Wee a
| “LIBRARY

Be.
Fuld

HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

XVI CENTURY

VOL. VIII.

cslbidern mie
EGE LIBRARY

WORKS BY W..-E. Hh EECKY:

HISTORY of ENGLAND in the EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY. 8vo.
Vols. I. & II. 1700-1760. 36s.
Vols. III. & IV. 1760-1784. 36s.
Vols. V. & VI. 1784-1793. 36s.

The HISTORY of KHUROPEAN MORALS from
AUGUSTUS to CHARLEMAGNE. 2 vols. crown
8vo. 16s.

HISTORY of the RISE and INFLUENCE of the
SPIRIT of RATIONALISM in EUROPE. 2 vols.
crown 8vo. 16s.

PLL III

London: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

HISTORY oF EHNGLAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

PRESENTED TO ST. MARY?S COLLEGE LIBR AR
BY REV. T. CALLAGHAN |

BY

WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY

VOLUME VIII.

LONDON
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
1890

All rights reserved

PRINTED BY al :

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE ~ a
LONDON 7 ‘
Sait es ea
.
4 i
e
=
> tan

~ a:
Py
se
sour

CONTENTS

OF

THE EIGHTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE REBELLION.

Recapitulation of the phases of the United Irish Society
Its strength and weakness . 5 A 6 5 :
McCormick, McNevin, and Bond . C

Emmet

Arthur O’Connor.

Lord Edward Fitzvorald. ays feet ee proposed bee

rejected :
Arrest of O’Connor at Rercate
Tardiness of the Government in eee leaders
Thomas Reynolds

Arrest at Bond’s house. Flight of Witzgerald. His ‘interrlows

with Reynolds .
Reynolds consents to give evidence”
Proclamation of martial law (March 30). oa causes ,
Burnings of houses.—F ree quarters, &c. .
Military proclamations
Disarming by flogging
Thomas Judkin Fitzgerald . :
His conduct indemnified by Parliament .
Motives and effects of the severities
Holt’s account of the origin of the rebellion
Attempts to reconstruct the Directory.—The brothers Sheared
The weeks before the rebellion A
Catholic declaration of loyalty
Pursuit and betrayal of Lord Edward Fitzgerald
Trial of the Earl of Kingston
Project to attack the peers assembled tor the ele
Capture of Lord Edward Fitzgerald
Information on which the Government acted .
Importance of the capture.—Higgins and Magan

vi CONTENTS OF

PAGH
Last days of Fitzgerald .  , 46
Arrest of the brothers Sheares through a6 information oe Capea

Armstrong ‘ oe ee eee
Arrest of Byrne and Neen —Flight an Lawless : c 52
The plot announced to the Lord Mayor and to the House of

Commons.—Address of the Commons tothe Lord Lieutenant. . 52
Trial of O’Connor and his companions. 52
O’Coigly found guilty and executed.—O’ Connor pad fares eines

acquitted : 5 c : é ; : 5 6 Breet. Ot}

First Stages of the Rebellion
It breaks out May 23 in the counties of Dublin, Kildare, and Meath.

Attack on Naas : - c ° ee OE
Attack on Clane. Lay hes at Preevecu: 6 A : : . 56
The treachery of Esmonde . : 57
Character of the rebellion in its first ae rns: police: come 58
State of Dublin and its neighbourhood.—Measures of defence 6 ay)
Proclamation of martial law unanimously sanctioned by the House

of Commons . 0 ; : 7 J : Sone al
Great energy of the loyalists . ; . 62
The outbreak not displeasing to some Siete of Govemfsent ~_ 63
The rebellion in the Queen’s County : 6 : 5 : = B63:
Unsuccessful rebel attack on Carlow . 5 : : : Pineal, 2%
Character of the rebellion in Carlow é é ; . : - 6d
Execution of Sir Edward Crosbie Sn ee ears ee GG
Rebel defeats at Hacketstown and Tarah 5 : a) tl
Atrocities at Rathangan.—Conciliatory policy of Cont Done -- 68
The massacre at Gibbet-rath é : ( j : dei. “OS
Failure of the plan of rebellion : ; : : , : eh
Causes of the rebellion in Wicklow . ; : : : i eee

Weauford Rebellion
Social condition of Wexford.—Defender disturbances . : a) 1(s)
Signs of conspiracy.—Reports about Orangemen . : a te
Martial law proclaimed in the county.—Severities that followed do)
The North Cork Militia accused of introducing Orangism . rasta ifs)
The shooting of prisoners at Dunlavin and Carnew , : Sy)
Historians of the Wexford Rebellion . : : ; : oa tehD
Gordon’s account of its causes. : : sell
Outbreak at Boulavogue (May 26). = Wathen J oma Marple Geis eh
Rebels defeated at Kilthomas Hill . ci : : F 5 ty
Victorious at Oulart.—Camolin and Ferns peennied : : SS,
Character of the rebels.—Enniscorthy attacked and taken . 84
Panic in Wexford.—Deputation to the rebels.— Reinforcement of

the garrison . 86

Uncertainty of the ropes! ether eae the Three Rock Mouniain 87
A detachment sent by General Fawcett cut to pieces. meee of

the garrison . ¢ 5 eke)
Surrender of Wexford. Sire and Teena of ‘the garrison . 89
The rebels enter Wexford (May 30) . ; : : : oe ll)
Bagenal Harvey elected commander-in-chief ... : : 5 hl

Rebel rule in Wexford.—Matthew Keugh . ( : : 5 5 8

THE EIGHTH VOLUME. vii

Capture of Lord Kingsborough.—Cornelius Grogan ; : ; 708
Events in Gorey . : : c ap oa
Attack on Newtown-barry. Sie of icendon . : : 5 ASIES
Massacre on Vinegar Hill . : ; : é ype LOL
Growing fanaticism.—Treatment of Protestants : > : . 103
Elliot defeats the rebels near Gorey (June l) . : : 5 8 OE:
Defeat of Walpole (June 4) . ‘ é 3 5 7 ells
Retreat of Loftus.—Rebel camp near Cored fy) oS e066
Battle of New Ross (June 5) . : 0 ; ; 5 G . 107
Scullabogue Barn : Q o& oo) Hiuil
Alarm of the Government. viene hom the Geatle : 0 ql
State of Ulster
Causes of its tranquillity—The Orange movement . 2 ee LS
Strict martiallaw . 1K)

Reaction caused by the pelicions Se of the Southern rebellion 120

Growing distrust of the French . ; co 6) dipal
Indignation caused by the oppression of smiiaedand : : a LPR
And by the conduct of the French to America . : 3 6 cy ARE
Letters illustrating the state of opinion in Ulster . : : . 126
Rebellion in Antrim . 5 5 ; : é : 0 Ac te)
And in Down . : n ; - : 4 : . 131
Battle of Ballinahinch (Ie une 13) f : ¢ con gS)
Complete suppression of the Northern gene ious ‘ ¢ F . 134
Weaford
Bagenal Harvey at Carrickbyrne Hill. : : ; 3 <eerso
His deposition.— Father Roche made commander . : 7 . 136
Camp at Lacken Hill.—Attack on Borris . 3 é : ps alate
Battle of Arklow (June 9) é é : . 138
Alarm in Dublin.—Lady Camden bce to ioelaed ; ; « j« JAO
Government letters calling for help : é : : . 141
Revival of religious animosities.—Letters of McNally : eng) Mee
Growing influence of the more violent party . , ; : . 145
Stagnation of trade . 7 é ; ; , af sone 7
Arrival of English poimiorcemmen | . ‘ : . . 147
Gordon on the nature of the rebellion round Gory. ; ; . . 148
Evacuation of Gorey.—Events in Wicklow.—Byrne’s march to
Vinegar Hill. : ‘ 149
Retreat of Father Roche. Sree at of Ane meer at fvceer Hill
(June 21). ; ; : : : . : é See 30)
Massacre in Renvacerthaa ; ; F ; ; go alissil
Keugh and Edward Roche at Wexford : : ; : elo
Position of the Protestants in Wexford . : " ; ; libs
Orange addresses . : ; c c 0 2 . a eLoD
Colonel Le Hunte’s fire-screens : 156
The Wexford rebels summoned to the Three Hooke, Seals of Gofis-
bridge. 5 ; ; : Cap aby
The massacre of Maxiord Metdoey F 4 4 F ; . 158
Keugh’s negotiation through Lord Fire ronaeh F ‘ LOO
Last day of rebel rule in Wexford . : é : : F . 162

Wexford reoccupied by the troops (June 21) _ . 4 C eos

vili

CONTENTS OF

Capture and execution of Father Roche .

Of Keugh

Of Cornelius Grogan 0

Of Colclough and Bagenal Macrey, 5

Other executions.—Military licence

General character of the rebellion é
Lord Cornwallis made Lord Lieutenant nad Conmandert in- 1-Chief :

CHAPTER XXX.

State of the rebellion when Cornwallis arrived .

Part taken by the priests .

Father Murphy leads the rebels .

Expedition to Carlow, Kilkenny, and Queer’ s Couey”

Defeat and massacre of rebels on Kilcomney Hill.—Death of Father
Murphy :

The rebels at Gore = Bldcdy Friday

Fight at Hacketstown

Fight at Ballyraheen Hill .

Last efforts of the rebels.—Misery of ice Conner 3

Cornwallis’s estimate of the situation .

His opinion of Clare 5

Proclamation and Act of NCES

Execution of Kearns, Perry, and Kyan

Execution of Redmond.—Surrender of Fitzgerald, Aiee: Eye!
Aylmer, &c. :

New regulation about oars arial é

Trial and execution of John and Henry Sheares .

Condemnation of McCann, Michael Byrne, and Bond

McCann executed.—Proposal of the remaining prisoners

Refusal.—Byrne executed.—Feeling of the loyalists

Renewed application of the prisoners, accepted .

Considerations that governed the decision

Fears of a renewed rebellion

Memorial of the State prisoners

Act of Attainder .

Lxpedition to Killala Bay

Buonaparte’s disinclination to an Irish expedition .

His project of invading England abandoned.—Sails for Heyat :
Applications of Lewins and Tone.—Humbert sails for Ireland(Aug. 6)
Landing at Killala.—Bishop Stock . .

Character of the invaders

And of the Irish recruits .

Proceedings of Generals Huteinwen and mae

The fight and race of Castlebar (Aug. 27)

Failure of Humbert to raise the country

Religious character the struggle assumed. —Conduct of the Wrench
Killala under French rule

Closing scenes of Humbert’s expedition :

PAGE

164
164
166
168
169
171
172

173
174
175
176

178
179
180
181
182
183
184
186
186

187
188
189
192
193
194
196
198
199
200
201

201
202
203
204
205
207
209
211
213
215
217
219

THE EIGHTH VOLUME.

Surrender of the French (Sept. 8) at Ballinamuck .
Recapture of Killala.—Conduct of the soldiers and officers

- Expedition of Napper Tandy . p 3
Surrender of Tandy and his companions ‘by Hamburg, eras ere
of Tandy .

Expedition of ee ated near Tees Swilly

Capture and condemnation of Wolfe Tone .

Dispute about the jurisdiction of the court-martial

Death of Tone.— Review of his career

Reappearance of the fleet of Savary in Killala Bae

Career of Holt in the Wicklow Mountains

The triumphant loyalists . 5

Military excesses and insubordination.

The untried prisoners.—Complaints of the State Lees

Refusal of the American Government to receive the United oy
men . ; : : : :

State prisoners detained in custody

The Irish at Botany Bay .

Disposal of other prisoners . 5

Cornwallis accused of excessive lenity

Loss of life in the rebellion .

Destruction of property.—State of A aneeees al ae

Attacks on the reputation of Grattan

The information of Hughes.

Great unpopularity of Grattan

CHAPTER XXXII.
THE UNION—PART I.

The Union during the Commonwealth

Petty advocates an Union

The commercial restraints. —Violenans

Effects of the Scotch Union.—The Irish Parllanient peniicns ee an
Union :

Facility with which ‘i could have been pea)

Advocates of Union in the next sixty years.—Adam Smith

Effects of the American War.—Franklin, Young, Montesquieu,
Chatham .

An Union eiteapetedd in 17 16

Opinion of Lord Harcourt.—Change in the state of Toland

Effects of the abolition of commercial restraints and the establish-
ment of legislative independence .

Opinion of George III. ;

List of English statesmen who believed an Union necessary 2

Failure of the commercial propositions brings the policy of Union
into the forefront

CONTENTS OF

English political opinion in its favour confirmed by the Regency
dispute .

Strong antipathy to the dae in Sroladde

Loyalty of the Irish Parliament of 1782 .

Elements of the Irish antipathy to an Union. S pifterence: of English
and Irish opinion

The Catholic Act of 1793. J eastistien a the Orion ae the
Catholic question .

The Fitzwilliam episode and the aoe Merrie of te Catholic
Committee.—Grattan’s prediction

Growth of sedition and anarchy makes self- Se ccmmene more
difficult .

The rebellion makes the nica orn: —The Goveruiaee Sieest
with producing rebellion in order to carry an Union

Examination of this charge

Union definitely determined on during the rebellion.—First con-
ferences ;

Opinions of Camden, pelkane Elliot a Dongs

First impressions of Castlereagh and Cornwallis .

Differences about the possibility of including Catholic emancipation
in the Union .

Opinions of Auckland, Bose and Carlie: ;

Clare visits Pitt.—A Protestant Union determined on

Cornwallis doubts its value .

Pitt communicates with Foster, Beresford aad Pamelp :

Scheme communicated to leading politicians in Ireland.— Their
views : : :

First notices in newspapers

Protestant opinions on the Union. —The Soon oa faa the
helplessness of the Protestants resented . 6

Catholic opinion more favourable.—Archbishop Troy 5

Provincial newspapers attended to.—Proposed increase of the
Regium Donum

Hopes that the epitome would hoe the en Sapien
Rowan.—Neilson .

Ulster linen manufacturers Sie the anion, = Geaminiien oe
tithes intended .

Cooke’s pamphlet in defence of an union

Pelham resigns.—Lord Castlereagh made Chief Sega:

Misgivings about the state of opinion .

Meeting of the bar.— The lawyers’ arguments against the Uaon

Comparison of the rival arguments

Constitutional capacity of the Legislature to ee an. Unione

Compromise proposed by Jebb.—The bankers and merchants.—
Dublin opinion.

Division among the anti- Catholics

Attitude of Ulster 4

Bishop Percy’s estimate of the ae of opinion

Protestants less favourable than Catholics to the Unions

Attitude of the Catholics .

The Government warned of the dancer of percents

PAGE

276
276
277

278
280
281
282

283
285

287
288
289

290
291
292
293
294

295
297

299
302

303
304

305
305
311
312
312
319
320

323
324
325
327
328
329
333

THE EIGHTH VOLUME. xt

PAGE

They resolve to do so.—Dismissals and resignations : F . 336

Measures to secure a majority.—State of opinion c d 6 5 Sf
Negotiation with the Catholic cea accept endowment

and the veto . 7 . 338

Belief that Catholic econ would soon follow the Union 5 Bul

The Session of 1799 ‘
Meeting of the Irish Parliament, January 22.—Discussions on the
Address. : - 342
The Government gerenied in Sic chore cen 2 orter . 346
Ponsonby fails to pledge the Commons against a reconsideration of

the question . ; : é Fi : a é : 4 . 347
Iiumination of Dublin ° : 347
Composition of the majority epe ihe “ity —The eaine

members : : : 5 . 348
Disappointment of Clare, (este ana Beresford é : 349
Determination of Government to persevere.—Message to the English

Parliament . 3 : : . 350
Opposition of Sheridan. Pitt 8 es J es 31 : : 5 a Boy
Discussion on the Union.—Resolutions in England. A 6 . 356

Pitt’s speech distributed in Ireland.—The Union plan remodelled.

County and borough representation . - 360
Cornwallis asks how the probable topics of the Conan were ee

be met . : é - . ; : : - . 361
Answer of Portland : é ; : F 5 Ber!
Multiplying signs ‘of Catholic at : 3 : : : . 363
True policy in dealing with Catholics . : 365
Cornwallis believes that opinion is growing fC aoaanie to the ie 365
Cattle houghing and other outrages in Connaught . ¢ : . 9366
Outrages near Dublin and Cork.—Fresh evidence of conspiracy.—

Confession of Wright 3 j : ; é 2 j OOS
Act of Indemnity.—Act authorising military law . : ae ond)
Complaints of the leniency of Cornwallis.—Widespread pear toe
Resolutions of Dobbs and Lord Corry . ‘ : : : + oy
Regency Bill : é : : : : : A ; . .- 304
Speech of Castlereagh . : : - : A 3 Paes 0)
Foster’s reply to Pitt (April 1799) : : ° : : ye Bite
Grant to Maynooth . ; ; é : ; . 386
Defeated by Clare.—His ppopaple noe j . : : Sein “BRN!
Priestly reaction in Ireland. : . 388
Escheatorship of Munster refused to epponenta of ihe Union Be 6xi)0)
Address in favour of the Union carried through the British Parlia-

ment.—Debates onit . : s 7 ool

Intended Militia Bill and eee Bill ceanaened P hah MOOS

CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE UNION—PART II.’

Means by which the majority was secured

Description by Cornwallis

Hostility of the county members

The Union peerages .

Compensation to borough-owners Q
Employment of the Place Bill to remodel the House of Coe :
Placemen and pensioners in the House

Lavish disposal of patronage

How far money bribes were eae

Progress of the majority

Opinion outside Parliament

Cornwallis believes opinion outside Leinster indifferent to the
Union.—His tour in Munster . :
Believes that if Parliament were as eubject to Topuiee matcones as
that of England, the Union would be carried

His journey through Ulster.—Favourable reception

The addresses in favour of the Union

Letters describing the state of opinion

Letter of Lord de Clifford

Letter of Luke Fox

Letter of Foster

Protestant bishops and the ion a eat College

Catholic bishops unanimous in favour of the Union.—Their part
in promoting it

The great body of Catholics peucres to foe it. ~ O'Leary Ries
ports it .

Dublin Catholics es Os speech of ey Connell

Grounds of the Catholic support - :

Plowden and Barrington on the Catholic hier

The rebels not generally hostile to the Union .

Death of Charlemont.—His hostility to the Union

Memoir of Lewins :

Disturbances come and go .

Bad harvest of 1799.

The time considered appropriate As pula on the non

Cornwallis valued it specially as benefiting the Catholics

Castlereagh’s justification of the means by which it was carried

Opinions of religious leaders.—Troops pouring in .

The Irish Parliament, 1800

Speech from the Throne.—Debate on Parsons’ amendment
Reappearance and speech of Grattan
Government majority .

The Opposition appeal to the conn or eons against the
Union

PAGE
394

395
396
400
402
404
405
408
410

411

411
412
413
414
417
418
419
421

422

424
425
426
427
428
428
429
430
432
432
435
435
436

437
440
44]

441

THE EIGHTH VOLUME.

Attempts to out-bribe the Government.—Feeling in Dublin

Appeals to the yeomen to resist the Union

Orange lodges declare against it .

County meetings and petitions against it

Letters of Cornwallis on its growing unpopularity

Defection of Unionist members.—Fears of a yeomanry rising

The Union guarantee of the Established Church

Message from the Lord Lieutenant Cee ‘ Se er fe
Union

Speech of eee Ee if eae

The Opposition speeches .

Speech of Edgeworth . é

Division—Twelve ministerial eee meee

Clare’s defence of the Union in the House of Lords

Speech of Lord Downshire

Speech of Lord Yelverton

The power of the King to create Irish peerages restricted. _Twenty
peers protest against the Union

Excitement in Dublin.—Determination of the Gover cere :

Knox predicts that Ireland may become the great centre of
Jacobinism

The debate in eens —Duel between Grattan eam Comm,

Foster’s speech, February 17

Majority of forty-six for the Government. “Discussion! on the
financial aspect of the Union

J. C. Beresford moves that the Irish poneidabion aaa be re.
twentieths, instead of two-seventeenths— Defeated

Castlereagh asks for assistance from aoe —Lord Corry’s offer
to the Government .

Attempts of Ponsonby and Pannell a aie a dissaition on the
question.—Speeches of Parsons and Saurin

Grattan’s plea for a dissolution.—Alarm of miatatactaners 5

Complaints from England of the slow progress of the measure.—
Castlereagh’s defence

The commercial clauses. = Gencestions to the conte! eamutacherer:

Foster and Edgeworth describe the means by which the measure
was carried : :

Government majorities. _The paupen satin eneaes ried :

Sir John Macartney raises the question of tithe of agistment ,

Tithe Bill carried.—The House adjourned.—Cornwallis’s forecast .

The Bill in the British Parliament.—False predictions

Grey’s summary of the case against the Union

Reply.—Estimate of the state of opinion in Ireland : :

The commercial clauses.—Debates in the British House of Lords ,

Irish Parliament reassembled.—Interest in the Union gone down .

Selection of the boroughs to be represented

Arrangements about representative and spiritual beets aaa the
selection of members for the first Imperial Parliament

The second reading.—Grattan’s speech

Great apathy of the House and of the country

xii
PAGE
442
449
443
444
445
446
447

448
449
455
456
457
458
466
467

468
469

470
470
471

475
476
476

477
478

478
479

480
481
481
482

483
484.
485
486
487
487

488
488
490

X1V CONTENTS OF

Opposition address to the King.—Speech of Dobbs : - . 492
Last stages of the Bill—King’s Speech. Formalities that followed 493
The Parliament House bought by the Bank of Ireland : - . 494
Summary of the case for and against the Union . : . 494
Skilful and prompt legislation required to make it a success Pentedee: 53)
Evils to be remedied largely non-political
The unlicensed whisky shops é ee i/
Non-residence of the ere oileaeemes ee to seen a : . 498
Popular ignorance.—History of Irish education . : : - os, 498
Jobbing of public offices . : ; - 500
Imperfect enforcement of law. —The constabulary force 5 6 SUM
The Catholic question
Its urgency a . 501
History of the sentenere with the Catholics pefore the Brion - 902
Importance of their services : : a 5 OK
Their conviction that their SS was cae 5 A 508
Their ignorance of the resolution of the King.—Lord Loughborough
informs the King of the intentions of the Cabinet . : 509
The King’s determined opposition.—The Cabinet divided. Pitt's
letter to the King. : : : ; , i OIL)
The King positively refuses ae pasar . : : ee Ri
Duty of Pitt to persevere . : 5 RAE
Resignation of Pitt (February 1801) a. some of i pollens! —
Pitt’s reluctance to resign ; ; 513
He consents to assist Addington in consrachas an ois Catholie
ministry . 7 , 3 : . . 513
Various judgments of his eondees ; ‘ ‘ ‘ E Sa wee TA:
State of Ireland 3 : ; ; ; ‘ : : A atts’
Hopes and fears of Gann aitce : é SRE EB G
Irish Protestants quite ready to accept Cnironc eeaneaaon OLS
Castlereagh writes from England on the intentions of Pitt. oe sll)
Cornwallis, Castlereagh, and Cooke refuse to serve under an anti-
Catholic ministry . 5 a ; ‘ : : - 520
Cornwallis pacifies the Gatholios 4 mare : : an is. ae
The pretended ‘pledge’ . : 522
Pitt promises (March 1801) to ane the @anolic cee
during the King’s reign, and offers to resume office 2 Bah OR)
Examination of his motives.—The King’s illness &c. 2 . 523
Irreparable injury produced by his decision : : ; = OLD.
Last days of Clare . : , 5 ROR
Lord Hardwicke made Vicsroy =bbok Chief ca : 527
Death of Clare.—Riot at his funeral.—Lord Redesdale succeeds nie 527
Irish policy of Redesdale. - . ; ; F - 628
The Hardwicke Administration not anpopelas : . 529

General election of 1802.—Complete indifference about thie Daioh 7 029
Emmet’s rebellion.—Loyalty shown in Dublin.—Letter of Grattan. 530
Later phases of the Catholic emancipation question . : A pl
The payment of the priests—urged by Grenville . é : do eH

THE EIGHTH VOLUME.

The question not pressed.—Letter of Cornwallis on the failure of
the Union

The proposed ooesar SR of tithes alse abandoned Sie hes
of the tithe question

Review of Pitt’s Irish policy and ae etocta

Failure of the financial arrangements of the Union—their history

Violent economical, social and political vicissitudes Ireland has
undergone in the nineteenth century

Democratic transformation of the Irish aoserematin

Fenianism—Combined with an agrarian struggle

Lalor

Mitchell

Character and success of ye new alliance

Views of the old anti-Unionists about repeal

Change in the attitude of classes in Ireland .

Influences that have strengthened the Union .

Political condition of Ireland not improved

Effect of Irish politics on English parties .

Conclusion é : . : °

INDEX .

xv

PAGE

534

535
536

538

541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
551

553

8696
HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN

rr eG EU BN UE CRI NUR

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE REBELLION.

THE United Irish Society had, as we have seen, passed through
several distinct phases since its foundation at Belfast in October
1791. It was originally a perfectly legal society consisting of
men who pledged themselves ‘ in the presence of God’ to use all
their influence to obtain ‘an impartial and adequate representa-
tion of the Irish nation in Parliament,’ and, as a means to this
end, to endeavour to secure the co-operation of Irishmen of all
religious persuasions; and although some of its leaders un-
doubtedly aimed from the first at separation, the real objects of
many, and the ostensible objects of all, were merely Catholic
emancipation and parliamentary reform. After-the suppression
of the society in 1794 it had been reconstructed on a new basis,
and became distinctly treasonable. An oath was substituted
for the original test, and it comprised an obligation to secrecy
and fidelity. The mention of Parliament in the declaration of
aims was suppressed ; a very elaborate organisation was created
consisting of a hierarchy of committees, each committee except
the lowest being formed by election from the subordinate sec-
tions; and the whole was directed by a General Executive
Directory of five members, elected by ballot from the Provincial
Directories, and sitting in Dublin. In 1795 the society appears
VOL, VII. B

2 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

to have been almost confined to Ulster andto Dublin. In 1796
it spread more widely through Leinster. In 1797 it extended
over the greater part of that province, had become very powerful
in Munster, and had gained some slight footing in Connaught.
At the close of 1796 and in the beginning of 1797 a military
organisation was grafted on it, and it became a main object to
create, arm, and discipline regiments for a rebellion.

The organisation on paper appeared very perfect, but its
real was very different from its apparent strength, and it was
enormously weakened by want of subordination, earnestness,
discipline, arms, and military skill. The executive and higher
committees had not, in fact, the absolute power assigned to
them in the constitution of the body, and it is probable that
each committee acted with great independence. Of the multi-
tude who had joined the society, only a few were genuine poli-
tical fanatics. Many had taken the oath, coerced by the intimi-
dation, or persuaded by the example of their neighbours; many
others had done so through the belief that the United Irish body
were likely to govern Ireland, through hopes that they would

_gain something in a confiscation of land, or through simple fear
of the Orangemen, against whom the great rival organisation
was supposed to be the chief protection. Such men were hardly
likely to make serious sacrifices for political ends. But still the
fact remains that the bulk of the peasantry in three provinces
in Ireland, were in the beginning of 1798 enlisted in a con-
spiracy which was daily extending, and were looking forward
to an immediate rebellion in conjunction with a French invasion.
The manufacture, plunder, and concealment of arms, the con-
stant attempts to seduce the soldiers and yeomen, the nightly
drills, the great organised assemblies under the pretext of potato
diggings, the frequent murder of magistrates, soldiers, and in-
formers, abundantly showed the seriousness of the situation.

In February 1798—before the declaration of martial law,
before the establishment of free quarters—the executive body
computed that half a million of persons had been sworn into
the society, and that more than 280,000 of them could be counted
on to appear in the field. In a paper drawn up by Lord Edward
Fitzgerald shortly before his arrest, it was calculated that the
number of armed men enlisted was 279,896. Of these men,

CH. XXIx. McCORMICK, McNEVIN, AND BOND. 3

110,990 were in Ulster, 100,634 in Munster, and 68,272 in
Leinster. From Connaught no returns appear to have come in.!
A few words may be said about the members of the Supreme
Executive. At the beginning of 1798 they appear to have
been Thomas Addis Emmet, Arthur O’Connor, William James
MeNevin, Oliver Bond, and Richard McCormick. The last had
been formerly Secretary of the Catholic Committee, and with
McNevin he represented the Catholic element in the Directory.
He was a warm friend of Tone, and he both knew and sganc-
tioned Tone’s first application for French assistance. He be-
longed, however, to the section of the Directory who were
opposed to a rebellion before the arrival of the French, and he
appears to have been much alarmed hy the crimes and violence
into which the movement had degenerated. In February 1798
he told Reynolds that he had ventured, at a provincial meeting
in that month, to recommend less violent measures, and that he
had been attacked in such a manner that he believed his life to
be in danger, and had resolved to realise his property and escape
from Ireland.? He fulfilled his intention, fled from Ireland in
March, and did not return till long after the rebellion.? McNevin,
as we have seen, had gone on a mission to France, but he had
returned in October 1797, and had reported to the Irish Direc-
tory that they might fully rely on French succour,‘ and, like
McCormick, he desired that all rebellion should be prevented
till that succour arrived. Oliver Bond was a rich woollen draper,
the son of a Dissenting minister in Donegal. He had been
imprisoned for his political conduct as early as 1793, and had
borne a prominent part in the conspiracy from its commence-
ment. He asserted on his examination by the Committee of
_ the House of Lords, that though he had been elected to the
supreme executive body, he had ‘declined to act officially,’ but
he was in the closest confidence of the leaders of the movement,
and he is said to have filled the important post of treasurer.®
Emmet and Arthur O’Connor were perhaps abler, they were
certainly more conspicuous men than their colleagues, and the

1 See Madden’s United Irishmen, Madden, iii. 48, 335.

i, 282-284, and also a paper in the 4 Report of the Secret Committee
Record Office, dated Feb. 26, 1798. of the House of Lords, p. 12.

2 Life of Thomas Reynolds, by his 5 This was stated hoth by McNally
son, i. 197. (Sept. 27, 1797) and by Turner.

3 Compare Tone’s Life, i. 126, 127 ;
B 2

4 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

first is one of the very few really interesting figures connected
with the rebellion. He was a respectable lawyer, an excellent
writer, a very honest and disinterested man, and he had certainly
not embarked in treason either through motives of selfish
ambition or through any mere love of adventure and excitement.
He became a United Irishman in order to obtain a radical
parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation; he found
that these things were never likely to be attained except by
force, and he at last succeeded in persuading himself that if
Ireland were only detached from England she would soar to an
unprecedented height of prosperity.!. Nature had intended him
much more for the life of a man of letters than for the scenes in
which he was now engaged, and his type is one which is often
found in the earlier stages of a rebellion, but is usually discarded,
or eclipsed in blood, long before the struggle has run its course.
His writings and his examination before the Privy-Council are
singularly interesting and instructive as showing the process by
which a humane, honourable, and scrupulous man could become
the supporter of a movement which was the parent of so many
crimes. Grattan knew Emmet slightly and admitted his in-
tegrity, but he had a profound contempt for his political
understanding. He described him, somewhat unceremoni-
ously, as a quack in politics who despised experience, set up
his own crude notions as settled rules, and looked upon elections
and representation as if they were operations of nature rather
than the work of art. Anyone, Grattan maintained, who could
bring himself to believe that a country like Ireland, in which
the people were so destitute that one-third of them were ex-
empted from the payment of hearth money on account of their
poverty, could be safely or tolerably governed with annual |
parliaments elected by universal suffrage, must be politically
mad, and had forfeited all right to be considered in Irish politics.
Emmet afterwards rose to considerable distinction in America
and became Attorney-General of New York. Grattan—perhaps
unjustly—thought his success much beyond his talents, and
such as he would never have attained if he had remained at
home.?

"See the passage in his exami- 2 See a curious conversation of
nation, McNevin’s Pieces of Irish Grattan in his Life, iv. 360, 361.
History, pp. 216, 217. Grattan acutely added: ‘Hngland

CH, XXIx. ARTHUR O’CONNOR. 5

Arthur O’Connor was of a very different type. He was a
man of wealth and high social position; a nephew of Lord
Longueville; a member of a family remarkable for its vio-
lence, its eccentricities, and its domestic quarrels. He had
some parliamentary standing, some shining talents, boundless
courage and enterprise, and he risked and sacrificed for his
_ opinions more than most of his colleagues. He was, however,
rash, obstinate and arrogant, very incapable of waiving his
personal pretensions for a public end, and very destitute of most
of the higher qualities of a real leader of men. In one of his
latest writings he mentions that early in life he had been deeply
impressed by reading in Leland’s ‘ History of Ireland’ a descrip-
tion of the Irish policy advocated by some of the counsellors of
Elizabeth. ‘Should we exert ourselves,’ they had said, ‘in
reducing this country to order and civility, it must acquire
power, consequence, and riches. The inhabitants will be thus
alienated from England; they will cast themselves into the
arms of some foreign power, or perhaps erect themselves into an
independent and separate state. Let us rather connive at their
disorder; for a weak and disordered people never can attempt
to detach themselves from the crown of Hngland.’! This pas-
sage, O'Connor said, appeared to him to furnish the key-note
explaining the English policy of his own day, and he declared
that it was this conviction that chiefly shaped the political
conduct of his life.2 He lived to extreme old age; he became
a general in the French service, and has left some writings
which throw much curious light on his character and on his
times. Like several of the early advocates of Catholic emancipa-~
tion, he was utterly without sympathy for the Catholic creed.
Few men, indeed, can have had a greater contempt for priests
and for what they teach, and in his last work he expressed his
unmingled detestation of O'Connell, and of the movement which
had placed the guidance of popular politics in Ireland under
the direction of an ignorant and low-born priesthood. In spite
of his admiration for the French Revolution, he was in his tastes
and temper essentially aristocratic, though he believed that the

should take care. She transports a 291, 292.
great deal of hostile spirit to that 2 O’Connor’s Monopoly the Cause
quarter.’ of all Evil, iii. 541, 542,

} Leland, History of Ireland, ii.

6 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

Irish gentry by appealing to the Irish people could break the
ascendency which English influence had hitherto exercised on
the counsels of the nation, and put an end to the religious and
class divisions by which that ascendency had been chiefly
maintained.

Several other men were at this time active in guiding the
conspiracy, most of them being in the Provincial Directory of
Leinster. ‘The most important was Lord Edward Fitzgerald,
who was chiefly entrusted with the military organisation and
who was intended to be commander-in-chief, though it is
doubtful whether he was ever formally elected to the Supreme
Executive. The co-operation of a member of the first family of
the Protestant aristocracy was of no small advantage to the
conspiracy in a country where the genuine popular feeling, amid
all its aberrations, has always shown itself curiously aristocratic,
and where the first instinct of the people when embarking in
democratic and revolutionary movements has usually been to
find some one of good family and position to place at their
head. Lord Edward’s very transparent character has been
already described. No one could doubt his courage, his energy,
his intense enthusiasm, or his perfect disinterestedness, and, as
he had been a captain in the army and had seen active service,
he had some military knowledge, but no competent judge ap-
pears to have discovered in him any real superiority of intellect.

The question of an immediate rising independently of the
French, had been much discussed in Ulster after the proclamation
of General Lake in May 1797, and it was again agitated in the
first weeks of 1798. Arthur O’Connor, as we have seen, had
formerly maintained that a French landing ought to precede
any rising in Ireland, but he now believed the organisation to
have become sufficiently powerful for independent action, and
in conjunction with Fitzgerald he strongly advocated it. The
dispute ran very high, and it made O’Connor a bitter enemy of
Emmet, whom he accused, very unjustly, of cowardice. The
party of Emmet, however, which desired to postpone the ex-
plosion till the arrival of the French, again prevailed, but it
prevailed only through the belief that a French invasion was
imminent. Lewins and McNevin in 1797 had been instructed
to ask only for 10,000 French troops, but for a very large

OH, XXIX, _ ARREST OF ARTHUR O’CONNOR. | 7

quantity of arms.' It was calculated that such assistance would
be amply sufficient to overthrow the English power in Ireland
without bringing any danger of a French domination. Promises
of support had more than once come from France, and although
the battle of Camperdown had thrown a great damp on the
hopes of the conspirators, they were revived by new assurances,
and especially by a message which was received at the begin-
ning of 1798 promising that French assistance would arrive in
Ireland in April, or at the latest in the beginning of May?
The English Government on their side received secret intelligence
in February and March of extensive preparations that were
making at Dunkirk, Havre, Honfleur, and Calais.’

The invasion was eagerly looked forward to. A new military
committee was appointed at Dublin in February for the ex-
press purpose of preparing a plan of co-operation with the
French, and instructions were furnished to the adjutant-
generals of the conspiracy to collect full information about the
state of the United Irish regiments within their districts; about
the roads, rivers, and bridges; the capacities of the towns and
villages to receive troops, and the strength and movements of
the enemy.* Arthur O’Connor determined to go to France to
arrange a combined movement, but he was arrested at Margate
on February 28, in company with a priest named O’Coigly or
Quigley, an English agitator named Binns, and two other men
who appear to have been his servants. McNally, in comment-
ing upon this arrest, significantly observed that it would have
very little effect upon the conspiracy, and that McCormick,
MecNevin, Drennan, and other leading Irishmen considered
O’Connor so impetuous that they were not sorry to have him
out of the way.°

It has often been asked why the Irish Government, with all
the information at its disposal, and at a time when the Habeas
Corpus Act was suspended, did not arrest the leading members

1 McNevin, pp. 190, 195.

2 See Report of the Secret Com-
mittee, Appendix, pp. Cvii, Cx, CXv,
CXxi, CXxil,

3 Castlereagh

5 J. W., March 9, 1798. McNally
had informed the Government as
early as Jan. 11 that the invasion was
to take place in April, that O’Connor

Correspondence, i, had left Ireland, to the great satis-

165-168.
4 See Report of the Secret Com-
mittee.

faction of his colleagues, and that his
destination was France.

8 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxrx.

of the conspiracy before it attained its height. In truth, how-
ever, the information they possessed was less full than has been
supposed. , Most of the schemes of the United Irishmen were
communicated to them, and they had a general knowledge of the
leading members of the conspiracy, but they appear to have
known little about the Supreme Executive, and they were con-
scious that they could produce no evidence against the leaders
which was the least likely to lead to a conviction. From the
June of 1797 they had received from an informer at Saintfield,
in the county of Down, regular-reports of county and provincial
meetings of the United Irishmen in Ulster.!_ In the same month
McNally had informed them that there was a secret directory
of about six members at the head of the United Irishmen.? In
September and October he told them that Bond was the treasurer
of the conspiracy; that the chief management was now trans-
ferred from Belfast to Dublin and confined to a very few; that
Keogh, McCormick, Lord Edward Fitzgerald, Arthur O’Connor,
Sweetman, Dixon, Chambers, Emmet, Bond, and Jackson were
in the secret, but that he was convinced that even their part in
the conspiracy was only a secondary one.? Some full and very
valuable additional information was soon after sent by Turner
from Hamburg.’ But there was never any question of McNally
appearing as a witness, and neither Turner nor the Saintfield
informer would consent to do so.

From the beginning of 1798, however, it was the urgent
desire of the Irish Government to arrest the conspirators. On
January 8, Camden wrote acknowledging the information of
Turner, and expressing his great regret that the author could not
be induced to come forward as a witness, and that the other
secret information which had been received from Lord Grenville’s
_ office could not be produced.’ A month later he informed
Portland that the confidential friends of the Government in
Ireland, after deliberating on the information from Hamburg,
had unanimously agreed that it was very advisable to arrest at
once the leaders of the conspiracy, even though it was probable
that no sufficient evidence could be produced to justify a trial.

* Report of the Secret Committee, * J. Richardson to the Marquis of
Appendix No. xiv. Downshire, Nov. 19, 1797 (R.0.).
ET avi, June 21. 1797. > Camden to Portland, Jan. 8,

$ Ibid. Sept. 27, Oct. 2, 1797. 1798.

CH, XXIX,. THOMAS REYNOLDS. 9

Such an arrest, they contended, would dislocate the conspiracy,
and if it produced an insurrection in some parts of the kingdom,
‘this event might not be unpropitious, as it would be more in
our power to crush it than if such event happened when the
enemy were off the coast.’ Portland, however, answered that such
a policy would be very rash and dangerous, and he positively
forbade it.1 Camden wrote that no reward ought to be withheld
from Turner if he would come forward and give evidence, but it
was answered that no earthly consideration would induce him to
go to Ireland,? and he soon after, without informing the Govern-
ment, returned to the Continent. But the Irish Government
now felt so strongly the necessity of speedily breaking the
organisation, that they even contemplated the extreme measure
of proceeding against the conspirators by an Act of attainder.3
At last, however, they succeeded in obtaining the evidence
they required. Their informant was a Catholic gentleman,
named Thomas Reynolds. He wasa young man of twenty-seven
who had been a silk merchant, but had retired from business,
and had purchased an estate in the county of Kildare. He was
brother-in-law of Wolfe Tone, and a neighbour and distant con-
nection of Lord Edward Fitzgerald. He had early taken a warm
interest in the question of Catholic emancipation. He had been
chosen as one of the representatives of Dublin in the Catholic
Convention in 1792, but had retired from that body with Lord
Fingall, and he had joined the United Irishmen in the beginning
of 1797. According to his own account, he did so for the sole
purpose of assisting the ostensible objects of the association, and
was very reluctantly induced by his connection, Lord Edward,

to accept a more prominent part. He was made colonel,

to attaint the conspirators by Act of
Parliament, I have no hope of bring-

1 See Camden to Portland, Feb. 8,
1798 (most secret), and the reply of

Portland.

2 Camden to Portland, March 1;
Portland to Camden, March 7, 1798.

’ Thus Cooke wrote to Lord
Auckland on March 19: ‘I fear we
cannot convict legally our prisoners,
though we have evidence upon evi-
dence; but they must be punished,
or the country is gone. Attainder if
ever is justifiable. Four days later
Clare wrote to the same correspon-
dent : ‘Unless we can summon reso-
lution to take a very decided step and

ing them to justice. It is not possible
to prevail with men who give secret
information to come forward in a
court of justice; and if these villains
escape with a temporary imprison-
ment only, there will be no possibility
of living in Ireland.’ (Auckland Cor-
respondence, iii. 393, 394.) Camden
had written to Portland on the 11th
that the head committee must be
arrested, even if it were found im-
possible to seize their papers.

10 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

treasurer of the province, and as such, member of the Executive
of Leinster. He then heard that a rebellion was imminent, and
it is stated that he learnt that the first step to be taken to insure
success was to deprive the Executive Government, if necessary
by assassination, of about eighty individuals, that the list was
shown him, and that it comprised many of the first persons in
Treland, and among them some of his own relations.’ Very
reluctantly, and after great hesitation, he resolved to defeat the
plan, and confided to an old loyalist friend that on the 12th of
March the whole Provincial Directory of Leinster would meet
at’ the house of Oliver Bond to prepare an insurrection. He
added that he neither sought nor would accept honour or reward,
but he made, according to his own account, four stipulations:
he was himself never to be prosecuted as a United Irishman ;
he was not to be forced to prosecute any other person as a
United Irishman; and the part he had taken in-giving the
information was to be concealed. As, however, he would pro-
bably, in spite of all precautions, be obliged to fly from Ireland
in order to escape assassination, and as his property consisted
chiefly of houses and lands, on which it was difficult to raise
money in those distracted times, he demanded a sum of 500J. to
enable him to quit the country.

Whether this was a true and complete account of his motives,
it is impossible to say. Up to the date on which he gave
evidence to the Government, Reynolds appears to have been
looked upon by his party as a man whose character and position
entitled him to such a measure of confidence and respect that they
were most anxious to secure his services, and to place him in
prominent and difficult positions. After he had given informa-
tion they at once discovered that he was a monster in human
form, a perfect prodigy of villany. He had poisoned his mother.
He had poisoned his mother-in-law. His whole life had been a
tissue of the basest frauds. The information he gave the Govern-
ment was due to the most sordid motives. The blow, however,
which he had rendered possible was completely successful, and

1 This rests on the authority of
Reynolds’s son (Life of Reynolds, i.
187, 188), who states that the list was
to have been produced at the trial of
Cummins, from whom Reynolds re-
ceived it, had not the confession of

the United Irishmen induced the
Government to desist from further
prosecutions. It does not appear to
have been ever stated by Reynolds in
court.

cH. xxix. COMMITTEE ARRESTED—FITZGERALD ESCAPES, El

on March 12 fifteen of the leaders of the United Irishmen form-
ing the Leinster Provincial Committee were arrested in the house
of Bond and their papers seized. Emmet, Sweetman, Jackson,
and McNevin, who were not included in the party at Bond’s,
were taken almost at the same time.

The conspiracy was thus suddenly, and at a most, critical
moment, at once deprived of its most important leaders; but
though a warrant was out against Lord Edward Fitzgerald, he
was still at large. There is little doubt that his escape was due
to Reynolds, who might easily, if he had chosen, have placed him
in the hands of the Government. On the 11th, the day before
the arrest, he had an interview with Fitzgerald, and he succeeded
in so alarming him by accounts of information in the hands of
the Government, as to induce him to abstain from the meeting at
Bond’s. On the 14th and 15th Reynolds had again secret in-
terviews with Fitzgerald, and on the 16th with his wife, and he
discussed with them the methods of concealment, and is stated even
to have lent them the money they required for a hasty flight.
His conduct at this time towards Fitzgerald shows real friend-
ship, and of all the many slanders with which Reynolds was
pursued none is more grotesquely false than that which described
him as the betrayer of Lord Edward. Nor does he appear as
yet to have had the smallest desire to bring his other colleagues
to punishment, though he was anxious to defeat their designs and
to extricate himself from the conspiracy. With the latter object
he supported a proposal, which was made immediately after the
arrest, for reforming the Provincial Directory, which would have
excluded him from that body, and his only wish appears to have
been to return to his country house, and, having prevented the
effusion of torrents of blood, to take no further part in politics.

He soon found, however, that a neutral position was im-
possible. As he anticipated, he was suspected, and, as he an-
ticipated also, the murderers were soon on his track. Three
separate attempts seem to have been made to assassinate him,
but they were baffled by his conspicuous courage and self-posses-
sion. On the other hand, the Government gave him no protec-
tion. His county was placed under martial law, he was him-
self a suspected man, and the officers in command knew nothing
of the service he had secretly rendered. A large party of dra-

12 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXIX.

goons and militia under Captain Erskine were sent to live on
free quarters at Kilkea Castle. Their proceedings there seem
to be a fair sample of the military licence that was then prevail-
ing. The floors and wainscoting were torn up, the walls were
pierced in many places in search for arms, the staircases and
furniture were broken with wanton violence, and the whole in-
terior of the castle was reduced to ruin. The loss was estimated
by Reynolds at several thousands of pounds. His troubles were
not yet over. A number of United Irishmen, probably hoping
to ruin him and discredit his testimony, now informed against
him, and he was arrested as a United Irishman and brought to |
Dublin for trial.

‘A Mr. Reynolds,’ wrote Camden to Portland, ‘was the
person who gave Government the information upon which the
committee at Oliver Bond’s was taken. This person was only
guessed at, although a note found upon Bond had convinced
many persons that he was the man. After that capture he went
into the county of Kildare, and has scarcely given us any infor-
mation since.’ Camden doubted whether this was through fear
of his old colleagues who suspected him, or through a desire to
return to their party, but thought that, most probably, he was
waiting to see what course would be the most prudent. ‘He
has, however, been taken up,’ continued the Lord Lieutenant,
‘upon the most positive information against him, by those whom
he commanded in a regiment which was formed.’ When
brought before the Council, he said that he was a protected
person ; they were obliged to concede this, and he then gave
information on oath to the Government.!

The moment was very critical, and it was rendered still
more so by the dangerous illness of Pelham, and especially by
“the dispute which had just broken out between Abercromby and
the Irish Government. On March 30 the blow which was

1 Camden to Portland, May 11,
1798. Ten days later Lord Clare
wrote to Auckland: ‘A man who had
given us private information, on the
express condition of never being de-
sired to come forward publicly, was
betrayed by some of his subalterns in
the county of Kildare, and arrested

in consequence by General Dundas,

who commands in that district, with-

out communication with Govern-
ment, and sent up to Dublin in
custody. In this dilemma the gentle-
man’s scruples have vanished, and he
will, I think, enable us to bring
many of the leading traitors to jus-
tice, and at their head Lord Edward
Fitzgerald.” (Auckland Correspon-
dence, iii. 421.)

CH. XXIX. MARTIAL LAW PROCLAIMED. 13

struck on the 12th was followed by the famous proclamation
of martial law and free quarters, which was undoubtedly a
proximate cause of the rebellion. Express orders were given to
Abercromby to employ the military in the disturbed districts,
and especially in Kildare, Tipperary, Limerick, Cork, the King’s
County, the Queen’s County, and Kilkenny, without wait-
ing for directions from the civil magistrates, for the purpose
of crushing rebellion in every shape, and forcibly disarming the
rebels. The officers were authorised to quarter troops wherever
it might seem to them necessary, to press horses and carriages,
to demand forage and provisions, to hold courts-martial for all
offences, and to issue ‘ proclamations.’ Special notices to the
inhabitants of particular counties were now promulgated, sum-
moning them to give up all arms and ammunition within ten
days, and announcing that if there was reason to believe that
this had not been fully done, the troops would be sent in large
bodies to live at free quarters among them, and other very
severe measures would be used to enforce obedience.!

This proclamation opened a scene of horrors hardly surpassed
in the modern history of Europe. In order to form a just and
sane judgment of it, we must bear clearly in mind the desperate
condition of the country. There was no longer any serious
hope of preventing a rebellion. There was abundant evidence
that at this time tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of men were
organised in a treasonable conspiracy, enrolled in regular regi-
ments, with their officers, their arms, and their ammunition, and
only waiting the arrival of the French fleet, which was expected
in April, to burst into open rebellion. Papers were flying from
cabin to cabin announcing that the deliverers would soon be on
the sea; that the hour of struggle, of triumph, and of vengeance
-was at hand. All the best accounts that came to the Govern-
ment represented rebellion as not only certain, but imminent.
McNally repeatedly warned them that the only difference among
the leaders was whether or not they should wait for the arrival
of the French, and he wrote in the beginning of 1798 that it
was the general opinion that in two months Ireland would be
separated from England.’ Another informant, two days before

1 Plowden, ii. 676. Camden to ccxev, cexcvi. Castlereagh Corre-
Portland, March 30,1798. Report of spondence, i. 168, 169.
the Secret Committee, Appendix, pp. 2 J. W., Jan. 3, 1798.

14 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

the arrest at Bond’s house, warned them that Lord Edward
Fitzgerald had resolved to propose an immediate rising, and
that, if not intercepted, it would certainly take place within
four weeks.! ‘The North,’ wrote a third and very’ important
informer, ‘is now, more than at any former period, held out as
an example to the other provinces. To the perfect state of
organisation there is their apparent tranquillity owing.’ ‘ Mili-
tary organisation has been adopted in the city, and some batita-
lions are already formed, and officers appointed.’ Twelve men
‘of the first military talent and experience’ were said to be
engaged, and assurances of immediate aid had come from the
French Directory.?

Higgins, who, among his other occupations, seems to have
done business as a land agent, mentions that he had been in
the country endeavouring, without any success, to collect some
rents. Several of the poorer kind of tenantry, he added, can-
didly declared that they never expected to see an agent among
them again, for they had been promised that the lands were ‘ to
It was by this kind of seduc-
tion that numberless of the ignorant and lower orders were
drawn from their allegiance by better-informed traitors.’ Magis-
trates reported that when they licensed public-houses they were
told that this would be the last time they would be asked to do
so, and tithe proctors that there was a general belief that tithes
would never again be paid.*

The expectation of revolution was universal, but the rising
was not to take place till the arrival of the French. There was
now, therefore, a short respite—an ominous and imperfect calm,
broken by constant accounts of the murder of magistrates and
informers, of attacks upon sentries, of nightly raids for arms, of
which that on the town of Cahir was the most conspicuous and

be their own, and divided equally.

1 Information endorsed ‘C., March
10, 1798.’ This was, I believe, Rey-
nolds.

2 Anonymous letter, dated Ste-
phen’s Green, April 22, and endorsed
‘Mag. This was from Magan. Another
informer, who professed to be on
intimate terms with the leaders of
the conspiracy, and to have access to
all their plans, resolutions, and corre-
spondence, corroborates the statement
in the text that the apparent tran-

quillity of the North was only due to
the perfection of its organisation.
‘It was in the North,’ he continued,
‘that the spirit of rebellion took its
birth. It is in the North it is fos-
tered. It is there that it is brought
to maturity. It is there, in fine, lie
the hopes, the spring, the wealth, the
force of the United Irishmen.’ (Letter
endorsed ‘V. secret, March 27.’)

3 ¥.H., May 15, 1798.

4 Musgrave.

CH. XXIX. THE GENTRY DISLIKE FREE QUARTERS. 15

the most audacious. Upon the use that was made of this short
interval the result of the contest might depend.

No one who will honestly face this situation can doubt that
it demanded extreme vigour—a vigour which would inevitably
transcend the limits of ordinary law. One of the ablest of the
rebels afterwards acknowledged, that up to the proclamation of
March 30 the process of arming the people for rebellion went
smoothly on, and that it was this proclamation and the measures
that followed, that alone arrested it.! On the other hand, no
one who knew the state of Ireland could donbt that such
measures, when adopted, must lead to horrible abuses. Ireland
was now wholly unlike what it had been at the outbreak of the
French Revolution. The crimes and panics of the last few
years, the fierce passions that had been aroused, and the tension
of long-continued danger and suspense, had filled it with savage
and inveterate hatreds, broken down all discipline in the army,
set class against class, and creed against creed. When a half-
disciplined yeomanry and militia, demoralised by a long course of
licence and irritated by many outrages, came to live at free quar-
ters upon a hostile peasantry, who regarded them as Orangemen,
and who were taught that every Orangeman had sworn to exter-
minate the Catholics, it was not difficult to anticipate the result.

The burnings of houses which had been well known in the
North were now carried on upon a yet larger scale in Leinster,
and the free quarters formed a new and terrible feature in the
system of military coercion. There is reason to believe that
this system was adopted contrary to the general wishes of the
Trish gentry,? and one of the principal of those in the Queen’s
County wrote a letter to Cooke clearly pointing out its evils.
‘T have my fears,’ he wrote, ‘this plan will not answer the end. .
It will unavoidably involve in punishment the innocent with
the guilty. he soldiers will find miserable means of living
among those who are the robbers and defenders. Of course
they will not, cannot be restrained from laying hold of the
substance and property of farmers who are innocent and loyal.
Indiscriminate punishment and much mischief must ensue.

1 Memoirs of Miles Byrne, i. 31. them, viz. by living at free quarters

2 «The gentlemen seem averse to upon the disaffected inhabitants,’
assist the military in the manner in (Camden to Portland, April 23, 1798.)
which Sir Ralph means to dispose of

16 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cm. xxix.

Surely, my dear Cooke, this is a more violent and coercive
system than burning the houses of those who were known to be
delinquents.’ !

If Abercromby had continued in command, it is possible that
the abuses resulting from this system might have been restrained,
though they could not have been wholly prevented, but neither —
Lake nor the Irish Government appear to have made the smallest
effort to check them. District after district was now proclaimed,
and after the stated interval the soldiers descended like a flight
of locusts upon it. They were quartered in the best of the
houses of the suspected persons in proportion to the supposed
means of the owners, and they lived as in an enemy’s country.
Many men were ruined by their exactions and their depredations.
All the neighbouring houses were searched, and any house in
which any weapon was found was immediately burnt. Many
others were burnt because the owners, terror-stricken perhaps by
the violence around them, had abandoned them, or because some
of the innumerable seditious papers were found in them. One
of the rebel leaders afterwards described how in one small corner
of Wicklow in a single morning no less than fourteen houses
were burnt by a single man.? Sometimes, after a period of
coercion had failed to produce a surrender of arms, a proclama-
tion was issued stating that the nightly patrols would for a time
be withdrawn in order that the people might be able without
fear to collect the arms and to bring them to an appointed place,
and that if this was not done before a given date the whole
district would be burnt. Great piles of arms came in this way
into the possession of the Government, though the people some-
times showed their feelings by breaking them to pieces before
they deposited them in the place that was assigned.

This plan of disarmament appears to have been adopted in
all the towns of the county of Kildare, and a few particular
instances which are preserved will enable the reader to under-
stand the manner in which it was worked. Thus the inhabit-
ants of the town of Kildare had refused to give up the arms which
the commanding officer was convinced they possessed, and they
alleged that there were none in the town. General Walford at

1 Charles Coote (Montrath) to 2 Holt’s Memoirs, i. 20.
Cooke, April 15, 1798. $ Leadbeater Papers, i. 225, 226.

CH, XXIX. THE DISARMING OF KILDARE, ay

once called the inhabitants together, and announced to them on
his honour that if they did not bring in their arms in twenty-four
hours he would burn every house in the town, and he at the
same time assured them that if they complied with his order
they should have complete protection, and that not a single
soldier would appear out of his barracks on that evening in order
that the people should have the opportunity of collecting and
depositing their arms without fear. The measure proved suc-
cessful, and great quantities of arms were brought in.) From
Athy in the same county Colonel Campbell wrote: ‘In conse-
quence of burning afew houses in this town and the neighbour-
hood, together with a little military discipline, we have got a
number of pikes.’? In other cases the resistance was more
obstinate. ‘This last week,’ wrote Lady Louisa Conolly to Mr.
Ogilvie on May 21, ‘was a most painful one to us. May-
nooth, Kilcock, Leixlip, and Celbridge have had part of a Scotch
regiment quartered at each place, living upon free quarters and
every day threatening to burn the towns. I have spent days in
entreaties and threats to give up the horrid pikes. Some houses
burnt at Kilcock yesterday produced the effect. Maynooth held
out yesterday, though some houses were burnt and some people
punished. This morning the people of Leixlip are bringing in
their arms. Celbridge as yet holds out, though five houses are
now burning. Whether obstinacy or that they have them not
I cannot say; ... we have fortunately two most humane
officers, that do not do more than is absolutely necessary from
their orders.’ ‘I expect,’ wrote Colonel Napier on the same day,
‘on my return to find Celbridge and Maynooth in ashes, as that
was the “order of the day.” 8

Horrible abuses and horrible sufferings inevitably accom-
panied these things. Many who resisted, and not a few it is
said who did not resist, were shot dead on their thresholds,
while countless families were deprived of all they possessed
and were driven homeless into the world. Farm horses were
seized and carried away. Stores of provisions were broken
into and shamefully wasted or destroyed, and acts of simple
robbery and purely wanton violence were of daily occurrence.

1 Saunders’s Newsletter, May 25, 3 Moore’s Life of Lord Edward
1798. Fitzgerald, ii, 100, 103.

2 Col. Campbell, May 14 (1.8.P.0.).

VOL. VII. C

18 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

Torture was at the same time systematically employed to
discover arms. Great multitudes were flogged till they almost
fainted; picketed and half strangled to extort confessions.
Blacksmiths were the special objects of suspicion and vengeance,
and many of them were scourged almost to death in the streets
of the villages in order to compel them to state what pikes
they had made, and to reveal the persons to whom they had
consigned them.}

It had been the habit of the republican party in Ireland, as
in France, to cut short their hair as a distinctive sign, and the
‘croppies, as they were termed, were an obvious mark for
military violence. The torture of these men soon became a
popular amusement among the soldiers. Some soldiers of the
North Cork Militia are said to have invented the pitched cap of
linen or thick brown paper, which was fastened with burning
pitch to the victim’s head and could not be torn off without
tearing out the hair or lacerating the skin. One soldier obtained
a special reputation by varying the torture. He was accustomed
to cut the hair of the victims still shorter, to rub into it
moistened gunpowder and then to set it on fire. Sometimes
also an ear or a portion of an ear was cut off.

All this went on in the proclaimed districts without inter-
ference and without restraint. In the great majority of cases
no doubt the sufferers were justly suspected of being enrolled in
a treasonable conspiracy and of possessing concealed arms.
But it was constantly asserted, and it is in the highest degree
probable, that in the complete military licence that prevailed,
mary of the victims were perfectly innocent. Men were acting
under the blinding influence of panic and widespread suspicions,
and often under influences that were still more pernicious. In
a country where every informer was at once marked out for
assassination, secret information naturally and necessarily played
a great part, and it gave terrible opportunities for the gratification
of private cupidities and private malice. Every Irish country
district is sure to be full of quarrels about leases and boundaries
and trespasses, quarrels between landlords and tenants, between
competing tenants, between debtors and creditors, between

1 See the graphic description in Hay’s Hist. of the Rebellion in Wew-
the Leadbeater Papers, i. 226, 227; ford, p. 64.

CH. XXIX. MILITARY OUTRAGES, 19

farmers and labourers. The burning of houses and the flogying
of individuals were very often not the result of any judicial or
quasi-judicial investigation, or even of the decision of an expe-
rienced and superior officer. Young subalterns, sergeants of militia,
common soldiers ordered and perpetrated these things, and it is
but too probable that they often acted on the whispered suggestion
of a private enemy.! If some men cut their hair short to attest
their republican sentiments, others did so for simple convenience,
while the hair of others was cut short by the United Irishmen
for the express purpose of exposing them to the vengeance of
the soldiers.2 Quakers, who had scruples about applying for
military protection, often fell under suspicion, though they were
among the most orderly and peaceful inhabitants of the country.’

Outrages on women were very common. Peasant girls had
often thrown themselves enthusiastically into the United Irish
movement, and attested their sentiments by their green ribbons,
while many others who knew or cared nothing about politics
wore something green in their dress. very person who did so
_ was tolerably sure to be exposed to insults which planted far
and wide, among a peasantry peculiarly susceptible on such
matters, the seeds of deadly, enduring hatred. Other outrages
were unconnected with any real or pretended political cause, and
were such as inevitably occur when an undisciplined soldiery
are quartered among a hostile population. Dr. Dickson, the
Protestant Bishop of Down, told Lord Holland how ‘he had seen
families returning peaceably from mass assailed without pro-
vocation by drunken troops and yeomanry, and the wives and
daughters exposed to every species of indignity, brutality, and

1 See e.g. Holt’s Memoirs, i. 32.

_ ® See Gordon’s Rebellion, pp. 57-59.
Gordon notices that after the rebel-
lion, short hair became the fashion
among men of all opinions.

8 Leadbeater Papers.

4 An old magistrate near Bray, in
the county of Wicklow, wrote in April
to the Government remonstrating
against a project of sending troops to
Newtown Mount Kennedy. ‘ We have
never had here,’ he said, ‘ the smallest
appearance of disturbance, nor are we
likely to have the least. . . . I depre-
cate dragooning such people, It isa

bad system except in open rebellion.
Those already enemies to Government
it exasperates. Of those who are
wavering and timid it makes decided
enemies, and it tends to disaffect the
loyal. Where is the man whose blood
will not boil with revenge who sees
the petticoat of his wife or sister cut
off her back by the sabre of the dra-
goon merely for the crime of being
green, a colour certainly with them
innocent of disaffection?’ (Mr. Ed-
wards, Old Court.) Compare Gordon’s
Rebellion, p. 59.

20 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

outrage, from which neither his remonstrances nor those of other
Protestant gentlemen could rescue them.’ '

In general the military proclamations were exclusively
directed to the objects of disarming the people and paralysing
rebellion, but there were instances in which these lines were
shamefully exceeded. The following extraordinary order was
issued at Cork on May 7: ‘Whereas it has been reported
to General Sir James Stuart that in some parts of the county
where it has been necessary to place troops at free quarters
for the restoration of tranquillity, general subscriptions have
been entered into by the inhabitants to purchase provisions
for the troops, by which means the end proposed of making
the burden fall as much as possible on the guilty is defeated
by making it fal] in a light proportion on the whole, and thereby
easing and protecting the guilty; it has been thought proper
to direct that whenever the practice has been adopted or shall
be attempted, the general officers commanding divisions in the
southern district shall immediately double, triple, and quadruple
the number of soldiers so stationed, and shall send out foraging
parties to provide provisions for the troops in the quantities
mentioned in the former notice bearing date April 27, and that
they shall move them from station to station through the district
or barony until all arms are surrendered and tranquillity is per-
fectly restored, and until it is reported to the general officers by
the gentlemen holding landed property and those who are em-
ployed in collecting the public revenue and tithes, that all rents,
taxes, and tithes, are completely paid up.’?

There was, of course, considerable difference among the sol-
diers. A Quaker lady, who lived at Ballitore in the county of
Carlow, and who has left the truest picture of the state of that
part of Ireland during the rebellion, notices the excellent conduct
of the King’s County Militia, who were quartered upon that
district, and how, when they were removed, the villagers es-
corted them on their way with tears and lamentations; and
she contrasts their conduct with that of the Tyrone Militia, who
succeeded them, and who lived in free quarters, wearing osten-
tatiously orange ribbons among the Catholic peasantry, and

) History of the Whig Party, i. 114.
* Dunfermline’s Life of Abercromby, pp. 122, 123.

CH. XXIX. PRACTICE OF TORTURE. 21

plundering alike the loyal and the disloyal! The North Cork
Militia, the Welsh Regiment of Ancient Britons, and two Hessian
regiments, which were sent over just before the rebellion, appear
to have been those which left the most bitter recollections in
Treland.

Particular instances of atrocious suffering were often related.
More than one victim died under the lash, and the terror it
produced was to many even worse than the punishment.
Gordon mentions a case which came under his own notice, of a
labouring man who dropped dead through simple fear.2- Another
case is related of a man in Dublin, who, maddened by the pain
of the pitched cap, sprang into the Liffey and ended at once
his suffermgs and his hfe. In a third case, which occurred at
Drogheda, a man who had undergone 500 lashes in order to
compel him to reveal some concealed arms, fearing that his forti-
tude would be overcome, pretended that arms were concealed in
a particular garden, and availed himself of a few moments of
freedom which he thus obtained, to cut his throat. Flogging to
extort confessions appears to have been nowhere more extensively
or more successfully practised than in Dublin itself, under the
very eyes of the Government, and under the direction of men
who were closely connected with it. A plot to seize Dublin did
unquestionably exist; great stores of pikes had been accumulated,
and a great number of them were discovered through the floggings.
The riding school of Beresford was well known as the chief scene
of the torture. In the country, it is said, whole villages were
deserted, and the inhabitants slept in the ditches and in the
fields through fear of outrages from the yeomen.

Some names were especially conspicuous for the hatred they
attracted. There was Gowan, who had performed good service
in hunting down robbers among the Wicklow mountains, but
who now became famous for the multitude of houses he burnt,
and who was said, though very probably untruly, to have on one
occasion stirred his punch with the severed finger of a rebel.

1 Leadbeater Papers, i. 223, 224. General Dunne stated that he had

2 Gordon’s Hist. of the Rebellion,
pp. 88, 89.

3 Teeling’s Narrative, pp. 1338, 134.
Madden has collected much evidence
about the practice of torture, 1. 292—
333. In a letter to Lord Castlereagh,

ascertained that a man had been
whipped to death by a magistrate in
the King’s County, and by another man
who acted under his orders. (B.-Gen.
Dunne (Tullamore) to Lord Castle-
reagh, Aug. 2, 1798, I.8.P.0.)

22 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX,

There was Hepenstal, known as‘ the walking gallows,’!a soldier
in the Wicklow Militia, gigantic in size and herculean in strength,
who was accustomed to extort confessions by tying a rope round
his prisoner’s neck, flinging him over his shoulder, and holding
him thus suspended above the ground till the half-strangled
victim disclosed his arms. The figure, however, which stands
out in the clearest relief is that of Thomas Judkin Fitzgerald,
the High Sheriff of Tipperary. His proceedings in that county
became the subject of a judicial trial, and of elaborate debates
in the House of Commons, and are therefore known to us with
some certainty, and with their chief circumstances of aggrava-
tion and palliation. A short study of his history and character
is very instructive, as revealing a type which the stormy condi-
tions of Irish life naturally produced, and which, if Ireland were
ever separated from English influence and criticism, might once
more become common.

It was a character by no means destitute of estimable and
even noble qualities. His energy, courage, and knowledge of
the country were fully admitted by those who most severely
censured him, and after the rebellion was over he received a
warm and unanimous vote of thanks from the Grand Jury of
the county. In the beginning of the year, when rebellion was
known to be smouldering there, and when French invasion was
constantly expected, the principal gentlemen of his county
came to him, as the man most likely to grapple success-
fully with the conspiracy, and implored him to accept the
dangerous position of High Sheriff. He consented to do so, and
it was emphatically stated in Parliament that if Tipperary
escaped the horrors of rebellion which desolated Wicklow,
Wexford, Carlow, Kildare, and Meath, this exception was mainly
due to the vigilance and to the severities of its High Sheriff? A
curious letter from a prominent Tipperary gentleman describes
Fitzgerald’s dealing with a number of disaffected men. ‘The
High Sheriff made a speech of three hours, partly in Irish,
explaining what the [’rench would do, and said he would give

’ 1 See Madden’s United Irishmen, him is well known:
1. 308, 309. He is said also to have ‘Here lie the bones of Hepenstal,

shot some United Irishmen in a man- Judge, jury, gallows, rope and all.’
ner hardly distinguishable from naked * See Howell’s State Trials, xxvii.

murder. The epitaph written for 765, 766, 768, 787

cH. xxix. THOMAS JUDKIN FITZGERALD. 98

them a free pardon if they delivered their arms, pikes &c., which I
think we had got nearly in before, but I told him there were some
people in the parish who perhaps were not entitled to pardon.
He asked me their names and called them forward. Then he
asked me their crimes. I told him for being up (sic). He asked
them if they confessed ; they said ‘‘ Yes,” but had not received
their commissions. . . . He shook hands with them, gave them
a lecture, made them all kneel down and pray for the King, and
forgave all past offences.’ He was now going to raise a corps
of 100 men, ‘every one of whom are to be United Irishmen.
He has engaged some desperate scoundrels in this neighbourhood;
he expects when he has them together that he will be able to act
upon them as Sir John Fielding did on the Bow Street officers
—set a rogue to catch a rogue.’ He: issued a printed notice
ordering all who had left their homes to return at once to defend
them, and to provide quarters for his Majesty’s troops, at the
same time eulogising in very high-flown terms the conduct of a
certain Mrs. Bunbury, who with the assistance of two men-ser-
vants had successfully defended her house against a marauding
party. He trusted that ‘such heroic conduct of a lady of such
high distinction, eminent for beauty and elegance of manners,
will raise the crimson blush of shame on the pallid cheeks of those
puny heroes who so disgracefully and cowardly surrendered large
quantities of well-loaded arms to the rebels.’ +

Those who are well acquainted with Irish life and character
will, I think, recognise in these extracts a not unfamiliar type,
and under the auspices of Fitzgerald the disarmament of Tippe-
rary was carried out with tremendous, unscrupulous but success-
ful energy. At the head of forty men he attacked a large body
of armed rebels, and carried no less than thirty-seven carts full
of captured arms into Cashel. An Irish magistrate has usually
good reason, from secret information or common report, to suspect
men against whom no legal evidence can be obtained, of being
centres of crime and disaffection in their neighbourhoods. All
such men were now seized and mercilessly flogged, till through
pain or terror some kind of confession was obtained. The men
who in broad daylight had attacked and plundered Cahir had
hitherto defied detection, but now at last information was

} Sir J, Carden to Lord Rossmore (Templemore), May 5, 1798.

24 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

obtained from a man whose courage failed when he had been
tied to the stake for flogging. At Nenagh several men were
flogged, and great quantities of concealed arms were in conse-
quence discovered. At Carrick-on-Suir the flogging of a single
man produced such terror, that not only he but thirty-six others
acknowledged themselves to be United Irishmen. ‘There was
scarcely a man,’ it was said in Parliament, ‘on whom corporal
punishment had been inflicted to extort confession, who did not
acknowledge guilt and discover widely extended accompliceship
in treason. Immense quantities of arms of every kind were dis-
covered, and in consequence cartloads were brought daily into
Clonmel from all quarters of the county, and thus by the timely
interposition of this spirited magistrate were the lives and pro-
perties of the gentlemen and loyal inhabitants preserved on the
very brink of destruction.’ Fitzgerald himself, when his case
came into the law court, defended himself in a vehement speech,
declaring that ‘ while sheriff he felt himself authorised to take
every mode of obtaining confessions, and that in order to discover
the truth, if every other mode failed, he had a right to cut off
their heads.’ !

A very respectable man named Wright, a teacher of French
in the town of Clonmel, fell under his suspicion. He happened
to be connected with some of the principal families of the neigh-
bourhood, and his case therefore received an amount of attention
which would not have been given to a poor and unprotected
peasant. It appears that one of the suspected persons, under
the torture of flogging, stated that Wright held the important
position of secretary to the United Irishmen in the county, and
it is possible, though by no means certain, that some secret
information had been given against him. Fitzgerald formed a
strong, though apparently a perfectly erroneous, opinion that
this man was the head and centre of United Irishmen in Tip-
perary, and the repositary of all their secrets. The rebellion
was at this time raging furiously in Wicklow and Wexford, and
the fate of Ireland and the lives of multitudes of loyal men

1 Howell’s State Trials, xxvii. 762-
764, 768. The reporter says the
gravity of the court was a little dis-
composed by this method of obtaining
confessions. Beresford, in one of his
letters to Auckland, says: ‘So far as I

can see, no man has withstood the fear
of any corporal punishment, and cer-
tain I am, that without much outrage
hundreds would peach.” (Auckland
Correspondence, iii. 412.)

CH. XXIX, THOMAS JUDKIN FITZGERALD. 25

seemed trembling in the balance. ‘The peasantry of Tipperary,’
said the Attorney-General, ‘were to a man organised, armed,
and ready to take the field at a moment’s warning. <A body of
8,000 rebels were ready to attack the town of Clonmel.’ !

It was under these circumstances of terror and danger that
the following horrible scene was enacted, which was disclosed
in a trial before Lord Yelverton and Judge Chamberlain, and
afterwards related to the House of Commons by the son of the
former judge, who had been one of the counsel of Wright.
Having heard that charges had been brought against him,
Wright went of his own accord to the house of Fitzgerald, for
the purpose of surrendering himself and challenging investiga-
tion. Fitzgerald at once drew his sword, ordered him to his
knees, and without any kind of trial, of his own authority con-
demned him to be first flogged and then shot. Next day
Wright was dragged to a ladder in one of the streets to undergo
his sentence. He knelt down to pray, with his hat before his
face. Fitzgerald snatched his hat from him, trampled it on the
ground, struck the prisoner on the forehead with his sword,
kicked him, and dragged him by the hair. Wright was then
stripped naked, tied to the ladder, and fifty lashes were admi-
nistered. An officer who was in the town came up and asked
Fitzgerald the reason of the punishment. Fitzgerald handed
him a French note which had been found on the prisoner, and
said that although he did not himself understand the language,
he believed the major would find in it ‘ what would justify him
in flogging the scoundrel to death.’ The officer read it, and
found it to be a perfectly insignificant note postponing an
appointment. He explained this to Fitzgerald, but the Sheriff
notwithstanding ordered the flogging to proceed. Wright re-
mained silent. One hundred more lashes were administered
with frightful severity, leaving the wretched man a mass of
bleeding wounds, and it is even alleged that the High Sheriff
asked the commanding officer of the troops who were quartered
in Clonmel to send a file of soldiers to shoot the prisoner. If
the request was made, it was probably for the purpose of
exciting terror, for there appears to have been no attempt to
carry out the sentence. Wright was flung into prison, where

1 Howell, p. 785.

26 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

he remained for six or seven days without any medical assist-
ance, in a cell with no other furniture than a straw pallet
without covering.

An indemnity Act, as I have said, had passed, indemnifying
loyalists for illegal acts committed in order to suppress the re-
bellion ; but in spite of it, Wright carried his case in March 1799
into the law courts, contending that the indemnity only applied
to cases in which the magistrates had acted on clear, or at least
serious, evidence of treason, had taken all possible means of
ascertaining the guilt of the persons they punished, and had
exercised their power with common humanity. This view of
the law was fully supported by the two judges. They declared
that the indemnity was never intended to protect a wanton and
inhuman exercise of power, even for the purpose of putting
down rebellion, that there must have been a grave and serious
examination of the accused person, and that the magistrate was
only entitled to plead the indemnity Act when he was able to
produce information on oath of the grounds on which he acted.
Strong evidence was given of the loyalty of Wright, and no
evidence of the smallest value was given to impugn it. The
jury found a verdict for the plaintiff with 500/. damages, and
the judges fully concurred in the verdict, expressed their belief in
the perfect innocence of Wright, and added that if much larger
damages had been given they would not have been excessive.

The Government brought the case before Parliament, asking
for a secret committee, before which Fitzgerald might lay the
grounds of his conduct, and for a special Act of indemnity.
The debate was very animated and instructive. It was not
contended by the Ministers that Wright was a guilty man,
though the language both of the Attorney-General and of some
of the supporters of the Government implied that there were
reasons for believing it. On the other hand, Colonel Bagwell,
who was one of the principal gentlemen near Clonmel, declared
in the most emphatic terms, and from full knowledge, that
Wright was one of the most respectable and upright men in the
town, and that not a shadow of just suspicion attached to him,
and he asserted that there had not been more than a single case
in which an inhabitant of Clonmel was proved to be a United

1 Compare the two accounts in Howell, xxvii. 761, 769-771.

Hy SEES THOMAS JUDKIN FITZGERALD. ne

Irishman, although a number of the inhabitants of that town
had been punished as such by the High Sheriff. Both he and
Mr. Hutchinson, the brother of Lord Donoughmore, speaking
with an intimate knowledge of the country, declared that
although Fitzgerald had undoubtedly shown great zeal and
performed great services, they believed that many of those
whom he had tortured were perfectly innocent, and that his ‘ zeal
had in a great many instances carried him much too far, and
excited a great deal of reprobation from many gentlemen in the
country.’ In the town of Clogheen, Hutchinson said, a respect-
able innkeeper had been brought out of his house by Fitzgerald,
tied to a ladder, and whipped. When he had received some
lashes, Fitzgerald asked him, ‘Who swore you?’ The man
answered that he never was sworn. After a few more stripes,
the same question was repeated and the same answer given.
The scourging was again begun and the High Sheriff then said,
‘If you do not confess who swore you Ill cut you to death.’
The man, unable to bear the torture any longer, did name a
person who he said had sworn him. He was at once cut down,
when he said to Lord Cahir, ‘That was a lie, my lord. The man
never swore me; bit he said he would cut me to death if I did
not accuse somebody, and to save my life I told the lie.’

What confidence, it was asked, could be placed in confessions
obtained by such means? And what could be more hideously
repugnant both to the letter and the spirit and the practice of
English law than this systematic employment of torture as the
means of extorting confessions? ‘They did not object to the
general Act of indemnity which had been passed. It was an ex-
treme measure required by an extreme necessity, but if it was
not to be made the instrument of intolerable tyranny it must
be scrupulously limited, and its application carefully watched.
Nothing could be more clear, nothing could be more equitable,
than the principles laid down by the judges, but Parliament was
now asked to pass a measure which would have the effect of
sweeping away every safeguard. It was asked by an ew post facto
law made in favour of an individual who had notoriously ex-
ceeded all bounds of humanity and moderation, to reverse a
decision of a law court, arrived at after a patient trial, by a most
respectable jury, and with the full approbation of two eminent

28 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

judges. It was asked to shut out from all hope of redress and
compensation not only Wright, but the many other innocent men
who had been tortured on the vaguest and most unfounded sus-
picion, and unjustly branded as traitors. It was even asked to
deepen the stigma upon their characters by a parliamentary pro-
ceeding based upon evidence which was not to be disclosed.
‘Was Mr. Fitzgerald, it was asked, ‘to be permitted to give
secret evidence before a secret committee, and say what he
pleased against the characters of those persons, in his own justi-
fication, without giving them any opportunity of refuting his
assertions?’ ‘ Was Parliament to interfere between the justice
of the country and the innocent persons injured, by setting aside
the verdict of a most respectable jury, which had done more than
anything else to quiet the country?’ ‘Was it to shut the door
of justice against the people, and thus to tell them that they must
expect no share of protection from the laws, and must. therefore
look to some other means of vindication?’ Was it to give a dis-
tinct legislative sanction, said one member who was at this time
wavering on the question of the Union,! to the most reckless
and most wanton application of torture? If it did, ‘he de-
clared to God, whatever might be the sentiments of his consti-
tuents, he should for himself think the sooner that Parliament
was extinguished the better !’

Fitzgerald, however, had powerful defenders, and his case was
urged with eloquence and skill. It was the case, it was said, of
a man who at the earnest entreaty of the gentry of his county
had accepted a post of great difficulty and danger, who had done
so with no object except the public good, and who by his energy
and courage had undoubtedly saved the lives of thousands and
preserved a great county from carnage and ruin. It was said
that the method of extorting confessions by torture had never
been practised in England. Had there ever been in England,
had there been in any other country in modern times, a situation
even distantly resembling that of Ireland? Could anyone who
knew what was happening in Wexford and Wicklow, and how
far the conspiracy had extended in Tipperary, doubt that this
county was in imminent, daily, almost hourly, danger of becom-
ing from end to end a scene of massacre and desolation? It

» Browne, the member for Dublin University.

CH, XXIX. THOMAS JUDKIN FITZGERALD. 29

was by the floggings to extort confessions and discover arms
that the conspiracy was broken and the danger averted, and
every other means had signally failed. It would no doubt have
been much more regular if the suspected persons had been
brought before juries, but if such a course had been taken, many
of those who now denounced the conduct of Fitzgerald would
probably have been long since hanged from the lamp-posts or
pierced by the rebel pikes. It is true that no evidence had
been adduced at the trial to show the guilt of Wright. But the
reason of this was very manifest. Fitzgerald was bound by an
oath of secrecy not to reveal the information which had been
given to him. If he had disclosed the names of his informers
in order to vindicate himself in a court of justice, he would have
betrayed his duty and broken his oath, and handed over those
who had trusted to him to almost certain death. Hyeryone who
knew the country knew that ‘if the names of any of these men
were to be disclosed, he would not live twenty-four hours.’ At
the very last assizes, a witness who was going to Clonmel to
substantiate at a trial the evidence he had given before the
magistrate, was murdered near the gate of the town. A secret
committee of the: House of Commons was the only tribunal
before which such information could be disclosed, with safety to
the lives of the informants. Those who dilated upon the ex-
cessive violence of Fitzgerald said little about his conspicuous
merits and the strong claim he had established on the country,
and they made no adequate allowance for the extreme dangers
of the moment. At atime when a great and horrible rebellion
was raging in the adjoining counties, when Tipperary was
known to be fully armed and organised, when outrages were of
hourly occurrence, and when there was good reason to believe
that within a few days the whole county would be in a blaze,
was it surprising or unpardonable that a loyal man, on whom
the chief responsibility of preserving the peace devolved, should
have somewhat lost the coolness of his judgment, and have
sometimes acted with undue violence and precipitation? Con-
duct in such moments must not be judged by the ordinary rules
which are applicable to quiet times. Parliament had passed
an Act of amnesty casting a veil of pardon over the crimes
that had been committed by the rebels. Ought it not to cover

30 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

with an equally effective indemnity the excesses that might
have been committed by loyal men, for the purpose of suppress-~
ing and preventing those crimes? It was well known that it
was now the policy of the disloyal party to bring a multitude of
vexatious actions against men who had taken an active part in
suppressing the rebellion, and as it was impossible that the
secret information on which they acted should be disclosed, it
would often be impossible to defend them. It was the plain
duty of Parliament to stop this. ‘In considering the case of
Mr. Fitzgerald, the House should act from motives of general
policy, and not suppose it was meant to bias their judgment by
individual consideration for the petitioner. . . . It was the duty
of Parliament to protect loyal men for acts done merely with a
view to suppress rebellion, and not leave them open to endless
persecutions and suits at law.’

The question was argued at great length, and on-both sides
with conspicuous ability. It was at last settled by a new and
fuller indemnity Act, which was so drawn as to make such
prosecutions as that of Fitzgerald almost impossible. It pro-
vided that in all cases in which sheriffs or other officers or
persons were brought to trial for acts done in suppressing the
rebellion, a verdict for the plaintiff should be null and void unless
the jury distinctly found that the act had been done maliciously
and not with an intent of suppressing rebellion, preserving
public peace, or promoting the safety of the State; and that
even where the juries did find that the act was ‘ malicious,’ the
judge or judges who tried the case should have the power of
setting such verdicts aside.'

In relating this discussion I have departed from the
strict chronological order of my subject, but I have done
so because these debates throw a clear stream of authentic
light upon the methods of repression which were at this time
employed, the motives that inspired them, the arguments
by which they were defended. What Fitzgerald did in Tip-
perary is probably not very unlike what was done in Wexford,
Wicklow, and Kildare on the eve of the rebellion. In reading
such narratives we seem transported from the close of the
eighteenth century to distant and darker ages, in which the

1 39 Geo. III. c, 50.

CH. XXIX. DEFENCE OF MARTIAL LAW. 31

first conditions of civilised society had not yet been attained,
and to which its maxims and reasonings are inapplicable. Clare
and the party that followed him always justified this violence.
By the burning of houses and the transportation of great
numbers of untried men they had succeeded, they said, in dis-
arming Ulster, the province where disaffection was most dan-
gerous.. By the unsparing use of the lash, Fitzgerald had
broken the conspiracy in the great county of Tipperary. By
very similar means Dublin had been disarmed, and the scheme
for seizing it, paralysed. These methods did not, it is true,
prevent an outbreak in Wexford and some adjoining counties,
but they at least succeeded in forcing it into a premature explo-
sion before the requisite organisation and concert had been
completed, and before the French had appeared upon the scene.

The language of the report of the secret committee, in which
the Government stated their own case, does not make sufficient
allowance for the extent to which the rebellion was a mere
unorganised rising of men who were driven to desperation by
intolerable military tyranny, but it at least shows very explicitly
the Government policy. Up tothe middle of March, the writer
says, there was noserious intention of hazarding a rebellion with-
out foreign assistance. It was the policy of the leaders to risk
nothing as long as their party was gaining strength, to extend
their organisation, add to their stock of arms, and wait for events.
‘ It appears from a variety of evidence laid before your committee,
that the rebellion would not have broken out so soon as it
did, had it not been for the well-timed measures adopted by
Government subsequent to the proclamation of the Lord
Lieutenant and Council bearing date March 30... . From
the vigorous and summary expedients resorted to by Govern-
ment, and the consequent exertions of the military, the leaders
found themselves reduced to the alternative of immediate insur-
rection, or of being deprived of the means on which they relied
for effecting their purpose, and to this cause is exclusively to be
attributed that premature and desperate effort, the rashness of
which has so evidently facilitated its suppression.’ !

1 Report of the Secret Committee, Trishmen] wouldhave become stronger
pp. 20,26. So, too,intheexamination but for the means taken to make it
of McNevin, Castlereagh said,‘ You explode.’ (McNevin’s Pieces of Irish
acknowledge the union [of United History, p. 203.)

32 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxrx.

It was a desperate policy, and it had desperate results. If
regarded purely asa military measure, it was certainly successful,
but it must be added that it was largely responsible for the
ferocity with which the rebellion was waged, and that it con-
tributed enormously to the most permanent and deadly evils of
Trish life. The hatred and distrust of law and Government, the
inveterate proneness to seek redress by secret combination and by
barbarous crimes, the savage animosities of class and creed and —
party, that make Irish government so difficult, were not created,
but they were all immensely strengthened, by the events which
T am relating. It must be added, too, that if martial law forced
the rebellion into a premature explosion, and thus made it com-
paratively easy to deal with it, it also undoubtedly turned into
desperate rebels multitudes who, if they had been left un-
molested, would have been, if not loyal subjects, at least either
neutral spectators or lukewarm and half-hearted rebels. When
Emmet was asked what caused the late insurrection, he answered,
‘The free quarters, the house burnings, the tortures, and the
military executions in the counties of Kildare, Carlow, and
Wicklow.’ The answer was not a candid one, for long before
these things had begun a great part of Ireland had been orga-
nised for rebellion, and was only waiting for the appearance of
the French. The true causes, as we have seen, were partly
political, and for these the Government was very largely respon-
sible. The rebellion, however, among the ignorant Catholic
peasantry was not mainly political. They had been in the first
place allured into the conspiracy by promises of the abolition of
tithes, the reduction or abolition of rents, and the redress of all
real or imaginary grievances. They had then been persuaded
by the United Irishmen that the Orangemen, with the conni-
vance of the Government, intended to massacre them, and that
they could only find safety in the protection of a great armed
Catholic organisation. Once that organisation was planted
among them, it spread rapidly by example, intimidation, or
persuasion. The worst and most dangerous men came inevitably
to the front. Many crimes were committed. There was no
regular and well-disciplined force like the modern constabulary
sufficiently powerful to maintain the peace. Martial law was
declared, and the tortures, the house burnings, and other mani-

CH. XXIX. THE NEW DIRECTORY. 33

fold abuses that followed it soon completed the work, and drove
the people in large districts to desperation and madness.

One of the most energetic of the leaders in Wicklow has
left an account of his own experiences which is well worthy of
attention. ‘Self-preservation,’ he says, ‘was the motive which
drove me into rebellion. . . . As to effecting a change of Govern-
ment, it gave me little trouble or thought. Reform was much
more necessary among the people of all ranks than the Govern-
ment, which was good enough for me. If the laws were fairly
and honestly administered, the people would have little reason to
complain. It was private wrongs and individual oppression,
quite unconnected with the Government, which gave the bloody
and inveterate character to the rebellion in the county of Wick-
low. The ambition of a few interested individuals to be at the
head of affairs first lighted up the flame everywhere. . . . The
poor people engaged in the Irish rebellion of 1798 had very
little idea of political government. Their minds were more
occupied with their own sufferings or enjoyments; and many, |
might say most, were compelled to join in the rebellion on pain
of death.’!

The capture at’ Bond’s house on March 12 of the principal
leaders of the organisation, and the general disarmament under
martial law which speedily followed, had given an almost fatal
blow to the conspiracy ; but efforts, which for a short time seem
to have escaped the knowledge of the Government, were made
to reconstruct it under a new Directory, in which the most pro-
minent members were two brothers of the name of Sheares.
They were lawyers, sons of a very estimable and generous Cork
banker, who had sat for many years in the House of Commons,
and they had ever since 1793 borne an active, though not a
very considerable, part in the conspiracy. Henry Sheares, the
elder, was a weak, vain, amiable, insignificant man, utterly un-
suited for the position he assumed, and chiefly governed by the
stronger will of his brother. Of John Sheares I have already
spoken. He impressed most of those with whom he came in
contact as a man of ability and great energy, a genuine and
dangerous fanatic of the type which rose to the ascendant in

1 Holt’s Memoirs, i. 17, 18.
VOL, VIII. D

34 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

France during the Reign of Terror. Fitzgerald also, the des-
tined commander, was still at large.

A few anxious and eventful weeks passed before the storm
burst. Cooke, writing a week after the arrest at Bond’s, ex-
pressed his opinion that the North was seriously better, and
that the organisation in Dublin had been broken, but there was
no change, he thought, in the dispositions of the lower classes ;
a dangerous popish spirit had arisen; a French invasion would
probably produce a rising, and many of the yeomanry and
militia were disaffected.! I have noticed in the last chapter
the remarkable letter in which McNally had warned the Govern-
ment that the Orange passion and fanaticism which was rising
in opposition to the United Irishmen had begun at the April
assizes to invade the courts of justice. The same sagacious
judge also warned them of the evil effects of the military excesses
which had begun: ‘I had accounts yesterday from Kildare,’
he wrote, ‘by eye-witnesses, of military depredations the most
extraordinary, and I understand that among the Irish soldiers
murmurs take place at the duty of distressing their country-
men. ? He mentions how a yeoman had gone to the house of a
lawyer in Dublin to search for a green bottle-stand with the
label Erin-go-bragh ; how he had vainly searched the house in
hopes of finding it ; how fifty lashes were given to the servant of
the house, and how there was much reason to believe that this
wanton outrage was due to a simple motive of private revenge.3
* All that Colonel Duff and Fitzgerald (the Sheriff of Tipperary)
have done at Nenagh,’ he said in another letter, ‘is known in
Dublin—such as the public whippings and confessions, &c., and
the pointed manner in which the Catholics are distinguished.
Need I say that body are bursting with vengeance?’4 False
rumours, either arising out of panic or deliberately invented for
political purposes, were flying to and fro. One report was that
the Government intended immediately to introduce into Parlia-
ment a Bill for effecting a legislative union. Another was
that they had determined to renew all the penal laws against
papists as soon as the people were disarmed. It was said that

1 Auckland Correspondence, iii. *Tbid. Undated, but no doubt a
392, 393. little later than the letter last cited.
2 J. W., April-27, 1798. > Thid.

3 Ibid. May 21, 1798.

CH, XXIX. CATHOLIC DECLARATION OF LOYALTY. 0,
Lord Edward would appear in a few days at the head =f “A
rebel hosts; that a great portion of the regulars as well as the
militia would co-operate with him;! that a rebel attack upon
Dublin was impending, and that it would be followed by a
general massacre.?_ Dublin was proclaimed, and partly through
flogging, partly through secret information, great quantities of
arms were discovered both there and in the country.2 Two
days before the rebellion broke out, Lord Clare wrote that
2,000 pikes had been already seized in Dublin, and that he
had no doubt that there were still more than 10,000 concealed
in it and its environs. The county of Kildare, he thought, was
now nearly disarmed, for more than 4,000 pikes and 1,500 stand
of firearms had been seized there.*

The shadow of impending rebellion hung visibly over the
land, and a great part of Ireland was regarded and treated as
in a state of actual war. How completely this was the case is
remarkably shown by a very earnest declaration which was
issued as early as May 6 by the leading Catholic gentry and
clergy, including all the professors of Maynooth. It was
addressed to ‘ the deluded people’ of their persuasion ‘who are
now engaged in open rebellion against his Majesty’s Govern-
ment.’ It implored them ‘to return to their allegiance ;’ and
to listen to the advice of their bishops and to the gentry of their
own creed, rather than to ‘a set of desperate and profligate men
who are availing themselves of the want of education and ex-
perience in those whom they seek to use as instruments for
gratifying their own wicked and interested views.’ The writers
felt themselves ‘ bound to rescue their names, and as far as in
them lies the religion which they profess, from the ignominy
which each would incur from an appearance of acquiescence in
such criminal and irreligious conduct.’ They declared publicly,
on the eve of the struggle, their firm determination ‘to stand
or fall with the present existing Constitution,’ and they pre-
dicted that if the rebellion triumphed it would end in the

1, H., May 15, 1798. Higgins 2 J. W., May 21.
says that the rumour that the Govern- 5 See the letters of May (L.S.P.0.),
ment designed to re-enact the penal and several notices in Waulkner’s
code, was sent by the Dublin con- Journal for that month.
spirators widely through the country, * Auckland Correspondence, iii.

especially to the priests, 422.

uy

36 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

downfall of the clergy as well as of ‘the ancient families and
respectable commercial men of the Roman Catholic religion.’

The toils, however, were gradually closing around the few
leading conspirators who were still at large, and of these the
most important was Lord Edward Fitzgerald. The Government
were perfectly aware of his treason, though they had as yet no
evidence which they could produce in the law courts against
him. They knew his negotiations with France; they knew
from Reynolds, from McNally, and probably from others the
leading part he was taking in the military organisation of the
conspiracy, and shortly before the arrests at Bond’s, Lord Clare
had said to one of his relations, ‘ For God’s sake get this young
man out of the country; the ports shall be thrown open to you,
and no hindrance whatever offered.’? All warnings, however,
and all remonstrances were thrown away upon him; it was
soon well known to the Government that he was tobe at the
head of an immediate insurrection, and his arrest became a
matter of the first public importance.

Towards the end of 1797 Higgins discovered that an obscure
and needy Catholic barrister named Magan, who was connected
with the conspiracy, was prepared to sell secret information to
the Government.? Ags he was amember of a baronial committee
and acquainted with some of the leading conspirators,‘ his offer
was readily accepted,® and it was soon found that he could
render assistance of the utmost importance.6 On April 22 he

1 Plowden, ii. 679, 680.

2 Moore’s Life of Lord EF. Fits-
gerald, ii. 58 (8rd edition),

3 The first mention of him in the
LS.P.O. is, I think, in a letter of Hig-
gins, Nov. 24,1797. On Jan. 5, 1798,
Higgins says he had not seen Magan
since, but will ‘fix him to meet you at
dinner at 6 P.M. to-morrow, and shall
in the course of this day or in the
morning give you a hint of his terms.’
The addresses of these letters are not
given, but they were probably written
either to Cooke or Pollock.

4 Feb. 6, 11798.

* <T suppose M. will call on you.
He was with me this day, and seemed
as if I had received a second 1002. for
him. For God’s sake send it, and
don’t let me appear in so awkward a
situation. (I, H., March 15.) When

the part played by this informer be-
came important, bis name was never
given in full. He was spoken of
simply as M., and an important letter
is endorsed ‘Mag.,’ but the hand-
writing of letters written by him is
clearly the same as that of one or two
later letters signed Francis Magan,
and the correspondence generally took
place through Higgins.

5 ‘This night there is to be a meet-
ing at Lawless’s. I shall learn to-
morrow the nature of it. I would
wish to put you in possession of some-
thing M. knows of, that you may ask
and interrogate him about them (sie),
and let him agree to come to a fixed
point of information. I know it is (or
will be from his late election) in his
power.’ (EF. H., March 28.)

CH, XXIX. PURSUIT OF LORD EDWARD. ot

wrote to Cooke: ‘I did not receive your promised favour till
Easter Monday last, and on reading your letter requested Mr.
H. to know your leisure for an interview. . . . He wrote me a
most pressing letter not to leave town. . . . At the risk of my
personal safety I accompanied him in a carriage to your door.
...TI have all along had in‘’contemplation to put.you in
possession of some act that would essentially serve the Govern-
ment as well as the country, and it may not be very long till
such is effected. At present, perhaps, you may not know that
Lord Edward lurks about town and its vicinity; he with Nelson
was a few days ago in the custody of a patrol or party in the
neighbourhood of Lucan, but not being known and assuming
other names, they were not detained for any length of time.
Nelson is now the most active man, and affects, if he really does
not hold, the first situation. For my part I sometimes imagine
he is the person that communicated with Government; however,
suspicion has not pointed at him. His absence, I know, at the
present moment would be considered as very fatal to the cause
in Dublin. I have just this moment heard Lord Edward has
been mostly in Thomas Street.’ The remainder of the letter is
devoted to the move general prospects of the society and to the
assurance of immediate aid which, as I have already mentioned,
had come from the French Directory.!. A week later Higgins
wrote that he knew from unquestionable authority that Lord
Edward Fitzgerald was in Dublin waiting to take the command
of the Leinster legions, and that the rising was to take place
on old May-day, and he adds: ‘If you can see M. this night
you can bring out where Lord Edward is concealed.’ ‘ What
hour shall I bring M. this night, if your leisure will permit ?
Remember to bring him to a point—I mean about Lord
-Edward.’?

Something, however, occurred to prevent the capture of Lord
Edward. He appears at this time to have frequently changed
his abode. As Government had obtained more certain intelli-
gence of the impending revolt, the pursuit became more severe,

1 Anonymous letter to Cooke en- ii. 406, 408; Moore’s Life of Lord L.
dorsed ‘ Mag.,’ Stephen’s Green, April itzgerald, ii. 80. Neilson’s name is
22, 1798. On the arrest of Lord often spelt ‘ Nelson’ in the correspon-
Edward and Neilson near the borders dence of the time.
of the county Kildare, see Madden, 2H, Man Veelivogs

38 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

and on May 11 a proclamation was issued offering a reward of
1,000/. for his apprehension.! On the 15th Higgins wrote a
long letter to Cooke, in the course of which he said: ‘M. seems
mortified that when he placed matters within the reach of
Government the opportunity was neglected.’ ? Higgins adds that
a meeting had been held on Friday night at the house of a man
named Murphy in Parliament Street, that letters had been sent
out to many parts of the country, and that in a few days Lord
Edward would appear at the head of a rebellion. ‘Lord
Edward, he concludes, ‘skulks from house to house—has
watches and spies around, who give an account of any danger
being near. It is intended he shall go into the country (it is
thought Kildare) and make a rising. Give me leave to remind
you of sending to M.’

It is a strange and even mysterious thing that Fitzgerald
had not before been arrested; and it can only be accounted for
by the extreme languor of the search before May 11. Neilson
and Lawless, who were well known, and several other more
obscure conspirators, appear to have been continually about
him, and he seems to have acted with the utmost rashness.
More than once he visited his wife in disguise, and, as we
have seen, it was known to the authorities that he especially
haunted Thomas Street. He had been there in the house of a
feather merchant named Murphy—the house in which he was
ultimately captured—for about a fortnight. He subsequently
stayed in the house of another feather merchant named Cormick
in the same street, and he had a third place of concealment in
that street in the private dwelling of a public-house keeper
named Moore. It is scarcely possible that he can have remained
so long in this neighbourhood, frequently accompanied by ten
or twelve friends who acted as a bodyguard, without the fact
being widely known, and Fitzgerald appears to have come to a
rather remarkable extent in contact with men who gave infor-

1 Madden, ii. 411.

2 The letter goes on: ‘ The strange
story Neilson told of receiving a mes-
sage to wait on you by Hyde, and the
answer he returned, induces M. to
believe Neilson communicates with
you, or that he dare not have sent any
such kind of message, If so, M. says

Neilson is playing a double game, for
not only in every club and society or
company he is vociferous in the abuse
of Government —how they broke word
and faith with him, as they do with
every person who should unhappily
place confidence in them.’
8 FW. H., May 15.

CH, XXIX, TRIAL OF LORD KINGSTON. 39

mation to the Government. Reynolds, as we have seen, had
twice visited him after his flight, but it was his obvious wish to
assist his escape. A man named John Hughes, who was cer-
tainly at one time an informer, had dined with him at Cormick’s
house on April 20, and Cox, the former editor of the‘ Union Star,’
was also much about him. Afterthe offer of the reward the danger
was manifestly greater, but Fitzgerald did not abandon his old
haunts. On the night of May 17 he was sleeping in the house
of Moore.!

In a long unsigned information, dated May 17, addressed to
Cooke, some unknown writer mentions thathe had been the whole
day on foot, had traced his ‘ friend’ without knowing at first
where ‘ he was to be brought to ;’ and at last ‘had his meeting’
at a pastrycook’s near Grafton Street. He had learnt that a plan
was formed for a rising on Wednesday or Thursday night; that
it was to take place in the North two days before the Leinster
rising, in order to draw off the troops from Dublin. It was
hoped that 45,000 men from Wicklow, Kildare, and the county of
Dublin could then be brought together to capture the metropolis.
The first object would be to seize the money in the bank. The
informant then speaks of two public-houses in Thomas Street
which he had visited, and says that he would meet his friends
‘early in the morning to obtain further information.’ ?

The attention of Dublin was at this moment for a brief space
diverted from all other subjects by a melancholy pageant which
was taking place in the Parliament. The Harl of Kingston had
lately shot Colonel Fitzgerald, who, with circumstances that were
peculiarly dishonourable, had seduced his daughter, and on
May 18 he was put on his trial for murder, before his peers. It
was the third time in the eighteenth century that such a scene
had been enacted in the Irish House of Lords. Lord Santry
had been tried and convicted of murder in 1739. Lord Netter-
ville had been tried and acquitted in 1745. Everything was
now done to enhance the solemnity of the trial. All the Lords of
the kingdom were summoned, and few were absent. They walked

1 Madden has traced Lord Ed- abode at Murphy’s. It is clear from

ward’s movements during his conceal-
ment with great care and minuteness.
He has made, however, one important
mistake. He says (ii. 406) that on
May 17, Fitzgerald had taken up his

the statement of Murphy (p. 412) that
he had not.

2 Information May 17. Endorsed
‘Sproule.’ This seems to have no con-
nection with Higgins and Magan.

40 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

in their robes of state in solemn procession from the House of
Lords to the colonnade in front of the building, and thence to
the House of Commons, which had been fitted up for the occa-
sion. The Lord Chancellor, bearing a white wand and seated
in the Speaker’s chair, presided as High Steward. The temporal
peers were ranged on his left, and the spiritual peers on his right.
The judges in their robes occupied the table in the centre. A
brilliant audience, including the peeresses and their daughters,
and the Commons with their families and friends, filled every
available space. The accused, clad in deep mourning, was
brought from the Castle. He entered the house with his eyes
fixed on the ground, knelt as he heard the charge and pleaded
not guilty. The King-at-Arms in his party-coloured robe pre-
ceded him, bearing the Kingston arms emblazoned on a shield,
and close by stood the executioner, holding his axe, but with the
edge averted from the prisoner.

Tke great provocation under which Lord Kingston had acted
had given him the warm sympathies of the spectators, and there
was a deep and anxious suspense when the witnesses for the
prosecution were three times called. But though the wife and
children of the deceased man were summoned, no accuser
appeared, and an acquittal became inevitable. The peers

‘adjourned to their own house. ‘The bishops claimed their old
privilege of not voting on a question of life and death. The lay
peers returned in procession to the Commons, and unanimously
pronounced their brother peer not guilty, and Lord Clare, having
announced the verdict, broke his wand and dissolved the
assem bly.}

The pageant, as it appears, might have had a very different
termination. On that day a most important letter came from
Higgins. It began with a detailed account of a meeting which
had taken place on the preceding night, when letters were read
from the country censuring the organised United Irishmen of
the city for not having yet made a single effort. A proposal
was then made to attack the Chancellor and peers when they
were assembled for the trial. It appears to have been suggested
by Lord Edward. It was discussed at length, and at last nega-

1 An interesting account of this circumstances of the death of Col.
trial was sent by Bishop Percy to his Fitzgerald are related at full in the
wife (May 18). See, too, Barrington’s Annual Register, 1797, pp. 55, 56,
Personal Sketches, i, 195-201. The

CH. XXIX, LORD EDWARD TRACKED. 4i

tived by a majority of two.! Higgins adds that an alternative
plan for an attack on the Castle was then proposed and adopted,
‘consented to by Lord Edward and those who now form the
secret committee or Directory, and is set down to take place
some night in the next week. M. thinks it is on the ensuing
Tuesday or Wednesday, but will be certain for your information.’ ?
Having given this important intelligence, Higgins proceeded to
indicate in detail, on the authority of his friend, the place where

that night Lord Edward might be found.
The place pointed out was on the road from Thomas Street,
where Lord Edward was now concealed, to Usher’s Island, where

1 Tt appears from a later letter
that Magan not only furnished this
information, but also played a great
part in the decision. After the death
of Lord Edward, Higgins wrote:
‘When I waited on you early in the
last month and told you of the inten-
tion of the rebels to rise ou the 14th
ult., you could scarcely be brought to
credit such. However, it turned out
a most happy circumstance that Lord
Edward was then with M., who found
means to prevail on him to postpone
his bloody purpose in the city. Else
on the day of Earl Kingston’s trial
you would have had a shocking scene
of blood and havoc in the city. I
should not have used the word prevail,
because Lord Edward’s purpose was
put to a vote and carried by M.’s
negative only.’ (F. H., June 30, 1798.)
In another letter, probably referring
to this, Higgins takes much credit to
himself. ‘Sure I am if [ had not
prevailed upon the person to come for-
ward and act in the manner he did
when the first attack was intended at
the H. of C., the nobility and Govern-
ment as well as the city of Dublin
would have been involved in a scene
of blood.’ (F. H., June 24.) He recurs
to the same subject July 12, 1798.

2 Higeins goes on in his broken,
ungrammatical style: ‘Neilson and
others have so prejudiced his mind
against any promise made by Govern-
ment, and of their breaking faith
with those who serve their cause,
after the service is rendered, that my
utmost exertions have been directed
to keep M. steady, who says the 3002.
promised should have been given at
once; but only giving two—and such
a long interval between, as made him
conceive Neilson’s assertion true—and

that he then was, and would still be
further neglected. However, I have
given him leave to draw upon me, and
fully satisfied him of the honourable
intentions of Government where ser-
vice was actually performed, and of
your kind attention if he would go
forward among the meetings, com-
municate what is transacting, and if
found necessary point out the spot
where they may be seized, &c. This
he has at length agreed todo... .I
also mentioned your kind promise of
obtaining 1,0002. for him (without the
mention of his name or enrolment of
it in any book) on having the business
done, which he pointed out before the
issuing of the proclamation. He
therefore puts himself on your honour
not to admit of any person to come
and search his house (which, I ven-
tured to promise, you would have ob-
served), but to place watches after
dusk, this night near the end of Wat-
ling Street or two houses up in that
street from Usher’s Island, another
towards the Queen’s bridge, and a
third in Island Street, the rear of
the stables near Watling Street, and
which leads up towards Thomas Street
and Dirty Lane, and at one of these
places they will find Lord Edward
disguised, He wears a wig and may
have been otherwise metamorphosed,
attended by one or two, but followed
by several armed banditti with new
daggers. He intends to give battle if
not suddenly seized. Lady Hgality
complains dreadfully about Lord Cas-
tlereagh ordering a short passport.
She will have letters sewed or quilted
in her clothes, and goes to Hamburgh.
I shall send you particulars. (F, H.,
May 18, 1798.)

42 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

Magan lived, and there is some reason to believe that the inten-
tion was to arrest him when he was going to the house and on
the invitation of his betrayer.! Major Sirr at the head of a party
was present at the appointed hour, and the two parties encoun-
tered. A confused scuffle took place in the dark, narrow, tor-
tuous streets. Sirr was knocked down. Lord Edward escaped
and made his way to the house of Murphy in Thomas Street,
where he had been formerly concealed, and where he intended
to remain through the 19th.

The extreme fatuity with which the conspiracy was conducted

is curiously shown by the fact that on this very day, on which
the most careful concealment was so imperatively required, the
brilliant uniform which Fitzgerald was to wear at the rising, was
sent to the house of Murphy. Neilson, who had been sixteen
months in prison, and was therefore well known to the authori-
ties, called there in the course of the morning. The street was
swarming with soldiers, who were well aware that Lord Edward
must be in the neighbourhood, and a public-house belonging to
Moore was searched. In spite of all this Neilson came a second
time to the house in the broad daylight of the afternoon, stopped
with Fitzgerald to dinner, then left the house, it is said, very
abruptly, and did not even shut the hall-door behind him.?

A few minutes after his departure, Major Sirr, accompanied
by Major Swan, Captain Ryan, and eight or nine private soldiers,
arrived. As the door had been left open they entered without
noise, resistance, or delay, but Sirr remained with the soldiers
below to prevent a rescue or an escape, while Swan and Ryan
mounted the staircase. Swan first entered the room where
Fitzgerald and Murphy were. The latter remained completely
passive, but Fitzgerald sprang from the bed on which he was
lying, and brandishing a very formidable dagger, attacked and
wounded Swan. The details of the conflict that ensued have been
somewhat variously related. The wounded man fired a pocket
pistol at Fitzgerald, but missed his aim, and, according to the

1 This is stated by Mr. Fitzpatrick
on the authority of a member of the
Moore family in Thomas Street, with
whom Lord Edward stayed. (See
Sham Squire, pp. 110-114.) According
to the earlier biographers of Fitzgerald
he was going to Moira House, where

his wife was, and which was in the
immediate neighbourhood of Magan’s
house.

2 See Murphy’s narrative in Mad-
den’s United Irishmen, ii. 414, 415;
Moore’s Life of Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald, ii, 85-87.

CH, XXX. CAPTURE OF LORD EDWARD. 43

account of Murphy, he then rushed out of the room to summon
the soldiers to his aid. Whether he left it or not, it is certain
that Ryan, armed only with a sword-cane, now grappled most
courageously with Fitzgerald, and although he speedily received
a mortal wound in his stomach, and was again and again stabbed,
he clung to his prisoner till the soldiers arrived. They found
Ryan bathed in blood and rapidly sinking, and Fitzgerald stood so
fiercely at bay that Sirr fired in self-defence. The ball lodged in
Fitzgerald’s right arm near the shoulder; he staggered for a mo-
ment, and then struggling desperately was seized and captured.!

The capture of Lord Edward Fitzgerald was undoubtedly
due to the information which was furnished by Magan through
Higgins. It was owing to them that he had been obliged to
take refuge in Murphy’s house on the night of the 18th, and
they had clearly pointed out the quarter of Dublin in which he
was concealed. I do not, however, think that it was they who
indicated the particular house. There is no trace of any com-
munication having been received from them on the 19th, and
Major Sirr afterwards stated that he only obtained the informa-
tion of the hiding place of Lord Edward a few minutes before
he went there.? It-is probable that the fact of Neilson, who was

1 Madden has printed the ac-
count of Murphy, who was in the
room during the earlier part of the
arrest, and he has also reprinted from
the Castlereagh Correspondence the
account given by the son of Ryan,
who received it from his father. They
agree remarkably, and I have followed
them in the text. In the Life of
Reynolds (ii. 230-236) there is another
account which the biographer says
his father received from Sirrand Swan,
and which was published in the life-
time of the former. It differs in
several small particulars from the
narratives of Murphy and Ryan.
Neither in the account by Reynolds
nor in that given by Moore in his
Life of Lord E. Hitzgerald is any
mention made of Swan’s having
quitted the room. The widow of
Ryan, afterwards writing to the Irish
Government about a pension, said:
‘My poor husband often told me that
had he not determined to take Lord
Edward at all events, whether he for-
feited his life or not, he was certain
he would have escaped through the

window, which had a communication
with the other houses, as he was left
above fifteen minutes without assist-
ance.’ (July 14, 1798, LS.P.0.) The
last sentence is no doubt an enormous
exaggeration, but in such moments
seconds appear like minutes. In
another letter Mrs. Ryan says her
husband was left alone with Fitzgerald
ten minutes after he was wounded.
(July 29, 1798.) Camden’s account
gives the impression of Swan having
had the more prominent part in the
arrest (Camden to Portland, May 20,
1798), and Beresford and Cooke both
represent Ryan as having only come
in towards the end of the scuftle, and
just before the arrival of the soldiers,
Auckland Correspondence, iii. 414,
418. See, too, “aulkner’s Journal,
May 22, 1798.

2 Moore’s Life of Lord H. Fits-
gerald, ii. 86. Beresford said that
Sirr went to Murphy’s house ‘ to search
for pikes, upon a vague idea that Lord
EK. Fitzgerald had been there or in
the next house.’ (Auckland Corre-
spondence, iii, 414.) Inthe account in

44 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH OEX IX:

well known to be a constant companion of Fitzgerald, having
been seen to leave Murphy’s house, furnished the clue, and it
is tolerably certain that many of the neighbours must have
known that this house had been for a considerable time the
hiding place of the rebel chief. It is not surprising that grave
suspicions of treachery should have attached to Neilson, but
they are, I believe, unfounded. Neilson, though he is one of
the heroes of a class of popular writers in Ireland, is not a man
deserving of any respect. He had been released from prison in
the preceding February on condition that ‘he should not belong
to any treasonable committee,’ but immediately after the arrest
at Bond’s house he broke his promise and became one of the
most active organisers of the conspiracy.! He was a drunkard,
and therefore peculiarly likely to have betrayed a secret, and the
letters I have quoted appear to me to establish a strong probability
that he either had, or intended to have, some secret communication
with the Government. Two facts, however, are quite sufficient
to acquit him of the charge of having deliberately betrayed
Fitzgerald. Major Sirr discovered that he was one of the chief
organisers of a desperate plot to rescue the prisoner,? and the

Reynolds’s biography it is stated that
on the day before the arrest Cooke
informed Major Sirr that if he would
go on the following day between five
and six in the evening to the house of
Murphy in Thomas Street he would
find Fitzgerald there. (Reynolds’s
Life, ii. 229.) I believe, however, this
account to be inaccurate. There
is nothing in the information of
Higgins about Murphy’s house. The
expectation was that Fitzgerald would
be arrested in the street on the night
of the 18th, and it was with this
object that Sirr acted. Murphy said
that he was told that one of Lord
Hdward’s bodyguard gave some in-
formation, and there were various
other rumours. Compare Madden, ii.
424; Fitzpatrick’s Sham Squire, pp.
122, 123.

1 Madden, iv. 52, 57-70.

2 Ibid. ii. 408, 440; iv. 58.
Neilson was again arrested on ac+
count of this plot. Higgins wrote:
‘Your supposed quondam communi-
cator, Neilson, had an interview with
a military committee on Friday last
and a further one on Tuesday—by a
military committee I mean a number

of militia men and soldiers united in
the infernal cause of murder—who
received directions from Neilson how
to act... . Surely you could get
much information from this infamous
renegade villain, who, I believe, has
promised you information (as every
good subject ought) how to meet the
plans and counteract the designs of
rebels; but he has gone from one
quarter of the country to the other,
and to the most remote . . . inculca-
ting rebellion. ... Neilson, therefore,
can develop almost every plan.’
(F. H., May 25,1798.) Itis probable
that Neilson, in communicating with
the Government, only did so to betray
them. In February Higgins wrote:
‘Neilson made communications to
Bond (and through him to all the
leaders of the infernal conspiracy) of
your visiting him, and of the various
questions you asked. .. . It was re-
solved at their meeting that if their
cause succeeded, Neilson should be
the first object of reward ;’ and in a
later letter : ‘ If Neilson is not bringing
you information he is a most danger-
ous person to remain here. He has
dined, supped &c. among the entire

CH, XXIX. IMPORTANCE OF THE ARREST, 45

promised 1,000/. was duly, though tardily, paid through Higgins
to Magan.

The capture was a matter of transcendent importance, for the
insurrection was planned for the 23rd, and Fitzgerald was to be
its commander. There is not, indeed, the smallest reason to
believe that Fitzgerald had any of the qualities of a great, man,
or was in the least likely to have led his country to any high or
honourable destiny. But he was a well-known public man.
He was a Protestant. He was a member of a great aristocratic
family, and if he had appeared at the head of the rebellion, it is
extremely probable that the northern rebels would have risen at
his call, though they remained almost passive when they found
the rebellion in Leinster headed by fanatical priests and by obscure
country gentlemen of whom they had never heard. In that case
the sea of blood which in the next months deluged a few
counties would have probably overspread the whole island. From
this great calamity Ireland was saved by the arrest of May
19. Of the two men who were concerned in furnishing the
information, different judgments must be formed. Higgins was
an open, prominent, consistent loyalist, who betrayed no one in
rendering this great’ service to his country. Magan, as far as
appears, was a simple informer. Whether any motives higher
and better than a mere desire for gain inspired him, we have no
means of judging.! On the very night in which Lord Edward
was arrested, he was elected a member of the head committee of
the United Irishmen.

‘On the announcement of Lord Edward being taken,’
Higgins wrote on the following morning, ‘the butchers in
Patrick’s Street Market and a number from the Liberty, it seems,

of the party.’ (F. H., Feb. 21, March
15, 1798.) It appears certain that

solvent, and the creditor gave up
all expectation of repayment. Some

if the United Irish leaders had not
afterwards made a compact with
the Government, Neilson would have
been tried, and the Government had
much hope of convicting him.

1 Mr. Fitzpatrick, who has thrown
more light than any other writer upon
the career of Magan, has discovered
one very curious fact. Magan’s father
had borrowed 1,000/. from a gentle-
man named Fetherston, for which the
latter held a joint bond from father
and son. The elder Magan died in-

years later, when the original creditor
was dead, Francis Magan appeared
unsolicited at the house of his son
and paid the debt. Mr, Fetherston
was extremely surprised, as he had
made no demand for the payment, and
as he knew that Magan was at this
time a poor man and entirely without
practice at the bar. It would be
curious to know whether the trans-
action took place shortly after the
arrest of Lord Edward. See Mr.
Fitzpatrick’s Sham Squire, p. 130.

46 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

got pikes at Carman Hall, Garden Lane, and Hanover Lane to
attempt a rescue, but on finding the prisoner had been removed
they desisted.’ Higgins adds that the armed bodyguard who
usually accompanied Lord Edward were carousing at a house in
Queen’s Street at the time of the arrest; that Fitzgerald had
intended to go down to Finglass on the following night ; that on
Thursday night he was to have taken the command of a great
body of assembled rebels, with the intention of at once march-
ing at their head upon Dublin. ‘The sacking of Beresford’s
bank, burning the custom-house, seizing the Castle &c. was deter-
mined on. . . . M. recommends the most strict watchfulness of
persons going out and coming in the different avenues of the
city. To-morrow he will send further irformation. Hewas elected
last night of the committee. I had a great deal of exertion to go
through to keep him steady, and was obliged last week to advance
him money: as I also stand pledged in the business to-him in the
payment of the 1,000/. or otherwise, have the goodness to let it
be done immediately, and do away the improper impression he has
received of the performance of Government promises.’ !

Lord Edward Fitzgerald was removed to Newgate, and con-
fined in a cell which had lately been occupied by Lord Ald-
borough. The vicissitudes of that sick-bed have been followed
by several generations of Irish readers and writers with an
intensity of interest hardly bestowed on any other page of Irish
history. On the first day he suffered greatly from the inflam-
mation of his wound, but it was soon relieved by suppuration ; it
was then believed for several days that he would recover, but
fever, brought on and aggravated by anxiety of mind, set in.
The death of Ryan, which took place on Thursday, the 31st,

1 ¥, H., May 20 Compare, too,
_Ais letter, June 30. On June 5, Hig-
gins writes: ‘I cannot do anything
with M. until you are pleased tosettle,
though I advanced him money.’ On

were so kind as to say that you would
immediately obtain what was pro-
mised to M. On June 20 the sum
was paid to Higgins, and appears
in the list of secret-service money :

the 8th he writes: ‘I cannot get
from M. a single sentence of who
assumes a Directory. I have so fre-
quently put him off about the pay-
ment of the 1,0002. that he thinks I
am humbugging him. I do entreat,
dear sir, as I stand pledged in this
business (however badly I am used
myself), you will not longer delay
having it settled for M” On the 18th
of the same month he writes: ‘ You

“KH. H., discovery ot (ake hs 000k
See Madden, i. 371. Magan had
some later communications with the
Government directly, or through Hig-
gins. He especially exerted his in-
fluence to have the soldiers removed
from the house of a lady where they
appear to have been living at free
quarters, and he wrote about a sum
of 5002. which Cooke had promised
him,

OH. XXIX, LORD EDWARD’S DEATH-BED. 47

made an ignominious death the almost certain result of a trial,
and it probably had a great part in hastening the catastrophe.!
The Government determined that in the very dangerous condi-
tion of affairs no friends or relations should be admitted to persons
confined for treason, and they refused till the last moments
to relax their rule. They offered, however, to permit .Lord
Edward to see the family chaplain, which he declined, but he
saw and prayed with the chaplain of the gaol. On Friday he
became much worse. On Saturday there was an execution
in the gaol that agitated him greatly, He prayed fervently that
God would pardon and receive all who fell in the cause. On
Sunday morning he seemed a little better, but the improvement
was slight and transient, and on that day his aunt, Lady Louisa
Conolly, received a message from the doctor that he was dying.
This lady, whose rare gifts of mind and character made a
deep impression on her contemporaries, was sister of the Duke
of Richmond, and wife of one of the most important members
of the Irish Parliament. She was deeply attached to Lord
Edward, and she at once came from Castletown to Dublin in
hope of seeing him for the last time. She was accompanied by
her niece, Miss Emily Napier, who has written a singularly
interesting account of what occurred. They drove first to the
Viceregal Lodge in the Phcenix Park, to ask permission from
Lord Camden. Lady Louisa entered alone, but soon returned in
a state of extreme agitation, saying that although she had even
knelt at the feet of the Lord Lieutenant he had refused her,
declaring that neither the Speaker nor the Chancellor would
approve of any relaxation of the rule. Orders had been given
to the coachman to return to the country, when Miss Napier
suggested that her aunt should apply to the Chancellor, who had
_always been her warm admirer. The suggestion was adopted.
Lord Clare happened to be dining at home, and he at once
received Lady Louisa with great kindness, told her that al-
though the Lord Lieutenant had refused her, and although the
orders were peremptory, he would take the responsibility of
admitting her, and would himself accompany her to the gaol.

1 Moore’s Life of Lord H. Fitz- turn he died very unexpectedly of
gerald, ii, 132. Lord Clare afterwards water on his chest.’ (Debate on Sept.
said: ‘For some days he seemed to 3.) See Haulhkner’s Journal, Sepi. 4,
recover, until having taken asudden 1798.

48 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

With a thoughtful kindness he suggested that they should first
drive to Leinster House and take up Lord Henry, the favourite
brother of Lord Edward, who had hitherto been denied access
to the prisoner. Lord Clare and Lord Henry Fitzgerald drove
first in Lord Clare’s carriage, followed by Lady Louisa Conolly
and her niece. At the door of the prison Lord Clare said
that he must restrict his permission to the aunt and brother,
and Miss Napier was driven back to Leinster House to await
their return.! They were but just in time. Lord Edward at
first knew them, but soon after became delirious. He died
early on the morning of June 4.?

The capture of Lord Edward Fitzgerald was immediately
followed by the annihilation of the new Directory through the
arrest of the two Sheares and the flight of Lawless. Their arrest,
as is well known, was due to information given by Captain
Armstrong of the King’s County Militia—a regiment which had
the reputation of containing many disaffected men, and which
was then quartered in a camp that had been formed at Lehauns-
town or Loughlinstown, about seven miles from Dublin. Arm-
strong had fora long time been accustomed to frequent the shop

1 J am indebted to the kindness
of Lady Bunbury for my knowledge
of Miss Napier’s very interesting un-
published narrative. Sir W. Napier
in a letter to Dr. Madden (ii. 454,
455) described, though with less sim-
plicity, the part played by Camden
and Clare in this matter.

2 Lord Castlereagh in an interest-
ing letter of Wickbam (June 4, 1798,
Record Office) describes the last days
of Lord Edward’s life. See, too, Cam-
den to Portland, June 4; a letter of
Elliot to Pelham in the Pelham MSS.,
and a letter of Beresford to Auckland
(Auckland Correspondence, ii, 442,
443). Lady Louisa Conolly related
the particulars of her interview with
her dying nephew in a letter to Mr.
Ogilvie, which is printed in Moore’s
Life of Lord Edward Litzgerald, ii.
135-139. Lord Clare alluded to this
scene with much good feeling in a
speech in the House of Lords, Sept. 3.
Miss Napier writes that, returning
home after the death of Lord Edward,
Lady Louisa Conolly related to her
the circumstancesof the last interview
as she had stated them in her letter
to Mr, Ogilvie, ‘adding that nothing

could exceed Lord Clare’s kindness ;
that he had allowed nobody to remain
in the room but himself; had walked
away from the bed on which the poor
sufferer lay so as not to hear anything
that passed between them, and in
short had shown her the tenderness of
abrother rather thana friend, and with
all his apparent sternness of manner
had cried like a woman when he saw
him dying.’ She adds: ‘ As I was the
sole witness of this melancholy trans-
action, and that it is not generally
known how entirely it was owing to
Lord Clare’s better feeling that this
last interview between my poor cousin
and his aunt and brother was per-
mitted, I have felt that it is but
justice to his memory to record it.’
(Account of the death of Lord H. Fitz-
gerald written by Miss Emily Napier.)
A letter from Lady Louisa Conolly
to Lord Camden (June 8) (also in the
possession of Lady Bunbury), mentions
that Lord Edward was buried at
eleven at night in St. Werburgh’s
Church. A single carriage and an
escort of twelve yeomen attended his
remains.

CH, XXIX. CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG.

of a Dublin bookseller named Byrne, who was himself a Unite
Trishman and a great publisher of political pamphlets. It does
not appear that in going there he had the smallest intention of
becoming either a rebel or an informer; but he was a man of
literary tastes, and was accustomed to buy all the political
pamphlets that appeared. He was an ardent reader of Paine,
for whose religious and political views he seems to have felt and
expressed a great speculative admiration, and he talked freely,
and, as he himself acknowledged, indiscreetly, about the badness
of the Government, or at least of the system of taxation in
Treland. All this might have taken place, and probably did
take place, without any intention of deception or any political
desion, but it is not surprising that it led Byrne to look upon his
acquaintance as a political sympathiser. The seduction of the
militia was at this time one of the first objects of the party.
Great numbers of private soldiers had been sworn in, but very
few of the officers had betrayed their trust, and if an officer in a
regiment which was already largely permeated by disaffection
could be induced to turn traitor, his services might be peculiarly
valuable. Byrne imagined that Armstrong would prove a useful
instrument, and he. asked him if he had any objection to be
introduced to Mr. Sheares.

Armstrong had never seen either of the brothers, and he at
once consented. On reflecting, however, on what he had done,
he formed a strong opinion, either from the manner of Byrne, or
from the reputation of Sheares, or from something which was
said in the course of the conversation, that the object was to
engage him in the United Irish plot,! and he felt that the path
before him was a dubious and a dangerous one. The course
which he adopted was to go to the colonel of his regiment, and to
another officer in whom he had full confidence, and to place him-
self unreservedly in their hands. He told them the request that
had been made to him, and the construction he put on it. He
confessed frankly that he had spoken imprudently and indis-
creetly, and he asked them to direct his conduct. They both

1 Toler in his speech for the pro- could contribute to their assistance.
secution said that Byrne spoke of the But this is not borne out by Arm-
Sheares as men of talent, who were  strong’s published evidence. See the
engaged in their country’s cause, and trial in Howell’s State Trials, vol.
who were satisfied that Armstrong xxvii.

VOL. VIII. EK

50 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XX1X.

said that it was his duty to see the Sheares, and if their
object was what he supposed, to pretend so far to accede to it as
to unravel the plot. The business was not of his seeking. He
had never wished or asked to play the part of a spy, but if an
unlooked-for chance placed in his hands the threads of a most
dangerous conspiracy, and enabled him to avert or defeat a
formidable and sanguinary rebellion, he could not, they said,
without a failure of duty, shrink from the task. Besides his
duty to his King and country, he had a duty to his regiment ;
and it was to avail himself of every means of discovering how
far the conspiracy had really infected it.

Such were the views of Colonel L’Estrange! and of Captain
Clibborn, and after the tragedy was completed all the brother
officers of Armstrong supported them, by signing a testimonial
in which they expressed their full approbation of his conduct.
Armstrong acted on their advice. He was introduced to Henry
and John Sheares as aman on whom they could fully rely, and the
whole story soon came out. He learnt that the conspirators had
now determined that it was no longer possible to wait for the
French, but that an immediate rebellion must be attempted ; that
it was to begin with an almost simultaneous attempt to surprise
the camp at Lehaunstown, to seize the artillery at Chapelizod and
to capture Dublin, and that John Sheares was to go down to
Cork to organise the rebellion in the South. He learnt also that
the military organisation was now complete, all the captains and
adjutants being appointed ; that there were some United Irish-
men in every regiment which had been in Dublin for the last
two years, and that a meeting had lately been held of deputies
from nearly every militia regiment in Ireland, including that of
Armstrong himself. It was believed by the conspirators that all,
or nearly all, those regiments would ultimately join the insur-
gents. Deputies from several different regiments had already
promised recruits for the rebel army, some ten, some twenty,

1 Tt is not clear from Armstrong’s
sworn evidence that Col. L’Hstrange
was consulted until after the first in-
terview of Armstrong with the Sheares,
though from that time Armstrong
undoubtedly acted under his direc-
tion and with his full approbation.
The statement in the text, however,
is based upon that of the Attorney-

General (Howell’s State Trials, xxvii.
298), and it is confirmed by Arm-
strong’s statement to Madden: ‘I put
myself under the direction of my
colonel and my friend. I acted by
their advice, and if I have done any-
thing wrong, they are more culpable
than I’ (United Irishmen, iv. 374.)

7 "yy ' tal *
JOT. MAR Y’S COLI HGH T

j - - REY. T. CALLAGH/ Ng
CH. XXIX, CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG. 51

some thirty, some one hundred men, provided they had sufficient
notice, but no impression had been made upon the officers. In
one street through which the soldiers were likely to pass in order
to attack the insurgents, so many houses had been secured that
a deadly fire was likely to take place. At the outset of the
rebellion the Lord Lieutenant was to be seized in the Castle, and
all the privy councillors in their private houses, and in this way,
it was thought, organised resistance would be paralysed. The
rising at Cork and the rising in other places were to be so
managed, that the news might reach Dublin at the same time.
The task assigned to Armstrong was to bring over his regiment.
In order to assist him, he was given the names of some soldiers
in it who were already sworn in. He was recommended to act
specially upon the Roman Catholics, and he was authorised to
promise every soldier who joined the conspiracy that he should
receive a portion of confiscated land in the King’s County. He
was himself promised the command of the regiment. The names
of the supreme executive were not disclosed to him, and he was
told that the exact day of the rising was not fixed, but that it
was close at hand.

These very alarming disclosures completely confirmed the
intelligence which the Government had been receiving from
other sources. They were not all made at a single interview.
The first took place on May 10, and immediately after, the pro-
clamation was issued, offering a reward of 1,000. for the appre-
hension of Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Armstrong communicated
what had passed not only to Colonel L’Estrange and Captain
Clibborn, but also to Lord Castlereagh and to Cooke, and he
appears to have acted largely under their advice. He had
several interviews with his victims, and at one of them Lawless
was present. On May 20—the day after the arrest of Lord
Edward Fitzgerald—he dined with the two brothers and with
members of their family. He afterwards said that he had done
wrong in accepting their hospitality, but that he had done so at
the urgent desire of Lord Castlereagh, who had represented to
him that a time when so many lives were in jeopardy, and so
terrible a catastrophe was impending, was not one for indulging
in delicate scruples or neglecting any possible means of informa-
tion. The next day the two brothers were arrested. In their

E 2

52 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

house was found, in the handwriting of John Sheares, the draft
of the proclamation to which I have already referred, urging
the insurgents to give no quarter to any Irishman who resisted
them.!

On the night before the arrest, Lawless had fled from
Dublin, and he succeeded in making his way to France,
where he entered the army, and rose in time to be a general
under Napoleon. Byrne was arrested on the same day as
the Sheares. On the 23rd, through information given by a
Catholic priest, the plot of Neilson to rescue Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald was discovered, and Neilson was imprisoned, though he
was never brought to trial, and in this way every leader in
Treland who had any real influence was removed. On the 21st
Lord Castlereagh, by the direction of the Lord Lieutenant,
wrote to the Lord Mayor of Dublin, announcing that a plot had
been discovered for placing Dublin, in the course of the present
week, in the hands of a rebel force, and for seizing the Executive
Government and those of authority in the city, and on the follow-
ing day a similar announcement was made to the House of Com-
mons. ‘The House responded by a very loyal address, and all
the members, with the Speaker and Serjeant-at-Arms at their
head, walked two and two through the streets to present it to
the Lord Lieutenant. The guards in every point of danger
were trebled, and every precaution was taken, as in a besieged
city.

While these things were happening in Ireland, Arthur
O’Connor and the four other men who had been arrested at
Margate in the preceding February, were being tried at Maid-
stone on the charge of high treason. The evidence against
That against Binns went
little further than to show that he had been actively employed
in obtaining a boat for the escape of the others to France. The
cases against Allen and Leary completely broke down, for the
former was probably, and the second certainly, a simple servant,
and there was no evidence that they were cognisant of the

them was of very different degrees.

1 The facts relating to the Sheares
will be found in their trial in Howell’s
State Trials, vol. xxvii., and in Mad-
den’s United Trishmen. Madden, on
this as on all other matters connected
with the United Irishmen, writes as a

most furious partisan, but he has had
the honesty to print some letters of
Armstrong, and notes of a conversa-
tion with him, giving the other side
of the question.

CH, XXIX, THE TRIAL AT MAIDSTONE. 53

designs of their master. The priest O’Coigly and Arthur
O'Connor were undoubtedly at Margate together, under false
names, attempting to go to France. This, however, in itself
only amounted to a misdemeanour, unless it could be proved
that the purpose of their journey was a treasonable one. The
evidence against O’Coigly was clear and conclusive, for in the
pocket of his great-coat was found a most seditious address
from ‘the Secret Committee’ in England to the French Hxecu-
tive, strongly and elaborately urging an invasion of England.
The case against O'Connor turned mainly upon the question
whether he was cognisant of this paper, and of the designs of
his companion. It was proved that he was well acquainted
with him, though he had denied the fact, and he was convicted
of one or two other misstatements. It was shown also that he
was the principal and guiding member of the party, and that
he had paid for the whole expedition, and a cipher discovered
in his razor case established a strong independent evidence of
treason. It had, however, no connection with the document
found in the possession of O’Coigly, and it was pretended that
O’Connor was flying from the country on account of private
embarrassments, and had, as a matter of charity, agreed to take
with him a distressed fellow-countryman, of whose character and
objects he knew nothing. The trial derived a great additional
interest from the appearance of nearly all the leading members
of the English Opposition, including Fox, Sheridan, Erskine,
Whitbread, the Duke of Norfolk, and Lord Moira, as witnesses in
favour of O'Connor. ‘They deposed that he had lived familiarly
with them, and that they considered his politics substantially
identical with their own. Grattan also was summoned for the
defence, but his evidence was remarkably scanty. It amounted
to nothing more than that O'Connor had a good and an unreserved
private character, and that he had never heard him express any
opinion in any degree favourable to a French invasion, but rather
the contrary.!. The judge summed up decidedly in favour of all
the prisoners except O’Coigly. The trial terminated on May 22.
O'Coigly was found guilty of high treason. Binns, Allen, and
Leary were acquitted and discharged. O’Connor was also

1 See Howell’s Stute Trials, xxvii. grossly misrepresented in a modern
50. This evidence has been very history.

54 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX;s

acquitted, amid a scene of excitement and confusion such as has
rarely been seen in an English court of justice,’ but he was de-
tained on a warrant of the Duke of Portland, on a new charge
of high treason. Fortunately for himself, and fortunately too
for Ireland, he remained during the next few weeks in prison,
and could take no part in the rebellion.

The Government were much dissatisfied at the acquittal of
O’Connor. Wickham ascribed it mainly to the impression pro-
duced by a most scandalous letter which was brought under
the notice of the court before the trial began, written by a
clergyman named Arthur Young, who confessed that he had
come in contact with three men who had been summoned as
jurymen in the case, and had urged upon them the transcendent
importance of hanging the prisoners.? Pollock, who had been
sent over on the part of the Irish Government, considered that
Leary alone ought to have been acquitted, and he believed that
the judge, when charging the jury, had been unconsciously
influenced and intimidated by the menacing presence and de-
meanour of the leading members of the Opposition in Lords
and Commons who were ranged before him. O’Coigly had
been much in Paris, and Wolfe Tone had formed a very un-

favourable opinion of his character. ‘The Government had long

1 ¢A proceeding then took place
which never had an equal in Ireland.
It was supposed that there was a
Secretary of State’s warrant to detain
O’Connor, and the moment judgment
of death was pronounced upon Quigly,
the dock was beset and several voices
were heard calling out, “The other
prisoners are discharged !” “ Discharge
Mr. O'Connor!” In an instant he
leaped from the dock. The crowd
was immense, the noise prodigious,
— the officers of the court calling out to
stop him. ‘ Seize O’Connor !” “Sto
O'Connor!” “Let O'Connor out!” &e.
&c. Swords were drawn, constables’
staves, sticks, bludgeons, knocking-
downs, &c. The judges frightened to
deathalmost. In short, it is scarcely
possible for you to conceive such a
scene. O’Connor, however, was brought
back, restored to his place in the
dock, and immediatelyafter committed
to gaol’ (J. Pollock, May 23, 1798.)

2 May 23. A few days later he
wrote to Cooke: ‘I lament most ex-

ceedingly that the hopes I had raised
as to the success of the trials should
have been so soon disappointed. I
am persuaded, feeble as the instru-
ment may appear, that unfortunate
letter of Arthur Young’s saved the
lives of all the prisoners who escaped,
and it was a miracle that it did not
prove the salvation of Coigly.’ (Cooke
to Wickham, private, May 26, 1798.
R.O.) See, for Young’s letter, Gur-
ney’s report of the trial, pp. 47, 48.
Lord Clare’s comment on this is very
characteristic, and, I think, very scan-
dalous. ‘I could never see any wis-
dom or good policy in prancing upon
Candour in the face of rebels, and I
cant but wish that your Attorney-
General as well as ours was less fond
of mounting this jaded pony. What
business had he to set aside some of
his best jurymen because Mr. Young
chose to write a foolish rhapsody to
one of them?’ (Awekland Correspon-
dence, ili. 438, 439.)
3 J. Pollock, May 23, 1798.

,

CH.) XXIXi REBELS ATTACK NAAS, 35

been well aware that he was steeped in treason, and a full year
before his arrest McNally had informed them that he was in
Ireland on a political mission, and had reported to them the
tenour of his conversation.! He met his fate with courage and
resignation, but asserted his innocence to the last. He was
hanged on Penningdon Heath on June 7.

The 23rd of May, which was the day appointed for the
insurrection, had arrived. The signal was to be the stopping of
the mail coaches from Dublin; and although the programme
was not fully carried out, those which were going to Belfast, to
Athlone, to Limerick, and to Cork, were that. night seized.
Long before daybreak on the 24th, numerous rebel parties were
in arms in the counties of Dublin, Kildare, and Meath. In
Kildare, in spite of all the stringent measures of disarmament,
the rising was especially formidable, and about 2.30 on the
morning of the 24th a party of rebels vaguely estimated at
1,000 men, and commanded by a farmer named Michael
Reynolds, whose house had lately been burnt by the soldiers,
attempted to surprise and capture the important town of Naas;
Lord Gosford, however, who commanded there, had been made
aware of their intention, and a party of Armagh Militia with a
detachment of dragoon guards were ready to meet them. Three
times the rebels dashed themselves desperately against the
troops, who were stationed near the gaol, and three times they
were repulsed. They then changed their tactics, took possession
of almost every avenue into the town, fought the troops with
great intrepidity for nearly three-quarters of an hour, but at
last gave way, broke and fled, closely pursued by the cavalry.
Hundreds of guns and pikes were brought in, either taken from
the dead or cast away by the fugitives in their flight. our
prisoners only were taken, of whom three were hanged in the
streets of Naas, while the fourth saved his life by giving valu-
able information. The loss on the King’s side was variously
estimated at from fourteen to thirty. Of the rebels, about
thirty were believed to have been killed in the streets, and more
than one hundred in the flight.?

1J. W., Feb. 5, 1797. Higgins Lord Gosford to General Lake, May
had been watching O’Coigly shortly 24, 1798; Gordon’s Hist. of the Rebel-

before thearrest. (F.H.,Jan.12,1798.) lion, pp. 74, 75 ; Musgrave’s Rebellions
2 Camden to Portland, May 24; ‘in Ireland (2nd ed.), pp. 238, 234.

56 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

Nearly at the same time, and at a distance of but a few
miles from Naas, 300 rebels attacked a small garrison of yeomen
and militia at Clane. But though the loyalists were surprised
and immensely outnumbered, their captain, Richard Griffith,
speedily rallied them, dispersed the rebels by a well-directed
fire and pursued them for some distance, killing many, and
burning every house in which they took refuge. Six prisoners
were taken; one was condemned at the drum-head and shot at
Clane; ‘the other five were hanged the same day with less
ceremony by the soldiers in Naas.’

About five in the morning, Griffith brought back his little
body of soldiers, and he then learnt a terrible tragedy that had
been enacted three miles from Clane. The small town of Pros-
perous, which was the centre of the cotton industry of Ireland,
had been garrisoned by forty or fifty of the North Cork Militia
under Captain Swayne, and by twenty of the Ancient Britons.
In the deadest hour of the early morning the sentinels on guard
were surprised and killed. Some soldiers were slaughtered in
their beds in the houses in which they were billeted, while the
barracks were surrounded and set on fire. Many of the men
who were in them perished by the flames or by suffocation.
Some sprang from the windows and were caught upon the
pikes of the assailants. ‘The remainder tried to cut their way
through the enemy, but nearly all perished. A gentleman
named Stamer, who was the principal proprietor of Prosperous,
and an English gentleman named Brewer, who was a prominent
manufacturer, were murdered in cold blood. Several of the party,
it is said, were recognised as men who on the very day before
the tragedy, had come forward to profess their loyalty, to ex-
press contrition for past offences, and to receive protections from
Captain Swayne.!

Griffith foresaw that the party from Prosperous would soon
attack him, and he at once drew out his small and gallant force
in Clane. He had scarcely done so when a great disorderly
body of insurgents poured in, their ragged clothes strangely
variegated by the scarlet uniforms and glittering helmets taken

1 Musgrave has printed a deposi- tion of Thomas Davis.) See, too,
tion of one of those whoescaped from Gordon’s Hist. of the Rebellion, pp.
Prosperous. (Appendix xy. Deposi- 72-74.

CH, XXIx. THE TREACHERY OF ESMONDE. 57

from soldiers who had perished. The loyalists were vastly
outnumbered, but Griffith drew up his force in an advantageous
post in the corner of a field where they could not be outflanked,
and awaited the attack. The rebels opened a heavy fire, but
they were evidently totally unacquainted with the use of fire-
arms, and every ball flew high above its mark. A deadly volley
from the militia and the yeomen, and a fierce charge, soon put
them to flight. Many were killed. ‘The roads and fields,’
writes Griffith, ‘were instantly covered with pikes, pitchforks,
sabres and some muskets. Five of the Ancient Britons, whose
lives the insurgents had spared and put in the front of the
battle on foot, armed only with pikes, deserted to us and gave us
the horrid detail of the massacre at Prosperous. We pursued
the rebels to near that town, but did not think it prudent to
enter it lest we should be fired at from the houses. We there-
fore returned to Clane, got our men reported, and having put
our wounded men on cars proceeded to Naas, whither we had
received orders to march.’

Before, however, the march began, a very curious incident
occurred. When the little force was first called together, many
men were absent, and it was noticed that among them was Dr.
Esmonde, the first lieutenant. A yeoman had strayed in and
privately informed Captain Griffith that this very officer had
actually commanded the rebels in the attack on Prosperous.
Dr. Esmonde was brother of Sir Thomas Esmonde, the head of
a conspicuous Catholic family of Wexford. He had only the
Sunday before accompanied Captain Swayne to the chapel at
Prosperous to exhort the people to surrender their arms, and it
is even said that the very night before his treachery he had
dined with his intended victim. He had succeeded in seducing
some of the yeomen under his command, and had gone off in
the night to lead the rebels. The yeoman who gave the in-
formation had been of the party, but his mind misgave him,
and he escaped in the darkness.

Griffith had but just received this startling information, and
his force was drawn out for leaving Clane, when Esmonde himself
rode in, ‘his hair dressed, his boots and breeches quite clean,
and himself fully accoutred,’ and took his accustomed station at
the right of the troop. Griffith was at first speechless with

58 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX;

astonishment and indignation, but he resolved to command him-
self, and Esmonde, fancying himself unsuspected, actually rode
with the troops to Naas as second in command. When they
arrived there, the captain ordered them to halt before the gaol,
and at once lodged the traitor within it. Ample proof of his
treachery was obtained, and he was sent to Dublin, tried and
hanged.!

Other inconsiderable conflicts, consisting chiefly of attacks
on small detachments of yeomen or militia and on the villages
they occupied, took place, on the first two days of the rebellion,
near Rathfarnham, Tallagh, Lucan, Lusk, Dunboyne, Barrets-
town, Baltinglass, and Kilcullen.? With very few exceptions
the troops had everywhere the advantage, though at Kilcullen
the pikemen succeeded in three times repelling the charge of a
body of heavy cavalry under General Dundas; and in two other
places the rebels victoriously attacked small detachments of
troops and succeeded in plundering their baggage. At Baltin-
glass, twenty-nine miles to the south of* Dublin, on the other
hand, one hundred rebels were killed without the loss of a single
loyalist. Some small towns and villages were occupied by
rebels. Numerous houses were plundered, and several murders
were unquestionably committed, though in the confused, con-
tradictory, and partisan accounts of what took place, it is
impossible with any confidence to estimate their number. The
troops appear to have given little or no quarter to those who
were found with arms in their hands, and those who were not
immediately killed seem to have been either flogged to extort
information, or shot or hanged in a very summary manner, often
without any form of trial. Shouts of ‘ Down with the Orange-
men!’ and numerous attacks upon Protestants where Catholics
were unmolested, showed the character the struggle was likely
to assume with the Catholic peasantry. On the other hand,
Catholics formed the great majority of the Irish militia and a
considerable minority of the yeomen. The Catholic Lord
Fingall, at the head of some corps of yeomen chiefly of his own
persuasion, took a most active and efficient part in suppressing

See a long and interesting letter 2 Gordon, pp. 71,72; Plowden, ii.
of Richard Griffith to Pelham (June 688-695; Faulkner's Journal, May 26,
4, 1798) in the Pelham MSS. 27, 1798.

CH. XXIx. THE REBELLION NEAR DUBLIN. 59

the rebellion. A numerously signed address expressing the
deepest loyalty was presented to the Lord Lieutenant by the
most respectable Dublin Catholics, and Archbishop Troy at once
ordered an earnest exhortation to loyalty to be read from the
altar at every mass. But religious passion from the first
mingled largely in the struggle, and its influence was magnified
both by panic and by design, for men on both sides found it
useful for their purposes to fan the flame by spreading rumours
of impending religious massacres. Numbers of panic-stricken
Protestants scattered over the districts in rebellion fled for
protection to the towns; the yeomen and militia men who
deserted to the rebels appear to have been almost exclusively
Catholics, and the great majority of those who were murdered
or plundered by the rebels were Protestants. The Catholics,
on the other hand, were told that the Government had resolved
to exterminate them, and that nothing remained for them but
to sell their lives dearly.

The recent arrests had deprived the rebellion of its com-
mander-in-chief and its Directory, and the failure of the plan
for the capture of the Castle and of the governors of Ireland
reduced it to a number of isolated and almost aimless outbreaks.
Even after the arrest of Lord Edward, however, Higgins assured
the Government, on the excellent authority of Magan, that the
plot for seizing Dublin was by no means abandoned,! and for
some days there were abundant signs of danger. Bodies of
rebels, manifestly intended to march upon the metropolis and to
co-operate with a rising there, approached Dublin from many
different quarters; some of them appeared at a distance of
only about three miles, both at Santry and at Rathfarnham,
but they were promptly attacked and speedily dispersed by the
corps of fencible cavalry known as Lord Jocelyn’s Foxhunters.
Signal fires blazed ominously by night from many points of the
Dublin and Wicklow hills. Within the city the lamplighters
struck work, meaning to leave the streets in total darkness, but
they were forced at the point of the bayonet to light the lamps.
Crowds of domestic servants, workmen, clerks, and shopmen
disappeared from their usual posts, having gone off to join the
rebels. McNally warned the Government that there was much

_ 1 FL HL, May 24, 1798. He gave a similar warning on June 5.

60 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

to fear from the treachery of servants, and that there was a design
to stop all provisions for the city.

Martial law had been at once proclaimed, and every precau-
tion was taken to guard against surprise. The old city watch-
men, who were perfectly inadequate for such an emergency,
were still suffered to call the hour, but they were deprived of
their pikes and muskets, and the task of preserving order was
entrusted to the yeomanry, who discharged it with a vigilance
and an energy which were then universally recognised. The
force in Dublin was already very powerful, and in the first fort-
night of the rebellion nearly a thousand more citizens joined it,
while many others might have been enrolled, if it had not been
for the determination of the authorities to accept no one whose
loyalty was not beyond dispute. Parties of yeomanry patrolled
the streets by night, and guarded all the most important posi-
tions. Cannon were placed opposite Kilmainham-and the new
prison. Tocsins or alarm bells were set up in various parts of
the town, and stringent orders were given that whenever the
alarm was sounded during the night, the neighbouring house-
holders must place lights outside their windows. The bridges
on the canals that flank three sides of Dublin were removed or
strongly guarded; all assemblies were forbidden, and _ strict
orders were given, as in other proclaimed districts, that no un-
authorised person should appear in the streets between nine at
night and five in the morning ; that all householders should post
outside their doors lists of those who were within; that all those
who had formerly registered their arms should send in an in-
ventory of them to the town clerk. General Vallancy was con-
sulted about the defence of the Castle, and recommended some
additional precautions, ‘especially the accumulation of large
supplies of hand-grenades, which he considered the most effec-
tive weapons against a tumultuous attack. The brushmakers’
shops were especially watched, for it was found that the long
mops known as ‘ Popes’ heads’ were made use of as pike
handles.

The search for arms was prosecuted with untiring vigilance,
and the discovery in the course of a few days of several large stores
of pikes or pike heads, and even of a few cannon, clearly showed
the reality and the magnitude of the danger. Some of these

CH, XXIX, MARTIAL LAW IN DUBLIN. 61

arms were found concealed in carts, as they were being moved
from one part of the city to the other, and others in the search
of suspected houses; but the discovery, in most cases, was due
either to secret information or to confessions that were extorted
under the lash. Courts-martial were daily held, and many
persons were hanged in the barracks or over Carlisle bridge ;
124 suspected rebels were sent on a single day to the tender.
The bodies of many rebels who had been sabred in the fights
round Dublin were brought into the town on carts and exposed
in the Castle yard.

The proclamation issued by the Lord Lieutenant and Council
directed the generals commanding his Majesty’s forces to
punish all persons acting, aiding, or in any way assisting in the
rebellion, according to martial law, ‘ either by death or otherwise,
‘as they shalldeem most expedient.’ This proclamation wasat once
laid before the House of Commons and unanimously sanctioned.
One member even spoke of giving it a retrospective action, and
executing under it the political prisoners who were now under
arrest, but the suggestion, though it was received with some
applause, was happily not pressed to a division. The flogging
of suspected persons in order to discover arms was practised
openly and avowedly, and it proved exceedingly efficacious, and
there was, as might have been expected, some unauthorised
violence. The house of a prominent rebel named Byrne, who
had been killed at Tallagh, and a house near Townshend Street
in which arms were discovered, were burnt to ashes; and when
Bishop Percy two days after the arrest of Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald drove down to Thomas Street to see the spot where it
occurred, he found the soldiers busily engaged in burning in the
middle of the street, piles of furniture taken from tradesmen’s
houses in which pikes had been discovered. McNally complained
bitterly that he could not appear without insult in the streets ;
and his own house was searched and a silver cup was taken.!

On the whole, however, the most striking feature of the time,
in Dublin, was the energy and the promptitude with which the
citizens armed and organised themselves for the protection of

1 In addition to the Government use of Sawnders’s Newsletter and
correspondence and the ordinary his- Faulkner's Jowrnal, and of the letters
tories of the rebellion, I have made of Bishop Percy.

62 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on. xxix.

their city. The real public spirit, manhood, and intelligence of
the Irish people in those dreary days must not be looked for
among the ignorant, half-starved rebels who were plundering
and wasting the country, but much rather in the loyalists who
rose by thousands to subdue them; who again and again
scattered bodies ten times as numerous as themselves, and who
even before the arrival of English troops had broken the force of
the rebellion. Dublin was no doubt full of rebels and con-
spirators, but they were completely cowed, and under the swift
stern measures of martial law they shrank into obscurity. All
the loyal classes were under arms. Bankers, merchants, shop-
keepers, students of the university, and even some clergymen,
were hastily enrolled. A circular was issued by the archbishop
to his clergy expressly authorising them to assume the military
character.!. There was a special corps of barristers, and it is said
that no less than 800 attorneys enlisted in the yeomanry.? At
the opening of Trinity term, the bar, the juries, and the attorneys
appeared almost without exception in military uniform, and
Judge Downes informed them that as almost every duty that
could now employ men in the city was military, he would detain
them as short a time as possible; that no continuous business
would be taken up which was not urgently necessary, and that,
with the exception of the King’s law officers, all the attorneys
and members of the bar were expected to appear in court in
military uniform.®

Countless rumours of impending acts of murder or treachery
were circulated, and for some days there was a complete ignorance
about the extent of the rebellion. Camden wrote on the 25th
that all communications with the South were cut off, and that
the judges who were going to the assizes at Clonmel were com-
pelled to turn back. Reinforcements, he said, were urgently

1 Saunders's Newsletter, June 13.

2 Barrington’s Personal Sketches,
iii, 395.

3 Sawnders’s  Nensletter, June
11. ‘The order, McNally wrote,
‘that barristers in uniform only
should move during the present term
at the bar cannot have a good effect.
What does it do but furnish a dis-
guise? Will achange of colour pro-
duce a change of principles? Besides,

there are several who, from personal
infirmities, could not assume a mili-
tary dress without becoming objects
of laughter. Itwould be well perhaps
if some of the judges would institute
a corps of invalids. McNally might
lead blind Moore to battle. But is it
just to deprive men of bread because
nature or misfortune has crippled
their limbs or impaired their consti-
tutions?’ (J. W., June 12, 1798.)

CHa are REBELLION IN QUEEN’S COUNTY. 63

needed, but there was as yet no news of insurrection in the
North.

There is much reason to believe that the outbreak was
witnessed with gratification by many of the members and sup-
porters of Government, who believed that the disease which had
been during the last years poisoning all the springs of Irish life
would be now by a short sharp crisis effectually expelled. I
have quoted the imprudent language to this effect used by
Beresford in the House of Commons in 1797. Just a month
before the rebels appeared in the field, the Knight of Kerry

made a remarkable speech in which he declared that the country
"was incontestably in a state of rebellion ; that it was the lurking
and mysterious character of the conspiracy that constituted its
real danger, and that once the rebels appeared in the field, that
danger would soon be over. At the very beginning of the re-
bellion Lord Clare predicted that the country ‘ would be more
safe and peaceable than for many years back.’ ‘TI consider,’
wrote Cooke in a very confidential letter, ‘this insurrection,
however distressing, as really the salvation of the country. If
you look at the accounts that 200,000 men are sworn in a con-
spiracy, how could that conspiracy be cleared without a burst ?
Besides, it will prove many things necessary for the future settle-
ment of the country when peace arises.’ *

The Queen’s County, as we have seen, had long been in a
state of extreme disturbance. It had been proclaimed towards
the end of January, and under the influence of martial law great:
numbers of suspected rebels had been imprisoned, and greati
quantities of arms discovered and surrendered.? On the 25th
an open rebellion broke out in it, but only in the feeblest, the
most unorganised, and inefficient form. There was much robbery.
There were also, it is said, some isolated murders of Protestants,
and at four in the morning a party variously estimated at 1,000

1 Camden to Portland, May 25,
1798.

2 Saunders’s Newsletter, April 25,
1798.

3 Letter of Bishop Percy (British
Museum), May 24, 1798. Percy, who
was living much among the members
of the Irish Government, adds his
own opinion: ‘In a month’s time, all
will be perfectly composed, I doubt

not, through the whole country ; in
the metropolis and its environs as
well as in the North. But for some
days past we have had great commo-
tions and disturbances here.’

4 Cooke to Wickham (private),
May 26,1798. The italics are mine.

5 Saunders’s Newsletter, Jan. 26,
April 5, May 4 and 8, 1798.

64 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cm. xxix

or 2,000 attacked the little town of Monastrevan, which was |
garrisoned by eighty-four yeomen. There was some serious
fighting, and the issue for one or two hours seemed very doubtful,
but the yeomanry then drove back their assailants, who set fire
to some houses and retired under the shelter of the smoke, leaving
sixty or seventy of their number dead on the field. Only four or
five of the yeomen appear to have fallen. It was noticed that of
the gallant little band that defended Monastrevan, fourteen were
Catholics, and that ten others were Methodists, who had been
deprived of their arms for refusing to exercise on Sundays, but
who now offered their services and bore a distinguished part in
the fight."

With this exception, no event of any real importance took
place during the rebellion in this county. Some of the rebels
who had attacked Monastrevan proceeded towards Portarlington,
but they had now dwindled toa disorderly mob of about 200
poor, unguided men, and they were met and easily dispersed by
a small body of cavalry at Clonanna, some four miles from
Portarlington. Twenty of them were killed at that place, and
in or near the wood of Kilbracken.? It has been stated that .
the escape of the remainder was largely due to a yeomanry officer
whom they had taken prisoner and whose life they had spared.
They at first entreated him to command them, and on his refusal
they piteously implored him to advise them. He recommended
them to fling away their pikes and to fly across the quaking bog,
where the cavalry could not pursue them.’

On the same morning on which Monastrevan was attacked,
1,000 or 1,500 rebels attempted to surprise the town of Carlow.
They assembled in the middle of the night on the lawn of Sir
Edward Crosbie, who lived a mile and a half from the town, and
at two in the morning they proceeded to the attack. But either
from secret information, or through their total neglect of the
most ordinary precautions, their design was known, and the
garrison of 450 men, some of them being regular soldiers, were
prepared to receive them. The rebels entered Carlow by Tullow

1 Compare Gordon, p. 80; Max- 2 Lord Portarlington to Sir J,
well, p. 67; Musgrave; Crookshank’s Parnell, May 25; Major Leatham to
Hist. of Methodism in Ireland, pp. Gen. Sir C. Asgill, May 26, 1798
133, 134; and the accounts and de- (1.8.P.0.).
spatches in Saunderss Newsletter, * Crookshank’s Hist. of Methodism
June 6 and 8, 1798. in Ireland, ii. 134.

CH, XXIX, THE REBELLION IN CARLOW.

6.

Street, unopposed, and proceeded to the open place a ~
where they set up a sudden yell. It was at once answered by
a deadly fire from the soldiers, who had been posted at many
different points. The panic-stricken rebels endeavoured to
fly, but found their retreat cut off; the houses in which they
sought a refuge were set on fire, and the soldiers shot or
bayoneted all who attempted to escape from the flames. Not
less than eighty houses were burnt, and that evening nineteen
carts were constantly employed in carrying charred or mangled
corpses to a gravel pit near the town. During several days, it
is said, roasted remains of rebels fell from the chimneys in which
they had concealed themselves. It was believed that more than
600 perished in the fight, or in the flames, or by martial law,
without the loss of a single life on the other side.’

For the general aspect of the county of Carlow during the
rebellion, I can hardly do better than refer my reader to the
truthful and graphic journal of Mary Leadbeater, the friend of
Burke, and the daughter of his old Quaker schoolmaster, Shackle-
ton. In that most fascinating and pathetic book he will find a
lifelike picture of the free quarters, the burning of houses, the
floggings, the plunder, the many murders, and many random or
wanton outrages that were committed, and he will probably find
some difficulty in striking the balance between the crimes of the
rebels and the outrages of the soldiers. The condition of the
county was that of simple anarchy, in which the restraints of
law and legal authority were almost wholly abrogated. There
was certainly nothing in the least resembling a desire to massacre
the Protestant population, and Mrs. Leadbeater relates many
instances of touching kindness and chivalry on the part of the
rebels. On the other hand, there were many savage murders,
and personal popularity or unpopularity counted for much.
‘Women and children,’ she says, ‘were spared, and Quakers in
general escaped; but woe to the oppressor of the poor, the hard

1 Compare Gordon, Plowden, and
Musgrave, and an account by a field
officer, who was with the Carlow
garrison, printed in Maxwell’s Hist.
of the Irish Rebellion, p. 73. Mrs.
Leadbeater says: ‘An attack in the
night had been made on Carlow,
which was repulsed with slaughter,
amounting almost to massacre. A

VOL. VIET.

row of cabins, in which numbers of
the defeated insurgents had taken
shelter, were set on fire, and the in-
mates burned to death. No quarter
was given, no mercy shown; and most
of those who had escaped, burning
with disappointment, rage, and re-
venge, joined the Wexford party.’
(Leadbeater Papers, i. 237.)
F

66 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

landlord, the severe master, or him who was looked upon as an
enemy.’ The few members of the upper classes who were to be
seen were generally dressed in deep black, for there was scarcely
a family which had not lost a member.

Among the victims of martial law in this county was Sir
Edward Crosbie, who was tried with indecent haste by a court-
martial, of which only one member was of a higher rank than a
captain, and whose execution appears to have been little better
than a judicial murder. He had been a parliamentary reformer
of the school of Grattan; he was a benevolent and popular
landlord, and he had, a few months before the rebellion, given
money for the support of some political prisoners who were in a
state of extreme destitution in Carlow gaol, but there was no
reason to believe that he was either a United Irishman or a
republican. He certainly took no part in the attack on Carlow,
and it does not appear that he had any previous knowledge of
the intention of the rebels to assemble on his lawn. Some
doubtful and suspected evidence, given by one or two convicted
United Irishmen, who were trying to save their lives, was,
it is true, adduced to the effect that he had uttered words of
sympathy with the party, but, on the whole, the probability
is that he was a perfectly innocent man, and was completely
passive in the matter. The point on which the court-martial
seems to have especially insisted was, that he had not at once
gone to Carlow to give information. It was urged, probably
with perfect truth, that it was impossible for him to have done
so, for all his servants had declared themselves United Irish-
men; he was surrounded by armed men, and even if he had
himself succeeded in escaping, his family would almost certainly
have been murdered. The court-martial was hurried through
when men were mad with fear and rage. Crosbie had only an hour
given him to prepare his defence. He had no proper counsel,
and some intended witnesses in his favour afterwards swore
that they had tried in vain to obtain admission into the barracks.
He was hanged and decapitated, and his head was fixed on a pike
outside Carlow gaol. It was afterwards stolen during the night by
an old, faithful servant, who brought it to the family burying place.!

* See an interesting pamphlet, 1801, called, Accurate and Impartial
published by his family at Bath in Narration of the Apprehension, Trial,

oP

It appeared at this time very probable that the rebellion was
already broken.! Mobs of half-starved, half-armed, and wholly
undisciplined men, without the smallest sign of any skilful or
intelligent leadership, or even of any genuine fanaticism, and in
many cases almost without common courage, were as yet the
only representatives of the conspiracy which had appeared so
formidable. On the very day of the attack on Carlow, a body of
rebels, estimated at more than 3,000, were routed and scattered
at Hacketstown, in the same county, with the loss of about 200
men, by a detachment of Antrim Militia and a small force of
yeomen, and two soldiers only were slightly injured.? On the
26th another rebel body, reckoned at 4,000 men, were totally
routed at the hill of Tarah, in Meath, by a force of yeomanry
apparently not more than a tenth part of their number.
Among the spoils taken in this battle were a general’s uniform
and a side saddle, and it was noticed that a woman or a man in
woman’s clothes was prominent among the rebels. ‘The killed,’
wrote a magistrate the next day, ‘ were not less than 200. ‘Two
prisoners only were taken, who were shot this morning... .
The roads this day were covered with dead bodies and green
cockades, together with pikes and horses they had pressed.’ *
Before the flight was over, it was estimated that at least 350 of
the rebels had been killed, while the loss on the loyal side was
only nine killed and sixteen wounded. Three hundred horses, and
all the ammunition and baggage of the rebels, were captured, and
eight soldiers, whom they had taken prisoners and preserved alive,
were released. Lord Fingall and his Catholic yeomanry bore
a distinguished part in this battle. Its consequences were very
important, for it completely broke the rebellion in Meath, and it

CH, XXIX, REBELS DEFEATED AT TARAH,

and Execution of Sir Edward Crosbie,
Bart. The minutes of the court-
- martial, which the family long tried
in vain to see, will be found in the
Trish State Paper Office. Mrs. Lead-
beater gives an extremely unfavour-
able picture of the conduct on another
oceasion of Major Denis, who pre-
sided at the court-martial. (Lead-
beater Papers, i. 239.)

1 This was evidently the opinion
of Bishop Perey, who was then in
Dublin, and who mixed much in the
Government circles. As early as May
26, he wrote to his wife, that such

multitudes of the rebels had been
slaughtered, that it was believed that
the kingdom would be quieter for
many years. Two days later, he wrote
that the rebels were everywhere dis-
persed, ‘ with great slaughter and very
little loss.” ‘In a slaughter of 300
or 400, it seldom happens that the
King’s troops lose more than three
or four individuals.’ (Bishop Percy’s
Letters, Brit. Mus.)

2 Gordon, pp. 81, 82.

> Geo. Lambert (Beauparc), May
27, 1798.

68 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

reopened the communication between the northern part of the
kingdom and the metropolis.!

In Carlow, the Queen’s County, and Meath, indeed, the rebel-
lion was already fairly broken. In Kildare, where it had been
much mere formidable, it was rapidly dwindling. The village of
Rathangan, in that county, appears to have been the scene of
some of the most horrible murders in the rebellion. It had been
occupied by the rebels on May 26, and they had at once
murdered an active magistrate who lived there, and are stated
by Musgrave to have afterwards murdered with the utmost deli-
beration, and often with circumstances of aggravated brutality,
not less than eighteen other persons, all of them being Protes-
tants. On the 28th a detachment of Tullamore yeomanry
cavalry endeavoured to relieve the town, but they were met with
so heavy a fire from the windows that they took flight, with a
loss of three killed and eleven wounded. Soon after, however,
Colonel Longfield appeared at the head of the City of Cork
Militia. This regiment, it may be noticed, like many others
employed in suppressing the rebellion, must have been mainly
Catholic, .and it was accompanied by a detachment of dragoons
and by two field-pieces. The rebels had entrenched themselves
near the great canal, apparently with some skill, but at the
second discharge of artillery they broke into a precipitate flight.
No loss was sustained by the troops of Colonel Longfield, but
between fifty and sixty rebels were killed in the fight, and several
others were afterwards hanged.?

Nearly at the same time a rebel leader named Perkins, who
was encamped with a large force on a hill near the Curragh of
Kildare, sent a message to General Dundas, offering to surrender,
provided he and his men obtained a free pardon, and were
suffered to return to their homes, and provided also, certain
conspicuous prisoners were released. To the great indignation
of the leading supporters of the Government, Dundas transmitted
this proposal to Camden, and recommended that it should be
accepted. Camden sent back orders to insist upon an uncon-
ditional surrender, but in the meantime Dundas had made a

* Plowden, ii. 702, 703; Gordon, op. 83. See, too, on the many murders
p. 82. , at Rathangan, a letter from Clare.
* Musgrave, pp. 251-258; Gordon, (Auckland Correspondence, iii. 437.)

CH. XXIX, GIBBET-RATH. 69

short truce with the rebels, and they readily agreed to lay down
their arms and disperse, on no other condition than being left at
peace. About 2,000 men are said to have availed themselves of
this permission, and to have dispersed to their homes with shouts
of joy, leaving thirteen cartloads of pikes behind them.!

The conduct of Dundas was furiously blamed in Dublin, and
for a time this general was scarcely less unpopular in Govern-
ment circles than Abercromby had been. In Parliament, also,
he appears to have been bitterly and angrily condemned ;?
but if his policy had been steadily pursued, it would have
probably brought the rebellion to a speedy and bloodless end.
It was interrupted, however, three days later, by a horrible
tragedy. Another large body of rebels, who had agreed with
General Dundas to surrender their arms, were assembled for that
purpose at a place called Gibbet-rath, on the Curragh of Kildare.
Sir James Duff, who had just madea rapid march from Limerick
with 600 men, proceeded with his force to receive the weapons.
Unfortunately, a gun was fired from the rebel ranks. Accord-
ing to the most probable account, it was fired into the air by a
rebel, who foolishly boasted that he would only deliver his gun
empty. Instantly, a deadly volley was poured by the troops
into the rebels, who fled in wild panic and disorder, fiercely pur-
sued by Lord Jocelyn’s Foxhunters. The officers lost all control
over their men. In the vast and open plain, defence and
escape were alike impossible; and although General Dundas, on
hearing what had occurred, hastened to do all that was possible
to arrest the slaughter, between 200. and 300 men were killed.

The affair was plausibly, though untruly, represented as a
deliberate plot to massacre defenceless men, who had been lured
by the promise of pardon into the plain; and it contributed,
perhaps, more than any other single cause, to check the disposi-
tion to surrender arms. Its bad effects must have been much
ageravated by the language used in the House of Commons,
where the clemency of Dundas was vehemently denounced, and

1 See Gordon, pp. 83,84. The ac- 433, 440. See, too, Camden to Port-
count, however, of Gordon, must be land (private), May 31,1798. Camden
compared with the letters (extremely adds: ‘The feelings of the country
hostile to Dundas) from Beresford are so exasperated, as scarcely to be
and Clare in the Auckland Corre- satisfied with anything short of ex-

spondence, iii, 432-438. tirpation,’
2 Auckland Correspondence, i.

70 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

where a vote of thanks was moved to Sir James Duff. An
incident, which occurred at this time, illustrates vividly the
extreme recklessness with which human life was now treated in
Treland. A very excellent Kildare Protestant clergyman, named
Williamson, fell into the hands of the rebels. The intercession
of a Catholic priest saved his life, and he was preserved as a
prisoner. He was recaptured by the loyalists, who at once
and without trial proceeded to hang him as a rebel. It happened
that his brother-in-law was an officer in the regiment, and by
this chance alone his life was saved.!

Ifa French force of disciplined soldiers had arrived in Ireland
at the beginning of the outbreak, or even if without that arrival
the rebel plot for seizing Dublin and the Irish Executive had suc-
ceeded, the rebellion would very probably for a time at least have
triumphed, and Ireland might have passed out of English rule.
Neither of these things had happened, and the one remaining
chance of the rebels lay in a simultaneous rising, extending over
all parts of the island. Such a rising was part of the scheme of
the original leaders, and if their plans had not been dislocated
by their arrest, it might have taken place. As yet, however, the
rebellion had only appeared in a small part of Leinster. Con-
naught was perfectly peaceful. In Munster, though some pikes
were captured, ‘and some slight disorders appeared near Cork
and Limerick, there was no semblance of regular rebellion.?
Above all, Ulster, where the conspiracy had begun, where its
organisation was most perfect, and where its outbreak was most
dreaded, was absolutely passive, and remained so for a full fort-
night after the rebellion began. The plan of the rebellion had

Cork coast in the course of this week.
Cooke wrote that leaders of the
United Irishmen had been arrested

1 Compare Gordon, pp. 84-86;
Plowden, li. 706-709; Musgrave, pp.
263, 264.

2 «Sir James Stuart informs me
that the South of Ireland is yet quiet,
but the dissatisfaction remains, and
no discoveries have been made from
a real repentance, but have all been
forced by severity, (Camden to Port-
land, June 2,1798.) Some discoveries,
which were regarded as very impor-
tant, were made at this time by a
young man, who was said to be a con-
fidential friend of Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald, and he stated that 4,000
French were expected to land on the

at Limerick, Cork, Kinsale, and West
Meath, and that 1,500 pikes had been
given up near Cork. (Cooke to Wick-
ham, June 2, 1790.) Several persons
were flogged, and some, it appears,
hanged, about this time at Cork and
Limerick.  (Saunders’s Nensletter,
June 12, 16, .1798.) Some small
bodies of rebels appeared in arms in
the south-western part of the county
of Cork about June 19, but they were
put down with little difficulty in a
few days. (Gordon, pp. 163, 164.)

CH. XXIX. STATE OF WICKLOW. Ga

been wholly frustrated. The expected capture of Dublin had
failed. The desertion of the Catholic militia, which had been
fully counted on, had not taken place, and the forces on the side
of the Government had displayed an unexpected energy. The
Irish yeomanry have been much and justly blamed by historians
for their want of discipline, for their extreme recklessness in
destroying both life and property, and for the violent reli-
gious passions they too frequently displayed. But if their faults
were great, their merits were equally conspicuous. To their
patriotic energy, to their ceaseless vigilance, to the courage with
which they were always ready to encounter armed bodies, five
or even ten times as numerous as themselves, the suppression
of the rebellion was mainly due. But the flame had no sooner
begun to burn low in the central counties, than it burst out with
redoubled fierceness in Wicklow and Wexford, and soon acquired
dimensions which taxed all the energies of the Government.

In neither county was it fully expected. Wicklow was one
of the most peaceful and most prosperous counties in Ireland.
It possessed a large and very respectable resident gentry.’ The
condition of its farmers and labourers was above the average, and
it had always been singularly free from disturbance and outrage.
Its proximity to Dublin, however, made it peculiarly open to
the ‘seductions of the United Irishmen, and it is said that, from
an early period of the movement, a party among the Wicklow
priests had favoured the conspiracy.' The organisation spread so
seriously, that some districts were proclaimed in November 1797.?
There was no branch of the Orange Society in the county of Wick-
low, but the yeomanry force in this county is said to have taken
a peculiarly sectarian character, for the strenuous and successful
efforts of the United Irishmen to prevent the Catholics from en-
listing in it, made it necessary to fill the ranks with Protestants of
the lowest order. Having thus succeeded in making the armed
force mainly Protestant, the conspirators industriously spread
reports that the Orangemen were about to massacre the Catholics,
and were supported and instigated by the Government. I haye
already noticed the maddening terror which such rumours pro-
duced, and a Catholic historian‘states, that in this county not once

1 See Burdy’s History of Ireland, p. 498. 2 Musgrave, p. 301.

12 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CHa EXIXs

only, but on several occasions, the whole Catholic population for
the extent of thirty miles deserted their homes, and slept in the
open air, through the belief that the armed Protestants were
about to sweep down upon them, to massacre them, or at least to
expel them from the county.

By these means a population with very little interest in
political questions were scared into rebellion; the conspiracy
took root and spread, and the methods of repression that were
adopted soon completed the work. ‘The burning of houses, often
on the most frivolous grounds, the floggings of suspected in-
dividuals, the insults to women, and all the many acts of violence,
plunder, brutality, and oppression, that inevitably follow when
undisciplined forces, drawn mainly from the lowest classes of
society, are suffered to live at free quarters upon a hostile
population, lashed the people to madness. I have quoted from
the autobiography of Holt the remarkable passage, in which that
Wicklow rebel declared how foreign were political and legislative
grievances from the motives that turned him into a rebel, and the
persecution of those who fell under suspicion was by no means
confined to the poor. We have seen a striking example of this
in the treatment of Reynolds in the county of Kildare. Grattan
himself lived in the county of Wicklow, but fortunately he was
detained in England, during the worst period of martial law,
by the postponement of the trial of O’Connor; his family,
however, found themselves exposed to so many insults, and
even dangers, that they took refuge in Wales.? A great part of
the Ancient Britons were quartered in the county of Wicklow,
and these Welsh soldiers appear to have everywhere aroused
a deeper hatred than any others who were employed in Ireland.

Some time before the rebellion began, those who knew the
people well, perceived that a dangerous movement was on foot.
A general indisposition to pay debts of any kind, or fulfil any
engagements; a marked change in the manner of the people;
mysterious meetings by night; vague but persistent rumours,
pointing to some great coming change; signal fires appearing
frequently upon the hills; busy strangers moving from cottage
to cottage, all foreshadowed the storm. There was also a
sudden cessation of drinking ; a rapid and unnatural abatement

1 Plowden, ii. 714-716. 2 Grattan’s Life, iv. 377-382.

aS STATE OF WEXFORD. ge

of the usual turbulence at fairs or wakes, which, to those who
knew Ireland well, was very ominous.!

The adjoining county of Wexford was also one of the most
prosperous in Ireland. Land sold there at an unusually high
price. It had a considerable and intelligent resident gentry,
-and in general the peasantry were comfortably situated,? though
there were some districts in which there was extreme poverty.
The people were Catholic, but mainly descended from English
settlers, and this county boasted that it was the parent of the
volunteer movement, the first corps having been raised by Wex-
ford gentlemen, under the command of Sir Vesey Colclough,
for the purpose of repressing Whiteboy outrages. Unlike
Wicklow, however, Wexford had been an important centre of
Defenderism. A great part of the county had been sworn in to
resist the payment of tithes, and in 1793 bodies, numbering, it
is said, more than 1,000 men, and very bravely commanded by
a young farmer named Moore, had appeared in arms around
Enniscorthy. A distinguished officer named Vallotton, who had
been first aide-de-camp to General Elliot during the famous
siege of Gibraltar,.lost his life in suppressing these obscure
disturbances, and more than eighty of the Defenders were killed.‘
After this period, however, Wexford appears to have been
remarkably free from crime and from illegal organisations,*
though it took a considerable part in the agitation for Catholic
emancipation. It has been asserted by its local historians, that
the United Irish movement had made little way in it before the
rebellion,® and that it was one of the latest and least organised
# Ibid. p. 12.

+ Taylor’s History of the Weaford
Rebellion, pp, 10-13; Hay, pp. 21-
28.

1 Holt’s Wemoirs, i. 20-24.

2 Hay’s History of the Rebellion
in Weaford (ed. 1803), pp. 12, 14.
This writer is a violent partisan of the
rebels. Some of the Wexford magis-
- trates obtained during the rebellion,
and in the weeks of martial law that

5 Musgrave, p. 319.
® Gordon, p. 86; Hay, p. 55. The
statement of these writers was sup-

preceded it, a reputation for extreme
violence; but it is remarkable that,
even in the fiercely partisan accounts
of the rebel historians, several of them
are spoken of with respect, and even
affection. Lord Courtown, Mr. Turner,
Mr. Carew, and Mr. Pounden (who was
afterwards killed at the head of the
yeomanry at Enniscorthy), evidently
tried to carry out the disarming with
moderation and humanity.

ported by some secret information.
On Oct. 17, 1797, Higgins wrote an
important letter, stating that the
Ulster Committee had just proposed
an immediate rising, but that the
Leinster Committee refused its con-
sent, stating that, though Dublin was
ready, some of the other Leinster
counties were not, and that Wexford,
by the last returns, only contained
294 United Irishmen.

74 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

counties in Leinster; but this statement is hardly consistent
with the progress which had been made in arming the popu-
lation, and it is distinctly contradicted by Miles Byrne, who
took an active part in the Wexford rebellion, and who assures
us that before a shot was fired, the great mass of the people of
Wexford had become United Irishmen.! How far there was any
real political or anti-English feeling smouldering among them,
is very difficult to determine. My own opinion, for which I
have collected much evidence in this book, is, that there was
little positive political disloyalty, though there was much turbu-
lence and anarchy, among the Irish Catholic peasantry, till
shortly before the rebellion of 1798, and their attitude at the
time of the French expedition to Bantry Bay can hardly be
mistaken. Byrne, however, stated in his old age, that he could
well remember the sorrow and consternation expressed in the
Wexford chapels when the news arrived that the French had
failed to land, and he mentions that his own father had told
him, that he would sooner see his son dead than wearing the red
uniform of the King, and had more than once shown him the
country around their farm, bidding him remember that all this
had belonged to their ancestors, and that all this had been
plundered from them by the English invaders.?

In the latter part of 1797, the magistrates became aware
that the conspiracy was spreading in the county. It was found
that secret meetings were held in many districts, and the usual
rumours of plots of the Orangemen to murder their Catholic
neighbours were being industriously circulated by seditious
agents, although, ‘in fact,’ as an historian who lived in the
county observes, ‘there was no such thing as an Orange associa-
tion formed in the county of Wexford until a few months after
the suppression of the rebellion, nor were there any Orangemen
in the county at its breaking out, except a few in the towns,
where detachments of the North Cork Regiment of Militia were

1 Memoirs of Miles Byrne, i. 55,
56. Hay had based his assertion
chiefly on the fact, that reports of the
United Irish movement seized at
Bond’s house, when the leaders of
the conspiracy were arrested, made
scarcely any mention of Wexford.
But Byrne says that the delegate

from that county had been delayed,
and had not arrived. It appears,
however, true that scarcely anything
had been done in Wexford to give
the people the rudiments of military
training, to appoint their commanders,
or to form them into regiments.
2 bidsiai—=L0y

CH. XXIX. STATE OF WEXFORD. G5

stationed.’! The yeomanry officers discovered that numbers of
the Catholics in their corps had been seduced, and they tried to
combat the evil by imposing a new test, obliging every man to
declare that he was not, and would not be, either an Orangeman
or a United Irishman. Many refused to take it, and the Govern-
ment did not approve of it; but the evil was found to-be so
serious, that a great part of the yeomanry were disbanded and
disarmed.2 These precautions, as the rebellion shows, were
certainly far from needless; but the result was, that the
yeomanry became almost exclusively Protestant. It was dis-
covered about the same time, by means of an informer, that
several blacksmiths were busily employed in the manufacture of
pikes, and one of them, when arrested, confessed that he had
been making them for upwards of a year without being sus-
pected. At the end of November there was a meeting of
magistrates at Gorey, and by the votes of the majority, 16 out
of the 142 parishes in the county were proclaimed.? Lord
Mountnorris adopted a course which was at that time frequent
in Ireland, and went, accompanied by some other magistrates,
from chapel to chapel during mass time, exhorting the people to
come forward and take the oath of allegiance, promising them
‘ protections ’ if they did so, but threatening free quarters if they
refused. Great numbers, headed by their priests, took the oath,
received protections, and succeeded in disarming suspicion.
Many of these were soon after prominent in the rebellion.‘

It was observed in the beginning of 1798, that the attend-
ance in the chapels suddenly and greatly increased, and religious
ceremonies multiplied. Trees were cut down in great numbers,
with the evident intention of making pike handles, and the
magistrates had little doubt that a vast conspiracy was weaving
its meshes around them. At the same time, they almost wholly
failed in obtaining trustworthy evidence.’ Fear or sympathy
closed the mouths of witnesses, and several prosecutions which
were instituted at the spring assizes failed, as the sole informer
proved to be a man of no character or credibility. One man,
however, was convicted on clear evidence of having thrown the

1 Taylor, p. 15. pp. 52, 53; Gordon, pp. 86, 87; Tay-
2 Byrne, i. 19-24. lor, p. 18.

8 Hay, p. 52. 5 Byrne, i, 23,

4

Musgrave, pp. 320-323; Hay,

76 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. 9 on. xxix.

whole country between Arklow and Bray into a paroxysm of
terror, by going among the people telling them that the French
had arrived at Bantry, that the yeomen or Orangemen (who
were described as if they were identical) were about to march
to encounter them, but that, before doing so, they had deter-
mined to massacre the entire Catholic population around them.
It is easy to conceive the motive and the origin of a report so_
skilfully devised to drive the whole Catholic population into re-
bellion, and the historian who has the strongest sympathies with
the Wexford rebels, states that ‘their first inducement to com-
bine was to render their party strong enough to resist the Orange-
men, whom they actually believed to be associated and sworn
for the extermination of the Catholics, and “‘ to wade ankle-deep
in their blood.”’ ‘Itwas frequently, he adds, ‘ reported through
the country, that the Orangemen were to rise in the night-time,
to murder all the Catholics.’ At the same time, in the opposite
quarter, corresponding fears were rapidly rising, and the respect-
able Catholics in the neighbourhood of Gorey offered a reward
of one hundred guineas for the detection of those who had
spread a rumour that on Sunday, April 29, all the churches
were to be attacked, and that a general massacre of Protestants
was to follow.!

It was evident that the county was in a very dangerous
state, and it was equally evident that if the conspiracy exploded,
it would take the form of a religious war. On April 27, the
whole county was proclaimed and put under martial law, and it
was martial law carried out not by the passionless and resistless
force of a well-disciplined army, but mainly by small parties of
yeomen and militia, who had been hastily armed for the defence
of their homes and families, who were so few that if a rebellion
- broke out before the population had been disarmed, they
would almost certainly have been massacred, and who were
entirely unaccustomed to military discipline. As might have
been expected, such circumstances at once led to outrages
which, although they may have been exaggerated and multiplied
by partisan historians, were undoubtedly numerous and horrible.
Great numbers of suspected persons were flogged, or otherwise
tortured. Some were strung up in their homes to be hanged,

) Hay’s Hist. of the Rebellion in Weaford, pp. 53-56.

CH. XX1X. THE DISARMING OF WEXFORD. yy

and then let down half strangled to elicit confession, and this
process is said to have been repeated on the same victim as
much as three times.!. Numbers of cabins were burnt to the
ground because pikes or other weapons had been found in
them, or because the inhabitants, contrary to the proclamation,
were absent from them during the night, or even because they
belonged to suspected persons. The torture of the pitched cap,
which never before appears to have been known in Ireland, was
now introduced by the North Cork Militia, and excited fierce
terror and resentment.

It was in the week previous to the outbreak of the rebellion
that these excesses reached their height. A gentleman of the
name of Dawson discovered that, though his tenants had very
recently come forward in their chapel, and in the presence of
their priest, to take the cath of allegiance, they were, notwith-
standing, actively engaged in the fabrication of pikes. He
succeeded in obtaining some confessions, and immediately great
numbers surrendered pikes, and asked and obtained protections.?
A meeting of the magistrates was held, and they agreed that
readiness to take the oath of allegiance, unaccompanied by a
surrender of arms, must no longer be accepted as a proof of
loyalty; that the danger of the county was extreme and
imminent, and that the most strenuous measures were required.
Free quarters had not yet been enforced in Wexford; but the
magistrates now announced, that they would begin in fourteen
days in every district in which arms had not been surrendered.*
In the meantime, burnings, whippings, transportations, and
torture were unsparingly employed to force a surrender. One
active magistrate is said to have scoured the country at the
head of a party of cavalry yeomen, accompanied by a regular
executioner, with a hanging rope and a cat-o’-nine-tails, flogging
and half strangling suspected persons till confessions were
elicited and arms surrendered. A Catholic historian graphically
describes the inhabitants of a village when the yeomanry de-
scended on them. ‘They had the appearance of being more
dead than alive, from the apprehension of having their houses
burnt and themselves whipped. . . . They fled out of their

1 Hay’s Hist. of the Rebellion in $ This was on May 23. (Hay, pp-
Weaford, p. 64. -78.)
2 Musgrave, pp. 321-325.

78 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

houses into large brakes of furze on a hill immediately above
the village, whence they could hear the cries of one of their
neighbours, who was dragged out of his house, tied up to a
thorn tree, and while one yeoman continued flogging him, another
was throwing water on his back. The groans of the unfortunate
sufferer, from the stillness of the night, reverberated widely
through the appalled neighbourhood, and the spot of execution,
these men represented to have appeared next morning “‘as if a
pig had been killed there.” ’?

‘Protections’ could no longer be obtained by the simple
process of taking the oath of allegiance without a surrender of
arms, and it is pretended by the rebel historians that many
innocent persons were so terrified and so persecuted if they did
not possess them, that they made desperate efforts to obtain
arms for the sole purpose of surrendering them. It is certain,
however, that the country was at this time full of arms, accumu-
lated for the purpose of rebellion, and it is equally certain, that
the violent measures that were taken, produced the surrender of
many of them. In the single parish of Camolin many hundreds
were given up in a few days, and it is stated that several
thousands of protections were issued in the week before the
rebellion.

As the yeomen were chiefly Protestants, it is perhaps not
surprising that they should have been regarded as Orangemen,
but it is much more strange that this charge should have
especially centred on the North Cork Militia. This regiment
is accused by historians of both parties of having first publicly
introduced the Orange system into the county of Wexford,
where it appears previously to have been unknown,? and it
seems to have excited a stronger popular resentment than any
other Irish regiment during the rebellion. It was commanded
by Lord Kingsborough, and it is worthy of especial notice, that
it only came to the county of Wexford in the course of April.
It is probably true that some of its officers wore Orange badges,
and it is perhaps true that they had connected themselves with

1 Hay, pp. 78, 79. information is very precise, says it
2 Compare Taylor, p. 15; Hay, only arrived in the county on een
p. 57. 26, and consisted of only 300 men

ee Hay says (p. 57), ‘in the begin- (p. 325). Long before this date, the
ning’ of April; but Musgrave, whose county was permeated with sedition.

CH. XXIx. MASSACRE AT DUNLAVIN. 79

the Orange Society, but it is quite certain that no regiment
raised in the South of Ireland, and in an essentially Catholic
county, could possibly have consisted largely of Orangemen. It
happened that Newenham, the excellent historian of the social
condition of Ireland, had been major in it about two years
before the rebellion broke out, and he mentions that at that
time two-thirds of the regiment were Catholics.! Whatever
may have been its demerits, no regiment showed a more un-
flinching loyalty during the rebellion, and it is said to have lost
a full third of its numbers.

The terror and resentment in Wexford were much increased
by a horrible tragedy which took place, on the morning of
May 24, at the little town of Dunlavin, in the adjoining .
county of Wicklow. ‘Thirty-four men,’ says the historian, who
is in sympathy with the rebellion, ‘were shot without trial, and
among them the informer on whose evidence they were arrested.
Strange to tell, officers presided to sanction these proceedings.’ ?
The other version of the transaction is given by Musgrave. He
says that large columns of rebels were advancing on Dunlavin,
and the small garrison of yeomen and militia found that they
were far too few to hold it. The number of prisoners in the
gaol for treason greatly exceeded that of the yeomen. Under
these circumstances, ‘ the officers, having conferred for some time,
were of opinion that some of the yeomen who had been disarmed,
and were at that time in prison for being notorious traitors,
should be shot. Nineteen, therefore, of the Saunders Grove
corps, and nine of the Narromore, were immediately led out and
suffered death. It may be said in excuse for this act of severe
and summary justice, that they would have joined the nume-
rous bodies of rebels who were roving round, and at that time
_ threatened the town. At the same time, they discharged the
greater part of their prisoners, in consideration of their former
good characters.’ 3

Another slaughter of the same kind is said to have taken
place on the following day, at the little town of Carnew, in the

1 Newenham’s State of Ireland, p. during the rebellion.
273. Newenham, in fact, quotes this ZEA Dy Sl.
regiment as an example of the loyalty 3 Musgrave, p. 243.
shown by large bodies of Catholics

80 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

same county, but there is, I believe, no evidence in existence
which can explain its circumstances. As Carnew was at this
time in the centre of the rebellious district,! it is probable that
this also was a case of a small body of yeomen, menaced by a
superior rebel force, and reduced to the alternative of shooting
or releasing their prisoners. Hay, who is the authority for the
story, declares that at Carnew ‘on May 25, twenty-eight prisoners
were brought out of the place of confinement, and deliberately
shot in a ball, alley by the yeomen and a party of the Antrim
Militia, the infernal deed being sanctioned by the presence of
their officers. Many of the men thus inhumanly butchered
had been confined on mere suspicion.’? In the history of
Musgrave there is no mention whatever of this terrible story, nor
is it, I believe, anywhere referred to either in contemporary
newspapers or in the Government correspondence ; but I cannot
dismiss it as a fabrication, in the face of the language of Gordon,
who is the most truthful and temperate of the loyalist historians.
‘No quarter,’ he says, ‘was given to persons taken prisoners
as rebels, with or without arms. For one instance, fifty-four
were shot in the little town of Carnew in the space of three
days.’ 3

The history of the Wexford rebellion has been treated by
several writers, who had ample opportunities of ascertaining the
facts, but they have in general written under the influence of
the most furious party and religious passion, and sometimes
of deep personal injuries, and they have employed them-
selves mainly in collecting, aggravating, and elaborating the
crimes of one side, and in either concealing or reducing to the
smallest proportions those of the other. Few narratives of the
same period are so utterly different, and the reader who will
compare the Protestant accounts in Musgrave, Taylor, and
Jackson, with the Catholic accounts in Hay, Byrne, Cloney, and
Teeling, will, I think, understand how difficult is the task of any
writer whose only object is to tell the story with simple and
unexaggerated truth. Fortunately, however, one contemporary
historian belongs to a different category. Gordon was a Pro-

1 Hay, pp. 86, 87. knew several of the murdered men.
2 Ibid. pp. 76, 87. See also Byrne’s ’ Gordon, p. 222,
Memoirs, i. 35, 36. Byrne says he

oH. XxIx. GORDON ON THE REBELLION. 81.
<— ey ea
testant clergyman, who had resided for about twenties 7
years near Gorey, which was one of the chief centres of the insur-
rection ; he was intimately acquainted with the circumstances of
the country, and his son was a lieutenant in a yeomanry regiment,
which took an active part in suppressing the rebellion. He was
a writer of little ability and no great research, but he had ad-
mirable opportunities of knowing the truth, and no one who
reads his history can doubt that he was a most excellent, truth-
ful, moderate, and humane man, singularly free from religious
and political bigotry, loyal beyond all suspicion, but yet with an
occasional, and very pardonable, bias towards the weaker side.
His estimate of the causes of the rebellion is probably as near
the truth as it is possible for us to arrive at. He does not con-
ceal the fact, that a dangerous political conspiracy had been
planted in the country, but he attributes the magnitude and
the fierceness of the Wexford rebellion to causes that were in
no degree political—to religious animosities ; to the terror ex-
cited in both sects by the rumours of impending massacres; to
the neglect of the Government, which left the country, ina time
of great danger, without any sufficient protection ; to the violent
irritation produced*by the military measures that have been
described. These measures were not, he admits, altogether in-
efficacious for good. ‘In the neighbourhood of Gorey,’ he says,
‘if I am not mistaken, the terror of the whippings was in
particular so great, that the people would have been extremely
glad to renounce for ever all notions of opposition to Government,
if they could have been assured of permission to remain in a
state of quietness.’ But a maddening panic was abroad, and by
a strange error of judgment, while the most violent animosities
were excited, the military force in the county was utterly in-
adequate. ‘Not above six hundred men, at most, of the regular
army or militia were stationed in the county, the defence of
which was almost abandoned to the troops of yeomanry and
their supplementaries, while the magistrates in the several dis-
tricts were employed in ordering the seizure, imprisonment, and
whipping of numbers of suspected persons.’ He adds, that
another great error had been made in making the yeomanry
force, cavalry instead of infantry. He had no doubt ‘that of the
latter, a force might have been raised within the county of

VOL. VIII. G

Oo

82 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.,

Wexford, quite sufficient to crush the rebellion in its commence-
ment in this part of Ireland.’!

It was on the evening of Saturday, May 26, that the stan-
dard of insurrection was raised at a place called Boulavogue,
between Wexford and Gorey, by Father John Murphy, the
curate of the parish, a priest who had been educated at Seville,
and whose character is very variously, though not quite incom-
patibly, represented by the opposing parties. He is described by
one set of writers as an ignorant, narrow-minded, sanguinary
fanatic, and by another set of writers as an honest and simple-
minded man, who had been driven to desperation by the burning
of his house and chapel, and of the houses of some of his
parishioners.? A small party of eighteen or twenty yeomanry
cavalry, on hearing of the assembly, hastened to disperse it, but
they were unexpectedly attacked, and scattered, and Lieutenant
Bookey, who commanded them, was killed. Next day the circle
of devastation rapidly spread. Two very inoffensive clergymen,
and five or, according to another account, seven other persons,
were murdered, and the houses of the Protestant farmers in the
neighbourhood were soon in a blaze. A considerable number
of Catholic yeomen deserted to the rebels, who now concentrated
themselves on two hills called Oulart and Killthomas, the former
ten miles to the north of Wexford, the latter nine miles to the
west of Gorey. ‘Two hundred and fifty yeomen attacked and
easily dispersed the rebels on Killthomas Hill, though they were
about ten times as numerous as their assailants. The retribution
was terrible. About one hundred and fifty rebels were killed ;
the yeomen pursued the remainder for some seven miles, burning
on their way two Catholic chapels and, it is said, not less than

1 Gordon’s Hist. of the Irish Re-
bellion, pp. 86-88. Musgrave says
that, when the rebellion broke out,
‘there were no other troops in the
county of Wexford but the North
Cork Militia, consisting of but 300
men, and they did not arrive there till
April 26. Their headquarters were
at Wexford, where three companies of
them were stationed; the remainder
were quartered at Gorey, Enniscorthy,
and Ferns. Twothousand troops pro-
perly cantoned in it would have awed
the rebels into obedience, and have
prevented the possibility of a rising.’

(P. 326.) Musgrave probably underrates
the number of the North Cork Militia.
Newenham (State of Ireland, p. 273)
says they were 600, which seems to
agree with Gordon’s estimate.

* Compare the accounts in Hay,
Cloney, and Miles Byrne, with those
in Musgrave. Musgrave admits that
Father John’s house was burnt, but
states (supporting himself by deposi-
tions), that it was not until after that
priest had taken arms, and he asserts
that the yeomanry captain prevented
his men from burning the chapel.

CH, XXIX, SUCCESSES OF FATHER JOHN. 83

one hundred cabins and farmhouses, and they are accused of
having shot many unarmed and inoffensive persons. Two or
three Catholic priests were among the rebels of Killthomas.!

A more formidable body of rebels, estimated at about 4,000,
under the command of Father John, had assembled on the hill
of Oulart. With the complete contempt for disorderly and half-
armed rebel mobs which characterised the Irish loyalists, a picked
body of only 110 of the North Cork Militia, under the command
of Colonel Foote, proceeded at once to attack them, while a few
cavalry were collected below to cut off their retreat.. The con-
fidence of the loyalist militia seemed at first justified, for the re-
bels fled at the first onset, hotly pursued up the hill by the
militia, when Father John succeeded in rallying his pikemen.
He told them that they were surrounded, and must either con-
quer or perish, and placing himself at their head, he charged the
troops. These were scattered in the pursuit, and breathless
from the ascent, and they had never before experienced the
formidable character of the Irish pike. In a few moments almost
the whole body were stretched lifeless on the ground; five only of
the force that mounted the hill, succeeded in reaching the cavalry
below and escaping to Wexford.

This encounter took place on the morning of Whitsunday,
May 27. Its effects were very great. The whole country was
at once in arms, while the loyalists fled from every village and
farmhouse in the neighbourhood. Father John lost no time in
following up his success. He encamped that night on Carrigrew
Hill, and early on the following day he occupied the little town
of Camolin, about six miles from Oulart, where the found 700 or
800 guns. Some of them belonged to the yeomen, but most of
them had been collected from the surrounding country when
it was disarmed. He then proceeded two miles farther, to
Ferns, whence all the loyalists had fled, and after a short
pause, and on the same day, resolved to attack Enniscorthy, one

1 Gordon, pp. 90-92; Taylor, pp.
26-30; Hay, pp. 87-89. See, too, the
very curious journal of Father J.
Murphy, printed by Musgrave, Ap-
pendix, p. 83. Hay positively says:
‘The yeomanry in the north of the
county proceeded on the 27th against
a quiet and defenceless populace;

sallied forth in their neighbourhoods,
burned numbers of houses, and put to
death hundreds of persons who were
unarmed, unoffending, and unresist-
ing; so that those who had taken up
arms had the greater chance of escave
at that time.’ (P. 89.)

84 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

of the most important towns in the county, and a chief military
centre.

The great majority of his followers consisted of a rabble of
half-starved peasantry, drawn from a country which was sunk in
abject squalor and misery '|—men who were assuredly perfectly
indifferent to the political objects of the United Irishmen, but
who were driven into rebellion by fear of Orange massacres,
or by exasperation at military severities.? Most of them had no
better arms than pitchforks, and great numbers of women were
among them. They had no tents, no commissariat, no cavalry,
hardly a vestige of discipline or organisation ; and although the
capture of Camolin had given them many guns, they were in
general quite incapable of using them. There were, however,
some exceptions to the general inefficiency. There were among
them men from the barony of Shilmalier, who had been trained
from boyhood to shoot the sea birds and other wild fowl for the
Dublin market, and who were in consequence excellent marksmen ;
there were deserters from the yeomanry, who were acquainted
with the use of arms and with the rules of discipline ; and after
the success at Oulart Hill, a few sons of substantial farmers
gradually came in with their guns and horses, while even the
most unpractised found the pike a weapon of terrible effect. No
other weapon, indeed, employed by the rebels, was so dreaded by
the soldiers, especially by the cavalry; no other weapon in-
flicted such terrible wounds, or proved at close quarters so
formidable.’

Enniscorthy was attacked shortly after midday on the 28th,
and captured aftér more than three hours of very severe fighting.

1 TI have quoted Whitley Stokes’s
description of the condition of the
peasantry at Oulart, vol. vii. p. 168.

+ Cloney gives a vivid picture of
the state of feeling at this time.
‘While the events which I have re-
lated were occurring on the 25th, 26th,
and 27th, the people in my quarter of
the country... were in the most
terrorstruck and feverish anxiety, as
reports were for some time indus-
triously circulated that the Orangemen
would turn out, and commit a general
and indiscriminate massacre on the
Roman Catholics. . . The most
peaceable and well-disposed fancied

they saw themselves, their families,
and their neighbours, involved in one
common ruin, and that each approach-
ing night might possibly be the last
of their domestic happiness. No one
slept in his own house. The very
whistling of the birds seemed to re-
port the approach of an enemy. The
remembrance of the wailings of the
women and the cries of the children
awake in my mind, even at this period,
feelings of deep horror.’ (Personal
Narrative of the Transactions in the
County of Weaford, p. 14.)

3 See Byrne’s Memoirs, i. 123, 162,
163, 266; Holt’s Memoirs, i. 43, 156.

CH. XIX, CAPTURE OF ENNISCORTHY. 85

The garrison appears to have consisted of about 300 infantry and
cavalry yeomen, and militia, and they were supported by some
hastily raised volunteers. The rebel force had now swollen to
6,000 or 7,000 men. ‘The little garrison sallied forth to attack
the assailants, and a severe and obstinate fight ensued. Adopt-
ing a rude but not ineffectual strategy, which they more than
once repeated in the course of the rebellion, and whichis said to
have been practised in Ireland as far back as the days of Strong-
bow, the rebels broke the ranks of the soldiers by driving into
them a number of horses and cattle, which were goaded on by the
pikemen. The yeomen at last, finding themselves in danger of
being surrounded, were driven backwards into the town, and made
a stand in the market-place and on the bridge across the Slaney.
For some time a disorderly fight continued, with so fluctuating a
fortune, that orange and green ribbons are said to have been
alternately displayed by many in the town. Soon, however,
a number of houses were set on fire, and a scene of wild confu-
sion began. The ammunition of the yeomanry ran short. The
rebels forded the river; and a general flight took place. The
loyalists in wild confusion fled through the burning streets, and
made their way to Wexford, which was eleven Irish miles distant.
The rebels, fatigued with their labours of the day, attempted no
pursuit, and after searching the town for ammunition, they re-
tired, and formed their camp around the summit of Vinegar Hill,
a small rocky eminence which rises immediately behind the town.
Three officers and rather more than eighty soldiers had fallen,
and between four and five hundred houses and cabins had been
burnt. ‘The loss of the insurgents is vaguely estimated at from
one hundred to five hundred men.!

When the news of the capture of Enniscorthy arrived at
Wexford, the wildest terror prevailed. The wives of soldiers who
had been killed ran screaming through the streets, while streams
of fugitives poured in, covered with dust and blood, half fainting
with terror and fatigue, and thrown destitute upon the world.
The few ships that lay in the harbour were soon thronged with

1 There is, as usual, a great diver-
sity in the accounts of the proceedings
in Enniscorthy. Musgrave accuses
the rebels of killing all the wounded,
andcommitting many other atrocities,
while Byrne expressly says that no

houses were burned or pillaged after
the town was taken, and that the
insurgents abstained from imitating
the cruelties of the yeomanry and
soldiers.

86 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

women and children, and most of the adult men who possessed
or could procure weapons, prepared to defend the town from the
anticipated attack. Fears of massacre, however, from without,
and of treachery from within, hung heavy on every mind, and
an attempt was made to avert the calamity by negotiation.
Three prominent and popular country gentlemen, named Bagenal
Harvey, John Henry Colclough, and Edward Fitzgerald, who were
supposed to have some sympathy with the rebellion, had been
arrested on suspicion, and thrown into Wexford gaol, and it
was now proposed to release them, and request them to go to the
insurgents on Vinegar Hill, for the purpose of inducing them to
disperse. Colclough and Fitzgerald, who were both Catholics,
accepted the mission. They were received with great applause
by the rebels, but their efforts proved wholly vain. Colclough
returned to Wexford. Fitzgerald, either voluntarily or through
compulsion, remained with the rebels, who at once made him one
of their chiefs.

A party of two hundred Donegal Militia with a six-pounder
arrived at Wexford from Duncannon Fort, which was twenty-
three miles from Wexford, early on the morning of the 29th,
and they brought with them the promise from General Fawcett
of further assistance. Including the volunteers, the town now
contained about twelve hundred well-armed defenders. To avoid
the danger of a conflagration like that of Enniscorthy, orders
were given that ail fires should be extinguished except during
specified hours, and all thatched houses in or near the town
were stripped, while barriers were raised at the chief passes.

‘The rebels meanwhile wasted some precious hours in inde-
cision and divided counsels. They scoured the country for arms
and provisions, compelled prominent men to come into their
~ camp, and murdered some who were peculiarly obnoxious to them.
Two men named Hay and Barker, who had seen considerable
service in the French army, now joined them. Hay was the
brother of the historian of the rebellion, and a member of a family
which had taken a prominent part in the Catholic affairs of
the county. Barker had served with distinction in the Irish
Brigade. ‘There was, however, no acknowledged commander,
no fixed plan, no discipline. It was noticed that particular
grievances, and the interests of particular districts, completely

CH, XXIX, REBELS ADVANCE TOWARDS WEXFORD. 87

dominated, with the great mass of the rebels, over all general’
considerations, and this fact clearly indicated the kind of influ-
ences that had brought the greater part of them together. One
man pointed to his forehead, scorched and branded by the
pitched cap; another showed with burning anger his lacerated
back; others told how their cottages had been burnt, how their
little properties had been plundered or destroyed, how their wives
and daughters had been insulted by the yeomen, and implored
that a force might be sent either to protect their families from
massacre by the Orangemen, or to avenge the grievances they
had suffered. It needed allthe influence of Father John, and of
a few men of superior social standing, to prevent the rebel army
from disintegrating into small groups, and it is doubtful whether
they would have succeeded if the mission of Fitzgerald and
Colclough had not persuaded the people that tke enemy were
completely discouraged.' And even when the tendency to dis-
persion was checked, the question, which town should next be
attacked, profoundly divided the rebel chiefs. They were divided
between New Ross, Newtown-barry, and Wexford. The best
military opinion seems to have favoured the first. New Ross
might, it is believed, at this time have been captured without
opposition, and, by opening a communication with the disaffected
in the counties of Waterford and Kilkenny, its possession would
have given a great immediate extension to the rebellion. Both
Barker and Hay advocated this course,” but they were overruled,
and it was resolved to attack Wexford. That night the rebels
advanced to a place called Three Rocks, the Wexford end
of a long heather-clad mountain ridge called the Forth, which
stretches across the plain to within about three miles of Wexford,
commanding a vast view of the surrounding country. Father
John led the way, bearing a crucifix in his hands. After him,
the men of most influence seem to have been Edward Fitzgerald,
Edward Roach, and John Hay. It is a curious and significant
fact, that all these owed their ascendency mainly to their position
among the landed gentry of the county.

General Fawcett had left Duncannon Fort with the promised
succour on the evening of the 29th, but stopped short that night

1 See the graphic descriptions of Byrne’s Memoirs.
the camp at Vinegar Hill, in Cloney’s 2 Gordon, p. 117; Byrne, i. 66.
Personal Narrative, and in Miles

88 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

at Taghmon, about seven miles from Wexford. On the morning
of the 30th, he sent forward a detachment of eighty-eight men
with two howitzers. They seem to have advanced very in-
cautiously, and as they passed under the Three Rocks, the rebel
pikemen poured down fiercely upon them. The affray did not
last more than fifteen minutes, and it was terribly decisive.
The two cannon were taken. An ensign and sixteen privates
were made prisoners. Hvery other soldier soon lay dead upon
the ground. A cluster of thorn trees in an adjacent field still
marks the spot where their bodies were collected and buried.
General Fawcett, on hearing of the disaster, at once retreated
with the remainder of his troops to Duncannon, leaving Wexford
to its fate.

The Wexford garrison, who were ignorant of what had
occurred, sallied out on the same day to the Three Rocks, hoping
to disperse the rebels. They found, however, a force estimated
at not less than 16,000 men, and they were received with a
steady fire. They at once returned to Wexford, leaving Colonel
Watson dead upon the field.

The alarm in Wexford was now extreme. LHarly on the
morning of the 30th, the toll house and part of the’ bridge were
found to be in flames, and there were great fears of an extensive
conflagration. The town was not made for defence. Two-thirds
of its inhabitants were Catholics, and could not be counted on;
several yeomen deserted to the rebels, and among the remainder
there was scarcely any discipline or subordination. Some
desired to kill the prisoners in the gaol, and Bagenal Harvey
was so much alarmed, that he climbed up a chimney, where he
remained for some time concealed. If the insurgents had at
once advanced and blocked the roads of retreat, especially that
_to Duncannon Fort, the whole garrison must have surrendered.
Hay, who surveyed the situation with the eye of a practised
soldier, implored them to do so,! but his advice was neglected,
and it is, perhaps, scarcely to be wondered at, that a disorderly
and inexperienced force like that of the rebels, having on this
very day crushed one detachment and repulsed another, should
have relaxed its efforts, and failed to act with the promptitude of
a regular army under a skilful general. At Wexford a council

1 Byrne’s Memoirs, i. 76, 77; Cloney’s Personal Narrative, p. 24.

CH, Xxx. SURRENDER OF WEXFORD. _ 89

of war was now hastily summoned, and it was decided that the
town must be surrendered. Bagenal Harvey was prevailed on
to write a letter to the rebels, stating that he and the other
prisoners had been treated with all possible humanity, and were
now at liberty, and imploring the insurgents to commit no mas-
sacre, to abstain from burning houses, and to spare: their
prisoners’ lives. Two brothers of the name of Richards, who
were known to be popular in the county, were sent to the rebels
to negotiate a surrender. They tied white handkerchiefs round
their hats as a sign of truce, brought some country people with
them, and reached the rebel camp in safety. After some dis-
cussion and division, the rebels agreed to spare lives and
property, but insisted that all cannon, arms, and ammunition
should be surrendered. They detained one of the brothers as a
hostage, and sent back the other with Edward Fitzgerald to
Wexford to arrange the capitulation.

But long before they had arrived there, almost the whole
garrison had fled from the town by the still open road to Dun-
cannon Fort, leaving the inhabitants absolutely unprotected, but
carrying with them their arms and ammunition. The yeomen,
commanded by Colonel Colville, are said to have kept some
order in the flight, but the other troops scattered themselves
over the country, shooting peasants whom they met, burning
cottages, and also, it is said, several Roman Catholic chapels.!
In the town the quays, and every avenue leading to the water-
side, were thronged with women and children, begging in piteous
tones to be taken in the ships. One young lady, in her terror,
actually threw herself into the sea, in order to reach a boat.
The shipowners, who were chiefly Wexford men, or men from
the neighbouring country, had promised to convey the fugitives
_ to Wales, and received exorbitant fares; but when the town was
occupied by the rebels, most of them betrayed their trust, and
brought them back to the town.

It was, indeed, a terrible fate to be at the mercy of the vast,
disorderly, fanatical rabble who now poured into Wexford. It
was not surprising, too, that the rebels should have contended
that faith had been broken with them; that Fitzgerald and
Colclough had been sent on a sham embassy, merely in order to

1 Gordon, p. 102; Burdy, p. 510; Cloney, p. 24; Hay, pp. 119, 120,

90 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

secure a period of delay, during which the garrison might escape
with their arms. The inhabitants, however, either through
sympathy or through a very pardonable policy, did all they
could to conciliate their conquerors. Green handkerchiefs, flags,
or branches of trees, were hung from every window, and most
of the townsmen speedily assumed the green cockade, flung
open their houses, and offered refreshment to the rebels. It was
observed that many refused it, till the person who offered it had
partaken of it himself, for there was a widespread rumour that
the drink had been poisoned. The rebels, who had been sleep-
ing for many nights without cover on the heather, presented a
wild, savage, grotesque appearance. They were, most of them,
in the tattered dress of the Irish labourer, distinguished only by
white bands around their hats and by green cockades, but many
were fantastically decorated with ladies’ hats, bonnets, feathers,
and tippets, taken from plundered country houses, while others
wore portions of the uniform of the soldiers who had been
slain. Their arms consisted chiefly of pikes, with handles from
twelve to fourteen feet long, and sometimes, it is said, even longer.
A few men carried guns. Many others had pitchforks, scrapers,
currying knives, or old rusty bayonets fixed on poles. A crowd
of women accompanied them on their march, shouting and
dancing in the wildest triumph.!

On the whole, they committed far less outrage than might
reasonably have been expected. Two or three persons, against
whom they had special grudges, were murdered, and one of these
lay dying all night on the bridge. Many houses were plundered,
chiefly those which had been deserted by their owners, but no
houses were burned, and there was at this time no general dis-
position to massacre, though much to plunder. In Wexford
also, as at Enniscorthy, and elsewhere, the rebels abstained most
remarkably from those outrages on women which in most coun-
tries are the usual accompaniment of popular and military
anarchy. This form of crime has, indeed, never been an Irish
vice, and the presence of many women in the camp contributed
to prevent it. The rebels also were very tired, and, in spite of

' See the description in the Nar- sent in Wexford when it was occupied
rative of Charles Jackson, pp. 14, 15. by the rebels.
Jackson, Cloney, and Hay were all'pre-

CH, 2x BAGENAL HARVEY MADE COMMANDER. 91

some intoxication, the streets of Wexford on the night of May 30
were hardly more disturbed than in time of peace.

A general search was made for arms and ammunition, but
only a few barrels of gunpowder and a few hundred cartridges
were found. Much exasperation was at first felt against those
who had conducted the negotiation, which had enabled the
garrison to escape, and the life of Fitzgerald seemed for a short
time in danger, but he soon recovered his ascendency.! The
gaol was thrown open, and Bagenal Harvey was not only released,
but was also at once, by acclamation, appointed commander-in-
chief. Few facts in the history of the rebellion are more curious
or more significant than this. In Wexford, more than in any
other part of Ireland, the rebellion became essentially popish, and
the part played by religious fanaticism was incontestably great.
Yet even here a Protestant landlord, of no brilliant parts or cha-
racter, was selected by the triumphant rebels as their leader.
Bagenal Harvey was the owner of a considerable property in the
county, but, unlike most Irish landlords of independent means,
he devoted himself to a profession, and had some practice at the
bar. He was a humane, kindly, popular man, much liked by
his tenants and neighbours, and long noted for his advanced
political opinions. He had been a prominent United Irishman
in 1793. He had been one of those who were commissioned to
present a petition to the King against the recall of Lord Fitz-
william in 1795, and he had been on all occasions an active
advocate of the Catholic cause. He had fought several duels,
and established a reputation for great personal courage, but he
was absolutely without military knowledge or experience. His
health was weak. His presence was exceedingly unimposing,
and he had none of the magnetic or controlling qualities that are

-needed for the leader of a rebellion. Whether sympathy, or
ambition, or the danger of resisting the summons of the fierce
armed mob that surrounded him, induced him to accept the post,
it is impossible to say. In the few weeks during which he
exercised a feeble and precarious power, his main object was to
prevent outrage and murder, and to give the struggle the cha-
racter of regular war.

On the 31st the main body of the rebels quitted Wexford,

1 Hay, p. 121.

92 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX,

leaving in it, however, a sufficient force to hold the town. The
command of it was entrusted to another Protestant, Captain
Matthew Keugh, a retired half-pay officer in the English army,
who had served in the American war, and who was well known
for his popular opinions. He divided the town into wards, and
organised in each a company of men, armed with guns or pikes,
who elected their own officers. A regular parade was established ;
guards were appointed and relieved, and a password was daily
given. At first, self-appointed commissaries, under pretence of
making requisitions, plundered houses indiscriminately, but a
committee of twelve principal inhabitants was elected to regulate
the requisition and distribution of food, and mere plunder appears
then to have almost ceased. The new authorities resolved to
punish it severely; they restored some plundered property, and
they established public stores of provisions, from which every
householder might obtain supplies gratuitously in proportion to
the number of his household. Great quantities of provisions
seem to have been brought in from the surrounding country,
and there was no serious want. It was noticed that no money
except coin was recognised, and that bank notes were often
used to light pipes, or as wadding for the guns. All the able-
bodied men were called upon to attend the camps, and there was
a curious, childish desire for decoration. ‘Most persons,’ says a
writer who was present, ‘were desirous to wear ornaments of
some kind or other, and accordingly decorated themselves in the
most fantastical manner, with feathers, tippets, handkerchiefs, and
all the showy parts of ladies’ apparel.’ Green was naturally the
favourite colour, but banners of all colours except the hated
orange now appeared, and the coloured petticoats of the women
were largely employed in military decorations.!

On the whole, the better class of citizens succeeded in main-
taining a precarious ascendency, but a few men from the humbler
classes became captains. Of these, the most powerful was a
former shoeblack, named Dick Munk, who had acquired much in-
fluence over the townsmen, and was now conspicuous from his
green uniform with silver lace, his green helmet, and his white
ostrich plume.? The leaders, however, were in a great degree
in the hands of the mob, and the distinction between Catholic

} Hay, pp. 128-133. . ? Jackson’s Personal Narrative, p. 35,

CH. XXIX. THE PROTESTANTS IN WEXFORD. 93

and Protestant was at once strongly accentuated. The houses
around Wexford were everywhere searched to discover ‘ Orange-
men. All who harboured ‘Orangemen’ were threatened with
death. Every Protestant who was not well known, and whose
sympathies were not popular, lay under the suspicion of Orangism,
and some hundreds were thrown into Wexford gaol or confined
in the barracks. It was probably the best fate that could happen
to them, for their lives would have beenin great danger if they had
been at large, and more than once crowds appeared at the prison
door clamouring for their blood. Keugh, however, set himself
steadily to prevent massacre, and he was nobly seconded by a
man named William Kearney, to whom the care of the prisoners
had been entrusted, and who showed himself a true gentleman,
and a man of conspicuous humanity and courage.! Certificates
were given to Protestants by Catholic neighbours, but especially
by the Catholic bishops and clergy. Dr. Caulfield, the Catholic
Bishop of. Wexford, afterwards wrote a curious private letter
to Archbishop Troy, describing the state of things during the
rebel rule at Wexford, and he declares that there was not a
Protestant in the town or in the surrounding country who did
not come tothe priests for protection, and that priests were
employed from morning to night in endeavouring to secure
them.? The leading inhabitants were extremely anxious that
there should be no religious persecution, and they even desired
that the Protestant worship should continue,® but there could
be no doubt of the current of popular feeling. ‘If you will go
home and turn Christians,’ the rebels were accustomed to say,
‘you will be safe enough.’ Old faithful Catholic servants in
Protestant households came to their mistresses, imploring them
to allow the parish priest to christen the family, as ‘it would be
_the saving of them all.’* The chapels, both in Wexford and the

1 Compare the grudging admission
in Taylor’s History of the Rebellion
in the County of Wexford, p. 81, with
the warm and striking testimony of
Mrs. Adams, in her most interesting
account of her experiences, appended
to Croker’s Researches in the South of
Ireland, pp. 347-385. This narrative
was written, without any view to pub-
lication, by the daughter of a Protes-
tant country gentleman, who lived

close to Wexford, and it is one of
the most instructive pictures of the
state of the county of Wexford during
the rebellion.

2 Plowden, ii. 750.

’s Hay, p. 144. It did not, how-
ever, continue, and the Protestants
who were not inconfinement generally
thought it advisable to attend the
Catholic service.

‘ Croker, p. 364.

94 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.)

neighbourhood, and around Vinegar Hill, were crowded with
Protestants, who sought to secure their lives, property, and liberty,
by obtaining from the priests certificates of conformity.

Two Roman Catholics of the name of Murphy, who had
given information at trials against United Irishmen, were seized,
tried for this offence, and put to death. The executions were
conducted with elaborate ceremony, which was evidently intended
to invest them with a judicial character, and to distinguish them
from acts of mob violence. A procession was formed; the Dead
March was played; a black flag was hoisted, and when the place
of execution was reached, all the people dropped on their knees
in prayer. Hither as a mark of ignominy, or more probably in
order to baffle justice if the rebellion was defeated, Protestant
prisoners were compelled to shoot the culprits.!

Roving bands of plunderers ranged unchecked through the
surrounding country; the few loyalists and Protestants there,
lived in constant alarm, and in the complete anarchy that pre-
vailed, there was a boundless scope for the gratification of private
malice and private greed. It must, however, be added that,
among the many horrors which throw a lurid light on this por-
tion of Irish history, there were many incidents that show
human nature at its best. Examples of gratitude or affection
shown by tenants to their landlords, by old servants to their
masters, by poor men who had received in past time some little
acts of charity and kindness from the rich, were very frequent.
Protestant ladies sometimes passed unmolested, on missions of
charity to their imprisoned relations, through great bodies of un-
disciplined pikemen, and poor women often risked their own lives
to save those of wounded men or of fugitives.?

In the meantime, strenuous efforts were made to arm the
people with pikes. Every forge in or near Wexford was em-

1 Taylor, pp. 79, 80; Hay, p. 168.
See, too, the curious description of
Jackson (pp. 22, 23), who was com-
pelled to take part in one of the exe-
cutions.

2 Thereader will find some striking
instances of this in Mrs. Adams’s ex-
perience. This lady had an old and
infirm father in the neighbourhood of
Wexford to care for, and her brother
(who lost his intellect from terror)
was a prisoner in Wexford gaol. She

says: ‘I shall ever have reasonto love
the poor Irish for the many proofs of
heart they have shown during this
disturbed season; particularly as they
were all persuaded into a belief, that
they were to possess the different
estates of the gentlemen of the
county, and that they had only to
draw lots for their possessions.’
(Croker’s Researches in the South of
Ireland, p. 361.)

CH, XXIX. WEXFORD AND GOREY. 95

ployed in manufacturing them, and the Bull-ring at Wexford
was filled with kitchen tables, which the carpenters were con-
verting into pike handles. Old folios, which had long slumbered
in the libraries of country houses, were now in much request, for it
was found that it was possible to use their bindings as saddles.
Three cannon were mounted in a position to command the
harbour, and three oyster boats in the harbour were fitted out
as cruisers. They succeeded in bringing in several vessels bound
for Dublin with provisions, and also in making a capture which was
of great importance. Lord Kingsborough, who commanded the
North Cork Militia, was ignorant of the occupation of Wexford by
the rebels, and was proceeding there by water, when on June 2 he
was taken prisoner by one of the armed oyster boats, together with.
two of his officers, and was imprisoned asa hostage. Another some-
what important acquisition of the rebels, was a Protestant gentle-
man named Cornelius Grogan, of Johnstown. The inhabitants of
his district rose to arms, and came to him asking him to be their
leader, and he was either persuaded or coerced into accepting. He
was an old, gouty, infirm man of little intelligence, but his assist-
ance was important, as he was one of the largest landlords of the
county, his estates being estimated at not less than 6,000J. a
year. He rode at the head of his people into Wexford, with
green banners flying before him, and amid great demonstrations
of popular rejoicing. ‘Two of his brothers were at this very time
bearing arms on the side of the Government.

The whole of the south of the county, except Ross and Dun-
cannon, was now in the hands of the rebels, and in the north
extreme terror prevailed. The yeomanry cavalry who had es-
caped from Oulart Hill had fled to Gorey, and that little town
was also crowded with fugitives from the country. A few yeo-
men and militia, who were collected there, tried to disarm the

surrounding country, and they are accused by the historians on
the rebel side of committing great atrocities, and slaughtering
multitudes of unarmed and perfectly inoffensive people. I have
myself little doubt that these charges are at least immensely
exaggerated, but it was a time when an outbreak was hourly
expected, and when there was no safe place for detaining
prisoners, and in the panic and violence that prevailed, human
. life was little valued, and very summary executions undoubtedly

96 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIx.

often followed very slight suspicions.' A rumour was spread
that an overwhelming force was marching on Gorey, and early on
the morning of the 28th the troops, accompanied by a crowd of
fugitives, among whom was the historian Gordon, fled to Ark-
low, but the commanding officer there, apparently suspecting
treachery, refused to admit this great miscellaneous multitude,
and most of them passed the night under the hedges near the
town. Gorey in the meantime was left absolutely unprotected.
The few remaining inhabitants shut themselves up in their
houses, but amad or intoxicated woman danced frantically through
the abandoned streets shouting in triumph, and her cries mingled
with the mournful wail of a deserted pack of hounds which had
been brought into the town by one of the fugitive gentry. There,
too, ‘six men who had been that morning, though unarmed,
taken prisoners, shot through the body and left for dead in the
street, were writhing with pain,’ and it was noticed that one of
these dying men, who was lying against a wall, though unable
to speak, threatened with his fist a Protestant who had run
back into the town for something he had forgotten. The road
was strewn with gunpowder spilt by the retiring troops, and as
a yeoman galloped by, it exploded under his horse’s hoofs,
scorching terribly both man and beast. A general plunder was
feared, and a band of women assembled for that purpose, but some
of the remaining inhabitants organised themselves into a guard ;
John Hunter Gowan, a magistrate of great courage and energy,
though also, it is said, of great violence, collected a body of men

without arms, and only for the pur-
pose of seeing the attacks on houses
&c. which were going on below

1 Hay makes the most atrocious
accusations against the yeomen about
Gorey. He says, they fell upon ‘the

defenceless and unoffending populace,
of whom they slew some hundreds ;’
that numbers who remained in their
houses were called out, and shot at
their own doors; that even infirm
and decrepit men were among the
victims; and that just before the
evacuation of the town, ‘eleven men,
taken out of their beds within a
mile’s distance, were brought in and
shot in the streets.” (Jnsurrection
of the County of Weaford, pp. 133-
135.) He describes, however, most
of these massacres as the massacres
of men who had assembled in bodies
on the eminences, though (Hay says)

Gordon, who lived close to Gorey, and
had better means than any other
historian of observing what went on
there, acknowledges that the yeomen
shot some of their prisoners before
evacuating the town, but he gives no
other support to these statements.
He says that the people in the neigh-
bourhood of Gorey were the last, and
least violent of all, in the county of
Wexford in rising against the esta-
blished authority, which he attributes
largely to the humane and concilia-
tory conduct of the Stopford family
to their inferiors. (Gordon, p. 104.)

CH. XXIXs REBELS REPULSED AT NEWTOWN-BARR -
to secure the town, and on the 31st, the militia and ye ma
who had abandoned it, returned and resumed their duty.!

On June 1, the rebels received a serious check. A body of
some 4,000 of them, who appear to have been unconnected with
those at Wexford, had assembled near Vinegar Hill, and attacked
the village of Newtown-barry, where about 350 yeomen and
militiamen were stationed, under the command of Colonel
L’Estrange. The village lies on the western bank of the Slaney,
about ten miles from Enniscorthy, and its capture would have
opened a way to the county of Wicklow, where the conspiracy
was widely spread. A priest of gigantic stature named Kearns
led the rebels, and two or three other priests took prominent
parts in the expedition. As they approached the village, they
stopped, dropped on their knees and prayed. The rebels had
one howitzer and some small swivels. Colonel L’Estrange feared
to be surrounded by superior numbers, and he retired from the
village, where, however, some loyalists continued to resist. The
yeomen soon returned, found the rebels dispersed and pillaging
through the streets, scattered them by a heavy fire of grape shot
when they attempted to rally, and put them to flight with great
loss. Two priests dressed in their sacerdotal vestments are said
to have been among the dead.”

Several days passed before the formidable character of
the rebellion in Wexford was fully known or fully realised.
Among the most active correspondents of Pelham was a Northern
magistrate named Henry Alexander, who appears at this time to
have been employed at the Ordnance Office at Dublin, and who
followed the course of the rebellion with great care. He was a
strong politician, violently opposed to Grattan and Catholic
emancipation, and his antipathies in some degree coloured his

1 Gordon, pp. 106-108. Gordon
praises greatly the activity of Gowan,
and gives no support to the rebel
statements about his barbarity.

2 The attack on Newtown-barry
is described with some difference
of detail by Gordon (pp. 108, 109),
Hay (pp. 137, 138), Musgrave (pp.
394, 395), Taylor (pp. 44-46), Byrne
(i. 86-89). Byrne has the autho-
rity of an eye-witness, for he was
with the rebel army in the attack,
but his account does not appear to

VOL. VIII.

have been written till more than fifty
years after, and was not published
till 1863. He is especially anxious
to contradict the statement of the
other historians, that the rebels be-
came generally intoxicated in New-
town-barry, and that this led to their
defeat. Colonel L’Estrange estimated
the rebels at not less than 10,000 or
15.000, and says that some 500 were
killed. He says that his own force
was only about 350 men. (See his
letters, June 1 and 2,1.8.P.0.)

BH

98 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, CH. XXIX.

judgments, but he was evidently an acute and industrious man,
with special means of information, and a long letter, which he
wrote on June 8, throws some considerable light on the con-
fused, scattered, and perplexing incidents of the earlier stages of
the struggle. It is remarkable as showing the estimate which
was then formed in Government circles of the nature and pros-
pects of the rebellion, and also the small importance which was
still attached to the events in Wexford.

He considered that the arrests at Bond’s house, and the arrest
of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, had the double effect of depriving
the rebellion of all intelligent guidance, and of hastening its ex-
plosion. He had been present at the examination of a deter-
mined rebel officer, who stated that it had been the plan of the
rebels to form large camps at Dunboyne, at Swords, and at the
foot of the Wicklow mountains near the house of Mr. Latouche.
The camp at Dunboyne had been successfully formed, but the
meeting at Swords had been at once dispersed by the Fermanagh
Militia, and the Wicklow rebels, who ‘ had proceeded to Rathfarn-
ham to surprise the yeomanry, who were to have been betrayed
to them by two of their own body (since convicted and executed,
confessing their guilt),’ had been defeated and driven into the
mountains by Lord Roden and a party of the 5th Dragoons.
A strong cordon now keeps them from the Lowlands. They have
no common stock of provisions, and each man relies on what he
has brought with him; ‘their houses are marked, and their
absence must be accounted for,’ and unless they can effect a
junction with the Wexford insurgents, want of food and want
of covering must soon oblige them to surrender or disperse.
‘Hwerywhere,’ he says, ‘there has been a great mixture of
ferocious courage in their leaders, who have precipitated them-
selves on death, and a rabble of followers, who suffer with a
stupid indifference. At Lord Rossmore’s little town they had
been nearly successful, although finally repulsed with consider-
able loss ;’ but though some of the Wicklow rebels are still very
defiant, many are exceedingly the reverse, and Alexander believes
that they would now accept almost any terms that would save
their lives. In spite of the rebellion, Colonel Ogle had under-
taken to raise one thousand yeomen in the county of Wicklow,
and he was accomplishing his task without difficulty. In one

CH. XXIX. LETTER OF ALEXANDER. 99

day, and from the small town of Bray alone, seventy recruits
came in.

The assemblage at Dunboyne was very large, and the rebel
force there was drawn from a large area extending as far as
Drogheda. ‘They have done much mischief, but are without
any leader of consequence. Two gentlemen that were their
prisoners assured me, their principal leader was a young man
about twenty-two, the innkeeper’s son of Lucan. He was
killed at the fight of Tarragh [Tarah] Hill, leading his men very
gallantly in full regimentals. A man of the name of Garrotty,
a better kind of farmer, was next to himin command. In other
respects each man did what he liked, and ranged himself under
his local commander. They had a surprising quantity and
variety of arms ; many more firearms than the Government had
believed possible, and each recruit as he joined was given his
choice of weapons. ‘Their proceedings have not been as cruel
and sanguinary as described, but they have been cruel to a great
degree; neither have they outraged the chastity of the women,
as reported. They have amongst their neighbours certainly
made distinctions, and plundered and murdered individuals
merely because they were Protestants.’ This, however, was due
to the ungovernable fury of the ignorant and priest-ridden part
of the mob, and not at all to the directions of the leaders, who
are not acting as a merely Catholic party would act, but who
dare not punish outrages, who fear to alienate their supporters
among the priests, and who have not ventured even to issue a
manifesto, lest they should offend either the Presbyterians or the
priests. Some of ‘the lower priests’ are taking a very leading
and mischievous part in the movement, and ‘the politicians are
obliged to take colour from the religionists.’

It is still, Alexander thinks, quite uncertain which of two

wholly different courses the rebellion will take. It may appeal
to the ferocity of republicanism, and run along the lines of the
French Revolution, and this would probably have been its course
if the French had arrived, but it is more likely that it will assume
a wholly different aspect, and appeal to a very different passion.
It may become an outburst of ‘the long and gradually ripened
vengeance’ which the ‘lower Catholics’ cherish against those
who haye invaded their temples, murdered their forefathers, and

H 2

100 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

appropriated their estates. This sentiment Alexander believes
to be deep and ineradicable in Irish life, and the governing fact
of Irish politics. ‘ The higher classes [of Catholics] are behaving
well. Lord Fingall showed great personal gallantry at the battle
of Tarragh. The King’s County Militia, who behaved so well
under L’Estrange, are almost all Catholics. Their bishops, and
some of their noblemen and gentry, are coming forward with
loyal addresses, but the great mass is decidedly against you.
England judged of the Catholics by the few of the higher ranks
they associated with. Conventional circumstances . . . may tie
up the militia and their higher clergy, but as long as the property
of the country exists, as long as the recollection of the Brehon
law of gavelkind exists, and Irish names remain, so long will the
lower Irish hope to regain what they think, whether justly or un-
justly, their hereditary property. I have talked to many of their
prisoners, and their only motive assigned for rising was to make
Treland their own again. All individuals, all political sentiments,
were only, as they were taught to believe them, instrumental to
that great end. . . . I am sure we deceive ourselves if we do not
calculate upon that permanent source of Irish disturbances, what-
ever occasional circumstances may retard or accelerate its operation.’

‘Troops,’ he says, ‘are impatiently expected from England ;
but if the administration, with the forces they have in Ireland,
require aid to crush a rebellion confined to a corner of the country,
woe be to this kingdom should the French land in force. When-
ever the rebels have been fought with common judgment, let
the disproportion of numbers be what it may, they have been
beaten, except by the Cork Militia, who acted with great impru-
dence, and by Fawcett, whose conduct, as far as private letters
state it, is most generally reprobated. Large bodies are forming
round the rebels on every side, and all Dublin is sanguine
in their expectations of their immediate destruction. Your
troops are very keen, and the rebels indiscriminately massa-
cring Protestant and Catholic soldiers, leaves no distinction
in the military enthusiasm.’ The general pardon, however,
offered by Dundas to the Kildare rebels, was strongly reprobated
among the supporters of the Government. ‘If it was a capitu-
lation, itwas wrong. If it was mercy, it was misapplied, because
the murderers of many of the military and others were in the

CH, XXIX. VINEGAR HILL. 101

mass of pardoned men. A mercy so precipitate seemed no
mercy to the friends of the sufferers, and . . . all Irish history
teaches us, with Irish rebels, a negotiating Government proves
the destruction of the English interest.’ ‘Little is known,’
Alexander adds in a postscript, ‘ of the Wexford rebellion, except
that their leaders behave more properly, and the men better con-
ducted.’!

The Wexford rebellion, however, from its magnitude, and also
from its sanguinary character, speedily became the centre of the
scene, attracting to itself the rebel elements in the surrounding
counties, and reducing all the other disturbances in Ireland
almost to insignificance. Though the larger body of the rebel
force that had captured Enniscorthy had proceeded to Wexford,
and had chosen Bagenal Harvey as their commander, a con-
siderable number still occupied the camp at Vinegar Hill, and
they remained there from May 28 till the 20th of the follow-
ing June. It was at this spot and during this time, that many
of the most horrible crimes of the rebellion were committed.
Vinegar Hill is the centre of a richly wooded and undulating
country, watered by the Slaney, and bounded on the north and
west by the blue line of the Wicklow hills. Enniscorthy lies
at its foot, and an area of many miles is gaily interspersed with
country houses and with prosperous farms, Near the summit of
the hill stood an old windmill. The mill no longer exists, but the
lower part of its masonry still remains, forming a round, grey
tower, about fifteen feet in diameter, which stands out con-
spicuously against the green grass, and is one of the most
prominent objects to be seen from Enniscorthy. Scarcely any
other spot in Ireland is associated with memories so tragical and
so hideous. The country around was searched and plundered,
and great numbers of Protestants were brought to the rebel
camp, confined in the old windmill, or in a barn that lay at the foot
of the hill, and then deliberately butchered. There appears in-
deed generally—though not always—to have been some form of
trial, and although the victims were all or nearly all Protestants,
they were not put to death simply for their creed. Many against
whom no charge was brought, or who were popular among the
people, or who could find some rebel to attest their innocence and

1 Henry Alexander to Pelham, June 3, 1798. (Pelham MSS.)

102 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

their goodness, were dismissed in safety, with written protections
from a priest. But all who had borne any part in the floggings,
burnings, and other measures of repression that had been so
frequent during the last few weeks; all who had shown them-
selves active or conspicuous on the loyalist side; all who were
pronounced by the rebel tribunals to be Orangemen, were de-
liberately put to death. The belief which had been so indus-
triously spread, that the Orangemen had sworn to exterminate
the Catholics, had driven the people mad; and although in truth
there were scarcely any Orangemen in Wexford, although until
shortly before the rebellion, religious dissension had been very
slight,! every Protestant of zeal and earnestness now fell under
suspicion. Some were shot, some were piked to death, many
were flogged in imitation of the proceedings of the yeomen
and in order to elicit confessions of Orangism, and there were
ghastly tales of prolonged and agonising deaths.

These rest, it is true, on scanty and somewhat dubious evi-
dence, but of the blackness of the tragedy there can be no question.
The dead bodies of many Protestants were left unburied, to be
devoured by the swine or by the birds. Some were thrown into
the river. Some were lightly covered over with sand. One man,
who had been stunned, and pierced with a pike, was thrown into
a grave while still alive, but a faithful dog scraped away the earth
that covered him, and licked his face till he revived, and some
passers-by drew him from the grave, sheltered him in their house,
and tended him till he recovered. How many perished on
Vinegar Hill, it is impossible to say. Musgrave, the most violent

1 One of the Wexford rebels,
before his execution, made a confes-
sion, which was formally attested, in
which he said: ‘ Every man that was
a Protestant was called an Orange-
man, and every one was to be killed,
from the poorest man in the country.
Before the rebellion, I never heard
there was any hatred between Roman
Catholics and Protestants; they al-
ways lived peaceably together. I
always found the Protestants better
masters and more indulgent landlords
than my own religion.’ (Musgrave,
Appendix, p. 100.) This statement,
however, may be qualified by a pas-
sage in a letter written to the Duke
of Richmond by Lady Louisa Co-

nolly, who was an exceedingly good
judge of the state of Ireland. She
said: ‘I still think that it [the re-
bellion} does not proceed from a reli-
gious cause, such numbers of the
greatest and best Catholics are so
unhappy about it, behave so well, and
take such pains to discountenance
anything of the kind. At Wexford
there has, so far back as thirty-six
years, to my knowledge, existed a
violent Protestant and Catholic party;
consequently these engines were set
to work for the purpose of rebellion.
In other places that of electioneering
parties, and so on; every means has
been seized that could answer their
design.’ (MS. letter, June 18, 1798.)

CH, XXIx. VINEGAR HILL. 103

of the Protestant loyalist historians, estimates the number at
more than five hundred. Gordon, the most moderate, says that
unquestionable evidence proves that it can have been little less
than four hundred. The Catholic historians usually confine
themselves to vague generalities, and to paralleling these atro-
cities with the massacres of prisoners by the yeomen and the
soldiers at Carnew, Dunlavin, and Gorey.!

The proceedings on Vinegar Hill were largely directed by
priests. Many of them were collected there. The mass was
daily celebrated, and fierce sermons sustained the fanaticism of the
people. A hot, feverish atmosphere of religious excitement pre-
vailed, and there was a ghastly mixture of piety and murder.
It was observed that religious hatred, industriously inflamed by
accounts of intended massacres of Catholics by Orangemen,
played here a much more powerful part than any form of
political or civil rancour, and it was often those who were
most scrupulously observant of the ceremonials of their religion,
who were the most murderous.? All the resources of super-
stition were at the same time employed to stimulate the courage
of the rebels. Father John Murphy was especially looked upon
as under Divine protection, and it was believed that he was in-
vulnerable, and could catch the bullets in his hand. Numbers of
Protestants around Vinegar Hill sought safety and protection by
conforming, and it must be added, that not a few others appear
to have been saved. by the intervention of the priests. Some of
those who thus escaped, were afterwards in imminent danger of
being hanged hy the soldiers, who regarded their release by the
rebels as a strong presumption of their guilt.

There were curious varieties in the treatment of Protestants.
In large districts, every house belonging to a Protestant was
burnt to the ground, but in others they were: little molested.
Gordon notices that the parish of Killegny, five milesfrom Ennis-
corthy, fell completely into the hands of the rebels, the Protes-
tants in it having all been surrounded before they were able to
escape. Yet not a single house in this parish was burnt, or a
single Protestant killed. He attributes this chiefly ‘to their

1 Numerous depcsitions by pri-Gordon,.pp. 139-142; Taylor, pp. 96~
soners, who had been taken to Vine- 108; Hay, pp. 167, 168.
gar Hill but spared, will be found, 2 Gordon, pp. 139, 195, 206, 218,
in Musgrave’s Appendix. See,,too, — OU Weytele a oye CKO)"

104 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX,

temporising conformity with the Romish worship, and to the very
laudable conduct of the parish priest, Father Thomas Rogers,
who, without any hint of a wish for their actual conversion, en-
couraged the belief of it among his bigoted flock.’ The Protestant
clergyman and his family were brought into the Romish chapel,
io purge themselves from the imputation of being Orangemen,
but they were afterwards suffered to remain unmolested, and
when they were in want, the parish priest sent them provisions.!

The two immediate objects of the Wexford rebels were,
the capture of Gorey and of New Ross. Like the attack on
Newtown-barry, these expeditions were intended to open out a
communication to other counties, and thus to produce that general
insurrection throughout Ireland without which the Wexford
rebellion was manifestly hopeless. On June 1, a body of rebels,
variously estimated at from 1,000 to 4,000 men, many of them
.on horseback, advanced upon Gorey from Corrigrua Hill, where
Bagenal Harvey had pitched his camp, burning many houses in
their seven miles’ march. Lieutenant Elliot, with three troops
of yeomanry cavalry, fifty yeomanry infantry, and forty men of the
Antrim and North Cork Militia, encountered them near the town,
and by a steady and well-directed fire completely routed them.
The rebel fire, in this as in most other conflicts of the struggle,
coming from men who were totally unacquainted with the use of
firearms, went far above the troops, and only three men were
‘killed. The victorious army abstained from pursuit, but burnt
many houses in a neighbouring village, which were said to belong
to rebels, and then retired to Gorey, bringing with them more
than 100 captured horses, some.arms, and two green flags.

1 Gordon, pp. 141-143. Gordon

soon.after succeeded this clergyman as
Rector of Killegny, and was therefore
wwell acquainted with the circum-
‘stances of the parish. He says that
there were signs that, if the rebellion
had lasted, the immunity of the Pro-
testants of this parish would not have
lasted, and that a few of those
who conformed to Catholicism
during the rebellion, in order .to
save their lives, continued in that
creed, ‘probably through fear of a
second insurrection.’ It appears from
one of the affidavits, that the rebels
were sometimes contented if their
prisoners consented to cross them-

selves, as this was considered a proof
that at least they were not Orange-
men. (Musgrave, Appendix, pp. 118,
119.)

2 Gordon, pp. 112, 113; Taylor,
pp. 47, 48. Gordon was himself near
this battle, and his son appears to
have been engaged in it. He says:
“A small occurrence after the battle,
of which a son of mine was a witness,

‘may help to illustrate the state of the

country at that time. Two yeomen,
coming to a.brake or clump of bushes,
and observing a small motion, as if
some persons were hiding there, one
of them fired into it, and the shot
was answered by a most piteous and

CH, XXIX, DEFEAT OF WALPOLE. 105

The rebels, however, did not abandon their enterprise, and
it was determined to renew it with a greatly increased force. A
large part of the men on Vinegar Hill went to the camp on
Corrigrua Hill, and on Sunday, June 3, a great force was mar-
shalled there, in preparation for an attack on Gorey, which was
intended for the morrow. On the same day, General , Loftus
arrived at Gorey, with a force of 1,500 men and five pieces of
artillery. Though the reinforcement consisted almost entirely
of militia and yeomanry,! it was believed that the loyalist force
would be amply sufficient to surround and capture the rebel camp
on Corrigrua Hill, and thus to crush the rebellion on this side of
Wexford. About ten o’clock on the morning of the 4th, the
troops marched from Gorey in two divisions, commanded re-
spectively by General Loftus and Colonel Walpole. They moved
along two different roads, for the purpose of attacking the hill
on opposite sides, General Loftus taking the road to the left, and
Colonel Walpole that to the right.

Early on the same morning, the insurgents had started on
their march for Gorey. Before their departure, mass was cele-
brated, and the priests distributed the ball cartridges. Unlike
the loyalists, they had thrown out scouts, and they soon discovered
the approach of the division of Walpole. This officer, though a
favourite at the Castle, was totally inexperienced in actual war,
and was blinded, like many others during the rebellion, by his
contempt for the rebels. As he now advanced heedlessly through
narrow lanes flanked by high hedges, he was suddenly attacked
by a powerful rebel force under the command of Father John
Murphy. A storm of grape shot failed to disperse the assailants.
Walpole was shot dead. His troops were driven back with
serious loss. They fled in disorder to Gorey; rushed hastily
through its streets under the fire of rebels, who had taken pos-
session of some of the houses, and did not pause in their retreat
till they reached Arklow. Three cannon were taken, and at
least fifty-four men were killed or missing. Among the officers

loud screech of a child. The other and eight children, almost naked—
yeoman was then urged by his com- one of whom was severely wounded—
panion to fire; but he, being a gentle- came trembling from the brake, where
man and less ferocious, instead of they had secreted themselves for
firing, commanded the concealed per- safety.’ (P. 113.)

sons to appear; when a poor woman 1 See Taylor, p. 49.

106 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

who were slightly wounded was Captain Armstrong, the accuser
of the Sheares’s. |

General Loftus had heard from a distance the noise of battle ;
he sent some seventy men across country to support Walpole,
and a second disastrous fight took place. Loftus could not
bring his artillery across the fields, but at length by a circuitous
road he reached the scene of conflict, where he found the dead
body of Walpole, and evident signs of the defeat of his division.'
He followed the rebel army towards Gorey, found it at last
strongly posted on a hill that commands that town, and was met
by a fire from the cannon which had been taken. Feeling him-
self unable either to take the post or to pass under it into the
town, he hastily retreated to Carnew in the county of Wicklow,
and thence to Carlow, leaving a great tract of country at the
mercy of the rebels.?

If these, instead of stopping for some days at Gorey, had
pressed immediately on, raising the country as they went, there
would have been little or nothing, in the opinion of a competent
judge, to check them between Wicklow and Dublin. The
loyalists of Gorey, who had expected complete security from the
arrival of Loftus, now fled in wild confusion with the retreating
troops to Arklow, leaving their property behind them. In the
town there was some plunder and much drinking. About
a hundred prisoners were released. Cattle were killed for the
rebel camp in such numbers, and so wastefully, that the remains
which were strewn about would probably have caused a pestilence,
if one of the inhabitants of Gorey had not come daily to carry
off and bury the hides and offal.

Many men came in from the
surrounding country.

Orders are said to have been given, that
all persons harbouring Protestants should bring them in on pain
of death, and it is stated that the rebels ‘ shot several Protestants

whom they had taken in their different marches.’* It is more

1 Compare Byrne’s Memoirs, i. ? Gordon, Taylor, Byrne, Hay.

97-101; Gordon, pp. 114-116; Hay,
pp. 49-51. Byrne was present in the
action, and his account differs in
some respects from that of the other
historians. He represents Walpole
as having been killed in the second
fight, All the other accounts place
his death at the beginning of the
conflict.

3 See the extracts from the ‘ Jour-
nal of a Field Officer’ quotedin Max-
well’s History of the Rebellion, pp.
112, 115. Byrne, however, gives
reasons for thinking that an im-
mediate march on Arklow would have
been imprudent (i. 114).

1 This is stated by Taylor (pp. 51,
52) and Musgrave (p. 406); and the

MARCH ON NEW ROSS. 107

CH. XXIX.

certain, that they sent out parties to burn the houses of Gowan
and two or three other magistrates who were obnoxious to
them.

While these things were happening at Gorey, a much larger
body under the command of Bagenal Harvey attempted to take
New Ross. Adopting their usual precaution of encamping
always on a height, they passed from Wexford to their old
quarters on the Three Rocks; thence on June 1 to Carrick-
byrne Hill, which is about seven miles from New Ross, and then
on the 4th to Corbet Hill, which is within a mile of that town.
A few days before, they might probably have occupied it without
resistance, thus opening a path into Carlow ; but General John-
ston was now there, at the head of at least 1,400 men, including
150 yeomen. His force was composed of the Dublin Militia
under Lord Mountjoy, with detachments from the 5th Dragoons,
the Clare, Donegal, and Meath Militia, the Mid-Lothian Fencibles,
and some English artillery. At daybreak on the 5th the insur-
gents were ready for the attack, but Harvey first endeavoured
to save bloodshed by sending a summons to the commander,
representing the overwhelming numbers of the assailants, and
summoning him to surrender the town, and thus save from total
ruin the property it contained. A man named Furlong, bearing
a flag of truce, undertook to carry the message, but as he
approached he was shot dead, and his pockets rifled. Few
incidents in the rebellion did more to exasperate the rebels,
and there is reason to believe that it was no misadventure, but
a deliberate act.!

The battle that ensued was the most desperate in the rebel-

lion.

‘ Field Officer ’ cited by Maxwell says:
‘Time was wasted in collecting and
piking Protestants, which might have
been employed with far greater ad-
vantage to the cause.’ On the other
hand, nothing is said about these
executions by Byrne, who was present
in the expedition, or by Gordon, who
was most intimately acquainted with
Gorey. Hay says that, before the
capture of Gorey, the military sta-
tioned there ‘plundered and burned
many houses, and shot several strag-
glers who happened to fall in their
way. This provoked the insurgents

The insurgents advanced at daybreak, driving before them

to vie with their opponents in this
mode of warfare, and ... enormities,
in fact, were committed on both
sides.’ (P. 146.) Byrne and Hay pre-
tend that the troops intended to kill
their prisoners in Gorey, and were
only prevented by the rapidity with
which they were driven through the
town. It seems to me quite im-
possible to pronounce with confidence
on these points.

1 Gordon says: ‘ To shoot all per-
sons carrying flags of truce from the
rebels, appears to have been a maxim
with his Majesty’s forces.’ (P. 118.)

108 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CHspEXIN

a quantity of black cattle to break the ranks of the troops, and
they were received with a steady fire of grape. ‘At near seven
o'clock,’ says an eye-witness who was with General Johnston,
‘the army began to retreat in all directions. . . . The rebels
pouring in like a flood, artillery was called for, and human blood
began to flow down the street. Though hundreds were blown
to pieces by our grape shot, yet thousands behind them, being
intoxicated from drinking during the night and void of fear,
rushed upon us. ‘The cavalry were now ordered to make a
charge through them, when a terrible carnage ensued. They
were cut down like grass, but the pikemen being called to the
front, and our swords being too short to reach them, obliged the
horses to retreat, which put us Into some confusion. We kept
up the action till half-past eight, and it was maintained with
such obstinacy on both sides that it was doubtful who would
keep the field. They then began to burn and destroy the town.
It was on fire in many places in about fifteen minutes. By this
time the insurgents advanced as far as the main guard, where
there was a most bloody conflict, but with the assistance of two
ship guns placed in the street, we killed a great number and kept
them back for some time.’! They soon, however, rallied, and by
their onward sweep bore down the artillerymen, and obtained
possession of the guns. Lord Mountjoy, at the head of the
Dublin County Regiment, then charged them, and a fierce hand-
to-hand fight ensued, but the troops were unable to pierce the
ranks of the pikemen. Lord Mountjoy was surrounded and fell,
and his soldiers fiercely fighting were driven back by the over-
whelming weight of the enemy, and at last crossed the bridge
to the Kilkenny side of the river, where, however, they speedily
rallied. Mountjoy was the first member of either House of
Parliament who had fallen in this disastrous struggle, and it
was bitterly noticed by the ultra-Protestant party, that he
was the Luke Gardiner who had been one of the warmest friends
of the Catholics, and who twenty years before had introduced
into the House of Commons the first considerable measure for
their relief.?

1 Taylor, pp. 56, 57. early in the contest.’ Major Vesey

2 On the death of Mountjoy, see says: ‘He was wounded and taken
the account by an eye-witness in prisoner early. When we stormed
Taylor, pp. 57, 58. GeneralJohnston, their fort, we found his body mangled
in the official bulletin, says he ‘fell and butchered.’

CH, XXIX, BATTLE OF NEW ROSS. 109

The town seemed now almost lost, and some of the troops in
wild panic fled to Waterford. If indeed all the resources of the
rebels had been exerted, nothing could have saved it. But though
the insurgents were the raw material out of which some of the
best soldiers in the British army have been formed; though they
showed a desperate and truly admirable courage, in facing for
long hours the charge of cavalry and bayonets, the volleys of
disciplined soldiers, and even the storm of grape shot, they were
in truth but untrained, ignorant, poverty-stricken, half-armed
peasants, most of whom had never before seen a shot fired in
war. Bagenal Harvey had ordered a simultaneous attack on-
the town in three quarters, but the men who rushed into it,
infuriated by the death of Furlong, kept no discipline and acted
on no plan. A large part, it is said indeed the great majority,
of the insurgents remained at Corbet Hill, and never descended
to share the dangers of their fellows, and even of those who had
taken the town, a multitude soon dispersed through the streets
to plunder or to drink. General Johnston succeeded in rallying
his troops, and placing himself at their head, he once more
charged the insurgents. A well-directed fire from the cannon
which had not been taken, cleared his way, and after desperate
fighting the town was regained, and the cannon recaptured
and turned against the rebels. Johnston himself displayed
prodigies of valour, and three horses were shot under him.

Still, the day was far from over. ‘The gun I had the honour to
command,’ writes the eye-witness I have quoted, ‘ being called
to the main guard, shocking was it to see the dreadful
carnage that was there. It continued for half an hour obsti-
nate and bloody. The thundering of cannon shook the town ;
the very windows were shivered in pieces with the dreadful
eoncussion. I believe 600 rebels lay dead in the main street.
They would often come within a few yards of the guns. One
fellow ran up, and taking off his hat and wig, thrust them up the
cannon’s mouth the length of his arm, calling to the rest, ‘‘ Blood-
an’~ounds ! my boys, come take her now, she’s stopt, she’s stopt ! ”
The action was doubtful and bloody from four in the morning to
four in the evening, when they began to give way in all quarters. . . .
I know soldiers that fired 120 rounds of ball, and I fired twenty-
one rounds of canister shot with the field piece 1 commanded.’ !

1 Taylor, pp. 58, 59.

110 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

Some striking figures stand out amid the confused struggle
in the town. In the hottest of the fire, a religious enthusiast
was seen among the insurgents bearing aloft a crucifix, and
though the bullets and grape shot fell fast and thick, many a
rebel paused for a moment before he charged, to kneel down and
kiss it. .A woman named Doyle, the daughter of a faggot cutter,
seemed to those who observed her to bear a charmed life. She
moved to and fro where the battle raged most fiercely, cutting
with a small bill-hook the belts of the fallen soldiers, and supplying
the insurgents with cartridges from their cartouches. At the
end of the battle, when the rebels were in retreat and about to
abandon a small cannon, she took her stand beside it, and said
she would remain to be shot unless there was courage enough
among the fugitives to save it, and she rallied a small party, who
carried it from the field. One soldier was noticed, who with
reckless daring disdained any shelter or concealment, and
stood conspicuous on the wall of a burning cabin, whence with
cool, unerring aim, he shot down rebel after rebel. At last the
inevitable shot struck him, and he fell backwards into the still
smoking ruins. A townsman named McCormick, who had once
been in the army, donned a brazen helmet, and was one of the
most conspicuous in the loyalist ranks. Again andagain, when
the soldiers flinched beneath the heavy fire and fled to shelter,
he drew them out, rallied them and led them against the enemy.
His wife was worthy of him. When at the beginning of the
battle all the other inhabitants fled across the bridge into the
county of Kilkenny, she alone remained, and employed herself
during the whole battle in mixing wine and water for the soldiers.
A boy named Lett, who was said to have been only thirteen,
had run away from his mother and joined the insurgents. At
a critical moment he snatched up a green banner, and a ereat
body of pikemen followed him in a charge. Another young boy
who was in the rebel ranks, may be noticed on account of the
future that lay before him. He was John Devereux of Taghmon,
who afterwards rose to fame and fortune in South America, and
became one of the most distinguished generals in the service of
Bolivar.

1 Many interesting particulars of Cloney’s Personal Narrative; and
this battle, from an eye-witness on from an eye-witness on the loyalist
the rebel side, will be found in _ side, in Taylor,

CH. XXIX, SCULLABOGUE.

Hit

At last, the insurgents broke and fled. The flight was
terrible, for it was through streets of burning and falling
houses, and many are said to have perished in the flames. The
streets of Ross, General Johnston reported, were literally strewn
with the carcases of the rebels.! ‘The carnage,’ wrote Major
Vesey, ‘ was shocking, as no quarter was given. The soldiers
were too much exasperated, and could not be stopped. It was
a fortunate circumstance,’ he adds, ‘for us that early in the
night a man ran in from their post to acquaint us that it was their
intention to attack us, and that they were resolved to conquer or
die, and so in fact they acted.’ In the first excited estimates,
the loss of the insurgents was reckoned at seven thousand men.
According to the best accounts, it was about two thousand.
The loss on the loyalist side was officially reckoned at two hun-
dred and thirty men.

The battle of New Ross was still raging, when a scene of
horror was enacted at Scullabogue barn, which has left an indelible
mark on Irish history. The rebels had in the last few days col-
lected many prisoners, and though some are said to have been
put to death, the great majority were kept under guard near
the foot of Carrickbyrne mountain, where the camp had lately
been, in a lonely and abandoned country house called Scullabogue
and in theadjoining barn. The number of the prisoners is stated
in the Protestant accounts to have been two hundred and
twenty-four, though the Catholic historians have tried to reduce
They were left under the guard of
The accounts of what happened are not

it to eighty or a hundred.
three hundred rebels.

1 Report of General Johnston, in-
closed by Camden to Portland, June
8, 1798.

2 Record Office. Hay declares
that there was not only an indis-
criminate massacre when New Ross
was taken, but that on ‘ the following
day also, the few thatched houses that
remained unburnt ... were closely
searched, and not a man discovered
in them left alive. Some houses set
on fire were so thronged, that the
corpses of the suffocated within them
could not fall to the ground, but con-
tinued crowded together in an up-
right posture, until they were taken
out to be interred.’ (P. 155.) How
far such stories were true, and how

far they were inventions or exaggera-
tions, intended to parallel the mas-
sacre of Scullabogue, it is impossi-
ble to say. Madden collected some
stories about the capture of New
Ross, from two old men who had been
there, and their account went to show
that there had been very general
massacre, but that it had been imme-
diately after the capture. He says,
they agreed ‘that, after the battle
was entirely over, as many were shot
and suffocated in the burning cabins
and houses from four o’clock in the
afternoon till night, and were hanged
the next day, as were killed in the
fight.’ (United Irishmen, iv, 445.)

112 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

quite consistent in their details, but it appears that in an early
stage of the battle, a party of runaways from the camp reached
Scullabogue, declaring that the rebel army at New Ross was cut
off; that the troops were shooting all prisoners, and butchering
all the Catholics who fell into their hands ; that orders had been
issued that the prisoners at Scullabogue should be at once
slaughtered ; and that a priest had given peremptory instructions
to that effect. The leader of the rebel guard is said to have at
first hesitated and resisted, but his followers soon began the
work of blood. Thirty-seven prisoners who were confined in the
house were dragged out, and shot or piked before the hall door.
The fate of those who were in the barn was more terrible.
The rebels surrounded it and set it on fire, thrusting back those
who attempted to escape, with their pikes, into the flames. Three
only by some strange fortune escaped. It is said that one hun-
dred and eighty-four persons perished in the barn by fire or
suffocation, and that twenty of them were women and children.
The immense majority were Protestants, but there were ten or
fifteen Catholics among them. Some of these appear to have
been wives of North Cork Militia men, and some others, Catholic
servants who had refused to quit their Protestant masters.!

By this time the Irish Government, which had been at first
disposed to look with contempt and almost with gratification at
the outbreak of the rebellion, were thoroughly alarmed. Pelham
was ill in England, but he received constant information from
Ireland, and his confidential correspondence shows clearly the
growing sense of danger.

On June 1, Elliot wrote to him, sending bulletins of the
various actions between the King’s troops and the rebels, ‘in all
of which,’ he writes, ‘the former have manifested the highest
spirit and intrepidity, and the most inviolable fidelity, and I can-
not help adding, that the zeal and alertness of the yeomanry have
contributed most essentially to the security of the metropolis.
The news to-day is not pleasant. The rebels are in considerable
force in the county of Wexford, and are in possession of the

1 Compare Gordon, pp. 121, 122; the Rebellion, p. 184. Taylor gives
Taylor, pp. 64-70; Hay, pp. 156-159; the names of ninety-five persons who
Cloney, pp. 44, 45. Among modern’ were killed at Scullabogue, and he
books, the reader may consult the says there were others whose names
rebel historian Harwood’s History of he could not discover.

CH. XXIX, GOVERNMENT LETTERS. ie:

town, and General Fawcett, in marching with a body of troops
from Waterford towards Wexford, has been obliged to retreat
with the loss of several men and a howitzer. . . . The provinces
of Ulster and Munster are at present in a state of tranquillity. . . .
If Lord Edward Fitzgerald and the other leading traitors had not
been apprehended, I am persuaded we should have had-at this
moment to encounter a very formidable and widely diffused re-
bellion. Troops from England are absolutely necessary, and I
hope the succour will be speedy. Our army is so disposed that
it is difficult to bring it together ; and if a foreign enemy were
in the country, we should have a fatal experience of the truth of
Sir Ralph Abercromby’s prediction, that a body of 5,000 men
might cut off our troops in detail. My greatest apprehension
at present isa religious war. In my own opinion, the evil which
has resulted from the Orange Association is almost irreparable,
and yet I am afraid Government will be compelled, or at least
will think itself compelled, to resort, in the present emergency,
to that description of force for assistance. At the same time, the
Lord Lieutenant and Lord Castlereagh endeavour to repress the
religious distinctions as much as possible.’ !

Two days later Lord Camden wrote: ‘The North and South
continue quiet, and the formidable part of the rebellion is now
confined to Wexford. . . . The cruelties the rebels have com-
mitted are dreadful, and the religious appearance which the
war now bears is most alarming. Whenever our troops have
had opportunities of meeting the rebels, they have behaved well,
but their wildness and want of discipline is most alarming, look-
ing as we must do to a more formidable enemy.’? Elliot stated
that the war in Wexford had ‘certainly assumed a strong re-
ligious spirit.’ Lord Fingall and the leading’ Catholic gentry,
he added, were quite sensible of the danger, and had presented a
most admirable address, but the rebels would undoubtedly fan the
flame of religious dissension, and the intemperance of Protes-
tants was assisting them. ‘The contest,’ he said, ‘is yet by no
means decided ; but if the rebels should not have the co-opera-
tion of a French army, I trust we shall put them down, If the
French should be able to throw a force of 5,000 men on any

1 Elliot to Pelham, June 1, 1798. (Pelham MSS.)
2 Camden to Pelham, June 3, 1798.
VOL. VIII. I

114 ENGLAND IN 1HE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

part of our coast, it would render the result very dubious.’ He
at the same time expressed his total want of confidence in the
abilities of Lake, who, ‘ though a brave, cool, collected man, ex-
tremely obliging, and pleasant in the transaction of business,’
‘has not resources adequate to the critical situation in which he
is placed.’ ‘The loss of Abercromby,’ continued Elliot, ‘ will
not easily be repaired.’

On the 5th, before the news of the battle of New Ross

‘arrived, Camden wrote to England in very serious and explicit
terms. He relates that two attacks on the Wexford rebels had
been defeated. The North, he says, may possibly be kept
quiet, but this ‘wholly depends upon a speedy end being put to
the rebellion near Dublin. It is therefore,’ he continues, ‘my
duty to state it to your Grace as a point of indispensable neces-
sity, as one on which the salvation of Ireland depends, that this
rebellion should be instantly suppressed. No event but an in-
stant extinction can prevent its becoming general, as it is noto-
rious that the whole country is organised, and only waiting
until the success of one part of the kingdom is apparent, before
the other parts begin their operations. The Chancellor, the
Speaker, Sir John Parnell, and all those friends of his Majesty’s
Government whom I am in the habit of consulting, have this
day thought it incumbent on them to give it as their solemn
opinion, and have requested me to state it as such, that the
salvation of Ireland depends upon immediate and very consider-
able succour, that a few regiments will perhaps only be sent to
slaughter or to loss, but that a very formidable force of many
thousand men, sent forthwith, will probably save the kingdom,
which will not exist without such a support. I feel myself that
their opinion is perfectly well founded, I add to it my own, and
T must add that General Lake agrees with these gentlemen and
me in the absolute necessity of this reinforcement.’ He asks,
accordingly, for at least 10,000 men.?

Tn a more confidential letter which was written next day to
Pelham, the Lord Lieutenant informs his Chief Secretary that he
had stated both to Portland and Pitt his decided opinion, ‘ that
unless a very large force is immediately sent from England, the

1 Elliot to Pelham, June 3, 1798.
» Camden to Portland, June 5, 1798.

CH, XXIX. GOVERNMENT LETTERS. 115

country may be lost.’ He expressed his deep conviction, that
Lake was not a man of sufficient ability or authority for his pre-
sent position, and he adds an important recommendation, which
he had apparently already sent to Pitt. ‘The Lord Lieutenant
ought to be a military man. The whole government of the
country is now military, and the power of the chief governor is
almost merged in that of the general commanding the troops.
I have suggested the propriety of sending over Lord Cornwallis,

. and I have told Pitt . . . that without the best military
assistance, I conceive the country to be in the most imminent
danger, and that my services cannot be useful to the King... .
A landing, even of a small body of French, will set the country in
a blaze, and I think neither our force nor our staff equal to the
very difficult circumstances they will have to encounter.’ In
Kildare he hopes that the spirit of the rebels is broken, but ‘ the
county of Wexford is a terrible example of their fury and
licentiousness. . . . Great impatience is entertained, from no
regiments having arrived from England, and indeed, it is mor-
tifying to think that we have not received a man, although the
rebellion has lasted for a fortnight.’ !

The battle of New Ross was a loyalist victory, but the
extraordinary resolution and courage shown by the insurgents
greatly increased the alarm. ‘ Although the spirit and gallantry
of his Majesty’s army,’ wrote Camden, ‘finally overcame the
rebels, your Grace will learn how very formidable are their
numbers, led on as they are by desperation and enthusiasm. . .
Major Vesey, who commanded the Dublin County Regiment
after the melancholy fate of Lord Mountjoy, describes the attack

against popery. In the capital there

1 Camdento Pelham, June 6. Lord
is a rebel army organised; and if the

Clare, who was never disposed to

panic, took an equally grave view.
The day after Walpole’s defeat, he
wrote: ‘Our situation is critical in
the extreme. We know that there
has been a complete military organi-
sation of the people in three-fourths
of the kingdom. In the North, no-
thing will keep the rebels quiet but
a conviction that, where treason has
broken out, the rebellion is merely
popish; but, even with this impres-
sion on their minds, we cannot be
certain that their love of republicanism
will not outweigh their inveteracy

garrison was forced out, to meet an
invading army from this side of
Wexford, they would probably, on
their return, find the metropolis in
possession of- its proper rebel troops.
In a word, such is the extent of
treason in Ireland, that if any one
district is left uncovered by troops, it
will be immediately possessed by its
own proper rebels. . . . I have long
foreseen the mischief, and condemned
the imbecility which has’ suffered it
to extend itself.” (Auckland Corre-
spondence, iv, 3.)

Tee

116 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH, XXIX,

which was made as the most furious possible. . . . Our force was
obliged twice to retire; they were, however, finally successful,
but they were so harassed and fatigued as not to be able to make
any forward movement, and your Grace will observe how very
formidable an enemy Colonel Crawford, who has been so long
accustomed to all descriptions of service, states the rebels to be.’ !

The letters of Colonel Crawford and Major Vesey were in-
closed, and they fully bear out Camden’s estimate of the serious-
ness of the crisis. ‘The insurgents,’ wrote the first officer,
‘yesterday marched from Carrickburne to within a mile and a
half of this place. This morning General Johnston was about
giving orders for advancing against them, when they did it, and
made as severe an attack as is possible for any troops with such
arms. They were in great force, not many firearms, and no guns
at first. They drove in our right, followed the troops quite into
the town, and got possession of four guns. By very great
personal exertion of General Johnston they were repulsed, and
the repeated attacks they afterwards made (being far less
vigorous than the first) were beaten back, and the guns retaken.
They certainly have given proofs of very extraordinary courage and
enthusiasm, and it is, in my opinion, very doubtful that the
force at present under General Johnston would be able to sub-
due the Wexford insurgents. Should it spread now, it would be
very seriousindeed. . . . The militia behaved with spirit, but are
quite ungovernable.’ ?

‘Thesemen,’ wrote Beresford, ‘inflamed by their priests, who
accompany them in their ranks, fight with a mad desperation.
It is becoming too apparent that this is to be a religious,
bloody war. We must conceal it as long as we can, because a

1 Camden to Portland, June 8,
1798.
2 Colonel Crawford, June 5. Two

did on the 5th... . To insure success
-we must be in considerable force.
Should we be defeated, a general

days later the same officer wrote to
General Cradock, that. before the
attack on New Ross he had so ‘ con-
temptible an opinion of the rebels as
troops,’ that he thought the best plan
would be to divide the army into
small columns, and beat them in de-
tail. ‘But,’ he says, ‘I have now
totally changed my opinion. I never
saw any trooos attack with more en-
thusiasm and bravery than the rebels

_the people of Wexford.

insurrection would probably be the
consequence. During the affair of
the 5th inst., large bodies of people
collected behind us in the county of
Kilkenny, and certainly were waiting
only the event of the attack made by
In short, I
do not think General Johnston’s and
General Loftus’s corps, even when
united, sufficiently strong —not nearly
so,’ (June 7, Record Office.)

CH, XXIX. GOVERNMENT LETTERS. pty

great part of our army and most of our militia are papists, but
it cannot be long concealed. . . . If the militia should turn or
the French come before the contest is ended and the rebellion
crushed, Ireland goes first, and Great Britain follows, and all
Europe after.’ ‘The only comfort we have is, that the Northern
Protestants begin to see their danger, and are arming in our
favour, but . . . Government are afraid to trust them, lest the
papists of the militia and army should take affront.’ !
Castlereagh was acting as Chief Secretary during the illness
of Pelham, and though he was by no means inclined to exaggerate
danger, he took an equally grave view of the situation. ‘The
rebellion in Wexford,’ he wrote, ‘has assumed a more serious
shape than was to be apprehended from a peasantry, however
well organised.’ ‘An enemy that only yielded after a struggle
of twelve hours is not contemptible. Our militia soldiers have,
on every occasion, manifested the greatest spirit and fidelity, in
many instances defective subordination, but in none have they
shown the smallest disposition to fraternity, but, on the contrary,
pursue the insurgents with the rancour unfortunately connected
with the nature of the struggle. Had the rebels carried Ross,
the insurrection would have immediately pervaded the counties
of Waterford and Kilkenny.’ Their forces ‘ consist of the entire
male inhabitants of Wexford, and the greatest proportion of those
of Wicklow, Kildare, Carlow, and Kilkenny. From Carlow to
Dublin, I am told, scarcely an inhabitant is to be seen. I am
sorry to inform you, that our fears about the North are too likely
to be realised. . . . Rely on it, there never was in any country so
formidable an effort on the part of the people. It may not dis-
close itself in the full extent of its preparation if it is early met
with vigour and success, but our forces cannot cope in a variety
‘of distant points with an enemy that can elude an attack when
it is inexpedient to risk a contest.’.? ‘Wexford, the peaceable,
the cultivated,’ wrote Cooke, ‘has been and is the formidable
spot. You will recollect, there were no returns, no delegates
from Wexford. How artificial! You recollect in Reynolds’
evidence that Lord Edward wanted to go to France, to hasten a
landing from frigates at Wexford.* Be assured the battle of

1 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 9, 10, 13.
2 Castlereagh to Pelham.
3 See Howell’s State Trials, xxvii. 412.

1138 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

New Ross was most formidable. . . . It was a grand attempt of
the rebels, well planned and boldly attempted, and the success
would have been ruinous. Johnston deserves greatly. He placed
himself at the head of the Dublin County Regiment when the
affair grew desperate, and by personal exertions succeeded.’
‘The Dublin yeomanry are wonderful.’! A landing of the French
or the slightest disaster, Camden again repeated, might make
the situation most alarming. ‘The most able generals, and a
most numerous and well-disciplined army, can alone save Ireland
from plunder, perhaps from separation from Great Britain.’ *

The apprehensions expressed in these letters would probably
have proved in no degree exaggerated if the French had landed,
or if the rebellion had spread. But day after day the insurgents
in Wexford looked in vain across the sea for the promised
succour. The North, in which they had placed so much trust,
was still passive, and although the banner of -religion had
been raised, and priests were in the forefront of the battle, the
Catholic province of Connaught and the great Catholic counties
of the South were perfectly tranquil. The insurrection was still
confined to a few central counties, and outside Wexford it was
nowhere formidable.

The tranquillity of the greater part of Ulster during the re-
bellion, the defection of the Presbyterians from the movement
of which they were the main originators, and the great and en-
during change which took place in their sentiments in the last
years of the eighteenth century, are facts of the deepest importance
in Irish history, and deserve very careful and detailed examination.
It would be an error to attribute them to any single cause.
They are due to a concurrence of several distinct influences, which
can be clearly traced in the correspondence of the time. Much
was due to the growth of the Orange movement, which had
planted a new and a rival enthusiasm in the heart of the dis-
affected province, and immensely strengthened the forces opposed
to the United Irishmen ;* and much also to the success of long-

' Cooke to Pelham, June 3, 1798. the right side. The people called

2 Camden to Portland, June 10, Orangemen (whose principles have
1798. See, too,anumber of very inte- been totally misrepresented) keep
resting letters on the situation, inthe the country in check, and will over-
Auckland Correspondence, iv. 3-10. power the rebels, should they stir.’

$ *Our Northern accounts arestill (Beresford to Auckland, June 1;
very good; no stir there except on Auckland Correspondence, iii. 442.)

CH, XXIX. MARTIAL LAW IN ULSTER. 119

continued military government. Martial law had prevailed in
Ulster much longer than in the other provinces, and, as we have
seen, an enormous proportion of the arms which had been so
laboriously accumulated, had been discovered and surrendered.
When the rebellion broke out, all the measures of precaution
that were adopted in Dublin were taken in the towns of. Ulster.
The yeomanry were placed on permanent duty, and patrolled the
streets by night. The inhabitants were forbidden to leave their
houses between nine at night and five in the morning, and com-
pelled to post up the names of those who were within them,
which were to be ealled over whenever the military authorities
desired. The arrival of every stranger was at once registered. A
proclamation was issued, ordering all persons who were not
expressly authorised to possess arms and ammunition, to bring
them in within an assigned period, under pain of military execu-
tion, and promising at the same time that if they did so, they
would be in no respect molested, and' that no questions would be
asked. At Belfast @ court-martial sat daily in the market-place
for the trial of all persons who were brought before it. One-man,.
in whose house arms were found, was sentenced to eight hundred
lashes, received two hundred, and then gave information which
led to the flogging of a second culprit. About four hundred
stand of arms were surrendered in a few days. One of the great
anxieties of the authorities at Belfast was to discover six cannon,,.
which had belonged to the Belfast volunteers, and had been
carefully concealed. They were all found in the last week
of May—two of them through information derived from an
anonymous letter. Several persons were flogged for seditious
offences. Many others who were suspected, but against whom
there was no specific charge, were sent to the tender, and seven
cars full of prisoners from Newry were lodged in Belfast gaol.
Such measures, carried out severely through the province,
made rebellion very difficult, and it was to them that Lord Clare
appears to have mainly attributed the calm of Ulster. It is,
however, very improbable that they would have been suft-
cient, if they had not been supported by a real change of
sentiments. The sturdy, calculating, well-to-do Presbyterians

1 Historical Collections relating to Belfast, pp, 479-483; McSkimmin’s
History of Canrickfergus, p. 97,

120 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

of the North might have risen to co-operate with a French army,
or even to support a general, though unaided insurrection, if it
had begun with a successful blow, and had been directed by
leaders whom they knew. They were more and more dis-
inclined to throw in their lot with disorderly Catholic mobs,
assembled under nameless chiefs, who were plundering and often
murdering Protestants, but who were in most cases scattered
like chaff before small bodies of resolute yeomen. The rebellion
in Leinster had assumed two forms, which were almost equally
distasteful to Ulster. In some counties the rebels were helpless
mobs, driven to arms by hope of plunder, or by fear of the
Orangemen, or by exasperation at military severities, but des-
titute of all real enthusiasm and convictions, and perfectly impo-
tent in the field. In Wexford they were very far from impotent,
but there the struggle was assuming more and more the character
of a religious war, and deriving its strength from religious fanati-
cism. The papers, day by day, told how the rebels were impri-
soning, plundering, and murdering the Protestants; how the
priests in their vestments were leading them to the fight, as to a
holy war, which was to end in the extirpation of heresy ; how Pro-
testants were thronging the chapels to be baptised, as the sole
means of saving their lives. In these accounts there was much
that was exaggerated, and much that might be reasonably pal-
hated or explained, but there was alsomuch horrible truth, and the
scenes that were enacted at Vinegar Hill and Scullabogue made
a profound and indelible impression on the Northern mind. Men
who had been the most ardent organisers of the United Irish
movement, began to ask themselves whether this insurrection
was not wholly different from what they had imagined and
planned, and whether its success would not be the greatest of
_ealamities. The tide of feeling suddenly changed, and even in
Belfast itself, it soon ran visibly towards the Government.

The change of sentiment was greatly accelerated by other
causes. The keynote of the conspiracy had been an alliance
with France, for the establishment by French assistance of an
Trish republic. But the utter failure of the French to profit by
the golden opportunity of the Mutiny of the Nore; the mis-
management of the Bantry Bay expedition ; the defeat of Camper-
down, and the disappointment of several subsequent promises

CH, xix ULSTER ALIENATED FROM FRANCE. 121

of assistance, had shaken the confidence of the more intelligent
Northerners in French assistance, while many things had lately
occurred which tended to destroy their sympathy with French
policy. ‘The United Irish movement, as we have seen, was
essentially and ardently republican; and although it assumed a
different character when it passed into an ignorant and bigoted
Catholic population, this change had not extended to the North.
Republicanism from the time of the American Revolution had
been deeply rooted among the Presbyterians of Ulster. They
had readily accepted those doctrines about the rights of man,
which Rousseau had made the dominant political enthusiasm of
Europe, and it was as the dawn of an era of universal liberty
that the French Revolution, in spite of all the horrors that
accompanied it, had been welcomed with delight. The pre-
cedent by which their leaders justified their appeal for French
assistance was that of 1688, when the heads of the English party
opposed to James II. invited over the chief of the neighbouring
republic with a small Dutch army, to assist them in establishing
constitutional liberty.!

But although the French had given many assurances that
they would leave the Irish free to settle their Constitution as
they pleased, the evident tendency of the Revolution towards a
military, conquering, and absorbing despotism had produced a
profound effect. The anxiety of McNevin, when he went to
France as the agent of the party, to limit the French contingent
to ten thousand men, clearly displayed it.2, WolfeTone mentions
in his journal, the disgust and indignation with which he read
the arrogant proclamation of Buonaparte to the republic of
Genoa, in the summer of 1797, when that Republic passed
wholly under French influence, and when its Constitution was
remodelled under the direction of a French minister. Such a
proclamation, Tone said to Hoche, if it had been published in
Treland, ‘ would have a most ruinous effect.’ ‘In Italy such dic-
tation might pass, but never in Ireland, where we understand
our rights too well to submit to it.’

The destruction, or complete subjugation to French in-
fluence, of the Dutch Republic, of the Republic of Venice, and of

1 McNevin’s Pieces of Irish His- 2 Secret Committee, pp. 16, 17.
tory, p. 204. 3 Tone’s Memoirs, ii, 416.

122 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

the Republic of Genoa, was soon followed by a series of atrocious
outrages directed against the Swiss Confederation. The Revo-
lution of the 18th fructidor, which drove Barthélemy and Carnot
from power, and the treaty of Campo Formio, which freed France
from all apprehension of the Emperor, were very unfavourable
to the interests of Switzerland, and it became manifest that it
was the intention of the French Government to force on a con-
flict. Itis not here necessary to enumerate the many arrogant
demands by which this policy was carried out. It is sufficient
to say, that the presence in Switzerland of a certain number of
discontented democrats, who played a part greatly resembling
that of the United Irishmen in Ireland, powerfully assisted it.
In a time of perfect peace a French army crossed the border ; all
resistance was crushed by force; Switzerland was given up to
military violence, and to undisguised and systematic spoliation.
Its ancient Constitution was destroyed, and a new Constitution,
dictated from Paris, was imposed upon it.!

But there was another republic which was far dearer to the
Ulster Presbyterians than Switzerland. No fact in the Irish
history of the latter half of the eighteenth century is more con-
spicuous, than the close connection that subsisted between the
North of Ireland and New England. The tree of liberty,
according to the United Irish phraseology, had been sown in
America, though it had been watered in France, and the great
number of Irish Protestants who had emigrated to America, and
the considerable part which they had borne in the American
Revolution, gave a tinge of genuine affection to the political
sympathy that united the two communities. Butat the critical
period at which we have now arrived, France and the United
States were bitterly hostile, and apparently on the very brink of

—war.

The conflict originated with the commercial treaty which had
been negotiated between England and the United States in 1794
and 1795. It had been fiercely resented in Paris, and the ill
feeling it created had been rapidly envenomed by disputes about
the rights of neutral vessels. I have related the controversy on

» See Mallet du Pan’s Hssai His- some excellent chapters on this revo-
torique sur la Destruction dela Ligue  lutioninthe Annual Register of 1798.
et de la Liberté Helvétique. Thereare See, too, Sybel.

CH. XXIX, FRANCE AND AMERICA QUARREL. 123

this question, which had sharply divided England in 1778 and
1780 from France, Russia, and other continental Powers. The
English maintained the right of seizing merchandise belonging
to a hostile Power, even when it was carried in neutral vessels.
The continental Powers maintained that free ships made free
goods, that a neutral Power had the right of carrying on commerce
with belligerent Powers, and conveying all goods belonging to
them which were not, according to a strictly defined rule, contra-
band of war. The United States strongly maintained the conti-
nental doctrine, but they had never been able to make England
acknowledge or observe it. France, on the other hand, was its
principal supporter. She had specially introduced it into her
treaty with America in 1778; and even since the war with
England had begun, she had formally disclaimed all right of
interfering with belligerent goods on American vessels. But a
considerable carrying trade of English goods by American ships
had grown up during the war, and France, finding herself seriously
damaged by her adhesion to the continental doctrine, which her
enemy refused to acknowledge, suddenly changed her policy ;
issued a decree ordering her privateers and ships of war to treat
the vessels of neutral nations in the same manner in which those
nations suffered themselves to be treated by the English; and
formally notified this decree to the Americans. She at the
same time contended that the United States, by entering into a
commercial treaty with England, had forfeited the privileges
of the treaty of 1778. The immediate consequence was, that
numerous American vessels were captured by French or Spanish
cruisers. From San Domingo especially, a swarm of French
corsairs went forth to prey upon American commerce.

John Adams, who was then President, tried to arrive at some
arrangement by negotiation, and three American envoys came to
Paris in October 1797. They obtained interviews with Talleyrand,
but their reception was exceedingly discouraging. The Directory
refused to receive them, and they were told in language of ex-
treme haughtiness that the French Government were exasperated
by the policy of the United States, and still more by the language
of its President, and would receive no American envoy without
ample avowals, reparations, and explanations. Soon, however,
it was intimated to them that one way was open to them by

124 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

which they could secure their neutrality, and save themselves
from the threatened vengeance of France. The great want of
the French Republic was money, and the envoys were informed
that, if America desired to obtain any concession from France or
any security for her commerce, she must purchase it by a large
and immediate loan. Money, it was said, and much money, they
must be prepared to furnish. It was added, that in addition to
this loan, a sum of about 50,0001. should be given to the members
of the Directory. Many other Powers, the envoys were told,
had consented to buy peace from France, and America would
find it equally her interest to do so. The force of France was
irresistible.

The startled envoys replied, that such a demand lay utterly
beyond their instructions, and had certainly never been contem-
plated by the Government which appointed them. They were
prepared, however, to send one of their number across the
Atlantic to ask for fresh instructions, if the French Govern-
ment would, in the meantime, put a stop to the capture of
American ships, and negotiate on the differences between the
two countries. America, they said, had always been friendly to
France, but the present state of things was even more ruinous
than war. Property to the value of more than fifty millions of
dollars had been already taken. Americans had been treated by
France in every respect as enemies, and it was for them to ask
for reparation. Not a dollar of American money, they were
very certain, would go in a loan to the French, unless American
property, unjustly confiscated, was previously restored, and
further hostilities suspended. Unless these conditions were
complied with, they would not even consult their Government
concerning aloan. They were, however, perfectly prepared to
negotiate a commercial treaty with France, as liberal as that
which they had made with England. :

The answer was a peremptory refusal. No confiscated pro-
perty, they were told, should be returned, and no promise was
given that the capture of American property should cease.
Unless part, at least, of the money demanded was forthcoming,
the envoys must leave Paris, nay more, the property of all
Americans would probably be confiscated. The United States
should take warning by the fate of Venice, for that fate might

CHPSEIXs EFFECTS OF THIS DISPUTE. 125

soon be their own. A new decree was issued in January 1798,
ordering that every ship of aneutral Power, which contained any
goods of English fabric or produce, should be deemed a lawful prize,
even though those goods belonged to neutrals, and that all ships
which had so much as touched at an English port should be
excluded from French harbours. Two of the American.envoys
were sent back to obtain fresh instructions. The third was, for
the present, allowed to remain at Paris.

When these things became known in America, they excited
a storm of indignation, Adams at once obtained power from
the Congress to increase the army and navy, and to strengthen
the defences. Washington was called from his retreat, and
placed at the head of the army. As the capture of American
vessels was still of almost daily occurrence, the Congress granted
liberty to fit out privateers for the purpose of making reprisals.
The envoy who had remained in Paris was immediately recalled,
and the American Government appealed to the judgment of their
own people and of the whole civilised world, by publishing all
the despatches of their envoys.’

The declaration of war which seemed inevitable did not take
place, though on both sides innumerable corsairs were fitted
out. The ambition of France took other directions; the vic-
tories of Nelson soon made her very impotent upon the sea,
and about two years later Buonaparte again reversed her policy,
and made a new and friendly arrangement with the Ameri-
cans. But the proof which was furnished by these despatches,
of the spirit in which France acted towards the country which
beyond all others seemed attached to her, made a profound im-
pression throughout Europe. ‘Not all the depredations of
the French in Germany, the Netherlands, Holland, Switzer-
land, and Italy,’ wrote a contemporary annalist, ‘no, not their
plunder of the papal territories, afforded to the minds of men
so convincing a proof that the French Republic was governed,
not more by a thirst of universal dominion than by a rage for
plunder, as the attempt to subject the Americans to tribute.’
In no other European country, however, did this episode

1 The despatches will be foundin  AHistoire del Europe pendant la Révo-
full in the appendix of the Annual lution (French translation), v. 62-67,
Register for 1798. See, too, Sybel, 150-152; and Adams’s Life.

126 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIx.

prove so important as in Ireland. In a most critical period
of Irish history, it gave a complete check to the enthusiasm
with which the French Revolution had hitherto been regarded
by the Northern Presbyterians, and the sudden revulsion of feeling
which it produced was one great cause of the tranquillity of
Ulster.

A few extracts from contemporary letters will be sufficient
to illustrate the progress of this change, and to justify my analysis
of its causes. No one knew Ulster better than Dean Warburton,
and on May 29 he wrote that all there was quiet, and that he
believed it would continue so if matters went well in the rest of
Treland. ‘The cunning and wary Northerners,’ he continued,
‘see that no revolution can be effected without a foreign aid (of
which they now despair). The steadiness and loyalty of our
militia have damped the hopes and expectations of the dis-
affected, and I think the Northern Dissenter will now quietly be
a spectator of that destructive flame which he himself originally

. kindled up, and will take no active part in the present attempt.’ !

Camden wrote that the report from U]ster was still favou rable,
but that be could only infer from it, ‘that with their disaffection
they [the Northerners] join much prudence; though there are
many persons who conceive an alteration has taken place in the
public mind there, from the American correspondence, and from
the Catholics of the South making the present so much a reli-
gious question.’? ‘The quiet ofthe North,’ wrote Cooke, ‘is to me
unaccountable ; but I feel that the popish tinge in the rebellion,
and the treatment of France to Switzerland and America, has
really done much, and in addition to the army, the force of Orange
yeomanry is really formidable.’ #

A report from Ulster in the Government papers, written
apparently in the last days of May, declared that the accounts
of Catholic atrocities in the rebellion were already having a
great effect on the Presbyterians, disinclining them from joining
with the Catholics, making them dread Catholic ascendency, and
reviving the old antipathy of sects.

1 Dean Warburton to Cooke *1.8.P.0. This paper is only
(Loughgilly), May 29, 1798. signed by initials. It is among those
2 Camden to Portland, June 2, of the first days of June. So Beres-
1798. ford, on the last day of May, after

8 Cooke to Wickham, June 2, describing the atrocities in Wexford,
1798. says : ‘Bad and shocking as this is, it

CH, XXIX. LETTERS OF BISHOP PERCY. 127

‘The Northerners, wrote Henry Alexander, ten days later,
‘do not like the papists. They feel the injuries to America.
They have not the plenty of provisions the Wexfordians had.
They possess the escheated counties ; and their bleachers, though
they would huckster with any man who would promise to govern
them cheapest, will not like the destruction of their greens.’ !

The letters of Bishop Percy throw much interesting light
on this subject. He was in Dublin while the rebellion was at
its height, but his diocese of Dromore was in the heart of the
disaffected part of Ulster, and in addition to the intelligence he
received from members of the Government at Dublin, he had
his own correspondents in Ulster. ‘The North,’ he wrote, ‘ is
perfectly safe ; the Protestants being here in some places mur-
dered by the Irish papists, has turned all the Dissenters against
them.’ His vicar-general wrote to him that his diocese was
absolutely tranquil, that the arms were being generally sur-
rendered ; that a judicious combination of severity and indulgence
was breaking up the conspiracy, and that the conspirators had
been profoundly disgusted by the disappearance of some of
their treasurers. ‘ Another cause,’ wrote the vicar-general, ‘ which
has alienated our Northern Irish republicans from France, is the
vile treatment shown to Switzerland and America ; to the latter
of whom they were exceedingly devoted, especially at Belfast,
where they are now signing resolutions of abhorrence of French
tyranny.’ ?

‘A wonderful change,’ wrote the Bishop, a few days later,
‘has taken place among republicans in the North, especially in
and near Belfast. They now abhor the French as much as they
formerly were partial to them, and are grown quite loyal. Last
Monday the King’s birthday was celebrated at Belfast, with as
much public rejoicing as it ever was at St. James’s. Not only
the whole town was illuminated, but bonfires were lighted on all
the adjoining hills. This could not be counterfeit... . It
is owing to the scurvy treatment which the French have shown

has its horrid use; for nowthere isa ence, iii. 439.)

flying off of many Protestant men ‘ Henry Alexander to Pelham,
who were united, and the North June10,1798. (Pelham MSS.)
consider it as a religious war, and, by 2 Bishop Percy to his wife, May

many letters this day, have resolved 28, 29,1798. (British Museum. )
to be loyal.” (Auckland Correspond-

128 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH, XX1X,

to the United States of America, so beloved and admired by our
Northern Republicans. You know how enthusiastically fond
they were of the Americans, and now that the latter must fly to
Great Britain for protection, their Irish friends are become the
warm adherents of Great Britain. They have sent the most
loyal address to Government, with offers of any service that shall
be accepted. . . . The murder of the Protestants in the South
will prevent etc ever joining again with them, much less in the
present rebellion.’

At Omagh alone, not less than six thousand Presbyterians
offered their services without expense to the Government, and
their example was followed in other places. The ranks of the
Orangemen at the same time rapidly filled, and great multitudes
of them offered to march to any part of the kingdom to suppress
rebellion.2 The attempts by intimidation or persuasion to
prevent the enrolment of a yeomanry force, had either ceased
or been completely defeated. According to Musgrave, the four
counties of Fermanagh, Tyrone, Derry, and Armagh together
furnished no less than fourteen thousand yeomen, and he adds
that three-fourths of them were Presbyterians ; that most of them
were Orangemen, and that, in spite of the recent disaffection of
the Presbyterian body, he did not know a single case of a Pres-
byterian yeoman having betrayed his oath of allegiance.’

It could hardly, however, have been expected that a con-
spiracy so widespread as that in Ulster should produce no
effect. Alarming intelligence now came to Dublin, that on
June 7 a rebellion had broken out in the North. A few months
before, such intelligence would have portended a struggle of the
most formidable dimensions, but it soon appeared that the re-
bellion was practically confined to the two counties of Antrim

and Down, and it was suppressed in a few days. In the county

1 Bishop Percy to his wife, June 8,
1798. On the illuminations at Belfast,
see Sawnders’s Nensletter, June 8.
Another remarkable letter on the state
of Ulster is from Lord William Ben-
tinck, who had resided in Armagh for
two years. ‘The Dissenters,’ he wrote,
‘whom I knew to be the most dis-
affected a year and a half ago, are now
ready to support the existing Govern-
ment, and | believe with sincerity. I
do not fancy that their opinions are

much changed or their natural incli-
nation to republicanism extinguished,
but their affection for their properties,
which they conceive in danger from
what they happily term a popish
rebellion, has been the cause of their
present inaction. They prefer a
Protestant to a popish Establish-
ment. (June 21, 1798, I.8.P.0.)

2 Saunders’s Newsletter, June 14,
1798.

3 Musgrave, p. 194,

CH, XXIX, THE REBELLION IN ANTRIM.

of Antrim the only important operation was an a
June 7, on the town of Antrim, by a body of rebels whose
strength is very variously estimated, but probably consisted of
from 3,000 to 4,000 men. Their leader was a young Belfast
cotton manufacturer, named Henry Joy McCracken, one of
the original founders of the United Ivish Society, and one of
the very few of those founders who ever appeared in the
field. He was a man of singularly amiable private charac-
ter, and is said to have formerly taken a part in establishing
the first Sunday-school at Belfast: A brother of William
Orr was conspicuous among the rebel officers.

As I have already stated, the Government had an informer
in the Provincial Committee of Ulster, who had long been
giving information about the Ulster rebels, and who fur-
nished reports which were regularly transmitted to London,
and which established the guilt of every leader of conse-
quence in the province. Through his information they were
fully prepared for the attack, and Antrim was defended by
Colonel Lumley with two or three troops of dragoons, two
cannon, and a considerable body of yeomanry. The rebels had
a cannon,? but it was disabled at the second shot. They were
chiefly armed with pikes, but some hundreds of them had
muskets. There was a sharp fight, lasting for between two
and three hours, in the streets of Antrim and in the adjoining
demesne of Lord Massareene, and the rebels showed very con-
siderable courage. They endured without flinching several

1 See Harwood, p. 203.

2 Nicholas Magean. Castlereagh
says: ‘It was upon his information
that General Nugent was enabled so
to dispose his force—at that time
very much weakened by detaching to
the South—as to attack the rebels
in those points of assembly, and to
gain those decisive advantages over
them, before their strength was col-

lected, which have completely re-

pressed the insurrection in the North,
at least for the present.’ (Castlereagh
to Wickham, private, June 22, 1798.)
Castlereagh mentions that the in-
former was in custody at his own
desire, but refused to give evidence.
This informer’s name is also spelt
Maguan, Magein, Magin, and Maginn.

VOL. VIII.

Pollock, in a letter dated July 13,
1798, mentions that Wickham said
that after the trials, ‘a letter should
be written by the Lord Lieutenant to
the Treasury in England, stating the
magnitude and importance of Magin’s
services, that by his means the rebels
in Ulster were prevented taking the
field” (1.8.P.0. Compare the Report
of the Secret Committee of 1798, app.
xiv;and Madden’s United Irishmen, 1.
458, 459; iv. 54.) There is reason to
believe that he made a stipulation,
that no man should lose his life on his
evidence.

8 According to another account,
two, but only one appears to have
been brought into action.

130 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxix.

discharges of grape shot; repulsed with heavy loss a charge of
cavalry; killed or wounded about fifty soldiers, and forced back
the troops into Lord Massareene’s grounds. Colonel Lumley
and three or four other officers were wounded. ‘T'wo officers
were killed, and Lord O’Neil fell, pierced with a pike, and died
in a few days. The rebels, however, were at last driven back,
and on the arrival of some additional troops from Belfast and
from the camp at Blaris, they fled precipitately, leaving from
200 to 400 men on the field.!

The little town of Larne had been attacked early on the
same morning by some rebels from Ballymena, but a small
body of Tay Fencibles, aided by a few loyal inhabitants, easily
drove them back. Randalstown and Ballymena were the same
day occupied by rebels with little resistance, and some yeomen
were taken prisoners, but the defeat of the 7th had already
broken the rebellion in Antrim. The rebels found that the
country was not rising to support them, and that there was
absolutely no chance of success. Disputes and jealousies are
said to have arisen in their ranks between the Protestants
and the Catholics. Multitudes deserted, and a profound dis-
couragement prevailed. Colonel Clavering issued a proclamation
ordering an immediate surrender of arms and prisoners, and as
it was not complied with, he set fire to Randalstown, with the
exception of the places of worship and a few houses belonging to
known loyalists. Two yeomanry officers were immediately after
released, and the inhabitants of Ballymena sent to Clavering,
offering to surrender their arms and prisoners, if their town was
not burnt.2. The small remnant of the rebel force returned, on
the 11th, to Dunagore Hill. Clavering, contrary to the wishes
of some hot loyalists, offered a pardon to. all except the leaders,
if they surrendered their arms and returned to their allegiance,
and this offer led to their almost complete dispersion. McCracken
with a very few followers attempted to escape, but he was soon
arrested, and tried and executed at Belfast. Another Antrim
leader, named James Dickey, was not long after hanged in the
same town, and he is stated by Musgrave to have declared

1 See the accounts (differing in in Teeling’s Personal Narrative.
many details) in Musgrave, Gordon, 2 General Nugent to General
McSkimmin, in the official bulletin Lake, June 18, 1798.

(Saunders’s Newsletter, June 11), and

REBELLION IN DOWN. 131

CH. XXIX.

before his execution, that the eyes of the Presbyterians had
been opened too late; that they at last understood from the
massacres in Leinster, that if they had succeeded in over-
turning the Constitution, they would then have had to contend
with the papists.'

The insurrection in the county of Down was as brief, and
hardly more important. It was intended to have broken out
on the same day as that in the county of Antrim, and in that
case it might have been very serious, but the precipitation of
the Antrim rebels prevented this, and the battle at Antrim on
the 7th put an end to all hopes of co-operation. On June 9,
however, a large body of rebels assembled in the barony of
Ards, and they succeeded in forming an ambuscade, and sur-
prising, near Saintfield, Colonel Stapleton, who with some York
Fencibles and yeomanry cavalry had hastened to the scene.
The rebels were at first completely successful, and they drove
the cavalry back in confusion with a loss of about sixty men,
including three officers and also the Rector of Portaferry,
who had volunteered to serve. The infantry soon rallied, re-
pulsed their assailants, and became masters of the field, but the
affair was at best indecisive, for the troops were ordered to re-
tire to Belfast, no prisoners were taken, and the rebels, having
suffered but little, occupied Saintfield. Next day most of the
surrounding country was in arms. Newtown Ards was at first
successfully defended, but then evacuated and occupied without
resistance. On the 11th, Portaferry was attacked, but after a
most gallant defence by the local yeomanry, aided by the guns
of a revenue cutter which was lying in the river, the assailants
were driven back with much loss. The rebels then in a great
body, numbering, it is said, at one time not less than 7,000 men,
encamped in a strong position behind Ballinahinch, on the
property of Lord Moira. They selected as their leader Henry
Monroe, a linendraper of Lisburn, who had been formerly an

1 Musgrave, p. 184. Musgrave accounts of the bloody goings-on in

must always be read with suspicion
when he treats of any question re-
lating to Catholics ; but I see no im-
probability in this statement, and it
is corroborated by the ‘ Field Officer’
quoted by Maxwell, who says: ‘ The

Wexford had their full share in
bringing the Northerners to their
senses, as many of them made no
scruple of declaring at the place of
execution.” (Maxwell's History of
the Rebellion, p. 217.)

k 2

132 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXIxX.

active volunteer, and who had some slight military knowledge
and capacity.

General Nugent marched hastily to encounter them with a
force of 1,500 or 1,600 men, partly yeomanry and partly regular
troops, and accompanied by eight cannon. As they proceeded
through the rebel country, their path was marked by innumer-
able blazing cottages, set fire to on theirmarch.! On the even-
ing of the 12th they succeeded, by a heavy cannonade, in
driving the rebels from the strong post on Windmill Hill, and
a rebel colonel, who defended it to the last, was taken there, and
immediately hanged. The rebels had also taken some prisoners,
but they did them no harm, and General Nugent relates that
his troops at this time surrounded a wood in which the rebels
had gathered, rescued the yeomanry prisoners, and killed nearly
all the defenders. In the middle of the night Ballinahinch
was occupied by troops, Monroe concentrating his forces on
a neighbouring height. ‘There was much division in the
rebel camp. One party counselled a night attack, and there
were reports that the troops were engaged in pillage or in-
capacitated by intoxication, but Monroe determined to await
the daybreak. It has been said that dissension broke out
between the Catholics and the Protestants, and it is at
least certain that some hundreds of rebels, in the night, fell
away in a body.? Perhaps the fact that many of them were
half armed, hopeless of success, and driven unwillingly into the
rebellion, furnishes the best explanation. General Nugent esti-
mated the rebel force on the evening of the 12th at near 5,000
men, but believed that as many persons who had been pressed into
the service, and who were totally unarmed, had escaped during the
night, there were not nearly so many on the morning of the 13th.

1 Teeling, p. 250.
2 Musgrave declares that the re-

bels in the battle of Ballinahinch
were ‘Protestant Dissenters, with

marched off in one body with their
leader;’ but he attributes this to
their discontent at Monroe’s refusal
to make a midnight attack, and he

few if any Roman Catholics, as 2,000
of them deserted the night before
the battle, and inflamed the Pres-
byterians very much against them.’
(2. 557.) Teeling, who gives the best
Catholic account of the battle, says
that, in the night before, ‘a division
of nearly 700 men, and more generally
armed with muskets than the rest,

makes no mention of any religious
differences. (Personal Narrative,
pp. 255, 256.) The ‘Field Officer ’
whose narrative is quoted by Maxwell,
believed that there was both mili-
tary dissension and religious jealousy.
(story of the Rebellion, p. 218.)
3 Printed bulletin.

BATTLE OF BALLINAHINCH. 133

CH. XXIX.

Shortly before daybreak on that morning, Monroe attacked
the troops in Ballinahinch. The rebels, according to the con-
fession of their enemies, showed signal courage, rushing to the
very muzzles of the cannon, where many of them were blown to
pieces, and where bodies were found as black as coal from the
discharge. Once or twice their impetuosity seemed to carry
all before it ; but at last, superior discipline and greatly superior
arms asserted their inevitable ascendency, and the rebels were
totally defeated and dispersed with the loss of 400 or 500 men.
The loss on the loyalist side was only twenty-nine. Some green
flags and six small unmounted cannon were among the spoil.
No prisoners were made during the fight, for the troops gave no
quarter, but nine or ten fugitives were captured almost imme-
diately after, and at once hanged. The town of Ballinahinch
was burnt almost to the ground. One of the correspondents
of Bishop Percy, who visited it shortly after the battle, says
that its smoke rose to heaven like that of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and that not more than three houses in it were unscathed.1

‘The conduct of the troops,’ writes Lord Castlereagh, de-
scribing this battle to Pelham, ‘ was everything one could wish
in point of spirit. Their discipline not much improved by free
quarters. Nugent writes in the highest praise of the Northern
yeomanry ; he describes them for this particular service as equal
to the best troops.’? ‘The rebels,’ he wrote in another letter,
‘ fought at Ballinahinch, as at Wexford, with determined bravery,
but without the fanaticism of the Southerners. They made the
attack, and used some wretched ship guns, mounted on cars,
with considerable address. . . . Upon the whole, the North is
divided in sentiment. We have numerous adherents, and I am
inclined to hope that the effort there will prove rather a diver-
sion than the main attack.’* It is a curious fact, that in this

1 See the report of General In a certain assembly no long

Nugent, June 13; and some interest-
ing letters, describing the battle, sent
by Bishop Percy to his wife. See, too,
the accounts in Teeling’s Personal
Narrative, in Maxwell and in Mus-
grave. The fact that the property
of Lord Moira was the centre of the
rebellion in Ulster, was not forgotten
by the opponents of that nobleman :
‘A certain great statesman, whom
all of us know,

while ago,
Declared from this maxim he never
would flinch—
That no town was so loyal as
Ballinahinch ’ &c.
(Beauties of the An? -Jacobin, pp. 289,
290

2 Castlereagh to Pelham, June 16,

1798. (Pelham MSS.)
3 Castlereagh to Elliot, June 16,
1798. (bid.)

134 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

battle the overwhelming majority of the rebels were Protestants,
while the Monaghan Militia, an almost exclusively Catholic
regiment, formed a large portion of the loyalist force.

The short Protestant rebellion in Ulster was almost wholly
untarnished by the acts of cruelty and murder that were so
frequent in'the South,! but the repression was not less savage
and brutal. After the decisive battle of Ballinahinch, however,
General Nugent followed the example of Colonel Clavering in
Antrim, and offered pardon and protection to all rebels, except
the leaders, who would lay down their arms and return to
their allegiance. Should that submission not be made, the pro-
clamation continued, ‘ Major-General Nugent will proceed to set
fire to, and totally destroy, the towns of Killinchy, Killileagh,
Ballinahinch, Saintfield, and every cottage and farmhouse in
the vicinity of those places, carry off the stock and cattle, and
put every one to the sword who may be found in arms.’ At
Belfast, Colonel Durham warned the inhabitants, that if any
traitor was found concealed, with the knowledge or connivance
of the owner, in any house in that town or neighbourhood,
‘such person’s house, so offending, shall be burnt, and the owner
thereof hanged.’ ?

No further troubles, however, appeared in Ulster, and a few
executions closed this page of the rebellion. Some slight move-
ments which had arisen in the county of Derry, had been easily
suppressed by General Knox, and in the other counties the
loyal party seemed now completely to predominate. Monroe
tried to escape, but was soon arrested, and hanged at Lisburn

before his own house, and, it

1 Bishop Percy, afterwards speak-
ing of the barbarities in other
parts of Ireland, adds: ‘Thank God,
our rebels in this country, being
chiefly Protestant Dissenters, were of
very different complexion, and were
guilty of no wanton cruelties. I
have accounts on all hands that they
treated our clergy, and others who
fell into their hands, with great
humanity, and according to the
usual laws of war.’ (Oct. 27.) This
was all the more remarkable if, as
Bishop Percy said in other letters,
the rebels in the North were only
miscreants of the lowest kind. ‘All the

is said, before the eyes of his

more rational republicans,’ he said,
‘are disgusted with France for their ill
treatment of America,’ and ‘are sepa-
rating from the popish Defenders,
who are only bent on mischief.’ (June
11, 13, 1798.) Musgrave and Gordon,
however, state that a party from
Saintfield attacked the house of a
farmer named McKee (who had pro-
secuted some United Irishmen), and
that, meeting a fierce resistance, they
set fire to the house, and all within
perished in the flames. (Musgrave,
p. 555 ; Gordon, p. 160.)
2 Maxwell, pp. 217, 218.

PROCLAMATION OF BAGENAL HARVEY. peels,

CH. XXIX.

mother and his wife. He died like a true Christian and a
brave man, and impressed all who witnessed his end, with his
courage and his manifest sincerity. His head, according to
the barbarous fashion of the time, was severed from his body,
and fixed on a spike in the market-place of Lisburn. The
green and white plume which he wore on his helmet in the battle
of Ballinahinch, wasafterwards given to Bishop Percy.!

We must now return to the theatre of war in Wexford, and!
follow the fate of the rebel army which had been defeated, but
not dissolved or dispersed, in the great battle of New Ross, on
June 5. On that evening; the rebels, with a long train of cars
bearing their wounded and dead, retreated to their old camp on
Carrickbyrne Hill, and it was there that Bagenal Harvey for the
first time learnt the horrible tragedy that had taken place at
Scullabogue. It is related that the resolution which had sup-.
ported him through the battle and the defeat: and the flight,
then gave way, and he wrung his hands in agony, bitterly de-
ploring that he had any part in a cause which bore such. fruit.
He opened a subscription for burying the remains of the murdered
prisoners, gave prompt orders to arrest and punish the murderers,
and at once wrote a proclamation, which was countersigned by his
adjutant-general Breen, and was printed, and widely distributed
among all the rebel forces through the county. It laid down
stringent rules of discipline under pain of death, and appointed.
courts-martial to enforce them. ‘ Any person or persons,’ it con—
eluded, ‘ who shall take upon them to kill or murder any person
or persons, burn any house, or commit any plunder, without
special written orders from the commander-in-chief, shall. suffer
death.’ ?

The unfortunate commander was very impotent in the midst
of the fierce mob of fanatics who swept him along. <A touching
letter, which has been preserved, written about this time to an

old friend, who asked him to

' 1 Bishop Perey to his wife, Oct.

27,1798. The Bishop says that the
painter Robinson painted a picture
of the battle of Ballinahinch, which
contained many portraits of those
who were engaged in it. It was
raffled for, and won by Lord Hertford.
Of the death of Monroe, we have

protect some property, paints

three remarkable accounts: Maxwell,
pp. 215, 216; Teeling, p. 260; Mus-
grave, p. 557. His name—like nearly
eyery name in this part of my his-
tory—is spelt by contemporaries in
several different ways.

2 Taylor, pp. 70-73 ; Hay, pp. 159
161; Cloney, pp. 44. 45.

136 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXI1X.

vividly both his character and his situation.! His short command
was, however, now over. On the 7th the rebels moved their
camp to the hill of Slyeeve-Keelter, which rises about five miles
from Ross, on the river formed by the united streams of the
Nore and Barrow. They there deposed Bagenal Harvey from
the command, and bestowed it on a priest named Philip Roche,
who had taken a prominent part in the defeat of Colonel Walpole
en June 4. The influence which this victory had given him, his
priestly character, his gigantic stature and strength, his loud
voice and his boisterous manners, made him much more fitted
to command the rebel army, than the feeble and scrupulous
Protestant gentleman he superseded, and there is some reason
to believe that he had more natural talent for military matters.?

1*Dear Sir,—I received your
letter, but what to do for you I know
not. I, from my heart, wish to pro-
tect all property. I can scarcely
protect myself, and indeed my situa-
tion is much to be pitied, and dis-
tressing to myself. Itook my present
situation in hopes of doing good,
aud preventing mischief. My trust is
in Providence. I acted always an
honest, disinterested ‘part, and had
the advice I gave some time since
been taken, the present mischief
could never have arisen. If I can
retire to a private station again, I
will, immediately. Mr. Tottenham’s
refusing to speak to the gentleman I
sent into Ross, who was madly shot
by the soldiers, was very unfortunate.
It has set the people mad with rage,
and there is no restraining them.
The person:I sent in, had private in-
structions to propose a reconciliation,
but God knows where this business
will end; but, end how it may, the
good men of both parties will be
inevitably ruined.’ (Taylor, p. 76.)

2 See Gordon, p. 123. I must ac-
knowledge myself quite unable to
draw the character of this priest.
Harwood sums up very well the
Catholic version, when he describes
him as ‘aman abundantly gifted by
nature with all the qualities that the
post required: of intrepid personal
courage, indomitable firmness, a quick
and true military eye, immense physi-
cal strength and power of enduring
privation and fatigue, great tact for
managing the rude masses he had to

rule, and a generous, humane heart
with it all” (istory of the Rebellion,
p. 185.) Maxwell gives the loyalist
version: ‘Like Murphy of Boula-
vogue, Roche was a man of ferocious
character and vulgar habits; but,
although drunken and illiterate, his
huge stature and rough manners gave
him a perfect ascendency over the
savage mobs which, in rebel parlance,
constituted an army.. . . He evinced
neither talent nor activity. His chief
exploit was an attack upon a gen-
tleman’s house, in which he was dis-
gracefully repulsed; while in a new
camp he formed within a mile of
Ross, the time was passed in drunken
revelry, diversified occasionally with
a sermon from Father Philip, or the
slaughter of some helpless wretch,
accused of being an enemy to the
people.” (Ibid. pp. 128, 129.) Mus-
grave describes him as ‘an inhuman
savage,’ but Gordon says that, although
‘Philip Roach was in appearance
fierce and sanguinary,’ several persons
who were in danger of being murdered
on Vinegar Hill, owed their lives ‘to
his boisterous interference.’ (P. 140.)
He admits that he was often intoxi-
cated, but adds, ‘for a charge of
cruelty against him, I can find no
foundation. On the contrary, I have
heard many instances of his active
humanity.’ (Appendix, p. 84.) Miles
Byrne describes himas‘aclergyman of
the most elegant manners, afine person,
tall and handsome, humane and brave
beyond description” (Memoirs, i. 86.)

CH. XxIx. ATTACK ON BORRIS. 137

Harvey went back to Wexford, where he assisted Keugh in
governing and defending the town, and restraining the populace
from outrage. The priests did all they could to sustain the
courage of the people, by appeals to their fanaticism and
credulity. Some are said to have declared that they were
invulnerable, that they could catch the bullets in their: hands,
that it was only want of faith that caused Catholic rebels to fall
by Protestant bullets; and protections and charms, signed and,
it is alleged, sold by the new commander, were hung round the
necks of the rebel soldiers, to guarantee them from any injury
in battle! The weather had been unusually fine, which greatly
lightened the hardships of those who were compelled to sleep
unsheltered in the open air, and this was constantly appealed to as
a clear proof that the benediction of Heaven rested on their cause.

This body of rebels made attempts, which were not wholly
unsuccessful, to intercept the navigation of the river of Ross.
They captured some small boats; they attacked a gunboat, and
killed some of her sailors, but failed to take her, and they
succeeded in intercepting a mail, which furnished valuable
information about the proceedings and preparations of the
Government. Onthe 10th they moved their camp to Lacken
Hill, a mile from Ross, where they remained for some days un-
molested and almost inactive. They sent, however, detachments
to scour the country for arms and provisions, and gave orders
that all males should join their camp. One small party pene-
trated to the little town of Borris in Carlow, which they partly
burnt, but the neighbouring country house of Mr. Kavanagh
had been turned into a fortress, and was strongly garrisoned by
yeomen, and when the rebels attacked it, they were beaten back
with heavy loss. ‘Ten of their number, it is said, were left dead,
and as many wounded, while only one of the garrison fell. It
should be remembered to the credit of Father Roche, that the
camp at Lacken Hill, where he held the undivided command,
appears to have been absolutely unstained by the murders which
had been so numerous at Vinegar Hill.

1 Taylor and Musgrave have was present at the attack, gives an

printed some curious ‘protections,’ interesting account of it. (Personal
which were taken from the necks of Narrative, pp. 48-51.)
captured or slain rebels. 3 Gordon, Appendix, p, 85.

2 Gordon, p. 124, Cloney, who

138 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

The reader may remember that another great body of rebels
had encamped, after the defeat of Colonel Walpole, in the neigh-
bourhood of Gorey. If they had pressed on at once, after the
victory of the 4th, upon Arklow, it must have fallen without
resistance, and the road to Dublin would then have been open
to them. They wasted, however, precious days, feasting upon
their spoil, trying prisoners who were accused of being Orange-
men, plundering houses, and burning the town of Carnew ;
and in the meantime the little garrison, which had at first
evacuated Arklow in terror, had returned, and had been
powerfully reinforced. It now amounted to 1,500 or 1,600
effective men, chiefly militia and yeomen, but with some artil-
lery. The whole was placed under the skilful direction of
General Needham, and every precaution was taken to create
or strengthen defences. The rebels at last saw that a great
effort must be made to capture the town; and reinforcements
having been obtained from Vinegar Hill and from other quarters,
they marched from Gorey on the 9th, in a great host which was
estimated at 25,000, 30,000, or even 34,000 men, but which,
in the opinion of General Needham, did not exceed 19,000.
According to the lowest estimate, their numbers appeared over-
whelming, but their leaders alone were mounted: they were for
the most part wretchedly armed, as searcely any blacksmith or
gunsmith could be found to repair their pikes or guns; their
attack was anticipated, and they began it fatigued with a long
day’s march.

It commenced about four in the afternoon. The rebels
advanced from the Coolgreny road and along the sandhills on
the shore in two great solid columns, the intervening space
being filled with a wild, disorderly crowd, armed with pikes
and guns, and wearing green cockades, and green ribbons round
their hats. Needham drew out his force in a strong position
protected by ditches in front of the barracks. Five cannon
supported him, and a heavy fire of grape shot poured con-
tinuously into the dense columns of the rebels. These set fire
to the cabins that form the suburbs of Arklow, and advanced
under shelter of the smoke, and their gunsmen availed them-
selves of the cover of fences, hedges, and ditches to gall the
enemy. It was observed, however, that they usually overloaded

CH. XXIX, BATTLE OF ARKLOW. 189

their muskets, and fired so high that they did little damage,
“and although they had three, or, according to another account,
four cannon, they had hardly any one capable of managing
them. Their shot for the most part plunged harmlessly into
the ground, or flew high above the enemy, and some of the
rebels wished their captains to give them the canister shot as
missiles, declaring that with them they would dash out the
brains of the troops. An artillery sergeant, who had been
taken prisoner, was compelled to serve at the guns, and it is
said that he purposely pointed them so high that they did no
damage to the troops.!

The brunt of the battle was chiefly borne by the Durham
Fencibles, an admirably appointed regiment of 360 men, which
had only arrived at Arklow that morning. The yeomanry
cavalry also more than once charged gallantly, and Captain
Thomas Knox Grogan, a brother of the old man who was with
the rebels at Wexford, was killed at the head of the Castletown
troop. For some time the situation was very critical; at one
moment it seemed almost hopeless, and Needham is said to
have spoken of retreat, but to have been dissuaded by Colonel
Skerrett, who was second in command. It is impossible, indeed,
to speak too highly of the endurance and courage of the thin
line of defenders who, during three long hours, confronted and
baffled a host ten times as numerous as themselves, and it was
all the more admirable, as the rebels on their side showed no
mean courage. ‘Their perseverance,’ wrote Needham to General
Lake, ‘ was surprising, and their efforts to possess themselves of
the guns on my right were most daring, advancing even to the
muzzles, where they fell in great numbers.’ ‘ A heavy fire of
grape did as much execution as, from the nature of the ground
- and the strong fences of which they had possessed themselves,
could have been expected. This continued incessantly from 6
o'clock until 8.30, when the enemy desisted from his attack and
fled in disorder.’ At this time their ammunition was almost
exhausted. The shades of night were drawing in, and their
favourite commander, Father Michael Murphy, had fallen. He
led his men into battle, waving above his head a green flag,

1 This statement, which has been writers, is confirmed by the report of
made by Gordon and also by the rebel Captain Moore, in the Record Office.

140 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

emblazoned with a great white cross, and with the inscription
‘Death or liberty,’ and he was torn to pieces by canister shot
within a few yards of the muzzle of a cannon which he was
trying to take. He was one of those whom the rebels believed
to be invulnerable, and his death cast a sudden chill over their
courage. It was too late for pursuit, and the rebels retired
unmolested to Gorey, but their loss had been very great.
‘Their bodies,’ wrote General Needham, ‘ have been found in
every direction scattered all over the country. The cabins
were everywhere filled with them, and many cars loaded with
them were carried off after the action. Numbers were also
thrown by the enemy into the flames at the lower end of the
town. On the whole, I am sure the number of killed must have
exceeded a thousand,’ On the loyalist side the loss was quite
inconsiderable.!

The battle of Arklow was the last in which the rebels had
any real chance of success, and from this time the rebellion
rapidly declined. For some days, however, the alarms of the
Government were undiminished. The multitude who had
appeared in arms in the county of Wexford, the fanatical
courage they displayed, the revolt which had begun in the
North, and the complete uncertainty about how far that revolt
might extend, or how soon the French might arrive, filled them
with an anxiety which appears in all their most confidential
letters. Within a few days great numbers of the principal
persons in Ireland, including nearly all the bishops, sent their
wives and children to England, and on the 10th Lady Camden
and her family crossed the Channel. This last fact was intended
to be a profound secret, but it was known to many, and in spite

1 See the report of General Need-
ham to General Lake, June 10, 11,
1798; and also an interesting account
of the battle by Captain Moore, in the
Record Office. Some particulars, de-
rived from those who were present,
are also given in a letter from H.
Alexander to Pelham, June 10. (Pel-
ham MSS.) See, too, the accounts in
Taylor, Musgrave, and Gordon, and
in the Memoirs of Miles Byrne, who
was present in the battle. Byrne
maintains that the retreat was wholly
unnecessary, and that Arklow might

with little difficulty have still been
taken. Beresford wrote to Auck-
land a description of this battle.
He says: ‘The Ancient Britons who
made their escape, assured Needham
that the priests who attend the army
say mass almost every hour, and work
up the people’s mind to enthusiasm.
There are two or three killed in every
battle” (Auckland Correspondence, iv.
15.) Father Michael Murphy’s body
appears to have been horribly muti-
lated after death by some Ancient
Britons, (See Gordon, pp. 212, 213.)

CH. XXIX, LETTERS OF CAMDEN. 141

of the most peremptory injunctions, it was speedily disclosed.!
Pelham was still in England, and on the 11th, Camden wrote
to him to press upon the English Ministers, both urgently and
officially, the extreme gravity of the situation. ‘You may be
assured,’ he wrote, ‘that the complexion this rebellion wears
is the most serious it is possible to conceive. Unless ‘Great
Britain pours an immense force into Ireland, the country is
lost ; unless she sends her most able generals, those troops may
be sacrificed. The organisation of this treason is universal, and
the formidable numbers in which the rebels assemble, oblige
all those who have not the good fortune to escape, to join them.
The rebels have possessed themselves of Wexford, and of that
whole country. They have possessed themselves of Newtown
Ards, and the whole neck of land on that side of the Lough
of Strangford is evacuated. The force from Wexford is so
great, that it is not thought proper to advance against them.
. . . There is no doubt an intention to attempt a rising within
the city. . . . The country is lost unless a very large reinforce-
ment of troops is landed.’ This opinion ‘ is universal.’?

To Portland he wrote, expressing his astonishment that the
English Government should treat this rebellion as one of trivial
importance, and that, in spite of his earnest representations, and
although the struggle had now lasted for between two and three
weeks, ‘not a single man had been landed in Ireland.’ Mr.
Elliot, he said, who had been sent over to lay the situation before
the Government, ‘ will communicate to you the religious frenzy
which agitates the rebels in Wexford, that they are headed by
their priests, that they halt every half-mile to pray, that the
deluded multitude are taught to consider themselves as fighting
for their religion, that their enthusiasm is most alarming. He
will inform your Grace how violently agitated the Protestant
feeling in Ireland is at this moment, and with how rapid strides

1 Bishop Percy mentions that,on of her voice. It was the whole story

the night of Lady Camden’s departure,
he was walking with the Bishop of
Clogher round Merrion Square, when
it was almost dark. When they came
opposite Lady Frances Beresford’s
house, they saw that lady standing
on her balcony, and could not help
hearing what a lady in the street be-
low was calling to her at the full pitch

of the departure of Lady Camden.
The two bishops, without revealing
themselves, contrived to see the face
of the indiscreet informant, and
found that she was Lady Castlereagh.
(Bishop Percy to his wife, June 11,
1798.)

2 Camden to Pelham, June 11,
1798. (Pelham MSS.)

142 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

the war is becoming one of the most cruel and bloody that ever
disgraced or was imposed on a country. He will explain to
your Grace how impolitic and unwise it would be to refuse the
offers of Protestants to enter into yeomanry or other corps, and
yet how dangerous even, any encouragement to the Orange
spirit is, whilst our army is composed of Catholics, as the militia
almost generally is.’!

Lord Castlereagh wrote several letters in the same sense.
He had not, he said, ‘a conception the insurgents would remain
together and act in such numbers,’ and although the narrow
limitation of the Ulster rebellion seemed encouraging, he had
secret information that it had been arranged, ‘that the rising in
Down and Antrim should precede that of the other counties where
the disaffection is less general.’ In the meantime, the fact that
no reinforcements had yet arrived from England afforded ‘a
moral which the disaffected do not fail to reason from, that with
French assistance, the people could have carried the country
before a regiment from the other side found its way to our
assistance.’ This circumstance, he observed, would hereafter
have its weight both in France and Ireland. ‘It is of im-
portance that the authority of England should decide this con-
test, as well with a view to British influence in Ireland, as to
make it unnecessary for the Government to lend itself too much
to a party in this country, highly exasperated by the religious
persecution to which the Protestants in Wexford have been
exposed.’ He sent over to England a specimen of the protec-
tions which had been issued by the rebels, attesting the conver-
sion to Catholicism of the person who bore it, and securing him
in consequence from molestation, and he pointed out as clearly
as Camden, that, in Wexford at least, the United Irish move-
ment had completely lost its original character, and had trans-
formed itself into a religious war. ‘The priests lead the rebels
to battle ; on their march they kneel down and pray, and show
the most desperate resolution in their attack. . . . They put
such Protestants, as are reported to be Orangemen, to death,

1 Camden to Portland, June 11,
1798 (most secret). On June 9, Lees
wrote to Auckland: ‘We have not
yet a single soldier from your side on
this.’ ‘Most strange, wrote Beres-
ford on the 14th, ‘not a man yet ar-
rived in the South or at Dublin... .

I hear some are at Carrickfergus.’
(Auckland Correspondence, iv. 11, 19.)
These passages, and the letters in the
text, have an important bearing on
the question how far the rebellion
was put down by Irish, and how far
by English, efforts.

LETTERS OF McNALLY. 143

CH. XXIX.

saving others upon condition of their embracing the Catholic
faith. It is a Jacobinical conspiracy throughout the kingdom,
pursuing its object chiefly with popish instruments.’!

Horrible indeed as were the cruelties that disgraced both
sides, they were less deplorable, because less permanent, than
the moral effects that were their consequence. Day by day,
almost hour by hour, the work of conciliation, which had been
carried on in Ireland during the last half-century, was being
undone, and in an age when religious animosities were generally
fading throughout Hurope, they acquired in Ireland a tenfold
virulence. No one saw this more clearly than McNally, whose
letters to the Government at this time are very instructive,
and in some respects very creditable both to his head and to
his heart. He strongly urged the falsehood and the folly of
describing the rebellion as a popish plot. It was at its outset
more Presbyterian than popish, and more deistical than either,
and its leaders were as far as possible from aiming at any
religious ascendency or desiring any religious persecution. It
was quite true, as he had told the Government nearly three
years before, ‘that the priests and country schoolmasters were
the principal agitators of French politics, and that among the
priests, those expelled from France, as well as the fugitive
students from that country, were the most active,’ but it was
also true ‘that this class of demagogues and pedagogues, far
from being superstitious Catholics, defied not only the devil,
but the Pope and all his works, and were in their private con-
versation pure deists. Among the Roman Catholics of property
and education,’ he continued, ‘I find strong principles, not only
of aristocracy, but monarchy. ‘These, however, I apprehend, are
but a small body. . . . Among the middling orders the Pope is
held in contempt. His recent misfortunes are laughed at, and
his ancient influence, through all its delegations, is nearly

gone.’? The rebellion was clearly taking a form which the

1 Castlereagh to Pelham, June 13;
Castlereagh to Elliot, June 16 (Pel-
ham MSS.); Castlereagh to Wickham
(Castlereagh Correspondence, i. 219).

2 J. W., June 6,1798. In another
letter he says: ‘ The secular clergy of
Treland, particularly those of Dublin,
have not been the instigators of re-
bellion ; the regulars it is who lighted

the brand, and among those the
younger were the most active, from
their attachment to French politics.
This class of men are the political
preceptors of country schoolmasters— -
a class of men who, the judges well
know, have been the most successful
agitators. (J. W., June 26, 1798.)

144 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX,

leaders had never anticipated or desired, and ‘of this,’ said
McNally, ‘I am well convinced, that numbers of those who were
zealous as United Irishmen of the first society, are shocked at the
present appearance of the country, and wish sincerely for peace.
Many who have wished to carry the question of reform and
emancipation, even by an armed body, such as the volunteers
were, shudder at the enormities to be expected from an armed
banditti.’!

‘The principle,’ he wrote in another letter, ‘which forms the
character of republicanism, I perceive, changes daily to that of
religion. The object of Government, it is said by the organised
and their adherents, is Protestant ascendency, and the destruc-
tion of Catholics and Dissenters. This insinuation comes most
effectually from the clergy, and has a powerful influence on the
lower classes. JI do not confine my observation to the Catholic
clergy, or to the Catholic bigots.’ Infinite harm had been done
by the acts and words of indiscreet Protestants. One officer
is reported to have said, when a crowd of Catholics came to
enlist in the yeomanry, ‘ These fellows are papists, and if we
don’t disarm them, they will cut our throats ;’ and such sayings,
whether true or false, were sedulously repeated through the
whole country. A report had been spread, ‘that Government
have determined not only on an union with England, but on re-
viving all the penal laws against the papists. From these and
other causes, among which Orange emblems are not the weakest,
old prejudices, old rancours, and old antipathies are reviving.
Orange emblems, while they create animosities, strengthen the
hopes of the United party. So few appear with them, that they
cannot inspire fear, but they create hatred.’ Another report
was, that a priest named Bush had been cruelly whipped, and that
he exclaimed under the torture, ‘My Saviour suffered more for
me than I have suffered.” The story, McNally said, may have
been false, but it was industriously spread for the purpose of
raising a spirit of retaliation. On the other hand, it was not
true, as the official bulletin asserted, that it was the rebels who
had set fire to Kildare. McNally had very recently seen a
respectable gentleman, who had been present when that little
town was in a blaze. ‘Two-thirds of its houses had been burnt,

1 J. W., June 13, 1798,

CH, XXIX. DEMORALISATION OF THE COUNTRY. 145

and the conflagration was due to the rank and file of the Dublin
Militia, who were determined to avenge the murder of one of
their officers.! (

The time, McNally clearly saw and repeatedly urged, had
come when the most terrible and enduring calamities could only
be averted by a speedy clemency. There were bitter complaints
of the whippings without trial. The soldiers were driving the
people to the rebels. The severities were producing sullen,
silent rancour. Executions were looked upon as merely mur-
ders; and when the procession for an execution commenced,
all those within doors to whose knowledge it came, betook
themselves to their prayers. On the other hand, it was now
generally felt that any government is better than anarchy, and
the great mass of industrious men only desired a rapid termina-
tion of the contest. ‘I cannot presume to advise,’ he writes ;
‘but take my opinion candidly. I do sincerely believe that all
classes are heartily tired and terrified, and would willingly go
almost any length for peace.’ ‘Ido believe that zeal to the cause
is now working in very few, except desperate adventurers and the
proscribed ; and I would venture to say, that a certainty of pardon
would melt down the tombination, strong as it appears.’ ?

It is easy, indeed, to understand the savage hatred that was
arising. In times of violence the violent must rule, and events
assume a very different shape from that in which they appear
to unimaginative historians in a peaceful age. When men are
engaged in the throes of a deadly struggle; when dangers,
horrible, unknown, and unmeasured, encompass them at every
step; when the probability not only of ruin, but of massacre, is
constantly before their eyes; when every day brings its ghastly
tales of torture, murder, and plunder, it is idle to look for the
judgments and the feelings of philanthropists or philosophers.
The tolerant, the large-minded, the liberal, the men who can
discriminate between different degrees or classes of guilt, and
weigh in a just balance opposing crimes, then disappear from
the scene. <A feverish atmosphere of mingled passion and panic
is created, which at once magnifies, obscures, and distorts, and
the strongest passions are most valued, for they bring most men

1 J. W., June 12, 13, and also some 2T take these sentences from a
_ undated letters, which were evidently number of letters, which are chiefly
written about the same time. undated.

VOL. VIII. L

146 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.

into the field, and make them most indifferent to danger and to
death. The Catholic rebellion only became really formidable
when the priests touched the one chord to which their people
could heartily respond, and turned it into a religious war, and
a scarcely less fierce fanaticism and thirst for vengeance had
arisen to repress it.

A few lines from one of the letters of Alexander, will show
the point of view of men who, without themselves sharing this
fanaticism, were quite ready to make use of it, and who advocated
a policy directly opposite to that of McNally. ‘Affections,’ he
says, ‘in Ireland decide upon everything. To calculate on our
judgments is nonsense.’ To the zeal, activity, and courage of
the yeomanry, Dublin is mainly indebted for its tranquillity, and
the whole country for its salvation. ‘Nothing can equal their
loyalty but their impatience,’ and they are not a little offended
by the reserve of the Government. Itis true that ‘ the thorough
knowledge every yeoman and loyal man has that (were he mean
enough to meditate it) no retraction of conduct could save him,’
secures Government a most decided, though sometimes a ‘ queru-
lous support.’ But it will not be possible for the Government
much longer to adopt a restraining or moderating policy. ‘ All
the Protestants are gradually arming, and ‘the Orangemen
would rise if encouraged by the Government, and make a crusade
if required.’ ‘Unless we trust, we cannot exist; and the man
who first trusts the lower Irish, bespeaks their fidelity. . . . If
Government does not use one of the two great bodies that exist
in the State, they will in a short time combine against it.’ The
French Government might have survived the revolutionary storm
if it had not by a dubious, compromising, and conceding policy
placed itself outside all the parties and enthusiasms of the State.
In Ireland, in the opinion of Alexander, it is the Whig Club,
the policy of Grattan, and the concessions of the Government
that have done the mischief, and that mischief can only be
arrested by throwing away the scabbard and adopting the most
uncompromising policy. ‘We have heard and listened to the
serpent hissing in Ireland, until we have been severely stung.
Lords O’Neil and Mountjoy, Commoners McManus, who presided
at the Dungannon meeting, have been the first victims of the
rebels’ fury, and they were the great advocates of the conceding

CH. XxIxX, ARRIVAL OF ENGLISH TROOPS. 147

system. In private life the most obnoxious men are safe, and
the prudent men, who conceived they stood well with both parties,
find moderatisme (sic) as bad a trade as it was in France.’ !

Higgins in one of his letters notices another element, which
contributed much to the horror and the desperation of the
struggle. It was the distress which inevitably followed from the
complete paralysis of industry and credit. Weavers no’ longer
gave employment to their workmen. English manufacturers
would send over no goods except for immediate payment.
Trade in all its branches was stagnant. No one ventured to
embark on any enterprise stretching into the unknown future.
‘As to bank-note currency, he wrote, ‘I do most solemnly
assure you, that the shopkeepers and dealers laugh at any person,
even buying an article, and asking change of a guinea note.
These circumstances, distressing to the poor, with the exorbitant
price of provisions, will occasion tradesmen out of employment
to engage, for bread, in any dangerous enterprise.’ Higgins
pressed this fact upon the Government, as deserving their most
earnest attention, and he reminded them that Chesterfield, who
steered Ireland so wisely and so successfully during the Scotch
troubles of 1745, had then made it one of his first objects to
provide employment for the people, by undertaking great works
of planting and cultivation in Phoenix Park.?

The clouds, however, were now at length clearing away. In
a few days it became evident, that in Down and Antrim the insur-
rection .was really suppressed, and that the remainder of Ulster
was not disposed to follow their example, and at the same time
the long-expected reinforcements from England at last arrived.
On the 16th it was announced that five Knglish regiments had
landed at Waterford,’ and immediately after, many English
militia regiments volunteered to serve in Ireland. The King had
no power to accept their offer without a special Act of Parliament,
but such an Act was speedily carried, in spite of the violent opposi-
tion and protest of the English Whig Opposition,‘ while the Irish
Parliament voted 500,000J. for their maintenance in Iveland.?

1 Henry Alexander to Pelham, want of bread. (Parl. Hist. xxxiii.

June 10, 1798. (Pelham MSS.) 1502.)

2h ae dune) 13, 1798) See, too, 8 Saunders’s Newsletter, Jane 16.
Saunders’s Newsletter, Jane 15. She- 4 Parl. Hist. xxxiii. 1493-1512,
ridan even attributed the rebellion 5 Saunders, June 28, 29.

mainly to want of employment and
L 2

CH, XXIX,

148 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

About 12,000 of the English militia came over, and the first
regiments arrived before the end of June.!_ The rebellion, it is
true, was then virtually over, but the presence of this great force
did much to guard against its revival and against the dangers
of invasion. Among other noblemen, the former viceroy, the
Marquis of Buckingham, now came to Ireland at the head of a
regiment of militia.

Gordon, who, from his long residence in the neighbourhood
of Gorey, is by far the most competent, as he is also the most
candid, historian of the proceedings of the rebels in that part of
the county of Wexford, observes that there were fewer crimes
committed there than in the southern parts of the county, and
that they were certainly not unprovoked. The burning of
houses by the yeomanry, the free quarters, the pitched caps, the
trials by court-martial, and the shooting of prisoners without trial,
went far to explain them. At the same time he observes that
‘the war from the beginning, in direct violation of the oath of
the United Irishmen, had taken a religious turn, as every civil
war inthe South or West of Ireland must be expected to take, by
any man well acquainted with the prejudices of the inhabitants.
The terms Protestant and Orangeman were almost synonymous,
with the mass of the insurgents, and the Protestants whom they
meant to favour were generally baptised into the Romish Church.’?

Gordon doubted much whether, in the event of a complete
success of the rebellion, any large number of Protestants in
Wexford would have been suffered to live, but he acknowledged
that the actual murders in this part of the county were not nume~
rous, and that ‘many individuals had evinced much humanity
in their endeavours to mitigate the fury of their associates.” A
few houses in Gorey, and two country honses in its immediate
_neighbourhood, were burnt by the rebels, and they confined
many prisoners in the market-house. Some persons, who were
especially obnoxious tothem, werepiked or shot. One or twowere
tortured with the pitched cap, but the lives of the great majority

1 See Musgrave, p. 559.

2 Gordon, pp. 133, 134. ‘So in-
veterately rooted,’ he elsewhere says,
‘are the prejudices of religious anti-
pathy in the minds of the lower
classes of Irish Romanists, that in
any civil war, however originating

from causes unconnected with reli-
gion, not all the efforts of their
gentry, or even priests, to the con-
trary, could (if I am not exceedingly
mistaken) restrain them from con-
verting it into a religious quarrel.’
(P. 285.)

CH, XXIX, REBELS IN WICKLOW. 149

of the prisoners were spared, and although they lived in constant
fear of death, it is not certain that they were seriously ill treated.
It appears, too, that loyalist families who had been unable to
escape, still continued to live in the neighbourhood, for the most
part unmolested, except that they were obliged to provide food
for the rebels.} .

A few days after the defeat at Arklow, the rebels evacuated
Gorey and the whole of the neighbouring country. Many of
them simply deserted from the ranks, and those who remained
embodied, divided into two parties. The smaller one, carrying
with them the prisoners, went to Wexford, while the main body
penetrated into the county of Wicklow, and on June 17 attacked
and burnt to the ground the little town of Tinnehely. It con-
tained an active Protestant population, who had done good
service in keeping their county in order, and it appears now
to have been the scene of great atrocities. Many houses in its
neighbourhood were burnt. ‘Many persons,’ writes Gordon,
‘were put to death with pikes, under the charge of being
Orangemen; and many more would have suffered, if they had
not been spared at the humane intercession of a Romanist lady,
a Mrs. Maher, in that neighbourhood.’ The rebels placed a
Catholic Wicklow gentleman, named Garret Byrne, at their
head, and they seem to have been conducted with some ability.
The yeomanry of the district, who, to the number of about five
hundred men, had been concentrated at Hacketstown, found it
hopeless to attack them; but General Dundas, with a large body
of troops anda train of artillery, arrived at Tinnehely on the 18th,
and it was thought that he could have easily crushed the rebels.
They had retired, however, to a strong position on Kilcaven
Hill, about two miles from Carnew; and although Dundas was
speedily strengthened by a junction with General Loftus, he
totally failed to surround or interceptthem. On the 20th there
was a cannonade between the two armies, which did little
execution on either side; the English general then withdrew
to Carnew, and the same night Byrne’s army directed its march,
unmolested, to Vinegar Hill.”

On the 19th the rebel force, which, under the command of

1 Compare Gordon, pp. 133-137, should, however, compare this account
with Byrne’s Memoirs, i. 147-152. with that (differing in some details)
2 Gordon, pp. 133-138, The reader given by Miles Byrne, who took part

150 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH, XXIX.

Father Philip Roche, still occupied a height near New Ross, was
surprised and compelled to retreat. One portion of it took the
line to Vinegar Hill. The other and larger portion, after some
fighting, in which the rebels showed more than usual skill, made
its way to the Three Rocks, near Wexford.'| The whole force of
the rebellion in Wexford was thus concentrated in two centres,
and the army at the disposal of General Lake was now amply
sufficient to crushit. A great combined movement was speedily
devised by Lake for surrounding Vinegar Hill. The failure of
two brigades to arrive in time, deranged the plan of completely
cutting off the retreat of the rebels; but on June 21, Vinegar
Hill was stormed from several sides, by an army which was
estimated by the rebels at 20,000 men, but which probably
amounted to 13,000 or 14,000, and was supported by a powerful
body of artillery. Against such a force, conducted by skilful
generals, the ill-armed, ill-led, disorganised, and dispirited
rebels had little chance. The chief brunt of the action was
borne by the troops under Generals Johnston and Dundas.
For an hour and a half the rebels maintained their position
with great intrepidity, but then, seeing that they were on the
point of being surrounded, they broke, and fled in wild con-
fusion to Wexford, leaving the camp, which had been stained
with so much Protestant blood, in the hands of the troops.
Thirteen small cannon were taken there, but owing to the in-
experience of the gunners, and the great deficiency of am-
munition, they had been of little use. The loss of the King’s
troops in killed and wounded, appears to have been less than
a hundred; while that of the rebels was probably five or six
times as great.?

in this campaign. (Byrne’s Memoirs,

i, 148-163.) Byrne naturally mini-
mises the number of murders by the

appears from Gordon’s narrative. He
dishonestly calls Gordon ‘ the Orange
historian.’

rebels. Hesays that a clerical magis-
trate named Owens, who had been
conspicuous in putting pitched caps
on rebels, was among the prisoners at
Gorey, and was not further punished
than by apitched cap ;and he palliates
the misdeeds of the party, by accusing
the yeomen of murdering the wounded
who were left on the field. He says
nothing about the burning of Tinne-
hely, and represents rather more
fighting as having taken place than

' Cloney gives a full account of
the retreat, in which he took part.
(Personal Narratiwe, pp. 54-60.)
Compare ‘The Journal of a Field
Officer,’ in Maxwell, p. 141, and Hay,
pp. 200, 201.

2 Compare the accounts of Mus-
grave, Gordon, Hay, and Byrne (who
took part in the battle)... Musgrave
gives Lake’s despatches in his Ap-
pendix.

CH.. XXIxs CAPTURE OF ENNISCORTHY. 151

Enniscorthy was at the same time taken, after some fighting
in the streets. The troops, as usual, gave no quarter, and the
historians in sympathy with the rebellion declare that the
massacre extended to the wounded, to many who were only sus-
pected of disaffection, and even to some loyalists who had been
prisoners of the rebels. A Hessian regiment which had lately
come over, was especially noticed for its indiscriminate ferocity.
Many houses were set on fire, and among others one which was em-
ployed by the rebels as their hospital. It was consumed, andall
who were init perished. The number of the victims was at least
fourteen, and one writer places it as high as seventy. The rebel
historians describe this act as not less deliberate than the burning
of the barn of Scullabogue. Gordon learnt, on what appeared
to him good authority, ‘ that the burning was accidental ; the bed-
clothes being set on fire by the wadding of the soldiers’ guns,
who were shooting the patients in their beds.’!

Nothing now remained but the capture of Wexford. This
town, as we have seen, had been left in the hands of a Protestant
gentleman named Keugh, who was one of the most conspicuous
of a small group of brave and honourable men, who, under cir-
cumstances of extreme difficulty and danger, tried to give the
rebellion a character of humanity, and to maintain it on the
lines of the United Irishmen. He was powerfully supported by
Edward Roche, who was a brother of Father Philip Roche, and
himself a well-to-do farmer of the county. This man had been
sergeant in a yeomanry regiment, and had deserted to the rebels,
with most of the Catholics in his troop, at the beginning of the
rebellion. He was soon after elected ‘a general officer of the
United army of the county of Wexford ;’? and he issued, on
June 7,a very remarkable proclamation to the rebels at Wexford.
After congratulating his followers on the success that had so far
attended their arms, and dilating on the supreme importance
of maintaining a strict discipline, he proceeded : ‘In the moment

1 Gordon, p. 145; Hay, p. 228;
Cloney, p. 47. Taylor, who is a

sively well in action, but their deter-
mination to destroy every one they

strongly loyal historian, mentions
that the loyalist prisoners were, by
mistake, slaughtered by the soldiers.
(P. 119.) General Lake, in report-
ing the victory at Vinegar Hill,
says: ‘The troops behaved exces-

think a rebel is beyond description,
and wants much correction.’ ( Castle-
reagh Correspondence, i. 223.)

2 See, for many particulars about
Edward Roche, Crofton Croker’s notes
to Holt’s Memoirs, i. 65-69.

152 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX.
of triumph, my countrymen, let not your victories be tarnished
with any wanton act of cruelty ; many of those unfortunate men
now in prison are not your enemies from principle ; most of them,
compelled by necessity, were obliged to oppose you. Neither
let a difference in religious sentiments cause a difference among
the people. Recur to the debates in the Irish House of Lords
on February 19 last; you will there see a patriotic and enlight-
ened Protestant bishop [Down], and many of the lay lords,
with manly eloquence pleading for Catholic emancipation and
parliamentary reform, in opposition to the haughty arguments of
the Lord Chancellor, and the powerful opposition of his fellow-
courtiers. ‘To promote a union of brotherhood and affection
among our countrymen of all religious persuasions, has been our
principal object.
have associated for this laudable purpose, and no power on earth
shall shake our resolution. To my Protestant soldiers I feel
much indebted for their gallant behaviour in the field, where
they exhibited signal proofs of bravery in the cause.’!

A number of respectable inhabitants of Wexford, among
whom the Catholic priests deserve a prominent place,? rallied
round Keugh and Roche, and, at the constant risk of their own
lives, preserved Wexford for some weeks from the horrors of
Vinegar Hill and Scullabogue. The difficulty of their task was
enormous, for they had to deal with fierce, fanatical, and some-
times drunken mobs, led by men who had sprung from the very
dregs of the people, and maddened by accounts of military
excesses, which were almost daily brought into the town by the

We have sworn in the most solemn manner ;

1 Hay, pp. 162, 163.

2 Musgrave has done the utmost
in his power to blacken the Catholic
priests in Wexford; but nothing can
be stronger than the testimony in
their favour, of Jackson, who was
an Englishman, a Protestant, and a
loyalist, and who was prisoner in Wex-
ford during the whole siege. He says:
‘The conduct of the Roman Catholic
clerey of Wexford cannot be too
much commended. Dr. Caulfield, the
titular Bishop of Leighlin and Ferns,
Father Curran, Father Broe, and,
indeed, the whole of the priests and
friars of that town, on all occasions
used their interest and exerted their
abilities in the cause of humanity.

Every Sunday, after mass, they ad-
dressed their audience, and implored
them in the most earnest manner not
to ill-treat their prisoners, and not
to have upon their consciences the
reflection of having shed innocent
blood.’ (Jackson, Warrative, p. 54.)
The same writer says: ‘ From what
I saw while I was in confinement, or
could learn, I think myself bound
to say that, in my opinion, such of
the rebel chiefs as had been in re-
spectable situations, detested the
system of murder and robbery, which
was as universally adopted by the
upstart officers and unruly mob, over
whom they had little more than a
nomiral command.’ (P. 43.)

CH. XXIX. STATE OF WEXFORD. 153

many fugitives who sought refuge within it. It was necessary
to give some satisfaction to the more violent party, and a regular
tribunal was formed to try those who had committed crimes
against the people. I have already spoken of the manner in
which two informers named Murphy were put to death, and on
June 6, the day after the battle of New Ross, a party of rebels
came to Wexford from Enniscorthy, probably by order of the
revolutionary tribunal on Vinegar Hill, and after some resistance
carried ten prisoners from that town, who were in Wexford gaol,
back to Enniscorthy, and executed them there.! About ten
days later another party from the same town, having, it is said,
overpowered the guard at Wexford gaol, carried four more
prisoners to Vinegar Hill, where they were put to death A
proclamation was issued at Wexford, on June 9, declaring, in
the name ‘of the people of the county of Wexford,’ that four
magistrates, who were mentioned by name, had committed
‘the most horrid acts of cruelty, violence, and oppression,’
and calling on all Irishmen to make every exertion to lodge
them in Wexford gaol, for trial ‘before the tribunal of the
people.’

Such measures, however, were far from satisfying the Wex-
ford mob, and the rebel leaders themselves, and especially those
who were Protestants, were in constant, daily danger. On one
occasion especially, Keugh and the committee who acted with
him in managing the town, were attacked by a mob, and Keugh
was accused of being a traitor, in league with the Orangemen ;
but his eloquence and presence of mind, the ascendency of a
strong character, and the support of a few attached friends, enabled
him to surmount the opposition. Crowds of Protestants, hcw-
ever, who had already received protections from the priests, now

in many other parts of the country,

1 Compare Gordon, pp. 149, 150;
particularly at Vinegar Hill; but

Jackson, pp. 24, 25.

2 Hay, p. 199.

8 Jackson, p. 50.

4 Gordon, pp. 147,148. Musgrave,
pp. 464-466. Musgrave says: ‘I have
heard, from the concurrent testimony
of different persons who resided at
Wexford at this time, that nothing
but the humaneand active interference
of Generals Keugh and Harvey pre-
vented that indiscriminate slaughter
of Protestants there, which took place

when they lost their authority, the
bloody work began. . . . Some of the
gentlemen confined in the prison ship,
assured me that the rebel guards
frequently inveighed against Keugh,
and vowed vengeance against him
because he would not indulge the
people—that is, because he did his
utmost to restrain their desire for
carnage.’ (Pp, 465, 466.)

154 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXIX.

came to the Catholic chapels with their children to be baptised,
believing that this was their one chance of safety. It is but
justice to add, that some priests objected strongly to these forced
and manifestly insincere conversions, and only consented to
accept them at the urgent entreaty of men who believed that
their lives were at stake. Even Bagenal Harvey, and the other
Protestant leaders, though they did not abjure Protestantism,
thought it advisable to clear themselves from suspicion of
Orangism, by attending the Catholic chapel.’ At the same time,
some Protestants in Wexford appear to have remained at large
and unmolested, during the whole occupation, and among them
was the Protestant rector, who was much beloved on account of
his kindness to the poor.”

The Protestants, however, who had excited suspicion or un-
popularity, were soon confined under a strong guard, which was
the only means of securing their lives. The gaol, the market-
house, one of the barracks, and one or two ships in the harbour,
were filled with them, and about 260 male Protestants were
in custody. The prisoners confined in one of the ships appear
to have been treated with much harshness by the captain,
but on their complaint they were brought back to land, and
William Kearney and Patrick Furlong, who were placed at
the head of the gaol, discharged their task with distinguished
humanity and courage. Protestant women were not imprisoned,
and although they endured terrible agonies of anxiety, they were
treated on the whole with great forbearance, and appear to
have suffered no outrage. ‘Several persons,’ McNally wrote
to the Government on June 13, ‘who have escaped from Wexford,
say that the insurgents there have treated the women with
great respect, that sentinels have been placed on the houses
where Mrs. Ogle and other ladies reside, to protect them

from insult, and that nothing like religious persecution has
taken place.’ °

1 Jackson, p. 53.

2 Gordon, p. 147; Hay, pp. 142-
145. Ihave mentioned the desire of
the more respectable rebel leaders
that the Protestant service should
continue; but Barrington pretends
that the rector was compelled to
conform to Catholicism,

8 Taylor, p. 81; Hay, p. 126.

4 Thave already quoted the very
interesting diary of Mrs. Adams,
published in Croker’s Researches in
the South of Ireland. A short frag-
ment of the diary of another lady,
who was in the town, is given by
Musgrave.

5T Jn Way UNC S.n 19S,

CH. XXIX. ORANGE ADDRESSES. 155

The fact that Lord Kingsborough was among the prisoners,
added not a little tothe embarrassment of Keugh. Apart from
considerations of humanity, it was a matter of manifest policy
to preserve a hostage of such importance ; but as Lord Kings-
borough had commanded the North Cork Militia, he was
peculiarly obnoxious to the people. Again and again mobs
assembled round the house where he was confined, demanding
his execution ; but by the courageous interposition of the prin-
cipal inhabitants, and especially of the Catholic bishop, Dr.
Caulfield, he was preserved unscathed. The leader of the more
violent party appears to have been a man named Thomas Dixon,
who was the captain and part proprietor of a trading vessel in
the bay, and who had obtained some rank in the rebel force.
He seems to have been indefatigable in inciting the people to
murder, and his wife powerfully seconded him. A pitched cap,
which was said to have been found in the barracks of the North
Cork Militia, was carried on a pike through the streets, and a
warrant was shown authorising a sergeant of the regiment to
found an Orange lodge.! Nearly every Protestant was suspected
of being an Orangeman, and the belief that Orangemen had sworn
to exterminate the Catholics was almost universal.

The Orange Society took great pains to repudiate this
calumny. It had been introduced into Dublin in 1797, and soon
after, by order of the different lodges, an address, signed by
the recognised leaders of the society, was drawn up and widely
published, in which the members declared their perfect loyalty
and their readiness to serve the Crown against any enemy, but,
at the same time, disclaimed all persecuting intentions. ‘ We
solemnly assure you,’ they said, ‘in the presence of Almighty
God, that the idea of injuring any one on account of his religious
opinion, never entered our hearts. We regard every loyal sub-
ject as a friend, be his religion what it may: we have no enemy
but the enemies of our country.’? Many respectable Catholics
had signed an address, declaring their loyalty and detestation of
the rebellion, and this address at once elicited a response from
one of the largest Orange associations in Ulster. ‘ We have

1 Hay, pp. 175, 176. been drawn up in February. See
2 Saunders’s Newsletter, Jane 19, Cupple’s Principles of the Orange
1798. This address appears to have Association (1799).

156 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

with the greatest pleasure,’ they said, ‘seen declarations of
loyalty from many congregations of our Roman Catholic brethren,
in the sincerity of which we declare our firm confidence, and
assure them, in the face of the whole world, and of the Being we
both worship, though under different religious forms, that, how-
ever the common enemies of all loyal men may misrepresent the
Orangemen, we consider every loyal subject as our brother and
our friend, let his religious profession be whatit may, Weasso-
ciate to suppress rebellion and treason, not any mode of worship.
We have no enmity but to the enemies of our country.’!

Such declarations could hardly penetrate to the great masses
of the ignorant rebels, and they drank in readily the charges
against the Orangemen, which were sedulously spread, and which
were strengthened by the many acts of lawless violence that were
perpetrated by the yeomen. Bishop Caulfield, afterwards de-
scribing this period to Archbishop Troy, stated that, during the
first fortnight of the rebel rule of Wexford, the priests were
usually able to secure the safety of the Protestants, but that after
this ‘the evil, sanguinary spirit broke loose, and no protection
availed. . . . It soon became treason to plead for protection,
for they were all Orangemen, and would destroy us all. In
spite of the peculiar sanctity which in Ireland has always
attached to a Catholic bishop, Dr. Caulfield declares that, when
he attempted to prevent murder, his own life was in imminent
danger. He was told that his house would be pulled down or
burnt, and his head knocked off. Three or four priests supported
him with great courage and devotion, but the rest appear to
have been completely scared and cowed by the fierce elements
around them. ‘They ‘dared not show themselves or speak, for
fear of pikes,’ and they more than once fled in terror to a vessel
in the harbour.?

A curious incident occurred, which paints vividly the
terror and the credulity that prevailed. There was a cer-
tain Colonel Le Hunte, who, though a Protestant, had lived
for some time, apparently without disturbance, in a house in
Wexford, but his country house, which lay within a few miles of
the town, was searched by a party under the leadership of Dixon.
It was found that the drawing-room contained some furniture

1 Faulkner's Journal, June 16, 1798. 2 Plowden, ii. 750, 751.

CH. XxIx, LAST DAYS AT WEXFORD, 157

of an orange colour, aud among other articles two fire-screens,
decorated with orange ribbons and ornamented with various my-
thological figures, such as Hope with her anchor, Minerva with
her spear, blindfolded Justice, Vulcan and the Cyclops, Gany-
mede and the eagle. Dixon at once told the people that he had
found the meeting place and the insignia of the Orangemen, and
that these mysterious figures represented different forms of
torture, by which it was intended to put Catholic men, women,
and children to death. He carried the screens through the
streets of Wexford, and speedily raised an ungovernable mob.
They attacked the house where Colonel Le Hunte was staying
and would have murdered him in a few moments, if two Catholic
gentlemen had not, at the imminent risk of their lives, interfered,
pushed back the pikes which were directed against them, and,
by persuading the people that so grave a case demanded a
regular trial, succeeded in placing him in the security of the
prison. The mob were, however, so furious at being denied
immediate vengeance, that the lives of the whole town com-
mittee were for some time in the utmost danger.!

All this portended that the rebel rule in Wexford would not
end without a great catastrophe. English ships of war were
seen hovering around the town, and soon some gunboats blocked
the harbour, preventing all escape by sea, while from the land
side, fugitives poured daily in, bringing gloomy tidings of the
failure of the rebellion, of the burning of their houses, and of
the fury of the troops. Father Philip Roche, with the greater
part of the force with which he had retreated from Lacken Hill,
near New Ross, was now at the old rebel encampment on the
Three Rocks, outside Wexford, and he came alone into Wexford to
seek for support toattack General Moore, who was marching from
the neighbourhood of New Ross, to join in the attack against
Vinegar Hill. arly on the morning of the 20th, the drum
beat in Wexford, and the whole armed population, except a few
guards, were ordered to march to the camp at Three Rocks,’ and
that afternoon they attacked Moore’s troops at a place called
Goffsbridge, or Foulkes Mill; near the church of Horetown. The

1 Hay, pp. 197, 198; Musgrave, sonal Narrative, pp. 44-46.

pp. 470, 471; Gordon, pp. 148, 149; 2 Hay, pp. 204-207.
Plowden, ii. 741, 742; Jackson’s Per-

158 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

rebels are said to have been skilfully led, and they fought with
great obstinacy for about four hours, when they were beaten
back and retired to the Three Rocks.!

It was on that afternoon, when the chiefs and the bulk of the
armed population were absent from the town, that the massacre
of Wexford bridge took place. Dixon, disobeying the orders of
his superiors, refused to leave Wexford with the other captains,
and he had a great mob who were devoted to him. ‘They were
not, it appears, inhabitants of the town, but countrymen from the
neighbourhood. On the preceding night, he had brought into
the town seventy men from the northern side of the Slaney, and
he had himself gone through the district of Shilmalier, which
was thronged with fugitives from the country about Gorey, call-
ing them to come to Wexford to defend the deserted town.? He
distributed much whisky among his followers, and, at the head
of a large crowd, he took possession of the gaol and market-house,
and brought out the prisoners to be murdered, in batches of ten,
fifteen, and twenty. A few were shot in the gaol and in the
market-place, but by far the greater number were hurried to the
bridge. A black flag bearing the symbol of the Redemption,
and with the letters M.W.S., was carried before them.2 Dixon
and his wife, both on horseback, presided, and a vast crowd, con-
taining, it is said, more women than men, accompanied the

1 Hay, pp. 226, 227. See, too,
Maxwell, pp. 141, 142, and Sir John
Moore’s despatches, describing the
battle, in Musgrave, Appendix, pp.
156, 157.

2 This is the statement of Hay
(pp. 207-213), and it is confirmed by
better authority. Bishop Caulfield,
in a private letter to Archbishop Troy,
says: ‘I could not find that there
were more than two or three of this
town engaged in the massacres, for
the townsmen had been that morning
ordered out to campnear Enniscorthy,
and a horde of miscreants, like so
many bloodhounds, rushed in from
the country, and swore they would
burn the town if the prisoners
were not given up to them. (Plow-
den, ii. 751.) Lord Kingsborough
also, as we shall see, distinctly ex-
culpated the townsmen from com-
plicity in the massacre.

3 Musgrave (p. 485) and Taylor

(p. 121) say that these letters were
believed to mean ‘murder without
sin, an interpretation which appears
to me incredible. If the rebels
wished to convey this sentiment, they
could have doneso much more clearly:
they would not have used the invidi-
ous term ‘murder ;’ and it is exceed-
ingly improbable that a banner in-
tended to convey such a meaning,
should have been prepared before-
hand. Hay says that this black flag
had been carried by one particular
corps through the whole rebellion,
and a member of that corps told
Crofton Croker that the letters signi-
fied only, ‘ Marksmen, Wexford, Shil-
malier.’ Shilmalier was the barony
of Wexford, most famous for its
marksmen, and also, as we have seen,
that from which most of the actors
in this tragedy seem to have come.
(See a note to Holt’s Memoirs, i. 89,
90.)

MASSACRE OF WEXFORD BRIDGE. 159

CH. XXIX.

prisoners, most of them shouting with savage delight, though
some dropped on their knees and prayed. The prisoners were
placed in rows of eighteen or twenty, and the pikemen pierced
them one by one, lifted them writhing into the air, held them
up for a few moments before the yelling multitude, and then
flung their bodies into the river. One man sprang oyer the
battlement, and was shot in the water. Ninety-seven prisoners
are said to have been murdered, and the tragedy was prolonged
for more than three hours. So much blood covered the bridge,
that it is related that, when Dixon and his wife endeavoured to
ride over it, their frightened horses refused to proceed, and they
were obliged to dismount, Mrs. Dixon holding up her riding
habit lest it should be reddened in the stream.

One priest courageously attempted to stop the murders.
Whether the many others who were present in Wexford were
paralysed by fear, or ignorant of what was taking place, or con-
scious that they would be utterly impotent before a furious
drunken mob, will never be known.! Happily the tragedy was
not fully consummated. Lord Kingsborough, who was guarded
in a private house, was not molested. Some prisoners in the
gaol succeeded in concealing themselves,’ and the great majority
had not been brought out from their different places of confine-
ment, when Edward Roche, followed shortly after by Dick
Munk, the shoeblack captain, galloped into the town, and crying
out that Vinegar Hill was invested, and that every man was
needed to repel the troops, succeeded in drawing away the
crowd, and putting an end to the massacre.
half dead with fear, who were still on the bridge, were taken
back to the gaol.’

A few prisoners,

difference of statement about how

1 Taylor and Musgrave have ac-
cused Bishop Caulfield of having re-
fused, when asked, to interfere to
prevent the massacre ; but the bishop
published a pamphlet in which he
most solemnly denied the charge,
and declared that, as he was in his
house at some considerable distance
from the scene, he knew nothing of
what was passing. (Reply of the
Rev. Dr. Caulfield, and of the R.C.
Clergy of Weaxford, to the Misrepre-
sentations of Sir R. Musgrave (1801).
The courageousinterposition of Father
Curran is undoubted; but there is a

far it was effectual. Caulfield, in his
letter to Archbishop Troy, gives a
vivid picture of the terror of the
priests. (See Plowden, ii. 749-751,
761.)

* Col, Le Hunte was one of these.

5 T have given the best account I
can of this massacre; but the reader
who will compare the original autho-
rities, will find numerous inconsisten-
cies and discrepancies among them.
Jackson, who wrote his Personal
Narrative, was actually kneeling on
the bridge, waiting his turn to be

CH. XXIX.

160 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

The end was now very nearly come. Three armies were on
the march to Wexford, and it was plainly indefensible. In the
night of the 20th, Keugh and the principal inhabitants took”
counsel together, and they agreed that the only chance for safety
was to endeavour to obtain terms, and that the only means of
accomplishing this was by the help of Lord Kingsborough. They
desired to save their own lives, to prevent the town from being
given up to the mercy of an infuriated soldiery, and also to
avert a general massacre of the remaining prisoners, and perhaps
of the whole Protestant population, which would probably take
place before the arrival of the troops, if the rebels were driven
to absolute desperation. Bishop Caulfield and the other leading
priests took an active part in these discussions, and Lord
Kingsborough fully entered into their views. Lord Kings-
borough at first proposed that he should himself go to meet the
troops, but this plan was rejected, and early on the morning of
the 21st, Keugh formally placed the government of Wexford in
his hands, with the assent of the chief inhabitants of the town.
Lord Kingsborough on his side agreed, as far as lay in his
power, that ‘they should all be protected in person and
property, murderers excepted, and those who had instigated
others to commit murder; hoping that these terms might be
ratified, as he had pledged his honour in the most solemn
manner to have these terms fulfilled, on the town being sur-
rendered to him, the Wexford men not being concerned in the
massacre which was perpetrated by country people in their
absence.’! Dr. Jacob, who had been the mayor of the town
piked, when the rescue came. Taylor
was one of the forty-eight prisoners
who were confined in the market-
place, and one of nineteen who were
saved. (Hist. of the Rebellion, p.
124.) Musgrave, who relates the

story with his usual research, and his
usual violent and evident partisan-

the others, and he pretends (p. 221)
that only thirty-six persons were
murdered. This is inconsistent with
the statements of the other writers,
and the long period during which the
tragedy was going on makes it very
improbable. Gordon gives a list of
‘some of the persons massacred on

ship, gives an account which, he says,
he received from eye-witnesses, who
were ina house close to the bridge.
(Pp. 485-487.) Hay—who is quite as
violent a partisan on one side as Mus-
grave on the other—was in the town,
and (according to his own account)
exerted himself greatly to prevent
the massacre. His long and confused
story differs in several respects from

the bridge of Wexford,’ which com-
prises fifty-three names. (Appendix,
pp. 62, 63.) Bishop Caulfield, in a
letter evidently not meant for publi-
cation, says the rebels called the
prisoners out ‘by dozens’ to be exe-
cuted. (Plowden, ii. 750.)

} See an interesting letter written
in 1799 by Captain Bourke, an officer
of the North Cork Militia (who had

CH, XXIX, PROPOSALS OF SURRENDER. 161

previous to the insurrection, was at the same time invited to
resume his functions. Captain McManus, a liberated prisoner,
accompanied by Hay, was at once sent to meet General Moore
with the offer of surrender signed by Keugh, and ‘ by order of
the inhabitants of the town of Wexford.’ It stated that the
envoys were ‘appointed by the inhabitants of all religious per-
suasions, to inform the officer commanding the King’s troops,
that they were ready to deliver up the town of Wexford without
opposition, lay down their arms, and return to their allegiance,
provided their persons and property were guaranteed by the
commanding officer; and that they would use every influence
in their power to induce the people of the country at large to
return to their allegiance also.’ !

Accompanying these proposals was an urgent letter from
Lord Kingsborough, supporting the offer of capitulation, which,
he wrote, ‘I hope, for the sake of the prisoners here, who are
very numerous, and of the first respectability in the country,
will be complied with. The people here have treated their
prisoners with great humanity, and I believe will return to
their allegiance with the greatest satisfaction.’ In a postscript
he adds: ‘ Since I have written the within (sic), the inhabitants
have come to the resolution of investing the mayor, Dr. Jacob,
in his authority, and have liberated all the prisoners. I at
present command here, and have promised them the within
terms will be agreed to.’ ?

Moore had no power to accept such a capitulation, but he
at once transmitted these letters to General Lake, who replied
by a blunt and absolute refusal. ‘ Lieutenant-General Lake,’
he answered, ‘cannot attend to any terms offered by rebels in
arms against their sovereign, While they continue so, he must
use the force entrusted to him with the utmost energy for their
destruction. ‘To the deluded multitude he promises pardon on
their delivering into his hands their leaders, surrendering their
arms, and returning with sincerity to their allegiance.’ 'Vhig
been captured with Lord Kings- ant to surrender the government of

borough), describing the negotiation, Wexford, and that this step was
and authenticated by Lord Kings- taken on the motion of Hay.

borough (then Lord Kingston) him- 1 Ibid. See, too, Musgrave, pp.
self. (Hay’s Hist., Appendix, pp. 498, 499.

Xxviii-xxx.) It appears, from this 2 Record Office.

letter, that Keugh was at first reluct- 8 Annual Register, 1798. p. 128

VOL, VIII. M

162 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX-

answer, however, was not known in Wexford till after the sur-
render had been accomplished.

The situation there during all that day was perilous in the
extreme. That morning the distant cannonade of the battle at
Vinegar Hill was distinctly heard, and in a few hours the
defeated rebels who had escaped, came pouring into the town by
thousands. The worst consequences might be anticipated from
the presence of this vast, disorganised, infuriated, and panic-
stricken crowd, with armsin their hands; and Lord Kingsborough
and Keugh, who appear to have acted in close concert, went in
much alarm to the Catholic bishop. They represented that if
the rebel army ‘continued any time in the town, they would
proceed to murder all the prisoners, . . . and that if the
troops should overtake them in town, they would make a
general slaughter of them, and perhaps indiscriminately of
the inhabitants, and reduce the town to ashes; that the only
means of preventing these shocking disasters, was to get the
rebels out of town; that a strong representation of their own
danger, and of Lord Kingsborough’s negotiations with the
military commanders and Government, would have more weight
with the rebels than any exhortations or consideration of duty.’!
By the combined exertions of Keugh and of the Catholic
bishop and clergy, the rebel force was induced to leave the
town, one portion of them marching into the barony of Forth,
and the other in the opposite direction, crossing the bridge to
the eastern side of the Slaney. Keugh, relying probably on
the engagements of Lord Kingsborough, and determined at all
hazards to use his great influence to the very last, to save the
town from the imminent danger of massacre and plunder, re-
fused to leave it; and chiefly through his efforts, that terrible
day passed in Wexford unstained by blood. ‘There was no
prisoner put to death,’ wrote Bishop Caulfield, ‘no Protestant
murdered, no houses burnt (though several of the rebels

threatened, and some of them attempted to set fire to the town).
No disaster took place, all was saved.’

Hay, pp. 242-244. In a letter to borough.’ (Oustlereagh Correspond-
Castlereagh, Lake says: ‘You will ence, i, 223.

see by the inclosed letter and address ‘ See Bishop Caulfield’s statement
from Wexford, what an unpleasant of his conduct. (Plowden, ii. 738,
situation I am led into by Lord Kings- —_739.)

CH. XXIX, TROOPS OCCUPY WEXFORD. 163

Lord Kingsborough sent another messenger to General
Moore, but he never reached his destination, for he was shot by
a rebel whom he had met upon his way. General Moore soon
arrived within a mile of Wexford, and could see the rebel army
retreating, and he received one of the liberated prisoners, who
gave him an assurance of the peaceful disposition of the towns-
people. Moore’s troops, like all who were employed in Wexford,
were in a state of wild undiscipline, and in spite of the utmost
efforts of the brave and humane commander, they had committed
numerous outrages on their march. Moore, wishing to save
Wexford, encamped his army beyond its borders; but Captain
Boyd, the member for the town, entered it with a small number
of yeomen, and was soon after followed by two companies of the
Queen’s Royals, who, without resistance, took possession of it.
Thus, on June 21, Wexford once more passed under the dominion
of the King, having been for twenty-three days in possession of
the rebels.

If Moore, or any other general of ability, humanity, and
tact, had held the supreme command in Wexford, the rebellion
would probably have at once terminated. But now, as ever,
Lake acted with a brutal, stupid, and undiscriminating severity,
that was admirably calculated to intensify and to prolong the
conflagration. The general rule that in rebellions, offers of
clemency should be held out to the ignorant masses, while the
leaders should be treated with severity, may be justified by
evident considerations both of equity and of policy, but, like
every maxim of political conduct, its application should depend
largely on the special circumstances of the case. There is a
wide difference between men who have fomented, organised, and
directed a rebellion, and men who, finding themselves in the
_ midst of a rebellion which they had not made, were compelled,
under pain of death, to take a leading part in it, or were in-
duced to do so in order to prevent it from degenerating into a
mere scene of massacre and plunder, or because they believed
that they could not, in a time of danger, honourably abandon
their people. In the great convulsions of the State, men should
not be judged only on technical grounds of legal guilt, but
rather by the general course of their conduct, motives, and
influence. In most cases, no doubt, the peace of a nation is

mM 2

164 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxix.

best secured by striking severely at the leaders of rebellion, but -
it is sometimes through clemency to these that it can be most
speedily and most effectually restored.

Neither Lake nor Castlereagh showed the least regard for
these considerations. The first proceeding of the commander-
in-chief was to issue a proclamation for the arrest of the leaders,
and Lord Kingsborough’s negotiation had made this peculiarly
easy. Father Philip Roche, perceiving the rebellion to be hope-.
less, desired to negotiate for his troops on the Three Rocks, a
capitulation like that of the rebels at Wexford, and in order to
do so, he boldly came down alone and unarmed. On his way
he was seized, dragged off his horse, so kicked and buffeted, that
he was said to have been scarcely recognisable, then tried by
court-martial, and hanged off Wexford Bridge. He met his fate
with a dogged, defiant courage, declaring that the insurgents in
Wexford had been deceived, that they had expected a general
insurrection through Ireland, and that if the other counties had
done their duty, they would have succeeded. Military men,
who had watched the conduct of this priest during his short
command, and who discussed the chief battles of the rebellion
with him before his execution, are said to have come to the con-
clusion that he of all the rebel leaders was the most formidable,
for he had a true eye for military combinations. The result of
his arrest was that the main body of rebels on the Three Rocks,
under the command of another priest, at once marched towards
the county of Carlow, to add one more bloody page to the
rebellion.'

Another, and a more interesting victim, was Matthew Keugh,
the rebel governor of Wexford. Having refused to abandon
the town, he was at the mercy of the Government, and he was
at once tried by court-martial, and condemned to death.
Musgrave has noticed the eminent dignity, eloquence, and
pathos of his defence, and his unalterable courage in the face
of death, and he seemed chiefly anxious to show that he had
no part or lot in the massacre of Wexford Bridge. Lord
Kingsborough, Colonel Le Hunte, and several other respect-
able witnesses came forward, and proved that he had acted

1 Compare Plowden, ii. 763; of the ‘Field Officer’ in Maxwell,
Musgrave, p. 507; and the remarks pp, 141.

CH. XXIX. EXECUTION OF KEUGH. 165

on all occasions with singular humanity, that he had uniformly
endeavoured to prevent the effusion of blood, and that they
owed their lives to his active interference. It is certain, in-
deed, that it was mainly due to him that Wexford, until the
day before its surrender, was almost unstained by the horrors
that were so frequent at Vinegar Hill, and that its surrender
was at last peacefully effected ; and it is equally certain that
Keugh had again and again risked his life in stemming the rising
tide of fanaticism and blood. Urgent representations were
made to Lake to take these circumstances into consideration,
but Lake was determined to show his firmness. Keugh was
hanged off Wexford Bridge ; his head was severed from his body,
and fixed on a pike before the court house in Wexford, while
his body was thrown into the river.

In a strictly legal point of view, the position of Lake was
no doubt unassailable, and this was probably the only considera-
tion that presented itself to his mind. It is clear that Lord
Kingsborough had no authority to pledge the Government to
spare the lives and properties of the Wexford insurgents, though
by making this engagement he probably saved the town from
destruction, and the prisoners and other Protestant inhabitants
from murder. It is clear, too, that Keugh had been a leading
figure in the rebellion, and the fact that he had risen by his
ability during the American war from the position of private
to that of captain in the King’s army, and was actually in the
receipt of half-pay when the rebellion broke out, aggravated his
situation. Nor is it likely that he was one of those who joined
reluctantly, fearing death if they refused. In America his
mind, like that of many others, had received a republican bias.
His sympathy with the United Irishmen had been long avowed,
and had led to his removal from the magistracy in 1796, and
all accounts represent him as a man of commanding courage
and conspicuous ability, much more likely to influence than to
be influenced. There is no proof that he instigated the rebel-
lion; but when it had taken place, and when he found himself
called by acclamation to a post of prominence and danger, he
unhesitatingly accepted it. How he acted in a position which
was one of the most difficult that could fall to any human being,
has been already told. In some cases, no doubt, as in the execu-

166 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XxIx.

tion of the Murphys and the surrender of the Enniscorthy pri-
soners, he was compelled to yield to an irresistible clamour; but
on the whole, the ascendency which this humane and moderate
Protestant gentleman maintained in Wexford during three
terrible weeks, in which the surrounding country had been made
a hideous scene of mutual carnage, forms one of the few bright
spots in the dark and shameful history I am relating. He was
a man of competent fortune, well connected, and exceedingly
popular, and his persuasive eloquence, as well as a great
personal beauty, which is said to have survived even in death,!
no doubt contributed to his influence. It is scarcely probable
that it could have continued. In the last days of his rule it
was visibly waning, and Keugh is himself said to have pre-
dicted that he would not have lived forty-eight hours after
the complete triumph of the rebellion. He received the con-
solations of religion from the clergyman of Wexford, who
had been preserved by his protection, and he died declaring
that his only object had been to reform and improve the Con-
stitution.?

Several other executions either accompanied or immediately
followed the executions of Roche and Keugh, but only three
need be referred to here. There was Cornelius Grogan, the
infirm and almost half-witted, but very wealthy, country gentle-
man, who had been brought into Wexford immediately after its
surrender to the rebels. Though he had once been an Opposition

1 Barrington was at Wexford
shortly after the rebellion, and saw
the heads of the leaders outside the
court house. He says: ‘The muti-

any medical man to give the least
explanation of. (Barrington’s Per-
sonal Sketches, i. 276, 277.)

2 Interesting notices of Keugh

lated countenances of friends and re-
lations in such a situation would, it
may be imagined, give any man most
horrifying sensations! The heads of
Colclough and Harvey appeared black
lumps, the features being utterly un-
distinguishable ; that of Keogh was
uppermost, but the air had made
no impression on it whatever. His
comely and respect-inspiring face
(except the pale hue, scarcely to be
called livid), was the same as in life.
His eyes were not closed, his hair not
much ruffled—in fact, it appeared to
me rather as a head of chiselled
marble, with glass eyes, than as the
lifeless remains of a human creature.
This circumstance I never could get

will be found in Gordon, Taylor,
Jackson, and Musgrave. Compare,
too, the vivid sketch in Barrington’s
Personal Recollections, iii. 296-298.
Keugh had an elder brother—an en-
thusiastic loyalist—who lived with
him. When the rebellion broke out,
and Matthew Keugh became a rebel
leader, the loyalist brother was driven
to such despair, that he blew out his
own brains. In spelling the name of
the Wexford governor, I have followed
most of the Wexford writers, as well
as Musgrave and Lord Castlereagh ;
but Barrington (who was related to
him) calls him Keogh; and Taylor,
Keughe.

cu. Xxm EXECUTION OF GROGAN. 167

member of Parliament, and though he was on friendly terms
with some persons who joined in the rebellion, nothing in his
former life or conversation gave the slightest reason for believing
that he had any sympathy with the United Irishmen, or any
knowledge of their plans, until the day when he found his place
occupied by the rebels, and himself a prisoner in their, hands.
Whether he was compelled by force to join them, or whether,
as was maintained by the Government, he was induced to do so.
in order to save his house from plunder and his. property from
ultimate confiscation, it is difficult to say. An old, feeble in-
valid, with no strength of intellect or character, he was very
passive in their hands. He was quite incapable of appearing
in the field or, indeed, of holding a weapon, but the rebels gave
him the title of commissary—it is said, through the belief that
this would make his numerous tenants more willing to supply
them—and it was proved that he signed an order for a woman
to receive some bread from the rebel stores. After the surrender
of Wexford, he was carried back to his own country house, where
he made no attempt to conceal himself. He was at once-seized,.
tried and condemned by a court-martial which appears-to have
been in many respects exceedingly irregular, and hanged off
Wexford Bridge. The spectacle of this feeble old man, with
his long white hair streaming over his shoulders, wrapped in
flannels and tottering on his crutches painfully but very placidly
to the gallows, was certainly not fitted to inspire the people with
much reverence for the law, and it is said that Bagenal Harvey,
who was executed at the same time, openly declared that,.
»vhoever might be guilty, Grogan at least was wholly innocent.
Like Sir Edward Crosbie, he had an old faithful servant, who
stole his head from. the pike on which it was transfixed, and.
secured for it a Christian burial.

1A number of facts from differ-
ent quarters about Grogan, have
been brought together by Dr.
Madden. (United Irishmen, iv. 502-
513.) Compare Musgrave, pp. 447,
448; Appendix, p. 1385, Barrington,
who had known Grogan intimately
for several years, declares most em-
phatically that he was ‘no more a rebel
than his brothers, who signalised
themselves in battle as loyalists ;’ and

he speaks very strongly of the illegal
constitution of the court-martial that
tried him. (Personal Recollections,
iii. 298-300.) There is an elabo-
rate examination, and a very severe
condemnation of this court-martial,
in a privately printed law book,
called Reports of Interesting Cases
argued in Ireland (1824), by RB. Rad-
ford Rowe. A long chapter is devoted
to the Irish courts-martial,

168 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.) XiKs

Bagenal Harvey at first believed that the engagement of
Lord Kingsborough would secure his life, and retired from
Wexford to his own country house; but on learning that no
terms would be granted to the leaders, he fled with a young and
popular country gentleman named John Colclough, a member
of one of the leading families in Wexford, who like himself had
taken part in the rebellion. The two fugitives, together with
the wife and child of Colclough, were concealed in a cavern in
one of the Saltee Islands, but were soon discovered and brought
to Wexford. They were both undoubtedly guilty of treason.
Colclough, though he had taken no prominent part in the
rebellion, and had certainly no concern in any of its atrocities,
had been in the rebel ranks in the battle of New Ross. Bagenal
Harvey, as we have seen, had been marked out by his known
and avowed sympathies as a leader of the rebellion in Wexford,
and had been for a short time its acknowledged commander-in-
chief. His claims, however, to the clemency of the Government
were very powerful. When Wexford was first threatened by
the rebels, the King’s representative in it had not hesitated to
implore Harvey to use his influence to obtain favourable terms,
and it was chiefly through that influence that the capture of
the town had been almost unstained by blood. His acceptance
of the post of commander ef the rebels, was probably quite as
much due to compulsion as to his desire. He saved many
lives, and he steadily set his face against murder and outrage.
It is, however, one of the worst features of the repression in
Ireland, that such considerations were scarcely ever attended
to, and were sometimes even made use of against the prisoner.
‘The display of humanity by a rebel,’ writes the most temperate
and most truthful of the loyal historians, ‘ was in general, in the
__-trials by court-martial, by no means regarded as a circumstance
in favour of the accused. Strange as it may seem in times of
cool reflection, it was very frequently urged as a proof of guilt.
Whoever could be proved to have saved a loyalist from assassi-
nation, his house from burning, or his property from plunder,
was considered as having influence among the rebels, conse-
quently a rebel commander.’ !

: ' Gordon, p. 187; see, too, Appen- thank my God, that no person can
dix, p. 85. Gordon relates the ex- prove me guilty of saving the life or
clamation of one ef the rebels: ‘I property of anyone,’

EXECUTION OF BAGENAL HARVEY, 169

CH. XXIX.

Bagenal Harvey had acquired the reputation of a very brave
man, but he appears now to have been completely unnerved.
He was sunk in the deepest dejection, and his demeanour
contrasted somewhat remarkably with that of Roche, Keugh,
Grogan, and Colclough. The massacre of Scullabogue seems to
have broken his heart, and from that time he had little. influ-
ence, and no hope in the struggle. Like Keugh, and like Bishop
Caulfield, too, he appears to have been firmly convinced that a
spirit had arisen among the rebels which, if not speedily checked,
must turn the movement into a general massacre—a massacre
not only of loyalists and Protestants, but also of the most respect-
able and the most moderate of its leaders.!. He stated in his
defence, that he had accepted the command of the rebellion
chiefly in order to prevent it from falling into much more
dangerous hands; that he had done his best to keep it within
the bounds of humanity; that he had seen with horror the
crimes and the fanaticism it had engendered, and that he had
always been ready to accede to proposals for restoring order and
government. Few things, indeed, can be sadder than the death
of a leader, who is conscious in his last moments that the cause
for which he dies was a mistaken one, and that its triumph
would have been a calamity to his country. Bagenal Harvey
was not a wise or a superior man, but he was humane, honour-
able, and well-meaning, and it is not probable that motives of
personal interest or ambition played any great part in shaping
his unhappy career.

Courts-martial, followed by immediate executions, were now
taking place in many parts of the county. Sixty-five persons
were hanged from Wexford Bridge on the charge of either

_1 ©Jn the local and short-lived in-
- gsurrection in the county of Wexford,
the tendency of affairs was so evident
to Bagenal Harvey and other Protes-
tant leaders, that they considered their
doom as inevitable, and even some
Romish commanders expressed appre-
hensions. Thus, Esmond Kyan, one
of the most brave and generous
among them, declared to Richard
Dowse, a Protestant gentleman of
the county of Wicklow, whom he had
rescued from assassins, that his own
life was irredeemably forfeited; for

if the rebellion should succeed, his
own party would murder him; and if
it should not succeed, his fate must
be death by martial law—which hap-
pened, according to his prediction.
Even Philip Roche, whose character as
a priest might be supposed to insure
his safety with his own followers,
made a similar declaration to Walter
Greene, a Protestant gentleman of
the county of Wexford, whose life he
had protected’ (Gordon’s History,
pp. 210, 211.)

170 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXIX,

having taken a leading part in the rebellion, or being con-
cerned in some of the acts of murder that accompanied it ;! but
Dixon, the author of the Wexford massacre, was not among
them, for he succeeded in escaping, and was never heard of again.
The executions, however, were far less horrible than the indis-
criminate burning of houses and slaughter of unarmed men, and
even of women, by the troops. They were now everywhere hunt-
ing down the rebels, who had dispersed by thousands after the
battle of Vinegar Hill and the surrender of Wexford, and who
vainly sought a refuge in their cabins. Discipline had almost
wholly gone. Military licence was perfectly unrestrained, and the
massacres which had taken place—magnified a hundredfold by
report—had produced a savage thirst for blood.. The rebel his-
torians draw ghastly pictures of the stripped, mutilated, often
disembowelled bodies, that lined the roads and lay thick around
the burning villages, and they say that long after peace had re-
turned, women and children in Wexford fled, scared as by an
evil spirit, at the sight of a British uniform.? The sober and
temperate colouring of the loyalist historian I have so often
quoted, is scarcely less impressive. ‘From the commencement
of the rebellion, writes Gordon, ‘soldiers, yeomen, and supple-
mentaries, frequently executed without any trial such as they
judged worthy of death, even persons found unarmed in their
own houses.’ ‘I have reason to think that more men than fell
in battle, were slain in cold blood. No quarter was given to
persons taken prisoners as rebels, with or without arms.’ ‘The
devastations and plundering sustained by the loyalists were not
the work of the rebels alone. Great part of the damage was
committed by the soldiery, who commonly completed the ruin of
deserted houses in which they had their quarters, and often
plundered without distinction of loyalist and croppy. The
Hessians exceeded the other troops in the business of depreda-
tion, and many loyalists who had escaped from the rebels were
put to death by these foreigners.’ 3

1 See the list in Musgrave’s Appen- were Protestants. (Pp. 180-184.)

dix, 160. These executions, however,
extended over the whole period from
June 21, 1798, to Dec. 18, 1800.
Gordon states that nine leaders were
hanged on June 25; three others on
the 28th. Four only of these leaders

2 See Hay, pp. 243, 247, &c.

8 Gordon, pp. 188, 197, 222. Hay
fully agrees with Gordon in giving
the first place in these atrocities to
the ‘Hompesch Dragoons,’ (P. 247.)
I may mention that, in 1770, Lord

CH, XXIX. ATROCITIES ON BOTH SIDES,

In two respects the conduct of the troops compared very un-
favourably with that of the rebels. Though the latter had com-
mitted great numbers of atrocious murders, it is acknowledged
on all sides that they abstained to a most remarkable degree
from outrages on women,! while on the other side this usual
incident of military licence was terribly frequent.. Al-
though, too, it is quite certain that the rebellion assumed in
Wexford much of the character of a savage religious war, and
that numbers of Protestants were murdered who had given no
real cause of offence except their religion, the rebels very rarely
directed their animosity against Protestant places of worship.
The church of Old Ross was, I believe, the only one that they
deliberately burnt, though in the general conflagrations that
took place, a few others may have been destroyed or plundered.
But there were large districts over which not a Catholic chapel
was left standing by the troops, and Archbishop Troy drew up
a list of no less than thirty-six that were destroyed in only six
counties of Leinster.?

Apart, indeed, from the courage which was often displayed
on both sides, the Wexford rebellion is a dreary and an ignoble
story, with much to*blame and very little to admire. It is like
a page from the history of the Thirty Years’ War, of the sup-
pression of La Vendée, of a Turkish war, or of a war of races in
India, though happily its extreme horrors extended only over a
small area, and lasted only for a few weeks. Though fanaticism
played some part, and revenge a great part, in the terrors of the
repression, the remarkable concurrence of both loyal and dis-
loyal writers in attributing the worst excesses to Germans and
Welshmen, who had never been mixed up in Irish quarrels, seems
to show that mere unchecked military licence was stronger than

Chatham had suggested that, if Ire-
land was ever invaded by a powerful
foreign army, witharms ready to be put
into the handsof the Roman Catholics,
the task of defending it should be
largely entrusted to a subsidised force
of German Protestants. (Thackeray’s
Life of Chatham, ii. 222.)

1 Compare Gordon, pp. 213, 214;
Hay, p. 247. Gordon says he has
‘not been able to ascertain an in-
stance to the contrary in the county
of Wexford, though many beautiful

young women were absolutely in the
power of the rebels.’

2 See many statistics about chapel-
burning in Madden, i. 349-351.
Gordon says that hardly one chapel
in the extent of several miles round
Gorey escaped burning. (Pp. 199, 200).
Bishop Caulfield, in his pamphlet in
reply to the misrepresentations of Sir
R. Musgrave, said: ‘In the extent of
nearly fifty miles from Bray to Wex-
ford, almost every Roman Catholic
chapel was laid in ashes.’ (P, ii.)

172 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXIX.

either, and there appears to have been little or no difference in
point of ferocity between the Irish yeomanry, who were chiefly
Protestant, and the Irish militia, who were chiefly Catholic."
Such a state of things was only possible by a shameful neglect
of duty on the part of commanding officers; and the fact that it
was not universal, proves that it was not inevitable. Gordon
has left the most emphatic testimony to the excellent discipline
and perfect humanity of the Scotch Highlanders, who were
commanded by Lord Huntley, and of the Durham Fencible
Infantry, who were commanded by, Colonel Skerrit, and a few
other names are remembered with honour.? But in general the
military excesses were very shameful, and they did much to
rival and much to produce the crimes of the insurgents.

By this time, however, a great change had taken place in
the Government of Ireland. We have seen that Lord Camden
had long wished to be relieved from his heavy burden, and had
represented that in the present dangerous situation of the country
the office of Lord Lieutenant and the office of Commander-in-
Chief should be united in the person of some skilful and popular
general. The Government at Jast acceded to his wish, and Lord
Cornwallis, who, in spite of the disaster of Yorktown, was re-
garded as the ablest of the English generals in the American
war, was induced to accept the double post. He arrived in
Dublin on June 20, and his administration opens a new and
very memorable page in the history of Ireland.

1 See the very emphatic statements of Lord Cornwallis. (Cornwallis Corre-
spondence, ii. 357, 369.)
2 Gordon, pp. 197, 198,

CH. Xxx. SITUATION OF THE COUNTRY. 173

CHAPTER XXX,

Waen Lord Camden resigned the viceroyalty, it was the strong
belief of the Government in Ireland that the rebellion was still
only in its earlier stages. In Wexford the fire then burnt with
undiminished fury, and it was regarded as not only possible, but
in a high degree probable, that the prolongation of the struggle
in that county, or the appearance of a French expedition on the
Trish coast, or a single rebel success, would be sufficient to throw
the whole land into flames. The large reinforcements which were —
at last passing from England to Ireland, and the rapid arming
and organisation of the Protestant population, had placed a very
formidable force at -the disposal of the Government; but the
omens all pointed to an extended, desperate, and doubtful civil
war, and it was felt that a military governor of great ability and
experience was imperatively needed. But in the last days of the
Camden administration, the prospect had materially changed.
The French had not arrived. It was becoming evident that Ulster
was not disposed to rise. The Catholic province of Connaught
continued perfectly quiet. In Munster there had been a small
rising, in a corner of the county of Cork, but it had not spread,
and it was completely put down on June 19, while the means
at. the disposal of the Government were at last sufficient to
. give a decisive blow to the rebellion in Wexford. The capture
of the rebel camp on Vinegar Hill, and the reconquest of the town
of Wexford, took place immediately after the arrival of Lord
Cornwallis in Ireland, but the whole merit of them belongs to
the previous administration. The rebellion was now broken and
almost destroyed, and the task which henceforth lay before the
Government was much more that of restoring order and checking.
_ erime than of reconquering the country.

174 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX

The rebels were so discouraged and hopeless, that they would
have gladly dispersed if they could have obtained any security
for their lives. For some time, indeed, fear or desperation had
probably contributed quite as much as any genuine fanaticism to
keep them together. ‘Their leaders,’ wrote Alexander, as early
as June 10, ‘inflict instant death for disobedience of orders,
but notwithstanding numbers wish to desert; but, I think un-
fortunately, their houses are destroyed, their absence marked,
and until it is wise to grant a general amnesty, no individual,
irritated as the soldiery are, can with safety leave their main
body.’! If Lake had accepted the overtures of Father Roche,
the chief body of the rebels would have almost certainly gladly
laid down their arms ; but when they found that their chief did
not return, they felt that they must look to their pikes alone for
safety.

We have seen that the anxiety of the rebels to place at their
head, men whom they recognised as their superiors in education
and social position, had more than once triumphed over the
difference of creed, but no Protestant, and no Catholic layman,
could touch the chords of confidence and fanaticism like their
priests. It would, indeed, be a gross injustice to describe the
priests as generally in favour of the rebellion. I have already
referred to the loyal attitude of some of their bishops, and to the
address of the professors at Maynooth, and many humbler priests
acted in the same spirit at a time when intimidation from their
own flocks and outrages by Protestants made their position
peculiarly difficult. Higgins appears to have been very intimate
with priests of this kind, and at a time when the anti-popery
fanaticism was at its height, he dwelt strongly upon their
services. He assured the Ministers, that they would find no
means of obtaining arms so efficacious as a promise of pardon
proclaimed from the Catholic altars. He reminded them that,
when the rebellion was raging, Father Ryan, the parish priest
of Clontarf, having first made terms with Beresford and others to
secure his people from molestation, exerted himself with such
success, that in five days, through his influence, no less than nine
carts full of weapons were surrendered. He mentioned that it
was through another priest, who officiated at ‘Adam and Eve

1 Alexander to Pelham, June 10, 1798.

REBEL PRIESTS. 175

CH, XXX.

Chapel,’ that he was enabled to inform the Government of the plot
to begin the rebellion by an attack on the two Dublin gaols and a
release of the prisoners, and that it was through the same priest
that the intended desertion to the rebels of a corps of yeomen at
Rathfarnham became known ; and he gave a curious description
of the system of intimidation, which alone prevented other priests
from denouncing secret oaths.'_ In many parts of the country,
it is true, great numbers of the lower priests were rebels at
heart, but Catholic writers pretend that no parish priest took
an open part in the rebellion,’ and that even in the county
of Wexford only about fifteen priests actually appeared with
the rebels in the battle-field. They had proved the most suc-
cessful leaders, but they were now a dwindling body. Father
Roche had been hanged off Wexford Bridge. Father Michael
Murphy had fallen in the attack on Arklow. Father Kearns
had been wounded at Enniscorthy, and though he soon appeared
again with the rebels, he was now lying concealed in a farmhouse
near Wexford. But Father John Murphy of Boulavogue, who
began the rebellion in Wexford, was still with the main body of
rebels on the Three Rocks Mountain, and he commanded them
in their last serious campaign.

Even after the surrender of Wexford, his force igs said to
have amounted to 15,000 men, but the desertions were then so
rapid and so general, that two days later it had dwindled to
5,000 or 6,000.3 He probably felt that he had committed him-
self beyond retreat, and he had always been opposed to surrender,

1 ¥, H., Aug. 22,1798; March 18,
1801. In the former of these letters,
Higgins describes an after-dinner
conversation with several respectable
priests. They deplored that the lower
orders were not giving up their arms.

Higgins asked why they did not
follow Father Ryan’sexample. They
said they had no orders, and they
added, that they had at first strongly
opposed unlawful oaths, ‘but some
well-known leaders (which they al-
lowed to be Keogh, McCormick,
Byrne, Dease, and Hamill) went
round to the several chapels, and _in-
formed the priests, if they should in
any manner whatever presume to
interfere, or to advise, or to admonish

_ the people on political subjects, or

against the means of their obtaining
their rights, the different committees
who collected for the support of their
chapels, and for the maintenance of
the priests, had so settled that they
should not get as much asa single six-
pence to support them, and let those
who cannot be silent, go to the Go-
vernment for support. Their having
no revenue but the casual collections

_and charitable donations to exist on,

[they] alleged that the threat forced
compliance.’ (I.8.P.0.)

* Dr. Caulfield’s Reply to Sir R.
Musgrave, p. 5.

3 Byrne’s Memoirs, i. 204, 206.
Byrne was one of the commanders of
this expedition, and describes it at
length,

176 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXX,

but he perceived that in Wexford the rebellion was burnt out
and exhausted, and when the arrest of Father Roche placed him
at its head, he determined to make a desperate effort to carry it
into the almost virgin fields of Carlow and Kilkenny. His army
left the Three Rocks early on the morning of the 22nd; crossed
the battle-field where Father Roche had fought General Moore
two days before, and which was still strewn with unburied
corpses and broken carts; traversed an opening called Scollogh
Gap, in the range of hills which separates the counties of Wexford
and Carlow, and scattered a little loyalist force which attempted
to defend a village called Killedmond, on the Carlow side of
the boundary. ‘This village was burnt to the ground, either by
the rebels or by the troops.!. The rebels burned every slated
house on their march, ostensibly lest it should furnish shelter
to the troops, probably really because such houses usually
belonged to Protestants and loyalists.

Their immediate object was to reach Castlecomer, a little town
in the county of Kilkenny, which is now so sunk in importance
that it is not even connected with a railway, and which will
probably scarcely be known by name to the majority of my
readers. It lies, however, in the heart of one of the very few
extensive coal districts in Ireland, and at the close of the
eighteenth century it was an important place, and the centre of
a large population of colliers.2 These men had taken part in
many disturbances, and Father John believed that they could be
readily persuaded to join him.

The expedition had little result, except to bring down ruin
and desolation on a peaceful country, and to furnish additional
evidence of the hollowness and unreality of the political element
in the rebellion. On the 23rd, some Wexford Militia and a
troop of dragoon guards attempted to prevent the rebels from
crossing the Barrow, but they totally failed, and a considerable
body of Wexford Militia were taken prisoners. They were most
of them Catholics, and appear to have readily joined the rebels;
but seven Protestant prisoners, who were accused of being

1 Gordon says, by the rebels (p. was said to clear 10,0002. a year
165); Byrne says, the troops set fire from the coal-fields on his estate.
to the houses; but Father Murphy, See, too, Griffith’s Geological and
to the barracks. Mining Report of the Leinster Coal

2 In the Hibernian Gaxzetteer(1789) District (1814); and also Parl, Hist.
it is stated, that Lord Castlecomer xxxiy. 883.

PRESENTED 20 S72. MARY'S COLLEGE Lao:
BY REV. T. CALLAGHAN

CH. Xxx. FATHER MURPHY’S MARCH. WG

Orangemen, were put to death in cold blood on the accusation,
according to one account, by the hands of their former comrades.}
On the 24th, there was much confused fighting. Castlecomer
was plundered. Many houses were burnt. The barracks of
Dunain, three miles from Castlecomer, were attacked, but bravely
and successfttly defended, and then, on the approach of a large
force from Kilkenny, under Sir Charles Asgill, the rebels withdrew
to the high ground. Nota spark of genuine fanaticism, not a sign
of real political feeling, was shown by the population. Many
colliers, it is true, joined the rebels, as they would have joined
any turbulent or predatory body, and they shared in the plunder
of Castlecomer; but almost immediately after, they began to
desert, and the more intelligent of the rebels saw plainly that
any attempt to advance towards Kilkenny would be madness.
‘Nothing, writes Byrne very bitterly, ‘but the certainty that
we should be joined by the mass of the population, could have
warranted such a proceeding; and to the shame of the people
of that country be it said, they preferred to bow in abject
slavery, and crouch beneath the tyrant’s cruelty, sooner than
come boldly to take the field with us.’ ?

The rebels passed the night of the 24th in the Queen’s
County, but there their reception was equally chilling. ‘Seeing
not the least disposition on the part of its inhabitants,’ says
Byrne, ‘either to aid or assist us in our present struggle to
shake off the cruel English yoke, we began our movement on
the 25th to approach as near as we could that day to Scollogh
Gap, Mount Leinster, and Blackstairs.’* After a weary march,
during which they appear to have met with absolutely no
sympathy or encouragement,‘ the rebels, exhausted with fatigue,
bivouacked late in the evening of the long, sultry day, on Kil-
comney ° Hill, near the pass of Scollogh Gap. That night such
‘of the colliers as had not previously deserted, abandoned them,
and they stole a great part of the firearms of their sleeping
comrades.®

On the 26th, Sir Charles Asgill, at the head of 1,100 men,

1 Compare Byrne, i. 212; Gordon, 2 Byrne, ii. 223,
p. 166; Cloney’s Personal Narrative, 8 Thid. p. 224.
p. 82; Musgrave, pp. 532, 533. Mus- 4 Thid. p. 225; Cloney’s Personal
grave says nine prisoners were then Narrative, p. 83.
put to death, and two others shortly 5 Or Kilconnell.
. after. 6 Byrne, i, 226; Cloney, p. 83.

VOL. VIII. N

178 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

and supported by a detachment of 500 Queen’s County Militia,
attacked and defeated the rebels on Kilcomney Hill. General
Asgill stated in his official report, though probably with great
exaggeration, that the rebels lost more than 1,000 men as well
as ten cannon, and that on his own side not more than seven men
were killed and wounded. ‘Some soldiers,’ he adds, ‘ who were
made prisoners the day before, and doomed to suffer death, were
fortunately relieved by our troops.’! The rebels were not effec-
tually surrounded or pursued, for the great majority of them
escaped or fought their way through Scollogh Gap into the
county of Wexford, but they appear there to have been com-
pletely broken. and demoralised, and they speedily dispersed.
They had lost their leader, Father John Murphy of Boulavogue.
There is some uncertainty about his fate, one account stating
that he fell unnoticed early in the battle, another that he was
taken by some yeomen and hanged at Tullow.? The troops of Sir
C. Asgill are accused of having committed horrible excesses.at
Kilcomney, spreading themselves over the country, plundering
and burning numerous houses, and killing in cold blood more than
a hundred inoffensive persons who had shown no sympathy
with the rebels, many of them being women and children.
The account of this massacre is exceedingly circumstantial, and
many names are given.’ Unfortunately there is nothing in the

1 See Sir Charles Asgill’s report to
Lord Castlereagh, June 27; Sawnders’s
Newsletter, Jane 28; Madden, iv. 417.
Miles Byrne, who took a prominent
part in the battle, gives a totally dif-
ferent account of it, describing it as
an unsuccessful attempt of Sir C.
Asgill to cut off the retreat of the
rebels; and declaring that in the fight
the soldiers suffered most, though the
Enelish general ‘preferred a more safe
and easy victory; running with his
army through the districts adjoining
Kilcomney, and, instead of pursuing
and fighting witb us in the field, mur-
dering in cold blood the unarmed, in-
offensive inhabitants, who never left
their homes.’ He says: ‘The hired
press of the English ascendency of
that day, would have it that we aban-
doned ten pieces of artillery and
quantities of baggage, and had thou-
sands killed and wounded. We had
no artillery to abandon, never having

had any since we left Wexford on June
21; and, as to losses sustained, ours
was far less than the enemy’s.’ (Pp.
228, 229.) I cannot understand
where the rebels got their cannon
from, and Byrne can hardly have been
ignorant of whether there were or
were not cannon in his army. On
the other hand, Asgill, in his official
despatch, expressly says that he took
ten cannon, and he cannot have been
mistaken. Compare also the account
of this battle in Gordon, pp. 168, 169.

2 Compare Byrne, i. 229, 230; Gor-
don, p. 185: Cloney, p. 86; Musgrave,
p- 544. Musgrave gives an interest-
ing description of the execution of
Murphy at Tullow, but says that
another priest of the same name fell
in the battle.

8 See the very detailed account in
Cloney, pp. 83-86 ; and compare Byrne,
i, 229, and Gordon, p. 168.

CH. XXX, MASSACRES OF REBELS. 179

conduct of this horrible war to raise any strong presumption
against it, though it has probably been told with the usual sup-
pressions and exaggerations. Acts of this kind may be partly
explained by the fact that defeated rebels often sought refuge
in the neighbouring cottages, and as they wore no uniforms, were
undistinguishable from the peasants.'_ That atrocious military
licence prevailed, and that great numbers of persons who were
not only unarmed, but perfectly innocent, were killed during the
struggle, is unfortunately beyond all reasonable doubt, and is
fully admitted by the more temperate of the loyalist writers.
‘The accounts that you see of the numbers of the enemy de-
stroyed in every action,’ writes Lord Cornwallis at this time,
‘are, I conclude, greatly exaggerated. From my own knowledge
of military affairs, 1 am sure that a very small proportion of
them only, could be killed in battle, and I am much afraid that
any man in a brown coat who is found within several miles of
the field of action is butchered without discrimination.’ ?

The reader will remember that the rebel army, after the
surrender of Wexford, had divided into two parts. We have
followed the fortunes of the larger one, which was commanded
by Father John Murphy. The fortunes of the smaller one may
be soon told.

The town of Gorey had passed through several vicissitudes
in the course of the rebellion. The refugees who had fled from
it to Arklow, returned to their homes on June 20, while the
battle on Vinegar Hill was taking place. A large part of the
rebel army in that battle had come from the neighbourhood of
Gorey, and when the rebels were defeated, and in a great mea-
sure dispersed to their homes, a small party of seventeen Gorey
yeomanry cavalry ‘had the courage and temerity to scour the
country in search of rebels, with the assistance of some others
who had joined them, and killed about fifty men, whom they
found in their houses or straggling homeward from the rebel army.’
This act was followed by a speedy and terrible retribution. A
party of 500 rebels, including some of the kinsmen of those
who had been massacred, and under the command of a gentle-

1 See, on the indiscriminate pp. 125,126.
slaughter often due to this cause, the 2 Cornnallis Correspondence, ii,
- Narrative of what passed at Killala, 355,
N 2

180 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

man named Perry, heard of the slaughter and of the weakness
of the party that perpetrated it, and they at once proceeded to
Gorey, determined to avenge it. The refugees who had so lately
returned from Arklow endeavoured to escape there again; the yeo-
manry, numbering, between infantry and cavalry, thirty-one men,
tried to cover their flight, and killed seven of the rebels, but they
soon found that they were on the point of being surrounded,
and they then broke and fled. The sequel of the story may
be told by Gordon. ‘The refugees, he says, ‘ were slaughtered
along the road to the number of thirty-seven men, besides a few
who were left for dead, but afterwards recovered. No women or
children were injured, because the rebels, who professed to act
on a plan of retaliation, found on inquiry that no women or
children of their party had been hurt.’ The day on which the
tragedy took place was long remembered in Wexford as ‘ Bloody
Friday.’ !

The party which attacked Gorey was detached from a larger
body, who now succeeded in penetrating into Wicklow, and were
joined by some rebels who had risen in that county. They
were commanded by men of higher social position than we
usually find in the rebellion. Anthony Perry, Esmond Kyan,
Edward Fitzgerald, and Garret and William Byrne, were all
either landed gentry, or belonged to the families of landed gentry,
in the counties of Wexford and Wicklow, and some of them en-
joyed a high reputation for integrity and benevolence.? On the
morning of June 25 they attacked Hacketstown, which lies within
the borders of the county of Carlow, and which had already been
unsuccessfully attacked on May 25. A small force of yeomanry
and militia, amounting probably to less than 200 men, and com-
manded by Captain Hardy and Lieutenant Gardiner, defended it,
and met the rebels outside the town, but they soon found them-

1 Gordon, pp. 156-158; Appendix,
p. 90. Musgrave prints an affidavit
truly describing this as a massacre of
unarmed Protestants; but, as Gordon
justly says, ‘we are not informed in
this affidavit that a considerable
number of Romanists had that day
been put to death in and about Gorey,
some of whom were kinsmen of those
who were most active afterwards in
this massacre of the Protestants.’

2 The reader may find several in-

teresting particulars about these men,
drawn from different sources, in Crof-
ton Croker’s notes to Holt’s Memoirs,
i. 54-61. Perry, according to Gordon,
had had his hair cut away and its
roots burned by ‘Tom the devil’—the
well-known sergeant of the North
Cork Militia—and his property was
destroyed by the yeomen. He then
threw himself into the arms of the
rebels. He was a Protestant; the
others were Catholics.

cH, xxx. HACKETSTOWN, BALLYELLIS, AND BALLYRAHEEN. 181

selves in imminent danger of being surrounded. Captain
Hardy and a few men were killed, and the troops retreated and
took up a strong position in the barracks. ‘The most obstinate
and bloody contest, wrote Lieutenant Gardiner, ‘took place
that has happened since the commencement of the present rebel-
lion. We fought in the midst of flames (for the town wasset on
fire), upwards ofnine hours.’ The barracks, andthe neighbouring
house of a clergyman named McGhee, were defended with great
heroism. The assailants, who had no artillery, were at last
beaten back. On the loyalist side eleven men were killed and
twenty wounded. On the rebel side the loss was far greater,
but Lieutenant Gardiner said that it was impossible to calculate
it with accuracy, as the rebels threw many bodies into the flames,
and carried off about thirty carloads of killed and wounded.
With the exception of the barracks and two other houses, the
whole town was consumed; its inhabitants were reduced to
the extremity of destitution, and the garrison fell back upon
Tullow.!

The rebels next attempted, on June 30, to take Carnew, but
they were foiled by the despatch of a considerable force of cavalry
and infantry from Gorey. The infantry were recalled, and about
two hundred cavalry, chiefly regulars but partly yeomen, were
sent to pursue the rebels, who succeeded, however, in drawing them
into an ambuscade, and put them to flight with the loss of fifty or
sixty men. It is said that not a single insurgent fell. Among
the killed were many of the Ancient Britons? On July 2,
another bloody affair took place on Ballyraheen Hill, between
Carnew and Tinnehely. A hundred and fifty yeomen tried to
dislodge a much larger body of rebels from the height, but a
charge of pikemen down the hill scattered them with the loss
_ of two officers and many privates. The soldiers then rallied in
a house near the foot of the hill, which their assailants during
the whole night vainly tried to burn. The conflagration of a
neighbouring house by the rebels proved of great use to the

1 See Lieutenant Gardiner’s de-
spatch, June 26 (1.8.P.0.), and the
accounts in Gordon, Hay, and Mus-
grave.

2 The different accounts of this
affair (which was called the battle of
Ballyellis), have been brought together

by Crofton Croker in his notes to
Holt’s Memoirs, the only really well-
edited book relating to the rebellion
(i. 78-86). Holt greatly magnifies the
number of the soldiers,and pretends
that 370 of them were slain.

182 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXX,

beleaguered yeomen, who were enabled in the clear light to fire
with deadly effect from the windows, and who are said to have left
more than a hundred men dead on the field.!’ One portion of
the rebels then made their way through the Wicklow mountains,
into the county of Kildare, where the rebellion had never wholly
ceased, and where among the hills and bogs it still continued
for some weeks, in the form of a predatory guerilla war, under
the leadership of William Aylmer. It had, however, but little
importance, for the rebels soon found that the people were not
with them, and were sometimes even actively against them, and
very few recruits joined them. A loyal man named Johnston,
who had been taken prisoner by them, and who afterwards
either escaped or was released, reported to the Government that
the Kildare rebels were utterly dispirited, and perfectly ready
to disband if they could obtain a pardon.? Another party of
Wexford rebels returned to their own county, where they were
soon hunted down, shot, or dispersed. Among the Wicklow
hills, however, a large Protestant farmer named Joseph Holt, who
was evidently a man of considerable ability and courage, and
who had chiefly managed the successful ambuscade on June 30,
kept together many rebels, and for a long time made plundering
excursions into the surrounding country.

The misery produced by these operations is by no means to
be measured by the loss of life in the field. Numbers of unarmed
peasants were hunted down because they were, or were believed
to be, rebel fugitives, or because they had given shelter to rebels.
Numbers of peaceful Protestants were murdered as Orange-
men, or as oppressors, or as loyalists. The blood passion, which
will be satisfied with nothing short of extermination, was roused
in multitudes, and it was all the more fierce because it was on
both sides largely mixed with fear. Over great districts nearly
every house was burnt, the poorer cabins by the troops as the
homes of rebels, the slated houses by the rebels as the homes of
Protestants or loyalists. Agriculture had ceased. Its imple-
ments were destroyed. The sheep and cattle had been plundered
and slaughtered. ‘I'he farmers were homeless, ruined, and often
starving. Misgovernment and corruption, political agitation
and political conspiracy, had done their work, and a great part

1 Gordon, pp. 174, 175; Hay, pp. ? Cooke to Wickham, July 17, 1798
261, 262. The number of killed and (Record Office),
wounded is very variously stated.

CH, XXX, JUDGMENTS OF CORNWALLIS, 183

of Ireland was as miserable and as desolate as any spot upon the
globe.

Lord Cornwallis was much shocked at the state of feeling
and society he found around him, and in some respects his judg-
ment of it was not altogether just. Arriving at a time when
the rebellion had received its deathblow, he certainly under-
rated the efficiency of the yeomanry and militia, who, in spite of
their great want of discipline, had virtually saved the country,
and had shown in these last weeks qualities of courage, vigilance,
and energy which Camden and Castlereagh abundantly recog-
nised. It was difficult to exaggerate, though it was easy to ex-
plain, the ferocity that prevailed, but a governor who came as a
perfect stranger to Ireland and to its passions, hardly made suffi-
cient allowance for the inevitable effect of the long-continued
tension and panic, arising from such a succession and alternation
of horrors as I have described. He spoke with indignation of
the prevalent folly ‘ of substituting the word Catholicism, instead
of Jacobinism, as the foundation of the present rebellion.’ ‘The
violence of our friends,’ he said, ‘ and their folly in endeavouring
to make it a religious war, added to the ferocity of our troops,
who delight in murder, most powerfully counteract all plans of
conciliation.’ ‘The minds of people are now in such a state that
nothing but blood will satisfy them; and although they will not
admit the term, their conversation and conduct point to no other
mode of concluding this unhappy business, than that of extirpa-
tion.’ ‘The conversation even at my table, where you will sup-
pose I do all I can to prevent it, always turns on hanging,
shooting, burning, &c. &c., and if a priest has been put to death,
the greatest joy is expressed by the whole company. So much
for Ireland and my wretched situation.’ ‘The life of a Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland comes up to my idea of perfect misery ;
but if I can accomplish the great object of consolidating the
British Empire, I shall be sufficiently repaid.’!

These last lines, which were written as early as July 1, pro-
bably point to a design which was already formed of pushing for-
ward a legislative union. It must be remarked, that in dilating
upon the sanguinary violence of the principal persons in Ire-
land, Lord Cornwallis always made one eminent exception. In

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 355-357, 369, 372.

184 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

several passages he speaks of the conspicuous moderation and
humanity of Lord Clare, ‘ whose character,’ he says, ‘has been
much misrepresented in England.’ ‘ Almost all the other prin-
cipal political characters here are absurdly violent.’ ‘The
Chancellor, notwithstanding all that is said of him, is by far the
most moderate and right-headed man among us.’ !

It is necessary to take such passages into account if we
would forma just judgment of this remarkable man, who played
so great a part in Irish history during the last twelve years of
the eighteenth century. The persistence with which Lord Clare
maintained the system of parliamentary corruption, and his
steady opposition to all concession of political power to the
Catholics, appear to me to have done very much to produce the
rebellion. But, unlike many of those who co-operated with
him, his conduct on these subjects was not due to personal
corruption or selfishness, but to strong and definite political
conviction. He upheld the system of corruption, because he
was convinced that Ireland with a separate Parliament could
only remain a part of the British Empire so long as that Parlia-
1oent was maintained in complete and permanent subservience to
the Executive in England. He opposed the admission of Catholics
to power, because he entirely disbelieved in the possible amal-
gamation of the Protestant and. Catholic nations in Ireland ;
because he predicted that if the policy of concession were adopted,
the overwhelming numerical preponderance of Catholics would
ultimately make them omnipotent, and because he saw in that
omnipotence the destruction of the Protestant Establishment in
Church and State, and ultimately of the Protestant ownership of
land. When, contrary to his wishes, the Catholic franchise was
conceded in 1793, he was convinced that a legislative union had
become the only means of saving the Church, and property,
and the connection ; and he opposed the completion of Catholic
emancipation, and contributed powerfully to the fatal measure
of the recall of Lord Fitzwilliam. His own policy on the one
side, and the French Revolution, French intrigues, and United
Irish conspiracies on the other, soon drew Ireland into the
vortex of revolution, and Clare then steadily supported the
measures of military repression. He supported, or at least fully

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, li, 362, 371.

CH. X3X CONDUCT OF CLARE. 185

acquiesced in, not only laws of great though probably necessary
severity, but also acts that were plainly beyond the law: the
illegal deportations, the burning of houses, the systematic
floggings of suspected persons in order to discover arms or
elicit confessions. He declared that it was the rigour of martial
law that had saved Ulster, and in after years he did not: flinch
from defending its excesses, even in the uncongenial atmosphere
of the English House of Lords. Wilberforce mentions how he
had once been present with Pitt in that House, when speeches
were made charging the authorities in Ireland with having
employed practices of the nature of torture to discover arms,
and Clare at once rose to justify their conduct. ‘I shall never,’
Wilberforce adds, ‘forget Pitt’s look. He turned round to me,
with that high indignant stare which sometimes marked his
countenance, and stalked out of the House.’! But in all this,
Clare acted upon the calculations of a definite policy, upon the
persuasion that such means were indispensable to the security of
the country. He was arrogant and domineering ; he delighted
in insulting language and in despotic measures, and he had a
supreme contempt for the majority of his fellow-countrymen,
but he was wholly free from the taint of personal cruelty, and
he was too brave and too strong to be blinded or swayed by the
passions of the hour.”

Something had been done in the closing days of Lord
Camden to mitigate, at least insome parts of Ireland, the severities
of martial law, and with the full assent of Clare, Cornwallis at last,
§ Lady Louisa Conolly wrote

from the county of Kildare, just be-
fore the return of Camden to Eng-

1 Life of Wilberforce, it. 327.
2 Jnaprivately printed book, called
Essays by an Octogenarian (1851), by

a gentleman named Roche, there are
some interesting remarks about Lord
Clare, based on personal knowledge.
The writer says: ‘I could state

many redeeming instances of persons,
whose legal guilt could not be gain-
said, saved by him from the lash
and halter, and not a few, I have the
happiness to know, through the inter-
cession of my own family. ... In
private life, moreover, I can affirm
that he was a generous and indulgent
landlord, a kind master, and an
attached friend’ (ii. 114, 115). He
mentions (p. 351) that, like Lord
Thurlow, he was extremely addicted
to profane swearing.

land: ‘ The free quarters, whipping the
people, and burning the houses, have
just been stopped, which rejoices me,
for although in some places, where
these terrible sentences were executed
with great caution by humane and
deserving officers, the object did
answer for discovering the pikes and
arms, yet, upon the whole, it was a
dangerous measure, in regard to the
licentiousness it produced among the
soldiers, the fury and madness it
drove the insurgents to, and the luke-
warmness that it threw upon the well-
disposed persons, who found them-
selves equally aggrieved by the free
quarters as the rebels are. So that it

186 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

though somewhat tardily, adopted a more decided policy of cle-
mency. On July 3, a proclamation was inserted in the ‘ Dublin
Gazette’ authorising the King’s generals to give protections to
such insurgents as, having been guilty simply of rebellion, sur-
rendered their arms, deserted their leaders, and took the oath of
allegiance ;! on the 17th a message from the Lord Lieutenant
was delivered to the House of Commons signifying his Majesty’s
pleasure to that effect, and an Act of amnesty was speedily carried
in favour of all rebels, with some specified exceptions, who com-
plied with these conditions.” It was difficult in a country where
complete anarchy had long prevailed, and where violent crime
was still appallingly common, to obtain any semblance of re-
spect for law, and it was necessary sometimes to punish severely,
loyalists who disregarded the protections of the generals ; but
slowly and imperfectly confidence was restored.

In the course of a few weeks, most of the remaining leaders
were either taken, or surrendered. Father Kearns was tried and
hanged at Edenderry. He appears to have shown much ferocity
during the rebellion, and to have fully deserved his fate, which he
met with sullen silence. It is stated that, four years before, at
Paris, during the ascendency of Robespierre, he had been seized
as a priest and hanged from a lamp post, but his huge weight so
bent the iron, that his feet touched the ground and he was rescued,
and succeeded in escaping to Ireland. Anthony Perry was
executed at the same time and place. I have already related
the intolerable brutality that turned him into a rebel, and
Gordon has borne an emphatic testimony to his efforts to restrain
the excesses of his followers, but it is probable that the part he
took in the retaliatory massacre at Gorey on Bloody Friday,
placed him beyond the clemency of the Government. Another
leader whose fate excited much sympathy was Esmond Kyan,
who had commanded the rebel artillery in the battle of Arklow.
He is described by an intensely loyalist historian? as ‘liberal,
generous, brave, and merciful,’ and he appears to have acted with
uniform humanity, and to have saved many lives. His own
would almost certainly have been spared, if there had been any

is a blessing we have it all stopped.’ 1 Plowden, ii. 773.

(Lady L. Conolly to the Duke of * Ibid. 782-784; 388 Geo, III.
Richmond, June 18,1798. Bunbury  c¢. 55 :

MSS.) 3 Taylor.

CH. Xxx. EXECUTION OF REDMOND. 187

time for an appeal, but his capture, trial, and execution were all
compressed into a few hours. He had a cork arm, which was
shot off at Arklow, and it is said to have been brought against
him as evidence in his trial.!

Kyan was at least a leader of the rebels, but there was one
execution which Gordon has indignantly denounced as a gross mis-
carriage of justice. It was that of Father John Redmond, who
was priest in the parish of Clough, of which Gordon was for
twenty-three years curate. Of his rebellious conduct, Gordon
says he could find no other proof than the sentence which con-
signed him to death, and he declares that on the one occasion on
which Father Redmond was seen with a body of rebels, his sole
object was to protect the house of Lord Mountnorris from plunder;
that he was so far from sympathising with the rebellion, that he
was actually obliged to conceal himself in Protestant houses
when the rebels were in possession of the country, and that he
was continually denounced by his co-religionists as a traitor
to their cause. He appears to have been treated with gross
brutality even before his trial, and it is a touching and charac-
teristic fact, that it is the pen of the Protestant clergyman of
his parish that has chiefly vindicated his memory.?

In several cases, however, more leniency was shown.
Edward Fitzgerald, a gentleman of considerable position in his
county, who had been a leader of the rebels from the day when he
had been sent with Colclough from Wexford to make terms with
them, surrendered on a promise that his life should be spared.
After his surrender he had some conversation with Cooke on
the course which the rebellion in Wexford had taken, and he
told him ‘ that at first his men fought well, but latterly would
not stand at all; that he and the other leaders had but little
command; that the mob were furious, and wanting to massacre
every Protestant, and that the only means they had of dissuading
them from burning houses, was that they were destroying their
own property. > He underwent a period of imprisonment, and was
afterwards banished to the Continent, as well as several other
conspicuous rebels, among whom were Garret Byrne, and Aylmer,

1 Faulkner's Journal, Aug. 11, in Byrne’s Memoirs, i. 300, 301; and
1798. See, too, various facts relating in Madden’s United Inishmen.

to these rebels, collected by Crofton 2 Gordon, pp. 185, 186.
Croker in Holt’s Memoirs, i, 57-61; 3 Cornmallis Correspondence, ii. 370,

188 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXK,

the leader in Kildare. Fitzgerald, Byrne, and Aylmer agreed,
on surrendering, to use their influence with their followers to
induce them to give up their arms and return to their allegiance,
and the Government fully recognised the good faith with which
they executed their promise. Cooke had interviews with most
of these men, and he described Aylmer, the Kildare leader, as
apparently ‘a silly, ignorant, obstinate lad.’! He had probably
higher qualities than Cooke perceived, for he became a distin-
guished officer in the Austrian service. He commanded the
escort which accompanied Marie Louise from Paris to Vienna
in 1814, and he is said in the same year to have visited London
in the suite of the Emperor of Austria. He afterwards resigned
his commission in the Austrian service, became colonel under
his countryman and fellow-rebel, General Devereux, in the service
of Bolivar, and received a wound which proved fatal, at the battle
of Rio de la Hache.?

Two men who surrendered on protection, were nevertheless
tried and hanged for murder. One of them was William Byrne,
the brother of Garret Byrne,’ and the other was William Deve-
reux, who was condemned for having taken part in the massacre
of Scullabogue.4 Edward Roche, having surrendered on condition
of being transported, was tried for complicity in the massacre on
Wexford Bridge ; but as it was proved that he had taken no part
in it, and had done much to terminate it, he was acquitted.

General Hunter, who was sent down to the county of Wexford
instead of Lake, appears to have discharged a difficult duty with
humanity and skill, and the writers who have most condemned
the conduct of the courts-martial in Wexford, have made an ex-
ception in favour of those which were presided over by Lord
Ancram and by Colonel Fowlis.’ A great improvement was
introduced into this department, by the order of Lord Cornwallis
that no sentence of court-martial should be carried into effect
before the evidence had been transmitted to Dublin for the in-
spection of the Government.

1 Cooke to Wickham, July 21, _ p.

1798 (B.0.).
2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.

159; and the rebel version in
Byrne’s Memoirs, 1. 156-158; 323,
324,

366; Madden, iv. 562.

3 See the loyalist version of the
proceedings of William Byrne in
Musgrave, pp. 515, 524; ‘Taylor,

* Hay very emphatically asserts
the innocence of Devereux (pp. 285,
286).

5 Hay, pp. 270, 275, 281.

CH. XXX. TRIAL OF THE SHEARES’S. 189

There were prisoners in Dublin whose guilt was in reality
of a far deeper dye than that of most of the Wexford leaders,
and a high commission, presided over by Chief Justice Carleton,
was appointed to try them. The first trial was that of John and
Henry Sheares. They were arraigned on July 4, but the trial
was postponed till the 12th. The evidence of Captain Armstrong
was clear and conclusive, and there could be no rational doubt of
the guilt of the prisoners. It is certain that they were on the
Executive Directory of the United Irish conspiracy ; that at the
time they were arrested, they were busily preparing an immediate
insurrection ; that they were engaged up to the very last moment
in attempting to seduce the soldiers of the King; and that,
although the elder brother was a far more insignificant person
than the younger one, the two brothers acted together in political
matters with the most perfect mutual confidence. The savage
proclamation against giving quarter to resisting Irishmen, which
was intended to be issued immediately after the insurrection had
broken out, was in the handwriting of John Sheares, and appears
to have been in the possession of the elder brother; and the two
brothers had already enjoyed the clemency of the Government,
who had mercifully abstained, at their petition, from prosecuting
a seditious Cork paper with which they were concerned.!. The
only point in the case on which there was the smallest real doubt,
was whether Henry Sheares was acquainted with the proclamation
drawn up by his younger brother. It is probable that he was,
but, even if the prosecution was on this point mistaken, it could
not alter the substantial merits of the case,

The trial, according to the evil fashion which was then
common both in England and Ireland,? was protracted far into
the night. The prisoners were defended with great ability by
Curran, Ponsonby, Plunket, and McNally. Several technical
points were raised and overruled. Great efforts were made to
excite religious prejudice against Armstrong, who was reported
to have expressed sympathy with the theological views of Paine.

1 Madden, iv. 231. In the L.S.P.O.
there is a letter from Henry Sheares,
from Cork, dated Sept. 12, 1797, pro-
posing to the Government that Mr.
O'Driscoll should put an end to the
publication of the Cork Gazette, on

condition that an impending prosecu-
tion was abandoned, and it is noted
that the Government accepted the
proposal.

2 See Stephen’s History of Crimi-
nal Lan, i, 422.

190 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

Much was said of the danger of the Irish law of treason, which
made the evidence of a single witness sufficient, and all the
resources of rhetoric, mingled with nota little misrepresentation,
were employed to aggravate the baseness of the conduct by
which Armstrong obtained his knowledge. I have already de-
scribed his conduct, the motives that appear to have governed
it, the advice under which he acted, the emphatic approval of his
brother officers. His memory has ever since been pursued with
untiring hatred, by writers who would probably have extolled
him asa hero if he had listened to the seduction of the Sheares’s,
and betrayed the camp into rebel hands—by writers who have
not found one word of honest indignation to condemn the conduct
of Esmonde at Prosperous, perhaps the basest of the many
acts of treachery in the rebellion. There can, however, be no
doubt of the truth of the evidence of Armstrong, or of the
importance of his services; and the Corporation of Dublin, being
of opinion that he had saved the city from a massacre, voted him
its freedom.!

The prominent position of the family of the Sheares’s, and
the eloquence of their defenders, contributed to throw some de-
ceptive halo around these two very commonplace conspirators,
who were executed after a fair trial and on clear evidence. The
best that can be said of them is, that they took a far smaller
part in organising the rebellion than others who were suffered
to escape because the evidence that could be produced against
them was not equally clear. Though they had long been en-
gaged in treason, they do not appear to have been in the con-
fidence of the old Directory, and it would not be just to
ascribe to that body any complicity in the intended proclama-
tion.

Like most conspirators, they were men of broken fortune, and
overwhelmed with debt. They had sometimes been obliged to
fly from Dublin from their creditors, and it is remarkable that
one of the principal and most exacting of these was Dixon, who
was prominent among the leaders of the conspiracy.2 Their

1 Faulkner's Journal, July 24, as reported. The purport of the
1798. manifesto or proclamation said to
2 McNally wrote immediately be found on them, has astonished
after the arrest: ‘Very few, I find, many who would haye gone great
had a knowledge, or even an idea, lengths on the known principles of
that the Sheares were implicated emancipation and reform, as well as

CH. XXX. EXECUTION OF THE SHEARES’S.

191

execution was appointed for the very day after their condem-
nation, but great efforts were made to save them, and they
themselves implored mercy, and offered to make discoveries.
Cornwallis, however, refused their petition, and in the face
of death, the courage which had supported them through’
their trial, appears to have wholly broken down.! Henry
Sheares, indeed, was as far as possible from the stuff of which
successful rebels are made, and he showed in the last scene of
his life an abject and pitiable cowardice. John Sheares was of
another stamp, and his enduring affection for his brother, and
his extreme desire to save him, form the best feature in his
character.

They were hanged on July 14, and buried beneath the church
of St. Michan, where, owing to some strange antiseptic property
of soil or atmosphere, their bodies were seen long years after,
dry and shrivelled, but undecayed. ‘Two letters, which John
Sheares wrote to his favourite sister on the night before his
execution, have been often printed and admired. They are,
Written in all
the inflated, rhetorical strain of sentiment, which the ‘ Nouvelle
Héloise’ had made popular, they show clearly how completely the

indeed, singularly curious and characteristic.

independency, but who shudder at
the thought of execution. I doubt
very much if they had any confidential
communication with Bond, Jackson,
and Dixon. This I know, the two
latter always spoke of them with
great bitterness, owing to some money
transactions ; and Dixon had an exe-
cution against them, and sued them
on it with great rigour.’ (J. W., May
23, 1798.) In a letter written Dec.
25, 1796, J. W. mentions that the
Sheares’s had been driven out of
Dublin by debt, and adds: ‘They
have touched citizens B. B. Harvey
and Dixon for a few hundreds.’

1 Beresford writes: ‘They con-
ducted themselves with great decency
on the trial, and with firmness, parti-
cularly the younger; ... but this
‘day, when they found no chance,
their courage failed them, and I hear
they sent offers of discoveries to Lord
Cornwallis. .. . At the gallows, they
both lost their spirits,and the younger,
I hear, fell into fits. (Beresford
Correspondence, ii. 157, 158.) Alex-

ander Knox says: ‘ When the Sheares
sent to entreat for mercy, it was I
who conveyed the message from the
Ordinary of Newgate, and I was pre-
sent at the consequent conversation
between Lord Castlereagh and the
Attorney-General.’ (Knox’s Remains,
iv. 82.) Alexander, writing to Pelham,
says: ‘The Sheares died like pol-
troons ; McCann and Byrne, the first
with a firm and manly courage, the
other ... with a constitutional in-
difference.’ (Alexander to Pelham,
July 26,1798 Pelham MSS.) Bar-
rington has printed a piteous letter
from Henry Sheares, imploring him to
entreat the Chancellor in his favour,
and Lord Clare seems to have, for a
time, wished to respite him. Madden
pretends that John Sheares showed
courage to the end. See the accounts
he has brought together (iv. 312, 313,
323-25), See, too, a curious anecdote
in Mr. Fitzpatrick’s Sham Squire,
pp. 190-192, and also the contempo-
rary account from a Cork newspaper
in Reynolds’s Life, ii. 210.

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

192

writer, like so many of the young enthusiasts of his time, had
been dominated and moulded by the genius of Rousseau ; and
they show not less clearly how true is the saying of a great
French poet, that affectation is often the thing that clings to us
the last, even in the face of death. It may be added, that two
brothers of the Sheares’s had fallen in the service of the King,
and it is a singular fact, that the Act for the regulation of trials
in cases of felony and treason, under which they were tried, had
been introduced many years before, into the Irish Parliament by
their own father.!. He had been one of the most respected men
of his time, and Lord Carleton, who tried and sentenced his
sons, had been his intimate friend.

The trials of John McCann, Michael Byrne, and Oliver Bond
speedily followed. The Government were extremely anxious to
bring before the public incontestable evidence of the existence
of a treasonable and republican conspiracy connected with
France, in order to silence those who still represented the rebel-
lion as aiming at nothing more than Catholic emancipation and
parliamentary reform, or as merely due to the severities of
martial law. Most ample and most conclusive evidence of this
kind was in their hands, but it consisted chiefly of documents
from France which could not be disclosed, and of the secret in-
formation of men who could be induced by no earthly considera-
tion to appear in the witness-box. Thomas Reynolds, however,
had by this time discovered that it was impossible for him to
remain in a neutral or semi-neutral position, and after the
attempt to assassinate him, and after his arrest asa United Irish-
man, on the information of United Irishmen, he turned savagely
at bay, and placed the whole of his knowledge at the full service
of the Government. The prisoners had been his colleagues on
the Leinster Committee, and in the three trials I have mentioned,
the case for the prosecution rested mainly on his evidence, cor-
roborated by the papers found in Bond’s house. This evidence,
if it was believed, was abundantly conclusive, and it was entirely

1 Commons Journals, Jan. 31, sequence of that independence, the

1766. See. too, Kaulkner’s Journal,
July 31, 1798. Some, at least, of the
prisoners tried by the special com-
mission, might never have been con-
victed, if Ireland had not obtained
her legislative independence. In con-

English Act of William III., making
two witnesses necessary in cases of
treason, was not in operation in Ire-
land, and it had never been adopted
by the Irish Parliament.

EXECUTION OF McCANN, 193

CH, XXX-

unshaken by cross-examination. McCann had acted as secretary
at the meeting at Bond’s house. Byrne had been the delegate
from Wicklow, and the most active organiser in that county.
Bond’s house had been the headquarters of the conspiracy, and
he had taken a leading part in it in every stage. The utmost
efforts were made to blacken the character of Reynolds and to
prove him unworthy of belief, but they had no effect on the
minds either of the judges or of the juries. The three prisoners
were found guilty and condemned to death, and in no single
case were the juries before delivering their verdict absent from
the jury box for more than a few minutes.!

McCann was hanged on July 19. Byrne and Bond lay
under sentence of death, when a proposal was made by the
other prisoners who had been arrested with them, and who were
lying in the prisons of Dublin, to make a full disclosure and
confession of their conspiracy, and to submit to banishment for
life to any country at amity with the King, provided their lives
were spared as well as those of Byrne and Bond. The negotia-
tion was begun through the instrumentality of Dobbs—a_bene-
volent and eccentric member of the Irish Parliament, who has
more than once appeared in the course of this history—and sixty-

four leading United Irishmen concurred in the application.
The Government were much perplexed. The application

1 Howell’s State Trials, vol. xxvii.
Castlereagh afterwards recommended
Reynolds to the English Government
as a man ‘of respectable family
and good character’ (Castlereagh to
Wickham, Nov. 16, 1798, R.O.); and
many years later he wrote to Rey-
nolds: ‘The situation I held in Ire-
land during the rebellion best enabled
me to judge of the motives which in-
fluenced your conduct; and I shall

-always feel it an act of mere justice

‘

to you to state, that your protecting
assistance was afforded to the State
long before you were known to any
member of the Government; that
it was afforded in the most use-
ful manner, when the prevention of
calamity could be your only motive
for making the important communi-
cations received from you; that they
were made without a suggestion of
personal advantage to yourself ; and,

-... had it not been for accidental

VOL. VIII.

circumstances, his Majesty's
Government in that country might
have remained to this day in igno-
rance of everything relating to you,
but of the truly important services
you were enabled to render to your
country.’ (Reynolds’s Life, i. 447.)
Lord Carleton wrote to Reynolds:
‘From the opportunities which were
afforded to me in 1798, for forming a
judgment of your character and con-
duct, in assisting his Majesty’s Govern-
ment towards putting down the dan-
gerous rebellion which took place at
that period, I formed a judgment that
in the whole of your conduct, and in
the communications which were car-
ried on on your part with the Govern-
ment, and in the evidence which you
gave upon the prosecutions of the
rebels, you had behaved with consis-
tency, integrity, honour, ability, and
disinterestedness.’ (Ibid. ii. 100.)

Oo

194 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

was made on the night of July 24; the execution of Byrne was
appointed for the 25th and that of Bond for the 26th, and Lord
Clare, on whom Cornwallis chiefly relied, had gone to his country
house in the county of Limerick. Cornwallis was inclined to
accept the proposal, and Lord Castlereagh appears to have
agreed with him. They considered ‘the establishment of the
traitorous conspiracy, by the strong testimony of all the prin-
cipal actors init,’ to be a matter of the very first political im-
portance. They believed that there were scarcely any of the
prisoners, except Neilson, whose conviction was certain, and
they were sincerely anxious to stop the effusion of blood. On
the other hand, Cornwallis wrote that he doubted whether it
would be possible to find a third man in the administration who
would agree with them, and he added, ‘the minds of people
are now in such a state, that nothing but blood will satisfy
them.’!

He assembled hastily his chief legal advisers, and among them
there were certainly some who were very free from all taint of
inhumanity. ‘Lord Carleton,’ Cornwallis wrote to Portland,
‘who might in any country be considered as a cool and tem-
perate man, gave his opinion in the most decided manner against
listening to the proposal, and declared that it would have such
an effect on the public mind, that he did not believe, if Byrne
and Oliver Bond were not executed, that it would be possible
to get a jury to condemn another man for high treason. He
said that several of those who signed the papers, and par-
ticularly Dr. McNevin, might possibly be convicted, and that
others might be lable to pains and penalties, by proceedings
against them in Parliament, and in short he gave his opinion
against the measure in the strongest and most decided terms,
and Lord Kilwarden and the Attorney-General spoke to the
same effect.’? In accordance with this opinion, Byrne was
executed.

It is impossible to deny, that an extremely sanguinary spirit
had at this time been aroused among the Protestants of Dublin
and of the counties which had been desolated by the rebellion.
It is aspirit which, in all times and races and countries, has fol-

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 370-372, 374.
2 Jbid. p. 372.

CH, XXX, POLITICAL. CRIMES. 195

lowed such scenes of carnage as I have described. In the mild
atmosphere of the nineteenth century, and in the recollection of
many who are: still alive; a very similar spirit was kindled among
the English population of India by sepoy cruelties, which were
scarcely more: horrible, and were certainly less numerous, than
those of the Irish rebellion of 1798. I cannot, however, regard
the strong feeling which was-shown against sparing the lives of
the chief authors, organisers, and promoters of that rebellion, as
merely an evidence of this sanguinary disposition. No one who
has any adequate sense of the enormous mass of suffering which
the authors of a rebellion let’ loose upon their country, will speak
lightly of their erime, or of the importance of penalties that,
may deter others from following in their steps. Misplaced
leniency is often the worst of cruelties, especially in a country
where the elements of turbulence are very rife; where the path
of sedition has an irresistible fascination to a large class of adven-
turous natures ; where a false, sickly sentiment, throwsits glamour
over the most commonplace and even the most contemptible of
rebels.

In the great lottery of civil war the prizes are enormous, and
when such prizes may be obtained by a course of aetion which
is profoundly injurious to the State, the deterrent influence
of severe penalties is especially necessary. In the immense
majority of cases, the broad distinction which it is now the
fashion to draw between political and other erimes, is both
pernicious and untrue. ‘There is no sphere in. which the
worst passions of human nature may operate more easily or
more dangerously than in the sphere of politics.. There is
no criminal of a deeper dye than the adventurer: who. is gam-
bling for power with the lives of men. There are: no crimes
which produce vaster and more enduring sufferings than those
which sap the great pillars of order in the State, and destroy
that respect for life, for property, and for law, on which all
true progress depends. So far the rebellion had been not only
severely, but mercilessly suppressed. Scores of wretched peasants,
who were much more deserving of pity than of blame, had been
shot down. Over great tracts of country every rebel’s cottage
had been burnt to cinders. Men had been hanged who, although

they had been compelled or induced to take a leading part in
0 2

196 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

the rebellion, had comported themselves in such a manner that
they had established the strongest claims to the clemency of the
Government. But what inconsistency and injustice, it was
asked, could be more flagrant, than at this time to select as special
objects of that clemency, the very men who were the authors
and the organisers of the rebellion—the very men who, if it had
succeeded, would have reaped its greatest rewards ?

It is true that these men had not desired such a rebellion as
had taken place, and that some of them, like Thomas Emmet,
were personally humane, well-meaning, and unselfish. But it was
scarcely possible to exaggerate the evil they had produced, and
they were immeasurably more guilty than the majority of those
who had already perished. They had thrown back, probably
for generations, the civilisation of their country. They had
heen year by year engaged in sowing the seed which had ripened
into the harvest of blood. They had done all in their power to
bring down upon Ireland the two greatest curses that can afflict
a nation—the eurse of civil war, and the curse of foreign in-
vasion ; and although at the outset of their movement they had
hoped to unite Irishmen of all creeds, they had ended by lash-
ing the Catholics into frenzy by deliberate and skilful falsehood.
The assertion that the Orangemen had sworn to exterminate the
Catholics, was nowhere more prominent than in the newspaper
which was the recognised organ of the United Irish leaders.
The men who had spread this calumny through an ignorant and
excitable Catholic population, were assuredly not less truly
murderers than those who had fired the barn of Scullabogue or
piked the Protestants on Wexford Bridge. :

Such arguments were very serious, and they at first prevailed.
After the execution of Byrne, however, a second application was
made to the Government. It was signed by no less‘than seventy-
eight prisoners, and it included the names of several leading con-
spirators, especially Arthur O’Connor, who had refused to take
part in the previous overture. Henry Alexander, who was related
to Bond, had interviews with him and with Neilson, and he
brought back hopes of great revelations.! In spite of the

1 He describes Bond as having own life (this was within a few hours
shown admirable courage ‘He de- of his execution), but that he would
sired me to state, that he would not act with those men now State pri-
move out of the ranks to save his  soners;... andhe added, that they

ry

PROPOSAL OF THE PRISONERS, 197

CH. XXX,

violent opposition of the Speaker and of Sir John Parnell, and
of the general sentiment of Dublin, the offer was accepted.
Lord Clare threw his great influence strongly on the side of
clemency,! and immediately after his arrival in Dublin, he, in
company with Lord Castlereagh, had an interview with Emmet,
McNevin, and O’Connor. The three United Irishmen agreed to
give the fullest information of every part of the treason, both
foreign and domestic, though they declined to criminate indi-
viduals or disclose names. They at once frankly acknowledged
their conspiracy with the French, though they declared that they
had never been prepared to accept Freneh assistance to such an
extent as to enable the French to interfere as conquerors rather
than allies. They offered not only to draw up a memorial in-
dicating the part they had acted, but also to appear for examina-
tion before the secret committees, and. answer on oath such
questions as were put tothem. The Government, on the other
hand, undertook that they should be ultimately released on
condition of going mto banishment, though they reserved the
right of fixing the time. They promised that they should not
be transported as felons, or to any place to which felons were
sent, and that Bond should obtain the benefit of this agree-
ment, and they gave a general assurance that no more prisoners
should be put to death unless they were concerned in murder,

could give the only information
capable of saving this country from
an aggravated civil war.’ The respite
was only announced to Bond twenty
minutes before the time appointed
for his execution. ‘ Your friend Neil-
son, writes Alexander, ‘stretching
out his arm with his hand clenched,
said, “ [holdin my hand every muscle,
sinew, nay, fibre of the internal or-
ganisation—nay. every ramification
of the United Irishmen, and ” (gradu-
ally opening his hand) ‘I will make
it as plain as the palm of my hand, if
our terms are complied with.” ...
The vivacity and earnestness of his
manner struck me, not with an opinion
of his sincerity, but of the impressive
habit he must have acquired. I
thought I read in his looks great fear
of death, but shading itself under a
pretended anxiety to save Bond, who
appeared next to indifferent about
his fate.’ See two long and interest-

ing letters to Pelham, July 26, Aug. 4,
1798. (Pelham MSS.)

'<The Speaker was frantic
against it [the respite of Bond], the
popular cry of Dublin loud against it.
The yeomen were to lay down their
arms ; all the loyalists felt themselves
deserted. Luckily, as soon as the

self most warmly in favour of the
measure, first in private, then in Par-
liament, and said that the Govern-
ment would have been inexcusable if
they had not entertained it. Puwd-
lie confidence revived.’ (Cooke to
Pelham, Aug. 9, 1798. Pelham MSS.)
Alexander notices, that Parnell was
‘stronger for non-conciliation’ even
than the Speaker. Jonah Barrington
made a bitter speech in Parliament,
in which he said that ‘another class
of men than loyalists seemed Govern-
ment’s first care.’ (Alexander to Pel-
ham, July 26, Aug. 4, 1798.)

198 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXX.

though they refused to make this a matter of treaty or stipu-
lation.

Both parties have stated very fully'the motives that actuated
them. The United Irishmen wished to save the life of Bond,
who was already convicted, and the lives of others who might be
hereafter condemned. They were convinced that the rebellion
was now definitely defeated, and that nothing remained except
to make terms. They found that the Government already knew
all that they could disclose of their negotiations with France,
for even the confidential memorial of McNevin to the French
Directory had been produced, in:a French translation, before the
secret committee ; and they believed that a full statement of their
own conduct and motives, so far from injuring them, would be in
truth their best vindication. In the opinion of Lord Castlereagh,
O’Connor and Emmet were very unwilling to enter into this
agreement; but Bond, Neilson, and McNevin, whose lives were
in special danger, strongly pressed it.

The Government on their side wished to stop the effusion of
blood, and to close the rebellion. There had been four capital
trials and executions. They feared that many more would only
make martyrs. They wished to send out of the country dan-
gerous men, whom they would probably be unable to convict, and
they wished above all to establish by undoubted evidence the
conspiracy with France. The Chancellor, it is said in a memorial
which was drawn up for the Duke of Portland, ‘stated in the
strongest manner his opinion of the expediency of obtaining, on
any terms consistent with the public safety, the confessions of
the State prisoners, particularly of McNevin and O'Connor, as
the only effectual means of opening the eyes of both countries
without disclosing intelligence which could by no means be made
public.’ ‘ We get rid of seventy prisoners,’ wrote Cooke, ‘many
of the most important of whom we could not try, and who could
not be disposed of without doing such a violence to the principles
of law and evidence as could not be well justified. Our zealots
and yeomen do not relish this compromise, and there has been
a fine buzz on the subject, but it being known the Chancellor
most highly approves of it, the tone softens.’! It is remark-

' Cornnallis Correspondence, ii. 248, 347-353. Compare, with these
376; Castlereagh Correspondence, i. accounts, that drawn up in a strain

NEW FEARS OF INVASION, 199

CHe ccKx,

able, however, that Cornwallis himself declared that he would
never have consented to this compact if he believed that the
lives of the prisoners were in his power, and that there was any
reasonable chance of convicting them. With the exception
of Bond, and perhaps Neilson, no traitors had really been
spared.!

The arguments in favour of the treaty were much strengthened
by the state of the country, which was still such that a re-
newed and ferocious outbreak might at any time be expected.
Numerous parties of banditti were at large. Murders were of
daily occurrence, and the confidential letters of the Ministers
show that great uneasiness prevailed.

‘The country, wrote Cooke to Pelham, ‘is by no means
settled nor secure should the French land, but I think secure if
they do not.’? A magistrate from Enniscorthy told Pelham,
that, except for scattered parties of banditti, that district was
almost pacified; but if a body of French troops were landed,
nearly all who had lately professed to return to their allegiance
would certainly join them, and the recent appearance off the Wex-
ford coast of some ships, which were at first supposed to be French,
had produced an immediate change in the demeanour of the
people. Higgins warned the Government that the flame was
far from quenched, and that a French invasion was expected; and
he transmitted a message from Magan, that the rebellion was
likely soon to break out in different parts of the kingdom, where
it was least expected.4 The Prince de Bouillon wrote from
Jersey, describing the active preparations of the fleet at Brest.°
Judkin Fitzgerald, however, the terrible High Sheriff of Tippe-
rary, was more confident. The danger, he thought, was much
exaggerated, and he specially urged the Government to exercise

of extreme bitterness by McNevin,
Pieces of Irish History, pp. 142-161.
See, too, the accounts by Emmet and
by Sweetman, in Madden’s United
Irishmen, iii.
O’Connor in his Letter to Lord
Castlereagh, published in 1799.

! Cornwallis Correspondence, i.
423.

2 Cooke to Pelham, Aug. 9, 1798.

$C. Colclough, Aug. 12, 1798.
(Pelham MSS.) About this time, a
woman came to some yeomanry at

58-59, and that of °

Enniscorthy, promising to point out
where some of the plate, plundered in
the rebellion, was concealed. Five
of them agreed to accompany her to
a wood in the neighbourhood. They
never returned; and their bodies
were soon after found unburied,
pierced and mangled with pikes.
(Faulkner’s Journal, Aug. 7, 1798.)

eheterAue 22, L798 Gusie.Op)

5 D’Auverene, Prince de Bouillon,
to Dundas, July 1798.

200 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH SRKG

their influence to induce the great proprietors to return to their
estates. ‘The yeomen,’ he adds, ‘do their duty everywhere
perfectly well, without the least reluctance, and it would be the
greatest injustice in me not to acknowledge the readiness with
which every order of mine is obeyed, and the hearty co-operation
of every lord, gentleman, and person of property in this county.
T am satisfied we are all determined to act together, and that
there is no danger.’ !

The memorial drawn up by the United Irishmen was an ex-
ceedingly skilful document, but it was more of the nature of a
defence than of a confession. I have in a former chapter made
much use of its statements. It represented the United Irish
Society as originally intended to unite the Protestants and
Catholics of Ireland, for the attainment of parliamentary reform
and Catholic emancipation. It described how its members
gradually came to perceive that English influence was the chief
support of parliamentary corruption in Ireland, that a reform
could only be attained by a separation, and that a separation
could only be achieved by alliance with France. It dwelt much
on the recall of Lord Fitzwilliam, the establishment of the
Orange system, the partiality of magistrates, and the outrages
of martial law, and it emphatically repudiated the charge of
assassination which was brought against the society. It at the
same time described very accurately its organisation, and the
successive steps of the negotiations with France. Castlereagh
in a confidential letter acknowledged that, in spite of some
declamation, it was a truthful document, that it admitted every
material fact contained in the secret intelligence, and that
it stated the facts in the order in which the Government
knew that they had occurred. The memoir, however, was
so essentially exculpatory, that the Government thought it
advisable to suppress it. The examination before the secret
committee was more satisfactory to them, and elicited a public
statement of all they desired, though in this case also some

1 J. Judkin Fitzgerald (Clonmel), It unfolds the true spirit of our
July 30. Jacobins.’ Cornwallis, on the other

2 Castlereagh to Wickham, Aug.4, hand, in returning it to the authors,
See, too, Cooke to Wickham, Aug. 7. described it as containing ‘many gross
‘What a curious memoir,’ he says, misstatements of facts.’ (Cornwallis
‘does Lord Castlereagh transmit! Correspondence, ii. 381.)

CH. XXX. PROCEEDINGS IN PARLIAMENT. 201

portions of the prisoners’ statements were withheld from pub-
lication.!

About this time, John Claudius Beresford asked in the
House of Commons for leave to bring in a Bill to confiscate the
properties of men convicted of high treason before a court-
martial, as if such a conviction had taken place before a court of
civil law. Castlereagh, however, opposed the motion, stating
that such a measure lay within the province of the Executive.?
Shortly after, the Ministers introduced a Bill of attainder con-
fiscating the property of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, Bagenal
Harvey, and Cornelius Grogan. Their special object was to affix
the stigma of guilt on the memory of Lord Edward, who had
been undoubtedly one of the foremost authors of the rebellion,
and whose premature death had saved him from all legal
penalties. In order, however, to prevent the Bill from appearing
altogether personal to the Leinster family, the names of Harvey
and Grogan were added. These two men had already expiated
their alleged treason on the gallows, and the wealth of the last
is much more certain than his guilt. The Bill was intro-
duced by the Attorney-General at the end of July, and several
witnesses, among whom Reynolds was the most conspicuous,
were examined. It appears to have passed its earlier stages
without opposition, but Lord Yelverton strongly objected to it,
and in its later stages it was much opposed in both Houses.
Dobbs took a prominent part against it;* and although the
Bill was ultimately carried, it had not yet received the royal
assent, when the startling news arrived in Dublin, that a French
expedition had landed at Killala Bay.

Of all the many deceptions that had attended the United
Trish conspiracy, none was so bitter and so fatal as the complete
_ apathy shown by the French during the two terrible months
that had just passed. In truth, since the death of Hoche, the
Trish could reckon on no real friend, and Buonaparte from the
first took very little interest in their affairs, During the last

1 See Emmet’s statement (Madden, 2 Saunders’s Newsletter, June 28,
iii. 56). The memoir of the three 1798.
United Irishmen will be found in the 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
Castlereagh Correspondence, i. 3538-379, 380.
872. Cornwallis was quite satisfied 4 FKaulkner’s Journal, Aug. 2,1798;

with the results of the examination. Auckland Correspondence, iv. 53.
(Correspondence, ii. 384.)

202 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

two months, however, of 1797, and in the January and Feb-
ruary of 1798, an English invasion was greatly in his thoughts,
and very serious preparations for it were made. Buonaparte
himself, Kleber, Caffarelli, and Dessaix visited the chief ports
on the French coast. A new requisition was sent to Holland,
and the army for the invasion of England was rapidly organised.
Buonaparte at this time had several interviews with Tone and
Lewins, asked many questions about Ireland, received from
them maps and reports, but himself said little, though one of
the Directory greatly elated them by an assurance ‘ that France
would never grant a peace to England on any terms short of the
independence of Ireland.’! If an English invasion had taken
place, it might have been combined with a movement against
Treland, and it would at all events, if successful, have prevented
England from giving assistance to Irish loyalists.

But the more Buonaparte examined the state of the French
navy, and the details of the projected enterprise, the less he was
satisfied, and at length, towards the close of February, he wrote
to the Directory that it must be abandoned. He then, with
one of those prompt decisive turns that were so characteristic of
his genius, completely changed his policy, and made the con-
quest of Egypt, and, as a preparation for that conquest, the
occupation of Malta, his supreme object. A few days before the
Irish rebellion broke out, he had sailed for Malta.?

Many years after, when reviewing his career at St. Helena,
he spoke of this decision as one of his great errors. ‘On what,’
he said, ‘do the destinies of empires hang! .. . If, instead
of the expedition of Egypt, I had made that of Ireland, if slight
deranging circumstances had not thrown obstacles in the way
of my Boulogne enterprise—what would England have been
to-day ? and the Continent? and the political world?’

Whether at this time any large expedition could have suc-
ceeded in reaching the Irish coast, it is impossible to say; but
no one can question that, if it had succeeded at the beginning
or in the middle of the rebellion, its effect would have been most
serious. If the outbreak in Ireland had taken place a little

1 Tone’s Memoirs, ii. 454-458, 462, 334.

473, 474, 476, 479. 3 Las Cases, Mémoires de Sainte-
_ * See Guillon, Za France et VIr-  Héléene, ii. 335 (ed. 1823).
lande pendant la Révolution, pp. 331-

CH. XXX, EXPEDITION OF HUMBERT, 203

earlier, or if the Egyptian project had been postponed a little
longer, Ireland would probably have become a central object in
the military policy of Buonaparte, and the whole course of events
might have been changed. Long afterwards, in 1804, Napoleon
thought seriously of an Irish expedition, and there is a letter in
his correspondence describing the conditions of success ;! but
the moment, since the mutiny of the Nore, in which such an
enterprise was most likely to have succeeded, found France
abundantly occupied in the Mediterranean. Lewins, in the be-
ginning of June, pressed the claims of his countrymen strongly on
the Directory. He reminded them of the promise he had been
authorised to send to Ireland, that France would never make
peace with England except on the condition of the independence
of Ireland. He described with some exaggeration, but probably
with perfect good faith, the magnitude and extent of the rebel-
lion, and he urged that 5,000 good French troops, with 30,000
guns and some cannon and munitions, would be sufficient to
secure its triumph.’

Wolfe Tone was indefatigable in supporting the applications
of his friend. The Directors were not unwilling to accede to
their demand, but they could do nothing more than effect a
slight diversion ; and after considerable delay, they gave orders
that a number of small expeditions should be directed simultane-
ously to different points on the Irish coast.4 Even such a plan,
if it had been promptly and skilfully accomplished, might have
had a great effect, but, as usual at this time, nothing in the
French navy was in good order, and everything was mismanaged.
‘The expedition of Humbert, which was the first ready, consisted
.of three frigates and only 1,036 soldiers. It was delayed until
the rebellion in Ireland had been crushed, and it started alone,
as.no other expedition was yet ready.

' ‘Tt set sail from the island of Aix on August 6, four days
after the great battle of the Nile, in which Nelson had totally
shattered the French fleet of Admiral Bruix, destroyed a third
part of the naval force of France, made England irresistible in

17 vendém. an xiii (Sept. 29, 359-361.

1804). 3 Tone’s Memoirs, ii. 505-509.

2 This letter is in the French 4 Guillon, pp. 368, 369. The orders
Archives de la Marine, and has been of the Directory appear only to have
printed by Guillon, Za France et been issued on July 30 (12 thermidor,
' VIrlande pendant la Révolution, pp. an yi).

204 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX,

the Mediterranean, and put an end to all chance of a French
conquest of Egypt. In order to escape the English, the French
took a long circuitous course. They intended to enter Donegal
Bay, but were prevented by hostile winds; they then made for
Killala Bay, in the county of Mayo, and anchored near the
little town of Killala on August 22. English flags flew from
their masts, and the port surveyor, as well as the two sons of
the bishop, went without suspicion to the fleet, and were de-
tained as prisoners. The same evening, about six o'clock, the
French landed. Some fifty yeomen and fencibles who were in
Killala were hastily drawn out by Lieutenant Sills to resist the
invaders, but they were speedily overpowered. Two of them
were killed, nineteen taken prisoners, and the rest put to flight.
A sailor named John Murphy, who commanded a small trading
vessel that lay in the bay, volunteered to set sail for France
bearing a despatch announcing the successful landing.'

The Protestant bishop, Dr. Stock, with eleven children,’ was
living in the great castle of Killala, and as it was visitation time,
and there was no decent hotel in the town, he was surrounded
by several clergymen. Dr. Stock had been very recently
appointed to the see, and the appointment had not been a
political one, but was entirely due to his merits. He had been
a Fellow of Trinity College. He was a distinguished Hebrew
scholar, and had published a translation of the Book of Job; he
spoke French fluently, and the singularly interesting and graphic
account which he wrote of the events that he now witnessed,
shows that he was akeen and discriminating judge of men. His
palace was at once occupied; a green flag with the inscription,
‘ Hrin-go-bragh,’ was hoisted above its gate, and he himself be-
came a prisoner in the hands of the French.3

1 Byrne’s Memoirs, iii. 54-57. relating to Humbert’s expedition are:

2 The bishop is careful to remark,
that Mrs. Stock had four other sons,

3 See his Narrative of what passed
at Killala during the French Invasion,
by an eye-witness. Bishop Stock also
wrote a private journal, which has
been printed by Maxwell in his His-
tory of the Rebellion of 1798 ; and two
long letters on the same subject,
which will be found in the Auckland
Correspondence. In addition to his
writings and to the Government de-
spatches, the chief original documents

an Impartial Relation of the Military
Operations im consequence of the
Landing of the French Troops, by an
officer who served under Lord Corn-
wallis (1799)—a pamphlet which
contains, among other things, an ex-
cellent military map; Votice Histo-
rique sur la Descente des Francais,
par L. O. Fontaine (adjutant-general
of Humbert); and The Last Speech and
Dying Words of Martin McLoughlin.
A book called Aventures de Guerre
au Temps de la République, by

CH. XXX. HUMBERT AND HIS MEN. 205

The French had brought with them three United Irishmen,
Matthew Tone, who was a brother of Wolfe Tone ; Bartholomew
Teeling ; anda man named Sullivan, who was nephew to Madgett,
the Secretary at the French Foreign Office. They had also an
officer named O’Keon, who was an Irishman naturalised in France,
and who was very useful, as he had come from the neighbour-
hood of Ballina, and was thoroughly acquainted with the Irish
language.' Humbert, their commander, was one of the many
adventurers to whom the French Revolution had opened out a
career. He was so illiterate that he could do little more than
write his name, and his manners were those of a rude, violent,
uneducated peasant. He was of good height and fine figure,
and in the full vigour of life, but his countenance was not
attractive, and he had a small, sleepy, cunning, cruel eye, as
of a cat when about to spring. He was, however, an excellent
soldier, full of courage, resource, decision, and natural tact,
and the bishop soon discovered that much of his rough and
violent manner was assumed for the purpose of obtaining imme-
diate obedience. He had served at the siege of Mayence, in La
Vendée, and at Quiberon, and had taken part. in the expedition
to Bantry Bay.

Of the troops he brought with him, the bishop has given a
striking picture. ‘To a superficial eye they presented nothing
that was imposing. ‘Their stature for the most part was low ;
their complexions pale and sallow, their clothes much the worse
for wear, but it was soon found that they were characterised
to a surprising degree by ‘intelligence, activity, temperance,
patience,’ and ‘the exactest obedience to discipline.’ They were
men ‘who would be well content to live on bread and potatoes,
to drink water, to make the stones of the street their bed, and
to. sleep in their clothes, with no covering but the canopy of
heaven. One half of their number had served in Italy under
Buonaparte ; the rest were from the Rhine, where they had
suffered distresses that well accounted for their persons and wan
looks. Several of them declared, with all the marks of sincerity,

Moreau de Jonnés, purports to give
the account of an eye-witness, but it
is full of errors. This expedition, as
well as that of Bantry Bay, has
recently been investigated by M.
Guillon, with a research that leaves

little or nothing to be added.

1 Stock’s Narrative, p. 60. Miles
Byrne gives several particulars about
the later life of O’Keon, or, as he
calls him, O’Kean. (Memoirs, iii. 64—
66.)

206 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. Cin Xk

that at the siege of Mentz, during the preceding winter, they had
for a long time slept on the ground in holes made four feet
deep under the snow ; and an officer, pointing to his leather small
clothes, assured the bishop that he had not taken them off for a
twelvemonth.’

Their conduct among the people was most admirable. Hum-
bert at once desired the bishop to be under no apprehension ;
he assured him that no one should be ill treated, and that the
French would take only what was absolutely necessary for their
support, and this promise was almost perfectly fulfilled. ‘It
would be a great injustice,’ writes the bishop, ‘ to the excellent
discipline constantly maintained by these invaders while they re-
mained in our town, not to remark that, with every temptation
to plunder, which the time and the number of valuable articles
within their reach, presentedtothem, . . . notasingle particular
of private property was found to have been carried away.’ In his
own palace, ‘ the attic story, containing a library and three bed-
chambers, continued sacred to the bishop and his family; and so
scrupulous was the delicacy of the French not to disturb the
female part of the house, that not one of them was ever seen to
go higher than the middle floor, except on the evening of their
success at Castlebar, when two officers begged leave to carry to
the family the news of the battle.’

There could hardly be a more hopeless enterprise than that
in which this handful of brave men were engaged. They
expected to find Ireland in a blaze of insurrection, or at least
thrilling with sympathy for French ideas. They came when
the rebellion was completely crushed, and reduced to a mere
guerilla war in the Wicklow mountains, when there were
hardly less than 100,000 armed men at the service of the
~ Crown, and to a province which had been perfectly tranquil
during the whole struggle, and which was almost untouched by
revolutionary propagandism. A proclamation had been pre-
pared, and was distributed among the poor, ignorant Mayo
peasantry, congratulating them on the interest they had taken
in the progress of the French Revolution, reminding them that
they had been enduring ‘ punishments, and even death,’ for their

‘ Navez-vous pas enduré con- parce qu’on vous regardait comme nos
stamment les supplices et la mort, amis?’ (Guillon, p. 375.)

CH. XXX. THE IRISH RECRUITS. 207

friendship to France,’ and adjuring them, by the example of
America, and by the memory of many battles, of which they had
assuredly never heard, to rise as a man to throw off the English
yoke. But Humbert soon found that he was in an atmosphere
of thought and feeling wholly different from what he had ex-
pected. He was disappointed to find that the bishop, who was
the principal person remaining at Killala, would not declare
himself on the side of the Revolution, and that the Protestants,
who were the most substantial inhabitants, held steadily aloof.
Two only, who were notorious drunkards, joined the French, and
it was characteristic of the ideas that prevailed, that, on doing
so, they thought it necessary to declare their conversion to the
Catholic faith.

Many boxes, however, of arms and uniforms had been
brought over, and when these were opened, the peasantry
speedily streamedin. Though ragged and dirty and half savage,
they had strong bodies and quick natural intelligence, and the
keen eye of the French general clearly saw, as many English
officers had seen before him, that, with the education of good
military discipline, they might be turned into soldiers as
excellent even as those of Buonaparte. But except a dislike
to tithes, which was far more languid in Connaught than in
either Munster or Ulster, they had not an idea in common with
the French, and no kind of political motive appears to have
animated them. They joined the invaders with delight when
they learnt that, for the first time in their lives, they were to
receive meat every day. They danced with joy like children
when they saw the blue uniforms, and the glittering helmets
edged with brown paper to imitate leopard’s skin, that were
provided for them, and they rapturously accepted the guns
that were given them, but soon spoiled many of them by their
utter inexperience. It was found necessary, indeed, to stop
the distribution of ammunition, as the only way of preventing
them from using their new toy in shooting crows.

In addition to the desire for meat rations, for uniforms and
for guns, the hope of plunder and the love of adventure made
many recruits, and there was some faint trace of a religious
feeling. Agents were abroad, busily whispering the familiar
-calumny that the Orangemen were plotting to exterminate the

208 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

Catholics,! and circulating old prophecies of a religious war,’
and there was a vague, wide-spread notion, that the French
were the special champions of the Catholic faith. The soldiers
of the Revolution, whom the panic-stricken priests in other
lands had long regarded as the most ferocious and most terrible
of the agents of anti-Christ, now found themselves, to their own
astonishment and amusement, suddenly transfigured into Cru-
saders; surrounded by eager peasants, who declared ‘ that they
were come to take arms for France and the Blessed Virgin.’
‘God help these simpletons,’ said one of the French officers to
Bishop Stock; ‘if they knew how little we care about the Pope
or his religion, they would not be so hot in expecting help
from us;’ and old soldiers of the Italian army exclaimed with
no small disgust, that, having just driven the Pope out of Italy,
they had never expected to meet him again in Ireland. The
Trish, on their side, were not a little surprised to find that these
strange soldiers ‘of the Blessed Virgin’ never appeared at mass,
could not be induced to treat a priest with the smallest respect,
and always preferred to carry on their communications through
the heretical bishop.?

The story is one which would have more of the elements of
comedy than of tragedy, if it were not for the dark spectre of a
bloody retribution that was behind. The French did what
they could to arm and discipline their wild recruits. They
restrained them severely from plunder, and they treated them
like children, which, indeed, in mind and character they truly
were. After reconnoitring Ballina, and scattering a small
party of soldiers in its neighbourhood, they pushed on towards
Castlebar, leaving 200 French soldiers to keep order at Killala,
and a few others at Ballina. There were, however, no signs of
a general rising in their favour, or of any real wish for their
success, and the kind of recruits they had hastily armed were
not likely to be of much use. The number of these recruits
has been very differently stated, and is not easy to ascertain.
It appears that, in the course of the French expedition, the

1A Narrative of what passed at 2 See Musgrave, pp. 560, 561.
Killala, p. 24. See, too, on the as- 8 Narrative of what passed at
siduity and success with which this  K¢#Zlala, pp. 59, 80, 81; Maxwell,
rumour was spread through Mayo,  p. 259.

Musgrave, p. 566.

CH. XXX. HUTCHINSON’S MARCH TO CASTLEBAR. 209

whole of the 4,000 or 5,000 guns they had brought over were
distributed, and that after the distribution recruits streamed in,
but the distribution of arms is no measure of the number of
Irish the French could bring into the field. Many who had
received guns and uniforms, availed themselves of the first oppor-
tunity to fly to their mountain cabins with their spoil. Some,
disguising their voices and with new stories, came again and
again, in order to obtain double or treble provisions of arms,
ammunition, and uniforms, and then disappeared and sold them
for whisky. Many recruits were left at Killala, and perhaps
some others at Ballina, and it is probable that the number of
Trish who were with Humbert when he arrived at Castlebar,
little, if at all, exceeded 500.1

Major-General Hutchinson at this time commanded in
Connaught, and he was at Galway when the news of the invasion
arrived. His province had been so quiet during the rebellion,
that it contained much fewer troops than the other parts of
Ireland, but he could at once assemble near 4,000 men. He
lost no time in collecting them, and in moving towards the scene
of danger; but Cornwallis, on hearing of the invasion, at once
sent General Lake, as a more experienced soldier, to command in
Connaught; gave orders for a concentration of many thousands
of troops from other provinces, and hastened to go down himself
to lead them. Hutchinson arrived at Castlebar on the 25th.
Whatever may have been the secret dispositions of the people,
he found the whole country through which he passed, and the
whole neighbourhood of Castlebar, perfectly quiet, though there
were alarming rumours that 1,800 Irish had joined the French
at Killala and Ballina. He was obliged, in moving his troops,
to leave Leitrim and Roscommon open, and the bridges of the
Upper Shannon almost without protection, but not the smallest
inconvenience ensued. All Connaught, except in the immediate
neighbourhood of Killala, was absolutely peaceful.? It was har-

1 This is the estimate of General
Hutchinson (Cornwallis Correspond-
ence, ii. 410); Cooke states that
Lake’s secretary, who was in the
battle, said ‘he saw no peasantry;’
and Cornwallis reported to Portland
on Sept. 1, that he had good reason to
believe that the French ‘have as yet
“been joined by a very inconsiderable

MOG, NAGIE

portion of the inhabitants, and those
(with very few exceptions) of the
lowest order. No material disaffec-
tion has shown itself in other parts
of the kingdom.’ (Ibid. p. 397.)
See, too, p. 402, and Stock’s Varrative,
pp. 21, 22.

2 Impartial elation of the
Military Operations im. Ireland, in

P

210 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

vest time, and the people were busily engaged in the fields;
and though they were not actively loyal as an English popula-
tion might have been, and would no doubt have submitted very
readily to a French Government, they were perfectly inoffensive,
and desired only to be left alone.

Very few new recruits now came in to the French, and the
relations between the French and their allies were already very
tense. The French were learning every day more clearly, that
they had been utterly deceived about the state of Ireland and
the disposition of its people. They saw no signs of a rising.
They perceived plainly that their recruits were as far as possible
from being either heroes or patriots, fanatics or revolutionists ;
that the sole object of a great proportion of them was plunder ;
that they were always ready to desert ; and that they were likely
to prove perfectly worthless in battle! The French frigates had
sailed away; English vessels were hovering around the Connaught
coast, to prevent either rescue or escape, and unless the aspect
of affairs was speedily changed, by a general rising, or by the
landing of a new French force, it was absolutely hopeless. The
Trish recruits, on their side, had found that service under a French
general was a very different thing from a mere plundering raid,
and they complained bitterly of hard labour and severe discipline
and contemptuous treatment. Two of them were shot, probably
for good reasons, by the French. The others were employed in
digging entrenchments, and were often, in the absence of horses,
harnessed to the cannon or to the waggons.?

General Lake arrived at Castlebar on the night of the 26th,
and at once took the command. The forces that were concen-
trated in that town were very considerable. In addition to those
under General Hutchinson, which amounted to nearly 4,000

consequence of the Landing of French
Troops under General Humbert. by an
officer under the command of Lord
Cornwallis (1799), pp. 5, 6-12.

1 Miss Edgeworth, wholived notvery
far from the scene of the rebellion, and
who had good means of information,
has described forcibly the character
of the recruits, and the disgust ex-
pressed by the French. (Life of R.
L. Edgeworth, ii. 214, 215.)

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
402. See a curious pamphlet, pub-
lished at Cork, called The Last

Speech and Dying Words of Martin
McLoughlin. It is evidently the
work of some one who was intimately
acquainted with the campaign; but
it is equally evident, that it was not
the composition of an uneducated
peasant. It gives a vivid picture of
the alleged ill treatment of the Irish.
Fontaine notices that they were em-
ployed to draw a waggon with am-
munition, as there were no horses.
(Notice dela Descente des Frangais,
p. 58.)

CH, XXX. HUTCHINSON ATTACKS CASTLEBAR, 211

men, General Taylor had marched from Sligo towards Castle-
bar, on the 25th, with about 1,200 men, chiefly yeomanry.!
There were two ways from Ballina to Castlebar. The regular
road lay through the village of Foxford, eleven miles from
Castlebar, and this was believed to be the only road by
which an army could march. Near that village it crossed the
river Moy, and at that point could easily be guarded. General
Taylor, at the head of his detachment, undertook to protect it,
and his corps had been strengthened by the Kerry Militia and
the Leinster Fencibles which had been detached from Castlebar.?
Humbert, however, completely outmanceuvred his opponents.
Taking a wild rocky path, which had been left unguarded because
it was believed to be completely impracticable for an army, he
avoided the troops that were waiting for him, and after a won-
derful march of no less than fifteen hours,* appeared before
Castlebar about seven o'clock on the morning of the 27th He
had hoped to surprise it, but the news of his approach had been
brought shortly before, to Hutchinson and Lake, and they
had drawn out their troops, numbering 1,600 or 1,700 men,*
on a height above Castlebar, flanked by a lake and by a
marsh, and so strong that it would appear madness for a tired
and inferior force to attack it. The troops of Hutchinson were
only militia, fencibles, and yeomen, but they greatly outnum-
bered the enemy. They were fresh from a night’s rest, and in
addition to their immense advantage of position, they had ten
pieces of cannon and one howitzer. There were probably
little more than 700 Frenchmen, though they were followed
by a considerable body of inefficient Irish recruits. They had
only thirty or forty mounted men, and their whole artillery
consisted of two small four-pound guns, which had been dragged
across the mountains by the peasantry.

The soldiers, however, who had been trained under Kleber
and Buonaparte, were of a very different type from the Irish
militia. At the sight of the enemy they seemed to forget their
fatigue, and at once pressed on rapidly to the attack. In the

1 Impartial Narrative, pp. 12,13. in addition, a reserve force in Castle-

= AN oyte Rajon Nee bar itself. (P. 16.) Compare General
’ See Humbert’s despatch, Guillon, Hutchinson’s statement, Cornwallis
p. 384. Correspondence, ii. 410.

4 Fontaine asserts that there was,

212 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

face of a deadly cannonade, which swept away many of them,
and scattered their Irish allies far and wide ; in the face of the
heavy fire of musketry, the little band of Frenchmen swiftly
climbed the steep ascent, and then, with their bayonets fixed,
rushed impetuously on the foe. The affair lasted only a few
minutes. The artillery, it is admitted, were well served.
Lord Roden’s cavalry showed real courage, but the rest of the
troops of Lake at once broke, and fled in the wildest terror.
They were driven, at the point of the bayonet, through the chief
street of Castlebar, and for some distance beyond the town.
All their cannon, all their flags, all their munitions, were taken.
The road was strewn with the muskets which they cast aside in
their headlong flight, and though the French soon desisted from
the pursuit, the remains of the beaten army never paused till
they reached Tuam, which was thirty miles from the scene of
action, and then after a short rest they again pressed on towards
Athlone. Some of the men who were beaten at Castlebar are
said to have reached that town at one o’clock on the 29th,
haying traversed sixty-three miles in twenty-seven hours.!

This was the flight known in Ireland as ‘the race of Castle-
bar.’ Never was there a rout more abject or more complete,
and those who witnessed it must have asked themselves what
would have happened if, at’ any time within the two preceding
years, 12,000 or 15,000 French soldiers like those of Humbert
had been landed. ‘Nothing could exceed the misconduct of
the troops, with the exception of the artillery . . . and of Lord
Roden’s Fencibles, was Hutchinson’s verdict on his army.?
‘The panic’ of the troops was described by Lake as ‘ beyond
description ;’* and Cornwallis feared that the effect on the
country would be so serious, that, in spite of the vast forces now
in Ireland, he urged upon Portland the necessity of sending as
great a reinforcement as possible from Great Britain either
to Dublin, Waterford, or Belfast. The impression the affair
made upon competent judges in England, may be inferred from
a letter from Auckland to Cooke. ‘In the course of twenty-four
eventful years,’ he wrote, ‘it has happened to me to receive
many unpleasant and unexpected accounts of military defeats

: Gordon, p. 237. 2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 410.
3 Ibid. p. 391. * Tbid. p. 392.

Gm. Xxx, MISCONDUCT OF THE TROOPS. 213

=

and disgraces. One of the hardest strokes in that way was the
surrender of Burgoyne’s army at Saratoga; but I do not think
it either affected or surprised me so much as your Castlebar
catastrophe. . . . If the impression of that business should
have encouraged and brought forward a general explosion, the
consequences may be very serious, and God send us a good
deliverance.’ !

Even this, however, is not a full measure of the misconduct
of the militia. ‘Their conduct, wrote an officer, speaking
of the Longford and Kilkenny regiments, ‘and that of the
carbiniers and Frazer’s, in action on the retreat from Castlebar
and Tuam, and the depredations they committed on the road,
exceed, I am told, all description. Indeed, they have, I believe,
raised a spirit of discontent and disaffection, which did not
before exist in this part of the country. Every endeavour has
been made to prevent plunder in our corps, but it really is
impossible to stop it in some of the regiments of militia with
us, particularly the light battalions.’ The women who accom-
panied the soldiers were described as the worst plunderers.
Cornwallis was obliged to issue a stern order, calling on the
officers * to assist him ‘in putting a stop to the licentious con-
duct of the troops, and in saving the wretched inhabitants from
being robbed, and in the most shocking manner ill treated, by
those to whom they had a right to look for safety and pro-
tection.’ He appointed a provost-marshal to follow with a
guard in the train of the army, to protect the villagers, and
he threatened with instant execution any soldier who was found
robbing, or with stolen articles in his possession.?

The soldiers of Humbert had well earned a period of rest,
and they remained at Castlebar from August 27 to September 4.
Humbert, however, was not inactive. He saw that, unless a new
French expedition arrived, his only chance was to win a general
support from the country, and he hoped to attain this end by
issuing a proclamation establishing a provisional government in
Connaught, and making arrangements for a general arming of
the people.? One of his first measures was to recall the 200

GTS. 0) 2 Cornnallis Correspondence, ii. 394, 395.
8 Guillon, pp. 387, 388.

214 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH RK.

French soldiers he had left at Killala, and who had hitherto
succeeded most admirably in preserving order. Three French
officers only were left there, to guard the town with the assist-
ance of Irish recruits.

The terror of the bishop and of the few Protestant inhabi-
tants at the removal of their protectors was very great, and
they feared that the tragedies of the Wexford rebellion would
now be reproduced in Connaught. They lived, in truth, for
three weeks in constant danger and alarm; and threats and
rumours of the most terrible description were abundantly
circulated. But in Mayo the people had not been driven to
madness by flogging and house-burning. They had been well
treated by their great landlords, and appear to have had no
dislike to them, and although agitators had begun to ply their
venomous trade, fanning religious passions, and telling the
people that, if they followed the French, they would never
again have to pay either tithes or rent,! Connaught had not
yet been drawn into their net. There was some plunder in
Killala, and much more in the open country around it, where
many gentlemen’s houses had been deserted by their owners,
but there was little fanaticism and no real ferocity, and probably
not more violence and outrage than would have taken place
in any country in which the people were poor, ignorant, and
lawless, and in which all the restraining influences that protect
property had been suddenly withdrawn. Musgrave, with his
usual malevolent partiality, has endeavoured to blacken the
character of these poor peasants, by collecting instances not
only of their misdeeds, but even of their evil intentions. An
impartial judge, who considers their circumstances, and re-
members how savagely in other parts of Ireland the civil
war had been provoked, and waged, and repressed, and
punished, will, I think, pronounce their conduct to have been
on the whole remarkably good. The testimony of Bishop
Stock on this subject is beyond suspicion. ‘It is a circum-
stance worthy of particular notice,’ he writes, ‘that during
the whole time of this civil commotion, not a drop of blood
was shed by the Connaught rebels, except in the field of war.
It is true, the example and influence of the French went a

1 See Martin McLoughlin, pp. 6, 7.

CH, XxK SIGNS OF RELIGIOUS ANIMOSITY. 218

great way to prevent sanguinary excesses. But it will not
be deemed fair to ascribe to this cause alone the forbearance of
which we were witnesses, when it is considered what a range of
country lay at the mercy of the rebels for several days after the
French power was known to be at an end.’!

This fact is especially remarkable, when we remember the
large number of refugees, driven by lawless violence from the
North, who had taken refuge in Mayo. It is, however, certain
that here, as in other parts of Catholic Ireland, what little
fanaticism existed was almost entirely religious. There was no
question of nationality or parliamentary reform. ‘The feeling
of the people was not primarily directed against England, or
against monarchy, or against landlords. The natural spon-
taneous division was between Catholics and Protestants; and a
disarming of the Protestants, the confiscation of their property,
and their expulsion from power and from Ireland, were frequently
threatened. Except at Castlebar, where much indiscriminate
plunder seems to have followed the capture of the town, nearly
all who were robbed, or whose houses were injured, were Pro-
testants. The few persons of some weight and education who
joined the French, appear to have been all Catholics. Several
priests assisted, or at least connived, at the rebellion, though
Bishop Stock attributes their conduct much less to fanaticism or
seditious dispositions, than to their utterly dependent position,
which made it necessary for them to adopt the political creed of
their people. This dependence, the bishop truly said, was one
of the chief dangers of Ireland, and he believed that 1t would
continue till the priests were paid by the State. Several Pro-
testant places of worship were injured, and it is a remarkable
illustration of the great distance that separated the Connaught
rebellion from the ideas of the United Irishmen, that the one
Presbyterian meeting-house in the neighbourhood was the special
object of hostility, and was soon reduced to a wreck.

This hostility was largely due to an attempt which had been
made to spread Protestantism in Mayo. The motives which in-
spired such attempts in the eighteenth century are so different
from those of modern missionary societies, that they have often
been misunderstood. In the period immediately following

1 Narrative, pp. 24, 25.

216 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. Xxx.

the Revolution, they had been especially political. At a later
period they were mainly social and industrial. The Irish gentry
at this time were singularly free from theological fanaticisms
and speculations, but they were convinced that in Ireland at
least, Protestantism incontestably represented the higher level of
order, industry, intelligence, and civilisation, and they believed
that all these things would follow in its wake. Even the
Charter Schools, which were distinctly proselytising, and which
led to some of the worst abuses in Irish life, were probably
originally due much less to an anxiety about the condition
of Catholic children in another world, than to a desire to bring
them under a more healthy and civilising influence in this.
In the same way, it was a widespread belief among philan-
thropic Irishmen in the eighteenth century, that the most
effectual method of reclaiming the more barbarous portions of
the island, was to plant in them small colonies of industrious
and intelligent Protestant manufacturers, which might act as
centres of civilisation, and gradually raise the level around
them. This was the policy that led to the plantation of German
palatines and of French refugees, and it was sometimes pursued
by private individuals. We have had a conspicuous example of
it in the colony established by Jackson at Forkhill; and some
years before the period with which our narrative is at present
concerned, an Harl of Arran had planted a colony of industrious
Presbyterian weavers from the North at a little village called
Mullifaragh, near Killala. It speedily took root and flourished,
and when the rebellion broke out, it numbered not less than 1,000
souls. These men were now denounced as Orangemen ; they
were plundered of their property; their houses were wrecked,
their looms destroyed, and a great number of them were carried
as prisoners to Ballina.!

Charost, who was the principal of the three French officers
left at Killala, steadily opposed these acts of violence. He did
all in his power to prevent the destruction of the Presbyterian
colony, and he made a special journey to Ballina to release the
prisoners. Having, like the other French officers, expected to

’ Stock’s Narrative, pp. 81-88,98. naught. The bishop had much op-
It appears from Bishop Stock, that posed the extension of the society to
there were some Orangemen in Con- this province.

CH. XXx. STATE OF KILLALA. yay:

find in Ireland a population prepared to struggle earnestly
against English rule, he was utterly disgusted with what he saw
about him, and he more than once expressed his contempt for
his allies! It was, in truth, not surprising that these poor
western peasants should have been unwilling to encounter hard-
ships and dangers for political causes about which they knew
nothing and cared nothing.

' The three officers showed an admirable zeal and courage in
preserving order and repressing outrage. A strong patrol was
appointed to parade through the town and its environs to the dis-
tance of three miles every night, but as robberies and midnight
outrages were very frequent, Charost issued a proclamation in-
viting all inhabitants, without distinction of religion or party, to
come to him and receive arms from the French stores, for the sole
purpose of securing property and order, and on no other condition
than a promise of restoring them to him when he called for them.
Many Protestants, who had no sympathy with the invaders,
gladly accepted this condition, obtained arms from the French
commander, and would have entered upon their duties if it had
not been for the violent and almost mutinous protest of the
recruits. They protested against arming Protestants, or any
persons who would not join in the rebellion, and they intimi-
dated the Protestants into resigning their arms. The confusion
of the three languages in which all orders were given, greatly
added to the difficulty of the situation, and Bishop Stock appears
to have been much employed in the negotiations. Streams of
peasants were pouring in from the country; robberies were of
daily and nightly occurrence, and for two or three days the
danger was great. At length a compromise was arrived at. A
regular provisional government was established in Killala and
the neighbourhood, for the sole purpose of maintaining order, and
although it was purely Catholic, it was directed by respectable
Catholic inhabitants, who had taken no part in the rebellion, and
who now came forward with the full approbation and sanction of
the Protestant bishop. Under this system, and ‘under the

1 Stock’s Narrative, p. 86. In his Irish devils, if I had a body to form
private journal, the bishop mentions out of them? I would pick out one-
that he overheard another French third of them, and, by the Lord, I
officer say to his commander: ‘Do would shoot the rest.’ (Maxwell,
you know what I would dowith these pp. 259.)

218 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH, XXX.

energetic direction of the French officers, a very tolerable degree
of order and security prevailed in the town and in its immediate
neighbourhood.!

At Castlebar, Humbert soon found that his hope of a general
rising was vain. A considerable number of the militia, who had
served under Lake, had deserted to him, and as they were all
Catholics, and as rumours of disaffection among the Catholic
militia had previously been very rife, their conduct has been often
ascribed to deliberate treachery, but it is at least equally pro-
bable that they acted merely under the influence of panic, as
many of them seem to have subsequently deserted from the
French.? Some hundreds of recruits, chiefly from the mountains
in the western part of Mayo, also came in, but they were nearly
all poor, ignorant men, of the lowest class, attracted by the hope
of plunder, and scarcely anyone of real weight was among them.
Humbert found his new recruits useful in throwing up entrench-
ments. He tried to give them some notions of military disci-
pline, and he armed them with the muskets which were thrown
away by the troops in their flight, but he found that there was
no real or genuine national movement in his favour. In the
meantime, Cornwallis was hurrying to the scene of action at the
head of irresistible forces, and he was a man of far greater mili-
tary talent than Lake or Hutchinson. On August 28, he had
reached Athlone; on the 30th, he was at Ballinamore; and on
September 4, he arrived at Hollymount, within about thirteen
miles of Castlebar. On that morning, Humbert, finding that
further delay would be fatal, left Castlebar, and directed his
course by long, swift, forced marches to Sligo. He probably
desired to reach the coast, where reinforcements were principally
expected ; to kindle insurrection in new fields, and to select the
line of march where he was least likely to meet a crushing

— British army ; and he appears to have had a somewhat wild pro-

1 See the full account in Bishop
Stock’s Marrative. The bishop says:
‘ Whatever could be effected by vigi-
lance, resolution, and conduct, for the
safety of a place confided to them,
was, to a surprising degree, effected
for the district of Killala by these
three French officers, without the
support of a single soldier of theirown
country, and that for the long space

of twenty-three days, from the first
of September to the day of the
battle.’ (P. 52.)

2 Cooke reports that Humbert
afterwards ‘said, 200 of the Longford
and Kilkenny [Militia] at one time
joined them, but they all deserted
from them, except about 60.’ (Corn-
nallis Correspondence, ii. 402.)

CH. XXX) MOVEMENTS OF HUMBERT, 219

ject of ultimately making his way to Dublin, and raising the
country about it.!

His position, however, was hopeless, for the forces now con-
centrated in Connaught were overwhelming. General Knox,
who had borne so great a part in Ulster politics, had at this time
been under orders for the West Indies, and had actually em-
barked at Portsmouth, when he was suddenly recalled, and with
a large detachment of English troops, he landed at Galway in
the beginning of September.? The defeated army of Lake had
been in some degree reorganised, and having been strengthened
by a junction with the troops of General Taylor, it was ordered
to follow on the steps of the French without hazarding a general
engagement,? while Cornwallis proceeded along the line from
Hollymount to Carrick-on-Shannon, with an army which is said
to have numbered not less than 20,000 men. Sligo, which
was the object of the march of the French, was garrisoned by
militia, and as the invaders approached the town, Colonel
Vereker, who believed that only a detachment of the French
were approaching, issued forth at the head of about 300 Limerick
Militia, thirty light dragoons, and two curricle guns, and attacked
the vanguard at a place called Colooney, about five miles from
Sligo. These militiamen, unlike those at Castlebar, fought most
gallantly for about an hour against a greatly superior force of
excellent French troops; and although they were ultimately
beaten with the loss of their two cannon, the French lost both men
and time they could ill spare. Humbert supposed the troops of
Vereker to be the advanced guard of an army, and he accordingly
suddenly changed his plan. In doing so, he appears to have com-
mitted a great error. If he had continued, Sligo must have been
taken, as it was abandoned by Vereker, and the French might
then have possibly evaded the army of Cornwallis, and prolonged
the struggle for some time in the mountains of the North. It
is probable, however, that Humbert knew little or nothing of
the real position of the English troops, and that he was influ-
enced by news which had just arrived, that an insurrection had
broken out about Granard, and that large bodies of men were in

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 3 Compare the Impartial Relation,
402. See, too, Musgrave, p. 603. pp. 20, 27; Cornwallis Correspond-
2 Faulkner's Journal, Sept. 6, ence, ii. 401.
1798.

220 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

arms in the counties of Longford and Westmeath. If the
French could make their way through the armies that belea-
guered them, to the country which was in insurrection, all might
still be well.

The fight of Colooney had taken place on the morning of the
5th, and Humbert next marched rapidly to Drummahair, and
then, turning inland towards Lough Allen and the Shannon,
endeavoured to make his way to Granard, hotly pursued by the
troops of Lake. The march was so rapid, that he was obliged to
leave three of his guns dismounted on the road, and to throw five
other pieces of artillery into the water. He crossed the Shannon
at Ballintra, but had not time to destroy the bridge; reached
Cloone on the evening of the 7th, and there gave his wearied men
afew hours’ rest. It was very necessary, for it was computed that
since the French had left Castlebar, they had marched 110 miles.!
Many of the Irish, seeing that the struggle was hopeless, and
knowing that they had no quarter to expect, had escaped after
the affair at Colooney ; ? but at Cloone, Humbert received a depu-
tation from the insurgents at Granard. His adjutant-general
described their chief as half a madman, but a madman whose
courage and fanaticism might well raise a flame in the country,
and he says that, ‘he spoke only of fighting for the Blessed
Virgin Mary, whose champion he declared himself to be.’

It was impossible, however, for the French to reach Granard.
Every mile of their march from Drummahair brought them
nearer to Cornwallis, who now completely intercepted them by
reaching Carrick on the 7th, and then marching late at night
to Mochill, which was three miles from Cloone, and the delay at
Cloone enabled Lake to come up with the enemy. On the 8th,
the little body of French found themselves surrounded, ata place
called Ballinamuck, by the combined armies of Lake and Corn-
wallis, and after a short resistance, the position being absolutely
hopeless, these brave men at last surrendered. Only 844 men
remained of the little band which for eighteen days had so
seriously imperilled the British dominion in Connaught. The

1 Guillon, p. 395. Lake recommended them to mercy—
2 Martin McLoughlin (p. 18). a fact sufficiently unusual to be coms
Musgrave states that many Irish de- memorated. (Musgrave, p. 609.)
serted from the French to Lake in 8 Guillon, p. 396.
the course of the pursuit, and that

Cia pes.< THE PACIFICATION OF CONNAUGHT.

221

lrish who still remained with the French, were excluded from
quarter, and cut down without mercy. No accurate or official
statistics on this subject are preserved, but it is stated that 500
were killed, but that many others succeeded in escaping across
the bogs. Many of these made their way to Killala, and took
part in its final defence.! The loyalists’ loss in killed, wounded,
and missing was only nineteen men.? Matthew Tone and Teeling,
though captured with the French, were sent to Dublin, tried by
court-martial, condemned, and hanged.’

The short rebellion in Connaught was now nearly over. On
the 9th, Cornwallis, just before his return to Dublin, issued a
general order congratulating his troops warmly on their con-
duct, and he added: ‘The corps of yeomanry, in the whole
country through which the army has passed, have rendered the
greatest services, and are peculiarly entitled to the acknowledg-
ment of the Lord Lieutenant, from their not having tarnished
their courage and loyalty . . . by any acts of wanton cruelty
towards their deluded fellow-subjects.’* The insurrection about
Granard, which at one time seemed likely to assume formidable
proportions, was speedily suppressed by Irish yeomen, with the
assistance of a small force of Argyle Fencibles.> In the part of

1 Stock’s Narrative, p. 97.

2 Compare the accounts in the Jm-
partial Relation, in Guillon, and in
Gordon. The letters in the Cornwal-
lis and Castlereagh Correspondences
throw very little light on the details.
Fontaine says, the Irish escaped with
the exception of 300, who defended
themselves to the last, and were all
cut to pieces; and he adds, that two
brothers named Macdonald performed
prodigies of valour. (Fontaine, p. 41.)
Musgrave pretends that the French,
on surrendering, loaded their Irish
allies with reproaches. Maxwell
quotes the following passage from
the manuscript ‘Journal of a Field
Officer :’ ‘ After the action, the regi-
ment was marched to Carrick-on-
Shannon, where, in the court house,
there were collected a couple of hun-
dred rebel prisoners, taken in arms,
An orderarrived from Lord Cornwallis,
directing a certain number of them to
be hanged without further ceremony,
and bits of paper were rolled up, the
word “death” being written on the

number ordered, and, with these in
his hat, the adjutant, Captain Kay (on
whom devolved the management of
this wretched lottery), entered the
court house, and the drawing began.
As fast as a wretch drew the fatal
ticket, he was handed out, and hanged
at the door. Iam not sure of the exact
number thus dealt with, but seventeen
were actually hanged. It wasadread-
ful duty to devolve upon any regiment ;
but somehow or other, men’s minds
had grown as hard as the nether
millstone.’ (Maxwell, pp. 243, 244.)

3 Madden gives, from an old
magazine, areport of Matthew Tone’s
defence, from which he appears to
have pretended that he had only
come to Ireland because he was a
French soldier, and had no sympathy
with Irish treason. His brother's
journals sufficiently prove the false-
hood of the plea. (See Madden’s
United Irishmen, ii. 112-116.)

4 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
401, 402.

5 Gordon, pp. 244-247,

222 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

Mayo which the French had endeavoured to raise, the distur-
bances lasted a few days longer. On September 12, at three in
the morning, a great mob of rebels or bandits attacked the gar-
rison which had been placed in Castlebar, but they were met
with great courage and easily defeated. Thirty or forty prisoners
were brought in; they included one Frenchman, and several
men who wore French uniforms.!

Almost the whole country was now reduced to order, and
Killala was the only place where there was any serious resist-
ance. Even after the surrender of the French, many peasants
assembled to defend the town. As the French guns had been
all distributed, great numbers of pikes were hastily manufactured,
and there were all the signs of a sanguinary contest. ‘750
recruits, Bishop Stock writes, ‘were counted before the castle
gate on the 11th, who came to offer their services for retaking
the neighbouring towns, that had returned to their allegiance. . . .
The talk of vengeance on the Protestants was louder and more
frequent, the rebels were drilled regularly, ammunition was de-
manded, and every preparation made for an obstinate defence.’ ?
Many of the rebels desired to imprison the whole Protestant po-
pulation, and to preserve them as hostages in case the troops
adopted, as there was too good reason to believe they would, the
policy of extending no mercy to rebels; but on receiving news
from Castlebar that General Trench, who commanded the loyalists,
had treated, and meant to treat, his prisoners with humanity,
they abandoned their intention. Except for the plunder of some
houses, and the destruction of much property, the Protestants
remained unharmed till the end.3

A force of about 1,200 militiamen with five cannon now
marched upon Killala, and they reached it on September 238.
It should be noticed, that among the soldiers who distinguished
themselves in the capture of Killala, a foremost place has been
given to the Kerry Militia, who, with the exception of their
officers, were probably all Catholics. Of the other troops, a
large proportion were Scotch, but some were Downshire and
Queen’s County Militia.

1 Gordon p. 248. See, too,aletter of the troops was most exemplary.
of Captain Urquhart, who seems to * Stock’s Narrative, pp. 70-72, 88,

have commanded at Castlebar. (Sept. 89, 97, 98.
12, L.S.P.0.) He says, the conduct $ Ibid. pp. 100-114.

CH, XXX. KILLALA RECAPTURED. 223

The last scene presented the same savage and revolting
features which disgraced the repression in Wexford. A long
line of blazing cabins marked the course of the advancing
troops, and the slaughter in the town was terrible. The rebel
force scarcely exceeded 800 or 900 men, and in the absence of
their allies, they showed more courage than they had yet dis-
played in Connaught. The bishop, who was an eye-witness of
the scene, describes them as ‘running upon death with as little
appearance of reflection or concern as if they were hastening
to a show.’! But those who had guns, showed themselves
ludicrously incapable of using them. After twenty minutes’ re-
sistance, they broke and fled, and were fiercely pursued by the
troops. Numbers were cut down in the streets. Many others,
who had fled to the seashore, were swept away by the fire of a
cannon which was placed at the opposite side of the bay. Some
took refuge in the houses, and in these cases the innocent in-
habitants often perished with the rebels. After the battle was
over, and even during the whole of the succeeding day, unre-
sisting peasants were hunted down and slaughtered in the town,
and it was not till the evening of that day, that the sounds of
the muskets, that were discharged with little intermission at
flying and powerless rebels, ceased. The town itself was by
this time like a place taken by storm, and although the general
and officers are said to have tried to restrain their soldiers, they
utterly failed.”

Bishop Stock estimates that about 400 rebels were killed in
the battle and immediately after it. He mentions that of fifty-
three deserters of the Longford Militia, who had come into
Killala after the defeat of Castlebar, not one returned alive to
his home ;3 and that so many corpses lay unburied, that ravens,
attracted by the prey, multiplied that year to an unexampled
extent through the fields of Mayo.4 He adds a’ bitter complaint

of ‘the predatory habits of the soldiery.’ The ‘militia seemed
to think they had a right to take the property they had been
the means of preserving, and to use it as their own’ whenever
they stood in need of it. Their rapacity differed in no respect
from that of the rebels, except that they seized upon things

1 Stock’s WVarrative, p. 123. * Ibid. pp. 39, 123.
2"Tbid. pp. 123-127. 4T bid. pi 27.

224 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

with somewhat less of ceremony or excuse, and that his Majesty’s
soldiers were incomparably superior to the Irish traitors, in
dexterity at stealing.’! A long succession of courts-martial
followed, and several more or less prominent persons, who had
joined the French, were hanged. Some poor mountain districts,
where the wretched fugitives had found a shelter, next occupied
the attention of the commander. The weather had broken up,
and the fierce storms of rain and wind which, as winter draws
on, seldom fail to sweep that bleak Atlantic coast, had begun.
‘General Trench, therefore made haste to clear the wild districts
of the Laggan and Erris, by pushing detachments into each,
who were able to do little more than to burn a number of
cabins ; for the people had too many hiding places to be easily
overtaken.’ ?

Such was the manner in which the rebellion was suppressed
in a province where it would never have arisen but for foreign
instigation ; where it was accompanied by no grave crimes, and
where the rebels had invariably spared the lives of such Protes-
tants as lived quietly among them. Can any impartial reader
wonder at the deep, savage, enduring animosities that were pro-
duced ? Can he wonder that the districts, where so many poor
peasants had been burnt out of their cabins when the winter
storms were approaching, should have soon after been infested
by robbers and cattle houghers ?

Humbert and the French soldiers who were taken at Ballina-
muck were sent to England, but soon after exchanged. The
three French officers who had so admirably maintained order at
Killala were, upon the urgent representation of Bishop Stock,
placed in a different category. An order was given that they
should be set at liberty, and sent home without exchange; but
__the Directory refused to accept the offer, stating that the officers
had only done their duty, ‘and no more than any Frenchman

1 Stock’s Narrative, p. 136.

2 Tbid. pp. 138, 139. In the Irish
State Paper Office, there is a letter
from the Rev. Robert Andrews, of
Castlebar, describing the capture of
Killala, and based on information
received from Dean Thompson, who
was a prisoner in thattown. It fully
corroborates the account of Bishop
Stock. He speaks of the ‘immense

carnage’ among the rebels, and the
release of the prisoners, and says:
‘TI have the pleasure to add, that not
one of the prisoners suffered, owing
to the gallantry of the French officers
there, who remained faithful to the
few devoted Protestants. Their lives
were repeatedly threatened. No pri-
soners except the chiefs were taken.’
(Sept, 23, 1798.)

CH. XXX. NAPPER TANDY. 225

would have done in the same situation.’ Of the three United
Irishmen who came over with Humbert, two, as we have seen,
were hanged, but the third succeeded in concealing his na-
tionality. O’Keon was tried by court-martial; but having
succeeded in satisfying the court that he was a naturalised
Frenchman, he was treated as a prisoner of war.

The French project for a series of expeditions to the Irish
coast was not wholly abandoned, and two others took place, one
of which was completely insignificant, while the other might
have been very serious. Napper Tandy had been for some time
one of the most prominent of a little band of Irish refugees, who
were plotting against England and quarrelling among them-
selves at Paris. Though still under sixty, his constitution
appears to have been much worn out, and he was always spoken
of as an old man. For about thirty-five years he had been
living a life of incessant political agitation or conspiracy, and,
like most men of this stamp, it had become essential to his
happiness. He was now very vain, very quarrelsome, and very
drunken, and he had joined with the priest O’Coigly, and with
Thomas Muir, the Scotch Jacobin, who had escaped from Botany
Bay, in bitter opposition to Tone and to Lewins. Tone had once
looked on him with some respect and even admiration; and as
late as the October of 1797, he had described him to Talleyrand
in complimentary terms,! but in his private journal he makes
no secret of his boastfulness and mendacity. He accuses him
of having told the French authorities that he was an experienced
military man; that he was a man of great property in Ireland ;
that he had such influence, that if he only appeared there,
30,000 men would rise to arms.? Napper Tandy, however, was
quite ready to risk his life in an almost desperate enterprise,
and the French were quite ready to try an experiment which
~ would cost them little. They gave him the title of General,
sent him over to Dunkirk, and placed a swift corvette, named
the ‘ Anacreon,’ at his disposal, with a small party of soldiers
and marines, and a considerable supply of arms and animunition

1 This was in a letter to Talley- connu par son patriotisme depuis 30
rand, 24 vendémiaire, an vi (Oct.15, ans.’ (French Foreign Office.)
1797), giving the names of the Irish 2 Tone’s Memoirs, ii. 460, 461, 467.
he knew personally at Paris. He Compare Castlereagh Correspondence,
calls Tandy, a ‘respectable vieillard, i. 406.

VOL, VIII. Q

226 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXX,

for distribution, and he sailed from Dunkirk for the north coast
of Ireland on September 8 or 4.

Several United Irishmen were on board the ‘ Anacreon,’
and among them there were two who had long been heartily
sick of the conspiracy, and were eagerly looking for an opportu-
nity of escaping from it. One of them was a man, from the
county of Armagh, named Murphy, who had been a private
tutor in London, and had there fallen into a circle of United
Jrishmen, of whom O’Coigly, Lawless, Binns and Turner were
the most conspicuous. O’Coigly had persuaded him that, with
his knowledge of languages, he would become ‘a great man,’
if he went to France, and he accordingly left England, and
was employed in some missions by the conspirators. Accom-
panied by another United Irishman, named George Orr,! he
went to Hamburg in April 1798, and was in communica-
tion with Bourdon, the French minister there: the two Irish-
men then proceeded to the Hague, where a man named Aherne
was acting as representative of Irish interests; in August
they arrived at Paris, and they were soon sent to Dunkirk to
join Tandy’s expedition. Murphy became general secretary to
Tandy, and he conducted much of his correspondence with the
Directory.”

His friend, George Orr, was also on board the ‘ Anacreon.’
Like Murphy, he was very tired of a life of conspiracy. There
is reason to believe that he was one of the persons who had for
some time been sending information to the English Government,
and there appears to me no doubt that he was the author of the
very curious account of Tandy’s expedition which is printed in
the ‘Castlereagh Correspondence.’ Of the other members of

1 The same names reproduce is a full biography of him in the
themselves with a most perplexing I.S.P.0. in which his name is spelt as
frequency in the Jrish rebellion. in the text
George Orr must not be confused ° Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
with Samuel Orr (the brother of 405-411. Wickham, in sending this

William Orr, who was hanged), who
took part in the rebellion, or with
Joseph Orr, of Derry, whois mentioned
in Tone’s biography. His name is
given in fullin Murphy’s statement
in the I.8.P.0

2 Depositionof John Powell Murphy
before R. Ford, Nov. 2, 1798, L.8.P.0.
Aherne’s name is spelt Akerne or
Akeone in this deposition; but there

account to Castlereagh (Oct. 25, 1798)
says, that it comes from ‘a person of
the name of O., respecting whom T
have often written to your lordship.
He was on board the “ Anacreon,” on
her late expedition to Ireland.’ (See
also a paper of Secret Information,
pp. 397-399.) In the I1.8.P.0. there
are letters about the Tandy expedi-
tion, endorsed ‘G.O.,’ especially one

CH, XXX. TANDY’S EXPEDITION. 22iR

the expedition, the most remarkable appear to have been a
certain General Rey, who had seen service in America, and
Colonel Thomas Blackwell, who was adjutant-general to Tandy.

This last personage was an Irishman by birth, but he had
left the country when he was only nine years old; and although
he had been in the Bantry Bay expedition, he seems to have
had no real interest in Irish affairs. He had been educated by
the Jesuits, but had become a fierce republican, an intimate
friend of Danton, a bold and reckless soldier of fortune. Ata
later period the British Government succeeded in accomplishing
his arrest, and on the road from Sheerness to London, he talked
very freely about the expedition to the officer who was in charge
of him, expressing his unbounded contempt for Napper Tandy,
and his disgust that an enterprise for which he cared nothing,
should have prevented him from serving with the French army
on the Continent.!

The ‘ Anacreon’ arrived, without any serious adventure, on
September 16, at the Isle of Arran, in the county of Donegal,
and Napper Tandy landed at the little town of Rutland. There
were no English troops nearer than Letterkenny, which was
twenty-five miles distant; but the population, so far from show-
ing the slightest disposition to welcome their liberators, gene-
rally fled from them to the mountains.2 The French remained
on shore about eight hours. Tandy distributed some absurdly
inflated proclamations ; hoisted an Irish flag; took formal pos-
session of the town, and examined the newspapers and letters
in the post office. He learnt from them that Humbert and all
his soldiers had been captured, and that Connaught, which he
expected to find in rebellion, was perfectly quiet, and he clearly
saw that his only course was to return. He became so drunk
while on shore, that it was found necessary to carry him to the

dated Liverpool, Oct. 21, 1799, giving
a detailed account of it.

1 Hxamination of Peter Perry, Bow
Street officer, Nov. 5, 1799 (1.8.P.0.).
There are several particulars about
Blackwell in a note to the Corn-
mallis Correspondence, iii. 284. He
had saved, during the Reign of
Terror, the lives of a Somersetshire
gentleman (a colonel in the army) and
of his daughter, who were then in

France; and he married the daughter.
Orr says, that Blackwell, during the
voyage, ‘compelled Tandy to give
him first the rank of adjutant-general,
and next that of general of brigade;’
and that he ‘had Tandy like a child
in leading strings. (Castlereagh
Correspondence, i. 406.)

2 See the reports of the post».
master, in Musgrave, Appendix, No.
ZOU, ;

Q2

228 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

ship, and he appears to have been in that state during most of
the expedition.!

Through fear of the English fleet, the ‘ Anacreon’ did not at-
tempt to regain France. It sailed northwards by the Orkney
Islands, took two small English merchant vessels—one of them
after a sharp conflict--and at last arrived safely at Bergen in
Norway. Murphy and Orr, who, according to their own accounts,
had tried to escape when in Ireland, now succeeded in making
their way to the English consul, who sent them in an American
ship to England, where they disclosed everything they knew.?
Napper Tandy and a few companions made their way to
Hamburg.

Their arrival proved a great perplexity and a great calamity
to that town. The English Government insisted peremptorily
on their surrender, as British subjects who were in rebellion
against their sovereign ; while the French minister claimed them
as French citizens, and threatened the most serious consequences
if they were given up. The dangers of either course were very
great, but Hamburg is a seaport, and England was more formi-
dable than France upon the sea. The Emperor of Russia, who
was now in alliance with England, imposed an embargo on
Hamburg ships, and at last, after a long and painful hesitation,
the Senate, in October 1799, surrendered Napper Tandy, and
three other Irishmen, to the English. The French Directory
retaliated by a letter declaring war against Hamburg, they im-
posed an embargo on its shipping, and they threatened still more
severe measures. The Senate sent a most abject apology to
Buonaparte, describing their utter helplessness, and the ruin
that must have befallen their town if they had resisted, but their
deputies were receivedwith the bitterest reproaches, They had
committed, they were told, a violation of the laws of hospitality,

1 The very graphic description of
his state in the Castlereagh Corre-
spondence (i. 407), is fully confirmed
by the account which Blackwell gave
the Bow Street officer, of the landing
at Rutland. ‘Tandy was so drunk on
that occasion, that he [ Blackwell] was
obliged to have him brought on
board on men’s shoulders.’ ‘Tandy
was always drunk, and incapable
of acting” (Hxamination of Peter

Perry.)

* Murphy says: ‘When they landed
in Ireland, Examinant and George
Orr (who had long determined to
leave the party as soon as they could)
endeavoured to escape, for which
Blackwell would have killed Exami-
nant, if Tandy had not prevented
him. They arrived in England, Oct.
21,1798. (Deposition of John Powell
Murphy, Noy. 2, 1798.)

Ca. ax, LAST DAYS OF NAPPER TANDY. 229

which ‘ would not have taken place among the barbarian hordes
of the desert,’ an act which would be their ‘ eternal reproach.’!

The three Irishmen who were surrendered with Napper
Tandy were Blackwell, Morres, and Corbett. Blackwell and
Corbett had both been on the‘ Anacreon,’ while Morres had been
in a rebellious movement in the county of Tipperary.?

They were all imprisoned for a long period, but none of them
lost their lives. Blackwell and Morres were ultimately released
without trial. Corbett succeeded in escaping, and he afterwards
saw much service in the French army, and became a general of
brigade. The Government was for some time perplexed about
what to do with Napper Tandy, and his ultimate release has been
ascribed to threats of reprisals by the French in the event of his
execution. It appears, however, that Lord Grenville had always
doubted the propriety of his arrest, and that Cornwallis strongly
advocated his liberation. He described him as ‘a fellow of so
very contemptible a character, that no person in this country
seems to care in the smallest degree about him,’ and he considered
it a mistake to have embroiled Hamburg with France on account
of him.

Tandy lay in prison till the April of 1801, when he was put
on his trial. He pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to death, but
was reprieved at once, and some months later was allowed to go
to France, where he soon after died.®> Perhaps the most remark-
able fact in his career, is the wide and serious influence it for a
short time exercised on the affairs of Europe.

We must now return to the other French expedition, which

was despatched to Ireland in the autumn of 1798. It consisted

1 Annual Register, 1798, pp. 101,

142, 143. In another letter, Corn-
102; 1799, p. 274; 1800, pp. 74, 75.

wallis says: ‘Considering the in-

Adolphus, vii. 236, 237, 242.

'2 See, on these men, Cornwallis
Correspondence, iii. 284. Morres was
a relation of Lord Frankfort, and had
been in the Austrian service. Corbett
was one of the undergraduates of
Trinity College, who had been ex-
pelled for treason at the visitation of
Lord Clare in February 1798.

8 An interesting account of Wil-
liam Corbett’s very brilliant career in
the French service will be found in
Byrne’s Memoirs, iti. 38-47.

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

capacity of this old man to do further
mischief, the mode by which he came
into our hands, his long subsequent
confinement, and, lastly, the streams
of blood which have flowed in this
island for these last three, years, I am
induced to request that your Grace
will submit the above proposition
[for his release and banishment] to
his Majesty’s favourable considera-
tion,’ (Ibid. p. 338. See, too, pp. 352,

. p. 355; Annual Register,
1802, p. 369.

230 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

of a ship of the line of eighty-four guns, called the ‘ Hoche,’
and of eight small frigates and a schooner, and it carried a
military force of little less than 3,000 men. Admiral Bompard
commanded the ships, and General Hardy the soldiers, and
Wolfe Tone, who was now an adjutant-general in the French
service, accompanied Bompard in the ‘ Hoche.’ From the first he
clearly saw that so small an expedition after the suppression of
the rebellion was almost hopeless, but he declared that if the
French sent even a corporal’s guard to Ireland, he would accom-
pany it, and if the expedition attained any result, a larger one,
under General Kilmaine, was expected to follow it. The fleet
started from Brest on September 14, and after a long, circuitous
passage of twenty-three days, it reached the neighbourhood of
Lough Swilly. The English, however, were not unprepared.
They had much secret information, and even if this had been
wanting, there was so little secrecy in the councils of the French
Government, that an account of the armament had appeared in
a Paris paper before its departure. On October 12, a powerful
English squadron, under Sir John Warren, bore down upon the
French. Though it consisted at first of only seven vessels, to
which an eighth was joined in the course of the action, it had
in reality a decided superiority, for four of its vessels were ships
of the line. Before the battle began, Bompard, perceiving that
the odds were greatly against him, strongly urged Wolfe Tone
to leave the ‘ Hoche’ for the small, fast-sailing schooner, called ‘ La
Biche,’ which had the best chance of escaping, representing to
him that, in the probable event of a capture, the French would
become prisoners of war, while he might be reserved for a
darker fate ; but Tone refused the offer. The ‘Hoche’ was sur-
rounded, defended with heroic courage for at least four hours, and
_till it was almost sinking, and then at last it surrendered. The
frigates tried to escape, but were hotly pursued, and three of
them that afternoon were captured, after a very brave and
obstinate defence.!

Owing to strong adverse winds and to its own shattered

1 The despatches of Sir John See, too, the account in Wolfe Tone’s

Warren describing the action, will be
found in the Annual Register, 1798,
pp. 144-146. M. Guillon has examined
the documents on the French side
(La France et VIrlande, pp. 408, 409),

Memoirs, by Tone’s son. The‘ Hoche’
is described in the French accounts
as having 74,in Sir J. Warren’s de-
spatch as having 84, guns, and there
are some other small discrepancies,

231

CH. XXX. CAPTURE AND TRIAL OF TONE,

condition, more than a fortnight passed before the ‘ Hoche’ was
brought safely into Lough Swilly. When the prisoners were
landed Wolfe Tone was immediately recognised,! placed in irons
in Derry gaol, and then conveyed to Dublin, where he was
tried by court-martial on November 10. His speech—for it
can hardly be termed a defence—was frank and manly. He
fully avowed the part he had taken, and disdained to shelter
himself under any pretence of having aspired to mere constitu-
tional reforms. ‘From my earliest youth,’ he said, ‘I have re-
garded the connection between Ireland and Great Britain as
the curse of the Irish nation, and felt convinced that, while it
lasted, this country could never be free nor happy. My mind
has been confirmed in this opinion by the experience of every
succeeding year. ...I designed by fair and open war to
procure the separation of the two countries. For open war I
was prepared ; but if, instead of that, a system of private assas-
sinations has taken place, I repeat, while I deplore it, that it is
not chargeable on me. . . . In a cause like this, success is every-
thing. Success in the eyes of the vulgar fixes its merits.
Washington succeeded, and Kosciusko failed.’

He was too brave a man to fear death, and he made no at-
tempt to avoid it, but he earnestly implored that, in consideration
of his rank in the French army, he might be saved from the
ignominy of the gallows, and might, like the French émigrés,
who had been taken in arms by their countrymen, be shot by a
platoon of grenadiers. The request was a reasonable and a
moderate one, but it was refused, and he was sentenced to be
hanged before the gaol on November 12. ‘The night before the
day appointed for his execution, he cut his throat with a penknife
which he had concealed.

_ The wound was at first not thought to be fatal, and it was
believedin Dublin that the sentence would be carried out in spite

1 Tt isstatedin Tone’s Memoirsthat stepped out of the boat, habited as

He re-

he was recognised by Sir George Hill,
ata breakfast party at Lord Cavan’s (ii,
524, 525), but the story is differently
told by Sir George Hill. He wrote to
Cooke : ‘ Until this moment, such has
been the stormy weather, that for
two days no boat has been on shore
from the “Hoche.” This morning,
some hundreds of the prisoners are
just landed. The first man who

an officer, was T. W. Tone.
cognised and addressed me instantly,
with as much sang-froid as you might
expect from his character. We have
not yet ascertained any other Hiber-
nian to be of this party. ... Tone
is sent off to Derry under a_ strong
escort. He cailed himself General
Smith.’ (Nov. 3, I1.8.P.0.) See, too,
Faulkner's Journal, Nov. 10, 1798.

232 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

of it. His old friend Curran, however, convinced that the trial
was illegal, determined to make an effort to set it aside, and
hoped that, by postponing the day of execution, some mitigation
might be obtained. Immediately after the sentence of the court-
martial had been delivered, he tried to obtain assistance from
Tone’s former friends, and especially from those Catholic leaders
whom he had formerly served, but he wholly failed. Men who
were already suspected, feared to compromise themselves or their
cause, by showing any interest in the convicted rebel, and among
men who were not suspected and loyal, there was a savage, vin-
dictive spirit, which is painful to contemplate.! Peter Burrowes,
however, an able and honest, though somewhat eccentric, Pro-
testant lawyer, supported him in a manner which was doubly
admirable, as it was certain to injure his professional prospects,
and as his own brother—the clergyman near Oulart—had been
one of the first persons murdered by the Wexford rebels. When
the Court of King’s Bench met on the morning of the 12th,
Curran appeared before it, and, while fully admitting that Tone
was guilty of high treason, he represented that a court-martial
had no right to try or sentence him. Ireland was not now in a
state of civil war. The courts were sitting; the King’s Bench
was the great criminal court of the land, and as Tone had never
held a commission in the army of the Crown, a military court
had no cognisance of his offence. He represented that every
moment was precious, as the execution was ordered for that very
day, and he applied for an immediate writ of Habeas Corpus.
The objection ought to have been made before, but it was
unquestionably valid, and the Chief Justice, Lord Kilwarden, had
long deplored the eclipse of law which existed in Ireland with the
full sanction of the Government. He at once ordered the writ to
be prepared, and in the meantime sent the sheriff to the barracks
to inform the provost-martial that a writ was preparing, and that
the execution must not proceed. The sheriff returned with a
reply that the provost-martial must obey the presiding major,
and that the major must do as Lord Cornwallis ordered him.
The Chief Justice, with visible emotion, ordered the sheriff to

1 There are two singularly heart- Cavan to Cooke (Noy. 7), and the
less letters on the subject in the Irish _ other from Sir G@. Hill to Cooke (Noy.
State Paper Office, one from Lord 15, 1798).

CH. XXX. TONE'S DEATH AND CHARACTER. 233

return to the barracks with the writ, to take the body of Tone
into custody, to take the provost-marshal and Major Sandys into
custody, and to show the writ to the general in command.

There was an anxious and agitated pause, and strong fears
were entertained that military law would triumph, and that the
prisoner would be executed in defiance of the writ. At last,
however, the sheriff returned, and stated that he had been re-
fused admittance into the barracks, but had learnt that on the
preceding night the prisoner had wounded himself dangerously,
if not mortally, and that instant death would be the result of
any attempt tomove him. The surgeon who attended him, soon
after appeared, and confirmed the report, and the Chief Justice
issued an order, suspending the execution.! Several days of
miserable, abject suffering, still lay before Wolfe Tone. He at
last died of his wound, on November 19.

It would be a manifest exaggeration to call him a great man,
but he had many of the qualities of mind and character by which,
under favourable conditions, greatness has been achieved, and
he rises far above the dreary level of commonplace which Irish
conspiracy in general presents. The tawdry and exaggerated
rhetoric; the petty vanities and jealousies; the weak sentimen-
talism ; the utter incapacity for proportioning means to ends, and
for grasping the stern realities of things, which so commonly
disfigure the lives and conduct even of the more honest members
of his class, were wholly alien to his nature. His judgment of
men and things was keen, lucid, and masculine, and he was alike
prompt in decision and brave in action. Coming to France
without any advantage of birth, property, position or antecedents,
and without even a knowledge of the language, he gained a real
influence over French councils, and he displayed qualities that

won the confidence and respect of such men as Carnot and
Hoche, Clarke and Grouchy, Daendels and De Winter. His
journals clearly show how time, and experience, and larger scenes
of action, had matured and strengthened both his intellect and
character. The old levity had passed away. The constant fits

1 The report of the court-martial, Tone’s Memoirs. Mr. Dicey has made
and of the proceedings before the some striking remarks on this conflict
King’s Bench, will be found in the between ordinary and martial law.
State Trials, xxvii. 614-626. See, too, (Lectures on the Constitution p. 303.)
the account by Wolfe Tone’s son in

234 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

of drunkenness that disfigured his early life no longer occur. The
spirit of a mere adventurer had become much less apparent. A
strong and serious devotion to an unselfish cause, had unques-
tionably grown up within him, and if he had become very un-
scrupulous about the means of attaining his end, he at least was
prepared to sacrifice to it, not only his life, but also all personal
vanity, pretensions, and ambition.
dent Ireland, now seems a very mad one, it is but justice to him
to remember how different was then the position of Ireland, both
in relation to England and in relation to the Continent. Ireland
now contains scarcely more than an eighth part of the popula-
tion of the United Kingdom, and it is hopelessly divided
within itself. At the time of the rebellion of 1798, the whole
population of the two islands was little more than fifteen millions,
and probably fully four and a half millions of these were Irish.
It was a much larger population than Holland possessed when
she confronted the power of Lewis XIV., or the United States
when they won their independence, or Prussia when Frederick
the Great made her one of the foremost nations in Kurope. It
was idle to suppose that such a people, if they had been really
united and in earnest, could not under favourable circumstances
have achieved and maintained their independence; and what cir-

If his dream of an indepen-

cumstance could seem more favourable than a great revolutionary
war, which especially appealed to all oppressed nationalities,
threatened the British Empire with destruction, and seemed
about to lead to a complete dissolution and rearrangement of the
political system of Europe ?

- Wiser men had warned him from the first, that he misread
both the characters and the sentiments of his people, but it is

1 Jn the census of 1801, the popu-
lation of Great Britain was estimated
at 10,942,646. The population of

tion in 1788, at about 4,000,000. A
calculation based on a return of
houses, made to the Irish Parliament

Ireland is more doubtful, for the
first census (which was a very im-
perfect one) was only taken in 1813,
when it was estimated at 5,937,852.
In 1821 it was found to be 6,801,827.
Earlier estimates are somewhat con-
jectural, being based chiefly on the
returns of houses; but allowing for
the abnormally rapid increase of
population in the last decade of the
century, they do not greatly disagree.
Parker Bush calculated the popula-

early in 1792, placed it at 4,206,612.
Whitley Stokes, in an able pamphlet
published in 1799, thought it then
somewhat exceeded 4,500,000. Gor-
don, after a careful examination,
concluded that in 1798 it was ‘ much
nearer to five than to four millions.’
Newenham, in his work on Irish
population, which was published in
1805, believed it to have risen at
that date to 5,395,436.

CH. XXx. SAVARY IN KILLALA BAY. 235

not difficult to understand the causes of his error. When he saw
the rapidity with which the revolutionary doctrines had spread
through the energetic, Protestant, industrial population of the
North; when he remarked the part which the independent
gentry had very recently taken in the volunteer movement ;
when he observed the many signs, both in Ireland and on the
Continent, of the dissolution of old beliefs and the evanescence
of sectarian passions, he easily persuaded himself that a united
national movement for independence had become possible, and
that the fierce spirit of democratic revolution, which was rising
with the force of a new religion over Europe, must sweep away
the corrupt and narrow Government of Ireland. Of the Irish
Catholics, Tone knew little, but he believed that their religious
prejudices had disappeared, that they would follow the lead
of the intelligent Presbyterians of the North, and that they were
burning to throw off the government of England. He lived to
see all his illusions dispelled, and when he started on his last
journey, it was with a despondency which was not far removed
from hopelessness. It is not uninteresting to notice that the
‘ Hoche,’ in which he was captured, was afterwards called the
* Donegal,’ and was the ship which, under the British flag, bore a
far more illustrious Irishman, Arthur Wellesley, to the scenes of
his triumphs in the Spanish Peninsula.

The defeat of the fleet of Bompard closes the history of
French expeditions to Ireland ; but one more, alarming episode
occurred. On October 27, Savary, who had commanded the
French squadron which landed Humbert, reappeared in Killala
Bay with four ships of war, and 2,000 soldiers. As it was not
at first known that the ships were French, two officers were sent
to them, and they were detained on board, and ultimately car-
ried to France. It was believed in Killala that these ships
~ formed part of the squadron which had been defeated by
Warren, but they are now known to have formed a separate ex-
pedition, sent to ascertain whether the rebellion was in progress.
On hearing that all was over, the French admiral hastily
weighed anchor, and though hotly pursued by some English
vessels, he succeeded in reaching France in safety.!

The rebellion was now virtually ended, though Joseph Holt

1 Compare Guillon, p. 413: and Stocks Narrative, pp. 144-148.

236 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

succeeded, for more than three months after the rest of Leinster
had been quieted, in keeping together some hundreds of rebels
among the Wicklow hills, and in evading or defying all the
forces of the Crown. He has himself, in his most curious auto-
biography, related his adventures and hairbreadth escapes. Of
the men who accompanied him, some were mere robbers; many
were peasants whose houses had been burnt by the yeomen,
and many others were deserters from militiaregiments. At one
time he says he had deserters from thirteen regiments among
his men;! and many who did not venture to desert, readily
supplied him with cartridges. He had also a considerable
number of the Shilmalier wild-fow] shooters, with their long
guns and their deadly aim; but on the whole, like Miles
Byrne, he considered the Irish rebel most terrible when he
had a pike in his hand, and he gave his men such a measure
of discipline, and he managed his attacks with such skill,
that he made them very formidable.

Several women hung about his party, and one of them, whom
he called his ‘ Moving Magazine,’ appears to have been by far
the most valuable of his followers. She was a girl named Susy
Toole, the daughter of a blacksmith at Annamoe. Being ac-
customed to wield the sledge-hammer, she had a more than
masculine strength, and she had also great natural tact, a most
ready and plausible tongue, an extraordinary power of disguising
her face and appearance, indomitable courage, and inflexible
fidelity. Carrying a basket of gingerbread and fruit, she ranged
over many miles of country, collecting the most minute and
accurate knowledge about the position, movements, and inten-
tions of every body of troops in the neighbourhood ; finding out
what men were wavering in their allegiance, and obtaining
from them large supplies of cartridges. She seldom returned to
Holt without two or three hundred cartridges concealed under
her clothes, and it was chiefly owing to her information that
Holt was so long able to defy his enemies, though a large reward
was placed upon his head. He kept the whole county of Wick-
low in constant alarm, and often made incursions into the ad-
joining counties. His men burnt numerous country houses, and
the farmhouses of men who were obnoxious to them, drove

1 Holt’s Memoirs, i. 144,

CH. Xxx. JOSEPH HOLT. 237

herds of cattle into the mountains, levied contributions, attacked
and often defeated small bodies of yeomanry or militia. Many
men were also murdered as Orangemen or yeomen. The little
town of Blessington, in the county of Wicklow, was captured
and plundered, and Captain Hume, one of the members for
the county, was killed in an unsuccessful skirmish with the rebels.

The Protestantism of Holt, as he himself states, always ex-
posed him to suspicion among his followers, and although they
recognised in him their most skilful and daring leader, his danger
was by no means exclusively from the loyalists. A large body of
his~men, under a leader named Hacket, broke away from him
because he would not permit them to carry on indiscriminate
plunder. A suspicion having got abroad that he was in negotiation
with General Moore, he was very nearly murdered, and at last,
as the winter nights drew on, his followers, availing themselves of
the amnesty which had been proclaimed, gradually dropped away.

Holt was a brave and skilful rebel leader—perhaps the most
skilful who appeared in Ireland during the rebellion—but he
cannot by any possibility be regarded as an Irish patriot. He
has himself most candidly declared, that he was absolutely in-
different to the political questions that were supposed to be at
issue in the rebellion, and that he would in fact have preferred
to have been on the other side.! Like great numbers of his
followers, he was a rebel because, having fallen under suspicion,
his house had been burnt, and the mountains seemed ‘his only
refuge. The picture he gives of the barbarities on both sides,
is probably drawn with no unfaithful touch. ‘The scenes of
cruelty I witnessed,’ he says, ‘ at this period are beyond human
belief and comprehension. . . . Many of the cruelties of the
rebels were in retaliation of the previous enormities committed
upon them by the yeomanry, who in their turn revenged them-
selves with increased acrimony, and thus all the kindlier and

best feelings of humanity were eradicated. . . . Human victims
were everywhere sacrificed to the demon of revenge, and their
mutilated carcases exhibited with savage ferocity. . . . Many

of the corps of yeomanry were a disgrace to humanity and the

colour of their cloth. The rebels were not less atrocious or re-

fined in their cruelties, but they were excited by the heads and
1 Holt’s Memoirs, i. 219.

238 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXe

hands above them, and considered their acts meritorious ; few of
them were really sensible of the true character of what they did.
They were wild, uncultivated, ignorant creatures, whom it was
difficult to control and impossible to keep in discipline when
excited.’ Many ‘ became rebels unwillingly, feeling acutely the
wrongs and oppression they had suffered. They grew more like
enraged tigers than men, and woe to the unhappy yeoman who
fell into their power; he was instantly put to death, often by a
cruel and attenuated torture. The soldiers of the regular army,
in a great degree from acting with the yeomanry, caught their
feelings, and indulged in cruelties with an avenging spirit, but,
generally speaking, the animosity existed in the breast of the
Irish peasant in its most exaggerated character against the
yeomanry. The murder in cold blood of an Orangeman or yeo-
man, was considered by the rebels a meritorious act of justice, and
that of a rebel by the loyal party as no crime. . . . Hach party
accused the other of cruelty and barbarous inhumanity, and the
accusation on both sides was just. Hach were guilty, atrociously
guilty, but each justified himself with the idea that his abomin-
able acts were but the just retaliation of previous wrongs.’ !

Holt himself seems to have done all that was in his power
to restrain his men from murder, and some conspicuous acts of
clemency and generosity, as well as his great daring and skill,
gave him much reputation. The Latouche family and Lord
Powerscourt exerted themselves to save his life, and at last, on
November 10, he surrendered himself to Lord Powerscourt, and
he appears to have given some useful information to the
Government.? He was transported to Botany Bay, but a few.
years later was suffered to return to Ireland,

The exultation of the triumphant party was now very great,
and it took many forms. ‘The best was an earnest desire to
assist those who had suffered on the loyalist side during the re-
bellion. There was a vast assemblage of all that was most
brilliant in Dublin society to hear Kirwan preach at St. Thomas’s
Church, in behalf of the widows and children of the soldiers who
had fallen in fighting against the rebels. The Lord Lieutenant
was present, and the principal ladies in Dublin, with Lady Clare

1 Holt’s Memoirs, 1. 198, 210, 220, moirs, p. xx. Castlereagh Correspon=
221. dence, ii. 186.
2 Croker's preface to Holt’s Me-

CH) Xx EXULTATION OF THE LOYALISTS. 239

and Lady Castlereagh at their head, acted as collectors. The
eloquence of the great preacher never soared to a loftier height,
and his vivid picture of the state of Ireland on the eve of the
rebellion, and of the passions the catastrophe had produced, is
even now well worthy of perusal. 1,122/. was collected: ‘the
largest collection,’ writes Bishop Percy, ‘I suppose ever made
at a single sermon.’! Parliament acted on the same lines, and a
sum of 100,000/. was voted for those loyalists who had suffered
during the rebellion.

Its thanks were also voted unanimously to the yeomanry,
militia, and other troops. Castlereagh, in introducing the
motion, gave the first place to the yeomen. ‘Their services,’ he
said, ‘ had effected the salvation of the country.’ Although they
had only been intended for local service in their respective
districts, they had everywhere outstripped the limits assigned to
them. There was not a single corps which had not volunteered
to march out of its district for the public service, and but for
them the country would not have been saved. After the Irish
yeomanry he placed the English militia, who, though not obliged
by law to serve out of their own country, had volunteered to do
so. Then came the Irish militia and fencible troops. There
had been some defections among them, but the overwhelming
majority had displayed great loyalty.?

There was a sudden rebound of confidence, and at the begin-
ning of August the Irish funds stood higher than before the
rebellion. The news of the destruction of a great French fleet:
by Nelson at the battle of the Nile, which arrived in Ireland in
the beginning of October, greatly increased the sense of security.
Dublin was brilliantly illuminated, and no discordant note
appears to have jarred on the general delight. At the same
time, all those sectarian anniversaries which had of late years
been falling gradually into desuetude, were galvanised into a
new vitality, and the now hated colour of Orange was every-
where paraded as the distinctive badge of loyalty. On the
anniversary of the battle of the Boyne, it was stated that up-
wards of 12,000 orange cockades were worn in the streets of

! Bishop Percy’s letter to his wife, in 1814.
July 9, 1798. Faulkner’s Journal, 2 Faulkner’s Journal, Oct. 6,1798.
July 10, 1798. Kirwan’s sermon is 8 Thid. Aug. 9, 1798.
in the volume of his sermons, printed eeLnids Oct. 6,1 798.

240 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

Dublin, and the great majority of the houses were decorated
with orange lilies.!. The religious service of October 23, com-
memorating the outbreak of the great rebellion of 1641, had of
late years been little used; but in 1798, it was resolved to
observe it with great solemnity in the churches, and there were:
even proposals, which were happily not persisted in, that
another prayer should be inserted in the Liturgy, to thank the
Almighty for having delivered the loyal people of Ireland from
another sanguinary conspiracy.? The usual official ceremonies
on the birthday of William III., were accompanied in 1798
by an enthusiasm which had certainly not been equalled for
a century. The yeomanry, decorated with orange colours,
assemnbled round the statue of King William, and fired their
few de joie. The Lord Lieutenant, the Lord Mayor and the
sheriffs, with a vast train accompanying them, paraded round
Stephen’s Green and College Green, while the cannon thundered,
and the church bells rang a triumphant peal. The pedestal and
railing of the statue of William had been painted afresh. A
cincture of orange and green ribbons encircled the head of the
great king. His shoulders were ornamented with a rich orange
sash with shining tassels. His horse had orange reins; orange
and blue ribbons hung from its saddle, and beneath its feet
lay a green silk scarf tied with pale yellow ribbons, the emblem
of the revolutionary union, which had now been trampled in the
dust. The loyalist song, with its refrain, ‘Down, down,
croppies, lie down,’ was now the favourite tune, and it kindled
in many a rebel breast a savage, though silent rage. Bishop
Percy mentions a poor blind woman, who tried to make a liveli-
hood by singing it through the streets of Dublin. She was soon
found lying murdered in a dark alley.*

The savage spirit on both sides was indeed little, if at all,
diminished. At the end of July, Cornwallis spoke of ‘the
numberless murders that are hourly committed by our people,
without any process or examination whatever,’> and even after

1 Saunders’s Newsletter, July 4, 1798. Mr. Fitzpatrick notices the riots

1798. that took place about this time at
2 See Faulkner’s Journal, Aug. 11, — Astley’s Circus, on account of this tune.
Oct. 18, 1798. 5 Creland before the Union, p. 83.)
8 See the graphic description in 5 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
Fauthner’s Journal, Nov. 6, 1798. 869.

4 Bishop Percy to his wife, Aug. 7,

MILITARY OUTRAGES, 241

CH, XXX.

the stringent measures of Cornwallis and of some of the general
officers to maintain discipline, there were several scandalous in-
stances of yeomen or militiamen having deliberately shot am-
nestied rebels who had received protections from the Government.
In one infamous case, a soldier who had clearly acted in this
way was acquitted of malicious intent, by a court-martial pre-
sided over by Lord Enniskillen. Cornwallis indignantly expressed
his dissent from the verdict, dissolved the court-martial with a
strong rebuke to its president, and directed that a new court-
martial should be summoned, on which no officer who had been
on the preceding one should sit. This case was but one of many,
illustrating the utter want of discipline and the total disregard
for human life that prevailed,! and it isa shameful and astonish-
ing fact, that the conduct of Lord Cornwallis produced the most
violent indignation in the ultra-loyal party, and was strongly
disapproved of by no less a person than Lord Camden.? Crime
produced crime. Murders of loyal men, or nightly outrages on
their property, were regularly followed by explosions of military
licentiousness, in which houses and chapels were burnt, and inno-
cent men not infrequently killed. I have mentioned, that at
least forty chapels’were burnt in the province of Leinster, and it
is a horrible illustration of the state of the country, that by far
the greater number of these were burnt some time after the cap-
ture of Wexford and of Vinegar Hill, and when serious organised

elapsed since we could not decidedly

' Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
trust any bodies of men, but those

419-422. See, too, a debate in the

House of Commons about a man
named Fenton, who had most de-
liberately shot a protected rebel.
(Faulkner's Journal, Aug. 16, 1798.)

2 He wrote to Castlereagh: ‘The
ends of justice would have been com-
-pletely answered by a disapprobation
of the sentence, was the case per-
fectly clear ; and the warmest advo-
cate for discipline must have been
satisfied with the farther step of
dissolving the court-martial; but to
add, that no member who had sat on
that court-martial should be chosen
for the future ones, is very severe... .
How long is it, my dear Lord C., since
me ordered an exclusive armament
of supplementary yeomen in the
North, and of Mr. Beresford’s corps
in Dublin? How many months have

VOL. VIII.

who are now so highly disapproved
of? That the violence of some of the
partisans of the Protestant interest
should be repressed, I believe you
know, I sincerely think; but that acon-
demnation of them should take place
will infinitely hurt the English interest
in Ireland. ... The great question
of union will be hurt by this measure,
as, however unjustly, it will indispose,
I fear, avery important party to what-
ever seems to be a faveurite measure
of Government.’ (Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, i. 425, 426.) Lord Ennis-
killen seems to have shown more
moderation under Cornwallis’s cen-
sure, than his advisers. See Awch-
land Correspondence, iv. 67; Corn-
nallis Correspondence, ili. 193.

R

242 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

resistance had almost wholly ceased.! As late as the January
of 1799, a gentleman from Gorey sent to Colonel Blaquiere a
-terrible account of the outrages that had been perpetrated in
that country. In the preceding November, he says, a party of
Ballaghkeen cavalry and of Hunter Gowan’s yeomen had, without
visible provocation, burnt more than nine houses in a single
night. Six weeks later some cavalry were searching for robbers,
when shots were fired from a house, a sergeant was killed,
and another soldier wounded. The house was at once burnt
down, and soon after the yeomen, at the burial of their comrade,
agreed to take signal vengeance. That night they burnt two
chapels, they burnt and plundered a priest’s house and nine
other houses spread over an area of six miles, and killed a man
and woman. ‘The people will not go to Gorey to prosecute,’
adds the writer. ‘I request my name to be kept secret, as a
gentleman of this neighbourhood has been, and is yet, in con-
tinual fear of his life for forwarding a prosecution against a yeo-
man for night murder.’ ”

How far these statements would have stood the test of a
judicial examination, I am not able to say; but whatever ele-
ments of doubt or exaggeration may cling to particular instances,
the broad features of the story are but too evident. A reign
of terror prevailed over the counties which had been desolated
by the rebellion, for months after armed resistance had ceased,
and in spite of some serious efforts to repress it, military licence
was almost supreme. ‘This country,’ wrote Cornwallis at the
very end of September, ‘is daily becoming more disturbed.
Religious animosities increase, and, I am sorry to say, are en-
couraged by the foolish violence of all the principal persons who
have been in the habit of governing this island; and the Irish
militia, from their repeated misbehaviour in the field, and their
extreme licentiousness, are fallen into such universal contempt
and abhorrence, that when applications are made for the protec-
tion of troops, it is often requested that Irish militia may not be
sent.’§

This condition is not surprising. Men who had been hastily

1 See the dates of these acts,in compare Plowden, ii. 785, 786.
Madden, i. 349, 350. S Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
2 A. Brownrigg (Gorey) to Colonel 414, 415.
Blaquiere, Jan. 17, 1799, I.S.P.0.;

CH. XXX, STATE OF THE MILITIA. 243

embodied in a time of great public danger, and who had never
been subject to real military discipline, had been for a long
period exposed to influences that would have demoralised the
best troops. Free quarters, martial law, and the system of
arbitrary house-burning and flogging, sanctioned by the Govern-
ment and covered by parliamentary Acts of indemnity, had very
naturally destroyed all their respect for law and property, while
the many horrors of the rebellion, and the sectarian passions
which it had inflamed, had as naturally given their licentiousness
a deep tinge of fierceness. The officers appear to have been
worse than the men. Like most tliings in Ireland, militia
appointments had been constantly made electioneering jobs,
intended to promote the political interests of leading politicians,!
and a power which was, in the existing state of Ireland, tre-
mendously great, was largely entrusted to the class of dissipated
squireens, to the idle, drunken, insolent, uneducated middlemen,
who were one of the worst elements in Irish life. I have
already described the manner in which the enormous and
sudden increase of farming profits, through the high price of
corn, had been followed by a vast growth of land jobbing and
sub-letting, which raised many suddenly to comparative wealth,
enabled numbers who had formerly been working farmers to
live an idle life, and thus largely increased a class which had for
some years been diminishing. In counties where the great pro-
prietors were absentees, and where there were few resident gentry,
such men were often made justices of peace, and they were
especially conspicuous among the yeomanry and militia officers.?
With all their faults, they were abundantly provided with

1 R. Griffith to Pelham, Sept. 6,
1798. (Pelham MSS.)

2 «Only a proportion of the cap-
tains, and none of the subalterns, of
Trish militia, are gentlemen, and
everyone knows what a brute the un-
educated son of an Irish farmer or
middleman is. ... The captains
cheat the men; both they and the
subalterns make themselves hated
and despised by them. . . . In short,
if you except the field officers, and a
certain smell number of officers of
lower rank, you may say of the Irish
militia, that there is neither honour

amongst the officers, nor subordina-
tion and discipline in the regiments.
... But, notwithstanding all this, I
should be very happy to command,
on any occasion, a regiment composed
of Irish militia soldiers, put into a
good old skeleton regiment of the
line. I know the Irish nation, and
well know the Irish army, and I am
convinced, that with good officers
and discipline, and a little experience,
it would be as fine an army and as
loyal as any the King or his ancestors
ever had.’ (Colonel Crawford to
Wickham, Nov. 19, 1798, B.O.)

R 2

244 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

courage, and their sporting tastes and unsettled habits gave
them a natural inclination to military life. During the struggle
of the rebellion they rendered real service; but in the hideous
military licence that followed, all their worst qualities appeared.

Drunkenness, as in all such periods, had greatly increased,
and the contagion of military licence speedily infected the best
troops. Letter after letter came to the Government, repre-
senting the extreme danger of the demoralisation of the very
choicest English regiments if they remained longer in Ireland.
One distinguished officer of the Guards, who was quartered at
Waterford, wrote that in that town every second house was a
whisky shop, and that he doubted whether the efficiency of
his own regiment could be maintained six months longer in
such a moral atmosphere. As for the Irish militia, he said:
‘Friends or foes are all the same to them, and they will plunder
indiscriminately, advancing or retreating, and from what I have
heard, no effort is made to restrain them. The dread the inha-
bitants have of the presence of a regiment of militia, is not to
be told. They shut up their shops, hide whatever they have,
and, in short, all confidence is lost wherever they make their
appearance.’ ?

Castlereagh at this time thought that there was little to be
feared in Ireland from disaffection, but much from insubordina-
tion and religious animosities, and from the disposition to plunder
which free quarters had engendered.? Cornwallis hated every-
thing about him, and expressed his disgust and his despair in
the strongest and most violent terms. Nine-tenths of the
people of Ireland, he believed, were thoroughly disaffected. The
militia would be perfectly useless in the event of a serious

» Miss Edgeworth has given a tleman, at any hour or place.” Thus
vivid description of these‘middlemen _ they put their promptitude to hazard
who re-let the lands, and live upon their worthless lives, in place of all
the produce, not only in idleness, but merit... . It certainly was not easy
in insolent idleness. This kind of to do business with those whose best
half-gentry, or mock-gentry, seemed resource was to settle accounts by
to consider itas the mostindisputable wager of battle. (Life of R. L.
privilege of a gentleman not to pay Edgeworth, ii. 120, 121. See, too, a
his debts. They were ever ready to striking passage on the power ac-
meet civil law with military brag-of- quired by this class, pp. 184, 185.)
war. Whenever a swaggering debtor * Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
of this species was pressed for pay- 341-343.
ment, he... ended by offering to 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
give, instead of the value of hisbond 406.
or promise, “ the satisfaction of a gen-

CH, XXX. THE UNTRIED PRISONERS. 245

invasion, and the small party who had long governed the
country through the support of the British Government, were at
bitter enmity with both the papists and the Presbyterians.!

An immediate question of great difficulty was, what to do with
the crowd of prisoners who had lain untried in the gaols, many
of them for several months, some of them for as much‘as two
years. A large number were well known to the Government to
be deeply implicated in the conspiracy, though there was no
evidence which could be produced in court. The Amnesty Act,
which was passed in 1798, in favour of rebels who surrendered
their arms and returned to their allegiance, excluded not only
murderers and deserters, but also all persons who had been in
custody for treason since the beginning of 1795, or who had
conspired with the King’s enemy to bring about an invasion,
or who had been members of the governing committees of the
United Irish conspiracy, or who had been attainted in the
present session by Parliament, or convicted by court-martial
since May 24; and italso excluded by name about thirty persons

who were, for the most part, on the Continent.?
could only obtain pardon by particular acts of royal favour.

All these
The

compact of the Government with the imprisoned leaders gave
rise to much difficulty, and to long, bitter, and most wearisome

recriminations.

' Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
413-415, 418. Compare the senti-

ments of one of the most pro-
minent members of that ‘small
party.’ ‘Be assured,’ Beresford

wrote to Auckland, ‘that the whole
body of the lower order of Roman
Catholics of this country are totally
inimical to the English Govern-
ment; that they are under the influ-
ence of the lowest and worst class
of their priesthood; that all the ex-
travagant and horrid tenets of that
religion are as deeply engraven in
their hearts as they were a century
ago, or three centuries ago, and that
they are as barbarous, ignorant, and
ferocious as they were then; and if
ministers imagine they can treat with
such men, just as they would with the
people of Yorkshire if they rebelled,
‘they will find themselves mistaken.
Again, the Dissenters are another set
of enemies to British Government.

Before the secret examinations had been

They are greatly under the influence
of their clergy also, and are taught
from their cradles to be republicans ;
but their religion—which is as fierce
as their politics—forbids them to
unite with the Catholics ; and to that,
in a great measure, is owing that we
were not all destroyed in this re-
bellion; for I believe, that if the
Wexford people had not broken out
so early into horrid acts of massacre,
as they did, the North would have
risen, and who knows what the event
might have been? ... The Church
of England men are all loyal subjects
to the King, and true to the British
connection, but their minds at present
are inflamed to a great degree of ani-
mosity against the papists; and this
is one reason why the latter so reluc-
tantly submit to any acts of lenity
held out by the Government.’ (Beres-
Sord Correspondence, ii. 169, 170.)
2 38 Geo. III. c. 55,

246 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX

published by the Government, extracts from them appeared in
the newspapers, and a report is said to have gone abroad, that
the prisoners had revealed the names of their fellow-conspirators.
The State prisoners, after the agreement had been made, though
not released, were allowed great latitude, and O’Connor, Emmet,
and McNevin now availed themselves of their liberty to have
the following advertisement inserted in the newspapers :
‘Having read in the different newspapers, publications pre-
tending to be abstracts of the report of the Secret Committee of
the House of Commons, and of our depositions before the Com-
mittees of the Lords and Commons, we feel ourselves called
upon to assure the public that they are gross, and to us as-
tonishing, misrepresentations, not only not supported by, but
in many instances directly contradictory to, the facts we
really stated on those occasions. We further assure our friends,
that in no instance did the name of any individual escape us ;
on the contrary, we always refused answering such questions
as might tend to implicate any person whatever, conformably
to the agreement entered into by the State prisoners and the
Government.’

The appearance of this advertisement extremely exasperated
the Government. One of their main motives in making a treaty
with men who were immeasurably more guilty than nine-tenths
of those who had been shot or hanged, was to obtain from them
such an acknowledgment of their conspiracy with France,as would
exercise a decisive influence on opinion; and although the ex-
tracts that had been published in the newspapers consisted of
only a selection of some incriminating parts of their admissions,
it has never been shown that they were inaccurate. The ad-
vertisement, it was said, was obviously drawn up for the purpose
of destroying the moral effect of these admissions, casting dis-
credit and doubt upon the whole report, and encouraging the
conspirators who were still at large; and it was published imme-
diately after the news had arrived of the landing of a French
expedition in Connaught, and when there was, in consequence,
grave danger of the rebellion being rekindled. In the House
of Commons the sentiments of the Government were fully
echoed, and by no one more powerfully than by Plunket, who
represented the small party still adhering to the views of Grattan.

CH, Xxx, THE STATE PRISONERS. 247

He described the advertisement as ‘a species of proclamation or
manifesto, couched in the most libellous and insolent language,
and proceeding from three men who were signal instances of the
royal mercy, . . . urging to rebellion and to the aid of a
French invasion, calling upon their friends to cast from them all
fear of having been detected in their treasons, and to prosecute
anew their machinations.’! Some men even maintained that the
compact had been broken, and that the prisoners should be tried
by martial law. The Government, however, acted more mode-
rately. The State prisoners, to their great indignation, were
now subjected to strict confinement, and by the direction of
Pitt himself, those who had signed the advertisement were re-
examined before the Committee, and obliged to acknowledge the
truth of their former evidence. It is but justice to them to say,
that they did this without difficulty.”

They had more reason to complain of the terms of an Act
which was subsequently passed, depriving them of the right of
returning, when banished, to the King’s dominions, or going to
any country at war with the King. The preamble described
them as men ‘ who, being conscious of their flagrant and enormous
guilt, have expresséd their contrition for the same, and have most
humbly implored his Majesty’s mercy . . . to grant his royal
pardon to them on condition of their being transported, banished,
or exiled.’ It would be impossible to describe less felicitously
or less truly their attitude, and Neilson wrote a letter indignantly
denying that they had either acknowledged their guilt, retracted
their opinions, or implored pardon. It is stated that he was
only restrained from publishing his protest by the threat, that in
that case the Government would consider the whole treaty as
cancelled, and send all the prisoners to trial.‘

Another difficulty speedily followed. The first intention had
been to send the State prisoners to America, but Portland con-
sidered that, by the law of nations, powers at amity have not a

1 There is only a newspaper report
of Plunket’s speech (reproduced by
Madden, iii. 75); but it is sufficient
to show the falsehood of McNevin’s
statement, that Plunket advocated
the summary execution of the signers
of the advertisement. (Pieces of
Trish History, p. 162.)

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.

390, 391, 399, 403; Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, i. 329, 330, 336, 337; Mad-
den’s United Irishmen, iii. 56, 57, 74—
76; McNevin’s Pieces of Irish His-
tory, pp. 160-163; Plowden, ii. 805,
806.

#38 Geo. LIL. c.:78.

4 See O’Connor’s Letter to Lord
Castlereagh.

248 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, KRX5-

right to transport to each other, without permission, such of
their subjects as had committed crimes, and it was soon found
that the American Government had not the smallest intention
of giving this permission. Rufus King, the American minister
in London, officially announced that the President, under the |
powers given him by a recent Act, would not suffer any of
the traitors from Ireland to land in America, and that if they
set foot on shore, he would instantly have them sent back to
Kurope.!

In a reply that King subsequently wrote to the remon-
strances of an Irishman, there is a passage justifying this decision,
which is so curious, as showing the part which Irish immigrants
had already begun to play in American politics, that it is de-
serving of a full quotation. ‘In common with others,’ he wrote,
‘we have felt the influence of the changes that have successively
taken place in France, and unfortunately a portion-of our in-
habitants have erroneously supposed that our civil and political
institutions, as well as our national policy, might be improved
by a close imitation of France. This opinion, the propagation
of which was made the duty, and became the chief employment,
of the French agents residing among us, created a more con-
siderable division among our people, and required a greater
watchfulness and activity from the Government, than could
beforehand have been apprehended. { am sorry to make the
remark ... that a large proportion of the emigrants from
Treland, and especially in the Middle States, have, upon this
occasion, arranged themselves on the side of the malcontents.
I ought to except from this remark, most of the enlightened and
well-educated Irishmen who reside among us, and, with a few
exceptions, I might confine it to the indigent and illiterate, who,
entertaining an attachment to freedom, are unable to appreciate
those salutary restraints, without which it degenerates into
anarchy. It would be injustice to say, that the Irish emigrants
are more national than those of other countries, yet, being a
numerous though very minor portion of our population, they are
capable, from causes it is needless now to explain, of being
generally brought to act in concert, and under artful leaders

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 425, 430; Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
394-396.

CH. XXX. THE STATE PRISONERS. 249

may be, as they have been, enlisted in mischievous combinations
against our Government.’ !

The result of the attitude of the American Government was,
that the leading members of the conspiracy still remained in
confinement for considerably more than three years. A proposal
which they made to go to Germany was not accepted,? and the
Duke of Portland peremptorily directed that they should be kept
in strict custody. In the beginning of December, the determina-
tion of the Government was formally announced by a written
message, which stated that fifteen of their number could not be
liberated at present, though the other State prisoners named in
the Banishment Bill would be permitted to retire to any neutral
country on the Continent, on giving security not to pass into an
enemy's country. The Lord Lieutenant expressed his regret
‘that a change of circumstances’ had rendered this precaution
necessary, and his determination to extend a similar indulgence
to the prisoners now excepted, as soon as it was consistent with
the public safety.

It is not, I think, necessary to enter in detail into the long
and angry controversy that ensued. O’Connor and his fellow-
prisoners contended, that their continued detention after they
had fulfilled their part of the compact, was a breach of faith to
men who were untried and unconvicted, and that the Govern-
ment were bound in honour to permit them at once to emigrate
to the Continent. Castlereagh, on the other hand, had from the
beginning stated that the Government had reserved a full dis-
cretion of retaining the prisoners in custody, as long as the war
should last, provided their liberation was deemed inconsistent
with the public safety. The excepted prisoners in Dublin, as
well as a few from Belfast, were soon after removed to Fort St.
George, in Inverness-shire in Scotland, where some of them re-
mained till the middle of 1802. It is worthy of special notice,
that of the twenty prisoners who were selected for confinement

1 McNevin’s Pieces of Irish His-
tory, p. 236. This letter was written
to Henry Jackson, Aug. 23, 1799.

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
426.

3 Compare the Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, i, 350, with the accounts of
the three leading United Irishmen,
which are given in McNevin’s Pieces

of Irish History, and\in Madden.
The paper signed by the seventy-three
State prisoners says nothing about
the time of their release, but simply
states their readiness ‘ to emigrate to
such country as shall be agreed on
between them and the Government.’
See Arthur O’Connor’s Letter to Lord
Castlereagh, p. 10.

250 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX

in this fortress on account of the prominent part they had taken
in organising the conspiracy, ten were nominal members of the
Established Church, six were Presbyterians, and only four were
Catholics.!

Few men can have had a loftier opinion of their own merits
than O’Connor, Emmet, and McNevin, and they have written
with burning indignation the account of their wrongs. At the
same time, the fate of these leading conspirators, who endured
a long, but by no means severe, imprisonment, and were
afterwards exiled to the Continent or to America, was a very
different one from that of multitudes of humbler men, who were
probably far less guilty. A stream of Irish political prisoners was
poured into the penal settlement of Botany Bay, and they played
some part in the early history of the Australian colonies,
and especially of Australian Catholicism. In November 1796,
Governor Hunter wrote home complaining of the turbulent and
seditious disposition of a large number of Irish Defenders who
had been sent out in the two preceding years; but he acknow-
ledged that they had one very real grievance, for neither the
date of their conviction nor the length of their sentence was
known in Australia. In September 1800, Governor King an-
nounced that the seditious spirit among the Irish political con-
victs had risen to ‘a very great height,’ and had been much
fostered by a priest who was among them. He adds, that the
number of rebels who had been sent from Ireland since the late
disturbances in that country, was 235, exclusive of the Defenders
sent out in 1794; that there were now about 450 Irish convicts
in the colony, but that some of them were ordinary felons. In
the spring of 1801, attempts at insurrection were made; pikes
were discovered, and the governor complained that 135 new con-
victs had just arrived from Cork, ‘of the most desperate and
diabolical characters that could be selected throughout that king-
dom, together with a Catholic priest of most notorious seditious
and rebellious principles.’ There were now, he said, not less
than 600 avowed and unrepentant United Irishmen among the
convicts. A year later he repeated his complaint, urging that
if seditious republicans continued to be sent, the colony would
soon be composed of few other characters; and, in May 1803,
he writes that ‘the list of fourteen men condemned lately to

1 Dickson’s Warrative, pp. 112, 116.

‘ESENTED TO ST. MARY'S COLLEGE J,
BY REV. T. CALLA CHAN

CH. XXX. FATE OF IRISH REBELS. 251

die was caused by one of those unhappy events that happen
more or less on the importation of each cargo of Irish convicts.’
In 1804, his warnings were justified by a serious Irish rebellion
in New South Wales, which was not suppressed without some
bloodshed. It is curious to notice how beneath the Southern
Cross, as in every disturbance at home, the familiar figure of
the Irish informer at once appeared. An old Irish rebel, who
declared that he had suffered so much by rebellion that he would
never again be implicated in it, gave the first information of
the designs of the conspirators.!

The political prisoners in New South Wales were usually
men who had been convicted under the Insurrection Act or by
courts-martial, and many of them were men who had been con-
demned to death, but whose sentences had been commuted.
Other prisoners were permitted to serve in the army and navy.
It was intended that these forced recruits should serve only in
the dangerous climates of the West Indies, but they gradually
percolated all branches of the service, and their possible influence
was a cause of some anxiety, both to the civil and military
authorities. It appears that, at the end of October 1798,
about 300 political prisoners were in confinement in the dif-
ferent gaols of Ireland, in addition to the eighty who were
banished by Act of Parliament. The Government was soon
afterwards relieved of the embarrassment, in a somewhat un-
expected way. A message came in January 1799 from the
King of Prussia, offering to take able-bodied Irish rebels

1 T have taken these facts from 343. Some time before the insurrec-

Mr. James Bonwick’s very interesting
little work, called First Twenty Years
of Australia, pp. 53-66. Mr. Bon-
wick states, that three Catholic priests
“were among the Irish convicts, and
that a Protestant clergyman, named
Henry Fulton, who was transported
on account of his participation in the
rebellion of 1798, became one of the
most prominent and useful clergymen
in New South Wales, and a warm
friend of the governor. Thomas
Muir, the Scotch Jacobite, unlike
most of his party, was a sincere
Christian, and employed himself
much in distributing Scripture ex-
tracts among the convicts.

2 Castlereagh Correspondence, i.

tion had broken out, Portland begged
that Irish seditious prisoners might
not be brought to the English ports,
‘because we are wholly unprepared
for their reception, and the army is
in general full as little inclined as
the navy, to admit persons of that de-
scription into any of their corps... .
As to their being sent to the corps in
Botany Bay, this mode of disposing
of them, appears to me certainly not
less exceptionable, than that of plac-
ing them in the 60th Regiment.’
(Portland to Camden, July 3, 1797,
WSie.Or)

3 Cornwallis
424426,

Correspondence, ii.

252 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXX.

who were fit and willing to serve as privates in the Prussian
army. The offer was gladly accepted. A Prussian officer,
named Schonler, came over to Ireland to select the recruits,
and on September 8 of that year a transport sailed from
Waterford for Emden, bearing 318 Irishmen to the Continent.'

When Cornwallis first came to Ireland, Bishop Percy described
him as very civil and pleasant, but added, ‘he will not be a
favourite here, for he is very sober himself, and does not push
the bottle. They also think him too merciful to the rebels.’ ?
The prediction was fully verified, and the outcries against ‘the
ruinous system of lenity’ of the Lord Lieutenant, were long and
loud among the supporters of the Government. Clare, who
had at first taken a different course, very soon subscribed to the
condemnation. He maintained that Cornwallis had ‘much
mistaken the nature of the people, in supposing that they were
to be brought back to submission by a system nearly of indis-
criminate impunity for the most enormous offences,’ that he had
exasperated the loyal, and encouraged the rebels, and that
nothing but a severe and terrible lesson would ever put a stop
to rebellion and outrage in Ireland. He quoted with some
felicity a passage from General Tarleton’s History of the
American campaigns of 1780 and 1781, in which Cornwallis
was represented as having pursued a similar policy in South
Carolina, in hopes of giving offence to neither party, and having
by his mistaken lenity greatly encouraged and strengthened,
without in any degree conciliating, the disloyal, while he at once
discouraged and exasperated those who had been ruined by their
attachment to the Crown.®

1 A number of letters about this

tothem to cut the Protestants’ throats,
transaction will be found in the

I.8.P.0. Miles Byrne declares that
the deported Irish were compelled to
work for years in the Prussian mines.
(See Byrne’s Memoirs, iii, 163, 164.)

? Bishop Percy to his wife, July
30, 1798.

3 Auckland Correspondence, iv.
70, 71. The following curious extract
from a private letter gives a vivid
picture of the state of feeling. ‘His
Excellency is held in very little re-
spect. The length of time he took
to beat Humbert, his subsequent al-
leged disregard to the rebels in Con-
naught, his thirty-days’ permission

his orders to the army to retire to the
interior on the approach of an invad-
ing enemy; his putting the yeomanry
off permanent duty in the county of
Wicklow ; his alleged neglect of the
late outrages in Wexfordand Kildare ;
his system of mercy to the rebels,
contrasted with his severe sentence
of censure on Wollaghan’s court-
martial—are universally brought in
charge against him in all companies,
as indicating a determination on his
part to render the kingdom, upon
system, uncomfortable to the Protes-
tants, and thereby to force them to
become the solicitors for an union.

Sup See & THE LOSS OF LIFE.

253

It is true that the system of government under Lord Corn-
wallis was less sanguinary than under Lord Camden; but an
extract from a private letter of Castlereagh to Wickham, in the
March of 1799, will probably be, to most persons, quite sufficient
to acquit it of any excess in lenity. Nearly 400 persons,
Castlereagh says, had been already tried under Lord Corn-
wallis. Of these, 131 were condemned to death, and 81
were executed. ‘This forms but a proportion of the number
of victims to public justice, for acts of treason and rebellion in
the disturbed districts. Numbers were tried and executed by
order of the general officers, whose cases never came before the
Lord Lieutenant, and it appears by the inclosed return from
the Clerk of the Crown, that 418 persons were banished or trans-
ported by sentences of courts-martial. . . . Since Lord Corn-
wallis’s arrival, exclusive of the infliction of punishment by
military tribunals, great numbers were convicted at the autumn
assizes.’ !

Of the total loss of life during the rebellion, it is impossible
to speak with any kind of certainty. The estimates on the sub-
ject are widely different, and almost wholly conjectural. Mad-
den, the most learned of the apologists of the United Irishmen,
pretends that not less than 70,000 persons must have perished
in Ireland, during the two months’ struggle ;? but Newenham,
who was a contemporary writer, singularly free from party
passion and prejudice, and much accustomed to careful statis-
tica] investigations, formed a far more moderate estimate. He
calculated that the direct loss during the rebellion was about
15,000. About 1,600, he says, of the King’s troops, and about
11,000 of the rebels, fell in the field. About 400 loyal persons
were massacred or assassinated, and 2,000 rebels were exiled or
hanged? The most horrible feature was the great number of

The devil of this language is, that it is
chiefly held by the most approved
friends of Government.’ (Sir G. Hill
to Cooke, November 15, 1798.)

1 Castlereagh to Wickham (pri-
vate), March 6, 1799. (Record
Office.)

2 Madden’s United Irishmen, i.
353. He says, 20,000 of the King’s
troops and 50,000 of the people
perished.

3 Newenham, On Irish Population,

p. 181, Alexander Marsden, who held
a very confidential post under the
Irish Government, wrote: ‘There
have not less than 20,000 persons
fallen in this conflict, which for the
time was carried on with great in-
veteracy. It was a desperate remedy,
but the country will now be in a
much more secure state than before.’
(A. Marsden to Messrs. Goldsmid,
Aug. 4, 1798, I.8.P.0.)

254 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

helpless, unarmed men, who were either deliberately murdered
by the rebels, or shot down by the troops. ‘ For several months,’
writes Mary Leadbeater, ‘ there was no sale for bacon cured in
Treland, from the well-founded dread of the hogs having fed
upon the flesh of men.’ !

Of the loss of property, it is equally difficult to speak with
accuracy. The claims sent in by the suffering loyalists amounted
to 823,5171.; ‘ but who,’ writes Gordon, ‘ will pretend to compute
the damages of the croppies, whose houses were burned, and
effects pillaged and destroyed, and who, barred from compensa-
tion, sent in no estimate to the commissioners?’ And, in
addition to this, we must remember the enormously increased
military expenditure, which was imposed upon the country,
and the terrible shock that was given, both to industry and to
credit.?

The double burden, indeed, of foreign war, and of internal
convulsion, was fast weighing down the finances of Ireland,
which had, a few years before, been so sound and prosperous ;
and although the increase of debt seemed small compared with that
of England, and was much exceeded in Ireland in the years that
followed the Union, it was sufficiently rapid to justify very grave
apprehensions. When the war broke out, the Irish national
debt was 2,344,314/.3 At the end of 1797, the funded debt had
risen to 9,485,7561., of which 6,196,316. was owed to England,
and it was computed that the expenditure of the country ex-
ceeded its income by about 2,700,000/.4 The terrible months
that followed, greatly aggravated the situation. Between De-
cember 1797 and August 1798, Ireland borrowed no less than
4,966,6661., nearly all of it at more than 6 per cent., and a large
proportion at more than 7 per cent.?

This was a grievous evil, but, at the same time, the great
spring of national prosperity was not yet seriously impaired.
A country which is essentially agricultural, will flourish when
agriculture is prosperous, even in spite of very serious and san-
guinary convulsions. In the height of the struggle, Beresford

1 Leadbeater Papers, i. 247, 3 Vol. vi. p. 434.

2 Compare Gordon’s History of the * See a letter of Beresford to
Rebellion, pp. 202, 203; Musgrave, Auckland. (Beresford Correspond-
p. 636 ; Newenham’s State of Ireland, ence, ii. 161.)
pp. 274, 275. 5 Tbid. pp. 167, 168.

cH, XXX. ATTACKS ON GRATTAN, 255

wrote that it was ‘most strange and extraordinary,’ that the
revenue every week was rising in a degree that had been hitherto
unknown.'! The moral scars left by the rebellion were deep
and indelible, and it changed the whole character of Irish life,
but the material devastation rapidly disappeared. There were
large districts, it is true, where, owing to the destruction of
houses, and the neglect or ruin of agriculture, extreme misery
prevailed, but the harvest of 1798 was a very good one, and this
fact did more than any measures of politicians to appease the
country. In August, Clare noticed the rich corn crops that were
ripening over the rebel districts through which he passed, and
he observed that the common people were everywhere returning
to their ordinary occupations.”

There was one ignoble task, in which the Government and
many of those who blamed the Government for its lenity, were
fully agreed. It was in doing all that lay in their power to
blacken the character of the man who, since the death of Burke,
was by far the greatest of living Irishmen. The savage assaults
that, in the last half of 1798, were directed against the character
of Grattan, form one of the most shameful incidents of this
shameful time. Im some respects, indeed, they had the motive
of self-defence. The Fitzwilliam episode had so visibly and so
largely contributed to the calamities of the last few years, that
it was very necessary for those who had brought about the re-
call of Lord Fitzwilliam and the reversal of his policy, if they
desired to exculpate themselves from a terrible weight of re-
sponsibility, to represent his appointment and policy as the main
source of the evil. Catholic emancipation and parliamentary
reform had been the first avowed objects of the United Irishmen,
and long before the United Irish conspiracy had arisen, Grattan
had been their most powerful advocate. He had opposed some
parts of the coercive legislation of the Government; he had
constantly denounced the acts of military and Orange violence
which had been so largely practised with their appraval or con-
nivance, and he had committed the still more deadly offence of
predicting only too faithfully the consequences that would follow
from them. It is true, that he had exerted all his eloquence and
influence in opposition to French democracy ; that he had never

1 Auckland Correspondence, iii. 442. ee libidielve ole

256 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

failed to urge that democracy of any kind would be ruinous to
Ireland ; that he had shown in every possible way, and on every
occasion, the depth of his conviction that Great Britain and
Treland must stand or fall together; that he had uniformly
taught the people, that no reform was likely to do them good
which was not constitutionally effected with the support of their
gentry and through the medium of their Parliament; that the
United Irish movement was essentially a revolt against his
teaching and authority, and that it had brought about the
almost total destruction of his influence. All this was incon-
testably true, but in the fierce reaction against Liberal ideas, it
is perhaps not wonderful that the tide should have run furiously
against the man who had been for many years their greatest
representative in Ireland.

A long and extremely scurrilous attack upon Grattan, and
his whole life and policy, had been written by Dr. Duigenan in
1797, in reply to the address which Grattan had published when
he seceded from Parliament. It had been sent over to London,
and refused by a publisher, but it appeared in Dublin imme-
diately after the suppression of the rebellion. In general the
writings and speeches of Duigenan, though they contained a good
deal of curious learning, neither received, nor deserved, much
attention, but this work so exactly fell in with the dominant
spirit of the moment, that it speedily ran through at least five
editions. A reader who is exempt from the passions of that time,
would find it difficult to conceive a grosser or more impudent
travesty of history. The calamities that had befallen Ireland, in
the opinion of Duigenan, were mainly due to two men, Burke and
Grattan. Burke was essentially a Romanist, and passionately
devoted to the interests of popery, and the main object of all his
later policy had been to overturn the Protestant Establishment
in Ireland, and to substitute popery in itsroom. ‘Whether Mr.
Burke had, at the time he formed his project of establishing
popery in Ireland, entertained it only as a step towards the
separation of Ireland from the British Empire, is not quite clear,
though his strong attachment to republican principles during
the American war gives good ground for suspecting him of
such a design.’ In the earlier part of his career, Burke had con-
tributed as much as any man in England to the separation of

CH. XXX, DUIGENAN’S ATTACK ON GRATTAN, 257

America from the mother country, and it was very probably the
success of the American rebellion that encouraged him to under-
take his Irish enterprise. Itis true that he afterwards ‘ changed,
or affected to change, all his former opinions in favour of republi-
canism,’ but the explanation was very evident. It was because
the French Revolution had proved hostile to popery.

But if there was some ambiguity about the motives of
Burke, those of Grattan were abundantly clear. According to
this veracious chronicler, the steady object which inspired all his
acts and all his speeches ever since the American War, was the
separation of Ireland from the British Empire. Ambition and
avarice were his guiding motives; coalitions between republican
infidels and popish bigots were his chosen means. All this was
developed in a strain of the coarsest invective. A passage
from the Psalms was selected as the motto, and it was the key-
note of the whole book. ‘Thy tongue imagineth wickedness,
and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp razor. Thou hast loved
unrighteousness more than goodness, and to talk of lies more
than righteousness. Thou hast loved to speak all words that
may do hurt, oh thou false tongue!’

Such was the .book which suddenly rose to popularity in
Treland, which was spoken of with delight in ministerial circles,
and was eulogised in unqualified terms by Canning in the Eng-
lish House of Commons.! The cry against Grattan was very
violent, and members in the close confidence of the Government
were extremely anxious, if possible, to connect him with the
United Irish conspiracy. It was perfectly true that some of its
members had at one time been his followers, and it was true also
that in his capacity of leader in Parliament of the party which
took charge of the questions of Catholic emancipation and reform,

Grattan had come in contact with, and had occasionally seen
at Tinnehinch, conspicuous reformers or advocates of Catholic
emancipation from Ulster, who were in fact United Irishmen.
It appears, indeed, to have been a common thing for active poli-
ticians to go down unsolicited to the county of Witklow for the
purpose of asking his advice, or of bringing him information
or complaints. We have already had an example of such a

’ See his speech in January 1799 too, several allusions to it in the
(Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 229, 230). See, Auckland Correspondence

VOL. VII. Ss

258 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX.

conference, and we have seen the earnestness with which
Grattan availed himself of the occasion, to impress upon his
guests how great a calamity to Ireland, a French invasion must
inevitably prove.! It is also true that, at the trial of Arthur
O’Connor, Grattan, like the leading members of the English
Opposition, had been called as a witness for the defence; but the
published account of the trial clearly shows that, unlike the
English witnesses, he confined his evidence to a bare statement
of the good private character of O’Connor, and to denying that
he had ever heard him express an opinion favourable to invasion.

In truth, the attitude of Grattan towards the French Revolu-
tion had, from the beginning, profoundly separated him from its
admirers. There was on both sides much coldness and distrust,
and Grattan appears to have had only a slight and superficial ac-
quaintance even with Arthur O’Connor and Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald, who sat with him in Parliament, and who belonged to the
same sphere of social life. We have seen how he had warned
the Catholic Committee against Tone, and how contemptuously
he had spoken of the abilities of Emmet. He can hardly, how-
ever, have failed to suspect that some of those with whom he
came into occasional contact were steeped in treason, and at the
time when there was a strong desire on the part of the Govern-
ment to implicate Grattan, a Government informer called Hughes
came forward, and told on oath before the Secret Commission of
Parliament the following story, which was all the more danger-
ous because some parts of it were undoubtedly true.

He said that about April 28, 1798, he had accompanied
Neilson to breakfast with Sweetman, one of the most prominent
of the Catholic United Irishmen, who was then in confinement,
and that he afterwards, with Neilson, proceeded in Sweetman’s
carriage to Tinnehinch. He was present, he said, when Grattan
asked Neilson many questions about the state of Ulster. He in-
quired how many families had been driven out, how many houses
had been burned by the Government or by the Orangemen, and
what was the probable strength of the United Irishmen and of the
Orangemen in Ulster. Hughes added that in the course of the
conversation Grattan said he supposed Neilson was a United Irish-
man, and that Neilson answered that he was; that Neilson and

* Vol. vii. p. 145.

CH, XXx. CHARGE AGAINST GRATTAN. 259

Grattan were for some time alone together ; that on their return
to Dublin, Neilson told him that his object in going to Tinnehinch
had been ‘to ask Grattan whether he would come forward, and that
he had sworn him,’ Hughes added also, that he saw a printed con-
stitution of the United Irishmen in Grattan’s library ; that he heard
Grattan tell Neilson that he would be in town about the follow-
ing Tuesday; and that he understood from Neilson that Grattan
had visited him in prison.

The great improbability of this story must be obvious to
anyone who considers the uniform attitude of Grattan towards
the United Irishmen, and the horror which he had always both
in public and private expressed of a French invasion, which it
was the main object of the United Irishmen to effect. At the
time when he was represented as having at the request of a man
immensely his inferior, and with whom he was but slightly ac-
quainted, reversed by one decisive step the whole of his past
life, he was in fact withdrawn from all active politics, and living
chiefly in England in order that he should be in no way mixed
withthem. The Government, too, which possessed from so many
sources such minute and confidential information about the plans,
proceedings, and negotiations of the conspirators, both in Ireland
and on the Continent, must have been perfectly aware, that if a
person of Grattan’s importance had joined the conspiracy, this
fact could not possibly have escaped their notice. Neilson was
examined before the committee, and he at once declared upon
oath that he had never sworn in Grattan; that he had never said
he had done so; that Grattan was never a United Irishman,
and had no concern in their transactions. He acknowledged,
however, that he had been more than once at Tinnehinch, and
that he had on one occasion unsuccessfully urged Grattan to

_*come forward.’ ”

1 Report of the Committee of the Grattan the last constitution of the

House of Lords, Appendix I.

2 Compare Neilson’s evidence in
the Report of the Committee of the
House of Lords, Appendix V., and his
own version of it which he sent to
Grattan. (Grattan’s Life, iv. 410, 411.)
Neilson’s evidence was exceedingly
inaccurate. He is stated in the
Report to have said: ‘I was twice
with Mr. Grattan at Tinnehinch in
April 1798. I either showed Mr.

Society of United Irishmen, or ex-
plained it to him, and pressed him to
come forward. I was accompanied
at these interviews by John Sweet-
man and Oliver Bond. But I do not
believe Mr. Grattan was ever a United
Irishman,’ In his examination he
did not mention his interview in
company with Hughes; but imme-
diately after his examination, he
wrote to the Chancellor to correct
s 2

260 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH, XXX.

Grattan, whose word appears to me of much more weight
than the oath of either Hughes or Neilson, has given two ac-
counts of the matter, one in a letter to Hrskine, asking for his
legal advice, and another in a paper which at a later period he
drew up for his son. In the former paper he says: ‘The three
persons, Bond, Neilson, and Sweetman, in the spring of 1798,
rode to the country to breakfast with me once, and once only,
without invitation or appointment, and at that visit of personal
acquaintance which is most improperly called an interview, made
no proposal to me, held no conversation with me, and never dis-
coursed on their own subject. A considerable time after, Mr. Neil-
son, with a man named Hughes, whom I did not know, without
appointment called on me to breakfast, which visit has been very
improperly called an interview, when he held no consultation with
me whatever, but only entered on a general conversation ; with
what specific view or application I cannot affirm ; but I can say
it was not attended with any effect ; and further that he showed
me the United Irishmen’s published and printed constitution,
and explained it, but did not show me or explain their plans.
I must observe that the said constitution was only the organisa-
tion of their committees, such as appeared in the published
report of the House of Commons a year anda half ago. . . . As
far as Mr. Hughes’ testimony relates to me, save only as above,
it is without foundation. It is not true that Mr. Neilson ever
swore me. It is not true that I ever went to see him in
Newgate, and it is impossible Mr. Neilson ever said it.’!

In the paper which Grattan afterwards drew up for his son,
there is a fuller account of the interview on which the charge
was based. ‘The conversation and interview with Neilson was
nothing—it was quite accidental. I was in my study, and

his evidence, by stating that he had
had another interview with Grattan,
in company with Hughes.

Itappears, from the statements both
of Grattan and Sweetman, that Neilson
was only once at Tinnehinch in com-
pany with Sweetman ; that this visit
took place, not in April (when Sweet-
man was in prison), but in the begin-
ning of March; that nothing whatever
was said on that occasion about the
United Irishmen; and that the conver-
sation referred to took place at the

second and last visit of Neilson, which
was that with Hughes. In a letter to
Grattan, Neilson complained that his
evidence had been misrepresented in
the report; and he gave what he
considered an exact statement of it.
He does not speak, in this version,
of two interviews in company with
Sweetman; and he mentions that he
called on Grattan with Sweetman,
because he happened to be living in
the neighbourhood.
1 Grattan’s Life, iv. 413, 414.

CH, XXX. STATEMENT OF GRATTAN. 260

Neilson was shown up along with a Mr. Hughes whom I did
not know. They complained very much of the excesses in the
North of Ireland, and of the murders of the Catholics; and I
remember Hughes saying that the phrase used by the anti-
Catholics was, ‘To Connaught or to hell with you.’ They
stated their numbers to be very great, and I then asked, ‘ How
does it come, then, that they are always beaten?’ I did not
ask the question with a view to learn their force, as the exami-
nation would lead one to believe, but in consequence of these
two individuals boasting of the numbers of these men who could
not protect themselves. Hughes then went downstairs, and
Neilson asked me to become a United Irishman. I declined.
He produced the constitution, and left it in the room. This
was nothing new. I had seen it long before, and it was gene-
rally printed and published. Hughes then returned, and they
both went away. ‘This is the entire of the transaction to which
so much importance was attached.’ !

This statement is, I have no doubt, the literal, unexaggerated
truth. The Government, however, had found in the evidence of
Hughes a formidable weapon for discrediting an opponent whom
they greatly feared, and for gratifying a large section of their
supporters. It is remarkable that in the report of the House of
Commons, all notice of this matter was suppressed. The Speaker
Foster is said to have urged that the statement of Hughes re-
lating to Grattan was utterly untrustworthy, and that no notice
ought to be taken of it. The House of Lords, probably under the
influence of Lord Clare, published to the world the statement of
Hughes, but accompanied it by a somewhat abbreviated version
of the evidence of Neilson.

It does not appear that the Government ever really believed
that Grattan had been a United Irishman ; but Portland at once
wrote to Cornwallis, urging that a criminal prosecution should
be directed against him, on the much more plausible ground of
‘misprision,’ or concealment of treason. Cornwallis, would have
been perfectly willing to take this step, if there had been any
chance of succeeding. ‘I have consulted the best law opinions
in the country,’ he writes, ‘on the expediency of a prosecution
against Mr. Grattan for misprision of treason, according to your

1 Grattan’s Life, iv. 373, 374.

262 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXX.

Grace’s recommendation in your letter dated the 15th inst., and
have found that all of them think that there would be no prospect
of our succeeding in such an attempt, and that no jury would con-
vict him on the evidence of Hughes, contradicted as he already
has been in parts of his evidence by Neilson, and as he certainly
would be by Sweetman.’ He considered, however, that a great
object had been attained by the publication of the evidence.
‘ Hnough has already appeared to convince every unprejudiced
person of Mr. Grattan’s guilt, and so far to tarnish his character
as to prevent his becoming again a man of consequence, and Mr.
Pollock, who is busily employed in the North, has been directed
to use his best endeavours to discover evidence that would
establish a criminal charge against him; but if these means
should fail, we must be satisfied with dismissing him from the
Privy Council.’

They did most signally fail. “Pollock, with his utmost endea-
vours, was unable to discover any of the evidence he sought for.?
The story of Grattan’s visit to Neilson in prison, which must
have been established if true, was never substantiated; and
Sweetman, as the Lord Lieutenant anticipated, was prepared to
give strong evidence against the charge. In a letter written to
Curran, he stated that in the one visit which he had paid to
Grattan, in company with Neilson and Bond, not only had nothing
passed relating to the United Irishmen, but the three United
Irishmen had specially agreed not even to touch on the subject,
in order that nothing like implication in treason could be imputed
to Grattan ; and having a very intimate knowledge of the inner
working of the conspiracy, he avowed most solemnly that Mr.
Grattan was totally unconnected with the United system.®

No attempt was made to bring the case before a law court;

5]

but the publication of the evidence of Hughes, and the admitted

1 Cornwallis to Portland, Sept. 24,

account of the perfectly innocent
1798.

character of the visit at which he

2 There is a curious account in
Dickson’s Narrative (pp. 67, 68) of
the eagerness with which Pollock
sought evidence against Grattan, and
his disappointment at finding that
Dickson’s correspondence had been
with Curran (who was his lawyer),
and not with Grattan.

3’ Madden, iy. 40, 41. Sweetman’s

was present, is powerfully confirmed
by the fact that Bond, who was pre-
sent on the occasion, and who was
examined by the Chancellor a few
days after Neilson, was asked no
question whatever about Grattan.
(See his examination, in the Report
of the Secret Committee.)

CH, XXX, UNPOPULARITY OF GRATTAN. 263

fact that some leading members of the conspiracy had visited
Grattan in his house, were sufficient, in the excited state of public
opinion, to make many of Grattan’s countrymen treat the charge
as if it were both formally advanced and legally proved. The
ministerial papers were full of denunciations of the ‘ companion
of conspirators.’ The King struck the name of Grattan from
the list of privy councillors, as sixteen years before he had struck
off the name of Grattan’s great rival, Flood. The authorities of
Trinity College, who in the golden days of 1782 had hung his
portrait in their examination hall, now removed it to a lumber
room, and replaced it by that of Lord Clare. The Corporation of
Dublin, while conferring the freedom of the city on several persons
who had taken a conspicuous part in suppressing the rebellion,
unanimously disfranchised their most illustrious representative.
The Corporation of Londonderry took the same course, though
some names that were conspicuous in granting the freedom, are
not to be found in the resolution withdrawing it. The Guild of
Dublin merchants, who had specially honoured Grattan as the
man who had done most to emancipate Irish trade, now struck
off his name from their roll. The Corporation of Cork changed
the name of Grattan Street, calling it Duncan Street, after the
victor of Camperdown.

It was not the first, nor was it the last, time that Grattan expe-
rienced the ingratitude and the inconstancy of his countrymen.
His health was at this time very bad, and he was suffering from
a nervous disorder which preyed greatly on his spirits. After
the publication of the book of Duigenan he appeared for a short
time in Dublin, and, according to the bad custom of the time,
published an advertisement in the papers which was equivalent
to a challenge, but it remained unnoticed by his assailant.
Grattan found that he could scarcely appear without insult in
the streets, and soon returned to England, where he remained
for many months. In a letter published in the ‘ Courier’ news-
paper he challenged investigation of the charge that had been
made against him, and at the same time, in strong and vehement
language, attributed to the corruption and tyranny of the govern-
ing faction in Ireland the chief blame of the crimes and the
calamities that had occurred.

A great question, however, was rapidly coming to maturity,

264 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CHOSE.

which was destined to call him from his retirement, and to make
him once more a central figure in Irish political life. The
English Ministers had now determined that the time had come
when the governing system in Ireland must at all hazards be
changed; and the last wave of the rebellion of 1798 had
not yet subsided, when the project of a legislative Union was
announced.

CH, XXXI. UNION OF 1654, 265

CHAPTER XXXI,

THE UNION.

PART Tl:

THE reader who has followed with any care the long course of
Trish history related in the present work, will have observed how
often, and from how many different points of view, and at what
long intervals, the possibility of a legislative Union between Great
Britain and Ireland had been discussed or suggested. It is
difficult, however, without some repetition, to form a clear, con-
nected conception of the history of the question, and I shall,
therefore, make nv apology for devoting a few pages to recapitu-
lating its earlier stages.

For a short time during the Commonwealth, such an Union
had actually existed. The great scheme of parliamentary reform
which had been devised by the Long Parliament was carried into
effect by Cromwell, and thirty Irish and thirty Scotch members
were summoned to the Reformed Parliament which met at West-
minster in 1654, and to the succeeding Parliaments of the
Commonwealth. With the Restoration the old constituencies and
the old separate constitutions were revived, but the expediency
-of a legislative Union was soon after strongly advocated by Sir
William Petty in that most remarkable work, the ‘ Political
Anatomy of Ireland,’ which was written about 1672, but pub-
lished, after the death of the author, in 1691.

It was composed in the short interval of returning prosperity
which followed the convulsions and confiscations of the Civil War.
Reviewing the past connection between England and Ireland,
Petty declared that Ireland had been for 500 years, only a loss
and charge to England ; that the suppression of the late rebellion

266 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

had cost England ‘ three times more, in men and money, than the
substance of the whole country when reduced was worth ;’ and
that ‘at this day, when Ireland was never so rich and splendid,
it was the advantage of the English to abandon their whole in-
terest in that country, and fatal to any other nation to take it.’
Nothing, he believed, could ever put an end to this evil but a
measure that should ‘ tend to the transmuting one people into
the other, and the thorough union of interests upon natural
and lasting principles.’ Much, he thought, might be done by
transplanting, for a few years, an English population into Ireland,
and an Irish population into England, but the most efficacious
remedy would be a complete legislative Union. It was absurd
that Englishmen, settled in Ireland for the King’s interests and
in the King’s service, should be treated as aliens; that the King’s
subjects should pay custom when passing from one part of his
dominions to another; that two distinct Parliaments should
exercise legislative powers in Ireland; that every ship carrying
West Indian goods to Ireland should be forced to unload in Eng-
land. Hecontrasted the condition of Ireland with that of Wales,
which had been completely united with England, and therefore
completely pacified, and he concluded, ‘ that if both kingdoms,
now two, were put into one, and under one legislative power and
Parliament, the numbers whereof should be in the same propor-
tion that the power and wealth of each nation are, there would be
no danger such a Parliament should do anything to the prejudice
of the English interest in Ireland; nor could the Irish ever
complain of partiality when they shall be freely and proportion-
ably represented in all Legislatures.’ ‘ If it be just that men of
English birth and estates living in Ireland should be represented
in the legislative power, and that the Irish should not be
judged by those whom they pretend do usurp their estates, it
seems just and convenient that both kingdoms should be united
and governed by one legislative power. Nor is it hard to show
how this may be made practicable.’ }

A new and very important influence affecting the question
had now come into play. Petty had complained of the laws
which in his time prohibited the export of Irish cattle to Eng-
land, and fettered the Irish trade with the colonies; but with

’ Petty’s Political Anatomy of Ireland, ed. 1691, pp. 28-33, 124, 125.

CH. XXXI. COMMERCIAL RESTRICTIONS AND UNION. 267

the Revolution and the ascendency of the commercial class that
followed it, an era of far more terrible commercial restrictions
began. It was not a purely Irish policy, for it extended also to
the American colonies and to Scotland; but, as we have seen,
the geographical position of Ireland and the complete dependence
of its Legislature made the effects of this policy in that country
peculiarly disastrous. The utter ruin by English law of the
woollen manufactures of Ireland, the restrictions by which the
Irish were prohibited from exporting them, not only to England
and to the Hnglish dominions, but also to all other countries
whatsoever, added greatly to the poverty of the nation, drove a
multitude of the best and most energetic settlers out of the
country, kindled a fierce resentment among those who remained,
and inspired Molyneux to publish in 1698 his famous treatise,
asserting the rightful independence of the Irish Parliament.
There is a passage in the work of this great champion of Inish
independence which is peculiarly significant. He observes that
there are traces of Irish members having under Edward III.
been summoned to a Parliament in England, and he adds that
if from these records ‘it be concluded that the Parliament of
England may bind Ireland, it must also be allowed that the
people of Ireland ought to have their representatives in the
Parliament of England; and this, I believe, we should be willing
enough to embrace, but this is a happiness we can hardly hope
fore

The history of the Scotch Union has been already related,
and we have seen how closely it was connected with the history
of the commercial disabilities. The exclusion of Scotch goods
from the English colonies, and the severe restrictions on Scotch
trade with England, had proved a fatal barrier to the progress of
. a poor and struggling country, and it had become a main object
of the more intelligent Scotch politicians to procure their aboli-
tion. The English, on the other hand, were extremely unwilling
to grant it, but they desired. to secure and consolidate the con-
nection of the two countries, which after the Revolution was in
ereat danger. ‘The violently hostile attitude towards England
adopted by the Scotch Parliament during the war; the positive

1 Molyneux, Case of Ireland being bownd by Acts of Parliament in England
(1698), pp. 97, 98.

268 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

refusal of that Parliament to adopt the succession of the Crown
in the House of Hanover; the Scotch Bill of security providing
that, on the death of Queen Anne without issue, the crown of
Scotland should be completely severed from that of England,
unless the religion and freedom of trade of Scotland had been
previously secured, and the strong retaliatory measures taken by
the English Parliament, together forced on the bargain of the
Union. England, with extreme reluctance, conceded the com-
mercial privileges which Scotland so ardently desired ; Scotland,
with extreme reluctance, surrendered her legislative independence
as the only price by which industrial prosperity could be pur-
chased. ‘The measure was carried probably largely by corruption.
It was certainly for more than a generation bitterly unpopular
in the weaker country, but it bound the two nations together by
an indissoluble tie, and the immense commercial benefits which
it conferred on Scotland, proved one of the chief causes of her
subsequent prosperity.

The drama was watched with natural interest in Ireland. In
1708, four years before the Scotch Union was completed, both
Houses of Parliament in Ireland concurred in a representation
to the Queen in favour of a legislative Union between England
and Ireland, and in 1707 the Irish House of Commons, while
congratulating the Queen on the consummation of the Scotch
measure, expressed a hope that God might put it into ber heart to
add greater strength and lustre to her crown by a yet more com-
prehensive union. Several of the ablest men in Ireland, such as
Archbishop King, Sir W. Cox, and Bishop Nicholson, clearly saw
the transcendent importance of such a measure,” and it is toler-
ably certain that, if England had desired it, it could then have
been carried without difficulty and without discontent. Ireland
had much more to gain by such a measure than Scotland, and
the national feeling, which was so powerful in Scotland, and which
at the close of the century became so powerful in Ireland, did not
as yet exist. The Catholic population were sunk in poverty and
degradation. ‘Those who would have been their natural leaders
in any political struggle had been completely broken by the
events of the last sixty-six years, and were for the most part

1 See vol. ii. pp. 50-65.
? Ibid. pp. 416, 417; Ball’s Irish Legislative Systems, pp. 84, 85.

CH, XXXI. EARLY ADVOCATES OF UNION. 269

scattered as exiles over the Continent. All the best contemporary
accounts represent the Catholics in Ireland as perfectly passive
‘and perfectly indifferent to political questions, and they had
assuredly no affection for a Legislature which consisted mainly of
the victors in two recent Civil Wars, and which was animated
by such sentiments as inspired the penal laws under Anne.
The dominant portion of the Protestants, on the other hand, were
new English settlers in possession of recently confiscated land,
and they had not, and could not have had, any of the strong
Irish feeling which was abundantly developed among their suc-
cessors. In the pliant, plastic condition to which Ireland was
then reduced, a slight touch of sagacious statesmanship might
have changed the whole course of its future development. But
in this as in so many other periods of Irish history, the favourable
moment was suffered to pass. The spirit of commercial mono-
poly triumphed. The petition of the Irish Parliament was
treated with contempt, and a long period of commercial restric-
tions, and penal laws, and complete parliamentary servitude,
ensued.

Several writers during the next fifty or sixty years, both in
England and Ireland, when reviewing the condition of Ireland
or the state of English trade, advocated a legislative Union
accompanied with free trade. Madden and Dobbs in Ireland,
Postlethwayt, Decker, Sir Francis Brewster, and Child in England,
were among them,! and they were soon followed by a writer of
far wider fame. Adam Smith devoted nearly the last words of
the ‘ Wealth of Nations’ to the subject. He desired that Ireland
as well as America should share the burden of the English national
debt, but he contended that the increase of taxation which would
follow a legislative Union would be more than compensated by

_the freedom of trade that would accompany it, and that it would
confer upon Ireland the still greater benefit of softening the
antagonism of class and creed, and delivering the nation from an
aristocracy founded not on birth or fortune, but om religious and
political prejudices. ‘Without an Union with Great Britain,’
he said, ‘ the inhabitants of Ireland are not likely, for many ages,
to consider themselves one people.’ ?

At the time of the American War the possibility of an Union

' See vol. ii. p. 416; vol. iv. p. 444. * Wealth of Nations, book v. ch. iii.

270 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

was widely discussed, and many pamphlets pointing to such a
measure appeared! This war brought into vivid relief the
dangers that might arise from the collision of distinct Legisla-
tures in the same Empire, and it was probably remembered that,
long before, Franklin had foreseen the danger, and had pointed
out a legislative Union as the best means of lessening the chances
of future separation.2 Arthur Young more than once touched
upon the subject, but with considerable hesitation. In one
portion of his work he appeared to advocate it, but on the whole
he inclined to the opinion that an arrangement by which England
granted free trade and relaxed the restrictions on the Irish
Legislature, while Ireland gave the British Government a com-
plete control over her military resources, would prove more
advantageous to both parties than an incorporating Union.3
Montesquieu, as we have seen, expressed to Lord Charlemont a
strong opinion in favour of a legislative Union.

These opinions were not confined to mere speculative writers.
Franklin mentions, in a letter from London in September 1773,
that it was reported that Lord Harcourt was about to introduce
a legislative Union at the next meeting of the Irish Parliament.
He added, that the idea of an Union was unpopular on the
Eastern side of Ireland, through the belief that Dublin would
decline, and that the Western and Southern parts would flourish
on its ruins, but that for that very reason it was popular in the
South and West. It appears certain, that the expediency of a
legislative Union had been the subject of consideration and
confidential discussion among English statesmen during the
Administration of the elder Pitt. No public steps, indeed, re-
lating to it were taken, and the sentiments of that great states-
man on the question are not easy to ascertain. The Irish policy
which was disclosed in his despatches and speeches consisted
mainly of three parts. He desired to respect most jealously and
scrupulously the exclusive right of the Irish Parliament to tax
Ireland. He viewed with great dislike the power of controlling
the Executive in the disposal of the Irish army, which the Irish
Parliament possessed in the law providing that 12,000 out

1 See vol. iv. p. 504. this notion.
2 See Franklin’s Zhird Letter to 3’ Tour in Ireland, i. 65; ii, 344—

Governor Shirley (written in 1754). 348.
Franklin at a later period recurred to 4 Franklin’s Works, viii. 84, 85.

OH. XXxt. CHATHAM ON THE UNION. Ri

of the 15,000 men supported from Irish resources must remain
in Ireland, unless the Parliament gave its consent to their re-
moval ; and he believed that it ought to be a great end of Eng-
lish policy to consolidate the Protestant interest by conciliating
as much as possible the Dissenters inthe North. A conspicuous
writer against the Union, however, who was intimately ac-
quainted with some of the leading statesmen of his time, stated
in 1799 that he believed there were men still living who well
remembered ‘that this very measure of an incorporating Union
was a favourite object of the late Harl of Chatham, and that
particularly in the year 1763 he often mentioned it as a matter
of great benefit and importance to Great Britain, and that he
formed to himself the hope of carrying the measure by means of
the Catholics, and that his avowed object was an object of taxa-
tion.’! If, however, Chatham at one time really formed the idea,
he appears to have afterwards abandoned it, for Lord Shelburne,
who probably enjoyed more of his confidence than any other
public man, assured Arthur Young that Chatham had repeatedly
declared himself against the policy of a legislative Union, al-
leging among other reasons the bad effects it would exercise on
the composition of the English Parliament.?

It is stated by Dalrymple that in 1776, at the close of the
Administration of Lord Harcourt, there was some question of
Lord Rochford succeeding him as Viceroy, and that he made it a
condition that he should be authorised to attempt to carry two
great measures—a repeal of the penal laws against the Catholics,
and a legislative Union. Lord Harcourt was consulted on these
proposals, and his advice appears to have been singularly saga-

cious. He said that there would not be much difficulty in re-

1 Address to the People of Ireland
- on the projected Union, by Thomas
Goold, pp. 13, 14. Goold says: ‘This
anecdote I have from a gentleman of
much worth and respectability, who
for many years had the honour of
representing in the Parliament of
Ireland an independent county.’
Another writer said: ‘This master-
piece of politics [the Union], which
was the darling project of the illus-
trious Lord Chatham, will be carried
into execution by his still greater son
aud successor.’ (Cooper's Letters on

the Irish Nation, written in 1799,
p. 352.)

2 Young’s Tow, ii. 347. The
Speaker Foster, in his speech against
the Union, Feb. 17, 1800, said : « When
I talk of England, I cannot avoid
mentioning the effect this Union may
have there. The late Lord Chatham
is said always to have objected to an
Union, lest the additional number of
members from Ireland might alter the
constitution of the House and make it
too unwieldy, or give too much weight
to the democratic balance.’ (P. 41.)

212 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXX,

pealing the penal laws; ‘that the Roman Catholics were all on
the side of England and of the King of England in the American
War, and that very good use might be made of them in the
course of it,’ and he added, that this was the opinion of some of
the principal persons in Ireland, both in Church and State. On
the subject of an Union, however, he thought there were ‘ great
though perhaps not insurmountable difficulties.’ ‘To attempt
it, he said, ‘in time of war would be insanity.’ ‘The minds of
the Irish must be long prepared :’ ‘ Government should take the
assistance of the best writers on both sides of the water, to point
out the advantages of the Union in different lights to different
men.’ ‘No Union should be attempted unless the wish for it
came from the side of Ireland, and even then not unless there
was a strong body of troops there to keep the madmen in order,
and these troops Irish and not English. In consequence of
this opinion, Dalrymple says that Lord Rochford relinquished
the idea of accepting the Viceroyalty.!

By the time of the American War the condition of Ireland
and the wishes of the Irish people had profoundly changed. A
long period of internal peace had greatly assuaged the divisions
and animosities of Irish life, and the Irish Parliament, though a
very restricted and a very corrupt body, contained several men
of eminent abilities and of wide and liberal judgments. A strong
national spirit had grown up among the Irish gentry, and there
seemed every prospect that they would successfully lead and
unite the divided sections of their people. The penal laws
against the Catholics remained on the statute-book, but most of
them had been allowed to fall into desuetude. There was a re-
publican spirit among the Presbyterians of the North, but the
Catholics for more than three-quarters of a century had shown
no seditious disposition, and a large trading interest had arisen
among them. ‘lhe country was plainly improving. With increas-
ing power, increasing patriotism, and increasing unity, the re-
sentment against both the commercial disabilities and the legis-
lative restrictions had strengthened, and the American War and
the volunteer movement kindled the smouldering fire into a
blaze. ‘Two measures of the widest importance were conceded.

1 Dalrymple’s Memoirs of Great 347, 348. See, too, the Cornwallis
Britain, ed. 1790, iii. Appendix, pp. Correspondence, iii. 129.

CH. XXXI. ENGLISH STATESMEN DESIRE UNIO }
The whole code of commercial restraint which exc .
commerce from the British plantations and from continental
Europe was abolished, and the full legislative independence of
the Irish Parliament was recognised.

The bearing of these measures on the question of an Union
was very obvious. <A few slight commercial restrictions re-
mained, and trade with England was still regulated by separate
acts of the two Parliaments, but Ireland obtained a field of
commercial development which was fully adequate to her real
requirements and capacities, and in her case, therefore, the
main inducement which led Scotland to accept the Union no
longer existed. The newly acquired independence of the Irish
Parliament, on the other hand, greatly increased both the
sacrifice involved in an Union and the national spirit opposed
to it. I have already described at length the nature of the
Constitution of 1782, the dangers that attended it, and the two
great conflicts which, in the first seven years of its existence,
brought the enfranchised Parliament into opposition to the
Parliament of England. These conflicts have, I think, often
been greatly misrepresented ; they should be carefully examined
by every student of Irish history, but I can here only refer to
what I have already written on the subject. One very evident
result of them was to strengthen greatly in the minds of
English statesmen the conviction, that the tie that bound the
two countries had become exceedingly precarious, and that
some form of Union was necessary to secure and consolidate the
Empire.

It is remarkable that George III. already looked with
fayour on the idea. In a letter written to North at the time of
Lord Townshend’s contest with the undertakers, he complained
of the open profligacy of public men in Ireland, and predicted
that it ‘must sooner or later oblige this country seriously to
consider whether the uniting it to this crown would not be the
only means of making both islands flourishing.’! During the
American War, and at the time when the great commercial
concessions were made to Ireland, Lord Hillsborough, who was
North’s Secretary of State, was known to be warmly in favour
of a legislative Union upon the Scotch model; Lord North

1 See Walpole’s George ITT. iii. 397, 398.
VOL. VIII. in

274 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

shared his opinion,! and after the surrender of all legislative
control over Ireland, that opinion appears to have become
common among English statesmen of all parties, and especially
among those who were directly responsible for the government
of Ireland. Even Fox, who introduced and carried the Act
of Renunciation, afterwards acknowledged that it was only
with extreme reluctance that he had consented to leave the
Empire without any general superintending authority over its —
commercial and external legislation, and he ardently desired
that some supplemental treaty should be carried, binding the
two countries more closely together.2 The Duke of Richmond
in 1783 openly declared in the House of Lords, that nothing
short of an incorporating Union could avert the danger of the
Trish Parliament, in some future war, throwing the weight of its
influence in opposition to England. The Duke of Portland,
who was Lord Lieutenant when the legislative independence
was conceded, acknowledged that it was only with ‘ the strongest
and most poignant reluctance,’ and under the stress of an over-
whelming necessity, that he consented to recommend that
measure, and he told his Government confidentially, that unless
the Irish Parliament would consent to enter into some treaty
placing the regulation of trade, the consideration to be granted
by Ireland for the protection of the British navy, and the share
which Ireland should contribute to the general support of the
Empire, above the fluctuating moods of successive Parliaments,
it was very questionable whether it might not be good policy
to abandon Ireland altogether. Temple, who succeeded
Portland as Viceroy, predicted that the concession which had
been made, was ‘but the beginning of a scene which will
close for ever the account between the two kingdoms.’® Even
the Duke of Rutland, whose Viceroyalty covers the most
prosperous period of the independent existence of the Irish
Parliament, was, in private, strongly in favour of a legislative
Union, and believed that, without such a measure, Ireland

1 Some considerable light has

See, too, Walpole’s Memoirs of George
recently been thrown upon the

ITT. iv. 200.

opinions of Hillsborough and North
on this subject in 1779, by the publi-
cation of the Diaries and Letters
of Thomas Hutchinson (Governor of
Massachusetts Bay), ii. 257, 295.

2 Vol. vi. pp. 307, 308.

8 Thid. p. 321.

4 Vol. iv. pp. 550, 551; vol. vi.
pp. 308, 309.

5 Vol. vi. p. 310.

CH. XXXI, THE COMMERCIAL PROPOSITIONS. 275

would not remain for twenty years connected with Great
Britain.!

The failure of the commercial propositions of 1785 was very
unfortunate. The original scheme of Pitt was, as we have seen,
gladly accepted by the Irish Parliament. It would have re-
gulated permanently both the commercial intercourse between
the two countries and the contribution of Ireland to the defence
of the Empire; and a reform of Parliament upon a Protestant
basis, such as Pitt then contemplated, would have been sufficient
to include in the parliamentary system by far the greater part
of the energy, intelligence, and property of the nation.

In the debates on this question, the open advocacy of a
legislative Union by Wilberforce, Lord Lansdowne, and Lord
Sackville,? showed clearly the current of English political thought.
Lord Camden, the favourite colleague of Chatham, and the re-
presentative of the most liberal section of English politics, sup-
ported the commercial propositions in a speech in which he re-
presented the existing condition of Ireland as threatening civil
war, and he was understood to argue in favour of them on the
ground that they would draw the two peoples ‘ into a legislative
Union, which was the object ultimately to be desired.’ Lord
Stormont, the old colleague of North, on the other hand, opposed
the propositions, arguing that if the proposed settlement proved
permanent and final, ‘ there was of course an end of all hope that
the two kingdoms would ever be under one Legislature ;’ and
that even if it were not final, it would still be fatal to an Union,
‘ because, every possible advantage being held out by England to
the Irish by the present propositions, she could have nothing re-
served by which she might afterwards induce them to consent
to an Union—she could have burdens only to offer to Ireland, a
very bad inducement to an union of Legislatures.’ * In the House
of Commons, Lord North spoke powerfully in the same sense.
‘He would most gladly,’ he said, ‘admit Ireland to a participa-
tion of every advantage of trade, provided she was so connected
with us as to form one people with us, under one Government,

? Vol. vi. p. 404. father’s opinion that Ireland must be
2 Thid. p. 404. our province if she will not be per-
3 Parl, Hist. xxv. 848. Lord  suaded to an Union.’ (Castlereagh
Camden’s son (the Irish Lord Lieu- Correspondence, i. 156.)
tenant), writes: ‘I inherit... my
T 2

276 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

one Legislature. . . . Until the happy day should come that
would make the two kingdoms one, he did not conceive it just
that one should be enriched at the expense of the other.’! Dean
Tucker at this time drew up a series of answers to the popular
arguments against an Union, which was published near the close
of the century, and was made much use of in the discussions on
the Union.’ ,

The failure of this negotiation, and the subsequent difference
on the Regency question, probably greatly strengthened the
desire of English statesmen to effect an Union, and it certainly
strengthened their indisposition to any measures of reform which
would weaken their control over the Irish Legislature. A letter
of the first Lord Camden is preserved, in which he avows his de-
cided opinion that the corruption and consequent subservience
of the Irish Parliament was, under the new Constitution of Ire-
land, the only means by which the connection could be main-
tained, and that sooner or later that Constitution, if it continued,
must lead to a civil war. It is a significant fact, too, that from
this time the overtures of the Irish Parliament, for a commercial
union with England on the lines of Pitt’s original scheme, were
uniformly declined.

If we now turn from the opinions of English statesmen to
the public opinion in Ireland, we shall find a remarkable con-
trast. No single fact is more apparent in the Irish history of
the last half of the century, than the strong and vehement dread
of an Union in Ireland. It does not date from the establishment
of Irish legislative independence. I have already mentioned the
furious riots that convulsed Dublin as early as 1759, on account
of an unfounded rumour that such a measure was in contempla-
tion. In 1776 Arthur Young collected opinions on the subject
of an Union with Great Britain, and was informed, ‘ that nothing
was so unpopular in Ireland as such an idea.’> In 1780 Lord
Hillsborough, having in his confidential correspondence with
the Lord Lieutenant thrown out a hint that some such measure
was desirable, Buckinghamshire answered, ‘ Let me earnestly
recommend to you not to utter the word Union in a whisper, or

1 Parl. Hist. xxv. 633. % Campbell’s Chancello ii
2 They were published by Dr. 4 Vol. ti pp. 435, 136. peeye
Clarke, in a tract called Union or ° Tour in Ireland, i. 65.

Separation (1799).

CH, XXXI. IRISH HOSTILITY TO UNION. Paty |

to drop it from your pen. The present temper will not bear it.’ !
In 1785, when Bishop Watson pressed upon the Duke of Rut-
land the policy of a legislative Union, the Lord Lieutenant
answered that he fully agreed with him, but that anyone who
proposed such a measure in Ireland would be tarred and
feathered.2 On most subjects the Irish Parliament was exceed-
ingly subservient, but on the subject of its own exclusive legis-
lative competence it was even feverishly jealous, and the suspicion
that the English Government was conspiring against the settle-
ment which had been so formally and so solemnly guaranteed in
1782 and 1783, never failed to kindle a fierce resentment in the
nation. In the violent opposition which Grattan led to the
amended commercial propositions in 1785, the irritation excited
by this suspicion, and by the language used in England on the
subject, is very apparent. Grattan saw in the amended pro-
posals, ‘an intolerance of the parliamentary Constitution of Ire-
land, a declaration that the full and free external legislation of
the Irish Parliament is incompatible with the British Empire.’
He described them as ‘ an incipient and a creeping Union.’ He
declared, that in opposing them he considered himself as opposing
‘an Union in limine, and already in this debate he fully
elaborated the doctrine of the incompetence of the Irish Parlia-
ment to carry a legislative Union, which fourteen years later be-
came so prominent in the discussions on the measure.’

This strong feeling on the part of the political classes in
Treland was certainly not due to any disloyal or anti-English
feeling. At the risk of wearying my readers by repetition, I
must again remind them, that the Irish Parliament of 1782 was
a body utterly unlike any Parliament that could be set up by
modern politicians. It was essentially an assembly of the lead-
ing members of the landed gentry of the country ; of the section
of the community which was bound to the English connection
by the strongest ties of sympathy and interest; of the chief re-
presentatives of property; of the classes from which, since the
Union, the magistracy and the grand juries have been principally
formed. It had uniformly and readily followed the lead of the
English Parliament in all questions of foreign policy. It had
contributed largely and ungrudgingly, both in soldiers and in

V Vol. iv. p. 504. 2 Vol. vi. p. 404. 3 Grattan’s Speeches, i, 240-243,

278 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXIe

money, to the support of the Empire in every war that had
arisen, and it was perfectly ready to enter into a treaty for
a permanent contribution to the British navy, provided such
a treaty could be framed without impairing its legislative
supremacy. Viceroy after viceroy had emphatically acknowledged
its unmixed loyalty, and they made no complaint of its present
dispositions ; but at the same time the most experienced English
statesmen and a succession of English viceroys were convinced
that the permanent concurrence of two independent Parliaments
under the Constitution of 1782 was impossible, and that a colli-
sion between the two Parliaments in time of peace would be
dangerous, and in time of war might very easily be fatal to the
connection.

In Ireland, on the other hand, the independence of the
Parliament was supported by the strong pride and passion of
Nationality—a sentiment which may be the source both of good
and of evil, but which, whether it be wise or unwise, must
always be a most powerful element in political calculations.
Trish statesmen, too, reviewing English legislation since the
Restoration, and perceiving the still prevailing spirit of
commercial monopoly, contended that the material interests
of Ireland could not be safely entrusted to a British Parliament.
They foresaw that an identification of Legislatures would ulti-
mately lead to an assimilation of taxation, raising Irish con-
tributions to the English level. They perceived that Ireland
was rapidly developing into a considerable nation, with its own
type of character and its own conditions of prosperity ; and they
especially dreaded the moral effects of an Union in promoting
absenteeism, weakening the power of the landed gentry, and thug
destroying a guiding influence, which in the peculiar conditions
of Ireland was transcendently important. Sir Robert Peel,
many years later, spoke of ‘the severance of the connection
between the constituent body of Ireland and the natural aristo-
cracy of the country,’ as perhaps the greatest and most irrepar-
able calamity that could befall Ireland, and on this point Grattan
and Peel were entirely agreed. Adam Smith believed that the
great work of uniting into one people the severed elements of
Trish life, could be only speedily accomplished if the legislative
power was transferred to a larger and impartial assembly un-

CH, XXxI, IRISH HOSTILITY TO UNION. 279

swayed by local tyrannies, factions, and corruptions. Grattan
believed that it could only be attained by the strong guidance
of the loyal gentry of both religions, acting together in a
national Legislature and appealing to a national sentiment, and
he dreaded, with an intense but by no means exaggerated fear,
the consequence to Ireland if the guidance of her people passed
into the hands of dishonest, disreputable, and disloyal adven-
turers. The rapid and indisputable progress of national pros-
perity in the last decades of the century, though in truth it was
largely due to causes that had very little relation to politics,
strengthened the feeling in support of the local Legislature, and
strong selfish as well as unselfish considerations tended in the
same direction. Dublin was furious at the thought of a measure
which would transfer the aristocracy and leading gentry of Ire-
land to London. The Irish bar had an enormous influence, both
in the Parliament and in the country, and it would be a fatal
blow to it if the Parliament no longer sat in the neighbourhood
of the Law Courts; the great borough owners perceived that a
legislative Union must take the virtual government of Lreland out
of their hands, and a crowd of needy legislators saw in it the
extinction of the system under which they could always, by
judicious voting, obtain places for themselves or their relatives.

It is not surprising that from all these sources a body of
opinion hostile to a legislative Union should have arisen in Ire-
land which appeared wholly irresistible. For about ten years
after the declaration of independence it was unbroken, and it is,
I believe, no exaggeration to say, that during that period not a
single Irish politician or writer of real eminence was in favour
of such a measure. At this time it was wholly impracticable,
for no corruption and no intimidation would have induced the
Trish Parliament to consent to it.

The disastrous events of the last years of the century, how-
ever, gradually produced some change. ‘The danger of foreign
invasion; the terrible rapidity with which conspiracy and anarchy
spread through the masses of the people, and the ‘menacing as-
pects which the Catholic question assumed, began to shake the
security of property, and to spread vague and growing alarms
among all classes. The concession of the franchise in 1793 to a
vast, semi-barbarous Catholic democracy, portended, in the eyes

280 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. — cu. xxx.

of many, the downfall of the Protestant Establishment, and per-
haps of the existing settlement of property. From this time a
few men began, through fear or through resentment, to look with
more favour on the idea of an Union, and Lord Clare steadily,
though as yet secretly, urged its necessity.

I have shown how the notion of a legislative Union began to
dawn on many minds in connection with the Catholic question ;
how some men thought that the Protestants, alarmed or exas-
perated by Catholic progress, would be inclined to take shelter
in such a measure; how other men foresaw that the concession
of Catholic emancipation might play the same part in the Irish
Union which trade privileges had played in the union with Scot-
land; and how Pitt himself evidently shared the idea. The
remarkable letter, written by him in the November of 1792,
which I have cited from the Westmorland Correspondence, speaks
of an Union as a vague, doubtful, distant prospect, but as a
measure which had been for some time largely occupying his
thoughts, and which he believed to be the one real solution of
the difficulties of Ireland. It would offer to the Protestants full
security for their property and their Church, and it would, at the
same time, remove the chief argument against Catholic suffrage.
The language of Charlemont, Grattan, and Curran proves that
the intentions and wishes of the English Government were
clearly perceived, and that they were exciting in the independent
section of Irish politicians great disquietude and determined
hostility.'

There are periods, both in private and public life, when the
ablest men experience what gamblers call a run of ill luck. At
such times the steadiest hand seems to lose its cunning, and the
strongest judgment its balance, and mistake follows mistake.
Some fatality of this kind seems to have hung over Irish legis-
lation in those critical years which are chiefly marked by the
Relief Act of 1793, and by the Fitzwilliam episode. I have done
all that lies in my power to unravel with care and impartiality,
the maze of conflicting motives and impulses that governed the
strangely wayward and uncertain course of English government
of Ireland during those anxious years. I have endeavoured to
show that Pitt and Dundas were animated by a spirit of real
and genuine liberality to the Catholics, and were convinced as a

1 Vol. vi. pp. 512, 513, 523, 524.

CH. XXXI. FITZWILLIAM AND THE UNION. 281

matter of policy that the United Irish conspiracy could only be
checked by conciliating them, but that they were hampered by
the opposition of the Irish Government, by the opposition of the
King, by their own ignorance of the state of Ireland, and by
their desire to reserve some great Catholic concession as an
inducement to the Union. I have endeavoured also to show
how motives of a different kind—jealousy of Whig ascendency
in the remodelled Government; a misunderstanding with Fitz-
william about the extent of his powers; a question of patronage
which was treated as a question of honour—acted upon their
conduct, and how the whole was aggravated by a natural luke-
warmness and indecision of purpose in dealing with great
questions of public policy, which appears to me to have been
a constitutional infirmity of Pitt. But whatever opinion the
reader may form about this explanation, he will hardly, I think,
question that the net results of the policy of this period were
extremely calamitous. The Relief Act of 1793 settled nothing,
and promised to add enormously both to the difficulty and the
danger of the government of Ireland. The sudden recall of Lord
Fitzwilliam, after the hopes that had been raised, gave a decisive
impulse to Catholic disloyalty. The appeal by the Government
to Protestant support against Catholic emancipation, stimulated
most fatally that spirit of religious dissension which was again
rising rapidly in Ireland.

The situation was made much worse when Lord Fitzwilliam
published the passage from a confidential letter of the Duke of
Portland, declaring that the postponement of the Catholic Relief
Bill would be ‘the means of doing a greater service to the
British Empire than it has been capable of receiving since the
Revolution, or at least since the Union.’ The meaning which
was at once attached to this passage was, that the Government
desired to delay the concession in order to obtain an Union, and
the question was thus forced prominently on public attention.
Its reception was exceedingly unfavourable, and the resolution
of the great Catholic Assembly in Francis Street Chapel showed
that, whatever support the measure might receive from some
Catholics, it was certain to meet from the Catholic Committee,
who led the active politics of that body, an implacable opposition."
Grattan, on his side, predicted that if the old taskmasters re-

? Vol. vii. pp. 72, 94, 95.

282 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

turned to power, ‘they would extinguish Ireland, or Ireland
must remove them.’ !

The horrible years of growing crime, anarchy, and dissension
which followed, convinced many that a great change of system
was required. The Parliament remained, indeed, a zealously
loyal body, and Arthur O’Connor and Lord Edward Fitzgerald
were probably the only members in it whose sympathies were
with France. But outside its walls the doctrine was openly pro-
fessed, that Ireland ought not to support England in the French
war; and at the same time the prospects of an invasion; the
imminent fear of rebellion; the violent religious war which had
broken out in Ulster, and the rumours that were spread among
the panic-stricken Catholics of Orange conspiracies to massacre
them, had all tended to aggravate enormously the difficulties of
local government in Ireland. The capacity of any portion of an
empire for extended and popular self-government is not a mere
question of constitutional machinery or of abstract reasoning.
It depends essentially upon the character and dispositions of the
people for whom that self-government is intended. A consti-
tutional arrangement which in one country will be harmless or
beneficent, in another country will infallibly lead to civil war, to
confiscation of property, to utter anarchy and ruin. Loyalty and
moderation ; a respect for law, for property, and for authority ;
a sentiment of common patriotism uniting the different sections
of the community ; a healthy disposition of classes, under which
trustworthy and honourable men rise naturally to leadership—
these are the conditions upon which all successful self-govern-
ment must depend. The events of Irish history had made the
soil of Ireland peculiarly unfavourable to it, but for a long period
before the outbreak of the French Revolution there had been a
great and rapid improvement. The country was not, and never
has been, fit for a democratic Government, but many of the best
Irishmen believed that healthy elements of self-government had
grown up, which would make it possible for the management of
affairs to pass safely and most beneficially out of the hands of
the corrupt aristocracy of borough owners. But this prospect
was now visibly receding, as the old fissures that divided Irish

1 Answer to the Catholic Address, Feb. 27,1795. (Grattan’s Miscellaneous
Works, p. 296.)

CH. XXXI, NINETY-EIGHT AND THE UNION. 283

life reopened, and as fear and hatred began to separate classes
which had for many years been approximating. The opinion so
powerfully expressed by General Knox about the necessity of an
Union, was no doubt held by other intelligent observers.!_ It was,
however, still that of isolated and scattered individuals, and up
to the outbreak of the rebellion there was no party in Ireland
which desired such a measure, no party which would even tolerate
its proposal.

The language of Gordon on this subject is very remarkable.
That temperate and truthful historian was himself a supporter
of the Union, and he had therefore no disposition to overrate
the feeling against it. Yet he declares that it could not possibly
have been carried, but for the horrers of the rebellion. ‘So
odious,’ he says, ‘was the measure to multitudes whose pride or
private interest, real or imaginary, was engaged, that it could
not with the smallest probability of success be proposed, until
prejudice was in some degree overcome by the calamities and
dangers of the rebellion.’ ?

From this fact a charge of the most tremendous kind has
been elaborated against the English Government, which will be
found repeated again and again by popular writers in Ireland,
and which has sunk deeply into the popular belief. It is that
the English Government, desiring an Union and perceiving that
it could not be effected without a convulsion, deliberately forced
on the rebellion as a means of effecting it. In a memoir written
by Dr. McNevin shortly after the Union, this charge is drawn
up with the utmost confidence. McNevin observes that Lord
Clare acknowledged that, for many years before the Union, the
destruction of the Irish Parliament had been a main object of
his policy. ‘ Joined with him,’ he says, ‘in this conspiracy were
some others, and in the number Lord Castlereagh, all of whom,

1 Wilberforce, in 1796, wrote the fallibly rise. The hatred and bad

following memoranda, derived from
conversations with Irishmen: ‘The
Irish gentry (sensible cool men) en-
tertain very serious apprehensions of
the Roman Catholics—say they keep
a register of the forfeited lands ; that
their priests have little influence over
them ; the menial servants commonly
Roman Catholics; masters cannot
depend on them; if the French were
to land 10,000 men, they would in-

opinion which the lower Roman Ca-
tholics entertain against the Protest-
ants, and particularly the English, is
very great. It seers impossible to
end quietly unless an Union takes
place. As wealth is diffused, the
lower orders will learn the secret of
their strength. (Life of Wilberforce,
ii. 163.)

2 Gordon’s History of the Rebel-
lion, pp. 295, 296.

284 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI,

with cold-blooded artifice, stirred up an insurrection, that was to
supply the necessary pretext for effecting their nefarious design.
In former times resort was had to similar acts of outrage, for the
purpose of driving the natives into a resistance that should be
followed by a forfeiture of their estates. Now a rebellion was
intentionally produced by the chief agents of the British Ministry,
in order to give an opportunity for confiscating the whole political
power and the independent character of the country by an Act
of Union.’ McNevin acknowledges that the conspirators, among
whom he was himself a leader, were aiming at a separation,
though he contends that they contemplated it only in the case
of a refusal of reform, and that they wished to obtain it only
‘through the co-operation of a respectable French force, to ex-
clude the barbarity of a purely civil war.’ ‘ But for the systematic
atrocities,’ he continues, ‘of the conspirators against the legis-
lative independence of Ireland, no civil war would have occurred
there to the present moment. We have the authority of the
American Congress that the colonies were driven designedly into
resistance, for the purpose of giving an opportunity to impose on
them a standing army, illegal taxes, and to establish among them
asystem of despotism. This arbitrary project, after miscarrying
in America, was transferred by the same monarch to Ireland, and
unhappily succeeded there. Before assistance could be obtained
against his schemes from the natural ally of his persecuted sub-
jects, an enlarged scope was given to the intolerable practice of
house burnings, free quarters, tortures, and summary executions,
which, as the Ministry intended, exploded in rebellion. After
this manner they facilitated the Union.’

Nor was even this the full extent of the perfidy attributed to
them. ‘Lord Cornwallis, writes McNevin, ‘declared him-
self inclined to justice and conciliation. He was violently
opposed by the Orange faction in the Cabinet, and from a motive
which he did not then disclose, but which subsequent events have
shown to be the projected union of the two countries, he wished
to make a merit with those who had suffered most from the
British Government, by teaching them to throw the severity of
their sufferings on their own villanous Parliament and merciless
countrymen. !

Pieces of Irish History, pp. 143, 144, 148.

CH. XXXII. CHARGE AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT. 285

O’Connell and his followers have more than once repeated
this charge, and accused the English Government of having
deliberately promoted the rebellion for the purpose of carrying
the Union. O’Connell explained on this hypothesis the whole
Fitzwilliam episode. He dwelt upon the fact that the Govern-
ment, for many months before the outbreak of the rebellion, had
secret information pointing out its most active leaders, and that,
in spite of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, those leaders
were suffered to remain at large, and he insisted upon the
passage from the report of the Secret Committee in which Lord
Castlereagh spoke of the measures that had been taken to cause
the rebellion to explode.

Such an accusation will probably appear to most readers too
wildly extravagant to require a lengthened refutation. Very
few Englishmen will believe that Pitt was capable either of the
extreme wickedness of deliberately kindling a great rebellion
for the purpose of carrying his favourite measure, or of the ex-
treme folly of doing this at a time when all the resources of
England were strained to the utmost in a desperate and most
doubtful contest with the mighty power of Napoleon. In the
Trish Government no one supported more strongly both the anti-
Catholic policy, and the military severities to which the re-
bellion has been attributed, than the Speaker Foster, who was
the most powerful of all the opponents of the Union; while
the perfectly simple and honourable motives that inspired the
humaner policy of Cornwallis appear with transparent clearness in
his confidential letters. ‘The reasons which long withheld the
Government from arresting United Irish leaders when they had
not sufficient evidence to put them on their trial, have been
already explained ; and if martial law forced the conspiracy into a
premature explosion, it did so only when the country had been
~ already organised for rebellion, and when it was an object of the
first importance to disarm it before the expected arrival of the
French. At the same time, fluctuating and unskilful policy has
often the effects of calculated malevolence, and the mistakes of the
Government both in England and Ireland undoubtedly contributed
very largely to the hideous scenes of social and political anarchy,
to the religious hatreds and religious panics, which alone ren-
dered possible the legislative Union. Nor can it, | think, be

286 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

denied that it is ina high degree probable, that a desire to carry
a legislative Union had a considerable influence in dictating the
policy which in fact produced the rebellion, and that there were
politicians who were prepared to pursue that policy even at the
risk of a rebellion, and who were eager to make use of the re-
bellion when it broke out, for the purpose of accomplishing their
design. The following striking passage from a work which I
have often quoted, shows the extreme severity with which the
situation was judged by a perfectly loyal writer, who was in
general one of the most temperate and most competent then living
in Ireland. ‘To affirm,’ writes Newenham, ‘ that the Government
of Ireland facilitated the growth of rebellion, for the purpose of
effecting the Union, would be to hold language not perhaps
sufficiently warranted by facts. But to affirm that the rebellion
was kept alive for that purpose, seems perfectly warrantable. The
charge was boldly made in the writer’s hearing, during one of the
debates on the Union by an honourable gentleman, who held a
profitable place under the Crown. And to affirm that that
measure never would have been carried into effect without the
occurrence of a rebellion, similar in respect of its attendant and
previous circumstances to that of 1798, is to advance what
nineteen in twenty men who were acquainted with the political
sentiments of the Irish people at that time, will feel little difficulty
in assenting to.’!

A careful examination of the confidential correspondence of
this time, appears to show that, although the expediency of a
legislative Union had long been present in the minds of Pitt and
of several leading English statesmen, and although it had been
persistently urged by Clare since 1793, no settled and definite
project of introducing such a measure was formed in England,

1 Newenham’s State of Ireland, or internal insurrection. With this

p. 269; see, too, p. 270. The language
of Miss Edgeworth shows strongly
the feeling prevailing on this subject
among the Protestants. ‘Govern-
ment,’ she says, ‘having at this time
the Union between Great Britain and
Treland in contemplation, were de-
sirous that the Irish aristocracy and
country gentlemen should be con-
vinced of the kingdom’s insufficiency
to her own defence against invasion

view, it was politic to let the different
parties struggle with each other, till
they completely felt their weakness
and their danger. .. . It is certain
that the combinations of the dis-
affected at home, and the advance of
foreign invaders, were not checked till
the peril became imminent, and till
the purpose of creating universal
alarm had been fully effected’ (Life
of R. L. Edgeworth, ii. 217, 218.)

CH, XXXI. FIRST DISCUSSION OF UNION. 287

before the outbreak of the rebellion.' Pitt, according to his
usual custom, discussed it at length in a very small circle, for
some time before it was even suggested to his Cabinet. Per-
haps the earliest notice of it, is a letter of June 4, 1798, in which
Pitt writes to Auckland that he had lately been discussing with
Lord Grenville, the expediency of taking steps for carrying an
Union immediately after the suppression of the rebellion. They
had been studying the Scotch Act of Union, and they especially
desired the assistance of Auckland in framing its trade and
finance clauses. Auckland appears to have communicated with
Clare, for a few days later he received a letter from that states-
man containing the following passage: ‘As to the subject of
an Union with the British Parliament, I have long been of
opinion that nothing short of it can save thiscountry. I stated
the opinion very strongly to Mr. Pitt in the year 1793, imme-
diately after that fatal mistake, into which he was betrayed by
Mr. Burke and Mr. Dundas, in receiving an appeal from the
Trish Parliament by a popish democracy. I again stated the
same opinion to him last winter; and if this were a time for it,
I think I could make it clear and plain to every dispassionate
man in the British Empire, that it is utterly impossible to
preserve this country to the British Crown, if we are to depend
upon the precarious bond of union which now subsists between
Great Britain and Ireland. It makes me almost mad, when I
look back at the madness, folly, and corruption in both countries,
which have brought us to the verge of destruction.’ 2
When Lord Cornwallis arrived in Ireland on June 20, he
does not appear to have known anything about an intention to
carry an Union, or, at least, to have received any fixed instruc-
tions relating to it.* A few weeks later, however, a small
number of persons, who were closely connected with the
‘Government of Ireland, were sounded on the subject. Lord
Camden appears to have been much consulted, and he wrote

but it was written two or three days
after the battle of New Ross.
3 Cornnallis

1 Clare, in his speech on the Union,
said: ‘I pressed it without effect,

until British Ministers and the British
nation were roused to a sense of their
common danger by the late sangui-
nary and unprovoked rebellion.’ —

2 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 2,
8, The letter of Clare is undated,

Correspondence, ii.
439, Auckland Correspondence, iv.
29. See, however, the remarks of
Sir C. Lewis, Administrations of
Great Britain, pp. 183, 184.

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXT.

288

about this time to Lord Castlereagh, ‘The King and every one of
his Ministers are inclined to an Union, and it will certainly be
taken into consideration here, and you will probably hear from the
Duke of Portland upon it.! Pelham was still Chief Secretary,
though ill health compelled him to remain in England ; and it
appears from a letter written to him by William Elliot, on July
28, that at that date Cornwallis leaned decidedly towards an
Union, but that both Pelham and Elliot were extremely reluc-
tant to undertake such a measure, and extremely doubtful
whether ‘the advantages resulting from it would answer the
expectation.’? Shortly after, Sylvester Douglas, who had been
the Irish Chief Secretary in 1794, wrote to Pelham advocating
the measure, and his letter is especially interesting, as it was
written from Dover, immediately after a consultation with Pitt
at Walmer Castle. Douglas fully agreed with Pelham that
there were great difficulties attending an Union, but he main-
tained that the safety of the Empire required it, and that if
the measure was desirable, the present was a very favourable
moment for carrying it. It would not be desirable unless it
was to the advantage of both countries, but great authorities,
such as Petty, Adam Smith, and Bacon (in his advocacy of the
Scotch Union), were in favour of it, and there was one con-
sideration which now dominated all others. Can Ireland, he
asked, hang much longer to England by the present slender
thread, ‘when some of their ablest men treat the interference
of the Executive of the Empire in those very affairs of Ireland,
which most concern the general interests of the Empire, as the
usurped tyranny of a foreign Cabinet ?’ and when ‘a few Irish
enthusiasts’ have been able to engage nearly 200,000 men to

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
376. This letter is unfortunately un-
dated.

2 W. Elliot to Pelham, July 28;
S. Douglas to Pelham, Sept. 12, 1798.
(Pelham MSS.) On Sept. 13 Pelham
wrote to Castlereagh that he had been
visiting Camden, who had just come
from Pitt. ‘We discussed, as you
may imagine, a subject which, I un-
derstand, you are more friendly to
than Iam. I confess that I have not
considered it sufficiently to be satis-
fied of the advantages resulting from
it, and must therefore be against it,

for it is not a thing to attempt with-
out the certainty of some great benefit
arising from it. However, I have
lately turned my thoughts more to
the subject than I had ever done
before, and think it more practicable
in the detail than I at first imagined.
. . . In times of speculation like the
present, there is great danger in any
change; and unless certain principles
are laid down as landmarks to which
we can always recur, I should much
fear a complete wreck of both coun-
tries.’ (Castlereagh Correspondence,
i. 345, 346.)

CH. XXXI. CASTLEREAGH AND CORNWALLIS. 289

break the connection? The century was fast drawing to a
close, but Douglas believed that, even before its end, the frail
tie that bound the two countries would probably be severed
unless an Union were carried. Who could believe, after the
confessions of Tone, Emmet, McNevin, and O’Connor, that
Catholic emancipation would postpone the evil? It would
probably accelerate it. For his own part, Douglas:said, he
could not resist the force of a question put by the United Irish-
men in one of their earliest publications. ‘Is there any middle
state between the extremes of Union with Great Britain and
total separation ?’!

Castlereagh, who already discharged most of the duties of
Chief Secretary, appears to have been from the first a decided
advocate of the Union. His views will be exhibited in detail in
the course of this narrative, but a significant passage may be
here cited from one of his earliest letters about it. Writing on
September 7, he expresses his deep gratification at the somewhat
tardy resolution of the Government to send overa large English
force, for the complete suppression of the rebellion and the pro-
tection of the country against invasion. ‘I consider it peculiarly
advantageous, he writes, ‘ that we shall owe our security so en-
tirely to the interposition of Great Britain. I have always been
apprehensive of that false confidence which might arise from an
impression that security had been obtained by our own exertions.
Nothing would tend so much to make the public mind imprac-
ticable with a view to that future settlement, without which we
can never hope for any permanent tranquillity.’ ?

The opinions of Cornwallis were gradually unfolded, and they
must be carefully followed. Though the Union is not named,
it is evidently referred to in a letter of July 20, in which Corn-
wallis, having mentioned that the rebellion was almost subdued,

‘adds, ‘How or when to bring forward, or even to broach, the
great point of ultimate settlement, is a matter in which I cannot
see the most distant encouragement. ‘The two or three people
whom I have ventured in the most cautious manner to sound, say
that it must not be mentioned now; that this is a time of too
much danger to agitate such a question ; but if a period of safety

1 §. Douglas to Pelham, Sept. 12, 1798.
2 Castlereagh Correspondence, i. 337.

VOLS VIL, U

290 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

should come when boroughs will be considered as a sure property,
and all good jobs again appear within our grasp, that moment
will not, I am afraid, be found propitious for expecting those
sacrifices which must be required. Convinced as I am that it
is the only measure which can long preserve this country, I will
never lose sight of it; and happy shall I be if that fortunate op-
portunity should ever arrive, when we may neither think our-
selves in too much danger nor in too much security to suffer its
production.’ !

In September, he recurs to the subject, and still in a de-
sponding tone. The great question, he says, of Irish adminis-
tration is, ‘how this country can be governed and preserved,
and rendered a source of strength and power, instead of remain-
ing an useless and almost intolerable burden to Great Britain.’
‘ A perseverance in the system which has hitherto been pursued
can only lead us from bad to worse, and after exhausting the re-
sources of Britain, must end in the total separation of the two
countries. ‘ With regard to future plans, I can only say that
some mode must be adopted to soften the hatred of the Catholics
to our Government. Whether this can be done by advantages
held out to them from an Union with Great Britain; by some
provision for their clergy, or by some modification of tithe, which
is the grievance of which they complain, I will not presume to
determine. The first of these propositions is undoubtedly the
most desirable, if the dangers with which we are surrounded will
admit of our making the attempt; but the dispositions of the
people at large, and especially of the North, must be previously
felt.’ ?

A few days later he notices the rise of a fatal division, which
affected profoundly the whole future of the question. ‘The
principal people here are so frightened that they would, I believe,
readily consent to an Union, but then it must be a Protestant
Union ; and even the Chancellor, who is the most right-headed
politician in this country, will not hear of the Roman Catholics
sitting in the United Parliament.’ ‘This country is daily be-
coming more disturbed. Religious animosities increase, and, I
am sorry to say, are encouraged by the foolish violence of all the
principal persons who have been in the habit of governing this

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 365. 2 Thid. ii. 404, 405.

CH, XXXI. AUCKLAND, ROSE, AND CARLISLE. 291

island. . . . The great measure, from which I looked for so much
good, will, if carried, fall far short of my expectations, as all the
leading persons here, not excepting the Chancellor, are deter-
mined to resist the extension of its operation to the Catholics.
I feel the measure of so much importance, that it is worth carry-
ing anyhow, but I am determined not to submit to the insertion
of any clause that shall make the exclusion of the Catholics a
fundamental part of the Union, as I am fully convinced that,
until the Catholics are admitted into a general participation of
rights (which when incorporated with the British Government
they cannot abuse), there will be no peace or safety in Ireland.’!

These first impressions were hardly encouraging. Auckland
at this time, after returning from a visit to Pitt, at which Irish
questions were much discussed, appears to have come to the
conclusion that, while the system of government in Ireland must
be changed, it would be better to be content with humbler
measures than a legislative Union. ‘The whole system of needy
and illiterate, and disaffected papist priests,’ he said, ‘ought to
be put down ;’ a respectable and responsible priesthood should
be endowed from the public purse; and something might per-
haps be done to relieve the Catholics from their tithe grievances,
but a legislative Union was a matter ‘of great difficulty in the
arrangement, of greater difficulty in the execution, and after all
precarious in its consequences, and it is plain that Auckland
would at this time have gladly relinquished the idea. George
Rose, who was one of the few men intimately consulted by Pitt,
was decidedly of opinion, that although a new arrangement be-
tween England and Ireland would be in itself desirable, the diffi-
culties of carrying it in the existing circumstances were insuper-
able. Lord Carlisle, who had been Lord Lieutenant when the
now ebbing flood of Irish nationality was rising to a spring tide
- height in 1782, wrote to Auckland a curious, anxious, hesitating
letter on the subject. This he thought was a moment when
much might be done, as, for the first time, a conviction had
grown up in Ireland that their old Government was insufficient
for their own safety and protection. ‘Dare you,’ he continued,
‘in this agitated sea of public affairs, turn towards the bold ex-
pedient of Union? It seems the most unfit hour for any busi-

‘ Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 414, 415.
v 2

292 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

ness that requires so much new thought and addition of labour,
and yet it is perhaps the only hour that Ireland could be found
practicable on the subject.’ He speaks of the terrible evils that
had grown up through the faults of English administration in
Treland; through the jobbing and corruption of the chief people
in that country; through the neglect of duty by the absentees,
and through the extreme poverty of some of the lower orders,
which made them ready to promote the most desperate schemes.
‘Something new,’ he said, ‘ must be attempted. I know no hand
or head more equal to a bold experiment than Mr. Pitt’s. Ireland
in its present state will pull down England. She is a ship on
fire, and must either be cast off or extinguished.’!

A strong will and intellect, however, was now applied to the
wavering councils of the Government. On October 8, Lord
Clare sailed for England to visit Pitt at Holwood, and to discuss
with him the future government of Ireland. He went, Lord
Cornwallis writes, ‘ with the thorough conviction that unless an
Union between Great Britain and Ireland can be effected, there
remains but little hope that the connection between the two
countries will long subsist ;’* but he went also with the firm
resolve that a measure of Catholic emancipation should form no
part of the scheme.

Cornwallis reluctantly acquiesced, but he deplored deeply the
course which the question seemed likely to take. He wrote
earnestly to Pitt, that it would be a desperate measure to make
an irrevocable alliance with the small ascendency party in Ireland ;
but assuming that this was not to be done, and that the question
of Catholic emancipation was merely postponed until after the
Union, he implored him to consider ‘whether an Union with
the Protestants will afford a temporary respite from the spirit of
faction and rebellion which so universally pervades this island,
and whether the Catholics will patiently wait for what is called
their emancipation, from the justice of the United Parliament,’
‘If we are to reason,’ he continues, ‘on the future from the past,
I should think that most people would answer these questions
in the negative; . . . if it is in contemplation ever to extend

1 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 42, 51, 52, 61. (These letters were written
in August and October.)
2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 416.

CH, XXXI. A PROTESTANT UNION DECIDED. 293

the privileges of the Union to the Roman Catholics, the present
appears to be the only opportunity which the British Ministry
can have of obtaining any credit from the boon, which must
otherwise in a short time be extorted from them.’! In a con-
fidential letter to Pelham, which has never been published, he
went still further, and his language is exceedingly remarkable.
‘I am apprehensive,’ he said, ‘that an Union between Great
Britain and the Protestants in Ireland is not likely to do us much
good. I am sensible that it is the easiest point to carry, but I
begin to have great doubts whether it will not prove an insuper-
able bar, instead of being a step, towards the admission of
Catholics, which is the only measure that can give permanent
tranquillity to this wretched country.’?

It must be observed, that during all this period there is not
the smallest trace of Cornwallis being aware of the conscien-
tious objections which the King entertained to the admission of
Catholics even into an Imperial Legislature, nor does it appear
that the King knew anything of the conferences that were going
on. Lord Clare, in the short period which he spent with Pitt,
fully attained his double object of confirming Pitt’s opinion in
favour of the Union, and of convincing him that it must be un-
accompanied with emancipation. He found the Ministry, he said,
‘full of popish projects,’ but he trusted that he had fully deter-
mined them ‘ to bring the measure forward unencumbered with
the doctrines of emancipation.’ ‘ Mr. Pitt,’ he said, ‘is decided
upon it, and I think he will keep his colleagues steady.’

Dundas appears at this time, as in 1793, to have been much

' Cornwallis

Correspondence, ii.
418, 419.

2 Cornwallis to Pelham, Oct. 15,
1798. (Pelham MSS.)

3 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 60,

“61. Auckland writes to Cooke: ‘ Mr.

Pitt went on Friday to Lord Gren-
ville’s to meet Lord Clare, who was to
proceed yesterday towards Holyhead.
Mr. Pitt had prepared the sketch of
an outline for a plan of Union, subject,
of course, to discussion and almost
certain alteration, and he meant, after
correcting and improving it at Hol-
wood, to have a copy sent to the Lord
Lieutenant, as a basis for communica-
tions with leading people. For fuller
particulars I must refer you to Lord

Clare, who is allowed by all here to
be equally pleasant and efficient as
a co-operator in difficult businesses,
going through the whole in a cordial
and manly way, without any of those
reserves, suspicions, implied preten-
sions and coldnesses, which too much
affect the very able mind of another
very able man. We have tried to
make use of your suggestion as to the
lot and ballot, so as to avoid the very
embarrassing affair of compensations.
How might it be something to the
following effect ?—The Counties, 32 ;
Dublin, 2; University, 1; Cork, Wa-
terford, Drogheda, Wexford, Kil-
kenny, Limerick, Derry, Belfast,
Newry, 9; each of the remaining 107

294, ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

more warmly in favour of the Catholics than Pitt, and there is
a very significant allusion to this in one of the letters of Corn-
wallis. ‘Had Mr. Dundas been in town,’ he writes, ‘ before the
Chancellor went over, he might perhaps have been able to carry
the point of establishing the Union on a broad and comprehen-
sive line ; but things have now gone too far to admit of a change,
and the principal persons in this country have received assurances
from the English Ministers, which cannot be retracted.’ !

These words were written in the middle of November, and
it was early in that month that the intended scheme was first
cautiously revealed to a few leading persons in Ireland. Corn-
wallis said, that as much opposition must be expected to it in the
Trish Parliament whatever shape it might assume, it was necessary,
as soon as the main principles were agreed on, to communicate
them to the chief friends of Government, and he added, that he
had himself so carefully avoided giving offence, that he believed
that no person of much political consequence was hostile to his
Government except the Speaker.” Most of the canvassing in this
month naturally took place in Ireland, but three conspicuous
Irishmen were in England, and with them Pitt personally
communicated. Of these, Foster, the Speaker, was by far the
ablest. Pitt found him ‘ perfectly cordial and communicative ;’
‘strongly against the measure of an Union (particularly at the
present moment), yet perfectly ready to discuss the point
fairly.’ Pitt hoped—as the event showed, without reason—
that Foster might be bribed, and he was prepared to offer him
an English peerage with, if possible, some ostensible situation,
as well as the life provision to which he would be entitled on
vacating the chair. Beresford and Parnell he had also seen.
Neither spoke very explicitly, but both appeared to dislike the
measure, though Pitt hoped that both would acquiesce in it if it
were fully resolved on. All three deprecated any authoritative
announcement of the scheme until the leading individuals in
Ireland had been consulted, and until steps had been taken for
disposing the public mind. The success of the measure Pitt
places to return 1 member each, and ' Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
from the 107 so returned, 50 to be 433, 434. See, too, on the Opinions of

chosen by lot and 6 by ballot—alto- Dundas, Castlereagh Correspondence,
gether 100 M.P.’s.” (Auckland to i, 431.

Cooke, Nov. 8, 1798, 1.8.P.0.) 2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii, 427.

CH. XXXI. OPINIONS OF IRISH POLITICIANS. 295

thought would depend altogether on the conduct of a few indi-
viduals in Ireland, and the Lord Lieutenant must do all in his
power to win them over. Elliot had arrived in England to sup-
port the arguments of Lord Cornwallis in favour of admitting
the Catholics to Parliament and office, but Pitt believed that such
a measure at this time was completely impracticable. ‘ With re-
spect to a provision,’ he added, ‘ for the Catholic clergy, and some
arrangement respecting tithes, I am happy to find a uniform
opinion in favour of the proposal among all the Irish I have seen ;
and I am more and more convinced that these measures, with some
effectual mode to enforcethe residence of all ranks of the Protestant
clergy, offer the best chance of gradually putting an end to the
evils most felt in Ireland.’ !

Cornwallis and Castlereagh communicated, as they were
directed, confidentially, with several leading Irish politicians,
and they were much encouraged by the result. Lord Shannon
and Lord Ely, who were two of the greatest borough owners in
Ireland, gave very favourable replies. The first was ‘impressed
in the strongest manner with the difficulties and disadvantages
of the present system,’ and ‘disposed to entertain the measure
favourably,’ though he refused at this stage openly to declare
himself. The second, ‘relying on the favour of the Crown in an
object personal to himself, ? ‘ was prepared to give it his utmost
support.’ Lord Pery, who had for fourteen years been Speaker,
strongly doubted the wisdom of the measure in itself, and not
less strongly the wisdom of bringing it forward in a time like
the present, but he said he would not hastily pledge himself
against it, and that if he found the measure to be really desired
by Parliament and the country, ‘he would feel it his duty to
surrender his own opinion, and give it his best assistance in the
. detail.’ Lord Yelverton, who had played such a great part in
the emancipation of the Irish Parliament, was fully in favour of
the Union. Conolly, a member of great influence, who repre-
sented the county of Derry, and who was one of the few Irish-
men who had at the same time a seat in the Irish and in the
English House of Commons, declared that he had always desired

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. Union with Ireland.’ (Life of Wilber-
439-441. Wilberforce about this force, ii. 318.)

time noticed that he found Pitt ‘ ex- 2 He wasmade an English peer and
tremely favourable to the idea of an a marquis when the Union was carried

296 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxr.

a legislative Union. The Attorney-General and the Solicitor-
General were quite prepared to give their services. Lord Kil-
warden and Lord Carleton doubted and hesitated, but did not
decidedly oppose. The Duke of Leinster, who since the attain-
der of his brother was naturally altogether alienated from the
Government, was consulted, but refused to give any opinion.
Corry was very favourable; Sir John Blaquiere was ‘ disposed to
be practicable.’ The Speaker was very adverse, and his ‘ weight
will be prodigious,’ but, at the same time, both Cornwallis and
Castlereagh believed that the measure could be carried through
Parliament, with no great difficulty. ‘Ihave great apprehen-
sions,’ added Cornwallis, ‘ of the inefficacy of it after it is carried,
and I do not think it would have been much more difficult to
have included the Catholics.’ !

A few opinions from active magistrates and from other men
who had always been warm supporters of the Government, about
the same time came in. Sir George Hill writes from Derry, ‘ People
have not yet spoken much out on the subject’ [of an Union ], ‘but
they are evidently inimical to the measure, and with the slight-
est encouragement would violently express themselves.’ ‘A
mischievous person could with ease excite a universal and danger-
ous clamour, by descanting on the supposed disadvantages of it.
It is high time, if such a measure be determined upon, that the
most confidential friends of Government were instructed to
prepare the public mind for the adoption of it, for be assured, if
it is suddenly proposed and forced, it will be the foundation of
endless calamity.’ For his own part, Sir George Hill said, his
leaning was strongly against it. Some considerable change he
admitted was required, but he believed that the settlement of
the Catholic question, the Regency, the commercial regulations,
and perhaps an increase in the proportion paid by Ireland for
the protection of the Empire, might all be accomplished with-
out an Union.? Sir George Shee writes that he was himself
in favour of an Union, but he found that people were in

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. letter, will give great assistance to
441, 442, 448-451; Castlereagh to the Union. He wants a peerage for
Wickham, Nov. 23, 1798. A part of his help, which Cornwallis hopes will
this last letter (which is in the Record be given. (Cornwallis to Portland,

Office) is omitted in the printed Jan. 4, 1799.)

Cornnallis Correspondence. Sir J. 2 Sir G. Hill to Cooke, Nov. 12, 15,
Blaquiere, Cornwallis says in another 1798. (1.S.P.0.)

OH, XXXL. FIRST ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE UNION. 297

general opposed to it.1 Colonel Crawford considered it abso-
lutely necessary to the security and prosperity of Ireland. It
would bring English capital largely into the country, and it
would render possible the great measure of Catholic eman-
cipation, which could never be safely granted with a separate
Parliament, for ‘ the influence of property could not stand against
the enthusiasm and ambitious aims of Catholics and Democrats.’
‘The people of this country,’ he added, ‘never will and never
can be contented until some means are devised of lessening the
tithes, nor will they cease to be urged on to opposition by their
priests, until some measures are adopted to attach the priests
and Catholic clergy (sic) to the present order of things, by giving
them an interest in its preservation.’? Cooke writes to Pelham
very despondingly: ‘The sectaries are very rancorous against
each other, and amongst the lower classes much malignant re-
venge prevails, and the humour in the upper classes isas bad... .
I do not think the idea of Union popular with the Protestants.
There is some inclination to it among the Catholics, possibly
because the Protestants. are adverse. . . . The Parliament at
present is extremely loose.’ *

The disposition of Parliament and the disposition of the
country were two very different things. The influence of the
Government in the former was so overwhelming that, for many
years, opposition had almost wholly disappeared, and the support
of a very small number of great borough owners was at all times
sufficient to outweigh the free constituencies. The Govern-
ment, however, were anxious not to introduce their measure
without obtaining some real popular support, and one of the
most difficult and most delicate tasks of the historian of the
Union is to estimate the amount of their success.

’ It is remarkable that their intention was first intimated in

newspapers that were opposed to them. On October 16, the
following paragraph appeared in the principal Dublin news-
paper, supporting them. ‘A most insidious and unadvised
rumour of an intended Union with Great Britain has been set
afloat by the Jacobin prints of this city, in order to do the

1 Sir G. Shee to Pelham, Nov. 11, Nov. 19,1798. (R.O.)
1798. (Pelham MSS.) 3 Cooke to Pelham, Nov. 9, 1798.
2 Colonel R. Crawford to Wickham, (Pelham MSS.)

298 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

little mischief which remains in their power to achieve... .
Perilous and perplexed would be the discussion of so momentous
a question at any period; but at this time of convulsion, the
dangers with which it would be attended are too fearful for
contemplation.” A month later the same newspaper again
expressed its entire disbelief in the rumours of an Union which
English and Irish newspapers (‘chiefly those of Jacobinical
complexion’) had for some time past been disseminating, but
ten days afterwards it inserted a notice which had appeared in
the English ‘Times’ of November 22, stating that an Union
would be brought forward, and added that it had reason to be-
lieve this paragraph to be true.!

If the judgment I have formed be correct, the public opinion
of Ireland up tothe beginning ofthe French war was practically
unanimous in opposition to any scheme of Union, and it ran so
strongly that no such proposal could have been made without
the most imminent danger. In the period between 1795 and
the outbreak of the rebellion, the Irish Parliament had been
much discredited, and the alarms and dangers of the time had
shaken many, but still there was no Irish party which would
have ventured openly to support an Union. But the scenes of
horror which were comprised in the six weeks of the rebellion
had produced a great change in the political aspect of Ireland,
and the Government calculated that if they pressed on the
Union without delay, they would find two strong, broad cur-
rents of genuine opinion in its favour.

One of these sprang from the alarm of the Protestants for
their Church, their property, and even their lives; from their
conviction that their safety depended wholly upon the presence
of a great English force, and that it was therefore their most
vital interest to bind themselves as closely as possible to their
protector. The other grew out of the resentment, the panic, and
the hopes of the Catholics, who found an insulting and lawless
spirit of Orange ascendency spreading on all sides, and the
bitterest enemies of the Catholic cause supreme in the Parliament.
The hope of passing under a more tolerant rule, the gratification
of humiliating those who had humiliated them, the anger which
was naturally produced by the burning of chapels and houses,

1 Faulkner's Jowrnal, Oct. 16, Nov. 17, 27, 1798.

cu. xxx1. ALLEGED HELPLESSNESS OF THE PROTESTANTS. 299

and by the Orange badges that were flaunted on every side,
and the prospect of obtaining from the Imperial Parliament the
emancipation which appeared more and more remote in the Parlia-
ment of Ireland, had given many Catholic minds an undoubted
bias in favour of the Union.

Of these two currents of opinion, the former was by far the
weaker, and there are many indications that all classes of Irish
Protestants were greatly irritated by a kind of argument which
was at this time much used. Hnglish Ministers were extremely
desirous of impressing upon them, that the power and the troops
of England alone stood between them and destruction. ‘Is this
a time,’ writes Sir George Shee, ‘ to talk of national pride, when
we have not the means within ourselves of repelling any attack
deserving the name of invasion; when our revenue is scarcely
equal to two months’ expenses on a war establishment ; when
fifteen out of twenty of our countrymen in general are sworn
rebels ; when the fidelity of a part of our army is at least doubt-
ful ; when the higher classes have lost the sway which ought to
attach to their rank and station; when even the Legislature is
held in disesteem; when experience has just proved that a re-
bellion of three.counties only, can with great difficulty be put
down; when we have such an enemy as the French Republic to
contend with?’! Such arguments were not soothing to the
national pride. Castlereagh, as we have seen, urgently desired
that the Irish Protestants should be brought to attribute the
suppression of the rebellion mainly to English aid, but Corn-
wallis complained that even Lord Clare ‘did not appear to
feel sufficiently how absolutely dependent the Protestants at
present are on the support of Britain.’ ?

The aspect in which this question presented itself to the
members of the ascendant creed can be easily understood. Ire-
land, it must be remembered, had never been like the American
colonies, which refused to support an army for their own pro-
tection, and for the general assistance of the Empire. ‘Twelve
thousand and afterwards fifteen thousand men had ‘been regularly
maintained by the Irish Parliament. During the whole of the
eighteenth century before the war of 1793 Ireland had contributed

1 Sir G. Shee to Pelham, Nov. using in favour of the Union.
11, 1798. These are the arguments 2 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
which Sir G. Shee says he had been 416,

300 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXxI.

largely, and liberally, and much beyond the stipulated propor-
tion, to the support of English wars undertaken for objects of
English policy, while crowds of Irish recruits had filled the
British army and the British fleet. For the very first time in
the course of the century, the parts had been reversed. The
Trish loyalists had been compelled to ask for English assistance
upon land, and this obligation was at once pressed upon them
with a most ungracious insistence as an argument for demand-
ing the surrender of their Legislature.

And had the obligations of the Irish Protestants to English
assistance been in truth so very great? In 1779, while multi-
tudes of Irishmen were fighting English battles in other lands,
and when the dangers of a French invasion were extreme, Ire-
land found herself almost denuded of troops, and compelled to
rely for her security on the great volunteer movement which had
been hastily organised by the Protestant gentry. In 1796 the
boasted protection of the British fleet had not prevented a
French fleet from lying for a week unmolested in an Irish bay,
and nothing but the accident of the weather saved Ireland from
a most formidable invasion. Even during the recent rebellion,
had the part played by England been so transcendent ? During
all the earlier and more dangerous period, in spite of the press-
ing and repeated entreaties and the bitter complaints of the
Irish Government, the loyalists of Ireland had been left entirely
unaided. ‘The few English regiments which were then in Ire-
land, were there in exchange for Irish regiments. Until after
the battle of New Ross, no succour had arrived, and the suppres-
sion of the rebellion had been left to Irish resources, and mainly
to the Irish yeomanry and militia. It is true that after that
time an overwhelming stream of English troops had poured in,
but they arrived only when-the crisis had passed, and the re-

_— ~ pellion had been effectually broken.!

1 No one has shown this more
clearly than Duigenan, who was a
warm advocate of the Union. ‘The
rebellion,’ he says, broke out ‘on the
23rd of May, 1798. The whole regular
army, the militia and the yeomanry
then in the kingdom, were the proper
forces of Ireland, and paid by Ireland.
Most of the regular troops had, at
different periods before, been sent out

of the kingdom on foreign service, and
their places supplied by fencible regi-
ments, many of them Scotch; but as
these troops were paid by the Irish
treasury, and were sent in lieu of
the Irish trained troops employed on
foreign expeditions, I do not account
them British troops sent to our assist-
ance. He proceeds to enumerate
the battles which had been fought

cH. xxx. ENGLISH RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE REBELLION. 301

It was asked, too, what were the causes which had made the
state of Ireland so perilous, that those who administered its
affairs were obliged for the first time in the eighteenth century to
call for English assistance on land. Every foreign danger to
which Ireland was exposed was confessedly due to English
quarrels; and Irish Protestants, who differed utterly in their own
principles, agreed in attributing a great part of the internal
anarchy, which had lately become so formidable, to English policy.
The old champions of Protestant ascendency, whether they held
the opinions of Clare or the more liberal opinions of Flood and
Charlemont, pointed to the success of a purely Protestant
Government. Whatever might have been its faults, it had at
least this incontestable merit, that for about eighty years of the
century, English statesmen might have almost wholly dismissed
Treland and Irish concerns from their thoughts. Ireland had
scarcely been more troublesome than if it had been an island in
the Pacific, and it had been as free from active sedition and re-
bellion as Cornwall or Devonshire. Great changes had after-
wards occurred, but the Protestant party attributed the anarchy
that now prevailed mainly to the Catholic Act of 1793, which
had broken the power of the ruling class and thrown open the
door to revolutionary innovations. But the concession of the
Catholic suffrage had been an English measure, forced by Eng-
lish intervention on a reluctant Administration, and carried in
spite of the earnest protests and the repeated warnings of Foster
and Clare.

From the opposite quarter of the political compass, the
Protestants who followed Grattan had come to a very similar
conclusion. They attributed the present condition of Ireland
to the obstinacy with which a Government appointed by Eng-
land had resisted parliamentary reform, and Catholic emanci-
pation, and the commutation of tithes; to the recall of Lord
Fitzwilliam after he had been suffered to raise the hopes of the

before English troops arrived, and
concludes, ‘The dates of each memor-
able action in this short but bloody
and wasteful rebellion are noted, to
prove that the suppression of it was
effected solely by the troops, militia
and yeomanry of Ireland, without any
assistance whatever from England.’

(Duigenan’s Present Political State of
Ireland, pp. 85, 92.) See, too, in this
volume, pp. 141, 142. A most power-
ful statement of the case, in one of
the speeches of Bushe against the
Union, will be found in Plunket’s Life,
ii. 357, 358,

302 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

Catholics to the utmost; to the stimulus given to religious
dissension when the Government deliberately evoked the Pro-
testant spirit in opposition to the Catholic claims; to the
intolerable violence and outrage that had accompanied the
process of disarming. These things did not, they admitted,
introduce the first seeds of sedition into Ireland, but they had
prepared the soil for the portentous rapidity of its growth, and
they were the chief causes of the desperate condition to which
the country had been reduced.

Under these circumstances, there was a very sullen and
resentful spirit among the Irish Protestants when the intended
Union was announced. The great preponderance of Protestant
feeling appears at this time to) have been clearly against the
scheme, and if war had not been raging and invasion pro-
bable, the preponderance would have been overwhelming. The
extreme danger of the situation, however, had undoubtedly
converted some, and shaken the opposition of many.

Among the Catholics, the first impressions were much more
favourable. The deposition of a governing and now a hostile
sect was not without its charm, and the Union promised the
speedy accomplishment of cherished objects. Some of the
Catholic prelates, and especially Dr. Troy, the Archbishop of
Dublin, from the beginning declared themselves warmly in
favour of the scheme. They would no doubt gladly have seen
Catholic emancipation incorporated in the Union, but, ‘from
what I learn,’ writes Cornwallis, ‘the present measure is not
likely to be opposed by the Catholics. They consider any
change better than the present system.’! ‘There appears no
indisposition on the part of the leading Catholics,’ writes Castle-
reagh in November ; ‘ on the contrary, I believe they will consider
any transfer of power from their opponents as a boon. I should
hope the proposed arrangement for the Catholic clergy will
reconcile that body. Dr. Troy is perfectly well inclined.’ ?
There seems to have been some question of inserting in the
Act of Union, a clause maintaining the exclusively Protestant
character of the Legislature, but both Cornwallis and the
English Ministers declared that the competence of the Imperial
Legislature to alter the oath must be expressly reserved, and it

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 434. 2 Ibid. pp. 448, 444,

— ee Te

«

CH. XXXI. THE PRESS. REGIUM DONUM. 303

was agreed that it was essential to the peace of Ireland that
tithes should be commuted and reduced, and that a competent
provision should be assigned from the State to the Catholic
clergy.! It was from the Catholic province of Munster, and
especially from the city of Cork, that the Government ex-
pected most support. Cork was at this time the second
city in Ireland, and it was long and widely believed that a
legislative Union would be as favourable to its progress as the
Scotch Union had proved to the development of Glasgow.?

The Government were anxious not to rely solely on borough
votes, and they did all in their power to influence the disposi-
tions of the people. ‘The principal provincial newspapers,’
writes Castlereagh in November, ‘ have been secured, and every
attention will be paid to the press generally.* ‘ Already,’ he
writes a little later, ‘we feel the want, and, indeed, the absolute
necessity of the primum mobile. We cannot give that activity
to the press which is requisite. ‘I cannot help most ear-
nestly requesting to receive 5,000/. in bank notes by the first
messenger. 4 As the payment of the Catholic priests was
intended to purchase the assistance of that body, so it was
hoped that the promise of some additional provision would dis-
arm the opposition, if it did not secure the support of the
Presbyterian ministers.’ Slight augmentations had already
taken place in 1784 and 1792, and about this time the negotia-
tions began which resulted in the considerable enlargement and
rearrangement of the Regium Donum in 1803. The attitude

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, i. sarily become soon the metropolis of

379, 380-393.

2 This belief (which had a great
effect on Catholic opinion about the
Union) was a very old one. In one
of Langrishe’s letters, written in 1768,
Hely Hutchinson is accused of aiming
at an Union. ‘By reducing us to be-
come a province only of another king-
dom, he hopes to recommend himself to
a seat in that senate, where he vainly
imagines that his parts, but not im-
possibly his arts, may soon render him
considerable. And this would cer-
tainly much endear him to that city
which he represents at present [Cork].
Should an Union between Barataria
and La Mancha [Ireland and England]
once prevail, that port would neces-

this island, and reduce our present
capital to a fishing village.’ (Bara-
tariana, p. 34.)

% Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
444,

* Ibid. iii. 27. A few days later
Castlereagh acknowledged the reply.
‘The contents of the messenger’s des-
patches are very interesting. Arrange-
ments with a view to further commu-
nications of the same nature will be
highly advantageous, and the Duke of
Portland may depend on their being
carefully applied.’ (Ibid. p. 34.)

5 Thid. ii. 444.

§ Killen’s Continuation of Reid’s
History of Preshyterianism in Ireland,
iii, 509-522. See, too, Castlereagh

304 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

of Ulster was regarded with extreme apprehension, but also with
some hope. The United Irish movement, which had its chief
seat in this province, was essentially a revolt against the Irish
Parliament. But Ulster republicanism had been suddenly
checked when the horrors of the Wexford rebellion showed
what an independent and popish Ireland was likely to be,
and Castlereagh thought it possible that many of the Repub-
lican party would now accept an Union as a compromise.'
Wolfe Tone had from the first devoted all the resources of his
powerful rhetoric to expressing his detestation of the Irish
Parliament; he had taught consistently that the only real and
final alternative for Ireland was Separation or Union,? and
although it does not appear that many of the United Irish-
men took the turn for which Castlereagh hoped, it is remark-
able that Hamilton Rowan, who was one of the most important
of them, was not only decidedly but enthusiastically in favour
of the Union. ‘In that measure,’ he writes, ‘I see the down-
fall of one of the most corrupt assemblies I believe ever existed,
and instead of an empty title, a source of industrious enter-
prise for the people, and the wreck of feudal aristocracy.’ ‘It
takes a feather out of the great man’s cap; but it will, I think,

put many a guinea in the poor man’s pocket.’ Neilson also,

though he never appears to

Correspondence, ii. 384. Ascheme for es-
tablishing a new universityin Armagh,
chiefly forthe benefit of the Dissenters,
was under consideration in 1799, but
was ultimatelyabandoned. The grounds
on which the Duke of Portland prin-
cipally objected to it, are curious and
significant. He thought that it was
not desirable to stimulate Dublin
University by the emulation of a
second university, as the students in
Trinity College were already too apt
to injure their health by overwork;
and he also thought it very desirable
that, after the Union, the higher order
of Irishmen should be educated as
much as possible in England, or (if
they were Presbyterians) in Scotland.
See Custlereagh Correspondence, ii.
364, 365, 382-384.

1 Cornwallis
444,

2B.g. The following passage
occurs in An Address to the People

Correspondence, ii.

have given up his wish for a

of Ireland (1796), which was brought
over by Hoche. ‘The alternative
which is now submitted to your choice
with regard to England is, in one
word, Union or Separation. You must
determine, and that instantly, between
slavery and independence. There is
no third way.’ (Tone’s Memoirs, ii.
275.)

* Rowan’s Autobiography, p. 340.
This was written in Jan. 1799, and
Rowan says he had long held this
opinion. Mrs. Rowan, who appears
from her letters to have been a woman
of very superior intellect and character,
altogether differed from her husband’s
politics. She was completely opposed
to his sedition, and she regarded the
Union with extreme dislike. (Ibid.
p. 338.) This is all the more remark-
able, as Lord Clare appears to have
had a great regard for her, and showed
her much kindness.

CH, XXXI. ULSTER OPINION.

305

complete separation of the two countries, expressed his gratifi-
cation at the Union as a measure which must benefit Ireland
commercially, and could not injure her politically.!

There were two other motives operating in Ulster which were
favourable to the Union. The free trade with England, which
was expected to follow it, was certain to give a great impulse to
the linen manufactures of Ulster, and Bishop Percy has noticed
that among these manufacturers there was from the beginning a
party devoted to the Union. In the Presbyterian North, too,
even more than in the other provinces, tithe legislation was
imperatively demanded. ‘As a measure connected with the
Union,’ writes Castlereagh, ‘nothing would engage the great
body of the people of all persuasions so certainly in its support,
as coupling it witha regulation of tithes, which in this country
has always been the first substantive object to which all re-
formers looked.’? It was ultimately decided not to connect a
tithe Bill with the Union, but one of the most effectual argu-
ments used by its partisans was the certainty that a tithe Bill
would immediately follow it.

The Government were now extremely desirous that a fall
statement of the case for the Union should be laid before the
Trish public. The task of drawing it up was assigned to the
Under Secretary, Cooke. His pamphlet seems to have been re-
vised before publication by some leading public men ;* and al-
though it appeared anonymously,’ it was at once recognised as
the official statement of the case, and it passed speedily through
many editions. Part of it consists of somewhat general reasonings
on the advantages of political Union. He dwelt upon the benefits
which had resulted from the union of Wales and Scotland with
England; upon the necessity the American colonies found of

‘drawing themselves together more closely by the Constitution of

1 See his letter to his wife, (though you keep the sentiment) to

Madden’s United Irishmen, iv. 105,
106. Dr. Madden, without, I think,
any good reason, questions Neilson’s
sincerity.

2 Cornwallis
444,

3 Lord Buckingham, in a letter
to Cooke congratulating him on his
pamphlet, suggests an argument from
the American Constitution which is
employed in it, and adds, ‘I wish you

VOL. VIII.

Correspondence, ii.

leave out the name of Dr. Troy, for
he is most eagerly and violently with
you on this question, and would pro-
bably not be much flattered by being
thus held out to exhibition.’ Troy’s
name does not appear in the published
pamphlet. (Buckingham to Cooke,
Noy. 22, 1798.)

* Arguments for and against an
Union between Great Britain and
Ireland.

x

306 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

1787; upon the immense and dangerous preponderance France
had acquired in Europe through the complete fusion of the many
states which originally composed it ; upon the strong arguments
in favour of Union derived from the present almost desperate
condition of Europe. France had succeeded in incorporating,
subduing, or influencing all the small countries about her.
Geneva, Savoy, the Austrian provinces of Flanders, the German
States on the left bank of the Rhine, had been incorporated with
her. Spain only moved at her dictation. Holland, Switzerland,
Sardinia, and the new Republic of Italy were occupied by her
armies. England was now the last solid barrier of the liberties
of Europe. Was it probable that she could have so long resisted
the concentrated power of France, if Scotland had still been a
half-separated kingdom, exposed as she had once been to inces-
sant French intrigues? Was it likely that she would long be
able to resist, if the constantly increasing power of France were
met by no corresponding increase and consolidation of the British
Empire ?

Ifthe Union of independent countries was a source of strength
and prosperity, much more so would such an Union be as that
which was now proposed. What, it was asked, is now the boasted
independence of Ireland? The crown of Ireland depends on
that of England, and the King of Ireland necessarily resides in
England. The counsels of the Government of Ireland are framed
in the British Cabinet. The Government of Ireland isadministered
by a British Lord Lieutenant and Secretary, appointed by the
Ministry in England, acting under their instructions and dis-
tributing the patronage of the Crown. No measure of the Irish
Parliament can become law without the licence of a British
minister, for it must receive the royal sanction, attested by the
Great Seal of Britain, which is in his custody. In all questions
which concern alliances, the declaration and conduct of war or the
negotiations for peace, Ireland is a completely subject State.
She has no communication with foreign Powers except through
British diplomatists. Her Parliament is supposed to be in a
great measure subservient to British influence.! Sucha situation
naturally produces constant jealousies, and furnishes a perpetual

1 See the powerful statement of Lord Castlereagh (Coote’s History of the
Union, pp. 339, 340).

g

CH. XXXI, COOKE’S PAMPHLET, 307

topic of complaint and invective to the newspapers and the par-
liamentary Opposition. But how, under its present Constitution,
could it be avoided? ‘So long as we form part of the British
Empire, we must acknowledge one executive power, one presiding
Cabinet, and it is of indispensable necessity for that Cabinet to
induce every part of the Empire to pursue the same principles
of action, and to adopt the same system of measures, as far as
possible ; and as the interests of England must ever preponderate,
a preference will always be given to her, or supposed to be given.’
If the two Parliaments act together, that of Ireland will always
be said to be meanly and corruptly subservient to the British
Cabinet. If they diverge, they may most seriously weaken the
strength of the Empire. The Parliament of Ireland may exhort
the King to make war when the views of England are pacific.
It may oppose wars in which England is engaged, declare against
treaties which England has made, and refuse to ratify commercial
articles. It has actually asserted a right to choose a Regent
of its own appointment, distinct from the Regent of England.

‘ Add to this the melancholy reflection, that the Irish Parlia-
ment has been long made the theatre for British faction. When
at a loss for subjects of grievance in Great Britain, they ever turn
their eyes to this kingdom, in the kind hope that any seed of
discontent may be nourished by their fostering attention into
strength and maturity. . . . We have seen the leaders of the
British Opposition come forward to support the character of Irish
rebels, to palliate and to justify Irish treason, and almost to
vindicate Irish rebellion.’

All this, in the opinion of the writer, would end with a legis-
lative Union. It is true that absenteeism might somewhat in-
crease, and London might be somewhat more than at present the

‘centre of Irish affairs; but ‘the British Cabinet would receive a

mixture of Irishmen, and the counsels of the British Parliament
would be much influenced by the weight and ability of the Irish
members. All our party contests would be transferred to Great
Britain. British faction would cease to operate here. . . . France
could no longer speculate on the nature of our distinct Govern-
ment and Parliament, and hope to separate the kingdom from
Great Britain.’ Ireland would be placed for ever on an equality
with Great Britain. All danger of her subjection, all danger of

x 2

308 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

partial laws by the British Parliament, would be at anend. ‘We
shall have full security that the British United Parliament will
never injure Ireland, because it must at the same time injure
Great Britain.’ The development of the material resources of
Treland would become a special object of Imperial policy, and in-
creasing loyalty would naturally follow increasing prosperity.

That such an increase of prosperity would follow the Union,
appeared to Cooke hardly doubtful. When two countries differ-
ing widely in their industrial, commercial, agricultural, and moral
development are identified in government, policy, and interests,
they will inevitably tend to the same level. English capital will
naturally find its employment in the undeveloped resources of
Treland. Cork is already the emporium of provisions for the
British navy, and the refuge for all homeward-bound convoys in
time of war when the Channel is unsafe. If the Union be carried,
there is little doubt that it will be converted into a great
maritime station, with dockyards like those of Plymouth and
Portsmouth. Landed property, which in England sells in time
of peace at from thirty to forty years’ purchase, in Ireland seldom
exceeds twenty years’ purchase; but with the increased security
and order which the Union would produce, the value of Irish
estates will gradually rise to the English level. Ulster will gain
complete security for her staple manufacture of linen. Already,
it is true, that manufacture is encouraged by English laws, but
these laws might at any time be repealed or changed. By an
Union they will be fixed for ever.

The most important advantages, however, to be expected
from the Union, were moral and political ones. In a remark-
able page, to which I have already referred, Cooke acknowledged
the immense progress that in the last twenty years Ireland
had been making in population, agriculture, manufactures, and
wealth. ‘It is universally admitted, that no country in the
world ever made such rapid advances as Ireland has done in these
respects; yet all her accession of prosperity has been of no avail;
discontent has kept pace with improvement; discord has grown
up with our wealth ; conspiracy and rebellion have shot up with
our prosperity.’! The truth is, that the condition of Ireland is

‘In the Castlereagh Correspon- of Cooke on the arguments for the
dence there is a curious memorandum Union. In it he ascribes the present

COOKE’S PAMPHLET. 309

CH, XXXI.

essentially unnatural and precarious. Nine-tenths of the pro-
perty of the country are in the possession of descendants of British
Protestant settlers, very many of whom owe their position to
the fortunes of civil war. The government of the country, the
parliamentary representation. and the Church revenues are all
in the hands of a small Protestant minority. As long as the
Catholics were restrained by severe penal laws the kingdom was
tranquil, and the tranquillity continued for nearly a century.
But with the repeal of these restrictions the old rivalry re-
appeared ; the Catholics soon demanded a change in the Consti-
tution, which would have the effect of transferring to them all
the powers of the State ; and the doctrine was rapidly spreading
throughout Europe, that in every country the religious establish-
ment should be the Church of the majority.

As long as the Catholics were to the Protestants as three to
one, this state of things was essentially anomalous; but in order
to change it, the Acts of Supremacy and of Uniformity must be
repealed, ‘for nothing could be so absurd as to make men who
deny the supremacy of the King, and the competency of the
Parliament in ecclesiastical concerns, members of the supreme
power, viz. the Legislature; and. at the same time to subject
these very men to the penalties of preemunire and treason for
denying that supremacy and competency.’ But if the Catholics
are admitted into the Legislature, and the Test Oaths and the
Act of Supremacy are repealed, the Protestant Hstablishment at
once becomes a publicwrong. At present this Establishment is
defensible, ‘ because on principles of reason, and from the nature
of a free Constitution, no religious sect can claim a right to be
established or supported by the State which denies the com-
petency of the State to regulate their conduct; but when that

‘principle is abandoned, the defence of the Protestant Church
Establishment is abandoned also.’

Nor would this be the only consequence. ‘Admitting the

Catholics to seats in the Legislature, and retaining, the present

reform principles of the Presbyterians.
5. The want of number in the Pro-

dangerous state of the country to six
causes. 1. The local independent
testants,

acting of the Legislature. 2. The
general prosperity of the country, which
has produced great activity and energy.
3. The emancipation of the Catholics.
4, The encouragement given to the

6. The uncertainty of coun-
sels as to this great division of the
country. (Castlereagh Correspondence,
ili, 55.)

810 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI,

parliamentary Constitution, would be like inviting a man to
dinner, and on his acceptance of the invitation, shutting the
door in his face.’ Reform would necessarily follow emancipa-
tion, and it must end by taking the whole political power of
the country from those who are the chief possessors of its
landed property. Could the security of property survive such a
revolution of power ?

The only real safeguard against this danger lay in an Union.
It would at once save the Empire from the great evil of an
‘Imperium in imperio, by giving it one Legislature, one supreme
organ of the public will. It would place Ireland ‘in a natural
situation, for all the Protestants of the Empire being united, she
would have the proportion of fourteen to three in favour of her
Establishment, whereas at present there is a proportion of three
to one against it.’ ‘If Ireland was once united to Great Britain
by a legislative Union, and the maintenance of the Protestant
Establishment was made a fundamental article of that Union,
then the whole power of the Empire would be pledged to the
Church Establishment of Ireland, and the property of the whole
Empire would be pledged in support of the property of every
part.’

These last arguments were addressed especially to the class
who still constituted the Irish Parliament, and were the chief
governing body in Ireland. Some of the other advantages,
however, that have been enumerated applied in a very large
measure to the Dissenters and to the Catholics, and special in-
ducements were held out to each sect. The Catholics were told
that all the privileges they had obtained from the Irish Parlia-
ment would be secured by the Union; that ‘it may be advisable
to connect with an Union a proper support for their clergy, and
some system of regulation for their Church not inconsistent
with their ecclesiastical principles ;’ and that ‘an opening may
be left in any plan of Union for the future admission of Catholics
to additional privileges.’ It will be observed, that no distinct
prospect of their admission into the Legislature is held out in
this pamphlet, but it was urged that the position of Catholics,
both socially and politically, would be greatly improved when
they were no longer legislated for under the influence of local
prejudices, jealousies, or antipathies, and with that ‘necessary State

CH, XXXI. CASTLEREAGH MADE CHIEF SECRETARY. 311

partiality towards Protestants’ which the present dangerous
condition of Ireland produced. The Catholic South and West,
were also the parts of Ireland which were likely to benefit most
largely by the agricultural and commercial advantages of the
Union. The Protestant Dissenters were told that their poli-
tical importance would be increased when they were united
with the Dissenting interests of Great Britain;! that further
provision would be made for their ministers, and that a modus
of tithes by which Dissenters and Catholics would be essentially
relieved, would probably accompany an Union.

Such were the principal arguments and promises of this very
important pamphlet, which first brought the question of the Union
fully before the Irish public, and furnished most of its advocates
with the substance of their speeches. The subject at once ab-
sorbed public attention almost to the exclusion of all others, and
it is stated that before the end of the year 1798, no less than
twenty-four pamphlets relating to it had already appeared.? In
the interval before the meeting of the Irish Parliament, parties
on each side were rapidly forming. The resignation which the
Chief Secretary Pelham had long been pressing on the Govern-
ment was at last accepted, and this important post was placed
in the strong hands of Lord Castlereagh. The appointment had
long been in consideration, and was strenuously supported by
Cornwallis ; but it encountered much opposition, chiefly, it ap-
pears, on the part of the King, who clung to the old rule that this
office should always be held by an Englishman. Cornwallis ace
knowledged ‘the propriety of the general rule,’ but he said that
Castlereagh was ‘ so very unlike an Irishman,’ that he had a just
claim to an exception in his favour.* The King gave his consent
in the beginning of November. It is a somewhat remarkable
‘fact that the first Irishman who was Chancellor, and the first
Irishman who was Chief Secretary since the Revolution, were
the two leading instruments in destroying the Irish Parliament.

The warning of Lord Harcourt, that a legislative Union ought

1 Tt was replied to this with much 2 Faulkner's Journal, Dec. 27,
force, that the Irish Dissenter was al- 1798.
ready politically in a better position 5 Castlereagh Correspondence, i.

than the English Dissenter, as the 424-444; Cornmallis Correspondence,
Test Act had been repealedin Ireland, ii. 439.
but not in England,

312 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

never to be attempted unless the minds of the Irish had been long
prepared, and unless the wish for it had come from them, had
been completely neglected. The measure of Pitt was flashed
suddenly upon the Irish public, on the eve of its introduction,
and, if we except the confidential overtures from Clare, the whole
initiative and idea of it came from England. The letters from
the chief persons about the Government in the weeks between
the disclosure of the scheme and its introduction into Parliament,
are full of misgivings about the state of public opinion, and some
of them of much complaint about Lord Cornwallis. Clare
complained of his coldness and his reserve, and expressed
grave fears about the House of Commons. ‘Foster is impracti-
cable, and Parnell now joins with him. If this should continue
to be the case, and nothing effectual is done here to counteract
it, I fear we shall have great difficulties to encounter.’ ‘In the
House of Commons there is certainly no man who will be a match
for Foster, if he chooses to persist in strong opposition to the
measure.’! Camden thought that it would have been wiser ‘ to
have received the voice and the conversation and the influence
of some leading characters’ in Ireland before starting the scheme
as a Government measure, but that it was now too late to recede.?
Near the end of November, however, it appeared to Elliot, who
was one of the best and ablest officials of the Government, that
the difficulties of the question had become so great, that it was
not improbable that the project would be abandoned.?

Perhaps the best way of studying the public opinion on the
subject, is to look separately at different classes. The first and
in some respects the most important opposition, came from the
bar. A great meeting was summoned on December 9, by
Saurin, who was one of its most distinguished and most esteemed
members. He belonged to an old Huguenot family, and was him-
self a man of strong Protestant principles and prejudices, and he
was in after years, when Attorney-General, one of the most for-
midable opponents of O'Connell. The meeting appears to have
included all that was eminent at the Irish bar, and after a very
able debate, in which Saurin, Plunket, and Peter Burrowes dis-
played especial ability, a resolution was carried by 166 to 82,

1 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 67, 70, 72, 74.
2 Castlereagh Correspondence, i. 448, 449, JF Morle shi, G)

CH. XXxI. ARGUMENTS OF THE LAWYERS. 313

condemning the Union as ‘an innovation which it would be
highly dangerous and improper to propose at the present junc-
ture.’ The debate was at once published, and had much influ-
ence upon opinion; it was followed by many other pamphlets,
chiefly written by lawyers, among which those of Goold, Jebb,
and Bushe were probably the most remarkable, and they supplied
the principal arguments in the subsequent debates.

For the most part, the opponents of the measure at this stage
abstained from committing themselves to any general assertion
that a legislative Union could at no time be expedient. They
dilated especially upon the inexpediency of pressing it forward
when the country was still torn by the convulsions of civil war ;
when it was impossible to take the full sense of the people ; when
the Habeas Corpus Act was suspended, and in the presence of an
enormous English army.

Was this a time, they asked, when Ireland should be called
upon to surrender the parliamentary Constitution under which,
with all its imperfections, she had subsisted for 500 years; to
hand over the government of the people toa Legislature in which
the whole Irish representation would form only a small fraction,
to extinguish for ever the Irish name and nationality ? What
were the inducements that were offered for such a step? Some
of them were evidently of the nature of bribes, and were measures
which were perfectly compatible with the existing system.
What was there in the maintenance of an Irish Parliament to
prevent the payment of the priests; or the additional payment
of Dissenting ministers, or a commutation of tithes ? Others
were sure to be largely deceptive. The commercial advantages
were especially insisted on. But it was acknowledged that Irish
commerce and manufactures during the preceding twenty years

had been advancing with a rapidity unexampled in their history,
unsurpassed in any part of Hurope. A Legislature, it was said,
can assist commerce and manufactures chiefly in two ways. It
may do so by protecting laws, granting bounties and monopolies,
or it may do so by measures extending the sphere of commercial
enterprise. The first right Ireland by the Union would absolutely
surrender, and she would surrender it into the hands of a Legis-
lature in which her most formidable rivals in the fields of com-
merce and manufactures are supreme. As a general rule, the

\

314 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

principle of protecting duties isa false one, ‘ but in our particular
situation, contending with a small capital and an infant esta-
blishment against an old establishment and enormous capital, it
is by protecting duties only that we can ever hope to gain that
strength which may enable us, at length, to place our manufac-
tures on equal terms.’ Could anyone believe that such protection
would be granted by an Imperial Parliament ?

There remained, then, the new spheres of industry that.
might be opened by the Union. But that measure could give
Treland no greater liberty than she already possessed, of trading
with the whole world outside the British Empire, and with the
whole British Empire outside Great Britain. In the trade with
Great Britain, it is true, Ireland suffered several disabilities, from
which it had long been an object of Irish statesmen by fair
negotiation to relieve her. But the two chief products of Ireland
were already freely admitted. Hngland might, no doubt, with-
draw the encouragement she granted to Irish linens, but she
would hardly do so as long as she could obtain her linens more
cheaply from Ireland than from any other country, and she
would certainly not shut her ports against Irish corn, for the
importation of corn was necessary to her increased population,
and Ireland was the one great granary which lay open at her
door. On the other hand, sooner or later, the Union must bring
a vast increase of taxation. A country with a debt of twelve
millions, was asked to unite with a country with a debt of 500
millions. Provisions were, no doubt, promised for keeping sepa-
rate exchequers, but was it not probable that the day would
come, when these debts would be blended? Had not Adam
Smith, the greatest of all the advocates of a legislative Union, ex-
pressly argued that the debts of the two countries should be amal-
gamated, and their taxation equalised? Was it not also certain
that the master evil, Absenteeism, would be enormously increased ?
It was an evil which would not only diminish the material
resources of Ireland, but would also in a large measure de-
prive her of the very class who could do most to ‘command,
reclaim, and soothe a wretched peasantry.’ Yet there was no
country in which, from its social and political circumstances, the
constant guidance of a loyal, respectable, and intelligent class
was more supremely important.

CHOERKIS - ARGUMENTS OF THE LAWYERS. 315

The opponents of the measure then proceeded to deal with
the contention of Cooke, that a legislative Union was necessary
to strengthen the connection, to guard against the dangers of
invasion and separation. What, they asked, was the Irish
Parliament which it was proposed to abolish? Was it not a
governing body of tried, ardent, devoted loyalists, intimately
acquainted with the circumstances of the country ? With the
single exception of the Regency question, it had never differed
on a question of Imperial policy from the British Parliament,
and a simple enactment would prevent the recurrence of a diffi-
culty, which had only arisen from an omission in the law. Not
one disaffected man of any real power or influence, had ever ap-
peared in the Irish Parliament. Not one instance could be cited,
in which the Irish Parliament had refused to support England
in times of difficulty and danger. ‘Never was any Parliament
so zealous, so vigilant, so anxious, so scrutinising as the Irish
Parliament on the occasion of the late rebellion. Not a breath
or murmur of opposition was uttered against the strongest
measures the Administration wished to adopt. Every additional
weapon that the executive magistrate demanded, every guinea
that he could require, was voted, not merely with cheerfulness,
but with anticipating alacrity and without a single dissenting
voice. Inthe British Parliament, there was an active faction
opposing the war, extenuating the rebellion, and censuring the
measures by which it was repressed. In the Irish Parliament,
not a man was found ‘to palliate its crimes, or to refuse the
necessary aid to the executive power.’ Who, it was more than
once asked, were the men who had put down the late most
dangerous rebellion? Were they not the loyal gentlemen of
Ireland, who had organised and led the yeomanry and the
militia? And was it not this very class, which the Union was
most likely to withdraw from Ireland, whose influence in Ireland
it was most certain to diminish? If there is a danger of a
separation from England, ‘it is not at least from any disposition
manifested by the gentry, by the property, by the Parliament
of Ireland. If any such tendency prevail, it is among the lower
classes of the people, corrupted by the empirics of the French
school, whose poison can be best and perhaps solely counter-
acted by a resident gentry and a resident Parliament, who are

316 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. — cu. xxx. -

unalterably and without exception, and from the most unequi-
vocal motives of self-interest, if there were nothing else to operate,
bound to maintain the connection to the last extremity.’

The danger of invasion to which Ireland is exposed, it was
said, springs in reality from two sources. The one is a geo-
graphical position, which no political measure can affect; the
other is the disaffection which such a measure aS was now con-
templated would most seriously increase. ‘ Formed in the
British Cabinet, unsolicited by the Irish nation,’ ‘passed in the
middle of war, in the centre of a tremendous military force,
under the influence of immediate personal danger,’ this Union
was not likely to be ‘salutary in its nature or permanent in its
duration.’ It was said, ‘ that advantage should be taken of the
passions that agitate and distract the minds of men at the close
of a widely extended rebellion; that the intolerance of the
Orangemen, the resentment of the excluded Catholics, the humi-
liation of the rebel, and the despairing apathy of the reformer,
afford an opportunity not to be lost of effecting a revolu-
tion’ which under normal circumstances would be impossible.
Such a policy might for a time succeed, but it could not
fail to be followed by the bitterest recriminations. It would
‘multiply and invigorate the friends of the French connec-
tion ; dishearten, alienate, and disgust the friends to the British
interest,’ and most materially weaken their hold upon their
countrymen. ‘ Who are they, it was asked, ‘whose pride and
consequence will be most humbled? The loyal and spirited
yeomen and gentry who have fought and bled in support of our
Constitution as it now stands.’ ‘The United Irishmen, I am told,
said Peter Burrowes, ‘hold a jubilee of joy at this measure.
They are its warmest advocates. They well know that their
numbers will be increased;’ and Plunket declared that ‘he
opposed the Union principally, because he was convinced that
it would accelerate a total separation of the two countries.’

The parallel that was established between the Scotch Union
and that which it was now desired to form, was strenuously
disputed. The Scotch Parliament had legislated in such a
manner that, without an Union, England and Scotland must
have been legally and absolutely separated on the death of
Queen Anne, and English statesmen had therefore an urgent

CH. XXXI, ARGUMENTS OF THE LAWYERS, Syib7/

motive for pressing on the Scotch Union, which was wholly
wanting in the case of Ireland. No two Parliaments indeed
could be more dissimilar in their relations to England than the
Scotch Parliament, which passed the Bill of Security, and the
Trish Parliament, which suppressed the rebellion of 1798. Scot-
land, too, at the time of the Union had a population which was
probably less than two millions. She was sunk in abject poverty.
She had no considerable manufactures. She was excluded from
the English colonies, and the cattle which were her only super-
fluity, were excluded from the English market. Her exports
to the whole world on a four years’ average scarcely exceeded
800,000/. The whole population of Edinburgh was little more
than 30,000. Ireland at the close of the eighteenth century had
4,500,000, some writers say 5,000,000 inhabitants. She had
the widest liberty of commerce. Her annual exports to England
alone were at least 2,500,000/. Her capital, according to the
best estimate,! contained more than 170,000 inhabitants, and
she was advancing with acknowledged and gigantic strides
on the path of material prosperity. It was added, too, that Scot-
land and England formed but a single island; that the progress
of Scotland, which was attributed so exclusively to her Union,
was not very marked till after the abolition of the hereditary juris-
dictions in 1746, and that two Scotch rebellions were at least
strengthened by the Union.

The doctrine which Grattan had maintained in 1785, of the
incompetence of the Trish Parliament to carry a legislative
Union, was now fully formulated, and it occupied a great part in
the discussions on the measure. Sometimes it was stated ag an
absolute incompetence. The more cautious, however, of the
disputants contented themselves with denying the right of the
“Parliament of Ireland to destroy its own existence, and transfer
its powers to another Legislature, without the consent of the
constituencies attested by a dissolution. This doctrine was
supported by the express statement of Locke, the most recog-
nised and authoritative exponent of the British Constitution as
established and reformed at the Revolution. ‘The Legislative,’

1 Whitelaw, after a careful in- See Warburton’s Hist. of Dublin,
vestigation, estimated the popula- Appendix No. 1.
tion of Dublin in 1798 at 172,091.

318 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XX EI.

he wrote, ‘cannot transfer the power of making laws to any
other hands. For it being but a delegated power from the
people, they who have it cannot pass it over to others. The people
alone can appoint the form of the Commonwealth, which is by
constituting the Legislative, and appointing in whose hands
that shall be. . . . The power of the Legislative being derived
from the people by a positive voluntary grant and institution, can
be no other than what that positive grant conveyed, which being
only to make laws and not legislators, the Legislative can have no
power to transfer their authority of making laws, and place it
in other hands... . The Legislative neither must nor can
transfer the power of making laws to anybody else, or place it
anywhere but where the people have.’ ‘Governments are dis-
solved from within when the Legislative is altered. . . . The
Constitution of the Legislative is the first and fundamental act
of the Society ; whereby provision is made for the continuation
of their Union, under the direction of persons and bonds of laws
made by persons authorised thereunto by the consent and
appointment of the people, without which no one man or number
of men amongst them can have authority of making laws that
shall be binding to the rest. When any one or more shall take
upon them to make laws whom the people have not appointed so to
do, they make laws without authority, and the people are not
therefore bound to obey.’! The conduct of the British Parlia-
ment of 1716, which, having been elected by its constituents for
three years, not only exercised its legitimate power by making
future Parliaments septennial, but also by its own authority
prolonged its own term of office for four years beyond the time
for which it had been elected, was described as essentially and
grossly unconstitutional. On the other hand, the conduct of
American statesmen was appealed to as an example. When

Constitution of the United States was remodelled in 1787,
and a large share of power transferred from the State Legisla-
tures to the Congress, a convention was specially elected by the
people to accomplish this change by their direct authority.

On the strength of such a doctrine, language of the most
ache gerne took, Eaendaeh Giting he angen

speeches on the Union, quoted pas- Junius. (Grattan’s Spee ili
sages to much the same effect from 389.) ‘ parks tee

CH, XXXI. ARGUMENTS OF THE LAWYERS, 319

serious and menacing character was employed. ‘I hold it to be
indisputably certain,’ said Peter Burrowes, ‘that the ancient
established Constitution of a nation like this cannot be justifiably —
annihilated without the previous consent of the nation, founded
upon the freest and fullest discussion of the subject.’ ‘If an
Union should be effected with England,’ said another distinguished
lawyer, ‘in pursuance of the consent of the majority of the
thinking part of the nation fairly taken when the nation can
think, I shall hold it to be my bounden duty to submit and to
act under it. But if the separate right of legislation shall be
annihilated, and transferred or incorporated with that of any
other country without such consent of the nation, I cannot con-
sider myself justly bound by the transaction.’ ‘ Hither this
Union is against the consent of the people, or it is not,’ said a
third lawyer. ‘If it is, the accomplishment of it is tyranny. If
it is not, where is the harm or danger of having the constitu-
tional sanction of the people?’ The yeomen were significantly
reminded that they had taken arms and had sworn to defend the
Constitution of their country, and that this Constitution might have
other enemies besides Father Murphy and the United Irishmen.

This short summary, condensed from the Anti-Union litera-
ture of 1798, will, I hope, show clearly the case of the opponents
of the measure. The reader who will compare the rival argu-
ments, will observe that there are several points in the pamphlet
of Cooke which were untouched, and also that on both sides,
but especially on that of the Anti-Unionists, there was a great
reticence about the Catholic question. It was not due to in-
difference, for it is probable that no other part of the subject so
largely affected the judgments of men, but rather to the fact that
on each side, strenuous friends and enemies of the Catholic claims
were united. It will be observed, too, that the opponents of the
Union evaded one most formidable consideration. There was
much force, or at least much plausibility, in the contention that
a system which placed the government of Ireland directly in the
hands of men of property, who were strongly and indisputably
attached to the Empire, and whose influence with their people
depended largely upon their political position, was conducive
both to the well-being of Ireland, and to its attachment to the
Empire. But if, in the constitutional changes that were mani-

320 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = cu. xxx1.

festly impending, the disloyal element, which undoubtedly ex-
isted in the country, and which the events of the last few years
had greatly intensified, invaded the Legislature, the problem
would wholly change. No political madness could be greater
than to put the legislative machinery of an integral and essential
portion of the Empire into the hands of men who were largely
or mainly disaffected to that Empire ; and who, in times of diffi-
culty, danger, and disaster, were likely to betray it. Nor did the
opponents of the Union adequately recognise how enormously
the revived religious and social antagonism produced by the late
convulsions, had aggravated the difficulty of self-government in
Treland.

On the question of the constitutional capacity of the Legis-
lature to carry an Union, a few words must besaid. The doctrine
that a Legislature can under no circumstances surrender its
separate existence and transfer its legislative powers, though it
may be supported by some authority and by some argument,
may, I think, be lightly dismissed. Every nation must have
some power of contracting an Union with another nation if it
desires it, and in the theory and tradition of the British Consti-
tution the Legislature is the supreme and perfect organ of the
national will. The British Constitution in this respect differs
essentially from the Constitution of the United States. In
America the powers of Congress are defined and limited; a tri-
bunal exists which can pronounce authoritatively upon the
validity of its acts; and in accordance with the principles of
Locke and of Rousseau, Conventions are formed to carry out con-
stitutional changes by express authority of the people. But the
enactment of the Scotch Union is a clear precedent, establishing
the capacity of the Legislature of the British Empire, and its
validity has not been seriously denied. If indeed the Scotch
Union had been invalid, the whole legislation of the United
Parliament would be vitiated, and the title of the monarch to
his Scotch throne would be destroyed, for that title does not rest
upon the Act of Settlement, which applied only to England, but
solely upon a clause in the Act of Union. Blackstone and a
long succession of great English lawyers have declared, in the
most emphatic terms, that the power of the Legislature within

the realm knows no limits except the laws of nature. Its acts

THE CONSTITUTIONAL ARGUMENT, 321

CH, XXXI.

may be iniquitous, tyrannical, subversive of the most ancient
liberties of the people; they may be the result of corruption,
intimidation, or fraud, but no Act of Parliament can be invalid,
for the simple reason that no tribunal exists which is competent
to annul it.

From a lawyer’s point of view, this position is unassailable.
An Act is a valid law which every tribunal must acknowledge to
be such, and which no existing authority has a legal right to re-
sist. But though an Act of Parliament cannot be invalid, it may
be unconstitutional, that is to say, opposed to the purposes for
which the Constitution was constructed, to the main prin-
ciples which were intended to govern its action.! Such Acts
have occurred in English history, and they can only be justified
by the plea of some overwhelming State necessity or expediency.
The Act of the Parliament of 1716 in prolonging its own exist-
ence beyond the period for which it was elected belongs, I think,
to this class,? and its best defence was that an election in 1717
would have endangered the whole settlement of the Revolution.
The Irish Union appears to me to have been another and a graver
example of the same kind. A Parliament which was elected
when there was no question of an Union, transferred its own rights
and the rights of its constituents to another Legislature, and the
act was accomplished without any appeal to the electors by a
dissolution.

The precedent of the Scotch Union has here also been adduced,
but it is not altogether applicable. At the time of that Union

1 «Tt is indeed difficult, perhaps
impossible, to give limits to the mere
abstract competence of the supreme
power, such as was exercised by
Parliament at that time [the Revolu-
.tion], but the limits of a moral cow-
petence subjecting, even in powers
more indisputably sovereign, occa-
sional will to permanent reason and
to the steady maxims of faith, justice,
and fixed fundamental policy, are
perfectly intelligible and perfectly
binding upon those who exercise
any authority, under any name or
under any title,in the State. The
House of Lords, for instance, is not
morally competent to dissolve the
House of Commons, no, nor even to
dissolve itself, nor to abdicate, if it

WO, wanat

would, its portion in the Legislature
of the kingdom, Though a king may
abdicate for his own person, he cannot
abdicate for the monarchy. By as
strong or by a stronger reason, the
House of Commons cannot renounce
its share of authority. The engage-
ment and pact of society, which
generally goes by the name of the
Constitution, forbids such invasion
and such surrender.’ (Burke’s ‘ Re-
flections on the Frenéh Revolution,’
Works, v. 57.)

* Tam aware that this doctrine is
strongly and even contemptuously
rejected, both by Hallam and Lord
Stanhope, but the reader should com-
pare with their remarks, those of Mr,
Dicey, On the Constitution, pp. 37-44.

Y

322 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

the objection was raised, that the members had no right to sub-
vert the old Constitution of Scotland without the consent of their
- constituents. It was answered partly by the precedent of 1688,
when the two Houses meeting in Convention transferred the
crown, altered the succession, and settled the Revolution without
consulting the constituencies, but partly also by the allegation that
the last Scotch Parliament was summoned by a proclamation in-
timating that it was to treat of an Union, and that, ‘ being sent
up for that declared purpose by their constituents, there re-
mained no occasion to demand any other instructions from them.’ !
No such statement could be made in the case of the Irish Union.
It may indeed be truly said that the dissolution of a Parliament
consisting mainly of nomination boroughs could have had but
little effect, but it would at least have elicited the opinion of the
free constituencies, and without their sanction such a measure as
the Union ought not, in my opinion, without the most urgent
necessity, to have been pressed.

To complete the sketch of the Anti-Union literature of 1798,
I must add that one of the most popular and most important of
these writers was prepared to advocate great changes in the ex-

isting Constitution as an alternative to an Union. In the very

1 Defoe’s History of the Union

and settling the treaty of Union then
between England and Scotland, pp. 230,

in contemplation, reasonably con-

231. This question was naturally much
discussed in the Irish Debates. A mem-
ber named Crookshank put the point
with much clearness: ‘I deny that the
Parliament of an independent State,
for which the members of that Par-
liament are trustees, has any right
whatever, without the permission of
its constituents expressly or impliedly
given for the purpose, to surrender
to another country the whole, or any
part, of its legislative authority. ...
This power can never, upon principle
or precedent, be contended to belong
to the representatives of the people,
but by express or implied delegation.
And so strongly were the British
Ministers, in the reign of Anne, im-
pressed with this great constitutional
principle, that in preparing for the
Union of England and Scotland, they
felt it necessary to declare, in the pro-
clamation for convening the Scotch
Parliament, that they were called
together for the purpose of arranging

cluding that the election of repre-
sentatives, after such an avowal of
the intended project, must be con-
sidered as permission to discuss and
finally decide upon that question.’
(Report of the Debates on the Union,
1799, pp. 20, 21.) The rival doctrine
was well stated by William Smith in
the same debate. ‘Parliament is as
competent to conclude an Union as it
is to enact a turnpike Bill... . Public
sentiment on a great and complicated
measure is weighty evidence of the
mischief or utility of that measure ;
as such it should be laid before, and
may, perhaps, conclusively sway the
judgment of that body, which has
the right of legislation. But public
opinion is but evidence, not law. It
is evidence which the people may lay
before that Parliament, . . . whose
right of finally and exclusively de-
ciding the question, uncontrolled by
popular whim, isaclearand undoubted
principle of the Constitution.’ (P. 87.)

CH. XXXI. THE BANKERS AND MERCHANTS, 323

remarkable pamphlet of Jebb, while the arguments against an
incorporating Union are stated with much force, a series of con-
cessions was proposed which would have gone far to transform
the relation between the two countries. It was said that, ‘in
order to set at rest every Imperial question that can suggest
itself as likely to occur to the most jealous and the most specula-
tive politician, it might be enacted that when the King had
declared war, and the British Parliament had sanctioned it, the
Irish Parliament should be bound to follow. It was suggested
also, that all questions of trade between the two countries should
be settled on the basis of reciprocity by a final and irrevocable
treaty ; that the religious establishment should be guaranteed
by a provision forbidding its alteration without the concurrence
of the two Parliaments, and finally that, ‘to accomplish what is
perhaps the Ministers’ grand object in the Union,’ the debts of
England and Ireland should be consolidated, and an arrange-
ment made by which Ireland should pay some proportion to the
general debt charge of the Empire. By such measures, Jebb
maintained, every real object expected from the Union could be
attained.!

The opposition which was led by the Irish bar was strenuously
supported. A large and thoroughly representative meeting of
the bankers and merchants of all religious opinions was held
in Dublin on December 18, and resolutions were unanimously
passed acknowledging the great increase of Irish commerce and
prosperity since 1782, expressing the strongest sentiments of
loyalty to the King and the connection, but at the same time
condemning in emphatic terms, as highly dangerous and impo-
litic, any attempt to deprive the Irish people of their Parliament.
The resolutions were introduced by William Digges Latouche,
the first banker, and one of the most respected men, in Ireland ;
and they were seconded by John Claudius Beresford, who had
hitherto been a strenuous supporter of the Government, who
was a warm partisan of the Protestant ascendency, and who had
lately shown great zeal, and also great violence, in putting down
rebellion in Dublin. If opinions were to be weighed as well as

1 Jebb’s Reply to a Pamphlet en- His arguments attracted much atten-
titled, Arguments for and against an tion and some favour among the
Union, pp. 19, 20. The author of this Ministers. See Ball’s Zrish Legislative
pamphlet was afterwards a judge. Systems, pp. 245, 246.

ae

324 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxxi.

counted, the significance of this meeting could hardly be over-
rated. ‘When I warn you,’ wrote Beresford to Lord Castle-
reagh, ‘of the universal disgust, nay, horror, that Dublin, and
even all the lower part of the North, have at the idea of the
Union, I do not do it with any idea that my opinion would have
weight in turning Government from their design, but from a
wish that they should know what they have to contend with ;
for I confess to you, that I fear more the effect the measure will
have on the minds of the people (particularly those that were
the best affected) than I do the measure itself. . . . The con-
versations on this subject have given the almost annihilated
body of United Irishmen new spirits, and the society is again
rising like a phoenix from its ashes.’' The Corporation of
Dublin, and a meeting of the county, denounced the measure
in even stronger terms. Foster, whose opinion was perhaps as
valuable as that of anyone in Ireland, solemnly warned the
Government, that the public mind was against them, and that
under such circumstances it would be dangerous, if not disastrous,
to persist.2 ‘The inflammation in Dublin,’ wrote Lord Castle-
reagh in the beginning of 1799, ‘is extreme,’ but he added that
it was ‘as yet confined to the middling and higher classes.’ 3
There were, however, other classes and other parts of Ire-
land in which opinion at this time was much more doubtful and
divided. Among the opponents of Catholic emancipation, there
was a profound difference. Foster and Clare, who were by far
the ablest men in that party, took opposite sides. John Beres-
ford, who had borne so great a part in the recall of Lord Fitz-
william, appears from his letters to have been completely panic-
stricken by the danger to which property and the Establishment
had recently been exposed; and he was as favourable to an
Union as his son, John Claudius Beresford, was opposed to it.

Duigenan, as was usual with him, followed Clare. Saurin was

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.

2 Tbid. i. 449. Lord Auckland
appears to have formed much the
same estimate as Foster of the opinion
of the country. On Dec. 22, 1798, he
wrote to Beresford, ‘ Your countrymen
seem to be completely absurd on the
subject of the Union. I shall not,
however, be sorry that the rejection

of it should be their own act and
deed. A day may come when they
will wish for it without being able to
obtain it.’ (Beresford Correspondence,
ii. 191.)

3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
81. There are many other notices of
the Dublin Opposition in the Castle-
reagh and Cornwallis Correspondence.

CH, XXXI. ORANGEMEN AND PRESBYTERIANS, 325

one of the most extreme opponents. Alderman James, a former
Lord Mayor of Dublin, who had great influence among the
Dublin Orangemen, was eager for the Union, under the belief
that the Prince of Wales and the Opposition were pledged to the
Catholics; and that ‘an Union was the only means of preserving
the Protestant State against the Irish papists and their English
supporters. | The Government hoped that such representations
would make many converts among the Orangemen, but it soon
appeared that their dominant sentiment was decidedly adverse
to the Union, and it was considered a great triumph when some
of its leading supporters succeeded in inducing the chief Orange
lodges, both in Dublin and the North, to come to an agreement
that they would not as a society take any part in the discussion,
but would leave each Orangeman in his individual capacity free
to adopt what line he pleased. ‘This,’ Duigenan said, ‘is the
utmost service the friends of the Union have been able to effect.’ ?
Complaints were made to the Grand Lodge, that some of the
younger members of the body, in their hostility to the Union,
were even making overtures to the United Irishmen,’ and some
yeomen declared that they would not retain their arms or con-
tinue their services if the measure was persisted in.

The attitude of Ulster, and especially of that great Presby-
terian population of Ulster which was so deeply imbued with
republicanism, was on the whole more encouraging. <A few
years before, the fiercest opposition would have probably come
from this quarter. But Ulster and Ulster politics had in the last
months strangely altered. ‘'The measure,’ wrote Castlereagh at
the end of November, ‘as yet has made no sensation in the North.
Some time since, the Presbyterians would have been found most
energetic opponents, but they have been long disinclined to
~ the existing system ; of late they are rather tired of the treason
in which they had very deeply embarked ; perhaps they may be
inclined to compromise with the Union;’ and he expressed, as

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ii.
443; Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 17.

2 See the resolution of the Grand
Lodge, Jan. 5, 1799; Cupples’ Prin-
ciples of the Orange Association Vin-
dicated (1799); also Castlereagh
Correspondence, ii. 52, 53, 80.

3 See Cupples’ Principles of the
Orange Association.

4 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
35, 80, 81; Cornwallis Correspondence,
iii. 29. Dobbs, in his remarkable
speech against the Union, in 1799,
noticed the strong and notorious
hostility of the loyal yeomanry of
Ireland to the measure. (Debate,
Jan. 22, 23, 1799, p. 38.)

326 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

we have seen, a hope that an augmentation of the Regium Donum
would secure their ministers.! Three weeks later, Castlereagh’s
father wrote from Mount Stewart, that he had heard no one ‘ argue
with any keenness either for or against’ the Union, but that
there were reports that two popular politicians were in favour of
it. ‘I infer, he continued, ‘the popular current will not be very
strong in this corner of the North against the measure. I
conclude most of those who were actuated with a strong reform-
ing spirit, entertain such a dislike and antipathy to the present
subsisting Parliament of the country, that they will not be very
adverse to any change that will rid them of what they deem so
very corrupt a Legislature.’ There was a hope among some
Belfast merchants, that an Union would greatly develop Belfast
trade. ‘The lower order of manufacturers and farmers, Lord
Londonderry said, ‘unless set going by the upper ranks, will
concern themselves little about the matter.’ ?

Cornwallis was very dubious on the subject. On December
15, he writes, ‘Our reports of the reception of the measure in
the North are not favourable, especially about Belfast ;’ but only
a fortnight later he reported that, although there were some
signs of renewed disaffection in the North, he did not believe
them to be connected with the Union, and that on that question,
‘the appearances in the North are by no means discouraging.
Belfast has shown no disinclination, at which some of the violent
party in Dublin are not less surprised than indignant. In Derry
the most respectable merchants are decidedly for the measure,
and I have understood from several persons lately returned from
the North, whose information deserves credit, that the linen trade,
looking to secure for ever the protection they now enjoy in
the British market, are friendly to the principle. Newry is
quiet on the question, and disposed to consider it fairly.’? ‘The
general disposition of the North, Lord Castlereagh wrote a little
later, ‘is favourable to the measure, particularly the linen trade.’ 4
Lord Charlemont, who hated the Union, acknowledged that
Ulster on this question showed none of the fire which it had
displayed in the days of the volunteers, and more recently when

' Cornwallis Correspondence, ii. 3 Tbid. ii. 78-80; Cornwallis Corre-
444, spondence, iii. 18.
2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. * Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.

39, 40. 127.

CH. XXXI. OPINIONS FAVOURABLE TO UNION. 327

the yeomanry were enrolled. ‘The silence of the country,’ he
wrote to an intimate friend, ‘is the only argument Administration
can bring forward against us, a silence principally occasioned by
the torpor which their own measures, perhaps cunningly, have
produced.’ He tried to organise a movement against the Union
at Armagh, and found ‘ the freeholders indeed willing, but many
of the gentlemen supine, and the sheriff is absent.’! Bishop
Percy, who supported the projected Union with much warmth,
believed at this time that there was much real opinion in its
favour. Dublin, he admitted, was fiercely and dangerously
opposed to it, and the Irish bar was exerting all its energies
against it, but he believed also that in Cork, Waterford, and
even Belfast, mercantile opinion was favourable to the measure ;
that the very expectation of it had already given a great spur to
the linen manufacture; and that in the South many landed
gentry, who had hitherto been strenuous advocates of the legis-
lative independence of Ireland, were so terrified by the scenes of
carnage in Wexford, and by the dangers to which their lives
and properties were exposed, that they would gladly and even
eagerly accept protection under the shelter of an Union. Such
a measure, in the opinion of Bishop Percy, would be of the
greatest advantage to Ireland; ‘ but after all, he wrote, ‘I fear
we are not sufficiently enlightened to resist the narrow, bigoted
outcries of the ignorant and the interested, and the lawyers are
overwhelming the world with publications, and the Dublin mob
are rending the skies with shouts against it, which probably may
prevent its passing, or even being mentioned atall in Parliament.’ ?

The Protestants formed but a small minority of the
population of Ireland, but they included the great pre-
ponderance of its energy, intelligence, and property. They
were the political and governing class, the class who chiefly
created that strong, intelligent, independent, and uninfluenced
public opinion, which in every country it is the duty of a wise
statesman especially to consult. It seems plain thatthe bulk of
Protestant opinion on the question oscillated, at this time,
between violent opposition and a languid or at best a favourable
acquiescence, and that there was very little real, earnest or

1 Charlemont to Halliday, Feb. 2, 2 Bishop Percy to his wife, Jan.
1799. (Charlemont MSS.) 13, 21,1799. (British Museum.)

328 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

spontaneous desire for the measure. Two facts, which appear
prominently in the correspondence of this period, attest most
eloquently the disposition of the people. The one was the
acknowledged necessity of keeping an immense English force in
Treland, for the purpose of guarding, not merely against a foreign
enemy, but also against the dangers to be apprehended in carry-
ing the Union.!. The other was the confession of Lord Castle-
reagh, that ‘nothing but an established conviction that the
English Government will never lose sight of the Union till it is
carried, could give the measure a chance of success.’ ?

On the Catholic side, however, it obtained a real though a
fluctuating, uncertain, and somewhat conditional support, and
there can be little doubt that if Catholic emancipation had
formed a part of the scheme, the support would have been very
considerable. Pitt at first’ desired to take this course;? but
Clare, as we have seen, convinced him that it was impracticable,
and Pitt then strongly inclined to an Union on a Protestant basis.*
Lord Grenville agreed with him, though before the rebellion he
said he would have thought differently.? Cornwallis, as we have
seen, doubted and fluctuated, while Dundas was prepared to

1 See an earnest letter of Lord
Castlereagh when there was some
question of the English militia return-
ing home. ‘The Lord Lieutenant’s
opinion decidedly is, that without the
force in question, it would expose the
King’s interest in this kingdom, to
hazard a measure which, however
valuable in its future effects, cannot
fail in the discussion very seriously to
agitate the public mind.’ (Cuastle-
reagh Correspondence, ii. 13.) Several
letters from Cornwallis on the ex-
treme danger of withdrawing the
English militia, will be found in the
second volume of the Cormwallis Cor-
respondence. In one of them he says,
‘All thoughts of uniting the two
kingdoms must be given up, if that
force should now be withdrawn.’ (P.
454.)

2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
81.

3 Ibid. i, 404. In the Pelham
MSS. there is a curious, but un-
fortunately undated, ‘plan of an
Union,’ which evidently was drawn up
at an early stage of the consideration

of the subject. It is divided into seven
articles, and it is accompanied by a
paper with comments on each article,
endorsed ‘ Notes by Mr, Pitt.’ The pas-
sage relating to the Catholics in the
original plan is, ‘ Catholics to be eli-
gible to all offices, civil and military,
taking the present oath. Such as
shall take the oath of supremacy in
the Bill of Rights, may sit in Parlia-
ment without subscribing the Abjura-
tion. Corporation offices to be Pro-
testant.’ Pitt’s comment upon this is,
‘The first part seems unexceptionable,
and is exactly what I wish (supposing
the present oath, as settled by the Irish
Act, 33 George III. c. 21, to be satis-
factory to the better part of the Catho-
lics, which should be ascertained),
but if this oath is sufficient for office,
why require a different one for Parlia-
ment ? and why are Corporation offices
to be exclusively Protestant, when
those of the State may be Catholic?’

* Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
412.

5 Buckingham’s Courts and Cabi-
nets, ii, 411.

i

CH.PXXXI, CATHOLIC SUPPORTERS OF THE UNION. a20

favour the wider scheme if Cornwallis considered it feasible.!
Among those who most regretted the change was William Elliot,
who was one of the ablest and most esteemed of the English
officials in Ireland. He had been thought of as Chief Secretary
when Lord Camden was appointed, and some years after the Union
he returned to Ireland in that position, but he was now. Under
Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant for the Military Department,
and was employed very confidentially in the communications
between the English and Irish Governments which preceded the
Union. He was so fully convinced that the Government were
making a profound mistake in dissociating the two measures,
that when the decision was finally taken, he desired to resign his
office and his seat in the Irish Parliament. ‘Since the measure
is embarked in,’ he wrote to Castlereagh, ‘I feel anxious for its
success. Even on its present narrow and contracted basis, I
believe it will be productive of advantage to the Empire. If
the Catholics are wise, they will acquiesce in it; but I am afraid
we have left them ground of complaint. I cannot be easily per-
suaded that if more firmness had been displayed here at first, an
Union might not have been accomplished including the admission
of the Catholic claims ; but Mr. Pitt has with a lamentable
facility yielded this point to prejudice, without, I suspect, acquir-
ing support in any degree equivalent to the sacrifice.’ ?

The Catholic leaders, however, themselves do not appear to
have agreed with Elliot. From the very first disclosure of the
scheme, it became evident that they looked on it with favour, and
Lord Fingall, Lord Kenmare, and Archbishop Troy at this time
entirely approved of the omission of the Catholic question from
the measure. ‘They considered that it would be ‘injurious to
the Catholic claims to have them discussed in the present temper

of the Irish Parliament ;’ that to do so ‘would hazard the suc-
cess of the Union without serving the Catholics ;’ that it would
be ‘much more for their interest that the question should rest
till it could be submitted in quieter times to the wnprejudiced
decision of the United Parliament, relying on their receiving

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, i. elaborate speech in favour of the
; Union (which was published sepa-
? Ibid. ii. 29, 30. This was written rately), strongly urged that Catholic
from England. The resignation was emancipation should, if possible, be
not accepted. Lord Minto,in hisvery made an article in the Act.

431

330 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

hereafter every indulgence which could be extended to them
without endangering the Protestant Hstablishment.’ Lord
Kenmare and Lord Fingall were especially anxious to see a State
endowment of the priests, which would make them less dependent
on the most ignorant and turbulent classes, and Archbishop Troy
promised that he would use all his influence in favour of the
Union on the sole condition that it contained no clause barring
future concessions. ‘Upon the whole,’ Lord Castlereagh wrote
in the beginning of December, ‘it appears to me, as far as the
dispositions of the Catholics have yet disclosed themselves, that
there is every reason to expect from them a preference for the
measure. An active support from that body would not perhaps
be advantageous to the success of the Union. It would particu-
larly increase the jealousy of the Protestants, and render them
less inclined to the question.’ !

The opinion of the Catholics outside the small circle of their
leading prelates and gentry was less decided, but at first the
Government considered it clearly favourable. At the discussion
at the meeting of the bar, a Protestant gentleman named Grady,
when advocating the Union, declared that the Catholics, who
formed the bulk of the people of Ireland, desired it. He was met
by loud cries of dissent, and he explained that he spoke from
an intimate knowledge of the South of Ireland; that the great
Catholic trading interest there was entirely in its favour, and that
the most respectable Catholics of his acquaintance considered
the Union to be not only of great general advantage to the State,
but also the only way of allaying the religious hatred and in-
tolerance which the last few months had revived. In the course
of the debate, a prominent Catholic lawyer named Bellew denied
these assertions, but he contented himself with stating that the
Catholics had as yet formed no decided opinion on the question,
and had not begun seriously to consider it.2, In the Government
letters, however, of November and the beginning of December,
the province of Munster, and especially the towns of Limerick
and Cork, are continually spoken of as decidedly favourable to
the Union.* The first resolutions in its favour came from the

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 3 See Castlereagh Correspondence,
35, 36. li. 17, 19, 26, 79, 84, 85; Cornwallis

* Report of the Debate of the Irish Correspondence, ii. 443 ; iii. 8.
Bar, Dec. 9, 1798, pp. 27, 28, 50, 51.

CH. XXXI. ATTITUDE OF THE CATHOLICS. 331

Corporation of Cork; they were passed unanimously, and Lord
Castlereagh states that a great number of principal inhabitants
expressed their approbation of them, and that Colonel Fitzgerald,
one of the members for the county, who was ‘ inferior to no man
in personal respectability,’ as well as Lord Shannon, the great
nobleman of the county, were strongly in favour of the Union.!
Lord Shannon, Lord Longueville, and Lord Donoughmore, who
were strong partisans of the Union, had great influence in Cork
and its neighbourhood, but they only, Lord Cornwallis said,
‘gave full effect to the natural sentiments of the place, which
are warmly in favour of the Union.’ A petition, it is true,
signed by 1,800 inhabitants of Cork was afterwards presented
against the Union, but it was strenuously asserted that it did not
represent the opinion of the majority of the traders or freemen of
that great Catholic town.? It was believed that Cork would gain
as much by it as Dublin would lose, and that her magnificent
harbour would become one of the chief centres of the commerce
of the Empire.* One of the first Irish pamphlets in favour of
the Union was written by Theobald McKenna, who had been
for many years the principal pamphleteer of the Catholic body.
It contained, however, one passage which was somewhat ominous.
‘Unless the servants of the Crown mean, among other internal
regulations, to include a settlement under the head of religious
difference completely coextensive with the grievance, then will
an incorporation of the Legislatures be found a measure bad for
Treland, but, if possible, worse for Britain.’

Before the meeting of Parliament, the Ministers had become
much less hopeful about the disposition of the Catholics. Early
in December, Cornwallis wrote to General Ross, ‘The opposition
to the Union increases daily in and about Dublin, and I am afraid,

from conversations which I have had with persons much con-
nected with them, that I was too sanguine when I hoped for the
good inclinations of the Catholics. Their disposition is so com-
4 McKenna’s Membir on Questions

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.

84, 85.
2 Coote’s History of the Union, p.
447; Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
124, 125.

3 See Cottingham’s Observations
on the projected Union, pp. 31, 32;
Barnes’ Rights of the Imperial Crown
of Ireland, pp. 85, 86.

respecting the projected Union, p. 23.
McKenna said, ‘If the people of
Scotland had been emancipated by
abolishing the hereditable jurisdic-
tions, the rebellions of 1715 and 1745
would, as to that country, have been
most probably prevented.’ (P. 16.)

332 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

pletely alienated from the British Government, that I believe
they would even be tempted to join with their bitterest enemies,
the Protestants of Ireland, if they thought that measure would
lead to a total separation of the two countries.’! ‘The principal
Catholics about Dublin,’ he wrote a few days later, ‘begin to
hold a much less sanguine language about the probable conduct
of their brethren, and are disposed to think that, in this part of
the kingdom at least, the greater number of them will join in
opposition to the Union.’?

Cooke still thought the great body friendly and well inclined,
but he observed that they held aloof, and that their leaders hesi-
tated. It was now argued that the Union could be no real union
without emancipation; ‘ that the Catholics, being the excluded
caste, will ever be discontented; that they will be called the
Trish ; that they will still have a distinct interest.’? There were
two important meetings of Catholic leaders at Lord Fingall’s, and,
to the great disappointment of the Government, no resolution
was arrived at.‘ Lord Kenmare was not present at the first
meeting, but wrote strongly in favour of the Union; Lord Fingall
seemed for atime somewhat doubtful; Bellew was with difficulty
prevented from moving a hostile resolution. He said to Lord
Cornwallis, that the Catholics could not be expected to favour a
measure from which they not only would derive no advantage,
but would find themselves in a worse situation than at present.
If they were excluded from Parliament at the Union, he saw no
prospect of their afterwards entering it, for when incorporated
into the mass of British subjects they would be a small minority,
and the British Test Act would be a strong barrier to their
claims. Cornwallis acknowledged that in his own opinion this
argument had much force.®

‘The Catholics as a body,’ wrote Cornwallis in the beginning
of January, ‘still adhere to their reserve on the measure of

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 16.

Za bidmappeal8,19.

3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
43, 46, 47; Auckland Correspondence,
iv. 76, 77.

* Archbishop Troy wrote to
Castlereagh : ‘The general opinion of
the meeting was, that the Catholics as
such ought not to deliberate on the

Union as a question of empire, but
only as it might affect their own
peculiar interests as a body; and on
this it was judged inexpedient to pub-
lish any resolution or declaration at
present.’ (Castlereagh Correspondence,
li. 61.)

5 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
22.

CH, XXXI. DISCOURAGING LETTERS, 333

Union. The very temperate and liberal sentiments at first
entertained and expressed by some of that body, were by no means
adopted by the Catholics who met at Lord Fingall’s and professed
to speak for the party at large. Whether it was their original
sentiment to oppose the Union unless their objects were com-
prehended in it, or whether this disposition was taken up when
they observed Government to be either weakly supported or op-
posed by the Protestants, it is difficult to determine. Certain it
is, they now hold off. . . . What line of conduct they will ulti-
mately adopt when decidedly convinced that the measure will
be persevered in on Protestant principles, I am incapable of judg-
ing. I shall endeavour to give them the most favourable im-
pressions without holding out to them hcpes of any relaxation
on the part of Government, and shall leave no effort untried to
prevent an opposition to the Union being made the measure of
that party ; as I should much fear, should it be made a Catholic
principle to resist the Union, that the favourable sentiments
entertained by individuals would give way to the party feeling,
and deprive us of our principal strength in the South and West,
which could not fail, at least for the present, to prove fatal to
the measure.’ !

These passages give a full and very authentic picture of the
state of public opinion on the subject of the Union, at the criti-
cal period before the meeting of Parliament in 1799. Several
of the most sagacious judges in Ireland warned the Government,
that the reception which the scheme had met with was such,
that it would be in the highest degree unwise to persist in it.
Many of those who held this language, were men who considered
the Union in the abstract exceedingly desirable, and who had
no doubt that by borough influence and Government pressure
it could be carried, but they contended that if it were carried
contrary to the genuine and uninfluenced opinion of the country,
and if such opinions as supported it were chiefly due to tran-
sient panic, to resentment, or to despair, it would not ultimately
prove a success. Lord Pery and Lord Carleton were fully con-
firmed in their first misgivings, and now strongly condemned
the project.2 Lord Kilwarden, who was one of the best and
ablest men in Ireland, and who had at first been very favourable,

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ili. 28, 29. * Thid. p, 4.

334 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

was so much impressed by the aspect of opinion, that he entreated
the Ministers, as soon as Parliament met, frankly to withdraw the
measure.! Parnell, after much confidential conversation with
Cooke, declared that he must oppose it, for it was, in his judg-
ment, ‘very dangerous and not necessary,’ and ‘a measure of
the greatest danger can only be justified by necessity.’ ?

Lord Ely, the great borough owner, who had been ready in
November, for a personal object, to support the Union, wrote
from London to Castlereagh in January: ‘ We have bad accounts
here of the state of the malcontents in Ireland. God grant that
this mad scheme may not go too far for all the projectors of it
to appease. I have not conversed with a single person since I
came here who has advanced a single argument in favour of it,
and all the Irishmen I converse with, are pointedly and deci-
dedly against the measure. I can scarcely give credit to their
bringing it on now... . Its great and only advocates are
men who do not belong to us, and absentees who never again
intend to visit Ireland.’* Lord Sheffield had been a strong
partisan of the Union, but he now hoped that it would not be
pressed if it were true, as he heard from Ireland, that the country
was ‘ universally ill prepared for it,’ and that it could be carried
only by a small majority. He quoted the saying of an Irish
judge, that an Union so carried would always leave behind it
‘a very angry party anxious to dissolve it, and that can only be
done by sword and separation. McNally, who watched the
changing aspects of events with a keener eye than many greater
men, and who had at least the merit of never flattering the
Government which employed him, was equally discouraging.
‘The Orange and Green, he wrote, ‘are making rapid ap-
proaches towards each other. The respectable Catholics, how-
_ ever, are determined not to come forward on the question of
Union in a body, though individually they are to a man against
it. I speak of those in the city. . . . In my judgment,
there will not be the slightest appearance of mob or riot.
Every man is aware of the great military force in the capital, and
of its daily increasing. I rather expect melancholy silence and

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, ili. 37.
62. ; * Lord Sheffield to Judge Downes,
2 Auckland Correspondence,iv. 77. Jan. 20,1799. (Pelham MSS.)

CH, XXXI. SIR G. SHEE, Soll

depopulated streets while the Parliament is sitting. Lord
Camden’s character loses much with the Orange party. They
say the Union was his object, that the rebellion was permitted
to increase, and they are sacrificed dupes to their loyalty. Men
in general speak loudly and boldly, and only want the power to
act. J know Cork as well as Ido Dublin. The acts of their
Corporation have very little influence out of their own hall.’!

One other remarkable letter may be cited. Sir George Shee
was, as we have seen, among the most active and most loyal of
the Irish magistrates, and he was one of the few members of
his class who were strongly in favour of the Union. He was
intimate with Pelham, and on the first day of 1799 he wrote to
him, that he was never more certain of any truth in his life, than
that an Union would be advantageous to Ireland and highly so
to the Empire at large, but he could not shut his eyes to the
fact that the opposition to it was becoming more formidable
every day, and he could not subscribe to the doctrine that the
measure must be carried at all hazards. ‘I anxiously hope,’ he
continued, ‘Government may not depend on the battle being
fought and won in Parliament only. ... If it should prove
that we have lost one great party without gaining another, we
shall be truly unfortunate. ... If it should unfortunately
appear that the enemy has gained possession of all the vantage
ground in the cities and counties in general, I fear a vote of the
House of Commons, passed by a small majority (which, I hear,
is all that can be expected), will not be considered as expressing
the sense of the people, and that, instead of proving the symbol
of concord, it may prove to be the signal for battle. At all
events, I trust no intention will be formed of supporting this
vote by military force, and yet if it should pass I do not see
how Government could retreat, let the opposition be what it
may. ... If the measure cannot be carried in the majority
of the counties and towns, and all parties in general continue
to decline expressing approbation of it, I really think that a
moment should not be lost in relinquishing it for the present,
and by that means quieting the ferment it has caused.’ ?

These words appear to me to bear the stamp of true states-

TOE Wieden. 9948 (CL.S.220,)
2 Sir G. Shee to Pelham, Jan. 1,1799. (Pelham MSS.)

336 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

manship ; but the Government had firmly resolved to flinch from
no obstacle. For carrying the measure through Parliament,
they relied mainly on the borough interest. Lord Cornwallis
said, indeed, that many of the borough owners were in their
hearts strongly disinclined to it, but he had as little doubt about
the course they would pursue. ‘If those who possess the borough
interest believe that the British Government are determined to
persevere in the measure of the Union, and that they will be able
to carry it, they will afford them the most hearty support; but
if they should entertain doubts on either of these points, they
will contend for the merit of having been the first to desert.’ }
Lord Shannon, the largest of the borough owners, was in favour
of the Union. In the opinion of Cooke, if Lord Ely and Lord
Downshire could be secured, the sixteen or eighteen votes which
they could command in the House of Commons would turn the
balance.”

The Duke of Portland now authorised the Lord Lieutenant
formally to assure all persons who had political influence, that
the King’s Government was determined to press on the Union,
‘as essential to the well-being of both countries, and particularly
to the security and peace of Ireland as dependent on its connec-
tion with Great Britain ;’ that they would support it with their
utmost power ; that even in the event of present failure, it would
be ‘renewed on every occasion until it succeeds, and that the
conduct of individuals upon this subject will be considered as
the test of their disposition to support the King’s Government.’ 3
Sir John Parnell, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was dismissed,
and replaced by Isaac Corry, a staunch Unionist. The dis-
missal of the Prime Sergeant, James Fitzgerald, immediately
followed, and he was replaced by St. George Daly, one of the
minority who had supported the Union at the bar debate. George
Knox, one of the Commissioners of Revenue, resigned his office.
John Claudius Beresford soon after took the same course.

In the House of Lords the Government was secure, and in
the House of Commons the number of men whom it was necessary
to gain in order to obtain a majority was not large. The House
consisted, it is true, of 8300 members, but the well-understood

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. * Auckland Correspondence, iv. 77.
22, 23, 36. is Correspondence, iii
22, 23, 36 3 Cormvallis C spondence, iii. 20.

CH, XXXI, SECURING A MAJORITY. 337

rule, that the member of a nomination borough, if he had received
his seat by favour and not purchase, must vote with his patron,
and the immense number of boroughs that were concentrated in
a very few hands, greatly simplified the task. A shameless traffic
in votes began, and many men of great name and position in the
world, were bought as literally as cattle in the cattle market.
There were, however, a few honest men like Conolly, who had
always desired an Union; a few like Yelverton, who probably
believed that the recent convulsions in Ireland and the state of
Europe had made it a necessity ; a few, like Sir George Shee, who
would gladly have seen the question adjourned, but who, when
it was raised, considered it in the public interest to support it.
‘The demands of our friends,’ wrote Cornwallis on the eve of the
meeting of Parliament, ‘rise in proportion to the appearance of
strength on the other side; and you, who know how I detest a
job, will be sensible of the difficulties which I must often have
to keep my temper; but still the object is great, and perhaps
the salvation of the British Empire may depend uponit. I shall,
therefore, as much as possible overcome my detestation of the
work in which I am engaged, and march on steadily to my point.
The South of Ireland are well disposed to Union, the North seem
in a state of neutrality, or rather apathy, on the subject, which is
to me incomprehensible ; but all the counties in the middle of
the island, from Dublin to Galway, are violent against it. The
Catholics on the whole behave better than I expected, and I do
not think that popular tumult is anywhere to be apprehended ex-
cept in the metropolis.’ !

In addition to attempts that were made to influence opinion
through the Press, and to some attempts to obtain addresses both
in the Catholic parts of the island and in the North,? the Govern-
ment trusted much for the ultimate popularity of the measure, to
the support of the Catholic bishops. A negotiation was officially
opened with them. They were told that, in the present division
of opinion, the political claims of the Catholics must; remain for

appearance of Government interfer-

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
39, 40.
2<JT have taken the necessary
steps for encouraging declarations
from the towns of Limerick, Water-
ford, Derry, and Newry, as far as they
can be obtained without too strong an

VOL. VIII.

ence, and am employed in counter-
acting, as far as possible, the county
meetings, which are extending them-
selves.’ Castlereagh Correspondence,
ii. 92 (Jan. 11, 1799).

338 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH XxXxI,

the consideration of the Imperial Parliament, but that the Govern-
ment were strongly desirous of proposing without delay an in-
dependent provision for the Roman Catholic clergy, under such
regulations and safeguards as the prelates would accept as com-
patible with their doctrines, discipline, and just influence. The
expediency of such a step, Lord Castlereagh added, was gene-
rally recognised, even by those who objected to concessions of a
political nature.

A large number of Catholic bishops were at this time in
Dublin, about the affairs of the College of Maynooth, and on the
17th, 18th, and 19th of January, 1799, they deliberated at the
invitation of the Government on this proposal, and arrived unani-
mously at some very important resolutions. They agreed ‘ that
a provision through Government for the Roman Catholic clergy
of the kingdom, competent and secured, ought to be thankfully
accepted,’ and that such an interference of Government in the
appointment of Catholic prelates ‘as may enable it to be satisfied
of the loyalty of the person appointed, is just, and ought to be
agreed to. They proceeded to explain how they desired this
power of veto to be exercised. They desired that, on episcopal
vacancies, the names of candidates to be transmitted to Rome,
should be selected as at present by the priests and bishops, but
that ‘the candidates so selected should be presented by the pre-
sident of the election to Government ; which, within one month
after such presentation, will transmit the name of the said can-
didate, if no objection be made against him, for appointment to
the Holy See, or return the said name to the president of the
election for such transmission as may be agreed on.’ If Govern-
ment have any proper objection against such candidates, the
president of the election will be informed thereof within one
month after presentation, who in that case will convene the
electors to the election of another candidate.’ These regulations,
the prelates explained, required the sanction of the Holy See, but
they promised to endeavour to procure that sanction as speedily
as possible. They agreed also ‘that the nomination of parish
priests, with a certificate of their having taken the oath of
allegiance, be certified to Government.’ !

1 The resolutions will be found in and Scotch Catholics, ii. 150-152. A
Butler's Memoirs of the English, Irish, manuscript copy was transmitted by

ENDOWMENT OF THE PRIESTS. 339

CH. XXXI.

These resolutions were signed by the four archbishops and
the six senior bishops of Ireland. They were accepted as the
unanimous opinion of the Irish Roman Catholic prelacy,! and
they were brought to Lord Castlereagh by Archbishop Troy and
Bishop Moylan.? They form a curious and instructive contrast
to the attitude of the Catholic bishops and laity, some years
later, when the question of the veto was revived, but they
in truth proposed to give the Government no power which
had not been long exercised by the civil authority in other non-
Catholic countries. In the schismatical empire of Russia, and
in the Protestant kingdom of Prussia, every Catholic prelate
held his see, not only with the direct sanction, but on the ex-
press nomination of the sovereign ; and even in the British Em-
pire, no Catholic bishop could be appointed in Canada, without
the approval of the civil governor. The provision for the
Catholic clergy was intended to be analogous to the Regium
Donum to the Presbyterian ministers, and some such assistance
was at this time actually enjoyed by the Catholic priesthood in
Scotland. Having very recently been reduced to great destitu-
tion by the confiscation of their property in France, the Scotch
Catholic prelates had petitioned the English Government for
assistance, and Pitt had conceded the request, and a formal
letter had arrived from Rome, under the signature of Cardinal
Borgia, thanking the English Government by the express com-
mand of Pius VI. for its munificence.‘

In England about the same time, Dr. Douglas, the bishop
who presided over the London Catholics, and also some other
prelates, expressed their strong desire to obtain a Government
provision for the English priests, and such provision seems to
have been seriously contemplated, and is even said to have been
at one time promised. At this period, indeed, the Catholic

3 Butler, ii. 161, 186, 187.

] Ibid) ii. 156, sSee, too, the
very warm letter of, the Scotch
bishops, expressing their thanks to

Bishop Moylan to Pelham, and is
among his papers. Butler quotes (p.
149) the speech in which Lord Castle-
reagh in 1810 described this negotia-

tion, and gives other valuable papers
relating to it.

1 See Butler, ii. 182, 183.

2 See a letter of Dr. Moylan
(Bishop of Cork) to Pelham, March 9,
1799. (Pelham MSS.)

their ‘generous benefactors, his Ma-
jesty’s Ministers, and explaining the
employment of the sum which had
been allowed them. (Castlereagh
Correspondence, ii. 332, 333.)

340 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ci. xxx.

bishops in the three kingdoms appear to have been unani-
mously in favour of a State endowment.’

The immense advantage of the proposed arrangement in
raising the character, status, independence, and loyalty of the
Irish priests, and in saving their congregations from various
burdensome and irritating dues, could hardly be exaggerated,
and it was intended to complete the policy by some regulations,
imitated from those in the Gallican Church, about the circula-
tion of papal rescripts in Ireland, and for securing a somewhat
better class of schoolmasters.2 The scheme, however, was also
intended as part of the plan of Union, as a means of securing
the favour and influence of a class who had great power over
their co-religionists.®

We have a curious illustration of the manner in which these
negotiations were conducted, in the fact that the Irish Govern-
ment appear to have acted in this important matter entirely on
their own responsibility, supported, indeed, by the expressed
opinion of Pitt and Dundas in favour of the endowment of the
priesthood, but without the sanction or knowledge of the Cabinet,
or even of the Secretary of State who was especially connected
with Irish affairs. Shortly after the resolutions had passed,
Bishop Moylan wrote a letter to Pelham, enclosing a copy of
them, and asking his opinion about them, and Pelham forwarded
it with a similar request to Portland. In his reply Portland
said, ‘ Until I received yours, I did not know that any conver-
sation had passed upon the subject between them [the Irish
bishops] and Lord Castlereagh, I mean in so official a form as
to have produced such a deliberation as you have sent me
the result of, and consequently, without any knowledge of the
sentiments of the Government and bishops of Ireland; and of
course, as you see, in the same state of ignorance with regard to
those of my colleagues in administration and the great lights
in the English Church, it would not only be imprudent, but is
really impossible for me to state anything upon this question, that
ought to be considered as an opinion, or is really more than an

_ ) See some remarkable letters of | out Europe, will be found in Sir J.
Sir J. Hippisley, Castlereagh Corre- Hippisley’s tracts, and in his letters

spondence, iii. 80, 81, 86, 87. in the third volume of the Castlereagh
2 Butler, ii. 168-170. A great Correspondence.
deal of information about the rules 3 Butler, ii. 168, 179.

prevailing on these matters through-

Ce XX, GOVERNMENT AND THE CATHOLICS, 341

outline of my own ideas, which, I must desire you to consider,
are by no means settled.’ Subject to these wide qualifications,
Portland gave his opinion, that the Gallican Church was the best
model to follow, but that the Catholics could only be put, like
the Protestant Dissenters, on the footing of a toleration, and that
it was exceedingly expedient that, when they were endowed,
measures should be taken to bring their clergy under the same
common law as the Anglican clergy, and their judgments and
sentences against lay Catholics, like those of the Anglican
ecclesiastical courts, under the superintendence and control of
the courts of law. HExcommunications, Portland said, were
employed in Ireland in a manner and for purposes that would
never be tolerated in any well-ordered Catholic country.!

With this exception, no fixed proposal appears to have been
as yet made to the Catholics, though much informal negotiation
was going on. ‘The Catholics,’ Cooke wrote a few days before
the meeting of Parliament, ‘ keep aloof, but apparently friendly..
My politics are to admit them after an Union. If Mr. Pitt
would undertake that, and we could reconcile it with friends here,
we might be sure of the point. The Catholics will carry the
day. Lord Shanrion would admit them; the Chancellor sturdy
against them.’? Wilberforce at this time was much with Pitt,
and he wrote in his diary: ‘ Pitt sanguine that after Union,
Roman Catholics would soon acquire political rights ; resolved to
give up plan, rather than excludethem. . . . I hear the Roman
Catholics more against it than they were. The bishops all
against Pitt’s tithe plan. The King said, “I am for it, if it is
for the good of the Church, and against it if contra.”’ ‘ Pitt as
usual,’ he wrote to a friend, ‘is more fair and open and well-
intentioned, and even well-principled, than any other of his

‘class. He is firmly persuaded that the Union will open the
most promising way by which the Roman Catholics may obtain
political power.’

The Irish Parliament met on January 22, and the great ques-
tion of the Union was at once raised by the King’s Speech,
which, without expressly mentioning it, recommended ‘some
permanent adjustment, which may extend the advantages enjoyed

' Portland to Pelham, March 26, 1799. (Pelham MSS.)
2 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 77, 78.
3 Wilberforce’s Life, li. 324, 325.

342 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXIe

by our sister kingdom to every part of this island, and would
also, at a time when the King’s enemies were conspiring to effect
a separation, ‘provide the most effectual means of maintaining
and improving the connection,’ and consolidating the British
Empire. The Address was moved by Lord Tyrone, the eldest
son of Lord Waterford, in a speech in which he carefully pointed
out, that it pledged the House to nothing more than a discussion
of the question. It was opposed, however, in limine by Sir
John Parnell; and George Ponsonby, seconded by Sir Law-
rence Parsons, moved an amendment, pledging the House
to enter into a consideration of what measures might best
strengthen the Empire; ‘maintaining, however, the undoubted
birthright of the people of Ireland to have a resident and
independent Legislature, such as it was recognised by the British
Legislature in 1782, and was finally settled at the adjustment
of all difficulties between the two countries.’

A long and striking debate, extending over more than
twenty hours, followed, and it is one of the very few debates in
the later sessions of the Irish Parliament which have been
separately and fully reported. ‘The immense preponderance of
speakers, and I think of ability, was on the side of the Opposition ;
Lord Castlereagh, however, was supported with some skill by the
Knight of Kerry and by Sir John Blaquiere, but especially by
a hitherto undistinguished member named William Smith. He
was the son of one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and was
himself at a later period raised to the bench, and he now proved
one of the best speakers and writers in defence of the Union.
On the other side there was a brilliant array of talent. Sir
Henry Parnell, George Ponsonby, Dobbs, Barrington, Parsons,
Hardy, and the late Prime Sergeant Fitzgerald, greatly dis-
tinguished themselves, but above all, the eloquence of Plunket
dazzled and astonished the House. According to an acute and
hostile judge, it turned several votes,! and some of its passages
of fierce invective are even now well known in Ireland.

The arguments on each side did not differ sensibly from
those I have already stated, but the reader of the debate will

} There is an interesting descrip- (Pelham MSS.). Griffith says he
tion of the effect of Plunket’s speech, never witnessed a debate in which
and of the debate in general, in a so many votes were decided by the
letter from R. Griffith to Pelham eloquence of the speakers.

CH, XXXI. CHARGES OF CORRUPTION. 343

notice how strenuously and how confidently the Opposition
speakers asserted the hostility of the country, and especially of
the loyal portion of the country, to the scheme. One speaker
boldly said that nine out of ten men were against it, and that the
only persons it would really gratify were the United Irishmen.
Another acknowledged that if it were the wish of Parliament and
of the people it ought to be carried, ‘ but,’ he continued, ‘ that
sense should be fully ascertained, without compulsion or undue
influence of any kind. So far as the voice of the people has been
yet collected, it is decidedly against it; and nothing but force,
actual or implied, with the aid of undue influence, could carry
the measure.’ ‘ Admitting,’ said a third speaker, ‘the right of
the people to call for an Union, I ask who, except the Corporation
of Cork, has asked for it? Has Parliament, or either House of
Parliament, or any body of men whatever?’ Parsons, at the
conclusion of the debate, said: ‘The sentiment of the nation
was now so decidedly evinced by the sense of the independent
gentlemen in the House against an Union, that he hoped the
Minister would never give him an opportunity of speaking on
the subject again;’ and Plunket declared that ‘within these
six last weeks a system of black corruption had been carried on
within the walls of the Castle, which would disgrace the annals
of the worst period of the history of either country.’ !

It is difficult to say how far these last words are exaggerated,
but there is no doubt that they had a large foundation of truth.
One member, near the close of the debate, after an ambiguous
and hesitating speech, announced his intention of voting for the
amendment of the Opposition. Shortly before the division, he
rose again to say that he was convinced that he had been mis-
taken, and would now vote with the Ministers. Barrington
‘states that it was well known in the House, that in the interval
he had received from Lord Castlereagh the promise of the
peerage he afterwards obtained.2 Another supporter of the
Government was said in the House, without contradiction, to have
received his commission as colonel the day before the division.*

1 Report of the Debate im the with the report of the speeches of
House of Commons of Ireland, Jan. Mr. Trench in the debate, pp. 79, 80.

22, 23, 1799, pp. 16, 39, 48, 61, 89. See, too, the extraordinary story
2 Compare the very graphic de- about Luke Fox, in Barrington.
scription in Barrington’s Rise and 3 Debate, p. 82.

Fall of the Irish Nation, ch. xxv.,

344 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

The amendment was ultimately rejected by a majority of one,
being supported by 105 votes and opposed by 106. The
original Address was then carried by 107 to 105. Considering
the enormous number of placemen in the House, and the over-
whelming majorities which on all normal occasions the Govern-
ment could command, these votes were equivalent to a severe
defeat. George Ponsonby rose and asked the Minister if he
intended to persist in the measure. Castlereagh hesitated, and
Sir John Parnell interposed, saying that he did not think it fair
to press for an immediate answer, but he took the liberty of
advising him not to think of the measure, at least while ‘ the
sentiments both of people and Parliament appeared so decisively
against it.’ Castlereagh said a few words which were construed
into acquiescence, but added that he was so convinced of the
wisdom of the measure, that ‘ whenever the House and the nation
appeared to understand its merits, he should think it-his duty to
bring it forward.’ A committee was appointed to draw up the
Address, and the House then adjourned.!

In the House of Lords, on the other hand, where the influence
of Clare was supreme, the Government were easily triumphant.
Lord Powerscourt and Lord Bellamont led the opposition to the
Address, but they were defeated by fifty-two to sixteen, or seven-
teen including one proxy. The Duke of Leinster and Lord Pery
were in the minority. Lord Ely did not vote. Lord Carleton
not only voted, but spoke with the majority ; but he immediately
after wrote to Pelham, that ‘many of those who supported the
motion for considering a proposition for incorporation, could not
be depended on at a later stage.’ It would be impossible, he
said, to estimate the evil consequences on the public mind of
having brought the question on at so inauspicious a period, and
he added, ‘ In the present critical situation of affairs, I hope no
idea may be entertained of continuing that ferment which I am
heartily sorry was raised.’ ?

When the report of the Address came before the Commons,
the struggle was renewed by a motion to omit the clause relat-
ing to the intended Union. The chief incidents in the debate

1 R. Griffith to Pelham, Jan. 24, 25; R. Griffith to Pelham, Jan. 24,
1799; Beresford Correspondence, ii. 1799 (Pelham MSS.) ; see, too, Corn-

194-196. nallis Correspondence, iii. 40, 41.
2 Lord Carleton to Pelham, Jan.

CH, XXXI, SPEECHES OF SMITH AND EDGEWORTH. 345

appear to have been a bitter personal altercation between Lord
Castlereagh and George Ponsonby; an elaborate and powerful
speech against the Union by Sir Lawrence Parsons, who denied
the necessity for it, and predicted that if it were pressed on,
contrary to the wishes of the people, it might most seriously
endanger the connection; and another comprehensive and
thoughtful vindication of it by William Smith. He dwelt much
upon the advantages the Catholics would obtain from a form
of Government under which their claims might be recognised
without danger to the Church Establishment, and which would
at once relieve them from much sectarian oppression. He ex-
patiated on the natural tendency to divergence which two
independent Legislatures under the same Executive were certain
to display, and he especially dwelt upon his favourite doctrine
of the fnll competence of Parliament to pass the Union, even
without any appeal to the people.

He discussed also a new argument which had been raised
against his view. If Parliament, it was said, was absolutely
unlimited in its competence, what security, or indeed what
meaning, could there be in the compact which Ireland was asked
to enter into with England? The Irish members were told, that
by surrendering their legislative powers and consenting to an
Union, they would secure for all future time, as by a treaty arrange-
ment, their commercial privileges, their proportion of taxation,
and their Established Church. But could the articles of Union
restrict the power of an omnipotent Parliament? Was it not
possible, that the day might come, when the descendants of the
Trish Protestants who made the Union, would find themselves a
small and unimportant minority in an Imperial Parliament,
vainly struggling against the violation of its most fundamental
articles? Smith was compelled to acknowledge that the obliga-
tion of the Articles of Union would be only an obligation of
honour, and not an obligation of law, but he dwelt on the enor-
mous improbability of their violation, and boldly declared that
such an act would absolve the subject from all allegiance to the
Government that was guilty of it. Among the less conspicuous
speakers in this debate was Edgeworth, the father of the illus-
trious novelist. He said that he had at first believed the mea-
sure to be a wise and a good one, but he found it to be obnoxious

346 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxx.

to the majority of the people, and therefore thought it his
duty to oppose it. In the division, 111 members voted for
expunging the contested clause, while only 106 members sup-
ported it.!

The Speaker Foster took no open part in these debates, but
both sides attributed to his immense influence a large part in
the defeat of the Government. Clare bitterly accused him of
having on this occasion manifested great partiality in the chair,”
and he had already, in the most public way, declared his implac-
able hostility to the Union. Just before the meeting of Parlia-
ment, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and citizens of Dublin presented
him with an address against that measure. In his reply, he
spoke of the unexampled rapidity with which Irish prosperity
had grown under her Protestant Parliament, and added, ‘In
my soul I think it [the Union] is fraught with possible conse-
quences, certainly not foreseen by those who bring it forward,
that will tend, if not to actual separation, to attempts at least
to separate us from Great Britain, to our utter ruin and to the
subversion of the British Empire.’* It was now clearly seen
that there was no chance of bribing him into acquiescence by
honours or money. There was no Irishman whose opinion was
He was one of the few men of eminent ability
and high character, who had been for many years closely attached
to the Irish Government. To his administration of the finances,
and especially to his legislation about corn bounties, a great
part of the recent prosperity of the country was ascribed; he

more important.

1 Coote’s History of the Union,
pp. 47-63; Cornwallis Correspond-
ence, iii. 47-50 ; compare, too, the de-
scription in Rarrington. Miss Edge-
worth says that her father was con-
vinced that the Union was at this
time decidedly against the wishes of
the great majority of men of sense
and property in the nation. (Life of
RL. L. Bdgenorth, ii. 222.) Miss Edge-
worth’s Castle Rackrent—one of the
best pictures ever drawn of one
side of Irish life—was published in
1800, when the Union was pending.
It concludes with the following
curious passage: ‘It is a problem
of difficult solution to determine,
whether an Union will hasten or
retard the melioration of this country.

The few gentlemen of education who
now reside in this country will resort
to England. They are few, but they
are in nothing inferior to men of the
same rank in Great Britain. The best
that can happen will be the introduc-
tion of British manufacturers in their
places. Did the Warwickshire Mili-
tia, who were chiefly artisans, teach
the Irish to drink beer? Or did
they learn from the Irish to drink
whisky ?’

2 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 80.

3 Laulkner’s Dublin Journal, San.
USP iS),

4 See many letters, written in a
spirit of bitter hostility to Foster, in
the Auckland and the Beresford Cor-
respondence.

PRESENTED TO ST. MARY’S COLLEGES LIBRAK
BY REV. T. CALLAGHAN

cH. xxx1. PONSONBY’S RESOLUTION. ADDRESS CARRIED. 347

presided over the House with conspicuous dignity and authority ;
and the strong part he had taken in opposition to the concession
of political power to the Catholics, and his steady support of
the most drastic measures of suppression during the rebellion,
had made him the special representative of a powerful body of
Protestant opinion through the nation. Ponsonby, who took
the ostensible leadership of the Opposition, was also a man of
great eloquence and great family and parliamentary influence,
but he had been usually in opposition. He had won a brilliant
victory, but he now tried to push it a step further, and proposed
a substantive resolution pledging the House ever ‘to maintain
the undoubted birthright of Irishmen, by preserving an indepen-
dent Parliament of Lords and Commons resident in this kingdom.’
After some hesitation, however, Fortescue, the member for the
county of Louth, expressed his dislike to a resolution which
would bind the freedom of the House in future sessions, when the
opinion of the country might possibly have changed. Three
or four other members concurred, and the resolution was not
pressed. Several country gentlemen declared that they wished
it clearly to be understood that their hostility was entirely con-
fined to the question of the Union, that they had no intention
of joining the Ponsonby faction in systematic opposition, and
that the Administration might still count upon their support
for all measures that were really necessary for carrying on the
government and strengthening the connection. The Address
without the passage relating to the Union was agreed to by the
House, and presented to the Lord Lieutenant, and the House
adjourned for a week.!

The exultation in Dublin at the defeat of the Government
was fierce and tumultuous. The mob drew the Speaker to his
house. Bonfires were kindled, and orders were sent out for a
general illumination. Even the General Post Office, though a
Government establishment, was a blaze of light. The windows
of those who refused to illuminate were broken, and among them
those of Lord Clare. His servants fired on the mob, and the
Chancellor expressed his hope to Lord Auckland, that they had
wounded some of them. Prominent men who had supported

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 47-51; Beresford Correspondence, ii.
197-202 ; Barrington, Coote.

348 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxt.

the Union were insulted in the streets, aud the lawyers resolved
to continue to give Fitzgerald the same precedence at the bar
as when he was Prime Sergeant.’

The refusal of a House of Commons, in which the Government
had hitherto been almost omnipotent, to allow the question of a
legislative Union to pass even its first parliamentary stage, would
in a country governed on constitutional principles have been
deemed decisive, and have secured the abandonment of the
measure, at least for that Parliament. The composition of the
majority greatly strengthened the case. The Government, it is
true, attributed much of their misfortune to the ‘ disinclination,
or, at best, the lukewarm disposition,’ of Lord Downshire and
Lord Ely. ‘Instead of bringing forward eighteen members, as
these noble Lords might have done, but five appeared, and one
of Lord Downshire’s . . . voted against us the second night.’ But
of all causes, Lord Castlereagh acknowledged that ‘ what seemed
to operate most unfavourably, was the warmth of the country
gentlemen, who spoke in great numbers and with much energy
against the question.’? ‘The Opposition,’ he said, ‘ exclusive of
the Speaker, Sir J. Parnell and the Ponsonbys, is composed of
‘country gentlemen.’ No less than thirty-four county members
voted against the Government, while only seventeen supported
them.* It is no doubt true, as Castlereagh and Beresford said,
that personal motives, and among others the prevailing belief that
after the Union each county would only send one instead of two
members to Parliament, greatly influenced them; but still the
fact remains, that in the small section of the Irish Parliament
which was really sound, independent, and representative, the pre-
ponderance against the Union was overwhelming, while an im-
mense proportion of those who voted for it held offices under the
Crown. It was a bold thing to persevere in the measure when,
on its very introduction, it was condemned by the metropolis,
and by a majority of two to one among the county members.

Great disappointment and irritation appear in the corre-
spondence of its leading Irish supporters. Clare, Cooke, and
Beresford uni‘ed in vehemently blaming Lord Cornwallis. They

' Auckland Correspondence, iv. * Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
80-82 ; Beresford Correspondence, ii. 143. Swlbid | pal3ss

196. * Beresford Correspondence, ii. 210.

CH. XXXI. DISAPPOINTMENT OF CLARE AND COOKE. 349

said that he had not taken the gentlemen of the country into
his confidence, and was governing entirely by two or three men ;
that by releasing dangerous rebels and repressing Orange zeal, he
had discouraged the loyal and encouraged the disloyal ; that he
had affronted Foster, who of all men had most influence in the
House of Commons, had driven the powerful influence of Lord
Enniskillen into opposition by the censure he had passed on the
court-martial over which that nobleman presided, and had in
fine showed a total ignorance of the character of the people, the
situation of the country, and the means by which it must be
governed. Clare spoke with his usual violence of Ponsonby as
‘a malignant knave ;’ ‘ but,’ he said, ‘ allowing for the villany
and treachery which might have been expected, I always under-
stood there was a certain majority of thirty in support of Govern-
ment.’ Cooke wrote with even greater asperity. ‘We could
not act,’ he wrote, ‘ withouta leader. Lord Cornwallis is nobody,
worse than nobody, . . . his silly conduct, his total incapacity,
selfishness, and mulishness has alone lost the question. Had
Lord Camden continued, had any person succeeded who would
have consulted with the gentlemen of the country and kept them
in good humour, . . . who would not have let down the spirit of
the loyal, who would not have degraded and discountenanced the
yeomanry, who would not have turned against him the whole
Protestant interest, the measure would have been carried... .
You must laugh at me for the divisionin the Commons. In the
first place, time was not given to form our numbers, but I was
told to consider Lord Downshire and Lord Ely as firm, and Lord
de Clifford ; and with their full assistance, and of others who had
promised, we ought to have divided 148 to 91.’ ‘ Will it not be
fair for me,’ he asked in another letter, ‘ to ask that I may be
‘allowed to change my situation into England? I am disgusted
here. I feel that everything with respect to this country is
managed by the English Ministry with so much ignorance, and
so contrary to the representations of those who are acquainted
with Irish subjects, that I am perfectly sick. Had any common
sense been observed in this measure, or had common sugges-
tions been attended to, the present measure would have suc-
ceeded.’ !

1 Auckland Correspondence, iv. 67, 70, 71, 80, 82-85; see, too, the Beres-

350 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

Cornwallis, on the other hand, consoled himself by the belief
that the proposed Union was not really disagreeable either to
the Catholics or the Presbyterians, but he acknowledged that
the late experiment showed the impossibility of carrying a
measure which was opposed by strong private interests, and
not supported by the general voice of the country. ‘If ever a
second trial of the Union is to be made,’ he said, ‘ the Catholics
must be included.’ !

From England the decision of the Government came in clear
and unfaltering language. It was the unanimous opinion of the
Ministers, Portland wrote, that nothing that has happened ought
to make any change in their intentions or plans. The measure
was evidently for the benefit of Ireland, and the good sense of
the country would sooner or later recognise the fact. ‘I am
authorised to assure you,’ he wrote, ‘ that whatever may be the
fate of the Address, our determination will remain unaltered and
our exertions unabated ; and that thongh discretion and good
policy may require that the measure should be suspended by you
during this session, I am to desire that you will take care that
it shall be understood that it neither is nor ever will be aban-
doned, and that the support of it will be considered as a necessary
and indispensable test of the attachment on the part of the Irish
to their connection with this country.’? It was accordingly an-
nounced that Pitt would at once proceed, as though nothing
had happened in Ireland, to submit the intended resolutions
on which the Union was to be based, to the British Parliament.

The question of the Union was already before it. On
January 22—the same day on which the Irish Parliament was
opened—a King’s message had been sent down to the British
Parliament, recommending, in terms very similar to those em-
ployed in the Irish Viceregal speech, a complete and final ad-
justment of the relations between England and Ireland, as the
most effectual means of defeating the designs of the King’s
enemies to separate the two countries, and of securing, conso-
lidating, and augmenting their resources. Sheridan—the most
eminent Irishman in the British Parliament since the death of

ford Correspondence, ii. 208-211; and 1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
also, the furious language of Duigenan 52.

about the Lord Lieutenant in Corn- 2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
nallis Correspondence, iii. 90. 137.

CH. XXXI. PITT’S SPEECH, JANUARY 1799. 351

Burke—at once moved an amendment, condemning the introduc-
tion of such a measure ‘ at the present crisis, and under the pre-
sent circumstances of the Empire.’ In the course of a long and
powerful speech, he predicted that ‘an Union at present, without
the unequivocal sense of the Irish people in its favour, . . . would
ultimately tend to endanger the connection between the two
countries ;’ that in the existing condition of Ireland, with martial
law, and in the presence of 40,000 English troops, the sense of
the nation could not be fairly taken; that the undoubted dis-
affection of Ireland would not be allayed, but aggravated, by the
abolition of a loyalist Parliament, and the transfer of authority
to the Parliament and nation of England, who, in the words of
Lord Clare, ‘are more ignorant of the affairs of Ireland than
they are of any country in the world.’ He spoke also of the
finality of the arrangement of 1782, and of the injurious influence
which Irish members might exercise on the Imperial Parliament.
He found no supporters, and after speeches by Canning and by
Pitt, the amendment was negatived without a division.

On January 31, shortly after the news had arrived of the
refusal of the Irish House of Commons to take the question into
consideration, Pitt-rose to move the resolutions for an Union, in
an exceedingly elaborate speech, which was one of the only three
that he afterwards revised for publication.! It contains a most
powerful, most authentic, and most comprehensive statement of
the whole case for the Union; and although much of its argu-
ment had been anticipated in the pamphlet of Cooke and in the
speeches of William Smith, it should be carefully considered by
everyone who is studying the subject.

Pitt began by acknowledging, in a tone of dignified regret,
that the circumstances under which he introduced his resolutions
were discouraging. It was in the full right and competence of
the Irish Parliament to accept or reject an Union; and while
the Irish House of Lords had agreed by a large majority to
discuss it, the Irish House of Commons had expressed a re-
pugnance even to consider it, and had done this before the
nature of the plan had been disclosed. Believing, however,
that a legislative Union was transcendently important to the
Empire at a time when foreign and domestic enemies were con-

1 Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii. 172.

352 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

spiring to break the connection, and that it would be eminently
useful to every leading interest in Ireland, he considered it his
duty to persevere. The question was one on which passion,
and prejudice, and a mistaken national pride were at first
peculiarly likely to operate, and some time might reasonably
be expected to elapse before misconceptions were dispelled, and
the advantages of the measure were fully understood. For his
part, he said, he was confident that all that was necessary to
secure its ultimate adoption was, ‘that it should be stated dis- -
tinctly, temperately, and fully, and that it should be left to the
dispassionate and sober judgment of the Parliament of Ireland.’

Starting from the assumption, which was admitted by all
loyal men, that a perpetual connection between England and
Ireland was essential to the interests of both countries, he con-
tended that the settlement of 1782 was neither wise, safe, nor final.
It destroyed the system of government that had before existed,
but it substituted nothing in its place. It left two separate and
independent Parliaments, ‘connected only by this tie, that the
third Estate in both countries is the same—that the Executive
Government is the same—that the Crown exercises its power
of assenting to Irish Acts of Parliament under the Great Seal,
and that with respect to the affairs of Ireland it acts by the
advice of British Ministers.’ This was now the only bond of a
connection which was essential to both countries, and it was
wholly insufficient to consolidate their strength against a common
enemy, to guard against local jealousies and disturbances, or
to give Ireland the full commercial, political, and social advan-
tages which she ought to derive from a close connection with
Great Britain. He noticed how in 1782 the necessity of some
future treaty connection to draw the nations more closely to-
gether, had been clearly suggested, and how the commercial pro-
positions of 1785 were intended to effect such a treaty, and he laid
ereat stress upon the language of Foster when, as Irish Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, he advocated those propositions. Foster
then said that things could not remain as they were; that
commercial jealousies must increase with independent Legisla-
tures ; that without united interests, a mere political Union would
fail to secure the connection. But the propositions of 1785 had
been rejected ; a legislative compact had been tried and found

CH. XXXI. PITT’S SPEECH, JANUARY 1799.
<M
impracticable, and it remained now only to try a
Union. He ‘ believed there was hardly a man who ever asked
himself the question, whether he believed there was a solid,
permanent system of connection between the two countries, that
ever answered it in the affirmative.’

Pitt then traversed with sonorous though very diffuse rhetoric,
but with no real originality, the well-known topics of the Regency ;
of the dangers that might arise in time of war from a difference
between the two Parliaments; of the embarrassment which two
distinct Legislatures, independent in their discussions and possibly
divergent in their bias, might cause to the foreign policy of the
Empire. ‘Inthe general strength of the Empire,’ he said, ‘ both
kingdoms are more concerned, than in any particular interests
which may belong to either. Every Court and statesman in
Europe knows how greatly a consolidation of the two Legislatures
would increase that general power. It would not only give it
an increased unity and energy of will, but also diffuse over the
feebler portion the vigour of the stronger. ‘To ‘ communicate to
such a mighty limb of the Empire as Ireland is, all the com-
mercial advantages which Great Britain possesses,’ to open to one
country the markets of the other, and give both a common use
of their capital, must immensely add to the resources, and there-
fore to the strength, of the Hmpire.

He dwelt much upon the dependence of Ireland on England,
as shown during the late convulsions. The naval power of
England alone saved Ireland from invasion. LHnglish militia,
uncompelled by the law, had gone over to protect her. The
English Exchequer had lent large sums to the Irish Exchequer.
He did not, he said, desire to upbraid Ireland with these cir-
cumstances, but to remind her that similar dangers might recur
‘when similar aid was impossible. What, then, is the remedy ?
‘Tt is to make the Irish people part of the same community, by
giving them a full share of those accumulated blessings which
are diffused through Great Britain, a full participation of the
wealth and power of the British Empire.’

He then touched—but in terms that were studiously vague
and guarded—on the arguments for an Union derived from
the anarchical and divided state of Ireland. He spoke of the
rebellion, with the ‘dreadful and inexcusable cruelties’ on the

VOL. VIII. AA

354 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

one side, and the ‘lamentable severities’ on the other; of the
animosities that divided the Catholics from the Protestants, the
original inhabitants from the English settlers ; of the Jow level of
civilisation in a large partof theisland; of the Established Church,
opposed to the religion of the great majority of the people ;
of the land of the country in the hands of a small Protestant
minority. For such a state of society, he said, there seemed no
remedy ‘but in the formation of a general Imperial Legislature,
removed from the dangers, and uninfluenced by the prejudices
and passions, of that distracted country,’ and bringing in its train
English capital and English industry. ‘No one can say that,
in the present state of things, and while Ireland remains a
separate kingdom, full concessions could be made to the Catholics,
without endangering the State, or shaking the Constitution of
Treland to its centre.’ How soon or how late these concessions
might be properly discussed, depended on the conduct of the
Catholics and on the temper of the time, but it was obvious
that a question which ‘might endanger the security and shake
the Government of Ireland in its separate state,’ might be much
less dangerous with a United Parliament. He would not, he
said, now enter into the detail of the means that might be
found to alleviate the distresses of the lower order of Irish
Catholics, by relieving them from the pressure of tithes, or by
securing under proper regulations a provision for the clergy.
He would only say that ‘a United legislative body promises a
more effectual remedy for their grievances, than could be likely
to result from any local arrangements.’

Coming to the more general interests of the country, Pitt
maintained that the undoubted recent prosperity of Ireland
depended mainly on the recent liberal commercial policy of
England. Articles essential to the trade or subsistence of Ireland, |
and articles which serve as raw materials for her manufactures,
are sent from England free of duty ; while by the free admission
of Irish linen into the English market, by the bounty granted
by the British Parliament on Irish linen, and by the duty laid
by the same Parliament on foreign linen, the linen manufacture
of Ireland had obtained the monopoly in England, which chiefly
raised it to its present height. A market had thus been opened
to Irish linen, to the amount of three millions. But the power

CH, XXXI. PITT’S SPEECH, JANUARY 1799. 355

which conferred these advantages might withdraw them; a
legislative Union alone could make that certain and permanent
which is now contingent and precarious ; and it would be followed
by an equality of commercial advantages which would inevitably
bring a flood of new prosperity into Ireland.

He replied, by the arguments I have already stated, to the
contention that the Irish Legislature was incompetent to pass an
Union. In this contention he saw the seeds of the Jacobin
doctrine of the sovereignty of the people ; a sovereignty always in
abeyance, to be called forth as suits the purposes of a party.
This doctrine, he said, he would oppose in whatever form and
wherever he encountered it. There must in every Government
reside somewhere a supreme, absolute, and unlimited authority.
It is impossible that the sovereignty should be anywhere but
in the supreme Legislature, nor is it otherwise in any system
of human jurisprudence. Lvery law restraining the privileges
or distinguishing the rights of electors, every law of enfran-
chisement and disfranchisement, implies this doctrine, and the
Parliament of Ireland, which had very lately associated itself
with a great body of Catholics in Ireland, was equally compe-
tent to associate itself with a Protestant Parliament in Great
Britain.

Some eloquent sentences followed about the complete com-
patibility of an Union with every true feeling of national pride,
and about the higher level of security and prosperity, of moral,
political, and social life, which was likely to result to Ireland
from an increased infusion of English influence. Does an Union,
he asked, by free consent and on just and equal terms, deserve to
be branded as a proposal for subjecting Ireland to a foreign
yoke? Is it not rather the voluntary association of two great
~ countries, which seek their common benefit in one empire, in
which each will retain its proportionate weight and importance,
under the security of equal laws, reciprocal affection, and inse-
parable interests, and in which each will acquire a strength that
will render it invincible? Prophecy bore a large part in these
discussions ; and to those who view them in the light of later
years, it is not the least instructive part. ‘he predictions of
Pitt were, that the Union would be of all measures the most
likely to give Ireland security, quiet, and internal repose ; that

AA 2

356 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

it would remove the chief bar to her internal advancement in
wealth and civilisation ; that it would vastly augment her mate-
rial prosperity, and that it would tend powerfully to unite the
higher and lower orders of her people, and to diffuse among all
classes a healthy predilection for English habits.

Pitt concluded his speech by strenuously denying that the
scheme was intended to bring Ireland under the burden of the
English National Debt, or make her the subject of increased
taxation, and he promised special provisions to guard against
the danger. He then moved a series of resolutions affirming
the expediency of the Union, and sketching—but in very wide
and general terms—its leading provisions. ‘The amount of the
Trish representation in both Houses was still unfixed, but a few
fundamental points were already affirmed. The succession to
the Throne was to be the same. The Churches in England
and Ireland were to be preserved as they are ‘now by law
established.’ The subjects of his Majesty in the two countries
were to be placed on the same footing in all matters of trade
and navigation through the whole Empire, and in all treaties with
foreign Powers. Articles of import and export now duty free
between England and Ireland, were to remain so. On other
articles moderate and equal duties were to be agreed to by the
two Parliaments, and they were to be diminished equally with
respect to both kingdoms, but in no case increased, and a
similar equality was to be established in all questions relating
to foreign goods and to internal duties. The debts of the two
countries were to be kept separate. The ordinary expenses of
the United Kingdom, in peace and war, were to be defrayed by
the two countries in fixed proportions, which were to be settled
at the Union. All laws in force and all courts established at
the time of the Union, were to remain, subject to such changes
as might be made by the Imperial Parliament.

These resolutions were for nearly three weeks under the dis-
cussion of the English House of Commons, before they were
sent up to the Lords. The greater part of the small Opposition
had at this time seceded, and Fox did not once appear upon the
scene, though he wrote to Grattan expressing his unqualified
hostility to the scheme.’ Sheridan, however, fought a hopeless

1 See his letter to Grattan, Feb. 4, 1799. He described it as ‘one of

CH, XXx1. THE ENGLISH OPPOSITION. 30%

battle with conspicuous earnestness and courage, and he was
supported by a few able men, and especially by Grey and
Laurence. The minority sometimes sank as low as fifteen, and
never at this time rose above twenty-four. In one of the de-
bates, Dr. Laurence, who had been an intimate friend of Burke,
mentioned the opinion of that great statesman. Burke, he said,
did not approve of a legislative Union. He considered ‘that
the two countries had now grown up under circumstances which
did not admit of such an incorporation,’ but he thought that the
Constitution of 1782 ought to have included, or been accom-
panied by, a positive compact, which, while leaving Ireland ‘the
entire and absolute power of local legislation,’ explicitly defined
the terms of her connection with England, and bound her on all
questions of peace or war to stand or fall with Great Britain.
In times of tranquillity, Burke said, such a stipulation would
be unnecessary ; in times of extreme irritation and mutual ani-
mosity it would be liable to be disregarded; ‘ but there are
doubtful and tremulous moments in the fate of every empire,
when he judged that it might be useful to have that, which is
now the feeling of all, confirmed and fixed by the guarantee of
the national faith,’ and Burke regretted that he had not opposed
recognition of Irish independence without such a stipulation.!
From the point of view of English interests, almost the only
objection which appears to have been seriously felt, was the
possible effect of the infusion of Irish members into the British
Parliament. Many thought that it would add an overwhelming
weight to the influence of the Crown, and Laurence acutely
dwelt on the great danger to parliamentary Government, if the
Trish members formed a distinct and separate body, acting in
concert amid the play of party politics. ‘They were certainly,’
he said, ‘ by no means deficient in the great popular talent of

eloquence. But if they should hereafter exercise it within these

the most unequivocal attempts. at
establishing the principles, as well as
the practice of despotism, that has
been made in our times.’ ‘Even the
French,’ he adds, ‘in their cursed
fraternisations, pretend at least that
they act in consequence of the desire
-of the people of the several countries.
... The truth is, I never was a friend
to the Union, as a speculative question,

nor should like it even if it were the
general wish of Ireland, much less at
such atime and in such circumstances.’
(Grattan’s Life, iv. 435, 436.)

! Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 311. See, too,
vol. vi. p. 512. Fox also, in a speech
before the Whig Club, is said to have
mentioned Burke’s opinion of the
impolicy of a legislative Union. See
Coote’s History of the Union, p. 292.

358 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXxI.

walls in any degree corresponding with the example which they
have lately given in their own proper theatre, where they con-
tinued a very animated debate for little less than the complete
circle of a day and night, he was apprehensive that we might
find the public business a little impeded in its progress.’!

On the whole the arguments of Sheridan and his small band
of followers, were but little directed against the abstract merits
of a legislative Union. Their main position was, that no such
Union could strengthen the connection, if it was carried by cor-
ruption or intimidation, without the free consent and real appro-
bation of the two Parliaments and nations. In the existing
state of Ireland, they said, the opinion of the people could not
be fairly taken. The most efficacious arguments of the Ministry
were bribes to particular sections of the community, and scarcely
veiled threats that, if the Union was rejected, Great Britain
would withdraw her protection in time of war, and her assist-
ance to the Irish linen trade, and would refuse her assent to
necessary Irish reforms. The Irish House of Commons had
condemned the scheme in its very first stage, and the majority
against it included a most decisive majority of the repre-
sentatives of the landed interest. If the members were unin-
fluenced by corrupt means, it never would pass there. Outside
Parliament, Cork and Limerick alone had expressed anything
like approbation of it, and Cork had been bribed by the hope
of a great dockyard. ‘The Orange party,’ said one speaker, ‘ had
been the foremost and the loudest in the cry against the Union;
while, on the other hand, no one considerable body of Catholics,
or of any other description, had been gained to its support.’
The very proposal had exercised the worst influence, and Grey
predicted that an Union so carried would not be acquiesced in,
and that attempts would one day be made to undo it. It was
added, too, that ‘all agreed that the rapid progress of the sister
kingdom in trade, in manufactures, and in agriculture, and their
concomitant opulence within the last twenty years, down to the
breaking out of the late disastrous rebellion, had been unex-
ampled in the history of that island, and perhaps only exceeded
in Great Britain.’

1 Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 316,317. It House of Commons of Lord Fitz-
was understood that Dr. Laurence william. (Auckland Correspondence,
was the special mouthpiece in the _ iv. 89.)

CH, XXXII. SPEECH OF DUNDAS. 359

Dundas, who was the warmest supporter in the Ministry, of
the Irish Catholics, spoke very earnestly and very ably in favom
of the measure. He read to the House the famous peroration
of the speech of Lord Belhaven against the Scotch Union, and
showed, point by point, how every prediction of evil from that
measure had been falsified ; how all the elements of Scotch pros-
perity had developed under its influence; how the feeling of
hostility to it, which once undoubtedly existed, had completely
subsided. He maintained that the root of the diseased con-
dition of Ireland was, that there was no real confidence between
the mass of the people and the ascendency Parliament, that
‘the whole power of the country was vested in one-fourth of
the people, and that fourth was separated from the other three-
fourths by religious distinctions, heightened and envenomed by
ancient and hereditary animosities. For curing this state of
things and allaying animosities, which were largely due to mutual
jealousies and fears, an incorporating Union was the only safe
and efficacious remedy, and it would give Ireland a power over
the executive and general policy of the Empire, which would
far more than compensate her for the loss of her separate Legis-
lature. The Ministry, in introducing their resolutions in spite
of the hostile vote of the Irish Commons, desired to place before
the dispassionate judgment of the Parliament and people of Ire-
land, ‘what the English Parliament was willing to share with
them, without attempting the smallest interference with their
independence.’ As long as the present unnatural situation of
Ireland continued, the Irish Catholics must inevitably labour
under the disadvantages of strong prejudices, jealousies, and ani-
mosities, and Dundas very earnestly maintained that nothing
could be so conducive to their interests as a legislative Union.

- Sheridan at once replied, that this ascendency Parliament of
Trish gentlemen, having already conceded the franchise to the
Catholics, had been perfectly ready during Lord Fitzwilliam’s
Viceroyalty to admit them as members, and would have certainly
done so if the Government of which Dundas was a member, had
not suddenly recalled the Lord Lieutenant. ‘ At any rate,’ added
Laurence, ‘his recall was never ascribed to the apprehension
of any difficulty in Parliament from his avowed support of the
Catholics; there was no appearance of such difficulty in anv

360 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

quarter; and no Lord Lieutenant ever brought back with him
from that shore such cordial effusions of veneration and affection,
both from the Parliament and the people.’ This was a true
statement and a forcible argument; but it was also true, that
Trish politics and Irish opinion had enormously changed since
1795. Canning, in one of his speeches, went farther than
Dundas. He not only argued that Catholic emancipation could
not take place in an Irish Parliament, but even hinted that if the
Union was not carried, it might be necessary to refortify the
Protestant ascendency, by reviving the old penal code against
the Catholics.

In Ireland, meanwhile, the Government were not idle. Itis
stated that no less than 10,000 copies of Pitt’s speech were
gratuitously circulated at the public expense,? and other methods
more effectual than appeals to popular reason were employed.
Lord Castlereagh wrote that he would despair of the success of
the Union at any future period, so weighty was the opposition
of the country gentlemen in the House of Commons, if he had
not been convinced that their repugnance was much more due to
their personal interest, than to a fixed aversion to the principle
of Union. He represented, therefore, that the proposed scheme
of representation must be materially changed. It had at first
been intended to restrict the representation of each Irish county
in the Imperial Parliament to a single member. Castlereagh
now argued that it should continue, as at present, to betwo. By
this means, he hoped the most powerful opposition to the Union
might be disarmed, especially as a seat in the Imperial Parliament
would be a higher object of ambition than a seat in the Parlia-
ment in Dublin.*

The question of the borough representation was a very difficult
one. The English Government laid it down as a fundamental
condition, that the whole Irish representation should not exceed
100, and it was much desired that the principle of giving pecu-
niary compensation to the borough owners should, if possible, be
avoided. It was agreed that the larger towns should send ina
regular but diminished representation, and it was at first pro-

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iii. 2 See Foster’s speech (April 11,
119. _ Compare Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 1799).
228-230. 3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.

143, 144, 149-153.

CH, XXxXI, PROBABLE POLICY OF ANTI-UNIONISTS. ; 361

posed, that the small boroughs should be grouped according to
the Scotch system, and afterwards that 108 small boroughs
should send in 54 members by a system of alternation, each
borough returning a member to every second Parliament. This
system, Lord Cornwallis said, would no doubt to a certain degree
affect the value of borough property, and probably disincline the
patrons to an Union, but he believed ‘ that means might be found
without resorting to the embarrassing principle of avowed com-
pensation, so as to satisfy the private interests of at least a sufti-
cient number of the individuals affected, to secure the measure
against any risk arising from this consideration.’! Castlereagh,
however, was now convinced that the principle of granting pecu-
niary compensation for boroughs must be adopted. There were
‘ eighty-six boroughs, he said, which were so close as to be strictly
private property.”

Another important question was, how the measures which
were likely to be taken by the Opposition in order to prevent an
Union, were to be met. The Union had been proposed mainly
on the principle that two independent Legislatures had a ten-
dency to separate; that it was necessary to give an additional
strength to the connection ; and that this measure would offer
great particular advantages to many important interests in Ire-
land. Cornwallis believed that it would be the policy of the
Opposition, to take up these several points, and to endeavour to
remedy them without an Union. The first question was the
admission of Catholics to Parliament. There were already signs
that the Opposition were making overtures to the Catholics, and
it was probable that some who had hitherto been determined
opponents of their emancipation would consent to it, if by doing
so they could detach them from the Government, and avoid the
abolition of the Parliament. The Catholics, on the other hand,
were likely to prefer emancipation without an Union, to eman-
cipation with one. In the one case, they would probably by de-
grees gain an ascendency ; in the other, their position would
always be an inferior one. ‘ Were the Catholic question to be
now carried, the great argument for an Union would be lost, at
least as far as the Catholics are concerned.’

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.7 ; 2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 20, 149-153.

362 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI,

It was probable also, the Lord Lieutenant thought, that the
party opposed to the Union would meet the argument drawn
from, the Regency dispute, by a Bill making the Regent of Eng-
land ipso facto Regent of Ireland; that they would again urge
their readiness to enter into a commercial arrangement with
England; that they would call upon the Government to make
at once the provision for the Catholic and Presbyterian clergy,
which the Government writers and speakers now pronounced so
desirable, and that finally they would take up the question of
the regulation of tithes, ‘ the most comprehensive cause of public
discontent in Ireland.’ ‘ Your Grace must be aware,’ wrote
Cornwallis, ‘that the party will carry the feeling of the country
more with them upon the question of tithes, than any other.
They will press Government to bring it forward, and impute
their refusing to do so, to a determination to force the question
of Union, by withholding from the people advantages which
might be extended to them equally by the Irish Legislature.’ !

This despatch was submitted to the deliberation of the Cabinet
in England, and the Duke of Portland lost no time in communi-
cating his instructions to the Irish Government. The ultimate
enactment of the Union was now to be the supreme and steady
object of all English policy in Ireland. If the question of Catho-
lic emancipation was introduced, the Government must oppose
it with all the resources at their disposal, and they must clearly
state that they would never permit it to be carried, except on the
condition of an Union, and by the means of an United Parlia-
ment. On the question of tithes, they must hold an equally
decisive language. This question must be settled on the same
principles in the two countries, and no plan of commutation must
be entertained in Ireland, unless the British Legislature had
previously seriously taken up the question. The proposed
Regency Bill seemed free from objection, and England would
gladly receive from Ireland any unconditional grant towards the
general expenses of the Empire, but a commercial compact could
only be made by the agreement of the two Parliaments. If the
payment of priests and Presbyterian ministers was proposed, the
Irish Government might give it a favourable reception, but they

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 53-55.

CH. XXXI. IMPROVED PROSPECTS. 363

should call upon its promoters to produce a specific plan of
their measures in detail.!

The very violence of the resentment which was aroused in
the Irish Parliament and in Dublin by the introduction of the
Union, appeared to the Ministers an additional reason for press-
ing iton. ‘The language and conduct both within and with-
out doors,’ wrote Castlereagh in a confidential letter to Wickham,
‘has been such on the late occasion, as to satisfy every thinking
man that if the countries are not speedily incorporated, they will
ere long be committed against each other.” There were signs,
which were deemed extremely alarming, of attempts at coalition
between the Orangemen and the Catholics,* and such a coalition
in case of a French invasion might prove fatal.

There were also, however, slight but undoubted indications
of an improvement in the prospects of the measure, especially
after it became known that the principle of compensation would
be largely adopted. The most encouraging of these signs
appeared among the Catholics, and it is among the clerical
and lay leaders of that body that the measure seems to have
found its most sincere well-wishers. Both Lord Kenmare and
Lord Fingall were among the number, and when George Pon-
sonby proposed to the former to introduce under certain condi-

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
59; Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
154-159. ‘ You will not omit to take
the earliest opportunity and the most
effectual means of convincing the
Roman Catholics, that it is needless
for them to entertain any expectation
of further indulgences, as long as the
Parliament of Ireland remains in its
present state.’ (Portland to Corn-
wallis, Jan. 30,1799. R.O.)

2 Castlereagh to Wickham, Feb, 4,
1799.

3 J have already quoted a letter of
McNally about this. For other evi-
dence see Castlereagh Correspondence,
ii. 169; iii. 87; Cornwallis Corre-
spondence, iii. 58. There is a curious
letter among the papers of Pelbam,
signed W. H. and undated, but evi-
dently of this time. The writer said
that the main danger was now that
the Protestants would unite with the
Catholics, promising them emanci-
pation. ‘Some of the most violent

Orangists have opposed the measure
[the Union], and now talk of com-
bining with their most deadly ene-
mies the Catholics, in order to lay
the question asleep for ever.’ Such
a junction, the writer says, would
prevent an Union for years, The
Government must do all in their
power to win the Catholics, and
they must appeal to individual in-
terests much more freely than they
had done. ‘When they next make
the attempt, let them ballast the
vessel steadily with gold, and hang
abundance of coronets, ribbons, and
mitres to the shrouds. If the vir-
tuous pride of the minister will not
suffer him to stoop to this, he will
never carry an Union with Hibernia.
He must not only flatter her vanity,
but fill her purse, for if ever there was
a spot on the globe where interest is
everything, it is this very country.’
(Pelham MSS.)

364 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

tions a motion for repealing the remaining Acts which imposed
restrictions on the Catholics, the offer was declined.! Dr.
Moylan, the Catholic Bishop of Cork, wrote expressing the deep-
est regret at the rejection of the Union. ‘It is impossible,’ he
wrote, ‘to extinguish the feuds and animosities which disgrace
this kingdom, and give it the advantages of its natural and
local situation, without an Union with Great Britain. . . . The
tranquillity and future welfare of this poor distracted country
rest in a great degree thereon. The earlier it is accomplished,
the better.’ When Corry accepted the office of Chancellor of
the Exchequer, from which Parnell had been removed, he was
obliged to go to his constituents at Newry for re-election, and
an attempt was made to oppose him, but it was defeated mainly
through the influence of Archbishop Troy and through the action
of the Catholic portion of the electorate. ‘The Catholics stuck
together like the Macedonian phalanx,’ wrote a Newry priest,
“and with ease were able to turn the scale in favour of the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer.’ Bishop Delany expressed a strong
opinion in favour of the Union, and Dr. Bodkin, who was one of
the most important priests in the West of Ireland, and who had
for many years been the agent of the majority of the secular
prelates at Rome, wrote from Galway, ‘My countrymen are very
warm, violent, and easily roused, but they as soon fall back and
return to a better sense. lam far from thinking the Union lost ;
a little time will rally and bring back the disheartened and dis-
affected. It is the only means left to save from ruin and
destruction that poor, infatuated Ireland.’ 4

Archbishop Troy at the same time exerted himself earnestly
and efficaciously to prevent any Catholic demands for emanci-
pation which might embarrass the Ministers, and a consider-
able body of the Catholic prelates in Ireland were in close
confidential communication with them. The proposal for the
payment of the Catholic clergy, being connected with the
Union, was postponed by the adverse vote of the Irish House
of Commons, but the prelates authorised the Archbishops of
Armagh and Dublin and the Bishop of Meath to treat with Lord

' Portland to Cornwallis (secret 3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
and confidential), Jan. 30, 1799. : t
» Dr. Moylan to Pelham, March 9, 4 Thid. ii. 188 ; iii. 89, 90.

1799.

CH. XXX1. OPINIONS ABOUT THE UNION. 365

Castlereagh on the subject whenever he thought fit to resume it.!
A proposal was for some time under discussion for conceding to
the Catholics in the Act of Union the offices reserved in the Act
of 1793, leaving the question of sitting in the Legislature to
the decision of the United Parliament.? It was not, however,
ultimately pressed, and Lord Castlereagh on the whole appears
to have been unfavourable to it. ‘ Any appearance of eagerness
on the part of Government,’ he thought, ‘ would argue weakness,
and bear too much the appearance of a bargain, to serve the
cause;’ and he added, ‘I conceive the true policy is, by a steady
resistance of their claims, so long as the countries remain
separate, to make them feel that they can be carried only with
us, through an Union.’ ?

On the whole, Cornwallis was probably justified when he
spoke of ‘a large proportion of the Catholics’ being in favour
of the Union ; ‘ and in other quarters the measure, in the opinion
of the Government, was making some way. One very important
acquisition was Lord Ely, who now declared his determination to
throw all his influence into its scale. In the North the feeling
was at least not strongly hostile, and Alexander wrote to Pelham
that on the whole he even considered it favourable, ‘but luke-
warmedly.’ The linen merchants and the great majority of the
inhabitants of Londonderry, he said, were for it, but the question
was looked on as one which chiefly concerned the gentlemen, and
it did not arouse any strong popular interest.? ‘The public
mind,’ wrote Cooke in the beginning of April, ‘is, I think, much
suspended on the subject. ‘There is little passion except among
the bar and the few interested leaders in the Commons. ‘The
Protestants think it will diminish their power, however it may
secure their property. The Catholics think it will put an end
to their ambitious hopes, however it may give them ease and
equality. The rebels foresee in it their annihilation.’7 ‘The
opinion of the loyal part of the public,’ wrote Cornwallis, ‘ is, from
everything that I can learn, changing fast in favour of the Union ;
but I have good reason to believe that the United Irishmen,

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
172; iii. 84, 85. 84. 5 Ibid. iii. 80.

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. § Alexander to Pelham, Feb. 18,
63, 64. 1799.

8 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. " Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

Sera, 87.

366 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = ca. xxx.

who form the great mass of the people, are more organised
and more determined than ever in their purposes of separation,
and their spirits are at this moment raised to the highest pitch
in the confidence of soon seeing a French army in this country.’ '

The open rebellion was over, and the military force of all kinds
at this time in Ireland, is said to have exceeded 137,000 men,?
yet the condition of great tracts of the country had hardly ever
been worse. The old crime of houghing cattle had broken out
with savage fury in Mayo and Galway. It does not appear on
this occasion to have been due to any recent conversion of
arable land into pasture, and it is impossible to say how far, or
in what proportions, it was due to the resentment and misery
produced by the military excesses that had followed the defeat
of Humbert, to.agrarian motives, or to deliberate political caleu-
lation. The pretexts chiefly put forward were a desire to lower
rents, and abolish middlemen, but Cornwallis believed that there
was some evidence that the United Irishmen were connected
with the outburst, and that it was part of a plan to stop the
usual supply of cattle to the Cork market, where the English
fleet was provisioned. The new Prime Sergeant, who was him-
self from Galway, gave the House of Commons a graphic account
of the state of a great part of Connaught. ‘ Hordes of armed
ruffians, in number forty to fifty in a gang, traversed the country
every night, over a tract of sixty miles, houghing the cattle of
gentlemen and farmers, and murdering all who dare to oppose
them. In this way, property to the amount of 100,000/. has
been destroyed, within the last two months, in the counties of
Galway and Mayo. Every man whose cattle were thus houghed
was forbidden, on pain of murder to himself and his family, to
expose those beasts in any market; so that they had no alter-
native, but either to bury the flesh, or give it to the country
people for little or nothing. . . . Against this infernal and de-
structive system no man dares appeal to public justice. . . . If
any man prosecuted one of the offenders, he did it at the moral
certainty of being almost immediately murdered.’ The same

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 81.

2 See Grattan’s Life, v. 31. It
appears from an estimate presented
by Lord Castlereagh to the House of
Commons (Feb. 11), of the charge of
the regiments serving in Ireland and
belonging to the British establish-

ment, that those troops amounted to
23,210 men.’ (Plowden, ii. 921.)

3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
60, 66, 67. This was also the opinion
of the Prime Sergeant and the
Attorney-General.

cH. xxx. THE HOUGHERS—JURYMEN INTIMIDATED. 367

fate hung over every magistrate who sent a hougher to gaol,
every witness who gave evidence against him, every juryman who
convicted him. Well-dressed men led the parties, and at least
one man who had played a conspicuous part in political rebellion
in Connaught was shown to be a leader. A rich farmer, who
had refused to take the United Irish oath, had no less than 250
bullocks houghed, and was reduced almost to beggary.! ‘The
rabble, said the Attorney-General, ‘are told that by pursuing
this practice, they will get land cheap ; the leaders know that
in distressing the British power, they will advance the interest
of the French Directory. ‘Do not expect, the Attorney-
General continued, ‘that the country gentlemen will dare to
serve on juries if the forfeit of their property is to be the result
of their verdicts, and if when that property has been already
destroyed, their lives are to be the next sacrifice. Such is the
situation of the most tranquil province of Ireland. . . . The
gentry are obliged to abandon their estates, and driven into the
towns; and to the honour of the Roman Catholic gentry of that
country be it spoken, that they have been the most active to
repress these outrages, and have been the most severe sufferers
from their extent: . .. There are two counties of your king-
dom in which the King’s judges have not dared for one year
past to carry their commission.’

A member named Ormsby mentioned, in the course of
the debate, that he was present at Carrick-on-Shannon, when
six traitors were acquitted in spite of the clearest evidence.
The judge said that he must adjourn the assizes, as no justice
could be obtained. One of the jurymen then stood up and
freely acknowledged this, adding, ‘My Lord, what can we do?
A coal of fire, set in our barn or the thatch of our house, de-
stroys our property, possibly the lives of our wives and children.
If you want verdicts of conviction, your juries must be summoned
from garrison towns, where the individual may look for protec-
tion.’ Another member mentioned a case in the county of
Limerick, in which a man ventured on his own part, and on that
of eight other persons, to prosecute an offender who had plundered
and destroyed their property. All nine were murdered in a
single night.

1 This last fact is mentioned in a letter from St. George Daly (Galway)
to Castlereagh, Feb, 9, 1799. (1.8.P.0.)

368 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

No part of the country, however, was worse than the neigh-
bourhood of Dublin itself, for the scattered fragments of the
rebel forces that had haunted the Wicklow hills, were now
converted into small bands of robbers and murderers. Every
country gentleman who continued to live in his house, required
an armed garrison. ‘Does a night pass,’ said the Attorney-
General in Parliament, ‘without a murder in the county? Do
gentlemen know that the amount of the deliberate and mid-
night murders in that small district of the county called Fingal,
within a short time past, exceeds two hundred? . . . It may be
said that this county, as indeed almost all Ireland, is proclaimed,
but even so the military officers cannot act without a magistrate,
and where are the magistrates to be found? . . . Are not your
mail coaches plundered to an immense amount almost within
view of the city?’ ‘It is a notorious fact, said the Prime
Sergeant, ‘ that no man could travel, even at noonday, six miles
from the capital in any direction, without the moral certainty of
being robbed or murdered by gangs of those banditti.’!

In the beginning of March, the houghing of cattle spread
fiercely in Meath, and it was said to have also appeared in the
South.? In the county of Cork, the tithe war was raging,
accompanied with the cruel persecution of all employed in
collecting tithes. Cornwallis believed that the whole of the
South was prepared to rise the moment a French soldier set; his
foot on shore; in the middle of March he pronounced this part
of Ireland to be by far the most agitated, and he inferred that
it was the quarter where a French invasion was most likely to
take place. Ulster was more quiet than the other provinces,
but signs of disturbance had appeared in the county of Antrim,
where the houses of some loyalists had been plundered.3

The Government about this time obtained some additional
secret information, and they appear to have discovered the exis-
tence of a United Irish executive in Dublin. An eminent Dublin
surgeon named Wright was arrested on a charge of high treason,
and on finding, from the questions of Cooke, that his conduct

1 See the very interesting debate 60, 61, 76, 77.

on Feb. 26 in Faulkner's Dublin * Private information, Feb. 1799
Journal, Feb. 28, 1799. (1.8.P.0.). See, too, Cornwallis Cor-
2 Tbid. March 5, 1799. respondence, iii. 67.

3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

CH. XXXI.

CONFESSION OF WRIGHT. 369

was known, he burst into tears and made a confession, which
Castlereagh sent to England. He told Cooke, that he believed
that the danger from the United Irish conspiracy had vanished,
since the men of property and ability connected with it had
been killed, taken, or banished; but that the Defender system,
which was purely Catholic, and was aiming at the establishment
of popery, had taken its place, and was rapidly drawing within
its circle the great body of the lower Catholics. Having dressed
the wounds of more than 500 rebels, he had learnt to know
their real feeling; he had found them to be inspired by a fierce
religious fanaticism, and he believed that this spirit was stea-
dily growing. The upper ranks of Catholics in general merely
looked for consequence in the State; and if they were on an
equal footing with the Protestants, they would be soon loyal
monarchy men.
by their priests, and especially by the friars, who were ‘a very
good-for-nothing set ;’ and they never could be reformed, ‘ but
by their priests and by better education.’ Orange societies,
and many acts of violence perpetrated by private irresponsible
loyalists, fanned the flame. Among the young men in Dublin,
especially among the merchant clerks and shopmen, there were
many active rebels of the old type, and young Robert Emmet was
their guiding spirit. ‘The whole country would rise if there
were to be a French invasion.’ Other information pointed to the
leading part Robert Emmet was beginning to take, and in May
the Government gave orders for his arrest, but he succeeded in
escaping to the Continent. Castlereagh himself, not long after,
expressed his belief, that the United system was in general laid
aside, ‘the Presbyterians having become Orangemen, and the
Catholics Defenders.’! But it was long before conspiracy of the
‘United Irish description had wholly ceased, and it was feared
that the near prospect of invasion might at any time revive it.?
The speeches I have last quoted, took place at the introduc-

But the lower ranks were entirely governed

1 Wickham to Castlereagh, April
14; Castlereagh to Wickham, May
1,6; Castlereagh to King, August 21,
199 GR_OS)

2 A later letter of Pollock throws
a little light on this subject. He
says, ‘ With regard to the rebel leaders
in Ulster, I delivered to Mr, Marsden
after the rebellion, an alphabetical

VOL. VIII.

book which I made out, and which con-
tains the names of every field officer of
the rebelsin that province. Fifteen out
of every twenty of them are and have
been (by a mistaken and misplaced
lenity, in my judgment) at large. If
an invasion were even probable, every
man of them ought to be taken up;
and as to the Dublin leaders, Mr.

BB

370 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

tion of one of the most severe of the many stringent coercion
Bills carried by the Irish Parliament. The proclamation of May
24. which had been approved by both Houses of Parliament, had
ordered the general officers to punish by death and otherwise,
according to martial law, every person concerned in the rebellion ;
but now that the actual struggle was over, and the courts were
open, martial law was plainly illegal. The impossibility of
the two jurisdictions acting concurrently had been foreseen,
and some months earlier, Lord Pery had recommended a Bill
authorising the military authorities to try by court-martial
persons engaged in the rebellion, alleging that without such law
the exercise of martial law could only be justified by the strictest
necessity, and that this necessity would be difficult to define.
The Government, however, while believing military law to be
indispensable in the unsettled state of the country, considered
also that less violence was done to the Constitution by giving
indemnity to those who had acted illegally for the preservation
of the State, than by enacting a law formally authorising martial
law when the courts were sitting.! The collision between Lord
Kilwarden and the military authorities about the execution of
Wolfe Tone, brought the difficulty into clear relief, and the
multiplying outrages throughout the country seemed to require
a new and very drastic remedy. Past transgressions of the law,
which had taken place since October 6, 1798, for the purpose of
suppressing the rebellion, preserving the public peace, and for the
safety of the State, were condoned by the very comprehensive
Indemnity Act which received the royal assent on March 25.?
But, in addition to this measure, a new Act was carried, placing
Treland, at the will of the Lord Lieutenant, formally and legally
under military law.

The preamble noticed that Lord Camden on March 30, 1798,
had, with the advice of the Privy Council, directed the military
commanders in Ireland to employ all their forces to suppress
rebellion; that the order of May 24, commanding them to

Cooke has had from me, from time to _lock to the Right Hon. C. Abbot, Aug.
time, the names of everyman of them. 16, 1801, Colchester MSS.)

Those that are the most dangerous, ‘ Castlereagh Correspondence, i.
are, I think, the last Hxecutive Direc- 446, 447.
tory, who hadarranged a new rebellion NGH) (Evete, ING (os Bt

in the end of 1799 and 1800. (J. Pol-

CH, XXXI. COERCION ACT, 1799. 371

punish by death or otherwise, according to martial law, all person's
assisting in the rebellion, had received the approbation of both
Houses of Parliament; that, although this measure had proved so
far efficacious as to permit the course of common law partially
to take place, very considerable parts of the kingdom were still
desolated by a rebellion, which took the form of acts of savage
violence and outrage, and rendered the ordinary course of justice
impossible; and that many persons who had been guilty of the
worst acts during the rebellion, and had been taken by his
Majesty’s forces, had availed themselves of the partial restora-
tion of the ordinary course of the common law, to evade the
punishment of their crimes. The Bill accordingly empowered
the Lord Lieutenant, as long as this rebellion continued, and
notwithstanding the opening of the ordinary courts of justice,
to authorise the punishment by death or otherwise, according to
martial law, of all persons assisting in the rebellion, or maliciously
attacking the persons or properties of the King’s loyal subjects
in furtherance of it; the detention of all persons suspected of
such crimes, and their summary trial by court-martial. No act
done in pursuance of such an order could be questioned, impeded,
or punished by the courts of common law, and no person duly
detained under the powers created by this Act, could be released
by a writ of Habeas Corpus.!

This Act, which invested the Lord Lieutenant with some ‘of
the extreme powers of a despotic ruler, has often been repre-
sented as a part of the Union campaign, intended to repress
opposition to an unpopular measure. It was opposed partly on
that ground in the House of Commons, and a few members
made strenuous efforts to modify its provisions, and to restrict
its area and its duration.? It was, however, the strong belief of
- the country members that some such Act was necessary, and
their concurrence enabled it to pass without difficulty. Rightly
or wrongly, indeed, the Irish Parliament was always ready to
meet outbursts of anarchy by measures of repression, much

1 39 Geo. III. c. 11. This Act is
interesting in constitutional history
for the emphasis with which it asserts
‘the undoubted prerogative of his
Majesty, for the public safety, to re-
sort to the exercise of martial law
against open enemies or traitors.’

(See Stephen’s History of Orimina
Law, i. 211.)

? Plowden, ii. 958, 959; Fautk-
ner’s Journal, Feb. 28,1799. It was
ultimately decided, that the Act should
expire two months after the opening
of the ensuing session of Parliament,

BB 2

372 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

prompter and much more drastic than English opinion would
have tolerated; and one or two members in the course of the
discussion; and a considerable body of excited opinion outside the
House, ascribed the disastrous condition of the country chiefly to
the excessive leniency of Lord Cornwallis, and to his departure
from the system of Lord Camden. Representations to this
effect had been persistently sent to England, and the English
Ministers concurred with them, and were by no means satisfied
with the moderation of the Lord Lieutenant; but Castlereagh
loyally supported his chief, urging that a severity which was
necessary while the rebellion was at its height, would be inexpe-
dient after its repression, and that, in fact, the list of persons
executed or transported under Lord Cornwallis had been very
considerable.! The Bill for establishing martial law, was not
altogether approved of in England, and some amendments were
introduced into it, at the request of the English Ministry ;? but
there is, I believe, no real ground for supposing that it was
intended for any other object than the ostensible ones, though
supporters of the Government are accused of having sometimes
employed the powers it gave them, to prevent meetings against
the Union. It was, however, maintained with much reason, that
a time when martial law was in force, was not one for pressing
through a vast constitutional change, unasked for by the country,
and violently opposed by a great section of its people.

The state of anarchy that prevailed had undoubtedly a great
part in convincing many, both in England and Ireland, that a
new system of government had become absolutely necessary.
‘The Union,’ Dundas wrote about this time, ‘ will certainly not
improve our Houses of Parliament. In all other respects it will
answer, and without it, Ireland is a country in which it will be
impossible for any civilised being to live, and it will be such a

1 See, for the exact figures, p. 253.
Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 62, 63,
67, 69, 70, 90. In a private letter
from England, Wickham said, ‘ At
present there is a general, I may say
an universal persuasion, that lenient
measures have been carried much too
far; and your Lordship may rely upon
what I say, when I assure you that
that which was matter or doubt when
your Lordship wasin England, is now

settled into a fixed opinion, accom-
panied by a disposition to attribute
the calamities with which Ireland
seems now threatened, to a departure
from the system adopted by Lord
Camden.’ (Wickham to Castlereagh
(private), March 4, 1799. R.O.)

2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
184, 197, 198; Cornwallis Correspon-
dence, ili. 74 76.

CH, XXXI. MOTIONS OF DOBBS AND CORRY. 373

thorn in our side as to render us for ever uncomfortable, let our
own affairs be conducted as well and prosperously as it is possible
for the wisdom of man to do.’!_ The Government speakers, in:
advocating the Bill for establishing martial law, painted the
situation of the country in the darkest colours. Lord Clare told
the House of Lords that, ‘in the western parts of this kingdom,
it was impossible for any gentleman of property to be safe, even
within his own habitation, unless every village throughout the
country was garrisoned, and every gentleman’s house a barrack,’
and that, ‘if there was no other cause, the enormous expense
of keeping up such a military force must sink the country.’
‘What is now the situation of the loyalists of this kingdom ?’
asked the Prime Sergeant. ‘They are comparatively a small
body of men, thinly scattered over the face of the island, sur-
rounded on all sides by an innumerable, inveterate, irreclaimable
host of sworn enemies. What security have, then, the loyalists
of Ireland for their safety at this moment, but in their own
personal bravery, and the protection of a great military force ?’?
‘The United Irishmen,’ wrote Cornwallis, ‘are whetting their
knives, to cut the, throats of all the nobility and gentry of the
island.’ *

A few other parliamentary proceedings may be briefly men-
tioned. Dobbs—the honest, amiable, but eccentric member who
has been so often mentioned—brought in a series of resolutions
asserting the expediency of a reform of Parliament, the immediate
admission of the six or eight Catholic peers into the House of
Lords, the admission of Catholics into the House of Commons
as soon as peace was restored, a commutation of tithes, and a
moderate provision for the Dissenting ministers and the Catholic

secular clergy. He appears, however, to have acted without any
concert, and the previous question was moved, and carried by
sixty-eight to one, the solitary supporter of Dobbs being Newen-
ham.

Lord Corry, the son of Lord Belmore, made another attempt

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 1799. The story is told a little dif-

79. ferently in Grattan’s Life,v. 25. The
2 Faulkner's Journal, Feb. 28, resolutions are, I think, not mentioned
March 12, 1799. in the Government correspondence,

3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.60. and there are scarcely any reports of
4 Faulkner's Jowrnal, March 7, the debates of this time.

374 ENGLAND IN THE. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXxXI.

to close the door against the reintroduction of the Union during
the existing Parliament. He moved that the House should at
ence resolve itself into a committee on the state of the nation,
and he announced his intention to move an address to the King,
declaring an inviolable attachment to the British connection, but
representing a separate independent Parliament as essential to
the interest and prosperity of Ireland. Lord Castlereagh opposed
the motion as unnecessary, declaring that there was no present
intention to press the Union. The temper of the House was
described by Lord Cornwallis as ‘ moderate ;’ several country
gentlemen took occasion to state explicitly, that they had every
wish to support the Government on all questions except the
Union, and some of them added, that even on that question they
did not consider themselves irrevocably pledged, if the circum-
stances of the kingdom should materially alter. The Government
defeated Lord Corry’s motion by 123 votes against 103, but Lord
Cornwallis warned the English Ministers that the debate turned
so much on Lord Castlereagh’s declaration that the question of
the Union was for the present asleep, that they must not infer
from the division that the probability of resuming this question
with advantage in the present session was in the slightest degree
increased.!

Another and more important measure of the Opposition was
a Regency Bill, intended to supply the omission in the law which
had rendered possible the conflict of 1789, and thus to meet one
of the most powerful arguments urged against the independent
Parliament in Ireland. It was moved by Fitzgerald, the former
Prime Sergeant, and it appears to have been debated at great
length. The Government disliked it, as destroying part of their
case for the Union, but it was difficult to find plausible grounds
for opposing it. It asserted in the strongest terms the depend-
ence of the Crown of Ireland on that of England, and the in-
separable connection of the two countries ; and it proceeded to
enact, that the person who was ipso facto Regent of England
should be always, with the same powers, Regent de jure in Ire-
land. Castlereagh somewhat captiously objected, that the Bill
evaded the point of controversy, by not defining the authority by

\ Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 64-66 ; Coote’s History of the Union,
pp. 191-196; Grattan’s Life, v. 26.

CH, xXXI. DEBATE ON THE REGENCY BILL. 375

which the Regent of England was to be made, that it might
apply to a person who had usurped the Regency in England on
an assumed claim of rights, and that circumstances might arise
when it would be expedient that the Regent of Ireland should
be under different restrictions from the Regent of England. A
few other objections of a very technical kind were suggested, and
the Government demanded a distinct and formal recognition of
the sole right of the British Parliament to appoint the Regent,
and define his powers over the two countries. Fitzgerald replied
by inserting in the Bill the words, ‘ according to the laws and
Constitution of Great Britain.” The Bill passed successfully
through its earlier stages and through the committee, but in the
report Castlereagh moved its rejection, and it was ultimately
postponed till the session had closed.!

In the discussion upon it, the whole question of the Union
appears to have been revived, and Castlereagh on this occasion
delivered what was perhaps his ablest speech in favour of that
measure. He observed that the Regency Bill, even if it were
adequate, could only meet one of the many Imperial questions
on which two independent Legislatures in the same Empire were
likely to diverge. In questions of peace and war, of general
trade and commerce, of treaties with foreign nations, of Admi-
ralty jurisdiction, of the religious establishment—which, he
observed, ought to be regulated on Imperial principles—such
divergence was always to be feared. ‘ How was it possible ?’
he asked, ‘to conceive that the Empire could continue as at
present, whilst all parts of it were to receive equal protection,
and only one part of itis to suffer the burdens of that protection ?
Must we not of necessity, and in justice, look to some settlement
of Imperial contribution ? And so soon as asystem of contribu-
tion should be established, was there any question as to peace
and war, which would not agitate every part of the country? .. .
Why have we not differed from Great Britain in former wars ?
It is because Great Britain supported the whole \expense. .. .
Wars have recently increased in their expense enormously. Ire-
land as a separate country, possessing all the advantages of the
commerce, and all the advantages of the protection of England,

1 Plowden, ii. 960-962, 967; Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 180, 181, 269,
270; Cornwallis Correspondence, ili. 87, 88.

376 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = ca. xxx.

will naturally be bound to contribute her just proportion for the
continuance of these advantages. When that shall be the case,
how can it be expected that she will tamely follow Great Britain
with that submission and subserviency which has hitherto marked
her conduct? . . . The feelings of the people must always be
agitated in proportion to their interests ; they would not easily
be reconciled to have their contributions called forth to support
measures which their representatives did not discuss. . .. It
was against the principle of human nature, that one country
should voluntarily and regularly follow the dictates of another ;
it was against the common principles of pride and independence,
which must ever grow and increase with the importance of the
kingdom.’ Hitherto the bond of connection had been the dis-
cretion of the Irish Parliament, which had acted with ‘ prudence,
liberality, and loyalty.’ But ‘in proportion to our wealth and
strength, the principle of discretion would be weakened, and
the sole security for the continuance of our connection would
vanish.’ !

These considerations had a great and undoubted weight. On
the other hand, the Speaker, Foster, availed himself of the Re-
gency debate to reply at length to the speech of Pitt, and to
concentrate in a single most able and most elaborate argument
the case against the Union. He began by a very full and con-
clusive argument to prove that, whatever may have been the
opinions of individual statesmen, the legislation of 1782 and
1783 had been accepted by the Parliaments of both countries
and announced by Ministers of the Crown in England, and by
the representatives of the Crown in Ireland, as a ‘final adjust-
ment’ of the constitutional questions between the two countries,
though some questions of commercial relationship remained to
— pe settled. He then proceeded to urge, that the constitutional
connection, which was established in 1782 and 1788, was not the
frail and precarious thread which Pitt represented. Pitt said
that one system of connection had been destroyed, and that no
other had been substituted for it; and he described the connection
of the two countries as now depending merely on the existence
of the King, and on the continued agreement of two entirely

1 The two speeches of Lord Castlereagh on the Regency Bill have been
published separately.

CH. XXXI. FOSTER’S SPEECH, APRIL 1799. out

independent Parliaments, exposed to all the attacks of party and
all the effects of accident. But in the amended Constitution of
Ireland, no Bill could become a law of Ireland which had not
been returned from England ‘ under the great seal of Great
Britain,’ and the very object of this provision was to prevent the
connection from being ‘a bare junction of two kingdoms under
one Sovereign, by ‘ making the British Ministry answerable to
the British nation, if any law should receive the royal assent in
Ireland which could in any way injure the Empire, or tend to
separate Ireland from it.’ ‘The English Council being respon-
sible for every advice they give their Sovereign,’ this provision
‘gives to Britain an effectual pledge to retain in her own hands,
that it never shall be in our power by any act of ours to weaken
or impair the connection.’ On the other hand, under the Con-
stitution of 1782,‘ Great Britain cannot throw us off. An Act of
the British Parliament is inadequate to it. As an instance, no
law of hers could repeal our Annexation Act of Henry VIII.’

That a Constitution of this kind, when in the hands of classes
who were indisputably loyal, and attached to the connection by
the strongest ties of interest, sentiment, and honour, was sufficient
to consolidate the Empire, Foster strenuously maintained. It
was said, that the Legislature of Ireland might differ from that of
Great Britain on questions of peace or war? Had it ever in the
long course of centuries done so, though its power to do so had
been as unlimited before as after the Constitution of 1782 ? Had
it ever, on any question of peace or war, or treaties, since we have
any record of its proceedings, clogged the progress of the Empire?
Had it not invariably, but most conspicuously since the recogni-
tion of its independence, shown the utmost zeal in supporting
Great Britain? The period since 1782 had been peculiarly
marked by great and trying events, but it had not produced a
single instance of difference on an Imperial question, with the
exception of the Regency, and if the Bill before the House were
adopted, that difference could never recur. \

In theory, no doubt, the two Legislatures might easily clash,
just as the British Parliament might at any time disagree with
the King in his declaration of peace or war; just as the two
Houses of the British Legislature might always, by irreconcilable
differences, bring the Government to a dead lock. Good sense

378 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

and patriotism and manifest interest maintained in harmony the
different parts of the British Constitution, and they would
operate equally in preventing collisions between the two
Parliaments.

Much use had been made by Pitt of the failure, in the Irish
House of Commons, of the altered commercial propositions of
1785, and especially of the very powerful speech in which
Foster had defended these propositions. Foster had then said,
‘that things could not remain as they were,’ that ‘ without
united interest of commerce in a commercial empire, political
union will receive many shocks, and separation of interest must
threaten separation of connection, which every honest Irishman
must shudder to look at.’ In reply to this, the House was
reminded, in the first place, that the original commercial pro-
positions had been agreed to by the Irish Parliament in a
division in which there were no Noes except the tellers’;and
that it was not the fault of the Irish Parliament if the negotia-
tions for a treaty of commerce were not renewed; and, in the
next place, that matters of commerce had in fact not remained
as they were. The Irish Parliament had since 1785 passed, with
the concurrence or at the suggestion of the Government, a series
of Acts for the express purpose of placing the commercial systems
of the two countries in harmony, and those measures had been
perfectly efficacious. The English Navigation Act had been
adopted. The monopoly of the Eastern trade by the Hast India
Company had been confirmed. A number of regulations relating
to the registry of shipping, to the increase of shipping, to the
lighthouse duties, and to Greenwich Hospital, had been adopted.
By the acknowledgment of the representatives of the English
Government in Ireland, the commercial systems of the two
countries were now working in perfect harmony. England
had not a single reason to complain of any act of the Irish
Parliament on this subject;! and that Parliament was both
willing and eager to enter into a compact about the Channel
trade. Although the altered treaty of 1785 had been rejected,
‘the good sense and mutual interest of each country had from
time to time passed all laws necessary to prevent the operation
and inconveniences of commercial jealousies.’

°

’ See vol. vi. pp. 405, 604.

CH, XXXI. FOSTER’S SPEECH, APRIL 1799. 379

The true inference, Foster said, which the English Minister
should have drawn from the rejection of the propositions of 1785,
was very different from that which he had drawn. ‘When a
suspicion that the operation of them might affect the indepen-
dence of our Legislature, created such a general disapprobation
as obliged him to abandon the measure, he should have learned
wisdom thereby, and not have proposed at this day, to a nation
so greatly attached to that independence, and the more so for
her rising prosperity since its attainment, a measure which does
not barely go to alter it, but avowedly and expressly to ex-
tinguish it. He should have recollected, that he now offers no
one practical or even speculative advantage in commerce when
the total extinction is required, and that a measure suspected
only to infringe on that independence failed in his hands,
though accompanied with offers of solid and substantial benefit
to trade.’

It had been said, that the Union with England would tend
to tranquillise the country, and to raise the tone of its civilisation.
And this, said Foster, is to be the result of ‘ transporting its
Legislature, its men of fortune, and its men of talents’! ‘Ifa
resident Parliament and resident gentry cannot soften manners,
amend habits, or promote social intercourse, will no Parliament
and fewer resident gentry do it?’! The greatest misfortune of
this kingdom, with respect to the tenantry, is the large class of
middlemen who intervene between the owner and the actual
occupier, ‘and these are mostly to be found on the estates of
absentees.’ Whatever may be the case in other countries, in
Ireland, at least, the example of the upper ranks is the most
effectual means of promoting good morals and habits among the
lower orders, and there is no country upon earth where the
guiding, softening, and restraining influence of a loyal resi-
dent gentry, is of more vital importance. If every estate and

1 Alexander, in writing about this
speech, says that Foster adopted
Curran’s saying, that Government
wished to transport the Parliament
almost in the same ship as the con-
victs. (Alexander to Pelham, April
11, 1799.) This argument was put
very graphically in one of the speeches
of Parsons. ‘Suppose any man of
plain understanding should meet your

peersand your hundred members onthe
road to London, and ask them, ‘* What
are you going there for?” and you
should answer, ‘‘ To preserve the peace
of Ireland,” would he not say, ‘‘ Good
people, go back to your own country ;
it is there you can best preserve its
peace; England wants younot, but
Ireland does” ?’ (Coote’s History of
the Union, p. 302.)

380 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

every village possessed a wise, just, and moderate resident
gentleman, the people would soon learn to obey and venerate
the law. But the new English policy was to sweep out of the
country a great portion of the very class on which its progress
in civilisation and loyalty mainly depended; to diminish the
power of those who remained, and to throw the country more and
more into the hands of landjobbers and agents. Complaints of
neglect of duty were often brought against the Church. Was the
standard of duty likely to rise, when the bishops were withdrawn
from their dioceses for eight months in the year? Was it cre-
dible, ‘that a Parliament, unacquainted with the local circum-
stances of a kingdom which it never sees, at too great a distance
to receive communication or information for administering in
time to the wants and wishes of the people, or to guard against
excesses or discontents, can be more capable of acting beneficially
than the one which, being on the spot, is acquainted with the
habits, prejudices, and dispositions of the people ?’

Foster then proceeded to dilate upon the importance of a
resident Parliament in repressing disaffection and rebellion. In
this, as in every part of his career, he assumed as a fundamental
and essential condition of Irish self-government, that the power
of Parliament should be retained in the hands of the classes that
were unquestionably loyal, and who represented the property of
the country ; and he maintained that the moral weight, and the
strong power of organisation and control, which an Irish Parlia-
ment gave them, were of the utmost importance. The volunteer
movement was not a movement of disaffection, but there was a
moment ‘when their great work was effected, and by the in-
discreetness of a few leaders their zeal was misled, and they
began to exercise the functions of Parliament. We spoke out
firmly. They heard our voice with effect, and took our advice
in instantly returning to cultivate the blessings of peace... .
Personal character, respect to individuals, opinion of their attach-
ment to one common country, all impressed an awe which was
irresistible. . . . Would equal firmness in a Parliament composed
five parts in six of strangers, sitting in another country, have had
the same effect ? ’

Then came the great rebellion which had so lately desolated
the country. Coulda Parliament sitting in another land grapple

CH. XXXI. FOSTER’S SPEECH, APRIL 1799. 381

with such a danger, like a loyal Parliament sitting in Dublin?
Would it have the same knowledge of the conditions of the
problem, or the same moral weight with the people, or the same
promptitude in applying stern and drastic remedies? He re-
minded the members of the day when they had gone in solemn
procession to the Castle to present their address of loyalty, and
of the outburst of enthusiasm which their attitude had aroused.
‘Tt animated the loyal spirit which crushed the rebellion before
a single soldier could arrive from England.’ Could any procession
of a United Parliament through St. James’s Park have had a
similar moral effect in Ireland? ‘The extraordinary, but wise
and necessary measure, of proclaiming martial law, required the
concurrence of Parliament to support the Executive. The time
would have passed by before that concurrence could have been
asked for and received from London, and it would have given a
faint support coming from strangers.’ No one had acknowledged
more emphatically than Lord Camden, how largely the ‘ peculiar
promptitude, alacrity, and unanimity’ of the Irish House of
Commons had contributed to crush the rebellion, and to save the
State, and to place it in a condition to encounter a foreign as
well as a domestic enemy.

The removal of the loyal Parliament which so effectually
suppressed the rebellion, would undoubtedly give a new en-
couragement to disaffection. It would also almost certainly
lead to an era of greatly increased taxation. One of the capital
advantages of Ireland during the eighteenth century was, that it
was one of the most lightly taxed countries in Europe. The speech
of Lord Castlereagh clearly foreshadowed that this was now to
change, and that a desire to make Ireland contribute in an in-
creased proportion to the expenses of the Empire, was one of the
. chief motives to the Union. ‘ He wants an Union in order to
tax you, and take your money, when he fears your own represen-
tatives would deem it improper, and to force regulations on your
trade which your own Parliament would consider injurious or
partial.’

This was but a part of the probable effect of the Union on
the material prosperity of Ireland, and Foster examined this
subject with a fullness of detail and illustration to which it is
wholly impossible in a brief sketch to do adequate justice. He

382 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

dweltin strong terms, but notin stronger ones than Clare and Cooke
had already used,! or than Castlereagh afterwards employed,’
on the great and manifest progress in material prosperity that
had accompanied the latter days of the Irish Parliament. It
had been its work ‘to raise this kingdom into prosperity, and
keep it in a steady and rapid advance, even beyond the utmost
hopes of its warmest advocates.’ He quoted the recent language
of Parliament itself, declaring in an address to Lord Cornwallis,
‘that under his Majesty’s benevolent auspices his kingdom of
Ireland had risen to a height of prosperity unhoped for and un-
paralleled in any former era;’ and he proceeded to argue, with
great ingenuity and knowledge, that the latter progress of Ireland
with her separate Parliament had been more rapid than that
of Scotland under the Union. And this progress was chiefly
accomplished under the Constitution of 1782. ‘It has not only
secured, but absolutely showered down upon you more blessings,
more trade, more affluence, than ever fell to your lot in double
the space of time which has elapsed since its attainment.’ ‘The
general export rose in seventy-eight years to 1782 from one to
five, and in fourteen years after 1782 from five to ten. The linen
export in the seventy-eight years rose from one to thirty-two,
and in the last fourteen years from thirty-two to eighty-eight, so
that the general export rose as much in the last fourteen years
as it had done not only during the preceding seventy-eight
years, but during all time preceding; and the linen increased
in the last fourteen years very nearly to treble the amount of
what it had been before. He inferred from this, that the con-
dition of Ireland was essentially sound, that if she were only wise
enough to abstain from experiment, industry and wealth must
increase, and civilisation and meliorated manners must follow
in their train.

It was said that this material progress was either not due to
political causes, or not due to the action of the Irish Parliament.
That political causes had largely produced the depression that
preceded it, Foster said, no one at least could doubt. No
United Irishman indeed had ever described more severely the

1 See vol. vi. p. 438. and general happiness in the last
2 In an Irish debate in 1803, fifteen years, than that part of the

Castlereagh said,‘NoPowerinEurope British Empire [Ireland] had done,’
had made more rapid strides in wealth (Parl. History, xxxvi. 1709.)

CH. XXXI. FOSTER’S SPEECH, APRIL 1799. 383

character and the effects of English commercial policy in Ireland,
than William Pitt in his speeches on the commercial propositions
of 1785. ‘Until these very few years, he had said, ‘the
system had been that of debarring Ireland from the enjoyment
and use of her own resources, to make the kingdom completely
subservient to the interests and opulence of this country, with-
out suffering her to share in the bounties of nature and the
industry of her citizens,’ for Great Britain till very recently had
‘never looked upon her growth and prosperity as the growth and
prosperity of the Empire at large.’ By simply repealing its own
restricting laws, the English Parliament had no doubt given a
ereat impulse to Irish progress, but the more liberal policy of
the English Parliament was largely due to the vigour which the
Octennial Act had infused into the Parliament of Ireland. And
in other ways the action of that Parliament had been more
direct. It gave the export bounties, which placed our linen trade
onan equal footing with the British, ‘ whereas till then our linen
was exported from Britain . . . under a disadvantage of 54 per
cent.’ It supported powerfully and efficaciously the demands of
the Executive on Portugal for the full participation of Ireland
in the Methuen treaty. During forty years the victualling trade
of Ireland had been harassed and restricted by twenty-four
embargoes, one of which lasted three years, until ‘ Parliament
took up the subject. The embargo ceased, and none has appeared
to oppress you from that day.’! And finally it was Parliament
which, by the bounties on corn, gave the first great impulse to
Trish agriculture. All this was due to the Constitution of 1782,
which ‘ gave freedom to our Parliament, and with it the power
of protection.’ Could the commercial interests of the country be
equally trusted to a Parliament which was dependent, or to a Par-
. liamentin which the Irish members were hopelessly outnumbered ?

It might be said, that ‘ you would depend on the articles
you may frame, to secure your trade and your purse.’ It was
answered, that the very doctrine of the omnipotence of Parlia-
ment, which was now so constantly urged, and which was neces-
sary to justify the Union, reduced its articles to mere waste

1 A remarkable paper on the effect predecessor in the chair, Edmund
of some of these embargoes on Irish ery, and sent to England. See
prosperity, was drawn up by Foster's Grattan’s Life, i. 334-338,

384 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

paper. The United Parliament will have the power to alter or
abrogate any article of the Union which it pleases, to abolish
bounties, to amalgamate debts, or to raise the level of taxation
as it desires, and a minority of a hundred Irish members will
have no power to stay its decision.

Foster then proceeded at great length, and with great am-
plitude of illustration, to examine in succession the different
industries that would be affected by the measure. The growth
of English manufactures in Ireland, as a result of the Union, he
believed to be wholly chimerical. He argued in much detail
that neither the woollen, nor the iron, nor the cotton, nor the
pottery manufactures of England, were likely to take any con-
siderable root in Ireland, and he especially combated the predic-
tion, which had much influence in Munster, that Cork would rise
after the Union to unprecedented prosperity. He proceeded
then to consider the contention of Pitt, that the Irish linen
manufacture was wholly dependent on the encouragement of
Great Britain, and that it was the policy of England, and not
anything done by the Irish Parliament, that had produced the
great and undoubted commercial prosperity of the last few years.
This line of argument Foster very strongly deprecated. The two
countries, he said, were so closely connected, that each could
greatly assist or greatly injure the other, and nothing could be
more detrimental to a true Union than to sow between them, by
idle boasts or threats, a spirit of commercial jealousy or distrust.
Ireland owed very much to England, but the benefit was re-
ciprocal, for it was proved by official statistics, that in 1797 the
export of English manufactures to Ireland alone was more than
one-third of the value of the export of those manufactures to all
the rest of Europe. Was it likely that Great Britain would
quarrel with such a customer? Independently of the historical
fact that the encouragement of the linen trade was intended as
a compensation for the iniquitous suppression of the Irish wool
trade, it was not true that Irish linen depended on English
bounties and encouragement. At the time when he spoke, the
linen trade was in a state of extraordinary prosperity. Irish
linens had very recently risen thirty-five per cent. above their
usual value, ‘ and yet the British merchants are so anxious to
purchase them, that they are even securing them on the greens

CH. XXXI. FOSTER’S SPEECH, APRIL 1799. 385

before they can goto market.’ ‘ Irish linens do not monopolise
the British market by means of the duty [on foreign linen], and
could at present find their way there, even if there was no duty
on the foreign.’ ‘In no place are we protected against German
linen except in Britain, and yet ours is finding its way almost
everywhere.’ ‘Our linens beat the German and the Russian in
the American markets. They are preferred even to the Scotch,
and no nation can bring the fabric to the perfection we do, not
so much perhaps from superior skill, as from the peculiar fitness
of our climate for bleaching.’

Such a trade could certainly exist and flourish without the
support of Great Britain. That England by a protective policy
directed against Ireland, could inflict much injury on her, was no
doubt true, but those who rashly counselled such a policy should
learn to dread the consequences of changing the course of manu-
facture by forced measures, and should remember that four and
a half millions of people will not remain idle. ‘ England raised
the woollen manufactory here by prohibiting the importation of
Irish provisions, and she established the woollen manufactory
afterwards in France by destroying the child of her own creation
in Ireland. Should she attempt and prevail in prohibiting our
linen to her ports, it is impossible to foresee what ports we may
find, what returns we may get, and in those how much of what
she now supplies us with, may be included.’

These words came with an especial weight from a statesman,
who was the acknowledged master of all questions relating to
the commercial condition of Ireland—a statesman whose life had
been largely spent in harmonising the commercial systems of
the two countries. Nor was there less weight in the language
in which he dwelt upon the extreme danger of persisting in such
‘a measure as the Union, in opposition to the genuine sentiment
of the intelligent portion of the nation. *‘ Let the silly attempt,’
he said, ‘to encourage its revival by getting resolutions privately
signde for it, be abandoned. If you doubt the general execration
in which it is held, call the counties. Take their sense at public
meetings, instead of preventing those meetings lest the general
sense should be known, and put an end to all the idle and silly
tricks of circulating stories, that this gentleman or that gentle-
man has changed his mind.’ ‘The Union of Scotland was re-

VOL. VIII. CC

386 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH, XXXI.

commended to prevent separation—we oppose the proposed Union
from the same motive.’

A mere sketch, such as I have given, can do little justice to a
speech which took more than four hours in its delivery, and was
atterwards published in a pamphlet of no less than 113 closely
printed pages. It should be compared with the great speech of
Pitt, which it was intended to answer, and it will not suffer by
the comparison. It had a wide and serious influence on opinion,
not only from its great intrinsic merits, but also from the high
character and position of its author; from his evident disinte-
restedness ; and from the confidential place he had for so many
years held in the Government of the country.

There were but few other proceedings in the Parliament of
1799 that need delay our attention. The Indemnity Act, and
the proceedings of the High Sheriff of Tipperary, which chiefly
produced it, have been elsewhere considered. The Act was
warmly recommended by Lord Castlereagh, and there is, I believe,
no evidence that he seriously disapproved of the conduct of
Fitzgerald.! A very remarkable and somewhat obscure episode,
however, took place about this time in the House of Lords, which
deserves some notice.

We have seen that the College of Maynooth, though built by
a parliamentary grant, had not at first any fixed or recognised
endowment from the State. The grant, however, of 8,0001.,
which had been voted in 1795, was followed in the three next
years by additional grants amounting together to 27,000/.2. But
in 1799, in consequence of negotiations entered into with Arch-
bishop Troy, and some other leading members of the Catholic
body, the Government determined to place the college on a firmer
basis, by providing it with a permanent annual endowment of
8,000/. which was to be devoted to the purpose of educating 200
students.’ The measure, like most others at this time, was in
reality taken mainly for the sake of winning support for the Union,4
and the Government do not appear to have anticipated any

' See Castlereagh Correspondence, made for the year 1799 in the Irish

ii. 280-282. : Parliament, it was much more intent
- * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. on the question of the Union than
71, 372.

8 bid. ili. 91, 372.
* Lord Castlereagh says, ‘When
the grant to the Catholic College was

on the internal economy of that
seminary.’ ( Cornwallis Correspondence,
ili. 374.)

CH. XXXL CLARE’S OPPOSITION TO MAYNOOTH. 387

serious resistance, or to have encountered any in the Commons ;
but when the Bill came before the Peers, it met with a most un-
expected fate. Lord Clare, without having given the smallest
hint of his intention either to Cornwallis or to Castlereagh, rose
to oppose it. He appears from the beginning to have detested
the institution, and he now maintained that its evils could only
be palliated by introducing into the seminary a lay element of
sons of Catholic gentry, who might liberalise the sacerdotal
students by their contact and manners, and also by insisting on
the students paying at least a portion of the expense of their
education. Maynooth, he complained, was a purely sacerdotal
institution ; the education was gratuitous; the future priesthood
of Ireland would in consequence be drawn from the dregs of the
population, and he spoke in terms of bitter invective of the recent
conduct of the Catholic clergy in dividing as much as possible
the Catholics from the Protestants. In the House of Lords, the
Chancellor was almost omnipotent, and on his motion the pro-
posal that the Bill should go into committee was rejected by
twenty-five to one. .

This was a complete and most unwelcome surprise to the
Government, and it threatened very seriously to disturb their
negotiations with the Catholics. The belief was soon widely
spread that it was intended to abolish Maynooth, but Castle-
reagh at once disavowed any such intention, and in the follow-
ing year a grant, which the Government desired, was duly voted
with a Bill slightly altering the administration of the College,
and Clare took a leading part in supporting it. ‘The cause of
his very extraordinary conduct in 1799 must be a matter of
conjecture. He himself wrote to Lord Castlereagh, that he was
convinced that if Maynooth on its existing lines received a per-
manent legislative sanction, it would enable the popish prelates
of Ireland to subvert its Government in ten years.! It appears,
however, to have been believed by many that other motives in-
fluenced his decision.2, Perhaps the most probable Was a desire

1 Compare the statements of second point, the rejection of the Bill

Cornwallis, Clare, and Castlereagh
in the Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
90-92, 371-375; Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, iii. 277-279.

2 Sir Robert Peel, many years
later, wrote to Croker, ‘As to your

in 1799, I believe at this moment no
human being but myself knows the
real truth on that point. It was an
act of sheer mischief and mutiny of
Lord Clare, who, perhaps, then had a
foresight of diminished influence on

ec2

388 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

to show the Government that if they tried to carry the Union
by making concessions to the Catholics, and sacrificing the party
of the ascendency, they might encounter a most formidable and
uncompromising opposition.

It is certain, however, that the attitude of the Catholic
priesthood in Ireland, had at this time created a very real and
widespread anxiety and irritation among men who were neither
Orangemen nor sympathisers with Orangemen, and that these
feelings were not solely or even mainly due to the part taken
by some priests in the rebellion. The great clerical reaction
throughout Europe, which followed the French Revolution, might
be already discerned in Ireland in an increased stringency of
ecclesiastical discipline, which was directly calculated to deepen
the divisions of Irish life. Much irritation had been created on
the eve of the rebellion by a pastoral of Dr. Hussey, commenting
on some cases in which Catholic soldiers are stated to have
been obliged to attend Protestant worship. The grievance
appears to have been a real one,! but it was said that the time
and manner in which it was denounced were eminently fitted to
sow the seeds of disaffection and division in the army.

More serious complaints were made, that the priests were
forcing Catholic parents, by threats of excommunication and de-
privation of all the benefits and blessings of the Church, to with-
draw their children from Protestant schools. It was obviously
intended, it was said, to bring into the hands of the priests the
education of all the lower orders throughout the kingdom, and
the worst enemy of Ireland could not devise a more effectual
scheme for keeping the Irish Catholics a distinct people, main-

the passing of the Act of Union. He

é I dislike to the Government, or from a
rejected the Bill without communi-

cation with the Irish Government.
Lord Castlereagh gave an assurance
in the Commons, as you will perceive,
that no prejudiceto the College should
arise from the proceedings in the
Lords.’ (Croker Correspondence, 2nd
ed. 11.33.) In 1801, Clare, contrary to
the wish of the other members of the
Government, tried to procure the ad-
mission of lay students into May-

nooth, and there was a somewhat
angry dispute. Lord Hardwicke
wrote: ‘Whether Lord Clare has

taken the part he has from spleen or

conviction that it was right to do so, I
cannot pretend to determine. .. . It
would be very curious if, after all that
has passed, Lord Clare should be at-
tempting to acquire popularity with
the Catholics at the expense of the
Government. He seems to me. with
a great share of cleverness and viva-
city, tobe very deficient in consistency
and precision in his ideas.’ (Corn-
wallis Correspondence, iii. 367, 368.)

1 See on this subject the Substance
of the Speech of Sir J. Hippisiey,
May 18, 1810, pp. 50-52.

CH. XXXI. INCREASED SACERDOTAL TYRANNY. 389

taining eternal enmity and hatred between them and the Pro-
testant body, and counteracting that liberal intercourse which
tolerant laws and tolerant manners had of late years established
between them. ‘This,’ it was added, ‘ was precisely the same
tyranny of which the Catholics had themselves so long com-
plained, as violating the first principles of nature, by denying the
parent the right of educating his children as seemed best to
himself, and the priests were far more inexorable in enforcing
the spiritual penalties, than the Legislature had ever been in
enforcing temporal ones. In the late rebellion there had been
alarming signs that when fanaticism was aroused, Catholic
servants in Protestant houses could not be trusted, and that
they looked upon their masters as aliens and reprobates. Few
things, it was said, had done so much to produce this feeling as
the inexorable refusal of absolution and the sacraments, by which
the priests now punished any Catholic servant who attended the
family prayers of his Protestant master, even when it was per-
fectly notorious that those prayers contained nothing in the
smallest degree hostile to the Catholic faith. In the English
Church the power .of excommunication had long been disused ;
and even when it was employed, it was exercised only under the
strict superintendence of the ecclesiastical courts. In Ireland
it was lavishly employed, and it was made the instrument of
atrocious tyranny. It was especially made use of to punish all
Roman Catholics who entered a Protestant church, assisted at a
Protestant sermon, or received any kind of moral or religious
instruction from a Protestant minister. ‘The excommunicated
person, wrote a Protestant bishop of very moderate opinions,
‘is driven from society; no one converses with him; no one
serves, no one employs him.’ The Bishop mentions one case,
which had come under his personal notice, of a Catholic who
in his family read the English Bible, and who sometimes went
to hear a sermon in a Protestant church. He was publicly ex-
communicated, and the immediate consequence was, that he lost
all his business as house~-painter, and was reduced to poverty.
He was often advised to bring an action for damages against the
priest, but he knew that his life would be in imminent danger
if he did so, and he was at last obliged to fly from the country.
It appeared to many Protestants, that a tyranny not less

390 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXX1.

crushing or degrading than the old penal laws was growing up
in Ireland, and that it might one day become a grave danger to
the State. It was represented that with the home education of
the priests, their numbers would certainly increase ; that the
bishops, not content with Maynooth, were establishing seminaries
for priests in almost every diocese ; that in the government of
Maynooth the Protestant element was little more than formal,
and had no real power.! A numerous priesthood, drawn chiefly
from the peasant class; educated on a separate and monastic
system ; uncontrolled and unendowed by the State, and exercising
an enormous influence over an ignorant and disaffected people,
might hereafter play a formidable part in Irish politics. The
attitude of the House of Lords in 1799 may have been largely
influenced by such fears.

The other incident which must be noticed in this session, was
of a very different kind. Colonel Cole, one of the members for
Enniskillen, who was an opponent of the Union, had been ordered
to join his regiment in Malta; he accordingly desired, in the
usual way, to vacate his seat, and it was known that a prominent
anti-Unionist would take his place. Seats in the Irish Parlia-
ment were vacated by the grant of a nominal office called the
Escheatorship of Munster, which corresponded to the Chiltern
Hundreds in England. In both countries the office was granted
as a matter of course, though a single case was discovered in
Ireland in which it had been refused. It was the main object,
however, of the Government to pack the Parliament with sup-
porters of the Union, and accordingly Cornwallis, who granted
the Hscheatorship invariably, and without question, in all cases
in which an Unionist was likely to be returned, took the extra-
ordinary course of refusing it to Colonel Cole, and to another
member whose seat would be filled by an anti-Unionist. His
act was defended on the ground that the bestowal of Crown
offices was within the sole and unquestioned prerogative of the
Crown; but an Opposition powerful in talent and character
maintained, that such an exercise of the prerogative was a gross
abuse, and a glaring violation of the spirit of the Constitution.

‘See a very remarkable letter strongly in favour of Maynooth, and
from the Bishop of Meath to Lord does not appear to have approved of
Castlereagh, Castlereagh Correspon- the act of the House of Lords in
dence, ii, 282-291. The Bishop was rejecting the vote.

CH. XXXt. ENGLISH UNION DEBATES, 1799. 391

The independent element in the House appears to have been
strongly with them, and an address, requesting the Crown to
grant a pension to Colonel Cole, which, by disqualifying him from
sitting in the House, would vacate his seat, was moved by John
Claudius Beresford. The Government succeeded in defeating
it by a motion for adjournment, but their majority was only,
fifteen, and the Duke of Portland intimated that for the future
it would be better to follow the rule adopted in England.!

The conduct of the Government in this matter clearly showed
their determination at all hazards to persevere. In April an
address in favour of the Union passed through both of the British
Houses of Parliament almost without opposition, after debates
which added little to the weight of argument, but much to the
weight of authority in its favour. The remarkable concur-
rence of opinion among those who had been personally respon-
sible for the administration of Ireland, that a speedy Union
was essential to the security and continuance of the connection,
is the strongest argument in favour of the Government. In
the English debates in this and the succeeding year, Carlisle,
Westmorland, Portland, Camden, and Buckingham, who had all
been Lords Lieutenant, and Hobart, Auckland, and Douglass, who
had all been Chief Secretaries, spoke strongly in favour of an
Union. Lord Fitzwilliam, however, and General Fitzpatrick, who
had been Chief Secretary in the Administration of Portland, took
the cther side, the first dwelling chiefly on the inopportuneness
of the moment for introducing so extensive a change, and the
second maintaining the acknowledged finality of the constituticnal
compact of 1782.

Very few of the seceding Whigs thought it necessary to be
present during these debates, and only three somewhat obscure
' peers signed the protest against the address. Lord Moira in
one House, and Sir Francis Burdett in the other, denounced the
whole recent Irish policy of the Government with great violence,
and the former declared that the Union in Ireland was viewed
‘by the nation at large, with an abhorrence amounting almost
to a degree of frenzy. A more temperate, and therefore a more
impressive speech, was made by Lord Darnley, who was a great
Trish proprietor. He believed that a legislative Union between

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 97-100; Grattan’s Life, v. 40-46.

392 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXI.

the two countries was in itself desirable; but he warned the
Ministers that they most seriously underrated the opposition
to it in Ireland. ‘Englishmen,’ he said, ‘are disposed to
measure everything by the standard of their own country,
than which nothing can be more fallacious when applied to
Ireland. I really believe that, in many respects, the inhabi-
tants of no two countries on the face of the globe are so essen-
tially different.’ English Ministers, he continued, were entirely
mistaken in supposing that the opposition to the Union in
Treland represented merely a faction or a cabal. ‘Unless I
am very much deceived, it speaks almost the united sense of
the whole Irish nation—not indeed of the whole nation taken
numerically, for unfortunately the majority of the population of
Treland is incapable of forming any adequate judgment on this
or any other subject; and if they were, their minds are so
tainted with the poison of French principles . . » that their
opinion would be of but little value as applied to the question.
I speak not therefore of them, but of the middle ranks of every
description throughout the country, the country gentlemen, the
yeomen, the merchants and manufacturers, the learned bodies
. . . the strength and sinew of the country, the zealous friends
of British connection . . . these, I fear, are your opponents. .. .
Nothing which I have seen or heard, induces me to believe that
this most respectable and important part of the Irish nation is
not decidedly hostile to every idea of Union.’!

Very little was said in reply to these representations, but
one speaker dilated on the many signs of unpopularity that had
attended and followed the Scotch Union, and had not prevented
that act from being a signal blessing to both countries. The
addresses, however, of the two English Houses of Parliament
in favour of the Union had a considerable moral effect, and the
speech of the Lord Lieutenant, in closing the session of the Irish
Parliament on June 1, clearly evinced the determination of the
Government to push on the measure. The fact that the Irish
House of Commons had emphatically condemned it in its very
first stage was not even referred to, but the Lord Lieutenant
stated that he had received his Majesty’s particular commands
to acquaint them with the addresses and resolutions of the two

1 Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 688-690.

CH. XSI. PARLIAMENTARY RECESS. 393

Houses in England. He added, that the King would receive
the greatest satisfaction in witnessing the accomplishment of
the Union, and that for his own part, if he were able ‘ to contri-
bute in the smallest degree to the success of this great measure,’
he would consider the labours and anxieties of a life devoted to
the public service, amply repaid.!

In addition to the Union, there were two other measures
which the English Government was extremely anxious to carry.
One of them was the imposition of an income tax on Ireland,
like that of England. The other was a law similar to one which
had just passed in England, enabling the King to take 10,000
men out of the Irish militia for the purpose of foreign service.?
Castlereagh and Cornwallis warned them that it would be most
dangerous to connect these measures with the Union, and the
latter measure appeared to the Lord Lieutenant in the existing
condition of Ireland altogether unsafe. It was, at one time, in
contemplation to summon Parliament for an October session, for
the purpose of imposing an income tax prior to an Union,* but
this intention was ultimately abandoned. It was perceived
that it would interrupt the measures which the Government were
taking to create a parliamentary majority for the Union, and to
this great end all their efforts and policies were now subordinated.
Seven months anda half were accordingly allowed to pass before
Parliament was again summoned, and in this interval the task
of securing a majority was accomplished.

' Seward’s Collectanea Politica,iii. iii, 133.
488_490. * Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.

2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 271, 272.
250, 251; Cornwallis Correspondence,

394 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE UNION.

Pant

Tuer kind of negotiation into which Lord Cornwallis was at this
time compelled to enter, was in the highest degree distasteful, to
his frank, honourable, soldier-like character, and his correspond-
ence shows that he was under no illusion about the nature of his
task, or about the real motives, opinions, and dispositions of his
supporters. ‘The political jobbing of this country,’ he writes,
‘ gets the better of me. It has ever been the wish of my life to
avoid this dirty business, and I am now involved in it beyond
all bearing. . . . How I long to kick those whom my public
duty obliges me to court!’ ‘My occupation is now of the most
unpleasant nature, negotiating and jobbing with the most.corrupt
people under heaven. I despise and hate myself every hour,
for engaging in such dirty work, and am supported only by the
reflection, that without an Union the British Empire must be
dissolved.’ He recalled, as applicable to himself, the bitter lines
in which Swift had painted the demon Viceroy, scattering in
corruption the contributions of the damned, and then complain-
ing that his budget was too small ;! and he repeated once more,
‘Nothing but the conviction that an Union is absolutely necessary
for the safety of the British Empire, could make me endure the

So, to effect his monarch’s ends,

From Hell a Viceroy devil ascends,

His budget with corruptions cramm’d,

The contributions of the damned ;

Which with unsparing hand he strows,

Through courts and senates as he goes;

And then at Beelzebub’s black hall,

Complains his budget is too small.

A Libel on the Rev. Dr. Delany and his Excellency Lord Carteret.

~

CH, XXXIL. THE COUNTY MEMBERS, 395

shocking task which is imposed on me.’ That the majority
which ultimately carried the Union, was not an honest majority
expressing honest opinions, he most clearly saw. ‘The nearer
the great event approaches,’ he wrote almost at the last stage of
the discussion, ‘the more are the needy and interested senators
alarmed at the effects it may possibly have on their interests and
the provision for their families, and I believe that half of our
majority would be at least as much delighted as any of our
opponents, if the measure could be defeated.’ !

In the face of such declarations, it appears to me idle to dis-
pute the essentially corrupt character of the means by which the
Union was carried, though it may be truly said that selfish
motives, and even positive corruption, were by no means a
monopoly of its supporters, and though there may be some differ-
ence of opinion about the necessity of the case, and some reason-
able doubt about the particular forms of bribery that were em-
ployed. The most serious feature in the parliamentary debates
of 1799, was the strenuous opposition to the measure by the
county members, who represented the great majority of the free
constituencies of Ireland, who on all normal occasions supported
the Government, and who in many instances, while opposing the
Union, disclaimed in the most emphatic terms any intention of
going into systematic opposition. Lord Castlereagh, as I have
said, attributed their attitude largely to the first intention of the
Government to diminish by a half the county representation,
and he hoped that the retention of the whole of that representa-
tion in his amended scheme, and the greatly enhanced dignity
attaching to a seat in the Imperial Parliament, would put an end
to their opposition. But in this expectation he was deceived.

Though some conspicuous county members supported the Union,
~ the large majority, as we shall see, remained to the end its
opponents.

The main power in Parliament, however, rested with the
great borough owners, and so many seats were in the hands of a
few men, that the task of the Government was not a very formid-
able one. In truth, when we consider the enormous and over-
whelming majorities the Government could on all ordinary
occasions command, and the utter insignificance of the Opposition,

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 100-102, 228.

396 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. XXXII.

especially after the secession of Grattan and the outbreak of the
rebellion, the difficulty they encountered is more wonderful than |
their success. A few of the borough seats were attached to
bishoprics, and were completely at their disposal. Others were
in the hands of great English absentees. Most of them were in
the control of men who heid lucrative offices in the Government,
or who had within the last few years been either ennobled, or
promoted in the peerage as a price of their political support.
Lord Shannon, who had long been the most powerful of the
borough owners, had from the beginning supported them ; Lord
Waterford, Lord Ormond, Lord Clifden, Lord Longueville, and
other peers with great influence in the House of Commons, were
on the same side. In the constitution of the Irish Parliament,
the purchase of a few men was sufficient to turn the scale and to
secure a majority, and this purchase was now speedily and simply
effected by promises of peerages.

Immediately after the Union had passed through the fea
House of Commons, but before it had received the royal assent,
Lord Cornwallis sent over a list of sixteen new peerages, which
had been promised on account of valuable services that had been
rendered in carrying it. It appears from the correspondence
that ensued, that the King and the English Government, though
they had given a general authority to Cornwallis, had not been
consulted in the details of the promotions, and they were anxious
to strike out a few names and adjourn the creations till after the
first election of representative peers for the Imperial Parliament.!
Cornwallis and Castlereagh both declared that this course would
involve a breach of faith which would make it impossible for
them to continue in the Government of Ireland, and a few sen-
tences from the letters of Castlereagh will throw a clear light on
the nature of the transaction. ‘It appears to me,’ he wrote,
‘that Lord Cornwallis, having been directed to undertake and
carry the measure of Union, and having been fully authorised by
various despatches to make arrangements with individuals to
which not only the faith of his own, but of the English Govern-
ment, was understood to be pledged, will be very harshly treated
if the wisdom of his arrangements, now the measure is secured, is
to be canvassed. . . . I am fully aware of the responsibility to

1 Cormmallis Correspondence, iii. 251-256,

CH. XXXII. THE UNION PEERAGES. 397

which the Irish Government has been subjected, in the exercise
of the authority which I conceive to have been delegated to them
at the outset of this measure. The importance of the object
could have alone induced the King’s Ministers to grant such
powers, and I hope they will now, in deciding what remains to
be done, advert to the nature of the struggle, as well, as the
authority which the Irish Government conceived itself in the
possession of. . . . It certainly has been exercised successfully
as far as the object is concerned, and not for any purposes per-
sonal either to Lord Cornwallis or myself. . . . In so long a
struggle, in a certain period of which, after the defection of seven
members in one division, the fate of the measure was in suspense,
it is not wonderful that the scale of favours should have been
somewhat deranged ; if in two or three instances, and I do not
believe it will appear in more, certain individuals, availing them-
selves of circumstances, obtained assurances of favours to which °
in strictness they are not entitled.’ ‘It appears that the Cabinet,
after having carried the measure by the force of influence of
which they were apprised in every despatch sent from hence for
the last eighteen months, wish to forget all this; they turn short
round, and say it would be a pity to tarnish all that has been
so well done by giving any such shock to the public sentiment.
If they imagine they can take up popular grounds by disappoint-
ing their supporters, and by disgracing the Irish Government, I
think they will find themselves mistaken. It will be no secret
what has been promised, and by what means the Union has been
secured. . . . The only effect of such a proceeding on their part,
will be to add the weight of their testimony to that of the anti-
Unionists in proclaiming the profligacy of the means by which
the measure has been accomplished. . . . The new peerages .
are all granted either to persons actually members of, or con-
nected with, the House of Commons.’ !

The sixteen peerages, however, referred to in these letters, by

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iii.
327, 328, 330, 331. Lord Cornwallis
writes, ‘He [the King] will, I am
“persuaded, see the necessity of my
having entered into embarrassing en-
gagements, according to the various
circumstances which occurred during
the long and arduous contest, and if
any of them should appear so strongly

to merit his disapprohation, as to in-
duce him to withhold ‘his consent to
their being carried into effect, he will
be pleased to allow me to retire from
a station which I could no longer
hold with honour to myself, or with
any prospect of advantage to his ser-
vice. (Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
265, 266.)

398 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXXII.

no means comprise the whole of what in this department was
done. In the short viceroyalty of Lord Cornwallis, no less than
twenty-eight Irish peerages were created, six Irish peers obtained
English peerages on account of Irish services, and twenty Irish
peers obtained a higher rank in the peerage.'

There was another form of bribe, which had probably not
less influence. If the Union was carried, a new object of
ambition of the first magnitude would be at once opened to the
Irish peerage. No promotion in that peerage was likely to be
so much coveted as the position of representative peer, which
was to be enjoyed by twenty-eight members of the Irish peerage,
and was to place them for life in the Imperial House of Lords.
But the influence the Government exercised in the peerage was
so great, that it was easy to foresee that, in the first election
at least, it would prove absolutely decisive. The first repre-
sentative peers, indeed, were virtually nominated by the Lord
Lieutenant, and they consisted exclusively of supporters of the
Union.?

It was essentially by these means that the Union was carried,
though there are some slight qualifications to be made. In the
long list of creations and promotions, there are nine which were
not connected with the Union, and among the new peers there
were doubtless a few who claimed and received rewards for
acting in accordance with their genuine convictions. Lord Clare,
the great father of the Union, was made an English peer in
September 1799.3 Lord Altamount had from the first declared
himself in its favour, and the tone of his whole correspondence
with the Government indicates a man of real public spirit, yet
he bargained for and obtained a marquisate. Lord Kenmare
was the leading member of a small group of Catholic gentlemen

1 See the list in Cornwallis Cor-

the Union as upon all other occasions,’
respondence, iii. 318, 319. Very full

induces the Ministers to recom-

details about the services of the new
peers will be found in earlier letters
(iii. 251-266).

2 Cornwallis
286, 287. :

3 Lord Clare’s English peerage
was first suggested from England as
early as June. Portland writes, ‘The
sense we have of Lord Clare’s services,
and of the manly and decided part
he has acted, as well with respect to

Correspondence, iii.

mend him for an English peerage,
‘without waiting, as was originally
intended, until the measure of the
Union was secured and completed.’
He believed, he said, that such a step
might clearly evince H.M.’s determi-
nation, and the rewards likely to be
obtained by supporting the Union.
(Portland to Cornwallis, June 28,
1799.)

Gre Sexe THE UNION PEERS.

399

who had long been in the close confidence of the Government,
and who undoubtedly desired the Union, yet the earldom of Lord
Kenmare was described by Lord Cornwallis as one of the titles
which he was ‘ obliged’ to promise in order to carry it.1 Men, it
is true, who valued honour more than honours, and who, in a
period of extreme corruption, believed it to be their duty to
take the invidious course of voting for the extinction of the
Legislature of their country, would not have acted in this manner.
They would rather have followed the example of Lord Gosford,
who warmly supported the Union, but at the same time refused
an earldom, in order that no imputation should rest upon the
integrity of his motives.? But the Irish borough owners should
be judged by no high standard, and it may be admitted, to their
faint credit, that in some few instances their peerages did not
determine their votes and their influence. In the majority of
cases, however, these peerages were simple, palpable, open bribes,
intended for no other purpose than to secure a majority in the
House of Commons. The most important of the converts was
Lord Ely, whose decision, after many fluctuations, appears to have
been finally fixed by a letter from Pitt himself. He obtained a
promise of an English peerage, and a well-founded expectation
of a marquisate, and he brought to the Government at least
eight borough seats, and also a vast amount of county influence
which was very useful in procuring addresses in favour of the
Union.?

1 «Among the many engagements
which I have been obliged to contract
in the event of the success of the
measure of a legislative Union, I have
promised to use my utmost influence
to obtain an earldom for Lord Ken-
mare.’ (Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

109.)
; 2 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
319. Bishop Perey notices that Lord
Gosford’s wife was very hostile to
the Union, and that their son voted
against it in the House of Commons.
(Jan. 30, 1800.)

3 On Dec. 11, 1799, Castlereagh
wrote to Portland, ‘Mr. Pitt’s letter,
which your Grace was so obliging as to
obtain for me, enabled me perfectly to
satisfy Lord Ely, without making any
positive promise as to the marquisate.
His Lordship is satisfied to leave

himself in the hands of the Govern-
ment.’ (Cornwallis Correspondence,
ili. 149.) The King was very anxious
to restrict the number of marquisates
and English peerages, and in 1800
the Duke of Portland wrote to the
Lord Lieutenant, that he must do his
best to confine the English peerages
to the Earls of Hly and Londonderry,
and to persuade the peers whom the
Lord Lieutenant had recommended
for marquisates, with the exception
of Lord Clanricarde, to surrender
their claims as a special favour to
the King. If absolutely necessary,
however, an exception might be made
for Lord Ely, as his intluence had
proved so great. Cornwallis an-
swered, ‘Lord Ely, who never will-
ingly relinquished anything, has a
promise of being made a marquis,

400 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on. xxxu.

But although the weight of such a mass of creations and
promotions must have been enormous in a Parliament constituted
like that of Ireland, it would have been insufficient but for some
supplementary measures. The first was, a provision that close
boroughs should be treated as private property, and that the
patrons should receive a liberal pecuniary compensation for their
loss. This compensation removed an obstacle which must have
been fatal to the Union, but being granted to opponents as
well as supporters, it cannot, in my opinion, be justly regarded
as strictly bribery, and it may be defended by serious arguments.
Nomination boroughs were in fact, though not in law, un-
doubtedly private property, and the sale or purchase of seats
was a perfectly open transaction, fully recognised by public
opinion, and practised by honourable politicians. As we
have already seen, Pitt, in his English Reform Bill of 1785,
proposed to create a fund for the purchase of the English
boroughs, and the United Irishmen included the compensation
of Irish borough owners in their scheme of radical reform.
The English Legislature always refused to recognise this traffic,
but it does not appear to have been formally prohibited or made
subject to legal penalties until 1809 ;! and even in 1832, Lord
Eldon maintained that proprietary boroughs were strictly pro-
perty. ‘ Borough property, he said, ‘was a species of property
which had been known in this country for centuries; it had been
over and over again made the subject of purchase and sale in all
parts of the kingdom, and they might as well extinguish the
right of private individuals to their advowsons, as their right to
exercise the privileges which they derived from the possession
of burgage tenures ;’ and he quoted the course which was taken
when abolishing the hereditable jurisdictions in Scotland, and

which, I understood from Lord Castle-
reagh, was authorised from England
in a letter written by Mr. Pitt, and
transmitted by your Grace to him,’
(Ibid. pp. 258, 262, 264.) Many
other particulars about Lord Ely
will be found in this correspondence.
He was compensated for six seats,
but he retained what was then the
close borough of Wexford in the
Imperial Parliament; he had consi-

derable county influence, and he ap-
pears to have bought nominations
from other borough owners. (Ibid.
p. 324.) Cornwallis notices the im-
portance of Lord Ely’s influence, in
procuring addresses for the Union
from the counties where his property
Taye, (2. 13)

' Ball’s Irish Legislative Systems,
2nd ed. p. 285; May’s Const. Hist.
i, 292, 2938.

CH, XXXII COMPENSATION FOR BOROUGHS. 401

the nomination boroughs in Ireland, as binding precedents.!
This view was not adopted by the Imperial Legislature, and
an overwhelming wave of popular enthusiasm, which brought
England almost to the verge of revolution, enabled the Whig
Ministry to sweep away the small boroughs, and carry the
Reform Bill of 1832. But in Ireland at the time of the Union
there was certainly no such enthusiasm; the borough interest
was stronger than in England, and it was idle to expect that those
who possessed it would make this great pecuniary sacrifice with-
out compensation. The opponents of the Union dilated with
much force upon the enormity of treating the right of represen-
tation as private property ; making the extinction of a national
Legislature a matter of bargain between the Government and
a few individuals, and then throwing the cost of that bargain
upon the nation. But in truth the measure was necessary if the
Union was to be carried, and its justification must stand or fall
with the general policy of the Government.

Eighty boroughs, returning 160 members, were in this
manner purchased at the cost of 1,260,000/., which was added
to the Irish national debt, and thus made a perpetual charge
upon the country. The sum of 15,0001. which was given for
each borough does not appear to have been unreasonable. ‘It
is well known,’ Grattan wrote to the citizens of Dublin in 1797,
‘ that the price of boroughs is from 14,000/. to 16,000J,, and has
in the course of not many years increased one-third—a proof at
once of the extravagance and audacity of this abuse. ? The con-
vulsions of the rebellion had, it is true, lowered the value of
borough property, and produced an insecurity which no doubt
greatly assisted the measure, but it was only equitable that the
compensation should be calculated by the market value before
the civil war began. It is remarkable that the largest sum
given in compensation went to Lord Downshire, who was a
vehement opponent of the Union. He received 52,500/. as
the owner of seven borough seats. The next largest sum was
45,0001., which went to Lord Ely. Of the whole sum, about a
third part was paid to opponents.of the Union. In some cases

1 Twiss’s Life of Eldon, ii. 1738, ofboroughseats in Ireland at different
4. periods, will be found in Ball’s Zrish
2 Grattan’s Miscellaneous Works, Legislative Systems, p. 286.
p.57. Some statistics about the price

VOL. VIII. DD

402 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on, xxxn.

the compensation for a single borough was distributed among
two or more persons, and the compensation paid for the Church
boroughs was applied to ecclesiastical purposes.’

These figures, however, only give an imperfect and approxi-
mate measure of the amount of borough interest in the Irish
Parliament, and of the relative weight of that interest on the two
sides of the question. Several of the close boroughs were allowed
to send one member to the Imperial Parliament, and one mem-
ber in the British House of Commons being considered equal to
two in the Irish one, no compensation in these cases was given.
Several seats were not reckoned strictly close, though a few
great families exercised an overwhelming influence over them,
and some borough owners were accustomed to purchase single
nominations from others, and thus exercised in fact a much
larger parliamentary influence than appears from the compensation
they received. The same statute which provided-for the com-
pensation of the borough owners, provided also that full compen-
sation should be granted to all persons whose offices were abo-
lished or diminished in value by the Union. Rather more than
30,0001. a year was granted in annuities to officers or attendants
of the two Houses of Parliament, by a separate statute.?

Another supplementary measure was a great remodelling of
the House of Commons, through the operation of the Place Bill.

It was the firm resolution of the Government, that they
would not dissolve Parliament, and submit the great question of
the maintenance of the national Legislature to the free judgment
of the constituencies. From such a step, wrote Cornwallis, ‘ we
could derive no possible benefit.’? At the same time, they
desired to change the composition of the House of Commons,
which in 1799 had so decisively rejected the measure, and
in this object they were eminently successful. In December,
Castlereagh wrote that not less than twenty-two seats were vacant,
which would be filled by their friends,‘ and in the few months
that elapsed between the prorogation of Parliament in 1799, and
the Union debates of 1800, no less than sixty-three seats became

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 2 40 Geo. III. c. 34, 50. See, too,
321-324 ; 40 Geo. III.c.34, 1,400,0002. Annual Register, 1800, pp. 145, 146.
was granted for the purposes of this 5 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
statute, but this extended to some 111.
other forms of compensation beside * Thid. p, 150.

that of the borough patrons.

CH. XXXIt. INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS. 403

vacant.! In this manner, without a dissolution, more than a
fifth part of the House was renewed. A few of the vacancies
were due to deaths, and a few to changes of office arising
from the dismissal of officials who opposed the Union. In
other cases men who were not prepared to vote for the Union,
were willing to accept the promise of some lucrative office and
leave Parliament;? but the great majority of these changes
were due to the conversion of the borough patrons. Members
holding seats by their favour, who were unwilling to support
the Union, considered themselves bound to accept nominal
offices and vacate their seats, and other members were brought
in for the express purpose of voting for the Union. Several of
them were Englishmen, wholly unconnected with Ireland, and
some were generals of the Staff. In the case of borough mem-
bers who had purchased their seats, a different rule prevailed,

and they were entitled to vote irrespective of their patrons.*
At the same time, the whole force of Government patronage
in all its branches was steadily employed. The formal and

1 See Grattan’s Speeches, iv. 37.

2 A private letter of Lord Castle-
reagh to his successor, Abbot, about
the end of 1801, gives an example of
this. ‘When Mr. K. .. . vacated his
seat for P.... in favour of a sup-
porter of Government, he received
an assurance of the first chairman’s
place that should fall vacant. Very
shortly after,and during the struggle,
that for Tyrone became so, and, of
course, under his engagement it be-
longed to Mr. K. We found that
Government would be involved in ex-
treme difficulty with one of its most
important and indeed most disinte-
rested friends, if that situation was
not open to Lord Abercorn’s recom-
mendation. I was directed by Lord
Cornwallis to see Mr. K. and to en-
deavour to prevail on him to waive
his claim, assuring him that Govern-
ment would not ultimately suffer him
to be a loser.’ He did so, and thus
had an indisputable claim on the
Government. (Colchester MSS.)

3 In Bishop Percy’s letters we
have an illustration of the working of
this system. The Bishop writes, that
two of Lord Downshire’s members
had lost their places for opposing the
Union, but Mr. Magenis ‘ has made
his peace with Government, and now

is strong for an Union, as his son
Willy tells me, and that his father is to
have a better place (and by the bye is
also promised some good Church pre-
ferment for his son). I asked him
how Lord Downshire would like this.
He told me that his father had paid
Lord D. for his seat in Parliament
this time, so was at liberty to dispose
of his vote (a curious traffic), but
Mrs. Brush thinks it must have been
bought cheap, as the rebellion ex-
pected, and the fear of an invasion,
made a seat in Parliament so cheap
it might be purchased for 6002. or
7002. I hope this shocking trade
is drawing to an end, and all the
abominable borough sales will cease
in this country if the Union should
take place.’ ‘Old Richard Magenis
and some others who stood aloof, have
now joined the Ministry. His price
is some good preferment promised to
Willy. Of this they make no secret,’
‘I believe I mentioned that Mr.
Magenis had given 1,000/. for his seat
in the present Parliament, which his
Lordship [Lord Downshire] had sent
to return him, but he refused to take
it, as he hopes tomake a better market
for his vote.’ (Bishop Percy to his
wife, Aug. 1, Dec. 10, 18, 1799,
British Museum.)

DD 2

404 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxtit,

authoritative announcement, that the English Government were
resolved to persevere until the Union was carried; that though
it might be defeated session after session, and Parliament after
Parliament, it would always be reintroduced, and that support
of it would be considered hereafter the main test by which
all claims to Government favour would be determined, had
an irresistible force. The dismissal of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer and the Prime Sergeant, because they refused to
support the Union, needs no defence, for no Administration
could possibly continue if some of its leading members were
opposed tothe main objects of its policy. The dismissal of Lord
Downshire from his regiment, from the Privy Council, and from
the governorship of his county, was defended on the ground
that he had been guilty of a grave breach of military discipline
in sending down a petition against the Union to his regiment
of militia to be signed; and in the opinion of Lord Cornwallis,
this dismissal, by evincing the determination of the Government
and by terrifying their opponents, did more than any other
single step to carry the measure.! But in addition to these, a
number of obscure men in non-political places were dismissed,
because either they or their relatives declined to support it.
In spite of the Place Bill of 1793, which had somewhat di-
minished the number of placeholders who might sit in Parlia-
ment,” there appear to have been in the last Irish House of
Commons no less than seventy-two persons who either held
civil places or pensions from the Crown, or were generals or
staff officers.’ All these men knew that their promotion, most

1 Cornwallis

MOSS, 192, 197.
2 See vol. vi. pp. 599-602.

Correspondence, iii. the King, they say, ‘Of those who
voted for the Union, we beg leave to

inform your Majesty that seventy-six

* In the course of the struggle,
Mr. O’Donnell moved that the address
to the Lord Lieutenant in favour of
the Union should be presented by ‘all
the general and staff officers, the
placemen and pensioners,’ who were
members of the House of Commons,
and the names of these members
were then drawn up, with the offices
they held. The list (which contains
seventy-two names) will be found in
Grattan’s Speeches, iv. 5-7, and in
Grattan’s Life, v. 173. In the protest
drawn up by the leaders of the Oppo-
sition, in the form of an address to

had places or pensions under the
Crown, and others were under the
immediate influence of constituents
who held great offices under the
Crown.’ (Grattan’s Speeches, iv. 32.)
Lord Cornwallis, on the other hand,
sent over to England a return of
the members of the Irish House of
Commons who held civil offices of
any kind whatever. The editor of
the Cornwallis Correspondence says,
‘There were fifty-six members hold-
ing offices at pleasure, of whom four
held also offices for life, six had offices
for life only, and nine were King’s

BESTOWAL OF PATRONAGE. 405

CH, XXXII.

of them knew that their retention of their emoluments, was in
the power of the Government, and would be determined by the
votes they were about to give. It was part of the Union scheme
that not more than twenty additional placemen should be in-
troduced by it into the Imperial Parliameut. Plunket, in one
of his speeches, declared with great force and eloquence, that if
there had been only twenty placemen in the Irish House of
Commons, or if the placemen who sat in it were allowed to vote
by ballot or according to their real wishes, it would have
been utterly impossible to have carried the Union.

Hope, however, was a more powerful agent of corruption
than fear, and it is, I believe, scarcely an exaggeration to say
that everything in the gift of the Crown in Ireland ; in the Church,
the army, the law, the revenue, was at this period uniformly and
steadily devoted to the single object of carrying the Union.
From the great noblemen who were bargaining for their mar-
quisates and their ribbands; from the Archbishop of Cashel, who
agreed to support the Union, on being promised the reversion
of the see of Dublin, and a permanent seat in the Imperial House
of Lords;! the virus of corruption extended and descended
through every fibre and artery of the political system, including
crowds of obscure men who had it in their power to assist or
obstruct addresses on the question. No two facts are at this
time more conspicuous, than the immense preponderance of legal
ability that was arrayed in opposition to the Union, and the
immense profusion of legal honours that were lavished on its
Twenty-three practising barristers voted for the

send a stranger to supersede the whole

supporters.
Counsel, or had patents of precedence.

Over these fifteen, Government had,
of course, no influence.’ (Cornwallis
Correspondence, iii. 243.) In this list
the military posts and the pensions are
not included; on the other hand, the
position of King’s Counsel and patents
of precedence are not counted in the
Opposition list.

1 T have collected in another hook
some curious facts about Archbishop
Agar’s conduct on this occasion.
(Leaders of Public Opinion in Tre-
land, pp. 157, 158.) The Primacy fell
yacant when the Union debates were
going on, and Cornwallis tried (though
without success) to have an Irishman
appointed. ‘It would have a very
bad effect,’ he wrote, ‘at this time, to

bench of bishops, and I should like-
wise be much embarrassed by the stop
that would be put to the succession
amongst the Irish clergy at this criti-
cal period ; when I am beyond measure
pressed for ecclesiastical preferment.’
(Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 210.)
‘Lord Clifden, to whom we stand in-
debted for seven Union votes; Lord
Callan, who has two friends in the
House of Commons, and Mr, Preston,
member for Navan, all nearly related
to the Archbishop of Cashel, came to
me this day to request that I would
agree to submit his name to his
Majesty’s consideration for the suc-
cession to the Primacy.’ (Ibid. pp. 217,
218.)

ENGLAND IN THE: EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx

406

Union, in the House of Commons, in 1800. In 1803 six of
them were upon the Bench, while eight others had received high
honours under the Crown.! Thirty-two barristers voted for the
Union at the bar debate in 1799. In 1803 not more than five
of them were unrewarded.2 Charles Kendal Bushe was then a
young lawyer starting in his career, and overwhelmed with
embarrassments from his efforts to pay the debts of his father,
and he has left a touching account of the struggle he underwent
from the dazzling promises that were made him by the Govern-
ment, if he would only place his eloquence and his vote at the
service of the Union.? Some shameful promises, however, were
shamefully broken. In one of his last letters, written just
before leaving Ireland, Cornwallis sent to England a list of fifty
promises of places, pensions, legal appointments, and promotions
in the peerage which he had formally made on the part of his
Majesty’s Government, acting by the direction and-authority of
the Ministers in England, but which, nevertheless, were still un-
fulfilled. With a single exception, they seem all to have been
made for the purpose of carrying the Union. In the list of
names, there are thirty-five members of the House of Commons
who had voted for it, and three of the pensions which had not
been promised by name to members of Parliament would actually
have been received by them. Some of these acknowledged
promises remained unfulfilled up to the change of Government
in 1806, and were then repudiated by the new Ministers.*

1 See the names and the appoint- the 6th. . He is now in great

mentsin Barnes's Rights ofthe Imperial
Crown of Ireland (1803), pp. 335-337.

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 18.

3 Grattan’s Life, v. 114,115. The
following curious letter gives a vivid
picture of the kind of negotiation
that was going on. A Government
agent writes to Marsden, that he had
been visiting the seat of Colonel
Almuty at Brianstown, near Long-
ford. The Union was mentioned. ‘I
suffered him to spend himself in a
philippic against it. Imade afew ob-
servations, and added that the county
of Longford had addressed. This he
denied; he said it was only’ the
Catholics, and there was scarcely a
Protestant in the county for it. He
isaman of much influence, and stands
well with the Catholics, His affairs
are much embarrassed, He has two
sons in the line, one a lieutenant in

distress, as the lieutenancy is not
paid for, and his lands are under
cust™. . . . I hinted that this would
be a good time for him to take a lead
with the Freeholders, asno man of any
consequence had stirred, and that the
first mover would be likely to attract
the notice of Government. I said
that he was foolishly letting slip the
only opportunity that might offer of
showing his zeal for Administration,
who certainly were very much alive
upon thesubject. He seemed to think
the measure would be carried... .
I have not yet had any opportunity
here of feeling the people, but I in-
cline to think that the Catholics are
its best friends, and the Protestants
seem sullen.’ (H. Purden to Marsden,
Oct. 14, 1799, I.S.P.0.)

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
339, 340. This letter is dated Feb.

CH, XXXIt. BESTOWAL OF PATRONAGE, 407

The details of these negotiations have for the most part been
destroyed.!_ The Under Secretary Cooke, and Alexander Mars-
den, who was, at the time of the Union, Assistant Secretary in the
Law Department, and who succeeded Cooke as Under Secretary;
were chiefly entrusted with them, and Marsden appears to have
been afterwards pursued with some rancour by disappointed
claimants.? Enough, however, remains to show beyond all real
doubt, the character of the transaction, and to justify the
emphatic and often repeated statements of Grattan, Plunket,
Bushe, Parsons, and Grey. As late as 1830, Lord Grey, while

19, 1801. It will be observed, that
these promises were quite independent
of the regular compensations which
had been granted by Act of Parlia-
ment in the preceding year. See, too,
on the ‘heavy mortgage’ upon the
patronage of Ireland in 1801, Lord
Colchester’s Diary and Correspondence,
i. 325.

4 Thus, near the end of 1801,
Castlereagh writes to his successor,
Abbot: ‘Mr. Grady’s case is one of
those with respect to which I took the
liberty of referring you for more pre-
cise information to Mr. Cooke, for
reasons which will naturally suggest
themselves, through whom the en-
gagement was made with the appro-
bation of the Lord Lieutenant. It
was one of those arrangements pressed
upon us by the necessity of the case,
at a moment when we were not alto-
gether in a situation, consistent with
the safety of the measure entrusted to
us, to decide merely upon the per-
sonal merits of those who had the
means to forward or impede it. The
number of applications to which you
have been exposed as the result of that
measure, have enabled you to judge
of the embarrassments under which
‘we acted.’ (Castlereagh to Abbot
(secret), Oct. 17.) ‘The consequence
[of some arrangements that have been
described] would be, that the Lord
Lieutenant would be able to fulfil the
expectations of promotion held out
by the last Government to Mr. Grady,
which would discharge a claim inmany
respects of a pressing nature, by his
succeeding to the office of Counsel of
the Revenue.’ (Abbot to Addington,
Jan. 19,1802. Colchester MSS.)

2 In November 1803, the Govern-
ment was severely blamed in Parlia-

ment for not having foreseen Emmet’s
insurrection, and some special attack
appears to have been contemplated on
Marsden. <A copy is preserved of the
following very significant letter, which
Wickham then wrote (Nov. 18, 1803)
to the Lord Lieutenant: ‘In writing
to Mr. Yorke on the subject of the
personal attack that is intended to be
made upon Marsden, your Excellency
will perhaps do well to call his atten-
tion to these points. 1. Marsden was
the person who conducted the secret
part of the Union. Hrgo, the price of
each Unionist, as well as the respective
conduct and character of each, is well
known to him. Those who figure
away and vapour in so great a style
in London, are well known to him.
They live in hourly dread of being
unmasked, and they all consider him
as the person who opposes their in-
terested views and jobs by his repre-
sentation of the whole truth. 2.
Marsden, as a lawyer, is supposed to
be the person who gives to the Go-
vernment the opinion that is acted
upon as to legal promotions. He is,
therefore, supposed to be the man
who has stood in the way of our fill-
ing the Bench and the confidential
law situations under the Crown with
improper persons, by giving a fair and
right interpretation to the Union en-
gagements. 3. Many of the persons
who make a great figure at the levee,
and on the benches of either House,
in London, really dare not look Mars-
den in the face. I have often wit-
nessed this, and have beendiverted by
it. With your Excellency and with
me they have an air of uncomfortable
greatness, but with him they quite
shrink away.’ (1.8.P.0.)

408 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = cm. xxxm..

asserting in the strongest terms the fatal consequences that would
arise from any attempt to tamper with the settlement of 1800,
did not hesitate to avow his abiding conviction, that ‘ there were
never worse means resorted to for carrying any measure,’ than
those by which the Union was accomplished,’ and Grattan him-
self expressed his belief, that of those who voted for it, not more
than seven were unbribed.?

There is one form of corruption, however, about which there
may be some controversy, and has probably been much exaggera-
tion. It has been asserted by O’Connell, that immense sums
were spent in direct bribes, and that as much as 8,000/. was
given for a vote in favour of the Union, and it was certainly the
belief of the Opposition that direct bribery was extensively
practised. It is scarcely probable that this can have been done
with the knowledge of Lord Cornwallis. Some leaders of the
Opposition appear to have attempted to meet corruption by
corruption, and are accused of having subscribed a large sum for
the purpose of purchasing votes. Lord Cornwallis, when writing
about a bribe which he believed had been offered by the Opposi-
tion for a vote, added, ‘If we had the means, and were disposed
to make such vile use of them, we dare not trust the credit of
Government in the hands of such rascals.’* It is certain that
there was no Irish fund from which any great sum could have
been drawn by the Government for the purpose of bribery. A
secret service fund of 5,000/. a year, which had been authorised
in 1793, could have gone but a little way in purchasing a
majority, even if it were applied to that object, and a small
additional sum, which had been subsequently granted for pen-
sions to informers in the rebellion, was altogether devoted to its
ostensible purpose. The 5,000/. which had been sent over from
England in the beginning of 1799, appears to have been chiefly,
if not solely, employed in purchasing support outside the House.
Wickham, in sending it, added, ‘The Duke of Portland has

1 Speech on Nov. 2, 1830. (Par.
Debates.) See, too, in the same de-
bate, the emphatic statement of Lord
Farnham, an old opponent of the
Union, but at the same time a strong
anti-repealer.

2 Grattan’s Life, v. 113.

3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
184, This letter, however, was written

on Feb. 8, 1800, and a great deal ap-
pears to have happened after that
date. :
+ See on the absence, before 1793,
of any secret service fund like that of
England, vol. iv. p.519. The Act of
1793 was 33 Geo. III. c. 34. On the ,
pensions to informers, see Cornwallis
Correspondence, iii. 319-321,

CH. XXXII. THE ALLEGED BRIBERY. 409°

every reason to hope, that means will soon be found of placing a
larger sum at the Lord Lieutenant’s disposal.’! Shortly before
the meeting of Parliament in 1800, Castlereagh urgently de-
manded a similar and if possible a larger sum, and 5,000J.
more appears to have been transmitted, with a memorandum
stating that ‘the fund was good security for a still further sum,
though not immediately, if it could be well laid out and furnished
on the spot.’? Two months later, Cooke wrote to England for a
fresh remittance, which he described as ‘ absolutely essential ’ for
the increasing demands. A ‘considerable sum’ was raised by
loan from a private individual, who soon pressed for repayment ;
and sayings were made out of the Irish civil list, and applied
as secret service money to meet many engagements that had
been entered into. Before the session had closed, Portland and
Pitt were again entreated to send over money; and Pitt, while
expressing his regret that he could not send as much as was
wanted, promised annual instalments of from 8,0001. to 10,0001.
for five years, which were probably intended to liquidate Union
engagements.’ One supporter of the Government in the House
of Commons appears to have been excused adebt of 3,0001.4 On
the whole, I should gather from these facts, that direct. money
bribes were given, though not to the extent that has been
alleged ; but it is probable that the greater part of this expendi-
ture went in buying seats from members who were willing to vacate
them, and in that case the transaction did not differ sensibly from
the purchase of boroughs by Administration, which up to a still
later period was undoubtedly practised in England.’ Several
transactions of this kind were rumoured, although on no good

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. wind up matters, exclusive of the
82. annual arrangement; and an imme-
_ * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. diate supply is much wanted. If it
151, 156. cannot be sent speedily, I hope we

3 Ibid. pp. 202, 226, 308. ‘Mr.
Pitt,’ wrote Cooke to Castlereagh in
April, ‘approves of your taking ad-
vantage of these vacancies in the
civil list. Quere: Will the law allow
you to increase the number of the
Commissioners of Boards?’ (P. 226.)
In July 1800, Castlereagh wrote, ‘ I
hope you will settle with King our
further ways and means; from the
best calculation I can make, we shall
absolutely require the remainder of
what I asked for, namely, fifteen, to

may discount it here.’ (Ibid. p. 278.)
In Lord Colchester’s Diary (May
1801) there is an entry, ‘The money
for engagements of the Union, as
authorised to be taken out of the
privy purse, to be settled between Mr.
Pitt and Lord Castlereagh’ (i. 266).

* See the letter, countersigned by
the Attorney-General, in Barrington’s
Rise and Fall of the Irish Nation,
C. XXVii.

5 May’s Constitutional History, i.
291,

410 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. — cu. xxxm.

authority, and we have the express statement of Edgeworth, that
in 1800 he was offered 3,000 guineas for his seat during the few
remaining weeks of the session.!

The various forms of pressure and influence I have described,
were steadily exerted through the whole period of the recess and
through the decisive session that followed, and it is by no means
surprising that they should have converted the minority of 1799
into the majority of 1800. ‘There is an opposition in Parlia-
ment to the measure of Union,’ wrote Cornwallis in May 1799,
‘formidable in character and talents. Their numbers, though
they have not proved equal to shake the Government, have for
the present rendered the prosecution of the measure in Parlia-
ment impracticable.’ But if the Governments in both countries
pursued their end without flinching, he had great hope of success.
‘We reckon at present,’ he added, ‘on the Union, 148 certain
with us, 98 against, and 54 whose line cannot yet be positively
ascertained.’ ‘ Your Grace will easily believe, that the usual
importunity of political friends has risen upon the present
occasion with the difficulties of Government and with the nature
of the question itself, which appears to them in prudence to
enjoin the most speedy accomplishment of their several objects,
as the measure is considered by them as fatal to the usual mode
of giving effect to their claims.’? A month later, the Govern-
ment strength in the Commons was believed to have risen to 165.
In December it was calculated at 180, but Cornwallis placed
little confidence in his supporters. ‘I entertain every day more
doubt of our success in the great question of Union,’ he wrote
at the very end of 1799; ‘we have a lukewarm, and, in some
instances, an unwilling majority; the enemy have a bold and
deeply interested minority, which will, I am afraid, even after our
friends are reckoned, run us much nearer than most people
expect.’ >

Outside the House, however, the Government believed that
the Union project was steadily and rapidly gaining ground, and,
after making all due allowance for the natural bias of Lord

1 Life of Hdgeworth, ii. 231. November, the Speaker is said to

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. have still asserted that the Opposi-
101. (R.0.) The last two passages tion had 140 votes. (Castlereagh Cor-
are omitted in the published letter. respondence, iii. 1.)

S Tbid pp. WOR mOL, slog. 5) in:

ca. xxx. ~—s« OPINION OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT. 411

Cornwallis, and for the partisan character of the sources from
which he chiefly obtained his information, it remains tolerably
certain that the measure was finding a real and increasing sup-
port. The opinions of Cornwallis varied from week to week,
but his general belief appears to have been, that the great mass
of the Irish people were thoroughly disaffected to the English
rule, and would welcome with delight a French invasion,
but that they were absolutely without attachment to their
Parliament, and perfectly indifferent to the question of Union.
In Dublin, he admitted, there was a fierce and passionate hostility
to it. In the central counties of Leinster, the strong predomi-
nance of feeling was against it, but elsewhere the Lord Lieu-
tenant believed that it was viewed, either with indifference or
with favour. In April 1799, after describing the extreme dis-
affection and the extreme corruption around him, he said, ‘The
great mass of the people neither think or care’ about the Union.!
In July he repeated, ‘ The mass of the people of Ireland do not
care one farthing about the Union, and they equally hate both
Government and Opposition.’ ‘ It is in Dublin only where any
popular clamour can possibly be excited.’? ‘I am preparing,’
he wrote in the sdme month, ‘to set out to-morrow on a tour
for three weeks to the South, for the purpose of obtaining de-
clarations &c. in favour of the Union. On the whole, we cer-
tainly gain ground.’ *

His tour proved exceedingly satisfactory, and in August he
went much farther than he had yet done, and assured Portland
of ‘the general good disposition’ of the people of Munster ‘ to-
wards the Government, and their cordial approbation of the
measure of Union.’ ‘ This sentiment,’ he continued, ‘ is confined
to no particular class or description of men, but equally pervades
both the Catholic and Protestant bodies, and 1 was much grati-
fied in observing that those feelings which originated with the
higher orders, have in a great degree extended themselves to the
body of the people. Were the Commons of Ireland as naturally
connected with the people as they are in England, and as liable to
receive their impressions, with the prospects we have out of doors,
I should feel that the question was in a great degree carried.’

} Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 4 Abid. pp. 110, 111;
Be se ibide Bs Uls:

412 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxiw

He believed that the real, or at the least the most formidable,
opposition to be encountered, was an opposition of self-interest,
arising from the fact that the proposed measure ‘ goes to new-
model the public consequence of every man in Parliament, and
to diminish most materially the authority of the most powerful.’ !

In October he made a journey through Ulster, for the pur-
pose of eliciting Union demonstrations in the province, and he
wrote to Portland that, though it would be ‘unsafe to trust
entirely to appearances,’ there was ‘reason to entertain very
sanguine hopes of the good disposition of the people in that part
of the kingdom towards the very important measure of a legis-
lative Union.’ He had not ventured to enter the county of
Down, where the influence of Lord Downshire was supreme, and
he considered it too perilous to attempt to obtain addresses from
the counties of Monaghan, Cavan, and Fermanagh, though the
‘corporation and principal inhabitants ’ of the town of Monaghan
had addressed him in favour of the Union; but in a large number
of towns through which he passed, addresses were presented to
him by the corporation and ‘ principal inhabitants, and in two
or three places he had unexpected encouragement. The priests
and some leading Catholics came forward at Dundalk with an
address in favour of the Union. At Belfast, though there was
much anti-Union feeling, ‘150 of the principal merchants and
inhabitants’ had met him at a dinner, which was understood to
be exclusively composed of supporters of the Union. At London-
derry he had been received with genuine enthusiasm. The
town was illuminated, and ‘Success to the Union resounded
from every quarter.’? ‘The Union,’ he wrote in November, ‘is, I
trust, making progress. The great body of the people in general,
and of the Catholics in particular, are decidedly for it.’ *

He relied largely on this disposition to justify to his own
mind the measures he was taking, and nothing was neglected
that could foster it. Every pamphlet or speech of any merit in
favour of the scheme was systematically, extensively, and gratui-
tously circulated. Great pains were taken to influence the press.
McKenna, the well-known Catholic pamphleteer, had been often
employed by the Government ; he appears now to have rendered

’ Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. ? Thid. pp. 138-140.
bet dee, 8 Ibid. p. 143.

‘

OPINION OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT, 413

CH, XXXII.

them material service, and he was recommended as a skilful
and willing agent for superintending the Unionist literature.!
Strenuous efforts were made to obtain declarations in favour of
the Union, and many came in from bodies of men in different
parts of Ireland. Their significance, however, may very easily
be exaggerated. Except in Galway, the supporters. of the
measure had hitherto never ventured to convene county or
popular meetings,” but the great borough owners and landlords,
who had been won over, the sheriffs in the counties, and other
important adherents of the Union, were busily employed, at the
request of the Lord Lieutenant, in procuring signatures in favour
of it. With so vast an amount of territorial influence and
Government patronage at their disposal, they had little difficulty
in doing so, and men who were sincerely in favour of the measure
were undoubtedly scattered, though not very thickly scattered,
over the whole island. It is remarkable, however, that, in spite
of all the efforts of the Government, the signatures to these
addresses did not number more than a small fraction—pro-
bably not morethan a twelfth part—of those which were appended
to the petitions to the House of Commons against the measure.
The support of the corporations of many important towns
was obtained, and this may at first sight appear more significant,
but these corporations were very small bodies, and frequently
completely subservient to some one great nobleman, Thus, to
give but a few examples: Lord Donegal could control the Cor-
poration of Belfast, Lord Roden the Corporation of Dundalk, and
the Primate that of Armagh, while the influence of Lord Water-
ford at Waterford, and that of Lord Ormond at Kilkenny, was

little, if at all, less absolute. The Corporation of Cork appears

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
105; Castlereagh Correspondence, iil.
£6, 27, 353. In a memorial sent to
the Chief Secretary, Abbot (Oct. 13,
1801), McKenna said, ‘The four
Administrations which successively
ruled Ireland, from 1793 to 1800,
have each, unsolicited by me, called
for that little aid to the cause of
civil society and good government
which I was able to contribute... .
But the affair of the Union constitutes
that ground on which my claim, at
least to a certain extent, is beyond all

question irresistible. You know that,
in consequence of application made to
me, I gave up my time and trouble to
the cultivation of that question. If
contributing nearly as much as any
other person to render that trans-
action palatable to the public, and to
extend the credit of it, be aservice to
Government, that service I must say
I rendered. A positive engagement
was made me.’ (Colchester MSS.)

2 Cornvallis Correspondence, iii.
105, 129.

414 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ‘cu. xxxit.

to have been under the combined influence of Lord Longueville,
Lord Donoughmore, and Lord Shannon, who were all supporters
of the Union.’ It is true, as Lord Cornwallis remarked, that the
words ‘principal inhabitants’ were usually added to the cor-
poration addresses; but, if the opponents of the measure may be
believed, they were far from being warranted by the facts.

The task of measuring with accuracy the public opinion of a
country on a political question which was never submitted to the
test of a general election, is an impossible one, but a few extracts
from confidential letters to the Government, and a few cross
lights thrown on this obscure subject from various quarters and
from different points of view, may assist our judgment. I have
mentioned in the last chapter the extremely reluctant support
which Lord Carleton had given to the measure, and have
quoted the desponding letter he wrote to Pelham immediately
after speaking in favour of it. In the March of 1799, he repeated
his remonstrance in very earnest terms. He said that he had
always looked to two objects, to obtain an Union and to preserve
it, and that the Government seemed to him to have neglected
the latter. ‘ Were the French to obtain any footing in this king-
dom,’ he continued, ‘I see the likelihood of their procuring a much
more powerful support than that which a few months ago would
have been afforded them.’ The Union, ke complained, had been
brought forward when the minds of the people were quite un-
prepared for it, and the result of this ‘ precipitate obtrusion’ was
‘much hazard, not only to those individuals who have supported
the measure of Union, but also to the safety of this kingdom, and
to the permanence of its connection with Great Britain.’ ‘Those
who are disposed to view the conduct of the British Government
in an unfavourable light, are led to suspect that the rebellion
has been suffered to continue, in order to forward the measure of
an Union. livery exertion should be made to remove the suspi-
cion, and to convince the people of this country that they are
indebted for the restoration of tranquillity to ... a British
army, brought to this country for their preservation.’ ‘I agree
with you in opinion, that, circumstanced as this country now is,
the measure ought not to be forced or accelerated. The public
mind is not yet prepared for it, and whatever irritates, will either
impede attainment of the object, or if attained will render its

L Cornwallis Correspondence, iii, 124, 125, 138, 139.

OH, XXxIh OPINION OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT. 415

continuance so precarious, as to make the measure noxious rather
than beneficial.’ He speaks of the great social division the
question had produced, and of the widespread fear that the real
aim and object of the Union was equality of taxation, raising
the taxation of Ireland to the much higher level of England.!
Pelham’s old correspondent, Alexander, was hardly more en-
couraginge. He wrote shortly after listening to the great speech
of Foster in April, and he was evidently profoundly under its
impression. He describes its powerful effect on men of all
classes, and added that the measure ‘will be most strenuously
opposed and most hollowly supported.’ ‘ Although parlia-
mentary reform was the ground of rebellion, and its plausible
pretence, men in disturbed times care so little as to the forms of
vesting power, so that it be exercised by their own party,
that now the populace willingly admit the Parliament to be the
voice of the people and its free organ.’ ‘The very quiet pro-
duced by the energy and moderation of Government, and the aid
of the military, is now attributed to the wisdom of Parliament.’
‘Rely upon it, the writer continued, ‘the measure cannot be
carried by force, nor by gross or open corruption. If carried, it
will not hold. A permanent governor, an honest and effective
administration, a combination of men of talent and labour, can
alone give security to the measure. Such a system will govern
our country quietly, and render it a noble ally to England.’ ?
From Connaught, Lord Altamount sent very favourable re-
ports. In Mayo he thought there was ‘a more general concur-
rence than in most parts of Ireland’ in favour of the Union, though
there was some opposition among the Catholics. ‘'The county
of Galway is brought over very fairly to the measure, the property
completely with it, and the Catholics as forward as their neigh-
‘bours.’ He had succeeded in obtaining the signatures of most
of the owners of property in Mayo. ‘If the Roman Catholics
stand forward,’ he said, ‘it will be unwillingly ; they are keeping
back decidedly, but many will be influenced, and seme few who
connected themselves with the Protestants during the disturbance,
will be zealously forward on the present occasion. The priests
have all offered to sign; and though I am not proud of many of

them as associates, I will take their signatures to prevent a pos-

1 Lord Carleton to Pelham, March 1799. (Ibid.)
1, 1799. (Pelham MSS.) % Lord Altamount, May 26, 1799.
* Alexander to Pelham, April 12, (1.8.P.0.)

416 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu,

sibility of a counter declaration. I hear the titular Archbishop
has expressed himself inclined to the measure. ‘This day I have
sent round to all the Catholics of property inthe country. I may
be mistaken, but in my judgment the wish of most of them would
be to stand neuter; or perhaps, if they had any countenance, to
oppose it—that is the fact. Several will sign from influence,
some from fear, but the majority, I believe, will pretend that
they have given opinions already, and cannot decently retract
them. . . . Every man applied to, of all persuasions, wants to
make it a personal compliment.’ ‘I have found,’ he adds, ‘to
my infinite surprise, that the county and the town of Sligo, with-
out the slightest interference and against all their representatives,
are decided friends to the Union. I know of no part of Ireland
where the unbiassed mind of the public is so generally with it.
. . . Roscommon is against it; but for that, the bull, or indeed
the entire of the province, might be considered as pledged to the
measure, or ready to be so.’?

In Kerry, Lord Castlereagh was informed about this time,
that ‘the entire property’ of the county was for the Union, and
he was convinced that the measure was gaining friends, and
was ‘in some parts of the kingdom decidedly popular.’? Lord
Waterford said that the opinion of the county and city of Water-
ford was nearly unanimous in favour of it. Lord Landaff de-
clared that almost all the considerable landlords in Tipperary,
except Lord Mountcashel and Lord Lismore, took the same
side, and Castlereagh had much hope that it would be possible
to carry a county meeting in favour of the Union.t Long
afterwards, in the British House of Lords, Lord Donough-
more declared that ‘the first favourable turn’ which the Union
question experienced after its rejection in 1799, came from
Tipperary, where an address in its favour was carried on his
proposal, and he added that his success was largely due to the
support of the Catholics, who believed that their emancipation
would be a certain consequence of the Union.> It is probable,

1 Castlereagh Correspond2nce, ii. June6,1810. Cornwallis confirms (Co7'-

327-329. (June 5, 1799.) vespondence, ili. 125) the great services
2 Thid. p. 345. (July 6.) of Lord Donoughmore on this question.
3 Thid. p. 394. Like his father, Lord Donoughmore
4 Ibid. p. 854; ili. 228, was a warm friend of the Catholics,

5 See Lord Donoughmore's reply and he appears to have had consider-
in the debate in the House of Lords, able influence among them.

ci. Xxx LORD DE CLIFFORD. 417

however, that the political forces in this county were somewhat
miscalculated, for almost at the last stage of the debates the
member for Tipperary with his two sons abandoned the Govern-
ment, though he had engaged to give the Union an unqualified
support, and though ‘ the objects he solicited were promised,’
alleging that ‘ the principal part of the respectable freeholders
of the county of Tipperary had signed resolutions against the
Union, though many of them had before instructed him to
support it.! In Limerick, it was said, the corporation was hos-
tile, but the bulk of the property of the county was decidedly
favourable to the measure.2 In Derry and Donegal, the gentry
were ‘in general well disposed,’ and the linen merchants, though
they took no active part, were supposed to be ‘on the whole
rather favourable,’ under the expectation that it would secure
their industry. Londonderry, more than any other town in
Ulster, appears to have desired the Union.*

A few additional letters of a more general description may be
noticed. Lord de Clifford appears to have been a retiring, honest,
and unpolitical peer, and he had taken no part in the divisions
of 1799, but no less than four members of the House of Commons
were returned by his influence.’ In reply to a letter strongly
urging him to vote for the Union, he expressed his deep attach-
ment to the present Administration, and his extreme reluctance
to oppose any measure they brought forward; but the Union,
he said, was so supremely important, that it was a question on
which he must think for himself. Ifthe great majority of the
people were against it, the present seemed to him a peculiarly
inopportune time for introducing it, and ‘even were the majority
of the well-affected in favour of it,’ he did not believe that it
would ultimately be likely to work for good. All who really
knew Ireland, knew that the very great majority of the people
looked on the present owners of land as a set of usurpers, and
had been long waiting for an opportunity to rise and wrest
their property from them. If the late terrible rebellion had
been circumscribed in its area and successfully suppressed, this
was much more due, he believed, to the personal influence
exercised by the resident country gentlemen over their neigh-

1 Cornmallis Correspondence, iii. 3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 352.
180, 182. 4 Thid. iii. 280. :
2 Ibid. p: 125° 5 Cornnallis Correspondence, iii. 164,

VOL. VII. EE

418 ENGLAND IN’ THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH. xxxil

bours and tenants, than to the English troops. ‘If by forcing
an Union upon this country, you disgust one half of these gentle-
men, and convert the other half into absentees, you will leave
the country a prey to the disaffected, and the consequence,
I fear, would be fatal.’ The Scotch parallel was wholly mis-
leading. In Scotland at the time of the Union a large portion
of the proprietors of land were attached to another king, while
the people did not care who was king, and blindly followed their
chiefs. In Ireland‘ the great body of the people are against you,’
while the presence and the constant influence of a loyal gentry
form the main support of the connection.!

Luke Fox, a clever lawyer who was raised to the bench for
his support of the Union, believed that Ireland was inhabited
by three nations, which were utterly different in character,
principles, and habits, and not less clearly divided by their
opinions about the Union. The Protestants of the Established
Church, ‘from every motive of a monopolising interest, are
determined opponents of the scheme of Union,’ and it would be
impossible to gain them, except by influence.

The Catholics, on the other hand, desired, above all things, to
get rid of their present rulers, and to emerge from slavery into
the class of British citizens, and they could be easily gained by
concessions. Nor isit in the least probable that such concessions
would alienate the Protestants. ‘ Religion is a mere pretence.
The true bone of contention is the monopoly of Irish power and
patronage,’ and once the ascendant Protestant descends through
the Union from the position of ruler, the question of religious
disqualification would assume a wholly different aspect. At
the same time, the concessions which Luke Fox deemed most
necessary were not concessions of political power. A commuta-
tion of tithes, and a decent provision for the Catholic clergy,
were measures which were urgently necessary, for which the
country was fully ripe, and which ought to be carried without
delay. Another scarcely less urgent measure was the foundation
of a Catholic College connected with the Protestant University.
The Catholic youth should be given ample facilities for obtaining
the best education in the country, and in secular matters the
Protestants and Catholics should be educated together, as they
were in Holland and in many parts of Germany. In this

* Castlereagh Correspondence, ti, 355-358.

(Rexx | LUKE FOX AND FOSTER. a 419

manner durable friendships would be formed, and the next
generation of Irishmen would be far more united than the present
one. Ultimately, he believed the King should be invested with
a patronage of popish bishoprics and other dignities, similar
to that which the French king had always possessed, and the
two religions should be placed on the same plane of dignity ;
but for this the time was not ripe.

As for the Presbyterians, they hated all monarchy, but Fox
believed that they were perfectly indifferent to the Union, and
would not quit their looms and bleach-greens for a single day
either to support or to protest against it. ‘They are neutral,
and not to be meddled with.’

On the whole, this writer considered that the Union would
prove an inestimable benefit both to Ireland and the Empire, but
only on condition of the conciliation of the Catholics. ‘ Without
comprehending the Catholics, in interest and principle, an Union
between the two countries can be neither durable nor useful.’ !

It is a great misfortune to the historian of this period of
‘Irish history, that the almost entire disappearance of the cor-
respondence of the Speaker Foster, makes it impossible for us
to follow, in their confidential and unreserved expression, the
opinions of the man who then played the most important part
in the opposition to the Union. One remarkable letter, how-
ever, written in the December of 1799, may be found. The
Government, resenting bitterly his attitude, had just deprived
his son of an office, and it was reported that Pitt had been
expressing loud dissatisfaction at the conduct of Foster. The
Speaker heard of this, and he wrote with much dignity to Pelham.
He observed that, in a parliamentary life of nearly forty years,
he had almost always been a supporter of the Government ; that
he had never supported it more vigorously or more earnestly
than in the late very dangerous times; that he was still fully
resolved to do so on every question but one, and that the last
time he saw Pitt, he had told him frankly, and with a full
statement of his reasons, that it was wholly impossible for him
to support the Union. Knowing what his sentiments were,
Pitt had no right to complain of the active part he had taken.
‘T told him,’ he says, ‘that I was against the legislative Union,

» Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 408-414.

420 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ci. xxxm.

and that if the measure was doubtful, the time was, in my mind,
particularly inexpedient, and that I must declare my sentiments
when called on. I added also, that nothing could induce me to
change this opinion ; but that if the sense of the nation, contrary
to my belief, was fairly and clearly for the measure, I should
yield to it, and endeavour in the detail to make it as little
injurious and as beneficial as I could, and I particularly ex-
plained that by the sense of the nation I did not mean a small
or influenced majority in the House, but the real uninfluenced
sense of the country in general. This was in December. The
sense of the country soon after appeared against the measure,
and it was rejected by the House in January. . . . The subject
is now, I hear, in contemplation to be renewed. My belief was
then right, and I am still stronger in belief that the measure is
more disliked now even than it was then; and I am persuaded
that if he [Pitt] is rightly informed of the means resorted to, of
the nature and history of many of the late addresses, and of the
general opinion of people uninfluenced by fear or expectation,
he will be convinced it is so. Intimidation, and depriving
gentlemen of office for giving a free opinion when that opinion
was avowed to be desired, and when the nature of the question
made it peculiarly necessary that it should be so; the offering
office to others who possessed different political creeds, are not
means to obtain the real sentiments of the nation, nor can any
man consider sentiments expressed under such circumstances to
be so... . If ever the real, uninfluenced sentiments of the
kingdom shall call for the measure, I will act as I have said,
but I honestly own I never can expect them to be so... . I
lament the unfortunate circumstances which have arisen to make
me differ from Government. No consideration but the clearest
conviction could induce me to do so, and that conviction is my
own, without any party junction or association whatever. .
The withdrawing all confidence, and even the usual official
attention ; the circulating pamphlets and newspaper paragraphs
to run me down, and the depriving my son of office, are not
means of persuasion to operate on me either the one way or the
other. I will act uniformly, and if future time shall show I am
mistaken in my opinion of the Union, I will at least enjoy the
satisfaction of having acted with integrity.’ !
* John Foster to Pelham, Dec. 8, 1799. (Pelham MSS.)

421

CH. XXXII. THE PROTESTANT BISHOPS.

The Government, in endeavouring to influence Irish opinion,
had the great advantage of the support of the heads of the
two principal Churches in the country. The bishops of the
Established Church were actuated partly by obvious motives of
self-interest, and partly also by a belief that the Union would
place their Church beyond all danger of attack, but their attitude
during the struggle was not a very active one. Out of the
twenty-two bishops, twelve only were present at the division on
the Union in the House of Lords in 1799, and two of these—
Dickson, the Bishop of Down and Connor, and Marlay, the
Bishop of Waterford—both voted and protested against it.! The
Protestant clergy do not appear to have taken any prominent part
in procuring addresses for the Union, though there were some
exceptions. Bishop Percy, who had been from the first a strong
and very honest supporter of the measure, succeeded in inducing
all the beneficed clergy of his diocese, except four or five, to
join with him in an address to the Lord Lieutenant in its favour,?
and similar addresses were signed by the bishops and clergy of
Cork and Limerick.’ O’Beirne, the Bishop of Meath—a man of
great energy and some ability, who had been converted from
Catholicism—was much consulted by the Government during the
whole arrangement, and it is curious to find among the sup-
porters of the Union the once familiar name of Lord Bristol, the
Bishop of Derry. The great question that was pending could
not, it is true, draw him from his retreat upon the Continent,
but he authorised Lord Abercorn to place his name on an address
in favour of it. ‘This seems to have been his last appearance in
Irish politics. The Primate appears to have refused to sign
this address, although he had previously voted for the Union.‘
Trinity College, the great centre of Protestant learning, though

1 Mant’s History of the Church of
Treland, ii. 762.

2 Bishop Percy to his wife, Oct.
LO 99:

8 This is stated in a letter of
Bishop Percy, in the 1.8.P.0., Oct. 9,
1799.

4 Bishop Percy says: ‘ Lord Bristol
has put his signature, yet the poor
Primate, though that county [Tyrone]
is chietly in his diocese, and though
he voted in Parliament for the Union,
was not allowed—by Madam, I sup-
pose—to add his name [to an address

in favour of it].’ (Dec. 10, 1799.) In
Cox’s Irish Magazine (Nov. 1807, p.
60) there is a letter which is said to
have been written, in 1779, by the
Bishop of Derry to Boswell, inquiring
what effect the Scotch Union had
exercised on the prosperity of Edin-
burgh. If this letter is genuine, it
shows that Lord Bristol at that early
date looked with some favour on the
idea of an Union, and believed that,
although Dublin would be against it,
the rest of Ireland would probably
welcome it.

422 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxx.

divided, was on the whole not favourable to the Union; and it
is remarkable that Magee, who was afterwards a very able and
very typical archbishop, was one of its opponents.' George
Knox and Arthur Browne, who were the members for the
University, both spoke and voted against the Union in 1799.
In the following year Browne changed his side and supported
it; but he acknowledged in the House of Commons that he
was acting in opposition to the wishes of the majority of his
constituents. He afterwards received some legal promotion,
and he never again represented the University.

The Catholic bishops appear to have been unanimous in favour
of the Union, and in the recess of 1799 they exerted themselves
strenuously, persistently, and on the whole successfully, in sup-
porting it. In July the Catholic Archbishop of Cashel wrote to
Archbishop Troy, expressing his decided good wishes for the
measure, and promising to exert his influence ‘ discreetly’ in the
counties of Tipperary and Waterford, to procure the signatures
of respectable Catholics to an address in its favour. He com-
plained, however, that the bishops had little political influence
over this class, and feared that if he took a too prominent action,
it might rather injure than serve the cause.? In the course of
the summer, Lord Cornwallis received strong declarations in
favour of the Union from bodies of Catholics, in both Waterford
and Kilkenny, and he wrote that, ‘as the clergy of that Church,
particularly the superiors, countenance the measure, it is likely _
to extend itself.’

Archbishop ‘Troy was indefatigable in procuring signatures
to addresses, and in urging his brother prelates to depart from
the neutrality which they appear at first to have desired to main-
tain. Dr. Moylan, the Bishop of Cork, was in the close confidence
of the Government, and he spent some days with the Duke of
Portland at Bulstrode.t ‘Nothing, in my opinion,’ he wrote in
September, ‘will more effectually tend to lay those disgraceful
and scandalous party feuds and dissensions, and restore peace
and harmony amongst us, than the great measure in contempla-

‘ Castlereagh Correspondence, iii. (Faulkner's Journal, Jan. 19, 1799.)

pp. 229, 230. In the beginning of * Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
1799, the electors of Trinity College 344, 345.

(who consisted of the Fellows and 3 Thid. p. 352

scholars) addressed their members, * Thid. pp. 370, 371.

calling on them to oppose the Union.

CH, XXXII. CATHOLICS SUPPORT THE UNION. 423

tion, of the legislative Union, and incorporation of this kingdom
with Great Britain. J am happy to tell you it is working its
way, and daily gaining ground on the public opinion. Several
counties which appeared most averse to it have now declared for
it, and I have no doubt but, with the blessing of God, it will be
effected, notwithstanding the violent opposition of Mr. Foster
and his party. . . . The Roman Catholics in general are avowedly
for the measure. In the South, where they are the most
numerous, they have declared in its favour, and I am sure they
will do the same in the other parts of the kingdom, unless over-
awed (as I know they are in some counties) by the dread of the
powerful faction that opposes it.’ He believed that all ‘seeds of
disaffection ’ would be removed, if the religious disabilities were
repealed at or immediately after the Union, and if, in addition
to the provision which was intended for the Catholic clergy,
measures were taken to abolish the gross abuses which existed
in the collection of tithes.!

The Catholic Archbishop of Tuam, though in favour of the
Union, at first shrank from taking an active part in a political
movement, but the advice of Archbishop Troy and of the Catholic
Archbishop of Armagh decided him. He signed an address,
and soon after he wrote, ‘I feel myself each day less shy in de-
claring my sentiments and wishes relative to the Union. I have
had an opportunity in the course of the parochial visitation of
this diocese, which is nearly finished, of observing how little
averse the public mind is to that measure ; and I have also had
an opportunity of acquiring the strongest conviction, that this
measure alone can restore harmony and happiness to our unhappy
country.’? Bishop Caulfield, who had more experience than any
other bishop of the horrors which had desolated freiand during
the last few months, presided over a great’ Catholic meeting in
‘favour of the Union at Wexford, at which an address was pre-
pared which received more than 3,000 signatures.? Through the
instrumentality of the priests, several other purely Catholic
addresses in favour of the Union were obtained,* and Lord Corn-
wallis firmly believed that, although the numerical majority of

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. % Plowden, ii. Appendix, pp. 820-
399-402. 322.
2 Thid. pp. 347, 348, 386, 387, 4 Ibid. p. 323.

424 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, on. xxxu.

the Catholics might be indifferent or seditious, the preponderance
of opinion in the guiding, educated, and respectable portion of
that body was in favour of his policy. ‘The Union,’ he wrote
in November, ‘is, I trust, making progress; the great body of
the people in general, and of the Catholics in particular, are de-
cidedly for it;’ and in begging the Government to permit the
Catholic peers to vote for the representative peers, he urged that
a refusal would be peculiarly ungracious ‘at a time when a re-
spectable part of the Roman Catholic community in this kingdom
is almost universally coming forward in favour of the Union.’ !
Among the supporters of the Union was Arthur O’Leary, the
most brilliant writer of the Irish Catholics. He boasted that he
had reconciled many to it, and he predicted that it would put
an end to all religious disqualifications and national jealousies, ;
and would close for ever ‘ the tumultuary scenes’ by which Ire-
land had been hitherto distracted.?

In the strange irony of Irish history, few things are more
curious than the fact that it was the English Government which
persuaded the Catholic priests to take an active part in Irish
politics, and to take part in them for the purpose of carrying
the legislative Union. They were not in all places successful.
Many Catholics, refusing to act as a separate body, signed ad-
dresses with the Protestants against the Union. Lord Castle-
reagh sent to the Catholic Bishop of Meath, as he probably did
to the other bishops, a sketch of the address which he wished
to be signed ; but the Bishop answered that, though he himself
fully approved of it, and though the whole body of his priesthood
agreed with him, the lay Catholics of Meath were ‘too near
Dublin, and too much accustomed to listen to the opinions of the
Protestants of Meath, to be as yet willing to declare in favour
of the Union ;’ and that till this had ceased to be the case, a
dependent priesthood did not dare to take an open or active part.

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
145, 146.

2 O’Leary’s ‘Address to the Par-
liament of Great Britain.’ (Collected
Works (Boston, 1868), p. 541.)

3 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
437, 488. Some later letters from
General Barnett describe the services
of this bishop. ‘The Admiral having
expressed to me on Thursday last, a

particular wish that Dr. Plunkett
should come forward, I last night
received authority from the Doctor
to assure your Lordship, that the
measure of Union shall receive his
decided support. . . . Your Lordship
has full power to make use of Dr.
Plunkett’s name in any way that you
may consider is most conducive to

the furtherance of the measure. The

CH. XXXL. THE CATHOLIC OPPONENTS. 425

In Dublin, Cornwallis acknowledged that the utmost he could
hope from the Catholics was neutrality, and it is tolerably certain
that this neutrality was not obtained. Itis said that here also the
clergy and a proportion of respectable Catholics were in favour
of the Union, but the bulk of the Dublin Catholics appear to have
still adhered to the convictions so emphatically expressed by the
great meeting in Francis Street in 1795. In a very important
Catholic meeting which was now held in the Exchange, resolu-
tions were unanimously passed, describing an Union as the extinc-
tion of the liberty of Ireland, attributing the unexampled rapidity
of the improvement of Ireland during the last twenty years entirely
to the Constitution of 1782,and denouncing, asa gross calumny
on the Catholic body, the imputation that they could be induced,
by either ‘ pique or pretension,’ to sacrifice the independence of
their country. It was on this occasion that Daniel O'Connell
made his first appearance ona public platform. Ina remarkable
passage, which was probably elicited by Canning’s threat that it
might be necessary to re-enact the penal code if the Union were
defeated, he declared that the Catholics of Ireland would rather
accept that code, and throw themselves on the mercy of their
Protestant brethren, than assent to the extinction of the Legisla-
ture of their country, and seek advantages as a sect, which would
destroy them as a nation.!

A few other distinctively Catholic addresses were drawn up
in different parts of the country, protesting against the Union,
and against the assertion that it was favoured by the Catholics.?
Much indeed may be truly said to qualify the importance of the
Catholic demonstrations in its support. Extreme want of moral
courage, and extreme susceptibility to external influences, have
always prevailed in Ireland, and the combined pressure of a

Doctor particularly requests that all
his clergy should sign, and, with
prudence, exert their utmost influence
to forward the measure.’... ‘ He will
write to the clergy of Westmeath to
give support to the measure... . He
believes the whole of the clergy in
this county to be in favour of the
measure. (General Barnett to the
Earl of Longford, Jan. 6, 1800; to
Admiral Pakenham, Dec. 22, 1799.
(1.8.P.0.)

' Plowden, ii. 980-983. Plowden
says: ‘Some difficulties arose in the
way of the meeting, from the military,
but were removed the moment his Ex-
cellency Marquis Cornwallis became
acquainted with the attempt made to
prevent an expression of the popular
opinion on a question big with the
fate of the popular interests.’

2 They will be found in Barnes
On the Union.

426 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxi1.

Government which had so much to give in this world, and of a
priesthood which was believed to have so much influence over
the next, was enormously great. It is indeed surprising that,
with such a weight of influence, the signatures in favour of the
Union were so few. It appears also to be generally admitted,
that the Catholics looked mainly, in their approval of the Union,
to Catholic objects, or were actuated by very natural feelings of
resentment or panic. If they could have obtained their emanci-
pation in an Irish Parliament, they would have preferred it, but
with the revival of a fierce Protestant spirit that had followed
the rebellion, and with the formal assurance they had received,
that the English Government were resolved, for all time, to exer-
cise their overwhelming influence to prevent the introduction of
Catholics into an Irish Legislature, the Union seemed the only
path of hope. The hatred and the humiliation which recent
events had produced, continued unabated, and large districts
were still convulsed by all the violence, tyranny, and panic of
military licence. Cornwallis wrote in November, that martial
law in Ireland was only too likely to pass into a tyranny ‘ more
violent and intolerable’ than that of Robespierre; ‘that the
vilest informers were hunted out from the prisons, to attack, by
the most barefaced perjury, the lives of all who are suspected of
being, or of having been disaffected, and that ‘every Roman
Catholic of influence was in great danger.’! The fact that the
Lord Lieutenant, who was attempting to carry the Union, had
steadily laboured to restrain this violence, and had incurred
great unpopularity in doing so; the fact that the Orange party
were in general vehement opponents of the Union, and the
strong reason the Catholics already had to believe that their
emancipation would be one of the first acts of the United Parlia-
ment, all influenced their judgments. ‘Their priests had good
grounds for expecting that a Government endowment would
speedily be granted to them, and they were assured that the
conduct of the Catholics in the crisis that had arisen would be
decisive of their future advantages.?

An approval which was so largely provisional, and which
rested so much on transient and abnormal conditions, could not

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 145.
” Castlereagh Correspondence, iii. 85.

cH. xxx. GENERAL ATTITUDE OF THE CATHOLICS. 427

be greatly counted on, though if a wise and liberal statesmanship
had followed the Union, it might perhaps have been rendered
permanent. Still, it appears to me to be impossible to review
with candour the facts that I have collected, in this and the
preceding chapter, without arriving at the conclusion that the
Union in 1800 was not in any of its stages positively distasteful
to the great body of the Irish Catholics, and that a very -impor-
tant section of them, including their whole hierarchy, the vast
majority of their landed gentry, and many if not most of their
lower priests, decidedly and consistently favoured it. Contem-
porary historians on both sides support this conclusion. The
Catholic historian Plowden was in favour of the Union, and he
writes, that although the great body of Roman Catholics at first
kept themselves back upon the question, and although some
highly respectable members of the communion were warm anti-
Unionists, yet ‘a very great preponderancy in favour of the
Union existed in the Catholic body, particularly in their
nobility, gentry, and clergy.’! The Protestant historian Bar-
rington was violently on the other side, and his judgment differs
but little as to the fact. ‘Nothing,’ he writes, ‘could be more
culpable than the conduct of a considerable portion of the
Catholic clergy.’ Speaking of the Catholics as a whole, he says,
‘No body of men ever gave a more helping hand to their own
degradation and misery.’ ‘The Bishops Troy, Lanigan, and
others, deluded by the Viceroy, sold their country.’ He says,
indeed, that ‘the great body of Catholics were true to their

1 Plowden, ii. 979, 980. In quoting
Plowden in favour of the Union, I
refer to his Historical Revicrw, pub-
lished in 1803.
Treland, from the Union to 1810,
which was published in 1811, his
point of view was wholly changed,
and he wrote as the most furious of
partisans. A single passage will serve
as a specimen: ‘The public can be
now no longer duped by the insidi-
ous practices of Mr. Pitt’s systematic
management of Ireland. Every page
of her post-Union history teems with
evidence of his having forced a rebel-
lion, in order to drown her inde-
pendence in the blood, and bury
her felicity under the ashes, of the
country, in the wicked (perhaps fruit-
less) hope of preventing her resurrec-

In his History of

tion by the immovable tombstone of
legislative Union. ... With a view
to raise an eternal bar to Catholic
concession, he introduced an apparent
system of justice and conciliation, to
furnish an argument that the Catho-
lics might be happy and prosperous,
as he foresaw they would be tranquil
and loyal, without emancipation. At
the same time, he secretly laboured to
establish, strengthen, and perpetuate
the Orange societies, which he well
knew to be incompatible with, and
essentially destructive of the peace,
concord, and prosperity of the coun-
try. In that work of deception,
Mr. Pitt’s prime and most efficient
instrument was Marquis Cornwallis’
(i. 94).

428 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn. xxxmt.

country,’ but he immediately adds, ‘the rebellion had terrified
them from every overt act of opposition.’ !

Even among the rebel party, delight at the humiliation of the
triumphant loyalists was thought by many to be the strongest
feeling. The overtures which some Orangemen made to the
Catholics, to join with them in defence of the national Legis-
lature, had little or no result. One of the leading United Irish-
men is said to have been the author of a song which was at this
time circulated, in which the rebels were represented as scorn-
fully repudiating these overtures, reminding the Orangemen
how lately their favourite tune had been ‘ Croppies, lie down,’
and predicting, with evident gratification, that Orangeman and
Croppy would now be reduced to the same insignificance.? A
great Kilkenny landlord writes from that county in July 1799,
‘The rebels and papists—I am sorry to say the terms are
almost synonymous—perceive there is no hope in rebellion, and
that death and ruin pursue those who try it. They will con-
tinue, therefore, peaceable, I believe, and are now become great
friends to Union; partly through malice, partly through fear ;
no matter, they everywhere come forward in favour of the
measure ; and I am happy to say several counties, Cork, Kerry,
Mayo, Waterford, have declared strongly and almost unanimously
in favour of it.’ 8

In the recess of 1799, Ireland lost a true patriot, who had for
a short time played a leading and very honourable part in her

1 Barrington’s Rise and Fall of
the Irish Nation, chapters xxvi. and
XXVii.

2 Dialogue between Orange and
Croppy, by Counsellor Sampson. This
poem was found in manuscript among
the papers of one of the United Irish-
men, and sent to the Government. It
is printed in Madden’s Literary Re-
mains of the United Irishmen of 1798,
pp. 122, 128. A few lines will indi-
cate its character :

‘Says Orange to Crop: “Let us
quarrel no more,

But unite and shake hands,
cord be o’er.

Let the Orange and Blue intermixed
with the Green,

In our hats and our bosoms hence-
forward be seen.

An Union with Croppies for me! ”

Let dis-

*“T care not,” says Croppy, “ not I,
by my soul,

Whether English or Orangemen Ire-
land control,

If tyrants oppress this unfortunate
land,

‘Tis all but the work of the Orange-
man’s hand.

No Orange alliance for me !

«« You remember the time when each
village and town

Most gaily resounded with ‘ Croppies,
lie down !’

Billy Pitt changed the note, and cries,
‘Down with them all—

Down Croppy, down Orange, down
great and down small.’

Ah, that was the way to be free ! ”’

3 Lord Clifden. (Diary and Cor-
respondence of Lord Colchester, i.
186.)

CH, XXXII. DEATH OF CHARLEMONT. 429

history. The weak health of Lord Charlemont had of late been
rapidly declining, and he died on August 4. He was a man, in
his best days, more eminent for his accomplishments than for his
abilities; and a politician who had no great strength of will, no
power of debate, and a constitutional hatred of violence and
extravagance, was not likely long to retain his ascendency in
the wild and stormy element in which his lot was cast. -A great
property and position in the district where the volunteer move-
ment was strongest, and the friendship of Flood and Grattan,
placed him in the front rank of Irish politics, and the trans-
parent disinterestedness of his public life, the soundness and
moderation of his judgment, and the readiness with which he
was always prepared to devote time, labour, and money to the
public good, established his position. In one critical moment his
services both to Ireland and to the Empire had been transcen-
dently great, but his influence speedily waned, and Inish poli-
tics drifted far from the path which he had chosen. On the
Catholic question, events appear to have somewhat modified his
opinion. That ‘chord of wondrous potency’ which, like Flood,
he had feared to wake, had been swept by no skilful hand,! and
in his last years, Charlemont was convinced that the completion
of the Act of 1793 by the admission of Catholics to Parlia-
ment, had become absolutely necessary. He had long predicted
and dreaded the impending Union, and his hostility was not
diminished as it approached. ‘It would, more than any other
measure, he wrote, ‘ contribute to the separation of two countries,
the perpetual connection of which was one of the warmest wishes
of my heart.’ ”

The probable effect of the measure was differently judged by
Lewins, who, though bitterly attacked by many of his fellow-
conspirators, still represented the United Irishmen at Paris.
Shortly after the Revolution of the 18th brumaire, he sent
to the French Government a remarkable memoir, urging that if
France allowed the Union to be accomplished, it would add

enormously to the power of her great enemy. It would have a

1<T am frightened about the
popery business. It ought to be
touched only by a master hand. It
is a chord of such wondrous potency,
that I dread the sound of it, and
believe with you that the harmony

would be better, if, like that of the
spheres, it were, at least for a time,
inaudible. (Flood to Charlemont,
Jan. 7, 1782.)

* Hardy’s Life of Charlemont, ii.
414, 416, 429, 430.

430 ENGLAND. IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxx,

greater effect than the Scotch Union, for Ireland was much more
valuable than Scotland. It would strengthen the Executive,
for the Irish members would be mere creatures of the Govern-
ment. It would increase the national credit, by adding Irish
wealth to the security of the British national debt. It would
place the military resources of Ireland without reserve at the
disposal of the British Ministers, and it would induce the Irish
to believe that they had been abandoned by France, and that
their true interest was to identify themselves with England.!
Lewins was hardly more disappointed at the failure of the
rebellion, than at the religious spirit, so hostile to the original
intentions of the United Irishmen, which had been aroused. He
sent over an agent named O’Mealey to England, and with the
intention of going to Ireland to communicate with the rebels;
but, with the usual felicity of Irish conspirators, O’Mealey and
another United Irishman who was engaged with him in the
same mission, seem to have become bosom friends with a spy
of the English Government, who reported all their proceedings.
From these reports, and from some other sources, the Ministers
received assurances that no rebellion was likely to occur un-
ess a French invasion took place, but that such an invasion
was eagerly looked forward to.?

The disturbances in the country came and went, like the
passing storms that sweep so rapidly over the inconstant Irish
sky, but on the whole they appear to have been somewhat less
than in the last few years. ‘The measure imposing martial law,
which has been noticed, was speedily carried; but in May,
Castlereagh still speaks of the horrible houghing of cattle in
Clare and Galway ; of outrages of banditti due to some agrarian
quarrel in Meath; of isolated but much exaggerated outrages
in Armagh and Antrim.? At the end of June he writes, ‘The
tranquillity of the country continues perfectly undisturbed, and
the minds of the people appear more settled than I have known
them for several years. ‘hey have suffered for their crimes.
Industry never was so profitable, and the departure of the Brest
fleet for the Mediterranean is considered by the disaffected such

1 Memoir of Thompson, 26 pri- Dec. 5, 1799.
maire, an viii. (F.F.O.) 8 Castlereagh to Wickham, May 6,
2 Reports in the I.8.P.0., July 24, 1799. (R.O.)

CH, XXXII, STATE OF THE COUNTRY.

an abdication of their cause as leaves them no other choi
submission, at least for the present.’ The revenue was rising.
‘The quarter ending June 2-4, 1799, exceeds the corresponding
quarter of the preceding year nearly 200,000/., and compared
with the same period of 1797, has risen above 350,0001., an
increase principally to be attributed to the superior productive-
ness of the old taxes, particularly the excise.’! Two, months
later he writes, ‘ Although no very serious symptoms appeared,
yet in many parts of Ireland the approach of the enemy’s fleet
towards our coast has produced a movement among the lower
orders.’ Cornwallis, in his journey through the South of Ire-
land, had been much encouraged by the tranquil and prosperous
aspect of the country through which he passed. In September
he writes, ‘The southern part of this wretched island is again
getting into a bad state, no doubt from encouragement re-
ceived from France. The counties of Waterford and Tipperary
are reported to be in a state of preparation for an immediate
rising. He expressed his own astonishment at the suddenness
of the change, but added that the spirit of disaffection was so
deeply rooted in the minds of the people of Ireland, that it would
require time and a total change in the system and constitution
of the Government to eradicate it. The Opposition declared
that the attempt to force on the Union, had greatly contributed
to these disturbances. ‘The Government believed that it had
little or nothing to do with them ; that the mass of the people were
perfectly indifferent to the Union, but that they hated England
and their landlords, and waited eagerly for a French invasion.4

} Castlereagh to Portland, June question of Union, as the anti-

29, 1799.

2 Castlereagh to King, Aug. 21,
1799. ‘It is too provoking,’ Lord
Clare wrote very characteristically at
this time, ‘that the old bitch, Lord
* Keith, should have let the French and
Spanish fleets slip him as they have
done. Most probably he will be ad-
vanced to the English peerage for the

exploit. (Clare to Cooke, Aug. 13,
L799 LO.)

3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
130, 132.

4 Thid.) aii. 93: *<As. to the pre-
sent tendency to rebellion... I

cannot bring myself to believe that
it has anything to do with the

Unionists in the country would fain
make us believe. No one who knows
anything of the country, or of the
nature and principle of the insur-
rection, could ever bring himself to
believe in November or December last
that the whole was at an end, The
question of Union may, perhaps, have
hastened the new organisation of the
counties of Down and Antrim of which
you speak, but I am far from thinking
myself that this is an evil, being per-
suaded that the seeds of insurrection
are lurking in every county, and that
the sooner they bear fruit ... the
better.’ (Wickham to Cooke, March 4,
1799. 1.5.P.0.)

432 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn. xxxii.

The harvest of 1799 proved extremely bad, and this greatly
aggravated the situation. The Government acted with much
energy. They at once prohibited absolutely the exportation of
corn and potatoes, accompanying the measure by a bounty on
the importation of flour, and by proclamations forbidding the
making of cakes, rolls, muffins, or anything but household
bread. An Act of Parliament was soon after passed, forbidding
for a certain time the consumption of barley or other corn in
making malt, or distilling spirits. These measures prevented
absolute famine, but there was much distress with its accompany-
ing disturbances, and there were the usual complaints of frauds
by millers and corn factors.’

The period seemed a strangely inauspicious one for pressing
on a great constitutional change, which Irish opinion had cer-
tainly not demanded. But in the eyes of the English Govern-
ment, there is little doubt that the very tension and anarchy and
panic that prevailed, formed the strongest ground for their policy.
An elaborate paper of arguments for the Union, which may be
found in the Castlereagh Correspondence, concentrates with great
force and frankness reasons which we have already seen scattered
or implied in many speeches and pamphlets. The writer recalls,
in a melancholy historical retrospect, the past relations of the
two countries. The earliest period had been well described by
Sir John Davies. ‘Too weak to introduce order and obedience,
the English authority was yet sufficient to check the growth of
any enterprising genius amongst the natives; and though it could
bestow no true form of civil government, it was able to prevent
the rise of any such form.’ The conquests of Elizabeth intro-
duced a long period of English supremacy, but also of persistent
English jealousy of Irish progress. ‘ Should we exert ourselves,’
said. her councillors, ‘in reducing this country to order and
civility, it must soon acquire power, consequence, andrule. The
inhabitants will then be alienated from England. ‘They will cast
themselves into the arms of some foreign Power, and perhaps
erect themselves into an independent State.’2 ‘Such,’ continued

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. * The reader will remember the
144. There are some good letters, on great influence which this statement.
the distress and frauds of the time, in Leland, had exercised over Arthur

by Higgins in the LS.P.0. The dis-  O’Connor’s polities.
tillery laws were 40 Geo. III. c. 6, 58.

Ci. xxx, ~ ARGUMENTS FOR UNION. 433

the writer, ‘ were the counsels that then made their way into the
British Cabinet, and we can entertain little doubt of their having
operated to the present time.’ This was the policy which in-
spired the destruction of the Jrish woollen manufactures under
William, lest they should rival those of England, and it was
shown equally in other ways. Without a navy, islands can
neither secure their trade nor their liberty. ‘ Above a hundred
years ago, Ireland made a perpetual grant for the support of an
Irish marine. This England never permitted to be applied,
because she wished to have the monopoly of the navy herself.’
Nor was this surprising, for a half-separated Ireland always
had been, and always would be, a danger to England. The
writer recalled how it had aggravated the peril of English in-
ternal contests in the days of Perkin Warbeck, in the Great
Rebellion and in the Revolution, and how often both France and
Spain had seen in Ireland the best vantage ground for attacking
England. <A long period of peace and quiescence had followed
the Revolution, but the experience of the independent Parliament
which Ireland had at last won, all pointed to ultimate separation.
‘Both the Parliament and people of Ireland have, for the last
seventeen years, been almost entirely engaged in lessening by
degrees their dependence on Great Britain. . . . It signifies
nothing to say that their views were honourable and patriotic.
. . . This may be readily acknowledged, and yet the effect of all
these patriotic exertions be the same, viz. that the connection
between the two countries is reduced by them almost to a single
thread, the unity of the executive power and a negative on the
laws passed in the Irish Parliament. Should this negative be
exercised on any important occasion, the two countries are
unavoidably committed. ...I do not say that the present
members of the Irish Legislature are at all inclined to come
to these extremities. Their conduct has been in the highest
degree loyal, and their attachment to England sincere. But who
can answer for their successors?’ ‘A vast majority of the
inhabitants of Ireland are either rebels or inclined to become
so. A great majority, again, of these rebels are Catholics, inimical
for the most part, on that score alone, to the existing Govern-
ment. ... A great many among the lower orders of the
northern Dissenters are inclined to join with them in their
VOL. VIII. He

434 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxtt.

attempt to overthrow the Constitution, or at least to introduce
democratic reform. . . . The object of the disaffected, that is
the great majority of the numbers at least of this island, is con-
fessedly a separation from Great Britain.’ ‘The Catholic claims
will soon be renewed with redoubled force.’ With the power
and numbers and present disposition of the Catholics, the rejec-
tion of those claims ‘would be a measure attended with the
greatest national danger.’ Their admission would be at least
equally dangerous, and if, as was probable, it was followed by a
democratic reform, making Parliament the true representative
of a disaffected people, there could be no real doubt of the result.
‘Indeed, it can hardly be conceived how the Roman Catholics in
this country could be admitted to a full participation in political
power, and the two countries continue connected as they are at
present. A Protestant country and a papist country united
under a Protestant monarch, who by his coronation oath was
bound to maintain the Protestant religion, would be a political
monster whose life must indeed be of short duration.’ If the
Catholic question is left to an Irish Parliament, however it may
be treated, it must lead either to fresh insurrection or to a final
separation from England.

It is on these grounds that the writer maintained that a
legislative Union was the only means of averting an ultimate,
and indeed a speedy, separation of the two islands, and he con-
tended that the present was the only moment in which it could
be carried. A little earlier, no possible inducement would have
made an Irish Parliament accept it. A little later, it would be
equally impossible. ‘The moment is now come, and it will
never occur again, when an Union may be practicable. The lead-
ing men in Ireland, who were most unfriendly to it, find that
neither their property nor the country is safe, and now wish for
Union. The measure should be despatched while men’s minds
are impressed with the present horrid state of Ireland, and while
the agitators are kept down by the discovery and failure of their
plots.’ !

These were, I believe, the true reasons that governed the
conduct of the English Ministers. In the mind of Lord Corn-
wallis the advantage the Catholics were likely to obtain from

’ Castlereagh Correspondence, iii. 26-54.

CH, XXXI CORNWALLIS AND CASTLEREAGH. 435

the measure, occupied perhaps even alarger place. He was con-
vinced that without an Union, Ireland would not long be a part
of the Empire; but he was convinced also, that; it could enjoy
no internal peace or permanent content, unless the Government
of the country was taken out of the hands of the men who had
triumphed in the civil war. As we have already seen, he had
been long since convinced that Catholic emancipation was the
only solution of Irish troubles. He knew nothing of what Ire-
land had been during the tranquil period before 1795, and
coming over to a country of which he was very ignorant, at the
moment when it was convulsed by the agonies and the anarchy
of a most ferocious civil war; when appalling dangers, and no
less appalling barbarities, had revived and inflamed all the old
hatred of creeds and classes and races, he believed that the ex-
isting system of government had hopelessly broken down, and
that the very first condition of security, prosperity, and civilisation
was to place the government of Ireland in the hands of an im-
partial and unimpassioned Legislature. Very reluctantly he
yielded to the representations of the English Ministers, that it
was impossible to carry Catholic emancipation concurrently with
the Union, but he hoped that this measure would speedily follow,
and he anticipated the best results from taking the government of
the country out of the hands of a loyalist class, who were now
deeply tinged with Orange passions. The Union, in his eyes, was
carried against this class, for the benefit of the Catholics, with
their approval, and in a large measure by their assistance.

We have seen how he hated the corruption which he was
compelled to practise. Lord Castlereagh, on the other hand,
pursued his course with a quiet, business-like composure ; nor is
there the slightest indication that it caused him a momentary
uneasiness. He was convinced that it was the necessary means
to a necessary measure, and he believed that he was corrupting
to purify. He described his task and that of Lord Cornwallis
as ‘to buy out, and secure to the Crown for ever, the fee simple
of Irish corruption, which has so long enfeebled the powers of
Government and endangered the connection.’ !

He seems to have had no scruples about his proceedings, and
if the approbation of men who, by their characters or their

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iii, 333.

Res

436 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxii.

positions, might be deemed patterns of religious sanctity, could
have encouraged him, this encouragement was not wanting. All
the heads of the Catholic Church, and nearly all the heads of
the Established Church in Ireland, approved of what he was
doing. In England, Wilberforce expressed serious alarm at the
effects the Union might have on the English woollen manufactures
and on the composition of the British Parliament, but he does
not appear to have expressed the smallest disapprobation of the
manner in which it was carried. Alexander Knox was the
private secretary of Castlereagh, and one of the warmest of his
admirers, and it is a remarkable fact that Castlereagh afterwards
asked this very distinguished religious writer to undertake a
history of the Union.!

In the mean time, most of the country was proclaimed, and
English troops were streaming in. In July there were rather
more than 45,000 effective soldiers in Ireland, in addition to
artillery, but in the autumn the army was largely reinforced, and
there was at one time a strange notion of sending over a large
body of subsidised Russians. It was rejected because Cornwallis
and Castlereagh represented the extremely bad effect it would
have on public opinion during the Union crisis;? but the force
that was in Ireland was soon so great, that unless a strong foreign
army was landed, it seemed irresistible.

It was under these circumstances that the last session of the
Trish Parliament was opened on January 15, 1800. The speech
from the Throne was long and elaborate, but it did not contain
the faintest allusion to the momentous question which now
filled all thoughts, and which the Government had determined
by all the means in their power to press on to an immediate
solution. It seems a strange reticence, but it may be easily ex-

1 See Castlereagh’s remarkable Union, they pursued honestly the in-

letter in Alexander Knox’s Remains,
iv. 539-541. In this letter Castile-
reagh says: ‘I feel confident that
the intentions of Government for the
public good, at that time, will bear
the strictest scrutiny. . . . I believe
their measures, when fairly explained,
will stand equally the test of criticism,
and that they may be shown to have
combined humanity with vigour of
administration, when they had to
watch over the preservation of the
State ; whilst in the conduct of the

terests of Ireland, yielding not more
to private interests than was requisite
to disarm so mighty a change of
any convulsive character.’ Knox said
Castlereagh was ‘the honestest and
perhaps the ablest statesman that has
been in Ireland for a century. I know
of him what the world does not and
cannot know, and what if it did know,
it would probably not believe.’ (Ibid.
p. 31.)

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
118, 137, 138, 145.

PARSONS’ AMENDMENT, JANUARY 1800. 437

CH, XXXII,

plained. The process of remodelling the borough representation
by substituting supporters for opponents of the Union, had been
undertaken, and in the first four days of the session, no less than
thirty-nine writs were moved.! As the great majority of the
vacant seats had been secured by the Government, Lord Castle-
reagh had an obvious reason for adjourning all discussion of the
Union till they were filled, but the same reason impelled the
Opposition to press it on without delay. Sir Lawrence Parsons,
haying first directed the Clerk to read the speeches in which
Lord Cornwallis, in opening and closing the last session, had
declared the firm resolution of the Government to carry the
Union, moved an amendment to the Address, expressing the deep
loyalty of the House of Commons to the Throne, to the connection,
and to the free Constitution of 1782, and at the same time pledg-
ing it ‘at all times, and particularly at the present moment,’ to
maintain an independent resident Parliament. Reminding the
House that Pitt had repeatedly postponed the parliamentary re-
form which he had once advocated, on the plea that a period of
war and disturbance was not one for introducing great constitu-
tional changes, he accused the Government of endeavouring to
destroy the independence of Ireland at a time when the spirit of
the people was depressed by recent troubles, when the country
was occupied by an enormousarmy, when martial law prevailed
and a formidable invasion was threatened, and when apprehen-
sions from without and from within made all free exercise of the
public mind upon the question impossible. He urged that it
was the duty of the members to deal with the question at once,
and not to sit supinely there, while the Minister of the Crown
was openly engaged in prostituting the prerogative of appointing
to places, for the purpose of packing the Parliament.
of men who are against the Union are to go out, that a string of

‘A string

men who are for it may come in.’

The debate which ensued extended through the whole night,
and lasted for not less than eighteen hours.? It appears to have
the Union. A fuller report of this

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

164.
2 The best report of Lord Castle-
reagh’s speech is, I believe, that in
Seward’s Collectanca Politica. See,
too, the reports in Coote’s History of

debate was published separately in
Dublin, but it is now extremely rare.
Long extracts from some of the Oppo-
sition speeches will, however, be found
in Grattan’s Life.

438 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on, xxx

been one of the fiercest ever heard in a legislative assembly.
Lord Castlereagh met the rising storm with great courage and
composure. He acknowledged that, although there was no
mention of the Union in the speech from the Throne, it was in-
tended to be the chief measure of the session. It had been
determined, he said, to make a separate communication on the
subject, and when that communication was made, the time would
have come for discussing it. Last year the measure had been
withdrawn because it was not yet fully understood, ‘and it was
stated that it would not again be proposed without full and
fair notice, and until there was reason to believe that the Parlia-
ment and the country had changed their opinions upon the sub-
ject.’ That change had, he believed, taken place. He was fully
satisfied, that the measure ‘was now approved by a great
majority of the people.’ ‘Nineteen of the most considerable
counties in Ireland, constituting above five-sevenths of the
kingdom,’ had declared themselves in favour of it. The amend-
ment of Parsons was not to reject the Union after mature investi-
gation, but to extinguish the question by anticipation, refusing
all information, and doing so at a time when a great number of the
members of the House were indispensably absent. Could it be
supposed that his Majesty would desist from the measure because
the Parhament of Ireland, thus circumstanced, had declined to
consider it? Was it, he asked, amid the derisive laughter of the
Opposition, decent to press forward this discussion when there
were so many gentlemen absent who had accepted places under
Government? Was it, he repeated, constitutional or right to
proceed to the determination of so important a subject, when so
large a proportion of their body was absent—to refuse even to
consider a measure of which so large a part of the kingdom
had expressed their approbation ?

On the other side, the language of Opposition soon passed
into the fiercest invective. It was denied emphatically and
repeatedly, that there was any truth in the statement that the
sense of the nation was in favour of the Union, and it was
asserted that what semblance of support the Minister had
obtained, had been obtained by the basest means. ‘During the
whole interval between the sessions, the most barefaced system
of parliamentary corruption had been pursued—dismissals, pro-

*

LANGUAGE OF THE OPPOSITION. 439

CH, XXXII.

motions, threats, promises.’ Bribes had been promised to the
Catholic and to the Presbyterian clergy. Irreconcilable and
delusive hopes had been alternately held out to the Catholics
and the Protestants. Agents of great absentee proprietors had
gone among the tenantry, obtaining signatures by refusing leases
to those who hesitated to sign; threatening to cail in the rent
to the hour; holding over them the terrors of an ejectment.
Revenue officers had been employed to canvass the obscurest
villages. Signatures had been sought in the very dregs of the
population, it was said even in the gaols. The whole patron-
age of the Crown was employed to favour the measure; the
powers of martial law were made use of to stifle opposition, and
the Viceroy himself had gone from county to county seeking
support. And the result of all this was, that out of a population
of nearly five millions, the Government had obtained ‘ about 5,000
signatures, three-quarters of whom affixed their names in sur-
prise, terror, and total ignorance of the subject ;’! that they
had nowhere ventured to call on the sheriffs legally to convene
the counties, and collect the unbiassed sense of the intelligent
portion of the community; that their measure had so little
genuine support, that they did not dare to announce it in the
speech from the Throne.

Language of this kind, in the mouths of such orators as
Plunket, Bushe, George Ponsonby, Fitzgerald, and Arthur Moore,

1 This is the statement of Plunket,
and the figures he gave do not appear
to have been disputed in the debate.
Grattan’s biographer, who reports the
speech, says that the signatures
to the addresses in favour of the
Union did not exceed 7,000. (Grattan’s
Life, vy. 79.) On the other hand,
Plowden says the Wexford address
was signed by more than 3,000, and
the Leitrim address by 1,836 persons,
(ii. Appendix, 322, 323.) An address
from Roscommon is said to have been
signed by ‘1,500 Catholics exclusive
of Protestants.’ (Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, iii. 222.) The number of
signatures in favour of the Union is
not, I think, anywhere mentioned in
the Government letters, but Castle-
reagh wrote: ‘The petitions pre-
sented to Parliament [against the
Union] have been more numerously
signed than the addresses and de-

clarations in favour of the measure,
which were, in general, studiously
confined to a superior description of
persons; but the preponderance of
property is undoubtedly on the side
of the latter.’ (Cornwallis Correspon-
dence, iii. 224.) Everything that can
be said by a skilful advocate to en-
hance the importance of the addresses
in favour of the Union, and to dimi-
nish the importance of the petitions
against it, will be found in Mr.
Ingram’s History of the Irish Union
—a book which is intended to show
that ‘the Irish Union is free from
any taint of corruption; ’ ‘ that it was
carried by fair and constitutional
means, and that its final accomplish-
ment was accompanied with the hearty
assent and concurrence of the vast
majority of the two peoples that dwell
in Ireland,’ (Preface.)

440 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on, xxxu.

was well fitted to inflame the country, whatever effect it might
have upon the House, and speaker after speaker warned the
Government, that if the Union was carried by such means and
at’ such a time, it would not be acquiesced in, and would
hereafter lead to generations of disloyalty, agitation, and
strife.

This debate, among other things, was very memorable for the
reappearance of Grattan on the scene of his ancient triumphs.
For some time he had been prostrated by a severe nervous dis-
order, peculiarly fitted to incapacitate him from mixing in the
agitations of public life, and all that had of late been taking
place in Ireland had strengthened his wish to retire completely
from it. He had returned from the Isle of Wight at the end
of 1799, and had refused, on the ground of his shattered health,
an invitation to stand for Parliament; but the crisis was now
so acute, that his friends and family urged that it was his duty
at all hazards to appear, and he at last with extreme reluctance
consented. One of the members for the nomination borough of
Wicklow had just died; the seat was purchased ; the election
was hurried through on the night of January 15, and early on
the following morning, while the House was still sitting, Grattan
entered. He wore the uniform of the volunteers. He was so
weak, that he was supported to his seat by George Ponsonby and
Arthur Moore, and when, having taken the oath, he rose to speak,
he was obliged to ask the permission of the House to speak
sitting. For a few moments it seemed as if it would be an idle
display, for his voice was so feeble that it was almost inaudible ;
but the excitement of the occasion and of the scene, and the fire of
a great orator, soon asserted their power, and the old eloquence
which had so often dazzled the House, kindled into all its
pristine splendour. His speech—the first of a series which are
among the most memorable monuments of Irish eloquence—
lasted for nearly two hours, and although it is not probable that
it changed votes, it had a deep and lasting effect on the country.
The members of the Administration, who hated and dreaded
Grattan, described his entry into the House as theatrical ; threw
doubt upon his illness; believed that the unpopularity which
during the last months had gathered round him had de-
stroyed his influence ; and when they found that this was not the

CH, XXxIh ‘THE CONSULAR EDICT.’ 441

case, hoped that Foster might be made jealous, and alienated
from the Opposition. But the country judged more wisely and
more generously. Men felt the deep pathos of the scene, and
the patriotism and genius of the foremost of living Irishmen
emerged gradually but steadily from the clouds of calumny that
had obscured them.

It was soon, however, apparent that the work of the recess
had been accomplished, and that in spite of the vacant seats the
Government had an ample majority. At ten o’clock on the morn-
ing of the 16th, the amendment was rejected by 138 votes to 96.
‘I trust this first success,’ wrote Lord Cornwallis, ‘ will cement
our party; it is still composed of loose materials, much more
intent on the personal than the public question.’! ‘ All depends
on the tone of the country, wrote Cooke. ‘If we can keep
that right, I believe all may do well.’?

A step was now taken by the Opposition, which was violently
denounced by the partisans of the Government, but which,
according to all modern notions, was so plainly right that it
needs no defence. Castlereagh had asserted that the majority
of the country was with him, and the Lord Lieutenant had
gone through both the South and North of Ireland for the
express purpose of obtaining addresses in favour of the Union.
The Opposition now sent through the country a letter which
Cornwallis and Clare somewhat absurdly described as a ‘ consular
edict,’ stating ‘that petitions to Parliament declaring the real
sense of the freeholders of the kingdom on the subject of a
legislative Union would, at this time, be highly expedient,’ and
requesting those to whom the circular was sent, to use their
influence to have petitions prepared in their several counties
without delay. This circular was signed by Lord Downshire ;
by the new Lord Charlemont, and by W. Ponsonby, the leader
‘of the regular Opposition, and they stated that it was drawn up
with the consent, and by the authority, of no less than thirty-
eight of the county members.*

A hundred thousand pounds was, at the same time, sub-
scribed, or, more probably, promised, by leading members of

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iil.
165. 170, 171. The circular was dated
2 Cooke to Grenville, Jan. 16, Jan. 20.
1800.

442 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxit

the party, and some desperate but manifestly hopeless attempts
were made to combat the Government by their own weapons.
Two seats, which the Government believed they had secured,
were obtained by the Opposition, and Peter Burrowes and
Thomas Goold—two able opponents of the Union—were intro-
duced into the House. Saurin was soon after brought in for
one of Lord Downshire’s boroughs, and other measures of a
more than dubious kind were taken. One venal member—a
brother-in-law of Lord Clare—who had voted for the Union in
1799, was unquestionably bribed by a sum of 4,000/. to vote
against it in 1800,! and it is stated by Grattan’s biographer that
another vote was only lost because the money was not forth-
coming for another bribe.?

In Dublin the feeling was so fierce, that it was impossible to
mistake or to misrepresent it. An aggregate meeting, with the
Sheriff at its head, presented addresses to both Grattan and
Foster. The Guild of Merchants passed resolutions condemning
the Union in the strongest terms, calling for a coalition of all
sects against it, and offering warm thanks to their Roman
Catholic fellow-citizens of Dublin for their manly and patriotic
conduct. Cornwallis observed with much concern, that the
influence of Grattan over the Dublin Catholics was very great,
and that at the same time there were signs of a most alarming
kind among the yeomen, who were chiefly Orangemen. Bur-
rowes strongly urged that the Opposition, as a body, should
make a formal appeal to them, reminding them that they had
sworn to uphold the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, and
calling on them in virtue of that oath to resist the impending
Union. He proposed that this appeal, emanating, in the first
place, from the lawyers’ corps, should be circulated through
every corps in the kingdom. ‘he responsible leaders of the
Opposition declined to take a step which might lead to an-
other rebellion, but unauthorised handbills of a most alarming
kind appeared. One of them, Cornwallis says, called on the
yeomanry, Orangemen, and Catholics, to form a solid and

» Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. which he had supported in 1799.
174, 182,184, Compare Grattan’s Life, Grattan’s son says that Cooke tried
v. 71, 72. The Opposition paid the to win the member back by a large
4,000/. he had paid of election ex- bribe, but that he refused to break
penses at Enniscorthy, on condition his promise with the Opposition,
of his voting in 1800 against the Union, * Grattan’s Life, v. 71.

CH. XXXII. ~ OPPOSITION OF THE ORANGEMEN. 443:

indissoluble bond of opposition to the Union. Another stated
that no Government could wrest the Parliament from 60,000
armed and tried men. Should 60,000 Irishmen, it was asked,
with arms in their hands, stand tamely by and see the Consti-
tution of their country destroyed?! It was noticed that great
numbers of yeomen accompanied the procession that went to
present an address of thanks to Grattan.”

In spite of the resolution in favour of neutrality passed by
the Grand Lodge, the Orangemen over a great part of Ireland
were straining fiercely, like hounds in the leash. Few things
in the history of this period are more curious than the many
Orange resolutions protesting against the Union. The Grand
Lodge was accused of having betrayed the country, under the
influence of a few great placeholders. Representatives of no
less than thirty-six lodges assembled at Armagh, declared that
it made no material difference whether the Constitution was
robbed by open and avowed enemies, or by pretended friends,
who were, in reality, the deadliest enemies of the country, and
that it was the duty of all Orangemen to stand forward in oppo-
sition to the impending measure. The representatives of thir-
teen Orange lodges in the county of Fermanagh at once echoed
this language, and very similar resolutions were passed by many
other lodges in different parts of Ireland. A large proportion of
the lodges, it is true, obeyed the direction of the Grand Lodge,
and kept silence on the subject, and some individual Orange-
men were conspicuous supporters of the Union, but there is not, I
believe, a single instance of an Orange resolution in its favour.

It is difficult to measure the extent and full significance of
the provincial feeling against it. ‘That there was, in large
classes, and over large districts, a profound apathy on the sub-
ject, is, I believe, perfectly true, and it is not probable that the
feeling ran anywhere as high as in Dublin and its neighbour-
hood, but, at the same time, the response to the circular of the
Opposition was very considerable. A great meeting in the
county of Down, convoked: by Lord Downshire, led the way,

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 3 See the text of many of these
167, 168; compare Grattan’s Life, v. resolutions in Barnes On the Union,
66-68, Appendix, pp. 138, 186, 142; Grattan’s

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. Life, v. 54-56.
165,

444. ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

and the example was speedily followed in Louth, Meath, Cavan,
At Limerick and at Dundalk, there
In general, the meetings

and many other counties.
were distinctively Catholic meetings.
appear to have had no denominational character. In some cases,
where the sheriff refused to convene them, private gentlemen
undertook the task, and petitions against the Union soon
poured in, signed by freeholders and other electors, from nearly
all the counties, and from nearly all the principal towns of
Ireland. In a confidential letter, dated March 5, Cooke stated
that petitions against the Union had come in from twenty-six
counties, and bearing 110,000 signatures.! There appear to
have been, at this time, absolutely no counter demonstrations
in favour of the measure.

It is, of course, not to be assumed that all these signatures
represented honest, unbiassed, intelligent conviction. Great
landlords had, no doubt, often selfish reasons for wishing that
the Union should not pass, and they probably sometimes exer-
cised undue pressure upon their tenants.2 It is said, too,
that a report was propagated that when the Parliament was
abolished, Irish law would be at an end; that leases would
accordingly be broken, and that the reason why so many gentle-
men were for the Union was because they wished to relet their
estates at advanced rents.? Many exaggerated or untrue reports

} Cooke to King, March 5, 1800.

dresses for the Union (mentioned on p.
(R.0.) See, too, Cornwallis Corre-

439), which had been presented to the

spondence, iii. 203. Barnes has printed
a list of the counties and other places
that petitioned the House of Commons
for or against the Union, extracted
from the journals of the House by
James Corry, clerk of the journals.
According to this list, the petitions
against the Union were signed by
112,888 persons. Of these signatures
106,347 were attached to the petitions
of the twenty-six counties, and the
remainder came from the towns. Six
counties sent no petition. Down and
Monaghan were the only counties
which sent petitions to the House of
Commons in favour of the Union,
and those petitions were signed by
3,070 persons. The petitions from
these two counties against the Union
had 28,435 signatures. (Barnes On
the Union, pp. 189-141.) This list,
of course, does not include the ad-

Lord Lieutenant in 1799. Grey is
reported to have said in one of his
speeches : ‘Though there were 707,000
who had signed petitions against the
measure, the total number of those
who declared themselves in favour of
it did not exceed 3,000. (Parl. Hist.
xxxv. 60.) These figures have been re-
peated by many writers, and, I am
sorry to say, by myself in my Leader's
of Publie Opinion in Ireland. It is
evident from the above-mentioned
authorities that 707,000 is a misprint
for 107,000, and Mr. Ingram has kindly
sent me the result of his own re-
searches, showing that out of seven-
teen contemporary newspapers or
periodicals, fourteen give the latter
figures.

2 See Castlereagh Correspondence,
ili, 223.

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 176.

et, xxxit. -LETTERS OF CORNWALLIS, JANUARY 1800. 445

were no doubt in the air, and neither corrupt motives nor sincere
and strenuous convictions were exclusively on one side, though
it is not, I think, very difficult to determine on which side there
was the balance of each.

The letters of Lord Cornwallis, in the interval that elapsed
between the division of January 16 and the formal introduction
of the Union in the House of Commons, indicated a great and
growing alarm. In letter after letter he urged, in the strongest
terms, that more English troops must immediately be sent
over, not now to guard against French invasion, or against the
United Irishmen, or against a Catholic rising, but to make it
possible to carry the Union without tumult and insurrection.
The necessity appeared to him the greater, as a large number of
Trish militiamen had been induced by high bounties to volun-
teer into English regiments. On January 18, he warned the
Duke of Portland that dangerous tumults might arise before the
Union had gone through all its stages. On the 20th and 21st,
he described the inflammatory handbills that were circulating
among the yeomen, the efforts of the Opposition to raise popular
clamour to the highest pitch, and the urgent necessity for send-
ing over regular troops at once. ‘Iam not idle, he said, ‘ on
my part; but my Cabinet friends have shown so total a want of
confidence in me, and have so eagerly seized every opportunity
of reprobating my conduct in severe, if not acrimonious terms,
that I am almost afraid to appeal to the general goodwill of the
people at large, which I have the vanity to think I possess.’
On the 24th he wrote: ‘There can, I think, now be no doubt of
our parliamentary success, although I believe that a great num-
ber of our friends are not sincere well-wishers to the measure of
the Union. . . . In Dublin and its vicinity the people are all
outrageous against Union ; in the other parts of the kingdom the
general sense is undoubtedly in its favour. It is, however, easy
for men of influence to obtain resolutions and addresses on either
side.’ In the last days of January, the situation had become
manifestly worse. The county meetings had begun. ‘ Every
engine is at work to irritate the minds of the people, and to carry
the opposition to the measure beyond constitutional bounds.’
‘The ferment that exists amongst all descriptions of persons in
this city is exceeding great.’ ‘The clamour against the Union is

446 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. 9 on. xxxn.

increasing rapidly, and every degree of violence is to be expected.
As none of the English regiments have yet arrived, I have been
under the necessity of ordering the Lancashire Volunteers from
Youghal to Dublin. ... The apprehensions of our friends
rendered this measure absolutely necessary. The Roman Catho-
lics, for whom I have not been able to obtain the smallest token
of favour, are joining the standard of opposition.’ !

This last sentence was very ominous. It was equally alarming
that the pressure of public opinion had begun to tell upon some
of the members of Parliament. Lord Oxmantown, who had just
returned from the county of Longford, told Lord Cornwallis that
he found the sense of the people so adverse to the Union, that
the county member who had voted for it in 1799, would now be
obliged to oppose it. I have already noticed the defection of
one of the members for the county of Tipperary, and of his two
sons, which was defended on the same grounds. ‘ The indefatig-
able exertions, aided by the subscriptions of the anti- Unionists,’
wrote Cornwallis, ‘ have raised a powerful clamour against the
measure in many parts of the kingdom, and have put the capital
quite in an uproar, and I am sorry to say some of our unwilling »
supporters in Parliament have taken advantage of these appear-
ances to decline giving any further support. God only knows
how the business will terminate.’ ‘Several members of the
House of Commons have represented to me the ferment which
now agitates the public mind, and their personal apprehensions.
. . . In the present temper of affairs, I am not prepared to say
that dangerous tumults will not arise, . . . and it is with real
concern that I express my fears that some defections may take
place among those from whom we had a right to expect
support. ?

There appears to have been for a short time serious fear that
the great loyalist yeomanry, who had contributed so largely to the
suppression of the rebellion, would resist the Union by arms. This
fear, however, was probably exaggerated. Neither Lord Down-
shire, nor Foster, nor Grattan, gave any countenance to such a
policy, and eloquent and ambitious lawyers are not the kind of
men who are likely to be leaders in rebellion. The indignation
of a great portion of the yeomanry was no doubt extreme, but

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii, 165-175. 2 Thid. iii. 176-180,

cu, xxxue THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH GUARANTEED. 447

even if they had drawn the sword, they could not have created
a national rebellion. It was impossible on the morrow of a
savage civil war, which had kindled the fiercest and most
enduring religious hatreds, that the divided parties should have
at once passed into new combinations, like the patterns of a
kaleidoscope; and neither Catholic Ireland nor Presbyterian
Ireland was likely to show much enthusiasm for the defence of
the Irish Parliament. On the great question of Catholic eman-
cipation, the opponents of the Union were profoundly divided,
and they did not in consequence venture to take the only course
that might have given the struggle a national character. If,
however, at this critical moment, a French army had landed
upon the coast, it may be questioned whether any considerable
section of the Irish people would have resisted it.

The Government in the mean time were busily engaged in
putting the finishing touches to the Union plan; but the only
serious change that was now made, appears to have been in the
article relating to the Established Church. It was a leading
argument of the supporters of the Union, that by uniting the
two Churches, it would secure the Irish Protestants for ever
from all danger of the subversion of their establishment. The
Archbishop of Cashel, however, insisted that a still further step
should be taken; that the maintenance of the Established
Church should be made an article of distinct treaty obligation,
and should be guaranteed for ever in the most solemn terms as
a fundamental portion of the compact under which the Irish
Protestant Parliament resigned into the hands of an Imperial
Parliament the legislative power of Ireland. The precedent for
such a course was to be found in the Scotch Union, when the
maintenance of the English and Scotch Churches in the existing
forms was made a fundamental and essential conditionof the treaty
of Union, was declared to be permanent and unalterable, and was
placed, as the authors of the Scotch Union believed, outside the
sphere of the legislative competence of the United Parliament.
It was in accordance with these views that the fifth article of the
treaty of Union was drawn up. It laid down ‘that the Churches
of England and Ireland, as now by law established, be united
into one Protestant Episcopal Church, to be called the United
Church of England and Ireland; that the doctrine, worship,

448 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cw. xxxtt.

discipline, and government of the said United Church shall be,
and shall remain in full force for ever, as the same are now by
law established for the Church of England; and that the con-
tinuance and preservation of the said United Church, as the
Established Church of England and Ireland, shall be deemed
and taken to be an essential and fundamental part of the Union;
and that, in like manner, the doctrine, worship, discipline, and
government of the Church of Scotland shall remain and be pre-
served as the same are now established by law, and by the Acts
for the union of the two kingdoms of England and Scotland.’ !

Tt does not fall within the limits of the present work to trace
the later history of opinion on this question. It is sufficient to
say that, for at least a generation, the binding force of the Union
guarantee was recognised by Parliament, that it was constantly
appealed to by the most eminent statesmen, and that when the
Catholics were admitted into the Imperial Parliament, a special
oath was imposed upon them, binding them in the most solemn
terms to disavow and abjure all intention of subverting the
Established Church. It was intended, in the words of Sir Robert
Peel, to assure the Protestants, ‘on the obligation of an oath, that
no privilege which the Act confers, would be exercised to disturb
or weaken the Protestant religion or the Protestant Government
within these realms.’? It was impossible, however, that a reser-
vation of this kind could be maintained for ever, and those
who watched with sagacity the course and character of party
warfare in England, might have easily predicted that if a
political leader ever found the destruction of the Irish Church a
convenient cry for uniting a party or for displacing a rival, the
moral obligation of the Act of Union was not likely to deter
him.

On February 5,a message from the Lord Lieutenant was
delivered to both Houses of Parliament, recommending on the
' part of the King in very strong terms a legislative Union, and
stating that ‘his Majesty had observed with increasing satisfaction
that the sentiments which have continued to be manifested in

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. land, April 2, 1835. See, too, a very

172, 176, 198.

2 See a most powerful passage on
the binding force of the Union guaran-
tee, in Sir Robert Peel’s great speech
on the Church Establishment in Ire-

remarkable speech of Plunket in 1829,
Plunket’s Life, ii. 293-302; and Can-
ning’s Speech (corrected and pub-
lished by himself), Feb. 15, 1825.

CH, XXXII. CASTLEREAGH’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 5. 449

favour of this important and salutary measure by such numerous
and respectable descriptions of his Irish subjects, confirm the
hope he had expressed that its accomplishment will prove to be
as much the joint wish, as it unquestionably is the common
interest, of both his kingdoms.’ Immediately after the message
had been read, Lord Castlereagh rose to move that it should be
taken into consideration, and in a long and very able speech,
unfolded and defended the whole scheme. He declared that the
more the prospect of a legislative Union had been understood,
the more it had gained in favour with those who were most
interested in the welfare of the country; that among the
members of the two Houses of Parliament, the preponderance of
property in its favour was nearly as three to one; that the
owners of a very large proportion of property in nineteen counties,
including five-sevenths of Ireland, had come forward in its sup-
port, and that most of the great commercial towns were on the
same side. He acknowledged that hostile dispositions had been
exhibited in some counties, but this, he said, was not strange, as
the last weeks had witnessed the ‘new political phenomenon’ of
a parliamentary minority who, not content with exercising their
deliberative powers within the House, had been employing all
their agents ‘ to bring the mass of the people to its bar as peti-
tionersagainst the Union.’ Sucha proceeding Castlereagh deemed
both deplorable and reprehensible. Parliament should no doubt
‘consult in some measure, for the guidance of its councils, the
great majority of those whose stake in the property and the
interests of the country give them a fair claim to due considera-
tion.’ It.should never suffer ‘any temporary and _ artificial
clamour ’ to intimidate or divert it from deciding impartially on
the interests of the country. For three months, during the dis-
cussions on the Scotch Union, the table of the Scotch Parlia-
ment had been daily covered with hostile petitions. But the
Scotch Parliament had persevered, and by doing so it had earned
the gratitude of both countries.

Passing from this branch of his subject, Castlereagh reca-
pitulated at much length the well-known arguments in favour
of the Union, and he then proceeded to explain its financial
aspects. In the Scotch Union the principle had been adopted
of at once subjecting Scotland to the English debt, and com-

VOL. VII. GQ

450 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

pensating her for this burden by an indemnity. The dispropor-
tion between the debts of England and Ireland was so great,
that such a course was impossible. The debt charge of Great
Britain was now 20,000,000/. a year. The debt charge of Ireland
was 1,300,0001.ayear. It was therefore determined that the two
debts should be kept wholly separate, that the taxation of the two
countries should be separate, but that a fixed proportion should
be established in which each should contribute to the general
expenses of the Empire. he first great task was to find a basis
of calculation by which this proportion might be ascertained. A
comparison of the average value of the imports and exports of
the two countries during the last three years showed, Castlereagh
said, that they bore to each other the proportion of nearly 7 to 1.
A similar comparison of the value of the malt, beer, spirits, wine,
tea, tobacco, and sugar consumed in the two countries, showed a
proportion of 74 to 1. The medium of these two calculations
was 74 to 1, and from these figures the Government inferred
that Great Britain ought to contribute 15 parts, and Ireland 2,
to the general expenses of the Empire.

This proportion was to continue unchanged for twenty
years, in order that the Union system might acquire stability.
After this period the Imperial Parliament was to have the
power of revising it according to the increased or diminished
relative ability of the two countries, but it was stipulated that
this revision must be made upon the same basis of calculation
as that on which the original proportion had been fixed. In
this way Ireland would obtain a complete security that she
could not be taxed beyond her comparative ability, and that the
ratio of her contribution must ever correspond with her relative
wealth and prosperity.

It was next proposed to establish that the revenues of
Ireland should constitute a consolidated fund, which was to be
charged in the first place with the interest and sinking fund
of the Irish debt, and afterwards appropriated to its pro-
portionate contribution ; that the Imperial Parliament might
impose on Ireland such taxes as were necessary for her con-
tingent, but with the limitation that in no case should any
article in Ireland be taxed higher than the same article in
Great Britain; that if, at the end of any year, a surplus should

CH, XXXII, CASTLEREAGH’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 5. 451

accrue from the revenues of Ireland, it should be applied to
purely Irish purposes ; and that all future loans, for the interest
and liquidation of which the two countries made provision in
proportion to their respective contributions, should be con-
sidered as a joint debt. Parliament, however, might, if it
thought fit, not make such corresponding provisions in the two
countries, and in that case the respective quota of the loans
borne by each country should remain as a separate charge, like
the debts contracted before the Union.

During the last few years, Castlereagh observed, Great
Britain had raised within the year a larger proportion of her
supplies than Ireland was able in time of war to do. It was,
therefore, certain that the proportion of the two debts would
vary, and possible that it might some day so change that the
system of a separate debt charge might become unnecessary.
There were two cases in which this might occur. If the separate
debts of the two countries should be extinguished, or if the in-
crease of one debt and the diminution of the other should ever
bring them to the same proportion as the respective contributions
of the two countries, a system of indiscriminate taxation would
become possible.

In his speech in the preceding year, Castlereagh had seemed
to foreshadow clearly a period of increased taxation, and this
had furnished Foster with some of his most powerful arguments.
Castlereagh now boldly maintained that smaller expenditure and
lighter taxation would follow the Union. He endeavoured, by
somewhat intricate calculations, to prove, that if Ireland retained
her separate Legislature, she would in every year of war pay
about a million, and in every year of peace about 500,0001.,
more than if she were united to Great Britain, and that a great
relief of taxation would accordingly be the consequence of the
Union.

Passing to the commercial clauses of the Union, he said that
he could have wished that the situation of the two countries
could have been at once and completely assimilated, so that
they might have become like two counties of the same kingdom.
This was, however, for the present, for two reasons, impossible.
The first reason was ‘the necessity of consulting the situation
of particular manufactures, which may require to a certain

qGaQ2

452 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxx,

degree a continuance of that guard and protection which they
have received to shelter their infant state.’ The second reason
was, the unequal burden of the two debts, which unavoidably
created an inequality of internal taxation. As, therefore, it
was proposed that the export to each country should be free, it
was necessary that duties on importation should be imposed, ‘ to
balance and countervail the internal duties in either country.’
As freedom of trade was the object. to be desired, it was hoped
that the articles secured by protecting duties would be few,
and that the exceptional duties would cease when they ceased
to be necessary.

The commercial clauses of the Union were based on these
general principles, and were modelled to a great extent upon
the commercial propositions of 1785, which had been so power-
fully defended by Foster, and which, in their commercial
aspect, had received the approbation of the Irish House of
Commons, though they had been rejected on a constitutional
ground which was not now at issue. They were comprised in
several sections. ‘The first section provided that the subjects
and the produce of either country should be placed upon an.
equal footing for ever as to all privileges, encouragements, and
bounties. By this section, Castlereagh said, the perpetual con-
tinuance of the British and Irish bounties on the export of Irish
linen would be secured, and Ireland would participate with
England in the right to provide the British navy with sailcloth,
from which she was at present excluded.

The second section repealed all prohibitions on the export
_of the produce of one country to the other, and provided that
all articles should be exported duty free. This section secured
to Ireland the raw materials which she received from Great
Britain, including the staple commodity of English wool, and
in two respects it went beyond the propositions of 1785; for in
that year England had reserved a duty on coal exported to
Ireland, and retained her complete prohibition of the export of
British wool. The same section put an end to all bounties on
articles of trade between the kingdoms, with the exception of
malt, flour and grain, which were, for the present, continued
under the existing regulations.

The third section enumerated the articles which were subject

CH, XXXII. CASTLEREAGH’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 5. 453

to duty in either country, and fixed the rate of the duty on each.
The question what duty was adequate for the purpose of securing
the manufactures of Ireland from being crushed and annihilated
by those of England, was very important. The Government
decided that 10 per cent. duty, in addition to the cost of freight,
which was estimated at 53 per cent., was amply sufficient. <A
higher duty would sacrifice the interests of the consumer, and
encourage indolence in the manufacturer, and no manufacture
deserved much encouragement which could not be maintained
with an advantage of 154 per cent. At the same time,
Castlereagh anticipated a time when all such duties would be
abolished ; and a short additional period of the progress which
Trish manufactures had exhibited in the latter days of the Irish
Parliament would, he believed, place them beyond all fear of
competition. ‘ When I fix this rate of protection,’ he said, ‘I
wish it should continue for such a period of years as will give
security to the speculations of the manufacturers. At the same
time, I wish to look forward to a period when duties of this
kind may be gradually diminished, and ultimately cease. It
must be evident to every man, that if our manufactures keep
pace in advancement for the next twenty years with the progress
they have made in the last twenty years, they may, at the
expiration of it, be fully able to cope with the British ; and that
the two kingdoms may be safely left, like any two counties of
the same kingdom, to a free competition.’ It was, therefore,
provided that after twenty years the United Parliament might
diminish the duties of protection in such ratio as may be ex-
pedient, and it was also provided that all articles which were
not specially enumerated in the Act, should be duty free upon
import. In this way, Castlereagh said, Ireland would be per-
petually secured in the English market for her linen.

The remaining sections authorised such countervailing
duties as might balance the internal duties growing out of
the unequal taxation of the two countries; provided that the
charges on the re-export of native, foreign, and colonial goods
should be the same in both countries, and that no drawback
should be retained upon any article exported from one country
to the other; and finally provided that a sum equal to that
which was now applied to the encouragement of manufactures

454 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx

and to charitable purposes, should continue to be so applied by
the United Parliament.

The relations of the Union to religious questions were
touched lightly. ‘One State, one Legislature, one Church—
these are the leading features of the system, and without
identity with Great Britain in these three great points of con-
nection, we never can hope for any real and permanent security.’
‘A firm Government and a steady system can never be hoped
for, so long as the Constitution and Establishments of Ireland
can be made a subject of separate question and experiment.’
The first great object was to place the Established Church on a
natural basis by incorporating it with that of England, and iden-
tifying it with the population and property of the Empire, but its
security would speedily react favourably on the position of the
Catholics. Castlereagh did not promise Catholic emancipation,
or a payment of priests. He said only that ‘strength and
confidence would produce liberality ;’ that the claims of the
Catholics could be discussed and decided on with temper and
impartiality in an Imperial Parliament, ‘ divested of those local
circumstances which produce irritation and jealousy, and pre-
vent a fair and reasonable decision;’ that the accusation of
having bribed the Catholic clergy was unjust, as ‘an arrange-
ment, both for the Catholic and Dissenting clergy, had been
long in the contemplation of his Majesty’s Government.’

He then proceeded to explain and to defend the proposed
system of representation. In the Upper House, Ireland was to
be represented by four spiritual peers sitting in rotation, and
by twenty-eight temporal peers elected for life. To the Lower
House she was to send sixty-four county members, and thirty-
six borough members representing the chief cities and towns,
and the University of Dublin! Patrons of the disfranchised
boroughs were to be compensated. ‘If this be a measure of
purchase, it will be the purchase of peace, and the expense of it
will be redeemed by one year’s saving of the Union.’ The Irish
representation thus established, would be so popular in its

1 In arguing this point Castlereagh There is, as I have already shown
said: ‘The population of Irelandis, (p. 234), strong reason to believe, that
in general, estimated from 3,500,000 the population of Ireland in 1800
to 4,000,000.’ It is almost certain somewhat exceeded 4,500,000.
that this was an understatement.

CH. XXXIL CASTLEREAGH’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 5. 455

nature and effects, that in a separate Parliament it would be
highly dangerous, especially since the Relief Act of 1793 had
introduced a new class of electors into the constituencies. But
mixed with the representation of Great Britain, and forming
part of a large and stable assembly, its danger would disappear,
and it might be safely entrusted with the interests of Ireland.

Such, concluded Castlereagh, in a somewhat cumbrous but
very instructive peroration, was the proposal made by Great
Britain to Ireland. ‘It is one which will entirely remove those
anomalies from the Executive which are the perpetual sources of
discontent and jealousy. It is one which will relieve the appre-
hensions of those who fear that Ireland was, in consequence of
an Union, to be burdened with the debt of Great Britain. It
is one which, by establishing a fair principle of contribution,
goes to release Ireland from an expense of 1,000,000/. in time
of war, and of 500,000/. in time of peace. It is one which
increases the resources of our commerce, protects our manu-
factures, secures to us the British market, and encourages
all the products of our soil. It is one that, by uniting the
Church Establishments and consolidating the Legislatures of
the Empire, puts an end to religious jealousy, and removes the
possibility of separation. It is one which places the great
question which has so long agitated the country, upon the
broad principles of Imperial policy, and divests it of all its
local difficulties. It is one which establishes such a repre-
sentation for the country as must lay asleep for ever the
question of parliamentary reform, which, combined with our
religious divisions, has produced all our distractions and
calamities.’

It is unnecessary to follow at length the debate which ensued.
Most of the arguments have been already given, and the resolu-
tions containing the terms of the intended Bill, which were now
laid before the House, were too fresh for much profitable criticism.
Several speakers denied with great emphasis the assertion that
the country, or the greater part of the property of the country,
favoured the Union. ‘They asserted, on the contrary, that the
general voice was strongly and clearly adverse to it; that ‘the
detestation of it was strikingly apparent in every quarter of
the kingdom, and among all classes of people;’ and that this

456 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx.

fact was proved by the contrast between the small number
of signatures to addresses in favour of the Union, and the
petitions against it from so many counties, which covered the
table.

The Opposition justified also with great force their appeal
to the country. They had only done, in a fairer and larger
measure, what the Government itself had done, when it en-
deavoured, by addresses signed in many quarters, and by
the personal influence exercised by the Lord Lieutenant in his
journey through Ireland, to procure such a semblance of popular
support as might counteract the effect of the hostile vote of the
House of Commons in 1799. Was it very strange, they asked,
that they should endeavour to procure the real sense of the
country, when so many extraordinary means had been used to
procure an apparent one? Was the question whether ‘the
supreme power of the State should be transferred to a country
divided from Ireland by boundaries which could not be removed,
and by feelings which could not be extinguished,’ a question
which should, in no sense, be submitted to the judgment of the
people? Was it not peculiarly desirable at a time when a
formidable rebellion was scarcely suppressed, and when martial
law was in force, that men of rank, property, and respectability,
should come forward to show the people the safety and pro-
priety of expressing, in a constitutional manner, their sense of a
measure that would deprive them of their Constitution? And
did not this course become imperatively necessary when the
means were considered by which this measure was being car-
ried? ‘ What a comprehensive system of corruption !’ exclaimed
George Ponsonby ; ‘the peers are to be purchased with a life
privilege, the bishops are to be rotated that the Ministry may
have all the influence of the Church, and two-thirds of the
Commons are declared to be a mere purchasable commodity ! ’

The father of Miss Edgeworth made another of those curious,
balanced, hesitating speeches, which are so unlike the general
character of Irish oratory. Considered on its merits, and in
the abstract merely, all the arguments, he thought, were in
favour of the Union, but he was still resolved to oppose it. ‘He
thought it improper to urge the scheme unless it should appear
to be desired by the sober and impartial majority of the nation ;

CH, XXXI. DIVISION, FEBRUARY 6. 457

and while seventy boroughs were allowed to be saleable com-
modities, for which the public money was to be given, he not
only deemed it impossible to collect the genuine sense of the
nation in that House, but could not conscientiously support a
scheme attended with this avowed corruption.’

The debate lasted from four o’clock in the afternoon of the
5th, till one on the following afternoon.! The division is said
to have been the largest ever known in the Irish House of
Commons, 278 members, including the Speaker and the tellers,
being present. The Government had 158 votes, and the
Opposition 115. Hight members only were absent and un-
paired, and it was understood that these had stayed away
intentionally, wishing neither to support nor oppose the Go-
vernment. It is a curious fact that Colonel Fitzgibbon, the
son and successor of Lord Clare, was among the number.’
Although the present majority of forty-three exceeded by one
vote that of January 16, it in reality marked a serious retro-
gression, for on the former occasion a considerable number of
seats at the disposal of the Government had been vacant.
Twelve of their former supporters passed to the Opposition, one
of them, as I have already mentioned, having been purchased
by the sum of 4,0007. How far the others were influenced by
genuine conviction, by the opinions of their constituents, or by
corrupt motives, it is impossible to say. Cornwallis and Castle-
reagh stated that they had undoubted proofs, though not such
as could be disclosed, that the Opposition were able to offer, and
did offer, as much as 5,000. for a single vote. ‘How it will
end, wrote Cornwallis, ‘God only knows. I think there are
not more than four or five of our people that can be either
bought off or intimidated, but there is no answering for the
courage or integrity of our senators.’ *

sider the number of placemen and
other influenced members who voted

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ili.
181. Barrington says the division

tookplace at114.m. For Castlereagh’s
speech I have followed the separately
published report, and for the others
the more imperfect reports in Coote’s
LTistory of the Union.

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 181.

3Tbid. iii. 182-184. The reader
may compare with this the remarks of
the contemporary and very impartial
historian of the Union, ‘If we con-

at the last division, the Cabinet had
little cause for real or honourable
triumph, as the majority could not be
deemed sufficient to give fullsanction
to the scheme in a moral or con-
scientious point of view. Though we
are friendly to the measure itself, we
cannot applaud the perseverance of
those who resolved to carry it into
effect against the sense of the inde-

458 ENGLAND IN TIE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxn.

In the House of Lords, the Government were much stronger.
Lord Clare, himself, brought forward the first resolution ap-
proving of the Union. He had not yet taken any opportunity
of stating his own arguments in favour of the measure of which
he was, in a great degree, the author, and he now treated
the subject in a memorable and most elaborate speech, which
occupied four hours in its delivery, and which was immediately
after published by authority. The greater portion of it con-
sisted of a very skilful, but very partial, review of the past history
of Ireland, with the object of showing that the possessors of the
land and political power of the country were a mere English
colony, who never had been, and who never could be, blended or
reconciled with the native race.! ‘ What was the situation of
Treland, he,asked, ‘at the Revolution, and what is it at this
day? The whole power and property of the country has been
conferred by successive monarchs of England upon an English
colony, composed of three sets of English adventurers who
poured into this country at the termination of three successive
rebellions. Confiscation is their common title; and from their
first settlement they have been hemmed in on every side by the
old inhabitants of the island, brooding over their discontents in
sullen indignation. It is painful to me to go into this detail,
but we have been for twenty years in a fever of intoxication,
and must be stunned into sobriety. What was the security of
the English settlers for their physical existence at the Revo-
lution? And what is the security of their descendants at
this day? The powerful and commanding protection of Great
Britain. If, by any fatality, it fails, you are at the mercy of
the old inhabitants of the island; and I should have hoped that
the samples of mercy exhibited by them in the progress of the
late rebellion, would have taught the gentlemen who call them-
selves the Irish nation, to reflect with sober attention on the
dangers which surround them.’

pendent part of the House of Com-
mons; for of the opposition of a real
majority of uninfluenced senators, no
doubts could be entertained by any
man of sense or reflection who knew
the predicament and constitution of
that assembly.’ (Coote’s History of
the Union, p. 381.)

1 I have quoted a few sentences
from this speech, in another connec-
tion, in a former volume, but the
reader will, I trust, excuse a repeti-
tion which is essential to bring out
the full force of Lord Clare’s argu-
ment.

CH, XXXII, CLARE'S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 10. 459

He described the efforts that had been made by the Irish
Parliament to obtain an Union in 1703 and 1707; how the
Ministers of Queen Anne refused to grant it, and how, ‘in find-
ing a substitute for it, there had been a race of impolicy between
the countries. The Parliament of England seemed to have con-
sidered the permanent debility of Ireland as their best security
for her connection with the British Crown, and the Irish
Parliament to have rested the security of the colony upon
maintaining a perpetual and impassable barrier against the
ancient inhabitants of the country.’ This was the true mean-
ing of the commercial disabilities and of the penal laws; and
this system continued with little variation, till the American
War and the volunteers led to the demand and the conces-
sion of free trade and a free Constitution. ‘On the old Irish
volunteers,’ he said, ‘I desire to be understood not to convey
anything like a censure. Their conduct will remain a problem
in history ; for without the shadow of military control, to their
immortal honour it is known that, from their first levy till they
disbanded themselves, no act of violence or outrage was charged
against them; and they certainly did, on every occasion where
their services were required, exert themselves with effect to
maintain the internal peace of the country. The gentlemen of
Ireland were all in their ranks, and maintained a decided in-
fluence upon them. But I shall never cease to think that the
appeals made to that army by the angry politicians of that day,
were dangerous and ill-judged in the extreme; and that they
established a precedent for rebellion, which has since been
followed up with full success.’

He dilated with extreme bitterness upon the defects of the
Constitution of 1782, which he now represented as the root of all
the subsequent evils of the country ; upon the history of the com-
mercial propositions, and the history of the Regency ; upon the
alliance that had grown up between the Oppositions in Hngland
und Ireland. He spoke of Grattan in language which was
evidently inspired by deep personal hatred. He passed then to
the Catholic question: ‘with respect to the old code of the
popery laws,’ he said, ‘there cannot be a doubt that it ought to
have been repealed. It was impossible that any country could
continue to exist under a code by which a majority of its

460 ENGLAND IN THE bIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = cu. xxxtt.

inhabitants were cut off from the rights of property. But in
the relaxation of these laws there was a fatal error. It should
have been taken up systematically by the Ministers of the Crown,
and not left in the hands of every individual who chose to take
possession of it, as an engine of power or popularity.’

He next told in his own fashion the history of the rise of
the Catholic Committee, of the mission of Burke’s son, of the
fluctuating policy and the great concessions of 1792 and 1793,
of the manner in which the Whigs, who had once been pre-
eminently the anti-popish party in the State, took up, for party
purposes, the Catholic cause; of the Government, themistakes and
the recall of Lord Fitzwilliam. For this Viceroy he now pro-
fessed ‘a warm and unfeigned personal respect,’ which contrasts
curiously with the language he had employed during his Vice-
royalty and immediately after his recall. Under all these
influences, he said, the question of Catholic emancipation had
béen fully launched. It had been originally started as a pretence
for rebellion. It had been then made a powerful ‘ engine of
faction,’ wielded in both countries ; it had already shaken Irish
Government to its foundations, and without an Union it must
soon level it to the dust. Ireland never can be at peace,
‘until this firebrand is extinguished,’ and it never can be ex-
tinguished as long as a separate Parliament remains. It forms
an inexhaustible source of popular ferment; the common topic
of discontent and irritation to rally the old inhabitants of the
island. It is idle to suppose that in this direction any finality
could be reached. If every political disqualification were abo-
lished, there would still be the grievance of the Established
Church. If that Church were swept away, the popish party
would then demand a formal recognition of the laws of their own
Church, and ‘when every other point has been yielded, an
apostle of sedition will not be wanting, in the fullness of human
arrogance and presumption, to propose a repeal of God’s holy
Commandment, and to proclaim the worship of graven images in
your streets.’ If, as appeared evident, the Catholics, not satis-
fied with the indulgences they had already experienced, were
determined to press their demands for the unqualified repeal of
the Test Laws and Act of Supremacy ; then, in God’s name, let
the question at least be discussed on its solid merits in a power-

CH» XXXII. CLARE'S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 10. 461

ful Imperial Parliament, removed from fear and passion and
prejudice. Let it there be ‘ gravely and dispassionately con-
sidered, whether a repeal of these laws may be yielded with
safety to the British monarchy; or whether, by adopting the
French model in abolishing all religious distinctions as connected
with the State, we shall lay the corner stone of Revolution and
Democracy.’ ;

For his own part, Clare left no doubt about his opinions or
about the course he would take, and once more, as in 1793, he
openly severed himself from his colleagues in the Government,
who were doing all in their power to conciliate the Catholics,
and to win their support by persuading them that emancipation
must followthe Union. ‘ My unaltered opinion,’ he said, ‘ is that
so long as human nature and the popish religion continue to be
what I know they are, a conscientious popish ecclesiastic never
will become a well-attached subject to a Protestant State, and
that the popish clergy must always have a commanding ih-
fluence on every member of that Communion. . . . In private
life I never inquired into the religion of any man, . . . but when
Iam to frame laws for the safety of the State, I do not feel
myself at liberty to act upon the virtues of individuals. Laws
must be framed to meet and counteract the vicious propensities
of human nature.’

He then argued that parliamentary reform, whether it was
carried on the lines of the Whig opposition, or on those of the
United Irishmen, could only throw the country into the hands
of a Jacobin democracy, subversive alike of religion and mon-
archy, of property and the connection. ‘Though two years before
he had described the country as advancing in prosperity more
rapidly than any other in Europe, he now painted its situation
as absolutely desperate. He related the rapid rise of the national
debt, and attributed it far less to the French war than to in-
ternal rebellion. ‘We have not three years of redemption,’ he
said, ‘ from bankruptcy or intolerable taxation, not one hour’s
security against the renewal of exterminating civil war. . .
Session after session you have been compelled to enact laws of
unexampled rigour and novelty to repress the horrible excesses
of the mass of your people; and the fury of murder and
pillage and desolation have so outrun all legislative exertion,

462 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = cu. xxxn.

that you have at length been driven to the hard necessity of
. . . putting your country under the ban of military government,
and in every little circle of dignity and independence we hear
whispers of discontent at the temperate discretion with which it
is administered. . . . Look to your civil and religious dissen-
sions, look to the fury of political faction, and the torrents of
human blood that stain the face of your country;’ to the
enormous expense necessary ‘to keep down the brutal fury of
the mass of the Irish people, who have been goaded to madness
by every wicked artifice that disappointed faction can devise.’
‘Our present difficulties arise ’ not from a foreign, but ‘ from an
Trish war—a war of faction—a Whig war and a United Irish-
man’s war. . . . If England were at peace at this hour with all
the Powers of Europe . . . you would be compelled to maintain
a war establishment for defence against your own people.’ The
civil war of 1641 had been a war of extermination. The recent
civil war would have been no less so, if it had not been for the
‘ strong and merciful interposition of Great Britain,’ which saved
‘the besotted rebels of this day.’ But the scale of expense
rendered necessary by the rebellion was ruinous. If it con-
tinued for three years 2,430,000/. must be raised for the interest
of the debt alone.!

It was asked, Clare said, in what way these evils would be
rectified by the Union. His first very confident prediction was
one which we have already met in the pamphlet of Cooke, and
which has been so glaringly and uniformly falsified by the event,
that it now appears almost grotesque. ‘I answer first,’ he said,
‘we are to be relieved from British and Irish faction, which is
the prime source of all our calamities.’

Besides this, the army of the Empire would become one, and
as it would be a matter of indifference where it was quartered,
Treland would thus be sufficiently garrisoned without additional
expense ; the resources of Ireland would be greatly augmented ;
English capital and manufactures, English industry and civilisa-
tion, would gradually cross the Channel, and the higher order of
Irishmen would be withdrawn ‘from the narrow and corrupted

1 The reader who desires to com- Union, will find full materials in the
pare this prediction with the actual Parliamentary Reports on the Taxation
progress of the Irish debt after the of Ireland, 1864 and 1865.

CH, XXXIl. CLARE'S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 10. 463

sphere of Irish politics,’ and would direct their attention to objects
of true national importance.

For all aspirations of Irish nationality and all appeals to
national dignity, he expressed unbounded scorn. He declared
that he would most gladly entrust the government of Ireland to
the British Parliament, even though Ireland had not a single
representative in it. ‘ When I look,’ he said, ‘at the squalid
misery, and profound ignorance, and barbarous manners and
brutal ferocity of the mass of the Irish people, Jam sickened with
this rant of Irish dignity and independence. Is the dignity and
independence of Ireland to consist in the continued depression
and unredeemed barbarism of the great majority of the people,
and the factious contentions of a puny and rapacious oligarchy,
who consider the Irish nation as their political inheritance, and
are ready to sacrifice the public peace and happiness to their
insatiate love of patronage and power? . . . If we are to pursue
the beaten course of faction and folly, I have no scruple to say,
it were better for Great Britain that this island should sink into
the sea, than continue connected with the British Crown on the
terms of our present Union. ... The British Islands are
formed by nature for mutual security or mutual destruction, and
if we are to pursue the course we have thought fit to run for the
last twenty years, it may become a question of doubtful issue,
whether at a crisis of difficulty and danger, Great Britain will
be enabled to support us, or we shall sink Great Britain.’

There was much more in the same strain, and it was followed
by a furious invective against those who had appealed to the
people to express their opinions in hostility to the scheme. He
spoke of these men as ‘the modern Revolutionary Government,
of the Irish Consulate canvassing the dregs of that rebel demo-
cracy, for a renewal of popular ferment and outrage, to over-
awe the deliberations of Parliament.’ He said that, in the awful
and perilous situation of the nation, the offer of England had
been treated by gentlemen who called themselves friends of
liberty and the Irish Constitution with ‘the fury of wild beasts ;’
that the lawyers had set the example ; that ‘appeals of the most
virulent and inflammatory tendency were made by these same
friends of liberty, to the deluded barbarians who had been so
recently consigned by them to indiscriminate extirpation ;’ that

464 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cm. xxxn,

in Parliament the ‘ Friends of Liberty and the Constitution’ at.
first would not suffer the Government measure to be discussed,
and then, when it was relinquished, had tried to press it to a
premature discussion in order to prevent itsrevival. But ‘ when
this first burst of noise and clamour had subsided,’ and the plan
was calmly considered, ‘ the sober and rational part of the Irish
nation saw in the measure of an Union a fair prospect of peace
and wealth and happiness for their country, and the bulk of the
people, professing not to understand the subject, were perfectly
indifferent to it. Such was the state of the public mind upon
this question, when the late recess of Parliament took place ;
and to their eternal reproach and dishonour be it spoken, some
persons of high rank and consequence in the kingdom availed
themselves of that opportunity to become emissaries of sedition,
and to canvass popular support against the measure by the most
shameless impositions on the ignorance and credulity of every
man who would listen to them. . . . But the active exertions
of itinerant Lords and Commoners were not deemed sufficient
for the occasion, and we have seen a consular authority assumed
by two noble lords and a right honourable commoner, who have
issued their letter missive to every part of the kingdom ; com-
manding the people, in the name of a number of gentlemen of
both Houses of Parliament, to come forward with petitions con-
demning in terms of violence and indignation the measure of
Union prior to its discussion in Parliament. ... Is there
salvation for this country under her present Government and
Constitution, when men of their rank and situation can stoop
to so shabby and wicked an artifice, to excite popular outcry
against the declared sense of both Houses of Parliament? But
this is not all. If loud and confident report is to have credit, a
consular exchequer has been opened for foul and undisguised
bribery. I know that subscriptions are openly solicited in the
streets of the metropolis to a fund for defeating the measure of
Union. . .. I trust there is still sense and honour left in the
Trish nation, to cut off the corrupted source of these vile abomina-
tions.’

These are the most material, or at least the most original
passages in this powerful speech, for it is needless to follow it
through its discussion of the old familiar topics of absenteeism,

LY RESENTED TO ST. MARY'S COLLEGE LIGRA

CH, XXXII. CLARE’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 10. 465

the position of Dublin, the benefits a poor country must receive
from a partnership with a rich one, the history and effects of the
Scotch Union. Clare must have been heard or read with very
mingled feelings by many of the supporters of Government; by
‘the puny and rapacious oligarchy,’ on whose purchased borough
votes the Ministers mainly relied to carry their measure; by
those who held, with Cornwallis, that the special benefit of the
Union would be, that it would render possible a complete and
speedy abolition of religious disqualifications ; by those who re-
lied chiefly for its justification, on its approval by a great body
of opinion in Ireland, and especially on the friendly disposition
of the Catholics.

The speech was evidently more fitted to defy and to exasper-
ate, than to conciliate public opinion, and it is easy to trace in
it that burning hatred of Ireland, that disgust at its social and
political conditions, which had of late become the dominant
feeling of Clare.! This feeling was probably much intensified by
disappointment, for the horrible scenes of anarchy and blood-
shed, which he mainly traced to the concessions of 1782 and
1793, had only taken their acute form after his own triumph in
1795, and had been largely attributed to his own policy. That
his picture, both of the social condition of the country and of the
difficulties of its Government, during the preceding twenty years,
was enormously exaggerated, few persons who have seriously
studied that period will dispute, and still fewer will subscribe
to his condemnation of the Irish county members for appeal-
ing to the opinion of the freeholders against a measure which
had never been submitted to the constituencies, and which was
being carried in manifest defiance of the wishes of the great
majority of the independent members. Denunciations of cor-
ruption are in themselves always respectable, and in the con-
duct of the Opposition there was something to justify them, but
they came with a strange audacity from a statesman who had
boasted that half a million had been once, and might be again
expended to break down an Opposition, and who was at this very
time a leading member of a Government which was securing
a majority by such means as I have described.

1 ¢Our damnable country,’ as he Even in his will he spoke of ‘this
described it in a letter to Auckland, giddy and distracted country.’

VOL, YIII,. Hu

466 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx.

The division in the Lords gave seventy-five votes to the
Government, and only twenty-six to the Opposition, and the Bill
passed through its remaining stages in that House with little
discussion. ‘The debates are very imperfectly reported, and
there seems to have been but little in them that need delay us.
Lord Downshire, who was there the most important member of
the Opposition, spoke, Lord Cornwallis says, apparently under
great depression. He appears to have denied the existence of a
‘consular exchequer, or at least to have asserted that he had
not subscribed to it, and he acknowledged that he had been no
admirer of the Constitution of 1782, and that if an Union had
been proposed in that year, or at the time of the Regency, he
might have supported it. A time of distraction, however, and
turbulence like the present, seemed to him peculiarly unsuitable
for such a measure, and he feared that it would only inflame
public discontent, and obstruct the return of tranquillity. Ire-
land had incontestably made great strides in wealth and com-
merce under her separate Parliament; when the late rebellion
broke out, that Parliament had saved the country by its energy,
and he could not consent to subvert it on mere speculation, or
through visionary hopes of greater benefits. The causes of the
rebellion he found chiefly in the divided counsels and inconsis-
tent policy of the Ministers. He had himself, as a friend of
Government, been requested to sign a strong declaration in sup-
port of the Protestant ascendency. A few months later he had
been called upon by the same Government to vote for a most
extensive measure of Catholic enfranchisement. He complained
bitterly that, after a life spent in supporting the Government,
after having been admitted into their close confidence, and hay-
ing made for them great sacrifices in very evil times, he was de-
nounced as if he were a seditious man, because he had signed
the ‘letter missive.’ ‘He had acted as an independent gentle-
man of Ireland, as a man of large possessions, acquainted with
the state of the country, and deeply interested in its welfare.
As it had been confidently asserted that the Unionists had a
greater extent of property than their opponents, it was incum-
bent on those who had a better knowledge of the opinion of the
public, to call for a constitutional declaration of sentiment, not
from the dregs of the people, but from. the more respectable part

CH, XXXII. SPEECHES OF YELVERTON. 467

of the community. . . . This was not the conduct of seditious
or disloyal men.’ !

One of the most memorable figures on the side of the
Government in these debates was the Chief Baron, Lord Yelver-
ton, who had borne so considerable a part in framing the Con-
stitution of 1782, and who had once been in the closest alliance
with Grattan. He was a great lawyer, an admirable speaker, a
statesman of sound and moderate judgment, a man of eminent
accomplishments, and of a singularly sweet, simple, and even
childlike nature, but, like many distinguished Irishmen, his
character had been broken down by extravagance and debt, and
he gained too much by the Union for his authority to have
much weight.2 His opinion in its favour had, however, been
expressed at a time when the chance of success was very doubt-
ful, and he spoke more than once powerfully in its support,
dwelling especially upon the full competence of Parliament to
carry it, and upon the evidence which modern history supplied
of the inadequacy of a federal connection, for defence in time of
danger, or for securing a lasting and real Union. He recalled
with pride his connection with the Constitution of 1782, stating
that this Constitution had made it possible for Ireland to secure
an Union of equality instead of an Union of subjection, but he
declared that even in 1782 he had desired an Union, and would
have readily accepted it if it had been proposed. He at the
same time showed some courage by delivering, in the face of a
great ministerial majority, an eloquent protest against the impu-
tations that had been thrown upon Grattan. He well knew him,
he said, ‘to be as incapable of engaging in any plot for sepa-

1 Compare Coote’s History of the
Union, pp. 411-414; Cornwallis Cor-
respondence, ili. 185, 186.

2 Many interesting particulars

Trishman, and the claims of the chief
judges were considered. Abbot then
wrote: ‘ Lord Avonmore, whose learn-
ing and talents are unquestionably

about Yelverton will be found in
Barrington, Grattan’s Zife, and Phil-
lips’ Lecollections of Curran. He at
once pressed for promotion in the
peerage (Cornwallis Correspondence,
iii. 258) ; he was made Viscount Avon-
moreimmediately after the Union, and
some places taken from the Downshire
family were given to his relations.
When Lord Clare died, Lord Hard-
wicke wished his successor to be an

great, is nevertheless so totally negli-
gent of propriety of manners, and so
extremely embarrassed in his private
concerns, that it is hardly creditable
for the King’s service, for him to re-
main Chief Baron of the Exchequer.
His very salary of office is assigned
to pay his creditors, by deed enrolled
in his own court.’ (Abbot to Adding-
ton, Jan. 19, 1802. Lord Colchester’s
MSS.)

Hu 2

468 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxx.

rating this country from Great Britain, as the most strenuous
advocate of the present measure.!

The majority in the House of Lords greatly disliked the por-
tion of the Union scheme which left the King an unlimited
power of creating Irish peers after the Union, and they desired
that the precedent of the Scotch Union should be followed, and
the roll of the Irish peerage closed. ‘The feeling was so strong,
that the King’s principal servants believed that the clause re-
lating to the peerage could not pass, but a compromise was at
last agreed to, leaving the Crown the power of creating one
Trish peerage for every three that should become extinct, until
the whole number was reduced to a hundred.? At the last
stage a protest against the resolutions was signed by the Duke
of Leinster, and nineteen other peers. They complained of the
annihilation in a time of great danger and disturbance, and in
opposition to the general voice of the nation, of the Constitution
which had for many ages maintained the connection between the
two countries, and been the best security for the liberty of Ire-
land. They argued in much detail, that the proportion of the
expenditure of the Empire imposed on Ireland exceeded her
capacity, and must lead her to speedy bankruptcy, and they
appealed solemnly to posterity to acquit them of having had any
part in a measure from which they anticipated the ruin and de-
gradation of their country.*

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. subject was at his house, but that

25; ill. 373; Cornwallis Correspon-
dence, ili. 41, 220. There is a sketch
of Yelverton’s speech on March 22, in
Coote, and it was printed fully as a
pamphlet both in Dublin and London.
Tt is rather too lawyer-like a perfor-
mance. Cooke wrote of it: ‘Lord
Yelverton made a fine speech, but
praised Grattan too much for our
purpose.’ (Cooke to King, March 24,
1800. R.O.) In a private letter to
Lord Grenyille, Cooke says: *‘ Lord
Yelverton made a most able speech
on the general question, but he rather
interlarded too much exculpation and
praise of Grattan. He also denied
that any propositions were ever made
to him by the Duke of Portland in
1782, of any measures which had the
tendency to an Union, or were to be
a substitute for it. I understand,
however, that the proposal on this

both his Lordship and Fitzpatrick
were so drunk that they might well
have forgotten what passed. This, at
least, is the Bishop of Meath’s account
of what passed.’ Cooke to Grenville,
March 24, 1800. (Grenville MSS.)

* Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
208, 219. The Duke of Portland, in
conceding this point, took occasion
to express his admiration of the Irish
aristocracy, ‘whose exemplary con-
duct, in the course of this great busi-
ness, entitles them to every possible
mark of consideration, and must se-
cure to them the gratitude of their
latest posterity.’ (Ibid. p. 226.) This
curious passage appears to have been
written with pertect seriousness.

3 Seward’s Coliectanea Politica,
ili. 516-520. One of the peers, how-
ever, subscribed to only a portion of
the protest,

cr. xxx. | DETERMINATION OF THE GOVERNMENT. 469

We must now revert briefly to the struggle in the Commons.
The excitement in Dublin while the question was under debate
was very great. A furious mob again attacked some of the sup-
porters of the Union, and attempted to throw their carriages into
the Liffey, and it was found necessary to guard the streets by
patrols of cavalry as in a period of rebellion.! The Government,
however, acted with great decision. It was at this time that
Lord Downshire was deprived of all his posts, and the Duke of
Portland wrote that the smallness of the last majority had in no
degree shaken or discouraged the Cabinet in England. ‘No
means, he added, ‘ should be omitted, no exertion neglected, that
can insure this measure, and there is no assistance of any kind
which the Government of this country can afford your Excellency,
that you may not depend upon, as it is the unanimous opinion
of those concerned in the administration of it, that it is essen-
tially necessary to the security, as well as to the prosperity of
both kingdoms.’ ‘I must not omit,’ he wrote in another letter,
‘to authorise and instruct you to declare that no disappointment
(which, however, the goodness of the cause and your exertions
will not suffer me to apprehend), will ever induce his Majesty
or his servants to recede from, or to suspend their endeavours ;
but that it is his Majesty’s fixed and unalterable determination
to direct, session after session, the proposition of Union to be re-
newed to Parliament, untilitis adopted by the good sense of the
nation.’ ”

The Government were extremely anxious that the question
should be pressed on without delay, while the first object of the
Opposition was to postpone it till the opinion of the country was
fully taken. On February 14, there was a preliminary dis-
cussion on the necessity of delaying the question till some further
papers were produced, and George Knox delivered a short, but
very remarkable speech. He argued that, whatever were its de-
fects, the Irish Parliament had at least represented ‘ every variety
of interest, property, talent, knowledge, wisdom and energy,’ in
the community ; that it had produced among the people, however
imperfectly, some real feeling of identity with the State, and had
afforded a natural and constitutional issue for the various senti-
ments and passions that agitated them. If, as he feared, an

1 Cornnallis Correspondence, iii, 180, 181. 2 Thid.

470 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxn.

Imperial Parliament failed to fulfil this function, the result would
prove most disastrous. He warned the House that content and
loyalty do not always follow in the train of prosperity, and that
nations act less from reason than from sentiment. It was quite
possible, he believed, that a period was coming in Ireland, of
better government, of augmented prosperity, and at the same
time of steadily increasing discontent. He even predicted that
a discontented and unguided Ireland might one day become, in
the English-speaking world, as formidable a source and centre
of aggressive Jacobinism as France had been on the Continent,
and that the poison of its baneful influence might extend to the
farthest limits of the civilised globe.

It was a bold, and, as many must have thought, a most extra-
vagant prediction. Could there, it might be asked, be any real
comparison, either for good or for ill, between a small remote island
inthe Atlantic, and the great nation which had for centuries exer-
ciseda dominant influence over the ideas and fortunes of Europe,
and which had acquired in its recent transformation a volcanic
fury that had shaken Christendom to its basis? Yet he who has
traced the part which Irish Jacobinism has played during the
last generations in those great English-speaking nations on which
the future of the world most largely depends; who has examined
the principles and precedents it has introduced into legislation ;
the influence it has exercised on public life and morals, and on the
type and character of public men, may well doubt whether the
prediction of Knox was even an exaggeration.

On the 17th, the Union passed into committee, and another
long debate, extending over eighteen or twenty hours, took place.
Among its incidents was a violent attack by Corry, the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, upon Grattan, on account of his alleged com-
plicity with Neilson and the United Irishmen, to which Grattan
replied by one of those crushing and unmeasured invectives in
which he sometimes indulged, and which are by no means among
the most admirable specimens of his oratory. The excitement
in the House was so great, that for several hours, Lord Cornwallis
says, the debate went on without attention, and a duel followed,
in which Corry was slightly wounded. Sir John Parnell attacked
the whole scheme with much elaboration, and was answered by
Lord Castlereagh, on whom almost the entire burden of the de-

CH, XXXII SPEECH OF FOSTER, FEBRUARY 17. 471

fence seems to have fallen ; and the Speaker, availing himself of
the fact that the House was in committee, delivered ee long,
most able, and most comprehensive speech.

He began by deprecating the train of reasoning recently
adopted by Clare and other speakers, who painted the situation
of Ireland as so desperate, its people so debased, and its feuds so
rooted, that any change of Government must be an improvement.
‘Can those who now hear me,’ he said, ‘deny that since the
period of 1782 this country has risen in civilisation, wealth, and
manufacture, until interrupted by the present war, in a greater
proportion and with amore rapid progress than any other country
in Europe, and much more than it ever did itself in alike period
before? And to what has this improvement been owing, but
the spirit, the content, and enterprise which a free Constitution
inspired? ‘To depress which spirit, and to take away which Con-
stitution, are the objects of the present measure.’ He denied
altogether that the independence of the Parliament was a mere
name. It was true that the Great Seal of England, which was
used through a British Minister, was essential to the validity of
Irish legislation, but the royal assent had never been withheld to
our injury since the Constitution of 1782, and it had become little
more than a theoretic restraint. ‘As no Legislature but our own
can make a law to bind us, we have only theoretic dependence,
but practical independence; whereas, if we adopt the proposed
Union and give up our Parliament, we shall reverse our situation,
and have a theoretic independence with a practical and sure de-
pendence. He then grappled at great length, and with a pro-
fusion of figures, with the argument that Ireland was on the verge
of bankruptcy; that nothing but a legislative Union could pre-
vent it; that the result of the Union would be an annual saving
‘of a million in time of war, and of half a million in time of peace.
The last two sessions had, he acknowledged, been the most ex-
pensive Ireland had ever seen ; the House had measured its grants
much less by its means than by its zeal to uphold Great Britain,
and it had voted them at the express invitation of the very
Minister who now made its liberality an argument for destroying
it. But it was not true that Ivish finances were desperate, and
it was not true that the Union would improve them. In the first
six years of the war, Great Britain had increased her debt by

472 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxu.

186 millions, and Ireland by 14 millions, the proportionate in-
crease being 124 to 1. Bya careful and intricate argument, to
which it is impossible here to do justice, but which made a pro-
found impression, though it was very seriously controverted,
Foster maintained that if the proposed Union had existed from
the beginning of the war, the debt of Ireland would have ex-
ceeded its present figure by nearly ten millions and a half, and
that, instead of bringing reduced taxation, the Union would
probably add not less than two and a half millions to the annual
taxation.

He examined with great knowledge and detail, but with a
strong protectionist bias, the commercial clauses, arguing that
some parts would prove injurious to Ireland, and that others
would confer advantages which might be equally attained with
separate Legislatures, and he then discussed the constitutional
provisions. He maintained that it was contrary to the now
acknowledged principles of the Constitution, that peers who
were elected as representatives should hold their seats for life ;
that it was absurd and mischievous that Irish peers who were
not in the House of Lords might sit in the House of Commons
for British seats, but not for the country with which they were
naturally connected by property and residence; that such a
provision would gradually dissociate the Irishmen of largest for-
tune from their native country ; that the bulk of the Irish peerage,
being deprived of the chief incentives and opportunities of poli-
tical life, would sink into an idle, useless, enervated caste. He
predicted that the removal of the legislative body to a capital
which was several days’ journey from Ireland, would exclude
Irish merchants and eminent lawyers from the representation,
impede all local inquiries, and fatally retard acquisition of local
information ; and he complained that, while elaborate provision
was made for securing in the future a settled proportion of con-
tribution, there was no corresponding provision for securing a
just proportion in representation. ‘A real union,’ he said, ‘is
a full and entire union of two nations. . . . There can be no
union of the nations while distinct interests exist, and almost
every line of the plan declares the distinctness of interest. . . .
Review the whole measure. It leaves us every appendage of
a kingdom except what constitutes the essence of independence,

CH. XXXII. FOSTER’S SPEECH, FEBRUARY 17. 473

a resident Parliament. Separate State, separate establishment,
separate exchequer, separate debt, separate courts, separate laws,
the Lord Lieutenant, and the Castle, all remain.’

He denied that any real benefits, either in trade or revenue,
could be expected, and added that, were it otherwise, he would
spurn them if they were the price of the surrender of the
Parliament. ‘Neither revenue nor trade will remain where
the spirit of liberty ceases to be their foundation, and nothing
can prosper in a State which gives up its freedom. I declare
most solemnly that if England could give us all her revenue
and all her trade, I would not barter for them the free Constitu-
tion of my country. Our wealth, our properties, our personal
exertions, are all devoted to her support. Our freedom is our
inheritance, and with it we cannot barter.’

He denounced as a ‘monstrous and unconstitutional offer’
the proposal to compensate borough owners, making the public
pay them for selling themselves, their constituents, and their
country. ‘Do you publicly avow that borough representation
is a private property, and do you confirm that avowal by the
Government becoming the purchasers?’ This measure, he
said, was notoriously taken for the purpose of acquiring in the
small boroughs a majority which could not be obtained in the
counties and considerable towns, and he believed that the prece-
dent must necessarily be one day extended to England, and that
it would prove far more dangerous to the British Constitution
than all the Hast India Bills that were ever framed. By this
and other kindred measures, he acknowledged that the Ministry
had obtained a majority in favour of the Union, but he still
believed, or pretended to believe, in the success of the minority.
‘It is impossible to suppose that Ministers can think of pro-
ceeding against the determined sense of the 120 members who
compose it, two-thirds of the county members among them, and
supported by the voice of the nation. Look on your table at
the petitions from twenty-five counties, from eight principal
cities and towns, and from Dublin. ‘Twenty-three of the
counties convened by legal notice have, from time to time,
declared against the Bill, and twenty of them unanimously.
The whole mercantile interest deprecate it. Wherever you go,
whoever you talk with out of doors, you hear it reprobated

474 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca, xxxu.

universally. Every day brings new conviction of the abhorrence
in which it is held throughout the kingdom.’

It is true, he said, that the promoters of the measure had
endeavoured to alarm and divide the nation by joining the
religious question with the question of Union, and exciting the
strong and opposing hopes and fears that were involved in it.
Foster emphatically refused to discuss Catholic emancipation
in connection with the Union, or to admit that ‘a distant
Parliament sitting in a distant land’ was more competent than
the Irish Parliament to deal with this great Irish question, or
more likely to give content by its decisions. ‘The Catholic is
equally [with the Protestant] a native of Ireland; equally
bound by duty, by inclination to his country. He sees with us
the danger of the attack, and joins with the Protestant to
prevent its approach, and save the Constitution. He is wise in
doing so. All differences are lost, they are asleep in this
common cause. He joins heart to heart with his fellow-subjects
to oppose the common enemy.’

‘You talk,’ continued Foster, ‘of this measure restoring
tranquillity. Itis but talk. Will taking men of property out
of the country doit? Will a plan full of the seeds of jealousy
and discontent effect it? Will depriving a nation of the liberty
which it has acquired, and to which it is devoted, insure con-
tent? If religious jealousies disturb its quiet, are they to be
allayed by a British Parliament? . . . British, not Irish, coun-
cils roused them. British, not Irish, councils now propose this
Union.’

Throughout this remarkable speech there is an evident
reference to the arguments of Clare; and in his concluding
passage, Foster dwelt with great power on Clare’s attack on
the county meetings, and on those who had convened them.
‘Tt is the fashion to say the country is agitated, and certain
letters, written by three members of Parliament, have been held
forth as unconstitutional and inflammatory. This is the first
time I ever heard a wish in gentlemen, to know the real senti-
ment of the freeholders by legal meetings to be convened by the
sheriffs, insulted by such appellations. The noble lord and his
friends said, the sense of the nation was with the measure. We
doubted the fact, and the legal and undoubted right of our con-

CH, XXXII. RESOLUTION FOR UNION CARRIED. ° 475

stituents to tell us their sentiments could alone ascertain it.
No, sir, that letter did not irritate, it was intended to appease.
But I will tell you what has irritated—the reviving this
ruinous measure after its rejection last year; the appeal
nominal which the noble lord and his friends resorted to against
the decision of Parliament; the refusing county meetings, which
are the constitutional mode of collecting the sense of the free-
holders, and sending papers directed to no man, neither address,
nor petition, nor instructions, but a pledge of opinion, through
all the chapels, the markets, the public-houses, and even the
lowest cabins, for signatures, and setting those up against this
House and the general voice of the kingdom... . I scarce
need mention the unconstitutional use to which the Place Bill
has been perverted, andthe . . . monstrous proposal of applying
the public money to purchase public rights from private in-
dividuals.’ These, he said, were the true causes of the agitation
that was so greatly deplored, and that agitation would never
cease till the measure was abandoned.

In this, as in the other speeches of Foster, the reader may find
the case against the Union in its strongest form, and may learn
to estimate the feelings with which that measure was regarded
by a large section of the Protestant gentlemen of Ireland. The
Government majority, however, was unbroken, and the resolution
declaring that there shall be a legislative Union between Great
Britain and Ireland, was carried by a majority of forty-six.

From this division, the Opposition perceived that their cause
was almost hopeless, and the measure now moved steadily, though
slowly, through its remaining stages. Some of the resolutions
passed with little discussion, and the difficult and delicate ques-
tion of the relative contributions of the two countries was
‘debated and agreed to in a single sitting on February 24. Lord
Castlereagh took the occasion to reply, in a speech which
appears to have been very able, to the calculation by which
Foster had endeavoured to show that under the Union scheme
the debt must increase much more rapidly than with a separate
Parliament, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer predicted that
‘in the next five years, taken in the proportion of two of war
to three of peace,’ Ireland under the Union would save nearly
ten millions. Foster, Parnell, and others maintained that the

476 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxm.

proportion imposed on Ireland was beyond her capacities; but
atest division on a question of adjournment gave the Government
150 votes to 108, and an amendment of John Claudius Beresford,
that the contribution of Ireland should be only two-twentieths
instead of two-seventeenths, was speedily negatived. Plunket
declared that he and his friends were determined to confine their
opposition to the principle of the measure, and that they would
decline to give it even that degree of sanction which might be
implied in attempts to mend it. The whole resolution ulti-
mately passed without a division.!

‘T see no prospect of converts,’ wrote Castlereagh at this
time to the English Under Secretary of State. ‘The Opposition
are steady to each other. [ hope we shall be able to keep our
friends true. . . . We require your assistance, and you must be
prepared to enable us to fulfil the expectations which it was
impossible to avoid creating at the moment of difficulty. You
may be sure we have rather erred on the side of moderation.’
‘When can you make the remittance promised ?’ wrote Cooke
to the same correspondent. ‘It is absolutely essential, for our
demands increase.’ ”

The Opposition now made it their chief and almost their only
object, to delay the measure until the opinion of the country had
been deliberately and constitutionally taken. Lord Corry, one
of their most respected and candid members, sent a proposal to
Lord Castlereagh, that if the Government would postpone any
proceedings on the Union till the following session, the Opposi-
tion would give them the fullest support, and that, ‘if the coun-
try should at that period appear to be in favour of an Union, they
would give it a fair assistance.’* The proposal was at once
rejected ; and on March 4, George Ponsonby introduced a series
of resolutions stating that petitions had already been presented
against the Union in the present session from twenty-six coun-
ties; from the cities of Dublin and Limerick; from Belfast,
Drogheda, Newry, and several other towns, and begging that

1 Compare Cornwallis Correspon- Speaker’s calculation appears to have

dence, ili. 199, 200; Coote, pp 444, been, that Ireland contributed little
445. The best report I have seenof to the war before 1797.

Castlereagh’s reply to Foster is given * Cornnallis Correspondence, iii.
in a pamphlet called, A Reply tothe 200-202.
Speech of the Speaker, Feb. 17, 1800. 3 Ibid. p. 200.

Castlereagh’s chief objection to the

CH, Xxx, ADDRESS FOR A DISSOLUTION. 477

these resolutions should be transmitted to England and laid
before the King. 110,000 persons, he said, had signed petitions
against the Union, and it was the duty of the House to lay them
before his Majesty, and to represent to him the true wishes of the
people. He appealed to the message to Parliament on February
5, in which the Lord Lieutenant, while recommending a legis-
lative Union, had relied on the general sentiment of the Irish
people being in its favour, and he deduced from this that the
concurrence of the will of the people was necessary to warrant
Parliament in making a change which amounted to a transfer of
the Constitution. Lord Castlereagh answered, that when the
people were left to themselves, there was a general disposition
among the loyal and well-informed classes to acquiesce in the
Union ; that the recent adverse expressions had been brought
forward ‘by manceuvre and artifice ;’ that seventy-four declara-
tions in favour of the Union had been made by public bodies in
the kingdom, nineteen of which had come from freeholders in
the counties, and that in these declarations, rather than in the
petitions to the House, the sense of the propertied and loyal part
of the community wasto be found. He added, that if on former
occasions the sense of the people had been taken against the sense
of Parliament, neither the Revolution Settlement of the Crown,
nor the Union with Scotland, could have been accomplished. The
Government carried an adjournment by 155 to 107.!

Another attempt of the same kind was made on the 13th by
Sir John Parnell, who moved that an address should be presented
to the King requesting him to dissolve Parliament, and take the
sense of the constituencies before the legislative Union was con-
cluded. Sir Lawrence Parsons, in supporting the motion, said
that, well as he knew the immense influence exercised by the
Crown in the choice of members, he was prepared to stake the
issue on the result of an election ; and Saurin, in a fiery speech,
declared that a legislative Union, carried without having been
brought constitutionally before the people, and in defiance of
their known wishes, would not be morally binding, and that the
right of resistance would remain, This doctrine was denounced
as manifest Jacobinism, and as a direct incentive to rebellion.
Grattan defended the motion in a short and moderate speech.

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, ili, 202-204; Coote, pp. 445, 446,

478 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxil

He disclaimed all wish of submitting the question on the French
principle to mere multitude ; to primary assemblies; to universal
suffrage. He desired only that it should be brought before the
constituencies legally and constitutionally determined, before
‘the mixture of strength and property which forms the order of the
country.’ The Lord Lieutenant had recommended the Union
on the supposition of the concurrence of the people. The
English Minister had defended it as a measure for identifying
two nations. The Irish Minister had justified it by appealing
to the addresses in its favour, and Parliament was acting in a
perfectly proper manner in advising his Majesty to exercise his
constitutional prerogative of dissolving the House of Commons,
and ascertaining the true sense of the constituencies. In
Scotland the sense of the electors upon the question of an Union
had been taken at an election. Why should not the same course
be adopted in Ireland? Whatever benefits might result from
the Union if it were carried in concurrence with the opinion of
the people, it was sure to prove disastrous if it was against it.
A dissolution on the question would be ‘a sound and safe mea-
sure,’ and no disturbance was likely to follow from it. ‘ Every
act necessary to secure the public peace, and to arm the Execu-
tive Government with power to that effect, had passed the House.
The supplies had been granted, the Mutiny Bill had passed, the
Martial Law Bill was agreed to. Under these circumstances the
measure was not dangerous; under every consideration it was
just.’ The Government, however, succeeded in defeating the
motion by 150 to 104:.}

Large classes of manufacturers were at this time seriously
alarmed, and the arguments and great authority of Foster had
profoundly affected them. Many petitions from them came in,
and representatives of several manufactures were heard at the
bar of the House. In England the delay caused by these pro-
ceedings seems to have excited some complaint, and Lord
Castlereagh wrote that he had received letters intimating that
the Irish Government were not pressing on the question with
sufficient rapidity. He urged, however, that it was impossible,
with any propriety or decency, to prevent persons whose private
interests were really affected by the measure, from being heard

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 212, 218; Grattan’s Speeches, iii, 411-413,

CH, XXxII. THE COMMERCIAL CLAUSES. 479

at the bar; that the conduct of the Opposition could not as yet
be fairly imputed to the mere object of delay, and that imprudent
precipitation might have the worst effect. It must be considered,
he said, ‘that we have a minority consisting of 120 members,
well combined and united; that many of them are men of the
first weight and talent in the House; that thirty-seven of them
are members for counties; that great endeavours have beén used
to inflame the kingdom; that petitions from twenty-six counties
have been procured; that the city of Dublin is almost unanimous
against it; and with such an Opposition, so circumstanced and
supported, it is evident much management must be used.’!

The cotton manufacturers were believed to be the most me-
naced, and their claims were pressed with much persistence, both
from Belfast and Cork. This manufacture ranked in Ireland next
to that of linen ; the value annually manufactured was estimated
at 600,000/. or 700,000/., and from 30,000 to 40,000 persons
were employed in it. About 130,000. worth of cotton, chiefly
fustians, was imported from England, but the manufacture of
calico and muslins was purely Irish, and was guarded by a pro-
hibitory duty of from thirty to fifty per cent. It was believed
that a sudden reduction of the duty to ten per cent. would lead
to a complete displacement of the calicoes and muslins of Ireland
by those of England. After some hesitation, the Government
consented to postpone this reduction for seven years ; and by this
concession, it did much to mitigate the opposition.?

The commercial clauses were now the only ones that were
contested with much seriousness, for the leading members of the
Opposition in the later stages of the discussion seldom took part
in the debates, and made no efforts to amend a scheme which
they found themselves unable to delay or reject. ‘The debate on
March 19, on the commercial clauses, however, was very thorough,
the Government plans being powerfully defended by John Beres-
ford and Castlereagh, and attacked with great elaboration by
Grattan and Foster. Both of these Opposition speakers adopted
a frankly protectionist line, maintaining that the diminution or
abolition of protecting duties on some seventy articles, and the
increased competition with England, that would follow the Union,

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 205, 206.
2 Thid, iii, 216, 217; Castlereagh Correspondence, iii. 251-2538,

480 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

must arrest the growth of native manufactures, which had been
during the last years so remarkable, and must end by making
England the almost exclusive manufacturing centre of the Em-
pire. Much, however, of their very able speeches was devoted to
pointing out the general demerits of the Union; the turpitude
of the means by which it was being carried, and its opposition
to the wishes of the people. The language of Foster was ex-
tremely virulent. In a skilful and bitterly sarcastic passage, he
described the account of the transaction which a future historian,
who ‘had not our means of information,’ was likely togive. He
would say that when the scheme was first proposed, the nation
revolted against it, and the Parliament rejected it, but that the
Minister persevered ; that without a dissolution, he changed, by
the operation of the Place Bill, a great part of the House of
Commons; that he set up the Protestant against the Catholic,
and the Catholic against the Protestant; the people against the
Parliament, and the Parliament against the people ; that he used
the influence of the absentee, to overpower the resident; that
he bought-the peerage, and made the liberality with which the
House of Commons granted its supplies, an argument for its abo-
lition ; that at a time when the rebellion was wholly suppressed,
and when only a few local disturbances remained, martial law
was extended over the whole island, and the country occupied
beyond all previous example with a great army; that dismissals
took place to such an extent, that there was not a placeman
in the minority, and all honours were concentrated in the
majority ; and finally that many sheriffs appointed by Govern-
ment, refused to convene the counties to petition Parliament,
lest the voice of the people should be fairly heard. ‘Such,’ said
Foster, ‘might be the account of the historian who could judge
from appearances only. - We who live at the time would, to be
sure, state it otherwise were we to write.’ !

This was the language of a skilful rhetorician, and of a bitter
opponent. It is interesting to compare it with that which was
employed about the same time by a very honest and intelligent
member of the House, who was himself, in principle, in favour of
the Union. ‘Iam an Unionist,’ wrote Edgeworth to his friend
Erasmus Darwin, ‘but I vote and speak against the Union now

‘ This speech is published as a pamphlet.

i. xxxtt. COMPENSATION FOR BOROUGHS—TITHES. 481

proposed to us. . . . It is intended to force this measure down
the throats of the Irish, though five-sixths of the nation are
against it. Now, though I think such an Union as would identify
the nations, so that Ireland should be as Yorkshire to Great
Britain, would be an excellent thing; yet I also think that the
good people of Ireland ought to be persuaded of this truth, and
not be dragooned into submission. The Minister avows that
seventy-two boroughs are to be compensated, i.e. bought by the
people of Ireland with one million and a half of their own money ;
and he makes this legal by a small majority, made up chiefly of
these very borough members. When thirty-eight county mem-
bers out of sixty-four are against the measure, and twenty-eight
counties out of thirty-two have petitioned against it, this is such
abominable corruption, that it makes our parliamentary sanction
worse than ridiculous.’!

The Government carried two divisions by majorities of
42 and 47. On the critical question of the compensation to
borough owners, the Opposition abstained from taking the
sense of the House,’ though they dilated with much bitter-
ness on the inconsistency of a Government which represented
the country as staggering on the verge of bankruptcy, and then
asked a vote of nearly a million and a half, in order to carry a
measure which they did not dare to submit to the judgment of
the constituencies.

Almost at the last moment, however, a new and considerable
excitement was caused by Sir John Macartney, who unexpectedly
revived, in connection with the Union, the old question of the
tithe of agistment, which had slumbered peacefully since the

days of George II. He reminded the House that the exemption

1 Life of Edgeworth, ii. 230, 231.
Writing on the subject in 1817, Hdge-
worth said: ‘It is but justice to Lord
Cornwallis and Lord Castlereagh to
give it as my opinion, that they began
this measure with sanguine hopes that
they could convince the reasonable
part of the community that a cordial
Union between the two countries
would essentially advance the in-
terests of both. When, however, the
Ministry found themselves in a mi-
nority, and that a spirit of general
opposition was rising in the country,
a member of the House, who had been

VOL. VIII.

long practised in parliamentary in-
trigues, had the audacity to tell Lord
Castlereagh from his place that, ‘if
he did not employ the wswal means of
persuasion on the members of the
House, he would fail in his attempt,
and that the sooner he set about it
the better.’ This advice was followed,
and it is well known what benches
were filled with the proselytes that
had been made by the convineing ar-
guments which obtained a majority.’
(ibid. p. 232.)

2 Cornwallis
ie

ale,

Correspondence, ili,

He

482 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxn.

of pasturage from tithes did not rest upon any law, but that the
claim of the clergy had been abandoned in consequence of a
resolution of the House of Commons in 1735, which pronounced
it to be new and mischievous, and calculated to encourage
popery, and which directed that all legal methods should be
taken for resisting it. By the Union, Macartney said, the
effect. of this resolution would cease, and the clergy would be
able, without obstruction, to claim additional tithes to the
amount of one million a year. The alarm excited by this pro-
spect among the eraziers was so great, that the Government
hastily introduced and carried a Bill making tithes of agistment
illegal.’

On March 28, the articles of the Union had passed through
both Houses, and they were transmitted to England, accom-
panied by the resolutions in favour of the measure, and by a
joint address of both Houses to the King, and the Irish Parlia-
ment then adjourned for nearly six weeks, in order to leave full
time for them to be carried through the British Parliament,
after which they were to be turned into a Bill. The recess
passed in Ireland without serious disturbance. Cornwallis, in a
passage which I have already quoted, expressed his belief that
at least half of the majority who voted for the Union would
have been delighted if it could still be defeated; he said that
he was afraid of mentioning a proposal for amalgamating the
two Ordnance establishments, lest the probable diminution of
patronage should alarm his friends, but he had no doubt that if
the Union plan came back from England unaltered, it would
pass, and he did not believe that there was much strong feeling
against it in the country. If there had been any change in
public feeling, he thought it was rather favourable than the
reverse, and Dublin, though very hostile, remained tranquil.
‘The word Union,’ he wrote, ‘will not cure the evils of this
wretched country. It is a necessary preliminary, but a great
deal more must be done.’ 2

In the English Parliament there was not much opposition to
be feared. The power of the Government in both Houses was
supreme, and there was little or nothing of novelty in the argu-

» Cornnmallis Correspondence, iii. * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
216, 220, 221; 40 Geo, IIL. e. 23. 228-231.

CH, XXXII THE UNION PREDICTIONS. 483

ments that were advanced. It has been justly remarked, as a
conspicuous instance of the fallibility of political prescience, that
the special danger to the Constitution which was feared from
the influx of a considerable Irish element into the British
Parliament, was an enormous increase of the power of the
Crown and of each successive Administration. ‘It appears to
me evident,’ said Grey, ‘that ultimately, at least, the’ Irish
members will afford a certain accession of force to the party of
every Administration,’ and ‘that their weight will be thrown
into the increasing scale of the Crown.’ In order to guard
against this danger, Grey proposed that the Irish representa-
tion should be reduced to eighty-five, and that the English
representation should, at the same time, be rendered more
popular by the disfranchisement of forty decayed boroughs.
Wilberforce, though in general favourable to the Union, shared
the fears of Grey, and acknowledged that the Irish element
‘could not fail to be a very considerable addition to the influ-
ence of the Crown;’ and although Pitt believed the danger
to be exaggerated, he acknowledged it to be a real one, and
attempted to meet it by a clause limiting to twenty the Irish
placemen in the House of Commons.' It need scarcely be
added, that the influence of the Ivish representation has proved
the exact opposite of what was predicted. A majority of Irish
members turned the balance in favour of the great democratic
Reform Bill of 1832, and from that day there has been scarcely
a democratic measure which they have not powerfully assisted.
When, indeed, we consider the votes that they have given,
the principles they have been the means of introducing into
English legislation, and the influence they have exercised on
the tone and character of the House of Commons, it is probably
not too much to say that their presence in the British Parliament
has proved the most powerful of all agents in accelerating the
democratic transformation of English politics.

On the side of the supporters of the Union, there was, at
least, equal fallibility. Pitt himself, in discussing the amount
of the Irish representation, expressed his hope and expectation
that the two countries would be so completely identified by the
measure, that it would be a matter of little importance in what

1 Parl. Hist. xxxv. 47, 48, 98-101, 116.

484 ENGLAND 1N THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn, xxxit.

proportion the representatives were assigned to one or other
part of the United Empire. ‘Let this Union take place,’ said
Lord Hawkesbury, ‘and all Irish party will be extinguished.
There will then be no parties but the parties of the British
Empire.’ !

The most formidable attack was made by Grey, who moved
an address to the King that proceedings on the Union should
be suspended till the sentiments of the people of Ireland
respecting it had been ascertained. He observed that it was
a remarkable fact, that the great majority of the constituencies
which were considered sufficiently important to send representa-
tives to the Imperial Parliament, had shown a determined hos-
tility to the Union, and he summed up with great power the
arguments on this point, which had been abundantly employed
in Ireland. The petitions in favour of the Union, he said, had
been clandestinely obtained, chiefly by the direct influence of
the Lord Lieutenant; they only bore about 3,000 signatures,
and some of them merely prayed that the measure should be
discussed. The petitions against it were not obtained by
solicitation, but at public assemblies, of which legal notice had
been given, and 107,000? persons signed them. Twenty-seven
counties had petitioned against the measure. Dublin petitioned
against it, under its great seal. Drogheda, and many other
important towns, took the same course. In the county of
Down, 17,000 respectable, independent men had petitioned
against the Union, while there were only 415 signatures to the
counter petition. The great majority against it consisted ‘ not
of fanatics, bigots, and Jacobins, but of the most respectable in
every class of the community.’ There were 300 members in
the Irish House of Commons. ‘ 120 of these strenuously opposed
the measure, among whom were two-thirds of the county mem-
bers, the representatives of the city of Dublin, and of almost all
the towns which it is proposed shall send members to the
Imperial Parliament. 162 voted in favour of the Union. Of
these, 116 were placemen—some of them were English generals
on the Staff, without a foot of ground in Ireland, and completely
dependent upon Government. . . . All persons holding offices

: Parl. Hist, xxxv. 43, 114. I have already given my reasons for
? The Parl. Hist. says 707,000, but —_ believing this to be a misprint.

CH, XXXII. SPEECH OF GREY. 485

under Government, even the most intimate friends of the
Minister, if they hesitated to vote as directed, were stripped of
all their employments. . . . Other arts were had recourse to,
which, though I cannot name in this place, all will easily con-
jecture. A Bill framed for preserving the purity of Parliament
had been abused, and no Jess than sixty-three seats had been
vacated by their holders having received nominal offices.’
Could it be doubted, he asked, in the face of such facts, that the
legislative’ Union was being forced through, contrary to the plain
wish of the Irish nation, contrary to the real wish even of the
Trish Parliament ? !

Pitt’s reply to these representations appears to have been
exceedingly empty, consisting of little more than a denunciation
of the Jacobinism, which would appeal from the deliberate
judgment of Parliament to ‘primary assemblies,’ swayed by
factious demagogues. ‘The resolution of Grey was rejected by
236 votes to 30, but his case remained, in all essential points,
unshaken, though something was said in the course of this and
subsequent debates, and though something more might have
been said to qualify it. His figures are not all perfectly
accurate, and Pitt ‘asserted that the number of members who
held offices under Government in the Union majority, was
enormously exaggerated, and was, in fact, not more than fifty-
eight.2, As we have clearly seen, corrupt and selfish motives
were very far from being exclusively on the side of the Union,
and opinion in Ireland was both more divided and more
acquiescent than Grey represented. It was said, probably with
truth, that the violence of the opposition in the country had
ereatly gone down, and in large districts, and among large
classes, there was a silence and a torpor which indicated, at
least, a complete absence of active and acute hostility. No one
who reads the letters of the bishops can doubt that the measure
had many Catholic well-wishers, and a much larger section of
the Catholic population, as well as a great proportion of the
Presbyterians, appear to have viewed it with perfect indifference.

1 Parl. Hist. xxxv. 59-61. Trish Parliament ; but it was either a

2 Ibid. 119. For fuller statistics mererandomstatement, or was arrived
of the numberof placemen, see pp.404, at by counting Queen’s Counsel and
405, The number 116 appearsto have others, over whom the Government
been mentioned by a speaker inthe had no real control.

486 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn, xxx.

It was said, too, that the balance of landed property was in its
favour, and if this estimate is based merely on the extent of
property, the assertion is probably true. ‘The Irish House of
Lords comprised the largest landowners in the country, and
Lord Castlereagh sent to England a computation, showing that
in the two Irish Houses, the landed property possessed by the
supporters of the Union was valued at 955,700/. a year, and
that of its opponents at only 329,500/.' Considering, however, the
attitude of the counties, it is not probable that any such propor-
tion existed among the independent and uninfluenced landlords
outside the Parliament.

The only serious danger to be encountered in England was
from the jealousy of the commercial classes, and their opposition
appears to have been almost exclusively directed against the
clause which permitted the importation of English wool into
Ireland. Cornwallis had, however, warned the Government that
so much importance was attached to this provision in Ireland,
that if it was rejected the whole Bill would probably fall through,”
and Pitt exerted all his influence in its support. Wilberforce
was on this question the leading representative of the English
woollen manufacturers, but the clause was carried by 183 to
58; and the woollen manufacturers were equally unsuccessful
in an attempt to obtain a prolongation of protection similar to
that which had been granted to the calico manufacturers in
Ireland. Inthe House of Lords the whole question was again
debated at some length, but the minority never exceeded, and
only once attained twelve. Lord Downshire, who sat in the
British House of Lords as Earl of Hillsborough, spoke strongly
in opposition. He said that before 1782 he had been favourable
to a legislative Union, but that his opinion had wholly changed.
Since 1782, ‘Ireland had flourished in a degree beyond all
former precedent.’ The Irish Parliament had shown by abun-
dant sacrifices its intense and undivided loyalty. He antici-
pated the worst consequences from the removal from Ireland of
many of the most important men of influence and property, who
had been resident among their people, and who were firm friends

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. portion of 102,5007. to 29,0002. The
224. This isexclusiveoftheabsentee bishops’ properties were counted
peers, whose properties were said to 80,0002. for, and 6,0002. against the
be divided on the question in the pro- Union, 2 Thidsaits2oile

CH, XXXII, LAST STAGES IN IRELAND. 487

to the British connection. Even apart from these considerations,
he said, he could not support the Union when twenty-six out of
the thirty-two counties had petitioned against it, twelve of them
being unanimous, and when ten great corporations had set their
seals of office to similar petitions; nor could he be blind to the
fact that ‘the members of the Irish House of Commons, who
opposed this measure, were men of the first talents, respectability,
and fortune, while those who supported it were men notoriously
under the influence of the Crown.’! Lord Moira, on the other
hand, who in the preceding year had been one of the most
vehement opponents, and who had voted by proxy against the
Union in the Irish House of Lords, now withdrew his opposition.
He could have wished, he said, that the opinion of the Irish
people had been ascertained upon a broader basis, and that some-
thing more distinct had been held out to the Catholics, but the
measure appeared to him liberal in nearly all its details, and the
Trish Catholics had much to hope from the enlightened disposi-
tions of an Imperial Parliament.?

The resolutions agreed to by the English Houses, and their
joint address to the King, arrived in Ireland on May 12, and
the Irish Parliament speedily occupied itself with the final stages
of the measure. Pitt in one of his last speeches had expressed
his opinion, that no question had been ever so amply and se
exhaustively discussed in any Legislature as the Irish Union ;
but the discussion now began to flag. There were still several
points of complexity and difficulty, but both sides felt that the
battle had been fought and won, and it was evident that there
was no longer any serious opposition to be feared. The selection
of the thirty-four boroughs which were to send representatives
into the Imperial Parliament, was settled without dispute, on the
principle of choosing those which paid the largest sums in
hearth money and window tax; and it is a striking illustration
of the state of the Ivish representation, that only twelve of these
boroughs were really open.’ The countervailing duties were
adjusted with equal facility, and a separate Bill was introduced

1 Parl, Hist. xxxv. 193-196. confined his assent to three out of
2 Ibid. xxxv. 170, 171. Lord eleven reasons. (Annual Register,
Moira joined, however, by proxy in 1800, p. 202.)
the second and final protest of Irish 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
peers against the measure, though he 233-235.

488 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxxu.

and carried, settling the manner of the election to the Imperial
Parliament. The representative peers were to be at once chosen
by their brother peers, but with this exception no election was
to take place at the Union, and the constituencies had there-
fore no immediate opportunity of expressing their judgment of
their representatives. Where the representation was unchanged,
the sitting members were to pass at once into the Imperial
Parliament. Where the representation was curtailed, one of the
two sitting members was to be selected by lot, and by the same
Bill the order of the rotation of the spiritual peers was fixed.!
The Union resolutions were cast into the form of a Bill, and on
May 21, the House, by 160 votes to 100, gave leave for its intro-
duction, andit wasat once readafirst time. George Ponsonby, who
chiefly led the Opposition, acknowledged in a short, discouraged
speech, that he had no hope of shaking the majority, but he said
that he would fulfil his duty, and oppose the measure to the end.?

On the 26th, the Bill was read a second time, and on the
motion for its committal, Grattan made a long, eloquent, but
most inflammatory speech. He asserted that ‘at a time of
national debility and division,’ the Ministers were forcing a Bill
for the destruction of Irish liberty and of the Irish Consti-
tution, through Parliament in the teeth of the declared sense of
the country, and ‘by the most avowed corruption, threats, and
stratagems, accompanied by martial law.’ He enumerated the
several grounds of his charge, and accused the majority of em-
ploying the power that had been entrusted to them to preserve:
the settled order of things, for the purpose of introducing a new
order of things, making government a question of strength and
not of opinion, and eradicating the great fundamental and
ancient principles of public security, as effectually as the most,
unscrupulous Jacobins. He predicted that anarchy, and not
order, would be the result; that Government in Ireland would
be fatally discredited, and would lose all its moral force. He
traversed with burning eloquence the old arguments against the
revenue clauses and the commercial clauses, predicting that the
Irish contribution would prove beyond the capacities of the
country ; that rapidly increasing debt, speedy bankruptcy, and
full English taxation, were in store for Ireland; that Irish

1 40 Geo. III. c. 29, * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 238, 235.

CH, XXxIt. GRATTAN’S SPEECH, MAY 26. 489

manufactures and commerce would wither with Irish liberty,
and that military government would prevail. He accused the
dominant faction in Ireland of having produced by their mis-
government all the calamities of the late rebellion, and he de-
nounced, in language of extreme and ungovernable violence, the
assertion that, ‘after a mature consideration, the people had
pronounced their judgment in favour of the Union.’ Of that
assertion, he said, ‘ not one single syllable has any existence in
fact or in the appearance of fact. I appeal to the petitions of
twenty-one counties publicly convened, and to the other petitions
of other counties numerously signed, and to those of the great
towns and cities. To affirm that the judgment of a nation is
erroneous, may mortify, but to assert that she has said aye, when
she has pronouncedno . . . tomake the falsification of her senti-
ments the foundation of her ruin, . . . to affirm that her Parlia-
ment, Constitution, liberty, honour, property, are taken away by
her own authority, exhibits an effrontery that can only excite
‘ astonishment and disgust, ‘ whether the British Minister speaks
in gross and total ignorance of the truth, or in shameless and
supreme contempt for it.’

The concluding ‘passages of the speech were in a different
strain, and pointed clearly to the belief that, although the
Union was inevitable, it would not be permanent. ‘The
Constitution may, for a time, be so lost—the character of the
country cannot be so lost. The Ministers of the Crown may,
at length, find that it is not so easy to put down for ever an
ancient and a respectable nation by abilities, however great, by
power and corruption, however irresistible. Liberty may re-
pair her golden beams, and with redoubled heart animate the
country.’ Neither the cry of loyalty, nor the cry of the con-
nection, nor the cry of disaffection will, in the end, avail against
the principle of liberty. ‘I do not give up the country. I
see her in a swoon, but she is not dead; though in her tomb
she lies helpless and motionless, still there is on her lips a
spirit of life, and on her cheek a glow of beauty.

Thou art not conquered ; beauty’s ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death’s pale flag is not advanced there.’ !

1 Grattan’s Speeches, iv. 1-23,

490 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

Such language was described by Lord Castlereagh as a
direct appeal to rebellion, or at least as a kind of ‘ prophetical
treason,’ and it was a fair, and by no means an extreme specimen
of the kind of language which was employed by the leaders of
the Opposition. Goold, Plunket, Bushe, Saurin, Lord Corry,
Ponsonby, Foster, were all men of high private character ; and
some of them were men of very eminent abilities and attain-
ments, of great social position, of great parliamentary influence
and experience. They all used the same kind of language as
Grattan. They all described the Union as a measure which
could never have been imposed on Ireland if the country had
not been weakened and divided by the great recent rebellion,
and occupied by a great English army. They all asserted that
it was being carried contrary to the clearly expressed wishes of
the constituencies, and by shameful and extensive corruption,
and they all predicted the worst consequences from its enact-
ment.

Such prophecies had a great tendency to fulfil themselves,
and the language of the Opposition went far towards forming the
later opinions of the country. In Parliament, however, it had
no effect. The House was languid, and tired of the subject.
Many of the members were absent, and in two divisions that
were taken on the committal, the Government carried their
points by 118 to 73, and by 124 to 87. Even in debate the
remarkable ability, and still more remarkable dignity and self-
control, displayed by Lord Castlereagh, enabled him to hold his
own.’ Beyond the limits of Parliament there were undoubtedly
many men, chiefly of the Established Church, who still wor-
shipped with a passionate enthusiasm the ideal of 1782, and
who endured all the pangs of despairing patriotism as they
watched the progress of its eclipse. But the great mass of the
Irish people were animated by no such feelings. There was
no movement, indeed, to support the Government. There is no
real reason to believe, that if the free constituencies had been
consulted by a dissolution, they would have reversed the judg-
ment expressed by their representatives and by their petitions.
But the movement of petitioning had wholly flagged. Demon-
strations seem to have almost. ceased, and there were absolutely

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii, 239-248.

CH, XXXII, APATHY OF THE NATION. 491

none of the signs which are invariably found when a nation
struggles passionately against what it deems an impending
tyranny, or rallies around some institution which it really loves.
The country had begun to look with indifference or with a languid
curiosity to the opening of a new chapter of Irish history, and
it was this indifference which made it possible to carry the
Union. Atone moment, it is true, there were grave fears that a
movement for petitioning would spread through the militia and
yeomanry, but the dismissal of Lord Downshire completely
checked it, and in the last and most critical phases of the
struggle the Opposition found themselves almost wholly unsup-
ported by any strong feeling in the nation.

The letters of Cornwallis are full of evidence of this apathy.
‘The country,’ he writes, ‘is perfectly quiet, and cannot in
general be said to be adverse to the Union.’ ‘The Opposition
. . . admit the thing to be over, and that they have no chance
either in or out of Parliament.’ ‘The city is perfectly quiet,
and has shown no sensation on the subject of Union since the
recommencement of business after the adjournment.’ ‘ Not-
withstanding all reports, you may be assured that the Union is
not generally unpopular, and it is astonishing how httle agita-
tion it occasions even in Dublin, which is at present more quiet
than it has been for many years.’! ‘I hardly think,’ wrote
Cooke to Lord Grenville, ‘we shall have any serious debate here-
Many of our opponents are on the wing. There is no
The Opposition

after.
sensation on the subject in town or country.’?
were not unconscious of the fact, and at least one of their con-
spicuous members seems to have complained bitterly of the
indifference of the nation.*

Their leaders desired to place upon the journals of the
House a full record of their cage, and they accordingly drew up
and though it was evident that the

public sentiment did not keep pace
with or sympathise with the opposition

' Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
235, 237, 239, 247. The dates otf
these letters are May 18, 21, 22,

June 4, 1800. within that House, and though that
2 Cooke to Grenville, May 22,1800. opposition should gradually diminish,
(Grenville MSS.) he would never acknowledge the

3 Mr. Goold ‘lamented that the
public feeling was not sufliciently
alive to the question of Union. He
lamented that the citizens of Dublin
did not exhibit in their countenances
the despondency of defeated liberty,

triumph of the Minister, and to the
last moment of its discussion would
glory in his efforts to repel a measure
which he conceived fatal to the
liberties of his country. (Dublin
Evening Post, May 17, 1800.)

492 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx.

a long, skilful, and very elaborate address to the King, embody-
ing in a clear and forcible form most of the arguments and facts
which have been given in the foregoing pages.! A single para-
graph may here be noticed, on account of the light that it throws
on the spirit in which the opposition to the Union was conducted.
Having pointed to the efficacy and rapidity with which the resi-
dent Parliament had exerted itself for the suppression of the
recent rebellion, the writers argued that no non-resident Parlia-
ment would be likely to combat disaffection with equal prompti-
tude and equal energy, and predicted that the Union would be
followed by a removal or abasement of the men of property and
respectability, which would ‘leave room for political agitators,
and men of talents without principle or property, to disturb
and irritate the public mind.’ This indeed appears to have
been one of the guiding ideas of Grattan, who had before argued
that a measure which took the government of the country out of
the hands of the upper orders, and compelled them ‘ to proclaim
and register their own incapacity in the rolls of their own
Parliament,’ would ultimately give a fatal impulse to the worst
forms of Irish Jacobinism.

This address was moved in the House of Commons, by Lord
Corry, on June 6, and defeated by 135 to 77, and the Bill then
passed quickly through its remaining stages. In the last stage,
Dobbs, in whom a religious enthusiasm amounting to mono-
mania was strangely blended with a very genuine and reasonable
patriotism, made a wild and frantic speech, declaring that ‘ the
independence of Ireland was written in the immutable records of
Heaven ;’ that the Messiah was about to appear on the holy
hill of Armagh, and that although the Union might pass the
House, it could never become operative, as it was impossible
that a kingdom which Revelation showed to be under the special
favour of Heaven, could be absorbed in one of the ten kingdoms
typified in the image of Daniel.2. After a bitter protest from

' This very remarkable protest iii. 249; Coote, pp. 498, 499. In the

will be found in Grattan’s Speeches,
iv. 24-36, in the Appendix to Grattan’s
Life, vol. v., and in Plowden.

2 There is a curious broadside in
the British Museum, purporting to be
a report of Dobbs’ speech on June 7.
See, too, Cornmallis Correspondence,

debate on February 6, Dobbs had
concluded his speech in a similar
strain, though the earlier part of it
was perfectly sane and even powerful.
I have given (vol. iv. p. 508), an out-
line of Dobbs’ prophetical views.

cH, Xxxtt. THE UNION CARRIED. 493

Plunket, a great part of the Opposition seceded, to avoid witness-
ing the final scene, and the Union passed through the Irish
Commons. ‘The greatest satisfaction,’ wrote Cornwallis, ‘is
that it occasions no agitation, either in town or country, and
indeed one of the violent anti-Union members complained last
night in the House, that the people had deserted them.’! The
Compensation Bill speedily followed, and was but little resisted.
In the Upper House, Lord Farnham and Lord Bellamont strongly
urged the excessive amount of the contribution to be paid by
Ireland under the Union arrangement,’ and there were two divi-
sions in which the Government had majorities of fifty-nine and
fifty-two. The twenty peers who had before protested, placed on
the journals of the House a second and somewhat fuller protest.
The Bill was then sent to England, where it passed speedily
through both Houses, and it received the royal sanction on the
first of August, the anniversary of the accession of the Hanoverian
dynasty to the British throne. The King, in proroguing the
British Parliament, declared that the Union was a measure on
which his wishes had long been earnestly bent, and he pronounced
it to be the happiest event of his reign.

The other formalities connected with it, need not detain us.
The Great Seal of Britain was delivered up and defaced, and a
new Seal of the Empire was given tothe Chancellor. A change
was introduced into the royal titles, and into the royal arms,
and the occasion was made use of to drop the idle and offensive
title of ‘King of France,’ which the English sovereigns had
hitherto maintained. A new standard, combining the three
orders of St. George, St. Andrew, and St. Patrick, was hoisted
in the capitals of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The noble
building in which the Irish Parliament had held its sessions, was
soon after bought by the Bank of Ireland. It is a curious and
~ significant fact, that the Government in consenting to this sale
made a secret stipulation, that the purchasers should subdivide
and alter the chambers in which the two Houses had met, so as

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. ham stated, that for the year ending
250. Jan. 5, 1799, the permanent taxes of
2 Along and able letter from Lord Great Britain were upwards of twenty-
Farnham to Lord Grenville on this’ six millions, those of Ireland but
point, will be found in the Grenville two millions,
MSS. (June 20,1800). Lord Farn-

CH, XXXII.

494 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

to destroy as much as possible their old appearance. It was
feared that disquieting ghosts might still haunt the scenes that
were consecrated by so many memories.

T have related with such fullness the history of this memorable
conflict that the reader will, I trust, have no difficulty in esti-
mating the full strength of the case on each side; the various
arguments, motives, and influences that governed the event. A
very few words of comment are all that need be added. If the
Trish Parliament had consisted mainly, or to any appreciable
extent, of men who were disloyal to the connection, and whose
sympathies were on the side of rebellion or with the enemies of
England, the English Ministers would, I think, have been amply
justified in employing almost any means to abolish it. It 1s
scarcely possible to over-estimate the danger that would arise if
the vast moral, legislative, and even administrative powers which
every separate Legislature must necessarily possess, were exer-
cised in any near and vital part of the British Empire, by men
who were disloyal to its interests. 'To place the government of
a country by a voluntary and deliberate act in the hands of dis-
honest and disloyal men, is perhaps the greatest crime that a
public man can commit; a crime which, in proportion to the
strength and soundness of national morality, must consign
those who are guilty of it to undying infamy. If, however, a
Parliament which was once loyal has assumed a disloyal charac-
ter, the case is a different one, and the course of a wise states-
man will be determined by a comparison of conflicting dangers.
But in a time of such national peril as England was passing
through in the great Napoleon war, when the whole existence
and future of the Empire were trembling most doubtfully in the

1 Among the Colchester Papers
there is a draft of adespatch to Lord
Pelham, on the proposal of the Bank
of Ireland to buy the Parliament
House. At the end there is added,
‘Private. ‘Iam given to understand
confidentially that the Bank of Ire-
land would in such case subdivide
what was the former House of Com-
mons into several rooms for the check
offices, and would apply what was the
House of Lords to some other use
which would leave nothing of its
former appearance. In the same
collection there is a letter from Abbot

to Lord Hardwicke, sanctioning the
purchase. ‘It should, however, be
again privately stipulated,’ he says,
‘that the two chambers of Parliament
shall be effectually converted to such
uses as shall preclude their being
again used upon any contingency as
public debating rooms. It would be.
desirable also, to bargain that they
should render the outside uniform,
and in the change of appropriation
reconcile the citizens to it, in some
degree, by making the edifice more
ornamental.’ (Feb. 1, 1802.)

CH, XXXII, REFLECTIONS ON THE UNION. 495

balance, history would not, I think, condemn with severity any
means that were required to withdraw the direction of Ivish
resources from disloyal hands. In such moments of agony and
crisis, self-preservation becomes the supreme end, and the tran-
scendent importance of saving the Empire from destruction sus-
pends and eclipses all other rules. But it cannot be too clearly
understood or too emphatically stated, that the legislative Union
was not an act of this nature. The Parliament which was abo-
lished was a Parliament of the most unqualified loyalists; it
had shown itself ready to make every sacrifice in its power for the
maintenance of the Empire, and from the time when Arthur
O’Connor and Lord Edward Fitzgerald passed beyond its walls,
it probably did not contain a single man who was really dis-
affected. The dangers to be feared on this side were not im-
minent, but distant; and the war and the rebellion created not a
necessity, but an opportunity.

It must be added, that it was becoming evident that the
relation between the two countries, established by the Constitu-
tion of 1782, could not have continued unchanged. It is true,
indeed, as I have already contended, that in judging such rela-
tions, too much stress is usually placed on the nature of the
legislative machinery, and too little on the dispositions of the
men who work it. But even with the best dispositions, the
Constitution of 1782 involved many and grave probabilities of
difference, and the system of a separate and independent Irish
Parliament, with an Executive appointed and instructed by the
English Cabinet, and depending on English party changes, was
hopelessly anomalous, and could not fail some day to produce
serious collision. It was impossible that the exact poise could
have been permanently maintained, and it was doubtful whether
the centripetal tendency in the direction of Union, or the centri-
fugal tendency in the direction of Separation, would ultimately
prevail. Sooner or later the corrupt borough ascendency must have
broken down, and it was a grave question what was to succeed it.
Grattan indeed believed that in the Irish gentry and yeomanry,
who formed and directed the volunteers, there would be found a
strong body of loyal and independent political feeling, and that
the government might pass out of the hands of a corrupt aristo-

496 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXXit.

cracy, of whose demerits he was very sensible, without falling into
those of a democracy from which he expected nothing but confis-
cation and anarchy.? He relied upon the decadence of the sec-
tarian spirit in Europe, and upon the tried loyalty of the Catholic
gentry and bishops, to prevent a dangerous antagonism of Pro-
testants and Catholics, and he imagined that an Irish Parliament,
fired with the spirit of nationality, could accomplish or complete
the great work of fusing into one the two nations which inhabited
Treland. But the United Irishmen had poisoned the springs of
political life. The French Revolution had given popular feeling a
new ply and new ideals ; an enormous increase of disloyalty and
religious animosity had taken place during the last years of the
century, and it added immensely to the danger of the democratic
Catholic suffrage, which the Act of 1793 had called into existence.

This was the strongest argument for hurrying on the Union ;
but when all due weight is assigned to it, it does not appear to
me to have justified the policy of Pitt. On the morrow of the
complete suppression of the rebellion, the danger of the Parlia-
ment being conquered by the party of disloyalty or anarchy
cannot have been imminent; and if it had become so, there can
be little doubt that the governing, the loyal, and the propertied
classes in Ireland would have themselves called for an Union. It
is quite certain that in 1799, it was not desired or asked for by
the classes who were most vitally interested in the preservation
of the existing order of property and law, and who had the best
means of knowing the true condition of the country. The
measure was an English one, introduced prematurely before it
had been demanded by any section of Irish opinion, carried with-
out a dissolution and by gross corruption, in opposition to the
majority of the free constituencies and to the great preponder-
ance of the unbribed intellect of Ireland. Under such conditions
it was scarcely likely to prove successful.

It may, however, be truly said that there have been many
instances of permanent and beneficial national consolidations

1*Tam no friend to the Irish 470. Ina letter to an Italian gentle-

aristocracy, and though I think what
Grattan said of them (that they are
only fit to carry claret to a chamber-
pot), is true, 1 think better of them
than of any Irish democracy that
could be formed.’ (R. Griffith to
Pelham, Oct. 8, 1798.)

2 See vol. vi. pp. 384-886, 469,

man about the Government of the
Cisalpine Republic, Grattan said:
‘She should have a representative
chosen by the people who have some
property, for I don’t like personal re-
presentation. It is anarchy, and
must become slavery. (Grattan’s
Life, v. 215.)

CH, XXXIL REFLECTIONS ON THE UNION.

497

effected with equal or greater violence to opinion. ‘The history
of every leading kingdom in Kurope is in a large degree a
history of successive forcible amalgamations. England herself
is no exception, and there was probably more genuine and wide-
spread repugnance to the new order of things in Wales at the
time of her conquest, and in Scotland at the time of her Union,
than existed in Ireland in 1800. A similar statement may be
made of many of the changes that accompanied or followed
the Napoleonic wars, and in a very eminent degree of the re-
union of the subjugated Southern States to the great American
repubhe. At a still later period the unification of Germany,
which is probably the most important political achievement
of our own generation, was certainly not accomplished in ac-
cordance with the genuine and spontaneous wishes of every
kingdom that was absorbed. If the Union had few active par-
tisans, it was at least received by great sections of the Irish
people with an indifference and an acquiescence which prompt,
skilful, and energetic legislation might have converted into
cordial support. The moment, however, was critical in the
extreme, and it was necessary that Irish politics should, for
a time at least, take a foremost place in the decisions of the
Government.

The evils to be remedied were many and glaring, and some
of them had little or no connection with political controversy.
There were the innumerable unlicensed whisky shops all over
the country, which were everywhere the centres of crime,
sedition, and conspiracy, and which many good judges considered
the master curse of Ireland; the most powerful of all the in-
fluences that were sapping the morals of the nation.! There
was the shameful non-residence of a great proportion of the

1 There is a striking letter on this cheap malt liquor, and put spirits

subject from John Pollock, in the
Colchester MSS. Pollock, after de-
scribing the general connivance at
these unlicensed distilleries, and the
enormous evils they produced, adds:
‘The greatest object that could be
accomplished for Ireland, and’ the
one that would render the minister
who may accomplish it, almost the
saviour of his country, would be to
adopt a system that should produce
good, wholesome, and comparatively

VOL, VIII,

beyond the reach of the common
people.’ (J. Pollock to Charles Abbot,
Aug. 16, 1801.) See, too, a striking
letter of Cooke, Castlereagh Corre-
spondence, iv. 14. On the great
part the whisky shop always bears in
the manufacture of Irish agrarian
and seditious crime, see some striking
evidence of Drummond, in Smyth’s
Ireland, Historical and Statistical,
ili. 67.

KK

498 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxn.

beneficed clergy and bishops of the Established Church, an evil
which, in the opinion of Dean Warburton, contributed, in the
North at least, more than almost any other cause, to open the
door to the seduction of revolutionary agents. It was due to
the disturbed condition of the country ; to the scantiness of the
Protestant population in many districts; to the low standard of
public duty that everywhere prevailed, and, perhaps still more,
to the want of proper residences for the clergy. It was said
that out of 2,400 parishes in Ireland, not more than 400 had
glebe houses, and it was part of the plan of Grenville and Pitt,
while granting new privileges to the Catholics, to strengthen
the civilising influence of the Established Church by the erection
of churches and glebes, by enforcing more strictly ecclesiastical
discipline, and by augmenting the incomes of the poorest clergy.’
After the Union this abuse was gradually remedied, partly
through the operation of an Act enforcing residence, which was
passed in 1808,? and partly through the higher standard of
clerical duty which followed in the train of the Evangelical
revival.

Another, and even graver evil, which was more slowly cured,
was the gross and sordid ignorance of the largest part of the
population—an ignorance which brought with it, as a necessary
consequence, barbarous habits and tastes, miserable agriculture,
improvident marriages, an inveterate proneness to anarchy and
violence. The great work of national education had not yet
been taken up on any extended scale by the State, but it was
manifest that State education was far more needed in Ireland
than in England, as it was impossible that a Protestant Church
could discharge the task of educating a Catholic population.
Statesmen in Ireland had not been insensible to this want, but
nearly all their schemes had been vitiated by being restricted
to Protestants, or connected with proselytism, or through the
inveterate jobbing that pervaded all parts of Irish life. An
Act of Henry VIII. had directed the establishment of an
English school in every parish in Ireland. An Act of Elizabeth,
which was reinforced or extended by several subsequent laws,

* See Buckingham’s Courts and quoted by Sir J. Hippisley, Substance
Cabinets, iii. 129, and aletter, written of a Speech, May 18, 1810, p. 15.
apparently on the authority of Lord 2 48 Geo. III. cap. 66.

Grenville, about the intentions of Pitt,

CH, Xxx NATIONAL EDUCATION. 499

instituted in every diocese a free diocesan school under the
direction of a Protestant clergyman. Under James I. and his
two successors seven important ‘ royal schools’ were founded and
endowed, as well as the first of the four blue-coat schools in
Ireland. Shortly after the Act of Settlement, Krasmus Smith
devoted a considerable property to the endowment of Protestant
day schools and grammar schools, and they soon spread over a
great part of Ireland. In 1733 the Irish Parliament instituted
the Charter Schools, which were intended to bring up the poorest
and most neglected Catholic children as Protestants, and at the
same time to give them a sound industrial education. We
have seen what large sums were lavished on these schools ;
how signally they failed in their object, and what scandalous
abuses were connected with them; and we have also seen how
Orde’s later scheme of national education was abandoned.
Private enterprise had no doubt done much. A writer in
1796 mentions that, in Dublin alone, there were in that year
not less than fifty-four charity schools, educating 7,416 children,!
and an immense multiplication of unendowed Catholic schools
had followed the repeal of those laws against Catholic education,
which were, perhaps, the worst part of the penal code.2 But
the supply of education remained very deficient in quantity,
and still more in quality. By the Act of 1792, any Catholic
who took the prescribed oath might compel the magistrate to
license him as a teacher,® and great numbers of men who
were not only incompetent, but notoriously disaffected, availed
themselves of the privilege, and they exercised a serious and
most evil influence in the rebellion. Sectarian feeling, and
especially the peculiar form of Protestant feeling which grew up
with the Evangelical revival, added greatly to the difficulties of
the case. It was not until thirty-one years after the Union that
Parliament took up efficiently, and on a large scale, the task of
educating the Irish people, and by that time the country was
covered with a dense, improvident, impoverished, and anarchical
population, already far exceeding its natural resources, and

1 The Prosperity of Ireland dis- * See Newenham’s State of MIre-
played in the State of Charity Schools land, p. xix, Appendix, pp. 34-37.
in Dublin, by John Ferrar (Dublin, 3 Castlereagh Correspondence, iii.
1796). 91, 92, 449, 450.

KK 2

500 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cH. xxxu.

increasing with a rapidity which foreshadowed only too surely
a great impending catastrophe.'

There were other evils of a different kind. One of the worst
results of the existence of a separate Irish Parliament, was the
enormous jobbing in Government patronage, and in the dispen-
sation of honours, that took place for the purpose of maintaining
a parliamentary majority. The Irish Custom and Revenue
Departments were full of highly paid offices, which naturally en-
tailed laborious and important duties, corresponding to those
which were discharged in England by hard-working secretaries
and clerks. In Ireland such posts were commonly given to
members of Parliament or their relatives, who treated them as
sinecures, and devoted a fraction of their salaries to paying
deputies to discharge their duties. I have mentioned how the
ereat office of Master of the Rolls had long been treated as a
political sinecure, and at the time of the Union it was jointly
held by Lords Glandore and Carysfort, with an income esti-
mated at 2,614/. a year, part of which was derived from an
open sale of offices in the Court of Chancery.? Even the military
patronage of the Lord Lieutenant had been long, to the great
indignation of the army, made use of to reward political ser-
vicesin Parliament. With the abolition of the local Parliament,
these great evils gradually came to an end; and although the
Union was very far from altogether purifying Government
patronage, it did undoubtedly greatly improve it. The exist-
ing holders of the Mastership of the Rolls were paid off with
an annuity equal to the revenues they had received; the office
was turned into an efficient judgeship, and bestowed, with a
somewhat increased salary, on a capable lawyer, and various
unnecessary offices were, in time, suppressed. The Administra-
tion of Lord Hardwicke appears to have been especially active
in restraining jobbing, and in this department, perhaps more
than in any other, were the anticipations of the more honest
supporters of the Union realised.

Very little, however, was done for some years to repress
anarchy, and provide for the steady enforcement of law.

‘ By the census of 1831, the Irish —_ 802, 303.
population was 7,707,401.

ee ; : a6 * Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.
2 Cormmallis Correspondence, iii, 85,

CH. XXXII URGENCY OF THE CATHOLIC QUESTION, 501

An Act of 1822 somewhat enlarged and strengthened the
scanty provisions for the establishment of constables in every
barony which the Irish Parliament had made, but the first step
of capital importance was the organisation by Drummond, in
1836, of that great constabulary force which has proved, perhaps,
the most valuable boon conferred by Imperial legislation upon
Treland, and which has displayed in the highest perfection, and
in many evil days, the nobler qualities of the Irish character.

Tt was evident, however, to all sound observers at the time,
and it became still more evident in the lght of succeeding
events, that the success or failure of the Union was likely to de-
pend mainly on the wise and speedy accomplishment of three
great kindred measures, the emancipation of the Catholics, the
commutation of tithes, and the payment of the priests. It was
most necessary that a change which was certain for so many
reasons to offend and irritate the national pride, should be accom-
panied by some great and striking benefit which would appeal
powerfully to the nation; and England had no commercial
advantages to offer to Ireland, that were at all equivalent to those
which the Union of 1707 had conferred upon Scotland. The
Catholic question: had risen to the foremost place in Irish
politics, and it had already been made the subject of two of the
most fatal blunders in the whole history of Hnglish statesman-
ship. By the Relief Act of 1793 a vast and utterly ignorant
Catholic democracy had been admitted into the constituencies,
while the grievance of disqualification was still suffered to con-
tinue through the exclusion from Parliament of a loyal and emi-
nently respectable Catholic gentry, whose guiding and restrain-
ing political influence had never been more necessary. In 1795
the hopes of the Catholics were raised to the point of certainty,
_ and the Irish Parliament was quite ready to gratify them, when
the English Ministry recalled Lord Fitzwilliam, and drove the
most energetic section of the Catholics into the arms of the
United Irishmen. After the terrible years that followed, no
statesmanship could have speedily restored the relation of classes
and creeds that existed in 1793 or even in 1795, but a great
opportunity had once more arisen, and the Sibylline books were
again presented.

We have seen that it had been the first wish of Pitt and

502 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. XXXII,

Dundas in England, and of Cornwallis in Treland, to make
Catholic emancipation a part of the Union ; and when this course
was found to be impracticable, there is good reason to believe
that Canning recommended Pitt to drop the Union, until a
period arrived when it would be possible to carry the two
measures concurrently.! Wiser advice was probably never given,
but it was not followed, and a Protestant Union was carried,
with an understanding that when it was accomplished, the
Ministry would introduce the measure of Catholic emancipation
into an Imperial Parliament. It was this persuasion or under-
standing that secured the neutrality and acquiescence of the
greater part of the Irish Catholics, without which, in the opinion
of the very best judges, the Union could never have been carried.

These negotiations have been made the subject of much con-
troversy, and some of their details are complicated and doubtful ;
but there is not, I think, any real obscurity about the main facts,
though the stress which has been laid on each set of them by
historians, is apt to vary greatly with the political bias of the
writer. It is in the first place quite clear that the English
Ministers did not give any definite pledge or promise that they
would carry Catholic emancipation in the Imperial Parliament,
or make its triumph a matter of life and death to the Adminis-
tration. On two points only did they expressly pledge them-
selves. The one was, that, as far as lay in their power, they
would exert the whole force of Government influence to prevent
the introduction of Catholics into a separate Irish Parliament.
The other was, that they would not permit any clause in the
Union Act which might bar the future entry of Catholics into
the Imperial Parliament; and the fourth article of the Union
accordingly stated, that the present oaths and declaration were

retained only ‘until the Parliament of the United Kingdom
shall otherwise provide.’

At the same time, from the

1 This was stated by Canning
himself in the House of Commons
(March 6, 1827): ‘I remember, Sir,
as well as if it happened yester-
day, Mr. Pitt’s showing me a letter
from Lord Cornwallis, in which that
noble lord said ‘he had sounded the
_ ground, and could carry the Union,

beginning of the negotiations

but not the Catholic question ; and I
also recollect my saying, “If I were
you, I would reject the one measure
if distinct from the other.” Mr. Pitt
rebuked me, as perhaps my rashness
deserved.’ (Parl, Deb. Second Series,
xvi. 1005, 1006.)

CH, XXXII, MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS IN 1799. 503

about the Union, Cornwallis, who was himself a strong advocate
of Catholic emancipation, had been in close and confidential
intercourse with the leading members of the Catholic body. He
had discussed with them the possibility of connecting Catholic
emancipation with the Union, and had reported to England that
they were in favour of the Union, and that they fully approved
of adjourning their own question till an Imperial Parliament
had been created, on the ground that a different course would
make the difficulties of carrying the Union in Ireland insuper-
able. They knew, however, that the disposition of Pitt and the
disposition of Cornwallis were in favour of emancipation in an
Imperial Parliament, and this knowledge was certainly a leading
element in determining their course. In all the official arguments
in favour of the Union in the early part of 1799, great stress
was laid upon the fact, that the Union would make an extension
of Catholic privileges possible without endangering the Irish
Church and the stability of Irish property, but at the same time
the utmost care was taken to avoid any language that could be
construed into a pledge, or could offend the strong Protestant
party in the Irish Parliament and Government.

Cooke, in the official pamphlet recommending the scheme,
argued that Catholic emancipation in an Irish Parliament must
ultimately prove incompatible with the maintenance of the Church
Establishment, and with the security of Protestant property, but
that ‘if Ireland was once united to Great Britain by a legis-
lative Union, and the maintenance of the Protestant Establish-
ment was made a fundamental article of that Union, then the
whole power of the Empire would be pledged to the Church Esta-
blishment of Ireland, and the property of the whole Empire
would be pledged in support of the property of every part,’ and
he inferred that, as ‘the Catholics could not force their claims
with hostility against the whole power of Great Britain and
Treland,’ there would be ‘ no necessary State partiality towards
Protestants,’ and ‘an opening might be left in any plan of Union
for the future admission of Catholics to additional privileges.’ !
Pitt, in his great speech in January 1799, said, ‘No man can
say that in the present state of things, and while Ireland remains
a separate kingdom, full concessions could be made to the

1 Arguments for and against an Union, pp. 29-34.

504 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxx.

Catholics without endangering the State, and shaking the Con-
stitution of Ireland to its centre. On the other hand, without
anticipating the discussion, or the propriety of agitating the
question, or saying how soon or, how late it may be fit to dis-
cuss it, two propositions are indisputable. First, when the
conduct of the Catholics shall be such as to make it safe for the
Government to admit them to the participation of the privileges
granted to those of the established religion, and when the temper
of the time shall be favourable to such a measure, .. . itis
obviousthat such a question may be agitated in an United Impe-
rial Parliament with much greater safety than it could be in a
separate Legislature. In the second place, I think it certain,
that, even for whatever period it may be thought necessary, after
the Union, to withhold from the Catholics the enjoyment of these
advantages, many of the objections, which at present arise out
of their situation, would be removed if a Protestant Legislature
were no longer separate and local, but general and Imperial,’ ?
Dundas used very similar language. ‘An Union, he said, ‘is
likely to prove advantageous to the Catholics of both countries.
. . . Should it ever be found prudent wholly to improve the
condition of the great majority of the Irish nation, the English
Catholics might expect to be no longer under any restraints.’ 2
The extreme and calculated vagueness of this language is
very evident, and there is no doubt that Cornwallis, in accord-
ance with his instructions, at this time carefully abstained from
giving any pledge to the Catholic leaders, though they can
hardly have remained ignorant of his opinion, that their admis-
sion into the Imperial Parliament would be not only a safe
measure, but one which was absolutely essential to the peace of
Jreland.* When, however, the Union scheme was defeated in
the session of 1799, and when it became evident that the great body
of the county members and of the Irish Protestants were against
it, the Government felt that the time had come for a more decided
policy. Cornwallis had warned them, that it was very doubtful
whether the Catholics would remain even passive, if they had

1 Parl. Hist. xxxiv. 272. There ® Cormvallis Correspondence, ii.
are some slight verbal variations in 415. On the negotiations of Corn-
the different reports of Pitt’s speech. wallis with the Catholics in the

* Speech of the Right Hon. H. beginning of 1799, see Castlereagh
Dundas, Feb. 7, 1799, p. 59. Correspondence, ii. 78, 79.

CH, XXXIL CASTLEREAGH’S MISSION TO ENGLAND. 505

nothing to rely on but a mere unsupported calculation of the
probable disposition of the Imperial Parliament. It was known
that some leading members of the Opposition were making over-
tures to them, offering to support their emancipation, if they
would help in defeating the Union,! and there was every reason
to believe, that if the Catholics could be persuaded that Foster
and his party had the will and the power to procure their ad-
mission into the Irish Parliament, they would declare themselves
almost unanimously against the Government.” In the opinion
both of Cornwallis and Castlereagh, it would, in that case, have
been impossible to carry the Union.

Under these circumstances, Castlereagh went over to England
in the autumn of 1799, by the direction of the Lord Lieutenant,
to lay the case before Pitt and his colleagues ; and he has himself,
in a most important letter, described the result of his mission.
‘TI stated,’ he says, ‘that we had a majority in Parliament, com-
posed of very doubtful materials: that the Protestant body was
divided on the question [of the Union], with the disadvantage
of Dublin and the Orange societies against us; and that the
Catholics were holding back, under a doubt whether the Union
would facilitate or impede their object. I stated it as the opi-
nion of the Irish Government, that, circumstanced as the parlia-
mentary interests and the Protestant feelings then were, the
measure could not be carried if the Catholics were embarked in
an active opposition to it, and that their resistance would be
unanimous and zealous if they had reason to suppose that the
sentiments of Ministers would remain unchanged in respect to
their exclusion, while the measure of Union in itself might give
them additional means of disappointing their hopes.

‘TI stated that several attempts had been made by leading
‘Catholics to bring Government to an explanation, which had, of
course, been evaded, and that the body, thus left to their own
speculations in respect to the future influence of the Union
upon their cause, were, with some exceptions, either neutral, or
actual opponents—the former entertaining hopes, but not inclin-
ing to support decidedly without some encouragement from

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 2 Castlereagh Correspondence, ii.
52; Castlereagh Correspondence, ii. 276,
132,

506 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = ci. xxxu.

Government; the latter entirely hostile, from a persuasion that
it would so strengthen the Protestant interest, as to perpetuate
their exclusion.

‘I represented that the friends of Government, by flattering
the hopes of the Catholics, had produced a favourable impression
in Cork, Tipperary, and Galway; but that, in proportion as his
Excellency had felt the advantage of this popular support, he
was anxious to be ascertained, in availing himself of the assistance
which he knew was alone given in contemplation of its being
auxiliary to their own views, that he was not involving Govern-
ment in future difficulties with that body, by exposing them to
a charge of duplicity, and he was peculiarly desirous of being
secure against such a risk before he personally encouraged the
Catholics to come forward and to afford him that assistance
which he felt to be so important to the success of the measure.

‘In consequence of this representation, the Cabinet took the
measure into their consideration; and having been directed to
attend the meeting, I was charged to convey to Lord Cornwallis
the result. . . . Accordingly, I communicated to Lord Corn-
wallis, that the opinion of the Cabinet was favourable to the prin-
ciple of the measure; that some doubt was entertained as to the
possibility of admitting Catholics into some of the higher offices,
and that Ministers apprehended considerable repugnance to the
measure in many quarters, and particularly in the highest, but
that, as far as the sentiments of the Cabinet were concerned, his
Excellency need not hesitate in calling forth the Catholic support,
in whatever degree he found it practicable to obtain it. ... I
certainly did not then hear any direct objection stated against
the principle of the measure, by any one of the Ministers then
present. . You will, I have no doubt, recollect, that so far from
any serious hesitation being entertained in respect to the prin-
ciple, it was even discussed whether an immediate declaration
to the Catholics would not be advisable, and whether an assur-
ance should not be distinctly given them, in the event of the
Union being accomplished, of their objects being submitted,
with the countenance of Government, to the United Parliament,
upon a peace. ‘T'his idea was laid aside, principally upon a con-
sideration that such a declaration might alienate the Protestants
in both countries from the Union, in a greater degree than it

cH. xxx, NEGOTIATION WITH CATHOLICS. a 507

was calculated to assist the measure through the Catholics, and
accordingly the instructions which I was directed to convey to
Lord Cornwallis were to the following effect: that his Excellency
was fully warranted in soliciting every support the Catholics
could afford; that he need not apprehend, as far as the senti-
ments of the Cabinet were concerned, being involved in the
difficulty with that body which he seemed to apprehend ; that it
was not thought expedient at that time, to give any direct assur-
ance to the Catholics, but that, should circumstances so far alter
as to induce his Excellency to consider such an explanation
necessary, he was at liberty to state the grounds on which his
opinion was formed, for the consideration of the Cabinet.

‘Tn consequence of this communication, the Irish Government
omitted no exertion to call forth the Catholics in favour of the
Union. Their efforts were very generally successful, and the
advantage derived from them was highly useful, particularly in
depriving the Opposition of the means they otherwise would have
had in the southern and western counties, of making an im-
pression on the county members. His Excellency was enabled
to accomplish his purpose without giving the Cathclics any direct
assurance of being gratified, and throughout the contest earnestly
avoided being driven to such an expedient, as he considered a
gratuitous concession after the measure as infinitely more con-
sistent with the character of Government.’ !

It was mainly by these assurances of the intentions of the
English Cabinet, that the Catholics were restrained from throwing
themselves heartily and as a body into the anti-Unionist move-
ment in the spring of 1800, and that the overtures of Foster’s
party for an alliance were defeated. The transcendent importance
of the result appears clearly from Lord Castlereagh’s words, and
it is amply confirmed by all the confidential correspondence of
the Government. ‘ All depends on the tone of the country,’
wrote Cooke; ‘if we can keep that right, I believe all may do
well.’ The Opposition, he said, had failed ‘in exciting popular
resistance.’ ‘Our adversaries . . . know that any attempt to
move Government without a general cry of popular discontent is
folly.’ ‘Ifthe public out of doors can be kept quiet, I think we

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv. to remind him of what had taken
8-12. This letter was written toPitt, place. It is dated Jan. 1, 1801,

508 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cH. xxxite

may now do well.’ ‘The Opposition still hope to inflame the
country, but they have not effected their purpose yet.’' The
movement against the Union in this year was far more serious
and extensive than any which the Government had been able to
obtain in its favour, and many Catholics joined with the Protes-
tants, but the great Catholic body did not throw themselves into
it, and the Union was in consequence carried. ‘The Catholics,’
Cornwallis afterwards wrote, ‘in the late political contest on the
measure of Union . . . certainly had it in their power to have
frustrated the views of Government, and throw the country into
the utmost confusion.’ ?

In spite of the reservations that had been made, their leaders
considered that their cause was won when the Lord Lieutenant
was authorised to ask their assistance, on the ground that the
English Cabinet was in favour of their emancipation in an Im-
perial Parliament. They naturally inferred that the Ministers
had unanimously resolved to carry it, and they made no question
of their power. They knew that the existing Government had
ruled England most absolutely for seventeen years; that the
personal authority of Pitt had hardly been equalled by Walpole,
and had been approached by no later Minister; that the Opposi-
tion in both Houses had sunk into insignificance. Difficulties on
the part of the King, and a possible postponement of their
triumph, had no doubt been hinted at, but the Catholic leaders
had every reason to believe that Pitt could carry his policy, and
they had no reason to believe the royal objections to be insuperable.
When the King prorogued the British Parliament immediately
after the Union, he described himself as ‘ persuaded that nothing
could so effectually contribute to extend to his Irish subjects the
full participation of the blessings derived from the British Con-
stitution,’ as the great measure which had been carried. What,
it was asked, could such language mean, but that the mass of the
Irish people were speedily to be admitted to that participation,
by the removal of the one disqualification that excluded them
from it ?

It is well known how their hopes were disappointed, and the

1 Cooke to Grenville, Jan. 16, Feb. * Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

14, 22, March 5, 10, 1800. (Grenville 307.
MSS.)

cH. Xxxul. CONDUCT OF LORD LOUGHBOROUGH. 509

story is both a melancholy and a shameful one. Though the
Catholic leaders probably knew that they had to encounter an
indisposition on the part of the King, they did not know that he
had already told his Ministers that he would consider his consent
to Catholic emancipation a breach of his coronation oath, and
that, on the appointment of Lord Cornwallis, he had expressly
written to Pitt, ‘ Lord Cornwallis must clearly understand that
no indulgence can be granted to the Catholics farther than has
been, I am afraid unadvisedly, done, in former sessions.’! They
did not know that the overtures that had been made to them
were made entirely without the knowledge of the King, without
any attempt to sound his disposition or to mitigate his hostility,
without any resolution on the part of Pitt to make Catholic
emancipation an indispensable condition of his continuing in
office, without even any real unanimity in the Cabinet. At the
time, indeed, when the Union was not yet carried, and when its
success was very doubtful, Castlereagh had mentioned it to the
Cabinet, and no one had objected ; but when the Union had been
safely accomplished, and Pitt, in the September of 1800, brought
the Catholic question formally before his colleagues, the Chan-
cellor, Lord Loughborough, for the first time struck a discordant
note, objecting to any favour being granted to the Catholics ex-
cept a commutation of tithes.

He had been staying at Weymouth with the King, and had
probably convinced himself that the King’s mind was as
hostile as ever to the measure. He had long been notoriously
aspiring to the position of ‘King’s friend, which Thurlow had
once held, and he had once before taken a very significant course
on the question which was now pending. In 1795, when the
King had consulted some leading lawyers about the compatibility
‘of Catholic emancipation and the coronation oath, Lord Kenyon
and Sir John Scott had assured the King that the alteration of
the Test Act was perfectly compatible with the coronation oath ;
but Lord Loughborough, without definitely committing himself
to the opposite opinion, had separated himself from the other
lawyers, and answered much more doubtfully.2 He now, with-
out the knowledge of his colleagues, informed the King of the

1 Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii.  cellors, viii. 172, 173. Stanhope’s
Appendix, p. xvi. Life of Pitt, iii, 268, 26.
2 Campbell’s Lives of the Chans

510 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxu.

intentions of the Cabinet, drew up a paper of arguments against
the proposed measure, and with the anti-Catholic party, of which
his relative Lord Auckland was the chief, proceeded to influence
the mind of the King still more against Pitt. The Archbishops
of Canterbury and of Armagh, and the Bishop of London, were
all made use of to confirm the King in his opposition.

A grave embarrassment was thus thrown in the path of the
Government. In the judgment of Lord Malmesbury, ‘if Pitt
had been provident enough to prepare the King’s mind gradually,
and to prove to him that the test proposed was as binding as the
present oath, no difficulty could have arisen.’ If, on the other
hand, as Pitt apparently desired, no communication had been
made to the King until Catholic emancipation, accompanied
with the necessary oath for the security of the Hstablished Church,
and with matured plans for the payment of the priests, and the
commutation of tithes, could have been presented to him as the
deliberate and unanimous policy of his Cabinet, there is little
doubt that he must have yielded. But a cabal had been raised,
while the question was still unsettled, and the King at once
determined upon his course. At a levee which was held on
January 28, he expressed to Dundas, in the hearing of a number
of gentlemen who stood by, his vehement indignation at hearing
of the proposal which Lord Castlereagh had brought over from
Ireland, and declared in a loud tone, that it was ‘the most
Jacobinical thing’ he had ever heard of, and that he would reckon
any man ‘his personal enemy’ who proposed any such measure.!
He wrote in the same strain and with no less vehemence to the
Speaker, Addington, urging him to persuade Pitt not even to
mention the subject.?

The knowledge of the royal sentiments at once gave activity
to the whole party of Auckland and Westmorland, and made an
evident impression on the Cabinet. Lord Loughborough was
no longer isolated. The Duke of Portland, Lord Liverpool,
and even Lord Chatham, the brother of Pitt, began to veer
towards the Opposition ; and when Pitt wrote to the King on
January 31, urging the admission of the Catholics and Dissenters
to offices, and of the Catholics to Parliament (from which Dis-
senters were not excluded), subject to certain specified tests for

i Wilberforce’s Life, ii. 7. * Pellew’s Live of Sidmouth, i. 285, 286.

CH. XXXII. THE KING REFUSES EMANCIPATION. dll

the purpose of guarding against any danger to the Established
Church, he was only able to describe this policy as ‘what ap-
peared to be the prevailing sentiments of the majority of the
Cabinet.’ He expatiated in the same letter on the nature and
force of the test which he proposed, and he added that the
measure should be accompanied by one for ‘ gradually attaching
the popish clergy to the Government, and for this purpose
making them dependent for a part of their provision (under
proper regulations) on the State, and by also subjecting them to
superintendence and control.’ He added, too, that he desired a
political pledge to be exacted ‘ from the preachers of all Catholic
or Dissenting congregations, and from the teachers of schools
of every denomination.” Such a policy, Pitt said, afforded ‘the
best chance of giving full effect to the great object of the Union,
that of tranquillising Ireland and attaching it to this country,’
‘This opinion’ was ‘ unalterably fixed in his mind, and must ulti-
mately guide his political conduct,’ and he intimated that if not
permitted to carry it into effect he must sooner or later resign.!

The King at once answered, that his coronation oath
prevented him from even discussing ‘any proposition tending to
destroy the groundwork of our happy Constitution, and much
more so that now mentioned by Mr. Pitt, which is no less than
the complete overthrow of the whole fabric.’ He reminded
Dundas, that he had expressed similar opinions during the vice-
royalty of Lord Westmorland, and during that of Lord Fitz-
william. He complained bitterly that he had not been treated
by his Ministers with proper confidence, and he proceeded to give
his own view of the merits and probable effects of the Union,
in language which contrasts most curiously with that which
during two eventful years his Ministers had been using in
Ireland. ‘My inclination to an Union with Ireland,’ he said,
‘was principally founded on a trust that the uniting the Hsta-
blished Churches of the two kingdoms would for ever shut the
door to any further measures with respect to the Roman Catholics.’
If Pitt would be content never to mention the subject, the King
said he would preserve an equal silence.?

1 Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii. Ap- Life of Pitt, iii. Appendix, pp. xxviii,
pendix, xxili-xxvili. xxx), and his letter to Dundas (Corn-
2 See his letter to Pitt (Stanhope’s wallis Correspondence, iii, 333).

512 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxin

It was becoming evident how gravely the Ministers had
erred in failing to ascertain and modify the opinions of the
King before they raised the question of the Union, and before
they involved themselves in negotiations with the Catholics.
As, however, the situation stood, it was, as it seems to me, the
plain duty of Pitt at all hazards to persevere. It would be
scarcely possible to exaggerate the political importance of his
decision, for the success of the Union and the future loyalty
of the Catholics of Ireland depended mainly upon his conduct ;
and beside the question of policy, there was a plain question of
honour. After the negotiations that had been entered into with
the Catholics, after the services that had been asked and
obtained from them, and the hopes which had been authorita-
tively held out to them in order to obtain those services, Pitt
could not without grave dishonour suffer them to be in a worse,
because a more powerless position, than before the Union, or
abandon their claims to a distant future, or support a Ministry
which was formed in hostility to them.

There appears to me but little doubt that he could have
carried his policy. It was utterly impossible, in the existing
state of England, of the Continent, and of Parliament, that any
Ministry could have subsisted, to which he was seriously opposed.
The impossibility became the more evident, from the fact that
the regular Opposition, under Fox and Grey, were openly in
favour of Catholic emancipation. If he had persevered he must
have triumphed, and the King must ultimately have submitted,
as he did on several other occasions when his feelings were
deeply affected, and in spite of his most vehement and un-
qualified protests. He had done so when he suffered Bute to
be driven from his Government; when he acknowledged the
independence of America; when he dismissed Thurlow ; when
he permitted Lord Malmesbury to negotiate with France ;
he acquiesced in the recall of S Wake of York from RA
lands; and he afterwards did so when he found it necessary to
admit Fox into his councils. Even on his own principles, the
question was not one excluding argument or compromise. He
declared that it would be a breach of the coronation oath to
assent to the abolition of the sacramental test, because it was the
great bulwark of the Established Church, which he had sworn to

cH. xxxu. PITT’S RESIGNATION-—SUPPORTS ADDINGTON, 513

defend.! But it was part of the scheme of Pitt to frame a new
political test, including an explicit oath of fidelity to the esta-
blished Constitution both in Church and State, and to impose it
not only on all members of Parliament, and holders of State and
corporation offices, but also on all ministers of religion and
teachers of schools.? A test so wide and so stringent would
surely be an adequate substitute for that which it was proposed
to abolish, and it is not likely that, when the necessity arose, the
conscience of the King would have been found inflexible. But
a firm resolution on the part of Pitt to carry his policy was an
indispensable condition.

He did indeed repeat his offer of resignation, declaring it to
be based on his ‘ unalterable sense of the line which public duty
required of him,’* and he afterwards defended his resignation in
Parliament, on the ground that he and his colleagues deemed it
equally ‘inconsistent with their duty and their honour’ to con-
tinue in office when they were not allowed to propose with the
authority of Government, a measure which they deemed the proper
sequel of the Union. Dundas, Grenville, Windham, Cornwallis,
and Castlereagh took the same course, and they were accompanied
by a few men in-minor places, among whom Canning was the
most conspicuous. But Pitt only accepted the necessity of
resigning with extreme reluctance, after much discussion, and
probably in a large degree under the pressure of Grenville and
Canning, and it was at once seen that, if he at present refused to
lead an anti-Catholic ministry, he was at least perfectly prepared
not only to support, but in a large measure to construct one.?
The King applied tothe Speaker Addington, as one who shared
his opinions on the Catholic question,’ and Addington at once

1 In his letter to Pitt, he said he
_ was under ‘a religious obligation’ ‘ to
maintain the fundamental maxims on
which our Constitution is placed,
namely, the Church of England being
the established one, and that those
who hold employments in the State
must be members of it, and con-
sequently obliged, not only to take
oaths against popery, but to receive
the Holy Communion agreeably to the
rites of the Church of England.’
(Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii. Appendix,
p. xxix.) But the King every year
assented to a Bill of Indemnity in

VOL, VIII.

favour of Protestant Dissenters who
took office without the qualification,
and no disqualification excluded these
Dissenters from Parliament.

2 See a letter of Lord Grenville
in Buckingham’s Courts and Cabinets,
ratte, ALAS),

® Stanhope’s' Life of Pitt, ii,
Appendix, p. xxx.

4 Thid. p. 286.

5 Compare Buckingham’s Courts
and Cabinets, iii. 131, 134, 148;
Malmesbury’s Diaries and Correspon-
dence, iv. 4.

6 Pellew’s Life of Sidmouth, i. 286,

LI

514 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

applied to Pitt. On the strenuous recommendation, .on the
earnest entreaty of Pitt, Addington accepted the task, and Pitt
not only promised his full parliamentary support, but also
exerted all his influence to induce the great body of his own
colleagues to continue at their posts. The resignation even of
Canning took place contrary to Pitt’s expressed desire. His own
brother, Lord Chatham, was one of those who remained in office.’

These proceedings were looked on in different quarters in
very different ways. Wilberforce pronounced the conduct of
Pitt to be ‘most magnanimous and patriotic.’? Abbot, who
succeeded Castlereagh as Irish Secretary, considered it mysterious
that Pitt should have resigned at all upon a question on which
he was not pledged, and which was not pressing; while many
of Pitt’s friends pronounced his resignation to be a grievous
error, and most damaging to the public weal. The Opposition
on their side declared the whole transaction to be a mere juggle.
It was perfectly evident, they maintained, that Addington would
never have accepted office without a secret understanding with
Pitt, and it was equally evident that he could only continue in it
by Pitt’s support. Pitt, they said, having entangled himself in
an embarrassing engagement tothe Catholics, was endeavouring
to extricate himself by going through the form of resigning
power into the hands of a dependant, from whom he could take
it when he pleased. He did not mean to act fairly to the
Catholics, or to press their cause with all his force, but he
intended after a mock battle to come back again, and leave them
in the lurch. By exerting himself to form an anti-Catholic
Ministry, by assisting the adversaries of concession to adjourn
the contest and consolidate their strength, he was preparing for
himself a pretext for ultimately abandoning the question, while
the inevitable recall which must soon follow his resignation

1 See Castlereagh Correspondence,
iv.35,39; Malmesbury Correspondence,
iv. 4; and the detailed account in
Pellew’s Life of Sidmouth. Canning
wrote: ‘Mr. Pitt has resigned on find.
ing himself not allowed to carry into
effect his own wishes and opinions,
and the views of the Irish Govern-
ment respecting the Catholic ques-
tion. The King has accepted his
resignation, and a new Government

is forming, in which Mr. Pitt earnestly
presses all those of his own friends
who are now in office to take part,
and to which he intends personally to
give the most decided and active
support in Parliament.’ (Life of Sid-
mouth, 1. 299.)

2 Wilberforce’s Life, iii. 2.

3 Pellew’s Life of Sidmouth, i. 334,
335, 339.

CH. XXXII. STATE OF IRELAND. 515

would make him absolute in the Cabinet.! It was also a very
general belief, that the Catholic question was not the real, not
the main, or at least not the only reason for the resignation.
It had become necessary to negotiate once more for peace, and
any other minister was likely to do so with more chance of suc-
cess and with less personal humiliation than Pitt. For. his own
party interest, it was asked, what could be more advantageous
than to quit office during these negotiations, and to resume it
when they were terminated? It may at once be said, that there
is no evidence whatever in the confidential letters of Pitt and
of his colleagues, that this last consideration was ever discussed,
or stated by them as a reason for the resignation, though it
was too obvious to have escaped the notice of Pitt, and may
very probably have contributed to dispel his hesitation. That
it was not, however, his main motive, is proved decisively by a
single fact. He was perfectly ready to resume office before the
peace negotiations had been concluded.?

We must now return to affairs in Ireland. The strange in-
difference to the question of the Union, which appears to have
prevailed there in the last stages of its discussion, still continued.
There were, it is true, in many parts of the country, dangerous
bodies of banditti, and there was much systematic anarchy. It
was greatly feared that a French invasion would be widely
welcomed, and one of the first acts of the Imperial Parliament
was to continue both martial law and the suspension of the
Habeas Corpus Act, but it was not believed that the disturbances
had any connection with the Union. ‘The quiet of the country
at large on the subject,’ wrote Cornwallis, immediately after the
measure had passed, ‘ and the almost good-humoured indifference
with which it is viewed in the metropolis, where every species

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.
60; Malmesbury Correspondence, iv. 4.

2 Sir Cornewall Lewis has examined
this episode with great care in his
Administrations of Great Britain,
and he entirely acquits Pitt of being
governed in his resignation by any
other consideration than the Catholic
question (pp. 151-153). The reader,
however, should compare on the other
side a powerful and _ interesting
letter by Dean Milman in the same
work (pp. 268-280). Dundas, accord-

ing to Lord Malmesbury, said, ‘If
these new ministers stay in and make
peace, it will only smooth matters
the more for us afterwards, and
Canning ascribed Vitt’s refusal to
resume power at once, to a desire to
see a peace negotiated by Addington.
Lord Malmesbury’s own opinion was,
‘that Pitt advises Addington to make
peace, will assist him in it, and that,
peace once made, he will then no
longer object to take office.’ (Malmes-
bury Correspondence, iv. 89, 47, 50.)

Tan a 2

516 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. = cu. xxx,

of outrageous opposition was to be expected, consoles us for
the painful audiences we are obliged to give patiently to our
discontented and insatiable supporters.’! After spending nearly
a month in the autumn, in travelling through the South of
Ireland, he wrote, ‘I found no trace of ill humour with respect
to the Union, and with the exception only of the county . of
Limerick, the whole country through which I passed was as
perfectly tranquil as any part of Britain.’? He at the same time
uniformly contended that the Union would do little or no good
unless it were speedily followed by a Catholic Relief Bill. He
predicted that if his successor threw himself into the hands of
the Orange party, ‘no advantage would be derived from the
Union ;’ that if Lord Clare and his friends had their way
at this critical time, they would ruin British government in
Ireland, and drive the country speedily into rebellion? He
believed that the confidence which the Catholics placed in his
own disposition and intentions towards them, had contributed
very largely to the present peace of Ireland and to the passing
of the Union, and he declared that he could not, in consideration
of his own character or of the public safety, leave them as he
found them.!

It is remarkable, however, how soon, in spite of the assur-
ances he had been authorised to give to the Catholics, he began
to distrust the disposition, or at least the determination of the
Cabinet. In October 1800, he wrote to a very intimate friend,
‘I cannot help entertaining considerable apprehensions that our
Cabinet will not have the firmness to adopt such measures as
will render the Union an efficient advantage to the Empire.
Those things which if now liberally granted might make the
Irish a loyal people, will be of little avail when they are extorted
on a future day. I do not, however, despair. He was much
provoked at receiving, both from the King and from the Duke
of Portland, letters urging him to make immediate arrangements
for the consolidation of the Ordnance establishments in the two
countries. It was a measure of centralisation, and a measure
for the reduction of patronage, which seemed in itself very

1 Cornnallis Correspondence, iii. 8 Ibid. pp. 237, 250.
270; see, too, pp. 282, 2838, 313. * Ibid. pp. 238 ; see, too, p. 316,
? Ibid. p. 291.

FEARS OF LORD CORNWALLIS. 517

CH. XXXII,

advisable, but it was certain to be unpopular, and he strongly
urged that, ‘instead of standing alone as the first feature of the
Union, it might be brought forward some months hence, accom-
panied by other arrangements of a more pleasing and palatable
nature.’ Could it have been intended ‘to have run the hazard
of agitating this island to a degree of madness, to have. taken a
step which everybody for the last century would have thought
likely to produce a civil war—for what? To consolidate the
two Ordnance establishments, which might have been done
eight or nine years ago with the greatest ease, if the Duke of
Richmond had been in the smallest degree accommodating ?’
‘ Lord Castlereagh,’ he added, ‘ will return soon to England, to
try to persuade the Ministers to adopt manfully the only measure
which can ever make the mass of the people of Ireland good
subjects ; but I suspect that there is too much apprehension of
giving offence in a certain quarter.’ ‘ My only apprehensions,’
he wrote in December, ‘are from the K—, from the cabal of the
late Lord Lieutenant, and from the inferior Cabinet on Irish
affairs, consisting of Lords Hobart, Auckland, &c., and the
timidity of Ministers.’ !

The letters of Lord Castlereagh from England in the last
days of the year added much to his anxiety.
Cornwallis wrote, ‘as I do, that this great work may now be
effected, and apprehending that if the opportunity is lost, it can
never be regained, you . . . will not wonder at the anxiety
that I suffer. Lord Loughborough, I find, is our most active and
formidable opponent.’ ‘Whatever his opinion may be of the

: Believing,’

perhaps, in abolishing the separate
Parliament, she has parted as well
with her most effectual means as with

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
294-296, 313. Inaremarkable paper
drawn up about this time by Lord

Castlereagh, in favour of admitting
- the Catholics to Parliament, the fol-
lowing observations occur: ‘Our
error perhaps has hitherto been,
yielding piecemeal rather than upon
system. In leaving an obvious ground
of struggle behind, we have always
encouraged demand, rather than at-
tained the only end with a view to
which the concession had been made,
... If the same internal struggle
continues, Great Britain will derive
little beyond an increase of expense
from the Union. If she is to govern
Ireland upon a garrison principle,

her most perfect justification. ...
The Union will do little in itself,
unless it be followed up. Inaddition
to the steady application of authority
in support of the laws, I look to the
measure which is the subject of the
above observations [Catholic eman-
cipation], to an arrangement of tithes,
and to a provision for the Catholic
and Dissenting clergy, calculated in
its regulations to bring them under
the influence of the State, as essen-
tially necessary to mitigate if it can-
not extingwish faction.’ ( Castlereagh
Correspondence, iv. 392-400.)

518 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ci. xxx

practicability of concession, he willin a short time, or Tam much
mistaken, find it still more impracticable to resist.’ ‘ With
almost all Europe leagued against us, we cannot long exist as a
divided nation.’ !

The dispute in England speedily developed, but at first the
letters of Cornwallis and his colleagues in Ireland were san-
guine about the issue. ‘If Mr. Pitt is firm, he will meet with
no difficulty, and the misfortunes of the present times are
much in his favour towards carrying this point, on the same
grounds that the rebellion assisted the Union.’ ‘ Owr Chancellor
will bully and talk big, but he is too unpopular here to venture
to quarrel with Administration.’* ‘ Everything depends on the
firmness of the Cabinet. There is no Opposition to be appealed
to, for they are a hundred times deeper committed upon the
point in question than Mr. Pitt. . . . The difficulties of the times
carried the Union; they will carry the present question.’? All
the signs seemed to show that Ireland was acquiescing in the
Union, and that prompt Catholic concession would insure its
success. ‘ Notwithstanding the scarcity,’ wrote Cornwallis, ‘I
hear nowhere of any symptoms of ill humour, and the Catholic
question will operate so forcibly through the whole country, that
Ido not think if the French come, they will meet with many
friends. Nobody would have believed three years ago that
Union, Catholic emancipation, and the restoration of perfect
tranquillity could have taken place in so short atime. ‘The
calm, however, cannot be expected to last, if the evil genius of
Britain should induce the Cabinet to continue the proscription
of the Catholics. They are quiet now, because they feel con-
fident of success. What a reverse must we not apprehend from
their unexpected disappointment !’ 4

In spite of the attitude of Lord Clare, and the violence of
the Orangemen, no serious opposition was apprehended from the
Irish Protestants. ‘You may be assured, wrote Cornwallis in
December, ‘that all the most powerful opposers of the measure
in favour of the Catholics, would join in giving their approbation
as soon as it is effected’? Cooke, whoswas probably better ac-

1 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 26, 27.
316, 317. 4 Ibid. pp. 13, 25.

2 Ibid. pp. 331-333. > Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
3 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv. 313,

cH, xxx. PITT’S EXPLANATION THROUGH CASTLEREAGH. 6519

quainted than any other member of the Government with the
political forces in Ireland, wrote two months later, ‘I am per-
suaded, from everything that I can collect, that the Protestant
mind is made up to acquiesce in concession to the Catholics.’
‘TI can find no man of common sense and temper who does
not think the concession may be safely made. In short,
as far as I can learn, the public mind was made up to con-
cession. I except Sir R. Musgrave, Duigenan, Giffard, and
a few Orangemen.’ He believed that sixty-four out of. the
hundred Irish members in the Imperial Parliament, would vote
in favour of the Catholics, though he feared that if the banner of
Protestantism were displayed, as it had been displayed in 1792,
‘the Orange spirit’ might still ‘show itself in an almost universal
blaze.’ ! William Elhot was even more sanguine than Cooke
about the dispositions in Ireland. Ninety-five out of a hundred
Irish members, he believed, would have voted for the Catholics.?
Under these circumstances, it may easily be conceived with
what alarm, with what absolute consternation, the Irish Govern-
ment received the news of the ministerial crisis which placed
Addington in power. It was not simply that a measure which
they believed vitally necessary to the peace of Ireland, and to
the success of the Union, was defeated; it was that Pitt, so far
from exerting his enormous power to force this measure through
Parliament, was actually engaged in assisting Addington in the
construction of an anti-Catholic Ministry. Castlereagh was then
in England, and by the instruction, and under the direct super-
intendence of Pitt, he wrote to Cornwallis to soften the blow.
The King, he said, was inexorably opposed to Catholic relief,
and would not give way. ‘The measure would have no chance
of success in the Lords; even if it were carried through both
‘Houses, the King would at all hazards refuse his assent ; and even
if he were compelled to yield, the measure would be so opposed
as to lose all its grace. Under these circumstances, Pitt had
determined not to press it, but he desired the Lord Lieutenant
to represent to the Catholics that an insurmountable obstacle
had arisen to the King’s Ministers bringing forward the measure
while in office ; ‘that their attachment to the question was such
that they felt it impossible to continue in administration under

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv. 2 Malmesbury Correspondence, iv.
45, 46, 51, 60. S 40,

520 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxu.

the impossibility of proposing it with the necessary concurrence,
and that they retired from the King’s service, considering this
line of conduct as most likely to contribute to the ultimate
success of the measure. Much was added about ‘the zealous
support’ that the Catholics might expect from the outgoing
Ministers, and especially from Pitt, but they were warned that
any unconstitutional conduct, or any attempt to force the ques-
tion, would be repressed, and that no specific time could be
stated for the attainment of their objects. It was to be the part
of the Lord Lieutenant to do all in his power to prevent any
demonstration by the Catholics.'

Cornwallis undertook to do what he could, but he at the
same time declared that nothing would induce him to ‘linger
for any length of time in office under the administration of men
who have come into power for the sole purpose of defeating a
measure which he considered to be absolutely necessary for the
preservation of the Empire,’ and he complained bitterly that,
when Catholic emancipation was acquiesced in by all the most
important parties and classes in Ireland, and had become
generally recognised as indispensably necessary for the safety of
the country, a hostile influence arising in England had again de-
feated it.2 Castlereagh and Cooke concurred with Cornwallis,
both in the course which he adopted, and in the sentiments he
expressed. ‘If Pitt does not so act as to make it demonstrative
that he is really serious on the Catholic question, wrote Cooke,
‘his resignation will be attributed to other causes.’ He believed,
however, that the eclipse of the question must be very brief.
‘To suppose that men who at such a crisis had given up their
situations upon a principle of honour, because they could not
bring forward the measures they thought necessary for the pre-
servation of the Empire—I say, to suppose that they could again
go back as Ministers without those measures being conceded, is
absurd. It is supposing them destitute of sense, principle,
integrity, honour, and even self-interest. . . . I think all still
must come right. . . . The superiority of Mr. Pitt is so strongly
felt, that no ministry will like to act without him. ‘You can

F ‘ Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 49, 50; Cornwallis Correspond nee,
oF =
385, 336, ili, 337, 341.

’ Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.

cH. xxx, © CORNWALLIS PACIFIES THE CATHOLICS. 521

hardly form an idea how the public mind had come round to
allow of concession to the Catholics.’ !

_ Cornwallis was at this time on very confidential terms with
the Catholic leaders, and acting upon his instructions, he suc-
ceeded in so far pacifying them, and convincing them of the good
intentions of Pitt, that no addresses or demonstrations took place
to disturb the Government. He attained this object chiefly by
two papers, which he gave to Archbishop Troy and Lord Fingall
to be circulated among the leading Catholics in the different parts
of Ireland. The first paper was extracted almost verbally from
the letter which Castlereagh had written under the supervision
of Pitt.2 It stated that the outgoing Ministers had resigned
office because they considered this line of conduct most likely to
contribute to the ultimate success of the Catholic cause ; it urged
the Catholics ‘ prudently to consider their prospects as arising
from the persons who now espouse their interests, and compare
them with those which they could look to from any other quarter ;’
and it continued, ‘ They may with confidence rely on the zealous
support of all those who retire, and of many who remain in office,
when it can be given with a prospect of success. ‘They may be
assured that Mr. Pitt will do his utmost to establish their cause
in the public favour, and prepare the way for their finally attain-
ing their objects; and the Catholics will feel that as Mr. Pitt
could not concur in a hopeless attempt to force it now, that he
must at all times repress with the same decision, as if he held
an adverse opinion, any unconstitutional conduct in the Catholic
body.’ On these grounds the Catholics were urgently implored

! Castlereagh Correspondence, iv. plenary power. . . . When the rebel-

60, 70. Alexander Knox, who was
secretary to Castlereagh, fully con-
curred in the necessity of emancipa-
‘tion, and he wrote at this time the
following remarkable words: ‘I am
well aware how much the distinct
Parliament contributed to keep up
disaffection ; but I am strongly per-
suaded that if disaffection be still
kept up by other sufficient means, the
want of a local Parliament may become
not an advantage, but areal grievance
to the Empire. I take it that one rea-
son among others why an Irish Parlia-
ment was first thought of, was because
the disturbed state of that country
required the presence of prompt and

lion actually commenced, the presence
of an Irish Parliament was not with-
out its efficacy. If rebellion be kept
alive (and alive it will be kept until
every degrading circumstance be re-
moved from the Catholics), even the
Union, calculated as it is for both
local and imperial benefit, may be-
comethe source of irreparable mischief
both to Ireland and the Empire ; be-
cause disturbance will, as much as
ever, require summary means of sup-
pression, but those means can no
longer have the same sanction as was
given them by a resident Parliament.’
(bid. pp. 32, 33.)

2 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.

522 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, i. xxx.

hod

to abstain from doing anything which could give a handle to the
opposers of their wishes.

The second paper expressed Cornwallis’s own sentiments.
It impressed on the Catholics how injurious it would be to their
cause, if they took part in any agitation or made any association
with men of Jacobinical principles, and thus forfeited the support
‘of those who had sacrificed their own situations in their cause.’
‘The Catholics,’ it continued, ‘should be sensible of the benefit
they possess by having so many characters of eminence pledged
not to embark in the service of Government, except on the
terms of the Catholic privileges being obtained.’ ’

No one who has read the correspondence, and understood the
character of Cornwallis, will doubt that these words were written
with the most perfect honesty, and they made an impression in
Ireland which was hardly equalled by the pamphlet which Lord
Fitzwilliam had written upon his resignation, or by the letter in
which Lord Downshire and his colleagues called on the country
to support them against the Union.? Yet no words were ever
more unfortunate or more deceptive. Cornwallis was obliged to
acknowledge that he had never ‘received authority, directly or
indirectly, from any member of Administration who resigned his
office, to give a pledge that he would not embark again in the
service of Government, except on the terms of the Catholic privi-
leges being obtained.’* What he wrote was merely an inference
—the natural inference of a plain and honourable man—drawn
from the situation. ‘The papers which were circulated among
the Catholics,’ he afterwards wrote, ‘have done much good. It
would perhaps have been better not to have inserted the word
pledge ; it was, however, used in a letter which I received from
Mr. Dundas at the same time with the communication from
Mr. Pitt through Lord Castlereagh, and it could not by any fair
construction be supposed to convey any other meaning, than that
persons who had gone out of office because the measure could
not be brought forward, would not take a part in any administra-
tion that was unfriendly to it.’4 How little right Cornwallis

347, 348; Castlereagh Correspondence, 71.

iv. 76. 3 Cornwallis Correspondence, iii.
' Cornwallis Correspondence, iii. 349.

348. 4 Tbid. p. 350. The letter of
* Castlereagh Corresponderce, iv. Dundas has never been found.

CH, XXXIL PITT ABANDONS THE CATHOLICS. 523

had to use the language he employed, is sufficiently shown by
one simple fact. In February, Pitt resigned office because he
could not introduce the Catholic relief as a Minister of the Crown.
In March he sent a message to the King, promising that whether
in or out of office he would absolutely abandon the question during
the whole of the reign, and he at the same time clearly intimated
that he was ready, if Addington would resign power, to resume
the helm, on the condition of not introducing Catholic emancipa-
tion, and not suffering it to pass.!

In my opinion, it is impossible by any legitimate argument
to justify his conduct, and it leaves a deep stain upon his charac-
ter both as a statesman and asa man. LHxplanations, however,
are not wanting. The King had just had a slight return of his
old malady. On February 14, he seems to have caught a severe
cold, and at first no other complication appeared, but about the
21st there were clear signs of mental derangement, and they
continued with little abatement till March 6. When the illness
took place, Addington had made the arrangements for the forma-
tion of his Cabinet, but the necessary formalities had not yet
been completed, and Pitt in the mean time was conducting the
business of the House. The King, on recovering, at once as-
cribed his illness to the agitation which Pitt had caused him.
He appears to have said this to Dr. Willis, and to have repeated
it to Lord Chatham, and it naturally came to the ears of Pitt.?
Pitt, according to his apologists, was so profoundly affected, that
he at once, under the impulse of a strong and natural emotion,
sent the King an assurance that he would never during his
Majesty’s reign again moye the Catholic question. He made no
secret to his immediate friends of the change in his attitude, and
many of them then declared that his resignation had no longer
‘an object. The one point of difference was removed ; all obliga-
tion to the Catholics was discarded ; a new state of things had
arisen ; why then should he not return to power? ‘On the
grounds of public duty, at atime of public danger,’ Pitt reconciled
himself to doing so. He refused, indeed, to take the first step,
to make any kind of overture, but he gave it clearly to be under-
stood through the Duke of Portland, that he would not be found

1 Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii. 303- 2 Lord Colchester’s Diary, i. 245 ;

306 ; Malmesbury Correspondence,iv. Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii. 302-304 ;
31, Malmesbury Correspondence, iv. 32

524 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on. xxxit

inexorable, if Addington voluntarily resigned, and if the King
thought fit to apply to him. On finding, however, that neither
the King nor Addington desired the change, he declined to take
any further step, and for a time he loyally supported the new
Government.!

This is the most charitable account of his conduct. It is
hardly, I think, the most probable one. It must be remembered,
that at the time of the recovery of the King, the crisis had been
surmounted; the Ministry of Addington was virtually constituted,
and there was therefore absolutely no occasion for any declaration
of policy from Pitt. No English statesman had exhibited during
his long career a more austere and rigid self-control ; no states-
man was less swayed by uncalculating emotion, less likely to be
betrayed into unguarded speech or hasty action; and though he
had served the King for seventeen years, his relations to him had
always been cold, distant, and formal. He had resigned office
with great reluctance, and, although he had long been disposed
to a liberal Catholic policy, he had always shown himself both
less earnest and less confident on the question than some of his
principal colleagues, and most ready to postpone it at the pres-
sure of difficulty. It was at all times the infirmity of his nature
to care more for power than for measures; and when the war
broke out, he was very desirous of adjourning difficult internal
questions till its close. The moment of his resignation was a
very terrible one. Marengo and Hohenlinden had shattered all
immediate hopes of restraining the ascendency of Napoleon on
the Continent. Turkey, Naples, and Portugal were the only
Powers that remained in alliance with England; and Russia,
Sweden, Denmark, and Prussia had just revived the armed
neutrality, directed against her maritime claims, which had
proved so formidable in the days of Catherine II. There were
not wanting statesmen who urged that, at such a time, a strong
hand should be at the helm; that the resignation had been a
great mistake ; that Pitt had given, and could therefore break, no
positive pledge to the Catholics ; that the Catholic question was
not one requiring an immediate solution. It was intolerable to
him to abandon the power he had wielded so skilfully and so

‘ Compare Pellew’s Life of Sid- trations of Great Britain, pp. 210-

mouth, i. 334-3837; Stanhope’s Life 214,
of Pitt, iii, 802-313 ; Lewis’s Adminis-

CH. XXXUL LAST DAYS OF CLARE, 525

long, and he was extremely indisposed to enter, in the midst of
the war, into a formidable conflict with the King and with the
Church, for the sake of a question in which he felt no deep
interest. The illness of the King gave him an unlooked-for
pretext for extricating himself with some colour of magnanimity
from his difficulty, and by deserting the Catholics he removed
the greatest obstacle in his path. It is a memorable fact that
he took this momentous step without having given Lord Gren-
ville, or, it is said, any other of his colleagues except Dundas,
the smallest intimation of his intention.!

If Pitt’s policy of adjourning great organic changes till the
peace, had been consistently carried out, the embarrassment would
never have arisen, for the Union would not have been carried.
The evil of carrying it, and then failing to carry the measure
which was its natural sequel, was irreparable. With different
circumstances the Fitzwilliam episode was reproduced. Once
more the hopes of the Catholics had been raised almost to the
point of certainty, and then dashed to the ground. Once more
assurances, which honourable statesmen should have deemed
equivalent to a pledge, had been given, and had not been fulfilled.
Once more the policy of Clare prevailed.

It does not appear, however, that in this last episode the Irish
Chancellor bore any considerable direct part. His stormy career
was now drawing to a close, and his relations with the English
Government after the Union were very troubled. The assurance
which Cornwallis had been instructed to convey to the Catholic
leaders, in order to obtain their acquiescence in the Union, had
been concealed from him ; and when he discovered that Catholic
emancipation was intended to be the immediate consequence of
the measure which he had done so much to carry, his indignation
. was unbounded, and he bitterly accused Castlereagh of decep-
tion.2 Cooke, who had hitherto been closely identified with his
policy, tried to pacify him by a long and admirable letter. He
urged that the concessions already made, rendered the ultimate

1 See Lewis’s Administrations of
Great Britain, pp. 213, 214.

2 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.
47, 51. ‘Lord Hobart . . . assured
me, that both he and Lord Clare had
been deceived by Mr. Pitt, and that
he would have voted against the
Union, had he suspected at the time

that it was connected with any pro-
ject of extending the concessions
already made to the Irish Catholics.
The present Lord Clare’s report of
his father’s views of the whole matter,
tallies with this account of the trans-
action.” (Lord Holland’s Memoirs of
the Whig Party, i. 162.)

?

526 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn. xxxu.

triumph of Catholic emancipation inevitable, and that it was
most important that it should not be postponed till after a long
and irritating struggle; that the introduction into an Imperial
Parliament of a few Catholic gentlemen could not possibly
endanger the Constitution, and might permanently attach to it
three millions of subjects; that the Established Church was
amply guaranteed by the solemn pledge in the Act of Union, and
by the adhesion to its doctrines of the great majority of the now
United Empire. The Union, he said, was likely to prove ‘the
greatest possible measure for the British Hmpire, because it
gave that Empire power to satisfy all the fair demands of all its
subjects, without the slightest danger to its own security,’ and it
would be madness in the existing state of Hurope to pronounce
an eternal interdict against concession, based upon an irreyo-
cable principle, and excluding all possibility of hope.?

This letter, however, was far from effecting its object, and
Cornwallis, who had for some time completely abandoned his
first impression of the right-mindedness and moderation of the
Chancellor, now looked upon Clare as one of the most dangerous
men in Ireland. The brutal murder of one of his servants
in the county of Limerick probably tended to exasperate his
feelings ; and immediately after the Union, Clare did his utmost
in the Imperial House of Lords to defeat every effort of concilia-
tion. Ina speech in favour of the continuation of martial law
in Ireland, he described Ireland as now wholly in the hands of a
wild and fierce democracy, with which civil government was
entirely unable to cope, and maintained that nothing but long-
continued martial law could give security to the property, laws,
and religion of the loyal inhabitants, or prevent them from falling
under the dominion of ‘unprincipled and merciless barbarians,’
‘spurred on by a pure love of blood.” Having given a most extra-
vagantly over-coloured picture of the barbarism of Treland, he

1 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.
Aj_46. This very interesting letter
contains another of those false
forecasts of the religious future, of
which we have had so many: ‘1 con-
sider that neither the Presbyterian
nor Catholic sect are new and rising,
but ancient and decaying sects ; that
their enthusiasm (at least among all
the higher and educated orders) is

worn out, and that civil equality would
produce in them a greater indifference
to their respective creeds, and make
them safer subjects. I think the de-
mocratic madness has greatly spent
itself, and that the two sects are
attached to the principles and forms
of our Constitution, and merely oppose
from the circumstance of being ex-
cluded.’ (P. 45.)

CH, Xxx. DEATH OF CLARE. 527

warned the House, that it was an absurd and a calamitous thing
to think of repressing this spirit by concession and indulgence.
The violence of his denunciations of his countrymen, and the
boldness with which he apologised for the use of torture in the
rebellion, scandalised his audience, and on one occasion he was
called to order for introducing into a discussion a wholly irre-
levant attack on Catholic emancipation. Ninety-nine out of a
hundred Catholics, he said, were perfectly indifferent to it.}

His policy triumphed on the downfall of Pitt, but he never
regained his old ascendency. He resented it bitterly, and soon
quarrelled with Hardwicke, the new Viceroy, and with Abbot,
the Chief Secretary. ‘The death of Lord Clare, in the month
of January 1802,’ wrote Abbot in his journal, ‘delivered the
Trish and also the British Government from great trouble. He
had rendered signal service to his country in a crisis of great
violence, but his love of power and the restlessness of his temper
made him unfit for the station of Chancellor, when no longer
coupled with the overruling authority which he had exercised as
Minister before the Union.’ His funeral, as is well known, was
the occasion of disgraceful rioting, and of insults much like those
which afterwards followed the hearse of Lord Castlereagh in
England, but the significance of the demonstration has been
exaggerated, for it appears to have been the carefully organised
outrage of a few men.?

Lord Hardwicke urged the Government to appoint an
Trishman to the vacant post, and recommended Lord Kilwarden,
as combining in a rare degree the requisite gifts, both of in-
tellect and character; but the Government followed the advice
of Lord Eldon, and Sir John Mitford, who had been Speaker of
the House of Commons since the resignation of Addington and
who was now made Lord Redesdale, became Irish Chancellor.

1 Parl. Hist. xxxy. 1231-1237 ;

O’Flanagan’s Lives of the Irish vhan-
cellors, li. 273, 274; Castlereagh Cor-

Secretary of State under him.’
p. 287.)

3 <The riot and disorder at Lord

(ibid.

respondence, iv. 61.

2 Lord Colchester’s Diary, i. 278,
279, 321. In a paper drawn up by
the Irish Government for Adding-
ton in Jan. 1802, Clare is said to be
‘hostile to any government by Lord
Lieutenant. Desirous himself to be
Lord Deputy, or at the head of Lords
Justices, and for Mr. Cooke to be

Clare’s funeral was occasioned by a
gang of about fourteen persons under
orders of a leader, so that it does not
tell so ill for the character of the
Dublin populace (whom I am not,
however, going to defend), as I had
at first imagined.’ (Lord Hardwicke
to Abbot, Feb. 2, 1802. Colchester
ISS.)

528 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cm. xxxtt

He was an excellent lawyer, and a very amiable and upright
man, but his first and last idea on the great question of Irish
policy was, that the main object of English government should
be to Protestantise Ireland. ‘The Catholics of Ireland, he
wrote, ‘must have no more political power. They have already
so much as to be formidable.’ ‘Nothing, in my opinion, can
be more despicable than the conduct of the Roman Catholics,
with a few exceptions, and nothing more abominable than the
conduct of their priests. The canting hypocrisy of Dr. Troy
. .. is, to me, disgusting. . . . I am decidedly of opinion
that you cannot safely grant anything; that you must raise
the Protestant, not the Roman Catholic Church. To make them
[the priests] your friends, is impossible. The college of May-
nooth vomits out priests ten times worse than ever came from
the Spanish colleges. I would withhold all supply to that
establishment, and were I Minister, would abolish it. ‘The
general profligacy of this country, derived partly from the
corruption of their Parliament, and partly from the corruptions
of the Catholic Church, which is less reformed here than in any
Catholic country in Europe, is astonishing to an Englishman.’
Jreland, he thought, should be governed for some years as
despotically as France, but in a more honest spirit, and with a
real desire to put down the inveterate jobbing of the country,
and this could never be achieved unless all the chief posts of
influence and power were filled by Hnglishmen. The legislative
Union was still but a ‘rope of sand,’ and much more was needed
to consolidate it. Looking back to all the tangled and incon-
sistent negotiations which had taken place during the last few
years, and especially during the Union struggle, he owned himself
utterly unable to explain the conduct of the English Ministers,
‘without supposing that men of great talents, of great expe-
rience, of great political knowledge, acted without reflection,
or without integrity, or from mere caprice, or that they were
deceiving, and endeavouring to overreach each other, some
meaning one thing, some the direct contrary.’ !

The opinions of Lord Redesdale were well known ; he him-
self brought them into full relief, in a very injudicious corre-

1 See his very curious letters in Lord Colchester’s Diary, i, 407—
466, 467, 476, 510, 511. Y, 1. 407-410, 436,

CH, XXXII, THE ADDINGTON MINISTRY. 529

spondence with Lord Fingall, and he remained Chancellor
during the short Ministry of Pitt that followed. The Lord
Lieutenant governed in the same spirit, though with more
discretion of language. ‘Lord Hardwicke’s,’ it was boasted,
‘is the only Administration that has never given the heads of
the Catholic clergy an invitation to the Castle; he in no way
recognises them further than the law admits them to be priests.’ !
This was the end of all the confidential intercourse that had
taken place between the Government and the bishops before
the Union; of all the hopes that had been held out; of all the
services the bishops had rendered in carrying the Union. Pitt,
at last tired of opposition, joined with the different sections
hostile to the Ministry, and drove Addington from power in the
spring of 1804, though he was obliged soon after to admit him
to his own Ministry; but the Catholics gained nothing by the
change, and the question which, in 1800, seemed almost won,
was adjourned to a distant future.

These things did not produce in Ireland any immediate
convulsion, and in the strange and paradoxical history of Irish
public opinion, the Addington Ministry can hardly be counted
even unpopular. Lord Redesdale, indeed, said that the country
for some time could only be held as a garrisoned country; that
the Jacobin spirit, though seldom openly displayed, was still
prevalent, and that it was most manifestly increasing in the
Catholic population.? Lord Hardwicke, in a paper drawn up
at the close of the summer of 1801, expressed his fear lest ‘the
aversion to the Union which obtained very strongly in many
parts of Ireland, and still continues unabated,’ might ‘be un-
happily confirmed, to the incalculable injury of the Empire ;’?
but when, in the June of 1802, a general election at last took
place, no such aversion was displayed. The saying of Lord
Clare, that the Irish are ‘a people easily roused and easily
appeased,’ was never more clearly verified. Though this was
the first occasion since the Union, in which the constituencies
had the opportunity of expressing their opinion of the conduct
of their representatives on that great question, the Union
appears to have borne no part whatever in the election, and it

1 See a letter of Lady Hardwicke. 2 Thid. pp. 407, 408.
(Lord Colchester’s Diary, i. 441.) ' bids p. 313.
VOL. VIII. MM

530 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. on. xxxin

is stated that not a single member who had voted for it was for
that reason displaced.!. In Ireland, even more than in most
countries, good administration is more important than good
politics, and the mild, tolerant, and honest administration of
Lord Hardwicke, gave him considerable popularity. Under
Cornwallis orders had been given for rebuilding and repairing,
at Government expense, the Catholic chapels which had been
burnt or wrecked after the rebellion, and this measure was
steadily carried on,’ while persistent and successful efforts were
made, especially by the Chancellor, to put an end to jobbing
and corruption.

The short rebellion of Emmet, in 1803, was merely the last
wave of the United Irish movement, and it was wholly uncon-
nected with the Union and with the recent disappointment of the
Catholics. It was suppressed without difficulty and without any
acts of military outrage, and it at least furnished the Govern-
ment with a gratifying proof that the Union had not broken
the spring of loyalty in Dublin, for the number of yeomen who
enlisted there, was even greater than in 1798.3 Grattan had
refused to enter the Imperial Parliament at the election of 1802,
but he watched the signs of the time with an experienced eye,
and the judgment which this great champion of the Catholic
claims formed of Lord Hardwicke’s Administration, is very re-
markable. He wrote to Fox that, without a radical change of
system, it would be impossible to plant in Ireland permanent,
unfeigned loyalty; that the Union had not been carried, for
although a loyal Parliament had been destroyed, ‘equality of
conditions, civil or religious, had not even commenced ;’ but he

1<«The general election was

to the Union a sufficient claim for
scarcely sufficient to ruffle the calm

into which, after the Union, the com-
motions of Ireland had subsided. .. .
Not a single member of the Irish
Parliament who supported the Union,
was displaced in consequence of the
displeasure of his constituents ; in no
instance was this support upbraided
to any candidate; some of the most
extensive and independent counties
returned gentlemen who had shown
great zeal in accomplishing this
momentous arrangement, and only in
one instance (the county of Dublin),
did any candidate deem his opposition

popular favour, to allude to it in
addressing the constituent body.’
(Annual Register, 1802, p. 194.)
According to this authority, twenty-
five new Irish members were elected.
(P. 436.)

® Dr. Troy to Marsden, Sept. 27,
1800, I.8.P.0. ; Colchester’s Diary, i.
291; Ireland, Historical and Sta-
tistical, by G. L. Smyth, iii. 403.

3 This is stated by Grattan in a
letter to Fox (Grattan’s Life, v. 242),
and it is corroborated by Alexander
Knox. (Remains, iv. 135.)

CHANGES IN THE CATHOLIC QUESTION. 531

CH, XXXII.

added, ‘ without any alteration in the legal condition of this
country, and merely by a temperate exercise of the existing laws,
the present chief governor of Ireland has more advanced the
strength of Government and its credit, than could have been
well conceived,’ and ‘from the manner in which this last re-
bellion was put down, I incline to think that if Lord Hardwicke
had been Viceroy, and Lord Redesdale Chancellor, in ’98, the
former rebellion would have never existed.’ !

But from this time the Catholic question passed completely
beyond the control of the Government. In Ireland the utter
failure of the gentry and the bishops to procure emancipa-
tion by negotiations with the Government, speedily threw the
energetic elements of the Catholic body and the lower priest-
hood into a course of agitation which altered the whole com-
plexion of the question, and enormously increased its diffi-
culty and its danger.? In 1799 the Catholic bishops had, as
we have seen, fully accepted the proposal of giving a veto on
episcopal appointments to the Government, and not only Pitt,
but also Grattan, had strongly maintained that emancipation could
only be safely carried, if it were accompanied by such restrictions
on ecclesiastical appointments and on intercourse with the
Holy See, as existed in all Protestant and in all Catholic
countries throughout Europe.* In opposition to Grattan, to
the Catholic gentry, to the English Catholics, and even to a
rescript frony Rome, O’Connell induced the great body of the
Trish Catholics, both lay and clerical, to repudiate all such
restrictions, and to commit themselves to an agitation for
unqualified emancipation. The panic and division created
by this agitation in Ireland, and the strong spirit of eccle-
siastical Toryism that overspread England after the death of
Pitt, combined to throw back the question. In 1800 the

1 Grattan’s Life, v. 242, 243. mote village in the country. Be

2 Magan, as early as Feb. 8, 1801,
describes the beginning of this move-
ment. ‘Every art is now used to
influence the Catholic mind. It is
said, nothing is to be done for them,
It is said to the inferior clergy, they
have been deceived by their bishops,
particularly since a late party of that
description dined with his Excellency,
which has received the utmost pub-
licity. It has reached the most re-

assured, if any arrangement is ever
likely to take place, it would be
prudent to let it be known through
some channel or other.’ (1.8.P.0.)
On the dinner referred to, see Castle-
reagh Correspondence, iv. 24.

® See Grattan’s remarkable speech
on the Catholic question in 1810, and
also Fagan’s Life of O'Connell, i, 71.
Many particulars on this subject will
be found in Sir J. Hippisley’s Tracts.

MM 9

032 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. a. xxxit.

conscientious objections of the King seemed to form the only
serious obstacle to Catholic emancipation. The establishment
of the Regency in 1812 removed that obstacle, but the Catholic
hopes appeared as far as ever from their attainment. The later
phases of this melancholy history do not fall within my present
task. It is sufficient to say, that when Catholic emancipation
was at last granted in 1829, it was granted in the manner
which, beyond all others, was likely to produce most evil, and
to do least good. It was the result of an agitation which,
having fatally impaired the influence of property, loyalty, and
respectability in Catholic Ireland, had brought the country to
the verge of civil war, and it was carried avowedly through
fear of that catastrophe, and by a Ministry which was, on
principle, strongly opposed to it.

Pitt, as we have seen, intended that the Union should be
followed by three great measures—the admission of Catholics
into Parliament, the endowment of their priesthood under con-
ditions that gave a guarantee for their loyalty, and the commu-
tation of tithes. Hach measure, if wisely and promptly carried,
would have had a great pacifying influence, and the beneficial
effect of each measure would have been greatly enhanced by
combination with the others.

The first measure had been abandoned, but, of the three, it
was probably, in reality, the least important, and there was no
insuperable reason why the other two should not have been
pressed. The King, it is true, had very lately declared himself
opposed to the payment of the priests, but he had not placed his
opposition on the same high and conscientious grounds as his
opposition to emancipation,! and Lord Grenville, who was far
more earnest on the Catholic question than Pitt, strongly main-
tained that the payment of the priests was a measure which
might be, and ought to be, carried.2 The Government had
offered endowment on certain conditions to the bishops in 1799,

1 See his letter to Pitt, Jan. 24, ment of the Catholic clergy.’ (Parl.

i799. (Stanhope’s Life of Pitt, iii.
Appendix, p.xvili.) Lord Monteagle,
in a speech in the House of Lords i in
1848, said (I know not on what autho-
rity), that George III., ‘ opposed as he
was to the concession of the Catholic
claims, was favourable to the endow-

Debates, 3rd series, p. 1131.) It does
not appear that the King had ob-

jected either to the endowment of
Maynooth, or to the payment of the
Scotch priests,

es 2 Castlereagh Correspondence, iv.
€

CH, XXXI1 PAYMENT OF PRIESTS. 033

and the offer and the conditions had been accepted, and a
report of the position of the different orders of priesthood in
Ireland had been drawn up, which clearly showed how sorely it
was needed.! The supreme importance, both moral and political,
of raising the status and respectability of this class of men,
of attaching them to the Government, and of making them,
in some degree, independent of their flocks, was sufficiently
obvious, and has been abundantly recognised by a long series
of the most eminent statesmen. In an intensely Catholic
nation, where there is scarcely any middle class, and where the
gentry are thinly scattered, and chiefly Protestant, the position
of the priesthood was certain to be peculiarly important, and
the dangers to be feared from a bad priesthood were peculiarly
great. Individuals often act contrary to their interests, but
large classes of men can seldom or never be counted on to do
so; and in Ireland, neither interest nor sentiment was likely to
attach the Catholic clergy to the side of the law. Drawn from
a superstitious and disloyal peasantry, imbued with their pre-
judices, educated on a separate system, which excluded them
from all contact, both with the higher education of their own
country and with the conservative spirit of continental Catho-
licism, they have usually found themselves wholly dependent
for all temporal advantages—for popularity, for influence, and
for income—upon the favour of ignorant, lawless, and often sedi-
tious congregations. Such a clergy, if they remained wholly un-
connected with the Government of the country, were not likely to
prove an influence for good, and if, as is undoubtedly true, the
Catholic Church has, in some most important respects, con-
spicuously failed as a moral educator of the Irish people, this
failure is to be largely ascribed to the position of its priest-
hood.

The moment was peculiarly favourable for reforming this
great evil. The bishops, though they could hardly press the
claims of the clergy, after the great disappointment of the laity,
were still ready to accept endowment with gratitude;? the

' According to this report, the parish priests, who gave them their
average income of Irish parish priests diet and lodging, support for one horse,
was then about 65/. a year, exclusiveof andan allowance of 107. in money.
the expense of keepingacurate. The (Castlereagh Correspondence, iv. 99.)
curates in most places lived with the *Thid. iv, 227-229. There is

534 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CH. XXXII,

clergy had not yet been transformed by agitation into political
leaders, and the poor would have welcomed with delight any
measure which freed them from some most burdensome dues.
Addington appears to have been fully convinced of the policy
of the measure, but Pitt, having once moved the Catholic
question out of his way, would take no steps in its favour,
and without his powerful assistance, it would have been hope-
less to attempt to carry it. The golden opportunity was lost,
and the whole later history of Ireland bears witness to the
calamity.

Lord Cornwallis, at this time, wrote the following charac-
teristic and pathetic lines to Marsden, who had aided him so
powerfully in carrying the Union. ‘Before I left London, I
spoke several times to Mr. Addington, on the subject of a pro-
vision for the Catholic clergy, and told him that, from an inter-
view which I had with Dr. Moylan, I found that they were now
willing to accept of it. He seemed to be fully impressed with
the necessity of the measure, especially as the Regium Donum
to the Presbyterian ministers was to be increased, and assured
me that he would take an early opportunity of representing it
to his Majesty. I have no doubt of Mr. A.’s sincerity, but I
am afraid that the August Personage whom I have mentioned, is
too much elated by having obtained his own emancipation, to be
in a humour to attend much to any unpleasant suggestions from
his purest confidential servants. If this point, at least, is not
carried, no hope can be entertained of any permanent tran-
quillity in Ireland, and we, who so strenuously endeavoured to
render that island the great support and bulwark of the British
Empire, shall have the mortification to feel that we laboured in
vain.’ !

The proposed commutation of tithes was abandoned in the

a similar letter of Castlereagh to

Marsden (July 5, 1802) in the
Desa On

1 Cornwallis to Marsden, July 19,
1802. (1.8.P.0.) It appears from
Lord Colchester’s diary that the Irish
Government, or at least the Chief
Secretary, Abbot, opposed the plan.
One of the reasons given has a melan-
choly significance. ‘It would form a
lasting and irrevocable bar to the long-
established policy of gradually Pro-

testantising the country, and wearing
out the attachment to the Catholic
religion.’ (P. 356.) The question,
however, was for some time under
deliberation. In September, Corn-
wallis wrote: ‘The Government here
will, no doubt, have firmness enough
to insist, in a certain quarter, on a
provision for the Catholic clergy.
Addington seemed determined to go
through with the measure when I
last saw him, and I hope he will not

COMMUTATION OF TITHES. 535

CH, XXXII.

same manner, and for the same reasons. Year after year the
English Government had been told, not only by Grattan, but
also by the chief members of the Irish Administration, that the
existing tithe system was the most fertile of all the sources
of Irish anarchy and crime, and that a wise and just system
of commutation was a matter of supreme importance... Lord
Loughborough, who chiefly defeated Catholic emancipation, had
himself drawn up a Tithe Commutation Bill. Lord Redesdale,
who represented the most exaggerated form of anti-Catholic
Toryism, had declared that such a measure was absolutely
necessary, and that without it, the country would never be suf-
ficiently quiet for the general residence of a Protestant clergy.!
But nothing was done, and Ireland was left for a whole genera-
tion seething in all the anarchy arising from this most prolific
source. The agitation at last culminated in a great organised
conspiracy against the payment of tithes, accompanied and sup-
ported, like all such conspiracies in Ireland, by a long and ghastly
train of murder and outrage. The fatal precedent was set, of a
successful and violent revolt against contracts and debts. The
Protestant clergy, who were for the most part perfectly innocent
in the matter, and who formed perhaps the most healthy, and
certainly the most blameless section of Irish life, were over large
districts reduced to the deepest poverty, and a vast step was
taken towards the permanent demoralisation of Ireland. At
last, after some abortive measures, the two great English parties
concurred in the outlines of a scheme of commutation, and in
1835 the Government of Sir Robert Peel introduced his Tithe
Bill, commuting tithes into a rent charge to be paid by the land-
lords with a deduction of 25 per cent.
had already been adopted by the Whig Opposition in the preced-
‘ing year, but they perceived that, by bringing forward an amend-
ment uniting Peel’s Bill with the wholly different question of the

The general principle

appropriation of the surplus revenues of the Irish Church to
secular purposes, they could defeat the Government, and them-

flinch.’ (Cornwallis to Marsden, enter thelistsagainst the great power

Sept. 2, 1802, 1.8.P.0.) A little later
he wrote: ‘It would have been better
if a provision for the Catholic clergy
could have been obtained when we
were threatened with no immediate
danger, but if we are again forced to

of France, without any ally to assist
us, I trust we shall see the necessity
of making ourselves as strong as
possible at home.’ (Ibid. Nov. 16,
1802.)

1 Colchester’s Diary, «

536 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxit

selves climb into power. With the support, and in a large
degree under the influence of O’Connell, they took this course ;
but they soon found that, though the House of Lords was ready
to carry the tithe composition, it was inexorably hostile to the
appropriation clause, and, at last, having cursed Ireland with
three more years of tithe agitation, the Whig Ministry carried
in 1838 the very Bill which Sir Robert Peel had been driven out
of office for proposing.

Tt was a tardy measure, discreditably carried, but it proved
of inestimable benefit to Ireland, and it is one of the very
few instances of perfectly successful legislation on Irish affairs.
It could not, however, efface the evil traces of the preceding
thirty-eight years of anarchy and outrage, and it is impossible
not to reflect with bitterness, how different might have been the
course of Irish history if even this one boon had accompanied
or immediately followed the Union.

The reader who considers all this, may justly conclude
that the continued disaffection of Ireland was much less due to
the Union, or to the means by which the Union was carried,
than to the shipwreck of the great measures of conciliation
which ought to have accompanied it, and which were intended to
be its immediate consequence. The policy which Pitt proposed
to himself was a noble and a comprehensive, though a sufficiently
obvious one; but when the time came to carry it into execution,
he appears to me to have shown himself lamentably deficient
both in the sagacity and in the determination of a great states-
man. Nor is it, I think, possible to acquit him of grave moral
blame. However culpable was the manner in which he forced
through the Union, there can at least be no reasonable doubt
that his motives were then purely patriotic; that he sought only
what he believed to be the vital interest of the Empire, and not
any personal or party object. There was here no question of
winning votes, or turning a minority into a majority, or con-
solidating a party, or maintaining an individual ascendency. It
is difticult to believe that the alloy of personal ambition was
equally absent, when he cast aside so lightly the three great
Catholic measures on which the peace of Ireland and the success
of the Union mainly depended. It is indeed probable that he’
disguised from himself the presence of such motives, and that

CH. XXXII. PITT’S HOPES AND DECEPTIONS. 537

they were in truth largely blended with public considerations.
The difficulties of his position were very great—the strain of a
gigantic and disastrous war; an obstinate and half-mad King;
a hostile Church; a divided Cabinet. He may easily have
persuaded himself, that it was a great public interest that he
should continue at the helm while the storm was at its height,
and that he would be able in a near future to accomplish his
designs. His genius was far more incontestable in peace
than in war, and according to all the precedents of the
eighteenth century, a war which had lasted seven years could
not be far from its end. When the Union was carried, Pitt was
only forty-one—twenty-one years younger than the Sovereign
whose resistance was the greatest obstacle in his path. His
constitution, it is true, was much broken, but it is probable that
he still looked forward to another long pacific Ministry, and if
he had obtained it, it is scarcely possible that he would have
left the great group of Irish questions unsolved.

But if this was his hope, it was doomed to bitter disappoint-
ment. The war had still fourteen years to run, and his own life
was drawing fast to its early close.. He regained office in 1804, but
he never regained power, and his last miserably feeble, struggling
and divided Ministry was wholly unfit to undertake the settlement
of these great questions. In a speech in March 1805, he spoke
in language which was not without its pathos, of his abiding
conviction that in an United Parliament concessions, under
proper guards and securities, might be granted to the Catholics
which would bring with them no danger and immense benefit
to the Empire ; he said that if his wish could carry them, he saw
no rational objection ; and Canning afterwards declared from his
own knowledge, that Pitt’s opinions on that subject were to the
very last unchanged.! But both in England and Ireland the
auspicious moment had passed, and moral and political influences
were rising, which immensely added to the difficulties of a wise
and peaceful solution.

1 See Canning’s speech, March 6, hope.’ He could fix no time, ‘though
1827, Parl. Deb. 2nd series, xvi. 1006. he candidly expressed his own opinion
Lord Fingall had an interview with as to the good policy of the measure.’
Pitt about the Catholic petition in (Lord Fingall to Marsden, March 19,
1805. Pitt, he says, ‘though extremely 1805, I.8.P.0.)
polite, gave us not the most distant,

538 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxi

. It would have been far wiser to have deferred the Union
question till the war had terminated, and till the English
Ministers had arrived at a well-grounded certainty that it was
in their power to carry the measures that could alone have made
it acceptable to the majority of the nation. Another evil which
resulted from carrying the Union in time of war, was that
its financial arrangements completely broke down. I do not
propose to enter into the extremely complicated and difficult
questions, that have been raised, relating to those arrangements
between the two countries in the years that followed the Union.!
They belong to the historian of a later period of Irish history, and
they deserve his most careful attention. Pitt and Castlereagh,
as we have seen, had fixed two-seventeenths as the proportion
of Ireland’s contribution to the general expenditure of the
Empire; and if the peace of Amiens had been a permanent one,
it is possible that this proportion might not have been exces-
sive. But the best Irish financiers had almost with one voice
predicted that it would prove so; and with the vast expenditure
that accompanied the last stages of the long French war, their
prediction was speedily verified. It was at once seen that Ire-
land was totally incapable of meeting her obligation, and the
prospect which Castlereagh had held out of diminished expendi-
ture, soon vanished likea mirage. It is asomewhat remarkable
fact, that it has been pronounced by the best authorities impos-
sible to state with complete accuracy the net liabilities of the
two countries, either at the time of the Union, or at the time of
amalgamation of the Exchequers in 1817.2? According to the
figures, however, which were laid before Parliament in 1815, the
separate funded debt of Ireland in 1801 was 26,841,2192.,
while that of Great Britain was 420,305,944/. But every year
after the Union, and in spite of an immense increase of the
revenue raised in Ireland by taxation,® the Irish debt increased
with a rapidity vastly greater than in the period before the
Union, vastly greater in proportion than that of Great Britain.

1 The most important facts relating

subject were collected by Mr. Chis-
to them will be found in the Parlia-

holm, the Chief Clerk of the Ex-

mentary Reports, On the Taxation of
Treland, in 1864 and 1865.

2 Report on the Taxation of Ire-
land, 1865, p. vii.

3 Some remarkable facts on this

chequer, in a paper on the relative
ability of Great Britain and Ireland
to contribute to the taxation of the
United Kingdom, Report of 1865,
Appendix 9. See also the Report of

CH, XXXII, AMALGAMATION OF THE EXCHEQUERS. 539

In 1817 the separate funded debt of Ireland had increased
to 86,838,938/., while that of England had only risen to
682,531,933/., and the proportion between the two, which at the
Union was about 1 to 15°5, had become in 1816 about 1 to 7°8.
The unfunded debt of Ireland in the same period rose from
1,699,9887. to 5,304,615/. and that of Great Britain from
26,080,1000. to 44,650,300/.! The Act of Union had provided
that if the debts of the two countries ever bore to each other the
same ratio as their contributions, they might be amalgamated ;
and in 1817, this time had more than come, the prediction of
the anti-Unionists was verified, and the debts of the two
countries were consolidated.

It must, however, be added, that this consolidation did not
for a long period lead to an equality of taxation. The poverty
of Ireland made this impossible. Irish taxation in the years
that followed the Union was chiefly indirect, and the small
produce of the duties that were imposed, clearly showed the real
poverty of the country.? Long after the consolidation of the
Exchequers, Great Britain bore the burden of many important

the time of the amalgamation of the

the Commissioners. It appears from
Hxchequers was 546,299,0342., the

these documents, that ‘the permanent

taxation of Great Britain increased
from 1801 to 1811 in the proportion
of 183 to 10, and the whole revenue,
including war taxes, as 21} to 10;
while the revenue of Ireland had, in
the same time, increased in the pro-
portion of 23 to 10’ (p. vi); that
‘the net revenue of Ireland derived
from taxation, upon an average of the
last five years, ending in 1816, was
more than doubled as compared with
the net revenue in 1800;’ and that in
1815, the net revenue raised in Ireland
by taxation exceeded that of 1800 by
“no less than 128 percent. (Pp. 140,
141.) See, too, the Report of 1864,
05 2s

1 Report of the Taxation of Ire-
land, 1864, pp. xx, xxi. The calcula-
tions of Mr. Finlaison give different
figures. His summary is that ‘the
value of the whole debt of Great
Britain (funded and unfunded) at the
time of the Union was 329,868,585/.,
and the value of the whole debt of
Treland, 23,198,8102., and the propor-
tion as 28°4 to 2; and that the value
of the whole debt of Great Britain at

value of the whole debt of Ireland
86,992,9312, and the proportion as
12:5 to 2. (Report of the Committee
on Irish Taxation, 1865, p. viii.)

2 In a speech on May 2, 1853,
during the debate about the income
tax, Lord J. Russell stated, on the
authority of Lord Sydenham, ‘that in
the year 1807 the revenue of Ireland
amounted to 4,378,0002. Between
that year and the conclusion of the
war, taxes were successively imposed
which, according to the calculations
of Chancellors of the Exchequer, were
to produce 3,400,0002. or to augment
the revenue to the extent of 7,700,0007.
What was the result? In the year
1821, when that amount, less than
400,000/. for taxes afterwards repealed,
ought to have been paid into the Ex-
chequer, the whole revenue of Ireland
amounted only to 3,844,000/., being
524,000/. lessthan in 1807. This was
not the effect of the income tax, or of
a direct tax. It was the effect of the
taxes upon the great articles of con-
sumption.’ (Parl. Deb. 3rd series,
exxvi, 1000, 1001,)

540 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxin

taxes which were not extended to Ireland, and even now Ireland
enjoys some exemptions. It was not until 1842 that Sir R.
Peel made some serious efforts to equalise the taxation. He
abstained, indeed, from imposing on Ireland the income tax,
which he then imposed on Great Britain, but he added one shil- .
ling in the gallon to the duty on Irish spirits, and he equalised the
stamp duties in the two countries. The policy was not altogether
successful. The additional duty on spirits was repealed in
1843; the additional revenue derived from the stamps was lost
in the reduction of the stamp duties both in Great Britain and
Treland. But the project of equalising taxation was soon carried
out with far greater severity and success by Mr. Gladstone, who
in 1853 extended the income tax to Ireland, which was then
just rising out of the deep depression of the famine ; and another
great step was taken in 1858, by the assimilation of the duties
on English and Irish spirits. By these successive measures the
equalisation of taxation was nearly effected. In ten years the
taxation of Ireland was increased 52 per cent., while that of
Great Britain was only increased 17 per cent., and the propor-
tion of the Irish to the British revenue, which in the first sixteen
years of the century was between one-thirteenth and one-four-
teenth, rose in the ten years after 1852 to one-tenth or one-ninth.!
It is no part of my task to discuss the wisdom or propriety
of these measures, or to examine what would have been the
financial condition of Ireland, if she had retained her separate
Parliament, or if the clause in the Act of Union relating to the
contribution had been drawn as Beresford desired.2 But the
contrast between the hopes held out in the speech of Castlereagh
and the actual course of events cannot be denied, and it exercised
an unfortunate influence on the history of the Union. Nor was
it possible for an Empire which was crippled by the strain of a
gigantic war, and during many subsequent years almost crushed
by the burden of its colossal debt, to assist Irish development,
as it might have done in happier times. In our own day, the
Imperial Parliament has conferred an inestimable benefit on
Treland, by largely placing at her service the unrivalled credit of
the Empire ; by lending immense sums for purposes of public
utility at a much lower rate of interest than any purely Irish

T Report af 1865, p. viii, Appendix No. 9. ASE De Os

CH, XXXII . LATER IRISH HISTORY, 541

fund could possibly have borne; but it was only after’ an
Act which was passed in the fifth year of Queen Victoria, that
this policy was to any considerable extent adopted.!

These considerations are sufficient to show, under what un-
favourable and unhappy circumstances the great experiment of
the Irish Union has been tried. They are, however, far from
representing the whole chain of causes which have retarded the
pacification of Ireland. Very few countries in an equal space of
time have been torn by so much political agitation, agrarian
crime, and seditious conspiracy; have experienced so many
great economical and social revolutions, or have been made the
subject of so many. violent and often contradictory experiments
in legislation. The tremendous fall of prices after the peace of
1815, which was especially felt in a purely agricultural country ;
the destruction by the factory system of the handloom industry,
which once existed in nearly every farmhouse in Ulster; an
increase of population in the forty-seven years that followed the
Union, from little more than four and a half to little less than
eight and a half millions, without any corresponding progress in
manufacturing industry or in industrial habits ; a famine which
exceeded in its horrors any other that Europe has witnessed
during the nineteenth century ; the transformation, in a period
of extreme poverty and distress, of the whole agricultural indus-
try of Ireland, through the repeal of the corn laws; the ruin of
an immense portion of the old owners of the soil; the introduc-
tion under the Encumbered Estates Act of anew class of owners,
often wholly regardless of the traditions and customs of Irish
estates; a period of land legislation which was intended to
facilitate and accelerate this change, by placing all agrarian
relations on the strictest commercial basis, and guaranteeing to
the purchaser by parliamentary title the most absolute ownership
of his estate; another period of legislation which broke the
most formal written contracts, deprived the owner not only of
all controlling influence, but even of a large portion of what he

1 See the evidence of Mr. Barnes, land before that, was a special loan

the Solicitor to the Public Works
Loan Commission, in the feport on
Trish Tawration (1865), p. 17. Mr.
Barnes said: ‘The loans to Ireland
previous to the Act of 5 Vict. were
very few. The principal loan to Ire-

to the Ulster Canal of 120,000/. under
an Act of Parliament passed for that
particular purpose. There were other
small loans made to Ireland, but not
to any extent before the Act I have
mentioned.’

542 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxtt.

had bought, and established a dual and a confused ownership
which could not possibly endure; an emigration so vast and so
continuous, that, in less than half a century, the population of
Ireland sank again almost to the Union level; all these things
have contributed in their different times and ways to the insta-
bility, the disorganisation, and the misery that swell the ranks
of sedition and agitation.

Other influences have powerfully concurred. The British
Constitution has passed under the democratic movement of the
century, and it has been assumed that a country in which a
majority of the population are disaffected, and which is totally
unlike England in the most essential social and political condi-
tions, can be safely governed on the same plane of democracy as
England, and its representation in the Imperial Parliament has
been even left largely in excess of that to which, by any of the
tests that regulate English and Scotch representation, it is
entitled. The end of every rational system of representation is
to reflect, in their due proportion and subordination, the dif-
ferent forms of opinion and energy existing in the community,
giving an especial weight and strength to those which can con-
tribute most to the wise guidance and the real well-being of the
State. In the representation of the British Empire, the part
which is incontestably the most diseased has the greatest pro-
portionate strength, while the soundest elements in Irish life
are those which are least represented. About a third part of
the Irish people are fervently attached to the Union, and they
comprise the great bulk of the property and higher education of
the country ; the large majority of those who take any leading
part in social, industrial, or philanthropic enterprise ; the most
peaceful, law-abiding, and industrious classes in the community ;
nearly every man who is sincerely attached to the British
Empire. In three provinces, such men are so completely out-
voted by great masses of agricultural peasants, that they are
virtually disfranchised ; while in the whole island, this minority
of about a third commands only a sixth part of the representation.
A state of representation so manifestly calculated to give an
abnormal strength to the most unhealthy and dangerous ele-
ments in the kingdom, is scarcely less absurd, and it is cer-
tainly more pernicious, than that which Grattan and Flood de-

CH, XXXII. ’ FENIANISM. 543

nounced. To place the conduct of affairs in the hands of loyal,
trustworthy, and competent men, is not the sole, but it is by far
the most important end of politics. No greater calamity can
befall a nation, than to be mainly represented and directed by
conspirators, adventurers, or professional agitators, and no more
‘severe condemnation can be passed upon a political system than
that it leads naturally to such aresult. We have seen how clearly
Grattan foresaw that this might one day be the fate of Ireland.

It was under these conditions or circumstances, that the great
political movement arose which forms the central fact of the
modern history of Ireland. The Fenian conspiracy, which sprang
up in America, but which had also roots in every large Irish
town, was not directed to a mere repeal of the Union; it aimed
openly and avowedly at separation and a republic, and it differed
chiefly from the Young Ireland movement in the far less
scrupulous characters of its leaders, and in its intimate connec-
tion with atrocious forms of outrage, directed against the lives
and properties of unoffending Englishmen. Growing up chiefly
in the comparatively prosperous population beyond the Atlantic,
being skilfully organised, and appealing for contributions to a
wide area of often very honest credulity, it obtained command
of large financial resources ; but its leaders soon found that un-
assisted F'enianism could find no serious response among the
great mass of the Irish people. Like the Young Ireland move-
ment, its supporters were almost exclusively in the towns. In
the country districts it was received with almost complete
apathy. The outbreaks it attempted proved even more insigni-
ficant than that of 1848, and altogether contemptible when com-
pared with the great insurrection of the eighteenth century. In
spite of the impulse given to the conspiracy, when the author of
_ the Act for disestablishing the Irish Church publicly ascribed
the success of that measure mainly to a murderous Fenian out-
rage, it is not probable that Fenianism would have had much
permanent importance, if it had not taken a new character, and
allied itself with a great agrarian movement.

We have had in these volumes abundant evidence of the
vast place which agrarian crime and conspiracy have played
in Irish history, but it was only very gradually that they be-
came connected with politics. ‘The Whiteboy explosions of the

544 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxn,

eighteenth century appear to have had no political character,
but some connection was established when the United Irish
movement coalesced with Defenderism, and it was powerfully
~ strengthened in the tithe war of the present century. Later
agrarian crime had an organisation and a purpose which made
it peculiarly easy to give it a political hue, and we have seen how
many influences had conspired to isolate the landowning class,
to deprive them of different forms of power, and to cut the ties
of traditional influence and attachment by which they were once
bound to their people.

The keynote of the modern alliance is to be found in the
writings of Lalor, one of the least known, but certainly not one
of the least important of the seditious writers of 1848. He
taught that a national movement in Ireland would never suc-
ceed, unless it were united with a movement for expelling all
loyal owners from the soil. ‘The reconquest of our liberties,’
he wrote, ‘ would be incomplete and worthless without the recon-
quest of our lands, and could not on its own means be possibly
achieved: while the reconquest of our land would involve the
other, and could possibly, if not easily, be achieved. . . . I se-
lected as the mode of reconquest, to refuse payment of rent, and
resist process of ejectment.’ ‘Our means, whether of moral
agitation, military force, or moral insurrection, are impotent °
against the English Government, which is beyond their reach ;
but resistless against the English garrison who stand here,
scattered and isolated, girdled round bya mighty people.’ ‘The
land question contains, and the legislative question does not
contain, the materials from which victory ismanufactured.’ ‘You
can never count again on the support of the country peasantry
in any shape or degree on the question of repeal. Their interest
in it was never ardent, nor was it native and spontaneous, but
forced and factitious. ‘In Ireland unluckily there is no direct
and general State tax, payment of which might be refused and
resisted.’ Rent is the one impost which can be so resisted; a
struggle against it is the one means of enlisting the great mass
of the farming classes in the army of sedition, and kindling
in them a strain of genuine passion. ‘There is but one way
alone, and that is to link repeal to some other question, like
a railway carriage to the engine, some question possessing the

LALOR AND MITCHEL. 545

CH. XXXIIe

intrinsic strength which repeal wants, and strong enough to
carry both itself and repeal together; and such a question there
is in the land. . . . Repeal had always tobe dragged.’ ‘There
is a wolf dog at this moment, in every cabin throughout the
land, nearly fit to be untied, and he will be savager by-and-
by. For repeal, indeed, he will never bite, but only bay, but
there is another matter to settle between us and England.’ ‘The
absolute ownership of the lands of Ireland is vested of right in
the people of Ireland. . . . All titles to land are invalid not
conferred or confirmed by them.’!

These doctrines were at once adopted by a much abler man.
John Mitchel, who wasted in barren and mischievous struggles
against the Governments, both of his own country and of the
United States, talents that might have placed him almost in the
foremost rank of the writers of his time, embraced the creed of
Lalor with all the passion of his hard, fierce, narrow, but earnest
nature, and he has contributed probably more than any other
past politician, to form the type of modern Irish agitation.
Speaking of his relations to Smith O’Brien, who aspired to a
purely Irish Government, but who steadily opposed every form
of robbery and outrage, Mitchel wrote: ‘Our difference is, not
as to theories of government, but as to possibilities of action ;
not as to the political ideal we should fight for, but by what
appeals to men’s present passions and interests, we could get
them to fight at all. I am convinced, and have long been, that
the mass of the Irish people cannot be roused in any quarrel,
less than social revolution, destruction of landlordism, and denial
of all tenure and title derived from English sovereigns.’ ?

1 Lalor’s writings on the land
question are chiefly to be found ina
_ paper called the Lrish Felon. A great
portion of them has been reprinted
by Mr. Bagenal in his very valuable
work, the American Irish, pp. 153-
197, where the connection between
Lalor’s teaching and the subsequent
land agitation is clearly shown. See,
too, the interesting account of Lalor’s
teaching in Sir Gavan Duffy’s Four
Years of Irish History, pp. 414-481 ;
and also a lecture, On the Continuity
of the Irish Revolutionary Movement,
by Mr. Brougham Leech (Professor
of Jurisprudence and International

VOL. VIII.

Law in the University of Dublin), In
the Report of the Special Commission
of 1888, the connection between the
land movement and the Fenian move-
ment has been clearly recognised and
abundantly illustrated.

* Dillon’s Life of Mitchel, ii. 130.
Mitchel adds: ‘This kind of social
revolution he [O’Brien] would resist
with all his force, and patriotic
citizens could do nothing less than
hang him, though with much re-
luctance.’ ‘I for my part believed,’
said Mr. Healy in one of his speeches,
‘with John Mitchel, that the land
system of Ireland is the nerve centre,

NN

546 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu. xxxu.

Tt was on these lines, that a great agrarian organisation was
created, connected with, and largely paid by the Fenian con-
spirators, and intended to accomplish the double task of drawing
into sedition, by appeals to self-interest, multitudes who were
indifferent to its political aspects, and of breaking down the in-
fluence and authority of the class who were the most powerful
supporters of the Union and the connection. A period of severe
agricultural depression, some real abuses, and much modern
English legislation assisted it, and the conspiracy soon suc-
ceeded in establishing, over a great part of Ireland, what has
been truly termed an ‘elaborate and all-pervading tyranny,’ !
accompanied by perhaps as much mean and savage cruelty, and
supported by as much shameless and deliberate lying, as any
movement of the nineteenth century. It would be difficult
to exaggerate the extent to which it has demoralised the
Irish people, and destroyed their capacity for selfgovern-
ment, by making cupidity the main motive of political action,
and by diffusing the belief, that outrage, and violence, and
dishonest and tyrannical combinations against property, con-
tracts and individual liberty, are the natural means of attaining
political ends. A parliamentary representation, subsidised by
the same men who paid agrarian conspiracy and dynamite
outrages,” supported it; and the Fenian leaders, without aban-
doning any of their ulterior objects, consented, after a short
period of hesitation, to make the attainment of an Irish
Parliament their proximate end, under the persuasion, that,
in the existing state of Ireland, the establishment of such a
Parliament would be in effect to confer legislative powers on the
National League, and that it would furnish the conspiracy with
an immensely improved vantage ground, or leverage, for working

is the ganglion, is the heart of British
rule; and I believe that if you want
to break the British rule, you must
strike it through the land system and
landlordism.’ “(Report of the Special
Commission, 1888, p. 107.)

1 Report of the Special Commission,
p. 53.

* ¢We are of opinion that the
evidence proves that the Irish National
League of America has been since the
Philadelphia Convention, April 25,
1888, directed by the Clan-na-Gael

a body actively engaged in promoting
the use of dynamite for the destruc-
tion of life and property in England.
It has been further proved, that while
the Clan-na-Gael controlled and
directed the Irish National League of
America, the two organisations con-
currently collected sums amounting
to more than 60,000Z. for a fund called
the Parliamentary Fund, out of which
payments have been made to Irish
members of Parliament.’ (ibid.
p. 118.)

cH. XXXII. THE OLD ANTI-UNIONISTS. 547

out its ultimate designs.! In this manner, the old social type
over a large part of the kingdom, has been broken up, and
ninety years after the Union, the great majority of the Irish
members are leagued together for its overthrow.

That no Parliament, resembling Grattan’s Parliament, could
ever again exist in Ireland, had long become evident, and the
men who most strongly opposed the Union in 1800, speedily
perceived it. As early as 1805, Foster himself warned the
Imperial House of Commons that the introduction of the Catholics
into Irish political life, might be followed by a struggle for the
repeal of the Union; that the Parliament which a Catholic de-
mocracy would demand, would not be one in which loyalty or
property would prevail, and that in the struggle, the seeds of
separation might be sown, and Ireland might one day be torn
from her connection with Britain.? Plunket, who was as friendly
to the Catholics, as he had once been hostile to the Union, was
equally emphatic. He spoke with indignation of those who,
having themselves rebelled against the Irish Parliament in 1798,
made the abolition of that Parliament a pretext for a new re-
bellion, and he implored Parliament to beware of any step that
could paralyse the Union settlement, and thereby shake the
foundations of public security, and the connection between the
two countries.2 Grattan, it is true, took a somewhat different
view. In 1810, the grand jury, the common council, and a
meeting of the freeholders and freemen of Dublin, passed resolu-
tions deploring the effects of the Union, and they requested
Grattan, as one of the representatives of the city, to present a peti-
tion for its repeal. Grattan answered, that he would present their
petition ; that he shared their sentiments, but that no movement
should be ever undertaken for the repeal of the Union, without

1 The following extract from one
of the Clan-na-Gael circulars, Dec. 18,
1885, states very clearly the policy
of that body. ‘While our objects lie
far beyond what may be obtained by
agitation, a national Parliament is an
object which we are bound to attain
by any means offered. ‘The achieve-
ment of a national Parliament gives
us a footing upon Irish soil; it gives
us the agencies and instrumentalities
of a Government de facto at the very
commencement of the Irish struggle.

It places the government of the land
in the hands of our friends and
brothers. It removes the Castle’s
rings, and gives us what we may well
express as the plant of an armed
revolution. From this standpoint the
restoration of Parliament is part of
our programme.’ (Report of the Special
Commission, pp. 116, 117. See, too,
the remarks of the judges, p. 23.)

2 Parl. Debates, iv. 1008, 1004.

* Plunket’s Life, i, 212; ii, 256,
257.

NN 2

548 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn. xxxtt.

‘a decided attachment to our connection with Great Britain, and
to that harmony between the two countries, without which the
connection cannot last,’ and unless it was called for, and sup-
ported by the nation !—a phrasein which he undoubtedly included
the Protestants of Ireland, and the great body of her landed
gentry. Among English opponents of the Union, Fox was con-
spicuous. In 1806, on the occasion of a vote for a monument
to Lord Cornwallis, he expressed his belief, that the Union,
‘with all the circumstances attending it, was one of the most
disgraceful acts in English history, but he also disclaimed any
wish or intention of repealing it, for, ‘however objectionable the
manner, under all the circumstances, under which it was carried,
it is impossible to remedy any objections which might have
originally existed against it, by its repeal.’? Grey, who, of all
Englishmen, took the foremost part in opposing the Union, lived
to be Prime Minister, during the early stages of the repeal agi-
tation of O’Connell; he drew up the King’s speech of 1833, which
pledged the Sovereign and the Whig party to employ all the
means in their power to preserve and strengthen the legislative
Union, as being ‘indissolubly connected with the peace, security,
and welfare’ of the nation, and he expressed his own emphatic
opinion, which was echoed by the leaders of both the great
parties in the State, that its repeal ‘would be ruin to both
countries.’

The attitude of classes on this question has been even more
significant than the attitude of individuals. The descendants
of the members of Grattan’s Parliament; the descendants of the
volunteers ; the descendants of that section of the Irish people
among whom, in 1799 and 1800, the chief opposition to the
Union was displayed, are now its staunchest supporters.
Grattan was accustomed to look to Protestant Ulster as the
special centre of the energy, intelligence, and industry of
Ireland,’ and since the Union its industrial supremacy has
become still more’ decisive. The prediction so often made in
the Union discussions, that in Ireland, as in Scotland, the
declining importance of the political capital would be accom-
panied or followed by the rise of a great industrial capital, has

! Grattan’s Miscellaneous Works, 2 Parl. Debates, vi. 127, 128, 174.
pp. 316-818. * See Grattan’s Life, v. 214.

cH. xxxi. © INFLUENCES FAVOURING THE UNION. 549

come true; but the Glasgow of Ireland has not arisen, as was
expected, in Catholic Munster, but in Protestant Ulster. The
great city of Belfast and those counties in Ulster, which are
now the strongest supporters of the legislative Union, form also
the portion of Ireland which, in all the elements of industry,
wealth, progress, intelligence and order, have risen to the
greatest height, and have attained to the full level of Great
Britain; and, unless some political disaster drags them down to
the level of the remainder of Ireland, their relative importance
must steadily increase. The Presbyterians of the North, who,
during the greater part of the eighteenth century, formed the
most dangerous element of discontent in Ireland, have been
fully conciliated; but the great majority of the Catholic popula-
lation, whose ancestors in 1800 had accepted the Union with
indifference or with favour, are now arrayed against it. Yet
even in the Catholic body, the landed gentry, a majority of the
Catholics in the secular professions, and an important and guiding
section of the Catholic middle class, are as much attached to
the Union as the Protestants; while the peace of the country has
been mainly kept during its many agitations by a great con-
stabulary force largely drawn from the ranks of the Catholic
peasantry. The utter feebleness of every attempted insurrection,
and the impotence of all political agitation that is not united
with an agrarian struggle, and largely subsidised from abroad,
show clearly how much hollowness and unreality there is in
Trish sedition.

Powerful influences at the same time have been strengthen-
ing the Union. Steam has brought Ireland vastly nearer to
England; has made her much more dependent on England ;
and has removed some of the chief administrative objections to
-the Union. The chances, both of foreign. invasion and of
successful insurrection, have greatly diminished. The whole
course and tendency of European politics is towards the
unification, and not the division of states. The relative position
of the two islands has essentially changed, the population of
Great Britain having trebled since the Union, while that of
Treland has probably not risen more than 200,000 or 300,000.
Economically, too, the free-trade system has greatly lessened
the dependence of England upon Ireland, while it has left

550 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu, xxxu.

England the only market for Irish cattle. Imperial credit at
the same time has acquired an increasing importance in the
material development of Ireland. Commercial, financial, and
social relations between the two countries have immensely
multiplied. Disqualifications and disabilities of all kinds have,
with scarcely an exception, been abolished. English profes-
sional life in all its branches is crowded with Irishmen, many of
them in the foremost ranks, while Irishmen have of late years
probably borne a more considerable proportionate part than the
inhabitants of any other portion of the Empire, in the vast
spheres of ambition and enterprise, which Imperial policy has
thrown open in India and the colonies.

. These last advantages, it is true, though of priceless value,
have not been without their shadow, for they have contributed,
with causes that are more purely Irish, to a marked and
lamentable decline in the governing faculty of the upper orders
in Ireland. No one who has followed with care the history
of Ireland in the eighteenth century, and especially the part
played by the Irish gentry when they organised the volunteers
in 1779, and the yeomanry in 1798, will question the reality of
this decline ; nor is it difficult to explain it. All the influences
of late years have tended, fatally and steadily, to close the paths
of public life and of healthy influence, in three provinces of Ire-
land, to honourable, loyal, and intelligent men, and the best and
most energetic have sought—not without success—in other
lands a sphere for their talents.

With a diminished population, material prosperity has at
last arrived, and the standard of comfort has been greatly
raised. Of ordinary crime there is very little, and although
agrarian conspiracy has never been more rife, it may at least
be said that the savage and unpunished murders which have at
all times accompanied it, have in the present generation become
less numerous. But the political condition has certainly not
improved, and the difficulty of Irish government has not dimi-
nished. ‘The elementary conditions of national stability, of all
industrial and political prosperity, are in few countries more
seriously impaired. The Union has not made Ireland either a
loyal or an united country. The two nations that inhabit it still
remain distinct. Political leadership has largely passed into

CH, XXXII. CONCLUSION. . 551

hands to which no sane and honourable statesman would entrust
the task of maintaining law, or securing property, or enforcing
contracts, or protecting loyal men, or supporting in times of diffi-
culty and danger the interests of the Empire. At the same time,
through the dissolution or enfeeblement of the chief influences on
which the connection of the two countries has hitherto depended,
English statesmen are confronted with one of the gravest and
most difficult of all political problems. It is that of creating,
by a wide diffusion and rearrangement of landed property, a
new social type, a new conservative basis, in a disaffected and
disorganised nation.

But of all the anticipations held out in 1800, none has been
so signally falsified as the prediction that the Union would take
Trish affairs out of the domain of English faction. There has
scarcely been a period since its enactment, in which Irish
questions or Irish votes have not been made the chief weapons
in party conflicts; and with the appearance in the Imperial
Parliament of a separate Irish party, ostentatiously indifferent to
the great interests of the Hmpire, the evil has been immensely
aggravated. Its effects have most assuredly not been confined
to Ireland. It has produced coalitions and alliances, to which
the worst periods of English party politics in the eighteenth
century can afford no adequate parallel; apostasies and trans-
formations so flagrant, so rapid, and so shameless, that they
have sunk the level of public morals, and the character and
honour of public men, to a point which had scarcely been
touched in Kngland since the evil days of the Restoration or
the Revolution.

There is no fact in modern history more memorable than
the contrast between the complete success with which England
_has governed her great Kastern Empire, with more than
200,000,000 inhabitants, and her signal failure in governing
a neighbouring island, which contains at most about 3,000,000
disaffected subjects. Few good judges will doubt that the
chief key to the enigma is to be found in the fact that Irish
affairs have been in the very vortex of English party politics,
while India has hitherto lain outside their sphere, and hag
been governed by upright and competent administrators, who
looked only to the well-being of the country. The lessons which

552 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ca. xxxin

may be drawn from the Irish failure are many and valuable.
Perhaps the most conspicuous is the folly of conferring power
where it is certain to be misused, and of weakening, in the
interests of any political theory or speculation, those great
pillars of social order, on which all true liberty and all real
progress ultimately depend.

dhe rd Daa Epc

ABB
A

Abbadie, Dean (Killaloe), Huguenot
refugee, ii. 345

Abductions (Ireland): common form
of outrage, ii. 358; varieties of
causes and objects, 359; considera-
tion of the charge that the outrages
were perpetrated by Catholics
against Protestants, 360 sqq.; the
crime common also in Scotland,
366

Abercromby, Sir Ralph : Commander
in-Chief in Ireland, vii. 425; esti-
mate of state of .Ireland, 426;
attempts to restore liberty and
legality, 428; general orders, Feb.
26, 1798, 430; cabal against him,
431; resignation and letters, 433 ;
effects of resignation, 435; expedi-
tion through Leinster and Munster,
436; martial law, 437; on the
prospects of Ireland, 439

Aberdeen, Grammar School and King’s
College, ii. 35; trade and popula-
tion (1755), 36

Abingdon, Lord, Bill for regulating
foreign trade of Ireland, vi. 305 sqq.

Abjuration oath, i. 293 sq.

Abney, Sir John, a Dissenter, Lord
Mayor of London, i. 93

Abo, Peace of, i. 404

Absenteeism (Ireland), ii. 189, 195,
239 sq., iv. 381, 399, 403, 407, 413,
vii. 446

Academy, Irish, iv. 437

Acadia: desired by France, i. 109;
ceded, after Peace of Utrecht, 122

Accidents: their importance in history,
14

Actors (stage): status improved by
Licensing Act of 1737, vi. 157

Actresses ; first permitted on stage, i.

ACT

Acts (and Bills): Alien (1792), vi. 77,
107; Arrest of Criminals escaping
to or from Scotland, vi. 264; Barren
Land (Ireland), vi. 602; Com-
prehension, i. 204; Conciliation
(America),iv.75; against Conspiracy
to Murder, vii. 206; Corporation, 1.
257, v. 155; Declaratory, iii. 340,
vi. 431, 434, 489, 552, vi. 303;
Dolben’s (to mitigate horrors of
middle passage), vi. 291; Election
(Grenville’s), iii. 224; Enclosure, vi.
195; Factory (1802), vi. 225; Ha-
beas Corpus, i. 252, iii. 535, (Ireland)
iv. 365, 371, 414, 524, 529; Hard-
wicke’s Marriage Act, i. 492 ; Hover-
ing, v. 31; Indemnity, v. 155, (Ire~
land) ii. 409, vii. 196, 444, viii. 30;
India (Dundas’s), iv. 287, (Fox’s)
288 sqq., (Pitt’s) iv. 301, v. 74;
Landed property qualification, i. 200;
Libel (1791), v. 193, (Ireland) vi.
602; Militia (Ireland), vi. 596;
Mutiny, i, 510, 512, iii. 348, iv. 510,
(Irish) iv. 511, 526, 558; Natural-
ising foreign Protestants, i. 50;
Jews, 1. 263; Navigation, ii. 8;
Nullum Tempus, iii. 125; Occasional
Conformity, i. 3, 87, 94; Octennial
(Ireland), iv. 381; Quartering, iii.
328, 399 ; Quebec, iii. 399, 502, iv.
254, 257, 470, v. 195, 501; Reform:
Burke’s, iv. 219; Pitt’s, 1785, v. 60;
Flood’s, 1790, v. 193; 1784, vi. 347 ;
Regency (1705), i. 39, (George III.)
ii. 89, vy. 145 ; Catholic Relief (1791),
v. 186, (1792) vi. 503, (Gardiner’s
1778) iv. 477, (1782) 556, vi. 486,
588, 602, vii. 91, 108 sqq.; Re-
nunciation (1783), vi. 313; Royal
Marriage (George III.), iii. 463, v.
88; Schism, i. 3, 95; Septennial, i.
5, 13, 216, 449, (Ireland) iv. 368 ;
Settlement, i. 12, 122, 219, ii. 151,

554

ADA

180; regulating Slave Trade, vi. 279 ;
Stamp, iii. 83, 320, 333, 338; Test,
i. 91, 256, ii. 404, 405, 407, iii. 496,
502, iv. 501, v. 155 sqq., 160; Tim-
ber (Ireland), vii. 152; Toleration,
i. 54, 203, ii. 45, 48, 408, iti. 496,
(Stanhope’s, 1789) v. 160; Treason,
i. 346; Whiteboy, vi. 408

Adams, John; defends soldiers tried
for Boston massacre, iii. 368 ;
opinions on American desire for
independence, 412, 414; proposi-
tions at Congress of Philadelphia,
429; on number of loyalists in
America, 441; on general apathy of
people regarding the war, 442; on
opposition to Independence, 459 ;
share in the Declaration, 460 ; com-
missioner to Paris (1776), iv. 43;
want of tact, 176 ; negotiates Dutch
loan to America, 250; on mercan-
tile debts to British citizens, 255

Adams, Samuel: dominant influence
in Boston, iii. 360; character and
career, 361; action during Boston
massacre, 867; leader in destruc-
tion of tea-ships, 387

Addington, Mr.: forms a ministry,
after Pitt’s resignation, viii. 514;
policy anti-Catholic, 519; effect of
King’s illness, 523; ministry re-
formed under Pitt, 529

Addison: his essays, i. 60; opinion
on witchcraft, 266

Adhémar, Count d’: French ambassa-
dor at London, vi. 370

Admiralty, Court of, established in
Ireland, vi. 327

Advertisement duty : imposed by
Tories, i.4; increased under George
II., 519 ; renewed, v. 203

oO ine Catholic owners of, iv.

2

Africa: distribution of possessions in
Peace of 1782, iv. 252

Aggregate Fund, v. 48

Agistment, tithe of, ii. 230, viii. 481

Agriculture—state in 18th century:
English, vi. 188 sqq.: Irish, ii. 331;
Scotch, ii. 26, 70

Aiguillon, Duke d’: tried for abuses
in Brittany, v. 339

Aiguillon, Duke d’ (son of the above) :
denounced war policy of French
Republic, v. 208 ; leader in abolition
of feudal rights, 483

Aix-la-Chapelle, Peace of, i. 426, 428

Alberoni, Cardinal: origin and career,
i. 233; policy as Prime Minister of
Spain, 234; Turkish war, 235; in-

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

AME

trigues for alliance, 236; promotes
Northern Confederation, 236 sq.;
expedition against Sardinia, 238 ;
raises regiments of Catalans, 70. ;
refuses terms of Quadruple Alliance,
240; sends Jacobite expedition to
Scotland, 248; disgrace and exile,
245; death, 246; character, 2b.

Aldborough, Lord: raises Irish forces
for Government, iv. 483 :

Alexander, Mr.: account of disturb-
ances in Armagh, vii. 182 ; position
and character, viii. 97 sq.

Allen, Col. (American), iv. 134

Allotments, garden, vi. 200 7.

Almanza, battle of, i. 46

Almshouses, ii. 253

Alnager (Irish sinecure office), iv. 395,
422, 427

Alsace, i. 124, 415, 417, v. 555, 591,
-594

Altamount, Lord: in command of Irish
volunteers, iv. 484 ; on refugees in
Connaught, vil. 188

Ambassadors, arrests of: of Sweden,
in Holland and England, i. 237; of
Spain, in Paris, 243

America: Colonies: taxation of, re-
jected by Walpole, i. 333; predes-
tined seat of a free nation, il. 2; early
difficulties, 3; invasion of charters
under Stuarts, ib.; effect of Revolu-
tion of 1688, 4; forms of government:
proprietary colonies, 7b.; Crown
colonies, 5; rivalry with Spain,
Holland and France, 6; commercial
policy of mother country, 7 ; restric-
tions on manufactures and exports,
8; origin of disaffection leading to
future disruption, 10; influx of Eng-
lish criminals, 11; introduction of
slavery, 7b.; rapid multiplication of
negro slaves, 13 sqq.; horrible treat-
ment, 14; statistics, 1740-76, 15;
public opinion, 16; why slavery
gravitated to the South, 17; Puri-
tanical customs, and legislation, 17
sq.; inoculation, 18 ; education, 19 ;
English and French disputes as to
boundaries, 443 ; first appearance of
George Washington, 444; active
hostilities, 446; disastrous results,
454; French successes in 1757, 485;
English conquest of Canada, 494;
first Methodist Society (1766), 601;
first bishop consecrated, 634; Stamp
Act imposed, iii. 83 ; effects of Peace
of Paris, 267; predictions of separa-
tion from England, 268; question
of cession of Canada, 269; impos-

INDEX.

AME

sibility of retaining the colonies by
foree, 271; military capabilities and
experience, 272; strong loyalty, 273;
disunion of colonies, 274; New Eng-
land, 276; Middle States, 280; Vir-
ginia, 285 ; other Southern colonies,
288 ; intellectual and material con-
dition, 289; moral and political,
292; treatment of Indians, 294;
relations to mother country, 296;
to Parliament, 297; to Crown, 298;
commercial restrictions on produc-
tions, 299 ; on exports and imports,
300; smuggling, 302; ‘writs of as-
sistance,’ 303

America—LHvents leading to Revolu-
tion: destruction of French power
in Canada, iii. 268; military spirit
evoked by that war, 304; Otis’ agi-
tation, 304 sq.; Grenville’s policy:
revision of trade laws, 307; esta-
blishment of army in the colonies,
310; determination to tax them,
312 ; the taxation intended for
colonial defence, 313; earlier pro-
posals to tax America, 314; argu-
ments in favour of it, 315; Frank-
lin’s views, 318, 323; Grenville’s
scheme, 319; Stamp Act, 320 ;
American opinion, 321; influence
of Barré’s speech, 324; arguments
for and against Act, 325 sqq. ;
American revolts against it, 329;
Boston riots, 8330; spread of flame,
331; impossibility of enforcing Act,
332; trade with England disorgan-
ised, 333; Pitt justifies Americans,
336; repeal of Stamp Act, 339 ;
commercial relaxations, 343; con-
fidence restored, 344; question of
compensating sufferers from riots,
345; Boston’s disputes with Governor
Bernard, 346; question of provision-
ing English troops, 348; Towns-
hend’s taxes, 353; denounced, 355;
smuggling riots, 359 ; growing spirit
of insurrection, 7b.; Samuel Adams,
360; attitude of Massachusetts, 362 ;
of the English Parliament (1768-69),
363; repeal of all the taxes except
that on tea, 365

America—Revolution: ‘Boston Mas-
sacre,’ ili. 367 sqgq.; trial and ac-
quittal of the soldiers, 369 ;
American humanity, 370; tea duty,
370 sqq.; abandonment of non-
importation agreements, 372; de-
struction of the ‘ Gaspee,’ 373; com-
mittees of correspondence, 375;
Hutchinson’s letters, 380; Boston

555

AME

tea ships, 887; closing of Boston
harbour, and suspension of Massa-
chusetts charter, 397; soldiers to
be tried in England, 398; Quartering
and Quebee Acts, 399; other colo-
nies support Boston, 403; Gage’s
difficulties, 404; numerous riots,
405; position of loyalists, 406;
Gage’s proclamation against hypo-
crisy, 407; Congress of Philadelphia
(1774), 408; grievances detailed by
it, 409; its resolutions, 410; addresses
to King and people of England, and
to Canadians, 411; general arming,
412; how few Americans wished for
independence, 413; illusions in
America, 414; and in England, 415;
divided opinion in America, 417;
loyalists, 418; enrolment of an
American army, 420

America—-Revolution organised: cap-

ture of Fort William, iii. 420; efforts
of conciliation by Chatham, 421;
by Burke, Hartley, &c., 422; by
North, 423; more coercive measures,
ib.; battle of Lexington, 425; New
England army increased, 426 ; Bun-
ker’s Hill, 427; Congress of Phila-
delphia (1775), 428; jealousy and
suspicion, 429; Washington com-
mander-in-chief, 430; invasion of
Canada, 436; fighting in Virginia,
437; negroes and Indians, 438;
number of loyalists, 441; misgivings,
442; general apathy, 443; defects
of army, 445; difficulties in enlist-
ment, 446; want of earnestness,
447; incapacity and indecision of
the British, 448; use of priva-
teers, 450; influence of Paine’s
‘Common Sense,’ 451; desire for
French alliance or aid, 453 sqq.;
England’s home difficulties, 456 ;
effects of engagement of German
mercenaries for service against
Americans, 459; Declaration of In-
dependence voted, 460
America—Revolution, 1776-77: New
York becomes chief centre of Revo-
lution, iv. 1; captured by Howe,
2; destruction proposed, 3; de-
moralisation of army, 5; loyalist
movements, 7; causes of their im-
potence, 9; Washington retreats to
New Jersey, 11; Ticonderoga, Lake
Champlain, 12; Charleston, Rhode
Island, 7b.; employment of Indians
on both sides, 13; creation of Ameri-
can navy, 15; popularity of priva-
teering, 16; deplorable condition of

556

AME

Washington’s army, 17; capture of
Lee, and retreat of Washington, 19;
British successes, 21; disaffection
among States, 22; Congress fly to
Baltimore, 23; accumulating diffi-
culties, 23 sq.; incapacity of Howe,
25; Washington surprises Trenton,
26; revulsion of feeling against
English, ib.; outrages by British
soldiers, 27; military difficulties
from equality of officers and
privates, 28; enlistment of new
army, 29; difficulties of Congress,
30; financial stress, 31; con-
fiscation, 32; paper money, 33;
attempted regulation of prices,
ib.; paper made legal tender, 34 ;
results, 35; general prospects of
the war, 87; Silas Deane sent
to Paris, 88; French subsidise
Americans, 42; American commis-
sioners at Paris, 43; assistance
from Spain, 45; friendly action of
Prussia and Holland, 46; French
enthusiasm for America, 47 sqq.;
Marie Antoinette and the Americans,
49 ; foreign enlistments for America,
50; embarrassments resulting, 51;
difficulties of Washington in New
Jersey, 52; predatory expeditions,
54 ; Washington defeated at
Brandywine, 55; Howe occupies
Philadelphia, 7b. ; sufferings of
American army, 57; winter at
Valley Forge, 58 ; Burgoyne cap-
tures Ticonderoga, 59; flight of
Americans, 60; renewed vigour of
New Englanders, 61; battle of
Stillwater, 62; Burgoyne in difficul-
ties, 7b.; his army surrenders at
Saratoga, 63

America— Revolution, 1778-79: treaty
between France and America, iy. 64;
North’s Bills of conciliation, 75 ;
English commissioners sent to
America, 78; England at war with
France, 79 ; French naval co-opera-
tion with America, 91; abortive
attack on Rhode Island, 7b.; other
expeditions in 1778, 92; disputes
in American army, 94; half-pay,
95; violation of Saratoga Conven-
tion, 96; English conduct the war
more fiercely, 98; despair of loyal-
ists, 99; American humanity, 100;
jealousy between Americans and
French, 101; projected invasion of
Canada, 7b.; opposition to a war
taxation, 103; rise of prices,
ib.; French disappointment with

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

AME

American character and conduct,
104; attitude of the people, 105;
negotiations with Spain, 109; ex-
ploits of Paul Jones, 113; effects of
depreciation of American paper, 115;
English devastations in Virginia
and Connecticut, 116; Americans
attack Six Nations (Indians), 117 ;
war in the South, 118; French and
Americans fail before Savannah,
119; other expeditions in 1779,
1b.

America—Revolution, 1780: English
take Charleston, iv. 120; subjugate
South Carolina, 121; battle of
Camden, 122 ; severities of English,
123 ; failure of English invasion of
North Carolina, 124 ; wretched con-
dition of American army, 125; dis-
content and discouragement, 127:
weakness, 128; revolution com-
pletely dependent on France, 130;
French fleet and army at Newport,
131; fleet blockaded by English,
132 ; Congress jealous of army, 2b.;
treason of Lee, and of Benedict
Arnold, 133 sqq.; execution of Major
André, 143; general results of cam-
paign, 147; new measures for
enlisting soldiers, 148 ; partial
bankruptcy, 149 ; negotiations with
Holland, 161; John Adams’s mis-
sion to Paris, 176; Vergennes’ pro-
posal of a truce, 177; peace party
growing in England, 179

America—Revolution, 1781: mutiny
of Pennsylvanian line, iv. 185;
English defeat at Cowpens, 187;
savage character of Southern war,
188; Arnold in Virginia, 189; Wash-
ington’s designs against New York,
191; depression of Americans, 192;
generosity of France, 194; English
predatory war in Virginia, 195;
Lafayette defeated at James river,
196; Cornwallis occupies York-
town, 197; Washington and Roch-
ambeau march to Virginia, 198;
French fleet in the Chesapeake, ib.;
Arnold captures and destroys New
London, 199; surrender of Corn-
wallis, 200 ; Oswald’s mission (from
Shelburne to Franklin, 1782), 226

America—Revolution, 1782: state of
affairs at Yorktown, iv. 247; finan-
cial difficulties, 248; disaffection in
army, 249; half-pay question, 7b. ;
Dutch and French loans, ¥%50 ;
necessity of peace, 251; preliminary
articles of peace, 252 sqq.; bound-

INDEX. 557

AME

aries, 253, 256; mercantile debts to
British citizens, 254; difference
with France in negotiations, 255 ;
fisheries, 256 ; Mississippi boundary,
257 ; preliminaries signed secretly,
259; new loan from France, 261;
skilful conduct of negotiations, 263 ;
treatment of loyalists, 264; reasons
for it, 266; definitive treaties of
peace signed, 284; relations of Ire-
land to America during the war,
431; districts planted by settlers
from Ulster, 7b.; American emis-
saries in Ireland, 487

America: quarrel with France, viii.
122; rights of neutral vessels in
time of war, 123; negotiation, 123
sq.; war postponed, 125; refusal
to receive Irish rebels who were
banished, 248

America — Arnyy : composition, iii.
426; defects, 437 . 445 sq.; boun-
ties to recruits, 450; difficulties of
recruiting (1776), iv. 9; foreign ele-
ment prominent, 15 : wholesale
desertions, 17; accession of distin-
guished European soldiers,50 ; result-
ing embarrassments, 51; difficulty
about appointing officers, 54; suffer-
ings in 1777, 57; defeat at Ticon-
deroga, 60; colours of uniforms,
69; state in 1779, 115; in 1780,
125; bounties and pay, 127; reor-
ganisation in 1780, 148; captive
officers, but not privates, exchanged,
149

Amherst, General, in command in
American revolution, il. 495; in
New England, iii. 311; desired the
war to be naval, iv. 71

Amusements: with animals, i. 550;
English popular, vi. 151 sqq.

Anatomy, first public lectures on, i.
574

Ancient Britons’ (Welsh regiment) :
outrages committed by, in Ireland,
vil. 304, viii. 21, 72

André, Major: negotiations with Bene-
dict Arnold, iv. 139 sq.; execution
by Americans, 143

Anet, Peter: sentenced to pillory for
attack on Christianity, ili. 492

Animals, humanity to, i. 550

Anjou, (Philip) Duke of, King of Spain,

i. 25, 40; defeated in Spain, power-

fulin Italy, 44; possessions claimed

in Italy, 45; cedes fortresses in

Netherlands to Dutch, 98; prolonged

warfare, 99 sqq.; his title recognised

by Peace of Utrecht, 103

ARK

Annaly, Lord: supporter of Irish Mu-
tiny Bill, iv. 510

Anne, Queen: Tory sympathies, i. 31;
Tory ministers, 32; partial trans-
formation of the ministry, 34 ; anger
of clergy against her, 37; ministry
made completely Whig, 42; Queen
alienated from ministers, 43; at-
tachment to her husband, 43 2.;
Mrs. Masham succeeds Duchess of
Marlborough as favourite, 43 ; sym-
pathies with Sacheverell, 53, 56;
exercised royal touch, 71; ‘ Bounty,’
76, 79; sympathies with Pretender,
134, 149; parsimony and debts,
145; party conflicts during her ill-
ness, 147; dismisses Oxford, 161;
death, 163

Annesley case, the: jurisdiction of
Irish House of Lords, ii. 419

Annual Parliaments, question of, i.
450, iv. 182, vi. 327

Annuities, perpetual (loans), i. 342

Anson’s expedition round Cape Horn,
1. 423

Anspach, margravate of, acquired by
Prussia, v. 595; desired by Austria,
vi. 87

‘ Appeal of murder,’ iti. 505

Arbuthnot, Admiral: blockade of
French in Newport (America), iy.
132

Archangel: grew out of English com-
merce, v. 37

Architecture, English, vi. 163

Argon, d’, inventor of battering-ships
against Gibraltar (1782), iv. 244

Arcot, iv. 173

Arians, measures against, i. 311

Aristocracy, English : popular cha-
racter, 1. 170; liberal tendencies,
171; influence in raising public
labour to honour, 172; uses of an
aristocracy, 173; influence in avert-
ing unscrupulous legislation, 176;
in making government popular, 178;
in encouraging patriotism, ib.; in
bringing young men into polities,
179; in making legislation a reflex
of the popular will, 180; drawbacks:

the worship of rank, 182 ; power of
unlimited veto, 183; nomination
boroughs, ib.; moderation of Eng-
lish peers, 184; Peerage Bill of
Stanhope, 185; influence of ayristo-
cracy at the Revolution, 186;
position temp. George IIL., vi. 143

Arklow, battle of, viii. 139
Arkwyright’s inventions, vi. 147, 190,

208

558 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ARM

Armed neutrality, the, iv. 156, 158 ;
revived, viii. 524

Armitstead, Mrs. (Mrs. C. J. Fox), iii.
467, v. 87

Armstrong, Capt., viii. 48, 189 sq.

Army, American. See America

Army, English: reduction, i. 480;
neglected condition in 1707, 504;
governed by articles of war, 508 ;
Mutiny Act, 510; question of stand-
ing armies, 513; barracks, 514;
American objection to English
standing army iii. 346, 360, 362;
numerical state in 1774, 456; diffi-
culties of recruiting (1757-76), 535 ;
abuses of impressing, 536 sqq.;
denunciations of system, 538; en-
listment of criminals, 539; diffi-
culty of obtaining recruits in
America (1776), iv. 9; outrages by
soldiers there, 27; state of army in
1779, 114; popular objection to
standing army, 377; recruits from
Treland (1775), 436 ; Catholic (Irish)
recruits, 455 sqq.; no Catholic
officers, 458; number of Irishmen
in English army during American
war, 483 .; English army in Ire-
land, 555

Arnold, Benedict : military career, iv.
134; charges against, 135; marriage,
136; court-martial on, 137; details
of his treason, 129 sqq.; flight, 141;
motives of treason, 142; in British
army, 143; American project for
his abduction, 146; in Virginia,
189; reward offered for his capture,
190; in New York, 196; destroys
New London, 199; goes to England,
1b.

Art, English, i. 526 sqq., vi. 160 sqq.

Articles of Church: movement for
abolishing Subscription, i. 497

sqq-

atk (England) : wages and food,
compared with those of the Con-
tinent, 1. 562 sq.

Artois, Comte d’ : negotiations against
French Republic, v. 547, 549, 557

Asceticism of Scotch Kirk, ii. 83 sq.

Ashburton, Lord (Dunning): desire to
diminish influence of Crown, iv.
216

Assiento treaty, on slave trade, i. 122;
received with satisfaction in Eng-
land, 127

Assignats (French), v. 601, vi. 24, 59,
81

Associate Presbytery schism, ii. 412

Aston, Sir R.: report on Whiteboy

AUS —

outrages in'Munster, iv. 336, 341 1.;
moderation and humanity, 342

Atheists, treatment of, by Government,
v. 169 sqq.

Atherton, Bishop (Waterford) hanged,
li. 235 n.

Atterbury, Bishop: composed Sache-
verell’s speech of defence, i. 53;
made bishop, 146; proposed by
Bolingbroke for Privy Seal, 162;
said to have counselled proclamation
of James III., 166; did not condemn
rebellion of 1715, 212; imprisoned,
251; exiled, 252

Auckland, Lord (William Eden) : early
career, iv. 78, 272; Chief Secretary
to Lord Carlisle (Viceroy), 518; re-
sentment at treatment of Carlisle,
544; negotiates commercial treaty
with France (Pitt’s), v. 24; know-
ledge of commercial questions, 35 ;
envoy in France, 221; on difficul-
ties of Triple Alliance, 257, 291; on
English indifference to foreign poli-
tics, 565, vi. 4; English minister at
the Hague, 61; reports from Holland,
65; negotiations with De Maulde,
70 sqq., 119 ; secret history of coali-
tion of 1794, vii. 33; on the‘ game
of patronage,’ 44; on the gloomy
state of 1794, 62; pamphlet for
peace with France, 230; his part in
the cabal against General Aber-
cromby, 432

Auditors of Imprest, v. 30, 32

Augustus IT. (Poland), i. 354, v. 540

Augmentation of small livings, i. 79

Aurungzebe (Mogul emperor), ii. 455

Austria: military position in Spain
(1710), i. 100; how affected by
Treaty of Baden, 124 ; alliance with
Spain (1725), 349; war with Fred-
erick (1741), 392 sqq.; war in 1744—
45, 414 sqq.; Peace of Dresden,
420; Italian campaigns of 1746,
424; after Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle,
429; new alliance against Frederick
(1756), ii.449 sqq.; campaign of 1757,
486, 490 sq.; of 1758, 492 sqq.; of
1759, 506 sqq.; of 1760, 508 sqq.;
disasters in 18th century, y. 222;
invasion of Turkey, 223; defeat,
224; Prussian designs against Aus-
tria, 234 ; insurrection in Flanders,
236; military events, 260; peace of
Sistova, 262; policy in 1790, 537;
guarantees integrity of Poland, 542;
proposals of French emigrant
Princes, 547; revolutionary agita-
tion, 552; alliance with Prussia,

INDEX.

AVI

554; war with France (see Coali-
tion); intrigues about partition of
Poland, vi. 87; complete defeat by
French (1794), vil. 62; Peace of
Campo Formio, 387

Avignon: seized by France, v. 337,
552; massacre by Jourdain there,
574

Aylesbury election (1703), i. 437

B

Bacon: on right of Irish Parliament
to legislate for Ireland, iy. 431 7.

Baden, Treaty of, i. 224

‘Badgers,’ vi. 237

Bahama isles : English driven from, by
Spanish, iv. 243

Bagenal (friend of Grattan), iv. 559

Bagwell, Colonel, on trial of Wright
(Clonmel), viii. 26

Baillie, Col.: defeated by Hyder Ali,
iy. 173

Baireuth : acquired by Prussia (1790),
v. 595, vi. 87

Baker, Mr.: motion against King’s
interference with yotes in Parlia-
ment, iv. 294

Baker, Sir George: on George III.’s
illness, v. 135,146 >

‘Balance of power,’ v. 229

Ballinahinch, battle of, viii. 132

Ballinamuck : defeat of General Hum-
bert’s expedition, viii. 220

Baltimore, Lord, founder of Maryland,
1. 277

Bancroft, Dr.: mission, from France,
to Ireland, vi. 432, 536

Bangorian controversy. See Hoadly

Bank of England; run on (1745), i.
442; suspends cash payments (1797 :
as also Bank of Ireland), vii. 278

Bankes, Mr., iv. 296

Banns of marriage made obligatory,
i, 492

Baptists : partial exemption from Sub-
scription, i. 203

Bar: ceded to France, i. 356

‘Baratariana,’ iy. 393

Barbier: on Parisian religious disputes
in 1733, v. 8323; on French Parlia-
ments, 338

Barcelona, siege of, i. 126

Barnard, Sir John, i. 431, 541

Barnave: denounced warlike disposi-
tion of French Republic, v. 208

Barracks, history of, 1. 514

Barre, Chevalier de la: tortured and
beheaded, for blasphemy, y. 336

559

BEL

Barré, Colonel: iii. 324; receives a
pension, iv. 209, 301

Barrier fortresses (Holland), i. 101,
109

Barrington, Lord, iii. 239, 456 sq., iv.
iia

Barrington, Sir Jonah, vi. 457

Barry, the actor, i. 547 :

Base coinage in Ireland, ii. 420

Bastille : captured, v. 440; number of
prisoners in it, 452 7.

Bath, Lord. See Pulteney

Bathurst, Lord Chancellor, iii, 168

Bavaria, Elector of: claims Austrian
throne, i. 888; crowned King of
Bohemia, 392; Emperor of Ger-
many, 401; renounces pretensions
to Austrian succession, 405; rein-
stated in Munich, 416; death, 418

Bavaria: Austrians expelled from
(1744), 1. 416; Peace of Fiissen,
419; war of succession (1778), iv.
175 ; proposed exchange for Flan-
ders, v. 83

Bayonet, fixed: invention of, i. 509

Bear-gardens, i. 550

Beauchamp, Lord: pamphlet against
‘simple repeal,’ vi. 305 sq.

Beaufoy, Mr.: motion for repealing
Test and Corporation Acts, y. 155

Beaumarchais, iy. 43

Beaumont, de, Archbishop (Paris), v.
325, 330, 333

‘Bed of justice,’ v. 319, 323, 337

Bedell, Bishop: humanity, during re-
bellion of 1641, ii. 131; treatment
by Catholics, 166, 167

Bedford, Arthur: work against play-
houses, i. 548

Bedford, Duke of: succeeds Temple
in Neweastle’s ministry, iii. 35; re-
fuses to join Grenville’s, 68; char-
acter and previous career, 69 sq.;
President of Council, 83; attacked
by mob, 91; negotiations and alter-
cations with Chatham, 118 ; mobbed
in Exeter, 151; revived old law on
trial of traitors, 363

Beggars: in Ireland (1731), nomadic,
li. 250; vicious practices, 251 ;
efforts to repress mendicancy, 258 ;
treatment of Catholic beggar chil-
dren, 254; paucity of beggars in
Northern and Central American
colonies, iii. 289

‘ Beggars’ Opera,’ popularity of, 1. 533,
542 ; its sequel suppressed, 542

Behn, Aphra, i. 521

Belfast: statistics in 1707-57, ii. 333;
Wesley’s impression of, 610; reyo-

560

BEL

_lutionary spirit manifested in, vi.
461; indignation at French war,
609 ; preparations for rebellion, vu.

Belgium: Act of Union of United
Provinces, v. 236 ; independence
proposed, 237 sqq.; invaded and
conquered by France, vi. 43, 51;
passing under French rule, 59; re-
formed on French type, 81; fierce
discontent, 82; harsh treatment,
104; proposed exchange for Bavaria,
113, 120; fatuity of Austrians, 117;
provinces completely French in 1794,
vii. 62; annexed to France, 230,
387

Belgrade, battle of, 1. 239

Bellamont, Lord : helps to raise forces
for Crown, iv. 483; activity against
rebellion in Cavan and Meath, vii.13

Belleisle : captured by English, iu.
32

Belleisle, Marshal, i. 403, 424

Bender, Marshal, v. 591, 599

Benedict XIV.: Voltaire’s ‘Mahomet’
dedicated to, v. 303; Brief about
Bull ‘ Unigenitus,’ 330

Bengal: famine of 1770, ili. 483

Bentham, Jeremy: portrait of Shel-
burne, iy. 214

Berbice, capture of, iv. 168

Berckel, Van, Pensionary of Amster-
dam, iy. 161

Beresford, John: numerous offices held
by him and his family, vii. 58 ;
called ‘ King of Ireland,’ 59; charge
of malversation, 73 ; dismissal from
office ostensible reason of Fitz-
william’s recall, 82; letters about
state of Irish society (1798), 452

Berg and Juliers, succession of, 1. 390

Bergen, battle of, 11. 507

Bergen-op-Zoom, capture of, 1. 425

Berkeley, Bishop (Cloyne) : patronised
by Queen Caroline, i. 466; project
for founding Christian university in
Bermuda, 499; aids Oglethorpe in
founding Georgia, 503; on Ivish
famine of 1740-41, li. 218; the
‘Querist,’ 303; maintained doctrine
of passive obedience, 399

Berlin: captured and plundered by
Austrians and Russians, ii. 509

Bermuda: Berkeley’s scheme
university, i. 499

Bernard, Governor (Massachusetts), iii.
346 sqq.

Bernardi (conspirator against William
III.), i. 347

Berridge, Rector of Hverton: attack

for

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

BOL

on John Wesley, ii. 598 ; eccentrici-
ties of character and style, 620;
labours as itinerant preacher, 621

Berwick, Duke of, 1. 244

Bessarabia: project to make it part
of a Greek empire, v. 220, 224, 274,
276

Betterton, the actor, i. 546 ”.

Beurnonville, General: against Coali-
tion, vi. 34, 89, 83

Bianconi, establisher of public cars
(Ireland), iv. 3317.

‘Bifrons’ (a pseudonym of Junius),
ili. 247

Binckes : sermon comparing Charles
I. to Christ, i. 66 sq.

Bingham, Sir Charles, Burke’s letter
to, on Absentee tax, iv. 408

Bintinaye, Chev. de la, v. 558, 563

Birmingham: population (1760), i.
198; anti-Revolutionary riots(1791),
v. 528; theatre in, vi. 158; its
rapid growth, 212

Biron, Duke of (Lauzun), vi. 6

Bischofiswerder, General, favourite of
Frederick I1., vy. 548, 554, 588, 596,
598

‘Black Act,’ i. 488

Blackhall, Bishop, i. 52

Black Hole, the, ii. 456

Blackstock Hill, battle of, iv. 124

Blackstone: apprehension of dangers
from Mutiny Act, i. 512 ; opposed to
barrack life for soldiers, 515 ;
asserted right of British Parliament
to bind Ireland, iv. 433

Black Watch, a Scotch regiment at
Fontenoy, i. 458

‘Black Wednesday,’ i. 516

Blackwell, Colonel Thomas, viii. 227,
229

Blakeney, General, ii. 453

Blanea, Florida, iv. 491, v. 575, 595

Blaquiere, Sir John, Chief Secretary
to Lord Harcourt, Viceroy, iv. 401,
412, 422, 435, 440

Blayney, Lord: mode of pacifying
Ulster, vii. 319, 341 sqq.

Blenheim, i. 37

Blindness prevalent among Irish poor,
u. 317

Bloody Friday, viii. 186

Bluecoat School, Dublin, vi. 451

Blue-stocking clubs, vi. 166

Board of Trade: reconstructed (1786),
v. 39

Bohler, Peter (Moravian) : ascendency
over John Wesley, ii. 556 sq.

Bohemia: war of 1744, i. 416, 419

Bolingbroke, Viscount (St. John):

. INDEX

BOL

sends expedition for conquest of
Canada, i. 106; secret negotiations
with France, 111; made Viscount,
127; character, 130; jealousy of
Oxford, 133; opposition, 136; de-
sires free trade with France, 142;
divergence from Oxford, 148; key
to his policy, 151 sq.; Prime Minis-
ter, 161; proposed Jacobite minis-
try, 162; position at death of Anne,
166; dismissed from office by George
I., 168; impeachment, 208; theory
of the ‘Patriot King,’ 218; quarrel
with Pretender, 316; overtures to
Whigs, 317; position in 1717, 318;
on National Debt, 340; connection
with Pulteney, 375, 381; ‘ Disserta-
tion on Parties,’ 380; retires to
France, 381; addicted to hard drink-
ing, 477 ‘

Bolton, Duke of, i. 281

Bolton, Sir Richard: opinion that
British Acts for Ireland must be
confirmed by Irish Parliament, iy.
431 n.

Bond, Oliver, leading United Irish-
man, vi. 538, vii. 9, vill. 3, 192 sq.,
One 199)

Bononcini, Handel’s rival, i. 532

Boncerf: his work inspired by Tur-
got, v. 388 >

Boroughs, sales of, in Ireland, vi. 323

Borris, viii. 137

Boscawen, Admiral :
War, li. 495 sq.

Boston (America): account of, iii. 279
sq.; printing-houses, 291 ».; riots
against Stamp Act, 330; dispute
with Governor Bernard, 346 sqq.;
opposition to standing army, 360;
treatment of English troops, 365;
‘Boston Massacre,’ 366; destruc-
tion of tea cargoes, 387 ; parliamen-
tary coercive measures, 397 Sg. 5
American blockade, 448; captured,
451

. Botany Bay: Irish political prisoners
sent to, vili. 250; Ivish rebellion
at, 251

Bouchain, i. 107, 113

Bouillé, Marquis de, captured St.
Hustatius, iv. 202 ; faithful to Lewis
XVL., v. 550, 565

Boulter, Archbishop, 1. 219, 409, 417

Bounties: on export of corn, i. 330;
on imports from American colonies,
ii. 8; on timber from them, iii. 328 ;
on carriage of corn (Ireland), iv. 356,
405, 415; on Irish flax and linen,
429, 501, viii. 354, 383 sq., 452; for

VOL. VIII.

in American

561

BRO

slave trade (France), vi. 293; on
Trish corn, 356 ; various, in Ireland,
439; on corn (Ireland), abandoned,
vii. 276

Bourbon, Duke de, iv. 244

Bourdonnais, La, i. 428

Bouverie, Mr. Edward: aids Prince of
Wales in Fitzherbert marriage, v. 86

Bouvet, Admiral: expedition against
Ireland (Bantry Bay), vii. 259

Bowes, Chancellor (Irish), iv. 353,
871, 373

Boxing, vi. 155

Boyd, Sir Robert, iv. 244

Boyle (Earl of Shannon), ii. 431, 434

‘Boy Patriots,’ 1. 379

Braddock, General:
War, ii. 446

Bradstreet, Sir Samuel (Recorder of
Dublin), vi. 303

Braemar : Jacobite rising (1715), i. 212

Brandywine, battle of, iv. 55

Bread riots (1769), ii. 115

Brehon laws, ii. 94, 104

Bremen, i. 211, 242

Breslau, Peace of, i. 402

Brewster, Sir Francis: advocated
Union with Ireland, iv. 444

Bribery: systematic at elections and
in Parliament, i. 366; ‘market
price’ of seats, 367; bribes in H.
of Lords, 368; committee of inquiry,
371; payment of Government sup-
porters, 372; measure against (1729),
447; bribery of King’s mistresses,
454; ‘assisted’ elections (Ireland),
iv. 440. See also Ireland—Union

Bridgeman’s landscape-gardening, i.
524

Bridgewater Canal, vi. 213

Bridport, Admiral: nayal victories
over French, vii. 229

Brienne, Loménie de, Archbishop
(Toulouse): abolished law against
Protestant (French) marriages, v.
308; Calonne’s successor, 401;
execrated, 417

Brihuega: surrender of English army,
i. 100

Brindley (engineer), vi. 213

Bristol: growth of population, i. 197

Bristol, Harl of. See Derry, Bishop of

Bristol, Lord: Viceroy (Ireland), iv.
372

Brooke, Henry: on penal laws, iv.
453 n., 469; on independence of
Trish Parliament, 490

Browne, Denis: on Connaught refu-
gees, vii. 189, 267

Browne, Marshal, il. 457, 489

00

in American

562 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,

BRO

Browne’s ‘HMstimate of the Manners
and Principles of the Times’ (1757),
i. 469

Brownrigg, Mrs., ili. 137

Brunswick, Duke of: in command of
Coalition forces, v. 593; proclama-
tion to the French, vi. 21, 33; his
slowness and indecision, 38; battle
of Valmy, 39

Brussels: captured by French (1746),
i. 425

Buckinghamshire, Earl of: Viceroy
(Ireland), iv.441; extreme financial
distress, 442; necessity for free
trade, 443; proposed relaxation of
commercial code, 448; outcry among
English manufacturers, 449; on
mitigation of penal laws, 476; dread
of Volunteers, 485 sq, ; growing dis-
content of people, 487; expected
invasion, 492; embarrassing posi-
tion, 496; defence of his policy,
502; deprecates discussion of
‘Union,’ 504; methods of securing
parliamentary majority, 505; popu-
lar cry for independence, 506 sq.;
Grattan’s declaration, 508; Irish
Mutiny Bill, 510 sqq.; recall, 514;
rewards to supporters, 516

‘Buckinghamshire lace’ smuggled
from France, v. 40

Bull-baiting, i. 552, v. 363

Bull ‘ Unigenitus,’ v. 321, 330, 332,
335

Bunker’s Hill, battle of, iii. 426

Buonaparte: career of victory, vil.
386 ; indifference to Irish affairs, 412;
projects and abandons expedition
against England, viii. 202; regret in
later days, 1b.; ascendency, viii.
524

Burgh, Hussey: reports and speech
on condition of Ireland, iv. 488, 499
sqq.; Prime Sergeant, vi. 301; Chief
Bayon, 311

Burgoyne, General ; expedition against
Ticonderoga, iv. 59; reaches the
Hudson, 61; defeat of his German
troops, 7b. ; outnumbered by enemy,
62; surrenders with his army at
Saratoga, 63, 148

Burgundy, Duke of, v. 390

Burke, Edmund: private secretary to
Lord Rockingham, i. 98; first
Parliamentary speeches, 96; lasting
character of his influence, 181 ;
school and University training,
182; early literary work, 183;
versatility, 184 ; intellectual energy,
185; purity of character, 186;

BUR

position in Parliament, 187 ;
character of his speaking, 188;
over-sensitive nervous organisation,
189; contemporary opinions on
his oratory, 190; effects on his
auditors, 191; differs from Chatham,
192; on East India Company, 193;
functions of juries in libel cases, 194 :
views about party, 111,195; about
aristocratic influence, 197; dislike
to Chatham’s character, 198; ex-
tent to which he supported Reform,
201; opposition to short Parlia-
ments, 202; to a Place Bill, 203;
to instructions to members, 7b.; to
changes in constitution of Parlia-
ment, 204; conservatism, 205 ;
method of political reasoning, 208 ;
criticism of his views, 218 ; policy
on American question, iii. 393, 422,
531, iv. 68; against Government
control of EK. I. Company, iii. 486 ;
defends Clive, 491; against abolition
of Subscription, 499; on Rodney at
St. Eustatius, iv. 167; plan of
economical reform (1780) 181, 218;
opposes parliamentary changes,
183; rejected at Bristol, elected at
Malton (1780), 7b.; Bill for regulat-
ing Civil List, 184; Paymaster of
Forces, 207, 280; opinion of Shel-
burne, 211, 240; of W. Pitt, 221;
on Fox’s India Bill, 289 ; on ‘penal
dissolution,’ 300; on Whiteboys,
320; against Absentee tax, 408;
literary style, 417; favours relaxa-
tion of Irish commercial restrictions,
448 ; is offered reward for services to
Catholics, 455; on Gardiner’s Re-
lief Bill, 479; on Irish indepen-
dence, 560; ridiculed Pitt’s financial
economies, v. 33; opposed his com-
mercial treaty with France, 43; on
Regency resolutions, 124 ; witticism
on Thurlow, 126; indiscretion in
Regency debate, 130; paroxysms
of passion, 131 sq.; dissatisfaction
with conduct of Regency question,
134 ; indictment against Queen
Charlotte suppressed, 151 ; on
religious tests, 159 ; attack on
atheists, 174; speech on religious
legislation, 177 ; comparison with
views of Montesquieu and Voltaire,
181; supported Catholic Relief Bill,
189; approved of corn bounties, 193 ;
censured Pitt’s anti-Russian policy,
290 ; on disorders of French
finance, 335; on abolition of French
Parliaments, 343; on bull-fights,

INDEX,

BUR

363; first impressions of French
Revolution, 453; reply to Fox,
456 ; motives attributed, 459 ;
growing influence, 461; ‘Retlec-
tions on French Revolution,’ 462,
arguments of the work, 463 sqq.;
prediction of course of movement,
472; its final issue, 474;  esti-
mate of effects of spoliation of
Church property, 475 ; incompati-
bility of pure democracy with
security of property, 479; French
socialism, 480; French propagand-
ism, 487; reception and influence
of the ‘Reflections,’ 7b.; replies,
489, 496; desires European inter-
vention, 499; English Constitution
not suitable for France, 500; con-
flict with Fox on Quebec Bill, 501
sq.; speech on rights of man, 503;
breach with Fox complete, 505;
isolation of Burke, 507; juries’
right in libel cases, 508; ‘Appeal
from New to Old Whigs,’ 508 sqq.;
theory of Constitution, 509; inter-
view with Lord Stormont, 510;
Camden sanctions Burke’s Whig-
gism, 513; Burke’s sympathy with
French emigrants, 514; if trium-
phant, Revolution must be cosmo-
politan, 516; goverhment separated
from property, 519; righteousness
of an anti-revolutionary war, 520;
general estimate of his policy on
the Revolution, 521; three condi-
tions of intervention, 522; effects
of question on his health, 524;
diffidence about political prophecy,
525; public opinion turns towards
him, 526; compliment of Sir J.
Reynolds, ib.; ‘Church in danger,’
527; opposed Pitt’s Irish commer-
cial propositions, vi. 40; eulogised
Dublin Whig Club, 459; influence
jin favour of Catholics, 479; letter
to Langrishe, 480; on Irish parties,
481; little influence of Catholic
clergy, 1b.; thought Union would
not be for mutual advantage of two
kingdoms, 512; on the Coalition
dispute, vii. 45; ‘Irish clique’
(1795), 84; education of Catholic
clergy, 118, 120; letters on May-
nooth, 129; fear of Catholic dis-
affection, 132; suggests Grattan as
best guide for Irish Catholics, 133 ;
death, 398; Canning’s eulogy, 399;
Burke desired formal diplomatic
connection of England with Vatican,
461

563

CAL

Burke, Richard: adviser of Catholic
Committee, vi. 482; character,
483; Westmorland’s opinion of
him, 492, 493, 495 ; opinion of the
grand jury opposition to Catholics,
507; succeeded by Wolfe Tone,
540; death, vii. 45; his library
presented to Carlow College by his
father, 131

Burke, William (1763), iii. 269

Burnet, Bishop: upheld claim of Wil-
liam III., i. 62; character, 80 sqq.;
death, 209

Burney, Miss, v. 524, 527, vi. 167

Bushe, Charles Kendal: with Grattan,
against Union, vii. 445

Bushe, Gervase : proposed Irish Mutiny
Bill, iv. 510

Bussiére : first public lecturer on
anatomy in England, i. 574

Bute, Earl of: relations with George
TII.’s mother, iii. 12, 49; influence
with that king, 25; made Secretary
of State, 28; succeeds Newcastle as
Prime Minister, 41; unpopularity,
49; increased by his nationality,
50; character, 54 sq.; generally dis-
trusted, 553; intimidation and cor-
ruption, 56 ; literary patronage, 58;
resignation, 62; shameful history
of his ministry, 63; wholly removed
from politics, 126

Butler, Bishop, i. 466

Butler, Colonel John:
Wyoming, iv. 92

Butler, My., iv. 334

Butler, Simon, chairman of United
Trishmen, vi. 540, 597, 608, vii. 9

Buxar, battle of, iii. 475

Bylandt, Admiral (Dutch), iv. 160

Byng, Admiral: defeat of Spaniards
off Cape Passaro, i. 241; failure to
relieve Minorea, ii. 453; court mar-
tial, 460; defenders and opponents,
461; execution, 462

Byrne, Garret, leader of Wicklow
rebels, vili. 149; banished, 187

Byrom’s epigram on Handel-Bonon-
cini rivalry, i. 532

Byron, Admiral, iy. 91

tragedy of

C

Cabinets: consisted of few members,
iv. 222; the ‘Prime Minister,’ vy.
18; diminution of royal power over
ministerial policy, 20 sq.

Cadiz, bombardment of, vii. 386

} Calas, judicial murder of, v. 343

0 Oo 2

564

CAL

Calcutta captured by Clive, ii. 497

Caldwell, Sir J.: report of debates of
Trish Parliament, iv. 326 ., 360;
account of Lord Townshend, 372;
anti-Catholic, 471

Calendar: ‘New Style’ introduced, i.
267 sq.

Calicoes, coloured, i. 523

Callimanco work, vi. 170

Calonne, M. de, v. 400, 561

Calvinistic Methodists, il.
605

Camden, (first) Lord: his career, iii.
157, 159 sq., 230, 338, 349, 507, iv.
207, 216, 375, v. 34, 513

Camden, (second) Lord. See Ireland—
Viceroy Camden

Campbell, General, surrender of Pen-
sacola, iv. 170

Campo Formio, Peace of, vii. 387

Canada: expedition for conquest of,
i. 106; disputed boundary, 429 ;
presence of French helped to pre-
serve British empire in America, il.
11; English conquest, 494; ultimate
consequence, the revolt of America,
496, iil. 268 sq.; Quebec Act, 399;
position of Catholics, 400; loyal to
England (1775), 436; invaded by
Americans, 2b.; abortive attempt to
enlist Frenchmen for American
rebel army, iv. 51; proposed com-
bined French and American inya-
sion (1778), 101 ; Franklin pro-
poses cession to America, 227;
frontiers defined (1782), 254, 256;
representative government estab-
lished (1791), v. 195; question of
Upper Chamber debated, 196 sqq.;
result of division of French and
English Canada, 200

Canals, English, Irish, and Scotch, vi.
213 sq.

Canning, George: confidant of Pitt,
vii. 388 ; recommended him to drop
Union measure for a time, viii. 502 ;
resignation, with Pitt, 514; on Pitt’s
desire for Catholic emancipation,
537

‘Canters’ (Ireland), iv. 328

Cape Breton, Isle of, captured, i. 423

Cape of Good Hope: unsuccessful
English expedition against, iv. 168

Cape Passaro, battle of, i. 241

Cape St. Vincent, battle of, vii. 386

‘Captain Stout’ (term used by De-
fenders), vil. 147

‘Capuchin cloaks,’ i. 308

Cardonnel, Marlborough’s secretary,
i. 121

575, 598,

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CAS

. Carhampton, Lord (Luttrell), iv.330..,,

333, vil. 172, 335, 425

Carleton, General, Governor of Canada,.
iii. 416, 436, iv. 203

Carlisle: captured by Young Preten-
der, i. 422

Carlisle, Lord (Viceroy, 1780): pre-
vious career, iv. 78, 268, 280, 518;
first impressions of Ireland, 519 ;
difficulty with Portugal about:
woollens, 520; fears of invasion,
521; active loyalty of Volunteers,
522; session of 1781, 524 sqq.;
loyalty of Parliament, 526; Carlisle
favours repeal of Poyning’s Law,
528 ; powers of Irish Privy Council,
ib.; Gardiner’s Catholic Bill, 529 ;
Dungannon meeting, 552; Grattan’s
address for independence, 535 ; Car-.
lisle’s secret correspondence with
Hillsborough, 536 ; character of ad-
ministration, 542; abrupt recall,
544; Lord-Lieut. of E. R. York-
shire, 20.

Carlos, Don (son of Philip V.), i. 239,
350, 355

Carlow College, vii. 126

Carmarthen, Lord, iv. 296, v. 34

Carnwath, Earl of, i. 214

Carolan, last of Irish bards, ii. 317

Carolinas, the, iv. 118,121 sqq.,186 sqq-

Caroline, Queen (George II.) i. 360,
365, 382, 464, 466, 520, 575

Carrick, Earl of, iv. 456

Carrickfergus: surprised by Thurot,
li. 437

Carteret (Lord Granville): career and
character, i. 375 sqq.; hostility to
the Pelhams, 399 sq.; brought
about Peace of Breslau, 405; un-
popularity, 411 ; intellect clouded by
drink, 478

Castlebar, English defeat at, viii. 212

Castlereagh, Lord (Robert Stewart) =
early career and opinions, vii. 443,.
vill. 51, 117, 142, 244, 269; acted
as Chief Secretary during Pelham’s
illness, viii. 117; first impressions
regarding Union, 289; first Irish-
man made Chief Secretary, 311 ;
speeches in favour of Union, 375,
449; reply to Foster on financial
side of Union, 475; bribery to main-
tain majority, 476; defends slow
progress of the Union, 478; his
mission to Hngland (1799), 505;
explains Pitt’s change of polisy
towards Catholics, 519; refuses to:
serve under anti-Catholic ministry,
520

INDEX. 565

CAS

Castrati, Italian singers in England,
i. 532

Castration: punishment proposed
against priests and friars, i. 296;
employed in Sweden, 297

Catalans, i. 125

Cathedral libraries founded in Ireland,
li, 328

Catherine II. (Russia): sympathies
with England, iv. 155; declaration
on neutral commerce, 156; career
and character, v. 210; administra-
tion, and extension of territory, 211;
desire of destroying Turkish Km-
pire, 212; partition of Poland, 217 ;
desire of establishing Greek Em-
pire, 219, 224, 274; war with Tur-
key, 222; results, 224; war with
Sweden, 226; action of Triple Al-
liance, 230; resentment, 231; their
mediation rejected, 232; renewal of
Swedish war, 270; peace of Warela,
271; proposals of peace with Tur-
key, 274; question of Oczakow, 275
sqq.; indignant at Allies’ demand,
280; massacre of Ismail, 284; de-
signs against India, 285; enthu-
siasm for Fox, 295; Peace of Jassy,
297; death of Potemkin, 1b.;
negotiations with Poles, 542; fa-
vours intervention in France, 548 ;
urges Austria and Prussia to war
against France, 568; motives, 569 ;
designs against Poland, 597; invades
that country, vi.84; intrigues with
Prussia, 87

Catholic Association (Ireland), iv. 453
sq., 469

Catholic Committee: action in 1790,
vi. 472 ; secession of Lord Kenmare
and party, 473; under influence of
democratic party, 476; engages
Richard Burke as paid adviser, 482 ;
declaration of belief and address,
504; summons a Conyention, 505 ;
action of grand juries, 506; compo-
sition and objects of Convention,
526; Wolfe Tone secretary of Com-
mittee, 540; Convention meets,
544; petitions King, 545; declines
to receive deputation of United
Trishmen, 548; Keogh’s moder-
ating influence, 550; dissolves
itself, 597; votes rewards for ser-
vices rendered, 7b.; agitation for
total repeal of restrictive laws, vil.
52; action on Fitzwilliam’s recall,
94; resolution against Union, 95;
many members in sympathy with
Wolfe Tone, 97; suspected commu-

CAT

nication with France, 100; adopts
principle of total separation from
England, 202; discourages enlist-
ment in yeomanry, 215, 283

Catholic Confederates for Peace (1645),
iy. 489

Catholicism: ill adapted for nations
desirous of political freedom, ii.
383; state on the Continent, iv.
466; unbelief among Catholic clergy,
467, v. 308

Catholics, English : penal laws,i.2, 268
sqq.; Whig and Tory policy towards,
5; Walpole’s conciliatory policy,
332; English readiness to believe
calumnies against, ii. 151; prosecu-
tions from motives of revenge &c.,
li. 506; imprisonment of priests,
506, 507 .; precarious position,
507; Relief Bill of 1778; anti-
Catholic riots in Scotland, 509;
Gordon riots, 510 sqq.; measures
mitigating penal laws, iv. 474; Catho-
lic repudiation of the dispensing
power and infallibility of Pope, v.
185 sq.; Relief Bill (1791) 2b.; oath
of allegiance, 187; changed estimate
of Catholicism, 189

Catholics, Irish: the penal code,
i. 278 sqq.; treatment under Eliza-
beth, ii. 94; soldiers in English
service then, 99; bishops executed,
118; all priests banished, 119; in-
crease of zeal, 120; religious houses
confiscated, 121; gentry put to tor-
ture, 158; tredtment of beggar
children, 254; ratio to Protestants
(1730), 255; in Continental armies,
262 sq.; systematic degradation,
266; condition under Anne: priest-
hunting, 267 sqq.; itinerant friars,
268 ; condition of Catholics in
early Hanoverian period, 271; im-
prisonment of priests and school-
masters, 272; attack on worshippers
at St. Kevin’s shrine, 274; Domini-
cans in Ireland, 276; statistics of
chapels and clergy (1732), 277;
gradual relaxation of religious dis-
abilities, 278; internal condition of
Trish Catholic Church in 1751, 279;
pernicious effects of penal laws, 281
sqq.; tolerant spirit of some higher
Protestant clergy, 308; decline of
persecutions, 310; bishops nomi-
nated by Pretender, 395; Catholics
excluded from British army, 396;
consequently driven to foreign ser-
vice, 397; improyed position of
Catholics, 437 ; recruited for English

566

CAT

army, iii. 457; limited leases, iv.
317; gentlemen charged with abet-
ting Whiteboys, 334; ecclesiastical
denunciation of Whiteboys, 338 sq.;
desertion of chapels, 340; loyalty
during American war, 364; examples
of loyalty (1775), 486; general con-
dition (1760-81), 451 sqq.; their
religion looked upon as an eyil,
451; penal laws directed rather
against property than creed, 452;
efforts of Catholic Association, 453 ;
gradual admission into army, 455 ;
lack of sympathy for Americans,
458; bills to enable Catholics to in-
vest money in mortgages, 459; and
to hold land for reclamation, 460 ;
attitude of Government towards
them, 461, 474; advowsons, 462;
oath and declaration, 1774, 463;
statement of grievances, 464; de-
moralising effect of penal laws, 465;
French education, 466; decadence
of religious feeling, 467; long period
of loyalty, 468; declaration of prin-
ciples, 469; sentiments of Irish
leaders, 471; growth of Irish toler-
ance, 472; nature of influences
favouring Catholics, 473; alleged
Roman plot for Irish independence,
475; Gardiner’s Relief Bill (1778),
477, 529; purchases of freehold
not allowed, 478 ; liberal subscribers
towards Volunteers, 485, 495;
money offers to Gevernment, 523 ;
Hutchinson’s scheme of education
(1782), 530; political union with
Protestants, 534; some penal laws
abolished, 556; intermarriage with
Protestants still illegal, 557; pro-
posed grant of franchise, vi.
337, 364; overtures from Presbyte-
rians, 337; enlisted among Volun-
teers, 360; movements in 1783-84,
367; drawn into political agitation,
368; Government spies: Father
O'Leary, 369; education, 451; srowth
of democratic element in Catholic
Committee, 472, 476; secession of
Lord Kenmare and leading gentry,
473; growing importance of Catholics,
4b.; position still anomalous and hu-
miliating, 474; complete abolition of
penal laws demanded, 476; influence
of Burke, 479 sqq.; Richard Burke
paid adviser of Catholic Committee,
482; Relief Bill proposed by Dun-
das, 486; lLangrishe’s Bill, 5038;
declaration and address of Catholic
Committee, 504; Catholic Conven-

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CAV

tion summoned, 505; Catholics
among United Irishmen, 538; ap-
proximation of Catholics and Pres-
byterians, 540; disaffection still
rare, 542; Convention petitions
King, 545; Relief Bill determined
on, 556; King receives Catholic
deputation, 559; term ‘Catholic’
first applied from Throne, 561 ; com-
plete Emancipation refused, 575 ;,
Parsons’s limited franchise, 583;
Relief Bill carried, 588; gratitude
of Catholics, 596; dissolution of
Convention, 597; immediate effect.
of Relief Bill, 602; diminished in-
fluence of both clergy and gentry,
vii. 5; liberal Protestant action (ex-
cept in Dublin), 11, 69; petitions for
complete emancipation, 68 ; English
Government alone the cause of its
not being granted in 1795, 70;
Grattan’s Relief Bill, 80; sympa-
thisers with French Revolution, 97;
Grattan’s Bill defeated, 115; pro-
posed foundation of Maynooth Col-
lege, 117; question of home educa-
tion of clergy, 118 sqq.; character
of priests, 122; system of Church
administration, 124; diminished in-
fluence of clergy, 125; establishment.
of Maynooth, 126; protest against
regulation of its studies by trustees.
and exclusion of Protestants, 128;
opinion of Burke, 129 ; contempt for:
clergy manifested, 143; spread of
Defenderism, 146 sqq.; persecutions
by Orangemen, 181; refugees in
Connaught, 188; sedition fomented
by Orange outrages, 193; spirit of
revenge, 194; Catholics tranquil
except in Ulster, 219; Ulster
Catholics most anti-English, 223;
Southern Catholics sympathise with
English against French invasion,.
266 ; growth of disloyalty, 217 sqq.,
296 sqq.; motives agitating masses,
364: emancipation, reform, tithes,
345; rent, 366; feeling of separate
nationality, 8367; rumours of an im-
pending massacre, 368; the pre-
tended Orange oath, 3869, 3873;
counter charge of Protestants, 7b.;
spoliation of chapels, 463; priests
taking part in Rebellion, viii. 82, 97,.
103, 136, 175; Emancipation post-
poned, 509 sqq.

Caulfield, Bishop (Wexford), viii. 93,
160, 169

Cavan, Lord, vii. 281, 318

Cavendish, Lord John, Chancellor of

INDEX.

CAV

Exchequer, iv. 206, 280; supporter
of Fox, 216

Cavendish, Sir Henry, vi. 524

Carysfort, Lord: on effect of Irish
Volunteer Convention on Conti-
nental opinion, vi. 370

Celtic element: influence in later Irish
history exaggerated, ii. 382 sq.

Censorship on plays, vi. 157

Chamberlain, Judge, vii. 851, 353, viii.
25

Chambers, Ephraim, author of an
‘Encyclopedia,’ v. 304

Chambers, Sir W. (architect), vi. 163

Chancellorship of Exchequer, Ireland:
history, vi. 373

Charity schools, ii. 546

Charlemont, Earl of : Governor of Ar-
magh (1763), iv. 347; on legislation
for Catholics, 456, 462,472; Volun-
teer movement, 484; commands the
Volunteers, 522; Dungannon meet-
ing, 533; refuses office, 545; rela-
tions with Flood, vi. 311,332; made
Privy Councillor, 327 ; early career,
330; political character, 331; sepa-
rates from Grattan, 332; secures
election of moderate delegates to
Conyention at Dublin, 338; elected
its chairman, 342; opposed to
Catholic franchise; 349; original
member of Whig Club, 458; on
danger of associating Catholic ques-
tion with reform, 522; predicts that
Catholic enfranchisement would
lead to separation or Union, 523;
warmly supported yeomanry, vii.
213; death, viii. 429

Charles I. (England) : transfigured in
Tory legend, i. 64; compared to
Christ, 65 sqq.; alleged miraculous
cures by his relics, 69; religious
policy towards Ireland, ii. 121

Charles II. (England): exercise of
‘royal touch,’ i. 70; Declaration
(1660) regarding Ireland, ii. 176;
varying feelings towards Irish, 179

Charles II. (Spain): bequeaths do-
minions to Duke of Anjou, i. 25

Charles VI., Emperor, i. 102, 106,
349, 353 sq., 387

Charles VII., Emperor.
Elector of,

Charles XII. (Sweden), i. 236 sq., 241

Charles, Archduke (Austria), i. 25, 99

Charles, Prince. See Pretender, Young

Charles of Lorraine, Prince, i. 416,
419, ii. 491

Charleston, burnt by General Howe,
iii. 427; fortified and defended by

See Bavaria,

567

CHA

Lee, iv. 12; capitulation to English,
120

Charlotte, Queen, v. 138

Charter schools, Ireland: object and
methods, ii. 200 sq.; helped by
George II. from privy purse, 201 ;
paucity of pupils, 202; Howard’s
exposure of their abuses, 203; ill-
treatment of children, 204; hated
by Ivish peasants, 2b.; subsidised,
iv. 380

Chateaubriand: on English parlia-
mentary oratory, v. 9; description
of Pitt, 17 x.

Chatelet (French court of law), v. 407

Chatelet, Mme. du, v. 302

Chatham, Lord: one of the Boy Pa-
triots, i. 379; denounces the sub-
ordination of English to Hanoverian
interests, 409; Paymaster of Forces,
426; seeks to develop African slave-
trade, 504; formed Highland regi-
ments, ii. 69; intrigues with Henry
Fox, 442; contempt for New-
castle, 445; denounces George II.’s
German treaties, 448; opposes
bringing Hanoverian troops into
England, 452; in Ministry with De-
vonshire, 458 ; obnoxious to George
II., 459, 466 ; dismissed from office,
462; coalesces with Newcastle, ib. ;
his patriotism, 463; absolute over
military and naval affairs, 466;
character of his eloquence, 467 sqq.;
influence over the House, 470; dis-
interestedness, 473; a great popular
leader, 474; independence, 475;
retrospect of his career, 7b.; at-
tack on Carteret, 476; alliance with
Pelhams, 477 ; inconsistencies, 478;
ingratitude to Newcastle, 480; arro-
gance, 482; histrionic turn, ib.;
attitude to royalty, 483; ostenta-
tion of his virtues, 484; greatness
as War Minister, 485; conduct
towards Cumberland, 488; condi-
tional offer of cession of Gibraltar
to Spain, 489; energetic action, 7b. ;
repudiates Convention of Closters-
even, 491; attacks on French coast,
492; conquest of Canada, 494;
naval management, 496; indiffer-
ence to finance, 505; criticism of
his war policy, 510 sqq.; prosperity
of England during his administra-
tion, 511; love of war, 7b.; bloodless-
ness of his victories, 512; power to
raise the spirit of the nation, 513 ;
home policy, 514; tries to destroy
party government, 515, ii, 19, 102;

568

CHA

strengthened democracy, ii. 516;
moral influence, 517; comparison
with Walpole, 518; ministerial
difficulties on accession of George
III. iii. 24 sqq.; popular objection
to German war, 30; peace nego-
tiations, 31; rejection of his policy
towards Spain, 34; resignation, 35;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,

CHU

the proclamation against seditious
writings, 20; on English neutrality,
45; aim to get Republic recognised,
49; relations with Sheridan, 97;
peremptory note to Lord Grenville,
99; complaint about Alien Act,
107 ; Grenville’s reply, 111; Chau-
velin’s dismissal from England, 123

Cheltenham: mineral springs dis-
covered, i. 555
Chesapeake, the :
victory, iv. 191
Cheselden’s lectures on anatomy, 1.574
Chesterfield, Lord: character and
career, i. 378; hated by King, 426;
anecdote of, 534 ;  viceroyalty
(Ireland), 378, ii. 429; on condition
of Irish poor, ii. 291

Child-murder in Scotland, ii. 90

Children’s literature, vi. 166

Chimney-sweeps, children employed
as, v1. 273

China, direct trade with, desired for
Treland, vi. 516

‘Christian Club’ (Shoreham), iii. 173

Church, English: clergy mainly Tories

accepts pension for himself and
title for his wife,36 ; temporary un-
popularity, 37; his sagacity justi-
fied by event, 88; excessive re-
quirements in peace negotiations,
48; conduct in retirement, 60; atti-
tude towards Wilkes, 82; prevented
by Temple from forming a Ministry,
90, 92; refuses to join Rockingham,
95; estimate of his conduct on this
occasion, 98 sgq.; questions on which
he differed from Rockingham, 101;
forms a ministry, 111; its hetero-
geneous character, 112; quarrel with
Temple, 113; made Earl of Chat-
ham, 114; loss of popularity, 7b.;
relations with Rockingham, 115;
the ‘forty days’ tyranny,’ 116; ex-

English naval

Chauvelin, M. de:

cessive arrogance, 117; resignation
of Rockinghamites, 118; foreign
and Indian policy, 119; Ministry
becoming Tory, 120; break-down of
Chatham’s health, 121; changes in
the ministry, 123; resignation of
Chatham, 138; speech on Wilkes’s
expulsion from Parliament, 147;
persistent opposition to Government,
163 ; modifies his opinion of party
government, 165; views on Reform,
178; duration of Parliament, 179 ;
contends that self-taxation is the
essence of liberty, 336 sqq.; de-
mands repeal of Stamp Act, 338;
popularity with Americans, 348;
position on American question, 392;
new efforts at conciliation (1774),
420; speech in favour of Americans
(1775), 532; great speech on con-
ciliation (1777). iv. 74; general de-
sire to place him at the head of a
ministry, 80; refusal of King to
receive him, 82; last appearance
in the House of Lords, 84; his
death, 85; how regarded by con-
temporary statesmen, 7b.; by the
King, 86; effects of his death on
the ministry, 87; views on Absen-
tee tax, 405; on Irish Union, viii.
270

French minister
plenipotentiary to England vi. 10;
estimate of English opinion, 13; on

in 18th century, i. 3; influence
inimical to freedom, 8; position
towards Revolution, 16; Sacheve-
rell’s defence, 53; position of clergy
towards Revolution, 62; casuistry,
63; Jacobite tendencies, 73; gains
and losses by Reformation, 74;
poverty and low social position, 75;
episcopal incomes, 78; clerical
power weakened, 79; latitudina-
rian party, 80; bishops in it, 85;
conflict between lower clergy and
bishops, 87; first use of terms
‘High’ and ‘Low’ Church, 70.:
Church measures in Anne’s reign,
90 ; religious liberty, 96 ; tithes, 206 ;
Church established in West India
Isles, ii. 21; dominant in Virginia,
ili. 285; status of clergy there, 288;
American colonies under jurisdic-
tion of Bishop of London, 401;
anti-American feeling of clergy,
529 ; bishops oppose repeal of
Test Acts, v. 158; and Stanhope’s
Toleration Bill, 161; bishops support
catholic Relief Bill, 189; fears
arising from French Revolution,
527: clerical dress in 18th century,
vi. 141

Church, French: many sceptics, v.

306; exemption from taxation, 325;
priests banished, 329; condemna-
tion of sceptical writings, 335; con-
flicts with Parliaments, 336; influ-

CHU

ence almost extinct (1774), 396; in
States-General, 430 ; ‘ Civil Consti-
tion,’ 490, 574; clergy slaughtered
in September massacres, vi. 35 sq.

Church, Irish: revenues and patron-
age, ii. 229; tithe disputes with
landlords, 230; small incomes of
lower clergy, 231; system of uniting
parishes, 232; negligent and absen-
tee bishops, 233; their convivial
lives, 234; abuses extend to lower
clergy, 235; neglect of the people,
236; collection of tithes, iv. 322
sqq.; non-residence, 325; bishops
once predominant in House of
Lords, vi. 518

‘Civil Constitution’ (French Church),
y. 490, 574

Civil List: George III., iii. 27, 154,
iv. 181; Ireland, rapid increase
(1776). iv. 441

Claim of Rights, ii. 52

Clandestine marriages, i. 490; noted
instances, 491; statistics of Fleet
marriages, 1b.; marriage law re-
modelled, 492; marriage treated as
civil contract, 493

Clanricarde, Lord, i. 161, 163, iy.
492

Clanricarde Volunteers, iv. 493

Clan system: Scotland, ii. 70; Ire-
land, 103

Clarence, Duke of, v. 150

Clarke, Rey. Dr.: example of rigid
exaction of tithes, iv. 346

Clarkson, Thomas, friend of negroes,
vi. 287

Classes : benefits arising from mixture,
i. 472; division of, in France, v.
373; changes in England, vi. 167
SQq-

Clinton, General: attempt to capture
Charleston, iv. 12; aim of his opera-
tions, 60 ; in New York, 63 ; succeeds
Sir W. Howe, 88 ; retires from Phila-
delphia to New York, 90; captures
Charleston, 120; instructions to
Major André, 144; offers to revolted
Pennsylvanian troops, 185; dissen-
sion with Cornwallis, 197; persistent
hopes after surrender of Cornwallis,
248

Clinton, General (American), iv. 192

Clive, Robert: victories in India, il.
497 sqq.; growing power, 498;
defeat of Dutch in Bengal, 499 ;
popularity in England, i. 168;
second administration, 477 ; policy,
478; efforts to cure abuses, 479;
firmness of will, 2b.; return to Eng-

ai: EA Dt
We MARY "Ss CQ

. 'Y REV. T. CAT 1,/
INDEX,

569

COM

land, 480; trial and acquittal, 491;
death, 492

Clootz, Anacharsis, v. 535, vi. 3

Closterseven, Convention of, ii. 486
sq., 491

Club Breton (afterwards Club des
Jacobins), v. 440

Clubs, servants’, i. 570

Coal duty, for erection of churches, i.
92 {

Coalition against France (1792) :
French defeats in Netherlands, vi.
18; neutrality of Hanover, 20;
proclamation of Duke of Brunswick,
21; extent of Coalition, 26; French
frontier crossed, 27; dilatoriness of
Brunswick, 33 ; capture of Longwy
and Verdun, 33; siege of Thion-
ville, 2b.; battle of Valmy, 38; re-
treat of allies, 41; Germany in-
vaded by Custine, ib.; French in
Flanders, 53 ; Jemmapes, 44; flight of
Austrian Government from Brussels,
62; Custine driven out of Germany,
83 ; repeated defeats of allies (1794),
vil. 62

Coalition (of 1783, Fox and North),
iv. 270; compared with that of
1757, 275; members of ministry,
280; dismissal, 295; Pitt’s ministry,
295 sqq.

Coblentz: centre of French emigra-
tion, v. 547, 584

Cock-fighting : a regular game of
schoolboys, 1.553; in Scotland, 554;
cock-throwing, i. 553

Coftee-houses in London (1708), i. 569

Collier, Sir George: descent upon Vir-
ginia, iv. 116

Commerce: rival theories on value of
foreign, i. 143; restrictions on
colonial, 11. 8; trade between Eng-
land and Scotland after Union, 57 ;
imports from Ireland to England
prohibited, 208; English restrictions
on American trade, ili. 299 ; profits
of colonial trade to England, 337 ;
relaxation of American restrictions
343; of Irish, iv. 500; treaty with
France (1786), v. 37 sqq.; influence
on national prosperity, 46 ; increase
of English commerce after Ameri-
can war, 202; Pitt’s commercial
propositions for Ireland, 388 sqq.

Commercial classes : mainly Whigs, i.
3; restrictions on their political
influence, 7; natural representatives
of political progress, 187; and of
religious toleration, 188; refugee
industry, 189; immigrations, 191 ;

570 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

COM

English industries originating
thence, 192; growing prosperity,
193 sqq.; the great towns, 197; in-
fluence of mercantile companies,
199; of funded interest, 199 sqq.;
advocates of religious toleration,
201; promoted international jeal-
ousy, 202; younger sons of nobility
engaged in commerce, v. 312

Commissioners of Account (Ireland) :
appointments used as bribes, iv.
397; severely censured in Parlia-
ment, 399

Common lands: great extent, i. 560 ;
reclamation and enclosure, 564;
interference with rights of common-
age in Ireland, iv. 320; arable as
well as pasture common lands, vi.
194; bad management, 195

Compton, Sir Spencer (Earl of Wil-
mington), i. 327; death, after brief
ministry, 411

Condé, Prince de, v. 495, 547

Confiscations : from Irish Catholics, 1.
288; from Irish chiefs and pyro-
prietors, ii. 102; Composition of
Connaught, 105; from loyalists in
America, iv. 10

Congress, American : at Philadelphia,
laid foundation of American inde-
pendence, ili. 408 sqq.; measures
decreed in 1775, 428 sq.; resolves
to enlist Indians, iv. 13; to form
navy, 15; flight to Baltimore, 23 ;
return, 26; enlistment (1776), 28;
bounties offered, 29; powers and
authority, 30; financial difficul-
ties, 31; issues paper money, 32;
advises confiscation of enemies’
property, 7b.; attempts to regulate
prices by law, 33; makes paper
legal tender, 34; negotiates for
assistance from France, 38; flight
to Lancaster and Yorktown, 56;
treatment of Saratoga Convention,
96; punishment of loyalists, 99;
relations with army, 127, 132; re-
organisation of army, 148; paper
money, 149; half-pay for life to
officers, 249; peace negotiations,
252 sqq., 259; power over the
States uncertain, 267

Connaught, Composition of, ii. 105 ;
attempts to overthrow titles, 114,
plantation resolved on by Went-
worth, 116 ; scheme deferred, 117

Conolly, Lady Louisa, vu. 134, viii.
17, 47

Conolly, Mr., vi. 565, 571, viii. 295,
337

COR

Constabulary, Irish: institution pro-
posed, vii. 55; carried into effect,
vill. 501

Constitution : Irish, 1782, vi. 313 sqq. ;
Canada : see Quebec Act

Contractors expelled from Parliament,
iv. 217

Convention Parliament (at Revolu-
tion), v. 111

Conventions, American Proyincial, iii.
413, 417

Convict hulks established, vi. 254

Convocation: antagonism between
higher and lower clergy, i. 89; de-
cadence, 90; suppressed, 251

Conway, General: soldier and parlia-
mentary leader, iil. 94, 96; carried
repeal of Stamp Act, 112; disputes
with Chatham, 156 ; political weak-
ness, ib.; resignation, 163; com-
mander-in-chief, iv. 207; irresolu-
tion, 216

Conway, General (American), iv. 50,94

Cooke, Under Secretary (Ireland):
policy towards Catholics, vi. 4965
importance of his position, vii. 57 5
letters on Westmorland’s Govern-
ment, 60 sq.; on state of Ireland
before and after Rebellion, viii. 34,
297 ; welcomed the insurrection, 63 ;
pamphlet stating case for Union,
305; on apathy of people towards
it, 365, 491, 507 ; on the Established
Church, 503; on Protestant desire to
favour Catholics, 518; on import-
ance of carrying Emancipation after
Union, 520

Coote, Brigadier General (in Ireland),
vii. 375

Coote, General Sir Eyre: military
achievements in India, ii. 503, iv.
173 ; death, 174

Copyright, i. 531

Cork : statistics 1700-35, ii. 335

Corn: bounties on, vi. 191; Acts to
relieve scarcity, 1935; excessive
prices at various times, 203

Cornwall, Mr. (Speaker), iv. 184

Cornwallis, Lord: drives Washington
into Pennsylvania, iv. 19; move-
ments impeded by General Howe, 25;
battle of Camden, 122; severities.
against insurgents, 123; failure in
North Carolina, 124; victory in
South Carolina, 183; battle of
Cowpens, 187; on American atro-
cities, 188; in Virginia, 196; occu-
pies Yorktown, 197; surrenders to
Americans, 200; Governor-General
of India, v. 209; defeat of Tippoo

INDEX,

COR

Sahib, 210; twice refused offer of
viceroyalty and chief military com-
mand in Ireland, vii. 339 sq.; ac-
cepts the combined positions, viii.
172. See also Ireland

Corruption, parliamentary: largely
practised under Charles II., i. 366 ;
jobbers of seatsin Parliament, 367 ;
increasing expense of elections, 70. ;
use of secret service money, 368;
direct money bribes to members of
House of Lords, 7b.; extended under
Walpole, 369 sqgq.; money payments
and pensions to members of Parlia-
ment, 372, iii. 171; alleged necessity
of corruption, vi. 380 sqq.; flagrant
instance in Ireland, 517

Corry, Chancellor of Exchequer (Ive-
land), viii. 470

Corry, Lord, viii. 492

Corsairs, French, i. 101

Corsica : English interest in, iii. 1538 ;
taken by France, 7b.

Corvées (in France), v. 387, 389, 402

Cottiers, ii. 198, 241, 246 sgq., iv. 318,
vi. 201

Cotton manufacture: number of op-
eratives in Lancashire, iv. 170;
prohibition of use of painted calicoes
in England, vi. 206; statistics of
growth of cotton’ trade in 18th
century, 207; improvements in
spinning processes, 207 sqq.

Country gentry: character and habits,
i. 556 sqq., . 292 sqq., 326, vi. 170

‘ Couple-beggars,’ ii. 368 sqq.

Cour: des Aides, v. 341, 407, 414; des
Comptes, 407, 414 ; Pléniére, 415, 417

Cowboys (American banditti), iv. 129

Cowpens, battle of, iv. 187

Cox, Walter, editor of ‘ Union Star,’
vii. 336

Crefeld, battle of, ii. 494

Crewe, Mrs., iv. 298, v. 58

Cricklade disfranchised, iv. 218

Crillon, Duke de, iv. 244, 247

* Crime: England, vi. 253, 262 sqq.;
Treland: see Ireland

Crimea severed from Turkey, v. 211

Croke, Rey. Dr. (President of Irish
Methodists), vil. 376

Crompton’sinyentions, vi. 147,190,208

Cromwell : in Ireland, ii. 170; cruel-
ties of his army, 171; Cromweilian
settlement, 172 sq.

* Croppies ’: origin of name, viii. 18

Crosbie, Sir Edward: victim of mar-
tial law in Ireland, viii. 66

Crown colonies: constitution, ii. 5

Crown: growing influence opposed, iy.

571

DAW

181; prerogative of naming minis
ters, 304 sq.

Crown of St. Stephen: restored from
Vienna to Buda, v. 251

Crull, Admiral (Dutch West Indian
service), iv. 167

Culloden, battle of, i. 423

Cumberland, Bishop; opponent of
Hobbes’s Utilitarianism, i. 84

Cumberland, Duke of: barbarity in
rebellion of 1745, i. 423; disasters
in Holland, 425; interference in po-
lities, ii. 90; death, 95

Curran: opposed to Union, vi. 513 5.
defence of rebel leaders, vii. 9, 353,
361; defence of Jackson, vii. 136;
on Orange outrages, 186; seces-
sion from parliamentary life, vii.
328

Curry, Dr., original member of Catho-
lic Association, iv. 453

Curt, M. de, vi. 105

Cushing, Thomas, Speaker of Assem-+
bly of Massachusetts, iii. 381

Custine, General (French) : invasion
of Germany, vi. 41; defeat, 83

Customs and Excise, i. 448, iv. 397,,
402, v. 30

Cyder tax, iii. 61, 93

Czaslau, battle of, i. 402

D

Daendels, General, commander of
Dutch expedition against Ireland,
vii. 407

Dallas, Count, commander in the
(French) Ivish brigade, iv. 202

Daly, Dennis, iv. 471

Dalrymple, General, vii. 257

Dancing : American customs, iii. 284 ;
proscribed by Puritans, 295

Danton, vi. 35 sq.

Dantzig, Prussian desire to obtain, v.
234, 283, 543, 597

Darby, Admiral: relief of Gibraltar,
iv. 165; naval work in 1791, 171

Darien colony scheme, ii. 50

Darlington, Countess of (mistress of
George I.), ii. 228

Dartmouth, Lord: attempt to concili-
ate Americans, iii. 424

Dashwood, Sir Francis (Lord De
Spencer), iii. 55, 62

Daun, Marshal, ii. 493, 509

Davenant (political economist), i. 340,
iv. 444

Davies, Sir John, iv. 401

Dawson, Capt. James, i. 422

572 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

DEA

Deane, Silas, American agent in Paris,
iv. 38, 43, 65

Deane, Sir R., iv. 505

Debtor prisoners: treatment of in Eng-
lish and Irish prisons, 1.500, 502, 536

Decayed boroughs, v. 60, 62

Decker (political economist), iv. 444

Declaration of Independence (Ameri-
can), ili.459 sq.; of Rights: Grattan’s
(1782), iv. 546; French, v. 482

De Clifford, Lord, viii. 417

Defenderism: history and growth, vi.
450, vii. 11; extension in 1791 and
1792, 12; in Meath, 13; trials and
perjured evidence, 7b.; became a se-
cret and permanent organisation,
14; purely Catholic character, 16;
progress in 1793, 17; importance in
Irish history, 18; at first hostile to
Dnited Irish movement, 19; and not
political, 20; French influence, 7d. ;
oath to assist French invasion, 31 ;
Defenderism in 1795, 146 sqq.; no
proof of connection yet with United
Irishmen, 148; plans and objects,
ab. ; confined to Catholics, 149; cha-
racter in Kildare: Laurence O’Con-
nor, 151; weakens influence of gen-
try over their tenants, 152; sus-
pected Defenders sent into King’s
fleet, 172; hideous outrage in
Armagh,176; Insurrection Act, 196 ;
increase of crimes connected with
Defenders, 201; collection of arms,
202; Defender emissaries, 220 ;
causes of discontent, 221; Defenders
gravitate towards the United Irish-
men, 223; numbers join that body,
224; outbreaks in Ulster, 217 sqq.,
278 sqq.; in central counties, 343,
370; revival in 1799, viii. 369

Defoe, 1. 54 7., 60 sq. ; on condition of
labouring poor, 562

Delany, Mrs., ii. 295, iv. 331

Delegates: members of Parliament
treated as—rise of theory, i. 396

Demerara: captured by English from
Dutch, iv. 168; captured from Eng-
lish by French, 202

Democratic spirit, growth of, iii.
228 ; societies and writings, Eng-
land, vi. 16, 55 sq.: Ireland, 364,
366

Denain, battle of, i. 113

Denmark: declares war against
Sweden, v. 228 ; England intervenes,
229; Triple Alliance forces an
armistice and peace, 231; offers
mediation between Turkey and
Russia, 291

DIS

Denmark, Queen of: Irish pension,
iv. 403

Deposing sovereigns: doctrine of right
of, repudiated by Irish Catholics, iv.
469

Derry, Bishop of (Hervey, Earl of
Bristol) ; career, vi. 332; character,
334; places himself at head of de-
mocratic movement (1783), 335 ;
relations with Presbyterians, 336;
claims franchise for Catholics, 337 ;
attends Dublin Convention in royal
state, 341; appears to have meant
to lead a revolution, ib.; his death
(1803), 387; his remedies for Irish
grievances, vil. 440; approved of an
Union, vii. 421

Descartes, v. 301

Despotism: early tendencies towards,
1.6 sqq.; of French sovereigns, v. 371

Devereux,John(Irish boy rebel), viii.110

Devonshire, Duchess of (Georgiana),
v. 57, 87

Devonshire, Duke of, ii. 428, 458, iu. 57

Diamond, battle of the (between
Orangemen and Catholics), vil. 177,
186

Dickinson’s ‘Farmer’s Letters,’ ili.
348, 419

Diderot, v. 304

Dietines (Polish), v. 543, 545

Disembowelling traitors, 1. 506

Disney, Dr. (Unitarian), v. 176

Dissenters : uniformly Whigs in 18th
cent., i. 3; meeting-houses wrecked
by favourers of Sacheverell, 53, 57 ;
hated by High Church party, 87 ;
Test Act extended to Ireland, 91;
Occasional Conformity Act, 92 sq.;
Schism Act, 95; position under
William III. and Anne, 202 sqq.;
exemptions under Toleration Act,
203 sq.; object to Comprehension
Bill, 204: position imperilled in
Anne’s reign, 206; statistics of con-
gregations (1716), 207; devoted to
Hanoverian succession, 2b.; repeal
of Occasional Conformity and
Schism Acts, 258; Test Act miti-
gated, 258 sqq.; ministers bribed by
Walpole, 365; intolerance shown to
them in Ireland, 11. 400; subject to
no religious test in American colo-
nies, iii. 273 1.; relieved from Sub-
scription, 502; remaining disabili-
ties, v. 155 sqq.; validity of their
marriages (Ireland) established, iv.
558; favoured Americans, ili. 530 5
generally with Pitt in 1784, iv. 311;
support Catholie Relief Bill, v. 188 ;

INDEX.

DIS

joy at French Revolution, 449. See
also England—Religious

Distillery: trade encouraged, i. 479;
duty on spirituous liquors, 7b.; clan-
destine stills, 480; increased disease
through gin-drinking, 7b.; licensing
Acts, 481

Divine right of kings, i. 8; distinction
between monarch de jure and de
facto, 63; decline of doctrine, 218

Division lists (parliamentary), rarely
published in 18th cent., i. 446

Divorce: arguments for and against,
i. 493, 495, 496 ; number of divorces,
vi. 268

Dobbs, Francis, iv. 507 sq., 533 sq.,
viii. 49, 373, 492

Dogger Bank, battle of, iv. 169

Dolben, Sir W.: Act to mitigate horrors
of middle passage, vi. 291

Domingo, St.: negro insurrection
(1791), v. 567, 576

Dominica (island), iv. 93, 242

Domestic service: disorganised state
(George II.), i. 570; board wages,
571; vales, ib.

Donauwerth, battle of, i. 37

Donegal, Marquis of : his evictions, iy.
347

Donoughmore, Lord, vii. 267, viii. 416

Dorset, Duke of : twice viceroy of Ire-
land, ii. 428, 431

Douglas, Bishop (Catholic prelate of
London district), vii. 462

Downshire, Lord (Hillsborough), vii.
400, viii. 336, 348 sq., 401, 403, 404,
412, 441, 446, 466, 486

Doyle, Major: earliest advocate of
Catholic emancipation, vi. 574

Draper, Sir W.: contest with Junius,
lil. 234, 242, 244

‘Drapier’s Letters,’ ii. 424

Drennan, Dr., writer of United Ivrish-
men’s addresses, vii. 9; his ‘Wake
of William Orr,’ 352 n.

Dresden, Peace of, i. 420; vicissitudes
of city, ii. 456, 493, 507, 509

Dress and manners, English, vi. 138 sqq.

Drogheda, Lord: helps to raise forces
for Crown, iv. 483

Drogheda, massacre of, ii. 171

Drunkenness: Dutch and Gernian
origin of the national vice, 1. 476 ;
hard drinking among upper classes,
477, vi. 153; enormous consumption
of beer, i. 478 ; passion for gin-drink-
ing, 479; measures passed torestrain
it, 479 sq.; increase of crime and im-
morality, 480; and of disease, 481 ;
regulation of licences to sell spirits,

573

“DUP

2b.; hard drinking in Scotland, ii.
89; in Ireland, 292, 317

Dublin: treatment of prisoners in, i.
501; Handel’s successes, 536; Dublin
Society : foundation and objects, ii.
301; encouragement of art, 302;
population in 18th cent., 318, viii.
317; cheapness of education, ii. 319 ;
libraries, 7b.; elements of disorder,
320; comparison between Dublin
society and that of London, 323;
cheap food, 323 .; booksellers,
324; music and stage, 325; trade
outrages (1784), vi. 358 ; Police Act,
406, vil. 206; penny post, vi. 436 ;
Protestant ascendency defined and
claimed by Corporation, 506

Dubois-Crancé: military organiser of
French Revolution, y. 405

Duck-hunting, i. 553

Duddington, Lieut. (of ‘ Gaspee’), iii.
B74

Duelling: common in England and
Treland, ii. 292; rarely punished,
295; diminishing, 317; duels be-
tween conspicuous men, vi. 266 sq.

Duff, Sir James: attack on rebels at
Gibbet-rath, viii. 69

Duigenan, Dr., Advocate-General (Ire-
land), vi. 567; character, 568;
opponent of Catholics, vii. 114 ;
visitation of Trinity College, 449;
scurrilous attack upon Grattan, viii.
257 sqq.

Dumouriez, French Minister for
Foreign Affairs,v. 601, vi. 34,39, 43, 69

Dunboyne, Lord, charged with support-
ing Whiteboys, iv. 334

Duneannon, Viscountess, v. 57

Dundas, General, viii. 68 sq.

Dundas, Henry: Lord Advocate in
North’s Ministry, iv. 222; Bill
affecting EK. I. Company, 287 ; Trea-
surer of Navy, v. 84; measure for
restoring confiscated Scotch estates,
74; on Fox’s denial of the Fitzherbert
marriage, 144; Home Secretary,
292; on English neutrality (1791),
564; Irish policy (1791), vi. 485 sqq.,
497, 556; desire to favour Catholics,
559; speech on Union, viii. 359

Dungannon: Volunteer meeting (1782),
iv. 582

Dunlayin, massacre at, viil. 79

Dunmore, Lord, iii. 437 sq.

Dunning (Lord Ashburton): resolution
against influence of Crown, iv. 181;
Chancellor of Duchy of Lancaster,209

Dupleix, Governor (French) of Pondi-
chery, i. 428, ii. 455

574

DUR

Du Roveray : with Talleyrand on mis-
sion to England, vi. 10, 49

Dutch Legion (Légion Batave), vi. 98,
104

Duties: multiplicity and complexity,
v. 30; Pitt’s modifications, 31, 35;
probate and legacy duties introduced
32; duties on imports from Ireland,
vi. 603

Dwyer, Captain (Irish highway rob-
ber), ii. 347

Dyson pension (Ireland), iv. 438

i

Earthquake of 1750, ii. 595

Eastern question in 18th century, v
210 sqq., 278

East India Company: relation to
Indian conquests, iii. 119, 193; re-
strictions on dividends, 193; con-
stitution modified, 194; opposed
American tea duty, 395 n.; affairs
from 1760-72, iii. 472 sqq.; gross
abuses, 474; displacement of native
princes, 475; growing power in
Bengal, 476; Clive’s second admini-
stration, 477; his measures of
reform, 478 sq.; directors refuse to
confirm them, 480; Parliament
institutes inquiry into revenues,
481; regulates dividends, 7b.; war
with Hyder Ali, 482; results of his
success, 483; bankruptcy, 484 ;
Adam Smith’s views on the Com-
pany’s methods, 484 sq.; secret
committee of inquiry, 486 ; consti-
tution of Company changed (1773),
488; charters renewed (1781), iv.
285; committees of investigation,
286; officials censured, 287; Burke’s
charges, 288; Fox’s India Bill, 2b.;
arguments for and against, 289;
unpopularity of Bill, 293; thrown
out by Lords, 294; Pitt’s India
Bills, 301, v. 74 sqy.; Company had
monopoly of supplying tea to Ire-
land, vi. 516

FEaver, Captain, ii. 353, 355

Ecclesiastical influence, coincidence
of, with great political and intel-
lectual activity, i. 60

Eckeren, battle of, i. 36

Economists, school of (French), vy.
369

Edgecumbe: reason why he was made
peer, i. 371

Edict of Nantes, Revocation of: in-
dustrial effects in Holland and

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

EMI

Prussia, i. 189; England, 190 sq.;
America, 192

Edinburgh: foundation of school of
medicine, i. 574; condition in 1720,
ii. 837; efficient police, 38; popula-
tion at time of Union, 7b.

Education: in Scotland, ii. 43 sqq.;
Ireland, 107, vi. 451, viii. 498 sqq.;
American colonies, iii. 290; popu-
lar, vi. 276 sq.

Edwards, Jonathan, iii. 279; first
American writer of eminence, 292

Edwin, Sir Humphrey, i. 93

Effingham, Lord, Governor of Jamaica,
v. 567; received vote of thanks from
France, vi. 2

Egremont, Lord, iii. 35, 67, iv. 336

Egypt, insurrection in, fomented by
Russia, v. 220

Highteenth century, greatness of, in
England, vi. 297; darker side, 298 ;
political morality compared with
that of the 19th, 299

Elections: petitions, adjudicated on
by party vote of whole House, i.
440 sqq., lii. 224; costs, in Ireland
in 1713, ii. 314; duration of scrut-
iny diminished, v. 60

Elective monarchy, evils of, iii. 1

Electoral Prince: made Duke of Cam-
bridge, i. 155

Elizabeth, Czarina, ii. 449, ili. 45

Elizabeth, Queen (England): treat-
ment of Ireland, ii. 95

Elliot, Sir George (defender of Gib-
raltar), iv. 244

Elliot, Sir Gilbert, iv. 274 m., v. 128,
150, 160, 526

Elliot, Hugh, English Minister at
Copenhagen, v. 231

Ellis, Welbore, Secretary of War, in
North’s ministry, iv. 203, v. 144

Elphinstone, Admiral: in Russian
navy, v. 227; defeat of Dutch in
Saldanha Bay, vii. 229

Emancipation, Catholic.
lies, Irish

Emigration: condition of in 17th
cent., li. 1; Irish, after English
Revolution, 259; of Protestants to
Continent, 260; to West Indies, 261;
Catholics to French, Spanish, Aus-
trian armies, 262 sq.; effects on
Ireland, 265; to America, iv. 430,
435, vi. 202

Emigrés, French :
549, 575

Eminent Americans, iii. 292; Irish-
men, ll. 262 sqq., 299 sqq., 302, 319,
325

See Catho-

vy. 495, 518, 547,

INDEX. 575

EMM

Emmet’s (Robert) Rebellion (1803),
vill. 530

Emmet, Thomas Addis ; counter
manifesto to Dublin Corporation’s
claim of Protestant ascendency, vi.
526; on origin of United Irishmen
movement, vii. 222; desire for
adjustment of differences after
Bantry Bay, 321; character and
career, Vili. 3 sq.; arrest, 11; im-
prisonment, 249 sq.

Encyclopedists, the, v. 305, 328, 329,
337

England—foreign, 1700-54: effects of
English hatred of foreigners, i. 17 ;
Tory maxim to isolate England from
Continental affairs, 23; Spanish suc-
cession dispute, 24 sqq.; complica-
tions ensuing, 25-37; peace nego-
tiations, 45, 47; disputes with
Spain regarding New World, 382 ;
Jenkins’s ears, 384; neutrality of
Hanover, 393; subsidy to Maria
Theresa, 7b. ; war in her behalf, 400
sqq-; British army in Flanders, 405 ;
Dettingen, 406; unpopularity of
war, 407; dismemberment of France
projected, 411; abortive attempt at
invasion by France, 413; alliance
with Holland, Austria, and Saxony,
418; naval successes (1745-47),
423';national debt increased through
subsidies granted, 427; peace with
France, 430

England—foreign, 1754-60: disputes
with France about possessions in
America, ii. 443; war, 444; attack
on French forts, 446; expedition of
Hawke, 447; German subsidies,
448; alliance with Prussia, 449;
fear of French invasion, 452; Byng’s
failure to relieve Minorca, 453;
disasters in America, 454; conflicts
with France in India, 455; French
gain possession of Hanover, 487 ;
despondency of statesmen, 488 ;
energetic action of Pitt,489; martial
enthusiasm in the towns, 490; sub-
sidy to Frederick II., 491; conquest of
Canada, 494; destruction of French
power in India, 499 sqq. ; victory of
Minden, 507; battle of Warburg,
510

England—foreign, 1760-69: objections
to German war, iii. 30; negotiations
for peace, 31; terms proposed, 32 ;
the ‘Family Compact’ between
France and Spain, 33 ; Pitt’s policy
rejected by the Ministry, 35; justi-
fied by events, 38; conquests in

ENG

West Indies, 39; Peace of Paris,
44; alleged treachery to Frederick
II, 45; failure of an attempted
Northern alliance, 119; Chatham’s
foreign and Indian policy, 7b.; loss
of Corsica, 124, 153; dispute with
Ae about the Falkland Islands,
53 :

England—foreign, 1779-81: war de-
clared by Spain (1779), iv. 110;
French expeditions in Africa and
against Jersey, 111, 164; French and
Spanish fleets in Channel, 112, 171;
the armed neutrality, 156; disputes
with Holland, 158; declaration of
war, 162; deplorable condition of
England, 163; siege of Gibraltar,
164; capture of St. Eustatius, 166
sqq-.; Tobago, 169; Pensacola, 171 ;
Minorca, 7b.; war with Hyder Ali,
172

England—foreign, 1785-91: Franco-

Dutch alliance, y. 78; England
supports Prussian intervention in
Holland, 80; result, 81; alliance
with Netherlands and Prussia, 82;
difficulty with Spain about Nootka
Sound, 206 ; convention with Spain,
208; war with Tippoo Sahib, 209; al-
liance with Russia on Eastern ques-
tion, 214; Triple Alliance, 229; re-
sentment of Russia, 231; Prussia’s
designs disclosed, 232; divergence
from Prussian policy, 238; Eng-
lish negligence of foreign politics,
239; Pitt’s replies to Prussia, ib. ;
statement of policy, 247; proposes
armistice, 255; censures Prussian
proposals, 256; coldness between the
two Governments, 257 ; Prussian in-
trigues, 260 ; efforts of Hngland and
Holland to produce peace, 261; Peace
of Sistova, 263; subsidy to Sweden,
270; results of Triple Alliance, 273;
cession of Oczakow demanded, 274
sqq.; its reasons, 276 sqq.; determi-
nation to support Prussia, 280 ;
Russian designs against India, 285 ;
Pitt’s anti-Russian policy opposed
in Parliament, 286; foreign Powers
refuse to support England, 291; ul-
timatum sent to Russia and re-
called, 292; triumph of Russia, 297 ;
attitude towards Poland (1791), 546 ;
absolute neutrality in French affairs,
558, 576; neutrality sincere, 562;
popular indifference to foreign
affairs, 565; object of Pitt’s foreign
policy, 566; second partition of
Poland, vi. 83 sqq.; protest, 91

576 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ENG

England and America, 1763-74: re-
lations with American colonies, iii.
267 sqq.; Grenville’s policy towards
America, 307; taxation of colonies,
812 sqq.; Rockingham ministry
indifferent to American affairs,
332; Grenville’s arguments for
taxing colonies, 334; Pitt’s reply,
336; Stamp Act repealed, 339 ;
Declaratory Act, 340; irritation
against America, 349; Towns-
hend’s colonial taxation, 351;
he suspends New York Assembly,
8352; establishes new Board of Cus-
toms, and new duties, 353 ; Ameri-
can reception of these measures,
855; attitude of English Parliament
(1768-69), 363; traitors to be tried
in England, 2b.; all duties repealed
except that on tea, 365 ; destruction
of the ‘Gaspee,’ 373; Boston tea-
ships, 387; impeachment of Oliver,
388; English opinion on American
question, 388 sqq

England and America, 1774-76:
Boston harbour closed, iii. 397 ; sus-
pension of Massachusetts charter,
2b.; soldiers to be tried in England,
398; Quartering Act, Quebec Act,
399; other colonies support Boston,
403; illusions in America and in
England, 415; American loyalists,
418; efforts of conciliation by Chat-
ham, 421; Parliament cuts off trade
of America, and increases army at
Boston, 423; North’s conciliation,
ab.; events of 1775, 425 sqq.; ne-
groes and Indians, 439; English
party in America, 441; Boston
evacuated, 451; Act authorising
confiscation of American ships, 453 ;
difficulty in raising soldiers, 455;
enlistment of German mercenaries,
458; produces Declaration of Inde-
pendence, 459; opinion on American
question, English, Scotch, Irish,
528 sqq.; party aspects of question,
541

England and America, 1776-77:
events in 1776, iv. 1 sqq.; results
of Howe’s incapacity, 21, 25, 27,
37; English successes, 56; public
opinion, 64 sq.; capitulation of
Saratoga, 63; leads to alliance of
France with America, 64; popu-
larity of war at close of 1776;
attempts to burn dockyards, 65 ; de-
spondency of Whigs, 67; their open
advocacy of American cause, 68 ;
uncompromising attitude of King,

ENG

70; conduct of North, 72; speech
of Chatham, 74; overtures to Frank-
lin, 75; North’s conciliatory mea-
sures, 1b.; commissioners sent to
America, 78; war with France, 79;
general desire for a Chatham mini-
stry, 80; obstinate refusal of King,
82; death of Chatham, 85; effects
on the ministry, 87; growth of
military spirit caused by prospect of
French war, 2b.; failure of attempts
at party fusion, 88

England and America, 1778-80: ex-
pedition of 1778, iv. 92; violation of
Convention of Saratoga, 96; Eng-
lish conduct war more fiercely, 98 ;
despair of loyalists, 99; projected
invasion of Canada, 101; resolution
of King to continue war, 106 ; mini-
sterial changes, 108; French and
Spanish fleets in Channel, 112;
Paul Jones, 113; depreciation of
American paper, 115; expeditions
of 1779, 117 sqq.; failure of English
invasion of North Carolina, 124;
grounds for belief that England would
ultimately triumph, 128; treason of
Lee and Arnold, 133 sqq.; execution
of Major André, 143; summary of
campaign of 1780, 147; proposals
for peace, 176 sq.; obstinacy of
King, 178; change of sentiment in
country, 179

England and America, 1781-82: Cow-
pens, iv. 187 ; savage character of
Southern war, 188: Arnold in Vir-
ginia, 189; English at Yorktown,
197; Washington and Rochambeau
in Virginia, 198 ; De Grasse in
Chesapeake, 7b.; destruction of New
London, 199; surrender of York-
town, 200; arrival of news in Eng-
land, 201; long succession of disas-
ters, 202; Oswald’s negotiations with
Franklin, 226 sqq.; whole force con-
centrated at New York and in Canada
(1782), 251 ; preliminary articles of
peace with France, Spain and
America (1782), 252 ; stages of
negotiation, 253 sqq.; estimate of
results, 263; abandonment of loyal-
ists, 264; annuities granted to a
few of them, 267; unpopularity of
peace, 268; treaties of peace signed)
284

England—Effects of French Revolu-
tion on Politics: belief that it would
promote European peace, v. 443 ;
benefit expected from eclipse of
France, 444; Whig antipathy to

INDEX.

ENG

France, 445; refusal to send flour
there, 446; revival of democratic
societies, 447, 498; hopes of Dis-
senters, 448; aristocratic democrats,
449; libels on Constitution, 450;
healthy condition of country, 451 ;
salutary literary and religious influ-
ences, 452; first impressions of Fox
and Burke, 453; speeches of Fox,
455, 459; of Pitt and Burke, 456;
motives attributed to Fox and Burke,
459; Burke’s ‘ Reflections on French
Revolution,’ 462 sgq.; schism in
Whig party, 480; enthusiasts for
Revolution, 496
England—Relations with France
(1792): English distrust Leopold
rather than France, vi. 1; pacific
King’s speech, 3; reduction of army
and navy, 4; French seek alliance
with England, 7; and a loan, 12;
state of politics, 16; attempted
coalition, 17; French and English
positions contrasted, 17 sq.; refusal
to interfere in favour of Lewis, 25 ;
French King dethroned, 27; recall
of English ambassador, 28; Sep-
tember massacres: effect on English
‘statesmen, 87; reports of French
political agents in England, 465 ;
‘speedy recognition of Republic de-
manded, 49; Grenville’s opinions
and policy, 53; English addresses to
the Convention, 55; growing sedition,
56; Grenville’s estimate of danger,
57; French provocations, 58; Pitt’s
chief anxiety about Holland, 60;
apprehensions of danger, 61; deter-
mination to abide by Treaty of
Alliance (1788), 62; negotiations
with Russia and Austris, 64; dis-
quieting news from Holland, 65;
‘Grenville on the alert, 66; French
provocations to Holland, 67 sqq.;
De Maulde gained over by England,
71; compromising papers seized,
72; Auckland’s advice, 73; Gren-
ville calls on Holland to arm, 74;
English militia called out, 75; Par-
liament summoned, 2b. ; division
among Whigs, 76; Alien Bill: in-
cendiary speeches of Fox, 77;
arrogance of Chauyelin, 92; French
provocations, 93 ; propagandism,
ab. ; negotiations of Maret, 94; war-
like public opinion, 96; relations of
Opposition with Chauyelin, 97 ; in-
vasion of Holland postponed, 98 ;
peremptory note from Chauvelin,
99; Grenville’s communication to

VOL. VIII.

England — political :

577

ENG

Russia, 100; reply to Chauvelin,
101; unequivocal language about
Holland, 103; question of French
West Indian Islands, 105; Chau-
velin protests against Alien Act,
107; Lebrun’s answer to Grenville,
108; French repudiation of views
of conquest, 109; English reasons
for believing in war, 110; replies of
Grenville to Chauvelin, 111; letter
of Miles to Maret, 112; proposed ex-
change of Austrian Netherlands for
Bavaria, 113 ; imminence of attack
on Holland, 7b.; De Maulde visits
Auckland, 119; negotiations with
Dumouriez, 120, 127; English war
feeling roused by execution of
Lewis, 121; dismissal of Chauvelin,
123; King’s message to Parliament,
ab.; terms of proposed alliance with
Prussia and Emperor, 129; pro-
posed representation to France,
130; ought England to be blamed
for the French war? 131 sqq. ;
changes in character of war, 134;
it opens new era in English politics,
135

England—French War: summary of

military and naval events of 1794-
97, vil. 229 sq.; Spain declares war
against England, 230; unsuccessful
peace negotiations at Paris, 231;
French in Bantry Bay, 256; result,
263 ; vicissitudes of war in 1796-97,
386; Portugal England’s only ally,
387; peace negotiations at Lille,
1b.; Pitt’s proposals, 388; demands
of Directory, 390; peace signed
between Portugal and France, 393 ;
possibility of corrupting Directors,
394; yvevolution of 18 fructidor,
394 ; Malmesbury expelled from
France, 395; hopes of peace dis-
pelled, 396; channels through which
French intrigues with United Ivish-
men became known, 399; Camper-
down, 411
England and Ireland. See Ireland
principles of
Whigs and Tories, i. 1; decline
of yeoman class, 6; restrictions on
political influence of commercial
class, 7; subserviency of judges,
1b.; tendencies towards despotism,
8; reaction from enthusiasm of
loyalty, 9; causes of Revolution,
10; Tory aid in that movement,
12; unpopularity of Revolutionary
Government, 16; English antipathy
to foreigners gradually turns against

Pant

578 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ENG

Revolution, 23; vicissitudes of the
two parties after accession of Anne,
33 sqq-; jealousy towards Holland,
108; confederation with France and
Prussia (1725), 350; defensive alli-
ance with France and Spain, 353 ;
sentiment anti-Gallican, 356; mate-
rial development, 361 ; events which
led to Walpole’s fall, 393 sq. ; growth
of republican spirit, 396; antagon-
ism of Carteret and Pulteney, 399;
Pelham Prime Minister, 410; com-
mercial element conspicuous in
administration, 433; parliamentary
corruption: rotten boroughs, 435;
bribery, 486; arbitrary proceedings
of the House of Commons, 436 sqq.;
pensioners and placeholders in Par-
liament, 447; duration of Parlia-
ments, 448; political capacity of
upper classes, 451; character of
representatives of counties and
large towns, 452; fear of Pre-
tender, 452; influence of popular
opinion, 453; simplicity of poli-
tics, 1b.; low standard of political
honour, 454; evils of neglect of
literature, 455; decline in religious
tone, 465 ; and in public spirit, 467 ;
apathy in 1745, 468; but not
through sympathy with Pretender,
469 ; benefits of mixture of classes,
472; system of government con-
trasts favourably with Continental
administrations, 473; commercial
policy towards colonies, i. 7; rela-
tions of home Government toslavery,
14; possessions in Hast, 19 sq.; in
West Indies, 20; ministry of Duke
of Newcastle, 438 sqq.; intrigues
of Henry Fox and William Pitt,
442; vacillation of Newcastle, 445 ;
ministry of Devonshire and Pitt,
458; ministerial interregnum, 462 ;
coalition ministry of Newcastle, 7b.;
decadence of party government, 464 ;
advantages of English type of mon-
archy, li. 5; political position of
the sovereign, 6; his withdrawal
- from active politics, 7; the Cabinet
has taken place of Privy Council,
9; accession of George III., 10;
his political errors, 14; ecclesiasti-
cal and legal tendencies towards
despotism, 17; growth of Tory sen-
timent, 18; scheme for destroying
parties, 19; adopted by the Court,
20; ‘the King’s friends,’ 21; con-
ception of the Cabinet, 2b.; Lord
Bath’s ‘Seasonable Hints,’ 22;

England — religious:

ENG

divisions in the ministry, 24 ; tenure
of judges, 27; resignation of Pitt
and Temple, 35; Bute succeeds
Newcastle as Prime Minister, 41;
Grenville ministry, 64; prosecution
of Wilkes, 70 sqq.; Rockingham
ministry, 92; degeneracy of party
government, 102 sqq.; Chatham:
ministry, 111; Tory element in it,
120; growing ascendency of North,
126; Wilkes’s case, 128 sqq.; re-
signation of Chatham, 138; minis-
terial difficulties and changes, 153:
sqq.; parliamentary reform, 170
sqq.; birth of English Radicalism,
174; analysis of opinions regard-
ing American taxation, 396 sq.;
coercive Acts for America, 397; re-
sults, 403; policy towards Ireland
in early years of George III., 461,
474; party aspects of American
question (1776), 541; fear of Tory
ascendency, 544; divided state of
country, 545; growing strength of
peace party (1780), iv. 179; econo-
mical reform question, 179 sq. 5
widespread political agitation, 180 ;
Dunning’s resolution against influ-
ence of Crown, 181; relations with
Trish Parliament, 351 sqqg.: opposi-
tion to Irish free trade, 449; ten-
dency towards religious toleration,
474; unofficial relations with Vati-
can, 475; state of finances in 1784,
v. 28; new Constitution for Canada,
195

Established
Church clergy mainly Tories, i. 3;
Dissenters antipapal and Whigs, 5;
doctrine of divine right of kings, 8;
aid of Church party towards the
Revolution, 10; religious liberty ex-
tended by it, 13; popular discon-
tent with the Revolution stimulated
by the Church, 16; antipathy to
Rome, 17; English interest in con-
tinental Protestants, 19; severe
orthodoxy of Queen Anne, 31; ec-
clesiastical agitation about Occa-
sional Conformity Bill, 37; partial
extinction of non-juror schism, 50 ;
decline of dogmatic theology, ii.
522; growth of physical science,
523; Deism not popular among
higher intellects, 524; Royal So-
ciety, 525; small amount of criti-
cism, 527; 18th century Deists left
little of enduring value, 528; latent
scepticism and indifference, 529;
abandonment of extempore preach-

INDEX. . 579

ENG

ing, 581; observance of Sunday,
532; neglect of public worship,
533; Sunday amusements, 534;
decadence of Universities, 535;
neglect of Fathers, 536; Trinitarian
controversy: Arianism in the
Church and among Dissenters, 537
sq.; Presbyterian ‘New Light’
opinions, 538 ; revolt against articles
of faith, 539; liberty of discussion,
540; subscription to the Articles,
542 ; causes predisposing to Metho-
dism, 545 sqq.; institution and in-
fluence of that sect,-549 sqq.; Hvan-
gelical revival, 619 sqq.

England—religious: Evangelical Re-
vival: originated from Methodism,
ii. 619 ; imitators of Whitefield’s ora-
tory, 620; Berridge, 7b.; model of
Rowland Hill, 621 ; Grimshaw, 622;
Romaine, 625; other early Evan-
gelicals, 626; effect of Evangelical-
ism in stimulating philanthropy,
634 ; in counteracting revolutionary
spirit, 635; in mitigating evils ac-
companying growth of manufac-
tures, 636; religious efficacy of its
teaching, 638; its defects, 639;
severance from intellect of country,
640; Sabbatarianism, 641; effects
on Catholic question; 642

England—religious: decrease of in-
tolerance, iii. 492; jurisdiction of
Ecclesiastical Courts, 493 ; penances
commuted for money payment, 494 ;
laws regarding excommunication,
ib.; abuses, 495; abuses of Test Act
in connection with City offices, 496 ;
movement for abolishing subscrip-
tion to the Articles, 497 ; Dissenters
relieved from Subscription, 502;
Catholic question, 503 sq.; working
of penal laws, 506 sqg.; Catholic
Relief Bill (1778), 508; anti-Catholic
riots in Scotland, 509; Gordon
riots, 510 sqq.

England—+veligious: progress of re-
ligious liberty, v. 154 sqq.; debates
on Beaufoy’s motions for repealing
Test and Corporation Acts (1787—
89), 155; causes of defeat, 159;
influence of French Revolution, 160,
189; Stanhope’s Toleration Bill,
160; obsolete persecuting laws, 161;
Sabbatarianism, 162; Sunday news-
papers, 164; decline of theological
influence in Government, 164 ; 18th
century notion of an Established
Church, 167; and of toleration,
168; Locke, Warburton, and Paley,

ENG

160 sq.; Burke’s attack upon Athe-
ists, 174; legislation in favour of
Catholics: English, 184; Scotch,
190; in favour of Scotch Episcopa-
lians, 191

England—social: drunkenness, i, 476

sqq-; consumption of beer, 478;
gin-drinking, 479 ; increase of crime
and immorality, 480; spirit licences,
481; Mohocks, 482; right of sanc-
tuary, 485; highway robberies, 487 ;
smuggling, 488; wrecking, 489;
reform of marriage laws, 490 sqq.;
banns or licence required, 492;
question of divorce, 493 sqq.; decline
of spirit of philanthropy and re-
form, 498; Berkeley and Oglethorpe,
499 ; condition of debtors’ prisons,
500 sqq.; neglect of army and navy,
504; public executions, 505; brutal
punishments, 506; the nation as-
sumes its modern aspect, 507; stand-
ing armies, 509; jealousy of the
army, 513; barracks, 515; growth
of newspapers and magazines, 519 ;
coarseness of manners, 7b.; fantastic
schemes of speculation, 521; gam-
bling, 522; lotteries, 2b.; influence
of Revolution on taste, 523; land-
scape-gardening, 524; taste for
botany, 525; painting, 526 sqq.;
music, 531; opera, 532; Han-
del controversy, 533 sqq.; im-
morality of stage, 538; low thea-
trical taste, 542; revival of Shake-
speare, 544; Garrick, 545; denun-
ciations of theatre, 548; humanity
to animals, 550; vivisection, 551;
bull-baiting, 552; cockfighting, 553 ;
inland watering-places, 554; sea-
bathing, 555; manner of life of
country gentry, 556; their amuse-
ments, 557 sq. ; condition of people,
1700-60, 558 sqq.; workmen, 559;
paupers, 560; wages, 562; enclosure
of common lands, 564; penny post
for London, 568; domestic service,
570 ; state of medical science,
573; public lectures on anatomy,
574; inoculation, 575

England—social: Dress and Manners :

brilliant colours in male attire, vi.
138 ; dress designating politics, 139;
and professions, 141; love of
pageantry, 142; lying in state, 1438 ;
position of aristocracy, 7b.; less
connected than formerly with com-
merce, 144; outward distinctions of
trades and professions diminishing,
145; wigs and swords no longer

PP 2

580 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ENG

worn in society, 146; introduction
of umbrellas, 7b.; Arkwright and
Crompton transform dress, 147;
fashion of extreme simplicity, 70. ;
influence of Fox and of French
Revolution on dress, 148; hair
powder discarded, 149; dress
assumes its modern character, 70. ;
‘Asiatic luxury,’ 150

Enegland—social : Popular Anuise-
ments: assemblies and masquer-
ades, vi. 151; gambling, 7b.; lateness
of hours, 152; hard drinking, 153;
fencing, bull-baiting, cockfighting,
155; racing and hunting, 156; intro-
duction of regatta, 157.—Theatre :
licensing Act of 1737, 157; growth
of provincial stage, 158; opera,
159 ; introduction of pianoforte, 160

-England—social: English Art: low
state under the first two Georges,
i. 526 sqq., vi. 160; portrait-painting,
i. 529; engraving, 530; increased
interest in art after 1750, vi. 161;
great artists, 7b. ; foundation of
Reyal Academy, 2b.; very little
royal patronage, 162; landscapes
and portraits, 7b.; architecture,
sculpture, pottery, engravings, 163 ;
taste for exhibitions, 164 ; increased
price of works of art, 164

England—social : Popularisation of
Knowledge : passion for physical
science, vi. 164; lectures, encyclo-
pedias, libraries, 165; children’s
literature, 166 ; blue-stocking clubs,
ab. ; multiplication of female
authors, 167

England—social: Class Changes :
assimilation of manners among
gentry, vi. 167; introduction of
London fashions in country, 168;
disappearance of small country
squires, 170; yeomen, 172; causes
of their disappearance, 173; roads
and travelling, stage coaches, turn-
pikes, 174; Palmer’s coaches, 177;
inereased love of travelling, 178;
intercourse with Continent, 179 ;
growing love of natural beauty,
180 ; effect on literature, ib. ; Pope’s
poetry and Addison’s criticism, 7b.;
rise of new school of poetry, 183;
increased tendency in middle class to
distinguish grades, 184; tradesmen
under George II. and under George
iII., 185 ; dishonesty in trade, 186 ;
great industrial prosperity under
George III., 187

England—social ; Agricultwre : im-

ENG
provements introduced, vi. 188 ;
influences consolidating farms,

189; domestic manufactures, 2b. ;
destroyed by machinery, 190; Eng-
land ceased to be wheat-exporting,
191; early corn laws, 7b. ; opinions
on corn bounties, 192; corn law of
1773, 194; common land, 194;
Enclosure Bills, 196; good results,
197; evils, 198; rapid disappear-
ance of small farmers, 199 ; farmers
turned into labourers, 2b.; increase
of population, chiefly in towns,
201; ‘The Deserted Village,’ 202;
corn law of 1791, 203; enormous
prices of wheat, 7b.; condition of
agricultural classes 1700-75, 204;
deterioration 1775-1800, 205; plans
for assisting them, 7b.; alterations
in poor law, 206

England—social : Manufactwres : In-

dian calicoes, vi. 206; dawn of
native cotton manufacture, 207 ;
Kay’s fly-shuttle, 7b. ; inventions of
Hargreaves, Arkwright, Crompton,
&c., 208; persecution of inventors,
209; rapid increase of cotton
manufacture, 210; chief centres,
1b.; Wedgwood pottery, 211; iron
manufacture, 212; canals, 213;
early steam engines, 215; James
Watt, 7b.; transformation of Eng-
land from agricultural to manufac-
turing country, 217; manufactures
supported England through French
war, 218; their favourable influence
on human happiness, 219 ; preju-
dicial effects in destroying domestic
industries, 220; sanitary neglect
and demoralisation in early period
of factories, 221; causes that
ageravated evil, 221; Place’s de-
scription of London workmen, 222 ;
children in factories, 223; first
Factory Act, 1802, 225.—Politicatl
Influence of Manufactures : moder-
ation and conservatism of old
English politics, 226; growing in-
fluence of great towns changes
type, 228; hastens parliamentary
reform, 2b.; and abolition of corn
laws, 229; manufacturers origin-
ally monopolists, 7b.

England—social : Sphere of Govern-

ment: ancient and medieval theory,
vi. 231; restriction of sphere after
Revolution, 232; Elizabeth’s Ap-
prentice Act falls into disuse, 233;
regulation of wages by law, 234;
other instances of regulation of in-

INDEX.

¥ ENG

dustry, 235; laws emancipating
industry, 237; strong 18th century
feeling in favour of restricting the
powers of government, 238; Burke
and Adam Smith, 239; shortcomings
of their theories, 241; enlargements
of sphere of government, 7b.; State
education, 242; factory laws, 2b. ;
sanitary laws, 243; regulation of
railways, 7b.; philanthropic inter-
ference, %b.; democracy, 244;
standing armies, 2b.; laws of suc-
cession, &c., ib.; reversal of 18th
century tendency, 245
England —social : Penal Code : causes
of its severity and absurdity, vi.
245 ; illustrations, 247 ; executions,
249; Burke’s protests against their
multiplication, 7b.; improvements
in code in 18th century, 251; trials,
252; transportation, 253; Howard
on abuses in English gaols, 255;
compared with Continental gaols,
258; measures of reform, 259;
treatment of debtors, 260; charac-
ter of Howard’s reformation, 261
England—social: Crime: character
of that of 18th century, vi. 262;
causes of large amount of crime in
England, 263; Act of 1773 for
arrest of criminals who escaped
to or from Scotland, 264; highway-
men, ib.; duelling, 266; proofs of
moral progress, 267; adultery and
divorce, 268 ; general moral charac-
ter of 18th century, 271
England—social: Reforming Spirit :
scope for philanthropy less than
at present, vi. 271; attempts to
regulate morals by law generally
abandoned, 272; legislation about
pauper children and lunatics, vb. ;
London charities, 273 ; moral effects
of Eyangelical movement, 274;
education little attended to in Eng-
land, 276; Sunday schools, 277 ;
increased sense of duty to savage
and pagan nations, 278
England—social: Slave Trade: its
earliest opponents; vi. 279; Act of
1750 regulating it, 7b.; case of
slave called Somerset, 280; Hartley
brings the question before Parlia-
ment, 281; Quaker abolitionists,
ib.; slave trade censured in origi-
nal draft of Declaration of Inde-
pendence, 282; Dean Tucker on
English slave trade, ib. ; provisions
of American Constitution of 1787,
284; slaves in Jamaica, 280 ; exten-

581

EXP

sion of the trade after peace of
1783, 286; the ‘ Zong’ (slave ship),
2b.; organised agitation for aboli-
tion, 287; original scope, 7b ; collec-
tion of evidence, 288 ; William Wil-
berforce, 289 ; favourable prospects
of cause in 1788, 290; inquiry of
Privy Council, 7b.; Pitt’s motion,
291; Dolben’s Act, ib.; agitation in
1789-90, 292 ; French abolitionists,
ab.; reaction produced by Revolu-
tion and St. Domingo insurrection,
293 ; Sierra Leone Colony, ib. ; agi-
tation in 1792, 294; scheme of
gradual abolition, 295; reaction in
1793-94, 2b.; failure of struggle in
last years of century, 296

Engraving, English, i. 530, vi. 163 ;
copyright in engravings, ib.

‘Enegrossers,’ speculators for mono-
poly of sale of provisions, vi. 237

Enniscorthy: captured by Irish rebels,
viii. 84

Episcopalians, Scotch: liberty of
worship provided by Toleration Act,
ii. 45; refusal to subscribe the ‘ as-
surance,’ 46; ‘Protected Ministers,’
2b.; relations with English Church,
47; Presbyterian interference, 2b. ;
Episcopalans crushed by laws of
great severity, 67 ; measure of relief
(1795), v. 191

Erskine, Thomas: resolution against
abuses in Indian government, iv.
295; opposed to Pitt, 297; on ter-
mination of impeachment by disso-
lution, v. 192

Erskine, Monsignor: representative
of the Pope at English Court, vii.
462

Esmonde, Dr.: treachery at Pros-
perous (Ireland), viii. 57 sq.

Kssequibo: taken by English from
Dutch, iv. 168; taken by French
from English, 202

Estaing, Count d’ (French admiral) :
operations in aid of Americans, iy.
91, 93, 115, 119

Kugene, Prince, i. 36, 37, 111

Eustache, General (French): demand
to march through Maestricht, vi. 69

Excommunication, laws regarding, iii.
494

Executions, public: by hanging, burn-
ing, pressure, 1. 505 sqq.; statistics,
1749-83, vi. 249; ‘drop’ introduced,
252

Exports: value temp. Anne, i. 195;
temp. George II. and George III.,
yi. 187

582

EYR

Eyre, Lord: example of manner of
Trish country life, ii. 294

Eyre, Colonel Stratford: account of
condition of Galway (1747), 11. 340 sq.

F

Factories: employment of children,
vi. 223; white slavery, 225; first
Factory Act, ib.

‘Fairesses, Daniel Mahony’s,’ ii. 350;
‘Fairies’ (Tipperary), iv. 329

Falkirk, battle of, 1. 423

Falkland Islands: taken from English

, by Spaniards, ili. 154

‘Family Compact,’ v. 38, 45, 214

Famines, ii. 218, v. 385, 427

Farms: size and working, vi. 189;
consolidation, 199

Farnese, Elizabeth: wife of Philip V.
(Spain), 1. 232

Fawcett, General: commander against
Wexford rebels, viii. 87

Fay (suspected Defender in Meath),
trial of, vii. 13

Feathers’ Tavern Association (against
Subscription), iil. 497

Felonies, enormous multiplication of,
yi. 247 sqq.

Fencibles (organised Volunteers, Ire-
land), vi. 326

Fénelon, v. 301, 390

Fenianism, vii. 543

Ferdinand of Brunswick, Prince, ii.
491, 493, 507

Ferguson, Major: killed in North
Carolina, iv. 124

Ferrers, Lord: the ‘drop’ first used at
his execution, vi. 253

Fersen, Count (friend of Marie Antoi-
nette), iv. 129

Fielding, Admiral: attempt to search
Dutch ships, iv. 160

Fielding, H.: instituted new police for
London, i. 487

Fielding, Sir John: house wrecked in
Gordon riots, ili. 515

Finagan, Teige (a famous Irish tory),
account of, ii. 349

Fingall, Lord, vii. 53, vill. 58, 67

Finland; invaded by Gustavus III.
(Sweden), v. 226, 269

Fisheries—Irish : vicissitudes of the
industry, ii. 334; Newfoundland—
French rights, iv. 252; rights of
United States, 256, 259; Green-
land, v. 22

Fitzgerald, George Robert: extraordi-
nary career, Vi. 339 sqq.

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

FIT :

Fitzgerald, Lady Edward, vii. 381, 400

Fitzgerald, Lord Edward: negotiations
with France, vii. 236 sq., 250; inti-
macy with advocates of assassina-
tion, 337; conduct as grand juror,
373; head of military organisation
of United Irishmen, vill. 6; not
arrested with Committee of United
Irishmen, 11; Government search
for him, 36; tracked, 41; captured,
42; his death-bed, 46; scene at his
death, 48

Fitzgerald, Lord Henry : member (with
Grattan) for City of Dublin, vi. 457

Fitzgerald, Robert (Knight of Kerry) :
description of Whiteboy disturb-
ances, and condition of people, iv.
340

Fitzgerald, Thomas Judkin (High
Sheriff of Tipperary): sketch of his
character and conduct, vill. 22 sqq.,
199, 200

Fitzgibbon (Karl of Clare): Attorney-
General (Ireland), iv. 314, 526; on
Catholic education (1782), 530; at-
tempt to check democratic reformers,
vi.365; career and character, 377 sq.;
opposed every measure of concession,
379; theory that corruption should be
normal method of government, 380 ;
Hume and Paley held like opinion,
381; legislation against tumultuous
risings and assemblies, 408; argu-
ments on Regency question, 425;
made Chancellor, 429; attack on
Catholic petition to King, 565;
speech on Catholic Relief Bill (1793),
588 sqq.; influential position at the
time, 594; made Viscount, vii. 21;
doctrine that Catholic Emancipa-
tion is inconsistent with the corona-
tion oath, 84 ; legal argument sub-
mitted to King, 88; assaulted by
mob, 99; secret letters to King, 108;
made Earl of Clare, 116; defence of
Government in Orv’s case, 359 7.;
of Government policy on Emanci-
pation and reform, 421; joins cabal
against Abercromby, 432; on state
of Kildare, viii. 35; at Lord E.
Fitzgerald’s death, 47; visit to Pitt:
Union determined on, 292; first
Irishman made Chancellor, 311;
opposition to Maynooth grant, 387 ;
defence of Union in Irish House of
Lords, 458 ; last days, 525; riot at
his funeral, 527

Fitzherbert, Mr.: English negotiator
with Spain (1790), v. 208

Fitzherbert, Mrs.: relations with

INDEX.

FIT

Prince of Wales, v. 86 sqq.; their
marriage, 88; secret disclosed, 89 ;
denied, 91; her subsequent history,
93; character, 94

Fitzpatrick, Chief Secretary to Duke
of Portland (Viceroy), iv. 544, vi.
308, viii. 391

Fitzwilliam, Lord. See Ireland—Vice-
roy Fitzwilliam

Flanders: British army in, i. 405;
Dettingen, 406; abortive issue of
campaign, 411; brilliant campaign
of French, 414. See Netherlands

Fleet Prison : marriages, i. 490; noted
instances of clandestine marriages,
491; treatment of prisoners, 500

Fleetwood, Bishop, sermons against
passive obedience, i. 121 sq.

Fletcher of Saltoun: on state of Scot-
land (1698) ii. 39 sq.; his proposed
remedies, 41

Fleury, Cardinal: assisted Walpoie’s
return to office, i. 327; co-operated
with his peace policy, 352; com-
pelled to support Stanislaus (Poland),
354 ; disgrace and death, 403 ;
treatment of Parliament of Paris,
v. 322

Flood, Henry: early career, iv. 362,
375, 378, 383, 386, 393, 400; pro-
motes Absentee tax,-412 ; and eorn
bounties, 415 ; eloquence, 416; life
and character, 419, 422; why he
took office, 420 sq.; desires pro-
vostship of Trin. Coll. Dub., 422;
Vice-Treasurer, 427; wish to enter
English Parliament, 428; policy
towards Catholics, 471; dismissal
from office, 525; efforts against
Poyning’s Law, 528; in English
House of Commons, v. 39, 41; Re-
form Bill (1790), 193; discontent,
wi. 301; argument on ‘Simple Re-
peal’ question, 303; popularity of
his doctrines, 310; Renunciation
Act obtained, 313; held seat at
same time in both Parliaments, 316;
relations with Volunteers, 322, 329;
hostile to Grattan, 327, 330; sup-
ports military retrenchment, 329 ;
draws up and introduces Volunteer
Reform Bill, 344 sq.; Reform Bill
of 1784, 347; desires to create
popular Protestant institutions,
349; supports agitation for protec-
tion, 352; Reform agitation, 365;
opposes Pitt’s commercial proposi-
tions, 397, 403; death, 522

Florida, West and East, iv. 170, 252,
260

583

FOX .

Fly-shuttle, v. 207
Fontainebleau, treaty of (1785), v.

UG

Fontenoy, battle of, i. 420

‘Forestallers’ (monopolisers of pro-
visions for sale) : old statute against,
iii. 116, vi. 237

‘ Forty days’ tyranny,’ the (Chatham’s
embargo on corn), ili. 116

Foster, Chief Baron, iy. 464, vi. 373

Foster, John: report on condition of
Ireland (1778), iv. 488; Corn Law
(bounties on export), vi. 354 ;
Press Bill, 360; Chancellor of Ex-
chequer (Ireland), 373; on Irish
National Debt, 434; elected Speaker,
ib.; opposition to Catholic Bill of
1793, vi. 568; hostility to Aber-
cromby, vii. 431, 433; desires severe
measures atter rebellion, viii. 197 n.;
his interview with Pitt, 294; his
great influence, 346; letter to Pel-
ham, 419; speeches against Union,
376 sqq., 471 sqq.; on the danger
of repeal, 547

Foundling Hospital, vi. 273

Fowke, Governor (Gibraltar), ii. 460

Fox, Charles James: early life, ii.
465; vicious habits, 466; his pecu-
liar charm, 467; passion for study,
468; estimate of his merits as a
politician, 469; and as a debater,
470; an ardent Tory in early life,
471; quarrel with North, 472; secedes
from Tories, 527; persistent opposi-
tion to American war, 528; influence
of his speechesin 1777, iv. 67; great
want of patriotism, 68 sq., 310, vi.
136; proposal to Rockingham of a
coalition ministry, iv. 87 sq.; returned
for Westminster, 1780, 183; in
Rockingham’s ministry, 1782, 206 ;
dissension with Shelburne, 216 ;
opinion of Wm. Pitt, 221; Parlia-
mentary reform, 223 ; desired league
of Russia and Prussia with Eng-
land, 225; mission of Oswald to
Franklin, 227; Grenville’s mission to
Franklin, 229; dispute with Shel-
burne, 230; outvoted in Cabinet,
235 ; resignation, 236; debate there-
on, 237; opinion of his friends,
239 ; his own opinion, 240; coalition
with North, 270; their previous
relations, 271; Fox’s justification of
change, 273; terms of compact, 70. ;
formation of ministry, 280; India
Bill, 289; attacks upon it, 291;
thrown out in Lords, 294.; ministry
dismissed, 295; Fox attempts to

584 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

FOX

prevent a dissolution, 296; mistaken
. tactics, 299; unconstitutional lan-
guage, 305; hostility to King, 306;
miscalculations, 309; election of
1784, 311; compensation for Clerk-
ship of Pells, 425; difficulty thence
arising, 426; speech against Pitt’s
commercial treaty with France, v. 43 ;
Westminster election and scrutiny
(1784), 57 sqq.; strong opponent of
slave trade, 67 ; close relations with
Prince of Wales, 84, 87; affair of
Mrs. Fitzherbert, 88; the Prince’s
debts, 89; authorised to deny Prince’s
marriage, 91; his after silence on
the subject, 95 ; question of Regency,
98 ; urges Claim of Right for Prince
of Wales, 103; Pitt’s reply, 104;
Fox’s retort, 105; explanation, 106;
debates on Pitt’s resolutions, 110
sqq-; party interests, 113; serious
illness, 144, 146; mistakes, 151;
supports repeal of Test Act, 157;
motion in favour of Unitarians, 176;
legislation about Catholics, 188 ; on
arrest of impeachment, 192 ; against
creation of hereditary aristocracy
(Canada), 197; property, not birth,
true foundation of aristocracy, 198 ;
feelings towards French Revolution,
. 199; opposition to Pitt’s anti-Rus-
sian policy, 287; backed by popular
opinion, 290; charge of secret
communication with Catherine IL.,
295; first impressions of French
Revolution, 453 ; expresses his sen-
timents in the Commons, 455; re-
joinder to Burke, 459; motives
attributed, 2b.; sincerity, 460; con-
flict with Burke on Quebec Bill, 501
sqq.; Fox’s defence of his views,
505; breach complete, 506; extent
to which it weakened the Opposi-
tion, 507; associates with Talleyrand
and Chauvelin, vi. 15; denounces
September massacres, 37; incendi-
ary speeches on Alien Bill (1792),
77; conflicting sentiments, 78 ;
his French sympathies repudiated
in his own party, 79; followers a
small minority, 81; relations with
Chauvelin, 96; denounces execution
of Lewis, 122; on repeal of De-
claratory Act, 307; opposes Pitt’s
commercial propositions for Ire-
land, 401; on Relief Bill (1795), vii.
91; on character of Ulster men,
287 ; encouraged by Grattan to dis-
cuss Irish affairs in English Parlia-
ment, 289; in 1806, opposed to

FRA

the Union, viii. 356, 357; and’ to:
repeal, 548

Fox, Henry (Lord Holland): charac-
ter, ii. 441; treatment of Newcastle,
442; made Secretary of State, 443 ;
resignation, 457; fails to form a
ministry, 458; treatment of Admiral
Byng, 461; unpopular in the coun-
try, 463; Paymaster of the Forces;
464; joins Bute’s party, ui. 42 ;
leader of Commons, 56 ; persecution
of officials of Whig connection, 58 ;
quarrel with Shelburne, 62 ; receives
peerage, 7b.; death, 465

Fox, Luke: on the three nations in-
habiting Ireland, viii. 418

France, 1700-65: relations to the Pope
under Lewis XIV., i. 22; rival claim-
ants to Spanish crown, 24; Charles
II.’s bequest to Duke of Anjou, 25 ;
French in Spanish Netherlands, 27;
Grand Alliance against France, 29 ;
war declared, 33; military opera-
tions, 36; French attempt-to in-
vade Scotland, 39, 41; peace
negotiations in 1706, 44; humiliat-
ing offers in 1709, 47; . ‘royal
touch’ for scrofula, 68, 71; deaths
in royal family, 97; Conference of
Gertruydenberg, 98; troops called
from Spain, 99; preliminaries of
peace, 1711, 107; Conference of
Utrecht, 108; demands of Lewis,
109; Peace of Utrecht, 122; con-
dition of France, 124; treaty of
commerce with England, 142 ;
Jacobite intrigues, 147; recognition
of Hanoverian succession, 152 ;
bankrupt in 1715 and 1769, 340;
Spanish Infanta betrothed to
Lewis XY., 348; confederation with
England and Prussia, 350; defensive
alliance with Spain and England,
353; treaty of Seville, 354; war of
Polish succession, 7b.; acquisition of
Lorraine, 355; menacing progress,
356; causes of growth of power, 357;
military system gave unity to the
nation, 358; opposition to Fleury’s
pacific policy, 383; the ‘Family
Compact,’ 384; hostility to Eng-
land, 386; position towards Maria
Theresa, 888; in coalition against
her, 392; utter defeat in Bohemia,
402; Dettingen, 406 ; abortive
attempt to invade England, 413;
invasion of Austrian Netherlands,
414; Friburg captured, 417; Fon-
tenoy and its results, 420; victories
in Flanders and Holland, 425; ex-

INDEX.

FRA

_ hausted resources, 427; Peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle, 428 sq. ; peace with
England and Holland, 430; posses-
sions in India, ii. 20; disputes with
England about North American pos-
sessions, 443 ; hostilities, 446 ;
French merchant ships captured,
447; alliance with Maria Theresa,
450; designs against Prussia, 451 ;
expedition against Minorca, 453;
successes in North America, 485 ;
expedition against Hanover, 20.;
defeat of Cumberland at Hasten-
beck, 486; French garrisons in
Austrian Netherlands, 487; defeat
at Rossbach, 491; English attacks
on French coast, 492; driven from
Hanover, 493; loss of Canada, 495 ;
destruction of power in India, 499
sqq-; shameful treatment of Lally,
504; German campaign of 1759,
507; France declares herself bank-
rupt, 511; peace negotiations with
England, i. 32; ‘ Family Compact,’
33; England takes her West India
islands, 39; Peace of Paris, 44
sqq-; takes Corsica, 153; design to
invade England (1764-65), 349 ;
humiliation after Peace of Paris,
454

France and America: American rebels

seek French alliance, iii. 455; appeal
for aid from American Congress, iv.
38; Vergennes’ suggested policy,
39; Turgot’s opposite proposals,
41; King approves Vergennes’ plans,
42; France assists America, 43;
deceitful professions to England,
44; popular enthusiasm for America,
46 sqq.; enlistments for American
army, 50; effect on French opinion
of English surrender at Saratoga,
63 sq. ; treaties with America signed,
64; rapid growth of navy (1778),
94; American revolution completely
. dependent on France, 130; expedi-
tion against Newport (N.Y.) 132;
irritation against American finance,
150; rights of neutral commerce,
156 ; unsuccessful attack on Jersey,
164; capture of St. Eustatius, 168 ;
help Dutch at Cape of Good Hope,
168; naval expedition (1781), 169 ;
with Spain against Minorca, 171;
aids Hyder Ali, 174; desires an end
of American revolution, 175; navy
aiding Americans, 190, 197; defeat
on Chesapeake, 191; American
dependence on French money and
support, 192; a loan granted and a

French Revolution :

585

FRE

gift from the King, 194; negotia-
tions for peace (1782), 226 sqq.; com-
bined attack with Spain against
Gibraltar, 244; loans to Ameriea,
250, 261; conduct of peace negotia-
tions, 252 sqq.; motives, 262

France, 1785-88: Treaty of Fontaine-

bleau, v. 77; alliance with Holland,
78; policy defeated by England and
Prussia, 79 sqq.; long the steady ally
of Turkey, 213; wavering, 221.—
Government system, 370 sqq.; feudal
rights, 376; unjust taxation, 379 ;
exemptions of nobles, 381; com-
parison of French and English taxa-
tion, 382; commercial restrictions,
384; famines, 385; extremes of
poverty and luxury, 386; Turgot’s
reforms, 387; Necker’s schemes,
390; effects of American war in ac-
celerating Revolution, 392; optim-
ism, 393; increase of prosperity,
394; intellectual activity, 395;
moral aspects of the time, 396; new
institutions of charity, 1b.; charm
of French society, 397; no fear of
revolution, 399; disillusion : deficit,
400; Notables summoned, 2b.; local
self-government recommended, 401;
free trade in corn, 402; corvée
abolished, 2b.; effect of meeting of
Notables, 403; insubordination in
army and its causes, 404; Paris
Parliament in conflict with Crown,
435, 409; destruction of French
influence in Netherlands, 408 ; civil
rights granted to Protestants, 7b.
France: States-General: demand for,
vy. 411; convocation promised but
postponed, 415 ; cowp d’état (1788),
415; revolts in provinces, 416;
bankruptcy declared, 417; Necker’s
second ministry, 7b.; States-General
convoked, 419; method of election,
420; Necker’s policy, 421; excite-
ment of the elections, 424; famine
(1788-89), 427 ; reforms proposed by
the three orders, 428 sqq.; manner
of voting, 430; constitutional mon-
archy attainable, 431; meeting of
States-General: leading men, 7b.
separate or united vote of three
orders? 433; third estate proclaim
themselves National Assembly, 436;
many clergy join them, 437; cap-
ture of Bastille, 440; summary of
causes of Revolution, 441
Antecedents—
Literary: change in literary spirit
after Lewis XIY., v. 301; Voltaire

586 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

P FRE

and Montesquieu, 7b.; Enceyclopsd-
ists, 304 ; totalalienation of intellect
from Christianity, 305; persecution
of opinion, 307; freethinking, 308;
Voltaire’s politics, 309; spread of
toleration, 316; expectation of a
bloodless revolution, 318; opposition
to Court passes to men of letters,
344 sqq.; decline of Voltaire’s in-
fluence, 344; rise of Rousseau’s,
345; his doctrines, 345 sqq.; politi-
cal influence, 365; the Economists,
369

French Revolution: Antecedents—
Parliaments : character and powers,
vy. 319; claim to represent nation,
321; conflict with Crown and
bishops, 322, 325; Parliaments
naturally conservative, 323; at-
tempts to check new taxation, 324;
tickets of confession, 325; exile of
the ParJiament of Paris, 7b.; pro-
vincial Parliaments support it, 326;
predictions of revolution, 327, 335;
Paris Parliament recalled, 329 ;
violence against priests, 7b. ; new
prominence of provincial Pavrlia-
ments, 331; they condemn ietters of
cachet, beds of justice, and the
financial administration, 332; per-
secution of freethinkers, 333; sup-
pression of Jesuits, ib.; taxes forced
through Parliament, 334; registra-
tion of edicts, ib.; disputes with
clergy, 336; political questions at
issue, 837; King asserts absolute
power, 338; trial of Duke d’Aiguil-
lon, 339; Maupeou suppresses Par-
jiaments, 340; popular disturbances,
341; success of cowp d’état, 342;
Voltaire’s approval, 343; Parlia-
ments restored, 386; defenders of
old privileges, 388; Paris Parlia-
ment centre of opposition after dis-
solution of Notables, 405; claims
for States-General right to impose
new taxes, 406; Parliament again
exiled, 7b.; recalled, 407; character
and danger of opposition, 410; new
constitution imposed by King, 414

French Revolution: Antecedents—
Character of Government: despot-
ism, v. 370; destruction of pro-
vincial government, 372; and of in-
dependence of tribunals, 373 ; divi-
sion of classes, ib.; gentry attracted
to towns, 374; growth of peasant
proprietary, 375; feudal burdens,
376; unjust and oppressive taxation,
379; other abuses, 384; low state of

French

FRE

agriculture, 7%b.; frequency of
famines, 385; contrasts of great
poverty and luxury, 386

French Revolution: Constituent As-

sembly: deeds of anarchy, v. 446;
October days, 447; Assembly trans-
ferred to Paris, 489; complete
change in laws and administration,
490; ‘Civil Constitution ’ for clergy,
491; King’s authority destroyed,
zb.; concentration of power, 493 ;
genuine reforms, 494; anarchy and
emigration, 495; persecution of
clergy and gentry, 514; proselytis-
ing character of the Revolution,
519; death of Mirabeau, 529; situ-
ation after Varennes, 530; charac-
ter of Assembly, 531 sqq.; revised
Constitution, 533; Assembly dis-
solves itself, 5384; constitution of
successor, 2b.; menacing aspect of
surrounding Powers, 535; pacific
spirit in France, 536; negro reyo-
lution in St. Domingo, 567, 576, vi.
2; enthusiasm when King signed
Constitution, v. 573; growth of an-
archy, 574; increase of emigration,
575; suspicions of England, 576;
distrust of King and Queen, 577

French Revolution—Legislative As-

sembly: composition, v. 574, 580;
measures against emigrants, 581;
relations with foreign Powers, 582;
military situation, 583; influences
impelling towards war, 584; national
ambition, 585; desire to overthrow
new Constitution, 586; division in
republican party, 587; triumph and
demands of Girondins, 2b. ; attempt
to alienate Prussia from Austria,
590; ultimatum to Emperor, 593;
Austrian reply, 599; war party
triumph, 601; anarchy of country,
2b.; war declared against Emperor,
ad.

French Revolution—War of 1792:

diplomatists distrust England, vi.
4; Hirsinger’s correspondence, 5;
Talleyrand’s mission, 6; alliance
with England desired, 7; mission
of Chauvelin, 11; loan sought, 12;
belief that France must soon suc-
cumb, 15; invasion of Netherlands,
17; defeats, 18; Tuileries captured
by mob, 19; expected invasion of
France, 20; Brunswick’s proclama-
tion, 21; its origin, 22; memorial
of Mallet du Pan, 23; treatment of
King and Queen, 24

Revolution —Invasion of

INDEX, 587

FRE

France: extent of Coalition, vi. 26;
frontier crossed, 27; revolution of
August 10: Monarchy abolished,
2b.; National Convention summoned,
ab.; recall of English ambassador
(Gower), 28; not resented in
France, 32; advance of allied
armies, 33; Longwy, Verdun, Thion-
ville, 2b.; September massacres, 35
sqq-; Valmy, 39; allies retreat, 41

French Revolution — Triumphant:

Austrian attack on Lille repelled,
vi. 41; conquest of Savoy and Nice,
zb.; Custine invades Germany, 42 ;
propagandism, 43; invasion and
conquest of Flanders, 2b.; King of
Naples humiliated, 44; boundless
confidence, 45

French Revolution—Negotiations with
England: distrust, 46; new agents,
47; recognition of Republic de-
manded, 49; Lebrun’s policy, 51;
Noel’s pictures of English affairs,
52; English addresses to Conven-
tion, 55; decree offering fraternity
and aid to nations desirous of
liberty, 58; French dominion in
Flanders, 59; encouragement of
disaffected Dutchmen, 60; proposed
‘Dutch Legion,’ 61

French Revolution—Ptovocations to

Holland: generals ordered to pur-
sue Austrians on Dutch territory,
67; decree opening Scheldt and
Meuse, ib.; threatening letter of
Claviére, 68; General Eustache
demands access to Maestricht, 69 ;
French ships sail up Scheldt, 7d. ;
intrigues with Dutch ‘ Patriots,’
70; yvecall of ambassador (De
Maulde), 71; ‘reforming’ Flanders,
81; decree of December 15, 7b.;
reverses in Germany, 83

French Reyolution—continued nego-

tiations with England: increasing
arrogance of Chauvelin, vi. 92;
instructions of Lebrun, 93; mis-
sion of Maret, 94; interview with
Pitt, ib.; secret negotiation pro-
posed by Pitt, 95; refused, 96;
Sheridan and Chauvelin, 97; inva-
sion of Holland suspended, 98;
violence at Paris, 99; refusal to
restrict decree of November 9 to
enemies of France, 99; Chauyelin’s
note to Grenville, 7b.; reply, 101;
circular of Monge to seaport towns,
103 ; Lebrun’s answer to Grenville,
108; repudiation of views of con-
quest, 109 ; project against Holland

FRA

revived, 110; Brissot’s report on
English attitude, 111; fleet armed
and, increased, 2b.; peace party in
France, 115; hostility of Dumouriez
to Jacobins, 7b.; deplorable state of
his army, 117; Dumouriez commis-
sioned to negotiate with Auckland,
118 ; execution of King, 121 ; Chau-
velin dismissed by England, 123;
recalled by Lebrun, 124; Maret
sent to London, 125; report to
Lebrun, 126; Convention declare
war against England and Holland,
127; Maret quits London, 128

France—Directory: Coalition shattered

by French successes, vii. 62; com-
plete ascendency of France on Con-
tinent, 230; futile negotiations of
Malmesbury at Paris, 231; alliance
with Spain, 386; vicissitudes of
war, 2b.; Buonaparte’s career of
victory, 1b.; Peace of Campo For-
mio, 887; England desires peace,
2b.; Malmesbury meets French
plenipotentiaries at Lille, 2b.; ma-
jority of Directory hostile to peace
—their demands, 390; Pitt’s pro-
posals rejected, 391; peace signed
with Portugal, 393; Directors open
to bribes, 394; revolution of 18
fructidor, 7b.; Malmesbury ordered
to quit France, 395; proof that
Trish interests had no real place
in French diplomacy, 397 ; parallel
from history of Irish Brigade, 398 ;
defeat of Dutch expedition, 411;
Switzerland crushed, viii. 122;
quarrel with America, 123; settle-
ment to be bought, 124; Directors
ask for personal pecuniary gift, 7b. ;
threats, 7b.; war postponed, 125;
effects of episode on Ulster Presby-
terians, 126

France and Ireland: attempts to create

revolution in Ireland, vii. 2 sqq.;
advantages to France of separating
Treland from England, 233; Tone’s
mission, 2b.; French ministers
ignorant of Irish affairs, 243 ;
Tone’s memorials, 244 sqq.; mis-
sion of Count O’Shea to Ireland,
249; Directory wish Irish insurrec-
tion to precede invasion, 250; O’Con-
nor’s memorial, 251; expedition
prepared, 252; scarcely any natu-
ralised (French) Irishmen in it,
253; expedition sails, 255; mishaps
of fleet, 2b.; in Bantry Bay, 256;
thrown into confusion by a storm,
259; conflicting counsels, 260 sq.;

588

FRA

. return to Brest, 263; renewed nego-
tiations with United Irishmen, 381;
mission and report of Jagerhorn,
383; French neglect of Ireland in
peace negotiations with England,
397 ; intrigues renewed, 399 ; Dutch
expedition defeated, 411; Buona-
parte sceptical about Irish revolu-
tion, vili. 202; expedition of Hum-
bert, 203 ; initial success, 209 sqq. ;
surrender to Cornwallis, 220; later
French expeditions, 225, 230, 235 ;
Lewins’s memoirs, vii. 412, viii.
429

Francis, Sir Philip: reasons for iden-
tifying him with Junius, ili. 246
sqq-; objections, 252; character,
254; member of first India Council,
489 ; on Pitt’s eloquence, v. 7

Frankfort: captured by Russians, ii.
506

Franking letters: abuses connected
with, v. 29; privilege reduced, 32

Franklin, Benjamin: on American
attachment to England, ui. 273;
plan for making the colonies a
single Federal State, 275, 378 ;
on Grenville’s policy, 318, 323;
on England’s right to tax colo-
nies, 342; sketch of his life, 375
sqq.; literary work, 376; attach-
ment to England, 377; labours to
prevent disruption from mother-
country, 378; States’ agent in
England, 379; sends Hutchinson’s
letters to America, 380; his defence
of his use of them, 383; return to
America, 422; revised the Declara-
tion of Independence, 460; consti-
tutional arguments in favour of
American colonies’ rights, 543 ;
commissioner to Paris (1776), iv.
43; approved projects for burning
Liverpool and Glasgow, 100 1. ;
opinion of Shelburne, 210; negotia-
tions with him (1782), 226 ; opinion
of Oswald, 230; objects to begging
for America in France, 250; mercan-
tile debts to British citizens, 254;
French leanings in negotiations,
255; apology for secretly signed
articles of peace, 260; treatment of
loyalists, 265; visit to Ireland, 434 ;
address to Irish, 487; his views
about Legislative Unions, viii. 270

Frederick Il. (the Great: Prussia) :
character, i. 389; claims Juliers
and Berg and part of Silesia, 390
sq.; treatment of Maria Theresa,
391; secret convention with her,

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

FUS

400; opportunism, 401; treachery,
402; invades Bohemia, 416; driven
back to Silesia, 417; designs against.
Hanover, ii. 449; excites enmity of
Madame de Pompadour, 450; cap-:
tures Dresden, 456; defeats Aus-
trians at Lobositz, 457; battle of
Prague, 486; defeated at Kolin, 2b. ;
wins battles of Rossbach and Leu-
then, 491; subsidised by England,
ib.; campaign of 1758: Zorndorf,
492; Hochkirchen, 493; relief of
Dresden, 7b.; campaign of 1759:
Zillichau, Frankfort, Kunersdorf,
506 ; Meissen, Bergen, Minden,
507; campaign of 1760: Dippoldis-
walde, 508 ; Dresden, Liegnitz,
Torgau, 509; Peace of Paris, ili.
44; alliance with Russia, 45 ; alien-
ated from England, 119; death, vy.
80

Frederick William II. (Prussia) : inva-
sion of Holland (1786), v. 80; am-
bitious designs, 232; desires ex-
change of Galicia for Dantzig and
Thorn, 234; alliance with Turkey,
235, 251; designs on Flanders, 236 ;
alliance with Poland, 252; English
opposition to his policy, 255; aliena-
tion from England, 257; Peace of
Sistova, 236; Polish question (1791),
540 sqq.; proposals of French emi-
grant Princes, 547; negotiates alli-
ance with Leopold, 548, 554; desires
intervention with France, 556 ; in-
terview and Declaration of Pilnitz,
557; urged by Catherine to war
against France, 570; indisposed to
act without the Emperor, 582; re-
jects overtures from Paris, 590;
alliance with Leopold ratified, 593 ;
sends army to frontier, 7b.; agrees
to partition of Poland, 598

Frederikshamn: besieged by Gustavus
IIT. (Sweden), v. 226, 270

Free Trade: Tory policy in Anne’s
reign, i. 4; foundation of policy laid
by Walpole, 335; advocates of,,iv.
444 sq.; agitation for, in Ireland,
498; granted by England, 500;
practical impediments, 520

‘Freeman’s Journal’: a supporter of
Trish Government (1796), vii. 210

French, Lady, made peeress, vii. 415

French, Sir Thomas, vii. 414

‘Friends of the Constitution’ (Irish
society), vi. 539, 552

‘Friends of the People’ (English so-
ciety), v. 195, 199, vi. 539

Fiissen, Peace of, i. 419

INDEX.

FUN

Funds, the; fluctuations at political
crises, i. 166, 199

Fur hats: export from America for-
bidden, ii. 9

G

Gabelle (salt tax) : pressure on poor in
France, v. 402

Gage, Gen. (Governor of Massachu-
setts), ill. 399, 425 sq., 448 sq.

Gages, Gen.: commander of Spanish
forces in Italy, i, 420, 424

Gainsborough (the painter): little en-
couraged by Court, vi. 162

Galitzin, Prince, Russian ambassador
in London, iii. 45, 55

Gallicanism : its political tendency, v.
323; order in council enjoining
observance of maxims, 336

Galloway, Mr. (delegate from Penn-
sylvania) : proposed modification of
American (colonial) constitution, iil.
419

Galvez, Governor (Spanish) of Loui-
siana, iv. 170

Galway, condition of, in early 18th
century, ii. 8338; severe application
of penal laws, 339; under military
government, 7b.; Governor Stratford
Eyre’s account, 340 sqq.

Gambia, the: French expedition
against settlements on (1779), iv. 111

Gambling: mania for speculative
schemes, i. 521; in private life, 522;
among women, ib.; public lottery
for purchase of Sloane collection,
523; horse-racing, cockfighting, &c.,
ii. 293; hazard, faro, &c. (1770-80),
vi. 151; the pillory threatened for
female gamblers, 152; private lot-
teries, 2b.

Game laws: in France, v. 374; in
England—increase of prosecutions
with growth of enclosures, vi. 262

-Gardening, passion for, i. 523 sqq.
Bridgeman’s system of landscape-
gardening, 524; introduced into
Treland, 525; botanical works pub-
lished, 70.

Gardiner’s Relief Bill, iv. 477 sqq., 529,
556

* Gaspee,’ the, outrage on by Americans,
ili. 373, 397

‘Gates, Gen. (American), iv. 11, 61, 62,
94, 122, 133

‘Gaultier, Abbé: negotiations with
Duke of Berwick for restoration of
Pretender, i. 132

589

GEO

Gavelkind, ii. 104, 108

Geary, Admiral, iv. 153

General Fund, v. 48

Généralité (French financial division),
y. 401

Genest, Mlle (Mme de Campan), v.
341

Geneva, vi. 43, 325

Genoa, i. 420, 424, 429

‘Gentleman’s Magazine’ founded, i.
519

George I.: proclaimed, i. 166; attitude
of Parliament and parties, 7b.; Civil
List, 167 ; arrival in England, 168 ;
first ministry, 168 sqg.; discontent
in country, 209; riots, disloyalty,
210; rebellion of 1715, 212; decline
of monarchical sentiment, 217; pro-
clamation to influence elections, 219;
revolution in Court etiquette, 220;
discontinuance of ‘royal, touch,’
221; development of party govern-
ment, 223; external danger to
dynasty, 228; alliances, 229 sqq.;
war with Spain, 240; dislike of
Prince of Wales, 319; communi-
cated with ministers in Latin, 328;
high opinion of Walpole’s finance,
335; death, 353

George II.: hostile to French, i. 356 ;
negotiates Treaty of Hanover, 398 ;
partiality to Hanoverian interests,
408; expense of his Hanoverian
army, 409; protest of Lords against
his partiality, 410; attempt to dis-
place Pelham, 426; dislike of Pitt,
2b., 459; patronises Handel, 533;
makes treaties for defence of his
foreign dominions, li. 448 ; alliance
with Prussia, 449; implacable to-
wards Admiral Byng, 461; recon-
ciliation with Pitt, 466; treatment
of Duke of Cumberland, 487; death
and character, 519

George III.: accession, iii. 10; early
life and character, 11; enthusiasm
at his accession, 12; virtues, 13;
evils produced by his personal
policy, 14; first Speech, 25; ‘a
Briton,’ 27; opposed Pitt’s policy,
34; marriage, 37; relations with
Grenville, 85 sqq.; first signs of
mental derangement, 89; continued
dislike of Whigs, 96; sympathy with
Chatham, 125; orders Wilkes’s ex-
pulsion from Commons, 130; popu-
lar discontent, 150; King’s debts,
154; conflict between Commons and
Lord Mayor, 259; first to realise
effect of Stamp Act on America,

590

GEO

333; consents to its repeal, 340;
afterwards determines to coerce
America, 416 ; protests against mili-
tary economy, 456; personal influ-
ence with ministers, 461; domestic
troubles, 462; Royal Marriage Bill,
463; hostile to Clive, 491 .; opposed
to abolition of subscription to the
Articles, 499; position towards Que-
bec Act, 502;-resolute action dur-
ing Gordon riots, 521; dislike of
Fox, 527; prescribed and directed
all details of policy, iv. 70; sup-
ported employment of Indians, 71 ;
refused to treat with America on
basis of recognition of independence,
73; modified views in 1777, 74;
determination not to accept Chat-
ham as Minister, 82 ; compared with
attitude towards Fox in 1804, 83;
dislike continued after Chatham’s
death, 86; resolution to continue
the war, 106; principles of policy,
2b.; ‘gold pills’ for elections, 108,
183 ; persistent refusal of concession
to America, 177 ; receipt of news of
surrender of Yorktown, 201; hos-
tility to Rockingham ministry, 205 ;
power in Parliament, 207; hostility
to Burke’s Reform Bill, 219; ap-
proyal of Oswald’s mission, 230;
favours showered on North and his
family, 276; attempt to escape the
coalition, 279; submission, 280;
treatment of ministers, 283; Fox’s
India Bill, 293; unconstitutional
interference, 294, 296; prerogative
of dissolution, 299 sqq.; augmenta-
tion of forces in Ireland (1767), 374,
377; dislike of Absentee tax, 410;
and recruiting from Irish Catholics,
457 ; Irish Volunteers, 523; the agi-
tation for Irish independence, 546 ;
influence over policy of ministers,
vy. 19: relations with Pitt, 47b.;
contraction of royal power: attempts
to reassert it, 20; parliamentary
reform (Pitt’s scheme), 61; hatred
of Prince of Wales, 85, 88; attempted
assassination by Margaret Nichol-
son, 90; increases Prince’s income,
92; kindnegs to Mrs. Fitzherbert, 94;
opinion of French Revolution, vi.
5; announces neutrality of Hanover,
20; recurrence of mental malady,
96; difficult position of ministers,
96; interview with Pitt and Thurlow,
99; parliamentary inquiry, 101, 135 ;
recovery, 145; resumes authority,
147; relations with family, 150;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

GIR

gratitude to Pitt, 152; great popu-
larity, 153; receives deputation of
Catholics (1792), 559; forbids Catho-
lic Emancipation (1795), vii. 85;

_ difficulties about coronation oath,

86; reiterates his refusal, 293; ob-
jection to making Catholic peers,
414; pensions Cardinal York, 463;
early desire of Irish Union, viii. 273;
ignorant of Pitt’s conferences on the
subject, 293; persistent desire for
Union, 392, 493; opposition to
Emancipation strengthened by
Loughborough, 509 sq.; renewed
illness, and its effects on Pitt, 523

George, Prince (husband of Queen

Anne): made Generalissimo and
High Admiral, i. 83; death, 42

Georgia: colony founded by Ogle-

thorpe for refuge for poor debtors,
i. 503; John Wesley’s visit, ii. 554
sqq.; Whitefield contributed to in-
troduction of slavery, 601; colony
joins in the rebellion, iii. 428; loyal-
ists a strong party in Georgia, iy.
92

Germaine, Lord George (Viscount

Sackville): disgraced after battle of
Minden, ii. 507; able administrator
and debater, iii. 526; attacked by
Fox, iv. 68; raised to peerage, 203

German Confederation (1785), for de-

fence of German Constitution, v.
83

Gertruydenberg, Conference of (1710):

French propositions for peace, i. 98
sq

Gibbet-rath, massacre at, vill. 69
Gibbon: on relations of Fox and Lord

North, iv. 272; on the increased
love of travelling, vi. 179

Gibraltar : proposal to exchange it for

Florida, i. 247; misunderstanding
with Spain about the proposed ces-
sion, 248, 350; besieged by Spaniards
(1726), 351; garrisoned by Hano-
verian soldiers, iv. 69; siege in 1779,
119; attack by fireships, 164;
bombardment, 165; last effort,
by combined French and Spanish
fleet (1782), 243 ; D’Arcon’s batter-
ing ships, 244; forces engaged, 1b.;
description of the attack, 245; enemy
completely defeated, 246

Gin-drinking : passion for, i. 479; pri-

vate gin-shops, 480

Gipsies: liable to death, iii. 504; law

repealed in 1783, 505

Girondins : ascendency under Brissot

and Vergniaud, v. 587; inyectives

INDEX, 591

GIS

against Leopold, 593; insolent treat-
ment of Lewis XVL., vi. 19

Gisborne, Dr., physician, with Dr.
Willis, to George III., v. 101

Gladstone, Mr.: on Pitt’s finance, y.
35 n., 53 n.

Glasgow: growth of, ii. 57

Glass manufacture in Ireland: export
prohibited, iv. 449

Glatz: ceded to Prussia by Peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle, i. 429

Glenshiel, valley of : attack on Span-
iards and Highlanders (1715), i.
244

Gloucester, Duke of: protest against
Pitt’s Regency Bill, vy. 128

Glynn, Sergeant (defender of Wilkes),
member for Middlesex, iii. 139

Godolphin, Earl of: character, i. 32 ;
political principles, 35; events of
ministry, 39; attacked as ‘ Volpone’
by Sacheverell, 52; urges his im-
peachment, 53; dismissed from
ministry, 59; charge of misapplying
public money, 106; death, 121

Goertz, Swedish ambassador to Hol-
land, arrested and executed, i. 237,
241

Goltz, Baron, Prussian chargé d'affaires
at Warsaw (1791), vi. 85

Goold, Mr. (Irish Catholic): offers
Government pecuniary aid for de-
fence of country, iv. 523 P

Goold, Thomas (member of the Irish
Parliament), viii. 271 ., 313, 442,
491 n.

Gordon, General: in battle of Sheriff-
muir (1715), i. 215

Gordon, Lord George: forms ‘ Protes-
tant Association,’ iii. 510; leads
mob to Parliament House, 511;
blockade of the House, 512; destruc-
tion of Catholic chapels and pro-
perty, 512 sq.; burning of Newgate,
514; attacks on public men, 515;
complete triumph of mob, 516;

. panic of people and authorities, 517 ;
more prisons burnt, 518; attack on
Langdale’s distillery, 519; suppres-
sion of riots, 520; number of killed
and wounded, 521; trial and acquit-
tal of Gordon, 522; death, 2b.; effects
of the riots on opinion, 523

Gordon, Rey. James: history of Lrish
Rebellion, viii. 81; estimate of causes
of its magnitude and fierceness, 7b.

Gosford, Earl of, Governor of county
Armagh, vii. 180; commanded
troops at Naas, vill. 55

Gower, (first) Earl, i. 380

GRA

Gower, (second) Earl: in Pitt’s minis-
try, iv. 296; silent member, v. 34
Gower, Earl (son of the above) : envoy
in Paris, 574; on French financial
condition, 601; instructions for
dealing with French Revolutionary
Government, vi.9; on French de-
sire for war, 15; letters on state of
France, 24 sq.; recalled after aboli-
tion of monarchy, 28; discussion
about his recall, 29 sqq.; interview
with Lebrun, 32

Graces, the (Irish analogue of Petition
of Rights), ii. 115

Grafton, Duke of: in Rockingham
ministry, ii. 97; in Pitt’s (1766),
112; career and character, 113;
nominal Prime Minister, 124; un-
popularity: attacked by Junius, 155;
retires to private life, 160; King’s
opinion of him, 164; Privy Seal
(1771), 168; resignation: in oppo-
sition to North, 526; in Rocking-
ham’s second ministry, iv. 207; in
Shelburne’s, 268

Grand Alliance, the: formation and
prospects, i. 29, 101 sq.

‘Grand Chamber’ (Paris Parliament),
v. 825

Grand juries (Ireland) : character in
18th century, vi. 506; set in motion
against Catholics (1792), 507

Granville, Lord (Carteret): career, i.
875; capacity, 376; character, 377

Grasse, de, Admiral (French): actions
in naval war of 1781, iv. 169, 197
Sq., 242

Grattan, Henry: estimate of Chat-
ham’s eloquence, ii. 469, 471; on
tithes (Ireland), iv. 323, 325; sup-
ports Protestant ascendency, 386 x. ;
writes in ‘ Baratariana,’ 393; on
Flood’s eloquence, 418 m.; enters
Trish Parliament (1775), 487; early
influence, 473 ; discourages religious
animosity,474; advocates free export
trade, 498; declaration of indepen-
dence (1780), 509; denounces sale of
peerages, 517; a Volunteer, 523;
efforts for independence, 527, 535,
546, 551; concessions from EHng-
land, 553; defence of Catholics,
557; popular favourite, 559; grant
from Parliament, 7b.; Phoenix Park
Lodge offered to him, 7b.; separation
from Charlemont, vi. 327, 3832;
hostility to Flood, 827; opposes
army reduction, 329; quarrel with
Flood, 330; alienated from Volun-
teers, 332 ; on the Volunteer Reform

592
GRA
« Bill, 345; policy, 383; theory of
Yrish politics not democratic, 385 ;
‘parliamentary reform, 386; measures
at which he aimed, 387; supports
Pitt’s commercial propositions, 396;
denounces them when transformed,
403; opposes Dublin Police Bill,
407; supports Whiteboy Act (1787),
408; action on tithes question, 410;
on Regency, 419; moves address to
Prince of Wales, 420; Grattan’s
arguments in the debate, 422; tries
~ to put an end to annual deficits, 433 ;
eulogy of Dean Kirwan, 448; ar-
yaignment of Buckingham’s minis-
ters, 456; elected for Dublin, 457 ;
helps to form ‘ Whig Club,’ 458 ;
theory of parliamentary reform, 468 ;
conviction of danger of democracy
for Ireland, 469; opinion on Catho-
lie question, 472, 556; on the de-
cline of bigotry, 510; favoured
united education of Catholics and
Protestants, 512; unqualified hos-
tility to Union, 513; opposed disloyal
and republican principles, 539 ;
speech on Address (1793), 562; sup-
ports Relief Bill, 572; rearrangement
of hearth tax, 602; desires commer-
cial treaty with England, 603; re-
fuses to denounce war with France,
608; supports it, vii. 22; again
proposes commercial understanding
with England, 25; decline of his
influence, 31; appointment of Fitz-
william as Viceroy, 36; Grattan
refuses office, 88; conferences with
English ministers, 2b.; disputes
about Viceroy, 40 sqq.; indignation
of Grattan’s party, 43; moves Ad-
‘ dress, 1795, 68; Emancipation Bill,
1795, 80; replies to addresses in
favour of Emancipation, 100; motion
for Committee on State of Nation,
106; on the functions of Viceroy,
107 ; speech on his Catholic Bill,
113; home education of Catholic
clergy, 120; advice to democratic
party, 145; resolution demanding
free trade (1796), 195; criticism
of Insurrection Bill, 197; violent
speech againstsuspension of Habeas
Corpus, 203; and on Government
apathy about Armagh outrages, 204 ;
resolution in favour of Catholic
Emancipation, 205; speech on
French war (1797), 275; defends
proposed Absentee tax, 277; alarm
at condition of country, 284 ; desires
revival of Volunteers, 7b.; censures

ENGLAND IN THE. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

GRE

proclamation of Ulster, 287 sq.;
encourages Fox to discuss Irish
affairs in English Parliament, 289 ;
resigns position in yeomanry, 321;
speech on Ponsonby’s reform resolu-
tions, 325; secession from parlia-
mentary life, 328; estimate of his
political conduct, 329; desire to make
the Irish one people, 367; reasons
for refusing to stand for next
Parliament, 416; blindness to the
rising religious animosities, 417 ;
denunciation of Government ‘ coer-
cion,’ 418 ; coercion necessary con-
sequence of corruption, 419; elo-
quent aspirations, 419 sq.; his own
review of this portion of his
career, 420; opinion of Emmet, viii.
4; attacked by Government party,
255; Duigenan’s pamphlet, 256 ;
informer Hughes, 258; Grattan
charged with being United Irishman,
259; improbability of story, 2b. ;
statement of Grattan, 260; Port-
land urges prosecution for misprision
of treason, 261; failure of evidence,
262; Grattan’s unpopularity for a
time, 263; reappearance in Pavrlia-
ment (Jan. 1800), 440; duel with
Corry, 470; speech on necessity of
a dissolution, 478 ; speech on Union
Bill, 488 sq.; ‘ prophetical treason,’ -
490; letter to Fox, on Hardwicke’s
administration, 530; opinion on
possible repeal, 547

Grattan’s Parliament.
1782 ; Grattan

Grayes, Admiral: commander of
British navy in America (1781), iv.
198

Great Seal: in commission, iv. 281,
v. 122; new one after Union, viii.
493

Greece: projects of independence, vy.
213; proposed Greek empire, 219,
224, 258

Greene, General (American): fayvour-
a officer of Washington, iy. 133,
8

Greenland fisheries : regulations
(1786) of Jenkinson (Lord Hawkes-
bury), v. 22

‘Green Linnets’ (Irish regiment), vii.
14

Gregg, a clerk, executed for supplying
State papers to the French, i. 41

Greig, Admiral (Russian) : naval battle
with Swedes, v. 227

Grenada (island) ; captured by French
in 1779, iv. 93

Sce Ireland,

INDEX,

GRE

Grenville, George : one of Boy Patriots,
i. 379; influence in Peace of Paris
negotiations, iii. 55; Prime Minister,
64; character, 65; previous career,
66 ; difficulties in forming his
ministry, 67 sqq.; prosecution of
Wilkes, 70 sqq.; discredit following
it, 81; other causes of unpopularity,
82 sq.; the Stamp Act imposed on
America, 83; Grenville’s polities, 84;
relations with the King, 85; suc-
ceeded by Lord Rockingham, 92;
opposed Wilkes’s expulsion, 140 ;
death, 168; his Election Act, 224;
policy towards America, real cause
of American Revolution, 306 sqq.;
his arguments for his scheme, 319 ;
desire to put America on same foot-
ing as Ireland, 322; provisions of
his Stamp Act, 323; arguments for
taxing colonies, 334 sqq; colonial
policy, v. 200

Grenville, Lord (William): Speaker,
vy. 23; made peer, 7b.; Foreign
Secretary (1791), 292; letters on
English neutrality, 562; relations
with Talleyrand, vi. 7; account of
his mission, 9; feelings after Sep-
tembermassacres, 37 ; policy towards
French Republic, 53, 57, 61, 63, 66,
74, 100 sqq., vii. 393 ;.against parti-
tion of Poland, vi. 91; President of
Board of Trade, 414; on the Master-
ship of the Rolls in Ireland, 70.;
illegal sale of places, 415; on ap-
pointment of Fitzwilliam as Viceroy,
vii. 40; on English party government
in Ireland, 44

Grenville. Thomas: Fox’s agent to
Vergennes, iv. 288 sq.; diplomatic
mission in Vienna, vil. 37

Grey, Lord: early political career, vy.
39, 93, 144, 195, 199; predictions
about Irish Union, viii. 483; sum-
mary of case against it, 484; on the
fatal consequences of repeal, 548

Grimshaw (revivalist preacher, York-
shire) ; sketch of his career, il. 622
Sqq-

Grogan, Cornelius, an oldman, executed
on Wexford Bridge, viii. 95, 166

Grouchy, General : commander of
French expedition to Bantry Bay,
vii. 259

Gualterio, Cardinal: account of Irish
Protestants temp. William and
Anne, li. 414

Guastalla, Duchy of, ceded to Spain at
Aix-la-Chapelle, i. 429

Guatimozin’ (Dr. Jebb): on legiti-

VOL. VIII.

593

HAN

mate independence of Irish Parlia-
ment, iv. 490 2

Guernsey ; run-away couples conveyed
thither from Southampton for
marriage, i. 498

Guichen, de, Admiral: expeditions in
favour of Americans, iy. 153, 171

Gustavus III. (Sweden): character,
v. 225, 265; invasion of Finland,
226; mutiny of officers, 227, 267;
war with Denmark, 228; result,
231; deplorable position in 1788,
2b.; reaction in his favour, 266;
opposition of nobles, 267; over-
throws by violence the Constitution,
268; defeated in Finland, 270;
defeats and victories, 7b.; makes
peace with Russia, 271 sqq.; sympa-
thies with French émigrés, 539, 547;
assassinated, 595

Gyllenborg, Swedish ambassador to-
London, arrested, i. 237

H

Habeas Corpus Act, i. 252, ili. 585, iv..
365, 371, 414, 524, 529

Hacket, Bishop (Down): never en-.
tered his diocese for twenty years,
ii. 233

Hacketstown: defeat of Ivish rebels
by Antrim Militia, viii. 67

Hackney coaches : number in London,.
i. 567 ; tax.on, 11. 253

Halifax (Nova Scotia) : origin of name,
i. 431

Halifax, Lord, ii. 67; Viceroy of Ire-
land, iv. 821, 336, 371, 456

Hall, Bishop: description of ‘ trencher
chaplains,’ i. 77 12.

Halliday, Dr., Charlemont’s letters to,
iv. 472 »., vi. 522

Hamilton (American statesman), iv.
150, v. 54

Hamilton (Robert): discredited the
Sinking Fund, v. 52 .

Hamilton, Gerard (‘Single Speech’),,
iv. 368, 424, vi. 373

Hamilton, Rev.Wm. (Irish magistrate) :
letters to Government on state of
the country, vii. 274, 279, 280

Hamilton, Sackville: an old Crown
servant dismissed by Fitzwilliam,
vii. 57

Hamilton, Sir Wm. : brought Etruscan
vases to England, vi. 211

Handel : contest with singer Senesino
and Italian Opera, i.533; bankruptcy,

QQ

594

HAN

534; his oratorios, 7b. ; opposition,
535; ‘Messiah’ first produced in
Dublin, 536 ; Handel’s successes in
Ireland, 537; ‘Judas Maccabeus’
his first success in England, 20. ;
conducted ‘ Samson’ when blind,
588; great impulse he gave to
sacred music, 20.

Hanmer, Sir Thomas, i.
150

Hanover, i. 124, 136, 350, 393, ii.
487; Hanoverian succession, i. 2,
119; Hanoverian favourites of
George I., 819; English hatred of
Hanoverians, 406, 408; charges
against, 409; soldiers in English
pay, 409, 424, 426, ii. 452

Hanway’s asylum for destitute boys,
vi. 374

Harcourt, Earl of: succeeds Towns-
hend as Viceroy of Ireland (1772),
iv. 400; Revenue Boards reunited,
402; new taxation, 403; Absentee
tax, 404 sq.; reply to arguments
against, 411; measure defeated,
412; new taxes, 414 ; corn bounties,
415; relations with Flood, 419,
422 sqq.; sends Irish troops to
America, 436, 488; discontent in
Parliament, 439 ; dissolution (1776),
ib.; measures for securing a majo-
rity, 440 ; recall: review of his ad-
ministration, 441; on Ivish Union,
vill. 271

Harcourt, Sir Simon:
Sacheverell, i. 55

Hardwicke, Lord (first Earl): Marriage
Act, 1. 490, 497 sq.; on retention of
Canada, ili. 270

Hardwicke, Lord (third Harl) ; Viceroy
of Ireland, viii. 527

Hardy, Admiral Sir C.: succeeded
Admiral Keppel, iv. 112, 153

Hargreaves: his spinning-jenny, vi.
190,208; driven from his home by
mob violence, 209

Harleian MSS. purchased by public
lottery, 1. 523

Harley : Chancellor of Exchequer and
Prime Minister, i. 59 ; made Harl of
Oxford, 127; character, 129; in-
trigues with Jacobins, 132; animo-
sity between him and Bolingbroke,
134,148; quarrel with Lady Masham,
and dismissal by Queen, 161

Harris, Sir James: minister to Holland,
v.79, 81; created Lord Malmesbury,
82; negotiations with Prince of
Wales, 85; peace negotiations at
Paris (1796), vii. 231; at Lille, 387 ;

141, 145,

speech for

ENGLAND IN THE, EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

HIG

secret understanding with Maret,
390; expelled from France, 395

Harris, Howell (Welsh revivalist) :
career, i. 604; joined militia and
preached in regimentals, 605

Harvey, Bagenal: commander-in-chief
of rebels, viii. 89, 91, 107, 109, 135;
deposed from command, 136;
executed, 168

Hastenbeck, battle of, ii. 486

Hastings, Warren: first Governor-
General of India, iii. 489 ; energetic
conduct of war with Hyder Ali, iv.
173 ; censured and his recall ordered
by House of Commons, 287; ques-
tion of arrest of his impeachment
by dissolution, v. 192

Hawke, Admiral Sir Edward, ii. 447,
496, 507

Hawkesbury, Lord : interview with De
Curt about French West India Is-
lands, vi. 105

Haynault: proposed surrender to King
of Hungary, v. 547 ,

Hearth-tax (Ireland), i. 255, vi. 445,
602, vii. 156

‘Hearts of Steel,’ iv. 393

Hebrides: Catholic population in, i.
311

Hedge schools, Ivish, iv. 471

Heidegger: combined with Handel in
direction of Italian theatre, i. 533

‘ Hell-fire Club,’ or ‘Blasters’ (Dublin),
ii. 321

Helvétius, v. 305

Henry, Patrick (great American orator),
ill. 288, 431, 454

Hepenstal, the ‘ walking gallows,’ viii.
22

Hereditary offices, sale of (France), y.
371

Hereditary revenue (Ireland), ii. 223,
iv. 399, 415, 432, vi. 599

Heron, Sir R. (Chief Secretary, Ive-
land): on Irish Mutiny Bill, iv.
511

Hertzberg, Count (Prussian states-
man), v. 278, 283, 548

Hervey, James (Methodist writer), i.
551, 601

Hervey, Lady Mary (mother of George
R. Fitzgerald), vi. 339

Hesse, Prince of: refuses
access to Maestricht, vi. 69

Hessian soldiers in pay of England, i.
350, vi. 4

Higgins, Francis (the ‘Sham Squire’):
information to Irish Government,
vil. 99, 210 sqq., 439, viii. 14, 36,
147

French

INDEX.

HIG

High Church: chiefly consisted of
lower order of clergy, i. 87
Highway robberies in London and
country, i. 487; George II. robbed
in Kensington Gardens, vi. 264 sq.
Highlands. See Scotland
Hill, Abigail. See Masham, Mrs.
Hill, Colonel (brother of Mrs. Masham):
colonel of two regiments, i. 59; in
command of expedition to conquer
Canada, 106
Hill, Rowland, i. 577, 589 7., 598, 614,
616, 621
Hill, Sir George (magistrate, county
Derry), vil. 215, 347
Hill, Sir Richard: brutal speech
against Burke, v. 133; suggested
tax on Sunday newspapers, 164
Hillsborough, Lord: Secretary of
State, with special care of colonies,
358; compromise on American tax-
ation, 365; defender of Catholics
(Irish), iv. 456; opposed Bushe’s
Mutiny Bill, 512; approved Irish
Volunteers, 523 ; opposed idea of an
Trish nayy, 525; thought the time
not suited for a Catholic Bill, 529;
in perplexity about Yelverton’s Bill,
538
Hindostan, ii. 497 sqq., ili. 119
Hippisley, Sir John: represented
England at the Vatican temp.
George IIL., vii. 461
Hirsinger’s correspondence (political
reports from England to France), vi.
4,12
Hoadley, Bishop : sermon against pas-
sive obedience, i. 50 ; latitudinarian-
ism: his sermon ‘On the Kingdom
of Christ,’ 250
Hobart, Major (Chief Secretary to
Buckingham and Westmorland), vi.
456, 472, 495 sq., 503, 528, 534,
564, 566, 640
Hoche, General: expedition against
Treland, vii. 252, 382, 412
Hochkirchen, battle of, ii. 492
Hogarth: his paintings and engray-
ings, i. 580, 531; his print of the
‘Times,’ iii. 59; prices of his pic-
tures, vi. 160
Hohentriedberg, battle of, 1. 419
Holbach’s ‘System of Nature’ (defence
of Atheism), v. 305
Holland: importance to England of
_its security, i. 26; English troops
sent to, 27; treaty with England,
101; Dutch method of controlling
generals in war, 102; how affected
by Treaty of Utrecht, 123; Dutch

595

HOR

guarantee (1712-13), 153; joins
confederation under treaty of Hano-
ver (1722), 350; neutrality, 360, 393 ;
alliance with England, Austria and
Saxony, 418; Dutch soldiers sent to
England (1745), 422 ; disasters, 424 ;
revolution in favour of House of
Orange, 425 ; after Aix-la-Chapelle,
429 ; peace with France, 430 ;
possessions in Kast, ii. 19; Scotch
brigade in Dutch service, ii. 458;
contraband trade with American
rebels, iv. 158; disputes with Eng-
land, 159; joims armed neutrality,
161; treaty with America, 7b. ; Eng-
land declares war, 162; loss of St.
Eustatius, 165; other losses, 168;
involved in Hyder Ali’s war, 174;
recognises American independence
after Yorktown, 250; truce with
England, 252 ; alliance with France
(1785), v. 78; Stadholder and ‘ Pa-
triots,’ 7b.; invaded by Prussia, 80;
new Constitution, 81; dangers from
France, (1792), vi. 60, 65; French
decree opening Scheldt, 67; threat-
ening letter of Claviére, 68 ; French
demand access to Maestricht, 69 ;
sail up Scheldt, 7b. ; the ‘ Patriots,’
70; recall of French ambassador
(De Maulde), 7b.; Pensionary ob-
tains information from him, 71;
compromising French papers seized
at Utrecht, 72; critical situation,
73; Grenville calls on Holland to
arm, 74 ; Frenchinvasion postponed,
98; Dutch Constitution impedes
military preparation, 104; signs of
coming invasion, 111, 113 ; Conven-
tion declare war, 127; Holland in
power of France (1794), vii. 62; expe-
dition against Ireland, 383 ; Camper-
down, 411

Holstein: conquered by Denmark in
1712, i. 211, vy. 228

Holt, Chief Justice: died during trial
of Sacheverell, i. 58

Holt, Joseph: Irish rebel, viii. 236
sqq:

Hooghly, the: Clive’s exploits on, ii.
497; the town of Hooghly captured
and plundered, 7b.

Hood, Admiral Sir §., iv. 169, 198, 202,
242, v. 57

Hopkins, Commander (American), iv.
15

Horne Tooke, rector of Brentford: a
supporter of Wilkes, ii. 129, 175,
258; opponent of Junius, 244 ; libel
on Speaker, 527; imprisoned, 533

Qian

596

TIOR

Horsley, Bishop: opposition to Sunday
amusements, y. 163, 189

Horton, Mrs. (wife of Duke of Cum-
berland), iii. 462

Hosier, Admiral: tragic expedition to
West Indies, i. 352

Hospitality (Ireland): examples of
extravagance, li. 294

Hotham, Admiral: defeat of French
at Savona, vii. 229

‘ Houghing’ (Ireland), ii. 247, 351 sqq.,
iv. 329, vi. 358, vii. 377, vill. 366 sqq.

Howard, John (philanthropist), v. 284,
vi. 255 sqq., 258

Howard, Mrs. (mistress of George IL.),
i. 328, 454

Howe, General: in America, i. 496,
ili. 427; succeeds Gage in command,
449; retreats from Boston, 451;
captures New York, iv. 2; lack of
enterprise, 21; incapacity, 25; re-
treats from New Jersey, 27; con-
tinued inactivity, 52; expedition
against Philadelphia, 54; failure to
follow up victory at Brandywine,
55; opens navigation of Delaware,
56; recalled, 88

Howe, Lord (Admiral) : commander of
fleet against America, iv. 71, 91;
relief of Gibraltar, 247; First Lord
of Admiralty, 296 ; defeat of French
at Ushant, vil. 229

Hudson’s Bay: offered to English at
Conference of Utrecht, 1. 109

Humbert, General: commander of
French expedition against Ireland
(Killala Bay), viii. 205; defeat, 219

Hume: on ruinous effect of National
Debt, i. 841; reception of his His-
tory, ii. 430; believed in necessity
of parliamentary corruption, vi. 381

Huntingdon, Lady, 11. 565, 576, 598,
601, 605, 616, 633, v. 174

Hussey, Bishop (Catholic) : negotiation
between Government and Irish
Catholics, vii. 90, 121; first Presi-
dent of Maynooth, 127

Hutcheson, Francis: influenced liberal
movementin Scotch Presbyterianism
(1733), 1. 588

Hutchinson, General, viii. 212

Hutchinson, Governor(Massachusetts),
iii. 365, 880, 384, 416

Hutchinson, Hely: on Whiteboy out-
rages, iv. 331 7.; Secretary of State
(1786), 337; Prime Sergeant, 361;
inveterate place-hunter, 7b.; pro-
ceedings about Augmentation
scheme, 382, 389; his support pur-
chased in 1771, 395; Provost of

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

INO

Trinity College, 416; Alnager, 422;
on number of Irishmen in fleet and
army, 483 m.; report on state of
country, 488; on Catholic education,
530; on Catholic franchise, vi. 586,
vii. 118; death, 127

Hyde, Justice: house wrecked in Gor-
don riots, iii. 514 :

Hyder Ali: wars with English, iii. 482,
iv. 172 sqq.

I

Immigration: of refugees, statistics,
i. 191; English industries founded
by them, 192; part played by Scotch
and Irish immigrants in American
Revolution, iii. 443

Impey, Sir Elijah: conduct in India
censured by House of Commons, iy.
287

Incapacity of English commanders:
in the war of 1741-43, i. 423

Incomes of families: English, French
and Dutch compared, i. 560

India, Hast: French settlements, i.
428; conflicts between French and
English, ii. 455; state in 1760-72,
ili. 472 sqq.; contests of native
princes, 475; Clive’s second ad-
ministration, 477 sqq.; attempts to
cure abuses, 479; war with Hyder
Ali, 482, iv. 172; provisions of India
Acts, 1773, iii. 488; arrangement of
possessions in peace of 1782, iv.
252; Committees on state of Indian
affairs, 286; censure on officials of
E. 1. C., 287; Bills introduced, 288
sqq., 801; Pitt’s India Bill enacted,
vy. 74; war with Tippoo Sahib, 208;
result, 210; scheme for Russian
attack on, 285; French defeats,
1796, vii. 229

Indians, American: American difficul-
ties with, iii, 271; treatment, 294;
missionary efforts, 295; war with
(1763), 811; appeals to, from both
sides, in American war, 439; em-
ployed by both sides, iv. 13;
their barbarities, 14; desolation of —
Wyoming, 92; Indian war, 1779,
117

Innocent XI. (Odescalchi) : disapproved
of James II.’s unconstitutional con-
duct, i. 21; enmity to Lewis XIV.,.
ab.; abetted enterprise of William
of Orange, 23

‘Innocent Papists’ (Ireland, 1660) :
definition of term, ii. 176

Inoculation ; introduced by Lady Mary

INDEX.

INT

Montagu into England, i. 575 ; into
America by Cotton Mather, ii. 18
Intermarriage: between aristocracy

and merchants, i. 193; of Catholics
and Protestants, ii. 371 sqq.
Intolerance, religious: against Jews,
i. 263; against Catholics and Uni-
tarians, 268 ; mutual proscription
of Puritans and Episcopalians in
Virginia and New England, 276;
treatment of French Protestants, v.
306 sq.
Inventors, persecution of : Kay, Har-
greayes, Arkwright, vi. 209
Inverness: fortified by Cromwell, ii.
33; condition, 1715-78, 34
Ireland—before 18th century: con-
trast between Irish and Scotch his-
tory, li. 92, 385; early relations be-
tween English and Irish, 93; Norman
Conquest protracted in Ireland, 7b. ;
“Killing an Irishman no felony,’
94; wars of Elizabeth, 95; English
atrocities, 7b.; ravages in Munster,
96 sq.; subjugation of Ulster, 97;
policy of England: religious, 99;
agrarian, 101 sqq.; exaggerated in-
fluence attributed to race in Irish
history, 380 sqq.; influence of cli-
mate, 383; and of religion, 383 sqq.
Treland—before 18th century: land
war: speculators’ craving for Irish
land, ii. 102; gigantic confiscations,
102, 105; Irish wars not wars of
nationality, 103; land system, 104 ;
Composition of Connaught (1585),
104, 114; land planted with English
tenants, 105 ; Payne’s ‘ Description’
(1589), 106; abolition of tanistry
and gavelkind, 108 ; plantation of
Ulster, 2b.; character of colonists,
109; beneficial results, 110; Irish
love of justice, 111; inquisition in-
to defective titles, 112; ‘discoverers,’
113; the Graces, 115; violated by
Wentworth, 116; settlement of
* Connaught deferred, 117
Jreland—before 18th century: Reli-
gious : state of religion under Eliza-
beth, ii. 118; religious troubles
under James I., 119; growing Ca-
tholie zeal, 120; Protestant intol-
erance, 1b.; religious policy of
Charles I., 121; Puritan threats to
extirpate Catholicism, 122
ireland: Rebellion of 1641 : causes, ii.
123; the outbreak, 125 ; conduct of
Lords Justices, 2b.; character of re-
bellion, 127; did not begin with a
’ general massacre, 128; O’Neill’s pro-

597

IRE

clamation, 129; Scotch unmolested,
130; events in Cavan, 181; first
week of the contest, 132; letters of
Lords Justices, 135; silent about
massacres, 136; inquiry into Irish
crimes, 138; Dean Jones’s report,
139; evidence of murders, 140;
crimes of Sir Phelim O’Neil, 143;
exaggerated accounts, 145 ; motives
of exaggeration, 146, 151; deposi-
tions in Trinity College, Dublin, 147;
extravagant accounts of Sir John
Temple, 149 ; exaggerations at time
of Act of Settlement, 151; probable
number of victims, 153; estimate of
evidence, 154; conduct of English
Parliament, 155; of English sol-
diers, 156; ruthless carnage, 157
sqq.; instances of humanity among
Trish, 161, 168; restraining orders
of Catholic bishops, 163; religious
element in the rebellion, 164; as-
sembly at Mullifarvan, 165; expul-
sion of English the aim of rebels,
166; various motives in the rebel-
lion, 169 ; Cromwell’s conduct of the
war, 170; massacre of Drogheda,
171; destruction of life, 172;
children sent into slavery, 173 ;
Cromwellian settlement, 7b.; the
Restoration, 174; proposed Act of
indemnity, 175; compromise, 176;
treatment of ‘innocent Papists,’ 176
sq.; vigorous restrictions, 177; ne-
gotiations, 178 sq.; Act of Settle-
ment, 180

Treland—at Revolution: Trish Parlia-
ment of 1689, almost wholly Catho-
lic, ii. 182; its acts about reli-
gion, and repealing Poyning’s Law,
183; repeal of Act of Settlement,
184; reprises to purchasers of
confiscated land, 186; Act of At-
tainder, 188; treatment of ab-
sentees, 189; general character of
the Act, 190; it was not a religious
proscription, 193 ; a similar English
Bill of Attainder, 194; complete
Protestant ascendency in Ireland,
196

Ireland, 1700-60: Political: Scotch

remedial legislation contrasted with
opposite policy in Ireland, i. 197
sqq.; Irish Established Church: of
rich minority, 197; supported by
tithes, 198; position of Catholi-
cism, 199; Catholic education for-
bidden, 200; the Charter Schools,
200 sqq., 304; absolute Protestant
aristocracy created, 205; obstacles

598 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

IRE

to industrial enterprise, 206; natu-
ral resources of Ireland, 207

Ireland, 1700-60: Commercial Legis-
lation: import of Irish cattle into
England prohibited, ii. 208; exclu-
sion from colonial trade, 7b.; wool
trade begun, 209; Irish forbidden
to export raw wool to Continent,
ib.; export of manufactured wool
prohibited, 211; hempen manufac-
tures crushed, 212; smuggling
trade with France, 213; scarcity of
money, 214; only coarse linen al-
lowed to be made, 215; extreme
poverty (1727), 216 sq.; famine of
1740-41, 218 sq.; English commer-
cial policy towards Ireland not pe-
culiar, 220; political consequences,
221 sq.

Treland, 1700-60: Haecutive: subor-
dination of Parliament, ii. 223;
Hereditary Revenue, 7b.; constitu-
tion of Parliament, 224 sq.; no
Habeas Corpus Act, 226; lucrative
sinecures held by English, 227;
Irish pensions for Royal favourites,
228; reduced incomes in Ksta-
blished Church, 229; resistance to
‘tithe of agistment,’ 230; abuses of
Church patronage, 231 sq.; non-
resident bishops, 233 sq.; abuses
among minor clergy, 235; pagan
ignorance of their flocks, 236; par-
tial restrictions of pensions, 237 ;
letter of Lucas on Government
abuses, 238

Treland, 1700-60: Absenteeism: causes
and extent, 11.239; results: middle-
men and cottiers, 240; rack-rent,
tithes, oppression, 241 ; abject
poverty, 242; effect of penal laws
on agriculture, 243; no Catholic
competition in sales of land, 7b.;
spread of pasture, 244; agricultural
industry paralysed, 245 ; dispersion
of Sculoag (yeomanry) class, 246;
the cottiers, 247; remedial efforts,
248 ; pauperism, 250; strolling beg-
gars, 251; idleness of women, 252 ;
repression of mendicancy, 253 ; pro-
selytism, 254; population: propor-
tion of Catholics to Protestants,
255; causes of Irish depression,
256 sqq.

Ireland, 1700-60: Emigration: early
nomadic tendencies of nation, ii.
258; emigration under Elizabeth,
James I., Cromwell, 259; acceler-
ated by Revolution, 1b.; Protestant
emigration, 260; Catholics in Con-

IRE

tinental armies, 262; distinguished
Trish officers in foreign services,
263 sq.; effects of emigration on
national character, 265

Ireland, 1700-60: Religious Legisla-

tion : the treaty of Limerick, i. 27%
sqq.; Irish Catholics powerless and
passive, 281; provisions of the
penal code, 283 sqq.; its failure and
success, 299 sqg.; systematic degra-
dation of Catholics, ii. 266 ; priest-
hunting, 267 sqq.; Boulter’s report
on state of Popery, 277; gradual
relaxation of religious disabilities,
278 ; Bishop Sweetman’s account of
condition and government of Catho-
lic clergy, 279 ; effects of penal code
on respect for law, 281; on character
of Irish religion, 282, 386; on dis-
tribution of property, 284; on social
life, 285 ; Jacobitism of priests, 394;
Catholic bishops nominated by
James II. and the Pretender, 395

Treland, 1700-60: Conjfiscations : social

and political effects, ii. 286 sqq.;
dread of Catholic ascendency, 286 ;
schism between landlords and
tenants, 2b.; relations of rich and
poor, 287; effects on literature,
288; on character of gentry, 289;
landlord oppression, 290; despotism,
291 ; duelling, drinking, extrava-
gance, 292 sq.; country life, 294;
disregard for law, 295; general
character of richer classes, 296; of
small landlords and middlemen,
297

Ireland, 1700-60: More pleasing as-

pects: intellectual activity, ii. 299 ;
learned societies, 300; Dublin So-
ciety, 301; its encouragement of art,
302; Bishop Berkeley’s ‘ Querist,”
303; Lord Molesworth’s proposed
remedies for ills of Ireland, 305 ;
Archbishop Synge’s sermon on
Toleration, 306; tolerant spirit of
some higher clergy, 307 sqq.; de-
cline of persecution, 310 sq.; cases
of Protestants aiding Catholics in
evading penal laws, 311 sq.; redeem-
ing features of Government, 313;
virtues of Irish poor, 314; earnest-
ness of religious conviction, 315,
386; hospitality and courtesy, 316;
love of music, 317; pilgrimages,
387 ; illustrations of Irish tolerance,
389 ; towards Quakers, 390; Wesley,
391; relations of Protestant clergy
to Catholics, 7b.; few witch trials,
892; little active disloyalty, 393;

INDEX.

IRE

‘the wild geese,’ 397 sq.; recruiting
for the Continent sometimes con-
nived at by Government, 398

Treland, 1700-60: Description of
Country: state of Dublin, ii. 318
sqq.; elements of disorder, 320 ;
profligacy and impiety, 321; osten-
tatious style of living, 322; book-
sellers and printers, 324; music
and stage, 325; goodness of roads,
326; knowledge of English, 327;
provincial press, 328; destruction
of woods, 329; consumption of
timber in iron-works, 330; cruelty
to horses and sheep, 331; low state
of agriculture, 332; linen manutac-
ture, Belfast, 333; fisheries, 334;
Cork, 335; Limerick, 337; Water-
ford, 7b.; Kilkenny, 338; military
and geographical importance of
Galway, ib. ; Catholics expelled
thence, 339; persecution of priests
and friars, 340; Governor Hyre,
340 sq.; decay of the town, 342;
the German colony (1709), 343;
improvements in husbandry intro-
duced by them, 344; Huguenot
refugees, 2b.; their services to the
linen manufacture, 345

Treland, 1700-60: Crime: tories and
yapparees, ii. 346;~ thieves and
smugglers in Kerry and Connaught,
348 ; ‘Daniel Mahoney’s fairesses,’
350; the Houghers, 351 sqq.; sus-
pected connivance of priests, 354 ;
privateers, 356; military riots, 357 ;
bad condition of prisons, 358; ab-
ductions, 359; their character, 361
sqq.; parallel customs in Wales and
Scotland, 366; ‘couple-beggars,’
368; mainly degraded priests, 370 ;
laws against intermarriages of
Catholics and Protestants, 371 sqq.;
Act of 1745: mixed marriages cele-
brated by priests declared null and
void, 377; consequences of these

> Jaws, 378

Treland, 1700-60: Protestants: con-
flict of High Churchmen and Non-
conformists, ii. 399; increase of
Presbyterians in North, 401; their
position as Dissenters, 402 ; grow-
ing animosity, 403 ; defiant attitude
towards Episcopalian clergy, 404 ;
Test Act and its results in Ireland,
405 ; ineffectual efforts to repeal it,
407, 409; controversies about a
Toleration Act, 408; Indemnity
(1715) and Toleration (1719) Acts,
409; practical permission of Presby-

599

IRE

terian marriages, 410; causes of
decadence of bresbyterianism, 411;
‘New Light’ schism, 2b.; Associate
Presbytery schism, 412

Ireland, 1700-60: Conflict between
English and Irish interest: Trish in-
terest purely colonial, ii. 412; causes
of Protestant discontent following
Revolution, 413 ; Jacobite schemes
for uniting Protestants and Catho-
lics, 414; political aspirations of
Protestants, 415 ; Molyneux’s ‘ Case
of Ireland,’ 7b.; petitions for an
Union similar to that of Scotland,
416; conflicts about patronage be-
tween English and Irish bishops,
417; disputes about money Bills,
418; question of appellate jurisdic-
tion of Irish House of Lords, 419 ;
base coinage, 420; Wood’s half-
pence, 422; popular indignation,
423; ‘ Drapier’s Letters,’ 424;
Wood’s patent withdrawn, 425;
character of Swift’s patriotism, 7b. ;
Iveland’s indebtedness to him, 426 ;
minor acts of Irish Parliament,
427; finances, 428; Viceroyalty of
Chesterfield, 429; Charles Lucas,
2b.; Primate Stone, 430 ; Boyle and
Anthony Malone, 431

Ireland, 1751-59: conflict with Go-
vernment, ii, 431; parliamentary
Opposition organised, 432; system
ot bounties, 433 ; political corrup-
tion, 434; financial difficulties, 435;
Protestant opposition to legislative
Union, 7b.; loyalty of Catholics,
436; their position improved, ib. ;
expedition of Thurot, 437

Ireland, 1760-78: Whiteboys, dc.:
growth of pasture land, iy. 812, 335 ;
partial prosperity, 313; causes of
Whiteboy movement, 314; land-
owners and middlemen, 315 ; leases,
316; condition of tenantry, 317;
agriculture, 318; comparison with
Scotland, 319; commonage, 321;
Whiteboys, 321 sqq.; tithe griev-
ances, 322 sqq.; Whiteboy outrages,
327 sqq.; not sectarian, 334; mea-
sures against Whiteboyism, 341 ;
Nicholas Sheehy, 343; Oakboys,
345 sqq.; Lord Donegal’s evictions,
347; Steelboys, 349

Treland, 1760-78: Political: legisla-
tive independence demanded, iv.
217; promised, 238; Constitutional
grievances, 351; government by
‘ Undertakers,’ 353 ; expenditure on
public works, 356; sketch of earlier

600

IRE

Constitutional history of Ireland,
857 sqq.; political life, 360; loyalty
during war, 363; Catholic regi-
ments, 364; popularity of Pitt, 365 ;
grievances of Pension List, 365;
duration of Parliament, 367; first
Viceroys of George III., 371; Lord
Townshend’s Viceroyalty, 372 sqq. ;
tenure of judges, 374; demand for
an Irishman as Chancellor, 375 ;
augmentation of army, 377; Octen-
nial Bill carried, 381; augmen-
tation scheme defeated, 384; cha-
racter of Parliament, 386; absence
of parties, 388; new Parliament,
386 sqq.; ‘ Baratariana,’ 393; em-
bargo on export of provisions, 395 ;
diminishing revenue, 399; Lord
Harcourt’s Viceroyalty, 400 sqq.;
new taxation, 403 sqg.; Absentee
tax, 403; remonstrance of peers,
406 ; reply, 407; Burke’s argumenis
against the tax, 408 sq.; measure
rejected, 412; corn bounties, 415 ;
Trish eloquence, 417; Flood takes
office, 427; commercial relaxations,
429; relation of American question
to Irish politics, 430; right of Irish
Parliament to legislate for Ireland,
431; claim of England to tax Ire-
Jand, 433; Franklin’s visit, 434;
loyalty of Parliament, 435; Ameri-
can party in Ireland, 437 ; increase
of Pension and Civil Lists, 441;
Viceroyalty of Buckinghamshire,
442 sqq.; necessity for free trade,
442; its advocates, 444; Irish poli-

~ tical economists, 445; opposition
to free trade, 449; restrictions on
Trish exports, 450

Treland, 1760-78: Religious : position
of Catholics in this period, iv. 451
sqq.; oath and declaration of 1774,
463 ; moral evils of penal laws, 465
sqq.; special difficulties of religious
problem in Ireland, 470; opinions
of Irish leaders on tolerance, 471;
Trish independence desired by Pro-
testants, 473; alleged Roman plot
for independence, 475; South of
Treland accused of favouring France:
Ulster, America, 474 7.

Ireland, 1778-82: Political: unpro-
tected condition of country, iv. 481;
militia scheme, 482 ; country arms
in self-defence, 483; rise of Volun-
teers, 484; growing discontent,
487; atrophy of prosperity, 488;
aspirations for a free Parliament,
489; French emissary among Pres-

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

IRE

byterians, 491; Ireland prepared
for invasion (1779), 492; growth
of Volunteering, 496; riotsin favour
of free trade, 498; England grants
free trade, 500; and consents to the
repeal of the Irish Test Act, 501;
organisation of Volunteers, 503; sug-
gestions of legislative Union, 504;
cry for legislative independence, 506 ;
Grattan’s declaration, 508; Mutiny
Act, 510 sqq.; sale of peerages, 515;
Carlisle’s Viceroyalty, 518 sqq.; im-
pediments to use of free trade, 520;
fears of invasion, 521; activity of

“Volunteers, 522; proofs of loyalty,
523; Habeas Corpus Bill, 526,
529; efforts for independence, 527 ;
Gardiner’s Catholic Bill, 529; Cath-
olic education, 530; political action
of Volunteers, 532; Grattan’s ad-
dress for independence, 535; cha-
racter of popular movement, 542;
Duke of Portland’s-Viceroyalty, 544
sqq-; Grattan’s Declaration of Rights
and Grievances, 546; concessions
won from England, 552; recruiting
for navy, 554; many disabilities
removed from Catholics, 556; con-
stitution wholly changed, 559;
happy prospects, 560

Ireland, 1782: dangers of reaction, vi.
301; dealings with Flood, 302; mis-
takes of subordinate officials, 302,
805 ; inadequacy of ‘simple repeal’ of
Declaratory Act, 303 ; circumstances
that strengthened distrust, 305 ;
English statesmen disliked Con-
stitution of 1782; danger to the
connection with England, 307; de-
claration of Fox, 7b.; Portland’s
secret negotiations in favour of
English superintending power, 308

Treland, 1782—Viceroy Temple: his
dark picture of state of Ireland, vi.
309; Act of Renunciation a necessity,
311; passed, 312 ; character, merits,
and dangers of Constitution of 1782,
313; Irish ministry not responsible
to Irish Parliament, 314, 317; dif-
ference of Constitution from that
which now exists in free colonies,
315; influence of English parties,
316; absence of Appropriation Act,
318 ; need of a commercial treaty,
ib.; dangerous position of Ireland
in time of war, 319 sq.; Richmond
argues that the only remedy is an
Union, 321; evil effects of Simple
Repeal controversy, 7b.; growth of
agitation for parliamentary reform

. INDEX,

IRE

322; Volunteer resolutions, 323 ;
state of Irish representation, 7b. ;
Temple’s financial reforms, 325;
Geneva refugees, 7b.; resignation of
Temple: interregnum, 2b.

dreland, 1783—Viceroy Northington :
Parliament dissolved, vi. 326 ; great
distress, 7b. ; establishment of Court
of Admiralty and separate post
office, 327; Grattan’s policy, 328;
dangerous symptoms in country, 2b.;
national debt of Ireland, 7b.; Flood
moves, Grattan opposes, reduction
of army, 329; political attitude of
Volunteers, 330; difficult position of
Charlemont, 332; Bishop of Derry
(Earl of Bristol) at head of demo-
eratic movement, 7b.; Volunteer
reform meetings, 335 sq. ; the Bishop
and the Presbyterians and Catholics,
336 sq.; Volunteer Convention in
Dublin, 337; Fox’s alarm, 2.;
Charlemont secures return of mode-
rate delegates, 338; George Robert
Fitzgerald, 339; Bishop’s entry
into Dublin in royal state, 341;
Charlemont elected chairman, 342 ;
the Convention’s Reform Bill, 343;
introduced into Commons, 344; re-
jected at first stage, 345 ; Convention
dissolved, 346; its address to King,
ib.; failure of later attempts to
carry reform, 347; opinions on
policy of Convention, 7b. ; opposition
to Catholic franchise, 349 ; interval
of quiet years before French Revo-
lution, 350; Northington retires,
351

Ireland, 1784-87—Viceroy Rutland:
distress in 1784, vi. 351; agita-
tion for protecting duties, 7. ;
arguments against, 353; Commons
ask for commercial arrangement
with England, 354; Foster’s Corn
Law: history and effects, 354 sqq.;
riots in Dublin, 358; houghing sol-

- diers, ib.; trade outrages, 359 ; Fos-
ter’s Press Bill, 360; ‘ Liberty Corps’
enlist Catholics, 7b. ; deterioration
of Volunteers, 361 ; drilling lowest
classes, 362; causes of the disturb-
ance of 1784-85, 363; rise of demo-
cratic reformers, 364; their Con-
gress, 366; attitude of Catholics,
367 ; seditious writings attributed to
priests, 368; Government spies:
O’Leary, 369; relations of French
to Irish sedition, ib. ; political agi-
tation subsides, 371; conservatism
of Parliament, 7b.; increase of pro-

601

IRE

sperity and of national expenditure,
372; offices held by absentees, 373 ;
Pitt on Irish free trade and reform,
375; Irish Administration opposes
reform : Fitzgibbon, 376 sqq.; Rut-
land opposes reform, 382; Grattan’s
policy and reform proposals, 383;
commercial position of Ireland, 388 ;
Pitt’s wish for commercial treaty
and partition of expense of navy,
389 ; discussion of terms of treaty :
Rutland’s views, 391; Pitt’s, 392
sqq.; Pitt’s plan laid before Irish
Parliament (1785), 395; clause pro-
viding against deficits, 396 ; propo-
sitions carried in Ireland, 397;
additional taxes voted in connection
with them, 398; opposition in
England, 399 ; commercial proposi-
tions transformed, ib.; attitude of
English Opposition, 401; resolutions
carried in England, 7b.; defeated
and abandoned in Ireland, 403;
embarrassing position of Govern-
ment, 7b.; frequent suggestions of
‘legislative Union,’ 404; character
of later commercial legislation of
Irish Parliament, ib.; Dublin police
(1786), 406; Whiteboy Act, 408;
Grattan’s motions relating to tithes,
410 ; commutation of tithes refused,
411; prosperity and general peace
of this period, 412; death of Rut-
land, 413

Tveland, 1788-90—Viceroy Bucking-
ham (formerly Lord Temple):
financial reforms, vi. 414; patronage,
2b.; ‘Ireland never so quiet,’ 415;
question of Regency : rival theories,
416; causes that made Ireland
adopt Whig theory, 418 ; address to
Prince of Wales, 420; question of
restrictions in the background, 7b.;
debates on subject, 421; estimate
of controversy, 425 sq.; Bucking-
ham censured for refusing to trans-
mit address, 428; commissioners
appointed to transmit it,429; King’s
recovery, 2b,; great increase of cor-
ruption, 429; Fitzgibbon made
Chancellor, ib.; resignation of Buck-
ingham (1790), 431; lLuzerne’s
letters about Ireland, 7b.; secret
French mission to Ireland (Dr.
Bancroft), ib.; Bancroft’s report,
432

Ireland—social, 1782-89: financial
position, vi. 433; reduction of in-
terest on debt, 435; and of legal
rate of interest, 436; growth of

602

IRE

prosperity, 2b. ; alleged causes: free
trade, abolition of penal laws,
bounties, 439; Ivish industries,
441; Parliament essentially govern-
ment by upper classes, 442; its
vices did not seriously affect
material wellbeing, 444 ; legal posi-
tion of poor, 445; remaining
obstacles to prosperity chiefly moral,
ab. ; increase of intellectual activity,
445 ; decadence of sectarian bigotry,
446; O’Leary and Kirwan, 1.;
politics begin to dominate over
theology in upper and middle
classes, 449; not among peasants,
450; Peep-o’-Day Boys and De-
fenders, 2b.; state of education,
451; Orde’s educational scheme,
ab.; dangerous movements external
to Parliament, 452; problems to be
solved, 453

Ireland, 1790-938: Viceroy Westmor-
land: parliamentary corruption:
action of Opposition, vi. 456; dis-
solution : new members, 457; vote
on account of apprehended Spanish
war, 458; Whig Club, 20.; signs of
revolutionary spirit, 459 ; speeches
of Parsons, 2b.; fascination of
French Revolution, 461 ; power of
Volunteers, 2b.; dangerous movye-
ments in Belfast, 462; ‘Northern
Whig’: Wolfe Tone, 463; Society
of United Irishmen founded, 465 ;
its spread: objects of its leaders,
466; theory opposed to that of
Whig Club, 468; Grattan’s attach-
ment to connection with England,
ab.; dread of democracy in Ireland,
2b. ; vival theories of parliamentary
veform, 470; growth of democratic
element in Catholic Committee,
472; discourtesies shown to Catho-
lics, 2b.; growing importance of
Catholics, 473; their anomalous
and humiliating position, 474;
Catholic Committee demand com-
plete abolition of penal laws, 476;
difficulty of ministers’ task, 477;
guiding motives of Irish ministers,
and of English, 478; circum-
stances favour Catholics, 479; in-
fiuence of Burke, 2b. ; indifference of
English ministers to Irish affairs,
482; Dundas proposes Relief Bill,
485; opposition of Irish Govyern-
ment, 487; Pitt endeavours to
soften antagonism, 491; Westmor-
land’s arguments, 492; supported
by Hobart, 495; conference of

)

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

IRE

Hobart and Parnell with Dundas.
and Pitt, 497; English ministers.
yield to Irish, 498; Pitt’s concilia-
tory letter, 499 ; liberal sentiments
of Pitt-and Dundas, 501; general
Protestant sentiment not repre-
sented by Irish ministers, 502;
Langrishe’s Relief Act (1792), 503 ;
Catholic Convention summoned,
505; hostile resolutions of grand
juries and of Corporation of Dublin,
2b.; frequent allusions to ‘ legislative
union,’ 512; Pitt in 1792 contem-
plated such a measure, 513; Hast
* Indian trade, 516; Government
corruption: Cork Weighmasters,
517; parliamentary corruption, 20. ;
details, 518; Government defence,
520; question of Catholic enfran-
chisement, 522; policies of Irish
Reformers, of English, and of Irish
ministers, 524; divisions and popu-
lar ferment, 528; no serious alarm,
530; speculations about practica-
bility of Union, 532; Pitt perplexed
and anxious, 533 ; growing influence
of French affairs in Ireland, 5353
French reports on Ireland, 536;
‘Friends of the Constitution,’ 539 ;
approximation of Catholics and
Presbyterians, 540; Catholic dis-
affection still rare, 542; sentiments.
of different classes, 7b. ; meeting of
Catholic Convention, 544; petitions
the King, 545; Protestant opinion
more favourable to concession, 546;
proclamation against seditious as-
semblies (National Guards), 547;
‘levelling spirit’ prevalent, 548,
557; Fitzgibbon’s opinion, 549;
general estimate of situation, 551;
alleged danger to property held
under Act of Settlement, 552; popu-
lar interpretation of word ‘ Union,’
554; England insists on Relief Bill,
555; Irish ministers reluctantly
obey, 556; false position of West-
morland’s Government, 558; Dun-
das prescribes relief to be given, 559
Treland, 1793-94—Viceroy Westmor-
land: term ‘Catholic’ first used
from Throne, vi. 561: parliament-
ary reform, 565, 597; Catholic
Relief Bill, 566; defeated, 574;
limited Catholic franchise proposed,
583 ; Relief Bill carried, 587 ;
military measures after French
declaration of war, 596; measures
regarding placemen and pensioners,
600; question of commercial treaty

INDEX.

IRE

with England, 603; discordant voice
in foreign politics, 605; seditious
principles expressed, 608 ; indigna-
tion of Belfast party at French war,
609 ; enrolling of militia, 7b. ;
multiplying signs of anarchy and
sedition, 610; contrast between
sentiments of Parliament and of
country, vii. 1; preparations for
rebellion, 3; leading United Irish-
men chiefly Protestants, 4; rise of
a Catholic seditious party, 5; pro-
ceedings of Dublin Committee of
United Irishmen, 8 ; arming of
people discussed in it, 10; spread
of Defenderism, 11 sgq.; report of
Lords’ Committee thereon, 17 ;
popular sympathy for France, 21;
quiet in 1794, 22; Grattan supports
war with France, 2b.; proposed
commercial treaty, 25; Ponsonby’s
Reform Bill, 7b. ; informer’s reports
on United Irishmen, 26; arrest of
French emissary (Jackson), 28;
escape of Rowan, 29; growth of
disloyalty, 7b.; Grattan’s influence
weakened, 31

Treland, 1795—Viceroy Fitzwilliam :
ministerial changes after Whig
secession of 1794, vii. 32; Fitz-
william designated as future Vice-
roy, 35; communicates with
Thomas Grenville and Grattan, 37;
Grattan refuses office, 38; negotia-
tions in England, 7b.; time of Fitz-
william’s appointment and extent
of his powers disputed, 40; dis-
pute settled—Fitzwilliam Viceroy :
Lord Milton, secretary, 50; instruc-
tions, 7b.; desires to yield Catholic
claims, 54; proposes a constabulary,
55; announces intention to accept
Catholic Bill, 56; dismissal of Hamil-
ton and Cooke, 57; and of Beresford,
58; anger of Castle party, 60; Fitz-

_ william urges necessity of Emanci-
pation, 65; silence of English
ministers on subject, 71; procrasti-
nation, 72; charge against Beres-
ford, 73; Portland declares against
Emancipation, 74; last remon-
strances of Fitzwilliam, 75; ordered
to stop Catholic Bill, 78; review of
his conduct, 79 ; recall : inquiry into
its motive, 80; Parliament votes
thanks to Fitzwilliam, 93 ; the pub-
lication of letters to Carlisle, 95;
departure postponed till Camden's
arrival, 96 ; effects of his recall, 97

Ireland, 1795-96—Viceroy Camden:

603

IRE

riots in Dublin on his arrival, vii.
99; English ministers stimulate
anti-Catholic feeling, 101; danger-
ous state of country, 105; defeat of
Catholic Bill, 115; effect on Irish
history, 7b.; Fitzgibbon’s rewards,
116 ; education of Catholic priest-
hood, 117 sqq.; foundation of May-
nooth, 126; Richmond advocates.
Union, 134; trial and suicide of
Wm. Jackson, 1386 ; Leonard
MeNally, 1388; Irish United Society
reconstituted, 144; spread of
Defenderism, 146; agrarian condi-
tions, 152 sqq.; rise of Orangism,
174 sqq.; persecution of Catholics,
179 sqq.; growth of religious ani-
mosity, 187; agrarian aspects of
Orange disturbances, 191; influence
on Catholic disaffection, 193; In-
surrection Act, 196; intelligence of
intended inyasion, 201; Habeas
Corpus Act suspended, 203; last
introduction of Emancipation, 205 ;
extreme anarchy, 206; enrolment.
of yeomanry, 213; political ass-
assinations, 222 ; junction of
United Irishmen and Defenders,
223; state of Ulster at end of 1796,
228 ; United Irish negotiations with
France, 233 sqq.; Hoche’s expedi-
tion, 252; failure, 256 sqq.; con-
duct of the people, 266; superficial
character of much Irish disloyalty,
272; probable temporary loss of
Treland if Hoche had landed, 273;
Absentee tax proposed and rejected,
277; Bank of Ireland suspends cash
payments, 278

Treland: Eve of Rebellion: North:
Orange outrages in Ulster, vii. 176
sqq.; anarchy, 217; rapid spread in
1797,278; character of disturbances,
ib.; Donegal, Roscommon, Tyrone,
279; murder of Dr. Hamilton, 281 ;,
Derry, 7b.; Armagh, 282; opposi-
tion to enlistments, 283 ; Grattan’s
proposed Volunteers, 284; martial
law proclaimed, 285; Lake’s pro-
clamation discussed, 287; state of
smothered rebellion, 294; seizure:
of arms, 7b.; Dean Warburton’s
letters, 295; spread of disloyalty,
296 ; co-operation of marauding
parties, 298 ; difficulties of disarm-
ing, 299; military outrages, 300,
305; by yeomanry, 301; by ‘An-
cient Britons,’ 303; Lord Moira’s
speech, 305; rebels sent to fleet,
307 ; correspondence of rebels with

604

IRE

- mutineers at the Nore, 308; Lake's
proposed methods of repression,
310; Knox’s letters to Pelham, 311;
conduct of Ulster gentry, 318; pos-
sibility that Reform might have
prevented rebellion, 321; disaffec-
tion among troops, 331; ‘Northern
Star’ suppressed, 332; Newell’s in-
formation, ib.; ‘Union Star’:
Cox’s confessions, 336; stricter en-
forcement of martial law, 338; offer
of command of Ireland and Vice-
royalty twice refused by Cornwallis,
339; revival of Orange outrages,
340; flight of Catholics, 341

Treland—Eve of Rebellion: Disarm-
ang: Lord Blayney’s severities, vii.
342; burning of houses, 2b.; out-
rages in Westmeath, 343; Multi-
farnham and Charleville, 344; Ty-
rone, Dungarvan, &c., 345 ; evidence
of increase of religious hatreds in
North, 347; green and orange
badges, 348; religious riots, 7b. ;
distrust of militia, 349; success of
disarming in Ulster, ib. ; September
assizes, 350; undetected crime, 351;
death sentences, 7b.; case of William
Orr, 352; examination of degree of
Government responsibility for pro-
ducing rebellion, 361

Treland—Eve of Rebellion: South:
spread of sedition to Catholic Ivre-
land, vii. 364; first centres, 720.;
motives of Catholic disloyalty:
tithe question, 365; rent, 366; re-
vived sentiment of nationality, 367 ;
1641 and 1797 compared, 368 ; pro-
phecies of Columkill, 7b.; fear
of Orange massacres — pretended
Orange oath, 369.—Leinster: De-
fenderism in King’s County, 370;
Carlow, Kilkenny, Kildare, Wex-
ford, Wicklow, tainted, 871 sqq.;
political opposition of Kildare gen-
try, 372; Pollock’s report. on con-
dition of central counties, 873;
illustrations of panic about Orange-
men, 7b.; troubles near Dublin,
374; state of Tipperary, 2b.— Muwn-
ster: state after failure of Hoche’s
expedition, 375; Cork and Bandon,
ab.; Mallow, 376; rumoured dis-
affection among Methodists, ib. ;
appalling spread of crime, 377.—
Connaught: more peaceful than
other provinces, 379; disaffection
in Sligo, Ennis, Mayo, 379.—Gene-
ral state of Ireland, 880; rebellion
postponed, 381

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

IRE

Ireland— Eve of Rebellion: Foreign
Assistance : renewed negotiations of
United Irishmen with France—mis-
sion of Lewins, vii. 881; negotia-
tions with Spain, 382; Dutch expe-
dition prepared, 383; mission of
Jagerhorn from France, 7b.; Me
Neyin’s memoir and plan of inva-
sion, 384; channels of Government
information, 399; Dutch fleet de-
tained in Texel, 407; probable effects
of invasion, 410; postponement of
expedition, 7b.; Dutch defeated at
Camperdown, 411; downfall of Car-
not and death of Hoche, 20.

Ireland —Eve of Rebellion: Dec. 1797
to March 1798: situation at end of
1797—Pelham’s estimate, vii. 421;
Clare’s, 422 ; expectation of inva-
sion, 7b.; alarming reports from
McNally, 423; Abercromby Com-
mander-in-Chief, 425 sqq. (see Aber-
cromby) ; succeeded _by Lake, 438 ;
all Catholic concession refused, 439 ;
Bishop of Derry’s proposed remedies
for rebellion, 440; acts of military
violence, 443; Absentee tax again
rejected, 447; calm in Ulster, 448;
anarchy and sedition in other pro-
vinces, 449; change of sentiment
among gentry, 453 ; rapid growth of
religious fanaticism, 455; Spring
Assizes, 1798, 456; juries do their
duty, 457; banditti in Queen’s
County, 458; secret dispositions of
English Government, 459

Ireland—Rebellion: 1798, Jan. to
May: veal and apparent strength
of United Irishmen, viii. 2; their
numbers, 7b.; leaders, 3 sqq.; arrest
of O’Connor, 7; information of
Thomas Reynolds, 9; arrest of chief
members of Committee, 11; effects of
proclamation of martial law and free
quarters, 13; gentry dislike free
quarters, 15; military coercion at
work, 16; disarming Kildare, 17;
pitched caps, 18; outrages on women,
19 ; military order forbidding ‘ gene-
ral subscriptions’ for provisioning
troops, 20; tortures, 21; Thomas
Judkin Fitzgerald, 22; Wright’s
case, 24; before law courts and Par-
lament, 26; new Indemnity Act,
30; Government defence, 31; Catho-
lic declaration of loyalty, 35; cap-
ture of Lord Ed. Fitzgerald, 43;
arrest of all influential leaders of
United Irishmen, 52

Iveland—Rebellion: 1798, May 23

INDEX,

IRE

to June 20: rebels attack Naas, viii.
55; tragedy at Clane, 56; treachery
of Dr. Esmonde, 57; conflicts near
Dublin, 58; Catholic loyal address
to Viceroy, 59; excitement in Dublin,
2b.; precautions, 60; martial law,
61; rebels cowed in Dublin, 62;
clerical and legal volunteers, 7b.;
rebellion in Queen’s County, 65;
execution of Sir E. Crosbie, 66;
rebel defeat at Tarah (Meath), 67;
murders of Protestants in Kildare,
68; slaughter of rebels at Gibbet-
rath, 69; outbreak in Wicklow,
71; Wexford, 73; yeomanry dis-
banded, and districts proclaimed,
75; panic about Orangemen, 76,
81; whole country put under martial
law, 77; results, 78; magisterial
outrages, 7b.; massacre at Dunlavin,
79; at Carnew, 80; Father John
Murphy at Boulavogue, 82; defeat
of militia, 83; capture of Ennis-
corthy, 84; advance on Wexford, 87;
defeat of regulars, 88; surrender of
Wexford, 89; town held by rebels,
92; humane treatment of Protes-
tants, 93; south of Wexford in hands
of rebels, 95; Gorey, 96; rebel
repulse at Newtown-barry, 97;
Alexander's account of rebels’ or-
ganisation, 98; Dunboyne camp,
99; rebels’ objects, 100; crimes
around Vinegar Hill, 101; proceed-
ings largely directed by priests, 103;
various treatment of Protestants,
ib.; rebel successes at Gorey, 105;
battle of New Ross, 107 sqq.; Sculla-
bogue, 111; Government letters
about rebellion, 112 sqq.; large force
from England asked for, 114; serious
crisis, 116; loyalty of the Orangemen,
118; success of martial law in
Ulster, 119; causes that alienated
Ulster from France, 121 sqq.; Pres-
byterians come forward to support
Government, 128; rebellion in
Antrim, 129; rebels dispersed, 130 ;
Down: battle of Ballinahinch, 132 ;
few acts of cruelty in Ulster re-
bellion, 134; rebel attack on Borris
(Carlow), 137; battle of Arklow,
139; increase of religious animosi-
ties, 144; demoralisation of country,
145; rebellion only formidable when
turned to religious war, 146; distress
following paralysis of industry, 147;
reinforcements from England, 70.;
Vinegar Hill stormed, 150; Ennis-
corthy retaken, 151; state of Wex-

Treland—Rebellion :

605

IRE

ford, 152 ; Orange and Catholic loyal
addresses, 155; last days at Wex-
ford, 157; massacre of Wexford
Bridge, 158; rebel proposals of
surrender, 160; rejected by Lake,
161; town occupied by troops, 163 ;
Lake’s indiscriminating severity,
ab.; execution of Father’ Philip:
Roche, Captain Keugh, and Grogan,
164 sqq.; of Bagenal Harvey, 168 ;
atrocities on both sides, 170;
chapels destroyed, 171; excesses.
by Germans and Welsh, 7d.

June 20 to Oc-
tober: Cornwallis Viceroy and
Commander-in-Chief, viii. 172; state
of country, 173; loyal priests, 174 ;
rebel priests, 175; rebels march
towards Carlow, 176 ; chilling recep-
tion by people, 177; defeated at
Kileomney Hill, 179; military
licence, 179; retribution, 180;
Hacketstown, Ballyellis, Ballyra-
heen, 180 sq.; dispersion of Wex-
ford rebels, 182; misery produced,
ib.; Cornwallis’s opinion of state of
feeling and society, 183 ; conditional
amnesty to rebels, 186 ; execution of
rebel leaders, 186, 188, 193; trial of
the two Sheares’s, 189; execution,
191; condemned prisoners appeal
for clemency, 193; their proposals.
accepted, 197; new fears of inva-
sion, 199; Bill of attainder against
Lord HE. Fitzgerald, Harvey and
Grogan, 201 ; Humbert’s expedition
to Killala, 204; his reception, 206
sqq.; Hutchinson’s advance against
the French, 209; defeat at Castle-
bar, 212; misconduct of English
troops, 212 sq.; state of Mayo, 214;
religious animosity, 215; provisional
government in Killala, 217; Hum-
bert’s movements after Castlebar,
218; defeats Vereker at Colooney,
219; surrender of French at Ballina-
muck, 220; rebellion in Connaught
suppressed, 221; Killala recaptured,
223; military punishments, 224;
other French expeditions: Napper
Tandy’s, 225; Bompard’s (with
Wolfe Tone), 229; capture and trial
of Tone, 231 ; his death, 233; Savary
appears in Killala Bay, 235 ; Joseph
Holt’s career in Wicklow, 236 ; loyal-
ist exultation, 238; Parliament
votes compensation to loyalists, and
thanks to troops, 239; revived cele-
bration of sectarian anniversaries,
ib.; continued savage spirit on both

606 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

IRE

sides, 240; military outrages, 241;
licentious conduct of militia, 242;
officers worse than men, 243; the
untried prisoners, 245; Emmet and
companions banished, 247; difficulty
as to their destination, 248; ultimate
result, 249; rebels sent to Botany
Bay, 250; fate of others, 251; esti-
mate of loss of life during Rebel-
lion, 253; loss of property, 254;
effects on finances, 2b.; national
prosperity not yet seriously im-
paired, 7b.; number of troops in
Ireland, 366 ; houghers in Mayo and
Galway, 2b.; magistrates and jury-
men intimidated, 367; bands of
robbers and murderers in Wicklow,
368; severe Coercion Act, 370;
isolated outrages continue, 430 sq.

Ireland—Agrarian System, 11. 216 sqq.,
240 sqq., 331, 332, iv. 312 sqq.;
allowance for land improvements,
vii. 152; ‘Timber Acts,’ 2b.; sub-
letting, 153, 155; the middleman,
154, 157; origin of low perpetuity
rents, 155; ‘canting,’ %b.; road-
making, 156; causes that produced
agrarian changes, 157; large sales of
land, 158; rents, 2b.; middleman’s
profits, 160; lands let to highest
bidder, 161; subdivision of land,
163; pauper tenantry, 166; misery
of cottiers, 167; great power of
landlords, 169 ; feudal customs and
contracts, 7b.; local authority of
landlords, 170; decline of their in-
fluence, 171

Hreland—Union: before Rebellion:
petitions for in 1703 and 1707, ii.
416; riots caused by the suggestion in
1759, 435; again suggested in 1780,
iv. 504; in 1786, vi. 404; and in 1792,
512, 518, 532; an early design of
Pitt’s, 513, vii. 49; Catholic reso-
lution against, 95; Richmond’s ar-
guments for Union, 134; speedy
introduction of a Bill not settled in
England before Rebellion, 459

Treland—Union: First Stage: recapi-
tulation of early stages of history of
question, viii. 265; Union of 1654,
ab. ; Sir W. Petty’s proposals (1672)
for complete legislative union, 465
sq.; influence of the commercial
restrictions and of the Scotch
Union on the question, 267 sq.;
succession of Irish and English
advocates of Union, 269; Franklin,
Arthur Young, 270; Montesquieu,
zb.; Chatham’s views, 2b.; Lord

IRE

Harcourt’s, 271; Irish opinion
changed by American war, 272 ;
Lord North favoured Union, 273;
the opinion common among English
statesmen in 1782, 274; and at the
time of the commercial propositions,
275; Irish hostility at different
periods, 276; its chief reasons, 278;
growing anarchy wrought some
change, 279; connection of the
Union with the Catholic question,
280; the Fitzwilliam episode, 281 ;
English Government charged with
having forced on Rebellion, 283 ;
refutation, 285; Pitt’s first dis-
cussion of Union, 287; Corn-
wallis and Castlereagh favour it,
288 sq.; Auckland, Rose, Carlisle,
291; Protestant Union decided,
293; rough draft, 293 .; canvass-
ing in Ireland, 294; opinions of
Trish politicians, 295; Irish magis-
trates, 296; first public announce-.
ment, 297; different arguments
addressed to Protestants and Catho-
lies, 298 sqq.; Catholic hopes from
Union, 302; press subsidised, 303 ;
enlargement of Regium Donum, 20.;
opinions of Wolfe Tone and Hamil-
ton Rowan, 304; Ulster opinion, 305;
Cooke’s pamphlet, 305 sqq.; Castle-
reagh made Chief Secretary, 311 ;
lawyers’ arguments against Union,
313; reticence about Catholic ques-
tion, 319; constitutional capacity of
Legislature to carry an Union, 320
sqq.; changes in Constitution pro-
posed as alternative to Union, 322;
bankers and merchants condemn
Union, 323; Orangemen and Pres-
byterians divided, 325; other
opinions, 326 sq.; draft plan with
Pitt’s notes, 328 7.; Catholic opinion,
328 sqq.; discouraging letters, 333 ;
Government determine to carry
measure, 336; securing a majority,
337; traffic in votes, 7b.; negotia-
tion with Catholic bishops, 2b. ; pre-
lates accept the veto, 338; endow-
ment of priests, 339; provision for
priests in England contemplated,
2b.; other kindred measures, 340 ;
indirect reference to Union in
speech from Throne (Jan. 1799),
341; debate thereon, 342; charges
of ‘black corruption,’ 343; a ma-
jority of one, 344; renewed discus-
sion, 345; defeat of Government,
346; excitement in Dublin, 347;
irritation of Government, 348;

INDEX. 607

IRE

English ministers determine to per-
severe, 350; Pitt moves resolutions
for Union, 351 sqq.; details of mea-
sure, 356; weakness of Opposition,
356; Burke’s opinion quoted, 357 ;
Sheridan leads the Opposition, 358 ;
Dundas’s speech in favour, 359;
action in Ireland, 360; probable
policy of anti-Unionists, 361; how
it should be met, 362; improved
prospects of measure, 363 ; favoured
by Catholic prelates, 364; and by
large proportion of Catholics, 365 ;
English debates on Union (1799),
391; King’s desire for Union, 392

Treland — Union : Second Stage :
‘dirty work’ of securing a ma-
jority, vill. 394; county members
chiefly hostile, 395; borough mem-
bers gained over, 396; peerages
promised, 7b.; selection of repre-
sentative peers, 398; close boroughs
purchased as private property, 400
sq.; compensation for abolished
offices, 402 ; remodelling the Com-
mons, ib.; patronage, 403 sqq.;
charge of direct money bribery, 408
sq.; calculations of numbers, 410 ;
opinion outside Parliament, 411;
tours of Viceroy in the South, 2b.; in
Ulster, 412; opinions expressed by
corporations of towns, 413; in
confidential letters, 414; from Con-
naught, 415; Kerry, Waterford,
Tipperary, 416; Limerick, Derry,
Donegal, Londonderry, 417; three
nations: Protestants, Presbyterians,
Catholics, 418; Foster’s sentiments,
419; most of Protestant bishops
favoured Union, 421; Catholic
bishops unanimous in fayour, 422;
Catholic opponents, 424; general
attitude of that body, 425 sqq.;
opinions of United Irishmen, 428 sq. ;
Government paper of arguments for
Union, 432; sentiments of Cornwallis
and Castlereagh, 435; parliamentary
opposition, 437; reappearance of
Grattan, 440; ‘consular edict’ of
Opposition, 441; attempt to combat
Government by their own weapons,
442; inflammatory appeals to yeo-
manry,ib.; Orange resolutions against
Union, 443 ; response to Opposition
circular, ib.; Cornwallis asks for
more English troops, 445; finishing
touches to Union plan, 447; ‘ Esta-
blished Church of England and Ivre-
land,’ 7b.; Lord Lieutenant’s mess-
age recommending Union, 448;

IRE

Castlereagh’s speech explaining pro-
visions, 469 ; Opposition speeches,
455sqq.; the division, 467; measure
in Lords, 458; Clare’s speech, 458
sqq-; Downshire’s, 466; Yelver-
ton’s, 467; protest of peers, 468;
excitement in Dublin, 469; deter-
mination of Government, ib.; reso-
lution debated in committee, 470;
Government majority, 475; financial
aspect of Union, 2b.; Lord Corry’s
proposal, 476; address for a disso-
lution, 477; the commercial clauses,
478, 481; means by which measure
was carried, 480 ; tithe of agistment,
481; articles of Union transmitted
to England, 482; predictions of Eng-
lish statesmen, 483; Grey’s speech
against Union, 484; Pitt’s reply,
485; last stages in Ireland, 487;
the Bill: Grattan’s speech against,
488 ; prophecies of Opposition, 490 ;
apathy of country, 2b.; Opposition
address to King, 492; last stages of
Bill, 493; formalities that followed,
2b.; Irish Parliament house sold,
494; summary of case for and
against Union, 494 sqq.

Ireland—after Union: evils to be re-
medied—unlicensed whiskey shops,
viii. 497; non-residence of clergy,
498; popular ignorance, ib.; job-
bing of public offices, 500; contempt
for law, 501; question of Catholic
Emancipation, 501 sqq.; martial law
continued, 515 ; Hardwicke, Viceroy,
527; Redesdale succeeds Clare, 7b. ;
his policy, 528; Hardwicke’s admin-
istration, 529; public indifference
about Union, 7b.; Emmet’s Rebel-
lion, 530 ; loyalty of Dublin, 7b. ;
letter of Cornwallis on failure of
Union, 534; tithe question, 535;
failure of financial arrangements,
538; violent economical, social and
political vicissitudes in Ireland in
19th century, 541; democratic trans-
formation of Irish representation,
542; Fenianism, 543; Lalor’s writ-
ings, 544; John Mitchel, 545; cha-
racter and success of new alliance,
546; views of old anti-Unionists
about repeal, 547; change in atti-
tude of classes in Ireland, 548; in-
fluences that have strengthened
Union, 549; political condition of
Ireland not improved, 551; effect
of Irish politics on English parties,
ib.

| Ireland—Catholic Question: urgency

608

IRI

at time of Union, viii. 501; negotia-
tions with Catholics, 502; im-
portance of their services, 507;
their conviction that Emancipation
was certain, 508; opposition of
King, 509 sqq.; Pitt’s desertion of
Catholics, 513; Irish Protestants
ready to approve Emancipation,
518; Cornwallis’s ‘pledge,’ 522;
Pitt promises to give up the Catholic
question during King’s reign, 523,
525; later phases of Catholic Eman-
cipation, 531; question of payment
of priests, 532 sq.

Irish Brigade, the (Irish Catholics in
French service), i. 420, ii. 262 sqq.,
397, vil. 253

Trish language: attempts to promote
and use it, li. 327 ; discountenanced
by Government, 328

Tron manufacture : forbidden in
American colonies (1719), ii. 9, ili.
299; trade in England languid be-
fore 1735, vi. 212; statistics, 1740-
1806, ib.

Irvine, Colonel W.: chairman of Dun-
gannon meeting of Volunteers, iv.
532

Islington: a popular watering-place,
1. 555

Ismail: butchery of Turks by Russians
(1790), v. 284

Italian singers and opera, 1. 532;
rivalry between Handel and Bonon-
cini, 7b.; vicissitudes of Italian
theatre, 533

Italy : vicissitudes in wars of 18th
century, i. 105, 350, 403, 417, 420,
424, vii. 386, viii. 524

J

Jackson’s Charity, Dundalk : for edu-
cation of children as weavers, vii.
174; mutilation of a schoolmaster,
176

Jackson (leader of Irish Catholics) :
opposed to Catholic enlistment, vii.
283

Jackson, Rev. W., French revolution-
ary emissary to Ireland, vii. 27;
arrest, 28; trial, 136; suicide, ib.

Jacobins : masters of France, vi. 19 ;
ascendency and terrorism, 24

Jacobites: futile French expedition
against Scotland, i. 41; party strong
in that country, 130; intrigues in
England, 131 sqq.; appointments
bestowed on Jacobites, 184; favoured

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

JEM

by upper classes, 139; activity in
1711, 147; recruitimg in Ireland,
154; Bolingbroke’s proposed Jacob-
ite ministry, 162; party paralysed —
at Anne’s death, 167; desired ruin
of Bank of England, 200; hostile to
Dissenters, 203; insurrection of
1715, 212; miracles said to be
wrought by James II., 222; Albe-
roni’s expedition to Scotland, 243 ;
result, 244; proposed expedition
under Ormond against England,
252; trials of prisoners, 346; re-
bellion of 1745, 421; Jacobitism in
Scotland encouraged by discontent
with Union, ii. 64; among Irish
priests, 394; and Irish Churchmen,
399 sq.; Jacobite project for uniting
Protestants and Catholics in Ireland,
414

Jail fever: ravages in jails, i. 501;
the ‘ Black Assize,’ 2b.

Jamaica : combined French and
Spanish expedition against, iv.
241; defeated by Rodney and Hood,
242; effects of the victory, 243;
many of the planters there Irish,
430

James I.: religious troubles in Ireland,
ii. 119; royal proclamation against
freedom of worship, 7b.

James II., conduct of, that conduced
to the Revolution, i. 10 sqq.; sub-
serviency to France, 18, 21, 23;
death, 30

James, Prince of Wales (the Preten-
der): said to be a supposititious.
child, i. 11; recognised as King of
England by Lewis XIV., 30; refusal
to become a Protestant, 137; reasons:
for distrusting his promises of tole-
ration, 138; proclamation issued on
death of Anne, 168; death, ili. 95

Jamieson, Colonel (American): finds.
papers compromising Benedict Ar-
nold, iy. 141

Jansenists: disputes with Jesuits, v.
321 sqq.

Japan: shipwrecked Japanese at St.
Petersburg, v. 321; Pitt’s desire of
commercial connection with Japan,
1b.

Jefferson, Thomas: drew up Declara-
tion of Independence, iii. 460, vi.
282; his opinion of the French
Revolution, v. 431

Jekyll, Sir Joseph: on resistance to
constituted authority, v. 509

‘Jemmy Twitcher’ (Lord Sandwich),
lll. 79

INDEX.

JEM

Jemmapes, battle of, vi. 44

Jenkinson, C.: made Lord Hawkesbury
for procuring regulation of New-
foundland and Greenland fisheries,
vy. 22; made Harl of Liverpool ten
years later, ib.; President of Board
of Trade under Pitt, 35

Jennens, Charles: selected words for
the ‘ Messiah,’ i. 536

Jersey: defeat of French expeditions
against, iv. 111, 164

Jervis, Admiral: defeat of Spaniards
off Cape St. Vincent, vii. 386

Jesuits: teachers of regicide, v. 309 ;
contest with Jansenists, 321 sqq.;
books burnt, and order suppressed,
333

Jews: hated in England, i. 262; Acts
of Naturalisation, 263; desired to
purchase town of Brentford, 2b. ;
popular opposition, 264; marriages
excepted from Hardwicke’s Act, 492;
enthusiastic reception of ‘ Judas
Maccabeeus,’ 537

<Job’ (disloyal toast : ‘James, Ormond,
Bolingbroke’), i. 210

Johnson, Colonel Guy: personal
attachment of American Indians
to, iv. 13

Johnson, Dr.: touched for King’s
evil, i. 72; on the multiplication of
newspapers, 518; on vivisection,
551; on Whitefield, ii. 615; Catho-
lies desire to purchase his assistance,
iy. 455; character of his Toryism,
y. 20; his dress, vi. 139 ; his literary
criticism, 183; on the increased
luxury of tradesmen, 185; on duel-
ling, 266

Johnson, Sir W.: reports on American
Indians, ili. 294 ; their affection for
him, iv. 13

Johnston, General: in command at
Fermoy (1797), vii. 429; wins the
battle of New Ross, viii. 107 sqq.,
at Vinegar Hill, 150

Johnston, George: English Commis-
sioner to America (1777), iv. 78

Jones, Dean: report on outrages in
Treland (1641), ii. 139, 165

Jones, Griffith (Welsh revival prea-
cher): career, ii. 603; founder of
Welsh ‘circulating schools,’ 2b.;
their success, 604

Jones, Paul: career, iv. 113; roving
commission on behalf of America,
2b.; on Irish coast, 494; in Russian
service (1788), v. 227; death, vi. 24

Jones, Sir W.: poem in praise of
American rebellion, iv. 70

VOL. VII.

.

609

KEI

‘Judas Maccabeeus’: occasion of com -
position, i. 537; enthusiastic recep-
tion by Jews, 7b.

Judges: subserviency under Stuarts,
i. 7; American colonies: precarious
and subordinate position, iii. 281;
Irish: tenure of office, iv. 374, 439,
504; salaries raised, 526; indepen-
dence established, 558

‘Juge de paix’ established, v. 494;
greatly diminished litigation, 7b.

Juliers and Berg, Duchies of: Prus-
sian desire for their possession, v.
547; arrangement with Elector
Palatine suggested, 556

_ Jullien, Mare Antoine: report to Le-

brun on English opinion, vi. 48

Joseph I. (Emperor) : death, i. 98 ; his
selfish conduct towards his allies, 102

Joseph II. (Emperor) : breaks Barrier
Treaty, v. 76; claims Maestricht
and free navigation of Scheldt, 7b.;
desires to exchange Flanders for
Bavaria, 83; tumults in Flanders,
84; his character, 218; relations
with Catherine II., 219; invades
Turkey, 222; defeat and flight of
Emperor, 224; death, 250

Jourdain, General: massacre of Avi-
gnon, y. 574; amnestied by Assem-
bly, 601

‘ Junius, letters of,’ 111. 233 sqq.; poli-
tical tenets of the writer, 238; vio-
lence, 239 sq.; hatred of the King,
242; causes of his success, 243;
prosecution of the publishers, 245 ;
reasons for identifying Junius with
Sir Philip Francis, 246. See
Francis, Sir Philip

Jurandes (France): suppressed by
Turgot, v. 387; restored by Maure-
pas, 389

Juries: rights in libel cases, v. 192;
introduced into France, 494

K

Kainardji, treaty of (Russia and Tur-
key, 1774), v. 211

Kalb, Baron de: in American service
(1768), iv. 50, 117, 122

Kaunitz (Austrian statesman, 1756), v.
538, 541, 548, 580, 600

Kay’s fly-shuttle, vi. 207; persecution
of the inyentor, 209

Keith, Mr.: present at the Prince of
Wales’s marriage with Mrs. Fitz-
herbert, v. 86, 89

Keith, Rey. A.; made ‘bishopric of

RR

610

KEI

revenue’ by clandestine marriages, i.
490

Keith, Sir R.: English minister at
Vienna (1788), v. 239, 241, 559, 591,
593

Kellermann, General (French): in
Coalition war (1792), vi. 34, 39

Kempenfeldt, Admiral (English, 1781),
iv. 202, 243

Ken, Bishop, i. 50

Kendal, Duchess of (mistress of George
I.): bribed to procure return of
Bolingbroke from exile, i. 454; had
an Irish pension, ii. 228; sold her
privilege of supplying new Irish
coinage (1722), 422

Kenmare, Lord (Irish Catholic), iv.
436, 462, vi. 367, 505, vil. 53, 66,
118, 267, 413, 415

Kennet, Dean (opponent of Sacheve-
rell) : represented as Judas, 1. 57

Kent’s landscape-gardening: rapidly
gained popularity, i. 524

Kentish petitioners, case of (the right
of petition), 1. 437

Keogh, John (Irish Catholic political
leader), vi. 472, 477, 526, 540, 550,
vil. 6, 252, 283

Keppel, Admiral: naval actions with
French, iv. 93; First Lord of Ad-
miralty, 207; supporter of Fox, 216;
in Shelburne’s ministry, 239; resig-
nation, 268; in coalition ministry
(1783), 280

Kerry bonds (Ireland): one of the
causes of Whiteboyism, iv. 328

Kerry, Knight of (Robert Fitzgerald),
iv. 493, viil. 63

Keugh, Captain Matthew: leader of
rebels in Wexford, vill. 92, 151, 160,
162, 185

Kevin, St., shrine of: attack on Irish
gathering at (1714), ii. 274

Khevenhiiller, General: organiser of
Maria Theresa’s forces, i. 400 sq.

Kidder, Bishop, i. 85

Kidnapping: in Highlands-—men and
boys sold to American planters, ii.
23; decoying boys in Aberdeen, 36;
similar custom prevailed in Ireland,
262 n.

Kileomney Hill: Irish rebels defeated
at, vili. 179

Kildare, Marquis of (leading Irish
statesman), iv. 353, 359

Kilkenny: wealth from coal mines and
linen trade, li. 338

Killala Bay: Humbert’s expedition,
viii. 203; landing, 204; Killala”
under French rule, 217; expedition

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

KIT

defeated, 219; recapture of Killala,
221

King, Archbishop: state of Ireland
after 1640, 11. 191, 231 sqq., 242 n.,
403 sq., 407 sq., 417

‘Kingfishers’ (hangers-on upon Dublin
Castle), 11. 231

King, Gregory: estimate of state and
condition of English people in 1696,
i. 560; average incomes of families,
561

‘King of France’: English royal title:
French protest against, vii. 390;
dropped after Irish Union, viii. 493

Kingsborough, Lord: taken prisoner
by Wexford rebels, viii. 155, 159;
testimony to their humane treat-
ment of prisoners, 161; negotia-
tions for capitulation, 162 sqq.

King’s County: origin of its name,
ii. 105; in rebellion, viii. 285, 371

King’s evil: use of ‘royal touch’ for
its cure, i. 67 sqq.

‘King’s friends’: ablest of them
lawyers, iv. 88: denounced by Shel-
burne, 214; disappearance of the
faction, v. 22

Kingston, Earl of: tried by peers
(Ireland, 1798) for murder, viii. 39

Kinsbergen, Admiral (Dutch) : on dan-
ger of Sebastopol to Turkey, v. 292

Kippis, Dr. (English Unitarian) : writ-
ings in favour of French revolu-
tionary principles, v. 180

Kirk, Scotch: established, ii. 41, 51;
influence on education, 44; treat-
ment of Episcopalians, 46; fanati-
cism, 473; opposition to Toleration
Act, 48; discontent, 49; dislike to
the Union, 62; narrowness and
intolerance, 78; compared with
Catholic Church, 79; religious
toleration denounced, 80; prosecu-
tions for witchcraft, 7b.; fanatical
extravagances, 83; Sabbath obser-
vance, 84, 87; sacerdotal tyranny,
85; decline of religious terrorism,
87; altered style of sermons, 88;
great names among ministers, 89;
failure to promote sobriety and
chastity, 90

Kirwan, Dean: sketch of his career,
vi. 446 sqq.; trained for a priest at
St. Omer, 447; joins Established
Church, 7b.; his pulpit eloquence,
2b.; character, 448 ; Church prefer-
ment, 7b.; his sermon on the rebel-
lion, viii. 238

‘Kit’ (disloyal toast: ‘King James
III.’), 1. 210

INDEX.

KNO

Knox, General : letters to Government
on state of North of Ireland (1798),
vii. 811, 454

Knox, George: proposed admission
of Catholics to Irish Parliament, vi.
574; speech in favour of Relief Bill
(1795), vii. 109; speech on Union
Bill (1800), viii. 469

Kolin, battle of (Prussians defeated by
Austrians), ii. 486

Kosciusko (hero of Poland): in ser-
vice of America, iv. 50

Kiinersdorf, battle of (1759), ii. 506

L

‘La Belle Mignonne’ (skull used
in religious devotions, France), v.
337

Labourers—England: industrial cha-
racter in 18th century, 1. 558 sqq.;
manner of life, 559; prices of food,
560; condition of agricultural
labourers, 561; wages in different
counties, 562 sqq.; advantages of
common lands, 564; later changes
of condition, vi. 199 sqqg.—America
(colonies): food and education, ili.
290

Ladies’ Fencibles (Newry: corps of
married men and fathers), iv. 522

Lafayette: abandoned fortune and
position to serve in Washington’s
army, iv. 50; Washington’s attach-
ment to him, 101; on court-martial
of Major André, 143; at head of
forces in New England, 190; spends
private money for his troops, 192;
in Virginia, 195 sq.; took part in
investiture of Yorktown, 200; in
France again, v. 208, 5743 assisted
Lewis XVI., vi. 24; prisoner in
Austria, 34

Lake, General (in command in
Ulster): ordered to disarm the
North, vii. 285; proclamation of
March 13, 286 sq.: sees crisis ap-
proaching (1797), 294; searching for
arms, 300; on alleged military ex-
cesses in Ulster, 3806; ‘overbur-
dened ’ with prisoners, 308 ; insists
on severe measures, 310; on result
of United Irish terrorism, 318;
Government desire to replace him,
339 ; discovers plot for Orr’s escape,
355; dislikes Abercromby, 425 ; suc-
ceeds him as Commander-in-Chief,
438; reports on state of Belfast,
448; made no effort to check mili-

611

LAT

tary abuses, viii. 16; rejects Wex-
ford rebels’ proposals of surrender,
161; indiscriminating severity, 163
sqq-; replaced by Cornwallis, 172 ;
serves against Humbert’s expedi-
tion, 209 sqq., 220

Lally, General (Irish-French): cha-
racter, 11. 500 ; French commander-
in-chief in India, 7b.; march upon
Madras, 501; difficulties, 502; battle
of Wandewash, 503; destruction of
Pondicherry, 7b.; his fate, 504

Lalor’s writings (1848), viii. 544

Lamballe, Princesse de: brutal treat-
ment by French reyolutionists, vi. 36

Lamotte: denounces war policy of
French Republic, v. 208

Landau: for a time added to French
dominions (1714), i. 124

Landed Property Qualification Act, i.
200

Land tax, introduced, i. 330 sq.; re-
duced, iil. 117; again raised, 457;
proposed introduction in France, v.
401

Langara, Admiral (Spanish) : defeated
by Rodney off Cape St. Vincent, iv.
152

Langrishe, Sir Hercules: on food of
Irish common people, iv. 315 7. ;
author of ‘ Barataria,’ 393 ; writ-
ings in support of Americans, 437 ;
steady friend of Catholics, 471;
Burke’s letter to him on Irish
parties, vi. 480; introduces Catholic
Relief Bill (1792), 503; Bill passed,
514 ; a debate of ‘ acrimonious’
unanimity,’ 563; speech in last
debate on Emancipation, vii. 205

Lanigan, Bishop (Ossory) : believes
that Irish priests were afraid of
assassination by rebels, vii. 449

Lansdowne, Lord: a Jacobite (1715),
i. 214

Lansdowne, Marquis of (see Shel-
burne): defence of Pitt’s commercial
treaty with France, v. 39 sq.

Latin, law court pleadings conducted
in, i. 507

Latitudinarians : growth of the party,
i. 80, 83 sqq., 315

La Touche, David: opposes conces-
sions to Irish Catholics, vi. 568;
character of his family, 2b.

La Touche, John: served as private
in his son’s corps against Irish
rebels, vii. 269

La Touche, William Digges: proposes
Absentee tax, vii. 447; opposes the
Union, viil. 323

RR 2

612
LAT

La Touche’s Bank: grants loan to
Trish Government in difficulties, iv.
482 /

Laud, Archbishop: opposition to
foreign refugees, i. 190

Laurens, Henry (ambassador from
America to Holland): captured by
English, iv. 161; sent to negotiate
loan in France, 193

Law, Bishop (Killala): example of
toleration towards Catholics, vi. 449

Law, William: sketch of his career,
ii. 548; relations with John
Wesley, 558

Lawes, Henry, composer of music for
Milton’s ‘Comus,’ i. 531

Lawless, Sir Patrick: envoy of Pre-
tender to Madrid, i. 146

‘Lawless, Valentine (Lord Cloncurry) :
joins in protest against house-burn-
ing and military excesses in Ulster,
vii. 305

Lawyers : numerous and influential in
American colonies, iii. 278, 281 ;
prominent among faction of ‘King’s
friends,’ iv. 88; professional incomes
in Treland, 362; Lawyers’ Corps
(Dublin), iv. 540

Layer, Mr. : hung and quartered as an
active Jacobite, i. 253

Leadbeater, Mary (Quakeress) : account
of Carlow during Rebellion, viii. 65

Lebrun (French Minister of Foreign
Affairs), vi. 32, 48 sqq., 108

Lede, Marquis of (Spanish general) :
capture of Palermo (1718), i. 239

Lee, Arthur: American commissioner
at Paris (1776), iv. 43

Lee, General: English soldier of for-
tune: supports American cause, iii.
431, iv. 12, 17 sqq., 94; treason to
Americans, 133, 145

Lee, John: signs treaty with Holland
as American commissioner, iy. 161

Leeds, Duke of: correspondence on
Prussian policy (1789), v. 239 sqq.
245; Oczakow question, 292

Leghorn: acknowledged as free port
by Quadruple Alliance, i. 240

Leinster, Duke of: commander of
Dublin Volunteers, iv. 484, 498,
503; Irish Master of the Rolls, vi.
874, 415; dismissal, 429 ; president
of ‘Friends of the Constitution,’
539; protest against military law in
Ulster, vii. 321

Lens, Peter, leader of ‘ Hell-fire Club’
(‘ Blasters ’), Dublin, ii. 321

Leopold, Emperor: accession, v. 251;
pacific policy, 253; negotiations

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

LEW

with Prussia, 258 ; Peace of Sistova,
263; pacification of Netherlands,
2b.; interested in French affairs, 538 ;
proposals to him of French Princes,
547; seeks alliance with Prussia,
548 ; hesitation about French affairs,
549; refuses to act alone in behalf
of Lewis XVI., 550; policy before
and after flight of Varennes, 551 ;
letters of Marie Antoinette to him,
552; proposes a Congress, 554; de-
signs on Alsace and Lorraine, 555 ;
Declaration of Pilnitz, 557; believes
England hostile to the French King,
561; friend of Poland, 569 ; increased
reluctance to intervene in France,
573; refuses to assist Lewis, 580;
forbids enrolments of French emi--
grants in his dominions, 587; de-
mands of France, 588: appeal from
his sister, 589 ; perplexing situation,
590; reply to France, 591; French
ultimatum, 593 ; alliance with Prus-
sia ratified, 2b.; still anxious to
avoid war, 594; fears for Poland,
595; death, 2b.

Leslie, General (English): in American
war, iv. 186, 189

Lessart, de, French Minister of Foreign
Affairs, v. 600, vi. 5

Leuthen, battle of (decisive victory
of Prussians over Austrians), il.
491

Lewins, Edward, negotiator with
French Government on behalf of
United Irishmen, vii. 381 sqq., viii.
203, 429

Lewis XIV. : relations with James II.,
i. 18, 21, 23; quarrel with Innocent
XI., 21 sq.; treatment of the ques-
tion of Spanish succession, 25 ;
occupies Spanish Netherlands, 26 ;
recognises Pretender, 30 ; peace ne-
gotiations in 1706, 44; humiliating
offers in 1709, 47; offers and de-
mands at Utrecht, 108 sq.

Lewis XYV.: betrothed to Spanish
Infanta, i. 348 ; with troops in Aus-
trian Netherlands, 414; political
and moral decrepitude, v. 300;
change in literary spirit under, 301;
persecution of opinion, 307; disputes
with Parliaments, 319 sqq.; Bull
‘Unigenitus,’ 321, 330,332; advocates
and magistrates exiled, 322; charac-
ter of Lewis, 324, 339; exile of
Parliaments, 325 ; conflict of eccle-
siastical and civil jurisdiction, 326 ;
influence of Mme. de Pompadour,
328; triumph of Parliament, 329,

INDEX.

LEW

‘beds of justice,’ 331, 337; conflict
and yacillation, 332; royal power
sinking, 333; conflicts about taxa-
tion, 334; signs of coming revolution,
335 ; power of imposing taxes, 337 ;
Lewis asserts his absolute power,
338; trial of Duke d’Aiguillon, 339;
suppression of Parliaments (1771),
340 ; protest of princes of the blood,
341; success of the cowp d’état, 342
Lewis XVI.: restores Parliaments, vy.
386; Turgot’s reforms, 387; in-
fluence of Maurepas, 389; effects
of Turgot’s dismissal, 7b. ; Necker’s
first ministry, 390; series of in-

competent ministers, 392; increased -

prosperity, 394; Court luxury and
expenditure, 394, 398; Lewis’s
character, 398; disillusion under
Calonne: deficit declared, 400;
assembly of the Notables (1787), 70. ;
results, 401 sqq.; unequal taxation,
402; state of army, 404; conflict
with Parliament of Paris, 405, 409 ;
retrenchment at Court, 407; ban-
ishes Duke of Orleans, 408; civil
rights conceded to Protestants, 7b. ;
character of Parliamentary opposi-
tion, 410; attitude and policy of
Lewis, 412; States-General pro-
mised, ib.; new constitution im-
posed by King (1788), 414; propor-
tion of commons in States-General,
419; their method of election, 420 ;
Necker’s policy, 421; political
agitation, 424; reforms demanded
by the three orders, 428 sqq.; what
the King was ready to grant, 431;
quarrels of commons with privileged
orders, 433; ‘National Assembly,’
436; scene in tennis court, 7d. ;
King holds a session, 437; his
offers, 438 ; rejected, 439 ; defection
of troops, 440; capture of Bastille,
2b. ; revolution still not inevitable,
441; Lewis’s weak and fluctuating
‘policy, 442; authority destroyed,
491; flight to Varennes, 530; ac-
cepts revised Constitution, 533,
573; disavows proceedings of emi-
grant Princes, 549; King distrusted
in France, 577; refused help by
Leopold, 580; issues proclamation
against emigration, 581; sanctions
decree against emigrant Princes,
ib.; yields to Assembly’s demand
for war, 588; secret appeal to
Powers for Congress, ib.; breaks
with Girondin ministers, vi. 19;
Tuileries attacked, 1b.; hopelessly

613

LIN

false position, 13; Grenville refuses
to intervene, 25; dethroned and
imprisoned, 27; executed, 121

Lexington, battle of (1775) : first blood
shed in American war, iii. 425

Libel trials: dispute about the powers
of juries, iii. 229 sgq.; Whigs deter-
mine to amend the law, 231; Dowdes-
well’s enacting Bill (1771), 7b.;
Fox’s declaratory Bill (1791) carried,
v. 193; Irish Act corresponding to
Fox’s passed, vi. 602

Liberalism, English : its desire to re-
strict the functions of Government,
vi. 239 sqq.; modifications in its
later type, 241; development of
manufactures, 242; need of sanitary
laws, 1b.; influence of railways, en-
larged philanthropy, the press, 243 ;
old tendency reversed: Government
interference sought rather than re-
sented, 244; large increase of taxa-
tion resulting, 245

‘Liberty’ Corps of Irish Volunteers:
recruited in Earl of Meath’s liber-
ties (woollen manufacturers), vi.
360

Liberum Veto: abolition proposed
(1780), v. 541; finally abolished,
543

Libraries: in Ireland, ii. 319, 328; in
New England, ili. 290; destruction
of New York libraries by Howe’s
troops, iv. 27; libraries in London,
vi. 165; circulating libraries intro-
duced a little before 1750, 166;
their rapid multiplication, 7b.

Licences—liquor: stringent restric-
tions in 1751, i. 481; restrictions on
issue by magistrates, 7b.; marriage
licences enjomed by Hardwicke’s
Act, 492

Liegnitz, battle of (defeat of Austrians
by Prussians), 11. 509

Lifford, Lord: Trish Chancellor, 1767—
88, iv. 488, vi. 415, 429

Lighting streets: a monopoly in Lon-
don, i. 486; method of payment, 2b.

Lille: siege and bombardment by
Austru.ns repelled, vi. 41

Limerick : statistics 1700-77, ii. 336 ;
at one time fortified, 337; remark-
able for cheapness of living, 1b.

Lincoln, General; defender of Charles-
ton, iv. 120

Lindsey, Theophilus: set up first
Unitarian chapel in London, y. 176

Linen manufacture: origin of the
trade in Ireland, ii. 211 ; vicissitudes,
212; bounties, ib.; trade extended

614

LIO

by refugees in North, 214; Crom-
melin’s efforts, 214 sq.; spinning-
schools established, 215; districts
depopulated, 216; the Palatines, 7b. ;
great increase of trade in North
(1760), 332; its condition in 1774,
iv. 429; in 1788, vi. 441; in 1799,
viii. 884; manufacturers favour
Union, viii. 305; effect of Union
upon, 308, 354, 384, 452

‘Lion’ (conspicuous spectacle) : origin
of term, i. 569; the lions in Tower
of London, 20.
Lisbon earthquake (1755): English
vote for relief of sufferers, 1. 503
Literature: danger of leaving science
and literature to unrestricted opera-
tion of law of supply and demand,
i. 456; methods that have been
adopted for encouraging them, 459;
Government patronage of literature
under Anne, 461; effects of degra-
dation of literature under first
Georges, 463; patronage of Queen
Caroline, 464; intellectual activity
in Ireland, i. 299 sqq.; effects of
Methodism on literature, 615 ; popu-
larisation of knowledge, 164 sqq.
—French literature, v. 301 sqq., 344
sqq., 895

Liverpool: growth from a village
(1565), to a parish (1699), to its
present position, i. 198; strongly
Hanoverian in 1745, 422

Lloyd, non-juror Bishop of Norwich :
death, i. 51

Loans, public: wasteful manner of
issue, iv. 184, v. 25 ;

Lobositz, battle of (defeat of Austrians
by Prussians), ii. 457

Lochaber axe, the: weapon adopted
at first by Irish Volunteers, iv. 484

Locke, John: his ‘Letters on Tolera-
tion,’ v. 169; doctrine of the gocial
contract, 345

Loéwendahl, Count: capture of fortress
of Bergen-op-Zoom, i. 425

Léwenhaupt, Count: Marshal of the
Diet (Sweden), v. 267

Loftus, General: on feelings of Mun-
ster Catholics (1797), vii. 292; re-
treat from Gorey, vii. 106

Loftus, Sir Edward: on magistrates’
treatment of Whiteboys, iv. 342 7.

London: gin-drinking, i. 480; inse-
curity of streets; the Mohocks, 482 ;
inefficiency of watchmen, 483 ;
street robberies, 484, 505 sq., vi.
248 sq.; executions, 1. 485; rights
of asylum abolished, 2b.; provision

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

LOU

for better lighting, 486; police
measures, 487; riots, 488; news-
papers and magazines, 517; at-
tempts to check its growth, 565;
increase, 1700-60, 566 sq.; water
supply, 567; penny post, 568; the
‘season,’ 7b.; coffee-houses, 569 ;
fashionable hours, 70.; state of
domestic servants, 570; sanitary
condition, 572; mortality, 573 ;
Wilkes riots, iii. 131 ; tragedy of St.
George’s Fields (1768), 133; growing
lawlessness, 134; men killed in pil-
lory, 135; strikes, 136; atrocious
crimes, 137 ; fashions and manners:
spread to provinces, vi. 168; rapid
growth, 186 ; condition of workmen,
222; charities, 273

Londonderry County: granted to
London Companies, ii. 116; com-
panies fined for non-fulfilment of
charter, 20.

Londonderry,
father) :
229

Longfield, Colonel: slaughter of rebels
at Rathangan, viii. 68

Long Island: fortified by Americans
(1776), iv. 1; attacked successfully
by Howe’s troops, 2

Longueville, Lord: condemned Aber-
cromby’s order to magistrates, vii.
449

Longwy: captured by Prussians, ‘vi.
33; retaken by French, 41

‘Lord Jocelyn’s Foxhunters’ (Irish
Fencible cavalry), viii. 59, 69

Lords-Justices: rulers of Ireland in
Viceroy’s absence, ii. 226

Lord-Lieutenant (Ireland) : brief time
of residence, iv.353 ; madeconstantly
resident, 371; relations with (Irish)
Privy Council, 388

Lorraine: under German princes, i.
356; interference of France, y. 555,
591, 594

Lorraine, Duke of (husband of Maria
Theresa): elected Emperor of Ger-
many, i. 418 sq.

Lothian, Lord: introduced into the
King’s room during his madness, v.
116, 148 ».

Lotteries, public: passion for (1711),
i. 522; special applications, 523;
loan raised by a lottery, ii. 447;
used for reduction of debt in Ireland,
vi. 435

Loughborough, Lord (see Wedder-
burn): hatred of Shelburne, iv.
215, 272; held Great Seal in com-

Lord ~(Castlereagh’s
on the state of Ulster, vii.

INDEX,

LOU

mission (Portland’s ministry), 281 ;
gave the only negative to conces-
sions to Ireland (1782), 553; rela-
tions with Fox, y. 98; position on
Regency question, 110; chief legal
adviser of Whigs, 125; on Pitt’s
restrictions, 139; succeeds Thurlow
as Pitt’s Chancellor, vi. 16; advises
George III. against concessions to
Catholics, viii. 509

Louisiana (Spanish colony) : condition
in 1779-80, iv. 170

Louyain, University: cause of an
insurrection against Austrians, v.
236

Loyat, Lord (Simon Fraser) : in rebel-
lion of 1715, i. 215; trial, 346; his
early career, 11. 30

Low Church: origin of name, i. 87;
specially strong in the episcopacy,
1b.

Lowlands. Sce Scotland

Lowther, Sir James: dispute about
land with Duke of Portland, iui.
125

Loyalists, American: called Tories,
iy. 7; causes of their impotence, 9;
hanged as traitors, 118; atrocious
treatment by their countrymen, 188;
abandoned by English, 264 sqq.;
refugees in Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick, 266; money grants from
England, 267 sq.

Lucas, Charles: letter to Halifax on
Irish political needs, ii. 238 ; charac-
ter, 429; popularity of his writings,
430

Luttrell, Colonel: elected for Middle-
sex (against Wilkes, 1770), ii. 142

Luxury, increase of in 18th century,
vi. 184; manner of life of trades-
men, 185; of apprentices and clerks,
186

Luzerne: French minister in America
(1781), iv. 260; ambassador to Lon-
don, vi. 431

M

Mably: on relation of religion to
politics and morals, v. 183; true
father of French socialism, 481;
attacked the institution of property,
ib.

Macartney, Sir George (afterwards
Lord Macartney): secretary to
Townshend (1767), iv. 373

Macartney, Sir John: on tithe of
agistment (Ireland, 1800), viii. 481

615

MAL

Mackintosh: on the French Revyolu-
tion, v. 496, vi. 50

Mackintosh (officer in rebellion of
1715): captured Leith, i. 215

Macaulay, Mrs.: a member of New

Radical School, iii. 176, 206

Macaulay, Lord: on Pitt’s Irish policy,

v. 69

Maccaronies, vi. 186

Macclesfield, Lord: Chancellor (George

II.), i. 328

Macgregor, Robert (Rob Roy): his

career, li. 26

Maclaurin (Scotch mathematician),

professor in Marischal College, ii.

36

Maclean, Sir John: head of a Jacobite

body (1715), ii. 30

Macpherson of Cluny (Scotch Jacobite,
1715), ii. 30

Madras: captured by French, and
then ransomed (1746), i. 428

Maestricht : claimed by Joseph IL, v.
76 ; French demand to pass through
it, vi. 69

Magan, Francis: Irish informer, viii.
36, 41, 45

Magazines, increase of, 1700-50, i.
517 sqq.; ‘Gentleman’s Magazine’
founded (1731), 519

Magdalen Asylum, the first, founded,
vi. 273

Magee, Archbishop (Dublin): objection
to sectarian colleges, vii. 127

Magpies formerly unknown in Ireland,
ii. 106 1.

Maguire, General (Irish - Austrian) :
military skill, displayed in German
campaign of 1758, ii. 493, 508, 510

Mahony, Daniel: a great Irish middle-
man, ii. 350

Maine, Duke du: head of conspiracy
against French Regent, i. 242

‘Main levée’ (French legal term), v.
325

‘Malagrida’ (popular nickname of
Shelburne), iv. 212

Malesherbes (Turgot’s colleague), v.
387

Mallet du Pan: on Pitt’s Budget
speech of 1798, v. 35 ».; memorial
to allied sovereigns on danger of
Lewis XVI., vi. 22 sq.

Malmesbury, Lord. See Harris, Sir
James

Malone, Anthony: his great genius,
ii. 431; appointed to try Whiteboys,
iv. 3837; Chancellor of Exchequer
(Ireland), 359 ; high position in his
profession, 361, 362 7.; style of his

616

MAL

speeches, 417; opponent of penal
laws, 471

Malony, Father: tried and banished
for exercising his ministry, ii.
506

Malouet: on election of States-General
(1789), v. 425; a member of that
body, 431

Malplaquet, battle of, i. 98

Malt-tax: riots against its extension
to Scotland, i. 488, il. 63

Manchester: early seat of woollen
manufacture, i. 197; population in
1699, ib.; in 1760, 198; a great
centre of Toryism, iii. 529

Mangalore, Peace of (with Hyder Ali),
vy. 209

Manhood suffrage: Bill in favour of,
in House of Lords (1780), iv. 182

Manilla: captured by English, iii. 46;
Spain refuses to pay stipulated
ransom, 83, 154

Man, Isle of : clandestine marriages in,
i. 498; island annexed to English
Crown (1765), ii. 83; Church
discipline severely enforced there,
494

Mann, Horace (Horace Walpole’s
correspondent), iv. 223

Mansfield, Lord (Murray): Chief Jus-
tice, iii. 62; on outlawry of Wilkes,
130, 146 sq.; on function of juries in
libel trials, 229 sq.; on taxation of
non-represented colonies, 316; dis-
countenanced legal measures against
Catholics, 507; assaulted by Gordon
rioters, 511; his library and pictures
burnt, 516; retires from Chief-
Justiceship, v. 124; decided an Irish
law case in 1782, vi. 305 sq., 311

Manufactures, English, vi. 188 sqq.,
226 sqq.; manufacturing class, iy.
450 ; towns, vi. 220 sqq.

Mar, Earl of: Governor of Scotland,
i. 134; heads Jacobite rising in
1715, 212; seizes Perth, 214; de-
feat, 215; flight to France, 216

Maret (Duke of Bassano): special
mission from France to England,
iv. 48; negotiations with Pitt, 94;
correspondence with Miles, 112

Maria Theresa: opposition to her suc-
cession, i. 388; coalition against her,
392; loyalty of Hungary, 2b.; sub-
sidy voted to her by England, 393;
truce with Frederick II., 401; Peace
of Breslau, 402; vindictive charac-
ter, 406; Treaty of Worms, 407 ;
Prussian invasion of Bohemia, 416 ;
war in Italy (1744), 417; husband

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

MAR

elected Emperor of Germany, 419 ;
Peace of Dresden, 420; desire to
continue war in Italy, 427; peace:
forced upon her, 428; alliance with —
Russia and Saxony, ii. 449; defeats
Prussians at Kolin, 486; decisive:
defeats of Austrians at Leuthen,.
491; campaign of 1758, 492 sqq.;
of 1759, 506 sqq.; of 1760, 509;
secret overtures from England, iil.
45; partition of Poland, vy. 217

Marie Antoinette : enthusiasm for
American cause, iv. 49; opposes
Turgot, v. 389; extravagance, 390;
manners and conversation, 393 ;
popularity, 399; becomes unpopular,
414; letters to her brother (Km-
peror Leopold), 549, 552, 578; be-
lieves England hostile, 561, 576 3.
Queen distrusted in France, 577;
policy and hopes, 578; hated by
people, 585; appeal to Emperor,
589; brutal insults—offered her, vi.
19 ; imprisoned, 27

Marines: Irish Catholic
(1758), iv. 455

Marlborough, Duchess of: influence
over Queen Anne, i. 32; displaced
by Mrs. Masham, 43

Marlborough, Duke of: influence of,
on Anne’s accession, i. 32 ; conduct
of war in Netherlands, 34, 36; re-
lations with political parties, 35 ;
Blenheim, 37; in ministry with
Godolphin, 39; opposes Lewis’s
proposals for peace, 48; is refused
the position of Captain-General, 49;
obstacles encountered in Spanish
war, 102, 107; painful position
in 1711, 105; why he did not
resign, 106; defeats Villars at
Bouchain, 107 ; removed from com-
mand, 108; disgrace, 113 ; military
character, 115; personal character,
116 sq.; negotiations with Jacobites,
119, 132 ; men saw in him a possible
Cromwell, 120; his downfall, 121;
appointments in 1715, 209; death,
vo.

Marlborough, (second) Duke of: in
German campaign of 1758, ii. 491 5.
death, 494

Marque, letters of : issued by England,
il. 447; by loyalists in New York,
iv. 116

Marriage laws: before Lord Hard-
wicke’s Act, i. 490; clandestine
marriages, ib. ; fraudulent practices,
491; legislation, 2b.; regulations of.
banns or licence, 492; theological

recruits

INDEX.

MAR

theory modified by secular, 493 ; di-
vorce, 493 sq.; Marriage Act of 1753,
497; dissolution of religious mar-

. Yiages for temporal reasons ad-
mitted, 497; clandestine marriages
at the Savoy and Fleet Prison, 498

Maryland: Catholic colony founded by
Lord Baltimore, i. 277; material
and social condition, ili. 288 sq.

Mary Queen of Scots: her tomb
reverenced by Scotchmen, ii. 91

Masham, Mrs. (afterwards Lady):
effects of influence over Queen
Anne, i. 44; in interest of Jacobites,
161

Mason, Monck: Bill in fayour of
Catholics (1761), iv. 459

Masquerades, i. 543

Massachusetts: prominent in Amer-
ican war, ili. 355, 363, 365, 397

Massacres, Irish, 1641: false or
exaggerated accounts of, ii. 128
sqq.; the depositions in Trinity
College, 147; extravagant accounts
of Sir J. Temple, 149; motives of
exaggeration, 151; probable num-
ber of victims, 153. See also
Treland—Rebellion

Mather, Cotton: introduced inocula-
tion into Boston (America), ii. 18

Matthew, General; descent on Vir-
ginia, iv. 116

Matthews, Admiral: dismissed from
service for incapacity, i. 414

Mauduit: agent for Massachusetts in
England, iii. 319

Maulde, de: sells information to Lord
Auckland, vi. 71, 119

Maupeou: coup d’état (1771), v. 340

Maurepas:; influence over Lewis XVL.,
vy. 389

Mayence, Elector of: relations with
French emigrants, v. 587 sq., 591

Maynooth College, vii. 117 sqq., 126
sqq-, 451

McCarry, Father: an Irish informer,

- vii. 209
McCormick, Richard: member of

Directory of United Irishmen, vii.

6, viii. 3, 129

McCracken, Henry Joy: leader of re- .

bellion in Antrim, viii. 129

McKenna, Theobald: Catholic writer,
vii. 6 sq., viii. 331, 413

MeNally, Leonard, vii. 28, 138, 143,
424, 458, viii. 7, 13, 34

McNeyin, Dr. : member of Directory
of United Irishmen, vii. 224, 384,
viii. 3, 121

Meat: average prices, 1700-60, i. 560;

617

MET

consumption of, in England in 1696,
ab.

Medical science, state of, 1700-60; i.
573

Mediterranean, English command of,.
i. 105

Medmenham Brotherhood, iii. 55;
Wilkes’s share in it, 76; Lord
Sandwich’s, 77

Meer Cossim: made Nabob of Bengal
by English, iii. 475

Meer Jaffier: Nabob of Bengal: de-
posed by English, iii. 475

Members of Parliament: property.
qualifications, i. 128; rise of desire
to treat them as delegates, 396;
immunity of their servants, 571

Mercantile corporations: Bank of
England, i. 199; East India Com-
pany, ib.

Mercier de la Riviére (French econo-
mist): advocate of despotism, v.
369

Mercy (Austrian Ambassador to Paris) ,
correspondence with Marie An-
toinette, v. 550, 554, 561, 576

Meredith, Sir W.: presented petition
against Subscription (1772), ui. 497

Merrick, Sir Henry: murdered in
County Cork rebellion, vii. 449

‘Mess Johns’ (nickname for private
chaplains), i. 77

Methodism: causes predisposing to
it, li. 544 sqq.; rise at Oxford, 549 ;
careers of John Wesley and his
companions, 550 sqq.; Moravian
influence on Methodism, 559; open
confession, 7b.; missionary work, 560,
577 sqq.; hostility of clergy, 561;.
erection of chapels, 7b.; Whitefield
begins field-preaching, 562; Wesleys
reluctantly follow, 563 ; relations of
first Methodists to the Church,
567 ; separation from Moravianism,
574; formation of a distinct society
(1740), 575; Calvinistic secession,
576; institution of lay preachers,
1b.; persecution of Methodists, 7d. ;
accused of Popery, 580; religious
terrorism, 582; physical manifesta-
tions, 583; religious madness, 585 ;
asceticism, 589; miracles, 591; be-
lief in witchcraft, 593; in special
judgments, 594; fanaticism, 595 ;
Antinomian tendencies, 596; in-
testine discord, 597; influence with
the poorer classes, 600; progress
in colonies, 601; in England, 602;
in Wales, 603; in Scotland, 607;
in Ireland, 608; influence on the

618

MET

young, 611; on army, 612; on
universities, 613; on literature,
615; on upper classes, 616; on
Church of England, 7b.; causes
that detached Methodism from the
Church, 632; later attitude of
Methodists, 634; restrained revolu-
tionary spirit, 636 ; influence in the
great towns, 637; Methodists
opposed relaxation of Subscription,
ili. 500; alleged disloyalty in Ive-
land (1797), vii. 376 ; still united to
Church in Ireland then, 376 7.

Methuen, treaty of, i. 142, v. 38, 40,
43, vi. 67

Middlemen (Ireland), ii. 240, 297, iv.
315

Middle passage: horrors of, vi. 288;
Dolben’s Act to mitigate, 291

Middle States (America) : account of
social state in 1765, 111. 280

Miffin, General (American): one of a
cabal against Washington, iv. 94

Milan, Milanese: how affected by
Peace of Utrecht, i. 123; by war
of Polish succession, 355 ; in 1745,
420

Miles, Mr.: aids Maret in his mission
to England, vi. 112, 126

Militia : England and colonies, i. 512,
ii. 489 sq., iii. 363, 431, iv. 28, 30.
—lIreland: desire to found a militia,
iv. 378, 482, 491; Militia Act
passed, vi. 596; disturbances at the
balloting, 609; resistance to the Act
strengthened Defenderism, vii. 14
Sq. ; regiments disaffected, 200, 207,
330, vill. 242 sq.

Milton, Lord: Chief Secretary to Lord
Fitzwilliam, vii. 50

Minden, battle of (defeat of French by
English and Germans, 1759), ii.
507

Minorca: Byng’s failure, ii. 453;
garrisoned by Hanoverian soldiers,
iv. 69; Spanish and French expedi-
tion against (1781), 171, 175; under
Spanish rule (1782), 202, 259; reli-
gious policy of England in, 470

Mint: right of sanctuary for debtors,
abolished, i. 486

“Minute men’ (volunteers in New
England), iii. 408

Mirabeau: opposed warlike policy of
French Republic, vy. 208 ; account of
suggested plan for Russian invasion
of India, 285; member of third
order in States-General, 431 ; death,
529

Mischianza, the, iv. 90

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

MOR

Missionary efforts among Indians, iii.
295

Mississippi boundary : agreed on
between England and America, iv.
253; objected to by France, 257

Mitchel, John: on Irish revolution,
viii. 545

Mitford, Mr.: introduced Catholic
Relief Bill of 1791, v. 186

Modena: how affected by Peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle, i. 429

Mogul empire: after death of Aurung-
zebe, ii. 455, iii. 475

Mohocks, the, i. 482

Mohun, Lord: duel with Duke of
Hamilton, i. 131

Moira, Lord: on military outrages in
Ireland, vii. 187, 221, 305, 430; on
the Union, viii. 391, 487

Moldavia, v. 219, 224, 274, 276

Molesworth, Viscount: pamphlet

suggesting remedies for Trish
poverty, il. 305 sq.
Mollendorf, General (distinguished

Prussian politician and soldier), v.
281, 599, vi. 88

Molwitz, battle of (defeat of Marshal
Neipperg), 1. 392

Molyneux’ ‘Case of Ireland,’
viii. 267

Monastrevan (Queen’s County): at-
tacked by rebels, viii. 64

Monopolies in commerce, benefits of,
v. 42

Monroe, Henry:
Down, viii. 131

Monserrat (island): originally oecu-.
pied by planters of Irish origin, iv.
430

Montcalm, General: commander of
French colonists and soldiers in
Canada, ii. 494 sq.

Montesquieu : on religious toleration,
v. 181; influence “of his visit to
England on his writings, 301 sq.;
political opinions, 351; recom-
mended an Union of England and
Treland, vi. 331

Montgomery, General (American), iii.
436

Montmorin (French Minister of Foreign
Affairs) : opposed war policy of the
Republic, v. 208, 582, 588, vi. 35 sq.

Moore, General: in command against
Wexford rebels, viii. 163

Moore, Thomas (poet): account of
expulsions from Trin. Coll. Dublin,
vii. 450

Morality, American, iii. 292

Morard de Galles, Admiral:

ii. 415,

leader of rebels in

come.

INDEX,

MOR

mander of fleet in Hoche’s expedi-
tion, vii. 255

Moravians: in Georgia, i. 503; in-
fluence on English Methodism, ii.
559, 574 sq.

Morgan, Colonel (American) : at battle
of Cowpens, iv. 187

Morris, Gouverneur : letters on events
of American war, v. 430, 433, 495

Morris, Robert, American financier, iv.
16, 23, 33, 248

Mountjoy, Lord: a prisoner in the
Bastille, ii. 191

Mountjoy (Luke Gardiner): Catholic
relief Bills, iv.477 sqq., 529, 556 sqq.;
bargains for a peerage, vi. 351, 352 ;
state of tenantry in Tyrone, vii.
345; commander of Dublin Militia,
vii. 107 sq.; killed in the battle of
New Ross, 108

Mountnorris, Lord:
chapels, viii. 75

Mourges, Scipio: French mission to
England, vi. 47

Moylan, Bishop (Cork) : loyal address
at time of Rebellion, vil. 267; com-
municates with Government on
Catholic affairs, viii. 339, 340; a
warm supporter of the Union, 422,
423

Mullaghamast: murder of Irish chiefs
at, li. 105

Munk, Dick: a shoeblack distinguished
in Wexford rebellion, viti. 92, 159

Munro, Sir Hector: commander in
war against Hyder Ali, iv. 173

Munster: confiscations in, after Des-
mond’s rebellion, ii. 105; Payne’s
‘Description,’ 106; English cruel-
ties (1641), 159; wretched condi-
tion (1784), iv. 314; suggested re-
vival of Presidency, 424. See also
Treland—Rebellion

Murphy, Father John: leader of Re-
bellion in Wexford, viii. 82 sqq.;
Vinegar Hill, 103; Gorey, 106 ;
Three Rocks Mountain, 175; his
death, 178

Murphy, Father Michael : rebel leader,
killed at Arklow, viii. 139

Musgrave, Sir R.: punishment of a
Whiteboy, iv. 331 2.

Music: in England, i. 531; operas,
532 ; Handel controversy, 533 sqq. ;
oratorios, 534; in Ireland, 536

Mutiny: Act, i, 510 sq.,iv. 510 sq.;
513, 526, 558; mutinies in American
army, 184 sqq.; at Spithead and
Nore, vii. 403 sq.

Mysore, Sultan of, v. 209

addresses in

619

NAT

N

Naas: outbreak of Irish rebellion, viii.
55

Nabobs (English adventurers in India),
ili. 171; bought themselves into
Parliament, 172

Nabobs of Oude and Bengal, iii. 475
sqq-

Mae siege of, i. 425

Napier, Sir Wm.; anecdote of William
Pitt, v.16

Naples: vicissitudes in 18th century,
i. 404, 417

Narbonne; French Minister of War,
v. 587

Nary, Rev. Dr.: statement of Catholic
objections to the Abjuration oath, i.
294

Nash, Beau, i. 554

Nassau, Prince of: in command at
siege of Gibraltar, iv. 244

National Assembly : the Declaration
of Rights, v. 482 sqq.

National Bank of Ireland: established,
vi. 436; suspends cash payments
(1797), vii. 278

National character: its basis, ii. 72;
effect of legislation on, 73; illus-
trated in Scotland in 18th century,
74; rise of spirit of nationality in
Treland, 436

National Convention (France) : sum-
moned by Legislative Assembly,
vi. 27

National Covenant against Popery, ii.
123

National debt—England: influence
upon Government of Revolution, i.
199; amount temp. George I., 322,
336; reductionof interest, 822, 343 ;
arguments for national debts, 336;
evils, 337 sq.; parts played by Whigs
and Tories in creating the debt, 341;
increased by subsidies to foreign
States, 427; schemes for reduction,
431 sq.; consolidation, 433 ; growth,
1727-63, ii. 510; 1780-84, iv. 163,
184, v. 28; Pitt’s schemes for re-
ducing, 47; Sinking Funds, 48, 51
sq.; enormous increase of debt un-
der Pitt, 53; his regulations, 204 ;
amount, 1801-17, viii. 538 sq.—
Ireland: amount, 1715-380, ii. 224,
427; proposals for liquidation, 428,
432; new debt created, 435 ; amount,
1760_86, iv. 439, 441, vi. 328, 433;
reduction of interest, 435; new loan
in 1798, vii. 447 ; amount, 1801-17,
vill. 539 sq.

620

NAT

National Guards (Dublin), vi. 536,
596, 606

Navy, American: first squadron, iv.
15; privateering, 17; roving com-
mission of Paul Jones, iv. 100,
113

Navy, English: successes, 1745-47, i.
423; reduction, 430; destitute boys
sent into, 487; neglected condition,
1741, 504; numberof sailorsin 1774,
ii. 456; party spirit among officers,
iv. 151; expeditions under Rodney,
152 sq.; increase by captures from
enemies (1782), 251; frauds by
treasurers, v. 29 ; reforms, 32; Pitt’s
care for navy, 206; losses in 1782,
251; Irishmen in navy, vii. 246
sqq-, 406 n.; mutiny at Spithead and
Nore, 403 sq.; suppression, 405;
the ‘ Hermione,’ 2b. ; low class from
which navy was recruited, 406

Necker : opposed to Vergennes’
American policy, iv. 48 ; first
ministry, v. 390; Provincial States,
ab.; scheme of reform, 391; resig-
nation, 7b.; recalled to office, 417 ;
proportion of Commons and method
of election of States-General, 418
sq.; Necker’s faults, 420, 422, 435,
437; dismissal, 440

Needham, General: in command at
battle of Arklow, viii. 138 sqq.

Negapatam: captured by English from
Dutch, iv. 1695; possession con-
firmed, 285

Negroes, American: rapid multiplica-
tion, ii. 11; history of their intro-
duction, 12 sq.; statistics, 13, 15;
why the slaves gravitated to the
South, 17; treatment during the
war, lii. 438

Neild, James: his services to debtor
prisoners, vi. 274

Nelson, Admiral: attack on Teneriffe
—his one failure, vii. 386; destruc-
tion of French fleets, viii. 208;
battle of the Nile, 239

Netherlands, Austrian : affairs in,
1781-85, v. 76 sq.; indemnity paid
by France, 77; home dissensions,
79; popular commotion, 84; insur-
rection (1778), v. 237; pacification,
263; granted Constitution, 264;
events of 1792, vi. 2 sqg.; invaded
by France, 17; French defeats, 18.
See also Holland; Belgium

Netherlands, Spanish: during war of
Spanish succession, 1. 27, 105

Neuchatel: how affected by Feace of
Utrecht, 1. 123

ENGLAND IN THE. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,

NEW

Neutral commerce, rights of, iv. 155
Sqq:

Nee kenstorcned (old name of New
York), iii. 280

Neweastle, Duke of: Prime Minister,
ii. 488; character, 439; Fox and
Pitt’s intrigues, 442; difficulties
with France about American colo-
nies, 443; vacillation, 444; gener-
ally distrusted, 445; perplexities
as to France and America, 447;
the German subsidies, 448 ; alliance
with Prussia, 449 ; resignation, 457 ;
treatment of Admiral Byng, 461;
forms coalition ministry, 462 ;
generous treatment of Pitt, 480;
resignation, ui. 41; in Rocking-
ham’s ministry, 94

Newdigate, Sir Roger: debate on Sub-
scription (1772), iii. 498

New England: description, iii. 276;
government, 277; litigation and
lawyers, 278; character of people,
279; education, 290; Puritanism,
400; character of soldiers, 426, 437
n., 447

Newenham, Sir Edward (member of
Irish Parliament), iv. 477, vi. 328,
346, 351, 522

Newfoundland, i. 109, iv. 252, 256,
259, v. 22

Newgate Prison :
prisoners, 1. 501

New Jersey: miscellaneous population,
ili. 280; revulsion of feeling towards
Washington, iv. 27

New London : destruction by Benedict
Arnold, iv. 199

‘New Lights,’ the (a Presbyterian
schism), 1. 411

Newnham, Alderman, v. 90

Newport (N. Y.): French fleet at.
(1780), iv. 131

New Ross, battle of, viii. 107, 115

New South Wales, transportation to,
vi. 254; Ivish political prisoners
sent there, viii. 250; serious Irish
rebellion there, 251

Newspapers, i. 517 sqq., 519, iil. 232,
v. 164, 203

Newton, John (of Olney): formerly a
slave-dealer, ii. 600; work as an
Evangelist, 626 sq.

Newtown-barry : repulse of Ivish re-
bels, vill. 97

New York: origin of name, ii. 6;
mixed nationalities of early

population, ii. 280; less favour-

able aspects of life there (1765),

281 ; manners, 282 .; refuses to

treatment of

INDEX.

NIC

obey Mutiny Act, 348; Assembly
suspended, 352 ; submission, 365 ;
after hesitation, joins other colonies
in revolt, 428 ; position towards the
Revolution in early stages, 442, 444 ;
captured by Howe (1776), iv. 2;
American proposals to burn the
town, 3; incendiary fires, 4; Pro-
vincial Convention, 7; continued
loyalty (1780), 130; Washington’s
expedition against (1781), 191, 198;
fall of Yorktown, 200
Nice: annexed to French Republic
(1792), vi. 41
Nicholson, Bishop: account of the
state of Derry in 1720, u. 216,
234
Nicholson, Margaret: attempt to stab
George IIL., v. 90
Ninon de l’Enclos’ skull: used in reli-
gious devotions, v. 337
Noailles, Vicomte de: leader in aboli-
tion of feudal rights (France), v.
483
Yoel (author of school books) : mission
from France to England, vi. 48;
despatches, 51
Nonconformists. See
Presbyterians
Non-importation agreements (Amer-
ica), ili. 355, 372
Non-jurors, i. 51, 72, 86
Non-resistance, doctrine of, i. 8 sq.,
50 sq., 55
Nootka Sound (Vancouver's Island) :
English trading settlement, v. 206 ;
seized by Spaniards, 207 sq.
Norfolk (America): burning of town
by Lord Dunmore, ii. 438, 451
“North Briton,’ No. 45 (Wilkes’s
paper), iii. 70 sqq., 76
North Cork Militia: Orangemen in,
viii. 74; introduced ‘pitched cap’
in dealing with rebels, 77
North, George : description of William
Pitt, v. 18 7.
North, Lord: growth of his influence,
: iii. 126 ; Prime Minister, 160 ; oppo-
sition of Chatham, 163; triumph of
“Government, 167; retention of
Townshend’s tea-duty, 370; at-
tempts to appease America, 423;
strength of his Government (1772-
74), 524; parliamentary approval
of his American policy, 525; seces-
sion of Fox, 527; popular support
of his American policy, 529 sqq.;
carried on American war against
this own judgment and wishes, iv,
72; frequently tendered resigna-

Dissenters ;

621

NUL

tion, 73; personal attachment to
King, 2b.; Bills of conciliation for
America, 75 ; sends Commission to
America, 78; position after death
of Chatham, 87 sq.; Warden of
Cinque Ports, 106; Cabinet changes,
1779, 108; resignation, 203; co-
alition with Fox, 270; terms of
compact, 273; motives, 276; in
office, 280; dismissal, 295; on Ab-
sentee tax, 404; suggests making
Flood President of Munster, 424 ;
on Fox’s pension, 426; mitigation
of penal laws, 477; repeal of com-
mercial restrictions in Ireland, 500;
objected to title ‘Prime Minister,’
vy. 19; on Regency question, 108;
against repeal of Test Acts, 157;
favours repeal of law against Uni-
tarians, 177; opposed Pitt’s com-
mercial propositions (Ireland), vi.
401; desired an Union with Ireland,
Vili. 275 sq.

‘Northern Confederation,’ the, i. 236

sq.

‘Northern Star,’ vil. 332, 424

Northington, Lord, Viceroy (1783) :
distress in Ireland, vi. 326 ; question
of annual sessions, 327; of Volun-
teers, 328; of reduction in military
department, 329; political attitude
of Volunteers, 330; their ‘ Conven-
tion’ and its Reform Bill, 342;
later attempts at reform, 347; Nor-
thington retires, 351

Northumberland, Harl of, Viceroy
(Ireland), iv. 371
Norton, Sir Fletcher: Speaker of

British Parliament, iv. 184; made
Lord Grantley, 217; death, v.
128

Norwich: resort of Flemish refugees,
i. 197; long ranked third among
English cities, ib.

Notables, Assembly of : not summoned
since reign of Lewis XIII., v. 400;
assembled by Calonne: its compo-
sition, 1b.; again assembled, by
Necker, 418

Nova Scotia: difficulty with France as
to its boundary, i. 429 sqq.

Nugent, General: engaged in disarm-
ing Irish, vii. 350

Nugent, Lord: sought relaxation of
Trish commercial code, iv. 448

Nujum-ad-dowla (son of Meer Jaffier),
ii. 476

Nullum Tempus Act; its origin and
object, iii. 125

622

OAK

O

Oakboys (Irish Protestants): disturb-
ances against Road Act and tithes,
iv. 345

Oath of Abjuration, i. 63

O’Brien, Sir Lucius: description of
Clare during Whiteboy outrages, iv.
326; motion for appointment of
Irish Chancellor (1767), 376; re-
port on state of country, 488 ; calls
for arming of militia against ex-
pected invasion, 492 ; defends
Grattan’s Address for Independence,
535

Obsolete laws, iii. 505

O’Byrnes, the, i. 113

O’Coigly, Father: arrest as United
Trishman, viii. 7; trial, 53; hanged,
55

O’Connell, Daniel: accused Govern-
ment of wilfully producing rebel-
lion, viii. 285; on Union bribery,
408; maiden speech, 425

O’Connell, General in the
Brigade, vil. 254

O’Connor, Arthur: enters Irish Par-
liament, vi. 457 ; speech on Catholic
Relief Bill (1795), vii. 111; joins
United Irishmen, 224; negotiating
for the society at Hamburg, 237 ;
memorial to French Directory, 250
sq. 3; imprisoned for seditious libel,
332; sketch of his character and
career, vili. 5; arrest, 7; trial, 52;
acquitted, 54

O’Connor, Lawrence (Naas school-
master): trial, vii. 151

‘O’Conor, Charles: co-founder of Catho-
lic Association (1759), iv. 453

O’Conor, Matthew : on Henry Brooke’s
efforts for Catholics, iv. 454 2.

Oczakow: cession demanded from
Russia, v. 274 sqq.

Ogle, George: opponent of Catholics
in Irish Parliament, vi. 568

Oglethorpe, James: sketch of his
career, i. 499; exposure of abuses
in English prisons, 500 sqq.; found-
ing of colony of Georgia, 503 sq.;
death, 2b.

O’Keefe, Bishop (Kildare): address
disavowing deposing power and in-
fallibility of Pope, iv. 469

£ Old Revolution Club’ (Scotland) : its
object, vil. 177

O’Leary, Father, iv. 330 »., 495, vi.
369, 446, vii. 211, 271

Oliver, Lieutenant-Governor (Massa-
chusetts), iii, 380; impeached (as a

Trish

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ORA

judge) for having received salary
from Crown, 388

O’Neil, John (Irish Protestant): sup-
porter of Catholic claims, vi. 567

O'Neil, Owen Roe: in command in
rebellion (1642), ii. 161, 164

O’Neil, Shane, ii. 95

O’Neil, Sir Brien: treachery of Essex
towards, li. 95

O’Neil, Sir Phelim: proclamation
against outrages, li. 129 ; his crimes,
143

O’Neill, Viscountess, vii. 413

Onslow, Colonel George: charge against
printers for reflecting on members
of Parliament, iii. 257

Onslow, Lord: present at the Prince
of Wales’s marriage with Mrs. Fitz-
herbert, v. 86, 88

Opera, English, rise of, 1. 532

Orange, House of, made hereditary
rulers of Holland, i. 425

Orange, Prince of (1794) : a refugee in
England, vii. 62

Orangism : history, vii. 173; disputes
between Catholic and Protestant
tenants, 174; history of Jackson’s
Charity, 174 sqq.; mutilation of
Berkeley and his wife, 176; battle of
the Diamond, 177; Orange Society :
foundation and objects, ib.; its pre-
cursors, 177,309; original title, 178 7.;
expulsion of Catholics, 179; resolu-
tions of the Armagh magistrates, 180;
apathy of Government, 181; esti-
mates of number of victims, 182 ;
extent of outrages, 183 ; compensa-
tion, 184; details of agitation, 185
sqq-; agrarian element, 191: influ-
ence on Irish politics, 192; terror
inspired, 194 ; extension of move-
ment,199; yeomanry chiefly Orange-
men, 214; alliance with Govern-
ment, 308; becomes a counterpoise
to United Irishmen, 309; proposal
to organise Orangemen as Fencibles,
312; a legitimate political associa-
tion, 313; rules and regulations, 2b. ;
two bodies incorporated into yeo-
manry, 314; fresh outbreak of out-
rage and persecution, 340; Orange
Boys, 341; the pretended Orange
oath, 369, 373, viii. 14, 93; calum-
nies repudiated, 155; declarations
against Union, 443

Oratorios introduced into England, i.
534

Oratory : value to a statesman, i. 361;
not usually in England the standard
of parliamentary weight, 362

INDEX.

ORD

Orde (Chief Secretary, Ireland); in-
troduces Pitt’s commercial proposi-
tions to Irish Parliament, vi. 396;
objection to his pension, 414; his
proposed system of national educa-
tion, 451

O'Reilly, Philip: in Irish Rebellion
(1642), ii. 131, 161

Orleans, Duke of (1787):
against loan of 1787, v. 408

Orloff, Alexis, murderer of Peter III.,
y. 212

Ormond, James (first) Duke of : opinion
on alleged Irish massacres (1641),
ii. 148; estates granted to, 177;
gift from Irish Parliament, 178

Ormond, James (second) Duke of: ap-
pointed to succeed Marlborough, i.
108 ; instructions from Bolingbroke,
111; result of the treachery, 112;
attempts a descent on Devonshire,
214; reward offered for apprehen-
sion, 244

Orr, William: his trial and execu-
tion, vii. 351 sqq.

Orsova: siege of, abandoned through
panic, v. 260; in power of Austria,
263

Osborne, Sir William (Irish Parlia-
ment): popular speaker, iv. 363, 383,
386 :

O’Shea, Count Richard: mission from
France to Ireland, vii. 249

Ostend Company (for Austrian trade
with India), i. 349, 352

Ostermann, Count (Russian Vice-
Chancellor, 1788), v. 232

Oswald, Mr.: Shelburne’s agent with
Franklin, iv. 226, 258

Oswald, Colonel: mission from Lebrun
to Ireland, vii. 2

Otis, James: an early advocate of
American resistance to England, iii.
304 sq., 321, 345, 347, 373

Oulart: Father John Murphy’s success
at, viii. 83 sq.

‘Owling,’ vi. 236

- Oxford: treatment of Methodists at,

protest

li. 612 sq.
Oxford, Earl of. See Harley
Oxmantown, Lord: on object of

Whiteboys, iv. 331 7.

12

Paine, Thomas: popularity of his
works, iii. 451 sq., vi. 55, 607

Painting, British. See Art

Paisley: speedy rise from village to

623:

PAR

considerable manufacturing town,
ii. 57

Palatines (German refugees, Ireland),
li. 343 sq.

Palermo ; captured by Spanish (1718),
i. 239

Paley, Dr.: reason for refusing to op-
pose Subscription, ii. 498; his
‘Moral and Political Philosophy ”
(1785), v. 170 sqq.; on the neces-
sity of parliamentary corruption, vi.
381

Palliser, Admiral Sir Hugh: conflict
with Keppel, iv. 93

Palmer’s mail-coaches: extensive in-
crease of postal service, vi. 177

Pamphlets, political importance of, i.
61, i. 232

Panin, Count: leader of a Russian
faction (Catherine II.), iv. 155, v.
217

Paper duty, 1. 4

Paper money, iii. 278, 308, iv. 32, 35,.
115, 127

Parish apprentices, vi. 272

Paris, Peace of, iii. 46, 61

Parker, Admiral: abortive attempt to
capture Charleston, iv. 12, 169

Parliament, English: popular desire
for reform, i. 434; Cromwell’s Re-
form Bill, 7b.; growth and causes
of Crown influence in Parliament,
435 sqq.; placemen in Parliaments
of George I. and George II., 436;
arbitrary proceedings of Commons,
437; censorship of the press, 438 ;
privilege, 439; abuse of judicial
functions: disputed elections, 440
sq.; history of parliamentary re-
porting, 442 sqq.; debate on the
subject (1738), 444; methods
adopted by reporters for avoiding
punishment, 446 ; Place Bills, 447 sq.;
Septennial Act increased corruption,
449 ; redeeming features: political
capacity of upper classes, 451 ;
large infusion of young members,
1b.; members for counties and for
great towns, 452; effects of fear of
Pretender, ib.; deference to public
opinion, 453; soldiers in Parlia-
ment, 513; influence of Scotch con-
tingent, ii. 75; Scotch members
paid for attendance, 2b.; question of
incapacity to sit as member, ili. 144
sqq.; relations of American colonies
to Parliament, 297; first attempt to
tax the colonies, 306 sqq.; com-
petence to do so, 315 sqq.; proposed
admission of American represent-

624 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

PAR

atives, 322, 347 ; Townshend’s
taxation of America, 351 sqq.: atti-
tude of Parliament towards America
(1768-69), 363; revival of law for
trying traitors in England, 7b. ; co-
ercive measures, 423; contest on
Royal Marriage Bill, 463; Parlia-
ment claims authority over terri-
torial revenue of East India Com-
pany, 481, 485; restrains its divi-
dends, 481 sq.; Secret Committee
on India, 486; Burke’s opposition,
éb.; regulation of ecclesiastical
Courts, 495; debate on application
of Toleration Act, 496; on proposed
abolition of Subscription, 498 ;
Dissenters relieved from Subscrip-
tion, 502; repeal of obsolete laws,
504; Catholic Relief Bill passed
(1778), 508; House blockaded by
Gordon rioters, 512; both Houses
meet under military protection, 514;
‘strong approval of North’s American
policy, 525; proposals of manhood
suffrage and of annual or triennial
Parliaments, iv. 182 sqg.; measures
of reform (1782), 217 sqq.; Pitt’s,
222 ; balance of parties, 270 ;
‘debate on terms of peace with
America, 278; Pitt’s reform resolu-
tions (1783), 281 ; India legislation,
285 sqq.; prerogative of dissolution,
300; right of legislating for Ireland,
431; free trade granted to Ireland,
500 ; concession of Irish inde-
pendence (1782), 552; termination
of corruption (Pitt), v. 24; Pitt’s
financial measures, 27 sqq.; debate
on his commercial treaty with
France, 38 sqq.; Sinking Fund, 47
sqq.; Westminster scrutiny, 58 ; pro-
tracted elections, 60; Pitt’s Reform
Bill (1785), 2b.; defeated, 62; later
history of Reform, 64 sqq.; slave
trade, 7b.; Government of India
Bill, 75; power of Parliament
during the King’s illmess, 100
sqq.; Pitt’s proposal, 102; Fox’s
Claim of Right for Prince of Wales,
103; Pitt’s resolutions debated and
carried, 110, 127; restrictions on
Regency, 136; debated, 188; func-
tions of new council, 139; Regency
Bill passed, 145; debate on repeal
of Test Act (1787), 155 sqq.; Fox’s
motion in favour of Unitarians, 176;
defeated, 181; legislation in favour
of Catholics, 184 sqq.; of Scottish
Episcopalians, 191; Crown claims
wight of arresting impeachment,

PAS

1b.; Libel Act of 1791, 192 ; Flood’s
Reform Bill (1790), 193; Quebec
Government Act, 195; Colonial de-
fence, 200; Pitt’s Budgets of 1790-
91-92, 202; opposition to Pitt’s
anti-Russian policy, 286 sq.; dis-
orderly session of May 6, 1791, 503;
winter session 1792, vi. 76; debates
on Alien Bill, 77; Fox’s arguments,
77 sq.; answered by his own follow-
ers, 79; King’s message after exe-
cution of Lewis XVI., 123 ; debates
on abolition of slave trade, 294 sqq.;
Irish Union, viii. 350 sqq., 482
sqq-

Parliament, Irish. See Ireland; Grat-
tan; Foster; Parsons; Ponsonby, &.

Parliamentary reporting. See Press

Parliaments, French. See France

Parma : arrangement under Treaty of
Seville, i. 353; after Peace of Aix-
la-Chapelle, 429

Parnell, Sir John: Chancellor of Ex-
chequer (Ireland), iv. 505, vi. 4375
on concessions to Catholics, 488 ;
interview with Pitt on subject, 497 ;
financial success, 515; on  pro-
sperity of country, 521; belief that
time would bring Protestants and
Catholics together, 567 ; a friend of
Grattan, vii. 38; Pitt communicates
the intended Union to him, viii. 294;
removal from office, 336; opposi-
tion to the Union, 342, 344 ;
attempts to procure a dissolution,
477

Parsons, Sir Laurence (afterwards
second Earl of Rosse): menacing
speech (1790), vi. 459; principles
approached those of United Irish-
men, 471; great speech on Catholic
question, 1793, 575 sqq.; protest
against French war, vii. 23; on
Fitzwilliam’s recall, 91; Catholic
Emancipation: right of voting
must lead to right of sitting in
House, 109; motion for inquiry
into discontent of nation (1798),
442; against Union Bill (1800),
viii. 477

Party government: development, i.
223; disliked by Anne, 224; de-
cadence (1757), il. 464 sq.; good and
evil of, 11. 106; increasing import-
ance, 108; its discipline, 109.—Par-
ties have not exchanged principles,
i. 2, 473

Passarowitz, Peace of (between Aus-
trians and Turks, 1718), i. 239

Pasture and tillage (Ireland) : confis-

INDEX. 625

PAT

cated lands chiefly pasture, ii. 207 ;
effect of destruction of cattle trade,
208; pasture best suited to Irish
soil and climate, 244; tendency to
pasture after 1715, 247 ; Parliament
endeavours to fixaminimum amount
of tillage on farms, 248; statistics,
1737-67, 7b. ; reasons why Catholics
favoured pasture, iy. 335 ; subsidiary
causes of prevalence of pasture, vi.
355 ; reaction wrought by Foster’s
Corn Law, 356; corn bounties, 356
Sq.

Patent places (England): absentee
holders, iv. 220

Patna: massacre of English by Nabob
of Oude, iii. 475

‘Patriots, Dutch,’ vi. 60

Paupers, Pauperism—England, i. 560
n.3; Ireland, ii. 250, 253

Payne, Robert: ‘Description of Ire-
land’ (1589), ii. 106

Pays Wélection, Pays d’état (France),
y. 372, 381, 403, 414

Peasants, French, y. 375, 446, 485 sq.,
494

Peel (grandfather of Sir Robert), vi.
209

Peep-o’-Day Boys (Irish Protestants) :
origin of contests with Defenders,
vi. 450 ; riots of 1792, 529; Protes-
tants were the aggressors, vil. 11;
outrages in 1795, 191 sq.

Peers, Peerages: large simultaneous
creation temp. Anne, i. 121; object
of Stanhope’s Peerage Bill, 185, v.
26; Walpole caused its rejection,
i. 332 ; sale of peerages in Ireland, iv.
517; statistics of peerage temp.
George III., v. 26; number created
by Pitt, 26 sq.; Catholic peerages
(Ireland), v. 414 sqq.; Union peer-
ages, vii. 396

Pelham, Henry : personal and political
character, i. 412; exertions in favour
of peace (1745), 419; complete as-
cendency in England, 426; organi-
sation of emigration (1749) to
Nova Scotia, 430 sq.; successful
financial policy, 431 sqq.; reduction
of national debt, 432 sq.; pro-
longed the system of parliamentary
corruption, 448 ; question of shorter
Parliaments, 450; political confu-
sion following his death, ii. 438

Pelham, Thomas: Chief Secretary (Ire-
land) under Lord Temple and Lord
Camden, vii. 93, 99; letters on state
of Ireland, 105; chiefly resided in
England; the reports he received

VOL, VIII.

PEN-
from Ireland, 199, 209, 292; illness
at beginning of Rebellion, viii. 12, -
112 ; succeeded by Lord Castlereagh,
311

Pells, Clerkship of, iv. 425
Penal code : treatment of prisoners, i.

500 sqq.; multiplication of capital
offences, 504; public executions,
505; brutal punishments, 506 sq.;
causes of severity and absurdity of
the code, vi. 245 ; illustrations, 246
sq.; result—frequent perjury of ju-
ries, 248; number of executions,
249; want of certainty, 250; im-
provements in code 1750-1800, 251 ;
length of trials, 252; sale of crimi-
nals to American planters, 253;
state of prisons, 255 sqq.; reforma-
tion of criminals, 261

Penal laws (Ireland) : code speedily

followed the Revolution, i. 178; in-
creased temp. Anne, George I. and
George II., 280 sqq.; civil disabili-
ties, 283; laws affecting education,
285 ; landed property, 287 ; interfer-
ing with domestic life, 289 ; relating
to worship, 291; imposition of
Abjuration oath, 292; laws against
popish dignitaries and friars, 295 ;
Castration Clause, 297; illustra-
tion of persecuting spirit, 297
sq.; general results of the penal
laws, 299 sqq.; influence on in-
dustrial life, ii. 2217.; on agricul-
ture, 243 ; priest-hunting, 267 sqq. ;
reports of mayors and sheriffs, 271
sqq.; effects on respect for law, 281 ;
on character of Irish religion, 282;
on distribution of property, 284;
on social life, 285; on relations of
landlords and tenants, 286; on Irish
literature, 288; on character of the
gentry, 289; directed (1760-78)
rather against property than creed,
iv. 452; weakened through military
and economic motives, 457 sqq.;
steps towards repeal, 459 sq., 477,
530, 556, vi. 503, 566; demoralising
effect, iv. 464 sqq. ; bills of discovery,
464. Sce also Catholics, English

Penances: public, imposed by Scotch

Kirk, ii. 84, 90

Pengelly, Chief Baron; died of jail

fever (1730), 1. 502

Penitentiaries established, vi. 261
Pennsylvania: great admixture of

nationalities, iii. 282; Quakers mo-
dify their principles there, 283

Penny post; London, i. 568; Dublin,

yi. 436
ss

626

PEN

Pensacola, siege of, iv. 170
Pensions: granted to literary men, i.

462; abuse, in Ireland, ii. 228;
amount in 1757, 229”.; tax on
non-resident pensioners, 237;

amount of pensions at various times,
iv. 865 sq.; continued increase, 367,
441; used as election bribes, 440

Percy, Bishop: ‘ Reliques of Ancient
Poetry,’ vi. 183; state of opinion in
Ulster, viii. 127; character of the
rebellion there, 134; favoured Union,
327; on the purchase of votes, 4037.

Perey, Lord: at battle of Lexington
(1775), iii. 425

Periodical literature: rapid growth,
1700-50, i. 518. See Magazines ;
Newspapers

Perrot, Sir John: measure for compo-
sition of Connaught (1585), ii. 104,
114

Persecutions—vreligious: less noticed
effects, i. 188 ; pernicious moral and
political results, 299; examples of
persecuting laws, v. 160 sq¢q.— Poli-
tical persecutions, 303 sqq.—Per-
secution of inventors, vi. 209

Pery, Speaker (Ireland) : remonstrance
against commercial restrictions, iv.
414; on Relief Bill of 1778, 478; on
necessity of Irish Mutiny Act, 510;
retired from Speakership, vi. 374 ;
on the Union, viii. 295, 344

Peter the Great (Russia) : contest with
Charles XII. (Sweden), i. 236

Peter III. (Russia): alliance with
Frederick the Great, iii. 45

Peterwardein, battle of (Turks defeated
by Prince Eugene), i. 235

Pétion (Jacobin), Mayor of Paris, y.
574, vi. 27

Petre, Father: his ambition rebuked
by Innocent X1., i. 21

Petty, Sir W.: on the loss of life in
Irish war of 1641-1652, ii. 172;
grants to, 177; on the proportion
of land held by Catholics and Pro-
testants, 181; Irish population,
255; Irish emigration, 259; advo-
eated Union, viii. 265

Philadelphia : Burnaby’s description
of it in 1759, ili. 283; social habits
and manners, 284; vicissitudes of
war, iv. 22, 26, 90

Philanthropy, 1. 499, 500, vi. 271

Philip I. (Spain): war of Spanish
succession, i. 103 sqq.; disputes
with England, 351, 353; death, 424

Philippine Islands: conquered by Sir
W. Drapery, iui. 40

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

PIT

Phillips, General : in command in Vir-
ginia (1781), iv. 195 i

Phipps, Sir Constantine (Jacobite) :
Irish Chancellor, i. 134

Pheenix Park Lodge, iv. 536, 559

Pianoforte introduced, vi. 159

Pierson, Major: defender of Jersey
against French (1781), iv. 164

Pigot, Admiral: successor of Rodney
in West Indies, iv. 242

Pilgrimages in Ireland, ii. 387 __

Pillory : punishment common in Eng-
land i. 507; inflicted as penance in
Scotland, ii. 90; a freethinker so
punished in England, iii. 492

Pilnitz, Declaration of (by Austria and
Prussia), v. 557, 592

Piracy, literary, in Dublin, ii. 324

‘Pitched cap’ (said to have been in-
vented by North Cork Militia), viii.
18, 77 ;

Pitt, William (the elder). See Chat-
ham

Pitt, William (the younger) : rejected by
Cambridge University, elected at
Appleby,1780, iv. 183; rapid rise,202;
dislike of Shelburne, 212; early
characteristics, 221; refusal of sub-
ordinate office, 222; desire of par-
liamentary reform, 7b.; Chancellor
of Exchequer (Shelburne ministry),
239 ; relations with Shelburne, 269;
dislike of North, 277; resolutions
on Parliamentary reform, 281; oppo-
sition to Fox’s India: Bill, 291;
made Prime Minister, 295; col-
leagues, 296; difficulties, 297; a
seemingly hopeless position, 298 ;
contest with Fox, 299; gives Clerk-
ship of the Pells to Barré, 301;
India Bill, 7b.; tendencies’ favour-
ing Pitt, 302; attempts at coalition,
303; unconstitutional language,
804; signs of popular confidence,
307; dissolution of Parliament,
308; moral and political reputa-
tion, 310; complete victory (1784),
311; unique position in 1784, v.
4; early training, 5 ; character
of eloquence, 6 sq. 3; opinions
of contemporaries, 8; skill as
debater, 9; self-control, iv. 301,
302, v.10; premature development
and purity of character, 11; ex-
cessive drinking, 7b. ; indifference to
money, 12; haughtiness, 13; poli-
tical courage, 14; amiability in
private life, 15; sanguine tempera-
ment, 7b.; playfulness with boys,
16; contrast with his father, 17;

INDEX. 627

PIT

public manner overstrained, 18 ;
position of First Lord of Treasury,
2b.; relations to King, 19; great
increase of ministerial authority,
21; revolts against Pitt’s ascen-
dency, 22; favourite colleagues, 24;
puts an end to Parliamentary cor-
ruption, 24; lavish creation of
peerages, 26; authority as War
Minister, 27; financial chaos, 28
sqq. ; measures of reform, 31; new
taxes, 32; readiness to accept sug-
gestions and criticism, 33; business
character of his ministry, 34; con-
solidation of duties, 35; free trade
policy, 36; commercial treaty with
France, 37,39 sqq.; desire of friendly
intercourse of England and France,
41; reduction of national debt, 47;
Sinking Fund, 51 sq. ; debt increased
through financial maladministra-
tion, 53; estimate of Pitt’s finance, 54
sqq.; smallness of legislative achieve-
ments, 56; Westminster election
scrutiny, 58 ; damaging defeat of Pitt,
59; Reform Bill (1785), 60; conduct
about reform, 63; slave trade, 64;
estimate of Irish policy, 68 sqq.;
Macaulay’s opinion, 69 ; Pitt’s mis-
conception of French Revolution,
70; incapacity as War Minister, 7d.;
Poor Law system, 71; neglect of
social problems and of literature,
ib.; pre-eminently a parliamentary
minister, 72; special brilliancy of
first period of ministry, 73; Go-
vernment of India Bill, 75; Prince
of Wales’s debts and secret marriage,
90, 92; King’s madness, 96; ques-
tion of Regency, 97 sq.; proposal in
Parliament, 102; reply to Fox’s
Claim of Right for Prince of Wales,
104, 106; question of the ‘ third es-
tate,’ 105; Pitt insists on a formal
decision, 108; the resolutions de-
bated, 109; rival arguments, 110,
120; popular favour on side of Go-
vernment, 114 ; ‘the Phantom King,’
123; precedent revolutionary, 124;
resolutions carried, 127; protest of
peers, 128; dignityand judgment of
Pitt, 129 sq.; restrictions on Regency,
136 sqq.; intended to be temporary,
142; Regency Bill passed in Com-
mons: recovery of King, 145; Pitt
unconciliatory towards Prince, 148;
called himself a Whig, 152; popu-
larity, 7b.; King’s gratitude, 153;
opposes repeal of Test Acts, 158 ;
and motion in favour of Unitarians,

PIT

181; legislation favouring Catholics,
189; agreed with Fox on doc-
trine about arrest of impeachment,
192; treatment of Flood’s Reform
Bill (1790), 194; Quebee Act, 195;
finance in 1790-91-92, 202 ; love of
peace, 205; care for national arma-
ments, 206; Nootka Sound, 7b.;

difficulty with Spain, 207; settled

by negotiation, 208; Pitt’s inter-
vention in foreign politics, 239;
his policy about Oczakow, 276
sq. ; resolves to support Prussia,
230; discussion in Parliament, 286;
popular opinion opposed to Pitt,
290 ; foreign Powers refuse support
291; ultimatum sent and recalled,
292; Pitt acknowledges his defeat,
293; his failure and its conse-
quences, 297 sq.; first reference to
French Revolution, 456; supports
Burke, 503 ; neutrality in French
affairs, 558; objects of foreign
policy, 566; advice to Burke,
568 ; pacific policy (1792), vi. 4,9;
Talleyrand’s mission, 7; Chauve-
lin’s, 12; dismissal of Thurlow, 16;
proclamation against seditious socie-
ties and writings, 2b.; negotiations
for a coalition of parties, 17 ; Lewis
XVI. dethroned, 27; recall of Lord
Gower, 28; step blamed, 29; Sep-
tember massacres, 37; erroneous
estimate of French affairs, 54;
apathy towards French conquest of
Belgic provinces, 58; chief anxiety
about Holland, 60; determination
to abide by Treaty of Alliance, 62 ;
motives, 63; negotiations with Ber-
lin and Vienna, 64; disquieting
news from Holland, 65; war pre-
parations, 75; meeting of Parlia-
ment, 76; Warden of Cinque Ports,
77; debate on Alien Bill, 77 sqq.;
pacific language and conduct, 92;
interview with Maret, 94; proposes
secret negotiation, 95; refused by
France, 96 ; warlike public opinion,
ab. ; execution of Lewis XVI., 121;
Pitt utilises popular war feeling,
122; dismissal of Chauyelin, 123;

‘war precipitated, 124; proposes

joint representation to France, 130;
pacific intentions, 131; blind to
magnitude and danger of the war,
134; character of his ministry
changed, 135 ; great speech
against slavery, 294 ; letters to Duke
of Rutland on Irish reform, vi. 375 ;
commercial propositions for Ireland

8s 2

628

PIT.

(1785), 395 sqq.; Catholic Relief
Bill (Ireland), 491; conciliatory let-
ter to Westmorland, 499; leaves
opening for future concessions, 500;
proof that he contemplated legisla-
tive Union, 513, 532; perplexed and
anxious about Irish politics,* 533 ;
insists on Relief Bill, 555; Whig
secession of 1794, vii. 32; conditions
of coalition, 33; Fitzwilliam chosen
for Irish Viceroyalty, 34; disputes
that followed, 39 sqq. (see Ireland,
Fitzwilliam) ; recall of Fitzwilliam,
80 sq.; Pitt’s forebodings about Ire-
land, 104; negotiations for peace
with France (1796), 230 sq., 387;
ardent desire for peace, 388; what
he was prepared to grant, 2b.; hu-
miliating position, 389; proposals
rejected, 390; twofold object of
Pitt, 392; expulsion of Malmesbury
from France, 395; Pitt still endea-
vours to negotiate, 7b.; proposed
bribes to Directors, 396 ; creation of
Trish Catholic peers, 414; his Irish
policy favourable to Catholics, 460 ;
relations with Vatican, 461; Irish
Union determined on, viii. 292;
speech on Union resolution (1799),
851; on proportion of Irish repre-
sentation, 483 ; treatment of Catho-
lics after Union, 502 sqq., 523;
resignation, 513; second ministry,
529; review of Pitt’s Irish policy
and its effects, 536 sqq.

Pitt, Thomas (nephew of Chatham),
ili. 499

Place Bills (limiting number of place-
men and pensioners in Parliament),
i. 447, viii. 402, 404

Place, Francis: on changes in habits
and position of working men, vi.
222

Placentia: how affected by Treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle, i. 429

Plassy, battle of: decisive of fate of
Bengal and of India, ii. 498

Platen, Countess of (mistress of George
I), i. 454

Plunket, William Conyngham, iy. 418,
vii. 445 sq., vill. 342, 343, 439, 490,
493, 547

Pluralities : system produced low type
of clergymen, i. 76

Plymouth ;: threatened by Paul Jones,
iv. 494; proposal to fortify it re-
jected (1786), v. 73

Poetry, new school of, towards end of
18th century, vi. 183

Poland: war of succession, i. 354;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

PON

results, 355; King subsidised by
England, 418; first partition (1772),
v. 211, 217, 541; Prussian designs,
233 sq.; alliance with Prussia, 252;
state since death of Sobieski, 539 ;
corruption and anarchy, 540; three
Powers guarantee remaining terri-
tory, 7b.; alliance with Prussia,
542; revolution in Constitution
(1791), 543 ; its dangers and merits,
ab.; refusal to cede Dantzig and
Thorn to Prussia, 7b.; Constitution
approved by Prussia, 545; weak-
ness, 569; gradual rise of conspiracy
against Poland, 570; coming to
maturity, 595; intentions of Cathe-
rine, 597; helpless position, vi. 83;
invaded by Russians, 84; conduct
of Prussia, 85; projects for parti-
tion, 87; carried out, 89

Police—in London: organised by
Henry Fielding, i. 487; in Dublin, vi.
406, vii. 206. Sce Constabulary

Polignac, Cardinal: representative of
France at Gertruydenberg and
Utrecht, i. 242

Pollock, John, vii. 373

Pollock (‘ Owen Roe O’Nial), iv. 490 7.

Pompadour, Marquis of: a leader in
conspiracy against French Regent,
i, 242

Pompadour, Mme. de (mistress of
Lewis XV.): cause of her hatred of
Frederick the Great, ii. 450; patro-
nises Voltaire, v. 303; persuades
the King to recall the Parliament,
328

Pondicherry: besieged in 1748, i. 428;
again besieged (1760) and captured,
li. 503

Poniatowski, Stanislaus
Poland), v. 540

Ponsonby, John: Speaker of Irish
House of Commons, iy. 353; Com-
missioner of Revenue, 371; one of
the ‘ Undertakers,’ 382; conduct in
Session of 1769, 390, 396

Ponsonby, George (son of the above) :
on Grattan’s Address for Independ-
ence, ivy. 535, 546 ; dismissed from
offices in 1789, vi. 429 ; led the
opposition to Buckingham, 456 ;
desired united education of Pro-
testants and Catholics, 512; pro-
posed Bill for extending Irish
foreign trade, 516; cause of his
change of action on Catholic ques-
tion, 569 ; speech in debate on Bill
of 1795, vii. 111; in last Irish de-
bate on Emancipation, 205; seces-

(King of

INDEX,

PON

sion from parliamentary life, 328 ;
opposed Union, viii. 347, 477

Ponsonby, William (brother of George):
proposed Reform Bill for Ireland,
vi. 565, vil. 25, 57, 324

Poor-laws, Poor-rates, i. 558

Pope, Alexander: his lines on Walpole,
i. 332; character of his poetry, vi.
180 sqq

Population: how computed before
1801, 1.197; statistics, 197 sq.; ratio
of Protestants to Catholics in Ire-
land (1730), i. 255; rapid increase
of colonial population, iii. 267, 271;
and of English, 1750-1800, vi. 201;
populations of Scotland and Ireland
at the dates of their Unions, viii.
234, 317

Porcelain: English passion for, due
to Queen Mary, i. 523

Portarlington: French refugee schools
at, 1. 344

Porteous, Captain, murder of, ii. 76

Porteous riots, i. 488

Porteus, Bishop: promoter of Act
against Sunday amusements, v.
163

Portland, Duke of: spoliation by Sir
J. Lowther, iii. 125 ; fayours Wilkes,
129; head of coalition ministry, iv.
280; Viceroy of Ireland, iv. 544;
the struggle for Irish independence,
545 sqq.; secret correspondence with
Shelburne, 548; proposed negotia-
tion with Grattan, 551; announces
English concessions, 553 ; dislike of
Volunteers, 555; offers Grattan
Phoenix Park Lodge, 559; West-
minster election, 1784, v. 57; treat-
ment of Flood, vi. 302; attempt to
secure ‘superintending power’ of
Great Britain over Irish affairs, 309 ;
in Pitt’s ministry (1794), vil. 32;
dispute about Viceroyalty for Fitz-
william, 33 sqq.; hesitating ‘policy
about Catholics, 72; declares against

’ Emancipation, 75; on Fitzgibbon’s
letter to the King, 103; creation of
Irish Catholic peers, 414

Portocarrero (Spanish priest), leader
of conspiracy against French
Regent, i. 243

Porto Novo, battle of (great defeat of
Hyder Ali), iv. 173

Portsmouth: proposal to fortify it
(1786) rejected, v. 73; alleged
Russian plot to destroy the dock-
yard, 285.

Portugal ; retires from Grand Alliance,
i, 102; how affected by Treaty of

629

PRE

Utrecht, 122; decadence as colonial
Power, ii. 19; invaded by Spain
(1762), iii. 39; refuses access to
Irish woollens, iv. 520; English
trade with, v. 40; peace with France
(1797), vii. 393

Post Office: secrecy violated, i. 454,

lil. 383; frauds by franking letters,
v. 29; revenue in 1790, 204 ;
established in Ireland, vi. 327

‘Potato diggings’ (Ireland): gather-

ings of disaffected, vii. 215

Potatoes (Ireland), ii. 198, 249, iv.

324

Potemkin (leader of Russian political

party), iv. 155, v. 213, 224, 297

Potocki, Count (Polish envoy to Berlin,

1792), vi. 85

Prague, battle of (Austrians and

Prussians), ii. 486

Pratt, Chief Justice: decisions in

favour of Wilkes, iii. 78

Presbyterians, Irish: Belfast protest

against execution of Charles I., i.
333 ; statistics in 1715, 401; politi-
cal position, 402; animosity of
Episcopalians, 403; strong organisa-
tion, 404; political and social effects
of Test Act, 405; causes that pro-
duced it, 404 sqq.; Regium Donum
withdrawn, restored, and augmented,
407 ; Toleration and Indemnity Acts,
409 sq.; impossibility of repealing
the Test, 410; marriages regulated,
ib.; decadence of Presbyterianism :;
the ‘New Lights,’ 411; Associate
Presbytery schism, 412; in America
prominent opponents of England,
lil, 282, iv. 118; Steelboys, 349;
sympathy with Americans, 458, 474;
attempt to abolish Sacramental
Test, 477; active Volunteers (North),
499; Test Act repealed, 501; pro-
minent among Volunteers, vi. 323 ;
relations with Bishop of Derry, 336;
negotiations with Catholics, 337,
478; republican spirit in North,
461, 477; tendency towards Catholic
alliance, 540; Synod of Ulster, 609;
large numbers among United Ivish-
men, vii. 4; renewed hatred of
Catholics, 187; ministers promote
sedition, 218; religious animosity,
347; separate from rebels in Ulster,
viii. 118 sqq.; offer aid to Govern-
ment, 128

Prescott, Colonel (American); battle

of Bunker’s Hill, iii. 427

Press, the: Tory and Whig treatment

contrasted, 1.4; great dissemination

630 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

PRE

of political pamphlets temp. Anne,
61; subsidised by Walpole, 517;
growth of influence, 518, ili. 228;
doctrine of libel, 229; changed cha-
racter of newspapers temp. George
III, 232; ‘Letters of Junius,’ 233
sqq.; establishment of important
newspapers, 256; right of pavrlia-
mentary reporting, ib.; prosecution
of printers, 257; conflict between
Lord Mayor of London and the
House of Commons, 258; riots, 261;
triumph of press, 262; estimate of
its influence, 262 sqq. ;_ its
methods, 263; weight attached to
anonymous writing, 264; mischief
wrought by a corrupt press, 265;
services rendered by the press under
George III., 266

‘Press, The’ (Dublin), vii. 424

Press-gangs, i. 504, ii. 579, iil. 535 sqq.

Preston, siege of, in rebellion of 1715,
1, 215

Preston Pans, battle of, in rebellion of
1745, i. 422

Pretender, the. See James, Prince of
Wales.

Pretender, Young (Prince Charles) :
lands in Scotland, i. 421; invades
England, 422; successes, 7b.;
crushed, 423; promised to restore
Scotch Parliament, ii. 64; desig-
nated Scotch bishops, 67

Price, Dr. (Nonconformist minister) :
defender of American cause in Eng-
land, iil. 530; writings on national
debt, v. 49, 51; eulogiser of French
Revolution, 160 ; sermon before the
‘Revolution Society,’ 449; de-
nounced enclosures as a cause of
depopulation, vi. 198

Priestley, Dr. (Dissenter) : hatred of
Established Church, y. 160; work
on ‘ Corruption of Christianity,’ 176;
joy at French Revolution, 528 ;
driven to take refuge in America,
529

Prime Minister: use of title, v. 18 sq.;
North declared it unknown to the
Constitution, 19

Prisons: atrocious treatment in (1729),
1. 500; state of Irish prisons, ii.
358; disgraceful condition of Eng-
lish (1773-90), vi. 255 sqq.; many
gaols private property, 256; no dis-
cipline, 257; gaol fever inveterate,
259 ; chaplains appointed, 7b.; treat-
ment of debtors, 260. See also
Oglethorpe ; Howard, John; Neild,
James

PRU

Privateers : Valentia (Ireland) a favour-
ite place of refuge (1711), ii. 356;
American, iii. 450; merchants~-
speculated in privateering, iv. 16;
English privateers, 94,168 ; French,
443 ; reculations about privateering,
v. 38

Privilege of Parliament, i. 439, iii.
226

Privy Council, iv. 368, 374, 388, 528,
v. 100

Privy Seal, iii. 114

Probate and legacy duties introduced,
v. 32

Proprietary colonies: their charters
and organisation, ii. 4, 14

‘Protected Ministers ’ (Scotland), ii.
46

Protestants—Irish : extent of landed
possessions, ii. 101 sqq.; alleged
massacres of (1641), 128 sqq. ;

looked on Catholics as common
enemies, 199 ; ‘conflict between
English and Irish interest, 412°sqq.;
Oakboys, iv. 345 ; growth of discon-
tent, 352 ; results of equal laws for
Protestants and Catholics, 470;
growth of Irish tolerance, 473 ;
acquiescence in Gardiner’s Relief
Bill, 480; military habits, 483 ;
favour Catholic Emancipation, vii.
69, 113; disarmed by Defenders,
149; objects in proselytising, viii.
215.—French : persecution of, v.
306, 343; marriages invalid, 307;
obtain rights of citizenship, 308,
408.—Protestant succession, i. 5,
39

Provence, Comte de, v. 547, 557
‘Provincial States’ (France), v. 372,

392, 401, 410

Provost of Edinburgh: civil disabilities

inflicted on (1736), ii. 76

Prussia: royal title of sovereign re-

cognised, 1. 123; confederation with
France and England, 350; claims
to Juliers and Berg, 390, v. 547,
556; to part of Silesia, i. 391;
acquisitions, 401 ; military skill
of soldiers, 509; attacked simul-
taneously by French, Russians,
Austrians and Swedes, ii. 490 ;
victories of Rossbach and Leuthen,
491; campaign of 1758, 492 sqq.;
of 1759, 507 sqq.; of 1760, 508 sqq.; ~
invades Holland (1787), v. 80 ;
alliance with England and Nether-
lands, 82; German Confederation,
83 ; triple alliance (1788), 229 ;
ambitious designs, 232; hopes to

INDEX,

PUB

restore Galicia to Poland and obtain
Dantzig and Thorn, 234; proposes
to assist Turks, 235; designs on
Flanders, 236; proposals to Eng-
land, 237; warlike disposition, 243;
definitive proposals, 246; alliance
with Turkey signed but not ratified,
251; alliance with Poland, 252;
Prussian proposals censured by
England, 256; alienation, 257 ;
treaty with Turkey ratified, 260;
Prussia abandons her designs, 262;
Peace of Sistova, 263; subsidy to
Sweden, 270; negotiations for peace
between Russia and Turkey, 274;
question aboutOczakow,275 sqq.; alli-
ance with England practically ended,
297; close alliance with Austria,
298; policy in 1790, 588; guaran-
tees integrity of Poland, 542; ques-
tion of Dantzig and Thorn, 543;
approves new Polish Constitution,
545; Austrian alliance formed, 554 ;
secret ambitions, 555; acquisition
of Margravates of Anspach and
Baireuth, 595; ascendency after
death of Leopold, 2b.; war with
France (see Coalition); treatment
of Poland, vi. 85; projects for par-
tition, 87; invasion, 89; explana-
tion to England, 91; complete de-
feat by French (1794), vii. 62

Public-houses : restrictions on, in
1751-53, i. 481

Public opinion; influence on Parlia-
ment, 1. 453

Pulaski, Count (a Pole): in army of
Washington, iy. 50, 92, 119

Pulpit oratory: great change in, just
before the Reyolution, i. 84; ser-
mons soon became mere moral
essays, 2. ; pulpit eloquence of Dean
Kirwan, vi. 446, vii. 238

Pulteney, William (Earl of Bath) : de-
nunciation of national debt (1736),
i. 341; his character and career,
374; attacks on Walpole in the
‘Craftsman,’ 375; lost popularity
by accepting peerage, 397; urged
impeachment of Walpole, 399; said
to have shortened his life by hard
drinking, 478

Purcell, Henry, musical composer, i.
532

Purefoy, Basil: witness in favour of
attainders of 1689, ii. 195

Purgatory of St. Patrick, ii. 387

Puritans, Puritanism : reaction against
after Restoration, i. 8; revived in
American colonies, ii. 17 ; stern laws

631

RAD

against social sins and amusements,
18; encouragement of education,
19; design to suppress Catholic
worship in Ireland, 123, 164; op-
position to Quebec Act, iii. 400

Pynsent, Sir W.: legacy to Pitt (Chat-
ham), iii. 121

Q

Quadruple Alliance (Austria, England,
France, Holland), 1. 239 sqq., 246
Quakers: exemptions under Tolera-
tion Act, i. 203; peculiar tenets,
205 ; temporary permission of affir-
mation, 206 ; tithes, 206, 260 ;
marriages excepted from Hardwicke’s
Act, 492; Quakerism in Ireland, ii.
389 sq., vill. 65; modified views as
to war (in Pennsylvania), iii. 283;
righteous dealing with Indians, 295 ;
disliked the revolution in America,
444; English Quakers strong oppo-
nents of slave trade, vi. 281 ;
American, less inflexible, 7b.; society
for abolishing the traffic, 286 sq.

Quarterage (on Catholic traders), iv,
462

Quebec: siege (1775), ii. 436; Act
(Constitution of Canada), iii. 399,
502, iv. 254, 257, 470, v. 501 sqq.

Queen’s County: origin of its name,
ii. 105; events in Rebellion, viii, 63
sqq-

‘Queen Sive’ (name used by leader
of Whiteboys), iv. 820

Quesnay (leader of French Econo-
mists): his principles in polities,
v. 369

Quesnel (Jansenist) : works condemned
by Bull ‘ Unigenitus,’ v. 321

Quesnoy : besieged by Prince Eugene,
i, 111; surrender, 113

‘ Question préparatoire,’ Question
préalable’ (France): meaning of
the terms, vy. 414 n.

R

Race: how far it has been important
in Irish history, ii. 380 sqq.

Rack-rents: rise of, in Scotland, ii.
69; extorted by middlemen in Ire-
land, 244; rents doubled between
1752-78, iv. 313

Radicalism, English: causes that led
to its birth (1769), i. 174 sq.; re-
gards members of Parliament as

6382

RAM

delegates, 176; effects on Whigs
and Tories, 176 sqq.

Ramillies, battle of : ruined French
cause in Spanish Netherlands, i.
44

Ramsay, Allan: abortive attempt to
promote dramatic. taste in Scotland,
1. 548

Randon de Lucenay: French revolu-
tionary emissary to London, vi. 48

Rapparees (‘Wood Kerns’) : descrip-
tionin Derrick’s ‘ Image of Irelande’
(1578), ii. 106 ».; bands of them in
various counties (1705-60), 347

Rastadt, Peace of (between France
and Emperor of Germany), i. 124,
230

Rathangan (Ireland): scene of some
of worst murders of Irish Rebel-
lion, viii. 68

Rawdon, Lord: (afterwards Lord Moira)
in command in South Carolina, iv.
189. See Moira

Raynal: denunciation of events of
French Revolution, v. 309

Rebellion: 1641, 11. 123 sqq., iv. 454;
1715, i. 212, 214 sqq.; 1745, 421,
468 ; Irish: see Ireland—Rebellion

Redesdale, Lord (Sir John Mitford) :
Trish Chancellor (1802), viii. 527;
desire to Protestantise Ireland, 528 ;
correspondence with Lord Fingall,
ab.

Redmond, Father John: wrongfully
executed as a rebel, viii. 187

Reformation: effect upon skilled arti-
sans, i. 188

Reform — Parliamentary: Septennial
Act, i. 5,13; extent of corrupt in-
fluence under first two Georges, lii.
170; statistics, 171; the nabobs,
2b. ; costs of election, 172 ; boroughs
set up for sale, 7b.; inequalities of
representation, 173; birth of Eng-
lish Radicalism, 174; agitation for
Reform, 175 ; ‘delegates,’ 176; atti-
tude of Whigs, 7b.; of Tories, 177;
views of Chatham, 178; of Burke,
201 sqq.; reform not unconstitu-
tional, 218; dangers to constitu-
tional government in 18th and 19th
centuries , 220; Pitt’s resolutions
(1783), iv. 281; his Reform Bill
(1785), v. 60; Ireland, vi. 322 sqq.—
Economical: Burke’s scheme, iv.
218 ; Pitt’s, 222.—Reform in Scot-
land after 1745, i. 476.—English
reforming spirit, vi. 271 sqq.

Refugees; industry, i. 188 sqq.; French
Protestants in Ireland, ii. 344 ;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

REV

extension of linen manufacture,
zb.; men who did eminent service,
B45

‘Regency caps’ (political headdress of
ladies, 1788), v. 145

Regency question (1788), v. 97 sqq.,
110 sqq., 136 ; discussion of theories
of Pitt and his opponents, vi. 417
sqq-

Regiments : raised by private gentle-
men, iv. 364, 483; by Irish Catho-
lics, to serve in Portugal, 365, 456

Regium Donum (to Dissenting minis-
ters), 1. 91 sq. ; increased at various
times, il. 402, 407, vill. 303

‘Regrators ’ (monopolisers of provis-
ions for sale), vi. 237

Reichenbach, Convention of (Austria,
1790), v. 262

Reign of Terror (France), events of,
vy. 513, vi. 28, 31, 34

Reinhard, vi. 125, 126: negotiations
with United Irishmen, vii. 236 sq.

Religion: low tone (England) under
first two Georges, i. 465; religious
troubles in Ireland (James I.), ii.
119; how far faults of Irish cha-
racter are due to Catholicism, 383 ;
penal laws produced intensity of
conviction, 386; pilgrimages, 387

Religious fanaticism, decline of, in
Europe, i. 577; fierce in American
colonies, ii. 3

Religious legislation, province of, v.
164

Religious
religious

Religious Societies founded, vi. 275

Reporting, parliamentary, history of,
ll. 442 sqq.

Representative government: condi-
tions and objects, iii. 211, viii.
524 sq.; representation of property
and opinion, iii. 212; of classes
and interests, 214; conflicting aims
of government, 217

Republican spirit, rise of, in Walpole’s
time, i. 396. See also England—
Effects of French Revolution on
Politics

Revenue: amount, v. 202 sq.; Boards,
division of, iv. 397; reunion, 402;
frauds by smuggling and on Post
Office, v. 28 sq.

Revenue officers: right of voting, iii.
225, iv. 184; disfranchised, iv. 218

Revolution—English : remoter causes,
i. 6 ; immediate causes, 9 sqq.; legis-
lative changes effected, 13; aristo-
cratic character, 16; Continental

revival. See England—

INDEX.

* REV

complications resulting from, 23;
influence on taste, 523.—French :
see France

Revolution Society (London), v. 449
sq., 498

Reynolds, Sir Joshua: admiration for
Burke, y. 526; character of his
artistic work, vi. 161

Reynolds, Thomas: Irish informer,
Vili. 9 sq.

Richardson’s works: tended to refine
tone of society, i. 521; sale of, in
Treland, ii. 324

Richmond (America) : English devas-
tations in 1781, iv. 189

Richmond, Duke of (Whig): desired
surrender of American colonies, iii.
544; in Rockingham’s second
ministry, iv. 207; desired universal
suffrage, 208; severed connection
with Fox, 239; in Pitt’s ministry
(1784), 296; opinion on Absentee
tax, 407; his unpopularity, v. 34;
letter to Lady Louisa Conolly (his
sister) advocating Union for Ireland,
vii. 134 sqq.

Rhode Island: privateers fitted out
from, iv. 16; combined French and
American attempt to capture, 91

Rigby : confidential follower of Duke
of Bedford, iii. 43; on Irish dis-
content in 1760, iv. 352; made
Irish Master of Rolls for life, 424,
vi. 374; death, 414

Right, Captain (name used by White-
boys), iv. 330, 332

Right of search (naval): difficulties
arising from its exercise, i. 383, 386

Ripperda (Dutch adventurer), i. 349,
352

Robespierre : denounced war policy of
Republic, y. 208; in the States-
General, 432

Robinson, Bishop: Privy Seal—last
clergyman to hold political office,
15 Wh)

‘Robinsons’ (umbrellas), vi. 147

Rochambeau, Count: commander of
French forces in American war, iv.
129, 131 sq., 191; advanced money
to Americans, 199; employed in
raising rebellion in Austrian Nether-
lands, vi. 2

Roche, Sir Boyle, vi. 367

Roche, Edward : sergeant of yeomanry
—deserted with his troops to rebels,
viii. 151; his proclamation, 152

Roche, Father Philip: succeeded Har-
vey in command of rebels, viii. 136;
defeat at Vinegar Hill, 150; at

hanged at Wexford, 164

Rochester, Earl of ; Lord-Lieutenant
of Ireland (1702), i. 33 sq.

Rochford, Lord; Irish policy, iv. 402,
404, 457

Rockingham, Marquis of: first mi-
nistry (1765), ili. 92 sqq.; import-
ant measures carried, 93 ; weakness,
94; attitude of Pitt, 95; fall of
ministry, 97; overtures from Chat-
ham, 166; Rockingham refuses
Fox’s proposals of party fusion, iv.
88 ; succeeds North, 204; hostility
of King to his ministry, 205; his
policy, 206; colleagues, 207; serious
difficulties before them, 208; in-
fluence of Shelburne, 209 ; measures
proposed, 216; measures carried,
217 sq. ; economic reform, 219,
arrears of civil list paid off, 220;
dissensions in Cabinet, 223; death,
235

Rodney, Admiral Lord, iy. 151 sqq.,
166 sq., 183, 242 sq.

Rohan Chabot, Chevalier de: caused
Voltaire’s imprisonment, v. 303

Roland (Girondin French Minister of
Lewis XVI.), vi. 19

Rolle, Mr. (hero of ‘ Rolliad’), v. 91,
144

Romaine, Rev. Wm. :
Evangelist, 1748), 11. 625

Romney (artist), vi. 162

Roscommon: one of most disturbed
counties before Irish Rebellion, vii.
279 sqq.

Rose, George, iv. 212

Rossbach, battle of (defeat of French
and Germans by Prussians, 1757),
li. 491

Rotation of crops: system introduced
by Jethro Tull, vi. 188

Roucoux, battle of: made French
masters of Austrian Netherlands, i.
425

Rousseau: on religious toleration, v.
183; rising influence, 345; ‘ Con-
trat Social’; relation to English
speculation, ib.; chief doctrines,
348 ; sovereignty of the people, 349,
356; criticisms of, by Voltaire and
Burke, 350; religion and education,
851; adaptation to French ideas,
352; doctrine qualified, 355; right
of property, 357; absolutism of
majorities, 358 ; universal suffrage,
359; not consciously a revolutionist,
360; dislike of violence, 861; advocacy
of small States and local patriotism,

career as

6384 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,

ROW

862; approved of bull fights, 363 ;
general estimate of his writings, 364;
influence and spread of his doctrines,
366; enthusiastic admiration, 369

Rowan, Hamilton : hopes disappointed
by French war (1797), vi. 608 ;
prosecuted for seditious libel, vii. 9;
flight to France, 29; in America,
232 sq.; approved of the Union,
vill. 304

Royal Academy founded, vi. 161

‘Royal George,’ foundering of, iv. 243

Royal Society, the : clerical opposition
it encountered, il. 525 sq.

Royal touch (for scrofula), i. 67 sqq.,
221, 223

Russell, Lord John: character as a
statesman, v. 3

Russell, Thomas (friend of Wolfe
Tone), vil. 232, 241 ».

Russia: alliance with England (1743),
i. 409; brought into Netherlands
war, 426; attacks East Prussia, il.
486; invades Pomerania, 492; de-
feat at Zorndorf, 7b.; captures
Frankfort, 506; attitude towards
England, 154; political parties:
Panin and Potemkin, iv. 155; re-
fuses to help Dutch, 169; offers to
mediate in 1779, 175; aggression
on Turkey, v. 212; alliance of Eng-
land, 214; partition of Poland, 217;
war with Turkey (1787), 222; suc-
cesses, 2b.; war with Sweden, 226 ;
navy strengthened, 227; Sweden
defeated, 7b. ; intervention of Triple
Alliance between Denmark and
Sweden, 230; resentment of Russia,
231; renewal of Swedish war, 270;
peace with Sweden, 271; cession of
Oczakow demanded by allies, 274 ;
refused by Russia, 280; capture of
Ismail, 284 ; designs against
India, 285; victories over Turks,
(1791), 295; Peace of Jassy (1792),
297; Russian policy in 1790, 537 ;
guarantees integrity of Poland, 542;
designs against that country, 369 ;
carried out, vi. 84 sqq.; proposes to
England concert on French affairs,
100

Rutland, Duke of: in Shelburne’s

ministry (1782), iv. 269; in Pitt’s
(1783), 296; Viceroy of Ireland, vi.
317 sqq.; confidential correspond-
ence with Pitt, 375; opposes reform,
376, 382; Pitt’s commercial pro-
positions, 391; Rutland approves
Grattan’s amendment, 327; proposi-
tions, transformed in England,

SAV

abandoned, 399, 403; favours a legis-
lative union, 404; tithes question,
410; commutation refused, 411;
prosperity and peace of his vice-
royalty, 412 ; death, 413

Ryan, Captain: killed in arresting
Lord Edward Fitzgerald, viii. 42

Ryswick, Peace of (between France
and England, 1697), i. 24, 30

Ss

Sabbatarian legislation. See Sunday

Sacheyerell, Dr.: account of sermons
that caused his prosecution, i. 51
sq-; impeachment, 53; skilful con-
duct of prosecution, 54; speeches
considered as authentic expression
of the Whig theory of the Constitu-
tion, 54 sq.; strong popular feeling
for Sacheverell, 56 ; his suspension,
ab. ; triumphal progress into Shrop-
shire, 57 ; mobs destroy Dissenters’
places of worship, 7b.; downfall of
Whigs, 59

Sackville, Viscount. See Germaine,
Lord George.

Sacramental test, profanation of, i.
254 sq.

Saldanha Bay, battle of (defeat of
Dutch by Elphinstone), vii. 229

Salt tax, i. 331

Saltee Islands (Ireland): caves used
as hiding places by rebels, viii. 168

‘Samson,’ i. 538

Sanctuary, right of, i. 486

Sandwich, Lord: notorious profligate,
friend of Wilkes, ii. 77, 79, 88;
First Lord of Admiralty, 168; in-
sults the American army, 416

Saragossa, battle of (Spanish defeat,
1710), i. 100

Saratoga Convention (capitulation of
British army, 1777), iv. 63; violated
by Americans, 96

Sardinia : vicissitudes in 18th century,
i. 238, 355, 404, 429

Sattimungul: English defeated by
Tippoo Sahib (1790), v. 210

Saturday holiday of Parliament, i,
3381

Savannah, siege of, iv. 119

Savile, Sir George: Bill for partial
repeal of penal laws against Catho-
lies, 111. 508; anti-Catholic riots in
Scotland followed its passing, 509 ;
and Gordon riots in London, 510
sqq.; Savile’s house destroyed, 513;
speech against parliamentary cor-

INDEX. 685

SAV

ruption, iv. 223 ; letter on Absentee
tax, 407

Savoy: vicissitudes in 18th century, i.
102, 122, 232, 240, vi. 41

Savoy, the: clergy claimed right to
issue marriage licences, i. 498

Sawbridge, Alderman: annual motion
for shortening Parliaments, iv. 282,
v. 60

Saxe, Marshal: incommand of French
against Frederick the Great, 1. 414,
420, 425

Saxony: political and military events
of 18th century, i. 418, 420, 11. 457,
486, 493, v. 543

Scarborough : favourite sea-bathing
place in 1733, i. 555

Scepticism, i. 248 sqq.,311,v. 304, 306,
331

Scheldt: French opening, in violation
of treaty rights, vi. 67, 69

Schleswig: conquered by Denmark,
i. 211; Danish indebtedness to
Russia for the possession, v. 228

Schools: charity schools established
under Anne, ii. 546 ; Sunday schools,
611, vi. 277 sq. See Education

Schiitz (Hanoverian ambassador to
England), i. 155

Schulenburg, Count (Prussian mini-
ster): designs on Alsace and Lor-
raine, v. 555; policy towards Poland,
570, 572; opposed to war with
France, 599; statements in regard
to Poland, vi. 84; invasion and
partition, 88 sqq.

Schuyler, General (American), ii. 436,
445, iv. 11, 13, 61, 132

Scotch in Ireland: plantation of Ulster,
iii. 108; character, 109; treatment
in rebellion of 1641, 137

Scotland—Political ; Scotch hostility
to Union, i. 131; Union developed
industry, ii. 50; provisions of treaty,
51; question brought to an issue by
measures of Scotch Parliament
(1703), 52; desire of independence,
53; English measures of concilia-
tion, 54; preparations for crisis, 55 ;
free trade the price of Union, 56;
commercial prosperity following, 57;
linen trade, 58; comparison of
Scotch and Irish Unions, 59; in-
fluences causing discontent after
Union, 62; Scotch peers with Eng-
lish peerages, 63; malt tax, 2. ;
Jacobitism strengthened by Union,
64; decrease of Gaelic tongue, 65;
measures against Episcopalians, 67 ;
growth of loyalty and industry, 69 ;

sCO

effects of overthrow of clan system
70; improvement in agriculture and
manners, 71; absence of beggars,
72; effects of legislation upon the
national character, 73; remains of
serfdom, 75; parliamentary corrup-
tion, 2b. ; murder of Captain Porteous,
76; general aspect of the people, 77

Scotland—Social: Highlands: despo-

tism of chiefs, ii. 22; barbarous vices
of people, 23 ; predatory habits, 24;
cattle-lifting, 25 ; impotence of law,
26; abject poverty, 27; superstitions,
28; pagan practices, 29; illustra-
tions of Highland fidelity, 7b. ; mili-
tary qualities of Scotchmen, 31;
Highland hospitality, 32; influence
of Inverness and Aberdeen, 33 sqq. ;
eifect of parish schools in spreading
the English tongue, 65 ; roads made,
66; Disarming Act,7b.; lowered posi-
tion of chiefs,67; abolition of national
dress, 7b.; measures against Episco-
palians, 7b.; formation of Highland
regiments, 69; rack-rents, 70

Scotland—Social: Lowlands: miser-

able condition of people, ii. 38;
religious persecution, 7b.; abject
poverty, 39; vagrant beggars, 40;
remedial measures, 41; establish-
ment of Kirk, 7b.; parish schools,
43; education, 7b.; Act of Toleration,
45, 48 ; Episcopalians after Revolu-
tion, 46 sqq.; discontent of Presby-
terians, 48; Abjuration oath, 49;
development of industrial life, 50 ;
commercial clauses of the Union,
51; gradual infusion of English
ideas, 85; manners in family life,
86; wages, 7b.; social intercourse,
1b. ; change of manners, 87; amuse-
ments, 88; external decorum, 89;
virtues due rather to industrial
habits than to theological influence,
90; Highland influence, 91

Scotland—Religious : the Kirk, ii. 78 ;

religious intolerance, 80; witchcraft,
81; fanatical extravagances, 83;
Kirk Session spies, 84

Scotland: reforms after 1745, i. 476,

riots against malt-tax, 488; clan-
destine marriages, 498; landscape-
gardening, 525; cock-fighting, 554;
Methodism, ii. 608; English anti-
pathy to the nationality, ii. 50;
venality of Scotchmen in England,
51; Toryism of Scotch writers, 53 ;
anti-Catholic riots, 509 ; opinion on
American question (1775-76), 533 ;
agrarian condition compared with

636

SCO

that of Ireland, ii. 319; forfeited
estates restored, vy. 74

Scott, Sir John (Lord Eldon); Soli-
citor-General, v. 124

Scriblerus Club, i. 499

Scullabogue, viii. 151

Sculoags : Irish equivalent of English
yeomen, ii. 246

Sculpture, English, i. 531, vi. 163

Scrutiny of election irregularities, v.
58, 60

Sea-bathing: general popularity after
17538, i. 555

Secret service money: spent on bribery,
i. 367; its expenditure only ac-
counted for to King, 371; the fund
in Ireland, iy. 519, viii. 408

Sedan chairs, i. 567; tax levied on
them, ii. 253

Sedition in England, vy. 56

Seminaries, Dissenters’: Schism Act
designed to suppress them, i. 95

Senesino (Italian singer): quarrel with
Handel, i. 533

Sepoys: fighting under Clive, i. 497;
under Hyder Ali, 483 ; under Warren
Hastings, iv. 173

September massacres (French Revolu-
tion), vi. 35

Serfdom, 11. 75, v. 310, 316 sq.

Seringapatam : besieged by English
(1792), v. 210

Servants: English, i. 570 sqq.; Scotch,
ii. 86

Seven Years’ War. See Frederick the
Great; Maria Theresa

Seville, Treaty of (between Spain and
Germany, 1728), i. 353

Shadwell’s ‘ Miser,’ i. 540

Shakespeare’s plays, revival of (1737),
i. 545

‘Shakspearian Club,’ the (1740), i.
545

Shannon, (first) Karl of: political in-
fluence (Ireland), iv. 353, 371

Shannon, (second) Earl of, iv. 371,
382, 525, vi. 418, vii. 377, 378, viii.
295, 331, 396, 414

Sharp, Granyille: founded colony of
Sierra Leone, for freed negroes, vi.
293

Sheares, Henry and John: prominent
United Irishmen, viii. 33; arrest,
48; trial, 189 sqq.; execution, 191

Sheehy, Rey. Nicholas: trial and exe-
cution as a Whiteboy, iv. 343 sqq.

Sheep: barbarous method of removing
their wool, ii. 331

Shelburne, Earl of (afterwards Marquis
of Lansdowne): quarrel with Lord

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

SIE

Holland, iii. 62; leaves Grenville’s
ministry, 87; expelled from Chat-
ham’s, 138; presides over American
affairs in Chatham’s, 349; in
Rockingham’s (1782), iv. 206;
position and character, 209 ; free-
trader, 210, 444; unpopularity, 211
sqq-; denounces ‘ King’s friends,’
214; dissension with Fox, 216;
economical reform, 219; negotia-
tions with Franklin, 226 sqq.; Prime
Minister, 236 ; colleagues, 239 ;
peace negotiations, 252 sqq.; ready
to cede Gibraltar, 263; treatment
of American loyalists, 264 sq.; un-
popularity of his ministry, 268 ;
coalition of North and Fox, 270;
resignation, 278 ; Irish Octennial
Bill, 381; Augmentation Bill (Ire-
land), 382; on Absentee tax, 405;
on Irish Volunteers, 496 .; on
‘ superintending power ’ of England,
vi. 302. See Lansdowne, Marquis of

Sheridan, Richard B.: member for
Stafford (1780), iv. 183; first speech
in House, 221 ; in coalition ministry,
280; ridiculed Pitt’s financial eco-
nomies, v.33; ‘explanation’ of Fox’s
denial of Prince of Wales’s marriage,
92; ascendency with Prince, 97;
negotiations with Thurlow, 98;
speeches in Regency debates, 119,
138 ; relations with Chauvelin, vi.
97 ; opposed Pitt’s Irish commercial
propositions, 401; against Union,
viii. 357, 359

Sheriffmuir, battle of (rebellion of
1715), i. 215

Shippen, Miss (Mrs. B. Arnold), iv. 90,
136, 146

Shippen, Mr., Jacobite member of
Parliament, i. 373, 380, 394, 395

Shippen, Sergeant: died of jail fever
(1730), i. 502

Shoreham freemen disfranchised, iii.
173

Shorter, Sir John (a Dissenter), Lord
Mayor of London, i. 93

Shrewsbury, Duke of.(1700): disgust
at life of a statesman, i. 58

Sicily: vicissitudes in 18th century, i.
123, 239, 244

Sierra Leone: founded as colony for
freed negroes, vi. 293; devastated
by French, 294

‘Sieve Oultagh’ (favourite Whiteboy
signature), iv. 332

Sieyés, Abbé: work in favour of com-
mons (France), v. 419, 429; sat in
third order in States-General, 431

INDEX.

SIL

Silesia: claims of Prussia to, i. 391
sq.; ceded by Austria at Aix-la-
Chapelle, 429

Silk trade (Irish), vi. 441

‘Simple Repeal’ controversy, vi. 303,
321

Sinecures : Swift’s catalogue of Irish,
ii, 227; English, v. 25; number in
the Customs, 30; French, 384

Sinking Funds, v. 47, 51, vi. 4

Sirr, Major: arrest of Lord Edward
Fitzgerald, viii. 42

Sistova, Peace of (between Austria
and Turkey, 1791), v. 236

‘Sive, Queen’ (leader of Whiteboys),
iv. 320

Six Nations (Indians): their country
reduced to a desert by Americans
(1779), iv. 117

Skelton, Rev. Philip: his parish in
Donegal, ii. 236; treatment by Oak-
boys, iv. 347 7.

Skerrit, Colonel: in command of
Durham Fencibles in Ivish Rebel
lion, viii. 172

‘Skinners’ (American banditti, 1780),
iv. 129

Slatina, battle of (defeat of Austrians
by Turks), v. 224

Slave trade: Chatham’s policy to
develop, 1.504 ; statistics in 18th cen-
tury, ii. 13; encouraged by home
Goyernment after Peace of Utrecht,
14; public opinion, 16; scruples as
to baptised slaves, 7b.; dealers at
work in Ireland (1650), 173; Pitt’s
position towards the trade, v.
64; great extent of English dealing,
65. See also Wilberforce and Eng-
land, Social.—Introduction of slaves
into America, ii. 11; treatment, 13
sq.; first introduced by Dutch, 14;
in Virginia, iii. 287; regiment of
slaves, iv. 96

Sloane collection purchased by public
lottery, i. 523

_Smalridge, Bishop, i. 212

Smelting iron: discovery of the pro-
cess, vi. 212

Smith, Adam: his ‘ Wealth of Nations,’
111.389 sqq.; on Hast India Company,
484; approved of an Absentee tax
for Ireland, iv. 404; much of Pitt’s
finance was learnt from him, v. 33,
35 n., 36; Smith’s system of politi-
cal economy, vi. 239; on the legiti-
mate functions of Government, 241

Smith, General: in command at
Limerick in Rebellion, vii. 266

Smuggling, i. 488, ii. 213, 348, ili.

637.

SPA

295, 302, 309, 359, iv. 447, v. 28,
31, 40

Sobieski: state of Poland after his
death, v. 539

Society: English and Continental
contrasted (1757), i. 471; theory of
society: social contract, v. 171,
345 ; French socialism, 481; French
Revolution not socialistic, 482

Societies: Promotion of Christian
Knowledge, ii. 545 sq., 604; Propa-
gation of Gospel, ii. 546, iii. 295;
for reformation of manners, ii. 546
sq. ; Supporters of Bill of Rights, iii.
175; for promotion of art, vi. 161;
for abolition of slaye-trade, 287

Somerset House built, vi. 163

‘Sons of the Shamrock’ (Irish reyolu-
tionary society), vi. 362

Sophia, Electress, i. 39, 156

Southampton, Lord: his part in the
Fitzherbert marriage, v. 86

South Sea Company: established by
Harley, i. 199 ; its object, 321 sqq.;
Fund, v. 48

Spain: favours expedition of William
of Orange, i. 21; disputed suc-
cession to Spanish crown, 24; death
and will of Charles II., 25; acces-
sion of Philip, Duke of Anjou, 26;
eyents of the war that ensued,
27, 36, 39, 44, 46; results, 98 sqq. ;
cost, 100; Italian dominions affected,
123; Infanta betrothed to Lewis
XY., 348; alliance with Austria,
349; dispute with England about
New World, 3883; the Family Com-
pact, 384; right of search (naval),
385 ; convention with England, 386 ;
war declared by England, 387; ex-
pedition against Austrian domi-
nions in Italy, 393; influence in
Italy, 404; capture of Milan, 420;
decadence of Spain as colonial
Power, ii. 19; war with England
(1762), iii. 39; Peace of Paris, 44
sqq.; intrigues with France against
England (1764-5), 349; joins France
in aiding America, iv. 45; takes
part with America, 109; declares
war against England, 110; expedi-
tions in 1779, 119; siege of Gibral-
tar, 152, 164 sq.; expedition against
West Florida, 170; in conjunction
with France against Minorca, 171 ;
negotiations for peace, 175; capture
of Bahamas, 243; last effort to take
Gibraltar, 244; articles of peace
(1782), 252 sqq.; Florida Blanca’s
communications with Vergennes

638

SPA

on Irish affairs, 491; difficulty with
England about Nootka Sound, v.
207; convention with England,
208; alarm at French Revolution,
575; peace with France (1795), vil.
230; declares war against England,
ib.; failure of naval expedition
against Ireland, 386

Sparrow, Colonel: charge of unneces-
sary violence against (in Trish Re-
bellion), vii. 443 : :

Spinning: schools for teaching, in
Treland, ii. 215; women of North
Treland skilful in, 252; a great
domestic industry in England, vi.
207 ; result of invention of spinning
by machine, 208 sqq., viii. 541

Spirits, British : limitation of right of
making, i. 478; quantities distilled,
1714-35, 479; illicit stills and gin-
shops, 480; regulation of licences,
481 . wae

Spitalfields weavers’ riots, i. 488, ii,
136

Staél, de, Mme., v. 397

Staffordshire: source of its wealth,
vi. 211

Stage-coachés, v. 163, vi. 174 sqq. _

Stair, Earl of : commander of British
army in Flanders (1742), i. 405

Stamp Act (America), ii. 320 sqq.

Standing armies: growth, i. 508;
attempts to reduce, 513 ;

Stanhope, General: surrender ofa Brit-
ish army at Brihuega,i. 100 _

Stanhope (Lord) his peerage bill, i. 185 :
negotiated treaty with France (1716-
17), 229; suggested restoration of
Gibraltar to Spain, 240; endeavour
to repeal Test Act, 257 ; sought to
mitigate the penal laws against
Catholics, 310; in ministry with
Sunderland, 320; made earl, 321;
South Sea project, 321 sqq.; death,
324

Stanislaus, King of Poland: dethroned
by Russians, elected by Poles, i.
354 sqq.

Stapleton, Colonel : defeated by rebels
at Ards (Down), viii. 131

Staremberg, General (Austrian): in
war of Spanish succession, i. 100

Starvation, deaths by, in prisons, i.
502

State imsurance system suggested
(1792), vi. 205

State trials, i. 7

Statesmen : characteristics of modern,
y. 1; Horace Walpole’s opinion of
first quality of a prime minister, 76. ;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

STO

endowments needed by a statesman
in a free country differ widely from
one in a despotism, 2; comparison
of Walpole, Chatham, Peel, and
Lord John Russell, 3; combination
of dazzling attributes in William
Pitt, 4

St. Christopher (island), i. 109

St. Clair, General (American), iy.
132

St. Columkill, prophecy of, vii. 368

St. Domingo, negro insurrection, vi.
293

Steam-engine, invention of, vi. 215

Steelboys (Ireland: mainly Presby-
terians): outrages by, iv. 349 ; many
tried and acquitted—thousands fied
to America, 350

Steele, Richard, i. 149, 186

Stephenson, Robert : account of
weavers’ trade (Ireland, 1774), iv.
430

St. Etienne, Rabaut de (historian of
National Assembly), guillotined, v.
432

Steuben, General (American), iv. 50,
143, 190, 195

St. Eustatius: captured by English
from Dutch, iv. 165, 168, 202

Stewart, Colonel, vi. 336

Stewart, Robert. See Castlereagh, Lord.

St. George’s Fields (London), riot in
(1768), iii. 133

St. Ginier, M.; scheme for Russian in-
vasion of India, v. 285

Stillingfleet, Bishop, i. 84 sq.

Stirling, Harl of (so called): skilful
use of American paper money, iv.
35

St. John. See Bolingbroke, Viscount.

St. Lucia: taken by English from
French (1778), iv. 93

Stock-jobbers dealing in seats in Par-
liament, i. 367

Stock, Bishop (Killala): account of
Humbert’s expedition, viii. 204 sqq.

Stokes, Whitley : on Irish subdivision
of land, vii. 164

Stone, Primate (Ireland): testimony
to loyalty of Catholics (1747), i.
282; his character, ii. 234, 430; his
wisdom and moderation in the
midst of disturbances, iv. 347: one
of the ‘Undertakers,’ 353, 371:
warm defender of Catholics, 456

St. Patrick, Knights of: order created
(1782), vi. 825

Stormont, Lord, iv. 276, v. 510

Stourton, Lord: story of the Fitz-
herbert marriage, vy. 86, 92

INDEX,

STR

Strafford, Earl of (Wentworth), ii. 116,
121

Struensee, Count: relations with
Queen of Denmark, iii. 462, iv. 403

Stuart, General Sir James: in com-
mand against Irish Rebellion, viii.
20

St. Vincent, Cape, battle of, iv. 152

St. Vincent (island), iv. 93

St. Winifred’s Well: Catholic pilgrim-
ages to in 1722, i. 307

Sudermania, Duke of (Swedish ad-
miral), v. 271

Suffrage: English and American
theory, v. 360

Sugar trade, li. 21, ili. 299, 308, iv.
514

Sullivan, General (American) : attack
on Rhode Island, iv. 91: expedition
against Six Nations (Indians), 117;
resignation of commission, 132

Sumatra: captured by English from
Dutch, iv. 169

Sumter, General (American) : in com-
mand in South Carolina, iv. 122,
124

Sunday—observance : Puritan legisla-
tion in America, ii.17; observance in
Scotland, 84,87; in England in 18th
century, 532 sqq., v. 162; proposed
training of militia on Sundays, ii.
533; amusements, 534, v. 162, 163 ;
influence of the Evangelical move-
ment on, ii. 641.——‘ Sunday Moni-
tor,’ first Sunday paper, ii. 256.—
Proposed tax on Sunday papers, v.
164.—Sunday schools established,
ii. 611, vi. 277 sq.

Sunderland, Lord: political position
and character, i. 318 sq.; gained
complete confidence of King (17165),
820; First Lord of Treasury, 321;
South Sea scheme droye him from
office, 324

Superstitions, Highland, ii. 28 sq.

Supply and demand, law of: imper-
fectly applicable to things of the
mind, i. 456; hasty generalisation
on the law, 457

Surajah Dowlah, ii. 456, 497 sq.

Suwarrow, General: defence of the
mouths of the Dnieper, v. 222

Sweaborg, v. 227, 264

Sweden; retrospect of Swedish his-
tory: revolution of 1772, v. 225;
war with Russia, 226; defeat, 227;
Denmark declares war, 228; inter-
vention of Triple Alliance, 230;
enthusiasm for Gustavus, 266; Diet
of 1789, 7b.; opposition of nobles,

639

TAR

267; King works a second reyolu-
tion, 268; renewal of war in Fin-
land, 269; naval battles in 1790,
270; Peace of Warela, 273

Sweetman, Bishop (Ferns, 1751); ac-
count of internal condition of
Catholic Church in Ireland, ii. 279

Swift, Dean : on clerical Jacobitism, i.
73 .; on poverty of clergy, 76; libels
against Whigs, 122; character, 157;
position in Tory party, 158; policy,
159; on Sacramental test, 255; on
commercial restrictions in Ireland,
ii. 211; ‘Proposal for the Universal
Use of Irish Manufactures,’ 214,
419; tracts on Irish poverty, 217;
catalogue of Ivish sinecure offices,
227; on abuse of Church patronage,
231, 2357.3; on evil of excessive
amount of pasturage, 245 2.; ‘ Dra-
pier’s Letters, 424; character of
his patriotism, 425; Ireland’s in-
debtedness to him, 426; religious
opinions, 530; favoured annual Par-
liaments, iii. 177; other political
opinions, 20.

Switzerland: a new Constitution im-
posed upon it by France (1798), viii.
122

Sydney, Lord: Secretary of State in
Pitt’s ministry, iv. 296, v. 34

Synge, Archbishop, ii. 407

Synge, Rey. Edward: sermon (before
Trish House of Commons) on re-
ligious toleration, 11. 306

T

Taille (French tax), v. 379, 390

Talileyrand: mission to Hngland (1792)
vi. 6; came to England for safety,
47; French Minister of. Foreign
Affairs (1797), vii. 391

Tandy, James :-information derived
from, vii. 140

Tandy, Napper: expelled from Irish
Volunteers, iv. 504 ; leader of demo-
cratic reformers, vi. 364; corre-
spondence with French agents, 467 ;
summoned for contempt of Parlia-
ment, 515; organiser of National
Guards (Dublin), 536; flight from
prosecution, vii. 9; took Defender
oath, 20; expedition to Iveland,
viii. 225; failure, 227; flight and
capture, 228; death, 229

Tanistry (Ireland), ii. 103; 108

Tarah : defeat of Irish rebels, chiefly
by Catholic yeomanry, viii. 67

640 ENGLAND IN THE .EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

TAR.

Tarleton, Colonel: in command in
South Carolina, iv. 122, 124; at
battle of Cowpens, 187

Taxation and Taxes : taxation and re-
presentation, iii. 325; America re-
volts against Stamp Act, 329; ar-
guments for taxation of» America,
334 sqq.; Chatham’s arguments
against, 336 sqgqq.—Amount of annual
revenue from taxes, vy. 28; Pitt’s re-
arrangement of duties, 32; taxes in

Budgets of 1791-92, 202.—Taxes in ~

France, 324, 375; unjust taxation,
379; arbitary system, 380; reforms,
881; Turgot’s schemes, 387.—Irish
taxation after Union, viii. 539

Tea: early use among poorest classes
in Lowlands, ii. 71; duty upon, iii.
371; object of maintaining it, 371
sqq-; annual consumption of tea in
Pitt’s time, v. 29

Temple Bar: heads of rebels on (1745),
1. 505

Temple, Sir John: exaggerations about
the rebellion of 1641, li. 149

Temple, (first) Earl: Privy Seal in coali-
tion ministry (1757), i. 462; brother-
in-law of Pitt, ii. 24; supports
Pitt’s war policy, 34; resigns with
him (1761), 35; allied with him
rather than with his brother (George
Grenville), 67; offices held by
Temple, 7b.; personal and political
character, 7b.; paid Wilkes’s law
expenses, 82; Pitt quarrels with
Temple, 113; Temple gave Wilkes
freehold qualification for his seat
in Parliament, 129

Temple, (second Harl, created Mar-
quess of Buckingham in 1784): posi-
tion at disruption of Whigs, iv. 239;
on Fox’s position then, 240; medium
of King’s interference with Com-
mons, 294; accepted office in
Pitt’s ministry, but immediately
resigned (1783), 295.—First Vice-
royalty (1782), see Ireland, Vice-
roy Temple—Second Viceroyalty
(1787), see Ireland, Viceroy Bucking-
hanv

Tenants’ improvements: confiscation
of, alleged by Whiteboys, iv. 333 ;
and by Steelboys, 347 sqq.

Tencin, Cardinal: successor of Cardi-
nal Fleury (France), i. 412

Tenison, Archbishop: on condition
of curates in 17138, i. 77

Ternay, Admiral de; commander of
French fleet in American war
(1780), iv. 129, 131

TPS

‘Teschen, Peace of (after war of
Bavarian succession), iv. 175

Theatre: riots in London against
employment of French actors (1738),
i. 488; immorality after the Restora- »
tion, 538 ; masks prohibited in, 539 ;
inferior to the French stage in de-
corum, 540; vehicle of political
satire, 541; the licensing Act of
1737, 542; low theatrical taste, 543;
revival of Shakespeare, 544; Gar-
rick, 545; denunciation of plays,
548; first theatre in Edinburgh, ii.
88; the golden age of English
theatre, vi. 157; patents for Theatres
Royal in provincial towns, 158;
growth of the provincial theatre,
159

Thionville : besieged by Coalition
(1792), vi. 33; blockade raised, 41

Third Order (Tiers Htat), v. 418 sq.,
430, 492

Thorn (Poland): Prussia desires pos-
session, v. 234, 283, 543, 597

Three Estates of Realm: meaning of
the phrase, v. 103

Three Orders (France): Turgot’s :
treatment of old system of States-
General, v. 391; Calonne’s (the
Notables), 400; Brienne’s, 401 sq. ;
Necker’s, 418 sq.; proportion of
representation, 419—S¢ee also France
—States-General

Three Rocks (Ireland): Irish rebels
at, Vili. 87 sqq.

Thurlow: Attorney-General, iii. 168;
character and policy, iv. 89; Lord
Chancellor, 2b.; in Rockingham’s
ministry, 206, 216; opposition to
Fox’s India Bill, 291; Pitt’s Chan-
cellor, 296; relations with Pitt, v.
22, 34; treachery to him, 98; rela-
tions with Prince of Wales and
Sheridan, 7b.; declaration for the
King, 125; effusive loyalty, 126;
continued friendship with Prince of :
Wales, 127

Thurot: killed in unsuccessful ex-
pedition against Ireland, ii. 437

Tickets of confession (France), v. 325,
329

Ticonderoga: captured by Americans,
iii. 436; retaken by English, iv. 60,
63

Tight-lacing, temp. George III., vi.
145

Tillotson, Bishop: popular preacher,
i. 84; Latitudinarian, 85; calum-
nies and invectives against him, 88

Tippoo Sahib (son of Hyder Ali), iv.

INDEX,

TIT

175: courage and military ability,
y. 209; defeated by English (1792),
210

Tithes—England: difficulties with
Quakers, i. 206, 260; Ireland: 1689,
ii. 183; pasture exempted from, ii.
245, 426, iv. 322, viii. 481, 482;
tithe-jobbers, ii. 313 ; system,
iy. 321; moduses, 322; tithe-proc-
tor, tithe-farmer, 323; want of uni-
formity, 324; some Protestants
oppose tithes, 325; commutation
refused, vi. 411; viii. 535; tithes in
France, v. 375

Titles to estates (Ireland): ‘dis-
coverers’ detecting flaws in, i.
112

Tobacco: value of crops exported
from Virginia and Maryland, 1758-
70, ii. 286 sq.; regulations of ex-
port, 300; taxation, 316; trans-
ferred from Customs to Excise, y.
203

Tobago: captured by French (1781),
iv. 169 ; formally ceded after
American war, 252

Toler, Baroness, vii. 413

Toler, Solicitor-General (Ireland), vil.
87, 206

Tolerance, religious: benefits result-
ing from its practice, i. 189; especi-
ally in England by reception of
foreign refugees, 190 sqq.; tolerance
displayed by Irish Catholics, ii. 389
sqq.: growth of tolerance in Ire-
land, iv. 473; theories of Locke and
Warburton, vy. 168 sqq.; of Paley,
171; spread of toleration through
Europe, 316

Tomline, Bishop: accuses Fox of
secret negotiations with Catherine
Ii., v. 296

Tone, Matthew: accompanies Hum-
bert’s expedition against Ireland,
viii. 205 ; hanged, 221

Tone, Wolfe: aims at alliance be-
tween Catholics and Presbyterians,
vi. 463 ; hatred of Irish Parliament,
ib.; desires Catholic enfranchise-
ment, 464; founds United Irishmen,
465; dislike of Whig Club and of
Grattan,468 ; paid secretary of Catho-
lic Committee, 540; reward from
Convention, 597 ; attempts to pacify
Defenders, vii. 19 ; advocates home
education of Irish Catholic clergy,
121; quarrels with leading United
Trishmen, 137; goes to Philadelphia,
ib.; memorial on state of Ireland,
142; opinion about the Americans,

VOL. VIII.

641

TOR

232; mission to France, 233 ;
memoir drawn up for French
Government, 234; made adjutant-
general in French army, 238; his
journals of this period, 239 ;
character and motives, 241 ; scheme
for invasion of Ireland, 242 ;
hatred of the Pope, 244; two more
memorials on state of Ireland, 244
sqq-; on Irishmen in English navy,
246 ; now known as ‘ Adjutant-
General Smith,’ 255; disgust at
French seamanship, 256; failure
of expedition, 263; accompanies
Duich expedition against Ireland,
383 ; description of expedition,
407 ; disappointed hope, 408 ;
Dutch scheme abandoned, 410;
sent to Hoche, 411; battle of Cam-
perdown, 2b.; procures French ex-
pedition under Humbert, viii. 203;
captured in Bompard’s expedition,
230; trial and sentence, 231; death
and character, 233 sqq.

Tontine annuities (Ireland): method
of raising loans, iv. 414

Toole, Susy (Holt’s ‘Moving Maga-
zine’), Vili. 236

Torgau, battle of (defeat of Austrians
by Prussians, 1760), ii. 509

Tories: prolonged ascendency, i. 1;
party for a time Jacobite, 2 ; prin-
ciples contrasted with those of
Whigs, 3; jealousy of press, 4 ;
treatment of Catholics, 5; parlia-
mentary reformers, 7b.; position at
Revolution, 10 sqq.; origin of name
‘Tory,’ 18; complaints about some
results of Revolution, 23; hostility
to William III., 25, 27; triumph on
Anne’s accession, 32; dissensions,
33; loss of Queen’s favour, 43 ;
Sacheverell, 50 sqq.; defeat of
Whigs (1710), 59; Church legisla-
tion, 90 sqq.; foreign policy, 103;
treatment of Marlborough, 113 ;
character of leaders, 128 ; policy
regarding succession, 131; Jacobite
intrigues, 132; Tories displaced by
Whigs (1714), 167; National Debt
chiefly created by Tories, 341 ; party
reinforced by discontented Whigs,
374; position after Walpole’s fall,
400; cessation of political rivalry
(1748-54), 430; advocacy of short
Parliaments, 450; confusion of
party lines temp. George I. 473;
natural histery of Whig and Tory,
474 sq.; change of character after
Jacobite failure, il. 464; revival,

Ted

642
TOR

jii. 18, 21; aversion to Continental
wars, 30; advocacy of reform, 177;
party divided on religious liberty
(1771-79), 502; whole body sup-
ported anti-American policy, 541;
proportion of Tories in coalition
(1783) ministry, iv. 276; acquiesced
in Absentee tax, 404; and in the
abolition of Test Act in Ireland, 501;
influence of French Revolution on
Toryism, vi. 185; Tories effected
emancipation of industry from
medieval and Tudor restrictions,
237

Tories (Irish). See Rapparees

Toulon: failure of siege of (1707), i.
103; escape of blockaded French
and Spanish fleets from (1744),
413

Townshend, Charles: in Rockingham
ministry, iii. 95; intrigues against
Chatham, 120; Pitt’s Chancellor of
Exchequer, 349; declaration on
taxation of America, 351; suspends
New York Assembly, 352; establishes
anew Board of Customs and new
taxes for America, 353; review
of his policy, 353 sq.; reception of
his measures in America, 355 ;
death, 356; character, 357; pecu-
niary results of his American taxa-
tion, 364; repeal of all the taxes
except that on tea, 365, 370

Townshend, Lord: Viceroy of Ireland
(1767), iv. 341 ”. 849, 372; character
and habits, 372 ; instructed to make
great offers, 373; dispute about
tenure of judges, 374; about appoint-
ment of Chancellor, 375; Septennial
Bill,376; augmentation of forces,377;
finances, 378 ; concessions offered,
380; Octennial Bill, 381; difficul-
ties about augmentation, 382 ;
scheme defeated, 384; dissolution
and general election (1768), 385 ;
indirect bribery, 386; new Payrlia-
ment, 389; Commons’ resolution
on Money Bills, 390; Townshend’s
protest and prorogation, 3892;
pleads for relaxation of (Irish) com-
mercial restrictions, 394 ; majority
purchased and maintained, 396 ;
disgusted, 398; success chequered
with defeats, 399; recalled, 400;
causes of his unpopularity, 401;
proposal to recruit from Irish
Catholics, 457; opposed to modify-
ing penal laws, 460. Sce Ireland,
political, 1760-1778

Townshend, Thomas: Home and

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

TRI

Colonial Secretary in
ministry, iv. 239

Trade, i. 194 sq.; tradesmen: habits,
vi. 184 sqq. ; amassed large fortunes,
187; trade outrages, vi. 358

Transportation of criminals : convicts
assigned as servants of contractors
for their transportation, vi.254; new
system in 1786; Botany Bay, 20. ;
political prisoners transported, viil.
250

Traun, Marshal: march from Alsace
to Bohemia (1744), 1. 416

Travancore, Rajah of: attacked by
Tippoo Sahib, v. 209

Travelling: difficulties through bad
state of roads, vi. 174, 176; intro-
duction of stage-coaches, 174 ;
carriages drawn by oxen, 175; Pal-
mer’s mail-coaches, 177 ; grow-
ing love for foreign travel and
scenery, 179

Treasury, First Lord of: recognised
as head of Government, i. 507

Treaties of Partition, the: 1698,
Spanish possessions to Archduke
Charles, i. 25 ; 1700, Spain, Spanish
Netherlands, &c., with compensa-
tion to France, 7d.

‘Trencher chaplains,’ 1. 77

Trenton: captured by Washington
(1776), iv. 26

Tréves, Elector of: relations with
French émigrés, v. 587 sq., 591

Triennial Parliaments : uncertain
character of, i. 4836; advocated by
Tories, 450 ; proposed (1780), iv. 183

Trimleston, Lord: Catholic address
for permission to serve the Crown,
iv. 364

Trinidad : captured by English (1797),
vii. 386

Trinity College, Dublin: object of
its foundation, ii. 121; its condition
in the first half of the 18th cen-
tury, 319; expenditure on its build-
ings, iv. 380; admits Catholics by

Shelburne

connivance, 530, vi. 451; Catholics ©

admitted (1793) to degrees, 566; —
addresses of the students to Grattan
and Lord Fitzwilliam, vii. 94, 114;
sedition in, 449 sq.; removal of
Grattan’s picture, viii. 263; Port-
land’s judgment of Trinity College,
304 m.; its hostility to the Union,
421 sq.

Triple Alliance: cause of its forma- —
tion, v. 229; at work, 233; Prussia
alienated, 257; results of the
alliance, 273 sqq.

INDEX.

TRO

Troy, Archbishop (Catholic) : opponent
of Whiteboyism, iv. 339; said to
have joined United Irishmen, vii.
305; supports the Union, vill. 422

sq.

Teron, Governor (New York), ili.4147.,
416, 444, iv. 116, 128

Tucker, Dean: argument for separa-
tion from Americ¢a, iii. 388 ; on Eng-
lish slave trade, vi. 282; on Union
with Ireland, viii. 276

Tuileries, capture of (1792), vi. 19

Tull, Jethro: introduced system of
rotation of crops, vi. 188

Turgot: memorial on America to
Lewis XVI., iv. 41; Latin epi-
gram on Franklin, 48 ; memorable
work of his ministry, v. 387; fall,
389

Turkey: war with Venice and Hungary,
i. 235; aggressions of Russia, v.
212; France a steady ally, 213;
loss of Crimea, 215; schemes of
partition, 217; declares war against
Russia (1787), 222; Austrian in-
vasion, 223; defeat of Joseph IL.,
224 ; treaty with Gustavus IIT., 226;
Prussia proposes alliance, 235;
disastrous campaign of 1789, 242;
Peace of Sistova (with Austria,
1791), 263; peace negotiations be-
tween Triple Alliance and Russia,
274; question of cession of Ocza-
kow, 274 sqq.; massacre of Ismail,
284; Peace of Jassy, 297

Turkey Company, iv. 501

Turner, Samuel (alias
Trish informer, vil. 400 sq.

Turnpike roads: at first extremely
unpopular, vi. 174; few near Lon-
don, 175; much extended after
1763, 176; badly kept, 7b.

Tuscany, Duke of (Maria Theresa’s
husband), i. 355. See also Lorraine,
Duke of

Twentieth-parts (tax), li. 229

‘Tyburn procession abolished, vi. 251

Tyrell, Edward; priest-hunter (1712),
ii. 268

Furnes) :

U

Ulster: subjugation (temp. Eliz.), ii.
97; plantation, 108; character of
eclonists, 109; condition temp.

James I., 111; events of rebellion |

(1641), 131 sqq; emigrants from,
formed a great part of American
army, iii. 534; disturbances in 1763,

643

VER

vi.347. See also Ireland—Rebellion;
Orangism.

Umbrellas, introduction of, vi. 146 sq.

‘Undertakers’ (great Irish borough-
owners), il. 435, iv. 353, 355, 368,
382, 385, vi. 442

‘Union Star,’ advocate of assassina-
tion (Ireland, 1797), vii. 336

Unitarians: excluded from benefits
of Toleration Act, i. 311; Fox’s
Bill in their favour, v. 176 ; distin-
guished writers, 180

United Irishmen. See Ireland, Vice-
roys Westmorland, Camden; Eve
of Rebellion ; Rebellion

Universities, decadence of, in 18th
century, li. 534 sq.; deism among
students (1729), 535

Unmarried women: improyed condi-
tion of, vi. 276

Urban VIII.: Bull against Oath of
Supremacy, ii. 120

Ushant, battle of: fought by Keppel
against French (1778), iv. 93; by
Howe against French (1794), vii. 229

Usher, Archbishop : condemns tolera-
tion of Papists, ii. 120

Usury: laws against frequently en-
forced, vi. 236

Utrecht, Treaty of (between Lewis XIV.
and England, 1713), i. 103, 105,
110, 122 sqq.

Vv

Vales (presents to servants), i. 571 sq.

Valmy, battle of : importance in
history of France, vi. 39

Vanloo (portrait-painter) ; popularity
of (1737), i. 530

Vansittart, Governor (Bengal) : iii.
477

Vatican, English relations with (1793),
vii. 461 sqq.

Vaughan, General: capture of St.
Eustatius (1781), iv. 166

Vendée, La: insurrection against
French Republic, y. 574

Verden: sold to George I. (as Elector
of Hanover), i. 211, 242

Verdun: captured by Prussians (1792),
vi. 35; retaken by French, 41

Vergennes; predicts secession of
American colonies, lii. 268; memo-
rial to Lewis XVI. on policy to-
wards America, iv. 39; his views
carried out, 42; methods, 43 sqq.;
change of sentiment towards Ameri-
ca, 176; proposals for peace, 177;

rom 2

644

VER

distrusts American public men, 194;
partakes in negotiations between
Franklin and England, 228 sq., 256;
annoyance at secret signing of ar-
ticles, 260; relations with Spain,
262; desires amnesty for American
loyalists, 265; stimulates Irish Pres-
byterians to insurrection, 491 ;
death, v. 80

Verner, Mr. (member of Irish Parlia-
ment): speech in defence of Orange-
men, vii. 186

Vertue, engraver (1756), i. 530

‘Veteran’: a signature used by Junius,
iii. 238

Viceroys (Ireland): brief tenure of
office by the first under George III.,
iv. 871

Vice-Treasurers (Ireland), iv. 423

Victor Amadeus, King (Sardinia), i.
239, 241

Vienna, Treaty of: secret articles
produced Treaty of Hanover, i. 351

Vigo, capture of (from Spain, by
English, 1719), i. 244

Villars, Marshal: in command in
Spanish Netherlands, i. 107, 111,
113; refused command in Spain,
244

Villiers, Elizabeth (mistress of William
III.), ii. 228

‘Vindex’: a signature used by Junius,
iii, 242

Vinegar Hill: crimes committed at,
vill. 101 sqq., 149 sqq.

Virginia: description, iil. 285; cha-
racter of people, 286; slavery, 287 ;
anti-Einglish feeling, 288; English
devastations in 1779, iv. 116; B.
Arnold in, 189; predatory war, 195

Viri, Count de: chief negotiator of
Peace of Paris, iv. 366

Vivisection ; common in 18th century,
i. 551

Volney’s ‘Torch’: distributed by
United Irishmen in Ireland, vii.
450

Voltaire on religious toleration, y. 181;
advocacy of a Greek empire, 213,
219; visit to England, vy. 301;
early writings and career, 302; ill
treatment by Government, 303;
eharacter, 7b. ; exile and anti-
christian writings, 304; assists
Encyclopedists, 305; his printers
punished, 307; theory of govern-
ment, 309; on division of classes,
311, 313; sympathies with royal
authority, 312; against universal
suffrage, 3813; and democratic

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

WAL

government, 314; general character
of his mind, 315; influence, 316;
its decline, 344

Volunteers, Irish: rise, iv. 114, 484
sqq-; their early history and in-
fluence (see Ireland, 1778-1783) ;
deterioration of the body, vi. 361;
revolutionary spirit among those of
Belfast, 462; vote address con-
gratulating French on capture of
Bastille, 535 ; affect French names
and emblems, 538

W

‘Wager of law’ (for debtors): only
abolished in 1838, iii. 505

Wages: of labourers, 1704, i. 562;
1768, 563 sq.; of menservants and
maidservants, u. 86; of Irish agri-
cultural labourers, iv. 314 m., vi.
357, vii. 162 7.,.167; regulation of
wages by authority, vi. 234 sq.

Waldegrave, Dowager Countess of,
wife of Duke of Gloucester, iii.
462

Wales; religious condition in Wesley’s
time, ii. 602; revivalist preachers,
603 sqq.; increase of Nonconformity,
606

Wales, Prince of (George I.’s son), i.
319, 326, 381 sq., 386

Wales, Prince of (George II.’s son), i.
430

Wales, Prince of (George III.’s son):
attached to coalition (1783), iv. 283;
his Civil List, 284; interference in
elections, v. 57,84 ; connection with
Fox and Whig leaders, 84; debts,
85; relations with Mrs. Fitzherbert,
86; marriage, 88; complete aliena-
tion from King, 89; Fitzherbert
marriage brought before Parliament,
90, 144; Fox authorised to deny it,
91; explanation of Sheridan, 93;
Mrs. Fitzherbert deserted, 7b. ;
marriage with Princess Caroline of
Brunswick, 94; King’s illness, 96;
question of Regency, 97; negotia-
tions with Thurlow, 98; Prince’s
claim argued by Fox, 103, 105, 106,
110 sqq.; action of Irish Parlia-
ment, 113, vi. 416 sqq.; brutal con-
duct towards his father, v. 116;
restrictions on Regent, 136; reply
to Pitt’s letter announcing appoint-
ment as Regent, 143; King’s re-
covery, 145; conduct of Prince, 147,
149 ; follows Fox in opposition, 512;

7
{

INDEX.

WAL

spoke in favour of the proclamation
against seditious writings, vi. 16;
desire to be Lord Lieutenant of Ire-
land, and pacify it by concessions
(1797), vii. 385
Wales, Princess Dowager of (George
III.’s mother): character, ii. 10;
death, 462
Walker, Sir Hoveden: commander of
fleet in conquest of Canada, i.
106
Wallachia : in power of Russia, v. 219;
Catherine II. desires to make it part
of a Greek empire, 224; position in
1787-90, 274, 276
Walmoden, Mme. de: received Irish
pension, ii. 228
Walpole, Horace: description of inse-
curity of streets of London (1742),
i. 483; sneered at Handel, 535;
description of Shelburne’s charac-
ter, iv. 211, 215; forecast of Pitt’s
ability, 221
Walpole, Sir Robert: follows Towns-
hend in the Whig schism (1717), i.
318; dislike of King’s German party,
319; return to office, 321; opposed
South Sea scheme, 324; Chancellor
of Exchequer, 2b.; sketch of his life,
324 sqq.; schemes for mitigating
suffering caused by South Sea Bub-
ble, 326; skill in managing men,
328; in avoiding violent concussions
of opinion, 329; in dealing with
country gentry, 330; religious policy,
331; sagacity of judgment, 332;
scheme of excise, 333, 345; finan-
cial skill, 334 ; measures for redeem-
ing National Debt, 335; sinking
fund, 342; respect for public opinion,
343 ; absolutism as a minister, 344;
his moderation somewhat exagger-
ated by historians, 346 sq; difficulties
in foreign policy, 348; objections to
treaty of Hanover, 351; averts war
by Treaty of Vienna (1731), 354;
war of Polish succession, 355 ;
pacific policy, 359 sqq.; Walpole’s
merits, 362; vices: low political
honour, 363 ; want of decorum, 364;
corruption, 366; how far the guilt
of it attaches to Walpole, 367 sqq. ;
resists attempts at reform, 369;
pernicious influence on young men,
370; report of Committee of Inquiry,
371; effect of Walpole’s language
on political morality, 373; his par-
liamentary opponents, 374 sqq.;
Bolingbroke, 380; Prince of Wales,
-381; isolation through death of the

645

WAS

Queen, 382; difficulties with Spain’
383; Walpole’s tact, 885; pro-
cures convention with Spain, 386;
driven to declare war, 387; policy
towards Maria Theresa, 393; re-
luctance to leave office, 394; made
Karl of Orford, 395; fall, ib.; dis-
union of his opponents, 397; failure
of impeachment, 398; last days,
399; comparison with Pitt, ii. 518

Walter, Mr. (founder of the Times) :
imprisoned for libelling the Prince
of Wales, v. 148 7.

Waltham Blacks  (deer-stealers) :
‘Black Act’ passed for their sup-
pression, i. 488; one of them or
dained and presented to an Irish
living, ii. 236

Warburg, battle of (1760) : chiefly won
by British cavalry, ii. 510

Warburton, Bishop: treatise on ‘ Al-
liance between Church and State,’
v. 170

Warburton, Dean (magistrate in
Ulster): reports on state of North
Treland, vii. 295, 318, 339, 423, viii.
126

Ward, General (American): in com-
mand of New England army, iii.
431

Warner, Dr.: examination of state-
ments about massacre in 1641, i.
152, 155

Warren, Dr.: physician to George IIL,
v. 102, 125, 135, 146

Washington, George: first appearance
of his name, ii. 444; made Com-
mander-in-Chief, iii. 429 ; sketch of
his life, 430; intellectual faculties,
432; military capacity, 433 ; charac-
ter, 434; refused a salary, 435;
difficulties from defects of army,
445; no heroism among his troops,
447; in New York (1776), iv. 1;
statistics of his army, 2; retreat
from New York, 2b. ; suggested
burning that town, 3; insubordi-
nation of his troops, 6; disband-
ment, 17; retreat to Pennsyl-
vania, 19; continued complaints
about his men, 20; defeats Germans
at Trenton, 26; improved state of
his forces, 27; objections to militia,
28; procures enlistment of new
army, 29; receives limited dicta-
torial power over his officers, 30;
difficulties with foreign officers, 51 ;
the rival armies in 1777, 52; de-
feated by Howe at Brandywine and
Germantown, 55; complaints cf

646

WAT

disaffection and apathy, 56; cabal
of generals against him, 94; ad-
vocates half-pay for officers, 95 ;
on French plans against Canada,
101; on rise in prices, 103; com-
plaints about American army in
1780, 125, 131; on power of England,
126; acknowledges dependence of
Revolution on France, 130; treat-
ment of Benedict Arnold, 137, 190;
execution of André, 143; on Ameri-
can financial straits, 151; design
on New York, 191: on American
distress, 193; expedition against
New York, 198 sqq.; capture of
Yorktown, 200; difficulties after
Yorktown, 247; offered a crown by
army, 249; Tone’s opinion of him,
vii. 232 ; recalled to the head of the
army in 1798, viii. 125

Watchmen, London (1742): ineffici-
ency of, i. 483

Watering-places, inland : growth of, i.
554

Watt, James: account of his life,
vi. 215; transformed Newcomen’s
steam-engine, 216; later career, 7b.;
his inventions led to perfection of
steam locomotion, 217

Watts’s hymns: received with enthu-
siasm by converted slaves (America),
ii. 601

Wayne, General (American): treat-
ment of Pennsylvanian mutineers,
iv. 185

Wedderburn (afterwards Lord Lough-
borough) : denunciations of North’s
American policy, iii. 168; becomes
North’s Solicitor-General, 169; in-
vective against Dr. Franklin, 384
sq.; his character, iv. 89. See
Loughborough

Wedgwood, Josiah: made English
pottery superior to French and
Dutch, vi. 211; artistic designs
from Flaxman, and from Etruscan
vases, 2b.

Wesley (Wellesley), Arthur (afterwards
Duke of Wellington): speeches in
Trish Parliament, vi. 458, 561,
574

Wesley, Charles: companion of his
brother (John), ii. 551, 553 ; conver-
sion, 558; preaching in Newgate,
559; aids Whitefield, 563; opposed
to his Calvinism, 575; treated as a
‘vagabond’ in Ireland, 579

Wesley, John: early life, ii. 550; first
companions, 551; visits Georgia,
553; character at this period, 70. ;

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

WHA

a High Churchman, 554; dissensions
in Georgia, 555 ; return to England,
556; Moravian influence, 7b.; con-
version, 557; pilgrimage to Herrn-
hut, 559; preaching in England,
561; excluded from Church pulpits,
ib. ; reluctantly follows Whitefield’s
field-preaching, 563; founds first
Methodist chapel, 573; differences
with Whitefield, 575; sanctions in-
stitution of lay preachers, 576;
missionary work, 577; attacked by
a mob, 578; suspected of Popery,
581 ; physical phenomena produced
by his sermons, 584; religious mad-
ness, 585; regarded by Wesley as
consequences of conversion, 587;
asceticism, 589; belief in miracles
wrought on behalf of his work, 591;
belief in visions, 592; in witchcraft,
593; in special judgments, 594;
difficulties arising from Antinomi-
anism and Calvinism among his
followers, 596 sq.; attacked in pam-
phlets and satires, 598 ; moderation
of his replies, 599; opponent of
slavery, 601; his work in English
provinces and Wales, 602 sqq.; in
Scotland, 608 ; in Ireland, 608 sq. ;
his influence on children, 611 ;
love of music, 616; attempt to
form union of Evangelical clergy-
men, 619; his manner of life,
627; administrative powers, 628;
mental, 629; many-sided activity,
630; influence, 631; lived and died
a member of Church of England,
632; opposition to Dissent, 633 ;
consecrated Coke as Bishop of
American Methodists, 634

West Indies: population—proportion
of negroes to whites, ii. 20; crea-
tion of baronets in, by Charles II., 21;
system of government, 2b.; value of
sugar trade, 7b. ; vicissitudes in wars
of 18th century, iii. 39, iv. 93, 202,
252

Westmorland, Earl of. See Ireland—
Viceroy Westmorland. Recalled
from Ireland and made Master of
the Horse, 50; his later influence
on Irish affairs, vil. 59, 61, 81 sqq.,
86

Wexford : events in, during Rebellion,
vill. 73 sqq., 86 sqq., 1385 sqq., 151

sqq-

Weymouth, Lord, Viceroy (Ireland) :
received usual grant, but resigned
before going over, iv. 371

Whale fishery of New England, iii.

INDEX.

WHE

280; removal of duty imposed by
England, 310

Wheat, price of, 1650-1750, i. 336,

559 sq.; later prices, vi. 193, 203 sq.
Wheelplough : introduced into Ireland
by the Palatines, ii. 344

Whigs: prolonged ascendency, i. 1;
their main principles, 2; detailed
contrast with Tories, 3; treatment
of press, 4; why they carried Sep-
tennial Act, 5; policy at Revolu-
tion, 10 sqg.; skilful conduct of
leaders, 12 ; origin of name ‘ Whig,’
18 ; difficulties after Revolution, 23 ;
defeat of party on accession of Anne,
33; preponderance in House of
Lords (1702), 35; great majority in
elections (1705), 38; pass a Regency
Bill, 39; complete Whig ascendency
in ministry, 42; foreign policy of
Government, 44; party division,
50; Sacheverell, 51 sqq.; theory of
Government, 62; Burnet, 80; re-
ligious legislation, 93 sqq., 253 sqq. ;
question of succession, 134; elec-
tions of 1713, 145; Tory discord
and Whig union, 149; conference
of leaders with Bolingbroke, 161;
Trish Commons violently Whig, 163;
triumph at George I.’s accession,
169; chief elements of party—ari-
stocracy, 170 sqq.; commercial
classes, 187; Nonconformists, 203—
party violence, 208; rebellion of
1715, 212 sqq.; consolidation of
Whig power, 227; conditions favour-
ing them, 228 sqq.; religious legis-
lation, 252 sqq.; repeal of laws
against witchcraft, 266; reform of
Calendar, 267; laws against Catho-
lies, 268, 275 sqq.; against Popish
dignitaries and friars, 295 sq. ;
penal laws against English Catholics,
303 sqq.; Whig schism of 1717,
318; Walpole, 354, 374; cessation
of political rivalry (1748-64), 430;
_ confusion of party lines, 473; na-
tural history of the two parties, 474
sq.; Toleration Act (1712), ii. 49;
Rockingham’s ministry, 92; coali-
tion with Chatham, 111; party
vicissitudes, 160 sqq.; inexperienced
leaders, 94; disorganisation, 464 ;
supremacy broken at death of George
II., 519; Reform question, iii. 176 ;
distinction between Whig and Radi-
cal, 209 ; party opposed Subscription,
499; divided on religious liberty,
502; accession of Fox, 527; Ameri-
can difficulty, 541; alleged origin of

Whitefield, George :

647

WHI

party colours, iv. 69; advocacy of
American cause, 68; attempted fusion
with Rockingham’s party, 88; re-
turn to power (1782), 204; oligar-
chical spirit of Old Whigs, 237;
disruption, 239; coalition of Fox
and North, 270; India Bill, 290;
Absentee tax, 405; home fortifica-
tions, v. 74; Prince of Wales, 84;
Regency question, 1038, 106, 111;
party ceases to be anti-Catholic,
188 ; principles on elective system,
197; Whig theory of social con-
tract, 3845; schism wrought by
French Revolution, 453; secessions
from Fox, 506; true character of
the party, 511; schism increased, vi.
16, 136; secessions to Pitt (1794),
vil. 32; disputes that followed, 42

S

Whig Club, Dublin, vi. 458, 471;

Northern Whig Club, Belfast, 462

Whiteboys: origin, ii. 198, 250, iv.

324; first proceedings; character
of outrages, 327; object, 328;
murders, 330; paralysed law, 331 ;
pseudo-Whiteboys, 332; attacks on
clergy, 333; outrages not sectarian,
334 sqq.; denounced by Catholic
clergy, 338 sq.; Protestants among
Whiteboys, 338 2.; desertion of
Catholic chapels, 340; real causes
of outbreak, 340 ; measures against,
341; hunting Whiteboys, 342;
Whiteboy Act, 1787, vi. 408. See
Treland, 1760-1778
early life and
character, ii. 552; visits Georgia,
556; preaching in England, 561;
field-preaching, 7b.; among colliers,
562; in London, 563; character
and genius, 7b.; failings, 564 ;
position in the Church, 565; elo-
quence as a popular preacher, 568
sqq.; effects on his hearers, 571;
matter of his discourses, 572; in-
fluence on religious revival, 573;
Calvinism; disputes with Wesley,
575; esteem for Wesley, 576; as-
ceticism, 589 ; the earthquake alarm
of 1750,596; expeditions to America,
601; advocated slavery, 1b.; work
in Wales, 605; in Scotland, 607;
satirised by Pope, 615; influence on
upper classes, 616
White, Richard: first to report ap-
proach of Hoche’s expedition to
Ireland, vii. 257 ; made Lord Bantry
for his services, 258
Whitworth (ambassador to Russia)

648

wIc

reports on Russian politics and
schemes, v. 274, 279, 280, 285, 294,
597

Wickham, William: special mission
from England to Switzerland (1794),
vii. 401; minister in Switzerland,
ib.; his relations with French emi-
grants, &., 402

Wicklow ; events in Rebellion, viii. 71
Sqq.

Wiss, temp. George III., vi. 145

Wilberforce, William: entered Parlia-
ment (1780), iv. 183 ; epigrammatic
description of coalition ministry,
276; compares Canning’s ora-
tory with Pitt’s and Fox’s, v. 9;
supports Pitt, 39; Pitt promises his
aid against the slave trade, 64 ;
Wilberforce’s denunciations of
English share in that trade, 65;
Sabbatarian strictness, 163 ; reason
for declining peerage, vi. 144;
sketch of his character, 289; Pitt
redeems his promise, 290; elo-
quent speech of Wilberforce against
the slave trade, 292; desire for im-
mediate abolition, 294; carries Bill
for abolition of slave trade with
foreigners, 295; later stages of the
work, 296 sq.; Wilberforce’s posi-
tion towards Irish Union, viii. 483,
486; on Pitt’s resignation (1801),
514

‘Wild geese, the’ (Irish enlisted in the
French service), ii. 397

Wild, Jonathan, i. 487

Wilkes: satire on Bute, iii. 50; fanned
English antipathy to Scotchmen,
52; attack on King’s speech (‘North
Briton, No. 45’), 70; his previous
career, 72; arrested, 73; arrest
declared illegal, 74; prosecuted for
libel, 75; ‘ Essay on Woman,’ 76;
duel with Martin, 78; popular in-
dignation against his opponents,
79; libels declared by Parliament
to be not protected by privilege, 80;
outlawry of Wilkes, 81; life on
Continent, 128; elected for Middle-
sex, 129; outlawry removed, 130;
imprisoned, 131 ; violent popular
demonstrations, 131 sqq.; new pro-
vocations, 139 ; expelled from Par-
liament, 140; re-elected, but de-
clared incapable, 141; elected a
third time, but Luttrell declared
member, 142; effects of the expul-
sion, 143; arguments on the case,
144 sqq.; one of the first English
Radicals, 175; his partin the conflict

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

WIT

about parliamentary reporting, 256)
258, 260 sq.; helped to suppress
Gordon riots, 520; regains seat for
Middlesex, 525; resolution against
him ‘rescinded, iv. 218; witticism
about Thurlow, v. 126

Wilkinson, Rev. Mr.: clandestine
marriages celebrated by, i. 498

William III.: popular complaints
against,i.23; treatment of question
of Spanish succession, 25; obliged
to acknowledge Philip as King of
Spain, 28; concludes Grand Alliance,
29; death, 30

William V., Stadholder
1766), v. 79

Willis, Dr., physician to George III.,
v. 101, 125, 136, 146, viii. 523

Wills, General: in command against
rebels of 1715, i. 215

Wilmington, Earl of: succeeds Wal-
pole as Prime Minister, i. 400;
death, after brief tenure of office,
AIL

Wilson: first great English landscape-
painter, i. 530; received little Court
favour, vi. 162

Wilson, the saintly Bishop of the Isle
of Man, i. 466

Winchilsea, Lord: conveyed challenge
of Colonel Lennox to Duke of
York, v. 150

Windham, Mr.: opposed Flood’s Re-
form Bill, v. 194; high opinion of
Burke, 526; opposed Fox, vi. 77;
joins Pitt’s ministry (1794), vii. 32;
policy towards Catholics, 104, viii.
513

Windham, Sir W.: arrested as Jaco-
bite (1715), i. 214; denounces
King’s interference with elections,
219; was Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer temp. Anne, 380; carried
Schism Act, 7b.; death, 2b.; warm
friend of Bolingbroke, 381

Window tax, vy. 31

Wine, consumption of : hard drinkers,
i. 478; revenue, v. 29; revival of
taste for French wines, 46

Winter campaigns, vi. 118

Winter, de, Admiral, commander of
Dutch fleet at the Texel, vi. 407

Wintoun, Lord: miserable scene at
his trial (1715), i. 346

Witchcraft: revival of superstition
after Sacheverell trial, i. 266; ordeal
by water (1712), 267; law making
it a capital offence repealed, ib. ;
persecution of witches in America,
11.18; and in Scotland, 81 sqq.; few

(Holland,

INDEX,

WOL

cases in Ireland, 392; Irish law
against, only repealed in 1821, iii.
504

Wolfe, Arthur (Lord Kilwarden), Trish
Attorney-General, vil. 71, 183, 350,
353°

Wolfe, General: death at Quebec
(1759), ii. 494 sq.

Wollstonecroft, Mary: the ‘ Rights of
Woman,’ vi. 167

Women: burnt for murder, i. 506;
publicly whipped, 507; progress of
education among (1700-50), 519;
gambling, 522; boxing matches be-
tween, 553; treatmentin Highlands,
ji. 24, 26; idleness of Irish, 252 ;
superior education in American
colonies, iii. 291; female authors,
vi. 167; position of unmarried
women, 276

Wood, Anthony: account of capture
of Drogheda (1649), ii. 171

Wood’s halfpence, i. 345, ii. 422

Woodfall: printer and publisher of
‘Letters of Junius,’ ii. 233 sqq. ;
prosecution, 245

Woodfall, William (brother of above):
prosecuted for reporting speeches in
Parliament, ili. 256; imprisoned,
258

‘Wood Kerns’ (Rapparees), ii. 106

Woods destroyed, in Ireland, ii. 328

Woodward, Bishop (Cloyne): on origin
of Whiteboyism, iv. 325, 327 n.

Wool trade: in Ireland, ii. 209; Eng-
lish restriction on it, 210 sqq., iv.
446; and on that of American
colonies, iii. 299; Irish woollens
refused admission to Portugal, 520;
prohibitory duties on them in Eng-
land, vi. 603 ; English wool admitted
to Ireland by Union, viii, 452,
486

Woolsack, signification of, iv. 447

Workhouses: foundation in England
(1723), i. 558; liberal diet, 561 m. ;
foundation in Dublin (1703), ii.
253

Worms, Treaty of (between Maria
Theresa and Germany, 1743), i.
407

Wray, Sir Cecil: candidate at West-
minster election (1784), v. 57

Wrecking: in England, i. 488 sq.; in
Highlands, ii. 82; in Ireland,
351

* Writs of assistance’ (America, 1761),
li. 303

Wyborg, battle of (Russian victory
over Swedes), vy. 271

649

YUL

Wyoming, desolation of (by Indians
under Colonel John Butler), iy. 92,
29

Wyse, Mr., one of the founders of the
Catholic Association, iv. 453

Yj

Yarmouth, Duchess of, i. 454

Yelverton, Lord (Avonmore): col-
league of Grattan, iv. 437; helped
to prepare Relief Bill of 1778, 477 ;
proposed to amend Poyning’s Law,
510; desired Irish navy, 525 ; made
Attorney-General, vi. 301; opposed
Volunteers’ Reform Bill, 344; raised
to the Bench, 376; history of his
Act for securing Irish titles, vii.
89 m.; conduct in Orr’s trial, 353
sqq-, Vill. 25; speech in favour of
Union, 467 sq.; character, vii. 353,
viii. 467

Yeomanry (military: Irish): enrolled
(1796), vii, 213; numbers, 301 ;
alleged excesses before Rebellion,
302; disaffection, 330; faults and
merits, vill. 71; many Catholics
seduced from loyalty, 75

Yeomen: decline of the class, i. 6;
causes of decline, 196, vi. 172;
yeomen of the American colonies,
iii. 290

Yonge, Sir George, iv. 239

York, Cardinal: received pension from
George III., vii. 463

York, Duke of, v. 107, 116, 128, 149

Sq.

Yorke, Charles: career, iii. 161; sad
end, 162

Yorke, Sir Joseph: English ambassa-
dor at Hague (1780), iv. 162

Yorktown: fall of, terminated Ameri-
can war, iv. 197, 200

Young, Arthur: on English agricultural
wages, i. 563 sq.; relations of land-
lords and tenants in Ireland 1776, ii.
291; rent, iv. 313; tithes, 322; ‘dis-
coverers,’ 464; produce of land in
England and france compared,
384 ; forecast of French Revolution,
409, 418; on States-General, 433 ;
on English roads, vi. 176; size of
farms, 189; on the corn laws, 192;
predicts American competition in
corn, 193 .; on the advantages of
enclosures, 197; on union with Ivre-
land, viii. 270, 271, 276

Young, Sir W., v. 118

‘Yule Vacance,’ i. 91

650 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ZAM ZUL
Zorndorf, battle of (defeat of Russians
Z by Prussians, 1758), i. 492
Zoutman, Admiral (Dutch) : battle of
Zamoiski, Chancellor (Poland, 1780), Dogger Bank (1781), iv. 169
y. 541 Ziillichau, battle of (defeat of Prussians
‘ Zong,’ the (slave ship), vi. 286 by Russians, 1759), ii. 506
THE END.
PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARD
LONDON

STANDARD HISTORICAL WORKS.

MACAULAY’S (Lord) HISTORY of ENGLAND, from
the ACCESSION of JAMES the SECOND.
Popular Fdition, 2 vols. crown 8yo. 5s. | People’s Edition, 4 vols. cr. 8vo. 16s.
Student's Edition, 2 vols. erown 8yo. 12s. | Cabinet Edition, 8 vols. post 8vo. 48s.
Library Edition, 5 vols. 8vo. £4.

MACAULAY’S (Lord) ESSAYS:

Student’s Edition, 1 vol. crown 8yvo. 6s. | Trevelyan Edition, 2 vols. cr. 8vo. 9s.
People’s Edition, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 8s. | Cabinet Edition, 4 vols. post 8vo. 24s.
Library Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. 36s.

MACAULAY’S (Lord) ESSAYS, with LAYS of ANCIENT
ROME. In 1 vol.

Popular Ndition, crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.
Authorised Edition, crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. or 3s. 6d. gilt edges.

MACAULAY’S (Lord) MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS:

People’s dition, 1 vol.cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d, | Library Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 21s.

MACAULAY'S (Lord) MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS
and SPEECHES:
Popular Edition, 1 vol. cr. 8vo. 2s.6d. | Student’s Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6s.
CaLinet Edition, including Indian Penal Code, Lays of Ancient Rome, and
Miscellaneous Poems, 4 vols. post 8vo. 24s.

MACAULAY’S (Lord) COMPLETE WORKS:

Cabinet Edition, 16 ¥ols. post 8vo. £4. 16s. | Library Edition, 8 vols. 8vo. £5. 5s.

HISTORY of ENGLAND from the FALL of WOLSEY
to the DEFEAT of the SPANISH ARMADA. By Jamns A. Frovupr.
12 vols. crown 8vo. 42s.

The ENGLISH in IRELAND in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. By James A. Froups. 3 vols. crown 8vo. 18s.

SHORT STUDIES on GREAT SUBJECTS. By Jamus

A. Froupz. 4 vols. crown 8yo. 24s.

HISTORY of ENGLAND from the ACCESSION of
JAMES I. to the OUTBREAK of the GREAT CIVIL WAR. By Samvurt
Rawson GARDINER. 10 vols. crown 8vo. 6s. each.

HISTORY of the GREAT CIVI. WAR, 1642-1649. By

Samvuet Rawson Garpiner (3 vols.) Vol. I. 1642-1644. With 24 Mays.
8vo. 21s, Vol. II. 1644-1647. With 21 Maps. 8vo, 24s.

UISTORY of ENGLAND in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. By W. E. H. Lecxy. 8vo. Vols. I. and II. 1700-1760, 36s.
Vols. IIL. and IV. 1760-1784, 36s. Vols. V. and VI. 1784-1793, 36s.

The CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY of ENGLAND since
the ACCESSION of GEORGE III. 1760-1870. By Sir fT. Erskine May
(Lord Farneonovcu). 3 vols. crown 8vo. 18s.

London: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

STANDARD HISTORICAL WORKS,

HISTORY of ENGLAND from the CONCLUSION of
the GREAT WAR in 1815 to the YEAR 1858. By Spencer Waxrote.
Liprary Eprrton (65 vols.). Vols. I. and II. 1815-1832, 36s. Vol. III. 1832—
1841, 18s. Vols. IV. and V. 1841-1848, 36s,
Cabinet Edition, 6 vols. crown 8vo. 6s. each.

A JOURNAL of the REIGNS of KING GEORGE IV.

KING WILLIAM IV. and QUEEN VICTORIA. By the late Cuartzs
C. F. Grevittr, Esq. Clerk of the Council to those Sovereigns. Edited by
Henry Reeve, C.B. D.C.L. Cabinet Edition, 8 vols. Crown 8vo. 6s. each.

A HISTORY of TAXATION and TAXES in ENGLAND,

from the EARLIEST TIMES to the YEAR 1885. By SrupHen Dowszrt.
‘Vols. I. and II. The History of Taxation, 2ls.; Vols. Ili. and IV. The

History of Taxes, 21s.
The ENGLISH in AMERICA: Virginia, Maryland, and

the Carolinas. By J. A. Dore, Fellow of All Souls College Oxford. 8yo. 18s.

The ENGLISH in AMERICA: the Puritan Colonies. By

J. A. Doyuz, Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. 2 vols. 8vo. 36s.

‘The ENGLISH CHURCH in the EIGHTEENTH CEN-

TURY. By Cuartzs J. Appny and Jonn H. Overton. Crown 8yo. 7s. 6d.

HISTORY of the PAPACY during the REFORMATION,

By the Rev. Manprri Cretcuton. 8yvo. Vols, I. and II. 1878-1464, 32s.
Vols. III. and IV. 1464-1518, 24s.

The HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY of EUROPE. By

Epwarp A. Freeman, With 65 Maps. 2 vols. 8vo. 31s. 6d,

HISTORY of the ROMANS under the EMPIRE. By

Dean Merivarz. Cabinet Edition, 8 vols. crown 8vo. 48s. Popular Edition.
8 vols. crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. each,

HISTORY of CIVILISATION in ENGLAND «and
FRANCE, SPAIN and SCOTLAND. By H.T. Bucxrz. 8 vols. er. 8vo, 24s.

The HISTORY of EUROPEAN MORALS from
AUGUSTUS to CHARLEMAGNE, By W. E. H. Lecry. 2 vols. cr. 8vo. 16s.

HISTORY of the RISE and INFLUENCE of the SPIRIT
of RATIONALISM in EUROPE. By W. E. H. Lecxy. 2 vols. er. 8vo. 16s.

DEMOCRACY in AMERICA. By A. De Tocquevinun.

Translated by H. Rerve. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16s.

The HISTORY of PHILOSOPHY, from Thales to Comte.

By G. H. Lewes. 2 vols. 8vo. 32s.

The HISTORY of ISRAEL. By Faved EWALp.
Syo. Vols. I. and II. 24s. Vols. III. and IV, 21s. Vol. ¥Y.18s, Vol. VI.
16s, Vol. VII. 21s. Vol. VIII. 18s.

London; LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

ty)
°
Zz
E
«a
°
0
4

UN

om ne ae
Sey wart
