i*:  .■'.'-■'.■J''" ^^^^v*'

^.v.

HISTOEY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

X\^II™  CENTURY

VOL III.

PRIKTKD BY

SPOTTISWOODB AND CO., NEW-STREHT SQUARE

LONDON

A

HISTOEY  OF  ENGLAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

BY

WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY

VOLUME  III.

FOURTH EDITION

LONDON
LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO.

1890

All rights reserved

CONTENTS

OF

THE THIRD VOLUME,

CHAPTER  X.

PAGE

Difficulty  of  combining  in  fixed  governments  security  and  ability  1

Evils  of  elective  monarchy 1

English  type  of  monarchy 5

Eequires  the  withdrawal  of  the  King  from  active  politics . .  7

George  ni.  the  last  English  King  who  greatly  influenced  politics.  10

His  early  life 10

Enthusiasm  at  his  accession. His  virtues 12

Evils  produced  by  his  personal  policy . ....  14

Oi/rcurngtances  that  favoured  his  power.

Example  of  foreign  monarchies

Ecclesiastical  and  legal  tendencies  towards  despotism  .
Extinction  of  Jacobitism. Growth  of  Tory  sentiment

Scheme  for  destroying  parties. Bolingbroke,  Carteret,  and  Pitt
Adopted  by  the  Court. Divided  administrations

Position  of  the  Cabinet

•  Seasonable  hints  of  an  honest  man '

Magnificent  position  of  England

Divisions  in  the  Government. The  King's  speech

Bute  and  the  Jacobites ...

Supply. Tenure  of  Judges .

Changes  in  the  Ministry

General  election ......

Arguments  for  peace  ......

Alliance  of  France  and  Spain. Policy  of  Pitt

Resignation  of  Pitt  and  Temple

Pitt  accepts  a  pension  fcr  himself  and  a  title  for  his

Conquest  of  Martinique  and  Havannah

Other  victories .......

Resignation  of  Newcastle, Bute  Prime  Minister

wife

16

17
18

19
20
21
22
23
25
26
27
28
29
30
32
35
3G
39
40
41

VI  CONTENTS  OF

PAGE

Negotiations  for  peace. Bedford  .... ...  42

The  Peace  of  Paris 44

Excessive  requirements  of  Pitt . ......  48

tJnpopularity  of  Bute 49

Hatred  of  the  Scotch 50

Character  and  position  of  Bute 55

Henry  Fox. Gross  intimidation 56

Literary  patronage  of  Bute ........  58

Parliament  approves  of  the  peace  .......  61

Its  unpopularity  in  the  country. Bute  and  Dashwood  resign .  62

Quarrel  of  Fox  and  Shelburne 62

Failure  of  the  Tory  Ministry 63

Grenville  Ministry  (Ajjril  1763).

Temple  and  Bedford  refuse  to  join 68

First  contest  7i-ith  Wilkes. No.  45, 'North  Briton ' . . . .  70

Arrest  of  Wilkes  under  a  General  Warrant 73

Pronounced  to  be  illegal. Prosecution  of  the  Messengers . .  74

Wilkes  dismissed  from  the  Militia. Prosecuted  for  libel . .  75

Parliament  orders  the  '  North  Briton  '  to  be  burnt . . . .  76

The '  Essay  on  Woman '.........  76

Martin's  duel  with  Wilkes .  78

Popular  support  of  Wilkes ........  78

Parliament  votes  libels  to  be  not  protected  by  privilege . . .  80

Wilkes  goes  to  France,  is  expelled  and  outlawed ....  81

Multiplication  of  riots  and  libels 82

The  Manilla  ransom. Bedford  joins  the  Government ...  83

Purchase  of  the  Isle  of  Man 83

Party  aspect  of  Grenville's  Ministry  . . . . . . .  84

Eelations  of  the  King  to  Grenville  and  Bedford ... .85

Resignation  of  Shelbm-ne 87

The  Regency  Bill 89

Bedford  attacked  by  the  mob 91

Change of Ministry. The Wliigs return  under Rockingham,

July  1765 92

37/(?  Itockingkam  Ministrtj .

Its  weakness. Pitt  refuses  to  join  it 95

The  King  undermines  it  . . . . . . . . .96

Its  dismissal 97

Conduct  of  Pitt  towards  the  Rockingham  Whigs ....  98

Questions  on  which  he  differed  from  Rockingham . . . .  101

His  views  about  party. Good  and  evil  of  party ....  102

Degeneracy  of  parties  under  George  III. Remedies  of  Burke  . .  110

Ministry  of  Pitt.

Its  heterogeneous  character . . Ill

Quarrel  with  Temple H3

THE  THIED  VOLUME.  vii

i-AGK

Pitt  accepts  the  Earldom  of  Chatham. Popular  icdignation .  114
Rockingham  refuses  to  see  Chatham . . . . .115

The  '  forty  days' tyranny  ' 116

The  Land-tax  reduced  by  the  Opposition 117

Resignation  of  remaining  partisans  of  Rockingham  , . . .  118

Failure  of  an  attempted  northern  alliance 119

Project  of  withdrawing the  territorial  revenue  from the  East

India  Company 119

Growth  of  the  Tory  element  in  the  Government . . . .  120

Chatham  incapacitated  by  illness 121

Changes  in  the  Ministry 123

Corsica  becomes  French 124

Plunder  of  the  Duke  of  Portland 125

Growing  ascendency  of  North. The  King  favours  the  Ministry .  127

CHAPTER  XI.

The  Middlesex  election.

"Wilkes  on  the  Continent 128

Stands  unsuccessfully  for  the  City  of  London. Elected  for  Mid-
dlesex, March  1768 129

Perplexity  of  the  Government. King  orders  his  expulsion  . . .  130

Wilkes  freed  from  his  outlawiy 130

Condemned  for  the  '  North  Briton '  and  '  Essay  on  Woman' , .  131

Great  riots  in  London 131

Disturbed  condition  of  the  country 135

Resignation  of  Chatham 138

New  provocations  by  Wilkes 139

His  expulsion,  February  1769. Opposed  by  Grenville . . .  140

Wilkes  re-elected  and  pronounced  incapable  of  sitting . . .  141

Third  election. Luttrell  pronounced  to  be  member . . .  142

Great  popularity  of  Wilkes 143

Arguments  on  the  doctrine  of  incapacity .....  144

Petitions  from  the  country  in  favour  of  Wilkes 150

Renewed  riots 151

Unpopularity of the Government. Corsica. The Falkland

Isles 153

The  King's  debts ]  54

Unpopularity  of  Grafton 155

Weakness  of  Conway .........  156

And  of  Camden 157

Dismissal  of  Camden. New  changes . . . . . .160

Charles  Torke,  his  tragic  end .  161

Final  resignation  of  Conway 163

Violent  opposition  of  Chatham 163

Overtures  to  Rockingham ... ....  165

Triumph  of  the  Government . . 167

Apostacy  of  Wedderbm-n 168

Despondency  of  the  Opposition 169

Viii  CONTENTS OF

Parliamentary  reform.  paqb

Extent  of  corrupt  influence 170

The  nabobs 171

Disfranchisement  of  Shoreham  freemen 173

Inequalities  of  representation 173

Birth  of  English  Radicalism— 1769 174

Public  meetings  ...........  174

Society  of  the  Supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Rights. Home . .  175

Instructions  to  members 176

Whigs compelled  to identify themselves with Parliamentary

reform ............  17vi

Views  of  Chatham  about  reform .......  178

Ednmnd  Burke. His  life,  character,  and  genius . . . .181

Differs  from  Chatham 192

His  conception  of  party ]  95

Dislike  to  Chatham's  character 198

Extent  to  which  he  supported  reform 201

His  opposition  to  triennial  Parliaments . . . . . .  202

To  a  Place  Bill 203

To  instructions  to  members 203

To  changes  in  the  constitution  of  Parliament ....  204

Consistency  and  nature  of  his  Conservatism 205

Distinctions  between  Whig  and  Radical 209

Objects  of  representative  systems 211

Criticism  of  the  views  of  Burke 218

Dangers  to  constitutional  government  in  eighteenth and  nine-
teenth centuries . . 220

Grenville's  Election  Act . 224

Unsuccessful  attempt  to  disfranchise  revenue  ofEcers. . . .  226

Curtailment  of  Parliamentary  privileges . . ,  226

Growth  of  the  Democratic  spirit 228

The  Press.

Its  growing  influence .........  229

The  doctrine  of  libel 229

Changed  character  of  newspapers 232

The  '  Letters  of  Junius ' 233

Problem  of  their  authorship .246

Parliamentary  reporting 256

Contest  with  printers .........  257

Estimate  of  the  influence  of  the  Press 262

Defeat  of  the  Tory  party  due  to  its  influence  and  to  the  American

War 266

THE THIED VOLUME.  IK

CHAPTER  XII.

America,  1763-1776.

PAGB

Effects  of  the  Peace  of  Paris  on  the  American  colonies . . .  267

Predictions  of  their  separation  from  England ....  2GS

Question  of  the  cession  of  Canada 269

Impossibility  of  retaining  the  colonies  by  force ....  271

Strong  loyalty  of  the  colonies 272

Their  independence  of  each  other 274

New  England 276

The  Middle  States 280

Virginia 285

The  other  Southern  colonies 288

Intellectual  and  material  condition  of  the  colonies . . .  289

Their  moral  and  political  condition 292

Their  relations  to  the  mother-country 296

And  to  the  Crown 298

Commercial  restrictions . 299

American  smuggling .........  302

•  Writs  of  assistance  ' 303

Elements  of  dissension ... .....  30i

Policy  of  Grenville.

Revision  of  the  trade  laws 307

Establishment  of  an  army  in  the  colonies 310

Determination  to  tax  the  colonies . • 312

Earlier  proposals  to  tax  America 314

Arguments  in  favour  of  it 315

Franklin  on  a  colonial  army 318

The  Stamp  Act 319

Speech  of  I'arre 324

Taxation  and  representation ........  325

Commercial  concessions. Quartering  Act 328

General  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act . . ....  329

Impossibility  of  enforcing  it 332

27/e  RocTdnglui/m  Ministry.

General  indifference  to  American  affairs . ...  332

Distress  in  the  trading  towns .......  333

Meeting  of  Parliament  (December  1765). The  Opposition . .  334

Pitt  justifies  the  Americans 336

Government  repeals  the  Stamp  Act,  but  asserts  the  right  to  tax .  339

Necessity  of  the  Declaratory  Act .341

New  revision  of  the  commercial  laws 343

Opinion  in  America •......•.  344

Governor  Picrnard . . . . . . . . .  346

New  York  refuses  to  obey  the  Mutiny  Act.  '  The  Farmer's  Letters'.  348

CONTENTS  OF

The  Chatham  ilinistry.

PAGE

Irritation  in  England  against  America ....  ,  349

Charles  Townsliend  proposes  to  tax  America 350

Suspends  the  New  York  Assembly .  352

Establishes  a  new  Board  of  Customs 353

Imposes  new  duties  for  purposes  of  revenue 353

Review  of  Townshend's  policy  .......  353

Reception  of  Townshend's  measures  in  America . . . .  355

Death  of  Townshend  (September  1767) 356

Changes  in  the  Ministry. Ascendency  of  North . . . .  358

Hillsborough  censures  the  Massachusetts  Circular  ....  358

Growing  spirit  of  insurrection 359

Samuel  Adams  ..........  360

Attitude  of  Massachusetts  .........  362

Attitude  of  the  English  Parliament,  1768  and  ]  769 . . .  363

Revival  of  a  law  for  trying  traitors  in  England  . . . .  363

Determination  to  repeal  all  the  duties  except  that  on  tea . .  365

Recall  of  Bernard. Submission  of  New  York 365

The  Boston  massacre 366

Acquittal  of  the  soldiers. American  humanity 368

The  tea  duty 370

Abandonment  of  the  non-importation  agreements . . . .  372
The  destruction  of  the  '  Gaspee  ' . . . , ...  373
Measure  to  protect  the  King's  ships. Committees  of  correspond-
ence ............  B75

Benjamin  Franklin 375

Sends  Hutchinson's  letters  to  America 380

Wedderburn's  invective 385

The  Boston  tea  ships 387

Impeachment  of  Oliver '  388

English  opinion  on  the  American  Question.

Tucker  advocates  the  cession  of  America 388

Adam  Smith 389

Chatham 392

Burke • 393

Parliament  in  favour  of  coercion 397

Closing  of  Boston  harbour . * 397

Suspension  of  the  Charter  of  Massachusetts 397

Soldiers  to  be  tried  in  England 398

General  Gage  made  Governor  of  Massachusetts. Quartering  Act.  399

The  Quebec  Act 399

The  other  colonies  support  Boston 403

Numerous  riots ........ •  405

Proclamation  of  Gage ...  407

The  Congress  at  Philadelphia  (September  1774) ....  408

General  arming. How  far  Americans  wished  for  independence .  412

Illusions  in  America  and  in  England 415

Divided  opinion  in  America 417

Tlie  loyalists 4^8

THE THIRD VOLUME.  XI

PACK

Enrolment  of  an  American  army. Capti^re  of  Fort  William . .  420

English  Parliament  meets,  November  1774 ....  420

ITew  efforts  of  conciliation  by  Chatham . . . . . .  421

By  Burke,  Hartley,  &c 422

Parliament  cuts  off  the  trade  of  America. Increases  the  array  at

Boston ............  42.^

Conciliatory  measure  of  North .......  42S

Battle  of  Lexington,  April  19, 1775 42.5

Battle  of  Bunker's  Hill,  June  17, 177.5 426

Congress  of  Philadelphia,  1775 428

Washington  appointed  commander. His  life  and  character  . .  4.30

Capture  of  Ticonderoga. Invasion  of  Canada 436

Death  of  Montgomery. American  retreat 437

Lord  Dunmore  in  Virginia. ........  437

Proceedings  in  the  Middle  and  Southern  colonies  ....  438

The  negroes  and  Indians 43i)

The  English  party  in  America 441

Misgivings  in  America 442

The  army  of  Washington 445

Dilatoriness  of  Gage 448

Replaced  by  Howe. Situation  of  the  Americans,  December  1775  .  440

Boston  evacuated,  March  17, 1776 451

Paine 's '  Common  Sense ' , ........  451

Motives  leading  to  separation 452

The  French  alliance . . 453

Difficulty  of  England  in  raising  soldiers 455

Enlistment  of  German  mercenaries 458

Produces  the  Declaration  of  Independence 459

CHAPTER  XIIL

Domestic  troubles  of  the  King 461

The  Royal  Marriage  Act 463

Charles  Fox 405

His  brief  separation  from  North  (1772) 472

Affairs  of  the  East  India  Company.

Despotism  exercised  by  its  servants ....  . .  473

.  474

.  475

.  476

.  477

.  481

.  481

.  482

,  484

.  484

The  private  trade

Displacement  of  native  princes  .....
Growing  power  of  the  Company  in  Bengal .

Administration  of  Clive  (1765)

Parliament  claims  authority  over  the  territorial  revenue
Regulates  the  dividends ......

War  with  Hyder  All

Bankruptcy  of  the  Company  (1772) ....
Views  of  Adam  Smith  aboiit  India  ....

Select  Committee  of  1773. Speeches  of  Burke

XU  CONTENTS  OF  THE  THIED  VOLUME.

PAGB

Indian  Acts  of  1773 488

Charges  against  Clive 490

His  acquittal  and  death .  491

Religious  legislation.

Great  diminution"of  intolerance .......  492

Abuses  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts 493

Nonconformists  elected  Sheriils  in  London 496

Proposed  abolition  of  subscription  to  the  Articles  ....  497

Dissenters  freed  from  the  subscription . . . . . .  501

The  Quebec  Act 502

Propriety of legislating for  Catholics. Diminution  of  Catholic

fanaticism 503

Obsolete  laws 504

How  far  the  anticatliolic  laws  were  enforced . . ...  506

Position  of  Catholics  in  England . ....  508

Belief  Bill  of  1778 508

Riots  in  Scotland 509

The  Gordon  riots,  1780 510

Trials  of  rioters 522

Effects  of  the  riots  on  opinion 523

General  popularity  of  the  North  Ministry 524

Parliamentary  approval  of  its  American  policy . - . • .  525

Secession  of  Fox 527

English  opinion  on  the  American  question,  1775  and  1776 . .  528

Scotch  opinion 538

Irish  opinion  . 534

Difficulties  of  enlistment. Impressment  ......  535

Criminals  enrolled  in  the  army 539

Party  aspects  of  the  American  question . . • . .  541

Grave  divisions  in  the  country . . , - . .  645

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

DT

THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CHAPTER  X.

One  of  the  most  difficult  problems  which  the  framers  of  con-
stitutions are  called  upon  to  solve  is  that  of  providing  that  the
direction  of  affairs  shall  be  habitually  in  the  hands  of  men  of
very  exceptional  ability,  and  at  the  same  time  of  preventing
the  instability,  insecurity,  and  alarm  which  perpetual  and
radical  changes  in  the  Government  must  produce.  Among  the
many  objections  to  hereditary  despotism,  one  of  the  most
obvious  is  that  it  implies  that  the  members  of  a  single  family,
educated  for  the  most  part  imder  circumstances  peculiarly  fitted
to  enervate  the  character,  shall,  during  many  generations,  be
competent  to  discharge  one  of  the  most  arduous  of  human  un-
dertakings, the  direction  of  the  complicated  and  often  conflicting
interests  of  a  nation.  Among  the  many  objections  to  elective
monarchy,  the  most  serious  is  that  it  condemns  the  country  in
which  it  exists  to  perpetual  conspiracies,  tumults,  and  intrigues,
which  are  fatal  to  the  formation  of  settled  political  habits,  and
derange  every  part  of  the  national  organisation.  Considered  as
a  matter  of  pure  theory,  no  form  of  government  might  appear
more  reasonable  than  that  under  which  the  leading  men  in  the
country  assemble  at  each  vacancy  of  the  throne  to  choose  the
man  who  appears  to  them  the  most  fitted  for  the  crown.  Bui
no  form  of  government  has  been  more  decisively  condemned  by
VOL. III.  B

2  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

experience.  The  elected  sovereign  is  always  likely  to  conspire
with  the  assistance  either  of  his  own  army  or  of  foreign  Powers
to  perpetuate  the  sovereignty  in  his  family.  The  other  great
powers  in  the  State,  through  fear  of  such  attempts,  are
tempted  to  reduce  the  military  establishments  below  what  is
necessary  for  the  security  of  the  nation.  Bitter  factions,  pro-
foundly detrimental  to  the  well-being  of  the  community,  are
inevitably  formed  among  the  great  families  who  are  competing
to  raise  their  candidates  to  the  throne.  Every  illness  of
the  sovereign  gives  rise  to  intrigues,  conspiracies,  and  inse-
curity ;  his  death  usually  leads  to  disorder,  and  sometimes  to
anarchy  and  civil  war.  Each  new  King  ascends  the  thione
tainted  by  the  arts  of  electioneering,  deeply  pledged  to  one
section  of  his  people,  the  object  of  the  vehement  hostility  of
another  section,  and  conscious  that  large  classes  are  looking
forward  eagerly  to  his  death.  Such  are  the  inevitable  vices  of
elective  monarchy,  and  they  are  so  grave  that,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  Papacy,  which  rests  upon  conditions  wholly  unlike
those  of  any  other  monarchy,  this  form  of  government  has  been
long  extirpated  from  Europe.  The  crowns  of  Sweden  and  of
Denmark  became  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries
strictly  hereditary.  The  Grerman  Empire,  and  the  kingdoms
of  Hungary,  Poland,  and  Bohemia  passed  away  or  were
absorbed,  and  they  perished  mainly  by  their  own  incurable
weakness.

Several  attempts  have  been  made  in  the  way  of  compromise
to  obviate  these  evils,  and  to  combine  the  advantages  of
hereditary  and  of  elective  monarchy.  One  theory  of  govern-
ment which  was  widely  diffused  in  antiquity,  and  which  may  be
traced  far  into  the  middle  ages,  but  which  has  now  passed  alto-
gether out  of  the  sphere  of  practical  politics,  was  that  royalty
was  hereditary  in  a  single  family,  but  that  the  chiefs,  tribes,  or
nations  had  the  power  of  electing  whom  they  pleased  from
among  its  members.

Another  theory,  which  if  not  openly  avowed,  has  been  some-
times practically  adopted,  is  that  the  King  holds  his  office
only  during  good  behaviour.  In  modern  France  the  sovereign
has  always  been  an  active  power  in  the  State,  continually  in-
tervening in  the  direction  of  affairs,  but  liable,  whenever  he

CH.  X.  EVILS  OF  POLITICAL  INSTABILITY.  3

showed  himself  either  incompetent  or  unpopular,  to  be  dis-
placed by  a  sudden  revolution.  To  men  who  are  firmly  con-
vinced that  the  ecclesiastical  notion  about  the  Di\ine  right  of
kings  is  a  baseless  superstition,  that  the  sovereign  is  but  the
first  magistrate  of  the  State,  and  that  the  office  he  holds  is
intended  for  the  benefit  of  his  people,  such  a  system  appears
at  first  sight  very  simple.  In  the  natural  course  of  events  it
must  often  happen  that  the  sovereign,  being  selected  by  no
principle  of  competition  and  being  exposed  to  more  than  or-
dinary temptations,  must  be  contemptible  both  in  intellect  and
character,  and  large  sections  of  his  subjects  come  to  look  upon
him  as  nothing  better  than  an  overpaid  and  inefficient  official,
who,  on  the  first  offence,  should  be  unceremoniously  dis-
charged.

But  the  evils  which  have  resulted  from  the  predominance  of
such  a  way  of  thinking  in  a  community  are  so  great  that  they
have  led  many  who  have  no  personal  sympathy  with  the  super-
stitious estimate  of  royalty,  as  a  matter  of  expediency,  rather  to
encourage  than  oppose  it.  An  hereditary  monarchy  which
subsists  only  on  the  condition  of  the  monarch  being  a  superior
man  must  be  in  a  chronic  state  of  insecurity,  and  the  stability
of  the  government  is  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  national
well-being.  Every  revolution  brings  to  the  surface  the  worst
elements  in  the  community,  demoralises  public  life,  impairs
material  interests,  and  weakens  the  empire  of  the  \aw.  It  is  a
great  calamity  for  a  people  when  its  criminal  classes  have  learnt
to  take  an  active  part  in  politics.  It  is  a  still  greater  calamity
when  the  appetite  for  organic  and  revolutionary  change  has
taken  hold  of  large  classes,  when  the  political  enthusiasm  of
opposition  assumes  the  form  of  rebellion,  and  when  the  pre-
vailing disposition  is  to  undervalue  the  slow  process  of  consti-
tutional reform,  and  to  look  upon  force  as  the  natural  solution
of  political  questions.  This  habit  of  regarding  revolution  as  in
itself  admirable  and  desirable,  and  making,  in  the  words  of
Burke,  the  extreme  remedy  of  the  State  its  habitual  diet,  is
perhaps  the  most  fatal  of  all  the  diseases  which  now  affect
political  bodies  in  Europe.  It  necessarily  throws  the  rulers
into  the  posture  of  self-defence,  and  makes  them  nervously  and
constantly  jealous  of  their  subjects. It  produces  reactions  in

B 2

4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch,  x.

which  the  most  important  reforms  are  endangered,  drives  from
politics  the  very  class  whose  co-operation  is  most  valuable,  and
exposes  every  nation  in  which  it  exists  to  the  opposite  evils  of
despotism  and  anarchy.  Political  liberty,  whether  in  Parlia-
ment or  in  the  press,  is  only  safe  and  permanently  possible  when
oppositions  are  content  to  act  within  the  lines  of  the  Constitu-
tion and  the  limits  of  the  law,  and  the  amount  of  freedom  which
any  nation  can  endure  is  measured  much  less  by  its  positive
civilisation  and  intelligence,  than  by  the  weakness  of  the  ele-
ment of  anarchy  that  is  within  it.

There  are  also  other  evils,  if  possible  more  serious,  which
follow  in  the  train  of  revolutions.  Every  deposed  dynasty  has
its  devoted  followers,  and  the  nation  is  thus  cursed  with  the
calamity  of  a  disputed  succession,  which  often  leads  to  civil
war,  and  always  makes  it  impossible  for  the  Government  to
command  the  whole  national  energies  in  great  emergencies  of
the  State.  No  other  influence  is  so  fatal  to  the  spirit  of
patriotism.  Through  hostility  to  the  Government  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  heroism,  fidelity,  and  devotion  of  the  nation  is
permanently  alienated  from  its  affairs,  and  forms  a  clear  de-
duction from  its  strength.  Subjects  learn  to  look  with  indif-
ference or  complacency  upon  the  disasters  of  their  country,  and
to  throw  perpetual  obstacles  in  the  course  of  its  policy.  Eulers
learn  to  pursue  two  policies— a  national  one  intended  to
benefit  the  nation,  and  a  dynastic  one  intended  to  benefit
themselves.  It  was  the  great  merit  of  the  conciliatory  policy
of  Walpole  that  it  saved  England  during  the  period  of  its  dis-
puted succession  from  a  large  part  of  these  evils  ;  but  in  France,
during  the  period  that  has  elapsed  since  the  Kevolution,  they
have  all  been  abundantly  displayed.  A  soil  once  peculiarly
fertile  in  political  genius  blasted  by  repeated  revolutions ;
large  classes  wholly  separated  from  the  management  of  affairs,
or  animated  by  an  insane  passion  for  anarchy ;  a  Government
embarrassed  by  dynastic  and  revolutionary  Opposition  in  the
most  critical  moments  of  its  foreign  policy,  and  vainly  seeking
by  wild  military  adventures  to  divert  to  foreign  channels  the
passions  that  are  dangerous  at  home  ;  an  administration,  both
civil  and  military,  deeply  tainted  with  corruption ;  a  grent
empire  invaded,  humiliated  and  dismembered,  and  finally  all  the

CH.  X.  CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY.  5

elements  of  disorder  rising  into  fierce  insurrection  against  the
Government  at  the  very  time  when  a  foreign  enemy  was  sur-
rounding the  capital ;  these  have  been  in  our  own  day  the  fruits
of  that  diseased  appetite  for  organic  change  and  that  contempt
for  all  constituted  authority  which  the  Great  Revolution  im-
planted in  the  chief  cities  of  PVance.  Blind  indeed  must  be
that  politician  who  fails  to  perceive  their  significance,  who  has
not  learnt  from  this  long  train  of  calamities  the  danger  of
tampering  with  the  central  pillars  of  the  State,  and  letting  loose
those  revolutionary  torrents  which  spread  such  ruin  and  desola-
tion in  their  path.

The  problem  of  combining  stability,  capacity,  and  political
freedom  has,  in  modern  constitutional  monarchies  of  the  Eng-
lish type,  been  most  fully  met  by  a  careful  division  of  powers.
The  sovereignty  is  strictly  hereditary,  surrounded  by  a  very
large  amount  of  reverence,  and  sheltered  by  constitutional  forms
from  criticism  or  opposition,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  so  re-
stricted in  its  province  that  it  has,  or  ought  to  have,  no  real
influence  on  legislation.  The  King,  according  to  a  fundamental
maxim,  '  can  do  no  wrong.'  The  responsibility  of  every  politi-
cal act  rests  solely  with  the  minister,  and,  as  he  has  the  whole
responsibility,  he  has  a  right  to  claim  the  whole  management.
The  credit  of  success  and  the  stigma  of  failure  belong  alike  to
him.  The  King  is  placed  altogether  above  the  vicissitudes  of
party  and  of  politics ;  he  is  confined  to  the  discharge  of  certain
offices  which  are  universally  admitted  to  be  useful  and  essential,
and  which  at  the  same  time  require  not  more  than  ordinary
abilities.  The  chief  efficient  power,  on  the  other  hand,  in  a
constitutional  monarchy,  is  virtually,  though  not  avowedly,  as
truly  elective  as  in  a  republic,  for  although  the  sovereign  chooses
the  minister,  he  is  restricted  in  his  choice  to  the  statesman
whom  the  dominant  political  party  has  selected  as  its  leader,
and  who  has  obtained  the  confidence  of  Parliament.

In  this  system  the  direct  political  power  of  the  sovereign
is  very  small,  but  yet  the  position  which  he  occupies  is  more
important  than  might  at  first  sight  be  imagined.  In  the
first  place,  as  Ihe  head  of  society,  the  patron  of  art,  the  dis-
penser of  international  courtesies,  the  supreme  representative
of  his  country  in  the  council  of  nations,  he  discharges  social,  and.

6 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

SO  to  speak,  ornamental  functions,  both  of  dignity  and  value,
and  in  the  next  place  he  contributes  very  largely  to  foster  the
patriotic  enthusiasm  which  is  the  animating  principle  and  moral
force  of  national  greatness.  The  great  majority  of  men  in
political  matters  are  governed  neither  by  reason  nor  by  know-
ledge, but  by  the  associations  of  the  imagination,  and  for  such
men  loyalty  is  the  first  and  natural  form  of  patriotism.  In
the  thrill  of  common  emotion  that  passes  through  the  nation
when  some  great  sorrow  or  some  great  happiness  befalls  the
reigning  dynasty,  they  learn  to  recognise  themselves  as  mem-
bers of  a  single  family.  The  throne  is  to  them  the  symbol  of
national  unity — the  chief  object  of  patriotic  interest  and  emotion.
It  strikes  their  imaginations.  It  elicits  their  enthusiasm.  It
is  the  one  rallying  cry  they  will  answer  and  understand.  Tens
of  thousands  of  men  who  are  entirely  indifferent  to  party  dis-
tinctions and  to  ministerial  changes,  who  are  too  ignorant  or
too  occupied  to  care  for  any  great  political  question,  and  to
whom  government  rarely  appears  in  any  other  light  than  as  a
machinery  for  taxing  them,  regard  the  monarch  with  a  feeling
of  romantic  devotion,  and  are  capable  of  great  efforts  of  self-
sacrifice  in  his  cause.  The  circle  of  political  feeling  is  thus
extended.  The  sum  of  enthusiasm  upon  which  the  nation  in
critical  times  can  count  is  largely  increased,  and,  however  much
speculative  critics  may  disparage  the  form  which  it  assumes,
practical  statesmen  will  not  disdain  any  of  the  tributary  rills
that  swell  the  great  tide  of  patriotism.  Even  in  the  case  of
more  educated  men  it  is  extremely  conducive  to  the  strength,
unity,  and  purity  of  the  national  sentiment,  that  the  supreme
ruler  of  the  nation  should  be  above  the  animosities  of  party,
and  that  his  presence  at  the  head  of  affairs  should  not  be  the
result  of  the  defeat  of  one  section  of  his  people.

To  these  advantages  it  must  be  added  that  the  monarchical
form  of  government  provides  a  simple  and  admirably  efficacious
machinery  for  effecting  without  convulsion  the  necessary  minis-
terial changes.  In  no  other  form  of  government  do  profound
mutations  of  men  and  policy,  violent  conflicts  of  opinion,  dis-
ordered ambitions,  and  glaring  instances  of  administrative  in-
capacity, affect  so  slightly  the  stability  of  the  Constitution.
A  ministerial  crises  has  no  affinity  to  a  revolution. The  per-

CH.  X.  CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY.  7

manenceof  the  supreme  authority,  unchallenged  and  undisturbed
amid  all  the  conflicts  of  parties,  calms  the  imaginations  of  men.
The  continuity  of  affairs  is  unbroken.  The  shock  is  deadened.
The  changes  take  place  with  regularity  and  in  a  restricted
orbit,  and  the  country  is  saved  from  an  insecurity  which  long
before  it  touches  the  limit  of  anarchy  is  disastrous  to  the  pro-
sperity of  nations.  Indirectly  the  monarchy  has  a  great  political
influence,  for  if  it  did  not  exist  the  aristocracy  could  hardly
subsist  as  a  considerable  political  power.  In  the  distribution
of  non-poHtical  patronage  the  sovereign  may  not  unreasonably
claim  a  real  voice,  and  if  he  be  an  able  man  the  experience
derived  from  an  oflScial  connection  with  many  successive
ministries,  and  the  peculiar  sources  of  knowledge  arising  from
his  relations  with  foreign  CoiU"ts,  will  never  be  wholly  unfelt  in
the  councils  of  the  nation.  In  a  few  rare  cases  of  nearly
balanced  claims  he  has  a  real  power  of  deciding  to  whom  he
will  entrust  the  task  of  forming  an  administration ;  in  a  few
rare  cases,  when  a  ministry  commanding  a  majority  in  Parlia-
ment is  pursuing  a  course  which  appears  plainly  repugnant  to
the  feelings  of  the  country,  he  may  justifiably  exercise  his  pre-
rogative to  dissolve  Parliament,  and  submit  the  question  to
the  decision  of  the  country.  But  in  the  immense  majority  of
cases  he  is  at  once  neutral  and  powerless  in  party  politics.  He
Bimply  puts  in  motion  a  machine  the  action  of  which  is  else-
where determined,  and  is  no  more  responsible  for  the  policy
to  which  he  assents  than  a  judge  for  the  laws  which  he  ad-
ministers. The  spirit  of  loyalty,  while  it  remains  a  powerful
adjunct  to  the  spirit  of  patriotism,  has  thus  ceased  to  be  in
any  degree  prejudicial  to  liberty.  The  position  of  the  King  in
the  Constitution  resembles  that  of  the  Speaker  in  the  House
of  Commons,  and  like  that  dignitary  his  political  neutrality  and
the  deference  with  which  he  is  regarded  contribute  largely  to
his  utility.

The  extreme  importance  of  freeing  the  sovereign  from  all
responsibility  and  withdrawing  him  from  all  official  influence
in  politics,  wherever  the  Parliament  is  a  real  exponent  of
the  people's  will  and  is  at  the  same  time  the  most  powerful
body  in  the  State,  maybe  easily  proved.  In  the  great  majority
of  cases  he  must  necessarily  be  a  man  of  very  ordinary  ability,

8 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

and  even  were  it  otherwise,  his  exclusion  from  Parliament
and  from  the  common  life  of  his  people  deprives  him  of  the
kind  of  esperi  nee  which  is  most  essential  for  a  popular
statesman.  And  no  statesman,  though  he  possessed  the  ability
and  experience  of  a  Walpole,  a  Chatham,  or  a  Peel,  could
conduct  the  policy  of  the  nation  for  the  period  of  a  long  reign
without  occasionally  incurring  violent  unpopularity  and  differ-
ing from  the  majority  of  the  legislators.  In  a  purely  constitu-
tional country  this  causes  little  disturbance,  for  the  minister  at
once  retires  and  is  replaced  by  a  statesman  who  shares  the  views
of  the  majority.  But  in  the  case  of  the  sovereign  no  such
expedient  is  possible.  He  must  remain  at  his  post.  He  must
eventually  carry  out  the  policy  of  his  Parliament,  and  select  ad-
visers in  whom  it  has  confidence.  If  then  he  regards  himself  as
personally  responsible  for  the  policy  of  the  nation,  and  if  he  be  a
man  of  strong,  conscientious  political  convictions,  his  position
will  soon  become  intolerable.  He  cannot  resist  without  danger,
or  yield  without  humiliation.  He  will  be  in  the  position  of  an
irremovable  Prime  Minister,  compelled  to  carry  out  a  policy
which  he  detests,  and  to  select  his  subordinates  from  among  his
opponents.  A  more  painful,  a  more  insecure,  a  more  fatally
false  position  could  hardly  be  conceived,  but  it  must  be  that  of
every  sovereign  who  in  a  constitutional  monarchy  is  an  active
party  in  politics.  If  the  collision  be  public,  it  may  shake  the
monarchy  to  its  basis.  If  it  be  confined  to  the  precincts  of  the
council-room,  it  is  only  a  little  less  dangerous.  A  secret  in-
fluence habitually  exercised  is  sure  to  be  suspected,  to  be  exag-
gerated, and  to  be  misrepresented.  The  national  policy  will
almost  inevitably  be  weakened  when  the  confidence  of  the  sove-
reign is  withheld  from  the  ministers,  or  when  he  is  perpetually
interfering  with  their  conduct.  Court  intrigues,  secret  and  un-
official advisers,  responsible  ministers  surrendering  their  real
convictions  in  deference  to  the  wishes  of  an  irresponsible  sove-
reign, are  the  natural  results  ;  and  even  if  the  firmness  of
ministers  succeeds  in  averting  them,  it  is  no  small  evil  that  the
duty  of  discussing  in  detail  every  political  step  with  the  sovereign
should  be  added  to  the  almost  overwhelming  burden  which
already  rests  upon  parliamentary  statesmen.  The  King  may
retain  a  great  influence  in  the  management  of  affairs  where

CH.  X.  CONSTITUTIONAL MONAECflY,  9

Parliament  is  altogether  a  subordinate  body,  restricted  in  its
functions  and  authority.  He  may  even  retain  it,  though  more
precariously,  when  Parliament  has  become  the  strongest  body
of  the  State,  if  the  composition  of  that  Parliament  is  so  ex-
clusive or  aristocratic  that  he  can  sway  it  by  the  influences
at  his  disposal.  But  whenever  Parliament  has  become  a
direct  expression  of  the  people's  will,  and  especially  whenever
the  existence  of  a  free  press  and  the  aggregation  of  a  large
proportion  of  the  population  in  great  towns  has  given  popular
opinion  an  irresistible  volume  and  momentum,  the  withdrawal
of  the  sovereign  from  the  arena  is  equally  essential  to  his
security  and  to  his  dignity.  The  only  political  power  he  can
reasonably  be  suflfered  to  exercise  is  that  of  a  suspensory  veto,
preventing  hasty  legislation,  and  above  all  delaying  the  decision
of  Parliament  on  great  questions  till  they  have  been  brought
directly  before  the  constituencies  by  an  election.  But  this  power
— which  should  certainly  be  lodged  somewhere  in  the  Constitu-
tion— is  exercised  as  efficiently  and  much  less  invidiously  by
the  House  of  Lords,  and  the  royal  veto  has  accordingly  fallen
into  desuetude  and  has  not  been  employed  since  the  reign  of
Anne.

The  substantial,  though  still  somewhat  imperfect  realisation
of  this  ideal  of  constitutional  monarchy,  has,  since  the  period
of  the  Act  of  Settlement,  been  only  sKghtly  due  to  legislation,
or  at  least  to  legislation  which  was  intended  to  affect  the  posi-
tion of  the  Crown.  It  has  resulted  partly  from  a  series  of  his-
torical facts  growing  out  of  the  accession  of  the  House  of  Hanover
which  have  been  described  in  a  former  volume,  and  partly
from  the  steady  subsequent  growth  of  the  popular  element  in
the  Constitution.  The  reigning  sovereign  has  exactly  the  same
legal  power  of  vetoing  bills  passed  by  both  Houses  of  Parliament
as  "William  III.  or  the  Stuarts,  but  it  is  a  power  which  it  has
become  impossible  to  exercise  with  safety.  The  Cabinet,  which
has  gradually  drawn  to  itself  nearly  all  the  ancient  powers  of
the  Privy  Council,  which  sits  without  the  presence  of  the
sovereign,  and  which  determines  the  policy  of  the  Government,
is  a  body  entirely  unknown  to  the  law  and  to  the  theory  of  the
Constitution  ;  and  it  is  no  special  enactment,  but  only  the  silent
strengthening  of  party  government,  that  has  virtually  deprived

10 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  x.

the  sovereign  of  his  legally  unrestricted  power  of  choosing  his
ministers.  Even  the  power  so  largely  exercised  by  the  Tudors
and  by  James  I.  of  changing  the  composition  of  the  represen-
tative body  by  summoning  previously  unrepresented  towns  to
send  members  to  Parliament,  was  in  theory  untouched  by  the
Eevolution,  and  no  less  a  writer  than  Locke  defended  the  pro-
priety of  extinguishing  the  rotten  boroughs  and  readjusting
the  proportion  of  members  to  electors  by  a  simple  exercise  of
prerogative.^  Such  schemes  soon  became  impossible,  but  the
form  which  popular  government  has  assumed  in  England  is
mainly  to  be  attributed  to  the  Whig  party,  who,  while  they
have  combated  steadily  the  Tory  doctrine  of  the  Divine  right
of  kings,  and  the  conception  of  monarchy  that  flows  from  it,
and  have  restricted  within  very  narrow  limits  the  political  func-
tions of  the  sovereign,  have  at  the  same  time,  unlike  many
continental  Liberals,  carefully  respected  his  dignity  and  his
ofl&ce,  and  made  it  a  main  object  to  place  both  outside  the
sphere  of  controversy.  But  in  the  eighteenth  century  the
Whig  ideal  was  still  far  from  its  attainment,  and  George  III.  is
the  last  instance  of  an  English  sovereign  endeavouring  sys-
tematically to  impose  his  individual  opinion  upon  the  nation,
and  in  a  great  degree  succeeding  in  his  attempt.

When  George  II.  died,  on  October  25,  1760,  his  grand-
son and  successor  had  but  just  completed  his  twenty-second
year.  The  life  of  the  young  Prince  had  hitherto  been  very
unsuitable  for  the  task  he  was  to  fulfil.  Since  his  thir-
teenth year,  when  his  father  died,  he  had  lived  entirely  with
his  mother,  and  he  exhibited  during  his  whole  career  the
characteristic  merits  and  defects  of  a  female  education/  His
mother  was  a  woman  of  a  somewhat  hard,  reserved,  and  tor-
tuous character ;  with  few  friendships  and  several  bitter  enmi-
ties ;  with  a  power  of  concealing  her  true  sentiments  which
baffled  even  those  who  came  in  closest  connection  with  her  ;
strict  in  the  observance  of  her  religious  duties,  and  in  her  care
of  her  nine  children ;  eminently  discreet  in  her  dealings  with  a
bad  husband  and  a  jealous  father-in-law ;  deeply  imbued  with

'  Locke,  On  Gwernmeyrt,  Book  2,  within  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown

ch.  xiii. See  too  Hallam's  Const.  Hut.  to  restore  the  Wsh  Parliament  by  its

ch.  xiii. O'Connell  once  drew  up  a  sole  action. See  O'Neil  Daunt's  Per-

legal  argument  to  prove  that  it  was  sonal Recollectioris of 0'Cotinell,ch. liyi.

CH.  X.  YOUTH OF GEORGE  III.  11

the  narrow  prejudices  of  a  small  German  Court,  fond  of  power,
unamiable,  and  somewhat  soured  by  adversity.  The  early  death
of  her  husband  had  deprived  her  of  the  prospect  of  a  crown,  and
although  after  his  death  Leicester  House  ceased  to  be  a  centre
of  active  opposition,  the  old  King  looked  upon  both  the  Princess
and  his  grandchild  with  jealousy,  and  they  had  in  consequence
little  intercourse  with  the  Court  circle,  with  the  Whig  ministers,
and  even  with  the  other  members  of  the  royal  family.  The
education  of  the  young  Prince  was  feebly  and  fitfully  conducted ;
and  it  is  remarkable  that  among  his  preceptors  Scott  had  been
recommended  by  Bolingbroke,  while  Stone  had  been  suspected
of  Jacobitism.  They  appear  to  have  discharged  their  functions
very  ill ;  for  George  III.  was  always  singularly  deficient  in
literary  culture.  Lord  Waldegrave,  who  was  much  the  ablest
of  his  gjovernors,  described  him  as  a  boy  of  respectable  abilities,
but  great  constitutional  indolence ;  scrupulous,  dutiful,  ignorant
of  evil,  and  sincerely  pious,  but  neither  generous  nor  frank »
harsh  in  his  judgments  of  others,  with  strong  prejudices,  in-
domitable obstinacy,  and  great  command  over  his  passions,
exceedingly  tenacious  of  his  resentments,  and  exhibiting  them
chiefly  by  prolonged  fits  of  sullenness.  His  indolence  he  suc-
ceeded in  completely  overcoming,  but  the  other  lines  of  this
not  very  pleasing  picture  continued  during  his  whole  life.  He
mixed  very  little  in  the  world — scarcely  at  all  with  the  young
nobility.  His  mother  said  that  their  lax  manners  would  pro-
bably corrupt  her  son.  Her  enemies  declared  that  the  real
explanation  of  this  strange  seclusion  was  her  own  insatiable
avarice  of  power,  which  made  her  wish  beyond  all  things  to  es-
tablish a  complete  ascendency  over  his  mind,  and  to  withdraw
him  from  every  influence  that  could  rival  her  own.  Like  most
members  of  German  royal  families,  she  exaggerated  the  pre-
rogative of  monarchy  to  the  highest  degree,  and  her  favourite
exhortation,  '  George,  be  a  king ! '  is  said  to  have  left  a  deep
impression  on  the  mind  of  her  son.  The  most  important
figure  in  the  smaU  circle  was  John,  Earl  of  Bute,  a  Scotch
nobleman  who  had  held  an  office  in  the  household  of  Frederick,
Prince  of  Wales,  had  lived  after  his  death  for  some  years  a
life  of  more  than  common  retirement  in  Scotland,  and,  on
the  estabHshment  of  the  household  of  the  young  Prince,  had

12 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  x.

been  placed  at  the  head  of  it  as  Groom  of  the  Stole.  He
was  a  man  of  some  literary  and  artistic  taste,  but  of  very
limited  talents,  entirely  inexperienced  in  public  business,  arro-
gant, reserved,  and  unpopular  in  his  temper,  and  with  extreme
views  of  the  legitimate  powers  of  royalty.  The  very  confi-
dential relations  of  Bute  with  the  Princess  gave  rise  to  a
scandal  which  was  widely  spread  and  generally  believed.^  He
became  the  chief  adviser  or  instructor  of  her  son,  and  strength-
ened in  his  mind  those  plans  for  the  emancipation  of  the  royal
authority  which  Greorge  III.  pursued  steadily  throughout  his
whole  life.

The  new  sovereign  came  to  the  throne  amid  an  enthusiasm
such  as  England  had  hardly  seen  since  Charles  II.  restored  the
monarchy.  By  the  common  consent  of  all  parties  the  dynastic
contest  was  regarded  as  closed,  and  after  two  generations  of
foreign  and  unsympathetic  rulers,  the  nation,  which  has  always
been  peculiarly  intolerant  of  strangers,  accepted  with  delight
an  English  king.  The  fa.vourable  impression  was  still  further
confirmed  when  the  more  salient  points  of  the  private  charac-
ter of  the  King  became  generally  understood.  Simple,  regular,
and  abstemious  in  all  his  tastes  and  habits,  deeply  religious
without  affectation  or  enthusiasm,  a  good  son,  a  faithful  hus-
band, a  kind  master,  and  (except  when  he  had  met  with  gross
ingratitude)  an  affectionate  father,  he  exhibited  through  his
whole  reign,  and  in  a  rare  perfection,  that  type  of  decorous  and
domestic  virtue  which  the  English  middle  classes  most  highly
prize.  The  proclamation  against  immorality  with  which  he
began  his  reign  ;  the  touchmg  piety  with  which,  at  his  coro-
nation, he  insisted  on  putting  aside  his  crown  when  receiving
the  sacrament;  his  rebuke  to  a  Court  preacher  who  had  praised
him  in  a  sermon ;  his  suppression  of  Sunday  levees ;  his  dis-
couragement of  gambling  at  Court ;  his  letter  of  remonstrance
to  an  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  who  had  allowed  balls  in  his
palace ;  his  constant  attendance  and  reverential  manner  at
religious  services ;  his  solemn  and  pious  resignation  under
great  private  misfortunes,  contrasted  admirably  with  the  open
immorality  of  his  father,  his  grandfather,  and  his  great -grand-

'  See  e.fj.  Lord Waldegrave's  ^Icminrs, p. 53. Walpole's Memoirs  of
Ornrgc  II.  ii.  204,  205.

CH.  X.  LIIS GOOD QUALITIES.  13

father,  and  with  the  outrageous  licentiousness  of  his  own
brothers  and  of  his  own  sons.  He  never  sought  for  popularity ;
but  he  had  many  of  the  kingly  graces,  and  many  of  the  national
tastes  that  are  most  fitted  to  obtain  it.  He  went  through  pub-
lic ceremonies  with  much  dignity,  and  although  his  manner  in
private  was  hurried  and  confused,  it  was  kind  and  homely,  and
not  without  a  certain  unaffected  grace.  Unlike  his  two  predeces-
sors, he  was  emphatically  a  gentleman,  and  he  possessed  to  a  rare
degree  the  royal  art  of  enhancing  small  favours  by  a  gracious
manner  and  a  few  well-chosen  words.  His  country  tastes,  his
love  of  field-sports,  his  keen  interest  in  the  great  public  schools,
endeared  him  to  large  classes  of  his  subjects ;  and,  though  he
was  neither  brilliant  nor  witty,  several  of  his  terse  and  happy
sayings  are  still  remembered.  He  was  also  a  very  brave  man.
In  the  Wilkes  riots,  in  1769,  when  his  palace  was  attacked  ;  in
the  Lord  George  Gordon  riots,  in  1780,  when  his  presence  of
mind  contributed  largely  to  save  London;  in  1786,  when  a
poor  madwoman  attempted  to  stab  him  at  the  entrance  of  St.
James's  Palace;  in  1795,  when  he  was  assailed  on  his  way  to
Parliament ;  in  1800,  when  he  was  fired  at  in  a  theatre,  he
exhibited  the  most  perfect  composure  amid  danger.  His  habit
in  dating  his  letters,  of  marking,  not  only  the  day,  but  the  hour
and  the  minute  in  which  he  wrote,  illustrates  not  unhappily
the  microscopic  attention  which  he  paid  to  every  detail  of
public  business,  and  which  was  the  more  admirable  because
his  natural  tendency  was  towards  sloth.  In  matters  that  were
not  connected  with  his  political  prejudices,  his  sincere  appre-
ciation of  piety  and  his  desire  to  do  good  sometimes  overcame
his  religious  bigotry  and  his  hatred  of  change.  Thus  he  always
spoke  with  respect  of  the  Methodists,  and  especially  of  Lady
Huntingdon  ;  he  supported  Howard,  and  subscribed  to  a  statue
in  his  honour  ;  he  supported  the  Lancaster  systom  of  education,
though  Lancaster  was  a  Dissenter,  and  was  looked  upon  with
disfavour  by  the  bishops  ;  he  encouraged  the  movement  for
Sunday-schools.  He  was  sincerely  desirous  of  doing  his  duty,
and  deeply  attached  to  his  country,  although  stronger  feelings
often  interfered  both  with  his  conscientiousness  and  with  his
patriotism.

It  is  not  surprising  that  a  sovereign  of  whom  all  this  may

14 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

be  truly  said  should  have  obtained  much  respect  and  admira-
tion ;  and  it  must  be  added  that,  in  his  hatred  of  innovation
and  in  his  vehement  anti-American,  anti-Catholic,  and  anti-
Grallican  feelings,  he  represented  the  sentiments  of  large  sec-
tions— perhaps  of  the  majority — of  his  people.  The  party
which  he  drew  from  its  depression  has  naturally  revered  his
memory,  and  old  age,  and  blindness,  and  deafness,  and  depriva-
tion of  reason,  and  the  base  ingratitude  of  two  sons,  have  cast  a
deep  pathos  over  his  closing  years.

All  these  things  have  contributed  very  naturally  to  throw  a
delusive  veil  over  the  political  errors  of  a  sovereign  of  whoin
it  may  be  said  without  exaggeration,  that  he  inflicted  more
profound  and  enduring  injuries  upon  his  country  than  any  other
modern  English  king.  Ignorant,  narrow-minded,  and  arbitrary,
with  an  unbounded  confidence  in  his  own  judgment  and  an
extravagant  estimate  of  his  prerogative,  resolved  at  all  hazards
to  compel  his  ministers  to  adopt  his  own  views,  or  to  un-
dermine them  if  they  refused,  he  spent  a  long  life  in  obsti-
nately resisting  measures  which  are  now  almost  universally
admitted  to  have  been  good,  and  in  supporting  measures  which
are  as  universally  admitted  to  have  been  bad.  He  espoused
with  passionate  eagerness  the  American  quarrel ;  resisted  ob-
stinately the  measures  of  conciliation  by  which  at  one  time  it
might  easily  have  been  stifled  ;  envenomed  it  by  his  glaring
partisanship,  and  protracted  it  for  several  years,  in  opposition
to  the  wish  and  to  the  advice  even  of  his  own  favourite  and
responsible  minister.  He  took  the  warmest  personal  interest  in
the  attempts  that  were  made,  in  the  matter  of  general  warrants,
to  menace  the  liberty  of  the  subject,  and  in  the  case  of  the
Middlesex  election  to  abridge  the  electoral  rights  of  constituen-
cies, and  in  the  other  paltry,  violent,  and  arbitrary  measures
by  which  the  country  was  inflamed  and  Wilkes  was  converted
into  a  hero.  The  last  instance  of  an  English  officer  deprived  of
his  regiment  for  his  vote  in  Parliament  was  due  to  the  personal
intervention  of  the  King ;  and  the  ministers  whom  he  most
warmly  favoured  were  guilty  of  an  amount  and  audacity  of
corruption  which  is  probably  unequalled  in  the  parliamentary
history  of  England.  All  the  measures  that  were  carried  or
attempted  with  the  object  of  purifying  the  representative  body

CH.  X.  HIS HATEED OF  REFOEM.  15

— the  publication  of  debates,  the  alteration  of  the  mode  of
trying  contested  elections,  the  reduction  of  sinecures  and  pen-
sions, the  enlargement  of  the  constituencies — were  contrary  to
the  wishes  of  the  King.  Although  his  income  during  the
greater  part  of  his  reign  was  little  less  than  a  million  a  year,'
although  his  Court  was  parsimonious  to  a  fault,  and  his  hospi-
tality exceedingly  restricted,  and  although  he  succeeded  to  a
considerable  sum  that  had  been  saved  by  his  predecessor,  he
accumulated  in  the  course  of  his  reign  debts  to  the  amount  of
no  less  than  3,398,06lL  ;  2  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that
contemporary  public  opinion  was  right  in  attributing  a  great
part  of  these  debts  to  his  expenditure  in  parliamentary  or
electoral  corruption.  Of  all  the  portions  of  the  empire  none
was  so  impoverished,  distracted,  and  misgoverned  as  Ireland,
but  every  attempt  to  improve  its  condition  found  in  the  King
a  bitter  adversary.  He  opposed  the  relaxation  of  the  atrocious
laws  by  which  Irish  commerce  had  been  crushed,  although  his
own  Tory  ministers  were  in  favour  of  it.  He  opposed  Catholic
emancipation  with  a  persistent  bitterness,  although  that  measure
alone  could  have  made  the  Irish  union  acceptable  to  the  people,
and  although  his  minister  had  virtually  pledged  himself  to
grant  it,  and  by  his  refusal  he  consigned  the  country  to  a
prolonged  and  disastrous  agitation,  the  efifects  of  which  may
never  disappear.  He  opposed  the  endowment  of  the  Catholic
clergy,  although  statesmen  of  the  most  various  schools  con-
curred in  the  belief  that  no  other  measure  would  act  so  bene-
ficially on  the  social  condition  of  Ireland,  or  would  so  effectually
tranquilHse  the  minds  of  its  people.  He  refused  to  consent  to
throw  open  the  higher  ranks  in  the  army  to  the  Catholics,
although  that  measure  had  already  been  conceded  to  the  army
in  Ireland  by  the  Irish  Parliament ;  and  he  flung  the  country
into  all  the  agonies  of  a  'No  Popery'  dissolution  at  the  very
time  when  a  fearful  struggle  with  France  was  demanding  the
utmost  unanimity,  and  when  thousands  of  Catholic  soldiers
were  fighting  bravely  in  his  cause.  In  the  same  spirit  he
supported  the  slave  trade ;  he  approved  of  all  the  various
measures  by  which  Pitt  in  1794  and  1705  suspended  almost

'  See  the  calculations  in  Burke's  Causes  of  the  Present  D'iscoiitentsi.
^  May's  Const.  Hist.  1.  206.

16  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ce.  x.

every  guarantee  of  the  liberty  of  the  subject;  he  described
the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts  as  the  palladium  of  the  con-
stitution, and  was  inexorably  opposed  to  their  abolition ;  he
created  Tory  peers  in  such  lavish  numbers,  and  with  such  an
exclusive  view  to  their  political  subserviency,  that  he  seriously
lowered  the  character  and  fundamentally  altered  the  ten-
dencies of  the  House  of  Lords,  and  produced  that  strong  per-
manent difference  between  the  two  Houses  which  is  one  of  the
greatest  dangers  of  the  Constitution ;  and  in  the  last  years  of
his  reign,  before  insanity  extinguished  his  powers  of  evil,  he
was  fanning  the  disastrous  French  war,  and  opposing  every
attempt  to  negotiate  a  peace.  In  a  word,  there  is  scarcely
a  field  of  politics  in  which  the  hand  of  the  King  may  not
be  traced — sometimes  in  postponing  inevitable  measures  of
justice  and  reform,  sometimes  in  sowing  the  seeds  of  enduring
evil.

The  root,  however,  of  his  great  errors  lay  in  his  deter-
mination to  restore  the  royal  power  to  a  position  wholly
different  from  that  which  it  occupied  in  the  reign  of  his
predecessor  ;  and  this  design  was  in  many  respects  more  plau-
sible than  is  now  generally  admitted.  Every  functionary  has
a  natural  tendency  to  magnify  his  office,  and  when  George  III.
ascended  the  throne  he  found  his  position  as  an  hereditary  con-
stitutional sovereign  almost  unique  in  the  world.  In  France,  in
Spain,  in  Austria,  in  the  smallest  principality  in  Germany,  the
sovereign  was  hardly  less  absolute  than  in  Kussia  or  Turkey.
And  the  power  of  the  English  sovereign  had  for  many  years
been  steadily  declining,  and  the  limitations  to  which  he  was
practically  subject  went  far  beyond  the  mere  letter  of  the  law.
The  time  had  indeed  long  passed  when  Elizabeth  directed  her
Parliaments  to  abstain  from  discussing  matters  of  state,  and
when  James  I.  declared  that,  '  as  it  is  atheism  and  blasphemy
in  a  creature  to  dispute  what  the  Deity  may  do,  so  it  is  pre-
sumption and  sedition  in  a  subject  to  dispute  what  a  king  may-
do  in  the  height  of  his  power  ; '  but  even  after  the  Eevolution,
William  III.  had  been  a  great  political  power,  and  Anne,  though
a  weak  and  foolish  woman,  had  exercised  no  small  amount  of
personal  influence.  What  the  position  of  the  English  sovereign
was  in  the  eyes  of  the  English  Church  was  sufficiently  shown

en.  X.  DECADENCE OF ROYAL  AUTHOEITY.  17

by  the  long  series  of  theologians  who  proclaimed  in  the  most
emphatic  terms  that  he  possessed  a  Divine  right,  different,
not  only  in  degree  but  in  kind,  from  that  of  every  other  power
in  the  State  ;  that  he  was  the  representative  or  vicegerent  of
the  Deity ;  that  resistance  to  him  was  in  all  eases  a  sin.  The
language  of  English  law  was  less  unqualified,  but  still  it  painted
his  authority  in  very  different  colours  from  those  which  an  his-
torian of  George  I.  or  of  George  II.  would  have  used.  The
'  Commentaries  '  of  Blackstone  were  not  published  till  George
III.  had  been  for  some  time  on  the  throne ;  but  Bute  had  ob-
tained a  considerable  portion  of  them  in  manuscript  from  the
author,  for  the  purpose  of  instructing  the  Prince  in  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Constitution.^  '  The  King  of  England,'  in  the
words  of  Blackstone,  '  is  not  only  the  chief,  but  properly  the
sole  magistrate  of  the  nation,  all  others  acting  by  commission
from  and  in  due  subordination  to  him.'  '  He  may  reject  what
bills,  may  make  what  treaties  ....  may  pardon  what  offences
he  pleases,  unless  when  the  Constitution  hath  expressly,  or  by
evident  consequence,  laid  dovni  some  exception  or  boundary.'
He  has  the  sole  power  of  regulating  fleets  and  armies,  of
manning  all  forts  and  other  places  of  strength  within  the
realm,  of  making  war  and  peace,  of  conferring  honours,  offices,
and  privileges.  He  governs  the  kingdom :  statesmen,  who
administer  affairs,  are  only  his  ministers.^

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  contrast  between  such  language
and  the  actual  position  of  George  II.  during  the  greater  part
of  his  reign  should  have  vividly  impressed  a  young  sovereign
surrounded  by  Tory  followers,  and  naturally  extremely  tenacious
of  power,  or  that  he  should  have  early  resolved  to  bend  all  his
faculties  to  the  task  of  emancipating  his  office  from  the  re-
si  rictions  that  surrounded  it.  The  period  of  his  accession  was
in  some  respects  exceedingly  propitious  to  his  design.  Among
the  causes  of  the  depression  of  royalty  one  of  the  most  obvious
and  important  had  been  the  long  exclusion  from  office  of  that
great  Tory  party  which  naturally  exalts  most  highly  the  royal
prerogative.  It  had  originally  been  defended,  and  perhaps
justified,  by  the  Jacobitism  of  Bolingbroke and  of  his  col-

'  Adolplius,  Hist,  of  George  III.  i.  p,  12.
^  Blackstone,  Book  1,  ch.  vii.
VOL.  III.  C

18  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,  at.  x.

leagues ;  but  it  had  been  perpetuated  through  party  motives,
and  the  borough  system,  assisted  by  royal  favour,  had  enabled
a  few  great  Whig  families  gradually  to  command  the  chief
power  in  the  State.  But  with  the  extinction  of  Jacobitism  the
necessity  for  this  exclusion  had  ceased.  Scotland  had  been
completely  pacified  by  the  aboKtion  of  hereditary  jurisdictions ;
the  English  Jacobites  were  shown  by  the  Eebellion  of  1745  to
be  few  and  insignificant.  Tlie  animosity  against  George  II.  on
account  of  the  severities  that  followed  the  Eebellion  was  not
extended  to  his  successor.  The  dislike  to  a  foreign  king,  which
had  hitherto  been  the  strongest  support,  had  now  become  one
of  the  most  formidable  difficulties  of  the  Jacobites.  George  III
was  English  by  birth,  by  education,  by  character,  and  by  creed.
The  Pretender  was  at  once  a  foreigner  and  a  Papist,  with  few
or  no  English  tastes,  and  sunk,  according  to  common  report,  in
habitual  drunkenness.'  So  many  years  had  elapsed  since  the
Act  of  Settlement  that  the  new  dynasty  had  struck  its  roots
firmly  in  the  soil,  and  all  those  large  classes  who  were  most
attached  to  the  theory  of  legitimacy  were  only  waiting  for  the
death  of  George  II.  to  rally  around  his  successor  as  they  had
rallied  around  Anne  or  around  Charles  II.

The  propriety  of  breaking  down  the  system  of  exclusion
seemed  manifest.  The  Tory  sentiment  of  the  country  had  long
found  no  adequate  expression  in  the  Government.  The  party
which  carried  with  it  the  genuine  sympathies  both  of  the
country  gentry  and  of  the  country  clergy  had  been  so  dis-
couraged that  after  the  death  of  Bolingbroke  and  of  the  Prince
of  Wales  it  was  scarcely  represented  in  Parliament,  and  its
political  eclipse  had  been  followed  by  a  great  increase  both  of
oligarchical  influence  and  of  corruption.  There  was  something
manifestly  unhealthy  in  the  continuance  dm*ing  many  years,  of
a  Government  like  that  of  Walpole,  which  was  supported  chiefly
by  a  majority  of  members  of  nomination  boroughs  in  opposition

'  '  The  Pretender  continues  to  be  was  passing  by.' Mr.  Stanley  to  Pitt,

perpetually  drunk  ;  the  other  day  he  — Grenville  Papers,!.  3Q6.  In  another

forced  a  Cordelier  to  drink  with  him  letter  Stanley  sa3-s  :  'The  Pretender's

as  long  as  he  possibly  could. At  last  eldest  son  is  drunk  as  soon  as  he  rises,

the  friar  made  his  escape,  which  the  and  is  always  senselessly  so  at  night,

other  resented  so  much  that  he  tired  when  his  servants  carry  him  to  bed.

with  ball  from  the  window  at  him.  He  is  not  thought of even  by  the

lie  missed  him,  but  killed  a  cow  that  exiles.' — Chatham  Corres]).  ii.  128.

rn.  X. ITS  EEVIVAL  UNDER  GEORGE  III.  19

to  the  large  majority  of  the  county  votes  ;  and  nothing  but  the
wisdom  and  moderation  with  which  the  Whig  party  used  their
ascendency  could  have  repressed  serious  discontent  in  the
country.  Bolingbroke,  in  works  which  seem  to  have  suggested
the  policy  of  George  III.,  had  strongly  urged  the  necessity  of
disregarding  the  old  party  distinctions,  and  building  up  the
royal  authority  on  their  decay.  Carteret,  after  the  fall  of  Wal-
pole,  had  designed  a  mixed  ministry,  in  which  Tories  as  well  as
Whigs  could  be  admitted  largely  to  power.  Pitt  had  long
chafed  bitterly  against  the  system  of  government  by  connection,
and  it  was  noticed  that  although  the  higher  offices  in  the
Grovernment  were  still  occupied  exclusively  by  Whigs,  the
country  party,  who  had  remained  sullenly  indifferent  to  pre-
ceding Governments,  rallied  warmly  around  him,  and  that  in
his  militia  appointments  he  entirely  overlooked  the  distinction
of  Whig  and  Tory.'

The  object  of  Pitt  was  to  check  the  corruption  that  prevailed
and  to  extend  the  area  of  patriotic  feeling.  The  object  of  George
III.  and  of  the  little  group  of  politicians  who  surrounded  and
counselled  him  was  very  different,  but  their  means  were  in
some  respects  the  same.  In  order  to  estimate  their  policy  it  is
necessary  in  the  first  place  to  form  a  clear  conception  of  their
aims  and  methods.  It  is  probable  that  Burke,  in  the  famous
pamphlet  in  which  he  described  the  condition  of  English
politics  in  the  first  years  of  George  III.,  considerably  exagge-
rated the  systematic  and  elaborate  character  of  the  plan  that
was  adopted,  but  its  leading  features  are  sufficiently  plain.
'  Prerogative,'  as  Horace  Walpole  said,  had  once  more  '  become
a  fashionable  word,'^  the  Divine  right  of  kings  was  once  again
continually  preached  from  the  pulpit,  and  the  Court  party  never
concealed  their  conviction  that  the  monarchy  in  the  preceding
reign  had  fallen  into  an  essentially  false  position,  and  that  it
should  be  the  first  object  of  the  new  sovereign  to  restore  it  to

'  After  his  resipnation  Pitt  said:  deserted  their  hounds  and  their  horses,

'  He  lay  under  great obligations to  preferring  for  once  their  parliamen-

many  gentlemen  who  had  been  of  the  tary  duty  .  .  .  and displayed  their

denomination  of  Tories,  but  who  dur-  banner  for  Pitt.' — Glover's Memoin,

ing  his  share  of  the  administration  had  p.  97  ;  see  too  p.  115. Walpole  speaks

supported  Government  upon  the  prin-  of  Pitt's  'known  design  of  uniting,

ciples  of  Whiggism  and  of  the  Revo-  that  was  breaking,  all  parties.' — Me-

lution.' — AVoem&T\e'&  Life  of  Rocking-  moirs  (f  George  III.  i.  15.

kam,\.loO. •  The  country  gentlemen  '^  Ibid.  16.

c  2

20 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. cii.  x.

vigour.  They  had,  however,  no  wish  to  restrict  or  override  the
authority  of  Parliament,  or  to  adopt  any  means  which  were  not
legal  and  parliamentary.  Their  favourite  cries  were  abolition
of  government  by  party  or  connection,  abolition  of  corruption
at  elections,  emancipation  of  the  sovereign  from  ministerial
tyranny.  No  class  of  politicians  were  to  be  henceforth  abso-
lutely excluded,  but  at  the  same  time  no  class  or  connection
were  to  be  allowed  to  dictate  their  policy  to  the  King.  The
aristocracy,  it  was  said,  had  obtained  an  exaggerated  place  in
the  Constitution.  A  few  great  families,  who  had  been  the
leading  supporters  of  the  Kevolution,  who  were  closely  con-
nected by  family  relationships,  by  friendship,  by  long  and  sys-
tematic political  co-operation,  had  come  to  form  a  single  co-
herent body  possessing  so  large  an  amount  of  borough  patronage
and  such  vast  and  various  ramiiications  of  influence,  that  they
were  practically  the  rulers  of  the  country.^  This  phalanx  was
beyond  all  things  to  be  broken  up.  If  a  great  nobleman  con-
sented to  detach  himself  from  it  and  to  enter  into  new  combi-
nations ;  if  on  a  change  of  ministry  subordinate  officials  were
content  to  abandon  their  leaders  and  to  retain  their  places,  such
conduct  was  to  be  warmly  encouraged.  The  system  of  divided
administrations  which  had  existed  under  William  and  Anne  was
to  be  revived.  The  ministers  were  to  be  as  much  as  possible
confined  to  their  several  departments ;  they  were  to  be  drawn  from
many  different  connections  and  schools  of  policy,  and  they  were
not  to  be  suffered  to  form  a  coherent  and  homogeneous  whole.
The  relations  of  the  Crown  to  the  ministry  were  to  be  changed.
For  a  considerable  time  the  Treasury,  the  Ecclesiastical  patron-
age, the  Cornish  boroughs,  and  all  the  other  sources  of  influence
which  belonged  nominally  to  the  Crown  had  been,  with  few  ex-
ceptions, at  the  disposal  of  the  minister,  and  were  employed  to
strengthen  his  administration.  They  were  now  to  be  in  a  great
degree  withdrawn  from  his  influence,  and  to  be  employed  in
maintaining  in  Parliament  a  body  of  men  whose  political  at-

'  '  During  the  last  two  reigns  a  set  and  influence  into  their  own  hands

of  undertakers  have  farmed  the  power  and  applied  it  to  their  own  creatures

of  the  Crown  at  a  price  certain  ;  and  without  consulting  the  Crown  or  Icav-

under  colour  of making  themselves  ing  any  room  for  the  roj-al  nomination

responsible  for  the  whole  have  taken  or  direction.'  —  Lord Melcombe  to

the  eole  direction  of  the  royal  interest  Bute. AdoIj)hus,  i.  2i.

CH.  X.  'THE  KING'S  FRIENDS.'  21

tachment  centred  in  the  King  alone,  "n'lio  looked  to  him  alone
for  promotion,  who,  though  often  holding  places  in  the  Govern-
ment, were  expected  rather  to  control  than  to  support  it,  and,
if  it  diverged  from  the  policy  which  was  personally  acceptable
to  the  King,  to  conspire  against  it  and  overthrow  it.  A  Crown
influence  was  thus  to  be  established  in  Parliament  as  well  as  a
ministerial  influence,  and  it  was  hoped  that  it  would  turn  the
balance  of  parties  and  accelerate  the  downfall  of  any  administra-
tion which  was  not  favoured  by  the  King.

There  were  many  sources  from  which  '  the  King's  friends,'  as
this  interest  was  very  invidiously  called,'  might  be  recruited.
Crown  and  Court  patronage  was  extravagantly  redundant,  and  it
was  certain  in  the  corrupt  condition  of  Parliament  that  many
politicians  would  prefer  to  attach  themselves  to  the  permanent
source  of  power  rather  than  to  transitory  administrations.  The
popularity  of  the  King  strengthened  the  party.  The  Tories,
who  resented  their  long  exclusion  from  power,  and  v.iio  recog-
nised in  the  young  sovereign  a  Tory  king,  supported  it  in  a
body ;  the  divisions  and  jealousies  among  the  Whig  nobles
made  it  tolerably  certain  that  some  would  be  soon  detached
from  their  old  connections  and  would  gather  round  the  new
standard,  and  the  personal  influence  of  the  sovereign  over  the
leading  politicians  was  suflScient  to  secure  in  most  ministries  at
least  one  member  who  was  content  to  draw  his  inspiration  from
him  alone.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  conception  of  the
Cabinet  as  a  body  of  statesmen  who  were  in  thorough  political
agreement,  and  were  jointly  responsible  for  all  the  measures
they  proposed,  was  still  in  its  early  stage,  and  was  by  no  means
fully  or  universally  recognised.  A  great  step  had  been  taken
towards  its  attainment  on  the  accession  of  George  I.,  when
the  principle  was  adopted  of  admitting  only  the  members
of  a  single  party  into  the  Government.  The  administration
of  Walpole,  in  unity,  discipline,  and  power,  was  surpassed  by
few  of  the  present  century.  After  the  downfall  of  that  adminis-
tration the  Whigs  defeated  the  attempt  of  the  King's  favourite

'  The  term  '  King's  friends,'  as  a  least  adopted  by  Bute.  See  a  lelier
distinction  for  a  particular  class  of  from  liira  (March  25, 17G3). —  Grcn'
politiciaus,  if not  invented,  was  at ville  Papers,  ii.  32,  33

22 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

statesman  to  mix  the  Government  with  Tories,  and  a  joint
resignation  of  the  Government  in  17-16  obliged  the  King  to
break  finally  with  Bath  and  Granville,  and  admit  Pitt  to  his
councils.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  lax  policy  of  Pelham
and  the  personal  weakness  of  Newcastle  had  led  to  great  lati-
tude and  violent  divergences  of  policy  in  the  Cabinet  which
they  formed.  Fox  and  Hardwicke,  in  the  debates  on  the  Mar-
riage Act,  inveighed  against  one  another  with  the  utmost
bitterness,  though  the  one  was  Secretary  of  State  and  the
other  Chancellor  in  the  same  Government.  Fox  and  Pitt  made
their  colleagues,  Murray,  Newcastle,  and  Eobinson,  the  objects
of  their  constant  attacks,  and  these  examples  rendered  it  more
easy  for  the  King  to  carry  out  his  favourite  policy  of  a  divided
Cabinet.

A  very  remarkable  pamphlet,  called  '  Seasonable  Hints  from
an  Honest  Man  on  the  new  Eeign  and  the  new  Parliament,'
appeared  in  1761,  defending  the  new  system  of  government,
and  it  soon  attracted  much  attention  from  the  fact  that  it  was
understood  to  be  the  composition  of  no  less  a  person  than
Lord  Bath,  the  old  rival  of  Walpole  and  the  old  colleague  of
Carteret.  ^  The  question,  the  writer  said,  for  the  sovereign  to
determine  was,  '  Whether  he  is  to  content  himself  with  the
shadow  of  royalty  while  a  set  of  undertakers  for  his  business
intercept  his  immediate  communication  with  his  people,  and
make  use  of  the  legal  prerogatives  of  their  master  to  establish
the  illegal  claims  of  factitious  oligarchy.'  He  complains  that
'  a  cabal  of  ministers  had  been  allowed  to  erect  themselves
into  a  fourth  estate,  to  check,  to  control,  to  influence,  nay,  to
enslave  the  others ; '  that  it  had  become  usual  '  to  urge  the
necessity  of  the  King  submitting  to  give  up  the  manage-
ment of  his  affairs  and  the  exclusive  disposal  of  all  his  employ-
ments to  some  ministers,  or  set  of  ministers,  who,  by  uniting
together,  and  backed  by  their  numerous  dependents,  may  be
able  to  carry  on  the  measures  of  Government ; '  that '  minis-

'  Walpole's George III. i. 54.  Loi'd  Bath.' — Butler's  Reminiscences,

Wilkes  in  private  conversations  said  i.  p.  74. '  This  project,'  said Burke,

t  hat  the  '  distinction  which  has  been  '  I  have  heard  was  first  conceived  by

supposed  to  exist  between  the  friends  some  persons  in  the  Court  of  Frederick

of  the  King  and  the  friends  of  tlie  Prince  of Via\es.'- -'/'/umyhts on tlw.

luiuister  ori;rinated  in  the  councils  of  Present  Discontents.

CH.  X.  'SEASONABLE HINTS FEOM AN HONEST MAN.'  23

terial  combinations  to  engross  power  and  invade  the  closet,'
were  nothing  less  than  a  '  scheme  of  putting  the  sovereign  in
leading-strings,'  and  that  their  result  had  been  the  monstrous
corruption  of  Parliament  and  the  strange  spectacle  of  '  a
King  of  England  unable  to  confer  the  smallest  employment
unless  on  the  recommendation  and  with  the  consent  of  his
ministers.'  He  trusts  that  the  new  King  will  put  an  end  to
this  system  by  showing  '  his  resolution  to  break  all  factious
connections  and  confederacies.'  Already  he  has  '  placed  in
the  most  honourable  stations  near  his  own  person,  some  who
have  not  surely  owed  their  place  to  ministerial  importunit}^,
because  they  have  always  opposed  ministerial  influence,'  and
by  steadily  pursuing  this  course,  the  true  ideal  of  the  Con-
stitution will  be  attained,  '  in  which  the  ministers  will  depend
on  the  Cro\vn,  not  the  Crown  on  the  ministers.'  But  to  attain
this  end  it  was  necessary  that  the  basis  of  the  Government
should  be  widened,  the  proscription  of  the  Tories  abolished,  and
the  sovereign  enabled  to  select  his  servants  from  all  sections
of  politicians.  *  Does  any  candid  and  intelligent  man  seriously
believe  that  at  this  time  there  subsists  any  party  distinction
amongst  us  that  is  not  merely  nominal  ?  Are  not  the  Tories
friends  of  the  royal  family  ?  Have  they  not  long  ago  laid  aside
their  aversion  to  the  Dissenters  ?  Do  they  not  think  the  Toler-
ation and  Estabhshment  both  necessary  parts  of  the  Constitu-
tion ?  and  can  a  Whig  distinguish  these  from  his  own  prin-
ciples ?  '  One  glorious  result  of  the  new  system  of  government
the  writer  confidently  predicts.  With  the  destruction  of
oligarchical  power  the  reign  of  corruption  would  terminate,  and
undue  influence  in  Parliament  was  never  likely  to  be  revived.

The  young  King  came  to  the  throne  when  rather  more
than  three  years  of  almost  uninterrupted  victory  had  raised
England  to  an  ascendency  which  she  had  scarcely  attained
since  the  great  days  of  Henry  V.  The  French  flag  had  nearly
disappeared  from  the  sea.  Except  Louisiana,  all  the  French
possessions  in  North  America,  except  St.  Domingo,  all  the
French  islands  in  the  West  Indies,  had  been  taken,  and  the
last  French  settlements  in  Hindostan  were  just  tottering  to
their  fall.  The  wave  of  invasion  which  threatened  to  submerge
Hanover  had been  triumphantly  rolled  back,  and the  nation,

24 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  x.

intoxicated  by  victory,  and  roused  from  its  long  lethargy  by
the  genius  of  its  great  statesman,  displayed  an  energy  and  a
daring  which  made  it  a  wonder  to  its  neighbours  and  to  itself.
No  sacrifice  seemed  too  great  to  demand,  yet»  in  spite  of  every
sacrifice,  commerce  was  flourishing  and  national  prosperity
advancing.  The  sudden  growth  of  the  colonial  empire  of
England,  and-  the  destruction  of  her  most  formidable  rival  on
the  sea,  had  an  immediate -effect,  and  it  was  computed  that  in
176X.  ^^nghsh  commerce  was  a  fifth  greater  than  in  the  last
year  of  the  preceding  peace.*

A  ministry  which  had  achieved  such  triumphs,  and  which
was  supported  by  such  a  tide  of  popular  favour,  would  have
been  able,  had  it  been  cordially  united,  to  defy  any  attempt
to  subvert  it.  But  it  was  divided  by  deep  fissures,  distracted
by  bitter  jealousies  and  animosities.  Its  war  policy  had  hitherto
been  directed  absolutely  by  Pitt,  who  almost  monopolised  the
popular  enthusiasm,  and  who  could  count  in  the  Cabinet  upon
the  firm  alliance  of  his  brother-in-law  Lord  Temple,  the  head
of  the  Grenvilles.  The  great  wealth  and  position  of  Temple
had  given  him  some  political  weight,  and  he  was  usually  en-
trusted with  the  defence  of  the  policy  of  Pitt  in  the  Lords ;
but  his  character,  at  once  grasping,  arrogant,  and  intriguing,
seldom  failed  to  alienate  those  with  whom  he  co-operated.
With  this  exception,  Pitt  had  scarcely  a  cordial  friend  in  the
Cabinet.  Personal  jealousies  and  rivalry,  real  differences  of
opinion,  but  above  all  the  unbounded  arrogance  with  which
Pitt  treated  his  colleagues,  had  raised  against  him  a  weight  of
animosity  which  it  needed  all  his  genius,  popularity,  and  suc-
cess to  repress.  In  the  council  the  other  ministers  cowered  like
timid  schoolboys  before  him.  More  than  once,  when  doubts
were  expressed  whether  the  Treasury  would  be  able  to  furnish
with  sufficient  celerity  or  in  sufficient  quantity  the  .necessary
supplies  for  the  expeditions  that  were  prepared,  Pitt  cut  short
the  debate  by  declaring  that  in  case  of  the  smallest  failure
he  would  at  once  impeach  the  Commissioners  of  Treasury,  or
Newcastle  himself,  before  Parliament.  He  compelled  no  less
a  man  than  Anson  to  sign  orders  as  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty
which  he  was  not  allowed  even  to  read,  and  he  constantly  gave
'  IJiukc,  Observations  on  the  State  of  the  Nation.

CE.  X.  GROWING  DESIEE  FOR  PEACE.  2o

orders  relating  to  the  war,  in  different  departments  without
even  informing  the  responsible  heads  of  those  departments  of
his  intentions.'  Newcastle  lived  in  a  continual  state  of  mingled
terror  and  resentment.  Fox  could  not  forget  that  he  had  been
once  deemed  the  equal  of  Pitt,  and  that  his  lucrative  post  of
Paymaster  of  the  Forces  was  in  truth  purely  subordinate.  Lord
Granville,  the  old  President  of  the  Council,  who  had  stood  in
the  foremost  rank  of  EngHsh  politics  before  Pitt  had  even
entered  the  House  of  Commons,  could  hardly  brook  the  im-
perious tone  of  his  younger  colleague,  and  a  powerful  section  of
the  ministry  looked  with  great  alarm  upon  the  rapidly  increasing
debt,  and  desired  at  all  hazards  to  bring  the  war  to  a  speedy
conclusion.  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  who  had  a  large  number  of
personal  adherents,  strongly  maintained  this  opinion,  and  pre-
dicted nothing  but  calamities,  and  his  view  was  warmly  sup-
ported by  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  by  Lord  Hardwicke,  and
above  all  by  George  Grenville,  who,  though  he  had  not  yet
obtained  a  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  was  already  looked  upon  as  the
best  man  of  business  in  the  Government.

The  change  which  had  taken  place  in  the  spirit  of  the  Court
appeared  fi'om  the  very  beginning.  Bute  at  once  obtained  the
dignity  of  Privy  Councillor,  to  which,  however,  as  an  old  ser-
vant of  the  new  sovereign,  he  had  an  undoubted  right ;  ^  and
the  first  royal  speech  to  the  Council  was  composed  by  the  King
and  Bute  without  any  communication  with  the  responsible
ministers  of  the  Crown.  The  sentences  in  which  it  spoke  of
'  a  bloody  and  expensive  war,'  and  of  '  obtaining  an  honour-
able and  lasting  peace,'  were  justly  interpreted  as  a  covert  cen-
sure upon  the  great  minister  who  was  conducting  the  war ;  and
it  was  only  after  an  altercatiofi  which  lasted  for  two  or  three
hours  that  Pitt  induced  Bute  to  consent  that  in  the  printed
copy  the .  former  sentence  should  be  changed  into  '  an  expen-
sive, but  just  and  necessary  war,'  and  that  the  words  '  in  con-

'  See  the curious  account  of  Sir  was  given  at  the  same  time  to  the

G.  Colebrooke. Walpole's  Jlrmoirs  of  Duke  of  York. Compaie  Walpole's

George  III.  i.  80-82.  Letters to  Montagu and  to  Jlann,

'■'  Walpole  saj'S  Bute  was  admitted  October  28,  1760. Hist,  of  the  late

into  the  Cabinet  (i.  p.  8),  but  it  is,  I  Minority,  pp.  10,  11. Adoljilnts,  i.  11,

think,  evident  that  he  only  means  the  AnJiual  Register,  1760,  p.  112.
Privy  Council. The  same  distinction

26 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. cu.  x,

cert  with  our  allies '  should  be  inserted  rafter  the  latter.  It
was  speedily  spread  abroad  from  lip  to  lip  that,  although  the
King  for  the  present  retained  his  old  ministers,  he  would  not
be  governed  by  them  as  his  grandfather  was.  Bute  became
the  medium  of  most  private  communications  between  the  King
and  the  more  prominent  statesmen,  and  he  was  generally  under-
stood to  be  the  real  centre  of  power.  The  necessity  of  drawing
together  the  divided  elements  of  the  ministry  was  very  mani-
fest, and  it  is  said  that  Pitt  invited  Newcastle  to  join  with  him
in  a  closer  union  ;  ^  but  the  old  statesman,  who,  though  he
sometimes  spoke  of  resigning  office,  was  in  truth  as  wedded  to
it  as  ever,  had  already  turned  towards  the  rising  star.  Both
the  King  and  Bute  skilfully  flattered  Newcastle  and  aggravated
the  jealousy  with  which  he  regarded  Pitt,  and  Newcastle,  though
one  of  the  oldest  and  most  experienced  statesmen  in  England,
actually  offered  to  serve  under  Bute.^

It  was  noticed  in  the  first  days  of  the  new  reign  that  the
great  Jacobite  families  who  had  long  been  absent  from  Court
now  crowded  the  antechamber.  Horace  Walpole,  who  was
present  at  the  first  levee,  was  favourably  struck  with  the
affable  behaviour  of  the  King,  and  its  contrast  to  the  half-shy,
half-sullen  manners  of  his  predecessor.^  Much  scandal,  how-
ever, was  caused  by  the  warm  reception  given  to  Lord  Gr
Sackville,  who  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Bute,  but  whose  con-
duct at  Minden  had  deeply  tarnished  his  reputation;"  and
much  criticism  was  provoked  by  a  sentence  which  the  King
himself  inserted  in  his  first  speech  to  Parliament.  Queen  Anne
was  believed  to  have  reflected  on  her  predecessor  when  she  U«v

'  Walpole's  George  Til.  i.  1 0,  1 2.  don't  stand  in  one  spot  with  hio  eyes
'■'According  to  Lo  d  Hardvvicke,  lixed  royally  on  the  ground  and  di  op-
Bute  'availed  himself  with  much  art  ping  bits  of  German  news;  he  walks
and  finesse  of  the  dissensions  between  about  and  speaks  to  everybody.  I
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Mr.  Pitt,  saw  him  afterwards  on  the  throne,
and  played  off  one  against  the  other  where  he  is  graceful  and  genteel,  sits
occasionally  till  he  had  got  rid  of  tlie  with  dignity  and  reads  his  answers  to
popular  minister.' — Rockingham's  3/e-  addresses  well.' — Walpole  to  Monta-
woirs,  1.  6,  7.  See  too  pp.  8-10,  and  gu,  Nov,  13,  17()0.  ?>eetoo  the  Letters
Dodingtons  Diary,  Dec.  27,  1760.  of  the  first  Earl  of  Malineshury,  i.  82.

3  'For  the  King  himself,  he  seems  ■•  Pitt seems  to have especially

all  goodnature  and  wishing  to  satisfy  resented  it,  and  it  is  said  to  have  been

everybody  ; all his speeches are  the  first  cause  of  his  enmi.ty  to  Bute,

obliging  ;  I  was  surprised  to  find  the  ^Fitzmauricc's  Life  of  Shclburne,  i.

levee  room  had  lost  so  entirely  the  232.
air  of  the  lion's  den. This  sovereign

cs.  X. CHANGE  IN  THE  TENUEE  OF  JUDGES. 27

scribed  herself,  on  a  similar  occasion,  as  '  entirely  English '  at
heart,  and  George  III.  indicated  a  somewhat  similar  spirit  in
the  sentence, '  Bom  and  educated  in  this  country,  I  glory  in  the
name  of  Briton.'  '  What  a  lustre,'  replied  the  House  of  Lords,
in  a  strain  of  almost  Oriental  servility,  *  does  it  cast  upon  the
name  of  Briton,  when  you.  Sir,  are  pleased  to  esteem  it  among
your  glories  ! ' '  In  a  different  spiiit,  but  with  almost  equal
absurdity,  the  King  was  afterwards  accused  of  insulting  his  Eng-
lish subjects  by  '  melting  down  the  English  name  '  into  that  of
Briton.2

The  chief  business  of  the  first  short  session  of  Parliament
was  to  regulate  the  civil  list  and  the  supplies.  The  first  was
fixed  at  800,000^.,  and  the  second  at  a  little  less  than  twenty
millions,  and  in  order  to  supply  what  was  defective  a  new  duty
of  3d,  a  barrel  was  imposed  on  beer  and  ale.  One  act,  how-
ever, was  accomplished  in  this  session  at  the  recommendation
of  the  King,  by  which,  at  the  cost  of  a  very  small  diminution
of  the  prerogative  of  his  successors,  he  acquired  great  popu-
larity for  himself.  The  Act  of  William  III.  making  the  judges
irremovable,  except  by  the  intervention  of  Parliament,  during
the  lifetime  of  the  King,  had  effectually  checked  the  gross
sycophancy  and  subserviency  that  had  long  disgraced  the
judicial  bench,  but  it  still  left  it  in  the  power  of  a  new
sovereign  to  remove  the  judges  who  had  been  appointed  by
his  predecessor.  Such  a  power  could  hardly  be  defended  by
any  valid  argument ;  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  the
Act ;  its  legality  had  been  disputed  on  the  death  of  William  by
Sir  J.  Jekyll,  and  it  had  been  very  sparingly  exercised.^  On
the  accession  of  George  L,  Lord  Trevor,  who  was  a  notorious
Jacobite,  was  removed  from  the  chief  justiceship  of  the  King's
Bench,  and  a  few  minor  changes  had  been  recommended  by  the
Chancellor.''  A  judge  named  Aland  was  removed  by  George  II.,
but  no  change  was  made  by  his  successor,  and  the  young  King
recommended  the  Parliament  to  provide  that  the  commissions
of  the  judges  should  no  longer  expire  on  the  demise  of  the

'  Pari  Hint.  xv.  0S2-98G.  '  SeeTownsend's  ffistof  the Ifonse

-  Stephen's  Life  of  Home  Toole,  i.  of  Co7nmons,  ii.  51.
fil. Junius  talks  of  the  King  having  *  Campbell's Li  res  of  the Chcui'

*  affectedly  renounced the name  of  cellars,  v.  295,  29G.
Englishman.' — Letter  to  the  King,

28 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  x.

sovereign. The  measure  was  a  wise  and  liberal,  though  not  a  ^
very  important  one,  and,  although  the  concession  was  made
entirely  at  the  expense  of  his  successors,  it  was  accepted  in  the
then  state  of  men's  minds  as  if  it  were  an  act  of  heroic  self-
sacrifice.

A  general  election  was  necessary,  by  Act  of  Parliament,
within  bix  months  of  the  accession,  but  before  that  time  several
changes  were  effected.  George  Grenville,  who  was  known  to
be  conspicuously  opposed  to  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  ob-
tained a  place  in  the  Cabinet.  Lord  Henley,  afterwards  Earl
of  Northington,  exchanged  the  position  of  Lord  Keeper  for  the
fidler  dignity  of  Chancellor.  He  was  a  coarse,  drunken,  and
unprincipled  lawyer,  of  no  very  extraordinary  abilities,  who
had  early  attached  himself  to  the  Leicester  House  faction,  and
who,  partly  through  a  desire  to  conciliate  that  faction,  and  partly
through  jealousy  of  Lord  Hardwicke,  had  been  appointed  Lord
Keeper  in  the  Coalition  ministry  of  Pitt  and  Newcastle ;  but
George  II.  refused  to  raise  him  to  the  House  of  Lords  until
the  trial  of  Lord  Ferrers,  when  there  was  a  difficulty  in  finding
a  lawyer  who  would  preside  as  Lord  Steward.^  In  the  new
reign  he  became  one  of  the  most  docile  and  useful  agents  of
the  policy  of  the  King.  The  enterprise  of  giving  Bute  high
political  office  was  found  somewhat  difficult,  but  a  characteristic
method  was  adopted.  Lord  Holdernesse,  who,  though  a  man  of
very  insignificant  abilities,  was  a  Secretary  of  State,  agreed  with
Bute,  as  early  as  November  1760,  to  quarrel  with  his  colleagues,
and  throw  up  his  office  in  seeming  anger.^  The  resignation  was
for  a  time  deferred;  but  it  was  accomplished  in  March  1761.
Lord  Holdernesse  obtained  a  pension  of  4,000Z.  a  year  for  life,
and  a  reversion  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  and  his  place  was  filled  by
the  favourite.  Nearly  at  the  same  time,  Legge,  the  Chancellor
of  the  Exchequer,  who  had  some  time  before  quarrelled  with
Bute  about  a  Hampshire  election,  was  dismissed  with  cir-
cumstances of  great  discourtesy,  and  his  place  was  filled  by
Lord  Barrington — an  honest  man,  but  one  who  adopted  and
avowed  the  principle  that  it  was  his  duty  always,  except  in  case

'  He  was  accused  of  taking  money  eating  the  opposite. See Walpole's

in  private  causes  from  both  sides,  and  George  III.  i.  240. Juuius's  Letters,

availing  himself  of  the  information  ot).
communicated  on  one  side  in  advo-  -  Dodington's  Diarij,  Nov.  1760.

en.  s.  COST OF  THE WAR.  29

of  the  gravest  possible  causes  of  difference,  to  support  the
ministers  selected  by  the  King,  whatever  party  or  connection
they  belonged  to,  and  whatever  might  be  his  opinion  of  the
men  and  of  their  measures.'  He  was  thus  completely  identified
with  the  King's  friends,  and  by  the  wish  of  the  King  was
kept  in  office  through  several  successive  administrations.  The
brilliant  but  versatile  and  unprincipled  Charles  Townsheud
filled  his  place,  and  a  few  other  changes  were  made  which.,
though  unimportant  in  themselves,  showed  that  Tory  ten-
dencies, and  especially  personal  devotion  to  the  sovereign,
had  become  the  passports  of  favour.  Notwithstanding  the  pro-
fessions of  purity  that  were  made  by  the  King's  friends,  it  was
noticed  that  the  general  election  which  now  took  place  was  one
of  the  most  corrupt  ever  known  in  England,  that  large  sums
were  issued  by  the  Treasury,  that  the  King  took  an  active  part
in  naming  the  candidates,  and  that  the  boroughs  attached  to
the  Duchy  of  Cornwall,  which  had  hitherto  been  at  the  disposal
of  the  ministry,  were  now  treated  as  solely  at  the  disposal  of  the
CrowTL.'^

It  was  evident  that  it  was  intended,  in  the  first  place,  to
strike  down  Pitt ;  ^  and  an  opportunity  soon  occurred.  The
great  question  now  impending  was  the  negotiation  for  peace.
The  arguments  in  favour  of  terminating  a  war  are  always
strong,  but  in  this  case  they  had  a  more  than  common  force.
The  debt  was  rapidly  increasing,  and  the  estimates  had  arisen
to  a  most  alarming  extent.  The  total  sum  granted  by  Parlia-
ment for  1761  was  more  than  nineteen  millions.  The  British
forces  in  different  parts  of  the  world  amounted  to  no  less
than  110,000  soldiers  and  70,000  seamen,  besides  60,000  Ger-
man auxiliaries  in  British  pay.*  The  success  of  England  had
hitherto  been  almost  unparalleled,  but  there  was  now  but
little  left  for  her  to  gain,  and  she  had  many  dangers  to  fear.
She  had  hitherto  been  very  successful in Germany, but  a

'  See  the  very  curious  letters  pub-  Feb.  2,  1761.
lished  in  the  Life  of  Barrington  by  ^  See  on  the  feeling  of  Bute to-

his  brother  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  -svards  Pitt  a  letter  of  the  Duke  ol

pp.  79,  99,  103-105.  Newcastle. — Bedford  Corrcs})ondence.

-  KWieniax\€s  Life  of  BocMiifjhani,  iii.  19.
i.  61-64.  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  Geonje  ^  Pari.  Hist.  xv.  1000-lOOG.

III. i. 41,  42. Dodington's Bianj,

30  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  cii.  x.

Grerman  war  could  not  fail  to  be  extremely  bloody  and  expen-
sive. The  interests  of  England  in  it  were  very  subordinate,
and  as  the  colonial  empire  of  France  was  passing  away,  it  was
certain  that  the  war  would  be  concentrated  chiefly  in  this
quarter.  In  a  Continental  war  the  normal  strength  of  France
was  so  great  that  the  chances  were  much  in  her  favour,  and,  in
the  opinion  of  some  good  judges,  there  was  much  danger  lest
the  King's  Grerman  dominions  should  be  ultimately  absorbed.'
The  Tory  party  had  always  looked  with  great  aversion  on  Con-
tinental wars,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  there  was  a  strong  minority
in  the  Cabinet,  including  Newcastle  and  Hardwicke,  who  were
prepared  to  sacrifice  much  for  a  peace.^  A  very  able  pamphlet,
called  '  Considerations  on  the  Grerman  War,'  appeared  about
this  time,  and  exercised  an  influence  which  was  probably  greater
than  that  of  any  other  English  pamphlet  since  Swift's  '  Con-
duct of  the  Allies.'  Its  author  was  an  obscure  vnriter  named
Mauduit,  and  it  was  said  to  have  been  published  under  the
countenance  of  Lord  Hardwicke.  The  writer  fully  approved  of
the  capture  of  the  French  islands,  and  of  the  destruction  of  the
naval  power  of  France  ;  but  he  argued  with  much  force,  that
no  policy  could  be  more  manifestly  suicidal  than  to  squander
larger  sums  than  were  expended  for  the  whole  land  and  sea
service  during  the  Duke  of  Marlborough's  campaigns,  in  a
German  war  waged  between  two  great  German  Powers,  for
the  possession  of  a  remote  German  province  which  might
belong  to  either  without  affecting  in  any  way  the  real  in-
terests of  England.  The  burden  of  the  war  was  beginning  to
be  seriously  felt.  In  March  1761,  when  there  were  rumours  of
an  approaching  peace  under  the  superintendence  of  Pitt,  the
funds  rose  four  per  cent.  When  the  three  years'  term  of  service
in  the  militia  expired,  and  a  new  ballot  was  about  to  take  place,
there  were  riots  in  several  of  the  Northern  counties.  At  Hex-
ham, in  Northumberland,  a  body  of  Yorkshire  militia  were
attacked  by  six  or  seven  thousand  rioters  armed  with  clubs,

'  See  Bedford  Correspondence,  iii.  try  neither  were  nor  could  be  united;

11-2S).  that  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  most  sin-

^  In Dodington's Diary,  Jan.  2,  cerely  wished  for  peace,  and  would  go

1761,  there  is  a  report  of  a  conversa-  any  length  to  obtain  it:  that  Mr.  Pitt

tion  he  had  with  Bute  on  the  prospects  meditated  a  retreat  and  would  stay

oi'  the  peace. Bute  said  '  the  minis-  in  no  longer  than  the  war.'

CH.  X.  NEGOTIATIONS  FOE PEACE.  31

and  a  serious  struggle  ensued,  in  which  forty-two  persons  were
killed  and  forty-eight  others  wounded.^  The  expedition  against
Belleisle  caused  many  murmurs,  for  it  cost  much  bloodshed,  and
the  island  was  little  more  than  a  barren  rock,  of  no  value  to
England,  and  at  the  same  time  so  near  the  French  coast  that
it  was  tolerably  certain  that  it  would  be  restored  at  the  peace.
The  unhealthy  quarters  to  which  English  conquests  had  recently
extended,  made  the  mortality  among  the  troops  very  great.
Bounties  rose  to  an  unexampled  height,  and  there  were  fears
that  if  the  war  continued  it  would  be  a  matter  of  great  difficulty
to  fill  the  ranks.-

Negotiations  for  peace  had  taken  place  as  early  as  November
1759,  and  they  were  resumed  in  the  spring  of  1761,  but  neither
party  appears  to  have  entered  very  keenly  into  them.  Pitt  had
just  sent  out  his  expedition  against  Belleisle,  and  he  was  anxious
that  nothing  should  be  done  until  it  succeeded.  He  told  the
King  that  he  by  no  means  thought  ill  of  the  state  of  the  war
in  Grermany ;  that  he  thought  the  total  destruction  of  the  French
power  in  the  East  Indies,  the  probability  of  taking  jMartinique
as  well  as  Belleisle,  and  the  probable  results  of  the  next  German
campaign,  would  enable  us  to  secure  all  Canada,  Cape  Breton,
the  neighbouring  islands,  and  the  exclusive  fishery  of  New-
foundland, and  that  he  would  sign  no  peace  on  lower  terms.
It  was  quite  certain  that  the  French  were  not  prepared  to
accede  to  such  terms,  and  both  the  King  and  Newcastle  strongly
remonstrated  against  the  determination  of  Pitt  to  lay  them
down  as  indispensable  at  the  very  outset  of  the  negotiations.-*
On  the  French  side,  also,  new  prospects  were  opening  out  which
produced  an  equal  hesitation.  Charles  III.,  who  had  very  re-
cently exchanged  the  throne  of  Naples  for  that  of  Spain,  still
remembered  with  bitterness  how  the  English  had  threatened
to  bombard  Naples  in  1742.  He  looked  forward  with  great
dread  to  the  complete  naval  supremacy  which  England  was
rapidly  attaining;  he  inherited  the  old  Spanish  grievances
against  England  about  Gibraltar  and  the  traae  of  the  Indies  ;

'  Animal Register,  1761, p 83.  -  AdolpJms,  i.  100.

Chatham  Correspondence,  ii.  100,  101.  *  See  the  letter  of  Newcastle  to

Walpoleto  Montagu,  March  19,  1761.  Lord  Hardwicke,  April  15,  1761. Al-

Sce  too  Adolphuss  Hist,  of  Enrjland,  bemarle's  Life  of  Ilucldiigham,  i,  23,

1.571,572.  24.

32 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. en.  x.

he  was  closely  connected  with  the  French  sovereign,  and  he
also  saw  a  prospect  of  obtaining  in  Portugal  conquests  of  great
value  at  little  cost.  These  various  considerations  were  rapidly
drawing  him  into  closer  alliance  with  France.'  Belleisle  was
captured  by  the  English  on  June  7,  1761.  On  the  loth  of  the
following  month,  the  French  negotiator  took  the  very  signifi-
cant and  very  startling  step  of  presenting  a  memorial  in  behalf
of  Spain,  claiming  the  restitution  of  some  prizes  bearing  the
Spanish  flag  which  had  been  taken  by  the  English,  the  right
of  the  Spaniards  to  fish  upon  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  and
the  demolition  of  the  English  settlements  on  the  disputed
territory  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras.^

Such  demands,  made  by  a  Power  with  which  England  was
at  perfect  peace,  through  the  intervention  of  a  Power  with
which  England  was  at  war,  could  have  but  one  meaning,  and
Pitt  loftily  expressed  to  the  French  agent  his  opinion  of  the
transaction.  '  His  Majesty,'  he  answered,  '  will  not  suffer  the
dispute  with  Spain  to  be  blended  in  any  manner  whatever  in
the  negotiations  of  peace  between  the  two  Crowns,  and  it  will
be  considered  as  an  affront  to  his  ]\Iajesty's  dignity,  and  as  a
thing  incompatible  with  the  sincerity  of  the  negotiations,  to
make  further  mention  of  such  a  circumstance.  Moreover,  it  is
expected  that  France  will  not  at  any  time  presume  a  right  of
intermeddling  with  such  disputes  between  England  and  Spain.'
The  rupture  of  the  negotiations  between  France  and  England
soon  followed.  It  is  not  necessary  to  examine  the  proceedings
in  great  detail ;  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  Pitt  was  prepared
to  purchase  the  restitution  of  Minorca  by  restoring  Belleisle,
Guadaloupe,  and  Marie-Galante  to  the  French,  and  that  he  con-
sented to  a  partition  of  the  Antilla  Isles ;  but  he  maintained
that  England  should  retain  all  the  other  conquests.  He  refused
the  French  demands  for  a  participation  in  the  fisheries  of  New-
foundland, for  the  cession  of  Cape  Breton  in  America,  for  the
restoration  of  either  Goree  or  Senegal  as  a  depot  for  the  French
slave  trade  in  the  West  Indies,  and  for  the  re-establishment  in

'  Theearlierstagesof  thisnegotia-  Chatham  Corrrsjmndevre,  vol.  ii.
tion  may be traced  in the  letters  -  Seethe  official  documents  on  the

between Grimaldi  and  Fuentes,  the  subject  in  Pari.  Hist.  xv. There  is  a

Spanish  ambassadors  at Paris and  good  epitome  in  De  Flassan's //is/,  rfa

Loudon,  in  Jan.,  Feb.  and  March  1 7G1.  la  Lijilomatie  Fran(;aise.

CH X.  '  THE  FAAIILY COMPACT  '  33

liindostan  of  the  frontier  of  1755.  He  refused  equally  the  de-
mand for  the  restoration  of  prizes  made  before  the  declaration
of  war,  and  he  insisted,  in  the  interest  of  the  King  of  Prussia,
that  the  French  should  vrithdraw  their  armies  from  Germany,
while  England  still  retained  her  right  of  assisting  her  ally.'
The  spell  of  success  which  had  so  long  hung  over  the  British
arms  was  still  unbroken.  The  capture  of  Belleisle  in  June
1761 ;  the  capture  of  Dominica,  by  Lord  Kollo,  in  the  same
month ;  the  tidings  of  new  successes  in  Hindostan,  and  a  vic-
tory of  Prince  Ferdinand  at  Vellinghausen  in  July,  contributed
to  raise  the  spirits  of  the  country,  and  formed  the  best  defence
of  the  demands  of  Pitt.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  doubt  that
he  sincerely  desired  peace,  if  he  could  have  obtained  it  on  terms
which  he  deemed  adequate.^  The  alliance,  however,  between
France  and  Spain  was  rapidly  consummated.  On  August  15,
1761,  the  family  compact  between  the  French  and  Spanish
kings  was  signed,  binding  the  two  countries  in  a  strict  offensive
and  defensive  alliance,  and  making  each  country  guarantee  the
possessions  of  the  other.  Mr.  Stanley,  the  vigilant  English
agent  who  had  been  negotiating  in  Paris,  obtained  secret  know-
ledge of  one  of  the  articles,  and  confidential  communications
from  other  quarters  corroborated  the  account.^  Pitt,  who  had
for  some  time  watched  with  great  suspicion  the  armaments  of
Spain,  perceived  clearly  that  the  declaration  of  war  was  only  de-
layed till  the  naval  preparations  of  Spain  were  completed  and
the  treasure  ships  which  were  expected  from  Mexico  and  Peru
had  arrived  safely  in  port.  He  acted  with  characteristic  promp-
titude and  decision.  Spain  had  committed  no  overt  act  which
could  be  reasonably  taken  as  a  pretext  for  war.  The  evidence  of
the  family  compact  was  somewhat  doubtful,  and,  being  derived
exclusively  from  secret  information, it  could  not  be  publicly

•  Adolphvs, i. 36-40. De Has-  doubt  of this. He  wrote  (Aug.  6,

gOM,  V.  382-388. A  curious  picture  of  1761)  :  '  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  has

the  debates  in  the  Cabinet,  and of  already  been  with  Lord  Bute  to  beg

the  imperative  manner  in  which  Pitt  that  we  may  not  lose  sight  of  peace  ;

silenced  all  opposition,  will  be  found  and  take  my  word  for  it,  Mr. Pitt  is

in  the  letters  of  Newcastle  to  Hard-  almost  as  unwilling,  though  he  is  too

wicke  in  Albemarle's  Life  of  Mocking-  wise  to  show  it.' — Grenvillc  Papers,  i.

liam,  vol.  i.  p.  382.

''■  It  is  remarkable  that  Jenkinson,  '  Compare  Walpole's George  III.

who  was  one  of  the  most  uncompro-  i.  123,  124,  Adolphus,  i.  41-45. Chat-

raising adherents of Bute, had no  hum  Con'espondence,\i.ViO,\^\.

VOL.  III.  D

34  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch x.

produced  The  Spanish  Government  loudly  disclaimed  all
hostile  iiitentions,  and  asserted  that  the  ships  of  war  which  were
building  in  the  Spanish  arsenals  were  only  such  as  were  required
for  convoying  merchant  vessels  from  Naples  to  Spain  and  re-
pressing the  Barbary  pirates.  Pitt,  however,  was  prepared  to
take  the  responsibility  of  a  war  which  it  was  very  difficult  to
justify  to  the  world,  and  he  resolved  to  strike,  and  to  strike  at
once.  Expeditions  were  speedily  planned  against  the  most  as-
sailable parts  of  the  Spanish  dominions,  and  on  September  18a
cabinet  council  was  held  in  which  Pitt  proposed  to  his  colleagues
the  immediate  withdrawal  of  the  English  ambassador  from
Madrid,  and  a  declaration  of  war  against  Spain  based  upon  the
warlike  demands  she  had  made  through  the  intervention  of  the
French  negotiator  in  the  preceding  July.^

Frederick  the  Great  afterwards  expressed  in  warm  terms  his
admiration  for  the  sagacity  and  enterprise  displayed  by  Pitt  in
this  conjuncture,  and  the  event  showed  that  the  policy  of  the
great  minister  was  as  wise  as  it  was  daring.  It  must  be  owned,
however,  that  modern  public  opinion  would  have  seldom  ac-
quiesced in  a  war  the  avowed  and  known  reasons  of  which  were
so  plainly  inadequate,  and  it  was  probably  by  no  means  only  a
desire  to  expel  Pitt  from  the  ministry  that  actuated  those  who
rejected  his  advice.  The  King  was  strongly  opposed  to  the
policy  of  Pitt  and  much  irritated  by  his  conduct.^  In  three
successive  cabinet  councils  the  questiojj  was  debated,  and  in
the  last  Pitt,  finding  himself  supported  by  no  one  but  Lord
Temple,  rose  with  great  warmth,  declaring  that  '  he  was  called
to  the  ministry  by  the  voice  of  the  people,  to  whom  he  con-
sidered himself  accountable  for  his  conduct,  and  he  would  not
remain  in  a  situation  which  made  him  responsible  for  measures
he  was  no  longer  allowed  to  guide.'  He  was  answered  by  old  Lord
Granville,  the  President  of  the  Council,  who  made  himself  the
representative  of  the  majority,  and  who  exhibited  on  this
occasion  one  last  flash  of  his  old  fire. '  I  can  hardly,'  he  said,

'.See  Grenville  Papers,  i. 386-7.  all  events  to the  uncertainty  about

Chatham Correspondence,  \i.liO-li^.  Mr.  Pitt.' Sept.  26,  he  writes: 'The

Bedfoiul  Correspondence,  iii.  46-49.  King  seems  every  day  more  offended

''■  Sept.  28,  17GI. Newcastle  wrote  with  Mr.  Pitt,  and  plainly  wants  to

to  Hardwicke  :  '  Tlie  King  seemed  so  get  lid  of  him  at  all  events.' — Albe-

provoked  and  so  weary  that  his  Ma-  marle's  Life  of  liockinfiham,  i.  42,  44.

jesty  was  inclined  to  put  an  end  at  See  too  Thdford  Corvcsp.  iii.  48.

ca.  X.  RESIGNATION OF  PITT.  35

'  regret  the  right  honourable  gentleman's  determination  to
leave  us,  as  he  would  otherwise  have  compelled  us  to  leave  him  ;
but  if  he  be  resolved  to  assume  the  right  of  advising  his
Majesty  and  directing  the  operations  of  the  war,  to  what  pur-
pose are  we  called  to  this  council  ?  When  he  talks  of  being
responsible  to  the  people,  he  talks  the  language  of  the  House
of  Commons  and  forgets  that  at  this  board  he  is  only  responsible
to  the  King.  However,  though  he  may  possibly  have  con\"inced
himself  of  his  infallibility,  still  it  remains  that  we  should  be
equally  convinced  before  we  can  resign  our  understandings  to
his  direction  and  join  with  him  in  the  measures  he  proposes.'
Pitt  and  Temple  persisted  in  their  determination,  and  on
October  5,  1761,  they  placed  their  resignations  in  the  hands  of
the  King.^

So  ended  an  administration  which  had  found  England  in  a
condition  of  the  lowest  depression,  and  by  the  efforts  of  a  single
man  had  raised  her  to  a  height  of  glory  scarcely  equalled  in  her
annals.  It  is  true  indeed  that  with  the  exception  of  James
Grrenville,  who  resigned  the  insignificant  post  of  Cofferer,  no
other  official  accompanied  Pitt  and  Temple  into  retirement,  but
with  Pitt  the  soul  of  the  administration  had  passed  away.  As
Burke  truly  said,  'No  man  was  ever  better  fitted  to  be  the
minister  of  a  great  and  powerful  nation,  or  better  qualified  to
carry  that  power  and  greatness  to  their  utmost  limits.  .  .  With
very  Httle  parliamentary,  and  with  less  Court  influence,  he  swayed
both  at  Court  and  in  Parliament  with  an  authority  unknown
before,  and  under  him  for  the  first  time,  administration  and
popularity  were  united.'  The  seals  of  Secretary  of  State  were
offered  to  George  Grenville,  but  he  refused  them,  though
accepting  the  leadership  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  they
were  then  given  to  Lord  Egremont,  an  avowed  Tory,  and  son
of  Sir  W.  Windham,  the  Tory  leader  in  the  last  reign.^  The
Duke  of  Bedford  soon  after  replaced  Temple  as  Privy  Seal.

So  far  the  policy  of  the  secret  counsellors  of  the  young
King  had  been  brilliantly  successful.  In  less  than  twelve
months,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  war,  the  greatest  war  minister
England  had  ever  produced  was  overthrown,  and  the  party  with

•  Adolplms,  i.  43,  44. Hist,  of  the  late  Mnority,  pp.  33-37. Annual  Re-
qxster,  1761.  •  Orenville  Pa^jers,  i.  411,412,

n 2

36  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

which  the  King  personally  sympathised  had  become  the  most
powerful  in  the  State.  But  grave  dangers  still  hung  around
the  Court,  and  no  one  was  more  conscious  of  them  than  Bute.
'  Indeed,  my  good  Lord,'  he  wrote  in  answer  to  the  congratula-
tions of  Lord  Melcombe,  '  my  situation,  at  all  times  perilous,
is  become  much  more  so,  for  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  language
held  in  this  great  city  ;  "  our  darling's  resignation  is  owing  to
Lord  Bute  .  .  .  and  he  must  answer  for  all  the  consequences ; "
which  is  in  other  words  for  the  miscarriage  of  another's  system
that  he  himself  coidd  not  have  prevented.'  ^  Newcastle,  on  the
other  hand,  was  filled  with  a  delight  which  he  took  little  pains
to  conceal,^  and  he  wrote  triumphantly  that  according  to  infor-
mation just  received  from  the  ambassador  at  Madrid,  Wall  had
expressed  his  concern  and  surprise  at  the  idle  reports  that
Spain  was  to  come  to  a  rupture  with  England,  and  had  assured
Lord  Bristol  that  there  never  was  a  time  when  the  King  of
Spain  wished  more  to  have  the  most  perfect  friendship  with
the  King  of  Great  Britain  than  at  present.  '  This,'  adds  the
Duke,  '  seems  a  flat  contradiction  to  all  Mr.  Pitt's  late  sup-
positions and  assertions.'  ^

It  was  inevitable  that  a  statesman  passing  out  of  office
after  rendering  such  services  as  those  of  Pitt  should  have  great
offers  pressed  upon  him,  and  every  motive  both  of  gratitude
and  policy  urged  the  King  and  Bute  not  to  depart  from  the
custom.  It  was  of  the  utmost  importance,  if  possible,  to  con-
ciliate Pitt,  or  at  all  events  to  diminish  his  popularity  and
withhold  him  from  systematic  opposition.  He  was  offered
and  he  refused  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster.  He  was  offered  and  he
refused  the  Governor-Generalship  of  Canada,  without  the  obliga-
tion of  residence  and  with  a  salary  of  5,000L  a  year  ;  •*  but  he
accepted  the  title  of  Baroness  of  Chatham  for  his  wife,  and  a  pen-
sion of  3,000^.  a  year  for  three  lives,  for  himself.  Contrary  to
all  custom,  these  rewards  were  announced  in  the  very  Gazette
that  announced  his  resignation,  and  they  produced  a  sudden
and  most  violent  revulsion  of  feeling.  On  an  impartial  con-
sideration this  revulsion  will  appear  not  a  little  unreasonable.
Though divided from his colleagues on a single  question,

>  Adnljjlivn,  i.  572.  ••  Chafhavi Corresp. ii. 147,  148.

*  Walpole's  George  III.  i.  82.  Harris's  JJfc  of  Hardmicke,  iii 258,

»  Bedford  Corr.  in.  49, 50.  259.

CH.  X.  HIS  TEMPORARY  UNPOPULARITY.  37

Pitt  had  no  wish  to  enter  into  permanent  opposition,  and
had  he  refused  all  favours  from  the  Crown,  such  an  intention
would  have  been  undoubtedly  ascribed  to  him.  No  rewards
were  ever  more  amply  earned,  and  the  pension  was  smaller
in  amount  than  that  which  had  just  been  bestowed  upon  Lord
Holdernesse  for  his  resignation.  In  English  public  life  it  is
scarcely  possible  for  anyone  who  does  not  possess  independent
means  to  take  a  prominent  part  out  of  office,  and  Pitt  had  not
yet  received  the  legacy  of  Sir  William  Pynsent  which  raised
him  to  comparative  wealth.  He  had  however  been  accustomed  to
use  a  language  about  pensioners,  and  to  talk  in  a  strain  of  high-
flown  and  heroic  disinterestedness,  not  quite  in  harmony  with
his  conduct,  and  a  storm  of  indignation  and  obloquy  was  easily
aroused.  Writers  connected  with  the  Court  party  were  the
foremost  in  lampooning  him,  and  the  extreme  bitterness  with
which  Horace  Walpole  and  Gray  spoke  of  his  conduct '  is  suffi-
cient to  show  that  the  feeling  was  not  confined  to  the  mob.
Pitt  also  exhibited  at  this  time  one  of  those  strange  fits  of
humility  and  extravagant  deference  to  royalty  to  which  he  was
liable.  He  burst  into  tears  at  a  few  civil  words  fi'om  the  young
King,  exclaiming,  '  I  confess,  Sir,  I  had  but  too  much  reason
to  expect  your  Majesty's  displeasure  ;  I  did  not  come  prepared
for  this  exceeding  goodness.  Pardon  me.  Sir ;  it  overpowers,  it
oppresses  me.'  ^  His  letters  to  Bute  acknowledging  the  kindness
of  the  King  were  couched  in  a  strain  of  florid,  fulsome,  almost
servile  humihty,  lamentably  unworthy  of  a  great  statesman.^

For  a  short  time  it  appeared  as  if  the  popularity  of  Pitt
were  eclipsed,  and  as  if  the  torrent  of  popular  indignation  which
was  so  greatly  feared  had  been  turned  against  the  fallen
statesman.  It  was  also  a  fortunate  circumstance  for  the  Court
party  that  the  resignation  took  place  at  a  time  when  the  recent
marriage  of  the  King  with  the  Princess  of  Mecklenburg  Strelitz,
and  the  gorgeous  ceremonies  of  the  wedding  and  of  the  coro-

'  See  for  Walpole's  opinions  his  let- d d  lie  and  never  would  be; but

ters  to  the  Countess  of  Ailesbury,  Oct.  it  was  for want  of reading  Thomas

10, 1761,  and  to  Conway,  Oct.  12, 1761.  a  Kempis, who knew mankind so

Gray  wrote at  the  same  time:  'Oh  much  better  than  I.' — Wor/is,  iii. p,

that  foolishest  of  great  men,  that  sold  2C.5.

his  inestimable  diamond  for  a  paltry  ^  Chatham Correspondence ii,

peerage  and  pension!  The  very  night  147.

it  happened  was  I  swearing  it  was  a  '  Ibid.  ii.  149-152.

38 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  x.

nation,  had  to  some  extent  stimulated  anew  that  sentiment  of
loyalty  which  was  already  beginning  to  fade.^

But  the  exultation  of  the  ministers  was  very  shortlived.
A  few  days  of  reflection  and  a  brief  and  dignified  letter  written
to  the  Town  Clerk  of  London  restored  the  popularity  of  Pitt,
and  a  speedy  reaction  set  in.  Addresses  congratulating  him  on
his  conduct  poured  in  from  many  of  the  chief  towns.  The
City  of  London,  which  had  long  been  his  chief  supporter,
after  a  momentary  hesitation  remained  firm  to  its  allegiance.
The  Common  Council  passed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  him  five  weeks
after  his  resignation.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Lord  Mayor's
day,  the  King  and  Queen  went  in  state  to  dine  at  the  Guild-
hall, and  Temple  induced  Pitt  to  take  the  injudicious  and
unbecoming  step  of  joining  the  procession.  The  result  was
what  had  probably  been  predicted.  The  populace  received  the
King  and  Queen  with  contemptuous  indifference,  Bute  with  an
outburst  of  insult,  and  Pitt  with  the  most  enthusiastic  applause.
In  Parliament  he  was  assailed  with  disgraceful  virulence  bj
Colonel  Barre,  a  partisan  of  Shelburne  who  was  then  '  devoted
to  Lord  Bute,'  ^  but  although  it  was  noticed  that  Barre  was  im-
mediately after  received  with  special  favour  at  Court,^  both
Parliament  and  the  public  were  disgusted  with  the  ferocity  and
the  scurrility  he  displayed.  Events  soon  justified  the  sagacity
of  Pitt.  No  sooner  had  he  retired  from  office  than  the  Spanish
Court  threw  aside  the  mask,  and  the  conciliatory  language  they
had  hitherto  employed  was  exchanged  for  a  tone  of  haughty
menace.  The  treasure  ships  which  Pitt  had  wished  to  intercept
arrived  safely  in  Spain.  Military  preparations  were  pressed  on
without  disguise. The  alliance  between  France  and  Spain  was

'  '  Mr.  Pitt  himself,'  wrote  Wal-  attack  upon  him,  in  a  strain  of  warm

pole,  Sept.  9, 1761,  '  would  be  mobbed  admiration,  asking  for  a  promotion,

if  he  talked  of  anything  but  clothes  Pitt had  refused  the  request  on the

and diamonds and bridesmaids.' —  ground  that  senior  officers  would  be

Walpole  to  Mann.  injured  by  the  promotion,  and  Barr6

2  This  was Shelburne's own  ex-  in  a  letter  to  Pitt  described  himself

pression. See  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  as  'bound  in  the highest  gratitude

•Shelburne,  i.  120.  for  tlie  attention  he  had received.' —

*  See  the  statement  of  Barre  him-  Chatham's Corresp. ii. 41-43, 171.

self  in  a  letter  to  Shelburne. — Fitz-  A  graphic  account  of  the  manner  in

maurice's  TAfe  of  Shelhitriie,  i. 126.  whichPitt  was  attacked  in  this  debate

Walpole's  George  III.  i.  122. Barre  will  be  found  in  a  letter  of  Mr.  Noel

had served  with  Wolfe,  and  he  had  Milbanke to Eockingham. — i'i/3  of

written to Pitt  shortly before his  Rochingham,  i.  79-83.

CH.  X.  THE  SPANISH WAE.  39

openly  avowed,  but  the  Spanish  Government  haughtily  refused  to
state  its  character  and  its  conditions.  Wall  propounded  a  long
series  of  grievances  against  England,  and  declared  that  Spain
would  no  longer  suffer  France  '  to  run  the  risk  of  receiving
such  rigid  laws  as  were  prescribed  by  an  insulting  victor.'  On
December  10, 1761,  the  English  Government,  having  vainly  de-r
mandeda  promise  that  the  Spanish  king  would  not  join  in  hos-
tilities against  England,  recalled  their  ambassador  from  Madrid.
On  the  31st  war  was  declared  against  Spain,  and  very  soon  after,
one  of  the  secret  motives  of  the  Spanish  policy  was  disclosed.
Portugal  was  on  friendly  terms  with  England,  but  she  had
been  perfectly  neutral  during  the  struggle,  and  had  given  no
kind  of  provocation  to  her  neighbours.  Without  even  a  colour-
able pretext  for  hostility,  Spanish  armies  were  now  massed  on
the  Portuguese  frontier,  and  in  March  the  Spanish  ambassador
and  the  French  plenipotentiary  presented  a  joint  and  peremp-
tory memorial  to  the  Portuguese  King,  ordering  him  at  once
to  break  off  all  correspondence  and  commerce  with  England,  and
to  join  France  and  Spain  in  the  war  that  was  waging.  The
insolent  demand  was  refused.  War  was  declared,  and  a  Spanish
army  was  soon  desolating  the  plains  of  Portugal.

But  the  hand  of  the  great  English  minister,  though  with-
drawn from  the  helm,  was  still  felt  in  every  department  of  the
war.  The  perfection  to  which  he  had  brought  every  branch
of  the  military  and  naval  service,  the  spirit  of  emulation  and
enterprise  he  had  breathed  into  them,  the  discernment  with
which  he  had  selected  the  commanders  for  the  most  arduous  posts,
were  all  still  felt,  and  victory  after  victory  crowned  the  British
arms.  In  February  1762,  the  important  island  of  Martinique
was  taken  from  the  French,  and  the  conquest  was  followed  by
that  of  the  dependent  isles  of  Grenada,  St.  Lucia,  and  St.
Vincent,  leaving  the  English  sole  possessors  of  all  the  Caribbean
Islands,  extending  from  the  eastern  point  of  Hispaniola  nearly
to  the  continent  of  South  America.  Another  and  still  greater
conquest  speedily  followed.  Among  the  designs  of  Pitt  one
of  the  most  important  was  the  conquest  of  Havannah,  the
richest  and  most  important  town  in  Cuba.  Its  harbour  was
one  of  the  best  in  the  world.  It  was  the  centre  of  the  whole
trade  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies,  and  it  was  defended  bj  strong

40  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  en.  x.

fortifications  and  by  a  powerful  fleet.  The  siege — which  was
conducted  with  signal  skill  and  daring — lasted  for  two  months
and  eight  days.  On  August  14,  1762,  Havannah  fell,  nine
noble  ships  of  the  line  and  four  frigates  were  taken,  five  others
were  destroyed  during  the  siege  or  in  the  docks,  and  the  trea-
sure taken  is  said  to  have  amounted  to  not  less  than  three
millions  sterling.'  On  September  21  a  formidable  French
attack  on  Briickenmiihle  was  repelled  with  great  loss  to  the
assailants  by  a  Oerman  and  English  army  under  Prince  Ferdi-
nand and  the  Marquis  of  Grranby.  On  October  6  Manilla,  with
the  Philippine  Islands,  was  conquered  by  Sir  W.  Draper,  and
among  the  Spanish  galleons  taken  at  sea  was  one  which  contained
a  treasure  valued  at  little  less  than  a  million.  In  Portugal  the
Spanish  army  was  at  first  successful,  but  it  was  soon  checked
by  the  assistance  of  English  and  Hanoverians  under  General
Burgoyne,  and  the  Spanish  were  compelled  to  evacuate  Estra-
madura.  The  only  serious  reverses  were  the  capture  by  the
Spaniards  of  the  Portuguese  settlement  of  Sacramento,  on  the
Eio  de  la  Plata,  and  the  capture  by  the  French  of  Fort  St.
John,  in  Newfoundland,  from  which,  however,  three  months
later  they  were  easily  expelled.

A  campaign  which  was  on  the  whole  so  brilliant  would
naturally  have  raised  the  reputation  of  the  ministry  that  con-
ducted it ;  but  in  this  case  every  success  was  mainly  attributed
to  Pitt,  and  was  regarded  as  a  justification  of  his  wisdom  and
as  a  condemnation  of  his  enemies.  It  was  known  that  the  war
with  Spain  was  his  policy ;  that  he  had  sent  out  the  expedition
against  Martinique ;  that  its  success  was  mainly  due  to  the
troops  his  victories  had  liberated  in  America;  that  he  had
planned  the  conquest  of  Havannah  ;  that  if  his  counsels  had
been  adopted,  the  number  of  rich  Spanish  prizes  that  were
brought  into  English  harbomrs  would  have  been  greatly  in-
creased. Without  the  ministry,  discontent  was  gathering  fast,
and  within  there  was  jealousy  or  division.  Grenville,  though
still  acting  with  docility  the  part  of  leader  of  the  House  of
Commons,  was  not  suffered  to  take  any  part  in  the  secret  cor-
ruption which  was  one  of  the  most  important  functions  usually
attached  to  his  post.^ Newcastle,  in  the  first  exultation  that

'  Annual  Itcffister,l7 (j2. See  too  ^  See  liis  complaint  of  the  diffi-

Jiiidford  Corresjwndencc,  iii.  130.  culty  he  had  '  to  carry  on  the  business

ca.  X.  EESIGNATION OF  NEWCASTLE.  41

followed  the  resignation  of  Pitt,  had  anticipated  a  renewal  of
his  ascendency,  but  he  soon  learned  how  greatly  he  had  mis-
calculated. Although  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  he  found
that  he  was  powerless  in  the  Grovernment.  Even  his  own
Bubordinates  at  the  Treasury  Bench  are  said  to  have  been  in-
structed to  sHght  him.  The  most  important  political  steps  were
taken  without  consulting  him.  Cabinet  councils  were  summoned
without  any  notice  of  the  subject  for  discussion  being  given
him.  The  King  made  no  less  than  seven  peers  without  even
informing  Newcastle  of  his  intention.  Neither  his  age,  his  rank,
his  position  in  the  ministry,  nor  his  eminent  services  to  the
dynasty,  could  save  him  from  marked  coldness  on  the  part
of  the  King,  from  contemptuous  discourtesy  and  studied  insults
on  the  part  of  the  favom-ite.^  The  situation  soon  became  in-
tolerable, and  when  Bute  announced  his  intention  of  with-
drawing the  subsidy  which  England  paid  to  the  King  of
Prussia,  Newcastle  refused  to  consent.  In  May  1762  the  old
statesman  resigned,  refusing  with  some  dignity  a  pension  that
was  offered  him  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting  a  fortune  which
had  been  wrecked  in  the  public  service.^  Bute  then  became
in  name,  what  since  the  resignation  of  Pitt  he  had  been  in
reahty,  the  head  of  the  ministry,  and  Grrenville  became  Secretary
of  State  in  his  stead.

The  Whig  party  which  had  so  long  been  in  power  was  now
put  to  the  test,  and  the  weakness  of  many  of  its  members  was
exposed.  George  Grenville,  one  of  the  most  rising  of  its
statesmen,  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  the  head  of  one  of  its
greatest  families,  had  already  gone  over  to  Bute,  and  a  long
train  of  the  personal  adherents  of  Newcastle  soon  followed
the  example.  The  bishops  led  the  way.  Newcastle  had  always
been  especially  careful  to  monopolise  the  ecclesiastical  patron-
age, and  it  was  said  that  there  was  not  a  single  bishop  on  the
bench  whom  he  had  not  either  appointed  or  translated. In

of  the  House  of  Commons without  iii.  79,  80.  Walpole's  Metnoirs  of  Georf/e

being  authorised  to  talk  to  the  mem-  III.  i.  156. Harris's Life of  Lord

bers  of  that  House  upon  their  several  Hardniclte,  iii.  2.30,  273,  274.
claims and pretensions.' — Grenville  ^  His private  fortune  is said to

Papers,  i.  p.  483.  have  been  reduced  from  25,000?. to

'  See the letters  of  Nevfcastle  to  6,000Z.  a  jear  by  his  long  tenure  of

Hardwicke,  Albemarle's  ii/e  o/J?<7c^-  office.— Harris's Life  of  Hardmiclie,

ingham,  i. 102-112; and  his letter  iii.  280.
to  Bedford,  Bedford  Correspondence,

42 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  x.

the  season  of  his  prosperity  they  had  thronged  his  hall  with
an  assiduity  that  sometimes  provoked  a  smile,  but  it  was
observed  that  only  a  single  bishop  was  present  at  his  farewell
levee.'  But  the  most  important  of  all  the  accessions  to  the
party  of  Bute  was  Fox,  the  old  rival  of  Pitt,  in  whose  favour
Grenville  was  displaced  from  the  leadership  of  the  Commons,
who,  in  consideration  of  the  promise  of  a  peerage,  undertook  to
carry  the  peace,  and  who,  having  vainly  attempted  to  draw  the
Duke  of  Cumberland  and  other  great  Whig  peers  into  the
same  connection,  threw  himself,  with  all  the  impetuosity  of
his  fearless  and  unscrupulous  nature,  into  the  service  of  the
Court.

The  main  object  of  the  party  since  the  downfall  of  Pitt  had
been  to  press  on  the  peace.  For  many  months  Bute,  without
the  knowledge  of  any  of  the  responsible  ministers  of  the  Crown,
carried  on  a  secret  negotiation  through  the  mediation  of  the
Sardinian  ambassador.  Count  Viri,^  and  when  it  had  arrived
at  some  maturity  it  was  finally  entrusted  to  the  Duke  of  Bed-
ford, who  had  for  a  long  time  identified  himself  with  the
extreme  peace  party.  His  letters  give  a  vivid  picture  of  the
feelings  of  a  section  of  the  Government.  Thus  in  June  1761,
while  Pitt  was  still  minister,  we  find  him  deploring  bitterly
the  expedition  against  Belleisle,  and  urging  that  '  if  we  retain
the  greatest  part  of  our  conquests  out  of  Europe  we  shall  be
in  danger  of  over-colonisitig  and  undoing  ourselves  by  them  as
the  Spaniards  have  done.'  ^  In  July  he  predicted  the  failure  of
the  projected  expedition  against  Martinique  and  the  speedy
conquest  of  the  King's  electoral  dominions  by  the  French.*
He  argued  that  to  deprive  the  French  of  the  Newfoundland

'  Cornwallis,  Bishop  of  Lichfield.  observed  to  him  that  there  were  but

The  Bishop  of  Norwich,  however,  who  two  bishops  present. He  is  said  to

was then  absent from London, re-  have  replied  that  bishops,  like  other

mained staunch to his benefactor.  men, were  too apt to forget their

See  on  the  ingratitude  of  the  bishops,  maker. I  think  this  has  been  said

Harris's  JAfe  of  HardivicJie,  iii. 334.  for  him,  or  the  resic:nation  of  power

Walpole"s Mcmoio-n of Gcorqe III.  has  much  brightened  his  luiderstand-

i. 169,170. Walpole to Montagu,  ing;  for  of  whatever  he  was  accused,

May  2.5, 1762. Newcastle is said  the  crime  of  wit  was  never  laid  to  his

on this occasion to have made a  charge.' — Doran's  Life  of  Mrs.  Mon-

very  happy  witticism  which  is  often  tagtt,  p.  120.

ascribed to Lord Melbourne. Mrs.  ^  See  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  SheU

Montagu writes  : '  The Duke of  hurne,  i.  p.  1H7.

Newcastle  after  his  resignation  had  a  *  Bedford  Correspondence,  iii.  17.

very  numerous  levee,  but  somebody  ^  Ibid.  pp.  23-29.

CH.  X  THE  DUKE OF  BEDFOKD.  43

fishery  would  be  to  ruin  their  naval  power,  and  would  unite
all  the  other  naval  powers  against  us,  as  aiming  at  h  naval
monopoly  '  at  least  as  dangerous  to  the  hberties  of  Europe  as
that  of  Lewis  XIV. ; '  ^  and  with  the  exception  of  a  slight  reser-  '
vation  on  the  article  of  Dunkirk,  he  advocated  the  unqualified
acceptance  of  every  one  of  the  French  demands  in  the  abortive
negotiation  I  have  described.^  It  is  remarkable  that  Bute  at
this  time  remonstrated  strongly  against  this  spirit  of  abso-
lute concession,  and  enumerated  conditions  very  little  different
from  those  of  Pitt,  as  essential  to  the  honour  and  safety  of
England.'  In  August  Rigby,  the  confidential  follower  of  Bed-
ford, wrote  to  him :  '  While  we  succeed  .  .  .  the  fire  is  kept
constantly  fanned.  For  my  own  part  I  am  so  convinced  of
the  destruction  which  must  follow  the  continuance  of  the  war,
that  I  should  not  be  sorry  to  hear  that  Martinico  or  the  next
windmill  you  attack  should  get  the  better  of  you.'  ■*  Lord
Shelburne,  who  was  deeply  mixed  with  the  intrigues  of  this
evil  time,  advocated  in  December  1761,  in  the  House  of  Lords,
the  withdrawal  of  all  English  troops  from  Germany,  and  the
complete  abandonment  of  Frederick  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of
February  1762,  Bedford,  though  now  Privy  Seal  and  an  active
member  of  the  Cabinet,  brought  forward  in  the  House  of
Lords  a  resolution  to  the  same  effect,  without  the  consent  ol
any  of  his  colleagues,  and  he  was  defeated  by  Bute,  who  carried
the  previous  question  by  105  to  16.^

It  is  obvious  that  such  a  statesman  was  peculiarly  unfit  to
carry  on  the  negotiation,  and  he  was  a  man  of  very  little  ability,
and  of  a  very  haughty  and  unaccommodating  temper.  His
personal  honour,  which  was  afterwards  malignantly  attacked,
appears  to  have  been  quite  unblemished,  and  on  one  im-
portant question  that  was  raised,  relating  to  the  frontier  in
Hindostan,  he  asserted  the  British  claims  with  energy  and
effect ;  ^  but  he  entered  upon  the  negotiation  with  the  strongest
desire  to  succeed  at  any  sacrifice  ;  he  showed  this  spirit  so  clearly
that  the  ministers  thought  it  necessary  to  impose  considerable

'  Bedford  Correspondence,  p.  26.  ^  Cavendish Debates,  i. 568-575.

2  Ibid.  p.  28.  Pari. Hist.  xv.  1217-1221. Bedford

'  Ibid.  pp.  30-34. Grenville Papers,  Correspondence,  in.  73. Fitzmaurice'a

i.  376.  Ufe  of  Shelburne,  i.  123,  124.

*  Bedford  Corresjmndence,  iii.  43.  ^ Bedford  Corres2}otidence,\n.-s.xn\,

44 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  x.

restrictions  on  his  powers  ;  •  and  it  may  easily  be  gathered
from  his  correspondence  that  he  desired  Havannah,  though
perhaps  the  richest  of  all  the  conquests  of  the  war,  to  be
restored  to  Spain  without  any  substantial  compensation  being
exacted.^

The  points  of  resemblance  between  the  Peace  of  Paris  and
the  Peace  of  Utrecht  are  so  many  and  so  obvious  that  it  is
impossible  to  overlook  them.  In  both  cases  a  war  of  extra-
ordinary success  was  ended  by  a  peace  which  was  very  ad-
vantageous, but  which  in  many  of  its  terms  was  greatly  inferior
to  what  might  reasonably  have  been  demanded.  In  both  casea
the  peace  was  forced  through  Parliament  amid  a  storm  of
unpopularity  and  by  corruption  and  intimidation  of  the  worst
kind.  In  both  cases  the  strange  spectacle  was  exhibited  of
English  ministers  looking  with  positive  alarm  or  dismay  on
some  of  the  greatest  successes  that  crowned  their  arms,  and
in  both  cases  the  extreme  longing  for  peace  was  mainly  due
to  party  motives,  and  especially  to  the  desire  of  excluding  from
power  a  great  man  who  was  pre-eminently  fitted  to  conduct  a
war.  It  cannot,  however,  be  justly  said  of  the  Peace  of  Paris
that  England  purchased,  as  she  had  done  under  Queen  Anne,
great  advantages  for  herself  at  the  cost  of  her  allies.  Portugal
was  restored  to  everything  she  had  lost  by  the  war,  and
although  Frederick  the  Great  had  some  real  reason  to  com-
plain of  England,  her  conduct  to  him  was  far  short  of  the
desertion  which  has  been  alleged.  The  wars  between  Prussia
and  Austria,  and  the  wars  between  England  and  France,  were
in  their  origin  entirely  distinct,  and  although  it  afterwards
suited  the  purpose  of  England  to  assist  Frederick,  as  France
was  assisting  Austria,  the  connection  was  of  a  purely  casual
and  interested  character.  No  stipulation  bound  England  to
continue  indefinitely  her  subsidy  to  Prussia,  and  in  April
1762,  when  the  Government  announced  their  intention  of
withdrawing  it,  they  were  perfectly  justified  in  doing  so.^
England  had  just  entered  into  a  new  war  with  Spain,  and  the

•  Bedford  Corrcspondenoe,iu.  Ibid.  riugton's  Life  of  BarriT!ijton,Y).  S2.
pp.  1 14-119,  126-129.  ^  See Bute's own  defence in a

2  Ibid.  pp. 118-119, 136-138.  Lord  despatch to Mitchell, the English

Barrington,  also,  was  of  opinion  that  Minister  to  Frederick  (May  26,  17G2).

no  compensation  should  be  asked  for  Bisset's Life of  Sir  A. Mitchell,  ii.

the  restoration  of Havannah. — Bar-  294-302.

PH.  X. ALLEGED  TREACHERY  TO  FREDERICK. 45

necessity  of  repelling  the  Spanish  invasion  of  Portugal  ren-
dered it  peculiarly  costly.  On  the  other  hand,  the  death  of
the  Czarina  Elizabeth  on  January  5j  1762,  had  placed  on  the
throne  of  Kussia  a  passionate  admirer  of  Frederick.  Peace
between  the  two  crowns  at  once  ensued.  For  the  few  months
during  which  Peter  the  Third  reigned,  there  was  even  an
alliance  between  Eussia  and  Prussia,  and  an  armistice  and
then  a  peace  between  Prussia  and  Sweden  speedily  followed.
The  great  confederation  against  Prussia  was  in  this  manner
dissolved.  France  and  Austria  alone  remained  opposed  to  her ;
and  although  England  by  the  Peace  of  Paris  engaged  no  longer
to  assist  her  ally,  she  stipulated  that  France  should  also  with-
draw from  the  war,  and  should  evacuate  the  territory  and
strong  places  she  had  occupied.  It  is  true,  however,  that  in
the  course  of  the  negotiations  there  were  some  things  of  which
Frederick  had  real  reason  to  complain.  By  a  strange  and
significant  omission,  the  article  compelling  the  French  to  cede
the  territory  and  strong  places  they  had  taken,  did  not  specify
the  Power  to  which  they  were  to  be  ceded.^  Bute  is  said
to  have  even  declared  in  Parliament  that  they  were  '  to  be
scrambled  for ; '  ^  and  but  for  the  promptitude  of  the  Prussian
king,  they  would  have  fallen  into  Austrian  hands.  It  is  cer-
tain that  in  January  1762  some  secret  overtures  were  made
by  Bute  to  the  Queen  of  Hungary  without  the  knowledge  of
Frederick,  and  two  charges  of  bad  faith  of  the  worst  descrip-
tion were  brought  against  the  English  minister.  It  was
alleged  that  in  order  to  induce  Austria  to  consent  to  an  early
peace,  he  held  out  hopes  that  England  would  use  her  influence
to  obtain  for  Austria  territorial  compensations  from  Prussia,
and  that  with  the  same  view,  after  the  death  of  the  Czarina,
Bute  had  urged  upon  Prince  Galitzin,  the  Russian  ambassador
in  London,  the  necessity  of  Russia  remaining  firm  to  the  Aus-
trian alliance,  maintaining  her  army  in  the  Prussian  terri-
tory, and  thus  compelling  Frederick  to  naake  large  concessions
to  Vienna.  These  charges  were  fully  believed  by  Frederick,
and  the  latter  rests  on  the  authority  of  Prince  Galitzin  him-
self; but  Bute  positively  asserted  that  they  were  untrue,  and

'  Carlyle's  Frederich,  book  xx.  ch.  *  Anecdotes  of  Chatham,  i.  401.

13.  Thackeray's  Zi/eo/Chatham,ii.  22.

46 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EiaHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x,

that  his  language  in  conversation  had  been  grossly  misunder-
stood or  misrepresented.^

As  far  as  England  was  concerned,  the  provisions  of  the
treaty  with  France  differed  but  little  from  those  which  had
been  rejected  by  Pitt  in  1761.  Minorca  was  restored  by
the  French,  and  England  retained  possession  of  all  Canada,
Nova  Scotia,  and  Cape  Breton,  of  Senegal,  Grenada,  and  the
Grrenadines,  and  of  the  three  neutral  islands,  St.  Vincent,
Dominica,  and  Tobago.  The  French,  however,  secm-ed  the
right  of  fishing  on  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  and  also  in  the
Grulf  of  St.  Lawrence  at  a  distance  of  three  leagues  from  the
shore,  and  two  small  islands  were  ceded  to  them  as  a  shelter
for  their  fishermen.  England  restored  Groree,  which  was
deemed  essential  to  the  French  slave  trade.  She  restored  the
islands  of  Gruadaloupe,  Marie- Gralante,  De  la  Desirade,  Marti-
nique, Belleisle,  and  San  Lucia,  and  in  Hindostan  there  was  a
mutual  restoration  of  conquests  made  since  1749.  The  French
were,  however,  forbidden  to  erect  fortifications  or  to  keep  troops
in  Bengal ;  they  were  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  English
candidates  as  Nabob  of  the  Carnatic  and  Surbah  of  the  Deccan,
and  they  undertook  to  reduce  Dunkirk  to  the  same  condition  as
before  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.

Spain  by  the  treaty  of  Paris  ceded  to  England  the  province
of  Florida,  with  some  adjoining  territory  to  the  east  and  south-
east of  the  Mississippi,  but  she  was  partly  indemnified  by  re-
ceiving from  France  New  Orleans  and  all  Louisiana  west  of  the
Mississippi.  She  renounced  all  right  to  participation  in  the
fishery  of  Newfoundland.  She  consented  that  the  adjudication
of  the  prizes  made  by  English  cruisers  on  the  coast  of  Spain
should  be  referred  to  the  English  Court  of  Admiralty,  and  she
acknowledged  the  long-disputed  right  of  the  English  to  cut
logwood  in  Honduras  Bay  provided  the  English  destroyed  the
fortifications  they  had  erected  there.  In  return  for  these  great
concessions  she  received  again  Havannah  and  the  other  ports  of
Cuba  which  had  been  conquered.  The  news  of  the  conquest  of
Manilla  and  the  other  Philippine  Islands  did  not  arrive  until

'  ComfiarcYrederick,  (Eurrr.t  Post-  AAolTphns' ITist. of  England,  i.l&-?)\  ;

hnviest,  iv.  2',i0-2!l2. Bissot's  Memoirs  and  especially  the  letters  in  the  ap-

of  Sir  Andrew  Mitchell,  ii. 20(i-802.  pendix,  pp.  579-589.
Histiiry  of  the  late  Miiwritij,  pp.  .52-54.

CH X.  PEACE OF  PARIS.  47

after  the  preliminaries  had  been  signed,  and  these  valuable  pos-
sessions were  in  consequence  restored  without  any  equivalent.
When  Manilla  was  captured,  the  private  property  of  the  inhabi-
tants was  saved  from  plunder  on  the  condition  of  a  payment  of
a  ransom  of  a  million  sterling,  one-half  of  which  was  paid  in
money  and  the  other  half  in  bills  upon  the  Spanish  Treasury,
These  bills  the  Spaniards  afterwards  refused  to  honour,  and  the
English  Government  was  never  able  to  obtain  their  payment.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  peace  was  extremely  ad-
vantageous to  England,  but  there  was  hardly  a  clause  in  it
which  was  not  below  what  she  might  reasonably  have  ex-
pected. Every  new  acquisition  which  she  obtained,  and  every
conquest  which  she  relinquished,  was  actually  in  her  hands
before  the  peace  was  signed.  JNIinorca,  which  was  the  one  great
French  conquest,  would  probably  have  been  retaken  if  the  war
had  continued,  and  its  value  did  not  amount  to  more  than  a
small  fraction  of  that  of  the  territory  which  England,  after
a  long  series  of  almost  uninterrupted  victories,  consented  to
abandon.  The  terms  of  the  peace  were  little,  if  at  all,  more
favourable  than  might  have  been  obtained  in  the  preceding
year,  though  the  war  had  been  since  then  uniformly  and
splendidly  successful.  In  the  former  negotiations  France  had
consented  to  cede  Goree  as  well  as  Senegal  to  England,  but
Goree,  and  with  it  the  French  slave  trade,  was  now  restored.
Guadaloupe  had  been  for  more  than  three  years  an  English
possession.  During  that  time  the  importation  of  a  multitude
of  negroes,  and  a  rapid  increase  of  commerce,  had  enormously
added  to  its  value ; '  and  in  the  impartial  and  very  competent
judgment  of  Chesterfield  it  might  easily  have  been  retained.^
George  Grenville  insisted  upon  its  retention,  but  Bute  was
so  anxious  to  hurry  on  the  peace  that  he  availed  himself  of
a  temporary  illness  which  prevented  Grenville  from  attending
to  public  business,  to  summon  a  council  by  which  it  was  sur-
rendered.' St.  Lucia,  which  was  selected  from  the  neutral
islands  for  surrender,  was  alone  much  more  valuable  than  the
three  neutral  islands  that  were  retained. Martinique,  from  its

•  See  the  description  of  the  island  -  Chesterfield's  Letters,  iv.  353,

by  Admiral  Rodney. — Grenville  Pa-  ^  Grenrille  Papers,  i.  450.

fers,  ii.  11-13.

48  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

situation  and  its  strong  fortifications,  was  extremely  important
as  a  military  post  for  the  protection  of  the  neighbouring  is
lands  '  and  its  conquest,  which  was  one  of  the  most  arduous  and
brilliant  enterprises  of  the  war,  seemed  a  needless  sacrifice  of
blood  and  treasure  if  this  rich  island  was  to  be  restored  a  few
months  later  without  any  equivalent.  Even  Havannah,  which  was
perhaps  the  richest  of  all  the  conquests  of  the  war,  would  have
been  restored  by  Bute  without  any  territorial  equivalent,  and  it
was  only  the  resolution  of  Grrenville,  and  the  strong  pressure  of
public  opinion,  that  obliged  him  to  exact  in  return  for  it  the
poor  and  barren  province  of  Florida.^  The  uncompensated  sur-
render of  Manilla  was  due  to  the  shameful  omission  of  any  pro-
vision relating  to  conquests  that  had  been  made,  though  they
were  not  known,  before  the  preliminaries  had  been  signed.

In  all  these  respects  the  peace  was  deserving  of  censure,
but  we  can  hardly,  I  think,  regret  the  abandonment  by  the
ministry  of  the  schemes  of  Pitt  for  destroying  the  whole  com-
mercial and  naval  greatness  of  France.  The  war  had  for  the
present  given  England  an  almost  complete  monopoly  in  many
fields,  and  Pitt  imagined  that  it  was  both  possible,  and  desirable
and  just,  to  prevent  France,  in  spite  of  her  vast  seaboard  and
her  great  resources,  from  ever  reviving  as  a  naval  power.  He
maintained  that  the  whole  American  fishery  should  be  denied
her.  He  had  himself  in  the  preceding  negotiations  consented,
on  certain  conditions,  to  leave  her  a  part  of  it ;  but  he  asserted
that  on  this,  as  on  many  other  points,  his  opinion  had  been
overruled  by  his  colleagues  ;  that  the  fisheries  of  Newfoundland
and  St.  Lawrence  formed  the  great  nursery  of  the  French  navy,
and  that  they  should  in  consequence  be  reserved  exclusively  for
England.  In  the  same  spirit  he  desired  to  obtain  for  England
a  strict  monopoly  of  the  slave  trade,  of  the  sugar  trade,  of  the
trade  with  India,  and  he  protested  against  any  cession  which
enabled  France  to  carry  on  any  of  these  branches  of  commerce.
Such  a  policy  could  hardly  fail  to  make  national  animosities
indelible.  It  is  probable  that  France  would  have  resisted  it  to
the  uttermost ;  and  it  rested  not  only  on  exaggerated  feelings
of  national  jealousy,  but  also  on  very  narrow  and  erroneous  views

' Grenville  Papcrx,  ii.  12,  13.

*  Ibid.  i.  450,  476,  483. Life  of  Shelhurne,  i.  154.

CH.  X.  RISING DISCONTENT.  49

of  the  nature  of  commerce.  No  English  statesman  maintained
more  persistently  than  Pitt  the  advantages  of  commercial
monopoly,  or  believed  more  firmly  that  the  commercial  interests
of  different  nations  were  necessarily  antagonistic'

If  the  peace  had  been  made  in  a  different  spirit  and  by
other  statesmen, it  would  probably  have  been  favourably  received.
The  Court  party,  who  observed  the  many  signs  of  weariness
in  the  nation,  and  who  remembered  that  during  the  last  two
reigns  the  disposition  of  the  sovereign  to  involve  the  country
in  Grerman  disputes  had  been  the  chief  source  of  disaffection,
hoped,  not  altogether  unreasonably,  that  the  young  king,  by
putting  an  end  to  the  German  tvar  and  by  showing  decisively
that  he  was  governed  by  no  German  sympathies,  would  have
reaped  an  abundant  harvest  of  popularity.^  But  all  such  ex-
pectations were  soon  falsified  by  the  event.  No  character  in
England  is  more  detested  than  that  of  a  Court  favourite,  and
the  scandal  about  the  relations  of  Bute  and  the  mother  of  the
King  was  eagerly  accepted.  In  the  very  beginning  of  the  new
reign  a  paper  was  affixed  to  the  Royal  Exchange  with  the  words,
*  No  petticoat  government,  no  Scotch  Minister,  no  Lord  George
Sackville,'^  and  after  the  displacement  of  Pitt  the  popular  in-
dignation rapidly  increased.  The  City  gave  instructions  to  its
members  to  promote  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  disposal  of  the
money  that  was  voted,  and  to  refuse  their  consent  to  any  peace
which  did  not  secure  to  England  all  or  nearly  all  the  conquests
she  had  made.  The  example  was  widely  followed.  The  vm-
popularity  of  Bute  was  such  that  he  could  not  appear  unat-
tended or  undisguised  in  the  streets,  and  he  was  compelled  to

'  See  the  striking  statement  of  gence  they  bring  me  be  true  Mr.  Pitt
his  views  on  this  matter,  Pari.  IRst.xv.  goes  down  fast  in  the  City,  and  faster
1265.  '  The  trade  with  these  conquests  at  this  end  of  the  town.  They  add
[Martinique  and  Guadaloupe]  is  of  you  rise  daily.  .  ,  .  Should  not  a
the  utmost  lucrative  nature  and  of  the  measure  so  extremely  popular  as  the
most  considerable  extent.  The  num-  sacrificing  that  country  [Hanover]  to
ber  of  ships  employed  by  it  are  a  great  this,  for  a  time,  to  secure  an  honour-
resource  to  our  maritime  power ;  and,  able  and  advantageous  peace.  .  .  .
what  is  of  equal  weight,  all  that  we  come  immediately  from  the  King,  and
gain  on  this  system  is  made  fourfold  by  his  order  be  carried  into  execution
to  us  by  the  loss  which  ensues  to  by  the  hands  in  which  he  jolaces  his
France.  But  our  conquests  in  North  whole  confidence?' — AdoljjJms,  i.  571,
America  are  of  very  little  detriment  572.
to  the  commerce  of  France  '  ^  Walpole  to  Montagu,  Nov, 13

«  Thus  in  Jan. 1761,  Lord Mel-  1760.
combe  wrote  to  Ikite  :  '  If  the  intelli-

VOL.  m.  E

50 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

enroll  a  bodyguard  of  butchers  and  boxers  for  his  protection.
He  was  insulted  as  he  went  to  Parliament.  On  one  occasion
his  chair  was  attacked  by  so  fierce  a  mob  that  his  life  was  in
serious  danger.  The  jack  boot,  which  by  a  pun  upon  his  name
was  chosen  as  his  popular  emblem,  was  paraded  ignominiously
through  the  streets,  hung  up  on  a  gallows,  or  thrown  into  the
flames,'  together  with  a  bonnet  or  a  petticoat  symbolising  the
Princess.  The  declaration  of  war  against  Spain,  which  signally
vindicated  the  foresight  of  Pitt,  the  splendid  victories  that  fol-
lowed, which  were  universally  accepted  as  the  direct  results  of
his  policy,  the  formal  resignation  of  Newcastle  which  brought
the  favourite  into  clear  relief  as  the  responsible  leader  of  the
ministry,  all  added  to  the  flame.  Never  perhaps  in  English
history  were  libels  so  bitter  or  so  scurrilous,  and  the  influence
of  Frederick  the  Great  was  employed  to  foment  them.^  The
story  of  Earl  Mortimer,  who  was  united  by  an  illicit  love  to  the
mother  of  Edward  III.,  and  who  by  her  means  for  a  time
governed  the  country  and  the  King,  became  the  favourite  sub-
ject of  the  satirists.  Among  the  papers  left  by  Ben  Jonson
were  the  plot  and  the  first  scene  of  an  intended  play  on  the  sub-
ject, and  these  were  now  republished  with  a  dedication  to  Bute
from  the  pen  of  Wilkes.

But  perhaps  the  most  popular  topic  in  the  invectives  against
Bute  was  his  Scotch  nationality.  In  addition  to  the  strong
national  antipathy  of  Englishmen  to  all  foreigners,  many
reasons  had  made  the  Scotch  peculiarly  unpopular.  They
had  for  centuries  been  regarded  as  natural  enemies.  The
Union  had  been  almost  equally  disliked  by  both  nations,  and
closer  contact  had  as  yet  done  very  little  to  soften  the  animosity.
The  Scotch  were  chiefly  known  in  London  as  eager  place-
hunters,  entering  into  keen  competition  with  the  natives  for
minor  offices.  They  were  poor,  proud,  sensitive,  and  pertina-
cious. Their  strange  pronunciation,  the  barrenness  of  their
country,  the  contrast  between  the  pride  of  their  old  nobility
and  the  wretched  shifts  to  which  their  poverty  compelled  them

'  Walpole to  Conway, Oct. 26,  sen  and  Michell  urging  them  to  use

17C)l.'Wa,\iK)]e'sJf/-rn(nr.'-ofGi'orgeIII.  all  their  intiuence  to  stir  np  winters

i.  85. GreriHl/e  Papem,  i.  452.  and  agitators  against Bute. —  Grcri'

^  See the  very  curious  letter  of  ville  Papers,  1.  467,  468.
Frederick  to  his  Ministers  Knyphau-

CH.  s. ENGLISH  HATEED  OF  THE  SCOTCH.  51

to  resort,  furnished  endless  themes  of  illiberal  ridicule.  Dur-
ing more  than  half  a  century  that  followed  the  Union,  only
a  single  English  man  had  been  elected  by  a  Scotch  consti-
tuency ; '  and  there  were  bitter  complaints  that  a  people  so  ex-
clusive at  home  should  be  suffered  to  descend  upon  the  rich
fields  of  English  patronage.  Yet  the  very  unpopularity  of  the
Scotch  drew  them  more  closely  together,  and  their  tenacity  of
purpose  enabled  them  in  the  race  of  ambition  to  distance  many
competitors.  The  contempt  for  poverty  which  is  one  of  the
most  conspicuous  signs  of  the  deep  vein  of  vulgarity  that
mingles  with  the  many  noble  elements  of  the  English  character,
and  a  more  than  common  disposition  to  judge  all  foreigners  by
their  own  standard  of  manners,  combined  with  other  and  some-
what more  serious  reasons  to  make  the  English  look  down  upon
the  Scotch.  As  we  have  already  seen,  the  Scotch  members  were
as  yet  an  unhealthy  and  a  somewhat  inferior  element  in  English
political  life.  They  had  been  the  last  members  who  received
wages  for  their  services.  They  were  still  exempt  from  the  pro-
perty qualification  which  was  required  from  most  English  mem-
bers.^ They  had  very  little  interest  in  English  affairs.  They
usually  voted  together,  and  their  venality  was  notorious.^

The  rebellion  of  1745  raised  the  national  antipathy  to  fever
heat.  The  Highland  march  to  Derby  and  the  disgraceful
panic  it  produced  in  London,  were  remembered  with  a  bitter-
ness that  was  all  the  more  intense  because  it  was  largely  mixed
with  shame.  And  now,  when  a  Scotch  representative  peer  of
the  name  and  lineage  of  the  Stuarts  had  become  almost  omni-
potent at  the  Court,  when  Jacobite  Scotchmen  were  received
with  marked  favour  by  the  Sovereign  ;  when  Scotch  birth  was
believed  to  be  one  of  the  best  passports  to  English  promotion,

•  Chauncy  Townsend, the Mem-  Scotch  should  be  excused  from  pajing

ber  for  Wigtovm,  who  died  in 1770.  their  proportion  of  this  extraordinary

— Annual  Register,  1770,  p.  114.  tax,  unless  it  was  because  forty-five

2  University members and sons  Scotch  representatives  in  that  House

of  peers were in England exempt.  always  voted  as  they  were  directed.'

Townshends  History  of  the  House  of  Townshend's  Hist,  ^of  the House  of

Comvions,  ii.  406.  Commons,  ii.  52,  53. Montesquieu,  in

^  Their subservience had been  his Notes sur VAvglcterre, which

very  bitterly  noticed  by  Jekyll  in  the  were  written  in  1730,  had  said,  'Jly

last  reign. When Walpole's  special  a  des  membres  ecossois  qui n'ont  que

tax  on  Papists  and  Nonjurors  was  im-  deux  cents  livres  sterling  pour  leiir

po.sed,  the Scotch were exempted.  voix  et  la  vendent  ;\  ce  prix.'
Jekyll  said  :  '  I  know  not  why  the

K 2

52  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  x,

there  arose  a  cry  of  hatred  and  indignation  which  rang  thiough
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  Churchill,  in  his  '  Pro-
phecy of  Famine,'  and  Wilkes,  in  his  '  North  Briton,'  were  its
most  powerful  exponents.  The  former,  in  lines  of  savage  vigour,
depicted  Scotland  as  a  treeless,  flowerless  land  formed  out  of
the  refuse  of  the  universe,  and  inhabited  by  the  very  bastards
of  creation  ;  where  famine  had  fixed  her  chosen  throne,  where  a
scanty  population,  gaunt  with  hunger,  and  hideous  with  dirt
and  with  the  itch,  spent  their  wretched  days  in  brooding  over
the  fallen  fortunes  of  their  native  dynasty,  and  in  watching
with  mingled  envy  and  hatred  the  mighty  nation  that  had
subdued  them.  At  last  their  greed  and  their  hatred  were  alike
gratified.  What  Force  could  not  accomplish  had  been  done  by
Fraud.  The  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  was  thrown
open  to  them.  Already  the  most  important  places  were  at
their  disposal,  and  soon,  through  the  influence  of  their  great
fellow-countrymen,  they  would  descend  upon  every  centre  of
English  power  to  divide,  weaken,  plunder,  and  betray.  With
less  genius,  but  with  even  greater  effect,  Wilkes  collected  in
his  weekly  libels,  every  topic  that  could  inflame  the  national
hatred  against  the  Scotch.  He  contended  that  '  a  Scot  had  no
more  right  to  preferment  in  England  than  a  Hanoverian  or  a
Hottentot ; '  and  he  pointed  out  with  bitter  emphasis  how  the
Scotchman  Mansfield  was  Chief  Justice  of  England,  how  the
Scotchman  Loudon  commanded  the  British  forces  in  Portugal,
how  the  Scots  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  and  James  Oswald  were  at
the  Treasury  Board,  how  the  Scotchman  Eamsay  was  Court
painter,  and  the  Scotchman  Adam  Court  architect ;  how  a
crowd  of  obscmre  Scotchmen  had  obtained  pensions  or  small
preferments  paid  for  from  the  earnings  of  Englishmen.  Buck-
ingham Palace  was  nicknamed  Holyrood  on  account  of  the
number  of  Scotchmen  who  entered  it.^  The  Duke  of  Cumber-
land had  long  been  one  of  the  most  unpopular  men  in  the
kingdom,  partly  on  account  of  the  severities  that  followed
Culloden,  but  these  severities  were  now  not  only  forgiven,  but
applauded ;  and  as  he  was  in  opposition  to  Bute,  he  speedily
became  a  hero,  and  was  extolled  as  the  second  deliverer  of
England. The  distinction  between  the  two  nations  was  so  deep

'  Walpole  to  Montagu,  June  8,  17G2.

CH.  X.  ENGLISH  HATRED  OF  THE  SCOTCH.  53

and  marked  that  Horace  Walpole  gave  the  Scotch  birth  of  Sir
Gilbert  Elliot  as  a  conclusive  reason  why  he  should  not  lead
the  House  of  Commons,  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford  assigned  the
same  reason  as  one  of  the  objections  to  the  appointment  of
Forrester  to  the  Speakership.'  Junius  himself  never  wrote
with  a  more  savage  hatred  than  when  he  reminded  the  King  of
the  treachery  of  the  Scotch  to  Charles  I.,  and  dilated  on  the
folly  of  any  sovereign  of  any  race  who  should  hereafter  rest
upon  their  honour.

These  instances  are  sufficient  to  show  how  far  the  great
work  of  uniting  the  two  nations  was  from  its  accomplishment.
The  dislike  of  the  Scotch  continued  for  many  years  unchecked,
and  among  the  Whigs  it  was  greatly  strengthened  by  the
strong  vein  of  Toryism,  if  not  of  Jacobitism,  which  was  at
this  time  conspicuous  in  Scotch  writers.  In  the  volumes  of
his  history  published  in  1754  and  1756,  Hume  had  devoted  a
grace  of  style,  a  skill  of  narration,  and  a  subtlety  of  thought,
which  no  English  historian  had  yet  equalled,  to  an  elaborate
apology  for  the  conduct  of  the  Stuarts.  Smollett  was  one  of
the  most  conspicuous  and  most  violent  of  the  writers  in  defence
of  the  Court.  The  '  Memoirs  of  Great  Britain,'  by  Sir  John
Dalrymple,  which  appeared  in  1771  and  1773,  for  the  first
time  revealed  the  damaging  iact  that  Algernon  Sidney,  whose
memory  had  been  almost  canonised  by  his  party,  had  received
money  from  the  French  ambassador,  and  in  1775  the  '  Original
Papers '  pubHshed  by  Macpherson  gave  an  almost  equal  shock
to  the  Whig  tradition  by  proving  the  later  communications
of  Marlborough  with  the  Stuarts.  The  writings  of  Horace
Walpole  sufficiently  show  the  indignation  with  which  these
books  were  regarded  by  Whig  poHticians,  while  the  popular
dislike  was  incessantly  displayed.  Macklin  painted  the  Scotch
in  the  most  odious  and  despicable  light  in  the  character
of  Sir  Pertinax  MacSycophant  in  the  '  ]Man  of  the  World.'
Hume  wrote  in  1765  that  the  English  rage  against  the  Scotch
was  daily  increasing,  and  he  added  that  it  was  such  that  he
had  frequently  resolved  never  to  set  his  foot  on  English  soil.'
At  a  time  when  the  passion  for  representing  plays  of  Shake-

'  Bedford  Corres})ondence,  iii.  xxxiiL
*  Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  ii.  665

54 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  x.

speare  with  dresses  tha'^  were  historically  correct  was  at  its
height,  it  was  suggested  that  Macbeth  should  wear  tartan  in-
stead of  the  modern  military  dress,  but  Grarrick  rejected  the
proposal,  not  because  it  was  historically  incorrect,  but  because
the  appearance  of  the  Scotch  national  dress  would  infallibly
damn  the  piece.^  When  Home,  the  famous  author  of  '  Douglas,'
produced  his  '  Fatal  Discovery'  in  1769,  Garrick,  in  spite  of  the
success  of  the  earlier  play,  did  not  venture  to  reveal  the  name
of  the  Scotch  author,  and  induced  a  young  Oxford  gentleman
to  father  the  piece.  The  play  was  successful  till  the  true
author  having  then  imprudently  disclosed  himself,  its  popu-
larity speedily  waned.^  As  late  as  1771,  when  Smollett  pub-
lished '  Humphry  CHnker,'  the  last  and  perhaps  the  greatest
of  his  novels,  it  was  assailed  with  a  storm  of  obloquy  on  the
ground  that  it  was  written  to  defend  the  Scotch.^

It  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  change  that  in  a  few  years
had  passed  over  English  politics,  of  the  disintegration  of  the
Whig  party  and  of  the  increasing  force  of  corrupt  influence
in  Parliament,  that  Bute  should  have  been  able,  in  spite  of  all
his  disadvantages,  by  the  assistance  of  royal  favour,  to  carry  his
measures  triumphantly  through  Parliament.  In  the  preceding
reign  Carteret  had  for  a  short  time  occupied  a  somewhat  similar
position ;  but  notwithstanding  his  brilliant  talents  and  his
long  and  varied  experience,  he  soon  found  liis  task  an  im-
possible one.  Bute  was  a  man  of  very  ordinary  intellect,  and
he  came  to  office  with  no  previous  experience  of  public  busi-
ness, with  no  practice  of  debate,  with  no  skill  in  managing
men.  His  speech  in  defence  of  the  Preliminaries  of  the  Peace
is  said  to  have  exhibited  some  power  both  of  reasoning  and
language,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  a  mere  elaborate  essay,
probably  learned  by  heart,  and  much  impaired  by  a  very
formal  delivery.  Charles  Townshend  compared  the  slow  mono-
tonous succession  of  its  sentences  to  the  firing  of  minute-guns.

'  Doran's  Jacobite  London,  ii.  p.  '  Like  the  generality  of  Scotch,'  he

350.  .  says,  '  Lord  Mansfield  had  no  regard

^  Scott's  Essay  on  the  Life  and  to truth whatever.'  —  Fitzmaurice's

Works  of  John  Home.  lAfe  of  Shelbwrne,  i.  89. Among  the

^  See  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  manyadmirablequalitiesof  the  Scotch

III.  iv.  .S28 . We  have  a  curious  illus-  there  is  probably  none  vs^hich  a  modern

tr  tion  of  the  change  that  may  take  observer  would  regard  as  so  conspicu-

place  in  national  judgments  in  the  ous-and  so  uncontested  as  their  emi-

A  utobiography of Lord Shelburne.  nent  truthfulness.

CH.  X.  INCAPACITY OF  THE GOVERNMENT.  55

There  have  been  statesmen  with  very  little  political  ability,
who  have  maintained  a  high  place  in  politics  by  the  personal
confidence  they  inspired,  by  a  frankness  and  simplicity  of  cha-
racter which  disarmed  enmities  and  attached  friends.  But  of
these  qualities,  to  which  the  success  of  Lord  Althorp  in  the
present  century  was  mainly  due,  Bute  was  wholly  destitute.
His  honour,  though  it  was  probably  unstained,  was  certainly
not  unsuspected.  His  relations  with  the  Princess  Dowager,
and  the  negotiations  with  Prince  Galitzin,  left  a  cloud  of
suspicion  upon  it.  The  publication  in  1756  of  the  '  Memoirs
of  Torcy '  had  for  the  first  time  disclosed  to  the  English  public
the  startKng  fact  that,  in  the  negotiations  between  the  English
and  French  in  1709,  a  large  bribe  had  been  offered  to  Marl-
borough to  induce  him  to  favour  the  French  cause,  and  a  charge
of  having  accepted  a  bribe  from  France  to  carry  the  Peace  of
Paris  was  brought  publicly  against  Bute  in  1 765.  Parliament,  it
is  true,  a  few  years  later,  after  a  careful  investigation,  pronounced
it  wholly  frivolous,'  but  it  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  low
estimate  in  which  Bute  was  held,  that  Lord  Camden,  long  after-
wards, expressed  his  firm  belief  that  it  was  substantially  true.^
A  natural  turn  for  tortuous  methods  and  secret  intrigues,  com-
bined with  great  moroseness  and  haughtiness  of  manner,  had
made  Bute  disliked  and  distrusted  by  all  with  whom  he  had  to
deal.  Even  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  with  whom  he  chiefly  shares
the  praise  or  blame  of  the  peace,  came  to  regard  him  with  hatred
when  he  found  that  during  the  negotiations,  he  was  secretly
corresponding  with  the  French.  Of  administrative  ability  he  had
absolutely  nothing.  The  peace,  bad  as  it  was,  would  have  been
much  worse  but  for  the  intervention  of  his  colleagues,  and
especially  of  George  Grenville,  and  the  financial  administration
of  this  ministry  was  one  of  the  worst  ever  known  in  England.
Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  who  had  been  made  Chancellor  of  the
Exchequer,  was  honourably  distinguished  in  the  last  reign  by
his  strenuous  opposition  to  the  execution  of  Byng,  but  he  was
better  known  as  the  President  of  the  Medmenham  Brother-
hood or  Franciscan  Club,  a  well-known  society  famous  for  its
debaucheries,  and  for  its  blasphemous  parodies  of  the  rites  of  the

'  Parliamentary  Hist. xvi. 763-  ^  See  Lord  Stanhope's  History  of

785.  England,  iv.  273.

56 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  x.

Catholic  religion.  Of  financial  knowledge  he  did  not  possess
the  rudiments,  and  his  ignorance  was  all  the  more  conspicuous
from  the  great  financial  ability  of  his  predecessor  Legge.  His
budget  speech  was  so  confused  and  incapable  that  it  was  re-
ceived with  shouts  of  laughter.  An  excise  of  4s.  in  the  hogs-
head, to  be  paid  by  the  grower,  which  he  imposed  on  cyder  and
perry,  raised  a  resistance  through  the  cyder  counties  hardly
less  furious  than  that  which  ha>i  been  directed  against  the  ex-
cise scheme  of  Walpole.^

One  man,  however,  of  real  ability  and  of  indomitable
courage  stood  by  Bute.  Henry  Fox,  soured  by  disappointment
and  unpopularity,  at  last  saw  the  possibility,  by  a  bold  act  of
apostasy,  of  recovering  his  ascendency,  and  he  fearlessly  con-
fronted the  tempest  of  opposition.  Of  the  feeling  of  the
country  he  had  no  illusion.  Just  before  he  took  the  lead  of
the  Commons  he  wrote  to  his  confidant  Shelburne :  '  Does
not  your  Lordship  begin  to  fear  that  there  are  few  left  of
any  sort,  of  our  friends  even,  who  are  for  the  peace  ?  I  own
I  do.' 2

Then  came  a  period  of  intimidation  and  corruption  compared
with  which  the  worst  days  of  the  V/alpole  administration  ap-
peared pure.  Bribes  ranging  from  200^.  and  upwards  were  given
almost  publicly  at  the  pay  office.  Martin,  the  Secretary  of  the
Treasury,  afterwards  acknowledged  that  no  less  than  25,0001.
were  expended  in  a  single  morning  in  purchasing  votes.  Large
sums  are  said  to  have  been  given  to  corporations  to  petition  for
the  peace.  Urgent  letters  were  written  to  the  lord-lieutenants  of
the  counties  calling  on  them  to  procure  addresses  with  the  same
object.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  ascendency  of  Bute,
patronage  had  been  extended  and  employed  with  extravagant
profusion  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  political  power  of
the  Crown,  and  this  process  was  rapidly  extended.  Bute  did
not  venture,  like  Harley,  to  create  simultaneously  twelve  peers,
but  sixteen  were  made  in  the  space  of  two  years.  The  number
of  Lords  of  the  Bedchamber  was  increased  from  twelve  to
twenty- two,  each  with  a  salary  of  5001.  a  year,  and  they  were

'  Pari.  JTisf.  xv.  1307-1316. This  linen  wliich  was  first  intended,  suffi-

tax  was  said  to  have  been  projiosed  ciently  to  explain  it  to  the  House.' —

'  because  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  could  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shelburne,  i.  186
not  be  made  to  understand  a  tax  on  *  Ibid,  i,  157.

CH.  X,  BEIEEEY  AND  INTIMIDATION.  57

selected  exclusiyely  from  among  the  members  of  Parliament.
It  was  found  necessary  to  raise  3,500,000Z.,  and  this  was  done
partly  by  two  lotteries,  and  partly  by  a  loan  which  was  not
thrown  open  to  public  competition,  and  which  was  issued  on
terms  so  shamefully  improvident  that  the  shares  at  once  rose
10  per  cent.  A  very  large  proportion  of  these  shares  were  dis-
tributed among  the  friends  of  the  Government,  and  thus  a
new  and  most  wasteful  form  of  bribery  was  introduced  into
English  politics.^

Intimidation  of  the  grossest  kind  was  at  the  same  time
practised.  All  the  partisans  of  Newcastle  were  at  once  driven
from  ofi&ce,  and  some  of  the  most  prominent  men  in  the  country
were  treated  with  an  arrogance  that  recalled  the  worst  days  of  the
Stuarts.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  was  expelled  from  the  office
of  Chamberlain  with  circumstances  of  the  grossest  insult.  The
King  refused  even  to  see  him  on  the  occasion,  and  with  his
own  hand  struck  his  name  from  the  Hst  of  Privy  Councillors.
The  Dukes  of  Newcastle  and  Grafton,  and  the  Marquis  of
Eockingham,  were  deprived  of  the  Lord-Lieutenancies  of  their
counties.^  It  has  always  been  one  of  the  most  healthy  features
of  English  political  life  that  the  public  offices  are  filled  with
permanent  officials,  who  are  unaffected  by  party  fluctuations,
who  instruct  alike  Whig  and  Tory  ministers,  preserve  unbroken
the  steady  tendencies  of  government,  and  from  the  stability
of  their  position  acquire  a  knowledge  of  administrative  de-
tails and  an  independence  and  impartiality  of  judgment  which
could  never  be  reasonably  expected  from  men  whose  tenure
of  office  was  dependent  on  the  ascendency  of  a  party.  This
system  Fox  and  Bute  resolved  to  break  down.  They  de-
termined that  every  servant  of  the  Government,  even  to  the
very  lowest,  should  be  of  their  own  nomination.^ A  persecu-

»  Walpole's  Georqe III. i. 199.  pendants  in  Crown  employments,  it

Hist,  of  the  Late Minority, pp.  69,  behoves  your  Lordship  in  particular

83, 93-102. Anecdotes  of Chatham,  to  leave  none  of  them.  •  Their  connec-

i.  282, North  Briton,  p.  234.  tions  spread  very  wide,  and  every  one

2  Adolphus,  i.  119. Albemarle's  of  their  relatives  and  friends  is  in  hlq

Life  of  Rockingham,  i.  158, 159. Ear-  heart  your  enemy.  .  .  .  Turn  the  ta-

ris.  Life  of  Ma/rdwicke,  iii,  320,  333-  bles  and  yon  will  immediately  have

335. _ ^  thousands  who  will  think  the  safety

^  '  The  impertinence  of  our  con-  of themselves depends upon youl

quered  enemies  last  night  was  great,  Lordship,  and  will  therefore  be  sia-

but  will  not  continue  so  if  his  Ma-  cere and active friends.'— Fox to

jesty  shows  no  lenity. But,  my  Lord,  Bute,  Nov.  1762. Shelburne's  Life,  i.

with regard to their  numerous  de-  180.

58  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch x.

tion  as  foolish  as  it  was  harsh  was  directed  by  Fox  against  the
humblest  officials  who  had  been  appointed  or  recommended  by
Whig  statesmen,  or  were  in  any  way  connected  with  them.
Clerks,  tidewaiters,  and  excisemen  were  included  in  the  pro-
scription. The  widow  of  an  admiral  who  was  distantly  con-
nected with  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  a  poor  man  who  had  been
rewarded  for  bravery  against  smugglers  at  the  recommendation
of  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  a  schoolboy  who  was  a  nephew  of  Legge,
were  among  those  who  were  deprived  of  places,  pensions,  or
reversions.  There  was  even  a  design  of  depriving  the  members
of  the  Opposition  of  the  great  patent  places  they  held,  although
the  terms  of  the  patents  distinctly  asserted  that  the  places  were
for  life.  Fox  wished  to  submit  to  the  twelve  judges  the  ques-
tion whether  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  King  to  annul  the
patents  ;  but  the  Chancellor,  Lord  Northington,  declared  that
it  would  be  as  reasonable  to  ask  them  to  pronounce  upon  the
validity  of  the  Great  Charter.  It  was  the  aim  of  the  Court
party  to  crush  to  the  very  dust  the  great  Whig  connection,
by  showing  that  no  person,  however  humble,  who  had  received
favours  from  it  could  escape  the  vengeance  of  the  Crown,  while
every  resource  of  patronage  and  place  was  employed  for  the
purpose  of  consolidating  the  new  interest.  One  official,  who
for  seven  years  had  been  of  the  King's  bedchamber,  was  turned
out  solely  because  he  had  no  seat  in  Parliament,  and  could
therefore  be  of  no  use  there.'

Among  the  few  merits  of  Bute  must  be  reckoned  his  strong
literary  tastes ;  and  his  patronage,  though  rarely  or  never  ex-
tended to  any  writers  except  those  of  his  party,  was  sometimes
judiciously  bestowed.  Johnson  owed  to  him  his  pension  of  300L
a  year.  Sir  James  Stuart,  the  Jacobite  political  economist  who
had  been  obliged  to  fly  from  England  on  account  of  his  partici-
pation in  the  rebellion  of  1745,  was  pardoned  through  his  in-
strumentality.^ That  invaluable  collection  of  about  30,000
pamphlets  published  at  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth,  which

^  WalTpole's  Memoirs  of  Georije  TIT.  the  conversation  of  Lord  Bute will

i.  233-240.  be found  in  Dutens'  Memoires d'ua

^  Burhe^s  Correspondence,  1.  130.  Votiage^t/r  qui  se rejJose,  ii.  299-306.

Colman's  i>\a.Y,  The  English  Merchant  The  author  had  been  employed  by

was written to  grace his pardon.  Bute  in  some  negotiations  preparatory

An  exceedingly  favourable account  to  the  Peace  of  Paris.
of  the  literary  acquirements  and  of

CH.  X.  HOGARTH'S '  TIMES.'  59

forms  one  of  the  most  precious  treasures  of  the  British  Museum
had  been  piuchased  by  Bute  for  his  own  library,  and  it  was
bought  from  him  for  presentation  to  the  nation,  by  the  King.^
Prosecutions  for  libel  during  this  ministry  were  exceedingly
rare;  it  was  one  of  the  first  objects  of  Bute  to  set  up  a  paper  to
defend  the  peace,  and  a  crowd  of  writers  were  soon  induced  by
pensions  or  places  to  support  the  ministry.  It  was  said,  though
probably  on  no  very  sure  authority,  that  more  than  30,000L
were  expended  on  the  press  in  the  first  two  years  of  the  reign.^
Pitt  became  the  incessant  object  of  the  most  virulent  attacks.
Smollett  assailed  him,  in  a  paper  called  '  The  Briton,'  with  dis-
graceful violence,  and  with  very  little  of  the  ability  he  showed
in  other  fields.  Dr.  Shebbeare,  who  in  1758  had  been  sentenced
to  imprisonment  and  to  the  piUory  for  a  \drulent  libel  against
the  House  of  Hanover,  was  pensioned  by  Bute  in  order  that  he
should  defend  the  peace,  and  Dr.  Francis,  JNIurphy,  Mallet,  and
several  other  obscure  writers,  were  employed  in  the  same  cause.
Hogarth,  who  was  sergeant-painter  to  the  King,  powerfully  as-
sisted them  by  his  clever  print  of  the  '  Times,'  which  appeared
in  1762.  Europe  was  represented  in  flames,  which  were
rapidly  extending  to  Grreat  Britain,  and  Pitt,  with  a  pair  of
bellows,  was  stimulatino-  the  conflaoration.  Ai'ound  his  neck
hung  a  Cheshire  cheese  with  3,000Z.  written  on  it,  alluding
to  his  pension  and  to  an  expression  in  one  of  his  speeches
that  he  would  rather  live  on  Cheshire  cheese  than  submit  to
the  enemies  of  England.  The  aldermen  of  London  were
humbly  worshipping  him.  Newcastle  fed  the  flames  with
'  Monitors  '  and  '  North  Britons,'  the  chief  papers  of  the  Oppo-
sition ;  the  King  of  Prussia,  like  Nero,  was  fiddling  amid  the
conflagration ;  while  Bute,  assisted  by  English  soldiers  and
sailors,  and  by  Highlanders,  was  endeavouring  to  extinguish
it.  A  man,  representing  Temple,  was  squirting  at  Bute  from
the  window  of  the  Temple  Cofifee-house.  A  waggon  was  bearing
off  the  treasures  taken  from  the  Spanish  ship  Hermione.  In
the  distance,  the  Newcastle  arms  were  being  taken  down  and
replaced  by  the  patriotic  ones.

^  Anrnial  Register,  1763,  Tp.  in.  121. Dodington's  Diary, Dec 20,

*  Anecdotes of  Chatham, i. 203. 1760.
Adolphus,  Hist. George  III.  i.  115,

80  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  x.

The  success  which  attended  the  measures  of  Bute  was,  for
a  time  at  least,  very  great.  Parliament  was  now  thoroughly
amenable  to  corrupt  influence.  In  addition  to  the  nucleus  of
genuine  Tories,  the  Government  could  count  upon  the  Bedford
connection,  upon  a  portion  of  the  Grenville  connection,  upon
the  small  group  of  politicians  who  followed  the  fortunes  of  Fox,
and  upon  nearly  all  the  bishops.  Newcastle  was  old  and
thoroughly  discredited,  and  most  of  his  adherents  had  gone
over  to  Bute  ; '  and  Pitt,  though  incomparably  the  greatest
figure  in  English  politics,  had  alienated  from  himself  most  of
his  former  colleagues,  had  little  Parliamentary  influence,  and
was  prostrated  during  a  great  part  of  this  critical  period  by  the
gout.  His  appearance  at  the  Guildhall  in  the  procession  of  the
King  ^as  much  blaraed,  and  was  afterwards  regretted  by  him-
self; but  with  this  exception  his  conduct  was  singularly  stain-
less. He  had  been  struck  down  in  the  very  zenith  of  his  great
career  and  when  his  popularity  was  at  its  height,  and  in  the
necessity  which  compelled  Bute  to  declare  war  against  Spain
his  policy  had  received  the  most  complete  vindication.  But
his  language  was  equally  free  from  irritation,  recrimination,
and  triumph.  His  attitude  was  that  of  a  great  citizen  conscious
that  his  country  was  passing  through  a  great  crisis,  and  re-
solved at  every  sacrifice  of  personal  considerations  to  support
the  Government  in  carrying  the  war  to  a  triumphant  issue,
and  securing  an  adequate  and  honourable  peace.  Violent  and
impetuous  as  he  often  was,  no  statesman  felt  more  strongly
that  foreign  politics  were  not  the  field  in  which  party  triumphs
might  be  legitimately  sought,  and  that  in  time  of  war  internal
division  should  be  as  much  as  possible  suspended.  Diuing  the
war  in  Portugal  he  strongly  supported  the  Government,  recom-
mending the  strictest  union,  and  declaring  against  all  '  alterca-
tion, which  was  no  way  to  carry  on  the  public  business.'  ^  The
fear  of  him  was  very  great,  and  it  was  doubtless  in  order  to  neu-
tralise the  effects  of  his  eloquence  that  the  exclusion  of  strangers
from  the  gallery  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  at  this  time  en-
forced with  special  rigour.^  Burke,  who  was  in  general  by  no
means  one  of  his  greatest  admirers,  said  with  truth  t-hat  the

'  Kockingbam's  3/tmoirs,  i.  1 52.  ^  ThacJicraij,  ii  7.

'  Pari.  Hist.  xv.  1227.

C-H.  X.  UNPOPULARITY OF THE  PEACE.  61

manner  in  which  after  his  fall  he  '  made  his  own  justification,
without  impeaching  the  conduct  of  any  of  his  colleagues,  or
taking  one  measure  that  might  seem  to  arise  from  disgust  ot
opposition,  set  a  seal  upon  his  character.'  ^  No  one  ever  under-
stood better  the  true  dignity  of  statesmanship.  He  met  the
storm  of  scurrility  that  raged  around  him  with  a  majestic  and
somewhat  disdainful  silence,  and  calmly  watched  the  tide  of
popular  favour  which  was  rising  higher  and  higher.  At  the
same  time  he  stooped  to  no  demagogue  art.  The  favourite
topic  of  the  opponents  of  the  Grovernment  was  abuse  of  the
Scotch ;  but  Pitt  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  rebuking  the
national  prejudice,  extolling  the  valour  which  had  been  shown
by  the  Highland  regiments  during  the  war,  and  censuring  the
conduct  of  those  who  were  trying  to  sow  animosity  between  the
two  nations.

The  Preliminaries  were  approved  in  the  House  of  Lords
without  a  division,  in  the  House  of  Commons  by  319  to  65.
The  Duke  of  Newcastle,  seeing  opposition  to  be  hopeless,  in-
duced his  friends  to  retire  before  the  division.  Pitt  spoke
against  the  terms  for  three  and  a  half  hours  ;  but  he  was  so
broken  by  painful  illness  that  he  was  obliged  to  speak  sitting,
and  although  his  speech  contained  passages  of  great  beauty  and
power,  his  voice  often  sank  into  an  inaudible  murmur.  The
exultation  of  the  Court  was  unbounded.  'Now,'  said  the
Princess  Dowager,  when  the  news  of  the  decisive  vote  arrived,
'  my  son  is  King  of  England.'  But  outside  the  House  the
feeling  was  very  different,  and  the  Ministers  who  made  the
Peace  of  Paris  were  scarcely  more  popular  than  those  who  had
made  the  Peace  of  Utrecht.  The  City  of  London  and  the  great
county  of  York  refused  all  solicitations  to  address.  The  ani-
mosity against  Bute  grew  daily  stronger,  and  Bedford  was
hissed  in  the  streets.^  The  cyder  counties,  which  had  hitherto
been  the  warmest  supporters  of  Toryism,  were  thrown  into  a  blaze
of  agitation  by  the  cyder  tax ;  and  although  it  was  carried  by
overwhelming  majorities  in  both  Houses,  this  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  occasion  on  which  the  House  of  Lords  divided  on  a
mouey  Bill.^ Probably  never  since  the  days  of  the  Eevolution

•  Annual  Register,  1761,  p.  481.  ^  'S^alpole's  Jlemoirs of  George  III.

3  Purl.  Hist.  XV.  13 16.

62 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

had  the  ministers  of  the  Crown  been  the  objects  of  such  execra-
tion in  the  country.  Bute  quailed  before  the  storm.  He  had
very  little  experience  in  the  agitations  of  public  life  ;  he  was
constitutionally  a  man  of  no  great  resolution  of  character;  he  had
lately  inherited  a  gigantic  fortune,  and  had  obtained  from  the
Crown  the  Garter  and  the  Eangership  of  Eichmond  Park  for
himself,  and  an  English  peerage  for  his  son.  He  had  little  left  to
aspire  to,  and  many  dangers  to  fear.  In  the  Cabinet  he  found
himself  isolated,  and  his  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Mansfield,  more  than
once  voted  against  him.  He  was  sincerely  attached  to  the  King,
and  could  not  but  be  sensible  that  he  was  ruining  his  popularity.
His  health  was  weak,  and  he  hoped  under  a  new  Ministry  to
wield  with  greatly  diminished  obloquy  the  same  powers  as  in
the  beginning  of  the  reign.  These  were  probably  the  real
reasons  of  his  resignation,  which  took  place,  somewhat  un-
expectedly, on  April  8,  1763.  Dash  wood  retired  with  him,
receiving  a  sinecure  and  the  title  of  Lord  De  Spencer.  Fox
claimed  his  peerage,  but  was  thrown  into  transports  of  fury  by
hearing  that  the  King  and  Bute  expected  him,  when  receiving
it,  to  resign  his  enormously  lucrative  office  of  Paymaster.  The
bargain  for  the  peerage  had  been  made  through  the  interven-
tion of  Shelburne,  and  Fox  accused  Shelburne  of  having  shame-
fully duped  him.  It  is  certain  that  Shelburne,  when  engaging
the  services  of  Fox  to  carry  the  peace,  never  told  him  that  on
receiving  the  promised  peerage  he  must  resign  his  office.  It
is  equally  certain  that  Fox,  when  accepting  the  offers  of  the
Government,  had  made  no  such  promise,  and  that  nevertheless
'  Shelburne,  without  his  knowledge  or  authority,  had  spoken  of
his  resignation  as  a  settled  thing.  It  was  said,  on  the  other
side,  that  public  opinion  would  have  been  greatly  scandalised  if
Fox  retained  such  an  office  with  a  peerage,  that  Fox  had  at  one
time  been  himself  of  that  opinion,  and  that  Shelburne  had  only
given  in  conversation  his  own  opinion  on  the  subject,  and  had
not  professed  to  be  communicating  the  words  of  Fox.  The
contention  was  long  and  vehement,  and  Fox  lost  no  opportu-
nity of  describing  Shelburne  as  'a  perfidious  and  infamous
liar ; '  but  he  at  last  succeeded  in  retaining  the  office,  though
entering  the  Upper  House  as  Lord  Holland. He  kept  it  till

CH.  X.  FALL OF  THE EUTE  MINISTRY.  63

l76o,  but  without  taking  any  further  part,  in  active  politics.'
The  character  of  the  ministers  was  shown  to  the  very  last ;  not
less  than  52,000L  a  year  out  of  the  public  money  was  granted
in  reversions  to  the  followers  of  Bute.^

The  history  of  this  ministry  is  peculiarly  shameful.  During
two  reigns  the  Tory  party  had  been  excluded  from  office,  and
during  all  that  time  they  had  constituted  themselves  the  special
champions  of  Parliamentary  purity.  In  the  writings  of  Boling-
broke,  in  the  speeches  of  the  Tory  leaders,  in  the  place  Bills
they  had  repeatedly  advocated,  the  necessity  of  putting  an
end  to  political  corruption  was  given  the  foremost  place.  This
had  been  their  favourite  cry  at  every  election,  the  battle-
ground they  continually  selected  in  their  contests  with  the
Whig  ministers  of  the  first  two  Georges ;  and  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  new  reign  the  purification  of  Parliament  and  of
administration  had  been  continually  represented  as  the  great
benefit  that  might  be  expected  from  the  downfall  of  the  Whigs.^
At  last  the  party  had  risen  to  power,  and  in  ten  months  of  office
they  far  surpassed  the  corruption  of  their  predecessors.  They
had  long  protested  against  the  monopoly  of  office  by  a  single
party ;  but  when  they  came  to  power  they  had  driven  out  the
humblest  officials  who  were  connected  with  their  opponents
with  a  severity  unparalleled  in  English  history.  They  had
delighted  in  expatiating  upon  the  administrative  incapacity
of  the  great  Whig  families,  and  upon  the  contrast  between  the
scandalous  Courts  of  the  first  two  Georges  and  the  unchal-
lenged purity  of  the  Tory  King ;  but  the  financial  policy  of  the
administration  of  Bute  displayed  a  grosser  incapacity  than  had
been  exhibited  by  any  previous  Governmejit,  and  the  appoint-

-  Compaie  Walpole's  George  III.  out  with  the  most  astonishing  pru-

i.  257,  258,  with  Lord  E.  Fitzmaurice's  dery,  both  moral  and  politicaL  Those

elaborate defence of Shelburne. —  who  in a  few  months after  soused

Shelhii/rne's  Life,  i.  199-229.  over  head and ears  into  the  deepest

'^  Walpole  to  Montagu,  April  14,  and  dirtiest  pits  of  corruption,  cried

1763.  out violently against the indirect

'  Walpole  says :  *  It  was  given  out  practices  in  the  electing  and  manag-

that  the  King  would  suffer  no  money  ing  of  Parliaments  which had  for-

to  be  spent  on  elections,' that 'he  had merly  prevailed Corruption

forbidden  any  money  [at  the  general  was  to  be  cast  down  from  Court  as

election] to be issued from the  AtG  was  from  Heaven.' — Thov.glit»  on

Treasury.' — Walpole's  George  IIIA.  the  Causes  of  the  Present  Discontents.

19,  41. '  Every one,' said Burke^  See  too  the  Seasonable  Hints  from  an

'must  remember  that  the  Cabal  set  Honest  Man  on  the  present  Crisis.

64  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  k.

ment  of  Dashwood  and  the  policy  of  Fox  produced  a  scandal  at
least  equal  to  any  in  the  former  reigns.  The  fame  of  the
country  was  lowered  by  the  peace  ;  an  enthusiastic  loyalty  was
dimmed.  The  ill-feeling  between  England  and  Scotland,  which
had  been  rapidly  subsiding,  was  revived,  and  the  whole  country
was  filled  with  riot  and  discontent.

After  a  short  negotiation,  George  Grenville  was  placed  at
the  head  of  the  Treasury.  A  remarkable  letter,  written  by
Bute  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford  a  few  days  before  the  resignation
of  the  former,  sums  up  the  principles  on  which  the  King  was
resolved  that  his  government  should  be  conducted.  The  first
and  most  important  was,  '  never  upon  any  account  to  sufi'er
those  ministers  of  the  late  reign  who  have  attempted  to  fetter
and  enslave  him,  ever  to  come  into  his  service  while  he  lives  to
hold  the  sceptre  ; ' '  in  other  words,  he  was  determined  that  the
group  of  Whig  noblemen  who  were  accustomed  to  act  together
in  poHtics,  and  who  during  the  last  reign  had  acquired  a  pre-
ponderating power,  were,  at  all  hazards  and  under  all  circum-
stances, to  be  absolutely  disqualified  from  acting  as  ministers  of
the  Crown.  In  order  to  maintain  this  disqualification,  the  King
was  resolved  '  to  collect  every  other  force,  and  especially  the
followers  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford  and  of  Mr.  Fox,  to  his  councils
and  support,'  and  to  give  every  encouragement  to  those  Whig
country  gentlemen  who,  without  abandoning  any  political
principles,  would  consent  to  support  his  Grovernment.  It  was
hoped  that  in  this  manner  a  Grovernment  might  be  formed
which  would  command  a  secure  majority  in  both  Houses,  but  in
which  no  set  of  statesmen  would  be  able  to  dictate  to  the  King.
It  was  hoped,  at  the  same  time,  that  with  the  retirement  of
Bute  the  feeling  of  loyalty  to  the  Crown  would  revive,  and  that
the  storm  of  popular  agitation  would  subside.  '  I  am  firmly  of
opinion,'  wrote  Bute,  '  that  my  retirement  will  remove  the  only
unpopular  part  of  Government.'

The  character  of  George  Grenville,  who  for  the  next  two
years  was  the  strongest  influence  in  the  English  Government,
has  been  admirably  portrayed  by  the  greatest  political  writer
of  his  own  generation  and  by  the  greatest  English  historian  of
the  present  century,  and  there  is  little  to  be  added  to  the
'  Bedford  Corresp.  iii.  223-22G,

CH.  X.  GEOKGE GRENVILLE.  65

pictures  they  have  drawn.  Unlike  Bute,  and  unhke  a  large
number  of  the  most  prominent  Whig  statesmen,  Grenville  was
an  undoubtedly  able  man,  but  only  as  possessing  very  ordinary
qualities  to  an  extraordinary  degree.  He  was  a  conspicuous
example  of  a  class  of  men  very  common  in  public  life,  who
combine  considerable  administrative  powers  with  an  almost
complete  absence  of  the  political  sense — who  have  mastered
the  details  of  public  business  with  an  admirable  competence
and  skill,  but  who  have  scarcely  anything  of  the  tact,  the  judg-
ment, or  the  persuasiveness  that  are  essential  for  the  govern-
ment of  men.  Educated  as  a  lawyer,  and  afterwards  desig-
nated for  the  post  of  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,  he
surpassed  all  his  leading  contemporaries  in  his  knowledge  of
parliamentary  precedents,  of  constitutional  law,  and  of  ad-
ministrative details ;  and  he  brought  to  the  Government  an
untiring  industry,  a  rare  business  faculty,  a  courage  that
flinched  from  no  opponent,  and  an  obstinacy  that  was  only
strengthened  by  disaster.  Few  men  were  more  sincerely  re-
spected by  their  friends,  and,  though  he  never  attained  any
general  popularity,  few  men  had  a  greater  weight  in  the  House
of  Commons.  His  admirers  were  able  to  allege  with  truth  that
he  was  one  of  the  most  frugal  of  ministers  at  a  time  when
economy  was  peculiarly  unpopular ; '  that,  though  his  fortune
was  far  below  that  of  most  of  his  competitors,  and  though  he
was  by  no  means  indifferent  to  money,  he  lived  strictly  within
his  private  means,  and  was  free  from  all  suspicion  of  personal
corruption  ;  and  that  he  more  than  once  sacrificed  the  favour  of
the  King,  of  the  people,  and  of  his  own  family,  to  what  he  be-
lieved to  be  right.  His  enemies  maintained  with  equal  truth
that  he  was  hard,  narrow,  formal,  and  self-sufiicient,  without
extended  views  or  generous  sympathies,  signally  destitute  of
the  tact  of  statesmanship  which  averts  or  conciliates  opposition,
prone  on  every  occasion  to  strain  authority  to  the  utmost  limit
which  precedent  or  the  strict  letter  of  the  law  would  admit.
Being  a  younger  brother  of  Lord  Temple,  and  brother-in-law  of
Pitt  and  of  Lord  Egremont,  he  had  the  assistance  of  considerable
family  influence  in  his  career  ;  but  he  had  himself  neither  high

'  He  boasted  that  the  secret  service in  any  other  recent  arlministration.—
money  was  lower  in  his  ministry  than Grenvillc  PajJcrs,  ii.  519,  iii.  143.

VOL. III.  F

66 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

rank  nor  great  wealth ;  his  talents  were  not  shining ;  he  was
peculiarly  deficient  in  the  qualities  that  win  popularity  either
with  the  nation  or  in  the  closet,  and  the  success  with  which  he
slowly  emerged  through  many  subordinate  offices  to  the  foremost
place  was  chiefly  due  to  his  solid  application  and  indomitable
will.  In  the  early  part  of  his  life  he  was  closely  connected
with  Pitt.  Like  him  he  began  his  career  among  the  '  Patriots,'
who  were  opposed  to  Walpole,  and  as  early  as  1754,  Pitt  had
pronounced  him  second  only  to  the  great  party  leaders  in  his
knowledge  of  the  business  of  the  House  of  Commons.'  He
was  dismissed  from  office  by  Newcastle,  with  Pitt,  in  1755;
held  office  under  Pitt  during  the  German  war ;  but,  after  many
transient  differences,  at  last  openly  quarrelled  with  him,  and
then  inveighed  against  the  extravagance  of  the  war  of  which
he  had  been  an  official  though  a  subordinate  and  a  reluctant
supporter.  Apart,  indeed,  from  all  questions  of  personal  ambi-
tion, the  characters  of  the  two  brothers-in-law  were  so  opposed
that  their  rupture  was  almost  inevitable.  Except  in  matters  of
military  administration,  Pitt  had  very  little  knowledge  of  public
business,  and  he  was  singularly  ignorant  of  finance.  He  excelled
ill  flashes  of  splendid  but  irregular  genius  ;  in  daring,  compre-
hensive, and  far-seeing  schemes  of  policy ;  in  the  power  of  com-
manding the  sympathies  and  evoking  the  energies  of  great
bodies  of  men.  He  was  pre-eminently  a  war  minister,  *  pleased
with  the  tempest  when  the  waves  ran  high,'  continually  seeking
to  extend  the  power  and  increase  the  influence  of  his  nation,  too
ready  to  plunge  into  every  European  complication,  and  too  indif-
ferent to  the  calamities  of  war  and  to  the  accumulations  of  debt.
Grenville,  on  the  other  hand,  was  minute,  accurate,  metho-
dical, parsimonious,  and  pacific,  delighting  in  detail,  anxious
above  all  things  to  establish  a  sound  system  of  finance  and  a
safe  and  moderate  system  of  foreign  policy,  desponding  to  a
fault  in  his  judgment  of  events,  clear  and  powerful,  indeed,
but  very  tedious  in  debate,  and  little  accustomed  to  look
beyond  the  walls  of  the  House  and  the  strict  letter  of  the  law.
During  the  last  years  of  George  II.  he  had  some  connection
with  the  Leicester  House  party  of  Bute  and  the  Princess  of
Wales;  and  when  Pitt  retired  from  office  in  1761,  Grenville,
'  See  GreJiviUe  Pujitrs,  i.  pp.  ix, x.

en.  X.  TEMPLE.  G7

Jis  we  have  seen,  became  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons.
His  sincere  desire  for  peace  may  excuse,  or  at  least  palliate,
his  acceptance  of  office  under  Bute,  and  his  silent  acquies-
cence in  the  corrupt  and  arbitrary  measures  of  that  unhappy
administration ;  and  he  at  this  time  did  good  service  to  the
country  by  compelling  Bute  to  exact  compensation  from  Spain
for  the  cession  of  Havannah.  He  was,  however,  so  discon-
tented with  the  details  of  the  peace  that  he  refused  to  take
any  part  in  defending  it,  and  was  accordingly  removed  from  the
leadership  of  the  House,  and  exchanged  his  position  of  Secretary
of  State  for  the  less  prominent  and  somewhat  less  dignified
office  of  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  where  he  appears  to  have
confined  himself  chiefly  to  the  duties  of  his  department.^  Bute
recommended  him  as  his  successor,  apparently  under  the  belief
that  he  was  a  mere  official  drudge,  and  would  yield  readily  to
the  inspiration  of  a  master.

He  became  the  head  of  the  Government  on  April  8,  1763,
holding  the  two  offices  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chan-
cellor of  the  Exchequer,  which  had  not  been  united  since  the
death  of  Pelham.  Lord  Egremont,  whose  influence  among  the
Tories  was  very  great,  and  Lord  Halifax,  who  was  a  man  of  popu-
lar manners  and  character,  but  of  no  great  ability  or  power,  were
made  Secretaries  of  State,  and  were  intended  to  share  the  chief
power ;  but  the  early  death  of  the  first  and  the  insignificance
of  the  latter  left  Grrenville  almost  without  a  rival.

His  natural  ally  would  have  been  his  elder  brother.  Lord
Temple,  a  man  of  very  great  wealth  and  position,  of  no  re-
markable talent  or  acquirement,  but  in  a  high  degree  ambitious,
arrogant,  violent,  jealous,  and  vindictive.  Temple,  however,
was  closely  allied  with  Pitt,  who  in  the  early  part  of  his  career
was  in  a  great  degree  dependent  on  the  Grenville  influence,
and  had  even  been  under  pecuniary  obligations  to  his  brother-
in-law,  and  who  repaid  the  boon  by  giving  Temple  a  very  dis-
proportionate infiuence  in  his  counsels  and  his  combinations.
He  had  been  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  the  administration
of  Pitt  and  Devonshire,  Lord  Privy  Seal  in  the  far  greater
administration  of  Pitt and  Newcastle, and,  although  he  was

'  See  an  interesting  autobiograpliical  sketch in  the Grenville  Papers.
i.  422-439,  482-485.

F 2

68 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cu.  x.

extremely  disliked  by  George  II.,  Pitt  succeeded  in  obtaining
for  him  the  Garter,  which  was  the  great  object  of  his  ambi-
tion. In  spite  of  several  explosions  of  personal  jealousy,  he
steadily  supported  the  German  policy  of  Pitt,  joined  him  in
recommending  war  with  Spain  in  1761,  retired  with  him  from
office,  and  became  from  that  time  one  of  the  most  violent  and
factious  of  politicians.  He  is  reported  to  have  said  of  himself,
very  frankly,  that  '  he  loved  faction,  and  had  a  great  deal  of
money  to  spare,'  ^  and  the  saying,  whether  it  be  true  or  false,
describes  very  faithfully  the  character  of  his  policy.  Indifferent
to  the  emoluments  of  office,  and  unconscious  of  any  remarkable
administrative  powers,  he  delighted  in  the  subterranean  and
more  ignoble  works  of  faction,  in  forming  intrigues,  inciting
mobs,  and  inspiring  libels.  He  was  the  special  friend  and
patron  of  Wilkes,  and  he  was  more  closely  connected  than  any
other  leading  politician  of  his  time  with  the  vast  literature  of
scurrilous  and  anonymous  political  libels.  He  assisted  many  of
the  writers  with  money  or  with  information,  and  he  was  believed
-to  have  suggested,  inspired,  or  in  part  composed  some  of  the
most  venomous  of  their  productions.  He  was  accused  of  having
'  worked  in  the  mines  of  successive  factions  for  near  thirty
years  together,'  of  '  whispering  to  others  where  they  might
obtain  torches,  though  he  was  never  seen  to  light  them  him-
self ; '  and  although  his  personal  friends  ascribed  to  him  con-
siderable private  virtues,  his  honour  as  a  public  man  was  rated
very  lew.  His  influence  upon  Pitt,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel,
was  very  disastrous,  and  at  the  time  when  Grenville  assumed
the  first  place  he  was  bitterly  opposed  to  his  brother.

Being  deprived  of  assistance  in  this  quarter,  Grenville  might
naturally  have  expected  his  chief  support  from  the  Duke  of
Bedford,  who  had  so  lately  been  his  colleague,  and  who  was  at
the  head  of  a  considerable  section  of  the  Whigs.  The  impor-
tance of  this  nobleman,  like  that  of  Lord  Temple,  depended
altogether  upon  the  accident  of  birth  which  made  him  the  head
of  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Whig  houses,  and  it  is  not,  I  think,
easy  to  find  any  consistent  principle  in  his  strangely  intricate
career,  except  a  desire  to  aggrandise  his  family  influence. The

' Grenville  Papers,  iii.  p.  xxxvii.

CT.  X.  BEDFORD.  69

great  inclination  towards  wealth  which  has  usually  prevailed
in  English  politics  has  always  been  justified,  among  other
reasons,  by  the  consideration  that  a  rich  man,  to  whom  the
emoluments  of  office  are  a  matter  of  indifference,  is  much  less
likely  than  a  poor  man  to  be  bribed  or  to  be  guilty  of  political
sycophancy  or  apostasy  ;  but  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this
presumption  hardly  applies  to  the  heads  of  great  houses,  who,
under  the  system  of  government  that  preceded  the  Eeform
Bill,  were  exposed  to  special  corrupting  influences  scarcely  less
powerful  than  those  which  act  upon  needy  men.  The  desire
of  obtaining  garters,  ribands,  and  promotions  for  themselves,
and  especially  the  imperious  necessity  of  providing  for  a  long
train  of  rapacious  followers  on  whose  support  their  influence
mainly  depended,  has  not  unfrequently  made  great  noblemen
of  splendid  fortune  and  position  the  most  inveterate  of  place-
hunters.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  does  not  appear  personally
to  have  cared  much  for  office ;  but  his  followers  were  among
the  most  unprincipled  poHticians  in  England,  and  the  faction
he  directed  amalgamated  cordially  with  no  party,  but  made
overtures  in  turn  to  each,  entered  into  temporary  alliances
with  each,  deserted  each,  and  formed  and  dissolved  its  con-
nections chiefly  on  personal  grounds.  The  Duke  himself  was
violent,  harsh,  and  fearless,  and  was  noted  as  the  only  man  who
ventiu-ed  to  oppose  Pitt  in  the  Cabinet  when  that  imperious
statesman  was  in  the  zenith  of  his  power.'  He  began  his
career  in  opposition  to  Walpole,  and  exerted  all  his  powers
to  produce  a  Spanish  war.  In  the  earlier  years  of  the  Pelham
ministry,  he  showed  considerable  administrative  abilities  as
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  from  1744  to  1748,  and  he  after-
wards had  the  rare  fortune  of  taking  a  leading  part  in  the
negotiation  of  two  peaces,  eacH  of  which  was  probably  on  the
whole  beneficial  to  the  country,  but  neither  of  which  was  at  all
glorious  or  popular.  As  Secretary  of  State  under  Pelham,  he
in  a  great  degree  dictated  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  which
concluded  the  Spanish  war,  without  obtaining  any  object  for
which  that  war  was  undertaken.  As  Ambassador  to  France,
uuder  Bute,  lie  negotiated  the  Peace  of  Paris,  which  made  him

'  See  Bedford  Corresp.  iii.  5G.

70  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  cu.  x.

SO  unpopular  that  for  some  time  he  could  not  show  himself
publicly  in  the  streets  of  London.  In  the  intervening  Devon-
shire administration  he  was  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  where
he  took  some  measures  to  mitigate  the  penal  laws  against  the
Catholics,  but  where  his  attempts  to  restrict  the  rights  of  the
Irish  Parliament  excited  violent  riots,  and  led  to  the  igno-
minious defeat  of  his  Government.  He  was  closely  connected
with  Fox,  with  whom  he  joined  the  ministry  of  Bute,  and
whose  harshest  and  most  tyrannical  acts  received  the  warm
approbation  of  his  confidential  follower  Eigby.  The  dissatisfac-
tion of  Grenville  at  some  portions  of  the  peace  had,  however,
produced  a  coldness  between  Bedford  and  Grenville,  which
for  some  time  prevented  their  cordial  co-operation.  When
Bute  retired  from  office  he  implored  Bedford  to  accept  the
position  of  President  of  the  Council  in  order  to  carry  on  with
Grenville  a  system  of  government  substantially  the  same  as
that  of  the  favourite ;  but  Bedford  declined  the  offer  on  the
ground  that  such  a  ministry  could  not  stand.  He  recom-
mended the  King  and  Bute  to  send  for  the  great  Whig
families  ;  and,  though  some  of  his  followers  took  offices  under
Grenville,  his  position  towards  him  in  the  beginning  of  his
ministry  was  one  of  neutrality,  if  not  of  secret  hostility.

The  Government,  under  these  circumstances,  was  not  strong,
and  at  first  it  appeared  probable  that  the  wishes  of  the  Court
would  be  fulfilled,  and  that  Bute  would  be  its  real  though  un-
official director.  For  some  time  most  important  negotiations
relating  to  its  composition  were  conducted  by  him,  and  the
Speech,  which  closed  Parliament  on  April  19,  1763,  identified
its  foreign  policy  with  that  of  the  preceding  ministry ;  for  the
King  was  made  to  speak  of  the  peace  as  having  been  con-
cluded '  upon  conditions  so  honourable  to  my  Crown,  and  so
beneficial  to  my  people,'  and  to  suggest  that  England  had
been  the  means  of  securing  a  satisfactory  peace  for  the  King  of
Prussia.  Wilkes,  who  for  a  few  days  had  suspended  the  pub-
lication of  the  '  North  Briton  '  to  watch  the  course  of  events,
now  broke  silence  ;  and  on  April  23  the  famous  45th  number
appeared,  attacking  the  King's  Speech  with  great  aspei'ity.
The  writer  dilated  especially  upon  the  abandonment  of  the
King  of  Prussia.,  the  inadequate  terms  of  the  peace,  the  Cyder

CH.  X.  '  NOETH  BRITON," NO.  45.  71

Act,  the  frequent  pronrotion  of  Scotchmen  and  Jacobites,  and  he
asserted  that  '  the  King  is  only  the  first  magistrate  of  this
country,  .  .  .  responsible  to  his  people  for  the  due  exercise  of
the  royal  functions  in  the  choice  of  ministers,  &c.'  '  The  per-
sonal character,'  he  added,  '  of  our  present  amiable  sovereign
makes  us  easy  and  happy  that  so  great  a  power  is  lodged  in
such  hands ;  but  the  favourite  has  given  too  just  cause  for  him
to  escape  the  general  odium.'  The  King's  Speech  is,  and  has
always  been  regarded  as,  the  speech  of  the  ministers,  and,
judging  it  in  that  Hght,  Wilkes  pronounced  the  last  speech
from  the  throne  to  be  '  the  most  abandoned  instance  of  minis-
terial effrontery  ever  attempted  to  be  imposed  upon  mankind.'
'  Every  friend  of  his  country,'  he  continued,  '  must  lament  that
a  prince  of  so  many  great  and  amiable  qualities,  whom  England
truly  reveres,  can  be  brought  to  give  the  sanction  of  his  sacred
name  to  the  most  odious  measures,  and  to  the  most  unjusti-
fiable public  declarations,  from  a  throne  ever  renowned  for
truth,  honour,  and  unsullied  virtue.'  '  The  ministers'  speech
of  last  Tuesday  is  not  to  be  paralleled  in  the  annals  of  this
country.'

The  blow  was  a  very  skilful  one.  The  King's  Speech,  as
Wilkes  truly  asserted,  had  long  been  regarded  as  simply  the
composition  of  the  ministers,  and  as  such  it  was  fully  open  to
criticism.  Even  Fox,  the  leading  minister  in  carrying  thp
peace,  had  very  recently  asserted  this  doctrine  in  the  plainest
terms.'  Considering  the  Speech  in  this  light,  the  criti-
cisms of  Wilkes,  though  severe,  were  not  excessive,  and  were
certainly  less  violent  than  some  in  previous  numbers  of  his
paper.  It  had  become,  however,  a  main  object  of  the  Court
party  to  draw  a  broad  distinction  between  the  King  and  his
ministers,  and  to  arrest  what  was  regarded  as  the  absorption  of
Crown  influence  by  the  administration.  The  paper  of  Wilkes,
in  the  eyes  of  the  Court  party,  was  a  direct  attack  upon  the
personal  veracity  of  the  Sovereign ;  and  although  Wilkes  was
now  member  for  Aylesbury,  and  therefore  protected  by  the
vague  and  formidable  panoply  of  Parliamentary  privilege,  it
was  determined  at  all  hazards  to  crush  him. The  King  himself

'  Walpolc's  George  III.  i.  121.

72 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

gave  orders  to  prosecute  him,'  and  for  several  years  the  ruin,
of  one  very  insignificant  individual  was  a  main  object  of  the
Executive.

John  Wilkes,  who  now  became  one  of  the  most  pro-
minent figures  in  English  politics,  was  at  this  time  in  his
thirty-sixth  year.  The  son  of  a  rich  trader  and  of  a  Presby-
terian mother,  he  had  been  educated  at  a  Presbyterian  school
at  Hertford,  and  in  the  house  of  a  Presbyterian  tutor,  and  he
afterwards  studied  at  the  University  of  Leyden.  When  only
twenty-two  he  married  a  rich  heiress,  ten  years  older  than
himself,  and  of  strict  Methodistical  principles,  from  whom  he
was  soon  after  separated  and  whom  he  treated  with  great  base-
ness. His  countenance  was  repulsively  ugly.  His  life  was
scandalously  and  notoriously  profligate,  and  he  was  sometimes
guilty  of  profanity  which  exceeded  even  that  of  the  vicious
circle  in  which  he  lived,  but  he  possessed  some  qualities  which
were  well  fitted  to  secure  success  in  life.  He  had  a  brilliant
and  ever  ready  wit,  unflagging  spirits,  unfailing  good  humour,
great  personal  courage,  much  shrewdness  of  judgment,  much
charm  of  manner.  The  social  gifts  must  have  been  indeed
of  no  common  order  which  half-conquered  the  austere
Toryism  of  Johnson,  extorted  a  warm  tribute  of  admiration
from  Gibbon,  secured  the  friendship  of  Keynolds,  and  made
the  son  of  a  London  distiller  a  conspicuous  member  of  the
INledmenham  Brotherhood,  and  the  favourite  companion  of  the
more  dissipated  members  of  the  aristocracy.  It  is  not  pro-
bable that  he  had  any  serious  political  convictions,  but  like
most  ambitious  men  he  threw  himself  into  politics  as  the
easiest  method  of  acqiuring  notoriety  and  position,  and  he  ex-
pended many  thousands  of  pounds  in  the  venture.  He  con-
tested Berwick  unsuccessfully,  but  became  member  for  Ayles-
bury in  l7o7,  and  connected  himself  by  a  close  personal
friendsliip  and  political  alliance  with  Lord  Temple. Having

'  This  is  stated  in  the  Journal  of  to  Ahnon (who  is  not  a very  good

the Duke of Grafton. — See  Camp-  authority), No.  45 was in a great

bell's Chancellors,  vi. 327  ; and  also  measure based  upon  a  conversation

(hxnville  Papers,  ii.  192. See too,  about  the  King's  Speech  between  I'itfc

on  the  warm  personal  interest  which  and  Temple  which  took  place  at  the

tlie King took in pushing  on the  house  of  the  latter  when  Wilkes  hap-

measures  against  Wilkes, Walpole's  pened  to  be  calling  tliere.
Ueoi-ije III. \y.^ I'UG. According

CH.  X.  AKREST OF WILKES.  73

speedily  dissipated  his  own  fortune  and  as  much  of  the  fortune
of  his  wife  as  it  was  possible  by  any  means  to  get  into  his
hands,  he  began  to  look  to  office  as  a  means  of  recruiting  his
finances,  and  he  had  hopes  of  becoming  ambassador  at  Con-
stantinople, or  obtaining  the  governorship  of  Canada,  but  his
prospects  were  blasted  by  the  downfall  of  the  ^^'higs,  and  in
the  beginning  of  the  new  reign  Bute  himself  is  said  to  have
interfered  to  defeat  one  of  his  applications.  He  took  a  pro-
minent part  in  censuring  the  King's  Speech  in  1761,  but  his
speaking  was  cold  and  commonplace,  and  made  no  impression  on
the  House.  The  '  North  Briton,'  however,  which  he  founded
in  the  following  year,  raised  him  at  once  to  importance.  It
had  little  literary  merit  beyond  a  clear  and  easy  style,  but  it
skilfully  reflected  and  aggravated  the  popular  hatred  of  the
Scotch  ;  it  attacked  the  Court  party  with  an  audacity  that  had
been  rarely  paralleled,  and  it  introduced  for  the  first  time  into
political  discussions  the  practice  of  printing  the  names  of  the
chief  persons  in  the  State  at  full  length  instead  of  indicating
them  merely  by  initials.^  It  soon  distanced  or  silenced  all
competitors,  but  no  prosecution  was  directed  against  it  till
the  accession  of  Grenville  and  the  publication  of  No.  45.

The  first  measure  of  the  Grovernment  was  to  issue  a  general
warrant,  signed  by  Lord  Halifax,  which,  without  specifying  the
names  of  the  persons  accused,  directed  the  apprehension  of
*  the  authors,  printers,  and  publishers '  of  the  incriminated
number  and  the  seizure  of  their  papers.  Under  this  warrant
no  less  than  forty-nine  persons  were  arrested,  and  the  publisher
having  acknowledged  that  Wilkes  was  the  author  of  the  paper,
he  was  seized  and  carried  before  Lord  Halifax,  while  his  drawers
were  burst  open  and  his  papers  carried  away.  He  refused
to  answer  any  question,  protested  against  the  illegality  of  a
warrant  in  which  no  name  was  given,  and  claimed  the  privilege
of  Parliament  against  arrest,  but  in  spite  of  every  protest  he
was  confined  a  close  prisoner  in  the  Tower,  and  denied  all
opportunity  of  consulting  with  his  friends  or  even  with  his
solicitor.

Such  proceedings  at  once  raised  legal  and  constitutional  ques-
tions of  the  gravest  kind,  and  Lord  Temple  warmly  supported

'  Walpolo's  Memoirs  of  Gamje  III.  iii.  1(J4.

74  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch s.

Wilkes  in  vindicating  his  rights.  The  attitude  of  the  dema-
gogue was  defiant  and  irritating  in  the  extreme.  One  of  the
Secretaries  of  State  was  Lord  Egremont,  whose  father  had  been
imprisoned  on  suspicion  of  Jacobitism  in  the  last  reign.  On  his
committal  to  the  Tower,  Wilkes  asked  to  be  lodged  in  the  room
in  which  Windham  had  been  confined,  or  at  all  events  in  a  room
in  which  no  Scotchman  had  been  lodged,  if  such  a  room  could  be
found  in  the  Tower.  He  wrote  a  letter  to  his  daughter,  who  was
then  in  a  French  convent,  congratulating  her  on  living  in  a  free
coantry,  and  sent  it  open,  according  to  rule,  to  Lord  Halifax.
He  applied  to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  for  a  writ  of  Habeas
Corpus,  and  when  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  it,  he  addressed
the  court  in  a  speech  in  which  he  complained  that  he  had  been
'  worse  treated  than  any  rebel  Scot.'  The  question  of  his  arrest
was  fully  argued  before  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  and  Chief
Justice  Pratt  and  the  other  judges  unanimously  pronounced  it
to  be  illegal  on  the  ground  that  Parliamentary  privilege  se-
cured a  member  of  Parliament  from  arrest  in  all  cases  except
treason,  felony,  and  actual  breach  of  the  peace,  and  that  a  libel,
though  it  might  tend  to  produce  the  latter  offence,  could  not  be
regarded  as  itself  a  breach  of  the  peace.  Numerous  actions  had
been  brought  against  the  messengers  who  executed  the  general
warrant  by  the  persons  who  were  arrested,  and  damages  for
various  amounts  were  obtained,  and  two  other  constitutional
points  of  great  importance  were  decided.  Chief  Justice  Pratt
authoritatively,  and  with  something  more  than  judicial  em-
phasis, determined  that  '  warrants  to  search  for,  seize,  and  carry
away  papers,'  on  a  charge  of  libel,  were  contrary  to  law.  He
also  expressed  his  opinion  that  general  warrants  issued  by  the
Secretary  of  State  without  specifying  the  name  of  the  person
to  be  arrested  were  illegal,  and  this  opinion  was  a  few  years
later  confirmed  by  Lord  Mansfield.^

When  these  decisions  were announced  the  triumph  of  the
people  was  unbounded. Wilkes  was  not  only  released  from  im-

' Compare  Adolplms,  i.  V^&,  137.  avoid  a  judgment  against  the  Crown

QamTphcWs  Chancellors,  Vi.^lO. The  on the merits of the case, the

legality of general warrants was  Attorney-General  admitted  a  formal

brought  before  Manstield  in  Novem-  objection, and so  contrived to be

ber  1705. He  gave  an  opinion  simi-  defeated. —Campbell's  Zz/e  of  Maiia-

lar to  that,  of  I'ralt. In  order to  //tW,  p.  102.

CH.  X.  TEIUMPH OF WILKES.  7o

prisonment,  but  a  special  jury  at  Guildhall  awarded  him  1,000L
damages  against  Mr.  Wood,  the  Under-Secretary  of  State  ;  and
Lord  Halifax  himself,  against  whom  an  action  was  brought,  was
compelled  to  resort  to  the  most  contemptible  legal  subterfuges
to  delay  the  proceedings.  Three  great  constitutional  questions
had  been  decided,  and  in  each  case  in  favour  of  Wilkes,  and  the
triumph  was  all  the  greater  because  both  search  warrants  and
general  warrants,  which  were  now  pronounced  to  be  illegal,  had
been  undoubtedly  frequently  made  use  of  since  the  Revolution.
Passions  on  both  sides  were  aroused  to  the  utmost,  and  neither
party  was  prepared  to  desist  from  the  contest.  Wilkes  re-
printed all  the  numbers  of  the  '  North  Briton '  in  a  single
volume,  with  notes  establishing  in  the  most  conclusive  manner
the  constitutional  doctrine  that  the  King's  Speech  should  be
regarded  simply  as  the  speech  of  the  ministers.  He  showed
that  this  doctrine  had  been  unequivocally  laid  down  in  the  two
preceding  reigns  by  such  statesmen  as  the  Duke  of  Argyle,
Carteret,  Shippen,  and  Pulteney,  and  that  in  1715  the  House
of  Commons  had  impeached  Oxford  among  other  grounds  '  for
having  corrupted  the  sacred  fountain  of  truth  and  put  false-
hoods into  the  mouth  of  his  Majesty  in  several  speeches  made
to  Parliament.'  Lord  Egremont  died  on  August  21,  1763,  but
^^'ilkes  pressed  on  eagerly  his  action  against  Lord  Halifax.  He
wrote  to  him  in  a  strain  of  great  insolence,  accusing  him  of
having  robbed  his  house,  and  he  even  made  a  vain  attempt  to
obtain  a  warrant  to  search  for  the  missing  documents.  The
King,  on  the  other  hand,  dismissed  Wilkes  from  the  colonelcy
of  the  Buckinghamshire  JNIilitia.  It  was  the  duty  of  Temple,
as  Lord-Lieutenant  of  the  county,  to  announce  to  him  the  fact,
and  he  did  so  in  a  letter  couched  in  the  most  complimentary
language.  Temple  was  at  once  deprived  of  his  Lord-Lieuten-
ancy, and  his  name  was  struck  off  the  list  of  Privy  Councillors.
The  Attorney-General  instituted  a  regular  prosecution  for  libel
against  Wilkes.  He  was  surrounded  by  spies,  who  tracked  his
every  movement  and  reported  to  the  ministers  the  names  of
all  who  had  intercourse  with  him,  and  his  correspondence  was
systematically  opened  in  the  Post  Office.^

' See much curious  evidence  of 155-160. In  one of  his  letters to
this, GreiiviUe  Pajyers,  ii.  8,  71,  130, Wilkes,  Temxile  said:  'lam  so  used

76 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  x.

The  struggle  was  speedily  transfeiTed  ti)  another  sphere.
On  November  15,  1763,  Parliament  met,  and  it  soon  appeared
that  a  majority  of  both  Houses  were  determined  to  pursue
Wilkes  with  the  most  vindictive  perseverance.  On  the  first
day  of  the  session  he  rose  to  complain  of  the  breach  of  privilege
in  his  person,  but  he  was  anticipated  by  Grenville,  who  pro-
duced a  royal  message  recapitulating  the  steps  that  had  been
taken  and  calling  the  attention  of  the  House  to  the  alleged
libel.  The  House  at  once  responded  to  the  demand,  and
although  the  question  was  at  this  very  time  pending  before
the  law  courts,  it  proceeded  to  adjudicate  upon  it,  voted  the
forty-fifth  nmnber  of  the  '  North  Briton '  '  a  false,  scandalous,
and  seditious  libel,'  and  ordered  it  to  be  burnt  by  the  common
hangman.'  Wilkes  vainly  endeavoured  to  avert  the  sentence
by  declaring  that  if  his  privilege  was  asserted,  he  was  quite
ready  to  waive  it  and  to  stand  his  trial  before  a  jury.

At  the  same  time  another  weapon  for  ruining  him  had
been  discovered.  Wilkes,  after  his  release  from  the  Tower,  had
set  up  a  private  printing  press  in  his  own  house,  and  among
other  documents  had  printed  a  parody  of  the  '  Essay  on  Man  '
called  '  An  Essay  on  Woman,'  and  also  a  paraphrase  of  the  '  Veni
Creator.'  They  were  anonymous,  but  the  former  at  least  appears
to  have  been  partly,  if  not  wholly,  composed  by  Potter,  the  son
of  the  'Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  one  of  the  colleagues  of
Wilkes  in  the  Medmenham  Brotherhood.  Bishop  Warburton
having  recently  published  Pope's  poems  with  illustrative  notes-,,
the  parody  contained  some  burlesque  notes  attributed  to  the
same  prelate.  Both  the  '  Essay  on  Woman '  and  the  imitation  of
the  '  Veni  Creator '  were  in  a  high  degree  blasphemous  and  ob-
scene. Both  of  them  would  have  been  most  proper  subjects  for
prosecution  had  they  been  published  or  widely  circulated.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  however,  the  little  volume  had  not  been  pub-
lished. Wilkes  had  not  intended  to  publish  it.  Its  existence
Avas  a  profound  secret,  and  only  thirteen  copies  had  been
])rivately  struck  off  for  a  few  of  his  most  intimate  friends.
Either  by  the  examination  of  papers  that  were  seized  under

to  tilings  of this sort  at  the Post  not  be  read  at  Charing  Crons  for  all  I

(,)liice,  and  am  so  sure  that  every  line  care.' — Grcnrillc  Papers,  i.  48'.).
I  write  must  be  .seen,  that  I  never  put  '  Pari.  Hist.  xv.  i;ioA-13tiO.

any  thiDg  in  black  and  while  that  might

CH.  X.  THE '  ESSAY ON  WOMAN.'  77

the  illegal  search  warrant  or  by  the  treachery  of  some  of  Wilkes's
old  associates  who  were  now  connected  with  the  Government,  the
ministers  obtained  information  of  its  existence,  and  one  of  their
agents  succeeded,  by  bribing  a  printer  employed  by  Wilkes,  in
obtaining  the  proof  sheets,  which  on  the  first  night  of  the  session
were  brought  before  the  House  of  Lords.  As  if  to  mark  in  the
clearest  light  the  nature  of  the  proceeding,  the  task  was  en-
trusted to  Lord  Sandwich,  who  had  been  the  intimate  friend  of
Wilkes,  who  had  been  like  him  a  member  of  the  Medmenham
Brotherhood,  and  who  was  notorious  as  one  of  the  most  profligate
noblemen  of  his  time.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  demerits  of
the  '  Essay  on  Woman,'  no  human  being  could  believe  in  the
purity  of  the  motives  of  Sandwich ,•  and  Wilkes  afterwards
even  asserted  that  he  was  one  of  the  two  persons  to  whom
the  poem  had  been  originally  read.'^  He  discharged  his  task  in
a  long  speech,  descanting  upon  the  profligacy  of  Wilkes  in  terms
which  elicited  from  their  common  friend  Lord  De  Spencer  the
pithy  comment  that  he  had  never  before  heard  the  devil  preach-
ing. Warburton  then  rose  to  complain  of  a  breach  of  privilege
on  account  of  the  appearance  of  his  name  in  the  notes,  and  in
language  in  which  the  courtier  was  at  least  as  apparent  as  the
saint,  he  declared  that  the  blackest  fiends  in  hell  would  not  keep
company  with  Wilkes,  and  apologised  to  Satan  for  comparing
Wilkes  to  him.  The  House  of  Lords  at  once  voted  the  poems
a  breach  of  privilege,  and  a  '  scandalous,  obscene,  and  impious
libel,'  and  two  days  later  presented  an  address  to  the  King  de-
manding the  prosecution  of  Wilkes  for  blasphemy.^

Before  this  time,  however,  Wilkes  was  no  longer  able  to
answer  for  himself.  Among  the  many  persons  who  had  been
attacked  in  the  '  North  Briton '  was  Martin,  a  former  Secretary  to
the  Treasury,  whose  corrupt  practices  at  the  time  of  the  Peace  of
Paris  have  been  already  noticed. In  the  debate  on  November  1 5

'  A  description  of the Essay  on  is  certainly  not  genuine. An  elabo-

Womaii  will  be  found  in  a  contem-  rate  discussion  about  the  authorship

porary pamphlet denouncing  it by  and the  true version of the poem

a  clergyman named Killidge. No  will  be  found  in  Dilke's  Paj^ers  of  a

genuine  copy  of  the  poem  is  known  Critic.

to  exist,  though  some  spurious  versions  -  Walpole  to  Mann,  Nov.  17,  17^3.

were  circulated.  The  manuscript  poem  Lord De Spencer  was  said  to  have

bearing  the  name  wliich  is  among  tlie  been  the  other.
Wilkes  papers  in  the  British  Mu.seum  ^  Walpole's  Georrjc III. i.Z0'd-^\2

(8  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  x.

he  got  up  and  denounced  the  writer  in  tlie  '  North  Briton  '  as
'  a  coward  and  a  malignant  scoundrel,'  and  on  the  following
day,  Wilkes  having  acknowledged  the  authorship  of  the  paper,
Martin  left  at  his  house  a  challenge  to  meet  him  in  Hyde  Park
with  pistols  within  an  hour.  Wilkes,  among  whose  faults  want
of  courage  cannot  be  reckoned,  at  once  accepted  the  challenge.
JMartin,  though  the  challenger,  selected  the  weapon,  and  it  was
afterwards  stated  that  during  the  whole  of  the  eight  months
tiiat  had  elapsed  since  the  provocation  was  given,  he  had  been
assiduously  practising  at  firing  at  a  target.  Wilkes  fell  dan-
gerously, it  was  at  first  thought  mortally,  wounded,  and  he
showed  an  anxiety  to  shield  his  adversary  from  the  consequences
of  the  duel,  which  was  a  strong  proof  of  the  genuine  kindness
of  his  nature,  and  added  not  a  little  to  his  popularity.'

It  is  not  surprising  that  under  these  circumstances  the
angry  feeling  prevailing  through  the  country  should  have  risen
higher  and  higher.  Bute  was  still  regarded  as  the  real  director
of  affairs,  and  the  animosity  against  the  Scotch  and  against
the  Court  was  as  far  as  possible  from  being  appeased.  In
the  cyder  counties,  a  crowned  ass  was  led  about  by  a  figure
attired  in  a  Scotch  plaid  and  decorated  with  a  blue  riband.^  At
Exeter  an  effigy  of  Bute  was  hung  on  a  gibbet  at  one  of  the
principal  gates,  and  the  mob  was  so  fierce  that  for  a  whole
fortnight  the  authorities  did  not  venture  to  cut  it  down.^
When,  in  obedience  to  the  vote  of  the  House  of  Commons,
an  attempt  was  made  to  burn  the  '  North  Briton,'  the  high
sheriff  and  constables  were  attacked,  the  obnoxious  paper
was  snatched  from  the  flames,  and  that  evening  a  jack-boot
and  petticoat  were  publicly  burnt  in  a  great  bonfire  at  Temple
Bar.'*  The  Common  Council  of  London  voted  thanks  to  the
City  members  for  asserting  the  liberties  of  their  country  in
the  question  of  general  warrants.  The  decisions  of  Chief
Justice  Pratt  in  favour  of  Wilkes  raised  that  judge  to  the
highest  point  of  popularity.  The  Corporation  of  Dublin  pre-
sented him  with  its  freedom,  and  the  example  was  speedily
followed by  the  City  of  London  and  by  a  great  number  of

'  Pari.  ILht.  xv.  1357-1359.  ''  Camphcll's  Chancellors,  vi.  289.

2  Wii]po\e's  Memoirs  of  Gcurr/e  III.  "  Walpolo's (rcorfjre III. i. 330.

i.  280.  Annual  Rrt/htcr  1703,  p.  144.

CH.  X.  PQPULAK INDIGNATION.  79

Other  corporations  in  England.  His  portrait  became  the
iavourite  sign  of  public-houses  throughout  the  country.  By
the  direction  of  the  Corporation  of  London  it  was  painted  by
Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds  and  placed  in  the  Guildhall  with  an  in-
scription '  in  honour  of  the  jealous  assertor  of  English  liberty
by  law.'  *  The  blasphemy  and  obscenity  of  the  poems  printed  by
Wilkes  could  not  be  questioned,  but  the  people  very  reasonably
asked  whether  the  private  character  of  Wilkes  was  at  all  worse
than  that  of  Sandwich,  who  was  the  most  prominent  of  his
persecutors  ;  and  whether  there  was  the  least  probability
that  Wilkes  would  have  been  prosecuted  for  immorality  if  he
had  not  by  his  defence  of  liberty  become  obnoxious  to  the
Court.  '  I  am  convinced,'  he  himself  wrote  to  the  electors  of
Aylesbury,  '  that  there  is  not  a  man  in  England  who  believes
that  if  the  "  North  Briton  "  had  not  appeared  the  "  Essay  on
Woman"  would  ever  have  been  called  in  question.'  The
hypocrisy,  the  impudence,  the  folly  of  the  part  taken  by  Lord
Sandwich  excited  universal  derision.  The  '  Beggar's  Opera '
■was  soon  after  represented  at  Covent  Garden,  and  in  the  speech
in  which  Macheath  exclaims  '  that  Jemmy  Twitcher  should  peach
me  I  own  surprises  me,'  the  whole  audience,  by  a  burst  of
applause,  recognised  the  application,  and  the  name  —which  has
been  perpetuated  in  the  well-known  lampoon  of  Gray — ever
after  clung  to  Lord  Sandwich,  as  Horace  Walpole  says,  '  almost
to  the  disuse  of  his  title.'  ^  The  circumstances  of  the  duel  with
Martin  were  such  that  it  was  commonly  regarded  as  little  less
than  a  deliberate  conspiracy  by  the  ministry  to  murder  Wilkes,
and  Churchill  embodied  the  popular  sentiment  in  '  The  Duellist,'
one  of  the  most  powerful  of  his  satires.

Wilkes  recovered  slowly,  but  in  the  mean  time  the  Parlia-
ment, rejecting  his  petition  that  further  proceedings  might  be
delayed  till  his  recovery,  pushed  on  its  measures  with  vin-
dictive energy,  and  its  first  step  was  one  of  very  considerable
constitutional  importance.  Hitherto  it  had  been  the  steady
and  invariable  policy  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  extend  as

'  Annvdl Register 1764, p. 51.  danger ;  and it  is  no  less  a  mercy

Campbell,  \\.  372.  that  God  hath  raised  up  the  Earl  of

^  Walpole's George III. i. 314.  Sandwich  to  vindicate  and  promote

*  It  is  a  mercy,' wrote  Chesterfield,  true  religion  and  morality. These

'  that  Wilkes,  the  intrepid  defender  two blessings will justly  make an

of  our  rights  and  liberties,  is  out  of  cpocha  in  the  annals  of  this  country.'

80  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

far  as  possible  the  domain  of  Privilege.  The  doctrine  that  no
member  of  Parliament  could  be  arrested  or  prosecuted  withoi^t
the  express  permission  of  the  House,  except  for  treason,  felony,
or  actual  breach  of  the  peace,  or  for  refusal  to  pay  obedience
to  a  writ  of  Habeas  Corpus,  had  hitherto  been  fully  acknow-
ledged, and  had,  as  we  have  seen,  been  very  recently  admitted
by  the  law  courts.  In  spite  of  the  opposition  of  Pitt  and  of  a
powerful  protest  signed  by  seventeen  peers,  a  resolution  was
now  carried  through  both  Houses  '  that  privilege  of  Parliament
does  not  extend  to  the  case  of  writing  and  publishing  seditious
libels,  nor  ought  to  be  allowed  to  obstruct  the  ordinary  course
of  the  laws  in  the  speedy  and  effectual  prosecution  of  so
heinous  and  dangerous  an  offence.'  As  the  resolution  was
given  a  retrospective  application,  the  proceeding  of  the  House
in  this  as  in  most  other  points  was  grossly  and  transparently
unjust ;  hut  considered  in  itself  it  had  a  great  value,  as
making  a  serious  breach  in  that  formidable  edifice  of  Parlia-
mentary privilege  which  was  threatening  to  become  almost  as
prejudicial  to  the  liberty  of  the  subject  as  the  royal  pre-
rogative. It  is  a  singularly  curious  fact  that  at  a  time  when
Parliamentary  privilege  was  becoming  a  chief  subject  of  popular
complaint,  this  great  concession  was  made,  not  in  consequence
of  any  pressure  of  opinion  from  without,  but  by  the  free  will  of
Parliament  itself,  for  the  purpose  of  crushing  a  popular  hero.
It  is  hardly  less  curious  that  nearly  at  the  same  time  the  City
of  London,  which  had  placed  itself  at  the  head  of  the  demo-
cratic movement,  should  more  than  once,  through  its  dislike
to  particular  measures,  have  petitioned  the  King  to  exercise
his  dormant  power  of  veto,  and  refuse  his  assent  to  Bills
which  had  passed  through  both  Houses  of  Parliament.^

Wilkes  was  unable  to  attend  Parliament  before  the  Christ-
mas vacation,  and  during  the  recess  he  went  over  to  France.
Whether  he  really  intended  to  retiun  is  doubtful.  The  Crown,
the  ministers,  and  the  majority  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament,
were  all  leagued  against  him,  and  it  was  tolerably  clear  that
they  were  determined  to  ruin  him.  A  trial  for  seditious  libel
and  a  trial  for  blasphemy  were  hanging  over  his head,  and

'  It  prcRonted petitions to this  effect  against  both  tlie  Cjder  Bill  and
the  Qticlx'C  Jiill.

CH.  X.  OUTLAWRY OF WILKES.  81

Purliament  liad  already  passed  resolutions  prejudging  his  case.
His  life  was  by  no  means  safe.  He  had  offended  large  classes,
and  he  was  surrounded  by  vindictive  enemies.  One  of  the
earliest  numbers  of  the  '  North  Briton '  had  obliged  him  to  fight
a  duel  with  Lord  Talbot,  Avho  had  officiated  as  High  Constable
at  the  Coronation.  On  a  former  visit  to  Paris  he  had  been
challenged  by  a  Scotchman  named  Forbes,  who  was  in  the
French  service,  on  account  of  his  attacks  upon  Scotland.  The
duel  with  Martin  bore  all  the  signs  of  a  deliberate  and  pre-
meditated attempt  to  destroy  him ;  and  when  he  was  lying
wounded  and  helpless  on  his  sick  bed,  a  mad  Scotchman
named  Dun  had  tried  to  penetrate  into  his  house  to  assassinate
him.  When  the.  time  came  at  which  he  was  summoned  to
appear  before  Parliament,  he  sent  a  certificate  signed  by  two
French  doctors,  stating  that  he  was  unable  to  travel.  The
House  of  Commons,  however,  made  no  allowance  for  his  state.
On  the  19th  of  January,  1764,  he  was  expelled  from  the  House
for  having  written  '  a  scandalous  and  seditious  libel,'  and  on
the  21st  of  February  he  was  tried  and  found  guilty  in  the
Comrt  of  King's  Bench  for  reprinting  No.  45,  and  also  for
printing  the  '  Essay  on  Woman ; '  and  as  he  did  not  appear  to
receive  sentence,  he  was  at  once  outlawed.  The  most  im-
portant of  the  actions  brought  by  Wilkes  had  been  that  against
Lord  Halifax.  By  availing  himself  of  every  possible  legal
technicality,  Halifax  had  hitherto  postponed  the  decision,  and
now  by  pleading  the  outlawry  of  Wilkes  he  terminated  the  affair.

The  Court  had  triumphed  ;  but  no  one  who  knew  the  Eng-
lish people  could  doubt  that  the  manifest  desire  of  those  in
power  to  hunt  down  an  obnoxious  politician,  would  rouse  a  fierce
spirit  of  opposition  in  the  country.  No  minister,  indeed,  was
ever  more  destitute  than  George  Grenville  of  that  which  in  a
free  country  is  the  most  essential  quality  of  a  successful  states-
man— the  power  of  calculating  the  effect  of  measures  upon
opinion.  Every  step  which  had  been  taken  in  the  Wilkes  con-
troversy was  ill-advised,  vindictive,  and  substantially  unjust.
The  Government  had  been  formally  convicted,  on  broad  legal
issues,  of  illegal  conduct.  They  had  resorted  to  the  most  dis-
reputable artifices  of  legal  chicanery  in  order  to  avert  the  con-
sequences of  the  decision,  and  they  had  carried  with  them  a

VOL.  in.  G

82 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

great  majority  of  Parliament,  in  usurping  the  functions  and
defying  the  sentences  of  the  law  courts.  The  Executive  and  the
Legislature  were  alike  discredited,  and  a  most  alarming  spirit
had  been  raised.  For  Wilkes  personally  there  was  not  much
genuine  sympathy,  and  he  was  still  far  from  the  height  of
popularity  which  he  subsequently  attained.  Churchill,  indeed,
predicted  that —

An  everlasting  crown  shall  twine

To  make  a  Wilkes  and  Sidney  join.^

But  Pitt,  who  represented  far  more  truly  the  best  liberal  senti-
ments of  the  country,  while  taking  a  foremost  part  in  opposition
to  the  unconstitutional  proceedings  of  the  Grovernment,  de-
nounced his  character  and  his  writings  in  the  strongest  terms,
and  it  is  remarkable  that  an  attempt  to  raise  a  public  subscrip-
tion for  him  was  a  failure,^  and  that  Kearsley,  the  publisher
of  the  'North  Briton,'  became  bankrupt  in  1764.^  A  Devon-
ehire  farmer  in  that  year  left  Wilkes  5,000l.  as  a  testimony
of  his  admiration  ;"*  and  he  was  always  received  with  abundance
of  mob  applause,  but  as  yet  the  general  public  appear  to
have  given  him  little  support  except  by  riots.  His  law  ex-
penses were  chiefly  paid  by  Temple,  and  he  afterwards  obtained
an  annuity  of  1,000L  from  the  Eockingham  Whigs,  who  sup-
ported him  in  much  the  same  spirit  as  the  Tories  under  QueeTi
Anne  had  supported  Sacheverell.  But  the  spirit  of  riot  and
insubordination  was  very  strong  in  the  country,  and  it  was
noticed  after  the  Wilkes  case  that  it  was  ominously  and  rapidly
extending.  Libels  attacking  in  the  grossest  manner  the  King,
the  Princess  Dowager,  and  the  ministry,  were  extremely  com-
mon, and  they  were  fiercely  resented.  In  17G4  no  less  than
200  informations  were  filed  against  printers.  In  the  whole
thirty-three  years  of  the  preceding  reign  there  had  not  been
so  many  prosecutions  of  the  Press.'^  Hitherto,  when  the
author  of  a  libel  was  known,  he  alone  was  prosecuted  ;  but  the
custom  was  now  introduced,  for  the  first  time  since  the  Eevo-
lution,  of  involving  in  these  cases  the  printers  also  in  the  pro-

'  The  Diwllist.  '  Annual  Register,  1761,  p.  118.

2  Grenville  Papers, ii. 138, 142.  ■•  Ibid.  p.  J)l.

See,  too,  Mr.  Rae's  Williei,  Sheridan,  *  Walpolc's Memoirs of George

and  Fox,  p.  CO.  TIL  ii.  15.

CH.  X.  ANNEXATION OF THE ISLE OF MAN.  83

secution.'  The  finances  of  the  country  were  managed  with  an
increased  economy,  and  corruption  had  somewhat  diminished ;
but  Shelburne  and  Barre  were  deprived  of  their  military  posts,
and  Generals  Conway  and  A'Court  of  their  regiments  on  account
of  their  votes  in  Parliament.  No  such  act  had  been  perpe-
trated since  Walpole  had  dismissed  Lords  Westmoreland  and
Cobham  from  the  commands  of  their  regiments ;  and  it  was
remembered  that  at  that  time  Grrenville  had  been  one  of  the
most  prominent  members  in  denouncing  the  act  in  the  House
of  Commons,  while  Bedford  had  signed  a  protest  against  it  in
the  House  of  Lords.

Nor  were  the  other  proceedings  of  the  Government  fitted
to  add  to  their  popularity.  Their  tame  acquiescence  in  the
Spanish  refusal  to  pay  the  Manilla  ransom  offended  bitterly
the  national  pride.  The  Stamp  Act,  which  was  imposed  on
America  in  1765,  in  order  to  obtain  100,000?.  of  revenue,
though  it  passed  almost  unnoticed  in  England,  produced  an
immediate  explosion  in  America,  and  led  in  a  few  years  to  the
dismemberment  of  the  empire.  Bedford,  who  joined  the
ministry  in  the  autumn  of  1763  as  President  of  the  Council,
brought  with  him  a  great  weight  of  personal  unpopularity
which  his  subsequent  conduct  had  no  tendency  to  diminish.
Perhaps  the  only  valuable  measure  that  can  be  ascribed  to  this
ministry  is  the  annexation  to  the  English  Crown  of  the  Isle  of
Man.  Its  sovereignty  had  long  been  vested  in  the  House  of
Derby,  who  did  honorary  service  for  it  by  presenting  two  fal-
cons to  the  kings  and  queens  of  England  on  their  coronation.
It  passed  by  marriage  to  the  Dukes  of  Athol,  and  the  island
had  been  the  centre  of  a  great  smuggling  trade  to  England  and
Ireland,  which  it  was  found  impossible  to  repress  till  the  Gren-
ville  mim'stry  in  1765  purchased  the  sovereignty  for  70,000?.^

The  party  aspect  of  the  ministry  of  Grenville  and  Bedford
was  somewhat  ambiguous.  Bedford,  who  was  one  of  its  leading
members,  was  the  head  of  a  great  Whig  house.  Grenville  had
begun  public  Kfe  as  an  undoubted  Whig ;  he  had  never  abjured
the  name, and  he  always  exhibited  that  high  sense  of  the

>  See  a  remarkable  letter  'Con-  Tractx,  i.  102.
cerning libels, warrants, and the  «  A,ifiyal Register 1764, p. 92  ;

seizure  of  papers,'  ascribed  to  Dun-  17G5,  pp.  i)6,  97,  262.
ning,  in  .ilmon's Scarce  and  Rare

a  2

84 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  x.

prerogative  and  power  of  the  House  of  Commons  which  usually
accompanied  Whig  politics.  He  felt  towards  it  as  men  feel
towards  the  sphere  in  which  they  are  most  fitted  to  excel ;  and
in  different  periods  of  his  career  he  maintained  its  authority
with  equal  energy  against  the  Crown,  against  the  colonies,  and
against  the  people.  At  the  same  time  there  was  some  undoubted
truth  in  the  assertion  of  Pitt,  that  this  Government  '  was  not
founded  on  true  Eevolution  principles,  but  was  a  Tory  adminis-
tration.' ^  It  was  not  simply  that  Grenville  had  seceded  from
the  great  body  of  the  Whig  party,  that  he  had  supported  the
ascendency  of  the  Tory  Bute,  that  he  advocated  with  the  Tory
party  the  speedy  termination  of  the  French  war,  that  his
leaning  on  almost  every  question  was  strongly  towards  the
assertion  of  authority.  It  is  also  certain  that  he  came  into
office  with  the  definite  object  of  carrying  into  action  the  Tory
principle  of  government.  The  real  and  essential  distinction
between  the  two  parties  at  this  period  of  their  history  lay  in
the  diiferent  degrees  of  authority  they  were  prepared  to  con-
cede to  the  sovereign.  According  to  the  Whigs,  a  connected
group  of  political  leaders  acting  in  concert  and  commanding  a
majority  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  ought  virtually  to  dic-
tate and  direct  the  government  of  the  country.  According  to
the  opposite  party,  the  supreme  directing  power  should  reside
with  the  Sovereign,  and  no  political  organisation  should  be
suffered  to  impose  its  will  upon  the  Crown.  According  to  the
Whigs,  the  system  of  government  which  prevailed  in  the  last
years  of  Greorge  II.,  whatever  might  have  been  the  defects  of
particular  statesmen  or  of  particular  measures,  was  on  the
whole  the  normal  and  legitimate  outcome  of  parliamentary
government.  According  to  the  Tories,  it  was  essentially  an
usurpation,  and  it  should  be  the  great  object  of  a  loyal  minister
to  prevent  the  possibility  of  its  recurrence.  Both  parties  recog-
nised the  necessity  of  establishing  some  strong  and  permanent
system  of  government,  but  the  one  party  sought  it  in  the  con-
nection of  agreeing  politicians,  commanding  parliamentary  in-
fluence ;  the  other  party  sought  it  in  the  creation  of  a  powerful
parliamentary  interest  attached  personally  to  the  Sovereign,
reinforced  by  disconnected politicians, and by small  groups

' Grenville  Pa^x'rs,  ii.  199,

CH.  X.  THE  KING'S  SYMPATHY WITH GKENVILLE.  85

drawn  from  the  most  various  quarters,  and  directed  by  a  states-
man who  was  personally  pleasing  to  the  King.  Other  questions
were  for  the  most  part  casual  and  incidental,  but  this  lay  at
the  root  of  the  division  of  parties,  and  it  is  the  key  to  the
language  which  was  constantly  used  about  breaking  up  parties,
removing  disqualifications,  admitting  politicians  of  all  kinds  to
the  service  of  the  King.  Grenville  avowedly  came  into  ojBfice
to  secure  the  King  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Whig
organisation  and  losing  the  power  of  political  guidance.'

He  was  in  many  respects  peculiarly  pleasing  to  the  King.
His  official  connection  with  Bute,  his  separation  from  the  great
Whig  families,  his  unblemished  private  character,  his  eminent
business  faculties,  his  industry,  his  methodical  habits,  his
economy,  his  freedom  alike  from  the  fire  and  the  vagaries  of
genius,  his  dogged  obstinacy,  his  contempt  for  popularity,  were
all  points  of  affinity.  Again  and  again  dtu-ing  the  first  months
of  the  ministry  the  King  spoke  of  him  with  the  warmest
affection,  and  he  declared  that  '  he  never  could  have  anybody
else  at  the  head  of  his  Treasury  who  would  fill  that  office  so
much  to  his  satisfaction.'  ^  In  the  chief  lines  of  their  policy
King  and  ministers  cordially  agreed.  The  King  had  himself,
as  we  have  seen,  directed  the  prosecution  of  Wilkes ;  he  warmly
supported  the  Stamp  Act,  and  the  disastrous  project  of  coercing
the  colonies ;  he  both  approved  of  and  counselled  the  uncon-
stitutional measure  of  depriving  officers  of  their  military  rank
on  account  of  their  votes  in  Parliament.^  But  Grenville  was
placed  in  office  to  act  the  part  of  a  pliant  and  convenient  tool,
and  nature  had  given  him  the  character  of  the  most  despotic
and  obstinate  of  masters.  Whatever  might  be  his  principles
or  his  professions,  his  Sovereign  soon  discovered  that  no  one
was  constitutionally  more  fond  of  power,  less  disposed  to  yield
to  pressure  from  without,  less  capable  of  making  harsh  decisions
palatable  to  others. There  is  something  at  once  whimsical  and

'  *  We entered  into the King's  warrantable  force  being  put  upon  the
service  ...  to  hinder  the  law  from  Crown. (Ibid.  p.  106. See  too  a  re-
being indecently and unconstitu-  markable  letter  of  Sir  John  Phillips
tionally given to him.' — Grenville  to  Grenville,  ibid.  p.  118.)
Papers,  ii.  86. 'I  told  his  Majesty  -  Ibid.  ii. 192. See  too  pp.  205,
that  I  came  into  his  service  to  pre-  49.3,  49.5,  500.
serve  the  constitution  of  my  country ^  Ibid.  jip.  162,  166,  223,  224.
and  to  preve^it  any  undue  and  un-

8G ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cu.  x.

pathetic  in  the  efforts  of  the  young  King  to  free  himself  from
the  yoke.  In  April,  1763,  Grenville  became  Prime  Minister.
In  July  we  already  find  the  King  and  Bute  consulting  on  the
possibility  of  displacing  him.  A  negotiation  was  accordingly
opened  with  Lord  Hardwicke,  but  he  refused  to  take  any  part
without  the  co-operation  of  Pitt  and  of  the  Whigs.  In  August,
when  the  death  of  Lord  Egremont  had  weakened  the  Tory  ele-
ment in  the  Cabinet,  and  strengthened  the  ascendency  of  Gren-
ville,  the  King  and  Bute  at  once  renewed  their  designs,  and  on
the  return  of  Grenville  from  a  brief  excursion  in  the  country
he  found  the  King  closeted  with  Pitt.  The  negotiation,  how-
ever, again  failed.  Pitt  insisted  on  the  expulsion  from  office  of
those  who  had  taken  a  leading  part  in  negotiating  the  peace,
and  the  restoration  to  office  of  the  great  Whig  families,  and  the
King,  who  dreaded  this  consummation  above  all  others,  was
compelled  to  ask  Grenville  to  continue  in  office.  He  did  so  on
the  assurance  that  Bute  was  no  longer  to  exercise  any  secret
influence  ;  and  he  was  bitterly  indignant  when  he  learnt  that
two  or  three  days  after  the  King  had  given  this  assurance,
Bute  had  made  through  the  instrumentality  of  Beckford  a
new  attempt  to  obtain  more  favourable  terms  from  Pitt.  The
King  then  considering  the  Grenville  ministry  the  sole  barrier
against  the  Whig  families,  changed  his  policy,  determined  to
support  it,  and  resolved  to  strengthen  it  by  a  junction  with  the
Bedford  faction.  The  unpopularity  of  Bedford  in  the  country
was  only  second  to  that  of  Bute,  and  his  blunt  manner  and
domineering  character  were  sure  to  bring  him  into  conflict  with
the  King,  but  he  had  at  least  quarrelled  with  the  main  body  of
the  Whigs,  and  he  could  bring  some  votes  and  some  administra-
tive skill  to  the  support  of  the  Government.  Bute  accordingly
applied  to  Bedford,  who  contented  himself  with  recommending
the  King  to  apply  to  Pitt.  The  advice  was  taken  ;  but  Pitt,
who  was  not  informed  of  the  intervention  of  Bedford,  again
urged  the  formation  of  a  Whig  ministry  and  the  exclusion  oi
tlie  chief  negotiators  of  the  peace,  and  especially  of  Bedford.
The  King  at  once  made  a  skilful  but  most  dishonourable  use
of  tlie  incautious  frankness  of  Pitt  in  the  closet  to  sow  dissen-
sions among  the  Whig  nobles,  reporting  to  each  such  expres-
sions as  were  most  likely  to  offend  them,  and  especially  instruct-

CH.  X.  EESIGNATION OF SHELBURNE.  87

ing  Lord  Sandwich  to  inform  Bedford  that  Pitt  had  made  his
exclusion  from  all  offices  an  essential  condition.  Bedford,  who
had  himself  advised  the  King  to  apply  to  Pitt,  and  who  was
probably  perfectly  unaware  that  Pitt  was  ignorant  of  that  fact,
was  naturally  greatly  incensed,  and  through  resentment  he  was
induced  to  join  the  ministry  as  President  of  the  Council,  while
Lord  Sandwich,  who  was  his  oldest  follower,  became  Secretary
of  State,  Lord  Hillsborough  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade,
and  Lord  Egmont  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.'

The  junction  of  the  Bedford  faction  with  the  ministry  took
place  in  September,  1763.  In  the  same  month  Lord  Shelburne
had  resigned  his  position  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade.
Shelburne  had  hitherto  been  the  most  devoted  follower  of  Bute  ;
he  entered  the  Grenville  ministry  by  the  favour  and  as  the
warmest  friend  of  Bute,^  and  he  had  thoroughly  identified  him-
self with  his  theory  of  government.  It  was  the  object  of  Bute
to  reduce  each  minister  as  much  as  possible  to  his  own  depart-
ment, and  to  absolve  him  from  allegiance  to  his  colleagues,  in
order  that  the  King  should  have  full  power  to  modify  the  com-
position of  his  Cabinet.  In  the  summer  of  1763,  when  the
King  was  resolved  to  displace  Grenville,  he  had  at  once  applied  to
Bute,  and  under  the  instructions  of  the  favourite,  the  President
of  the  Board  of  Trade  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  secret
negotiations  both  with  Bedford  and  with  Pitt  for  the  purpose  of
displacing  and  overthrowing  the  Prime  JMinister.^  Such  services
showed  how  fully  Shelburne  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the
designs  of  Bute  ;  but  he  was  himself  rapidly  becoming  discon-
tented. He  appears  to  have  disliked  both  his  , office  and  his
colleagues ;  he  doubted  or  more  than  doubted  the  legality  ol
the  measures  that  were  taken  against  Wilkes,  and  he  seems
to  have  thought  that  his  own  influence  and  importance  were
not  sufficiently  recognised.  How  far  his  motives  were  of  a
public  and  how  far  they  were  of  a  private  nature  it  is  impossible
to  say,  but  on  September  3  he  resigned  his  post,  and  he  after-
wards voted  with  his  followers  Barre,  Fitzmaurice,  and  Calcraft

'  See  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  ^  ggg  ^-^^q  correspondence  between

vnl.  iii. Gretiville  Pajjers,  a.  8'3-Q7f  Bute  and  Shelburne. — Fitzmaui-ice  s

104-107, 191-206. Bfsdford Corre-  Life  of  Shelhurne,\.  212,-218.
sjiondeme,  vol.  iii. Wal^mh's  Georga  ^  Ibid.  pp.  281-28'J

111.

88  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

against  the  Court  and  the  ministry.  The  King  in  bitter  anger
deprived  him  of  his  por.t  of  aide-de-camp,  and  Barre  of  the
posts  of  Adjutant-Greneral  of  the  Forces  and  Governor  of
Stirling  Castle ;  and  from  this  time  Shelburne  severed  himself
from  Bute  and  attached  himself  to  what  seemed  to  be  the
rising  fortunes  of  Pitt.'

The  junction  of  Bedford  had,  however,  given  some  strength
to  the  ministry,  and  although  Bedford  complained  that  he  had
not  a  sufficient  share  in  the  disposition  of  places,  the  year  1764,
during  which  the  country  was  convulsed  by  the  Wilkes  riots,
was  a  year  of  comparative  peace  in  the  closet.  The  King,  how-
ever, detested  the  hard  and  overbearing  character  of  Bedford  ;
he  disliked  the  notorious  profligacy  of  Sandwich,^  and  although
for  some  months  he  appeared  reconciled  to  Grenville  and  often
expressed  warm  esteem  for  him,  he  soon  began  to  hate  him  as
intensely  as  the  last  king  had  hated  Lord  Temple.  In  truth,
Grenville  was  in  the  closet  the  most  tedious,  prolix,  and  obsti-
nate of  men,  and  his  domineering  and  overbearing  temper  was
shown  in  the  smallest  matters.  '  When  he  has  wearied  me  for
two  hours,'  said  the  King  on  one  occasion,  'he  looks  at  his
watch  to  see  if  he  may  not  tire  me  for  one  hour  more.'  He
refused  a  grant  of  20,000L  for  the  purchase  of  some  grounds
adjoining  Buckingham  Palace,  which  the  King  was  very  anxious
to  secure  in  order  to  prevent  buildings  that  would  overlook  him
in  his  walks.  He  adopted  so  imperious  a  tone  that  the  King
complained  that '  when  he  had  anything  proposed  to  him,  it
was  no  longer  as  counsel,  but  what  he  w^as  to  obey.'^ His

'  See  the  detailed  account  of  this  ever  shown  reluctance  to  employ  bad
event  in  Lord  E.  Fitzmanrice's  Life  men  who  were  subservient  (o  his
of  Shelburne.  Walpole  said  :  '  Many  views.  When  remonstrated  with  for
reasons  are  given  [for  the  resigna-  erai)loying  such  a  man  as  Fox,  his
tion],  but  the  only  one  that  people  answer  was,  '  We  must  call  in  bad
choose  to  take  is,  that  thinking  Pitt  men  to  govern  bad  men.' — Ibid.  i.
must  be  minister  soon,  and  finding  452.  In  1778,  when  North  was  very
himself  tolerably  obnoxious  to  him,  anxious  to  resign  and  when  there  was
he  is  seeking  to  make  his  peace  at  any  a  question  of  reconstructing  the  ad-
rate.' — Walpole  to  Mann,  Sept.  13,  ministration  on  a  Whig  basis,  the  King
n&^^.  declared  he  would  accept  no  ministry

-  'The King speaks daily  with  in  which  some  pohticians  he men-

raorc and  more  averseness to Lord  tioned  had  not  seats  in  the  Cabinet,

Sandwich, and appears to have a  and among tliese politicians was

settled dislike to his character.' —  Sandwich. — Letters  of  George  ILL  to

(rrenriUe  Papers,  ii.  496. The  King  Lord  North,  ii.  158.

•Would  liave  deserved  more  credit  for  ^  Grenville  Papers,  iii.  213.
his  feelini's  about  Sandwich  if  he  had

CH.  X.  THE  REGENCY  BILL.  89

management  of  the  Eegeney  Bill  was  a  much  graver  offence,
and  it  wounded  the  King  in  his  most  sensitive  points.  In
April,  1765,  the  King  was  attacked  with  an  alarming  illness,
and  it  was  afterwards  known  that  symptoms  then  for  the  first
time  appeared  of  that  mental  derangement  which  clouded  the
latter  years  of  his  reign.  On  his  recovery  it  was  thought  right
to  provide  against  the  confusion  which  might  result  from  the
death  or  illness  of  the  King  while  his  children  were  still  young,
and  a  Eegeney  Bill  was  accordingly  introduced  in  which  it  was
proposed  to  restrict  the  right  of  becoming  regent  to  the  queen
and  the  royal  family  then  residing  in  England ;  but  when  in  the
course  of  the  discussion  in  the  House  of  Lords  the  question
arose  who  constituted  the  royal  family,  it  appeared  that  the
Cabinet  had  not  agreed  upon  or  even  considered  the  subject.
Bedford  and  Halifax,  actuated  probably  by  antipathy  to  Bute,
maintained,  in  opposition  to  their  own  colleague  the  Chancellor,
that  the  term  Eoyal  Family  did  not  include  the  Princess
Dowager.  Bedford  opposed  and  threw  out  a  resolution  inserting
the  name  of  the  princess,  and  Halifax  and  Sandwich  succeeded
in  extorting  from  the  King  his  consent  to  a  clause  limiting  the
regency  to  the  Queen  and  the  descendants  of  the  late  King
usually  resident  in  England,  and  thus  pointedly  excluding  his
mother.

Much  obscurity  hangs  over  the  motives  which  induced  the
King  to  consent  to  this  insult  to  a  parent  to  whom  he  was  ten-
derly attached,  but  it  appears  that  the  affair  was  transacted  in
great  haste,  that  the  King  hardly  understood  or  realised  what
he  was  doing,  and  that  he  was  persuaded  by  Halifax  that  if  the
princess  were  not  indirectly  excluded  in  the  Bill,  the  House  of
Commons  would  take  the  still  stronger  and  more  insulting
step  of  excluding  her  by  name.  At  all  events,  he  soon  bitterly
repented,  and  even  implored  Grenville  as  a  personal  favour  to
himself  to  include  the  princess  in  the  Bill,  and  the  matter  be-
came still  worse  when  the  House  of  Commons,  instead  of  display-
ing the  spirit  which  Halifax  had  predicted,  inserted  her  name
on  the  ground  that  the  omission  was  a  direct  insult  offered  by
the  King's  servants  to  the  King's  mother.  The  King  was  driven
to  the  verge  of  madness  by  the  false  position  in  which  he  was

90  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch,  x.

placed.'  In  April,  when  the  Regency  question  was  still  pending,
he  had  been  negotiating  with  his  uncle  the  Duke  of  Cumber-
land, and  also  with  Bute,  about  a  possible  change  of  govern-
ment, and  on  ]May  6  he  implored  Cumberland  to  save  him
from  a  ministry  which  had  become  intolerable  to  him.^  He
had  no  truer  or  more  loyal  subject,  but  because  Cumberland
had  lately  been  in  opposition  to  Bute  all  his  services  to  the
dynasty  had  been  forgotten,  and  the  King  had  looked  on  him
with  the  most  vindictive  hatred.  A  few  months  before,  the
Duke  had  been  struck  down  by  apoplexy,  and  his  life  was  in
imminent  danger  ;  but  the  King,  though  perfectly  aware  of  the
condition  of  his  uncle,  refused  even  to  send  to  inquire  after
him, '  because,'  as  he  explained  to  Grenville,  '  after  the  Duke's
behaviour,  no  one  could  suppose  he  would  inquire  out  of  regard
to  him.'  ^  Yet  it  w^as  to  this  prince  that  the  King  now  resorted
in  his  distress.  The  ministers  had  been  for  some  time  aware
that  the  King  had  lost  confidence  in  them,  and  that  some
change  of  government  was  contemplated,  and  on  May  9  the
Duke  of  Bedford  remonstrated  in  no  measured  terms  with  his
master  on  the  treachery  of  his  conduct.''  Cumberland  was
authorised  to  negotiate  with  Pitt  and  with  the  old  Whig
families  whose  exclusion  the  King  had  so  ardently  desired,  but
who  probably  appeared  less  dangerous  when  allied  with  a  states-
man who  was  in  many  respects  hostile  to  their  system. Pitt

'  Burke —who  had  not  yet  entered  on May 3. He immediately after

Parliament — wrote at this time to  felt  that  he  had  committed  an im-

Flood :  '  Tlie  Regency  Bill  has  shown  propriety, and his opinion was

such want of  concert  and  want  of  strengthened  by  the  Chancellor,  who

capacity  in  the  ministers,  such  inat-  assured  him  that  many  people  were

tention  to  the  honour  of  the  Crown,  offended at it,  and that a  motion

if  not  such  a  design  against  it,  such  against it  would be made by the

imposition  and surprise upon the  Opposition. On the  5th, the King

King,  and  such  a  misrepresentation  'in the  utmost  degree  of  agitation

of  the  disposition  of  Parliament  to  and  emotion,  even  to  tears,'  implored

the  Sovereign,  that  there  is  no  doubt  Grenville  to  alter  the Bill, but  he

tliat  there  is  a  fixed  resolution  to  get  was unable to prevail. — Ibid. pp.

rid  of  them  all  (except  perhaps  Gren-  152-155.

ville),  but  principally  of  the  Duke  of  -  See Cumberland's own state-

F.cdford.' — Burke Correspondence,  i.  ment. — Albemarle's  Life  of  Rocliing-

7'j, 80. The best account of the  liami,  i.  185-203. On  the  27lh  of  April

management  of  the  Regency  Bill  is  the  King  had  an  interview  with  Bute

in tlie Grenville  Papers,  iii.,  espe-  at  Richmond. — Grenville  Papers,  iii.

cially  the  very  interesting  Diary  of  134.
G.  Grenville, pp.  112-222. The  in-  ^  Ibid.  ii.  490.

terview  at  wliich  the  King  consented  ••  Grenville Papers,  iii. 159,  160.

to  the  exclusion  of  his  mother  was  Bedford  Correspondence,  iii.  279-281.

cii.  X.  ATTEMPTS TO FOini  A XEW MINISTEY.  91

seemed  ready  to  assume  ofSce,  and  the  Whig  families  to  co-
operate with  him ;  but  Temple,  who  had  lately  been  reconciled
to  Grenville,  and  who  probably  desired  a  purely  family  ministry,
declined  the  office  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  persuaded
Pitt  to  break  off  the  negotiation.  Pitt  did  so  chiefly  on  the
ground  that  the  influence  of  Bute  was  as  strong  as  ever,  and
overrode  that  of  the  responsible  ministers  of  the  Crown. ^  An
attempt  was  then  made  to  induce  Lord  Lyttleton  to  form  a
government,  but  this,  too,  speedily  failed.

A  serious  riot  about  this  time  complicated  the  situation.
The  silk  weavers  being  in  great  distress,  had  petitioned  for  the
exclusion  of  all  French  silks  from  England,  and  they  resented
bitterly  the  terms  in  which  Bedford  opposed  the  measure.  On
May  15  a  great  body  of  them  bearing  black  flags  followed  the
King  to  the  House  of  Lords,  broke  the  chariot  of  the  Duke  of
Bedford,  wounded  him  on  the  hand  and  on  the  temple,  and  two
days  later  attacked  Bedford  House  with  such  fury  that  a  large
body  of  soldiers  was  required  to  save  it  from  destruction.  The
episode  was  peculiarly  unfortunate,  for  it  gave  the  impending
change  of  ministry  the  appearance  of  a  concession  to  mob  vio-
lence. Bedford  absurdly  ascribed  the  riot  to  the  instigation  of
Bute,  and  lost  no  opportunity  of  showing  his  anger.^

In  the  meantime  the  King  had  intimated  clearly  to  his
ministers  his  determination  to  dispense  with  their  services,  and
they  held  office  only  till  their  places  were  filled ;  but  Cumber-
land was  soon  obliged  to  recommend  his  nephew  to  recall  them.^
The  humiliation  was  almost  intolerable,  but  it  was  undergone.
Grenville  insisted  on  a  solemn  promise  from  the  King  that  he
would  never  again  have  a  private  inteiview  with  Bute.  He
insisted  upon  the  dismissal  of  Stewart  Mackenzie,  the  brother
of  Bute,  from  the  sinecure  office  of  Privy  Seal  in  Scotland,
though  the King  had distinctly  pledged  his  honour  that  he

'  See  the  letter  of  the Duke  of  which  is  printed  in  Albemarle's  Life

Cumberland, May 21, 1765.— Albe-  of Rockingham, the '  Diary  ' "of

murlti's  Life  of  liockinffJmm,  i.  211.  George Grenville in the Greiiville

^  Walpols's Memoirs of George  Papers,  and the account  given by

III.  ii.  155-159. Grenville  Papers,  Walpole. These  three accounts  are

ill.  171.  not in  all points quite coincident,

^  I have compiled this account  and  some  of  the  dates  in  the  Duke  of

from the memorial  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  memorial  appear  to  be

Cumberland  describing  the  negotia-  wrongly  given,
tiuns  with  which  he  was  entrusted,

92 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

ehould  retain  it.  He  lectured  the  King  agaiji  and  again  on  the
duplicity  he  had  shown.  His  Majesty,  on  the  other  hand,  was
at  no  pains  to  conceal  his  sentiments.  He  displayed  the  most
marked  courtesy  towards  the  leaders  of  the  Opposition,  listened
with  a  dark  and  sullen  countenance  to  the  expostulations  of  his
ministers,  and  when  they  ventured  to  express  a  hope  that  he
would  accord  them  his  confidence  he  preserved  a  blank  and  sig-
nificant silence  without  even  the  courtesy  of  a  civil  evasion.
When  an  appointment  was  to  be  made  he  studiously  neglected
their  wishes,  and  often  filled  it  up  without  even  informing  them
of  his  choice.  Bedford,  three  weeks  after  the  Grovernment  had
been  restored,  demanded  an  audience,  and  calmly  read  to  the
King  a  paper  formally  accusing  him  of  acting  towards  his
ministers  with  a  want  of  confidence  and  sincerity  utterly  incom-
patible with  constitutional  monarchy.  '  If  I  had  not  broken
into  a  profuse  sweat,'  the  King  afterwards  said,  '  I  should  have
been  suffocated  with  indignation.'  Once  more  he  resorted  to
Cumberland  and  empowered  hitn  to  offer  the  most  liberal
terms  to  Pitt.  A  ministry  directed  by  that  great  statesman
would  have  been  beyond  all  comparison  the  most  advantageous
to  the  country ;  it  had  no  serious  difficulty  to  encounter,  and
Pitt  himself  was  now  ready  to  undertake  the  task,  but  the  evil
genius  of  Lord  Temple  again  prevailed.  Without  his  co-
operation Pitt  could  not  or  would  not  proceed,  and  Temple
absolutely  refused  to  take  office  even  in  the  foremost  place.
The  King,  however,  would  not  fall  back  on  Grenville.  Yielding
for  a  time  what  had  long  been  the  main  object  of  his  policy,  he
authorised  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  to  enter  into  negotiations
with  the  great  Whig  families.'  A  communication  was  made  to
the  old  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  in  July  1765,  after  about  seven
weeks  of  almost  complete  administrative  anarchy,  the  main
body  of  the  Whigs  returned  to  office  under  their  new  leader
Lord  Eockingham.  Of  Grrenville,  the  King  in  after  years
sometimes  spoke  with  regret  and  appreciation,  but  he  never
forgot  or  forgave  the  last  months  of  his  ministry.  '  I  would
sooner  meet  Mr.  Grenville,'  he  is  reported  to  have  said,  '  at
the  point  of  my  sword  than  let  him  into  my Cabinet.' '  I

'  ?>ee  the  Bedford  Cor respondnicr, pnlo's  (rcorffn  IJT. Grenrille  Pajfers,
iii.  283,  284,  286-290,  293-2^5. Wal- iii. Alhem-dxlfis  Life  of  Itocldngham.

CH.  X.  MINISTRY OF  EOCKINGHAM.  93

had  rather  see  the devil iu my closet than George Gren-
ville.'  1

Of  Kockingham,  the  new  minister,  there  is  little  to  be  said.
A  young  nobleman  of  very  large  fortune  and  unblemished
character,  he  had  been  for  some  time  only  remarkable  for  his
passion  for  horseracing,  but  had  obtained  a  faint  glimmer  of
notoriety  when  he  resigned  his  office  of  First  Lord  of  the  Bed-
chamber and  was  dismissed  from  the  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  his
county  for  his  opposition  to  the  peace,  and  he  was  selected  by
the  Whigs  as  their  leader  mainly  on  account  of  his  property
and  connections,  but  partly  on  account  of  his  conciliatory
manners  and  high  character.  He  was  almost  absolutely  desti-
tute of  the  ordinary  power  of  expressing  his  opinions  in  debate,
but  his  letters  show  a  clear,  moderate,  and  sound  judgment,
and  he  had  considerable  tact  in  smoothing  difficulties  and
managing  men.  He  carried  out  a  steadily  Kberal  policy  with
great  good  sense,  a  perfectly  single  mind,  and  uniform  courtesy
to  opponents.  He  had  the  advantage  of  following  one  of  the
most  unpopular  of  ministers,  and  the  genius  of  Burke,  who  was
his  private  secretary,  and  who  was  brought  into  Parliament  by
his  influence,  has  cast  a  flood  of  light  upon  his  administration
and  imparted  a  somewhat  deceptive  splendour  to  his  memory.
Few  Enghsh  statesmen  of  the  highest  rank  have  been  more
destitute  of  all  superiority  of  intellect  or  knowledge.  Few
English  ministries  have  been  more  feeble  than  that  which  he
directed,  yet  it  carried  several  measures  of  capital  importance.
It  obtained  from  Parliament — what  the  former  ministry  had
steadily  resisted— a  formal  condemnation  of  general  warrants.
By  restoring  to  their  posts  the  officers  who  had  been  deprived  of
their  military  rank  for  their  votes  in  Parliament,  it  affixed  such
a  stigma  to  that  practice  that  it  never  was  repeated.  It  allayed
the  discontent  and  even  disloyalty  of  large  classes  of  the  EngHsh
people  by  abolishing  or  at  least  profoundly  modifjdng  the  ob-
noxious Cyder  Act,  and  by  the  more  doubtful  measure  of  pro-
hibiting the  importation  of  French  silks.  It  negotiated  a  bene-
ficial commercial  treaty  with  Eussia ;  it  was  the  first  ministry
since  that  of  Walpole  which  took  serious  measures  to  relax
the  commercial  restrictions  which  were  the  true  cause  of  the

*  Albemarle's  Life  of  J?ocM»f/J(a)n,  ii.  50.

94 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, cii.  x.

alienationof  the  colonies  ;  and  above  all,  by  repealing  the  Stamp
Act,  it  for  a  time  averted  the  struggle  which  soon  afterwards
brought  about  the  disruption  of  the  empire.  It  did  all  this  in  the
short  space  of  one  year  and  twenty  days,  in  spite  of  every  kind
of  opposition  from  within  and  from  without,  and  as  far  as  can
be  ascertained  without  resorting  to  any  of  the  corrupt  practices
that  had  been  so  common  among  its  predecessors.  It  was
essentially  a  ministry  of  great  families.  The  Duke  of  New-
castle brought  to  it  his  vast  experience,  his  industry,  and  influ-
ence, and  he  exerted  himself  with  laudable  zeal  for  the  repeal
of  the  Stamp  Act.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  habits  of  the
old  minister  that  the  Church  patronage  was  at  his  desire  specially
attached  to  the  office  of  Privy  Seal  which  he  held,  and  it  is
scarcely  less  characteristic  of  another  side  of  his  character
that  he  anxiously  warned  Eockingham  against  Burke,  whom
he  suspected  of  being  a  Jacobite  and  a  Papist  in  disguise.^  In
party  politics  the  leading  idea  of  Newcastle  at  this  time  was
dread  of  Pitt,  and  the  great  object  at  which  he  ineffectually
aimed  was  a  junction  between  the  followers  of  Eockingham  and
Bedford.  The  great  family  connection  of  the  Cavendishes,  and
many  other  Whig  nobles  distinguished  only  for  their  wealth
and  position,  joined  the  ministry,  which  represented  all  that
remained  unbroken  and  unchanged  of  the  powerful  party  which
in  the  last  two  reigns  had  governed  the  country.

But  in  spite  of  aristocratic  support  the  ministry  had  no  real
strength,  and  it  soon  perished  by  the  combination  of  many
enemies.  Death  had  greatly  thinned  the  ranks  of  Whig  ad-
ministrators, and  the  secession  of  G-renville  and  Bedford,  the
alienation  of  Pitt  and  of  Temple,  had  thrown  the  management
of  the  party  into  the  hands  of  young  men  altogether  inexpe-
rienced in  government,  mixed  with  two  or  three  worn-out  vete-
rans :  Eockingham,  who  should  have  led  the  party  in  the  House
of  Lords,  rarely  opened  his  mouth  in  debate  ;  Conway,  who  led
the  party  in  the  Commons,  was  a  brave  and  popular  soldier,  who
had  ser\  ed  with  distinction  at  Culloden,  Fontenoy,  and  Laffeldt,
and  had  commanded  a  corps  under  Prince  Ferdinand  in  1761,
but  as  a  parliamentary  leader  he  had  neither  resolution,  know-
ledge, nor  eloquence  ;  Dowdeswell,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-

'  Prior's  L\fe  of  Burlw,  \.  135.

CH.  X.  WEAKNESS OF THE GOVERNMENT.  95

chequer,  was  a  good  financier,  but  nothing  more.  Charles
Townshend,  though  he  clung  to  the  rich  oflBce  of  Paymaster  of
the  Forces,  treated  his  colleagues  with  undisguised  contempt,
described  the  Grovernment  of  which  he  was  a  member  as  a
'  lutestring  administration  fit  only  for  summer  wear,'  and  osten-
tatiously abstained  from  defending  its  measures.  Northington,
the  Chancellor,  and  Barrington,  the  Secretary  for  War,  were  kept
in  office  to  please  the  Kling,  and  were  completely  at  his  ser\dce.
They  were  prepared  at  any  moment  to  turn  against  their  col-
leagues, and  they  were  strongly  committed  to  views  hostile  to
those  of  the  Government  to  which  they  belonged  on  the  two
capital  questions  of  American  taxation  and  the  legality  of
general  warrants.  Chesterfield  very  justly  described  the  ministry
as  an  arch  which  wanted  its  keystone,  and  the  true  keystone
was  evidently  Pitt.'

Eockingham  had  done  everything  in  his  power  to  draw  Pitt
to  his  side,  but  he  wholly  failed.  Pitt  remained  persistently
isolated  from  all  other  politicians.  While  admitting  that  the
characters  of  the  new  ministers  were  good,  he  openly  declared
in  Parliament  that  he  could  not  give  them  his  confidence,  and  he
countenanced  a  charge  which  is  now  known  to  have  been  com-
pletely groundless,  but  which  was  beHeved  by  both  Temple
and  Bedford,^  that  Bute  was  exercising  a  controlling  influence
upon  their  counsels.  While  Pitt  maintained  this  attitude  the
ministry  could  have  no  genuine  popularity ;  and  the  Duke  of
Cumberland,  who  had  called  it  into  power,  and  who  warmly
supported  it,  died  at  the  end  of  October,  about  three  months
before  the  Old  Pretender,  the  son  of  James  II.,  whose  prospects
he  had  ruined  at  Culloden.

To  a  truly  constitutional  sovereign  there  was  no  reason
why  the  Eockingham  ministry  should  not  have  been  accept-
able. It  consisted  to  an  exaggerated  extent  of  members  of
those  great  families  who  are  naturally  brought  into  closest
contact  with  the  Throne.  It  was  studiously  moderate  in  its
policy,  and none  of  its members  were  ever  accused  of  the

'  Lord  Lyttleton wrote at this  also  much  desired in the  Court.' —

time  (Jan.  28,  1765)  :  '  The  desire  of  Phillimore's  Zi/e  of  Lyttleton,  ii.  683.
Mr.  Pitt  in  the  public  is  inexpressi-  '  Bedford  Corresijondence,  iii.  304,

bly  strong,  and  nothing  will  satisfy  305,  312.
them  without  him. I  believe  he  is

90)  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

slightest  disrespect.  But  to  George  III.  its  very  existence  was
an  intolerable  humiliation  to  be  endured  only  from  extreme
necessity.  Only  two  years  had  elapsed  since  the  King  had
authorised  Bute  to  declare  that  he  would  never  again  during
his  whole  reign  admit  the  great  Whig  connection  to  power.
The  Duke  of  Devonshire,  who  was  one  of  the  chief  supporters  of
the  Grovernment,  was  the  son  of  the  very  statesman  who  had  so
lately  been  dismissed  from  office  by  the  King  in  a  manner  which
amounted  to  little  less  than  personal  insult.  The  King  had
been  the  first  man  to  suggest  the  dismissal  of  Conway  from  his
civil  and  military  posts.  He  was  now  obliged  to  restore  Con-
way to  his  regiment,  and  to  accept  him  as  Secretary  of  State
and  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons.  He  had  vehemently  sup-
ported the  most  violent  measures  against  Wilkes,  but  he  now
saw  general  warrants  and  the  seizure  of  the  papers  of  supposed
libellers  formally  condemned  in  Parliament  by  resolutions  intro-
duced under  the  auspices  of  his  ministers,  and  he  was  obliged
to  raise  Chief  Justice  Pratt  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Camden.
The  repeal  of  the  American  Stamp  Act  was  contrary  to  the
strongest  wishes  of  the  King.  In  order  to  make  it  possible  it
was  accompanied  by  a  declaratory  Act  asserting  the  abstract  right
of  the  Imperial  Parliament  to  tax  the  colonies.  Grenville,  Bed-
ford, and  the  whole  party  of  Bute  bitterly  opposed  the  repeal,
while  Pitt  denounced  the  declaration  that  accompanied  it.  The
debates  were  long  and  vehement,  and  they  were  especially  note-
worthy on  account  of  two  speeches  in  defence  of  the  Govern-
ment, which  extorted  warm  eulogy  from  Pitt,  and  in  the  words
of  Dr.  Johnson  '  filled  the  town  with  wonder.'  They  were  the
first  parliamentary  speeches  of  Edmund  Burke.

The  King  soon  made  no  secret  of  his  hostility  to  the  mea-
sures of  his  ministers.  He  assured  those  who  held  offices  in
his  household  that  they  were  at  full  liberty  to  vote  against  the
minister,  and  Lord  Strange  was  authorised  to  spread  about  the
report  that  the  King  was  opposed  to  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp
Act.  Eockingham,  who  understood  the  character  of  his
Sovereign,  heard  of  it,  and  at  once  insisted  upon  obtaining
in  writing  the  consent  of  the  King,  which  he  showed  to  those
who  desired  it ;  but  place-hunters  knew  only  too  well  the  real
wishes  of  the King  and the weakness of  the Government.

en X.  FALL  OF THE  ROCKIXGHAM MINISTRY.  97

]twas  the  evil  custom  of  the  time  to  treat  the  adjudication  of
disputed  elections  as  party  questions,  to  be  decided  according
to  the  majority  in  the  House  and  not  according  to  the  merits
of  the  case.  On  a  question  of  a  Scotch  election  in  February
1766,  the  ministers  only  carried  their  candidate  by  eleven  votes,
and  on  the  following  day  they  were  beaten  in  the  Lords  by  a
maj  ority  of  three.  *  Many  attempts  were  made  to  ind  ace  isolated
politicians  to  join  the  ministry,  but  they  uniformly  failed,  and
it  was  generally  felt  that  its  days  were  numbered.-  A  motion
of  Grenville  to  enforce  the  Stamp  Act  was  rejected  by  274  to
1 34,  but  it  was  remarkable  that  the  minority  included  not  only
the  friends  of  Bute,  but  also  nearly  a  dozen  of.tbe  King's  house-
hold.^ The  Chancellor  and  the  Secretary  of  War  both  voted
against  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.*  Eockinghara  wished  to
restore  some  vigour  and  discipline  to  the  ministry  by  removing
Jeremiah  Dyson,  one  of  the  under  treasurers,  who  had  been  in
conspicuous  opposition  to  his  chief,  but  the  King  positively
refused.  He  had  indeed  two  measures.  When  a  ministry
represented  his  personal  views,  Walpole  himself  was  not  more
strenuous  in  enforcing  unanimity  among  its  members.  When
it  diverged  from  his  views,  Pelham  was  not  more  indulgent  of
dissent.  In  the  same  spirit  the  King  refused  to  create  a  single
peer  at  the  desire  of  his  ministers.  The  King's  friends,  who
filled  the  subordinate  places  in  the  Government,  plotted  inces-
santly and  voted  fearlessly  against  their  chief.  At  last,  in  May
1766,  the  Duke  of  Grafton  struck  the  death-blow  by  resigning
the  seals  of  Secretary  of  State.  '  He  had  no  objection,'  he  said,
'  to  the  persons  or  the  measiu^es  of  the  ministers,  but  he  thought
they  wanted  strength  and  efficiency  to  carry  on  proper  measures
with  success,  and  that  Pitt  alone  could  give  them  solidity.'  In
July,  the  Chancellor,Lord  Northington,  who  had  very  persistently
thwarted  and  opposed  his  colleagues  in  the  Cabinet,  openly
revolted,  and  informed  the  King  that  the  ministry  could  not  go
on.  The  ministers  were  dismissed,  and  on  July  7,  17G6,  the
Kingf  once  more  sent  for  Pitt.

'  Alheraaile's  Life  of  JlocMiiijJiani  '  Walpole's 3Tcmoirs of George

i.  29G.  III.  ii.  287,  288.

-  Thackeray's  Life  of  Chatham,  ii.  *  Albemarle's  Life  of  Rockinf/ha/m,,

7.5. Grenville  Papers-  Bedford  Cor-  i.  321. Barrington's  Life  of  Barring-

re.<sj}onde7ice,  Chatham  Corrcsj^ondence.  tun,  p.  108.

VOL.  III.  H

98  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch x.

The  conduct  of  Pitt  iu  refusing  to  join  the  Rockingham
Government,  if  not  the  worst,  was  certainly  the  most  disas-
trous incident  of  his  career.  He  had  no  ground  of  complaint
because  Rockingham  had  taken  office,  for  he  had  again  and
again  been  appealed  to  during  the  Grenville  ministry  to  form
a  government,  and  he  had  absolutely  refused.  Two  months
before  the  Grenville  ministry  fell,  Rockingham  had  visited
him  at  Hayes,  with  the  object  of  effecting  a  junction  with
him  ;  and  when  the  new  ministry  was  formed,  and  during  the
whole  period  of  its  existence,  every  possible  effort  was  made  to
obtain  his  alliance.  At  least  three  separate  applications  were
made  to  him  by  Rockingham.  His  advice  was  asked  with  a
marked  deference.  The  restoration  of  the  officers  who  had
been  removed  from  their  military  posts  on  account  of  their
votes  in  Parliament,  a  formal  condemnation  of  general  warrants,
and  the  bestowal  of  some  special  honour  on  Chief  Justice  Pratt,
had  been  three  conditions  on  which  Pitt  specially  insisted  in
his  abortive  negotiations  with  the  King  before  the  fall  of  the
Grenville  administration.  All  of  these  were  carried  out  by
Rockingham.  In  order  still  further  to  conciliate  him,  Grafton,
who  was  his  most  devoted  follower,  was  made  Secretary  of  State.
His  brother-in-law,  James  Grenville,  was  offered  one  of  the  Vice-
Treasurerships  of  Ireland.  Nuthall,  who  was  his  confidential
lawyer,  and  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  was  made  Solicitor
of  the  Treasury.  It  was  clearly  intimated  to  Pitt  that  Rocking-
ham and  his  colleagues  '  were  most  ready  to  be  disposed  of  as  he
pleased'andhe  wasexpressly  asked  to  place  himself  at  their  head.^
He  could  have  entered  the  Government  on  what  terms  he  wished,
and  could  without  difficulty  have  converted  the  Whig  party  from
a  struggling  minority  into  the  dominant  power  of  the  State.  The
importance  of  doing  so  was  self-evident.  As  Pitt  himself
declared,  'Faction  was  shaking  and  corruption  sapping  the
country  to  its  foundations.'  The  utter  disintegration  of  parties,
and  the  influence  of  the  Crown,  now  steadily  employed  in  dis-
solving connections  and  sowing  dissensions,  had  threatened  the
very  ruin  of  parliamentary  government,  had  created  both  at
home  and  in  the  colonies  a  mass  of  disaffection  which  had  hardly

'  K[\)&ra:ix\es  IJfe  of  RocMnghani, ma\irice's  Life  of  Shelhin-nc,  i.  3fil-
i.  312. AcMjj/tm;  i.  227-230 Titz- 371.

CE,  X.  NECESSITY OF A  STRONG G0VERX:MEXT.  99

been  equalled  since  the  accession  of  tlie  House  of  Brunswick,
had  brought  Parliament  into  contempt,  and  was  likely,  if  any
great  foreign  complication  arose,  to  lead  the  country  to  over-
whelming disaster.

It  has  often  been  said  that  the  democratic  character  which
Parliament  has  in  the  present  century  assumed  has  weakened  the
Executive,  and  produced  an  excessive  number  of  feeble  ministries,
but  in  no  period  of  English  history  was  this  evil  more  con-
spicuous than  in  the  first  years  of  George  III.  In  less  than
six  years  England  had  been  ruled  by  the  united  ministry  of
Pitt  and  Newcastle,  by  the  ministry  of  Newcastle  alone,  by  the
ministry  of  Bute,  by  the  ministry  of  Grenville,  and  afterwards
of  Grenville  and  Bedford,  and  lastly  by  that  of  Kockingham.  It
was  of  vital  importance  to  establish  once  more  a  system  of  firm
and  settled  government,  resting  on  an  undisputed  parliamentary
ascendency,  and  secure  from  the  intrigues  of  royalty  and  of
faction.  This  could  only  be  done  by  a  coalition  of  parties,  and
the  natural  lines  of  combination  were  very  clear.  On  most  im-
portant points  the  followers  of  Grenville  and  Bedford  agreed
with  the  Tories,  and  the  followers  of  Pitt  with  the  Whio-s,
Though  Grenville  and  Bedford  had  lately  proscribed  Bute,  the
political  affinity  was  so  strong  that  they  actually  made  overtures
to  him  in  1766,  which  he  rejected  Avith  much  contempt.  On
the  other  hand,  the  junction  of  Pitt  and  his  followers  with  the
genuine  Whigs  would  have  given  that  party  a  decisively  popular
bias,  and  would  have  brought  to  it  all  the  weight,  ability,  and
popularity  that  were  required  to  give  it  a  commanding  power
in  the  State.  Its  leaders  were  for  the  most  part  men  of  up-
right character  and  of  liberal  views,  and  unusually  free  from
the  taint  of  Parliamentary  corruption.  There  was  little  ability
in  the  party,  but  Charles  Townshend  only  wanted  firm  guidance
to  rise  very  high,  and  in  the  still  obscure  private  secretary  of
Lord  Kockingham  the  ministry  could  count  upon  a  follower
whose  genius  never  indeed  exhibited  the  meteoric  brilliancy  or
the  magnetic  and  commanding  power  of  that  of  Pitt,  but  who  far
surpassed  Pitt  and  all  other  English  poKticians  in  the  range  of  his
knowledge,  in  the  depth  and  comprehensiveness  of  his  judgment
in  the  sustained  and  exuberant  splendour  of  his  imagination.  On
nearly  all  the  great  questions  that  were  impending,  Pitt  agreed

100  ENGLA^S^D IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

with  Eockingliam  ;  he  agreed  with  him  about  the  cyder  tax,
about  general  warrants,  about  the  seizure  of  papers,  about  the
restoration  of  the  military  officers  who  had  been  removed  from
their  posts  for  their  votes  in  Parliament,  about  the  necessity  of
repealing  the  Stamp  Act.  The  most  serious  point  of  difference
was  the  Declaratory  Act  asserting  the  right  of  the  English  to  tax
America.  But  whatever  opinion  may  be  held  about  its  abstract
truth,  it  was  the  only  condition  on  which  the  great  practical
measure  of  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  could  be  carried.  The
Tories,  the  Grrenvilles,  the  Bedfords,  and  the  King  were  all
bitterly  hostile  to  the  Americans.  In  the  ministry  itself  the
Chancellor,  Charles  Townshend,  and  Barrington  shared  their
opinion.  Lord  Mansfield  had  privately  asserted  that  as  a  matter
of  law  the  English  Parliament  nad  an  undoubted  right  to  tax
the  colonies.  Lord  Hardwicke  was  strongly  of  the  same  opinion.
Public  opinion  in  the  country  and  in  Parliament  was  exasperated
by  the  resistance  of  America.  Considered  abstractedly,  it  would
no  doubt  have  been  better  if  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  simply
and  unconditionally  repealed,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  any  ministry
could  have  carried  such  a  measure ;  it  is  quite  certain  that
a  weak  one  could  not.  The  Rockingham  Ministry  was
very  weak,  and  it  was  weak  chiefly  through  the  abstinence
of  Pitt.

He  not  only  repelled  on  repeated  occasions  the  overtures  of
the  Whig  leaders,  but  he  also  shook  the  ministry  to  its  basis.
On  some  questions,  it  is  true,  he  cordially  supported  it.  He
seconded  the  resolution  of  Dowdeswell  for  remodelling  the  cyder
tax,  and  he  spoke  with  extraordinary  force  in  favour  of  re-
pealing the  Stamp  Act.  The  ministers,  with  their  usual  defer-
ence, had  carefully  consulted  his  wishes  about  the  repeal,'  but
he  openly  declared  his  want  of  confidence  in  them.  '  Con-
fidence,' he  said  in  a  characteristic  phrase,  '  is  a  plant  of
slow  -growth  in  an  aged  bosom ;  youth  is  the  season  of
credulity.'

The  reasons  for  his  conduct  were  probably  very  various.
Much  must  be  allowed  for  a  natural  character  which  was  morbidly
irritable  and  impracticable,  and  peculiarly  unfit  for  co-opera-
tion with  others.  'Nothing,'  wrote  Burke  in  May  17G5,  'but
'  All)cmarle's  L'lfc  (if  TtocMiKjhdin,  i.  209.

CH.  X.  EEFUSAL OF  PITT TO JOIN K0CKINGH.4JVI.  lUl

an  intractable  temper  in  your  friend  Pitt  can  prevent  a  most
admirable  and  lasting  system  from  being  put  together;  and
this  crisis  will  show  whether  pride  or  patriotism  be  predomi-
nant in  his  character,  for  you  may  be  assured  that  he  has  it  now
in  his  power  to  come  into  the  service  of  his  country  upon  any
])lan  of  politics  he  may  choose  to  dictate,  with  great  and  honour-
able terms  to  himself  and  to  every  friend  he  has  in  the  world,
and  with  such  a  stretch  of  power  as  will  be  equal  to  everything
but  absolute  despotism  over  the  King  and  kingdom.  A  few
days  will  probably  show  whether  he  will  take  this  part  or  that
of  continuing  on  his  back  at  Hayes  talking  fustian.' '  But  Pitt,
as  Lord  Hardwicke  once  said,  would  '  neither  lead  nor  be  driven.' ^
Constant  attacks  of  gout  had  prostrated  his  strength,  irritated
his  nerves  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  and  perhaps  produced  in
him  a  secret  desire  to  postpone  as  much  as  possible  a  return  to
office.  He  was  courted  on  all  sides,  and  personal  friendships
or  antipathies  greatly  governed  him.  His  friendship  with
Temple  was  now  rapidly  dissolving,  but  Temple  had  still  a  great
influence  over  his  mind,  and  it  had  for  some  time  been  steadily
employed  in  alienating  him  from  the  great  body  of  the  Whigs.
The  old  dislike  to  Newcastle  was  also  still  living,  and  Pitt  de-
clared peremptorily  that  he  could  never  have  '  any  confidence
in  a  system  where  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  has  influence.'^  The
fear  was  very  unreasonable,  for  the  influence  of  the  old  duke
was  nearly  gone,  and  he  professed  himself  ready  to  take  what-
ever course  Pitt  required.

There  were,  however,  a  few  real  differences  between  Pilt
and  the  Eockingham  Ministry.  On  the  capital  point  of  Ameri-
can taxation  they  differed  on  the  question  of  right,  though  they
agreed  on  the  question  of  policy.  Pitt  disliked  the  free-trade
views  of  Burke,  and  the  more  aristocratic  Whigs  disliked  the
City  agitation  which  Pitt  encouraged.  It  must  be  added  that
the  impending  dissolution  of  the  Eockingham  Ministry  would

'  Burie's  Correspondence,  i.  80.  to  Rockingham  which  does  the  writer
^  Albemarle's  Life  of  liockingham,  very  great  credit,  urging  that  a  junc-
i.  177.  tion  with  Pitt  was  absolutely  indis-
3  Chatham  Corrrspondcnce,  ii.  360.  pensable  to  the  Government,  and  that
See  too  p.  322. The  final rupture  he  was  himself  perfectly  ready  to  re-
seems  to  have  been  in  Oct.  1764  (ibid.  sign  office  in  order  to  facilitate  it.

pp.  293-208.) On  January  9, 176(5,  Albemarles  Life  of  Rocldngham, k

the  Duke  of  Newcastle  wrote  a  letter  261,  265.

102  ENGLANP IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  x.

almost  necessarily  throw  the  chief  power  into  the  hands  of  Pitt,
and  he  probably  miscalculated  greatly  his  power  of  forming  a
sti'ong  ministry.

He  was,  however,  also  actuated  by  another  reason,  which
drew  him  closer  to  the  King.  As  we  have  already  seen,'  from
an  early  period  of  his  career  he  had  rebelled  much  against
the  system  of  party  government,  and  in  this  respect  he  sym-
pathised strongly  with  the  doctrines  which  George  III.  had
imbibed  from  Bolingbroke.  JNIany  expressions  in  his  letters  show
that  his  real  desire  was  to  remain  isolated  and  unconnected,
that  he  wished  to  form  an  administration  of  able  men  drawn
from  every  quarter,  and  that  he  looked  with  great  dread  and
irritation  to  the  prospect  of  family  or  party  influence  narrowing
ministries  as  they  had  been  narrowed  in  the  days  of  Walpole,
The  cry  of  the  abolition  of  parties  was  one  which  had  been
raised  by  the  followers  of  the  King  at  the  very  beginning  of
the  reign,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  Burke  himself,  though  he
became  the  greatest  and  most  earnest  of  all  the  advocates  of
party  government,  appears  to  have  listened  to  it  with
some  momentary  favour.^  That  Pitt  should  have  felt  such
sentiments  was  very  natiu^al.  Party  government  in  the  latter
days  of  George  II.  had  assumed  some  of  its  worst  forms.
The  opponents  of  the  dominant  party  were  regarded  as  the
opponents  of  the  dynasty,  and  disaffection  was  thus  unnaturally
and  unnecessarily  prolonged.  In  the  absence  of  strong  popu-
lar influence  corrupt  family  influence  had  been  inordinately
increased,  and  the  amount  of  ability  at  the  disposal  of  the
Crown  very  unduly  limited.  It  was  natural  that  a  states-
man who  was  conscious  of  unrivalled  genius  and  of  unrivalled
popularity,  and  who  had  at  the  same  time  little  family  influence
and  but  few  personal  adherents,  should  have  revolted  against
the  constraints  imposed  by  the  organisation  of  the  great  Whig
families.  '  As  for  my  single  self,'  he  wrote  to  Newcastle  in  Oc-
tober 1764,  '  I  purpose  to  continue  acting  through  life  upon  the

'  See  p.  19.  all  good  men,  to  abolish  those  odious

*  See  a  very curious  passage  in  party  distinctions  [Whig  and  Tory]

the  historical  section  of  the  Annval  and  to  extend  the  royal  favour  and

Register  for  1702. *  From  the  begin-  protection  equally  to  all  his  Majesty's

ning  of  this  reign it  had  been  pro-  subjects.' — Annual  lietjistcr  1702,  p.

feesed,  with  the  general  applause  of  [17  j.

CH.  X.  PITT'S DISLIKE  TO PAETY.  103

best  convictions  I  am  able  to  form,  and  under  the  obligation
of  principles,  not  by  the  force  of  any  particular  bargains.  .  .  .
I  shall  go  to  the  House  free  from  stipulations  about  every
question  under  consideration.  .  .  .  Whatever  I  think  it  my
duty  to  oppose  or  to  promote,  I  shall  do  it  independent  of  the
sentiments  of  others.  ...  I  have  little  thoughts  of  beginning
the  world  again  upon  a  new  centre  of  union.  ...  I  have  no
disposition  to  quit  the  free  condition  of  a  man  standing  single,
and  daring  to  appeal  to  his  country  at  large  upon  the  sound-
ness of  his  principles  and  the  rectitude  of  his  conduct.'^  '  The
King's  pleasure,'  he  wrote  towards  the  end  of  the  Eockingham
ministry,  '  and  gracious  commands  alone  shall  be  a  call  to  me.
I  am  deaf  to  every  other  thing.' ^  'As  to  my  future  conduct,'
wrote  his  follower  Shelburne  to  Eockingham,  'your  lordship
will  pardon  me  if  I  say  "  measures,  not  men,"  will  be  the  rule
of  it.' 3

The  propriety  of  discouraging  party  distinctions,  and  en-
deavouring on  every  occasion  to  select  in  a  judicial  spirit  the
best  man  and  the  wisest  measure  irrespective  of  all  other  con-
siderations, has  so  plausible  a  sound  that  it  will  appear  to  many
little  less  than  a  truism.  No  reasonable  man  will  question
that  party  government  is  at  best  a  highly  artificial  system
■ — so  artificial  indeed  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  it  can  be
the  final  or  permanent  type  of  government  in  civilised  nations

' CJiatham  Corresnoiidence,ii.29G,  he  said 'that  he  wished  for  < he  sake

297.  On  Feb.  24,  1766,  when  Rocking-  of  his  dear  country  that  all  our  i'ac-

liam  had  been  making  a  new  indirect  t ions  might  cease ;  that  there  might

overture  to  Pitt,  the  latter  wTote  to  be  a  ministry  fixed  such  as  the  King

Shelburne:  'Lord  Rockingham's  plan  should  appoint and  the public ap-

appears  to  me  to  be  such  as  can  never  prove  .  .  .  that  if  ever  he  was  again

bring  things  to  a  satisfactory  conclu-  admitted  as  he  had  been  into  the  royal

sion;  his  tone  being  that  of  a  minister,  presence,  it  should  be  independent  of

master  of  the  Court  and  of  the  pub-  anypcrsonal  connections  whatsoever.'

lie,  making  openings  to  men  who  are  • — Bedford Correspondence, iii. 338.

seekers  of  offices  and  candidates  for  'Lord  Chatham,'  wrote Mitchell  in

ministry.  ...  In  one  word,  my  dear  Dec.  1766,  'declares  to  all  the  world

lord [he continued], I  shall never  tliat  his  great  point  is  to  destroy  fac-

set  my  foot  in  the  closet  biit  in  the  tion,  and  he  told  the  House  of  Lords

hope  of  rendering  the  King's  personal  the  other  day  "that  he  could  look

situation  not  unhappy,  as  well  as  his  the  proudest  connection  in  theface."'

business  not  unprosperous  ;  nor  will  I  — Chatliam  Correspondence,  iii.  138.
owe  my  coming  thither  to  any  Court  ^  E'itzmaurice's  Life  of  Shelburne,

cabal or  ministerial  connection.'- —  i.  382. See  too  his  very  similar  de-

('hatham  Correspond ence,  iii.  11,  12.  ckxration  in  1762. —  Albemarle's L^fe

In  April 1766, Rigby  wrote  to the  of  RocMngham,  i.  Inl.
Duke  of  P)edford  that  Pitt. had  made  '  Shclburnc's  Life,  i.  331.

a  kind  of  farewell  speech,'  in  which

10-i  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  x.

■ — and  that  it  has  many  evils  and  many  dangers.  It  is  a  great
evil  that  political  questions  should  be  decided  by  the  Legislature
on  a  double  or  a  false  issue,  each  member  speaking  of  their
intrinsic  merits  while  he  is  thinking  largely  of  their  relation
to  the  well-being  of  his  party.  It  is  a  great  evil  that  politicians
should  be  obliged  to  conceal,  or  attenuate,  or  even  deny  their
genuine  convictions  when  on  some  particular  occasion  the  course
which  appears  to  them  the  wisest  is  not  that  which  has  been
adopted  by  the  leaders  of  their  party.  It  is  a  great  evil  in  a
country  in  which  at  least  nine  out  of  ten  questions  have  no
real  connection  with  party  divisions,  that  men  of  the  greatest
administrative  ability  should  for  years  be  excluded  absolutely
from  the  management  of  affairs,  because  the  organisation  to
which  they  have  attached  themselves  is  politically  the  weakest.
Party  interests  often  run  counter  to  national  interests,  and
there  is  then  much  danger  lest  party  spirit  should  weaken
national  affection.  It  is  not  easy  for  an  Opposition,  in  the
full  ardour  of  conflict,  to  look  with  immixed  pleasure  upon
national  triumphs  that  are  due  to  the  policy  of  their  opponents,
or  to  deplore  very  bitterly  national  calamities  that  may  lead
themselves  speedily  to  power.  The  mixture  of  party  with  foreign
politics  has  sometimes  led  to  the  gravest  calamities,  and  the
deep  division  which  party  introduces  into  the  councils  of  a
nation  has  often  weakened  it  seriously  in  the  hour  of  danger,
diminished  the  amount  of  talent  and  energy  available  for  its
service,  and  induced  its  enemies  to  underrate  greatly  its  patriot-
ism and  its  strength.  In  a  perfect  government  the  management
of  affairs  would  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  men  who  were  not
only  eminent  for  their  ability  and  their  integrity,  but  who  also
made  it  their  sole  object  to  do  what  they  thought  best  for  their
country.  No  one  can  fail  to  observe  how  widely  party  govern-
ment diverges  from  this  ideal  by  the  inevitable  introduction  of
other  and  lower  motives  of  political  action.  Even  apart  from
the  necessities  of  co-operation,  and  from  the  desire  for  place
and  power,  the  keen  competition  of  parties  generates  a  kind  of
sporting  interest  like  fox-hunting  or  horse-racing,  which  becomes
to  many  the  strongest  and  most  absorbing  of  political  passions.
Those  who  are  nearest  to  the  arena,  those  who  are  brought  into
closest  contact  with the  chief  actors,  are naturallv  the  most

cii X.  i:vn,S OK I'AKTY GOVKfLN'MKNT.  105

Biiscepliblc  to  it,  ;uid  they  are  very  apt  to  regard  politics  as
little  more  than  a  game  played  by  rival  leaders,  and  every
measure  as  merely  a  good  or  bad  move  in  the  race  for  power.
Party  government  thus  never  fails  to  introduce  a  large  amount
of  insincerity  and  unreality  into  politics.  ^Vhen  there  are  two
plausible  courses  to  be  pursued,  the  Government  takes  the  one
and  the  Opposition  is  almost  bound  to  defend  the  other.  The
Government  have  the  advantage  of  the  first  choice  and  the  most
authentic  information.  The  Opposition  have  the  advantage  of
a  somewhat  later  experience.  Whenever  any  considerable  amount
of  discontent  against  the  conduct  of  the  Government  exists  in
the  country,  whether  it  be  reasonable  or  unreasonable,  the
Opposition  is  usually  practically  obliged  to  constitute  itself  its
representative  and  exponent.

The  gravity  of  these  evils  cannot  easily  be  over-estimated.
A  close  observer  of  English  political  life  can  hardly  fail  to  feel
how  rarely  even  the  greatest  intellects  can  preserve  their  full
sanity  of  judgment  in  the  fierce  excitement  of  a  party  conflict,
and  how  dangerous  it  is  that  public  affairs  should  in  critical
moments  be  administered  by  men  in  whom  that  sanity  is  in  any
degree  impaired.  The  transition,  too,  from  opposition  to  power
is,  under  the  system  of  party  government,  surrounded  with
some  peculiar  difficulties.  When  a  party  is  in  opposition  the
party  element  in  its  policy  is  usually  strongly  accentuated.
Its  leaders  must  maintain  specially,  keenly,  and  vividly  the
interests  and  opinions  of  the  particular  classes  that  support
it.  But  once  it  arrives  at  power  its  point  of  view  is  widely
changed.  It  inherits  and  must  carry  out  lines  of  conduct  which
it  had  stubbornly  opposed ;  it  must  preserve  the  essential  con-
tinuity of  the  national  policy ;  it  becomes  the  representative
not  merely  of  one  section  but  of  all  sections  of  the  people,  and
while  it  retains  the  organisation,  it  must  discard  or  subdue
many  of  the  characteristics  of  a  party.  The  true  spirit  in  which
a  statesman  should  guide  the  government  of  his  country  is  not
that  of  a  missionary  or  an  advocate,  or  an  avenger,  or  an  ex-
perimentalist, but  of  a  trustee.  It  is  his  business  to  adapt
institutions  to  the  wants  of  men  with  opinions  or  in  stages  of
civilisation  widely  different  from  his  own ;  to  provide  for  the
well-being  of  systems  with  which  he  has  no  personal  sympathy;

lOG  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  x.

to  protect  interests  -which  he  never  would  have  created  :  to
carry  out  engagements  into  which  he  never  would  have  entered.
Personal  and  even  party  ideals  can  have  only  a  faint  and  casual
influence  upon  his  policy.  The  spirit  of  conflict  and  the  sec-
tional habits  of  thought  which  party  opposition  especially  de-
velops must  be  lowered  or  must  disappear.  He  must  cultivate
above  all  things  that  form  of  imagination  which  reproduces
habits  of  thought  and  feeling  widely  dilferent  from  his  own,
and  realises  the  conditions  of  the  happiness  of  men  in  many
different  circumstances,  of  man}'  different  types  and  classes,
and  with  many  different  beliefs.

At  the  same  time,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in  a
former  chapter,  party  divisions,  though  in  a  large  degree
artificial,  have  some  real  or  natural  basis,  and  are  in  some  form
or  measure  the  inevitable  and  almost  spontaneous  products  of
representative  government.  Each  party  usually  represents
a  special  theory  of  government  or  doctrine  or  ideal,  which
more  or  less  colours  a  great  part  of  political  judgments.
Each  party  is  the  special  representative  of  different  class
interests,  and  reflects  with  some  degree  of  fidelity  different
types  of  character  and  intellect.  As  long  as  these  differences
exist  the  system  of  party  must  grow  up ;  and  its  political  ad-
vantages are  very  great.  No  other  method  has  ever  been  devised
which  is  equally  efficacious  in  securing  the  fidelity  of  represen-
tatives. A  man  who  would  have  little  scruple  in  changing  his
opinions  if  he  were  an  isolated  individual,  or  in  yielding  to  the
blandishments  or  the  temptations  of  power,  will  be  much  less
likely  to  abandon  an  organised  body  of  men  to  whom  he  has
pledged  his  allegiance,  and  to  enter  formally  into  new  connec-
tions or  alliances.  By  pledging  successive  generations  to  the
advocacy  of  particular  measures  or  to  the  attainment  of  some
political  ideal,  the  system  of  party  organisation  greatly  increases
the  probability  of  their  ultimate  triumph,  and  it  also  secures
the  representation  in  an  organised  form  of  the  different  opinions
and  class  interests  of  the  nation.

B\xi  its  chief  advantages,  and  those  which  make  it  indispen-
sable in  parliamentary  government,  are  that  it  gives  adminis-
trations some  measure  of  permanence  and  stability,  and  that  it
places  the  habitual  direction  of  affairs  in  the  hands  of  competent

CM.  X  N]CC1-:SSITY 01'" PAKTY.  1(J7

le;ulcTs.  A  (lovernincut  (li'jx'iiding  for  its  exislciico  on  the  iso-
lated and  unbiassed  judgment  of  some  GOO  individuals  woixld  be
an  impossibility.  It  could  never  count  for  a  week  upon  its
tenure  of  otfice.  It  could  never  make  an  engagement  for  the
future.  It  could  never  enter  into  any  course  of  sustained  and
continuous  policy.  In  order  that  a  government  should  faithfully
discharge  its  functions  it  must  have  sufficient  stability  to  sur-
mount difficulties,  to  brave  transient  unpopularity,  to  survive
occasional  blunders.  Even  if  the  House  of  Commons  consisted  of
the  six  hundred  wisest  men, a  ministry  dependent  on  so  many
unconnected  judgments  would  be  absolutely  unfit  to  conduct  the
business  of  the  nation  ;  and  the  more  the  actual  composition
of  the  House  is  considered  the  stronger  becomes  the  argument
for  disciplined  political  action.  The  House  of  Commons  usually
contains  four  or  five  men  of  extraordinary  statesmanlike  genius.
It  contains,  perhaps,  eighty  or  ninety  others  who,  from  long
parliamentary  experience,  from  the  education  of  county  or
municipal  government,  or  from  natural  ability  improved  by  read-
ing, are  eminently  sound  judges  in  politics,  and  count  among
their  number  many  men  quite  capable  of  conducting  depart-
ments of  government  and  defending  their  policy  in  Parlia-
ment. It  contains,  also,  a  few  men  who,  without  any  general
legislative  knowledge  or  capacity,  are  able,  from  the  circum-
stances of  their  lives,  to  throw  great  light  on  special  subjects,  such
as  agriculture,  military  organisation,  navigation,  the  money
market,  or  the  condition  of  India  or  the  colonies.  There  are
also  a  large  number  of  la^vyers  who  are  authorities  on  technical
questions  of  law,  but  whose  general  habits  of  thought  and  reason-
ing are  essentially  unpolitical,  whose  time  and  studies  are  mainly
devoted  to  another  sphere,  who  usually  regard  the  House  of  Com-
mons simply  as  a  stepping-stone  to  professional  promotion,  but
who,  on  account  of  their  practice  in  speaking,  and  of  that  freedom
from  diffidence  which  is  a  characteristic  of  their  profession,  are
thrown  into  an  unfortunate  prominence.  But  the  great  majority
of  members  are  perfectly  incompetent  to  conduct  independently
legislative  business,  or  to  form  opinions  of  any  value  on  the
many  intricate  and  momentous  questions  submitted  to  rhem.
There  are  landlords  or  sons  of  landlords  brought  into  the  House
on  account  of  the  imjxutancc  of  their  properties  or  of  their

108  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

local  popularity,  who  have  never  made  the  smallest  study  of
the  political  conditions  of  the  country,  or  of  the  general  prin-
ciples that  underlie  political  questions,  who  value  the  House  as
a  pleasant  club,  and  their  legislative  functions  as  giving  them
an  honorary  leadership  in  their  counties.  There  are  manu-
facturers the  spring  and  summer  of  whose  days  have  been
wholly  spent  in  amassing  wealth,  and  who,  having  succeeded  in
business  and  obtained  the  influence  which  natiually  belongs
to  great  employers  of  labour,  aspire  in  their  old  age  to  such
social  consequence  as  Parliament  can  afford.  There  are  place-
hunters,  demagogues  and  intriguers  whose  sole  object  is  to  push
their  fortunes,  and  who  are  ready  to  spread  their  sails  to  any
breeze,  and  to  adopt  any  cause  which  is  conducive  to  their
interests.  And  this  strangely  composite  assembly  has  to  decide
not  only  ([uestions  of  home  and  domestic  policy,  but  also  ques-
tions of  foreign  policy  of  the  most  delicate  description,  questions
on  which  accurate  and  extensive  knowledge  of  circumstances
and  conditions  wholly  unlike  those  of  England  is  imperatively
necessary,  questions  on  which  the  promptest  and  most  decisive
action  is  often  required.  To  suppose  that  a  government  de-
pendent on  this  great  mass  of  unguided,  incompetent,  and  some-
times dishonest  judgments,  can  act  under  such  circumstances
with  the  requisite  intelligence  and  firmness,  or  can  command
the  respect  and  confidence  of  foreign  governments,  is  absurd.
The  sole  way  of  enabhng  a  popular  assembly  to  exercise
supreme  power  with  safety  is  to  divide  it  into  great,  coherent,
disciplined  party  organisations.  When  such  organisations
exist,  they  will  necessarily  be  directed  by  the  ablest  men,
who  become  responsible  for  their  guidance,  who  can  count  upon
the  habitual  support  of  a  large  body  of  followers,  and  who
therefore  represent  a  permanent  calculable  force  in  the  political
world.

These  considerations  apply  to  every  case  in  which  a  Parlia-
ment is  the  most  powerful  body  in  the  State,  though  it  must  be
acknowledged  that  they  have  a  still  greater  force  in  our  own  day
than  they  had  under  George  III.  Parliament  is  now  a  much
larger  body.  The  Irish  union  added  105  members,  and  the
average  attendance  of  English  and  Scotch  has  also  been  greatly
increased. Under  the  old  system  so  many  members  had  small

cii.  X.  IXCRRASINO IMPORTANCE OF PARTV.  109

constituencies  completely  under  their  control,  und  cvcm  in
large  constituencies  the  means  of  supervision  were  so  scanty,
that  a  very  large  proportion  of  members  were  usually  absent,
and  public  business  was  practically  conducted  by  a  compara-
tively small  body.  At  the  same  time,  while  the  average  parlia-
mentary attendance  has  been  greatly  raised,  there  has  been  no
corresponding  elevation  of  the  average  of  parliamentary  ability.
Besides  this,  under  the  old  system,  members  who  were  elected
were  at  least  free  to  exercise  their  judgments.  Now  great
bodies  of  uneducated  constituents,  newspaper  writers,  dema-
gogues, local  agitators,  are  perpetually  interfering  with  each
question  as  it  arises,  and  putting  pressure  on  the  judgment  of
the  representatives.  Questions  of  the  most  difficult  foreign
policy,  involving  consequences  of  the  most  various,  intricate,
and  far-reaching  nature,  are  treated  in  great  popular  agita-
tions by  multitudes  who  have  no  real  feeling  of  political
responsibility,  and  no  detailed  and  minute  knowledge  of
the  subjects  on  which  they  are  pronouncing.  If  the  domestic
and  still  more  the  foreign  policy  of  the  country  is  to  be  at  the
mercy  of  these  violent  gusts  of  ignorant,  irresponsible,  interested
agitation,  nothing  but  ruin  can  be  predicted ;  and  it  is  only  the
firm  coherence  of  party  organisation  that  gives  statesmen  the
power  of  resisting  them.  It  must  be  added,  too,  that  Parlia-
ment encroaches  much  more  than  formerly  on  the  province  of
the  Executive,  and  meddles  much  more  habitually  in  the  details
of  measures.  For  these  reasons  parties  appear  to  me  not  merely
expedient  but  absolutely  necessary,  if  the  House  of  Commons
is  to  retain  its  present  position  in  the  State.  A  House  of
Commons  without  clearly  defined  parties  might  exist,  but  it
could  not  be  safely  entrusted  with  the  virtual  government  of
the  country.

It  is  easy  to  maintain  the  discipline  of  party  organisa-
tions when  they  represent  a  clear  division  of  principles  and
measures.  It  is  much  more  difficult  in  periods  of  political
languor,  when  there  is  no  pressing  question  at  issue,  when  the
old  grounds  of  controversy  have  been  exhausted  and  new  ones
have  not  yet  arisen,  and  when  the  keenest  observers  of  political
conflicts  can  detect  but  little  real  difference  of  principle  or  even
of  tendency. At  such  times  the  true  function  of  the  party  in

110  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

opposition  is  to  restrain  the  Government  from  isolated  mistakes,
to  expose  such  mistakes  when  they  are  committed;  and  if
through  blunders  or  personal  unpopularity  the  Government  has
fallen  into  discredit^,  to  be  prepared  to  take  its  place  and  to  carry
on  the  administration  on  the  same  general  lines,  but  with  greater
dexterity  of  management.  This  is  the  contingency  for  which
under  such  circumstances  an  Opposition  should  wait.  The
great  majority  of  the  mistakes  of  governments  are  at  all  times
unconnected  with  party  principles,  and  a  body  whose  function
is  to  criticise  and  prevent  them  is  discharging  a  duty  of  the
first  importance.  No  doctrine  in  modern  politics  is  more  mis-
chievous than  that  an  Opposition  is  bound  to  justify  its  separate
existence  by  showing  that  it  differs  on  broad  questions  of  prin-
ciple and  policy  from  the  party  in  power.  Among  the  greatest
dangers  of  modern  constitutional  governments  is  the  temptation
presented  to  Oppositions  to  go  about  looking  for  a  cry,  seeking
for  party  purposes  to  force  on  changes  for  which  there  is  no  real
and  spontaneous  demand.

Although  public  opinion  was  quite  ripe  for  some  measures
of  reform,  the  lines  of  political  division  in  the  first  years  of
George  III.  were  strangely  confused,  and  party  had  in  a  great
degree  degenerated  into  faction.  There  was  little  of  the  natural
union  of  politicians  through  community  of  political  principles
and  aims ;  but  there  were  several  distinct  groups  united  through
purely  personal  motives — through  attachment  to  a  particular
nobleman,  or  a  desire  to  secure  for  particular  families  a  mono-
poly of  power.  As  long  as  a  very  large  proportion  both  of  the
county  and  borough  votes  were  at  the  command  of  a  few  great
noblemen,  who  were  closely  connected  by  relationship  or  friend-
ship, it  was  inevitable  that  this  form  of  influence  should  prevail
in  Parliament ;  and  the  evil  lay  not  in  the  existence  but  in
the  great  multiplication  of  these  groups,  and  in  the  purely
personal  motives  that  usually  actuated  them.  The  first  great
object  should  have  been  to  draw  a  distinct  line  of  policy  ac-
cording to  which  these  scattered  fragments  might  be  combined.
The  temptation  of  politicians  in  popular  governments  is  to
outrun,  but  in  oligarchical  governments  to  lag  behind,  genuine
public  opinion  ;  and  there  were  questions  of  the  gravest  and
most  pressing  kind  which  had  long  been  calling  for  the  atten-

CK.  X.  OPPOSITE VIKWS OK iUHiKK AND ITIT.  Ill

lioii  1)1'  I  he  li'i;isl:iturs.  Such  wore  ilu;  iuiulocjuacy  of  llit;  popular
element  and  the  gross  and  notorious  corruption  in  Parliament,
and  tlie  appearance  within  its  walls  of  an  organised  Court  party
distinct  from  the  party  of  administration.  By  pressing  these
questions,  all  stattjsmen  would  soon  be  obliged  to  take  a  side,  and
it  was  probable  that  the  excessive  subdivision  of  parties  would
s])(>o(lily  disappear.

This  was  very  much  tlie  policy  which  was  advocated  by
J)urke  as  the  spokesman  of  the  Rockingham  Whigs.  He  main-
tained that  the  habit  of  systematic  co-operation  between  poli-
ticians was  to  be  encouraged  rather  than  discouraged  ;  that
the  personal  attachments  and  connections  which  cemented  it
were  very  useful  in  government,  but  that  it  was  necessary,  in
the  face  of  the  mass  of  discontent  which  was  smouldering  in
the  nation,  and  of  the  growing  corruption  and  inefficiency  of
Parliament,  that  each  party  should  have  a  distinct  line  of
policy.  As  time  went  on,  these  lines,  as  we  shall  see,  became
clearer  and  clearer ;  and  the  writings  of  Burke  probably  con-
tributed more  than  any  other  single  influence  to  define  them.
Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  while  loudly  proclaiming  the  necessity
of  strengthening  the  popular  element  in  Parliament,  imagined
it  to  be  both  possible  and  useful  to  break  up  absolutely  the
small  bodies  which  had  grown  up  around  the  great  families.
He  regarded  with  some  reason  the  selfishness,  the  incapacity,
the  intrigues,  and  the  jealousies  of  the  great  nobles  as  the
main  cause  of  the  weakness,  anarchy,  and  corruption  of  recent
English  politics.  He  imagined  that  by  selecting  subordinate
ministers  from  men  of  the  most  various  factions  he  might,
with  the  assistance  of  the  King,  dissolve  these  factions,  subdue
all  serious  opposition,  and  by  the  ascendency  of  his  own  genius,
character,  and  popularity,  give  a  firm  and  consistent  movement
to  the  administration.'

In  accordance  with  these  principles,  the  new  ministry  was
formed  of  politicians  drawn  from  the  most  opposite  quarters  and
encumbered  by  the  most  opposite  antecedents.  Some  of  them
were  men  of  great  ability  and  position  ;  but  they  were  men  who
in  the  divisions  that  had  grown  out  of  the  Wilkes  case,  and  out

'  The  judgment  of  Walpole  when  markable  instance  of  his  political  sa-
the  ministry  was  first  formed  is  a  re- gacity. •  The  plan  will  probably  be

112  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  x.

of  the  Stamp  Act,  had  recently  pursued  the  most  divergent
courses,  and  who  in  many  instances  had  shown  a  strange  vacilla-
tion of  character  and  opinion.  The  King's  friends  mustered
strongly  in  the  lower  offices,  and  they  also  held  several  posts
of  commanding  imj)ortance.  Lord  Northington  exchanged  the
Chancellorship  for  the  post  of  President  of  the  Council,  and  as
the  new  office  was  somewhat  less  lucrative  than  the  former  one
he  obtained  in  addition  the  grant  of  a  pension  of  4,000Z.  a  year,
from  the  time  he  quitted  office,  as  well  as  a  reversion  of  Clerk
of  the  Hanaper  for  two  lives.  Lord  Barrington  was  still  Secre-
tary of  War.  Charles  Townshend,  whose  support  of  the  policy
of  taxing  America  was  no  secret,  was  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-
chequer. Lord  North,  who  had  for  some  time  been  rising  to
notice  as  one  of  the  ablest  defenders  of  the  Court  policy
about  Wilkes  and  about  America,  was  made  Joint  Paymaster  of
the  Forces.  His  colleague,  George  Cooke,  is  said  never  to  have
even  spoken  to  him  till  they  were  united  in  the  same  office.
Side  by  side  with  them  sat  the  new  Chancellor,  Lord  Camden,
who  in  the  Wilkes  case  and  in  the  case  of  America  had  identi-
fied himself  with  the  most  popular  opinions.  Conway,  who  in
the  last  ministry  had  introduced  and  carried  the  repeal  of  the
Stamp  Act,  was  induced  to  abandon  the  Eockingham  party,  and
retain  his  old  office  of  Secretary  of  State.  Shelburne  and  Barre,
who  were  now  closely  attached  to  Pitt,  and  who  had  distin-
guished themselves  by  their  uncompromising  opposition  to
American  taxation,  were  both  in  the  ministry,  the  first  as
Secretary  of  State,  the  second  as  a  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland.
Lord  Grranby  was  made  Commander-in-Chief.  The  head  of
the  Treasury  would  naturally  have  fallen  to  Pitt,  but  he
emphatically  refused  it.  He  felt,  as  the  result  showed  with
too  good  reason,  that  his  health  made  him  wholly  unfit  for
a  post  of  great  official  duty,  and,  though  the  real  head  of
the  Government,  he  held  only  the  almost  sinecure  office  of
Privy  Seal.  The  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  had  so  recently  re-
volted against  Eockingham,  was  made  First  Lord  of  the
Treasury. When  only  twenty-four,  Grafton  had  been  Groom

lo  pick  and  cnll  from  all  quarters,  and  thorough-bass  of  drums  and  trumpets,

break  all  parties  as  much  as  possible.  and  is  not  made  for  peace.' — To  Mon<

From  this  moment  I  date  the  wane  tagu,  July  10,  17C6.
of  Mr.  Pitt's  glor}- ;  he  will  want  tlie

en.  X.  PITT QUARRELS WITH TKMPLE.  113

of  the  Stole  to  Crcorge  III.  when  he  was  the  Prince  of  vVales,
;nid  his  courily  nuinners,  as  well  as  a  certain  ductility  of
principles,  had  made  him  peculiarly  acceptable  to  the  King,
but  had  not  secured  him  from  being  deprived  of  the  Lord-
Lieutenancy  of  his  county  for  his  opposition  to  the  peace.  His
great  position,  his  very  considerable  powers  of  speech,  and
the  unbounded  admiration  he  professed  for  Pitt,  explained
his  promotion  ;  but  he  hated  business,  he  was  passionately
devoted  to  field  sports,  and  he  had  neither  the  industry
nor  the  firmness  that  were  required  for  the  head  of  a  Govern-
ment.

In  this  strangely  incoherent  ministry  Temple  had  no  place.
His  influence  over  his  brother-in-law  had  dming  the  last  few
months  been  most  disastrously  displayed  ;  but  the  relations
between  them  had  been  rapidly  becoming  strained.  They
differed  about  the  Stamp  Act ;  for  Temple  on  this  question
agreed  with  his  brother  George  Grenville.  They  differed  about
Wilkes ;  for  Pitt,  though  condemning  the  legal  proceedings  of
which  he  was  the  object,  never  concealed  his  contempt  for  that
demagogue.  They  diflfered  in  party  politics  ;  for  Temple  was
now  steadily  gravitating  towards  Grenville.  At  the  same  time,
the  popularity  which  he  had  lately  enjoyed  on  account  of
his  connection  with  "Wilkes  had  raised  his  pretensions  to  the
highest  point.  Pitt  offered  to  place  him  at  the  head  of  the
Treasury ;  but  refused  to  grant  him  an  equal  share  in  nomi-
nating to  the  other  posts.  Temple  was  bitterly  offended,
broke  oflf  the  conference  in  anger,  and  began  to  inspire
virulent  libels  against  his  brother-in-law.  In  an  anonjTnous
pamphlet  on  the  other  side  there  occurred  a  phrase  which  was
much  noticed  for  its  happiness  of  expression,  and  in  which
critics  imagined  that  they  could  trace  the  hand  of  Pitt :  '  Had
Lord  Temple  not  fastened  himself  upon  Mr.  Pitt's  train,  he
might  have  crept  out  of  life  with  as  little  notice  as  he  crept  in,
and  gone  off  with  no  other  degree  of  credit  than  that  of  adding
a  single  unit  to  the  bills  of  mortality.'  The  secession  of  Temple
contributed,  indeed,  to  make  the  Government  more  popular
with  the  King;  it  relieved  Pitt  from  one  of  his  worst  ad-
visers, but  the  whole  Grenville  connection  were  now  united  in
opposition.

VOL.  III.  I

114  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

Much  mo'e  fatal  to  the  ministry  was  the  news  that  Pitt
was  resolved  to  abandon  the  House  of  Commons,  and,  as  Earl
of  Chatham,  to  take  his  seat  among  the  Lords.  His  promotion
to  the  peerage  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  his  acceptance
of  the  post  of  Privy  Seal,  as  that  office  was  always  held  by
a  peer,'  and  it  was  probably  due  to  a  well-founded  conviction
that  his  health  was  so  broken  and  his  nervous  system  so
shattered  that  it  was  simply  impossible  for  him  to  conduct
public  business  in  the  House  of  Commons.  But  he  soon  found,
as  Pulteney  had  found  before,  how  ruinous  such  an  honour
may  be  to  a  popular  statesman.  The  main  secret  of  his  un-
rivalled influence  over  the  people  was  the  conviction  that  he
owed  his  power  to  their  favour ;  that  in  the  midst  of  the  cor-
ruption of  an  essentially  aristocratic  Government  he  was  the
great  representative  of  the  democracy  of  England.  His  pension
had  for  a  time  obscured  his  popularity ;  but  it  soon  returned,
and  his  unrivalled  influence  in  the  House  of  Commons  was
unshaken.  But  now,  at  last,  the  spell  was  broken.  The  re-
vulsion of  feeling  was  immediate  and  irrevocable.  The  City,
where  he  had  lately  been  idolised,  refused  to  present  an  address.
The  lamps  which  had  already  been  placed  around  the  Monu-
ment, for  an  illumination  in  honour  of  his  return  to  office,  were
at  once  removed.  Shorn  of  the  popularity  which  had  been  the
chief  element  of  his  power,  he  passed  into  an  assembly  which
was  eminently  uncongenial  to  his  eloquence,  while  in  the
House  of  Commons  Charles  Townshend  alone  was  able  to  en-
counter Grenville  and  Burke ;  and  Townshend,  in  spite  of
his  extraordinary  abilities,  had  all  the  vanity  of  a  woman  and
all  the  levity  of  a  child.  '  The  City,'  wrote  Sir  Robert  Wilmot,
'  have  brought  in  their  verdict  of  felo  de.  se  against  William,
Earl  of  Chatham.'  ^  '  I  wish,'  wrote  Chesterfield  to  his  son,
'  I  could  send  you  all  the  pamphlets  and  half-sheets  that
swarm  here  upon  the  occasion ;  but  that  is  impossible,  for
every  week  would  make  a  ship's  cargo.  Tt  is  certain  that
Mr.  Pitt  has  by  his  dignity  of  Earl  lost  the  greater  part  of
bis  popularity,  especially  in  the  City  ;  and  I  believe  the  Oppo-
sition will  be  very  strong,  and  perhaps  prevail  next  session
in  the  House  of  Commons,  there  being  now  nobody  there
'  Thackeray's  Life  of  Chat/ia:ii,  ii.  81. ^  Chatham  drre.tjwndence,  iii.  28

rii.  X.  HIS RELATIONS WITH ROCKINCnAM.  115

who  has  the  authority  and  ascendency  over  them  that  Pitt
had.' '

At  every  step  the  difficulties  of  Chatham  increased.  He
had  at  all  times  remarkably  few  personal  adherents.  In  one  of
his  conversations  in  17G2  he  represented  himself  as  so  isolated
in  Parliament  that  he  had  no  one  except  the  Clerk  to  speak  to ;
and  just  before  his  second  ministry  he  described  himself,  with
the  gross  bad  taste  into  which  he  occasionally  fell,  as  '  standing
like  our  first  parents,  naked,  but  not  ashamed.'  The  politicians
whose  opinions  in  general  agreed  the  best  with  his  own  were
those  who  were  attached  to  Rockingham,  and  he  wished,  while
breaking  up  the  Rockingham  organisation,  to  retain  the  ser-
vices of  the  chief  members  of  the  party.  Rockingham  appears
to  have  acted  with  great  moderation.  He  advised  those  of  his
followers  who  were  not  removed  by  Chatham  to  remain  in
office,  and  many  great  noblemen  of  the  connection  accordingly
remained  in  posts  which  were  chiefly  honorary.  But  after  the
conduct  of  Chatham  during  the  late  ministry  cordial  co-opera-
tion was  impossible.  Chatham  visited  Rockingham  ;  but  the
latter  positively  refused  to  see  him.^  Dowdeswell,  whose  finan-
cial capacity  was  very  considerable,  and  who  was  much  respected
in  the  House  of  Commons,  was  strongly  pressed  to  join  the
Government,  either  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  or  as
Joint  Paymaster,  but  he  absolutely  refused.^  Edmund  Burke,
whose  splendid  genius  was  rising  rapidly  above  the  horizon,
might  have  had  a  seat  at  the  Board  of  Trade  ;  but  he  remained
faithful  to  his  leader  and  to  his  party.*

It  was  unfortunate,  too,  that  the  ministry  was  formed  at  a
period  of  great  and  general  distress.  The  harvest  had  been
unusually  bad ;  the  price  of  corn  rose  with  ominous  rapidity.
In  every  part  of  England  bread  riots  took  place.  Flour  mills
were  destroyed ;  corn,  bread,  and  other  necessaries  were  in
many  places  seized  by  the  populace  and  sold  at  low  prices,  and
several  lives  were  lost  in  the  western  counties  in  collisions
between  the  soldiers  and  the  mob.  The  jails  were  filled  with
prisoners,  and  discontent  was  wide  and  bitter. The  Govern-

'  Chatham,  Correspon(lence,  \n.2\.  *  Ibid. p. 111. Prior's TA/c  of

• Gvenrille  Papers,  iii.  28S.  Bvrltc,  i.  103.

'  Chathom  Co7'n:tjj<i/i/iv>UT,'m.2'2,2ii.

I  2

116  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  rn.  x.

ment,  according  to  the  unwise  custom  of  the  time,  issued  a
proclamation  in  September  1766  for  putting  in  force  an  old
statute  against  forestallers,  regraters,  and  engrossers  of  corn ;
and  this  measure  proving  ineffectual,  they  thought  it  necessary
to  prohibit  the  export  of  corn.  By  an  Act  of  Charles  II.
corn  might  be  legally  exported  from  England  as  long  as  the-
home  price  was  under  o3s.  4cZ.  a  quarter,  and  this  limit  had
not  yet  been  attained ;  but  as  the  price  was  rapidly  rising,  and
as  famine  was  approaching,  the  ministers  thought  it  necessary
to  anticipate  the  legal  period  of  prohibition.  The  proper
machinery  for  effecting  this  was,  of  course,  an  Act  of  Parlia-
ment. But  Parliament  was  not  sitting,  and  there  were
serious  objections  to  summoning  it  as  quickly  as  might  be  re-
quired. Under  these  circumstances,  an  order  of  Council  was
issued  laying  an  embargo  on  corn.  The  act  was  obviously
beyond  the  law  ;  but  under  ordinary  circumstances  it  would
probably  have  excited  no  comment,  for  it  was  called  forth  by  a
grave,  pressing",  and  acknowledged  necessity,  and  Parliament
was  perfectly  ready  to  ratify  what  was  done.  Chatham,  in  a
very  reasonable  and  moderate  speech,  and  in  language  which
was  perfectly  constitutional,  defended  it  as  '  an  act  of  power
justifiable  before  Parliament  on  the  ground  of  necessity;'  but
Northington  contended  that  under  such  circumstances  the  pro-
clamation was  legally  as  well  as  morally  justifiable,  and  Camden
added  that,  at  worst,  the  measure  was  'but  a  forty  days'
tyranny.'  Mansfield  at  once  saw  his  advantage,  and,  assuming
the  position  of  the  champion  of  law  against  prerogative,  he
answered  with  crushing  force.

In  the  Commons  the  debates  were  even  more  damaging
to  the  ministry.  Beckford,  who  was  one  of  the  most  intimate
friends  of  Chatham,  and  who  was  sometimes  put  forward  to
speak  in  his  name,  declared  that  '  if  the  public  was  in  danger,
the  King  has  a  dispensing  power,  with  the  advice  of  the
Council,  whenever  the  salus  populi  requires  it.'  It  is  not
probable  that  he  meant  anything  very  different  from  what
would  now  be  generally  acknowledged,  that  extreme  cases
sometimes  arise  in  which  it  is  the  duty,  and  therefore  the
right,  of  ministers,  at  their  own  peril,  and  subject  to  the  sub-
sequent judgment  of  Parliament,  to  set  aside  the  law;  but  his

cu.  X.  ARROGANCE  OF  CHATHAM.  117

expressions  were  plainly  inaccurate,  and  they  might  be  easily
construed  into  a  revival  of  the  dispensing  doctrine  of  the
Stuarts.  Grenville  moved  that  the  words  should  be  taken
down,  and  Bcckford  was  ultimately  obliged  to  retract  them.
A  Bill  waa  brought  in  by  Conway  to  indemnify  those  who  acted
under  the  proclamation  ;  but  Grenville  maintained  that  the  act
of  indemnity  must  include  the  ministers  who  advised  as  well  as
the  officials  who  acted  under  the  proclamation.  The  ministers
accepted  this  correction,  and  Chatham  especially  recommended
that  the  Act  should  be  '  made  as  strong  as  possible ; '  but  the
whole  transaction  raised  a  great  deal  of  angry  and  exaggerated
outcry  against  his  administration.'

It  was  evidently  necessary  to  strengthen  it,  but  no  minister
was  ever  less  fitted  than  Chatham  to  conciHate  opponents
or  to  perform  the  delicate  functions  of  party  management.
His  colleagues  complained  that  he  consulted  no  one  in  his
nominations,  that  he  took  the  most  important  steps  without
their  knowledge,  that  they  were  often  wholly  ignorant  of  the
policy  he  designed.  The  letters  of  his  opponents  were  full  of
complaints  of  '  the  hauteur  with  which  Lord  Chatham  treats
all  mankind  ; '  of  '  the  disgust  which  extended  very  wide  among
the  principal  families  of  the  kingdom  ; '  of  '  the  insolent  be-
haviour of  the  minister  to  the  first  nobility  of  the  kingdom.'
Continually  harassed  by  the  conflicting  pretensions  of  titled
beggars,  whose  sole  merit  lay  in  their  properties  and  their
names,  he  met  them  with  a  pride  which  was  beyond  the  pride
of  birth  or  wealth,  and  he  made  personal  enemies  at  every  step.
In  the  House  of  Commons  the  Government  was  especially
weak.  When  Charles  Townshend  brought  forward  his  first
budget,  Grenville  and  Dowdeswell  combined  to  reduce  the
land-tax  from  4s.  to  3s.  in  the  pound,  and  by  the  assistance  of
the  county  members  they  carried  their  motion  by  a  majority
of  18.  This  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  instance  since
the  Revolution  of  a  minister  being  defeated  on  a  money
Bill,  and  it  is  a  significant  illustration  of  the  declining
populai-ity  of  Chatham,  that  on  this  occasion  '  most  of  those

'  7  Geoi'fje  TTl.  cap.  vii. See  an  letter from Flood to Charlemont

account  of  the  whole  transaction  in  a  (^Flood's  Letters,  ix.). See  too  Chat-

letter  from  Grenville  himself,  Gren-  ham  Correspondence,  iii.  125-128.
v^.lle  Papers,  iii.  311-343, and in a

118 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  x

who  had  county  or  popular  elections '  were  united  against
him.' '

The  attempt  to  withdraw  single  politicians  from  their
several  connections  signally  failed.  Overtures  were  made  to
the  Bedford  faction,  but  the  Duke,  whom  Chatham  had  re-
cently endeavoured  to  drive  out  of  all  active  politics,  would
only  join  if  he  had  the  disposal  of  so  many  places  that  he
would  have  become  virtually  the  director  of  the  Government,
and  the  negotiation,  to  the  great  deUght  of  the  King,  accord-
ingly failed.  In  the  course  of  it,  Chatham  wished  to  appoint  a
partisan  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford  Treasurer  of  the  Council,  and
Lord  Mount  Edgcumbe,  who  held  that  post,  was  asked  to
exchange  it  for  the  post  of  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber.  He
refused,  and  was  summarily  dismissed,  and  the  Government  thus
lost  the  support  of  the  patron  of  four  boroughs  not  long  before
a  general  election,  and  once  more  mortally  affronted  the  whole
Rockingham  connection.  In  November  and  December  1766,
the  administration  seemed  in  a  state  of  complete  dissolution.
The  Duke  of  Portland,  the  Earls  of  Besborough  and  Scarborough,
Lord  Monson,  Sir  C.  Saunders,  Sir  W.  Meredith,  and  Admiral
Keppel,  resigned,  and  Conway  was  only  prevented  with  ex-
treme difficulty  from  following  their  example.  A  few  scat-
tered politicians — the  most  remarkable  being  Sir  E.  Hawke —
were  induced  to  fill  the  void,  but  a  new  negotiation  with  the
Duke  of  Bedford  ended  only  in  a  violent  altercation.  The
ministry  had  neither  the  strength  which  grows  out  of  popularity
nor  the  strength  which  grows  out  of  interest.  '  There  is  still
a  little  twilight  of  popularity,'  wrote  Burke,  '  remaining  round
the  great  peer,  but  it  fades  away  every  moment.'  ^  '  One  thing,'
wrote  Charlemont  to  Flood,  '  appears  very  extraordinary,  if  not
indecent — no  member  of  the  Opposition  speaks  without  directly
abusing  Lord  Chatham,  and  no  friend  ever  rises  to  take  his

part Never  was  known  such  disunion,  such  a  want  of

concert  as  visibly  appears  on  both  sides.  How  it  will  end
Heaven  only  knows.'  ^  '  Such  a  state  of  affairs,'  wrote  Chester-
field, after  the  resignation  of  the  Rockingham  section  of  the
ministry,  '  was  never  before  seen  in  this  or  any  other  country.

'  rnrl.  Hut.  xvi.  362-364. Chat-  ^  Purke's  Correspondence,  i.  106.

ham  Correspondence,  iii.  224.  '  Chatham Correspondence, iiL

i;n.  X.  FOREIGN  AND  INDIAN rOLICY.  119

When  tliis  ministry  shall  be  settled,  it  will  be  the  sixth  in  six
years'  time.'  '

Alarming  intelh'gencc  had  be\in  received  of  renewed  war  pre-
parations in  France,  and  Chatham  resolved  to  guard  against  the
danger  that  was  still  apprehended  from  the  Family  Compact,
by  a  great  northern  alliance  of  England,  Prussia,  and  Russia.
F'rederick,  however,  resented  bitterly  the  desertion  of  Eng-
land in  the  last  war,  and  he  utterly  refused  the  alliance.  Of
Chatham  personally  he  spoke  with  respect  and  admiration,  but
professed  himself  entirely  sceptical  about  the  continuance  of
his  power  and  popularity  since  he  had  accepted  a  peerage.
Frederick  had  now  entered  into  a  close  and  separate  connection
with  Russia,  and  was  wholly  alienated  from  England,  while
Russia  would  only  accept  the  alliance  if  it  were  made  to  extend
to  a  Turkish  war.-  '  One  thing  I  feel,'  wrote  that  experienced
diplomatist.  Sir  Andrew  Mitchell,  '  that  the  late  frequent
changes  in  England  have  created  a  degree  of  diffidence  in
foreign  Powers  which  renders  all  negotiation  with  them  diffi-
cult and  disagreeable.'  ^

The  Government  could  thus  point  to  no  great  triumph  of
policy  to  counterbalance  its  internal  weakness.  A  project
was  indeed  entertained  of  withdrawing  the  great  dominions
which  had  been  conquered  in  Hindostan  from  the  control  of  a
mere  mercantile  company,  placing  them  under  the  direct
dominion  of  the  Crown,  and  diverting  to  the  public  treasury
the  territorial  as  distinguished  from  the  mercantile  revenues.
Clive  had  at  one  time  suggested  this  measure,  though  he
afterwards  appears  to  have  opposed  it."*  Chatham  attached
very  great  importance  to  it,  and  Shelburne  entered  cor-
dially into  his  views,  but  a  parliamentary  inquiry  into  the
affairs  of  the  Company  was  the  only  step  of  importance  that
was  taken  before  Chatham  was  hopelessly  incapacitated  by
illness.  It  was  moved  in  the  Commons  in  November  1766,
and  it was characteristic  of  Chatham  that  he  entrusted  the

210. 'There  are  four  parties,' Lord  ' Chatham Correspondence, iii,

Northington said about this  time,  136.

'Putes,  Bedfords,  Rockinghams,  Chat-  -  Ibid.  iii.  6-0,  84-86.

liams, and we (the last) are the  ^  Ibid.  iii.  80.

weakest of the  four.' — Albemarle's  *  Ibid.  iii.  62. Fitzmaurice's \ifp

JAfc  of  Rocldngham,  ii.  34.  of  Shelburne,  ii.  16-18.

120  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  x.

motion,  not  to  any  of  the  responsible  ministers  of  the  Crown,
but  to  Beckford,  one  of  the  vainest  and  most  hot-headed  of  the
City  politicians.  The  inquiry  was  ordered  by  a  large  majority,
in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  Grrenvilles  and  the  Rocking-
hams ;  but  Charles  Townshend,  while  supporting  it,  took  occa-
sion to  say,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  leading  principle  of
Chatham,  that  '  he  believed  the  Company  had  a  right  to  ter-
ritorial revenue.'  ^  Townshend  was  already  intriguing  against
his  chief,  speaking  openly  against  him  in  private  circles,
and  probably  aspiring  to  the  position  of  Prime  Minister,
and  he  soon  after  more  openly  raised  the  standard  of  revolt
by  declaring  his  full  sympathy  with  the  policy  of  taxing
America.

The  Grovernment  was  steadily  becoming  a  Tory  Government.
Separated  from  the  Grenville  connection,  from  the  Bedford
connection,  and  from  the  Rockingham  connection,  the  King's
friends  were  necessarily  its  chief  support.  The  King  was
gratified  by  the  restoration  of  Mr.  Stuart  Mackenzie,  the
brother  of  Bute,  to  the  post  from  which  Grenville  had  so  im-
periously thrust  him,  subject  however  to  the  condition  that  he
was  to  exercise  no  political  power.^  Lord  Northumberland,  the
brother-in-law  of  Bute,  was  thrown  into  paroxysms  of  fury
because  another  nobleman  had  been  preferred  to  him  as  Master
of  the  Horse,  but  he  was  pacified  by  a  dukedom ;  ^  and,  to  the
astonishment  and  indignation  of  many  of  the  old  followers  of
Chatham,  most  of  the  vacant  places  were  filled  up  by  Tories.
The  power  of  the  Government  rested  upon  the  extreme  division
of  its  opponents,  and  upon  the  firm  union  which  was  again
established  between  the  ministry  and  the  Court.  Each  of  these
possessed  so  great  an  influence  over  elections  and  over  members
of  Parliament  that  they  could  seldom  fail  when  united  to
command  a  majority.  The  defeat  of  the  Government  on  the
land-tax  was  chiefly  due  to  a  surprise  and  to  the  selfish
interests  of  the  county  members,  but  in  most  cases  the
Government,  even  when  much  divided,  discredited,  and  out-
debated,  could  count  upon  large  majorities  in  the  House  of
Commons. In  critical  divisions  abstentions  were  very  nume-

'  Fitzmaurice's  TAfe  of  Shelburne,  '  Chatham  Correspondence,  i\\.  58.

ii.  22.  '  Grenville  Paj^ers,  iii.  384,  385.

cii.  X.  ILLNESS OF CHATHAM.  121

rous,  and  one  or  other  section  of  the  Opposition  usually  left
the  House.'

The  clouds  darkened  more  and  more.  The  health  of  Chat-
ham, which  was  now  of  such  capital  importance,  rapidly  gave
way.  In  the  very  first  month  of  his  administration  he  had
been  prostrated  with  fever,^  and  it  soon  became  evident  that
he  could  exercise  no  steady  direction  over  affairs.  From
October  1766  till  the  following  March  he  was  at  Bath,  but  was
able  to  keep  up  some  correspondence  with  his  colleagues,  but
immediately  on  his  return  his  disease  appeared  to  settle  mainly
on  his  nerves.  For  some  time  it  had  been  evident  to  close
observers  that  his  mind  was  gravely  disordered.  In  public
this  was  shown  by  the  extraordinary  and  ungovernable  arrogance
with  which  he  treated  almost  every  leading  politician  with
whom  he  came  in  contact ;  by  the  strange  outbursts  of  wild
rhodomontade  that  defaced  some  of  his  noblest  speeches ;  by
the  unbridled  fury  with  which  he  often  resented  the  slightest
opposition.  In  private  the  symptoms  were  still  more  un-
equivocal. The  legacy  of  Sir  W.  Pynsent  had  made  him  a
rich  man,  but  it  was  wholly  insufficient  for  the  extravagant
expenses  into  which  he  now  plunged.  He  bought  up  all  the
residences  around  Hayes  and  around  his  London  house  in  order
to  free  himself  from  neighbours.  He  ordered  great  plantations
at  Hayes,  and  pushed  on  the  works  with  such  feverish  haste
that  it  was  necessary  to  continue  them  by  torchlight  throughout
the  night.  He  could  not  bear  to  have  his  children  under  the
same  roof,  and  could  not  tolerate  the  slightest  noise.  He  sold
Hayes  and  removed  to  Pynsent,  where  he  insisted  on  covering
a  barren  hill  with  cedars  and  cypresses,  which  were  brought  at
enormous  expense  from  London.  A  constant  succession  of
chickens  were  boiling  or  roasting  in  his  kitchen  at  every  hour
of  the  day,  as  his  appetite  was  altogether  uncertain,  and  when
he  desired  to  gratify  it  his  temper  could  not  brook  the  smallest
delay.  He  soon  grew  tired  of  Pynsent,  began  to  pine  after  Hayes,
and  at  last,  with  great  diflBculty,  Lady  Chatham  succeeded  in
repurchasing  it  for  him.  About  nine  months  after  he  came
to  power  his  health  wholly  gave  way. A  gloomy  and  myste-

•  The  following  were  the  numbers 131  to  67,  lOGto.So,  ISOtoUT. — Wal-
in  several  of  the  chief  party  divisions pole's  George  III.  vol.  ii.
in  1766. 129  to  76, 106  to  IS,  140  to  56,  ^  Greuklle  Paj/crs,  in.  279.

122  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  x.

rioas  malady  affecting  his  nerves  and  his  mind,  rendered  him
incapable  of  any  mental  exertion,  of  any  political  intercourse,
of  enduring  even  the  faintest  noise,  of  transacting  the  most
ordinary  business,  and  in  this  state  he  continued  with  little
intermission  from  March  1767  for  more  than  two  years.'

The  Government  fell  at  once  into  complete  anarchy.  The
spell  of  the  name  of  Chatham  was  still  so  great  that  he  was
kept  at  the  head  of  affairs,  but  he  was  unable  to  take  the
smallest  part  in  counsel  or  debate.  Sometimes  in  the  height
of  his  malady  he  was  seen  taking  exercise  out  of  doors,^  but
he  could  bear  no  discussion,  he  could  make  no  mental  effort.
The  King  vainly  asked  an  interview  of  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour.
He  wrote  letter  after  letter  full  of  the  kindest  consideration,
imploring  him  to  see  Grafton,  if  it  were  but  for  five  minutes.
He  represented  to  him  that  the  Government  majority  in  the
Lords  was  one  day  only  six,  and  another  only  three ;  that  Shel-
burne  was  plotting  against  his  colleagues  ;  that  Townshend  was  in
open  enmity  with  Grafton ;  that  Conway  had  already  announced
his  intention  of  resigning ;  that  the  Grenvilles,  the  Rocking-
hams,  and  the  Bedfords  were  united  in  their  efforts  to  storm
the  closet,  while  trhey  confessed  that  they  were  far  too  divided
to  form  an  administration.  The  answers  received  by  the  hand
of  Lady  Chatham  were  always  in  substance  the  same.  '  Such
was  the  state  of  Lord  Chatham's  health  that  his  Majesty  must
not  expect  from  him  any  further  advice  or  assistance.'  '  He  is
overwhelmed  with  affliction  still  to  find  that  the  continuance
in  extreme  weakness  of  nerves  renders  it  impossible  for  him  to
flatter  himself  with  being  able  soon  to  present  himself  befv)re
his  Majesty. He  is  as  yet  utterly  incapable  of  the  smallest

'  ^ee'^al^ole's  Memoirs  of  George  answered  his  call  to  return.' — Philli-

ITI.  iii.  41-44.  Chatham.  Correspond-  more's  Life  of  Lyttleton,  p.  729.
ence. Whately  wrote  (July  30, 1767),  ^  '  Here  [at  Bath]  Lord  Chatham  is,

*  Lord Chatham's state  of  health  (I  and  goes  ont  every  day  on  horseback

was  told  authentically  yesterday)  is  when  the  weather  lets  him,  and  looks

certainly the lowest dejection and  rather  thin  and  pallid  ;  but  otherwise

debility  tliat  mind  or  body  can  be  in.  very  well  in  appearance  ;  he  sees  no

He  sits  all the day  leaning  on  bis  one.' — Mr. Augustus Hervey  to Mr.

hands, which he supports on the  Grenville, Nov. 3, 1767. Grenville

table  ;  does  not  permit  any  person  to  Papers, iv. 180. On May 5,  1 767,

remain in the  room; knocks  when  Chesterfield  wrote,  '  Lord  Cliatham  is

he  wants  anything,  and  having  made  still  ill,  and  only  goes  abroad  for  an

his  wants  known,  gives  a  signal  with-  hour a day  to  take  the  air  in his

out speaking, to tlie person who  coach.' — Chatham  Corresp.  iii.  253.

CH.  X.  CHANGKS IN THE MINISTRY.  123

efifort.'  lie  had  no  wish  to  continue  in  a  post  the  duties  of
which  he  was  unable  to  discharge,  and  he  again  and  agaiu
implored  the  King  to  accept  his  resignation ;  but  broken  and
in  some  respects  discredited  as  he  was,  his  name  was  still  the
one  support  of  the  Government.  The  King  implored  him  to
remain ;  Grafton,  Camden,  and  Shelburne  wrote  urgently  to
the  same  effect.  On  one  occasion  Grafton  obtained  an  inter-
view with  him,  but  he  found  him  completely  prostrated  with
nervous  weakness  and  depression,  and  was  able  to  extract
from  him  little  more  than  an  entreaty  to  remain  at  his  post,
and  the  general  advice  to  strengthen  the  ministry  by  some
coalition ;  if  possible,  by  a  junction  with  the  Bedford  party.'

That  ministry  was  now  indeed  the  strangest  spectacle  of
confusion.  As  Charlemont  said,  it  '  was  divided  into  as  many
parties  as  there  were  men  in  it.'  During  the  latter  part  of
1767  and  some  months  of  1768  it  continued  in  a  condition  of
chronic  fluctuation,  perpetual  negotiations  and  intrigues  going
on  between  the  different  fractions  of  the  ministry  and  the
different  sections  of  the  Opposition.  Every  leading  Whig
statesman  took  part  in  them,  and  in  the  com-se  of  them  we
for  the  last  time  find  in  public  affairs  the  names  of  the  old
Duke  of  Newcastle  and  of  Lord  Holland.  Without  describing
them  in  detail,  it  may  be  suflSeient  to  relate  the  most  important
changes.  In  September  1767  Charles  Townshend,  the  Chan-
cellor of  the  Exchequer  and  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons,
died,  and  Lord  North  became  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  A
few  months  later  the  Bedford  faction  effected  a  junction  with
the  Government.  The  Duke  indeed  declined  office,  but  Gower,
Sandwich,  Weymouth,  and  Rigby  were  introduced  into  the
ministry,  while  Northington  and  Conway  retired. ^

'  See  the  interesting  passage  from  kept them from  breaking;  that  be

the  Duke  of  Grafton's  autobiography  was  the  most  efficient man among

quoted  in  Walpole's  George  III.  iii.  them,  that  he  made  each  of  them  be-

51,  52.  lieve  he  was  in  love  with  them  {sic)

*  In  one  of  Lord  Lyttleton's  let-  and  fooled  them  all ;  that  unless  that

ters  (Nov.  25,  1767)  there  is  a  very  madman,  Lord  Chatham,  should  come

curious  account  of  a  conversation  of  and  throw  a  lireball  in  the  midst  of

Lord  Mansfield  with  the  writer  on  them  he  thought  they  would  stand

the  condition  and  prospects of the  their  ground,  but  what  that  might  do

ministry. Mansfield  said  that  '  no  he could not  tell ; that  Lord  Bute

opposition  would  signify  anything  if  alone  could  make  a  ministry  which

the  ministers  held  together,  that  the  could  last;  that  if  he  was  dead  no

King  mediated between them and  ntlier  man  could  do  it  so  well.  ...  He

124  KNGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CKNTUKY.  ch.  x.

In  January  17G8  Lord  Hillsborough,  whose  sympathies  were
with  the  Tory  party,  was  appointed  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Colonies,  and  in  October  Shelburne,  who  was  now  one  of  the
most  trusted  adherents  of  Chatham,  was  almost  forced  tc
resign.  Shelburne  had  become  obnoxious  both  to  the  King,
the  Bedford  faction,  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  He  utterly
differed  from  the  pacific  policy  of  the  Government,  and  he
would  have  resisted  by  force  the  acquisition  of  Corsica  by
France.  He  now  went  with  his  follower  Colonel  Barre  into
opposition.  Lord  Camden,  the  Chancellor,  was  at  variance
with  all  the  other  members  of  the  Cabinet,  and  remained  for
long  periods  absent  from  its  meetings.  The  Duke  of  Grafton,
the  nominal  Prime  Minister,  was  outvoted  on  some  of  the
most  important  questions,  and  desired  only  to  resign.  In  July
1767  he  had  told  the  King  that  he  could  not  continue  at  the
head  of  the  Treasury  under  existing  circumstances,  that  he  had
accepted  the  foremost  place  merely  for  the  sake  of  acting
under  Chatham,  and  not  with  any  intention  of  being  First
Minister  himself,  and  that  unless  Chatham  was  able  and  willing
to  grasp  the  helm  he  was  resolved  to  retire.*  He  was  per-
suaded with  difficulty  to  continue  in  office  if  Conway  remained,
and  then  again  to  continue  when  Conway  resigned,  but  he  was
fully  conscious  that  he  was  unfit  for  his  post,  and  incapable  of
controllinof  the  discordant  elements  of  the  Government.  He
gave  full  rein  to  his  feelings  of  disgust  and  of  indolence,  and
remained  for  long  periods  in  the  country,  only  going  once  a
week  to  London  to  discharge  his  duties  as  First  Minister  of  the
Crown. ^

On  every  important  question  it  touched,  the  ministry  which'
was  formed  by  Chatham  pursued  a  course  opposed  to  the  policy
of  its  chief.  Beyond  all  other  English  statesmen  Chatham  had
been  jealous  of  French  power,  conspicuous  in  denouncing  the
attempt  to  tax  America,  and  fearless  in  the  assertion  of  popular
rights.  His  colleagues  during  the  season  of  his  prostration
permitted  France  to  obtain  possession  of  Corsica,  revived  the
disloyalty  of  America  by  imposing  duties  on  certain  goods  im-

1  hen  dwelt  a  good  deal  on  the  ccr-  raore's  Life  of  Lyttlct(m,Y>Y^.  7M-Td^.
taint.y of a fixed resohition  in  the  ' Grcnville  Papers,  iv.  27,  81.

King  not  to  change  his  army  but  only  "  Walpole's  Gea/yje HI.  iii.  31)1.

the generals  of  that army.'— Philli-  392. Greiioille  Pajjcrs,  iv.  208.

rn.  X.  THK NULLUM TE.Ml'US ACT.  125

ported  into  the  colonics,  and  flung  the  country  into  a  paroxysm
of  agitation  by  maintaining  that  the  simple  vote  of  the  House
of  Commons  was  sufficient  to  disqualify  Wilkes.  They  also
justly  aroused  great  indignation  by  a  measure  wliich  was  re-
garded as  a  flagrant  violation  of  personal  property  for  political
purposes.  Sir  James  Lowther,  the  son-in-law  of  Jjute,  a  man
of  immense  wealth  and  political  influence  in  Cumberland  and
Westmoreland,  but  whose  violence,  arrogance,  despotism,  and
caprice  rose  almost  to  the  point  of  madness,*  was  engaged  in
a  fierce  political  contest  in  those  counties  with  the  Duke  of
Portland,  the  head  of  the  most  important  family  of  the  Oppo-
sition. The  property  of  Portland  had  been  granted  by  the
Crown,  and  Sir  James  Lowther  discovered  that  a  certain  dis-
trict containing  many  freemen,  which  had  been  for  two  genera-
tions in  the  undisputed  possession  of  the  Portland  family,  was
not  distinctly  specified  in  the  grant.  Availing  himself  of  the
legal  maxim  that  no  lapse  of  time  can  destroy  the  rights  of  the
Crown  or  of  the  Church,  Lowther  disputed  the  title  of  the
Duke  to  this  portion  of  his  property,  and  obtained  from  the
Crown  a  lease  of  the  lands  for  himself.  The  notorious  object
of  this  transaction  was  the  transfer  of  a  few  votes  from  the
Opposition  to  the  Grovernment,  and  it  appeared  peculiarly
iniquitous,  for  the  latter  refused  to  give  the  Duke  of  Portland
access  to  the  collection  of  grants  in  the  office  of  the  Surveyor-
General,  which  might  have  enabled  him  to  defend  his  rights.^
Even  among  the  supporters  of  the  ministry  it  produced  grave
discontent,  and  it  led  to  the  Nullum  Tempus  Bill,  which,
though  thrown  out  by  the  influence  of  Lord  North  in  1768,
was  carried  without  opposition  in  the  following  year,  and
secured  landowners  from  all  dormant  claims  on  the  part  of  the
Crown  after  an  undisputed  possession  of  sixty  }\3ars.

The  ministry  of  Chatham  had  been  warmly  supported  by  the
King,  for  Chatham  had  thrown  himself  cordially  into  the  King's
great  object,  the  destruction  of  the  previous  system  of  govern-
ment by  party  or  by  connection.  '  I  know,'  wrote  the  King  on
the  day  he  signed  the  warrant  creating  his  minister  an  earl,
*the Earl of  Chatham will zealously give his aid  towards

'  Some  very  curious  anecdotes  of ii.  70-72.
this  siiiiriilar  personatre  will  be  found  -  Walpolc's  6^tw^c  III.  iii. ]43-

in  Albemarle's Li/e  of  lUickingham, 140.

126 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.

destroying  all  party  distinctions  and  restoring  that  subordina-
tion to  government  which  can  alone  preserve  that  inestimable
blessing,  liberty,  from  degenerating  into  licentiousness;' '  and
in  another  letter  he  described  '  the  very  end  proposed  at  the
formation  of  the  present  administration '  as  being  '  to  root  out
the  present  method  of  parties  banding  together.'  ^  The  patience
and  consideration  with  which  the  King  acted  towards  Chatham
during  his  illness  forms  one  of  the  brightest  pages  of  his
reign,  and  for  some  time  there  was  a  cordial  union  between
the  Court  and  the  Exef^utive.  The  introduction  of  the
Bedford  faction  into  the  Government  was  contrary  to  the
wishes  of  the  King,  but  he  appears  to  have  recognised  the
necessity.  His  objections  to  this  faction  were  rather  personal
than  political,  and  the  condition  of  the  Government  was  at  this
time  extremely  favourable  to  his  designs.  A  feeble,  uncertain,
and  wavering  ministry,  without  any  efficient  head,  and  paralysed
by  the  dissensions  of  its  most  important  members,  gave  rare
facilities  for  the  exercise  of  his  influence.  Several  of  the
ministers  were  personally  attached  to  him.  The  discipline
and  unity  of  action  of  the  King's  friends  gave  them  an  over-
whelming power  amid  the  disintegration  of  parties.  Bute,  whose
personal  unpopularity  and  incapacity  had  greatly  weakened
the  royal  cause,  was  now  wholly  removed  from  politics,^  and
in  the  new  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  I^ord  North,  the
King  had  found  a  parliamentary  leader  who  was  prepared
to  accept  office  under  the  conditions  he  required,  and  who
was  in  almost  every  respect  pre-eminently  ^tted  to  represent
hife  views.

The  son  of  the  Earl  of  Guilford,  Lord  North  had
entered  Parliament  in  1754,  had  accepted  a  lordship  of  the
Treasury  under  Pitt  in  1759,  had  been  removed  from  office
by  Kockingham in 1765, and had again come into office

' Chatham  Correspondence,  iii.  21.  disposition  of  offices  or  the  conduct

-  IV)id.  iii.  187.  of  measures  either  directly  or  indi-

^  In 1778 I'ule authorised his  rectly,  by  himself  or  any  other,  from

son  to  write  to  tlje  papers,  '  tliat  he  the  time  when  the  late  Duke  of  Cum-

declares upon  his solemn word of  berland  was  consulted  in  the  arrange-

honour that he has not had the  ment  of a ministry  in 17G5  to  the

lionour of waiting upon his Ma-  present hour.' — See  the Correspond-

jesty  but at  his. levee or drawing-  ence  of  Gem-go  III.  and  Lord  Norihy

room  ;  nor  has  he  presumed  to  offer  i.  p.  xxi.
any  advice  or  opinidn  concerning  the

CH.  X.  GROWING INFLUENCE OF NORTH.  127

witli  Titt  as  Joint  rayinaster  of  the  Forces.  He  belonged,
however,  to  none  of  the  Whig  parties,  and  he  possessed
in  the  highest  degree  that  natural  leaning  towards  authority
which  was  most  pleasing  to  the  King.  Since  the  beginning
of  the  reign  there  had  been  no  arbitrary  or  unpopular
measure  which  he  had  not  defended.  He  supported  the
Cyder  Act  of  Bute  and  opposed  its  repeal.  He  moved  the
expulsion  of  Wilkes.  He  was  one  of  the  foremost  advocates  of
general  warrants  in  every  stage  of  the  controversy.  He  defended
the  Stamp  Act.  He  bitterly  resisted  its  repeal.  He  defeated
for  a  time  the  attempt  to  secure  the  property  of  the  subject
from  the  dormant  claims  of  the  Crown.  Most  of  the  measures
which  he  advocated  in  the  long  course  of  his  ministry  were
proved  by  the  event  to  be  disastrous  and  foolish,  but  he  possessed
an  admirable  good  sense  in  the  management  of  details,  and  he
had  many  of  the  qualities  that  lead  to  eminence  both  in  the
closet  and  in  Parliament.  His  ungainly  form,  his  harsh  tones,
his  slow  and  laboured  utterance,  his  undisguised  indolence,  fur-
nished a  ready  theme  for  ridicule,  but  his  private  character
was  wholly  unblemished.  No  statesman  ever  encountered  the
storms  of  political  life  with  a  temper  which  it  was  more  diffi-
cidt  to  ruffle  or  more  impossible  to  embitter.  His  almost
mifailing  tact,  his  singularly  quick  and  happy  wit,  and  his  great
knowledge  of  business,  and  especially  of  finance,^  made  him
most  formidable  as  a  debater,  while  his  sweet  and  amiable  dis-
position gave  him  some  personal  popidarity  even  in  the  most
disastrous  moments  of  his  career.  Partly  through  political
principle  and  partly  through  weakness  of  character  he  continu-
ally subordinated  his  own  judgment  to  that  of  the  King,  and
carried  out  with  greatly  superior  abilities  a  policy  not  very
dififerent  from  that  of  Bute.  The  growing  power  of  North  drew
the  King  more  closely  to  his  ministers,  and  he  cordially  adopted
their  views  on  the  two  great  questions  on  which  English  politics
were  now  chiefly  concentrated.  These  questions  were  the
Middlesex  election  and  the  renewed  taxation  of  America.

'  See  a  very  striking  account  of of Riuby. — Bedford  Correipondince,
hia  budget  speech  in  1767,  in  a  letter iii.  408.

128  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTU CENTURY.

CHAPTER  XI.

When  we  last  encountered  Wilkes  in  this  narrative  he  had
retired  to  Paris  after  his  duel  with  Martin,  and  had  a  few
months  later  been  outlawed  on  account  of  his  refusal  to  appear
to  take  his  trial  in  England.  He  soon  recovered  his  old  health
and  spirits ;  but  his  political  enthusiasm  seems  for  a  time  to
have  died  away  in  his  admiration  for  '  the  matchless  charms  '
of  an  Italian  courtesan  named  Corradini,  with  whom  he  was
now  violently  enamoured.  He  projected  a  jom-ney  to  Italy
with  her  and  with  Churchill,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1764  he
met  Churchill  at  Boulogne;  but  a  great  catastrophe  interfered
with  their  plan.  Churchill  was  seized  with  a  malignant  fever,
and  died  in  a  few  days,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-three,  leaving
a  sadly  stained  and  shameful  memory,  and  a  few  volumes,  which
were  once  supposed  to  rival  the  poetry  of  Pope,  but  wliich  have
now  almost  wholly  dropped  out  of  the  notice  of  the  world.
Wilkes  soon  after  went  on  with  his  mistress  to  Italy.  He
spent  several  months  between  Bologna,  Florence,  Rome,  and
Naples ;  saw  much  of  Winckelmann ;  was  present  at  Naples
at  the  miracle  of  St.  Januarius,  and  kissed  the  phial  on  his
knees  ;  projected  a  history  of  England,  a  biography  and  anno-
tated edition  of  the  poems  of  Churchill,  but  soon  found  that
extended  literary  undertakings  were  wholly  unsuited  to  his
tastes ;  and  at  length,  having  quarrelled  with  Corradini,  he
returned  alone  to  France.'  He  visited  Voltaire  at  Ferney,
and  the  old  patriarch  was  much  struck  with  his  liveliness
and  wit.  The  Rockinghams  had  now  come  to  power,  and  as  they
had  been  strongly  opposed  to  the  measures  which  had  driven
him  from  England,  he expected  much  from  their  assistance.

'  Tlie  rif'tails  of  liis  journey  throuii;h scrijit fragment  of  autobiogra^jhy  in
Italy  will  lie  found  in  a  curious  manu- tlie  British  Museum.

CH.  XI.  wiLKKs  i:li:ctku  i-oi:  Mii>i'i,i:si';x.  12!i

He  paid  a  secret  visit,  to  JajihIoh  in  17(>G  in  lujpes  of  ohtaining
a  pardon  ami  a  pension,  and  perliaps  the  embassy  of  Con-
stantinople ;  '  but  he  soon  found  that  the  ministers,  though
they  raised  among  themselves  a  large  private  subscription  for
him,  could  not,  or  would  not,  do  anything  more.^  On  the
change  of  Government  he  renewed  his  overtures,  trusting  to
his  former  friendship  with  Grafton  ;  but  he  was  told  that
without  Chatham  nothing  could  be  done.  After  the  language
of  Chatham,  a  personal  application  would  have  been  a  humi-
liation too  great  for  Wilkes  to  endure  ;  and  he  returned,  full  of
indignation,  to  the  Continent,  and  published  an  angry  account
of  the  transaction.  In  March  1768,  however,  on  the  eve  of  the
general  election,  he  again  appeared — this  time  without  any  con-
cealment— in  London,  forwarded  a  petition  for  pardon  to  the
King,  but  at  the  same  time  announced  himself  as  a  candidate
for  the  representation  of  the  City  of  London.  The  spectacle  of
a  penniless  adventurer  of  notoriously  infamous  character,  and
lying  at  this  ver}'  time  under  a  sentence  of  outlawry,  and  under
a  condemnation  for  blasphemy  and  libel,  standing  against  a
})opular  alderman  in  the  metropolis  of  England,  was  a  very
strange  one  ;  and  although  Wilkes  was  at  the  bottom  of  the
poll,  he  obtained  more  than  1,200  votes,  and  in  the  opinion  of
Franklin,  who  was  then  living  in  England,  he  would  probably
liave  succeeded  had  he  appeared  earlier  in  the  field.  He  at
once  stood  for  Middlesex.  He  had  powerful  supporters.  Temple
contributed  the  freehold  qualification  which  was  necessary ;  the
Duke  of  Portland  was  on  his  side ;  Home,  the  rector  of  Brent-
ford, who  was  already  known  as  a  man  of  great  energy,  ability,
and  local  influence,  threw  all  liis  power  into  the  scale.  The
election  took  place  at  Brentford  on  March  28,  and  its  result  was
that  Wilkes  was  at  the  head  of  the  poll.

The  triumph  of  Wilkes  was  wholly  unexpected  by  the  Govern-
ment,' and  they  had  great  doubts  about  the  course  they  should

' Grenrille  P(ipers,\\\.^b. Prior's  tion  of  ;  and  they  are  apprehensive  if

Life  of  Burle,  i.  1 53.  he  has  it  not,  that  the  mob  of  London

*  «The  ministers  are  embarrassed  will  rise  in  his  favour.' — The  Bishop

to  the  last  degree  how  to  act  with  re-  of Carlisle to Gren\ille  (May  27

pard  to  Wilkes. It  seems  they  are  177fi).  ^rc/iv^Ule  Papers,  in.  2i} .
afraid  to  press  the  King  for  his  par-  ^  Pec  the  letters  of  Lord  Camden,

don,  as  that  is  a  subject  his  Majesty  CumpleU's  Chancellors,  vi.  390-3'JL'.
will  not  easily  hear  the  least  men-

VOL.  Til.  K

130  t:ngland  in  the  eighteenth  centuky. m.  xi,

pursue.  As  a  Member  of  Parliaincnt  he  was  already  known,  and
he  was  as  far  as  possible  from  being  formidable ;  nothing,  indeed,
was  more  likely  to  terminate  his  popularity  than  a  parliamentary
career.  '  I  do  not  fear  firebrands  in  this  House,' Canning  once  said,
with  great  good  sense  :  '  as  soon  as  they  touch  its  floor  they  hiss
and  are  extinguished ; '  and  with  the  single  exception  of  O'Connell,
who  possessed  to  a  very  high  degree  the  talents  both  of  a  debater
and  of  a  party  leader,  the  truth  of  this  saying  has  been  always
verified  in  England.  In  the  weak,  divided,  and  headless  minis-
try of  Grafton  there  were  not  wanting  voices  to  urge  that  in  the
face  of  the  fierce  storm  of  popular  excitement  that  was  rising,
and  after  the  many  mistakes  that  had  been  made  in  the  earlier
encounters  between  Wilkes  and  the  Government,  the  wisest
course  was  to  grant  the  new  member  a  free  pardon,  and  to
allow  him  to  take  his  seat  in  the  House  and  sink  gradually
to  his  natural  level.  But  the  Kmg  took  a  warm  and  personal
interest  in  the  matter,  and  his  firm  will  dictated  the  policy  of
his  Government.  He  complained  bitterly  that  the  Duke  of
Grafton  had  proposed  to  him  to  pardon  Wilkes,  and  he  wrote
to  Lord  North  a  peremptory  injunction  that  the  whole  power  of
the  Government  must  be  exerted  to  expel  the  demagogue  from
Parliament.'

In  the  meantime  two  important  events  had  occurred.  In
order  to  avoid  arrest  in  the  course  of  the  election,  Wilkes  had
written  to  the  solicitor  of  the  Treasury  pledging  himself  to
surrender  on  his  outlawry  at  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  on  the
first  day  of  the  succeeding  term.  He  accordingly  appeared
before  Lord  Mansfield  on  April  20,  and  again,  after  the  rectifi-
cation of  some  legal  informalities,  on  the  27th.  The  question  of
the  legality  of  the  outlawry  was  argued  at  great  length,  and  Lord
Mansfield  postponed  the  decision  to  the  following  term,  but  in
the  meantime  refused  to  admit  Wilkes  to  bail.  He  accordingly
remained  in  prison  till  June  8,  when  Mansfield,  on  a  purely
technical  point  of  law,  pronounced  the  outlawry  to  be  illegal.
Wilkes  was  thus  restored  to  his  full  rights  as  a  British  subject;
but  the  condemnation  which  had  been  pronounced  against  him
during  his  absence  for  seditious  libel  and  for  blasphemy  still

' Cori-rsp(i)i<lnire of George III. tviih Lord Nortli, i. 2, Walpole's
Chvnjc  III.  iii,  200.

cit.  XI.  IMPRISON. MHNT OI' WJI.KKS.  l.'il

rcniaiucd.  OnJuiir  IS  Ik;  ;ij)])c;in'(l  id  receive  lii.s  senleiKjc,
'J'liiTi'  were  (lie  strongest  reasons  hnth  nf  jn.stice  and  policy  wliy
tlie  court  should  deal  leniently  with  liirn,  for  he  liad  alrcadv
8uftered  much,  and  he  liad  suffered  in  detiance  of  the  law.  It
had  been  decided  Ihat  the  general  warrant  by  which  he  had
been  originally  arrested  was  illegal ;  that  the  search  warrant  by
which  his  papers  were  seized  was  illegal ;  that  the  outlawry
pronounced  against  him  was  illegal.  It  was  as  certain  as  any
proposition  in  hi.story  could  be  that  the  King's  Speech  had,  at
lea.st  since  the  accession  of  the  House  of  Brunswick,  been
uniformly  discussed  as  the  speech  of  the  ministers ;  and
regarding  it  in  that  light  there  was  nothing  exceptionally
violent  in  the  incriminated  number  of  the  'North  Briton.'
However  culpable  might  be  the  'Essay  on  Woman,'  it  was  an
outrage  upon  common-sense  to  condemn  Wilkes  for  '  publish-
ing'  a  pamphlet  of  which  he  had  only  struck  off  twelve  or
thirteen  copies,  with  the  most  profound  secrecy,  for  distribution
among  his  intimate  friends ;  and  no  human  being  could  beheve
that  the  prosecution  of  the  essay  had  been  really  undertaken  in
the  interests  of  public  morals.  Wilkes,  however,  was  sentenced
to  be  imprisoned  for  twenty-two  months,  to  be  fined  1,000^.,
and  to  obtain  security  for  good  behaviour  for  seven  years  after
his  imprisonment  had  terminated.  One  usual  element  in  sen-
tences for  libels  was  omitted.  The  judges  knew  too  well  the
feehngs  of  the  populace  to  confer  upon  Wilkes  the  popular
triumph  which  would  have  inevitably  ensued  had  he  been
sentenced  to  stand  in  the  pillory.

While  these  events  were  taking  place,  the  riotous  spirit
which  had  for  some  years  been  growing  stronger  and  stronger
in  England  increased  almost  to  the  point  of  revolution.  At
the  opening  of  the  Middlesex  election,  the  mob  at  break  of
day  took  possession  of  every  avenue  and  turnpike  leading  to
the  place  of  voting,  and  would  suffer  no  one  to  pass  who  did
not  wear  a  blue  cockade  with  the  name  of  Wilkes  and  No.  45 ;
and  during  the  two  days  of  the  election  the  whole  town  was
almost  at  their  mercy.  The  windows  of  the  ^Mansion  House
were  demolished.  The  houses  of  Lord  Bute,  Lord  Eomont,
the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  and  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton
were  attacked The  City  .Marshal  and  many  of  the  principal

K  2

132  ENGLAND IN THE EIGTITEENTir CENTUKY.  ch xi.

opponents  of  Wilkes  were  assaulted  as  they  drove  through
Hyde  Park.  The  coach-glasses  of  all  who  refused  to  huzza
for  '  Wilkes  and  Liberty '  were  broken,  and  even  ladies  were
taken  out  of  their  chairs  and  compelled  to  join  in  the  popular
cry.  The  Austrian  Ambassador,  one  of  the  most  stately  and
ceremonious  of  men,  was  dragged  from  his  coach  and  '45'
chalked  on  the  soles  of  his  shoes.  The  same  popular  number
was  inscribed  on  every  carriage  that  drove  through  the  streets,
and  on  every  door  along  the  roads  far  beyond  the  precincts  of  the
City.  Franklin  noticed  that  there  was  hardly  a  house  within
fifteen  miles  of  London  unmarked,  and  the  inscription  might
be  seen  from  time  to  time  the  whole  way  from  London  to
Winchester.

'  P^or  two  nights,'  wrote  the  same  accurate  observer, '  London
was  illuminated  at  the  command  of  the  mob.  .  .  .  The  second
night  exceeded  anything  of  the  kind  ever  seen  here  on  the
greatest  occasions  of  rejoicing,  as  even  the  small  cross  streets,
lanes,  courts,  and  other  out-of-the-way  places,  were  all  in
a  blaze  with  lights,  and  the  principal  streets  all  night  long,
as  the  mobs  went  round  again  after  two  o'clock  and  obliged
people  who  had  extinguished  their  candles  to  light  them  again.
Those  who  refused  had  all  their  windows  destroyed.' '  When
Wilkes  appeared  at  the  King's  Bench  to  receive  judgment  as
an  outlaw,  the  w^iole  neighbourhood  of  the  Court  was  thronged
by  his  partisans ;  and  when  the  Court,  refusing  to  accept  bail,
committed  him  to  prison,  he  was  rescued  on  Westminster
Bridge ;  the  horses  were  taken  off  the  carriage  in  which  he  was
conveyed ;  he  was  dragged  in  triumph  by  the  crowd  through
the  Strand  and  through  Fleet  Street,  and  it  was  with  much  diffi-
culty that  he  at  last  succeeded  in  escaping  from  his  admirers
and  surrendering  to  the  authorities.'^  The  sentence  that  was
passed  on  him  exasperated  the  people  to  the  highest  degree,
])ut  they  assumed  that  when  Parliament  met  he  would  be
released  and  allowed  to  take  his  seat.  It  assembled  at  length
on  May  10  in  the  midst  of  a  fierce  tumult,  great  crowds  shouting
'  Wilkes  and  Liberty  ! '  about  the  House.  But  the  chief  ex-
citeuK'nt  was  in  St.  (leorge's  Fields,  around  the  King's  Bench

' Fru/iJ/li/i's  M'orJ.:i  (Spark's  ed.)  vii.  :V.)tl,  4(10.
-  Annual  Jlc^tstfr,  17(;8.  p.  KK).

cit.  XI.  Rior  IN  ST.  fii;oK<;i:\s  fields.  133

jirisoii,  will  IT  Wilkes  w.is  cdii lined.  'J'lie  ( iovcriiriK-nl  ;iiit  icij);ile(l
;i  (hiiiLjcpjus  riot,  and  citlicr  betause  I lioy  feared  lost  the  eou-
tatj^ion  slmuld  giiiu  the  Kiiylish  troops,  or  in  a  spirit  of  more
bravado,  they  selected  a  detachment  from  a  Scotch  regiment
to  keep  the  peace,  and  Lord  Weymouth,  the  Secretary  of  State,
VTotc  to  the  magistrate  of  the  district  urging  him  not  to  scruple
to  employ  tlie  soldiers  in  case  of  riot.  The  mob,  finding  that
their  hero  was  not  released,  began  to  threaten  the  prison,  and  to
assail  tlie  soldiers  with  stones  and  brickbats,  and  in  the  course
of  a  confused  scullle  which  ensued,  some  soldiers,  pursiung  into
a  private  house  a  man  who  liad  assaulted  them,  encountered  and
killed  a  young  man  of  very  respectable  position,  named  Allen,
who  is  said  to  have  been  entirely  unconnected  with  the  riot.
Soon  after,  the  Kiot  Act  was  read.  The  troops  fired ;  five  or  six
})ersons  were  killed  and  fifteen  woimded,  and  among  the  latter
there  were  two  women,  one  of  whom  died  soon  after.  The
coroner's  inquest  held  upon  Allen  found  a  Scotch  soldier,  named
Donald  Maclean,  guilty  of  his  murder,  and  another  soldier,  as
well  as  the  commanding  officer,  guilty  of  aiding  and  abetting
it.  The  Grand  Jury,  a  few  months  later,  threw  out  the  bills
against  the  two  latter;  but  the  former  was  put  on  his  trial
and  acquitted.  It  was  with  difficulty  that  the  mob  were
restrained  from  tearing  him  to  pieces ;  and  the  indignation
became  still  greater  wh(>n  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  pub-
licly presented  him,  after  his  accpiittal,  with  thirty  guineas
on  the  part  of  the  Government ;  and  when  Lord  Barrington,
the  Secretary  of  War,  issued  a  general  order  conveying  special
thanks  to  the  soldiers  for  their  behaviour,  and  promising  that
'  if  any  disagreeable  circumstances  should  happen  in  the  exe-
cution of  their  duty,'  they  should  have  'every  protection
that  the  law  can  autlmrise  and  their  ofticers  can  give.'  The
only  sister  of  Allen  survived  but  a  few  months  the  shock
she  had  received  in  her  brother's  death,  and  they  were  laid
together  in  the  churchyard  of  Newington,  in  Surrey.  The
inscription  on  their  tombstone  described  William  Allen  as  '  an
Englishman  of  unspotteil  life  and  amiable  disposition,  who  was
inhumanly  niunlenil  by  Scottish  detachments  from  the  army,'
and  two  significant texts  adjured  the  earth  to  refuse  to  cover

134  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xi.

his  blood,  and  the  Almighty  '  to  take  away  the  wicked  from
before  the  King.' '

The  exceeding  weakness  of  the  civil  power  was  very  evident,
and  there  were  great  fears  that  all  the  bulwarks  of  order  would
yield  to  the  strain.  The  neglect  of  the  ministers  to  arrest
Wilkes  as  an  outlaw  when  he  first  appeared  in  England,  and  the
complete  impunity  of  those  who  in  broad  daylight  had  rescued
him  from  the  officers  of  justice,  and  conducted  him  in  triumph
through  London  and  Westminster,  emboldened  the  mob  as
much  as  the  tragedy  of  St.  George's  Fields  exasperated  them.
The  City  constables  were  so  few  that  in  the  course  of  the  elec-
tion London  was  almost  unprotected,  nearly  the  whole  avail-
able force  being  collected  at  Brentford.  It  was  doubtful  whether
even  the  soldiers  could  be  fully  trusted.  Some  regimental
drummers  were  said  to  have  beaten  their  drums  for  Wilkes.  A
soldier  was  heard  exclaiming  in  the  very  Court  of  King's
Bench  that  he  at  least  would  never  fire  upon  his  fellow-country-
men ;  and  it  was  rumoured  that  if  Wilkes  were  suffered  to  take
his  seat  in  Parliament,  his  first  measure  would  be  to  move
that,  on  account  of  the  increased  price  of  provisions,  the  pay
of  the  soldiers  should  be  raised.  Lord  Mansfield  may  have
listened  too  much  to  his  constitutional  timidity  when  he  said
that  unless  some  vigorous  measures  were  promptly  taken,  there
would  be  a  rebellion  in  ten  days  ;  and  Franklin  no  doubt
exaggerated  when  he  said  that  if  Wilkes  had  possessed  a  good
character  and  th-^  King  a  bad  one,  Wilkes  would  have  driven
George  II L  from  the  throne;  but  it  is  at  least  certain  that
the  state  of  England  was  very  alarming.  From  the  beginning
of  the  reign  the  growing  violence  of  the  mobs  and  the  growing
weakness  of  the  law  had  been  ominously  displayed.  Thus  in
1763,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  abolish  the  system  of
admitting  to  the  theatres  at  half-price  after  the  third  act,  the
great  theatres  of  Drury  I^ane  and  Covent  Garden  were  com-
pletely wrecked  ;  every  seat  and  ornament  within  them  was
destroyed ;  the  rioters  even  tried  to  cut  down  the  pillars
on  which  the  gallery  of  Covent  (iarden  Tlieatre  rested,  and
they  (lid  all  this  wit h  complete  impunity.- In two successive

'  Aiinitnl  Jtrr/htrr,  ITCii),  p.  Ufi.  Tt  is  romn,rkablc  tliat  thn  Drury  I.ano

'  ^l««M«/ y/r/yvcs^/r,  17()."),  pp.  o2  J8. riuts  were  iiistigulcd  and  in  part  do-

cii.  XI.  fi  ROW  I  NO I.A\VLES«NliSS.  1  3.'3

yt'ars  we  fiiul  a  man  who  was  exposed  on  the  pillory  killed  by
llu?  ill-lrcaf  iiinit  of  I  he  iiiol).'  An  a(  tempt  to  rescue  a  eriniinal
uho,  in  IT))!^,  was  condemned  for  rape,  was  so  fonnidahlc  that,
in  spite  of  (he  intervention  of  tiie  milifary,  it  was  not  till  near
eij^'ht  in  the  eveninf(  that  the  ant  horif  ies  coulfl  carry  out  the
sentenc«> ;  "■'  and  it  was  rarely  tiiought  safe  to  execute  a  criminal
at  Tyhurn  without  the  protection  of  a  military  force.''  'J'he
numlier  of  disbanded  soldiers  and  sailors  without  any  means
of  subsistence  after  the  peace,  greatly  added  to  the  evil,  and
the  watchmen  were  so  utterly  helpless  that  Parliament  in
despair  offered  a  reward  of  40L  for  the  apprehension  of
every  robber.  The  result  was  a  revival  of  a  practice  which
liad  appeared  in  England  in  the  last  reign.  A  confederation
of  five  men  employed  themselves  partly  in  inducing  im-
poverished wretches  to  commit  robberies,  in  order  to  obtain
the  reward  for  their  conviction,  and  partly  in  falsely  accusing
innocent  persons.  In  a  fw  months  they  in  this  manner  ob-
tained more  that  9G0/.,  and  most  of  their  victims  were  in  the
grave  wlu'U  (he  hideous  crime  was  discovered.*

The  Middlesex  election  took  place  at  a  time  of  great
<listress  and  commercial  depression.  I  have  already  noticed
the  bid  harvest  of  17G7,  the  disturbances  it  produced,  and  the
embargo  which  was  imposed  on  the  export  of  com.  The  follow-
ing winter  was  extremely  rigorous,  and  the  distress  among
the  workmen  in  Ix>ndon  was  so  great  that  the  King,  at  the
j)ctition  of  the  City  of  London,  agreed  to  shorten  the  Court
mourning  for  the  Duke  of  York.*  Strikes  were  very  numerous,
and  London  was  full  of  poor,  idle,  reckless  men  prepared  for
the  most  desperate  enterprise.  Six  thousand  weavers  were  the
most  active  agents  in  the  Wilkes  riots. Four  thousand  sailors

frtxlcd by anonymous  writinjrs of  *  This  aisc  is  briefly  noticed in

riiilip  Fmncis—liis  first  known  com-  the  A  mm  a  I  Jirtfister  of 1762.  p.  75  :

|N>sit  ions  in  print.—  Pjirkos  and  Meri-  for  a  further  account  see  a  remarkable

vale's  Li/r  of  Franch,  i.  f>S.  6'.t.  es-^ay  on  capital  pnnisbmont.s  in  Eng-

'  Annual Jfiyhtrr, 17r.2, p. 7o  ;  land  in  the  .fl/////<»/«yia  I/ibrriiira,  \v.

17<>.1.  p.  (\7  ;  for  another  instance  of  172. It  is  a  curious  illustration  of  the

n  culprit  being  killed  by  ill-u.'^ire  in  absurdity  of British law  tliat  it  was

the  pillory,  see  JHHM<l^//<yM^•r,  1  "SO,  found  that  none of  these  criminals

p.  207.  rouldbeexccuted.as  theiroffenceonlv

*  GrrnriUf  Paprr*,  ii.  iy.3. An-  amounted  to  i>erjury. One  of  them

•tM«i/  I{rffift<T,  I7fi:{.  p.  !»fi  w:»s  killed  by  the  raob  on  the  pillory.

»  AiinHti!  l,'<^iftrr,  1705,  p.  58.  '  lIoIt"s  Gcor^je  III.  i.  149,  156.

136  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xi.

on  board  the  mcrcliant  ships  in  the  Thames  mutinied  for  higher
wages,  and  stopped  by  force  all  outward-bound  ships  which
were  preparing  to  sail.'  The  watermen  of  the  Thames,  the
journeymen  hatters,  the  journeymen  tailors,  the  glass-grinders,
were  soon  on  strike,  and  during  two  or  three  years  London
witnessed  scenes  of  riot  that  could  hardly  have  been  surpassed
in  Connaught  or  the  Highlands.  At  Wapping  and  Stepney  the
coalheavers,  who  were  chiefly  Irish,  were  for  more  than  a  year
at  war  with  the  masters  of  the  coal  ships.  They  boarded  the
ships  and  compelled  the  sailors  to  cease  from  work.  They  kept
guard  at  every  landing-place  to  prevent  them  from  receiving
supplies  of  provisions ;  they  obliged  them  to  keep  watches  as  if
they  were  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  fought  bloody  battles
with  the  sailors  in  the  streets.  A  man  named  Green,  who  was
agent  of  one  of  the  London  aldermen,  was  especially  obnoxious
to  them,  and  one  evening  at  eight  o'clock  his  house  was  be-
sieged by  a  party  provided  with  fire-arms.  Green  having  barri-
caded his  door,  defended  himself,  with  the  assistance  of  a  sailor
and  of  a  maid-serv"ant,  for  no  less  than  nine  hours.  Eighteen
of  the  assailants  were  shot ;  two  hundred  bullets  were  lodged
in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  house.  At  last,  when  his  ammu-
nition was  expended,  Green  succeeded  in  escaping,  but  it  was
not  until  five  in  the  morning  that  the  Guards  appeared  upon
the  scene.  A  few  days  later  the  sister  of  Green  was  attacked
in  her  house,  dragged  into  the  street,  and  murdered.^  Riots
not  less  serious  and  still  more  persistent  were  caused  by  the
Spitalfields  weavers,  who  were  accustomed  during  1767  and  the
three  following  years  to  range  through  the  streets  disguised
and  armed,  breaking  into  the  shops  of  weavers  who  refused  to
strike,  destroying  their  looms,  and  cutting  their  work  in  pieces.
Many  were  killed  or  wounded  in  conflicts  with  the  soldiers.  A
law  was  passed  making  the  otfence  capital;  but  soon  after, more
than  a  hundred  and  fifty  looms  were  destroyed  in  two  nights.
Two  '  cutters  '  were  hanged  under  the  new  law,  but  a  man  named
Clarke,  who  had  been  a  chief  witness  against  them,  afterwards
fell  into  the  hands  of  a  mob  of  more  than  two  thousand  persons,
and  in  the  full  daylight,  in  one  of  the  fields  near  Bethnal  Green,

•  Ati»val  Tfi'f/ixtrr,  \~r)S,]K  105.  JTL  iii.  219-221. Annvnl  Register,

*  Walpole's  '  Memoirs of (iconjc ]7(J8,  jn'.  O'J,  111,  110,  121).

nil.  XI.  ATKOCMOrs CKIMKS.  I.*??

lie  was  (lrlibcr:it(jly  .stinifil  to  death.  The  tnigrdv  lasted  l<»r
two  lioiirs,  iluring  whicli  tin;  wrdclicd  man  vaiidy  implored  liis
murderers  to  shoot  liim  and  [)iit  liim  (»ut  of  his  agonies.'

These  wer(>  Imt  the  more  con.s{)icu(jiis  instances  of  a  sj>iiit
of  insubordination  and  of  violence  whieh  was  shown  in  many
forms  and  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  and  was  everywhere
encouraged  by  the  manifest  impotence  of  authority.  Ordinary
crime  had  greatly  increased.  '  Housebreaking  in  Loudon,'  it
was  said,  '  was  never  known  to  be  so  frequent ;  seldom  a  night
piissing  but  some  house  or  other  was  entered  and  robbed.'  ^
The  tone  of  manners  was  very  savage,  and  several  crimes  oc-
curred about  this  time  which,  though  they  can  only  be  regarded
as  instances  of  extreme  individual  depravity,  and  had  no  real
eonnection  with  the  general  disturbance  of  society,  height-
i-netl  the  impression,  and  sent  a  thrill  of  horror  through  the
country.  'J'lius,  in  17(57,  a  journeyman  shoemaker  nanaed
Williamson,  who  had  maiTied  a  half-witted  girl  for  her  money,
was  proved  to  have  bound  her  daily  to  a  post  in  her  room,
handcufl'ed  her,  hung  her  at  times  so  tightly  that  only  her  toes
eould  touch  the  ground,  and  thus  slowly  starved  her  to  death.
Eighty  thousand  persons  are  said  to  have  been  present  at  his
execution,  and  it  was  with  great  diflBculty  that  he  could  be  kept
out  of  the  hands  of  the  crowd,  who  desired  to  tear  him  limb  from
limb.^  In  Fetter  Lane — one  of  the  most  crowded  thoroughfares
of  London — ^Mrs.  Browurigg  and  her  son,  for  the  space  of  two
years,  subjected  their  apprentices  to  ill-usage  so  horrible  that
after  the  lapse  of  a  century  it  is  still  popularly  remembered.  The
wretched  girls  were  stripped  naked,  scourged  for  the  slightest
offence  till  the  blood  streamed  from  their  wounds,  tied  to  a
staple  in  the  wall,  beaten  on  the  head  till  every  feature  was  dis-
figured, flung  into  a  coal-hole  to  sleep,  famished  till  they  could

'  Annual  Itigiirtcr,  17()7,  pp.  1.T.1,  f<'r  (p.  80)  emphatically  said, 'Villany

140.  l.">2, l.")S  ; 17(>8. j^p. \'.V.\ ].^7  ;  is  now  arrived at such  a  height  in

1760,  pp.  11 1,  ll'4,  132, 136, 138;  1771,  London  that  no  man  is  safe  in  hi.s

p. '.••!.  own  house.' And  it  was  noticed  that

-  Annual Rcfjigtcr, 1770,  p. 78.  in  17.59  and  1760,  two  rears  of  war.

Accurate  statistics of the  crime of  the  number  of  criminals  condemmd

housebreaking  in  Ixindon  and  West-  at  the  Old  Bailey  w;is  only  29;  whihr

minster  may  be  found  in  Pari.  Hist.  during  the  two  last  years  of  peace,

xvi.  930. Hetwccn  Michaelmas  17(!9  1770  and  1771,  the  number  hatl  risin

and  M.irch  t  i.  1770.no  less  than  104  tolol. Annual Iii'ghter,l';'i2,if^.\H,

houses  Wire  broken  open  and  robbed.  145.
In  1772  a  writer  in  \hc  Annual Itajis-  »  Annual Iii<jtfftr,\~t&l,  pp.4S,  49.

138  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xi.

scarcely  stand.  One  of  them  after  two  months  of  suffering  suc-
ceeded in  escaping  ;  another,  covered  with  wounds  and  atte-
nuated by  hunger,  at  last  gave  evidence  against  her  tormentors ;
the  third  died  in  agonies  from  ill-treatment.  The  chief  culprit
was  executed  amid  the  wild  delight  of  the  mob,  who,  as  she  was
driven  to  the  gallows,  ran  by  the  side  of  the  coach  shouting  to  the
chaplain  to  pray  for  her  damnation.^  In  1771,  an  informer  fell
into  the  hands  of  a  gang  of  criminals,  who  tied  a  red-hot  pair
of  tongs  around  his  neck,  put  burning  coals  into  his  clothes,
and  then  thrust  his  head  into  a  fire.  In  the  same  year  a  woman
was  scourged  through  the  most  crowded  part  of  London  as  far
as  Temple  Bar  for  having  decoyed  young  children  from  their
parents,  blinded  them,  and  then  employed  them  as  beggars.^

The  general  election  of  1768  made  very  little  change  in
the  strength  and  disposition  of  parties,  and  the  interest  of
the  nation  was  almost  wholly  concentrated  on  the  contest  in
Middlesex.  To  later  generations,  however,  this  interest  is  less
exclusive,  for  it  was  at  this  election  that  Charles  Fox  first
entered  the  House  of  Commons,  and  that  Horace  Walpole,  to
whom  we  have  hitherto  been  indebted  for  our  fullest  accounts
of  parliamentary  proceedings,  to  the  great  loss  of  subsequent
historians,  gave  up  his  seat

Several  months  elapsed,  during  which  Wilkes  lay  in  prison,
and  it  was  hoped  that  the  popular  excitement  would  die  away.
The  Government  had  become  more  and  more  disorganised.
The  removal  of  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst  from  the  Governorship  of
Virginia  was  intended  to  replace,  in  a  time  of  great  colonial
difficulty,  a  non-resident  by  a  resident  governor,  but  it  excited
much  notice  because  Amherst  had  been  appointed  by  Chatham,
and  was  one  of  his  favourite  officers,  and  because  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  Lord  Bottetort,  one  of  the  avowed  followers  of  ]5ute.
The  resignation — it  might  almost  be  called  the  expulsion— of
Shelburne  in  October  17G8  was  still  more  significant,  and  a  few
days  later  Chatham  himself  resigned.  His  health  and  nerves
seemed  hopelessly  disordered.  Though  incapable  of  giving  any
continuous  attention  to  public  affairs,  he  was  able  to  perceive

'  Ainni/il  li<//istcr,  lli'>7,i>\\]\~-  '  Hiid. 1771,  p.  ^,5. Cicntlurnan's

]21,  l'J0-l'J7. '  3Iaiia:\ne,\-ri\,i^.'r.',2.

cii.  xr.  Ni:\V PROVOCATIONS I!V WII.KKS.  139

lliat  llic  iiiiiiisfry  were  diverging'  f^rcally  from  liis  policy,  and
he  resented  lluj  removal  of  Amherst  and  .Sheli)urne.  He  ac-
cordingly wrote  to  the  King  in  a  strain  that  admitted  of  no
refusal,  and  he  was  succeetled  as  Lord  Privy  Seal  by  Lord
liristol.  The  King's  friends  were  continually  becoming  more
powerful.  In  the  ministry  Grafton,  sick  of  his  position-,
careless  of  politics,  and  panting  only  for  freedom,  was  chiefly
occupied  in  obtaining  a  divorce  from  his  wife.  The  King
was  resolved  upon  the  expulsion  of  "Wilkes,  and  Lord  North,  as
his  representative,  urged  it  upon  the  ministry;  but  although
lie  soon  induced  Grafton  to  consent,  the  opposition  of  Conway,
(Jranby,  Hawke,  and  Camden,  during  the  first  session,  delayed
the  decision,'  Li  December,  Cooke,  who  was  the  other  member
for  ISIiddlesex,  died  ;  Serjeant  Gl3Tin,  who  had  recently  dis-
tinguished himself  as  the  defender  of  Wilkes,  was  set  up  as  the
popular  candidate,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Court
and  of  the  ministry,  he  won  the  seat.  The  election,  like  the
preceding  one,  was  very  riotous  ;  a  man  named  Clarke,  who
was  on  the  popular  side,  lost  his  life,  and  two  men  who  belonged
to  the  Court  faction  were  tried  for  murder  and  found  guilty.
The  verdict  was  received  by  the  assembled  crowd  with  an  ex-
plosion of  brutal  joy,  but  it  was  afterwards  shown  conclusively
tiiat  Clarke  had  been  suffering  from  a  disease  which  might  have
caused  his  death,  and  to  the  great  indignation  of  the  populace,
the  condemned  men  were  pardoned.  Wilkes  did  everything
in  his  power  to  fan  the  flame.  He  accused  ^Mansfield,  in  a
petition  to  the  House  of  Commons,  of  a  gross  irregularity  in
his  trial  in  1763.  He  accused  Webb,  the  preceding  Secretary
of  the  Treasury,  of  having  bribed  a  printer  to  give  evidence
against  him  ;  and  having  obtained  a  copy  of  the  official  letter
of  Lord  Weymouth  to  the  magistrates  before  the  riot  in  St.
(ieorge's  Fields,  he  at  once  sent  it  to  the  '  ^t.  James's  Chro-
nicle,' with  a  brief  Init  violent  note  charging  the  ministry  with
having  deliberately  'planned  and  determined  upon'  'the
horrid  massacre  of  St.  George's  Fields,' and  shown  'how  long
a  hellish  project  can  be  brooded  over  by  some  infernal  spirits
without  one  moment's  remorse.' The  Government  resolved  to

' Waljolcs  .V,  mitirs  of  Giorffc  Til.  iii.  200.  277,  .TIG.

140  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

take  notice  of  this  letter.  The  natural  course  would  have  been
to  bring  it  before  the  law  courts,  and  if  this  was  not  done  it
was  then  for  the  House  of  Lords  alone  to  resent  an  insult  directed
against  one  of  its  members.  Lord  Barrington,  however,  brought
the  letter  before  the  House  of  Commons,  which,  assuming  the
functions  of  a  law  court,  at  once  voted  it  a  libel.  Wilkes,  upon
being  summoned,  immediately  acknowledged  the  authorship,
claimed  the  thanks  of  the  country  for  having  exposed  '  that
bloody  scroll,'  and  calmly  remarked  that  '  he  was  only  sorry  he
had  not  expressed  himself  upon  that  subject  in  stronger  terms,
and  that  he  would  certainly  do  so  whenever  a  similar  occasion
should  present  itself.' '  The  Government  then  resolved  to  take
the  step  about  which  they  had  so  long  hesitated,  and  on
Februarys,  1769,  on  the  motion  of  Lord  Barrington,  Wilkes
was  expelled  from  Parliament  on  the  ground  of  his  three  offences:
the  forty-fifth  number  of  the  '  North  Briton,'  the  volume  of
obscene  poetry,  and  the  preface  to  the  letter  of  Lord  Wey-
mouth.

George  Grenville,  who  had  taken  so  prominent  a  part  in
the  early  measures  against  Wilkes,  but  whose  profound  know-
ledge of  constitutional  law  was  seldom  at  fault,  opposed  this  ex-
pulsion in  a  speech  which  was  afterwards  published  at  length,  and
which  is  the  most  favourable  remaining  specimen  of  his  talents.
He  had  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  the  resolution  of  the  House
was  equally  unconstitutional  and  impolitic.  Three  distinct
charges  were  combined  in  one  resolution,  and  it  was  quite
possible  that  if  the  House  had  voted  upon  them  separately,  it
would  have  pronounced  each  of  them  insufficient  to  justify  the
expulsion.  For  the  forty-fifth  number  of  the  '  North  Briton  '
Wilkes  had  been  expelled  by  a  previous  Parliament,  and  there  was
nothing  more  certain  in  parliamentary  law  than  that  expulsion
by  one  Parliament  did  not  exclude  a  politician  from  the  next
When  Walpole  was  expelled  from  Parliament  for  alleged  corrup-
tion, though  he  was  not  allowed  again  to  sit  in  that  Parliament,
his  election  after  the  next  dissolution  was  not  only  unopposed
but  unquestioned.  The  obscene  poems  had  been  written  five  years

'  The  words — which  are  not  in  the  able  speech  ho  afterwards  made  and

abstract of Wilkes' speech in the  corrected  on  the  subject  of  the  expiil-

Parliamentary  debates — were  <]Uoted  sion. — See  Abnoii's  Collection  (ifScarce

by  G.  Greuviilc  in  the  very  remark-  and  ItiUrcd'uKj  Tractx,  iii.  ;;i,  Wl.

ni.  XI.  EXPULSION ()!• WII.KKS.  Ill

brforc.  Wilkes  was  alroiuly  oxj)i!\liii<:(  llic  olT<-Ui-(-.  in  jjrison.
I'hcy  wfvi'  ill  no  rospt^rt  an  offcnice  against  tlie  House,  and  a
forniiT  I  Iniise  of  Commons,  violently  hostile  to  Wilkes,  liad  not
I  lii»ui,dit  tit  to  make  them  a  ground  of  expulsion.  The  preface  to
Jiord  Weymouth's  letter  had  been  voted  a  libel,  but  it  was  not  an
offence  against  a  member  of  the  Lower  House  ;  it  had  not  been
brought  before  the  law  courts,  and  Blackstone,  who  was  the  chief
legal  defender  of  the  ministerial  policy,  acknowledged  that  by
itself  it  was  no  adequate  reason  for  expulsion.  The  imprison-
jiicnt  of  Wilkes  would,  it  is  true,  incapacitate  him  for  many
mouths  from  discharging  his  duties  in  Parliament,  but  this
imjirisonment  could  not  be  regarded  as  a  fresh  crime,  and  it  was
<piite  certain  that  a  mere  inability  to  discharge  parliamentary
duties  did  not  justify  expulsion.  Windham,  while  still  a
Member  of  Parliament,  had  been  for  more  than  two  years  in
the  Tower  when  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  was  suspended,  and
other  members  had  been  sent  for  long  periods  from  London  in
the  army  or  navy.  It  was  added,  too,  that  it  was  tolerably
clear  that  the  contest  would  not  end  with  the  expulsion  of
Wilkes.  He  would  at  once  be  re-elected,  and  the  House  would
be  thus  confronted  with  a  constitutional  question  of  the  gi'avest
kind.

The  warning  was  disregarded.  The  expulsion  was  carried
by  219  to  137.  On  February  16  Wilkes  was  unanimously  re-
elected, and  on  the  17th  the  House,  on  the  motion  of  Lord
Strange,  voted  that  having  been  expelled  he 'was  incapable  of
sitting  in  that  Parliament.

It  is  now  generally  acknowledged  that  this  step  was  a  dis-
tinct breach  of  the  law.  Whatever  might  be  the  injustice,
whatever  might  be  the  impolicy  of  the  first  expulsion,  the  legal
right  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  expel  an  offending  member
was  indisputable.  But  it  was  one  thing  to  expel.  It  was  quite
another  thing  to  disqualify.  The  first  lay  within  the  province
of  the  House  of  Commons  alone.  The  second  could  only  be  done
by  Act  of  Parliament.  It  was  indeed  true  that  the  power  of  ex-
pulsion might  be  reduced  to  insignificance  if  the  expelled  person
were  immediately  sent  back  by  his  constituents  to  the  House.
It  was  true  that  the  incapacity  the  House  pretended  to  create
extendeil  only  to  the  existing  House  of  Commons  and  woidd

142  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEEXTII CENTURY.  en.  xi.

be  terminated  by  a  dissolution. It  was  true  that  it  might  be
very  reasonably  argued  that  it  was  a  great  evil  if  the  House  of
Commons  should have  no  means  of  excluding  from  its  walls
a  man  who  had  outraged  decency  or  systematically  obstructed
business,  if  his  constituents  approved  of  his  conduct  or  if  he
happened  to  be  the  proprietor  of  a  nomination  borough. In
the  quiet  days  of  George  II.  the  constituencies  would  probably
have  acquiesced  in  the  Wilkes  decision  as  placidly  as  they  ac-
quiesced in  the  far  graver  usurpation  of  a  House  of  Commons
which  systematically  decided  disputed  elections  by  party  votes,
and  thus  after  every  dissolution  brought  into  Parliament  many
men  who  were  certainly  not  the  real  choice  of  the  constituencies.
But  the  days  of  this  tolerance  were  now  over,  and  a  spirit  had
arisen  in  the  country  which  watched  the  proceedings  of  the
House  with  a  jealous  scrutiny  unknown  in  the  previous  reign.
Immediately  on  the  declaration  of  incapacity  a  large  body  of
the Middlesex  gentlemen formed themselves  into  a  society
for  defending  the  cause  of  the  constituencies. On  March  16
there  was  a  new  election  at  Brentford,  and  Wilkes  was  again
put forward and again unanimously elected. A merchant
uamed Dingley desired to oppose him,  but could find no
freeholder to second him,  and  was  driven  by  violence  from
the  hustings. Next day the House again  pronounced the
election void. Colonel Luttrell,  the son of  Lord Irnham,
was then induced to vacate his seat in Parliament and
to stand  in opposition to  the  popular  favourite. He  was  a
young  officer  of  the  Guards,  in  no  way  connected  with  JMiddlesex,
and  his  chief  recommendation  was  his  courage. The  interfer-
ence was  indeed  deemed  so  dangerous  that  his  life  was  insured
at  Lloyd's  Coffee-house,  and  the  chances  of  his  surviving  the
contest  became  a  favourite  subject  of  bets. The  election,  how-
ever, contrary  to  expectation,  was  a  very  orderly  one,  the  popular
party  being  resolved  to  show  that  without  any  violence  they
could  command  an  immense  majority. Wilkes  obtained 1,14,3
votes,  Luttrell  296,  and  a  lawyer  named  Whitaker,  who  had
thrust  himself  into  the  contest,  5. After  the  poll  a  number  of
horsemen  with  colours  flying  and music  playing,  attended  by
several  thousand  people,  went  through  St.  James's  Street  and  the
iStrynd  and  over  London  Bridge  to  congratulate  Wilkes,  and  that

..•H.  XI.  EI-'FKCTS OK  'I'HK KXl'UJ.MoN.  143

ni^liI  London  wms  illiiminalcd.  On  llic  14tl»  (lie  election  of
Wilkes  was  again  i)ronounccti  void.  On  the  IGth,  after  a  long
debate  and  by  a  majority  of  only  1!J7  to  143,  Luttrell  was
declared  dniy  elected.  A  petition  against  the  refnrn  "was
speedily  signed,  and  it  was  argued  in  the  House  on  May  8.
After  a  debate  of  great  power  the  election  was  conlirmed  })y
221  lo  1.'>L\  Next  day,  amid  a  storm  of  popular  insult,  the
Iving  drove  to  Westminster  to  close  the  session.'

Wilkes  had  lost  his  seat,  but  he  had  no  reason  to  regret  the
issue  of  the  struggle.  Few  of  the  most  illustrious  English
statesmen  have  enjoyed  a  greater  or  a  more  enduring  popularity
or  liave  exercised  a  more  commanding  power.  When  in  April
1770  he  was  released  from  prison  London  was  illuminated  for
joy,  and  the  word  '  liberty '  in  letters  three  feet  high,  blazed  on
the  front  of  the  ^lansion  House.  In  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the
Court  he  was  elected  successively  alderman  and  sheriff,  and  after
a  fierce  struggle  which  lasted  for  three  years,  Lord  Mayor,  and
then  once  more  member  of  Parliament,  and  he  governed  with  an
almost  absolute  sway  that  City  influence  which  was  still  one  of
the  great  forces  in  English  politics.  His  old  action  against  Lord
Halifax,  which  had  been  suspended  by  his  outlawry,  was  resumed.
He  obtained  4,000L  damages,  and  would  probably  have  obtained
more  had  it  not  been  discovered  during  the  trial  that  Grenville
had  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  action  promised  Lord  Halifax
that  in  case  of  defeat  his  expenses  should  be  paid  bv  the
Treasury.  Li  addition  to  the  cost  of  the  election,  a  sum  of
about  20,000L  was  raised  by  subscription  to  pay  his  debts,
and  provide  him  with  a  competence ;  and  gifts,  legacies,  and
testimonials  poured  in  upon  him  from  many  quarters.  He  had
also  done  more  than  any  other  single  man  to  unite  a  divided
and  powerless  Opposition,  and  to  mark  out  the  lines  of  political
parties.  The  doctrine  that  a  resolution  of  the  House  of
Commons  can  neither  '  make,  alter,  suspend,  abrogate,  nor
annihilate  the  law  of  the  land,'  became  the  rallying  cry  of  the
party.  Grenville  on  this  question  cordially  concurred  with
Kockingham.  Temple  and  Chatham  were  reconciled  in  1769,
and  in  tht^  May  of  that  year  Temple. wrote  to  Lady  Chatham,

'  Walpolc's Memoirs  of  George  TTJ.  iii. Annual I?ff;i,*trr, ITCO- Pari.
Uitt.  xvi.

144  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEKNTII CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

'  Things  tend  apace  to  coalition  among  us.' '  A  violent  attack
of  gout  at  last  restored  the  troubled  nerves  of  Chatham.  In
September  1769  he  appeared  unexpectedly  at  the  King's  levee  ;
and  when  Parliament  met  in  the  following  January,  he  took
his  place  among  the  peers,  and  with  an  eloquence  as  powerful
as  that  of  his  early  days  he  denounced  the  unconstitutional
measure  that  had  taken  place,  and  endeavoured  to  lead  the
House  of  Lords  to  the  rescue  of  the  constitution.

The  debates  that  took  place  during  several  years  on  the
Middlesex  election  brought  into  clear  relief  the  conflicting
doctrines  about  the  relations  between  members  and  their  con-
stituencies, and,  notwithstanding  the  great  length  to  which  they
were  protracted,  the  really  essential  arguments  may  be  con-
densed in  a  small  space.  Blackstone,  who  was  a  member  of  the
House,  was  put  forward  to  defend  the  Government.  He  main-
tained that  while  a  general  incapacity  to  sit  in  the  House  of
Commons  can  only  be  created  by  Act  of  Parliament,  an  in-
capacity limited  to  a  single  Parliament  may  be  created  by  the
House  of  Commons  alone.  This,  it  was  said,  is  involved  in  the
power  of  expulsion  which  it  was  admitted  that  the  House  pos-
sessed, and  which  without  this  addition  would  be  absolutely
nugatory,  and  it  was  established  by  the  case  of  Walpole,  who
was  expelled  for  alleged  corruption,  re-elected,  and  then  declared
incapable  of  sitting  in  that  Parliament.  It  is  remarkable  that
while  Walpole  and  his  friends  complained  bitterly  that  this
expulsion  was  due  to  a  purely  factious  combination,  there  is  not
the  smallest  reason  to  believe  that  they  ever  questioned  the
doctrine  that  it  incapacitated  the  expelled  member  from
sitting  till  after  the  dissolution.  If  indeed  that  doctrine
were  discarded,  the  right  of  expulsion  would  only  expose  the
House  to  perpetual  degradation  and  insult,  for  a  large  number
of  the  members  were  as  completely  masters  of  their  boroughs
as  of  their  estates,  and  they  might,  therefore,  safely  set  the
House  at  defiance.  Several  precedents,  more  or  less  applicable,
might  be  discovered  in  the  stormy  period  between  1642  and
1660,  but  the  case  of  Walpole  was  the  one  undoubted  instance
since  the  devolution  of  an  expelled  member  being  at  once  re-

' Chatham  Corrc^pondeyxcc,  iii..')o8.

,11.  XI.  AHOIJ.MHNTS ON llIK WII.KES CASK.  1  l'»

elected,  and  Walpolc  was  proiiomiccd,  on  account  of  hi.s  <-x])ul-
sion,  incapable  of  sitting  in  that  Parliament.'

The  Opposition,  on  the  other  hand,  maintained  tliat  to  be
eligible  as  member  of  Parliament  was  the  common  right  of  all
]^-itish  snlijects  ;  that  incapacities  annulling,  suspending,  or
al)ri(lging  this  common  right  can  only  be  created  by  Act  of
Parliament;  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  had  been  so  created,
for  tlie  law  enumerated  and  defined  the  several  kinds  of  in-
capacity, and  that  it  was  completely  beyond  the  competence  of
one  branch  of  the  Legislature  by  its  sole  action  to  change  the
law.  Sir  Kdward  Coke  and  other  authorities  had,  it  is  true,
liiid  down  that  as  every  court  of  justice  has  laws  and  customs
for  its  direction,  so  there  is  a  lex  et  consuetudo  parllamenti
which  must  be  gathered  out  of  the  records  and  precedents  of
the  two  Houses  and  which  forms  part  of  the  unwritten  law  of
the  land.  But  this  '  law  and  custom  of  Parliament '  can  only
exist  when,  in  the  absence  of  any  provision  of  the  statute  law,
it  is  possible  to  point  to  a  long,  uniform,  and  unchallenged
series  of  parliamentary  precedents.  Were  it  otherwise  the
consequences  would  be  of  the  most  dangerous  description,  for  it
is  certain  tliat  in  the  course  of  its  long  and  turbulent  history
each  House  had  often  and  in  many  directions  transgressed  its
just  limits.  It  was  surely  absurd  to  go  to  the  anarchy  of  the
Great  Kebellion  for  legal  precedents,  and  the  case  of  Walpole
could  be  of  little  real  service  to  the  ministry.  The  resolution
incapacitating  him  alleged  *  that  having  been  expelled  this
House  for  a  high  breach  of  trust  in  the  execution  of  his  office
and  notorious  corruption  when  Secretary  of  War,  he  was  incap-
able of  being  re-elected  a  member  to serve  in the  present

'  In ITiOS ^Ir. Wollaston being  Scarce  nnd  Interesting  Trart»,\6\.\n.

a  collector  i>f  duties  was  '  expellutl '  In 1715 Serjeant Comyns having

from the House  in oViedience to a  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  qualifica-

law  which  had  recently  disqualified  t ion,  the  House  determine<l  that  the

those  who  held  that  oflice  from  sit-  votes  given  to  him  were  lost, and  pave

tinp,  and  having  given  up  the  oflice  the  scat  to  the  candidate  who  stood

he was re-elected and allowed to  next  on  the  p-yW  ;  and  in  1727  they

sit. The  partisans  of  Wilkes  main-  adopted a  similar  course  in  a  case

tained  iliat  this  wasa  valid  precedent,  where the elected person being a

while  his  opponents  thought  the  word  Gimmissioner  of Customs was dis«

•expelled' was  in  this  case  improperly  qualified. In both of these cases

used  by  the  Commons.  The  case  was  at  however,  there  was  a  statutori-  dis-

Icast  not  one  of  penal  expulsion, ."^ce  qualification. — See  P^lsham's  liut.  of

a  long  discussion  of  it  in  •  A  Fair  Trial  Getn-ge  III.  i.  242-243.
of  the  lnip<->rtant  Question,'  Alnion's

Vol..  111.  L

146  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

Parliament.'  The  cause  of  the  expulsion  was  thus  cited,  and  it
was  a  cause  which  might  possibly  justify  the  exclusion.  The
resolution  incapacitating  Wilkes  assigned  no  reason  except  his
expulsion  by  the  House.  The  resolution  incapacitating  Wal-
pole  was  passed  at  the  petition  of  the  rival  candidate,  but  the
House  refused  to  give  that  candidate  the  seat,  and  no  member
sat  for  the  borough  of  Lynn  till  after  the  dissolution.  The
House  of  Commons  of  George  III.  pronounced  the  candidate
who  had  the  smaller  number  of  votes  to  be  member  for  INIid-
dlesex.  It  was  added  that  the  Whig  doctrine  that  the  resolu-
tion of  one  House  cannot  create  a  disability,  was  maintained
by  no  one  more  clearly  than  by  Blackstone  himself,  who  in  his
own  '  Commentaries  '  had  declared  that  to  be  capable  of  election
to  Parliament  was  the  common  right  of  all  British  subjects,  and
who  had  given  a  full  enumeration  of  the  legal  incapacities  which
alone  could  bar  this  right.^

When  the  subject  passed  into  the  House  of  Lords,  however,
it  was  argued  on  somewhat  different  grounds,  and  the  Govern-
ment rallied  chiefly  upon  a  doctrine  which  was  propounded  by
Lord  Mansfield  in  a  speech  of  extraordinary  subtlety  and  power.
He  began  by  positively  refusing  to  express  any  opinion  about
the  legality  of  the  decision  which  had  been  arrived  at  by  the
House  of  Commons.  '  Mj  sentiments  about  it,'  he  said,  '  are
locked  in  my  own  breast  and  shall  die  with  me.'  He  would
only  say  that  '  whenever  the  statute  law  is  silent  he  knew  not
where  to  look  for  the  law  of  Parliament  except  in  the  proceed-
ings and  decisions  of  each  House  respectively.'  He  added  that
declarations  of  law  made  by  either  House  of  Parliament  had
always  bad  effects,  for  they  had  the  semblance  of  legislative
acts  whereas  they  had  no  real  legal  force  or  validity.  If  either
House  as  a  legislative  body  thought  tit  to  declare  a  particular
doctrine  to  be  law,  he  as  a  judge  would  pay  no  attention  what-
ever to  its  declaration.  But  though  the  House  of  Commons
had  no  power  of  laying  down  authoritatively  general  principles
of  law,  it  had  a  legal  right  of  trying  and  deciding  particular
cases  without  appeal.  Each  House  was  not  only  a  legislative
assembly, it  was  also  a  judicial  body,  supreme  in  its  own  pro-

'  The  passage  was  altered  in  later  editions.

CH.  r.!.  AUOKMKNT.S ON TIIH WII.KIiS CASK.  147

vincc,  aiidall  <nic>ti<>iis  toucliiiig  (lie  scats  of  the  Luwcr  llouae
could  be  (lucidcil  by  that  House  alone.  Its  decision  was  final,  for
there  was  no  other  court  in  which  they  could  be  tried.  The  judges
might  be  corrupt,  the  sentences  might  be  erroneous,  but  the
determinat  ion  nmst  be  received  and  submitted  to  as  the  law  of
the  land,  for  no  existing  body  was  competent  to  question  or
reverse  it.  The  law  might  no  doubt  be  changed  by  an  Act  of
Parliament,  in  which  of  course  the  Lower  House  must  concur,
l)ut  as  long  as  it  was  not  changed,  the  judicial  decision  of  the
Commons  on  a  question  touching  elections  to  their  House  was
absolute  and  final.  '  Tf  they  determined  wilfully  wrong  it  was
iniquitous  indeed,  and  in  the  highest  degree  detestable ;  but
it  was  a  crime  of  which  no  human  tribunal  could  take  cognis-
ance, and  it  lay  between  God  and  their  conscience.'  By  the
constitution  of  the  country  the  House  of  Lords  had  no  right  to
offer  any  advice  to  the  Sovereign  on  the  subject  or  in  any  way
to  discuss,  question,  or  impugn  the  judgment  of  the  House  of
Commons  on  a  matter  which  lay  within  the  proper  judicial
province  of  that  body.

The  speech  of  Chatham  in  reply  to  these  argmnents  was
one  of  his  greatest  efforts,  and  considering  the  subtlety  and
delicacy  of  the  distinctions  discussed  it  gives  a  very  high  idea
of  his  power,  not  only  as  an  orator,  but  also  as  a  political
thinker  and  as  a  debater.  The  danger,  indeed,  of  the  doctrine
of  ^Mansfield  was  of  the  gravest  kind.  What  limit  could  be
put  to  the  usurpations  of  a  body  which  was  itself  the  sole  judge
of  its  own  privileges,  which,  by  asserting  in  a  judicial  proceed-
ing a  power  beyond  the  law,  could  establish  that  power  without
appeal,  and  was  thus  able  under  pretence  of  declaring  the  law
to  make  the  law  ?  Every  judicial  body  must  indeed  be  vested
with  the  powers  and  privileges  necessary  for  performing  the
office  for  which  it  is  apjx)inted,  but  no  court  of  justice  can
have  a  power  inconsistent  with  or  paramount  to  the  known
laws  of  the  land.  The  representatives  of  the  people  were  the
trustees  of  the  people,  receiving  from  the  people  certain  defined
powers,  and  they  could  not  abuse  those  powers  more  grossly  than
when  they  extended  them  beyond  the  limits  of  the  law  for  the
purpose  of  invading  the  rights  of  those  from  whom  they  were
derived. That  which  distinguishes  constitutional  government

L  2

148  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cn.  xi.

from  blank  despotism  is  that  no  individual  or  corporation
within  it  is  above  the  law.  This  was  the  meaning  of  the  great
conflict  of  the  Revolution,  when  the  doctrine  of  passive  obedi-
ence was  exploded,  when  our  kings  were  obliged  to  confess
that  their  title  to  the  throne  and  the  rule  of  their  govern-
ment had  no  other  foundation  than  the  known  law  of  the  land.
But  now  this  doctrine  of  passive  obedience  and  of  a  power
beyond  the  law  was  revived  in  favour  of  what  was  called  the
popular  branch  of  the  Legislature.  '  What  is  this  mysterious
power  undefined  by  law,  unknown  to  the  subject,  which  we
must  not  approach  without  awe  or  speak  of  without  reverence,
which  no  man  may  question,  but  which  all  men  must  obey  ?  '
It  is  evident  that  it  contained  a  germ  of  tyranny  fatal  to  the
very  idea  of  constitutional  government,  and  that  it  would  make
the  House  of  Commons  much  less  the  representative  than  the
ruler  of  the  people.  It  was  said  that  the  Lords  had  no  right
to  interfere  even  by  the  expression  of  an  opinion.  On  the
contrary,  to  do  so  was  their  bounden  duty.  As  mediators  be-
tween the  King  and  the  people  it  was  for  them  to  submit  to  the
King  the  causes  of  the  discontents  of  his  people.  As  one  of  the
three  powers  whose  concurrence  was  necessary  to  every  change
of  law,  it  was  for  them  to  protest  when  the  law  had  been  vir-
tually changed  without  their  assent.  As  hereditary  guardians
of  the  British  constitution,  descendants  of  the  barons  who  had
extorted  the  Great  Charter,  it  was  for  them  to  sound  the  warning
when  the  constitution  was  invaded.  '  Where  law  ends,  tyranny
begins."  The  attempt  of  one  branch  of  the  Legislature  to  pass
beyond  the  limits  that  were  assigned  to  it,  and  to  place  itself
in  the  discharge  of  any  of  its  functions  above  the  law  of  the
land,  is  an  act  of  revolution,  an  act  of  treason  against  the  con-
stitution. The  House  of  Commons,  by  confusing  the  province
of  jurisdiction  with  that  of  legislation,  by  asserting  what  was
virtually  a  sole  power  of  altering  or  making  the  law,  by  in-
vading the  chartered  rights  which  lay  at  the  very  heart  of
British  liberty,  had  been  guilty  of  such  an  act.  The  particular
instance  might  appear  to  some  of  little  moment,  but  the  claim
which  was  advanced  extended  to  a  complete  subversion  of  the
Constitution.  If  no  other  power  might  even  protest  against
the  decision  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  any  matter  relating

i:h.  XI.  AUGUMKNTS ON TIli; WII.KES  CASE.  IV)

to  elect  idiis,  that  House  iiiii^lit  l»y  an  ailjilrary  deeiarat  ion
transfer  or  extinguish  the  franchises  of  great  bodies  of  their
constituents,  change  the  whole  law  of  election,  and  annul  Acts
of  I'arliainent  (hat  had  been  carried  for  the  express  purpose
of  seeuriii''  the  riv;hts  of  electors.  ]iatli<T  than  tliat  such
a  claim  should  be  ac(iuiesced  in,  extrenK-  remedies  should
In-  resorted  to;  but  it  was  one  of  the  great  advantages  of  a
iiiixed  GovernmcTit  tliat  it  did  inucli  to  make  such  remedies
unnecessary,  for  each  part  had  a  great  power  of  restraining
the  aberrations  of  the  others.  The  balance  of  the  constitu-
tion was  now  disturbed,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  the  House
of  Lords  to  aid  in  restoring  it.  They  were  asked  to  affirm
by  a  solemn  resolution  the  true  doctrine  of  electoral  rights,
to  petition  for  the  dissolution  of  a  House  of  Commons  which
had  violated  the  constitution,  and  to  lead  the  way  in  a  strug-
gle for  such  a  measure  of  parliamentary  reform  as  would
place  the  representative  body  in  harmony  with  its  con-
stituents.

In  addition  to  these  arguments,  another  doctrine  of  a  very
extreme  and  indeed  revolutionary  kind  was  propounded  by  the
j)opular  party.  They  contended  that  the  introduction  of  a
-ingle  illegitimate  element  into  the  representative  body  was
-ufhcient  to  invalidate  all  its  proceedings,  even  in  cases
w  here  the  withdrawal  or  transfer  of  one  vote  would  make  no
liifference  in  the  decision.  In  the  words  of  Junius,  'If  any
part  of  the  representative  body  be  not  chosen  by  the  people,
that  \r.\Tt  vitiates  and  corrupts  the  whole.'  'The  arbitrary
appointment  of  Mr.  Luttrell  invaaes  the  foundations  of  the  laws
themselves,  as  it  manifestly  transfers  the  right  of  legislation
from  those  whom  the  people  have  chosen  to  those  whom  they
have  rejected.'  The  authority  of  Locke,  who  was  generally  re-
garded as  the  almost  classical  exponent  of  the  principles  of  parlia-
mentary government  as  established  at  the  Kevolution,  was  cited
in  favour  of  this  doctrine.  'Governments,'  he  wrote,  *  are  dis-
solved from  within  when  the  Legislative  is  altered.  The  con-
stitution of  the  Legislative  is  the  first  and  fundamental  act  of
.-<x?iety.  .  .  .  When  any  one  or  more  shall  take  upon  them  to
make  laws  whom  the  people  have  not  appointed  so  to  do,  they
uiake  laws  without  authoritv,  whii-h  the  people  are  not  there-

150 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi

fore  bound  to  obey.''  Neither  Chatham  nor  Burke  appears  tc
have  asserted  this  doctrine,  but  it  was  strongly  maintained  in
one  House  by  Shelburne,  who  was  usually  in  alliance  with
Chatham,  and  in  the  other  by  Sir  George  Savile,  who  was  one
of  the  most  respected  members  of  the  Rockingham  party,  and
it  formed  the  burden  of  numerous  addresses  and  petitions.^
To  a  practical  politician  it  may  perhaps  be  sufficient  to  say  that
if  it  were  rigidly  applied  it  would  have  invalidated  every  Act
of  Parliament  upon  the  Statute  Book.

Independently  of  the  question  immediately  at  issue,  the
jNIiddlesex  election  was  extremely  important  from  the  impulse
it  gave  to  political  agitation  outside  the  House  of  Commons.
There  was  at  first  some  slight  hesitation  as  to  the  form  which
the  pressure  of  public  opinion  on  the  members  should  assume,
and  in  a  few  cases  instructions  were  sent  by  constituencies  to
their  members,  but  it  was  soon  agreed,  in  accordance  with  the
urgent  representations  of  Burke,^  that  petitions  to  the  King
were  likely  to  be  most  efficacious.  About  seventeen  counties,*
and  many  cities  and  boroughs,  sent  up  addresses  to  the  Throne,
complaining  that  the  rights  of  freeholders  had  been  violated,
and  in  most  cases  petitioning  for  a  dissolution.  Great  efforts
were  made  to  procure  counter  addresses,  but  only  the  universi-
ties, four  counties,  and  three  or  four  cities  responded,  and  the
preponderance  of  opinion  against  the  Government  appeared
enormous.  A  meeting  summoned  in  the  City  to  support  the
Government  was  attended  by  not  more  than  thirty  persons,
and  was  soon  broken  up  in  confusion  by  the  mob.  Some  of
the  merchants  signed  an  address  of  confidence  to  the  King,
and  went  in  a  cavalcade  to  present  it,  but  they  were  attacked
on  their  way,  and  it  was  only  after  a  struggle  of  some  hours
that  a  small  remnant  succeeded  in  reaching  the  palace.  In
the  meantime  a  hearse  with  four  horses,  followed  by  a  long
tumultuous  procession,  and  bearing  escutcheons  representing
the  murder  of  Allen  and the  murder  of  Clarke,  was drawn

'  Locke  on GmcrJinimt,  book  ii.  58. Chatham  says fifteen counties

ch.  xix.  })etitioncd,  and  that  '  these  tii'teen  pe-

*  Fitzmaurices  Zi/i,'  of  Sltilhu)-nc,  litioningcounticscontain  more  people
ii.  205.  Ilian  all  the  rest  of  tlje  kingdom,  as

'^  JiuTlK's  Qn-rcupondcncc, i. KJIi, they  pay  inlinitcly  more  land  ta.x.' —
176,  177,  181,  18!i,  235.  Chatkavi  Corrcapondtncc,  iv.  ICD.

♦  Anuval  livgiister, 1770,  pp.  oO-

CM.  \i.  SKi.NS OK I'OI'IJLAU DISCONTHNT.  1  .">  1

thrnii^'h  tlif  Stniiid  (<•  Si.  J;iiiics's  raliicc,  to  Carllnn  Jfouse,
to  Cuiiibi-rland  House,  and  (<>  11h'  rosid(;nc(3  of  Lord  \V(;yiTiouth.
The  railings  of  the  pahice  were  defended  with  difhculty ;  many
conspicuous  persons  were  insulted,  and  the  white  staff  of  Lord
Talbot  was  broken  in  his  hand.  Five  rioters  taken  in  the  act
were  reserved  for  prosecution,  but  the  grand  jury  refused  to  find
a  true  bill  against  them.'  The  manifest  partiality  of  juries  was
»'ne  of  the  most  alarming  symptoms  of  the  time,  and  one  of  the
chief  encouragements  to  the  prevailing  violence.^  For  months
liiittrell  was  unable  to  appear  in  the  streets.^  A  man  was
arrested  in  the  act  of  posting  up  a  supposed  speech  of  Oliver
CVoniwell  when  he  drove  the  members  of  the  Long  Parliament
out  of  their  llouse.^  In  July  1769  the  Duke  of  Bedford  having
imprudently  gone  to  Exeter  to  receive  some  local  honours,  was
attacked  in  the  cathedral,  and  obliged  to  escape  by  a  private
way  into  the  bishop's  palace.  At  Honiton  he  was  assailed  with
ptones,  bull-dogs  were  let  loose  at  him,  and  Ins  life  was  in  serious
danger.*  Language  breathing  all  the  violence  of  revolution
had  become  habitual.  Barre  said  in  Parliament  that  disregard
to  petitions  '  might  teach  the  people  to  think  of  assassination.'*'
A  silver  goblet  was  presented  to  Wilkes  by  the  Court  of  Common
Council  when  he  was  elected  sherifT,  and  he  chose  as  the  sub-
ject of  ornamentation  the  death  of  Caisar,  with  an  inscription

from  Churchill,

May  every  tyrant  feel
The  keen  deep  seurchings  of  a  patriot  steel.

Alderman  Townsond,  one  of  the  most  active  of  the  City  poli-
ticians, refused  to  pay  the land  tax  on  the ground that  the

'  Ainnial  Ii<:)i.itr);  \7C>'J,i>p.Si,8~.  disposition of  the  people  to  be  such

Walpoles  Memoirs  of  George  III.  iii.  tliat  juries,  under  the  inllucnce  of  the

3oO-;i53.  general  infatuation,  could  hardly  be

•  Tlie  Kinp  writinp  to  Lord  North  got to  do justice  to  soldiers  under

complained  bitterly  of  'the  factious  prosecution.' — Annual  ItnjiMcr,  176'.t,

and partial conduct  of the grand  p.  62. According  to  Walpole, '  In  the

jury,' and  a<lded, '  if  tliere be no  hands of  a  Middlesex jury at  that

means  by  law  to  quell  riots,  and  if  time  no  man's  life  was  safe.' — Mevunr.*

juries  forget  they  are  on  their  oath  of  George  III.  \V\.?>\2.

to  be guided  by  facts not faction,  '  Ibid.  iii.  35'.t.

this  constitution  must  be  overthrown,  ♦  See  Cavendish,  Dcbatcf,  i.  101.

and  anarchy  (the  most  terrible  of  all  '  Walpole, p.  378. Annual  He-

evils)  must  ensue.'—  Corresjtondence  gi.ifrr,  l~(\0,  pp.  117,  118.

(-/  George  III.  and  I^ird  Sorth,  i.  8.  '  Walpole,  iv.  37.
1  lie  miuisters  described  '  the  unliajipy

152  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi

Parliameut  which  imposed  it  was  an  illegal  one,  and  he  actually
brought  the  case  before  the  Court  of  King's  Bench.

In  July  1769  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Livery  of  London  pre-
sented an  address  to  the  King  arraigning  the  whole  conduct  of  his
ministers  as  subversive  of  the  Constitution,  on  which  alone  the
relation  between  the  House  of  Brunswick  and  its  subjects  de-
pends ;  and  in  the  following  March  they  presented  a  new  remon-
strance, couched  in  language  such  as  had  perhaps  never  before
been  used  by  a  public  body  to  its  sovereign,  except  in  the  course
or  upon  the  eve  of  a  revolution.  '  Under  the  same  secret  and
malign  influence,'  they  said,  '  which  through  each  successive
administration  has  defeated  every  good  and  suggested  every
bad  intention,  the  majority  of  the  House  of  Commons  have
deprived  your  people  of  their  dearest  rights.  They  have  done
a  deed  more  ruinous  in  its  consequences  than  the  levying  of
ship-money  by  Charles  L,  or  the  dispensing  power  assumed  by
James  IL,  a  deed  which  must  vitiate  all  the  future  proceedings
of  this  Parliament,  for  the  acts  of  the  Legislature  itself  can  no
more  be  valid  without  a  legal  House  of  Commons  than  without
a  legal  prince  upon  the  throne.  .  .  .  Parliament,'  they  con-
tinued, '  is  corruptly  subservient  to  the  designs  of  yoiur  Ma-
jesty's ministers.  Had  the  Parliament  of  James  II.  been  as
submissive  to  his' commands  as  the  Parliament  is  at  this  day  to
the  dictates  of  a  minister,  instead  of  clamours  for  its  meeting,
the  nation  would  have  rung  as  now  with  outcries  for  its  dissolu-
tion.'' It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  Chatham  himself  was
suspected  of  having  drawn  up  this  document,  and  that  he  re-
garded it  with  unqualified  approbation.  The  King  in  his  answer
described  it — surely  with  great  justice — as  disrespectful  to
himself  and  injurious  to  his  Parliament ;  but  this  answer  was
treated  by  Chatham  and  others  as  a  violation  of  the  article
of  the  Bill  of  Eights  which  secured  to  subjects  the  liberty  of
petition.  The  London  Livery,  undeterred  by  the  rebuff,  pre-
sented another  and  scarcely  less  insolent  address,  and  when  the
King  received  it  with  a  few  words  of  disapprobation,  the  liOrd
Mayor,  Beckford,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  delivered  a  long
rejoinder,  which  was  composed  for  him  by  Home,  and  which
was  afterwards  engraven  on  his  statue  in  the  Guildhall,  declar-

' Purl  Hist,  xvi,  893,  891.

a^. XI.  FRANCE  TAKES  CORSICA.  153

iiig  llial  wlioi'vcr  li;i(l  ;ilienatcvl  liis  jNIajesty's  afTcctions  from
his  loyal  sul>jects  in  general  and  from  I^ondon  in  particular  was
an  enemy  to  his  ^Majesty's  person  and  family,  and  a  betrayer
of  the  constitution  'as  it  was  established  at  the  glorious  and
necessary  Kevolution.'  On  the  other  hand,  both  Houses  of
Parliament  supported  by  large  majorities  the  most  violent
proceedings  and  doctrines  of  the  ministers.  Lord  North  was
accused  of  having  declared  that  petitions  for  a  dissolution  of
Parliament  were  unconstitutional  if  not  illegal,'  and  the  King,
laying  his  hand  on  his  sword,  exclaimed,  '  Sooner  than  yield
to  a  dissolution  I  will  have  recourse  to  this.'*

There  was  little  or  nothing  to  counterbalance  the  unpopu-
larity of  the  Government.  In  America  discontent  and  disaffec-
tion were  becoming  continually  more  formidable,  and  in  Europe
the  authority  of  England  had  visibly  declined.  The  heroic
struggle  which  the  Corsicans  under  Paoli  had  for  many  years
waged  against  their  Genoese  oppressors  had  excited  only  a
languid  interest,  and  in  December  1763  a  proclamation  was
issued,  forbidding  English  subjects  to  assist  the  '  Corsican
rebels ; '  but  when  the  French  purchased  the  island  from  Genoa
in  1768,  disregarded  the  strong  protest  of  the  English  ambas-
sador, and  crushed  all  resistance  by  overwhelming  forces,  the
national  jealousy  of  England  became  actively  sensitive.  The
well-known  book  of  Boswell  greatly  added  to  the  interest,
and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  and  some  other  leading  persons
subscribed  large  sums  to  assist  the  insurgents.  The  value  of
the  new  acquisition  of  France  was  enormously  exaggerated  by
l^urke '  and  by  many  other  politicians,  and  it  was  absurdly  re-
presented as  sufiGcient  to  turn  the  balance  of  power  in  the  Medi-
terranean. By  a  strange  chance  which  no  human  sagacity  could
have  predicted,  it  proved  in  truth  even  more  important  than
was  feared,  for  it  made  Napoleon  Buonaparte  a  French  subject.

Nearly  at  the  same  time  the  question  of  the  Falkland
Islands  brought  England  to  the  verge  of  a  war  with  Spain,

'  Pari.  Huof.  xvi.  578. He  after-  cnct;  iii.  41t).
wards  is  said  to  have  explained  awav  ^  Walpole's  Grorge  III.  iv.  60.

liis  meaning,  and  it  is  very  probable  '  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Sluibnrne,

that  he  was  not  qxiite  accurately  re-  ii.  llD-124. Bnrke  said,  '  Corsica,  a

ported. Lord  Epmiont  in  the  House  French  province  was  terrible  to  him.'

of Lords  described  tlie  petitions  ;us  Cavendish,  Debates,  i.  40.
'  treasonable.' — Chatham  Correfji.'ml-

154 ENGLAND  m  TKE  EIGHTEEXXn  CENTURY. ch.  xi.

These  islands  appear  to  have  been  first  seen  hy  Davis  in  1592,
and  by  Hawkins  in  1594,  but  their  present  name  was  only
given  to  them  in  the  reign  of  William,  and  no  attempt  was
made  to  colonise  them  till  Anson  described  them  in  his  '  Voyage  '
as  valuable  in  themselves,  and  especially  valuable  on  account
of  their  nearness  to  Chili  in  the  event  of  a  Spanish  war.  In
1748  an  English  expedition  to  the  Falkland  Islands  was
planned,  but  Wall,  the  Spanish  ambassador,  represented  in  such
strong  terms  that  the  Spaniards  possessed  the  exclusive  do-
minion of  the  South  Sea,  and  would  treat  any  intrusion  as
an  act  of  war,  that  the  design  was  relinquished.  In  1765,
however,  it  was  resumed.  Lord  Egmont  instructed  Captain
Byron  to  take  formal  possession  of  the  Islands  in  the  name  of
his  Britannic  Majesty,  and  in  the  following  year  a  garrison  was
established  and  a  small  wooden  fort  erected.  The  transaction
appears  to  have  been  at  first  almost  unnoticed,  but  in  1769  the
Spaniards  demanded  the  immediate  abandonment  of  the  island
which  had  been  occupied,  and  their  demand  being  disregarded,
they  next  year  sent  out  a  powerful  expedition,  which  captured
the  entire  garrison,  detained  a  British  frigate  for  twenty  days,
and  summarily  expelled  the  British  from  the  South  Sea.  Such
an  act  of  violence  and  insult,  following  as  it  did  the  obstinate
refusal  of  Spain  to  pay  the  Manilla  ransom,  seemed  to  make
Avar  inevitable.  At  last,  however,  after  much  not  very  digni-
fied negotiation,  the  Spanish  king  agreed  to  disavow  the  act
of  his  servant  and  to  restore  the  garrison,  maintaining,  how-
ever, his  old  claim  of  right,  and  receiving,  it  is  said,  a  verbal
assurance  that  the  English  would  speedily  evacuate  the  island.
These  events  were  not  fitted  to  strengthen  an  unpopular
Government,  and  a  few  months  after  the  general  election  the
ministers  were  compelled  to  ask  for  the  sum  of  5I3,000Z.  in  pay-
ment of  the  debts  of  the  King.  In  the  last  reign,  certain  funds,
wliich  were  intended  to  produce  800,000/.  a  year,  were  appro-
l)riated  to  the  Civil  List,  with  the  understanding  that  if  they  fell
below  that  amount  Parliament  would  supply  the  deficiency.  In
the  present  reign,  it  was  determined  to  abolish  the  element  of
uncertainty,  and  a  fixed  annual  sum  of  800,000L  was  voted  for
the  Civil  List.  Besides  this,  the  King  possessed  considerable
revenues  which  were  not  within  the  cognisance  of  Parliament.

cii.  XI.  WEAKNI':SS OF GRAFTON.  lo5

]((•  liiiil  iiilii  riled  ii  large  sum  from  his  economiciil  predtjco.s.snr,
he  had  the  hcrcthlary  revenues  (k.'rived  from  the  Principality  of
Wales  and  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall,  and  he  derived  something
from  (hilics  which  had  been  recently  imposed  by  royal  preroga-
1  ive  in  the  new  West  Indian  Islan<ls.  It  was  believed — probalily
with  much  truth — that  these  revenues  were  amply  sufficient
for  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  intended,  and  that  the
tlebt  was  due  to  an  expenditure  which  could  not  be  openly
avowed.  It  was  the  first  of  a  long  series  which  extended
during  the  whole  reign.  All  parties  were  prepared  to  pay  it,
but  fhe  Opposition  contended  that  Parliament  should  at  least
receive  a  detailed  account  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was  in-
curred, and  attempts  were  unsuccessfully  made  in  both  Houses
to  obtain  an  inquiry  into  the  state  and  expenditure  of  the  Civil
List.'

The  personal  unpopularity  of  the  Government  was  also
very  great,  and  the  weakness  of  the  Prime  jNIinister  was  espe-
cially conspicuous.  Grafton,  though  he  is  now  chiefly  remem-
bered as  the  object  of  the  most  savage  of  all  the  invectives  of
Junius,  was  certainly  not  destitute  of  the  qualities  of  a  states-
man, and  he  was  judged  very  favourably  by  some  of  the  ablest
of  his  contemporaries.  Chatham,  for  a  time,  gave  him  an
unreserved  confidence.  Conway,  in  1770,  refused  to  serve
under  any  other  leader.  Camden  assured  him  that  he  would
'  rather  see  him  at  the  head  of  the  Government  then  than  any
other  man  in  the  kingdom  ;'  and  a  letter  of  Charles  Fox  has
been  preserved  in  which  that  great  statesman  declared  that
there  was  no  other  chief  he  would  more  willingly  follow.  But
his  better  qualities  were  all  marred  and  clouded  by  faults  very
natural  to  a  young  man  of  great  position,  strong  passions,  weak
character,  and  moderate  ambition,  who,  without  any  of  the
long  apprenticeship  of  office,  and  contrary  to  his  own  wishes,
found  himself  at  the  age  of  thirty-two  Prime  ^linister  of
England.  Had  Chatham  been  able  to  remain  at  the  helm,
Grafton,  under  his  guidance,  would  proliably  have  won  an
honourable  place  in  English  history  ;  but  at  the  head  of  a
divided  Cabinet,  surrounded  by  uncongenial  colleagues,  out-
voted  in  his  Cabinet  on  important  questions,  and  exposed  in

'  Annual  i:i>ji.ittr,  17C?,  p.  03. Pari.  Jlisi.  xvi.  813-852.

156  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTII CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

turn  to  the  outrages  of  the  populace  and  to  the  blandishments
of  the  Court,  his  character  and  his  convictions  utterly  failed.
His  notorious  indolence,  vacillation,  and  indifference,  the  con-
trast between  his  old  friendship  with  Wilkes  and  his  recent
policy,  and  the  careless  and  undisguised  profligacy  which  led
him,  on  one  occasion,  when  still  Prime  Minister,  to  appear
publicly  at  the  opera  with  a  well-known  courtesan,  were  all
sources  of  scandal  or  of  weakness.  In  private  life  he  was  es-
teemed an  honourable  man,  and  he  had  but  little  of  the  ambition
which  is  the  chief  cause  of  political  treachery,  but  he  had  aban-
doned Kockingham,  he  had  abandoned  Wilkes,  and  he  was  now
rapidly  abandoning  Chatham.

The  conduct  of  two  of  the  most  important  of  his  colleagues
was  scarcely  more  respectable.  One  of  the  most  remarkable
characteristics  of  the  ministry  of  Chatham  was  that  it  exactly
reproduced  the  old  type  of  divided  administrations  which  pre-
vailed in  England  immediately  after  the  Kevolution.  The  very
idea  of  a  consistent  Government  policy  to  which  all  its
members  were  pledged  had  almost  disappeared,  and  each
minister  restricted  himself  mainly  to  his  own  department.
This  was  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  manner  in  which
the  administration  had  been  formed,  and  of  the  withdrawal
of  the  great  statesman  who  alone  could  have  given  it
a  steady  and  consistent  direction.  General  Conway  had
been  persuaded  by  Horace  Walpole  to  abandon  the  Rock-
ingham connection,  and  to  retain  under  Chatham  the  position
not  only  of  Secretary  of  War,  but  even  of  leader  of  the  House
of  Commons,  in  order  to  exclude  Grenville  from  that  post;  ^  but
already,  at  a  time  when  Chatham  was  not  yet  incapacitated  by
illness,  Horace  Walpole  assures  us  that  Conway,  being  offended
at  the  dismissal  of  Lord  Mount  Edgecumbe,  '  dropped  all  inter-
course with  Lord  Chatham,  and  though  he  continued  to  conduct
the  King's  business  in  the  House  of  Commons,  he  would  neither
receive  nor  pay  any  deference  to  the  minister's  orders,  acting
for  or  against  as  he  approved  or  disliked  his  measures.'^  It
was  quite  consistent  with  this  beginning  that  he  should  still
have remained in  office when Townshend,  by reviving the

'  Walpolc's  George  III.  ii.  339-;]41.  ^  ILi-l.  ii.  385.

HT.  XI.  CONWAY AND CAMDMN.  157

scheme  of  Ainorican  taxation,  reversed  the  policy  wliith,  in  the
liockingham  aihninistratitm,  Conway  had  done  so  much  to
carry  into  effect.  In  January  1768,  however,  four  months
after  the  death  of  Townshend,  Conway,  partly  in  consequence
of  his  disapproval  of  the  conduct  of  the  Government  towards
the  Duke  of  Portland,  and  partly  in  consequence  of  the  growing
influence  of  the  Bedford  faction,  resigned  the  seals  of  office,
but  he  was  actually  persuaded  by  tlie  King  to  continue
'.Minister  of  the  House  of  Commons,'  and  member  of  the
Cabinet  in  the  ministry  with  which,  on  most  points,  he  was
both  personally  and  politically  at  variance.'  It  was  soon  made
a  matter  of  complaint  by  the  Bedford  section  of  the  Govern-
ment that  '  there  was  no  acting  with  Conway,  who  always  in
the  House  adhered  to  his  own  opinion,  and  would  not  acquiesce
in  what  was  determined  in  council.'^  Yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,
he  remained  Cabinet  minister  and  apparent  leader  of  the  House
of  Commons,  and  he  still  retained  this  position  when  Chatham
returned  to  active  politics,  although  he  entirely  agreed  with
Chatham  on  the  main  questions  that  were  in  dispute.  He
appears  to  have  supposed  that  his  personal  friendship  for
( I  raft  on,  and  the  fact  that  he  was  drawing  no  salary,  justified
his  position.

The  failure  of  the  Chancellor  was  equally  conspicuous.  As
a  lawyer,  Camden  was  surpassed  by  no  contemporary  except
Mansfield.  In  Parliament,  some  good  judges  preferred  the
simple,  colloquial,  and  unstrained  lucidity  of  his  style  to  the
subtle  and  elaborate  rhetoric  of  his  great  rival,'  and  the  strong
passion  for  popularity  which  sometimes  showed  itself,  if  not
in  the  substance  at  least  in  the  expression  of  his  judgments,
gave  him  a  bias  in  favour  of  liberty  at  a  time  when  it  was
gravely  endangered.  But  Camden,  like  Grafton,  was  unfit  to
stand  alone,  and  on  the  eclipse  of  Chatham  he  sank  into  insig-
nificance. He  saw  the  whole  character  of  the  ministry  changed
by  the  growing  predominance  of  that  Bedford  faction  which
was  most  hostile  to  the  policy  of  Chatham.  He  saw  the
Government  of  which  he  was  a  member,  pursuing,  on  the  two
great  questions of  American  taxation  and  of  the  Middlesex

'  Walpolc's  Georfjc  ITT.  iii.  1 4S-1  .•;n.  >  Nicliolls*  TlccolU'ctions  of  Gcorqe

-  Il'kl.  r-311.  ///.  ii.  128.  •'

158  ENGLAND IN Till': EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

election,  a  course  which  was  directly  opposed  to  his  opinions,
yet  he  still  remained  at  his  post.  He  was  full  of  difficulties
and  irresolution.  He  did  not  wish  by  resigning  to  throw  the
Government  of  the  country  into  confusion,  or  into  hands  still
more  hostile  to  Chatham  and  to  his  policy.  He  expected  the
return  of  Chatham,  and  till  his  recovery  everything  seemed
provisional  and  unsettled.  He  was  attached  to  Grafton,  and  a
strong  personal  interest  bound  him  to  office.  He  had  risen  to
the  first  rank  in  his  profession,  and  had  held  the  great  office  of
Chief  Justice  of  Common  Pleas  before  he  accepted  his  Chancel-
lorship ;  but  if  he  now  resigned,  he  sank  at  once  into  com-
parative poverty.  There  was  then  no  regular  retiring  pension
for  an  ex-Chancellor,  and  Camden  had  nothing  to  fall  back
upon  but  a  pension  of  1,500L  a  year,  which  had  been  procured
for  him  by  Chatham.  At  one  time  he  appears  to  have  disbelieved
in  the  reality  of  the  illness  of  Chatham,  and  he  spoke  of  his
former  leader  with  much  bitterness.'  He  abandoned  London
durino-  the  Middlesex  riots.  He  withdrew  more  and  more
from  ministerial  business.  He  was  thrown  into  an  agony
of  distress  by  the  libels  which  described  him  as  ungrateful
to  Chatham.  He  was  silent  in  debate,  and  often  absent  from
the  Cabinet  councils.  He  wished  to  resign  on  the  resig-
nation of  Chatham,  but  suffered  himself  to  be  dissuaded  by
Grafton.  Yet  he  never  protested  or  even  distinctly  intimated
his  opinion.  In  confidential  letters  to  Grafton  he  urged  the
o-rave  political  danger  of  the  course  which  was  being  pursued
about  the  Middlesex  election ;  but  when  the  question  was  debated
in  the  Cabinet  he  withdrew,  and  Grafton  afterwards  asserted

'  William  Gerard  Hamilton  wTote  Chancellor  on  whom  you  had  particn-

to  Temple  (July  20,  1767),  '  Tlie  idea  lar  reasons  to  rely  has  played  a  sort

of continuing Lord Camden as a  of  fast  and  loose  patne,  and  spoken

friend  of  Lord  Chatliam's  is  extremely  of  your  lordsliip  witli  submission or

entertaining  if  the  accounts  wliicli  I  indillercnce  according  to  tlie  reports

hear  are true,  and  my  authority  is  he  heard  of  your  health,  nor  lias  he

suchthat  I  have  not  a  cioul)tof  them  ;  altered  liis  language  until  he  found

and  tliey  are  that,  in  all  jilaces,  the  you  were  really  returning  to  town.'—

most  violent  man  against  Lord  Chat-  (JhatJumti Correspondence, iii. .303.

ham,  and  the  harshest  interpreter  of  This coincidence has been justly

his  long  sickness  and  of  his  late  con-  pointed out as one of the many

duct  in  every  particular,  is  Lord  Cam-  slight indications that  Junius was

(\cx\^—(ireinil\e Papers,  iv. 64. In  well  acquainted  with  the  information

liis  privateletter  to  Chatham,  written  then  current  in  Lord  Temple's  circle
January  2, 1768,  Junius  said,  *  The

.11 M.  CAMKr.N ATTACKS TIIK OOVKHNMKNT.  I  .'/J

(hat  tlu!  Cliancfllor  had  never  inforincd  hini  that  the  vote  of  in-
capacity was  contrary  to  Lnv.  Their  diil'erence  a])out  the  poliey
of  the  nieasnrc  liad  i)ro(hice(l  a  co](hiess  between  them,  and  in
the  suniiniT  of  ITtJ'J  they  appear  to  have  had  little  intercourse.
I''in(lin^'  hiniself  in  a  minority  in  the  ministry,  incapable  of
iiilhieneing  its  decisions,  and  unwilling  at  this  time  to  destroy
it  by  resigning,  Camden  abstained  from  giving  any  opinicju  to
his  colleagues,  and  conlined  himself  to  his  judicial  business.
Yi't  it  is  certain  that  he  communicated  his  opinion  to  Chatham
ulien  (iiatham  had  resigned  oflfice  and  was  preparing  for
opposition,'  and  at  last,  when  his  old  leader  reappeared  in  the
House,  and  denounced  the  ministerial  policy  as  a  violation
"f  the  Constitution,  the  Chancellor,  who  should  naturally
have  been  its  foremost  defender,  arose  to  express  his  full
concurrence  with  the  attack.  'For  some  time,'  he  said,
'  I  have  beheld  with  silent  indignation  the  arbitrary  measures
of  the  ministers.  I  have  drooped  and  hung  down  my  head
ill  council,  and  disapproved  by  rny  looks  those  steps  which  I
knew  my  avowed  opposition  could  not  prevent.  ...  I  now
l>r(X'laim  to  the  world  that  I  entirely  coincide  in  the  opinion
ixj)ressed  by  my  noble  friend,  whose  presence  again  reani-
mates us,  respecting  the  unconstitutional  and  illegal  vote  of
the  House  of  Commons.  ...  By  their  violent  and  tyrannical
toniluct  ministers  have  alienated  the  minds  of  the  people  from
his  ^lajesty's  Government.  ...  A  spirit  of  discontent  has
spread  into  every  corner  of  the  kingdom,  and  is  every  day  in-
creasing. If  some  methods  are  not  devised  to  appease  the
clamours  so  universally  prevalent,  I  know  not  whether  the
people,  in  despvir,  may  not  become  their  own  avengers,  and
take  the  redress  of  grievances  into  their  own  hands.'

It  was  impossible  that  any  ministry  could  permit  a  Chan-
cellor to  continue  in  office  who  denounced  in  such  terms  the
main  line  of  policy  of  the  Cabinet  of  which  he  was  a  member,
.ind  nothing  could  be  more  imcandid  than  the  language  of  the
Opposition,  who  described  the  dismissal  of  Camden  as  an
unwrtrrantable  interference  with  judicial  liberty,  the  dismissal
of  an  upright  and  independent  judge,  because  he  had  given  an

»  See GrennlU Pauert,  iv. 402, 4Co. Pari  Hht.  xvi.  S25. Adolphus.
i.  4iO.

160 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEr. vn. \i.

opinion  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The  whole  episode  was
discreditable  in  the  extreme,  and  it  ought  to  have  been  fol-
lowed by  an  immediate  resignation.  It  was  probably  thought,
however,  that  a  dismissal  would  have  more  effect  upon  public
opinion  than  a  resignation,  and  Chatham  strongly  supported
the  Chancellor  in  remaining  at  his  post.'  He  was  dismissed
on  January  17,  1770,  about  a  week  after  his  speech.^  Lord
Granby,  the  popular  Commander-in-Chief,  took  the  first  oppor-
tunity in  the  House  of  Commons  of  declaring  that  he  would
always  lament  the  vote  he  had  given  in  favour  of  the  incapacity
of  Wilkes  as  the  greatest  misfortune  of  his  life,  and  a  few  days
after  he  resigned  his  office.  In  the  minor  or  ornamental
departments  of  the  Administration  there  were  several  resig-
nations, which  implied  a  considerable  loss  of  Parliamentary
influence.  The  Dukes  of  Beaufort  and  Manchester,  the  Earls
of  Coventry  and  of  Huntingdon,  gave  up  their  places  at  the
Court.  James  Grenville,  ever  faithful  to  Chatham,  resigned
his  office  as  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland,  and  Dunning  that  of
Solicitor-General.  On  January  28  another  and  much  more
important  resignation  was  very  unexpectedly  announced.
Grafton  had  recanted  nothing  and  modified  nothing,  and  he
defended  the  policy  of  his  Government  boldly  and  ably  in  the
House  of  Lords,^  but  he  was  disgusted  with  his  position  and
with  the  storm  of  obloquy  around  him  ;  he  disdainfully  threw
up  his  post,  refusing  to  give  any  specific  reason,^  and  retired
for  a  time  into  private  life.  Lord  North,  who  was  already
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  was  his  successor.

The  post  which  was  most  difficult  to  fill  was  that  of  Chancellor.
Mansfield  positively  refused  to  exchange  his  Chief  Justiceship
for  a  dignity  which  was  so  perilous  and  so  precarious,  and  Sir

• Chatham Corre!tpondence,iu.iiSO.  of  RocUngliam,  \\.  157.

2  Lord  Temple  described  this  cpi-  »  Kigby  wrote  (May  14,  1770),  '  I

sodc  as 'tlie  dismissal  of  the  virtuous  tliink the very best speech I  ever

and  independent  lord  wlio  sat  on  the  beard  in  my  life  was tlie Duke  of

woolsack,  in  order  to  supply  his  i)lace  Grafton's reply  to  Chatham,  a  very

by  some  obsequious  lawyer  who  would  memorable part of which was tlie

do as he was commanded.' Lord  most  solemn  declaration  that  a  man

Shelburne 'hoped  there would  not  can make in public, never to act

be  found  in  tlie  kingdom  a  wretch  so  again  in  public  business  witli  Lord

base  and  moan -spirited  as  to  accept  Chatliara.' — Bedford, Correspondence,

the  Seals  on  the  conditions  on  wliicli  iii.  412.
they  were  olTered.' — Albemarle's  Life  '  Waljiolc's  Gcorrjc  JIT.  iv.  87.

CH.  XI.  CIlAULl-.S VOKKK.  IGl

Kurdlcy  Wilinot,  I  lie  Chief  Just  ice  o(  Coininon  Plojis,  wlio
(l(>t('.;l(>(l  iind  despised  parfy  politics,  was  ecpially  peremptory
in  liis  refusal.  The  Court  had  at  this  moment  very  little
legal  ability  at  its  disposal,  and  the  candidate  who  appeared
in(jst  suitable  was  Charles  Yorkc,  a  younger  son  of  the  great
Lord  llardwieko,  and  brother  of  one  of  the  most  intimate
friends  of  Kockingliam.  As  a  very  young  man,  he  had  gained
a  considerable  literary  reputation  by  a  once  popular,  though
now  forgotten,  book  called  'Athenian  Letters,'  and  he  had
become  Solicitor-General  before  the  death  of  George  II.,  and
Attorney-General  in  the  troubled  ministry  that  succeeded.  He
n'signed  at  last,  but  only  after  the  procsedings  against  Wilkes.
He  then  separated  himself  completely  from  the  party  of  Bute,
but  still  maintained  a  somewhat  independent  line.  In  the
debates  that  grew  out  of  the  Wilkes  prosecutions  he  condemned
the  principle  of  general  warrants,  though  contending  that  they
had  been  frequently  employed ;  but  he  maintained  in  oppo-
sition to  Pitt,  and  in  a  speech  which  extorted  the  highest
eulogy  from  Walpole,  that  parliamentary  privilege  does  not
extend  to  cases  of  libel.  In  the  Rockingham  Ministry  he  was
again  Attorney-General,  and  he  appeared  now  completely  iden-
tified with  that  party,  and  resigned  his  post  on  the  accession
of  Pitt.  With  something  more  than  the  usual  keenness  of
professional  an)bition,he  combined  a  very  unprofessional  sensi-
tiveness of  character,  and  though  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  and
on  the  whole  an  exceedingly  prosperous  man,  he  was  restless,
discontented,  morbid,  nervous,  and  vacillating,  and  the  natural
infirmities  of  his  temperament  were  at  this  time  aggravated
by  ill-health.  He  had  been  thought  of  as  Chancellor  by
Charles  Townshend,  when  that  statesman  contemplated  a
secession  from  Chatham,  but  on  the  whole  he  had  remained
lirmly  attached  to  the  Eockingham  connection,  and  had  pledged
himself  to  Rockingham  and  to  his  brother  to  decline  the  post
which  the  Duke  of  Grafton  had  offered  him.  He  at  first  honour-
ably fulfilled  his  promise;  but  the  King,  who  was  passionately
interested  in  maintaining  his  Ministry,  resolved  to  interpose
and  he  exerted  all  his  personal  influence  to  gain  his  point.
His  eflibrts  in  a  private  interview  were  in  vain  ;  Yorke,  though
restless  and  agitated  through  disappointed  ambition,  adhered
VOL.  III.  M

1G2  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,  en.  xi.

to  his  pledge  and  refused  to  desert  his  party,  and  the  negotia-
tioD  appeared  to  have  terminated.  On  the  nest  day,  however,
•when  he  was  attending  a  levee,  he  was  again  called  into  the
closet  of  the  King,  who  renewed  with  intense  earnestness  his
eutreatieb.  Of  the  particulars  of  the  interview,  we  only  know
that  the  King  appealed  to  his  loyalty  as  a  subject  not  to
abandon  him  in  his  distress,  that  he  appealed  to  his  self-
interest  as  a  lawyer,  intimating  to  him  that  if  he  now  refused
them,  the  Seals,  which  were  the  highest  object  of  his  ambition,
would  under  no  possible  circumstances  be  again  offered  to  him,
and  that  he  at  length  succeeded  by  long  persistence  in  over-
bearing his  opposition,  and,  in  the  words  of  Lord  Hardwicke,
'  compelling  him  '  to  accept  the  post.  The  unhappy  man  went
from  the  royal  cabinet  to  his  brother's  house,  where  he  met
the  leaders  of  the  Opposition.  He  felt  at  once  the  full  enormity
of  what  he  had  done,  and  fled  broken-hearted  to  his  own  house.
In  three  days  he  was  a  dead  man.  According  to  the  version
circulated  by  his  family,  his  death  was  due  to  natural  disease,
accelerated  by  excitement  and  mental  anguish.  According  to
another  and  more  probable  account,  he  died  by  his  own  hand.
The  patent  which  raised  him  to  the  peerage  had  been  made  out,
and  awaited  only  the  impression  of  the  Great  Seal.  When
he  was  dying,  he  was  asked  to  authorise  that  impression,  but
he  refused,  and  added,  with  a  shudder,  that  he  hoped  the  Seal
was  no  longer  in  his  custody.^

It  might  have  been  supposed  that  by  this  time,  at  least,
Conway,  who  still  shared  most  of  the  sentiments  of  the  Eock-
ingham  Whigs,  would  have  perceived  that  it  was  his  duty  to
sever  himself  from  the  Ministry,  but  he  still  for  some  time
continued  in  the  Cabinet.  In  January  1770,  shortly  after  the
death  of  Yorke,  the  King  offered  him  the  Mastership  of  the
Ordnance,  which  was  vacant  by  the  resignation  of  Granby.
The  office  was  a  military,  not  a  political  one,  but  to  accept  it
at  this  critical  moment  was  evidently  to  involve  himself  still
further  in  his  connection  with  the  Court.  After  infinite  hesi-
tation he  at  last  arrived  at  a  characteristic  compromise,  and
agreed  to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  office  without  accepting

'  Harris'  Life  of  llardnidtc,  iii.  465-479. Campbell's Chancellors,  vii.

on.  XI.  OPPOSITION OP CHATHAM.  103

the  .siilary.  As  Ioiilj  ;is  (Jninon  rciiiuiiicd  he  (Ictormiiiod  to
n'lnain  in  tlu;  ('abiiict,and  Le  did  his  utmost  to  induce*  Grafton
to  ri'iiiain.  Tlie  resignation  of  Grafton  at  hist  brought  this
strange  and  discrt'difahle  scene  to  an  end,  and  Conway  then
detached  hiin.self  from  the  Administration.'

The  opposition  of  Chatham  to  the  Goverurncnt  was  at  this
time  of  the  most  violent  description,  and  his  language  recalls
that  which  he  was  accustomed  to  employ  in  his  early  contests
with  Walpole  and  Carteret.  He  repeatedly,  in  different  forms,
endeavoured  to  obtain  from  the  Lords  a  resolution  affirming
the  unconstitutional  character  of  the  decision  of  the  Commons
about  Wilkes.  He  brought  forward  a  resolution  asking  for  the
dissolution  of  Parliament,  and  even  a  Bill  for  reversing  the
decision  of  the  Lower  Houro.  He  denounced  the  conduct  of
the  Commons  in  language  little  less  vehement  than  that  of  the
City  remonstrance,  and  intimated  not  obscurely  that  if  per-
sisted in  it  would  justify  rebellion.  Of  the  conduct  of  the
King,  of  the  King's  ministers,  and  especially  of  the  King's
friends,  he  spoke  with  scarcely  an  affectation  of  reserve.  '  These
measures,'  he  said  in  one  of  his  speeches,  'made  a  part  of  that
unhappy  system  which  had  been  fdrmed  in  the  present  reign
with  a  view  to  new  model  the  Constitution  as  well  as  the
Government.  .  .  .  The  Commons  had  slavishly  obeyed  the
commands  of  his  ^Majesty's  servants,  and  had  proved  to  the
conviction  of  every  man,  what  might  have  been  only  matter
of  suspicion  before,  that  ministers  held  a  corrupt  influence
in  Parliament.  It  was  demonstrable,  it  was  indisputable.'''
Speaking  of  his  own  experience  as  a  minister,  he  said,  in  words
which  read  like  an  echo  of  those  of  Grenville  and  Rockingham  :
*  I  was  duped,  I  was  deceived.  I  soon  found  that  there  was  no
original  administration  to  be  suffered  in  this  countrv.  The
same  secret  influence  still  prevailed  which  had  put  an  end  to
all  the  successive  administrations  as  soon  as  they  opposed  or
declined  to  act  under  it.  .  .  .  The  obstacles  and  difficulties
which  attended  every  great  and  public  measure  did  not  arise
from  those  out  of  government. They  were  suggested,  nourished,

'  \\'a]po\c's  d'orjc  III.  iy.5i>,r>G.  ■  Chatham Coyresvondrncc, iii.

CO.  61,  1V3.  418.

V  2

164  ENGLAND IN THE EIGETEENTK CENTURY.  en.  xi.

and  supported  by  tliat  secret  influence  I  have  mentioned,  and
by  the  industry  of  those  very  dependants ;  first  by  secret
treachery,  then  by  official  influence,  afterwards  in  public  coun-
cils. A  long  train  of  these  practices  has  at  length  unwillingly
convinced  me  that  there  is  something  behind  the  throne  greater
than  the  King  himself.' '  In  Grafton  he  expressed  himself  com-
pletely deceived.  '  There  was  in  his  conduct  from  the  time  of  my
being  taken  ill,  a  gradual  deviation  from  everything  that  had
been  settled  and  solemnly  agreed  to  by  his  Grrace  both  as  to  mea-
sures and  men,  till  at  last.there  were  not  left  two  planks  together
of  the  ship  which  had  been  originally  launched.'^  He  strenuously
supported  an  inquiry  into  the  expenditure  which  had  caused  the
King's  debts,  intimating  very  clearly  that  in  his  judgment  the
debts  had  been  incurred  in  corrupting  the  representatives,  and
he  asked  whether  the  Sovereign  '  means,  by  drawing  the  purse-
strings  of  his  subjects,  to  spread  corruption  through  the  people,
to  procure  a  Parliament  like  a  packed  jury,  ready  to  acquit  his
ministers  at  all  adventures?'^  When  the  King  made  his
famous  answer  rebuking  the  Corporation  of  London  for  the  dis-
respectful language  of  their  petition,  Chatham  moved  a  resolu-
tion censuring  those  who  had  advised  the  King  to  give  such  an
answer,  on  the  ground  that  the  legal  right  of  the  subject  to
petition  f@r  redress  of  grievances  had  been  indiscriminately
checked  and  reprimanded.'*  Quoting  from  Eobertson,  he  re-
minded the  House  of  Lords  how  Charles  V.  had  once  '  cajoled
and  seduced '  the  peers  of  Castile  to  join  him  in  overturning
that  part  of  the  Cortes  which  represented  the  people ;  how
'  they  were  weak  enough  to  adopt,  and  base  enough  to  be  flat-
tered with  an  expectation  that  by  assisting  their  master  in
this  iniquitous  purpose  they  would  increase  their  own  strength
and  importance,'  and  how,  as  a  just  and  natural  consequence,
they  soon  '  exchanged  the  constitutional  authority  of  peers  for
the  titular  vanity  of  grandees.'*  He  reprobated  with  the
utmost  vehemence  the  patient  attitude  of  the  Ministry  towards
Spain  ;  spoke  of  that  Power  in  language  which  could  only  have
been  used  on  the  supposition  that  war  with  her  was  inevitable

' Chatham CorrcHpondcncc, iii.  '  Ibid.  pp.  424,  426.

422.  *  Ibid.  p.  4r)3.

■>■  Ibid.  pp.  423,  42.J  "  Ibid.  p.  :!72.

cu.  XI.  OVKRTURHS TO RorivINC  IIA^F.  165

Hnd  di'sir.'ihlc,  hl.uiK-d  IIh;  ministers  severely  for  llu-  neglect
into  which  they  had  sutrfrcil  the  naval  and  military  st,'rvices  to
fall,  ('numeral cd  in  a  speech  of  great  ptnver  and  knowledge  the
ditVerent  measures  (Iia(  were  required  to  restore  them  to  elH-
ciency,  and  at  (he  same  time,  with  his  usual  independence,
denounced  the  conduct  of  Wilkes  and  of  the  popular  party,
who  by  raising  an  outcry  against  the  system  of  pressgangs  were
crippling  (he  streng(h  of  the  nation.'

Cha(  ham  at  this  time  took  great  pains  to  effect  an  union  wit  h
the  other  Whigs,  and  especially  with  Rockingham,  and  he  ap-
pears to  have  become  at  last  sensible  of  the  error  he  had  made
in  so  often  discarding  or  repudiating  their  assistance.  His  old
distinctive  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  breaking  up  parties  now
disappears.  '  There  are  men  who,  if  their  ow^n  services  were  for-
gotten, ought  to  have  an  hereditary  merit  with  the  House  of
Hanover.  ...  I  would  not  wish  the  favours  of  the  Crown  to
flow  inv;u-ia])ly  in  one  channel.  But  there  are  some  distinctions
which  are  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things.  There  is  a  distinc-
tion between  right  and  wrong — between  Whig  and  Tory.  .  .  .
An  Jidministration  must  be  popular  that  it  may  begin  with  repu-
tation. It  must  be  strong  within  itself  that  it  may  proceed  with
vigour  and  decision.' ^  No  sound  ministry  could  be  maintained
by  fraud  or  even  by  exclusive  systems  of  family  connections  or
powerful  friendships,  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  careful  to  add
that  no  one  valued  more  '  that  honourable  connection  which  arises
from  a  disinterested  concurrence  in  opinion  upon  public  mea-
sures, or  from  the  sacred  bond  of  private  friendship  and  esteem.'
(^f  Kockingham  himself,  both  in  public  and  private,  he  spoke
with  deep  respect.  *  As  for  Lord  Kockingham,'  he  wrote  to
Calcraft,  '  I  have  a  firm  reliance  on  his  zeal  for  liberty,  and  will
not  separate  from  him.'^  'His  whole  language,' he  wrote,  in
another  letter,  after  an  interview  with  Kockingham,  '  was  as  I
expected,  honourable,  just,  and  sensible. My  esteem  and  con-

'  Chatham Correspondence,  iv.  2-  which  lie  had  adopted  about parly

18.  trovernment  in  ihe  tirst  years  of  the

-  Il>i(l.  iv.  17.18.  reign was  a  mistake. 'For  fifteen

'Ibid. iii. 43l». In one  of t)ie  years,' he  said,  '  there  had  been  a  .«ys-

la.<t  speeches CI  athani  made (Dec.  tern  at  St.  James's of breaking  all

r>,  1777),  there  is  a  remarkable  passage  connections, of extinguishing all

which Gin he construiKl  into  little  principle. A few menhad got  an

li  >s  il.an  a  confes^iun  tliat the  line  ascendency  where no mam shoultl

166  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xi.

fideiice  in  his  lordship's  upright  intentions  grow  from  every
conversation  with  him.''  In  seconding  a  motion  of  Eocking-
ham  he  took  occasion  to  say  that  he  wished  this  to  be
considered  as  a  public  demonstration  of  his  cordial  union  with
that  statesman.  '  There  has  been  a  time,  my  lords,'  he  added,
'  when  those  who  wished  well  to  neither  of  us,  who  wished  to
see  us  separated  for  ever,  found  a  sufficient  gratification  for
their  malignity  against  us  both.  But  that  time  is  happily  at
an  end.  The  friends  of  this  country  will,  I  doubt  not,  hear
with  pleasure  that  the  noble  lord  and  his  friends  are  now  united
with  me  and  mine,  upon  a  principle  which,  I  trust,  will  make
our  union  indissoluble.  .  .  .  No  ministerial  artifices,  no  private
offers,  no  secret  seduction,  can  divide  us.'  ^

The  picture  was  somewhat  overcoloured.  The  correspond-
ence of  Chatham  himself,  and  the  correspondence  of  Burke,
who  was  the  most  confidential  as  he  was  by  far  the  ablest  friend
of  Eockingham,  suffice  to  show  that  the  jealousy  that  once
divided  the  two  parties  was  by  no  means  extinct.  On  the
Eockingham  side  there  was  some  very  natural  personal  resent-
ment, and  also  a  constant  fear  lest  Chatham  should  resume  his
old  policy  of  breaking  up  that  strong  party  organisation  which
in  the  opinion  of  Burke  was  the  sole  method  of  putting  an  end
to  the  impotence  of  successive  administrations  and  restraining
the  influence  of  the  Crown.  On  the  side  of  Chatham,  there
was  a  stronger  sympathy  with  the  democratic  element  in  the
country,  and  a  proneness  to  employ  stronger  language  and  to
resort  to  more  energetic  measures  than  the  Eockinghams
desired.  '  The  Marquis,'  he  wrote  in  one  of  his  letters,  '  is  an
honest  and  honourable  man,  but  "  moderation,  moderation,"  is

have  a  personal  ascendency;  by  the  grown  old,  and  find  myself  unable  to

executive  powers  of  the  State  heinjj  at  fill  any  ofiice  of  business ;  but  this  I

tlieir  command  they  had been  fur-  am  resolved  upon,  that  I  will  not  even

nished  with  the  means  of  creating;  di-  sit  at  council  but  to  meet  t-iie  friends

visions.  This  brou<i:ht])liable  men,  not  of  Lord  Rockingham;  wliatever  dif-

capable men,  into the  highest  and  ferences  may  liave  been  between  us

most  responsible  situations, and to  tliey  must  be  forgotten. The  state  of

such  men  was  the  government  of  this  the  nation  is  such that all private

once  glorious  empire  now  entrusted.' —  animosities  must  subside. He,  and

Thacieray's  Life  of  Ckat/ianifii. 'M^i.  lie alone, has a knot of spotless

' Chatham  Corregpon.dcnce,'n\A'6\.  friends  such  as  ouglit  to  govern  tliis

^  Ibid.  p.  408. Lord  Fitzwilliain  kingdom.' See  too  a  similar  conver-

reported  to  Rockingham,  November  sation  reported  by  the  Duke  of  Port-

1 769,  a  conversation  in  which  Chat-  land. — Albemarle's  Life  of  liovkiiig-

ham  said: 'For  my  own  part  I  am  ham,\\.  112,  143

cri.  M.  TIJIIMi'lI Ol' TIIK GOVKRNMKNT.  107

1  Ih'  Iiiirf'fii  of  tilt'  soiiLf  ;iiii<)ii<r  (li»^  body.  l-'or  myself  I  lun
resolved  to  hi;  in  eiiniest  for  tiio  public,  and  shall  be  a  scare-
crow of  violence  to  the  gentle  warblers  of  tlic  grove,  tlie  m-'nle-
rate  \\liigs  and  temperate  statesmen.''  Still  in  public  th«*
(wo  parties  were  agreed,  and  a  coalition  was  formed  against  the
(lovernment  wliich  once  would  have  been  invincible.  As  Philip
Francis  afterwards  wrote,  '  North  succeeded  to  what  I  be-
lieve he  himself  and  every  man  in  the  kingdom  at  that  time
thought  a  forlorn  hope.'^  Chatham,  Rockingham,  Grenville,
and  Temple  were  united  under  the  same  banner,  wliile  a  fever
of  public  opinion  had  ])een  excited  in  the  country  by  the  ]\Iid-
dlesex  election  which  had  never  been  paralleled  since  the  fall
of  Walpole.

The  result  was  the  complete  triumph  of  the  Government.
The  induence  of  the  Court  was  now  so  great,  and  its  attractive
power  so  irresistible,  that  in  both  Houses  it  commanded  a
steady  and  unflinching  majority.  The  House  of  Lords,  which
in  the  case  of  the  Aylesbury  electors  under  Queen  Anne,  had
obtained  a  most  legitimate  popularity  by  its  defence  of  the
rights  of  electors  against  the  usurpations  of  the  Commons,  now
carried  every  resolution  of  the  Ministers  by  a  large  majority.
It  abdicated  one  of  its  most  important  functions  by  formally
declining  to  take  any  step  in  the  ^liddlesex  election,  on  the
ground  that  its  interference  would  be  unconstitutional ;  and
for  some  time,  in  order  to  diminish  as  much  as  possible  the
effects  of  the  eloquence  of  Chatham,  it  carefully  excluded
all  strangers  from  its  debates.  In  spite  of  the  coalition  of
the  scattered  fragments  of  the  Whig  party;  in  spite  of  the
petitions  which  poured  in  from  every  part  of  the  country
against  the  Government ;  in  spite  of  America,  of  Corsica,  and
of  the  Falkland  Islands ;  in  spite  of  the  manifest  decline  of
the  reputation  of  England,  which  had  recently  been  so  great,
and  jf  the  naval  and  military  services,  which  had  recentlv
b(^en  so  efficient,  the  majority  of  the  Government  was  un-
broken. In  Lord  North  the  King  had  found  a  servant  of
admirable  tact,  ability,  and  knowledge,  and  new  recruits  were
speedily  obtained. The  Great Seal  having  been placed  for

•  C/mtham  CvrrfitjHfndfHcc,ii\.iCt!<.  in Parkes  and  Merivale's  Li/c  of

•  See the autobiographical sketch I'rancit,  i.  3G2.

168  ENGL/VND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

about  a  year  in  Commission,  was  bestowed  on  Bathurst,  who,
though  an  undistinguished  lawyer  and  insignificant  politician,
held  it  for  more  than  seven  years.  Lord  Granby,  who  was  the
most  popular  of  the  recent  seceders  from  the  ministry,  died  in
October  1770.  George  Grenville  died  in  the  following  month,
and  three  months  later.  Lord  Suffolk,  who  pretended  to  lead
the  Grenville  party,  abandoned  all  his  former  principles,
and  joined  the  ministry  as  Privy  Seal.  Whately,  the  most  con-
fidential friend  of  Grenville,  took  the  same  course.  The  chief
members  of  the  Bedford  faction  had  already  gone  over,  and  the
Duke,  who  had  for  some  time  been  excluded  from  public  life
by  blindness  and  ill-health,  died  in  the  beginning  of  1771.
Sir  Edward  Hawke  was  replaced  at  the  Admiralty  by  Lord  Sand-
wich. Grafton,  who  had  once  professed  to  be  the  most  devoted
follower  of  Chatham,  solemnly  pledged  himself,  in  a  speech  in
May  1770,  never  again  to  act  with  him  in  public  business,'  and  a
year  later,  when  Lord  Suffolk,  on  the  death  of  Halifax,  exchanged
the  office  of  Privy  Seal  for  that  of  Secretary  of  State,  he  accepted
the  vacant  post,  though  with  the  characteristic  condition  that
he  should  not  be  required  to  attend  the  Cabinet.^  Thurlow,
who  was  advanced  to  the  position  of  Attorney-General,  showed
an  amount  of  legal  and  debating  power  which  restored  the
strength  of  the  ministry  in  the  department  where  it  was  most
weak,  and,  to  the  astonishment  and  scandal  even  of  the  corrupt
assembly  at  St.  Stephen's,  he  was  soon  joined  by  Wedderburn.
This  very  able  Scotchman — one  of  the  ablest  and  most  corrupt
of  the  many  able  and  corrupt  lawyers  who  in  the  eighteenth
century  were  conspicuous  in  English  politics — though  he  first
entered  Parliament  under  the  patronage  of  Bute,  had  for  some
time  been  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  opponents  of
the  Court.  His  repeated  and  eloquent  denunciations  of  the
American  policy  of  the  Government,  his  magnificent  defence  of
the  rights  of  electors  in  the  case  of  the  Middlesex  election,  and
his  resignation  of  his  borough  seat  because  its  patron  was
opposed  to  the  popular  cause,  had  made  him  one  of  the  idols
of  the  people.  Clive,  who  was  at  this  time  in  opposition,  at
once  provided  him  with  a  new  seat.  His  name  was  a  favourite
toast  at  the  popular  banquets. The  City  of  Loudon  voted  him

'  Bedford  Corrcf!2)o)idencc,'n\.  i\2. - Chathayn  Corn'spondcnce,  [v.  170.

CH.  XI.  TRIUMPH OF THE GOVEENMEIsT.  169

its  freedom ;  Chatham  spoke  of  him  with  warm  admiration,
and  the  Whig  party  imagined  that  another  Camden  had  arisen
in  their  ranks.  Wedderburn,  however,  was  only  working  with
great  shrewdness  and  more  than  common  effrontery  to  raise
his  price,  and  in  January  1771  he  concluded  a  secret  nego-
tiation with  North  by  becoming  Solicitor-General,  justifying
himself  on  the  ground  that  he  belonged  to  the  Grenville  con-
nection. The  Tory  party,  who  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the
Government  had  given  it  only  a  partial  and  hesitating  support,^
rallied  in  all  their  strength  around  Lord  North,  while  the
furious  quarrels  of  the  City  demagogues  divided,  weakened,
and  discredited  the  popular  cause.  Though  the  grievance  of
the  Middlesex  election  was  unredressed,  the  excitement  which
had  blazed  so  high  in  1768,  1769,  and  1770,  gradually  subsided,
and  it  was  followed  by  a  long  period  of  ignoble  apathy.

The  confidential  letters  of  the  leaders  of  the  Opposition  are
full  of  complaints  of  the  change  that  had  taken  place.  '  England
at  this  day,' wrote  Chatham  in  January  1771,  'is  no  more  like
Old  England  or  England  forty  yearr,  ago,  than  the  Monsignori
of  modern  Eome  are  like  the  Decii,  the  Gracchi,  or  the  Catos.'  ^
'  I  do  not  see,'  he  afterwards  wrote, '  that  the  smallest  good  can
result  to  the  public  from  my  coming  up  to  the  meeting  of  Par-
liament. A  headlong,  self-willed  spirit  has  sunk  the  City  into
nothing.  .  .  .  The  narrow  genius  of  old-corps  connection  has
weakened  the  Whigs,  and  rendered  national  union  on  revolution
principles  impossible.'  ^  '  The  public  has  slept  quietly  upon  the
violation  of  electors'  rights  and  the  tyranny  of  the  House  of
Commons.'*  '  Fuit  Uium  !  the  whole  constitution  is  a  shadow.'^
'  After  a  violent  ferment  in  the  nation,'  wrote  Burke,  '  as  re-
markable a  deadness  and  vapidity  has  succeeded.'  'The  people
have  fallen  into  a  total  indifference  to  any  matters  of  public
concern. I  do  not  suppose  that  there  was  ever  anything  like

'  See  a  remarkable  passage  in  one  last  a  king  who  knows  not  the  name

of  Dr.  Johnson's  pamiihlets  in  favour  of  party,  and  who  wishes  to  be  the

of  the Government. '  Every  honest  common  father  of  all  his  people.' —

man  must  lament  that  it  [the  Govern-  The  False  Alarm.
ment]  has  been  regarded  with  lixed  -  ChatJiam.  Correspondence,  iv  83.

neutrality  by  the  Tories,  who,  being  ^  Ibid.  iv.  187.

long acciistomed to signalise their  *  ibid.  p.  204.

principles  by  opposition  to  the  Court,  *  Ibid.  p.  259.

do  not  yet  consider  that  tbey  have  at

170  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xi,

this  stupor  in  any  period  of  our  history.' '  '  In  the  present
state  of  things,'  wrote  Junius  in  the  last  letter  he  addressed  to
Woodfall,  '  if  I  were  to  write  again,  I  must  be  as  silly  as  any
of  the  horned  cattle  that  run  mad  through  the  City,  or  as  any
of  your  wise  aldermen.  I  meant  the  cause  and  the  public
Both  are  given  up.  I  feel  for  the  honour  of  this  country  when
I  see  that  there  are  not  ten  men  in  it  who  will  unite  and  stand
together  upon  any  one  question.  But  it  is  all  alike,  vile  and
contemptible.' -

Yet  the  consequences  of  the  struggle  that  has  been  re-
counted were  by  no  means  so  transient  as  might  be  supposed.
New  questions,  new  lines  of  party  division,  new  political  forces
were  called  into  being,  and  the  condition  of  the  representative
body  assumed  a  prominence  in  English  politics  which  had
never  before  been  equalled.  At  the  time  of  the  Revolution  the
question  at  issue  lay  mainly  between  the  Crown  and  the  Par-
liament, and  it  was  the  great  effort  of  Whig  statesmen  and  of
the  Whig  party  to  check  the  encroachments  of  prerogative  and
to  strengthen  the  popular  branch  of  the  Legislature.  It  was
not  yet  foreseen  that  Parliament  could  itself  become  the  oppres-
sor of  the  people,  and  that  in  and  through  the  representative
body  the  Crown  could  regain  a  great  part  of  the  power  which
it  had  lost.  '  The  power  of  the  Crown,'  wrote  the  great  Whig
statesman  in  1770,  'almost  dead  and  rotten  as  prerogative,  has
grown  up  anew,  with  much  more  strength  and  far  less  odium,
under  the  name  of  influence.  An  influence  which  operated
without  noise  and  without  violence,  an  influence  which  con-
verted the  very  antagonist  into  the  instrument  of  power ;  which
contained  in  itself  a  perpetual  principle  of  growth  and  renova-
tion, and  which  the  distresses  and  the  prosperity  of  the  coimtry
equally  tended  to  augment,  was  an  admirable  substitute  for  a
prerogative  that,  being  only  the  offspring  of  antiquated  preju-
dice, had  moulded  in  its  original  stamina  irresistible  principles
of  decay  and  dissolution.' '  We  have  seen  the  appalling  extent
to  which  parliamentary  corruption  rose  under  the  first  two
Georges,  but  the  Whig  Government  usually  succeeded  so  well

'  Jiurkvs CorrcKjwndrnce,  i.  25(1,  '  r>iirl<e"s  ThniKjhl^t  on  the  I'trnivf.

3iG.  Lisconttnts.

'  Woudfall's  Jiniiuy,  i.  'i,jo.

OH.  XI.  GROWTH OF POLITICAL COERUPTION.  171

in  avoidiug  collisions  with  public  opinion  that  the  outbursts
against  it  were  rare,  transient,  and  feeble.  The  most  formid-
able was  at  the  close  of  the  ministry  of  Walpole ;  but  the  evil,
though  for  a  time  seriously  diminished  by  the  legislation  of
1743,  soon  displayed  a  renewed  vigour.  It  was  aggravated  by
the  growing  wealth  of  the  country,  which  made  the  struggle
for  seats  more  keen ;  by  the  disorganised  and  fluctuating  con-
dition of  parties,  which  in  many  constituencies  disturbed  and
unsettled  the  balance  of  political  power ;  by  the  appearance  of
the  Court  in  the  field  as  a  new  and  active  competitor  for  parlia-
mentary interest.  The  enormous  corruption  employed  to  carry
the  Peace  of  Paris,  the  new  system  of  issuing  Government
loans  at  extravagant  terms  and  distributing  the  shares  among
partisans  of  the  Government,  the  profligate  multiplication  of
Court  places,  all  stimulated  the  evil.  It  appeared  by  the  list  in
the  '  Court  Calendar,'  that  in  1770,  192  members  of  the  House
of  Commons  held  places  under  the  Government,  and  it  was
stated  that  the  number  of  places  had  doubled  since  1740.^
Another  very  important  source  of  corruption  arose  from  the
great  increase  of  the  National  Debt  resulting  from  the  war.
The  excise  and  customs  revenue  had  risen  to  about  six  millions
sterling,  and  the  numerous  officials  who  were  employed  to
collect  it  were,  for  the  most  part,  docile  servants  of  the  Govern-
ment. In  1782  Lord  Kockingham  declared  that  as  many  as
11,500  revenue  officers  were  employed,  and  that  no  less  than
70  elections  were  controlled  by  their  votes.^

In  the  first  decade  of  George  III.  also,  the  nabobs,  or
Indian  adventurers,  who  had  returned  in  great  numbers  laden
with  the  spoils  of  Hiudostan,  began  to  appear  prominently  in
English  political  life.  At  the  end  of  1767,  Chesterfield  being
desirous  of  bringing  his  son  into  Parliament  at  the  approach-
ing election,  offered  a  borough-jobber  2,500L  for  a  secure  seat,
but  was  told  '  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  borough
to  be  had  now,  for  that  the  rich  East  and  West  Indians  had
secm-ed  them  all  at  the  rate  of  3,000^.  at  least,  but  many  at
4,000L,  and  two  or  three  that  he  knew  at  5,000^.'3  '  For  some
years  past,'  said  Chatham,  in one of  his speeches in  1770,

'  AuniMlBefflitcr,  1770,  \->.  72.  =>  Cliesterfield's Ldtc-rs  to  /tis  :ij"

•  Pari.  Ilistorii,  xxiii.  lUl.  December  TJ,  17G7.  '

1  72  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  en.  xi,

'  there  has  been  an  influx  of  wealth  into  this  country  which
has  been  attended  with  many  fatal  consequences,  because
it  has  not  been  the  regular,  natural  produce  of  labour  and
industry.  The  riches  of  Asia  have  been  poured  in  upon  us,
and  have  brought  with  them  not  only  Asiatic  luxury,  but,  I
fear,  Asiatic  principles  of  government.  Without  connections,
without  any  natural  interest  in  the  soil,  the  importers  of  foreign
gold  have  forced  their  way  into  Parliament  by  such  a  torrent
of  private  corruption  as  no  private  hereditary  fortune  could
resist.'  ^  It  was  very  natural  that  a  class  of  men  who  were  for
the  most  part  utterly  ignorant  of  English  politics  and  indifferent
to  English  liberty,  whose  habits  of  thought  had  been  formed  in
scenes  of  unbridled  violence  and  despotism,  and  who  had  ob-
tained their  seats  for  purely  personal  ends  and  by  the  most
lavish  corruption,  should  have  been  ready  to  support  every
attempt  to  encroach  upon  the  Constitution.  They  usually
attached  themselves  to  the  King's  friends.  CKve  himself  at
one  time  brought  no  less  than  five  members  into  Parliament,
and  we  find  him,  in  1767,  bargaining  for  an  English  peerage
as  the  reward  of  his  services  against  Wilkes.^  The  sums  that
were  lavished  in  parliamentary  contests  at  this  time  had  prob-
ably never  before  been  equalled.  In  spite  of  the  scandalous
spoliation  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  by  Sir  James  Lowther,
Portland  succeeded  in  wresting  Westmoreland  and  Cumber-
land from  Lowther  in  the  elections  of  1768,  but  each  party
is  said  to  have  expended  40,000^  in  the  contests.^  The  con-
test for  the  town  of  Northampton  at  the  same  election  cost
each  party  at  least  30,000Z.'*  'The  immense  wealth,'  said
Walpole,  '  that  had  flowed  into  the  country  from  the  war  and
the  East  Indies  bore  down  all  barriers  of  economy,  and  intro-
duced a  luxury  of  expense  unknown  to  empires  of  vaster  ex-
tent.' 5

There  were  some  cases  of  corruption  so  flagrant  that  Par-
liament was  obliged  to  take  notice  of  them.  In  1761,  the
borough  of  Sudbury  openly  advertised  itself  for  sale.*^ At  the

' Chatham  Corrcx2>ondence,  in  AO?).  April  12,  ]7()8.

"^  Grcntille  J'ajjc-rs,  \v.  li. Wal-  *  Wix.]i)o\c'ii  Memoirs  of  Gccr/je  III.

p(.ie's  (liorqc  111.  i.  3;iO.  iii.  1!)8.

a  Walpo'le's  acoryc.  J  J  I.  iii.  107.  "  Ibid.  i.  42.

■•  Clioaterflcld's  Letters  to  his  Son,

CH.  SI.  CONDITION OF REPRESENTATION.  173

next  election  the  magistrates  of  the  city  of  Oxford  wrote  a
formal  letter  to  their  late  representatives  offering  to  secure  their
re-election  on  condition  of  their  paying  the  Corporation  debt.
The  offending  magistrates  were  summoned  before  the  House,
reprimanded  for  their  conduct,  and  confined  for  -five  days  in
Newgate,  but  the  House  refused  to  authorise  their  prosecution,
and  they  are  said  to  have  completed  their  bargain  with  their
members  diu-ing  the  short  period  of  their  detention.'  A  few
borough-brokers  whose  too  open  proceedings  had  been  brought
under  the  unwilling  notice  of  Parliament  after  the  election  of
1768,  were  thrown  for  a  short  time  into  Newgate  ;^  and  Judge
Willes,  in  trying  an  aggravated  case  of  bribery  by  the  mayor
of  a  Cornish  borough,  took  occasion  to  say  that  '  the  crime
had  got  to  such  a  pitch  that  it  threatened  the  utter  ruin  of  the
nation.'^  At  Shoreham  it  was  discovered  that  the  majority  of
the  freemen  had  formed  themselves  into  a  permanent  society
called  the  '  Christian  Club,'  for  the  purpose  of  selling  the  seat
to  the  highest  bidder,  and  of  monopolising  the  purchase-money
to  the  prejudice  of  the  other  electors.  After  long  discussions
eighty-one  of  the  offending  freemen  were  disfranchised,  and  an
important  precedent  was  created  by  a  measure  extending  the
right  of  voting  for  members  of  that  borough  to  all  40s.  free-
holders in  the  adjoining  rape  of  Bramber.'*

The  constitution  of  the  House  of  Commons  was,  indeed,
such  that  even  if  there  had  not  been  systematic  corruption  in
the  constituencies  and  among  the  members,  it  would  have  had
but  little  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  true  representative  of  the
nation.  In  a  book  published  in  1774  it  was  shown  by  very
careful  computations  that  out  of  the  513  members  who  sat  for
England  and  Wales,  as  many  as  254  represented  less  than
11,500  voters,  and  as  many  as  56  about  700  voters.  Of
these  56  members  no  one  had  a  constituency  of  38  electors,
and  6  had  constituencies  of  not  more  than  3.  The  county  of
INIiddlesex,  including  London  and  Westminster,  returned  only
8  members,  while  Cornwall  returned  44.^  And  yet,  taken  as  a
whole,  the  representation  of  England  and  Wales  was  far  more

'  Pari.  Hid.  xvi.  397-402. Wal-  ^  Anmial  Register, 1771,  pp.  .54,

pole's  6'<'«;'.<76^  JJJ.  iii.  153,  154.  .06. Adolplms,  \.^1\).

-  Walpole's  George  IIT.'iW.  ^i>~.  ^  De Burgh's Political  I>lsserta-

Annual  Begister,  17G9,  p.  93.  twns,  i.  40-48.

174  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

real  and  more  independent  than  that  of  Scotland.'  As  long  as
the  House  of  Commons  abstained  from  violently  opposing  the
popular  wishes  these  anomalies  were  acquiesced  in ;  but  the
JMiddlesex  election  for  the  first  time  brought  it  into  open  oppo-
sition to  public  opinion.

The  year  1769  is  very  memorable  in  political  history,  for
it  witnessed  the  birth  of  English  Kadicalism,  and  the  first
serious  attempts  to  reform  and  control  Parliament  by  a  pres-
sure from  without,  making  its  members  habitually  subser-
vient to  their  constituents.  Small  extra-parliamentary  meet-
ings of  active  politicians,  usually  members  of  Parliament,  for
the  purpose  of  supporting  or  opposing  particular  measures  or
statesmen,  were  already  well  known  in  English  public  life.
The  famous  meeting  at  the  '  Fountain,'  where  Pulteney
harangued  against  the  policy  of  Walpole,  and  the  meeting  of
t  he  followers  of  Walpole  to  discuss  the  propriety  of  persevering
with  the  Excise  Bill,  are  well-known  examples.  In  the  great
agitations  of  1641  and  1642  there  had  been  many  instances  of
great  assemblies  for  the  purpose  of  subscribing  or  presenting
petitions  to  the  King  or  to  the  Parliament,^  and  a  movement
of  the  same  kind  was  created  in  opposition  to  the  Excise
Bill  of  Walpole.^  But  it  was  only  in  the  agitation  of  1769  and
1770  that  open,  popular  meetings,  for  the  purpose  of  giving
expression  to  public  opinion  on  great  political  questions  be-
came a  normal  and  important  element  in  English  public  life.^
The  innovation  rapidly  spread.  At  one  meeting  which  was
held  in  Westminster  Hall  in  the  August  of  1769,  7,000  persons
are  said  to  have  been  present ;  ^  and  there  were  soon  few
counties  in  which  large  bodies  of  freeholders  did  not  assemble
to  protest  against  the  conduct  of  the  Parliament,  to  draw  up
instructions  for  their  members,  or  to  petition  the  King  for
redress  of  grievances.  A  multitude  of  small  political  societies,
under  the  guidance  of  local  politicians,  were  accustomed  to
meet at  different  taverns  in  the  City;  but they  were  soon

'  On  the  extraordinary  condition  *  Cooke's  Hint,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.

of  the  Scotch  representation  before  187.  May's  Coiiirtitntionol  History,  ii.

the  Ileforra  P.ill  of  18:]2,  see  IVIay's  121.  Buckle's  Y/iv!;.  of  Civilisation,  i.

ConMitutional  Hintory.  i.  301-304.  391,  395.

'■^  Sec  Clarendon's  History,  i.  403,  '-  Annual  licgistcr,  17fi9,  pp. 125.

101,  412,  413;  iii.  f)].  120.

■'  Tindal's  History,  iv.  219.

CH.  XI.  AGITATION FOR rARLL\MIiNTAllY JiEFORM.  175

absorbed  or  eclipsed  by  a  great  democratic  association  called
the  Society  of  the  Supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Eights,  which  was
founded  in  17G9  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  Wilkes  in  his
struggle  with  the  Court,  and  of  advocating  political  changes  of
the  most  drastic  character.  The  man  who  appears  to  have
contributed  most  largely  to  its  formation  was  Home,  the  Vicar
of  Brentford,  afterwards  better  known  as  Home  Tooke,  who
had  now  thrown  aside  the  clerical  profession,  for  which  he  was
utterly  unsuited,  and  flung  himself  unreservedly  into  political
agitation.  The  great  contributions  to  grammar  and  the  science
of  language  which  have  given  him  a  permanent  place  in
English  literature  belong  to  a  later  period  of  his  life,  and  at
this  time  he  was  known  chiefly  as  one  of  the  most  violent
agitators  among  the  City  politicians.  He  possessed  some  lite-
rary and  still  greater  forensic  ability,  and  was  a  man  of
undoubted  energy,  courage,  honesty,  and  independence,  but  at
the  same  time  turbulent,  vain,  and  quarrelsome,  and  very  un-
scrupulous about  the  means  he  employed.  In  the  cause  which
was  raised  by  the  Middlesex  election,  he  once  said  that  he  was
prepared  to  dye  his  black  coat  red ;  and  he  was  very  active  in
canvassing,  organising  public  meetings,  writing  libels,  and  en-
deavouring to  hunt  to  death  those  unfortunate  men  who  were
accused  of  having  committed  murder  in  the  riots  that  grew
out  of  the  election.  Wilkes  himself,  and  also  Glynn,  Saw-
bridge,  Oliver,  and  Townshend,  who  represented  the  City  party
in  Parliament,  were  among  the  original  members  of  the  society,
and  a  long  series  of  tests  were  prepared  to  be  offered  to  can-
didates at  elections.  Every  candidate  was  required  to  aim
at  a  full  and  equal  representation  of  the  people  in  Parlia-
ment, annual  Parliaments,  the  exclusion  from  the  House  of
Commons  of  every  member  who  accepted  any  place,  pension,
contract,  lottery  ticket,  or  other  form  of  emolument  from  the
Crown  ;  the  exaction  of  an  oath  against  bribery ;  the  impeach-
ment of  the  ministers  who  had  violated  the  rights  of  the
Middlesex  freeholders,  and  instigated  the  '  massacre '  of  St.
George's  Fields  ;  the  redress  of  the  grievances  of  Ireland,  and
the  rfjstoration  of  the  sole  right  of  self-taxation  to  America.
Home,  and  a  large  section  of  the  more  respectable  members,
soon  after  retired  from  the  society  in  consequence  of  the  quarrel

176  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xi.

between  Wilkes  and  Home  ;  but  the  seceders  formed  a  new
and  very  similar  club,  called  the  '  Constitutional  Society,'
which  was  the  parent  of  many  later  societies,  such  as  the
'  Whig  Club,'  the  '  Friends  of  the  People,'  and  the  '  London
Corresponding  Society.'  ^

It  was  a  leading  doctrine  of  the  new  party  that  a  member
of  Parliament  should  be  simply  a  delegate,  who  must  regulate
his  political  career  entirely  according  to  the  wishes  of  his  con-
stituents. In  a  great  meeting  which  was  held  in  February
17G9,  Beckford  declared  that  if  he  received  instructions  from
his  constituents  directing  him  to  take  a  course  opposed  to  his
convictions,  he  would  consider  himself  bound  to  do  so,  and
'  would  not  oppose  his  judgment  to  that  of  6,000  of  his  fellow-
citizens.'  The  habit  of  sending  instructions  from  constituencies
to  members  was  warmly  encouraged,  and  in  the  course  of  1769
it  had  become  common.  The  Radical  party,  however,  was
very  weak  in  Parliament  and  not  strong  in  the  country.  It
included  a  few  speculative  republicans,  the  most  prominent  of
whom  were  Mrs.  Macaulay,  the  historian,  who  was  sister  to
Alderman  Sawbridge,  and  a  wealthy  and  very  excellent  private
gentleman  named  Hollis,  whose  passion  for  printing  and  col-
lecting magnificent  editions  of  English  seventeenth  century
works  in  defence  of  liberty  made  him  well  known  to  students,
and  whose  donations  may  be  traced  in  several  foreign  libraries.^

One  of  the  results  of  this  movement  was,  that  the  Whigs
were  compelled,  though  slowly  and  timidly,  to  identify  them-
selves with  the  question  of  parliamentary  reform.  Hitherto
the  question  had  not  been  fully  appropriated  by  either  party,
and  it  was  by  no  means  clear  to  which  party  its  advocacy
would  ultimately  fall.  The  Whigs  represented  especially  the
mobile  and  progressive  classes  in  the  community ;  and  as  they
owed  their  origin  to  a  great  struggle  for  political  liberty,  they
were  the  natural  guardians  of  the  popular  element  in  the  Con-
stitution. But,  on  the  other  hand,  for  half  a  century  after  the
accession  of  the  House  of  Brunswick,  they  kept  the  Revolution
Settlement  intact  mainly  by  a  parliamentary  majority  derived

'  Stephen's  JAfe  of  'Home  Toohe,  i.  '  tlie  supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Eights.'

lf.:?-175. Sec  too  a  remarkable  letter  — Woodfall's  Junius,  i.  275-296.
of  Junius  to  Wilkes  severely  critiois-  ^  Annual  lie(jutcr, 1709, p. 73.

ing  the  resolutions  of  the  society  of  Walpolc's  Gcoryc  lll.\\\.'6'i\.

oa.  XI.  TORY ADVOCATES OF REFORM.  177

from  Whig  nomination  boroughs  at  a  time  when  the  popular
sentiment  was  usually  sullen,  hostile,  or  indifferent.  During
all  that  time  they  were  the  party  of  the  Government,  and
had  therefore  the  conservative  instincts  which  power  naturally
produces,  and  they  included  the  commercial  classes,  who  were
much  more  disposed  and  tempted  to  bribe  than  the  country
gentry.  The  Tories,  as  we  have  seen,  were  long  the  habitual
advocates  of  short  parliaments,  place  Bills,  and  pension  Bills ;
and  one  of  the  strongest  sentiments  of  the  country  gentry  was
dislike  to  that  corruption  by  which  merchants,  and  at  a  later
period  Indian  nabobs,  so  often  succeeded  in  defeating  them
among  their  tenants.  This  appears  very  clearly  in  the  writings
of  Bolingbroke.  '  As  to  Parliaments,'  wrote  Swift  to  Pope  in
1 72 1 , '  I  adored  the  wisdom  of  that  Gothic  institution  which  made
them  annual ;  and  I  was  confident  our  liberty  could  never  be
placed  upon  a  firm  foundation  until  that  ancient  law  were  re-
stored among  us.  For  who  sees  not  that  while  such  assemblies
are  permitted  to  have  a  longer  duration,  there  groweth  up  a
commerce  of  corruption  between  the  ministry  and  the  deputies
.  .  .  which  traffic  would  neither  answer  the  design  nor  ex-
pense if  Parliaments  met  once  a  year.'  Among  the  posthumous
works  of  Swift,  there  is  a  short  but  very  remarkable  '  Essay
on  Public  Absurdities,'  in  which  that  great  Tory  writer  enume-
rated what  he  deemed  the  chief  political  evils  of  his  time.  It
is  imbued  with  the  strongest  prejudices  of  his  party.  He
speaks  of  the  folly  of  giving  votes  to  any  who  did  not  belong
to  the  established  religion  of  the  country.  He  condemns  ab-
solutely standing  armies.  He  deplores  that  persons  without
landed  property  could  by  means  of  the  boroughs  obtain  an
entrance  into  Parliament.  But  side  by  side  with  these  views  we
find  him  blaming  the  custom  of  throwing  the  expense  of  an
election  upon  a  candidate,  the  custom  of  making  forty-shilling
freeholders  in  order  to  give  votes  to  landlords,  and  the  im-
munity of  members  and  their  servants  from  civil  suits.  '  It  is
likewise,'  he  adds,  '  absurd  that  boroughs  decayed  are  not  abso-
lutely extinguished  because  the  returned  members  do  in  reality
represent  nobody  at  all ;  and  that  several  large  towns  are  not
represented  though  full  of  industrious  townsmen.' ' But  the

'  Scott's  Sivift.,  X.  P,62-3G6.
VOL. III.  N

178  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTII CENTURY.  cit.  xi.

hopes  of  reform  Avliich  had  been  raised  on  the  accession  of
George  III.  soon  proved  vain  ;  corruption  under  a  Tory  ministry
advanced  in  new  forms  and  with  an  accelerated  rapidity,  and  it
was  no  longer  the  Court  but  the  people  who  looked  with  jealousy
on  the  House  of  Commons,  and  desired  to  limit  its  authority.
The  changed  attitude  of  parties  was  remarkably  shown  when
Chatham,  in  1770,  brought  the  Middlesex  election  before  the
House  of  Lords.  A  motion  was  introduced  by  Lord  JNIarch-
mont,  and  warmly  supported  by  Lord  Mansfield,  and  by  the
whole  party  which  was  the  especial  exponent  of  the  views  of
the  Court,  deprecating  any  interference  of  the  House  of  Lords
with  that  great  constitutional  question,  on  the  ground  that  a
resolution  *  directly  or  indirectly  impeaching  a  judgment  of
the  House  of  Commons  in  a  matter  wherein  their  jurisdiction
is  competent,  final,  and  conclusive,  would  be  a  violation  of  the
constitutional  rights  of  the  Commons,  tends  to  make  a  breach
between  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  leads  to  a  general
confusion.'  It  was  left  for  the  Whigs  to  maintain  the  limitations
which  the  Constitution  imposed  upon  the  Commons,  and  above
all,  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  the  people  to  a  fuller  represen-
tation within  it.

The  attitude  of  the  Whigs  towards  the  question  of  parlia-
mentary reform  differed  widely  from  that  of  the  new  Eadical
])arty.  In  order  to  understand  it,  we  must  discriminate  care-
fully between  the  policy  of  Chatham  and  that  of  the  followers
of  Eockingham.  The  great  service  of  Chatham  to  the  cause  is
that  he  was  the  first  statesman  who  openly  maintained  the
necessity  of  an  extended  system  of  reform,  and  who  brought  in
a  definite  plan  for  accomplishing  this  end.  He  never  proposed
any  lowering  of  the  parliamentary  suffrage,  and  he  had  no
sympathy  with  the  doctrine  of  personal  representation  which
was  implied  in  the  resolutions  of  the  Society  of  the  Supporters
of  the  JUU  of  Kiglits,  and  which,  a  few  years  later,  was  clearly
formulated  by  Stanhope,  Cartwright,  and  Jebb.  *  The  share  of
the  national  burdens,'  he  once  said,  '  which  any  part  of  the
kingdom  bears,  is  the  only  rule  by  which  we  can  judge  of  the
weight  that  it  ought  to  have  in  the  political  balance.' ' In  a

' Chatlunn  Cnri-i'!>pot)drnce,\v.  ITiD. 1i;iiti,  in one of  liis  spocchos  on  the
Accordinj,'  to  Lord  Cliarleniont,  C'liat- Stamp  Act  in  ITCC,  said,  'If  England

cir.  \i.  CHATHAM OX rARLIAMF.NTAUr REFORM.  179

very  remarkable  speech,  delivered  in  January  1770,  he  stated
Cilearly  the  principles  that  governed  him.  'The  Constitu-
tion,' he  said,  '  intended  that  there  should  be  a  permanent
relation  between  the  constituent  and  representative  body  of
the  people.  Will  any  man  affirm  that  as  the  House  of
Commons  is  now  formed,  that  relation  is  in  any  degree  pre-
served ?  It  is  not  preserved,  but  destroyed.  Let  us  be  cautious,
however,  how  we  have  recourse  to  violent  expedients.'  The
representation  of  the  counties  and  of  the  great  cities  and
trading  towns,  he  maintained,  was  still  real  and  independent,
but  the  small  boroughs  were  '  the  rotten  parts  of  the  Consti-
tution.' These  rotten  parts,  however,  he  deemed  it  not  possible
or  not  prudent  to  destroy.  '  The  limb  is  mortified,  but  the  am-
putation might  be  death.'  ^  '  Let  us  try  then,'  he  continued,
'  whether  some  gentler  remedies  may  not  be  discovered.  Since
we  cannot  ciure  the  disorder,  let  us  endeavour  to  infuse  such
a  portion  of  new  health  into  the  Constitution  as  may  enable  it
to  support  its  more  inveterate  diseases.'  This  might  be  done
by  giving  one  more  member  to  every  county.  In  this  way,  the
amount  of  honesty  and  public  spirit  in  the  House  would  be
largely  increased  ;  the  influence  of  the  mercenary  boroughs
woidd  be  diminished,  and  the  change  would  be  effected  in
complete  accordance  with  the  true  spirit  of  the  Constitution
for  '  the  knights  of  the  shire  approach  nearest  to  the  consti-
tutional representation  of  the  country,  because  they  represent
the  soil.' 2

On  the  subject  of  shortening  the  duration  of  parliaments,
Chatham  had  much  hesitation.  The  cry  for  annual  parlia-
ments in  a  great  degree  disappeared  among  the  more  moderate
members  of  the  Eadical  party,  and  triennial  parliaments,  which
had  existed  for  some  time  after  the  Eevolution,  became  their

were  not  properly  represented, the  sented." — Original  Letters  to  Henry

representation  ought  to  be  amended.  Flood,  pp.  14,  15.

The  .safe  advice of Machiavel  must  '  In  another  speech,  if  rightly  re-

onc  day  be  pm-sued,  and  the  Constitu-  ported,  he  spoke  with  more  hesitatiori

tion brought back  to  its  first  prin-  of  'the  corrupt  and venal boroughs

ciples. People,  however,  are  apt  to  which  perhaps  could  not  be  lopped  off

mistake  the  nature  of  representation,  entirely  without  the  hazard  of  a  pub-

which  is  not  of  person  but  of  proper-  lie  convulsion.' — Chatham Coi'vesp.  iii.

ty,  and  in  this  light  there  is  scarcely  457.

H  blade  of  glass  which  is  not  reprc-  ■'  Iljid.  iii.  406,  407.

N 2

180  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xt.

object.  In  1770,  however,  when  the  City  of  l^ondon  addiessed
Chatham  on  the  subject,  he  distinctly  repudiated  the  notion  that
triennial  parliaments  would  prove  an  efficient  remedy  for  the  evils
of  the  State.'  As  late  as  April  1771,  he  wrote  to  Shelburne  that
he  had  been  endeavouring  to  collect  opinions  on  the  question,
and  found  that  there  was  a  very  real  dislike  to  any  proposal
for  shortening  the  duration  of  Parliament.  '  The  dread  of
the  more  frequent  returns  of  corruption,  together  with  every
dissoluteness  which  elections  spread  through  the  country,
strongly  indisposes  families  of  all  descriptions  to  such  an  altera-
tion. As  I  am  persuaded  that  this  opinion  is  genuine,  and
very  widely  extended,  I  should  think  it  totally  unadvisable  for
me  to  stir  it.'  'As  to  additional  knights  of  the  shire,'  he
added,  '  I  collect  little  encouragement.  At  best,  the  thing  in
theory  is  not  quite  disapproved,  but  the  execution  not  much
desired  by  any  ;  probably  arising  from  the  present  conduct  of
representatives  of  counties,  not  the  most  enlightened  or  spirited
part  of  the  House.' ^  Very  soon,  however,  the  manifest  impos-
sibility of  inducing  the  existing  Parliament  to  yield  to  the
wishes  of  the  nation  on  the  question  of  the  Middlesex  election
changed  the  opinion  of  Chatham,  and  on  May  1,  1771,  he
announced  his  conversion  to  short  parliaments.  '  The  in-
fluence of  the  Crown  is  become  so  enormous  that  some  stronger
bulwark  must  be  erected  for  the  defence  of  the  Constitu-
tion. The  Act  for  constituting  septennial  parliaments  must
be  repealed.  Formerly  the  inconveniences  attaching  to  short
parliaments  had  great  weight  with  me,  but  now  we  are  not
debating  upon  a  question  of  convenience.  Our  all  is  at  stake.
Our  whole  Constitution  is  giving  way,  and  therefore,  with  the
most  deliberate  and  solemn  conviction,  I  declare  myself  a  con-
vert to  triennial  parliaments.'^  The  necessity  for  some  serious
change  in  the  constitution  of  Parliament  he  strongly  felt.  He
urged  Lord  Rockingham  in  1770  to  aim  at  the  strengthening
of  the  democratic  part  of  the  Constitution,''  and  he  once  pre-
dicted to  Lord  Buchan  that  before  the  end  of  the  century
either  the  Parliament  would  reform  itself  from  within  or  be
reformed  with  a  vengeance  from  without.

' ChatJiam.  Cort-exjwndence,  ill.  H'>\.  '  Hud.  i v.  174.

2  Ibid.  iv.  lofi,  157.  '  Walpolc's  (Icimjc  J 1 1,  iv.  57,58.

cu.  XI.  EDMUND BURKE.  181

These  views  cannot  be  regarded  as  exaggerated,  but  they
were  less  timid  than  those  of  the  Eockingham  section  of  tlie
Whigs.  The  views  of  this  party  were  chiefly  defended  by,
and  may,  I  believe,  be  very  largely  attributed  to,  a  great  man
who  had  now  appeared  among  them,  and  whose  writings,  even
to  the  present  day,  have  coloured  all  that  is  best  in  English
political  thinking.

There  is  no  political  figure  of  the  eighteenth  century
which  retains  so  enduring  an  interest,  or  which  repays  so
amply  a  careful  study,  as  Edmund  Burke.  All  other  states-
men seem  to  belong  wholly  to  the  past ;  for  though  many  of
their  achievements  remain,  the  profound  changes  that  have
taken  place  in  the  conditions  of  English  political  life  have
destroyed  the  significance  of  their  policy  and  their  example.
A  few  fine  flashes  of  rhetoric,  a  few  happy  epigrams,  a  few
laboured  speeches  which  now  seem  cold,  lifeless,  and  common-
place, are  all  that  remain  of  the  eloquence  of  the  Pitts,  of  Fox,
of  Sheridan,  or  of  Plunket.  But  of  Burke  it  may  be  truly  said,
that  there  is  scarcely  any  serious  political  thinker  in  England
who  has  not  learnt  much  from  his  writings,  and  whom  he  lias
not  profoundly  influenced  either  in  the  way  of  attraction  or  in
the  way  of  repulsion.  As  an  orator,  he  has  been  surpassed  by
some,  as  a  practical  politician  he  has  been  surpassed  by  many,
and  his  judgments  of  men  and  things  were  often  deflected  by
violent  passions,  by  strong  antipathies,  by  party  spirit,  by
exaggerated  sensibility,  by  a  strength  of  imagination  and  of
atfection,  which  continually  invested  particular  objects  with  a
halo  of  superstitious  reverence.  But  no  other  politician  or
writer  has  thrown  the  light  of  so  penetrating  a  genius  on  the
natm'e  and  working  of  the  British  Constitution,  has  impressed
his  principles  so  deeply  on  both  of  the  great  parties  in  the
State,  and  has  left  behind  him  a  richer  treasure  of  political
wisdom  applicable  to  all  countries  and  to  all  times.  He  had  a
peculiar  gift  of  introducing  into  transient  party  conflicts  obser-
vations drawn  from  the  most  profound  knowledge  of  human
nature,  of  the  first  principles  of  government  and  legislation,
and  of  the  more  subtle  and  remote  consequences  of  political
institutions,  and  there  is  perhaps  no  English  prose  writer  since

!82  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xi.

Bacon  whose  works  are  so  thickly  starred  with  tliought.  The
time  jnay  come  when  they  will  be  no  longer  read.  The  lime
will  never  come  in  which  men  would  not  grow  the  wiser  by
reading  them.

He  is  one  of  the  very  few  instances  of  a  conspicuous  statesman
who  took  no  part  in  English  politics  till  he  had  attained  the
mature  age  of  thirty-six.  The  second  son  of  an  Irish  attorney,
who  was  fi>r  some  time  at  the  head  of  his  profession  in  Dublin,
and  of  a  Catholic  lady  of  good  family,  he  had  received  an  excel-
lent education  in  a  Quaker  school  at  Ballitore,  in  the  county  of
Kildare,  and  passed  from  thence  to  Dublin  University,  where  he
soon  after  obtained  a  scholarship,  and  where  he  appears  to  have
found  an  amount  of  intellectual  activity  considerably  greater
than  that  which  Gibbon  a  few  years  later  found  at  Oxford.^
Burke  had,  however,  little  or  no  college  ambition.  His  favourite
studies  lay  outside  the  regular  course;  and  although  he  brought
from  the  University  a  singularly  wide,  accurate,  and  intelligent
knowledge  of  the  ideas  and  sentiments  of  the  classical  writers,
and  of  the  laws  and  conditions  of  ancient  societies,  he  never
attained,  or  perhaps  aspired  to,  that  fastidious  delicacy  and
polish  of  scholarship  which  is  the  pride  of  the  great  English
schools.  He  spoke  and  wrote  much  for  a  college  debating
society.  He  assiduously  attended  the  great  college  library,
and  he  there  laid  the  foundation  of  that  vast  and  midtifarious
knowledge  which  distinguished  him  from  all  the  statesmen  of
his  time.  Had  his  intellect  been  less  powerful  and  comprehen-
sive, had  his  capacity  for  assimilating  knowledge  been  less
extraordinary,  the  immense  variety  of  his  tastes  and  pursuits
would  have  infallibly  dissipated  his  energies  and  destroyed  that
power  of  concentration  without  which  no  great  thing  can  be
done,  and  it  is  curious  to  observe  how  long  his  mind  vibrated
doubtfidly  between  different  careers.  He  was  called  to  the
]^ar,  but  he  disliked  the  profession  and  never  practised,  though
he  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  jurisprudence
which  h;is  obtained  the  admiration  of  great  lawyers.  He  was
probably  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Chair  of  Logic  at

'  Sen  r.urkc's  correspondence  cliarminfj  book,  the  Lcndhcater  Pa-
with  llicliard  Sliacklcton,  tlie  son  of  pent,  written  liy  tlic  daughter  of
his  sdioolmaster,  in  thai singularly Kicliard  SliacklctuD.

cii.  XI.  KAULY JJi'"E.  183

Glasgow  University.'  He  thought,  at  one  lime,  under  the  pres-
sure of  straitened  circumstances,  of  emigrating  to  the  American
colonies.  In  1756  he  emerged  into  notice  by  his  admirable
imitation  of  Bolingbroke,  and  in  the  same  year  he  published
his  well-known  treatise  on  the  '  Sublime  and  Beautiful,'  which
appeared  in  a  greatly  enlarged  form  in  the  following  year.
This  class  of  studies,  which  Hutcheson  had  recently  made
very  popular,  had  always  a  great  fascination  to  his  mind,  and  it
was  united  in  Burke  with  a  delicacy  of  taste  in  his  judgment
of  art  which  was  warmly  recognised  by  both  Keynolds  and
l^arry.  History,  at  the  same  time,  occupied  a  large  share  of
his  attention.  He  began,  but  never  finished,  a  work  on  early
English  history.  He  wrote  wholly  or  in  part  an  anonymous
'  Account  of  the  European  Settlements  in  America,'  and  the
historical  sketches  of  the  '  Annual  Eegister,'  which  was  founded
in  1758,  were,  for  many  years,  from  his  pen.  His  writings  are
fall  of  admirable  examples  of  that  highest  kind  of  historical
insight  which  illuminates  the  present  by  the  experience  of
the  past,  and  detects  and  discriminates  amid  the  great  mul-
titude of  indifferent  facts  the  true  causes  and  principles  of
national  greatness  or  decay.  In  1759  we  find  him  applying
for  a  consulship  at  Madrid,^  and  he  was  afterwards,  for  a
short  time,  private  secretary  to  Gerard  Hamilton,  by  whose
favour  he  obtained  an  Irish  pension  of  SOOl.  He  soon,  how-
ever, disagreed  with  Hamilton,  threw  up  his  pension  at  the  end
of  a  year,  and  resumed  his  old  life,  writing  much  for  the  book-
sellers, haunting  the  gallery  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and
mixing  largely  with  the  best  literary  and  artistic  society  of  his
time.

There  are  few  men  whose  depth  and  versatility  have  been
both  so  fully  recognised  by  their  contemporaries,  and  whose
pre-eminence  in  many  widely  different  spheres  is  so  amply
attested.  Adam  Smith  declared  that  he  had  found  no  other
man  who,  without  communication,  had  thought  out  the  same
conclusions  on  political  economy  as  himself.  Winstanley,  the
Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  bore  witness  to  his  great

'  Tlicrc is some  controversy  on  •  Chatluiin  Corrcsiiondcnce,  i.  -130-

this  point, ^ije  I'riur's  Ufa  of  Burke, iX\.
i.  l-l,  45.

184  ENGLAND IN Tlll^ KIGUTEENTU CENTURY.  en.  xi.

knowledge  of  the  '  philosophy,  history,  and  filiation  of  lan-
guages, and  of  the  principles  of  etymological  deduction.'
Arthur  Young,  the  first  living  authority  on  agriculture,  acknow-
ledged his  obligations  to  him  for  much  information  about  his
special  pursuits,  and  it  was  in  a  great  degree  his  passion  for
agi-iculture  which  induced  Burke,  when  the  death  of  his  elder
brother  had  improved  his  circumstances,  to  encumber  himself
with  a  heavy  debt  by  purchasing  that  Beaconsfield  estate  where
some  of  his  happiest  days  were  spent.'  His  conversational
powers  were  only  equalled,  and  probably  not  surpassed,  by
those  of  Johnson.  Goldsmith  described  him  as  '  winding  into
his  subject,  like  a  serpent.'  'Like  the  fabled  object  of  the
fairy's  favours,'  said  Wilberforce,  '  whenever  he  opened  his
mouth  pearls  and  diamonds  dropped  from  him.'  Grattan  pro-
nounced him  the  best  talker  he  had  ever  known.  Johnson,  in
spite  of  their  violent  political  differences,  always  spoke  of  him
with  generous  admiration.  '  Burke  is  an  extraordinary  man.
His  stream  of  mind  is  perpetual.'  '  His  talk  is  the  ebullition
of  his  mind.  He  does  not  talk  for  a  desire  of  distinction,  but
because  his  mind  is  full.'  '  He  is  the  only  man  whose  common
conversation  corresponds  with  the  general  fame  which  he  has
in  the  world.  Take  up  what  topic  you  please,  he  is  ready
to  meet  you.'  '  No  man  of  sense  could  meet  Mr.  Burke  by
accident  under  a  gateway  to  avoid  a  shower  without  being
convinced  that  he  was  the  first  man  in  England.'  It  is
not  surprising  that  '  he  is  the  first  man  in  the  House  of
Commons,  for  he  is  the  first  man  everywhere.'  He  once  de-
clared that  *  he  knew  but  two  men  who  had  risen  considerably

'  No less than 14,000Z. (out  of  obscure  slanders  on  the  subject  which

20,000Z.  required  to  buy  the  estate)  had  been  exhumed  and  elaborated  by

was  raised  on  a  mortgage  which  was  the  late  Jlr.  Dilke,  and  which  have

still  outstanding  when  the  estate  was  since  been  reprinted. It  was  natural

sold  in  1812. Mr.  (now  Sir  Josepli)  that  in  an  age  of  unsparing  calumny

Napier  has investigated  with great  a high-minded and very sensitive

care  the  circumstances  relating  to  the  public  man  should  have  endeavoured

Beaconsfield estate and to a  small  as much as possible to wiihdi-aw

jiroperty  at  Cloghcr,  which  was  also  his private concerns  and domestic

in  tlie  F.urke  family,  in  a  lecture  on  relations from  the  public  gaze. It

Edmund  I'nrke delivered  in  Dublin  in  was equally natural that a  critic

1862  to  the  Young  Men's  Christian  As-  of the stamp  of Mr. Dilke  should

sociation.  This  lecture  contains  seve-  regard  such  a  reticence  as  profoundly

ral  particulars  about  Burke's  private  suspicious,  and  shoiild  make  it the

lifewhicli  willnotbo  found  elsewhere,  endless theme  of dishonourable  in-

and  a  vt-ry  complete  answer  to  some  sinuatious.

CH.  XI.  HIS CHARACTEE.  185

above the common standard — Lord Chatham and Edmund
liarke.' '

The  admirable  proportion  -which  subsisted  between  his
different  powers,  both  moral  and  intellectual,  is  especially
remarkable.  Grenius  is  often,  like  the  pearl,  the  offspring  or
the  accompaniment  of  disease,  and  an  extraordinary  develop-
ment of  one  class  of  faculties  is  too  frequently  balanced  by  an
extraordinary  deficiency  of  others.  But  nothing  of  this  kind
can  be  found  in  Burke.  His  intellectual  energy  was  fully
commensurate  with  his  knowledge,  and  he  had  rare  powers  of
bringing  illustrations  and  methods  of  reasoning  derived  from
many  spheres  to  bear  on  any  subject  he  touched,  and  of  com-
bining an  extraordinary  natural  facility  with  the  most  untiring
and  fastidious  labour.  In  debate,  images,  illustrations,  and
arguments  rose  to  his  lips  with  a  spontaneous  redundance  that
astonished  his  hearers ;  -  but  no  writer  elaborated  his  com-
positions more  carefully,  and  his  printers  were  often  aghast
at  the  multitude  of  his  corrections  and  alterations.  Nor
did  his  intellectual  powers  in  any  degree  dry  up  or  dwarf  his
moral  nature.  There  is  no  public  man  whose  character  is
more  clearly  reflected  in  his  life  and  in  his  intimate  cor-
respondence ;  and  it  may  be  confidently  said  that  there  is
no  other  public  man  whose  character  was  in  all  essential  re-

'  See  the  different  testimonies  on  more  incontestably  inspired  by  the
the  subject  collected  in  Prior  and  moment  and  transported  with  the
.Macknight's  Lives  of  Burke,  and  also  fury  of  the  god  within  him  than  in
the  masterly  sketch  in  Buckle's  Hist.  those  finished  passages  which  it  would
of  Civilisation,  i.  414-423.  Charles  cost  Shakespeare  long  study  and  la-
Butler  says  that  'Burke's  conversa-  hour  to  produce.' — Lady  Minto's  Z?/V
tion  was  rambling,  but  splendid,  rich  of  Sir  G.  Elliot,  i.  215.  Walpole,  on
and  instructive  beyond  comparison.'  the  other  hand,  while  speaking  of  tlie
— 'iiViWex's Reminiscences, i.  \&%.  Some  'inexhaustible  fertility'  with  which
interesting  fragments  which  were  Burke  '  jioured  out  new  ideas,  meta-
reporied  by  Mrs.  Crewe  have  been  phors,  and  allusions  which  came  forth
printed  by  Lord  Houghton  in  the  ready  dressed  in  the  most  ornamental
PJnhbiblifln  Society  and  in  Eogers'  and  yet  the  most  correct  language,'
Ilecolk'ctions.  complained  that  even  when  he  'rc-

*  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  after  a  very  plied  extempore,  his  very  answers,
interesting  description  of  the  elo-  that  sprang  from  what  had  been  said
quence  of  Sheridan,  says,  'Burke  also  by  others,  were  so  painted  and  art-
abounds  with  these  fine  passages,  and  fully  arranged,  that  they  wore  the
he  soars  also  as  much  out  of  the  appearance  of  study  and  preparation.'
lower  regions  of  discom-se  and  infi-  ^Walpole "s  Geim/e  III.  ii.  273,  275.
nitely  further  into  those  of  imagina-  Gibbon  bears  witness  to  the  correct -
tion and  fancy  ;  but  no man  could  ness  of  those  printed  speeches  which

ever  perceive  in  him  the  least  trace  he  had  himself  heard  delivered. Mis-

of  preparation,  and  he  never  appears  cdlaneons  Wurlis,  i.  235.

180  ENGLAND IN TIIH EIGIITKENTll CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

spects  more  transparently  pure.  Weak  liealtli,  deep  and  fer-
vent religions  principles,  and  studious  habits,  saved  hiin  from
the  temptations  of  youth  ;  and  amid  all  the  vicissitudes  and
corruption  of  politics  his  heart  never  lost  its  warmth,  or  his
conscience  its  sensitiveness.  There  were  faults  indeed  which
were  only  too  apparent  in  his  character  as  in  his  intellect — an
excessive  violence  and  irritability  of  temper;  personal  anti-
pathies, which  were  sometimes  carried  beyond  all  the  bounds
of  reason  ;  party  spirit,  which  was  too  often  suffered  to  obscure
his  judgment,  and  to  hurry  him  into  great  intemperance  and
exaggeration  of  language.  But  he  was  emphatically  a  good
man  ;  and  in  the  higher  moral  qualities  of  public  as  of  private
life,  he  has  not  often  been  surpassed.  That  loyal  affection
with  which  he  clung  through  his  whole  life  to  the  friends  of
his  early  youth  ;  that  genuine  kindness  which  made  him,  when
still  a  poor  man,  the  munificent  patron  of  Barry  and  Crabbe,
and  which  showed  itself  in  innumerable  acts  of  unobtrusive
benevolence ;  that  stainless  purity  and  retiring  modesty  of
nature  which  made  his  domestic  life  so  different  from  that  of
some  of  the  greatest  of  his  contemporaries  ;  that  depth  of  feeling
which  made  the  loss  of  his  only  son  the  death-knell  of  the  whole
happiness  of  his  life,  may  be  traced  in  every  stage  of  his  public
career.  '  T  know  the  map  of  Engkmd,'  he  once  said,  '  as  well
as  the  noble  lord,  or  as  any  other  person,  and  I  know  that  the
way  I  take  is  not  the  road  to  preferment.'  Fidelity  to  his
engagements,  a  disinterested  pursuit  of  what  he  believed  to  be
right,  in  spite  of  all  the  allurements  of  interest  and  of  popu-
larity ;  a  deep  and  ardent  hatred  of  oppression  and  cruelty  in
every  form  ;  a  readiness  at  all  times  to  sacrifice  personal  pre-
tensions to  party  interests ;  a  capacity  of  devoting  long  years
of  thankless  labour  to  the  service  of  those  whom  he  had  never
seen,  and  who  could  never  reward  him,  were  the  great  charac-
teristics of  his  life,  and  they  may  well  make  us  pardon  many
faults  of  temper,  judgment,  and  taste.

It  was  in  July  1765  that  liord  Eockingham,  having  just
become  Prime  Minister,  made  Burke  his  private  secretary,  and
almost  immediately  afterwards  by  the  influence  of  LordVerney
he  was  returned  to  Parliament  for  tlie  small  borough  of  Wen-
dover. From  this  time  he  becaine  one  of  the  warmest  friends

cu.  XI.  HIS rOSITION"  IN PARLIAMKNT.  187

and  most  intimate  connsellors  of  Eockingham,  and  the  chief
defender  of  his  policy,  both  in  Parliament  and  in  the  press.  In
Parliament  he  had  great  obstacles  to  contend  with.  An  Irish-
man unconnected  with  any  of  the  great  governing  families,  and
without  any  of  the  influence  derived  from  property  and  rank,
he  entered  Parliament  late  in  life  and  with  habits  fully  formed,
and  during  the  greater  part  of  his  career  he  spoke  as  a  member
of  a  small  minority  in  opposition  to  the  strong  feeling  of  the
House.  He  was  too  old  and  too  rigid  to  catch  its  tone,  and  he
never  acqu;red  that  subtle  instinct  or  tact  which  enables  some
speakers  to  follow  its  fleeting  moods  and  to  strike  with  unfailing
accuracy  the  precise  key  which  is  most  in  harmony  with  its
prevailing  temper.  '  Of  all  politicians  of  talent  I  ever  knew,'
wrote  Horace  Walpole,  '  Burke  has  least  political  art,'  and  his
defects  so  increased  with  age  that  the  time  came  when  he
was  often  listened  to  with  undisguised  impatience.  He  spoke
too  often,  too  vehemently,  and  much  too  long;  and  his  elo-
fiuence,  though  in  the  highest  degree  intellectual,  powerful,
various,  and  original,  was  not  well  adapted  to  a  popular
audience.^  He  had  little  or  nothing  of  that  fire  and  majesty  of
declamation  with  which  Chatham  thrilled  his  hearers,  and  often
almost  overawed  opposition,  and  as  a  parliamentary  debater
he  was  far  inferior  to  Charles  Fox.  That  great  master  of  per-
suasive reasoning  never  failed  to  make  every  sentence  tell
upon  his  hearers,  to  employ  precisely  and  invariably  the  kind  of
arguments  that  were  most  level  with  their  understandings,  to
subordinate  every  other  consideration  to  the  single  end  of  con-
vincing and  impressing  those  who  were  before  him.  Burke
was  not  inferior  to  Fox  in  readiness  and  in  the  power  of  clear
and cogent  reasoning. His  wit,  though  not  of the  highest

'  There  is  an  excellent  criticism  in  arg-nment  that  the  House  are  never

of  the  merits  and  defects  of  Burke  sensible that he argues as  well  as

as  a  speaker  in  a  letter  of  Flood  to  he  does. Vox  gives  a  strong  proof  of

Charlemont,  describing  one  of  Burke's  this, for  he makes use of Burke's

great  speeclies on conciliation  with  speech  as  a  repertory,  and  by  stating

America. '  His  performance  was  tlie  crabbedly  two  or  three  of  those  ideas

best  I  have  heard  from  him  in  the  which  Burke  has  buried  under  flowers,

whole  winter. He  is  always  brilliant  he  is  thought  almost  always  to  have

to  an  uncommon  degree,  and  yet  I  had more argument.'  —  Cliarlcmoitt

believe it  would  be  better  he  were  MSS. Erskine  used  to  say  tliat  tlie

less  so. I  don't  mean  to  join  with  grand  fault  of  Burke's  speaking  was

tlie  cry  wliich  will  alwaj'S  run  against  that  he  was  too  episodical.  — I'rior's

shining  pnrts,  when  I  say  that  I  sin-  Life  of  Burke,  ii.  473.
cerely  think  it  interrupts  him  so  much

188 ENGLAND  IN  TUE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEV. cii.  xi.

order,  was  only  equalled  by  that  of  Townshend,  Sheridan,  and
j)erhaps  North,  and  it  rarely  failed  in  its  effect  upon  the  House.
He  far  surpassed  every  other  speaker  in  the  copiousness  and
correctness  of  his  diction,  in  the  range  of  knowledge  he  brought
to  bear  on  every  subject  of  debate,  in  the  richness  and  variety
of  his  imagination,  in  the  gorgeous  beauty  of  his  descriptive
passages,  in  the  depth  of  the  philosophical  reflections  and  the
felicity  of  the  personal  sketches  which  he  delighted  in  scatter-
ing over  his  speeches.  But  these  gifts  were  frequently  marred
by  a  strange  want  of  judgment,  measure,  and  self-control.  His
speeches  were  full  of  episodes  and  digressions,  of  excessive
ornamentation  and  illustration,  of  dissertations  on  general  prin-
ciples of  politics,  which  were  invaluable  in  themselves,  but  very
unpalatable  to  a  tired  or  excited  House  waiting  eagerly  for  a
division.  As  Grattan  once  said,  '  they  were  far  better  suited  to
a  patient  reader  than  an  impatient  hearer.'  Passionately  in
earnest  in  the  midst  of  a  careless  or  half-hearted  assembly,
seeking  in  all  measures  their  essential  and  permanent  tendencies,
while  his  hearers  thought  chiefly  of  their  transient  and  personal
aspects,  discussing  first  principles  and  remote  consequences,
among  men  whose  minds  were  concentrated  on  the  struggle  of
the  hour,  constantly  led  away  by  the  endless  stream  of  ideas
and  images  which  were  for  ever  surging  from  his  brain,  he  was
often  interrupted  by  his  impatient  hearers.  There  is  scarcely
a  perceptible  difference  between  the  style  of  his  essays  and  the
style  of  his  published  speeches  ;  and  if  the  reader  selects  from
his  works  the  few  passages  which  possess  to  an  emment  degree
the  flash  and  movement  of  spoken  rhetoric,  he  will  be  quite  im
likely  to  find  them  in  the  former  as  in  the  latter.'

Like  most  men  of  great  imaginative  power,  he  possessed  a
highly  strung  and  over-sensitive  nervous  organisation,  and  the
incessant  conflicts  of  parliamentary  life  brought  it  at  last  into
a  condition  of  irritability  that  was  wholly  morbid  and  abnormal.
Though  eminently  courteous  and  amenable  to  reason  in  private
life,  in  public  he  was  often  petulant,  intractable,  and  ungovern-
ably violent.  His  friends  sometimes  held  him  down  by  the  skirts
of  his  coat  to  restrain  the  outbursts  of  his  anger.  He  spoke
with  a  burning  brain  and  with  quivering  nerves. The  rapid,  ve-

'  See  e.g.  the  magnificent  decla- Erench  war  in  the  first  letter  on  (lie
matory  passage  on  the  justice  of  the Ke^icidal  I'euce.

en.  XI.  CirARACTER OF HIS SPEAKING.  1S9

hement,  iin[)etvioas  torrent  of  liis  eloquence,  kindling  as  it  flowed,
and  the  nervous  motions  of  his  countenance  reflected  the  un-
governable excitement  under  which  he  laboured  ;  and  while  Fox
could  cast  off  without  an  effort  the  cares  of  public  life  and  pass  at
once  from  Parliament  to  a  night  of  dissipation  at  Brooks's,  Burke
returned  from  debate  jaded,  irritated,  and  som-ed.  With  an  in-
tellect capable  of  the  very  highest  efforts  of  judicial  wisdom  he
combined  the  passions  of  the  most  violent  partisan,  and  in  the
excitement  of  debate  these  too  often  obtained  the  ascendancy.
Few  things  are  more  curious  than  the  contrast  between  the
feverish  and  passionate  excitement  with  which  he  threw  himself
into  party  debates,  and  the  admirably  calm,  exhaustive,  and  im-
partial summaries  of  the  rival  arguments  which  he  afterwards
drew  up  for  the  '  Annual  Eegister.'  Though  a  most  skilful  and
penetrating  critic,  and  though  his  English  style  is  one  of  the
very  finest  in  the  language,  his  taste  was  not  pure.  Even  his
best  writings  are  sometimes  disfigured  by  strangely  coarse
and  repulsive  images,  and  gross  violations  of  taste  appear
to  have  been  frequent  in  his  speeches.  It  is  probable  that  in
his  case  the  hasty  reports  in  the  '  Parliamentary  History  '  and
in  the  '  Cavendish  Debates  '  are  more  than  commonly  defective,
for  Burke  was  a  very  rapid  speaker,  and  his  language  had  the
strongly  marked  individuality  which  reporters  rarely  succeed  in
conveying;'  but  no  one  who  judged  by  these  reports  would
place  his  speeches  in  the  first  rank,  and  some  of  them  are  wild
and  tawdry  almost  to  insanity.  Nor  does  he  appear  to  have
possessed  any  histrionic  power.  His  voice  had  little  charm.
He  had  a  strong  Irish  accent,  and  Erskine  described  his  delivery
as  '  execrable,'  and  declared  that  in  some  of  his  finest  speeches  he
emptied  the  House.^

'  It  is  related  of  Coleridge  that  a  of Burke's speaking in Wraxall's

very  experienced shorthand writer  JVemoirs,  ii.  So-3S ;  Walpole's  Me7noirs

was  employed  to  take  down  his  lee-  of George III. ii. 273, 274  ; Last

tures  on Shakespeare,  and that  his  Journals,  i.  84,  8.5,  443  ;  and in the

manuscript  proved  almost  nnintelli-  \et\ers  m 'L^uAj  ^Imto's  lAfe  of  Sir  G.

gible. The  reporter  afterwards  said  Mliot.  See  too  Butler's  Eeminiscences^

that  from long experience he  had,  pp.  166-168. Erskine's  very  unfavour-

with  every  other  speaker  he  had  ever  able  description  of  his  manner  is  given

heard, been almost  always able to  in  Campbell's  Chancellors,  ix.  68,  69.

guess  the  form  of  the  latter  part  of  Lord Brougham,  in his sketch of

each  sentence  by  the  form  of  the  be-  Burke [Statesmen of  George  III.),

ginning,  but  that  the  conclusion  of  has  collected  several  instances  of  his

every one  of  Coleridge's sentences  glaring bad taste. Another, too

was  a  surprise  to  liim.  gross  for  quotation,  will  be  found  in

-  There  are  excellent  descriptions  Jesse's  Life  of  Sclicgn,  iv. 130, 131.

190  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITICENTE CENTURY.  cii.  \i

Gerard  Hamilton  once  said  that  while  everywhere  else
Burke  seemed  the  first  man,  in  the  House  of  Commons  he
appeared  only  the  second.  At  the  same  time  there  is  ample
evidence  that  with  all  his  defects  he  was  from  the  first  a  great
power  in  the  House,  and  that  in  the  early  part  of  his  career,  and
almost  always  on  occasions  of  great  importance,  his  eloquence
had  a  wonderful  power  upon  his  hearers.  Pitt  passed  into  the
House  of  Lords  almost  immediately  after  Burke  had  entered
the  Commons.  Fox  was  then  a  boy.  Sheridan  had  not  yet
become  a  member  ;  and  his  fellow-countryman,  Barre,  though
a  rhetorician  of  great  if  somewhat  coarse  power,  was  com-
pletely eclipsed  by  the  splendour  and  the  variety  of  the  talents
of  Burke.  Charles  Townshend  alone,  who  shone  for  a  few
years  with  a  meteoric  brilliancy  in  English  politics,  was  re-
garded as  his  worthy  rival.  Johnson  wrote  to  Langton  with
great  delight  that  Burke  by  his  first  speeches  in  the  House
had  'gained  more  reputation  than  perhaps  any  man  at  his  first
'appearance  ever  gained  before.'  ^  '  An  Irishman,  Mr.  Burke,
is  sprung  up,'  wrote  the  American  General  Lee,  who  was  then
watching  London  politics  with  great  care,  '  who  has  astonished
everybody  with  the  power  of  his  eloquence  and  his  comprehensive
knowledge  in  all  our  exterior  and  internal  polities  and  com-
mercial interests.  He  wants  nothing  but  that  sort  of  dignity
annexed  to  rank  and  property  in  England  to  make  him  the  most
considerable  man  in  the  Lower  House.' ^  Grattan,  who  on  a
question  of  oratory  was  one  of  the  most  competent  of  judges,
wrote  in  1769,  'Burke  is  unquestionably  the  first  orator  among
the  Commons  of  England,  boundless  in  knowledge,  instanta-
neous in  his  apprehensions,  and  abundant  in  his  language.  He
speaks  with  profound  attention  and  acknowledged  superiority,
notwithstanding  the  want  of  energy,  the  want  of  grace,  and
the  want  of  elegance  in  his  manner.'  ^  Horace  Walpole,  who
hated  Burke,  acknowledged  that  he  was '  versed  in  every  branch
of  eloquence,' that he  possessed '  the quickest conception,

Wilkes  said  that  the  Venus  of  Burke  either  the  first  or  second  speaker  ? ' —

•was  somotimcs  tlic  Venus  of  whisky.'  Rogers'  IlecollectionK,  p.  80.

•  Wliat  will  they  think,'  Sheridan  once  ' IJoswell's  Johnson.  (Crokcr's  ed.).

Kiid,  •  of  the  public  sjioakinp:  of  this  p.  177.

a<?e  in after  times  when they  read  '^  Cliailinm.  Correxj)0)i(li'nci',Vi\.\\\

Mr. TJarke's speeches and are  told  ^  Graft an's  Life,  i.  1'12.

ihat  in  his  d:iy  he  was  not  accounted

en.  XI.  CHARACTER OF  HIS SPEAKING.  191

amazing  facility  of  elocution,  great  strength  of  argumentation,
all  the  power  of  imagination  and  memory,'  that  even  his  unpre-
meditated speeches  displayed  '  a  choice  and  variety  of  language,
a  profusion  of  metaphors,  and  a  correctness  of  diction  that  was
surprising,'  and  that  in  pubh'c  though  not  in  private  life  his  wit
was  of  the  highest  order,  '  luminous,  striking,  and  abundant.'
He  complained,  however,  with  good  reason  that  he  'often  lost
himself  in  a  torrent  of  images  and  copiousness,'  that  '  he  dealt
■abundantly  too  much  in  establishing  general  positions,'  that  he
had  '  no  address  or  insinuation  ; '  that  his  speeches  often  showed
a  great  want  of  sobriety  and  judgment,  and  '  the  still  greater
want  of  art  to  touch  the  passions.' '

But  though  their  length,  their  excursiveness,  and  their  di-
dactic character  did  undoubtedly  on  many  occasions  weary  and
even  empty  the  House,  there  were  others  in  which  Burke  showed
a  power  both  of  fascinating  and  of  moving  such  as  very  few
speakers  have  attained.  Gibbon,  whose  sinecure  place  was  swept
away  by  the  Economical  Eeform  Bill  of  1782,  bears  testimony  to
the  '  delight  with  which  that  diffusive  and  ingenious  orator,  Mr.
Burke,  was  heard  by  all  sides  of  the  House,  and  even  by  those
whose  existence  he  proscribed.'  ^  Walpole  has  himself  repeatedly
noticed  the  effect  which  the  speeches  of  Burke  produced  upon
the  hearers.  Describing  one  of  those  against  the  American  war,
he  says  that  the  wit  of  one  part  '  excited  the  warmest  and  most
continued  bursts  of  laughter  even  from  Lord  North,  Eigby,  and
the  ministers  themselves,'  w^hile  the  pathos  of  another  part
'  drew  iron  tears  down  Barre's  cheek,'  and  Governor  Johnston
exclaimed  that  '  he  was  now  glad  that  strangers  were  excluded,
as  if  they  had  been  admitted  Burke's  speech  would  have  excited
them  to  tear  ministers  to  pieces  as  they  went  out  of  the  House.'  ^
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  describing  one  of  Burke's  speeches  on  the
Warren  Hastings'  impeachment,  says  :  '  He  did  not,  I  believe,
leave  a  dry  eye  in  the  whole  assembly.'  ^  INIaking  every  allow-
ance for  the  enthusiasm  of  a  French  Eoj^nlist  for  the  author  of
the  '  Eeflections  on  the  French  Eevolution,'  the  graphic  descrip-
tion by  the  Duke  de  Levis  of  one  of  Burke's  latest speeches

'  Walpole's  Last  Journals,!.  84-  ^  ^YsXY>o^Q's  Last  Journals,  ii 191

83.  438,  443,  513  ;  ii.  2(S.  Walpoles  Letters,  vii.  2j>,  30.

•  Gibbon's  Miscellaneous  ]Vorhs,  i.  *  Lady  Minlo's  Lift  of  Sir  Gilhen

23:)  i^lliot.  i.  195.

102  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEKNTII CENTUKY.  cit,  xi.

Oil  that  subject  is  sufficient  to  show  the  magnetism  of  his
eloquence  even  at  the  end  of  his  career.  '  He  made  the  whole
House  pass  in  an  instant  from  the  tenderest  emotions  of  feeling
to  bursts  of  laughter ;  never  was  the  electric  power  of  eloquence
more  imperiously  felt.  This  extraordinary  man  seemed  to  raise
and  quell  the  passions  of  his  auditors  with  as  much  ease  and  as
rapidly  as  a  skilful  musician  passes  into  the  various  modulations
of  his  harpsichord.  I  have  witnessed  many,  too  many,  political
assemblages  and  striking  scenes  where  eloquence  performed  a
noble  part,  but  the  whole  of  them  appear  insipid  when  compared
with  this  amazing  effort.'^

There  are  few  things,  I  think,  more  melancholy  in  English
history  than  that  Chatham  and  Burke  should  never  have  been
cordially  united.  They  were  incomparably  the  ablest  men  then
living  in  English  politics.  Both  of  them  were  men  of  high
honour,  of  stainless  morals,  of  pure  and  disinterested  patriotism,
l)ut  though  often  approaching  there  was  always  something  that
kept  them  asunder.  The  conduct  of  Pitt  towards  the  first
Kockingham  Ministry,  and  the  opposition  of  the  Eockingham
party  to  the  Ministry  of  Grafton,  sowed  dissensions  between
them,  and  they  were  profoundly  different  in  their  characters  and
their  intellects.  Burke,  whose  leaning  was  always  to  the  side  of
caution,  and  usually  to  the  side  of  authority,  was  very  deficient
in  that  power  of  popular  sympathy  which  Chatham  so  eminently
possessed  ;  and  his  nature,  at  once  proud,  simple,  retiring,  and
sensitive,  shrank  from  the  imperious  and  impracticable  arro-
gance, and  from  the  elaborate  and  theatrical  ostentation  of
Chatham.  In  public  he  sometimes  spoke  of  him  with  warm
eulogy.  Even  when  he  censured  his  policy,  as,  for  example,
in  his  famous  and  most  admirable  description  of  the  ill-
assorted  and  heterogeneous  character  of  his  second  ministry,
his  language  was  studiously  deferential  and  moderate ;  and
on  the  death  of  Chatham,  Burke  was  one  of  the  first  to  pay
a  generous  tribute  to  his  memory,  but  it  is  quite  evident  from
his  private  correspondence,  extending  over  many  years,  that  his
admiration  for  him  was  largely  mixed  with  dislike.  On  almost
every  important  question  we  find  some  serious  divergence  of
opinion.  On  the  great  question  of  America,  they  were  agreed
'  Prior's  Bnrlc,  ii.  472.

CH.  XI.  THE EAST INDIA COMPANY,  193

in  reprobating  the  Stamp  Act  and  in  desiring  its  repeal ;  but
they  dififered  in  principle  about  the  Declaratory  Act,  and  they
differed  in  policy  about  the  commercial  restrictions.  In  October
1766  Grafton,  in  his  own  name  and  in  that  of  Conway,  urged  upon
Chatham  the  necessity  of  securing  the  services  of  Burke,  '  the
readiest  man  upon  all  points,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  House.' '  The
gentleman  you  have  pointed  out  as  a  necessary  recruit,'  replied
Chatham,  '  I  think  a  man  of  parts  and  an  ingenious  speaker.  As
to  his  notions  and  maxims  of  trade  they  never  can  be  mine.'  ^

On  the  constitutional  questions  arising  from  the  Middlesex
election  both  sections  of  the  party  were  agreed,  but  the  Eock-
inghams  would  have  been  content  without  a  dissolution,  and
they  looked  with  much  more  reserve  and  hesitation  than  Chat-
ham on  the  democratic  agitation  which  was  raised  against  the
Parliament.

On  the  question  of  the  East  India  Company  they  were  vio-
lently opposed.  Chatham  desired  that  the  territorial  possessions
of  the  Company  should  be  gradually  taken  under  the  direct
dominion  of  the  Crown ;  that  the  immense  revenues  derived
from  the  treaties  of  Clive  in  Bengal  should  accrue  to  the
national  exchequer ;  and  that  the  Crown  should  interfere  to
put  an  end  to  the  scandalous  oppression  of  the  natives.  '  India,'
he  wrote,  '  teems  with  iniquities  so  rank  as  to  smell  to  earth
and  heaven.  The  reformation  of  them,  if  pursued  in  a  pure
spirit  of  justice,  might  exalt  the  nation  and  endear  the  English
name  through  the  world.  .  .  .  The  putting  under  circum-
scription and  control  the  high  and  dangerous  prerogative  of  war
and  alliances,  so  abused  in  India,  I  cannot  but  approve,  as  it  shuts
the  door  against  such  insatiable  rapine  and  detestable  enor-
mities as  have  on  some  occasions  stained  the  English  name  and
disgraced  human  nature.'  ^  The  subject  gave  rise  to  long  and
intricate  discussions  in  1766  and  the  three  following  years,
and  considerable  restrictions  were  imposed  on  the  powers  of  the
Company.  In  1767  an  Act  was  passed  which,  among  other
provisions,  restrained  it  from  making  a  dividend  of  more  than
ten  per  cent.,  and  two  years  later  an  Act  guaranteed  the  Com-

'  Chatham  Correspondence, in.  wo,  -  Seethe.  Chatham  Corresjjondence,

111.  Lord  Stanhope's  Hist,  of  Eng-  especially  iii.  Gl,  liiD,  200,  216,  26S> ;
land,  V.  app.  p.  x.  iv.  276,  277.

VOL.  III.  0

194  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ot.  xt.

pany  the  territorial  revenues  of  India  for  five  years  longer
on  several  conditions,  the  most  important  being  an  annual
payment  of  400,000^.  to  the  Imperial  exchequer.'  In  1773
Burgoyne  carried  resolutions  embodying  the  views  of  Chat-
ham, that  all  acquisitions  made  under  the  influence  of  a  mili-
tary force,  or  by  treaty  with  foreign  Powers,  do  of  right
belong  to  the  State,  and  that  to  appropriate  such  acquisi-
tioTis  to  private  use  is  illegal ;  while  Lord  North  carried  a  Bill
restricting  and  modifying  the  constitution  of  the  East  India
Company.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  when  viewed  in  the  light
of  his  later  Indian  policy,  that  Burke  was  strenuously  and
even  passionately  opposed  to  these  proceedings  as  a  violation
of  the  charter  of  the  Company  and  a  spoliation  of  private  indi-
viduals. He  denied  that  the  Government  had  any  right  to
territorial  revenues  acquired  by  the  efforts  of  a  private  corpora-
tion. He  denied  that  the  direct  power  of  the  Crown  was  likely
in  any  way  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  natives,  and  he
predicted  that  if  Indian  patronage  passed  into  the  hands  of  the
Crown  it  would  be  '  a  beginning  of  such  a  scene  of  frauds,  im-
positions, and  Treasury  jobbing  of  all  sorts,  both  here  and  in
India,  as  would  soon  destroy  all  the  little  honesty  and  public
spirit  we  have  left.'  ^

The  next  great  constitutional  question  was  raised  by  the
doctrine  of  Mansfield,  that  in  prosecutions  for  libel  the  jury
must  only  pronounce  on  the  fiict  of  the  publication  and  the
meaning  of  the  innuendos,  leaving  it  to  the  judge  to  say  whether
the  document  is  legally  a  libel.  Both  Chatham  and  Burke
agreed  in  denouncing  this  doctrine  as  fatal  to  tlie  liberty  of  the
press  and  in  desiring  its  overthrow,  but  they  differed  wholly  as
to  the  means.  The  Rockingham  party  attempted  without  suc-
cess to  carry  an  enacting  Bill  stating  in  its  preamble  that
doubts  had  arisen  on  the  subject,  and  establishing  that  hence-
forth the  jury  should  have  a  right  to  decide  whether  the  paper
submitted  to  it  was  a  libel.  Chatham  and  his  followers,  on
the  other  hand,  vehemently  maintaiiuul  that  Mansfield  liad  been
guilty  of  an infringement  of  the  law  which  would  justify  ini-

'  7 George III.  c.  57. 9  George 254,  25o,  28!?.  Bvrltc^s  Cnrrespondcvce.
III.  n.  24, ""  i.  210,  211, '{SK,  :{!I0. WaIi>olo's  A^xi

*  Soe  Chtitlium  ( imxajiondcncCf  iv. Journals,  i.  IC'J,  207,  210,  212-  2 }6.

CH.  XI.  BURKE'S  VIEWS  ABOUT  PARTY.  lf)5

peacbment,  that  there  was  no  real  doubt  upon  the  question,  and
that  the  proper  way  of  dealing  with  it  was  by  a  declaratory  law.
On  both  sides  the  irritation  was  very  great.  '  If  you  yield
now,'  wrote  Burke  to  Dowdeswell,  '  the  horseman  [Chatham]
will  stick  to  you  while  you  live.  .  .  .  Not  an  iota  should  be
yielded  of  the  principle  of  the  Bill,  or  the  principle  of  the  pre-
amble.' '

Another  grave  question  which  threatened  to  divide  the  two
sections  of  the  Opposition,  was  the  tax  upon  absentees,  which
was  proposed  by  the  Irish  Parliament  in  1774,  and  which  caused
much  agitation  among  the  great  Whig  nobles  who  possessed
estates  in  Ireland.  Chatham,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  con-
tended that  if  the  Irish  Parliament  voted  this  tax  no  other  body
should  interfere  with  it,  for  on  a  question  of  Irish  taxation  it
was  supreme.  Burke  and  the  Eockingham  party  were  pre-
pared to  resort  to  all  measures  in  England  to  overthrow  the
decision.^

The  main  differences,  however,  between  Burke  and  Chatham
lay  in  their  methods  of  remedying  the  abuses  of  Parliament
and  the  disorganised  condition  of  parties.  We  have  already
seen  the  measures  of  Chatham,  and  the  views  of  Burke  on  the
subject  are  well  deserving  of  careful  study.  The  magnitude  of
the  evil  he  fully  recognised.  '  The  distempers  of  monarchy,'  he
wrote,  '  were  the  great  subjects  of  apprehension  and  redress  in
the  last  century ;  in  this,  the  distempers  of  Parliament.'  But
according  to  him,  the  first  condition  of  improvement  was  that
'  the  whole  scheme  of  weak,  divided,  and  dependent  adminis-
trations '  should  be  changed,  and  especially  that '  the  King's  men
should  be  utterly  destroyed  as  a  corps.' ^  His  great  objects
were  to  build  up  a  party  interest  independent  of  Court  in-
fluence, and  suflSciently  powerful  to  decide  the  course  of  English
politics,  to  put  an  end  to  the  system  of  mere  casual  and  tem-
porary unions  of  discordant  politicians,  and  to  revive  a  high
sense  of  party  discipline.  '  Party,'  he  said  in  a  very  striking
passage,  '  is  a  body  of  men  united  for  promoting  by  their  joint
endeavom-s  the  national  interest  upon  some  particular  principle

'  Bvrl-e's Corrcapontlcnre,  i. 251.  2110-307,  318-321. Albemarle's  Life

See  on  the  other  side  Cluit limit  Cane-  of  llocldtit/ham,  ii.  226-234.
9j)ondeiice,\\'.  \Q\ -\()\,  W^-\\\.  ^  liiir lie's (\irirxpo/idi/uc,  i. 170,

*  Cluutliam Cwrespoiidenrc, iv.  210.

(>  2

196  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

in  whjcli  they  are  all  agreed.  For  my  part  I  find  it  impossible
to  conceive  that  any  one  believes  in  his  own  politics,  or  thinks
them  to  be  of  any  weight,  who  refuses  to  adopt  the  means  of
having  them  reduced  into  practice.  .  .  .  Every  honourable
connection  will  avow  it  is  their  first  purpose  to  pursue  every
just  method  to  put  the  men  who  hold  their  opinions  into  such  a
condition  as  may  enable  them  to  carry  their  common  plans  into
execution  with  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  State.  As
this  power  is  attached  to  certain  situations,  it  is  their  duty  to
contend  for  these  situations.  Without  a  proscription  of  others,
they  are  bound  to  give  to  their  own  party  the  preference  in  all
things,  and  by  no  means  for  private  considerations  to  accept  any
offers  of  power  in  which  the  whole  body  is  not  included.  .  .  .
IMen  thinking  freely  will  in  particular  instances  think  differently.
But  still  as  the  greater  part  of  the  measures  which  arise  in  the
course  of  public  business  are  related  to,  or  dependent  on,  some
great  leading  general  principles  in  government,  a  man  must  be
peculiarly  unfortunate  in  the  choice  of  his  political  company  if
he  does  not  agree  with  them  at  least  nine  times  in  ten.  .  .  .
When  the  question  is  in  its  nature  doubtful  or  not  very  mate-
rial, the  modesty  which  becomes  an  individual,  and  (in  spite
of  our  Court  moralists)  that  partiality  which  becomes  a  well-
chosen  friendship,  will  frequently  bring  on  an  acquiescence  in
the  general  sentiment.  Thus  the  disagreement  will  naturally  be
rare  ;  it  will  be  only  enough  to  indulge  freedom  without  violating
concord  or  disturbing  arrangements.  And  this  is  all  that  ever
was  required  for  a  character  ot  the  greatest  uniformity  and
steadiness  in  connection.  How  men  can  proceed  without  any
connection  at  all  is  to  me  utterly  incomprehensible.' '

In  consolidating  this  party  organisation  few  things  are  more
important  than  the  services  of  great  historical  families  who  have
from  generation  to  generation  attached  themselves  to  the  same
political  party ;  who  supply  that  party  with  conspicuous  and  uni-
versally recognised  leaders,  and  with  a  great  weight  of  connec-
tion and  borough  influence, and  who  devote  their  leading  members
from  early  life  to  a  political  career.  Much  was  said  about  '  the
growth  of  an  aristocratic  power  prejudicial  to  the  rights  of  the
Crown  and  the  balance  of  the  Constitution.' An  oligarchical

I  Tlumyhtx  on  tlie  Cause  offhe  Present  Discont<  nir.

CH.  XI.  ARISTOCRATIC  INFLUENCE.  197

despotism  like  that  of  Venice  might  indeed  be  easily  conceived,
and  in  the  opinion  of  Burke  it  was  beyond  all  other  despotisms
to  be  detested.  '  But,'  he  added, '  whatever  my  dislikes  may  be,
my  fears  are  not  upon  that  quarter.  The  question  on  the  in-
fluence of  a  Court  and  of  a  peerage  is  not  which  of  the  two  dangers
is  the  most  eligible,  but  which  is  the  most  imminent.  He  is
but  a  poor  observer  who  has  not  seen  that  the  generality  of  the
peers,  far  from  supporting  themselves  in  a  state  of  independent
greatness,  are  but  too  apt  to  fall  into  an  oblivion  of  their  dignity
and  to  run  headlong  into  an  abject  servitude.  .  .  .  These
gentlemen,  so  jealous  of  aristocracy,  make  no  complaints  of
those  peers  (neither  few  nor  inconsiderable),  who  are  always  in
the  train  of  a  court,  and  whose  whole  weight  must  be  con-
sidered as  a  portion  of  the  settled  influence  of  the  Crown.'  It
is  only  when  some  peers  forming  a  political  interest,  separate
from  the  Court  and  set  themselves '  against  a  back-stairs  influence
and  clandestine  government,'  that  the  alarm  is  sounded  and
the  Constitution  pronounced  in  danger  of  being  forced  into  an
aristocracy.  All  this  was  but  part  of  the  system  that  w^as  being
steadily  pursued  '  of  sowing  jealousies  amongst  the  different  orders
of  the  State,  and  of  disjointing  the  natural  strength  of  the  king-
dom, that  it  may  be  rendered  incapable  of  resisting  the  sinister
designs  of  wicked  men  who  have  engrossed  the  royal  power.' '

^  Thmt^Msonthe  Cause  of  tlie Present  nay  almost  every  man,  has been  in

Discontents. Fox  in  the  same  spirit,  and  out,  with or  without  any  other

in  two  very  remarkable  letters  written  set  of  men,  so  that  nothing  like  the

in  1794:,  defended  the  maintenance  of  principle of a  party is  left  in the

party  government  as  '  the  only  mode  nation. This revolution must in

or  plan  in  this  country  by  which a  the end have great consequences  ;

rational man  can  hope  to  stem  the  the  present miserable disconnection

power  and  influence  of  the  Crown;'  among  all  the  great  men  and  their  de-

and  he says,  *  I  am convinced  that  pendants  in  the  kingdom  has  thrown

this  system,  and  this  alone,  has  pre-  a  greater  power  into  the  hands  of  the

vented Great Britain from falling  Crown,  than  an  augmentation  in  the

into  what  Hume  calls  its  euthanasia  army  of  10,000  men.  ...  At  present

of  absolute  monarchy.' — LordSussell's  we  have  in  the  nation  only  one  set  of

Life  of  Fox,  iii.  68-72. I  may  add  a  men  that  can  pretend  to  the  appear-

few  sentences  describing  the  political  ance  of  a  party,  which  are  those  wuo

condition  of  England  in  1772,  from  a  adhere  to  the  Couiton  every  question,

very  able  anonymous  book  published  .  .  .  These men, who are strictly

in  that  year. '  No  regular  party  ex-  united and under the ministerial

isting,tlae  breath  of  the  day  has  formed,  banner,  having  a  principle  of  imion

dissolved,  and  changed  oppositions  ;  wanted by every other  set,  are an

no tie or  connection  being  formed  over-match  for  all.' — Letters on the

among any set of men,  they  have  Present State  of  England,  pp.  202-

fallen  into  the  most  unnatural  unions  204.
imaginable.  .  .  .  Every  set of men.

198  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

The  influence  of  the  great  families  if  rightly  used  is  a  strong
barrier  against  the  undue  influence  of  the  Court,  and  it  gives  a
healthy  permanence,  unity,  and  consistency  to  party  organisations.
In  one  of  his  letters  to  the  Duke  of  Eichmond,  Burke  noticed
as  a  fact  very  applicable  to  English  history  that  '  there  were  two
eminent  families  at  Rome  that  for  several  ages  were  distinguished
uniformly  by  opposite  characters  and  principles,  the  Claudian
and  Valerian,'  and  that  '  any  one  who  looks  attentively  to  their
history  will  see  that  the  balance  of  that  famous  constitution
was  kept  up  for  some  ages  by  the  politics  of  certain  families  as
much  as  by  anything  in  the  laws  and  orders  of  the  State.'  '  I
do  not  look  upon  your  time  or  lives  as  lost,'  he  added, '  if  in
this  sliding  away  from  the  genuine  spirit  of  the  country  certain
parties  if  possible,  if  not  the  heads  of  certain  fiimilies,  should
make  it  their  business  by  the  whole  course  of  their  lives,  prin-
cipally by  their  example,  to  mould  into  the  very  vital  stamina
of  their  descendants  those  principles  which  ought  to  be  trans-
mitted pure  and  unmixed  to  posterity.' '

To  a  statesman  of  these  views  it  is  obvious  that  the  career
of  Chatham  must  have  been  extremely  obnoxious.  His  avowed
design  of  breaking  up  parties,  his  incapacity  of  acting  steadily
with  any  connection,  his  preference  for  ministries  formed  out  of
isolated  politicians  detached  from  different  connections,  the  ex-
treme and  obsequious  reverence  he  repeatedly  showed  for  the
Sovereign,  his  manifest  wish  in  at  least  one  period  of  his  life  to
employ  the  political  influence  of  the  Court  to  destroy  the  cohe-
sion of  aristocratic  factions,  were  all  in  the  highest  degree
offensive  to  Burke.  The  maxim  '  not  men  but  measures,'
which  was  current  among  the  followers  of  Chatham,  he  described
as  a  kind  of  charm  by  which  many  politicians  were  enabled  '  to
get  loose  from  every  honourable  engagement,'  ^  and  in  more
than  one  passage  of  splendid  eloquence  he  painted  the  anarchy
into  which  the  ministry  of  Chatham  had  fallen  on  account  of  the
political  method  employed  by  its  creator.'' But  it  is  only  in  his

'  Bxi/rlicR Ctyrrestpoiuhnce, i.  382,  the  pout,  or  if  any  other  cause  witli-

383.  drew  him  from  public  cares,  princi-

^  ThcmrjhtK on, the Cause of  the  pies  directly  the  contrary  to  his  own

Prexent  UixenD-tcnts.  were  sure  to  predominate.  .  .  .  When

'  See,  e.p.,  that  noble  passage  in  his  face  was  hid  but  for  a  moment,

I'lis  speech  on  Amnrican  taxation. 'If  his  whole  system  was  on  a  wide  sea

ever  Lord  Chatham  fell int(j  a  fit  of  witliout chart or  compass.  .  .  .  De-

CM.  XI.  BURKE'S  DISLIKE OF CHATHAM.  199

private  correspondence  that  the  extent  of  his  dislike  becomes
fully  apparent.  'The  Court,'  he  wrote  to  Lord  Eockinghain
in  1769, '  alone  can  profit  by  any  movements  of  Lord  Chatham,
and  he  is  always  their  resource  when  they  are  run  hard.'  '  By
sending  for  Lord  Chatham,'  the  King's  friends  can '  mean  nothing
else  than  to  patch  a  shred  or  two  of  one  or  more  of  the  other
parties  upon  the  old  Bute  garment,  since  their  last  piecing
is  worn  out.  If  they  had  been  dissatisfied  with  the  last
botching  of  Lord  Chatham,  they  would  not  have  thought  again
of  the  same  workman.'  '  The  style  of  Lord  Chatham's  politics
is  to  keep  hovering  in  air  over  all  parties  and  to  souse  down
where  the  prey  may  prove  best.'  '  The  character  of  their  party
[that  of  Chatham]  is  to  be  very  ready  to  plunge  into  difficult
business — ours  is  to  go  through  with  it.'  The  Tory  jNIinistry
of  North,  he  wrote  in  1774,  'has  three  great  securities — the
actual  possession  of  power,  chapter  of  accidents,  and  the  Earl
of  Chatham.  This  last  is  the  sacra  anchoraJ'  '  Lord  Chat-
ham,' he  wrote  to  Eockingham  in  the  same  year,  '  shows  a  dis-
position to  come  near  you,  but  with  those  reserves  which  he
never  fails  to  have  as  long  as  he  thinks  that  the  closet-door
stands  ajar  to  receive  him.  The  least  peep  into  that  closet
intoxicates  him,  and  will  to  the  end  of  his  life.'  '  Lord  Chat-
ham is,  in  a  manner,  out  of  the  question,  and  the  Court  have
lost  in  him  a  sure  instrument  of  division  in  every  public  con-
test.' '  Acquainted  as  I  am  with  the  astonishing  changes  of
Lord  Chatham's  constitution  (whether  natural  or  political),  I
am  surprised  to  find  that  he  is  again  perfectly  recovered.  But
so  it  is.  He  will  probably  play  more  tricks.'  '  Lord  Chatham's
coming  out  is  always  a  critical  thing  to  your  lordship.' '  In  a  letter
written  after  the  death  of  Chatham  by  Burke  to  his  old  school-
master, Shackleton,  with  whom  he  was  accustomed  to  keep  up  an
exceedingly  intimate,  affectionate,  and  unreserved  correspond-
ence, there  is  a  character  of  Chatham  which  probably  reflects

prived of his  guiding  influence  Lis  of  the  set,  they  easily  prevailed  so  as

colleagues were  whirled about,  the  to  seize  upon  the  vacant,  unoccupied,

sport  of  every  gust  and  easily  driven  and derelict minds of his friends,

jntoany  port;  and  as  those  who  joined  and  instantly  they  turned  the  vessel

with  them  in  manning  the  vessel  were  wholly  out  of  the  course  of  his  policy.'
the most directly opposite to his  '  Burke's Correspondence,  i. 179,

opinions,  measures  and  character,  and  204, 206,  252,  475,  506  ; ii. 55,  03,

far  the  most  artful  and  most  powerful  78.

200  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

the  views  of  the  writer  much  more  faithfully  than  anything
which  was  intended  for  the  public.  Shackleton  had  apparently
wi-itten  something  about  the  moral  dangers  of  party  warfare.
Burke  answered  that  parties  in  politics  were  absolutely  inevit-
able, and  that  he  had  only  known  three  classes  of  men  who
kept  free  from  them.  There  were  a  few  country  gentlemen  who
took  no  considerable  part  in  public  business  ;  there  were  place-
hunters,  whose  sole  object  was  the  pursuit  of  their  private
interest ;  and  there  were  '  ambitious  men  of  light  or  no  princi-
ples, who  in  their  turns  make  use  of  all  parties,  and  therefore
avoid  entering  into  what  may  be  construed  into  an  engagement
with  any.'  '  Such,'  he  added,  '  was  in  a  great  measure  the  late
Earl  of  Chatham,  who  expected  a  very  blind  submission  of  men
to  him  without  considering  himself  as  having  any  reciprocal
obligation  to  them.  It  is  true  that  he  very  often  rewarded
such  submission  in  a  very  splendid  manner,  but  with  very  little
marks  of  respect  or  regard  to  the  objects  of  his  favour;  and  as
he  put  confidence  in  no  man  he  had  very  few  feelings  of  resent-
ment against  those  who  the  most  bitterly  opposed  or  most
basely  betrayed  him.'  ^

These  passages  will  be  sufficient  to  show  the  nature  and  ex-
tent of  the  dislike  which  Burke  felt  towards  Chatham,  and  the
chief  reasons  on  which  it  was  based.  '  The  Thoughts  on  the
Cause  of  the  Present  Discontents,'  which  was  written  by  Burke
in  answer  to  a  pamphlet  by  a  follower  of  Grenville,  exhibited  in
the  most  masterly  manner  the  whole  system  of  Kockingham's
politics.  In  its  original  draught  it  contained  a  direct  attack
upon  Chatham,  which  it  was  deemed  politic  to  suppress,^  and  it
is  impossible  to  read  it  with  attention  without  perceiving  that
it  implied  a  severe  censure  upon  his  whole  past  policy.  Though
one  of  the  most  valuable  permanent  contributions  ever  made  to
English  political  philosophy,  its  appearance  at  a  time  when
Grenville,  Chatham,  and  Kockingham  were  united  on  the
questions  growing  out  of  the  Middlesex  election,  was  regarded
with  much  reason  as  of  very  doubtful  expediency.^  Chatham,  in
a  letter  to  Kockingham,  complained  that  it  had  done  much  hurt

'  BurWs  Correspondence,  ii.  276,  '  See the remarks of Walpole,

277.  Memoirs of George III. iv. 129-

«  Ibid.  i.  200.  135.

CH.  XI.  BURKE AS A EEFORMER.  201

to  the  cause,  and  had  dangerously  narrowed  the  basis  of  oppo-
sition. 'In  the  wide  and  extensive  public,  the  whole  alone
can  save  the  whole  against  the  desperate  designs  of  the  Court.
Let  us  for  God's  sake  employ  our  efforts  to  remove  all  just
obstacles  to  a  true  public-spirited  union  of  all  who  will  not  be
slaves.' '

On  the  subject  of  parliamentary  reform  also,  Burke  differed
widely  from  Chatham,  and  he  manifested  a  far  greater  distrust
of  popular  politics.  In  many  respects,  indeed,  he  may  be  justlj"
regarded  as  a  reformer.  No  one  asserted  more  strongly  that
*  to  give  a  direction,  a  form,  a  technical  dress  and  a  specific
sanction  to  the  general  sense  of  the  community  is  the  true
end  of  the  Legislature  ; '  that  the  Sovereign  and  the  House  of
Lords,  as  well  as  the  Commons,  must  be  regarded  as  only
trustees  of  the  people ;  that  the  Lower  House  was  not  intended
to  be  a  control  upon  them,  but  a  control  for  them.  He  quoted
with  full  approval  the  saying  of  Sully  that  popular  revolts  never
spring  from  a  desire  to  attack,  but  always  from  an  impatience
of  suffering,  a  saying  which  has  lost  much  of  its  truth  since
the  democratic  agencies  of  modern  times  have  begun  to  act
powerfully,  systematically,  and  habitually  upon  classes  which
were  once  whollj'  untouched  by  political  agitations.  In  all  dis-
putes between  the  people  and  their  rulers,  he  contended,
the  presumption  is  at  least  on  a  par  in  favour  of  the  people,  for
they  have  no  interest  in  disorder,  while  the  governing  class;es

■  Rockingham's  3[emoirs,  ii.  193-  from  the  ostensible  public  man !
195.  This  letter  bears  the  following  Must  all  this  theatrical  stuthng  and
strange  and  very  melancholy  endorse-  raised  heels  be  necessary  for  the
ment  written  by  Bm-ke  more  than  character  of  a  great  man  ?  Edmund
twenty  years  later  amid  the  excite-  Burke.  Oh!  but  this  does  not  dero-
ment  of  the  French  Revolution.  gate  from  his  great,  splendid  side,  God
'July  13,  1792.  Looking  over  poor  forbid! — E.  B.'  In  Mrs.  Crewe's
Lord  Rockingham's  papers,  I  hnd  this  Memoranda  of  Burke's  Conversation
letter  from  a  man  wholly  unlike  him.  there  is  the  following  more  favour-
It  concerns  my  pamphlet  (TAe  Caxiseof  able  character  of  Chatham.  'Lord
the  Discontents).  I  remember  to  have  Chatham  was  a  great  minister  and
seen  this  knavish  letter  at  the  time.  bold  in  his  undertakings.  He  in-
The  pamphlet  is  itself  by  anticiiDation  spired  the  people  with  warlike  ar-
an  answer  to  tljat  grand  artihcer  of  dour  when  it  was  necessary.  He  con-
fraud.  He  would  not  like  it.  It  is  sidered  mobs  in  the  light  of  a  raw
pleasant  to  hear  Mm  talk  of  the  great  material  which  might  be  manufac-
extensive  public  who  never  conversed  tured  to  a  proper  stuff  for  their  own
but  with  a  parcel  of  low  toad-eaters.  happiness  in  the.end.' — Rogers's  ^^ffZ-
Alas ! alas  ! how  different  the  real  lections,  p.  82.

202  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGnXEENTH  CENTURY.  en.  xx.

have  many  sinister  influences  to  determine  their  policy.'  No
statesman  defended  more  ably  the  rights  of  electors  in  the  case
of  the  Middlesex  election.  He  supported  Grenville's  Bill  for
terminating  the  scandalously  partial  decisions  of  disputed  elec-
tions. He  was  perhaps  the  first  statesDian  who  urged  that  lists
of  the  voters  in  every  important  division  should  be  published,
in  order  that  the  people  might  be  able  to  judge  the  conduct  of
their  representatives.  He  advocated  parliamentary  reporting.
He  strenuously  defended  the  right  of  free  criticism  in  the
debates  upon  the  Libel  Bill.  He  supported  the  disfranchise-
ment of  revenue  officers.  He  was  the  author  of  one  of  the  most
comprehensive  measures  ever  carried  through  Parliament  for
diminishing  the  number  of  those  superfluous  places  which  were
a  chief  source  of  the  corruption  of  Parliament,  and  when  in
of)position  he  advocated  a  much  larger  reduction  than  he  was
able  in  his  short  period  of  ofiicial  life  to  effect.

All  these  were  great  measures  of  reform,  but  beyond  these
he  refused  to  move.  To  the  demand  for  short  Parliaments
he  off"ered  a  strenuous  opposition.  He  urged  with  great
weight  and  truth  the  horrible  disorder  and  corruption  which
constantly  recurring  elections  would  produce,  as  well  as  the
inevitable  deterioration  of  the  character,  influence,  and  com-
petence of  Parliaments  that  would  arise  from  frequent  breaches
in  the  continuity  of  public  business,  and  frequent  changes  in
the  men  who  conducted  it ;  and  he  maintained  that  the  remedy
would  rather  aggravate  than  diminish  the  great  evil  of  Court
influence.  Triennial  Parliaments  meant  triennial  contests  of
independent  gentlemen  with  only  their  private  fortunes  to  sup-
port them,  with  Court  candidates  supported  by  the  money  and
influence  of  the  Treasury ;  and  members  who  felt  their  seats
tottering  beneath  them,  were  at  least  as  likely  to  lean  for  sup-
port upon  the  ministry  as  upon  the  people.  It  was  noticed  by
every  experienced  politician  that  the  influence  of  the  ministry
was  much  greater  in  the  first  and  last  sessions  of  a  Parliament
than  in  the  intermediate  sessions  when  members  sat  a  little
more  firmly  on  their  seats. ^

'  Tlinnfjhts  on  the  Cause  of  the  Piss-  ^  Speech  on  the  Duration  of  Parlia-

srnt  JAHcontents.  Letteo'totlie  Slwriffs  ments. It is  curious  to  contrast  tin's

of  Tin^tol. Letter  on  the  .Duraiiuii  (f  with tlie  statement of  Junius that

Parliament.  '  the  last  session  of  a  sciiteiniial  I'ar-

CB.  XI.  INSTRUCTIONS  TO MEMBERS.  203

A  Place  Bill,  which  was  another  favourite  remedy,  he  almost
equally  disliked.  It  was  quite  right  to  prune  the  scandalous
redundancy  of  sinecures  and  Court  places  which  supplied  the
minister  with  such  inordinate  means  of  influencing  votes.  But
to  remove  the  responsible  heads  of  the  great  civil  departments
and  of  the  army  and  navy  from  Parliament,  and  to  disconnect
the  greater  part  of  those  who  hold  civil  employments  from
all  parliamentary  interest,  could  not  fail  to  lower  the  position
of  the  Legislature,  and  to  endanger  the  safety  of  the  Consti-
tution.^

He  was  not  less  hostile  to  the  doctrine,  which  was  rapidly
spreading  over  England,  that  representatives  are  simply  dele-
gates, and  must  accept,  even  against  their  own  judgments,  im-
perative instructions  from  their  constituents.  On  his  election
for  Bristol  in  1774  his  colleague  spoke  in  favour  of  the  coercive
force  of  instructions,  while  Burke  at  once  denounced  them  as
resting  upon  an  essential  misconception  of  the  nature  of  repre-
sentative government.  '  Your  representative  owes  you,'  he
said,  '  not  his  industry  only,  but  his  judgment,  and  he  betrays
instead  of  serving  you  if  he  sacrifices  it  to  your  opinion.  .  .  .
Parliament  is  not  a  congress  of  ambassadors  from  different  and
hostile  interests.  ...  It  is  a  deliberative  assembly  of  one  na-
tion with  one  interest,  that  of  the  whole  ;  where  not  local
purposes  nor  local  prejudices  ought  to  guide,  but  the  general
good.  .  .  .  You  choose  a  member  indeed,  but  when  you  have
chosen  him  he  is  not  member  of  Bristol,  but  a  member  of  Par-
liament.' Electors  are  competent  to  select  a  man  of  judg-
ment and  knowledge  to  send  into  the  great  council  of  the
nation ;  but  they  are  not  competent  to  determine  the  details
of  legislation,  and  an  attempt  to  usurp  this  function  would  in-
evitably lower  the  character  of  Parliament.  '  Government  and
legislation  are  matters  of  reason  and  judgment.'  Every  member
is  bound  to  decide  upon  the  arguments  that  are  placed  before
him  what  course  is  best  for  the  whole  community,  and  '  what

liament  is  usually  employed  in  court-  They  ever  grow  curst  with  age  ;  so

ing  the  favour  of  the  people.'—  Dedi-  that  if  you  will  have  good  of  them,

cation  to  the  English  People.  Charles  put  them  off  handsomely  when  they

I.  thought  long  Parliaments  specially  come  to  any  age,  for  young  ones  are

hostile  to  royal  influence. He  wrote  ever  most  tractable.'
to  Wentworth  (January  22,  1634-5),  >  Thoughts  on  the  Cause  of  the  Pre-

'  Parliaments  are  of  the  nature  of  cats.  seii/,  Discontents.

204  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

sort  of  reason  is  that  in  which  one  set  of  men  deliberate  and
another  decide,  and  where  those  who  form  the  conclusion  are
perhaps  300  miles  distant  from  those  who  hear  the  arg^u-
ments?'  These  views  were  generally  adopted  by  the  Whig
party,  and  it  appears  to  have  been  mainly  due  to  the  in-
fluence of  Burke  that  the  fashion  of  authoritative  instructions,
which  after  the  Middlesex  election  threatened  to  become  uni-
versal in  popular  constituencies,  in  a  few  years  almost  passed
away.

But  Burke  went  much  further  than  this.  He  protested
against  any  change  in  tlie  essential  constitution  of  Parliament,
and  he  looked  with  a  disgust  and  an  indignation,  which  he  was
at  no  pains  to  conceal,  upon  the  levelling  doctrines  and  the
sweeping  changes  that  were  advocated  by  the  society  of  the
supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Eights.  '  The  bane  of  the  Whigs,'  he
once  wrote,  '  has  been  the  admission  among  them  of  the  corps
of  schemers  who  in  reality  and  at  bottom  mean  little  more  than
to  indulge  themselves  with  speculations,  but  who  do  us  infinite
mischief  by  persuading  many  sober  and  well-meaning  people
that  we  have  designs  inconsistent  with  the  Constitution  left  us
by  our  forefathers.  .  .  .  Would  to  God  it  were  in  our  power  to
keep  things  as  they  are  in  point  of  form,  provided  we  were  able
to  improve  them  in  point  of  substance.  The  machine  itself
is  well  enough  to  answer  any  good  purpose,  provided  the
materials  were  sound.' '  In  accordance  with  these  views  he  op-
posed all  attempts  to  lower  the  suffrage,  to  abolish  the  rotten
boroughs,  to  add  to  the  county  representation,  or  in any  way

'  Burlte's Correspondence,  ii.  383.  but  if  thegeneral  disposition beagainst

So  again  he  speaks  of  '  a  rotten  sub-  a virtuous  and  manly  line  of  pul)liG

division of a faction amongst our-  conduct,  there  is  no  form  into  which

selves  who  liave  done  us  infinite  mis-  it  can  be  tlirovvn  tliat  will  improve  its

chief  by  the  violence,  rashness,  and  nature  oradd  to  its  energy.' Ibid.  ii.  38-1.

often  wickedness  of  their  measures.  I  Speaking  of  the  assertion '  that we

mean  the  Bill  of  Rights  people  ; '  and  are  not  happy  enough  to  enjoy  a  suf-

he  adds,  '  If  no  rempdy  can  be  found  licient  number  of  voters  in  England,'

in  the  disposition  of  capital  people,  he  sa,ys, '  I  believe  that  most  sober

in  the  temper,  spirit  (and  docility  too)  thinkers  on  this  subject  are  rather  of

of the lower, and in tlie  thorough  opinion  that  our  fault  is  on  the  other

union  of  both,  nothing  can  be  done  by  side,  and  that  it  would  be  more  in  the

any  alteration  in  forms.'  Ibid.  i.  22J»,  spirit  of our  Constitution  and  more

231. In  a  later  letter  he  says,  '  If  the  ;igrecabU^  to  the  ])a(tern  of  our  best

nation  at  large  has  disposition  enough  law.s,  by  lessening  the  number  to  add

to oppose all bad principles and  tothe  weight  and  independency  of  our

bad  men,  its form of  government  is  voters. And  truly,  considering the

in  my  opinion  fully  sufncicnt  for  it ;  inmiense  and dangerous cliarge of

CH.  XI.  BURKES CONSERVATISM.  205

to  modify  the  framework  of  Parliament.  In  the  face  of  the
glaring  aad  monstrous  abuses  of  the  representative  system  he
deprecated  all  change,  and  even  all  discussion  of  the  Constitu-
tion. '  Plowever  much,'  he  said,  '  a  change  might  improve
the  platform,  it  could  add  nothing  to  the  authority  of  the
Legislature.'  'Authority  depending  on  opinion  at  least  as
much  as  on  duty,  an  idea  circulated  among  the  people  that
om-  Constitution  is  not  so  perfect  as  it  ought  to  be,  before  you
are  sure  of  mending  it,  is  a  certain  method  of  lessening  it
in  the  public  opinion.'  '  There  is  a  difference  between  a  moral
and  political  exposure  of  a  public  evil  relative  to  the  administra-
tion of  government,  whether  of  men  or  systems,  and  a  declaration
of  defects  real  or  supposed  in  the  fundamental  constitution  of
your  country.'  '  When  the  frame  and  constitution  of  the  State
is  disgraced,  patriotism  is  destroyed  in  its  very  source.  .  .  .  Our
first,  our  dearest,  most  comprehensive  relation,  our  country  is
gone.'  He  deplored  as  a  great  evil  '  the  irreverent  opinion  of
Parliament  which  had  grown  up.'  He  complained  '  that  we  are
grown  out  of  humour  with  the  English  Constitution  itself,'
'that  it  is  never  to  have  a  quietus,  but  is  continually  vilified
and  attacked,'  and  he  quoted  with  evident  sympathy  the  opinion
of  those  who  believed  '  that  neither  now  nor  at  any  time  is  it
prudent  or  safe  to  be  meddling  with  the  fundamental  principles
and  ancient  tried  usages  of  our  Constitution,  that  our  repre-
sentation is  as  nearly  perfect  as  the  necessary  imperfection  of
human  affairs  and  of  human  creatures  will  suffer  it  to  be,
and  that  it  is  a  subject  of  prudent  and  honest  use  and  thank-
ful enjoyment,  and  not  of  captious  criticism  or  rash  experi-
ment.' ^

These  views  he  held  with  consistent  earnestness  through
every  portion  of  his  life.  They  appeared  in  the  'Observations
on  the  State  of  the  Nation,' and  in  the  'Thoughts  on  the  Cause
of  the  Present  Discontents,'  which  were  written  amid  the
agitation  that  followed  the  INIiddlesex  election.  In  1780  he
seriously  thought  of  retiring  from  politics  on  account  of  the  seces-

elections,  tho  prostitute  and daring evil.' — Observations  on  the  State  of  the
venality,  the  corruption  of  manners, Xation.

the idleness  and protligacy of the  '  See especially his speecli on

lower  sort  of  voters,  no  prudent  man the  Reform of  Parliament. Burke's
would  propose to increase such an Wi^rks,  x.  92-108.

«

206  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xi.

sion  of  a  portion  of  his  party  to  the  Radical  views.'  In  1782,
wlien  the  younger  Pitt  introduced  the  question  of  parliamentary
retorm,  Burke  was  his  most  vehement  and  most  formidable
opponent,  and  he  never  varied  on  the  question  till  the  sympathy
of  his  party  with  the  democratic  aspects  of  the  French  Revolu-
tion finally  severed  him  from  the  Whigs.  His  imagination,  which
seldom  failed  to  intensify  the  conclusions  of  his  reason,  trans-
figured the  British  Constitution  into  a  work  of  almost  super-
human wisdom,  and  he  made  it  the  object  of  an  almost  adoring
reverence.  To  unfold  its  matchless  beauties,  to  trace  its  far-
reaching  consequences,  to  describe  the  evils  that  would  flow
from  any  attempt  to  tamper  with  it,  to  guard  it  from  cap-
tious and  irreverent  criticism,  became  a  constant  object  of  his
life.  He  possessed  to  an  extraordinary  degree  that  'retro-
spective imagination  '  which  Moore  has,  I  think,  truly  de-
scribed as  a  characteristic  of  his  countrymen,  and  he  clung  with
an  instinctive  affection  to  every  institution  which  represented
the  labours  and  the  experiences,  which  was  interwoven  with
the  habits,  associations,  and  sympathies  of  many  generations,
and  was  supported  not  only  by  deliberate  judgments  but  by  pre-
scription, custom,  unconscious  and  unreasoning  prejudice.  It
cost  him  much  to  eradicate  anything  that  was  deeply  planted
in  the  habits  of  a  nation,  to  sap  or  relax  any  organism  which
derived  its  strength  from  the  long  traditions  of  the  past.  His
writings  after  the  outburst  of  the  French  Revolution  contain
the  most  powerful  apology  in  all  literature  for  these  modes  of
thinking  and  feeling,  but  it  is  a  complete  misconception  to
suppose  that  his  conduct  after  the  Revolution  was  an  apostasy,
was  anything  but  the  natural  and  indeed  inevitable  develop-
ment of  his  career.  The  evil  of  those  levelling,  speculative,
and  metaphysical  theories  of  politics  which  triumphed  at  the
Revolution  was  one  of  his  earliest  and  deepest  convictions.  It
may  be  traced  in  every  important  political  work  which  pro-
ceeded from  his  pen,  and  it  was  clearly  visible  to  his  con-
temporaries. INIrs.  Macaulay,  who  was  the  ablest  writer  of
the  New  Radical  School,  at  once  recognised  in  Burke  the
most  formidable  antagonist  of  her  ways  of  thinking,  and  she
wrote  a  reply  to  his  '  Thoughts on  the  Cause of  the Present

' Corrci^iioiulcncr,  ii.  385,  386.

CH.  XI.  BURKE'S  CONSERVATISM,  207

Discontent?,' in  which  she  described  that  pamphlet  as  containing
*  a  poison  sufficient  to  destroy  all  the  little  virtue  and  under-
standing of  sound  policy  which  is  left  in  the  nation,'  and  as
peculiarly  fitted  to  divert  the  nation  from  '  organic  and  truly
useful  reforms,'  to  a  revival  of  '  aristocratic  faction.'  Walpole
in  1772  wrote,  '  Burke  was  certainly  in  his  principles  no  mode-
rate man,  and  when  his  party  did  not  interfere  generally  leaned
towards  the  arbitrary  side,  as  appeared  in  the  debates  on  the
Church.'  ^  Bishop  Watson  declared  that  long  before  the  French
Eevolution  he  had  come  to  regard  Burke  as  'a  High  Church-
man in  religion,'  and  '  a  Tory,  perhaps  indeed  an  aristocratic
Tory,  in  the  State.' ^  During  the  Warren  Hastings  trial  his
colleagues  noticed  as  a  curious  characteristic  of  his  mind,  the
special  vehemence  with  which  he  dilated  on  any  outrage  done  to
an  ancient  dynasty,  to  the  worship  and  the  sanctity  even  of  a
pagan  creed. ^

It  will  probably  now  appear  to  most  persons  that  on  the  sub-
ject of  Parliamentary  Eeform  Chatham  exhibited  a  far  greater
wisdom  than  Burke,  and  that  the  reverence  with  which  Burke
looked  upon  the  Constitution  as  it  existed  in  his  day  was  exag-
gerated even  to  extravagance.  The  corruption  and  indeed  ab-
surdity of  the  representative  system  could  hardly  be  overstated;
and  experience,  which  is  the  one  sure  test  in  politics,  has  de-
cisively shown  that  it  was  possible  to  reform  the  abuses  of  Par-
liament and  to  allay  the  deep  discontent  of  the  nation  without
impairing,  for  any  good  purpose,  the  efficiency  of  government.
With  Burke  an  extreme  dread  of  organic  change  co-existed  with  a
great  disposition  to  administrative  reform.  The  Tory  party,
which  prevailed  after  the  French  Eevolution,  adopted  one  side
of  his  teaching,  but  wholly  discarded  the  other,  and  they  made
the  indiscriminate  defence  of  every  abuse,and  the  repression  or
restriction  of  every  kind  of  political  liberty,  1  he  great  end  of
government.  At  last  in  Canning  and  his  followers  a  school  of
statesmen  arose  on  whom  Burke  might  have  looked  with  favour,

•  Laiit  Jonrnnh,  i.  84.  Indian priesthood,  he  spoke of  the

-  Watson's  Afiecdotes  of  his  Own  piety  of  the  Hindoos  with  aaniiration,

I'iiiie,  i.  1H2.  and  of  their  holy  religion  and  sacred

'  Lord  Holland  writes :  '  Mr.  Fox  functions  with  an  awe  bordering  on

has  more  than  once  assured  me  that  devotion.' — Lord  Holland's  J/t worn- «/

in bis [Bui-ke's] invectives against  t/wM'/ti//  Prirti/,i.  5,  C>.  See  too  Moore's

Ml llas'ings's indignities to the  Life  of  Sheridan,  li. 'J\,  ^-i.

208 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xi.

who  were  bitterly  opposed  to  any  considerable  change  in  the
constitution  of  the  House  of  Commons,  but  who  were  at  the  same
time  ardent  advocates  of  religious  and  commercial  freedom,  of  a
liberal  foreign  policy,  and  of  administrative  reform.  But  the
abuses  of  the  representative  system,  which  had  long  been  increas-
ing, soon  became  intolerable,  and  in  1832  an  irresistible  wave  of
public  opinion  swept  away  the  more  corrupt  portions  of  the
borough  system,  and  with  it  the  deep  English  prejudice  against
parliamentary  reform.

It  is  well  worth  trying,  at  a  time  when  very  different
modes  of  political  thought  are  prevailing,  to  realise  the  reasons
which  underlie  the  opinions  of  Burke.  Even  the  errors  of  so
great  a  thinker  are  often  more  instructive  than  the  wisdom  of
lesser  men,  for  they  spring  not  from  poverty  of  thought,  or  want
of  insight  or  sagacity,  but  merely  from  imperfections  of  mental
balance.  No  politician  ever  saw  more  clearly  than  Burke  the
remote,  subtle,  and  indirect,  as  well  as  the  more  immediate
consequences  of  institutions  and  measures.  It  was  in  comparing
the  good  and  evil,  the  advantages  and  the  dangers,  that  his
judgment  was  often  refracted  by  his  passions  or  his  imagina-
tion y.

It  must  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  he  never
adopted  some  of  the  favourite  arguments  of  the  opponents  of
reform.  The  opinion  that  nomination  boroughs  were  a  legiti-
mate form  of  private  property,  which  cannot  be  touched  with-
out confiscation,  was  expressed  by  no  less  a  writer  than  Junius,
and  was  countenanced  by  the  younger  Pitt ;  but  no  traces  of
it  will,  I  believe,  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Burke.  Nor  did
he  ever  hold  the  favourite  Tory  doctrine  that  all  right  of  re-
presentation rests  ultimately  in  the  owners  of  the  soil.  Divine
right,  whether  of  kings,  or  nobles,  or  freeholders,  had  no  place
in  his  political  philosophy.  On  one  occasion  when  a  county
member  maintained  this  doctrine,  Burke  took  great  pains  to
refute  it,  showing  by  the  antiquity  of  the  boroughs,  and  by  the
early  presence  of  lawyers  in  the  House,  that  in  the  theory  of
the  Constitution  the  commercial  interest  and  the  professions
had  as  much  right  to  representation  as  the  landed  interest.'
*The  virtue,  spirit,  and  essence,'  he  once  said,  'of  a  House  of
'  Pari.  TTld.  xvi.  920,921.

cu.  XI.  METHOD OF  POLITICAL  REASONING.  209

Commons  consists  in  its  being  the  express  image  of  the  feel-
ings of  the  nation.' '

His  first  and  most  important  objection  to  the  Radical
school  of  politicians  was  the  method  of  their  reasoning.  Nine-
tenths  of  the  reformers  of  his  time,  as  he  truly  said,  argued
on  the  ground  of  natural  right,  and  treated  representation
not  as  a  question  of  expediency,  but  as  a  question  of  morals.^
Inequalities  in  their  view  were  equivalent  to  injustices.  All
men  are  naturally  equal,  all  had  an  equal  right  to  self-govern-
ment, and  therefore  to  an  equal  share  in  the  representation.
It  is  evident  that  if  this  principle  were  admitted  it  would  lead
to  a  complete  subversion  of  that  whole  system  of  complex,
balanced,  prescriptive,  and  heterogeneous  government  which  is
known  under  the  name  of  the  British  Constitution.  It  would
lead  by  a  logical  necessity  to  universal  suffrage,  to  equal  elec-
toral districts,  to  the  destruction  of  a  monarchy  and  a  political
aristocracy  which  did  not  emanate  directly  from  the  people.
Nor  were  these  the  only  dangers  to  be  apprehended.  A  mode
of  reasoning  which  described  the  House  of  Commons  as  neither
actually  nor  virtually  representative,  and  persuaded  the  people
that  their  natural  rights  were  violated  by  each  branch  of  the
Legislature,  could  not  fail  to  destroy  all  feeling  of  affection  for
the  country  and  for  its  Government.

In  opposition  to  these  views  it  was  the  first  principle  of
Burke  and  of  the  school  of  Whig  politicians  who  took  their
politics  from  his  writings,  that  Government  rests  wholly  on
expediency,  that  its  end  is  the  good  of  the  community,  and
that  it  must  be  judged  exclusively  by  the  degree  in  which  it
fulfils  this  end.  The  Whig  in  this  respect  stood  equally  apart
from  the  Tory  and  from  the  Radical  of  the  eighteenth  century.
The  Tory  maintained  a  theological  doctrine  of  the  Divine  right
of  kings  as  the  corner-stone  of  his  politics.  The  Radical
rested  upon  metaphysical  doctrines  about  natural  rights  and
the  natiu:al  equality  of  men,  and  anomalies,  inequalities,  in-
equitable dispositions  of  political  power  were  the  chief  subjects

'  Tlunights  an  the  Present  Discon-  on the Duration of Parliaments).

tents. So  again,  '  To  govern  accord-  Warhs,  x.  73.

ing  to  the  sense  and  agreeably  to  the  -  Speech  on  the  Reform  of  Parlia-

interests  of  the  people,  is  a  great  and  mcnt  (1782). Ibid.  x.  95.
glorious  object  of  government '  (Speech

VOL.  III.  P

210 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xr.

of  his  complaints. In  the  judgment  of  Burke  this  mode  of
reasoning  is  essentially  and  fundamentally  false. Government
is  a  matter  of  experience,  and  not  a  matter  of  theory. The
sole  question  to  be  asked  about  an  institution  is,  how  it  works.
That  it  is  an  anomaly,  that  it  is  formed  on  other  principles
from  other  parts  of  the  Government,  that  it  is  what  is  ftilsely
called *  illogical,'  or,  in  other  words,  in  dissonance  with  the
general  tendency  of  the  institutions  of  the  country,  is  no  valid
argument  against  it. The  term  '  logic '  is  rightly  applied  to
trains  of  reasoning,  but  not  to  political  institutions ;  for  the
object  of  these  is  neither  truth  nor  consistency  nor  symmetry,
but  utility. It  may  indeed  be  truly  said  that  no  Government
which  is  simple  and  symmetrical  can  be  a  good  one,  and  that
the  anomalies  which  are  often  regarded  as  the  chief  blemishes
are  in  truth  among  the  chief  excellences  of  the  Constitution.
For  Government  is  obliged  to  discharge  the  most  various  func-
tions, to  aim  at  many  distinct  and  sometimes  inconsistent  ends.
It  is  the  trustee  and  the  guardian  of  the  multifarious,  com-
plicated, fluctuating,  and  often  conflicting  interests  of  a  highly
composite and  artificial society. The principle that tends
towards  one  set  of  advantages  impairs  another. The  remedies
which  apply  to  one  set  of  dangers  would,  if  not  partially  counter-
acted, produce  another. The  institutions  which  are  admirably
adapted  to  protect  one  class  of  interests,  may  be  detrimental
to  another. It  is  only  by  constant  adjustments,  by  checks  and
counterchecks,  by  various  contrivances  adapted  to  various  needs,
by  compromises between competing interests, by continual
modifications  applied  to  changing  circumstances,  that  a  system
is  slowly  formed  which  corresponds  to  the  requirements  and
conditions of  the  country,  discharges  the  greatest  number  of
useful  functions,  and  favours  in  their  due  proportion  and  degree
tlie  greatest  number  of  distinct  and  often  diverging  interests.
The  comparative  prominence  of  different  interests,  tendencies,
and  dangers,  must  continually  occupy  the  legislator,  and  he
will  often  have  to  provide  limitations  and  obstacles  to  the  very
tendency  which  he  wishes  to  make  the  strongest  in  his  legis-
lation. In  the  words  of  Burke,  '  There  is  not,  there  never
was,  a  principle of  government  under  heaven  that  does  not,
in  the  very  pursuit  of  the  good  it  proposes,  naturally  and  in-

CH.  x[. CONDITIONS OV  REPKKSENTATIVE GOVERNMKNT. 211

evitably  lead  into  some  inconvenience  which  makes  it  abso-
lutely necessary  to  counterwork  and  weaken  the  application  of
that  first  principle  itself,  and  to  abandon  something  of  the
extent  of  the  advantage  you  proposed  by  it,  in  order  to  pre-
vent also  the  inconveniences  which  have  arisen  from  the  in-
strument of  all  the  good  you  had  in  view.'  ^  The  legitimate
place  of  abstract  reasoning  in  politics  is  therefore  a  very  small
one.  In  political  theories,  '  the  major  makes  a  pompous  figure
in  the  battle,  but  the  victory  of  truth  depends  upon  the  little
minor  of  circumstances.'  '  Circumstances  give  in  reality  to
every  political  principle  its  distinguishing  colour  and  discrimi-
nating effect.  The  circumstances  are  what  render  every  civil
and  political  scheme  beneficial  or  obnoxious  to  mankind.'

To  make  these  views  more  clear,  let  us  consider  for  a  short
time  what  are  the  objects  which  a  representative  system  in
England  in  our  own  century  is  expected  to  attain.  It  must,
in  the  first  place,  bring  together  a  Parliament  so  distinguished
for  its  ability,  its  political  knowledge,  and  its  integrity,  that  it
may  be  safely  entrusted  with  the  chief  voice  in  the  Government
of  the  Empire.  No  task  can  be  conceived  more  serious  or  more
responsible  than  that  which  is  imposed  on  it.  The  welfare  of
at  least  a  fifth  part  of  the  human  race,  the  relations  of  this
great  multitude  to  the  remainder  of  their  kind,  the  futm-e  of
millions  who  are  yet  unborn,  is  largely  dependent  on  its  deci-
sions. Eaces,  religions,  interests,  social  conditions  the  most
various  and  the  most  hostile,  pass  under  its  control,  and  a  single
false  step  may  be  traced  in  blood  over  the  history  of  centuries.
It  is  not  expected  or  required  that  every  Member  of  Parlia-
ment should  be  competent  to  discharge  the  high  and  difiicult
functions  of  a  statesman,  but  Parliament  must  at  least  include
many  such  men ;  it  must  discover,  support,  and  restrain  them  ;
and  it  must  exercise  a  general  supervision  over  the  vast  and
complex  field  of  imperial  interests.  This  is  necessary  for
the  welfare  and  even  for  the  existence  of  the  Empire.  It  is
equally  necessary  to  the  popular  character  of  the  Grovernment ;
for  if  the  House  of  Commons  is  manifestly  inefficient  and
corrupt,  it  will  inevitably  decay. It  becomes,  then,  a  matter

•  Speech  on  the  Duration  of  raiiiamcnts. \Jorls,  x.  73.
p  2

212 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

of  the  most  vital  importance  to  consider  by  what  classes  a
body  which  is  entrusted  with  these  momentous  functions  is  to
be  elected.  Politics  would  be  unlike  any  other  product  of  the
human  mind  if  it  were  not  true  that  a  high  average  of  intel-
ligence among  the  electors  was  necessary  for  a  high  average  of
intelligence  among  the  representatives.  If  the  predominating
power  of  election  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  poorest  and
the  most  ignorant  classes  of  the  community ;  if  it  be  entrusted
mainly  to  those  who  have  no  political  knowledge,  no  real  political
opinions,  no  sense  of  political  responsibility  ;  if  this  great  mass
of  elective  incompetence  be  carefully  sheltered  from  the  in-
fluence of  the  more  instructed  classes,  what  can  possibly  be
expected  except  the  degradation  of  Parliament  and  the  decay
of  the  Empire  ?  Nothing  in  the  whole  history  of  superstition
is  more  grotesque  than  the  doctrine  that  the  panacea  for  par-
liamentary evils  is  to  be  found  in  lowering  the  suffrage,  as
though  by  some  amazing  process  of  political  alchemy  the  ability
and  intelligence  of  the  representative  body  were  likely  to  in-
crease in  direct  proportion  to  the  ignorance  and  incapacity  of
the  elective  body.  And  the  difficulty  of  the  problem  is  greatly
aggravated  by  the  fact  that  it  is  necessary  to  the  efficiency  of
Parliament  that  it  should  not  only  maintain  a  high  average  of
ability,  but  also  that  it  should  include  many  young  men  capable
of  devoting  their  lives  to  the  work  of  statesmanship.

These  are  among  the  results  which  a  good  elective  system
is  required  to  accomplish ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  the  sole
object  of  parliamentary  government  is  to  secure  the  best  men
for  the  management  of  the  State.  It  is  also  required  to  secure
a  representation  of  the  people,  and  under  this  term  many  dis-
tinct considerations  are  comprised.  Parliament  is  in  the  first
place  a  representative  of  the  property  of  the  country.  After
the  maintenance  of  personal  security,  the  very  first  object  for
which  all  government  is  created  is  to  secm-e  to  every  member
of  the  community  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  that  which
he  has  honestly  earned  or  honestly  received  from  others.  In
practical  as  in  theoretical  politics,  taxation  and  representation
are  very  closely  connected,  and  one  of  the  first  signs  of  the
undue  preponderance  or  depression  of  a  class  is  usually  to  be
found  in  partial  and  unfair  adjustments  of  taxation. In  an

CH.  XI REPEESENTATION OF PROPERTY  AND OPINION.  213

itleal  system  every  taxpayer  should  have  some  political  weight ;
but  it  should  be  a  weight  proportioned  to  the  amount  of  his
contributions.  A  bad  representative  system  may  easily  be-
come an  instrument  of  legal  confiscation,  one  class  voting  the
taxes  which  another  class  is  obliged  to  pay,  one  class  plunging
the  Government  into  a  career  of  extravagance  under  the  con-
viction that  the  burden  of  the  expense  will  be  thrown  upon
another.  Besides  this,  the  possession  of  property,  but  especially
of  property  which  is  moderate  in  its  amount  and  somewhat
precarious  in  its  character,  is  the  chief  steadying  and  restrain-
ing influence  in  politics.  Experience  shows  that  the  diffusion
through  the  bulk  of  a  community  of  a  fair  measure  of  education
and  enlightenment  is  no  real  guarantee  against  the  pursuit  of
Utopias,  against  the  contagion  of  wild,  dangerous,  or  malignant
enthusiasms,  against  the  introduction  into  political  life  of  that
spirit  of  speculation  and  experiment,  of  gambling  and  of  adven-
ture, which  always  leads  nations  to  disaster  if  not  to  ruin.  It  is
of  capital  importance  to  all  nations,  but  especially  to  free  nations,
that  they  should  attain  a  large  measure  of  stability  in  their
affairs,  and  that  the  spirit  of  caution  should  predominate  in
their  councils.  In  no  other  way  can  these  ends  be  so  adequately
reached  as  by  placing  the  chief  political  power  in  the  hands  of
the  classes  whose  material  interests  are  most  immediately  and
most  obviously  affected  by  anarchy  or  by  war.

Parliament  is,  again,  a  representative  of  the  opinions  of  the
nation.  The  various  ideas,  aspirations,  and  discontents  which  are
circulating  in  the  community  should  find  an  expression  within
its  walls,  and  an  expression  in  some  degree  proportionate  to
their  weight  in  the  country.  To  efi'ect  this  is  very  difficult,  and
no  simple  and  symmetrical  system  of  election  can  attain  it ;  for
the  divisions  of  opinion  do  not  correspond  with  any  accuracy  to
the  divisions  of  classes.  Great  multitudes  can  hardly  be  said
to  contribute  anything  to  public  opinion ;  and  there  is  much
danger  of  only  two  or  three  broad  lines  being  represented,  while
the  intermediate,  minor,  and  rising  schools  of  political  thought
are  suppressed.  There  are  also  grave  and  opposite  evils  con-
nected with  the  representation  of  opinions  to  be  guarded  against.
It  is  right  that  the  different  forms  of  political  opinion  which
exist  in  the  nation  should  be  represented ;  but  it  is  also  right

214  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

that  they  should  hold  a  due  subordination  to  the  great  leading
principles  of  party  divisions.  When  Parliament  is  disinte-
grated into  numerous  small  fractions  acting  independently  of
party  organisations,  the  Executive,  being  unable  to  count  upon
steady  majorities,  loses  all  power,  and  the  policy  of  the  country
all  firmness,  consistency,  and  continuity.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  a  great  evil  when  party  discipline  is  too  perfect,  and  when
party  outlines  are  too  sharply  defined.  A  minister  commanding
a  majority  is  then  able  to  defy  any  preponderance  of  argument
against  his  measures  in  Parliament,  and  to  neglect  great  out-
bursts of  discontent  in  the  country ;  and  all  those  intermediate
shades  of  opinion  which  produce  compromises,  soften  tran-
sitions, and  prepare  coalitions,  disappear.  Parliament  at  dif-
ferent times  has  been  subject  to  each  of  these  diseases,  and
their  remedy  is  to  be  found  much  more  in  public  opinion  than
in  mere  political  machinery.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance,
both  to  the  efficiency  of  a  representative  body  and  to  its  moral
influence  in  the  country,  that  it  should  reflect  as  far  as  pos-
sible the  various  modes  of  political  thought  subsisting  among
the  people.  Most  great  truths  which  have  arisen  among
mankind  have  been  long  peculiar  to  small  minorities,  and  it  is
a  grave  calamity  if  the  voice  of  those  minorities  should  be  long
unheard  in  the  councils  of  the  nation.  Even  if  an  opinion  be
wholly  or  partially  erroneous,  it  is  well  that  Parliament  should
come  into  direct  contact  with  its  representatives.  One  of  the
greatest  dangers  to  parliamentary  government,  one  of  the
siu'est  causes  of  the  decay  of  loyalty  and  patriotism,  is  the
growth  of  great  masses  of  unrepresented  opinion.  The  pacify-
ing influence  of  Parliament  arises  chiefly  from  the  fact  that  it
is  the  safety-valve  of  the  nation ;  that  it  gives  a  voice  to  its
wants,  discontents,  suspicions,  and  aspirations ;  brings  them
imder  the  direct  cognisance  of  the  Government,  and  submits
them  to  a  full  and  serious  examination.

Parliament,  again,  is  the  representative  of  classes  and  of
interests.  Every  class  has  its  own  interests,  which  should  be
protected ;  its  own  habits  of  thought,  which  should  be  repre-
sented ;  its  own  special  knowledge  to  contribute  to  the  govern-
ment of  the  country.  It  is  necessary  that  the  views  of  all
fihould  bo  represented. It  is  also  necessary  that  no  one  should

CH.  ii.  REPrtESENTATION OF CLASSES.  215

swamp  or  overwhelm  the  others.  All  government  must  be
carried  on  by  tradition,  in  regular  grooves,  according  to  a
formed  system ;  and  it  is  practically  impossible  that  such  a
system  can  continue  through  several  generations  under  the
control  of  a  single  section  of  the  community  without  being
unduly  directed  towards  the  promotion  of  its  special  interests.
When  one  class  possesses  a  monopoly  or  an  overwhelming
preponderance  of  power,  it  is  almost  certain  to  abuse  it ;  and
even  apart  from  the  temptation  to  a  consciously  selfish  policy,
a  mixture  of  classes  is  very  essential  to  soundness  of  political
judgment.  Experience  shows  how  little  this  is  attained  by
placing  political  power  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  a  small
and  restricted  class,  even  when  as  a  whole  it  is  incontestably
the  most  enlightened.  Class  bias  often  does  more  to  distort
than  education  to  expand  the  intellect,  and  rectitude  of  moral
judgment  is  by  no  means  proportioned  to  intellectual  develop-
ment. It  is  those  who  from  their  position  are  brought  into
closest  personal  contact  with  the  chief  actors  in  the  fray,  who
are  most  liable  to  treat  politics  as  a  game,  and  to  care  more
for  the  party  bearing  of  measures  than  for  their  real  or  in-
trinsic merit.  A  small  wealthy  class  is  much  less  quickly
and  seriously  injured  by  the  consequences  of  misgovemment
than  the  gi'eat  industrial  community.  It  may  even  be  bene-
fited by  a  policy  which  is  very  injurious  to  the  country  at
large,  and  it  is  liable  to  many  special  distorting  influences.
The  close  social  connection  which  binds  the  English  upper
classes  to  the  Established  Church,  to  the  army,  to  the  Indian
and  diplomatic  services,  has  often  had  a  very  perceptible
influence  upon  their  policy,  and  they  have  always  been  prone
to  the  spirit  of  '  clique  and  of  coterie,'  to  a  certain  over-refine-
ment of  reasoning  which  is  peculiarly  misleading  in  practical
politics,  to  the  habit  of  judging  great  questions  on  personal
grounds  or  on  side  issues.  No  other  constituencies  represent
so  exclusively  the  highly  educated  classes  as  the  Universities,
and  the  political  influence  of  the  Universities  has  been  almost
uniformly  hostile  to  political  progress.  It  is  very  necessary
that  opinions  which  have  been  formed  in  the  drawing-room  or
the  study  should  be  brought  in  contact  with  that  shrewd
middle-class  intellect  which  judges  questions  on  broader  issues

216 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi

and  sometimes  ■with  larger  sympathies.'  There  are,  it  is  true,
great  sections  of  the  community  who  are  quite  incapable  of
forming  any  reasonable  or  competent  judgment  on  political
questions ;  but  they,  too,  have  their  interests,  which  may  be
injured,  and  it  is  right  that  their  sufferings  and  their  real  or
fancied  grievances  should  find  a  voice  in  the  Legislature.  In
politics,  the  evils  that  spring  from  monopoly  are  sometimes
even  graver  than  the  evils  which  spring  from  incompetence.
To  maintain  a  proper  balance  of  class  representation  is  a  task
of  no  small  delicacy ;  and  as  the  most  ignorant  and  most  in-
competent portion  of  the  community  is  necessarily  the  most
numerous,  it  is  evident  that  an  elective  system  which  was  at
once  perfectly  simple  and  perfectly  democratic  would  establish
an  overwhelming  preponderance  in  favour  of  the  classes  least
fitted  to  exercise  it.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  ostensible  effects  of
changes  in  class  representation  are  often  very  different  from
the  real  effects.  The  pursuit  of  equality  sometimes  leads  to  the
creation  of  a  new  aristocracy,  to  new  concentrations  of  political
power.  When  votes  were  given  in  the  eighteenth  century  to  the
40s.  freeholders  in  Ireland,  the  measure  was  apparently  a  very
democratic  one,  and  it  was  the  more  remarkable  because  the
new  electors  were  chiefly  Catholic.  In  reality  its  effect  was  to
increase  greatly  the  landlord  power.  For  many  years  the  land-
lord could  count  upon  the  votes  of  the  40s.  freeholders  on  his
estate  with  the  most  absolute  certainty.  At  last,  on  one  memor-
able occasion  of  vital  interest  to  their  religion,  they  presumed  to
act  for  themselves.  At  the  Clare  election  they  opposed  and  de-
feated their  landlords,  returned  O'Connell  to  Parliament,  and
compelled  a  reluctant  Government  to  concede  Catholic  Emanci-
pation. It  was  their  first  act  of  independence,  and  Parliament
at  once  interposed  to  disfranchise  them. When  a  large  class

'  '  One  may  generally  observe  that  of  their  country  to  the  advancement  of

the  body  of  a  people  has  juster  views  their  own  fortunes,  whereas  the  gross

for  the  public  good,  and  pursues  them  of  the  people  can  have  no  other  pro-

with  greater  uprightness,  than  the  no-  spect  in  changes  and  revolutions  than

bility  and  gentry,  who  have  so  many  of  public  blessing-^,  tliatareto  diffuse

private  expectations and particular  themselves  throuLch  the  whole  State

interests,  which  hang  like  a  f;Use  bias  in general.' — Addison's Fumarhs  m

upon  their  judgments,  and  may  pos-  Italy.
fiihlydispose  them  to  sacrifice  the  good

CTi XI.  CONFLICTING AIMS OF GOVERNMENT.  217

of  voters  are  perfectly  ignorant  and  dependent,  they  must
necessarily  either  sell  their  votes  or  bestow  them  according  to
the  directions  of  a  leader.  The  landlord,  the  manufacturer,
the  Catholic  priest,  the  Anglican  clergyman,  the  Dissenting
minister,  the  public-house  keeper,  the  secretary  of  the  trades-
union,  acquire  under  such  circumstances  an  extraordinary  im-
portance. In  purely  democratic  countries,  where  the  natural
social  influences  are  comparatively  weak,  adventurers  frequently
arise,  who  make  it  their  aim,  by  obtaining  the  direction  of  the
most  ignorant  voters,  to  organise  and  accumulate  great  masses
of  political  power,  and  thus  to  acquire  a  preponderating  power
in  the  State.

We  have  here,  then,  a  number  of  distinct  advantages
and  dangers  which  must  be  considered  in  every  good  system
of  representative  government.  No  one  of  the  ends  I  have
enumerated  can  be  neglected  without  impairing  the  efficiency
of  the  machine.  Yet  no  one  of  them  can  be  fully  and  per-
fectly attained  without  a  sacrifice  of  one  or  more  of  the  others.
The  question  is  one  of  proportion  and  of  degree,  of  balance  and
of  adjustment.  The  evils  of  government  lie  sometimes  in
defects  of  representation  and  sometimes  in  vices  of  adminis-
tration ;  and  that  is  on  the  whole  the  best  which  produces
fewest  evils  and  discharges  the  greatest  variety  of  useful  func  -
tions.  Organic  legislative  changes  are  scarcely  ever  unqualified
benefits.  The  statesman  has  usually  to  ask  himself  whether
a  proposed  change  removes  greater  evils  than  it  produces ;
whether  the  evils  which  are  now  greater  do  not  tend  naturally
to  diminish,  and  those  which  are  now  less,  to  increase;  whether,
even  if  the  immediate  change  be  an  incontestable  good,  it  may
not  lead  to  other  changes,  or  produce  remote  consequences
which  alter  the  balance.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  arrest  the
growth  of  a  living  organism ;  it  is  a  fatal  thing  to  disturb  the
foundations  of  an  ancient  building ;  and  there  are  lines  of
policy  to  which  each  of  these  metaphors  may  be  justly  applied.
The  problem  of  legislation  is  a  practical  problem  of  great  dif-
ficulty, to  be  solved  by  a  simultaneous  attention  to  many  dis-
tinct and  often  conflicting  considerations,  and  not  by  any  short
method  of  logic  or  equalisation.  A  representative  system  may,
no  doubt,  be  framed  by  this  latter  method,  but  it  would  be

218  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xi.

essentially  different  from  the  English  constitution,  destitute  of
its  distinctive  merits,  and  at  variance  with  the  whole  course  of
its  traditions.  This  was  the  lesson  which  Burke  was  never
tired  of  inculcating,  and  his  dislike  to  the  methods  and  reason-
ing of  the  reformers  lay  at  the  root  of  his  dislike  to  the  mea-
sures they  advocated.  '  That  man,'  he  said,  '  thinks  much  too
highly,  and  therefore  he  thinks  weakly  and  delusively,  of  any
contrivance  of  human  wisdom,  who  believes  that  it  can  make
any  sort  of  approach  to  perfection.'  Taking  this  maxim  as  a
guide,  he  entirely  denied  that  Parliament  exhibited  any  evils
which  could  not  be  sufficiently  met  by  secondary  remedies,
leaving  its  organic  framework  untouched.  The  Constitution
as  it  existed  was  '  made  by  the  peculiar  circumstances,  occa-
sions, tempers,  dispositions,  and  moral,  civil,  and  social  habi-
tudes of  the  people,  which  disclose  themselves  onlj^  in  a  long
space  of  time.  It  was  a  vestment  which  accommodates  itself
to  the  body.'  What  evil  or  grievance,  he  asked,  can  be  dis-
tinctly referred  '  to  the  representative  not  following  the  opinion
of  his  constituents  ? '  Was  it  not  a  fact  that  under  the  Constitu-
tion which  it  had  become  the  fashion  to  decry,  the  country  had
enjoyed  '  a  growing  liberty  and  a  growing  prosperity  for  500
years  ? '  Is  it  true  that  the  local  interests  of  Cornwall  and
Wiltshire,  where  the  representation  is  enormously  exagger-
ated, are  less  attended  to  than  those  of  Yorkshire  or  War-
wickshire ?  Warwick  has  members — is  it  more  opulent,  happy,
and  free  than  Birmingham,  which  is  unrepresented  ?  ^

It  is  quite  possible  to  recognise  the  full  justice  of  the
general  principles  laid  down  by  Burke  without  accepting  the
consequences  he  drew  from  them.  It  ie  true  that  representa-
tion is  not  a  matter  of  speculation  but  a  matter  of  expediency,
but  it  is  also  true  that  the  English  representative  system  had
become  so  corrupt  and  so  imperfect,  thnt  as  a  matter  of  the
merest  expediency  its  reform  was  imperatively  demanded.
The  extreme  venality  of  the  representative  body,  the  fiict  that
Crown  influence  and  aristocratic  influence  were  much  more
powerful  within  it  than  the  influence  of  the  people  whom  it
was  supposed  to  represent,  its  opposition  during  the  whole  of
the  Wilkes  case  to  the  sentiments  of  tlie  people,  and  its  con-

>  Burke's  Worlds,  x.  97-102.

CH.  XI.  REFORM NOT UNCONSTITUTIONAL.  219

slant  tendency  to  infringe  vipon  the  province  of  the  law,  could
not  reasonably  be  denied.  It  may  be  true  that  the  local
interests  of  the  unrepresented  portions  of  the  country  were  not
neglected,  but  it  is  very  certain  that  the  monopoly  of  power
which  a  small  class  possessed  was  reflected  very  clearly  in  the
strong  class  bias  of  the  law,  and  that  the  education,  the  sani-
tary condition,  and  the  material  well-being  of  the  great  unre-
presented masses  of  the  nation  were  shamefully  neglected.  No
one  who  contrasts  English  legislation  since  it  has  acquired  a
more  popular  character  with  that  of  the  eighteenth  century  can
be  insensible  to  this  fact.  Nor  is  it  true  that  a  modification
of  the  representative  system  was  equivalent  to  a  subversion
of  the  Constitution.  It  was  never  intended  that  this  system
should  remain  stereotyped  and  unaltered  while  great  centres
of  population  rose  and  decayed,  and  while  the  relative  im-
portance of  different  classes  and  of  different  portions  of  the
country  was  entirely  altered.  The  Crown  had  long  exercised  a
power  of  calling  constituencies  into  existence  as  the  condition
of  the  country  required.  As  might,  however,  have  been  ex-
pected, this  prerogative  was  shamefully  abused :  under  the
Stuarts  it  was  employed  solely  or  mainly  for  corrupt  purposes,
and  the  feeling  against  it  was  so  strong  that  the  enfranchise-
ment of  Newark-on-Trent  by  Charles  II.  was  the  last  instance
of  its  exercise.  This  branch  of  the  prerogative  having  fallen
into  desuetude,  it  was  for  the  whole  Legislature  to  replace  it ;
but  the  peculiar  condition  of  public  opinion  at  the  Eevolution,
and  the  long  period  of  disputed  succession  and  aristocratical  pre-
dominance which  followed,  adjourned  the  question.  Had  the
task  of  parliamentary  reform  been  begun  in  the  eighteenth
century,  had  the  seats  of  small  boroughs,  which  were  proved  to
be  corrupt,  been  systematically  transferred  to  the  great  towns,
or  to  those  portions  of  the  country  which  were  most  inade-
quately represented,  it  is  probable  that  far  larger  portions  of
the  old  inequalities  that  existed  would  have  even  now  con-
tinued.

In  judging,  however,  the  opinions  of,  Burke,  there  are  some
considerations  to  be  remembered  which  are  too  often  forgotten.
Public  opinion  on  the  subject  was  very  immature,  and  Burke
continually  affirmed  tliat  there  was  no  strong  or  real  demand

220  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xi.

for  parliamentary  reform,  and  that  if  such  a  demand  were
general,  he  would  be  ready  to  concede  it.'  Almost  the  only  very
active  advocates  of  Keform  were  the  City  politicians,  who  were
certainly  not  generally  supported  throughout  the  nation.  The
abolition  of  the  rotten  box'oughs,  which  alone  would  have  been
a  serious  remedy,  was  demanded  by  no  responsible  politician,
and  in  the  existing  state  of  parties  and  of  public  opinion  it  was
manifestly  impracticable.  Triennial  parliaments  would  pro-
bably have  aggravated  more  evils  than  they  palliated ;  and  a
large  addition  to  the  county  representation,  which  was  the
favourite  remedy  of  Chatham,  found,  as  he  himself  acknow-
ledged, but  few  and  doubtful  supporters.  The  lowering  of  the
suffrage  had  scarcely  any  advocates  of  weight,  and  in  the  face
of  the  utter  ignorance  and  extreme  lawlessness  of  the  lower
sections  of  society,  and  of  the  scenes  of  riot  that  had  so  lately
been  enacted,  it  would  have  required  no  small  coiurage  to  at-
tempt it.

It  must  be  added,  too,  that  the  future  of  parliamentary
government  seemed  much  more  doubtful  than  at  present.  The
difficulties  of  maintaining  this  form  of  government  continually
appear  in  the  writings  of  Burke.  '  Our  Constitution,'  he  writes,
'  stands  on  a  nice  equipoise  with  steep  precipices  and  deep  waters
upon  all  sides  of  it.  In  removing  it  from  a  dangerous  leaning
towards  one  side,  there  may  be  risk  of  oversetting  it  on  the  other.'
He  speaks  of  '  the  extreme  difficulty  of  reconciling  liberty  under
a  monarchical  government  with  external  strength  and  with  in-
ternal tranquillity,'^  and,  like  most  of  the  leading  Liberal  states-
men of  the  time,  he  appears  to  have  been  continually  haunted  by
a  fear  of  the  destruction  of  British  liberty. In  modern  times

'  Thus  in  his  speech  against  re-  this  great  subject  should  be  known,

form  in  1782,  he  says,  'I  went  through  When  it  is  known  it  must  be  preva-

most  of  the  northern  parts^the  York-  lent. It  would  be  dreadful  indeed

shire  election  was  then  raging;  the  if  there  were  any  power  in  the  nation

year before, through most of the  capable of resisting its  unanimous

western counties  —  Bath, Bristol,  desire,  or  even  the  desire  of  any  great

(Gloucester — not one  word  either  in  and  decided  majority  of  the  people,

the  towns  or  country  on  the  subject  The  people  may  be  deceived  in  their

of  representation.' — JBurlivs  Works,-s..  choice  of  an  object, but  I  can  scarcely

101. In  a  remarkable  letter  on  the  conceive  any  choice  they  can  make  to

same  subject  to  the  chairman  of  a  be  so  very  mischievous  as  the  exist-

Buckingiiamshire  meeting  in  1780,  he  cnce  of  any  human  force  capable  of

says,  'I  most  heartily  wish  that  the  resisting  it.' — Ibid.  ix.  31!>,  320.

deliberate  sense  of  the  kingdom  on  '■  Thoughtsonthe Present  Discontents

fH.  XI. DANGERS TO PAELIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT.  221

such  fears  would  hardly  be  seriously  expressed  by  the  gloomiest
of  prophets.  The  dangers  hanging  over  parliamentary  govern-
ment are  indeed  grave  and  manifest ;  but  they  are  of  another
kind.  It  is  but  too  probable  that  parliament  may  decline  in
ability  and  efficiency,  that  it  may  cease  to  attract  the  highest
intellect  and  the  highest  social  eminence  of  the  country,  that
it  may  cease  to  include  any  considerable  number  of  young  men
capable  of  devoting  their  lives  to  political  duties,  that  the
variety  of  opinions  and  interests  existing  within  the  country
may  no  longer  be  represented  within  its  walls.  The  increasingly
democratic  character  and  the  increasing  strength  of  the  House
of  Commons  may  make  it  impossible  for  it  to  co-operate  with
the  other  branches  of  the  Legislatm-e ;  and  the  constant  inter-
vention of  the  House  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Executive,  and
of  the  constituencies  in  the  proceedings  of  the  House,  may
profoundly  alter  its  character  as  a  legislative  body.  Govern-
ments living  from  day  to  day,  looking  only  for  immediate  popu-
larity, and  depending  on  the  jfluctuating  and  capricious  favour
of  great  multitudes  who  have  no  settled  political  opinions,  may
gradually  lose  all  firmness  and  tenacity,  and  all  power  of  mus-
cular contraction,  all  power  of  restraining,  controlling,  or  re-
sisting, may  thus  pass  out  of  the  body  politic.  The  habit  of
sacrificing  present  advantages  for  the  attainment  of  a  distant
object,  or  for  the  benefit  of  generations  who  are  yet  unborn,
which  is  the  essence  of  true  national  greatness,  may  decline.
When  every  question  is  submitted  directly  to  the  popular  ver-
dict, it  becomes  more  and  more  difficult  to  pursue  any  long-
continued  course  of  prescient  policy,  to  guard  against  remote
dangers,  to  preserve  that  amount  of  secrecy  which  in  foreign
policy  is  often  indispensably  necessary,  to  carry  any  measure
which  is  not  level  with  the  average  intelligence  of  the  most  un-
instructed  classes  of  the  community.

The  dangers  resulting  from  this  state  of  things  are  very  real
and  serious.  There  are  a  few  countries,  among  which  the  great
American  republic  is  the  most  conspicuous,  which  are  so  happily
situated  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  for  political  follies  seriously
to  injure  them.  There  are  others  which  are  so  situated
that  any  considerable  relaxation  of  their  vigour,  caution,  and
sagacity  exposes  them  to  absolute  ruin. The  insular  situation

222  ENGLAND IN  TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

of  England  makes  many  political  follies,  which  might  ruin
a  continental  country,  comparatively  harmless ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  England  is  the  centre  of  a  vast,  complex,  and
highly  artificial  empire,  which  can  only  be  maintained  by  the
constant  exertion  of  a  very  large  amount  of  political  wisdom
and  virtue.  The  remote  and  indirect  consequences  of  a
political  measure  are  often  more  important  than  its  immediate
eJBfects,  but  they  have  seldom  much  weight  in  popular  judg-
ments. It  is  even  possible  that  so  great  a  preponderance
of  votes  may  be  placed  iu  the  hands  of  men  who  have  no
political  opinions  whatever,  that  statesmen  may  come  to  look
upon  the  opinion  and  intelligence  of  the  country  as  little
more  than  one  of  the  minor  subdivisions  of  power,  and  ma}'
almost  neglect  it  in  their  calculations  if  they  can  appeal
successfully  to  the  passions,  the  prejudices,  or  the  fancied
interests  of  the  most  ignorant  masses  of  the  population.

But  serious  as  are  the  dangers  that  may  threaten  the
efficiency  of  parliamentary  government,  this  form  of  liberty
has  taken  such  deep  root  in  European  manners  that  its  total
destruction  seems  almost  impossible.  The  degrees  of  power
possessed  by  representative  bodies  differ  widely,  but  there  are
very  few  countries  in  Europe,  however  backward,  in  which,  in
some  form,  they  do  not  subsist.  The  public  opinion  which
maintains  them  is  no  longer  merely  national.  It  is  European,
and  it  is  supported  by  the  great  power  of  the  European  press.
But  in  the  early  years  of  George  III.  representative  institutions
were  the  rare  exception,  and  the  influence  of  foreign  example  and
opinion  was  almost  wholly  on  the  side  of  despotism.  Europe  Avas
strewn  with  the  wrecks  of  the  liberties  of  the  past.  The  Cortes
of  Spain,  the  States-General  of  France,  the  republics  of  Central
Italy,  the  greater  part  of  the  free  institutions  of  the  towns  of
Flanders,  of  Germany,  and  along  the  Baltic,  had  passed  away.
All  the  greatest  States,  all  the  most  rising  and  vigorous  Powers
on  the  Continent,  were  despotic,  and  tlie  few  remaining  sparks
of  liberty  seemed  flickering  in  the  socket.  In  1766  the
French  King  issued  an  edict  declaring  that  he  held  his  crown
from  God  alone,  and  that  he  was  the  sole  fountain  of  legis-
lative power  ;  and  in  1771  the  local  parliaments,  which  formed
the  last  feeble  barrier to regal power,  were  abolished. In

en XI.  PROSPECTS OF EUROPEAN LIBERTY.  22;j

Sweden  the  royal  authority  was  greatly  aggrandised  by  the
Revolution  of  1772.  In  Switzerland,  if  Geneva  had  made  some
steps  in  the  direction  of  democracy,  in  Berne,  Fribourg,  Soleure,
Zurich,  and  Lucerne  the  government  had  degenerated  into  the
narrowest  oligarchy.  In  Holland,  where  the  House  of  Orange
had  recovered  a  quasi-royal  position  in  1747,  the  growing  cor-
ruption of  the  States-General  and  of  the  administration,  the
scandalous  delays  of  the  law,  and  the  rapid  decadence  of  the
nation  in  Europe,  were  manifest  to  all.^  Poland  was  already
struggling  in  the  throes  of  anarchy,  and  in  1772  she  underwent
her  first  partition.  The  freedom  of  Corsica  was  crushed  by  a
foreign  invader ;  Genoa  had  sunk  into  a  corrupt  oligarchy  ;
Venice,  though  she  still  retained  her  republican  government,
and  though  she  had  enjoyed  an  unbroken  calm  since  the  peace
of  Passerowitz  in  1718  had  deprived  her  of  the  Morea  arid
Cerigo,  had  fallen  into  complete  insignificance,  and  her  ancient
liberties  were  ready  to  fall  at  the  first  touch  of  an  invader's
hand.

The  prospects  of  liberty — and  especially  of  monarchical
liberty — were  very  gloomy;  and  during  the  American  War
it  was  the  strong  belief  of  the  chief  Whig  politicians  that  the
defeat  of  the  Americans  would  be  probably  followed  by  a  sub-
version of  the  Constitution  of  England.  This  fear  acted  in
different  ways  upon  different  minds.  With  Burke  it  showed
itself  most  clearly  in  an  extreme  caution  in  touching  that  Con-
stitution which  alone  in  Europe  still  maintained  the  union  of
political  liberty  with  political  greatness.  He  felt,  as  most  pro-
found thinkers  have  felt,  that  an  appetite  for  organic  change  is
one  of  the  worst  diseases  that  can  affect  a  nation  ;  that  essential
stability  and  the  formation  of  settled  political  habits  are  the
conditions  of  all  good  government;  that  amid  the  infinite
variety  and  fluctuation  of  human  circumstances,  fashions,  and
opinions,  institutions  can  never  obtain  a  real  strength  or  pro-
duce their  full  benefits  till  they  have  taken  root  in  the  habits
of  a  nation,  and  have  gathered  around  them  a  large  amount  of
unreasoning  and  traditional  support. He  was  keenly  sensible

'  See  a  striking  letter  by  Rousseau American licmevihrancer for 1776.
to  a  Dutch  gentleman  '  On  the  Present part  ii.  pp.  292-295.
State  of Liberty in Europe.'  iu  tlie

2'24 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

how  rapidly  fabrics  which  have  taken  centuries  to  build  may
be  destroyed — how  easily  the  poise  and  balance  of  a  mixed
constitution  may  be  irrevocably  disturbed — how  strong  are  the
temptations  drawing  active  and  ambitious  minds  from  the  slow,
laborious,  and  obscure  process  of  administrative  reform  to  the
more  stirring  fields  of  revolutionary  change.  To  oppose  this
tendency  was  one  of  the  great  objects  of  his  life  ;  and  the  dislike
to  fundamental  changes,  the  attachment  to  traditional  forms,
and  the  indifference  to  theoretical  anomalies,  which  had  always
been  conspicuous  in  English  political  life,  found  their  best  ex-
pression and  defence  in  his  writings.

But  if  no  great  organic  changes  were  attempted,  a  number
of  secondary  reforms  were  accomplished  which  greatly  improved
the  representative  system.  Perhaps  the  most  important  was
Greorge  Grenville's  measure  for  reforming  the  method  of  deciding
disputed  elections.  I  have  described  in  a  former  chapter  '  the
scandalous  manner  in  which  election  petitions  were  adjudicated
upon  by  a  party  vote  of  the  whole  House,  how  the  proceedings
had  lost  almost  all  semblance  of  a  judicial  act,  how  through  the
systematic  disregard  of  evidence  a  large  number  of  members
owed  their  seats  not  to  their  constituents  but  to  the  House.
Grenville  predicted  that  '  the  abominable  prostitution  of  the
House  of  Commons  in  elections  by  voting  for  whoever  has
the  support  of  the  ministers,  must  end  in  the  ruin  of  public
liberty  if  it  be  not  checked,'  and  he  asked  the  members  whether
they  would  not  rather  entrust  their  property  to  a  jury  drawn
from  the  very  dregs  of  the  population  than  to  such  a  tri-
bunal. Tlie  scandal  had  long  been  wide  and  general,  but  the
proceedings  of  the  Middlesex  election  made  it  intolerable.  It
was  generally  felt  that  at  a  time  when  the  outside  public
had  begun  to  watch  with  a  severe  and  jealous  scrutiny  the
proceedings  of  the  Commons,  it  was  impossible  that  so  glaring
an  abuse  should  be  suffered  to  continue.  It  was  too  palpably
absurd  that  the  whole  country  should  be  convulsed  with  agita-
tion, that  the  Constitution  should  be  represented  as  outraged,
and  all  the  proceedings  of  Parliament  as  invalidated,  because
Luttrell  had  been  substituted  for  Wilkes  as  member  for  Mid-
dlesex, while  every  Parliament  probably  contained  twenty  or

'  Sec  Vol.  I.,  pp.  410-'U2.

CH.  XI.  GRENVILLE'S ELECTION ACT.  225

thirty  members  who  in  reality  owed  their  seats  to  a  party  vote
in  the  House  of  Commons.

The  measure  of  George  Grenville  remedying  this  evil  was
the  last  public  service  of  that  statesman.  It  transferred  the
decision  of  disputed  elections  from  the  whole  House  to  a  com-
mittee of  fifteen  members,  thirteen  of  whom  were  elected  by
ballot,  and  the  remaining  two  by  the  rival  candidates.  They
were  bound  to  examine  all  witnesses  on  oath,  and  they  were
themselves  sworn  to  decide  according  to  evidence.  Lord  North,
who  had  just  become  Prime  Minister,  disliked  the  Bill,  and
endeavoured  to  postpone  it,  but  it  was  supported  by  all  the
sections  of  the  Whig  party  ;  it  was  advocated  by  Burke
in  one  House  and  by  Chatham  in  the  other,  and  it  found
some  support  even  in  the  Tory  ranks.  The  more  honourable
members  of  the  party  could  not  be  insensible  to  the  enormity
of  the  scandal.'  Sir  W.  Bagott,  who  was  conspicuous  among
the  county  member.-:,  warmly  supported  the  measure,  and
Mansfield  prevented  all  serious  opposition  in  the  Lords  by
declaring  himself  in  its  favour.  The  Attorney-General,  De
Grey,  vainly  adjured  the  House  to  bear  the  present  evils  rather
than  '  fly  to  others  which  we  know  not  of ; '  ^  and  the  measure
which  was  introduced  in  February  1770,  received  the  royal
assent  in  the  following  April.  It  was  at  first  limited  to  seven
years,  but  it  proved  so  popular  and  so  successful  that  in  1774
it  was  made  perpetual.^

The  Opposition  were  less  successful  in  an  attempt  to  dis-
franchise the  revenue  officers,  whose  numerous  votes  formed

'  Thus  Dr.  Johnson  in  a  pamphlet  '^  These  were  the  last  words  of  his

called  The  Patriot,  describing  the  old  speech. Wedderburn  began  his  reply

mode  of  trying  elections,  says,  'The  by  contmuing  the  quotation  :

claim  of  a  candidate  and  the  right  '  And  thus  the  native  hue  of  resolution

of  electors  are  said  scarcely  to  have  Is  sicklied  o'er  with  tlie  pale  cast  of
been,  even  in  appearance,  referred  to  thought,

conscience,  but  to  have  been  decided  And  enterpri&es  of  great  pith  and
by  party,  by  passion,  by  prejudice,  or  moment

by  frolic.  To  have  friends  in  the  With  this  regard  their  currents  turn
borough  was  of  little  use  to  him  who  a%vry,

wanted  friends  in  the  House  ;  a  pre-  And  lose  the  name  of  action.'
tence was easily  found  to  evade  a  Pari.  Hist.  xvi.  921.

majority,  and  the  seat  was  at  last  his  '  Ibid.  xvi. n()2-y23  ;  xvii.  10fi2-

that  was  chosen,  not  by  his  electors,  but  1074. An/nial  lityisfcr,  1770,  pp.  77,

by  his  fellow-senators.' Since  Gren-  78,  226,  227. Walpole's  GeoTge  III.

ville's  Bill,  he  says,  '  a  disputed  elec-  iv.  Ill, 112. Grciicille Papers,  iv.

tion  is  tried  witli  the  same  scrupulous-  515, 516. Walpole's  Last  JournaU,

ness  and  solemnity  as  any  other  title.'  i.  .Sll-325

VOL. IIL  Q

220  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

one  of  the  great  sources  of  the  illegitimate  power  of  the  Crown.
A  motion  to  this  effect  was  brought  forward  by  Dowdeswell  in
February  1770,  and  it  gave  rise  to  a  long  and  animated  debate.
It  was  contended,  probably  with  some  truth,  that  if  Charles  I.
had  possessed  as  extensive  means  as  the  reigning  sovereign,  of
influencing  and  managing  the  constituencies,  he  might  have
succeeded  in  his  design  of  enslaving  the  country,  and  the
rapidly  increasing  importance  of  this  evil  was  abundantly  dis-
played. The  Tory  party  had  formerly  complained  of  it,  but
they  were  now  cordially  united  with  the  IMinistry  and  with  the
King's  friends,  and  Dowdeswell  was  defeated  by  263  to  188.'

The  pretensions  of  each  House  of  Parliament  to  place  it-
self outside  the  law  were  next  dealt  with.  One  of  the  most
obnoxious  of  parliamentary  privileges  was  the  immunity  from
arrest  for  debt  and  for  misdemeanor,  and  from  civil  suits,  which
was  enjoyed  not  only  by  the  members  of  both  Houses,  but
also  by  their  servants,  during  the  Session  of  Parliament,  and
for  forty  days  before  and  after.  An  enormous  amount  of  fraud
was  thus  sheltered,  and  tradesmen  complained  bitterly  that,  in
the  case  of  a  large  class  of  their  customers,  they  had  no  legal
method  of  enforcing  their  debts.  At  one  time  Members  of
Parliament  are  said  to  have  issued  protections  to  persons  who
were  not  in  their  service,  enabling  them  to  secure  the  privilege
of  Parliament ;  but  this  practice  was  condemned  by  a  Standing
Order,  and  in  1677  a  member  named  Wanklyn  was  expelled
for  granting  a  protection  to  a  person,  who  was  not  his  servant,
in  order  to  hinder  the  execution  of  a  writ.^  Two  statutes,
passed  under  William  and  Anne,  very  slightly  abridged  parlia-
mentary privileges  ;  ^  but,  though  several  attempts  had  been
made  to  abolish  those  of  the  servants  of  Members,  they  always
miscarried  in  the  Commons  till  the  Middlesex  election  brought
the  whole  question  into  the  foreground.  In  1770  a  very
important  measure  was  carried,  which  enacted  that  any  suit
might  at  any  time  be  brought  against  persons  entitled  to  the
privilege  of  ParKament;  and  though  the  innnunity  of  members

'  Pari.  TTi.f/^.xvi.  834-841.  Annual  212. Sec  too  4  Geo.  III.  c.  33.

B^gute.r,  1770.  pp.  69-71.  ^  12  and  13  W.  III.  c.  3 ;  2  and  3

'-  Commons  ./(nirnalst,  vol.  ix.  431.  Anne,  c.  18;  yee  too  11  Geo.  II.  c.  24.
Burgh's Political iJisqvisiitioug, j

en.  XI.  PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGE.  227

of  the  House  of  Commons  from  arrest  was  expressly  reserved,
no  such  privilege  was  any  longer  granted  to  their  servants.  By
this  measure  the  worst  forms  of  parliamentary  privilege  were
abolished,  and  a  great  step  was  taken  towards  the  universal
ascendency  of  law.'

At  the  same  time  the  claim  of  the  House  of  Commons  to
constitute  itself  a  tribunal  for  the  trial  and  punishment  of  private
injuries  done  to  its  members  was  suffered  totally  to  fall  into
desuetude.  This  power  was  altogether  unknown  to  the  law  of
England,  and  it  was  as  inequitable  as  it  was  anomalous.  During
the  two  preceding  reigns  it  had  very  frequently  been  exercised,
but  the  last  case  appears  to  have  been  in  1767,  when  JVIr.  Luttreli
complained  to  the  House  of  a  breach  of  privilege  because  some
individuals  had  entered  his  fishery  and  taken  fish.^  The  House
referred  the  case  to  the  Committee  of  Privileges,  who  examined
witnesses  without  oaths,  and  who  acquitted  the  prisoners.
Proceedings  of  this  kind  had  never  been  recognised  by  the
law  courts ;  but  the  victims  were  usually  poor  men,  and  the
public  were  so  indifferent  to  the  matter  that  the  House  was
enabled,  without  opposition,  continually  to  try  and  imprison
offenders  by  a  process  which  was  perfectly  illegal.  The  Middle-
sex election,  for  the  first  time,  aroused  a  strong  public  opinion
on  the  subject ;  and,  though  no  formal  step  was  taken,  the
illegal  power  ceased  from  this  time  to  be  exercised.^

Another  change,  which,  though  much  less  important  than
the  foregoing,  was  also  significant  of  the  altered  relations  of
the  Commons  to  the  public,  was  the  abolition  of  the  rule  which
compelled  all  who  were  censured  by  the  House  for  breach  of
privilege,  to  receive  the  censure  upon  their  knees.  The  cere-
mony is  said  to  have  been  brought  into  some  ridicule  in  1751
by  a  culprit  who,  on  rising  from  the  floor,  exclaimed  in  a  tone
that  was  audible  to  all,  while  ostentatiously  dusting  his  dress,
that  this  was  in  truth  '  the  dirtiest  house  he  had  ever  been
in  ; '  and  in  the  same  year  a  Scotch  Jacobite  named  Alexander

'  10 Geo. TIL c. 50. See too  540.

BlacMtnnf,  Book  I.  ch.  it. May"s  Lam  ^  For  a  full  liistory  of  parliamen-

oj  Parliament,  ch.  v. Mansfield  spoke  tary  privilege,  see  Peraberton's  Liiirr

powerliilly  in  favour  of  this  measure.  to Lord  LaiKjdale  on  Parliamentary

Pari.  Hist.  xvi.  974-978.  Frltnleye,

^  Commons  JournftU,  vol.  xxxi.  p.

228  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

Murray,  on  being  ordered  to  kneel,  informed  the  indignant
House  that  he  never  knelt  except  to  God  alone.  It  was  found
impossible  to  make  him  yield,  and  he  was  imprisoned  in  New-
gate for  four  months,  and  was  then  released  by  a  prorogation/
A  few  printers  appear  to  have  been  subsequently  censured  in
the  usual  form  ;  ^  but  in  1772,  when  the  question  of  privilege
was  at  its  height,  the  Commons  very  judiciously  resolved  to  pre-
vent a  repetition  of  the  scandal,  and  the  practice  of  kneeling
was  abolished  by  a  standing  order.

These  measures  are  sufficient  to  show  that,  although  both
Houses  of  Parliament  obstinately  supported  the  INIinistry  in
their  contests  with  Wilkes,  they  were  not  insensible  to  the
great  change  that  had  passed  over  the  spirit  of  the  country,  and
were  prepared  to  allay  the  discontent  by  very  considerable  con-
cessions. The  immense  progress  the  democratic  spirit  had
made  outside  the  walls  was,  indeed,  too  manifest  to  be  over-
looked. The  institution  of  public  meetings,  the  creation  of
great  political  organisations,  the  marked  change  in  the  attitude
of  constituents  to  their  members,  and  the  severe  scrutiny  with
which  the  legal  proceedings  of  Parliament  were  watched,  were
all  signs  of  the  growing  ascendency  of  opinion.  Writing  at
the  end  of  1769,  Horace  Walpole  noticed  that  in  the  last  reign
the  House  of  Lords  had  obtained  an  ascendency  in  the  State,
in  the  beginning  of  the  present  reign  the  Crown,  at  this  time
the  people.^  The  victory  was,  it  is  true,  very  far  from  attained,
and  the  dangers  before  the  Constitution  were  of  the  gravest
kind  ;  but  still  the  arena  of  the  contest  was  changed  and  was
enlarged.  A  new  force  had  begun  to  enter  powerfully  into
political  calculations ;  and  with  the  growth  of  public  opinion,
its  organ,  the  press,  naturally  acquired  an  increased  importance..

We  have  already  traced  the  early  stages  of  its  progress.  We
have  seen  how,  in  spite  of  the  stamp  and  of  the  advertisement
duty  which  had  been  imposed  under  Anne  and  increased  under
George  II.,  and  in  spite  of  the  numerous  prosecutions  instituted
under  the  Grenville  Ministry,  its  importance  had  been  steadily
growing. The  increase  of  the  number  of  papers  was,  indeed,

'  Walpole's George  II.  i. 17,21, waZim,  i.  208.
29,  :U.  »  Walpole's  George  III.  iv.  1.

^  Andrews'  Hist,  of  British  Jour-

CH.  XI.  TRIALS  FOR  lii;1':l.  229

not  very  rapid,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  continuous.  Ac-
conling  to  some  statistics  which  were  published,  the  number  of
stamps  issued  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1753  was  7,411,757  ;
in  1760,  9,464,790;  in  1774,  12,300,000.'  No  less  than
seven  new  magazines  were  published  in  England  between  1769
and  1771.^

The  legal  position  of  newspapers  was  one  of  considerable
danger  and  perplexity.  The  conduct  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons in  excepting  libels  from  the  offences  that  were  covered
by  parliamentary  privilege,  shows  the  spirit  of  the  legislators,
and  there  was  a  great  desire  to  withdraw  press  cases,  as  far  aa
possible,  from  the  cognisance  of  juries.  By  the  old  method  of
ex  officio  informations,  which  was  now  very  frequently  em-
ployed, the  Attorney-General  was  able  to  send  them  to  trial
without  the  previous  assent  of  a  grand  jury,  and  when  the
trials  took  place  the  judges  laid  down  a  doctrine  on  the  sub-
ject of  libels  which  almost  transferred  the  decision  from  the
juries  to  themselves.^

I  have  already  referred  to  this  doctrine.  Lord  Mansfield
and  those  who  agreed  with  him  contended  that,  in  all  libel
cases,  there  was  a  question  of  fact,  which  was  altogether  for  the
jury,  and  a  question  of  law,  which  was  altogether  for  the  judge.
The  question  of  fact  was,  whether  the  incriminated  person
had  written  or  published  the  alleged  libel,  and  what  was  the
meaning  of  its  several  clauses  and  expressions.  The  question
of  law  was,  whether  the  document  bearing  this  meaning  had
or  had  not  the  character  of  a  libel,  and  on  this  question  the
jury  were  bound  to  follow  absolutely  the  direction  of  the  judge.
As  the  latter  question,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  was  the
sole  real  subject  of  dispute,  the  decision  was  virtually  removed
from  the  jury-box  to  the  Bench.

To  a  mind  unversed  in  the  subtleties  of  law,  such  a  posi-
tion was  not  a  little  extraordinary.  It  was  a  strange  thing  to
call  upon  twelve  men  to  determine  upon  oath  whether  a  man
was  guilty  of  the  publication  of  a  libel,  and  at  the  same  time
to  forbid  them  to  consider  whether  the  document  was  a  libel,
and  whether  its  publication  involved  guilt. It  was  a  stran^

'  AwliG^s'  Hist.of  JouTnalism,\.2\\. ^  See  Jlay's Constitutional I/is-
2  Wright's  Ronse  of  Hanover,  ii.  373. tory,  ii.  107-116.

230  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xi.

thing  to  introduce  the  -words  '  false  and  malicious '  into  the
information  laid  before  the  jury,  and  then  to  say  that  '  these
being  mere  formal  words,' '  the  jury  had  no  right  to  consider
them,  or  to  enter  into  any  examination  of  the  intentions  of  the
writer.  As  Junius  truly  said,  '  In  other  criminal  prosecutions,
the  malice  of  the  design  is  confessedly  as  much  a  subject  of
consideration  to  a  jury  as  the  certainty  of  the  fact.'  In  a  trial
for  homicide,  the  jury  had  not  to  consider  only  whether  the  dead
man  met  his  death  by  the  hand  of  the  prisoner ;  they  had  also
to  estimate  the  intentions,  motives,  and  provocations,  and  to
decide  whether  the  act  was  murder  or  manslaughter,  or  neither.
It  is  not  easy  to  see  why  a  different  rule  should  be  appHed  to
libels.

It  is,  however,  quite  certain  that  the  doctrine  as  laid  down
by  Mansfield  was  that  of  a  long  succession  of  the  most  emi-
nent English  lawyers.  It  was  confessedly  that  of  Holt,  one
of  the  greatest  and  most  constitutional  of  judges.^  Under
George  II.  the  question  had  been  raised  in  the  prosecutions
which  were  directed  against  the '  Craftsman.'  Sir  Philip  Yorke,
afterwards  the  great  Lord  Hardwicke,  while  conducting  the
prosecution,  asserted  this  doctrine  in  the  strongest  terms,  ard
though  the  jury  on  one  occasion  refused  to  give  him  a  verdict,
the  Chief  Justice  Raymond  fully  sanctioned  his  description  of
the  law.^  Mansfield  himself  declared  that  for  fourteen  years  he
had  uniformly  laid  down  this  doctrine  from  the  Bench  without
question,  and  he  was  supported  by  the  unanimous  opinion  of
the  judges  who  sat  with  him.'*  The  one  great  authority  on  the
other  side,  as  yet,  was  Lord  Camden,  who  strenuously,  and  at
every  period  of  his  life,  maintained  that  the  decision  of  the

'  Sec  Lord  Mansfield's  statement  Wlioare  judges  alike  of  the  facts  and
of  this  view  in  Lord  Campbell's  JAves  the  laws.'

ofthe  Chief  Justices,  n.\l^-im.  j^^j.^^  Mansfield,  in  the  case of the

^  J  art Jhst.  XVI I2h7.  Dean  of  Asaph,  is  said,  by  a  strange

=•  Campbell  s  Lord  Chancdlars,  vi.  ^  ^j  memory,  to  have  stated  that

176. It  waa  on occasion  ot  the  ac-  Pui^noy  had  admitted  that  'libel  or

(luittal  of  the  Crajtsvum  th^t  Pulteney  ^^^  libel '  was  a  quest  ion  for  the  Court,

vvrote  his  ballad  called Ihe  JIanost  ^  ■ -^^  ^^-^  ballad-

«/(*?■?/,  with  the  well-known  stanza :  .,,,,,  ,  , -i t

'For  Sir  Philii.  well  knows  ^'  'f  twelve  honest  men  have  decided

That  his  innuendoes  „  *''^  ^'^".^<^'  .  ^ . .,

* Will  serve  him  no  longer  Who  are  3udges  of  facts,  though  not

In  verse  or  in  prose,  J"''«'^^  "^  ^'^^^'^•

For  twelve  honest  men  have  decided  *  Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  ii.  481,

the  cause,  485.

CH.  XI.  THE LIBEL BILL.  23 1

whole  question  belonged  legally  to  the  jury.  In  the  last  reign
when  prosecuting  a  libel  as  Attorney-General,  he  attended  so
little  to  the  authority  of  the  judges,  that  in  arguing  the  cha-
racter of  the  libel,  he  turned  his  back  upon  them,  directing  his
words  exclusively  to  the  jury ;  and  in  the  House  of  Lords  he
made  this  question  especially  his  own.  He  had  the  rare  triumph
of  living  to  see  his  doctrine  finally  established  in  1792,  and  that
not  by  an  enacting,  but  by  a  declaratory  law,  which  asserted
that  his  version  of  the  law  had  always  been  the  true  one.*

To  amend  or  determine  the  law  of  libel  so  as  to  bring  the
question  of  motive  and  of  intention  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  jury,  became  one  of  the  great  objects  of  the  Whig  party,
although,  as  we  have  seen,  they  unfortunately  differed  upon
the  question  whether  the  law  should  be  made  declaratory  or
enacting.  The  enacting  Bill  of  Dowdeswell  appears  to  have
been  chiefly  due  to  Burke,  and  it  was  first  introduced  and  de-
feated in  1771.  It  may  be  questioned,  however,  whether  the
judicial  doctrine  about  libel  was  not  on  the  whole  rather  favour-
able to  libellers  than  the  reverse.  When  the  opinion  is  widely
diffused  that  men  in  high  political  or  judicial  authority  are
acting  partially,  oppressively,  or  illegally,  to  some  particular
class  of  culprits,  it  will  almost  always  be  found  that  juries  take
a  strong  bias  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  Wilkes  case  and
the  excessive  multiplication  of  press  trials  under  Grrenville  had
already  done  very  much  to  produce  such  a  bias,  and  the  violent
discussions  on  the  legal  doctrine  of  libel  greatly  increased  it.
In  poHtical  cases  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  obtain  a  verdict
from  a  London  jury  against  libellers,  and  the  knowledge  of  this
fact  greatly  encouraged  them.^

There  was  also  at  this  time  a  great  change  passing  over  the

*  Ca.m^he\VsCha)icellnrs,yuA5-4:7.  cleared  away,  I  believe  that  English

Thurlow,  Bathurst,  and  Kenyon  pro-  lawyers almost unanimously tliiulf

tested  strongly  against  the  measure.  that  Lord  Camden's  view  of  the  ques-

Considering  the  long  chain  of  authori-  lion  was  correct  on  strict  legal  prin-

ties  who  agreed  with  Lord  Mansfield,  ciples  ;  and  tliat  the  Act  was'properly

and  the  scorn  which was so abun-  made  to  declare  the  right  oi  the  jury

dantly  poured  on  mere  laymen  who  to  determine  upon  the  character  of

discussed  the  question  on  the  grounds  the  alleged  libel,  instead of  enacting

of  common  sense,  justice,  and  analogy,  it  as  aninnovation  '  (p.  47).

it is  amusing  to read  Lord Camp-  2  See  some  acute  observations  on

bell's commentary upon the Act.  this point  in  the Annual  Register,

•Now  that  the  mist  of  prejudice  has  1771,  p.  60.

232  ENGLAND IN THE EIiUITEENTII CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

press.  In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  news-
paper was  intended  for  little  more  than  to  collect  and  circulate
current  news,  and  to  make  known  the  wants  of  the  community
by  advertisements.  Political  discussions  were  conducted  in
other  quarters,  by  pamphlets,  by  broadsides,  or  by  periodical
papers  which  were  wholly  devoted  to  that  purpose.  The
political  papers  to  which  Swift,  Addison,  Steele,  Defoe,  and
many  other  writers  under  Queen  Anne  contributed,  were  er.-
tirely  occupied  with  party  warfare,  and  made  no  pretensions  to
fulfil  the  functions  of  regular  newspapers.  '  Cato's  Letters,*
which  appeared  under  George  I.  at  the  time  of  the  South  Sea
Bubble,  and  which  were  written  by  Trenchard  and  Gordon ;  the
'  Craftsman,'  in  which  Bolingbroke,  Pulteney,  and  Amhurst
assailed  during  many  years  the  Government  of  Walpole  ;  the
'North  Briton,'  which  was  the  chief  organ  of  opposition  in  the
beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  III.,  were  all  of  the  same
nature.  It  was,  however,  inevitable  that  these  two  classes  of
periodicals  should  be  eventually  amalgamated,  and  that  the
amalgamation  should  greatly  add  to  the  importance  of  each.
An  editor  who  combined  in  a  single  paper  the  interest  derived
from  the  circulation  of  news  and  the  interest  derived  from  po-
litical discussions,  and  who  selected  and  recorded  in  his  columns
the  facts  upon  which  he  based  his  political  disquisitions,  had  a
manifest  advantage  over  his  neighbours.  The  political  element
may  sometimes,  though  rarely,  be  found  in  the  newspapers  of
the  Eevolution  ;  it  became  more  prominent  in  the  reign  of
Anne,'  but  until  the  reign  of  George  III.  most  of  the  political
writing  which  exercised  a  powerful  influence  upon  opinion
is  to  be  found  either  in  pamphlets,  or  in  periodical  papers
which  were  exclusively  devoted  to  political  controversy.
In  the  first  decade  of  George  III.,  however,  the  character
of  newspapers  was  gradually  changing.  Walpole  has  noticed
that  before  this  time  political  abuse  was  generally  confined  to
Saturday  essays,  but  that  about  1768  the  daily  and  evening
newspapers,  stimulated  by  the  example  of  "Wilkes,  had  begun
to  print  every  outrageous  libel  that  was  sent  to  them.'^  The
grsat  development  of  magazines  and  newspapers  put  an  end  to

'  IIallam"s Hist,  of  Lnjland.  oh.  ^  Walpolc's Hfcvinirs of George

xvi.  Iir.  iii.  lOd,  1C5

:h.  XI.  JUNIUS.  233

or  absorbed  that  literature  of  detached,  periodical  essays,  which
during  three  reigns  had  been  so  considerable.  It  was  a  signifi-
cant thing  that  while  the  'Rambler'  and  the  ' Advent ixrer '
were  published  in  a  separate  form  like  the  '  Spectator  '  and  the
'  Tatler,'  Dr.  Johnson  published  the  '  Idler '  every  Saturday  in
a  newspaper  called  the  '  Universal  Chronicle,'  and  this  kind  of
writing  was  now  so  popular  that  he  complained  bitterly  that  his
essays  were  immediately  reproduced  by  rival  papers.  Gold-
smith's '  Citizen  of  the  World  '  first  appeared  in  the  columns  of
the  '  Public  Ledger.'  In  the  same  way  the  best  political
writing  began  gradually  to  find  its  way  into  the  newspapers.^

Newspaper  political  controversy  was  then  entirely  different
from  what  it  now  is.  The  leading  article  in  which  a  modem
newspaper  asserts  its  own  views  with  a  prominence  of  type
and  of  position  that  adds  not  a  little  to  their  authority,  had  not
yet  appeared.  As  a  regular  feature  of  newspapers  it  cannot,  I  be-
lieve, be  traced  farther  back  than  the  French  Eevolution.^  The
political  bias  was  shown  in  scattered  comments,  in  a  partial  and
significant  selection  of  news,  and  especially  in  letters,  written,
for  the  most  part,  under  assumed  names.  The  importance  and
amount  of  this  correspondence  had  of  late  years  greatly  in-
creased, and  in  the  beginning  of  1769  a  writer  appeared  who
soon  riveted  the  attention  of  England,  and  whose  letters  have
become  a  classic  in  English  literature.

Under  many  other  signatures  Junius  had  for  some  time
been  before  the  public.  He  himself  asserted  that  nearly
everything  that  had  attracted  attention  for  more  than
two  years  before  the  appearance  of  the  first  letters  under
that  name  was  from  his  pen,  and  two  of  the  signatures  he  has
specifically  recognised  as  his  own.^  Whether  all  the  miscel-
laneous letters  which  were  published  by  Woodfall  are  rightly
attributed  to  him  may,  however,  be  doubted.^  Though  con-
taining occasional  passages  of  weighty  invective  and  of  brilliant

'  This  change  is  noticed  in  Mil-  the  Newspaper  Press,  i.  430,  431.

ler's Retrospect of the Eighteenth  *  See  his  anonymous  letter  to  G.

Century,  in.  %Z. On  the  absorption  of  Grenville, Grenville  Papers,  iv.  3S\,

the  old  essay  writing  by  newspapers,  dated  October  20,  1768. See  too  pp.

see  Timperley's  Eiwijclopedia  of  Lite-  355,  856.

rary  Anecdote,  p.  702.  *  See the elaborate argument

^  Andrews' History oj British  against  the  geruineness  of  these  let-

JournaU,  i.  274. Grant's  Uistorij  of  ters  in  Dilke  s  Pa/;<r«  o/"  a  Critic.

234  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xu

epigram,  these  early  letters  are,  I  think,  of  very  little  vahie,
and  it  was  only  by  slow  degrees  that  the  writer  learnt  the
secret  of  true  dignity  of  style,  and  exchanged  the  tone  of  simple
scmrility  for  that  measured  malignity  of  slander  in  which  he
afterwards  excelled.  The  first  letter  under  the  signature  of
Junius  appeared  on  November  21,  1768,  but  it  was  of  no  con-
siderable importance,  and  was  not  republished  in  the  collection
of  letters  that  was  authorised  by  the  writer.  On  January  21,
1769,  a  much  abler  and  more  elaborate  letter  appeared  under
the  same  signature,  reviewing  the  whole  political  condition  of
the  country,  and  attacking  with  great  virulence  the  Duke  of
Grafton,  Lord  North,  Lord  Hillsborough,  Lord  Weymouth,
Lord  Granby,  and  Lord  Mansfield.  In  an  evil  hour  Sir  William
Draper,  the  distinguished  officer  who  had  commanded  the  ex-
pedition which  captured  the  Manilla  Islands,  entered  the  lists
on  behalf  of  the  Commander-in-Chief.  The  appearance  in  the
field  of  an  officer  of  such  high  position  and  well-known  reputa-
tion, and  the  great  literary  superiority  of  his  opponent,  attracted
attention  to  the  controversy,  while  the  extraordinary  fierceness
and  ability  with  which  the  unknown  writer  in  the  succeeding
letters  assailed  the  Sovereign  and  the  foremost  ministers  of  the
Crown,  soon  moved  public  curiosity  to  the  highest  point.  The
interest  in  them  is  not  to  be  fairly  measured  by  the  increase
of  the  circulation  of  the  '  Public  Advertiser,'  in  which  they  ap
peared,  for  they  were  copied  into  many  other  papers.  They
were  imitated  by  almost  every  public  writer,  and  even  by  a  large
number  of  the  most  eminent  speakers.  The  excitement  culmi-
nated in  the  letter  to  the  King  which  was  published  on  Decem-
ber 19,  1769,  but  the  letters  under  the  signature  of  Junius
continued,  with  occasional  intermissions,  till  January  21,  1772.
They  appeared  at  a  time  which  was  pre-eminently  favour-
able to  their  success.  The  Chatham  Ministry,  on  which  so
many  hopes  had  been  built,  had  been  paralysed  by  the  illness
of  its  chief,  and  a  period  of  administrative  anarchy  had
ensued  such  as  England  had  rarely  witnessed.  Chatham
at  last  resigned,  and  soon  after  returned  full  of  indignation
to  public  life,  to  find  every  principle  of  his  policy  aban-
doned by  his  former  colleagues.  Wherever  the  eye  was  turned
the political  horizon  was  darkly  clouded. In  the  American

CH.  XI.  CIKCUMSTANCES  TUAT FAVOURED HIM.  235

colonies  the  flood  of  discontent  rose  higher  and  higher.  Abroad,
Enghmd  was  humiliated  by  the  refusal  of  Spain  to  pay  the
Manilla  ransom,  by  the  acquisition  of  Corsica  by  the  French,
and  soon  after  by  the  expulsion  of  the  English  from  the  Falk-
land Islands.  At  home,  the  encroachments  on  the  rights  of
electors  had  raised  popular  indignation  almost  to  the  point  of
revolution.  Blood  had  been  shed ;  Parliament  and  the  law-
courts  were  alike  discredited,  and  the  popularity  of  the  Sove-
reign was  gone.  The  ministers  were  strong  in  their  purchased
majorities,  but  they  were  divided  among  themselves,  without
credit  or  popularity  in  the  country,  and  for  the  most  part
notoriously  destitute  of  administrative  capacity.  A  misgovern-
ment  relieved  by  no  gleam  of  success  at  home  or  abroad,  and
equally  fatal  to  constitutional  liberty  and  to  imperial  greatness,
had  reduced  the  nation  which  had  lately  been  the  arbiter  of
Europe  to  a  condition  of  the  most  humiliating,  the  most  dis-
graceful impotence.  The  press  and  the  jiury-box  alone  remained
for  opposition.  The  former,  which  was  looked  upon  as  the  one
still  unfettered  organ  of  opinion,  was  becoming  more  and  more
powerful,  and  Burke  noticed  as  a  special  characteristic  of  the
time  the  favour  with  which  the  public  looked  upon  the  most
ferocious  libels.'  The  classes  from  which  the  London  juries  were
drawn  fully  shared  the  feeling,  and  the  belief  that  the  judges
were  illegally  endeavouring  in  press  cases  to  abridge  their
authority  had  irritated  them  to  the  highest  point.

In  order  to  understand  fully  the  success  of  Junius,  in  order
to  judge  fairly  the  intense  virulence  which  he  imported  into
political  controversy,  these  things  must  be  duly  weighed.  He
had  abilities  that  would  command  admiration  at  any  time,
but  at  this  period  everything  seemed  conspiring  in  his  favour.
The  mystery  that  surrounded  him  added  to  the  eifect.  As  he
wrote  to  Wilkes  :  '  At  present  there  is  something  oracular  in
the  delivery  of  my  opinions.  I  speak  from  a  recess  which  no
human  curiosity  can  penetrate ;  and  darkness,  we  are  told,  is
one  source  of  the  subHme.  The  mystery  of  Junius  increases
his  importance.'

The  merit  of  Junius  is  almost  exclusively  literary.  His
letters  contain  no  original  views,  no  large  generahsations,  710

•  Cavendish  Dcbaten,  ii.  106.

23G  KNGLAND IN THE ErGlITEEXTII CENTUllY.  ch.  x..

proofs  of  political  prescience,  no  great  depth  or  power  of
thought.  He  was  in  no  respect  before  his  age,  and,  unlike
Burke,  who  delighted  in  arguing  questions  upon  the  highest
grounds,  Junius  usuuU}'  dealt  with  them  mainly  in  their  per-
sonal aspects.  On  the  great  question  of  American  taxation
he  avowed  himself  the  partisan  of  Grenville,  and  bitterly
lamented  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.  On  the  question
of  parliamentary  reform  he  maintained  the  wholly  untenable
positions  that  a  nomination  borough  is  of  the  nature  of  a
freehold,  that  the  whole  Legislature  is  incompetent  to  abolish
it,  and  that  the  question  of  parliamentary  reform  should
be  decided  by  the  Commons  alone.  Considering  the  letters
merely  in  their  literary  aspect,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that
they  are  very  unequal  in  their  merits.  They  are  sometimes
stilted,  always  too  manifestly  artificial,  and  not  unfrequently
overcharged  with  epigram  and  antithesis.  They  have,  how-
ever, literary  merits  of  the  highest  order,  and  their  style  is
entirely  different  from  that  of  any  of  the  great  models  of  the
time.  It  bears  no  resemblance  to  the  style  of  Swift,  of  Addison,
of  Bolingbroke,  of  Johnson,  or  of  Burke,  yet  in  some  respects
it  is  not  inferior  to  any  of  these.  No  writer  ever  excelled
Junius  in  condensed  and  virulent  invective,  rendered  all  the
more  malignant  by  the  studied  and  controlled  deliberation  of
the  language,  in  envenomed  and  highly  elaborated  sarcasm,  in
clear  and  vivid  statement ;  in  the  art  of  assuming,  though  an
unknown  individual,  an  attitude  of  great  moral  and  political
superiority ;  in  the  art  of  evading  difficulties,  insinuating  un-
proved charges,  imputing  unworthy  motives.  His  letters  are
perfectly  adapted  to  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  intended.
There  is  nothing  in  them  superfluous  or  obscure,  and  nothing
that  fails  to  tell.  He  had  to  the  highest  degree  the  gift  of
saying  things  that  are  remembered,  and  his  epigrams  are  often
barbed  with  the  keenest  wit.  Like  most  writing  which  is  at
once  very  good  and  very  laboured,  Junius  appears  to  most
advantage  in  quotation.  Eead  continuously,  there  is  a  certain
monotony  of  glitter  and  of  rhythm,  but  passages  embedded  in
the  style  of  another  writer  seldom  fail  to  shine  with  the  bril-
liancy of  a  diamond.  Very  hapjiy  metaphors  and  phrases  of
high  imaginative  beauty  mav  be  found  in  his  pages. His  rare

cii.  XI.  CUAllAOTERISTICS OF JUNIUS.  237

eulogies  are  usually  intended  for  the  injury  of  some  third
person,  but  the  few  lines  which,  in  his  letter  against  Home,  he
devotes  to  the  praise  of  Chatham,  though  their  central  image  is
by  no  means  irreproachable,'  have  all  that  peculiar  charm,  beyond
analysis  or  dehuition,  which  belongs  only  to  the  very  best
writing.  As  a  popular  political  reasoner  he  was  truly  admirable.
He  introduced,  indeed,  little  or  nothing  new  or  original  into
controversy,  but  he  possessed  to  supreme  perfection  the  art  of
giving  the  arguments  on  his  side  their  simplest,  clearest,  and
strongest  expression ;  disengaging  them  from  all  extraneous
matter,  making  them  transparently  evident  to  the  most  cursory
reader.  In  this,  as  in  most  other  respects,  he  is  a  curious  con-
trast to  Burke,  who  is  always  redundant,  and  who  delights  in
episodes,  illustrations,  ramifications,  general  reflections,  various
lights,  remote  and  indirect  consequences.  Junius  never  for  a
moment  loses  sight  of  the  immediate  issue,  and  he  flies  swift
and  direct  as  an  arrow  to  its  heart.  The  rapid  march  of  the
eighteenth  century  is  apparent  in  his  style,  and  it  is  admirably
suited  for  a  class  of  literature  which,  if  it  impresses  at  all,  must
impress  at  a  glance.

He  possessed  the  easy  air  of  good  society,  and  his  letters,  if
not  those  of  a  great  statesman,  are  at  least  unquestionably  those
of  a  man  who  had  a  real  and  experimental  knowledge  of  public
business,  who  had  mixed  with  active  politicians,  who  knew  the
anecdotes  which  circulated  in  political  society.  In  the  present
century  the  great  development  of  parliamentary  reporting,  and
of  a  press  which  is  largely  written  by  men  who  are  closely
connected  with  political  life,  has  brought  the  public  into  very
intimate  contact  with  their  rulers,  and  has  diffused  the  habits
of  political  thought  over  a  wide  area.  Yet,  even  now,  a  few
nights  spent  in  the  gallery  of  the  House  of  Coiumons,  and  some
free  social  intercourse  with  political  leaders  of  different  parties,
will  teach  much  to  the  most  careful  student  of  written  politics.
But  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  chasm  between  the  mere
literary  politician  and  the  practical  statesman  was  much  wider,
and  even  so  great  a  man  as  Dr.  Johnson  altogether  fililed  to

'  *  Recorded  honours  shall  gather  port  the  laurels  that  adorn  it.'  It  is
round  his  monument  and  thicken  over  no  great  eulog-y  of  a  monument  tli;!.t
him.  It  is  a  solid  fabric,  and  will  sup- it  is  not  crushed  by  laurel  wreaiLs.

238  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi

bridge  it.  The  letters  of  Junius  are  eminently  the  writings
of  a  man  who  understood  the  conditions  of  public  life  and
the  characters  of  public  men — who  wrote  not  simply  for  public
applause  or  for  the  gratification  of  private  spite,  but  for  the
attainment  of  definite  political  ends.  He  showed  an  inti-
mate acquaintance  with  the  business  and  with  the  staff  of
the  War  OfBce,  and  much  knowledge  of  the  characters  and
positions  of  the  City  politicians.  He  had  a  clear  view  of  the
distinction  between  what  is  practically  attainable  and  what  is
simply  desirable,  and  of  the  frequent  necessity  of  waiving
general  principles  for  the  attainment  of  definite  ends.  No  one
can  read  his  letters  to  Wilkes  without  being  struck  with  the
eminently  practical  cast  of  his  judgment — with  the  rare  political
sagacity  with  which  he  could  judge  an  immediate  issue.  On
broad  political  questions  his  judgments,  as  I  have  said,  are  very
worthless,  but  they  are  at  least  not  those  of  a  mere  demagogue.
I  have  already  referred  to  his  opinions  about  American  taxation
and  about  nomination  boroughs.  It  may  be  added  that  he
objected  strongly  to  giving  members  to  the  great  trading  towns  ;
that,  while  advocating  triennial,  he  opposed  annual  ParHaments ;
that  he  supported  against  the  City  politicians  the  legality  of
} tress  warrants  ;  that,  in  spite  of  his  furious  hatred  of  the  King,
he  argued  strongly  for  the  superiority  of  monarchical  over  re-
publican government.  He  received  no  money  for  his  writings,
and  could  have  no  selfish  object  to  gain,  while  he  had  grave
dangers  to  fear.  There  is  little  doubt  that  he  had  some  real
public  spirit,  and  a  very  sincere  desire  to  drag  down  men
whose  public  lives  were  scandalously  bad.  He  was  evidently  one
of  those  men  to  whose  nature  hatred  is  an  imperious  necessity,
and  who,  without  any  personal  provocation  or  private  interest,
are  only  too  glad  to  gratify  it.

It  is  true  that  this  is  not  always  the  character  of  his  writ-
ing. No  plausible  explanation  based  on  mere  public  grounds
has  been  given  of  the  ungovernable,  the  almost  frantic  fury
with  which,  in  the  spring  of  1772,  chiefly  under  the  signature
of  Veteran,  and  with  earnest  injunctions  to  Wood  fall  to  conceal
the  identity  of  that  signature  with  Junius,'  he  inveighed  against
an  obscure  change  at  the  War  Office,  which  led  to  the  removal

•  See  Woodfall.  i.  247,  248.

cH.  XI.  VTDLENCK  OF  JUNIUS.  2.39

of  D'Oyly,  to  the  resignation  of  his  brother  clerk,  Philip  Francis,
and  to  the  appointment  by  Lord  Barrington  of  Chamier  to  the
higher  post  of  Deputy- Secretary  at  War.  Barrington,  though
he  was  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  King's  friends,  had
hitherto  been  barely  mentioned  in  the  attacks  of  Junius.
He  is  now  '  the  bloody  Barrington,  that  silken,  fawning
courtier  at  St.  James's,'  whose  '  very  name '  '  implies  every-
thing that  is  mean,  cruel,  false,  and  contemptible,'  *a  wretch,'
'  who  wants  nothing  in  his  office  but  ignorance,  impudence,
pertness,  and  servility,'  next  to  the  Duke  of  Grrafton,  'the
blackest  heart  in  the  kingdom.'  Chamier  is  assailed  in  letter
after  letter  in  a  strain  of  the  coarsest  and  most  vulgar  insolence.
This  gentleman,  who  was  descended  from  a  distinguished
refugee  French  minister,  was  already  at  the  time  of  his  ap-
pointment, one  of  the  ten  original  members  of  Dr.  Johnson's
famous  club,  and  he  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  much  more
than  ordinary  acquirements,  and  of  a  perfectly  stainless  charac-
ter and  reputation.  The  sole  definite  charge  indeed  which
Veteran  could  bring  against  him  was  that  in  his  youth  he  had
been  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  and  this  very  innocent  fact  is  the
chief  theme  of  the  witticisms  of  his  assailant.  He  describes
him  with  wearisome  iteratii^n  as  '  Tony  Shammy,'  '  a  little
gambling  broker,'  '  little  Three  per  Cent.  Eeduced,' '  a  mere  scrip
of  a  Secretary,'  '  with  the  activity  of  a  broker  and  the  polite-
ness of  a  hairdresser,'  '  a  little  Frenchified  broker  from  Change
Alley.'  It  is  probable  that  all  this  was  due  to  the  meanest  per-
sonal motives,  and  if  Philip  Francis  was  indeed  the  writer  it  is
very  explicable.

Even  apart  from  its  moral  aspects,  the  outrageous  violence
of  his  language  was  a  grave  literary  fault.  "NVe  find  in  Junius
nothing  of  that  relief  and  variety  of  colouring,  that  delicacy  of
touch,  that  measured  and  discriminating  severity  which  has
made  the  immortal  letters  of  Pascal  permanent  models  in  con-
troversy. Junius  probably  never  drew  a  portrait  which  even
approximated  to  truth.  His  enemies  are  all  villains  of  the
deepest  dye,  and  his  chief  task  is  to  diversify  and  intensify
the  epithets  of  hatred.  Thus,  to  give  but  a  few  examples,  the
Sovereign  is  called  by  implication  '  the  basest  and  meanest  fellow
in  the  kingdom.' His  mother  is  '  the  demon  of  discord,'  '  the

240  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xi.

original  creating  cause  of  the  shameful  and  deplorable  condi-
tion of  this  country,'  a  being  '  who  watches  with  a  kind  of  provi-
dential malignity  over  the  work  of  her  hands.''  The  Duke  of
Grafton  is  '  a  black  and  cowardly  tyrant,'  '  degraded  below  the
condition  of  a  man,'  'who  had  passed  through  every  possible
change  and  contradiction  of  conduct,  without  the  momentary
imputation  or  colour  of  a  virtue,'  '  the  friend  of  every  villain  in
the  kingdom,'  though  at  the  same  time  '  there  is  not  a  man  in
either  House,  whose  character,  however  flagitious,  would  not  be
ruined  by  mixing  with  his  reputation.'  The  Duke  of  Bedford
is  described  as  destitute  of  all  natural  affection,  as  having  sold
his  country  for  money  to  France,  as  hated  with  equal  intensity
though  on  different  grounds  by  every  honest  Englishman  and
by  every  honest  Scotchman,  as  having  hitherto  escaped  by  a
special  providence  from  the  detestation  of  the  populace  in  order
that  he  might  be  reserved  for  the  public  justice  of  his  country.
Lord  Mansfield  is  declared  '  with  the  most  solemn  appeal  to
God,'  to  be  '  the  very  worst  and  most  dangerous  man  in  the
kingdom.'  '  The  whole  race  of  the  Con  ways '  are  '  the  meanest
of  the  human  species.'  Colonel  Luttrell  '  had  discovered  a  new
line  in  the  human  character.  He  has  degraded  even  the  name
of  Luttrell.'  Home  is  actuated  by  '  the  solitary  vindictive
malice  of  a  monk  brooding  over  the  infirmities  of  his  friend
.  .  .  and  feasting  with  a  rancorous  rapture  upon  the  sordid
catalogue  of  his  distresses.'  Garrick,  who  was  suspected  of
the  unpardonable  crime  of  having  taken  some  pains  to
discover  the  authorship  of  these  letters,  was  '  a  rascal '  and  a
'  vagabond.'

The  malignity  of  Junius  was  indeed  tridy  fiendish,  and  it
was  utterly  uncurbed  by  any  restraints  of  truth,  or  decency,  or
honour.  In  few  writers  is  a  delight  in  the  contemplation  and
infliction  of  pain  more  keen  and  more  evident,  and  he  has  a  pe-
culiar pleasure  in  directing  his  sarcasms  to  those  circumstances
or  moments  of  private  surrow  which  are  sacred  to  every  honoiu:-
aV)le  disputant.  When  the  Princess  Dowager  was  dying  of
cancer  we  find  him  gloating  over  her  condition,  and  upon  the

'  Tlie  passa.c,'es  about  tlie  Princess  nature. The  oilier passages I liavp

Dowa^^cr  are  from  the  letters  signed  quoted are from  the letters  signed

Domitian,  but  Junius  in  one of  his  Junius,
private  letters  acknowledged  that  sig-

HIS EXTREME MALIGNITY.

241

loathsome  remedy  that  was  employed  to  alleviate  her  suffering.^
He  taunted  the  King  with  the  imputed  frailty  of  his  mother
and  with  the  undutiful  conduct  of  his  child.  He  jested  with  the
Duke  of  Grafton  on  the  infidelity  of  his  wife.  In  his  corre-
spondence with  the  Duke  of  Bedford  he  points  with  savage
pleasure  to  the  death  of  his  only  son,  and  because  the  Duke
had  shortly  after  that  event  voted  on  an  important  public
question  he  falsely  and  basely  charged  him  with  the  want  of
all  natural  affection.^  Even  his  own  gallery  of  monsters
scarcely  contains  a  more  unlovely  picture  than  that  which
Junius  has  unconsciously  drawn  of  himself.  We  see  him
full  of  the  most  nervous  alarm  at  the  prospect  of  detec-
tion, and  at  the  dangers  that  menaced  him,^  but  at  the  same
time  thrilling  with  a  keen  and  undisguised  enjoyment  at  the
thought  of  the  pain  he  was  inflicting.  At  one  time  he  advises
Wilkes  about  the com'se  of  conduct  'which  will  in  the  end

'  An  atrocious  note  which  Wood-
fall  refused  to  print  has  been  given
for  the  first  time  by  Mr.  Twisleton  in
his  great  work  on  the  handwriting  of
Jxmius,  plate  103.  In  the  text  of  a
letter,  Junius  had  ^\Titten  :  '  When  all
hopes  of  peace  are  lost,  his  Majesty
tells  his  Parliament  that  he  is  prepar-
ing, not  for  barbarous  war,  but  (with
all  his  mother's  softness) /c^r  a  differ-
ent sitvation  ; '  and  he  adds,  as  a  note,
'  The  lady  herself  is  now  preparing
for  a  different  situation.  Nothing
keeps  her  alive  but  the  horrible  suc-
tion of  toads.  Such  an  instance  of
Divine  justice  would  convert  an
atheist.'  On  this  remedy,  which  was
supposed  in  the  18th  century  to  be
useful  in  cases  of  cancer,  see  Twisle-
ton, p.  XXV.,  and  compare  one  of  the
private  letters  of  Junius  to  Woodfall,
'  What  do  you  mean  by  afhrming
that  the  Dowager  is  better  ?  I  tell
you  she  suckles  toads  from  morn-
ing to  night.' — Woodfall's  Junius,  i.
241.  In  a  letter  signed  Domitian,
Junius  wrote,  '  Few  nations  are  m  the
predicament  that  we  are,  to  have  no-
thing to  complain  of  but  the  filial
virtues  of  our  Sovereign.  Charles  I.
had  the  same  implicit  attachment  to
his  spouse,  but  his  worthy  parent  was
in  her  grave.  It  were  to  be  wished
that  the  parallel  held  good  in  all  the

VOL.  Til.

circumstances.'

-  The  infamous  falsehoods  of
Junius  about  the  Duke  of  Bedford
are  fully  exposed  in  Lord  Brougham's
StatesmenofGem-ge III.  art. '  Bedford,'
and  in  Lord  J.  Russell's  Introduct  ion
to  the  third  volume  of  the  Bedford
Correajjondence.  Among  other  charges
the  Duke  and  Duchess  were  accused  of
having  sold  the  clothes  and  trinkets
of  their  son.  The  truth  was  that
'  these  effects  were  given,  as  was  the
practice,  to  the  immediate  servants
of  Lord  and  Lady  Tavistock,  and  sold
by  them  for  their  own  benefit.'  Bed-
ford's despair  at  the  death  of  his  son
was  such  that,  as  Hume  said,  '  no-
body believed  when  it  happened  that
he  would  have  sm-vived  the  loss.'

^  '  I  must  be  more  cautious  than
ever.  I  am  sure  I  sliould  not  survive
a  discovery  three  days,  or  if  I  did
they  w'ould  attaint  me  by  bill.  Change
to  the  Somerset  Coffee  House,  and  let
no  mortal  know  the  alteration.  I  am
persuaded  you  are  too  honest  a  man
to  contribute  in  any  way  to  my  de-
struction.'— Woodfail's  Junius,  i.  231,
232.  'When  you  consider  to  what
excessive  enmities  I  may  be  exposed,
you  will  not  wonder  at  mv  cautions.'
Ibid.  i.  208.  '  Though  you  would
fight,' he  wrote  to  Draper,"  'there  are
others  who  would  assassinate.'

242 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xr.

break  the  heart  of  JNIr.  Home.'  At  another  he  annoimces  his
intention,  '  having  nothing  better  to  do,'  to  entertain  himself
and  the  public  with  '  torturing  Lord  Barrington.'  The  Duke  of
Grafton  he  describes  by  an  expressive  image  of  satisfaction  as,
'  the  pillow  upon  which  I  am  determined  to  rest  all  my  resent-
ments.' '  Our  language,'  he  writes  to  Lord  Mansfield,  '  has  no
term  of  reproach,  the  mind  has  no  idea  of  detestation,  which  has
not  already  been  happily  applied  to  you  and  exhausted.  Ample
justice  has  been  done  by  abler  pens  than  mine  to  the  separate
merits  of  your  life  and  character.  Let  it  be  my  humble  office  to
collect  the  scattered  sweets  till  their  united  virtue  tortures  the
sense.'  He  has  a  manifest  pleasure  in  dragging  women  into
his  letters,  and  he  is  perfectly  regardless  of  truth  if  he  can  only
wound  an  opponent.  Thus  without  a  shadow  of  evidence  he
accused  the  Duke  of  Bedford  of  having  been  bribed  by  the
French  to  sign  the  Peace  of  Paris.  A  certain  Dr.  Musgrave
had,  it  is  true,  brought  a  similar  accusation  against  the  Princess
Dowager,  Lord  Bute,  and  Lord  Holland,  but  Bedford  was  not
included  in  the  charge,  which  rested  only  on  the  gossip  of  a
coffee-house,  and  which  was  afterwards  unanimously  voted  by
the  House  of  Commons  to  be  frivolous  and  untrue.  Sir  W.
Draper  challenged  Junius  to  produce  the  evidence  of  his  charge.
But  the  effrontery  of  the  slanderer  was  quite  unshaken.  He
answered  that  a  bribe  had  under  similar  circumstances  been
offered  to  Marlborough,  and  '  only  not  accepted,'  that  he
judged  the  proceedings  of  Bedford  by  internal  evidence,  and
that  '  a  religious  man  might  have  remembered  upon  what
foundation  some  truths  most  interesting  to  mankind  have  been
received  and  established.  If  it  were  not  for  the  internal  evi-
dence which  the  purest  of  religions  carries  with  it,  what  would
become  of  the  Decalogue  and  of  Christianity  ?  '  In  a  letter
under  the  signature  of  Vindex,  which  Woodfall  refused  to  print  as
a  whole,  he  accused  the  King  of  cowardice.  The  charge  was  with-
out truth  and  without  plausibility,  for  both  in  moral  and  in  phy-
sical courage  George  III.  considerably  exceeded  the  high  average
of  English  gentlemen.  But  a  private  letter  to  Woodfall  abun-
dantly explains  the  motives  of  the  attack.  '  T  must  tell  you  (and
with  positive  certainty)  that  our  gracious  *  *  *  *  is  as  callous  as  a
stockfish  to  everything  but  the  reproach  of  cowardice.  That  alone

en.  XI.  SUCCESS  OF  JUNIUS.  243

is  able  to  set  the  humours  afloat.  After  a  paper  of  that  kind
he  won't  eat  meat  for  a  week.' '

The  hatred  with  which  Junius  regarded  the  mini.stersof  the
King,  violent  as  it  was,  paled  before  that  with  which  he  regarded
their  master.  '  It  lowers  me  to  myself,'  he  wrote  to  Wilkes,
'  to  draw  another  into  a  hazardous  situation  which  I  cannot
partake  of  with  him.  This  consideration  will  account  for  my
abstaining  from  the  King  so  long.  ...  I  know  my  groinid
tlioroughly  when  I  affirm  that  he  alone  is  the  mark.  It  is  not
Bute  nor  even  the  Princess  Dowager.  It  is  the  odious  hypo-
crite himself  whom  every  honest  man  should  detest  and  every
brave  man  should  attack.'  ^  He  watched  with  keen  delight  the
domestic  sorrows  that  wrung  his  heart,  and  was  always  ready  to
pour  fresh  poison  into  the  wound.  '  Since  my  note  of  this
morning,'  he  wrote  privately  to  Wilkes,  '  I  know  for  certain  that
the  Duke  of  Ciunberland  is  married  to  Luttrell's  sister.  The
Princess  Dowager  and  the  Duke  of  Grioucester  cannot  live,  and
the  odious  hypocrite  is  in  profundis.  Now  is  your  time  to
torment  him  with  some  demonstration  from  the  City.  Suppose
an  address  from  some  proper  number  of  Liverymen  to  the
Mayor  for  a  common  hall  to  consider  of  an  address  of  congratu-
lation— then  have  it  debated  in  Common  Council — think  of
something — ^you  see  you  need  not  appear  yourself.'  ^

The  great  success  of  Junius  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  low
condition  of  the  political  writing  of  the  time,  of  the  partiality
of  juries,  and  of  the  exasperated  state  of  public  opinion.
Among  its  minor  causes  was  a  well-known  passage  in  one
of  the  speeches  of  Barke,  in  which  for  party  purposes  that
great  orator  not  a  little  exaggerated  his  merits.  It  must  be
remembered  too  that  contemporary  writers  did  not  possess  the
knowledge  of  Junius  derived  from  his  private  letters,  which  both
furnish  many  clues  to  his  character  and  enable  us  to  trace  to
him  many  most  discreditable  letters  published  under  other  sig-

'  Woodfall's  Juniux,  i.  221.  Com-  he  would  put  himself  at  the  head  of
pare  George  Grenville's  Journal  of  his  armj  or  do  anything  to  save  his
May  176.5,  written  at  the  time  of  the  country.' — Grenville  Papers,  iii.  177.
silk  weaver  riots.  '  Mr.  Grenville  went  ^  Junius  to  Wilkes,  Oct.  21,  1771,
in  next.  The  King  spoke  to  him  first  Wilkes' M8S  British  Museum.  Wood-
upon  the  state  of  the  rioters.  He  fall,  in  his  published  edition,  sup-
seemed  in  great  disorder  and  agita-  pressed  part  of  this  letter,
tion ;  hurt  with  people  thinking  he  had  ^  Ibid.  This  letter  was  received
kept  out  of  the  way  from  fear,  .said  Nov.  7,  1771.

K  2

244  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xi,

natures.  A  reader  who  knows  Junius  as  we  know  him  now,  must
indeed  have  an  extraordinary  estimate  of  the  value  of  a  brilliant
style  if' he  can  regard  him  with  the  smallest  respect.  He  wisely
attacked  for  the  most  part  men  whose  rank  and  position  pre-
vented them  from  descending  into  the  arena,  and  who  were  at
the  same  time  intensely  and  often  deservedly  unpopular.  Hia
encounter  with  Home  was  the  one  instance  in  which  he  met  a
really  able  and  practised  writer ;  and  although  the  character
of  Home  was  a  very  vulnerable  one,  he  appears  to  me  to  have
had  in  this  controversy  a  great  advantage  over  his  opponent.
There  was  indeed  something  strangely  imprudent,  as  well  as
strangely  impudent,  in  an  anonymous  newspaper  libeller  assur-
ing a  skilful  controversialist  that  '  he  could  not  descend  with
him  to  an  altercation  in  the  newspapers,'  and  that  for  his  part
'  he  measured  the  integrity  of  men  by  their  conduct  and  not  by
their  professions.'  The  great  literary  superiority  of  Junius  to
Sir  W.  Draper  is  incontestable,  but  the  most  important  charge
which  he  urged  against  that  officer  has  no  real  weight.  Draper,
who  had  commanded  the  expedition  against  the  Manilla  Islands,
and  who  would  have  been  entitled  to  no  less  than  25,0001.  out
of  the  ransom  money  which  the  Spaniards  refused  to  pay,  had
repeatedly  urged  upon  the  Grovernment  the  duty  oi  prosecuting
the  claim.  At  last,  when  it  was  plainly  useless,  he  desisted,
and  he  soon  after  obtained  some  professional  advancement  to
which  his  past  services  amply  entitled  him.  A  skilful  writer
might  represent  this  as  the  conduct  of  a  man  who  had  betrayed
and  sold  his  '  companions  at  arms  for  a  riband  and  a  regiment,'
but  there  was  nothing  in  it  which  was  not  compatible  with  the
most  scrupulous  honour.  The  elaborate  legal  arguments  of
Junius  against  Lord  Mansfield  for  admitting  a  felon  named  Eyre
to  bail,  and  on  account  of  his  directions  to  the  jury  in  an  obscure
trespass  case,  are  pronounced  by  lawyers  to  be  so  grossly  wrong
that  they  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  writer  cannot  have
been  of  their  profession.'  The  detailed  charge  of  peculation
against  the  Duke  of  Grafton  about  the  oaks  in  Whittlebury
forest  appears  to  have  been  equally  false.^ On  the  great  con-

'  See  CumpheWs  IJfe  of  3ra»sf /'hi.  '  See  Almnii's  Biographical  A?ieo-

Brougham's  Statesmen  of  Georga  III. dotes,  i.  12-lC.
art.  '  iMausfield.'

«H.  XI.  PROSECUTION OF  THE PUBLISHERS.  245

stitutional  questions  of  the  day  Junius  did  little  more  than  re-
produce common  arguments  with  much  more  than  common
ability,  and  with  the  exception  of  the  abandonment  of  the
P'alkland  Islands,'  no  foreign  question  is  treated  by  him  with
any  prominence.  He  is  far  more  at  home  in  dilating  upon  such
subjects  as  the  Scotch  birth  of  Mansfield,  the  connection  of  his
family  with  the  Pretender,  the  matrimonial  infelicities  and
amatory  vagaries  of  Grafton,  the  descent  of  that  nobleman  from
an  illegitimate  son  of  Charles  II.,  the  parsimony  of  Bedford,  his
conduct  on  the  death  of  his  son,  and  an  assault  which  was  made
upon  him  on  a  country  racecourse.^

P'or  nearly  a  year  under  the  signature  of  Junius  he  continued
his  libels  entirely  without  restraint ;  but  when  the  letter  to  the
Kiug  appeared,  the  Attorney-General  very  properly  prosecuted
Woodfall  who  had  published  it,  and  Almon  and  Miller  who  had
reprinted  it.  The  trial  of  Almon  took  place  first,  and  he  was
ultimately  found  guilty  of  publishing,  and  sentenced  to  pay  a
fine  of  ten  marks  and  to  find  sureties  for  his  good  behaviour  for
two  years.  Woodfall,  who  was  the  chief  offender,  was  next
arraigned,  and  Mansfield,  who  tried  the  case,  laid  down  very
clearly  his  doctrine  that  the  libellous  character  of  the  document
was  for  the  judge  and  not  for  the  jury.  The  jury  responded  by  a
special  and  irregular  verdict  of '  guilty  of  printing  and  publishing
only.'  After  long  discussion  it  was  ordered  that  this  verdict
should  be  set  aside,  and  that  there  should  be  a  new  trial.  But
before  this  decision  was  carried  into  effect,  IVIiller  had  been  tried
at  Guildhall,  and  in  spite  of  the  clearest  evidence  of  the  repub-
lication he  was  acquitted  amid  the  enthusiastic  applause  of  a
great  multitude.  The  temper  of  the  London  juries  was  sufiici-
ently  evident,  and  no  attempt  was  made  to  renew  the  prosecu-
tion of  Woodfall.^  Mansfield  refused  to  permit  the  prosecution
of  the  scandalous  libels  against  himself,  and  Grafton  and  Bedford

•  In  a  letter  to  Mackrable,  Philip  Stocks.'— Parkes  and  jMerivale's  Life

Francis  writes,  '  Tlie  approach  of a  of  Francis,  \.2o\,'i^'A.

war  loads  me  with  business,  as  by-and-  -  In  one  of  his  private  letters  he

by  I  hope  it  will  with  money  '  (Dec.  begged  Woodfall  to  find  out  the  exact;

11,  1770),  and  in  his  autobiography  day  on  which  this important  event

he  says,  '  We  thought  a  Spanish  war  took  place. — Woodfall,  i.  227,  578.

inevitable,  and  that  Chatliam must  '  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv.  :)5,

be  employed. Lord Wej-mouth on  36.  Campbell's  C7ii</yM«^ice8,  ii.  47&-

that  conviction  resigned  the  Secretary  480.
of  State's  office,  and  I  lost  500^.  in  the

246  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

took  the  same  course.  The  torrent  of  libel  flowed  on  unchecked
and  unrestrained,  and  the  writings  of  Junius  became  for  some
time  the  favourite  model  of  political  writers,  who,  though  they
could  not  rival  him  in  ability,  often  equalled  and  sometimes
even  exceeded  him  in  scurrility  and  falsehood.

The  writings  of  Junius  have  a  great  importance  in  the
history  of  the  growing  influence  of  newspapers,  and  they  per-
haps contributed  something  to  the  resignation  of  Grafton.  They
have,  however,  very  little  permanent  value,  and  would  probably
have  been  almost  forgotten,  had  it  not  been  for  the  problem
of  their  authorship,  which  appears  to  possess  to  some  minds
an  inexhaustible  attraction.  Burke,  Gerard  Hamilton,  Boyd,
and  Dunning  seem  to  have  been  most  suspected  at  the  time,
and  answers  were  even  published  addressed  to  '  Junius,  alias
Edmund,  the  Jesuit  of  St.  Omer's.' '  The  publication,  how-
ever, by  Woodfall  of  the  private  and  miscellaneous  letters  of
Junius,  greatly  changed  the  conditions  of  the  inquiry;  and
the  very  elaborate  work  of  Taylor,  identifying  Junius  with
Philip  Francis,^  gave  a  renewed  impulse  to  the  discussion.
Probably  no  English  book,  except  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,
has  been  submitted  to  such  a  minute  and  exhaustive  criticism
as  the  '  Letters  of  Junius ; '  and  although  the  sufficiency  of
the  evidence  tracing  them  to  Francis  is  still  much  disputed,
it  may,  I  think,  be  truly  said  that  rival  candidates  have  almost
disappeared  from  the  field.  I  do  not  propose  to  examine  in
detail  a  question  on  which  I  have  nothing  new  to  offer,  and
which  appears  to  me  to  have  already  occupied  much  more
attention  than  it  deserves ;  but  a  brief  abstract  of  the  argu-
ments in  favour  of  the  claim  of  Francis  can  in  a  work  like  the
present  hardly  be  avoided.

The  great  and  evident  knowledge  shown  by  the  anonymous

•  This,  e.g.,  was  the  address  of  a  very  tion,  or  ground  for  the  slightest  sus-

able letter  signed  Zeno in defence  picion  that  I  had  any  share  whatso-

of  Mansfield. — Fuhlio  AdveHiser,  Oct.  ever in  that controversy.' — Burke's

15,1771. Burke  complained  bitterly  Cor?-eKjMiidcnce,i.  270,  271. He  again

that  Lord  Mansfield  '  had  not  thought  and again  distinctly  and  upon his

proper  to  discountenance  the  blending  honour  denied  that  he  was  the  author

a  vindication  of his character  with  of  Junius. — Ibid.  pp.  275,  282. 13os-

the most scurrilous attacks upon  well's  Johnson,  p.  625.
mine ;  and  that  he  has  permitted  the  ^  Juidns  Identijied  with  a  jDlstiih'

first  regular  defence  that  I  have  ever  ffuished  Liviiuj  Character. (London,

seen  made  for  him  to  be  addressed  to  LSI 6,)
me,  without  the  least  proof,  prcsump-

CH.  XI.  WAS  FRANCIS  '  JUNIUS  '  ?  247

writer,  of  the  business  and  of  the  officials  of  the  War  Office  ;  his
furious  resentment  at  the  appointment  of  Chamier,  which  was  in
no  respect  either  improper  or  important,  but  which  was  followed
by  the  resignation  of  Francis  ;  his  adoption,  while  expressing
that  resentment,  of  other  signatures ;  and  his  anxiety  to  dis-
connect his  letters  on  this  subject  from  the  letters  of  Junius,
as  if  he  feared  that  they  might  furnish  a  clue  to  the  authorship
of  the  latter,  first  directed  suspicion  to  the  former  chief  clerk
of  the  War  Office  ;  and  a  great  number  of  independent  lines  of
evidence  converge  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  handwriting
of  Junius  has  been  submitted  to  the  most  minute,  patient,
and  elaborate  examination  by  one  of  the  first  professional
authorities  on  the  subject,  and  has  been  pronounced  by  him
to  be  unquestionably  the  disguised  handwriting  of  Francis,  and
the  argument  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  Francis
had  once  sent  a  copy  of  verses,  with  an  anonymous  note  in  a
disguised  hand,  to  a  young  lady  at  Bath,  and  this  disguised
writing  appears  identical  with  that  of  Junius.'  The  movements
of  Francis  during  the  Junian  period  have  been  minutely  traced,
and  the  periods  of  his  absence  from  London  and  of  his  illness
have  been  found  to  correspond  with  striking  accuracy  to  the
periods  in  which  the  letters  of  Junius  were  suspended.^  Junius
mentions  some  speeches  of  Chatham  which  he  had  himself
heard,  and  adopts  or  imitates  many  of  their  phrases.  The  same
speeches  were  actually  published  from  notes  that  were  taken
by  Francis.^  Among  the  miscellaneous  letters  is  one  under  the
signature  of  '  Bifrons,'  in  which  the  author  mentions  casually
that  he  had  seen  the  works  of  the  Jesuit  Casuists  burned  at
Paris. This  event  took  place  in  August  1761  ;  and  as  the  war

'  See Twisleton and Cliabot's  pp.xxx;iv.,xxxvi.  T&j\ox's,  Junius Ide-Ji-

Handwriting of Junius  —  probably  ^i/jV^^.pp.  257-313.  It  was  once  believed

the most complete investigation  that  the  reports  of  those  speeches  did

ever made into the handwriting  not  appear  till  long  after  the  letters

of  an  author. The  facts  relating  to  of  Junius. Dilke,  however,  who  has

the  copy  of  verses  will  be  found,  pp.  examined  the  Junius question  with

219-244. The  verses  seem  to  be  in  great  minuteness,  has  shown  that  re-

the handwriting  of Tilghman, the  ports may  be found in  the  earlier

cousin  and  intimate  friend  of  Francis.  newspapers, {PajJers  of  a  Critic,  ii.

^  Parkes and Merivale's  Life  of  109-121.) This no doubt  weakens

Francis.  the  argument  from  the  coincidence  of

*  This  fact  rests  on  the  distinct  exjjression,  but  it  leaves  the  fact  that

assertion  of  the  publishers  of  the  P«rZ.  Francis heard and took notes of

Sist.  in  which  the  reports  appeared.  speeches which Junius heard and

See  Stanhope's  History  of  England,  v,  imitated.

248  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xi.

was  raging,  the  only  British  subjects  who  could  have  seen
the  transaction  were  either  prisoners  of  war  or  those  who  were
attached  to  the  suite  of  Hans  Stanley,  who  was  then  in  Paris
negotiating  for  peace.  Francis  was  at  this  time  Assistant
Treasury  Clerk  to  Pitt  at  the  Foreign  Office.  He  had  shortly  be-
fore been  sent  to  Portugal  on  the  mission  of  Lord  Kinnoul.  He
was  especially  recommended  for  the  Foreign  Office  on  account
of  his  perfect  knowledge  of  French ;  and  if  it  could  be  proved
that  he  was  one  of  the  few  persons  despatched  with,  or  to,  Hans
Stanley,  this  fact  would  go  far  towards  settling  the  contro-
versy. Unfortunately,  no  evidence  which  is  at  all  decisive  has
been  produced.  Lady  Francis,  who  was  extremely  inaccurate
and  untrustworthy  in  her  recollections,  stated  indeed  that  '  her
husband  was  at  the  Court  of  France  when  Madame  de  Pom-
padour drove  out  the  Jesuits ; '  and  that  he  '  allowed  to  his
family  that  he  had  seen  the  Jesuit  books  burnt  by  the  hangman.'
A  letter  from  a  lady  with  whom  Francis  was  in  love  proves
that  when  the  mission  of  Hans  Stanley  was  organised,  Francis
had  asked  to  accompany  it  as  secretary,  but  had  not  obtained
the  post ;  and  it  has  been  noticed  that  no  despatches  in  the
handwriting  of  Francis  exist  between  July  24  and  August  20,
176L  This  interval  would  give  ample  time  for  a  journey  to
Paris  and  back,  and  it  was  during  this  time  that  the  Jesuit
books  were  burnt.  But  although  it  has  never  been  proved  that
Francis  was  at  this  time  in  Paris,  it  is  certain  that  the  letters
of  Hans  Stanley  to  Pitt  passed  through  his  hands,  and  it  is  a
remarkable  fact  that  one  of  those  letters  gives  a  detailed  account
of  the  burning  of  the  Jesuit  books.'

Evidence  of  another  kind  tends  not  less  clearly  to  identify
Francis  with  Junius.  Junius  maintains  the  somewhat  unusual
combination  of  Court  opinions  on  the  subject  of  American  taxa-
tion with  popular  opinions  about  the  Middlesex  election.  Francis
on  both  points  agreed  with  him.^ The  character  of  Francis  and

'  This  arf^iment  was,  I  believe,  first  ^  Francis, in  a  speech made  in

brought forward in an admirable  1796,  said  that  on  the  American  ques-

essay  in  Herman  Meri vale's  Jlidm-i-  lion  he  adopted  '  tlie  principles  and

cat Studies — a book  of great  inte-  the  language  of  Lord  Chatham,'  and

rest and beauty. See too Parkos  rfjoiced  that  America had  resisted.

and Merivale's Life of  Fraucn, i.  This has been urged as a strong

192-1 '.'G.  argument against the Franciscan

CH.  XT.  WAS FliANCIS 'JUNIUS'?  249

the  apparent  character  of  Junius  were  strikingly  similar.  Mixed
witli  some  real  public  spirit,  we  find  in  both  the  same  disposition
to  carry  into  political  warfare  the  most  rancorous,  inveterate,
and  ungovernable  personal  hatred,  the  same  vein  of  profaneness
and  coarseness,'  the  same  passion  for  concealment  and  disguise.
Francis  from  very  early  years  was  an  anonymous  writer  in  the
press,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  the  period  immediately  preceding
the  Junius  Letters  he  made  Woodfall's  '  Public  Advertiser '  one
of  the  receptacles  of  his  productions.^  As  he  had  been  in  both
the  Foreign  Office  and  the  War  Office,  and  was  on  intimate  terms
with  Calcraft,  who  was  one  of  the  closest  advisers  of  Pitt,  he  had
access  to  means  of  information  denied  to  the  outer  world.  His
intellectual  qualities,  like  his  moral  qualities,  bore  a  manifest  re-
semblance to  those  of  Junius.  He  was  one  of  the  most  fastidious
and  accurate  masters  of  English  of  his  time,^  and  was  even  called
by  Burke  '  the  prince  of  pamphleteers.'  *  Hjs  style,  like  that
of  Junius,  was  terse,  vivid,  and  incisive,  abounding  in  sar-
casm and  in  invective,  full  of  energy  and  brilliancy.  He  had
the  peculiar  gift  of  directness,  which  was  so  conspicuous  in
Junius.  '  Few  men,'  said  Fox  of  him,  '  say  so  much  in  so  few
words.'  '  Ay,  sir,' rejoined  Biu:ke;  '  his  style  has  no  gummy
flesh  about  it.'  ^  A  great  part  of  his  undoubted  writing  ap-
pears to  me  fully  equal  to the bulk  of  Junius,  and  much

theory  {Grenville  Papers,  iii.  p.  xx.),  appeared,  in  the  PuMie  Advertiser
but  it  has  been  completely  overthrown  in  September  1 769,  directed  against
by  the  lAfe  of  Francis,  which  proves  Jmiius  and  signed  Junia.  Junius
that  at  the  time  when  the  letters  of  at  once  answered  in  a  tone  of  coarse
Junius  appeared,  Francis,  like  Junius,  raillery,  urging  that  'since  Junia
adoptedthe  views  of  Grenville,  though  has  adopted  my  name,  she  cannot
he  appears  to  have  abandoned  them  in  common  matrimonial  decency
as  early  as  1776.  In  a  letter  written  refuse  to  make  me  a  tender  of  her
from  India  in  that  year  to  his  friend  person,'  &c.  Two  or  three  days  later,
D'Oyly,  he  speaks  strongly  of  the  it  struck  him  that  this  letter  was 'idle
folly  of  carrying  on  the  war  against  and  improper,'  so  he  wrote  to  Wood-
America,  and  adds,  '  There  was  a  fall  to  insert  a  paragraph  to  the  effect
time  when  I  could  reason  as  logically  that  he  had  'some  reason  to  suspect
and  passionately  as  anybody  against  that  the  last  letter  signed  Junius  in
the  Americans,  but  since  I  have  been  this  paper  was  not  written  by  the  real
obliged  to  study  the  book  of  wisdom,  Junius.' — Woodfall's  Junius,  i.  199  ;
I  have  dismissed  logic  out of  my  iii.  218,  219.

library.' — Parkes  and  Merivale,  i.  10-t—  -  Parkes  and  Merivale,  i.  211,  212.

108,  250.  3  ggg  Lord  Brougham's  sketch  of

'  The  great  coarseness  with  which  Francis  in  his  Statesmen  of  Qeorge

Junius  writes  about  women  has  been  III.

often  noticed,  and  it  gave  rise  to  a  *  Parkes  and  Merivale,  ii.  206.

very  cliaracteristic  episode. A  letter  *  Ibid.  ii.  257.

250  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  .m.

superior  to  the  miscellaneous  letters,  though  it  perhaps  never
rises  to  the  excellence  of  the  best  passages  in  the  former.  If
Francis  was  not  Junius,  few  critics  will  deny  that  he  was  one  of
the  best  of  his  imitators.  He  was  still  alive  when  the  volume
of  Taylor  was  published,  and  his  conduct  with  reference  to  it
was  very  remarkable.  A  few  words  of  direct  denial  would  have
gone  a  long  way  towards  silencing  inquiry  ;  but  if  Francis  ever
appeared  to  deny  the  authorship,  it  was  always  in  terms  that
were  carefully  equivocal.  His  first  gift  to  his  wife  after  his
second  marriage  was  an  edition  of  Junius  ;  and  he  left  her  as
a  posthumous  present,  a  copy  of  '  Junius  Identified,'  which  was
found  sealed  up  and  dii-ected  to  her  in  his  bureau.  Whether
truly  or  falsely,  it  is  quite  evident,  from  his  whole  conduct,  that
he  desired,  without  committing  himself  to  any  positive  assertion,
to  convey  to  her  mind  that  he  was  the  author  of  '  Junius.'  Many
men  might  have  amused  themselves  with  giving  their  wives
falsely  such  an  impression  during  their  lifetime ;  very  few
would  have  taken  measures  to  prolong  the  comedy  after  their
death.^

No  one  of  these  considerations  can,  I  think,  be  regarded  as
absolutely  conclusive ;  but  their  combined  force  is  very  great.
Some  others  of  minor  importance  have  been  adduced.  Such
are,  the  numerous  peculiarities  of  phrase  or  spelling  that  have
been  found  in  both  Francis  and  Junius  ;  the  apparent  regard
and  even  tenderness  of  Junius  for  Woodfall,  who  had  been  a
schoolfellow  of  Francis,  and  his  anxious  inquiry  whether  he  did
not  suspect  the  authorship ;  the  very  curious  excisions  in  the
fragmentary  autobiography  of  Francis,  which  seem  as  though
the  author  were  anxiously  endeavouring  to  erase  every  clue  to
some  great  secret.  It  has  been  noticed  that  Junius  never
attacked  Lord  Holland,  who  had  been  so  closely  connected  with
Bute,  and  who  was  one  of  the  most  unpopular  men  in  England.
In  one  of  his  private  letters  he  said,  '  I  wish  Lord  Holland
may  acquit  himself  with  honour.'  In  another  letter  he  speaks
of  himself  as  having  '  designedly  spared  Lord  Holland  and
his  family ; '  and  this  forbearance  has  been  explained  by  the
fact  that  the  father  of  Francis  was  domestic  chaplain  to  Lord

'  See  the  curious  letter  of  Lady  a  few  additional  reminiscences  (jf
Francis  to  Lord  Carapbcll,  in  Camp-  Lady  Francis  in  Parkcs  and  Mcrivalc.
bell's  Clia7ictil(»-H,  "iii 211-2  U;  and

CH.  XI.  WAS  FRANCIS 'JUNIUS'?  251

Holland,  and  that  Philip  Francis  obtained  his  first  appointment
by  his  influence.  Too  much  stress,  however,  appears  to  me  to
have  been  laid  on  this  argument,  for  Holland  had  retired  from
active  politics  before  Junius  began  to  write.  Francis,  if  he  was
indeed  Junius,  had  certainly  no  hesitation  in  attacking  his  bene-
factors ;  and  the  autobiography  of  Francis  shows  that  before
the  appearance  of  the  Letters  of  Junius  both  father  and  son
resented  bitterly  what  they  considered  the  inadequacy  of  the
rewards  they  had  received  from  Lord  Holland.*  Another
common  argument,  which  is,  I  think,  absolutely  worthless,  is
derived  from  the  fact  that  Francis  was  by  birth  and  parentage
an  Irishman,  The  interest  and  sympathy  which  Junius  showed
in  Irish  affairs,  and  also  a  few  expressions  which  are  of  Irish
origin,  have  been  assumed  to  point  to  an  Irish  writer.^  Francis
may  have  derived  these  expressions  from  his  father,  who  had
lived  long  in  Ireland ;  but  he  himself  left  his  native  country
when  he  was  not  ten  years  old,  and  did  not  revisit  it  till  long
after  the  period  of  the  letters  of  Junius.

Still  the  cumulative  weight  of  the  evidence  pointing  to
Francis  is  extremely  great,  though  it  is,  perhaps,  too  much  to
say  that  it  places  the  case  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt.  His
life  has  been  minutely  investigated  without  discovering  a  single
fact  which  is  absolutely  incompatible  with  his  claim,  while  the
most  decisive  evidence  can  be  adduced  agfainst  the  chief  rival
claimants  who  have  been  named.  All  legal  authorities  seem
agreed  that  Junius  was  not  a  lawyer ;  and  if  this  be  true,  one
large  class  of  competitors  is  at  once  removed.^ The  number  of

'  Parkes  and  Merivale,  i.  360, 361.  the  fact  that  '  Philip  Francis  was  born

Hayward's  Move  about  Junins.  and  passed  the  first  ten  years  of  his

"  The  most  remarkable  is  his  em-  life  within  a  walk  of  Luttrellstown  '

ployment  of the term '  collegian,'  {Hist,  of  England,  ch.  xvii.). I  quite

which  is  used  at  Dublin  University  agree  with  Mr.  Hayward  {More  about

(where  Dr.  Francis  received  his  edu-  Junius,  pp.  57,  58)  that  this  argument

cation).  A  few  other  expressions  have  is  worthless. Eesidence in  a great

been  collected  in  Prior'sZ?yi;^/'i/iir7^e,  town like Dublin is not likely  to

and  in  Coventry's  Junius,  but  they  are  give  much  knowledge  of  families  liv-

not  very  decisive. Great  stress  has  ing  seven  miles  away. Francis  left

been  laid  upon  the  language  in  which  Dublin  when  he  was  a  child,  and  in  a

Junius spoke of  Luttrell. 'He  has  fiercely  contested  election  every  family

degraded  even  the  name  of  Luttrell,'  scandal  that  could  be  raked  up  against

•  A  family  on  which  nature  seems  to  the  unpopular  candidate  was"  sure  to

have  entailed  a  hereditary  baseness  become  known.

of  disposifioTi.' Macaulay  saj-s  that  ^  Several  writers  on  the  subject

to the great majority of  English  are  very confident that they can

readers  such  language  must  have  been  also  prove  (chiefly  by  Junius'B  great

tmintelligible,  and  he  explains  it  by  anxiety  that  the  galleries  of  the  House

252  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xi,

persons  who  possessed  tLe  kind  of  official  knowledge  which  he
exhibited  was  not  large,  and  every  rival  claim  has  either  been
met  by  some  insuperable  objection,  or  has  fallen  from  want
of  positive  support.  The  evidence  pohiting  to  Francis  has  been
continually  growing,  and  it  may  be  safely  atfirmed  that  no
material  or  intellectual  objection  to  the  theory  of  his  author-
ship can  be  sustained.

The  moral  objections,  however,  to  the  Franciscan  theory  are
real  and  serious;  and  anyone  who  adopts  that  theory  must  be
prepared  to  admit  that  Junius  was  a  much  less  honourable  man
than  some  writers  have  supposed.  He  must  be  prejiared  to  ad-
mit that  he  was  capable,  under  the  impulse  of  personal  or  poli-
tical resentment,  of  attacking  with  savage  ferocity  men  who
had  been  his  benefactors  or  the  benefactors  of  his  family,  and
with  whom  he  had  lived  on  terms  of  friendship.  He  must  be
prepared  to  admit  that  he  was  equally  capable  of  accepting  great
favours  from  men  whom  as  an  anonymous  writer  he  had  been
holding  up  to  the  execration  of  the  nation,  and  of  associating
with  them  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship.  The  father  of
Philip  Francis  had  been  one  of  the  writers  in  the  service  of
Bute,  and  the  King  had  given  him  a  living,  a  chaplaincy,  an
English  and  an  Irish  pension.  Sir  William  Draper  was  an  inti-
mate friend  of  the  fomily,  and  was  in  close  correspondence  with
the  elder  Francis  at  the  time  when  Junius  was  pursuing  him
with  his  most  cutting  attacks.  Garrick  was  also  a  friend  of
his  father,  who  had  dedicated  to  him  a  play.  It  may,  indeed,
be  said  in  extenuation  that  Francis  hatl  adopted  opposite  poli-
tics from  his  father;  that  he  was  only  drawn  reluctantly  and  in
self-defence  into  a  controversy  with  Draper;  that  he  suspected
Garrick  of  making  iiK[uiries  into  a  secret  which  it  was  of  vital
importance  to  him  to  preserve.  ]5ut  what  can  be  said  of  his
wanton  attack  upon  "NVelbore  Ellis,  to  whom  1^'rancis  partly  owed
his  situation  in  the  War  Office,  with  whom  he  was  long  after
on  terms  of  intimate  friendship,  and  whom  Junius  described  as
*  the  most  contemptible  little  piece  of  machinery  in  the  whole

of  Parliament  should be opened  to  of  any  real  value  on  tlie  matter. See,

Btranf,'orri  on  particular nif^lits)  that  however.  Junius Tdriitificd,  pp.  130-

he  was  not  a  member  of  cither  I  louse  13.'{. Parkes  and Merivale, ii. 532,

of  Parliament,  but  I  confes.s  that  to  my  533.
own  mind  there  appears  no  evidence

CH.  XI.  WAS FRANCIS 'JUNIUS'?  253

kingdom'?  What,  above  all,  can  be  said  of  bis  attack  upon
Calcraft,  of  wbom  Junius  writes  that  he  'riots  in  the  plunder
of  the  ar?ny,  and  has  only  determined  to  be  a  patriot  wlion
he  could  not  be  a  peer'?  Nearly  two  years  before  this  attack
the  elder  PVancis  had  described  Calcraft  to  his  son  as  '  the
man  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  all  your  happiness,  and  for
almost  all  I  myself  enjoy.'  He  was  the  warmest,  the  most
intimate  friend  of  Philip  Francis,  and  he  had  laboured  strenu-
ously to  secure  his  promotion  at  the  War  Office.  Until  the
death  of  Calcraft  in  1772,  Francis  continued  in  close  friend-
ship with  him.  By  a  codicil  to  his  will  Calcraft  left  him  a
legacy  of  1,000?.,  with  an  annuity  of  250?.  for  his  wife,  and
charged  his  executors  to  bring  Francis  into  ParKament.^  The
case  of  Lord  Barrington  is  little  less  striking.  "VVe  have  seen
the  unmeasured  ferocity  with  which  Junius,  under  other  names,
assailed  that  nobleman  at  the  time  of  the  appointment  of
Chamier  ;  and  it  is  certain,  on  the  Franciscan  theory,  that
Francis  then  considered  himself  bitterly  aggrieved,  though  it
appears  from  his  letters  that  he  parted  from  Barrington  on
terms  of  perfect  civility,  and  that  he  professed  to  his  friends  that
he  left  the  War  Office  at  his  own  wish.  He  appetirs,  however,
soon  to  have  found  that  Barrington  had  no  real  ill-will  towards
him.  A  little  more  than  two  years  after  the  letters  of  Veteran
had  appeared,  Francis  solicited  an  Indian  appointment  of
1 0,000/.  a  year  from  Lord  North,  the  favourite  minister  of  the
King,  and  he  obtained  it  at  the  special  recommendation  of
Tjord  Barrington,-  with  whom  he  ever  after  was  on  terms  of
warm  friendship.^  It  may  be  added  that  when,  in  1787,  he
was  accused  of  acting  dishonourably  in  accepting  the  position  of
manager  in  the  impeachment  of  his  personal  enemy  Warren
Hastings,  he  publicly  defended  himself  by  declaring  that  he
had  consulted  and  obtained  the  approval  of  Sir  W.  Draper,
than  whom  '  there  could  not  be  a  stricter  or  more  scrupulous
judge  of  points  of  honour.'  *

'  See  on  tlie  relations  of  Francis  to  him,  he  vn-ote  the  handsomest  and

to  Calcraft,  Parkes  and  Men  vale,  i.  strongest letter imaginable in my

282-2SS.  favour  to  Lord  North. Other  interests

*  In  his  fragment  of  autobiography  contributed,  but  I  owe  my  success  to

he  says,  speaking  of  his  Indian  ap-  Lord  Barrington.' — Parkes  and  Meri-

pointment,  '  Barrington  was  gone  to  vale,  i.  324.  32.5.
Court. I  saw  him  the  next  morning.  '  Ibid.  pp.  32S-330.

As  soon  as  I  had  e.xplainea  everything  *  Ibid.  p.  227.

254  ENGLAND IN THE KIGIITEENTH CENT[JRY.  cii.  xi.

The  picture  is  not  an  edifying,  some  have  contended  that  it  is
not  a  possible,  one.  With  this  view  I  cannot  concur.  Of  all  the
professions  that  have  grown  up  under  the  conditions  of  moderr
society,  anonymous  writing  is  perhaps  that  in  which  it  is  most
difficult  to  maintain  a  high  standard  of  honour,  for  it  is  that  in
which  dishonourable  acts  may  be  committed  with  the  greatest
impunity.  The  organ  which  throws  the  blaze  of  pubhcity  on
all  around  may  be  itself  an  asylum  of  impenetrable  secrecy,  and
the  power  of  writing  without  fear  of  detection  attracts  many
who  would  once  have  found  a  congenial  sphere  for  their  talents
in  the  baser  forms  of  political  conspiracy  and  intrigue.  An
anonymous  press  enables  such  men  to  strike  in  the  dark  with-
out fear  and  without  shame,  to  gratify  private  malice  under  the
mask  of  public  duty,  to  spread  abroad  calumnious  falsehoods
and  venomous  insinuations  without  incurring  the  risk  or  the
discredit  of  exposure,  to  follow  the  impulses,  passions,  or  in-
terests of  the  hour  without  regard  either  to  their  past  or  to  their
future.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  there  was  anything  ic
the  character  either  of  Junius  or  of  Francis  to  render  it  impos-
sible that  they  should  abuse  this  power  to  the  utmost.  If  the.
letters  of  Poplicola  and  of  Antisejanus  have  been  rightly  attri-
buted to  Junius,  we  must  believe  that  in  1767,  when  he  sus-
pected Chatham  of  subservience  to  Bute,  he  denounced  him  as
*aman  piu-ely  and  perfectly  bad,'  'a  traitor,'  and  'a  villain,'
worthy  of  the  Tarpeian  Rock  or  of  a  gibbet  • '  that  a  few  months
later,  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  a  pol^iical  end,  he  WTote
])rivately  to  him  expressing  the  '  sentiment  of  respect  and  vene-
ration '  he  had  '  always '  entertained  for  his  character,'^  and  that
he  afterwards  made  him  the  subject  of  his  warmest  public
eulogy.  Even  apart  from  this  episode  the  facts  which  have  been
stated  in  the  last  few  pages  are  surely  sufficient  to  show  how
little  Junius  can  be  regarded  as  a  man  of  scruples,  truthfulness,

'  Wofxlfall's  Junius, ii.  45l-4fi7.  horse  of  a  stallion ;  to  shake  hands

The  following  passa;,'e  in  a  letter  of  with  a  ycotchraan  at  the  Ijawird  of

Antisejanus  is  eminently  in  the  stj'le  catching all his infamy; to fipht

of  Junius. 'I will  not  censure  him  under  iiis  auspices  against  the  Consii-

for  tlie  avarice  of  a  pension,  nor  the  tution,  and  to  receive,  tlic  word  from

mclannhrply  ambition  of  a  title.  These  him,  prero<,'ative,  and  a  thistle  (hy  the

were  oiijfcls  which  he  perliaps looked  once  respected name of  Pilt);  it  is

up  to,  tiiough  ih''  rest  of  the  world  even  below  contempt.' — P.  4(>7.
thought  them  far  beneath  his  accept-  *  C'hatfiam Corrcsj/oudence,iu. ^02-

ance. But  to  become  the  stalking-  305.

m.  XI.  CHARACTER OF  FRANCIS.  2.55

or  honour.  And  if  we  turn  to  the  acknowledgod  writings  of
Francis  the  probability  is  greatly  strengthened.  No  single  fact
is  more  conspicuous  in  the  character  of  Francis  than  the  manner
ill  which  he  continually  quarrelled  with  those  from  whom  he  had
received  benefits,  and  his  writings  are  full  of  disparaging  and
injurious  remarks  about  men  with  whom  he  had  lived  on  terms  of
the  closest  intimacy,  and  to  whom  he  should  have  been  bound  by
strong  ties  of  gratitude.'  The  most  powerful  moral  objection  to
the  Franciscan  authorship  of  Junius  is  the  attack  upon  Calcraft.
At  the  time  it  was  penned  Francis  was  in  close  intimacy  with
Calcraft,  but  he  could  not  yet  know  that  touching  proof  of  the
fidelity  of  his  friendship  which  was  furnished  by  his  will.  But
long  after  Calcraft  was  in  his  grave  Francis  wrote  the  fragment  of
autobiography  which  has  been  discovered  among  his  papers,  and
the  following  are  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  man  who
was  his  constant  benefactor,  and  who  was  supposed  to  have  been
his  warmest  friend.  *  Calcraft  undoubtedly  owed  his  rapid  for-
tune to  j\Ir.  Fox's  patronage.  He  was  the  son  of  an  attorney
at  Grantham,  and  went  to  London  literally  to  seek  his  fortune.
At  the  age  of  six  and  forty  he  had  a  landed  estate,  the  rent-roll
of  which  was  above  10,000Z.  a  year.  In  his  quarrel  with  Lord
Holland  I  think  he  had  as  much  reason  on  his  side  as  an  in-
terested man  can  have  for  deserting  an  old  friend  and  bene-
factor. There  was  not  virtue  in  either  of  them  to  justify  their
quarrelling.  If  either  of  them  had  had  common  honesty  he
could  never  hav^.  been  the  friend  of  the  other.'  ^

The  great  progress  of  the  Press,  both  in  literary  merit  and
in  political  importance,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  charac-
teristics of  the  period  we  are  reviewing.  Within  ten  years  of  the
publication  of  the  letters  of  Junius,  three  newspapers  which
played  a  considerable  political  part  long  after  the  Eeform  Bill

'  The  following  is  the  testimony  with  some  nnfricndly  or  contemptu-
cf  Merivale  on  this  subject.  '  One  ous  notice,  some  insinnated  or  pro-
friend,  supporter,  patron,  and  col-  nounced  aspersion,  unerrateful  at  best,
league  after  another— Kinnonl,  Chat-  but  treacherous  also,  if,  as  has  been
ham,  Robert  Wood,  Calcraft,  D'Oyly,  already  conjectm-ed,  he  meant  those
Clavering,  Fowke,  Coote,  Fox,  the  records  to  be  known  some  day  to  the
Prince  of  Wales  -those  who  had  world.' — Parkes  and  Merivale,  ii.  415,
wished  well to  him,  defended  him,  416.

showered  benefits  on  him.  appear  at  *  Parkes  and  Merivale,  i.  359.

last  in his  written  records  branded

256  ENGLAND IN  TUE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

of  1832  were  called  into  existence.  The  *  Morning  Chronicle'
was  established  in  1770,  the  'Morning  Post' in  1772,  and  the
*  Morning  Herald'  in  1780.*  The  great  interest  excited  by  the
judgments  of  Mansfield,  and  by  the  Press  cases  which  he  de-
cided, is  said  to  have  first  led  to  the  publication  in  newspapers
of  full  legal  reports.^  Soon  after,  John  Bell,  the  proprietor  of
the  '  "World  '  and  of  the  '  Morning  Post,'  introduced  newspaper
dramatic  criticism,  and  newspapers  began  to  send  their  regular
reporters  to  the  pit.^  In  1776  Lord  North  raised  the  stamp
from  Id.  to  l^d.,  but  the  measure  does  not  appear  to  have
seriously  impeded  the  progress  of  the  Press.  In  1777  there
were  no  less  than  seventeen  papers  published  in  London,  seven
of  which  were  daily,  and  in  the  following  year  appeared  John-
son's '  Sunday  Monitor,'  the  first  Sunday  paper  in  England.'*

But  the  most  important  fact  in  this  period  of  newspaper
history  was  the  virtual  conquest  of  t,he  right  of  parliamentary
reporting.  AVilliam  Woodfall,  a  relative  of  the  printer  of  the
'  Public  Advertiser,'  had  paid  great  attention  to  the  subject
of  reporting,  and  full  reports  of  the  more  important  speeches
were  becoming  common  in  the  newspapers.  These  reports
were  distinctly  contrary  to  a  standing  order  of  the  House.
As  might  be  expected  from  the  manner  in  which  they  were
composed  they  were  very  inaccurate  and  very  partial,  and
they  were  in  some  respects  much  more  audacious  than  those
which  had  excited  so  much  parliamentary  indignation  in  the
last  reign.  They  were  no  longer  confined  to  the  recess  of
Parliament,  but  appeared  when  the  members  were  still  sitting.
The  names  were  sometimes  given  without  disguise,  and  often
indicated  by  grossly  scurrilous  nicknames.  At  the  same  time
the  irritation  of  the  country  against  the  House  and  the  desire
(o  make  the  proceedings  of  the  representatives  amenable  to
criticism  were  so  great  that  it  was  dangerous  to  interfere  with
them.  The  City  politicians  resolved  to  make  tliis  the  next
subject  of  dispute,  and  for  the  last  time  Ilorne  and  Wilkes  co-
operated in  the  struggle.

'Wright's  House  of  Hanover,  ii.  tnoFootc's  J?anJ,'riij>t;  AnAvcws' Hist.

873.  of  Journalum,  i.  11K5.
*  Campbell's  Life  of  Man xf  eld.  *  Andrews,  i.  220.

■  Foote's  Worhs,  i.  xlv-xlvi. See

on.  XI.  PROCEEDINGS  AGAINST  THE  PRINTERS.  257

It  was  in  February  1771  that  Colonel  George  Onslow
brought  before  the  House  a  complaint  that  two  printers  had
misrepresented  the  speeches  and  reflected  on  several  members
of  the  House.  The  case  was  very  flagrant,  for  Onslow  himself
had  been  designated  as  '  little  cocking  George,' '  the  little  scoun-
drel,' and  '  that  paltry,  insignificant  insect,'  but  the  dangers  of
a  new  conflict  at  this  time  were  so  great  that  even  the  King,
though  violently  oj^posed  to  all  parliamentary  reporting,  re-
commended great  caution,^  and  the  same  language  was  held  by
several  leaders  of  the  Opposition.  The  House,  however,  ordered
the  ofifending  printers  to  be  taken  into  custody ;  and  as  the  Ser-
geant proved  unable  to  execute  the  order,  the  House  addressed
the  King  to  issue  a  proclamation  offering  a  reward  of  501.  for
the  capture  of  either  of  the  delinquents.

The  offence,  however,  still  continued,  and  on  the  12th  of
March  Onslow  brought  in  a  new  motion  for  proceeding  against
six  other  printers  who  had  been  guilty  of  it.  It  was  deter-
mined to  put  down  absolutely  the  practice  of  parliamentary
reporting,  and  to  declare  open  war  with  the  Press.  A  few
members,  however,  of  the  Rockingham  and  Chatham  connec-
tions argued  strenuously  against  this  course,  and  although
they  were  soon  shown  to  be  an  inconsiderable  minority  they  re-
fused to  desist.  Probably  for  the  first  time  in  English  parlia-
mentary history  the  forms  of  the  House  were  employed  for  the
purpose  of  systematic  obstruction.  By  repeated  amendments
and  motions  of  adjournment  the  debate  was  protracted  till  past
four  in  the  morning,  and  the  House  was  compelled  to  divide
twenty-three  times.-  At  last  the  majority  triumphed.  The  six
printers  were  ordered  to  attend,  and  the  House  was  committed
to  a  struggle  with  the  Press.

Of  the  eight  printers  who  were  now  under  the  ban  of  the
House,  one  was  already  in  custody  by  order  of  the  House  of
Lords.  A  property  case  in  which  Lord  Pomfret  was  defendant
had  recently  been  carried  on  appeal  before  that  House,  and
owing  probably  to  the  social  position  of  the  defendant,  the  lay
lords,  instead  of  leaving  the  matter  to  the  legal  members,  had

' Correspondence of  George  III. 63. The  minorities  ranged  from  55
and  Lord  North,  i.  57,  58.  to  10,  and  the  majorities  from  143  to

-  Annual  Begister,  1771,  pp.  62, 70.

VOL.  III.  S

258  ENGLAl^D IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xt.

very  scandalously  taken  part  in  the  division.  Lord  Pomfret
was  in  high  favour  at  Court,  and  accordingly  the  Lords  of
the  Bedchamber  had  voted  in  his  favour.  Woodfidl  and  another
printer  had  censured  their  conduct,  and  for  this  offence  had
been  thrown  into  prison.'  Of  the  other  printers  four  ap-
peared when  summoned  by  the  Commons,  but  Thompson  and
Wheble,  who  were  the  two  printers  first  incriminated,  and
]Miller,  who  was  one  of  the  others,  resolved  to  defy  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  House.  Wilkes  and  Home,  though  now  at  enmity,
appear  to  have  independently  instigated  this  resistance.  On
]March  14  Wheble  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Speaker  inclosing
an  opinion  of  counsel,  and  declaring  that  he  was  resolved  to
'  yield  no  obedience  but  to  the  laws  of  the  land,'  and  next  day
both  Wheble  and  Thompson  were  collusively  arrested  by  fellow-
printers  and  brought  before  two  aldermen  who  were  sitting
separately  to  try  cases.  One  of  these  aldermen  was  Wilkes
himself;  the  other  was  his  brother  politician  Oliver.  Wilkes
and  Oliver  at  once  discharged  the  prisoners  as  guilty  of  no  legal
offence,  and  Wilkes  bound  over  Wheble  to  prosecute  his  captors
for  assault  and  false  imprisonment,  and  he  also  wrote  to  the
Secretary  of  State  informing  him  that  a  man  who  was  charged
with  no  offence  against  the  law  of  the  land  had  been  illegally
arrested  by  virtue  of  a  royal  proclamation,  in  violation  of  the
common  rights  of  Englishmen  as  well  as  of  the  chartered  privi-
leges of  the  City  of  London.  The  two  men  who  had  made  the
arrest  claimed  the  reward  offered  in  the  proclamation,  but  the
Government  being  convinced  that  they  had  acted  on  an  under-
standing with  the  culprits,  refused  to  pay  it.

Nearly  at  the  same  time  a  messenger  of  the  House  of
Commons  attempted  to  arrest  Miller  in  his  own  house,  but
Miller  at  once  sent  for  a  constable  and  gave  the  messenger  into
custody.  Both  parties  were  taken  to  the  IMansion  House,
where  Crosby,  the  Lord  Mayor,  accompanied  by  Wilkes  and
Oliver,  proceeded  to  try  the  case.  The  Deputy-Sergeant-at-
Arms  attended  on  the  part  of  the  Speaker,  and  in  the  name  of
the  House  of  Commons  peremptorily  ordered  that  both  mes-
senger and  printer  should  be  delivered  up  to  him.  The  Lord
Mayor,  in  reply,  asked  whether  the  Speaker's  warrant  by  which
Miller  had  been  arrested  had  been  backed  by  a  City  magistrate.

'  Wiilpolo's  Uenrgr  ITT.  iv.  284-280.

CH.  XI.  RELEASE OF THE I'KINTERS.  259

As  the  answer  was  in  the  negative  he  decided  that  it  was
illegal,  for  the  charters  of  the  City  provided  that  no  warrant,
attachment,  or  process  could  be  executed  within  it  except
by  its  own  magistrates.  The  demand  of  the  Deputy-Sergeant
was  refused.  Miller  was  discharged  from  custody,  and  the  mes-
senger of  the  House  of  Commons  was  committed  to  prison,  but
admitted  to  bail  on  his  own  application.

It  was  quite  evident  that  another  conflict  of  the  most
embarrassing  nature  had  arisen.  The  royal  proclamation  which
was  issued  to  support  a  standing  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,
was  of  very  doubtful  legality,  and  a  serious  conflict  had  sprung
up  between  the  jurisdiction  of  the  House  and  the  jurisdiction
of  the  City.  The  right  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  enforce
its  own  standing  order  against  reporting  by  committing  those
who  refused  to  obey  it,  cannot  reasonably  be  disputed,  but  it
had  unexpectedly  come  into  collision  with  another  jurisdiction,
which  the  Lord  Mayor  was  bound  by  his  oath  of  office  to  pro-
tect. The  excitement  produced  by  the  iNliddleaex  election  had
not  yet  subsided,  and  the  House  of  Commons  found  itself  again
confronted  by  an  agitator  of  whose  singular  audacity  and
address  it  had  already  ample  experience.  At  the  same  time  it  was
now  impossible  to  recede.  The  printers  whose  arrest  had  been
ordered  were  at  large,  and  the  '  Society  for  the  Support  of  the
Bill  of  Eights  '  voted  each  of  them  lOOl.  for  having  '  appealed
to  the  law  of  the  land,  and  not  betrayed  by  submission  the
rights  of  Englishmen.'  The  messenger  of  the  House  of  Commons
was  threatened  with  prosecution  for  having  obeyed  the  orders  of
the  House,  and  he  would  have  been  in  prison  had  he  not  reluc-
tantly consented  to  give  bail.  The  King  wrote  indignantly  to
Tjord  North  that  the  '  authority  of  the  House  of  Commons  is
totally  annihilated  if  it  is  not  in  an  exemplary  manner  supported
to  morrow  by  instantly  committing  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Alder-
man Oliver  to  the  Tower.'  '  As  to  Wilkes,'  he  added,  '  he  is
below  the  notice  of  the  House,'  and  he  showed  an  amusingly
significant  and  sagacious  wish  to  separate  him,  if  possible,  from
the  proceedings  against  his  coadjutors.'

'  Letters  of  Ocorge  III.  to  Lord  into  prison  for  debt,  if  some  measure
North,  i  64-67.  He  said  very  was  not  speedily  taken  to  revive  his
shrewdly  that  Wilkes  must  soon  get popularity.

8  2

260  ENGLAND IN TEE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xi.

The  Lord  Mayor  and  Oliver,  who  were  members  of  the
House,  were  successively  ordered  to  attend  in  their  places,  and
Wilkes  at  the  Bar  of  the  House.  Wilkes  at  once  wrote  a
reply,  declaring  that  he  was  the  legitimate  member  for  Mid-
dlesex, that  he  was  ready  to  attend  in  his  place  in  Parliament,
but  that  he  absolutely  refused  to  appear  at  the  Bar.  The  Lord
Mayor  and  Oliver  duly  attended,  and  the  former  defended  him-
self with  great  dignity  and  simplicity,  alleging  his  oath  of
office  which  obliged  him  to  preserve  inviolate  the  franchises  of
the  City,  the  charters  of  the  City  which  secured  the  citizens
from  any  law  process  being  served  upon  them  except  by  their
own  officers,  and  the  confirmation  of  those  charters  by  Act  of
Parliament.  The  House,  as  usual,  speedily  put  itself  in  the
wrong.  The  arrest  and  bailing  of  the  messenger  was  the
grievance  which  was  most  sensibly  felt,  and  the  Lord  Mayor's
clerk  was  accordingly  commanded  to  attend  with  the  book
of  minutes,  and  by  order  of  the  House  the  recognizance  of
the  messenger  of  the  House  was  erased.  The  conduct  of  the
House  of  Commons  in  thus  expunging  by  its  sole  authority
a  judicial  record  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  the  ordinary
course  of  the  law,  was  justly  designated  by  Chatham  as  '  the
act  of  a  mob  and  not  of  a  senate,'  and  most  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  Opposition  protested  against  it  by  leaving  the
House.  The  House  at  the  same  time  ordered  that  the
threatened  prosecution  of  the  messenger  should  not  be  pro-
ceeded with.  It  had  no  right  or  power  to  take  such  a  course,
and  accordingly  the  messenger  was  duly  indicted,  and  only  saved
by  the  nolle  prosequi  of  the  Attorney-General.  The  House
granted,  after  long  discussion  and  vacillation,  the  demand  of
the  Lord  Mayor  to  be  heard  by  counsel,  but  added  the  con-
dition that  nothing  must  be  said  against  the  privileges  of  the
House,  which,  as  the  sole  question  at  issue  was  the  extent  of
these  privileges,  rendered  the  concession  a  palpable  mockery.

Junius  lost  no  time  in  summing  up  the  proceedings  of  the
Commons  with  his  usual  felicitous  terseness.  '  In  their  first
resolutions  [against  the  printers]  it  is  possible  that  they  might
have  been  deceived  by  ill-considered  precedents.  For  the  rest
there  is  no  colour  of  palliation  or  excuse.  They  have  advised
the  King  to  resume  a  power  of  dispensing  with  the  laws  by

CH.  XI.  RENEWED KIOTS.  261

royal  proclamation,  and  kings,  we  see,  are  ready  enough  to
follow  such  advice.  By  mere  violence,  and  without  the  shadow
of  right,  they  have  expunged  the  record  of  a  judicial  proceed-
ing. Nothing  remained  but  to  attribute  to  their  own  vote  a
power  of  stopping  the  whole  distribution  of  criminal  and  civil
justice.'^  The  illness  of  the  Lord  Mayor  caused  some  delay  in
the  proceedings  of  the  House,  and  in  the  meantime  the  strong
popular  feeling  was  clearly  shown.  The  horses  of  the  Lord
Mayor's  carriage  were  again  and  again  taken  off,  and  his  car-
riage was  drawn  by  an  enthusiastic  populace  who  thronged  the
streets  wherever  he  passed,  invaded  the  lobbies  of  the  House
of  Commons,  and  repeated  all  the  scenes  of  riot  which  had  so
lately  followed  the  JNIiddlesex  election.  The  carriages  of  several
of  the  leading  supporters  of  the  Ministry  were  attacked  and
broken ;  Lord  North  very  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life,
and  the  King  was  hissed  in  the  streets.  The  Lord  Mayor  and
Oliver  were  at  length  committed  to  the  Tower,  but  their
residence  there  was  one  continued  triumph.  Addresses  ex-
pressing admiration  for  their  conduct  poured  in  from  every
side.  The  leading  members  of  the  Opposition,  in  a  procession
of  sixteen  carriages,  went  to  the  Tower  to  visit  them.  A  great
mob,  attended  by  a  hearse,  beheaded  and  burnt  on  Tower
Hill  figures  representing  the  Princess  Dowager,  Lord  Bute,
and  the  leading  opponents  of  the  printers  in  both  Houses ;  and
when  at  length,  after  six  weeks'  detention,  the  Lord  Mayor  and
OHver  were  released  by  the  prorogation,  they  were  saluted  by
twenty-one  cannon  belonging  to  the  Artillery  Company,  and
escorted  to  the  Mansion  House  by  an  immense  crowd  of  en-
thusiastic admirers.  That  night  London  was  illuminated,  and
the  windows  of  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons  were
broken  by  the  mob.

The  most  significant  part,  however,  of  the  transaction  was
the  manner  in  which  the  House  of  Commons  cowered  before
Wilkes.  He  had  lost  no  opportunity  of  defying  it,  and  he  was
the  soul  of  the  whole  movement  of  opposition.  Three  times
the  House  summoned  him  to  appear  at  the  Bar,  and  three
times  he  disobeyed.  At  last  the  House  put  an  ignominious
end  to  the  contest  by  ordering  him  to  attend  on  a  day  when

'  Wooclfairs  Junius,  ii.  219,  2l'0,

2G2  ENGLAND IN TIIK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

it  was  itself  adjourned.'  The  printers  meanwhile  remained
at  liberty,  and  from  this  time  reports  of  the  proceedings  of  the
House  of  Commons  were  tacitly  permitted.  In  the  Lords  the
prohibition  was  maintained  a  little  longer,  but  the  example  of
the  Commons  was  soon  silently  followed.  The  nation  was  thus
enabled  systematically  to  study  and  to  judge  the  proceedings
of  its  representatives,  and  the  Press  made  another  gigantic
stride  in  political  importance.

The  growth  of  the  Press  as  a  great  power  in  English  politics
is  perhaps  the  most  momentous  of  all  the  events  of  the  period
we  are  considering.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  it  has  modi-
fied the  poUtical  life  as  profoundly  as  steam  in  the  present
century  has  altered  the  economical  condition  of  England.  Side
by  side  with  the  recognised  Constitution  another  representative
system  has  grown  up,  in  which  the  various  wants,  aspirations,
and  opinions  of  the  nation  are  reflected  with  at  least  equal
accuracy ;  another  debating  organ  in  which  political  questions
are  so  fully  discussed  that  the  debates  of  Parliament  are  fre-
quently little  more  than  its  echo.  On  great  occasions  parlia-
mentary discussion  is  usually  more  searching  and  complete
than  discussion  in  the  newspapers,  but  on  most  minor  questions
the  palm  of  superiority  must,  I  think,  be  conceded  to  the  latter.
Of  all  the  instruments  which  human  wisdom  has  devised,  a  free
Press  is  the  most  eflScacious  in  putting  an  end  to  jobs,  abuses,
political  malversation  and  corruption.  A  public  writer  has
strong  motives  to  expose  these  things,  and  except  in  very  rare
cases  he  has  no  motive  to  conceal  them.  They  wither  beneath
the  blaze  of  publicity  which  is  thrown  on  all  the  details  of
administration,  on  the  discontents  and  grievances  of  every  class
of  the  community.  The  newspaper  press  not  only  reflects  the
many  phases  and  modifications  of  public  opinion,  it  also  gives
it  an  irresistible  volume  and  momentum.  Organising,  directing,
intensifying,  and  sometimes  creating  it,  bringing  the  ablest
leaders  speedily  to  the  surface,  adding  immensely  to  the  facili-
ties of  co-operation,  difi'using  the  popular  arguments  with  vm-
paralleled  rapidity  and  over  an  enormous  area,  repeating  them
day  by  day  till  they  have  become  familiar  to  all  classes,  and

'  Pari  nist.  xv'j.  164.

CH.  XI.  INFLUENCE OF THE PEESS.  263

watching  with  an  unceasing  vigilance  the  smallest  encroach-
ment of  power,  it  has  strengthened  immeasurably  the  spirit
and  resources  of  liberty,  and  has  made  dangers  which  once  ap-
peared very  imminent  wholly  chimerical.  It  at  the  same  time
makes  it  impossible  for  any  man  of  ordinary  intelligence  to  live
exclusively  the  life  of  a  class  or  of  a  province.  It  brings  before
him  with  some  degree  of  vividness  the  modes  of  life  and
thought  and  reasoning  of  all  classes  of  his  countrymen,  and  on
great  occasions  it  arouses  the  national  passions  with  a  strange
velocity  and  power.  It  is  the  most  efficacious  of  all  means  of
political  education.  Thousands  who  would  scarcely  read  any-
thing else  find  in  it  a  source  of  perpetual  interest.  The  highest
special  knowledge  is  poured  into  its  columns,  and  it  raises
enormously  the  average  of  political  information,  intelligence,
and  capacity.

It  is  difficult  to  over-estimate  these  ser\dces,  and  few  persons
will  deny  that,  in  England  at  least,  they  outweigh  the  evils
which  the  abuses  of  the  Press  have  produced.  Whether  they
do  so  everywhere  is  less  certain,  and  the  magnitude  of  those
evils  is  usually  underrated  by  those  who  judge  exclusively
from  English  experience.  Nowhere  else  in  free  governments
do  we  find  so  large  an  amount  of  power  divorced  from  responsi-
bility. A  very  few  men,  who  are  altogether  unconnected  with  the
official  business  of  the  State,  who  are  personally  unknown  to  the
nation,  whose  position  is  entirely  self-constituted  and  peculiarly
exposed  to  sinister  influences,  often  succeed  in  acquiring  by
the  Press  a  greater  influence  than  most  responsible  statesmen.
They  constitute  themselves  the  mouthpiece  and  the  representa-
tives of  the  nation,  and  they  are  often  accepted  as  such  through-
out Europe.  They  make  it  their  task  to  select,  classify,  and
colour  the  information,  and  to  supply  the  opinions  of  their
readers ;  and  as  comparatively  few  men  have  the  wish  or  the
time  or  the  power  to  compare  evidence  and  weigh  arguments,
they  dictate  absolutely  the  conclusions  of  thousands.  If  they
cannot  altogether  make  opinion,  they  can  at  least  exaggerate,
bias,  and  inflame  it.  They  can  give  its  particular  forms  a  wholly
factitious  importance ;  and  while  there  are  very  few  fields  of
labour  in  which  the  prolonged  exercise  of  brilliant  talent  produces
so  little  personal  reputation,  there  are  also  very  few  in  which

2()4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi

exceedingly  moderate  abilities  may  exercise  so  wide  an  influence.
Few  things  to  a  reflecting  mind  are  more  curious  than  the  extra-
ordinary weight  which  is  attached  to  the  anonymous  expression
of  political  opinion.  Partly  by  the  illusion  of  the  imagination,
which  magnifies  the  hidden  representative  of  a  great  corpora-
tion— partly  by  the  weight  of  emphatic  assertion,  a  plural  pro-
noun, conspicuous  type,  and  continual  repetition,  unknown  men,
who  would  probably  be  unable  to  induce  any  constituency  to
return  them  to  Parliament,  are  able,  without  exciting  any
surprise  or  sense  of  incongruity,  to  assume  the  language  of
the  accredited  representatives  of  the  nation,  and  to  rebuke,
patronise,  or  insult  its  leading  men  with  a  tone  of  authority
which  would  not  be  tolerated  from  the  foremost  statesmen  of
their  time.  It  was  the  theory  of  the  more  sanguine  among  the
early  free-traders  that  under  the  system  of  unrestricted  competi-
tion all  things  would  rank  according  to  their  real  merils.  In  that
case  the  power  and  popularity  of  a  newspaper  would  depend
mainly  upon  the  accuracy  and  amount  of  its  information,  the
force  of  its  arguments,  the  fidelity  with  which  it  represented
the  dominant  opinion  of  the  nation.  But  anyone  who  will
impartially  examine  the  newspapers  that  have  acquired  the
greatest  circulation  and  influence  in  Europe  and  in  America,
may  easily  convince  himself  of  the  falseness  of  this  theory.
A  knack  of  clever  writing,  great  enterprise  in  bringing  to-
gether the  kind  of  information  which  amuses  or  interests  the
public,  tact  in  catching  and  following  the  first  symptoms  of
change  of  opinions,  a  skilful  pandering  to  popular  prejudice ;
malevolent  gossip,  sensational  falsehood,  coarse  descriptions,
vindictive  attacks  on  individuals,  nations,  or  classes,  are  the
elements  of  which  many  great  newspaper  ascendencies  have
been  mainly  built.  Newspaper  writing  is  one  of  the  most
open  of  all  professions,  but  some  of  the  qualities  that  are  most
successful  in  it  do  not  give  the  smallest  presumption  either  of
moral  worth  or  of  political  competence  or  integrity.

It  is  a  strange  thing,  though  custom  has  made  it  very
familiar,  that  so  large  a  part  of  the  formation  and  represen-
tation of  political  opinion  should  be  a  commercial  speculation.
Many  papers  have  no  doubt  been  set  up  solely  to  advocate  parti-
cular causes  and  interests,  and  have  discharged  their  task  with

CH.  XI.  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PRESS.  265

admirable  disinterestedness  and  integrity.  But  these  are  not
usually  the  papers  which  have  acquired  the  widest  popularity
and  success.  A  newspaper,  as  such,  is  and  must  be  a  commercial
speculation,  with  interests  in  many  respects  coincident,  in  some
respects  directly  clashing  with  the  true  interests  of  the  nation.
Considered  commercially,  its  popularity  is  the  condition  and
the  measure  of  its  success,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  perfect  indif-
ference from  what  source  that  popularity  is  derived.  It  must
write  down  to  the  level  of  its  readers.  Its  business  is  not  to
improve  them  but  to  please  them.  If  a  vicious  style,  if  coarse,
vulgar,  or  immoral  descriptions,  if  personal  slander  or  class
attacks  are  widely  popular,  it  is  the  commercial  interest  of  the
newspaper  to  gratify  the  taste,  and  by  gratifying,  it  immeasur-
ably increases  it.  Day  after  day,  week  after  week,  the  impression
is  deepened,  the  taste  is  strengthened.  No  such  powerful
instrument  as  a  corrupt  Press  has  ever  been  discovered  for
vulgarising  the  national  mind,  for  lowering  the  moral  sense,
for  deepening,  stimulating,  and  perpetuating  class  hatreds  or
national  animosities.  Most  modern  wars  may  be  ultimately
traced  to  national  antipathies  which  have  been  largely  created
by  newspaper  invectives  and  by  the  gross  partiality  of  news-
paper representations.  As  the  writers  have  no  part  in  the
dangers,  while,  by  the  increased  circulation  of  their  papers,
they  reap  a  large  harvest  from  the  excitement  of  war,  they
have  a  direct  interest  in  producing  it.  Wherever  there  is  some
vicious  spot,  some  old  class  hatred,  some  Lingering  provincial
antipathy,  a  newspaper  will  arise  to  represent  and  to  inflame  it.
In  countries  where  class  animosities  are  deep  and  savage,  or
where  the  form  of  government  is  still  unsettled  and  contested,
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile  an  unshackled  Press  with
national  stability  and  security.  The  most  plausible  argument
of  the  opponents  of  national  education  is  the  fact  that  in  many
countries  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  one  of  the  chief  forms  of
reading  of  the  poor  will  consist  of  newspapers  written  for  the
express  purpose  of  playing  upon  their  most  odious  passions.

It  was  one  of  the  felicities  of  English  history  that  the
Press  only  rose  to  great  political  importance  when  the  troubles
of  a  disputed  succession  had  completely  subsided  ;  and  although
it  is  impossible  to  feel  much  respect  for  those  who  conducted  it

•266  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xi.

in  the  days  of  Wilkes  and  of  Junius,  they  undoubtedly  rendered
a  most  important  service  to  their  country.  In  the  early  years  of
George  III.,  and  especially  about  the  year  1770,  there  was  grave
danger  that  under  the  system  of  parliamentary  government  the
Crown  would  regain  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  power  it  had  lost  by
the  Revolution.  The  Opposition  was  broken,  divided,  defeated.
The  King  and  the  King's  friends  had  succeeded  in  disintegrating
the  old  parties  in  the  State,  in  sapping  the  aristocratical  power
which  was  once  the  most  formidable  barrier  to  their  designs,  in
disposing  for  their  own  objects  of  the  vast  fields  of  Government
patronage,  in  forming  a  great  permanent  interest  and  acquiring
an  overwhelming  majority  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  The
Scotch,  the  bishops,  the  numerous  members  of  both  Houses
who  held  Court  offices,  steadily  voted  together,  and  the  ranks
of  the  King's  friends  were  speedily  recruited  by  place-hunters
drawn  from  the  different  connections.  The  elective  system  was
so  corrupt,  the  influence  of  the  Treasury  on  the  boroughs  was
so  great,  the  Government  patronage  was  so  vast  and  so  redun-
dant, that  there  seemed  every  prospect  of  the  continuance  of
their  power.  The  immediate  causes  of  their  defeat  are  to  be
found  chiefly  in  the  growth  of  a  free  Press,  which  gave  a  new
strength  and  energy  to  the  popular  movement  for  reform,  and
in  the  overwhelming  discredit  which  the  disastrous  termination
of  the  American  War  threw  upon  the  ministry  which  had  con-
ducted it.  The  earlier  phases  of  the  American  movement  I
have  already  very  cursorily  indicated.  I  shall  now  proceed"  to
examine  that  movement  in  some  detail,  and  to  estimate  its  vast
and  various  influence  upon  the  fortunes  of  England.

AMERICA AT THE  PEACE OF PARIS.  267

CHAPTER Xn.

AMEKICA, 1763-1776.

At  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  the  thirteen  Araerf-
can  colonies  which  were  afterwards  detached  from  the  English
Crown  contained,  according  to  the  best  computation,  about  a
million  and  a  half  freemen,  and  their  number  probably  slightly
exceeded  two  millions  at  the  time  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence. No  part  of  the  British  Empire  had  gained  so  largely
by  the  late  war  and  by  the  ministry  of  Pitt.  The  expiilsion  of
the  French  from  Canada  and  of  the  Spaniards  from  Florida,  by
removing  for  ever  the  danger  of  foreign  interference,  had  left
the  colonists  almost  absolute  masters  of  their  destinies,  and  had
dispelled  the  one  dark  cloud  which  hung  over  their  future.  Xo
serious  danger  any  longer  menaced  them.  No  limits  could  be
assigned  to  their  expansion.  Their  exultation  was  unbounded,
and  it  showed  itself  in  an  outburst  of  genuine  loyalty.  The
name  of  Pittsburg  given  to  the  fortress  erected  where  Fort
Duquesne  had  once  stood  attested  the  gratitude  of  America  to
the  minister  to  whom  she  owed  so  much.  Massachusetts,  the
foremost  of  the  New  England  States,  voted  a  costly  monument
in  Westminster  Abbey  to  Lord  Howe,  who  had  fiillen  in  the
conquest  of  Canada.  The  Assembly  of  the  same  State  in  a
congratulatory  address  to  the  Governor  declared  that  without
the  assistance  of  the  parent  State  they  must  have  fallen  a  prey
to  the  power  of  France,  that  without  the  compensation  granted
to  them  by  Parliament  the  burdens  of  the  war  would  have  been
insupportable,  that  without  the  provisions  of  the  treaty  of  peace
all  their  successes  would  have  been  delusive.  In  an  address  to
the  King  they  repeated  the  same  acknowledgment,  and  pledged
themselves,  in  terms  to  which  later  events  gave  a strange  sig-

268  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu.  xii.

nificance,  to  demonstrate  their  gratitude  by  every  possible  testi-
mony of  duty  and  loyalty.'

Several  acute  observers  had  already  predicted  that  the
triumph  of  England  would  be  soon  followed  by  the  revolt  of  her
colonies.  I  have  quoted  in  a  former  chapter  the  remarkable
passage  in  which  the  Swedish  traveller,  Kalm,  contended  in
1748  that  the  presence  of  the  French  in  Canada,  by  making
the  English  colonists  depend  for  their  security  on  the  support  of
the  mother-country,  was  the  main  cause  of  the  submission  of  the
colonies.  In  his  '  Notes  upon  England,'  which  were  probably
written  about  1730,  Montesquieu  had  dilated  upon  the  restric-
tive character  of  the  English  commercial  code,  and  had  expressed
his  belief  that  England  would  be  the  first  nation  abandoned  by
her  colonies.  A  few  years  later,  Argenson,  who  has  left  some  of
the  most  striking  political  predictions  upon  record,  foretold  in
his  Memoirs  that  the  English  colonies  in  America  would  one
day  rise  against  the  mother-country,  that  they  would  fonn  them-
selves into  a  republic,  and  that  they  would  astonish  the  world  by
their  prosperity.  In  a  discourse  delivered  before  the  Sorbonne
in  1750  Turgot  compared  colonies  to  fruits  which  only  remain
on  the  stem  till  they  have  reached  the  period  of  maturity,  and
he  prophesied  that  America  would  some  day  detach  herself  from
the  parent  tree.  The  French  ministers  consoled  themselves  for
the  Peace  of  Paris  by  the  reflection  that  the  loss  of  Canada  was
a  sure  prelude  to  the  independence  of  the  colonies  ;  and  Ver-
gennes,  the  sagacious  French  ambassador  at  Constantinople,
predicted  to  an  English  traveller,  with  striking  accuracy,  the
events  that  would  occur.  *  England,'  he  said, '  will  soon  repent
of  having  removed  the  only  check  that  could  keep  her  colonies
in  awe.  They  stand  no  longer  in  need  of  her  protection.  She
will  call  on  them  to  contribute  towards  supporting  the  burdens
they  have  helped  to  bring  on  her,  and  they  will  answer  by
striking  off  all  dependence.'  "^

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Englishmen  were  wholly  blind
to  this  danger.  One  of  the  ablest  advocates  of  the  retention  of
Canada  was  the  old  Lord  Bath,  who  published  a  pamphlet  on

'  Grahame's TRxt.  of  tlie United 1774, p.  101.
Sfafrx,  iv.  91,95. Hutchinson's  Ifltt.  *  Bancroft'.s  Hist,  of  the United

of  Massachusetts Bay  from 1749 to Slates,  i.  525.

cii.  xii. SHOULD  CANADA  BE  RETAINED  ?  269

the  subject  which  had  a  very  wide  influence  and  circulation ; '  but
there  were  a  few  politicians  who  maintained  that  it  would  be
wiser  to  restore  Canada  and  to  retain  Guadaloupe,  with  perhaps
Martinico  and  St.  Lucia.  This  view  was  supported  with  distin-
guished talent  in  an  anonymous  reply  to  Lord  Bath,  which  is
said  to  have  been  written  by  William  Burke,  the  friend  and
kinsman  of  the  great  orator.  Canada,  this  writer  argued,  was  not
one  of  the  original  objects  of  the  war,  and  we  had  no  original  right
to  it.  The  acquisition  of  a  vast,  barren,  and  almost  uninhabited
country,  lying  in  an  inhospitable  climate,  and  with  no  commerce
except  that  of  furs  and  skins,  was  economically  far  less  valuable
to  England  than  the  acquisition  of  Gruadaloupe,  which  was
one  of  the  most  important  of  the  sugar  islands.  Before  the  war
France  had  a  real  superiority  in  the  West  Indies,  and  the  Eng-
lish Caribbean  islands  were  far  more  endangered  by  the  French
possession  of  Gruadaloupe,  than  the  English  American  colonies  by
the  French  possession  of  Canada.  The  latter  danger  was,  indeed,
never  great,  and  by  a  slight  modification  of  territory  and  the  erec-
tion of  a  few  forts  it  might  be  reduced  to  insignificance.  England
in  America  was  both  a  far  greater  continental  and  a  far  greater
naval  Power  than  France,  and  she  had  an  immense  superiority
both  in  population  and  position.  But  in  addition  to  these
considerations,  it  was  urged,  an  island  colony  is  more  advan-
tageous than  a  continental  one,  for  it  is  necessarily  more  de-
pendent upon  the  mother-country.  In  the  New  England  pro-
vinces there  are  already  colleges  and  academies  where  the
American  youth  can  receive  their  education.  America  pro-
duces, or  can  easily  produce,  almost  everything  she  wants.  Her
population  and  her  wealth  are  rapidly  increasing ;  and  as  the
colonies  recede  more  and  more  from  the  sea,  the  necessity  for
their  connection  with  England  will  steadily  diminish.  '  They
will  have  nothing  to  expect,  they  must  live  wholly  by  their  own
labour,  and  in  process  of  time  will  know  little,  inquire  little,
and  care  little  about  the  mother-country.  If  the  people  of  our
colonies  find  no  check  from  Canada  they  will  extend  themselves
almost  without  bounds  into  the  inland  parts.  .  .  .  What  the
consequence  will  be  to  have  a  numerous,  hardy,  independent

'  Letter  to  Two  Great  Men  on  tJie  Prospect  of  Peace.

270  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xn.

people  possessed  of  a  strong  country,  communicating  little  oi
not  at  all  with  England,  I  leave  to  your  own  reflections.  .  .  .
By  eagerly  grasping  at  extensive  territory  we  may  run  the  risk,
and  that  perhaps  in  no  very  distant  period,  of  losing  what  we  now
possess.  The  possession  of  Canada,  far  from  being  necessary  to
our  safety,  may  in  its  consequences  be  even  dangerous.  A
neighbour  that  keeps  us  in  some  awe  is  not  always  the  worst
of  neighbours.  So  far  from  sacrificing  Gruadaloupe  to  Canada,
perhaps  if  we  might  have  Canada  without  any  sacrifice,  we  ought
not  to  desire  it.  .  .  .  There  is  a  balance  of  power  in  America
as  well  as  in  Europe.' '

These  views  are  said  to  have  been  countenanced  by  Lord
Hardwicke,'^  but  the  tide  of  opinion  ran  strongly  in  the  opposite
direction.  Mauduit  as  well  as  Bath  wrote  in  favour  of  the
retention  of  Canada,  and  their  arguments  were  supported  by
Franklin,  who  in  a  remarkable  pamphlet  sketched  the  great  un-
developed capabilities  of  the  colonies,  and  ridiculed  the  'vision-
ary fear'  that  they  could  ever  be  combined  against  England.^
Pitt  was  strongly  on  the  same  side.  The  nation  had  learned  to
look  with  pride  and  sympathy  upon  that  greater  England  which
was  growing  up  beyond  the  Atlantic,  and  there  was  a  desire
which  was  not  ungenerous  or  ignoble  to  remove  at  any  risk  the
one  obstacle  to  its  future  happiness.  It  was  felt  that  the  colo-
nists who  had  contributed  so  largely  to  the  conquest  of  Cape
Breton  had  been  shamefully  sacrificed  at  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-
Chapelle,  when  that  province  was  restored  to  France  ;  and  that
the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  Canada  was  essential,  not  only

'  Remarlis  on  the  Letter  Addressed  them. Nothing but the immediate

to  Trvo  Great  Men,  pp.  30,  31.  command  of  the  Crown  lias  been  able  to

^  Hutchinson's  Ilistory  of  Massa-  produce  even  the  imperfect,  union  but

chvsettsBay,froiti\li^tomi^,^.\OQ.  lately seen there of the  forces  of

Hardwicke,  however,  is  said  to  have  some colonies. If they could not

been  governed exclusively  by  com-  agree to unite for tlieir defence

mercial  considerations.  against  the  French  and  Indians  ,  .  .

'  '  Their  jealousy  of  each  other  is  so  can  it  reasonably  bo  supposed  there  is

great,  that  however  necessary  a  union  any  danger  of  their  uniting  against

of  the  colonies  has  long  been  for  their  their  own  nation,  which  protects  and

common  defence  and  security  against  encourages them, with which they

their  enemies,  and  how  sensible  soever  have  so  many  connections  and  ties  of

each  colony  has  been  of  that  necessity,  blood,  interest, and affection, and

yet  Ihcy  have  never  been  able  to  effect  which  it  is  well  known,  they  all  love

such  a  union  among  themselves,  nor  much  more  than  they  love one  an-

even to agree in requesting the  other?' — Canada  Pamphlet, Franklin's

mother-country to establish it for  Worlis,\\.  \\,  i2.

CH.  X.I.  MILITARY CAPABILITIES OF  AMERICA.  271

to  the  political  and  commercial  prosperity  of  the  Northern  colo  -
nists,  but  also  to  the  security  of  their  homes.  The  Indian  tribea
clustered  thickly  around  the  disputed  frontier,  and  the  French
being  numerically  very  inferior  to  the  English,  had  taken
great  pains  to  conciliate  them,  and  at  the  same  time  to  incite
them  against  the  English.  Six  times  within  eighty-five  years
the  horrors  of  Indian  war  had  devastated  the  northern  and
eastern  frontier.^  The  Peace  of  Paris,  by  depriving  the  Indians
of  French  support,  was  one  of  the  most  important  steps  to
their  subjection.

To  any  statesman  who  looked  upon  the  question  without  passion
and  without  illusion  it  must  have  appeared  evident  that  if  the
English  colonies  resolved  to  sever  themselves  from  the  British
Empire,  it  would  be  impossible  to  prevent  them.  Their  popula-
tion is  said  to  have  doubled  in  twenty-five  years.  They  were  sepa-
rated from  the  mother-country  by  three  thousand  miles  of  water.
Their  seaboard  extended  for  more  than  one  thousand  miles.
Their  territory  was  almost  boundless  in  its  extent  and  in  its  re-
sources, and  the  greater  part  of  it  was  still  untraversed  and  un-
explored. To  conquer  such  a  country  would  be  a  task  of  great
difficulty,  and  of  ruinous  expensed  To  hold  it  in  opposition  to
the  general  wish  of  the  people  would  be  impossible.  England
by  her  command  of  the  sea  might  easily  destroy  its  commerce,
disturb  its  fisheries,  bombard  its  seaboard  towns,  and  deprive  it
of  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life,  but  she  could  strike  no  vital
blow.  The  colonists  were  chiefly  small  and  independent  free-
holders, hardy  backwoodsmen  and  hunters,  universally  ac-
quainted with  the  use  of  arms,  and  with  all  the  resources  and
energies  which  life  in  a  new  country  seldom  fails  to  develop.
They  had  representative  assemblies  to  levy  taxes  and  organise
resistance.  They  had  militias  which  in  some  colonies  included
all  adult  freemen  between  the  ages  of  sixteen  or  eighteen  and
fifty  or  sixty; 2  and  in  addition  to  the  Indian  raids,  they  h-ad  the

'  Hildreth's  History  of  the  United  suppose  at  least  200,000  men  able  to

States,  ii.  496.  bear  arms;  and  not  only  able  to  bear

^  Fiurnaby's Travels in North  arms,  but  having  arms  in  their  pos-

America. Pinkerton's Voyages, xiil  session unrestrained  by  any  iniqui-

725,728,749. Gerard  Hamilton,  in  a  tons  game  Act. Inthe  Jlassachusetts

letter  written  in 1767,  said,  '  There  Government  particularly  there  is  an

are  in  the  different  provinces  above  a  express  law  by  which  every  man  is

million  of  people  of  which  we  may  obUged  to  have  a  musket,  a  pound  of

272  ENGL.AJJD IN THE EIGHTKENTII CENTURY.  en.  xii.

military  experience  of  two  great  wars.  The  capture  of  Louisburg
in  1749  had  been  mainly  their  work,  and  although  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  following  war  they  exhibited  but  little  alacrity,  Pitt,
by  promising  that  the  expenses  should  be  reimbursed  by  the
British  Parliament,  had  speedily  called  them  to  arms.  In  the
latter  stages  of  the  war  more  than  20,000  colonial  troops,  10,000  of
them  from  New  England  alone,  had  been  continually  in  the  field,
and  more  than  400  privateers  had  been  fitted  out  in  the  colonial
harbours.*  The  colonial  troops  were,  it  is  true,  only  enlisted
for  a  single  campaign,  and  they  therefore  never  attained  the
steadiness  and  discipline  of  English  veterans ;  but  they  had  co-
operated honourably  in  the  conquest  of  Canada,  and  even  in  the
expeditions  against  Havannah  and  Martinique,  and  they  con-
tained many  skilful  officers  quite  capable  of  conducting  a  war.

Under  such  circumstances,  with  the  most  moderate  he-
roism, and  even  without  foreign  assistance,  a  united  rebelHon  of
the  English  colonies  must  have  been  successful,  and  their  con-
nection with  the  mother-country  depended  mainly  upon  their
disposition  towards  her  and  towards  each  other.  For  some  years
before  the  English  Eevolution,  and  for  several  years  after  the
accession  of  William,  the  relations  of  the  colonies  to  England
had  been  extremely  tense ;  but  in  the  long  period  of  unbroken
"Whig  rule  which  followed,  most  of  the  elements  of  discontent
had  subsided.  The  wise  neglect  of  Walpole  and  Newcastle  was
eminently  conducive  to  colonial  interests.  The  substitution  in
several  colonies  of  royal  for  proprietary  governments  was  very
popular.  It  was  found  that  the  direct  rule  of  the  Sovereign  was
much  more  equitable  and  liberal  than  that  of  private  companies
or  individuals.  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Delaware  alone
retained  the  proprietary  form,  and  in  the  first  two  at  least,  a  large
party  desired  that  the  proprietors  should  be  compensated,  and
that  the  colonies  should  be  placed  directly  under  the  Crown.'*
There  were  slight  differences  in  the  colonial  forms  of  government,

powder,  and  a  pound  of  bullets  always  Grahame,  iv.  94.

by  him,  so  there  is  nothing  wanting;  '■'  See  a  very  remarkable  pamphlet

but knapsacks (or old stockings,  of  Franklin, called  Cool  Thoughts  on

which  will  do  as  well)  to  equip  an  th:e Present Situation.  (1764),  advo-

army  for  marchinpr.' — Chatham Cor-  eating  the  abolition  of  the  proprietary

ri.<(]iondencfi,  iii.  t.'03.  government  in  Pennsylvania.  Frank-

' Rjimsay's  Hist,  of  the  American  lin's  Works,  iv.  78-93.
JlcTolutuiii,\.  40. Hildrcth,  ii. 486.

cH.xn.  ATTACHMENT TO ENGLAND.  273

but  everywhere  the  colonists  paid  their  governors  and  their
other  officials.  The  lower  chamber  in  each  province  was  elected
freely  by  the  people,  and  in  nearly  every  respect  they  governed
themselves  under  the  shadow  of  the  British  dominion  with  a
liberty  which  was  hardly  equalled  in  any  other  portion  of  the
civilised  globe.  Political  power  was  incomparably  more  diffused,
aud  the  representative  system  was  incomparably  less  corrupt  than
at  home,  and  real  constitutional  liberty  was  flourishing  in  the
English  colonies  when  nearly  all  European  countries  and  all  other
colonies  were  despotically  governed.  ]Material  prosperity  was  at
the  same  time  advancing  with  giant  strides,  and  religious  liberty
was  steadily  maintained.  Whatever  might  be  her  policy  nearer
home,  in  the  colonies  the  English  Government  in  the  eighteenth
century  uniformly  opposed  the  efforts  of  any  one  sect  to  oppress
the  others.'

The  circumstances  and  traditions  of  the  colonists  had  made
them  extremely  impatient  of  every  kind  of  authority,  but  there
is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  they  were  animated  by  a  real
attachment  to  England.  Their  commercial  intercourse,  under
the  restrictions  of  the  Navigation  Law,  was  mainly  with  her.
Their  institutions,  their  culture,  their  religion,  their  ideas  were
derived  from  English  sources.  They  had  a  direct  interest  in
the  English  war  against  France  and  Spain.  They  were  proud
of  their  English  lineage,  of  English  greatness,  and  of  English
liberty,  and,  in  the  words  of  Franklin,  they  had '  not  only  a  respect
but  an  affection  for  Great  Britain ;  ...  to  be  an  Old  England
man  was  of  itself  a  character  of  some  respect,  and  gave  a  kind  of
rank  among  them.'  *  Hutchinson,  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts,
who  was  one  of  the  strongest  supporters  of  the  royal  authority,
acknowledges  that  when  George  III.  mounted  the  throne,  if
speculative  men  sometimes  figured  in  their  minds  an  American
Empire,  it  was  only  '  in such  distant  ages that  nobody  then

'  In Carolina a law had been  and  in others the  Di.ssenters,  have

passed deprincg the Dissenters  of  been predominant, they  have  made

their  political  privileges,  but  it  was  partial  laws  in  favour  of  their  respec-

repealed by the King in Council.  tive  sects,  and  laid  some  difficulties  on

Franklin's Worlds,  iv.  84. Franklin  the  others,  but  those  laws  have  been

adds,  '  Nor  is  there  existing  in  any  of  generally,  on  complaint,  repealed  at

the American  colonies  any  test  im-  home.' P.  88.

posed by Great Fa-itain  to exclude  ^  See  his  evidence  before  Parlia-

Dissenters  from  office. In  some  colo-  ment  in  1766. Franklin's  Works,  iv,

nies,  indeed,  where  the  Episcopalians,  169.

VOL.  III.  T

274  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

living  could  expect  to  see  it;'  and  he  adds  that  the  rapid
growth  of  colonial  power  had  as  yet  produced  no  '  plan  or  even
desire  of  independency,'  and  that  'the  greatest  hope  from  the
reduction  of  Canada,  as  far  as  could  be  judged  from  the  public
prayers  of  the  clergy  as  well  as  from  the  conversation  of  people
in  general,  was  '  to  sit  quiet  under  their  own  vines  and  fig-trees,
and  to  have  none  to  make  them  afraid.'^  The  great  career  of
Pitt,  which  had  intensified  patriotic  feelings  throughout  the
Empire,  was  nowhere  more  appreciated  than  in  America,  and
the  Peace  of  Paris,  however  distasteful  to  Englishmen,  might  at
least  have  been  expected  to  strengthen  the  loyalty  of  the  colo-
nies. It  had  been  made  by  men  who  were  wholly  beyond  the
range  of  their  influence,  yet  they  had  gained  incomparably
more  by  it  than  any  other  portion  of  the  Empire.

The  patriotism  of  the  colonies  indeed  attracted  them  fiir  more
to  England  than  to  each  other.  Small  groups  of  colonies  were
no  doubt  drawTQ  together  by  a  natural  aflSnity,  but  there  was  no
common  colonial  government,  and  they  were  in  general,  at  least
as  jealous  of  each  other  as  of  England.  One  of  the  chief  excuses
for  imposing  by  parliamentary  authority  imperial  taxation  on
the  colonies  was  the  extreme  difficulty  of  inducing  them  to
co-operate  cordially  for  nailitary  purposes.^  Soon  after  the  Ee vo-
lution William  had  proposed  a  plan  for  general  defence  against
the  French  forces  in  Canada  by  which  each  colony  was  to  con-
tribute a  contingent  proportionate  to  its  numbers,  but  all  the
colonial  Assemblies  rejected  it,  and  the  States  which  were  most
remote  from  the  danger  absolutely  refused  to  participate  in  the

'  Hutchinson's  Hiit.  of  Massachu-  some provinces have  been  sufTcrinff

ietts  Bay,  84,  85.  from  their  enemies,  the  neip;hbonring

*  The  Swedish  traveller  Kalm.who  ones  were  quiet  and  inactive  and  as  if

visited  North America  in 1749  and  it  did  not  in  the  least  concern  them.

1760,  was  mucli  struck  with this  dis-  Tliey  have  frecjuentl^' taken  up  two  or

like  toco-operation. He  says,  'Each  three  yearsincon.sidering  whether  they

Engflish  colony  in North  America  is  should  qive  a.«sistar.ce  to  an  oppressed

independent  of  the  other.  .  .  .  From  sister colony, and sometimes they

hence  it  happens  that  in  time  of  war  have exju-essly  declared themselves

things  go  on  very  slowly  and  irrcgu-  against it. Tliere are  instances of

larly  here ;  for  not  only  the  sense  of  provinces wlio  were  not  onlj'  neuter

one province is sometimes directly  in  these  circumstances,  but  who  even

o[)j«site  to  that  of  another,  but  fre-  carried  on  a  great  trade  with  the  Power

quently  the  views  of  the  governor  and  which  at  that  very  time  was  attack-

tho.se of  the  Assembly  of  the  .same  iiig and laying waste some other

province  are  cjuit« difTerent.  ...  It  provinces.' — I'inkerton's  Voya/j(g,Tim

has  commonly  happened  that  wliile  4G0,  461.

CH.  XII.  DJSUNION OF TIIK COLONIES.  275

expense.'  In  1754,  when  another  ppreat  war  was  impending,
a  Congress  of  Commissioners  from  the  different  colonies  as-
sembled at  Albany,  at  the  summons  of  the  Lords  of  Trade,
for  the  purpose  of  concerting  together  and  with  the  friendly
Indians  upon  measures  of  defence.  Benjamin  Franklin  was
one  of  the  Commissioners  for  Pennsylvania,  and  he  brought
forward  a  plan  for  uniting  the  colonies  for  defence  and  for  some
other  purposes  of  general  utility  into  a  single  Federal  State,
administered  by  a  President-Greneral  appointed  by  the  Crown,
and  by  a  general  council  elected  by  the  colonial  Assemblies ;  but
the  plan  was  equally  repudiated  by  the  colonial  Legislatures  as
likely  to  abridge  their  authority,  and  by  the  Board  of  Trade  as
likely  to  foster  colonial  independence.^  In  the  war  that  ensued
it  was  therefore  left  to  the  colonial  legislatures  to  act  inde-
pendently in  raising  troops  and  money,  and  while  the  Northern
colonies  which  lay  nearest  Canada  more  than  fulfilled  their  part,
some  of  the  Southern  ones  refused  to  take  any  considerable  share
of  the  burden.  The  management  of  Indian  affairs  gradually
passed  with  general  approval  from  the  different  colonial  legis-
latures to  the  Crown,  as  it  was  found  impossible  to  induce  the
former  to  act  together  on  any  settled  plan.^  The  history  of  the
colonies  during  the  twenty  or  thirty  years  preceding  the  Decla-
ration of  Independence  is  full  of  intestine  or  inter-colonial  dis-
])utes.  There  were  angry  discussions  about  boundaries  between
Massachusetts  on  the  one  hand,  and  Ehode  Island,  New  Hamp-
shire, and  Connecticut  on  the  other.  Albany  was  long  accused  of
trafficking  largely  with  the  Indians  for  the  spoils  they  had  ob-
tained in  their  raids  upon  New  England.  New  York  quarrelled
fiercely  with  Virginia  about  the  responsibility  for  the  failure
of  a  military  expedition,  and  with  New  Hampshire  about
the  govei'ument  of  the  territory  which  was  subsequently
known  as  Vermont.  In  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  the  As-
semblies were  in  continual  hostility  with  their  proprietaries,
and  the  mother-country  was  compelled  to  decide  a  violent
dispute  about  salaries  between  the  Virginian  laity  and  clergy.
Great bodies of  Dutch,  Germans,  French, Swedes, Scotch,

'  Grahame,  iii 13.  »  Franklin's  Works,  i.  177.

'  Grahame,  iv.  145-147.

T  2

276  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu.  xii.

and  Irish,  scattered  among  the  descendants  of  the  English,
contributed  to  the  heterogeneous  character  of  the  colonies,  and
they  comprised  so  many  varieties  of  government,  religious  be-
lief, commercial  interest,  and  social  type,  that  their  union  ap-
peared to  many  incredible  on  the  very  eve  of  the  Revolution."
The  movement  which  at  last  arrayed  them  in  a  united  front
against  England  was  not  a  blind  instinctive  patriotism  or  com-
munity of  sentiment,  like  that  which  animates  old  countries.
It  was  the  deliberate  calculation  of  intelligent  men,  who  per-
csived  that  by  such  union  alone  could  they  attain  the  objects
of  their  desire.

New  England,  which  was  the  centre  of  the  resistance,  was
then  divided  into  the  four  States  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  Con-
necticut, New  Hampshire,  and  Rhode  Island,  and  it  was,  in  pro-
portion to  its  size,  by  far  the  most  populous  portion  of  British
America.  It  comprised  about  a  third  part  of  its  whole  popu-
lation,^ and  Massachusetts  alone  had,  during  a  great  part  of
the  last  war,  maintained  7,000  men  under  arms.  The  de-
scendants of  the  old  Puritans,  the  New  Englanders  were  still
chiefly  Congregationalists  or  Presbyterians,  and  there  might
be  found  among  them  an  austerity  of  manners  and  of  belief
which  was  hardly  exceeded  in  Scotland.  It  was,  however,
gradually declining  under  many  influences. Time,  increas-

'  The  following  is  the  judgment  themselves,  there  would  soon  be  a
of  that  usually  veiy  acute  observer,  civil  war  from  one  end  of  tlie  con-
Burnaby,  wlio  travelled  through  the  tinent  to  the  other;  while  the  Indians
colonies  in  175'.)  and  17()0.  '  Fire  and  and  negroes  would  with  better  reason
waterarenot  more  heterogeneous  than  impatiently  watch  the  opportunity  of
the  different  colonies  in  North  Ame-  exterminating  them  allogether.'  —
rica.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  jealousy  I'inkerton,  xiii.  752.  Otis,  one  of  the
and  emulation  which  they  possess  in  earliest  and  most  considerable  of  the
regard  to  each  other.  The  inhabi-  Ainorican  patriots,  wrote  in  17G5, 'God
tants  of  Pennsylvania  and  New  York  forbid  these  colonies  slKJuld  ever  prove
have  an  inexhaustible  source  of  ani-  undutiful  to  their  mother-country,
niosity  in  their  jealousy  for  the  trade  Wiiencver  such  a  day  shall  come  it
of  the  Jerseys.  Massachusetts  Hay  will  be  the  beginning  of  a  terrible
and  Rhode  Island  are  not  less  inte-  scene.  Were  these  colonies  left  to
rested  in  that  of  (Jrmnecticut.  Tlie  themselves  tomorrow,  America  would
West  Indies  are  a  common  subject  of  be  a  mere  shambles  of  blood  and  con-
emulation  to  them  all.  Even  the  fusion  before  little  petty  states  could
limits  and  boundaries  of  each  colony  be  settled.' — Answer  to  the  Halifax
are a constant  source  of litigation.  Libel,  p.  16.

In  short, such  is  the  difference of  '  According  to  Grahame  (iv.  125)

character,  of  manners,  of  religion,  of  in 1763 it contained upwards of

intere-st  of  the  different  colonics,  th:it  500,000  persons. The  jYorth  American

I  think  if  I  am  not  wholly  ignorant  (iazetteer  (2nd edit.  1778)  estimates

of  the  human  mind,  were  they  lei't  to  its  population  at  upwards  of  600,000.

CH.  XII.  NEW ENGLAND  277

ing  wealth,  the  intellectual  atmosphere  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, the  disorders  and  changes  produced  by  a  state  of  war,
contact  with  large  bodies  of  European  soldiers,  and  also  the
demoralising  influence  of  a  great  smuggling  trade  with  the
P'rench  West  Indies,  had  all  in  their  diflferent  ways  impaired
the  old  types  of  character.  The  Governments  of  three  of  the
colonies  were  exceedingly  democratic.  In  Massachusetts  the
Council  or  Upper  Chamber,  instead  of  being,  as  in  most  pro-
vinces, appointed  by  the  Sovereign,  was  elected  annually  by
the  Lower  Chamber ;  every  town  officer  was  annually  chosen ;
all  town  affairs  were  decided  in  public  meetings ;  the  clergy
were  selected  by  their  congregations,  and,  with  the  exception  of
a  few  Custom-house  officers,  the  Crown  officers  were  paid  by
the  State.  The  Governor  was  appointed  by  the  Crown,  and  he
possessed  a  right  of  veto  upon  laws,  and  also  upon  the  appoint-
ment of  Councillors  ;  but  as  his  own  salary  and  that  of  the  whole
Executive  depended  on  the  popular  vote,  and  as  the  Council
emanated  directly  from  the  representative  body,  his  actual  power
was  extremely  small.  The  civil  list  allowed  by  the  Assembly
was  precarious  and  was  cut  down  to  the  narrowest  limits.  The
Governor  usually  received  1,000L  English  currency  a  year,  but
obtained  some  additional  occasional  grants.  The  Lieutenant-
Governor  received  no  salary  as  such,  except  during  the  absence
of  the  Governor,  and  the  office  was  therefore  usually  combined
with  some  other.  The  judges  had  each  only  about  1207.  sterling
a  year,  with  the  addition  of  some  fees,  which  were  said  not  to
have  been  sufficient  to  cover  their  travelling  expenses.'  The
Attorney-General  received  no  salary  from  the  Assembly,  as  the
Governor  refused  to  recognise  its  claim  to  have  a  voice  in  his
appointment.  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut  were  even  more
democratic  than  Massachusetts.  By  the  charters  conceded  to
these  colonies,  the  freemen  elected  all  their  officers  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  and  they  were  not  obliged  to  communi-
cate the  acts  of  their  local  legislatures  to  the  King.  Such  a
system  had  naturally  led  to  grave  abuses,  and  in  Rhode  Island
especially  there  were  loud  complaints  of  the scandalous  par-

'  Reports  of  i^ui  Board  of  Trade  Office.  See  too  a  letter  of  Hutchinson
on  thf  Establishments  in  Ameriea  in  the  American  Ilemunbraiicer,  111 6^
(1766).  American  Papers,  MSS.,  Record parti.  159.

278  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn.  xir.

tiality  of  the  judges  and  of  the  low  prevailing  tone  of  honesty
and  statesmanship.'

One  of  the  most  remarkable  recent  changes  in  New  Eng-
land manners  was  the  extraordinary  increase  of  litigation
and  the  rapid  growth  in  numbers  and  importance  of  the
legal  class.  For  a  century  and  a  half  of  colonial  days  there
were  but  two  lay  presidents  of  Harvard  College ;  nearly  half
the  students  were  intended  for  some  church  ministry,  and  the
profession  of  a  lawyer  was  looked  upon  as  in  some  degree  dis-
honest and  disreputable.  It  was  rapidly  rising,  however,  in
New  England  as  elsewhere,  and  it  contributed  more  than  any
other  profession  to  the  Revolution.'  Jefferson,  Adams,  Otis,
Dickenson,  and  many  other  minor  agents  in  the  struggle  were
lawyers.  Another  influence  which  did  much  to  lower  the  New
England  character  was  the  abundance  of  depreciated  paper
money.  In  1750  the  British  Parliament  granted  a  sum  of
money  to  reimburse  Massachusetts  for  what  it  had  expended
more  than  its  proportion  towards  the  general  expense  of  the  war,
and  the  Legislature  of  the  province  determined  to  redeem  their
paper,  but  to  do  so  at  a  depreciated  value,  and  only  an  ounce
of  silver  was  given  for  50s.  of  paper,  though  the  bills  them-
selves promised  an  ounce  for  6s.  8d.  In  1751  the  mother-
country  was  obliged  to  interpose  to  prevent  the  New  Englanders
from  cheating  their  English  creditors  by  making  paper  legal
tender.-''

'  See  tlic  very  unfavouraljle  jnc-  popular  devotion,  were  so  many  books

tnre  given by 15urnaby  ; Pinkerton,  as  those  on  tlie  law  exported  to  the

xiii. 742,74:5.  \Vinterbolham'siV<'se«f  plantations.' — l<j>ccch  on Conciliation

,-<itvation  of  the  United  States  (17U0),  ivith  America. .See  too  Burke's  7i'Mro-

ii.  21^0. Burke's  European  tkttlcments  jican  Settlements  in  America,  ii.  804.

in  America,  ii.  300.  The  passion  for  the  law  steadily  in-

^  See a  curious passage in the  creased,  and  in 1787 Noah  Webster

Lifeof  Adams  prelixcd  to  his  Fnwilitir  wrote,  '  Never  was  such  a  rage  for  the

Letters  to  his  Wifc,x>V.'x..:i.iy. Tucker  study  of  law. From  one  end  of  the

says  of  America, '  In  no  country  per-  continent  to  tlie  other  the  students  of

liaps  in  the  wfjrld  are  (here  so  many  this  science  are  muUi})lying without

lawsuits.' — Letter  to  Jivrkc,\). '20. So  number. An  infallihlo  ))roof  that  tlie

too  Burke,  '  In  no  country perhaps  business  is  lucrative.' — Webster's  Ji>-

in  the  world  is  the  law  so  general  a  says,]).  IK!.

study. The  profession  itself  is  nurae-  *  24  Geo.  TI.  c.  5.S. Another  law

rous  and  powerful,  and  in  most  pro-  to  fiK;ilitate  recovery  of  debts  from

vinces  it  takes  the  lead. The  greater  America  was  made  in  1732  (0  Geo.  II.

number  of  the  deputies  sent  to  Con-  c.  7). See  on  this  subject Tucker's

pre!?3  were  lawyers.  ...  I  have  been  Letter to  Jiurhe,  pp.  29  31. Bollus'

told  by  an  eminent  bookseller  that  in  no  Fiiinncia.l  History  of  tlie  United  States,

branch  of  his  business,  after  tracts  of  pp.  29,  30.

cu.  xii.  NEW  ENGLAND.  279

►Slill  with  every  drawback  the  bulk  of  the  New  EDglanders
were  a  people  of  strong  fibre  and  high  morals.  Strictly  Sab-
batarian, rigidly  orthodox,  averse  to  extravagance,  to  gambling,
and  to  effeminate  amusements,  capable  of  great  efforts  of  self-
sacrifice,  hard,  stubborn,  and  indomitably  intractable,  they  had
most  of  the  cjualities  of  a  ruling  race.  The  revival  of  Jonathan
Edwards,  the  later  preaching  of  Whitefield,  and  the  numerous
days  of  fasting  or  thanksgiving,  had  done  something  to  sus-
tain their  fanaticism.  A  severe  climate  and  long  struggles
with  the  French  and  the  Indians  had  indurated  their  charac-
ters, and  the  common  schools  which  had  been  established  in
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  in  every  village  had
made  a  certain  level  of  education  universal.  Their  essentially
republican  religion,  the  traditions  of  their  republican  origin,
and  the  republican  tone  of  their  manners,  had  all  conspired
to  maintain  among  them  a  spirit  of  fierce  and  jealous  inde-
pendence. They  had  few  manufactures.  Slavery,  being  un-
suited  to  their  soil  and  climate,  had  taken  but  little  root,  and
there  was  said  to  be  no  other  portion  of  the  globe  in  which
there  was  so  little  either  of  wealth  or  of  poverty.'  The  bulk  of
the  population  were  small  freeholders  cultivating  their  own
land.  By  a  somewhat  singular  anomaly,  the  democratic  colony
of  Ehode  Island,  during  nearly  the  whole  of  its  colonial  his-
tory, adopted  the  E^  glish  law  of  real  property  with  its  system
of  entail  and  primogeniture ;  but  in  the  other  New  England
colonies  the  law  favoured  equal  division,  reservino-,  however,
in  the  case  of  intestacy,  a  double  portion  for  the  elder  son.^
Extreme  poverty  was  unknown  ;  yet  Burke,  who  was  admirably
acquainted  with  American  life,  questioned  whether  there  were
two  persons  either  in  ^Massachusetts  or  Connecticut  who  could
afford  to  spend  1,000Z.  a  year  at  a  distance  from  their  estates.^
Boston,  at  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Paris,  contained  18,000  or
20,000  inhabitants.* It  was  the  great intellectual  centre  of

'  Winterbotham's Mew of the  18,000  to  20.000.  Pinkerton,  xiii.  744.

United  States,  ii.  3,  4.  Adams  in  his  Diary, Worhg  ii.  213,

^  Story's  Constitution  of  theUnited  estimates  it  at  16,000.  Winterbofham'

States,  i.  ?0,  166.  some years after the Revolution,

^  Observations  on  the  State  of  the  reckons  it  at  18,038. In  the  North

Nati-im.  American  Gazetteer,  it  is  placed as

■*  Bumaby  in 1759 reckons the  high  as  30,000,  but  tliis  is  certainly

population of Boston at from  an  exaggeration.

280  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xii.

the  colonies,  and  five  printing  presses  were  in  constant  em-
ployment within  its  walls.  It  contained  the  chief  distilleries
in  America  ;  it  was  noted  for  its  commerce,  its  ship-building
and  its  cod-fishery ;  and  in  1763  no  less  than  eighty  New
England  vessels  were  employed  in  the  whale  fishery  at  the
mouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence.'  Boston,  however,  unlike  most
American  towns,  appears  for  a  long  time  to  have  been  almost
stationary.  The  rise  of  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  other
towns  had  diminished  its  prosperity,  and  the  New  England
States  were  burdened  by  considerable  natural  disadvantages,
and  by  the  great  weight  of  debt  bequeathed  from  the  war.

Among  the  Middle  States  the  two  provinces  of  New  York
and  New  Jersey  still  contained  many  families  descended  from
the  old  Dutch  settlers ;  but  they  were  being  rapidly  lost  in  a
very  miscellaneous  population.  Twenty-one  years  before  New
York,  or,  as  it  was  then  called.  New  Amsterdam,  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  English,  it  was  computed  that  no  less  than
eighteen  different  languages  were  spoken  in  or  near  the  town,^
and  it  continued  under  English  rule  to  be  one  of  the  chief
centres  of  foreign  immigration.  It  was  noticed  during  the
War  of  Independence,  that  the  political  inditference  of  these
colonies  formed  a  curious  contrast  to  the  vehemence  of  New
England,^  and  New  York  fluctuated  more  violently  in  its
political  attitude  than  any  other  colony  in  America.  The  town
at  the  Peace  of  Paris  was  little  more  than  half  the  size  of
Boston,  but  it  was  rapidly  advancing  in  commercial  prosperity,
and  large  fortunes  were  being  accumulated.  In  the  country
districts  much  of  the  simplicity  and  frugality  of  the  old  Dutch
settlers  survived ;  but  the  tone  of  manners  in  tlie  town  was
less  severe  and  more  luxurious  than  in  New  England.  There
were  but  few  signs  of  the  theological  intolerance  so  con-
spicuous in  some  of  the  older  States,  and  very  many  religions,
representing  very  many  nationalities,  subsisted  side  by  side  in
apparent  harmony.  There  was  little  intellectual  life ;  educa-
tion was  very  backward,  and  the  pursuit  of  wealth  appears  to
have  been  the  absorbing  passion.  The  letters  written  by  the
Governor  and  Lieutenant-Governor  to  the  home  authorities  in

•  Grahame's  7/t«<. iv. 129, 130. twreA\.20(i.
Burke's  European  StMlr.vients,  ii.  183.  »  Chastellux  (Eng.  trans.),  Travels

'  Tyler's  Ilixt.  of  Amrriran  Htcra- iiiXorth  Avienvain  1780-1782,  ii.  180.

CH.  XII.  NEW YORK.  281

1765  and  the  two  following  years  give  a  curious,  though  perhaps
somewhat  overcharged  picture,  of  the  less  favourable  aspects  of
New  York  life.  The  most  opulent  raen  in  the  State  had  risen
within  a  single  generation  from  the  lowest  class.  Few  per-
sons except  lawyers  had  any  tincture  of  literature,  and  lawyers
under  these  circumstances  had  attained  a  greater  power  in  this
province  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  King's  dominions.  They
had  formed  an  association  for  the  purpose  of  directing  political
affairs.  In  an  Assembly  where  the  majority  of  the  members
were  ignorant  and  simple-minded  farmers,  they  had  acquired  a
controlhng  power ;  they  knew  the  secrets  of  every  family.
They  were  the  chief  writers  in  a  singularly  violent  press.
They  organised  and  directed  every  opposition  to  the  Governor,
and  they  had  attained  an  influence  not  less  than  that  of  the
priesthood  in  a  bigoted  Catholic  country.  There  was  a  long
and  bitter  quarrel  about  the  position  of  the  judges,  one  party
wishing  that  they  should  hold  their  office  during  good  be-
haviour, and  should  thus  be  beyond  the  control  of  the  Execu-
tive or  Home  Government;  the  other  party  wishing  that  they
should  receive  fixed  and  adequate  salaries,  instead  of  being
dependent  on  the  annual  vote  of  the  Assembly.  The  utmost
annual  sum  the  Assembly  would  vote  for  its  Chief  Justice  was
3001.  of  New  York  currency,  which  was  much  less  valuable
than  the  currency  of  England.  Legal  decisions  are  said  to
have  been  given  with  great  and  manifest  partiaHty.  '  In  the
present  state  of  our  courts  of  justice,'  wrote  the  Lieutenant-
Governor,  '  all  private  property  for  some  years  past,  as  well  as
the  rights  and  authority  of  the  King,  are  more  precarious  than
can  be  easily  imagined.'  On  one  occasion  the  Chief  Justice
gave  a  judgment  against  a  member  of  the  Assembly ;  by  the
influence  of  that  member  his  salary  was  reduced  by  50^.  In
cases  affecting  the  Eevenue  Acts  or  the  property  rights  of  the
Crown,  the  law  was  almost  impotent,  and  the  Governor  vainly
tried  to  obtain  the  right  of  appeal  to  an  English  court.  Cases
under  51.  in  value  were  decided  by  the  local  magistrates  ;  and
as  it  was  the  custom  for  each  member  of  the  Assembly  to  have
the  nomination  to  all  civil  and  military  offices  in  his  own
county,  the  Commission  of  the  Peace  was  the  usual  reward  of
electioneering  services. Nothing  was  more  common  than  lo

282  ENGLAND IN  TJIE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  ui.

find  petty  cases  decided  in  public-houses  by  magistrates  who
were  selected  from  the  meanest  and  least  respectable  trades-
men, and  who  were  sometimes  so  ignorant  that  they  were
obliged  to  put  a  mark  instead  of  a  signature  to  their  warrants.'
By  far  the  most  important  of  the  INliddle  States  was  the
great  industrial  colony  of  Pennsylvania.  A  fertile  soil,  a  great
abundance  of  mineral  wealth,  a  situation  singularly  favourable
to  commercial  intercourse,  and  a  population  admirably  ener-
getic and  industrious,  had  contributed  to  develop  it,  and  it
far  surpassed  all  the  other  colonies  in  the  perfection  of  its
agriculture,  and  in  the  variety,  magnitude,  and  prosperity  of
its  manuffictures.  Its  population  at  the  time  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence  appears  to  have  been  about  350,000.
The  Quakers,  who  were  its  first  colonists,  now  formed  about  a
fifth  part  of  the  population,  and  still  exercised  the  greatest
power  in  the  Assembly.  Pennsylvania,  however,  rivalled  or
surpassed  New  York  in  its  attraction  to  foreign  immigrants,
and  few  countries  have  contained  so  great  a  mixture  of  nation-
alities. The  Germans  were  so  numerous  that  they  for  some
time  returned  15  out  of  the  69  members  of  the  Assembly.'^
Nearly  12,000  had  landed  in  the  single  summer  of  L749,  and
in  the  middle  of  the  century  a  German  weekly  paper  was  pub-
lished at  Philadelphia.'  There  was  also  a  large  colony  of  Irish
Presbyterians,  who  lived  chiefly  along  the  western  frontier,
and  who  had  established  a  prosperous  linen  manufacture  ;  and
Swedes,  Scotch,  Welsh,  and  a  few  Dutch  might  be  found  among
the  inhabitants.  The  law  of  real  property  was  nearly  the  same
as  in  Massachusetts.  There  was  perfect  liberty,  and  the  pre-
vailing spirit  was  gentle,  humane,  pacific,  and  keenly  money-

'  Dnnimantx  rclatinff  to  tJiv  Colo-  At  their  entertainments  there  is  no

nial  Hint  lira  of  New  York  jn'oniredin  conversation  that  is  agreeable  ;  there

Ilollnnd, Enqland,  and  France, vii.  is no  modesty ;  no  attention  to  one

500,  70"),  760,"  774,  796,  707,  906,  971).  another. They  talk  very  lond,  very

New  York  is  described  by  most  of  the  fast,  and  all  together.  If  they  ask  you

writers on America I  liave  already  a  question,  before  you  can  utter  three

quoted. J.  Adams  gives  a  very  un-  words  of  your  answer  they  will  break

favourable  picture  of  the  manners  of  out  upon  you  again  and  tidkaway.' —

its  inhabitants. He  writes,  '  With  all  Adams' Diary,  1774. Wnrlis,  li. '^^'^.

the  opulence  and  splendour  of  this  city  On  the  condition  of  education  in  New

[New  York]  there  is  very  little  good  York, see  Tyler's  I/ist.  of  American

breeding  to  be  found. We  have  been  Literature,  ii.  206,  207.
treated  withana^siduousrespect,butI  ''■  Winlerbotham,  ii.  439.

have  not  seen  one  real  gentleman,  one  '  Kalm's  Travrh  in  Noiili  America.

well-bred  man,  since  I  came  to  town.  I'inkerton,  xiii.  .'595,  39G.

CH.  xn.  PENNSYLVANTA.  28:i

making.  The  Quakers,  though  their  distinctive  character  was
very  clearly  imprinted  on  the  colony,  had  found  that  some  de-
parture from  their  original  principles  was  indispensable.  A
section  of  them,  in  flagrant  opposition  to  the  original  tenet  of
their  sect,  contended  that  war  was  not  criminal  when  it  was
strictly  defensive.  A  long  line  of  cannon  defended  the  old
Quaker  capital  against  the  French  and  Spanish  privateers;  and
the  Pennsylvanian  Assembly,  in  which  the  Quakers  predomi-
nated, repeatedly  voted  military  aids  to  the  Crown  during  the
French  wars,  disguising  their  act  by  voting  the  money  only  '  for
the  King's  use,'  and  on  one  occasion  '  for  the  purchase  of  bread,
flour,  wheat,  or  other  grain^^  the  latter  being  understood  to  be
gunpowder.^

Philadelphia  was  probably  at  this  time  the  most  beautiful  and
attractive  city  in  the  American  colonies ;  famous  for  its  ship-
building, for  the  great  variety  of  its  commerce,  and  for  its  very
numerous  institutions  of  benevolence  and  instruction.  Burnaby,
who  visited  it  in  1759,  was  filled  '  with  wonder  and  admiration  '
at  the  noble  city  which  had  grown  up  where,  eighty  years  before,
the  deer  and  the  buffalo  had  ranged.  He  dilates  upon  the  ad-
mirable lighting  and  paving  of  the  streets,  upon  its  stately  town
hall,  upon  its  two  public  libraries  ;  upon  its  numerous  churche<5,
almshouses,  and  schools ;  upon  its  market,  which  was  '  almost
equal  to  that  of  Leadenhall ; '  upon  the  crowd  of  ships  that
thronged  its  harbour.  He  estimated  its  population  at  1 8,000
or  20,000,  and  he  tells  us  that  about  twenty-five  ships  were
annually  built  in  its  docks,  and  that  many  of  its  houses  were
let  for  what  was  then  the  very  large  sum  of  lOOL  a  year.  It
contained  an  opulent  and  brilliant,  if  somewhat  exclusive
society,  with  all  the  luxury  of  a  European  city.  The  gay
profusion  of  flowers  that  were  scattered  through  the  houses,
the  rich  orchards  extending  to  the  very  verge  of  the  town,  and
encircling  every  important  dwelling ;  the  aspect  of  well-being
which  was  displayed  in  every  class  ;  the  use  of  tea,  which  as
early  as  1750  was  universal  in  every  farmer's  house;  ^  the  mul-

*  Franklin's TAfe, pp.  148-155.  respect, ^ee  his  q,xxi\o\is  Life,  Travels,

Kalm's  Travels. Pinkerton,  xiii.  391.  and  CJiristian  Experiences  (ed.  18.50),

As  early  as  1741,  the  Quaker,  Thomas  pp.  .S62,  363.

Chalkley,  had lamented  the  falling  ^  Kalm's  Travels. Pinkerton,  xiii.

away  of  Pennsylvanian  Quakers  in  this  49 1.

284  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xii.

tiplication  of  country  seats  ;  the  taste  for  lighter  and  more
cheerful  ^manners,  which  had  sprung  from  contact  with  the
English  officers  during  the  war ;  the  periodical  assemblies  of
gentlemen  and  ladies  of  the  best  society  to  pass  the  summer
days  in  fishing  n])(in  the  Schuylkill,  diversified  with  music  and
with  dancing  all  bring  before  us  the  picture  of  a  State  which
was  far  removed  from  the  simplicity,  the  poverty,  and  the
austerity  of  its  Quaker  founders."  To  a  European,  however,
or  at  least  to  a  French  taste,  the  tone  of  manners  appeared
formal  and  cumbrous.  A  brilliant  Frenchman  who  visited  Phila-
delphia during  the  War  of  Independence,  complained  with
some  humour  that  dancing,  which  in  other  countries  was  re-
garded as  an  emblem  of  gaiety  and  love,  was  treated  in  America
as  an  emblem  of  legislation  and  marriage ;  that  every  detail  ol
a  ball  was  regulated  beforehand  with  the  most  minute  pre-
cision, and  carried  out  with  a  stern  severity ;  that  each  dancer
was  restricted  to  the  same  partner  for  the  whole  evening ;  ^  and
that  the  almost  endless  succession  of  toasts  that  were  rigidly
enforced,  made  an  American  entertainment  nearly  intolerable
to  a  stranger.  He  noticed,  too,  the  significant  manner  in
which,  in  the  absence  of  titles,  precedence  had  come  to  be  de-
termined by  wealth.^  A  curious  relic  of  a  standard  of  com-
mercial integrity  which  had  long  since  passed  away,  survived
in  the  middle  of  the  century  in  the  custom  of  '  marriage  in
the  shift.'  When  a  man  died  leaving  debts  which  his  widow
was  unable  to  pay,  she  was  obliged,  if  she  contracted  a  second
marriage,  to  leave  her  clothes  in  the  hands  of  the  creditors,  and
to  go  through  the  ceremony  in  her  shift.  Gradually,  however,
the  ceremony  was  mitigated  by  the  bridegroom  lending  her
clothes  for  the  occasion.'' The  conflicts  with  the  proprietary

'  Bnrnaby's  7>ffre&.  See  too  Kalm's  Miss  Wilkes,  whose  judtrment  I  liear

Trarrh, ten years earlier,  and the  hi^dily  C(immended,  would  she  think

jXiiHli  Am^ricanOazpftver, arts. ' Penn-  herscH'  much  indc-btod  to  lier  favourite

Bylvania' and  'Philadelphia.' There  admirer  if  he  furcid  a  musl  disag-ree-

isa  vory  t^'raphic  description  of  Phila-  ahlc  ])artncr  upon  Jier,  foraloiij,^  win-

delphia,  evidently  hy  an  eyo-witness,  ter's ni^ht, because he would not

in  that  curious  book,  the  JAfe  nfliamp-  dance  with  lier  himself  ? ' See  on  this

/yWc  J/wre  Cart'/r,  published  in  1749,  custom the remarks of Twisleton,

1750.  Twisleton  and  Chabot's  JTa?id writing

'  The  same  custom,  however,  ap-  n/Juniux,  p.  235.

pears  to  have  prevailed in p;nf,daiid.  '  Chastellux's  Travels,  i.  278.

Junius,  in  one  of  his  private  letters  to  *  Kalm. Pinkerton,  xiii.  512.
Wilke-s alludes to  it. 'I  .'ijipcal  lo

CH.  xir.  VIRGINIA.  285

government  turno^l  fliit^fly  upon  the  question  of  how  far  the
proprietary  estates  might  be  submitted  to  taxation,  and  tLe
decision  of  the  motlier-couutry  was  given  in  favour  of  the
colonists.  The  conflict  was  especially  violent  on  account  of  the
peculiarity  of  the  Pennsylvanian  Government,  which  consisted
only  of  two  parts,  a  governor  and  a  representative  chamber,
while  in  the  other  colonies  the  council  or  upper  chamber  acted
the  part  of  a  mediator  or  umpire.  A  Council  existed,  it  is  true,
in  Pennsylvania,  but  it  had  no  legislative  power,  and  was  re-
stricted to  the  function  of  advising  the  Executive.  The  pro-
prietary government  was  both  weak  and  unpopular ;  and  Penn-
sylvania, like  most  other  colonies,  was  disturbed  by  many
outbreaks  of  lawless  violence.

The  only  other  colony  which  it  is  necessary  particularly  to
notice  on  account  of  the  part  which  it  played  in  the  Eevolution,
is  Virginia,  the  oldest  of  the  charter  colonies — the  colony  of
Washington,  Jefferson,  Patrick  Henry,  the  Eandolphs,  and
the  Lees.  At  the  Peace  of  Paris,  in  1763,  it  appears  to  have
contained  about  200,000  inhabitants,  the  large  majority'  being
slaves,'  and  its  character  was  wholly  different  from  the  Puritan
type  of  New  England  and  from  the  industrial  type  of  Penn-
sylvania. The  Church  of  England  was  here  the  dominant
religion,  and  it  was  established  by  law.  There  was  a  fixed
revenue  for  the  support  of  the  civil  establishments,  derived
partly  from  Cro\vn  quit  rents,  and  partly  from  a  duty  on
tobacco,  which  had  been  granted  for  ever.  A  system  of  entails
subsisted  which  was  even  stricter  than  that  in  England,  and  it
concurred  with  the  conditions  of  slave  labour  and  with  the
nature  of  the  soil  to  produce  a  much  more  unequal  distribution
of  property  than  in  the  Northern  colonies.  The  Ulster  Presby-
terians, who  had  penetrated  largely  into  Massachusetts,  Penn-
sylvania, Maryland,  and  North  Carolina,  had  formed  a  con-
siderable settlement  on  the  northern  and  western  frontiers  of
Virginia,  and  a  few  French  refugees  were  also  established  in  the
colony,  but  over  the  greater  part  of  it  the  English  element  was
in  the  free  population  almost  unmixed.  Education  in  general
was  very  backward. There  were  scarcely  any  manufactures,  and

'  Compare,  on  the  population  of  p.  711  ;  Grahame,  iv.  122  ;  Winter-
Virginia, Burnaby ; Pinkerton, xiii. bothaoi.

286  ENGLA^'D IN THK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii,

there  was  but  little  town  life.  Wheat  was  produced  in  abund-
ance, and  the  tobacco  of  Virginia  and  of  the  adjoining  colony  of
Maryland  was  long  esteemed  the  finest  in  the  world.  Four  great
navigable  rivers  enabled  the  planters  to  load  their  ships  before
their  own  doors  at  distances  of  more  than  eighty  miles  from  the
sea;  and  in  1758,  70,000  hogsheads  of  tobacco  were  exported
from  Virginia.'  After  this  time  the  tobacco  culture  seems
to  have  somewhat  dwindled,  under  the  rising  competition  of
Georgia  and  of  the  western  country  along  the  Mississippi.  The
management  of  the  colony  was  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  great
planters,  some  of  them  descended  from  Cavaliers  who  had
emigrated  during  the  troubles  of  the  Commonwealth.  They
were  a  high-spirited  and  haughty  class,  extremely  tenacious  of
social  rank,  hospitable,  convivial,  full  of  energy  and  courage,
and  as  essentially  aristocratic  in  their  feelings,  if  not  in  their
manners,  as  the  proudest  nobility  of  Europe.  They  resented
bitterly  the  entry  during  the  Eevolution  war  of  new  families
into  power,  and  it  was  noticed  that  the  popular  or  democratic
party  in  this  province  showed  more  zeal  in  breaking  down
precedence  than  in  combating  the  English.'^  A  great  portion
of  the  colony  was  absolutely  uncultivated  and  uncleared,'  but
large  landed  properties  gave  so  much  social  consequence  that
they  were  rarely  broken  up,  though  they  were  usually  very
heavily  encumbered  by  debts.  In  Virginia,  as  in  the  other  colo-
nies, there  were  some  yeomen,  but  this  class  can  never  flourish
where  slavery  exists,  and  there  was  an  idle,  dis£5)r)ated,  indebted,
and  impoverished  population,  descended  in  a  great  degree
from  younger  sons  of  planters,  who  looked  with  contempt  on
manual  labour,  and  who  were  quite  ready  to  throw  themselves
into  any  military  enterprise.  A  traveller  from  Europe,  after
passing  through  the  greater  part  of  the  colonies,  noticed  that
in  Virginia,  for  the  first  time,  he  saw  evidence  of  real  poverty
among  the  whites.*  The  upper  classes  were  keen  huntsmen  ;
among  all  classes  there  was  much  gambling  and an intense

'  Winterbotham,  iii.  112.  cviUivatorl. In  New Enpland more

»  Chastcllux,  ii.  181).  than  lialf  the  whole  is  cull  ivated,  anil

■  Noah  Webster,  wlio  was  one  of  in Connrctioiit scarcely  a  tenth  re-

tho  best  of  the  earlj  economists  of  mains in a wild stale.' Webster's

America,  wrote  in  171)0  :  'In  Viri,'inia  Ji$sayf,  p.  30.5.

and .Maryland I should question  *  Chastcllux,  ii.  100.

whclher a tenth uf  the land  is  yet

OH.  XII.  VIRGINIA.  287

passion  for  liorse-nicing,  and  even  in  districts  where  (here  were
no  public  conveyances  and  no  tolerable  inns,  great  crowds  fro^ri
distances  of  Ihirtyor  forty  miles  were  easily  collected  by  a
cock-figlit.'  Among  the  lower  class  of  whites  there  was  a  great
brutality  of  manners,  and  they  were  especially  noted  for  their
habit  of  '  gouging '  out  each  other's  eyes  in  boxing  matches  and
quarrels.-  'Indians  and  negroes,' a  traveller  observed,  'they
scarcely  consider  as  of  the  human  species.'  Acts  of  violence,
and  even  murder,  of  which  they  were  the  victims,  were  never  or
scarcely  ever  punished,  and  no  negro  was  suffered  to  give  evi-
dence in  a  court  of  law  except  at  the  trial  of  a  slave  for  a  capital
offence.'  Virginia,  however,  was  a  great  breeding  country  for
negroes,  and  chiefly,  perhaps,  for  this  reason  they  are  said  to
have  been  treated  there  with  somewhat  less  habitual  cruelty
than  in  the  We.st  Indies.''

Burke  has  very  truly  said  that  slave-owners  are  often  of  all
men  the  most  jealous  of  their  freedom,  for  they  regard  it  not
only  as  an  enjoyment  but  as  a  kind  of  rank  ;  and  it  may  be
added  that  slavery,  when  it  does  not  coexist  with  a  thoroughly
enervating  climate,  is  exceedingly  favourable  to  the  military
qualities,  for  by  the  stigma  which  it  attaches  to  labour  it  diverts
men  from  most  peaceful  and  industrial  pursuits.  Both  of  these
truths  were  exemplified  in  Virginia,  which  produced  a  very
large  proportion  of  the  most  prominent  advocates  of  indepen-
dence, while  it  was  early  noted  for  the  efficiency  of  its  militia.'
Virginia  always  claimed  to  be  the  leading  as  well  as  the  oldest
colony  in  America,  and  though  its  people  were  much  more  dis-
sipated and  extravagant  than  those  of  the  Northern  colonies,
the  natural  advantages  of  the  province  were  so  great,  and  the
tobacco  crop  raised  by  the  negroes  was  so  valuable,  that  in  the
ten  years  preceding  1 7  70  the  average  value  of  ;  he  exports  from
Virginia  and  Maryland  exceeded  by  considerably  more  than  a
third  the  united  exports  of  the  Xew  England  colonies.  New  York
and  Pennsylvania.^ A  large  number  of  the  planters  appear  to

'  Cha<tcllnx,  pp.  2S,  29.  See  too  Grahime,  iv.  122-124. Web-

=  Ibid.  pp.  I<.t2,  19.S.  ster's Es-mi^g, pp. 3G1-364. Story's

»  Burnaby. Pinkerton's  Voya/jes,  Constitution  of  tlm United States,  i.

xiii.  714,  715.  29-.83.

*  Chastellux.ii.  19.3-19.5. There  is  »  Sparks' Life of Waskivjfon.

an  excellent  description  of  Virpinian  Washington's  Workji,  i.  133.

society  inWirt's  Life  of  Patrick  Henri/.  «  Hildreth,  ii.  559.

288  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xu

have  been  warmly  attached  to  England,  but  much  discontent
was  produced  by  the  interference  of  the  mother-country  iu  the
quiurrel,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  between  the  laity  and
the  clergy  of  this  State.  The  sixty  or  seventy  clergymen  of
the  EstabUshed  Church  received,  in  addition  to  a  house  and  to
some  glebe  lands,  an  annual  stipend  in  the  form  of  tobacco,
which  was  delivered  to  them  packed  in  hogsheads  for  exporta-
tion at  the  nearest  warehouse.  In  a  year  when  the  tobacco
crop  failed,  the  Assembly  passed  a  law  obliging  the  clergy  to
receive  their  stipends  in  money  instead  of  tobacco,  and  enforced
it  without  waiting  for  the  royal  assent.  The  clergy  complained
that  no  allowance  having  been  made  for  the  low  price  of  tobacco
in  good  years,  it  was  unfair  that  they  should  be  deprived  of  the
benefit  of  its  high  price  in  a  bad  year,  and  they  sent  over  an  agent
to  England  and  induced  the  English  Government  to  disallow  the
law.  Actions  were  brought  by  the  clergy  to  recover  the  sums
out  of  which  they  had  been  defrauded,  but  although  the  law
was  indisputably  on  their  side  they  found  it  impossible  to  obtain
verdicts  from  Virginian  juries.  It  was  in  pleading  against  them
that  Patrick  Henry,  the  greatest  of  American  orators,  first
exhibited  his  eloquence  and  his  antipathy  to  England.  He  had
been  successively  a  storekeeper,  a  farmer,  and  a  shopkeeper,
but  had  failed  in  all  these  pursuits,  had  become  baulcrupt,
and  at  last,  with  a  very  tarnished  reputation,  had  entered  the
law  courts,  where  he  soon  displayed  a  power  of  popular
eloquence  which  had  never  yet  been  equalled,  or  perhiips  ap-
proached, in  America.  He  openly  told  the  juries  that  the
act  of  the  English  Government  in  disallowing  the  proceedings
of  the  Virginian  Assembly  was  an  instance  of  tyranny  and
misgovernmi-nt  that  dissolved  tlie  political  compact,  and  speak-
ing in  a  popular  cause  he  created  so  fierce  a  spirit  iu  the  colony
that  the  clergy  gave  up  all  attempts  to  obtain  what  was  due
to  them.'  In  addition  to  this  passing  quarrel,  there  was  a  more
chronic  source  of  anti-English  feeling  in  Virginia  in  the  com-
mercial restrictions  which  prevented  the  planters  from  sending
their  tobacco  to  foreign  countries.

It  is  not  necessary  to  pursue  further  a  description  of  the
Southern  colonies. Maryland  in sr)!!,  produce,  tind  social  COD-

' nnrnnby. Pinkorton,  xiii.  712  7  1  I. \\"\T\.'i>.  Life  of  H&nry.

CH.  XII.  Till'] SOUTHERN COLONIES.  289

dition  greatly  n'S(3iul)l(Ml  N'irgiuia,  but  properties  were  smaller;
a  few  rieli  Koman  Catholics  might  still  be  found  among  the
landowners,'  and  the  colony  was  full  of  convicts,  who  were
brought  there  in  great  numbers  from  England,  and  sold  as
slaves  to  the  planters.  In  Maryland  the  same  law  of  real
property  prevailed  as  in  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania,  but
in  all  the  other  Southern  colonies  the  English  law,  with  its
tendency  to  favour  great  agglomerations  of  land,  was  main-
tained.' In  the  vast  provinces  of  Carolina  the  climate  was
more  enervating  and  the  proportion  of  negroes  was  much  larger
than  in  Virginia,  and  there  were  greater  contrasts  of  wealth  and
poverty  than  in  any  other  parts  of  British  America.  Georgia
and  Florida  were  too  undeveloped  to  have  much  political  or
intellectual  influence.  Through  the  whole  of  the  Southern
colonies  there  was  much  less  severity  of  religious  orthodoxy,  less
energy  and  moral  fibre,  less  industrial,  political,  and  intellectual
activity  than  in  the  North,  and  a  much  greater  tendency  both
to  idleness  and  to  amusement.  Charleston  is  said,  of  all  the
American  towns,  to  have  approached  most  nearly  to  the  social
refinement  of  a  great  European  capital.

In  general,  however,  the  American  colonies  had  attained
to  great  prosperity  and  to  a  high  level  of  civilisation.  Burnaby
noticed  that  in  a  journey  of  1,200  miles  through  the  Northern
and  Central  colonies  he  had  not  met  with  a  single  beggar.'
Domestic  wages  were  much  higher,^  and farmers  and  farm-

'  Adams  mentions  in  1774  a  Ca-  the  title  of  gentlemen,  and  they  hold

tholic  gentleman  named  Carroll  (one  their  negroes and  convicts — that  is,

of  the  signers  of  the  Declaration  of  all  labouring  people  and  tradesmen —

Independence) who lived at Anna-  in such contempt, that  tliey think

polls,  in  Maryland,  as  a  man  of  the  first  themselves  a  distinct  order  of  beings,

fortune  in  America. 'His  income  is  Hence  they  never  will  suffer  their  sons

10,000^.  a  year  now,  will  be H,OQOl.  to  labour  or  learn  any  trade,  but  they

in  two  or  three  years  they  say;  besides,  bring  them  up  in  idleness  or,  what  is

his  father  has  a  vast  estate  which  will  worse,  in  horse-racing,  cock-fighting,

be  his.' — Adams'  ]{'(>?•/<•,<!,  ii.  380.  and  card-playing.  .  .  .  The  object  of

*  Story's  ConstituHoa  of  the  United  the  men  of  property  here,  the  planters.

States,  i.  16.5, 166.  In  1777AdamswTites  kc,  is  universally  wealth. Every  way

that  in  ilaryland  'they  have  but  few  in  the  world  is  sought  to  get  and  save

merchants. They  are  chiefly  planters  money  ;  land  jobbers,  speculators  in

and  farmers ;  the  planters  are  those  land  ;  little  generosity  to  the  public,

who  raise  tobacco,  and  the  fanners  little  public  spirit.' — Adams' Works,

such  as  raise  wheat,  &c. The  lands  ii.  4.S6.

are  cultivated  and  all  sorts  of  trades  *  Pinkerton's  Voyages,  xiii.  750.

are  exercised  by  negroes  or  by  trans-  *  Ibid.  xiii. 500. It  must  be  re-

jx)rted  convicts,  which  has  occasioned  membered,  however,  that  the  slaves

the  planters  and  farmers  to  assume  in  America  were  not  only  negroes  and

VOL. III.  U

'i'JU  ENGLAND IN TllK EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xii.

labourers  incomparably  more  prosperous  than  in  England  or  in
any  other  part  of  Europe.  '  The  Northern  yeomanry,'  wrote
an  American  economist  at  a  time  when  America  can  have  done
little  more  than  recover  from  the  losses  of  the  War  of  Inde-
pendence, '  not  only  require  more  clothing  tlian  the  Southern,
but  they  live  on  expensive  food  and  drinks.  Every  man,  even
the  poorest,  makes  use  of  tea,  sugar,  spirits,  and  a  multitude
of  articles  which  are  not  consumed  by  the  labourers  of  any
other  country.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  labouring  people  in  New
England  eat  meat  twice  a  day,  and  as  much  as  their  appetites
demand.'  Owing  to  the  admirable  parish  libraries,  there  were
New  England  parishes  '  where  almost  every  householder  has
read  the  works  of  Addison,  Sherlock,  Atterbury,  Watts,  Young,
and  other  similar  writings,  and  will  converse  handsomely  on
the  subjects  of  which  they  treat ; ' '  and  Boston,  New  York,
Philadelphia,  and  Charleston,  would  in  almost  all  the  ele-
ments of  civilisation  have  ranked  high  among  the  provincial
towns  of  Europe.  When  Kalm  visited  Canada  in  1750,  he  found
that  there  was  not  a  single  printing  press  in  the  whole  territory
possessed  by  the  French,^  but  before  that  time  most  of  the
more  important  British  colonies  possessed  a  newspaper,  and  by
the  close  of  1765  at  least  forty-three  newspapers  are  said  to
have  been  established  in  America.^  There  were  seven  important
colleges,'*  and  there  were  at  least  four  literary  magazines.'^

In  New  England,  education  was  always  conducted  at  home,
but  in  the  Southern  and  some  of  the  Middle  colonies  the  rich
planters  were  accustomed  to  send  their  sons  for  education  to
England.'''  In  these  States  education  was  almost  a  monopoly
of  the  rich  ;  schoolmasters  were  despised,  and  schools  were  ex-
tremely rare.  Martin,  the  last  royal  governor  in  North  Carolina,
stated  that  in  his  time  there  were  only  two  schools  in  the  whole
colony.'^  In  the  first  thirty  years  of  the  eighteenth  century
there  was  but  one  grammar  school,  in  the  next  forty  years  there

convicts — many  of  the  poor  emip^ants  much  lower  estimate {Bctrostpect  of

from  Europe  sold  themselves  to  the  tlw  Eighteenth  Crntury,  iii.  n()-92).
y)lanters  for  a  term  of  years,  and  some-  *  Harvard, William and Mary,

limes  in  this  way  paid  thoir  passage.  Yale,  New  Jersey,  King's, rhiladel-

'  Webster's  Essays,  pp.  ;^.'5i>, ;i6C>.  phia,  and  Rhode  Island.
This  was  published  in  17iiO.  ^  Tvler,  ii.  30.5,  300.

=  I'inkerton,  xiii.  (i(iO.  • « Miller,  iii.  I'Jl,  11(2,  194.

'  Tyhfi^  Jlist..  of  Amer-ican.Litera-  '  ^c-e  i^nhinc's  American  Loyalists,

turf,  ii.  .501. Miller,  however,  gives  a  p.  35.

CH.  Sir.  A.MKKICAN KDUCATIOX.  291

were  but  three  in  the  great  province  of  South  Carolina.'  Noah
Webster  mentions  that  he  once  saw  a  copy  of  instructions  given  to
a  representative  of  Maryland  by  his  constituents,  and  he  found
that  out  of  more  than  a  hundred  names  that  were  subscribed,
'  three-fifths  were  marked  by  a  cross  because  the  men  could  not
\vrite.'  He  ascertained  in  1785  that  the  circulation  of  news-
papers in  the  single  New  England  State  of  Connecticut  was
equal  to  that  in  the  whole  American  territory  south  of  Penn-
sylvania,- and  he  has  recorded  the  extraordinary  fact  that  in
some  parts  of  the  colonies  the  education  of  the  young  was  fre-
quently confided  to  the  care  of  purchased  convicts.^  All  the
great  seminaries  of  learning  lay  in  the  Northern  and  JNIiddle
colonies  and  in  Virginia,  and  the  English  education  of  the  rich
planters  of  the  South  had  greatly  coloured  their  political  opinions.
At  the  same  time  they  formed  the  more  important  part  of  the
very  small  leisure  class  which  existed  in  America ;  and  it  is  a
remarkable  fiict  that  the  Southern  colonies,  though  in  general
far  behind  the  Northern  ones,  produced  no  less  than  five  out  ot
the  first  seven  presidents  of  the  United  States.

In  the  Northern  colonies,  on  the  contrary,  education  was
both  very  widely  diffused  and  very  equal.  The  average  was
exceedingly  high,  but  there  were  no  eminences.  The  men  were
early  devoted  to  money-making,  but  it  was  noticed  that  there
was  a  general  ambition  to  educate  women  above  their  fortunes,
and  that  in  some  towns  there  were  three  times  as  many  '  gen-
teelly bred '  women  as  men.''  The  absence  of  any  considerable
leisure  class,  the  difficulty  of  procuring  books,''  and  especially

'  Miller's  Retrospect,  iii.  230.  great  personal  knowledge  of  America,

'  Webster's  Essays,  338,  360.  it  is  said, '  There are five  printing

'  '  The  most  important  business  in  houses  [in  Boston],  at  one  of  which  the

civil  society  is  in  many  parts  of  Arae-  Boston  Gazette  is  printed,  and  comes

rica  committed  to  the  most  worthless  out  twice  a  week.  The  presses  here  are

characters.  .  .  .  Education  is  sunk  to  generally  full  of  work,  which  is  in  a

a  level  with  the  most  menial  services.  great  measure  owing  to  the  colleges

.  .  .  Will  it  be  denied  that  before  the  and schools for useful learning in

war  it  was a  frequent  practice  for  New  England,  whereas  at  New  York

gentlemen  to  purchase  consicts  who  there is but  one little bookseller's

had  been  transported  for  their  crimes  shop,  and  none  at  all  inVirginia,  Mary-

and  employ  them  as  private  tutors  in  land,  Carolina,  Barbadoes,  or  any  of

their  families?' — Ibid.  pp.  17-19. See  the  sugar  islands,' p.  199. As  late  as

too  pp.  55,  338.  1760  it  is  said  that  '  there  were  no

*  Ibid.  p.  30.  Greek types  in the  country, or if

*  In  that  curious  book,  the  Life  of  there  were  that  no  printer  knew  how
Bampfijlde  Moore  Carnv,  which  was  to  set  them.' — Tudor s  Life  of  Otis,
published  in  1719,  and  which shows  p.  16.

v2

292  ENGLAND IN TIIF, KKillTKF.NTIl CENTURY. cu.  xii.

the  intensely  cominerciul  ami  money-making  character  of  the
colonists,  were  fatal  to  original  literature ;  and,  except  for  a  few-
theological  works,  American  literary  history  before  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century  would  be  almost  a  blank.  Berkeley
wrote  his  '  Alciphron  and  his  '  Minute  Philosopher '  in  .Rhode
Island ;  but  the  first  native  writer  of  real  eminence  was  Jonathan
Edwards,  who  was  born  in  1703.  He  was  soon  followed  by  Ben-
jamin Franklin,  who  in  literature,  as  in  science,  took  a  place
among  the  greatest  of  his  contemporaries.  Kittenhouse,  who
was  born  near  Philadelphia  in  1732,  attained  some  distinction
in  astronomy ;  and  among  the  Americans  who  sought  a  home
in  England  were  the  painters  Copley  and  West,  and  the  gram-
marian Lindley  ^Murray.  Several  of  those  noble  public  libraries
which  are  now  one  of  the  great  glories  of  America  had  already
arisen ;  the  first  circulating  library  was  established  at  Phila-
delphia in  1731,^  and  between  1763  and  1770  a  medical  school
was  founded  in  the  same  city,  and  courses  of  lectures  were  for
the  first  time  given  on  anatomy,  on  the  institutes  of  medicine,
on  the  Linna^an  system  of  botany,  and  on  the  discoveries  of
Lavoisier  in  chemistry.^

Tlie  moral  and  political  aspect  of  the  country  presented  a
much  more  blended  and  doubtful  picture,  and  must  have
greatly  perplexed  those  who  tried  to  cast  the  horoscope  of
America.  Nations  are  essentially  what  their  circumstances
make  them,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  American  colonists
were  exceedingly  peculiar.  A  country  where  so  large  a  propor-
tion of  the  inhabitants  were  recent  immigrants,  drawn  from
different  nations  and  professing  various  creeds ;  where,  owing
to  the  vast  extent  of  territory  and  the  imperfection  of  the
means  of  communication,  they  were  thrown  very  slightly  in  con-
tact with  one  another,  and  where  the  money-making  spirit  was
peculiarly  intense,  was  not  likely  to  produce  much  patriotism
or  community  of  feeling.  On  the  other  hand,  the  same  circum-
stances had  developed  to  an  almost  unprecedented  degree
energy,  variety  of  resource,  independence  of  character,  capacity

'  Frnnklin's  TAfc,  j).  DO.  of the early intellcctu.il history  of

^  Miller's  Jletrospcct  of  the  Eir/h-  the  colonies. Sec  too  lliklrcth's //i«<.

irrnth  Ci'iitnry,  iii.  2:Ui,  2:57,  282.  This  of  the  United  States,  ii.  513.

book  contains  an  admirable  account

CH.  XII.  AMERICAN  MORALS.  293

for  self-government.  In  a  simple  and  laborious  society  many
of  the  seed-plots  of  European  vice  were  imknown.  Small  free-
holders cultivating  their  own  lands  were  placed  under  conditions
very  favourable  to  iiiorid  development,  and  the  wild  life  of  the
explorer,  the  pioneer,  and  the  huntsman  gave  an  unbounded
scope  to  those  superfluous  energies  which  become  so  dangerous
when  they  are  repressed  or  misdirected.  Beliefs  that  had  loiig
l)een  waning  in  Europe  retained  much  vigour  in  the  colonies,
and  there  were  little  sects  or  societies  which  represented  the
fervour  and  purity  of  the  early  Christians  perhaps  as  perfectly
as  anything  upon  earth.  Travellers  noticed  that,  except  where
slavery  had  exercised  its  demoralising  influence,  the  intercourse
between  the  sexes  was  singularly  free  and  at  the  same  time  sin-
gularly pure.'  There  was  a  great  simplicity  and  freshness  of
character,  a  spirit  of  warm  hospitality,  a  strong  domestic  feeling.
Political  corruption,  which  was  the  great  cancer  of  English  life,
was  almost  unknown,  though  there  were  serious  scandals  con-
nected with  the  law  courts,  and  though  the  level  of  commercial
integrity  was  probably  lower  than  in  England.  A  large  proportion
of  the  men  who  played  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  events  to  be  re-
corded, were  men  of  high  private  morals,  simple,  domestic,  honoiu:-
able,  and  religious.  When  the  conflict  with  England  became
inevitable,  one  of  the  first  proceedings  of  the  different  States
was  to  appoint  days  of  hmniliation  and  prayer,  and  Washington
notes  in  his  private  diary  how  on  this  occasion  he  '  went  to
church  and  fasted  all  day.'  The  most  stringent  rules  were  made
in  the  American  camp  to  suppress  all  games  of  chance  and  to
punish  all  profane  language.  John  Adams,  recounting  week
after  week  in  his  diary  the  texts  of  the  sermons  he  had  heard,
and  his  estimate  of  the  comparative  merits  of  the  preachers,
when  he  was  leading  the  popular  party  in  the  very  agony  of
the  struggle  for  the  independence  of  America,  is  a  typical
example  of  a  class  of  politicians  strangely  unlike  the  revolu-
tionists of  Europe.

The  most  serious  evil  of  the colonies  was  the  number  and
force  of  the influences  which  were impelling  large  classes  to

'  Chastellux,  i.  lij.1, 154.  Mimmns vanian  morals  and manners in  the
dfi  Lafni/ette,  i.  p.  25. See  too  the Mimoins  dii  Comtc  de  Scgvr.
very engaging pictiu'c  ol! Pcnnsyl-

294  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. cii.  xii,

violence  and  anarchy,  brutalising  them  by  accustoming  them  to
an  unrestrained  exercise  of  power,  and  breaking  down  among
them  that  salutary  respect  for  authority  which  lies  at  the  root
of  all  true  national  greatness.  The  influence  of  negro  slavery
in  this  respect  can  hardly  be  overrated,  and  in  the  slave  States
a  master  could  commit  any  act  of  violence  and  outrage  on  a
negro  with  practical  impunity.  The  relations  of  the  colonists
to  the  Indian  tribes  were  scarcely  less  demoralising.  White
men  planted  among  savages  and  removed  from  the  control
of  European  opinion  seldom  fail  to  contract  the  worst  vices
of  tyrants.

The  voluminous  and  very  copious  despatches  of  Sir  W.
Johnson  and  of  JNIr.  Stuart,  who  during  many  years  had  the
management  of  Indian  affairs,  are,  on  the  whole,  extremely
creditable  to  the  writers.  They  show  that  the  Government
laboured  with  great  humanity,  equity,  and  vigilance  to  pro-
tect the  rights  of  the  Indians,  but  they  also  show  that  they
had  to  encounter  insuperable  difficulties  in  their  task.  The
Executive  was  miserably  weak.  There  were  usually  no  troops
within  reach.  Juries  in  Indian  cases  could  never  be  trusted,
and  public  opinion  on  the  frontier  looked  upon  Indians  as
little  better  than  wild  beasts.  The  French  had  in  this
respect  succeeded  much  better.  The  strong  Executive  of
Canada  guarded  the  Indians  effectually  from  depredations,
restricted  commercial  dealings  with  them  to  the  better  class
of  traders,  and  attached  them  by  a  warm  feeling  of  gratitude.
But  the  despatches  of  Johnson  and  Stuart  are  full  of  accoimts
of  how  the  English  settlers  continually  encroached  on  the  terri-
tory which  was  allotted  by  treaty  to  the  Indians  ;  how  the  rules
that  had  been  established  for  the  regulation  of  the  Indian
trade  were  systematically  violated  ;  how  traders  of  the  lowest
kind  went  among  the  savages,  keeping  them  in  a  state  of  con-
tinual drunkenness  till  they  had  induced  them  to  surrender
their  land  ;  how  the  goods  that  were  sold  to  Indians  were  of
the  most  fraudulent  description  ;  how  many  traders  deliberately
excited  outrages  against  their  rivals ;  how  great  numbers  of
Indians  who  were  perfectly  peaceful,  and  loyal  to  the  English,
were  murdered  without  a  shadow  of  provocation  ;  and  how  these
crimes  were  perpetrated  without  pimitjhment  and  almost  witli-

CH.  XH.  TREATMENT OF INIJIANS.  295

out  blame.'  A  few  voices  were  no  doubt  raised  in  the  colonies  on
their  behalf,  Franklin  wrole  with  honest  indignation  denounc-
ing some  horrible  murders  that  had  been  perpetrated  in  I'enn-
sylvania.  The  Quakers  were  usually  noted  for  their  righteous
deahng  with  the  Indians.  John  Eliot  in  the  seventeenth
century,  and  Brainerd  in  the  eighteenth  centiury,  had  laboured
with  admirable  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  the
Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel  had  planted  several
missionary  stations  among  them.  In  general,  however,  the
French  missionaries  were  far  more  successful.  This  was  partly,
no  doubt,  owing  to  their  creed,  for  Catholicism,  being  a  highly
pictorial,  authoritative,  and  material  religion,  is  much  more
suited  than  Protestantism  to  influence  savages  and  idolaters ;
but  much  also  depended  on  the  great  superiority  of  the  Catholic
missionaries  in  organisation,  education,  and  even  character.
The  strange  spectacle  was  often  shown  of  Presbyterians,  Baptists,
and  Anglicans  contending  in  rivalry  for  converts.  New  England
Puritans  tried  to  persuade  their  converts  that  their  dances,
their  rejoicings  at  marriages,  and  their  most  innocent  amuse-
ments were  wrong.  Many  missionaries  were  absolutely  un-
acquainted with  the  language  of  those  to  whom  they  preached,
and  they  had  no  interpreters  except  ignorant  backwoodsmen.^
It  is  a  significant  fact  that  in  the  French  war  the  Indians  were
usually  on  the  side  of  the  French,  and  in  the  War  of  Indepen-
dence on  the  side  of  the  Government,  and  the  explanation  is
probably  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  constant  and  atrocious  out-
rages which  they  endured  from  the  American  traders.

To  these  elements  of  anarchy  must  be  added  the  enormous
extent  of  smuggling  along  the  American  coast,  and  also  the

'  Letters  on  Indian  affairs  form  a  as  his  text,  "  For  God  is  no  respecter

very  large  proportion  of  the  papers  of  persons,"  and  desired  it  to  be  ex-

(Plantations,  General)  on  America  in  plained to them  ; the interpreter

the  Record  OflSce. The  most  valuable  (though  the  best  in  that  country)  told

have  been  printed  in  the  admirable  the  Indians  that "  God  had  no  love  for

collection  of  Documents  relative  tothe  such  people  as  them,"  on  which  I  im-

Colonial  IILitvnj  of  New Yorli,  pub-  mediately  stopped  him  and  explained

lished  by  order  of  the  Legislature  of  the  text,  as  I  did  the  rest  of  his  dis-

that  State. See  e.g.  vol.  vii.  602,  637-  course,  to  prevent  farther  mistakes  ;

6il,  837,  838,  9i6-948,  953-977.  had  I  not  been  present  the  error  must

^  Ibid. vii. 969, 970. Sir W.  have  passed,  and  many  more  might

Johnson  mentions  that  he  was  himself  have  been  committed  in  the  course  of

present  when  one  of  the  missionaries,  the  sermon.'
preaching  to  the  Indians,  '  delivered

296  I'NGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CE'NTURY. cii.  xii.

extreme  weakness  of  the  Government,  which  made  it  impossible
to  enforce  any  nnpopuhir  law  or  repress  any  riot.  There  was  no
standing  army,  and  the  position  of  the  governors  was  in  several
States  one  of  the  most  humiliating  dependence.  In  the  four
New  England  States,  in  New  Jersey,  and  in  New  York,  all  the
executive  and  judicial  authorities  depended  mainly  or  entirely
for  their  salaries  upon  an  annual  vote  of  the  Assembly,  which
was  at  all  times  liable  to  be  withdrawn  or  diminished.  It  was
not  possible  under  such  circumstances  that  any  strong  feeling
of  respect  for  authority  could  subsist,  and  the  absence  of  any
great  superiority  either  in  rank  or  in  genius  contributed  to
foster  a  spirit  of  unbounded  self-confidence  among  the  people.

The  relation  of  this  great,  rising,  and  civilised  community
to  the  parent  State  was  a  question  of  transcendent  importance
to  the  future  of  the  Empire.  The  general  principle  which  was
adopted  was,  that  each  colony  should  regulate  with  perfect
freedom  its  local  affairs,  but  that  matters  of  imperial  concern,
and  especially  the  commercial  system,  should  remain  under
the  control  of  the  Imperial  Parliament.  The  common  law  and
the  statute  law,  as  far  as  they  existed  before  the  colonisation,
were  extended  to  the  colonies,  but  the  relation  of  the  colonial
legislatures  to  the  GTovernment  at  home  was  not  very  accurately
defined.  The  original  charters,  while  authorising  them  to  levy
taxes  and  make  laws  for  the  colonies,  had  declared  that  the
colonists  should  be  deemed  natural-born  English  subjects,  and
should  enjoy  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  thereof;  that
the  laws  of  England,  in  so  far  as  they  were  applicable  to  their
circumstances,  should  be  in  force  in  the  colonies,  and  that  no
law  should  be  made  in  the  colonies  which  was  repugnant  or
did  not,  '  as  near  as  may  be  conveniently,'  conform  to  the  laws
of  England.  A  statute  of  William  provided  that  all  colonial
laws  which  were  repugnant  to  laws  made  in  England,  '  so  far
as  such  law  shall  relate  to  and  mention  the  said  plantations,
are  illegal,  null,  and  void.' '

These  restrictions  are  of  a  very  vague  description,  and,  as  is
often  the  case  in  English  law,  the  meaning  was  determined  more
by  a  course  of  precedents  than  by  express  definition. Great

'  7  and  R  William  II  f.  cap.  22.  Story's  Con»tit.vtion  of  the  United  St  a  ten
i.  130,  147-140.

cH.  XII. RELATION OF  THE  COLONIES  TO PARLIAMENT. 297

remedial  measures,  guaranteeing  the  rights  of  subjects,  such
as  the  Great  Charter  or  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  were  in  full
force  in  the  colonies ;  but  the  colonial  legislatures,  with  the
entire  assent  of  the  Home  Government,  assumed  the  right  of
modifying  almost  every  portion  both  of  the  common  and  of
the  statute  law,  with  a  view  to  their  special  circumstances.
The  laws  relating  to  real  property,  the  penal  code,  and  the  laws
relating  to  religious  belief,  were  freely  dealt  with,  and  it  became
a  recognised  principle  that  the  colonies  might  legislate  for
themselves  as  they  pleased,  provided  they  left  untouched  alle-
giance to  the  Crown  and  Acts  of  the  English  Parliament  in
which  they  were  expressly  mentioned.

The  scope  of  the  Act  of  William  establishing  this  latter
restriction  was  also  determined  by  precedent.  The  theory  of
the  English  Government  was,  that  Parliament  had  by  right
an  absolute  and  unrestricted  power  of  legislation  over  the  de-
pendencies of  England.  The  colonies  were  of  the  nature  of
corporations  which  lay  within  its  supreme  dominion,  but  which
were  entrusted  with  certain  corporate  powers  of  self-government.
In  an  early  period  of  colonial  history  this  theory  had  been
contested  in  the  colonies,  and  especially  in  Massachusetts;  and
it  had  been  contended  that  the  colonies,  having  been  founded
in  most  instances  without  any  assistance  from  the  Home  Govern-
ment, and  having  received  their  charters  from  the  Sovereign,
and  not  from  the  Parliament,  were  in  the  position  of  Scotland
before  the  Union,  bound  in  allegiance  to  the  King,  but  alto-
gether independent  of  the  English  Parliament.  This  theory,
however,  was  inconsistent  with  the  whole  course  of  English
legislation  about  the  colonies,  with  the  terms  of  the  charters,
and  with  the  claims  of  the  colonists  to  rights  that  were  de-
rived exclusively  from  English  law.  It  was  not  within  the
prerogative  of  the  Sovereign  either  to  emancipate  English  sub-
jects by  charter  from  the  dominion  of  Parliament,  or  to  confer
upon  aliens  the  character  of  Englishmen.  The  claim  to  be
beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  Parliament  was  accordingly  soon
dropped  by  the  colonists  ;  and,  although  it  revived  at  the  era  of
the  Revolution,  we  find  Massachusetts  in  1757, 1761,  and  1768,
acknowledging,  in  the  most  explicit  and  emphatic  terms,  the
right  of  the  English  Parliament  to  bind  the  colonies  by  its

298 ENGLAND  IN  TUE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xn.

Acts.'  The  only  modern  Acts  of  Parliament,  however,  which
were  esteemed  biudinir  were  those  in  which  the  colonies  were
expressly  mentioned ;  and  these  Acts  dealt  with  them,  not  as
separate  units,  but  as  integral  parts  of  one  connected  Empire.
It  was  the  recognised  right  of  Parliament  to  establish  a  uniform
commercial  system,  extending  over  the  whole  Empire,  and
binding  every  portion  of  it.  There  were  also  some  matters
which  were  mainly,  if  not  exclusively,  of  colonial  interest,  on
which  Parliament  undertook  to  legislate,  and  its  authority  was
submitted  to,  though  not  without  some  protest  and  remon-
strance. It  was  sometimes  necessary  to  establish  a  general
regulation  binding  on  all  the  colonies ;  and  as  there  existed  no
general  or  central  colonial  government,  it  devolved  upon  tlie
Imperial  Parliament  to  enforce  it.  On  this  principle  Parlia-
ment introduced  the  English  Post-office  system  into  the  colonies,
determined  the  rates  of  postage,  regulated  the  currency,  created
new  facilities  for  the  collection  of  debts,  established  a  uni-
form law  of  naturalisation,  and  even  legislated  about  joint-stock
companies.^

The  relation  of  the  colonial  governments  to  the  Crown  varied
in  some  degree  in  the  different  colonies.  As  a  oeneral  rule  the
Governor  and  the  Council  represented  the  royal  authority,  and,
except  in  the  case  of  the  three  colonies  of  Connecticut,  Khode
Island,  and  Maryland,  the  Crown  had  a  right  of  disallowing  laws
which  had  passed  through  all  their  stages  in  America.^  The
royal  veto  had  fallen  into  complete  disuse  in  England,  but  in
the  case  of  colonial  legislation  it  was  still  not  unfrequently
employed.  With  the  exception,  however,  of  measures  relating
to  commerce,  colonial  Acts  were  rarely  or  never  annulled,  ex-
cept when  they  tended  to  injure  or  oppress  some  class  of  colo-
nists. As  the  Governor  was  usually  paid  by  an  annual  vote
of  the  Assembly,  and  as  he  had  very  little  patronage  to  dispose
of,  the  Executive  in  the  colonies  was  extremely  weak,  and
the  colonists,  in  spite  of  the  occasional  exercise  of  the  royal
veto,  had  probably  a  much  more  real  control  over  legislation
than  the  people  of  England.  Trial  by  jury,  both  in  civil  and
criminal  cases,  was  as  universal  as  in  England  ;  but  an  appeal

'  story's  Constittifion  of  the  United  States,  i.  174.
==  Ilildrctli,  ii.  517.  '  Story,  i.  158.

ra.  XII.  THE  COMMERCIAL  SYSTEM.  299

lay  from  all  the  highest  courts  of  judicature  in  the  colonies  to
the  King  in  Council.

There  were  assuredly  no  other  colonies  in  the  world  so
favourably  situated.  They  had,  however,  before  the  passing  of
the  Stamp  Act,  one  real  and  genuine  grievance,  which  was
already  preparing  the  way  to  the  disruption  of  the  Empire.  I
have  already  in  a  former  volume  enumerated  the  chief  restric-
tions of  the  commercial  code ;  but  it  is  so  important  that  the  true
extent  of  colonial  grievances  should  be  clearly  understood,  that
I  trust  the  reader  will  excuse  some  repetition  in  my  narrative.
The  colonies  were  not,  like  Ireland,  excluded  from  the  Naviga-
tion Act,  and  they  had  no  special  reason  to  complain  that  their
trade  was  restricted  to  vessels  built  either  in  England  or  in  the
plantations,  and  manned  to  the  extent  of  two-thirds  of  their
crew  by  British  subjects.  In  this  respect  they  were  on  an
exact  level  with  the  mother-country,  and  the  arrangement  was
supposed  to  be  very  beneficial  to  both.  It  was,  however,  un-
doubtedly a  great  evil  that  the  colonists  were  confined  to  the
British  dominions  for  a  market  for  their  tobacco,  cotton,  silk,
coffee,  indigo,  naval  stores,  skins,  sugar,  and  rice,^  as  well  as
many  less  important  articles  ;  that  they  were  prohibited  from
carrying  any  goods  from  Europe  to  America  which  had  not
first  been  landed  in  England,  and  that  every  form  of  colonial
manufacture  which  could  possibly  compete  with  the  manufac-
tures of  England  was  deliberately  crushed.  In  the  interest  of
the  English  wool  manufacture  they  were  forbidden  to  export
their  own  woollen  goods  to  any  country  whatever,  or  even  to
send  them  from  colony  to  colony.  In  the  interests  of  English
iron  merchants  they  were  forbidden  to  set  up  any  steel  furnaces
or  slitting  mills  in  the  colonies.  In  the  interest  of  English
hatters  they  were  forbidden  to  export  their  hats,  or  even  to  send
them  from  one  colony  to  another,  and  serious  obstacles  were
thrown  in  the  way  of  those  who  sought  to  establish  a  manu-
fticture  for  purely  home  consimiption.  In  the  interest  of  the
English  sugar  colonies,  the  importation  of  sugar,  molasses,  and
rum  from  the  French  "West  Indian  islands,  which  was  of
extreme  importance  to  the  New  England  colonies,  was  virtually

'  The  law  about  the  last  three  ar- among the ennmerated, sometimes
tides  varied. Thej'  were sometimes among  the  unenumerated  articles.

oOO  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

forbidden.  Every  act  of  the  colouial  legislatures  which  sought
to  encourage  a  native  or  discourage  an  English  Ixanch  of  trade^
was  watched  with  jealous  scrutiny.  Thus  in  1761  the  Assembly
of  South  Carolina,  being  sensible  of  the  great  social  and  poli-
tical danger  arising  from  the  enormous  multiplication  of  negroes
in  the  colony,  passed  a  law  imposing  a  heavy  duty  upon  the  im-
portation of  slaves ;  but  as  the  slave  trade  was  one  of  the  most
lucrative  bi^anches  of  English  commerce,  the  law  was  rescinded
by  the  Crown.  In  the  same  year  instructions  were  sent  to  the
Governor  of  New  Hampshire  to  refuse  his  assent  to  any  law
imposing  duties  on  negroes  imported  into  the  colonies.'

There  is,  no  doubt,  much  to  be  said  in  palliation  of  the
conduct  of  England.  If  Virginia  was  prohibited  from  sending
her  tobacco  to  any  European  country  except  England,  English-
men were  also  prohibited  from  purchasing  any  tobacco  except
that  which  came  from  America  or  Bermuda.  If  many  of  the
trades  and  manufactures  in  which  the  colonies  were  naturally
most  fitted  to  excel  were  restricted  or  crushed  by  law,  the  cul-
tivation of  indigo,  and  the  importation  into  England  of  pitch,
tar,  hemp,  flax,  and  ship-timber  from  America  were  encouraged
by  English  bounties,  and  several  articles  of  American  produce
obtained  a  virtual  monopoly  of  the  English  market  by  their
exemption  from  the  duties  which  were  imposed  on  similar
articles  imported  from  foreign  countries.  If  the  commercial
system  diminished  very  seriously  the  area  of  profitable  com-
merce that  was  open  to  the  colonies,  it  at  least  left  them  the
elements  of  a  great  national  prosperity.  The  trade  with  Eng-
land and  the  trade  with  the  English  West  Indies  were  large
and  lucrative,  and  the  export  trade  to  foreign  countries  was  only
prohibited  in  the  case  of  those  articles  which  were  enumerated
in  the  Navigation  Act.  Among  the  non-enumerated  articles
were  some  of  the  chief  productions  of  the  colonies — grain  of
all  kinds,  salted  provisions,  timber,  fish,  and  rum  ;  and  in  all
these  articles  the  colonists  were  suffered  to  trade  with  foreign
nations  without  any  other  restriction  than  that  of  sending  them
in  ships  built  and  chiefly  manned  by  British  subjects.  They
were,  however,  forbidden,  in  the  ordinary  state  of  the  law,  to
send  salted  provisions  or  any  kind  of  grain  except  rice  to  Eng-

'  Oralianic,  iv.  7'.'.

CH.  XII.  THE COMMERCIAL SYSTEM.  301

land.  The  prohibition  of  the  extremely  important  trade  with
the  French  West  Indies  was  allowed,  with  the  tacit  connivance
of  the  Government,  to  become  for  a  long  time  little  more  than
a  dead  letter.  The  provision  which  prevented  the  colonists
from  receiving  any  European  goods  except  direct  from  England
•was  much  mitigated  before  1763,  and  to  some  extent  after  that
date,  by  the  system  of  drawbacks  freeing  these  goods  from  the
greater  part  of  the  duties  that  would  have  been  paid  in  Eng-
land, so  that  many  Continental  goods  were  actually  sold  more
cheaply  in  America  than  in  England.  It  was  a  great  grievance
and  absurdity  that,  for  the  sake  of  a  few  Portugal  merchants
in  London  who  charged  a  commission  on  the  goods  that  passed
through  their  hands,  the  colonists  were  forbidden  to  import
directly  wine,  oil,  and  fruit  from  Portugal,  and  were  obliged  to
send  them  the  long  journey  to  England,  to  be  landed  there,
and  then  reshipped  for  America.  But  in  practice  this  rule
was  somewhat  mitigated,  and  American  ships  carrying  fish  to
Portugal  were  tacitly  allowed  to  bring  back  small  quantities
of  wine  and  fruit  as  ship  stores.*  It  is  a  gross  and  flagrant
misrepresentation  to  describe  the  commercial  policy  of  England
as  exceptionally  tyrannical.  As  Adam  Smith  truly  said,  '  Every
European  nation  had  endeavoured  more  or  less  to  monopolise
to  itself  the  commerce  of  its  colonies,  and  upon  that  account
had  prohibited  the  ships  of  foreign  nations  from  trading  to
them,  and  had  prohibited  them  from  importing  European
goods  from  any  foreign  nation ; '  and  '  though  the  policy  of
Great  Britain  with  regard  to  the  trade  of  her  colonies  has
been  dictated  by  the  same  mercantile  spirit  as  that  of  other
nations,  it  has,  upon  the  whole,  been  less  illiberal  and  oppres-
sive than  that  of  any  of  them.'  ^ Even  France,  which was

*  Letters  of  Governor  Bernard  on  of  the  world,  to  confine  (as  far  as  laws

the  Trade  and  Government  of  America,  can  confine)  the  trade  of  the  colonies

p.  4. See  too  Franklin's  Causes  of  to  the  mother-country.  .  .  .  Thus  the

American Discontents before 1768.  trade  of  the  Spanish  colonies  is  con-

Worlis,  iv.  250,  251. Wealth  of  Ka-  fined  by  law  to  Old  Spain,  the  trade

tions,  book  iv.  ch.  iv.,  vii.  of  the  Brazils  to  Portugal,  the  trade  of

2 Wealth  of  Aations,  book  iv.  ch.  ]\Iartinico  and  the  other  French  colo-

vii. See  too  Gentz  On  the  State  of  nies  to  Old  France,  and  the  trade  of

Europe  before  and  after  the  French  Curac-oa and Surinam to Holland,

Jlevolutwn  (English  trans.),  pp.  295  But  in  one  instance  the  Hollanders

808. '  Ever since the discovery of  make  an  exception  (perhaps  a  wise

America,'  says  Dean  Tucker,  '  it  has  one), viz. in  the  case  of Eustatia ,

been  the  system  of  every  Em-opean  which is open  to  all the world.' — •

Power  which  had  colonies  in  that  part  Tucker's  Four  Tracts,  p.  133.

302 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. cu.  xii.

by  far  the  most  liberal  of  Continental  nations  in  her  dealings
vrith  her  colonies,  imposed  commercial  restrictions  more  severe
than  those  of  England.  Not  only  was  the  trade  of  French
Canada,  like  that  of  British  America,  a  monopoly  of  the  mother-
country  ;  it  was  not  even  open  without  restriction  to  French-
men and  to  Canadians,  for  the  important  trade  in  beavers
belonged  exclusively  to  a  company  in  France,  and  could  only
be  exercised  under  its  authorisation.'

Still,  when  every  allowance  has  been  made,  it  is  undoubtedly
true  that  the  commercial  policy  of  England  had  established  a
real  opposition  of  interest  between  the  mother-country  and  her
colonies ;  and,  if  the  policy  which  was  the  proximate  cause  of
the  American  Kevolution  was  chiefly  due  to  the  King  and  to
the  landed  gentry,  the  ultimate  cause  may  be  mainly  traced
to  the  great  influence  which  the  commercial  classes  possessed
in  British  legislation.  The  expulsion  of  the  French  from
Canada  made  it  possible  for  the  Americans  to  dispense  with
English  protection.  The  commercial  restrictions  alone  made
it  their  interest  to  do  so.  If  the  'Wealth  of  Nations'  had
been  published  a  century  earlier,  and  if  its  principles  had  passed
into  legislation,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  separation  of  Eng-
land and  her  colonies  might  have  been  indefinitely  adjourned.
A  false  theory  of  commerce,  then  universally  accepted,  had
involved  both  the  mother-country  and  her  colonies  in  a  web  of
restrictions  which  greatly  retarded  their  development,  and  had
provided  a  perpetual  subject  of  irritation  and  dissension.  The
Custom-house  and  revenue  officers,  unlike  other  officials  in
America,  were  not  paid  by  the  local  legislatures.  They  were
appointed  directly  by  the  Crown  or  by  the  governors,  and  in
America  as  in  England  cases  of  revenue  fraud  might  by  means
of  the  Admiralty  Court  be  tried  without  the  intervention  of
a  jury.  Smuggling  was  very  lucrative,  and  therefore  very
popular,  and  any  attempt  to  interfere  with  it  was  greatly  re-
sented.

The  attention  of  the  British  Government  was  urgently  called
to  it  during  the  war.  At  a  time  when  Great  Britain  was
straining  every  nerve  to  conquer  Canada  from  the  French,  when
the  security  of  British  America  was  one  of  the  first  objects  of

'  Kalm. rinkcrton's  Voyagcn,  xiii.  700.

CH.  xn.  SMUGGLING.  303

English  policy,  and  when  large  sums  were  remitted  from  Vwg-
land  to  pay  the  colonies  for  fighting  in  their  own  cause,  it  was
found  that  the  French  fleets,  the  French  garrisons,  and  the
French  West  India  islands,  were  systematically  supplied  with
large  quantities  of  provisions  by  the  New  England  colonies.
The  trade  was  carried  on  partly  by  ordinary  smuggling  and
partly  under  the  cover  of  flags  of  truce,  granted  ostensibly
for  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  and  large  numbers  of  per-
sons, some  of  them,  it  is  said,  high  in  official  life,  connived
and  participated  in  it.  Pitt,  who  still  directed  affairs,
wrote  with  great  indignation  that  this  trade  must  at  all
hazards  be  suppressed  ;  but  the  whole  mercantile  community
of  the  New  England  seaports  appears  to  have  favoured  or
partaken  in  it,  and  great  difficulties  were  found  in  putting
the  law  into  execution.  The  smuggling  was  even  defended
with  a  wonderful  cynicism  on  the  ground  that  it  was  good
policy  to  make  as  much  money  as  possible  out  of  the  enemy.
Some  papers  seized  in  the  possession  of  Frenchmen  at  New
York,  showed  clearly  how  extensive  and  well-organised  was
the  plan  of  the  French  for  obtaining  their  supplies  from  New
England.  Amherst  wrote  to  Massachusetts,  Ehode  Island,  and
Connecticut  to  lay  an  embargo  on  all  but  transports  engaged
in  Government  employ,  and  this  measure  was  actually  taken,
but  it  was  removed  in  little  more  than  a  month.'  In  order  to
detect  if  possible  the  smuggled  goods,  the  Custom-house
officers  in  1761  applied  to  the  Superior  Court  in  Massachusetts
to  grant  them  'writs  of  assistance.'  These  writs,  which  were
frequently  employed  in  England,  and  occasionally  in  the
colonies,  bore  a  great  resemblance  to  the  general  warrants
which  soon  after  became  so  obnoxious  in  England.  They  were
general  writs  authorising  Custom-house  officers  to  search  any
house  they  pleased  for  smuggled  goods,  and  they  were  said  to
have  been  sometimes  used  for  purposes  of  private  annoyance.
They  appear,  however,  to  have  been  perfectly  legal,  and  if
their  employment  was  ever  justifiable,  it  was  in  an  attempt  to
put  down  a  smuggling  trade  with  the  enemy  in  time  of  war.
The  issue  of  the  warrants  was  resisted,  though  unsuccessfullv,

'  Hildretli,  ii.  498. Macpherson's  Annak  of  Commprce,  Hi.  .3.30. Arnolds
nixt.  of  Itlwile  Ts^aitd,  ii.  227,  23.5,  236.

304  ENGLAND IN THE ERillTEENTll CENTUKV.  cu.  xii.

by  the  Boston  merchants,  and  a  young  hiwyer  of  some  talent
named  James  Otis,  whose  father  had  just  been  disappointed
in  his  hopes  of  obtaining  a  seat  upon  the  bench,  signalised
himself  by  an  impassioned  attack  on  the  whole  commercial
code  and  on  the  alleged  oppression  of  Parliament,  which  ex-
cited great  enthusiasm  in  the  colonies,  and  was  afterwards
regarded  by  John  Adams  and  some  others  as  the  first  step
towards  the  Kevolution.'

There  were  indeed  already  on  all  sides  symptoms  by  which
a  careful  observer  might  have  foreseen  that  dangers  were  ap-
proaching. The  country  was  full  of  restless  military  adven-
turers called  into  prominence  by  the  war.  The  rapid  rise  of  an
ambitious  legal  profession  and  the  great  development  of  the
Press  made  it  certain  that  there  would  be  abundant  mouthpieces
of  discontent,  and  there  was  so  much  in  the  legal  relations  of
England  to  her  colonies  that  was  anomalous,  unsettled,  or  un-
defined, that  causes  of  quarrel  were  sure  to  arise.  The  revenue
laws  were  habitually  violated.  There  was,  in  the  Northern
colonies  at  least,  an  extreme  impatience  of  every  form  of  control,
and  the  Executive  was  almost  powerless.  The  Government
would  gladly  have  secured  for  the  judges  in  Massachusetts  a
permanent  provision,  which  would  place  them  in  some  degree
beyond  the  control  of  the  Assembly,  but  it  found  it  impossible
to  carry  it.  The  Assemblies  of  North  Carolina  and  New  York
would  gladly  have  secured  for  their  judges  a  tenure  of  office
during  good  behaviour,  as  in  England,  instead  of  at  the  King's
pleasure,  but  the  Home  Government,  fearing  that  this  would
still  further  weaken  the  Executive,  gave  orders  that  no  such
measure  should  receive  the  assent  of  the  governors,  and  in  New
York  the  Assembly  having  refused  on  any  other  condition  to  vote
the  salaries  of  the  judges,  they  were  paid  out  of  the  royal  quit
rents.'  There  were  frequent  quarrels  between  the  governors
and  the  Assemblies,  and  much  violent  language  was  employed.

'  Otis  tells  a  story  of  a  man  who  npainst  the  writs  of  assistance will

possessed  one of these  writs,  being  be  found  in  this  work — a  remarkable

summoned  by  a  judf^e  for  Sabbath-  book  from  which  I  have  derived  much

broakin^r  and  swearinf,',  and  avenging  assistance. See  too Adams' ]]'or/,.i,

birnsflf  hj  searching  the  house  of  th(;  i.  i57,  .08,  ii.  .524,  52.5.
jud^'e from  top  to  bottom.— Tudor's  -  liancroft,  i.  502,  503. Grahamc,

Life  of  Otit,  p.  67. A  very  full  ab-  iv.  87,  88.
btract  of the great  speech of Otis

en.  xn.  ACCESSION 01' GRKNVILLE.  305

In  1762,  on  tlie  arrival  of  some  French  ships  off  Newfoundland,
the  inhabitants  of  Massachusetts,  who  were  largely  employed  it
the  fishery,  })etitioned  the  governor  that  a  ship  and  sloop  be-
longing to  the  province  should  be  fitted  out  to  protect  theii
fishing  boats.  The  governor  and  council  complied  with  their
request,  and  in  order  that  the  sloop  should  obtain  rapidly  its
full  complement  of  men  he  offered  a  bounty  for  enlistment.
The  whole  expense  of  the  bounty  did  not  exceed  4001.  The
proceeding  might  be  justified  by  many  precedents,  and  it  cer-
tainly wore  no  appearance  of  tyranny;  but  Otis,  who  had  been
made  one  of  the  representatives  of  Boston  as  a  reward  for  his
incendiary  speech  about  the  writs  of  assistance,  saw  an  oppor-
tunity of  gaining  fresh  laurels.  He  induced  the  House  to  vote
a  remonstrance  to  the  governor,  declaring  that  he  had  invaded
'  their  most  darling  privilege,  the  right  of  originating  taxes,'  and
that  '  it  would  be  of  little  consequence  to  the  people  whether
they  were  subject  to  George  the  King  of  Great  Britain  or
Lewis  the  French  king  if  both  were  arbitrary,  as  both  would  be
if  both  could  levy  taxes  without  Parliament.'  It  was  with  some
difficulty  that  the  governor  prevailed  on  the  House  to  expunge
the  passage  in  which  the  King's  name  was  so  disloyally  intro-
duced.'

The  immense  advantages  which  the  colonists  obtained  by
the  Peace  of  Paris  had  no  doubt  produced  even  in  the  New
England  colonies  an  outburst  of  loyal  gratitude,  but  the  prospect
was  again  speedily  overclouded.  The  direction  of  colonial  affairs
])assed  into  the  hands  of  George  Grenville,  and  that  unhappy
course  of  policy  was  begun  which  in  a  few  years  deprived  Eng-
land of  the  noblest  fruits  of  the  administration  of  Pitt.

Up  to  this  time  the  North  American  colonies  had  in  time
of  peace  been  in  general  almost  outside  the  cognisance  of  the
Government.  As  their  affairs  had  no  influence  on  party  politics
Parliament  took  no  interest  in  them,  and  Newcastle,  during
his  long  administration,  had  left  them  in  almost  every  respect
absolutely  to  themselves.  It  was  afterwards  said  by  a  Treasury
official,  who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  management
of  affiiirs,  that  '  Grenville  lost  America  because  he  read  the
American  despatches,  which  none  of  his  predecessors  had  done.'

>  Hiuchinson,  pp.  97,  98. Tudor's  Li/e  qf  Otis,  pp.  118-122.
VOL.  III.  X

306  ENGLAND IN Till': EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

The  ignorance  and  neglect  of  all  colonial  matters  can  indeed
hardly  be  exaggerated,  and  it  is  stated  by  a  very  considerable
American  authority,  that  letters  had  repeatedly  arrived  from  the
Secretary  of  State  who  was  officially  entrusted  with  the  adminis-
tration of  the  colonies,  addressed  'to  the  Governor  of  the  Island
of  New  England.' •  America  owed  much  to  this  ignorance  and
to  this  neglect;  and  England  was  so  rich,  and  the  colonies  were
long  looked  upon  as  so  poor,  that  there  was  no  disposition  to
seek  anything  more  from  America  than  was  derived  from  a  partial
monopoly  of  her  trade.  But  the  position  of  England,  as  well
as  of  America,  was  now  wholly  changed.  Her  empire  had  been
raised  by  Pitt  to  an  unprecedented  height  of  greatness,  but
she  was  reeling  under  a  national  debt  of  nearly  140  millions.
Taxation  was  greatly  increased.  Poverty  and  distress  were  very
general,  and  it  had  become  necessary  to  introduce  a  spirit  of
economy  into  all  parts  of  the  administration,  to  foster  every
form  of  revenue,  and  if  possible,  to  diffuse  over  the  gigantic  em-
pire a  military  burden  which  was  too  great  for  one  small  island.
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  ministry  of  Bute,  Charles
Townshend  and  his  colleagues  had  already  contemplated  a  change
in  the  colonial  system,  that  they  desired  to  reduce  the  colonial
governments  to  a  more  uniform  system,  to  plant  an  army  in
America,  and  to  support  it  by  colonial  taxes  levied  by  the
British  Parliament,  and  that  it  was  only  the  briefness  of  their
tenure  of  office  that  prevented  their  scheme  from  coming  to
maturity.'^  When  Grenville  succeeded  to  power  on  the  fall  of  Bute,
he  took  up  the  design,  and  his  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the
details  of  office,  his  impatience  of  any  kind  of  neglect,  abuse,
and  illegality,  as  well  as  his  complete  want  of  that  political  tact
which  teaches  statesmen  how  far  they  may  safely  press  their
views,  foreshadowed  a  great  change  in  colonial  affairs.  He
resolved  to  enforce  strictly  the  trade  laws,  to  establish  per-
manently in  America  a  portion  of  the  British  army,  and  to
raise  by  parliamentary  taxation  of  America  at  least  a  part  of
the  money  which  was  necessary  for  its  support.

'  Otis,  liirihfst  of-tho  British  Colo-  evce,  iii.  210. Walpole's  Ged'tje  III.

iw's  axKcrtcd  (3rcl  vA.  176r>),  p.  :{7.  iii.  :52. Mr. Bancroft lias  cf)llected

-  ^(^e  Knox's  Axfra-q/firird  Paprrs,  with  fjrcat industry all  the extant

ii.  20. Alnrion's liiographical  Ancc-  evidence  of  this  plan.
dotcK,  ii.  81-83. Bt:dif«rd  Currcyxnid-

CH.  XII.  MEASURES AGAINST SMUGGLKVG.  307

These  three  measures  produced  the  American  Kevolution,
and  they  are  well  worthy  of  a  careful  and  dispassionate  exami-
nation The  enormous  extent  of  American  smuggling  had  been
brought  into  clear  relief  during  the  war,  when  it  had  assumed
a  very  considerable  military  importance,  and  as  early  as  1762
there  were  loud  complaints  in  Parliament  of  the  administration
of  the  Custom-house  patronage.  Grenville  found  on  examina-
tion that  the  whole  revenue  derived  by  England  from  the
custom-houses  in  America  amounted  to  between  1,000L  and
2,000L  a  year ;  that  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  this  revenue  the
English  Exchequer  paid  annually  between  7,000Z.  and  8,000L,
and  that  the  chief  custom-house  officers  appointed  by  the  Crown
had  treated  their  offices  as  sinecures,  and  by  leave  of  the  Trea-
sury resided  habitually  in  England.'  Great  portions  of  the  trade
laws  had  been  systematically  violated.  Thus,  for  example,  the
colonists  were  allowed  by  law  to  import  no  tea  except  from  the
mother-country,  and  it  was  computed  that  of  a  million  and  a  half
pounds  of  tea  which  they  annually  consumed,  not  more  than  a
tenth  part  came  from  England.^  This  neglect  Grenville  resolved
to  terminate.  The  Commissioners  of  Customs  were  ordered  at
once  to  their  posts.  Several  new  revenue  officers  were  appointed
with  more  rigid  rules  for  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  The
Board  of  Trade  issued  a  circular  to  the  colonies  representing
that  the  revenue  had  not  kept  pace  with  the  increasing  com-
merce, and  did  not  yield  more  than  one-quarter  of  the  cost
of  collection,  and  requiring  that  illicit  commerce  should  be
suppressed,  and  that  proper  support  should  be  given  to  the
Custom-house  officials.  English  ships  of  war  were  at  the
same  time  stationed  off  the  American  coast  for  the  purpose  of
intercepting  smugglers.'

In  1764  new  measures  of  great  severity  were  taken.  The
trade  with  the  French  West  India  islands  and  with  the
Spanish  settlements,  for  molasses  and  sugar,  had  been  one  of
the  most  lucrative  branches  of  New  England  commerce. New

' Grevrille  Paper s,M.\\\.  molasses,  consumed  in  the  colonies,

2  Bancroft,  ii.  178. See  too  J/usm-  were  smuggled.' — ^shme's  American

clm,icttenins.  Letter  iii. According  to  Loyalists,  i.  p.  12.

Sabine, 'Nine-tenths  probably  of  all  '  Arnold'' s  Hist,  of  Rhode  Island,

the  tea,  wine  and fruit,  sugar and  ii.  216.

X  2

:^08 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xn.

Enerland  found  in  the  French  islands  a  market  for  her  timber,
and  she  obtained  in  return  an  abundant  supply  of  the  molasses
required  for  her  distilleries.  The  French  West  India  islands
were  nearer  than  those  of  England.  They  were  in  extreme
need  of  the  timber  of  which  New  England  furnished  an  in-
exhaustible supply,  and  they  were  in  no  less  need  of  a  market
for  their  molasses,  which  had  been  excluded  from  France  as
interfering  with  French  brandies,  and  of  which  enormous
quantities  were  bought  by  the  New  England  colonies.  In
1763,  14,500  hogsheads  of  molasses  were  imported  into  New
England  from  the  French  and  Spanish  settlements ;  it  was
largely  paid  for  by  timber  which  would  otherwise  have  rotted
uselessly  on  the  ground,  and  the  possibility  of  selling  this
timber  at  a  profit  gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  necessary  work
of  clearing  land  in  New  England.  No  trade  could  have  been
more  clearly  beneficial  to  both  parties,  and  the  New  Englanders
maintained  that  it  was  the  foundation  of  their  whole  system
of  commerce.  The  distilleries  of  Boston,  and  of  other  parts  of
New  England,  had  acquired  a  great  magnitude.  Eum  was  sent
in  large  quantities  to  the  Newfoundland  fisheries  and  to  the
Indians,  and  it  is  a  circumstance  of  peculiar,  and  melancholy
interest  that  it  was  the  main  article  which  the  Americans  sent
to  Africa  in  exchange  for  negro  slaves.  In  the  trade  with  the
Spanish  settlements  the  colonists  obtained  the  greater  part  of
the  gold  and  silver  with  which  they  purchased  English  com-
modities, and  this  fact  was  the  more  important  because  an
English  Act  of  Parliament  had  recently  restrained  the  colo-
nists from  issuing  paper  money.'

In  the  interest  of  the  English  sugar  colonies,  which  desired
to  obtain  a  monopoly  for  their  molasses  and  their  sugar,  and
which  at  the  same  time  were  quite  incapable  of  furnishing
a  sufficient  market  for  the  superfluous  articles  of  American
commerce,  a  law  had  been  passed  in  1733  which  imposed  upon
molasses  a  prohibitory  duty  of  sixpence  a  gallon  and  on  sugar  a
duty  of  five  shillings  per  cwt.  if  they  were  imported  into  any  of
the  British  plantations  from  any  foreign  colonies.  No  portion
of  the  commercial  code  was  so  deeply  resented  in  America,

'  Macpheraon's Aiivnh of Com- firali.-une. Letters  of  Governor  I'er-
merer, iii. 171 177, \'S^. Hanrrot't. iiard.

CH.  XII.  GRENVILLE'S  COMMERCIAL  POLICY.  309

and  its  effects  would  have  been  ruinous,  had  not  the  law  been
systenaatically  eluded  with  the  connivance  of  the  revenue  offi-
cers, and  had  not  smuggling  almost  assimied  the  dimensions
and  the  character  of  a  branch  of  regular  commerce.  After
several  renewals  the  Act  expired  in  1763,  and  the  colonies
urgently  petitioned  that  it  should  not  be  renewed.

Bernard,  the  Governor,  and  Hutchinson,  the  Lieutenant-
Governor  of  Massachusetts,  strongly  condemned  the  policy  of
the  Act,  and  dwelt  upon  the  impos.sibility  of  enforcing  it.  Gren-
ville,  however,  refused  to  relinquish  what  might  be  made  a
source  of  revenue,  and  the  old  law  was  renewed  with  several
important  modifications.  The  duty  on  molasses  was  reduced
by  one-half,  but  new  duties  were  imposed  on  coffee,  pimento,
French  and  East  India  goods,  white  sugar  and  indigo  from
foreign  colonies,  Spanish  and  Portuguese  wine,  and  wine  from
Madeira  and  the  Azores,  and  the  most  stringent  measures  were
taken  to  enforce  the  law.  Bonds  were  exacted  from  every
merchant  who  exported  Imnber  or  iron ;  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Courts  of  Admiralty,  which  tried  smuggling  cases  with-
out a  jury,  was  strengthened  and  enlarged,  and  all  the  officers
of  ships  of  war  stationed  on  the  coasts  of  America  were
made  to  take  the  Custom-house  oaths  and  act  as  revenue
officers.  In  addition,  therefore,  to  the  old  race  of  experienced
but  conniving  revenue  officers,  the  repression  of  smuggling
became  the  business  of  a  multitude  of  rough  and  zealous
sailors,  who  entered  into  the  work  with  real  keenness,  with  no
respect  of  persons,  and  sometimes  with  not  a  Httle  unneces-
sary or  excessive  violence.  The  measure  was  one  of  the  most
serious  blows  that  could  be  administered  to  the  somewhat
waning  prosperity  of  Boston,  and  it  was  the  more  obnoxious  on
account  of  its  preamble,  which  announced  as  a  reason  for  impos-
ing additional  duties  that  '  it  is  just  and  necessary  that  a  revenue
be  raised  in  your  Majesty's  dominions  in  America  for  defraying
the  expenses  of  defending,  protecting,  and  securing  the  same.'
In  order  to  diminish  the  severity  of  these  restrictions,  bounties
were  in  the  same  year  given  to  the  cultivation  of  hemp  and
flax  in  the  colonies.  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  were  allowed
to  export  the  rice  which  was  their  chief  product  to  the  French
West  India  islands ;  and  the  whale  fishery,  which  was  one  of  the

310 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xii.

most  profitable  industries  of  New  England,  was  relieved  of  a
duty  which  Lad  hitlicrto  alone  prevented  it  from  completely
superseding  or  eclipsing  the  whale  fishery  of  England.'

Judging  by  the  mere  letter  of  the  law,  the  commercial
policy  of  Grenville  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  aggravated  the
severity  of  the  commercial  code,  for  the  new  restrictions  that
were  imposed  were  balanced  by  the  new  indulgences  that
were  conferred.  In  truth,  however,  the  severe  enforcement  of
rules  which  had  been  allowed  to  become  nearly  obsolete  was  a
most  serious  injury  to  the  prosperity  of  New  England.  A  trade
which  was  in  the  highest  degree  natural  and  beneficial,  and
which  had  long  been  pursued  with  scarcely  any  hindrance,  was
impeded,  and  the  avowed  object  of  raising  by  imperial  authority
a  revenue  to  defray  the  expense  of  defending  the  colonies,  created
a  constitutional  question  of  the  gravest  kind.

It  was  closely  connected  with  the  intention  to  place  rather
more  than  10,000  soldiers  permanently  in  America.  This  scheme
was  also  much  objected  to.  The  colonists  retained  in  its  full
force  the  dread  of  a  standing  army,  which  had  been  so  powerful  _
in  England  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  In  time  of  war,  they
said,  they  had  always  shown  themselves  willing  to  raise  troops
at  the  requisition  of  the  governor.  Parliament,  in  the  last
war,  had  repeatedly  acknowledged  the  alacrity  which  they  had
shown,  and  tliey  asked  why  the  country  might  not,  as  hereto-
fore, be  protected  in  time  of  peace  by  its  own  militias,  which
were  organised  and  paid  without  any  assistance  from  the
mother-country.  It  was  urged  that  the  expulsion  of  the  French
from  Canada  had  greatly  diminished  its  foreign  dangers,  and
it  was  asked  whether  the  army  was  really  intended  to  guard
against  foreigners.

It  is  possible,  and  indeed  very  probable,  that  a  desire  to
strengthen  the  feeble  Executive,  and  to  prevent  the  systematic
violation  of  the  revenue  laws,  was  a  motive  with  those  who
recommended  the  establishment  of  an  army  in  America ;  but
the  primary  object  was,  no  doubt,  the  defence  of  the  colonies
and  the  maintenance  of  imperial  interests.  In  the  earlier  stages
of  colonial  history,  little  had  boon  done  in  the  way  of  protection,

'  4  r;co.  III.  15.  2fi,  27.  20. Macplierson's  7/>V.  of  Commrrcn,  iii.  395-401.
Graham. ■,  iv.  lfin-176. 'J'udor's  Lifp  of  Oih,  j..  lf)5.

rn.  XII.  LVDIAN WAR, 17C3.  311

because  these  poor  and  scattered  communities  appeared  of  little
value  either  to  England  or  to  her  enemies.  British  America,
however,  was  now  a  great  and  prosperous  country.  When  we
remember  its  vast  extent,  its  great  wealth,  and  its  distance
from  the  mother-country  ;  when  we  remember  also  that  a  great
part  of  it  had  been  but  just  annexed  to  the  Crown,  and  that  its
most  prosperous  provinces  were  fringed  by  tribes  of  wild  Indians,
the  permanent  maintenance  in  it  of  a  small  army  appears  evi-
dently expedient.  The  dangers  from  Indians  in  the  north  had
been  no  doubt  diminished  by  the  conquest  of  Canada,  but  a
terrible  lesson  had  very  recently  shown  how  formidable  Indian
warfare  might  still  become.  In  June  1763,  a  confederation
including  several  Indian  tribes  had  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  ^
swept  over  the  whole  western  frontier  of  Pennsylvania  and
Virginia,  had  murdered  almost  all  the  English  settlers  who
were  scattered  beyond  the  mountains,  had  surprised  and  cap-
tured every  British  fort  between  the  Ohio  and  Lake  Erie,  and
had  closely  blockaded  Fort  Detroit  and  Pittsburg.  In  no  pre-
vious war  had  the  Indians  shown  such  skill,  tenacity,  and  con-
cert ;  and  had  there  not  been  British  troops  in  the  country,  the
whole  of  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  Maryland  would  probably
have  been  overrim.  In  spite  of  every  effort,  a  long  line  of
country  twenty  miles  in  breadth  was  completely  desolated,  and
presented  one  hideous  scene  of  plunder,  massacre,  and  torture.
It  was  only  after  much  desperate  fighting,  after  some  losses,
and  several  reverses,  that  the  troops  of  Amherst  succeeded  in
repelling  the  invaders  and  securing  the  three  great  fortresses
of  Niagara,  Detroit,  and  Pittsburg.

The  war  lasted  for  fourteen  months;  but  during  the  first  six
months,  when  the  danger  was  at  its  height,  the  hard  fighting
appears  to  have  been  mainly  done  by  English  troops,  though  a
considerable  body  of  the  militia  of  the  Southern  colonies  weie
in  the  field.  At  last  Amherst  called  upon  the  New  England
colonies  to  assist  their  brethren,  but  his  request  was  almost
disregarded.  Massachusetts,  being  beyond  the  zone  of  imme-
diate danger,  and  fatigued  with  the  burden  of  the  late  war,
would  give  no  help ;  and  Connecticut  with  great  reluctance
sent  250  men.  After  a  war  of  extreme  horror,  peace  was  signed
in  .September  1764. In  a  large  degree  by  the  efforts  of  English

."^12  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch. xii.

soldiers,  the Indian  territory  was  again  rolled  back,  and  one
more  great  service  was  rendered  by  England  to  her  colonies.^

This  event  was  surely  a  sufficient  justification  of  the  policy
of  establishing  a  small  army  in  the  colonies.  But  it  was  not
alone  against  the  Indians  that  it  was  required.  It  was  a  general
belief  in  America  that  if  another  war  broke  out,  France  would
endeavour  to  regain  Canada,  and  that  she  might  be  aided  by
an  insurrection  of  her  former  subjects.'^  It  was  almost  certain
that  the  next  French  war  would  extend  to  the  West  Indies,  and
in  that  case  America  would  be  a  post  of  vital  importance  both
for  defence  and  for  attack.  It  was  plainly  unwise  that  such  a
position  should  be  left  wholly  denuded  of  troops,  and  dependent
for  its  protection  upon  the  precarious  favour  of  the  winds.

These  considerations  appear  to  me  to  justify  fully  the  policy
of  the  ministers  in  desiring  to  place  a  small  army  permanently
in  the  colonies.  We  must  next  inquire  whether  it  was  un-
reasonable to  expect  the  colonists  to  support  it.  The  position  of
England  after  the  Peace  of  Paris  was  wholly  different  from  her
position  in  the  preceding  century.  She  was  no  longer  a  small,
compact,  and  essentially  European  country,  with  a  few  outlying
possessions  of  comparatively  little  value.  By  the  conquests  of
Clive  in  Hindostan,  by  the  great  development  of  the  colonies
of  British  America,  by  the  acquisition  of  Florida  and  Canada
and  of  the  important  islands  which  had  recently  been  annexed,
she  had  become  the  centre  of  an  empire  unrivalled  since  that
of  Charles  V.  and  pregnant  with  the  possibilities  of  almost
unbounded  progress.  It  devolved  upon  the  English  statesmen
who  obtained  power  after  the  Peace  of  Paris  to  legislate  for
these  new  conditions  of  national  greatness,  and  to  secure,  as
far  as  human  sagacity  could  do  so,  the  permanence  of  that  great
Empire  which  had  been  built  up  by  so  much  genius  and  with
so  much  blood,  and  which  might  be  made  the  instrument  of
such  incalculable  benefits  to  mankind.  The  burden  of  the
naval  protection  they  proposed  to  leave  exclusively  with  the
mother-country,  but  the  burden  of  the  military  protection  they
proposed  to  divide.  They  maintained  that  it  was  wholly  im-
possible that  8,000,000  Englishmen,  weighed  down  with  debt

'  Trumbull's Higt.  of  the United hame,  Hutchinson.
State*, pp. 455-467. liildreth,  Gra-  ■  Otis,  Riff h/x of  t fie  Colomts,  p.  ^7

CH.  XII.  PROPOSED AMERICAN  ARMY.  313

and  with  taxation,  and  with  a  strong  traditional  hostility  to
standing  armies,  could  alone  undertake  the  military  protection
of  an  empire  so  vast,  so  various,  and  in  many  of  its  parts  so
distant.  Two  subsidiary  armies  had  already  been  created.
The  East  India  Company  had  its  own  forces  for  the  defence  of
India,  and  Ireland  supported  a  large  force  both  for  its  own
defence  and  for  the  general  service  of  the  Empire.  Townshend
and  Grenville  resolved  to  plant  a  third  army  in  the  colonies.

The  case  of  Ireland  is  here  worthy  of  special  notice.  If
North  America  was  the  part  of  the  British  Empire  where  well-
being  was  most  widely  diffused,  Ireland  was  probably  the  part
where  there  was  most  poverty  and  wretchedness.  Her  popula-
tion exceeded  that  of  British  America  by  barely  half  a  milUon ;
her  natural  resources  were  infinitely  less.  By  her  exclusion
from  the  Navigation  Act  she  had  been  shut  out  from  all  direct
trade  with  the  British  dependencies,  while  her  most  important
manufactures  had  been  suppressed  by  law.  The  great  majority
of  her  population  had  been  reduced  to  extreme  degradation  by
the  penal  code.  She  was  burdened  by  a  tithe  system  sup-
porting an  alien  Church.  Her  social  system  was  disorganised
by  repeated  confiscations  and  by  the  emigration  of  her  most
energetic  classes,  and  she  was  drained  of  her  little  wealth  by
absenteeism,  by  a  heavy  pension  list,  and  by  an  exaggerated
establishment  in  Church  and  State,  in  which  the  chief  offices
were  reserved  for  Englishmen.  Yet  Ireland  from  Irish  revenues
supported  an  army  of  12,000  men,  which  was  raised  in  1769  to
15,000.

I  have  no  wish  to  deny  that  the  Stamp  Act  was  a  griev-
ance to  the  Americans,  but  it  is  due  to  the  truth  of  history
that  the  gross  exaggerations  which  have  been  repeated  on
the  subject  should  be  dispelled,  and  that  the  nature  of  the
alleged  tyranny  of  England  should  be  clearly  defined.  It  can-
not be  too  distinctly  stated  that  there  is  not  a  fragment  of
evidence  that  any  English  statesman,  or  any  class  of  the  English
people,  desired  to  raise  anything  by  direct  taxation  from  the
colonies  for  purposes  that  were  purely  English.  They  asked
them  to  contribute  nothing  to  the  support  of  the  navy  which
protected  their  coast,  nothing  to  the  interest  of  the  English
debt. At  the  close  of  a  war  which  had  left England over-

314  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

whelmed  vrith  additional  burdens,  in  which  the  whole  resources
of  the  British  Empire  had  been  strained  for  the  extension  and
security  of  the  British  territory  in  America,  by  which  the
American  colonists  had  gained  incomparably  more  than  any
other  of  the  subjects  of  the  Crown,  the  colonies  were  asked
to  bear  their  share  in  the  burden  of  the  Empire  by  contributing
a  third  part — they  would  no  doubt  ultimately  have  been  asked
to  contribute  the  whole — of  what  was  required  for  the  main-
tenance of  an  army  of  10,000  men,  intended  primarily  for  their
own  defence.  100,000^.  was  the  highest  estimate  of  what  the
Stamp  Act  would  annually  produce,  and  it  was  rather  less  than
a  third  part  of  the  expense  of  the  new  army.  This  was  what
England  asked  from  the  most  prosperous  portion  of  her  Empire.
Every  farthing  which  it  was  intended  to  raise  in  America,  it
was  intended  also  to  spend  there.

The  great  grievance  was  of  course  that  the  sum  was  to  be
raised  by  imperial  taxation,  and  that  it  was  therefore  a  de-
parture from  the  old  system  of  government  in  the  colonies.
Hitherto  the  distinction  between  external  and  internal  taxa-
tion had  been  the  leading  principle  of  colonial  administration.
Parliament  exercised  a  recognised  right  when  it  determined
the  commercial  system  of  the  colonies  by  the  imposition  of
duties  which  produced  indeed  some  small  revenue,  but  which
were  not  intended  for  that  purpose,  but  solely  for  the  purpose
of  commercial  regulation.  But  taxes  intended  for  the  purpose
of  revenue  had  only  been  imposed  by  the  colonial  assemblies.
Twice  already  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  imposition  of  im-
perial taxation  for  military  purposes  had  been  contemplated.
In  1739  a  body  of  American  merchants  under  the  leadership  of
Sir  W.  Keith,  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  had  proposed  the
establishment  of  a  body  of  troops  along  the  western  frontier  of
the  British  settlements,  and  had  suggested  a  parliamentary
duty  on  stamped  paper  and  parchments  as  a  means  of  de-
fraying the  expense;  but  Walpole  had  wisely  declined  to  accede
to  the  proposition.  In  1754,  when  it  was  necessary  to  make
preparations  for  the  great  war  with  France,  and  when  the  scheme
for  uniting  the  colonies  for  military  purposes  had  failed,  the
Government  proposed  that  the  governors  of  the  several  pro-
vinces  should  meet  together,  and  with some  members  of  the

cii.  XII.  COLONIAL  TAXATION BY rARLIAMENT.  315

general  councils  should  concert  measures  for  the  defence  of  the
colonies.  It  was  proposed  that  the  English  Treasury  should
advance  such  sums  as  they  deemed  necessary  for  this  purpose,
and  that  it  should  be  reimbursed  by  a  tax  imposed  on  all
the  colonies  by  the  Imperial  Parliament.  The  extreme  diffi-
culty of  obtaining  any  simultaneous  military  action  of  the
colonies,  and  the  impossibility  of  inducing  the  colonies  which
were  remote  from  the  immediate  danger  to  contribute  their
quota  to  the  common  cause,  were  the  reasons  alleged ;  and  in
order  that  the  grievance  should  be  as  small  as  possible,  it  was
intended  that  Parliament  should  only  determine  the  proportion
to  be  paid  by  each  colony,  leaving  it  to  each  colonial  assembly
to  raise  that  sum  as  it  pleased.  Franklin,  who  was  consulted
about  the  scheme,  wrote  some  able  letters  to  Shirley,  the
Governor  of  Massachusetts,  protesting  against  it,  and  Pitt
refused  to  adopt  it.'

The  constitutional  competence  of  Parliament  to  tax  the
colonies  is  a  question  of  great  difficulty,  upon  which  the  highest
legal  authorities  have  been  divided,  though  the  decided  pre-
ponderance of  legal  opinion  has  been  in  favour  of  the  right.
Parliament  repeatedly  claimed  and  exercised  a  general  right
of  legislating  for  the  colonies,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  show
by  the  distinct  letter  of  the  law  that  this  did  not  include  the
right  to  make  laws  imposing  taxes.  It  was  admitted  by  the
Americans  that  it  might  impose  trade  duties  which  produced
revenue,  though  they  were  not  primarily  intended  for  that
purpose  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  Charter  of  Pennsylvania,
though  of  that  colony  alone,  expressly  reserved  to  Parliament
the  right  of  taxation."  To  an  accm-ate  thinker,  indeed,  it
must  appear  evident  that  every  law  which  in  the  interest  of
English  manufacturers  prohibited  the  Americans  from  pursuing
a  form  of  manufacture,  or  buying  a  particular  class  of  goods
from  foreigners,  was  in  reality  a  tax.  The  effect  of  the  mono-
poly was  that  the  Americans  paid  more  for  these  goods  than

'  See  on  this  negotiation  Frank-  i.  195-198.
lin's  letters  to  Shirley,  with  the  pre-  ^  gy ^^le Charter the  Sovereign

fatory  note. — ±'ranldin's Works,  iii.  engaged never to  levy  any tax  In

66^58. Thackeray's  Life  of  CJiathuvi,  Pennsylvania, '  unless the same he

ii.  56, 57. The  Controversy betn-ee',.  with  the  consent  of  the  proprietors  or

Great  Bi^tnin  and  her  Colonies  Be-  chief  governor  or  Assembly,  or  by  Act

rien-ed  (1769),  pp.  194-198.  Bancroft,  of  Parliament  in  England''

316  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

it  they  had  produced  them  or  bought  them  from  foreigners,
and  this  excess  was  a  sum  levied  from  the  Americans  for  the
benefit  of  England.  If  the  Virginian  planters  were  obliged
by  restrictive  laws  to  send  their  tobacco  to  England  alone,  and
if  a  tax  was  imposed  on  all  tobacco  in  England  for  the  purpose
of  revenue,  it  is  clear  that  at  least  a  portion  of  that  tax  was
really  paid  by  the  producer  in  Virginia.  It  is  also  not  evi-
dent in  the  nature  of  things  why  the  general  defence  of  the
Empire  should  be  esteemed  less  an  imperial  concern  than  the
regulation  of  commerce ;  and  why,  if  Parliament  might  bind  the
colonies  and  raise  money  for  the  regulation  of  their  commercial
system,  she  might  not  also  both  determine  and  enforce  their
military  obligations.  The  general  opinion  of  English  lawyers
appears  to  have  been  that  the  distinction  between  internal  and
external  taxation  had  no  basis  in  law  or  in  fact,  and  that  the
right  of  the  English  Legislature  was  supreme  over  the  colonies,
however  impolitic  it  might  be  to  exercise  it.  In  1724  the  law
officers  of  the  Crown,  one  of  whom  was  Sir  Philip  Yorke,  had
given  their  opinion  that  '  a  colony  of  English  subjects  cannot
be  taxed  but  by  some  representative  body  of  their  own  or  by
the  Parliament  of  England  ; '  and  a  similar  opinion  was  given
in  1744  by  Murray,  afterwards  Lord  Mansfield.  ]\Iansfield  was
subsequently  one  of  the  strongest  advocates  of  the  Stamp  Act,
and  the  most  vehement  opponent  of  its  repeal.  In  a  few  years
the  colonial  lawyers  appear  to  have  agreed  substantially  with
those  of  England,  for  they  maintained  that,  in  order  to  esta-
blish by  argument  the  sole  right  of  the  Assemblies  to  tax
the  colonies,  it  was  necessary  to  deny  that  the  Imperial  Parlia-
ment had  any  power  of  legislating  for  them.

It  was  admitted  that  it  was  a  new  thing  to  impose  internal
taxation  on  the  colonies.  The  Post  Office  revenue,  which  was
often  alleged  as  an  example,  might  be  regarded  merely  as  a
payment  exacted  for  the  performance  of  a  service  of  general
utility,  and  the  propriety  of  imposing  this  new  burden  on  the
colonies  was  defended  on  the  ground  that  the  circumstances
both  of  the  colonies  and  of  England  had  radically  changed.'
The  idea,  however,  of  supporting  an  American  army  by  ira-

'  As  Dr.  Johnson  wittily  thniigh not,  put  a  calf  into  the  plon.ih;  we
somewhat  ofTensively  wrote  :  '  We  do wait  till  it  iis  an  ox.'

CH.  XII.  DIFFICULTIES  01-' RAISING AN ARMY.  317

perial  taxation  of  America  was,  as  we  have  seen,  not  new,  and
some  of  the  best  judges  of  American  affairs  appeared  to  regard
it  as  feasible.  When  the  question  of  establishing  a  general
fund  during  the  war  was  under  discussion  in  1754  and  1755,
Governor  Shirley  gave  his  opinion  '  that  the  several  assemblies
within  the  colonies  will  not  agree  among  themselves  upon  such
a  fund  ;  that  consequently  it  must  be  done  in  England,  and
that  the  only  effectual  way  of  doing  it  there  will  be  by  an  Act
of  Parliament,  in  which  I  have  great  reason  to  think  the  people
will  readily  acquiesce,  and  that  the  success  of  any  other  method
will  be  doubtful.'  ^

This  passage  implies  what  was  probably  the  strongest
argument  weighing  upon  the  Ministers.  It  was  the  absolute
impossibility  of  inducing  America  to  support  her  own  army
unless  the  English  Parliament  intervened.  There  was  no
central  colonial  government.  There  was  no  body,  like  the  Irish
Parliament,  competent  to  tax  the  several  provinces.  In  order
to  raise  the  money  for  the  support  of  an  American  army  with
the  assent  of  the  colonies,  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  assent
of  no  less  than  seventeen  colonial  assemblies.  The  hopeless-
ness of  attempting  to  fulfil  this  condition  was  very  manifest.
If  in  the  agonies  of  a  great  war  it  had  been  found  impossible  to
induce  the  colonies  to  act  together ;  if  the  Southern  colonies
long  refused  to  assist  the  Northern  ones  in  their  strug-o-le
against  France  because  they  were  far  from  the  danger;  if
South  Carolina,  when  reluctantly  raising  troops  for  the  war,
stipulated  that  they  should  act  only  within  their  own  province ;
if  New  England  would  give  little  or  no  assistance  while  the
Indians  were  carrying  desolation  over  Virginia  and  Pennsyl-
vania; what  chance  was  there  that  ail  these  colonies  would
agree  in  time  of  peace  to  impose  uniform  and  proportionate
taxation  upon  themselves  for  the  support  of  an  English  army  ?  ^
It  seemed  evident,  as  a  matter  of  practical  statesmanship,  that

'  TJie Controversy  hetween Cheat  New  Jersey  in  1775, said, 'The  neces-

Brituin  and  her  Colonies,  pp.  196, 197.  sity  of  some  supreme  judge  [to  deter-

■■^  See  a  very  able  statement  of  the  mine  the  quota  of  each  province  to

dissension  among  the  colonies  in  The  the  general  expense]  is  evident  from

Contrm-ersji hctween Great Britain  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  as  other-

and  her  Colonies,  pp.  93-97.  Governor  wise  some  of  the  colonies  might  not

Franklin  (the  son  of  Benjamin  Frank-  contribute  their  due  proportion.  I  )ur-

lin)  in  a  speech  to  the  Assembly  of  ing  the  last  war  I  well  remember  it

318  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

it  would  be  impossible,  without  the  assistance  of  Parliament,  to
support  an  American  army  by  American  taxation,  unless  the
provinces  could  be  induced  to  confide  the  power  of  taxation  to
a  single  colonial  assembly,  and  unless  England  could  induce
that  assembly,  by  the  promise  of  commercial  relaxations,  to
vote  a  subsidy.  To  both  parts  of  this  scheme  the  difficulties
were  enormous,  and  probably  insuperable.  Extreme  jealousy
of  England,  of  the  Executive,  and  of  each  other,  animated
the  colonies,  while  a  spirit  of  intense  commercial  monopoly  was
dominant  in  England.  Under  these  conditions  the  problem
might  well  have  appeared  a  hopeless  one.

It  would  have  been  far  wiser,  under  such  circumstances,  to
have  abandoned  the  project  of  making  the  Americans  pay  for
their  army,  and  to  have  thrown  the  burden  on  the  mother-country.
Heavily  as  the  English  were  at  this  time  taxed,  grievous  as  was
the  discontent  that  was  manifested  among  the  people,  the  support
of  an  American  army  of  1 0,000  men  would  not  have  been  over-
whelming, while  a  conflict  with  the  colonists  on  the  question
could  lead  to  no  issue  that  was  not  disastrous.  There  was
indeed  one  method  which  might  possibly  have  been  successful.
Fresh  duties  imposed  on  American  goods  might  have  raised  the
required  sum  in  a  manner  mischievous  and  wasteful  indeed  both
to  England  and  the  colonies,  but  not  wholly  inconsistent  with  the
usual  tenor  of  their  government,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Franklin
such  a  measiire  might  have  been  acquiesced  in.  In  the  begin-
ning of  1764  that  very  shrewd  observer  wrote  a  letter  urging
the  necessity  of  converting  the  Government  of  Pennyslvania
from  a  proprietary  into  a  royal  one,  in  which  there  occurs  a
passage  which  is  singularly  curious  when  read  in  the  light  of
the  author's  subsequent  career.  '  That  we  shall  have  a  stand-
ing army  to  maintain,'  he  says,  '  is  another  bugbear  raised  to

was  ardently  wished  by  some  of  the  cliule  Massachusetts  Bay  should  come
coloniesthat  others,  who  were  thou'^'^ht  into  his  Majesty's  requisition  on  the
to  be  delinquent,  might  be  compelled  occasion.  l?ut  as  none  of  the  Assem-
by  Act  of  Parliament  to  heparan  equal  blios  of  the  New  En^rland  Govcrn-
share  of  the  public  burdens.  .  .  .  mcnts  thnuL'ht  themselves  nearly  con-
When  the  Assfmbly  in  1 7f)4  was  called  cerned,  not  hint,'  was  granted  by  them,
upon  to  make  provision  for  raising  and  the  vvliole  burden  of  the  pxpodi-
some  troops  on  account  of  the  Indian  tion  then  carried  on  fell  on  Great
war,  they  declined  doing  it  for  some  Britain  and  three  or  four  of  the  mid-
time  but  on  condition  a  majority  of  die  colonies.' — See  Txichcr's  Letter  to
the  eastern  colonio;  so  far  as  to  in-  linrhc,  pp.  49,  50.

CH.  XII.  GRENVILLES SCIIKME.  319

terrify  us  from  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  king's  government.  It
is  very  possible  that  the  Crown  may  think  it  necessary  to  keep
troops  in  America  henceforward,  to  maintain  its  conquests  and
defend  the  colonies,  and  that  the  Parliament  may  establish
some  revenue  arising  out  of  the  American  trade  to  be  applied
towards  supporting  these  troops.  It  is  possible  too  that  we  may,
after  a  few  years'  experience,  be  generally  very  well  satisfied
with  that  measure,  from  the  steady  protection  it  will  afford  us
against  foreign  enemies  and  the  security  of  internal  peace
among  ourselves  without  the  expense  and  trouble  of  a  militia.' '

Grenville  adopted  another  course,  but  he  acted  with  exddent
reluctance  and  hesitation.  In  March  1764,  at  the  same  time  as
the  commercial  measure  I  have  already  described,  he  brought
forward  and  carried  a  resolution  asserting  that  '  for  further
defraying  the  expense  of  protecting  the  colonies  it  may  be  proper
to  charge  certain  stamp  duties  in  the  said  colonies.'  Further
measures  were  postponed  for  a  year,  in  order  to  ascertain  fully
the  sentiments  of  the  colonies,  and  also  to  give  them  an  oppor-
tunity, if  they  chose  to  avail  themselves  of  it,  either  of  suggesting
some  other  tax  or  of  preventing  the  action  of  Parliament  by
themselves  raising  the  sum  which  was  required."

At  the  close  of  this  session  the  agents  of  the  different
colonies  went  in  a  body  to  Grenville  to  ask  him  if  it  was  still
his  intention  to  bring  in  the  threatened  Bill.  Grenville  replied
positively  in  the  affirmative,  and  he  defended  his  determination
by  arguments  which  he  had  already  used  both  in  private  and
in  the  House  of  Commons.  The  interview  was  described  by
Mauduit,  the  agent  of  Massachusetts,  in  a  letter  to  his  colony,
and  his  accuracy  was  fully  attested  by  Montagu,  the  agent  for
Virginia.  Grenville,  according  to  these  reporters,  urged  '  that
the  late  war  had  found  us  70  millions  and  had  left  us  more
than  140  millions  in  debt.  He  knew  that  all  men  wished  not
to  be  taxed,  but  in  these  unhappy  circumstances  it  was  his  duty
as  a  steward  for  the  public  to  make  use  of  every  just  means  of
improving  the  public  revenue.  He  never  meant,  however,  to
charge  the  colonies  with  any  part  of  the  interest  of  the  national
debt.  But,  besides  that  public  debt,  the  nation  had  incurred
a  great  annual  expense  in  the  maintaining  of  the  several  new

*  Franklin's  Works,  iv,  89,  90. -  Almon's  Biographical  Anecdotes,  ii.  88-92.

320

FNGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

conquests  which  vre  had  made  during  the  war,  and  by  which
the  colonies  were  so  much  benefited.  The  American  civil  and
military  establishment,  after  the  Peace  of  Ais-la-Chapelle,  was
only  70,000L  per  annum.  It  was  now  350,000L  This  was  a
great  additional  expense  incurred  upon  American  account,  and
he  thought  therefore  that  America  ought  to  contribute  towards
it.  He  did  not  expect  that  the  colonies  should  raise  the  whole  ;
but  some  part  uf  it  he  thought  they  ought  to  raise,  and  a  stamp
duty  was  intended  for  that  purpose.'  He  then  proceeded  to
defend  the  particular  tax  which  he  had  selected.  It  was  the
easiest.  It  was  the  most  equitable.  It  would  fall  exclusively
on  property.  It  could  be  collected  by  very  few  officers.  It
would  be  equally  spread  over  America  and  the  West  Indies.
*I  am  not,  however,'  he  continued,  '  set  upon  this  tax.  If  the
Americans  dislike  it,  and  prefer  any  other  method  of  raising
the  money  themselves,  I  shall  be  content.  Write  therefore  to
your  several  colonies,  and  if  they  choose  any  other  mode  I  shall
be  satisfied,  provided the  money  be  but  raised.'  • He  hinted

'  Almon's  liiograpJdcal  Anecdotes,
ii.  82-92.  In  the  reply  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts As.sembly  to  Manduit.  the
followins-  passage  occurs  :  '  The  actual
laying  the  stamp  duty,  you  say,  is
deferred  till  next  year,  l\Ir.  Grenville
being  willing  to  give  the  provinces
their  option  to  raise  that  or  some
equivalent  tax,  "  desirous,"  as  he
WHS  pleased  to  express  himself,  "to
consult  the  ease,  and  quiet,  and  the
goodwill  of  the  colonies."'  'Tliis
suspension,'  tlie  lett  er  adds.  '  amounts
to  no  more  than  this,  that  if  the  colo-
nies will  not  tax  themselves  as  they
may  be  directed,  the  Parliament  will
tax  them.' — Mauduit's  ]'it'7V  of  the
New  England  Colonies,  pp.  1)5-100.  In
77ie  Controrersij  het?vren  Great  Britain
and  her  CoUmies,  whicli  was  perhaps
the  ablest  statement  of  the  case
against  the  colonies,  and  which  was
written  by  Knox,  the  Under-Secretary
of  State,  and  one  of  Grcnville's  confi-
dential writers,  it  is  said,  '  Mr.  Gren-
ville, indeed,  went  so  far  as  to  desire
the  agents  to  ac(|uaint  the  colonies
that  if  they  could  not  aL-^rce  among
tlicmselves  upon  raising  a  revenue
by  their  own  Assemblies,  yet  if  they
all,  or  any  of  them,  disliked  stamp
duties,  and  would  propose  any  other

sort  of  tax  which  would  carry  the
appearance  of  equal  efficacy,  he
would  adopt  it.  But  he  warmly  re-
commended to  them  the  making
grants  by  their  own  Assemblies  as
the  most  expedient  method  for  them-
selves.'— P.  199.  Burke,  however,
states  that  Grenville  in  the  many  de-
bates on  the  Stamp  Act  never  made
this  apologj''  for  himself,  that  he  al-
ways expressed  his  dislike  to  the
system  of  raising  money  by  requisi-
tions to  the  colonial  Assemblies,  and
his  preference  for  parlianjentary  taxa-
tion, and  that  it  is  therefore  impos-
sible he  can  have  recommended  the
colonies  to  tax  themselves,  though  he
may  have  urged  them  to  agree  upon
the  tax  which  they  would  wish  Parlia-
ment to  propose  (Speech  on  American
Taxati(m).  It  ajipears,  however,  evi-
di'nt  from  the  Ma.ssachusetts  letter
tliat  although  Grenville  was  inexor-
able about  the  right  of  Parliament  to
tax  the  colonies,  tlie  colonists  under-
stood him  to  have  intcntionallj'  left
it  open  to  them  to  prevent  the  ex-
ercise of  that  right  by  raising  the
money  themselves.  All  that  politicians
in  England  really  wanted  was  an
American  contribution  to  the  de-
fence of the Empire. See too  the

CH.  xii.  AMHRICAN OPINION ON THE TAX.  321

that  by  agreeing  to  the  tax  the  Americans  could  make  a  pre-
cedent for  their  being  always  consulted  by  the  ministry  before
they  were  taxed  by  Parliament.'

Grenville  has  been  much  blamed  for  not  having  made  a
formal  requisition  to  each  colonial  Assembly,  as  was  usual  in  time
of  war,  requesting  them  to  raise  a  sum  for  the  support  of  the
army ;  but  it  is  almost  certain  that  such  a  requisition  would  in
most,  if  not  all,  cases  have  been  refused,  and  the  demand  would
have  been  made  use  of  as  a  proof  that  Parliament  had  no  right
to  impose  the  required  tax.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  if  the
colonics  were  anxious  to  avoid  what  they  regarded  as  the  op-
pression of  parliamentary  taxation,  by  themselves  making  the
provision  for  the  required  army,  they  had  ample  time  and  op-
portunity to  do  so.  They  were,  however,  quite  resolved  not  to
contribute  to  the  army  in  any  form.  They  had  not  asked  for
it.  They  disliked  and  dreaded  it  as  strengthening  the  Eng-
lish Government.  Their  own  taxes  were  much  increased  by
burdens  inherited  from  the  war,  a  great  part  of  the  country  was
still  suffering  from  recent  devastations  by  the  Indians,  and  "the
irritation  caused  by  the  measures  against  smuggling  was  very
strong.  The  proposed  tax  was  discussed  in  every  provincial
Assembly,  and  the  result  was  a  long  series  of  resolutions  and
addresses  to  Parliament  denying  in  the  most  emphatic  terms
the  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  America,  and  asserting  that  if
the  scheme  of  the  Minister  were  carried  into  effect,  '  it  would
establish  the  melancholy  truth  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
colonies  are  the  slaves  of  the  Britons  from  whom  they  are  de-
scended.' ^  The  Pennsylvanians  alone  made  some  advance  in  the
direction  of  compromise  by  resolving  that,  '  as  they  always  had
thought,  so  they  always  shall  think  it  their  duty  to  grant  aid
to  the  Crown,  according  to  their  abilities,  whenever  required
of  them  in  the  usual  constitutional  manner,'  but  they  took  no
measure  to  carry  their  resolution  into  effect.  In  Xew  England
the  doctrine  that  Parliament  had  no  right  whatever  to  legislate
for  America  was  now  loudly  proclaimed,  and  Otis  was  as  usual
active  in  fanning  resistance  to  the  Government.

statement  of  Garth,  the  Agentof  South  '  Annual  Repister,  1765,  p.  33.

Carolina;  Bancroft,  ii.  211 ;  and  that  ^  j^gg  ^he  Virginian  Address,  Gra-

of  Franklin,  lIT^r^'s.i. 29 1,292  ;  iv.  194. hame.  iv.  180.

VOL. III.  Y

322  ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xn

It  was  obvious  that  a  very  dangerous  spirit  was  arising  in
the  colonies. A  few  voices  were  raised  in  favour  of  the  admis-
sion of  American  representatives  into  Parliament ;  but  this  plan,
which  was  advocated  by  Otis  and  supported  by  the  great  names
of  Franklin and  of Adam Smith,  would have encountered
enormous practical difficulties,  and  it  found  few friends in
either  country. Grenville  himself,  however,  appears  to  have
for  a  time  seriously  contemplated  it. As  he  was  accustomed
to  say  to  his  friends, he had never  entertained  the smallest
design  against  American  liberty,  and  the  sole  object  of  his
colonial  policy  was  to  induce  or  oblige  America  to  contribute
to  the  expense  of  her  own  defence  in  the  same  manner  as  Ire-
land. He  had  consulted  the  colonial  agents  in  order  that  the
colonies  might  themselves  suggest  the  form  of  the  contribution,
and  establish  the  precedent  of  being  always  in  such  cases  con-
sulted. He  had  deferred  the  Stamp  Act  for  a  whole  year  in
order  that  the  colonies  might,  if  they  chose,  make  imperial
taxation  unnecessary  ;  and  if  the  Americans  thought  that  their
liberties  would  become more secure by  the  introduction of
American  representatives  into  the  British  Parliament,  he  was
quite  ready  to  support  such  a  scheme.^ He  would  probably,
however,  have  found  it  not  easy  to  carry  in  England,  and  it  was
soon  after  utterly  repudiated  in  America. At  the  same  time,
after  the  open  denial  of  the  competence  of  Parliament  to  tax
the  colonies,  it  was  especially  difficult  to  recede,  and  Grrenville
had  some  reason to  think  that  the  colonial  addresses  exagf-
gerated  the  sentiments  of  the  people. When  the  project  was
first laid before  the  agents of  the colonies,  the  Agent for
Khode  Island  was  the  only  one  who  unequivocally  repudiated
it.^ The  form  oi  ^hie  tax  was  not  one  which  would  naturally
attract  much  attention,  and it might  be  hoped that  public
opinion  would  soon  look  upon  it  as  of  the  same  nature  as  the

'  See  Knox's  Extra-official  Papers,  as  well  as  the  Lower  House  would  have

ii.  24,  25,  :}l-33.  Hutchinson's  ^J.sf.c/  set  at  rest  the  whole  question.' Lord

Masxachusctts,  p.  112. In  his  Notes  on  Liverpool  was  accustomed  lo  say  that

the  United  States,  Sir  Augustus  Foster,  no  serious  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act

who  was  English  Secretary  of  Lega-  would  have  been  made,  if  Grenville

tion  at  Washington,  1801-1806,  men-  had  ciuried  it  at  once  without  leaving

tions that hoth Jefferson and his  a  year  for  discussion. See  Quarterly

successor  in  the  Presidency,  JMadison,  Itecicm,  No.  cxxxv,  p.  .'57.
expressed  their  belief  tliat  'the  timely  *  See  Grahame,  iv.  1S8

concession  of  a  few  seats  in  the  Upper

cH.  XII.  THE  STAMP  ACT.  323

postal  revenue  which  the  Imperial  Parliament  had  long  levied
in  the  colonies.

In  February  1765  the  agents  of  several  of  the  colonies  had
an  interview  with  Grenville,  and  made  one  last  effort  to  dis
suade  him  from  introducing  the  measure.  Grenville,  in  his
reply,  expressed  his  sincere  regret  if  he  was  exciting  resent-
ments in  America,  but,  he  said,  '  it  is  the  duty  of  my  office  to
manage  the  revenue.  I  have  really  been  made  to  believe  that,
considering  the  whole  circumstances  of  the  mother-country
and  the  colonies,  the  latter  can  and  ought  to  pay  something
to  the  public  cause.  I  know  of  no  better  way  than  that  now
pursuing  to  lay  such  a  tax.  If  you  can  tell  of  a  better  I  will
adopt  it.'  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  had  shortly  before  come
over  as  Agent  for  Philadelphia,  presented  the  resolution  of
the  Assembly  of  his  province,  and  urged  that  the  demand  for
money  should  be  made  in  the  old  constitutional  way  to  the
Assembly  of  each  province  in  the  form  of  a  requisition  by  the
governor.  '  Can  you  agree,'  rejoined  Grenville,  '  on  the  pro-
portions each  colony  should  raise  ?  '  The  question  touched  the
heart  of  the  difficulty ;  the  agents  were  obliged  to  answer  in
the  negative,  and  the  interview  speedily  closed.  A  few  days
later  the  fatal  Bill  was  introduced  into  a  nearly  empty  House,
and  it  passed  through  all  its  stages  almost  unopposed.  It  made
it  necessary  for  all  bills,  bonds,  leases,  policies  of  insurance,
newspapers,  broadsides,  and  legal  documents  of  all  kinds  to
be  written  on  stamped  paper,  to  be  sold  by  public  officers  at
varying  prices  prescribed  by  the  law.  The  proceeds  were  to
be  paid  into  his  Majesty's  treasury,  and  they  were  to  be  applied,
under  the  direction  of  the  Parliament,  exclusively  to  the  pro-
tection and  defence  of  the  colonies.^  Offences  against  the
Stamp  Act  were  to  be  cognisable  in  America  as  in  England  by
the  Courts  of  Admiralty,  and  without  the  intervention  of  ju-
ries. In  order  to  soften  the  opposition,  and  to  consult,  to  the
utmost  of  his  power,  the  wishes  of  the  colonists,  Grenville  in-
formed the  colonial  agents  that  the  distribution  of  the  stamps
should  be  confided  not  to  Englishmen  but  to  Americans,  and  he
requested  them  to  name  such  persons  in  their  respective  pro-
vinces as  they  thought  best  qualified  for  the  purpose  and  most

'  5  Geo.  III.  c.  12.

324  ENGLAND IN THK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

acceptable  to  the  inhabitants.  They  all  complied  with  the
request,  and  Franklin  named  one  of  his  intimate  friends  as
stamp  distributor  for  Pennsylvania.

The  Stamp  Act,  when  its  ultimate  consequences  are  consi-
dered, must  be  deemed  one  of  the  most  momentous  legislative
\cts  in  the  history  of  mankind  ;  but  in  England  it  passed  almost
completely  imnoticed.  The  Wilkes  excitement  absorbed  public
attention,  and  no  English  politician  appears  to  have  realised
the  importance  of  the  measure.  It  is  scarcely  mentioned  in
the  contemporary  correspondence  of  Horace  Walpole,  of  Gren-
ville,  or  of  Pitt.  Burke,  who  was  not  yet  a  member  of  the
House  of  Commons,  afterwards  declared  that  he  had  followed
the  debate  from  the  gallery,  and  that  he  had  never  heard  a
more  languid  one  in  the  House;  that  not  more  than  two  or
three  gentlemen  spoke  against  the  Bill ;  that  there  was  but  one
division  in  the  whole  coiu^se  of  the  discussion,  and  that  the
minority  in  that  division  was  not  more  than  thirty-nine  or  forty.
In  the  House  of  Lords  he  could  not  remember  that  there  had
been  either  a  debate  or  division,  and  he  was  certain  that  there
was  no  protest.'  Pitt  was  at  this  time  confined  to  his  bed  by
illness,  and  Conway,  Beckford,  and  Barre  appear  to  have  been
almost  the  only  opponents  of  the  measure.  The  latter,  whose
American  experience  during  the  Canadian  war  had  given  him
considerable  weight,  described  the  colonists,  in  a  fine  piece  of
declamation,  as  '  sons  of  liberty '  planted  in  America  by  the
oppression  and  strengthened  by  the  neglect  of  England,  and  he
predicted  that  the  same  love  of  freedom  which  had  led  them
into  an  uncultivated  and  inhospitable  country,  and  had  sup-
ported them  through  so  many  hardships  and  so  many  dangers,
would  accompany  them  still,  and  would  inspire  them  with  an
indomitable  resolution  to  vindicate  their  violated  liberty.  His
words  appear  to  have  excited  no  attention  in  England,  and  were
not  even  reported  in  the  contemporary  parliamentary  history  ;

'  Burke's spoech on American  l^arr'',  who  is the  prosont  Pitt and

taxation,  April  1774. The  followint,'  tlie  dread  of  all  the  vociferous  Norths

is  Horace  WalpoleV  sole  noticeof  the  and  Kif;bys,on  whose  lun^^s  depended

measare : 'There  has  been nothing  so much of Jlr. Grenville's power.'

of  note  in  Parliament  but  one  slight  Waljiole  to  Hertford,  Feb.  12,  1765.

day on the  Aracjrican  taxes,  which  Beckford,  some  years  later,  mentioned

Cliarles Townsh'nd supporting, re-  that he  had  opposed  the  Stamp  Act,

ceived  a  pretty  lieavy  thump from  —Cavendish  JJehate.t,  i.  11.

CH.  XII.  TAXATION  AND  REPEESENTATION.  32.5

but  they  were  at  once  transmitted  to  America  by  the  Agent  f(jr
Connecticut,  who  had  been  present  in  the  gallery,  and  they
contributed  not  a  little  to  stimulate  the  flame.  The  '  sons  of
liberty '  became  from  this  time  the  favourite  designation  of  the
American  associations  against  the  Stamp  Act.

In  truth,  the  measure,  although  it  was  by  no  means  as  un-
just or  as  unreasonable  as  has  been  alleged,  and  although  it  might
perhaps  in  some  periods  of  colonial  history  have  passed  almost
unperceived,  did  unquestionably  infringe  upon  a  principle  which
the  English  race  both  at  home  and  abroad  have  always  regarded
with  a  peculiar  jealousy.  The  doctrine  that  taxation  and  repre-
sentation are  in  free  nations  inseparably  connected,  that  consti-
tutional government  is  closely  connected  with  the  rights  of
property,  and  that  no  people  can  be  legitimately  taxed  except
by  themselves  or  their  representatives,  lay  at  the  very  root  of
the  English  conception  of  political  liberty.  The  same  principle
that  had  led  the  English  people  to  provide  so  carefully  in  the
Great  Charter,  in  a  well-known  statute  of  Edward  I.,  and  in  the
Bill  of  Eights,  that  no  taxation  should  be  drawn  from  them  ex-
cept by  the  English  Parliament ;  the  same  principle  which  had
gradually  invested  the  representative  branch  of  the  Legislature
with  the  special  and  peculiar  function  of  granting  supplies,  led
the  colonists  to  maintain  that  their  Uberty  would  be  destroyed
if  they  were  taxed  by  a  Legislature  in  which  they  had  no  repre-
sentatives, and  which  sat  3,000  miles  from  their  shore.  It  was
a  principle  which  had  been  respected  by  Henry  VIII.  and
Elizabeth  in  the  most  arbitrary  moments  of  their  reigns,  and
its  violation  by  Charles  I.  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the
Kebellion.  The  principle  which  led  Hampden  to  refuse  to  pay
20s.  of  ship  money  was  substantially  the  same  as  that  which
inspired  the  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act.  It  might  be  im-
possible to  show  by  the  letter  of  the  law  that  there  was  any
generical  distinction  between  taxing  and  other  legislative  Acts  ;
but  in  the  constitutional  traditions  of  the  English  people  a  broad
line  did  undoubtedly  exist.  As  Burke  truly  said,  '  the  great
contests  for  freedom  in  this  country  were  from  the  earliest
times  chiefly  on  the  question  of  taxing.'  The  English  people
have  always  held  that  as  long  as  their  representatives  retain
the  power  of  the  purse  they  will  be  able  at  last  to  check  every

32(5  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

extravagance  of  tyraiiuy,  but  that  whenever  this  is  given  up
the  whole  fabric  of  their  liberty  is  undermined.  The  English
Parliament  had  always  abstained  from  imposing  taxes  on  Wales
until  Welsh  members  sat  among  them.  When  the  right  of
self-taxation  was  withdrawn  from  Convocation,  the  clergy  at
once  assumed  and  exercised  the  privilege  of  voting  for  Members
of  Parliament  in  virtue  of  their  ecclesiastical  freeholds.  The
English  Parliament  repeatedly  asserted  its  authority  over  the
Parliament  of  Ireland,  and  it  often  exerted  it  in  a  manner
which  was  grossly  tyrannical ;  but  it  never  imposed  any  direct
tax  upon  the  Irish  people.  The  weighty  language  of  Henry
Cromwell,  who  governed  Ireland  in  one  of  the  darkest  periods
of  her  history,  was  remembered  :  '  I  am  glad,'  he  wrote,  '  to  hear
that  as  well  non-legal  as  contra-legal  ways  of  raising  money
are  not  hearkened  to.  .  .  .  Errors  in  raising  money  are  the
compendious  ways  to  cause  a  general  discontent ;  for  whereas
other  things  are  but  the  concernments  of  some,  this  is  of
all.  Wherefore,  I  hope  God  will  in  His  mercy  not  lea,d  us  into
temptation.'  '

It  is  quite  true  that  this  theory,  like  that  of  the  social
contract  which  has  also  borne  a  great  part  in  the  history  of
political  liberty,  will  not  bear  a  severe  and  philosophical
examination.  The  opponents  of  the  American  claims  were
able  to  reply,  with  undoubted  truth,  that  at  least  nine-tenths
of  the  English  people  had  no  votes ;  that  the  great  manufac-
turing towns,  which  contributed  so  largely  to  the  public  bur-
dens, were  for  the  most  part  wholly  unrepresented ;  that  the
minority  in  Parliament  voted  only  in  order  to  be  systematically
overruled  ;  and  that,  in  a  country  where  the  constituencies
were  as  unequal  as  in  England,  that  minority  often  represented
the  large  majority  of  the  voters.  It  was  easy  to  show  that  the
financial  system  of  the  country  consisted  chiefly  of  a  number  of
particular  taxes  imposed  on  particular  classes  and  industries,
and  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  these  taxes  were  levied
not  only  without  the  consent  but  in  spite  of  the  strenuous  op-
position of  the  representatives  of  those  who  paid  them.  The
doctrine  that  '  whatever  a  man  has  honestly  acquired  is  abso-

'  H.  Cromwell  to  Thurloe,  February  24,  1657.  TKurloe  State  Pajwrg,
vi.  820.

OT.  III.  TAXATION  AND  KEPRESENTATION.  327

lutely  his  own,  and  cannot  without  robbery  be  taken  from  him,
except  by  his  own  consent,'  if  it  were  applied  rigidly  to  taxa-
tion, would  reduce  every  society  to  anarchy ;  for  there  is  no
tax  which  on  such  principles  a  large  proportion  of  the  tax-
payers would  not  be  authorised  in  resisting.  It  was  a  first
principle  of  the  Constitution  that  a  Member  of  Parliament  was
the  representative  not  merely  of  his  own  constituency,  but
also  of  the  whole  empire.  Men  connected  with,  or  at  least
specially  interested  in  the  colonies,  always  found  their  way
into  Parliament ;  and  the  very  fact  that  the  colonial  arguments
were  maintained  with  transcendent  power  within  its  walls  was
sufficient  to  show  that  the  colonies  were  virtually  represented.

Such  arguments  gave  an  easy  dialectic  victory  to  the  sup-
porters of  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  in  the  eyes  of  a  true  statesman
they  are  very  insufficient.  Severe  accuracy  of  definition,  re-
finement and  precision  of  reasoning,  are  for  the  most  part
wholly  out  of  place  in  practical  politics.  It  might  be  true  that
there  was  a  line  where  internal  and  external  taxation,  taxation
for  purposes  of  commerce  and  taxation  for  purposes  of  revenue,
faded  imperceptibly  into  one  another ;  but  still  there  was  a
broad,  rongh  distinction  between  the  two  provinces  which  was
sufficiently  palpable  to  form  the  basis  of  a  colonial  policy.  The
theory  connecting  representation  with  taxation  was  susceptible
of  a  similar  justification.  A  Parliament  elected  by  a  consider-
able part  of  the  English  people,  drawn  from  the  English
people,  sitting  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  exposed  to  their
social  and  intellectual  influence,  was  assumed  to  represent
the  whole  nation,  and  the  decision  of  its  majority  was  assumed
to  be  the  decision  of  the  whole.  If  it  be  asked  how  these  as-
sumptions could  be  defended,  it  can  only  be  answered  that  they
had  rendered  possible  a  form  of  government  which  had  arrested
the  incursions  of  the  royal  prerogative,  had  given  England  a
longer  period  and  a  larger  measure  of  self-government  than
was  enjoyed  by  any  other  great  European  nation,  and  had
created  a  public  spirit  sufficiently  powerful  to  defend  the
liberties  that  had  been  won.  Such  arguments,  however  worth-
less they  might  appear  to  a  lawyer  or  a  theorist,  ought  to
be  very  sufficient  to  a  statesman.  Manchester  and  Sheffield
had  no  more  direct  representation  in  Parliament  than  Boston

328  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xii.

or  Philadelphia;  but  the  relations  of  unrepresented  English-
men and  of  colonists  to  the  English  Parliament  were  very-
different.  Parliament  cotild  never  long  neglect  the  fierce
beatings  of  the  waves  of  popular  discontent  around  its  walls.
It  might  long  continue  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  wishes  of  a
population  3,000  miles  from  the  English  shore.  When  Parlia-
ment taxed  the  English  people,  the  taxing  body  itself  felt  the
weight  of  the  bm-den  it  imposed  ;  but  Parliament  felt  no  part
of  the  weight  of  colonial  taxation,  and  had  therefore  a  direct
interest  in  increasing  it.  The  English  people  might  justly
complain  that  they  were  taxed  by  a  body  in  which  they  were
very  imperfectly  represented ;  but  this  was  a  widely  different
thing  from  being  taxed  by  the  Legislature  of  another  country.
To  adopt  the  powerful  language  of  an  Irish  writer,  no  free
people  will  ever  admit  '  that  persons  distant  from  them  1 ,000
leagues  are  to  tax  them  to  what  amount  they  please,  without
their  consent,  without  knowing  them  or  their  concerns,  without
any  sympathy  of  affection  or  interest,  without  even  sharing
themselves  in  the  taxes  they  impose — on  the  contrary,  diminish-
ing their  own  burdens  exactly  in  the  degree  they  increase
theirs.'  •

The  Stamp  Act  received  the  royal  assent  on  March  22,
1765,  and  it  was  to  come  into  operation  on  the  1st  of  Novem-
ber following.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  measure  granting  the
colonies  bounties  for  the  import  of  their  timber  into  England,
permitting  them  to  export  it  freely  to  Ireland,  INIadeira,  the
Azores,  and  any  part  of  Europe  south  of  Cape  Finisterre ;
and  in  some  other  ways  slightly  relaxing  the  trade  restric-
tions.^ A  measure  was  also  passed  which  obliged  the  colonists
to  provide  the  British  troops  stationed  among  them  with
quarters,  and  also  with  fire,  candles,  beds,  vinegar,  and  salt.
Neither  of  these  measures,  however,  at  the  time  excited  much
attention,  and  public  interest  in  the  colonies  was  wholly  con-
centrated upon  the  Stamp  Act.  The  long  delay,  which  English
statesmen  had  hoped  would  have  led  to  some  proposal  of  com-
promise from  America,  had  been  sedulously  employed  by  skilful
agitators  in  stimulating  the  excitement ;  and  when  the  news

' Connderafwiis  on  the  Dependen- Langrishc),  Dublin,  17G0,  p.  75.
cics  nf  Great  Britain  (by  Sir  Hercules  ^  5  Geo.  III.  c.  45.

CH.  XII. AMERICAN REVOLTS AGAINST THE STAMP ACT. 329

arrived  that  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  carried,  the  train  was
fully  laid,  and  the  indignation  of  the  colonies  rose  at  once  into
a  flame.  Virginia  set  the  example  by  a  series  of  resolutions
which  were  termed  'the  alarum  bell  to  the  disaffected,'  and
which  were  speedily  copied  in  the  other  provinces.  They  de-
clared that  the  colonists  were  entitled  by  charier  to  all  the
liberties  and  privileges  of  natural-born  subjects ;  '  that  the
taxation  of  the  people  by  themselves,  or  by  persons  chosen
by  themselves  to  represent  them,  ...  is  the  distinguishing
characteristic  of  British  freedom,  without  which  the  ancient
constitution  cannot  exist,'  and  that  this  inestimable  right  had
always  been  recognised  by  the  King  and  people  of  Great
Britain  as  undoubtedly  belonging  to  the  colonies.  A  congress
of  representatives  of  nine  States  was  held  at  New  York,  and  in
an  extremely  able  State  paper  they  drew  up  the  case  of  the
colonies.  They  acknowledged  that  they  owed  allegiance  to  the
Crown,  and  'all  due  subordination  to  that  august  body,  the
Parliament  of  Great  Britain  ; '  but  they  maintained  that  they
were  entitled  to  all  the  inherent  rights  and  liberties  of  natural-
born  subjects  ;  'that  it  is  inseparably  essential  to  the  freedom
of  a  people,  and  the  undoubted  right  of  Englishmen,  that  no
taxes  be  imposed  on  them  but  with  their  own  consent,  given
personally  or  by  their  representatives  ; '  that  the  colonists  '  are
not,  and  from  their  local  circumstances  cannot  be,  represented
in  the  House  of  Commons  of  Great  Britain ; '  that  the  only
representatives  of  the  colonies,  and  therefore  the  only  persons
constitutionally  competent  to  tax  them,  were  the  members
chosen  in  the  colonies  by  themselves ;  and  '  that  all  supplies
of  the  Crown  being  free  gifts  from  the  people,  it  is  unreason-
able and  inconsistent  with  the  principles  and  spirit  of  the
British  Constitution  for  the  people  of  Great  Britain  to  grant
to  his  Majesty  the  property  of  the  colonies.'  A  petition  to  the
King  and  memorials  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament  were  drawn
up  embodying  these  views.'

It  was  not,  however,  only  by  such  legal  measures  that  the

opposition  was  shown. A  furious  outburst  of  popular  violence

speedily  showed  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  enforce  the  Act,

In  Boston,  Oliver,  the  secretary  of  the  province,  who  had  ac-

'  See  Story's  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  i.  175,  176.

330  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xii.

cepted  the  office  of  stamp  distributor,  was  bung  in  effigy  on  a
tree  in  the  main  street  of  the  town.  The  building  which  had
been  erected  as  a  Stamp  Office  was  levelled  with  the  dust ;  the
house  of  Oliver  was  attacked,  plundered,  and  wrecked,  and  he
was  compelled  by  the  mob  to  resign  his  office  and  to  swear
beneath  the  tree  on  which  his  effigy  had  been  so  ignominiously
hung,  that  he  never  would  resume  it.  A  few  nights  later
the  riots  recommenced  with  redoubled  fury.  The  houses  of
two  of  the  leading  officials  connected  with  the  Admiralty  Court
and  with  the  Custom-house  were  attacked  and  rifled,  and  the
j&les  and  records  of  the  Admiralty  Court  were  burnt.  The
mob,  intoxicated  with  the  liquors  which  they  had  found  in  one
of  the  cellars  they  had  plundered,  next  turned  to  the  house  of
Hutchinson,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  and  Chief  Justice  of  the
province.  Hutchinson  was  not  only  the  second  person  in  rank
in  the  colony,  he  was  also  a  man  who  had  personal  claims  of
the  highest  kind  upon  his  countrymen.  He  was  an  American,
a  Calvinist,  a  member  of  one  of  the  oldest  colonial  families,  and
in  a  country  where  literary  enterprise  was  very  uncommon  he
had  devoted  a  great  part  of  his  life  to  investigating  the  history
of  his  native  province.  His  rare  ability,  his  stainless  private
character,  and  his  great  charm  of  manner  were  universally
recognised  ;  ^  he  had  at  one  time  been  one  of  the  most  popular
men  in  the  colony,  and  he  had  been  selected  by  the  great
majority  of  the  Assembly  as  their  agent  to  oppose  in  England
the  restrictive  commercial  laws  of  Grenville.  Bernard,  how-
ever, considering  this  position  incompatible  with  the  office  of
Lieutenant-Governor,  which  Hutchinson  had  held  since  1758,  in-
duced him  to  decline  it ;  and  although  Hutchinson  was  opposed
to  the  policy  of  the  Stamp  Act,  the  determination  with  which
he  acted  as  Chief  Justice  in  supporting  the  law  soon  made  him
obnoxious  to  the  mob.  He  had  barely  time  to  escape  with  his
family,  when  his  house,  which  was  the  finest  in  Boston,  was
attacked  and  destroyed.  His  plate,  his  furniture,  his  pictures,
the  public  documents  in  his  possession,  and  a  noble  library
which  he  had  spent  thirty  years  in  collecting,  were  plundered
and  burnt.  Eesolutions  were  afterwards  carried  in  the  town
for  suppressing  riots,  but  nothing  was  done,  and  it  was  evident

'  Sou  Tudor 's  Life  of  Otin,  pp.  i2i-i'dd.

CH XII.  RIOTS IN AMERICA.  381

that  the  prevailing  feeling  was  with  the  rioters.  INIayhew,  one  of
the  most  popular  preachers  of  Boston,  had  just  before  denounced
the  Stamp  Act  from  the  pulpit,  preaching  from  the  text,  '  I
■would  that  they  were  even  cut  off  which  trouble  you.'  A
leading  tradesman  who  had  been  notoriously  a  ringleader  was
apprehended  by  the  sheriffs,  but  he  was  released  without  in-
quiry in  consequence  of  a  large  portion  of  the  civic  guard
having  threatened  to  disband  themselves  if  he  were  committed
to  prison.  Eight  or  ten  persons  of  inferior  note  were  actually
imprisoned,  but  the  mob  compelled  the  jailer  to  surrender
the  keys  and  released  them,  and  not  a  single  person  was  really
punished.'

The  flame  rapidly  spread.  In  the  newly  annexed  provinces,
indeed,  and  in  most  of  the  West  Indian  islands,  the  Act  was
received  without  difficulty,  but  in  nearly  every  American  colony
those  who  had  consented  to  be  stamp  distributors  were  hung
and  burnt  in  effigy,  and  compelled  by  mob  violence  to  resign
their  posts.  The  houses  of  many  who  were  known  to  be  sup-
porters of  the  Act  or  sympathisers  with  the  Grovernment  were
attacked  and  plundered.  Some  were  compelled  to  fly  from  the
colonies,  and  the  authority  of  the  Home  Government  was
exposed  to  every  kind  of  insult.  In  New  York  the  effigy  of
the  Governor  was  paraded  with  that  of  the  devil  round  the
town  and  then  publicly  burnt,  and  threatening  letters  were
circulated  menacing  the  lives  of  those  who  distributed  stamps.-
The  merchants  of  the  chief  towns  entered  into  agreements  to
order  no  more  goods  from  England,  to  cancel  all  orders  already
given,  in  some  cases  even  to  send  no  remittances  to  England  in
payment  of  their  debts,  till  the  Stamp  Act  was  repealed.  The
lawyers  combined  to  make  no  use  of  the  stamped  papers.  In
order  that  the  colonies  might  be  able  to  dispense  with  assistance
from  England,  great  efforts  were  made  to  promote  manufac-
tures. The  richest  citizens  set  the  example  of  dressing  in  old
or  homespun  clothes  rather  than  wear  new  clothes  imported
from  England ;  and  in  order  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  wool,  a
general  agreement  was  made  to  abstain  from  eating  lamb.

When  the  1st  of  November  arrived,  the  bells  were  tolled  as

'  Holmes' A7nialsofA7ne?-ica,1765.  -  Documents  relating  to  the  Colo'

Grahame's  Hut.  iv.  Annual  Register,  nial  Hist,  of  New  York,  vii.  pp.  770-
1765. i  dams'  Diary,  Works,  ii.  156. 775,

332  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

for  the  funeral  of  a  nation.  Tlie  flags  were  lumg  half-mast
high.  The  shops  were  shut,  and  the  Stamp  Act  was  hawked
about  with  the  inscription,  '  The  folly  of  England  and  the  ruin
of  America.'  The  newspapers  were  obliged  by  the  new  law  to
bear  the  stamp,  which  probably  contributed  much  to  the  ex-
treme  virulence  of  their  opposition,  and  many  of  them  now
appeared  with  a  death's  head  in  the  place  where  the  stamp
should  have  been.  It  was  found  not  only  impossible  to  dis-
tribute stamps,  but  even  impossible  to  keep  them  in  the  colo-
nies, for  the  mob  seized  on  every  box  which  was  brought  from
England  and  committed  it  to  the  flames.  Stamps  were  required
for  the  validity  of  every  legal  document,  yet  in  most  of  the
colonies  not  a  single  sheet  of  stamped  paper  could  be  found.
The  law  courts  were  for  a  time  closed,  and  almost  all  business
was  suspended.  At  last  the  governors,  considering  the  impos-
sibility of  carrying  on  public  business  or  protecting  property
under  these  conditions,  took  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and
issued  letters  authorising  non-compliance  with  the  Act  on  the
ground  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  procure  the  requisite
stamps  in  the  colony.

The  determination  of  the  opponents  of  the  Act  was  all  the
greater  because  in  the  interval  between  its  enactment  and  the
period  in  which  it  was  to  come  into  operation  a  change  had
taken  place  in  the  Administration  at  home.  The  Grrenville
Ministry  had  fallen  in  July,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  that  of
Eockingham ;  and  Conway,  who  had  been  one  of  the  few  oppo-
nents of  the  Stamp  Act,  was  now  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Colonies.

Up  to  this  time  colonial  affairs  had  scarcely  excited  any
attention  in  the  English  political  world.  The  Duke  of  Cumber-
land, in  a  long  and  detailed  memorial,^  has  recounted  the  nego-
tiations he  was  instructed  to  carry  on  with  Pitt  in  April  and
May  1765,  with  a  view  to  inducing  that  statesman  to  combine
with  the  Eockingham  party  in  a  new  ministry,  and  it  is  very
remarkable  that  in  this  memorial  there  is  not  a  word  relating
to  the  colonies.  The  general  political  condition  of  the  country
was  carefully  reviewed.  Much  was  said  about  the  Eegcncy  Bill,
the  Cyder  Bill,  the  dismissal  of  officers  on  account  of  their

'  Albemarle's  Life  of  Itockinghavi,  i.  18")- 203.

en.  xn.  PHTITIONS OF ENGLISU MERCHANTS.  333

votes,  the  illegality  of  general  warrants,  the  abuses  of  military
patronage,  the  growing  power  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  the
propriety  of  attempting  a  new  alliance  with  Prussia  ;  but  there
is  not  the  smallest  evidence  that  either  Pitt  or  Cumberland,  or
any  of  the  other  statesmen  who  were  concerned  in  the  negotia-
tion, were  conscious  that  any  serious  question  was  impending
in  America.  The  Stamp  Act  had  contributed  nothing  to  the
dowTifall  of  Grenville ;  it  attracted  so  little  attention  that  it
was  only  in  the  last  days  of  1765  or  the  first  days  of  1766  that
the  new  ministers  learnt  the  views  of  Pitt  upon  the  subject ;
it  was  probably  a  complete  surprise  to  them  to  learn  that  it  had
brought  the  colonies  to  the  verge  of  rebellion,  and  in  the  first
months  of  their  power  they  appear  to  have  been  quite  uncertain
what  policy  they  would  pursue.  One  of  the  first  persons  in
England  who  fully  realised  the  magnitude  of  the  question  was
the  King.  On  December  5,  1765,  he  wrote  to  Conway  :  '  I  am
more  and  more  grieved  at  the  accounts  of  America.  "WTiere
this  spirit  will  end  is  not  to  be  said.  It  is  undoubtedly  the
most  serious  matter  that  ever  came  before  Parliament ;  it  re-
quires more  deliberation,  candour,  and  temper  than  I  fear  it
will  meet  with.'  ^

The  INIinisters  would  gladly  have  left  the  question  of
American  taxation  undecided,  but  this  was  no  longer  possible.
Parliament  had  almost  unanimously  asserted  its  right,  and
the  colonial  Assemblies  had  defiantly  denied  it.  The  servants
of  the  Crown  had  in  nearly  every  colony  been  insulted  or
plundered,  and  the  honour  of  England  and  of  the  Parliament
was  deeply  touched.  The  Ministry  was  very  weak ;  Pitt  had
refused  to  join  it ;  the  King  disliked  and  distrusted  it,  and
he  was  strongly  in  favour  of  the  coercion  of  America.  On
the  other  hand,  it  was  clear  that  the  Act  coidd  not  be  en-
forced without  war,  and  the  merchants  all  over  England  were
suffering  seriously  from  the  suspension  of  the  American  trade.
Petitions  were  presented  from  the  traders  of  London,  Bristol,
Liverpool,  and  other  towns,  stating  that  the  colonists  were
indebted  to  the  merchants  of  this  country  to  the  amount  of
several  millions  sterling  for  English  goods  which  had  been  ex-
ported to  America  ;  that  the  colonists  had  hitherto  faithfully

'  Aibemarle's  life  of  RocMngham,  i.  269.  ^  Ibid.  i.  256.

334  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xii.

made  good  their  engagements,  but  that  they  now  declared  their
inability  to  do  so  ;  that  they  would  neither  give  orders  for  new
goods  nor  pay  for  those  which  they  had  actually  received ;  and
that  unless  Parliament  speedily  retraced  its  steps,  multitudes  of
English  manufacturers  would  be  reduced  to  bankruptcy.  In
Manchester,  Nottingham,  Leeds,  and  many  other  towns,  thou-
sands of  artisans  had  been  thrown  out  of  employment.  Glas-
gow complained  that  the  Stamp  Act  was  threatening  it  with
absolute  ruin,  for  its  trade  was  principally  with  America,  and
not  less  than  half  a  million  of  money  was  due  by  the  colonists
of  Maryland  and  Virginia  alone,  to  Glasgow  merchants.^

Parliament  met  on  December  17,  1765,  and  the  attitude  of
the  different  parties  was  speedily  disclosed.  A  powerful  Opposi-
tion, led  by  Grenville  and  Bedford,  strenuously  urged  that  no
relaxation  or  indulgence  should  be  granted  to  the  colonists.  In
two  successive  sessions  the  policy  of  taxing  America  had  been
deliberately  affirmed,  and  if  Parliament  now  suffered  itself  to  be
defied  or  intimidated  its  authority  would  be  for  ever  at  an  end.
The  method  of  reasoning  by  which  the  Americans  maintained
that  they  could  not  be  taxed  by  a  Parliament  in  which  they
were  not  represented,  might  be  applied  with  equal  plausi-
bility to  the  Navigation  Act  and  to  every  other  branch  of
imperial  legislation  for  the  colonies,  and  it  led  directly  to  the
disintegration  of  the  Empire.  The  supreme  authority  of  Parlia-
ment chiefly  held  the  different  parts  of  that  Empire  together.
The  right  of  taxation  was  an  essential  part  of  the  sovereign
power.  The  colonial  constitutions  were  created  by  royal  charter,
and  it  could  not  be  admitted  that  the  King,  while  retaining  his
own  sovereignty  over  certain  portions  of  his  dominions,  could  by
a  mere  exercise  of  his  prerogative  withdraw  them  wholly  or  in
part  from  the  authority  of  the  British  Parliament.  It  was  the
right  and  the  duty  of  the  Imperial  Legislature  to  determine  in
what  proportions  the  different  parts  of  the  Empire  should  con-
tribute to  the  defence  of  the  whole,  and  to  see  that  no  one
part  evaded  its  obligations  and  unjustly  transferred  its  share  to
the  others.  The  conduct  of  the  colonies,  in  the  eyes  of  these
politicians,  admitted  of  no  excuse  or  palliation. The  disputed

'  Pari.  TTist.  xvi. 133-137 ; Walpolc's  Memoirs,  ii.  20G  ; Burhe's Corre-
tjumiloicc,  i.  100.

CH.  XII.  ARGUMENTS OF  GRENVILLE.  :V65

right  of  taxation  was  established  by  a  long  series  of  legal
authorities,  and  there  was  no  real  distinction  between  internal
and  external  taxation.  It  now  suited  the  Americans  to  describe
themselves  as  apostles  of  liberty,  and  to  denounce  England  as
an  oppressor.  It  was  a  simple  truth  that  England  governed
her  colonies  more  liberally  than  any  other  country  in  the  world,
rhey  were  the  only  existing  colonies  which  enjoyed  real  political
liberty.  Their  commercial  system  was  more  liberal  than  that  of
any  other  colonies.  They  had  attained,  under  British  rule,  to
a  degree  of  prosperity  which  was  surpassed  in  no  quarter  of  the
globe.  England  had  loaded  herself  with  debt  in  order  to  re-
move the  one  great  danger  to  their  future ;  she  cheerfully  bore
the  whole  burden  of  their  protection  by  sea.  At  the  Peace  of
Paris  she  had  made  their  interests  the  very  first  object  of  her
policy,  and  she  only  asked  them  in  return  to  bear  a  portion
of  the  cost  of  their  own  defence.  Somewhat  more  than  eight
millions  of  Englishmen  were  burdened  with  a  national  debt
of  140,000,000L  The  united  debt  of  about  two  milhons  of
Americans  was  now  less  than  800,000?.  The  annual  sum  the
colonists  were  asked  to  contribute  in  the  form  of  stamp  duties
was  less  than  100,000?.,  with  an  express  provision  that  no
part  of  that  sum  should  be  devoted  to  any  other  purpose
than  the  defence  and  protection  of  the  colonies.  And  the
country  which  refused  to  bear  this  small  tax  was  so  rich  that  in
the  space  of  three  years  it  had  paid  off  1,755,000?.  of  its  debt.
No  demand  could  be  more  moderate  and  equitable  than  that  of
England ;  and  amid  all  the  high-sounding  declamations  that
were  wafted  across  the  Atlantic,  it  was  not  difficult  to  perceive
that  the  true  motive  of  the  resistance  was  of  the  vulgarest  kind.
It  was  a  desire  to  pay  as  Httle  as  possible ;  to  throw  as  much  as
possible  upon  the  mother-country.  Kor  was  the  mode  of  re-
sistance more  respectable — the  plunder  of  private  houses  and
custom-houses  ;  mob  violence  connived  at  by  all  classes  and
perfectly  unpunished;  agreements  of  merchants  to  refuse  to
pay  their  private  debts  in  order  to  attain  political  ends.  If  this
was  the  attitude  of  America  within  two  years  of  the  Peace  of
Paris,  if  these  were  the  firstfruits  of  the  new  sense  of  security
which  British  triumphs  in  Canada  had  given,  could  it  be  doubted
that  concessions  would  only  be  the  prelude  to  new  demands  ?

336  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xii.

Already  the  Custom-house  officers  were  attacked  by  the  mobs
almost  as  fiercely  as  the  stamp  distributors.  Already  Otis,  the
most  popular  advocate  of  the  American  cause,  was  ridiculing
the  distinction  between  internal  and  external  taxation,  and
denying  that  the  British  Legislature  possessed  any  rightful
authority  in  America.  Already  a  highly  seditious  press  had
grown  up  in  the  colonies,  and  to  talk  scarcely  disguised  treason
had  become  the  best  passport  to  popular  favour.  It  would  be
impossible  for  Parliament,  if  it  now  receded,  to  retain  perma-
nently any  legislative  authority  over  the  colonies ;  and  if  this
too  were  given  up,  the  unity  of  the  Empire  would  be  but  a  name,
and  America  would  in  re;ility  contribute  nothing  to  its  strength.
If  ministers  now  repealed  the  Stamp  Act  they  would  be  guilty
of  treachery  to  England.  They  would  abdicate  a  vital  portion
of  the  sovereignty  which  England  rightfully  possessed.  They
would  humiliate  the  British  Parliament  before  the  Empire  and
before  the  world.  They  would  establish  the  fatal  principle  that
it  must  never  again  ask  any  of  the  distant  portions  of  the  Empire
to  ■contribute  to  the  burden  of  their  own  permanent  defence,
lliey  would  establish  the  still  more  fatal  precedent,  that  the  best
way  of  inducing  Parliament  to  repeal  an  obnoxious  tax  was  to
refuse  to  pay  it,  and  to  hound  on  mobs  against  those  who  were
entrusted  with  its  collection.

These  were  the  chief  arguments  on  the  side  of  the  late
ministers.  Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  rose  from  his  sick-bed,
and  in  speeches  of  extraordinary  eloquence,  and  which  pro-
duced an  amazing  effect  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  he
justified  the  resistance  of  the  colonists.  He  stood  apart  from
all  parties,  and,  while  he  declared  that  '  every  capital  measure '
of  the  late  ministry  was  wrong,  he  ostentatiously  refused  to
give  his  confidence  to  their  successors.  He  maintained  in  the
strongest  terms  the  doctrine  that  self-taxation  is  the  essential  and
discriminating  circumstance  of  political  freedom.  His  opinion
on  the  great  question  at  issue  cannot  be  better  expressed  than  in
his  own  terse  and  luminous  sentences.  '  It  is  my  opinion,'  he
said,  '  that  this  kingdom  has  no  right  to  lay  a  tax  upon  the
colonies.  At  the  same  time  I  assert  the  authority  of  this
kingdom  over  the  colonies  to  be  sovereign  and  supreme  in  every
circumstance  of  government  and  legislation  whatsoever.  .  .  .

en.  XII.  ARGUMENTS OF PITT.  S^V

Taxation  is  no  part  of  the  governing  or  legislative  power.  The
taxes  are  a  voluntary  gift  and  grant  of  the  Commons  alone.  In
legislation  the  three  estates  of  the  realm  are  alike  concerned ;
but  the  concurrence  of  the  peers  and  the  Crown  to  a  tax  is  onl}'
necessary  to  close  with  the  form  of  a  .law.  The  gift  and  grant
is  of  the  Commons  alone.  .  .  .  The  distinction  between  legisla-
tion and  taxation  is  essentially  necessary  to  liberty.  .  .  .  The
Commons  of  America,  represented  in  their  several  Assemblies,
have  ever  been  in  possession  of  the  exercise  of  this,  their
constitutional  right  of  giving  and  granting  their  own  money.
They  would  have  been  slaves  if  they  had  not  enjoyed  it.  At
the  same  time  this  kingdom,  as  the  supreme  governing  and
legislative  power,  has  always  bound  the  colonies  ...  in  every-
thing, except  that  of  taking  their  money  out  of  their  pockets
without  their  consent.'  In  his  reply  to  Grenville  he  reiterated
these  principles  with  still  stronger  emphasis.  '  I  rejoice,'  he
said,  '  that  America  has  resisted.  Three  millions  of  people,
so  dead  to  all  the  feelings  of  liberty  as  voluntarily  to  submit  to
be  slaves,  would  have  been  fit  instruments  to  make  slaves  of
the  rest.  ...  In  such  a  cause  your  success  would  be  hazardous.
America,  if  she  fell,  would  fall  like  the  strong  man  with  his
arms  around  the  pillars  of  the  Constitution.  .  .  .  When  two
countries  are  connected  together  like  England  and  her  colonies
without  being  incorporated,  the  one  must  necessarily  govern ;
the  greater  must  rule  the  less,  but  so  rule  it  as  not  to  con-
tradict the  fundamental  principles  that  are  common  to  both.
If  the  gentleman  does  not  understand  the  difference  between
external  and  internal  taxes,  I  cannot  help  it ;  but  there  is  a
plain  distinction  between  taxes  levied  for  the  purpose  of  rais-
ing a  revenue,  and  duties  imposed  for  the  regulation  of  trade
for  the  accommodation  of  the  subject;  although  in  the  conse-
quences some  revenue  might  incidentally  arise  from  the  latter.
...  I  will  be  bold  to  affirm  that  the  profits  to  Great  Britain
from  the  trade  of  the  colonies  through  all  its  branches  is  two
millions  a  year.  This  is  the  fund  that  carried  you  triumphantly
through  the  last  war.  .  .  .  This  is  the  price  America  pays  for
her  protection.  ...  I  dare  not  say  how  much  higher  these
profits  may  be  augmented.  .  .  .  The  Americans  have  not  acted
in  all  things  with  prudence  and  temper.  They  have  been
VOL. III.  z

338  ENGLAND IN THE KICIITKKNTII CENTUEY.  cii.  xii.

driven  to  madness  by  injustice.  Will  you  punish  them  for  the
madness  you  have  occasioned  ?  Kather  let  prudence  and  temper
come  first  from  this  side.  I  will  undertake  for  America  that  she
will  follow  the  example,  .  .  .  Upon  the  whole  I  will  beg  leave  to
tell  the  House  what  is  really  my  opinion.  It  is  that  the  Stamp
Act  should  be  repealed  absolutely,  totally,  and  immediately ;
that  the  reason  for  the  repeal  should  be  assigned,  because  it
was  founded  on  an  erroneous  principle.  At  the  same  time  let
the  sovereign  authority  of  this  country  over  the  colonies  be
asserted  in  as  strong  terms  as  can  be  devised,  and  be  made  to
extend  to  every  point  of  legislation  whatsoever ;  that  we  may
bind  their  trade,  confine  their  manufactures,  and  exercise  every
power  whatsoever — except  that  of  taking  their  money  out  of  their
pockets  without  their  consent.' '

These  views  were  defended  in  the  strongest  terms  by  Lord
Camden,  who  pledged  his  great  legal  reputation  to  the  doctrine
that  taxation  is  not  included  under  the  general  right  of  legisla-
tion, and  that  taxation  and  representation  are  morally  insepar-
able. '  This  position,'  he  very  rashly  affirmed, '  is  founded  on  the
laws  of  nature  ;  nay,  more,  it  is  itself  an  eternal  law  of  nature.
For  whatever  is  a  man's  own  is  absolutely  his  own.  No  man  has
a  right  to  take  it  from  him  without  his  consent,  either  expressed
by  himself  or  representative.  Whoever  attempts  to  do  it  at-
tempts an  injury. Whoever  does  it  commits  a  robbery.'  "^

The  task  of  the  ministers  in  dealing  with  this  question  was
extremely  difficult.  The  great  majority  of  them  desired
ardently  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  the  wishes  of  the
ICing,  the  abstention  of  Pitt,  and  the  divided  condition  of  par-
ties had  compelled  Eockingham  to  include  in  his  Government
Charles  Townshend,  Barrington,  and  Northington,  who  were
all  strong  advocates  of  the  taxation  of  America,  and  Northing-
ton  took  an  early  opportunity  of  delivering  an  invective  against
the  colonies  which  seemed  specially  intended  to  prolong  the
exasperation.  '  If  they  withdraw  allegiance,'  he  concluded,
'you  must  withdraw  protection, and then  the  little  State  of

' Chatham  Corresjjondcnee,  ii.3G:?-  which  Mr.  Pitt  has  whenever  he  takes

372. Rockingham  next  day  wrote  to  ))art  in  debate.'— Albemarle's  Life  of

the  King, '  The  events  of  yesterday  in  Ilockingham,  i.  270.

the  House of Commons  have  shown  '■'  I'arl.  Ifixf.  xvi.  178.
the ama/iug power and inllueiice

cii.  XII.  REPEAL OF THE  STAMP ACT.  IVM)

Genoa  or  the  kingdom  of  Sweden  may  soon  overrun  them.'
The  King  himself,  though  he  was  prepared  to  see  the  Stamp
Act  altered  in  some  of  its  provisions,  was  decidedly  hostile  to
the  repeal.  When  the  measure  was  first  contemplated,  two
partisans  of  Bute  came  to  the  King  offering  to  resign  their
places,  as  they  meant  to  oppose  the  repeal,  but  they  were  at
once  told  that  they  might  keep  their  places  and  vote  as  they
pleased.  The  hint  was  taken,  and  the  King's  friends  were
among  the  most  active,  though  not  the  most  conspicuous,
opponents  of  the  ministers.'  And  in  addition  to  all  these
difficulties  the  ministers  had  to  deal  with  the  exasperation
which  was  produced  in  Parliament  by  the  continual  outrages
and  insults  to  which  all  who  represented  the  English  Grovern-
ment  in  America  were  exposed.

Their  policy  consisted  of  two  parts.  They  asserted  in  the
strongest  and  most  unrestricted  form  the  sovereignty  of  the
British  Legislature,  first  of  all  by  resolutions  and  then  by  a  De-
claratory Act  affirming  the  right  of  Parliament  to  make  laws
binding  the  British  colonies  '  in  all  cases  whatsoever,'  and  con-
demning as  unlawful  the  votes  of  the  colonial  Assemblies  which
had  denied  to  Parliament  the  right  of  taxing  them.  Side
by  side  with  this  measure  they  brought  in  a  Bill  repealing
the  Stamp  Act.^  It  was  advocated  both  in  its  preamble  and
in  the  speeches  of  its  supporters  on  the  ground  of  simple
expediency.  The  Stamp  Act  had  already  produced  evils  far
outweighing  any  benefits  that  could  flow  from  it.  To  enforce
it  over  a  vast  and  thinly  populated  country,  and  in  the  face
of  the  universal  and  vehement  opposition  of  the  people,  had
proved  hitherto  impossible,  and  would  always  be  difficult,  dan-
gerous, and  disastrous.  It  might  produce  rebellion.  It  would
certainly  produce  permanent  and  general  disaffection,  great
derangement  of  commercial  relations,  a  smothered  resistance
which  could  only  be  overcome  by  a  costly  and  extensive  system
of  coercion.  It  could  not  be  wise  to  convert  the  Americans
into  a  nation  of  rebels  who  were  only  waiting  for  a  European
war  to  throw  off  their  allegiance.  Yet  this  would  be  the  natural
and  almost  inevitable  consequence  of  persisting  in  the  policy

'  Grenville  Papers,  iii.  353,  3G2,  365. Albemarle's  Life  of  Rockingham.
'  6  Geo,  III.  c.  11,  12.

340  ENGLAND IN THlv EIGUTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xii.

of  Grenville.  The  chief  interests  of  England  in  her  colonies
were  commercial,  and  these  had  been  profoundly  injured  by
the  Stamp  Act.  As  long  as  it  continued,  the  Americans  were
resolved  to  make  it  their  main  effort  to  abstain  as  much  as
possible  from  English  goods,  and  the  English  commercial
classes  were  unanimous  in  favour  of  the  repeal.  The  right  of
the  country  was  affirmed  and  the  honour  of  Parliament  vindi-
cated by  the  Declaratory  Act.  It  now  remained  only — if  possible
without  idle  recrimination — to  pursue  the  course  which  was
most  conducive  to  the  interests  of  England,  And  that  course
was  plainly  to  retire  from  a  position  which  had  become  utterly
untenable.

The  debates  on  this  theme  were  among  the  fiercest  and
longest  ever  known  in  Parliament.  The  former  ministers
opposed  the  repeal  at  every  stage,  and  most  of  those  who  were
under  the  direct  influence  of  the  King  plotted  busily  against
it.  Neai'ly  a  dozen  members  of  the  King's  household,  nearly
all  the  bishops,  nearly  all  the  Scotch,  nearly  all  the  Tories
voted  against  the  ministry,  and  in  the  very  agony  of  the  contest
Lord  Strange  spread  abroad  the  report  that  he  had  heard  from
the  King's  own  lips  that  the  King  was  opposed  to  the  repeal.
Rockingham  acted  with  great  decision.  He  insisted  on
accompanying  Lord  Strange  into  the  King's  presence,  and  in
obtaining  from  the  King  a  written  paper  stating  that  he  was
in  favour  of  the  repeal  rather  than  the  enforcement  of  the  Act,
though  he  would  have  preferred  its  modification  to  either
course.  The  great  and  manifest  desire  of  the  commercial  classes
throughout  England  had  much  weight ;  the  repeal  was  carried
through  the  House  of  Commons,  brought  up  by  no  less  than  200
members  to  the  Lords,  and  finally  carried  amid  the  strongest
expressions  of  public  joy.  Burke  described  it  as  '  an  event  that
caused  more  universal  joy  throughout  the  British  dominions
than  perhaps  any  other  that  can  be  remembered.''

Of  these  two  measures  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  was
that  which  was  most  violently  denounced  at  the  time  ;  but  the
Declaratory  Act,  which  passed  almost  unopposed,  is  the  one
which  now  requires  defence. It  has  been  represented  as  the

'  Albemarle's  IJfr  of  liocMngham, licguter,  176G. Grenville  Papers,  iii
i.250,  292,  2'Jl)-302,  :514,  321. Annual ;}53-:{70.

r>T.  MI.  TUK DICCLATIATORY ACT.  341

s(»urc(i  of  ull  tlic  calamities  that  ensued,  for  us  long  as  the
right  of  Parliament  to  tax  America  was  asserted,  the  liberty
of  tlie  colonies  was  precarious.  I  have  already  stated  my
opinion  that  no  just  blame  attaches  to  the  ministry  on  this
matter.  It  would  no  doubt  have  been  better  if  the  ques-
tion of  the  right  of  taxation  had  never  been  raised,  and  no
one  asserted  this  more  constantly  than  Burke,  who  largely
inspired  the  policy  of  the  Government.  But  the  ministers
had  no  alternative.  Parliament  had  already  twice  asserted
its  right  to  tax.  With  the  exception  of  Lord  Camden,
the  first  legal  authorities  in  the  country  unanimously  main-
tained it.  The  Americans  had  openly  denied  it,  and  they
had  aggravated  their  denial  by  treating  an  Act  of  Parliament
and  those  who  were  appointed  to  administer  it  with  the
grossest  outrage.  It  was  quite  impossible  that  Parliament
with  any  regard  to  its  own  dignity  could  acquiesce  tamely
in  these  proceedings.  It  was  quite  impossible  that  a  weak
ministry,  divided  on  this  very  question  and  undermined  by
the  Court,  could  have  carried  the  repeal  if  it  had  been  un-
accompanied by  an  assertion  of  parliamentary  authority  on  the
matter  that  was  in  dispute.  All  accounts  concur  in  showing
that  the  proceedings  of  the  Americans  had  produced  a  violent
and  very  natural  irritation,^  and  every  mail  brought  news
which  was  only  too  well  fitted  to  aggravate  it.  The  judg-
ment on  this  subject  of  Sir  George  Savile,  who  was  one  of
the  most  sagacious  members  of  the  Rockingham  party,  is
of  great  weight.  In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Americans  he
wrote :  '  You  should  know  that  the  great  obstacle  in  the  way
of  the  ministers  has  been  unhappily  thrown  in  by  yourselves —
I  mean  the  intemperate  proceedings  of  various  ranks  of  people
on  your  side  the  water — and  that  the  difBculties  of  the  repeal
would  have  ^»een  nothing  if  you  had  not  by  your  violence  in
word  and  action  awakened  the  honour  of  Parliament,  and
thereby  involved  every  friend  of  the  repeal  in  the  imputation

'  Thus  Shelburne  reported  to  Pitt,  355. Walpole  says, 'As  the  accounts

December  21,  1765. 'The prejudice  from  America  grew  every  day  worse,

against  the  Americans  on  the  whole  the  ministers,  who  at  first  were  in-

seeraed  very  great,  and  no  very  de-  clined  to  repeal  the  Act,  were  borne

cided  opinion  in  favour  of  the  minis-  down  by  the  liagrancy  of  the  provoca-

try.' — Chatham Correspondence, ii.  tion.' — Momoirs  of  Gcoi-gc  ITI.\\.-22\.

342  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,  cii.  xii.

of  betraying  the  dignity  of  Parliament.  This  is  so  true  that
the  Act  would  certainly  not  have  been  repealed  if  men's  minds
had  not  been  in  some  measure  satisfied  with  the  Declaration  of
Eight.' '

Franklin,  in  the  very  remarkable  evidence  which  he  at  this
time  gave  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  about
the  political  condition  and  prospects  of  America,  having  been
asked  whether  he  thought  the  Americans  would  be  contented
with  a  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  even  if  it  were  accompaniea
by  an  assertion  of  the  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  them,  an-
swered, '  I  think  the  resolutions  of  right  will  give  them  very
little  concern,  if  they  are  never  attempted  to  he  carried  into
practice.'  ^  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  judgment
was  a  just  one.  All  testimony  concurs  in  showing  that  the
repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  produced,  for  a  time  at  least,  a  com-
plete pacification  of  America.  As  Adams,  who  was  watching
the  current  of  American  feeling  with  great  keenness,  wrote,
*  The  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  has  hushed  into  silence  almost
every  popular  clamour,  and  composed  every  wave  of  popular
disorder  into  a  smooth  and  peaceful  calm.'  ^

In  addition  to  these  measures,  the  colonial  Governors  were
instructed  to  ask  the  Assemblies  to  compensate  those  whose
property  had  been  destroyed  in  the  late  riots. An  Act  was

'  Albemarle's  Life  of  Rocldngliam,  Adams'  biographer  says  the  colonists

i. 305. Charles  Fox,  in a speech  '  received the repeal  of the Stamp

which  he  made  on  December  10,  1777,  Act  with  transports  of  joy,  and  disre-

fully  corroborated  this  assertion,  and  garded the  mere  empty  declaration

declared  that '  it  was  not  the  inclina-  of  a  right  which  they  flattered  them-

tion of  Lord  Rockingham, but the  selves  was  never  to  be  exercised.  The

necessity  of  his  situation,  which  was  spirit  of  resistance  immediately  sub-

the  cause  of  the  Declaratory  Act.' —  sided,  and  a  general  tranquillity  pre-

Parl. Hist.  xix.  503. The  Duke  of  vailed  until  the  project  of  levying  in-

llichmond,  who  on  all  American  ques-  ternal  taxes  upon  the  ])eople  of  the

tions  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  colonies by Act of Parliament  was

members of  the  Ilockingham  part}',  resumed  in  England.' Iltid.  i.  81,  82.

said  in  1778,  'that  with  respect  to  the  P.iarke  in  his  great  speech  in  1774  on

Declaratory  Act  any  reason  that  ever  t]ieAmericanqiiestion,speakingof  (he

weighed  with  him  in  favour  of  that  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  said  : '  I  am

Act  was  to  obtain  the  repeal  of  the  bold  to  saj%  so  sudden  a  calm,  recovered

Stamp Act. Many people  of  high  after  so  violent  a  storm,  is  without

principles  would  never,  in  his  opinion,  parallel  in  history.' The  testimony  of

have been brought to repeal the  Hutchinson  is  equally  decisive. 'Tlie

Stamp  Act  without  it ;  the  number  of  Act  which  accompanied  it  [the  repeal

those  who  opposed  that  repeal,  even  as  of  the  Stamp  Act]  with  the  title  of

it  was,  were  very  numerous.' — Chut-  "  Securing  the  Dependency  of  the  Colo-

Uam  ConuKpondence,  iv.  501,  502.  nies,"  caused  no  allay  of  the  joy,  and

-  Franklin's  Wnrl's,  iv.  17<).  was  considered  as  mere  naked  form.'

'Adams" Diary. Il>v7..«,  ii. 203.  Ilhf.  of  Musmchusdts  B(UJ,yi.\\7.

en.  xu,  COMMKUriAL liKLAXATlONS.  843

carried  indemnifying  tlio.sc  who  had  violated  the  Stamp  Act,
and  some  considerable  changes  were  made  in  that  commer-
cial system  which  was  by  far  the  most  real  of  the  grievances
of  America.  It  was  impossible  for  a  Government  w-hich  had
just  won  a  great  victory  for  the  Americans,  by  the  assistance
of  the  commercial  and  manufacturing  classes,  to  touch  either
the  laws  prohibiting  some  of  the  chief  forms  of  manufacture  in
the  colonies  or  the  general  principle  of  colonial  monopoly  ;  and
the  favourite  argument  of  the  opponents  of  the  Stamp  Act  was
that  the  trade  advantages  arising  from  that  monopoly  were  the
real  contribution  of  America  to  the  defence  and  prosperity  of
the  Empire.  Within  these  limits,  however,  much  remained  to
be  done.  The  restrictions  imposed  upon  the  trade  with  the
French  West  India  islands,  and  especially  upon  the  importation
of  molasses,  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  the  main  practical
grievance  of  the  commercial  system.  The  prohibition  of  manu-
factures, however  unreasonable  and  unjust,  was  of  no  great
consequence  to  a  country  where  agriculture,  fisheries,  and
commerce  were  natm:'ally  the  most  lucrative  forms  of  enter-
prise ;  but  an  abundant  supply  of  molasses  was  essential  to
the  great  distilleries  at  Boston.  The  duty  when  it  was  Is.  a
gallon  had  been  a  mere  dead  letter.  When  Grenville  reduced
it  to  6d:  a  gallon,  the  most  violent  measures  had  still  been  un-
able to  suppress  a  great  smuggling  trade,  and  the  duty  only
yielded  2,000/.  a  year.  The  Rockingham  Government  lowered
it  to  Ic^.,  and  this  small  duty,  being  no  longer  a  grievance,
produced  no  less  than  17,000Z.  The  duties  imposed  on  coffee
and  pimento  from  the  British  plantations,  and  on  foreign
cambrics  and  lawns,  imported  into  America,  were  at  the  same
time  lowered;  and  the  British  West  India  islands,  in  whose
favour  the  colonial  trade  with  the  French  islands  had  been  re-
stricted, were  compensated  by  the  opening  in  them  of  some
free  ports  and  by  some  other  commercial  favours.^

'  The  Americans,'  said  Chatham  a  few  years  later,  when  de-
scribing this  period,  '  had  almost  forgot,  in  their  excess  of
gratitude  for  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  any  interest  but
that  of  the  mother-country ;  there  seemed  an  emulation  among
the  different  provinces  who  should  be  most  dutiful  and  forward

'  Macpberson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  iii.  446,  447.

344  ENGLAND IN THK KIGIITKEXTII CENTURY.  cu.  xu.

in  their  expressions  of  loyalty.' '  The  Rockingham  Ministry
had  undoubtedly,  under  circumstances  of  very  great  difficulty,
restored  confidence  to  America,  and  concluded  for  the  present
a  contest  which  would  probably  have  ended  in  a  war.  In  most
of  the  provincial  Assemblies  and  in  many  public  meetings  of
citizens,  addresses  of  thanks  were  carried  to  the  King,  to  the
ministry,  to  Pitt,  Camden,  and  Barre  ;  and  in  more  than  one
province  statues  were  raised  to  the  King  and  to  Pitt.  The
shrewd  Philadelphian  Quakers  passed  a  characteristic  resolu-
tion, '  that  to  demonstrate  our  zeal  to  Great  Britain,  and  our
gratitude  for  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  each  of  us  will
on  the  4th  of  June  next,  being  the  birthday  of  our  gracious
Sovereign,  dress  ourselves  in  a  new  suit  of  the  manufactures
of  England,  and  give  what  homespun  clothes  we  have  to  the
poor.'  ^  A  feeling  of  real  and  genuine  loyalty  to  the  mother-
country  appears  to  have  at  this  time  existed  in  the  colonies,
though  it  required  much  skill  to  maintain  it.

The  Americans  had  in  truth  won  a  great  victory,  which
inspired  them  with  unbounded  confidence  in  their  strength.
They  had  gone  through  all  the  excitement  of  a  violent  and
brilliantly  successful  political  campaign  ;  they  had  realised  for
a  time  the  union  which  appeared  formerly  so  chimerical ;  they
had  found  their  natural  leaders  in  the  struggle,  and  had  dis-
covered the  weakness  of  the  mother-country.  Many  writers
and  speakers  had  arisen  who  had  learnt  the  lesson  that  a
defiance  of  English  authority  was  one  of  the  easiest  and  safest
paths  to  popular  favour,  and  the  speeches  of  Pitt  had  kindled  a
fierce  enthusiasm  of  liberty  through  the  colonies.  There  was  no
want  of  men  who  regretted  that  the  agitation  had  ceased,  who
would  gladly  have  pressed  on  the  struggle  to  new  issues,  and
who  were  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  first  occasion  for
quarrel.  It  was  not  easy  for  an  ambitious  man  in  these  distant
colonies  to  make  his  name  known  to  the  world ;  but  if  events
ever  led  to  a  collision,  a  great  field  of  ambition  would  be  sud-
denly opened.  Besides  this,  principles  of  a  far-reaching  and
revolutionary  character  had  become  familiar  to  the  people.  It
is  a  dangerous  thing  when  nations  begin  to  scrutinise  too  closely
the  foundations  of  political  authority,  the  possible  results  to
'  Thackeray's  TAfe  of  Chaiham,  ii.  203  -'  Annual  licr/istcr,  17(!0,  p.  1 11.

CH.  XII.  THE VOTES 01-' COMPKNSATION.  345

wbicli  political  principles  may  logically  lead,  the  exact  limits  by
which  the  different  powers  of  a  heterogeneous  and  prescriptive
government  must  be  confined.  The  theory  of  English  lawyers
that  a  Parliament  in  which  the  Americans  were  unrepresented
might  fetter  their  commerce  in  all  its  parts,  and  exact  in  taxa-
tion the  last  shilling  of  their  fortunes,  and  that  their  whole
representative  system  existed  only  by  the  indulgence  of  Eng-
land, would,  if  fully  acted  on,  have  reduced  the  colonies  to
absolute  slavery.  On  the  other  hand,  Otis  and  other  agitators
were  vehemently  urging  that  the  principles  of  Chatham  and
Camden  would  authorise  the  Americans  to  repudiate  all  parlia-
mentary restrictions  on  American  trade.  No  objection  seems
indeed  to  have  been  felt  to  the  bounties  which  England
conferred  upon  it,  or  to  the  protection  of  their  coasts  by
English  vessels  ;  but  in  all  other  respects  parliamentary  in-
terference was  profoundly  disliked.  Lawyers  had  assumed
during  the  late  troubles  a  great  prominence  in  colonial  poli-
tics, and  a  litigious,  captious,  and  defining  spirit  was  abroad.

It  was  noticed  that  in  the  addresses  to  the  King  and  to  the
Government  thanking  them  for  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,
as  little  as  possible  was  said  about  the  supremacy  of  Parliament,
and  in  the  most  exuberant  moments  of  colonial  gratitude  there
were  no  signs  of  any  disposition,  in  any  province,  to  undertake,
under  proper  guarantees  and  limitation,  the  task  of  supporting
such  English  troops  as  might  be  stationed  in  America.  Had
the  colonies  been  before  willing  to  contribute  this  small  service
to  the  support  of  the  Empire,  the  constitutional  question  might
never  have  been  raised ;  had  they  now  offered  to  do  so,  it  would
probably  never  have  been  revived.  The  requisitions  to  the
colonial  Assemblies  to  compensate  the  sufferers  in  the  late
riots  were  very  unpopular.  In  one  or  two  provinces  the  money
was,  it  is  true,  frankly  and  promptly  voted  ;  but  in  most  cases
there  was  much  delay.  Massachusetts,  where  the  most  scan-
dalous riots  took  place,  rebelled  violently  against  the  too
peremptory  terms  of  the  requisition;  refused  at  first  to  pass
any  vote  of  compensation ;  yielded  at  last,  after  a  long  delay,
and  by  a  small  majority,  but  accompanied  its  grant  by  a  clause
indemnifying  the  rioters,  which  was  afterwards  annulled  by
the  King. Bernard,  who  since  the  beginning  of  1760  had  been

346  ENGLAND IN THK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xii.

Governor  of  ^Massachusetts,  had  of  hite  become  extremely  iiu-
popuhir,  and  his  name  has  been  pursued  with  untiring  virulence
to  the  present  day.  His  letters  are  those  of  an  honest  and
rather  able,  but  injudicious  and  disputatious  man,  who  was
Irving,  under  circumstances  of  extreme  difficulty,  to  do  his
duty  both  to  the  Government  and  the  people,  but  who  was
profoundly  discontented  with  the  constitution  of  the  province.
In  1763  and  1764  he  exerted  all  his  influence  to  procure  the
lowering  or  the  abolition  of  the  duties  in  the  Sugar  Act,  and  in
general  a  larger  amount  of  free  trade  for  the  colonies.  In  1765
he  op})osed  the  Stamp  Act  as  inexpedient,  though  he  main-
tained that  Parliament  had  the  ri^ht  of  taxinjT  the  colonies,
provided  those  taxes  were  exclusively  applied  for  the  benefit
of  those  who  paid  them.  Up  to  this  time  he  appears  to  have
been  generally  liked  and  esteemed  ;  ^  but  he  was  now  called
i:pon  to  take  the  most  prominent  part  in  maintaining  the  policy
of  the  English  Government,  and  his  letters  give  a  vivid  picture
of  the  difficulties  he  encountered.  He  describes  himself  as
placed  '  in  the  midst  of  those  who  first  stirred  up  these  dis-
turbances, without  a  force  to  protect  my  person,  without  a
council  to  advise  me,  watched  by  every  eye,  and  misrepresented
or  condemned  for  everything  I  do  on  the  King's  behalf.'  He
laments  that  the  governments  of  the  colonies  '  were  weak  and
impotent  to  an  amazing  degree,'  that  '  the  governors  and
officers  of  the  Crown  were  in  several  of  the  chief  province?
entirely  dependent  upon  the  people  for  subsistence,'  that  '  the
persons  of  the  governors  and  Crown  officers  are  quite  defence-
less and  exposed  to  the  violence  of  the  people,  without  any
possible  resort  for  protection,'  and  he  continually  urged  that
as  long  as  the  Council,  which  was  the  natural  support  of
the  Executive,  was  elected  annually  by  the  Assembly,  and
as  long  as  almost  all  the  civil  officers  were  mainly  dependent
for  their  salaries  on  an  annual  vote  of  the  Assembly,  it  would
be  impossible  to  enforce  in  Massachusetts  any  unpopular
law  or  to  punish  any  outrage  which  was  supported  by  popular
favour.  It  was  his  leading  doctrine  that  if  British  rule  was  to
be  perpetuated  in  America,  and  if  a  period  of  complete  anarchy
was  to  be  averted,  it  was  necessary  to  put  an  end to  the  ob-

'  Sec  Hutchinson,  p.  2.j1.

CH  xii.  GOVKRNOK  BERNARD.  347

scurity  which  rested  upon  the  relations  of  the  colonies  to  the
Home  Government ;  to  establish  finally  and  decisively  the
legislative  ascendency  of  the  British  Parliament,  and  to  remodel
the  constitutions  of  the  colonies  on  a  uniform  type.  He  pro-
posed that  the  Assemblies  should,  as  at  present,  remain  com-
pletely representative  ;  but  that  the  democratic  element  in  the
Constitution  should  be  always  balanced  by  a  council  consist-
ing of  a  kind  of  life  peers,  appointed  directly  by  the  King,
and  that  there  should  be  a  fixed  civil  list  from  which  the  King's
officers  should  derive  a  certain  provision.  As  such  changes  were
wholly  incompatible  with  the  charters  of  the  more  democratic
colonies,  he  proposed  that  American  representatives  should  be
temporarily  summoned  to  the  British  Parliament,  and  that  Par-
liament should  then  authoritatively  settle  the  colonial  system.'
These  views  were  of  course  at  first  only  communicated
confidentially  to  the  Grovernment,  but  in  the  open  acts  of
Bernard  there  was  much  that  was  offensive  to  the  people.
His  addresses  were  often  very  injudicious ;  he  had  a  bad  habit
of  entering  into  elaborate  arguments  with  the  Assembly,  and
he  was  accused  of  straining  the  small  amount  of  prerogative
which  he  possessed.  The  Assembly,  shortly  after  the  repeal
of  the  Stamp  Act,  showed  its  gratitude  by  electing  Otis,  the
most  violent  assailant  of  the  whole  legislative  authority  of
England,  as  its  Speaker,  and  Bernard  negatived  the  choice.
The  Assembly,  contrary  to  immemorial  usage,  refused  to  elect
Hutchinson,  the  Lieutenant-Grovernor,  Oliver,  the  Secretary  of
the  Province,  and  the  other  chief  officers  of  the  Crown,  mem-
bers of  the  Council.  Bernard  remonstrated  strongly  against  the
exclusion  ;  he  himself  negatived  sis  '  friends  of  the  people  '  who
had  been  elected,  and  he  countenanced  a  claim  of  Hutchinson
10  take  his  seat  in  his  capacity  of  Lieutenant-Governor  among
the  councillors.  The  relations  between  the  Executive  and  the
Assembly  were  thus  extremely  tense,  while  the  inhabitants  of
Boston  were  very  naturally  and  very  pardonably  intoxicated
with  the  triumph  they  had  obtained.  The  little  town,  which
was  probably  hardl}'  known  even  by  name  in  Europe  outside

'  Heproposed  that  thirty  reprcsen- islands.— Letters  of  George  Bernard,
tatives  should  be  sent  from  the  con- p.  34.
tinental  colonies,  and  fifteen  from  the

348  LNGLAXD IN TlIK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

commercial  circles,  had  bearded  the  Government  of  England,
and  it  was  deeply  sensible  of  the  heroism  it  had  displayed.
Not  only  were  the  rioters  never  punished,  not  only  were  they
the  objects  of  general  sympathy — the  '  sons  of  liberty  '  resolved
to  meet  annually  to  commemorate  their  resistance  to  the  Stamp
Act,  and  to  express  their  admiration  for  one  another.  Attempts
to  enforce  the  revenue  Acts  were  continually  resisted.  It  was
observed  that  the  phrase,  '  No  representation,  no  taxation  !  '
which  had  been  the  popular  watch-cry,  was  beginning  to  be
replaced  by  the  phrase,  '  No  representation,  no  legislation  ! '  and
niany 'patriots'  whose  names  are  emblazoned  in  American  history,
with  unbounded  applause  and  with  the  most  perfect  security  were
hurling  highly  rhetorical  defiances  at  the  British  Government.

The  clause  in  the  Mutiny  Act  requiring  the  colonists  to
supply  English  troops  with  some  of  the  first  necessaries  of  life,
was  another  grievance.  Boston,  as  usual,  disputed  it  at  every
point  with  the  Governor ;  and  New  York  positively  refused  to
obey.  In  a  very  able  book  called  '  The  Farmer's  Letters,'
written  by  a  lawyer  named  Dickinson,  which  appeared  about
this  time,  it  was  maintained  that  if  the  British  Legislature  has
the  right  of  ordering  the  colonies  to  provide  a  single  article
for  British  troops,  it  has  a  right  to  tax  :  '  An  Act  of  Par-
liament commanding  to  do  a  certain  thing,  if  it  has  any
validity,  is  a  tax  upon  us  for  the  expense  that  accrues  in  com-
plying with  it.'

It  is  evident  that  great  wisdom,  moderation,  and  tact  were
needed  if  healthy  relations  were  to  be  established  between
England  and  her  colonies,  and  unfortunately  these  qualities
were  conspicuously  absent  from  English  councils.  The  down-
fall of  the  Eockingham  Ministry,  and  the  formation  of  a  minis-
try of  which  Grafton  was  the  nominal  and  Pitt  the  real  head,
seemed  on  the  whole  a  favourable  event.  The  influence  and
popularity  of  Pitt  were  even  greater  in  America  than  in  England.
ILis  acceptance  of  the  title  of  Earl  of  Chatham,  which  injured
him  so  deeply  in  English  opinion,  was  a  matter  of  indifference
to  the  colonists ;  and  he  possessed  far  beyond  all  other  English
statesmen  the  power  of  attracting  or  conciliating  great  bodies
of  men,  and  firing  them  with  the  enthusiasm  of  loyalty  or
patriotism. Camden,  who next to  Chatham v.as the  chief

CH.  XTi.  GliOWING DIFFICULTIES IN ENGLAND.  349

English  advocate  of  the  colonial  cause,  was  Chancellor.  Con-
way, who  moved  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  was  one  of  the
Secretaries  of  State  ;  and  Shelburne,  who  at  the  age  of  twenty-
nine  was  placed  over  American  affairs,  had  on  the  question
of  taxing  America  been  on  the  side  of  Chatham  and  Camden.
Illness,  however,  speedily  withdrew  Chatham  from  public  affairs,
and  in  the  scene  of  anarchy  which  ensued  it  was  left  for  the
strongest  man  to  seize  the  helm.  Unfortunately,  in  the  absence
of  Chatham,  that  man  was  unquestionably  the  Chancellor  of
the  Exchequer,  Charles  Townshend.

From  this  time  the  English  government  of  America  is  little
more  than  a  series  of  deplorable  blunders.  A  feeling  of  great
irritation  against  the  colonies  had  begun  to  prevail  in  English
political  circles.  The  Court  party  continually  repeated  that
England  had  been  humiliated  by  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.'
Grenville  maintained  that  if  that  Act  had  been  enforced  with
common  firmness,  the  stamp  duties  in  America  would  soon  have
been  collected  with  as  little  difficulty  as  the  land  tax  in  England ;
and  he  pointed  to  the  recent  news  as  a  conclusive  proof  that
the  policy  of  conciliation  had  failed  ;  and  that  through  the  vacil-
lation or  encouragement  of  English  statesmen,  the  spirit  of  re-
bellion and  of  anarchy  was  steadily  growing  beyond  the  Atlantic.
There  was  a  general  feeling  that  it  was  perfectly  equitable  that
America  should  support  an  army  for  her  own  defence,  and  for
that  of  the  neighbouring  islands ;  and  also,  that  this  had  be-
come a  matter  of  vital  and  pressing  importance  to  the  British
Empire.  The  political  correspondence  of  the  time  teems  with
intimations  of  the  incessant  activity  with  which  France  and
Spain  were  intriguing  to  regain  the  position  they  had  lost
in  the  late  war.  The  dispute'  about  the  Manilla  ransom  and
the  annexation  of  Corsica  were  the  most  conspicuous,  but
they  were  not  the  most  significant,  signs  of  the  attitude  of
those  Powers.  Plans  for  the  invasion  of  England  had  been
carefully  elaborated.  French  spies  had  surveyed  the  English
coast.  In  1764  and  1765  an  agent  of  Choiseul  had  minutely
studied  the  American  colonies,  and  had  reported  to  his  master

'  'The whole  body of courtiers  state until something  of the kind

drove him  [Charles  Townshend]  on-  should  be  done.' — Burke's  Speech  on

wards. They always talked as if  American  Taxation  (1774).
the  King  stood  in  a  sort  of  humihated

o50  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  xh.

that  the  English  troops  were  so  few  and  scattered  that  they
could  be  of  no  real  service,  and  that  democratic  and  pro-
vincial jealousy  had  prevented  the  erection  of  a  single
citadel  in  ajl  New  England.'  The  King  fully  agreed  with
his  wisest  ministers  that  the  army  was  wholly  insufficient  to
protect  the  Empire,  and  the  scheme  of  Chatham  for  averting
the  rapidly  growing  dangers  from  France  by  a  new  alliance
with  Prussia  had  signally  failed.  England  was  beginning  to
learn  the  lesson  that  in  the  crisis  of  her  fate  she  could  rely  on
herself  alone,  and  that  in  political  life  gratitude  is  of  all  ties
the  frailest  and  the  most  precarious.  At  the  same  time,  the
country  gentlemen  who  remembered  the  days  of  Walpole,  when
England  was  more  prosperous  though  less  great,  murmured  at
the  heavy  land  tax  in  time  of  peace,  and  had  begun  to  complain
bitterly  that  the  whole  expense  of  the  defence  of  wealthy
colonies  was  thrown  on  them.  The  factious  vote,  in  which  the
partisans  of  Grenville  and  most  of  the  partisans  of  Kockingham,
with  the  notable  exception  of  Burke,  concurred,  which  reduced
the  land  tax  proposed  by  the  Government  from  4s.  to  3s.
in  the  pound,  made  it  necessary  to  seek  some  other  source
of  revenue.^  Shelburne  himself  fully  adopted  the  view  that
America  should  support  her  own  army,  and  he  imagined  that
if  it  were  reduced  to  the  smallest  proportions  the  required  sum
might  be  gradually  raised  by  enforcing  strictly  the  quit  rents
of  the  Crown,  which  appear  to  have  fallen  into  very  general
neglect,  and  by  turning  the  grants  of  land  to  real  benefit.^
Townshend,  however,  had  other  schemes,  and  he  lost  little  time
in  forcing  them  upon  Parliament.

On  January  26,  1767,  in  a  debate  on  the  army,  George
Grenville  moved  that  America,  like  Ireland,  should  support  an
establishment  of  her  own  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  discussion
which  followed,  Townshend  took  occasion  to  declare  himself  a
firm  advocate  of  the  principle  of  the  Stamp  Act. He  described

'  Bancroft,  iii.  28. Fitzmaiirice's  sooner  or  later. The most obvious

Life  of  Shelburne,  \\.Z-o.  manner  of laying  a  foundation for

2  [Seep.  117.  such  a  fund seems  to  be  by  takinj;

5  '  The forming of an  American  proper  care  of  the  quit  lands,  and  by

fund to support the exigencies of  turning the  grants  of land  to  real

government  in  the  same  manner  as  is  benefit.' — Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shcl-

(ione  in  Ireland,  is  what  is  so  higlily  lurne,  ii.  35.
reasonable that it must take  i)la<x;

CH.  XII.  TOWNSHEND'S DECLARATION.  3ol

the  distinction  between  external  and  internal  taxes  as  ridiculous,
in  the  opinion  of  every  one  except  the  Americans ;  and  he
pledged  himself  to  find  a  revenue  in  America  nearly  sufficient
for  the  purposes  that  were  required.'  His  colleagues  listened
in  blank  astonishment  to  a  pledge  which  was  perfectly  un-
authorised by  the  Cabinet,  and  indeed  contrary  to  the  known
decision  of  all  its  members ;  but,  as  the  Duke  of  Grafton
afterwards  wrote,  no  one  in  the  ministry  had  sufficient
authority  in  the  absence  of  Chatham  to  advise  the  dismissal
of  Townshend,  and  this  measure  alone  could  have  arrested
his  policy.  Shelburne,  who  was  the  official  chief  of  the
colonies,  wrote  to  Chatham,  who  was  then  an  almost  helpless
invalid,  relating  the  circumstances  and  expressing  his  com-
plete ignorance  of  the  intentions  of  his  colleague.  The
news  had  just  arrived  that  New  York  had  openly  repudiated
an  Act  of  Parliament  by  refusing  to  furnish  troops  with
the  first  necessaries  of  life ;  and  it  produced  an  indignation
in  Parliament  which  Chatham  himself  appears  fully  to  have
shared.  '  America,'  he  wrote  confidentially  to  Shelburne,
*  afifords  a  gloomy  prospect.  A  spirit  of  infatuation  has  taken
possession  of  New  York.  Their  disobedience  to  the  Mutiny  Act
will  justly  create  a  great  ferment  here,  open  a  fair  field  to  the
arraigners  of  America,  and  leave  no  room  to  any  to  say  a  word
in  their  defence.  I  foresee  confusion  will  ensue.  The  peti-
tion of  the  merchants  of  New  York  is  highly  improper ;  .  .  .
they  are  doing  the  work  of  their  worst  enemies  themselves.
The  torrent  of  indignation  in  Parliament  will,  I  apprehend,
become  irresistible.'^  In  a  letter  written  a  few  days  later  he
says,  '  The  advices  from  America  aiford  un pleasing  views.  New
York  has  drunk  the  deepest  of  the  baneful  cup  of  infatuation,
but  none  seem  to  be  quite  sober  and  in  full  possession  of  reason.
It  is  a  literal  truth  to  say  that  the  Stamp  Act  of  most  unhappy
memory  has  frightened  those  irritable  and  umbrageous  people
quite  out  of  their  senses.'^ Letters  from  colonial  governors

'  There  are  two  accounts  of  this  and  the  extracts  from the  Duke of

Epeech:  the  first  in  a  letter  from  Lord  Grafton's  Memoirs  in  Lord  Stanhope's

Charlemont  to  Flood  (Jan.  29),  Chat-  JHstory,  v.  App.  xvii.  xviii.

hamCorresj)ondence,\i\.\l?>,l~i^;  the  -  CkathamCa7-resj)o>idence,  iu.  188,

other  in  a  letter  from  Shelburne  to  180.

Chatham  (Feb.  1),  ibid.  iii.  182-188.  ^  Ibid.  p.  193.
See  too  Grenrille  Papers,  iv.  211,  222,

352  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

painted  the  state  of  feeling  in  the  darkest  colours.  At  every
election,  in  the  bestowal  of  every  kind  of  popular  favour,  to
have  opposed  parliamentary  authority  in  America  was  now  the
first  title  to  success  ;  to  have  supported  it,  the  most  fatal  of
disqualifications.  The  pulpit,  the  press,  the  lawyers,  the
'  sons  of  liberty ' — all  those  classes  who  subsist  or  flourish  by
popularity — were  busy  in  inflaming  the  jealousy  against  Eng-
land, and  in  extending  the  field  of  conflict.  There  was  a
general  concurrence  of  opinion  among  American  ofiicials  that,
even  apart  from  the  necessity  of  providing  for  the  defence
of  the  colonies,  it  was  indispensable,  if  any  Act  of  Parliament
was  henceforth  to  be  obeyed,  that  a  small  army  should  be
permanently  established  in  America,  and  that  the  Executive
should  be  strengthened  by  making  at  least  the  governor,  who
represented  the  English  Crown,  and  the  judges,  who  represented
English  law,  independent  of  the  favour  of  the  Assemblies.  It
is  remarkable  that  among  the  ofiicials  who  advocated  these
views  was  the  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  had  been  ap-
pointed Crown  Governor  of  New  Jersey.  It  was  urged,  too,
that  the  more  democratic  constitution?  among  the  colonies  must
be  remodelled  ;  that,  while  the  Assembly  should  always  be  the
legitimate  and  unfettered  representative  of  the  people,  the
Council  must  always  be  chosen  by  the  Grovernor.

Very  strong  arguments  might  be  urged  in  favour  of  these
changes;  but  there  was  one  still  stronger  against  them — that
it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  efiect  them.  On  May  13, 1767,
however,  when  Chatham  was  completely  incapacitated,  and
when  all  other  statesmen  had  sunk  before  the  ascendency  of
Townshend,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  brought  in  his
measure.  With  that  brilliancy  of  eloquence  which  never  failed
to  charm  the  House,  he  dilated  upon  the  spirit  of  insubordina-
tion that  was  growing  up  in  all  the  colonies,  upon  the  open
defiance  of  an  Act  of  Parliament  by  New  York,  and  upon  the
absolute  necessity  of  asserting  with  dignity  and  decision  the
legal  ascendency  of  Parliament.  The  measures  which  he
ultimately  brought  forward  and  carried  were  of  three  kinds:
]^)y  one  Act  of  Parliament  the  legislative  functions  of  the
New  York  Assembly  were  suspended,  and  the  Governor  was
forbidden  to  give  his  sanction  to  any  local  law  in  that  province

,,n.  XII.  TOWNSllKND'.s TAXES.  353

till  the  terms  of  the  Mutiny  Act  had  been  complied  with."  By
another  Act  a  Board  of  Commissioners  of  the  Customs  with
large  powers  was  established  in  America  for  the  purpose  of
Buperintending  the  execution  of  the  laws  relating  to  trade.'*
By  a  third  Act  the  proposal  of  taxing  America  was  resumed.
Townshend  explained  that  the  distinction  between  internal  and
external  taxation  was  in  his  eyes  entirely  worthless ;  but  in  the
discussions  on  the  Stamp  Act  the  Americans  had  taken  their
stand  upon  it.  They  had  represented  it  as  transcendently  im-
portant, and  had  professed  to  be  quite  willing  that  Parliament
should  regulate  their  trade  by  duties,  provided  it  raised  no
internal  revenue.  This  distinction  Townshend  said  he  would
observe.  He  would  raise  a  revenue,  but  he  would  do  so  only  by
a  port  duty  imposed  upon  glass,  red  and  white  lead,  painters'
colours,  paper,  and  tea,  imported  into  the  colonies.  The  charge
on  the  last-named  article  was  to  be  Sd.  in  the  pound.  The
whole  annual  revenue  expected  from  these  duties  amounted  to
less  than  40,000L,^  and  it  was  to  be  employed  in  giving  a  civil
list  to  the  Crown.  Out  of  that  civil  list,  salaries  were  to  be
paid  to  the  governors  and  judges  in  America ;  and  in  the  very
improbable  event  of  there  being  any  surplus,  it  was  to  go  to-
wards defraying  the  expense  of  protecting  the  colonies.  In
order  to  assist  in  the  enforcement  of  the  law,  writs  of  assistance
were  formally  legalised.  Coffee  and  cocoa  exported  from  Eng-
land to  the  colonies  were  at  the  same  time  freed  from  the  duty
which  they  had  previously  paid  on  importation  into  England.
Tea  exported  to  the  colonies  obtained  a  similar  indulgence  for
five  years,  but  the  drawback  on  the  export  of  china  earthenware
to  America  was  withdrawn.*

It  is  a  strange  instance  of  the  fallibility  of  political  foresight
if  Townshend  imagined  that  America  would  acquiesce  in  these
measures,  that  England  possessed  any  adequate  means  of  en-
forcing them,  or  that  she  could  a  second  time  recede  from  her
demands  and  yet  maintain  her  authority  over  the  colonies.  It
is  mournful  to  notice  how  the  field  of  controversy  had  widened
and  deepened,  and  how  a  quarrel  which  might  at  one  time  have

'  7  Geo.  Til.  c.  59.  '  \^a?.r^o\es  ^femo^rf:  of  George  III.

2  Jbid.  c.  41.  iii.  28.  *  7  Geo.  III.  c  4G,  56.

VOL.  III.  A A

3.54  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKV. cii.  xii.

been  appeased  by  slight  mutual  concessions  was  leading  inevit-
ably to  the  disruption  of  the  Empire.  England  was  originally
quite  right  in  her  contention  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  colonies
to  contribute  something  to  the  support  of  the  army  which  de-
fended the  unity  oi  the  Empire.  She  was  quite  right  in  her
belief  that  in  some  of  the  colonial  constitutions  the  Executive
was  far  too  feeble,  that  the  line  which  divides  liberty  from
anarchy  was  often  passed,  and  that  the  result  was  profoundly
and  permanently  injurious  to  the  American  character.  She  was
also,  I  think,  quite  right  in  ascribing  a  great  part  of  the  resist-
ance of  America  to  the  disposition,  so  common  and  so  natural  in
dependencies,  to  shrink  as  much  as  possible  from  any  expense
that  could  possibly  be  thrown  on  the  mother-country,  and  in
forming  a  very  low  estimate  of  the  character  and  motives  of  a
large  proportion  of  those  ambitious  lawyers,  newspaper  writers,
preachers,  and  pamphleteers  who,  in  New  England  at  least,
were  labouring  with  untiring  assiduity  to  win  popular  applause
by  sowing  dissension  between  England  and  her  colonies.  But
the  Americans  were  only  too  well  justified  in  asserting  that  the
suppression  of  several  of  their  industries  and  the  monopoly  by
England  of  some  of  the  chief  branches  of  their  trade,  if  they
did  not  benefit  the  mother-country,  at  least  imposed  sacrifices
on  her  colonies  fully  equivalent  to  a  considerable  tax.'  They
were  also  quite  justified  in  contending  that  the  power  of  taxa-
tion was  essential  to  the  importance  of  their  Assemblies,  and
that  an  extreme  jealousy  of  any  encroachment  on  this  preroga-
tive was  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  traditions  of  English
liberty.  They  had  before  their  eyes  the  hereditary  revenue,
the  scandalous  pension  list,  the  monstrous  abuses  of  patronage,
in  Ireland,  and  they  were  quite  resolved  not  to  suffer  similar
abuses  in  America.^  The  judges  only  held  their  seats  during
the  royal  pleasure.  Ministerial  patronage  in  the  colonies,  as
elsewhere,  was  often  grossly  corrupt,^  and  in  the  eyes  of  the

'  Reo  the  '  Cause  of  American  Dis-  who  was  residing  in  England  in  1758,

contents before 1768.' —  Franklin's  there  is  an  extraordinarj',  though  pro-

Works,  iv.  250,  251.  bably  somewhat  overcharged,  account

'•^  See  a  powerful  statement  of  the  of  Engli.sh  appointments  in  America,

abuses  in  Ireland  in  the  i'l/r7«w's  Zcf-  '  For  many  years  past  .  .  .  most  of  the

iers.  No.  10.  places  in  the  gift  of  the  Crown  have

'  In a  private letter written  bj  been  filled  with  broken  Members  of

General  Iluske,  a  prominent  American  rarliamcnt,  of  bad  if  any  principles,

CH.  xii. lil'X'KlTION UV TOWNSIIKND'.S J-AVV JN AMERICA. 355

colonists  the  annual  grant  was  the  one  efficient  control  upi.n
maladmini  stration .

A  period  of  wild  and  feverish  confusion  followed.  Counsels
of  the  most  violent  kind  were  freely  circulated,  and  for  a  time  it
seemed  as  if  the  appointment  of  the  new  Board  of  Commissioners
would  be  resisted  by  force ;  but  Otis  and  some  of  the  other
popular  leaders  held  back  from  the  conflict,  and  in  several  colo-
nies a  clear  sense  of  the  serious  nature  of  the  struggle  that  was
impending  exercised  a  sobering  influence.  Georgia,  which  had
been  inclined  to  follow  the  example  of  New  York,  was  brought
to  reason  by  the  prospect  of  being  left  without  the  protection
of  English  troops  in  the  midst  of  the  negroes  and  the  Indians.'
The  central  and  southern  colonies  hesitated  for  some  time  to
follow  the  lead  of  New  England.  Hutchinson  wrote  to  the
Government,  at  home  that  Boston  would  probably  find  no  other
town  to  follow  her  in  her  career  of  violence ;  and  De  Kalb,  the
secret  agent  of  Choiseul,  who  was  busily  employed  in  fomenting
rebellion  in  the  colonies,  appears  for  a  time  to  have  thought  it
would  all  end  in  words,  and  that  England,  by  keeping  her  taxes
within  very  moderate  limits,  would  maintain  her  authority.^
Massachusetts,  however,  had  thrown  herself  with  fierce  energy
into  the  conflict,  and  she  soon  carried  the  other  provinces  in  her
wake.  Non-importation  agreements  binding  all  the  inhabitants
to  abstain  from  English  manufactures,  and  especially  from
every  article  on  which  duties  were  levied  in  England,  spread
from  colony  to  colony,  and  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  issued
a  circular  addressed  to  all  the  other  colonial  Assemblies  de-
nouncing the  new  laws  as  unconstitutional,  and  inviting  the
different  Assemblies  to  take  united  measures  for  their  repeal.

pimps,  valets  de  chambre,  election-  handsome  wife  to  his  embraces  and
eering scoundrels, and even livery  procuring  him  other  means  of  gratify-
servants. Tn  one  word,  America  has  ing his lust. Innumerable are in-
been  for  many  years  made  the  hos-  stances  of  this  sort  in  places  of  great
pital  of  Great  Britain  for  her  decayed  trust.' — Phillimore's  JJ/e  of  Lyttclton,
courtiers,  and  abandoned,worn-outde-  ii.  604.  In  Parliament  Captain  Phipps,
pendants. I  can  point  you  out  a  chief  speaking  of  America, said,  'Individuals
justice  of  a  province  appointed  from  have  been  taken  from the gaols to
home  for  no  other  reason  than  publicly  preside  in  the  seat  of  justice;  offices
prostituting  his  honour  and  conscience  have been  given to men who  had
at  an  election  ;  a  livery  servant  that  never  seen  America.' — Cavendish  De-
is secretary  of  a  province,  app6inted  hates,  i.  91.
from hence  ;  a  pimp,  collector  of  a  '  lliklreth,  ii.  540.
whole  province,  who  got  this  place  of  -  Bancroft,  iii.  1  Ifi,  140.
the  man  in  power  for  prostituting  his

3oG  ENGLAND IN THK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

The  Assembly  at  the  same  time  drew  up  a  petition  to  the
King  and  addresses  to  the  leading  English  supporters  of  the
American  cause.'  These  addresses,  which  were  intended  to  act
upon  English  opinion,  were  composed  with  great  ability  and
moderation ;  and  while  expressing  the  firm  resolution  of  the
Americans  to  resist  every  attempt  at  parliamentary  taxation,
they  acknowledged  fully  the  general  legislative  authority  of
Parliament,  and  disclaimed  in  the  strongest  language  any  wish
for  independence.  In  America  itself  the  language  commonly
used  was  less  decorous.  One  of  the  Boston  newspapers  dilated
furiously  upon  the  '  obstinate  malice,  diabolical  thirst  for  mis-
chief, effrontery,  guileful  treachery,  and  wickedness '  of  the
Governor-  in  such  terms  that  the  paper  was  brought  before
the  Assembly,  but  that  body  would  take  no  notice  of  it,  and
the  grand  jury  refused  to  find  a  trae  bill  against  its  publisher.
The  Commissioners  of  the  revenue  found  that  it  was  idle  to
attempt  to  enforce  the  Kevenue  Acts  without  the  presence  of
British  troops.  Riots  were  perfectly  unpunished,  for  no  jury
would  convict  the  rioters.  Bernard  wrote  that  his  position  was
one  of  utter  and  humiliating  impotence,  and  that  the  first  c<.n-
dition  of  the  maintenance  of  English  authority  in  Massachusetts
was  to  quarter  a  powerful  military  force  at  Boston.

While  these  things  were  happening  in  America,  the  com-
position of  the  Ministry  at  home  was  rapidly  changing.  On
September  4, 1767,  after  a  short  fever,  Charles  Townshend  died,
leaving  to  his  successors  the  legacy  of  his  disastrous  policy  in
America,  but  having  achieved  absolutely  nothing  to  justify  the
extraordinary  reputation  he  possessed  among  his  contemporaries.

'  In their  petition to the  King  most  distant  thought  of  independency

they  say,  '  With  great  sincerity  per-  of  Great  Britain.' •  So  sensible  are

mit  us  to  assure  your  Majesty  that  the members of this  House,' they

your  subjects of this  province  ever  wrote  to  Rockingham,  '  of  their  hap-

have,  and  still  continue  to  acknow-  piness  and  safety  in  their  union  with

ledge  your  Majesty's  High  Court  of  and dependence upon the mother-

Parliaraent, the supreme legislative  country,  tliat  they  would  by  no  means

power  of  the  whole  Empire,  the  super-  be  inclined  to  accept  of  an  indepen-

intendingauthorityof  which  is  clearly  dency  if  olTered  to  them.' — The  true

admitted  in  all  cases  that  can  consist  Sentimcntt^  of  A mv7nea,  as  contained  in

with  the  fundamental  rights  of  nature  a  (Mlection  of  Letters  sent  from  the

and the Constitution.' '  Your  lord-  House of  Rcjrresentativcs  of  Massa-

ship,'  they  wrote  to  Shelburne,  'is  too  chusetts  Bay  to  several  Persons  of  Uif/h

candid  and  just  in  your  sentiments  Ilankin  this  Kingdom. London,  ITfiS.
to  suppose  that  the House  have  the  ^  Bancroft. Hutchinson.

CH.  xn.  CHARLES TOWNSIIEND.  357

Nothing  of  the  smallest  value  remains  of  an  eloquence  which
some  of  the  best  judges  placed  above  that  of  Burke  and  only
second  to  that  of  Chatham,'  and  the  two  or  three  pamphlets
which  are  ascribed  to  his  pen  hardly  surpass  the  average  of  the
political  literature  of  the  time.  Exuberant  animal  spirits,  a
brilliant  and  ever  ready  wit,  boundless  facility  of  repartee,  a  clear,
rapid,  and  spontaneous  eloquence,  a  gift  of  mimicry  which  is
said  to  have  been  not  inferior  to  that  of  Garrick  and  of  Foote,
great  charm  of  manner,  and  an  unrivalled  skill  in  adapting
himself  to  the  moods  and  tempers  of  those  who  were  about  him,
had  made  him  the  delight  of  every  circle  in  which  he  moved,
the  spoilt  child  of  the  House  of  Commons.  He  died  when  only
forty-two,  but  he  had  already  much  experience  of  official  life.
He  had  been  made  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  1754,  Treasurer
of  the  Chamber  and  member  of  the  Privy  Council  in  1756,
Secretary  of  War  in  1761,  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  in
1763,  Paymaster-Greneral  in  1765,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer
in  1766.  The  extraordinary  quickness  of  apprehension  which
was  his  most  remarkable  intellectual  gift,  soon  made  him  a
perfect  master  of  official  business,  and  no  man  knew  so  well
how  to  apply  his  knowledge  to  the  exigencies  of  debate,  and
how  to  pursue  every  topic  to  the  exact  line  which  pleased  and
convinced  without  tiring  the  House.  Had  he  possessed  any
earnestness  of  character,  any  settled  convictions,  any  power  of
acting  with  fidelity  to  his  colleagues,  or  any  self-control,  he
naight  have  won  a  great  name  in  English  politics.  He  sought,
however,  only  to  sparkle  and  to  please,  and  was  ever  ready  to
sacrifice  any  principle  or  any  connection  for  the  excitement  and
the  vanity  of  a  momentary  triumph.  In  the  absence  of  Chatham,
whom  he  disliked  and  feared,  he  had  been  rapidly  rising  to  the
foremost  place. He  had  obtained  a  peerage  for  his  wife,  and

'  Flood,  in  a  letter  to  Charlemont,  wit,  to  Chatham  in  solid  sense,  and

describing  a  debate  in  which  almost  to  every  other  speaker  in  histrionic

all  the  chief  speakers  in  Parliament  power. — Memoirs  of  George  III. See

had exerted themselves, says that  especially, ii. 275  ; iii.  23-27. Sir

'  Burke  acquitted  himself  verj'  honour-  George  Colebrooke  said  that  '  Nobody

ably,'  but  there  was  '  no  one  person  excepting  Mr.  Pitt  possessed a  style

near  Townshend. He is  an orator.  of  oratory  so  perfectly  suited  to  the

The  rest  are  speakers.' — Oin()inal  Let-  House' (Walpole's George III.  iii.

to".?  to  Flood,  p.  27. Walpole  in  his  102). And Thurlow described him

numerous  allusions to his  speeches  as  '  the most  delightful  speaker he

describes  him  as  greatlj'  superior  to  ever knew.' — Nicholls' George III.

Burke  in  brilliancy  and  spontaneity-  of  p.  26.

3o8  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii

the  post  of  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland  for  his  brother;  he  had
won  the  favour  of  the  King,  and  was  the  idol  of  the  House  of
Commons,  and  had  forced  the  Government  into  a  line  of  policy
which  was  wholly  opposed  to  that  of  Camden,  Grafton,  and
Shelburne.  In  a  few  months,  or  perhaps  weeks,  he  would
probably  have  been  the  head  of  a  new  ministry.  Death  called
him  away  in  the  full  flush  of  his  triumph  and  his  powers,  and  ho
obeyed  the  summons  with  the  same  good-humoured  levity  which
he  had  shown  in  so  many  periods  of  his  brief  and  agitated
career.'

He  was  replaced  by  Lord  North,  the  favourite  minister  of
the  King,  and  one  of  the  strongest  advocates  of  American  taxa-
tion, and  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  months  nearly  all  those
who  were  favourable  to  America  disappeared  from  the  Govern-
ment. Conway,  Shelburne,  and  Chatham  successively  resigned,
and  though  Camden  remained  for  a  time  in  office  he  restricted
himself  exclusively  to  his  judicial  duties,  and  took  no  part  in
politics.  Lord  Hillsborough  was  entrusted  as  Secretary  of  State
with  the  special  care  of  the  colonies,  and  the  Bedford  party,
who  now  joined  and  in  a  great  measure  controlled  the  Govern-
ment, were  strenuous  supporters  of  the  policy  of  coercing
America.

The  circular  of  the  Massachusetts  Assembly  calling  the  other
provincial  Assemblies  to  assist  in  obtaining  the  repeal  of  the
recent  Act  was  first  adverted  to.  Hillsborough,  in  an  angry
circular  addressed  to  the  governors  of  the  different  provinces,
urged  them  to  exert  their  influence  to  prevent  the  Assemblies
of  their  respective  provinces  from  taking  any  notice  of  it,  and
he  characterised  it  in  severe  terms  as  '  a  flagitious  attempt
to  disturb  the  public  peace  '  by  '  promoting  an  im warrantable
combination  and  exhibiting  an  open  opposition  to  and  denial

'  Tovvnslienfl is now chiefly re-  G.Colcbrooke'schiiractcrof  liim.  Ibid,

raembered  by  the  sinf>:ularly  beautiful  pp.  100-102. In  an  able  paper  in  tlie

character  of  liini  in  Uurke's  s})eech  f>n  North  liriton  (No.  20) it  is  said  of

American  taxation, lloiace  Walfiole  him,  '  He  joins  to  an  infinite  fire  of

says  of  liim, '  He  liad almost  every  imaj^ination  and  brilliancy  of  wit,  a

great  talent  and  every  little  quality.  cool  and  solid  judgment,  a  wonderful

.  .  .  With  such  a  capacity he must  capacity  for  business  of  ever}' kind,  the

have  been  the  greatest  man  of  this  most  intense  application  to  it,  and  a

age,  and  perhaps  inferior  to  no  man  consummate  knowledge  of  the  great

in  any  age,  had  his  faults  been  only  commercial  interests  of  this  country,

in  a  moderate  prof)ortion.' — Meinmix  which I never heard were before

of  Gcorijc  III.  iii.  100. See  too,  f>ir  united  in  the  same  person.'

en.  xii.  SMUGGLING RIOTS.  359

of  the  authority  of  Parliament.'  He  at  the  same  time  called
on  the  Massachusetts  Assembly  to  rescind  its  proceedings  on
the  subject.  After  an  animated  debate  the  Assembly,  in  the
summer  of  17G8,  refused  by  92  votes  to  17.  It  was  at  once
dissolved,  and  no  new  Chamber  was  summoned  till  the  following
year.  The  Assembly  of  Virginia  was  dissolved  on  account  of
resolutions  condemning  the  whole  recent  policy  of  England,
and  in  the  course  of  a  few  months  a  similar  step  was  taken  in
Maryland,  Georgia,  North  Carolina,  and  New  York.  It  was  a
useless  measure,  for  the  new  Assemblies  which  were  summoned
in  obedience  to  the  charter  were  very  similar  to  their  predeces-
sors. In  the  meantime,  two  regiments  escorted  by  seven  ships  of
war  were  sent  to  Boston  to  strengthen  the  Government.  More
energetic  attempts  were  made  to  enforce  the  revenue  laws,  and
several  collisions  took  place.  Thus  the  sloop  '  Liberty,'  belong-
ing to  Hancock,  a  leading  merchant  of  the  patriot  party,  arrived
at  Boston  in  June  1768,  laden  with  wines  from  Madeira,  and  a
Custom-house  officer  went  on  board  to  inspect  the  cargo.  He
was  seized  by  the  crew  and  detained  for  several  hours  while  the
cargo  was  lauded,  and  a  few  pipes  of  wine  were  entered  on  oath
at  the  Custom-house  as  if  they  had  been  the  whole.  On  the
liberation  of  the  officer  the  vessel  was  seized  for  a  false  entry,
and  in  order  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  a  rescue  it  was
removed  from  the  wharf  under  the  guns  of  a  man-of-war.  A
great  riot  followed,  and  the  Custom-house  officers  were  obliged
to  fly  to  a  ship  of  war,  and  afterwards  to  the  barracks,  for  pro-
tection.' On  another  occasion  a  cargo  of  smuggled  Madeira
was  ostentatiously  carried  through  the  streets  of  Boston  with
an  escort  of  thirty  or  forty  strong  men  armed  with  bludgeons,
and  the  Custom-house  officers  were  so  intimidated  that  they
did  not  dare  to  interfere.^  At  Newport  an  inhabitant  of  the
town  was  killed  in  an  affray  vrith  some  midshipmen  of  a  ship  of
war,^  and  a  few  months  later  a  revenue  cutter  which  was  lying
at  the  wharf  was  attacked  and  burnt.'*  At  Providence,  an
active  Custom-house  officer  was  tarred  and  feathered.^ Effigies

'  Holmes'  America?i  Annals,  \7G8.  '  Arnold's  Hist. //  Rhode  Island,

Hutchinson's  Hist,  of  MassacJiusctts  ii.  288.
But/,  pp.  189,  190.  "  Ibid.  p.  297.

'-  Ibid.  p.  188.  »  Ibid.  p.  294

3G0  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,  ch.  xii.

of  the  uew  CoiniuissiontTs  were  hung  on  the  liberty  tree  at
Boston.  The  Governor  and  other  officials  were  insulted  by
the  mob,  and  new  non-importation  engagements  were  largely
subscribed.

The  lirst  troops  from  England  arrived  in  Massachusetts
between  the  dissolution  of  the  old  and  the  election  of  the  new
Assembly,  but  shortly  before  their  arrival  the  inhabitants  of
Boston  gathered  together  in  an  immense  meeting  and  voted
that  a  standing  army  could  not  be  kept  in  the  province
without  its  consent.  Much  was  said  about  Brutus,  Cassius,
Oliver  Cromwell,  and  Paoli ;  the  arms  belonging  to  the  town
were  brought  out,  and  Otis  declared  that  if  an  attempt  was
made  against  the  liberties  of  the  people  they  would  be  dis-
tributed. A  day  of  prayer  and  fiisting  was  appointed  ;  a  very
significant  resolution  was  carried  by  an  immense  majority,  call-
ing upon  all  the  inhabitants  to  provide  themselves  with  arms
and  ammunition,  and  no  one  was  deceived  by  the  transparent
pretext  that  they  might  be  wanted  against  the  French.  Open
treason  was  freely  talked,  and  many  of  the  addresses  to  the
Governor  were  models  of  grave  and  studied  insolence.

These  documents  were  chiefly  composed  by  Samuel  Adams,  a
very  remarkable  man  who  had  now  begun  to  exercise  a  dominant
influence  in  Boston  politics,  and  who  was  one  of  the  chief
authors  of  the  American  Revolution.  He  had  an  hereditary  anti-
pathy to  the  British  Government,  for  his  fath^  seems  to  have
been  ruined  by  the  restrictions  the  English  Parliament  imposed
on  the  circulation  of  paper  money,  and  a  bank  in  which  his  father
was  largely  concerned  had  been  dissolved  by  Act  of  Parliament,
leaving  debts  which  seventeen  years  later  were  still  unpaid.  It
appears  that  Hutchinson  was  a  leading  person  in  dissolving  the
bank.  Samuel  Adams  had  taken  part  in  various  occupations.  He
was  at  one  time  a  small  brewer  and  at  another  a  tax-gatherer,  but
in  the  last  capacity  he  entirely  failed,  for  a  large  sum  of  money
which  ought  to  have  passed  into  the  Exchequer  was  not  forth-
coming. It  seems,  however,  that  no  more  serious  charge  could
be  substantiatea  agaiust  him  than  that  of  unbusiness-like  habits
and  an  insufficient  stringency  in  levying  the  public  dues ;  the
best  juages  appear  to  have  been  fully  convinced  of  his  integrity
in  money  matters,  and  it  is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  austere  and

cu.  XII.  SAMUEL ADAMS.  361

simple  tenor  of  his  whole  later  life.'  He  early  became  one  of
the  most  active  writers  in  the  American  Press,  and  was  the  soul
of  every  agitation  against  the  Government.  It  was  noticed  that
he  had  a  special  skill  in  discovering  young  men  of  promise  and
brilliancy,  and  that,  without  himself  possessing  any  dazzling
qualities,  he  seldom  failed  by  the  force  of  his  character  and  the
intense  energy  of  his  convictions  in  obtaining  an  ascendency  over
their  minds,  and  in  inspiring  them  with  hostility  to  the  British
Government.  It  was  only  in  1765,  when  Adams  was  already
forty-three,  that  he  obtained  a  seat  in  the  Assembly,  when,
with  Otis  and  two  or  three  others,  he  took  a  chief  part  in  orga-
nising opposition  to  the  Government.  In  the  lax  moral  atmo-
sphere of  the  eighteenth  century  he  exhibited  in  perfection  the
fierce  and  sombre  type  of  the  seventeenth-century  Covenanter.
Poor,  simple,  ostentatiously  austere  and  indomitably  cou-
rageous, the  blended  influence  of  Calvinistic  theology  and  of
republican  principles  had  permeated  and  indurated  his  whole
character,  and  he  carried  into  politics  all  the  fervour  of  an
apostle  and  all  the  narrowness  of  a  sectarian.  Hating  with  a
fierce  hatred,  monarchy  and  the  English  Church,  and  all  privi-
leged classes  and  all  who  were  invested  with  dignity  and  rank ;
utterly  incapable  of  seeing  any  good  thing  in  an  opponent,  or
of  accepting  any  form  of  political  compromise,  he  advocated  on
all  occasions  the  strongest  measures,  and  appears  to  have  been
one  of  the  first  both  to  foresee  and  to  desire  an  armed  struggle.
He  had  some  literary  talent,  and  his  firm  will  and  clearly
defined  principles  gave  him  for  a  time  a  greater  influence  than
abler  men.  He  now  maintained  openly  that  any  British  troops
which  landed  should  be  treated  as  enemies,  attacked,  and,  if
possible,  destroyed.  More  moderate  counsels  prevailed ;  yet
measures  verging  on  revolution  were  adopted.  As  the  Governor
alone  could  summon  or  prorogue  the  Assembly,  a  convention
was  held  at  Boston  when  it  was  not  sitting,  to  which  almost
every  town  and  every  district  of  the  province  sent  its  delegate,
and  it  assumed  all  the  semblance  of  a  legislative  body.

The  Assembly  itself,  when  it  met,  pronounced  the  establish-

'  The  life  of  S.  Adams  has  been  his  character. Several  facts  relating

written  with  great elaboration and  to  him  will  be  found  in  Hutchinson's

unqualified  eulogy  by  W.V. Wells,  and  Hist,  of  Massiachusctts  Bay,  pp.  2'J4,

Bancroft  adopts  a  very  similar  view  of  295.

362 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xii,

ment  of  a  standing  army  in  the  colony  in  time  of  peace  to  be
an  invasioif  of  natural  rights  and  a  violation  of  the  Constitution,
and  it  positively  refused  to  provide  quarters  for  the  troops  on
the  ground  that  the  barracks  in  an  island three  miles  from
the  town,  though  within  the  municipal  circle  of  Boston,  were
not  yet  full. The  plea  was  ingenious  and  strictly  legal,  and
the troops were accordingly quartered as well as paid at
the  expense  of  the  Crown. The  simple  presence  among  the
colonists  of  English  soldiers  was,  however,  now  treated  as  an
intolerable  grievance ;  the  regiments  were  absurdly  called  '  an
unlawful  assembly,'  and  they  were  invariably  spoken  of  as  if
they  were  foreign  invaders. The  old  distinction  between  in-
ternal and  external  taxation,  the  old  acquiescence  in  commercial
restrictions,  and  the  old  acknowledgment  of  the  general  legis-
lative authority  of  Parliament,  had  completely  disappeared  from
Boston politics. The  treatise which,  half  a  century  earlier,
Molyneux  had  written  on  the rights  of  the  Irish  Parliament
now  became  a  text-book  in  the  colonies,  and  it  was  the  received
doctrine  that  they  owed allegiance  indeed  to  the King, but
were  wholly  independent  of  the English  Parliament. They
scornfully  repudiated  at  the  same  time  the  notion  of  maintain-
ing like  Irelandamilitary  establishment  for  the  general  defence
of  the  Empire. It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  project  of  a
legislative  union with Great  Britain,  which  was  at  this  time
advocated  by  Pownall  in  England,  was  absolutely  repudiated
in  America. Pownall  wished  the  colonial  Assemblies  to  con-
tinue, but  to  send  representatives  to  the  English  Parliament,
which would  thus possess  the  right  of  taxing  the  colonists.
But  this  scheme  found  no  favour  in  America. It  was  pro-
nounced impracticable  and  dangerous. It  was  said that  the
colonial  representatives  would  speedily  be  corrupted,  that  the
colonists  could  never  hope  to  obtain  a  representation  adequate  to
their  importance,  and  that  inadequate  representation  was  even  a
greater  grievance  than  taxation  without  representation.  Bernard
now  strongly  advocated  the  permanent  admission  of  American
representatives  into  the  British  Parliament  as  the  only  possible
solution,  but  he  acknowledged  that  the  idea  was  unpopular,  and
he  alleged  that  the  true  reason  was  that  if  the  colonies  were
represented  in  Parliament  th(\v  could  have  no  pretext  for  dis-

en.  XII.  PROCEEDINGS OF  PARLIAMENT.  363

obeying  it.'  It  was  evident  that  every  jrath  of  compromise  was
closing,  and  that  disaffection  was  steadily  rising  to  the  height
of  revolution.  Foreign  observers  saw  that  the  catastrophe  was
fast  approaching,  and  Choiseul  noticed  that  the  English  had
no  cavalry  and  scarcely  10,000  infantry  in  America,  while  the
colonial  militia  numbered  400,000  men,  including  several
cavalry  regiments.  It  was  not  difficult,  he  concluded,  to  pre-
dict that  if  America  could  only  find  a  Cromwell  she  w'ould
speedily  cease  to  form  a  part  of  the  British  Empire.^

For  the  present,  except  a  few  revenue  riots,  resistance  was
purely  passive.  The  Massachusetts  Assembly  petitioned  for
the  removal  of  the  troops  and  for  the  removal  of  the  Governor.
Acute  lawyers  contested  every  legal  point  that  could  possibly
be  raised  against  the  Government.  The  grand  juries  being
elected  by  the  townships  were  wholly  on  the  side  of  the  people,
and  they  systematically  refused  to  present  persons  guilty  of
libel,  riot,  or  sedition.  Non-importation  agreements  spread
rapidly  from  town  to  town,  and  had  a  serious  effect  upon  English
commerce.  The  troops  had  little  to  do  as  there  was  no  open
resistance,  but  they  found  themselves  treated  as  pariahs  and
excluded  from  every  kind  of  society,  and  they  had  even  much
difficulty  in  procuring  the  necessaries  of  life.

The  English  Parliament  in  December  1768  and  January
1769  greatly  aggravated  the  contest.  Both  Houses  passed  re-
solutions condemning  the  disloyal  spirit  of  Massachusetts,  the
non-importation  agreements,  and  the  Boston  convention ;  and
addresses  were  carried  thanking  the  Sovereign  for  the  mea-
sures he  had  taken  to  maintain  the  authority  of  England ;  pro-
mising a  full  support  to  future  measures  taken  with  that  end,
and  suggesting  that  the  names  of  the  most  active  agitators
should  be  transmitted  to  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,  and  that
a  long  disused  law  of  Henry  VIII.  which  empowered  the  Gover-
nor to  bring  to  England  for  trial,  persons  accused  of  treason
outside  England,  should  be  put  in  force.^  This  last  measure
was  due  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  and  although  it  was  certainly
not  unprovoked,  it  excited  a  fierce  and  legitimate  indignation
in  America,  and  added  a  new  and  very  serious  item  to  the  long

' Letters  of  Governor  Bernard,  pp.  S.i-GO.  -  P)ancroft.

'  Pari.  Hist.  xvi.  477-487. Cavendish  Dehates,  i.  iy-2-li}4.

304  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

list  of  colonial  grievances.  Already,  the  colonial  advocates
\vere  accustomed  to  say,  a  Parliament  in  which  the  colonies
■were  wholly  unrepresented,  claimed  an  absolute  power  of  re-
stricting their  commerce,  of  taxing  them,  and  even,  as  in  the
case  of  New  York,  of  suspending  their  legislative  assemblies.
British  troops  were  planted  among  them  to  coerce  them.  Their
governors  and  judges  were  to  be  made  independent  of  their
Assemblies,  and  now  the  protection  of  a  native  jury,  which  alone
remained,  was  to  be  destroyed.  By  virtue  of  an  obsolete  law,
passed  in  one  of  the  darkest  periods  of  English  history  and  at  a
time  when  England  possessed  not  a  single  colony,  any  colonist
who  was  designated  by  the  Governor  as  a  traitor  might  be
carried  three  thousand  miles  from  his  home,  from  his  witnesses,
from  the  scene  of  his  alleged  crime,  from  all  those  who  were
acquainted  with  the  general  tenor  of  his  life,  to  be  tried  by
strangers  of  the  very  nation  against  whom  he  was  supposed
to  have  oflfended.  Combine  all  these  measures,  it  was  said,
and  what  trace  of  political  freedom  would  be  left  in  the
colonies  ?

'[his  measure  was  apparently  intended  only  to  intimidate
the  more  violent  agitators,  and  it  was  never  put  in  action.  The
Cabinet  were  much  divided  about  their  American  policy,  and
signs  of  weakness  speedily  appeared.  Townshend's  Act  had
brought  America  to  the  verge  of  revolution,  and  had  entailed
great  expense  on  the  country,  but  it  had  hitherto  produced  no
appreciable  revenue,  and  there  was  little  or  no  prospect  of  im-
provement. It  was  stated  that  the  total  produce  of  the  new
taxes  for  the  first  year  was  less  than  16,000Z.,  that  the  net  pro-
ceeds of  the  Crown  revenue  in  America  were  only  about  295^.,
and  that  extraordinary  military  expenses  amounting  to  1 70,000L
had  in  the  same  period  been  incurred.'  Pownall,  who  had  pre-
ceded Bernard  as  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  strongly  urged  in
Parliament  the  repeal  of  the  new  duties,  and  a  considerable
section  of  the  Cabinet  supported  his  view.  After  much  discus-
sion it  was  resolved  to  adopt  a  policy  of  compromise  ^ — to  repeal

'  Ilildrcth,  ii.  553.  the  warm  measures  taken  on  your  side

-  Tlie Miussacliusetts Agent, De  had  come  to  llieir  knowledge  he  had

]'.''rdt,  wrote  to  the  Assembly  in  July  settled  the  repeal  of  those  Act.s  [for

J7()8, describing an interview  with  the  taxation  or  coercion  of  America]

Hillsborough. '  He  assured  me,  before  with  Lord  North  the  Chancellor,  but

cs.  XII.  CONDITION OF BOSTON.  365

the  duties  on  glass,  paper,  and  painters'  colours,  and  to  retain
that  on  tea  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  the  right.  Less  than
300/.  had  hitherto  been  obtained  by  this  charge  ;  but  the  King,
the  Bedford  section  of  the  Cabinet,  and  Lord  North  determined.
in  opposition  to  Grafton  and  Camden,  to  retain  it,  and  they
carried  their  point  in  the  Cabinet  by  a  majority  of  one  vote.
A  circular  intimating  the  intention  of  the  Government  was
despatched  in  the  course  of  1769  to  the  governors  of  the  dif-
ferent colonies,  and  in  this  circular  Lord  Hillsborough  officially
informed  them  that  the  Cabinet  '  entertained  no  design  to  pro-
pose to  Parliament  to  lay  any  further  taxes  on  America  for  the
purpose  of  raising  a  revenue.' '  Governor  Bernard,  whose  rela-
tions with  the  Assembly  and  Council  of  Massachusetts  had  long
been  as  hostile  as  possible,  was  rewarded  for  his  services  to  the
Crown  by  a  baronetcy,  but  in  the  August  of  1769  he  was  recalled
to  England  amid  a  storm  of  insult  and  rejoicing  from  the  people
he  had  governed ;  and  after  about  a  year,  Hutchinson,  who,
though  equally  devoted  to  the  Government,  was  somewhat  less
unpopular  with  the  colonists,  was  promoted  to  the  ungrateful
post.  Some  slight  signs  of  improvement  were  visible.  New
York  submitted  to  the  Mutiny  Act,  and  its  Assembly  accord-
ingly regained  its  normal  powers.  The  non-importation  agree-
ments had  for  some  time  been  very  imperfectly  observed,  and
it  was  soon  noticed  that  a  good  deal  of  tea  was  imported  in
small  quantities,  and  that  the  port  duty  was  paid  without
difficulty.^

Hitherto,  though  the  townspeople  of  Boston  had  done  every-
thing in  their  power  to  provoke  and  irritate  the  soldiers  who
were  quartered  among  them,  there  had  been  no  serious  colli-
sion. The  condition  of  the  town,  however,  was  such  that  it
was  scarcely  possible  that  any  severity  of  discipline  could  long
avert  it.  There  was  a  perfect  reign  of  terror  directed  against
all  who  supported  the  revenue  Acts  and  who  sympathised  with
authority.  Soldiers  could  scarcely  appear  in  the  streets  with-
out being  the  objects  of  the  grossest  insult.  A  Press  eminently
scurrilous  and  vindictive  was  ceaselessly  employed  in  abusing

the  opposition  you  bad  made  rendered  '  Grabame,  iv.  297.

it  absolutely  necessary  to  support  the  -  See  Hutchinson's  ITist.  of  Max-

authority  of  Farliament.' — MciKsachu-  .mc/nt.'^ctfs  Hay,  pp.  350,  351,422.  423.
setts  State  I'cijiers,  p.  101.

3G6  ENGLAND IN THI-: HKHlTKENTll CENTUKY.  en.  xii.

them  :  they  had  become,  as  Samuel  Adams  boasted,  '  the  objects
of  the  contempt  even  of  women  and  children.'  Every  offence
they  committed  was  maliciously  exaggerated  and  vindictively
prosecuted,  while  in  the  absence  of  martial  law  they  were
obliged  to  look  on  upon  the  most  flagrant  insults  to  authority.
At  one  time  the  '  sons  of  liberty'  in  a  procession  a  mile  and  a
half  long  marched  roimd  the  State  House  to  commemorate
their  riots  against  the  Stamp  Act,  and  met  in  the  open  fields
to  cliant  their  liberty  song  and  drink  '  strong  halters,  firm
blocks,  and  sharp  axes  to  such  as  deserve  them.'  At  another  an
informer  who  was  found  guilty  of  giving  information  to  revenue
officers  was  seized  by  a  great  multitude,  tarred  and  feathered,
and  led  through  the  streets  of  Boston,  which  were  illuminated
in  honour  of  the  achievement.  A  printer  who  had  dared  to
caricature  the  champions  of  freedom  was  obliged  to  fly  from  his
house,  to  take  refuge  among  the  soldiers,  and  ultimately  to
escape  from  Boston  in  disguise.  Merchants  who  had  ventured
to  import  goods  from  England  were  compelled  by  mob  violence
to  give  them  up  to  be  destroyed  or  to  be  re-embarked.  A
shopkeeper  who  sold  some  English  goods  found  a  post  planted
in  the  ground  with  a  hand  pointing  to  his  door,  and  when  a
friend  tried  to  remove  it  he  was  stoned  by  a  fierce  mob  through
the  streets.  A  popular  minister  delighted  his  congregation  by
publicly  praying  that  the  Almighty  would  remove  from  Boston
the  English  soldiers.  It  was  said  that  they  corrupted  the
morals  of  the  town,  that  their  drums  and  fifes  were  heard  upon
the  Sabbath-day,  that  their  language  was  often  violent,  threaten-
ing, or  profane,  that  on  several  occasions  they  had  struck
citizens  who  insulted  them.'  On  March  2,  1770,  there  was  a
scuffle  at  a  ropewalk  between  some  soldiers  and  the  ropemakers,
and  on  the  night  of  the  5th  there  occurred  the  tragedy  which,
in  the  somewhat  grandiloquent  phrase  of  John  Adams,  '  laid
the  foundation  of  American  independence.'  A  false  alarm  of
fire  had  called  a  crowd  into  the  streets,  and  a  mob  of  boys  and

'  Holmes. Bancroft. One  of  the  sumo we may safely say  that  our

later  accusations  against  the  English  language  has  suffered  more  injurious

soldiers  was,  that  tliey  impaired  the  changes  in  America  since  the  Dritish

purity  of  the  American  pronunciation  army  landed  on  our  shores  than  it  liad

of  English. Noah  Webster,  in  his  cu-  sutTered  before,  in  the  period  of  tlireo

rious  essay  on  the '  ]\Ianners  of  the  centuries.' — Wcbxter's  J'Jssai/s, 'p. ',)6.
United  States'  (1787),  say.s,  '  I  pre-

CH.  XII.  THE  liOSTON MASSACRE.  3G7

men  amused  themselves  by  surrounding  and  insulting  a  solitary
sentinel  who  was  on  guard  before  one  of  the  public  buildings.
He  called  for  rescue,  and  a  party  consisting  of  a  corporal  and
six  common  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Preston,
appeared  with  loaded  muskets  upon  the  scene.  The  mob,
however,  refused  to  give  way.  Some  forty  or  fifty  men — many
of  them  armed  with  sticks — surrounded  the  little  band  of
soldiers,  shouting,  '  Rascals,  lobsters,  bloody  backs  ! '  '  and  defy-
ing them  to  use  their  arms.  They  soon  proceeded  to  violence.
Snowballs  and,  according  to  some  testimony,  stones  were  thrown.
The  crowd  pressed  violently  on  the  soldiers,  and  it  was  after-
wards alleged  that  one  of  the  soldiers  was  struck  by  a  club.
Whether  it  was  panic  or  resentment,  or  the  mere  necessity  of
self-defence,  was  never  clearly  established,  but  a  soldier  fired,
and  in  another  moment  seven  muskets,  each  loaded  with  tw^o
balls,  were  discharged  with  deadly  effect  into  the  crowd.  Five
men  fell  dead  or  dying,  and  six  others  were  wounded.

There  are  many  dreadful  massacres  recorded  in  the  page  of
history — the  massacre  of  the  Danes  by  the  Saxons,  the  massacre
of  the  Sicilian  Vespers,  the  massacre  of  St,  Bartholomew — but
it  may  be  questioned  whether  any  of  them  had  produced  such
torrents  of  indignant  eloquence  as  the  affray  which  I  have  de-
scribed. The  '  Boston  massacre,' or,  as  the  Americans,  desiring
to  distinguish  it  from  the  minor  tragedies  of  history,  loved  to
call  it,  '  the  bloody  massacre,'  at  once  kindled  the  colonies
into  a  flame.  The  terrible  tale  of  how  the  bloody  and  brutal
myrmidons  of  England  had  shot  dowm  the  inoffensive  citizens
in  the  streets  of  Boston  raised  an  indignation  which  was  never
suffered  to  flag.  In  Boston,  as  soon  as  the  tidings  of  the  tragedy
were  spread  abroad,  the  church  bells  rang,  the  drums  beat  to  call
the  people  to  arms,  and  next  day  an  immense  meeting  of  the
citizens  resolved  that  the  soldiers  must  no  longer  remain  in  the
town.  Samuel  Adams  and  the  other  leading  agitators,  as  the
representatives  of  the  people,  rushed  into  the  presence  of  Hut-
chinson, and  rather  commanded  than  asked  for  their  removal.
Hutchinson  hesitated  much.  He  was  not  yet  governor.  Ber-
nard was  in  England.  Hutchinson  had  himself  asked  for  the
troops  to  be  sent  to  Boston. He  knew  that their  removal

'  In  allusion  to  the  British  custom  of  flosrsinpr  soldiers.

368  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cir.  xii.

would,  under  the  circumstances,  be  a  great  humiliation  to  the
Government  and  a  great  encouragement  to  the  mob,  and  that
if  once  removed  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  recall  them..
On  the  other  hand,  if  they  remained  it  was  only  too  probable
that  in  a  few  hours  the  streets  of  Boston  would  run  with  blood.
He  consulted  the  council,  and  found  it  as  usual  an  echo  of  the
pablic  voice.  He  yielded  at  last,  and  the  troops  were  removed
to  Fort  William,  on  an  island  three  miles  from  Boston,  and  the
wish  of  the  townsmen  was  thus  at  last  accomplished.  An
immense  crowd  accompanied  the  bodies  of  the  '  martyred '
citizens  to  their  last  resting-place.  An  annual  celebration  was
at  once  resolved  upon,  and  for  several  years  the  citizens
were  accustomed  on  every  anniversary  to  meet  in  the  chief
towns  of  America  in  chapels  hung  with  crape,  while  the  most
popular  orators  described  the  horrors  of  the  Boston  massacre,
the  tyranny  of  England,  and  the  ferocious  character  of  standing
armies.'

Few  things  contributed  more  to  the  American  revolution
than  this  unfortunate  affray.  Skilful  agitators  perceived  the
advantage  it  gave  them,  and  the  most  fantastic  exaggerations
were  dexterously  diffused.  The  incident  had,  however,  a  sequel
which  is  extremely  creditable  to  the  American  people.  It  was
determined  to  try  the  soldiers  for  their  lives,  and  public  feeling
ran  so  fiercely  against  them  that  it  seemed  as  if  their  fate  was
sealed.  The  trial,  however,  was  delayed  for  seven  months,  till
the  excitement  had  in  some  degree  subsided.  Captain  Preston
very  judiciously  appealed  to  John  Adams,  who  was  rapidly  rising
to  the  first  place  both  among  the  lawyers  and  the  popular
patriots  of  Boston,  to  undertake  his  defence.  Adam.s  knew
well  how  much  he  was  risking  by  espousing  so  unpopular  a
cause,  but  he  knew  also  his  professional  duty,  and,  though
violently  opposed  to  the  British  Government,  he  was  an  emi-
nently honest,  brave,  and  humane  man.  In  conjunction  with
Josiah  Quincy,  a  young  lawyer  who  was  also  of  the  patriotic
party,  he  undertook  the  invidious  task,  and  he  discharged  it
with  consummate  ability.  It  was  clearly  shown  that  the  popu-
lar account  which  had  been  printed  in  Boston and  circulated

•  The  commemoration  was  kept  up by  that  «f  the  4th  of  July. Tudor's
till  1783,  after  which  it  was  replaced Life  of  Otis,  p.  IG^i.

CH.  XII.  AMERICAN HUMANITY.  3G9

asrfiduously  through  the  colonics,  representing  the  affair  as  a
deliberate  and  premeditated  massacre  of  unoffending  citizens,
was  grossly  untrue.  As  was  natural  in  the  case  of  a  confused
scuffle  in  the  dark,  there  was  much  conflict  of  testimony  about
the  exact  circumstances  of  the  affair,  but  there  was  no  sufficient
evidence  that  Captain  Preston  had  given  an  order  to  fire  ;  and
although  no  soldier  was  seriously  injured,  there  was  abundant
evidence  that  the  soldiers  had  endured  gross  provocation  and
some  violence.  If  the  trial  had  been  the  prosecution  of  a
smuggler  or  a  seditious  writer,  the  jury  would  probably  have
decided  against  evidence,  but  they  had  no  disposition  to  shed
innocent  blood.  Judges,  counsel,  and  jurymen  acted  bravely
and  honourably.  All  the  soldiers  were  acquitted,  except  two,
who  were  found  guilty  of  manslaughter,  and  who  escaped  with
very  slight  punishment.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  after  Adams  had  accepted  the
task  of  defending  the  incriminated  soldiers,  he  was  elected  by
the  people  of  Boston  as  their  representative  in  the  Assembly,
and  the  public  opinion  of  the  province  appears  to  have  fully
acquiesced  in  the  verdict.^  In  truth,  although  no  people  have
indulged  more  largely  than  the  Americans  in  violent,  reckless,
and  unscrupulous  language,  no  people  have  at  every  period  of
their  history  been  more  signally  free  from  the  thirst  for  blood,
which  in  moments  of  great  political  excitement  has  been  often
shown  both  in  England  and  France.  It  is  a  characteristic
fact  that  one  of  the  first  protests  against  the  excessive  multi-
plication of  capital  offences  in  the  English  legislation  of  the
eighteenth  century  was  made  by  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts,
which  in  1762  objected  to  death  as  a  punishment  for  forgery  on
the  ground  that  *  the  House  are  very  averse  to  capital  punish-
ment in  any  case  where  the interest  of  the  Government  does

'  See on tliis episode, Adams'  verdict seems to have  given  much

Works,  1. 97-114,  ii.  229-233;  Hut-  satisfaction. Hutchinson  wrote  (Dec.

chinson's  Hist,  of  Massachusetts  Bay  ;  1770)  :  '  The  reception  which  has  been

Hutchinson's  letters  to  Bernard,  and  given  to  the  late  verdicts  everywhere

the  histories  of Hildreth  and Ban-  except  in  Boston  has  been  favourable

croft. Mr.  Bancroft  in  his account  beyond  my hopes. I  expected that

of  this  transaction  appears  to  me  to  the  court  and  jury  would  be  censured,

exhibit  even  more  strongly  than  usual  but  they  are  generally  applauded.' —

that violent partisanship which so  American  Reitievibrancer ,  1776,  part  i.

greatly  impairs  the  value  of  his  very  p.  159.
learned  history. Outside  Boston  the

VOL.  III.  B P.

r^TO  ENGLAND IN Till-: EIGIITEKNTII CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

not  absolutely  require  it,'  and  where  some  other  punishment
;vill  be  suthcieutly  deterrent.*  In  the  long  period  of  anarchy,
riot,  and  excitement  which  preceded  the  American  revolution
there  was  scarcely  any  bloodshed  and  no  political  assassination,
and  the  essential  humanity  of  American  public  opinion  which
was  shown  so  conspicuously  during  the  trial  of  the  soldiers  at
Boston,  was  afterwards  displayed  on  a  far  wider  field  and  in  still
more  trying  circumstances  during  the  fierce  passions  of  the;
Kevolutionary  war,  and  still  more  remarkably  in  the  triumph  of
the  North  in  the  War  of  Secession.

While  these  things  were  taking  place  in  America,  Lord
North  carried  through  Parliament  his  measure  repealing  all  the
duties  imposed  by  Townshend's  Act,  with  the  exception  of  that
on  tea,^  which  he  maintained  in  spite  of  a  very  able  opposition
led  by  Pownall.  His  defence  of  the  distinction  was  by  no
means  destitute  of  plausibility  or  even  of  real  force.  The  other
duties,  he  said,  were  imposed  on  articles  of  English  manufacture
imported  into  America,  and  such  duties  were  both  unprecedented
and  economically  inexpedient,  as  calculated  to  injure  English
industry.  The  duty  on  tea,  however,  was  of  another  kind,  and
it  was  in  perfect  accordance  with  commercial  precedents.  The
Americans  had  themselves  drawn  a  broad  distinction  between
external  and  internal  taxation.  No  less  than  thirty-two  Acts
binding  their  trade  had  been  imposed  and  submitted  to,  and
the  power  of  Parliament  to  impose  port  duties  had,  till  the  last
two  years,  been  unquestioned.^  Whatever  might  be  said  of
the  Stamp  Act,  the  tea  duty  was  certainly  not  a  grievance  to
America,  for  Parliament  had  relieved  the  colonies  of  a  duty  of
nearly  12cZ.  in  the  pound,  which  had  hitherto  been  levied  in
England,  and  the  colonists  were  only  asked  in  compensation  to
pay  a  duty  of  3d.  in  the  pound  on  the  arrival  of  the  tea  in
America.  The  measure  was,  therefore,  not  an  act  of  oppression
but  of  relief,  making  the  price  of  tea  in  the  colonies  positively
cheaper  than  it  had  been  before.'* It  was  coupled  with  the

'  Tudor's  Li/e  of  0th,  p.  113. Ac-  from  twonty-ninc  to  thirty. — Howard

cording  to  Dr.  I'ricc  (On  (Jiril  I.ihrrtij,  On  Prijiann,  p !).
p.  101),  not  more  than  ono  execution  ^  10  Geo.  III.  17.

hwl  taken  place  in  Ma.ssachusctts  Hay  "  Hee  Cavendish Dcbatcn, i. 198,

in  eiffliteon  years.  The  annual  average  222,

of oxfcutionH in London alone for  *  Stedman,  i.  74.  Hutchinson  says:

twenty-three  years  before 1772  was  '  By  taking  otf  12</.,  which  used  to  lie

en.  xii.  THE  TEA  DUTY.  371

circular  of  Lord  Hillsborough  pledging  the  English  Government
to  raise  no  further  revenue  from  America.  At  the  same  time
the  quartering  Act,  which  had  been  so  much  objected  to,  was
allowed  silently  to  expire.'

It  will  probably  strike  the  reader  that  every  argument
which  showed  that  the  tea  duty  was  not  a  grievance  to  the
colonies,  was  equally  powerful  to  show  that  it  was  perfectly  use-
less as  a  means  of  obtaining  a  revenue  from  them.  It  would
be  difficult,  indeed,  to  find  a  more  curious  instance  of  legislative
incapacity  than  the  whole  transaction  displayed.  The  repeal
of  the  greater  part  of  Townshend's  Act  had  given  the  agitators
in  America  a  signal  triumph ;  the  maintenance  of  the  tea  duty
for  the  avowed  purpose  of  obtaining  a  colonial  revenue  left  them
their  old  pretext  for  agitation,  and  at  the  same  time  that  duty
could  not  possibly  attain  the  end  for  which  it  was  ostensibly
intended,  and  the  Government  by  the  circular  of  Lord  Hills-
borough had  precluded  themselves  from  increasing  it.  Hut-
chinson, whose  judgment  of  American  opinion  is  entitled  to  the
highest  respect,  has  expressed  his  firm  conviction  that  the
Government  might  have  raised  the  whole  revenue  they  expected
from  Townshend's  Act  without  the  smallest  difficulty,  if  they
had  simply  adopted  the  expedient  of  levying  the  duty  on  goods
exported  to  America  in  England  instead  of  in  the  colonies.^

The  object  of  maintaining  the  tea  duty  was,  of  course,  to
assert  the  right  of  Parliament  to  impose  port  duties,  and  this
assertion  was  thought  necessary  on  account  of  the  recent  con-
duct and  language  of  the  Americans.^ At  the  same  time  North,

paid  in  Ens:land,  and  substituting  3d.  would  have  been  more  than  the  whole
only,  payable  in  the  colonies,  tea  was  paid  on  the  other  articles.  The  con-
cheaper  than  it  had  ever  been  sold  by  sumer  in  America  would  have  paid
tlie  illicit  traders,  and  the  poor  people  the  duty  just  as  much  as  if  it  had
in  America  drank  the  same  tea  in  qua-  been  paid  upon  importation.' — Hist.
lity  at  3.'!.  the  lb.  which  the  people  in  of  Masmchvsetis  Bay,  p.  179.  I  have
England  drank  at  fi.f.' — HUt.  of  Mas-  akeadj'quoted  the  opinion  of  Franklin
ta^husetts  Bay,  p.  3.51.  to  much  the  same  elFect.

'  Pari.  Hist. xvi. 8.52-874  ; Ca-  *  8ee  Lord  North's  strong  state-

vendish  Drhates,  i.  484-500.  ment  of  the  reluctance  with  which  he

2  '  If  tliese  duties  [those  in  Towns-  maintained  any  part  of the  duties,

bend's  Act]  had  been  paid  upon  ex-  Pari.  Hist.  xvi.  8.54  ;  Cavendish  Be-

portation  from  England  and  applied  hates, i. 485, 486. The speech of

to  the  purpose  proposed,  there  would  George  Grenville in this debate,  as

not  have  been  any  opposition  made  to  reported  by  Cavendish,  is  particularly

the  Act.  It  would  have  been  a  favour  worthy  of  attention,
to  the  colonies The  saving  upon  tea

372  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu.  xii.

like  Grenville,  continually  maintained  that  the  plan  of  oblig-
ing America  to  pay  for  her  own  army  might  have  been  easily
and  peaceably  carried  out  had  the  condition  of  English  parties
rendered  possible  any  steady,  systematic,  and  united  policy.
Tt  was  the  changes,  vacillation,  divisions,  and  weaknesses  of
English  ministries,  the  utter  disintegration  of  English  parties,
the  rapid  alternations  of  severity  and  indulgence,  the  existence
in  Parliament  of  a  powerful  section  who  had  at  every  step  of
the  struggle  actively  supported  the  Americans  and  encouraged
them  to  resist,  the  existence  outside  Parliament  of  a  still  more
democratic  party  mainly  occupied  with  political  agitation — it
was  these  things  which  had  chiefly  lured  the  colonies  to  their
present  state  of  anarchy,  had  rendered  all  resistance  to  au-
thority a  popular  thing,  and  had  introduced  the  habit  of  ques-
tioning the  validity  of  Acts  of  Parliament.  The  evil,  however,
was  accomplished.  The  plan  of  making  America  pay  for  her
defence  was  virtually  abandoned,  and  the  ministers  were  only
trying  feebly  and  ineffectively  to  uphold  the  doctrine  of  the
Declaratory  Act,  that  Parliament  had  a  right  to  draw  a  revenue
from  America,  by  maintaining  a  duty  which  was  in  full  accord-
ance with  American  precedents  and  which  was  a  positive  boon
to  the  American  people.

The  policy  was  not  quite  imsuccessful.  The  non-importa-
tion agreements  had  lately  been  so  formidable  that  the  English
exports  to  America,  which  amounted  to  2,378,000^.  in  1768,
amounted  only  to  1,634,000^.  in  1769 ; '  but  the  merchants  in
the  colonies,  after  some  hesitation,  now  resolved  to  abandon
those  agreements,  and  commerce  with  England  resumed  its  old
activity.  An  exception,  however,  was  still  made  in  the  case  of
tea,  and  associations  were  formed  binding  all  classes  to  abstain
from  that  beverage,  or  at  least  to  drink  only  what  was  smuggled.
The  next  two  or  three  years  of  colonial  history  were  somewhat
less  eventful,  though  it  was  evident  that  the  spirit  of  insub-
ordination and  anarchy  was  extending.  In  North  Carolina  in
1771,  some  1,500  men,  complaining  of  extortions  and  oppres-
sions of  their  local  courts,  rose  to  arms,  and  refused  to  pay
taxes,  and  the  colony  was  rapidly  dividing  into  a  civil  war.
The  Governor,  however, at  the  head  of  rather  more  than  1,000
'  Pari,  ffift.  xvi 855.

OH.  XII.  THE  'GASPEE.'  373

militia,  completely  defeated  the  insurgents  in  a  pitched  batflo.
Some  hundreds  were  killed  or  wounded,  and  six  were  after-
wards hung  for  high  treason.  In  Massachusetts  the  troops
were  not  again  brought  into  Boston,  but  Castle  William,  which
commanded  the  harbour,  and  to  which  the  Boston  patriots
had  once  been  so  anxious  to  relegate  them,  was  placed  under
martial  law,  and  the  provincial  garrison  was  withdrawn.  There
were  long  and  acrimonious  disputes  between  Hutchinson  and
the  Massachusetts  Assembly  about  the  right  of  the  former  to
convene  the  latter  at  Cambridge  instead  of  Boston  ;  about  the
extent  to  which  the  salaries  of  Crown  oflBcers  should  be  exempted
from  taxation  ;  about  the  refusal  of  the  governor  to  ratify  the
grant  of  certain  sums  of  money  to  the  colonial  agents  in  Eng-
land. In  1772,  Hutchinson,  to  the  great  indignation  of  the
colony,  informed  the  Assembly  that,  as  his  salary  would  hence-
forth be  paid  by  the  Crown,  no  appropriation  would  be  required
for  that  purpose.  Otis,  who  had  long  been  the  most  fiery  of
the  Boston  demagogues,  had  now  nearly  lost  his  intellect  as
well  as  his  influence ;  and  John  Adams,  who  was  a  far  abler
man,  had  for  a  time  retired  from  agitation,  and  devoted  himself
to  his  profession.  Samuel  Adams,  however,  still  retained  his
influence  in  the  Assembly,  and  he  was  unwearied  in  his  efforts
to  excite  ill-feeling  against  England,  and  to  push  the  colony
into  rebellion.

In  Khode  Island  a  revenue  outrage  of  more  than  common
daring  took  place.  A  ship  of  war,  called  the  *  Gaspee,'  com-
manded by  Lieutenant  Duddingston,  and  carrying  eight  guns,
was  employed  under  the  royal  commission  in  enforcing  the
revenue  Acts  along  the  coast,  and  the  commander  is  said  to
have  discharged  his  duty  with  a  zeal  that  often  outran  both
discretion  and  law.  He  stopped  and  searched  every  ship  that
entered  Narraganset  Bay,  compelled  all  ships  to  salute  his  flag;
sent  a  captured  cargo  of  smuggled  rum,  contrary  to  law,  out  of
the  colony  to  Boston  on  the  ground  that  it  could  not  be  safely
detained  in  Newport ;  seized  more  than  one  vessel  upon  in-
sufficient e\-idence ;  searched  for  smuggled  goods  with  what
was  considered  unnecessary  violence,  and  made  himself  ex-
tremely obnoxious  to  the  colony,  in  which  smuggling  was  one
of  the  most  flourishing  and  most  popular  of  trades. The  Chief

374 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xn.

Justice  gave  an  opinion  that  the  commander  of  one  of  his
Majesty's  ships  could  exercise  no  authority  in  the  colony  with-
out having  previously  applied  to  the  Governor,  and  shown  him
his  warrant.  Duddingston  appealed  to  the  Admiral  at  Boston,
who  fully  justified  his  conduct,  and  an  angry  altercation  ensued
between  the  civil  and  naval  authorities.  On  June  9,  1772,
the  '  Gaspee,'  when  chasing  a  suspected  vessel,  ran  aground  on
a  shoal  in  the  river  some  miles  from  Providence,  and  the  ship
which  had  escaped  brought  the  news  to  that  town.  Soon
after  a  drum  was  beat  through  the  streets,  and  all  persons
who  were  disposed  to  assist  in  the  destruction  of  the  King's
ship  were  summoned  to  meet  at  the  house  of  a  prominent
citizen.  There  appears  to  have  been  no  concealment  or  dis-
guise, and  shortly  after  ten  at  night  eight  boats,  full  of  armed
men,  started  with  muffled  oars  on  the  expedition.  They  reached
the  stranded  vessel  in  the  deep  darkness  of  the  early  morning.
Twice  the  sentinel  on  board  vainly  hailed  them,  when  Dud-
dingston himself  appeared  in  his  shirt  upon  the  gunwale  and
asked  who  it  was  that  approached.  The  leader  of  the  party
answered  with  a  profusion  of  oaths  that  he  was  the  sheriff  of  the
county  come  to  arrest  him,  and  while  he  was  speaking  one  of  his
men  dehberately  shot  the  lieutenant,  who  fell  badly  wounded  on
the  deck.  In  another  minute  the  '  Gaspee  '  was  boarded.  The
crew  were  soon  overpowered,  bound,  and  placed  upon  the  shore.
Duddingston,  his  wounds  having  been  dressed,  was  landed  at
a  neighbouring  house  ;  the  party  then  set  fire  to  the  '  Gaspee,'
and  while  its  flames  announced  to  the  whole  country  the  suc-
cess of  their  expedition,  they  returned  in  the  broad  daylight
to  Providence.  Large  rewards  were  offered  by  the  British
Government  for  their  detection ;  but,  though  they  were  uni-
versally known,  no  evidence  could  be  obtained,  and  the  outrage
was  entirely  unpunished.'  An  American  historian  complains
that  this  event,  though  due  to  a  mere  '  sudden  impulse,'
inspired  at  least  one  English  statesman  with  a  deep  hostility  to
the  charter  of  the  colony,  according  to  which  Governor,  As-
sembly, and  Coimcil  were  all  elected  directly  by  the  people.*

'  A full account  of this tr.ans-  given  a  curious  letter  describing  it,

action  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Arnold's  by  Ephraim  Bowcn,  one  of  the  party

very interest  iiip: IHatnrii of  IVwde  who  captured  the  Traspee.'
Jtland,  ii.  309-320. Mr.  "Arnold  has  '  Bancroft,  iii 461

CH XII.  BFNJAMIN  FRANKLIN.  375

It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that,  just  before  this  outrage
took  place,  the  British  Parliament  had  passed  an  Act  for  the
protection  of  his  Majesty's  ships,  dockyards,  and  naval  stores,
by  which  their  destruction  was  made  a  felony,  and  the  INIinistry
were  empowered,  if  they  pleased,  to  try  those  who  were  accused
of  such  acts  in  England.'  This  law,  though  it  applied  to  the
colonies,  was  not  made  with  any  special  reference  to  them,
but  it  became  one  of  their  great  grievances.  Perhaps  the
state  of  feeling  disclosed  in  the  town  of  Providence  at  the  time
of  the  destruction  of  the  *  Gaspee,'  may  be  regarded  as  the
strongest  argument  in  its  defence.

A  considerable  step  towards  uniting  the  colonies  was  taken
in  this  year  and  in  1773  by  the  appointment  in  Massachu-
setts, Virginia,  and  some  other  colonies  of  committees  specially
charged  with  the  task  of  collecting  and  publishing  colonial
grievances,  maintaining  a  correspondence  between  the  different
provinces,  aud  procuring  authentic  intelligence  of  all  the  acts
of  the  British  Parliament  or  Ministry  relating  to  them.  In
England  they  were  already  represented  by  agents  of  great
ability,  the  most  prominent  being  Benjamin  Franklin,  who
at  this  time  possessed  a  greater  reputation  than  any  living
American.

He  was  born  in  1706,  and  was  therefore  now  in  the  decline
of  life.  A  younger  son  in  a  large  and  poor  family,  ill-treated
by  his  elder  brother,  and  little  favoured  by  casual  good  fortune,
he  had  risen  by  his  own  energies  from  a  hmnble  journeyman
printer  at  Boston  and  Philadelphia  to  a  foremost  place  among
his  countrymen ;  and  he  enjoyed  a  reputation  which  the  lapse
of  a  century  has  scarcely  dimmed.  Franklin  is,  indeed,  one  of
the  very  small  class  of  men  who  can  be  said  to  have  added
something  of  real  value  to  the  art  of  living.  Very  few  writers
have  left  so  many  profound  and  original  observations  on  the
causes  of  success  in  life,  and  on  the  best  means  of  cultivating
the  intellect  and  the  charactei.  To  extract  from  surrounding
circumstances  the  largest  possible  amount  of  comfort  and
rational  enjoyment,  was  the  ideal  he  placed  before  himself  and
others,  and  he  brought  to  its  attainment  one  of  the  shrewdest
and  most  inventive  of  human  intellects,  one  of  the  calmest  and

'  12  Geo.  III.  c.  24.

376 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  x.r.

best  balanced  of  human  characters.  *It  is  hard,'  he  once  wrote,
*  for  an  empty  sack  to  stand  upright ; '  and  it  was  his  leading
principle  that  a  certain  amount  of  material  prosperity  is  the
almost  indispensable  condition  as  well  as  the  chief  reward  of
integrity  of  character.  He  had  no  religious  fervour,  and  no
sympathy  with  those  who  appeal  to  strong  passions  or  heroic
self-abnegation ;  but  his  busy  and  somewhat  pedestrian  intel-
lect was  ceaselessly  employed  in  devising  useful  schemes  for
the  benefit  of  mankind.  He  founded  societies  for  mutual  im-
provement, established  the  first  circulating  library  in  America,
introduced  new  methods  for  extinguishing  fires,  warming  rooms,
paving  and  lighting  the  streets,  gave  a  great  impulse  to  educa-
tion in  Pennsylvania,  took  part  in  many  schemes  for  strength-
ening the  defences  and  improving  the  police  of  the  colony,  and
was  the  soul  of  more  than  one  enterprise  of  public  charity.
'  Poor  Eichard's  Almanac,'  which  he  began  in  1732,  and  which
he  continued  for  twenty-five  years,  attained  an  annual  circulation
of  near  1 0,000,  and  he  made  it  a  vehicle  for  diffusing  through
the  colonies  a  vast  amount  of  practical  knowledge  and  homely
wisdom.  His  brother  printed  the  fourth  newspaper  which  ever
appeared  in  America,  and  Franklin  wrote  in  it  when  still  a
boy.  He  had  afterwards  a  newspaper  of  his  own,  and  there
were  few  questions  of  local  politics  in  which  he  did  not  take  an
active  part.  He  was  very  ambitious  of  literary  success,  and
within  certain  limits  he  has  rarely  been  surpassed.  How  com-
pletely blind  he  was  to  the  sublime  and  the  poetical  in  litera-
ture, he  indeed  conclusively  showed  when  he  tried  to  improve
the  majestic  language  of  the  Book  of  Job  or  the  Lord's  Prayer
by  translating  them  into  ordinary  eighteenth  century  phraseo-
logy ;  but  on  his  own  subjects  no  one  wrote  better.  His  style
was  always  terse,  luminous,  simple,  pregnant  with  meaning,
eminently  persuasive.  There  is  scarcely  an  obscure  or  involved
or  superfluous  sentence,  scarcely  an  ambiguous  term  in  his
works,  and  not  a  trace  of  that  false  and  inflated  rhetoric  which
has  spoilt  much  American  writing,  and  from  which  the  addresses
of  Washington  himself  are  not  quite  free.  He  was  a  most
skilful  and  plausible  reasoner,  abounding  in  ingenious  illustra-
tion, and  with  a  happy  gift  of  carrying  into  diflBcult  and  intri-
cate subjects  that  transparent  simplicity  of  style  which  is,  per-

CH.  xji.  BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN.  377

haps,  the  highest  reach  of  art.  At  the  same  tinie  his  re-
searches and  writings  on  electricity  gave  him  a  wide  reputa-
tion in  the  scientific  world,  and  in  1752  his  great  discovery  of
the  lightning  conductor  made  his  name  universally  known
through  Europe.  It  was  indeed  pre-eminently  fitted  to  strike
the  imagination  ;  and  it  was  a  strange  freak  of  fortune  that
one  of  the  most  sublime  and  poetic  of  scientific  discoveries
should  have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  one  of  the  most  prosaic  of  great
men.

In  every  phase  of  the  struggle  with  England  he  took  a
prominent  part ;  and  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  if  he  had
been  able  to  guide  American  opinion,  it  would  never  have  ended
in  revolution.  Dm-ing  a  great  portion  of  the  struggle  he
always  professed  a  warm  attachment  for  England  and  the  Eng-
lish Constitution.  In  conversation  with  Burke  he  expressed
the  greatest  concern  at  the  impending  separation  of  the  two
countries ;  predicted  that  '  America  would  never  again  see  such
happy  days  as  she  had  passed  under  the  protection  of  England,
and  observed  that  ours  was  the  only  instance  of  a  great  em-
pire in  which  the  most  distant  parts  and  members  had  been
as  well  governed  as  the  metropolis  and  its  vicinage.' '  A  man
so  eminently  wise  and  temperate  must  have  clearly  seen  that
colonies  situated  3,000  miles  from  the  mother-country,  doubling
their  population  every  twenty-five  years,  possessing  representa-
tive institutions  of  the  freest  and  most  democratic  type,  and
inhabited  by  a  people  who,  from  their  circumstances  and  their
religion,  carried  the  sentiment  of  independence  to  the  highest
point,  were  never  in  any  real  danger  of  political  servitude,  and
that  there  was  no  difference  between  America  and  England  which
reasonable  men  might  not  easily  have  compromised.  Person-
ally, no  one  had  less  sympathy  than  Franklin  with  anarchy,
violence,  and  declamation,  and  in  some  respects  his  natural
leaning  was  towards  the  Tories.  It  is  remarkable  that  when
he  was  in  England  at  the  time  of  the  Middlesex  election,  his
sympathies  ran  strongly  against  "Wilkes,  he  spoke  with  indig-
nation of  the  punishment  that  must  await  a  people  '  who  are
imgratefully  abusing  the  best  Constitution  and  the  best  King

'  Burke's  'Appeal  from  the  New See too Franklin's Worllit,  i. 413,
to  the  Old  Whigs.' Works,  vi. 122. 414

878  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  ch.  xii.

any  nation  was  ever  blessed  with ; '  •  and  he  fully  adopted
the  Tory  maxim  that  the  whole  political  power  of  a  nation
belongs  of  right  to  the  freeholders.^  He  held  under  the  Govern-
ment the  position  of  Postmaster-General  for  America.  He
was  once  thought  of  as  Under-Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colo-
nies under  Lord  Hillsborough,  and  his  son  was  royal  Governor
of  New  Jersey.

His  writings  are  full  of  suggestions  which,  if  they  had
been  acted  on,  might  have  averted  the  disruption.  As  we
have  already  seen,  he  had  advocated  an  union  of  the  Colonies  for
defensive  pmrposes  as  early  as  1754,  and  in  1764  had  regarded
with  great  equanimity,  and  even  approval,  the  possible  estab-
lishment of  an  English  army  in  America,  paid  for  by  duties
imposed  on  the  colonies.  He  opposed  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  it
is  quite  evident,  from  his  conduct,  that  he  neither  expected
nor  desired  that  it  should  be  resisted.  In  one  of  his  writings,
he  very  wisely  suggested  that  England  should  give  up  her
trade  monopoly,  and  that  America  should  in  return  agree  to  pay
a  fixed  annual  sum  for  the  military  purposes  of  the  Empire.
In  another,  he  advocated  a  legislative  union,  which  would
have  enabled  the  English  Parliament,  without  injustice,  to  tax
America.  He  strongly  maintained  the  reality  of  the  distinction
between  internal  and  external  taxation,  and  asserted  with
great  truth  that  '  the  real  grievance  is  not  that  Britain  puts
duties  upon  her  own  manufactures  exported  to  us,  but  that  she
forbids  us  to  buy  like  manufactures  from  any  other  country.'
He  was  agent  for  Pennsylvania  at  the  time  of  the  Stamp  Act,
and,  in  his  examination  soon  after,  before  the  House  of  Com-
mons, he  defended  the  colonial  cause  with  an  ability,  a  presence
of  mind,  and  a  moderation  that  produced  a  great  impression
upon  Parliament.  His  many  tracts  in  defence  of  their  cause,
though  they  are  very  far  from  a  fair  or  candid  statement  even
of  the  facts  of  the  case,  were  undoubtedly  the  ablest  and  most
I^lausible  arguments  advanced  on  the  American  side.  In  1767
he  mentioned  the  assiduity  with  which  the  French  ambassador

'  Franklin's  Works,  vii.  399-404.  the  allowing  them  to  vote  for  legis-

*  '  All  the  land  in  England  is  in  lators  is  an  impropriety.' — '  Political

fact  represented.  .  .  .  As  to  those  who  Observations,'  Franklin's Wor/iS, iv.

have  no  landed  properly  in  a  county,  221.

CH.  XII.  BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.  379

was  courting  him,  and  he  added,  'I  fancy  that  intriguing  nation
would  like  very  well  to  meddle  on  occasion  and  blow  up  the
coals  between  Britain  and  her  colonies ;  but  I  hope  we  shall
give  them  no  opportunity.'  ^  In  his  confidential  correspond-
ence with  American  politicians,  he  constantly  advocated  mode-
ration and  patience.  'Our  great  security,'  he  wrote  in  1773,
*  lies  in  our  growing  strength  both  in  numbers  and  wealth,
that  creates  an  increasing  ability  of  assisting  this  nation  in  its
wars,  which  will  make  us  more  respectable,  our  friendship  more
valued,  and  our  enmity  feared  ....  In  confidence  of  this
coming  change  in  our  favour,  I  think  our  prudence  is,  mean-
while, to  be  quiet,  only  holding  up  our  rights  and  claims  on  all
occasions  .  .  .  but  bearing  patiently  the  little  present  notice
that  is  taken  of  them.  They  will  all  have  their  weight  in  time,
and  that  time  is  at  no  great  distance.'^  'There  seems  to  be
among  us  some  violent  spirits  who  are  for  an  immediate  rup-
ture ;  but  I  trust  the  general  prudence  of  our  country  will
see  that  by  our  growing  strength  we  advance  fast  to  a  situation
in  which  our  claims  must  be  allowed ;  that  by  a  premature
struggle  we  may  be  crippled  and  kept  down  another  age  .  .  .
that  between  governed  and  governing  every  mistake  in  govern-
ment, every  encroachment  on  right,  is  not  worth  a  rebellion  .  .  .
remembering  withal  that  this  Protestant  country  (our  mother,
though  lately  an  unkind  one)  is  worth  preserving,  and  that  her
weight  in  the  scale  of  Europe,  and  her  safety  in  a  great  degree,
may  depend  on  our  union  with  her.'^

In  addition  to  his  position  of  agent  for  Pennsylvania,  he
became  agent  for  New  Jersey,  for  Georgia,  and  in  1770  for
Massachusetts.  His  relations,  however,  with  the  latter  colony
were  not  always  absolutely  cordial.  His  religious  scepticism,
his  known  hatred  of  war,  his  personal  relations  to  the  British
Government,  his  dislike  to  violent  counsels,  and  to  that  exag-
gerated and  declamatory  rhetoric  which  was  peculiarly  popular
at  Boston,  all  placed  him  somewhat  out  of  harmony  with  his
constituents  ;  and  although  they  were  justly  proud  of  his  Eiuo-

'  Franklin's  Tra?'Z'S,  vii.  357.  rica.  '  Go  home  and  tell  your  country-

2  Ibid.  viii.  pp.  30,  31. After  the  men  to  get  children  as  fast  as  they

Stamp Act, Franklin expressed his  can.'

opinion  in  a  pithy  sentence  to  Ingcr-  '  Ibid.  pp.  78,  79-
soil,  who  vs'aa  then  returning  to  Ame-

580  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cir.  xii

pean  reputation,  even  this  was  sometimes  a  cause  of  suspicion.
They  felt  that  he,  and  he  alone,  of  living  Americans,  by  his
own  unassisted  merit,  had  won  a  great  position  in  England,  and
they  doubted  whether  he  could  be  as  devoted  to  their  cause  as
men  whose  reputation  was  purely  provincial.  In  1771,  Arthur
Lee,  of  Virginia,  who  was  fully  identified  with  the  extreme
party,  was  appointed  his  colleague,  and  there  were  several
other  symptoms  that  Franklin  was  looked  on  with  some  distrust.
The  suspicions  of  his  sincerity  were,  however,  wholly  ground-
less. His  heart  was  warmly  in  the  American  cause,  and
although  he  would  have  gladly  moderated  the  policy  of  his
countrjonen,  he  was  by  no  means  disposed  to  suffer  himself  to
be  stranded  and  distanced.  His  views  became  more  extensive,
and  his  language  more  emphatic;  he  now  maintained  with
great  ability  the  position  that  the  colonies,  like  Hanover,  or
like  Scotland  before  the  Union,  though  they  were  subject  to
the  English  king,  were  wholly  independent  of  the  British  Legis-
lature; and  in  1773  he  was  concerned  in  a  transaction  which
placed  him  at  open  war  with  English  opinion.

It  had  been  for  a  long  time  the  habit  of  Hutchinson,  the
Governor-General  of  Massachusetts;  of  Oliver,  who  was  now
Lieutenant-Governor ;  and  of  some  other  politicians  of  the  pro-
vince who  were  attached  to  the  Crown,  to  carry  on  a  strictly
private  and  confidential  correspondence  about  the  state  of  the
colonies  with  Whately,  who  had  formerly  been  private  secretary
to  George  Grenville.  In  June  1772  Whately  died,  and  in
December,  by  some  person  and  some  means  that  have  never
been  certainly  disclosed,  the  letters  of  his  American  corre-
spondents were  stolen  and  carried  to  Franklin.  The  letters  of
Hutchinson  had,  with  one  exception,  been  written  before  his
appointment  as  Governor,  but  at  a  time  when  he  held  high
office  in  the  colony,  and  they  were  written  with  the  perfect
freedom  of  confidential  intercourse.  Whately,  though  pecu-
liarly conversant  with  colonial  matters,  held  at  this  time  no
office  under  the  Crown,  and  was  a  simple  member  of  the  Oppo-
sition. Hutchinson,  in  wTiting  to  him,  dilated  upon  the  turbu-
lent and  rebellious  disposition  of  Boston,  the  factious  character
of  the  local  agitators,  the  weakness  of  the  Executive,  the
necessity  of  a  military  force  to  support  the  Government,  and

CH.  XII.  IIUTCIIIXSON'S LKTTKRa.  381

the  excessive  predominance  of  the  democratic  element  in  the
constitution  of  jMassachusetts.  '  I  never  think,'  he  wrote  in
the  letter  which  was  afterwards  most  violently  attacked,  '  of
the  measures  necessary  for  the  peace  and  good  order  of  the
colonies  without  pain.  There  must  be  an  abridgment  of  what
are  called  English  liberties.  ...  I  doubt  whether  it  is  pos-
sible to  project  a  system  of  governTuent  in  which  a  colony
,3,000  miles  distant  from  the  parent  State  shall  enjoy  all  the
liberty  of  the  parent  State.  ...  I  wish  the  good  of  the  colony
when  I  wish  to  see  some  further  restraint  of  liberty  rather
than  the  connection  with  the  parent  State  should  be  broken,
for  I  am  sure  such  a  breach  must  prove  the  ruin  of  the  colony.'
Oliver  argued  with  more  detail  that  the  Council  or  Upper
Chamber  should  consist  exclusively  of  landed  proprietors,
that  the  Crown  officers  should  have  salaries  independent  of
popular  favour,  that  the  popular  election  of  grand  juries  should
be  abolished,  and  that  there  should  be  a  colonial  representa-
tion in  the  English  Parliament.  All  this  appears  to  have
been  most  honestly  written,  but  it  was  written  without  the
reserve  and  the  caution  which  would  have  been  maintained  in
letters  intended  to  be  published.  Both  Hutchinson  and  Oliver
impressed  on  their  correspondent  their  desire  that  these  letters
should  be  deemed  strictly  confidential.'  They  were  brought  to
Franklin  as  political  information  for  his  perusal.  He  at  once
perceived  the  advantage  they  would  give  to  the  popular  party,
and  he  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  send  them  to  Massa  •
chusetts  on  condition  that  they  should  not  be  printed  or
copied  ;  that  they  should  be  shown  only  to  a  few  of  the  leading
people,  that  they  should  be  eventually  returned,  and  that  the
source  from  which  they  were  obtained  should  be  concealed.

The  letters  were  accordingly  sent  to  Thomas  Gushing,  the
Speaker  of  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts,  and,  as  might  have
been  expected,  they  soon  created  a  general  ferment.  As
Franklin  acutely  wrote,  'there  was  no  restraint  proposed  to
talking  of  them,  but  only  to  copying.'  They  were  shown  to
many  of  the  leading  agitators.  John  Adams  was  suffered  to
take  them  with  him  on  his  judicial  circuit,  and  they  were
finally  brought  before  the  Assembly  in  a  secret  sitting. The

•  See  the  letters  of  Oct.  26,  1769,  and  May  7,  1767.

382  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

Assembly  at  once  carried  resolutions  censuring  them  as  designed
to  sow  discord  and  encourage  the  oppressive  acts  of  the  British
Government,  to  introduce  arbitrary  power  into  the  province
and  subvert  its  constitution,  and  with  the  concurrence  of  the
Council  it  petitioned  the  King  to  remove  Hutchinson  and
Oliver  from  the  Government.  The  letters  were  soon  generally
known.  The  sole  obstacle  to  their  diffusion  was  the  promise
that  they  should  not  be  copied  or  printed,  and  it  was  not  likely
that  this  would  be  observed.  According  to  one  account,'  copies
were  produced  which  were  falsely  said  to  have  come  by  the
last  mail  from  England,  and  which  were  therefore  not  included
under  the  original  promise.  According  to  another  accounf*
Hancock,  one  of  the  leading  patriots,  took  'advantage  of
the  implied  permission  of  Hutchinson '  to  have  copies  made.
Hutchinson  had  indeed  been  challenged  with  the  letters,  and
been  asked  for  copies  of  them  and  of  such  others  as  he  should
think  proper  to  communicate.  After  some  delay,  he  answered
evasively,  '  If  you  desire  copies  with  a  view  to  make  them
public,  the  originals  are  more  proper  for  the  purpose  than  the
copies,'  and  this  sentence  appears  to  have  been  considered  a
sufficient  authorisation.  The  letters  were  accordingly  printed
and  scattered  broadcast  over  the  colonies.

When  the  printed  copies  arrived  in  England,  they  excited
great  astonishment,  and  William  Whately,  the  brother  and
executor  of  the  late  Secretary,  was  tilled  with  a  very  natural
consternation  at  a  theft  which  was  likely  to  have  such  important
consequences,  and  for  which  public  opinion  was  inclined  to
make  him  responsible.  He,  in  his  turn,  suspected  a  certain
Mr.  Temple,  who  had  been  allowed  to  look  through  the  papers
of  his  deceased  brother,  for  the  purpose  of  perusing  one  relating
to  the  colonies,  and  a  duel  ensued,  in  which  Whately  wis
wounded.  Franklin  then,  for  the  first  time,  in  a  letter  to  a
newspaper,  disclosed  the  part  he  had  taken.  He  stated  that
he,  and  he  alone,  had  obtained  and  transmitted  to  Boston  the
letters  in  question,  that  they  had  never  passed  into  the  hands
of  William  Whately,  and  that  it  was  therefore  impossible  either
that  Whately  could  have  communicated  them  or  that  Temple
could  have  taken  them  from  his  papers. There  is  some  reason

'  Sparks'  Contimiution  of  FronlUn's  TAfv.  ^  Bancroft.

en.  XII.  FRANKLIN'S  DEFENCE.  383

to  believe  that  the  original  owner  had  left  them  carelessly  in  a
public  office,  from  whence  they  had  been  abstracted,  but  the
mystery  was  never  decisively  solved.

Franklin  always  maintained  that  in  all  this  matter  he  had
simply  done  his  duty,  and  that  his  conduct  was  perfectly
honourable.  The  letters,  he  said,  '  were  written  by  public
officers  to  persons  in  public  stations,  on  public  affairs,  and
intended  to  procure  public  measures.'  They  were  brought  to
him  as  the  Agent  for  Massachusetts,  and  it  was  his  duty  as
such  to  communicate  to  his  constituents  intelligence  that  was
of  such  vital  importance  to  their  affairs.  He  even  urged,  more
ingeniously  than  plausibly,  that  he  was  animated  by  a  virtuous
desire  to  lessen  the  breach  between  England  and  the  colonies.
Like  most  Americans,  he  said,  he  had  viewed  with  indigna-
tion the  coercive  measures  which  emanated,  as  he  supposed,
from  the  British  Grovernment,  but  his  feelings  were  much
changed  when  it  was  proved  that  their  real  origin  might  be
traced  to  Americans  holding  high  offices  in  their  native  country.
It  was  to  con\'ince  him  of  this  truth  that  the  letters  had  been
originally  brought  to  him.  It  was  to  spread  a  similar  convic-
tion among  his  countrymen  that  he  had  sent  them  across  the
Atlantic.  With  more  force  his  apologists  have  m-ged  that  the
sanctity  of  private  correspondence  was  not  then  regarded  as  it
is  regarded  now,  and  that  the  Government  itself  continually
tampered  with  it  for  political  purposes.'  In  1766  the  Duke  of
Bedford  discovered,  to  his  great  indignation,  that  a  letter  which
he  had  written  to  the  Duke  of  Grrafton  had  been  opened  ;  and
among  the  items  of  secret-service  money  during  the  adminis-
tration of  Grrenville  was  a  sum  to  a  Post  Office  official  '  for
engraving  the  many  seals  we  are  obliged  to  malce  use  of.'^  If
Government  was  not  ashamed  to  resort  to  such  methods,  was  it
reasonable  to  expect  that  an  agent  who  was  endeavouring  in  a
hostile  country  and  against  overwhelming  obstacles  to  maintain
the  interests  of  his  colony  would  be  more  scrupulous  ?  Letters
of  Franklin  himself,  written  to  the  colony,  had  been  opened,
and  their  contents  had  been  employed  for  political  purposes.
Hutchinson  had  been  concerned  in  this  proceeding,  and  could

'  See  p 75. Burke's Works, ix.  ^  Qrenville  Pavers, iii. 99, 8]].

148.  312.

384 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en,  xii.

therefore  hardly  complain  that  his  own  weapons  were  turned
against  himself.*

These considerations,  no doubt,  palliate the conduct of
Franklin. Whether  they  do  more  than  palliate  it,  must  be  left
to  the  judgment  of  the  reader. In  England  that  conduct  was
judged  with  the  utmost  severity. For  the  purpose  of  ruining
honourable  officials,  it  was  said,  their  most  confidential  letters,
written  several  years  before  to  a  private  Member  of  Parliament
who  had  at  that  time  no  connection  with  the  Grovernment,  had
been  deliberately  stolen ;  and  although  the original  thief  was
undiscovered,  the  full  weight  of  the  guilt  and  of  the  dishonour
rested  upon  Franklin. He  was  perfectly  aware  that  the  letters
had  been  written  in  the  strictest  confidence,  that  they  had  been
dishonestly  obtained  without  the  knowledge  either  of  the  person
who  received  them  or  of  the  persons  who  wrote  them,  and  that
their  exposure  would  be  a  deadly  injury  to  the  writers. Under
these  circumstances  he  procured  them. Under  these  circum-
stances he  sent  them  to  a  small  group  of  politicians  whom  he
knew  to  be  the  bitterest  enemies  of  the  Governor,  and  one  of
the  consequences  of  his  conduct  was  a  duel  in  which  the  brother
of  the  man  whose  private  papers  had  been  stolen  was  nearly
killed. Any  man of  high and sensitive  honour,  it  was said,
would  sooner  have  put  his  hand  in  the  fire  than  have  been  con-
cerned in  such  a  transaction. When  the  petition  for  the  re-
moval  of Hutchinson and Oliver arrived, the Government
referred  it  to  the  Committee  of  the  Privy Council,  that  the
allegations  might  be  publicly  examined  with  counsel  on  either
side,  and  the  case  excited  an  interest  which  had  been  rarely
paralleled. No  less  than  thirty-five  Privy  Councillors  attended.
Among  the  distinguished  strangers  who  crowded  the  Bar  were
Burke,  Priestley,  and  Jeremy  Bentham. Dunning  and  Lee,
who  spoke  for  the  petitioners,  appear  to  have  made  no  impres-
sion ; while on the other side, Wedderburn,  the Solicitor-
General,  made  one  of  his most brilliant  but most  virulent
speeches. Aft^r  a  brief  but  eloquent  eulogy  of  the  character
and  services  of  Hutx;hinson,  he  passed  to  the  manner  in  which
the  letters  were  procured,  and  turning  to  PVanklin,  who  stood

'  See  Franklin's  own  vindication panying  notes. Workg,  iv.  404-455.
of  his  proceedings,  with  the  accom-

CH.  xii.  WEDDERHURN'S  INVECTIVE.  385

before  Lirn,  he  delivered  an  invective  wh-ich  appears  to  have
electrified  his  audience.  '  How  the  letters  came  into  the  pos-
session of  anyone  but  the  right  owners,'  he  said, '  is  still  a  mystery
for  Dr.  Franklin  to  explain.  He  was  not  the  rightful  owner,
and  they  could  not  have  come  into  his  hands  by  fair  means.
Nothing  will  acquit  Dr.  Franklin  of  the  charge  of  obtaining
them  by  fraudulent  or  corrupt  means  for  the  most  malignant  of
purposes,  unless  he  stole  them  from  the  person  who  stole  them.
I  hope,  my  Lords,  you  will  brand  this  man  for  the  honour  of
this  country,  of  Europe,  and  of  mankind.  .  .  .  Into  what
country  will  the  fabricator  of  this  iniquity  hereafter  go  with
unembarrassed  face  ?  Men  will  watch  him  with  a  jealous  eye.
They  will  hide  their  papers  from  him,  and  lock  up  their  escri-
toires. Having  hithei'to  aspired  after  fame  by  his  writings,  he
will  henceforth  esteem  it  a  libel  to  be  called  a  man  of  letters —
homo  trium  literarum.^  But  he  not  only  took  away  those
papers  from  one  brother — he  kept  himself  concealed  till  he
nearly  occasioned  the  murder  of  another.  It  is  impossible  to
read  his  account,  expressive  of  the  coolest  and  most  deliberate
malice,  without  horror.  Amid  these  tragical  events,  of  one
person  nearly  murdered,  of  another  answerable  for  the  issue,  of
a  worthy  Governor  hurt  in  his  deafest  interests,  the  fate  of
America  in  suspense — here  is  a  man  who,  with  the  utmost  in-
sensibility of  remorse,  stands  up  and  avows  himself  the  author
of  all. I can  compare him only  to Zanga  in Dr. Young's

Eevenge : '

Know  then,  'twas  I —
I  forged  the  letter. I  disposed  the  picture,
I  hated,  I  despised,  and  I  destroj-.

I  ask,  my  Lords,  whether  the  revengeful  temper  attributed
by  poetic  fiction  only  to  the  bloody  African,  is  not  surpassed
by  the  coolness  and  apathy  of  the  wily  American  ?  '

The  scene  was  a  very  strange  one,  and  it  is  well  suited  to
the  brush  of  an  historical  painter.  Franklin  was  now  an  old
man  of  sixty-seven,  the  greatest  writer,  the  greatest  philosopher
America  had  produced,  a  member  of  some  of  the  chief  scien-
tific societies  in  Europe,  the  accredited  representative  of  the
most  important  of  the  colonies  of  America,  and  for  nearly  an

'  Fur— a  thief.
VOL,  III.  C  C

386  ENGLAND  IN THE  EICrHTEENTH CENTURY.  ai.  xii.

hour  and  in  the  midst  of  the  most  distinguished  of  living
Enghshmen  he  was  compelled  to  hear  himself  denounced  as  a
thief  or  the  accomplice  of  thieves.  He  stood  there  conspicuous
and  erect,  and  without  moving  a  muscle,  amid  the  torrent  of
invective,  but  his  apparent  composure  was  shared  by  few  who
were  about  him.  With  the  single  exception  of  Lord  North,
the  Privy  Councillors  who  were  present  lost  all  dignity  and  all
self-respect.  They  laughed  aloud  at  each  sarcastic  sally  of
"SVedderburn.  '  The  indecency  of  their  behaviour,'  in  the  words
of  Shelbm-ne,  '  exceeded,  as  is  agreed  on  all  hands,  that  of  any
committee  of  elections  ; '  and  Fox,  in  a  speech  which  he  made  as
late  as  1803,  reminded  the  House  how  on  that  memorable  occa-
sion '  all  men  tossed  up  their  hats  and  clapped  their  hands  in
boundless  delight  at  Mr.  Wedderburn's  speech.'  The  Committee
at  once  voted  that  the  petition  of  the  Massachusetts  Assembly
was  '  false,  groundless,  and  scandalous,  and  calculated  only  for
the  seditious  purpose  of  keeping  up  a  spirit  of  clamour  and  dis-
content in  the  province.'  The  King  in  Council  confirmed  the
report,  and  Franklin  was  ignominiously  dismissed  from  his  office
of  Postmaster.  It  was  an  office  which  had  yielded  no  revenue
before  he  had  received  it,  but  which  his  admirable  organisation
had  made  lucrative  and  important.  The  colonists  accepted  the
insults  directed  against  their  great  representative  as  directed
against  themselves,'  and  from  this  time  the  most  sagacious
of  American  leaders  had  a  deep  personal  grudge  against  the
British  Government.^

In  the  meantime  a  serious  attempt  was  made  to  make  the  tea
duty  a  reality.  About  seventeen  million  pounds  of  tea  lay  unsold
in  the  warehouses  of  the  East  India  Company.  The  Company
was  at  this  time  in  extreme  financial  embarrassment,  ahnost
amounting  to  bankruptcy,  and  in  order  to  assist  it  the  whole
duty  which  had  formerly  been  imposed  on  the  exportation  to
America  was  remitted.^  Hitherto  the  Company  had  been  obliged
to  send  their  tea  to  England,  where  it  was  sold  by  public  sale
to  merchants  and  dealers,  and  by  them  exported  to  the  colo-

' On  the  extraordinary  popularity  JAvex  of  tlie Chancellors,  \m. 14-11>.

of  Franklin  at  this  time,  see  the  letter  Clidthiim  Corrcspimdcncc/w .  H22,  H2H

of  Dr.  Ru'^li,  (jno'cd  in Sparks' Con-  '*  By  the  previous  law  (12  (iio.  HI.

tiniK/fiiDi  to  the  Life  of  FriinliHn.  c.  60) a  drawback  of  tliree-tiftlis  of

'  Life of  Franklin. Campbell's  the  duly  had  been  ;iIlowed.

CH.  XII.  THE  TEA  RIOT  AT  BOSTON.  387

nies.  The  Compmy  were  now  permitted  to  export  tea  direct
from  their  warehouses  on  their  own  account  on  obtaining
a  licence  from  the  Treasury,^  and  they  accordingly  selected
their  own  agents  in  the  different  colonies.  As  the  East  India
Company  had  of  late  been  brought  to  a  great  extent  under
the  direction  of  the  Government,  the  consignees  were  such
as  favoured  the  Administration,  and  in  Boston  they  included
the  two  sons  of  Hutchinson.  Several  ships  freighted  with  tea
were  sent  to  the  colonies,  and  the  Government  hoped,  and  the
'  sons  of  liberty '  feared,  that  if  it  were  once  landed  it  would
probably  find  purchasers,  for  owing  to  the  drawback  of  the  duty
on  exportation  it  could  be  sold  much  cheaper  than  in  Eng-
land itself,  and  cheaper  than  tea  imported  from  any  other
country.  The  colonies  at  once  entered  into  a  conspiracy  to
prevent  the  tea  being  landed,  and  a  long  series  of  violent
measures  were  taken  for  the  purpose  of  intimidating  those  who
were  concerned  in  receiving  it.  At  last,  in  December  1773,
three  ships  laden  with  tea  arrived  at  Boston,  and  on  the  16th
of  that  month  forty  or  fifty  men  disguised  as  Mohawk  Indians,
and  under  the  direct  superintendence  of  Samuel  Adams,
Hancock,^  and  other  leading  patriots,  boarded  them,  and  post-
ing sentinels  to  keep  all  agents  of  authority  at  a  distance,  they
flung  the  whole  cargo,  consisting  of  342  chests,  into  the  sea.
In  the  course  of  the  violent  proceedings  at  Boston  in  this  year,
the  Council,  the  militia,  the  corps  of  cadets  had  been  vainly
asked  to  assist  in  maintaining  the  law.  The  sheriff  of  the  town
was  grossly  insulted.  The  magistrates  would  do  nothing,  and,
as  usual,  the  crowning  outrage  of  the  destruction  of  the  tea
was  accomplished  with  perfect  impunity,  and  not  a  single  person
engaged  in  it  was  in  any  way  molested.  At  Charleston  a  ship
arrived  with  tea,  but  the  consignees  were  intimidated  into
resignation,  and  the  tea  was  stored  in  cellars  where  it  ultimately
perished.  At  New  York  and  Philadelphia  the  inhabitants
obliged  the  captains  of  the  tea  ships  at  once  to  sail  back  with
their  cargoes  to  the  Thames.

•  13  Georsre  III.  c.  44.  from St.  Eustatia. IRst.  of  Massa-

^  Hutchinson notices that. Han-  chitsttts  Bay, -p.  2^*7. See  too  Sabine's

cock's uncle had made his large  Ameincan  Loyalists,  i.  9.

fortune chietiy by smuggling tea

c  c  2

388  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CKNTUEY.  cm.  xii.

While  the  law  was  thus  openly  defied,  the  popular  partj
vrere  inflexibly  opposed  to  the  project  of  granting  the  judges
fixed  salaries  from  the  Crown,  and  thus  making  them  in  some
degree  independent  of  the  Assemblies.  In  Massachusetts  the
Assembly  declared  all  judges  who  received  salaries  from  the
Crown  instead  of  the  people  unworthy  of  public  confidence,
and  it  threatened  to  impeach  them  before  the  Council  and  the
Governor.  In  February  1774,  proceedings  of  this  kind  were
actually  instituted  against  Oliver,  the  Chief  Justice  of  the
l)rovince,  because  he  had  accepted  an  annual  stipend  from  the
Crown.  Out  of  100  members  who  voted,  no  less  than  92
supported  the  impeachment.  Hutchinson  of  course  refused  to
concur  in  the  measure,  and  on  March  30  he  prorogued  the
House,  and  at  the  same  time  accused  it  of  having  been  guilty
of  proceedings  which  '  strike  directly  at  the  honour  and  autho-
rity of  the  King  and  Parliament.'

The  news  of  these  events  convinced  most  intelligent  Eng-
lishmen that  war  was  imminent,  and  that  the  taxation  of
America  could  only  be  enforced  by  the  sword.  Several  distinct
lines  of  policy  were  during  the  next  two  or  three  years  advo-
cated in  England.  Tucker,  the  Dean  of  Gloucester,  a  bitter
Tory,  but  one  of  the  best  living  writers  on  all  questions  of  trade,
maintained  a  theory  which  was  then  esteemed  visionary  and
almost  childish,  but  which  will  now  be  very  differently  regarded.
He  had  no  respect  for  the  Americans ;  he  dissected  with  un-
sparing severity  the  many  weaknesses  in  their  arguments,  and
the  declamatory  and  rhetorical  character  of  much  of  their
patriotism  ;  but  he  contended  that  matters  had  now  come  to
such  a  point  that  the  only  real  remedy  was  separation.  Colo-
nies which  would  do  nothing  for  their  own  defence,  which  were
in  a  condition  of  smothered  rebellion,  and  which  were  continu-
ally waiting  for  the  difficulties  of  the  mother-country  in  order
to  assert  their  power,  were  a  source  of  political  weakness  and
not  of  political  strength,  and  the  trade  advantages  which  were
supposed  to  spring  from  the  connection  were  of  the  most  delu-
sive kind.  Trade,  as  he  showed,  will  always  ultimately  flow  in
the  most  lucrative  channels.  The  most  stringent  laws  had
been  imable  to  prevent  the  Americans  from  trading  with  foreign
countries  if  they  could  do  so  with  advantage,  and  in  case  of

CH.  xu.  TUCKKR AND ADAM HMITII.  ,'i«*J

separation  the  Americans  would  still  resort  to  England  for  most
of  their  goods,  for  the  simple  reason  that  England  could  supply
them  more  cheaply  than  any  other  nation.  The  supremacy  of
English  industry  did  not  rest  upon  political  causes.  '  The  trade
of  the  world  is  carried  on  in  a  great  measure  by  British  capital.
British  capital  is  greater  than  that  of  any  other  country  in  the
world,  and  as  long  as  this  superiority  lasts  it  is  morally  impos-
sible that  the  trade  of  the  British  nation  can  sutfer  any  very
great  or  alarming  diminution.'  No  single  fact  is  more  clearly
established  by  history  than  that  the  bitterest  political  animosity
is  insufficient  to  prevent  nations  from  ultimately  resorting  to
the  markets  that  are  most  advantageous  to  them,  and  as  long
as  England  maintained  the  conditions  of  her  industrial  su-
premacy unimpaired  she  was  in  this  respect  perfectly  secure.
But  nothing  impairs  these  conditions  so  much  as  war,  which
wastes  capital  unproductively  and  burdens  industry  with  a  great
additional  weight  of  debt,  military  establishments,  and  taxa-
tion. The  war  which  began  about  the  Spanish  right  of  search
had  cost  sixty  millions,  and  had  scarcely  produced  any  benefit
to  England.  The  last  war  cost  ninety  millions,  and  its  most
important  result  had  been,  by  securing  the  Americans  from
French  aggression,  to  render  possible  their  present  rebelhon.
Let  England,  then,  be  wise  in  time,  and  before  she  draws  the
sword  let  her  calculate  what  possible  advantage  she  could  derive
commensurate  with  the  permanent  evils  which  would  inevitably
follow.  The  Americans  have  refused  to  submit  to  the  authority
and  legislation  of  the  Supreme  Legislature,  or  to  bear  their  part
in  supporting  the  burden  of  the  Empire.  Let  them,  then,  cease
to  be  fellow-members  of  that  Empire.  Let  them  go  their  way
to  form  their  own  destinies.  Let  England  free  herself  from  the
cost,  the  responsibility,  and  the  danger  of  defending  them,  re-
taining, like  other  nations,  the  right  of  connecting  herself  with
them  by  treaties  of  commerce  or  of  alliance.'

The  views  of  Adam  Smith,  though  less  strongly  expressed,
are  not  very  different  from  those  of  Tucker.  The  '  Wealth  of
Nations '  appeared  in  1776,  and  although  it  at  first  attracted
DO  great  attention  and  had  little  political  influence  for  at  least
a  generation  after its appearance,  it  has  ultimately  proved

'  Tucker's  Political  Tracts.

SdO  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

one  of  the  most  important  events  in  tlie  economical,  and
indeed  in  the  intellectual,  history  of  modern  Europe.  No  part
of  it  is  more  remarkable  tlian  the  chapters  devoted  to  the
colonies.  Adam  Smith  showed  by  an  exhaustive  examination
that  the  liberty  of  commerce  which  England  allowed  to  her
colonies,  though  greatly  and  variously  restricted,  was  at  least
more  extensive  than  that  which  any  other  nation  conceded  to
its  dependencies,  and  that  it  was  sufficient  to  give  them  a  large
and  increasing  measure  of  prosperity.  The  laws,  however,  pre-
venting them  from  employing  their  industry  in  manufactures
for  themselves,  he  described  as  '  a  manifest  violation  of  the
most  sacred  rights  of  mankind,'  and  likely  '  in  a  more  advanced
state  '  to  prove  '  really  oppressive  and  insupportable.'  Hitherto,
However,  these  lawt^,  though  they  were  '  badges  of  slavery  im-
posed without  any  sufficient  reason,'  had  been  of  little  practical
importance ;  for,  owing  to  the  great  cheapness  of  land  and  the
great  dearness  of  labour  in  the  colonies,  it  was  obviously  the
most  economical  course  for  the  Americans  to  devote  themselves
to  agriculture  and  fisheries,  and  to  import  manufactured  goods.
His  chief  contention,  however,  was  that  the  system  of  trade
monopoly  which,  with  many  exceptions  and  qualifications,  was
maintained  in  the  colonies  for  the  benefit  of  England,  was
essentially  vicious ;  that  the  colonies  were  profoundly  injured
by  the  restrictions  which  confined  them  to  the  English  market,
and  that  these  restrictions  were  not  beneficial,  but  were  indeed
positively  injurious  to  England  herself.  These  positions  were
maintained  in  a  long,  complicated,  but  singularly  luminous
argument,  and  it  followed  that  the  very  keystone  of  English
colonial  policy  was  a  delusion.  '  The  maintenance  of  this
monopoly  has  hitherto  been  the  principal,  or,  more  properly,
perhaps,  the  sole  end  and  purpose  of  the  dominion  which  Great
Britain  assumes  over  the  colonies.'  The  burden  of  a  great  peace
establishment  by  land  and  sea,  maintained  almost  exclusively
from  English  revenue,  two  great  wars  which  had  arisen  chiefly
from  colonial  questions,  and  the  risk  and  probability  of  many
others,  were  all  supposed  to  be  counterbalanced  by  the  great
advantage  which  the  mother-conntry  derived  fi'om  the  monopoly
of  the  colonial  trade.  The  truth,  however,  is  that  'the  mono-
poly of  the  colony  trade  depresses  the industry  of  all  other

en.  XII,  ADAM  SMITH.  391

countries,  1-mt  cliiefly  that  of  tne  colonies,  without  in  the  leasts
increasing,  but,  on  the  contrary,  diminishing,  that  of  the  country
in  whose  favour  it  is  established.'  '  Under  the  present  system
of  management,  therefore.  Great  Britain  derives  nothing  but
loss  from  the  dominion  which  she  assumes  over  the  colonies.'

Like  Tucker,  Adam  Smith  would  gladly  have  seen  a  peace-
ful separation.  '  Great  Britain,'  he  wrote,  '  would  not  only  be
immediately  freed  from  the  whole  annual  expense  of  the  peace
establishment  of  the  colonies,  but  might  settle  with  them  such
a  treaty  of  commerce  as  would  effectually  secure  to  her  a  free
trade  more  advantageous  to  the  great  body  of  the  people,
though  less  so  to  the  merchants,  than  the  monopoly  which  she
at  present  enjoys.'  She  would  at  the  same  time  probably
revive  that  good  feeling  between  the  two  great  branches  of  the
English  race  which  was  now  rapidly  turning  to  hatred.  Such
a  solution,  however,  though  the  best,  must  be  put  aside  as
manifestly  impracticable.  No  serious  politician  would  propose
the  voluntary  and  peaceful  cession  of  the  great  dominion  of
England  in  America  with  any  real  hope  of  being  li.stened  to.
'  Such  a  measure  never  was  and  never  will  be  adopted  by  any
nation  in  the  world.'

Dismissing  this  solution,  then,  Adam  Smith  agreed  with
Grenville  that  every  part  of  the  British  Empire  should  be
obliged  to  support  its  own  civil  and  military  establishments,
and  to  pay  its  proper  proportion  of  the  expense  of  the  general
government  or  defence  of  the  British  Empire.  He  also  agreed
with  Grenville  that  it  naturally  devolved  upon  the  British
Parliament  to  determine  the  amount  of  the  colonial  contribu-
tions, though  the  colonial  Legislatures  might  decide  in  what
way  those  contributions  should  be  raised.  It  was  practically
impossible  to  induce  the  colonial  Legislatures  of  themselves  to
levy  such  taxation,  or  to  agree  upon  its  proportionate  distri-
bution. Moreover,  a  colonial  Assembly,  though,  like  the  vestry
of  a  parish,  it  is  an  admirable  judge  of  the  affairs  of  its  own
district,  can  have  no  proper  means  of  determining  what  is  ne-
cessary for  the  defence  and  support  of  the  whole  Empire.  This
*  can  be  judged  of  only  by  that  Assembly  which  inspects  and
superintends  the  affairs  of  the  whole  nation.'  '  The  Parliament
of  England,'  he  added,  '  has  not  upon  any  occasion  shown  the

392  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGUTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

smallest  disposition  to  overburden  those  parts  of  the  Empire
which  are  not  represented  in  Parliament.  Tlie  islands  of
Jersey  and  Guernsey  .  .  .  are  more  lightly  taxed  than  any  parts
of  Great  Britain.  Parliament  .  .  .  has  never  hitherto  demanded
of  the  colonies  anything  which  even  approached  to  a  just  propor-
tion of  what  was  paid  by  their  fellow-subjects  at  home,'  and  the
fear  of  an  excessive  taxation  might  be  easily  met  by  making  the
colonial  contribution  bear  a  fixed  proportion  to  the  English  land
tax.  The  colonists,  however,  almost  unanimously  refused  to
submit  to  taxation  by  a  Parliament  in  which  they  were  not  repre-
sented. The  only  solution,  then,  was  to  give  them  a  representa-
tion in  it,  and  at  the  same  time  to  open  to  them  all  the  prizes  of
English  politics.  The  colonists  should  ultimately  be  subjected
to  the  same  taxes  as  Englishmen,  and  should  be  admitted,  in
compensation,  to  the  same  freedom  of  trade  and  manufacture.

If  we  pass  from  the  political  philosophers  to  active  poli-
ticians, we  find  that  Chatham  and  Burke  were  substantially
agreed  upon  the  line  they  recommended.  Burke,  who  had
long  shown  a  knowledge  and  a  zeal  on  American  questions  which
no  other  politician  coidd  rival,  had  in  the  preceding  year  ac-
cepted, with  very  doubtful  propriety,  the  position  of  paid  agent
of  New  York;  and  in  1774  he  made  his  great  speech  on
American  taxation.  In  the  same  year  Chatham  reappeared  in
the  House  of  Lords,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  American
debates.  Burke  and  Chatham  continued  to  differ  on  the  ques-
tion of  the  abstract  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  America,  but
they  agreed  in  maintaining  that  the  union  to  the  British  Crown
of  a  vast  civilised  and  rapidly  progressive  country,  evidently
destined  to  take  a  foremost  place  in  the  history  of  the  world,
was  a  matter  of  vital  importance  to  the  future  of  the  Empire.
In  the  speeches  and  letters  of  Chatham  especially,  this  doc-
trine is  maintained  in  the  most  emphatic  language.  '  I  fear
the  bond  between  us  and  America,'  he  wrote  in  1774,  'will
be  cut  off  for  ever.  Devoted  England  will  then  have  peen
her  best  days,  which  nothing  can  restore  again.' '  '  Although
I  love  the  Americans  as  men  prizing  and  setting  a  just  value
upon  that  inestimable  blessing,  liberty,  yet  if  I  could  once  per-
suade myself  that  they  entertain  the  most  distant  intention  of

'  Thackeray's  IaJc  of  Chathnm,  ii,  L'74.

CH.  XII.  POLICY OF LUIiKI-:.  393

throwing  off  the  legislative  supremacy  and  great  con^titutionai
buperiutending  power  and  control  of  the  British  Legislature,  I
should  myself  be  the  very  first  person  ...  to  enforce  that  power
by  every  exertion  this  country  is  capable  of  making.' '

In  the  speeches  of  Burke,  no  passages  of  equal  emphasis
will  be  found ;  but  Burke,  like  Chatham,  entirely  refused  at
this  time  to  contemplate  the  separation  of  the  colonies  from  the
Empire ;  and  he  maintained  that  the  only  good  policy  was  a
policy  of  conciliation,  reverting  to  the  condition  of  affairs  which
existed  before  the  Stamp  Act,  and  repealing  all  the  coercive
and  aggressive  laws  which  had  since  then  been  promulgated.
This  was  what  the  Americans  themselves  asked.  In  presenting
a  petition  from  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  in  August  1773
Franklin,  their  agent,  had  written  '  that  a  sincere  dispositior
prevails  in  the  people  there  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the
mother-country  ;  that  the  Assembly  have  declared  their  desire
only  to  be  put  into  the  situation  they  were  in  before  the  Stamp
Act.  They  aim  at  no  revolution.'  ^  In  this  spirit  Burke  urged
*heir  claims.  '  Eevert  to  your  old  principles  .  .  .  leave
America,  if  she  has  taxable  matter  in  her,  to  tax  herself.  I
am  not  here  going  into  a  distinction  of  rights,  nor  attempting
to  mark  their  boundaries.  I  do  not  enter  into  these  meta-
physical distinctions.  I  hate  the  very  sound  of  them.  Leave
the  Americans  as  they  anciently  stood,  and  these  distinctions,
bom  of  our  unhappy  contest,  will  die  along  with  it.  .  .  .  Let
the  memory  of  all  actions  in  contradiction  to  that  good  old
mode,  on  both  sides  be  extinguished  for  ever.  Be  content  to
bind  America  by  laws  of  trade  ;  you  have  always  done  it.  Let
this  be  your  reason  for  binding  their  trade.  Do  not  burthen
them  with  taxes  ;  you  were  not  used  to  do  so  from  the  begin-
ning. Let  this  be  your  reason  for  not  taxing.  These  are  the
arguments  of  states  and  kingdoms.  Leave  the  rest  to  the
schools ;  for  there  only  they  may  be  discussed  with  safety.  If
intemperately,  unwisely,  fatally,  you  sophisticate  and  poison
the  very  source  of  government  by  urging  subtle  deductions  and
consequences  odious  to  those  you  govern,  from  the  unlimited
and  illimitable  natiure  of  supreme  sovereignty,  you  will  teach
them  by  these  means  to  call  that  sovereignty  itself  in  question.'
'  Thackeray's  Life  of  Chatham,  ii.  279.  =  Franklin's  ^Vm^^is.  iv.  43?.

394  ENGLAND  IN  TUE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

The  duty  on  tea  should  especially  he  at  once  repealed.  It  waf
said  that  it  was  an  external  tax  such  as  the  Americans  had
always  professed  themselves  ready  to  pay  ;  that  port  duties
had  been  imposed  by  Grenville  as  late  as  1764  without  exciting
any  protest,  and  that  it  was  therefore  evident  that  the  claims
of  the  Americans  were  extending.  But  the  American  distinction
had  always  been  that  they  would  acknowledge  external  taxes,
which  were  intended  only  to  regulate  trade  ;  but  nut  internal
taxes,  which  were  intended  to  raise  revenue.  Townshend,
with  unhappy  ingenuity,  proved  that  an  external  tax  could  be
made  to  raise  revenue  like  an  internal  tax,  and  this  purpose
was  expressly  stated  in  the  preamble  of  the  Act.  '  It  was  just
and  necessary,'  the  preamble  said,  '  that  a  revenue  should  be
raised  there  ; '  and  again,  the  Commons  '  being  desirous  to  make
some  provision  in  the  present  Session  of  Parliament  towards
raising  the  said  revenue.'  It  would  also  be  difficult  to  con-
ceive a  more  absiu-d  position  than  that  of  the  Ministry  which
retained  the  tea  duty.  It  was  an  intelligible  policy  to  force
the  Americans  to  support  an  army  for  the  defence  of  the  Em-
pire ;  but  it  was  calculated  that  the  duty  would  at  the  utmost
produce  \6,000l.  a  year,  and  the  Ministry  had  precluded  them-
selves from  the  possibility  of  increasing  the  revenue.  Towns-
hend no  doubt  had  meant  to  do  so  ;  but  Lord  North  had
authorised  Lord  Hillsborough  to  assure  the  colonial  Gover-
nors, in  his  letter  of  May  17G9,  'that  his  Majesty's  present
Administration  have  at  no  time  entertained  a  design  to  propose
to  Parliament  to  lay  any  further  taxes  upon  America  for  the
purpose  of  raising  a  revenue.'  16,000L  a  year  was  therefore
the  utmost  the  Ministers  expected  from  a  policy  which  had  led
England  to  the  brink  of  an  almost  inevitable  war.  But  even
this  was  not  all.  In  order  to  impose  this  unhappy  port  duty
of  Zd.  in  the  pound  on  the  Americans,  Parliament  had  actually
withdrawn  a  dutj  of  Is.  in  the  pound  which  liad  hitherto  been
paid  without  question  and  without  difficulty  upon  exj)ortation
from  England,  and  which  necessarily  fell  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,
upon  those  who  purchased  the  tea.  '  Incredible  as  it  may
eeem,  yon  have  deliberately  thrown  away  a  large  duty  which
you  held  secure  and  quiet  in  your  hands,  for  the  vain  hope  of
getting  three-fourths  less,  through  every  hazard,  through  cer-

CH.  XII.  POLICY OF  BURKE.  395

tain  litigation,  and  jjnssibly  through  war.''  It  was  said  that
the  duty  was  merely  an  assertion  of  right,  like  the  Declara-
tory Act  of  17GG.  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  very
preamble  of  the  new  Act,  which  asserted  not  merely  the  jus-
tice, but  also  the  expediency,  of  taxing  the  colonies.  A  simple
repeal  was  the  one  possible  form  of  conciliation,  for  a  legislative
union  between  countries  3,000  miles  apart  was  wholly  im-
practicable, and  it  was  absolutely  repudiated  by  the  colonies.
On  the  subject  of  the  restrictive  trade  laws,  Burke  wisely  said
as  little  as  possible.  He  knew  that  the  question  could  not  be
raised  without  dividing  the  friends  of  America,  and  probably
without  alienating  the  commercial  classes,  who  were  the  chief
English  opponents  of  American  taxation.

Whether  the  policy  of  Burke  and  Chatham  would  have  suc-
ceeded is  very  doubtful.  After  so  much  agitation  and  violence,
after  the  promulgation  of  so  many  subversive  doctrines  in
America,  and  the  exhibition  of  so  much  weakness  and  vacil-
lation in  England,  it  could  scarcely  be  expected  that  the  tem-
pest would  have  been  calmed,  and  that  the  race  of  active  agitators
would  have  retired  peaceably  into  obscurity.  Philosophers  in
their  studies  might  draw  out  reasonable  plans  of  conciliation,
but  pure  reason  plays  but  a  small  part  in  politics,  and  the
difl&culty  of  carrying  these  plans  into  execution  was  enormous.
Party  animosities,  divisions,  and  subdivisions;  the  personal
interests  of  statesmen  who  wanted  to  climb  into  office,  and  of
agitators  who  wanted  to  retain  or  increase  their  power  ;  the
obstinacy  of  the  Court,  which  was  opposed  to  all  concession
to  the  colonies,  and  no  less  opposed  to  a  consolidation  of
parties  at  home ;  the  spirit  of  commercial  monopoly,  which
made  one  class  averse  to  all  trade  concessions ;  the  heavy
weight  of  the  land  tax,  which  made  another  class  peculiarly
indignant  at  the  refusal  of  the  colonists  to  bear  the  burden  of
their  own  defence ;  the  natural  pride  of  Parliament,  which  had
been  repeatedly  insulted  and  defied  ;  the  anger,  the  jealousy,
and  the  suspicion  which  recent  events  had  created  on  both  sides

>  The  East  India  Company had  tion,  provided  it  consented  to  repeal

clearly seen the absurdity of the  the  duty  of  threepence  in  the  pound

transaction,  and  offered  that  the  Go-  paid  in  America. Pari.  Hist,  xviii

vernment should retain a duty  of  178.
sixpence  in tlie pound  on  cxporta-

:'y6  ENGLAND IN THE KTOIITKF.NTII CENTURY.  ch.  xn.

of  the  Atlantic;  tlie doubts  wliicli existed  in  England  about
the extent  to  which  the  disloyal  spirit  of  New  England  had
permeated the other  colonies ; the  doubts which  existed  in
America  about  which  of  the  many  sections  of  English  public
opinion  would  ultimately  obtain  an  ascendency  ; and, tinally,
the  weak  characters,  the  divided opinions,  the  imperfect  in-
formation, and  the  extremely  ordinary  capacities  of  the  English
Ministers,  must  all  be  taken  into  account. Had  Chatham  been
at  the  head  of  affairs  and  in  the  full  force  of  his  powers,  con-
ciliation might  have  been  possible  ; but  such  a  policy  required
a  firm  hand,  an  eagle  eye,  a  great  personal  ascendency. Popular
opinion in  England,  which had supported  the  repeal  of  the
Stamp  Act,  and  had acquiesced  in  the  repeal  of  the  greater
part  of  Townshend's  Act,  was  now  opposed  to  further  conces-
sion. England,  it  was  said,  had  suflficiently  humiliated her-
self. The  claims and the  language  of  the  colonial  agitators
excited  profound  and  not  unnatural  indignation,  and  every  mail
from  America  brought  news  that  New  England  at  least  was  in
a  condition  of  virtual  rebellion ; that  Acts  of  Parliament  were
defied and  disobeyed  with  the  most  perfect impunity ;  that
the representatives of the British Government  were  habi-
tually exposed  to  the  grossest  insult,  and  reduced  to  the  most
humiliating  impotence. The  utility  of  colonies  to  the  mother-
country  was  becoming  a  doubtful  question  to  some.  Ministers,  it
was  said,  admitted  in  Parliament  that '  it  might  be  a  great  ques-
tion whether  the  colonies  shoidd  not  be  given  up.'' England,
indeed,  was  plainly  staggering  under  the  weight  of  her  empire.
In  1 774,  on  the  very  eve  of  its  gigantic  struggle,  Parliament
resounded  with complaints of  the magnitude of  the peace
establishment,  and  there  were  loud  cries  for  reduction. It  was
noticed  that  the  land  tax  was  Is.  higher  than  in  any  previous
peace  establishment; that the  Three  per  Cents.,  which  some

'  Annual Jlcipsfcr, 1774, p. 02.  wlietlicr  (licrc  should  ever  be  JV  .strict

The  Kiiifi  liimsclf  wrote  (Nov.  1774):  union  between  tiie  colonies  and  the

'We  niu-st either  master  them [tlie  niotl.cr-country  ; I have doubts

colonies] or totally Icnve thcin to  whether  they  are  a  real  service  or  a

them.selves,  and  treat  them  as  aliens.'  burthen to us; but I never hnd  a

—  (Arrrrspondence of Gr.imje III.  i.  doubt  iis  to  our  rijj^ht  to  lay  an  in-

216. h&  early  as  Jan. 17(i9  llu.ssey,  ternal tax upon tiiem.' —  6'a?'6'»//t«A

the  Attorney-General  to the  Queen,  Debates,  i.  I'Jl.
Buid  in  Parliament:  '  1  have  my  doubts

CR.  XII.  COERCIVE ACTS 01 I'ARLIAMKNT.  397

years  ago  wore  above  90,  bad  now  fallen  to  about  86;  that  Ibe
land  and  malt  taxes  were  almost  entirely  absorbed  by  the  in-
creased expenditure  required  for  the  navy.'  All  this  rendered
the  attitude  of  the  colonies  peculiarly  irritating.  The  pub-
lication of  the  letters  of  Hutchinson  produced  great  indignation
among  English  politicians ;  and  the  burning  of  the  '  Gaspee,'
the  destruction  of  tea  in  Boston  harbour,  and  the  manifest  con-
nivance of  the  whole  population  in  the  outrage,  raised  that
indignation  to  the  highest  point.  The  time  for  temporising,
it  was  said,  was  over.  It  was  necessary  to  show  that  England
possessed  some  real  power  of  executing  her  kws  and  protecting
her  officers,  and  the  Ministers  were  probably  supported  by  a
large  majority  of  the  English  people  when  they  resolved  to
throw  away  the  scabbard,  and  to  exert  all  the  powers  of  Par-
liament to  reduce  iSIassachusetts  to  obedience.

The  measures  that  were  taken  were  very  stringent.  By  one
Act  the  harbour  of  Boston  was  legally  closed.  The  Custom-
house officers  were  removed  to  Salem.  All  landing,  lading,  and
shipping  of  merchandise  in  Boston  harbour  was  forbidden,  and
English  men-of-war  were  appointed  to  maintain  the  blockade.
The  town,  which  owed  its  whole  prosperity  to  its  commercial
activity,  was  debarred  from  all  commerce  by  sea,  and  was  to
continue  under  this  ban  till  it  had  made  compensation  to  the
East  India  Company  for  the  tea  which  had  been  destroyed,  and
had  satisfied  the  Crown  that  trade  would  for  the  future  be
safely  carried  on  in  Boston,  property  protected,  laws  obeyed,
and  duties  regularly  paid.^

By  another  Act,  Parliament  exercised  the  power  which,  as
the  supreme  legislative  body  of  the  Empire,  Mansfield  and
other  lawyers  ascribed  to  it,  of  remodelling  by  its  own  autho-
rity the  Charter  of  Massachusetts.  The  Greneral  Assembly,
which  was  esteemed  the  legitimate  representative  of  the  de-
mocratic element  in  the  Constitution,  was  left  entirely  un-
touched ;  but  the  Council,  or  Upper  Chamber,  which  had  been
hitherto  elected  by  the  Assembly,  was  now  to  be  appointed,
as  in  most  of  the  other  colonies  of  America,  by  the  Crown,  and
the  whole  executive  power  was  to  cease  to  emanate  from  the
people. The  judges and magistrates  of  all  kinds,  including

'  Annual  Register,  1774,  p.  r>3.  *  14  George  HI.  c.  19.

398 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xii.

the  sheriffs,  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  royal  governor,  and
weie  to  be  revocable  at  pleasure.  Jurymen,  instead  of  being
chosen  by  popular  election,  were  to  be  summoned  by  the  sheriffs.
The  right  of  public  meeting,  which  had  lately  been  much
employed  in  inciting  the  populace  against  the  Grovernment,
was  seriously  abridged.  No  meeting  except  election  meetings
might  henceforth  be  held,  and  no  subject  discussed,  without
the  permission  of  the  governor.^

It  was  more  than  probable  that  such  grave  changes  would
be  resisted  by  force,  that  blood  would  be  shed,  and  that  Eng-
lish soldiers  would  again  be  tried  for  their  lives  before  a  civil
tribunal.  The  conduct  of  the  Boston  judges  and  of  the  Boston
jury  at  the  trial  of  Captain  Preston  and  his  soldiers  had  re-
dounded to  their  immortal  honour ;  but  Government  was
resolved  that  no  such  risk  should  be  again  incurred,  and  that
soldiers  who  were  brought  to  trial  for  enforcing  the  law  against
the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  should  never  again  be  tried  by  a
Boston  jury.  To  remove  the  trial  of  prisoners  from  a  district
where  popular  feeling  was  so  violent  that  a  fair  trial  was  not
likely  to  be  obtained,  was  a  practice  not  wholly  unknown  to
English  law.  Scotch  jm-ies  were  not  suffered  to  try  rebels,  or
Sussex  juries  smugglers ;  and  an  Act  was  now  passed  '  for  the
impartial  administration  of  justice,'  which  provided  that  if  any
person  in  the  province  of  Massachusetts  were  indicted  for
murder  or  any  other  capital  offence,  and  if  it  should  appear  to
the  governor  that  the  incriminated  act  was  conmiitted  in  aiding
the  magistrates  to  suppress  tumult  and  riot,  and  also  that  a
fair  trial  cannot  be  had  in  the  province,  the  prisoner  should  be
sent  for  trial  to  any  other  colony,  or  to  Great  Britain.''^

These  were  the  three  great  coercive  measures  of  1774.  It
is  not  necessary  to  dilate  upon  them,  for  their  character  is
transparently  evident,  and  the  provocation  that  produced  them
has  been  suflBciently  explained.  The  colonial  estimate  of  them
was  tersely  stated  in  the  remonstrance  of  the  province.  *  By
the  first,'  they  say,  *  the  property  of  unoffending  thousands  is
arbitrarily  taken  away  for  the  act  of  a  few  individuals  ;  by  the
second  our  chartered  liberties  are  annihilated,  and  by  the  third
our  lives  may  be  destroyed  with impunity.' General  Gage,

•  14  George  III.  c.  15.  »  Ihi.l.  c.  ;U).

CH.  XII.  Tni^. QUEBEC ACT.  399

who  li;i(l  for  some  years  been  commander-in-cliicf  of  the  whole
English  army  in  America,  was  appointed  Governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  entrusted  with  the  task  of  carrying  out  the
coercive  policy  of  Parliament ;  and  in  order  to  assist  him,  an
Act  was  carried,  quartering  soldiers  on  the  inhabitants.'

One  other  measure  relating  to  the  colonies  was  carried  during
this  session,  which  met  with  great  opposition,  and  which,  thougli
important  in  American  history,  is  still  more  important  in  the
history  of  religious  liberty.  It  was  the  famous  Quebec  Act,  for
the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  limits  and  regulating  the  con-
dition of  the  new  province  of  Canada.'^  The  great  majority  of
the  inhabitants  of  that  province  were  French,  who  had  been
accustomed  to  live  under  an  arbitrary  government,  and  whose
religious  and  social  conditions  differed  widely  from  those  of  the
English  colonists.  The  Government  resolved,  as  the  event
showed  very  wisely,  that  they  would  not  subvert  the  ancient
laws  of  the  province,  or  introduce  into  them  the  democratic
system  which  existed  in  New  England.  The  English  law  with
trial  by  jury  was  introduced  in  all  criminal  cases;  but  as  all
contracts  and  settlements  had  hitherto  been  made  under  French
law,  and  as  that  law  was  most  congenial  to  their  tastes  and
habits  and  traditions,  it  was  maintained.^  In  all  civil  cases,
therefore,  French  law  without  trial  by  jury  continued  in  force.
A  legislative  Council,  varying  from  seventeen  to  twenty-thr(!e
members,  open  to  men  of  both  religions,  and  appointed  by  the
Crown,  managed  all  legislative  business  except  taxation,  which
was  expressly  reserved.  The  territory  of  the  province,  deter-
mined by  the  proclamation  of  1763,  was  enlarged  so  as  to  in-
clude some  outlying  districts,  which  were  chiefly  inhabited  by
French  ;  and  by  a  bold  measure,  which  excited  great  indigna-
tion both  among  the  Puritans  of  New  England  and  among  the
Whigs  at  home,  the  Catholic  religion,  which  was  that  of  the
great  majority  of  the  inhabitants,  was  virtually  established.
The  Catholic  clergy  obtained  a  full  parliamentary  title  to  their

'  14  George  III.  c.  54.  greatly  preferred  liaving  their  triab

-  Ibid.  c.  83.  determined  by  judges  tobaving  them

=■  According  to  General  Carleton,  determined  by  juries,  and  bad  not  the

the Governor, Canada contained  lea.'Jt  desire  for  any  pojmlar  assemblies

150,000  Catliolics,  and  less  than  400  —Fan.  lligt.  xvi'i.  1H07,  13tJ8.

ProtestantvS  :  and  the  French  Catholics

400  ENGLAND IN THE EIGirn:ENTn CENTURY.  en.  vii.

old  ecclesiastical  estates,  and  to  tithes  paid  by  members  of  their
own  religion  ;  but  no  Protestant  was  obliged  to  pay  tithes.

The  Quebec  Act  was  little  less  distasteful  to  the  colonists
than  the  coercive  measures  that  have  been  related.  The  exist-
ence upon  their  frontiers  of  an  English  state  governed  on  a
despotic  principle  was  deemed  a  new  danger  to  their  liberties,
while  the  establishment  of  Catholicism  offended  their  deepest
religious  sentiment.  Its  toleration  had  indeed  been  provided
for  by  the  Peace  of  Paris,  and  on  the  death  of  the  last  French
bishop  the  Government  had  agreed  to  recognise  a  resident
Catholic  bishop  on  the  condition  that  he  and  his  successors
should  be  designated  by  itself,  but  the  political  position  of  the
Catholics  had  been  for  some  time  undetermined.  The  Pro-
testant grand  jurors  at  Quebec  had  insisted  that  no  Catholic
should  be  admitted  to  grand  or  petty  juries,  and  the  party  they
represented  would  have  gladly  concentrated  all  civil  and  poli-
tical power  in  the  hands  of  an  infinitesimal  body  of  Protestant
immigrants,  degraded  the  Catholics  into  a  servile  caste,  and  re-
produced in  America  in  a  greatly  aggravated  form  the  detestable
social  condition  which  existed  in  Ireland.  At  home  the  strength
of  the  anti-Catholic  feeling  was  a  few  years  later  abundantly
shown,  but,  with  the  exception  of  some  parts  of  Scotland,  no
portion  of  the  British  Islands  was  animated  with  the  religious
fervour  of  New  England,  and  no  sketch  of  the  American  Pe-
volution  is  adequate  which  does  not  take  this  influence  into
account.  In  this  as  in  many  other  respects  these  colonies  pre-
sented a  vivid  image  of  an  England  which  had  long  since  passed
away.  Their  democratic  church  government,  according  to  which
each  congregation  elected  its  own  minister,  their  historical  con-
nection with  those  austere  republicans  who  had  abandoned  their
native  country  to  worship  God  after  their  own  fashion  in  a  desert
land,  and  the  intensely  Protestant  type  of  their  belief,  had  all
conspired  to  strengthen  the  Puritan  spirit,  and  in  the  absence
of  most  forms  of  intellectual  life  the  pulpit  had  acquired  an
almost  unparalleled  ascendency.  The  chief  and  almost  the  only
popular  celebration  in  Massachusetts  before  the  struggle  of  the
Revolution  was  that  of  the  5th  of  November.' In  Boston,  which

'  See a  curious  account  of this 2fi-29. It  degenerated  into  a  violent
celebration  in  Tudor's  LH'c  of  Ot\»,  pji. contention Uuiwccn  diircrciit  parts  of

CH.  XII.  AMKRICAN DISLIKE TO BISHOPS.  401

was  the  chief  centre  of  the  political  movement,  the  theological
spirit  was  especially  strong,  for  the  population  was  unusually
homogeneous  both  in  race  and  in  religion.  The  Congregational-
ists  were  three  or  four  times  as  numerous  as  the  Episcopalians,
and  other  sects  were  as  yet  scarcely  represented.^

The  spirit  of  American  puritauism  was  indeed  so  fierce  and
jealous  that  the  AmericanEpiscopalians  who  were  connected  with
the  English  Church  were  never  suffered  in  the  colonial  period  to
have  a  bishop  among  them, but  remained  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Bishop  of  London.  Berkeley,  Butler,  and  Seeker  had  vainly
represented  how  injurious  this  system  was  to  the  spiritual  welfare
of  the  American  Episcopalians.  Sherlock  complained  bitterly
that  he  was  made  responsible  for  the  religious  welfare  of  a  vast
country  which  he  had  never  seen,  which  he  never  would  see,  and
over  which  he  could  exercise  no  real  influence.  Gibson  tried
to  exercise  some  control  over  the  colonial  clergy,  but  found  that
he  had  no  means  of  enforcing  his  will.  Archbishop  Tenison  had
even  left  a  legacy  for  the  endowment  of  two  bishoprics  in
America.  The  Episcopalians  themselves  petitioned  earnestly
for  a  resident  bishop,  and  stated  in  the  clearest  terms  that
they  wished  him  to  be  only  a  spiritual  functionary  destitute
of  all  temporal  authority.  '  The  powers  exercised  in  the  con-
sistory courts  in  England,'  it  was  said,  'are  not  desired  for
bishops  residing  in  America.'  They  were  not  to  be  supported  by
any  tax  ;  they  were  not  to  be  placed  either  in  New  England  or
Pennsylvania,  where  non-episcopal  forms  of  religion  prevailed,  or
to  be  suffered  in  any  colony  to  exercise  any  authority,  except
over  the  members  of  their  own  persuasion.^  It  was  urged  that
those  who  were  in  communion  with  the  Established  Church  ot

Boston.  When  the  Americans  invaded  According  to  Sherlock,  the  Episco-
Canada  in  1775,  Washingti^n  forbade  palian  ministers  in  America  were
thecommemoration,  lest  it  should  iiri-  chiefly  Scotch  and  Irish.  A  great
tate  the  Canadian  Catholics.  Sparks'  niunber  of  them  appear  to  have  been
Was/iififfton,  iii.  144.  educated  in  Dublin  University.  The
'  Tudofs  Life  of  Of-is,-p-p.  4'1&,AA7.  Massachusetts  Assembly,  writing  in
2  See  the  report  of  Bishop  Sher-  17U8  to  tlieiragent  in  England.against
lock  to  the  King  in  Council,  on  the  the  t.Txat  ion  of  America  by  England,
Church  in  the  Colonies. — Documents  say  :  '  The  revenue  raist-d  in  America,
reluti/ifj  to  the  Colonial  Tfigtorij  of  fnr  aught  we  can  tell,  m^y  be  as  con-
Neiv  York,  vol.  vii.  pp.  360-86!).  ]\iuch  stitutionally  applied  towards  the  sup-
information  about  the  condition  of  port  of  prelacy,  as  of  soldiers  and  pen-
the  Episcopalians  in  America  will  be  sioners  ; '  and  they  add,  '  We  hope  in
found  in  the  correspondence  between  God  such  an  establishment  will  never
Archbishop  Seeker  and  some  Ameri-  take  place  in  America.' — Wells'  Life
can  clergymen  in  the  same  volume.  of  S.Adam»,  i.  200.
VOL.  III. D  n

402  ENGLAND IN THE KIGIITEENTU CENTURY.  cji.  xii.

England  were  the  only  Christians  in  America  who  were  deprived
of  what  they  believed  to  be  the  necessary  means  of  religious
discipline ;  that  the  rite  of  confirmation,  which  is  so  important
in  the  Anglican  system,  wns  unkncnvn  among  them;  that  it  was
an  intolerable  grievance  and  a  fatal  discouragement  to  their
creed,  that  every  candidate  for  ordination  was  obliged  to  travel
6,000  miles  before  he  could  become  qualified  to  conduct  public
worship  in  his  own  village.  By  a  very  low  computation,  it  was
said,  this  necessity  alone,  imposed  on  each  candidate  an  expen-
diture of  lOOL,  and  out  of  fifty-two  candidates  who,  in  1767,
crossed  the  sea  from  the  Northern  colonies,  no  less  than  ten  had
died  on  the  voyage  or  from  its  results.^  More  than  once  the
propriety  of  sending  out  one  or  two  bishops  to  the  colonies  had
been  discussed,  but  the  notion  always  produced  such  a  storm
of  indignation  in  New  England  that  it  was  speedily  abandoned.
It  was  not  indeed  a  question  on  which  the  ]\Iinisters  at  all
cared  to  provoke  American  opinion ;  and  it  is  a  curiously  signi-
ficant illustration  of  the  theological  indifference  of  the  English
Government  that  the  first  Anglican  colonial  bishop  was  the
Eishop  of  Nova  Scotia,  who  was  only  appointed  in  1787  ;  and
that  the  first  Anglican  Indian  bishop  was  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta,
who  was  appointed  by  the  influence  of  Wilberforce  in  1814.

It  is  easy  to  conceive  how  fiercely  a  Protestantism  as  jealous
and  sensitive  as  that  of  New  England  must  have  resented  the
establishment  of  Catholicism  in  Canada ;  and  in  these  colonies
at  least  the  political  influence  exercised  by  the  clergy  was  very
o-reat.  Public  meetings  were  held  in  the  churches.  Procla-
mations were  read  from  the  pulpit.  The  Episcopalian  ism  of  a
large  proportion  of  the  Government  officers  contributed  per-
ceptibly to  their  unpopularity  ;  political  preaching  was  almost
universal,  and  the  sermons  of  Mayhew,  Chauncey,  and  Samuel
Cooper  had  much  influence  in  stimulating  resistance.  The  few
clergymen  who  abstained  from  introducing  polit  ics  into  the  pulpit
were  looked  upon  with  great  suspicion  or  dislike.'^  The  fast  days
which  were  held  in  every  important  crisis  diffused,  intensified,

•  Petition to Lord Hillsborough  known Tory clerfrjTnan in Boston,

from the Anglican clergy of New  He  answered  his  accusers  :  '  I  do  not

York  and New  Jersey,  Oct.  12,  1771.  understand  politics,  and  you  all  do.

MSS.  Record  Oflice.  •  •  ■ Vou liave  politics  all  the  week  :

'  This was one of the charges  pray  let  one  day  in  seven  be  devoted

brought against Dr.  Lyles, a well-  to  religion.  ,  .  .  Give  me  any  subject

CH xii.  AMKRICA  SUPPORTS  BOSTON.  403

and  consecrated  the  spirit  of  resistance,  and  gave  a  semi-
religious  tone  to  the  whole  movement.  There  were  a  few
prominent  leaders,  indeed,  who  were  of  a  different  character.
Otis  lamented  bitterly  that  the  profession  of  a  saintly  piety  was
in  New  England  the  best  means  of  obtaining  political  power.
Franklin  was  intensely  secular  in  the  character  of  his  mind,  and
his  theology  was  confined  to  an  admiration  for  the  pure  moral
teaching  of  the  Evangelists,  while  Jefferson  sympathised  with
the  freethinkers  of  France  ;  but  such  ways  of  thinking  were  not
common  in  America,  and  the  fervid  Puritanism  of  New  England
had  a  very  important  bearing  upon  the  character  of  the  struggle.
It  was  soon  evident  that  the  Americans  were  not  intimidated
by  the  Coercion  Acts,  and  that  the  hope  of  the  INIinistry  that
resistance  would  be  confined  to  JNIassachusetts,  and  perhaps  to
Boston,  was  wholly  deceptive.  The  closing  of  the  port  of  Bos-
ton took  place  on  the  1st  of  June,  1774,  but  before  that  time
the  sympathies  of  the  other  colonies  had  been  clearly  shown.
The  Assembly  of  Virginia,  which  was  in  session  when  the  news
of  the  intended  measure  arrived,  of  its  own  authority  appointed
the  1st  of  June  to  be  set  apart  as  a  day  of  fasting,  prayer,  and
humiliation,  '  to  implore  the  Divine  interposition  to  avert  the
heavy  calamity  which  threatened  destruction  to  their  civil
rights,  with  the  evils  of  civil  war,  and  to  give  one  heart  and  one
mind  to  the  people  firmly  to  oppose  every  injury  to  the  American
rights.'  The  Governor  at  once  dissolved  the  House,  but  its
members  reassembled,  drew  up  a  declaration  expressing  warm
sympathy  with  Boston,  and  called  upon  all  the  colonies  to  sup-
port it.  The  example  was  speedily  followed.  Subscriptions
poured  in  for  the  relief  of  the  Boston  poor  who  were  thrown
out  of  employment  by  the  closing  of  the  port.  Virginia,  South
Carolina,  and  Maryland  sent  great  quantities  of  corn  and  rice.
Salem  and  Marblehead,  which  were  expected  to  grow  rich  by
the  ruin  of  Boston,  ofiFered  the  Boston  merchants  the  free  use  of
their  harbours,  wharfs,  and  warehouses. Provincial,  town,  and

to  preach on  of  more consequence  the  pulpit  a  denunciation  of  the  •  exe-

than  the  truths  I  bring  to  you,  and  I  arable  house  of  Hanover.' — Mem.  de

will  preach  on  it  next  Sabbath.' La-  iMj'arjMc,  i. 38. See  too  on  the  use

fayette  mentions  how,  '  ajant  taxe  un  made  of  days  of  '  fasting  and  prayer'

ministre  anglican  dene  parler  que  du  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  the  revo-

ciel,'  he  was  much  gratified  on  the  lutionary feeling, Tucker's Life  of

following Sunday by hearing from  Jijfcrson,  i.  54,  55.

D  n  2

404  ENGLAND IN TllK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

county  meetings  were  held  in  every  colony  encouraging  Boston
to  resist,  and  the  1st  of  June  was  generally  observed  throughout
America  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer. The  Assembly  of  Mas-
sachusetts was  convoked  by  the  new  Governor,  and  soon  after
removed  from  Boston  to  Salem,  and  it  showed  its  feelings  by
calling  on  him  to  appoint  a  day  of  general  fasting  and  prayer,
by  recommending  the  assembly  of  a  congress  of  representa-
tives of  all  the  colonies  to  take  measures  for the  security  of
colonial liberty,  by  accusing the  British  Government  of  an
evident  design to  destroy  the  free  constitutions  of  America,
and  to  erect  in  their  place systems  of  tyranny  and  arbitrary
sway,  and  by  calling  upon  their  constituents  to  obstruct  the
Government  by  every  means  in their  power,  and  to  give  up
every  kind of  intercourse with  England  till  their  wrongs  were
redressed. As was expected  in Boston, the Assembly was
at  once  dissolved,  hut  the movement of  resistance  was  un-
checked. An attempt  made  by  some  loyalists  to  procure  a
resolution  from  a  public  meeting  in  favour  of  paying  the  East
India  Company  for  the  tea  which  had  been  destroyed  was  de-
feated by  a  great  majority. The  system  of  committees  charged
in  every  district  with organising  resistance and keeping  up
correspondence  between  the  colonies,  which  had  been  found  so
efficient  in  1765  and  1767,  was  revived  ;  the  press  and  the  pulpit
all  over  America  called  on  the  people  to  unite ;  and  a  '  solemn
league  and  covenant'  was  formed,  binding  the  subscribers  to
abstain  from  all  commercial  intercourse  with  Great  Britain  till  the
obnoxious  Acts  were  repealed.  It  was  agreed  that  all  delinquents
should  be  held  up  in  the  newspapers  to  popular  vengeance,  and
on  the  5th  of  September,  1774,  the  delegates  of  the  twelve  States
assembled  in  Congress  at  Philadelphia.

'  The  die  is  now  cast,'  wrote  the  King  at  this  time ;  '  the
colonies  must  either  submit  or  triumph.'  The  war  did  not
indeed  yet  break  out,  but  both  sides  were  rapidly  pre-
paring. Fresh  ships  of  war  and  fresh  troops  were  sent  to
Boston.  General  Gage  fortified  the  neck  of  land  which  con-
nected it  with  the  continent ;  he  took  possession,  amid  fierce
demonstrations  of  popular  indignation,  of  the  gunpowder  in
some  of  the  arsenals  of  New  England  ;  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion  describing the  new  '  league  and  covenant '  as  '  an  illegal

en.  XII.  MOB VIOLENCE IN AMERICA.  405

and  traitorous  comliination,'  but  he  was  unable  to  obtain  any
prosecution.  He  tried  to  erect  new  barracks  in  Boston,  but
found  it  almost  impossible  to  obtain  builders.  Most  of  the
new  councillors  appointed  by  the  Crown  were  obliged  by  mob
violence  to  resign  their  posts,  and  the  few  who  accepted  the
appointment  were  held  up  to  execration  as  enemies  of  their
country.  Riots  and  outrages  were  of  almost  daily  occurrence.
Conspicuous  Tories  were  tarred  and  feathered,  or  placed  astride
of  rails,  and  carried  in  triumph  through  the  streets  of  the
chief  towns.  One  man  was  fastened  in  the  body  of  a  dead  ox
which  he  had  bought  from  an  obnoxious  loyalist,  and  thus  carted
for  several  miles  between  Plymouth  and  Kingston.  Another
was  nearly  suffocated  by  being  confined  in  a  room  with  a  fire,
while  the  chimney  and  all  other  apertures  were  carefully  closed.
Juries  summoned  under  the  new  regulations  refused  to  be
sworn.  Judges  who  accepted  salaries  from  the  Crown  were
prevented  by  armed  mobs  from  going  to  their  courts.  Most  of
the  courts  of  justice  in  Massachusetts  were  forcibly  closed,  and
the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  informed  General  Gage  that
it  was  totally  impossible  for  them  to  administer  justice  in  the
province,  that  no  jurors  could  be  obtained,  and  that  the  troops
were  altogether  insufficient  for  their  protection.

Conspicuous  politicians,  even  members  of  the  Congress,  are
said  to  have  led  the  mobs.  In  Berkshire  the  mob  actually  forced
the  judges  from  the  bench  and  shut  up  the  court-house.  At
Worcester,  about  5,000  persons,  a  large  proportion  of  them  being
armed,  having  formed  themselves  in  two  files,  compelled  the
judges,  sheriffs,  and  gentlemen  of  the  bar  to  pass  between  them
with  bare  heads,  and  at  least  thirty  times  to  read  a  paper  pro-
mising to  hold  no  courts  under  the  new  Acts  of  Parliament.  At
Springfield  the  judges  and  sheriffs  were  treated  with  the  same
ignominy.  At  Westminster,  in  the  province  of  New  York,  the
court-house  and  jail  w-ere  captured  by  the  mob,  and  the  judges,
sheriffs,  and  many  loyalist  inhabitants  were  locked  up  in  prison.
A  judge  in  the  same  province  had  the  courage  to  commit  to
prison  a  man  who  was  employed  in  disarming  the  loyalists.
The  prisoner  was  at  once  rescued,  and  the  judge  carried,  tarred
and  feathered,  five  or  six  miles  through  the  country.*  Great
'  Moore's  Diary of  the  American  Il( volution, vol. i.  37-52, 138. This

406  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xii

numbers  of  loyalists  were  driven  from  their  estates  or  their  busi-
nesF ;  and  except  under  the  very  gims  of  British  soldiers,  they
could  find  no  safety  in  New  England.  As  the  Crown  possessed
scarcely  any  patronage  in  the  colonies  to  reward  its  friends,  all
but  the  most  courageous  and  devoted  were  reduced  to  silence,
or  hastened  to  identify  themselves  with  the  popular  cause.
*  Are  not  the  bands  of  society,'  wrote  a  very  able  loyalist  at  this
time,  *  cast  asunder,  and  the  sanctions  that  hold  man  to  man
trampled  upon  ?  Can  any  of  us  recover  debts,  or  obtain  com-
pensation for  an  injury,  by  law  ?  Are  not  many  persons  whom
we  once  respected  and  revered  driven  from  their  homes  and
families,  and  forced  to  fly  to  the  army  for  protection,  for  no  other
reason  but  their  having  accepted  commissions  under  our  King  ?
Is  not  civil  government  dissolved  ?  .  .  .  What  kind  of  offence
is  it  for  a  number  of  men  to  assemble  armed,  and  forcibly  to
obstruct  the  course  of  justice,  even  to  prevent  the  King's  courts
from  being  held  at  their  stated  terms ;  to  seize  upon  the  King's
provincial  revenue,  I  mean  the  moneys  collected  by  virtue  of
grants  made  to  his  Majesty  for  the  support  of  his  government
within  this  province ;  to  assemble  without  being  called  by
authority,  and  to  pass  Governmental  Acts ;  to  take  the  militia
oiit  of  the  hands  of  the  King's  representative,  or  to  form  a  new
militia ;  to  raise  men  and  appoint  officers  for  a  public  purpose
without  the  order  or  permission  of  the  King  or  his  representa-
tive, or  to  take  arms  and  march  with  a  professed  design  of  op-
posing the  King's  troops  ?  '  '  Committees  not  known  in  law
.  .  .  frequently  elect  themselves  into  a  tribunal,  where  the
same  persons  are  at  once  legislator,  accusers,  witnesses,  judges,
and  jurors,  and  the  mob  the  executioners.  The  accused  has  no
day  in  court,  and  the  execution  of  the  sentence  is  the  first  notice
he  receives.  This  is  the  channel  through  which  liberty  matters
have  been  chiefly  conducted  the  summer  and  fall  past.  .  .  .
It  is  chiefly  owing  to  these  committees  that  so  many  respectable
persons  have  been  abused  and  forced  to  sign  recantations  and
resignations  ;  that  so  many  persons,  to  avoid such  reiterated

very  interesting  book  is  a  collection  of  condition of the colonies. Pee too

extracts  from  the  contemporary  news-  Force's Aiiirriran, Arrhirrx (41  h

papers  on  both  sides  of  the  question,  series),  i.  747, 748, 7G7-7G9,  7U5, 12G0-

aud  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  social  1263.

en.  xn.  TROCLAMATTON OF OAGE.  407

insults  as  are  more  to  be  flc[)rec:ited  by  a  man  of  sentiment
than  death  itself,  have  been  obliged  to  quit  their  houses,  families,
and  business,  and  Hy  to  the  army  for  protection ;  that  husband
has  been  separated  from  wife,  father  from  son,  brother  from
brother,  the  sweet  intercourse  of  conjugal  and  natural  affection
interrupted,  and  the  unfortunate  refugee  forced  to  abandon  all
the  comforts  of  domestic  life.' '  Even  in  cases  which  had  little
or  no  connection  with  politics,  mob  violence  was  almost  un-
controlled. Thus  a  custom-house  officer  named  Malcolm,  who
in  a  street  riot  had  struck  or  threatened  to  strike  with  a  cutlass
a  person  who  insulted  him,  was  dragged  out  of  his  house  by
the  mob,  stripped,  tarred  and  feathered,  then  carted  for  several
hours  during  an  intense  frost,  and  finally  scourged,  with  a  halter
round  his  neck,  through  the  streets  of  Boston,  and  all  this  was
done  in  the  presence  of  thousands  of  spectators,  and  with  the
most  absolute  impunity.  At  Marblehead  the  mob,  believing  that
an  hospital  erected  for  the  purpose  of  inoculation  was  spread-
ing contiigion,  burnt  it  to  the  ground,  and  for  several  days  the
whole  town  was  in  their  undisputed  possession.'*

Among  many  graver  matters,  an  amusing  indignation  was
about  this  time  excited  by  a  proclamation  which  General  Gage,
according  to  a  usual  custom,  issued  '  for  the  encouragement  of
piety  and  virtue,  and  the  prevention  of  vice,  profaneness,  and
immorality.'  The  General  knew  that  the  Boston  preachers
made  it  a  favourite  theme  that  the  presence  of  British  soldiers
was  fatal  to  the  purity  of  New  England  morals,  and  he  now  for
the  first  time  inserted  '  hypocrisy '  in  the  list  of  the  vices  against
which  the  people  were  warned.  The  vehemence  with  which
this  was  resented  as  a  studied  insult  to  the  clergy,  convinced
many  impartial  persons  that  the  insinuation  was  not  wholly
undeserved.

'  MassachV'Xettmsis,  or  Lett'-rs  on  King's College  in New York, and

thii  Present  Troubles  of  Massachvsctts  the  most  distinguished Episco{)alian

jy^y,  Lttters  I ,  IV.  in  America. He had  written  some-

-  Ibid.  Letter  III.  These  veiy  thing  on  the  loyalist  side,  and  accord-
remarkable  lettei"s  were  written  by  inerly  received  a  letter  threatening  his
Leonard,  one  of  his  Majesty's  Council.  life,  and  was  soon  after  compelled  to
The  author  was  himself  di-ivcn  from  tlj' half-dressed  over  the  college  fence,
his  house  in  Taunton,  and  bullets  to  take  refuge  in  an  English  ship  of
were  tired  into  it. — Moore's  Dianj,  i.  war,  and  ultimately  in  England. —
38.  Among  the  numerous  persons  Documents  rehting  to  the  Colonial
who  were  at  this  time  driven  into  History  of  New  York,  \\n.  2'J7 .
exile was Dr.  Cooper, President of

408 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xn.

The  people  were  in  the  meantime  rapidly  arming.  Guns
were  collected  from  all  sides,  the  militia  was  assiduously
drilled,  and  its  organisation  was  improved  ;  bodies  of  volunteers
called  '  minute  men '  were  formed,  who  were  bound  to  rise  to
arms  at  the  shortest  notice,  and  New  England  had  all  the  aspect
of  a  country  at  war.  A  false  alarm  was  spread  abroad — possibly
in  order  to  ascertain  the  number  who  would  rise  in  case  of  in-
surrection— that  the  British  troops  and  vessels  were  firing
upon  Boston,  and  in  a  few  hours  no  less  than  30,000  men  from
Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  are  said  to  have  been  in  arms.
The  collision  was  happily  averted,  but  the  episode  gave  the
popular  party  new  confidence  in  their  strength,  and  over  the
greater  part  of  New  England  their  ascendency  was  undisputed.
The  new  seat  of  government  at  Salem  was  abandoned  ;  the  new
councillors,  and  all  or  nearly  all  the  officers  connected  with  the
revenue,  fled  for  safety  to  Boston,  and  although  the  troops  were
not  openly  resisted  they  experienced  on  every  side  the  animosity
of  the  people.  Farmers  refused  to  sell  them  provisions.  Straw
which  they  had  purchased  was  burnt.  Carts  with  wood  were
overturned,  boats  with  bricks  were  sunk,  when  it  was  discovered
that  they  were  for  the  King's  service,  and  at  the  same  time
colonial  agents  were  industriously  tempting  individual  soldiers
to  desert.

The  Congress  which  met  in  Philadelphia,  though  it  had  no
legal  authority,  was  obeyed  as  the  supreme  power  in  America.
It  consisted  of  delegates  selected  by  the  Provincial  Assemblies
which  then  were  sitting,  and,  in  cases  where  the  Governor  had
refused  to  convoke  them,  by  Provincial  Congresses  chosen  by
the  people  for  that  purpose.  Except  Georgia,  all  the  colonies
which  existed  before  the  peace  of  1763  were  represented.  The
number  of  delegates  varied  according  to  the  magnitude  of  the
States,  but  after  much  discussion  it  was  determined  that  no
colony  should  count  for  more  than  one  in  voting.  The  Con-
gress in  the  first  place  expressed  its  full  and  unqualified  appro-
bation of  the  conduct  of  the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  exhorted
them  to  continue  unflinching  in  their  opposition  to  the  invasion
of  th(,'ir  Constitution,  and  invited  the  other  colonies  to  con-
tribute liberally  to  their  assistance.  It  next  drew  up  a  series
of  extremely  able  State  papers  defining  and  enforcing  the  posi-

CH.  XII.  CONGRESS On 1774.  40&

tion  of  the  Americans.  After  long  debate  and  violent  difiference
of  opinion,  it  was  resolved  not  to  treat  the  commercial  re-
strictions as  a  grievance,  or  to  deny  the  general  legislative
authority  of  Parliament  over  America.  Franklin,  as  we
have  seen,  had  recently  contended  that  the  colonies,  though
subject  to  the  King,  were  by  right  wholly  independent  of  the
Parliament,  and  this  doctrine  had  been  formally  maintained
by  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  in  its  addresses  of  1773,
but  it  was  not  the  contention  of  the  original  opponents  of  the
Stamp  Act,'  and  it  was  not  generally  accepted  in  the  other
colonies.^  The  Congress,  therefore,  while  asserting  in  the
strongest  terms  the  exclusive  right  of  the  provincial  legisla-
tures in  all  cases  of  taxation  and  internal  policy,  at  last  con-
sented to  add  these  remarkable  words  in  their  declaration  of
rights  :  '  From  the  necessity  of  the  case  and  in  regard  to  the
mutual  interests  of  both  countries,  we  cheerfully  consent  to  the
operation  cf  such  Acts  of  the  British  Parliament  as  are  bona
fide  restrained  to  the  regulation  of  our  external  commerce  for
the  purpose  of  securing  the  commercial  advantages  of  the
whole  Empire  to  the  mother-country  and  the  commercial  bene-
fits of  its  respective  members.'  They  enumerated,  however,  a
long  series  of  Acts  carried  during  the  present  reign  which  were
violations  of  their  liberty,  and  which  must  be  repealed  if  the
two  countries  were  to  continue  in  amity. Among  them  were

'  Even  Otis,  who  had  been  the  The  same  doctrine  is  laid  down  with
first  to  denounce  the  commercial  re-  equal  emphasis  in  the  Farmer's  Let-
strictions  as  unconstitutional,  and  ters :  '  The  Parliament  unquestionably
who  repudiat  ed  writs  of  assistance  as  possesses  a  legal  authority  to  regulate
the  creation  of  the  English  Parlia-  the  trade  of  Great  Britain  and  all  its
ment,  maintained — not  very  consis-  colonies.  Such  an  authority  is  essen-
tently — that  Parliament  had  a  real  tial  to  the  relation  between  a  mother-
legislative  authority  in  America,  and  country  and  its  colonies.  .  .  .  We  are
he  deprecated  in  the  strongest  Ian-  but  parts  of  a  whole,  and  therefore
guage  any  measure  tending  to  separa-  there  must  exist  a  power  somewhere
tion.  '  The  supreme  Legislative,'  he  to  preside  and  preserve  the  connec
wrote  in  1765,  'represents  the  whole  tion  in  due  order.  This  power  is
society  or  community,  as  well  the  lodged  in  the  Parliament.' — Letter  II.
dominions  as  the  realm;  and  this  is  -  tJtory's  Constitution  of  the  United
the  true  reason  why  the  dominions  are  States,  i.  178, 1 79.  Jefferson  says  that
justly  bound  by  such  Acts  of  Parlia-  about  the  middle  of  1774  he  main-
ment  as  name  them.  This  is  implied  tained  that  the  relations  of  England
in  the  idea  of  a  supreme  sovereign  to  the  colonies  were  similar  to  those
power ;  and  if  the  Parliament  had  not  of  England  with  Scotland  before  the
such  authority  the  colonies  would  be  Union,  or  of  England  with  Hanover
independent,  which  none  but  rebels,  at  present,  but  he  only  found  one
fools,  or  madmen  will  contend  for.' —  person  to  agree  with  him. — Autobio-
Ansiver  to  the Halifax  Libel,  p.  16.  grajjhy.

410  ENGI.WD IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CKNTURY.  en.  xit

the  Acts  closing  the  harbour  of  Boston,  changing  the  constitu-
tion of  ■Massachusetts,  establishing  despotic  government  and
the  Popish  religion  in  Canada,  interfering  with  the  right  of
public  meeting,  quartering  British  troops  upon  the  colonists,  and
above  all  imposing  taxation  by  Imperial  authority.

They  pronounced  it  unnecessary  to  maintain  a  standing
army  in  the  colonies  in  time  of  peace,  and  illegal  to  do  so
"without  the  consent  of  the  local  legislatures.  They  com-
plained also  that  their  assemblies  had  been  arbitrarily  dissolved,
that  their  governors  had  conspired  against  their  liberty,  and
that  in  several  cases  they  had  been  deprived  of  their  constitu-
tional right  of  trial  by  jury  or  at  least  by  a  'jury  of  the  vicin-
age.' The  Court  of  Admiralty  tried  revenue  cases  without  a
jury,  and  the  governor  had  power  to  send  for  trial  out  of  the
colony  those  who  were  accused  of  treason,  of  destroying  the
King's  ships  or  naval  stores,  or  of  homicide  committed  in  sup-
pressing riot  or  rebellion.  All  this  mass  of  legislation  Parlia-
ment must  speedily  and  absolutely  repeal.  For  the  present,
however,  the  Congress  resolved  to  resort  only  to  peaceful  means,
and  their  weapon  was  a  rigid  non-importation,  non-consumption,
and  non-exportation  agreement,  which  was  to  be  imposed  by  their
authority  upon  all  the  colonies  they  represented  and  was  to
continue  until  their  grievances  had  been  fully  redressed.

From  December  1  following,  the  members  of  the  Congress
bound  themselves  and  their  constituents  to  import  no  goods
from  Great  Britain,  to  purchase  no  slave  imported  after  that
date  and  no  tea  imported  on  account  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany, and  to  extend  the  same  prohibition  to  the  chief  products
of  the  British  plantations,  to  the  wines  of  Madeira  and  the
West  India  islands  which  were  unloaded  to  pay  duty  in  England,
and  to  foreign  indigo.  On  September  10,  1775,  if  the  griev-
ances were  not  yet  redressed  a  new  series  of  measures  were  to
come  into  force,  and  no  commodity  whatever  was  to  be  exported
from  America  to  Great  Ikitain,  Ireland,  or  the  West  Indies,
except  rice  to  Europe ;  committees  were  to  be  appointed  in
every  town  and  county  to  observe  the  conduct  of  all  persons
touching  this  association,  and  to  publish  in  the  '  Gazette  '  the
name  of  anyone  who  had  violated  it ;  and  all  dealings  with
such  persons  and  with  any  portion  of  the  colonies  which  refused

tTi.  XII.  CONGRHSS OF 1774.  41 1

to  join  the  association  were  forbidden.  At  the  same  time  tlie
Coiitrrcss  ao-rced  for  themselves  and  their  constituents  to  do
the  utmost  in  their  power  to  encourage  frugality  and  promote
manufactures,  to  suppress  or  suspend  every  form  of  gambling
and  expensive  amusement,  to  abandon  the  custom  of  wearing
any  other  mourning  than  a  black  ribbon  or  necklace  for  the
dead,  and  to  diminish  the  expenditure  at  funerals.

In  addition  to  these  measures,  they  issued  very  powerful  ad-
dresses to  the  King  and  to  the  people  of  England  professing  their
full  loyalty  to  the  Crown,  but  enumerating  their  grievances  in
emphatic  terms.  In  the  address  to  the  people  of  England  they
skilfully  appealed  to  the  strong  anti-Catholic  feeling  of  the  na-
tion, denying  the  competence  of  the  Legislature  '  to  establish  a
religion  fraught  with  sanguinary  and  impious  tenets,' '  a  religion
that  has  deluged  your  island  in  blood,  and  dispersed  impiety,
bigotry,  persecution,  murder,  and  rebellion  through  every  part
of  the  world  ; '  and  they  predicted  that  if  the  Ministers  succeeded
in  their  designs,  '  the  taxes  from  America,  the  wealth  and,  we
may  add,  the  men,  and  particularly  the  Eoman  Catholics  of  this
vast  continent,  will  be  in  their  power '  to  enslave  the  people  of
Great  Britain.  Their  own  attachment  to  Great  Britain  they
emphatically  affirmed.  *  You  have  been  told,'  they  said,  '  that
we  are  seditious,  impatient  of  government,  and  desirous  of
independency.  Be  assured  that  these  are  not  facts  but  ca-
Imnnies.  .  .  .  Place  us  in  the  same  situation  that  we  were
at  the  close  of  the  last  war,  and  our  former  harmony  will  be
restored.'  At  the  same  time,  in  an  ingenious  address  to  the
Canadians  they  endeavoured  to  alienate  them  from  England,
to  persuade  them  that  they  were  both  oppressed,  deceived,  and
insulted  by  the  present  IMinisters,  and  to  induce  them  to  join
with  the  other  colonies  in  vindicating  their  common  freedom.
Difference  of  religion,  they  maintained,  could  be  no  bar  to  co-
operation. '  We  are  too  well  acquainted,'  they  said,  '  with  the
liberality  of  sentiment  distinguishing  your  nation  to  imagine
that  difference  of  religion  will  prejudice  you  against  a  hearty
amity  with  us,'  and  they  referred  to  the  example  of  the  Swiss
cantons,  where  Protestant  and  Catholic  combined  with  the
utmost  concord  to  vindicate  and  guard  their  political  liberty.
Having  issued  these  addresses,  the  Congress  dissolved  itseK  in

412  KNOLANl) IN THE EIGUTEENTH CENTURY.  ni.  xii.

loss  than  eight  weeks ;  but  it  determined  that  unless  griev-
ances were  first  redressed,  another  Congress  should  lueet  at
Philadelphia  on  INIay  10  following,  and  it  recommended  all  the
colonies  to  choose  deputies  as  soon  as  possible.'

Such  were  the  proceedings  of  this  memorable  body,  which
laid  the  foundation  of  American  independence.  Perhaps  the
most  perplexing  question  raised  by  its  proceedings  is  the
degree  of  sincerity  that  can  be  ascribed  to  the  disclaimer  of
all  wish  for  separation.  That  a  considerable  party  in  New
England  anticipated  and  desired  an  open  breach  with  England
appears  to  me  undoubted,  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  many  of
the  leading  agents  in  the  Kevolution  expressed  even  to  the  last
moment  a  strong  desire  to  remain  united  to  England.  It  was  in
August  1774,  when  the  Americans  were  busily  arming  them-
selves for  the  struggle,  that  Franklin  assured  Chatham  that
there  was  no  desire  for  independence  in  the  colonies.'^  John
Adams,  who  had  not,  like  Franklin,  the  excuse  of  absence  from
his  native  country,  wrote  in  March  1775,  as  I  conceive,  very
untruly,  of  the  people  of  Massachusetts,  '  that  there  are  any
that  pant  after  independence  is  the  greatest  slander  on  the
province.'  Jefferson  declared  that  before  the  Declaration  of
Independence  he  had  never  heard  a  whisper  of  disposition  to
separate  from  Great  Britain ;  and  Washington  himself,  in  the
October  of  1774,  denied  in  the  strongest  terms  that  there  was
any  wish  for  independence  in  any  province  in  America.^

The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  more  distinguished  Americans
were  quite  resolved  to  appeal  to  the  sword  rather  than  submit
to  parliamentary  taxation  and  to  the  other  oppressive  laws  that
were  complained  of,  but  if  they  could  restore  the  relations  to
the  mother-country  which  subsisted  before  the  Stamp  Act,  they
had  no  desire  whatever  to  sever  the  connection.  In  1774  and
during  the  greater  part  of  1775  very  few  Americans  wished

'  Journal  of  the  Procrediiifix  of  the  never  beard  in  anj'  conversation,  from

Congrcu  held  at  I'hilnddjihhi, Si-pt.  any  person,  drunk  or  sober,  tijc  least

1774. Sec  too  the  account  of  the  de-  ex]irassion  of  a  wish  for  a  separation,

bates  in  Adams's  Diary.  or  hint  that  such  a  thing  would be

^  He  said  to  Chatham  that, 'hav-  advantageous  to  America.' — Negotia-

ing  more  than  once  travelled  almost  tions  in  London. Franklin's  Worhs,

from  one  end  of  the  continent  to  the  v.  7.

other, and kept a  great variety  of  '  See  on this subject,  Washing-
company — eating,  drinking,  and  con-  ton's  Worhs,  ii.  401,  41)0-502.
versing with them freely, J liavc

CH xir.  DISLIKE OF INDErENDKNCE.  413

for  independence,  and  long  after  this  period  many  of  those
who  took  an  active  part  in  the  Revolution  would  gladly  have
restored  the  connection  if  they  could  have  done  so  on  terms
which  they  considered  compatible  with  their  freedom.  The
instructions  of  the  chief  colonies  to  their  delegates  in  Congress
are  on  this  subject  very  unequivocal.  Thus  New  Hampshire
instructed  its  delegates  to  endeavour  '  to  restore  that  peace,
harmony,  and  mutual  confidence  which  once  happily  subsisted
between  the  parent  country  and  her  colonies.'  Massachusetts
spoke  of  '  the  restoration  of  union  and  harmony  between  Great
Britain  and  the  colonies  most  ardently  desired  by  all  good
men.'  Pennsylvania  enjoined  its  representatives  to  aim  not
only  at  the  redress  of  American  grievances  and  the  defini-
tion of  American  rights,  but  also  at  the  establishment  of  '  that
union  and  harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies
which  is  indispensably  necessary  to  the  welfare  and  the  hap-
piness of  both.'  Virginia  aspired  after  '  the  return  of  that
harmony  and  union  so  beneficial  to  the  whole  Empire  and  so
ardently  desired  by  all  British  America,'  and  North  and  South
Carolina  adopted  a  similar  language.'  In  1775  the  Convention
of  South  Carolina  assured  their  new  governor  that  they  adhered
to  the  British  Crown,  though  they  had  taken  arms  against
British  tyranny.  The  Virginian  Convention  in  the  same  year
declared  '  before  God  and  the  world '  that  they  bore  their  faith
to  the  King,  and  would  disband  their  forces  whenever  the
liberties  of  America  were  restored  ;  the  Assembly  of  New  Jersey,
while  their  State  was  in  open  rebellion,  rebuked  their  governor
for  supposing  the  Americans  to  be  aiming  at  national  independ-
ence ;  ^  and,  lastly,  the  Provincial  Congress  of  New  York,  when
congratulating  Washington  on  his  appointment  as  commander-
in-chief  of  the  insurgent  force,  took  care  to  add  their  assurance
*  that  whenever  this  important  contest  shall  be  decided  by
that  fondest  wish  of  each  American  soul,  an  accommodation
with  our  mother-country,  you  will  cheerfully  resign  the  deposit
committed  into  your  hands.'  ^

Many  other  public  documents  might  be  cited  showing  that

'  Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  •  See  other  instances  in  Gratiame,

Congress  held  at  Pkila<iel^)hia,  Scj)t.  5, iv.  392. 395.
1774.  '  Ramsay,  i.  220.

414 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xii.

the  Americans  took  up  arms  to  redress  grievances  and  not  to
establish  independence,  and  that  it  was  only  very  slowly  and
reluctantly  that  they  became  familiarised  with  the  idea  of  a
complete  separation  from  England.  Nor  is  there,  I  think,  any
reason  to  believe  that  this  language  was  substantially  untrue.
In  March  1776  General  Reed,  in  confidential  letters  to
Washington,  lamented  that  the  public  mind  in  Virginia  was
violently  opposed  to  the  idea  of  independence.*  Galloway,  one
of  the  ablest  of  the  Penn^vanian  loyalists,  afterwards  expressed
his  belief  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  that
at  the  time  when  the  Americans  took  up  arms  less  than  a  fifth
part  of  them  '  had  independence  in  view  ; '  "^  and  John  Adams
when  an  old  man  related  how,  when  he  first  went  to  the  Congress
at  Philadelphia,  the  leading  conspirators  in  that  toAvn  said  to
him,  '  You  must  not  utter  the  word  independence  or  give  the
least  hint  or  insinuation  of  the  idea  either  in  congress  or  any
private  conversation  ;  if  you  do  you  are  undone,  for  the  idea
of  independence  is  as  unpopular  in  Pennsylvania  and  in  all  the
JNFiddle  and  Southern  States  as  the  Stamp  Act  itself.''  Adams
tells  how,  when  a  letter  which  he  had  written  in  1775  advo-
cating independence  was  intercepted  and  published,  he  was
'  avoided  like  a  man  infected  with  the  leprosy,'  and  '  walked
the  streets  of  Philadelphia  in  solitude,  borne  down  by  the
weight  of  care  and  unpopularity.' ''  Few  men  contributed
more  to  hasten  the  separation  between  the  two  countries,  yet
he  afterwards  wrote  these  remarkable  words,  *  For  my  own
part  there  was  not  a  moment  during  the  Revolution  when  I
would  not  have  given  everything  I  possessed  for  a  restoration
to  the  state  of  things  before  the  contest  began,  provided  we
could  have  a  sufficient  security  for  its  continuance.'^

In  1774  also,  it  is  evident that  a large proportion  of  the
most  ardent  patriots  imagined  that  redress  could  be  obtained

'  March ?.  and 15, 177fi. See  its inhabitants wislics an indepcn-

Wiushinc^on's  Works,  iii.  347,  348.  dency. I  am  satislied  (not  to  answer

*  E.raminatwn  of  Joseph  (Jallo-  for  our  eastt^rn  neii^-'libonrs)  a  very
tray,  p.  4.  larire majority, particular!}' in this

'  Adams'  Worlis,  ii.  512.  province, are  utter  enemies  to  such

*  Ibid.  p.  513.  In  a  cnnfidonti.al  a  principle.' — Documents  relatirifi  to
letter  from  New  York,  dated  Au^.  7,  the  Colonial  IHstonj  of  New  York,
1775,  Governor  Tryon  .said  :  '  I  .should  viii.  603.

do  jneat  injustice  to  America  were  I  *  See  Washington's  Worh^,  ii.  501

*o hold  uji  an  idea  that  the  bulk  of

t.n.  XII.  ILLUSIONS IN AMERICA AND ENGLAND.  415

without  actual  fighf  ing,  and  that  the  Legislalure  of  the  greatest
country  in  the  world  would  repeal  no  less  than  eleven  recent
Acts  of  Tarliainent  in  obedience  to  a  mere  threat  of  resistance,
'i'hcy  knew  that  numerous  urgent  petitions  in  favour  of  conci-
liation had  been  presented  by  English  merchants,  and  that
many  of  the  most  conspicuous  English  politicans,  including
Chatham,  Camden,  Shelburne,  Conway,  Barre,  and  Burke,  were
on  their  side,  and  they  overrated  greatly  the  strength  of  their
friends,  and  especially  the  eflfect  of  the  non-importation  agree-
ments upon  English  prosperity.  '  England,'  it  was  argued  in
the  Congress,  '  is  already  taxed  as  much  as  she  can  bear.  She
is  compelled  to  raise  ten  millions  in  time  of  peace.  Her  whole
foreign  trade  is  but  four  and  half  millions,  while  the  value  of
the  importations  to  the  colonies  is  probably  little,  if  at  all,  less
than  three  millions.'  'A  total  non-importation  and  non-expor-
tation to  Great  Britain  and  the  West  Indies  must  produce  a
national  bankruptcy  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.'  ^  Eichard
Henry  Lee,  one  of  the  most  prominent  Virginian  politicians,
was  so  confident  in  the  effect  of  non-importation  that  he
declared  himself  '  absolutely  certain  that  the  same  ship  which
carries  home  the  resolution  will  bring  back  the  redress.' -
Washington  was  more  doubtful,  but  he  expressed  his  opinion
privately  that  by  a  non-importation  and  a  non- exportation
agreement  combined,  America  would  win  the  day,  though  one
alone  would  be  insufficient.  John  Adams,  Hawley,  and  Patrick
Henry,  however,  were  of  opinion  that  the  proceedings  of  the
Congress  were  very  useful  in  uniting  the  colonies,  but  that  they
were  quite  insufficient  to  coerce  Great  Britain,  and  that  the
question  must  ultimately  be  decided  by  the  sword.^

In  England,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  to  the  very  last  a
great  disbelief  in  the  reality  of  a  colonial  union.  Nearly  iiH
the  rumours  of  violence  and  insubordination  had  come  from
two  or  three  of  the  New  England  States  and  from  Virginia,
and  it  was  supposed  that  in  the  moment  of  crisis  the  other
States  would  hold  aloof,  and  that  even  in  the  insurgent  colonies
a  large  party  of  active loyalists  could  be  fully  counted on.

'  Speech  of  Chase. Adams'  Worh,  '  Tudor's  lA/e  of  Otis,  pp. 256

ii.  383.  257.

■'  Ibid.  u.  362.

416  ENGLAND IN THE KIGHTEKNTU  CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

Provincial  governors  beinir  surrounded  by  such  men  were
naturally  inclined  to  underrate  the  capacity  or  the  sincerity
of  their  opponents,  and  they  thought  that  the  wild  talk  of
lawyers  and  demagogues  and  the  demonstrations  of  mob  vio-
lence would  speedily  collapse  before  firm  action.  Hutchinson,
who  lived  in  the  centre  of  the  disaifection,  and  who  ought
to  have  known  the  New  England  character  as  well  as  any
man,  predicted  that  the  people  of  America  would  not  attempt
to  resist  a  British  army,  and  that  if  they  did  a  few  troops
would  be  sufficient  to  quell  them.'  His  opinion  appears  to
have  had  considerable  weight  with  George  III.,  and  greatly
strengthened  him  in  his  determination  to  coerce.^  General
Gage  for  some  time  took  the  same  view.  He  assured  the
King  in  the  beginning  of  1774  that  the  Americans  'will  be
lions  while  we  are  lambs,  but  if  we  take  the  resolute  part
they  will  undoubtedly  prove  very  meek,'  and  he  thought  that
'  four  regiments,  intended  to  relieve  as  many  regiments  in
America,  if  sent  to  l^oston  '  would  be  '  sufficient  to  prevent  any
disturbance.'^  General  Carleton,  it  is  true,  the  Governor  of
Canada,  and  Tryon,  the  Governor  of  New  York,  though  they
had  no  doubt  of  the  ability  of  England  to  crush  insurrection,
warned  the  Government  that  the  task  would  be  a  very  serious
one,  and  would  require  much  time  and  large  armies,^  but  the
prevailing  English  opinion  was  that  any  armed  movement
could  be  easily  repressed.  Soldiers  spoke  of  the  Americans
with  professional  arrogance,  as  if  volunteers  and  militias  or-
ganised by  skilful  and  experienced  officers,  consisting  of  men
who  were  accustomed  from  childhood  to  the  use  of  arms,  and
fighting  with  every  advantage  of  numbers  and  situation,  were
likely  to  be  as  helpless  before  regular  troops  as  a  Middlesex
mob.  Unfortunately,  this  ignorant  boasting  was  not  confined
to  the  mess-room,  and  Lord  Sandwich,  in  March  1775,  ex-
pressed the  prevailing  infatuation  with  reckless  insolence  in
the  House  of  Lords.  He  described  the  Americans  as  '  raw,
imdisciplined,  cowardly  men.'  He  said  that  the  more  they
produced  in  the  field,  the  easier  would  be  their  conquest. He

'  Tiulor's  Ufe  of  Oti»,  p.  428.  '  Ibid.  p.  164.

^  (Wrmjiniiflvner of  Gforgf. TJJ.  *  See their opinions in Tudor's

n-itli  Lord  .\orth,  vol.  i.  pp.  IIM,  \'J'>. TJfr  of  Otis,  p.  428.

en.  .XII.  HESITATION" IN AMERICA.  417

accused  them  of  having  shown  egregious  cowardice  at  the  siege
of  Louishurg,  and  he  predicted  that  they  would  take  to  flight
at  the  very  sound  of  a  cannon.  '  Whether,  under  the  most
favourable  circumstances,  the  subjugation  would  produce  any
advantages  commensurate  with  the  cost ;  whether,  assuming
that  England  had  conquered  her  colonies,  she  could  permanently
hold  them  contrary  to  their  will ;  and  whether  other  nations
were  likely  to  remain  passive  during  the  struggle,  were  questions
which  appear  to  have  scarcely  occurred  to  the  ordinary  English
mind.

It  was,  however,  quite  true  that  in  America  there  was  much
difference  of  opinion,  and  that  large  bodies  were  only  dragged
with  extreme  reluctance  into  war.  In  New  York  a  powerful
and  wealthy  party  sympathised  strongly  with  the  Government,
and  they  succeeded  in  June  1775  in  inducing  their  Assembly
to  refuse  its  approbation  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Congress.^
Even  in  New  England  a  few  meetings  were  held  repudiating
the  proceedings  at  Philadelphia.^  Three  out  of  the  four  dele-
gates of  South  Carolina  in  the  Congress  declined  to  sign  the
non-importation  agreements  until  a  provision  had  been  made
to  permit  the  exportation  of  rice  to  Europe.*  The  Pennsyl-
vauian  (Quakers  recoiled  with  horror  from  the  prospect  of  war,
and  the  Convention  of  the  province  gave  instructions  to  their
delegates  in  the  Congress,  which  were  eminently  marked  by
wisdom  and  moderation.  They  desired  that  England  should
repeal  absolutely  the  obnoxious  Acts  ;  but,  in  order  that  such  a
measure  should  not  be  inconsistent  with  her  dignity,  they
recommended  an  indemnity  to  the  East  India  Company,  pro-
mised obedience  to  the  Act  of  Navigation,  disowned  with  ab-
horrence all  idea  of  independence,  and  declared  their  willing-
ness of  their  o^vn  accord  to  settle  an  annual  revenue  on  the
King,  subject  to  the  approbation  of  Parliament,  Virginia  had
been  very  prominent  in  hurrying  the  colonies  into  war,  and  its
great  orator,  Patrick  Henry,  exerted  all  his  powers  in  stimu-

'  Pari.  Jlisf.  xviii.  446,  447. See  Colden  to  Lord  Dartmout'i  (Feb.  ],

too  the  very  similar  speech  of  Eigby,  1775)  in  the Boctntwnts  reluting  to

Walpole's  Lant  JournaU,  i.  481.  the  Colonial History of  JVciv York,

-  Ramsay,  i.  14H. See,  on  there-  viii.  531,  532.

niarkable  loyalty  shown  by  the  New  *  Adolphus,  ii.  211.

York  Assembly  at  this  time,  a  strik-  *  Adams,  ii,  385.
inp letter  of Lieutenant  -  Governor

VOL.  III.  E E

418  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xn.

lating  resistance ;  but  even  Virginia  insisted,  in  opposition  to
John  Adams  and  to  other  New  Englanders,  on  limiting  the  list
of  grievances  to  Acts  passed  since  1763,  in  order  that  there
might  be  some  possibility  of  reconciliation.'  Among  the  Epis-
copalians, and  among  the  more  wealthy  and  especially  the  older
]>lanters,  the  English  party  always  predominated,  and  a  large
section  of  the  mercantile  class  detested  the  measures  which
suspended  their  trade,  and  believed  that  America  could  not
subsist  without  the  molasses,  sugar,  and  other  products  of
the  British  dominions.  There  was  a  wide-spread  dislike  to  the
levelUng  principles  of  New  England,  to  the  arrogant,  restless,
and  ambitious  policy  of  its  demagogues,  to  their  manifest  desire
to  invent  or  discover  grievances,  foment  quarrels,  and  keep
the  wound  open  and  festering.^  There  were  brave  and  honest
men  in  America  who  were  proud  of  the  great  and  free  Empire
to  which  they  belongetl,  who  had  no  desire  to  shrink  from  the
burden  of  mahitaining  it,  who  remembered  with  gratitude  all
the  English  blood  that  had  been  shed  around  Quebec  and
Montreal,  and  who,  with  nothing  to  hope  for  from  the  Crown,
were  prepared  to  face  the  most  brutal  mob  violence  and  the
invectives  of  a  scurrilous  Press,  to  risk  their  fortunes,  their
reputations,  and  sometimes  even  their  lives,  in  order  to  avert
civil  war  and  ultimate  separation.  Most  of  them  ended  their  days
in  poverty  and  exile,  and  -as  the  supporters  of  a  beaten  cause
history  has  paid  but  a  scanty  tribute  to  their  memory,  but
they  comprised  some  of  the  best  and  ablest  men  America  has
ever  produced,  and  they  were  contending  for  an  ideal  which
was  at  least  as  worthy  as  that  for  which  Washington  fought.
The  maintenance  of  one  free,  industrial,  and  pacific  empire,
comprising  the  whole  English  race,  holding  the  richest  plains
of  Asia  in  subjection,  blending  all  that  was  most  venerable  in
an  ancient  civilisation  with  the  redundant  energies  of  a  youthful
society,  and  destined  in  a  few  generations  to  outstrip  every
competitor  and  acquire  an  indisputable  ascendency  on  the
globe,  may  have  been  a  dream,  but  it  was  at  least  a  noble  one,
and  there  were  Americans  who  were  prepared  to  make  any
personal  sacrifices  rather  than  assist  in  destroying  it.

'  Adams' H'orl:'!,  ii.  384.  differencps in Congress in Adams'

'See a grapliic account of flie W'or/tf.  \i.  'M'lO,  4\0.

en.  XH.  HKSITATION IN AMERICA.  419

Conspicuous  among  these  politicians  was  Galloway,  one  of
the  ablest  delegates  from  Pennsylvania,  who  saw  clearly  that  a
change  in  the  American  Constitution  was  necessary  if  England
was  to  remain  united  to  her  colonies.  He  proposed  that  a
President-General  appointed  by  the  Crown  should  be  placed
over  the  whole  group  of  American  colonies  ;  that  a  Grand
Council,  competent  to  tax  the  colonies  and  to  legislate  on  all
matters  relating  to  more  colonies  than  one,  should  be  elected
by  the  Provincial  Assemblies  ;  that  Parliament  should  have  the
right  of  revising  the  Acts  of  this  Grand  Council,  and  that  the
Council  should  have  the  right  of  negative  upon  any  parlia-
mentary measure  relating  to  the  colonies.^  The  proposal  at
first  met  with  considerable  support  in  the  Congress,  and  it  was
finally  defeated  by  a  majority  of  only  one  vote.  Dickinson,  whose
*  P'armer's  Letters '  had  been  one  of  the  ablest  statements  of  the
American  case,  shrank  with  horror  from  the  idea  of  rebellion.
He  bitterly  accused  John  Adams  and  the  other  New  Englanders
of  opposing  all  measures  of  reconciliation,  and  declared  that  he
and  his  friends  would  no  longer  co-operate  with  them,  but  would
carry  on  the  opposition  in  their  own  way.^  The  remarkable
eloquence  and  the  touching  and  manifest  earnestness  of  the
letters  which  appeared  at  Boston  under  the  signature  of  '  ]Massa-
chusettensis,'  urging  the  people  to  shrink  from  the  great  cala-
mity of  civil  war,  had  for  a  time  some  influence  upon  opinion.
As  usual,  however,  in  such  a  crisis,  the  more  energetic  and
determined  men  directed  the  movement,  and  the  fierce  spirit
of  New  England  substantially  triumphed  over  all  opposition.
The  Congress  agreed,  it  is  true,  to  profess  its  loyalty,  to  petition
the  King,  and  to  limit  its  grievances  to  measures  carried  since
1763,  but  it  offered  no  basis  of  compromise  ;  it  demanded  only
an  unqualified  submission,  and  it  enumerated  so  long  a  list  of
laws  that  must  be  repealed  that  it  was  quite  impossible  that
Parliament  could  comply.  General  Grage  deemed  the  aspect
of  affairs  so  threatening  that  he  suspended  by  proclamation  the
writs  which  he  had  issued  summoning  the  Assembly  of  Massa-
chusetts to  meet  at  Salem  in  October  1774.  But  a  provincial
congress  was  at  once  convened.  It  was  obeyed  as  if  it  had  been

>  Adams'  Worls,  ii.  387-3S!>. Galloway's  Examination,  pp.  47-49.
'  Adams'  Work<i,  ii.  410,  4 lit.

420  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

a  regular  branch  of  the  IjCgislature,  and  it  proceeded  to  orga-
nise the  revolution.  Measures  were  taken  for  enlisting  soldiers
for  the  defence  of  the  province  ;  general  officers  were  selected.
It  was  resolved  to  enroll  as  speedily  as  possible  an  army  of
12,000  men  ^vitllin  the  province,  and  Khode  Island,  New
Hampshire,  and  Connecticut  were  asked  to  join  to  raise  the
number  of  men  to  20,000.  A  committee  was  at  the  same  time
formed  for  corresponding  with  the  people  of  Canada,  and  a
circular  was  sent  round  to  all  the  New  England  clergy  asking
them  to  use  their  influence  in  the  cause.'

Before  the  end  of  the  year  intelligence  arrived  that  a  pro-
clamation had  been  issued  in  England  forbidding  the  exporta-
tion of  military  stores,  and  it  was  at  once  responded  to  by  open
violence.  In  Khode  Island,  by  order  of  the  Provincial  As-
sembly, forty  cannon  with  a  large  amount  of  ammunition  were
removed  from  Fort  George,  which  defended  the  harbour,  and
placed  under  a  colonial  guard  at  Providence.  The  captain  of  a
King's  ship  which  was  stationed  ofif  the  province  demanded  an
explanation.  The  Governor  replied  that  the  cannon  had  been
removed  lest  the  King's  officers  should  seize  them,  and  that
they  would  be  used  against  any  enemy  of  the  colony.  In  New
Hampshire  a  small  fort  called  William  and  Mary,  garrisoned
by  one  officer  and  five  private  soldiers,  was  surprised  and  cap-
tured by  a  large  body  of  armed  colonists,  and  the  military  stores
which  it  contained  were  carried  away.  ]\Iills  for  manufacturing
gunpowder  and  arms  were  set  up  in  several  provinces,  and
immediate  orders  were  given  for  casting  sixty  heavy  cannon.

Though  no  blood  had  yet  been  shed,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to
say  that  the  war  had  already  begun,  and  in  England  the  indig-
nation rose  fierce  and  high.  Parliament  had  been  unexpectedly
dissolved,  and  the  new  Parliament  met  on  November  30,  1774,
but  no  serious  measure  relating  to  America  was  taken  till
January  1775,  when  the  House  reassembled  after  the  Christmas
vacation.  The  Ministers  had  a  large  majority,  and  even  apart
from  party  interest  the  genuine  feeling  of  both  Houses  ran
strongly  against  the  Americans.  Yet  at  no  previous  period
were  tliey  more  powerfully  defended.  I  have  already  noticed
that  Chathiiin,  having  returned  to  active  politics  after  his  long

' Ramsay,  i.  IHO.

ni.  xn.  PROPOSALS OP CHATHAM.  421

illness  in  1774,  hud  completely  identified  himself  with  the
American  cause,  and  had  advocated  with  all  his  eloquence
measures  of  conciliation.  He  reiterated  on  every  occasion  his  old
opinion  that  self-taxation  is  the  essential  condition  of  political
freedom,  described  the  conduct  of  the  British  Legislature  in
establishing  Catholicism  in  Canada  as  not  less  outrageous  than
if  it  had  repealed  the  Great  Charter  or  the  Bill  of  Eights,'  and
moved  an  address  to  the  King  praying  that  he  would  as  soon
as  possible,  '  in  order  to  open  the  way  towards  a  happy  settle-
ment of  the  dangerous  troubles  in  America,'  withdraw  the
liritish  troops  stationed  in  Boston,  In  the  course  of  his  speech
he  represented  the  question  of  American  taxation  as  the  root-
cause  of  the  whole  division,  and  maintained  that  the  only  real
basis  of  conciliation  was  to  be  found  in  a  distinct  recognition  of
the  principle  that '  taxation  is  theirs,  and  commercial  regulation
ours ; '  that  England  has  a  supreme  right  of  regulating  the
commerce  and  navigation  of  America,  and  that  the  Americans
have  an  inalienable  right  to  their  own  property.  He  fully  justi-
fied their  resistance,  predicted  that  all  attempts  to  coerce  them
would  fail,  and  eulogised  the  Congress  at  Philadelphia  as  worthy
of  the  greatest  periods  of  antiquity.  Only  eighteen  peers  voted
for  the  address,  while  sixty-eight  opposed  it.

On  February  1  lie  reappeared  with  an  elaborate  Bill  for
settling  the  troubles  in  America.  It  asserted  in  strong  terms
the  right  of  Parliament  to  bind  the  colonies  in  all  matters  of
imperial  concern,  and  especially  in  all  matters  of  commerce  and
navigation.  It  pronounced  the  new  colonial  doctrine  that  the
Crown  had  no  right  to  send  British  soldiers  to  the  colonies
without  the  assent  of  the  Provincial  Assemblies,  dangerous  and
unconstitutional  in  the  highest  degree,  but  at  the  same  time  it
recognised  the  sole  right  of  the  colonists  to  tax  themselves,
guaranteed  the  inviolability  of  their  charters,  and  made  the
tenure  of  their  judges  the  same  as  in  England.  It  proposed
to  make  the  Congress  which  had  met  at  Philadelphia  an  oflficial
and  permanent  body,  and  asked  it  to  make  a  free  grant  for
imperial  purposes.  England,  in  return,  was  to  reduce  the
Admiralty  Courts  to  their  ancient  limits,  and  to  suspend  for

*  Cliatham Corrct/Mudoice,  iv.  352.

422  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CKNTURY.  ch.  xii

the  present  the  different  Acts  complained  of  by  the  colonists.
The  Bill  was  not  even  admitted  to  a  second  reading.

Several  other  propositions  tending  towards  conciliation  were
made  in  this  session.  On  March  22,  1775,  Burke,  in  one  of
his  greatest  speeches,  moved  a  series  of  resolutions  recommend-
ing a  repeal  of  the  recent  Acts  complained  of  in  America,  re-
forming the  Admiralty  Court  and  the  position  of  the  judges,
and  leaving  American  taxation  to  the  American  Assemblies,
without  touching  upon  any  question  of  abstract  right.  A  few
days  later,  Hartley  moved  a  resolution  calling  upon  the  Govern-
ment to  make  requisitions  to  the  colonial  Assemblies  to  provide
of  their  own  authority  for  their  own  defence  ;  and  Lord  Camden
in  the  House  of  Lords  and  Sir  G.  Savile  in  the  House  of
Commons  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  repeal  of  the  Quebec  Act.
All  these  attempts,  however,  were  defeated  by  enormous
majorities.  The  petition  of  Congress  to  the  King  was  referred
to  Parliament,  which  refused  to  receive  it,  and  Franklin,  after
vain  efforts  to  effect  a  reconciliation,  returned  from  England  to
America.  The  Legislature  of  New  York,  separating  from  the
other  colonies,  made  a  supreme  effort  to  heal  the  wound  by  a
remonstrance  which  was  presented  by  Burke  on  May  15.
Though  strongly  asserting  the  sole  right  of  the  colonies  to  tax
themselves,  and  complaining  of  the  many  recent  Acts  incon-
sistent with  their  freedom,  it  was  drawn  up  in  terms  that  were
studiously  moderate  and  respectful.  It  disclaimed  '  the  most
distant  desire  of  independence  of  the  parent  kingdom.'  It
acknowledged  fully  the  general  superintending  power  of  the
English  Parliament,  and  its  right  'to  regulate  the  trade  of
the  colonies,  so  as  to  make  it  subservient  to  the  interest  of  the
mother-country,'  and  it  expressed  the  readiness  of  New  York
to  bear  its  '  full  proportion  of  aids  to  the  Crown  for  the  public
service,'  though  it  made  no  allusion  to  the  project  of  support-
ing an  American  army.  The  Government,  however,  induced
the  House  of  Commons  to  refuse  to  receive  it,  on  the  ground
that  it  denied  the  complete  legislative  authority  of  Parliament
in  the  colonies  as  it  had  been  defined  by  the  Declaratory
Act.

Parliament  at  the  same  time  took  stringent  measures  to
enforce  obedience. It  pronounced  Massachusetts  in  a  state  of

CFi.  XII.  CONCILIATORY MEASURE OF NOliTII.  423

rebellion,  and  promised  to  lend  the  Ministers  every  aid  in  sub-
jugating it.  It  voted  about  6,000  additional  men  for  the  land
and  sea  service ;  it  answered  the  non-importation  and  non-
exportation  agreements  of  the  colonies  by  an  Act  restraining
the  New  England  States  from  all  trade  with  Great  Britain,
Ireland,  and  the  West  Indies,  and  from  all  participation  in
the  Newfoundland  fisheries,  and  it  soon  after,  on  the  arrival  of
fresh  intelligence  from  America,  extended  the  same  disabilities
to  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  South
Carolina.  It  was  also  resolved  that  the  British  force  in  Boston
should  be  at  once  raised  to  10,000  men,  which  it  was  vainly
thought  would  be  sufficient  to  enforce  obedience.

At  the  same  time  North  was  careful  to  announce  that  these
coercive  measures  would  at  once  cease  upon  the  submission
of  the  colonies,  and  on  February  20,  1775,  he  had,  to  the  great
surprise  of  Parliament,  himself  introduced  a  conciliatory  reso-
lution which  was  very  unpalatable  to  many  of  his  followers  and
very  inconsistent  with  some  of  his  own  earlier  speeches,  but  by
which  he  hoped,  if  not  to  appease,  at  least  to  divide  the  Ameri-
cans. His  proposition  was,  that  if  and  as  long  as  any  colony
thought  fit  of  its  own  accord  to  make  such  a  contribution  to  the
common  defence  of  the  Empire,  and  such  a  fixed  provision  for
the  support  of  the  civil  government  and  administration  of  justice,
as  met  the  approbation  of  Parliament,  it  should  be  exempted
from  all  imperial  taxation  for  the  purpose  of  revenue.

The  reception  of  this  conciliatory  measure  was  very  remark-
able. Hitherto  Lord  North  had  guided  the  House  with  an
almost  absolute  sway,  and  on  American  questions  the  Oppo-
sition seldom  could  count  upon  90  votes,  while  the  Ministers
had  usually  about  260.  The  disclosure,  however,  of  the  con-
ciliatory resolution  produced  an  immediate  revolt  in  the  minis-
terial ranks.  Six  times  Lord  North  rose  in  vain  efforts  to
appease  the  storm.  The  King's  friends  denounced  him  as
betraying  the  cause.  The  Bedford  faction  was  expected  every
moment  to  fly  into  open  rebellion,  and  Chatham  states  that  for
about  two  hours  it  was  the  prevailing  belief  in  the  House  of
Commons  that  the  Minister  would  be  left  in  a  small  minority.
The  storm,  however,  had  a  sudden  and  most  significant  ending.
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  who  was  known  to  be  in  the  intimate  con-

424  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  rn.  xii.

fidence  of  the  King,  declared  for  the  Bill,  and  the  old  majority
Bpeedily  rallied  around  the  Minister.'

At  an  earlier  stage  of  the  dispute  this  resolution  might  have
been  accepted  as  a  reasonable  compromise,  but  in  the  midst  of
the  coercive  measures  that  had  been  adopted  it  pleased  no  one.
Burke  and  the  Whig  party  denounced  it  as  not  stating  what
sum  the  colonists  were  expected  to  pay,  leaving  them  to  bid
against  one  another,  and  to  bargain  with  the  mother-country,
and  in  the  meantime  holding  them  in  duress  with  fleets  and
armies,  like  prisoners  who  had  not  yet  paid  their  ransom.
Barre  assailed  it  with  great  bitterness,  as  intended  for  no  other
object  than  to  excite  divisions  in  America.  The  colonists  them-
selves repudiated  it  as  interfering  with  their  absolute  right  of
disposing  as  they  pleased  of  their  own  property,  and  most  later
historians  have  treated  it  as  wholly  delusive.^  With  this  view
I  am  unable  to  concur.  The  proposition  appears  to  me  to  have
been  a  real  and  considerable  step  towards  conciliation.  It  was
accepted  as  such  by  Governor  Pownall,  who  was  one  of  the
ablest  and  most  moderate  of  the  defenders  of  the  colonies  in
Parliament,^  and  it  was  recommended  to  the  Americans  by  Lord
Dartmouth  in  language  of  much  force  and  of  evident  sincerity.
lie  argued  that  the  colonies  owed  much  of  their  greatness  to
English  protection,  that  it  was  but  justice  that  they  should  in
their  turn  contribute  according  to  their  respective  abilities  to
the  common  defence,  and  that  their  own  welfare  and  interests
demanded  that  their  civil  establishments  should  be  supported
with  a  becoming  dignity.  Parliament,  he  says,  leaves  each
colony  '  to  judge  of  the  ways  and  means  of  making  due  pro-
vision for  these  purposes,  reserving  to  itself  a  discretionary
power  of  approving  or  disapproving  what  shall  be  offered.'  It
determines  nothing  about  the  specific  sum  to  be  raised.  The
King  trusts  that  adequate  provision  will  be  made  by  the  colo-
nies, and  that  it  will  be  '  proposed  in  such  a  way  as  to  increase
or  diminish  according  as  the  public  burthens  of  this  kingdom
are  from  time  to  time  augmented  or  reduced,  in  so  far  as  those
burthens  consist  of  taxes  and  duties  which  are  not  a  security

'  Chatham  Corrrspondence,\vAO?>,  '  See  e.g.  Lord  Russell's Life  of

404.  See  too  Gibbon  to  Holroyd,  Feb.  Fox,  i.  85,  8(5.

2.7,  Animal  Kcqi-Hfcr,  1775,  pp.  95-98,  '  See  his  very  able  speech, Pari.

Walpolu's  Last  Jouriialg,  i.  4(i3,  4G4.  Hist,  xyiii.  322-329.

CH.  XII.  BATTLE OF LEXINGTON.  425

for  the  National  Debt.  By  such  a  mode  of  contribution,'  he
adds,  '  the  colonies  will  have  full  security  that  they  can  never
be  required  to  tax  themselves  without  Parliament  taxing  the
subjects  of  this  kingdom  in  a  far  greater  proportion.'  lie  as-
sured them  that  any  proposal  of  this  nature  from  any  colony
would  be  received  with  every  possible  indulgence,  provided  it  was
unaccompanied  by  declarations  inconsistent  with  parliamentary
authority.^

The  letter  of  Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  governors  of  the  colo-
nies was  written  in  March.  Little  more  than  a  month  later  the
first  blood  was  shed  at  Lexington.  On  the  night  of  April  18,
1775,  General  Gage  sent  about  800  soldiers  to  capture  a  maga-
zine of  stores  which  had  been  collected  for  the  use  of  the  pro-
vincial army  in  the  town  of  Concord,  about  eighteen  miles  from
Boston.  The  road  lay  through  the  little  village  of  Lexington,
where,  about  five  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  1 9th,  the  ad-
vanced guard  of  the  British  found  a  party  of  sixty  or  seventy
armed  volunteers  drawn  up  to  oppose  them,  on  a  green  beside  the
road.  They  refused  when  summoned  to  disperse,  and  the  Eng-
lish at  once  fired  a  volley,  which  killed  or  wounded  sixteen  of
their  number.  The  detachment  then  proceeded  to  Concord,
where  it  succeeded  in  spiking  two  cannon,  casting  into  the  river
five  hundred  pounds  of  ball  and  sixty  barrels  of  powder,  and  de-
stroying a  large  quantity  of  flour,  and  it  then  prepared  to  return.
The  alarm  had,  however,  now  been  given ;  the  whole  country
was  roused.  Great  bodies  of  yeomen  and  militia  flocked  in  to
the  assistance  of  the  provincials.  From  farmhouses  and  hedges
and  from  the  shelter  of  stone  walls  bullets  poured  upon  the  tired
retreating  troops,  and  a  complete  disaster  would  probably  have
occurred  had  they  not  been  reinforced  at  Lexington  by  900
men  and  two  cannon  under  Lord  Percy.  As  it  was  the  British
lost  65  killed,  180  wounded,  and  28  made  prisoners,  while  the
American  loss  was  less  than  90  men.

The  whole  province  was  now  in  arms.  The  Massachusetts
Congress  at  once  resolved  that  the  Xew  England  army  should
be  raised  to  30,000  men,  and  thousands  of  brave  and  ardent

'  This  letter  is  printed  in  the  Docu- American  Archives  (Ith  series),  ii.  27|
mentx  relating  to  the  Colonial  Histonj 28.
of  Ncm  Yorh,  viii.  515-517. Force's

426  ENGLAND IN TIIK KlGIITKENTIl CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

yeomen  were  being  rapidly  drilled  into  good  soldiers.  The
American  camp  at  Cambridge  contained  many  experienced
soldiers  who  had  learnt  their  profession  in  the  great  French  war,
and  very  many  others  who  in  the  ranks  of  the  militia  had
already  acquired  the  rudiments  of  military  knowledge,  and
even  when  they  had  no  previous  training,  the  recruits  were
widely  different  from  the  rude  peasants  who  filled  the  armies
of  England.  As  an  American  military  writer  truly  said,  the
middle  and  lower  classes  in  England,  owing  to  the  operation  of
the  game  laws  and  to  the  circumstances  of  their  lives,  were  in
general  almost  as  ignorant  of  the  use  of  a  musket  as  of  the  use
of  a  catapult.  The  New  England  yeomen  were  accustomed
to  firearms  from  their  childhood ;  they  were  invariably  skilful
in  the  use  of  spade,  hatchet,  and  pickaxe,  so  important  in
military  operations  ;  and  their  great  natural  quickness  and  the
high  level  of  intelligence  which  their  excellent  schools  had
produced,  made  it  certain  that  they  would  not  be  long  in
mastering  their  military  duties.  The  whole  country  was  prac-
tically at  their  disposal.  All  who  were  suspected  of  Toryism
were  ordered  to  surrender  their  weapons.  General  Gage  was
blockaded  in  Boston,  and  he  remained  strictly  on  the  defensive,
waiting  for  reinforcements  from  England,  which  only  arrived
at  the  end  of  May.  Even  then,  he  for  some  time  took  no
active  measures,  but  contented  himself  with  offering  pardon  to
all  insurgents  who.  laid  down  their  arms,  except  Samuel  Adams
and  John  Hancock,  and  with  proclaiming  martial  law  in  Mas-
sachusetts. He  at  length,  however,  determined  to  extend  his
lines,  so  as  to  include  and  fortify  a  very  important  post,  which
by  a  strange  negligence  had  been  left  hitherto  unoccupied.

On  a  narrow  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Boston,  but  separated
from  it  by  rather  less  than  half  a  mile  of  water,  lay  the  little
town  of  Charleston,  behind  which  rose  two  small  connected
hills,  which  commanded  a  great  part  both  of  the  town  and
harbour  of  Boston.  Breed's  Hill,  which  was  nearest  to  Charles-
ton, was  about  seventy-five  feet.  Bunker's  Hill  was  about  one
hundred  and  ten  feet,  in  height.  The  peninsula,  which  was
little  more  than  a  mile  long,  was  connected  with  the  mainland
by  a  narrow  causeway.  Cambridge,  the  head-quarters  of  the
American  forces,  was by  mad  aljout  four  miles  from  Bunker's

en.  XII.  BATTLE OF  HUNKER'S IIILL.  427

Hill,  but  much  of  the  intervening  space  was  occupied  by
American  outposts.  The  possession,  under  these  circumstances,
of  Bunker's  llill,  was  a  matter  of  great  military  importance,
and  Gage  determined  to  fortify  it.  The  Americans  learnt  his
intention,  and  determined  to  defeat  it.

On  the  night  of  June  16,  an  American  force  under  the
command  of  Colonel  Prescott,  and  accompanied  by  some  skil-
ful engineers  and  by  a  few  field-guns,  silently  occupied  Breed's
Hill  and  threw  up  a  strong  redoubt  before  daylight  revealed
their  presence  to  the  British.  Next  day,  after  much  unneces-
sary delay,  a  detachment  under  General  Howe  was  sent  from
Boston  to  dislodge  them.  The  Americans  had  in  the  mean-
time received  some  reinforcements  from  their  camp,  but  the
whole  force  upon  the  hill  is  said  not  to  have  exceeded  1,500
men.  Most  of  them  were  inexperienced  volunteers.  Many  of
them  were  weary  with  a  long  night's  toil,  and  they  had  been
exposed  for  hours  to  a  harassing  though  inefifectual  fire  from  the
ships  in  the  harbour ;  but  they  were  now  strongly  entrenched
behind  a  redoubt  and  a  breastwork.  The  British  engaged  on  this
memorable  day  consisted  in  all  of  between  2,000  and  3,000  re-
gular troops,  fresh  from  the  barracks,  and  supported  by  artillery.
The  town  of  Charleston,  having  been  occupied  by  some  American
riflemen,  who  poured  their  fire  upon  the  English  from  the  shelter
of  the  houses,  was  burnt  by  order  of  General  Howe,  and  its
flames  cast  a  ghastly  splendour  upon  the  scene.  The  English
were  foolishly  encumbered  by  heavy  knapsacks  with  three  days'
provisions.  Instead  of  endeavouring  to  cut  off  the  Americans
by  occupying  the  neck  of  land  to  the  rear  of  Breed's  Hill,  they
climbed  the  steep  and  difficult  ascent  in  front  of  the  battery,
struggling  through  the  long  tangled  grass  beneath  a  burning
Bun,  and  exposed  at  every  step  to  the  fire  of  a  sheltered  enemy.
The  Americans  waited  tiU  their  assailants  were  within  a  few
rods  of  the  entrenchment,  when  they  greeted  them  with  a  fire
so  deadly  and  so  sustained  that  the  British  line  twice  recoiled,
broken,  intimidated,  and  disordered.  The  third  attack  was
more  successful.  The  position  was  carried  at  the  point  of  the
bayonet.  The  Americans  were  put  to  flight,  and  five  out  of
their  six  cannon  were  taken.  But  the  victory  was  dearly
purchased. On  the  British  side  1,05-4  men,  including  89  com-

428  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

missioned  officers,  fell.  The  Americaus  only  admitted  a  loss
of  449  men ;  and  they  contended  that,  if  they  had  been  pro-
perly reinforced,  and  if  their  ammunition  had  not  begmi  to
fail,  they  would  have  held  the  position.'

The  battle  of  Breed's,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  of  Bunker's
Hill,  though  extremely  bloody  in  proportion  to  the  number  of
men  engaged,  can  hardly  be  said  to  present  any  very  remarkable
military  character,  and  in  a  great  European  war  it  would  have
been  almost  unnoticed.  Few  battles,  however,  have  had  more
important  consequences.  It  roused  at  once  the  fierce  instinct
of  combat  in  America,  weakened  seriously  the  only  British
army  in  New  England,  and  dispelled  for  ever  the  almost  super-
stitious belief  in  the  impossibility  of  encountering  regular
troops  with  hastily  levied  volunteers.  The  ignoble  taunts
which  had  been  directed  against  the  Americans  were  for  ever
silenced.  No  one  questioned  the  conspicuous  gallantry  with  which
the  provincial  troops  had  supported  a  long  fire  from  the  ships
and  awaited  the  charge  of  the  enemy,  and  British  soldiers  had
been  twice  driven  back  in  disorder  before  their  fire.  From  this
time  the  best  judges  predicted  the  ultimate  success  of  America.

On  May  10  the  new  Continental  Congress  had  met  at
Philadelphia,  and  it  at  once  occupied  itself,  with  an  energy
and  an  industry  that  few  legislative  bodies  have  ever  equalled,
in  organising  the  war.^  Like  the  former  Congress,  its  debates
were  secret,  and  its  decisions  were  ultimately  unanimous.  New
York,  which  for  a  time  had  flinched,  was  now  fully  rallied  to
the  cause,  and  before  the  close  of  the  Congress,  Georgia  for
the  first  time  openly  joined  the  twelve  other  colonies.  The
conciliatory  offer  of  Lord  North  w^is  emphatically  rejected.
The  colonies,  it  was  said,  had  the  exclusive  right,  not  only  of
granting  their  own  money,  but  also  of  deliberating  whether
they  will  make  any  gift,  for  what  purpose  and  to  what  amount ;

'  See General Gape's despatch.  morninp. From  ten  to  four,  or  .somo-

Amcrican  llemembranccr, 1776,  part  tinaes  live,  we  are  in  Congress,  and

ii.,  pp. 132, 133. Kamsay,  Stedman,  from  six  to  ten  in  committees  again,

and  Bancroft.  I  don't  mention this to make you

^  John  Adams,  describing  his  liie  think  me  a  man  of  importance,  because

at  Philadelphia  to his  wife,  in De-  not  I  alone,  but  the  whole  Congress,

cember  1775,  says:  '  The  whole  (Jon-  is  thus  employed. — Adams'  Familiar

gress  is  taken  up  almost,  in  dilVerctit  jA-ttcrs,  p.  127.
committees,  from  seven  to  ten  in  the

vH.  XII.  CONGItKSS OK l"r,.  429

and  '  it  is  not  just  that  they  should  be  required  to  obh"ge  them-
selves to  other  contributions,  while  Great  Britain  possesses  a
monopoly  of  their  trade.'  Still  professing  to  have  no  desire  to
separate  from  Great  ]jritain,  the  Congress  drew  up  another
petition,  expressing  deep  loyalty  to  the  King,  and  addresses  to
the  people  of  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  Canada,  and  to  the
Assembly  of  Jamaica,  asserting  that  the  British  had  been  the
aggressors  at  Lexington,  and  had  destroyed  every  vestige  of
constitutional  liberty  in  Massachusetts,  and  that  America,  in
taking  up  arms,  acted  strictly  in  self-defence.  It  forbade  the
colonists  to  have  any  commercial  intercourse  with  those  ports
of  America  which  had  not  observed  the  non-importation  agree-
ment of  the  preceding  year.  It  forbade  them  to  furnish  any
provisions  or  other  necessaries  to  British  fishermen  on  their
coast,  or  to  anyone  connected  with  the  British  army  or  navy.
It  at  the  same  time  ordered  that  ten  companies  of  riflemen  from
Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,  should  be  raised  to  rein-
force the  New  England  army  at  Cambridge ;  made  rules  for
the  regulation  of  the  revolutionary  army ;  determined  upon  an
expedition  to  Canada ;  issued  bills  of  credit  to  the  amount  of
3,000,000  Spanish  dollars ;  established  an  American  post-office
with  Franklin  at  its  head  ;  appointed  a  number  of  general
officers,  and,  above  all,  selected  George  Washington  as  Com-
mander-in-chief of  the  American  army.

The  unanimity  with  which  these  measures  were  decreed
was  due  to  the  great  forbearance  of  many  members  of  the
Congress,  for  the  secret  debates  of  that  body  were  distracted
by  the  bitterest  divisions.  As  John  Adams  wrote,  *  Every
important  step  was  opposed  and  carried  by  bare  majorities,'
and  a  large  amount  of  jealousy  and  suspicion  was  displayed.^
Adams,  at  the  head  of  the  New  England  party,  maintained
that  America  should  at  once  declare  her  independence,  form
herself  into  a  confederation,  seize  all  the  Crown  officers  as
hostages,  and  enter  into  negotiations  with  France  and  Spain ;
and  letters  which  he  had  written  expressing  these  views
fell into  the hands of  the British Government. Dicliiin-

'  Autobiography. Adams'  Wor7;!t,  and enmities, and  provincial  views

ii. 503. 'It is almosG  impossible,'  and prejudices,  intermin2:le in the

wrote  Adams,  '  to  move  anything  but  consultation.  — Ibid.  ii.  448.
you  instantly  see  private  friendships

430  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xn.

son,  however,  supported  by  Pennsylvania  and  by  some  of  the
other  Middle  States,  insisted  upon  drawing  up  another  petition
to  the  King,  and  making  a  last  effort  towards  reconciliation  ;
and  after  a  very  angry  resistance,  Adams  was  obliged  to  yield.
Zubly,  a  Swiss  clergyman,  who  was  prominent  among  the
delegates  of  Georgia,  appears  to  have  gone  still  further.
'  There  are  persons  in  America,'  he  complained,  '  who  wish  to
break  off  with  Great  Britain ;  a  proposal  has  been  made  to
apply  to  France  and  Spain ;  before  I  agree  to  it  I  will  inform
my  constituents.  I  apprehend  the  man  who  should  propose  it
would  be  torn  to  pieces,  like  De  Witt.' '  He  objected  strongly
to  the  proposed  invasion  of  Canada  as  an  unjustifiable  aggression,
and  to  the  non-importation  and  non-exportation  agreements  as
certain  to  ruin  America.  He  openly  expressed  his  hope  that  the
present  winter  would  witness  a  reconciliation  with  the  mother-
country  ;  and  he  declared  his  opinion  that  '  a  republican  govern-
ment is  little  better  than  government  of  devils.'  ^  The  trade
agreements  were  debated  vehemently  through  several  days,
and  a  large  proportion  of  the  members  appear  to  have  held  that
the  non-exportation  agreement  would  render  it  impossible  for
the  colonies  to  obtain  the  money  which  was  necessary  for
carrying  on  the  war.  Negotiations  with  P"'rance  and  Spain
were  spoken  of,  but  as  yet  there  was  great  doubt  about  the
disposition  of  these  Powers.  It  is  curious,  amid  the  storm  of
invective  which  at  this  time  was  directed  against  English
tyranny,  to  read  the  opinion  of  Gadsden,  one  of  the  repre-
sentatives of  South  Carolina,  who  was  most  active  in  pro-
moting the  Kevolution :  '  France  and  Spain,'  he  said,  '  would
be  glad  to  see  Great  Britain  despotic  in  America.  Our  being
in  a  better  state  than  their  colonies,  occasions  complaints
among  them,  insurrections  and  rebellions.  But  these  Powers
would  be  glad  we  were  an  independent  State.'  ^

Perhaps  the  most  difficult  question,  however,  was  the  ap-
pointment of  a  commander-in-chief;  and  on  no  other  subject
ilifl  the  Congress  exhibit  more  conspicuous  wisdom.  When  only
twenty-three,  Washington  had  been  appointed  commander  of
the  Virginian  forces  against  the  French  ;  and  in  the  late  war,
though  he  had  met  with  one  serious  disaster,  and  had  no  op-

'  Adams' War  Is,  ii,  450.
'  Ibid.  ii.  466,  461>,  472.  '  H-id.  p.  474.

ciL  XII.  GEORGE WASUINGTON  431

portunity  of  obtaining  any  very  brilliant  military  reputation,
he  had  always  shown  himself  an  eminently  brave  and  skilful
soldi(!r.  His  great  modesty  and  taciturnity  kept  him  in  the
background,  both  in  the  Provincial  Legislature  and  in  the  Con-
tinental Congress ;  but  though  his  voice  was  scarcely  ever  heard
in  debate,  his  superiority  was  soon  felt  in  the  practical  work  of
the  committees.  '  If  you  speak  of  solid  information  or  sound
judgment,'  said  Patrick  Henry  about  this  time,  '  Colonel  Wash-
ington is  unquestionably  the  greatest  man  in  the  Congress.'
He  appeared  in  the  Assembly  in  uniform,  and  in  military  mat-
ters his  voice  had  an  almost  decisive  weight.  Several  circum-
stances distinguished  him  from  other  oflBcers,  who  in  military
service  might  have  been  his  rivals.  He  was  of  an  old  American
family.  He  was  a  planter  of  wealth  and  social  position,  and
being  a  Virginian,  his  appointment  was  a  great  step  towards
enlisting  that  important  colony  cordially  in  the  cause.  The
capital  question  now  pending  in  America  was,  how  far  the  other
colonies  would  support  New  England  in  the  struggle.  In  the
preceding  March,  Patrick  Henry  had  carried  a  resolution  for
embodying  and  reorganising  the  Virginia  militia,  and  had
openly  proclaimed  that  an  appeal  to  arms  was  inevitable ;  but
as  yet  New  England  had  borne  almost  the  whole  burden.  The
army  at  Cambridge  was  a  New  England  army,  and  General
Ward,  who  commanded  it,  had  been  appointed  by  Massachu-
setts. Even  if  Ward  were  superseded,  there  were  many  New
England  competitors  for  the  post  of  commander;  the  army
naturally  desired  a  chief  of  their  own  province,  and  there  were
divisions  and  hostilities  among  the  New  England  deputies.'
The  great  personal  merit  of  Washington  and  the  great  political
importance  of  securing  Virginia,  determined  the  issue ;  and
the  New  England  deputies  ultimately  took  a  leading  part  in  the
appointment.  The  second  place  was  given  to  General  Ward,
and  the  third  to  Charles  Lee,  an  English  soldier  of  fortune
who  had  lately  purchased  land  in  Virginia  and  embraced
the  American  cause  with  great  passion.  Lee  had  probably  a
wider  military  experience  than  any  other  oflScer  in  America,  but
he  was  a  man  of  no  settled  principles,  and  his  great  talents
were  marred  by  a  very  irritable  and  capricious  temper.

'  See  Adams"  Diarr. Wor7;s,  ii.  415.

432  ENGLAND IN Tlli'] EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xi..

To  the  appointment  of  Washington,  far  more  than  to  any
other  single  circumstance,  is  due  the  ultimate  success  of  the
American  Revolution,  though  in  purely  intellectual  powers,
Washington  was  certainly  inferior  to  Franklin,  and  perhaps  to
two  or  three  other  of  his  colleagues.  There  is  a  theory  which
once  received  the  countenance  of  some  considerable  physio-
logists, though  it  is  now,  I  believe,  completely  discarded,  that
one  of  the  great  lines  of  division  among  men  may  be  traced  to
the  comparative  development  of  the  cerebrum  and  the  cerebel-
lum. To  the  first  organ  it  was  supposed  belong  those  special
gifts  or  powers  which  make  men  poets,  orators,  thinkers,  artists,
conquerors,  or  wits.  To  the  second  belong  the  superintending,
restraining,  discerning,  and  directing  faculties  which  enable  men
to  employ  their  several  talents  with  sanity  and  wisdom,  which
maintain  the  balance  and  the  proportion  of  intellect  and  cha-
racter, and  make  sound  judgments  and  well-regulated  lives.
The  theory,  however  untrue  in  its  physiological  aspect,  corre-
sponds to  a  real  distinction  in  human  minds  and  characters,  and
it  was  especially  in  the  second  order  of  faculties  that  Washington
excelled.  His  mind  was  not  quick  or  remarkably  original.
His  conversation  had  no  brilliancy  or  wit.  He  was  entirely
without  the  gift  of  eloquence,  and  he  had  very  few  accomplish-
ments. He  knew  no  language  but  his  own,  and  except  for  a
rather  strong  turn  for  mathematics,  he  had  no  taste  which  can
be  called  purely  intellectual.  There  was  nothing  in  him  of  the
meteor  or  the  cataract,  nothing  that  either  dazzled  or  over-
powered. A  courteous  and  hospitable  country  gentleman,  a  skilful
farmer,  a  very  keen  sportsman,  he  probably  differed  little  in
tastes  and  habits  from  the  better  members  of  the  class  to  which
he  belonged ;  and  it  was  in  a  great  degree  in  the  administra-
tion of  a  large  estate  and  in  assiduous  attention  to  county  and
provincial  business  that  he  acquired  his  rare  skill  in  reading
and  managing  men.

As  a  soldier  the  circumstances  of  his  career  brought  him  into
the  blaze  not  only  of  domestic,  but  of  foi'eign  criticism,  and  it  was
only  very  gradually  that  his  superiority  was  fully  recognised.
Lee,  who  of  all  American  soldiers  had  seen  most  service  in  the
English  army,  and  Conway,  who  had  risen  to  great  repute  in
the  Frenfh  army, were  both  accustomed  to  speak  of  his  military

CH.  XII.  GEORGE WASHINGTON.  433

talents  with  extreme  disparageinent ;  but  personal  jealousy  and
animosity  undoubtedly  coloured  their  judgments.  Kalb,  who
had  been  trained  in  the  best  military  schools  of  the  Continent,
at  first  pronounced  him  to  be  very  deficient  in  the  strength,
decision,  and  promptitude  of  a  general ;  and,  although  he
soon  learnt  to  form  the  highest  estimate  of  his  military
capacity,  he  continued  to  lament  that  an  excessive  modesty
led  him  too  frequently  to  act  upon  the  opinion  of  inferior  men,
rather  than  upon  his  own  most  excellent  judgment.'  In  the
army  and  the  Congress  more  than  one  rival  was  opposed  to
him.  He  had  his  full  share  of  disaster ;  the  operations  which
he  conducted,  if  compared  with  great  European  wars  were
on  a  very  small  scale ;  and  he  had  the  immense  advantage  of
encountering  in  most  cases  generals  of  singular  incapacity.  It
may,  however,  be  truly  said  of  him  that  his  military  reputa-
tion steadily  rose  through  many  successive  campaigns,  and
before  the  end  of  the  struggle  he  had  outlived  all  rivalry,  and
almost  all  envy.  He  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  technical
part  of  his  profession,  a  good  eye  for  military  combinations,
an  extraordinary  gift  of  military  administration.  Punctual,
methodical,  and  exact  in  the  highest  degree,  he  excelled  in
managing  those  minute  details  which  are  so  essential  to  the
eflficiency  of  an  army,  and  he  possessed  to  an  eminent  degree
not  only  the  common  courage  of  a  soldier,  but  also  that  much
rarer  form  of  courage  which  can  endure  long-continued  sus-
pense, bear  the  weight  of  great  responsibility,  and  encounter  the
risks  of  misrepresentation  and  unpopularity.  For  several  years,
and  usually  in  the  neighbourhood  of  superior  forces,  he  com-
manded a  perpetually  fluctuating  army,  almost  wholly  destitute
of  discipline  and  respect  for  authority,  torn  by  the  most  violent
personal  and  provincial  jealousies,  wretchedly  armed,  wretchedly
clothed,  and  sometimes  in  imminent  danger  of  starvation.  Un-
supported for  the  most  part  by  the  population  among  whom
he  was  quartered,  and  incessantly  thwarted  by  the  jealousy  of
Congress,  he  kept  his  army  together  by  a  combination  of  skilJ,
firmness,  patience,  and  judgment  which  has  rarely  been  sur-
passed, and  he  led  it  at  last  to  a  signal  triumph.

In  civil  as  in  military  life,  he  was  pre-eminent  among  his

'  See  Greenes  German  Element  in  the  American  War,  pp.  142-1'14.
VOL.  III.  F  F

•434  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEKNTII CENTURY.  ch.  xn.

contemporaries  for  the  clearness  and  soundness  of  his  judg-
ment, for  his  perfect  moderation  and  self-control,  for  the  quiet
dignity  and  the  indomitable  firmness  with  which  he  pursued
every  path  which  he  had  deliberately  chosen.  Of  all  the  great
men  in  history  he  was  the  most  invariably  judicious,  and  there
is  scarcely  a  rash  word  or  action  or  judgment  recorded  of  him.
Those  who  knew  him  well,  noticed  that  he  had  keen  sensi-
bilities and  strong  passions;  but  his  power  of  self-command
never  failed  him,  and  no  act  of  his  public  life  can  be  traced
to  personal  caprice,  ambitic  n,  or  resentment.  In  the  despon-
dency of  long-continued  failure,  in  the  elation  of  sudden  suc-
cess, at  times  when  his  soldiers  were  deserting  by  hundreds  and
when  malignant  plots  were  formed  against  his  reputation,  amid
the  constant  quarrels,  rivalries,  and  jealousies  of  his  subordi-
nates, in  the  dark  hour  of  national  ingratitude,  and  in  the  midst
of  the  most  universal  and  intoxicating  flattery,  he  was  always
the  same  calm,  wise,  just,  and  single-minded  man,  pursuing
the  course  which  he  believed  to  be  right,  without  fear  or  favour
or  fanaticism;  equally  free  from  the  passions  that  spring
from  interest,  and  from  the  passions  that  spring  from  imagina-
tion. He  never  acted  on  the  impulse  of  an  absorbing  or
uncalculating  enthusiasm,  and  he  valued  very  highly  for-
tune, position,  and  reputation ;  but  at  the  command  of
duty  he  was  ready  to  risk  and  sacrifice  them  all.  He  was
in  the  highest  sense  of  the  words  a  gentleman  and  a  man  of
honour,  and  he  carried  into  public  life  the  severest  standard
of  private  morals.  It  was  at  first  the  constant  dread  of  large
sections  of  the  American  people,  that  if  the  old  Grovernment  were
overthrown,  they  would  fall  into  the  hands  of  military  adven-
turers, and  undergo  the  yoke  of  military  despotism.  It  was
mainly  the  transparent  integrity  of  the  character  of  Washing-
ton that  dispelled  the  fear.  It  was  always  known  by  his  friends,
and  it  was  soon  acknowledged  by  the  whole  nation  and  by  the
English  themselves,  that  in  Washington  America  had  found  a
leader  who  could  be  induced  by  no  earthly  motive  to  tell  a
falsehood,  or  to  break  an  engagement,  or  to  commit  any  dis-
honourable act.  Men  of  this  moral  tyjje  are  happily  not  rare,
and  we  have  all  met  them  in  our  experience ;  but  there  is
scarcely another instance in history  of  such a man having

cii.  XII.  GEORGE  WASUINGTON.  435

reached  and  maintained  (he  highest  position  in  the  convulsions
of  civil  war  and  of  a  great  popular  agitation.

It  is  one  of  the  great  advantages  of  the  long  practice  of  free
institutions,  that  it  diffuses  through  the  community  a  know-
ledge of  character  and  a  soundness  of  judgment  which  save  it
from  the  enormous  mistakes  that  are  almost  always  made  by
enslaved  nations  when  suddenly  called  upon  to  choose  their
rulers.  No  fact  shows  so  eminently  the  high  intelligence  of
the  men  who  managed  the  American  Revolution  as  their  selec-
tion of  a  leader  whose  qualities  were  so  much  more  solid  than
brilliant,  and  who  was  so  entirely  free  from  all  the  characteristics
of  a  demagogue.  It  was  only  slowly  and  very  deliberately  that
Washington  identified  himself  with  the  revolutionary  cause.
No  man  had  a  deeper  admiration  for  the  British  Constitution,  or
a  more  sincere  wish  to  preserve  the  connection  and  to  put  an
end  to  the  disputes  between  the  two  countries.  In  Virginia
the  revolutionary  movement  was  preceded  and  prepared  by  a
democratic  movement  of  the  yeomanry  of  the  province,  led  by
Patrick  Henry,  against  the  planter  aristocracy,'  and  Washington
was  a  conspicuous  member  of  the  latter.  In  tastes,  manners,
instincts,  and  sympathies  he  might  have  been  taken  as  an  ad-
mirable specimen  of  the  better  t}'pe  of  English  country  gen-
tleman, and  he  had  a  great  deal  of  the  strong  conservative
feeling  which  is  natural  to  the  class.  From  the  first  pro-
mulgation of  the  Stamp  Act,  however,  he  adopted  the  conviction
that  a  recognition  of  the  sole  right  of  the  colonies  to  tax  them-
selves was  essential  to  their  freedom,  and  as  soon  as  it  became
evident  that  Parliament  was  resolved  at  all  hazards  to  assert
and  exercise  its  authority  of  taxing  America,  he  no  longer
hesitated.  An  interesting  letter  to  his  wife,  however,  shows
clearly  that  he  accepted  the  proffered  command  of  the  American
forces  with  extreme  diffidence  and  reluctance,  and  solely  because
he  believed  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  honourably  to  refuse
it.  He  declined  to  accept  from  Congress  any  emoluments  for
his  service  beyond  the  simple  payment  of  his  expenses,  of
which  he  was  accustomed  to  draw  up  most  exact  and  methodical
accounts.

The  other  military  events  of  the  year  must  be  very  briefly

'  See  Wirt's  Life  of  Patrick  Henry.
p  F  2

43i;  ENGLAND IN THE KIGHTEENTU CENTURY.  cii.  xii.

related.  About  three  weeks  after  the  skirmish  at  Lexington  a
])arty  of  colonists  under  Colonels  Allen  and  Benedict  Arnold  had
succeeded,  without  the  loss  of  a  man,  in  seizing  the  two  very  im-
portant forts  of  Ticonderoga  and  Crown  Point,  which  commanded
Lakes  George  and  Champlain,  and  were  indeed  the  key  of
Canada,  but  which  had  been  left  by  the  English  in  the  charge  of
only  sixty  or  seventy  soldiers.  In  September,  in  obedience  to
the  direction  of  the  Congress,  a  colonial  army  invaded  Canada.
Washington  was  at  this  time  organising  the  army  in  JNIassachu-
sett5,  but  the  Canadian  expedition  was  entrusted  to  the  joint
command  of  Schuyler — who,  however,  was  soon  obliged  through
ill-health  to  return  to  Ticonderoga — and  of  Montgomery,  a  brave
and  skilful  Irish  soldier  from  Donegal,  who  had  been  for  many
years  settled  in  the  colonies,  and  had  served  with  great  distinc-
tion in  the  late  French  war.  For  some  time  the  invasion  was
successful.  Several  parties  of  Indians  joined  the  provincials.'
General  Carleton,  who  commanded  the  English  in  Canada,  with
800  soldiers  was  driven  back  when  attempting  to  cross  the
St.  Lawrence.  The  small  fort  of  Chamblee  and  the  much  more
important  fort  of  St.  John  were  taken.  Montreal  was  occupied
in  November,  and  in  the  beginning  of  December  Montgomery
Uiid  siege  to  Quebec.  He  had  been  joined  just  before  by
Benedict  Arnold,  who  had  been  sent  by  Washington  at  the
head  of  an  expedition  to  assist  him,  but  their  joint  efforts  were
unsuccessful.  The  Canadians  remained  loyal  to  England.
Their  laws  and  their  religion  had  been  guaranteed.  They  had
enjoyed  under  English  rule  much  prosperity  and  happiness.
The  Catholic  priests  were  strongly  on  the  side  of  the  English
Government.^  The  contagion  of  New  England  republicanism
had  not  penetrated  to  Canada,  and  the  Canadians  had  no  sym-
pathy with  the  New  England  character  or  the  New  England
creed.  They  were  especially  indignant,  too,  at  the  invasion,
because  on  June  1,  1775,  about  four  weeks  before  Congress
secretly  decided  upon  this  step,  that  body  had  passed  a  resolu-
tion disclaiming  any  such  intention,  and  had  caused  it  to  be
widely  disseminated  through  Canada.^  Unsupported  by  the
inhabitants,  in  the  midst  of  a  Canadian  winter,  without  large

'  Hteclman,  i.  133.  '  Compare  Lord  Stanhope's  Hixt.

-  See  Adolplins,  ii.  239. riamsay, vi. 7fi, and Bancroft, Hiri. of  t/m
i.  238,  United  Stntrx,  viii.  \li'>  177.

CM.  xiL  FIGHTING IN VIRGINIA.  437

caimuu  or  sufficient  animuuition,  Montgomery  soon  found  his
position  a  hopeless  one.  ]Iis  troops  deserted  in  such  numbers
that  only  800  remained.'  They  were  turbulent,  insubordinate,
and  half-trained ;  and  they  had  enlisted  for  so  short  a  period
and  were  so  unwilling  to  renew  their  contract  that  it  was  neces-
sary to  press  on  operations  as  quickly  as  possible.'^  He  fell  on
the  Jast  day  of  1775  in  a  desperate  but  unsuccessful  attempt
to  storm  Quebec,  and  in  the  course  of  the  following  year  the
Americans  evacuated  Canada.

In  most  parts  of  the  colonies  the  British  government  simply
perished  through  the  absence  of  British  soldiers,  but  in  Virginia
Lord  Dunmore,  the  Governor  of  the  province,  made  desperate
eflforts  to  retain  it.  Having  removed  a  store  of  gunpowder
from  Williamsburg,  in  order  to  secure  it  from  the  provincials,
he  was  obliged  to  fly  from  the  palace  to  a  British  man-of-war.
There  were  no  English"  soldiers  in  the  province,  but  with  the
assistance  of  some  British  frigates,  of  some  hundreds  of  loyalists
who  followed  his  fortunes,  and  of  a  few  runaway  negroes,  he
equipped  a  marine  force  which  spread  terror  along  the  Virginian
coast,  and  kept  up  a  harassing,  though  almost  useless,  preda-
tory war. Two  incidents  in  the  struggle  excited  deep  resent-

'  l^ancroft.  much  more  tractable.' — Washington's

*  'The New Englanders,' wrote  II'wA'«, iii. 180, 181. Washmgton

Montgomery, 'are the worst stuff  writes (Jan. 31, 1776): 'The ac-

imaginable for soldiers. They are  count  given  of  the  behaviour  of  the

homesick.  Their  regiments  are  melted  men  iinder General Montgomery is

away,  and  yet  not  a  man  dead  of  any  exactly  consonant to  the opinion  I

distemper. There  is  such  an  equality  have  formed  of  these  people,  and  such

among  them  that  the  officers  have  no  as  they  will  exhibit  abundant  proofs

authority, and there are very few  of  in  similar  cases  whenever  called

amongthem  in  whose  spirit  I  have  con-  upon. Place  them  behind  a  parapet,

fidence.  The  privates  are  all  generals,  a  breastwork,  stone  wall,  or  anything

but  not  soldiers,  and  so  jealous  that  it  that will afford them shelter, and

is  impossible,  though a  man  risk  his  from their  knowledge of a  firelock

person,  to  escape  the  imputation  of  they  will  give  a  good  account  of  the

treachery.' — Bancroft, Hist, of the  enemy ;  but  I  am  as  well con\-inced

United  States,  viii.  p.  18o. The  day  as  if  I  had  seen  it,  that  they  will  not

after the  capitulation of Montreal,  march  boldly  up  to  a  work,  nor  stand

Montgomery  wrote  to  General  Schuy-  exposed in a plain.' — Ibid. p. 277.

ler  : 'I am exceedingly  sorry that  See  too  p.  285. The  failure  and  death

Congress  has  not  favoured  me  with  a  of  Montgomery,  Washington  ascribed

committee  ;  it  would  have  had  great  to  the  system  of  short  enlistments,' for

effect  with  the  troops,  who  are  exceed-  had  he  not  been  apprehensive  of  the

ingly  turbulent,  and  even  mutinous.  troops  leaving  him  at  so  important  a

...  I  wish  some  method  could  be  fallen  crisis,  but  continued  the  blockade  of

apon  of  engaging  gentlemen  to  serve.  Quebec,  a  capitulation,  from  the  best

A  point  of  honour and  more  know-  accounts  I  have  been  able  to  collect,

ledge  of  the  world  to  be  found in  must  inevitably  have  followed.' — Ibid,

that  class  of  men  would  greatly  re-  278.
form  discipline,  and  render  the  troops

438  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. cu.  xii.

ment  throughout  America.  The  first  was  a  proclamation  b^
which  freedom  was  promised  to  all  slaves  who  took  arms  against
the  rebels.  The  second  was  the  burning  of  the  important  town
of  Norfolk,  which  had  been  occupied  by  the  provincials,  had
fired  on  the  King's  ships,  and  had  refused  to  supply  them  with
provisions.  It  was  impossible,  however,  by  such  means  to
subdue  the  province.  An  attempt  to  raise  a  loyalist  force  in
the  back  settlements  of  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas  was  defeated
by  the  arrest  of  its  chief  instigators  in  the  summer  of  1776,  and
soon  after,  Dunmore,  being  no  longer  able  to  obtain  provisions
for  his  ships,  abandoned  the  colony.  The  unhappy  negroes
who  had  taken  part  with  the  loyalists  are  said  to  have  almost
universally  perished.'

In  the  Southern  provinces,  and  especially  in  the  two
Carolinas  and  in  Georgia,  there  was  a  considerable  loyalist
party,  but  it  was  unsupported  by  any  regular  troops,  and
after  a  few  spasmodic  struggles  it  was  easily  crushed.  Most  of
the  governors  took  refuge  in  English  men-of-war ;  a  few  were
arrested  and  imprisoned.  Provincial  Congresses  assumed  the
direction  of  affairs  ;  except  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
British  soldiers  the  power  of  England  had  ceased,  and  there
was  no  force  in  America  competent  to  restore  it.  In  the  chief
towns  the  stir  of  military  preparation  was  incessant.  When
Franklin  attended  the  Congress  at  Philadelphia  in  the  Sep
tember  of  1775,  he  found  companies  of  provincial  soldiers
drilled  twice  a  day  in  the  square  of  the  Quaker  capital,  and  the
fortifications  along  the  Delaware  were  rapidly  advancing.  Six
powder  mills  were  already  designed,  and  two  were  just  about
to  open.  A  manufactory  of  muskets  had  been  established
which  was  expected  to  complete  twenty-five  muskets  a  day.
Suspected  persons  were  constantly  arrested, and  the  letter-bags
systematically  examined.  Tories  were  either  tarred  and  fea-
thered or  compelled  to  mount  a  cart  and  ask  pardon  of  the
crowd,  and  the  ladies  of  the  town  were  busily  employed  in
scraping  lint  or  making  bandages  for  the  wounded.^

Over  the  inland  districts  the  revolutionary  party  was  ss
yet  supreme,  but  the  whole  coast  was  exposed,  almost  without
defence,  to  the  attacks  of  English  ships  of  war,  and  all  the

'  Stedman. Dancroft. Kamsay,  i.  252. -  Parton's  Z(/(w>/" /'Vu/i/./i/i,  ii.  100.

cii xiT.  NEGROES AND INDIANS.  431)

chief  towns  in  America  were  seaport.  The  Americans  pos-
sessed a  large  popuhition  of  seafaring  men  who  were  eminently
fitted  for  maritime  warfare,  but  they  had  as  yet  not  a  single
ship  of  war.  The  Government  made  large  offers  to  gunsmithy
to  induce  them  to  abandon  America  for  England  '  The  manu-
facture of  gunpowder  was  only  slowly  organised,  and  for  many
months  the  colonial  forces  were  often  in  extreme  danger  in
consequence  of  the  scantiness  of  their  supply.  It  was  wisely
determined  to  pay  the  provincial  troops  and  to  pay  them  well ;
but  as  all  foreign  commerce  was  arrested,  and  as  most  forms
of  industry  were  dislocated,  there  was  very  little  money  in
the  country,  and  paper  was  speedily  depreciated.  Some  of  the
necessaries  of  life  had  hitherto  been  imported  from  England,
and  the  great  want  of  native  woollen  goods  was  especially  felt
in  the  rigour  of  the  first  winter  of  the  war.

Though  the  negroes,  who  were  so  numerous  in  the  Southern
States,  were  a  cause  of  great  anxiety  to  the  colonists,^  they  re-
mained at  this  time,  with  few  exceptions,  perfectly  passive ;
but  one  of  the  first  consequences  of  the  appeal  to  arms  was  to
bring  Indian  tribes  into  the  field.  In  the  great  French  war
they  had  been  constantly  employed  by  the  French  and  fre-
quently by  the  English,  and  it  was  not  likely  that  so  formidable
a  weapon  would  be  long  unused.  Neither  side,  it  is  true,
desired  a  general  Indian  rising.  Neither  side  can  be  justly
accused  of  the  great  crime  of  inciting  the  Indians  to  indiscrimi-
nate massacre  or  plunder,  but  both  sides  were  ready  to  employ
them  as  auxiliaries.  Before  the  battle  of  Lexington  the  Provin-
cial Congress  of  Massachusetts  formed  a  company  out  of  Stock-
bridge  Indians  residing  in  the  colony.^  In  the  beginning  of
April  1775  they  issued  an  address  to  the  Mohawk  Indians  exhort-
ing them  '  to  whet  the  hatchet '  for  war  against  the  English,^

'  See  a  letter  of  Governor  Tryon,  groes who would join his camp,

Documents relating to  the Colonial  20,000  negroes  would  join  it  from  the

llistorii  of  New  York,  viii.  647.  two provinces  in a fortnight.  .  .  .

'^  Thus  J.  Adams  in  1775  gives  an  Their  only  security  is  that  all  the
account  of  an  interview  with  some  King's  friends  and  tools  of  Govern-
gentlemen  from  Georgia.  '  These  ment  have  large  plantations  and  pro-
gentlemen  give  a  melancholy  account  perty  in  negroes,  so  that  the  slaves  of
of  the  State  of  Georgia  and  South  the  Tories  would  be  lost  as  well  as
Carolina.  They  say  that  if  1,000  re-  those  of  the  Whigs. — Adams'  Works,
gular  troops  should  land  in  Georgia,  ii.  428.

and their commander  be  provided  ^  Washington's  Worls,\\\.\7o.

witli  arms  and  clothes  cnougli,  and  *  Yoxcc's  American  Archives  (tth

proclaim freedom to all the re-  series),  i.  134!),  18.30,

4-40  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTII CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

and  Indians  were,  as  we  have  seen,  employed  by  the  Provincials
in  their  invasion  of  Canada.  In  March  1775  Mr.  Stuart,  who
managed  Indian  alTairs  for  the  Government  in  the  Southern
colonies,  reported  to  the  Government  that  General  Gage  had
informed  him  '  that  ill-aflfected  people  in  those  parts  had  been
endeavouring  to  poison  the  minds  of  the  Indians  of  the  six
nations  and  other  tribes  with  jealousies,  in  order  to  alienate  their
affection  from  his  Majesty,''  and  New  England  missionaries
appear  to  have  been  in  this  respect  especially  active.^  Up
to  the  middle  of  this  year  the  English  professed  great  re-
luctance to  make  use  of  savages.  In  July,  Stuart  wrote  very
emphatically  to  the  Eevolutionary  Committee  of  Intelligence
at  Charleston,  which  had  expressed  suspicions  on  this  subject.
'  I  never  have  received  any  orders  from  my  superiors  which  by
the  most  tortured  construction  could  be  interpreted  to  spirit
up  or  employ  the  Indians  to  fall  upon  the  frontier  inhabitants,
or  to  take  any  part  in  the  disputes  between  Great  Britain  and
her  colonies,'^  and  both  English  and  colonists  exhorted  the
Indians  as  a  body  to  remain  neutral.*  It  is,  however,  certain
that  in  the  beginning  of  June  1775,  Colonel  Guy  Johnson,
who  had  succeeded  Sir  William  Johnson  in  the  direction  of
one  great  department  of  Indian  affairs,  had,  in  obedience  to
secret  instructions  from  General  Gage,  induced  a  large  body
of  Indians  to  undertake  '  to  assist  his  Majesty's  troops  in  their
operations in Canada,'^  and  in  July  this  policy  was  openly

'  March  28,  1775. MSS. Record  sent  by the  twelve colonies had  a

Office  (Plantations,  General).  long interview with the chiefs of

*  Documents  relating  to  the  Colo-  the  six  nations,  and  gave  them  an
nial  IIixti}ry  of  Nero  York,  viii.  656,  elaborate  account  of  the  motives
657.  See  too  a  letter  of  the  Provin-  which  had  united  them  against  Eng-
cial  Congress,  dated  April  4,  1775,  to  land.  They  added,  however  :  '  This  is
a  Ni-77  England  missionarj%  urging  a  family  quarrel  between  us  and  Old
him  to  use  his  influence  to  make  the  England.  You  Indians  are  not  con-
Indians  take  up  arms  against  the  Eng-  cerned  in  it.  We  do  not  wish  you  to
lish. Wa-^hington's  Works,  Vu.  Vdb.  take  up  the  hatchet  against  the  King's

'  July 18, 1775. M8S. Record  troops. We  desire  you  to  remain  at

Office.  home  and  not  join  cither  side,  but

*  In  a  speech  to  the  Indians,  keep  the  hatchet  buried  deep.' —
August  30,  1775,  Stuart  said  :  '  There  Documents  relati/if/  to  the  Coloniul
is  a  di/Terence  between  the  white  Higtory  of  New  York,  viii.  610.  See
people  of  England  and  the  white  too  the  Secret  Journals  of  Congress,
people  of  America;  this  is  a  matter  July  17,  1775.

which  docs  not  concern  j'ou,  they  will  *  Documents  relating  to  the Colo-

decide  it  among  themselves.' — MSS.  nial  Hist,  of  New  York,  win.  ()'A&. See

Record  l)ffico  (Plantations,  General).  Secret  Journals  of  Congress,  June  27

In  August 1775,  tlic  Commissioners  1775.

cii.  XII.  AMERICAN LOYALISTS.  441

avowed  by  Lord  Dart  month.  It  was  defended  on  the  gnjiind
tluit  the  Americans  had  themselves  adopted  it.'

Few  things  were  more  terrible  to  the  Americans  than  the
scourge  of  Indian  war.  As  it  had  generally  been  the  function
jf  the  Government  to  protect  the  savages  against  the  rapacity
and  violence  of  the  colonists,  England  could  count  largely
upon  their  gratitude,  and  the  horrors  which  never  failed  to
multiply  in  their  track  gave  a  darker  hue  of  animosity  to  the
struggle.

But  the  greatest  danger  to  the  colonial  cause  was  the  half-
heartedness  of  its  supporters.  It  is  difficult  or  impossible  to
form  any  safe  conjecture  of  the  number  of  real  loyalists  in
America,  but  it  is  certain  that  it  was  very  considerable.  John
Adams,  who  would  naturally  be  inclined  to  overrate  the  pre-
ponderance in  favour  of  independence,  declared  at  the  end  of
the  war  his  belief  that  a  third  part  of  the  whole  population,
more  than  a  third  part  of  the  principal  persons  in  America,
were  throughout  opposed  to  the  Kevolution.^  Massachusetts
was  of  all  the  provinces  the  most  revolutionary,  but  when
General  Gage  evacuated  Boston  in  1776  he  was  accompanied

'  July  24,  1775,  Lord  Dartmouth  savages  they  could  against  us  here,
wrote  to  Colonel  Johnson  :  '  The  un-  who  with  their  riflemen  are  continu-
natural  rebellion  now  raging  in  ally  firing  on  our  advanced  sentries.'
America  calls  for  evcrj'  effort  to  sup-  — MSS.  Record  Office.  On  October
press  it,  and  the  intelhgence  his  Ma-  2-t,  1775,  Stuart  sent  ammunition
jesty  has  received  of  the  rebels  Laving  to  the  savages  according  to  instruc-
excited  the  Indians  to  take  a  part,  tions,  adding :  '  You  will  understand
and  of  their  having  actually  engaged  that  an  indiscriminate  attack  upon
a  body  of  them  in  arms  to  support  the  province  is  not  meant,  but  to
their  rebellion,  justifies  the  resolu-  act  in  the  execution  of  any  concerted
tion  his  Majesty  has  taken  of  re-  plan,  and  to  assist  his  JIajesty's
quiring  the  assistance  of  his  faithful  troops  or  friends  in  distressing  the
adherents  the  six  nations.  It  is,  rebels.'  — Ibid.  On  November  20,
therefore,  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that  1775,  Lord  North  said  in  Parliament:
you  lose  no  time  in  taking  such  steps  '  As  to  the  means  of  conducting  the
as  may  induce  them  to  take  up  the  war,  he  declared  there  was  never  any
hatchet  against  his  Majesty's  rebel-  idea  of  employing  the  negroes  or  the
lious  subjects.' — JDocuments  on  the  Indians  until  the  Americans  them-
Colonial  Histm'i/  of  Ketv  York,  viii.  selves  had  first  applied  to  them  ;  that
596.  General  Gage  wrote  to  Stuart  General  Carleton  did  then  apply  to
(September  12,  1775)  telling  him  to  them,  and  that  even  then  it  was  only
hold  a  correspondence  with  the  In-  for  the  defence  of  his  own  province.'
dians,  'to  make  them  take  arms  — Pav/. //«.•;!'.  xviii.  904.
against  his  Majesty's  enemies,  and  to  -  Adams'  Works,  x.  87.  Many  par-
distress  them  all  in  their  power,  for  ticulars  about  the  strength  of  the
no  terms  are  now  to  be  kept  with  loyalist  part}'  will  be  fuund  in  Mr.
thera.'  '  The  rebels,'  he  continues,  Sabine's  very  interesting  book.  The
•have  themselves  opened  the  door.  Loyaluts  of  America.
They have brought down all the

442  ENGLAND IN Till-: EIclHTHENTH CENTURY.  ui.  xii.

l)y  more  than  1,0()U  loyalists  of  that  towu  aud  of  the  neigh-
lx)uring  country.  Two-thirds  of  the  property  of  New  York
was  supposed  to  belong  to  Tories,  and  except  in  the  city  there
appears  to  have  been  no  serious  disaflfection.'  In  some  of  the
Southern  colonies  they  were  believed  to  form  nearly  half  the
population,  and  there  was  no  colony  in  which  thf;y  were  not
largely  represented.  There  were  also  great  multitudes  who,
though  they  would  never  take  up  arms  for  the  King,  though
they  perhaps  agreed  with  the  constitutional  doctrines  of  the
Kevolutionists,  dissented  on  grounds  of  principle,  policy,  or
interest  from  the  course  which  they  were  adopting.  There
were  those  who  wished  to  wait  till  the  natural  increase  of  the
colonies  made  coercion  manifestly  impossible,  who  feared  to
stake  acknowledged  liberties  on  the  doubtful  issue  of  an  armed
struggle,  who  shrank  from  measures  that  would  destroy  their
private  fortunes,  who  determined  to  stand  aloof  till  the  event
showed  which  side  was  likely  to  win,  who  still  dreamed  of  the
possibility  of  resisting  the  Parliament  without  casting  off  alle-
giance to  the  Crown.  If  America  succeeded  in  throwing  off
the  yoke  of  England,  it  could  hardly  be  without  the  assistance
of  France,  and  many  feared  that  France  would  thus  acquire  a
power  on  the  Continent  far  more  dangerous  than  that  of
England  to  the  liberties  of  the  colonies.  Was  it  not  likely,  too,
that  an  independent  America  would  degenerate,  as  so  many  of
the  best  judges  had  predicted,  into  a  multitude  of  petty,  he-
terogeneous, feeble,  and  perhaps  hostile  States  ?  Was  it  not
certain  that  the  cost  of  the  struggle  and  the  burden  of  inde-
pendence would  drain  its  purse  of  far  more  money  than  Eng-
land was  ever  likely  to  ask  for  the  defence  of  her  Empire?
Was  it  not  possible  that  the  lawless  and  anarchical  spirit  which
had  of  late  years  been  steadily  growing,  aud  which  the  patriotic
]);irty  had  actively  encouraged,  would  gain  the  upper  hand,  and
that  the  whole  fabric  of  society  would  be  dissolved  ?  Jolui
Adams  in  his  Diary  relates  the  '  profound  melancholy '  which
fell  upon  him  in  one  of  the  most  critical  moments  of  the
struggle,  when  a  man  whom  he  knew  to  be  a  horse-jockey  and
a  cheat,  and  whom, as  an  advocate, he  had  often  defended  in  the

Purl.  I/ist.  xviii.  123-12!).  Sparks' ZfAw/ 1F«a7«';/(/^om.  Force's  American
Archives  (Itb  scries),  i.  773,  1)57.

cii.  XII.  GENERAL APATHY.  443

law  courts,  came  to  him  and  expressed  the  unbounded  gratitude
which  he  felt  for  the  great  things  which  Adams  and  his  col-
leagues had  done.  '  We  can  never,'  he  said,  '  be  grateful
enough  to  you.  There  are  now  no  courts  of  justice  in  this
province,  and  I  hope  there  will  never  be  another.'  *  Is  this  the
object,'  Adams  continued,  '  for  which  I  have  been  contending  ?
said  I  to  myself.  .  .  .  Are  these  the  sentiments  of  such  people,
and  ho\Y  many  of  them  are  there  in  the  country  ?  Half  the
nation,  for  what  I  know ;  for  half  the  nation  are  debtors,  if  not
more,  and  these  have  been  in  all  countries  the  sentiments  of
debtors.  If  the  power  of  the  country  should  get  into  such
hands — and  there  is  great  danger  that  it  will — to  what  purpose
have  we  sacrificed  our  time,  health,  and  everything  else  ? ' '

Misgivings  of  this  kind  must  have  passed  through  many
minds,  and  the  older  colonists  were  not  of  the  stuff  of  which
ardent  soldiers  are  made.  Among  the  poor,  vagrant,  adven-
turous immigrants  who  had  lately  poiured  in  by  thousands  from
Ireland  and  Scotland,  there  was  indeed  a  keen  military  spirit,
and  it  was  these  men  who  ultimately  bore  the  chief  part  in  the
war  of  independence  ;  but  the  older  and  more  settled  colonists
were  men  of  a  very  different  type.  Shrewd,  prosperous,  and
well-educated  farmers,  industrious,  money-loving,  and  emi-
nently domestic,  they  were  men  who,  if  they  were  compelled
to  fight,  would  do  so  with  courage  and  intelligence,  but  who
cared  little  or  nothing  for  military  glory,  and  grudged  every
hour  that  separated  them  from  their  families  and  their  farms.
Such  men  were  dragged  very  reluctantly  into  the  struggle.
The  American  Eevolution,  like  most  others,  was  the  work  of  an
energetic  minority,  who  succeeded  in  committing  an  undecided
and  fluctuating  majority  to  courses  for  which  they  had  little
love,  and  leading  them  step  by  step  to  a  position  from  which
it  was  impossible  to  recede.^ To  the  last,  however,  we  find

•  Adams'  Worl's,  ii.  420.  was  a  very  able  and  honest  man,  and

2  One  of  the  most  remarkable  docu-  he had much more than common

ments  relating  to  the  state  of  opinion  means  of  forming  a  correct  judgment,

in America is the examination of  lie  sa}s,  ' I  do  not  believe,  from  the

Gallo\va,v  (late  Speaker  of  the  House  best  knowledge  I  have  of  that  time

of  Assembly  in Pennsylvania")  by  a  [the  beginning  of  the  rebellion],  that

Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  one-fifth of the people had inde-

June 16, 1779. As a loyalist, his  pendence  in  view.  .  .  .  Many  of  those

mind  was  no  doubt  biassed,  but  he  who  have  appeared  in  support  of  the

•144

KNGLAND IN TIIK EUlllTKKNTH CKNTUKY.

vac'illatiou,  uncertainty,  half-measures,  and  in  large  classes  a
great  apparent  apathy.  In  June  1775,  the  Provincial  Con-
gress of  New  York  received  two  startling  pieces  of  intelligence,
that  Washington  was  about  to  pass  through  their  city  on  his  way
to  Cambridge,  and  that  Tryon,  the  royal  governor,  had  just
arrived  in  the  harbour.  The  Congress,  though  it  was  an  essen-
tially Whig  body,  and  had  assumed  an  attitude  which  was
virtually  rebellion,  still  dreaded  the  necessity  of  declaring
itself  irrevocably  on  either  side,  and  it  ultimately  ordered
the  colonel  of  militia  to  dispose  of  his  troops  so  as  to  receive
'  either  the  General  or  Governor  Tryon,  whichever  should
first  arrive,  and  wait  on  both  as  well  as  circumstances  would
admit.' '  The  dominant  Quaker  party  of  Pennsylvania  was  at
least  as  hostile  to  rebellion  as  to  imperial  taxation,  and
Chastellux  justified  the  very  democratic  institutions  which
P^ranklin  established  in  that  province  when  the  Revolution
had  begun,  on  the  ground  that  '  it  was  necessary  to  employ  a
sort  of  seduction  in  order  to  conduct  a  timid  and  avaricious
people  to  independence,  who  were  besides  so  divided  in  their
opinions  that  the  Republican  party  was  scarcely  stronger  than
the  other.'  ^  In  every  Southern  colony  a  similar  division  and  a
similar  hesitation  may  be  detected.

present  rebellion  have  by  a  variety  of
means  been  compelled.  ...  I  think
1  may  venture  to  say  that  many  more
*han  four-fifths  of  the  people  would
prefer  an  union  with  Great  Britain
upon  constitutional  principles  to  that
of  independence.'  Galloway  was
asked  the  following  question  :  '  That
part  of  the  rebel  army  that  enlisted
in  the  service  of  the  Congress — were
they  chieliy  composed  of  natives  of
America, or  were  the  greatest  jmrt  of
them  P^nglish,  Scotch,  and  Irish  ? '
Galloway  answered,  '  Tlie  names  and
places  of  their  nativity  being  taken
down,  I  can  answer  tlie  question  with
l)reci.sion.  There  were  scarcely  one-
fourth  natives  of  America— about,
one-half  Irish— the  other  fourth  were
English  and  Scotch.'  This  last
answer,  however,  must  be  qualilied
V)y  a  subsequent  answer,  tliat  he
judged  of  the  country  of  the  troops
by  the  deserters  wlio  came  over  to
the  numV)er  of  between  2,000  and
:?,000,  at  the  time  when  Galloway  was
with  SirW.  lluwcat  riiiladclohia. I

have  no  doubt  that  in  the  beginning
of  the  war  the  proportion  of  pure
Americans  in  the  army  was  much
larger,  as  it  was  chiefly  recruited  in
New  p]ngland,  wliere  the  population
was  most  unmixed.  It  is  stated  that
more  than  a  fourth  part  of  the  conti-
nental soldiers  employed  during  the
war  were  from  Massachusetts.  See
Greene's  Historical  View  of  ths  AmcH-
can  Ili'Toliition,-^.  235.  Galloway's  very
remarkable  evidence  was  reprinted  at
Philadelphia  in  1855.  In  his  Lctterx
to  a  Kohk-man  on  the  Conduct  of  the
War,  Galloway  reiterates  his  asser-
tion that  '  three-fourths  of  the  rebel
army  have  been  generally  composed
of  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish,  while
scarcely  the  small  proportion  of  one-
fourth  are  American,  notwithstanding
the  severe  and  arbitrary  laws  to  force
them  into  the  service.' — P.  25.

'  See  a  curious  note  in  Washing-
ton's Workx,  iii.  8.

■^  Chasteilu.x,  Travels  in,  .\orth
America,  Eng.  trans,  i.  'SA2.

cu.  XII.  DEFECTS OF THE AMEIJICAX ARMY,  445

The  result  of  all  this  was,  that  there  was  much  less  genuine
militr^ry  enthusiasm  than  might  have  been  expected.  When
Washington  arrived  at  Cambridge  to  command  the  army,he  found
that  it  nominally  consisted  of  about  17,000  men,  but  that  not
more  than  14,500  were  actually  available  for  service,  and  they
had  to  guard  a  line  extending  for  nearly  twelve  miles,  in  face  of
a  force  of  at  least  9,000  regular  troops,  besides  seamen  and
loyalists.  Urgent  demands  were  made  to  the  different  colonies
to  send  recrmts,  but  they  were  very  imperfectly  responded  to.
Colonel  Lee,  in  a  remarkable  letter  on  the  military  prospects
of  the  Americans,  estimated  that  in  three  or  four  months  the
colonists  could  easily  have  an  efficient  army  of  100,000  infantry.'
As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  month's  recruiting  during  this  most
critical  period  produced  only  5,000  men.  There  was  abundant
courage  and  energy  among  the  soldiers,  but  there  was  very  little
subordination,  discipline,  or  self-sacrifice.  Each  body  of  troops
had  been  raised  by  the  laws  of  its  own  colony,  and  it  was
reluctant  to  obey  any  other  authority.  Washington  complained
bitterly  of  '  the  egregious  want  of  public  spirit '  in  his  army.
The  Congress  had  made  rules  for  its  regulation.  The  troops
positively  refused  to  accept  them,  as  they  had  not  enlisted  on
those  terms,  and  Washington  was  obliged  to  yield,  except  in
the  case  of  new  recruits.  The  Congress  had  appointed  a
number  of  officers,  but  the  troops  rebelled  violently  against
their  choice,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  they  would  only
remain  at  their  post  as  long  as  they  served  under  such  oflBcers
as  they  pleased.'^  The  absence  of  any  social  difference  between
officers  and  soldiers  greatly  aggravated  the  difficulty  of  en-
forcing discipline.^  The  local  feeling  was  so  strong  that
General  Schuyler  gave  it  as  his  deliberate  opinion  that  '  troops
from  the  colony  of  Connecticut  will  not  bear  with  a  general  from
another  colony.'  *  The  short  period  for  which  the  troops  had
consented  to  enlist  made  it  impossible  to  give  them  steadiness
or  discipline,  to  count  upon  the  future,  or  to  engage  in
enterprises  of  magnitude  or  continuity,  ^^'hat  little  subordi-
nation had  been  attained  in  the  beginning  of  the  period  was

'  Amrrican  Ilemembrancer, 1776,  '  Ibid.  p.  279.

part  i.  p.  25.  *  Ibid.  p.  243  ;  see  too  p.  151.

^  Washinffton's  WorJ/.i,  ill.  176.

440  ENGLAND IN THE KIGIITKENTU CENTUKY.  cii.  xii

destroyed  at  the  close,  for  the  officers  were  obliged  to  connive
at  every  kind  of  relaxation  of  discipline  in  order  to  persuade  their
soldiers  to  re-enlist.'  Personal  recriminations  and  jealousies,
quarrels  about  rank  and  pay  and  service,  were  incessant.  Great
numbers  held  aloof  from  enlisting,  imagining  that  the  distress
of  their  cause  would  oblige  the  Congress  to  offer  large  bounties,*
no  possible  inducement  could  persuade  a  large  proportion  of
the  soldiers  to  re-enlist  when  their  short  time  of  service  had
expired,  and  there  were  instances  of  gross  selfishness  and  mis-
conduct among  the  disbanding  soldiers.^  The  term  for  which  the
Connecticut  troops  had  enlisted  expired  in  December,  and  the
whole  body,  amounting  to  some  5,000  men,  absolutely  refused
to  re-enlist.  It  was  vainly  represented  to  them  that  their  de-
sertion threatened  the  whole  American  cause  with  absolute
ruin.  The  utmost  that  the  most  strenuous  exertions  could
effect  was,  that  they  would  delay  their  departure  for  ten  days.
There  were  bitter  complaints  that  Congress  granted  no  bounties,
leaving  this  to  the  option  of  the  several  colonies,  and  also  that
the  scale  of  pay,  though  very  liberal,  was  lower  than  what  they
might  have  obtained  in  other  employments.  Great  numbers
pretended  sickness,  in  order  to  escape  from  the  service ;  "*  great
numbers  would  only  continue  in  the  army  on  the  condition  of
obtaining  long  furloughs  at  a  time  when  every  man  was  needed
for  the  security  of  the  lines.*  There  was  a  constant  fear  of  con-
centrating too  much  power  in  military  hands,  and  of  building

'  Washington's  WorLi,  iii.  p.  280.  surprised  at  any  disaster  that  may
-  Ibid.  pp.  200,  201,  281.  happen,  .  .  .  Could  I  have  foreseen
'  Ibid.  pp.  240,  280.  what  I  have  experienced,  and  ;uii
•*  Ibid.  p.  191.  likely  to  experience,  no  consideration
5  Washington's  letters  are  full  of  upon  earth  should  liave  induced  mo
complaints  on  the  subject.  I  will  to  accept  this  command.'  (Washing-
quote  a  few  lines  from  a  letter  of  ton's  Uorfe,  iii.  178,  17'.).)  'No
Nov.  28,  1775.  'Such  a  dearth  of  troops,'  he  writes  in  another  letter,
public  spirit,  and  such  want  of  virtue,  '  were  ever  better  provided  or  higher
such  stockjobbing  and  fe-rlility  in  all  paid,  yet  their  backwardness  to
the  low  arts  to  obtain  advantages  of  enlist  for  another  year  is  amazing.
one  kind  or  another  in  tiiis  great  It  grieves  me  to  see  so  little  of  that,
change  of  military  arrangement,  I  patriotic  spirit  which  I  was  taught  to
never  saw  before,  and  pray  God's  believe  was  characteristic  of  this
mercy  that  I  may  never  be  witness  to  j)eople.'  (Ibid.  p.  181.)  '  The  pre-
again.  ...  I  have  been  obliged  to  sent  soldiery  are  in  expectation  of
allow  furloughs  as  far  as  fifty  men  to  drawing  fmm  the  landed  interest  and
a  regiment,  and  the  oflicers,  I  am  farmers  a  bounty  equal  to  that  given
per.-uadf-<l,  indul.u^e  as  many  more.  .  .  at.  the  commencement  of  this  army
Sucli  a  mercenary  spirit,  pervades  tlie  and  therefore  they  keep  aloof.'  lt)jd.
whole  that  I should not  be at all  p.  188,

en.  XII.  WANT OF i:.\R.NEST.VE>5S.  4-17

up  a  sy.-^tcm  of  de.'^potisin,  and  there  was  a  general  belief  annon^
the  soldiers  that  unquestioning  obedience  to  their  oificer.s  was
derogatory  to  their  dignity  and  inconsistent  with  their  freedom.

The  truth  is,  that  although  the  circumstances  of  the  New
Englanders  had  developed  to  a  very  high  degree  many  of  the
qualities  that  are  essential  to  a  soldier,  they  had  been  very
imfavourable  to  others.  To  obey,  to  act  together,  to  sacrifice
private  judgment  to  any  authority,  to  acknowledge  any  superior,
was  wholly  alien  to  their  temperament,'  and  they  had  nothing
of  that  passionate  and  all-absorbing  enthusiasm  which  trans-
forms the  character,  and  raises  men  to  an  heroic  height  of
patriotic  self-devotion.  Such  a  spirit  is  never  evoked  by  mere
money  disputes.  The  question  whether  the  Supreme  Legis-
lature of  the  Empire  had  or  had  not  the  right  of  obliging  the
colonies  to  contribute  something  to  the  support  of  the  imperial
army,  was  well  fitted  to  produce  constitutional  agitation,  elo-
quence, riots,  and  even  organised  armed  resistance  ;  but  it  was
not  one  of  those  questions  which  touch  the  deeper  springs  of
human  feehng  or  action.  Any  nation  might  be  proud  of  the
shrewd,  brave,  prosperous,  and  highly  intelligent  yeomen  who
flocked  to  the  American  camp  ;  but  they  were  very  different
men  from  those  who  defended  the  walls  of  Leyden,  or  immor-
talised the  field  of  Bannockburn.  P'ew  of  the  great  pages  of
history  are  less  marked  by  the  stamp  of  heroism  than  the
American  Eevolution  ;  and  perhaps  the  most  formidable  of  the
diflSculties  which  Washington  had  to  encounter  were  in  his  own
camp.

Had  there  been  a  general  of  any  enterprise  or  genius  at  the
head  of  the  British  army,  the  Americans  could  scarcely  have
escaped  a  great  disaster ;  but  at  this  period,  and  indeed  during
all  the  earlier  period  of  the  Revolutionary  War,  the  English

*  General  Trambull  wrote  to  Wash-  very  easily  imbibe.  The  pulse  of  a
in<rton,  Dec.  1775:  '  Tlie  late  extra-  New  Enjjland  man  beats  high  for
ordinary  and  reprehensible  conduct  liberty;  his  engagement  in  the  ser-
of  some  of  the  troops  of  this  colony  vice  he  thinks  purely  voluntary,  there-
impresses  me  and  the  minds  of  many  fore  when  the  time  of  enlistment
of  our  people  with  grief,  surprise,  is  out  he  thinks  himself  not  holden
and  indignation.  .  .  .  There  is  great  without  further  engagement.  This
difficulty  to  support  liberty,  ro  exer-  was  the  case  in  thelastwar.  I, greatly
cise  government,  to  maintain  sub-  fear  its  operation  amongst  the  sol-
ordination,  and  at  the  same  time  to  diers  of  the  other  colonil;s,  as  I  am
prevent  the  operation  of  licentious  sensible  that  it  is  the  genius  and
and  levelling  principles,  which  many  spirit  of  our  people." Ibid.  p.  1S.3.

44S  ENGLAND IN TilK Kk;  UTKKN'TIl CENTURY.  ch.  xn.

exliibited  an  utter  ubseuce  of  all  military  capacity.  That  spirit
ot  enterprise  and  daring  which  had  characterised  every  branch
of  the  service  during  the  administration  of  Chatham,  had  abso-
lutely disappeared.  Every  week  was  of  vital  importance  at  a
time  when  undisciplined  yeomen  were  being  drilled  into  regular
troops,  and  the  different  provincial  contingents  were  being
slowly  and  painfully  organised  into  a  compact  army.  But  week
after  week,  month  after  month,  passed  away,  while  the  British
lay  inactively  behind  their  trenches.  After  the  first  reinforce-
ments had  arrived  at  the  end  of  May  1775,  General  Gage  had
upwards  of  11,000  men  at  his  disposal,  including  seamen  and
loyalists ;  yet  even  then  weeks  of  inactivity  followed.  At
Bunker's  Hill  more  than  1,000  men  were  lost  in  capturing  a
position  which  during  several  months  might  have  been  occupied
any  day  without  resistance.  Gage  knew  that  the  town  which
he  held  was  bitterly  hostile  ;  that  the  Americans  greatly  out-
numbered him ;  that  they  occupied  strong  and  fortified  posi-
tions ;  that  he  was  himself  secure  through  his  command  of
the  sea;  that  his  army  was  the  sole  support  of  the  British
Empire  in  New  England.  A  very  large  proportion  of  his  sol-
diers were  incapacitated  by  illness.'  He  considered  those  who
remained  too  few  to  be  divided  with  safety ;  and  he  maintained
that,  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  means  of  transport,  it  would
be  both  rash  and  useless  to  attempt  to  penetrate  into  the
country,  and  that  success  would  only  drive  the  Americans  out
of  one  stronghold  into  another.

He  probably  feared,  also,  by  energetic  measures,  to  commit
the  country  irrevocably  to  a  war  which  might  still  be  possibly
avoided,  and  to  produce  in  an  undecided  and  divided  people
an  outburst  of  military  enthusiasm.  There  was  a  wide-spread
expectation  that  the  resistance  would  fall  to  pieces  through  the
divisions  of  the  Americans,  through  the  stress  of  the  blockade,
or  in  consequence  of  the  conciliatory  propositions  of  North.
Gage  would  risk  nothing. His  information  was  miserably  im-

'  Accordinp:  to  Bancroft,  Gage  had  (Bancroft.,  Hist,  of  the  United  States^

never  more  than  6,500  effective  troops,  viii.  pp.  42-44.)  Still  the  British  troops

though  his  nominal  force,  including  were  regular  soldiers,  admirably  pro-

sailora and  loyalists,  was  estimated  vided with all munitions  of war,

at 11,500 men. Washington  at  this  while  the  Americans  were  almost  un-

time  had  nominally  17,000  men,  but  disciplined  and singularly destitute

never  more  than  14,500  fit  for  duty.  of  all  that  was  required.

(H.  XII.  THE ARMY BKFORK BOSTON.  449

perfect,  and  he  was  probably  very  indifferently  informed  of  the
extreme  weakness  of  the  Americans.  The  Provincials  had  as
yet  no  cavalry.  They  had  scarcely  any  bayonets.  Their  am-
munition was  so  deplorably  scanty  that  in  the  beginning  of
August  it  was  discovered  that  there  were  only  nine  rounds  of
ammunition  for  each  man,  and  a  fortnight  passed  before  they
received  additional  supplies,  and  in  this  condition  they  succeeded
in  blockading,  almost  without  resistance,  a  powerful  English
army.  Nor  was  Gage  more  successful  in  conciliating  than  in
fighting.  He  had  made  an  agreement  with  the  inhabitants  of
]5oston  that,  on  delivering  up  their  arms,  they  might  depart
with  their  effects  ;  but  he  soon  after  repented,  and  though
the  people  had  complied,  he  refused  to  fulfil  his  promise.
Many,  indeed,  were  allowed  to  depart,  but  they  were
obliged  to  leave  their  effects  behind  as  a  security  for  their
loyalty.

At  length,  in  October,  he  was  recalled,  and  General  Howe
assumed  the  command;  but  the  spirit  of  indecision  and  in-
capacity still  presided  over  the  British  forces.  In  November
and  December,  the  time  for  which  the  American  troops  enlisted
having  ended,  most  of  them  insisted  on  disbanding,  and  a  new
army  had  to  be  formed  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  On
the  last  day  of  December,  1775,  when  the  old  army  had  been
disbanded,  only  9,650  men  had  been  enlisted  to  supply  their
place,  and  more  than  1,000  of  these  were  on  furlough,  which
it  had  been  necessary  to  grant  in  order  to  persuade  them  to
enlist.'  Yet  not  a  single  attempt  appears  to  have  been  made
to  break  the  American  lines.  '  It  is  not  in  the  page  of  history,
perhaps,'  wrote  Washington,  '  to  furnish  a  case  like  ours  :  to
maintain  a  post  within  musket-shot  of  the  enemy  for  six
months  together  without  powder,  and  at  the  same  time  to
disband  our  army  and  recruit  another  within  that  distance  of
twenty  odd  British  regiments.'  ^  '  My  situation,'  he  wrote  in
February  1776,  '  has  been  such  that  I  have  been  obliged  to
use  art  to  conceal  it  from  my  own  officers,'  and  he  expressed
his  emphatic  astonishment  that  Howe  had  not  obliged  him,

'  Washington's  Worh,  i.  164.  ■  Ibid.  iii.  221,  222.

VOL.  III.  G G

1.50  ENCIJ.ANI) IN TllK KIGHTEENTII CENTLKY.  ch.  xm,

under  very  disatlvantageous  cireunistances,  to  defend  the  lines?
he  had  occupied.'

The  negligence  and  delay  of  the  British  probably  saved  the
American  cause,  and  great  efforts  were  made  to  recruit  the
provincial  army.  Before  many  weeks  the  army  around  Boston
had  considerably  increased,  and  before  the  middle  of  the  year
it  was  pretended,  though  probably  with  great  exaggeration,
that  the  Americans  had  altogether  80,000  men  in  arms.^  In
April  the  Congress  voted  about  1,300,000L  for  the  support  of
the  army,  and  in  June  it  offered  a  bounty  of  ten  dollars  for
every  man  who  would  enlist  for  three  years.  Large  numbers
of  cannon  were  cast  in  New  York,  and  great  exertions  were
made  to  fit  out  a  fleet.  A  hardy  seafaring  population,  scat-
tered over  a  long  seaboard,  accustomed  from  childhood  both  to
smuggling  and  to  distant  commercial  enterprises,  formed  an
admirable  material  for  the  new  navy.  The  old  privateersmen
of  the  ■  last  war  resumed  their  occupation,  and  the  number  of
British  merchant  vessels  that  were  captured  brought  a  rich
return  to  the  American  sailors.  The  want  of  ammunition  was
the  most  serious  deficiency,  but  it  was  gradually  supplied.
Manufactories  of  arms  and  gunpowder  were  set  up  in  different
provinces.  The  Americans  succeeded  in  purchasing  powder  in
Africa,  in  the  Bahama  Islands,  and  in  Ireland.  A  few  daring
men  sailed  from  Charleston  to  East  Florida,  which  had  never
joined  in  opposition  to  the  Government,  and  surprised  and
captured  near  St.  Augustine  a  ship  containing  15,000  lbs.  of
powder.  A  cargo,  which  was  but  little  less  considerable,  was
seized  by  the  people  of  Georgia  immediately  on  its  arrival
from  England ;  and  several  ships,  carrying  military  stores  to
Boston,  were  intercepted  before  the  British  appear  to  have  been
aware  that  American  privateers  were  upon  the  sea.  The  news
from  Canada  was  extremely  discouraging,  but  it  was  counter-
balanced by  a  great  triumph  in  Massachusetts.  The  blockade
of  Boston  became  more  severe ;  sickness  disabled  many  of  the
British  soldiers ;  swarms  of  privateers  made  it  very  difficult  to
obtain  provisions  ;  and  at  last,  on  the  night  of  March  4,  1776,

'  Washington's  Wm-kx,  in.  285.  Washington's letters that  the esti-

-  Amrriean  licmembrancrr, 1770, mtiXasinthe  American  Upmembrarwer
part ii. p. 281. It is  evident  from greatly  exceeded  the  truth.

CH.  XII.  'COMMON SENSE.'  451

the  Americans  obtained  possession  of  Dorchester  heights,  which
commanded  the  harbour.  The  town  was  now  no  longer  tenable.
On  ^larch  17,  Howe,  with  the  remainder  of  his  army,  con-
sisting of  about  7,600  men,  sailed  for  Halifax,  and  Washington
marched  in  triumph  into  the  capital  of  Massachusetts

At  the  same  time  public  opinion  in  the  colonies  began  to  run
strongly  in  the  direction  of  independence.  Great  stress  has
been  placed  on  the  effect  of  an  anonymous  pamphlet  called
'  Common  Sense,'  advocating  complete  separation  from  England,
which  appeared  at  Philadelphia  in  January  1776.^  It  was  the
first  considerable  work  of  the  notorious  Thomas  Paine,  who
had  only  a  few  months  before  come  over  from  England,  and
had  at  once  thrown  himself,  with  the  true  instinct  of  a  revo-
lutionist, into  hostility  to  his  country.  Like  all  his  works,
this  pamphlet  was  written  in  clear,  racy,  vivid  English,  and
with  much  power  of  popular  reasoning ;  and,  like  most  of  his
works,  it  was  shallow,  violent,  and  scurrilous.  Much  of  it
consists  of  attacks  upon  monarchy  in  general,  and  hereditary
monarchy  in  particular ;  of  very  crude  schemes  for  the  estab-
lishment of  democratic  forms  of  government  in  America,  and
of  violent  denunciations  of  the  English  King  and  people.
England  is  described  as  '  that  barbarous  and  hellish  power
which  hath  stirred  up  the  Indians  and  negroes  to  destroy  us.'
The  lingering  attachment  to  her  is  ridiculed  as  mere  local  pre-
judice. Not  one-third  part  of  the  inhabitants  even  of  Penn-
sylvania, it  is  said,  are  of  English  descent ;  and  the  Americans
are  recommended  to  put  to  death  as  traitors  all  their  country-
men who  were  taken  in  arms  for  the  King.  At  the  same  time
the  arguments  showing  that  America  was  capable  of  subsisting
as  an  independent  Power,  and  that,  as  a  part  of  the  British
Empire,  she  could  only  be  a  secondary  object  in  the  system  of
British  politics,  were  stated  with  great  force.  The  present
moment,  it  was  urged,  was  eminently  opportune  for  complete
separation.  Eeunion  could  only  be  purchased  by  concessions
that  would  be  fatal  to  American  liberty.  Cordial  reconciliation
was  no  longer  possible,  and  America  had  now  the  inestimable
advantage  of  the  mihtary  experience  of  the  last  war,  which  had
filled  the  country  with  veteran  soldiers. If  the  struggle  were

'  See  tho  American  ItnncmhTancrr,  177fi,  part  i.  pp.  2:?8-241,
G  G  2

452  ENGLAND IN TlIK EIOnTEENTII CENTURY.  oi.  xii.

adjourned  for  forty  or  iitty  years,  the  Ainerieans  would  no
doubt  be  more  numerous,  but  they  would  probably  be  less
united,  and  it  was  quite  possible  that  there  would  not  be  a
general  or  skilful  military  ofKcer  among  them.

It  is  said  that  not  less  than  100,000  copies  of  this  pamphlet
were  sold  ;  and  Washington  himself,  not  long  after  its  appear-
ance, described  it  as  '  working  a  powerful  change  in  the  minds
of  many  men.' '  As  is  usually,  however,  the  case  with  very
}>opular  political  writings,  its  success  was  mainly  due  to  extra-
neous circumstances.  It  fell  in  with  the  prevailing  tendency
of  the  time,  and  gave  an  expression  to  sentiments  which  were
rising  in  countless  minds.  The  position  of  men  who  were  pro-
fessing unbounded  devotion  to  their  Sovereign,  and  were  at
the  same  time  imprisoning  his  governors,  waging  a  fierce  war
against  his  armies,  and  invading  a  peaceful  province  which  was
subject  to  his  rule,  was  manifestly  untenable.  When  blood
was  once  shed,  amid  the  deepening  excitement  of  the  contest
the  figments  of  lawyers  disappeared,  and  the  struggle  assumed
a  new  character  of  earnestness  and  animosity.  Several  acts  of
war  had  already  been  committed,  of  which  Americans  might
justly  complain,  and  others  were  grossly  exaggerated  or  mis-
represented. The  conduct  of  the  British  troops  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  war  in  firing  upon  the  Provincials  at  Lexington,  was
absurdly  described  as  a  wanton  massacre.  The  conduct  of  Gage
to  the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  and  the  burning  of  Charleston
during  the  battle  of  Bunker's  Hill  to  prevent  it  from  being  a
shelter  for  American  soldiers,  were  more  justly  objected  to ;
while  the  proceedings  of  Lord  Dunmore  in  Virginia  raised  the
indignation  of  the  colonists  to  the  highest  point.  When  the
news  of  the  burning  of  Norfolk  arrived,  Washington  expressed
his  hope  that  it  would  '  unite  the  whole  country  in  one  indis-
soluble band  against  a  nation  which  seems  to  be  lost  to  every
sense  of  virtue  and  those  feelings  which  distinguish  a  civilised
people  from  the  most  barbarous  savages.''^  If  such  language
could  bo  employed  by  such  a  man,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  how
fierce  a  spirit  must  have  been  abroad.  In  the  dissolution  of
all government, mob inf  iniidat  i<>n had a  great power over

'  AVjisliinpton's  Wor/tf,  iii.  27('),  :U7.

*  JA/e  and  ('orri'spundcnre  of  JoM'jth  lircil,  i.  148

c:i.  XII.  Till'. I'KKNCll ALLIANCK.  453

|)nli(  ifians,  and  m(>l)s  ;\rr  always  in  favour  of  the  strongest
measures ;  and  the  adoption  of  the  policy  of  armed  resistance
liad  naturally  given  an  increased  power  to  those  who  had  been
the  first  lo  advocate  it.  Every  step  which  was  taken  in  England
added  to  the  exasperation.  Already  the  Americans  had  been
proclaimed  rebels ;  and  all  commercial  intercourse  with  them
had  been  forbidden.  The  petition  of  Congress  to  the  King,
which  was  the  last  serious  effort  of  America  for  pacification,
was  duly  taken  over  to  England  ;  but,  after  a  short  delay.  Lord
Dartmouth  informed  the  delegates  that  '  no  answer  would  be
given  to  it.'  An  Act  of  Parliament  was  passed  authorising  the
confiscation  of  all  American  ships  and  cargoes,  and  of  all  vessels
of  other  nations  trading  with  the  American  ports ;  and  by  a
clause  of  especial  atrocity,  the  commanders  of  the  British  ships
of  war  were  empowered  to  seize  the  crews  of  all  American
vessels,  and  compel  them,  under  pain  of  being  treated  as
mutineers,  to  serve  against  their  countrymen.'

All  these  things  contributed  to  sever  the  colonies  from
amicable  connection  with  England,  and  to  make  the  prospect
of  reconciliation  appear  strange  and  remote.  Separation,  it
was  plausibly  said,  was  the  act  of  the  British  Parliament  itself,
which  had  thrown  the  thirteen  colonies  out  of  the  protection
of  the  Crown.  But  another  and  more  practical  consideration
concurred  with  the  foregoing  in  producing  the  Declaration  of
Independence.  One  of  the  gravest  of  the  questions  which  were
agitating  the  Revolutionary  party  was  the  expediency  of  asking
for  foreign,  and  especially  for  French,  assistance.  France  had
hitherto  been  regarded  in  America,  even  more  than  in  England,
as  a  natural  enemy.  She  was  a  despotic  Power,  and  could
not  therefore  have  much  real  sympathy  with  a  struggle  for
constitutional  liberty.  Her  expulsion  from  America  had  been
for  generations  one  of  the  first  objects  of  American  patriots;
and  if  she  again  mixed  in  American  aflfairs,  it  Avas  natural  that
she  should  seek  to  regain  the  province  she  had  so  lately  lost.
If  America  was  destined  to  be  an  independent  Eepublic,
nothing  could  be  more  dangerous  than  to  have  a  military  and
aggressive  colony  belonging  to  the  most  powerful  despotism  in
Europe  planted  on  her  frontiers.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it
'  16  Geo.  III.  c.  5

454 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEKNTII  CKNTURY. ch.  xii.

appeared  more  than  probable  that  the  intervention  or  non-
intervention of  France  would  determine  the  result  of  the  pre-
sent struggle.  If  America  were  cordially  united  in  her  re-
sistance to  England,  it  would  be  impossible  to  subdue  her ;
but  it  was  quite  evident  to  serious  men  that  America  was
not  united ;  that  outside  New  England  there  was  scarcely  an
approach  to  unanimity ;  that  powerful  minorities  in  almost
every  province  were  ardently  attached  to  England ;  and  that,
of  the  remainder  of  the  population,  a  very  large  proportion
were  vacillating,  selfish,  or  indifferent,  ready,  if  the  occasion
could  be  found,  to  be  reconciled  with  England,  and  altogether
unprepared  to  make  any  long  or  strenuous  sacrifices  in  the
cause.  Under  these  circumstances  the  Kevolutionary  leaders
had  much  to  fear.  There  was  a  party  in  the  Congress,  among
whom  Patrick  Henry  was  conspicuous,  who  desired  to  purchase
French  assistance  by  large  territorial  cessions  in  America  ; '  but
this  view  found  little  favour.  Apart  from  all  considerations  of
territorial  aggrandisement,  it  was  the  evident  interest  of  France
to  promote  the  independence  of  America.  She  could  thus
obtain  for  herself  a  share  in  that  vast  field  of  commerce  from
which  she  had  hitherto  been  excluded  by  the  Navigation  Act.
The  humiliation  of  the  loss  of  Canada  would  be  amply  avenged
if  the  thirteen  old  colonies  were  separated  from  England.  A
formidable  if  not  fatal  blow  would  be  given  to  that  maritime
supremacy  against  which  France  had  so  long  and  so  vainly
struggled;  and  the  French  West  India  islands,  which  were
now  in  time  of  war  completely  at  the  mercy  of  England,  would
become  comparatively  secure  if  the  harbours  of  the  neigh-
bouring continent  were  held  by  a  neutral  or  a  friendly  Power.
Ever  since  the  Peace  of  Paris,  a  feeling  of  deep  humiliation
and  discontent  had  brooded  over  French  society ;  and  even  in
Europe  the  influence  of  France  appeared  to  have  diminished.
The  recent  appearance  of  Russia  as  an  active  and  formidable
agent  in  the  European  system,  and  the  recent  growth  of
Prussia  into  the  dimensions  of  a  first-class  Power,  had  profoundly
altered  the  European  equilibrium.  Both  of  these  Powers  lay  in
a  great  degree  beyond  the  influence  of  France  ;  and  although  one
school  of  French  politicians  maintained  that  the  rise  of  Prussia

'  Adams'  Life,  Worlds,  i.  201.

cu.  xn.  TlIK FRENCH ALLIANCE.  4.55

was  beneficial,  as  establishing  a  balance  of  power  in  Germany,
and  checking  the  preponderance  of  Austria,  another  school
looked  upon  it  as  seriously  affecting  both  French  ascendency
and  French  security.  Great  indignation  was  felt  in  Paris  at
the  passive  attitude  of  the  Government  at  the  time  of  the  first
partition  of  Poland  in  1772,  and  during  the  war  that  ended  in
the  treaty  of  Kainardji  in  1774,  when  Kussia  succeeded  in
extending  her  territory  southwards,  in  separating  the  Crimea
from  the  Turkish  Empire,  and  in  acquiring  a  right  of  protec-
torate over  Christians  in  Constantinople.  As  long  as  the  old
King  lived,  there  seemed  little  chance  of  a  more  active  policy ;
but  in  May  1774,  Lewis  XV.  died,  and  a  new  and  more
adventurous  spirit  was  ruling  at  the  Tuileries.  Under  such
circumstances  it  appeared  to  Adams,  and  to  the  more  sagacious
of  his  supporters,  that  it  would  be  possible  to  obtain  from
France  such  a  measure  of  assistance  as  would  insure  the  inde-
pendence of  America  without  involving  her  future  in  European
complications.  But  the  first  condition  of  this  policy  was  a
declaration  by  the  colonies  that  they  were  finally  and  for  ever
detached  from  Great  Britain.  France  had  no  possible  interest
in  their  constitutional  liberties.  She  had  a  vital  interest  in
their  independence.  It  was  idle  to  suppose  that  she  would
risk  a  war  with  England  for  rebels  who  might  at  any  time  be
converted  by  constitutional  concessions  into  loyal  subjects,  and
enemies  of  the  enemies  of  England.

The  questions  of  a  French  alliance  and  of  a  declaration  of
independence  were  thus  indissolubly  connected.  In  the  autumn
of  1775  a  motion  was  made  in  Congress,  and  strongly  supported
by  John  Adams,  to  send  ambassadors  to  France.  But  Congress
still  shrank  from  so  formidable  a  step,  though  it  agreed,  after
long  debates  and  hesitation,  to  form  a  secret  committee  '  to
correspond  with  friends  in  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  other
parts  of  the  world.'  ^  But  the  conduct  of  England  herself  soon
dispelled  the  hesitation  of  America.  England  found  herself  at
this  time  confronted  with  a  military  problem  which  she  was
utterly  unable  by  her  own  unassisted  efforts  to  solve.  The
same  pressure  of  financial  distress,  the  same  reluctance  to
increase the army  estimates,  which  had made the English

'  Adams'  Life,  Works,  i.  200-203.

456 ESGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. m.  xu

Ministers  so  anxious  to  throw  upon  America  the  burden  of  sup-
porting her  own  army,  had  prevented  the  maintenance  of  any
considerable  army  at  home.  Public  opinion  had  never  yet
fully  accepted  the  fact  that  the  forces  which  were  very  adequate
under  Walpole  were  wholly  insufficient  after  the  Peace  of  Paris.
The  King,  indeed,  had  for  many  years  steadily  maintained  that
military  economy  in  England  had  been  carried  to  a  fatal  point,
and  that  the  army  was  much  below  what  the  security  of  the
Empire  required ;  but  his  warnings  had  been  disregarded.'  The
feeling  of  the  country,  the  feeling  of  the  House  of  Commons,
against  large  standing  armies  was  so  strong  that  it  was  impos-
sible to  resist  it.  As  late  as  December  1774,  the  seamen  had
been  reduced  from  20,000  to  1 6,000,  and  the  land  forces  had
been  fixed  at  1 7,547  eflfective  men.^  In  the  following  year,  when
the  war  became  inevitable,  Parliament  voted  28,000  seamen
and  55,000  land  forces,  but  even  this  was  utterly  inadequate
for  the  conquest  of  America,  and  as  yet  it  only  existed  upon
paper.  Most  of  the  troops  that  could  be  safely  spared  had
been  already  sent,  and  the  result  had  been  the  formation  of
two  armies,  one  of  which  was  not  more  than  sufficient  for  the
protection  of  Canada,  while  the  other  had  been  for  months  con-
fined within  the  town  of  Boston.  It  was  quite  evident  that
much  larger  forces  were  required  if  America  was  to  be  subdued,
and  Howe  strongly  urged  that  he  could  make  no  aggressive
movement  with  any  prospect  of  success  unless  he  had  at  least
20,000  men.  To  raise  the  required  troops  at  short  notice  was
very  difficult.  In  January  1776,  Lord  Barrington  warned  the
King  that  Scotland  had  never  yet  been  so  bare  of  troops,  and

'  As  early  as  Aug.  11,  1765,  the  982.

King  had  written  to  Conwaj* :  '  The  On  August  26,  1775,  he  wrote  to

only  method  that  at  present  occurs  to  Lord  Nortli,  '  The  misfortune  is,  that

me  by  which  the  French  can  be  pre-  at  the beginning of this  American

vented  settling  on  the  coast  of  New-  business  there  has  been  an  unwilling-

foundland would be the having  a  ness  to  augment  tlie  army  and  navy,

greater  military  force  in  that  island  ;  I  proposed  early  in  the  summer  the

but  the  economical,  and  I  may  say  sending be.ating orders  to Ireland  ;

injudicious,  ideas  of  this  country  in  this  was  objected to  in  the  Cabinet ;

time of peace, make it not very  if  it  had  then  been  adopted,  the  array

practicable,  for  a  c^n-ps  ought  on  pur-  would  have been at least  2,000  or

pose  to  be  raised  for  that  service,  we  3,000 men  stronger  at  this  hour.' —

having  more places  to  garrison  than  CoiTcspondenee  of  George III.  and

we  have  troops  to  supply.' He  adds  Lmul  North,  vol.  i.  26.5,  266.

that  we  are  '  very  unable  to  draw  the  *  Adolphus,  ii.  153.
Bword.' — British  Miiseuvf. Eg. JfSS.

CH.  XII.  OPINION OF BARRINGTON.  457

that  those  in  England  were  too  f(!W  for  the  security  of  the
country.'  The  land  tax  for  177G  was  raised  to  four  shillings
in  the  pound.  New  duties  were  imposed  ;  new  bounties  were
offered.  Recruiting  agents  traversed  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,
and  the  most  remote  districts  of  Ireland,  and  the  poor  Catholics
of  jNIunster  and  Connaught,  who  had  been  so  long  excluded
from  the  English  army,  were  gladly  welcomed.  Recruits,  how-
ever, came  in  very  slowly.  There  was  no  enthusiasm  for  a  war
with  English  settlers.  The  pressgangs  met  with  an  unusual
resistance.  No  measure  short  of  a  conscription  could  raise  at
once  the  necessary  army  in  England,  and  to  propose  a  conscrip-
tion would  be  fatal  to  any  Government.

The  difficulties  of  subduing  America  by  land  operations,
even  under  the  most  favom-able  circmnstances,  were  enormous.
Except  on  the  sea-coast  there  were  no  fixed  points,  no  fortified
places  of  such  importance  that  their  possession  could  give  a
permanent  command  of  any  large  tract  of  territory ;  the  vast
distances  and  the  difficulties  of  transport  made  it  easy  for  in-
surgents to  avoid  decisive  combats ;  and  in  a  hostile  and  very
thinly  populated  country,  the  army  must  derive  its  supplies
almost  exclusively  from  England.^  The  magnitude,  the  ruinous
expense  of  such  an  enterprise,  and  the  almost  absolute  impossi-
bility of  carrying  the  war  into  distant  inland  quarters,  ought
to  have  been  manifest  to  all,  and  no  less  a  person  than  Lord
Harrington,  the  Secretary  for  War,  held  from  the  beginning
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  England  to  subdue  America  by
an  army,  though  he  thought  it  might  be  subdued  by  a  fleet
which  blockaded  its  seaport  towns  and  destroyed  its  commerce.
But  Barrington  was  one  of  the  most  devoted  of  the  King's
friends,  and  he  was  a  conspicuous  instance  of  the  demoralising
influence  of  the  system  of  politics  which  had  lately  prevailed

'  The  Political  Life  of  Lord  Bar-  and  he  thought  that,  in  the  existing

rington,  pp.  1C2-16'1.  condition  of  opinion  in  America, if

^  General  Lloyd,  who  was  one  of  New  England  were  subdued,  the  rest
the  best  English  writers  on  the  art  of  of  the  colonies  would  all  submit.
war,maintained  that  England,  in  con-  The  impossibility,  however,  of  sub-
sequence of  her  possession  of  Canada,  duing  them  by  land  measures,  if  they
might  have  completely  crushed  the  did  not,  he  clearly  showed.  See  k
four  provinces  of  New  England  by  remarkable  chapter  on  the  American
operating  vigorously  on  the  line  of  war  in  his  '  Retiections  on  the  Prin-
countrj'  (about  150  miles)  extending  ciples  of  War,'  appended  to  his  His-
from  Boston  to  Albanj',  or  to  some  tory  of  the  Seven  Years'  War.
other  point on the Hudson river ;

458  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

iu  England.  Already,  at  the  close  of  1774,  he  informed  his
colleagues  in  the  clearest  and  most  decisive  manner  of  his  dis-
approval of  the  policy  they  were  pursuing,  and  he  repeatedly
begged  the  King  to  accept  his  resignation.  '  I  am  summoned
to  meetings  '  of  the  Ministers,  he  complained,  '  when  I  some-
times think  it  my  duty  to  declare  my  opinions  openly  before
perhaps  twenty  or  thirty  persons,  and  the  next  day  I  am  forced
either  to  vote  contrary  to  them  or  to  vote  with  an  Opposition
which  I  abhor.'  He  wished  to  retire  both  from  the  JNIinistry
and  from  Parliament,  but  he  had  declared  that  he  would  remain
in  both  as  long  as  his  Majesty  thought  fit,  and  he  accordingly
continued  year  after  year  one  of  the  responsible  Ministers  of
the  Crown,  though  he  believed  that  the  policy  of  the  Govern-
ment was  mistaken  and  disastrous.  It  was  only  in  December
1778  that  his  resignation  was  accepted.'  The  King  was  the  real
director  of  the  Administration,  and  he  was  determined  to  relin-
quish no  part  of  his  dominions.  He  was  accordingly  reduced
to  the  humiliating  necessity  of  asking  for  foreign  assistance  to
subdue  his  own  subjects.  It  was  sought  from  many  quarters.
He  himself,  as  Elector  of  Hanover,  agreed  to  lend  2,355  men  of
his  Electoral  army  to  garrison  JNIinorca  and  Gibraltar,  and  thus
to  release  some  British  soldiers  for  the  American  war.  The
Dutch  had  for  a  long  time  maintained  a  Scotch  brigade  in  their
service,  and  the  Government  wished  to  take  it  into  English
pay,  but  the  States-General  refused  to  consent.  Russia  had
just  concluded  her  war  with  the  Turks,  and  it  was  hoped  that
she  might  sell  some  20,000  of  her  spare  troops  to  the  English
service,  but  Catherine  sternly  refused.  The  little  sovereigns
of  Germany  were  less  chary,  and  were  quite  ready  to  sell  their
subjects  to  England  to  fight  in  a  quarrel  with  which  they  had
no  possible  concern.  The  Duke  of  Brunswick,  the  Landgrave
of  Hesse  Cassel,  the  Hereditary  Prince  of  Hesse  Cassel,  and
the  Prince  of  Waldeck  were  the  chief  persons  engaged  in  this
white  slave  trade,  and  they  agreed  for  a  liberal  payment  to
supply  17,742  men  to  serve  under  English  officers  in  America.'^

'  Political  Life  of  Lord  Barring-  have  marked  his  opinion  of  the  trans-

if)»,  pp.  14fi-186.  action by  claiminef  to levy on  the

'■'  See  on  the  terms  of  this  bargain,  hired troops which passed tlirou^h

('nrrenj)ondciicc  of  Gvorr/e III. and  his  dominions the  same  duty  as  on

Lord  North,  i.  258-2fiO,  2fi6,  267,  2!)},  so  many  iicad  of  cat  lie.
2'.)r>. Frcdi'rick  the  Great  is  said  to

cii.  XII.  DECLARATION OF  INDEPENDENCE.  459

The  German  princelets  acted  after  their  kind,  and  the  con-
tempt and  indignation  which  they  inspired  were  probably  un-
mixed with  any  feeling  of  surprise.  The  conduct,  however,  of
England  in  hiring  German  mercenaries  to  subdue  the  essenti-
ally English  population  beyond  the  Atlantic,  made  reconcilia-
tion hopeless  and  the  Declaration  of  Independence  inevitable.
It  was  idle  for  the  Americans  to  have  any  further  scruples  about
calling  in  foreigners  to  assist  them  when  England  had  herself
set  the  example.  It  was  necessary  that  they  should  do  so  if
they  were  successfully  to  resist  the  powerful  reinforcemeno
which  was  thus  brought  against  them.

It  belongs  rather  to  the  historian  of  America  than  to  the
historian  of  England  to  recount  in  detail  the  various  steps  that
led  immediately  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  It  will
here  be  sufficient  to  indicate  very  briefly  the  main  forces  that
were  at  work.  Even  after  the  enlistment  of  foreign  mercenaries
by  Great  Britain,  the  difficulty  of  carrying  the  Declaration  was
very  great.  As  late  as  March  1776,  John  Adams,  who  was  the
chief  advocate  of  the  measure,  described  the  terror  and  disgust
with  which  it  was  regarded  by  a  large  section  of  the  Congress,
and  he  clearly  shows  the  nature  of  the  opposition.  '  All  our
misfortunes,'  he  added,  *  arise  from  the  reluctance  of  the
Southern  colonies  to  republican  government,'  and  he  complains
bitterly  that  '  popular  principles  and  axioms  '  are  '  abhorrent  to
the  inclinations  of  the  barons  of  the  South  and  the  proprietary
interests  in  the  Middle  States,  as  well  as  to  that  avarice  of
land  which  has  made  on  this  continent  so  many  votaries  to
jNIammon.'  It  was  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to  mould  the
governments  of  the  Southern  and  Middle  States  into  a  purely
popular  form,  destroying  altogether  the  proprietary  system  and
those  institutions  which  gave  the  more  wealthy  planters,  if  not
a  preponderance,  at  least  a  special  weight  in  the  management
of  affairs.  The  Congress  recommended  the  colonists  'where
no  government  sufficient  to  the  exigencies  of  their  afiairs  hath
hitherto  been  established '  to  adopt  a  new  form  of  government,
and  it  pronounced  it  necessary  that  the  whole  proprietary
system  should be dissolved.' The Eevolution  was speedily

'  Adams'  WorJ/s,  i.  207,  208,  217, Uvited  States,  book  ii.  ch. i.  ; Jay's
218 ; Story's Constittition of tlie Life,  by  his  Son,  i.  io.

4G0  EN^GLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xn.

accomplished,  and  the  tide  of  democratic  feeling  ran  strongly
towards  independence.  Virginia,  now  wholly  in  the  hands  of
the  revolutionary  party,  concurred  fully  with  Massachusetts,
and  the  influence  of  these  two  leading  colonies  overpowered
the  rest.  In  Pennsylvania,  in  New  Jersey,  in  Maryland,  in
Delaware,  in  New  York,  in  South  Carolina,  there  was  powerful
opposition,  but  the  strongest  pressure  was  applied  to  overcome
it.  New  Jersey  and  Maryland  first  dropped  off  and  accepted
the  Eesolution  of  Independence,  but  South  Carolina  and  Penn-
sylvania opposed  it  almost  to  the  last,  while  Delaware  was
divided  and  New  York  abstained.  John  Adams  was  now  the
most  powerful  advocate,  while  John  Dickinson  was  the  chief
opponent  of  independence.  At  last,  however,  it  was  resolved
not  to  show  any  appearance  of  dissension  to  the  world.  The
arrival  of  a  new  delegate  from  Delaware,  and  the  abstention  of
two  delegates  of  Pennsylvania,  gave  the  party  of  independence
the  control  of  the  votes  of  these  provinces.  South  Carolina,  for
the  sake  of  preserving  unity,  changed  sides.  New  York  still
abstained,  and  on  July  2  the  twelve  colonies  resolved  that
*  these  united  colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and
independent  States ;  that  they  are  absolved  from  all  allegiance
to  the  British  Crown,  and  that  all  political  connection  between
them  and  the  State  of  Great  Britain  is,  and  ought  to  be,  totally
dissolved.'  Thomas  Jefferson,  of  Virginia,  whose  literary  power
had  been  shown  in  many  able  State  papers,  had  already  drawn
up  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  which  having  been  revised
by  Franklin  and  by  John  Adams,  was  now  submitted  to  the
examination  of  Congress,  and  was  voted  after  some  slight
changes  on  the  evening  of  the  4th.  It  proclaimed  that  a  new
nation  had  arisen  in  the  world,  and  that  the  political  unity  of
the  English  race  was  for  ever  at  an  end.

DISGRACE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF CUMBERLAND.  461

CHAPTER XIII.

The  importance  of  the  American  question  during  the  few  years
that  preceded  the  Declaration  of  Independence  was  so  trans-
cendently  great  that  I  have  thought  it  advisable  to  devote  the
last  chapter  exclusively  to  its  development, and  have  endeavoured
to  preserve  the  unity  and  clearness  of  my  narrative  by  omitting
several  matters  of  domestic  policy  which  I  shall  now  proceed
to  relate.

The  Government  from  the  accession  of  Lord  North  to  the
foremost  place  had  continued  steadily  to  increase  in  parlia-
mentary authority,  and  the  long  period  of  anarchy  and  rapid
political  fluctuation  which  marked  the  beginning  of  the  reign
had  completely  ceased.  The  Court  was  now  closely  united
with  the  Ministers.  The  King  disposed  personally  of  nearly
all  the  ecclesiastical,  and  most  of  the  other  departments  of
patronage.  He  prescribed  in  a  great  measure  the  policy  of  his
Government.  His  friends  in  Parliament  steadily  supported  it ;
the  most  important  of  the  old  followers  of  Grenville  had  joined
it ;  it  was  strengthened  by  the  personal  popularity  of  North,  by
the  eclipse  of  Chatham,  and  by  the  dissension  between  his  fol-
lowers and  those  of  Eockingham,  and  it  commanded  overwhelm-
ing majorities  in  both  Houses.  The  democratic  movement
which  followed  the  ]Middlesex  election  had  gradually  subsided.
The  City  opposition  was  broken  into  small  and  hostile  frag-
ments, and  a  great  political  apathy  prevailed  in  the  nation.

But  while  the  course  of  events  appeared  thus  eminently
favourable  to  the  designs  of  the  Court,  a  long  series  of  dis-
graces and  calamities  had  cast  a  dark  shadow  around  the  throne.
In  1770  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  one  of  the  brothers  of
the  King,  had  been  compelled  to  appear  as  defendant  in  an
action for criminal conversation  on account  of  his  adultery

462  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. tii.  xin.

with  Lady  Grosvenor,  and  to  pay  10,000L  in  damages.  He  then
formed  a  new  and  notorious  connection  with  another  married
woman,  and  soon  after  the  King  learnt  with  bitter  indignation
that  in  October  1771  he  had  secretly  married  jNlrs.  Horton,
the  widow  of  an  undistinguished  Derbyshire  gentleman.  The
new  Duchess  was  daughter  of  Lord  Irnham,  and,  as  Junius
and  the  other  satirists  of  the  Court  noticed  with  ferocious
pleasure,  she  was  sister  to  that  Colonel  Luttrell  who  had  been
so  lately  put  forward  in  opposition  to  Wilkes  as  the  champion
of  the  Court.  Immediately  after  this  marriage  had  been  an-
nounced, the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  the  favourite  brother  of  the
King,  confessed  that  he  had  several  years  before  contracted  a
secret  marriage  with  the  Dowager  Countess  of  Waldegrave,  an
illegitimate  daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  and  granddaughter
of  the  great  statesman  of  the  last  reign.  Very  soon  after,  news
arrived  from  Copenhagen  of  the  disgrace  of  the  King's  sister,
the  Queen  of  Denmark,  who  had  been  arrested  by  the  command  of
her  husband  on  a  charge  of  adultery  with  Count  Struensee,  the
Prime  Minister  of  Denmark,  and  had  been  thrown  into  prison.
Struensee  was  executed  with  circumstances  of  peculiar  horror,
but  the  Queen  after  four  months  of  confinement  was  suffered
to  retire  to  Hanover,  where  a  few  years  later  she  died.  The
Princess  Dowager,  the  mother  of  the  King,  was  in  the  mean-
time slowly  dying  of  cancer,  and  ten  days  after  the  news  of  her
daughter's  disgrace  arrived  in  England,  she  ended  her  stormy
and  unhappy  life.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  that  for
several  years  before  her  death  she  had  exercised  any  political
power ;  but  the  belief  in  her  influence  had  never  ceased,  and
neither  her  sex  nor  her  sorrows  nor  her  munificent  charities  could
screen  her  from  the  most  brutal  insults,  which  pursued  her  to
the  very  end  of  her  life.  Wilkes,  Home,  Junius,  and  a  crowd
of  nameless  libellers  and  caricaturists,  and  especially  the  in-
famous papers  called  the  '  Whisperer '  and  the  '  Parliamentary
Spy,' vied  with  each  other  in  insulting  her;  and  in  ]March  1771,
when  the  Princess  was  stricken  down  with  her  mortal  illness,
Alderman  Townshend  made  a  furious  attack  upon  her  in  the
House  of  Commons,  declaring  that  for  ten  years  England  had
been  governed  by  a  woman,  that  he  considered  the  Princess
Dowager  of Wales  to  be  the  cause  of  all  the  calamities  of  the

CH.  xiri.  TIIK ROYAL MAKRIAGK HILL.  463

country,  and  tliat  an  irnjuiry  sliould  bo  made  into  lier  conduct.'
The  Princess  died  on  February  8,  1772,  and  her  body  was  a
few  days  later  carried  to  the  tomb  amid  the  shouts  and  re-
joicings of  the  mob.'^

In  the  same  month,  and  in  consequence  of  the  scandals  con-
nected with  the  Dukes  of  Cumberland  and  Gloucester,  a  King's
message  was  brought  to  Parliament  urging  both  Houses  to  take
into  consideration  measures  for  making  more  effectual  the
right  which  had  always,  it  was  stated,  belonged  to  the  kings  of
this  nation  of  approving  of  all  marriages  in  the  royal  family,
and  it  was  followed  by  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  which  more
than  any  other  measure  in  1772  divided  opinion  both  in  Par-
liament and  in  the  country.  The  object  of  this  Bill  was  to
prevent  the  great  dangers  which  might  arise  from  clandestine
or  improper  marriages  in  the  royal  family.  It  was  possible
that  in  consequence  of  such  marriages  the  title  of  the  successor
to  the  throne  might  become  a  matter  of  doubt  and  of  dispute,
and  it  was  very  probable  that  connections  might  be  formed,  and
disgraceful  elements  introduced  into  the  royal  family,  which
would  greatly  lower  the  authority  of  the  monarchy  in  the
country.  To  guard  against  these  dangers,  the  Marriage  Bill-
prohibited  any  descendant  of  the  late  I^ng  except  those  who
were  the  issue  of  princesses  married  into  foreign  houses,  from
contracting  marriage  before  the  age  of  twenty-five  without  the
assent  of  the  King  signified  under  the  Great  Seal.  After  that
age  they  might  marry  without  the  royal  consent,  but  only  if
they  had  given  notice  of  their  intention  to  the  Privy  Council
twelve  months  before  the  ceremony  was  performed,  -and  if  the
two  Houses  of  Parhament  did  not  signify  their  disapprobation.
All  marriages  contracted  in  defiance  of  this  Act  were  to  be
null,  and  all  who  celebrated  them  or  assisted  at  them  were  to
be  subject  to  the  penalties  of  prsemunire.^

This  Bill  was  fiercely  and  persistently  opposed.  Its  adver-
saries emphatically  denied  that  the  King  possessed  either  by  law
or  by  prerogative  any  control  over  the  marriages  of  his  family
other  than  that  which  every  parent  or  guardian  possesses  over

'  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv.  134. -  AValpole's  La^^t  Journals,  i,  17.
lo5 Cavendish  Debates,  \\  Ail .  Par^  ^  12  Geo.  Ul.c.xi,

Hist.  xvii.  122.

4G4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xiii.

his  children  or  his  wards  wht'ii  they  are  minors.  They  dilated
upon  the  great  number  of  persons  far  removed  from  the  throne
who  would  ultimately  be  brought  imder  the  provisions  of  the
law,  and  deprived  during  their  whole  lives  of  their  natural  and
inherent  right  of  marrying  according  to  their  inclination  ;  and
they  urged  that  while  no  immorality  was  so  pei'nicious  to  the
community  as  the  immorahty  of  those  who  occupied  an  eminent
position  in  the  eyes  of  men,  the  moral  effects  of  a  Bill  imposing
such  formidable  restraints  upon  marriage  must  be  in  the  highest
degree  injurious.  To  treat  the  whole  royal  family  as  a  separate
caste,  and  to  make  intermarriage  between  its  members  and
subjects  almost  impossible,  was  no  doubt  very  congenial  to  the
sentiments  of  a  German  court,  but  it  was  a  slur  upon  the
English  nobility,  it  was  utterly  inconsistent  with  English
traditions,  and  it  claimed  for  a  German  family  reigning  by  a
parliamentary  title  a  position  which  had  not  been  claimed
either  by  the  Plantagenets,  the  Tudors,  or  the  Stuarts.  The
principle  that  a  marriage  which  was  valid  in  the  eyes  of  God
and  of  the  Church  could  be  pronounced  by  the  civil  law  to  be
not  only  criminal  and  irregular,  but  null  and  void,  had  indeed
been  introduced  into  English  legislation  in  the  last  reign,  but
it  was  a  principle  which  was  contrary  to  religion,  and  would
never  be  fully  recognised  by  opinion.  Nor  was  the  Bill  likely
to  fulfil  its  objects.  It  was  intended  to  prevent  improper
persons  from  sitting  on  the  throne,  but  it  imposed  no  restraint
on  the  imprudent  or  profligate  marriage  of  the  reigning  prince.
It  was  intended  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  disputed
successions  ;  but  it  would  almost  certainly  multiply  clandestine
marriages,  and  call  into  being  two  classes  of  heirs  ;  those  who
were  legitimate  in  the  eyes  of  God,  of  the  Church,  and  perhaps
of  public  opinion,  and  those  whose  legitimacy  depended  on  an
Act  of  Parliament.

Arguments  of  this  kind  made  the  Bill  exceedingly  un-
popular outside  Parliament,  and  in  the  House  of  Commons
itself  the  feeling  against  it  was  so  strong  that  an  amendment
limiting  it  to  the  reign  of  George  III.  and  three  years  longer
was  only  rejected  by  a  majority  of  18.' The measure  was

' CorrrKjwiidcme of  Gcorrjc 111.  trith Lord North, i. 99, 100. Park
Jlitit.  xvii.  123.

cii.  XIII.  CHARLES FOX.  4Go

geuemlly  understood  to  eiiinnate  especially  from  the  King,  and
his  influence  was  employed  to  the  utmost  to  carry  it.  'I  do
expect,'  he  wrote  to  Lord  North,  '  every  nerve  to  be  strained  to
carry  the  Bill  through  both  Houses  with  a  becoming  firmness,
for  it  is  not  a  question  that  immediately  relates  to  administra-
tion, but  personally  to  myself,  and  therefore  I  have  a  right  to
expect  a  hearty  support  from  everyone  in  my  service,  and  shall
remember  defaulters.' '

The  Bill  was  carried  by  large  majorities,  and  it  still  remains
on  the  Statute  Book  ;  and,  although  it  may  be  justly  regarded
as  oppressive  by  the  collateral  branches  of  the  House  of  Bruns-
wick, who  are  too  far  from  the  throne  to  have  any  reasonable
prospect  of  succeeding  to  it,  it  cannot  be  said  to  have  hitherto
produced  any  of  the  public  dangers  that  were  foretold.  The
discussions  on  the  measure  are  especially  interesting  as
marking  the  first  appearance  in  opposition  to  the  Government
of  Charles  James  Fox,  a  man  whose  name  during  the  next  thirty
years  occupies  a  foremost  place  in  English  history,  and  whose
character  and  early  life  it  will  now  be  necessary  to  sketch.

He  was  the  third  son  of  the  first  Lord  Holland,  the  old  rival
of  Pitt.  He  had  entered  Parliament  irregularly  and  illegally  in
November  1768,  when  he  had  not  yet  completed  his  twentieth
year,  and  in  February  1770  he  had  been  made  a  Lord  of  the
Admiralty  in  the  Government  of  Lord  North.  The  last  political
connection  of  Lord  Holland  had  been  with  Bute,  and  his  son
appears  to  have  accepted  the  heritage  of  his  Tory  principles
without  inquiry  or  reluctance.  His  early  life  was  in  the  highest
degree  discreditable,  and  gave  very  little  promise  of  greatness.
His  vehement  and  passionate  temperament  threw  him  speedily
into  the  wildest  dissipation,  and  the  almost  insane  indulgence
of  his  father  gratified  his  every  whim.  When  he  was  only  four-
teen Lord  Holland  had  brought  him  to  the  gambling  table  at
Spa,^  and,  at  a  time  when  he  had  hardly  reached  manhood,
he  was  one  of  the  most  desperate  gamblers  of  his  day.  Lord
Holland  died  in  1774,  but  before  his  death  he  is  said  to  have
paid  no  less  than  1 40,000?.  in  extricating  his  son  from  gambling
debts.  The  death  of  his  mother  and  the  death  of  his  elder  brother
in  the  same  year  brought  him  a  considerable  fortune,  including

' Correspondence  of  George  III.  ivith  Lord  XoHh,  i.  91.
^  Russell's  Life  of  Fo.r,  i.  4.
VOL.  III.  II II

4t)(.;  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITHENTII CENTURY. en.  xui.

an  estate  iu  the  Isle  of  Thanet  and  the  sinecure  office  of  Clerk
of  the  Pells  in  Ireland,  which  was  worth  2,300?.  a  year ;  bnt
in  a  short  time  he  was  obliged  to  sell  or  mortgage  everything
he  possessed.  He  himself  nicknamed  his  ante-chamber  the
Jerusalem  Chamber  from  the  multitude  of  Jews  who  haunted  it.
Lord  Carlisle  was  at  one  time  security  for  him  to  the  extent  of
15,000/.  or  16,000Z.  During  one  of  the  most  critical  debates
in  1781  his  house  was  in  the  occupation  of  the  sheriffs.  He
was  even  debtor  for  small  sums  to  chairmen  and  to  waiters
at  Brooks's  ;  and  although  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  was
partly  relieved  by  a  large  subscription  raised  by  his  friends,  he
never  appears  to  have  wholly  emerged  from  the  money  diffi-
culties in  which  his  gambling  tastes  had  involved  him.  Kor
was  this  his  only  vice.  With  some  men  the  passion  for  gambling
is  an  irresistible  moral  monomania,  the  single  morbid  taint
in  a  nature  otherwise  faultless  and  pure.  With  Fox  it  was  but
one  of  many  forms  of  an  insatiable  appetite  for  vicious  ex-
citement, which  continued  with  little  abatement  during  many
years  of  his  public  career.  In  1777,  during  a  long  visit  to
Paris,  he  lived  much  in  the  society  of  Madame  du  Deffand,  and
that  very  acute  judge  of  character  formed  an  opinion  of  him
which  was,  on  the  whole,  very  unfavourable.  He  has  much
talent,  she  said,  much  goodness  of  heart  and  natural  truthful-
ness, but  he  is  absolutely  without  principle,  he  has  a  contempt
for  everyone  who  has  principle,  he  lives  in  a  perpetual  intoxica-
tion of  excitement,  he  never  gives  a  thouglit  to  the  morrow,
he  is  a  man  eminently  fitted  to  corrupt  youth.'  In  1779,  when
he  was  already  one  of  the  foremost  politicians  in  England,  ho
was  one  night  drinking  at  Almack's  with  Lord  Derby,  Major
Stanley,  and  a  few  other  young  men  of  rank,  when  they
determined  at  three  in  the  morning  to  make  a  tour  through
the  streets,  and  amused  themselves  liy  instigating  a  mob  to
break  tlie  windows  of  the  chief  memliers  of  the  Government.^
His  profligacy  with  women during  a  great  part  of  his  life  was

'  Mdme. da  DefTand  to  H.  Wal-  wife,  saj's,  '  Fox  drinks  what  I  .should

polo. ISee Corregjwiidciice of  Fo.p,  i.  call  a  f^rcat  deal,  thonpli he  is not

J).  14fl.  reckoned  to  do  so  by  his  conip.Tnions  ;

■'  Jbid.  i.  224,  225. Fox  afipoara,  Sheridan  exces^ively,  and  (irey  more

liowevcr,  to have  drunk less, or  in  than any of th(?m.  .  .  .  J'it.t, 1 :ini

have  l)ome  drink  better,  than  .several  lold, drinks as much as anybody,

of hi.s leading  contemporaries. Sir  generally  more  tlian  any  of  his  coni-

Oilliert Elliot., in a letter to hi.s  pany,  and  that  he  is  a  pleasant,  con-

(11.  xii^.  ClIARLKS FOX.  407

notorious,  though  he  appears  at  last  to  have  confined  himself
to  his  connection  with  j\Irs.  Annitstead,  whom  he  secretly
married  in  September  1795.'  He  was  the  soul  of  a  group  of
brilliant  and  profligate  spendthrifts,  who  did  much  to  dazzle
and  corrupt  the  fashionable  youth  of  the  time ;  and  in  judging
the  intense  animosity  with  which  George  III.  always  regarded
him,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  his  example  and  his  friend-
ship had  probably  a  considerable  influence  in  encouraging  the
Prince  of  Wales  in  those  vicious  habits  and  in  that  undutiful
course  of  conduct  which  produced  so  much  misery  in  the
palace  and  so  much  evil  in  the  nation.^  One  of  the  friends  of
Charles  Fox  summed  up  his  whole  career  in  a  few  significant
sentences.  *  He  had  three  passions — women,  play,  and  politics.
Yet  he  never  formed  a  creditable  connection  with  a  woman.
He  squandered  all  his  means  at  the  gaming  table,  and,  except
for  eleven  months,  he  was  invariably  in  opposition.'

That  a  man  of  whom  all  this  can  be  truly  said  should  have
taken  a  high  and  honourable  place  in  English  history,  and
should  have  won  for  himself  the  perennial  love  and  loyalty  of
some  of  the  best  Englishmen  of  his  time,  is  not  a  little  sur-
prising, for  a  life  such  as  I  have  described  would  with  most  men
have  destroyed  every  fibre  of  intellectual  energy  and  of  moral
worth.  But  in  truth  there  are  some  characters  which  nature
has  so  happily  compounded  that  even  vice  is  unable  wholly  to
degrade  them,  and  there  is  a  charm  of  manner  and  of  temper
which  sometimes  accompanies  the  excesses  of  a  strong  animal
nature  that  wins  more  popularity  in  the  world  than  the  purest
and  the  most  self-denying  virtue.  Of  this  truth  Fox  was  an
eminent  example.  With  a  herculean  frame,  with  iron  nerves,
with  that  happy  vividness  and  buoyancy  of  temperament  that
can  ever  throw  itself  passionately  into  the  pursuits  and  the  im-
pressions of  the  hour,  and  can  then  cast  them  aside  without  an
effort,  he  combined  one  of  the  sweetest  of  human  tempers,
one  of  the  warmest  of  human  hearts.  Nothing  in  his  career  is
more  remarkable  than  the  spell  which  he  cast  over  men  who  in
character and principles  were  as  imhke  as  possible  to  himself.

vivial  man  at  table.'— Lady  Jlinto's  -  See  Walpole's  Last  Joiirnah,  ii.

Life  of  Sir  G.  Elliot,  i.  180.  480,  502,  503,  598,  o!>9

'  KusscU's  lAfe  of  Fox,  iii.  78.

}I H 2

468  ENGLAND IN TIIK EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. c«.  xiir.

*  He  is  a  man,'  said  Burke,  '  made  to  be  loved,  of  the  most
artless,  candid,  open,  and  benevolent  disposition ;  disinterested
in  the  extreme,  of  a  temper  mild  and  placable  to  a  fault,
without  one  drop  of  gall  in  his  whole  constitution.'  'The
power  of  a  superior  man,'  said  Gibbon,  '  was  blended  in  his  at-
tractive character  with  the  softness  and  simplicity  of  a  child.
Perhaps  no  human  being  was  ever  more  perfectly  exempt  from
the  taint  of  malevolence,  vanity,  or  falsehood.'  '  He  possessed,'
said  Erskine,  '  above  all  men  I  ever  knew,  the  most  gentle,  and
yet  the  most  ardent  spirit.'  He  retained  amid  all  his  vices
a  capacity  for  warm  and  steady  friendship,  a  capacity  for
struggling  passionately  and  persistently  in  opposition,  for  an
impopular  cause  ;  a  purity  of  taste  and  a  love  of  literature  which
made  him,  with  the  exception  of  Burke,  the  foremost  scholar
among  the  leading  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  ;  an
earnestness,  disinterestedness,  and  simplicity  of  character  which
was  admitted  and  admired  even  by  his  political  opponents.

He  resembled  Bolingbroke  in  his  power  of  passing  at  once
from  scenes  of  dissipation  into  the  House  of  Commons,  and
in  retaining  in  public  affairs  during  the  most  disorderly  periods
of  his  private  life  all  his  soundness  of  judgment  and  all  his
force  of  eloquence  and  of  decision.  Gibbon  described  how  he
'  prepared  himself  for  one  important  debate  by  spending
twenty-two  previous  hours  at  the  hazard  table  and  losing
1 1 ,000?.  Walpole  extols  the  extraordinary  brilliancy  of  the
speech  which  he  made  on  another  occasion,  when  he  had  but
just  arrived  from  Newmarket  and  had  been  sitting  up  drinking
the  whole  of  the  preceding  night,  and  he  states  that  in  the
early  period  of  his  brilliant  opposition  to  the  American  policy
of  North  he  was  rarely  in  bed  before  five  in  the  morning,  or
out  of  it  before  two  in  the  afternoon.'  Yet  like  Bolingbroke
he  never  lost  the  taste  and  passion  for  study  even  at  the  time
when  he  was  most  immersed  in  a  life  of  pleasure.  At  Eton  and
Oxford  he  had  been  a  very  earnest  student,  and  few  of  his
contemporaries  can  have  had  a  wider  knowledge  of  the  imagi-
native literatures  of  Greece,  Italy,  or  France.  ITe  was  passion-
ately fond  of  poetry,  and  a  singularly  delicate  and  discriminating
critic;  but  he  always  looked  upon  literature  chiefly  from  ita

' Walp  lie's  Jjist  JiniriiiilK,  ii.  4.

CM.  XI. I.  CHARLES FOX.  469

ornamental  and  imaginative  side.  Incomparably  the  most  im-
portant book  relating  to  the  art  of  government  which  appeared
during  his  lifetime  was  the  'Wealth  of  Nations,'  but  Fox  once
owned  that  he  had  never  read  it,  and  the  history  which  was  his
one  serious  composition  added  nothing  to  his  reputation.  In
books,  however,  he  found  an  unfailing  solace  in  trouble  and  disap-
pointment. One  morning,  when  one  of  his  friends  having  heard
that  Fox  on  the  previous  night  had  been  completely  ruined  at
the  gaming  table,  went  to  visit  and  console  him,  he  found  him
tranquilly  reading  Herodotus  in  the  original.  '  What,'  he  said,
'  would  you  have  a  man  do  who  has  lost  his  last  shilling  ? '

His  merits  as  a  politician  can  only  be  allowed  with  great
deductions  and  qualifications.  But  little  stress  should  indeed  be
laid  on  the  sudden  and  violent  change  in  his  political  principles,
which  was  faintly  foreshadowed  in  1772  and  fully  accomplished
in  1774,  though  that  change  did  undoubtedly  synchronise  with
his  personal  quarrel  with  Lord  North.  Changes  of  principle  and
policy,  which  at  forty  or  fifty  would  indicate  great  instability  of
character,  are  very  venial  at  twenty-four  or  twenty-five,  and  from
the  time  when  Fox  joined  the  Whig  party  his  career  through
long  years  of  adversity  and  of  trial  was  singularly  consistent.
I  cannot,  however,  regard  a  poHtician  either  as  a  great  states-
man or  a  great  party  leader  who  left  so  very  little  of  permanent
value  behind  him,  who  offended  so  frequently  and  so  bitterly
the  national  feelings  of  his  countrymen,  who  on  two  memorable
occasions  reduced  his  party  to  the  lowest  stage  of  depression,
and  who  failed  so  signally  during  a  long  public  life  in
winning  the  confidence  of  the  nation.  His  failure  is  the  more
remarkable  as  one  of  the  features  most  conspicuous  both  in
his  speeches  and  his  letters  is  the  general  soundness  of  his
judgment,  and  his  opinions  during  the  greater  part  of  his  life
were  singularly  free  from  every  kind  of  violence,  exaggeration,
and  eccentricity.  Much  of  it  was  due  to  his  private  life,  much
to  his  divergence  from  popular  opinion  on  the  American  question
and  on  the  question  of  the  French  Eevolution,  and  much  also
to  an  extraordinary  deficiency  in  the  art  of  party  management,
and  to  the  frequent  employment  of  language  which,  though
eminently  adapted  to  the  immediate  purposes  of  debate,  was
certain  from  its injudicious energy  to  be  afterwards  quoted

470  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKV.  ch.  xin.

against  him.  Like  more  than  one  great  master  of  words,  he  was
trammelled  and  injured  at  every  stage  of  his  career  by  his  own
speeches.  The  extreme  shock  which  the  disastrous  coalition  of
1 784  gave  to  the  pubKc  opinion  of  England  was  largely,  if  not
mainly,  due  to  the  outrageous  violence  of  the  language  with
which  Fox  had  in  the  preceding  years  denounced  Lord  North,
and  a  similar  violence  made  his  breach  with  the  Court  irre-
vocable, and  greatly  aggravated  his  dilierence  with  the  nation
on  the  question  of  the  French  Eevolution.

But  if  his  rank  as  a  statesman  and  as  a  party  leader  is  by  no
means  of  the  highest  order,  he  stood,  by  the  concurrent  testi-
mony of  all  his  contemporaries,  in  the  very  first  line,  if  not  in
the  very  first  place,  among  English  parliamentary  debaters.  He
threw  the  whole  energy  of  his  character  into  his  career,  and  he
practised  it  continually  till  he  attained  a  dexterity  in  debate
which  to  his  contemporaries  appeared  little  less  than  miraculous.
'  During  five  whole  sessions,'  he  once  said,  '  I  spoke  every  night
but  one,  and  I  regret  only  that  I  did  not  speak  on  that  night.'
With  a  delivery  that  in  the  beginning  of  his  speeches  was  some-
what slow  and  hesitating,  with  little  method,with  great  repetition,
with  no  grace  of  gesture,  with  an  utter  indifference  to  the  mere
oratory  of  display,  thinking  of  nothing  but  how  to  convince  and
persuade  the  audience  who  were  immediately  before  him,  never
for  a  moment  forgetting  the  vital  issue,  never  employing  an
argument  which  was  not  completely  level  with  the  appre-
hensions of  his  audience,  he  possessed  to  the  very  highest  degree
the  debating  qualities  which  an  educated  political  assembly  of
Englishmen  most  highly  value.  The  masculine  vigour  and
strong  common  sense  of  his  arguments,  his  unfailing  lucidity,
his  power  of  grasping  in  a  moment  the  essential  issue  of  a
debate,  his  skill  in  hitting  blots  and  throwing  the  arguments
on  his  own  side  into  the  most  vivid  and  various  lights,  his
marvellous  memory  in  catching  up  the  scattered  threads  of  a
debate,  the  rare  combination  in  his  speeches  of  the  most  glowing
vehemence  of  style  with  the  closest  and  most  transparent
reasoning,  and  the  air  of  intense  conviction  which  he  threw
into  every  discussion,  had  never  been  surpassed.  He  was  one
of  the  fairest  of  debaters,  and  it  was  said  that  the  arguments
of  his opponents  were  very  rarely  stated  with such  masterly

ui.  XIII.  UXrorULARITY OF FOX.  471

power  as  by  Fox  hiins(!lf  before  he  proceeded  to  grapple  with,
and  to  overthrow  th(*in.'  He  possessed  to  the  highest  degree
what  Walpole  called  the  power  of  'declaiming  argument,'  and
that  combination  of  rapidity  and  soundness  of  judgment  which
is  the  first  quality  of  a  debater.  '  Others,'  said  Sir  George
Savile,  '  may  have  had  more  stock,  but  Fox  had  more  ready
money  about  him  than  any  of  his  party.'  '  I  believe,'  said
Lord  Carlisle,  '  there  never  was  a  person  yet  created  who  had
the  faculty  of  reasoning  like  him.'  '  Nature,'  said  Horace  Wal-
pole, '  had  made  him  the  most  powerful  reasoner  of  the  age.'
'  He  possessed  beyond  all  moderns,'  wrote  Mackintosh,  '  that
union  of  reason,  simplicity,  and  vehemence  which  formed  the
prince  of  orators.'  '  Had  he  been  bred  to  the  bar,'  wrote  Philip
Francis,  '  he  would  in  my  judgment  have  made  himself  in  a
shorter  time,  and  with  much  less  application  than  any  other
man,  the  most  powerful  litigant  that  ever  appeared  there.'  '  He
rose  by  slow  degrees,'  said  Burke,  '  to  be  the  most  brilliant  and
accomplished  debater  the  world  ever  saw.'  His  finest  speeches
were  wholly  unpremeditated,  and  the  complete  subordination  in
them  of  all  rhetorical  and  philosophical  ambition  to  the  imme-
diate purpose  of  the  debate  has  greatly  impaired  their  per-
manent value  ;  but  even  in  the  imperfect  fragments  that  remain,
the  essential  qualities  of  his  eloquence  may  be  plainly  seen.

At  the  period,  however,  we  are  now  examining,  his  talent
was  yet  far  from  its  maturity,  and  the  statesman  who  became
one  of  the  steadiest  and  most  consistent  of  Whigs  was  still  one
of  the  most  ardent  of  Tories.  Almost  the  first  speech  he  ever
made  was  in  favour  of  the  expulsion  of  Wilkes,  and  he  was  one  of
the  ablest  advocates  of  the  election  of  Luttrell,  one  of  the  fiercest
vituperators  of  the  City  democrats.  Very  few  poKticians  were
so  unpopular  in  the  City,  and  in  the  great  riot  of  1771  his
chariot  was  shattered  by  the  mob,  he  was  dragged  through
the  mud,  and  his  life  was  in  some  danger.^  He  defended  the
Nullum  Tempus  Act,  which  was  one  of  the  harshest  measures
of  the  early  period  of  the  reign,  and  resisted  the  attempt  of
Sir  W.  ^Meredith  in  1771  to  procure  its  repeal.  He  opposed
the  law  which  punished  by  disfranchisement  the  gross  corrup-

'  Butler's  Tiemniscencex,  i.  159.  of  this  riot in  Mr.  Trevelyan's  noble

'  8te  the admirable  description Life  of  Fox.

472  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xiii.

tion  of  the  electors  of  Shoreham.  He  opposed  the  law  making
the  Grenville  Election  Act  perpetual.  He  opposed  the  motion
for  relieving  clergymen  of  their  subscription  to  the  Thirty-
nine  Articles,  though  he  expressed  a  strong  wish  that  the  ob-
lifiration  should  be  no  longer  extended  to  students  at  the
Universities.'  It  is  curious  to  find  Lord  Holland  congratulating
himself  on  the  close  connection  of  his  son  with  Lord  North,  and
anticipating  that  the  young  statesman  would  infuse  a  new
energy  into  his  chief  in  the  struggle  with  the  Whigs  that
followed  the  resignation  of  Grafton,^  and  it  is  not  less  curious
to  read  the  judgment  of  the  future  historian  of  James  II.  upon
the  history  of  Clarendon.  '  I  think  the  style  bad,  and  that  he
has  a  great  deal  of  the  old  woman  in  his  way  of  thinking,  but
hate  the  opposite  party  so  much  that  it  gives  me  a  kind  of
partiality  for  him.'  ^

The  resignation  of  Fox  in  February  1772  was  not  due  to
any  general  opposition  to  the  policy  of  North,  but  to  his
opposition  to  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  and  to  his  unsuccessful
effort  to  amend  that  Marriage  Act  of  Lord  Hardwicke  which
his  father  had  so  ably  and  so  bitterly  opposed.  It  appears,
however,  from  a  letter  addressed  by  Lord  Holland  to  Lord
Ossory  that  Fox  considered  that  he  *  had  reason  to  be  dissatis-
fied,' and  to  think  that  '  Lord  North  did  not  treat  him  with  the
confidence  and  attention  he  used  to  do,'  and  also  that  his  father
considered  that  he  '  had  been  too  hasty  in  a  step  of  this  con-
sequence.' Fox  himself  probably  soon  adopted  a  similar  view,
for  he  spoke  of  North  in  a  tone  of  marked  moderation  and  com*
pliment,  expressed  in  strong  terms  his  general  concurrence  with
his  political  principles,  and  clearly  intimated  his  desire  not  to
go  into  general  opposition.*  North  met  his  overtures  in  the
same  spirit,  and  towards  the  close  of  1772  the  first  quarrel  of
Fox  with  the  Tory  party  was  ended.  A  new  disposition  of
places  was  made  expressly  to  open  a  place  for.  him,  and  he
became  one  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Treasury.

The  most  engrossing  subject  of  parliamentary  discussion
in  1772 and  the following  year was  the aiTairs  of  the  East

'  Pari.  IliM.  xvii.  203.  *  Corrcajwndencc  of  Fox,  i.  70-87.

■'  Correspondence  of  Fo.r ,  i.  G.'i,  (H. liussell's  Life  of  Fox,  i.  33-38.
■  Jesse's  Life  of  Selnyn,  iii.  11.

cu.  xiii.  STATE 01'' INDIA.  4i:i

India  Company,  and  in  order  to  understand  them  it  will  be
necessary  to  resume  in  a  few  pages  the  narrative  which  was
broken  off  in  a  former  volume.  The  period  of  Indian  history
during  the  five  years  that  followed  the  return  of  Clive  to
England  in  February,  1760,  though  it  is  not  the  most  tragical,
is  perhaps  the  most  shameful  in  its  whole  annals.  The  victories
of  Clive  had  filled  the  natives  with  an  abject  terror  of  the  Eng-
lish name,  and  had  given  Englishmen  an  almost  absolute  ascen-
dency in  Bengal.  But  this  power  was  not  in  the  hands  of  the
responsible  government  of  England.  It  was  not  even  in  the
hands  of  the  great  commercial  Company  which  nominally  ruled
the  British  possessions  in  Hindostan.  It  was  practically  mono-
polised by  a  great  multitude  of  isolated  officials,  scattered
over  vast  and  remote  districts,  dominating  in  the  native  Courts,
far  removed  from  all  control,  and  commanding  great  bodies  of
disciplined  Sepoys.  INIost  of  them  had  left  England  when
little  more  than  schoolboys,  and  at  a  time  when  their  charac-
ters were  wholly  unformed.  Some  of  them  were  desperate
adventurers  of  broken  fortunes  and  tarnished  honour,  and  they
had  gone  to  the  East  at  a  time  when  very  few  even  of  the  best
Eiu-opeans  would  have  considered  themselves  bound  to  apply
the  whole  moral  law  to  men  of  a  pagan  creed  and  of  a  colour
ditfering  from  their  own.  The  government  of  the  Company
was  too  weak,  too  divided,  and  too  distant  to  exercise  any  real
control  upon  their  conduct ;  and  they  found  themselves  wholly
beyond  the  range  and  influence  of  European  opinion,  and  in
a  country  where  all  the  traditions,  habits,  and  examples  of
government  were  violent  and  despotic.  The  Company  had
regulated  the  salaries  of  its  servants  according  to  a  European
scale,  and  they  were  utterly  insufficient  to  support  them  in  the
East.  By  the  strictest  economy  they  could  barely  live  upon
their  pay,  while  they  had  unlimited  opportunities  of  acquiring
by  illicit  means  enormous  wealth.  Nowhere  in  Europe,  no-
where else,  perhaps,  in  the  world,  were  large  fortunes  so  easily
amassed.  Clive  himself  had  gone  out  a  penniless  clerk  ;  when
he  returned  to  England,  at  thirty-four,  he  had  acquired  a  for-
tune of  more  than  40,000L  a  year,  besides  giving  50,000^.  to
his  relatives  ;'  and  he  afterwards  declared  that  when  he  remem-
•  Malcolm's  Life  of  Clive,  ii.  1 87.

474  r:NGLANI) IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

heretl  what  he  might  have  obtained  he  was  astonished  at  liis
moderation.  It  ^Yas  a  common  thing  for  young  men  who  had
gone  out  without  a  penny  to  return,  in  ten  or  twelve  years,
with  fortunes  that  enabled  them  to  rival  or  eclipse  the  oldest
families  in  their  counties.

It  needs  but  little  knowledge  of  human  nature  to  perceive
that  such  a  combination  of  circumstances  must  have  led  to  the
grossest  abuses.  The  English  officials  began  everywhere  to
trade  on  their  own  account,  and  to  exercise  their  enormous
power  in  order  to  drive  all  competitors  from  the  field.  A  chief
part  of  the  native  revenues  consisted  of  duties  imposed  on  the
transit  of  goods ;  but  the  servants  of  the  Company  insisted  on
exempting  themselves  from  paying  them.  Sometimes  they
sold  for  large  sums  a  similar  exemption  to  native  traders.
They  defied,  displaced,  or  intimidated  all  native  functionaries
who  attempted  to  resist  them.  They  refused  to  permit  any
other  traders  to  sell  the  goods  in  which  they  dealt.  They
even  descended  upon  the  villages,  and  forced  the  inhabitants,
by  flogging  and  confinement,  to  purchase  their  goods  at  exor-
bitant prices,  or  to  sell  what  they  desired  to  purchase,  at  prices
far  below  the  market  value.  They  exacted  heavy  sums,  as  fines,
from  those  who  refused  to  yield  ;  disorganised  the  whole  system
of  taxation  in  the  native  states  by  the  exemptions  they  claimed;
seized,  bound,  and  beat  the  agents  of  the  native  governments ;
openly  defied  the  commands  of  the  Nabob,  and  speedily  under-
mined all  authority  in  Bengal  except  their  own.  Monopolising
the  trade  in  some  of  the  first  necessaries  of  life,  to  the  utter
ruin  of  thousands  of  native  traders,  and  selling  those  necessaries
at  famine  prices  to  a  half-starving  population,  they  reduced
those  who  came  under  their  influence  to  a  wretchedness  they
had  never  known  before.  The  native  rulers  had  often  swept
like  some  fierce  monsoon  over  great  districts,  spreading  de-
vastation and  ruin  in  their  path  ;  but  the  oppression  of  the
English  was  of  a  new  and  wholly  different  kind.  Never  before
had  the  natives  experienced  a  tyranny  which  was  at  once  so
skilful,  so  searching,  and  so  strong.  Every  Sepoy  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  Company  felt  himself  invested  with  the  power  of
his  masters.  Whole  districts  which  had  once  been  populous
and llourishin^ were at  last  utterly  depopulated,  and  it  was

cu XIII.  STATl'] (;!•■ INDIA.  475

noticed  that  on  the  appearance  of  a  jjarfy  of  English  merchants
the  villages  were  at  once  deserted,  and  the  shops  shut,  and  the
roads  thronged  with  panic-stricken  fugitives.

There  were  other  means  by  which  the  vast  fortunes  of  the
upper  servants  of  the  Company  were  accumulated.  The  Com-
pany had  not  adopted  the  plan  of  governing  the  country  directly.
It  ruled  mainly  by  its  influence  over  the  native  authorities,
and  its  chief  servants  exercised  an  almost  unlimited  power  of
promoting  or  degrading.  They  became  the  centre  of  a  vast
web  of  intrigue,  countless  native  officials  competing  for  their
support,  and  purchasing  it  by  gifts  wrung  from  an  im-
poverished people.  More  than  one  native  ruler  struggled
against  the  tyranny,  and  there  was  much  mutiny  and  disorder
among  the  British ;  but  in  critical  moments  they  always  dis-
played a  skill,  a  courage,  and  a  discipline  that  enabled  them
to  crush  all  opposition.  The  Emperor  had  been  murdered  in
1760,  and  his  successor,  having  made  the  Nabob  of  Oude  his
Viceroy,  attempted  to  restore  the  Imperial  ascendency  in
Bengal ;  but,  after  two  severe  defeats,  he  was  compelled  to
retreat.  Meer  Jaffier,  whom  the  English  had  made  Nabob  of
Bengal  after  the  battle  of  Plassy,  was  deposed  by  them,  and
his  son-in-law,  jNIeer  Cossim,  was  raised  to  the  vacant  seat.
He  proved,  however,  to  be  a  man  of  energy  and  capacity.
He  resented  bitterly  the  trade  privileges  of  the  English,  and
he  attempted  to  place  the  English  traders  on  a  level  with  his
own  subjects.  The  English,  finding  him  recalcitrant,  soon  re-
solved to  depose  him.  The  struggle  was  long  and  desperate ;
150  English  were  deliberately  massacred  by  the  Nabob  at
Patna.  The  Nabob  of  Oude  joined  his  forces  with  those  of
Meer  Cossim ;  but  the  prowess  of  the  English  proved  again
victorious.  Meer  Jaffier  was  once  more  made  Nabob  of  Bengal,
and  the  total  defeat  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude  in  the  battle  of
Buxar,  on  September  15,  1764,  destroyed  the  power  of  the  only
great  Mogul  chief  remaining,  and  placed  the  Emperor  himself
under  the  protection  of  the  English.  In  Madras  the  English
influence  was  extended  by  the  subjugation  of  some  indepen-
dent chiefs.  Mohammed  Ali,  the  Nabob  of  that  province,  was
wholly  subservient  to  the  English  ;  and  the  Company  obtained
the  grant  of  a  great  part  of  the  revenues  of  the  Carnatic. In

476  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITKENTU CENTURY. t-H.  yiii.

January  1765,  jNIeer  Jaftier  died,  and  the  succession  to  liis
throne  Uiy  between  his  surviving  son,  who  was  a  youth  of
twenty,  and  an  infant  who  was  the  son  of  his  eldest  deceased
son.  The  choice  legally  rested  with  the  Emjieror  ;  but  he  was
not  even  consulted.  The  Company  made  Nujum-ad-dowla,
the  son  of  Meer  Jaffier,  Nabob  ;  but  he  purchased  the  dignity
both  by  large  money  gifts  and  by  conditions  which  marked
another  step  in  the  subjugation  of  Bengal  to  the  English.
The  new  Nabob  was  compelled  to  leave  the  whole  military
defence  of  the  province  to  the  English,  keeping  only  as  many
troops  as  were  necessary  for  purposes  of  parade  and  for  the
administration  of  justice  and  the  collection  of  the  revenue.
The  civil  administration  was  hardly  less  effectually  transferred
by  a  provision  placing  it  in  the  hands  of  a  Vicegerent,  who
was  to  be  chosen  by  the  Nabob  by  the  advice  of  the  Governor
and  Council,  and  who  might  not  be  removed  without  their
consent.  The  large  revenues  the  Company  already  received
from  Bengal  were  confirmed  and  increased ;  the  Company's
servants  obtained  a  formal  concession  of  the  privilege  of  trading
within  the  country  without  paying  the  duties  exacted  from
native  traders,  provided  they  paid  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  on
the  single  article  of  salt,  and  the  accountants  of  the  Revenue
were  not  to  be  appointed  except  with  their  approbation.

At  every  turn  of  the  wheel,  at  every  change  in  the  system
or  the  personality  of  the  Government,  vast  sums  were  drawn
from  the  native  treasury,  and  most  steps  of  promotion  were
purchased  by  gifts  to  the  English.  A  great  part  of  these
gifts,  going  to  minor  servants  for  procuring  minor  promotions,
have  never  been  traced;  but  the  Select  Committee  of  1773
published  a  detailed  account  of  such  sums  as  had  been  proved
and  acknowledged  to  have  been  distributed  by  the  princes  and
other  natives  of  Bengal  from  the  year  1757  to  1766,  both  in-
cbided.  Omitting  the  great  grant  which  had  been  made  to
Clive  after  the  battle  of  Plassy,  these  sums  amounted  to  no  less
than  5,940,498^

Eumours  of  these  abuses  hnd  begun  to  come  to  England.
The  Indian  adventurer,  or,  as  he  was  popularly  ciillcd,  the
Nabob,  was  now  a  conspicuous  and  a  very  im])opnlar  figure
ill I'lirliairuMit, iiiid the feeling of discontent was greatly

en.  XIII.  SECOND ADMINISTRATION OK CLIVE.  477

strengthened  by  the  impoverished  and  embarrassed  condition
of  the  Company.  While  num])er3  of  its  servants  were  return-
ing to  England  laden  with  enormous  wealth,  the  great  cor-
])oration  itself  seemed  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy.  The  pay
of  its  troops  was  in  arrears,  and  the  treasury  at  Calcutta  was
empty ;  heavy  bills  had  been  drawn  in  Bengal,  and  it  was  with
the  utmost  difficulty  they  could  be  met.'  Vansittart,  who  had
succeeded  Clive  in  the  government  of  Bengal,  though  a  man  of
good  intentions  and  of  some  ability,  was  utterly  unable  to
control  his  servants,  and  he  was  often  paralysed  by  resistance
in his  own  Council. Orders  were  sent  out  from  England,  in

1764,  forbidding  the  servants  of  the  Company  from  engaging
on  their  own  account  in  the  inland  trade,  and  enjoining  that
all  presents  exceeding  4,000  rupees  received  by  them  should
be  paid  to  their  masters  ;  but  these  orders  were  completely
disregarded.  It  was  felt  by  the  Directors  that  if  the  Company
was  to  be  saved,  a  stronger  hand  was  needed  in  India.  After
several  stormy  debates  and  much  division  of  opinion,  Clive
was  again  made  Governor  and  Commander-in-Chief  of  Bengal,
and was  invested  with extraordinary  powers ; and in May,

1765,  he  arrived  at  Calcutta.

His  administration  lasted  only  for  eighteen  months,  but  it
was  one  of  the  most  memorable  in  Indian  history.  He  found,
in  his  own  emphatic  words,  '  that  every  spring  of  the  Govern-
ment was  smeared  with  corruption  ;  that  principles  of  rapacity
and  oppression  universally  prevailed,  and  that  every  spark  of
sentiment  and  public  spirit  was  lost  and  extinguished  in  the
unbounded  lust  of  unmerited  wealth.'  The  condition  of  affairs,
he  informed  the  Directors,  was  '  nearly  desperate,'  and,  he
added,  '  in  a  country  where  money  is  plenty,  where  fear  is  the
principle  of  government,  and  where  your  arms  are  ever  victo-
rious, it  is  no  wonder  that  the  lust  of  riches  should  readily
embrace  the  proffered  means  of  its  gratification,  and  that  the
instruments  of  your  power  should  avail  themselves  of  your
authority  and  proceed  even  to  extortion  in  those  cases  where
simple  corruption  could  not  keep  pace  with  their  rapacity.
Examples  of  this  sort  set  by  superiors  could  not  fail  of  being
followed  in  a  proportionate  degree  by  inferiors.  The  evil  was
'  Mill,  book  iv.  ch.  v.

478  1-:NGLAND in the EIOnTEENXII CENTUJn'.  m.  xiii.

.contagious,  and  spread  among  the  civil  and  military  down  to
the  writer,  the  ensign,  and  the  free  merchant.' '

The  scheme  of  policy  which  he  adopted  shows  clear  traces  of
a  powerful  and  organising  mind.  Though  himself  the  greatest
conqueror  in  the  Indian  service,  he  strongly  censured  the  spirit
of  aggrandisement  and  adventure  that  had  passed  into  the
Company,  and  he  declared  that  they  never  could  expect  good
finances  till  they  recognised  their  own  position  as  a  purely
commercial  body,  put  a  check  to  the  incessant  military  expe-
ditions in  which  they  had  engaged,  and  resolved  to  restrict
their  influence  and  their  possessions  to  Bengal,  Orissa,  and
Behar.^  But  the  relations  of  the  English  with  the  Emperor
and  with  the  Nabob  of  Bengal  were  both  changed.  The  Em-
peror and  his  Vizier,  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  were  still  in  a  state
of  hostility  to  the  Company,  but  they  were  thoroughly  broken
and  humiliated,  and  the  war  had  for  some  time  languished.
Clive  now  concluded  a  definite  peace  with  them.  The  Nabob
of  Oude  received  back  all  his  territory  on  paying  a  large  sum
in  compensation,  with  the  exception  of  Allahabad  and  Corah,
which  were  reserved  for  the  Emperor.  The  financial  relations
between  the  Emperor  and  Bengal  were  much  modified,  and  one
change  was  made  which  was  of  capital  importance  in  the  future
Government  of  India.  The  'Dewannee,'  or  right  of  collecting,
receiving,  and  administering  the  revenue  of  Bengal,  Orissa,  and
Behar,  was  granted  to  the  Enghsh.  They  thus  became  practi-
cally the  sovereigns  of  the  country.  The  Nabob  of  Bengal
received  a  large  pension  from  the  Government,  but  he  was
deprived  of  all  real  power,  though,  by  the  advice  of  Clive,  he
was  still  retained  as  a  nominal  ruler,  in  order  that  in  case  of
any  complication  with  European  Powers  the  English  might  be
able,  under  the  fiction  of  a  native  prince,  to  preserve  a  somewhat
greater  liberty  of  action  in  declaring  or  in  dechning  hostilities.

He  at  the  same  time  made  great  efforts  to  cure  the  abuses
of  the  administration.  The  difficulties  he  had  here  to  en-
coimter  were  enormous,  for  he  had  not  only  to  struggle  with
the  opposition  of  the  civil  servants  in  India,  but  also  with  very
serious  obstacles  raised  by  the  Directors  at  home.  In  spite  of
the  orders  of  the Directors enormous  presents  had  passed  to

'  Malcolm's  TAfe  of  Clive  ii.  335-338. =  Mill,  iv.  7.

CH.  xm.  SECOND ADMINISTRATION OF CrrV'P:.  4  79

their  cliief  servants  in  India  on  the  accession  of  Nnjurn-ad-
dowla,  and  on  the  appointment  of  his  vicegerent  the  inland  trade
had  been  expressly  recognised  and  encouraged  by  the  treaty  with
the  new  Nabob.  At  the  same  time  the  Directors  positively  refused
to  raise  the  salaries  of  their  servants,  and  until  such  a  step  was
taken  it  was  impossible  that  the  inland  trade  could  be  sup-
pressed. Some  compromise  was  evidently  necessary,  and  that
which  was  adopted  by  Clive,  though  it  was  in  direct  diso-
bedience to  the  instructions  of  his  superiors  at  home,  and
though  he  was  accused,  apparently  with  good  reason,  of  having
in  the  course  of  the  transaction  speculated  largely  for  his  own
interest,'  was  probably  one  of  the  best  that  could  have  been
devised.  A  peremptory  order  was  issued  forbidding  the  infa-
mous practice  of  forcing  the  natives  to  buy  and  sell  at  such
prices  as  the  servants  of  the  Company  chose  to  prescribe,  and
the  inland  trade  and  presents  from  natives  were  in  general
terms  prohibited.  CHve  resolved,  however,  to  maintain  for  the
Company  a  strict  monopoly  of  the  salt  trade,  which  was  probably
the  most  lucrative  in  Bengal,  and  to  assign  the  profits  of  that
trade  in  specified  proportions  to  the  Governor,  the  Councillors,
and  the  senior  civil  and  military  officers.  The  shares  of  the
trade  were  granted  to  the  civil  servants  as  low  down  as  factors,
and  to  the  military  servants  as  low  down  as  majors,  and  the
chaplains  and  surgeons  were  included  in  the  arrangement.  35
per  cent,  was  allowed  as  a  tax  to  the  Company.  According  to
the  estimate  of  Clive,  the  profits  from  this  source  of  a  councillor
or  colonel  would  be  at  least  7,000^  a  year ;  those  of  a  major
or  factor,  2,000^.^

These  measures  and  several  others  of  detailed  reform  were
carried  amid  storms  of  unpopularity.  When  some  of  the  Bengal
functionaries  refused  to  act  imder  him,  he  sent  to  Madras  for
substitutes.  On  one  day  200  officers  resigned,  and  but  for  the
fidelity  of  the  Sepoys  the  whole  military  organisation  of  the
Company  might  have  fallen  to  the  ground.  But  the  iron  will
of  Clive  was  never  diverted  from  its  object.  He  encountered
the  animosities  of  those  whose  illicit  gains  he  disturbed  with
the  same  calm  courage  which  he  had  displayed  at  Fort  ^^'illiam,

'  Mill,  hook  iv.,  cliap.  vii.  ;  see  too  chap.  v.
■^  Jlalcolm's  Clin;  iii.  lUl-lOS.

480  ENGLAND IN Till-: EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xm.

at  Plassy,  and  at  Chinsurali ;  ami  when  at  last,  in  January
17G7,  his  broken  health  obliged  him  to  return  to  England,  he
had  undoubtedly  left  the  state  of  India  much  better  than  he
had  found  it.  Had  the  lines  of  his  policy  been  steadily  main-
tained, the  affiiirs  of  the  Company  might  never  have  passed
under  the  hostile  notice  of  Parliament.

The  Directors,  however,  refused  to  confirm  the  provisions  he
had  made  about  the  salt  trade,  and  on  the  removal  of  Clive  the
old  trade  abuses  grew  up  again,  though  in  a  somewhat  mitigated
form.  The  belief  in  the  enormous  wealth  of  India  had  greatly
increased,  and  the  proprietors  of  the  Company  began  to  clamour
loudly  for  an  augmented  dividend.  In  spite  of  the  great  debts
of  the  Company,  in  spite  of  the  strong  opposition  of  the  Direc-
tors, the  proprietors  insisted  on  raising  the  dividend  in  1766
from  6  to  10  per  cent.,  and  in  1767  to  12^  per  cent.

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  great  question  of  the  justice
and  propriety  of  a  parliamentary  interference  with  the  govern-
ment of  India  first  came  into  practical  importance.  We  have
seen  in  a  former  chapter  that  Chatham  strongly  maintained  that
it  was  both  the  right  and  the  duty  of  the  Crown  to  take  the
government  of  India  under  its  direct  control ;  that  no  subjects
could  acquire  the  sovereignty  of  any  territory  for  themselves,
but  only  for  the  nation  to  which  they  belonged  ;  that  while
the  trading  privileges  of  the  Company  should  be  preserved  as
long  as  its  charter  was  in  force,  its  territorial  revenue  belonged
of  right  to  the  nation ;  and  that  the  gross  corruption  and
oppression  that  existed  in  India  loudly  called  for  parliamentary
interference.  These  views  were  maintained  with  equal  em-
phasis by  Shelburne  ;  but  in  the  Cabinet  of  Chatham  himself
Charles  Townshend  strongly  urged  that  the  question  should
not  be  brought  before  the  House  of  Commons,  and  the  whole
Eockingham  section  of  the  Whigs  maintained  the  sole  right  of
the  Company  under  the  terms  of  its  charters  to  the  govern-
ment and  revenues  of  India.  As  no  reservation  of  territorial
revenue  to  the  Crown  had  been  made  when  these  charters  were
purchased  by  the  Company,  granted  by  the  Crown,  and  con-
firmed by  Parliament,  they  contended  that  the  claims  now  put
forward  on  the  part  of  the  Government  were  utterly  incon-
bistcnt  with  good  f;ii(li or  rospect  for  property. In  November

CH.  xni.  GOVERNMENT RESTRAINS THE COMPANY.  481

1766,  however,  Parliament  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire
into  and  to  publish  the  state  of  the  Company's  revenue  and
other  affairs,  its  relations  to  the  Indian  princes,  the  expenses
the  Government  had  incurred  on  its  account,  and  even
the  correspondence  of  the  Company  with  its  servants  in
India.  It  was  with  difficulty  that  the  Company  procured
an  exemption  of  the  confidential  portion  of  that  correspond-
ence from  the  general  publicity.  In  1767  a  law  was  passed
which  introduced  several  new  regulations  into  the  manner  of
voting  and  declaring  dividends  in  public  companies ;  *  it  was
immediately  followed  by  an  Act  which,  in  defiance  of  the  late
resolution  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors  raising  the  dividend  of
the  East  India  Company  to  12^  per  cent.,  limited  it  till  the
next  Session  of  Parliament  to  10  per  cent.,^  and  the  Company,
terrified  by  the  action  of  the  Grovernment,  then  entered  into  an
agreement,  by  which  it  purchased  the  extension  of  its  terri-
torial revenue,  and  also  a  temporary  exemption  from  a  duty
which  had  been  imposed  upon  some  kinds  of  tea,  bv  binding
itself  to  pay  400,000^  a  year  into  the  public  exchequer  for  twc
years  from  February  1,  1767.^

The  question  of  right  which  was  thus  raised  was  a  very
grave  one.  The  enactment  of  a  law  restraining  a  trading
company  from  granting  such  dividends  as  were  voted  and
declared  by  those  who  were  legally  entrusted  with  the  power  of
doing  so,  was  opposed  by  all  sections  of  the  Opposition  as  a
gross  violation  of  the  rights  of  property,  and  as  inconsistent
with  the  security  of  every  commercial  corporation  in  the  coun-
try. Counsel  were  heard  against  the  Bill.  On  the  third  reading
in  the  House  of  Lords  a  minority  of  forty-four  divided  against
a  majority  of  fifty-nine,  and  nineteen  peers  signed  a  protest
against  the  measure.*  The  principle,  however,  was  maintained
and  extended.  In  1768  the  restraint  on  the  dividend  was  con-
tinued for  another  year,  and  in  1769  a  new  agreement  was
made  by  Parliament  with  the  East  India  Company  for  five
years,  during  which  time  the  Company  was  guaranteed  its  ter-
ritorial revenues,  but  was  bound  to  pay  an  annuity  of  400,000^,

'  7  Geo.  III.  c.  48.  Aiinah  of  Commerce,  iii.  463-466.

-  ILid.  c.  40.  *  Adolphus,  i.  801,302.

^  Ibid.  c.  56,  57.  See  Macpherson's

VOL. III.  I I

482  KNULAND IN THK EIGHTEKNTU CKNTUKY. ch.  xiii.

and  to  export  a  specified  tiuautity  of  liritish  goods.  It  was  at
liberty  to  increase  its  dividend  during  that  time  to  12^  per
cent,  providing  the  increase  in  any  one  year  did  not  exceed
1  per  cent.  If,  however,  the  dividend  should  fall  below  10  per
cent,  the  sum  to  be  paid  to  the  Government  was  to  be  pro-
portionately reduced.  If  it  sank  to  6  per  cent,  the  payment  to
the  Government  was  to  cease.  In  case  the  finances  of  the
Company  enabled  it  to  pay  off  some  specified  debts,  it  was  to
lend  some  money  to  the  public  at  2  per  cent.'

It  is  obvious  that  this  law  rested  upon  the  supposition  that
the  Company  possessed  an  enormous  surplus  revenue,  and  a
large  section  of  politicians  regarded  the  exaction  of  the  annuity
as  a  simple  extortion,  which  was  wholly  unwarranted  by  the
terms  of  the  charter.  It  soon  became  evident  that  the  Com-
pany was  totally  unable  to  pay  it.  Its  debts  were  already
estimated  at  more  than  six  millions  sterling.^  It  supported
an  army  of  about  30,000  men.  It  paid  about  one  million
sterling  a  year  in  the  form  of  tributes,  pensions,  or  compensa-
tions to  the  Emperor,  the  Nabob  of  Bengal,  and  other  great
native  personages.'  Its  incessant  wars,  though  they  had  hitherto
been  always  successful,  were  always  expensive,  and  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  wealth  which  should  have  passed  into  the  general
exchequer  was  still  diverted  to  the  private  accounts  of  its  ser-
vants. At  this  critical  period,  too,  the  Company  was  engaged
in  a  desperate  and  calamitous  struggle  withKyder  Ali,  the  ruler
of  Mysore,  who  was  by  far  the  ablest  and  most  daring  native
enemy  the  English  had  yet  encountered  in  Hindostan.  The
war  had  begun  in  1767,  when  Hyder  Ali  succeeded  in  inducing
the  Nizam  of  Deccan  to  join  him  against  the  English ;  but
although  it  had  become  evident  from  the  begirming  that  an
enemy  had  arisen  who  was  widely  different  in  skill  and  courage
from  those  whom  the  Company  had  as  yet  encountered,  it
seemed  as  if  English  discipline  was  likely  to  be  as  usual  com-
pletely victorious.  After  several  vicissitudes  of  fortune  Hyder
Ali  was  defeated  in  a  great  battle  near  Amboor.  The  Nizam
ffll  away  from  him  and  made  peace  with  the  English.  Man-
galore,  one  of  Hyder  Ali's  principal sonports,  was  captured  by

'  ;»  Geo.  III.  c 24.  ' H'ni/t/i  of  \iitin)iH,  bonk  v.  cli.  i.  part  3

^  An II II (I I  llnj'iatvr,  177:5,  p.  fi5.

CH.  XIII.  liANKI{lJl'T(JY Ol' TIIJ', COMPANY.  481:5

a  S(iu;idr(.'n  (Vom  lionibay.  Colonel  Sinilli  par.sued  the  defeated
chieftain  into  his  own  country,  and  although  he  was  unable  to
force  him  to  give  battle,  he  penetrated  far  into  Mysore  and
captured  several  fortresses.  But  towards  the  close  of  1768
a  great  turn  took  place  in  the  fortunes  of  the  war.  Ilydor  Ali
reconquered  everything  that  had  been  taken.  With  14,000
horsemen  and  a  large  force  of  Sepoys,  he  swept  almost  without
resistance  over  the  southern  division  of  the  Carnatic,  reducing
a  once  fertile  laud  to  utter  ruin ;  and  soon  after,  having  by  a
series  of  artful  manoeuvres  succeeded  in  drawing  the  English
army  far  from  Madras,  he,  at  the  head  of  0,000  cavalry,  tra-
versed 120  miles  in  three  days,  and  appeared  unexpectedly  in
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  English  capital.  He  at
once  proposed  a  peace ;  and,  as  the  open  town  and  the  rich
country  round  ]Madras  were  at  his  mercy,  the  English  agreed  to
negotiate.  In  April  1769  a  treaty  was  signed,  providing  for
a  mutual  restitution  of  conquests  and  an  alliance.

It  was  the  first  instance  in  which  a  victorious  native  Power
liad  almost  dictated  terms  to  the  English,  and  its  effects  on  the
fortunes  of  the  Company  were  immediate.  The  price  of  East
India  Stock  fell  60  per  cent.,  the  credit  of  the  Company  sank,
and  as  the  revenues  from  India  began  to  fail,  and  the  shadow
of  unpopularity  fell  more  darkly  upon  the  Corporation,  the  old
complaints  of  the  abuses  that  were  practised  grew  louder
Three  supervisors  were  sent  out  to  India  by  the  Directors  in
1769,  with  authority  to  investigate  every  department  of  the
service ;  but  the  ship  in  which  they  sailed  never  reached  its
destination.  In  1770  Bengal  was  desolated  by  perhaps  the
most  terrible  of  the  many  terrible  fomines  that  have  darkened
its  history,  and  it  was  estimated  that  more  than  a  third  part  of
its  inhabitants  perished.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  these  calamities,
in  spite  of  the  rapidly  accumulating  evidence  of  the  inadequacy
of  the  Indian  revenues,  the  rapacity  of  the  proprietors  at  home
prevailed,  and  dividends  of  12  and  12^  per  cent.,  as  permitted
by  the  last  Act,  were  declared.  The  result  of  all  this  could
hardly  be  doubtful.  In  July  1772,  the  Directors  were  obliged
to  confess  that  the  sum  required  for  the  necessary  payments  of
the  nest  three  months  was  deficient  to  the  extent  of  no  less
than 1,293,000?.,  and  in  August  the Chairman and  Deputy

484 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xih.

Chairman  waited  on  the  INIinister  to  inform  him  that  nothinoj
short  of  a  loan  of  at  least  one  million  from  the  public  could
save  the  Company  from  ruin.

The  whole  system  of  Indian  government  had  thus  for  a
time  broken  down.  The  division  between  the  Directors  and
a  larg€  part  of  the  proprietors,  and  between  the  authorities
of  the  Company  in  England  and  those  in  India,  the  pri-
vate and  selfish  interests  of  its  servants  in  India,  and  of  its
proprietors  at  home,  the  continual  oscillation  between  a  policy
of  conquest  and  a  policy  of  trade,  and  the  great  want  in  the
whole  organisation  of  any  adequate  power  of  command  and  of
restraint,  had  fatally  weakened  the  great  corporation.  In  Eng-
land the  conviction  was  rapidly  growing  that  the  whole  system
of  governing  a  great  country  by  a  commercial  company  was
radically  and  incurably  false.  The  arguments  on  the  subject
cannot  be  better  stated  than  they  were  a  few  years  later  by
Adam  Smith.  The  first  interest,  he  said,  of  the  Sovereign  of  a
people  is  that  its  wealth  should  increase  as  much  as  possible  ;
and  this  is  especially  the  case  in  a  country  like  Bengal,  where
the  revenue  is  chiefly  derived  from  land  rent.  But  a  company
of  merchants  exercising  sovereign  power  will  always  treat  their
character  of  sovereigns  as  a  mere  appendix  to  their  character  of
merchants,  will  make  all  government  subservient  to  the  main-
tenance of  trade  monopoly,  and  will  employ  it  to  stunt  or  dis-
tort the  economical  development  of  the  people  over  whom  they
rule.  In  the  Spice  Islands  the  Dutch  were  said  to  burn  all
spiceries  which  a  fertile  season  produces  beyond  what  they
expected  to  be  able  to  dispose  of  in  Em*ope  with  such  profit  as
they  deemed  suflBcient.  In  British  India,  Government  officials
had  been  known  to  compel  a  peasant  to  plough  up  a  rich  field
of  poppies,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  they  might  be  able  to
sell  their  own  opium  at  a  higher  price.  As  sovereigns  it  was
the  plain  interest  of  the  Company  that  their  subjects  should
buy  European  goods  as  cheaply,  and  should  sell  their  own
goods  as  profita])]y,  as  possible.  As  merchants  possessing  the
sole  right  of  trading  between  India  and  Europe,  it  was  their
interest  to  compel  the  Indians  to  buy  what  the  Company
supplied  at  the  dearest  rate,  and  sell  what  the  Company  pur-
chased  for  Ihe European market  at  the  cheapest  rate. The

OH.  XIII.  HELPLESSNESS  Oi^ THE COMPANY.  485

first  object  of  sovereign  merchant  companies  is  always  to  ex-
clude competitors  from  the  markets  of  the  country  they  rule,
and  consequently  to  reduce  some  part  at  least  of  the  surplus
produce  of  that  country  to  what  they  themselves  require  or
can  dispose  of  at  the  profit  they  consider  reasonable.  In-
sensibly but  invariably,  on  all  ordinary  occasions,  they  will
prefer  the  little  and  transitory  profit  of  the  monopolist  to  the
great  and  permanent  revenues  of  a  sovereign.  And  the  public
trade  monopoly  of  the  Company  is  but  a  small  part  of  the  evil.
This,  at  least,  extends  only  to  the  trade  with  Europe.  But  the
private  trade  of  the  servants  of  the  Company  extended  to  a  far
greater  number  of  articles,  to  every  article  in  which  they  chose
to  deal,  to  articles  of  the  first  necessity  intended  for  home  con-
sumption. It  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  clerks  of  a.  great
counting  house,  10,000  miles  distant  from  their  masters,  will
abstain  from  a  trade  which  is  at  once  so  lucrative  and  so  easy,
and  it  is  no  less  idle  to  doubt  that  this  trade  will  become  a
ruinous  form  of  oppression.  The  Company  has,  at  least,  a
connection  with  India,  and  has,  therefore,  a  strong  interest
in  not  ruining  it.  Its  servants  have  gone  out  for  a  few  years
to  make  their  fortunes,  and  when  they  have  left  the  country
they  are  absolutely  indifferent  to  its  fate.  If  their  wishes  are
attended  to,  they  will  establish  the  same  legal  monopoly  for
their  private  trade  as  the  Company  possesses  for  its  public
trade.  If  they  are  not  suffered  to  do  so,  they  will  attain  the
same  end  by  other  means,  by  perverting  the  authority  of
Government  and  the  administration  of  justice,  in  order  to
harass  and  to  ruin  all  rival  traders.^

The  subject  was  discussed  in  Parliament,  in  1772,  at  great
length,  and  with  much  acrimony.  Several  propositions  were
put  forward  by  the  Directors,  but  rejected  by  the  Parliament ;
and  Parliament,  under  the  influence  of  Lord  North,  and  in
spite  of  the  strenuous  and  passionate  opposition  of  Burke,
asserted  in  unequivocal  terms  its  right  to  the  territorial
revenues  of  the  Company.  A  Select  Committee,  consisting  of
thirty-one  members,  was  appointed  by  Parliament  to  make  a
full  inquiry  into  the  affairs  of  the  Company.  It  was  not,
however,  till  1773  that  decisive  measures  were taken. The

' Wealth  of  .Vatkins,  book  iv.  ch.  vii.

486  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGIITKKNTII CENTL'KY.  en.  xiii.

Company  was  at  this  time  absolutely  helpless.  Lord  North
commanded  an  overwhelming  majority  in  both  Houses,  and  on
Indian  questions  he  was  supported  by  a  portion  of  the  Oppo-
sition. The  Company  was  on  the  brink  of  ruin,  unable  to  pay
its  tribute  to  the  Government,  unable  to  meet  the  bills  which
were  becoming  due  in  Bengal.  The  publication,  in  1773,  of
the  report  of  the  Select  Committee,  revealed  a  scene  of  mal-
administration, oppression,  and  fraud  which  aroused  a  wide-
spread indignation  through  England ;  and  the  Government
was  able  without  difficulty,  in  spite  of  the  provisions  of  the
charter,  to  exercise  a  complete,  controlling  and  regulating
power  over  the  affairs  of  the  Company.  A  new  Committee —
this  time  sitting  in  secret — was  appointed  by  the  Government
to  investigate  its  affairs,  and  Parliament  took  the  decisive  step
of  preventing  by  law  the  Company  from  sending  out  to  India
a  Commission  of  Supervision,  which  it  had  appointed,  on  the
ground  that  it  would  throw  a  heavy  additional  expenditure  on
its  tottering  finances.*

A  very  earnest  opposition  was  made  to  this  measure  by  a
few  members,  among  whom  Burke  was  pre-eminent.  The  part
which  Burke  took  in  the  contest  is  a  curious  illustration  of  the
strong  natural  conservatism  of  his  intellect,  and  a  curious  con-
trast to  his  later  speeches  on  Indian  affairs ;  and  few  persons
who  follow  his  speeches  as  they  appear  in  the  parliamentary
reports  will  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  ungovernable  violence  of
language,  and  the  glaring  faults  of  taste,  temper,  and  tact
which  they  display.^  His  arguments,  however,  when  reduced
to  their  simplest  expression,  were  very  forcible.  He  contended
that  to  violate  a  royal  charter,  repeatedly  confirmed  by  Act  of
Parliament,  was  to  strike  at  the  security  of  every  trading  cor-
poration, and,  indeed,  of  all  private  property,  in  the  kingdom,
and  that  it  was  a  clear  violation  of  the  charter  of  a  self-governed
Company  to  prevent  it,  by  Act  of  Parliament,  from  managing
its  own  affairs  and  exercising  a  supervision  and  control  over  its
own  servants. Every  additional  proof  of  the  abuses  in  India

'  13  Geo.  III.  c.  9. An?iiial  lU'ffis-  summary  of the arf^umcnts  against

ter,  1773,  pp.  73-76.  the  (iovernment  proposal  in  the  An-

^  Kee  j'nrl.  l/ist.  xvii. It  i.s  ciiri-  vual  Iligistcr  and in  the  protests  of

OT3S  to  contrast  the  wild  languape of  the  dissentient  jieers,  which  were  pro-

these speeches with  the admiralilc  V)al)ly  all  written  V)y  I'.urke.

L-H.  xni. ARGUMENTS AGAINST GOVERNMENT CONTROL.  4H7

was  ail  additional  argument  for  permitting  the  Cwmpaiiy  to
send  out  a  coniniittee  of  supervision,  and  the  simple  postjjune-
ment  of  such  a  step  would  necessarily  aggravate  the  evils  that
were  complained  of.  It  was  true  that  the  financial  condition
of  the  Company  was  deplorable ;  but  its  embarrassments  were
partly  due  to  transient  and  exceptional  causes,  and  mainly  to
the  conduct  of  the  Government  itself.  Without  a  shadow  of
authority  in  the  terms  of  the  charter  or  in  the  letter  of  the
law,  the  ministers  had  raised  a  distinction  between  the  terri-
torial revenue  and  the  trade  revenue  of  the  Company.  By
threatening  the  former  they  had  extorted,  in  addition  to  the
legitimate  duties  which  had  been  paid  into  the  Imperial
exchequer,  no  less  than  400,000Z.  a  year,  at  a  time  when  the
finances  of  the  Company  were  altogether  unable  to  bear  the
exaction.  This  tribute,  which  was  the  true  origin  of  the
bankruptcy  of  the  Company,^  was  purely  extortionate.  In
one  form  or  another  it  was  computed  that  little  less  than  two
millions  sterling  had  of  late  passed  annually  from  the  Company
to  the  Government.^  The  interference  of  Parliament  with  the
affairs  of  the  Company  had  been  going  on  since  1767,  and  had
produced  nothing  but  unmixed  disaster.  Not  a  single  abuse
had  been  in  reality  removed.  Government  had  shaken  the
credit  of  the  Company;  had  introduced  a  fatal  element  of
uncertainty  into  all  its  calculations  ;  had  imposed  upon  it  a
tribute  which  reduced  it  to  bankruptcy;  had  paralysed  its
eflForts  to  control  the  abuses  of  its  own  servants.  Nor  was
there  the  smallest  reason  to  believe  that  the  withdrawal  of
the  chief  patronage  of  India  from  the  Company,  and  the
transfer  of  an  almost  boundless  fund  of-corruption  to  the  ser-
vants of  the  Crown,  would  prove  beneficial  either  to  England  or
to  India.  In  the  eyes  of  the  law  Parliament  may,  no  doubt,
be  regarded  as  omnipotent ;  but  its  power  does  not  equitably
extend  to  the  violation  of  compacts  and  the  subversion  of  pri-
vileges which  had  been  duly  purchased.  Yet  this  was  the
course  which  Parliament  was  now  taking  when  it  virtually  can-
celled the  charter  it  had  granted.

These arguments,  however,  proved  of  no  avail. A  large
number  of  proprietors  of  the  Company  supported  the  Goveru-

'  Pari.  Hist.  xvii.  567.  -  Ann.  lleg.  177r> y.  76.

488  ENGLAND IN THE ElGIlTEliNTH CENTURY. cii.  xni.

ment.  Clive  himself,  who  was  in  violent  opposition  to  the
predominating  party  among  the  Directors,  was  usually  on  their
side.'  The  public  mind  was  at  last  keenly  sensible  of  the
enormity  of  the  abuses  in  India,  and  it  was  felt  that  an  empire
already  exceeding  in  magnitude  every  European  country  except
France  and  Russia,  with  a  gross  revenue  of  four  millions,  and
a  trade  in  proportion,^  should  not  any  longer  be  left  uncon-
trolled by  Parliament.  The  Company  was  obliged  to  come  to
Parliament  for  assistance,  and  the  ministers  resolved  to  avail
themselves  of  the  situation  to  reorganise  its  whole  constitution.
By  enormous  majorities  two  measures  were  passed  through
Parliament  in  1773,  which  mark  the  commencement  of  a  new
epoch  in  the  history  of  the  East  India  Company.  By  one
Act,  the  ministers  met  its  financial  embarrassments  by  a
loan  of  1,400,000L  at  an  interest  of  4  per  cent.,  and  agreed  to
forego  the  claim  of  400,000^.  till  this  loan  had  been  discharged.
The  Company  was  restricted  from  declaring  any  dividend  above

6  per  cent,  till  the  new  loan  had  been  discharged,  and  above

7  per  cent,  till  its  bond-debt  was  reduced  to  1,500,000?.
It  was  obliged  to  submit  its  accounts  every  half-year  to
the  Lords  of  the  Treasury  ;  it  was  restricted  from  accepting
bills  drawn  by  its  servants  in  India  for  above  300,000Z.  a
year,  and  it  was  obliged  to  export  to  the  British  settlements
within  its  limits  British  goods  of  a  specified  value.  By  an-
other Act,  the  whole  constitution  of  the  Company  was  changed,
and  the  great  centre  of  authority  and  power  was  transferred  to
the  Crown.  The  qualification  to  vote  in  the  Court  of  Proprietors
was  raised  from  5001.  to  1,000?.,  and  restricted  to  those  who  had
held  their  stock  for  twelve  months ;  and  by  this  measure  1,246
voters  were  at  once  disfranchised.  The  Directors,  instead  of
being,  as  heretofore,  annually  elected,  were  to  sit  for  four  years,  a
quarter  of  the  number  being  annually  renewed.  The  Mayor's
Court  at  Calcutta  was  to  be  restricted  to  small  mercantile  cases,
and  all  the  more  important  matters  of  jurisdiction  in  India  were
to  be  submitted  to  a  new  court,  consisting  of  a  Chief  Justice
and  three  puisne  judges  appointed  by  the  Crown.  A  Governor-
General  of  Bengal,  Behar,  and  Orissa,  was  to  be  appointed  at
a  salary  of  25,000?.  a  year,  with  four  Councillors,  at  salaries  of

' Malcolms  Lifcn/  Clivc,  iii.  :]i:5-316.  ^  Thid.  289.

CH.  xm.  THE INDIAN ACT OF 177o.  4tf9

8,u00L  a  year,  and  the  other  presidencies  were  made  subordi-
nate to  Ben<j;al.  The  first  Governor-General  and  Councillors
■were  to  be  nominated,  not  by  the  East  India  Company,  but  by
Parliament ;  thoy  were  to  be  named  in  the  Act,  and  to  hold
their  offices  for  five  years ;  after  that  period  the  appointments
reverted  to  the  Directors,  but  were  subject  to  the  approbation  of
the  Crown.  Everything  in  the  Company's  correspondence  with
India  relating  to  civil  and  military  affairs  was  to  be  laid  before
the  Government.  No  person  in  the  service  of  the  King  or  of
the  Company  might  receive  presents,  and  the  Governor-General,
the  Councillors,  and  the  judges  were  excluded  firom  all  com-
mercial profits  and  pursuits.'

By  this  memorable  Act  the  charter  of  the  East  India
Company  was  completely  subverted,  and  the  government  of
India  passed  mainly  into  the  hands  of  the  ministers  of  the
Crown  The  chief  management  of  affairs  was  vested  in  persons
in  whose  appointment  or  removal  the  Company  had  no  voice  or
share,  who  might  govern  without  its  approbation  or  sanction,
but  who  nevertheless  drew,  by  authority  of  an  Act  of  Parlia-
ment, large  salaries  from  its  exchequer.  Such  a  measure
could  be  justified  only  by  extreme  necessity  and  by  brilliant
success,  and  it  was  obviously  open  to  the  gravest  objections
from  many  sides.  The  direct  appointment  by  the  legislative
body  of  great  executive  officers  was  especially  denounced  as  at
once  unprecedented  and  unconstitutional ;  for  it  freed  ministers
from  the  responsibility,  while  it  left  them  the  advantages,  of
the  patronage,  and  thus,  in  the  words  of  the  protest  of  the
Eockingham  peers,  '  defeated  the  wise  design  of  the  Constitu-
tion, which  placed  the  nomination  of  all  offices  either  imme-
diately or  derivatively  in  the  Crown,  while  it  committed  the
check  upon  improper  nominations  to  Parliament.'  Some  of  the
names  then  selected  were  afterwards  very  prominent  in  English
and  Indian  history.  Warren  Hastings  was  the  first  Governor-
General  :  Barwell,  Clavering,  Monson,  and  Phihp  Francis  were
the  four  Councillors.

In  a  future  chapter  of  this  history  it  will  be  my  task  to  de-
scribe the  results  of  this  great  change  and  experiment  in  govern-

'  13 Geo. m. ch. r.3,  64  ;  Pari. 1773,  95-105  ;  Mill's  Hii^onj  of  Bn-
Hist.  xfii.  928,  929 ;  Annual  lieffistir tish  India,  book  iv.  ch.  ix.

490 ENGLAND  IN  TUE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch  xni.

ment  which  makes  the  year  1773  so  memorable  in  the  history
of  British  administration  in  India.  The  overwhehuing  majori-
ties by  which  the  measure  was  carried,  in  spite  of  the  opposition
of  the  Company,  of  the  City  of  London,  and  of  the  Rockingham
Whigs,  show  that  it  obtained  something  more  than  a  mere
party  support ;  and  Lord  North,  having  attained  his  end,  was
anxious  as  much  as  possible  to  alleviate  the  stroke.  Seventeen
millions  of  pounds  of  tea  were  lying  in  the  warehouses  of  the
Company,  and  by  permitting  the  direct  export  of  this  tea  to
the  Colonies,  North  hoped  to  grant  a  great  boon  to  India,  and
did  not  foresee  that  he  was  taking  a  great  step  toward  the  loss
of  America.

Another  subject  which  now  attracted  general  attention  was
the  charges  that  were  brought  against  Clive.  He  complained
bitterly  that  he  had  been  examined  before  the  Select  Com-
mittee as  if  he  had  been  a  sheep-stealer.  The  report  of  the
Committee  unveiled  the  many  acts  of  violence  and  rapacity
he  had  committed  during  his  earlier  administration  ;  the  great
reforms  which  he  had  undertaken  during  his  later  administra-
tion had  mortally  offended  many  corrupt  interests ;  he  had
bitter  enemies  among  the  Directors ;  he  was  the  most  promi-
nent and  most  wealthy  representative  of  a  class  of  men  who
were  very  unpopular  in  the  country ;  and  as  he  had  attached
himself  to  the  Grenville  connection  in  politics,  and  had  not
after  the  death  of  Grenville  fully  identified  himself  with  North,
his  position  in  Parliament  was  somewhat  isolated.  General
Burgoyne,  w'hen  presenting  one  of  the  reports  of  the  Select
Conmiittee,  declared  that  it  contained  an  account  of  crimes
shocking  to  human  nature ;  and  a  few  days  later  he  brought  on
a  vote  of  censure  directed  personally  against  Clive.  Having
enumerated  the  disgraceful  circumstances  attending  the  depo-
sition of  Surajah  Dowlahin  1757,  the  fictitious  treaty  dravrn  up
by  Clive  in  order  to  elude  the  payment  that  had  been  promised
to  Omichund,  the  forgery  by  Clive  of  the  name  of  Admiral
Watson,  and  the  enormous  gifts  which  Clive  had  received  as  a
reward  for  the  elevation  of  Meer  Jaffier,  he  moved  that  Clive
did  at  that  time, '  through  the  influence  of  powers  with  which  he
was  entrusted,'  obtain,  under  various  authorities,  sums  amounts
iug  to  234,000L,  and  in  so  doing  abused  those  powers. The

CH.  xin.  ACQUITTAL AJS'D UKATH OF OLIVE.  491

debates  that  followed  were  very  remarkable  for  the  oonfusion  of
parties  and  persons  they  displayed.  Clive  defended  himself  with
great  ability  and  power,  and  his  chief  advocate  was  Wedderburne,
the  Solicitor-General,  while  one  of  his  chief  assailants  was
Thurlow,  the  Attorney-General.  Lord  North  voted  with  his
enemies.  The  Court  party  were  divided ; '  and  the  bulk  of  the
Opposition  supported  Clive.  Fox  and  Barre  agreed  in  attack-
ing him,  while  Lord  G.  Germaine  powerfully  defended  him.
Burke  was  also  among  his  defenders.  He  always  drew  a  broad
distinction  between  the  career  of  Clive  and  the  career  of
Hastings,  and  maintained  that  though  the  former  had  com-
mitted great  crimes,  his  serious  attempts  in  his  last  ad-
ministration to  purify  the  government  of  India,  and  especially
his  prohibition  of  presents  from  the  natives,  had  done  much
to  atone  for  them.^  The  facts  that  were  alleged  against
him  could  not,  indeed,  be  disputed;  but  the  danger  of  the
crisis,  and  the  universal  habits  of  Indian  life,  were  strong
circumstances  of  palliation.  It  was  remembered  that  fifteen
years  had  passed  since  the  incriminated  acts  were  committed ;
that  Clive  had  performed  services  of  transcendent  value  to  the
Empire ;  that  in  his  last  administration,  with  every  opportunity
of  enormously  increasing  his  fortune,  he  had  refrained  from
doing  so ;  and  that  the  animosity  against  him  was  quite  as
much  due  to  his  merits  as  to  his  crimes.  The  resolution  of
Burgoyne  was  divided  into  two  parts.  The  first  part,  asserting
that  Clive  had  accepted  234,000Z.,  was  carried  without  a  di-
vision ;  but  the  latter  part,  censuring  his  conduct,  was  rejected
after  a  long  debate,  and,  on  the  motion  of  Wedderburne,  the
House  unanimously  resolved  '  that  Eobert  Clive  did  at  the  same
time  render  great  and  meritorious  services  to  this  country.'  ^

He  did  not  long  survive  the  triumph. The  excitement  of  the
conflict  and  the  storm  of  invective  that  was  directed  against  him

'  The  King  himself  was  very  hos-  ■  See  Burke's  TJor^^, xiii.  141-14(i.

tile  to Clive. He wrote to North,  ^  ggg Annual  BcgisUr, 1773,  p.

May  22,  1773  :  '  I  own  I  am  amazed  107. Malcolm's  Memoirs  of  Clive,  iii.

that  private  interest  could  make  so  359,  360. The  account  in  the  Pari.

many  individuals forget  what  they  IHgt.  xvii. 881,  882,  represents the

owe  to  their  country,  and  come  to  a  motion of censure as having  been

resolution  that  seems  to  approve  of  carried,  but this  appears  to  be  an

Lord  Olive's  rapine.' Correspondence  error. Walpole (^Last Journuls,  i.

of  George  III.  nith  Lord  N&rth. See,  243-245)  mentions several speeches

too,  Fox's  Coi-resimndcnce,  i.  92.  which  arc  not  given  in  the /'a?'^.  Uist^

492  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURl'.  ch.  xmi.

contributed  to  iiuhinge  his  mind,  which  had  always  been  subject
to  a  dark,  constitutional  melancholy ;  and  a  painful  disease,  and
a  dangerous  narcotic  taken  to  alleviate  it,  aggravated  the  evil.
In  November  1774,  he  died  by  his  own  hand,  when  but  just
forty -nine ;  and  in  this  manner,  about  two  years  before  the  out-
break of  the  American  War,  England  lost  the  greatest  general
she  had  produced  since  the  death  of  Marlborough.'

Another  group  of  measures  of  considerable  importance,  which
occupied  at  this  time  the  attention  of  the  public  and  of  Par-
liament related  to  religious  liberty.  The  spirit  of  intolerance,
as  we  have  seen  in  the  last  volume,  had  been  for  a  long  time
steadily  declining  in  England,  and  there  was  no  disposition  in
the  hisfher  ranks  of  the  Government  and  among  the  leaders  of
either  of  the  great  parties  in  the  State  to  make  legislation
subservient  to  religious  fanaticism.  Prosecutions  for  religious
heterodoxy  had  almost  wholly  ceased.  The  only  case,  I  be-
lieve, of  the  punishment  of  a  freethinker  for  his  writings  in
the  early  years  of  George  III.  was  that  of  Peter  Anet,  who  was
sentenced  in  1762  to  stand  twice  in  the  pillory,  and  to  be  im-
prisoned for  a  year  in  Bridewell  with  hard  labour,  for  a  very
violent  and  scurrilous  attack  upon  Christianity.^  The  Methodist
movement,  however,  contributed  to  strengthen  a  spirit  of
fanaticism  among  the  classes  who  were  influenced  by  it,  and,
on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  was  encountered
by  explosions  of  mob  violence  which  often  amounted  to  a  high
degree  of  persecution,  and  which  were  sometimes  in  a  very
shameful  manner  connived  at,  countenanced,  or  even  instigated
by  local  magistrates  and  by  clergymen.  Isolated  incidents  oc-
casionally occurred  which  seemed  to  show  that  the  spirit  of
persecution  was  rather  dormant  than  dead  ;  ^  and  the  law,  though
mildly  administered,  contained  many  things  that  were  repugnant
to  true  religious  liberty.

'  See  Malcolm's  Memoirs  of  Clivc.  fire  witli  liis  liiinds  tied  behind  Iiiin,

Mill's  Hist, of  British  India,  Pari.  to  roast,  and  then  stufTcd  hot  bacon

Dihates,  vol.  xvii.,  and  the  admirable  down his throat. — Ann. lieg. 1765),

account  of  Indian  affairs  in  the  An-  p.  i);j. In  the  .same  year  we  road  that

iiual  Ilc(jistcr.  'On  Saturday  imirning-  a  Metliodi.st

*  Annual  licgistcr,  17C2,  p.  li;5.  preacher,  who  liiul  di.sturbed  the  peace

'  Thus in 17G'J Abel  Proffer  was  of  the city of Gloucester  with  liis

convicted at  the  Monmouth  Assizes  enthusiastic  rant,  was  flogged  tlirougli

for barbarous treatment of a  Jew.  the  streets  by  order  of  the  mayor.' —

He  had  placed him before  a  large  lb.  p.  108.

CH.  xm.  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  COURTS.  493

The  Ecclesiastical  Courts  still  retained  a  jurisdiction  which
was  in  many  respects  oppressive  and  anomalous,  and  there  were
frequent  complaints  of  their  expensive,  vexatious,  and  dilatory
proceedings.  Their  conflict  with  the  temporal  courts  dates  from
a  period  long  anterior  to  the  Eeformation,  and  the  temporal
courts  had  early  assumed,  and  exercised  with  much  severity,  a
superintending  influence  over  the  spiritual  ones,  defining  their
sphere  of  action,  and  arresting  by  'writs  of  prohibition'  their
attempts  to  extend  their  authority.  The  Ecclesiastical  Courts
retained,  however,  a  power  of  taking  cognisance  of  acts  of  pri-
vate immorality,  heresy,  and  neglect  of  religious  observances,
and  some  large  departments  of  wrong  lay  within  their  juris-
diction. The  withholding  of  tithes  and  other  ecclesiastical
dues  and  fees  from  the  parson  or  vicar,  injuries  done  by  one
clerg3anan  to  another,  questions  of  spoliation  and  dilapidation
of  churches  or  parsonages,  matrimonial  cases,  and  also,  by  a
peculiarity  of  English  law,  testamentary  cases  and  cases  of  in-
testacy, passed  under  their  control.

The  tendency  of  English  law,  however,  was  gradually  to
abridge  their  sphere.  The  strange  power  they  originaUy  pos-
sessed of  compelling  an  accused  person  to  criminate  himself,  by
tendering  to  him  what  was  termed  an  ex-qfficio  oath  relating
to  the  matter  in  dispute,  would  probably  have  been  abolished
under  Elizabeth  but  for  the  direct  intervention  of  the  Queen,*
It  was  finally  taken  away  under  Charles  11.^  and  the  juris-
diction of  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts  in  cases  of  tithes  and  other
pecuniary  dues  was  greatly  limited.  When  a  question  of  dis-
puted right  was  raised,  the  trial  passed  at  once  from  the  Eccle-
siastical to  the  Civil  Court,  and  this  rule  applied  to  all  tithe  cases
in  which  the  defendant  pleaded  any  custom,  modus,  or  composi-
tion. The  Ecclesiastical  Court  had,  therefore,  only  to  enforce
an  undisputed  right,  and  in  cases  of  dues  or  tithes  under  the
value  of  40s.  a  law  of  William  III.  provided  a  summary  process
by  which  they  might  be  recovered  before  a  justice  of  the  peace.^
The  discipUne  the  Spiritual  Courts  exercised  in  cases  of  im-
morality, and  especially  in  cases  of  non-attendance  at  church,
gradually  faded  away,  from  the  impossibility  of  enforcing  it.

'  UaMam's  Hist,  of  Enf!l/ind,ch.iv.  -  i:?  Car.  IL  st.  i.  c.  12.

'  Elackstone,  book  iii.  ch.  vii.

494  ENGLAND IN THE KICHTKKNTIl CENTURY. en.  xm

The  only  place  where  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  discipline
of  the  Anglican  Church  appears  to  have  been  habitually  and
severely  enforced  was  in  the  Isle  of  Man  under  the  Episcopate
of  Bishop  Wilson.

Already  in  the  seventeenth  century  it  had  become  customary
to  commute  these  penances  for  a  money  payment,'  and  such
payments  in  cases  which  were  mainly  pro  salute  aniTni
gradually  ceased.  Archbishop  Seeker  in  1753  complained
bitterly  of  the  difficulty  of  enforcing  any  kind  of  ecclesiastical
discipline.  Yet  occasionally  in  some  country  parishes,  even  in
the  closing  years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  spectacle
might  be  seen  of  some  poor  woman  arrayed  in  a  white  sheet
doing  public  penance  for  her  fault. -

In  cases,  however,  of  the  wrongs  which  I  have  enumerated,
and  also  in  cases  of  defamation,  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts  re-
tained all  their  vigour,  and  there  were  bitter  complaints  of  their
abuses  and  of  the  excessive  expense  of  their  procedure.  They
possessed  also  a  peculiar  weapon  of  terrible  force.  The  sentence
of  excommunication  might  be  imposed  by  them  for  many  of-
fences ;  but  it  was  most  commonly  employed  as  a  punishment
for  contempt  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  in  not  appearing  before
it,  or  not  obeying  its  decrees,  or  not  paying  its  fees  or  costs.
An  excommunicated  person  in  England  was  placed  almost
wholly  beyond  the  protection  of  the  law.  He  could  not  be  a
witness  or  a  juryman.  He  could  not  bring  an  action  to  secure
or  recover  his  property.  If  he  died  without  the  removal  of  his
sentence  he  had  no  right  to  Christian  burial.'  Nor  was  this
all.  After  forty  days'  contumacy  ho  might  be  arrested  by  the
writ  'De  excommunicato  capiendo,'  issued  by  the  Court  or
Chancery,  and  imprisoned  till  he  was  reconciled  to  the  Church.

It  is  a  singular  fact  that  such  a  tremendous  power,  which

' Blackstono,  book  iv.  oh.  xv,  xix.  An.  licfi.  181."?,  p.  Bfi.
In the deVj.'ite  about Erclcsiastical  '  Several  curious  particulars  about

Courts  in 1813,  one  of  the  speakers  Church  discipline  in  Enpland  in  the

mentions a  case of defamation in  eighteenth  c(^ntury  will  he  found  in

wliioh  'the  defendant  liad  been  ac-  Abbey  and  Overton's  very  interesting

<|uitted  before  the  CVjinmissary  Court  work  on 77//?  English Church  in  th^}

of  Surrey,  but  was  afterwards  found  FAnhteenih Century,  ii. 52-54,  506-

guilty in the Court of  Arches  and  50;).

condemned  to  do  j^>cnance,  and  then  '  See  Jacob's  Zaw  7>jc^?fl«rtry,  art.

came  .a  dispensation from perform-  '  Excommunication.' Tomlins' Lam

lince,  fur  which  he  had  to  pay  06^.' —  fyict.  art.  '  Excommunic;ition.'

(11.  XIII.  EXCOMMUNIC.VTIO.V.  49j

in  theory  at  least,  might  extend  even  I  o  pcrjx-t  iml  iinijrisonment,
shouhl  during  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth  century  have  been
lodged  with  an Ecclesiastical Court, and that  it might  be
applied  to  men  who  had committed  such  trivial  offences  as
the  non-payment  of  fees  or  costs. Nor  was  it  by  any  means  a
dead  letter. Howard,  in  the  course  of  his  visits  to  the  English
gaols,  mentions  that  in  Kothwell  gaol,  in  Yorkshire,  he  found
a  weaver  named  William  Carr,  who,  '  having  given  a  bad  name
to  a  woman  who  was  said  not  to  deserve  a  very  good  one,'  was
cited  before  the Ecclesiastical  Court and imprisoned '  until
he shall have made satisfaction to the Holy Church a?
well  for  the  contempt  as  for  the  injury  by  him  done  unto  it.'
He  lay  in prison  from  May  1774  to  July  1776,  when  he  was
released  by  an  insolvent  Act  which  forgave  that  class  of  debtors
their  fees.'  In  1787  two  women  were  committed  to  Northampton
gaol  by  virtue  of  the  writ  '  De  excommunicato  capiendo,'  '  be-
cause they  had  wickedly  contemned  the  power  of  the  keys.'  "^
In  this  year,  however,  an  Act  was  carried  limiting  the  time  of
commencing suits in these  Courts  for different  offences  to
six  or  eight  months.^ But  the  most  serious  abuses  connected
with  them  continued  to  the  present  century. In  1812  Lord
Folkestone brought forward  the subject  when  presenting a
petition  from  a  young  woman  who  had  lain  for  two  years  in
Bristol  gaol  as  an  excommunicated  person. She  had  neglected
to  perform  a penance  imposed on  her  by  the  Ecclesiastical
Court;  had  been excommunicated  and  imprisoned in  conse-
(juence ;  and, as she  was  too  poor  to  pay  the  fees that  had
been  incurred,  she  was unable  to  obtain her  release. Lord
Folkestone  related  six  or  seven  other  cases  of  a  similar  kind,
and  in  about  half  of  them  the  excommunicated  person  had  been
at least three years  in  prison."* In  1813  an  important  Act
was  passed  regulating the  Ecclesiastical  Courts. The  power
of  excommunication  for  contempt  and  non-payment  of  fees  was
taken  away. The  penalty  was  reserved  only  for  certain  expressly
defined  offences,  and  no  civil  penalty  or  disability,  except  im-

•  Howard on. Prisons (^rd ed.),  '  27  Geo.  ITI.  c.  44.

p.  416.  *  J'arl.  Uchtitrg,  xxi.  90,  100,  295-

«  Disnevs  Li/c  of  Si/hs,  199,  200,  303.
373,  374.

49G  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKV. cii.  xm.

prisoumeut  not  exceeding six  mouths,  could  any  longer  attach
to  excommunication.'

A  very  scandalous  form  of  persecution,  in  which,  however,
religious  motives  had  no  part,  was  practised  in  the  last  years  of
George  II.  and  the  early  years  of  George  III.  by  no  less  a
body  than  the  Corporation  of  the  City  of  I^ondon. In  1748
that  Corporation  made  a  bye-law  imposing  a  fine  of  400L  and
20  marks  on any  person  who,  being  nominated  by  the  I>ord
Mayor  for  the  office  of  Sherifif,  refused  to  stand  the  election  of
the  Common  Hall,  and  GOOl.  on  anyone  who,  being  elected,  re-
fused to  serve.  The  proceeds  of  these  fines  were  to  be  employed
in building  the  New  Mansion House,  which  had  just  been
beofun. But  the  office  of  Sheriff  was  one  of  those  in  which  no
one  could  serve  who  had  not  previously  taken  the  Sacrament
according  to  the  Anglican  rite,  and  it  was,  therefore,  one  of
those  from  which  Dissenters  were  excluded. It  would  appear
almost  incredible,  if  the  facts  were  not amply  attested,  that
under  these  circumstances  the  City  of  London  systematically
elected  wealthy  Dissenters  to  the  office  in  order that they
should  be  objected  to  and  fined,  and  that  in  this  manner  it
extorted  no  less  than  15,0001. The  electors  appointed  these
Dissenters  with  a  clear  knowledge  that  they  would  not  serve,
and  with  the  sole  purpose  of  extorting  money. One  of  those
whom  they  selected  was  blind  ;  another  was  bedridden. Some-
times the  victims  appealed  against  the  sentence,  but  the  case
was brought  in  the  first  instance  before a  City  court,  which
always gave verdicts  for the Corporation,  and the cost  of
appeals  against  the  whole  weight  of  the  City  influence  was
so  great  that  few  men  were  rich  enough  or  determined  enough
to  encounter  it. At  last  a  gentleman  named  Evans,  who  had
been  elected  Sheriff,  determined  to  fight  the  battle  to  the  end.
For  no  less  than  ten  years  the  case  was  before  the  Courts. It
was  contended  on  the  part  of  the  Corporation  that  the  Toleration
Act  did  nothing  more  than  suspend  the  penalties  for  attending
the  Nonconformist,  and  neglecting  the  Anglican,  service ;  that
it  left  the  Dissenters  liable  to  every  other  penalty  and  incon-
venience to  which  they  had been  previously  subject,  and  that
they  might,  therefore,  be  legally  fined for  refusing  to  serve  in

'  r,3  Geo.  TTI.  c.  127.

cii.  xiM.  SUBSCRIPTION TO TIIK ARTICLKS.  497

an  office!  wliich  they  could  not  legally  fill  without  going  through
a  ceremony  repugnant  to  their  conscience.  This  doctrine  was
at  last  finally  overthrown  in  1767  by  a  judgment  of  the  House
of  liords.  After  consultation  with  the  judges,  and  after  one
of  the  most  admirable  of  the  many  admirable  speeches  of  Lord
JMansfield,  the  House  decided  that  the  Toleration  Act  took
away  the  crime  as  well  as  the  penalty  of  Nonconformity,  and
that  no  fine  could  be  legally  imposed  on  Nonconformists  who
refused  to  serve  in  offices  to  which  conscientious  Dissenters
were  ineligible  by  law.^

The  next  important  question  relating  to  religious  liberty
was  one  to  which  I  have  already  adverted  in  another  connection.
The  movement  for  abolishing  the  subscription  to  the  Thirty-
nine  Articles  was  defended  mainly  on  the  principles  of  Locke
and  of  Hoadly.  Though  not  absolutely  coextensive,  it  was  at
least  closely  connected  with  the  growth  of  the  Arian  school  of
which  Clarke,  Sykes,  Clayton,  and  Lindsey  were  prominent
representatives,  and  it  received  a  great  impulse  in  1766  from  the
publication  and  the  popularity  of  the  '  Confessional '  of  Arch-
deacon Blackbume.  In  1771  a  society  called  the  Feather's
Tavern  Association  was  formed  for  the  purpose  of  applying  to
the  Legislature  for  relief.  Blackbume  and  Lindsey  were  its  most
active  members,  and  in  February  1772  a  petition,  drawn  up  by
Blackbume  and  signed  by  250  persons,  was  presented  to  the
House  of  Commons  by  Sir  W.  Meredith.  Of  those  who  signed
it  about  200  were  clergymen,  and  the  remainder  were  lawyers
and  doctors,  who  protested  especially  against  the  custom  which
prevailed  at  the  universities  of  obliging  students  who  came  up
for  matriculation,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  or  even  earlier,^  and
who  were  not  intended  for  the  Church,  to  subscribe  their  consent
to  the  Articles.  It  was  remarked  that  Oxford  was  strongly
opposed  to  the  movement,  while  a  powerful  party  at  Cambridge
supported  it.  Watson,  who  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Llandaff,
and  who  was  at  this  time  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge,
published  two  letters  in  favour  of  it,  under  the  signature  of  '  A
Christian  Whig,'  which  were  presented  to  every  Member  of  Par-

'  See the noble speech  of  Lord Stephens  on  the  Constitution,  pp.  337
MansfieUi,  Pari.  Jlist.  xvi.  313-827. 338.
Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  ii.  511-514.  ^  Pari.  Hist.  xvii.  250.

VOL.  III.  K K

498  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xiii.

liameut  the  day  before  the  petition  was  taken  into  considera-
tion.' Paley,  who  was  then  rising  to  prominence  as  a  lecturer
at  Cambridge,  refused  to  sign  the  petition  on  the  characteristic
groimd  that  he  was  '  too  poor  to  keep  a  conscience,'  but  he  fully
concurred  in  it,  and  he  wrote  anonymously  in  its  support.^
It  was  signed  by  Jebb  and  John  Law,  who  were  prominent
tutors  at  Cambridge,  and  it  was  countenanced  by  the  Bishop
of  Carlisle,  who  was  father  of  John  Law,  and  also  it  is  said  in
some  degree  by  Bishop  Lowth.^

Lord  North  was  anxious  that  the  petition  should  be  received
and  silently  laid  aside ;  but  Sir  Roger  Newdigate,  who  was  vio-
lently opposed  to  it,  insisted  upon  moving  its  rejection,  and  a
very  interesting  debate  ensued.  On  the  side  of  the  petitioners
the  chief  topics  were  the  obscurities,  the  absurdities,  and  incon-
sistencies of  the  Articles,  the  manifest  severity  with  which  they
pressed  upon  many  clerical  consciences,  the  folly  of  asking
schoolboys  of  sixteen  to  declare  their  assent  to  a  long  series  of
complicated  dogmatic  assertions,  the  individual  right  and  duty
of  every  Protestant  to  interpret  Scripture  freely  for  himself,  the
essentially  Popish  character  of  all  attempts  to  prescribe  religious
opinions  by  human  formularies,  the  danger  and  the  immorality
of  holding  out  temptations  to  dissimulation  and  prevarication
by  annexing  rewards  or  punishments  to  particular  opinions,  the
duty  of  opening  the  Church  as  wide  as  possible  to  all  conscien-
tious men.  The  petitioners  were  quite  ready  to  assent  to
Scripture  as  the  inspired  Word  of  God,  and  to  abjure  all  popish
tendencies,  but  they  refused  to  be  bound  by  any  merely  human
formularies.  Among  the  arguments  on  the  other  side  may  be
mentioned  the  appearance,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  of  two
political  doctrines  which  were  afterwards  destined  in  connection
with  Irish  polities,  and  with  the  Eoman  Catholic  question,  to
attain  a  great  importance. It  was  contended  that  the  Corona-

'  Watson's  Autobiography, i. 05,  opinions  of  their  compilers.  The  Arti-

66.  cles,  lie  maintained,  were  intended  by

*  Meadley's  Life  of  Paley,  pp.  47-  the  Legislat  ure  to  exclude  abettors  of

50,  Append.  3-46, In  his  Moral  Phi-  Popery,  Anabaptists,  and  members  of

lotophy,  book  iii.  ch.  xxii.,  Paley  jus-  sects  hostile  to episcopacy,  and  t)ie

titled  subscription,  but  stronfjly de-  intention  of the Legislature  is tlie

nied  that  it  bound  the  subscriber  (o  measure  of  the  obligation  of  the  snb-

believe  eveiy  proposition  contained  in  scriber.

the  Articles, or  al'  the theological  '  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  7-13.

CH.  xin.  DEBATE ON  THE  SUBSCKIPTION .  499

tion  Oath  made  it  unlawful  for  the  Sovereign  to  give  his  assent
to  any  law  which  changed  the  form  or  character  of  the  Estab-
lished Church,  and  that  a  similar  incapacity  was  imposed  upon
Parliament  by  the  articles  of  the  Scotch  Union,  which  enacted
the  permanent  maintenance  of  the  then  existing  Church  estab-
lishments in  the  two  countries.'  It  is  remarkable  that  Burke,
while  strongly  opposing  the  petition,  took  great  pains  to  dis-
claim all  sympathy  with  these  arguments,  and  asserted  that  the
Coronation  Oath  only  bound  the  Sovereign  to  respect  the
religion  which  his  Parliament  had  sanctioned,  and  that  the  Act
of  Union  was  no  bar  to  the  right  of  the  united  Parliament  to
revise  and  modify  the  ecclesiastical  conditions  of  the  country.^

The  King  was  very  strongly  opposed  to  the  prayer  of  the
petitioners,^  and  Lord  North,  in  a  temperate  speech,  opposed  it
as  disturbing  what  was  now  quiet,  and  as  likely  to  introduce
anarchy,  confusion,  and  dissension  into  the  Chiurch.  The  peti-
tion was  supported  among  others  by  Lord  Greorge  Germaine,
Sir  George  Savile,  and  Thomas  Pitt,  the  nephew  of  Chatham,
who  belonged  to  dififerent  political  connections,  and  its  advocates
appear  to  have  been  chiefly  Whigs.  Dowdeswell,  however,  and
Burke  on  this  question  severed  themselves  from  their  friends,*
and  the  speech  of  Burke  was  by  far  the  ablest  in  the  debate.
He  urged  the  great  danger  of  religious  alterations,  which  usually
pave  the  way  to  religious  tumults  and  shake  one  of  the  capital
pillars  of  the  State.  He  dwelt  upon  the  complete  indifference
of  the  great  majority  of  the  people  to  the  subject,  and  he  laid
down  very  emphatically  the  principle  which  always  governed  his
own  attitude  and  that  of  the  section  of  the  Whig  party  which
he  inspired,  towards  proposed  reforms.  '  The  ground  for  a
legislative  alteration  of  a  legal  establishment  is  this  and  this
only ;  that  you  find  the  inclinations  of  the  majority  of  the
people,  concurring  with  your  own  sense  of  the  intolerable  nature
of  the  abuse,  are  in  favour  of  a  change.' No  such  desire  existed

'  See  both  of  these  arguments  in  tion,  says,  '  My  sentiments  in  regard

the  speech  of  Sir  Roger  Newdigate,  to  tlie  petition of  the  clergy  praying

I'arl.  Hist.  xvii.  255,  256.  to  be  relieved from subscription to

*  Ibid.  276-279.  the  39  Articles,  are  in  opposition  to
'  Correspond nvce  of  George III.  the opinions  of  nearly  all  my own

Kith  Lord  North,  i.  89  ;  ii.  378.  party.' — Life  of  the  Countess  of  Euii'

*  Burke,  in  a  letter  to  Lady  Hunt- tingdon,  ii.  287.
ingdon,  promising  to  oppose  the  peti-

K K 2

500  ENGLAND JN TlIK KIGUTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xiii.

in  the  present  case.  While  strongly  asserting  the  right  of  every
uiau  to  follow  his  own  convictions  in  religion,  he  as  strongly
maintained  the  undoubted  right  of  the  Legislature  '  to  annex  its
own  conditions  to  benefits  artificially  created,'  and  '  to  take  a
security  that  a  tax  raised  on  the  people  shall  be  applied  only  to
those  who  profess  such  doctrines  and  follow  such  a  mode  of
worship  as  the  Legislature  representing  the  people  has  thought
most  agreeable  to  their  general  sense,  binding  as  usual  the
minority  not  to  an  assent  to  the  doctrines,  but  to  a  payment  of
the  tax.'  The  present  question,  he  said,  is  not  a  question  of
ihe  rights  of  private  conscience,  but  of  the  title  to  public
emoluments.  He  drewa  vivid  picture  of  the  utter  unsuitability
of  the  Bible  to  be  treated  as  a  bond  of  union  or  a  summary  of
fiwth,'  and  he  dilated  upon  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  a
religious  organisation  without  any  fixed  code  of  belief,  and  the
confusion  and  anarchy  which  an  abolition  of  subscription  would
probably  produce.  By  a  majority  of  217  to  71  the  House  refused
to  receive  the  petition."'^

The  question  was  again  introduced  in  1773  and  1774,  but  it
made  no  progress  either  in  the  House  or  in  the  country,  though
the  subscription  of  students  at  Cambridge  was  soon  after  modi-
fied. Several  of  the  leaders  of  the  movement  seceded  from
tlie  Church  of  England  to  Unitarianism,  and  the  school  of
Hoadly  was  in  its  decadence,  and  a  new  spirit  was  arising  in
the  Church.  It  was  a  significant  fact  that  the  Methodists,  and
the  section  of  the  Anglican  clergy  who  were  most  imbued  with
tJieir  principles,  were  the  most  ardent  opponents  of  the  relaxa-
tion of  subscription,^  and  the strongly  dogmatic  character  of

'  '  What  is  that  Scripture  to  which  a  man  could  not  mistake  his  way. It

they  are  content  to  subscribe  ? They  is  a  most  venerable  but  most  mul-

rli)  not  think  that  a  book  becomes  of  tifarious collection of the records

Dirine  authority  because  it  is  bound  of  the Divine economy,  a  collection

in  blue  morocco,  and  is  printed  by  John  of  an  infinite  variety  of  cosmogony,

Basket  and  his  assigns  ? The  Bible  is  theology,  history,  prophecy,  psalmody,

avast  collection  of  different  treatises.  morality,  apologue,  allegory,  legisla-

A  man  who  holds  the  Divine  autho-  tion,  ethics,  carried  tlnough  different

rity  of  one  may  consider  the  other  as  books, by different  authors, at  dif-

nierely  human.  .  .  .  Tlierc  are  some  ferent ages, for  dilTerent  ends and

wlio  reject  the  Canticles — others  six  purposes.' — Burke's  WorJ.'s,  x.  20,  21.
of  the  Epistles. The  Apocalypse  has  ^  Pari.  Ifist.xvii. 2i6-2[)6.  Burke's

been  suspected  even  as  heretical,  and  Worl's,  x.  .3-21.

was  doubted  of  for  many  ages.  ...  "  JJ/e  of  the  Countesx  of  Hunting-

Tlie  Scripture  is  no  one  summary  of  dun, ii. 285-288. Walpole's L(ut

doolrines  regularly  digested,  in  which  Juarnah,  i.  37fi.

en.  XIII.  DISSENTERS' SUBSCRIPTION,  601

the  Evangelical  school,  and  the  Calvinistic  theology  which  soon
became  dominant  within  it,  tended  to  attach  its  members  to  the
Articles.  The  opposition  to  them  soon  died  away,  and  when  it
was  next  revived  it  was  by  the  school  which  was  beyond  all
others  the  most  opposed  to  that  of  Hoadly,  by  the  school  f)f
Newman  and  Keble,  who  justly  looked  upon  the  Articles  as
the  stronghold  of  that  Protestant  faith  which  they  desired  to
extirpate  from  the  Church.

In  the  course  of  the  debates  on  the  subscription,  Lord
North  said  that  if  the  application  for  relief  had  come
from  Dissenting  ministers,  who  received  no  emoluments  from
the  Establishment,  he  could  see  no  objection  to  it,  and  this
remark  encouraged  the  Dissenters  to  apply  for  a  relief  from
their  subscription.  As  we  have  seen,  their  ministers,  school-
masters, and  tutors  were  compelled  by  the  Toleration  Act  to
assent  to  thirty-five  and  a  half  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of
the  Church  of  England.  No  such  subscription  had  been  exacted
in  the  Irish  Toleration  Act  of  1719,  which  legalised  the  position
of  the  Irish  Protestant  Dissenters,  and  it  was  on  various  grounds
unpopular  among  the  Dissenters  in  England.  Many  had
drifted  far  from  the  orthodoxy  of  their  fathers,  many  had
adopted  the  views  of  Hoadly,  that  all  subscriptions  to  human
formularies  were  wrong,  and  many  others  who  cordially  believed
the  doctrinal  articles,  regarded  the  subscription  to  them  as  a
humiliating  act  of  homage  to  a  rival  Church.  The  law  indeed
appears  to  have  been  very  rarely  enforced,  and  there  was  a  party
among  the  more  orthodox  Dissenters  who  desired  its  maintenance,
and  even  petitioned  against  the  abolition  of  the  subscription
to  the  Anglican  Aiiicles  as  tending  to  encourage  the  growth  of
Arianism.'  The  prevailing  Dissenting  opinion,  however,  was  on
the  other  side,  and  the  relief  Bill  was  extremely  well  received
in  the  House  of  Commons.  The  ministers,  though  they  did
not  take  it  under  their  own  charge,  appear  to  have  favoured  it,
or  at  least  to  have  been  divided  on  the  subject.  On  the  side
of  the  Opposition,  Burke  spoke  strongly  in  its  favour,  and  the
great  body  of  the  Whigs  supported  it.  It  was  carried  through
the  House  of  Commons  by  large  majorities  in  1772  and  1773,
but  the  bishops — strongly  countenanced  by  the  King,  and  iip-
•  Pari.  Hist,  xvii -111,  li:!.  770-772,  7S(J-7'.iO.

602  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xiii

patently  at  his  orders  by  the  ministry ' — opposed  it  in  the
Lords,  and  in  spite  of  the  warm  support  of  Chatham  it  was
defeated  in  that  House.  In  1779,  however,  it  was  brought
in  with  more  success,  and  by  the  concurrence  of  both  parties
Dissenting  ministers  and  tutors  were  admitted  to  the  benefits
of  the  Toleration  Act  without  a  subscription  to  the  Articles,
provided  they  declared  themselves  Christians  and  Protestants,
and  believers  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.^  In  the  same
year  the  Irish  Parliament  relieved  the  Irish  Nonconformists
from  the  Test  Act.

On  these  questions  the  tendency  of  the  Whigs  was  some-
what more  decidedly  towards  religious  liberty  than  that  of  the
Tories.  This  was,  however,  in  some  degree  due  to  the  greater
freedom  of  an  Opposition,  and  in  some  degree  to  the  old  alliance
of  the  Dissenters  with  the  Whigs ;  and  each  party  was  much
divided,  and  the  prevailing  temper  of  Lord  North  was  far
removed  from  intolerance.  In  one  most  important  measure,
which  marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  religious  liberty,  the
Government,  as  we  have  already  seen,  represented  the  liberal,
and  the  Opposition  the  intolerant  side.  The  Quebec  Act  of
1774,  establishing  Catholicism  in  Canada,  would  a  generation
earlier  have  been  impossible,  and  it  was  justly  considered  a
remarkable  sign  of  the  altered  condition  of  opinion  that  such
a  law  should  be  enacted  by  a  British  Parliament,  and  should
have  created  no  serious  disturbances  in  the  country.  The
Church  party  was  at  this  time  closely  allied  with  the  Court
against  the  Americans.  The  bishops  were  on  nearly  all  ques-
tions steady  supporters  of  I-rord  North,  and  only  one  of  them
actively  opposed  the  Quebec  Bill.  The  Whig  party  and  the
City  politicians  were  fiercely  hostile  to  the  measure.  Chatham
denounced  it  as  'a  breach  of  the  Reformation,  of  the  Revolu-
tion, and  of  the  King's  Coronation  Oath,'  '  a  gross  violation  of
the  Protestant  religion.'  The  City  of  London  presented  an  ad-
dress to  the  King  petitioning  him  not  to  give  his  assent  to  a
]>ill  which  was  inconsistent  with  his  Coronation  Oath  and  with
his  position  as  protector  of  the  Protestant  religion.  When
the  King  went  down  to  the  House  of  Lords  to  give  his  assent  to

' Corrrxpondcnce  of  Oeorge III.  ^  19  Geo.  III.  n.  44. See  Bekham's

rvUh  Lord  Northy  i.  101.  lAfc  of  Lindxry,  ]}i>.  66  67

en.  xin.  THE CATHOLIC QUESTION.  503

the  Bill,  he  was  met  by  cries  of  '  No  Popery  ! '  from  an  angry
mob,'  and  the  Sovereign  who  in  his  later  years  was  justly
regarded  as  the  bitterest  enemy  of  his  Catholic  subjects  in
Ireland,  was  now  described  as  leaning  more  strongly  to  Popery
than  any  English  monarch  since  the  Stuarts.  It  was  customary
to  compare  George  III.  in  this  respect  to  Charles  I.'*  When
Burke,  in  1775,  moved  his  famous  scheme  for  conciliating
America,  Horace  Walpole  commented  upon  it  in  these  terms :
'  It  is  remarkable  that  in  his  proposed  repeal  he  did  not  men-
tion the  Quebec  Bill — another  symptom  of  his  old  Popery.'^

The  success  of  the  Quebec  Act  led  Parliament,  a  few
years  later,  to  undertake  the  relief  of  the  Catholics  at  home
from  some  part  of  the  atrocious  penal  laws  to  which  they  were
still  subject.  The  absurdity  of  maintaining  such  laws  sus-
pended over  the  heads  of  a  small  and  peaceful  fraction  of  the
nation,  in  an  age  of  general  enlightenment  and  toleration,  was
now  keenly  felt,  and  it  was  the  more  conspicuous  on  account
of  the  marked  change  which  had  passed  over  the  spirit  of  the
chief  Catholic  Governments  of  Europe.  Kehgion  had  every-
where ceased  to  be  a  guiding  motive  in  politics.  Nearly  all
the  CathoHc  governments  of  Europe  were  animated  by  a  purely
secular  spirit,  and  were  completely  emancipated  from  clerical
influence.  Pombal  in  Portugal;  Choiseul,  Malesherbes,  and
Turgot  in  France  ;  Aranda  and  Grimaldi  in  Spain,  however  much
they  may  have  differed  on  other  points,  were  in  this  perfectly
agreed.  If  Austria,  under  Maria  Theresa,  formed  a  partial
exception,  the  accession  to  the  empire  of  Joseph  II.  in  1764
had  already  given  a  new  bias  to  its  policy.  The  Jesuits,  who
represented  especially  the  intolerance  and  aggressiveness  of
CathoHcism,  had,  for  many  years,  lost  all  credit  and  almost  all

'  Walpole  s  Last  Journals,  i.  374-  Papists,  as  Charles  had. And  George

379.  III.  has  an  armj-,  which  Charles  had

*  'James U.  lost his crown  for  not.' — Walpole's  Za«<  Joj/rwai*,  i.  378.

such enormities. The prince  that  The  poet  Cowper  wrote  (Feb.  13, 1780)

wears  it  to  the  prejudice  of  that  fa-  about  the  resemblance  of  the  reigns

niily  is  authorised  by  a  free  Parlia-  of  George  UL  and  of  Charles  I.,  •  es-

mcnt  to  do  what  James  was  expelled  pecially the suspicion that  obtains

for  doing  1 A prince cried  up  like  of a  fixed  design  of  Government  to

Charles  I.  for  his  piety  is  as  favour-  favour  the growth of  Poperv.' Seo

able  to  Papists  as  Charles  was,  and  Albemarle's Life  of  Ilocking'ham^ ii.

has  a  bench  of  bishops  as  unjust  to  393.

the  Presbyterians, as propitious to  '  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  541.

504  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTU CENTURY.  en.  xiii.

power.  They  had  been  expelled  from  Portugal  in  1759,  from
France  in  1764,  from  Bohemia  and  Denmark  in  1766,  from
Spain,  the  Spanish  colonies  in  America,  Venice  and  Genoa  in
1767,  from  Malta,  Xai:)les,  and  Parma  in  1768,  and,  at  last,  in
1773  Clement  XIV.  had  been  induced  to  issue  his  famous  bull
suppressing  the  order.  In  nearly  all  Catholic  countries,  the
tendency  was  to  enlarge  the  bounds  of  religious  liberty,  to
secularise  the  Government,  and  to  restrict  the  power  of  the
Church.  Charles  III.  had  almost  completely  fettered  the  In-
quisition of  Spain.  In  the  course  of  a  few  years,  stringent
laws  were  made  reducing  the  power  of  the  clergy  in  Venice,
Austrian  Lombardy,  Piedmont,  Parma,  and  the  Two  Sicilies.  An
imperial  edict  in  1776  had  abolished  some  of  the  worst  forms
of  persecution  in  Austria  and  Hungary,  and  in  the  same  year
Necker,  though  an  austere  Calvinist,  obtained  a  foremost  place
among  the  ministers  of  France.

All  these  things  made  the  legal  position  of  the  English
Catholics  appear  especially  shameful,  and  the  laws  against
them  manifestly  reflected  the  passions  and  the  intolerance  of
another  age.  In  considering,  however,  the  real  working  of
these  laws,  we  must  remember  the  curious  conservatism  of
English  legislators,  who  have  continually  preferred  to  allow  a
bad  or  an  unpopular  law  to  become  dormant  rather  than  repeal
it.  The  Statute-book  is  by  no  means  a  true  reflex  of  contem-
porary opinion  aud  practice,  for  it  is  full  of  strange  survivals  of
other  ages.  Thus  a  law  of  Henry  V.  which  provided  that  all
members  of  counties  and  boroughs  nmst  be  residents  in  the
constituencies  they  represented,  and  that  no  non-resident  could
be  a  voter,  was  suffered  to  be  completely  obsolete  for  centuries,
and  was  at  last  removed  from  the  Statute-book  in  1774.'  I
have  already  referred  to  the  law  for  slowly  pressing  to  deatli
prisoners  who  refused  to  plead,  which  was  only  repealed  in
1772,^  and  to  the  law  for  punishing  Irish  witches  with  death,
which  was  only  repealed  in  1821,'  and  several  other  ahnost
equally  striking  instances  may  be  adduced.  Shortly  before  the
Restoration,  thirteen  gipsies  were  executed  at  one  Suffolk
assize,  under  a  law  of  Elizabeth,  which  made  all  gipsies  found

'  It  was  repealed  by  14  Geo.  III. ndtution,  257-260.
c.  58. See  for  much  informrition  on  ^  12  Geo.  III.  c.  20.

tlib  subiect,  Creasy '8  JJixt.  uf  the  Con-  '  1  &  2  Geo.  IV.  c.  18.

CH.  xiii.  OBSOLETE  LAWS.  505

in  England  liable  to  death,'  and  this  luw,  though  censured  by  a
committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1772,^  was  not  repealed
till  1783.'  The  medi;uval  'appeal  of  murder,'  which  enabled
the  heir  of  the  deceased  person  to  challenge  the  alleged  murderer
to  battle,  after  his  acquittal  by  a  jury,  and  which  took  away
from  the  Crown  all  power  of  pardoning  the  accused  if  he  were
defeated,  was  recognised  by  English  law  during  the  whole  of
the  eighteenth  century.  It  was  eulogised  in  Parliament  by
Dunning  in  1774,*  and  it  was  only  abolished  in  1819  on
account  of  an  appellee  having,  in  the  previous  year,  thrown
down  his  glove  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  and  demanded  his
legal  right  of  trial  by  battle.*  The  '  wager  of  law,'  according
to  which  a  man  who  was  charged  with  a  debt  was  released
from  it  if  he  denied  the  obligation,  and  obtained  eleven  neigh-
bours to  swear,  from  a  general  knowledge  of  his  character,
that  they  believed  him,  existed  in  English  law  till  1833.^
From  time  to  time  an  ingenious  man  exhumed  some  obsolete
and  forgotten  law  for  the  purpose  of  extorting  money  or  grati-
fying revenge.  Thus,  in  1761,  we  find  a  lady  tried  at  "West-
minster to  recover  a  penalty  of  20l.,  under  a  law  of  Elizabeth,
because  she  had  not  attended  any  authorised  place  of  worship
for  a  month  previously,  and  acquitted  by  the  jury  on  the
ground  of  her  ill-health.^  In  1772,  a  vicar  was  fined  lOl.  and
his  curate  51.  for  not  havinof  read  in  church  an  old  Act  against
cursing  and  swearing.  The  vicar,  it  appears,  had  dismissed
his  curate,  and  the  sons  of  the  latter  having  discovered  the
existence  of  this  long-forgotten  law,  brought  the  action  in
revenge,  not  knowing  that  their  father  would  be  involved  in
the  condemnation.*  In  1774,  a  gentleman  was  indicted  at  the
Chester  Assizes  for  having  broken  the  law  of  Elizabeth,  which,
in  order  to  prevent  the  increase  of  the  poor,  made  it  penal  to
erect  any  detached  cottage  without  accompanying  it  with  four
acres  of  freehold  land.^  The  judges  expressed  great  indigna-
tion at  the  proceeding,  and  at  their  representation  the  statute

*  Blackstone,  book  iv.  c.  13.  •  3  &  4  William  IV.  c.  42.

2  Pari.  innt.  xvii.  448-450.  '  firitish  Chrmich;  Feb.  23.  1761.

'  23  Geo.  III.  c.  61.  "  Gentleman's  Ma(jazinc, 1772,  p.

*  Pari.  Hist.  x\i\.\2'dl-\2^7.  See, 330.

too,  Campbeirs  Lives  of  the  Cliancel-  '  SI Eliz. c.  7. See  Blackstone,

hrs,  viii.  22-24.  book  iv.  c.  13.

*  51)  Geo.  III.  c.  4(5.

506  ENGLAND IN THE EIQUTEENTU CENTURY. ch.  xni.

was  repealed  in  the  following  session.'  Two  statutes  of  Charles
II.  requiring  that  the  dead  should  be  buried  in  woollen,  and
imposing  a  penalty  of  5l.  on  clergymen  who  neglected  to
certify  to  the  churchwarden  any  instances  in  which  the  Act
was  not  complied  with,  were  only  repealed  in  1814,  on  account
of  a  number  of  actions  being  brought  by  a  common  informer  to
recover  the  penalties.^

In  all,  or  nearly  all  of  these  cases,  the  prosecutions  were
due  to  private  motives  of  revenge  or  avarice,  and  similar
motives,  no  doubt,  inspired  most  of  those  directed  against
Catholics.  The  Act  still  subsisted  which  gave  a  reward  of  lOOl.
to  any  informer  who  procured  the  conviction  of  a  Catholic  priest
performing  his  functions  in  England,  and  there  were  occasional
prosecutions,  though  the  judges  strained  the  law  to  the  utmost
in  order  to  defeat  them,  and  insisted  upon  a  rigour  and  fulness
of  proof  that  would  not  have  been  exacted  in  any  other  case.
In  1767,  a  priest  named  John  Baptist  Malony  was  tried  at
Croydon  on  the  charge  of  having  administered  the  sacrament
to  a  sick  person,  was  found  guilty  and  was  condemned  to
perpetual  imprisonment.  He  lay  for  some  years^  in  confine-
ment, and  was  then  banished  from  England.  In  the  same  year,
a  mass-house  in  Southwark  was  suppressed,  but  the  priest
succeeded  in  escaping  by  a  back-door.  Two  priests,  named
Webb  and  Talbot—  the  latter  a  brother  of  Lord  Shrewsbury —
were  prosecuted  in  1768  and  1769,  but  were  acquitted  through
a  defect in the  evidence  establishing  their  orders. Malony

'  Observations  on  a  Scheme  for  the  most  despicable  of  mankind,  a  common

Maintenance  of  the  Poor,  in  a  Li-tter  informing  constable  of the (^ity  of

to Thomas Gilbert (Chester, 177fi),  London. He  was  convicted  of  being

pp.  21,  22. The  law  was  repealed  by  a  popish  priest,  and  the  Court  weie

15  Geo.  IIL  c.  32.  reluctantly  obliged  to  condemn  him

*  rhillimore's Ilht.  of  Geo.  III.  (shocking  as  the  idea  was)  to per-

p.  68. 54  Geo.  in.  c.  108.  petual  imprisonment. His  Lordship

'  According  to  IJurke  (speech  at  was  then  in  olllce,  and  though  every

r.ristol  in  1780),  two  or  three  years.  method  was  taken  by  the  Privy  Coun-

Hurke's  Worhs,  iii.  389. Oliver  says  cil  to  give  a  legal discharge  to  the

bis  imprisonment  lasted four  years.  prisoner,  neither the laws then in

{Collections  il  lust  rating  tlw. Hist, of  force  would  allow  of  it,  nor  dared  the

ttis Cat-iolic Beliffvm in Cor7iwall,  King  himself  to  grant  him  a  pardon.

JJrron,  Dorset,  4'c.  pp.  14,  15.) Lnrd  He,  however,  with his  colleagues  in

Shelburne  alluded  to  tliis  case  in  a  office,  was  so  perfectly  persuaded  of

speech in 1778. '  Mr. Malony, a  the  impolicy  and  inhumanity  of  the

priest of the  Roman Catholic  per-  law,  that  they  ventured  to  give  him

suasion,  had been apprehended  and  liis  liberty at  every  hazard.' — Pa^L

brought to  trial by  tlie  lowest and  f/ist.  xix.  1145.

CH.  XIII.  POSITION OF ENGLISH CATHOLICS.  507

was,  I  believe,  the  only  priest  actually  convicted  during  the
reign  of  George  III.,  but  prosecutions  were  sufficiently  fre-
quent to  make  their  position  exceedingly  precarious.  j\Irs.
Lingard,  the  mother  of  the  historian,  who  died  in  1824  at  the
age  of  92,  is  said  to  have  remembered  the  time  when  her
family  had  to  go  in  a  cart  at  night  to  hear  mass,  the  priest
wearing  a  round  frock  to  resemble  a  poor  man.'

Mansfield  and  Camden,  who  differed  on  most  questions,  agreed
cordially  in  discountenancing  legal  measures  against  Catholics.
One  priest  appears  to  have  escaped  conviction  mainly  through
the  extraordinary  ingenuity  with  which  Mansfield  from  the
bench  suggested  doubts  and  difficulties  in  the  evidence  of  a
very  clear  case,  and  thus  gave  the  jury  a  pretext  for  acquitting
the  prisoner.^  Sir  William  Stanley,  of  Hooton,  was  indicted
in  1770  for  refusing  to  part  with  his  four  coach-horses  when
a  20^.  note  was  tendered  to  him,  but  he  was  acquitted  upon
the  ground  that  a  bank-note  was  not  legal  tender.^  In  an-
other case,  the  owner  of  an  estate  in  the  north  of  England
endeavoured  to  reduce  a  lady,  who  was  a  near  relative  of  his
own,  to  utter  poverty  by  depriving  her  of  her  jointure,  which
was  in  the  form  of  a  rent-charge  on  his  estate,  on  the  plea
that  being  a  Catholic  she  could  take  no  estate  or  interest  in
land.  Lord  Camden  took  up  her  case  with  great  zeal,  and
finding  that  there  was  no  remedy  in  the  existing  law,  he  took
the  extreme  step  of  bringing  in  and  carrying  a  special  Act  of
Parliament  for  her  relief.'*  The  position  of  Catholics,  how-
ever, and  especially  of  Catholic  landowners,  was  always  one  of

'  Oliver's Collections illustrating  '  See  his verj'  curious  charge  in

tlie  History  of  tlie Catholic  Religion,  Campbells  Clmf  Justices,  \\.  o\^.-o\^.

p.  33. Gentleman's  Magazine,  1767,  In  1776  Dunning  moved  in  the  Court

pp.  141,142.  lixitlex's  Memorials  of  the  of King's Bench for informations

J-Jnglish  Catholics. Butler  states  (ii.  against  two  Middlesex  justices  of  the

64)  that  in 1780  he  ascertained  that  peace,  who  had  refused  to  compel  two

a  single  house  of  attorneys  in  Gray's  persons  charged  with being Roman

Inn  had  defended  more  than  twenty  Catholics,  to  take  the  oaths. Mans-

priests under  prosecution for their  field  refused  the  injunction,  and at

religion,  and  had  defended  them  in  the  same time expressed  his  disap-

most  cases  gratuitously. Butler  does  proval of  the  attempt  to  revive  the

not  say  ovtr  how  long  a  period  these  severities of  the penal code. — An-

prosecutioiis were  diffused. I sus-  nual  Register,  1776,  p.  I'Jl.
pect  the  time  must  have  included  at  ^  Oliver,  p.  1.5.

least  the  whole  reign  of  George  III.,  *  Burke's Works,  iii. 389. But-

and that  the  defence  of  all  the  Ca-  ler's  Memorials  of  the  English  Catho-

tholic  cases  must  have  fallen  to  this  lies,  ii.  72,  73.
tirm.

508  ENGLAND IN Tilt: EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

extreme  preeariousness.  They  were  still  subject  to  a  double
laud-tiix.  They  were  iit  the  uiercy  of  their  Protestaut  relatives,
who  might  easily  deprive  them  of  their  land  ;  at  the  mercy  of
common  informers  ;  at  the  mercy  of  any  two  justices  who
might  at  any  time  tender  to  them  the  oath  of  supremacy.
They  were  virtually  outlaws  in  their  own  country,  doomed  to
a  life  of  secrecy  and  retirement,  and  sometimes  obliged  to  pur-
chase by  regular  contributions  an  exemption  from  prosecution.

Several  of  their  largest  landowners  had  recently  taken  the
oath,  and  the  English  Catholics  were  a  small  body  with  no
power  in  the  State.  A  Catholic  writer,  in  1781,  estimated  that
in  that  year  they  counted  7  peers,  22  baronets,  and  about  150
other  gentlemen  of  landed  property.  Several  of  the  peers
and  three  or  four  of  the  baronets  were  men  of  great  estates^
but  the  landed  properties  of  the  remaining  commoners  did  not
average  more  than  1,000L  a  year,  and  not  more  than  two
or  three  Catholics  held  prominent  positions  in  the  mercantile
world.'

The  worst  part  of  the  persecution  of  Catholics  was  based
upon  a  law  of  William  III.,  and  in  1778  Sir  George  Savile
introduced  a  Bill  to  repeal  those  portions  of  this  Act  which
related  to  the  apprehending  of  Popish  bishops,  priests,  and
Jesuits,  which  subjected  these  and  also  Papists  keeping  a
school  to  perpetual  imprisonment,  and  which  disabled  all
Papists  from  inheriting  or  purchasing  land.  In  order  to  obtain
the  benefits  of  the  law,  it  was  necessary  that  the  Catholics
should  take  a  special  oath  abjuring  the  Pretender,  the  temporal
jurisdiction  and  deposing  power  of  the  Pope,  and  the  doctrine
that  faith  should  not  be  kept  with  heretics,  and  that  heretics,
as  such,  may  be  lawfully  put  to  death.'^

It  is  an  honourable  fact  that  this  lielief  Bill  was  carried
without  a  division  in  either  House,  without  any  serious  oppo-
sition from  the  bench  of  bishops,  and  with  the  concurrence  of
both  parties  in  the  State.  The  law  applied  to  England  only,
but  the  Lord  Advocate  promised,  in  the  ensuing  session,  to
introduce  a  similar  measure  for  Scotland.

It  was  hoped  that  a  measure  which  was  so  manifestly  mod e-

'  Stntr  and  Jichnrinur  of  Engligh Catholics  from  the Ileformatiou  tn  the
3Vr7r  1781,  141.  121,  IL'2. "  ^  lb  Geo.  III.  c.  (JO.

CH.  xiri.  ANTI-CATITOLIC RIOTS IN SCOTLAND.  609

rate  and  equitable,  and  which  was  carried  with  such  unanimity
through  Parliauient,  would  have  passed  almost  unnoticed  in  the
country ;  but  fiercer  elements  of  fanaticism  than  politicians
perceived  were  still  smouldering  in  the  nation.  The  first  signs
of  the  coming  storm  were  seen  among  the  Presbyterians  of
Scotland.  The  General  Assembly  of  the  Scotch  Established
Church  was  sitting  when  the  English  Relief  Bill  was  pending,
and  it  rejected  by  a  large  majority  a  motion  for  a  remonstrance
to  Parliament  against  it.  But  in  a  few  months  an  agitation  of
the  most  dangerous  description  spread  swiftly  through  the  Low-
lands. It  was  stimulated  by  many  incendiary  resolutions  of
provincial  synods,  by  pamphlets,  handbills,  newspapers,  and
sermons,  and  a  '  Committee  for  the  Protestant  Interests '  was
formed  at  Edinburgh  to  direct  it.  The  Scotch  Catholics  were
exceedingly  alarmed,  and  they  endeavoured  to  avert  the  danger
which  they  feared  by  signing  and  publishing,  in  the  beginning
of  1779,  a  letter  to  Lord  North,  entreating  him  to  forego  his
intention  of  putting  them  in  the  same  position  as  their  brethren
in  England,  as  any  such  attempt  would  arouse  a  spirit  of  fanati-
cism in  Scotland  that  would  endanger  their  lives  and  property.
But  it  was  now  too  late.  Furious  riots  broke  out  in  January
1779,  both  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow.  Several  houses  in  which
Catholics  lived,  or  the  Catholic  worship  was  celebrated,  were
burnt  to  the  ground.  The  shops  of  Catholic  tradesmen  were
wrecked,  and  their  goods  scattered,  plundered,  or  destroyed.
Catholic  ladies  were  compelled  to  take  refuge  in  Edinburgh
Castle.  The  houses  of  many  Protestants  who  were  believed  to
sympathise  with  the  Relief  Bill  were  attacked,  and  among  the
number  was  that  of  Robertson  the  historian.  The  troops  were
called  out  to  suppress  the  riot,  but  they  were  resisted  and  pelted,
and  not  suffered  to  fire  in  their  defence ;  and  the  fears  or  sym-
pathies of  the  Edinbm"gh  magistrates  were  clearly  shown  in  the
almost  grotesque  servility  of  the  proclamation  which  they  issued
to  the  rioters.  '  To  remove  the  fears  and  apprehensions,'  they
wrote,  '  which  had  distressed  the  minds  of  many  well-meaning
people  in  the  metropolis,  with  regard  to  the  repeal  of  the  penal
statutes  against  Papists,  the  public  are  informed  that  the  Act
of  Parliament  passed  for  that  purpose  was  totally  laid  aside,
and  therefore  it  was  expected  that  all  peaceable  subjects  would

510  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cu.  xiii.

carefully  avoid  connecting  themselves  with  auy  tumultuous
assembly  for  the  future.' '

The  flame  soon  spread  soutliwards.  For  some  years  letters
on  the  increase  of  Popery  had  been  frequently  appearing  in  the
London  newspapers.'^  Many  murmurs  had  been  heard  at  the
enactment  of  the  Quebec  Act,  and  many  striking  instances  in  the
last  ten  years  had  shown  how  easily  the  spirit  of  riot  could  be
aroused,  and  how  impotent  the  ordinary  watchmen  were  to  cope
with  it.  Great  discontent  had  undoubtedly  been  produced  in
large  sections  of  the  population  by  the  Relief  Bill  in  1778  ;  the
success  of  the  Scotch  riots  in  preventing  the  introduction  of  a
similar  measure  for  Scotland  encouraged  the  hopes  of  procuring
its  repeal ;  and  the  fanatical  party  had  unfortunately  acquired
an  unscrupulous  leader  in  the  person  of  Lord  George  Gordon,
whose  name  now  attained  a  melancholy  celebrity.  He  was  a
young  man  of  thirty,  of  very  ordinary  talents,  and  with  nothing
to  recommend  him  but  his  connection  with  the  ducal  house  of
Gordon,  and  his  position  as  a  member  of  Parliament,  and  he
had  for  some  time  distinguished  himself  by  coarse,  violent,  and
eminently  absurd  speeches  on  the  enormities  of  Popery,  which
only  excited  ridicule  in  the  House  of  Commons,  but  which  found
admirers  beyond  its  walls.  He  was  a  Scotchman,  and  appears
to  have  been  honestly  fanatical,  but  his  fanaticism  was  mixed
with  something  of  the  vanity  and  ambition  of  a  demagogue,
and  with  a  vein  of  recklessness  and  eccentricity  closely  akin  to
insanity.  A  '  Protestant  Association,'  consisting  of  the  worst
agitators  and  fanatics,  was  formed,  and  at  a  great  meeting  held
on  May  29,  1780,  and  presided  over  by  Lord  George  Gordon,
it  was  determined  that  20,000  men  should  march  to  the
Parliament  House  to  present  a  petition  for  the  repeal  of  the
Relief  Act.

It  was  about  half-past  two  on  the  afternoon  of  Friday,  June

2,  that  three  great  bodies,  consisting  of  many  thousands  of  men,

wearing  blue  cockades,  and  carrying  a  petition  which  was  said

to  have  been  signed  by  near  120,000  persons,  arrived  by  different

'  C&mpheWs  Chief  Justices, ii.^iei.  to pass a motion requesting the

^  Several  cnrioxis  letters  on this  bishops  in thoir  several dioceses  to

subject will be founrl in the  Sf.  obtain  from  their  chirpy  an  account

.frimcu's  C/ini9iirle  ioT  17^0. The  alarm  of  the  Catholics  in  cadi  parish. .See

at  the  alleged  increase  of  Popery  led  6fent.  Mag.  1767 p.  42!>.
the  House  of  Lords  in  the  next  year

en.  xtii.  THE GORDON RIOTS.  511

roads  at  the  Parliament  Ilcnise.  Tlieir  first  design  appears  to
have  been  only  to  intimidate,  but  they  very  soon  proceeded  to
actual  violence.  The  two  Houses  were  just  meeting,  and  the
scene  that  ensued  resembled  on  a  large  scale  and  in  an  aggra-
vated form  the  great  riot  which  had  taken  place  around  the
Parliament  House  in  Dublin  during  the  administration  of  the
Duke  of  Bedford.  The  members  were  seized,  insulted,  com-
pelled to  put  blue  cockades  in  their  hat  s,  to  shout '  No  Popery ! '
and  to  swear  that  they  would  vote  for  the  repeal ;  and  many  of
them,  but  especially  the  members  of  the  House  of  Lords,  were
exposed  to  the  grossest  indignities.  Lord  Mansfield,  who  was
now  in  his  76th  year,  was  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  mob
on  account  of  the  recent  acquittal  of  a  Popish  priest  by  his  in-
fluence. The  windows  of  his  carriage  were  broken,  the  panels
were  forced  in,  and  he  was  in  great  danger  of  being  torn  to  pieces,
when  the  Archbishop  of  York  succeeded  with  much  courage  in
extricating  him  from  the  grasp  of  his  assailants.  The  Chan-
cellor, Lord  Thurlow,  who  was  equally  unpopular,  was  not  present,
but  the  mob  speedily  recognised  his  brother,  the  Bishop  of
Lincoln.  In  a  few  moments  a  wheel  of  his  carriage  was  wrenched
off,  and  the  bishop  was  for  a  time  in  extreme  danger,  when  a
law  student  succeeded  in  dragging  him,  half  fainting,  into  a
neighbouring  house,  where  he  disguised  himself  and  then
escaped  over  the  roofs.  The  carriage  of  Lord  Stormont
was  shattered  to  pieces,  and  he  was  for  half  an  hour  in  the
hands  of  the  mob.  Bathurst,  Boston,  Townshend,  Hills-
borough, and  many  other  peers  underwent  the  grossest  ill-
usage.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  that  day  bringing  in  a
motion — to  which  the  insensate  proceedings  of  the  mob  furnished
a  ghastly  commentary— in  favour  of  putting  all  power  in  the
hands  of  the  populace  by  granting  them  universal  suffrage  and
annual  parliaments.  But  no  serious  discussion  was  possible.
Pale,  bruised,  and  agitated,  with  their  wigs  torn  off,  their
hair  dishevelled,  their  clothes  torn  and  bespattered  with  mud,
the  peers  of  England  sat  listening  to  the  frantic  yells  of  the
multitude  who  already  thronged  the  lobbies.  In  the  Commons
Lord  George  Gordon  presented  the  petition,  and  demanded  its
instant  consideration.  The  House  behaved  with  much  courage,
and  after  a  hurried  debate  it  was  decided  by  192  to  7  to  adjourn

512  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xiii.

its  consideration  till  the  Gth.  Lord  George  Gordon  several
times  appeared  on  the  stairs  of  the  gallery,  and  addressed  the
crowd,  denouncing  by  name  those  who  opposed  him,  and  especi-
ally Burke  and  North  ;  but  Conway  rebuked  hira  in  the  sight  and
hearing  of  the  mob,  and  Colonel  Gordon,  one  of  his  own  rela-
tives, declared  that  the  moment  the  first  man  of  the  mob  entered
the  House  he  would  plunge  his  sword  into  the  body  of  Lord
George.  The  doors  were  locked.  The  strangers'  gallery  was
empty,  but  only  a  few  doorkeepers  and  a  few  other  ordinary
officials  protected  the  House,  while  the  mob  is  said  at  first  to
have  numbered  not  less  than  G0,000  men.  Lord  North  suc-
ceeded in  sending  a  messenger  for  the  Guards,  but  many
anxious  hours  passed  before  they  arrived.  Twice  attempts  were
made  to  force  the  doors.  At  one  time  the  danger  seemed  so
imminent  that  Colonel  Luttrell  proposed  that  they  should  be
thrown  open,  and  that  the  members  should,  with  their  dra^vn
swords,  endeavour  to  cut  their  way  through  the  mob.  Happily,
however,  the  crowd,  though  it  contained  some  desperate  fanatics,
and  some  desperate  criminals,  consisted  chiefly  of  idle,  purpose-
less ruffians  of  the  lowest  class,  bent  only  on  mischief  and
amusement,  but  animated  by  no  very  bitter  animosity,  by  no
means  desirous  of  carrying  matters  to  extremity,  and  content
with  having  kept  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  for  several  hours
blockaded  and  imprisoned.  The  stifling  heat  of  the  day  caused
many  to  drop  away.  Lord  ]Mahon  harangued  the  crowd  with  some
effect  from  the  window  of  a  neighbouring  coffee-house ;  Alderman
Sawbridge  and  the  Assistant  Chaplain  expostulated  with  them,
but  without  much  success,  and  at  last  about  nine  o'clock  the  troops
appeared,  and  the  crowd,  without  resisting,  agreed  to  disperse.
A  great  part  of  them,  however,  were  bent  on  further
outrages.  They  attacked  the  Sardinian  Minister's  chapel  in
Duke  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  They  broke  it  open,  carried
away  the  silver  lamps  and  other  furniture,  burnt  the  benches
in  the  street,  and  flung  the  burning  brands  into  the  chapel.
The  Bavarian  Minister's  chapel  in  ^^'arwick  Street  Golden
Square  was  next  attacked,  plundered,  and  burnt  before  the
soldiers  could  intervene.  They  at  last  appeared  upon  the  scene,
and  some  slight  scuffling  ensued,  and  thirteen  of  the  rioters
Wf'r<'  captured

en.  xiii.  THE  GORDON  RIOTS,  513

It  was  hoped  that  the  riot  had  expended  its  force,  for  Satur-
day and  the  greater  part  of  Sunday  passed  with  little  disturb-
ance, but  on  Sunday  afternoon  new  outrages  began  in  Moorfields,
where  a  considerable  Catholic  population  resided.  Several
houses  were  attacked  and  plundered,  and  the  chapels  utterly
ruined.  The  mob  tore  up  altars,  pulpits,  pews  and  benches,
and  made  large  fires  of  them.  Nothing  but  the  bare  walls  re-
mained, and  even  these  sometimes  fell  before  the  heat.  The
soldiers  were  called  in,  but  only  when  it  was  too  late,  and  they
were  not  suffered  to  fire.  Authority  seemed  completely  para-
lysed. The  impunity  that  had  hitherto  attended  the  outrages,
the  hope  of  gigantic  plunder,  the  madness  which  every  hour
became  stronger  and  more  contagious,  the  desperation  of  men
who  had  already  compromised  themselves  beyond  return,  all
added  to  the  flame.  The  mob  were  fast  finding  their  leaders;  and
as  their  confidence  in  themselves  increased,  they  loudly  boasted
that  they  would  root  out  Popery  from  the  land,  release  the  prison-
ers who  had  been  confined  in  Newgate  for  the  outrages  on  Friday,
and  take  signal  vengeance  on  the  magistrates  who  had  com-
mitted them,  and  on  all  who  had  given  evidence  against  them.

Monday,  June  5,  was  the  anniversary  of  the  King's  birthday,
and  the  signs  of  oflScial  rejoicing  contrasted  strangely  with  the
panic  that  was  abroad.  The  military  preparations  were  still
miserably  inadequate.  A  proclamation  was  issued  promising  a
reward  of  5001.  for  the  detection  of  those  who  were  concerned
in  plundering  the  Sardinian  and  Bavarian  chapels,  but  the
rioters  were  as  far  as  possible  from  being  intimidated.  One
party,  carrying  spoils  of  the  chapels  they  had  plundered,  marched
in  triumph  to  Lord  George  Gordon's  house  in  Welbeck  Street,
and  then  burnt  them  in  the  adjoining  fields.  Another  party
went  to  Virginia  Lane,  Wapping,  and  a  third  to  Nightingale
Lane,  and  in  each  of  these  places  a  Catholic  chapel  was  soon
in  a  bhize.  A  Catholic  school  at  Hoxton  was  nest  destroyed.
They  then  attacked  the  houses  and  shops  of  those  who  had
given  evidence  against  the  rioters,  burnt  them,  and  plundered
their  contents.  Sir  George  Savile's  house  in  Leicester  Square
underwent  the  same  fate.  As  the  proposer  of  the  Eelief  Bill,
he  was  especially  obnoxious  to  the  fanatical  portion  of  the
rioters,  and  he  had  prudently  taken  the  precaution  of  secretlv  re-

VOL.  III.  L  L

514  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. rn.  xm.

moving  his  plate  and  some  other  valuables.  The  house,  however,
was  completely  wrecked,  and  when  the  evening  closed  in,  it  was
little  more  than  a  ruin.  The  iron  rails  that  surrounded  it  were
torn  up,  and  became  formidable  weapons  in  the  hands  of  the
moll.

All  this  was  done  with  complete  impunity,  and  as  a  natural
consequence  the  spirits  of  the  rioters  rose  higher  and  higher.
On  Tuesday,  Jime  6,  more  daring  enterprises  were  attempted.
All  the  troops  in  London  were  concentrated  on  a  few  points,
such  as  the  Tower,  the  Houses  of  Parliament,  St.  James's  Palace,
and  St.  George's-in-the-Fields,  and  great  districts  were  almost
wholly  unprotected.  No  Catholic  house  was  any  longer  secure.
No  one  knew  how  many  were  implicated  in  or  sympathised  with
the  rioters,  for  the  most  peaceful  subjects  now  wore  blue  cock-
ades as  a  protection  from  the  mob.  The  two  Houses  met  under
strong  military  protection,  but,  in  spite  of  that  protection,
Lord  Sandwich,  on  his  way  to  Parliament,  was  torn  out  of
his  carriage,  which  was  broken  in  pieces,  his  face  was  cut,  and
he  was  rescued  with  difficulty  by  the  Horse-guards.  An  at-
tack was  made  on  the  house  of  Lord  North,  but  it  was  suc-
cessfully defended  by  a  party  of  light  horse,  who  with  drawn
swords  charged  the  mob  and  trampled  several  men  under  their
horses'  hoofs.  At  six  in  the  evening  a  party  went  to  the  house
of  Justice  Hyde,  near  Leicester  Fields,  which  in  less  than  half
an  hour  was  utterly  wrecked ;  while  another  party,  consisting
of  many  thousands  of  desperate  men,  passed  rapidly  through
Long  Acre, and  down  Holborn,till  they  arrived  at  Newgate.  They
summoned  Mr.  Akerman,  the  keeper,  to  release  their  comrades,
and  on  his  refusal  they  at  once  besieged  the  gaol.  It  had  been
lately  built  at  an  expense  of  40,000^.,  and  was  esteemed  the
strongest  in  England.  The  mob,  however,  were  under  the
direction  of  men  who  well  knew  what  they  had  undertaken,
and  they  had  provided  themselves  with  sledge  hammers  and
pickaxes  to  batter  down  the  door,  and  long  ladders  to  scale
the  walls.  For  a  time  the  great  iron  gate  resisted  their
efforts,  and  no  gunpowder  appears  to  have  been  employed.
V)\it  another  and  not  less  formidable  means  of  assault  was
Hpeedily  discovered.  TIk-  house  of  the  chief  keeper,  which  ad-
joined ilio  gaol,  was  easily  1)rok('n ()j)f'n,  and  great  masses  of

cu.  XIII.  TIIK GOKDON IJIOTS.  rj\5

funiil  arc  were  flunjr  down  Uirougli  the  windows,  piled  ag.'iinsl
the  prison  door,  and  tlien  ifjnited.  New  combustibles  were
brought  in  from  all  sides,  and  a  furious  blaze  was  kindled,  till  the
door  was  red-hot  and  tottering  upon  its  hinges.  In  the  mean-
time the  keeper's  house  was  set  on  fire,  and  the  prison  chapel
caught  the  flames,  while  men,  climbing  on  high  ladders,  flung
burning  brands  through  the  grated  orifices,  and  soon  ignited
the  woodwork  of  the  prison.  The  fire  spread  far  and  fast,  cast-
ing its  red  and  fluctuating  glare  upon  the  dense  and  savage
crowd  half-mad  with  drink  and  with  excitement.  One  hundred
constables  endeavoured  to  disperse  them,  but  the  rioters  closed
around  them  and  overpowered  them,  and  flung  their  staves  into
the  flames,  and  sentinels  kept  watch  at  every  street  to  guard
the  depredators  against  surprise.  About  300  prisoners,  four  of
whom  were  under  sentence  of  death,  were  confined  in  Newgate.
They  were  divided  between  the  hope  of  escape  and  the  still
more  pressing  fear  of  being  burnt  alive  or  smothered  by  the
dense  volumes  of  smoke  that  already  rolled  through  the  prison,
and  their  piercing  cries  were  clearly  heard  above  the  tumult.
At  length  the  iron  door  gave  way  beneath  the  heat  and  the
repeated  blows.  The  crowd  rushed  in ;  some  climbed  to  the
roof,  and  made  a  hole  through  the  rafters ;  others  penetrated
through  a  gap  made  by  the  burning  chapel.  The  cells  were
broken  open,  and  the  prisoners  dragged  out.  All  seem  to
have  been  saved  except  some  intoxicated  rioters,  who  sank  down
stupified  with  drink,  and  perished  in  the  fall  of  the  burning
rafters.  In  a  short  time  little  but  blackened  walls  remained
of  the  greatest  prison  in  London,  and  a  new  contingent  of
desperate  malefactors  was  added  to  the  rioters.

The  mob  had  triumphed,  but  they  did  not  pause  in  their
career  of  crime.  Parties  were  at  once  told  off  for  different
enterprises.  One  party  attacked  the  Catholics  in  Devonshire
Street,  Ked  Lion  Square ;  another  destroyed  the  house  of
Justice  Cox,  in  Great  Queen  Street ;  a  third  broke  open  the
new  prison  in  Clerkenwell,  and  released  all  the  prisoners ;  a
fourth  attacked  and  wrecked  the  house  of  Sir  John  Fieldino-,
who,  as  the  most  active  magistrate  in  London,  was  especially
obnoxious  to  them ;  a  fifth,  shortly  after  midnight,  attacked
the great house of  Lord ^Mansfield in Bloomsbury  Square.

516  ENr.LAXI) IN Tin: KIGIITKENXn CENTURY.  en.  xiii.

Lord  and  Lady  Alansficld  had  but  just  time  to  escape  through
tlie  back  when  it  was  broken  open,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the
furniture  was  thrown  out  of  the  windows,  and  kindled  into
a  blaze  before  the  door,  A  collection  of  precious  pictures,
a  noble  law  library,  many  priceless  manuscripts  from  the  pen
of  jNIansfield  himself,  many  important  legal  papers  which  were
in  his  care,  were  thrown  in  to  feed  the  flames.  The  wine
cellars  were  broken  open,  and  the  crowd  was  soon  mad  with
drink.  A  party  of  guards  arrived  when  the  ruin  was  almost
accomplished,  and,  the  Riot  Act  having  been  read,  the  magis-
trates ordered  them  to  fire,  and  six  men  and  a  woman  were
killed,  and  several  wounded ;  but  the  passions  of  the  mob
had  risen  too  high  for  fear.  It  was  remembered  that  Lord
jMansfield  possessed  a  country  house  between  Highgate  and
Ilampstead,  and  a  party  was  sent  to  burn  it ;  but  they  were
anticipated  and  repelled  by  a  party  of  horse.  Eleven  or  twelve
private  houses  were,  however,  that  night  in  a  blaze,  and  the
conflagration  mingled  with  the  splendour  of  a  general  illumina-
tion; for  the  mob  compelled  every  householder  to  illuminate
in  honour  of  their  triumph.

Wednesday,  June  7,  long  known  in  London  by  the  name
of  '  Black  Wednesday,'  witnessed  a  spectacle  such  as  London
had  never  before  seen.  The  long  tension,  the  succession  of
sleepless  nights,  the  complete  triumph  of  the  mob  during  four
days,  the  proved  incapacity  of  the  City  authorities  to  keep  the
peace,  the  knowledge  that  the  worst  criminals  from  the  gaols
were  at  large,  the  threatening  warnings  sent  out  by  the  mob
that  they  would  destroy  the  Bank,  the  prisons,  and  the  palaces,
had  utterly  cowed  the  people.  A  camp  was  formed  and
cannon  were  drawn  out  in  Hyde  Park.  The  I'crkshire  JNIilitia,
and  soon  after  the  Northumberland  JNlilitia,  arrived  to  reinforce
the  regular  troops.  Strong  guards  were  stationed  at  the  chief
public  buildings,  at  the  houses  of  the  ministers,  at  Devonshire
House  and  Kockingham  House,  and  every  important  dwelling
was  barricaded  as  in  a  siege,  and  guarded  by  armed  men.  ]?ut
a  great  section  of  London  was  completely  in  the  hands  of  the
mob.  The  Lord  Mayor  and  the  City  magistrates  seemed  para-
lysed with  fear.  Many  magistrates  had  fled  from  London ;  the
houses  of  th('  f<\v  who  were  really  artivc  had  been  plundered  or

CE.  XIII.  THE GORnON RIOTS.  517

burnt,  and  all  spirit  of  self-reliance  and  resistance  appeared  for
the  moment  to  have  been  extinguished.  Fanaticism  had  but
little  part  in  the  proceedings  of  this  day  ;  it  was  outrage  and
plunder  in  their  most  naked  forms.  Kichard  Burke,  in  a  letter
dated  from  '  What  was  London,'  gives  us  a  vivid  picture  of  the
abject  terror  that  was  prevailing.  '  This  is  the  fourth  day,'  he
writes,  '  that  the  metropolis  of  England  (once  of  the  world)  is
possessed  by  au  enraged,  furious,  and  numerous  enemy.  Their
outrages  are  beyond  description,  and  meet  with  no  resistance.  .  .  .
What  this  night  will  produce  is  known  only  to  the  Great  Dis-
poser of  things.  ...  If  one  could  in  decency  laugh,  must  one
not  laugh  to  see  what  I  saw :  a  single  boy,  of  fifteen  years  at
most,  in  Queen  Street,  mounted  on  a  pent-house  demolishing  a
house  with  great  zeal,  but  much  at  his  ease,  and  throwing  the
pieces  to  two  boys  still  younger,  who  burnt  them  for  their  amuse-
ment, no  one  daring  to  obstruct  them  ?  Children  are  plun-
dering at  noonday  the  City  of  London.'  ^  Three  boys,  armed
with  iron  bars  torn  up  from  Lord  Mansfield's  house,  went  down
Holborn  in  the  middle  of  the  day  shouting  '  No  Popery  ! '  and
extorting  money  from  every  shop,  and  they  met  with  no  op-
position. Small  parties  of  the  same  kind  levied  coutrilm-
tions  in  almost  every  district,  no  one  daring  to  resist  them,
lest  the  mob  should  be  called  down  upon  their  houses.  One
man  on  horseback  was  especially  noticed  who  refused  to  take
anything  but  gold.  Dr.  Johnson  walked  on  that  day  to  visit
the  ruins  of  Newgate,  and  he  passed  a  party  plundering  the
sessions  house  of  Old  Bailey.  They  consisted,  as  he  observed,  of
less  than  100  men,  and  '  they  did  their  work  at  leisure,  in  full
security,  without  sentinels,  without  trepidation,  as  men  lawfully
employed  in  full  day.'  ^  In  the  afternoon  the  shops  were  shut.
'  No  Popery  ! '  was  chalked  upon  the  shutters,  and  bits  of  blue
silk  were  hung  out  from  almost  every  house.  Eumours  of  the
most  terrible  kind  were  circulated  through  the  town.  It  was
reported  that  the  mol)  liad  tlireatened  to  let  loose  the  lunatics
from  Bedlam  and  the  lions  from  the  Tower ;  that  the  French
had  organised  the  whole  movement  in  order  that  the  destruc-
tion of  London,  and  especially  of  the  Bank,  might  produce  a
national  bankruptcy ;  that  the  soldiers  had  been  tampered  with,

•  Burke's  CiirrcsjH'udcnec,  ii.  350,  351.  -  Croker's  JSosicell,  p.  G-tS.

518 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xia.

and  would  refuse  to  fire  on  the  people.  The  Duke  of  Grafton
gives  a  curious  illustration  of  the  universality  of  the  alarm,
in  the  fact  that  even  the  servants  of  the  Secretary  of  State
wore  blue  cockades  to  conciliate  the  mob.  In  the  evening,
scenes  more  terrible  than  any  that  had  yet  been  witnessed  took
place.  The  King's  Bench  prison,  the  Fleet  prison,  the  new
Bridewell,  the  watchhouses  in  Kent  Street  near  St.  George's
Church,  the  toll-gates  on  Blackfriars  Bridge,  and  a  great
number  of  private  houses,  were  simultaneously  in  flames.  From
a  single  point  thirty-six  distinct  conflagrations  were  counted.
The  tall  pinnacles  of  fire  rising  like  volcanoes  in  the  air,  the
shouts  of  the  populace,  the  blaze  reflected  in  the  waters  of  the
Thames,  the  shrieks  of  women,  mingling  with  the  crackling  of
the  flames,  with  the  crash  of  falling  buildings,  and,  from  time
to  time,  with  the  sound  of  musketry  as  the  troops  fired  in
platoons  into  the  crowd,  all  combined  to  form,  in  the  words  of
an  eye-witness,  a  perfect  '  pictiure  of  a  city  sacked  and  aban-
doned to  a  ferocious  enemy.'  The  rioters  had  seized  large
supplies  of  arms  in  the  artillery  grounds,  and  the  great  num-
ber of  felons  who  were  now  in  their  ranks  gave  an  additional
desperation  to  the  conflict.  It  was  noticed  that  a  brewer's  boy,
riding  on  a  horse  strangely  decorated  with  chains  from  Newgate,
led  the  most  daring  party.  Under  his  guidance  they  at-
tempted to  capture  and  burn  the  Bank  of  England  ;  but  a
strong  body  of  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Holroyd,
repelled  them  with  the  loss  of  many  lives,  and  they  were  in  like
manner  defeated  in  an  attempt  upon  the  Pay  Ofliice.

The  riots  were  fortunately  localised.  The  worst  conflagra-
tions were  in  Queen  Street,  Little  Eussell  Street,  Bloomsbury,
and  Holborn.  Chains  drawn  across  the  Strand  and  Holborn,
and  protected  by  lines  of  soldiers,  prevented  the  mob  from
passing  westwards ;  but  Charing  Cross,  the  Haymarket,  and
I'iccadilly  were  illuminated  through  fear.  Strange  to  say,  in
the  unmolested  parts  of  the  town  the  ordinary  amusements
still  went  on,  and  Horace  Walpole  notices  that  on  this  dreadful
r.ight  Lady  Ailesbury  was  at  the  play  in  the  Haymarket,  and
that  his  four  nieces  were  with  iho  Duke  of  Gloucester  at
Ranelagh.'  The  night  was  fortunately  very  calm,  and  the  sk}
'  Litters  to  the  CoiDitcs-x  of  Ongnni,  June  7,  1780.

cii.  xi:i.  TIIR GORDON RIOTS.  519

was  clear,  and  glowing  with  the  reflected  flames,  save  where
dark  volumes  of  ascending  smoke  from  time  to  time  overspread
it.  The  streets  in  the  quarters  where  the  riot  was  at  its  height
w-ere  thronged  with  idle  spectators — many  of  them  women  with
infants  in  their  arms — gazing  on  the  scene,  and  mixing  with
terror-stricken  fugitives  who  were  endeavouring  to  save  some
portion  of  their  property.  Spectators  were,  in  most  places,  in
little  danger  ;  for  the  rioters  were  busily  engaged,  and  they
might  be  distinctly  seen  by  the  glare  of  the  flames  pursuing
their  work  of  plunder  and  demolition,  for  the  most  part  entirely
undisturbed,  in  the  midst  of  the  burning  houses.  Wraxall
went  through  a  great  part  of  the  disturbed  district  on  foot,
without  the  smallest  hindrance,  and  he  noticed  that  as  he
stood  with  his  companions  by  the  wall  of  St.  Andrew's  church-
yard, near  the  spot  where  the  fiercest  conflagration  was  raging,
a  watchman  with  a  lantern  in  his  hand  passed  by,  calling  the
hour  as  in  a  time  of  profound  tranquillity.

The  resistance  was  confined  to  a  few  j^oints.  Some  attempts
were  made  to  extinguish  the  flames,  but  they  were  baffled  by
the  mob.  A  large  engine  was  brought  to  play  upon  the  Fleet
prison  ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  soldiers,  the  rioters  cut
oflf  its  pipes  and  flung  it  into  the  flames.  At  Blackfriars  Bridge,
when  the  toll-gates  were  plundered,  the  soldiers  fired  with
considerable  effect.  Many  rioters  were  killed  ;  one  man  was
noticed  to  run  thirty  or  forty  yards,  when  pierced  by  a  bullet,
before  he  dropped  dead ;  and  several,  when  dead  or  dying,  are
said  to  have  been  thrown  by  their  comrades  into  the  Thames.
Others  were  killed  in  the  attack  on  the  King's  Bench  prison  ;
but  the  greater  number  fell  in  the  unsuccessful  attacks  on  the
Bank  and  on  the  Pay  Office.  The  most  terrible  scene,  how-
ever, took  place  near  the  decline  of  Holborn  Hill,  in  front  of
St.  Andrew's  Church,  where  the  buildings  of  a  great  Catholic
distiller,  named  Langdale,  were  attacked  and  burnt.  Immense
casks  of  unrectified  spirits,  still  wholly  unfit  for  human  con-
sumption, were  staved  in,  and  the  spirits  flowed  in  great  streams
along  the  road,  while  men,  women,  and  children  gathered  it
up  in  pails  or  lapped  it  with  their  hands.  Such  a  scene  of
drunken  madness  had  perhaps  never  been  before  exhibited  in
England. Numbers,  buth  of  men  and  women,  killed  themselves

520  ENGLAND  IN  THE  F.IGUTEENTII CENTURY. cii.  xiii,

by  drinking  (he  poisonons  draught.  Women  with  infants  in
their  arms  were  seen  lying  insensible  along  the  road.  Soon
the  fire  reached  the  spirits,  and  it  leapt  forth,  with  a  tenfold
fury,  in  the  midst  of  the  reeling  and  dizzy  crowd  who  were
plundering  the  house.  Numbers  fell  into  the  burning  ruins,
or  into  the  midst  of  the  liquid  fire.  Eight  or  nine  wretched
creatures  were  dragged  out  when  half-burnt,  but  most  of  those
who  fell  perished  by  one  of  the  most  horrible  of  deaths.

The  night  of  June  7  was  the  end  of  all  that  was  serious  in
the  Gordon  riots.  The  defeat  of  the  attacks  upon  the  Bank
and  the  Pay  Office,  and  the  terrible  scene  on  Holborn  Hill,
had  broken  the  spirits  and  power  of  the  rioters,  while  the  in-
troduction into  London  of  large  bodies  of  regular  troops  and  of
militia  had  made  further  resistance  impossible.  In  addition
to  the  permanent  debility  and  indeed  impotence  of  the  London
police  force,  and  to  the  incompetence  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and
of  several  of  the  City  magistrates,  other  causes  combined  to
paralyse  the  civil  power.  The  military  forces  at  the  disposal  of
the  Crown  were  diminished  by  the  exigencies  of  the  great  war
which  was  raging  in  America.  The  Ministry  of  Lord  North  was
already  tottering  to  its  fall,  and  its  weakness  enfeebled  every
branch  of  the  Executive,  while  the  recollection  of  the  furious
outbursts  of  popular  indignation  which  had  been  aroused
against  those  who  employed  soldiers  in  suppressing  the  Wilkes
riots  in  17G9  made  both  magistrates  and  ministers  extremely
timid.'  As  Lord  Mansfield  once  said  with  profound  truth,
*  It  is  the  highest  humanity  to  check  the  infancy  of  tumults,
and  a  well-directed  volley  on  the  first  day  of  the  riots,
though  it  would  have  exposed  the  Government  to  much  foolish
declamation,  would  probably  have  prevented  all  the  horrible
scenes  that  ensued.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  Wilkes,  who  had
been  the  instigator  or  the  pretext  of  the  last  great  riots  in
London,  took,  as  alderman,  a  distinguished  and  courageous  part
in  suppressing  the  Gordon  riots,  in  defending  the  Bank,  and  in
protecting  the  Catholics,  and  he  received  the  special  thanks

I  jri  1770— four  years  before  tlio  for  fcfLrnf  boinc:  hnnrjcd. TJic  Guards

Gnrdon  riots— Dr.  Johnson  liad  said,  will  not  come  for  fear  of  boinj^^  given

♦Thecharactcristic  of  our  own  Govern-  uplo  (lie  blind  T:i<xe  of  popular  juries.'

ment  at  present  is  imbecility. The  -  Croker's  Jiomril,  p.  CUK.
magistrates  dare  not  call  the  Guards

ai.  XIII.  EFFECTS  OF  THE  IiIOT.=f.  521

of  the  Privy  Council  for  liis  services.  No  one,  liowever,  in  lliis
trying  period  appeared  in  a  more  honourable  li<(lit  than  the
King.  The  calm  courage  which  he  never  failed  to  show,  and  hir,
extreme  tenacity  of  purpose,  which  in  civil  affairs  often  proved
very  mischievous,  were  in  the  moments  of  crisis  peculiarly
vahiable.  Many  lives  and  a  vast  amount  of  property  had  been
sacrificed  because  no  officer  dared  to  allow  his  soldiers  to  fire
except  by  the  direction  of  a  magistrate,  and  after  the  Eiot
Act  had  been  read  and  a  whole  hour  had  elapsed.  Such  an  in-
terpretation of  the  law  made  the  display  of  soldiers  in  the
midst  of  burning  houses  and  in  the  agonies  of  a  great  struggle
little  more  than  a  mockery,  and  the  King  strongly  contested
it.  On  the  7th  he  called  of  his  own  accord  a  meetinsf  of  the
Privy  Council,  and  obtained  from  Wedderburn,  the  Attorney-
General,  an  opinion  that,  if  a  mob  were  committing  a  felony,
such  as  burning  down  a  house,  and  could  not  be  prevented  by
any  other  means,  the  military  might  and  ought  to  fire  on  them
at  once,  and  that  the  reading  of  the  Kiot  Act  under  such  cir-
cumstances was  wholly  unnecessary.  Much  hesitation  appears
to  have  been  shown  in  the  Council,  but  the  King,  declaring
that  at  least  one  magistrate  would  do  his  duty,  announced  his
intention  of  acting  on  his  own  responsibility,  on  the  opinion  of
Wedderburn,  and  his  readiness,  if  any  difficulty  were  shown,  to
lead  his  guards  in  person.  The  Council  at  length  agreed  with
the  opinion,  and  a  discretionary  power  was  given  to  the  soldiers,
which,  though  it  was  much  complained  of  by  some  constitu-
tional pedants,  was  manifestly  necessary,  and  was  the  chief
means  of  suppressing  the  riots.'

In  the  course  of  the  four  days  during  which  the  riots  were  at
their  height  no  less  than  seventy-two  private  houses  and  four  gaols
were  destroy ed.^  Of  the  number  of  the  rioters  who  were  killed
it  is  impossible  to  speak  with  accuracy.  No  account  was  made
of  those  who  died  of  drink,  who  perished  in  the  ruins  or  in
the  burning  spirits,  who  were  thrown  into  the  Thames,  or  who
were  carried  away  when  wounded  and  concealed  in  their  own
homes. Excluding  these,  it  appears  from  a  report  issued  by

'  See  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vWi.  -  See  Lord  Loughborough's  Charge,

41-43. Jesse's  Mevioirs  of  Geo.  III., Ann,  Reg.  1780,  p.  281.
ii.  276-279.

522  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITKENTII CKNTURY. ch.  mu.

Ainhorst  shortly  after  the  suppression  of  the  riots,  that  285  had
been  killed  or  had  died  of  their  wounds,  and  that  173  wounded
prisoners  were  still  in  his  hands.  In  the  opinion  of  the  most
competent  judges  the  whole  city  had  been  in  imminent  danger
of  destruction,  and  owed  its  escape  mainly  to  the  fact  that  the
mob  at  the  time  when  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  have
resisted  them,  wasted  their  strength  upon  chapels  and  private
buildings,  instead  of  at  once  attacking  the  Bank  and  the  public
offices,  and  also  to  the  happy  accident  that  on  the  night  of  the
7th  there  was  scarcely  a  breath  of  wind  to  spread  the  flames.
135  prisoners  were  soon  after  brought  to  trial,  and  59  were
capitally  convicted,  of  whom  21  were  executed.  Lord  George
Gordon  was  thrown  into  the  Tower,  and  was  tried  before  Lord
jNIansfield  on  the  charge  of  high  treason  for  levying  war  upon
the  Crown.  The  charge  was  what  is  termed  by  lawyers  '  con-
structive treason.'  It  rested  upon  the  assertion  that  the
agitation  which  he  had  created  and  led  was  the  originating  cause
of  the  outrages  that  had  taken  place.  As  there  was  no  evidence
that  Lord  George  Gordon  had  anticipated  these  outrages,  as  he
had  taken  no  part  in  them,  and  had  even  offered  his  services
to  the  Government  to  assist  in  their  suppression,  the  accusation
was  one  which,  if  it  had  been  maintained,  would  have  had  con-
sequences very  dangerous  to  public  liberty.  After  one  of  the
greatest  speeches  of  Erskine,  Lord  George  Gordon  was  ac-
quitted, and  he  still  retained  such  a  hold  over  large  classes
that  thanksgivings  were  publicly  offered  up  in  several  churches
and  chapels.  lEe  was  many  years  after  thrown  into  prison  for
a  libel  upon  IMarie  Antoinette,  and  he  died  in  Newgate  in  171)3.
Before  the  close  of  his  life  he  startled  his  theological  admirers
by  his  conversion  to  Judaism.'

•  The three  most detailed con-  vation  of  the  Protcxfant  Association

temporary  accounts  of  lliese  riots  are  :  (London, 1780). The  poet Crabbe

tlie  A'drrative of  the Late  JJidiirb-  witnctwed  some  of the  scenes, and

anrrs  in.  Lond/m  and  Wcstndvxtcr,  by  esix^cially  the cajjture  of Newgate,

William  Vincent,  of  Gray's  Inn  (tiic  and  he  describes them  in  a  letter  in

real  writer  of  this,  which  is  the  fullest  ids  bioj^^raphj',  wliich  is  unfortunately

account  of  the  riots,  was  Thomas  llol-  imperfect. Horace Walpole and

croft);  the  Annval  Register  of  1780,  Wraxall  were  both  witnesses  of  the

which also  contains reports  of the  scenes on lUack Wednesday. TIk;

trials  of  the chief  rioters  ; and an  first  has  described  them  very  fully  in

anonymous  Narrative  of  tlic  Proceed-  his  letters  to  Lord  Stratford  and  to

i'lij*  of  Lord  Geor^je  (lor don  and  the  the Countess of Ossory ; and the

I'lraimt  assembled  under  the  JJenomi-  second  in his  Menunrs. .Sec also  a

cii.  xiir.  EFFECTS OF THE  RIOTS.  623

In  the  House  of  Commons  a  series  of  resolulions  were  in-
troduced by  Burke  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Government,
vindicating  the  recent  IvcHef  Bill,  and  condemning  the  misrepre-
sentations which  had  led  to  the  tumults.  An  attempt  was  made
to  allay  the  fears  of  the  more  fanatical  Protestants  by  a  Bill
introduced  by  Sir  George  Savile  forbidding  Catholics  from
taking  any  part  in  the  education  of  Protestants ;  but  though  it
passed  the  Commons,  it  miscarried  in  the  Tjords.

The  riots  of  1780  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  period  of
time  with  which  the  present  chapter  is  occupied  ;  but  it  is  the
plan  of  this  l)ook  to  prefer  the  order  of  subjects  to  the  order
of  chronology,  and  these  disturbances  were  the  immediate
consequence  of  the  religious  legislation  under  Lord  North.
Making  every  allowance  for  the  amount  of  ordinary  crime
which  entered  into  them,  and  considering  how  infinitesimal  was
the  provocation  that  produced  them,  they  display  a  depth  and
intensity  of  fanaticism  we  should  scarcely  have  expected  in
the  eighteenth  century ;  and  similar  disturbances,  though  on  a
much  smaller  scale,  took  place  at  Hull,  Bristol,  and  Bath.  The
disgrace  was  keenly  felt  both  at  home  and  abroad.^  Secret
negotiations  for  peace  were  at  this  time  going  on  with  Spain,
and  it  was  noticed  that  the  reports  of  the  riots  in  London
greatly  interfered  with  them,  for  the  no-Popery  fanaticism  in
London  irritated  the  public  opinion  of  Spain,  while  the  suc-
cess of  the  rioters  was  thought  clearly  to  prove  the  weakness  of
the  Government,^  '  Our  danger,'  wrote  Gibbon  shortly  after
the  suppression,  '  is  at  an  end,  but  our  disgrace  will  be  labting,
and  the  month  of  June  1780  will  ever  be  marked  by  a  dark
and  diabolical  fanaticism  which  I  had  supposed  to  be  extinct.'  '^

letter from Dr. Warner in Jesse's  ' Miscellaneovs Worl'S, ii. 241.

Life  of  Sehvi/n,  iv. 327-3S5,  and  the  '  Rien,'  wrote  JIadame  Du  Deflfand,

interesting:  journal  of  the  Moravian,  '  nest plus  affreux  que  tout  ce  qui

James Hutton. — r.enham's Life of  arrive chez vous. Votre liberte  no

Htitton,  pp.  530-536. I  need  scarcely  me  seduit  point. Cette  liberte  taut

refer  to the  admirable  narrative  of  vantee  me  parait  bien  plus  onereuse

Dickens, in Larnahy Rudge,  based  que  notre  esclavage.' — Walpole's  Let-

upon Holcroft, Walpole, and the  tcrs,  vi.  88. In  one  of  the  letters  of

Annual  Ihfjister.  Maria Theresa  to  Marie  Antoinette

' See e.g. the two well-known  (June  30.jl  780)  she  speaks  with  great

poems  of  Cowper  on  tlie  burning  of  dislike  of  a  contemplated  visit  of  the

Lord  Manslield's  library.  Emperr.r  to  England  :  '  Surtout  apri  s

■^  See Cumberland's ^/iiiioirs,  ii.  la  terriVile  6meute, inou'ie entre  les

35-36,  48.  puissances  civilisLCs  qui  vicnt  de  se

5-24  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xiii.

To  a  writer  of  the  nineteenth  century,  however,  the  lesson
to  be  derived  from  the  narrative  is  not  altogether  a  gloomy
one.  Whatever  judgment  may  be  formed  in  other  respects  in
the  old  controversy  between  those  who  regard  the  history  of
modern  England  as  a  history  of  unqualified  progress,  and  those
who  regard  it  in  its  most  essential  features  as  a  history  of
decay,  there  is  at  least  one  fact  which  no  serious  student  of
the  eighteenth  century  will  dispute.  It  is,  that  the  immense
changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the  past  century  in  the
enlargement  of  personal  and  political  liberty,  and  in  the  miti-
gation of  the  penal  code,  have  been  accompanied  by  an  at  least
equal  progress  in  the  maintenance  of  public  order  and  in  the
security  of  private  property  in  England.

The  Government  of  Lord  North  during  the  period  pre-
cedinsT  the  gfreat  outbreak  of  the  American  War  was  almost
wholly  occupied  with  domestic,  Indian,  and  colonial  questions,
and  neither  exercised  nor  aspired  to  exercise  any  consideral)le
influence  on  the  affairs  of  other  nations.  The  Eevolution,  which
in  1772  changed  the  Constitution  of  Sweden,  breaking  the
power  of  the  aristocracy  and  aggrandising  that  of  the  Crown,
was  effected,  in  a  great  measure,  under  French  instigation,  and
England  had  no  voice  in  the  infamous  treaty  which  in  the  same
year  sanctioned  the  first  partition  of  Poland,  or  in  the  treaty
of  Kainardji  in  1774,  by  which  Kussia  made  the  Crimea  a
separate  khanate,  and  greatly  extended  both  her  own  frontier
and  her  influence  in  Turkey.  In  1772  the  Government  had
to  contend  with  a  keen  commercial  crisis  and  a  period  of  acute
and  general  distress.  In  many  parts  of  England  there  were
desperate  food  riots.  Several  banks  broke,  and  a  widespread
panic  prevailed.'  But  in  Parliament  the  Government  continued
for  some  years  invincibly  strong,  and  its  Indian  policy  and
the  earUer  parts  of  its  American  policy  appear  to  have  been
generally  regarded  either  with  approval  or  with  indifference.

passer. Voili cet*e liberty tant  insnrrection  which  for  foiir  days  to-

pr.jnC'e— cette legislation unique.  pethor has made such devastatiou

Sans  religion,  sans  moeurs,  rien  no  so  in  this  town,  and threatened  not  less

soutient '  —  Arneth, Correxpondance  than  a  total  (Icstniction  of  it.' — June

grcrrfc  de,  "Mnrie  Tlilrhc  et  Jifafie  Atv-  10,  1780. MSS.  Uocord  Ofhce.

tiniiitfr.,  iii.  Ml. IIill.sl)oroiigh,  in  a  '  Walpoles  fMKt Jou/rnti.!g, i.  88,

jii-ivate  letter  to  Buc.kingliamshire,  the  122, 128, A?m. lleg. 1772,  DO,  91,

Lord-Lieutenant of In^land, s|)caks  lUU,  110.
of  '  the  dreadful  and  unaccountable

cii.  Mil.  STRENGTH OF TIIH GOVERNMENT.  525

In  177  1  Parliament  was  dissolved  sliortly  l3efore  the  natural
period  of  its  existence  had  expired  ;  and  the  American  measures
of  the  Government,  if  they  had  been  seriously  unpopular  in
the  constituencies,  would  certainly  have  affected  the  elections.
The  election,  however,  fully  confirmed  the  ministerial  majority.'
In  the  first  important  party  division  on  an  American  question
that  followed  the  dissolution  the  ministers  counted  264  votes
to  73.^  The  Reform  spirit  appeared  to  have  almost  died  away.
Grenville's  Act  for  the  trial  of  disputed  elections  was,  it  is
true,  renewed  and  made  perpetual  in  1774,  in  spite  of  the
opposition  of  Lord  North  ;  but  different  motions  for  shortening
the  duration  of  Parliament,  and  for  making  its  constitution
more  popular,  were  rejected  without  difficulty,  and  appear  to
have  excited  no  interest.  The  city  of  Westminster  supported
the  ministers,  and  the  democratic  fervour  of  the  City  of  London
had  greatly  subsided.  Wilkes  found  rivals  and  bitter  enemies
in  Home  and  Townshend ;  but  at  last,  after  two  disappoint^
ments,  he  became  Lord  Mayor  of  London  in  1774,  and  in  the
election  of  the  same  year  he  without  opposition  regained  his
seat  as  member  for  Middlesex  ;  but  though  he  made  some  good
speeches  against  the  policy  of  the  Grovernment  in  America,  his
position  in  Parliament  was  never  a  distinguished  one,  and  he
soon  abandoned  the  character  and  the  practices  of  an  agitator.
All  the  worst  measures  of  American  coercion  that  preceded  the
Declaration  of  Independence  were  carried  by  enormous  majorities
in  Parliament.  The  Act  for  closing  Boston  harbour  passed  its
chief  stages  without  even  a  division.  The  Act  for  subverting
the  charter  of  ^Massachusetts  was  finally  carried  in  the  House
of  Commons  by  239  to  64,  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  92  to  20,

'  Lord  Russell  thinks  that  '  the  lution  was,  that  *  the  ad%-ices  from
abrupt  dissolution  prevented  any  in-  America,  though  industriously  con-
fluence being  exercised  by  American  coaled,  were  so  bad  that  great  cla-
affairs  on  tlie  temper  of  the  elections,'  mour  was  feared  from  the  American
and  he  quotes  a  speech  of  Lord  Suffolk,  merchants  and  trading  towns  ' — Last
who  said  he  advised  the  dissolution,  Journals,  i.  399.  At  the  same  time  the
foreseeing  that  if  it  were  delayed  the  American  Coercion  Acts  were  among
Americans  would  take  steps  '  to  in-  the  most  conspicuous  acts  of  the  Go-
fluence  the  general  election  by  crea-  vernment  in  the  late  Parliament,  and
ting  jealousies,  fears,  and  prejudices  they  must  necessarily  have  had  a  con-
among  the  mercantile  and  trading  siderable  part  in  determining  the
part  of  the  nation.' — Russell's  Life  of  votes  of  the  electors.
Fox,  i.  70,  71.  According  to  Walpole  ^  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  436.
one rea.«on  of the premature  disso-

52G  ENGLAND IN TlIK HIGnTEENTII CENTUIIY. cii.  xut.

The  Act  for  enabling  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts  to  send
colonists  accused  on  capital  charges  to  be  tried  in  England,
was  ultimately  carried  in  the  Commons  by  127  to  24,  in  the
]>ords  by  43  to  12.  The  motion  for  repealing  the  tea  duty,
Nvhich  was  supported  by  one  of  the  greatest  speeches  of  Burke,
was  rejected  by  182  to  49.  In  February  1 775  the  address  moved
by  Lord  North,  pledging  Parliament  to  support  the  Government
in  crushing  the  resistance  in  America,  was  carried  by  29G  to  luG,
and  an  amendment  of  Fox,  censuring  the  American  policy  of
the  ministers,  was  rejected  by  304  to  105.  In  jNIarch  the  con-
ciliatory propositions  of  Burke  were  defeated  by  the  previous
question,  which  was  carried  by  270  to  78.  In  INIay  the  very
respectful  remonstrance  of  the  General  Assembly  of  New  York,
which  was  one  of  the  last  efforts  of  conciliation  by  the  moderate
party  in  America,  was  censured  by  the  House  of  Commons,  as
'  inconsistent  with  the  legislative  authority  of  Parliament,'  by
186  to  67.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  had  urged  in  the  Cabinet
the  repeal  of  the  tea  duty,  but  had  been  outvoted.  He  still
remained  for  some  time  in  the  ministry,  trying  in  vain  to
modify  its  policy  in  the  direction  of  conciliation.  In  August
1775  he  wrote  a  strong  remonstrance  to  Lord  North  on  the
subject.  Seven  weeks  later  he  resigned  the  Privy  Seal  and
went  into  opposition,  declaring  in  Parliament  that  he  had
hitherto  '  concurred  when  he  could  not  approve,  from  a  hope
that  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  Government  would
be  the  probability  of  amicable  adjustment,'  and  recommend-
ing the  repeal  of  all  Acts  relating  to  America  which  had  been
carried  since  1763.  But  although  Grafton  had  very  lately
been  Prime  Minister  of  England,  he  did  not,  according  to
"SValpole,  carry  six  votes  with  him  in  his  secession.'  The
resignation  of  Conway,  which  immediately  followed,  proved
even  less  important.  Dartmouth,  who  had  hitherto  directed
American  affairs,  obtained  the  Privy  Seal,  and  he  was  replaced
by  J^ord  George  Germaine,  better  known  under  the  name  of
Lord  George  Sackville,  who  had  never  overcome  the  stigma
which  his  conduct  at  Minden  had  left  ujjoii  his  n'2)ii<a<i()n,  but

'  Walpole's LnM Joiirnah,  iii.  :?. i.  281,  282. Thackeray's  67/a^/ia7«,  ii.
tlniine's  (jn-rt ajiondriicr  of  (livrgr  III. .'507,  'W6.

cii.  xiM.  FOX RRCEDKS FPvOM TIFE TORIES.  527

who  \v;is  an  aMc;  administrator,  and  a  still  inoro  al)lo  debater.
l[e  speedily  infused  a  new  energy  into  the  direetion  of  American
affairs,  and  the  enlistment  of  the  German  troops  appears  to
have  been  principally  due  to  liim.  The  Opposition  in  the
beginning  of  177G  was  almost  contemptible  in  numbers,  and
at  the  same  time  divided  and  discredited.  The  Duke  of
Richmond  in  one  House,  and  Burke  in  the  other,  were  the
steadiest  and  most  powerful  opponents  of  the  American  policy  of
the  Government,  and  they  had  now  found  an  ally,  who  excelled
them  both  as  a  parliamentary  debater,  in  Charles  Fox,  who,
having  been  dismissed  from  the  Government  in  February  1774,
at  once  threw  himself  with  a  passionate  vehemence  into  the
Opposition.

His  secession,  like  most  acts  of  his  early  life,  was  very
discreditable  in  its  circumstances.  A  libel  on  the  Speaker,
written  by  Home,  had  been  brought  under  the  notice  of  the
House  of  Commons.  Lord  North,  with  his  usual  moderation,
would  gladly  have  suffered  the  matter  to  drop ;  but  one  of  the
members  insisted  on  Woodfall,  the  printer,  appearing  before
the  House,  and  it  was  moved,  upon  his  apology,  that  he  should
be  committed  to  the  Sergeant-at-Arms.  North,  after  some
hesitation,  agreed  to  this  course  ;  but  Charles  Fox,  who  was
at  this  time  a  Commissioner  of  the  Treasury,  in  opposition  to
the  known  wishes  of  his  chief  moved  that  Woodfall  should  be
committed  to  Newgate,  declared  that  he  selected  this  gaol  in
defiance  of  the  City  and  Sheriffs,  in  whose  jurisdiction  it  lay,
and  insisted  on  carrying  his  motion  to  a  division.  Lord  North,
perplexed,  irresolute,  and  embaiTassed  by  a  previous  speech
in  which  he  had  leaned  towards  severity,  voted  with  his  tm-bu-
lent  subordinate  ;  but  most  of  the  ministerial  party  were  on  the
other  side,  and  the  motion  of  Fox  was  rejected  by  152  to  68.
Such  an  act  of  glaring  insubordination  could  not  be  passed
over.  The  King  wrote  next  day,  with  much  indignation,  *I
am  greatly  incensed  at  the  presimiption  of  Charles  Fox  in
obliging  you  to  vote  with  him  last  night,  but  approve  much  of
your  making  your  friends  vote  in  the  majority ;  indeed,  that
young  man  has  so  thoroughly  cast  off  every  principle  of  com-
mon honour  and  honesty  that  he  must  become  as  contemptible
as  he  is  odious,  and  I  hope  you  will  let  him  know  that  vou  are

528  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

not  insensible  of  his  conduct  towards  you.' '  About  ten  days
later  Lord  North  curtly  dismissed  Fos,  who  thus,  at  the  age  of
twenty-five,  was  finally  severed  from  the  Tories.

He  did  not  for  some  years  formally  attach  himself  to  any
section  of  the  Whigs  ;  -  but  he  passed  at  once  from  an  extreme
Tory  into  virulent  and  unqualified  opposition  to  his  former
chief,  and  he  was  conspicuous  beyond  all  other  speakers  for
his  attacks  upon  the  American  policy  of  the  Government.  It
must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  he  never  appears  when
in  office  to  have  taken  any  active  part  in  defending  the
American  policy  of  the  Government,  that  this  policy  only
attained  its  full  distinctness  and  prominence  after  his  dismissal,
and  that  his  father  had  from  the  first  disapproved  of  the  taxa-
tion of  America.^  From  an  early  period  of  his  life,  Fox  seems
to  have  had  some  intimacy  with  Burke,"*  and  the  conversation
of  that  extraordinary  man  profoundly  influenced  his  opinions.
The  sincerity  of  his  opposition  to  the  American  War  never
appears  to  have  been  seriously  questioned,  and  it  is  confirmed
by  the  great  sacrifices  of  popularity  he  made  in  the  cause,  and
by  the  strong  internal  evidence  of  his  speeches  and  letters.
The  circumstances  of  his  secession,  his  extreme  youth,  and  the
extravagant  dissipation  in  which  he  at  this  time  indulged,^  de-
])rived  him  of  all  the  weight  that  attaches  to  character ;  but
his  extraordinary  debating  skill  developed  rapidly  in  opposition,
and  Grattan,  who  had  heard  him  speak  in  many  periods  of
his  career,  considered  his  speeches  during  the  American  war
the  most  brilliant  he  ever  delivered.^

The  division  of  opinion  in  the  country  upon  the  American
question  was  probably  much  more  equal  than  in  Parliament,
and  it  is  also  much  more  difficult  to  estimate  with  accuracy ;
but  it  appears  to  me  evident  that  in  1775  and  in  1776  the
preponderating  opinion,  or  at  least  the  opinion  of  the  most
powerful  and  most  intelligent  classes  in  the  community,  was
on  American  questions  with  the  King  and  with  his  ministers.
In  February  1775,  Lord  Camden  wrote,  'I  am  grieved  to
observe  that the landed  interest  is  almost altogether anti-

' CorreKpondencc of George III.  ^  Ibid.  p.  2G.

and  Lord  North,  i.  170.  *  Wal pole's  Laat  Jonriials,  ii.  4.

^  Rco  Corrcxpondrncv  of  Fox,  i.  223.  *  Corrcyj/ondeiicc  of  Fox,  i.  298.
»  Ii)i(i.  i.  \Ti,  \-s:,.

cii.  XIII. ENGLISH OriNION ON TlfE  AMKKICAN WAR.  529

American,  tliougli  the  common  people  hold  the  war  in  abhor-
rence, and  the  merchants  and  trad'ismen,  for  obvious  reasons,
are  likewise  against  it.' '  The  Established  Church  was  stre-
nuously anti- American,  and  the  Bishops  voted  steadily  for  the
measures  of  coercion.^  The  two  Universities  presented  ad-
drosses  on  the  same  side,  and  the  addresses  from  the  great  towns
in  favour  of  the  Government  were  both  more  numerous  and
more  largely  signed  than  those  which  opposed  it.  Manchester,
which  was  still,  as  in  1745,  a  great  centre  of  English  Toryism,
led  the  way;''  while  on  the  other  hand,  'the  majority  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  great  trading  cities  of  London  and  Bristol
still  wished  and  struggled  to  have  matters  restored  to  their
ancient  state.'"*  It  was  said,  however,  with  some  truth,  that
the  opposition  of  the  merchants  was  mainly  an  opposition
of  interest,  and  the  opposition  of  the  City  an  opposition  of
faction,  and  it  was  acknowledged  by  the  warmest  advocates  of
the.  Americans  that  the  trading  classes  on  this  question  were
greatly  divided,  and  the  bulk  of  them  exceedingly  languid  in
their  opposition.  The  cessation  of  the  Turkish  war  and  of  the
troubles  in  Poland  had  revived  trade,  and  the  loss  of  American
commerce  was  not  yet  sensibly  felt,  while  the  supply  of  the
army  in  America  and  the  equipment  of  new  ships  of  war  had
given  a  sudden  stimulus  to  the  transport  trade  and  to  many
branches  of  English  industry.'^  The  stress  of  legal  opinion  in
every  stage  of  the  controversy  appears  to  have  been  hostile
to  the  Americans,  and,  in  1776,  Horace  Walpole  emphatically
declared  that  '  the  Court  have  now  at  their  devotion  the  three
great  bodies  of  the  clergy,  army,  and  law.'  **  The  general  English
opinion,  which  at  the  time  of  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  had
been  very  favourable  to  the  colonists,  appears  to  have  turned.

'  Chatham's Correspondence, iv.  III.  and  Loo'd  Nortli,  i.  267-271.

401.  ^  See the very  remarkable and

*  As Franklin ■wrote, '  Sixteen  impartial  analj-sis  of  English  opinion

Scotch  peers  and  twenty-four  bishops,  (very  probably  written  by  T.urke)  in

with  all  the Lords  in  possession  or  the  ^l?^w«a7  7^d'/7i.?^w,  1776,  pp.  38,  39.

expectation  of  places,  when  they  vote  *  Ibid. p. 38. See,  too, on the

together  unanimously,  as  they  gene-  apathy  of  the  trading  classes  at  this

rally do for ministerial measures,  time,  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  ii.  6;

make  a  dead  majoritj' that  renders  Burke's  Correspondence,  ii. 50; Coi--

jiU  debating ridiculous.' — Franklin's  respondence  of  Gcorqc  III.  and  Lord

Worhs,  V.  46.  North,  i.  235.  236,  272,  273.

'  See a valuable note by Mr.  ^  Walpole's  Laht  Journals,  ii.  00,

Donne  in  the  Coriespondenee  of  Georrje  91 .

VOL.  III.  M M

:,:]U  F.NCJLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

There  was  a  strong  feeling  of  indignation  at  the  recent  pro-
ceedings in  America ;  a  general  belief  that,  as  a  matter  of
patriotism,  Government  ought  now  to  be  supported,  even
tliDUgh  some  of  its  past  acts  had  been  culpable  ;  a  widespread
anticipation  that  by  a  little  decision  all  resistance  might  be
overcome,  that  the  civil  war  might  still  be  averted,  or  that  at
least  it  might  be  terminated  in  a  single  campaign.

The  great  strength  of  the  Opposition  lay  in  the  Noncon-
formist bodies,  who  were  in  general  earnestly  and  steadily
in  favour  of  the  Americans.  The  '  p]ssay  on  Liberty,'  by  Dr.
Price,  which  was  published  in  1775,  was  a  powerful  defence
of  their  cause,  and  it  identified  it  very  skilfully  with  the
cause  of  constitutional  liberty  and  of  parliamentary  reform  at
home.  In  two  years  it  passed  through  eight  editions,  and  in
the  judgment  of  Walpole  it  was  '  the  first  publication  on  that
side  that  made  any  impression.' '  But  though  the  majority  of
the  old  Dissenters  were  staunch  supporters  of  the  Americans,
even  in  their  ranks  there  was  some  languor  and  division,^  while
a  large  section  of  the  Methodists,  as  we  have  already  seen,  took
the  other  side.  The  tract  of  John  Wesley  against  the  Ameri-
can pretensions  had  an  enormous  circulation.  Lord  Dartmouth
was  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  laymen  in  the  Evangelical
religious  world ;  and  Cowper,  the  great  poet  of  the  movement,
believed  that  the  King  would  be  committing  a  sin  if  he  acknow-
ledged the  independence  of  America.  Literary  opinion  was,  on
the  whole,  anti-American.  The  views  of  Junius,  of  Adam  Smith,
and  of  Dean  Tucker  have  been  already  given.  Dr.  Johnson  was
a  leading  pamphleteer  in  support  of  the  Government.  Gibbon
in  Parliament  steadily  supported  Lord  North,  and  Eobertson,
though  somewhat  timidly,  leaned  to  the  same  side.  Hume,
however,  though  in  most  of  his  sympathies  a  decided  Tory,  was
one  of  the  very  few  men  who  as  early  as  1775  agreed  cordially
with  Burke  that  the  attempt  to  coerce  America  could  lead  to
nothing  but  disaster  and  ruin.^

'  Laxt  JmtrnaU,  ii.  22,  23.  84,  85) ;  and  in  another  place  he  says,

*  Witlpolc  in one  phice  even  as-  the  Dissenters,  though  on the  whole

Forts  tliiit  the  I'rcHhyterians  and  other  American, 'were  yet  kept  (|uict  by

Dissenters  in  Knghind 'were  eiitiiely  pensions  to  their  cliiol's.' — Ibid. jjp.

passive,'  being  bribefl  or  .sold  by  their  '^2'^,  324.

leaders,  though  those  in  Ireland  were  '  See  Donne's  notes  to  the  Corj'e-

urtivi;  on the  American side'  (I'lid.

en.  Mil.  BURKE ON ENGLISH OPINION.  531

Tlie  confidential  letters  of  Burke  throw  inucli  valuable  light
on  the  condition  of  English  opinion  on  the  American  question,
and  they  are  full  of  bitter  complaints  of  the  languor  or  aliena-
tion even  of  the  natural  supporters  of  the  Whig  party.  In
January  1775,  describing  the  failure  of  his  friends  to  arrest  the
American  measures  of  the  ministry,  he  says  :  '  The  mercantile
interest,  which  ought  to  have  supported  with  efficacy  and
power  the  opposition  to  the  fatal  cause  of  all  this  mischief,
was  pleaded  against  us,  and  we  were  obliged  to  stoop  under
the  accumulated  weight  of  all  the  interests  in  this  kingdom.  I
never  remember  the  opposition  so  totally  abandoned  as  on  that
occasion.' '  In  the  August  of  the  same  year,  he  writes  with  great
bitterness  to  Eockingham  :  '  As  to  the  good  people  of  England,
they  seem  to  partake  every  day  more  and  more  of  the  character
of  that  administration  which  they  have  been  induced  to  tolerate.
I  am  satisfied  that  within  a  few  years  there  has  been  a  great
change  in  the  national  character.  We  seem  no  longer  that
eager,  inquisitive,  jealous,  fiery  people  which  we  have  been
formerly;  .  .  .  No  man  commends  the  measures  which  have
been  pursued,  or  expects  any  good  from  those  which  are  in
preparation,  but  it  is  a  cold,  languid  opinion,  like  what  men
discover  in  affairs  that  do  not  concern  them.  .  .  .  The  m.er-
chants  are  gone  from  us  and  from  themselves.  .  .  .  The  leading
men  among  them  are  kept  full  fed  with  contracts  and  renjit-
tances  and  jobs  of  all  descriptions,  and  are  indefetigable  in
their  endeavours  to  keep  the  others  quiet.  .  .  .  They  all,  or
the  greatest  niunber  of  them,  begin  to  snuflf  the  cadaverous
Jiaut  gout  of  lucrative  war.  War  is  indeed  become  a  sort  of
substitute  for  commerce.  The  freighting  business  never  was  so
lively  on  account  of  the  prodigious  taking  up  for  transport  ser-
vice. Great  orders  for  provisions  and  stores  of  all  kinds  .  .  .
keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  mercantile  world,  and  induce  them
to  consider  the  American  war  not  so  much  their  calamity  as
their  resource  in  an  inevitable  distress.'  ^  '  The  real  fact,'  he
\vrote  a  month  later, '  is  that  the  generality  of  the  people  of
England  are  now  led  away  by  the  misrepresentations  and  arts
of  the  JNIinistry,  the  Court  and  their  abettors,  so  that  the  violent

spondence  of  George  III. and  Lord  '-  Bnrke's  Correspotidence,  il.  2.

A'09-th,  i.  279,  280 ;  ii.  401.  «  Ibid.  ii.  48-50.

532  ENGLAND IN THE KIGUTEENTU CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

measures  towards  America  are  fairly  adopted  and  countenaiu'cti
by  a  majority  of  individuals  of  all  ranks,  professions,  or  occu-
pations in  this  country,'  and  he  complains  that  the  Opposition
were  compelled  '  to  face  a  torrent  not  merely  of  ministerial  and
Court  power,  but  also  of  almost  general  opinion.' '

The  party  in  England,  however,  that  favoured  the  Ameri-
cans, though  it  could  not  shatter  the  Government,  was  quite
sufficiently  strong  to  encourage  the  colonists,  and  many  of  its
members  threw  themselves  into  their  cause  with  the  most  pas-
sionate ardour.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  effect  that  must  have
been  produced  on  the  excited  minds  beyond  the  Atlantic  by  the
language  of  Chath^am  in  his  great  speech  in  January  1775.
*  The  spirit  which  resists  your  taxation  in  America,'  he  said,  '  is
the  same  that  formerly  opposed  loans,  benevolences,  and  ship-
money  in  England.  .  .  .  This  glorious  spirit  of  Whiggism
animates  three  millions  in  America  who  prefer  poverty  with
liberty  to  gilded  chains  and  sordid  affluence,  and  who  will  die  in
defence  of  their  rights  as  freemen.  .  .  .  For  myself,  I  must
declare  that  in  all  my  reading  and  observation — and  history  has
been  my  favourite  study — I  have  read  Thucydides,  and  have
studied  and  admired  the  master  states  of  the  world — that  for
solidity  of  reasoning,  force  of  sagacity,  and  wisdom  of  conclu-
sion under  such  a  complication  of  difficult  circumstances,  no
nation  or  body  of  men  can  stand  in  preference  to  the  General
Congress  at  Philadelphia.  .  .  .  All  attempts  to  impose  servi-
tude upon  such  men,  to  establish  despotism  over  such  a  mighty
continental  nation,  must  be  vain,  must  be  fatal.  We  shall  be
forced  ultimately  to  retract.  Let  us  retract  while  we  can,  not
when  we  must.'  In  accordance  with  these  sentiments  he  with-
drew his  eldest  son  from  the  army  rather  than  suffer  him  to  be
engaged  in  the  war.^  Lord  Effiugliam  for  the  same  reason
threw  up  his  commission,  and  Amherst  is  said  to  have  refused
the  command  against  the  Americans.^  In  1775  the  question
was  openly  debated  in  Parliament  whether  British  officers  ought
to  serve  their  sovereign  against  the  Americans,  and  no  less  a
person  than  General  Conway  leaned  decidedly  to  the  negative,
and  compared  the  case  to  that  of  French  officers  who  were  em-

• hntko's  C(i7'rc'.ijwndr»re,u.  (^S,  GO.  -  C'hathnm  C'orrr.yionth'ure,  iv.  420.

*  Wiilpole's  Ltitit  JnuriKilit,  i.  4.'/.»

cir.  XIII.  SCOTCH OPINION.  '/.V.i

ployed  ill  tlio  massacre  of  St.  Ijartholornew.'  The  Duke  of
Ivicliinond,  after  the  battle  of  Bunker's  Hill,  declared  in  Par-
liament that '  he  did  not  think  that  the  Americans  were  in
rebellion,  but  that  they  were  resisting  acts  of  the  most  unex-
ampled cruelty  and  oppression.' 2  The  Corporation  of  liondon
iu  1775  drew  up  an  address  strongly  approving  of  their  resist-
ance,^ and  the  addresses  of  several  other  towns  expressed  similar
views.  A  great  meeting  in  London,  and  also  the  guild  of  mer-
chants in  Dublin,  returned  thanks  to  Lord  Effingham  for  his
recent  conduct,  and  in  1776  the  freedom  of  the  City  was  con-
ferred on  Dr.  Price,  on  account  of  his  defence  of  the  Americans.'*
An  English  subscription — though  a  very  small  one — was  raised
for  the  relief  of  the  Americans  who  were  wounded  at  Lexing-
ton, and  for  the  relatives  of  those  who  had  been  killed,-'  and  in
1777  Home  was  sentenced  to  a  year's  imprisonment  and  to  a
fine  of  2001.  for  publishing  an  advertisement  of  the  Constitu-
tional Society,  accusing  the  English  troops  in  that  battle,  of
murder.^  When  Montgomery  fell  at  the  head  of  the  Ameri-
can troops  in  the  invasion  of  Canada,  he  was  eulogised  in  the
Ikitish  Parbament  as  if  he  had  been  the  most  devoted  servant
of  the  Crown.^

With  scarcely  an  exception  the  whole  political  representation
of  Scotland  in  both  Houses  of  ParliartLent  supported  Lord
North,  and  was  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Americans.  Scotland,
however,  is  one  of  the  very  few  instances  in  history,  of  a  nation
whose  political  representation  was  so  grossly  defective  as  not
merely  to  distort  but  absolutely  to  conceal  its  opinions.  It
was  habitually  looked  upon  as  the  most  servile  and  corrupt
portion  of  the  British  Empire  ;  and  the  eminent  liberalism
and  the  very  superior  political  qualities  of  its  people  seem  to
have been  scarcely  suspected  to  the  very  eve  of  the  Eeform

'  Pa7-l. Hist, xviii. 998. Cart-  1776,  p.  41.

Wright,  who  in  tlie  next  generation  *  Animal Register, 1776, pp.  41

became  so  prominent  as  a  parliamen-  -43,  126. Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.

tary  reformer,  refu.sed  a  naval  appoint-  502,  .503  ;  ii.  23.

nient  at  this  time  because  it  would  *  Franklin's  Life,  p.  401.

imply  ser\-ice  against  the  Americans.  *  Annual  Register,  1777,  p.  21).

Life and Correspondence of Major  '  Annual Register, 1776. p 15.

( iiHmright,  1.  75,  81.  Yox'sCon-espondenee,  i.  142.  Adolphus,

"  Pari.  Hist,  xviii.  1076.  ii.  241.

*  Adolphus,  ii.  253. Annual  Reg.

53-i  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENTfl CENTURY.  ch.  xiii.

Eill  of  1832.  Tluit  something  of  that  liberalism  for  which
Scotland  is  now  so  distinguished,  existed  at  the  outbreak  of
the  American  War,  may,  I  think,  be  inferred  from  the  very
significant  fact  that  the  Government  were  unable  to  obtain
addresses  in  their  favour  either  from  Edinburgh  or  Glasgow.'
The  country,  however,  was  judged  mainly  by  its  representa-
tives, and  it  was  regarded  as  far  more  hostile  to  the  American
cause  than  either  England  or  Ireland.  A  very  able  observer,
when  complaining  of  the  apathy  and  lassitude  with  which  the
American  policy  of  the  Government  was  generally  regarded,
adds,  '  We  must  except  from  all  these  observations  the  people
of  North  Britain,  who  almost  to  a  man,  so  far  as  they  could  be
described  or  distinguished  under  any  particular  denomination,
not  only  applauded,  but  proffered  life  and  fortune  in  support  of
the  present  measures.'  ^

*  In  Ireland,'  says  the  same  writer,  '  though  those  in  office
and  the  principal  nobility  and  gentry  declared  against  America,
by  far  the  majority  of  the  Protestant  inhabitants  there,  who  are
strenuous  and  declared  Whigs,  strongly  leaned  to  the  cause  of
the  colonies.'  ^  '  There  are  three  million  Whigs  in  America,'
said  Chatham,  in  1775,  'and  all  Ireland  is  Whig,  and  many  in
England.'  ^  Protestant  Ireland  was  indeed  far  more  earnestly
enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Americans  than  any  other  portion
of  the  Empire.  Emigrants  from  Ulster  formed  a  great  part  of
the  American  army,  and  the  constitutional  question  of  the
independence  of  the  Irish  Parliament  was  closely  connected
with  the  American  question.  The  movement  of  opinion,  how-
ever, was  confined  to  the  Protestants.  The  Catholic  gentry,
on  this  as  on  all  other  occasions  of  national  danger,  presented
addresses  to  the  King  attesting  in  strong  terms  their  loyalty,

' Correspondence  of  Geo. III. i.  the Amcriean licvolution, ii. iill.

209.  Ilanisay adds, however, tliaL 'the

^  Annn/il lirgisier, 1776, p. 39.  army  and  tlie  Congress  ranked  amoiii^

The same character  seems to  have  t})eir best ollicers and most valu-

extended  to  the  Scotch  in  America.  able members some individuals of

♦  The  Irish  in  America,*  it  was  said,  that nation.' — Ibid. Adams notices

'  with  a  few  exceptions  were  attached  the  strong  opposition  of  the  Scotch,

1o indopondonce. . . .  The  Scotcli,  wlio  were  .'settled  in  Virginia,  to  the

on  the  other  hand,  though  they  had  measures taken  by  the Congress  iu

formerly  sacriliced  much to liberty  177o. — Adams' Diary,  Wor}i.i,i\.  A'M.
in  their  own  countrj',  were  generally  '  Annual  llrgider,  177fi,  p.  ;?9,

dis{josed to support the claims of  *  Wa'pole's  Laxt  Journah,  i.  d-AO.

Great  Britain.'— liamsay's  History  of  Thackeray's  Chatham,  ii.  280.

CH.  xm. DIFFICULTIES  OF  KKCRUITING. THE  I'RKSS-GANGS. 535

but  the  mass  of  the  Catholic  population  were  politically  dead,
and  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  contributed  anything  to  the
public  opinion  of  the  country.

One  remarkable  fact,  however,  was  noticed  both  in  Enghmd
and  Ireland.  There  was  a  complete  absence  of  alacrity  and
enthusiasm  in  enlisting  for  the  army  and  nav}'.'  This  was  one
of  the  chief  reasons  why  Germans  were  so  largely  enlisted,  and
it  is  the  more  remarkable  because  Irish  Catholics  were  now
freely  admitted  into  the  service.  For  a  long  time  the  system
of  enrolling  soldiers,  and  still  more  the  system  of  enrolling
sailors,  had  excited  much  discontent,  and  the  legality  of  press-
gangs  had  very  lately  been  brought  into  question.  The  impress-
ing for  the  navy  rested  rather  on  immemorial  custom  than  on
positive  law,  and  it  was  pronounced  by  lawyers  to  be  a  part  of
the  common  law.^  The  impressing  for  the  army  was  more
rarely  resorted  to,  but  a  statute  of  Anne  authorised  magistrates
within  their  specified  limits  to  impress  for  the  army  such
able-bodied  men  as  did  not  follow  any  lawful  calling  and  had
not  some  other  support,  and  several  subsequent  Acts  continued
the  system  for  limited  periods.  A  special  clause  exempted
such  as  had  votes  for  members  of  Parliament  from  liabiHty  to
impressment.^  In  1 757,  a  gentleman  of  property  having  been
pressed  and  confined  in  the  Savoy,  his  friends  applied  for  an
immediate  writ  of  Habeas  Corpus,  under  the  well-known  Act
of  Charles  II.  The  question  was  not  determined,  as  the  gentle-
man was  released  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War ;  but  the
judges  who  were  consulted  all  pronounced  that  this  Act  only
applied  to  those  who  had  committed  or  were  accused  of  com-
mitting a  criminal  offence,  and  that  a  man  accused  of  no  crime
could  not  claim  its  protection.  A  Bill  was  introduced  in  the
beginning  of  1758  to  remedy  this  strange  anomaly,  but  it  was
thrown  out  by  the  instrumentality  of  Lord  Hardwicke,-*  and  this
extension  of  the  Habeas  Corjius  Act  was  only  granted  in  1816.-^

The  enormous  cruelty  and  injustice  of  the  impressment  for
the  navy,  as  it  was  actually  carried  on,  can  hardly  be exag-

'  See  Annual  liegistcr,  1776,  p.  39.  impressment  for  the  army  appears  to

2  Blackstone,  book  i.  c.  13.  have  exiiired  in  1780.

s  2  &  3  Anne,  c.  19. Pari.  Hht.  *  Pari.  Hisf.  xv.  875-923.

XV.  875  ;  Clodc's  Military Farctn  of  ^  50  Geo.  UI.  c.  100.

tkd  Crown,  ii.  15-19, The  lasi  Act  for

536  ENGLAND IN TUE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xiii.

gerated,  and  it  seemed  doubly  extraordinary  in  a  country  wliicli
was  so  proud  of  its  freedom.  '  Impressment,'  as  has  been
truly  said,  'is  tlie  arbitrary  and  capricious  seizure  of  in-
dividuals from  the  general  body  of  citizens.  It  differs  from
conscription  as  a  particular  coniiscation  differs  from  a  general
tax.'  ^  Voltaire  was  much  struck  with  this  feature  of  English
life,  and  he  drew  a  vivid  picture  of  a  boatman  on  the  Thames
boasting  to  him  one  day  of  the  glories  of  English  freedom  and
declaring  that  he  would  sooner  be  a  sailor  in  England  than  an
archbishop  in  France,  the  next  day  with  irons  on  his  feet,
begging  money  through  the  gratings  of  the  prison  into  which
he  had  been  thrown  without  the  imputation  of  any  crime,  and
w^here  he  must  remain  till  the  ship  was  ready  which  was  to
carry  him  to  the  Baltic.  In  a  system  so  violent  and  so  arbi-
trary, all  kinds  of  abuses  were  practised.  As  we  have  already
seen,  the  press-gang  was  often  employed  to  drag  Methodist
teachers  from  a  work  which  the  magistrates  disliked.  It  was
sometimes  employed  to  avenge  private  grudges.  It  was  thus
that  Fielding  represents  Lord  Fellamar  endeavouring  to  get
rid  of  his  rival  by  employing  a  lieutenant  to  press  him.  On
one  occasion  in  1770  a  marriage  ceremony  in  St.  Olave's,
Southwark,  was  interrupted  by  a  press-gang,  who  burst  into
the  church,  struck  the  clergyman,  and  tried  to  carry  away  the
bridegroom.^  As  merchant  ships  came  in  from  America,  and
the  sailors  looked  forward,  after  their  long  voyage,  to  see  once
more  their  wives  and  children,  a  danger  more  terrible  than
that  of  the  sea  awaited  them,  for  it  was  a  common  thing  for
ships  of  war  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  returning  vessels,  in  order  to
board  them  and  to  press  their  sailors  before  they  landed.'  Often
the  press-gang  went  down  to  some  great  sea-port  and  boarded
all  the  merchant-ships  lying  at  anchor,  in  order  to  collect  sailors
for  the  royal  navy.*  They  were  sometimes  fiercely  resisted.  On
one  occasion  in  1770,  110  impressed  seamen  who  were  being
carried  down  the  Thames  in  a  tender,  broke  open  the  hatches,
overpowered  the  officers  and  crew, ran the tender  aground

'  May's  Const. ITiKt.  of  Enqland.  '  Annual  liegiRtcr,  1770,  p.  Ifil.

Hume, in his Essay 'On some  re-  '  Hcc  i\\c  Life  of  JIavipfi/lde  Mooro

markablc Customs,'  called  attention  {■'arew  (1749),  pp.  128-].'5(>.
to  the  prcat  anomaly  of  imincssmcnt  ^  Annnal  Ji'ci/intcr,  1770,  p.  147.

in  a  free  eouutrv.

cii.  xin.  niK  PRESS-GANGS.  537

on  the  coast,  of  Essex,  and  thus  succeeded  in  escaping.'  On
another,  when  the  sailors  of  a  merchant  vessel,  which  was  lying
otf  Gravesend,  saw  the  boat  of  a  ship-of-war  approaching,  tliey
seized  all  the  arms  on  board  and  drove  off  their  assailants  with
a  loss  of  one  man  killed  and  of  several  dangerously  wounded.^
In  1779  a  man  was  hung  at  Stafford  for  killing  one  of  those
who  were  endeavouring  to  press  him,  and  a  party  of  sailors  were
tried  at  Ipswich  for  the  murder  of  a  publican  in  whose  house
they  were  impressing  sailors,  but  were  acquitted  on  account  of
the  impossibility  of  ascertaining  who  struck  the  blow.'  Of  the
vast  sum  of  private  misery  produced  by  the  system  it  is  diffi-
cult to  form  an  adequate  estimate.  One  case — which  was
})robably  but  one  of  many — happened  to  attract  considerable
attention  on  account  of  its  being  mentioned  in  Parliament  by
Sir  William  Meredith,  in  1777.  A  sailor  had  been  taken  in
the  press  that  followed  the  alarm  about  the  Falkland  Islands,
and  carried  away,  leaving  a  wife  who  was  then  not  nineteen,
with  two  infant  children.  The  breadwinner  being  gone,  his
goods  were  seized  for  an  old  debt,  and  his  wife  was  driven  into
the  streets  to  beg.  At  last,  in  despair  she  stole  a  piece  of
coarse  linen  from  a  linendraper's  shop.  Her  defence,  which
was  fully  corroborated,  was  that  '  she  had  lived  in  credit  and
wanted  for  nothing  till  a  press-gang  came  and  stole  her  hus-
band from  her,  but  since  then  she  had  no  bed  to  lie  on,  nothing
to  give  her  children  to  eat,  and  they  were  almost  naked.  She
might  have  done  something  wrong,  for  she  hardly  knew  what
she  did.'  The  lawyers  declared  that  shop-lifting  being  a
common  offence,  she  must  be  executed,  and  she  was  driven  to
Tyburn  with  a  child  still  suckling  at  her  breast.'*

Even  worse  than  the  authorised  system  was  the  illicit
pressing  for  the  East  India  Company.  Great  numbers  of
young  men  were  inveigled  or  kidnapped  by  crimps  in  its
service,  confined  often  for  long  periods,  and  with  circumstances
of  the  most  aggravated  cruelty,  in  secret  depots  which  existed
in  the  heart  of  London,  and  at  last,  in  the  dead  of  night,
shipped  for  Hindostan.  Several  cases  of  this  kind  were  detected
in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  by  the  escape  of

'  Ammal  lifgister,  1770,  p.  147.  '  Und.  1779,  pp.  204.  215,  21C

»  Ibid.  p.  14'j.  *  Purl.  Hist.  xix.  238.

533  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CKNTUEY.  ch.  xiii.

prisoners,  and  it  ^Ya3  evident  that  the  system  was  practised  on
a  hirge  scale.^

The  regular  press-gang  was  not  confined  to  England,  and  it
formed  one  of  the  gravest  and  most  justifiable  grievances  of  tlic
American  colonists.  As  early  as  1747,  one  of  the  most  terrible
riots  ever  known  in  New  England  was  produced  by  the  seizure
of  some  Boston  sailors  by  the  press-gang  of  Admiral  Knowles.
An  Ensrlish  vessel  was  burnt.  English  oSicers  were  seized  and
imprisoned  by  the  crowd.  The  Governor  was  obliged  to  take
refuge  in  the  Castle.  The  sub-sheriff  was  impounded  in  the
stocks,  the  miHtia  refused  to  act  against  the  people,  and  the
Admiral  was  ultimately  obliged  to  release  his  captives.^  A
similar  resistance  was  shown  to  many  subsequent  attempts
to  impress  in  New  England,^  and  one  of  the  first  and  ablest
writers  against  the  system  was  Benjamin  Franklin.  In  Eng-
land a  great  opposition  was  raised  in  the  City  of  London  in
1770  and  1771,  at  the  time  of  the  great  press  for  seamen
which  was  made  when  a  war  with  Spain  about  the  Falkland
Islands  appeared  imminent.  Press  warrants  in  the  City  were
only  legal  when  backed  by  an  alderman,  and  Crosby  the  Lord
jNIayor,  and  most  of  the  aldermen  refused  to  back  them.
Wilkes  and  Sawbridge,  in  their  capacity  of  aldermen,  dis-
missed some  men  who  had  been  pressed  in  the  City.  A  press-
gang,  which  was  beating  a  drum  through  the  City,  was  brought
before  the  Lord  Mayor  and  reprimanded ;  and  at  a  great  meeting
in  Westminster  Hall,  at  which  both  Wilkes  and  Sawbridge
spoke,  impressment  was  denounced  as  a  violation  of  the  Consti-
tution." The  agitation,  however,  did  not  spread.  The  attempts
which  had  been  made  more  than  once  since  the  Kevolution
to  make  impressing  unnecessary,  by  a  system  of  additional
bounties  and  pensions,  and  by  the  formation  of  a  reserve,'^  had

'  See  several  instances  of  1  lie  kind  iriitcliinson's  Hist, of  Massachusetts

in  Andrews'  XVIII. Cent.  p.  2Uy-212.  Bay,  p.  231.

VXnWimorii's  Iligt.  of  Gfo.  III.  pp.  (iO,  *  Animal  Beqistcr,  1770,  pp.  157,

»;i. AnmialJ{/!fjr.itcr,llC)7,p.ii2.  Ifil,  162,169,  174;  1771,  pp. 16,67,

*  Graliame's  Jfistory  of  tlie  United  68,  70.

iVtete«,  iii.  295-:{00.  '  See  vol.  i.  p.  504. In 1770,  in

•  Arnold's  Hist,  of  New  England,  order  to  escape  the  necessity  of  pro.ss-
ii.  255,  256.  See,  too,  on  the  press-  ing,  several  of  the  cliiof  towns  sub-
ing  in  New  England,  tlic  very  curious  scribed  a<lditional  bounties  for  sailors
y(»Hr/irt2  of  Thomas  Chalklcy  from  16117  who  enlisted  voluntarily.  Anntuil
to 1741  (ed.  1850),  pp.  :Ji;i,  :{I4,  and  JSn/istrr,  1770,  pp.  l.OO,  16;{.

CH.  xiii.  ENLISTMENT OF CRIMINALS.  539

not  succeeded,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  legality  and
absolute  necessity  of  impressment  were  at  this  time  strongly
asserted  by  three  such  different  authorities  as  Chatham,  Mans-
field, and  Junius.'

In  the  great  difficulty  of  obtaining  voluntary  recruits  for
the  American  War,  the  press  for  sailors  was  very  largely
resorted  to,  and  in  1776  it  was  especially  fierce.  In  less  than
a  month  800  men  were  seized  in  London  alone,  and  several
lives  were  lost  in  the  scuffles  that  took  place.^

While  these  means  were  employed  for  recruiting  the  navy,
others  of  an  equally  questionable  kind  were  found  necessary
for  filling  the  vacancies  in  the  army.  I  have  noticed  in  a
former  chapter  that  it  had  been  a  common  thing  for  press-gangs
for  the  navy  to  hang  about  the  prison-gates  and  seize  criminals
whose  sentences  had  just  expired,  and  this  was  not  the  only
way  in  which  the  gaols  were  made  to  furnish  their  contingent
for  the  defence  of  the  country.  Two  or  three  Acts  in  favour  of
insolvent  debtors  had  been  passed,  granting  them  their  liberty
on  condition  of  enbsting  in  the  army  or  navy,  and  in  1702  a
system  had  begun  which  continued  up  to  the  time  of  the
Peninsular  War,  of  permitting  criminals,  who  were  undergoing
their  sentence,  to  pass  into  the  army.^  In  the  beginning  of
the  American  War,  this  system  appears  to  have  been  much
extended.  The  usual  manner  of  disposing  of  criminals  under
sentence  of  transportation  had  hitherto  been  to  send  them  to
America,  where  they  were  sold  as  slaves  to  the  planters ;  but
the  war  that  had  just  broken  out  rendered  this  course  impos-
sible. For  a  time  the  Government  was  in  great  perplexity.
The  gaols  were  crowded  with  prisoners  whose  sentence  it  was
impossible  to  execute.  The  governors  of  the  African  colonies
protested  against  the  introduction  of  a  criminal  element  among
them. An  Act  was,  it  is  true,  passed,  authorising  the  punish-

'  Walpole's  3fcmoirs  of  Geo.  III.  equip  a  respectable  fleet  -within  tlie

iv.  18L Chatham  Correspondence,  iii.  time  in  whicli such armaments are

4«0,  481  ; iv. 22,  43. Adolphus,  i.  usually  wanted.' — Thackeray's Chat-

459. Junius' Ze-rtcr.?  (sisrnature  Philo-  //</;;(,  ii.  217.

Junius). Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  ^  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  ii.  75

ii.  p.  419. Chatham  said,  'I  believe  77,81.

every  man  who  knows  anything  of  the  '  Clode's  Military Forces of  ike

British  navy  will  acknowledge  that,  Crown,  ii.  12-16
w  ithout  impressing,  i  t  is  impossible  to

540

ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

ment  of  liard  labour  in  Englaud  as  a  substitute  for  transpor-
tation to  'any  of  his  Majesty's  colonies  and  plantations,'  and
galleys  were  set  up  in  the  Thames  where  criminals,  under
sentence  of  transportation,  were  employed  in  hard  labour.^
But  it  soon  occurred  to  the  Government  that  able-bodied
criminals  might  be  more  usefully  employed  in  the  coercion  of
the  revolted  colonists,^  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  large
numbers  of  criminals,  of  all  but  the  worst  category,  passed  at
this  time  into  the  English  army  and  navy.  In  estimating  the
light  in  which  British  soldiers  were  regarded  in  America,  and
in  estimating  the  violence  and  misconduct  of  which  British
soldiers  were  sometimes  guilty,  this  fact  must  not  be  forgotten.
It  is  indeed  a  curious  thing  to  notice  how  large  a  part  of  the
reputation  of  England  in  the  world  rests  upon  the  achievements
of  a  force  which  was  formed  mainly  out  of  the  very  dregs  of
her  population,  and  to  some  considerable  extent  even  out  of  her
criminal  classes.^

The  difficulty  of  procuring  voluntary  recruits  for  the  army
and  navy  seems  to  show  that,  if  the  bulk  of  the  poorer  popu-
lation of  the  country  did  not  actively  sympathise  with  the
Americans,  a  war  with  a  people  of  their  own  race  and  language

'  16  Geo.  III.  c.  43.  Walpole's
Last  Journals,  ii.  38.  Annual  Regis-
ter,  1776,  p.  1G3.

■■*  Jly  knowledge  of  this  subject  is
derived  from  the  '  Government  Cor-
respondence' in  the  Irish  State  Paper
Office.  On  March  30,  1776,  Lord
llarcourt,  tlie  Lord-Lieutenant  of
Ireland,  wrote  to  tlie  Secretary  of
State,  Lord  Weymouth,  complaining
that  the  gaols  in  Ireland  were  full  of
convicts  under  sentence  of  trans-
portation, '  as  no  merchant  will  con-
tract to  convoy  them  to  America
whilst  the  present  rebellion  subsists.'
He  proposed,  therefore,  to  pardon  sucli
of  them  as  were  fit  and  serviceable
men,  '  on  condition  of  their  entering
into  his  Maj(;sty's  land  and  sea  ser-
vice, as  I  shall  direct.'  Weymouth
answered  (April  23,  1776),  'The
measure  proposed  by  your  Excellency
for  granting  pardons  to  prisoners
who  may  be  found,  on  proper  exami-
nation, to  be  tit  for  tlie  sea  or  the  land
service,  has  been  of  late  in  many  in-
Blanccs  pursued  here,  and  his  Majesty

approves  of  your  granting  pardons  to
prisoners  in  the  several  gaols  of  Ire-
land under  these  circumstances.  Bub
it  will  occur  to  your  Excellency  how
necessary  it  is,  that  the  enlisting  of-
ficers should,  in  the  strongest  manner,
be  enjoined  to  examine  and  report,
before  the  pardon  shall  be  granted,
whether  the  prisoners  are  really  fit
for  service,  as  a  discharge  cannot  so
properly  be  granted.  It  should  also  be
observed  that  when  they  are  engaged,
j)articulaT  care  should  be  taken  to
secure  this  kind  of  recruits,  and  that
Ihey  be  considered  rather  in  a  differ-
ent light  from  those  who  enter  volun-
tarily.'

'  It  does  not  appear  to  have  been
only  the  British  troops  who  were
recruited  from  the  prisons.  Speaking
of  the  Germans  in  the  I'ritish  service,
Goltz  wrote  to  Frederick  (March  13,
1777),  '  Les  rccrues  hessoises  sont  en
grande  partie  des  malfaiteurs  de-
tachi's  de  la  chaine.' — Circourt,  Action
Comvi'H7ir,  de  la  France  et  de  I'Ame-
riqiie,  iii.  81.

cu.  xm. TAllTY ASPECTS OF THE AMERICAN QUESTION. £4.1

bad  at  least  no  popularity  among  them.  In  concluding  this
review  of  the  condition  of  English  opinion  in  1776,  a  few
words  must  be  added  about  the  relations  of  the  American
contest  to  English  party  principles.  Chatham,  as  we  have  seen,
invariably  maintained  that  the  American  cause  was  essen-
tially the  cause  of  the  Whigs.  In  his  great  speech  in  the
beginning  of  1775  he  asserted  that  'the  great  fundamental
maxim'  of  the  British  Constitution  is,  'that  no  subject  of
England  shall  be  taxed  but  by  his  own  consent,'  and  that  '  to
maintain  this  principle  is  the  common  cause  of  the  Whigs  on
the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  and  on  this.'  In  December
1777,  when  the  war  had  been  long  declared,  he  extolled  the
Americans  as  '  Whigs  in  principle  and  heroes  in  conduct,'  and  he
openly  expressed  his  wish  for  their  success.  Like  the  Whigs
the  Americans  made  the  full  development  of  civil  liberty,  and
especially  the  defence  of  the  great  Whig  principle  that  taxa-
tion and  representation  are  inseparably  connected,  the  main
object  of  their  policy,  and  the  highly  democratic  character  of
their  political  constitutions  lay  at  the  root  of  their  resistance.
Public  meetings,  instructions  to  members,  all  the  forms  of
political  agitation  that  had  of  late  years  grown  up  in  England,
were  employed  by  the  popular  party  in  America.  On  the  other
hand,  all  who  esteemed  licentiousness  rather  than  despotism
the  great  danger  of  England,  all  who  disliked  the  develop-
ment of  the  popular  element  in  the  Constitution,  all  whose
natural  leaning  was  towards  authority,  repression,  and  pre-
rogative, gravitated  to  the  anti-American  side.  In  America
the  supporters  of  the  English  Government  were  invariably
called  Tories.  In  England  the  King,  the  followers  of  Bute,
and  the  whole  body  of  Tories,  were  ultimately  enlisted  against
the  Americans,  while  the  support  of  their  cause  became  more
and  more  the  bond  of  union  between  the  Whigs  who  followed
Chatham  and  the  Whigs  who  followed  Eockingham.  By  a
true  political  instinct  the  clergy  of  the  Established  Church
and  the  country  gentry,  who  were  the  natural  supporters  of
Toryism,  were  generally  ranged  on  one  side,  and  the  Dissenters
and  the  commercial  classes  on  the  other.

So  far  the  party  lines  of  the  American  question  appear  very
clear  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  Grenville,  whc  began  the  policy

512  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITKENTll Cl<:NrUKY.  ch.  xm

(if  taxing  America,  always  called  himself  a  NN  liig",  lie  defended
hiri  measure  by  Whig  arguments,  and  he  strenuously  maintained
that  the  bulk  of  the  party,  in  supporting  the  Americans,  had
deserted  the  orthodox  traditions  of  their  policy.  The  Whigs
were  the  hereditary  champions  of  the  rights  of  Parliament,  and
it  was  the  power  of  Parliament  that  was  in  question.  The
Whigs  had  made  it  one  of  their  first  objects  to  make  the
Sovereign  dependent  on  Parliament  for  his  supplies,  and  they
were  therefore  bound  to  look  with  peculiar  jealousy  on  a
theory  according  to  which  supplies  might  be  raised  by  requi-
sition from  the  Crown,  and  for  other  than  local  purposes,  by
Assemblies  over  which  Parliament  had  no  control.  The  Whigs
were  the  natural  opponents  of  all  extensions  of  the  royal  pre-
rogative, and  they  could  not  with  any  consistency  admit  that
the  King  could  withdraw  by  charter  a  portion  of  his  dominions
from  the  full  authority  of  Parliament.  Much  of  the  language
and  some  of  the  arguments  of  the  Americans  were  undoubtedly
drawn  from  the  Tory  arsenal.  As  Lord  North  truly  said,  it
was  the  colonists  who  appealed  to  the  King's  prerogative.  It
was  the  ministers  who  upheld  the  authority  of  Parliament.
The  Americans  delighted  in  contrasting  their  devotion  to  the
Sovereign  with  their  repudiation  of  parliamentary  control,  and
they  dilated,  in  language  which  seemed  an  echo  of  that  of  the
early  Tories,  upon  the  unconstitutional  enlargement  of  the
dominion  of  Parliament.  With  the  deep-seated  conservatism
of  the  English  character,  the  Whigs  had  always  pretended  that
the  Kevolution  had  made  no  real  change  in  the  relative  posi-
tion of  the  great  powers  of  the  State ;  that  it  had  only  arrested
encroachments  by  the  Sovereign,  and  defined,  asserted,  and
protected  the  ancient  liberties  of  the  people.  The  Americans,
on  the  other  hand,  maintained  with  great  reason  that  Parlia-
ment, since  the  Revolution,  or  at  least  since  the  Rebellion,  had
acquired  a  wholly  new  place  in  the  British  Empire,  and  that
the  arguments  of  English  lawyers  about  the  necessary  subordi-
iialion  of  all  parts  of  the  British  Empire  to  the  Supreme  Legis-
lature, and  about  the  impossibility  of  the  Sovereign  withdrawing
British  subjects  by  charter  from  parliamentary  control,  were
based  upon  a  state  of  things  wliich  at  t]i(>  time  when  the  colo-
nies were  founded existed  ncitlier  in law  nor in fact. '  At

CH.  xiii. PARTY ASrECTS OF THE A:\rERICAN QUESTION. 543

present.'  Frauklin  wrote,  '  1  lie  colonics  consent  and  submit  to
tne  supremacy  of  the  Legislature  for  the  regulations  of  general
commerce,  but  a  submission  to  Acts  of  Parliament  was  no  part
of  their  original  Constitution.  Our  former  kings  governed
their  colonies  as  they  had  governed  their  dominions  in  France,
without  the  participation  of  British  Parliaments.  The  Parlia-
ment of  England  never  presumed  to  interfere  in  that  prero-
gative till  the  time  of  the  great  Eebellion,  when  they  usurped
the  government  of  all  the  King's  other  dominions,  Ireland,
Scotland,  &c.' '

But  although  the  arguments  by  which  the  followers  of
Grenville  and  Bedford  maintained  that  their  policy  was  a
legitimate  outcome  of  the  principles  of  the  \Miiig  party  were
by  no  means  without  plausibility,  or  even  without  real  force,
the  main  current  of  Whig  sentiment  flowed  irresistibly  in
the  opposite  direction.  As  the  conflict  deepened,  the  line  of
division  corresponded  closely  with  the  division  of  parties.  The
whole  body  of  the  Tories,  headed  by  the  King,  steadily  sup-
ported a  policy  of  coercion,  while  the  Whigs  made  the  cause
of  the  colonists  their  own,  though  they  defended  it,  as  we
have  seen,  by  different  arguments  and  in  different  degrees.
Chatham  could  never  tolerate  the  idea  of  an  independent
America,  though  he  foresaw  the  danger  at  a  very  early  stage  of
the  conflict.  He  treated  the  whole  question  as  one  of  the
right  of  every  free  people  to  be  taxed  only  by  their  own  repre-
sentatives. He  strongly  asserted  the  right  and  policy  of  the
parliamentary  restrictions  of  American  commerce,  and  with
Shelburne  he  emphatically  protested  against  the  new  American
doctrine  that  the  Sovereign  could  not  place  his  troops  in  any
part  of  his  dominions  that  he  chose. ^  The  Eockingham
Whigs,  on  the  other  hand,  while  they  regarded  the  surrender  of
the  parliamentary  power  of  taxation  as  a  matter  not  of  ricrht
but  of  policy,  were  prepared  to  make  wide  concessions  in  other

'  Letter  of  B.  Franklin,  Nov.  29,  rogative. In  the  present  case,  Ad-

1769. American  Iievu:?/i/>rancer,  1775,  ministration  contended  for  the  ri"-ht

p.  52. In  a  speech  in  1775  Lord  North  of  Parliament, while  the  Americans

said,  '  If  he  understood  tlie  meaning  talked of their belonging to the

of  the  words  Whig  and  Tory,  he  con-  Crown. Their  language, therefore

ceived  that  it  was  the  characteristic  was that of Toryism.' — Pari.  Ilist.

of  Whiggism  to  gain  as  much  for  the  xviii.  771.
peoi)le  as  possible,  while  the  aim  of  ^  Adolphus,  ii.  309.

Toryism was to increase the pre-

.544  ENGLAND IX THE EIGnTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiii.

directions ;  and  some  members  of  the  party,  almost  from  the
beginning  of  the  struggle,  were  willing  to  consent  to  a  final
surrender  of  English  dominion  over  the  colonies.  Of  this  sec-
tion the  Duke  of  Eichmond  was  the  most  conspicuous.  As
early  as  1776  he  argued  that  America  never  could  be  subdued
except  at  a  ruinous  expense  ;  that  by  continuing  the  war,  she
would  be  forced  into  alliance  with  our  natural  enemy  France  ;
that  if  subdued,  she  would  take  the  first  opportunity  of  re-
volting, and  that  this  opportunity  would  probably  be  when
England  was  engaged  in  a  deadly  struggle,  and  when  an
American  revolt  might  prove  her  ruin.  If,  then,  he  contended,
America  can  no  longer  be  kept  amicably  dependent,  it  is  better
to  acknowledge  her  independence  at  once,  to  save  further  ex-
penditure, to  enter  while  it  is  still  possible  into  close  alliance
with  her,  and  thus  to  avert  the  great  danger  of  her  alliance
with  France.'

One  other  consideration  weighed  greatly  with  the  Whig
statesmen.  It  was  the  firm  conviction  of  many,  if  not  of  all
of  them,  that  the  triumph  of  the  English  in  America  would
give  such  an  ascendency  to  the  Tory  party  and  to  the  power  of
the  Crown,  that  it  would  be  fatal  to  English  liberty.  Such  an
opinion  was  more  than  once  imphed  in  the  speeches  of  Chat-
ham. It  was  the  opinion  of  Fox^  and  of  Horace  Walpole,^
and  many  years  after  the  struggle  had  terminated  it  was  de-
liberately reaffirmed  by  Burke.''  We  have  a  curious  picture  of
the  tone  of  thought  prevailing  among  some  of  the  Whig  leaders

'  These  views  were  privately  ex-  *  In  defendinp;  h'S  conduct  on  the

pressed  \>y  the  Duke  of  liichmond  to  American  question,  he  says,  '  He  cer-

his  brother-in-law,  ]Mr.  Connolly,  in  a  tainly never could, and  never did,

remarkable letter  dated Nov. 177(),  wish  the  colonists  to  be  subdued  by

now  in  the  possession  oi;  Sir  Charles  arms. He  was  fully  persuaded  that

Hunbury,  who  has  kindly  allowed  me  if  such  sliould  be  the  event,  they  must

to  make  use  of  it.  In  Jan.  1778,  Kicli-  be  held in  that  subdued  state  by  a

uiond  declared  in  Parliament  his  readi-  great  body  of standing  forces,  and

ness  to  acknowledj^'c  American  inde-  ])CThaps of  foreitjn  forces. He  was

pendence. {Walpole's  Laxt  Journa/n,  strongly  of  opinion  that  such  armies,

ii.  182.)  first  victorious  over  Enpflislimen,  in  a

^  Fox's  Correspondence,  i.  142-147.  conflict for English constitutional

'  In  March  1778,  he  writes,  'I  had  rights  and  privileges,  and  afterwards

a.s  little  doubt  but  if  the  concjucst  of  habituated  (though in America)  to

America  should  be  achieved,  the  mo-  keep  an  English  peojjlc  in  a  state  of

ment  of  the  victorious  army's  return  abject  subjection,  would  prove  fatal  in

would  be  that  of  the  destruction  of  the  end  to  the  liberties  of  England  it-

our liberty.'— Walpole's Last Jour-  self.' — '  Appeal  from  the  New  to  tlie

luiU,  ii.  241.  Old  Whigs,' Burke's Worha,  vi.  124.

en.  XIII.  DIVIDED  STATE OF  ENGLAND.  545

in  the  beginning  of  the  American  contest,  in  a  letter  which  was
written  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  Burke  from  Paris  in  the
August  of  1776.  Richmond  had  gone  to  France  to  prosecute  his
claim  to  an  old  French  peerage,  and  he  declares  that  the  poli-
tical condition  of  England  was  one  reason  why  he  was  anxious
to  obtain  it.  England,  he  believed,  was  on  the  verge  of  des-
potism, and  it  would  be  a  despotism  more  oppressive  than  that
of  France,  for  it  would  be  less  tempered  by  habit  and  manners.
He  himself  was  likely  to  be  among  the  proscribed,  and  in  that
case,  '  if  America  be  not  open  to  receive  us,  France  is  some
retreat,  and  a  peerage  here  is  something.' '

Under  all  these  circumstances,  England  entered  into  the
ill-omened  conflict  in  which  she  was  engaged,  profoundly
divided.  A  party,  small  indeed  in  numbers,  but  powerful  from
its  traditions,  its  connections,  and  its  abilities,  had  identified
itself  completely  with  the  cause  of  the  insurgents,  opposed
and  embarrassed  the  Government  in  every  effort  to  augment
its  forces  and  to  subsidise  allies,  openly  rejoiced  in  the  victories
of  the  Americans,  and  exerted  all  its  eloquence  to  justify  and
to  encourage  them.  We  must  now  pass  to  the  other  side  of
the  Atlantic,  and  examine  the  movements  of  public  opinion  in
America  and  the  measures  of  the  American  Congress  to  organise
the  war.

'  Bnike's  Correspondence,  ii.  112-120.

END OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.

VOL.  III.  N  N

PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NKW -STREET SQUARE

LONDON

STANDARD  HISTOEICAL  WOEKS.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord) HISTORY  of  ENGLAND, from

the  ACCESSION  of  JAMES  the  SECOND.
Popular  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  5s. i  People's  Edition,  4  vols.  cr.  8vo.  ICs.
Student's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  12s.  |  Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  8vo.  48s,
Library  Edition,  5  vols.  8vo.  £4.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS:

Student's  Edition,  1  vol,  crown  8vo.  6s.  I  Trevelyan  Edition,  2  vols.  cr.  8vo.  9,!?.
People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  8s.  |  Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols,  post  8vo,  24s.
Library  Edition,  3  vols,  8vo,  36s.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS,  with  LAYS  of  ANCIENT

ROME. In  1  vol.
Popular  Edition,  crown  Svo.  2s.  &d.
Authorised  Edition,  crown  8vo.  2s.  6d.  or  3s.  &d.  gilt  edges.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS  :

People's  Edition,  I  vol.cr,  Svo,  4s,  &d.  |  Library  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  21s.

MACAULAY'S (Lord) MISCELLANEOUS WRITESTGS

and  SPEECHES:
Popular  Edition,  1  vol.  cr,  Svo,  2s.&d.  \  Student's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  6s.
Cabinet  Edition,  including  Indian  Penal Code, Lays of Ancient  Rome,  and
Miscellaneous  Poems,  4  vols,  post  Svo.  24s,

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  C0:MPLETE  WORKS :

Cabinet  Edition,  16vols,  post  Svo.  £4.  16s.  |  Library  Edition,  8  vols,  Svo.  £b.  5s,

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  from  the  EALL  of  WOLSEY

to the DEFEAT of the SPANISH ARMADA. By James A. Fkoude.
12  vols,  crown  Svo,  42s.

The ENGLISH in IRELAND in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. By  James  A.  Feoude, 3  vols,  crown  Svo.  18s.

SHORT STUDIES on  GREAT SUBJECTS. By  James

A.  Fkoude, 4  vols,  crown  Svo.  24s,

HISTORY of ENGLAND from the ACCESSION of-

JAMES  I,  to  the  OUTBREAK  of  the  GREAT  CIVIL  WAR. By  Samcel
Rawson  Gardiner. 10  vols,  crown  Svo.  6s.  each.

HISTORY  of  the  GREAT  CIYH.  WAR,  1642-1649. By

Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner (3  vols.) Vol.  I,  1642-1644. With  24  Maps,
Svo.  21s. Vol.  II.  1644-1647. With  21  Maps. Svo.  24s.

HISTORY of ENGLANT) in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. By  W.  E.  H.  Lkckt. Svo. Vols.  L  and  n,  1700-1760,  36s,
Vols.  Ill,  and  IV.  1760-1784,  36s. Vols.  V,  and  VI.  1784-1793,  36s.

The  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  since

the  ACCESSION  of  GEORGE  IIL  1760-1870, By  Sir  T.  Erskine  May
(Lord  Farnborouuh). 3  vols,  crown  Svo.  ISs.

London:  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

STANDAED  HISTOEICAL  WOEKS.

HISTORY  of ENGLAND from the CONCLUSION of

the  GREAT  WAK  iu  l«li5  to  tho  YEAli  1858. By  Spencke  Walpolk
LiBHAKY  Editiun-  (0  vols.). Vols.  I.  and  II,  1815-1832,  36*-. Vol.  III.  1832-

1841,  18s. Vols.  IV.  and  V.  1841-1858,  36s.
Cabinet  Edition,  6  vols,  crown  8vo.  6s.  each.

A  JOURXAL  of  the  KEIGNS  of  KING  GEOEGE  IV.

KlXtx  WILLIAM  IV.  and  QUEEN  VICTORIA.  By  the  late  Charles
C.  E.  Gkeville,  Esq.  Clerk  of  the  Council  to  those  Sovereigns.  Edited  by
Henry  Reeve,  C.B.  JJ.C.L. Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols. Crown  870.  6s.  each.

A  HISTOEY  of  TAXATION  and  TAXES  in  ENGLAND,

from  the  EARLIEST  TIMES  to  the  YEAR  1885.  By  Stephen  Dowell.
Vols.  I.  and  II.  The  History  of  Taxation,  21s.  ;  Vols.  Hi.  and  IV.  The
History  of  Taxes,  2 Is.

The  ENGLISH  in  AI^LEEICA : Virginia,  Maryhind,  and

the  Carolinas. By  J.  A.  Doyle,  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford. 8vo.  18s.

The  ENGLISH  in  AMEEICA :  the  Puritan  Colonies. By

J.  A.  Doyle,  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford. 2  vols.  Svo.  36s.

Tlie  ENGLISH CHUECH  in  the  EIGHTEENTH  CEN-

TURY. By  Charles  J.  Abbey  and  John  H.  Overton. Crown  Svo.  7s.  6d.

HISTOEY  of  the  PAPACY  during  the  EEFOEMATION.

By  the  Rev.  Mandell  Creighton.  Svo.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  1378-1464,  32s.
Vols.  in.  and  IV.  1464-1518,  24s.

The HISTOEICAL GEOGEAPHY of EUEOPE. By

Edward  A.  Freeman. With  65  Maps. 2  vols.  Svo.  3  Is.  6d,

HISTOEY of  the EOMANS under the  E^IPLRE. By

Dean  Merivale.  Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  crown  Svo.  4Ss.  Popular  Edition,
8  vols,  crown  Svo.  35.  6d.  each.

HISTOEY of CIVILISATION in ENGLAND and

FRANCE,  SPAIN  and  SCOTLAND. By  H.  T.  Buckle. 3  vols.  cr.  Svo.  24s.

The HISTOEY of EUEOPEAN MOE^VLS from

AUGUSTUS  to  CHARLEMAGNE. By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky. 2  vols.  cr.  Svo.  16s.

HISTOEY  of  tlie  EISE  and  DnTFLUENCE  of  the  SPIEIT

of  RATIONALISM  in  EUROPE. By  V^.  E.  H.  Lecky. 2  vols.  cr.  8vo.  16s.

DEMOCEACY in  AMEEICA. By  A.  De  Tocqueville.

Translated  by  H.  Reeve. 2  vols,  crown  Svo.  16s.

The  HISTOEY  of  PHILOSOPHY,  from  Thales  to  Comte.

By  G.  H.  Lewes. 2  vols.  Svo.  32s.

The HISTOEY of ISEAEL. By Heinrich Ewald.

8vo.  Vols.  L  and  IL  24s.  Vols.  IIL  and  iV.  21s.  Vol.  V,  18s.  Vol.  VI.
16s. Vol.  VII.  21s. Vol.  VIII.  185.

London:  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

<c^.

.P

fJlL

Tif.-  *?.^

/

W'^^^rtna

{j^Kji  (^r-^^'-il^i lri[*.-ir^'  L  1^^

-^-.u^'^-'"i-v4.'^

CENTRAL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY
University  of  California,  San  Diego

DATE  DUE

SLP  21 .

^^L  01 1981

UCSD  Libr.

UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

AA 000  884  620 6

,f\ Jv '-

•~t  '^

vr

< c

4 /•

f  '.'

'f.  «i

.,  ••  ,f.

^  ?
vs

r ^

i

Urn

WMBT

i

^^^B

\t.„.

y

IMiVVS^rtjfi

H  iMi  fMM!  I!  ti  iHiiuMM' innnnnh  #
