HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

XVIII™  CENTUKY

VOL.  V.

PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQtJARB

LONDON

A

HISTOEY  OF  ENGLAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

WILLIAM EDAVAEP HAPJPOLE LECKY

VOLUME V.

THIRD EDITION

LONDON

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
•1891

AH rights reterted

CONTENTS

OF

THE FIFTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

PAGR

Characteristics  of  modern  Statesmen 1

Wiliia))L  Pitt

His  unique  position  in  1784 4

Nature  of  his  eloquence 5

His  self-control 10

Premature  development,  and  purity  of  character . . . .11

Addicted  to  excessive  drinking . . . . , , . .  11

Indifference  to  money 12

Stateliness  of  manner 13

Political  courage 14

Amiability  in  private  life . . . 15

Sanguine  temperament . . . . . . . . .15

Love  of  boys Ifi

His  public  manner  overstrained .......  18

Position  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury 18

Pitt's  relations  to  the  King ]  9

Contraction  of  royal  power — attempts  to  reassert  it . . . .  20

Great  increase  of  ministerial  authority 21

Revolts  against  Pitt's  ascendency 22

His  favourite  colleagues 24

Termination  of  parliamentary  corruption 24

Excessive  creation  of  peerages 26

Pitt's  authority  as  war  minister , . .  27

Financial  skill 27

Condition  of  English  finances  in  1784 28

Pitt's  measures  against  smuggling '31

Rearrangement  of  duties . . . . . . . , .  31

Restriction  of  the  right  of  franking  letters .....  32

Additional  taxation. Precautions  against  fraud . . , .  32

Pitt's  readiness  to  accept  suggestions  and  criticism . . .  33

VI

CONTENTS  OF

Business  character  of  his  ministry

Consolidation  of  duties

Free-trade  polic3\ The  Irish  propositions  .
French  commercial  treaty ....

Sinking  fund .

Continued  during  the  French  War .

Enormous  increase  of  the  debt ....

Jiargely  due  to  financial  maladministration
General  character  of  Pitt's  financial  administration
Smallness  of  Pitt's  legislative  acliievements .
Tlie  Westminster  scrutiny .....

Measures  reforming  the  system  of  elections .

Parliamentary  Reform  Bill  of  1785

Defeated. Declining  interest  in  the  question

Pitt  abandons  the  cause. Taken  up  by  Flood  and  Grey

Pitt's  conduct  about  Reform ....

And  about  the  Slave  Trade  ......

Tlie  trade  abolished  without  difficulty  after  his  death
Pitt's  Irish  policj'  .......

His  misconception  of  the  French  Eevolution. Incapacity
minister .........

Neglect  of  social  problems. And  of  literature .
Pitt  pre-eminently  a  parliamentary  minister .

Special  brilliancy  of  the  first  period  of  Pitt's  Ministry
Occasional  defeats ........

Progress  of  Scotland. IJest  oration  of  the  forfeited  estates
Indian  Government

Forcigii  AJfairs

Joseph  II.  breaks  the  Barrier  Treaty .....
Claims  l\Iacstricht  and  free  navigation  on  the  Scheldt
Fears  of  a  Dutch  war. Treaty  of  Fontainebleau  (Nov.  1785)
French  pay  tlie  Dutch  indemnity .....

The  Franco-Dutch  alliance

Conflict between the parly of  the Sladholdcr and  the Dafch

'Patriots' .........

Prussian  invasion  of  Holland. Supiiorted  by  England
Triumph  of  the  Stadholder  (October  1787). Act  of  Mutual

rantoc ..........

1'riple  alliance  of  Great  Britain,  the  Nclherlands,  and  i'rus.sia,
Joseph  II. 's  policy  in  Flanders ......

lli.s  wi.sh  to  exchange  Flanders  for  Bavjiria

Tumults  in  Flanders  in  1780  and  1787  ....

War  between  Ilu.shia  and  Turkey,  1787 ....

Till'  I'riiioc  of  Wales

Conned  inn  f)r  the  Whigs  with  the  Prince  of  Wales . .
Debts  of  tlie  Prince  ...  ....

Ills  relations  with  Mrs.  Fit zherbert

Uis  muniagc

Gua
1788

THE FIFTH  VOLUME.  vii

PACB

Ccmpleto  alienation  from  the  King 8!>

The  Fitzheibert  marriiigc  brought  beforte  Parliament ...  90

Fox  authorised  to  deny  it 01

Fxi^lanation  of  Sheridan '•>.'?

Subsequent  history  of  Mrs.  Fitzherbert ......  1).3

Fox's  conduct 95

The  Begcncy

The  King's  madness,  Oct.  1788 9G

Kelations  of  Pitt  to  the  Prince. Fox  returns  from  Italy . .  97

Ctmduct  of  Thurlow 98

Inquiry  of  the  Privy  Council  into  tlie  state  of  the  King  . , .  100

I'ariiamenfary  inquiry. Dr.  Willis . ......  Idl

Fox's  Claim  of  Kight  for  the  Prince  of  Wales ....  lo:?

Repudiated  by  Pitt 104

Position  of  the  two  leaders  defined ](),i

The  Duke  of  York  and  North  try  to  prevent  a  formal  decision . .  108

Pitt  insists  on  it 108

The  rival  arguments 110

Popular  favour  on  the  side  of  the  Government . . . .11-1

Letters  of  Grenville . . ..115

Speech  of  Sheridan . . . . , . . . . .119

Answer  of  Pitt. His  popular  doctrine 119

'  The  Phantom  King ' 128

Itevolutionary  character  of  the  precedent  established . . .  121:

Thurlow's  declaration  for  the  King 125

The  Government  resolutions 127

Death  of  Cornwall,  the  Speaker. Grenville  elected  . . .128

Skill  with  which  Pitt  managed  the  debates 128

A''iolence  and  indiscretions  of  Burke . . . . . .  1  liO

His  opinion  of  the  course  that  should  have  been  adopted . . .  i;!l

Opposition  insist  on  another  examination  of  physicians  . . .  Lio

The  restrictions  on  the  Regent lUG

Letter  of  the  Prince  of  Wales 14S

The  Fitzherbert  marriage  again  alluded  to  and  denied . . .  141:
Regency  Bill  passed the  Commons. The  King  better. Strong

party  feeling 145

King's  recovery. Conduct  of  the  Princes . . . , . .  147

Divisions  in  the  royal  family. Duel  of  the  Duke  of  York . .  150

Mistakes  of  Fox 151

Popularity  of  Pitt 152

And  of  the  King 153

CHAPTER XIX.

IteViijioJis  Lihcrty

Beaufoy's  motion  for  repealing  thcTcst  and  Corporation  Acts  (1787

and  1789) 155

Spt^eches  of  North  and  Fox . . . . . , . . 157
Pitt  defeats  the  motion 158

viii  CONTENTS  OF

PAGE

Revived  by  Fox  in  1790. Speech  of  Burke 1;,9

Influence  of  the  French  Kevolution. 8ir  G.  EUiot's  motion  (1791)  100

Stanhope's  Toleration  BiU IGO

Observance  of  Sunday  ..........  162

History  of  the  decline  of  theological  influence  in  Government .  164
Eighteenth  century  conception  of  an  Established  Church. And  of

toleration 168

. Locke 169

Warburton 170

Paley 171

Burke 174

Fox's  motion  in  favour  of  the  Unitarians .....  176

Supported  by  North. Opposed  by  Burke . . . . . .  177

Comparison  of  Burke's  views  with  those  of  Montesquieu  and  Vol-
taire . . . . . . . . . . . .181

Bernardin  de  St.  Pierre 182

Mably. Eousseau . . . . . . . . . .1815

Catholic  Relief  Bill  of  1791. Legislation  about  Catholics  . . .  184

The  Scotch  Catholics  relieved  in  1793 191

Repeal  (1795)  of  the  Acts  against  Scotch  Episcopalians . , .  191

Constitutional  History

The  claim  to  arrest  impeachments  by  prorogation  or  dissolution .  191

Finally  surrendered  in  1790 192

Libel  Act  of  1791 193

Flood's  proposal  (1790)  for  parliamentary  reform . . . .193

The  Quebec  Government  Act  (1791) 195

Fox  on  ai'istocracies 197

Colonial  defence 200

Budget  of  1790 2()2

Budgets  of  17^91  and  1792 203

Military  and  naval  defence 206

Dispute  with  Spain  about  Nootka  Sound 206

War  with  Tippoo  Sahib 208

The  Eastern  Question.

Catherine  II 210

Ru.ssian  aggression  on  Turkey 212

Voltaire'8  Tocsin  des  Rois 212

France  the  steady  ally  of  Turkey . . . . . . .  213

Knglisb  alliance  with  Russia 214

The  annexation  of  the  Crimea 215

Foresight  of  Vergenncs .........  216

Schemes  of  partition 217

.Joseph  II 218

Ai;ooni[)anies  Catherine  to  the  Crimea 219

The  Turks  prepare  for  the  struggle. Their  isolation . . ,  220

Outbreak  of  the  war  in  1788. Russian  successes . . . .  222

iJisasters  of  Austria  in  the  eighteenth  century ....  222

JoBeph  compelled  Lo  retreat. Difhcultics  of  his  position . . .  224

THE FIFTH VOLUME.  IX

The  Swedish  War

Retrospect  of  Swedish  history. Revohition  of  1772
Gustavus  III.  besieges  Fredcrickshamn,  1788 . . . ,
Naval  battle. Mutiny  of  Swedish  officers ....
Denmark  declares  war  against  Sweden .....
Intervention  of  England. The  Triple  Alliance  undertake  to  pacify

Europe

Force  the  Danes  into  an  armistice  and  peace ....

Resentment  of  Russia

Slie  refuses  the  mediation  of  the  allies .....

2L'(;
227
228

229
281-
2:51
232

Prussian  and  Austrian  Policy

Ambitious  designs  of  the  King  of  Prussia 282

Hopes  to  restore  Galicia  to  Poland  and  obtain  Dantzig  and  Thorn  .  284

Proposes  to  assist  the  Turks  ........  235

Desires  the  separation  of  Flanders  from  the  Empire . . .  28fi

Divergence  of  English  from  Prussian  policy 238

English  despatches  June  and  September  1789 23'J

Military  events  in  1789 242

Exchange  of  notes  between  England  and  Prussia  (Oct.  1789-Feb.

1790) 242

Death  of  Joseph  II.  (Feb.  20,  1790) 250

Accession  of  Leopold. Signature  of  alliance  between  Prussia  and

Turkey 251

Its  ratification  withheld. Alliance  of  Prussia  and  Poland . .  252

Pacific  policy  of  Leopold 258

Demands  of  the  King  of  Prussia . . ■*■ 254

King  of  Great  Britain  proposes  an  armistice. Censures  the  Prus-
sian policy 255

Alienation  of  Great  Britain  and  Prussia 257

Negotiations  between  Prussia  and  Austria  ......  258

Military  events. Prussian  treaty  with  Turkey  ratified . . .  2(iO

Efi:orts  of  England  and  Holland  to  produce  peace . . . .  2(51

Convention  of  Reichenbach 2r)2

Peace  of  Sistova  (Aug.  4,  1791) 263

Pacification  of  the  Netherlands .......  2G4

Swedish  Affairs

Character  of  Gustavus  III 2fi5

His  deplorable  position  at  the  end  of  1788 265

Reaction  in  his  favour. Diet  of  1789 2()G

Opposition  of  the  nobles  .........  2(17

King  overthrows  by  violence  the  Constitution . ....  2fi8

His  success  and  popularity . . . . . . . .  209

Campaigns  of  1789  and  1790 270

Peace  of  Warela  closes  the  Swedish  War  (Aug.  15,  1790) . .  271

Summary  of  the  achievements  of  the  Triple  Alliance  . . . .  278

The  allies  demand  the  surrender  of  Oczakow 274

Reasons  for  this  demand . . . . . . . ..276

Refusal  of  Russia 280

CONTENTS OF

ilepresentations  of  Prussia

England  resolves  to  support  her  by  arms
Capture  of  Ismail  ......

Designs  upon  India  ......

Discussion  in  Parliament. Strong  opposition
Foreign  Powers  refuse  to  support  England
An  ultimatum  to  Eussia  sent  and  recalled
Pitt  acknowledges  his  defeat ....

Fawkener  sent  to  Pvussia

Fresh  successes  of  the  Russians. Adair's  journey
Peace  of  Jassy. Death  of  I'otemkiu .
The  failure  of  Pitt  and  its  consequences  .

PAGK

281
283
281
285
2«6
291
292
293
294
295
297
297

CHAPTER XX.

Causes  of  the  Fuench  Kevolution.

Great  influence  of  the  French  Revolution  on  English  llioiiglit  and

politics 300

Its  Literary  Antecedents

Change  in  the  literarj'  spirit  after  Lewis  XIV 301

Voltaire  and  Montesquieu  visit  England 301

First  writings  not  revolutionary. Voltaire's  early  career . . .  302

PI  is  ill-treatment  by  the  Government 303

His  exile  and  antichristian  writings .......  304

The  literature  of  the  Encyclopajdists 304

Total  alienation  of  the  French  intellect  from  Christianity  . . .  305

Persecution  of  opinion 307

How  far  freethinking  prepared  the  Revolution 308

Freethinkers  not  naturally  revolutionists. Politics  of  Voltaire .  309

General  character  of  his  mind 315

Extent  of  liis  influence. Spread  of  toleration  through  Europe .  316

Expectation  of  a  bloodless  revolution 318

The  Parliaments

First  opposition  to  the  Crown  originated  with  them . . .319

Their  character  and  powers . . . . . . . . .  319

Opposition  to  the  Bull  Unigenitus. Claim  of  the  Parliaments  to

represent  the  nation . . , . . . . . .321

Conflict with the Crown and Episcopacy in the Ministry of

Floury 322

Magistrates  recalled  from  exile  in  1733 ......  323

Tiio  Parliament  natm'ally  conservative . , . . . .  323

llcncwed conflict  in 1717. Parliament attempts to check  new

taxation 324

The  tickets  of  confession 325

Exile  of  the  Parliaments,  1753 323

Popular  excitement  in  Paris. Predictions  of  revolution . . .  3i'6

The  jcjurnals  of  D'Argenson 327

Chesterlicid  foroseea  the  Revolution 328

THE  FIFTH VOLUME.

XI

Parliament  recalled,  1754. Its  violence  against  priests  .

Brief  of  iJenedict  XIV. Suppressed  by  the  Parliament

New  prominence  of  the  provincial  Paiiiaments. Growth  of  scepti

cism

Court  turns  against  the  Parliament. Renewed  conflict
Parliament  condemns  letters  of  cachet,  beds  of  justice,  and  the

financial  administration .......

Persecution  of  freethinkers. Suppression  of  the  Jesuits .
Decline  of  ro3'al  authority .......

Taxes  forced  through  Parliament  in  1763. Arrest  of  magistrates
No  edicts  obligatory  which  had  not  been  registered  by  all  tlie  Par

liaments ..........

I'redictions  of  a  revolution  ........

Disputes  with  the  clergy,  1765,  1766. Declining  interest  in  theology
Execution  of  La  Barre. Intolerance,  impiety,  and  superstition
Seizure  of  Avignon ........

Important  political  questions  relating  to  the  Parliaments
Ling  asserts  his  absolute  power .....

Trial  of  the  Duke  of  Aiguillon .....

Suppression  of  the  Parliaments  by  Maupeou,  1771 .
Popular  disturbances .......

Success  of  the  couj)  d'etat. Judgment  of  Burke
Voltaire's  approval  of  the  suppression  of  Parliaments  .

Ojjj'ositw7i,  to  the  Coxcrt  j) asses  cMeJiy  to  Men  of  Letters
Decline  of  the  intiaence  of  Voltaire  ....

Rising  influence  of  Rousseau. The  '  Contrat  Social ' .
Its  relation  to  English  speculation ....

Its  chief  doctrines  .......

Their  adaptation  to  French  ideas. English  and  French
Rousseau  qualifies  his  theories .....

Dangers  of  the  absolutism  of  majorities .
English  and  American  theory  of  the  suffrage
Rousseau's  dislike  of  violence .....

His  advocacy  of  small  states  and  local  patriotism
General  estimate  of  Rousseau .....

LLis  political  influence

ideal

The  Economists  . ,

Character  of  the  Government

Its  despotism .

Destruction  of  provincial  government ....
And  of  the  independence  of  tribunals. Division  of  classes

The  gentry  attracted  to  the  towns

Growth  of  a  peasant  proprietary

The  feudal  burdens ........

Unjust  and  oppressive  taxation .....

Comparison  of  French  and  English  taxation .

Other  abuses  and  oppressions. Low  state  of  agriculture

Frequency  of  famines  during  the  eighteenth  century
Contrasts  of  great  poverty  and  luxury  ....

TAfiE

32!)
330

,  394

.  .  3!)5

.  396

.  .  397

.  398

.  .  399

declared . .  400

. .  400

xii  CONTENTS OF

PACK

Reign  of  Lewis  XVI.

Lewis  XVI.  restores  the  Parliaments 386

Ministry  of  Turgot 387

Effects  of  his  dismissal 389

First  ministry  of  Necker. The  provincial  Assemblies . . .  390

Effects  of  the  American  War  in  accelerating  the  Revolution . .  392

French  society  in  the  early  years  of  the  reign 392

Increase  of  prosperity ....

Intellectual  activity .....

Moral  aspects  of  the  time  ....

Its  rare  charm ......

Character  of  the  King ....

All  fear  of  Eevolution  had  passed

Disillusion  of  the  nation  under  Calonue. Deficit

Assembly  of  the  Notables,  Feb.  1787 .

Ministry  of  Brienne. Notables  refuse  to  vote  a  land  tax. . .401

Provincial  States. Free  trade  in  corn. Abolition  of  the  corvee .  402

Effect  of  the  meeting  of  the  Notables . . . . . .  403

Insubordination  in  the  army  and  its  causes 404

The  Parliament,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  Notables,  becomes  the

centre  of  opposition .........  405

Declares  that  the  States-General  alone  have  the  right  to  impose

new  taxes  ............  406

Exiled  to  Troyes " . . .  406

Recalled,  Sept.  1787 407

Loan  rai.sed ...........  408

Destruction  of  French  influence  in  the  Netherlands. Civil  rights

granted  to  Protestants .........  408

Forecast  of  Arthur  Young ........  409

Character  and  danger  of  the  parliamentary  opposition . . .  410
Attitude  and  policy  of  the  King. States-General  promised . .412

Qmjj  d'etat.  May  1788 414

Revolts  in  the  provinces 416

Declaration  of  bankruptcy. Resignation  of Brienne. Recall  of

Necker 417

Question  of  the  form  in  which  the  States-General  should  meet .  418
King  grants  a  double  representation  to  the  Commons . . .419

Mode  of  election. Faults  of  Necker 420

Tiic  Sovereign  still  retained  much  authority ....  423
Agitation  produced  by  the  election. I\Iulliplication  of  pami)hlcts

and  newspapers 425

Famine,  1788-1789 426

The  cahiers  of  the  three  orders 428

Constitutional  monarchy  easily  attainable .....  430

Meeting  of  tlio  St,atcs-General. The  leading  men . . . .  431

Opinions  of  Arthur  Young  and  Morris 433

Should  the  three  orders  vote  .separately  or  together  ?  . . . .  433

Bicameral  arrangcinent  rejected .......  435

The third estate proclaim themselves the National Assembly.

Scene  in  tlie  tennis  court 4.'!()

Large  body  of  the  clergy  joins  them #•••••  437

THE  FIFTH  VOLUME.  xiii

PAfiK

Royal  Sossion,  -Tunc  23. Tlie  King's  offers 438

Rejected  by  the  commons. Nobles  join  them 439

Rise  of  the  anarchists. Capture  of  the  Bastille 440

The  Kevolutiou  not  inevitable. Summary  of  its  causes . . .  44-1

CHAPTER  XXI.

First  Effrcfa  of  the  Berulnt'ioit,  on.  Enylixh  Politics

General  belief  that  the  Revolution  would  promote  European  peace  443

Long  antagonism  of  France  and  England  .....  443

Advantages  derived  by  England  from  the  eclipse  of French  in-

llucnce 444

Whig  antipathy  to  France 445

Refusal  of  permission  to  export  flour  to  France 446

French  influence  revives  English  democratic  societies . . .  447

Price's  sermon ...........  449

How  far  French  examples  were  likely  to  be  dangerous  to  England .  451

Enthusiasm  caused  by  the  destruction  of  the  Bastille  . . .  453

First  impressions  of  Fox  and  Burke 453

Fox  praises  the  Revolution  in  Parliament,  Feb.  5,  1790 . . .  455

Burke's  speech,  Feb.  9 456

Close  of  the  debate 459

Motives  attributed  to  the  speakers 459

Theu'  sincerity 460

Burke's  '  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution  ' . . . .  462

His  predictions  of  the  course  of  the  movement . . . . .  472

His  estimate  of  the  effects  of  the  spoliation  of  Church  property .  475

Incompatibility  of  pure  democracy  with  the  security  of  property .  479

Examination  of  the  connection  of  the  Revolution  with  socialism .  480

Constituent  Assembly  not  socialistic 482

Causes  that  checked  socialistic  tendencies  in  France . . .  485
Burke  insists  on  the  proselytising  character  of  the  Revolution . .  487
Reception  and  influence  of  the  'Reflections  on  the  French  Revo-
lution ' 487

Dissolution  of  Parliament,  autumn  1790 489

Progress  of  the  Revolution

National  Assemblj-  transferred  to  Paris 489

Complete  change  in  the  laws  and  administration  of  France . .  490

Genuine  reforms  effected  .........  494

General  anarchj' 494

Judgment  of  Morris  ..........  495

English  enthusiasts  for  the  Revolution. Mackintosh  and  Paine  . .  4'.'6

Democratic  societies  and  addresses 498

Burke  looks  forward  to  European  intervention  against the  Revo-
lution 499

xiv  CONTENTS  OF

PACK

All  nations  not  fit  for  political  liberty 501

Conliict  between  Burke  and  Fox  on  the  Quebec  Bill . . . .  501

Isolation  of  Burke  from  his  party . . ....  507

'Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs' 508

Lord  Stormont's  interview  with  Burke 510

True  character  of  the  Whig  party 511

The  Prince  of  Wales  follows  Fox 512

Camden  sanctions  Burke's  Whiggism  .... , .  513
Burke's  intense  sympathy  with  the  French  emigrants . . .514

His  belief  that  the  Revolution,  if  triumphant,  must  be  cosmopolitan  51 G

Government  separated  from  property 519

Eighteousness  of  an  anti-revolutionary  war. Imminence  of  the

danger 520

General  estimate  of  Burke's  policy  on  the  Revolution  . . . .  521

His  tliree  conditions  of  intervention 522

Effects  of  the  question  on  Burke's  health 524

His  diffidence  about  political  prophecy 525

Public  opinion  turns  towards  him 526

The  Birmingham  riots ...  528

Eroits  on  the  Continent

Death  of  Mkabeau 52!)

Flight  of  Varennes 530

Conduct  of  the  Assembly. Its  character ......  531

Lewis  XVI.  accepts  the  Constitution 533

Dissolution  of  the  National  Assembly. Constitution  of  its  successor  534

Jlenacing  aspect  of  surrounding  Powers ■ .  535

Pacific  spirit  in  France 536

Guiding  principles  of  Russia  and  tlie  Emperor 537

Of  Prussia 538

The  Polish  Question

State  of  Poland  since  the  death  of  Sobieski  ....

Its  first  partition  in  1772. The  three  Powers  guarantee  its  remain

ing  territory

Prussian  alliance  with  Poland .......

Revolution  in  the  Polisli  Constitution,  May  1701. Its  dangers  and

merits

Poland  refuses  to  cede  Dantzig  and  Thorn  to  Prussia  .

Judgment  of  llailos

King  of  Prussia  approves  of  the  new  Constitution

Altitude  of  England

The  Frencii  emigrants.  Their  negotiations  with  foreign  Powers
The  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Prussia  negotiate  for  an  alliance
Hesitation  of  Leofjold  about  French  all'airs.  ....
Ilefu.scs  to  assist  Lewis  XVI.  unless  he  was  supported  by  otlie

Powers

Ili.M  policy  before  and  afl IT  the  (light  of  VareiHics

Lotlors  of  Marie  .\nloiiielte  to  Leopold .....

)39

541
542

543
543

514
515
546

547
518
549

5r,()

r..-.  1

5oG

557
558
5(51

502
5(;5
oGG
567
567

568
569
570
573

573
574

575
576

THE FIFTH VOLUME.  XV

PA  OS

Alliance  between  Prussia  and  the  Emperor  consummatccl. Secret

ambitions  of  the  Powers ......... 554

Designs  on  Alsace  and  Lorraine ......

The  King  of  Prussia  more  anxious  than  the  Emperor  for  interven

tion  with  France

Interview  and  Declaration  of  Pilnitz

Absolute  neutrality  of  England  in  French  affairs

The  Emperor  and  Marie  Antoinette  consider  her  hostile  .

Evidence  from  confidential  diplomatic  corresx^ondence  of  the  sin

cerity  of  English  neutrality .......

Indifference  of  English  public  opinion  to  foreign  affairs  .
Objects  of  Pitt's  foreign  policy. Estimates  of  French  affairs
Conduct  of  Lord  Effingham  during  the  insurrection  at  St.  Domingo
Pitt  regretted  the  outbreak  of  the  war  on  the  Continent .
Catherine  urges  the  Emperor  and  King  of  Prussia  to  engage  in  the

war ............

Her  motives. Weakness  of  Poland

Gradual  rise  of  the  conspiracy  against  Poland ....

Increasing  reluctance  of  Leopold  to  intervene  in  France
Enthusiasm  when  Lewis  XVI.  accepted  the  Constitution .
Growth  of  anarchy .........

Increase  of  the  emigration. Growing  hostility  of  foreign  Powers

French  suspicions  of  England

Distrust  of  the  King  and  Queen. Their  relations  to  foreign  Powers 577
Leopold  refuses  to  assist  them ........ 580

The  Legislative  Assemldy

Its  composition 580

Its  measures  against  the  emigrants . . . ' . . . .  581

Indisposition  of  the  continental  Powers  to  act  without  the  Emperor  582

Growing  belief  in  peace. In  France  a  war  spirit  arising  . .  583

Prevailing  belief  that  France  was  completely  paralysed . . .  583

Influences  that  impelled  her  towards  war  .....  584

Divi?ion  in  the  repulilican  party. Triumphs  and  demands  of  the

Girondins  .  587

Narbonne  organises  the  war. Secret  appeal  of  the  King  to  foreign

Powers 588

Letter  of  Marie  Antoinette  to  Mercy 589

Difficulties  of  the  position  of  Leopold 5!tO

His  hesitating  policy . . 5i)l

French  ultimatum  to  the  Emperor 593

Alliance  between  the  Emperor  and  Prussia  ratified. German  army

approaches  the  frontier 593

The  Emperor  still  anxious  to  avoid  a  war .....  594

His  fears  for  Poland ..........  595

Change  in  the  Spanish  IMinistry. Death  of  Leopold. Assassina-
tion of  Gustavus  III 595

The  Polish  Question

Signs  of  the  conspiracy  forming  against  Poland 596

Whitworiii  discovers  the  intentions  of  Catherine .... 597

xvi  CONTENTS OF THE FiFTn VOLUME.

PAGE

The  King  of  Prussia  agrees  to  a  partition ......  .51)8

Keith  describes  the  position  of  the  Court  of  Vienna . . ,  51)9

Approach  of  the  French  War. Attitude  of  the  Powers . . .  509

Austrian  reply  to  the  French  ultimatum .....  .599

The  war  party  triumph  in  France. Anarchy  of  tlie  country . .  601

France  declares  war  against  the  Emperor . . . - •  601

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

IN

THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

The  qualities  of  mind  and  cliaracter  which  in  modern  societies
have  proved  most  successful  in  political  life  are  for  the  most
part  of  a  wholly  different  order  from  those  which  lead  to
eminence  in  the  spheres  of  pure  intellect  or  pure  moral  effort.
Originality  and  profundity  of  thought,  the  power  of  tracing
principles  to  their  obscure  and  distant  consequences,  the  intel-
lectual and  imaginative  insight  which  penetrates  to  the  heart  of
things  and  expresses  in  a  perennial  form  the  deeper  emotions  or
finer  shades  of  human  character,  can  be  of  little  or  no  service  in
practical  politics.  Nor  are  the  moral  qualities  that  are  required
in  the  higher  spheres  of  statesmanship  those  of  a  hero  or  a
saint.  Passionate  earnestness  and  self-devotion,  complete  con-
centration of  every  faculty  on  an  unselfish  aim,  uncalculating
daring,  a  delicacy  of  conscience  and  a  loftiness  of  aim  far  ex-
ceeding those  of  the  average  of  men,  are  here  likely  to  prove
rather  a  hindrance  than  an  assistance.  The  politician  deals  very
largely  with  the  superficial  and  the  commonplace ;  his  art  is
in  a  great  measure  that  of  skilful  compromise,  and  in  the  con-
ditions of  modern  life  the  statesman  is  likely  to  succeed  the  best
who  possesses  secondary  qualities  to  an  unusual  degree,  who  is
in  the  closest  intellectual  and  moral  sympathy  with  the  average
of  the  intelligent  men  of  his  time,  and  who  pursues  common
ideals  with  more  than  common  ability.  'The  first  quality  of  a
VOL.  V.  B

I

2  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTS KNTK CENTURY. en.  xvni.

prime  minister  in  a  free  country,'  said  Horace  Walpole,  *  is  to
have  more  common  sense  than  any  man.'  Tact,  business  talent,
knowledge  of  men,  resolution,  promptitude  and  sagacity  in  deal-
ing with  immediate  emergencies,  a  character  which  lends  itself
easily  to  conciliation,  diminishes  friction  and  inspires  confidence,
are  especially  needed,  and  they  are  more  likely  to  be  found
among  shrewd  and  enlightened  men  of  the  world  than  among
men  of  great  original  genius  or  of  an  heroic  type  of  character.

In  a  free  country  and  under  a  parliamentary  government  the
qualities  required  for  a  great  statesman  differ  widely  from  those
which  are  needed  under  a  despotism,  and  they  are  so  various  and
dissimilar  that  no  one  has  ever  possessed  them  all  in  an  extra-
ordinary degree.  The  talent  of  an  orator  or  debater  who  can
carry  his  measures  triumphantly  through  parliamentary  contro-
versies ;  the  talent  of  a  tactician  skilful  in  the  difficult  art  of
party  management ;  the  talent  of  an  administrator  who  can  con-
duct the  ordinary  business  of  the  country  with  vigour  and
sagacity ;  the  constructive  talent  which,  when  a  great  change
has  to  be  accomplished,  can  carry  it  out  by  wise  and  well-con-
ceived legislati-on ;  the  political  prescience  which  foresees  the
eflFect  of  measures,  understands  the  tendencies  of  the  time  and
directs  and  modifies  a  policy  in  accordance  with  them,  must  all
meet  in  an  ideal  statesman.  He  must  preserve  the  happy
medium  between  arrogance  and  irresolution,  between  rashness
and  timidity,  under  circumstances  that  are  peculiarly  fitted  to
bring  either  failing  into  relief.  Widely  different  talents  are
required  for  a  minister  in  time  of  peace  and  in  time  of  war,  and
the  qualities  of  mind  and  character  that  exercise  the  most  power-
ful magnetic  influence  over  great  masses  of  men  are  not  always
those  that  win  the  confidence  of  parliaments  or  statesmen.  It  is
possible  for  a  man  to  be  immeasurably  superior  to  his  fellows  in
eloquence,  in  knowledge,  in  dexterity  of  argument,  in  moral
energy  and  in  popular  sympathy,  and  at  the  same  time  plainly
inferior  to  the  average  of  educated  men  in  soundness  and
sobriety  of  judgment.  The  best  man  of  business  is  not  always
the  most  enlightened  statesman,  and  a  great  power  of  foreseeing
and  understanding  the  tendencies  of  his  time  may  be  combined
with  a  great  incapacity  for  managiug  men  or  for  dealing  wit:
daily  difficulties  as  thoy  ari.se.

CH.  xviii.  CHARACTEEISTICS OF STATESMEN.  3

By  the  natural  limitations  of  human  nature  some  of  these
gifts  of  statesmanship  are  sure  to  be  wanting  in  the  greatest
minister,  and  experience  shows  that  the  extraordinary  posses-
sion of  one  of  them  is  often  balance('  by  a  more  than  common
deficiency  in  another.  No  English  statesman  conducted  the
affairs  of  the  nation  at  home  and  abroad,  for  a  considerable
period,  more  skilfully  or  more  prosperously  than  Walpole.
His  administration  probably  saved  England  from  a  prolonged
period  of  disputed  succession  and  gave  her  the  strength  that
carried  her  through  subsequent  wars,  but  he  undoubtedly
lowered  the  moral  tone  of  public  life,  and  he  scarcely  left  a
trace  of  constructive  statesmanship  on  the  Statute  Book.  Chat-
bam  possessed  to  the  highest  degree  the  power  of  commacd
and  the  qualities  that  appeal  to  the  enthusiasm  of  a  nation.
He  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  orators,  one  of  the  greatest  of  war
ministers,  and  his  general  views  of  policy  often  exhibited  a
singular  genius  and  sagacity ;  but  he  had  scarcely  any  talent
for  internal  administration,  and  he  was  utterly  incapable  of  party
management.  Peel  far  surpassed  all  his  contemporaries  in  the
masterly  skill  and  comprehensiveness  with  which  he  could  frame
his  legislative  measures  and  in  the  commanding  knowledge  and
ability  with  which  he  could  carry  them  through  Parliament ;  his
speeches  are  full  of  wide  and  sagacious  surveys  of  the  whole
field  of  politics,  and  in  the  department  of  finance  Huskisson  was
the  only  statesman  of  his  generation  who  could  be  looked  upon
as  his  rival ;  but  he  showed  so  little  of  the  prescience  of  a
statesman  that  on  the  three  most  important  questions  of  his
day — the  questions  of  Catholic  Emancipation,  parliamentary
reform,  and  free  trade — his  mistakes  were  disastrous  to  his
country  and  almost  ruinous  to  his  party ;  and,  although  he
appeared  for  a  time  one  of  the  greatest  of  parliamentary  leaders,
he  left  his  party  dislocated,  impotent,  and  discredited.  His
rival.  Lord  John  Russell,  took  a  foremost  part  in  that  Reform
Bill  which  is  perhaps  the  most  important  legislative  measure  of
the  nineteenth  century,  and  a  considerable  part  in  many  other
measures  of  almost  the  highest  value.  His  political  judgment  on
the  chief  events  of  his  time  was  so  sound,  moderate,  and  sagacious
that  there  was  scarcely  an  opinion  of  his  youth  which  he  was
obliged  to  abandon  in  old  age,  and scarcely  a  line  of  policy

B 2

4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUnY. en.  xviii.

which  he  suggested  that  has  not  been  justified  by  the  event.
Though  not  an  orator,  he  succeeded  both  as  leader  of  the
House  of  Commons  and  as  leader  of  the  Opposition.  He  was
courageous,  earnest,  transparently  straightforward  and  honour-
able, but  yet  he  can  scarcely  be  called  either  a  brilliant,  a  power-
ful, or  a  very  popular  statesman.  A  want  of  tact  and  manage-
ment, an  imperfect  knowledge  of  men,  a  curious  strain  of  party
pedantry  which  showed  itself  in  his  speeches  and  judgments,  an
undue  restlessness  and  independence  when  co-operating  with
other  statesmen,  impaired  his  influence  both  with  his  colleagues
and  with  the  country.

The  most  remarkable  of  all  instances  of  the  combination  of
the  more  dazzling  attributes  of  a  parliamentary  statesman  is  to
be  found  in  the  young  minister  whose  triumph  at  the  election
of  1784  has  been  described  in  the  last  volume.  His  position  at
this  moment  was  one  of  the  most  enviable  and  most  extra-
ordinary in  history.  He  was  but  just  twenty-five,  an  age  when
talents,  knowledge,  and  character  are  with  most  men  completely
immature  and  when  a  politician  who  entered  Parliament  with
great  advantages  is  considered  very  fortunate  if  he  has  attained
the  rank  of  Under-Secretary  and  has  on  a  few  occasions  caught
the  ear  of  the  House.  At  this  age  Pitt  had  attained  a  parlia-
mentary ascendency  which  his  father  had  scarcely  rivalled.  He
had  fought,  with  an  eloquence,  courage,  and  sagacity  which
excited  the  admiration  of  the  whole  nation,  one  of  the  most
desperate  parliamentary  battles  in  English  history,  and  he  had
totally  defeated  an  Opposition  consisting  of  the  majority  of  the
House  of  Commons,  and  directed  by  a  group  of  statesmen  and
orators  of  the  very  highest  eminence.  The  victory  at  the  hust-
ings had  been  decisive.  Nearly  160  of  the  Opposition  had  lost
theii'  seats.  Pitt  found  himself  at  the  head  of  a  majority  which
represented  the  undoubted  sentiments  of  the  country.  He  had
no  colleagues  who  could  for  a  moment  rival  his  influence,  and  by
a  strange  combination  of  circumstances  he  came  to  power  un-
pledged as  to  his  policy,  and  supported  by  a  great  section  of
each  party  in  the  State.

It  was  ail  extraordinary  position,  and  it  soon  appeared  that
Pitt  had  both  Die  talents  and  tlie  clinractcf  to  mnintain  it.
With  one  brief  infcrval lie  conl  iiinrd lo he prime  minister  uf

en.  XVIII.  PITT'S  ELOQUENCE.  5

Ktigland  till  his  death.  For  nearly  nineteen  years  he  was  as
absolute  as  Walpole  in  the  Cabinet  and  the  Parliament,  far
more  powerful  than  Walpole  from  his  hold  upon  the  afiections
and  admiration  of  the  people.

Such  a  statesman  may  have  had  great  defects,  but  he  must
have  had  extraordinary  merits,  and  before  proceeding  with  the
course  of  our  narrative  it  may  be  well  to  attempt  in  one  com-
prehensive picture  to  form  a  general  estimate  of  both.

His  first  and  most  conspicuous  talent  was  that  of  an  orator
or  debater.  The  son  of  the  greatest  of  English  orators,  he  was
destined  almost  from  the  cradle  for  a  parliamentary  career,  and
the  whole  force  and  bent  of  his  intellect  was  ceaselessly  em-
ploved  in  this  one  direction.  His  father  was  accustomed  to
make  him  practise  declamation  when  still  a  child,  and  to  give
him  facility  and  flexibility  of  language  by  making  him  translate
at  sight  from  classical  and  modern  foreign  writers,  attending
rather  to  the  force,  flow,  and  elegance  of  the  language  than  to
exact  fidelity  of  translation.  At  Cambridge  it  was  noticed  how
minutely  he  applied  himself  to  the  study  of  language,  how  care-
fully in  reading  the  classical  writers  he  analysed  their  style,
noted  down  every  forcible  or  happy  expression,  and  especially
compared  the  opposite  speeches  on  the  same  subject,  observing
how  each  speaker  managed  his  own  case,  and  how  he  answered
or  evaded  the  case  of  his  opponents.  In  mathematics  and  in
Locke's  philosophy  he  found  an  admirable  discipline  for  his
reasoning  powers,  and  it  was  remembered  that  Barrow's  sermons
were  recommended  by  Chatham  as  specially  fitted  to  purify  and
invigorate  his  style.  He  was  a  hard  student,  but  there  was
nothing  in  his  studies  that  was  desultory  or  aimless.  Though
he  entered  Parliament  at  twenty-one  he  had  already  been  long
accustomed  to  haunt  the  galleries  of  both  Houses  during  im-
portant debates,  and  it  was  his  practice  while  each  speech  was
proceeding  to  consider  how  it  could  be  answered  and  how
it  could  be  improved.  By  such  methods  he  acquired  what
Coleridge  has  truly  called  '  a  premature  and  unnatural  dexterity
in  the  combination  of  words,'  a  power  of  pouring  forth  with
endless  facility  perfectly  modulated  sentences  of  perfectly  chosen
language,  which  as  far  surpassed  the  reach  of  a  normal  intellect
as  the  feats  of  an  acrobat  exceed  the  capacities  of  a  normal  body.

6  ENGLAND IX THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

He  had,  indeed,  every  requisite  of  a  great  debater :  perfect
self-possession;  an  unbroken  flow  of  sonorous  and  dignified
language;  great  quickness  and  cogency  of  reasoning  and
especially  of  reply ;  an  admirable  gift  of  lucid  and  methof^ical
statement ;  an  extraordinary  skill  in  arranging  the  course  and
symmetry  of  an  unpremeditated  speech ;  a  memory  singularly
strong  and  singularly  accurate.  No  one  knew  better  how  to
turn  and  retort  arguments,  to  seize  in  a  moment  on  a  weak
point  or  an  unguarded  phrase,  to  evade  issues  which  it  was  not
convenient  to  press  too  closely,  to  conceal  if  necessary  his
sentiments  and  his  intentions  under  a  cloud  of  vague,  brilliant,
and  imposing  verbiage.  Without  either  the  fire,  passion,
imagination,  or  histrionic  power  of  his  father,  he  could  entrance
the  House  by  his  sustained  and  lofty  declamation  or  invective,
and  he  employed  with  terrible  effect  the  weapon  of  cutting
sarcasm  and  the  tone  of  freezing  contempt.  Good  judges  com-
plained of  a  '  great  monotony  in  his  intonations,  an  absence  of
variety  in  his  gesture,  an  ungraceful  habit  of  sawing  the  air
with  his  body,'  but  he  had  a  noble  voice,  clear,  powerful  and
melodious,  and  there  was  about  him  an  unvarying  dignity  and
even  majesty  of  manner  which  always  reminded  men  that  he
was  speaking  with  the  authority  of  a  great  minister.

Those  who  read  his  speeches  will  derive  little  from  them
but  disappointment.  What  especially  strikes  the  reader  is
their  extreme  poverty  of  original  thought.  They  are  admirably
adapted  for  their  immediate  purpose,  but  beyond  this  they  are
almost  worthless.  It  has  been  said  with  truth  that  not  one
philosophical  remark,  not  one  image,  not  even  one  pointed
aphorism  out  of  them  has  been  remembered.'  There  is  not
a  trace  in  them  of  the  wide  or  subtle  political  views,  the  ex-
quisite delineations  of  character,  the  deep  insight  into  the
springs  of  human  feeling  and  action  which  make  the  speeches
of  Burke  so  invaluable.  Burke  once  described  Pitt  with  much
bitterness  as  '  the  sublime  of  mediocrity,'  ^  and  it  is  true  tliiit
with  all  his  great  powers  his  mind  seemed  always  to  move  in
the  region  of  the  commonplace. It  was  said  by  his  admirers

'  See the severe but admirably ii.  310-,^29.
acute  and  powctrful  e.'^say  on  I'itt  \>y  ^  Hutlcr's  lieini/iiscr/iccs,  p.  172.

Coleridge. A'ssays  on  his  Own  Times,

CH.  xviii.  PITT'S  ELOQUENCE.  7

that  liis  tlioughts  clothed  themselves  almost  spontaneously  in
the  most  appropriate  and  felicitous  language,  but  we  look  in
vain  for  those  far-reaching,  vivid,  and  imaginative  epithets  and
phrases  which  in  the  speeches  of  his  father,  of  Burke,  and  some-
times of  Grattan,  at  once  arrest  the  attention,  and  open,  as  with
a  sudden  flash,  new  vistas  to  the  mind.  Hardly  any  other  great
speaker  was  so  little  remembered,  and  the  few  phrases  which
are  not  forgotten  are  only  instances  of  the  happy  expression  of
perfectly  commonplace  ideas.  Thus,  when  Erskine  in  a  feeble
speech  repeated  arguments  which  had  been  more  powerfully
stated  by  Fox,  Pitt  began  his  reply, '  The  honourable  and  learned
gentleman  who  succeeded  the  right  honourable  gentleman,
(dtenuating  the  thread  of  his  discourse.'  When  his  health  was
drunk  as  the  saviour  of  Europe,  Pitt  loftily  disclaimed  the  com-
pliment :  '  Europe  is  not  to  be  saved  by  any  single  man.
England  has  saved  herself  by  her  exertions,  and  will,  I  trust,
save  Europe  by  her  example.'

To  a  good  writer  who  knows  that  the  supreme  end  of  his
art  is  to  give  language  the  utmost  meaning  of  which  it  is  sus-
ceptible, to  make  it  reveal  and  distinguish  with  accuracy  and
with  clearness  the  finest  fibres  of  thought,  few  styles  can  be
more  repulsive  than  the  style  of  Pitt.  Redundant  and  copious
beyond  measure,  a  commonplace  thought  is  beaten  out  into
period  after  period,  piled  one  on  another  with  a  monotonous  and
architectural  symmetry,  and  with  a  manifest  desire  to  produce
the  greatest  possible  pomp  and  parade  of  language.  Though
an  admirable  reasoner,  Pitt  was,  in  this  respect,  scarcely  equal
to  Fox.  We  miss  the  firm  grasp,  the  extreme  fairness  which
stated  in  the  strongest  form  the  strongest  argument  of  an
opponent,  the  close  contact  with  the  reality  of  things.  High-
sounding  generalities,  a  kind  of  vague  grandiloquence  which
seemed  to  indicate  a  mind  less  occupied  with  facts  than  with  the
presentation  of  facts,  bore  a  large  part  in  his  speeches,  and,
never  stooping  to  the  familiar,  he  often  failed  to  touch  the
definite  and  the  concrete.  Francis,  who  was  a  very  acute
though  a  very  prejudiced  and  malevolent  critic,  maintained  that
Pitt's  eloquence  was  more  fit  for  declamation  than  for  debate,
and  he  would  allow  him  no  merit  except  a  perfect  elocution,
a sonorous  voice,  and  an astonishing choice and fluency  of

8  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ot.  xvni.

language,  which,  however,  wholly  failed  to  fix  itself  on  the  me-
mory.' Windham,  who  was  an  equally  competent  and  a  less
prejudiced  judge,  spoke  of  Pitt's  '  State  Paper  style,'  and  ex-
pressed his  belief  that  '  he  could  speak  a  King's  Speech  off-
hand.' It  was  generally  acknowledged  that  he  was  superior  to
Fox  in  method  and  arrangement,  in  skill  of  statement,  in  the
more  uniform  and  equable  elevation  of  his  language.  It  was
remarked  by  the  excellent  critics  in  the  reporters'  gallery,  that
it  was  often  difficult  to  follow  the  train  or  sequence  of  Fox's
speeches,  but  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  remembering  what
he  said.  Pitt's  speeches,  on  the  other  hand,  were  perfect  in
their  method,  and  it  was  easy  and  delightful  to  follow  them ;  but
when  the  musical  voice  had  ceased,  it  was  not  always  so  easy  to
remember  what  had  charmed.^

The  canons  of  writing  and  of  speaking  are,  however,  essen-
tially different,  and  the  best  justification  of  Pitt's  rhetoric  is  the
enormous  impression  which,  during  so  many  years,  and  on  so
many  subjects,  it  scarcely  ever  failed  to  make  on  a  highly  edu-
cated audience.  Beporting  in  his  day  was  far  from  perfect,^
and  even  the  most  perfect  reporting  can  never  adequately
convey  the  power  and  charm  of  a  great  orator.  Lord  Holland
has  said  that  those  who  had  heard  the  debates  of  Pitt  and
Fox  in  the  House  of  Commons  had  '  heard  the  art  of  public
and  unpremeditated  speaking,  in  as  great  perfection  as  human
faculties  exercised  in  our  language  can  attain ; '  "*  and  we  have
some  measure  of  their  greatness  in  the  comparisons  that  were

'  Parkes  and  Merivale'j  Life  of  claraation,  not  lowered  in  its  tone  for
Fifnicix,  ii.  4G9,  470.  a  moment;  not  a  particle  of  all  this
-  Butler's  Itcmlnucences,  p.  160.  is  preserved  in  Ihe  report  lately
'  Lord  Grenville  mentioned  to  publislied,  though  said  to  be  done  by
Ko^^crs  the  great  injustice  which  re-  Canning.' — Horner's  Life.  \.y>  ^^l-  A.
jiorLiiig  did  to  the  speeclies  of  Pitt.  writer  in  the  Annual  llcAjiKter  re-
Jle  said  that  there  were  only  two  marks  :' It  is  unjust  to  lean  too  much
Bpeeches — that  on  the  Sinking  Fund,  on  particular  words  and  phrases  at-
and  that  on  the  answer  to  I'onaparte's  tributed  to  the  members  of  either
letter  to  George  III.,  corrected  by  House.  Our  public  reports  of  pro-
Pitt,  himself,  llogers's  ItccoUvctions,  cccdings  in  rarlianient  are  not  suffi-
pp.  ]  88-1 'JO.  I'erliaps  his  greatest  ciently  accurate  for  such  a  purpose.'
Hpeech  was  that  on  the  renewal  of  — An.  11  eg.  1791,  p.  112.  This  ouglit
the  war  in  180:5,  of  which  Fox  finely  to  be  remembered  when  forming  a
Haid  lliat  'if  iJemostbencs  had  been  judgment  of  the  ahuost  insane  lan-
])ri'Hf'rit  he  must  have  admired  and  gunge  that  was  often  attributed  to
might  have  envi(;d.'  Horner  says  of  IJurke,  who  was  a  very  rapid  speaker,
it:  'I'itt's  peroration  was  a  conipletc  '  Ilnlliind's  Memoirs  of  the  Whig
half-hour  of liis most powerful  du-  Purlij,  ii.  38.

CH.  xvui.  PITT'S ELOQUENCE.  9

made  between  tliem  and  the  most  illustrious  of  their  suc-
cessors. Chateaubriand,  having  attended  the  debates  of  the
House  of  Commons  when  an  exile  during  the  French  Revolu-
tion, returned  to  London  as  ambassador  at  a  time  when  Canning
and  Grey  were  in  the  zenith  of  their  powers,  and  he  has  left  a
most  emphatic  testimony  to  the  great  decadence  that  had  taken
place,'  and  Wilberforce  only  pronounced  what  appears  to  have
been  the  almost  universal  judgment  when  he  asserted  that,  as
an  orator  or  debater,  Canning,  in  his  most  brilliant  days,  be-
longed to  an  altogether  lower  plane  than  the  two  great  rivals
who  had  preceded  him.^  Pitt  is  said  to  have  himself  defended
the  extreme  redundance  of  his  speeches,  on  the  ground  that  he
preferred  it  to  the  repetitions  of  Fox,  and  that  one  or  other  is
absolutely  necessary  for  any  speaker  who  would  thoroughly  and
adequately  impress  his  views  on  a  popular  audience.^  The
difference  between  the  reasoning  of  the  two  orators  was,  no
doubt,  partly  due  to  difference  of  intellectual  character,  but
partly  also  to  the  fact  that  Fox  was  nearly  always  in  opposition,
while  Pitt  was  nearly  always  in  office.  In  a  parliamentary
government  a  minister  is  constantly  obliged  to  speak  when
it  would  be  better  to  keep  silence,  and  it  must  be  one  of  his
most  frequent  objects  to  avoid  disclosing  his  opinions  and  inten-
tions, to  evade  questions  which  cannot  be  safely  brought  to  an
immediate  issue,  to  keep  open  to  himself  more  than  one  course
of  action,  to  secure  the  concurrence  of  men  of  more  than  one
shade  of  opinion.  When  a  great  master  of  language  finds  him-
self in  such  a  position,  he  will  naturally  learn  to  cultivate  a
style  of  eloquence  adapted  to  its  exigencies.  He  will  often
very  deliberately  substitute  words  for  things,  avoid  rather  than
aim  at  precision,  and  employ  language  for  the  purpose  of
obscuring  rather  than  defining  thought.  Such  a  mode  of
speaking  seldom  fails  to  exercise  a  pernicious  influence  both
on  intellect  and  character,  but  it  must  be  judged,  like  other
things,  by  its  adaptation  to  its  end,  and  not  by  mere  literary
tests.

Pitt  had  an  unlimited  command  of  this  kind  of  rhetoric.
He  had,  also,  to  a  very  remarkable  degree,  the  inestimable  gift

'  See  a  remarkable  passage  in  his  ^ Wilh^rf area's  Life,  v.  310.

Essai  sur  la  Llttiraturc  Amjlaise,  ii.  *  Gill'ord.

2;ii),  210.

10  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xvni.

of  reticence,  a  gift  wliich  is  rarely  united  with  so  great  a
wealth  of  words.  No  speaker  was  more  difScult  to  pro-
voke to  a  reply  when  an  obstinate  or  a  dignified  silence  was
most  conducive  to  his  interest.^  His  self-control  was  almost  un-
failing, and  he  had  a  most  rapid  and  intuitive  sagacity  in  read-
ing the  temper  both  of  the  House  and  of  the  public.  He  had  a
good  political  judgment,  but,  beyond  all  things,  a  most  excellent
House  of  Commons  judgment.  The  House  seemed  perpetually
before  his  mind,  and  Windham  complained  with  truth  that  in
preparing  his  measures  he  thought  less  of  their  operation  than
of  their  reception,  and  esjaecially  of  the  manner  in  which  they
would  look  in  a  parliamentary  statement.^  There  have  been
wiser  statesmen,  and  there  have  been  greater  orators,  but  no
other  English  minister  was  so  skilled  in  the  management  alike
of  a  party  and  of  a  debate,  in  the  art  of  knowing  how  far
questions  might  be  pressed  without  danger  or  compromised
without  discredit.  Amid  the  passion  and  provocation  of  debate,
in  sittings  that  were  prolonged  till  the  streaks  of  morning  had
begun  to  illuminate  the  horizon,  at  times  when  a  thousand  cares
unconnected  with  the  immediate  subject  of  discussion  were
weighing  on  his  mind,  at  times  when  great  public  dangers  were
impending,  and  when  the  interests  of  the  nation  were  shame-
fully subordinated  to  party  passions,  he  scarcely  ever  lost  his
self-command  or  his  dignity,  his  supreme  good  sense,  or  his
authority  over  the  House.  Burke,  who  was  in  some  respects
an  immeasurably  greater  man,  often  emptied  the  House  by  his
discursiveness,  and  excited  ridicule  or  disgust  by  extravagances
of  passion,  taste,  and  metaphor,  which  seemed  scarcely  com-
patible with  sanity.  Fox,  in  intellectual  powers,  was  probably
fully  equal  to  Pitt,  but  through  his  whole  political  life  the
indiscretion  and  violence  of  some  of  his  own  speeches  were
the  chief  obstacles  to  his  career.  But  the  young  minister,  in
the  moments  of  his  most  vehement  declamation,  was  always
essentially  calm  and  collected,  and  his  com])lete  mastery  over
himself  was  one  of  the  great  secrets  of  his  influence  over
others.

•  I  have  noticed  (vol.  iv.  pp.  .301, For  a  later  example  see  Wraxall's
302)  how  eminently  he  displayed  this Post/i unions  Hfeiiwirs,  iii.  p.  354.
gift  in  the  great  contest  of  1783-1784.  *  Iloriier's  Life,  i.  315.

en.  XVIII.  PITT'S  PRIVATE CHARACTER.  11

Like  William  III.,  to  whom  in  character  he  bore  some  re-
semblance, he  was  more  wonderful  as  a  very  young  man  than
as  a  man  of  mature  life.  Intellect  and  character  with  him
had  both  developed  prematurely,  and  acquired  their  full  force
at  an  age  when  with  other  men  they  are  in  the  bud.  As  was
inevitable,  however,  such  a  development  was  somewhat  onesided.
It  was  truly  said  of  him  that  he  never  was  a  boy,  and,  owing  to
the  strange  circumstances  of  his  life,  he  knew  very  little  of  men
or  manners  except  as  they  were  exhibited  in  political  life,  and
Been  through  the  unnatural  medium  of  a  great  ministerial
position.  His  knowledge  of  public  opinion,  and  especially  of
parliamentary  opinion,  was  rarely  at  fault,  but  he  had  not  much
skill  in  discriminating  individual  character,  and  little  knowledge
of  common  life.^

In  the  noble  portraits  of  him  which  Gainsborough  has  left,
it  is  not,  I  think,  difficult  to  detect  an  expression  of  purit}?-  and
almost  of  unworldliness  as  of  one  who  had  never  succumbed  to
the  chief  temptations  of  youth.  Natural  shyness,  weak  health,
and  a  home  education  strengthened  this  purity  of  nature,  but
contributed  also  to  the  stiffiiess  and  awkwardness  of  his  manner.
His  indifference  to  female  charms  was  the  constant  subject  of
coarse  taunts  which  exhibit  only  too  clearly  the  fashionable
morals  of  the  time.  Neither  play,  nor  the  turf,  nor  the  theatre
could  allure  him,  and  no  pleasure  was  ever  suffered  to  divert  him
from  the  paths  of  ambition  and  of  public  duty.^

In  one  point  alone  could  his  private  character  be  justly
assailed.  It  is  said  that  when  a  boy,  being  very  weak,  his
physician  ordered  him  large  quantities  of  port  wine,  and  he  was
accustomed  to  employ  the  same  means  to  sustain  his  strength
and  spirits  during  political  conflict.  Grenville  related  how  he
had  seen  him  swallow  a  whole  bottle  of  port  in  tumblerfuls
before  going  down  to  the  House,  and,  although  his  power  of
bearing  wine  was  very  great,  yet  towards  the  end  of  his  life  his
shaking  hand  and  his  bloated  features  indicated  plainly  the
excess  which  was  undermining  his  constitution. This  vice  was

'  See  iTbrwer's  Zt/b,  i.  pp.  315,  316.  sion  dis{.laj'ed  when  joining  in  some

Wllberforce' s  Life,  ii.  92,  93. Bland  games  of  chance,  but  he  adds, 'He

Burgc'S  Papers,  p.  87.  perceived  their  increiising  fascination,

-  Wilberforce  noticed 'the  intense  and  soon after  suddenly  abandoned

earnestness  '  wliich  Pitt  on  one  occa-  them  for  ever.' — Life,  i.  p.  18.

12  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii,

sliared  by  probably  the  majority  of  the  statesmen  who  were  his
contemporaries.  His  friend  Dundas  was  especially  addicted  to
it,  and  it  is  related  that  on  one  occasion  neither  statesman  was
in  a  condition  to  answer  an  attack  in  the  House  of  Commons.
J3ut  with  this  single  exception  there  is,  I  believe,  no  evidence
that  Pitt's  excessive  drinking  was  ever  suffered,  in  public  life,
to  obscure  the  clearness  of  his  intellect  or  to  impair  the  cold
and  commanding  dignity  of  his  manner.^

His  integrity  was  not  only  unquestionable  but  unquestioned.
We  have  already  seen  how,  when  his  political  position  was  most
precarious,  and  when  he  had  scarcely  any  private  means,  he
gave  the  rich  sinecure  of  Clerk  of  the  Pells  to  Colonel  Barre
instead  of  retaining  it  for  himself.  In  1788,  during  the  debates
on  the  Regency,  when  it  appeared  likely  that  he  would  be  at
once  obliged  to  retire  from  office  and  to  seek  a  livelihood  at  the
bar,  some  bankers  and  other  rich  men  of  London  agreed  to  offer
him  a  free  gift  of  100,000/.,  but  he  peremptorily  refused  to
accept  it.^  His  indifference  to  money  matters  amounted  indeed
to  a  fault.  He  held  the  two  offices  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury
and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  in  1792  the  King  insisted
on  conferring  on  him  the  Wardenship  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  thus
raising  his  official  income  to  at  least  10,000?.  a  year ;  yet,  though
he  had  no  expensive  tastes,  through  simple  negligence  of  his
private  affairs  and  the  unchecked  dishonesty  and  extravagance
of  his  servants  he  was  soon  overwhelmed  with  debt.  In  1801
his  friends  raised  12,000/.  to  relieve  him  from  his  most  pressing
debts.

For  mere  honorary  distinctions  he  cared  as  little  as  for  money.
Though  he  distributed  peerages  with  a  lavish  and  culpable  pro-
fusion he  never  desired  one  for  himself,  and  he  declined  the  blue
riblj(jn  when  it  was  offered  him.  To  lead  the  House  of  Com-
mons, to  wield  the  energies  of  England,  was  his  one  jjassion,  and

'  Rce Wraxall's Historical Me-  was  unable  to  speak. The best  is

vitdm,  ii.pp.  472-474  ;  Kofi;eis's  Ilt'col-  said  to  be  the  following:
l/rliiinx;  Lady  Minto's  Life  of  Sir  G.  ^  Pitt.  I  cannot  see  the  Speaker!

Kllii>t,\ p.  189. S(!Voial  paiticnlars  Hal,  can  you?

(in  tlic  subject  collected  from  various  '  Du.iulaH. Not  see  the Speaker  1

•  |iiait-rr.H  will  be  found  in 'J"it)il).s's  Cm-  Ilan;^  it  1  I  .see  two.'
tiini  of  Awcilotvn,  \.  p)).  50,  RI. A  -  SlanLope's  Life  of  PlLt,  ii.  pp.

number of cpi(,Tan)s were written  IG,  17.
about  the  one  occasion  on  which  he

en.  XVIII.  HIS IIAUGIITINESS.  13

the  whole  force  of  his  mind  and  character  was  devoted  to  it.
His  tall,  slender  figure,  habitually  drawn  up  to  its  utmost  height,
his  head  thrown  back,  his  fixed  and  abstracted  gaze,  the  repel-
ling stiffness  of  his  bow,  his  pale  face,  which  seemed  nearly
always  when  in  repose  to  wear  an  expression  of  forbidding
sternness  or  of  supercilious  disdain,  and  which  could  darken  at
times  with  a  peculiar  and  domineering  fierceness,  all  indicated  a
man  who  was  more  fitted  to  command  than  to  attract.  The  un-
bending stateliness  of  his  public  manner  and  diction  would  have
been  indeed  intolerable  to  a  popular  assembly  of  English  gentle-
men had  it  not  been  united  with  a  singular  soundness  and
moderation  of  judgment,  with  great  calmness  of  temper  and
with  transcendent  powers  of  eloquence  and  command.  He  was
popular  in  the  House,  but  it  was  the  kind  of  popularity  which
a  great  general  always  enjoys  among  his  soldiers  when  they  have
an  unbounded  confidence  in  his  skill.  The  House  of  Commons,  as
Bolingbroke  once  said, '  like  a  pack  of  hounds,  grows  fond  of  the
man  who  shows  them  game  and  by  whose  halloo  they  are  used
to  be  encouraged.'  No  statesman  was,  however,  more  destitute
of  some  of  the  qualities  that  generally  lead  to  popularity,  and
it  is  evident  from  the  correspondence  of  his  contemporaries  how
often  he  galled  the  self-respect  or  the  vanity  of  those  with
whom  he  came  in  contact.  '  I  know  the  coldness  of  the  climate
you  go  into,'  wrote  Shelburne  to  one  who  was  about  to  have  an
interview  with  Pitt,  '  and  that  it  requires  all  your  animation  to
produce  a  momentary  thaw.'  •  '  This  personage,'  wrote  Sir
James  Harris,  who  then  knew  Pitt  only  in  his  public  capacity,
*  is,  I  take  it,  composed  of  veiy  hard  materials,  and  there  enters
a  good  deal  of  marble  into  his  composition.'  Lord  Carmarthen,
when  Secretary  of  State,  was  almost  driven  to  resignation  by
the  haughtiness  with  which  Pitt  compelled  him,  when  unwell,  to
be  present  at  a  Court  ceremony  ;  and  the  '  hauteur  '  of  his  manner,
the  inattention,  often  amounting  to  discourtesy,  with  which  he
treated  both  his  colleagues  and  his  followers,  was  a  frequent
subject  of  complaint.^  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  House  this
aspect  of  his  character  was  naturally  still  more  strongly  felt,  and

'  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shelburne, ii.  257,  2o8.  Buckinpfham's  Courts  avd
iii.  t22.  Cfihinets,  ii.  154. Rose's  Diary,  i.  p.

"^  See  Malmeshiiri/  Correajjondencc, 131.

14  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

Burke,  in  one  of  his  confidential  letters,  speaks  bitterly  of  '  this
age  when  boys  of  twenty  have  got  to  the  head  of  affairs  and  bear
themselves  with  all  the  sour  and  severe  insolence  of  sixty,  and
which  even  from  sixty  would  be  intolerable.'  ^  In  his  speeches
there  was  a  total  absence  of  the  familiarity,  the  variety  of  tone,
the  happy  illustrations,  the  flexibility  and  simplicity  of  Fox,
and  Pitt  scarcely  ever  in  public  condescended  to  anything  more
nearly  approaching  a  jest  than  an  icy  sarcasm.  His  relation  to
his  party  was  quite  unlike  that  of  Fox  and  North.  He  stood
cold,  solitary,  lofty,  and  inaccessible.  Even  the  roll  and  splendour
of  his  declamation,  though  it  never  failed  to  fascinate  the  House,
had  little  genuine  warmth  and  little  power  of  moving  the
passions.  It  was  a  glow  of  language  rather  than  of  feeling,  the
glitter  of  the  sunlight  upon  the  snow.

Exaggerated  pride  and  extreme  avarice  of  power  were  the
chief  defects  of  such  a  character.  Indomitable  resolution  was
its  great  merit.  It  was  said  of  him  that, '  though  his  consummate
judgment  enabled  him  with  singular  felicity  to  avoid  expres-
sions necessarily  productive  of  personal  collision,  he  scarcely
ever  receded,  apologised,  or  betrayed  any  apprehension  of  con-
sequences.' ^  No  statesman  ever  exhibited  political  courage  in
a  higfher  degree  than  William  Pitt.  He  showed  it  when  as  a
young  man  of  twenty-four  he  confronted  the  united  powers  of
Fox,  Burke,  and  Sheridan,  supported  by  a  large  majority  of  the
House  of  Commons.  He  showed  it  during  the  Regency  Debates
when  it  seemed,  for  a  time,  as  if  the  whole  fabric  of  his  power
was  giving  way,  and  he  showed  it  not  less  conspicuously  amid
the  accumulating  misfortunes  that  clouded  his  last  days.  What-
ever faults  of  strategy  or  administration  he  displayed  in  the
conduct  of  the  great  French  war,  he  at  least  never  flinched  or
faltered;  and  he  inspired  with  his  own  proud  self-confidence  both
the  Parliament  and  the  country.  The  haughty  spirit,  however,
which  was  never  known  to  bend,  was  at  last  broken  by  the
disasters  of  TJlm  and  Austerlitz,  and  the  light  which  had  so
long  guided  the  fortunes  of  England  sank  in  a  darkness  which
was  not  of  tlio  sunset  but  of  the  eclipse.

'  Lady Minto's TAfc of Sir O.  *  Wraxall, Posthumous Memoirs,

JClliot,  i.  p.  IH. This  was  written  in ii.  'ii.T>,  346.
17»0.

C7T.  xvrii.  HIS HAPPY TE^MPER.  15

Such  was  Pitt  as  lie  appeared  in  public  to  the  gaze  of  men.
There  was,  however,  another  and  a  very  different  Pitt  known
to  a  few  intimate  friends.  Baxter,  in  a  remarkable  page  of
his  autobiography,  has  noticed  that  Cromwell,  whose  figure
dominates  so  sternly  and  so  grandly  over  the  England  of  the
Commonwealth,  was  '  naturally  of  such  vivacity,  hilarity,  and
alacrity,  as  another  man  hath  when  he  has  drunken  a  cup  too
much.'  The  same  contrast  between  public  and  private  life  may
be  detected  in  the  case  of  Pitt.  When  he  was  among  the  few
whom  he  thoroughly  trusted ;  when  the  reserve  and  the  shyness
he  nearly  always  exhibited  in  the  presence  of  strangers  had  passed
away,  he  could  cast  aside  both  the  cares  and  the  dignity  of
office,  and  become  one  of  the  most  charming  and  even  one  of
the  gayest  companions.  The  wonderful  quickness  and  the
wonderful  self-control  which  he  exhibited  in  public  life  then
took  the  form  of  the  readiest  but  most  inoffensive  wit,  and  of  a
temper  which  was  as  amiable  as  it  was  imperturbable.  '  He
was,'  said  Wilberforce,  '  the  wittiest  man  I  ever  knew,  and,  what
was  quite  peculiar  to  himself,  had  at  all  times  his  wit  under
entire  control.'  ^  '  His  temper,'  wrote  George  Eose,  '  was,  I
think,  the  sweetest  I  ever  knew.'  '  The  powerful  energies  of  his
character  softened  into  the  most  perfect  complacency  and  sweet-
ness of  disposition  in  the  circles  of  private  life,  the  pleasures  of
which  no  man  ever  more  cheerfully  enjoyed.'  ^  '  He  was  en-
dowed,' said  Lord  Wellesley,  '  beyond  any  man  of  his  time
whom  I  knew,  with  a  gay  heart  and  a  social  spirit.  .  .  .  He  was
a  most  affectionate,  indulgent,  and  benevolent  friend,  and  so
easy  of  access,  that  all  his  acquaintances  in  any  embarrassment
would  rather  resort  to  him  for  advice  than  to  any  person  who
might  be  supposed  to  have  more  leisure.'  ^  '  He  was,'  said  Lord
Malmesbury,  '  the  most  forgiving  and  easy-tempered  of  men.'  *

Two  kindred  qualities  which  contribute  greatly  to  lighten

the  burdens  of  public  life  he  possessed  to  a  remarkable  degree.

The  courage  with  which  he  was  so  pre-eminently  endowed  was

always  sustained  and  coloured  by  a  strong  hopefulness. '  He

was,'  Addington  was  accustomed  to  say,  '  the  most  sanguine  man

I  ever  knew,'^  and  those  who  will study  his  letters during

'  Wilberforces  Life,  i.  18.  ''  Diaries,  iv.  185.

2  Eose's  Diary,  ii.  260,  289.  *  Pellew's  Life  of  Sidmouth,  i.  p.

»  Ibid.  ii.  294.  72.

]  6  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xviii.

some  of  the  most  critical  periods  of  his  life  will  hardly  fail  to
be  struck  with  the  truth  of  the  saying.  He  had  also  to  a  rare
degree  the  inestimable  gift  of  turning  the  cui-rent  of  his  thoughts,
and  casting  aside  the  pressure  of  care.  It  is  one  of  the  powers
in  which  men  differ  the  most,  and  one  of  those  which  contribute
most  largely  to  the  happiness  and  usefulness  of  life.  It  is
essentially  physical,  and  with  Pitt  it  was,  no  doubt,  closely
connected  with  that  singular  capacity  for  long,  deep,  and
unbroken  sleep,  which  he  retained  in  the  most  anxious  periods
of  his  life.  On  one  occasion,  after  an  unusual  strain  of  labour
and  anxiety,  he  is  said  to  have  slept  continuously  for  more  than
sixteen  hours. ^

Amid  the  accumulating  calamities  of  his  last  years  his
temper,  which  had  once  been  so  gay  and  delightful,  is  said  to
have  clouded,^  but  even  till  near  the  end  there  were  times  when
he  was  more  like  a  boisterous  boy  than  a  careworn  statesman.

In  1804  Sir  William  Napier,  the  future  historian  of  the  Penin-
sular War,  being  then  a  boy  of  between  eighteen  and  nineteen,
stayed  for  some  time  with  him  at  Putney,  and  he  has  left  a  most
curious  and  graphic  account  of  his  host.  Pitt  usually  returned
to  dinner  somewhat  exhausted,  and  drank  the  greater  part  of  a
bottle  of  port  in  a  rapid  succession  of  glasses,  but  when  he  had
recovered  his  strength  from  this  stimulant  he  ceased  to  drink.
His  conversation  was  then  always  gay,  good-natured,  humorous,
and  sparkling  with  amusing  anecdotes.  He  liked  boys,  and
could  put  them  at  once  and  completely  at  their  ease,  and  he
joined  in  their  games  not  merely  with  condescension  but  with
every  appearance  of  genuine  hilarity  and  delight.  On  one  occa-
sion. Lady  Hester  Stanhope,  two  boys  of  the  Stanhope  family,
and  Napier  himself,  determined  to  blacken  Pitt's  face  with
burnt  cork,  which  he  strenuously  resisted,  belabouring  his
assailants  with  a  cushion.  In  the  midst  of  the  boisterous  scene
a  servant  announced  that  Lord  Castlereagh  and  Lord  Liverpool
desired  to  see  the  Prune  Minister  on  business.  They  were
ushered  into  another  room  and  the  game  still  for  some  time
colli inucd,  wlien  Pitt  said  he  must  not  keep  the  grandees  any

'  WraTin}],  PofffJiiimnvs  Mnwoirs,'n.  *  .See  tlie  remarks  of  T-onl  Gron-

pp.  .TI7,  .'{18.  fiinnhoim's  Li/c  (if  1 'it f^,  vHlc,  llogcrs's  llfcollccluiii.s,i)i).  188,
iii.  p.  3'J.  ISO.

CH.  XVIII.  PITT'S PRIVATE  LIFE.  17

longer  waiting;  water  and  a  towel  were  brouglit;  the  face  of
the  minister  was  washed  ;  the  basin  was  hid  under  a  sofa,  and
his  two  colleagues  were  admitted.  Napier  was  surprised  at  their
deferential  and  almost  obsequious  manner,  but  much  more  at
the  sudden  transformation  that  passed  over  Pitt.  '  His  tall,  un-
gainly, bony  figure  seemed  to  grow  to  the  ceiling,  his  head  was
thrown  back,  his  eyes  were  fixed  immovably,'  and  apparently  com-
pletely regardless  of  those  who  were  before  him.  He  listened  to
what  they  had  to  say,  answered  them  in  curt  cold  sentences, '  and
finally,  with  an  abrupt,  stiff  inclination  of  the  body,  but  without
casting  his  eyes  down,  disinissed  them.  Then,  turning  to  us
with  a  laugh,  caught  up  his  cushions  and  renewed  our  fight.' '

It  is  impossible  to  read  this  account  witliout  remembering
the  theatrical  attitude  of  superiority  and  excessive  dignity  which
the  elder  Pitt  was  accustomed  to  assume  in  his  intercoui'se  witli
his  colleagues  and  his  subordinates.  The  son  was  not  indeed,
like  the  father,  by  nature  a  consummate  actor.  He  was  stiif
and  awkward  in  person  and  manner  ;  his  countenance  had  but
little  variety  of  expression,  and  his  voice  but  little  variety  of
tone,  and  he  had  no  taste  for  ceremony  and  display.  In  private
he  was  perfectly  simple  and  unaffected,  and  in  the  life  of  country

'  Bruce's  Life  of  Sir W.  Najiicr,  at bj' the turnpike keeper. Tbey

i.  28-32. Lord  Holland  also  notices  were Pitt, Tliurlow, and Diinda.s.

as  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Pitt  According  to another  version,  liow-

'  his  eye  in  the  air.' He  did  not  know  ever,  they  knocked  at  the  door  of  a

Pitt  in  private  life,  but  speaks  of  tlie  farmer  to ask  their  way,  and  were

conflicting  accounts  of  his  conversa-  fired  at  as  housebreakers. Compare

tion. Some  said  it  was  '  occasionally,  Wraxall,  Hist.  Mem.  ii.  473; Atick-

playful  in the extreme and  always  lajul Correspondence, i. 360  ; The

good-humoured and brilliant,' and  Molliad, p. 37 ; Quarterly Ilerlerv,

some  that  it '  was  either  excessively  xiii.  p.  211. Chateaubriand  gives  a

childish  or  very  sarcastic' — Memoirs  vivid  picture  of  Pitt  as  he  appeared

of  the  Wkirj  Party,  11.1^1x33,  i2. The  to a stranger: '  M. Pitt  en habit

journals of Wilberforce  abundantly  noir,  epee  a  poignee  d'acier  au  cote,

show  the  high,  and  sometimes  boiste-  chapeau  noix  sous  le bras,  montait,

rous,  spirits  of  Pitt,  when  among  his  enjaiubant  deux  ou  trois  marches  a

intimate friends. Speaking  of one  lafois. II  ne  trouvait  sur  son  jaassyge

visit to Wimbledon he says, 'We  que  trois  ouquatre  emigres  desoeuvres;

found  one  morning  the  fruits  of  Pitt's  laissant tomber  sur  nous  un  regard

earlier  rising,  in  the  careful  sowing  of  dedaigneux,  11  passait,  le  nez  au  vent,

the  garden  beds  with  the  fragments  la  tigure  pale. Ce grand financier

of  a  dress  hat  in  which  Piydcr  had  n'avait  aucun  ordre  chez  lui ; point

overnight  come  down  from  the  opera.'  d'heures  reglees  pour  ses  rei)as  ou  son

—  Wilberforce 's Life, i. 28. There  sommeil,  .  .  .  mal  vetu,  sans  plaisir,

was  a  strange  story  in 1784  or  1785  sans  passion,  avide  de  pouvoir,  il  me-

that  one  night  three  drunken  horse-  prisait  les  honneurs  et  ne  voulait  etre

men galloped through a turnpike  que  William Pitt.' — Essai  sur  la  Lit-

witliout  paying  the  toll,  and  were  tiretl  teraturc  Anylaise.

VOL.  V.  C

18  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

houses,  which  speedily  discloses  the  superficial  foibles  of  manner
and  temper,  he  appears  always  to  have  made  a  favourable  im-
pression.^ But  the  repelling  and  frigid  dignity  of  his  public
manner  was  exaggerated  and  overstrained,  and  if  it  grew  in  the
first  instance  naturally  out  of  his  character  and  his  position,
it  appears  to  have  been  sedulously  maintained  for  the  pur-
pose of  authority  and  command.  Once  and  once  only  in
his  long  career  did  his  majestic  self-control  wholly  fail.  It
was  when  the  vote  was  carried  which  pronounced  his  old  friend
and  colleague.  Lord  Melville,  guilty  of  peculation  It  was
noticed  that  Pitt  then  drew  the  cocked  hat  which  he  was
accustomed  to  wear,  more  deeply  over  his  forehead ;  and  some  of
his  faithful  friends  gathered  round  him,  to  conceal  from  the
triumphant  Opposition  the  tears  that  were  trickling  down  his
cheek.^

We  must  now  pass  to  the  more  difficult  task  of  attempting
to  form  an  estimate  of  his  character  as  a  minister,  remembering
that  for  nearly  nineteen  years  he  exercised  an  almost  absolute
authority  over  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  that  for  nearly
nine  of  these  years  the  country  was  at  perfect  peace.

There  were,  in  the  first  place,  some  consequences  arising
from  his  ascendency  which  were  in  a  great  degree  independent
of  the  measures  he  introduced.  We  have  seen  that  the  nature
of  the  Cabinet,  and  the  relation  of  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury
to  his  colleagues,  had  long  been  unsettled  questions  in  the
British  Constitution.  According  to  one  theory  each  minister
is  a  servant  of  the  Crown,  responsible  for  his  own  department,
and  with  little  or  no  dependence  on  his  colleagues.  According
to  the  other  theory,  the  Cabinet  is  a  strictly  homogeneous  body,
and  there  is  one  minister  whose  special  charge  is  to  direct  and
give  unity  to  its  policy.  It  had  been  the  manifest  wish  of  the
King  to  revive  the  former  system,  under  which  he  could  be  the
true  director  of  the  national  policy,  and  in  the  first  'weak
ministries  of  the  reign  the  greatest  divisions  of  opinion  and  of

'  George  Nort.li,  who  met  liim  at  Party,  i.  p.  31.  See,  too,  the  Malmes-
thc  country  house  of  t)io  Duke  of  hiin/ JJuirirs,  \v.  IIJI.  Lord  Mahiics-
liutlaiul  ;it  ;i  tiuio  when  jjarty  r;incour  bury  dcHcrihod  his  manners  in  a
wiiH  peculiarly  stronf^,  wrote  tliat  lie  country  liousc  as 'quite  those  of  aa
was  Horry  to  find  that  'so  bad  a  accomplished  idler.' — lb.  p.  317.
polit  ician  was  so  very  pleasant  a  man.'  *  lb.  p.  lUT.
-Lord Holland's  .l/riu.  of  the Whig

CH.  xvm.  niS RELATIONS TO THE KING.  19

authority  subsisted.  Lord  North,  though  personally  extremely
subservient  to  the  King-,  had  a  greater  ascendency  in  his  own
Cabinet  than  most  of  his  predecessors,  but  he  always  disclaimed
the  title  of  Prime  Minister  as  unknown  to  the  Constitution.*
But  whatever  name  might  be  employed,  there  could  be  at  least
no  question  of  the  absolute  authority  which  Pitt  maintained
over  his  colleagues.  It  was  not  that  he  did  not  permit,  even  to
a  culpable  extent,  open  questions  among  men  in  office.  It  was
not  that  the  Eang  did  not  exercise,  during  the  whole  course  of
his  ministry,  a  constant  advising  influence  over  the  policy  of
the  Cabinet.  On  the  questions,  indeed,  of  parliamentary  reform
and  of  the  impeachment  of  Hastings,  Pitt  adopted  a  line  of
policy  very  repugnant  to  the  King,  but  in  general  he  showed  an
evident  desire  to  abstain  from  any  course  which  might  be  in
conflict  with  the  royal  wish.  At  the  same  time  he  was  too
strong  a  minister  either  to  pursue  a  dictated  policy  or  to  tolerate
cabals  against  his  power,  and  the  old  system  of  a  divided  Cabinet,
of  '  King's  friends  '  maintained  in  office  for  the  purpose  of  con-
trolling, and,  if  commanded,  overthrowing  their  chief,  now  came
finally  and  decisively  to  an  end.  Justly  confident  in  his  name
and  in  his  talents,  in  the  support  of  parliament  and  of  the
country,  and  in  the  impossibility  of  replacing  him,  Pitt  occupied
a  position  wholly  difierent  from  that  of  the  early  ministers  of
the  reign.  His  tone  towards  the  King  was  uniformly  respectful
but  formal  and  distant,  equally  removed  from  the  domineering
arrogance  of  Grenville  and  Bedford,  from  the  subservience  of
Bute  and  North,  and  from  the  spasmodic  and  emotional  loyalty
of  Chatham.  The  King  never  appears  to  have  bestowed  on
him  the  full  favour  which  he  once  bestowed  on  Bute  and  North,
but  he  concurred  in  the  general  lines  of  his  policy;  he  was
bound  to  him  by  a  strong  obligation  of  gratitude ;  he  saw  in
him  the  only  barrier  against  a  Whig  ascendency,  and  he  was
not  insensible  to  the  immense  increase  of  his  own  popularity,

'  See  an interesting letter  from  an officer  unknown to  the  law  of

the daughter of Lord North to  Great  Britain  and  inconsistent  with

Brougham in the appendix of  the Constitution,' and that Sir R.

Brougham's  Statesmen  of  the  Time  of  Walpole  had  '  for  many  years  acted  as

George  III. In 1741 a  number  of  sucli  by  taking  upon  himself  the  chief,

peers  drew  up  a  protest  against  the  if  not  the  sole,  direction  of  affairs.'—

government  of  Walpole  on  the  ground  Rogers's Protests of  the Lords, ii.

tliat  '  a  sole  or  tven  a  first  minister  is  p.  10.

c  -z

20 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xvm.

wliicli  was  a  consequence  of  the  popularity  of  his  minister.
The  conduct  of  Pitt  on  the  Regency  question  touched  him  more
sensibly,  and  by  a  strange  felicity  it  was  at  the  same  time  in
the  highest  degree  conducive  to  ministerial  authority,  for  it
established  the  doctrine  that  during  the  incapacity  of  the  King
the  practical  government  of  the  country  must  devolve  upon
the  minister.

In  this  manner  the  conflict  of  1784,  like  many  others  in
English  history,  ended  in  a  compromise.  The  King  had
completely  triumphed  over  the  Coalition  which  he  hated,  and
his  popularity  in  the  country  was  enormously  increased,  but  the
result  of  the  conflict  was  to  establish  finally  that  system  of
ministerial  authority  which  it  had  been  the  first  great  eflTort  of
his  reign  to  overthrow.  The  gradual  contraction  of  the  govern-
ing powers  of  the  English  sovereign  is  one  of  the  most  striking
political  facts  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  I  have  accordingly
devoted  much  space  to  it  in  the  present  work.  The  founders  of
the  Revolution,  though  they  intended  to  provide  securities
against  a  despotic  monarchy,  certainly  never  contemplated  a
cipher  king,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  all  things  relating  to
foreign  policy  William  III.  was  the  most  powerful  political
influence  in  the  country.  The  formation  of  a  homogeneous
Cabinet,  which  more  than  any  other  single  cause  diminished
the  royal  power,  was,  as  we  have  seen,  not  the  result  of  any  law
or  settled  design,  but  was  gradually  and  almost  fortuitously
effected  through  the  exigencies  of  Parliamentary  Government,
and  there  had  always  been  a  school  of  politicians  who  believed
that  the  King  should  exercise  a  more  active  directing  influence
in  the  affairs  of  the  State.  This  had  been  the  theory  of  Boling-
broke.  It  had  been  adopted  by  Pulteney  and  Carteret ;  it  had
for  a  time  some  attraction  for  Shelburne,  and  it  was  a  leading
article  of  the  Toryism  of  Dr.  Johnson.  Whiggism,  that  vigorous
thinker  was  accustomed  to  say,  rested  at  the  time  of  the  Revo-
lution on  definite  principles,  but  had  degenerated  in  the  early
Hanoverian  reigns  into  a  mere  system  of  stockjobbing,  cor-
ruption, and  monopoly.  A  few  great  families  who  had  ac-
cumulated a  vast  amount  of  borough  patronage,  and  a  rich  and
corrupt  mercantile  class  which  had  acquired  by  bribery  an
ascendency  in  the  chief  towns,  had  got  possession  of  the  govern-

CH.  xvm.  INCREASED MINISTERIAL  ASCENDENCY.  21

ment  of  thp  country.  TLey  had  gradually  appropriated  the
patronage  of  the  Crown,  and  they  employed  it  systematically
in  maintaining  a  corrupt  majority  in  Parliament.  They  kept
up  the  distinction  between  Whig  and  Tory  as  a  pretext  for
excluding  from  power  the  great  body  of  the  landed  interest,  and
they  had  reduced  the  King  to  a  mere  puppet  in  their  hands.
Dr.  Johnson  strenuously  asserted  that  government  by  parlia-
meiitary  corruption  was  the  master  political  evil  of  the  time,
and  that  the  true  remedy  was  to  be  found  in  strengthening  the
royal  power.  A  prince  of  ability,  he  said,  steadily  and  con-
spicuously pursuing  the  interests  of  his  people  could  not  fail  of
parliamentary  concurrence.  He  might  and  should  be  the
directing  soul  and  spirit  of  his  administration ;  in  short  his  own
jniuister  and  not  the  mere  head  of  a  party ;  and  then,  and  not
till  then,  would  the  royal  dignity  be  sincerely  respected.  In  our
mixed  government  a  certain  amount  of  Crown  influence  over
the  Houses  of  Parliament  is  not  only  salutary  but  necessary.'

We  have  seen  the  efforts  of  George  III.  in  the  earlier  years
of  his  reign  to  regain  the  royal  authority,  and  we  have  seen  also
how  little  those  efforts  tended  in  the  direction  of  political  purity.
The  election  of  1784  was  a  decisive  event  in  the  struggle,  but  its
significance  was  at  first  veiy  dubious.  Ostensibly  the  King  had
completely  triumphed,  and  the  most  gloomy  prognostications
were  common  in  the  Whig  party.  '  The  elevation  of  Mr.  Pitt,'
wrote  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  young  writers  of  that  party,
'established  a  precedent  which  extirpated  the  last  shadow  of
popular  control  from  the  government  of  England.'  Till  this
event  the  House  of  Commons  '  had  exercised  a  negative  on  the
choice  of  the  Minister  of  the  Crown.'  ^

But  in  truth  the  victory  of  Pitt  was  more  a  victory  of  the
people  than  of  the  King ;  and  his  character,  his  talents,  and  his
position  all  conspired  to  give  him  an  independent  authority.
For  many  years  he  was  the  only  possible  minister,  and  if  the
King  had  desired  to  overthrow  him  he  could  only  have  done  so
by  falling  back  upon  Fox,  whom  beyond  all  other  men  he
detested. Under  such  circumstances  the  ministerial  power  was

'  See  especially  Johnson's  convcr-  -  Mackintosh, Vindicia Gulliecr,

sations  collected  by  Dr.  Maxwell.  p.  312.

22  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

naturally  consolidated.  The  minister,  and  not  the  King,  became
the  true  and  habitual  centre  of  authority,  and  the  faction  of  the
'King's  friends'  completely  disappeared.  Jenkinson,  who  had
chiefly  led  and  organised  it,  took  a  part  in  opposition  to  Pitt  on
the  question  of  the  impeachment  of  Hastings ;  but  his  opposition,
which  might  once  have  been  fatal  to  a  ministry,  proved  wholly
immaterial.  Pitt  had  no  fear  of  him,  and  he  attached  him  fully
to  himself.  Though  he  had  little  debating  power,  Jenkinson
had  a  remarkable  knowledge  of  commercial  questions,  and  he
obtained  a  high  reputation  in  1786  by  the  ability  which  he  dis-
played in  regulating  the  Newfoundland  and  Greenland  fisheries
and  in  the  revisal  of  the  trade  and  navigation  laws.  Pitt  soon
after  raised  him  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Hawkesbury,  placed  him
at  the  head  of  the  reconstituted  Board  of  Trade,  made  him
Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  and  ten  years  later  he
became  Earl  of  Liverpool,  but  his  influence  in  the  ministry  of
Pitt  was  wholly  legitimate  and  was  no  greater  than  naturally
belonged  to  a  Minister  of  the  Crown.'

One  serious  attempt,  however,  was  made  to  maintain  the  old
system  of  an  independent  influence  in  the  Ministry.  Lord
Tharlow  never  acquiesced  in  the  ascendency  of  a  statesman  whom
he  personally  disliked,  who  was  much  younger  than  himself  and
who  sat  in  the  other  House  of  Parliament,  and  he  hoped  to
retain  in  the  ministry  of  Pitt  the  position  of  the  King's  special
and  confidential  minister  which  he  had  previously  held.  A  very
mischievous  tradition  had  of  late  years  been  forming  that  the
Chancellor,  though  a  member  of  the  Cabinet  and  entrusted  with
the  Cabinet  secrets,  had  a  right  to  pursue  in  politics  an  inde-
pendent and  even  a  hostile  course.  'Such  had  been  the  course
of  North ington  in  the  first  ministry  of  Rockingham,  of  Camden
in  tlie  ministry  of  Grafton,  of  Thurlow  himself  in  the  second
ministry  of  Rockingham.  At  first  the  dislike  of  Thurlow  to
Pitt  was  rarely  shown.  He  opposed  a  measure  for  restoring  the
estates  forfeited  after  the  rebellion  of  1745,  and  complained,  not
unreasonably,  that  lie  had  not  been  consulted  in  its  preparation.
lie  made  liimself  the  unqualified  defender  of  Warren  Hastings,
and  is  said  to  have  proposed  to  ask  the  King  to  raise  Hastings

'  Sec  Wraxall'a  Posthumous  Memoirs,  ii.  107-109,  MC,  117,  161-lGC,  31J),

cii.  XVIII.  POSITION IN THE CABINET.  23

to  the  peerage  without  consulting  Pitt.  He  opposed  a  measure
supported  by  Pitt  for  mitigating  the  horrors  of  the  slave  trade.
During  the  illness  of  the  King  he  intrigued  with  the  Prince  of
Wales  in  order  to  secure  his  continuance  of  office,  and  althougli
on  the  recovery  of  the  King  he  retained  the  Seals,  it  was  impos-
sible any  longer  to  trust  him,  and  his  relation  to  Pitt  was  one  of
sullen  neutrality  occasionally  passing  into  open  hostility.  But
Pitt  met  his  intrigues  and  his  hostility  with  firmness  and  with
tact.  In  1790  he  raised  William  Grenville,  who  had  been
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  the  Lords  and  conferred
upon  him  the  leadership  of  the  Ministerial  party  in  that  House,
and  in  the  summer  of  1792,  when  Thurlow  had  renewed  his
hostilities  by  violently  attacking  Pitt's  scheme  for  the  reduction
of  the  debt,  Pitt  informed  the  King  that  either  the  Chancellor
or  the  Prime  Minister  must  retire  from  office.  To  the  astonish-
ment and  indignation  of  Thurlow,  the  King  at  once  consented  to
his  dismissal.  He  sank  speedily  into  political  insignificance,  and
the  ascendency  of  Pitt  was  undisputed.

There  were,  it  is  true,  some  later  periods  in  which  it  was
menaced.  In  1794,  when  the  great  Whig  secession  had  brought
a  new  and  powerful  element  into  the  Government,  veteran
politicians  believed  that  the  ascendency  of  Pitt  in  his  Cabinet
would  wane  and  that  the  royal  influence  was  likely  to  grow.
*  The  King,'  wrote  a  very  experienced  ofiicial,  who  had  peculiar
means  of  knowing  the  undercurrents  of  political  life,  '  seems  to
be  the  greatest  gainer  from  this  arrangement.  For  many  years
his  hands  have  been  completely  tied  up.  He  has  had  no  other
option  than  that  between  Pitt  and  Fox,  who  have  divided  the
country  and  the  House  of  Commons  between  them.  As  he  was
determined  not  to  employ  the  latter,  he,  of  course,  fell  under
subjection  to  the  former.  At  present  a  third  party  is  formed.
If  he  quarrels  with  Pitt  he  has  Windham  to  resort  to.  I  really
think  that  till  now  the  King  never  was  his  own  master,  and
from  my  personal  knowledge  of  his  Majesty  I  am  satisfied  he
will  be  very  well  inclined  to  avail  himself  of  the  freedom  he  has
thus  acquired.'  ^  At  a  much  later  period  the  formation  of  the
Ministry  of  Addington  and  the  defeat  of  Pitt's  policy  in  favour

'  Bland  Burgcs  Papers,  p.  2Gli

24  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

of  tlie  Irish  Catholics,  showed  the  power  the  King  could  still
exercise,  but  it  was  Pitt  who,  more  than  any  previous  minister
under  George  III.,  made  the  responsible  minister  the  true
source  of  political  power  and,  formed  a  system  and  tradition  of
government  which  could  never  be  destroyed.

Great  avarice  of  power  and  extreme  self-reliance  were
marked  features  of  his  character,  and  he  showed  very  little
disposition  to  ally  himself  with  any  of  those  shining  talents
that  might  imperil  his  ascendency.  He  sought  rather  to  sur-
round himself  with  men  of  sound  judgment  and  great  business
capacity  who  could  never  rise  into  competition  with  him.  With
excellent  judgment,  he  selected  Eden,  at  a  time  when  that
politician  was  in  opposition,  to  negotiate  the  commercial  treaty
with  France,  and  his  warm  and  close  friendship  with  Dundas  and
Grenville  contributed  largely  to  the  success  of  his  ministry.
When  he  gave  confidence  he  gave  it  without  reserve ;  and  in
discussing  political  questions  with  those  whom  he  trusted,  no
one  was  more  frank  and  open,  more  patient  of  contradiction,
more  candid  in  weighing  opposing  arguments.^  Like  Walpole,
he  was  fond  of  framing  his  measures  with  one  or  two  colleagues
round  a  dinner-table.  His  mind  was  very  receptive  to  the  ideas
of  others,  and  he  was  accused  of  not  always  acknowledging  his
obligations.^  He  had  a  high  sense  of  the  duty  of  a  Prime
Minister  to  superintend  all  the  departments  of  government,  and
in  critical  periods  of  foreign  policy  he  frequently  wrote  the  de-
spatches which  the  Foreign  Minister  signed.^  No  minister  since
Walpole  had  exercised  such  unquestioned  and  absolute  authority
in  the  Government.

Another  consequence  of  the  ascendency  of  Pitt  was  the
complete  termination  of  direct  parliamentary  corruption.  The
credit  of  the  great  and  salutary  change  which  had,  in  this
respect,  passed  almost  insensibly  over  English  p;irli;i,mentary
life  does  not,  indeed,  rest  solely  or  even  mainly  with  him.  The
system  of  corruption  appears  to  have  continued  with  little  or  no
abatement  fJirough  the  administration  of  Lord  North,  but  the

'  See  Wilborforce's /^?;/>',  ii.p.  135.  '  Hose's  Diaries,  i.pAOS.  Political

*  This  wjis  cs|)nciiilly  tiiio  of his  MoinonuHla  of the Duke of Leeds

BinkiriK  liiii'l,  tilt:  iDiii"  i'lc!i  of  which  (edited liy C)sc;ir Urovvnint::), p. v.

waH  t;ikcn  witiioul  uckuuvvlcdgiuent  ]C,\  ;  Auckland  C'orre.yjo/u/fiicr,'!.  22');

froiu  Dr.  I'rico.  Bland  Burgcs  Pa^Krs,  p.  78.

en.  xvin.  8INECURES AND LOANS.  25

Rockingham  Ministry  had  ahnost  extinguished  it.  The  exclu-
sion of  contractors  from  Parliament,  and  especially  Burke's
great  measure  of  economical  reform,  which  swept  away  a  vast
number  of  superfluous  places  and  strictly  limited  the  pension
list  and  the  Secret  Service  Fund,  mai'k  a  new  epoch  in  parlia-
mentary history.  The  long  ministry  of  Pitt,  however,  confirmed
what  had  been  done.  He  was  carried  to  power  at  the  election
of  1784  by  a  wave  of  the  most  genuine  popular  enthusiasm,  and
Wraxall  was  probably  correct  in  his  assertion  that  no  House  of
Commons  since  the  accession  of  the  House  of  Hanover  had  been
elected  with  so  little  corruption.'  A  minister  of  perfect  in-
tegrity, who  enjoyed  great  popular  support,  as  well  as  the  con-
fidence of  the  King,  and  of  an  overwhelming  majority  in  the
House  of  Commons,  was  not  tempted  to  stoop  to  methods  of
government  which  had  been  habitual  in  former  Parliaments,
and  during  his  long  ministry  the  traditions  of  the  old  system  of
corruption  were  finally  cut.  The  financial  reforms  which  were
his  special  glory,  contributed  greatly  to  the  purification  of  poli-
tical life.  Between  1784  and  1799  the  numerous  sinecure
offices  in  the  Custom  House  were  abolished,  and  it  was  stated
that  the  expense  of  collecting  a  revenue  of  22,000,000^.  in  1799
only  exceeded  by  3,000Z.  the  expense  of  collecting  a  revenue  of
little  more  than  14,000,000^  in  1784.  One  of  the  worst  and
most  wasteful  forms  of  bribery  that  had  grown  up  during  the
reign  had  been  the  custom  of  contracting  loans  and  issuing
lottery  tickets  on  terms  which  were  below  the  market  value,
and  then  distributing  shares  or  tickets  among  the  supporters  of
the  Government.  The  minister  usually  settled  with  a  few  select
friends  in  the  City  the  terms  on  which  a  proposed  loan  should
be  made,  and  gave  them  lists  of  the  friends  who  were  to  be
favoured,  with  the  specific  sums  to  be  assigned  to  each.  In  one
instance,  towards  the  end  of  the  administration  of  Lord  North,
the  scrip  was  at  a  premium  of  101.  per  cent,  two  days  before
the  names  of  the  subscribers  were  sent  to  the  Bank  from  the
Treasury.  This  abuse  Pitt  finally  terminated.  "When  he  desired
to  contract  a  loan,  he  gave  public  notice  in  the  City  through  the
Bank  of Englacd  that  he  would  receive  sealed  proposals  from

'  Posthumous  Memoirs,  i.  237.

26  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xviii.

all  who  wished  to  send  them,  and  m  order  to  guard  against  all
partiality  they  were  opened  in  the  presence  of  the  Governor  and
Deputy-Governor  of  the  Bank.  The  lowest  tender  given  by
persons  of  known  credit  was  accepted,  and  Pitt  was  able  with
truth  to  assure  the  House  of  Commons  that  not  a  shilling  had
been  reserved  for  distribution  among  his  friends.^

The  merit  of  Pitt  in  this  respect  is  very  great,  but  there  is
one  serious  deduction  to  be  made.  No  previous  minister  created
peerages  so  lavishly  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  his  political
influence,  or  affected  so  permanently  and  so  injuriously  the
character  of  the  House  of  Lords.  At  the  time  of  the  Revolu-
tion the  House  of  Lords  consisted  of  150  temporal  peers  and
26  bishops.  The  simultaneous  creation  of  twelve  peers  under
Anne  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  the  peace  of  Utrecht,  and  the
numerous  creations  that  immediately  followed  the  accession  of
George  I.,  had  given  a  great  shock  to  public  opinion,  and  formed
one  of  the  chief  arguments  for  Stanhope's  Peerage  Bill  in  1719,
which  provided  that  the  King  should  not  have  the  power  of  add-
ing more  than  six  to  the  then  existing  number  of  178  peers.
The  measure  was  rejected,  but  from  this  time  till  the  death  of
George  II.  the  prerogative  of  creating  peers  was  exercised  with
great  moderation,  and  on  the  accession  of  George  III,  there
were  only  174  British  Peers,  twelve  of  whom  were  Roman
Catholics,  and  therefore  incapacitated  from  sitting  in  Parlia-
ment. There  had  been  a  Whig  majority  in  the  House  of  Lords
ever  since  the  Revolution,  but  it  was  one  of  the  fixed  objects  of
George  III.  to  destroy  it,  and  at  the  same  time  to  make  the
gi-ant  of  peerages  a  means  of  maintaining  his  influence  in  the
House  of  Commons.  Forty-two  British  peers  were  created  or
promoted  in  the  first  ten  years  of  his  reign,  and  about  thirty
more  during  the  administration  of  Lord  North.  Even  these
creations,  however,  were  far  surpassed  by  Pitt.  Burke's  Eco-
nomical Reform  Bill  had  swept  away  most  of  the  sinecure  ofiices
by  which  political  services  had  been  hitherto  rewarded,  and
peerages  became  in  consequence  much  more  habitually  the  prizes
of  piil)lic  life.  In  the  first  five  years  of  the  administration  of
I'itt  forty-eight  peers  were  created,  and  when  ho  resigned  ollice

'  Rohc'h OhnrrraUons rrxprrtinfi Sec too Jlay's Const. Ilidury, i.
the J'u/jUc A'j-jjcnditure, i>p. 2G-2b. 327,

CH.  x\iii.  FINANCIAL ADMINISTEATION.  27

in  1801  he  liad  created  or  promoted  upwards  of  110.'  They
were  nearly  all  men  of  strong  Tory  opinions  promoted  for
political  services,  the  vast  majority  of  them  were  men  of  no
real  distinction,  and  they  at  once  changed  the  political  tenden-
cies and  greatly  lowered  the  intellectual  level  of  the  assembly
to  wliich  they  were  raised.

A  third  consequence  arising  from  the  ascendency  of  Pitt
relates  chiefly  to  the  period  when  England  was  at  war.  It  has
been  constantly,  and  I  believe  truly,  said  that  Pitt  was  not  suc-
cessful as  a  War  Minister,  that  his  subsidies  were  lavishly  but
often  unproductively  squandered,  that  his  plans  were  ill  con-
ceived and  ill  executed,  and  that  he  had  no  real  eye  for  military
combinations.  It  must,  however,  be  added  that  it  was  a  matter
of  supreme  importance  to  England,  when  entering  on  her  deadly
struggle  with  the  Eevolution  and  with  Napoleon,  that  she  should
have  been  directed  by  a  strong  and  popular  ministry  even
though  it  may  have  been  in  some  respects  inefficient.  A  weak
minister  could  never  have  raised  the  spirit  of  the  people  to
an  heroic  height,  and  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  the  coali-
tion against  Napoleon  would  have  been  formed  or  maintained
were  it  not  for  the  unbounded  confidence  of  foreign  potentates
in  the  strength  of  the  English  Ministry,  in  its  complete  com-
mand of  the  resources  of  the  nation,  and  in  the  resolution  and
stability  of  its  chief.

Passing  from  this  class  of  services  we  may  next  proceed  to
examine  his  character  as  a  legislator.  His  first  and  probably
his  g-reatest  title  to  regard  was  his  financial  administration.  No
characteristic  of  his  intellect  appears  to  have  more  strongly  im-
pressed those  who  knew  him  than  his  extraordinary  aptitude  for
all  questions  relating  to  figures,  and  having  taken  the  office  of
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  he  gave  financial  measures  the
most  prominent  place  in  the  early  years  of  his  ministry.  This
was  in  itself  a  matter  of  no  small  importance,  for  these  questions,
resolving  themselves  for  the  most  part  into  dry  and  intricate
details,  make  little  show  in  history  and  rarely  excite  an  enthu-
siasm or  an  interest  at  all  commensurate  with  their  importance.
Nations  seldom  realise  till  too  late  how  prominent  a  place  a
sound  system  of  finance  holds  among  the  vital  elements  of
'  May's  Const.  Hist.  i.  232-238.

28  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

national  stability  and  well-being ;  bow  few  political  cbanges  are
wortb  purcbasing  by  its  sacrifice;  bow  widely  and  seriously
buman  happiness  is  affected  by  tbe  downfall  or  tbe  perturbation  of
national  credit,  or  by  excessive,  injudicious,  and  unjust  taxation.
Tbe  condition  of  Englisb  finances  on  tbe  accession  of  Pitt  was
very  serious.  Tbe  accounts  of  tbe  war  were  still  to  a  large
deo-ree  unsettled.  Tbe  enormous  increase  of  debt  during  the
war  bad  been  accompanied  by  a  great  diminution  of  commerce
resulting  from  tbe  colonial  losses  of  England,  while  tbe  finances
bad  been  allowed  to  fall  into  almost  inextricable  confusion.  In
tbe  year  ending  January  1784,  tbe  permanent  taxes,  and  tbe
land  and  malt  taxes,  which  were  voted  every  year,  produced
together  only  about  twelve  and  a  half  millions,  which  was  nearly
two  millions  less  than  Avas  required  for  tbe  annual  services  and
for  tbe  interest  of  tbe  funded  debt.  But  in  addition  to  this
debt  there  was  a  large  unfunded  debt,  the  exact  amount  of
w^hich  could  not  yet  be  ascertained,  but  which  was  certainly  not
less  than  fourteen  millions,  and  these  outstanding  bills  were
circulated  at  a  discount  of  fifteen  or  twenty  per  cent.  Tbe  defi-
ciency in  the  year  was  not  less  than  three  millions,  and  tbe
public  credit  was  so  low  that  the  three  per  cents  more  than
twelve  months  after  tbe  peace  were  between  56  and  57,  scarcely
higher  than  in  tbe  most  unfavourable  period  of  the  war,  more
than  ten  per  cent,  lower  than  immediately  after  the  signature  of
tbe  preliminary  treaties.'

Most  of  the  taxes  fell  greatly  below  tbe  estimate,  chiefly  on
account  of  the  recent  enormous  increase  of  smuggling.  A
Committee  of  tbe  House  of  Commons  estimated  tbe  defalcation
of  the  revenue  produced  by  this  cause  alone  at  not  less  than  two
millions.  Whole  fleets — including  vessels  of  three  hundred  tons
burden — were  employed  in  this  trade  ;  40,000  persons  on  sea
and  land  are  said  to  have  been  engaged  in  it.  It  was  pursued  in
many  districts  with  scarcely  a  semblance  of  concealment,  almost
tlio  whole  population  conniving  or  concurring  in  it,  and  there
wero  complaints  that  agriculture  was  in  some  places  seriously

'  Tnmline'fi Life  of Pitt, i. pp.  the  war  was  no  less  (lian  27,000,000^.

4K.'!,  \H\  ;  iSlanliopc's  Life  of  Pitt,  p.  exclusive of loyalists' debentures.

HI'.); Macplierson's Annalu  of Com-  Rose's  Jncreasc  of  the  Here itue  from

wrrre, iv. tt'l. (Jooif,'e Rose states  17'.)2 /r  171)1),  p.  0.
tliat  l\\(:  lloatirif;  deliL  at the  end  of

cu.  XVIII,  FRAUDS ON THE REVENUE,  29

impeded  by  the  constant  employment  of  farmers'  horses  in
carrying  smuggled  goods  to  a  distance  from  the  shore.  Pitt
computed  that  at  least  13,000,000  pounds  of  tea  were  annually
consumed  in  the  kingdom,  but  duty  was  only  paid  on  5,500,000.
Assuming,  what  was  notoriously  untrue,  that  the  consumption
of  foreign  wines  was  only  equal  to  what  it  had  been  thirty-six
years  before,  the  revenue  had  in  this  single  article  been  de-
frauded of  280,000^.  a  year.'

The  abuses  in  the  postal  revenue  were  of  another  kind  but
equally  glaring.  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  every  member
of  both  Houses  had  the  right  of  franking  as  many  letters  as  he
pleased,  by  writing  his  name  and  the  word  '  free '  on  the  covers,
and  he  had  also  the  right  of  receiving  free,  letters  addressed
to  himself.  These  privileges  were  soon  enormously  abused.
Covers  of  letters  bearing  the  signature  of  members  of  Parlia-
ment were  sent  by  hundreds  in  boxes  over  the  kingdom,  for
distribution  or  for  sale ;  the  forgery  of  franks  became  the  com-
monest of  crimes  ;  one  member  of  Parliament  is  said  to  have
received  no  less  than  oOOl.  a  year  from  a  great  mercantile  house  for
franking  their  correspondence,  and  as  letters  might  be  addressed
without  payment  to  members  in  places  where  they  were  not
residing,  numerous  other  persons  were  accustomed,  by  an
easily  concerted  fraud,  to  receive  their  letters  free  under  the
name  of  a  member.  It  was  computed  that  the  Government  loss
through  the  franking  of  letters  was  not  less  than  170,000/.  a  year.
An  Act  had  been  passed  in  1783  slightly  restricting  the  privilege
of  franking,  obliging  the  members  to  write  the  whole  super-
scription of  the  letters  they  franked  and  making  the  forgery
of  franks  highly  penal,  but  it  proved  quite  insufficient  to
suppress  the  frauds  connected  with  the  system.^

The  reports  of  a  recent  commission  to  inquire  into  the  public
accounts  had  shown  that  this  department  was  honeycombed
with  abuses.  Treasurers  of  the  Navy  had  usually  large  sums  in
their  hands  which  they  were  suffered  to  retain  even  when  out
of  office,  in  some  cases  for  no  less  than  forty  years.  At  the  end
of  1783,  more  than  forty  millions  of  public  money  which  had

*  Macpherson, iv.  49,  50. Tom- all,  Posthumous  Mciiwirs,  i.  138-1-10;

line,  ii.  170.  ~ Asliton's Old Times, p. 12'J ; Jlac-

2  Adolphus,  iv.  123,  124  ; Wrax- phcrson,  iii.  p.  400;  4  Geo.  111.  c.  2K

30  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENXn CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

been  issued  for  tlie  public  services  were  as  yet  unaccounted  for.
In  1785  there  were  four  treasurers  of  tbe  Navy  and  three
paymasters  of  the  Army  besides  those  actually  in  office,  whose
accounts  were  still  unsettled.  The  whole  system  of  auditing
accounts  was  little  better  than  a  farce.  There  were  two  officers,
entitled  '  Auditors  of  Imprest,'  who  were  ostensibly  charged  with
this  function,  and  each  had  in  some  years  of  the  war  received
as  much  as  16,000Z.,  but  their  office  had  become  a  sinecure ;
its  duties  were  wholly  performed  by  clerks,  who  confined  them-
selves to  ascertaining  that  the  accounts  were  rightly  added,  but
without  any  attempt  at  a  real  investigation.  Every  kind  of  fraud
and  collusion  could  grow  up  under  such  a  system,  and  there
appears  to  have  been  also  little  or  no  check  upon  the  fees,  per-
quisites, and  gratuities  given  to  persons  in  official  situations,^

The  extreme  multiplicity  and  complexity  of  duties  opened  an
endless  field  of  confusion  and  fraud.  Created  at  different  times
and  without  any  attempt  at  unity  or  consistency,  they  formed  a
maze  in  which  only  the  most  experienced  officials  could  move.
There  were  sixty-eight  distinct  branches  of  Customs  duties.
There  were  articles  which  were  subject  to  no  less  than  fourteen
separate  duties.  Difterent  sets  of  .duties  imposed  on  the  same
article  had  been  appropriated  by  Parliament  to  payment  of  the
interest  on  different  branches  of  the  National  Debt.  It  was
noticed  by  one  of  Pitt's  best  officials  that  so  trifling  an  article
as  a  pound  of  nutmegs  paid,  or  ought  to  have  paid,  nine  dif-
ferent duties.^  The  amazing  intricacy  of  this  branch  of  the
revenue  made  all  preceding  Chancellors  of  the  Exchequer  shrink
from  any  attempt  to  revise  or  consolidate  it,  and  it  also  formed
a  great  field  of  patronage.  When  Pitt  became  Minister  there
were  said  to  have  been  no  less  than  196  absolute  sinecures  con-
nected with  the  Customs.  They  were  offices  granted  by  patent
and  in  the  gift  of  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  their  united
income  amounted  to  42,000/.^

It  is  the  supreme  merit  of  the  early  years  of  the  administra-
tion of  I'itt  that  ho  carried  order  and  light  into  this  chaos,  and

•  Tomlinc,  ii.  pp.  28-33 ;  Pari.  Hist. George  Rose.

XXV.  2!t8-31 1.  ^  Ilo.se's Oh.tm-afunis rexpcctivg

*  'J'fiinline,  ii.  pp.  23.'>,  230. Tliis thn Piihlio ICvpenditure and the
Btatcment  i.s  given  on  tlie  ;iiillioiily  of Injluciur  of  the  Crotvn,  pj).  !),  10.

CH.  xviit.  PITT'S  FINANCIAL  MEASURES.  31

placed  the  finances  of  the  country  once  more  on  a  sound  basis.
It  is  impossible  within  the  scope  of  a  work  like  the  present  to
give  more  than  a  general  sketch  of  his  financial  reforms,  and
such  a  sketch  can  only  do  very  partial  justice  to  the  industry,
knowledge,  and  skill  with  which  he  manipulated  a  vast  multi-
tude of  obscure  and  intricate  details.  His  first  object  was
to  fund  the  unfunded  debt  and  to  put  down  the  smuggling
trade.  The  former  object  was  gradually  accomplished  in  1784
and  1785,  To  attain  the  la.tter  many  measures  were  adopted.
Some  of  them  were  entirely  restrictive.  An  Act  known  as  the
*  Hovering  Act '  authorised  the  confiscation  of  a  kind  of  vessel
that  was  specially  built  for  the  smuggling  trade,  and  of  all
vessels  carrying  tea,  coffee,  spirits,  and  any  goods  liable  to  for-
feiture on  importation,  that  were  found  at  anchor  or '  hovering '
within  four  leagues  of  the  coast,  and  an  immense  variety  of
regulations  were  made  for  preventing  frauds  in  the  process  of
distillation  and  for  increasing  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the
vast  smuggling  business  which  was  carried  on  by  vessels  in  the
regular  trade.'  At  the  same  time,  in  the  true  spirit  of  Adam
Smith,  Pitt  clearly  recognised  the  fact  that  the  extraordinary
development  of  smuggling  in  any  article  is  a  proof  that  the
duty  on  it  is  excessive,  and  he  adopted  on  a  large  scale  the
policy  of  reducing  and  equalising  duties,  and  diffusing  the  burden
over  a  wide  area.  It  was  found  by  experience  that  the  duty  on
tea  gave  rise  to  the  most  numerous  frauds,  and  it  had  hitherto
proved  impossible  to  detect  them.  Pitt,  reviving  a  policy
which  had  been  pursued  by  Pelham,^  reduced  this  duty  from
119  to  12^  per  cent.,  and  provided  for  the  loss  which  the
exchequer  might  possibly  incur  by  largely  increasing  the  duty
CD  the  windows  of  houses,  which  it  was  not  possible  to  evade.^
The  duty  on  British  West  India  rum,  which  was  another  import-
ant article  of  the  smuggling  trade,  was  also  greatly  diminished,'*
while  the  duties  on  wine  were  transferred  from  the  Custom
House  to  the  excise,  which  was  found  the  least  expensive  and
the  most  effectual  method  of  collecting  them.^  This  was  the
method  which  "VValpole  had  endeavoured  to  introduce  in  1733

>  24  Geo.  in.,  sess.  2,  c.  47. 26  ^  24  Geo.  III.,  sess.  2,  c.  3S.

Geo.  III.  c.  40.  ♦  2(5  Geo.  III.  c.  73.

2  See  Dowell's  Hiif.  of  Taxation,  '  26  Geo.  III.  c.  59.
ii.  183.

32  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xvrii.

and  whicli  he  bad  been  compelled  by  popular  clamour  to
abandon,  but  Pitt  carried  it  in  178C  witli  little  difficulty.  The
abuses  in  franking  letters  were  remedied  by  a  measure  which
had  been  recommended  in  a  report  on  the  Post  Office  during
Shelburne's  administration,  reducing  the  privilege  to  very
moderate  limits.  It  was  provided  that  no  member  of  Parlia-
ment could  frank  a  letter  unless  he  wrote,  together  with  his
name,  the  post  town  from  which  it  was  to  be  sent,  the  day
of  the  month,  and  the  year,  and  no  member  could  receive
freely  letters  addressed  to  him  except  at  his  actual  place  of
residence.'

These  measures  were  carried  out  with  great  caution.  Though
it  was  probable  that  the  reduction  of  duties  would  soon  be  com-
pensated by  increased  consumption  and  more  regular  payments,
Pitt  did  not  trust  to  this.  It  was  his  first  principle  in  finance
that  a  clear  and  considerable  surplus  must  be  created,  and  he
courageously  imposed  a  great  mass  of  additional  taxation  in  the
form~of  duties  on  different  articles.  In  the  budget  of  178-i
new  taxes  were  imposed  which  were  estimated  to  produce
9o0,000Z.  In  the  budget  of  1785  he  imposed  taxes  to  the
amount  of  rather  more  than  400,000?.^  In  the  first  years  of  his
administration  he  imposed  or  increased,  among  other  taxes,
those  on  carriages  and  horses,  on  sport,  plate,  bricks,  hats,  and
perfumery ;  he  extended  the  system  of  trade  licences ;  he
increased  the  postage  of  letters  and  the  taxes  on  newspapers  and
advertisements,  and  he  introduced  the  probate  and  legacy  duties.
Frauds  in  the  revenue  were,  at  the  same  time,  combated  and
greatly  diminished  by  a  complete  reorganisation  of  the  machinery
of  auditing  accounts.  One  measure  '  for  better  regulating  the
office  of  the  Treasurer  of  his  Majesty's  Navy '  provided  that  all
sums  issued  by  the  exchequer  for  the  service  of  the  navy  should
be  placed  in  the  Bank  to  be  withdrawn  only  as  required,  and
that  the  treasurer  should  close  his  accounts  every  year.  By
another  measure  the  '  Auditors  of  Imprest '  were  abolished,  and  a
board  of  five  coiiiinissioners  was  appointed  with  the  largest  and
most  Hti'iiigejit  pf)vv(;rs  of  auditing  the  public  accounts  of  ev(ny
department. ]3y  a  third  measure  a  similar  body  was  appointed

«  21  Geo.  III.,  sess.  2,  c.  37.

»  rarl  Jlixt.  xxiv.  1030,  xxv.  fi.'C ;  Toiiilinc,  i.  r,02,  ii.  ?.d.

fit.  xvH!.  riTT'S FINANCIAL SKILL.  33

to  inquire  into  'the  fees,  gratuities,  perquisites,  and  emoluments'
received  iu  public  oiiiceSj  and  into  all  abuses  connected  witli
them.'

The  importance  of  these  measures  in  purifying  English
administration  can  hardly  be  exaggerated,  and  it  is  a  shameful
instance  of  the  perverting  influence  of  party  spirit  that  Sheridan,
and  even  Burke,  who  was  himself  the  author  of  the  first  great
measure  of  economical  reform,  should  have  ridiculed  the  minute
economies  of  Pitt,  taunting  him  with  '  hunting  in  holes  and
corners 'for  abuses,  and  describing  his  measure  for  inquiring
into  fees  and  perquisites  as  a  '  ratcatching  bill  instituted  for  the
purpose  of  prying  into  vermin  abuses.'  There  was  a  fur  truer
and  nobler  ring  in  the  language  of  Pitt,  who  declared  that  he
could  not  conceive  how  any  Englishministercouldcousider  him-
self justified  in  omitting  '  any  exertion  that  might  tend,  even  in
the  most  minute  particular,  to  promote  that  economy  on  which
the  recovery  of  the  State  from  its  present  depressed  situation  so
much  depended.'  ^

It  was  in  this  class  of  legislation  that  the  true  greatness  of
Pitt  was  most  clearly  shown.  In  measures  of  a  more  splendid
and  imposing  character  he  was  rarely  really  successful,  but  no
minister  displayed  more  industry  and  skill  in  remedying  de-
tailed abuses,  discovering  the  causes  that  rendered  particular
branches  of  the  revenue  unproductive,  introducing  order,  sim-
plicity and  economy  into  great  departments  of  national  finance.
The  greater  part  of  this  kind  of  work,  it  is  true,  is  always
accomplished  by  permanent  officials,  and  a  very  large  proportion
of  the  financial  measures  of  Pitt  were  revivals  of  measures  or
projects  of  Walpole  and  Pelham,  or  results  of  suggestions  made
by  Adam  Smith  or  other  political  writers.^  But  Pitt  had  at
least  the  merit  of  perceiving  their  value,  and  it  was  his
eloquence  and  influence  that  carried  them  through  Parliament.
In  this  class  of  questions  he  displayed  a  remarkable  degree  of
candour  and  moderation  in  accejoting  criticism  and  modifying
or  withdrawing  unpopular  schemes. Thus  in  1784  he  withdrew

■  Toniline,  ii.  28-3.3.  Dowell's  Ilisfnri/  of  Taxation,  vol.  ii.

*  Pari.  Hist.  xxv.  369-373.  Sir  Richard  Iliil  drew  up  in  1784  a

'  For  an  interesting account  of  long  list  of  suggested  taxes. Purl.

the  sources  from  which  Pitt  derived  Hist.  xxiv.  1233,  1234.

the  idea  of  many  of  his  measures,  see

VOL.  V.  D

34  ENGLAND IN THE EIGITTEKNTIT CENTUEY. en.  xviit.

a  proposed  duty  ou  coal,  a  proposed  licence  for  hop  planting,
and  a  proposed  tax  on  ribbons  and  gauze,  when  he  found  them
to  be  unpopular,  and  substituted  other  taxes  in  their  place. ^
In  1785  he  abolished  the  duties  on  bleached  and  dyed  cotton
goods,  which  had  been  imposed  in  the  preceding  year,  on  the
ground  that  they  had  been  found  by  experience  to  be  injurious
or  unproductive,  and  at  a  later  period,  and  on  similar  grounds,
he  repealed  the  taxes  he  had  imposed  on  shops,  on  maid-servants,
and  on  foreign  gloves. ^

The  essentially  business  character  of  his  ministry  was  due  to
himself,  and  especially  to  his  habit  of  seeking  advice  and
support  chiefly  outside  his  Cabinet.  He  was  still  the  only
member  of  the  Cabinet  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  the  peers
who  were  his  colleagues  seem  to  have  contributed  nothing  to
his  popularity  and  very  little  to  his  strength.  Thurlow  and  the
Duke  of  Richmond  were  both  men  of  great  ability,  but  the  first
was  usually  at  least  as  much  an  embarrassment  as  a  support,  and
the  latter  was  extremely  unpopular.  Camden,  who  was  now  the
President  of  the  Council,  had  lost  a  great  deal  of  his  old  energy
and  ambition,  and,  except  on  the  Regency  question,  he  rarely
took  a  prominent  part  in  debate.  Gower,  who  held  the  Privy
Seal,  scarcely  opened  his  mouth  in  Parliament.  Carmarthen
appears  to  have  conducted  foreign  affairs  with  dignity  and
knowledge,  but  neither  he  nor  Sydney,  the  other  Secretary  of
State,  had  any  unusual  talent,  or  was  capable  of  adding  any-
thing to  the  strength  of  the  Ministry.  It  was  from  ministers
who  were  not  yet  in  the  Cabinet  that  Pitt  derived  most  assist-
ance,^ and  above  all  from  Dundas,  the  treasurer  of  the  navy,  with
whom  from  the  time  of  the  downfall  of  the  Shelburne  Ministry  he
liad  been  on  terms  of  warm  personal  friendship  and  who  enjoyed
more  of  his  political  confidence  than  any  other  man.  This  able
Scotch  lawyer  had  nothing  of  the  moral  grandeur,  the  dis-
interestedness, the  consistency  or  the  superb  eloquence  of  Pitt,
but  he  had  a  far  greater  experience  of  business  and  of  men,  far
more  popular  and  conciliatory  manners,  and  one  of  the  very
best  polilicjil  jiKlgiiiciits  of  his  liuic.  He  was  an  unpolished
but  most  useiul  dcbatfi-,  shrewd,  practical,  ready,  and  courageous,

'  Tomlinc,  i.  r>OR.  llCu  177.

'  25  Oco.  III.  c.  24. Ailoliilius,  iv,  '■>  Hue  Jilund  Jiiiri/rs  Paj'crx,  p.  fiS.

CH.  xvm.  CONSOLIDATION OF DUTIES.  35

and  he  had  a  specially  wide  knowledge  of  all  matters  relating
to  trade.  The  reconstruction  of  the  Board  of  Trade  in  1786  ap-
pears to  have  been  fully  justified  by  the  prominence  which  trade
questions  were  assuming  in  English  politics  With  Jenkinson,
now  Lord  Hawkesbury,  as  its  president,  and  William  Grenville,
afterwards  Lord  Grenville,  as  its  vice-president,  it  became  one
of  the  most  efficient  departments  of  the  administration,  and  the
apostasy  of  Eden  in  1786  transferred  another  man  who  was
eminently  distinguished  for  his  knowledge  of  commercial  ques-
tions from  the  Opposition  to  the  Government.  Pitt  appears  to
have  also  had  extensive  communications  with  leading  authorities
on  trade  outside  the  sphere  of  politics,  and  he  gained  the  full
confidence  and  support  of  the  trading  classes,  who  were  every
year  rising  to  greater  influence.  It  was  believed  that  he  alone
of  Prime  IMinisters  had  thoroughly  mastered  the  commercial
system  of  the  country  and  had  made  its  development  the  first
object  of  his  policy.

His  financial  statements  were  masterpieces  of  comprehensive
and  luminous  exposition;  ^  and  his  great  measure  in  1787,  con-
solidating the  different  branches  of  Customs  and  Excise,  was
one  of  the  most  important  in  English  commercial  history.  The
intricacy  and  multiplicity  of  duties  had  indeed  become  intoler-
able, and  the  ministry  of  North  had  already  undertaken  to  deal
with  it,  and  had  taken  some  steps  in  the  direction  of  consolida-
tion, but  it  was  reserved  for  Pitt  to  carry  out  the  work  in  all  its
details.  He  abolished  the  existing  multifarious  duties  and  draw-
backs, and  substituted  for  them  a  single  duty  on  each  article,
amounting  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  aggregate  of  the  duties  it
had  previously  paid ;  and  all  duties  and  other  taxes,  instead  of
being  divided  as  heretofore  into  a  number  of  distinct  funds,  were
now  brought  into  one  general  fund,  called  the  Consolidated  Fund,

'  Mr.  Gladstone,  in  one  of  his  finan-  of  public  economy;  a  work,  and  one
cial  speeches,  has  cited  the  following  of  the  finest  works  upon  practical  and
description  of  Pitt's  Budget  Speecli  of  theoretical  finance  that  ever  distin-
1798  fiom  Mallet  du  Pan  :  '  From  the  guished  the  pen  of  a  philosopher  and
time  that  deliberative  assemblies  have  statesman.  We  may  add  this  state-
existed,  I  doubt  whether  any  man  ment  to  the  learned  researches  of
ever  heard  a  display  of  that  nature  such  men  as  Adam  Smitli,  Arthur
equally  astonishing  from  its  extent,  Young,  and  Stuart,  whom  the  mi-
its  precision,  and  the  talents  of  its  nister  honoured  with  liis  quotations.'
author.  It  is  not  a  speech  spoken  by  — Gladstone's  Financial  Statements,
tlie  minister,  it  is  a  complete  course  p.  15.

36  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. C7i.  xtiii.

out  of  Avhicli  nil  tlie  different  classes  of  public  creditors  were
to  be  paid.  In  settling  the  new  duties,  fractions  were  usually
changed  into  the  next  liigliest  integer,  and  by  this  means  a
gain  of  about  20,000Z.  a  year  was  attained.  Burke  and  Fox
warmly  eulogised  this  measure,  which  was  carried  with  general
assent.  Its  principle  was  simple  and  by  no  means  original,  but
the  magnitude  and  complexity  of  the  task  is  sufficiently  shown
by  the  fact  that  nearly  3,000  resolutions  were  necessary  to  carry
it  into  effect.^  Pitt,  at  the  same  time,  while  reorganising  and
simplifying  this  vast  department,  abstained  from  filling  up  the
numerous  sinecures  connected  with  the  Custom  House  when
they  became  vacant,  and  at  last,  when  fifty  of  them  had  in  this
way  fallen  in,  he  abolished  them  altogether  in  1798.-

It  must  be  added  that  Pitt,  though  not  the  first,  was  the
second  leading  minister  who  had  thoroughly  mastered  and
adopted  Adam  Smith's  views  about  free  trade.  Shelburne,  it
is  true,  in  this  respect  anticipated  him,  but  Pitt  had  a  much
greater  power  and  opportunity  of  embodying  his  principles  in
legislation.  His  two  great  measures  of  this  kind  were  the  com-
mercial  propositions  relating  to  Ireland,  which  he  brought  for-
ward in  1785,  and  the  commercial  treaty  with  France,  which  he
carried  in  1786.  The  history  of  the  former  will  be  related  at
length  in  another  part  of  this  work.  It  will  here  be  suffi-
cient to  say  that  the  original  propositions  of  Pitt,  which  were
accepted  by  the  Irish  Parliament,  would  have  established  com-
plete free  trade,  commercial  equality  and  reciprocity  between
England  and  Ireland ;  the  latter  country  purchasing  the  advan-
tage by  an  annual  contribution  to  the  support  of  the  British
navy.  The  scheme  was  eminently  wise  and  liberal,  and  if  carried
into  effect  it  would  have  probably  added  greatly  to  the  prosperity
of  both  countries,  and  would  have  united  them  in  a  bond  of
the  closest  intimacy.  Unfortunately  the  jealousy  with  Avhicli
English  manufacturers  had  long  regarded  the  progress  of  Irish
industry  was  by  no  means  extinct ;  I*itt  was  compelled  by  the
pressure  of  the  trading  interest  to  modiiy  the  original  proposi-
tions, and  among  the  clauses  introduced  in  the  new  version  was

' 27 Goo. HI. c. ]:i; Dowcll's  vntions  rcsppctiiig  the  PitMio  Expcn-

Jliiit.  of  Taxatwu,  ii.  I'M ;  Toiuliiie,  ii.  ditiirr,  and  the  Injlucnce  of  the  Crvwn,

pp.  2:j:j-24!).  pp.  '.>,  10.

•■'  'M  Geo.  III.  c.  86  ;  Hose's  Ohm'

cii.  xviir.  COMMERCIAL TREATY WITH FEANCE.  37

one  binding  the  Irish  Parliament  on  a  large  class  oi"  questions  to
enact  all  such  laws  as  might  be  hereafter  enacted  in  England.
Such  a  proposal  might  have  been  wise  or  the  reverse,  but  it  was
plainly  inconsistent  with  the  complete  independence  of  the  Irish
l*arliament  which  had  been  established  in  1782,  and  of  which
Irish  politicians  were  extremely  jealous,  and  on  this  ground  the
amended  propositions  were  rejected  in  Ireland.  It  was  after-
wards one  of  the  most  ardent  wishes  of  Grattan  and  other  lead-
ing Irish  politicians  to  renew  the  negotiation  and  establish  a
permanent  commercial  union  between  England  and  Ireland  on
the  lines  of  the  original  scheme,  and  without  infringing  on  the
constitutional  independence  of  the  Irish  Parliament.  Lord
Lansdowne  strongly  advocated  this  course,^  but  Pitt,  either  from
the  pressure  of  other  cares,  from  resentment  at  the  rejection  of
his  former  schemes,  from  fear  of  arousing  commercial  jealousy
in  England,  or  perhaps  from  a  desire  to  keep  the  question  open
for  the  purpose  of  negotiating  a  legislative  union,  declined  all
overtures,  and  the  commercial  relations  of  the  two  countries
remained  as  they  had  been  established  in  1782.

The  treaty  with  France  was  more  successful,  and  it  seems  to
me  to  constitute  Pitt's  chief  title  to  legislative  fame.  The
policy  of  commercial  treaties  was  at  this  time  a  favourite  one.
In  17G6  such  a  treaty  had  been  negotiated  between  England
and  Russia  for  twenty  years,  and  it  was  chiefly  English  commerce
that  had  raised  Archangel  from  a  small  fishing  village  into  the
great  centre  of  northern  trade.  Much  political  alienation,  how-
ever, had  lately  grown  up  between  the  two  countries,  and  the
treaty  was  suffered  to  expire,  though  Russia  had  in  1785  con-
cluded a  commercial  treaty  with  the  Emperor,  and  was  in  process
of  negotiating  one  with  France.^  The  project  of  a  commercial
treaty  between  England  and  France  was  an  idea  of  Shelburne.
As  early  as  1769  that  very  able  man  had  protested  against  the
notion  that  France  was  the  natural  and  inevitable  enemy  of

'  In  his  speech  on  the  commercial  of Ireland  proved  so  totally  averse,

treaty with France he said, '  He  namely, obliging her to adopt  ira-

trusted  the  old  propositions  [to  Ire-  plicitly  all  our  further  acts  of  trade.'

land]  would  be  simplified  and  passed  Pari.  Hist.,  xxvi.  5Go.
without delaj' and without being  -  See  Annual  Register, I78G, p.

mixed  with  any  point  of  politics,  par-  lil.
ticularly  with  that  to  which  the  sense

38  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

England,  and  lie  had  taken  tlie  first  steps  to  negotiate,  at  the
close  of  the  American  War,  a  commercial  treaty  between  the  two
countries.^  The  French  ministers  appear  to  have  strongly
favoured  a  policy  of  free  trade,^  and  in  one  of  the  articles  of  the
Peace  of  Versailles  it  was  agreed  that  commissioners  should  be
appointed  to  make  new  commercial  arrangements  between  the
two  countries  on  the  basis  of  reciprocity  and  mutual  convenience.'
The  English,  however,  for  some  time,  showed  no  desire  to  carry
out  the  project  of  the  treaty;  the  French  prohibited  several
English  manufactures  which  had  been  formerly  admitted  into
France,  and  a  great  contraband  trade  had  grown  up.  Under
these  circumstances,  Pitt  revived  the  idea  of  a  close  commercial
treaty  with  France.  Eden  was  selected  as  the  English  nego-
tiator in  Paris,  and  the  treaty  was  signed  in  September  1786.

It  was  to  continue  in  force  for  twelve  years.  It  established
between  the  two  countries  complete  liberty  of  navigation  and  of
commerce  in  all  articles  that  were  not  specifically  excepted,
admitted  the  wines  of  France  into  England  at  the  same  duties
hitherto  paid  by  those  of  Portugal,  reduced  the  duties  on  a  long  list
of  the  principal  articles  of  both  countries,  and  provided  that  all
goods  not  specified  were  to  pay  only  such  duties  as  were  paid  by
the  most  favoured  nation,  without  prejudice,  however,  to  the
'  Family  Compact'  of  1761  on  the  one  side,  or  to  the  Methuen
Treaty  with  Portugal  on  the  other.  Privateers  belonging  to  any
prince  at  war  with  one  of  the  contracting  parties  might  no  longer
equip  themselves  or  sell  their  prizes  in  the  ports  of  the  other,
and  the  religious  worship,  property,  and  personal  freedom  of  the
inhabitants  of  each  country  when  residing  in  the  other  were
carefully  guaranteed.

This  policy  required  some  courage.  The  memory  of  the
explosion  of  indignation  caused  by  the  commercial  clauses  of  the
Treaty  of  Utrecht  had  not  died  away.  The  popular  antipatay
to  France  had  naturally  acquired  a  fresh  strength  during  the
American  War,  and  it  was  not  forgotten  that  Pitt's  own  father
had  been  beyond  all  things  anti-Gallican.  In  addition  to  Fox,
Ijurko  and  .Slicridiui,  the  treaty  was  assailed  in  the  House  of

'  Filzni.iurice'H  Life  of  Sltrlhnrne, Commcrcr,  iv.  20.
iii.  lii<>,  107,  318,  '^2'^,  380.  "  Aiiclilnnd  Corrrnjwndciicc,  i.  pp.

^  iSuc MaqjUtTbon's Annals of SO,  ISO,  187.

cvi.  xvui.  COMMERCIAL TREATY WITH FRANCE.  39

Commons  with  great  eloquence  by  Philip  Francis  ;  by  Flood,
whose  speech  on  this  occasion  extorted  warm  eulogies  from  his
opponents  ;  and  by  Grey,  in  a  maiden  speech  which  at  once  con-
vinced the  House  that  a  new  debater  of  almost  the  first  rank
had  appeared  among  them.  Pitt  himself  made  one  of  his
greatest  speeches  in  defence  of  the  measure,  and  he  was  some-
what feebly  supported  in  the  Commons  by  Wilberforce,  Grenville,
and  Dundas.  In  the  House  of  Lords,  Lord  Lausdowne  defended
the  principle  of  the  treaty  with  masterly  ability,  though  he
criticised  in  a  very  hostile  spirit  some  of  its  details.

The  question  was  argued  on  several  entirely  distinct  grounds.
Looking  at  it  from  its  purely  commercial  aspects  it  was  contended
that  no  treaty  could  be  more  advantageous  than  one  with  France.
It  opened  to  English  manufacturers  an  immediate  market  of
more  than  20,000,000  of  persons,  a  market  which  was  close  at
hand,  which  must  produce  expeditious  and  certain  returns,  and
which  would  probably  eventually  spread  English  goods  over  the
greater  part  of  Europe.  What  was  there  to  counterbalance  this
benefit?  The  English  manufactures  were  well  established.
With  the  English  superiority  in  capital  and  coal  they  were
never  likely  to  be  shaken.  They  were  increasing  with  an  extra-
ordinary rapidity,  and'  their  great  want  was  a  more  extended
market.  This  market  the  treaty  would  give  them,  and  it  would
mere  than  compensate  them  for  the  loss  of  the  monopoly  in
America.  France,  on  the  other  hand,  was  pre-eminently  a
country  of  wines  and  brandies,  of  oil  and  vinegar,  articles
which  England  did  not  produce,  and  which  it  was  a  great  object
to  her  to  obtain  at  a  cheap  rate.  The  two  countries  were  thus
peculiarly  fitted  to  carry  on  a  mutually  advantageous  trade,  for
each  had  its  own  distinct  staple  ;  each  produced  in  great  abun-
dance what  the  other  wanted,  and  the  great  and  leading  lines  of
their  respective  riches  did  not  clash.  It  was  true  that  duties  on
a  number  of  articles  of  import  were  to  be  lowered  on  an  average
fifty  per  cent.,  but  it  was  a  well-established  and  often  a  wise  policy
to  surrender  revenue  for  great  commercial  purposes.  Nor  was  such
a  surrender  likely  to  be  serious,  for  increased  consumption  would
rapidly  recuperate  the  Treasury,  and  the  chief  loss  would  certainly
fall  upon  the  smuggling  trade,  which  it  was  a  main  object  of  recent
commercial  legislation  to  suppress. French  cambrics  were  abso-

40  ENGLAND IN TIIK EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xviiI:

liitely  proliibited  in  England  except  for  exportation,  but  yet  they
Vt^ere  notoriously  in  general  use.  French  laces  were  absolutely
prohibited,  yet  it  was  said  that  more  than  two-thirds  of  what  was
called  Buckinghamshire  lace  was  made  in  France.^  Not  more
than  600,000  gallons  of  brandy  were  legally  imported  into
England,  and  according  to  the  best  estimates  between  300,000
and  400,000  more  were  smuggled.

It  was  said  that  the  trade  with  Portugal  would  be  ruined  by
the  French  Treaty,  but  the  assertion  was  at  least  an  exaggera-
tion. We  had  bound  ourselves  by  the  Methuen  Treaty  to  admit
Portuguese  wines  at  duties  a  third  below  those  on  French
wines,  and  Pitt  was  prepared,  if  the  duty  on  French  wines  was
reduced,  to  make  a  corr^jsponding  reduction  on  those  of  Portugal.
If  in  other  respects  the  trade  with  Portugal  diminished,  this
was  but  a  slight  counterpoise  to  the  great  benefit  of  the  opening
of  the  French  market.  The  Portuguese  trade  was  small,  distant,
aud  declining,  and  there  had  been  of  late  great  complaints  of
the  obstacles  which  the  Portuguese  Government  had  thrown  in
its  way.

The  political  objection  was  that  which  was  deemed  most  for-
midable, and  on  this  point  both  Pitt  and  Lord  Lansdowne  pro-
tested in  the  strongest  and  most  eloquent  terms  against  the
popular  notion  that  England  and  France  were  natural  enemies.
'  To  suppose  that  any  nation  could  be  unalterably  the  enemy  of
another  was  weak  and  childish.  It  had  no  foundation  in  the
experience  of  nations  nor  in  the  history  of  man.  It  was  a  libel
on  the  constitution  of  political  societies  and  supposed  the  exis-
tence of  diabolical  malice  in  the  original  frame  of  man.'  It  was
not  true  that  all  the  best  English  traditions  were  traditions  of
hostility  to  France.  Close  friendship  with  that  country  was  the
policy  of  Elizabeth,  of  Cromwell,  and  of  Walpole.  The  most
deadly  blow  that  had  been  recently  directed  against  the
political  system  of  Europe  was  the  partition  of  l*oland — an  act
in  which  France  had  no  part,  and  which  would  have  been  im-
possible if  Ihighuid  and  France  had  been  cordially  united.  It
was  an  act,  said  Lord  Lansdowne,  which,  'if  kiiigiloms  are  to
be  judged  hereafter  like  men,  must  one  day  meet  with  condign
puuishmeiit,'  and  he added,  that  if  he  hud  not  censed  to  bo

•  i'url.  llhl.  xxvi. Ill,  W:,.

cit.  will.  CO.M:,rERCIAL  TIIKATY AVITII FRANCE.  41

Secretary  of  State  in  1700  it  had  been  his  '  full  intention  to  have
proposed  to  the  King  of  France  a  confidential  as  well  as  an  open
connection  with  Great  Britain  in  order  to  have  prevented  that
reproach  to  Europe.'

The  truth  is,  as  Pitt  urged  with  admirable  force,  that  France
and  England,  instead  of  being  doomed  by  nature  to  constant
enmity,  are  from  their  circumstances  peculiarly  fitted  for
friendly  connection,  and  each  nation  has  been  sacrificing  its
most  real  interests  through  political  jealousy.  '  By  promoting
habits  of  friendly  intercourse  and  mutual  benefit,'  the  treaty
would  have  at  least  '  the  happy  tendency  of  making  the  two
nations  enter  into  more  intimate  connection  with  each  other,'  and
as  their  tastes,  manners,  and  interests  were  blended  or  assimi-
lated, the  chances  of  future  war  would  steadily  and  certainly
diminish.  If,  however,  the  old  hostility  were  unhappily  renewed
there  was  nothing  in  the  new  arrangement  to  weaken  the  mili-
tary resources  of  England,  for  a  commerce  which  made  her
richer  could  only  make  her  stronger.

It  was  idle  to  argue  from  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  against  the
present  treaty.  The  commercial  treaty  under  Queen  Anne  was
rejected  mainly  through  party  motives,  and  it  was  rejected  at  a
time  when  England  possessed  very  few  of  the  manufactures  in
which  she  is  now  without  a  rival.  That  the  conduct  of  France
to  England  during  the  American  War  was  extremely  unfriendly,
Pitt  fully  acknowledged.  But  the  policy  of  nations  should  not
be  determined  by  mere  motives  of  resentment,  and  it  was  a
matter  of  legitimate  pride  that,  after  so  many  eff*orts  to  crush
ICngland,  France  now  acknowledged  herself  to  have  failed,  and
was  looking  forward  with  eagerness  to  the  benefit  of  an  amicable
connection.

Such  were  the  chief  arguments  urged  on  behalf  of  the  treaty.
The  arguments  on  the  other  side,  if  less  sound,  are  certainly  not
less  worthy  of  the  attention  of  historians.  The  old  belief  that
all  wealth  consists  of  mone}^,  and  that  therefore  trade  can  only
be  beneficial  to  the  country  which  obtains  the  largest  return  in
gold,  was  steadily  waning,  but  it  still  found  one  very  able  advo-
cate in  Parliament.  The  speech  of  Henry  Flood  illustrates  with
singular  fidelity  the  economical  ideas  of  a  generation  which  was
now  passing  speedily  away. '  Eii'^,L'uk1  and  France,'  he  said,  '  are

42  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUP.y. cii.  xvm.

naturally  and  invariably  rivals.'  'It  was  impossible  but  one
must  have  the  advantage  of  tlie  other  in  all  treaties  of  this
nature ; '  the  nation  which  is  at  once  the  poorest  and  the  most
abstemious  '  will  always  drain  from  the  richest  in  all  commer-
cial intercourse/  and  for  this  reason  Trance  must  ultimately
diminish  bur  specie  and  increase  her  own.'  Since  Colbert,  the
French  had  been  steadily  advancing  in  manufactures.  '  Had
they  not  a  hundred  towns  now  employed  in  the  woollen  manu-
facture? Have  they  not  considerable  ironworks  ?  Were  they  not
establishing  with  all  possible  expedition  and  encouragement  the
manufacture  of  cottons  ? '  France  had,  in  a  word,  manufactures
of  the  same  kind  as  those  of  England,  amply  sufficient  to  supply
her  own  market,  sufficient  perhaps  to  invade  the  English  market,
and  England  will  therefore  be  obliged  to  pay  not  in  manufac-
tures but  in  specie  for  the  wines,  brandies,  and  olives,  which  she
will  receive.  Monopoly,  according  to  Flood,  is  the  first  condition
of  profitable  commerce.  It  is  the  main  advantage  of  colonies
that  they  supply  such  monopolies,  and  '  in  all  commercial
treaties  with  foreign  powers  the  true  policy  is  to  acquire  as
many  of  them  in  your  favour  as  you  possibly  can,  and  to
diminish  if  possible  those  of  the  nation  with  which  you  are
in  treaty.'  But  France  from  her  soil  and  climate  already
possesses  a  physical  monopoly  of  the  products  she  would  chiefly
send  to  England — and  those  products  were  objects  not  of
necessity  but  of  luxury — while  England  has  no  monopoly  of  the
manufactured  goods  she  desires  to  sell.

*■  The  great  objects  of  such  a  country  as  this  are  those  coun-
tries which  are  destitute  of  manufactures,  but  rich  in  bullion
or  in  necessary  or  highly  useful  commodities.  Spain,  from
defect  of  industry  and  from  abundance  of  bullion,  is  such  an
object.  Holland,  from  defect  of  territory  and  from  commercial
opulence,  is  another.  The  Northern  kingdoms  are  objects  from
the  plenty  of  commodities  of  tlie  first  and  second  necessity.'
J3ut  a  trade  with  a  country  which  will  supply  us  mainly  with
luxuries,  will  drain  away  our  specie,  and  will  destroy  the  mono-
poly of  our  own  manufactures  in  the  home  market,  is  not  a
benefit  but  an  evil.  It  is  never  wise  to  risk  the  certainty  of
the  home  market  for  the  chance  of  any  other.  '  The  market  of
the  world  is  a  great  thing  in  sound ; but  in  reality  the  home

CH.  xviii,  C03I.MEKCIAL TREATY WITK FRANCE.  43

market  is  in  every  country  greater  than  that  of  all  the  rest  of
the  world.'  It  is  greater  in  extent.  It  is  invaluable  from  its
steadiness  and  its  security.  '  Foreign  consumption  is  only
worth  to  British  industry  that  sum  by  which  the  exports  of
Great  Britain  exceed  all  that  she  imports  for  home  consumption.'
The  commercial  ideas  expressed  in  this  speech  differ,  how-
ever, widely  from  those  which  were  advanced  by  the  leaders  of
the  Opposition.  Fox  expressly  disclaimed  '  that  mode  of  argu-
ing which  deemed  exports  a  gain  and  imports  a  loss,'  and  Burke
declared  that  he  felt  no  jealousy  of  the  manufactures  of  France
and  believed  that  for  a  long  period  our  ascendency  in  this
department  was  overwhelming,  though  he  contended  that  a
close  commercial  alliance  must  ultimately  'blend  the  property
of  the  two  kingdoms  '  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  poorer  one.
They  argued,  however,  that  even  commercially  we  should  lose
more  through  the  treaty  than  we  gained.  The  loss  to  the
revenue  from  the  reduction  of  duties  would  be  greater ;  the
diminution  of  smuggling  would  be  smaller  than  was  predicted  ;
and  England  in  gaining  the  French  market  would  sacrifice  others
which  were  more  secure  if  not  more  lucrative.  The  Portuguese
trade  was  sure  to  fall  off,  the  Methuen  Treaty  would  pro-
bably not  be  renewed,  and  thus  England  would  lose  one  of  her
oldest  and  steadiest  coinmercial  connections.  Already  the
Emperor,  irritated  by  the  manifest  preference  of  the  English
Government  for  France,  had  retaliated  by  imposing  crushing
duties  on  English  goods  in  Flanders,^  and  it  was  probable  that
other  foreign  powers  would  follow  his  example.  France  had  of
late  entered  most  seriously  into  rivalry  with  English  commerce
in  the  Levant,  and  one  of  her  great  objects  was  to  obtain  the
carrying  trade  of  the  Mediterranean.  '  Through  her  rivers  and
canals  she  intended  to  pour  the  commodities  of  England  into
other  countries.  She  had  already  by  her  politics  contrived  to
wrest  our  shaz-e  of  the  Levant  trade  from  us,  and  it  was  a  part
of  her  present  design  to  divert  the  remainder  from  its  former
channel,  and,  by  supplying  all  the  ports  in  the  Mediterranean
!Sea  through  the  Seine,  the  Garonne,  the  Canal  of  Languedoc,
and  the  Rhone,  to  engross  the  carrying  trade  of  the  Levant  and
to  ruin  our  factory  at  Leghorn  and  our  other  establishments  in
»  Fail  Hid.  xxvi.  113.

44  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEvY. cii.  xvm.

those  seas.' '  It  was  a  matter  of  great  consideration  to
England  that  France  was  now  evidently  paying  a  special
attention  to  her  navy,  and  it  shonld  not  be  foi'gotten  that  if  a
near  trade  brings  immediate  returns,  it  is  the  distant  trade  of
England  which  chiefly  fosters  and  maintains  her  naval  supe-
riority.

The  main  arguments,  however,  of  the  Opposition  were  of  a
political  kind,  and  they  show  clearly  the  intense  dislike  and
distrust  of  France  which  characterised  the  Whig  party  till  the
French  Revolution  altered  their  views.  Fox  and  Burke  both
complained  bitterly  of  the  '  narrow  and  confined  ground '  on
which  Pitt  argued  a  question  that  in  reality  affected  vitally  the
Avhole  disposition  of  power  in  Europe.  '  France,'  said  Fox,  '  is
the  natural  political  enemy  of  Great  Britain.'  In  spite  of  the
apparent  levity  of  her  national  character,  for  much  more  than  a
century  and  through  all  changes  of  administration  and  circum-
stances, she  had  been  governed  on  a  regular  and  constant  idea,
'  that  of  overweening  pride  and  national  aggrandisement.'  Some-
times by  force  of  arms,  sometimes  by  negotiations,  sometimes  by
small  and  isolated  but  well-calculated  encroachments  on  the
rights  of  weaker  powers,  sometimes  by  commercial  connections,
she  had  been  steadily  pursuing  her  one  object,  the  acquisition  of
a  dominant  influence  in  Europe.  England  was  her  hereditary  and
her  most  formidable  opponent.  She  had  been  less  consistent
than  France,  and  under  the  Stuarts  she  had  abandoned  the  task
which  belonged  to  her,  but  since  the  Revolution  her  policy  had
been  almost  invariable.  '  Her  true  situation  was  that  of  a  great
nuiritime  power,  looked  up  to  by  the  other  powers  of  Europe  as
that  to  which  the  distressed  should  fly  for  assistance,  whenever
France  unjustly  attacked  them.'  But  it  was  impossible  that
England  could  maintain  this  independent  and  suspicious  attitude
which  was  so  essential  to  the  balance  of  power,  if  her  material
interests  were  inextricably  blended  with  those  of  France.  The
object  of  France  in  making  this  treaty  was  very  obvious.  '  She
meant  to  draw  tliis  country  into  her  scale  of  the  balance  of
power,  wliich  could  not  but  make  it  preponderate;  to  tie  our
Iiaiids  and  prevent  us  fnjm  eng;iging  in  any  alliance  with  other
powers.'  The  policy  of  tlie  Government  was  a  direct  reversal  of
»  rurl.  Hist.  xxvi.  188.

rn.  xviTi.  COMMERCIAL TREATY WITH FRANCE.  4  5

the  settled  English  policy  since  tbe  Revolution,  and  especially
of  the  policy  of  Chatham,  who  had  declared  in  the  strongest
terms  his  rooted  distrust  and  jealousy  of  France.  How  well
founded  was  his  judgment  events  had  but  too  clearly  shown.
No  two  sovereigns  could  be  more  unlike  than  Lewis  XIV.  and
Lewis  XVL,  but  the  traditions  of  French  policy  were  so  persis-
tent that  the  mild  and  respectable  sovereign  who  now  occupied
the  French  throne  had  fully  rivalled  the  ambition,  while  he  had
attained  much  more  than  the  success,  of  his  predecessor.

Was  it  necessary  to  recall  to  Englishmen  the  perfidy  with
which  France  had  fostered  the  American  revolt  while  duping
England  by  the  most  pacific  assurances,  or  the  resolution  and
skill  with  which,  when  she  had  cast  aside  the  mask,  she  had
organised  and  sustained  the  coalition  which  dejjrived  England  of
the  most  precious  of  her  colonies  ?  Since  that  date  she  had  been
jiursuing  the  same  ends  by  other  means.  The  fortifications  of
Cherbourg  were  rising  with  a  menacing  rapidity.  The  French
navy  was  eagerly  pressed  on.  In  flolland  the  party  opposed  to
the  House  of  Orange  and  the  English  alliance  was  openly
assisted.  By  extending  her  commercial  connections  France  was
chiefly  seeking  to  prepare  for  herself  new  political  alliances,  to
sow  dissension  among  her  opponents,  to  fetter  their  action  by  en-
tangling engagements.  This  was  the  true  meaning  of  the  special
commercial  privileges  which  had  lately  been  given  to  America  ;
of  the  treaty  of  alliance  and  commerce  which  had  in  1785  been
concluded  with  the  Netherlands  ;  of  the  commercial  treaty  which
was  being  negotiated  with  Russia ;  of  the  eagerness  of  France  to
negotiate  a  treaty  with  England.  In  1761  the  father  of  the  pre-
sent minister  had  abandoned  office  because,  on  receiving  secret  ■
intelligence  of  the  '  Family  Compact '  between  France  and  Spain,
his  colleagues  were  not  j^repared  at  once  to  resent  it  by  a  declara-
tion of  war  against  Spain.  By  one  of  the  clauses  of  the  com-
mercial treaty,  England  was  asked,  for  the  first  time,  formally
to  recognise  that  Compact.  The  discouragement  thrown  by  the
treaty  on  Portugal  would  probably  deprive  England  of  her  most
important  ally  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  would  possibly  turn
that  ally  into  an  enemy.  Portuguese  statesmen  would  argue
that  if  a  close  commercial  connection  between  neighbouring
nations  was so peculiarly  valuable,  Spain and  Portugal were

46  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

nearer  to  each  other  than  France  and  England,  and  Englii^h
policy  might  thus  induce  Portugal  to  throw  herself  into  the
arms  of  Spain  and  to  add  her  weight  to  the  already  prepondera-
ting power  of  the  House  of  Bourbon.

In  spite  of  the  arguments  which  were  thus  powerfully  urged,
the  commercial  treaty  was  carried  through  all  its  principal  stages
bv  majorities  of  more  than  two  to  one,  and  it  excited  no  serious
panic  or  opposition  among  the  commercial  classes.  The  favour,
or  at  least  acquiescence  with  which  they  accepted  it  contrasts
remarkably  with  their  violent  opposition  to  the  Irish  proposi-
tions, and  the  contrast  is  the  more  remarkable  as  Ireland  was
certainly  far  less  capable  than  France  of  rivalling  the  manu-
factures of  England,  The  difference,  however,  is  not  inex-
plicable. English  commerce,  as  we  shall  see,  had  already  great
and  special  legislative  advantages  in  its  dealings  with  Ireland,
and  Ireland  could  offer  no  market  comparable  to  that  which
free  trade  with  France  woiild  almost  certainly  open.

The  War  cf  the  French  Revolution,  a  few  years  later,  tore  to
shreds  the  commercial  treaty  of  Pitt,  and  by  a  strangely  un-
fortunate fate  the  minister  who  had  laboured  so  assiduously  to
lay  the  foundations  of  a  lasting  friendship  between  two  great
nations  which  had  been  for  centuries  divided  was  afterwards
regarded  by  France  as  the  most  inveterate  of  her  enemies.  The
merit  of  the  conception  of  the  French  treaty  belongs  chiefly  to
Shelbume,  but  Pitt  deserves  much  credit  for  the  skill  and
courage  with  which  he  carried  it  into  effect.  If  it  did  not
during  the  few  years  of  its  existence  produce  all  the  advantages,
it  certainly  produced  little  or  nothing  of  the  evils  that  were  pre-
dicted, and  it  was  an  important  element  in  the  great  increase  of
national  prosperity.  One  of  its  most  remarkable  consequences
was  an  immediate  revival  of  the  taste  for  French  wines  which
had  prevailed  in  England  before  the  wars  of  the  Revolution,
and  the  importation  of  these  wines,  which  in  the  year  before
the  treaty  was  less  than  100,000  gallons,  rose  in  six  years  to
083,000  gallons.'

The  Commercial  Treaty  was  probably  the  most  valuable
result  of  the  legislation  of  Pitt. That,  however,  to  which  his

'  See  an interesting  account  of wine in  Mr. Gladstone's Fiiuincial
the  cliangcs  in  tlic  Enylish  taste  for Slatcmeiits,  pp.  151-15IJ.

en.  xvni.  PITT'S SINKING FUND.  47

contemporaries  appear  to  have  attaclied  tlie  greatest  Importance
was  his  legishxtion  fertile  purpose  of  reducing- the  National  Debt.
He  found  that  debt  on  his  accession  to  office  increased  to  about
250,000,000/.,  which  was  two  and  a  half  times  as  large  as  the
amount  which  Walpole  thought  it  possible  for  England  to  sup-
port. He  clearly  saw  that  its  magnitude  was  the  chief  permanent
element  of  weakness  in  the  nation,  and  that  if  it  is  pardonable
or  necessary  for  a  nation  in  the  struggle  of  a  great  war  to  throw
a  large  portion  of  the  cost  upon  posterity,  it  is  at  least  un-
pardonable for  a  nation  in  time  of  peace  to  bequeath  that
burden  undiminished  to  its  children.  In  bringing  forward  a
new  loan  in  1784,  for  the  purpose  of  funding  a  great  part  of  the
unfunded  debt,  he  said  that  '  it  had  always  been  his  idea  that  a
fund  at  a  high  rate  of  interest  was  better  for  the  country  than
those  at  low  rates ;  that  a  4  per  cent,  was  preferable  to  a  3  per
cent.,  and  a  5  per  cent,  better  than  a  4  per  cent.'  '  The  reason
of  this,'  he  continued,  '  was  that  in  all  operations  of  finance  we
should  have  in  our  view  a  plan  of  redemption.  Gradually  to
redeem  and  to  extinguish  our  debt  ought  ever  to  be  the  wise
pursuit  of  Government,  and  every  scheme  and  operation  of
finance  should  be  directed  to  that  end.'  ^  In  accordance  with
these  maxims  it  was  one  of  his  first  objects,  as  soon  as  the
finances  of  the  country  would  allow  of  it,  to  provide  a  new
sinking  fund  for  the  redemption  of  the  debt.

In  1786  he  already  found  it  possible  to  take  considerable
steps  in  this  direction.  Partly  through  the  new  taxation  he  had
imposed,  partly  through  the  normal  increase  of  wealth  in  a
period  of  peace  and  great  manufacturing  prosperity,  but  partly
also  through  the  improved  management  of  the  revenue,  and  the
great  diminution  of  smuggling  resulting  from  recent  legislation,
the  alarming  deficit  which  had  existed  two  years  before  was
removed,  and  there  was  already  a  surplus  of  revenue  exceeding
900,000Z.  Pitt  determined  by  slight  additional  taxation  to
raise  the  surplus  to  1,000,000/.,  and  to  apply  this  sum  annually
to  the  redemption  of  the  debt.

The  earliest  considerable  measure  for  the  reduction  of  the
National Debt  had  been  the  Sinking Fund,  which  was first
proposed  by  Lord  Stanhope,  and  was  established  by  Walpole  in
»  Pari.  Ihst.  xxiv.  1022.

4S  ENGLAND IN THE EIGETEENTII CENTURY. en,  xvni.

1716.  Previous  to  this  date  a  number  of  particular  taxes  and
duties,  limited  in  their  duration,  had  been  charged  with  the  pay-
ment of  the  interest  of  particular  loans ;  these  taxes  were  then
made  perpetual  and  brought  into  three  funds,  called  the  Aggre-
gate, the  South  Sea,  and  the  General  Funds ;  and  as  they
amounted  annually  to  a  larger  sum  than  the  annual  interest  of
the  debt,  it  was  provided  that  the  surplus  should  be  collected
into  a  fourth  fund  called  the  Sinking  Fund,  and  ajoplied  invio-
lably to  the  payment  of  the  National  Debt.  This  fund  was  much
augmented  by  the  reduction  of  the  interest  from  five  to  four  per
cent,  which  was  effected  in  1727,  and  by  a  further  reduction  to
three  per  cent,  which  was  gradually  effected  by  two  measures
that  were  carried  in  1749  and  1750.

It  is  now  well  understood  that  the  maintenance  of  a  special
and  separate  fund  for  the  payment  of  the  National  Debt  is  a
mere  matter  of  arrangement  or  political  convenience,  and  that
the  capacity  of  a  nation  for  reducing  in  any  year  its  national
debt  depends  exclusively  on  the  existence  and  the  amount  of
surplus  revenue  over  its  charges.  Every  scheme  of  liquidation
must  be  a  delusion  if  it  does  not  presuppose  an  annual  revenue
greater  than  the  annual  expenditure.  To  allot  year  by  year  a
definite  sum  to  the  reduction  of  the  debt  is  a  wise  policy  as
long  as  that  sum  consists  of  surplus  revenue,  but  if  the  revenue
is  below  the  necessary  charges  or  is  only  equal  to  them  it  is
absolutely  senseless.  In  that  case  it  is  necessary  to  contract  a
new  debt  in  order  to  pay  off"  a  portion  of  the  old  one.  If  the
new  debt  is  raised  on  the  same  terms  as  the  old  one  the  country
Avill  lose  the  necessary  expenses  incurred  in  launching  the  new
loan,  but  in  other  respects  the  financial  situation  will  remain
unchanged.  If  the  country  borrows  at  higher  interest  than  the
old  debt  it  will  become  to  that  extent  poorer  by  the  transaction.
The  only  circumstance  under  Avhich  it  can  be  advantageous  to
Ijorrow  in  order  to  pay  off"  an  old  debt  is  when  it  is  possible  to
raise  the  new  loan  on  better  terms  than  the  old  one.

These  propositions,  however,  which  now  appear  very  elemen-
tary, were  not  recognised  in  England  in  the  eighteenth  century,
"jliero  was  a  strange  belief,  even  in  the  time  of  Walpole,  that  by
niaintainiuf;  the  Sinl\in<r  Fund  inviolate  it  would  accumulate  at
i-()Iiij»iiiiim1  interest  while  the  new  dchts  that  might  be  incurred

CH.  xvm.  POLICY OF SINKING FUNDS.  49

would  accumulate  only  at  simple  interest,  and  that  it  might
therefore  be  a  wise  policy  to  borrow  even  at  high  interest  rather
than  divert  the  Sinking  Fund  from  its  purpose.'  How  far
Walpole  himself  held  these  notions  is  very  doubtful.  The
finances  under  his  management  were  in  a  thoroughly  healthy
condition,  and  the  formation  of  the  vSinking  Fund  and  the
exaggerated  belief  in  its  efficacy  at  least  strengthened  public
credit  and  enabled  him  to  carry  into  effect  his  really  valuable
measure  of  reducing  the  interest  on  the  debt.  For  some  vears
however,  the  policy  of  applying  the  surplus  resulting  from  the
three  funds  that  have  been  mentioned,  after  the  payment  of  the
interest  of  the  National  Debt,  to  the  diminution  of  its  principal
was  steadily  pursued  even  in  years  when  the  other  taxes  were
not  sufficient  to  cover  the  expenditure  of  the  country.  Between
1716  and  1728,  6,1G8,732L  was  actually  borrowed,  while  the
sum  paid  off  through  the  operation  of  the  Sinking  Fund  was
only  6,648,000L  As  we  have  seen,  however,  in  a  former  part  of
this  work,  Walpole  soon  discarded  this  useless  and  cumbrous
system.  First  of  all  the  interest  of  the  new  loans  was  thrown
upon  the  Sinking  Fund.  In  17oo,  500,000/.  was  taken  from  the
Sinking  Fund  for  the  supplies  of  the  year.  In  1731,  1,200,000/.
was  taken  from  it. In  1735  it  was  anticipated  and  mortgaged.''^

In  1771  and  1772  Dr.  Price,  an  eminent  Nonconformist
minister,  who  during  many  succeeding  years  held  a  prominent
place  among  the  political  writers  of  England,  published  his
'  Treatise  on  Reversionary  Annuities '  and  his  more  elaborate
*  Appeal  to  the  Public  on  the  Subject  of  the  National  Debt,'  which
were  destined  to  exercise  a  profound  and  most  singular  influence
on  English  financial  policy.  He  urged  that  a  certain  sum
should  be  annually  set  aside  for  the  redemption  of  the  National
Debt ;  that  it  should  be  employed  in  purchasing  stock  in  the
market  at  the  current  prices ;  that  the  interest  and  dividends  of
the  stock  so  purchased  should,  in  addition  to  the  original
annual  sum,  be  invariably  applied  to  the  purchase  of  new  stock,

'  See  especially  an  Egsaij  on  the  Bi'ht,  and anticipates much  of tlie

Public Debts  of  the  Kingdmn^  pub-  reasoning  of  Dr.  Price,
lislied anonymously in 172() and  -  Hamilton  0 nth:  National  Beht,

ascribed  to  Sir  Nathaniel  Gould,  M. P.  pp.  93-1)6. Price On  the Nationul

It  has  been  reprinted  in Lord  Over-  7AW  (Lord  Overstone's Srleet  Tnirts

stone's  St'h'ct  Tracts  on  the  Aationul  on  the  A'ational  Debt),  :!L'9-:3.'17.

VOL. V.  K

50 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xvni.

and  tliat  iu  this  manner  a  fund  should  be  formed  which  would
increase  by  compound  interest  at  a  continually  accelerating
speed  and  would  enable  the  nation  at  a  very  small  expense  ta
discharge  the  whole  of  its  debt.

The  essential  characteristic,  he  maintained,  of  this  scheme,
was  that  it  should  be  pursued  without  interruption,  in  times  of
war  as  well  as  in  times  of  peace,  in  times  of  deficit  as  well  as  in
times  of  surplus,  and  in  that  case,  by  the  virtues  of  compound
interest,  it  would  produce  effects  which  seemed  absolutely
magical.  '  A  State,'  he  said,  '  may  without  difficulty  redeem  all
its  debts  by  borrowing  money  for  that  purpose  at  an  equal  or
even  any  higher  interest  than  the  debts  bear ;  and  without  pro-
viding any  other  funds  than  such  small  ones  as  shall  from  year
to  year  become  necessary  to  pay  the  interest  of  the  sums
borrowed.'  '  Let  a  State  be  supposed  to  run  in  debt  two  mil-
lions annually,  for  which  it  pays  four  per  cent,  interest;  in
seventy  years  a  debt  of  140  millions  would  be  incurred.  But  an
appropriation  of  400,00OZ.  per  annum,  if  employed  in  the  manner
of  the  Sinking  Fund,  would  at  the  end  of  this  term  leave  the
nation  beforehand  six  millions.'  '  Let  us  suppose  a  nation  to  be
capable  of  setting  apart  the  annual  sum  of  200,000Z.  as  a
fund  for  keeping  the  debts  it  is  continually  incurring  in  a
course  of  redemption.  ...  A  debt  of  200,000/.  discharged  the
first  year  will  disengage  for  the  public  an  annuity  of  10,000/.
If  this  annuity,  instead  of  being  spent  on  current  services,  is
added  to  the  fund,  and  both  employed  in  paying  debts,  an
annuity  of  10,500/.  will  be  disengaged  the  second  year,  or  of
20,500/.  in  both  years.  And  this  again  added  to  the  fund  the
third  year,  will  increase  it  to  220,500/.  with  which  an  annuity
will  be  then  disengaged  of  11,025/.,  and  the  sum  of  the  dis-
charged annuities  will  be  31,525/.,  which  added  to  the  fund  the
fourth  year  will  increase  it  to  231,525/.,  and  enable  it  then  to  dis-
engage an  annuity  of  1 1,576/.  5s.  and  render  the  sum  of  the  dis-
engaged anniiit  ios  in  lour  years  43,101/.  5.s'.  Let  any  one  proceed
in  this  way  and  he  may  satisfy  hiuiseH"  that  the  original  fund,
together  witli  tlie  sum  of  the  annuities  disengaged,  will  incre;i,se
faster  and  faster  every  year  till  in  oighfy-six  years  the  fund
becomes  13,283,41  I/,  and  Iht-  sum  of  llic  disengaged  annuities
13,083,111/. Til- full value,  111.  ivloiv,  ;it  Hve  per  cent,  of  an

en.  XVIII.  PITTS SINKING FUND.  51

annuity  of  lo,083/l<l*l<i5.  will  have  been  paid  iu  elglity-six  years,
that  is,  very  nearly  202,000,000^.  of  debt.  And  consequently  it
appears  that,  though  the  State  had  been  all  along  adding  every
year  to  its  debts  three  millions,  that  is,  though  in  the  time
supposed  it  had  contracted  a  debt  of  258,0O0,OO0Z.,  it  would
have  been  more  than  discharged  at  no  greater  expense  than  an
annual  saving  of  200,000^' '

It  would  lead  us  too  far  to  enter  into  an  elaborate  exami-
nation of  the  now  universally  acknowledged  fallacies  that  under-
lie these  reasonings.  It  will  be  sufficient  here  to  say  that  the
interest  of  the  capitalised  stock  devoted  to  the  payment  of
the  debt  is  not  a  spontaneous  product,  but  is  exclusively  derived
from  taxation  appropriated  to  the  purpose,  and  that  therefore  it
is  by  taxation,  and  taxation  alone,  that  the  debt  is  paid.  The
theories  of  Price,  however,  though  clearly  refuted  at  the  time
by  a  few  obscure  and  almost  forgotten  writers,^  were  widely
accepted,  and  when  Pitt  resolved  upon  the  reduction  of  the
National  Debt  he  entered  into  correspondence  with  Price,
received  from  Price  three  separate  plans  for  accomplishing  his
object,  and  adopted  one  of  them  with  scarcely  any  change,
though  without  any  public  recognition  of  the  true  author.'
His  Bill  for  reducing  the  debt  was  introduced  in  1786.  It
appropriated  an  annual  surplus  of  a  million  to  the  purchase  of
stock.  The  interest  of  the  stock  so  purchased  was  to  be  applied
in  a  similar  manner,  and  to  this  fund  were  to  be  added  the  taxes
appropriated  for  the  payment  of  annuities  as  soon  as  the  terms
of  those  annuities  had  expired.  This  Sinking  Fund  was  to  be
vested  in  six  Commissioners  of  high  rank,  and  every  legislative
precaution  was  taken  to  prevent  it  from  being  diverted  to  any
other  purpose.  When  the  annual  income  received  by  the  Com-
missioners amounted  to  four  millions,  it  was  no  longer  to  be
necessarily  applied  to  the  Sinking  Fund,  but  remained  at  the
disposal  of  Parliament.^

The  scheme  passed  with  very  little  criticism. No  member

'  Price Oa the Naf-ional Dcht;  *  See Mortran's IJfe of Price,

Lord  OveYs\onc,  Si-Uct Iractx  on  the  pp.  45,  120, IL'5  ; Hamilton  on  The

jXational  Dcht.  pp.  31.5,  316,  317,  3l.'3.  Nutkmal  Debt,  149-lGU  ; Lord  Over-

-'  See  two  of  the  Tracts  reprinted  stone's  Sidcct  Tracts,  pp.  389,  400.

in Lord Over.stone's Tracts on the  *  26  Geo.  III.  ch.  31.
jVatumal  Diht.

B  2

52  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xriii.

of  the  Opposition  ajipears  to  liave  clearly  seen  the  fallacy  of  its
calculations,  and  public  opinion  long  looked  upon  the  Sinking
Fund  as  the  central  pillar  of  English  finance.  In  time  of  peace,
when  it  svas  possible  to  reduce  the  debt  out  of  a  surplus,  the
financial  policy  of  Pitt  seemed  veiy  successful,  and  the  process
of  reduction  did  undoubtedly  proceed  with  a  slightly  accelerated
rapidity.  7,231,508Z.  of  the  funded  debt  had  been  discharged
in  the  twenty-six  years  that  followed  the  Peace  of  Utrecht ;
6,013,640L  in  the  eight  years  from  174-8  to  1756,  which  fol-
lowed the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle ;  10,990,010^.  in  the  twelve
years  that  followed  the  Peace  of  Paris.  In  the  ten  years  of  peace
from  1783  to  1793  which  followed  the  American  War  the  debt
was  reduced  by  10,242,100L'  In  1792  a  new  step  was  taken
in  the  same  direction  by  a  measure  providing  that  there  should
be  a  sinking  fund  of  1  per  cent,  attached  to  every  fresh  loan.
But  soon  the  great  French  War  began,  and  it  became  necessary
to  borrow  largely  every  year  at  a  time  when  the  funds  were
greatly  depressed,  and  the  credit  of  the  country  was  strained  to
the  utmost.  Yet  still  the  system  of  the  Sinking  Fund  was  main-
tained. The  nation  annually  borrowed  vast  sums  at  high  interest,
and  applied  a  part  of  them  to  pay  off  a  debt  which  bore  a  low
interest,  and  the  absolutely  useless  and  unrequited  loss  resulting
tVom  this  process  in  the  course  of  the  war  can  have  been  little
less  than  20,000,0001^

There  is  something  very  singular  and  very  melancholy  in
this  part  of  the  administration  of  Pitt.  By  his  contemporaries
he  was  generally  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  financial  ministers.
Godolphin  and  Walpole  had  never  reached,  Peel  and  Gladstone
liave  certainly  not  surpassed,  the  authority  and  popularity  he  en-
joyed ;  and  the  supreme  end  which  he  set  before  himself  in  his
financial  policy  was  the  redemption  of  the  National  Debt.  In
the  great  speech  in  wliich  he  inti-oduced  })is  plun  for  its  reduc-
tion, he  predicted  tliat  the  Sinking  Fund  would  so  reduce  it  that
the  exigencies  of  war  would  never  again  raise  it  to  its  former
(rnorrnous  height,  a.nd  he  looked  upon  this  as  his  chief  title  to

'  Harriillon  (Jn  the  National  Urht,  '  Tlie work of Dr. Hamilton,  wliich

pp.  l-^ 21.  was  j)iil>lishc>(l  in  1818,  scom.s  to  have

''  Gornjiarf! Haniillon On the  cliiolly disiiolled tiie illusion  about

Kiituiifil  Dfhl,  |i|i.  1;'2, ir)3;  McC'nl-  \  he  Sinking- Fund.
loL-b. On Td.riil'uni, \>iK 458, ISU.

CTi.  Win.  PITTS  LOANS.  63

mme.  *Tliis  plan,'  he  said,  '  wliicli  I  have  now  the  honour  to
bring  forward,  has  long  been  the  wish  and  hope  of  all  men,  and
I  am  proud  to  flatter  myself  that  my  name  may  be  inscribed
on  that  firm  column  now  about  to  be  raised  to  national  faith
and  national  prosperity.' '  In  the  same  spirit,  in  his  picture  at
Windsor,  he  is  represented  holding  in  his  hand  a  scroll  with  the
inscription,  '  Redemption  of  the  National  Debt.'  ^  Yet  the
minister  who  made  these  promises  is  the  minister  in  all  English
history  who  has  thrown  the  heaviest  burden  upon  posterity.
The  National  Debt  at  the  end  of  the  American  War  was
about  250,000,000^.;  at  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  in  1802,  it
was  574,000,000^. ;  at  the  end  of  the  French  War  of  I'itt,  it
considerably  exceeded  800,000,000Z.

An  immense  proportion  of  this  overwhelming  debt  was  due
to  financial  maladministration.  I  do  not  now  inquire  how  far  it
would  have  been  possible  by  a  different  course  of  policy  to  have
avoided  the  French  War,  and  thus  saved  the  enormous  burden
which  it  entailed.  I  do  not  inquire  whether  the  vast  subsidies
which  were  so  lavishh'  scattered  might  not  have  been  more  skil-
fully and  at  the  same  time  more  sparingly  bestowed.  Putting
these  questions  wholly  aside,  the  case  against  the  financial  ad-
ministration of  Pitt  is  overwhelming.  During  the  first  four  or
five  years  of  the  war  he  committed  the  fatal  blunder  of  leaving
the  taxation  of  the  country  almost  unchanged,  and  raising
almost  the  whole  sum  required  for  the  war  in  the  form  of  loans.
In  this  manner,  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  contest,  at  a  time
when  the  resources  of  the  country  were  still  untouched,  he
hampered  the  nation  with  an  enormous  debt,  wliicli  made  it
impossible  for  it  by  any  efforts  to  balance  its  expenditure.^
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  first  six  years  of  the  war,  he
raised  by  loans  no  less  than  108,500,000^,  and  he  raised  them
on  terms  so  unfav^ourable  that  they  added  nearly  200,000,000/.
to  the  capital  of  the  National  Debt.*

*  Pari.  JTut.  XXV.  1310,1311.  states  the  case  with  great  clearness

*  Eussell's  Zy/i?  <;/■  i-l'.r,  iii.  54.  and on  tlie  best  authority: 'Here,

*  Compare  on  the  taxation  in  dif-  Sir,  is  the  War  lUidget  of  171)3.
ferent  periods  of  the  war,  Hamilton  Wliat  did  Mr.  Pitt  do  with  regard  to
On  the  National  Debt,  pp.  157,  22G;  the  first  operations  of  the  war?
Voxtcr'?,  Progress  of  the  Nation,'p.'i9i'i.  Mr.  Pitt  proposed  a  plan involvins?

*  The  following  passage  from  an  excess  of  charge  over  ways  and
one  of  the  speeches  of  Mr.  Gladstone meana  of  1,500,000^.  .  .  .  lie  met  this

54  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENTK CENTURY. cir.  xviii.

The  effect  of  tliis  measure  on  the  permanent  prosperity  of
the  countjy  can  hardly  be  better  expressed  than  in  the  words  of
Dr.  Hamilton.  Writing  in  1813,  that  economist  noticed  that
at  that  time  the  amount  of  taxes  was  about  four  times  what  it
]iad  been  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and  he  adds,  '  The
whole  amount  of  taxes  upon  the  average  of  the  last  three
years,  after  deductions,  is  about  65,000,000Z. — a  sum  more
than  sufficient  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  war,  enormous
as  it  is,  but  not  sufficient  to  provide  at  the  same  time  for  the
interest  of  the  debt  formerly  contracted.  Our  present  national
revenue  would,  therefore,  have  been  sufficient  to  support  with-
out limitation  of  time  the  expense  of  the  present  war,  on  the
scale  it  is  conducted,  if  the  taxation  during  former  wars  and
the  early  period  of  the  present  one  had  been  equal  to  the
expenditure.' '

The  finance  of  Pitt  has  not  been  without  its  defenders,  but
their  arguments  seem  to  me  to  amount  to  little  more  than  a
palliation.  Montague  and  Godolphin  had  raised  the  sums
which  they  required  on  the  principle  of  paying  a  rate  of
interest  for  each  loan  equal  to  the  market  value  of  money  at
the  time.  They  raised  money  at  par,  paying  5,  6,  7,  and
even  8  per  cent.,  and  the  result  was  that  in  time  of  peace
Walpole  and  Pelham  were  able  gradually  to  reduce  the  interest
to  3  per  cent.,  diminishing  at  each  reduction  the  national
burden.  Pitt,  as  we  have  seen,  had  once  expressed  in  strong
terms his approval  of  tliis policy,  but  his own course  was

charge  not  by  attempting  to  fill  his  per  cent. Such  were  the  fatal  effects

exchequer  by  the  proceeds  of  taxes,  of  the  series  of  measures  upon  which

bur, by sending into the  City and  he had entered, that in order to

asking  for  a  loan  of  f;,000,()0()Z.  at  7oZ.  obtain those 17,000.000/. indepen-

,  .  .  Mr.  Pitt  thought  he  should  get  denily of annuities separately'

that  lean  at  4  per  cent.,  but  he  liad  to  created  he  added  :i4, 000,000/.  to  the

pa}'  4/.  :i,s. 'k/.  per  cent,  even  on  the  c;ipital of the National Debt. In

4, "'00,000/.  of the  first  year. Wliat  fact,  the  financial  operations  of  these

was  the  second  step? In  1794 i\Ir.  six  years,  unsuccessful  and  ineffective

I'itt borrowed 11,000,000/., paying  as  they  were  in  re.-pect  to  the  war,

lur  it  not  41.  3«.  id.,  but  il.  lOs.  'Jd.  gave him a sum of no  more  than

J  er cent. In 1795 he borrowed  l(iS..0OO,()()OZ.,  but they  added  nearly

)8,000,000Z.  at  41. ]r,s.  M per  cent.  200,000,000/. to the cnpital of the

In  I7!)(;  he  hnrrowod 2.''>,000,()O0Z.,  for  Kaiional  Debt.'— lIussuH's /,//r  r/7''-.r,

wliich  hcpaid  4/.  bU'  !tc/.  and  I/.  ll!.v.  IV/.  iii.  .5.5,  5(). ISee  too  tlic  very  severe

In  1797  he  borrowed  :i2,. 500,000/..  for  judgment  on Pitt's financial polic;y

which he paid 51. I4s. Hd. and  in (Say, JCcoininiie J\>Iiliij[itc, biunie

(!/.  (!*.  10^/.,  per  cent. Again,  in  1798  fartic,  eh.  xiv.  xvi.
he  borruvve<i  17,000,000/.  at  0/.  ■\s.  \\d  '  Ibimilion.p.  1.58.

CH.  xvHi.  riTT'S FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION.  55

wholly  diflercMit.  He  .raised  his  loans  mainly  in  the  3  per  cents.,
obtaining  sums  which  were  proportionately  below  the  nominal
value,  and  the  result  was  that  with  returning  peace  and  rising
funds  the  burden  of  interest  remained  unchanged.  It  has  been
argued,  however,  with  much  knowledge  and  ability,  that  the
condition  of  the  money  market  was  such  that  Pitt  would  have
failed  in  attempting  to  negotiate  such  large  loans  as  he  desired
at  a  higher  nominal  rate  of  interest,  or  at  least  that  the  terms  on
which  he  oould  have  done  so  would  have  been  very  burdensome.
The  fatal  error  of  raising  so  small  a  sum  by  taxation  during  the
first  years  of  the  war  has  been  extenuated,  on  the  ground  of  the
unpopularity  of  the  war  and  the  distress  occasioned  by  defective
harvests,  and  by  a  commercial  crisis  of  unusual  severity.  But
the  ablest  defender  of  Pitt  has  candidly  acknowledged  that  two
great  miscalculations  profoundly  influenced  his  financial  policy.
One  of  them  was  the  belief,  which  he  expressed  both  in  public
and  in  private,  that  the  resources  of  France  had  been  ruined  by
the  first  shock  of  the  Eevolution,  and  that  the  war  which  had
begun  was  likely  to  be  a  very  short  one.  The  other  was  his
firm  conviction  that  in  the  Sinking  Fund  he  had  found  a  rapid
and  infallible  instrument  for  reducing  the  National  Debt.'
After  a  few  years,  it  is  true,  the  magnitude  of  the  problem
Ijeeame  evident,  and  the  financial  ability  of  Pitt  was  displayed
in  the  new  taxes  he  devised.  But  the  error  of  the  early  years
of  the  war  was  not  and  could  not  be  retrieved,  and  its  conse-
quences are  felt  to  the  present  hour.

Such,  then,  appear  to  me  to  have  been  the  true  outlines  of
the  financial  administration  of  Pitt.  He  displayed  an  extra-
ordinary aptitude  in  mastering  and  explaining  the  intricate
details  of  national  finance  ;  he  adopted  and  assimilated  at  a
very  early  date  some  of  the  best  economical  teaching  of  his
time  ;  he  rendered  great  service  to  the  country  in  simplifying
and  reforming  the  tariff,  readjusting  the  whole  system  of
taxation,  abolishing  much  wasteful  and  corrupt  expenditure,
and  extending  commercial  liberty.  He  found  the  finances  of
England  in  a  state  of  the  most  deplorable  and  disastrous  depres-

'  See Mr. William Newmarch's Pitt  duriiig  the  first French liar
very able pamphlet in defence of (1855).
I'itt,  called 'The  Loans  raised  by  Mr.

56  ENGLAND IN TKE EIGRTEKNTII CENTUIlY. ch.  xviir.

sion,  and  in  a. few  years  he  made  them  the  admiration  of  the
world.  But  history,  which  judges  statesmen  mainly  by  the
Lroad  lines  of  their  policy,  and  the  nett  result  of  their  lives,
must  also  pronounce  that  his  financial  administration  was
marked  by  grave  errors,  and  that  those  errors,  if  measured  by
the  magnitude  of  their  consequences,  have  greatly  outweighed
its  merits.

Passing  from  this  field  to  a  more  general  review  of  the
policy  of  Pitt,  there  are  two  things  with  which  we  shall  be
especially  struck,  the  singularly  wise  and  enlightened  views
which  he  took  of  the  chief  home  questions  of  his  time,  and  the
extreme  paucity  of  his  actual  achievements.  In  1787,  it  is  true,
he  joined  with  North  in  opposing  and  rejecting  a  motion  of
Beaufoy  for  repealing  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts ;  but  on  the
questions  of  parliamentary  reform,  of  slavery,  and  of  Catholic
emancipation,  his  views  were  of  the  most  liberal  type.  Yet
although  he  exercised  for  many  years  an  unrivalled  autho-
rity in  Parliament,  and  although  on  these  questions  he  was
in  substantial  agreement  with  Fox,  he  did  little  or  nothing,
and  left  the  accomplishment  of  these  tasks  to  his  successors.
AVe  have  already  seen  how  his  father  had  urged  that  a  serious
parliamentary  reform  could  not  be  much  longer  safely  post-
poned, and  had  suggested  that  it  should  consist  of  a  large
addition  to  the  number  of  county  members,  and  the  establish-
ment of  triennial  parliaments.  We  have  seen,  too,  that  Pitt
himself  had  taken  up  the  question  in  1782  under  the  second
Ilockingham  Ministry,  and  in  1783  under  the  Ministry  of  the
Coalition.  On  the  first  occasion  he  contented  himself  with
moving  for  a  committee  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  pai'lia-
mentary  representation,  but  on  the  second  he  introduced  a  defi-
nite plan  of  which  the  chief  features  were  the  disfranchisement
of  any  borough  in  which  the  majority  of  voters  were  proved
to  be  corrupt,  and  an  addition  to  the  representation  of  the
counties  and  of  the  metropolis.  The  eloquence  with  which  he
advocated  these  measures  made  a  deep  impression  upon  the
House  and  the  country,  and  created  strong  and  general  hopes
that  on  his  advent  to  power  he  would  speedily  carry  them  into
elfect.

Almost the  fir.st  nicai-ure  ot'  his adiiiijii.itralion,  however,

CH.  xvm.  THE  WESTMINSTER  ELECTION.  57

was  very  inauspicious.  His  conduct  about  the  Westminster
scrutiny  showed  that  he  was  capable  of  employing  and  even
straining  against  an  adversary  one  of  the  worst  abuses  of  the
existing  constitution,  and  it  is  by  far  the  most  conspicuous  of
his  very  few  tactical  mistakes.

Amid  the  general  and  splendid  triumphs  of  the  election
of  1784  there  had  been  one  partial  reverse.  The  Westminster
election  excited  an  interest  which  attached  to  no  other  single
contest,  for  Westminster  was  regarded  as  holding  among
boroughs  the  same  sort  of  precedence  as  Yorkshire  among
counties,  and  Fox  himself  was  one  of  the  candidates.  All
the  influence  of  the  Court  and  of  the  Government  was  em-
ployed against  him,  but  his  supporters  were  many  and  very
powerful.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  the  nominal  head  of  the
Rockingham  party,  and  his  brother-in-law,  the  Duke  of  Devon-
shire, occupied  great  palaces  within  the  borough.  Georgiana,
the  beautiful  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  and  her  sister  Viscountess
Duncannon,  were  among  the  most  active  and  most  successful
canvassers  for  the  Whigs.  The  Prince  of  Wales  himself  threw
his  influence  without  restriction  and  almost  without  disguise
into  the  same  scale,  and  Carlton  House  became  one  of  the  chief
centres  of  Fox's  friends.

There  were  three  candidates,  Lord  Hood  and  Sir  Cecil
Wray  on  the  side  of  the  Government,  and  Fox  on  the  side  of
the  Opposition.  It  soon  appeared  that  Hood,  who  carried
with  him  the  reputation  of  his  great  naval  services,  was  the  in-
disputable favourite  with  the  constituency,  which  had  in  the
last  Parliament  been  represented  by  Rodney;  but  the  contest
between  Fox  and  Wray  was  obstinate,  and  for  a  long  time
doubtful.  The  poll  was  kept  open  for  the  full  legal  period  of
forty  days.  At  the  end  of  the  second  day  Fox  passed  Wray  by
139  votes,  but  Wray  soon  recovered  what  he  had  lost,  and  con-
tinued in  a  majority  till  the  twenty-third  day,  when  he  was  again
passed.  On  the  fortieth  day  Lord  Hood  was  at  the  head  of  tlio
poll,  but  Fox  had  defeated  Wray  by  236  votes.

The  triumph  was  not  a  very  brilliant  one,  but  it  was  doubly
valued  on  account  of  the  general  disaster  of  the  party.  There
was  a  great  procession  to  Devonshire  House,  in  which  the  ostrich
feathers  of  the  I'riuce  of  Wales  were  borne  before  the  newly

58  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUr.Y. cii.  xviii.

elected  member.  The  streets  were  illummated.  There  were
splendid  festivals  at  Carlton  House,  and  the  Prince  of  Wales
appeared  at  a  dinner  given  by  Mrs.  Crewe,  in  the  buff  and  blue
uniform  of  the  Whigs,  and  gave  the  toast,  '  True  Blue  and  Mrs.
Crewe.'  But  in  the  meantime  Fox  was  not  returned,  for  on  the
last  day  of  the  poll  Sir  Cecil  Wray  and  thirteen  electors  pre-
sented a  paper  to  the  High  Bailiff  who  was  the  returning  officer,
complaining  of  irregularities  in  the  election,  and  demanding  a
scrutiny,  and  the  High  Bailiff,  who  was  strongly  opposed  to
Fox,  consented  to  grant  it.

It  is  now  generally  admitted  that  he  was  wrong,  though  it
is  doubtful  wliether  his  conduct  was  contrary  to  the  strict  letter
of  the  law.  Scrutinies,  indeed,  had  often  been  granted  by  return-
ing officers,  but  they  had  been  granted  before  the  full  legal  period
of  the  election  had  terminated,  and  they  had  invariably  been
closed  before  the  day  on  which  the  law  made  the  writ  return-
able. On  that  day  it  surely  ought  to  have  been  returned,  and  the
jurisdiction  of  the  returning  officer  should  have  been  at  an  end.
If  there  was  any  doubt  about  the  validity  of  the  election,  a
committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  constituted  under  Gren-
ville's  Act,  and  empowered  to  examine  witnesses  on  oath,  was
the  proper  tribunal  to  try  it.  Could  it  be  tolerated  that  a  mere
returning  officer — perhaps,  as  in  the  present  case,  a  notorious
partisan — who  had  no  power  to  compel  the  attendance  of
witnesses  or  to  exanjine  them  upon  oath,  should  take  upon
himself  the  functions  of  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons, and- by  a  protracted  inquiry  deprive  elected  members  of
their  seats,  and  constituencies  of  their  representatives,  for
mouths  or  even  years  after  the  meeting  of  Parliament?  If  the
mere  suspicion  of  bad  votes  was  sufficient  to  justify  such  a
scrutiny,  it  would  be  easy  to  disfranchise  for  whole  sessions  all
the  most  populous  cities  in  the  kingdom.  The  conduct  of  tho
High  l>uiliff  was  contrary  to  the  uniform  practice  of  elections  in
jMigland.  When  returning  officers  granted  scrutinies,  they  had
always  made  itacondilion  that  they  should  t(>nninate  on  the
day  on  wliidi  ilic  writs  Dught  to  1)0  returned.  WIkmi  scrutinies
were  demanded  wliieh  would  ]ki,vc  extended  beyond  the  specilied
date  tliey  had  alw;iys  been  n^fused,  ami  the  House  had  never
censured the  refusal. Jf Ihe law  had not in express  terms

c]i.  XVIII.  WKSTMIN'STER  SCRUTINY.  59

liiuited  the  discretion  of  t^ie  returning  officers,  there  conid  at
least  be  very  little  dispute  about  what  course  precedent  and
the  analogies  of  the  constitution  prescribed.

Fox  was  not  excluded  from  Parliament,  for  he  was  returned
for  the  small  Scotch  borough  of  Kirkwall,  and  he  conducted
his  own  case  with  extraordinary  eloquence  and  with  a  great
superiority  of  argument,  while  Pitt,  to  the  astonishment  of
many  of  his  friends,  fully  justified  the  returning  officer.  A
petition  demanding  an  immediate  return  of  the  writ  was  sup-
ported by  Fox  in  one  of  the  greatest  speeches  ever  made  before
I^arliament.  In  the  course  of  his  argument  he  mentioned  that,
according  to  the  lowest  estimate,  the  scrutiny  was  likely  to  cost
him  18,000L  Pitt  answered  in  a  strain  of  most  supercilious
and  arrogant  invective ;  described  his  adversary  as  a  '  political
apostate,'  who,  by  pretending  to  be  the  butt  of  ministerial  perse-
cution, was  striving  to  excite  public  compassion  in  order  to
regain  the  popularity  he  had  lost,  and  defeated  the  motion
for  taking  the  petition  into  consideration  by  195  to  117.  The
High  Bailiff  was  then  directed  to  proceed  with  the  scrutiny  '  with
all  practicable  despatch,'  but  in  the  beginning  of  the  next
session,  though  eight  months  had  elapsed  since  the  election,  the
scrutiny  was  only  complete  in  two  out  of  the  seven  parishes  into
which  Westminster  was  divided,  and  it  had  scarcely  affected  the
relative  positions  of  the  competitors.  A  motion  was  then  intro-
duced calling  upon  the  High  Bailiff  to  make  an  immediate  return,
but  Pitt  again  opposed  it  and  insisted  on  the  continuation  of
the  scrutiny,  which  was  likely,  however  it  ended,  to  ruin  his
opponent.  But  it  soon  became  evident  that  on  this  question
he  could  not  command  the  House.  His  majority  dwindled  to
39 ;  on  the  second  division  it  sank  to  9,  and  at  last,  on
March  3,  1785,  he  was  defeated  by  a  majority  of  38.  An  im-
mediate return  was  ordered.  Fox  took  his  seat  for  Westminster
without  further  molestation,  and  he  afterwards  obtained  2,000Z.
damages  in  an  action  at  law  against  the  High  Bailiff.  The
Government  succeeded,  indeed,  in  defeating  by  a  large  majority
a  motion  for  expunging  the  proceedings  of  Parliament  in  the
preceding  session  on  the  subject,  but  on  the  whole  question
there  could  be  no  doubt  that  l^itt  had  suffered  a  damauino-  and
humiliatinsj"  defeat.

GO  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. at.  xviii.

It  left  a  serious  stain  upon  his  cliaracter.  His  conduct  and
his  language  appeared  to.  show  that  he  was  more  capable  than
might  have  been  expected  of  acting  under  the  influence  of
vindictive  and  ungenerous  feelings,  though  much  allowance
niust  be  made  for  the  anxiety  of  a  minister  to  support  his
subordinate,  and  for  the  difficulty  of  receding  from  a  false  path
to  which,  in  a  period  of  intense  party  excitement,  he  had  rashly
committed  himself.  The  contest  greatly  increased  the  personal
animosity  which  divided  the  two  great  rivals,  and  it  shook  the
confidence  of  parliamentary  reformers  in  the  sincerity  of  Pitt.
It  had,  however,  one  valuable  constitutional  result.  Though
Pitt  maititained  to  the  last  that  the  conduct  of  the  High  Bailiff
had  been  perfectly  legal,  he  agreed  to  introduce  an  enacting
Tueasure  preventing  such  an  incident  from  recurring,  and  at  the
same  time  diminishing  the  great  evil  of  too  protracted  elections.
By  this  law  the  poll  was  closed  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  day.
If  a  scrutiny  were  demanded  it  might  be  granted,  but  all  writs
must  be  returned  after  a  general  election  on  or  before  the  day
on  which  they  were  returnable,  after  a  by-election  within  thirty
days  at  furthest  after  the  closing  of  the  poll.^

The  question  of  parliamentary  representation  was  raised  by
Alderman  Sawbridge  soon  after  the  meeting  of  the  new  Parlia-
ment in  1784,  and  Pitt,  while  asking  for  a  postponement,
declared  in  the  strongest  terms  that  his  opinions  and  his
intentions  were  completely  unchanged  by  his  accession  to  office.
He  reiterated  his  belief  that  the  faults  which  had  lost  America
to  England  were  due  mainly  to  the  condition  of  the  repre-
sentative body,  which  did  not  reflect  the  true  sentiments  of  the
people,  and  he  promised  at  a  very  early  date  to  introduce  a
R(?form  Bill,  On  April  18,  1785,  he  redeemed  his  pledge,  and
at  the  same  time  very  fully  explained  his  views  on  the  subject.
Tlie  scheme  which  he  proposed  was  a  very  singular  one,  and  it
diiri-red  in  some  important  respects  from  any  which  had  hitherto
bcrn  before  the  pul^lic.  It  was  only  to  come  gradually  into
npci-;itioii,  ;iinl  two  essential  parts  of  it  were  that  the  number
of  MKMiibcrs  ill  tlie  House  should  be  unchanged,  and  that  no
constituency  shouh.l  be  disiranchised  except  by  its  own  con-
eeut.  J'itt  proposed  that  thirty-six  decayed  boroughs  returning
'  25  Geo.  III.  cli.  81.

cii.  xvni.  PITT'S REFORM RILL.  Gl

seventy-two  members  should  be  disfrancliised  by  their  own
voluntary  application,  receiving  a  compensation  in  money,
and  that  the  seventy-two  members  should  be  added  to  the
representation  of  the  counties  and  the  metropolis.  A  sum  of
a  million  pounds  was  to  be  set  apart  as  a  compensation  fund ;
it  was  to  be  divided  into  thirty-six  parts,  and  each  borough,
on  the  application  of  two-thirds  of  its  electors,  was  to  be  en-
titled to  one  share,  which  was  to  be  distributed  by  a  special
committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  due  proportion,  among
the  several  persons  interested  in  the  borough.  If  the  sum  was
not  at  first,  sufficiently  large  to  induce  the  decayed  boroughs  to
apply  for  disfranchisement,  it  was  to  be  suffered  to  accumulate
till  the  temptation  became  irresistible.

When  this  process  had  been  accomplished  and  seventj^-two
seats  had  been  transferred  to  the  county  and  metropolitan
representation,  Pitt  proposed  that  a  second  sum  should  be  set
apart  which  should  be  devoted  to  purchasing  on  similar  terms
the  franchise  of  any  other  boroughs  which  either  were  or  might
hereafter  be  decayed,  and  that  the  seats  so  acquired  should  be
transferred  to  populous  unrepresented  towns  which  petitioned
Parliament  for  representation.  This  part  of  the  system  was
intended  to  be  permanent,  adapting  itself  to  all  future  local
fluctuations  of  population,  working  spontaneously,  preventing
the  possibility  of  the  aggregation  of  political  power  in  decaj^ed
places,  and  securing  a  steady  but  gradual  transfer  of  power  to
the  chief  centres  of  population.  In  addition  to  the  enlargement
of  the  electoral  body  which  would  result  from  the  enfranchise-
ment of  the  great  towns,  Pitt  proposed  an  increase  of  the  county
constituencies  by  the  enfranchisement  of  copyholders.

This  curious  plan  appears  to  have  been  elaborated  in  con-
junction with  the  Yorkshire  reformers,  and  it  was  introduced  in
a  long  and  brilliant  speech.  It  met,  however,  with  very  little
favour.  The  King  was  strongly  opposed  to  the  whole  project
of  parliamentary  reform,  although  he  promised  Pitt  that  he
would  not  use  his  influence  against  it.'  The  Cabinet  was  by
no  means  unanimous  in  its  favour,  and  Pitt  did  not  take  the
only  step  that  would  have  given  the  measure  a  real  chance  of
success.  He  introduced  it  as  the  head  of  the  Ministry,  but  he
'  See  his  letter  to  Pitt ,  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  i.  p.  xv.

G2  ENGLAND IN THE ElttriTEENTn CENTURY. ch.  xviii,

never  gave  tlie  smallest  intimation  bliat  if  defeated  be  would
resign  his  post.  The  Opposition  were  exceedingly  divided  ou
the  subject.  North,  and  probably  most  of  the  members  of  his
wing  of  the  Coalition,  were  opposed  to  all  parliamentary  reform,
and  among  the  Whigs  the  same  view  was  adopted  by  Burke,
Portland,  and  Fitzwilliam.  Fox,  Sheridan,  and  most  of  the
"Whigs  were  decided  reformers,  and  they  fully  approved  of  the
disfranchisement  of  decayed  boroughs  and  of  a  large  increase  of
county  representation.  But  although  Fox  voted  for  the  intro-
duction of  the  Bill  he  was  implacably  hostile  to  the  purchase  of
borough  seats,  which  was  its  leading  feature.  The  franchise,  he
maintained,  was  not  a  property  but  a  trust,  and  he  declared
that  he  never  would  consent  to  purchase  from  a  majority  of
tlie  electors  what  belonged  equally  to  all.  Tlie  measure  was
defeated  in  its  very  first  stage.  Leave  to  introduce  it  was
refused  by  248  votes  to  174.

The  principle  of  purchasing  disfranchisement  with  money
was  afterwards  applied  by  Pitt  on  a  large  scale  when  carrying
tlie  Irish  Union,  Pitt  acknowledged  that  it  was  the  'tender
part'  of  the  Bill  of  1785,  but  he  pleaded  that  it  was  absolutely
necessary  if  any  reform  was  to  be  carried.  It  was  a  notorious
ftict  that  the  small  boroughs  were  generally  and  openly  treated
as  saleable  property,  and,  except  under  the  strongest  stress  of
public  opinion,  a  parliament  which  was  full  of  representatives  or
owners  of  boroughs  was  never  likely  to  consent  to  their  un-
compensated extinction.  It  is  certain  that  no  violent  public
opinion  on  the  subject  existed,  and  that  the  reform  spirit  had
greatly  gone  down.  Like  all  nations  among  whom  the  political
sentiment  is  highly  developed,  the  English  have  always  cared
greatly  for  practical  grievances  but  very  little  for  theoretical
aiioinalics.  During  the  latter  stages  of  the  American  war,
wiicii  an  un]iii[)ul;ir  ministry  commanded  a  great  parliamentary
majority,  and  when  disaster  after  disaster  was  falling  iipon  the
cf)nntry,  the  denuuid  for  a  change  in  the  representative  system
liad  grown  very  formidable.  But  the  election  of  1784  had
])jaced  in  power  a  statesman  who  was  extremely  popular.  It
had  been  carried  with  very  little  corruption.  The  ccnintry  was
governed  in  substantial  accordance  with  its  wishes,  and  it  was
I'.'ipidlv  regaining  its  foriinr prosperity. Not niort^  than oiglit

cii.  xMii.  PITT Ar.ANUONS REFOini.  G3

petitions  were  presented  in  favour  of  reform  when  Pitt  moved
tJie  introduction  of  his  Bill,  and  when  the  measure  was  defeated
there  was  no  serious  expression  of  resentment  or  regret.

Pitt  acted  on  the  question  very  characteristically.  A  dis-
tinguishing feature  of  his  character  was  his  extreme  love  of
power  without  any  corresponding  enthusiasm  for  particular
measures.  When  it  was  a  question  of  maiataining  his  position
no  man  showed  himself  more  determined  and  inflexible.  When
it  was  a  question  of  carrying  out  a  particular  line  of  policy  no
one  was  more  sensitive  to  oppositioii  and  more  ready  to  modify
his  course.  He  had  made  the  question  of  parliamentary  reform
peculiarly  his  own.  He  had  described  in  the  strongest  and
most  eloquent  terms  the  dangers  arising  from  the  existing
defects  in  the  representative  system.  He  had  pledged  himself
as  minister  to  introduce  a  scheme  for  reform,  and  he  had  now
fulfilled  his  promise.  With  all  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  his
eloquence  he  proposed  a  plan  which  he  believed  would  be  final
and  satisfactory,  but  it  had  been  defeated  in  its  very  first  stage.
He  found  that  the  question  was  in  a  high  degree  difficult  and
dangerous,  and  that  it  was  one  on  which  jaublic  opinion  was
very  languid,  and  he  at  once  decided  upon  his  course.  From
this  time  he  completely  cast  it  aside,  and  to  the  day  of  his  death
no  parliamentary  reformer  could  ever  obtain  from  him  the
smallest  assistance.  The  great  and  sudden  increase  of  manu-
facturing industry,  producing  new  agglomerations  of  population,
rapidly  aggravated  the  anomalies  of  the  representative  system,
but  for  some  years  neither  party  in  Parliament  again  stirred
the  question  of  reform.  At  length,  in  1790,  Henry  Flood
introduced  a  plan  for  increasing  the  county  representation  ;  but
Pitt,  while  declaring  that  hiss  own  sentiments  were  unchanged,
pronounced  the  time  to  be  inopportune,  and  moved  and  carried
an  adjournment.  After  the  great  French  war  had  broken
out,  the  question  was  taken  up  by  Grey  with  the  support  of  the
small  remnant  of  the  Whigs,  and  was  introduced  in  1792, 1793,
and  1797  ;  but  I'itt,  now  supported  by  an  overwhelming  weight
of  public  opinion,  opposed  all  constitutional  changes  during  the
war.  It  was  not  until  forty-six  years  after  the  motion  of  Pitt
that  parliamentary  reform  was  again  introduced  by  a  minister,
and  when  it  triumphed  in  18-j2  it  was  through  an  explosion  of

64  ENGLAND IN TPIE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

popular  feeling  whicli  brouglit  tlie  country  to  the  very  verge  of
revolution.

Pitt  cannot,  I  tliink,  under  tlie  circumstances,  be  very  seriously
blamed  for  having  abandoned  the  question,  though  a  man  of
stronger  feelings  and  convictions,  exercising  for  so  many  years
so  great  an  authority  over  English  politics,  would  have  certainly
renewed  his  efforts  and  have  risked  something  in  the  cause.
Pitt,  however,  did  much  more  than  simply  abandon  it.  Rightly
or  wrongly,  he  was  so  alarmed  at  the  danger  of  anarchy  spring-
ing from  the  French  Revolution,  that  for  some  years  he  main-
tained what  was  little  less  than  a  reign  of  terror  in  England
directed  against  all  who  ventured  to  advocate  any  form  of  demo-
cratic reform  or  to  maintain  any  independent  political  organi-
sations in  the  country.  And  in  Ireland  his  policy  was  still  more
questionable.  Great  as  were  the  abuses  of  the  English  parlia-
mentary system  they  were  exceeded  by  those  which  existed  in
Ireland,  and  in  that  country  the  question  of  parliamentary
reform  was  one  of  vital  and  pressing  importance.  At  one
moment  the  idea  of  supporting  a  reform  of  the  Irish  Parliament
seems  to  have  met  with  favour  in  his  eyes,  but  it  was  speedily
abandoned.  He  made  it  his  object  to  maintain  that  body  in  a
condition  of  complete  subordination,  and  accordingly  the  Govern-
}nent  of  this  great  reformer  steadily  resisted  all  attempts  at
parliamentary  reform,  and  finally  desti-oyed  the  Irish  Parlia-
ment by  the  most  lavish  corruption  in  the  parliamentary  history
of  the  empire.

His  conduct  about  the  slave  trade  was  very  similar.  The
horrors  of  that  trade  had  at  last  begun  to  touch  the  conscience
of  the  English  people,  and  Pitt  vehemently  and  eloquently
urged  as  a  moral  duty  its  abolition.  For  some  years,  at  least,
li(!  was  undoubtedly  sincere  in  doing  so.  Wilborforce  was  one
oi"  his  most  intimate  friends,  and  it  was  Pitt  who  recommended
him  to  undertake  the  cause  of  abolition.  When  "Wilberfoi'ce
was  struck  down  by  serious  illness  in  1788,  Pitt  promised  tlin.t  if
the  illness  ended  fatally  he  would  himself  undertake  the  cause.
]Ie  supportc^d  with  all  his  influencte  the  inquiry  into  the  abuses
of  the  trade  and  the  Act  of  1788  for  mitigating  the  liard-
ships  of  tiie  Middle  I'assage.  He  himself  introduced  a  mo-
timi \'i>r  liliolitiun  ; ail  vocal  I'd  iiiMiic(Ii;it(^  :is  distiiigiiishcd from

CH xviiT.  THE SLAVE TRADE.  Go

gradual  abolition,  and  spoke  repeatedly  in  a  strain  of  tlie  highest
eloquence  on  the  subject.  Nothing  could  be  more  liberal,  more
enlightened,  more  philanthropic,  than  the  sentiments  he  ex-
pressed, and  his  speech  in  1792  was  perhaps  the  greatest  he
ever  delivered.  But  Thurlow,  Dundas,  and  Lord  Liverpool  in
his  Cabinet  were  advocates  of  the  slave  trade,  and  they  were
supported  by  the  King.  The  French  Revolution  and  the  insur-
rection in  St.  Domingo  cooled  the  public  feeling  on  the  subject,
and  Pitt's  zeal  manifestly  declined.  He  never,  it  is  true,
abandoned  the  cause  ;  he  spoke  uniformly  and  eloquently  in
its  favour,  but  he  never  would  make  it  one  on  which  his
ministry  depended.  He  suffered  Dundas  to  take  a  leading
part  against  the  abolition.  He  suffered  the  cause  to  be  defeated
year  after  year  by  men  who  would  have  never  dared  to  risk
lus  serious  displeasure,  and  he  at  the  same  time  exerted  all  his
influence  with  the  abolitionists  to  induce  them  to  abstain  from
pressing  the  question.

This,  however,  was  not  all.  From  the  beginning  of  the  war,
the  complete  naval  ascendency  of  England  almost  annihilated
the  slave  trade  to  the  French  and  Dutch  colonies,  and  when
those  colonies  passed  into  the  possession  of  England  the
momentous  question  arose  whether  the  trade  which  had  so  long
been  suspended  should  be  suffered  to  revive.  It  was  in  the
power  of  Pitt  by  an  Order  of  Council  to  prevent  it,  but  he
refused  to  take  this  course.  It  was  a  political  and  conniierciul
object  to  strengthen  these  new  acquisitions,  and  as  they  had  so
long  been  prevented  from  supplying  themselves  with  negroes
they  were  ready  to  take  more  than  usual.  The  result  was  that,
in  consequence  of  the  British  conquests  and  under  the  shelter  of
the  British  flag,  the  slave  trade  became  more  active  than  ever.
Wilberforce  declared,  in  January  1802,  that  it  had  been '  carried,
especially  of  late  years,  to  a  greater  extent  than  at  any  former
period  of  our  history.'  English  capital  flowed  largely  into  it.
It  was  computed  that  under  the  administration  of  Pitt  the
English  slave  trade  more  than  doubled,  and  that  the  number
of  negroes  imported  annually  in  English  sliips  rose  from  25,000
to  57,000.>

'  See  on this subject  two  very  former  article  wns  written  by  Cole-

Btriking articlps in the lidinhiirr/h  ridge. See, loo,  Wilberforce's  Life,

/fem'w,  July 1808,  Aja-il  18JI. The  iii.  2;i.

VOL.  V.  F

66  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xvrii.

This  continued  witliout  abatement  foi'  about  seven  years.
The  cause  of  abolition  had  lost  much  of  its  popularity,  and  in
1800,  1801,  1802,  and  in  1803,  Wilberforce  thought  it  wise  to
abstain  from  bringing  it  forward  in  Parliament.  In  1804,  how-
ever, it  was  determined  to  renew  the  struggle,  and  circumstances
had  become  in  some  respects  more  favourable.  The  Irish  mem-
bers, introduced  into  Parliament  by  the  Union,  were  strongly
in  favour  of  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade,  and  a  few  of
the  West  Indian  planters,  fearing  the  competition  of  the  newly
acquired  colonies,  began  to  desire  its  suspension.  In  July  1804,
AVilberforce,  encouraged  by  some  favourable  divisions  in  the
House  of  Commons,  desired  to  bring  in  a  resolution  forbidding
.•my  further  importation  of  slaves  into  the  conquered  colonies,
but  Pitt  prevented  him  from  doing  so  by  engaging  to  issue  a
royal  proclamation  for  that  purpose.  For  more  than  a  year,
however,  and  without  any  real  reason  being  assigned,  the  fulfil-
ment of  this  promise  was  delayed,  and  during  that  delay  thou-
sands, if  not  tens  of  thousands,  of  negroes  were  imported.  It
was  not  until  September  1805  that  the  promised  Order  of
Council  was  issued  which  first  seriously  checked  the  trade,
by  forbidding  English  ships  to  bring  slaves  into  the  Dutch
colonies.'

It  is  but  justice  to  Pitt  to  remember  that  the  two  most
illustrious  advocates  of  abolition  continued  to  the  last  to  believe
ill  him.  AViJberforce  was  sometimes  dubious  and  shaken;  he
confessed  th{vt,  the  indifference  shown  to  the  cause  in  the  Minis-
terial raidvS  had  '  sickened  him  of  public  life  and  of  public  men  ; '
he  mentions  the  '  significant  winks  and  shrugs  '  with  which  it
was  intiniated  to  him  that  he  was  too  easily  deceived;  but  his
friendship  with  J 'itt,  though  it  was  sometimes  clouded,  was  never
destroy Bfl,  and  after  the  death  of  Pitt  he  expressed  in  the
strongest  and  most  solemn  terms  his  full  belief  in  his  truth-
fulness and  infegi'ity.  Clai-kson  nl^o,  wliili^  acknowledging  that
the  sincerity  of  I'itt  '  IkuI  been  genernlly  ((nestioned,'  entii'ely
I'efiised  ((»  lii'IIe\e  |,|i;it  tlie  niinisler  \vli(i  li;ul  })een  the  most
pfiwerCnl  and  uselnl  snpporter  oflhe  anti-slavery  cause  in  its
earlier  stages  ever  in  liis  liejirt  ahnndonecl  it. Cltirkson  was  not,

'  SfiO  l,hf! 'Icl.nilc'l  ;i(;friiiiit  f)l' lliosf; \<<\. iii., iilse the AiuiiKiL Uvij'isler
tran-Maction.*? in \Viriiciluic;o's L'iJ'<', IMXI,  p. '.!().

nr.  xvni.  TITK SLAVE TKADE.  G7

like  Wilberforce,  an  iiitiiuate  friend  of  Pitt,  but  he  too  had
passed  under  the  spell  of  his  personal  influence,  and  he  ascribed
the  failure  of  the  cause  during  the  later  days  of  Pitt  solely  to  the
obstacles  which  the  minister  had  to  encounter  in  his  Cabinet,  in
Parliament,  and  at  Court.  ^

Much  weight  must  be  given  to  these  testimonies.  It  is  pro-
bable that  the  real  explanation  of  the  conduct  of  Pitt  is  to  be
found  in  his  desire  to  subordinate  the  whole  question  to  com-
mercial and  military  considerations  during  a  dangerous  and
exhausting  war,  and  also  in  his  uniform  and  characteristic
desire  to  avoid  all  questions  which  might  bring  him  into  collision
with  the  King,  outrun  public  opinion,  or  embarrass  or  imperil  his
political  position.  The  fact,  however,  remains  that  for  seventeen
years  after  the  most  powerful  minister  England  had  ever  known
had  branded  the  slave  trade  as  immoral  and  detestable,  and  had
advocated  its  immediate  abolition,  it  not  only  continued  without
restraint,  but  also  enormously  developed.  There  is  probably
little  or  no  exaggeration  in  the  statement  of  a  most  competent
authority  on  the  question,  who  has  declared  that  '  an  impartial
judgment  must  now  regard  the  death  of  Mr.  Pitt  as  the
necessary  precursor  of  the  liberation  of  Africa,'  and  has  added
that,  '  had  he  perilled  his  political  existence  on  the  issue,  no
rational  man  can  doubt  that  an  amount  of  guilt,  of  misery,  of
disgrace,  and  of  loss  would  have  been  spared  to  England  and  to
the  civilised  world  such  as  no  other  man  ever  had  it  in  his
power  to  arrest.'  ^

At  length  Pitt  died  and  Fox  arrived  at  power,  and  he  at  once
made  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade  amain  object  of  his  policy.
The  war  was  still  raging.  The  King  and  royal  family  were
still  hostile,  and,  like  Pitt,  Fox  had  opponents  of  abolition  in  his
Cabinet ;  but,  unlike  Pitt,  he  was  so  earnest  in  the  cause  that
his  followers  well  knew  that  he  would  risk  and  sacrifice  power
rather  than  not  carry  it.  The  change  produced  by  this  persua-
sion was  immediate.  A  measure,  introduced  by  the  Attorney-
General  in  his  official  capacity,  was  speedily  carried,  forbidding
British subjects from  taking  any  part in suppl3'iug foreign

'  Wilberforce's Life, vol. iii.  ;  -  Stephen's Esa^ays  in Eccleslaa-

Clarkson's  Hisionj  of  ihc  AhoVition tical  Bloyrajjliy,  pp.  494,  49.").
of  the  Slare  Trade,  ii".  r)C)3-r)0tJ.

08  EXGLA>'D IN Tlir: EIGHTEENTH CliNTURY. cii.  xviii.

powers,  whether  hostile  or  neutral,  with  slaves.  The  employment
of  British  vessels,  seamen,  and  capital  in  the  foreign  slave  trade
was  absolutely  prohibited.  No  foreign  slave  ship  was  allowed
to  be  fitted  out  in  British  ports,  and  the  Order  of  Council  which
had  been  issued  preventing  the  importation  of  negroes  into  the
Dutch  settlements  was  ratified  and  extended.  Another  Act,
designed  to  prevent  any  sudden  temporary  increase  of  the
British  slave  trade  that  might  arise  either  from  the  restriction
of  the  foreign  trade  or  from  the  prospect  of  the  speedy  siippres-
sion  of  the  British  trade,  forbade  the  employment  in  the  traflic
of  any  British  shipping  not  already  engaged  in  it.  A  Resolution,
moved  by  Fox,  was  then  carried  through  both  Houses,  pledging
Parliament  to  proceed  with  all  practicable  expedition  to  the
total  abolition  of  the  British  slave  trade,  and  an  address  was
presented  to  the  King  requesting  him  to  negotiate  with  foreign
powers  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  total  abolition  of  the
slave  trade.  Fox  died  almost  immediately  after,  but  Lord
(Trenville,  who  succeeded  him,  lost  no  time  in  fulfilling  the
pledge,  and  the  measure  which  Pitt  during  so  many  years  had
I'pfrained  from  carrying,  was  carried  in  1807,  with  little  or  no
difficulty,  by  one  of  the  weakest  ministries  of  the  nineteenth
century.

The  Irish  policy  of  Pitt  will  be  fully  examined  in  another  por-
tion of  this  work,  and  we  shall  find,  I  think,  that  it  exhibits  in  an
aggravated  form  the  worst  features  of  his  English  policy.  It  is  a
history  of  eminently  wise  and  enlightened  ideas  abandoned  at  the
first  sign  of  difficulty  or  unpopularity,  deliberately  sacrificed  when-
ever they  appeared  likely  to  weaken  or  embarrass  the  Ministry.
This  was  the  character  of  his  ]if)licy  about  commercial  liberty.
This  was  the  character  of  his  policy  about  Catholic  emancipation,
which  has  had  consr'quences  of  evil  that  it  is  scarce!}'  possible
to  over-estimate.  Jt  is  not  too  much  to  say  tluit  the  recall  of
Jiord  Fitzwilliaiu  at  a  time  when  the  hopes  of  the  Catholics
were  raised  to  the  highest  point,  and  when  the  Irish  P;irliament
was  perfectly  rejidy  to  cMrry  Catholic  eninncijiation,  wns  the  chief
cause  of  llif  vciidlion  of  171)8,  and  that  the  weakness,  if  not
treacliory,  with  which  I'itt,  after  the  Union,  abandoned  the
( /atholic  cause,  created  reseutuieuta  which  are  felt  to  the  present
hour.

en.  xviii.  PITTS  IRISH POLICY.  69

It  must  not,  liowever,  be  forgotten  that  the  legislative  union
with  Ireland  is  the  one  great  domestic  measure  of  Pitt's  ministry
that  remains,  and  Lord  Macaulay,  whose  estimate  of  Pitt's  Irisli
policy  is  widely  different  from  mine,  has  pronounced  its  original
conception  to  be  Pitt's  chief  title  to  fame.  '  It  is  only  just  to
his  memory,'  writes  Macaulay, '  to  say  that  Pitt  formed  a  scheme
of  policy  so  grand  and  so  simple,  so  righteous  and  so  humane,
that  it  would  alone  entitle  him  to  a  high  place  among  statesmen.
He  determined  to  make  Ireland  one  kingdom  with  England,  and
at  the  same  time  to  relieve  the  Catholic  laity  from  civil  dis-
abilities, and  to  grant  a  public  maintenance  to  the  Roman
Catholic  clergy.  Had  he  been  able  to  carry  these  noble  designs
into  effect  the  Union  would  have  been  a  union  indeed.'

It  appears  to  me  scarcely  possible  to  form  a  more  erroneous
judgment.  A  legislative  union  had  long  been  a  familiar  subject
of  political  discussion,  and  Pitt,  like  Fox  and  almost  all  tlie
more  conspicuous  Irish  politicians,  had  long  seen  the  necessity
of  carrying  Catholic  emancipation.  That  measure  had  year  after
year  been  debated  in  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  the  favourite
argument  against  it  had  been  the  danger  of  Catholic  pre-
ponderance in  a  separate  Parliament.  The  payment  of  the
priests  had  been  also  more  than  once  discussed  in  the  Irish
I'arliament.  The  three  measures  were  in  fact  among  the  com-
monplaces of  Irisli  political  speculation,  and  the  idea  of  com-
bining them  was  so  far  from  being  a  sign  of  extraordinary
original  genius,  that  it  could  hardly  have  been  missed  by  the
most  incapable  statesman.  The  Union  was  a  measure  which
gave  great  scope  for  statesmanship,  but  this  was  not  in  its  con-
ception but  in  its  execution.  Had  the  extinction  of  the  Irish
Legislature  been  effected  without  exciting  sentiments  of  resent-
ment and  humiliation  in  the  country ;  had  the  difficult  task  of
bringing  the  Catholics  within  the  circle  of  the  Constitution
been  promptly,  prudently,  and  successfully  accomplished,  the
measure  would  indeed  have  been  a  feat  of  the  highest  states-
manship. But  judged  by  such  tests  as  these  the  legislative
union  of  1800  was  the  most  miserable  of  failures.  Carried  by
gross  corruption,  at  a  time  when  the  country  was  under  marti;il
law,  without  a  dissolution,  and  in  opposition  to  evident  mani-
festations of  popular  opinion,  it  arrayed  against  itself  almost  all

70  ENGLAND IN THE laCIlTI-nCNTII CENTURY. ca.  xviii.

the  genius,  patriotism,  and  virtue  of  Ireland,  and  it  left  endur-
ing animosities  behind  it.  One  class  was,  however,  in  some
degree  in  its  favour.  Hopes  amounting  to  a  pledge  had  been
held  out  to  the  Catholic  priests  that  the  Union  would  be  im-
mediately followed  by  emancipation.  At  the  time  when  Pitt
authorised  these  communications  to  be  made  he  was  perfectly
aware  of  the  sentiments  of  the  King  on  the  subject,  and  he  com-
municated with  the  Catholics  without  the  knowledge  of  the
King,  and  without  having  taken  any  measure  to  secure  the  accom-
plishment of  his  pledge.  There  is  no  doabt  that  he  sincerely
desired  to  fulfil  it,  but  when  the  Union  was  carried  he  found
the  obstacles  to  emancipation  greater  than  he  supposed.  The
King's  mind  especially  was  so  set  against  it  that  the  mere  agita-
tion of  it  produced  a  temporary  return  of  his  insanity.  Very
reluctantly,  and  probably  chiefly  under  the  influence  of  Lord
Grenville,  Pitt  recognised  the  plain  and  stringent  obligation  of
honour,  and  resigned  his  ofl3ce,  but  a  month  had  not  passed
before  he  promised  the  King  that  he  would  abandon  the  cause
of  the  Catholics,  and  when  he  returned  to  power  it  was  as  a  de-
termined adversary  of  their  emancipation.  From  that  day  their
alienation  from  England  was  complete.

The  evil  effects  of  Pitt's  Irish  policy  it  seems  to  me  difficult
to  exaggerate.  In  Ireland  he  had  to  deal  with  social  and
political  conditions  wholly  different  from  those  to  which  he  was
accustomed,  and  he  conspicuously  failed  to  master  them.  In
the  French  Revolution  he  had  to  deal  with  a  new  and  un-
exampled phenomenon,  and  it  will  now  be  scarcely  disputed
that  he  totally  misunderstood  its  character  and  its  importance.
J 11  the  conduct  of  the  war,  the  strength  of  his  character  and
the  confidence  he  inspired  proved  of  great  value ;  but  he  had
nothing  of  his  father's  skill,  nothing  of  that  intuitive  perception
of  characti^r  by  which  his  father  brought  so  many  men  of  daring
and  ability  to  the  forefront,  and  until  his  death  English  operations
on  the  Continent  present  few  features  except  those  of  extreme
costliness  ;i  1)1 1  ;il]ii()st  imifonii  failure.  Few  English  campaigns
have  been  more  deph)rahle  than  those  of  the  Duke  of  York  in
J  70  |.  jind  1  7'.)9,  and  it  was  not  until  Pitt  was  in  his  grave  that
tli<'  riiiulisli  army  recovered  its  niicieiit  vigoiii-.  'I'lie  navy,  it  is
ti-iic,  iiiuro  than sustained  its  fonncr  repiilal  i<Mi,  hut  no  [lart  of

en.  XVIII.  riTT'S PATRONAGE  71

the  merit  belongs  to  I'itt.  During  two  most  critical  years,
when  tlie  whole  safety  of  the  country  depended  on  the  navy,
he  maintained  at  the  head  of  the  Admiralty  his  perfectly
inefficient  brother,  Lord  Chatham  ;  and  Lord  St.  Vincent,  who
was  the  one  really  great  naval  minister  during  the  war,  owed
his  position  not  to  Pitt,  but  to  Addington.

Pitt  was,  in  truth,  beyond  all  things  a  parliamentary
minister,  and  in  provinces  that  lay  outside  the  parliamentary
arena  he  showed  very  little  real  superiority.  The  great  social
problems  arising  from  the  sudden  development  of  the  factory
S3'stem,  which  began  in  his  time,  never  appear  to  have  for  a
moment  occupied  his  thoughts.  To  the  terrible  and  growing
evils  of  the  English  Poor  Law  system  he  was  so  blind  that
he  urged  that  parish  relief  should  be  given  as  '  a  matter  of
right  or  honour,'  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  children  of  the
recipient.  In  this  way,  he  said,  a  large  family  will  become
a  blessing  and  not  a  curse,  and  '  a  proper  line  of  distinc^tion  '
will  be  drawn  '  between  those  who  are  able  to  provide  for  them-
selves by  their  labour,  and  those  who,  after  having  enriched
their  country  with  a  number  of  children,  have  a  claim  upon  its
assistance  for  their  support.' '

In  the  disposal  of  his  vast  and  various  patronage,  no
minister  showed  himself  more  perfectly  and  uniformly  iiidii-
ferent  to  the  interests  of  science  and  literature.  The  touching
and  discriminating  kindness  with  which  Sir  Robert  Peel  so
often  turned  aside  in  the  most  anxious  moments  of  his  career
to  smoothe,  by  judicious  patronage,  or  out  of  the  small  funds  at
his  disposal,  the  path  of  struggling  or  neglected  genius,  w^as
wholly  alien  to  the  character  of  Pitt.  In  his  relations  with
those  with  whom  he  came  in  immediate  contact,  he  was  an
amiable  and  kindly  man,  but  he  never  showed  the  slightest
wish  to  recognise  any  form  of  struggling  talent,  or  to  employ
his  patronage  for  any  other  object  than  the  support  of  his
political  interests,  or  the  gratification  of  his  political  friends.
He  had  himself  some  literary  tastes,  but  they  appear  to  have  only
touched  the  surface  of  his  nature.  No  man  knew  better  the  art
of  embellishing  a  peroration  or  pointing  a  repartee  with  a  Latin

'  Pari.  Hht.  xxxii,  710. See  too  Wade's  Hid.  of  the  Middle  and  Working

Clas/-(  s,  pp.  'JU-U5.

72  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

quotation,  and  iu  the  parliamentary  circles  of  the  eigbteenth
centmy  this  art  was  prized  as  the  very  highest  result  of  educa-
tion,' but  he  was  quite  without  Fox's  power  of  casting  off  the
ambitions  of  politics  and  finding  in  books  a  sufficient  aliment
for  his  nature.  He  was  a  politician  and  nothing  more.  Office
was  to  him  the  all  in  all  of  life ;  not  its  sordid  fruits,  for  to  these
he  was  wholly  indifferent;  not  the  opportunity  v.hich  it  gives
of  advocating  and  advancing  great  causes ;  for  this  he  cared
much  too  little ;  but  the  excitement  and  exultation  which  the
possession  and  skilful  exercise  of  power  can  give  was  to  him
the  highest  of  pleasures.  It  was,  as  he  truly  said,  '  the  pride
of  his  heart  and  the  pleasure  of  his  life.'

Parliamentary  talents  under  a  parliamentary  government  are
often  extravagantly  overrated,  and  the  type  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  describe,  though  combining  great  qualities  both
of  intellect  and  character,  is  not,  I  think,  of  the  very  highest
order.  Under  such  a  government  Pitt  was  indeed  pre-eminently
formed  to  be  a  leader  of  men,  capable  alike  of  directing,  control-
ling and  inspiring,  of  impressing  the  imagination  of  nations,
of  steering  the  bark  of  the  State  in  times  of  great  difficulty
and  danger.  He  was  probably  the  greatest  of  English  parlia-
mentary leaders ;  he  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  parliamentary
debaters  ;  he  was  a  very  considerable  Finance  Minister,  and  he
had  a  sane,  sound  judgment  of  ordinary  events.  But  his  eye
seemed  always  fixed  on  the  immediate  present  or  on  the  near
future.  His  mind,  though  quick,  clear,  and  strong,  was  narrow
in  its  range,  and  neither  original  nor  profound,  and  though  his
nature  was  pure,  lofty,  and  magnanimous,  there  were  moral  as
well  as  mental  defects  in  his  statesmanship. Of  his  sincere

'  My olfl friond Jfr. William  quote  the  lines  of  Virgil  (yE«-.  iv.  340),

I'.rrmkr; (late Master  of Cliancery  in  Me  si  fata  mcis  patcrentur  ducere  vitam

Ireland) took down in 181(),  from a  Ausi)iciis  et  sponte  mea  comiwuc-iv  ouras,

r.  ArmitM-e  wliO  lived  much  in  Ueliipnascohrom/piiaiHitootaaltamauerent,
London  political  society  in  tlie  first  Et  rccidiva  mami  posui^em  PLigania  victis.
years  of  the  century,  the  following  In  the  middle  of  the  quotation,  how-
anecdote,  which  has  not,  I  think,  ever,  his  memory  failed  him.  He
appeared  in  print.  In  the  debates  hesitated  and  paused,  when  J'ox,
which  f.llowcd  the  Peace  of  Auiiens,  bending  forward  from  the  Opposition
tlie  Opposition  had  taunted  I'iit  witli  bench,  prompted  his  rival  to  tiie  end
liavingfdilefl  in  the  avowed  objects  of  yf  i),e  passage.  The  speech  and  the
the  war— the  restoration  of  the  Hour-  ,]uotation  will  be  found  in  Pari.
bons  anfl  the  deslruction  of  tlie  lie-  Jlid.  K^axi.  i'l'J.
Volulinn. J'ilt  in  Ids  reply  began  to

cii.  xvni.  PITTS DEFEATS.  /3

and  siiiyle-iiiinded  patriotism  there  can,  indeed,  I  believe,  be  no
doubt.  '  For  personal  purity,  disinterestedness,  integrity,  and
love  of  his  country,' wrote  Wilberforce,  'I  have  never  known  his
equal.'  ^  He  was  not  a  statesman  who  would  ever  have  raised
dangerous  questions,  or  embarrassed  foreign  negotiations,  or
trammelled  his  country  in  times  of  war,  or  appealed  to  subversive
passions  or  class  hatreds  in  order  to  climb  into  power,  or  to  win
personal  or  party  advantages.  But  the  love  of  power,  which
was  so  dominant  a  feature  in  his  character,  though  it  never  led
him  to  take  a  course  directly  injurious  to  his  country,  did,  I
think,  undoubtedly  more  than  once  lead  him  to  cast  aside  too
lightly  great  causes  which  might  have  benefited  her.  A  certain
want  of  heart,  a  deficiency  of  earnestness  and  self-sacrifice,  is
very  apparent  in  his  career.  Perhaps  with  a  warmer  nature  he
would  not  have  so  generally  preserved  that  balance  of  intellect
which  was  pre-eminent  among  his  merits.

His  ministry  between  the  defeat  of  the  Coalition  and  the
outbreak  of  the  war  of  the  Revolution  may  be  divided  into  two
parts — that  which  preceded  and  that  which  followed  the  question
of  the  regency.  The  first  period  was  by  far  the  more  prosperous.
It  was  adorned  by  the  great  financial  measures  I  have  enume-
rated and  by  the  commercial  treaty  with  France  ;  and  the  nation
which  imagined  itself  ruined  by  the  loss  of  America  and  by  the
magnitude  of  its  debt,  naturally  exaggerated  the  part  which
political  measures  bore  in  its  returning  prosperity.  With  the
single  exception  of  the  Westminster  scrutiny,  Pitt's  parlia-
mentary management  was  at  this  time  almost  perfect.  He  was
at  once  firm  and  conciliatoiy,  and  he  showed  in  the  highest
measure  all  the  gifts  of  tact,  temper,  presence  of  mind,  know-
ledge of  the  dispositions  and  feelings  of  Parliament.  In  addition
to  his  defeats  about  the  Westminster  scrutiny  and  about  the
Irish  commercial  propositions,  a  proposal  of  the  Duke  of  Rich-
mond, the  Master-General  of  the  Ordnance,  to  fortify  Plymonlh
and  Portsmouth  was  rejected  in  the  beginning  of  1786  by  the
casting  vote  of  the  Speaker.  It  was  a  project  which  was  suggesteil
by the humiliating panic which the French and Spanish

'  Wil])crforce's  TJfi\  iii.  249,  2r)0. by George  Rose  on returning from
See loo the touching lines  written Pitt's  funeral,  Rose's  Diaricxy  p.  'lo'6.

74  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

fleets  had  during  the  Last  war  spread  along  the  coast,  but
tbe  old  English  dread  of  barracks  and  fortified  places  was
not  extinct ;  the  Whig  Opposition  did  not  disdain  to  appeal  to
it,  and  the  proposed  fortifications  were  absurdly  described  as
dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  England,  strongholds  for  separating
sokliers  from  their  fellow-countrymen,  seminaries  for  Praetorian
bands.  The  defeat  does  not,  however,  appear  to  have  at  all
weakened  the  ministry,  or  the  advocacy  of  one  unpopular  pro-
posal to  have  diminished  the  popularity  of  Pitt.  English
opinion  strongly  and  warmly  supported  him,  and  Scotland,
which  was  advancing  steadily  and  rapidly  in  prosperity,  was
gratified  by  the  ascendency  of  Dundas.  A  measure  proposed
by  that  statesman  in  1784  and  carried  without  difficulty,
restoring  the  estates  that  had  been  forfeited  in  the  rebellion  of
1745,  contributed  to  efface  the  last  lines  of  division  that  the
disputed  succession  had  left  in  Scotch  life.  It  was  a  measure
which  had  previously  been  contemplated  by  North  and  would
probably  have  been  carried  into  effect  by  him  if  his  ministry
had  lasted ;  ^  but  there  was  a  peculiar  felicity  in  its  falling  to
the  ministry  of  Pitt,  whose  father,  by  arming  the  Highlanders
and  leading  them  to  glory  under  the  British  flag,  had  done  so
much  to  dispel  their  lingering  Jacobitism.  It  was  arranged
that  the  heirs  to  the  forfeited  estates  should  compensate  the
(jovernment  for  the  sums  employed  by  it  in  improvements  and
in  the  liquidation  of  encumbrances,  and  the  sums  derived  from
this  source  were  to  be  devoted  chiefly  to  the  completion  of  a
work  of  great  national  importance — a  canal  to  join  the  Firth  of
Forth  with  the  Firth  of  Clyde.

The  question  of  Indian  government,  which  had  been  the
ostensible  cause  of  the  downfall  of  the  preceding  Administration,
was  settled  for  the  present,  by  the  enactment  in  a  slightly  modi-
fied form  of  the  Pill  which  Pitt  had  unsuccessfully  introduced
into  the  last  Parliament.  It  was  a  measure  which  differed  more
in  form  than  in  substance  from  that  of  Fox,  and,  while  it  avoided
the  mistake  of  placing  lii(li;iii  ])aironage  avowedly  in  the  hands
of  the  English  minister,  it  in  reality  gave  him  jicrhaps  even
greater power  than  the  previous  Will. The  Company's  homo

•  Adnlplius,  iv.  VoJ.  110.

HK.  xviii.  GOVEUNMKNT OF INDIA BILL.  i  i')

go\'('riiii:('iit,  consisting  of  tlie  Court  of  Directors  and  tlie  Court
of  Proprietors,  remained,  but  over  tliem  was  placed  a  Board  of
Control  appointed  by  tbe  King,  holding  office  during  pleasure,
and  consisting  of  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,  the  Chancellor
of  the  Exchequer,  and  four  other  members  of  the  Privy  Council.
This  body  was  unpaid  and  it  had  no  patronage ;  but  it  was
empowered  to  superintend,  control,  and  amend  the  whole  civil
and  military  government  of  the  Company ;  to  examine  all
accounts,  instructions,  and  despatches,  and  even  in  some  cases  to
transmit  orders  to  India  without  the  inspection  of  the  Directors.
A  Committee  of  Secrecy,  consisting  of  not  more  than  three
members,  was  to  be  formed  out  of  the  Directors,  and  when  the
Board  of  Control  issued  orders  requiring  secrecy,  the  Comnuttee
of  Secrecy  was  to  transmit  those  orders  to  India  without  inform-
ing the  other  Directors.  The  Court  of  Proprietors  at  the  same
time  lost  its  chief  governing  faculty,  for  it  could  no  longer
annul  or  modify  any  proceeding  of  the  Court  of  Directors  which
had  received  the  approbation  of  the  Board  of  Control.  A
tribunal  was  established  for  trying  in  England  abuses  that
took  place  in  India,  and  there  was  an  extraordinary  provision
making  it  obligatory  upon  the  servants  of  the  Company  to
declare  truly  upon  oath  and  under  severe  penalties  the  amount
of  property  they  had  brought  from  India.  The  authority  of  the
Covernor-General  and  Council  over  the  Subordinate  Presidencies
of  Madras  and  Bombay  was  greatly  enlarged.  Numerous  in-
ternal regulations  were  made  relating  to  the  affairs  of  India,  and
several  of  them  were  adopted  substantially  from  Fox's  Bill,  and
the  measure  also  contained  clauses  restricting  the  patronage  of
the  Directors  and  making  retrenchments  in  the  Company's
establishments.  The  patronage  of  India  was  in  general  left  to
the  Directors,  but  the  Governor-General,  the  Presidents  and
JMembers  of  all  the  Councils,  were  to  be  chosen  subject  to  the
King's  approbation,  and  it  was  at  any  time  to  be  in  the  jDower  of
the  King  to  remove  them.'

The  Bill  was  hotly  opposed,  chiefly  on  the  two  somewhat
conflicting  grounds  of  the  immense  accession  of  power  which
the  establishment of  the  Board  of  Control  must  give  to  the

»  24  Geo.  IIL  c.  23;  Mill's  Hist.  »/ British  Tmlia,  book  v.  cli.ix.

7G ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xvm.

Crown,  and  of  the  inefficiency  of  a  system  wMcla  gave  the  power
of  direction  and  command  to  one  body  and  the  nomination  of
the  officials  who  were  entrusted  with  the  task  of  carrying  out
those  commands  to  another.  Several  amendments  suggested
by  the  Opposition  were  accepted  by  Pitt,  and  the  measure  was
finally  carried  by  a  great  majority.  In  1786  the  section  obliging-
servants  of  the  Company  to  deliver  inventories  of  their  pro-
perty was  repealed ;  a  few  new  regulations  were  made  in
the  conduct  of  trials  for  offences  committed  in  India, ^  and  l)y
later  Acts  some  other  slig-ht  changfes  were  made  :  but  on  the
whole  the  system  of  double  government  established  by  the  Act
of  1784  continued  to  direct  Indian  affairs  till  the  abolition  of
the  Company  in  1858.  For  the  next  few  years  discussions
relating  to  India  were  chiefly  of  a  retrospective  character  re-
lating to  the  proceedings  of  Warren  Hastings — a  great  and
intricate  question,  which  only  arrived  at  its  final  stages  after  the
period  I  have  selected  for  the  termination  of  this  history,  and
into  which  it  is,  therefore,  not  my  intention  to  enter.

Though  the  period  we  are  considering,  if  compared  with
that  which  preceded  it  and  with  that  which  immediately  fol-
lowed it,  was  a  period  of  European  calm,  there  were  several
questions  raised  which  might  easily  have  produced  a  general
conflagration.  The  mixed  dominion  which  had  so  long  existed
in  the  Austrian  Netherlands  had  proved  a  fertile  source  of
confusion  and  dispute,  and  in  1781  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.,
availing  himself  of  the  war  between  England  and  Holland,  had
taken  the  bold  step  of  declaring  the  Barrier  Treaty  no  longer
binding,  dismantling  several  of  the  barrier  fortresses  and  oblig-
ing the  Dutch  garrisons  to  withdraw  froin  all  of  them.  Encou-
raged by  his  success,  the  Emperor  in  1784  made  a  new  aggres-
sion upon  Holland  by  reviving  an  old  imperial  claim  upon  the
lown  of  Maestricht  and  by  insisting  on  llie  free  navigation  of
the  river  Sclieldt.  The  Dutch  right  of  exclusive  sovereignty
over  that  river  had  been  acknowledged  for  nearly  140  yeai"s.
Jt  was  established  by  the  Treaty  of  Miinster,  confirmed  and
guaranteed  by  the  Barrier  Treaty  of  1715,  and  by  a  convention
in  1718,  and  it  was  believed  by  Dutch  statcsinen  to  be  abso-
lutely eb-beutial  to  the  security  of  their  country.  The  Austrians
'  2(;gc().  Tii.  c.  ru.

ni.  xviiT.  TREATY OF F0NTAIN]:ELI:AU.  77

now  seized  two  Dutch  forts  which  connnanded  the  river,  and  a
gi'eat  Austrian  arm^^,  accompanied  Ly  hirge  trains  of  artillery,
was  ordered  to  march  to  the  Netherlands.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Dutch  broke  down  the  dykes  round  the  fort  of  Lillo,  which
the  Austrians  had  seized,  an  imperial  vessel  in  the  Scheldt  was
fired  at,  and  the  Dutch  strained  all  their  resources  to  raise  a
powerful  army.  A  number  of  minor  claims  against  Holland
were  at  the  same  time  raised,  and  the  Empress  of  Russia,  wlio
was  now  in  close  alliance  with  Joseph,  notified  to  the  States  her
intention  of  supporting  the  Emperor.  For  a  time  a  European
war  seemed  inevitable,  but  France  warmly  supported  the
Itepublic,  and,  her  mediation  being  at  last  accepted,  the
dispute  was  settled  by  the  Treaty  of  Fontainebleau,  which  was
signed  on  November  8,  1785.  The  States  acknowledged  the
Emperor's  absolute  and  independent  sovereignty  over  that
portion  of  the  Scheldt  which  flowed  through  the  Austrian
Netherlands  from  Antwerp  to  the  limits  of  Saftingen,  but  on
the  rest  of  the  river  the  exclusive  sovereignty  of  the  States  was
fully  recognised  according  to  the  Treaty  of  Miinster,  and  the
Emperor  agreed  to  abandon  all  claim  to  Maestricht  and  the
surrounding  country,  on  receiving  an  indemnity  of  ten  millions
of  guilders.  A  few  slight  rectifications  of  territory  were  at
the  same  time  made,  a  few  small  fortresses  were  dismantled,  and
the  contracting  parties  formally  renounced  all  further  preten-
tions that  either  might  have  against  the  other.'

The  dismantling  of  fortresses  which  took  place  through  the
policy  of  Joseph  II.  had  some  years  later  a  considerable  effect
in  rendering  the  French  conquest  of  the  Netherlands  rapid  and
easy.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  parts  of -the  arrangement
that  w^as  concluded  at  Fontainebleau  was  that  as  the  Dutch  posi-
tively refused  to  pay  the  full  sum  of  ten  millions  of  guilders
which  was  demanded  by  the  Emperor,  the  French  undertook
themselves  to  pay  nearly  half  of  it.  It  is  hardly  surprising  that
such  a  proceeding  should  have  been  unpopular  in  France,  and
that  Parisian  opinion  should  have  attributed  it  to  the  Queen,
who  was  thus,  it  was  said,  without  the  smallest  claim  of  justice
or  policy,  pouring  French  gold  into  the  coffers  of  her  brother.

'  Annual  lieqhtcr,  1784-5,  p.  212; De  Flassan,  Za  Dijjlomatie  Franqaisc ;
Adolphus,  iv.  180-185

78  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUnY. en.  xviii.

The  payment,  however,  perhaps  saved  France  the  greater  ex-
penditure of  another  war,  and  it  certainly  tended  to  strengthen
that  close  connection  between  France  and  Holland  which  had
been  recently  established,  and  which  it  had  become  one  of  the
chief  ends  of  French  diplomacy  to  maintain.  The  Treaty  of
Fontainebleau  was  at  once  followed  by  a  close  military  and
commercial  alliance  between  France  and  Holland.  Each  State
guaranteed  the  other  the  possession  of  all  its  territories,  and
engaged  to  assist  the  other  when  attacked,  by  specified  contin-
gents on  land  and  sea.  Each  State  bound  itself  to  place  the
subjects  of  the  other  on  the  footing  of  the  most  favoured  nation,
to  give  the  other  on  all  occasions  assistance  both  in  counsel  and
succour,  to  agree  to  no  treaties  or  negotiations  that  could  be
detrimental  to  the  other,  to  give  notice  to  the  other  of  any  such
negotiations  as  soon  as  they  were  proposed.

This  treaty  of  alliance  was  concluded  on  November  10, 1785,
and  ratified  on  the  following  Christmas  Day.  It  showed  clearly
that  the  star  of  England  had  for  the  present  paled,  and  it  was  a  very
serious  blow  to  her  influence  in  Europe.  One  of  her  oldest  and
closest  allies,  one  of  the  chief  maritime  powers  of  the  world,  had
thus  detached  herself  from  the  English  connection,  thrown  lier
influence  into  the  scale  of  France,  and  virtually  become  a  party
to  the  Bourbon  Family  Compact.  In  the  eloquent  and  ominous
words  of  a  contemporary  observer :  '  All  the  systems  of  policy
which  had  been  pursued  for  two  centuries  by  the  maritime
powers  in  the  support  of  a  balance  of  power,  all  the  conventions,
treaties,  and  ties  of  union  between  them  founded  on  the  seem-
ingly unfailing  principles  of  a  common  interest,  common  views,
common  religion,  foreign  danger,  and  common  defence,  were
now  at  once  done  away  with  and  dissolved.' '

T]\c.  I'ranco-Dntch  alliance  was  one  of  the  results  of  the  enmity
uliicli  li.ui  lirokcn  out  between  England  and  Holland  dnring  the
Aniericaii  War,  but  like  that  enmity  it  maybe  ultimately  traced
to  the  rivalry  between  the  two  great  factions  into  which  Dutch
politics  were  divided.  The  party  attacluul  to  the  I'rince  of
Orange,  t]i(;  hereditiiry  Stadholder,  was  steadily  IViendly  to  the
English  alliance,  but  the  more  repnblican,  or,  as  it  called  itself,
'the  patriotic  party,'  was  actively  siippoi-ted  \\\  l'Vanc(>,  and  to

•  Annual  Ucijixlrr,  MM '),  [i]).  KIT l.'l'J.

en.  XVIII.  DISSENSIONS IN THE NETHERLANDS.  79

the  growing  influence  of  that  party  both  the  war  against  England
aiul  the  Treaty  of  Fontainebleau  must  be  mainly  ascribed.  The
dissension  had  grown  up  in  the  long  minority  that  preceded  the
accession  to  power  in  17GG  of  the  reigning  Stadholder,  Wil-
liam v.,  and  it  had  been  much  deepened  by  the  feebleness  of
that  Prince.  No  part,  indeed,  of  the  great  governing  qualities
of  mind  and  character  which  made  the  elder  branch  of  the  House
of  Orange  the  most  illustrious  ruling  family  of  its  age  '  had
descended  to  the  younger  branch  which  followed  the  death  of
King  William  III.  of  England.  It  is  probable  that  a  large
portion  of  the  '  patriotic  party '  would  have  gladly  abolished  the
hereditary  Stadholdership,  but  the  leaders  usually  professed
themselves  ready  to  support  the  existing  constitution,  with
modifications  which  would  have  deprived  the  Prince  of  Orange
of  almost  all  real  weight  in  the  State.  They  wished  him  to
have  no  seat  in  any  college  of  the  Republic.  They  desired  to
separate  his  office  from  that  of  Captain-General  which  gave  him
command  of  the  army,  and  also  to  abolish  the  'Reglements'
which  gave  him  in  the  three  provinces  of  Utrecht,  Overyssel,
and  Guelderland,  the  direct  appointment  of  the  magistrates  of
towns.  The  two  parties  were  nearly  balanced.  In  the  summer
and  autumn  of  1785  numerous  '  free  companies '  sujDporting  the
'  patriotic '  party  appeared  in  arms,  and  in  several  of  the  chief
towns  there  were  disturbances  almost  amounting  to  revolution.
In  the  September  of  this  year  the  Stadholder  was  obliged  to
abandon  the  Hague,  but  Guelderland  and  some  other  portions  of
the  Netherlands  still  warmly  supported  him.  A  year  later  the
Stadholder,  with  the  full  assent  of  the  States  of  Guelderland,
subdued  the  towns  of  Elburg  and  Hattem,  in  that  province,
which  had  revolted  aofainst  them ;  and  the  States  of  Holland
with  only  two  dissentient  voices,  assuming  a  right  which  they
did  not  possess  over  a  neighbouring  province,  suspended  the
Stadholder  from  the  office  of  Captain-General,

These  events  produced  an  extreme  and  general  agitation.
Sir  James  Harris,  the  English  minister,  was  indefatigable  in
supporting  by  his  counsel  and  influence  the  party  of  the  Stad-
holder, and  he  organised  the  resistance  to  the  French  party
with  great  skill  and  success.  In  September  1786,  however,
wheii  the States of Holland d(^prlved  the  Prince  of Orange

80  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. lh xviii.

of  liis  military  autliority,  the  prospect  seemed  extremely  dark.
Groningen  and  Overyssel,  Harris  wrote,  were  irreconcilably  lost
to  tlie  House  of  Orange.  Utrecht  might  at  any  moment
abandon  her  allegiance.  In  Friesland  the  contest  ran  very
hio-h,  but  the  majority  in  the  States  seemed  unfavourably  dis-
posed. Even  Zealand,  which  had  been  warmly  attached  to  the
Stadholder,  seemed  swerving  from  the  cause.  French  money
was  abundantly  distributed ;  the  leaders  of  the  patriotic  faction
held  meetings  at  the  house  of  the  French  ambassador,  and  it  was
generally  believed  that  they  intended,  by  the  advice  and  with  the
support  of  France,  to  deprive  the  Stadholder  of  his  office  and  to
declare  that  it  should  no  longer  be  hereditary  in  the  House  of
Orange.  French  diplomatists  openly  said  that  an  hereditary
Stadholder  was  of  too  new  a  creation  to  have  acquired  a  con-
stitutional sanction ;  that  it  never  had  the  approbation  of  the
whole  Republic,  and  that,  as  it  was  brought  about  by  a  revolu-
tion, it  might  be  destroyed  in  the  same  manner.

The  Prince  of  Orange  had  already  appealed  for  help  to  Frede-
rick the  Great  of  Prussia,  but  the  old  sovereign  showed  little  or
no  disposition  to  take  any  serious  part  in  the  dispute.  He  died,
however,  on  August  17, 1786,  and  the  accession  to  the  throne  of
his  nephew  Frederick  William  II.,  who  was  brother  of  the  Princess
of  Orange,  greatly  changed  the  situation.  Immediately  after  the
(n'ents  in  Guelderland,  Goertz  was  sent  from  Prussia  and  liayneval
from  France  in  hopes  of  composing  or  influencing  affairs  in  the
Netherlands,  but  they  met  with  no  success,  and  in  January
1787  they  were  both  recalled.  In  February,  Vergennes,  who
had  long  been  a  leading  influence  in  French  politics,  died.  For
a  few  months  the  dissensions  in  the  Netherlands  seemed  to
smoulder,  but  towards  the  end  of  June  the  Princess  of  Orange,
liaving  determined  to  visit  the  Hague,  from  which  her  husband
was  excluded,  was  arrested  on  her  way,  turned  back  and  treated
like  a  prisoner.  She  at  once  appealed  to  her  brother,  but  the
States-Gerun-al,  relying  on  French  support,  refused  to  give  any
Hatisfaction.  In  September  a  Prussian  anuy  of  more  than
20,000  men,  under  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  invaded  lloUnnd.

'J'he  Prussian  intervention  was  largely  due  to  English  in-
fluence, and  it  was  rendered  possible  by  a  secret  convent  ion
which was sii'neil Ix'tween tlie two (miiiiI  ries. The chief

tir.  xviii.  DUTCH CONSTiTaXlON SETTLED.  Hi

measures  necessary  fur  the  restoration  of  the  Stadholder  to  hi.s
i'nll  powers  were  agreed  upon,  and  England  bound  herself  to
prepare  forty  ships  of  the  line  to  support  Prussia,  and  to  declare
war  against  any  power  which  attempted  to  interfere  with  her
enterpri.^e.  In  Holland,  Sir  James  Harris  took  an  extremt-ly
active  part,  and  large  sums  of  English  money  were  expended  in
arming  the  supporters  of  the  Stadholder.'  It  soon  ap[)oared
that  the  attitude  of  Prussia  had  a  decisive  effect,  and  tliat  a
great  proportion  of  the  people  were  on  the  side  of  the  House  of
Orange  and  rather  favoured  than  resented  the  invasion.  Utrecht,
which  had  been  prominent  in  its  resistance  to  the  Prince,  sur-
rendered, without  a  blow.  The  Stadholder,  after  an  absence  of
two  years,  returned  to  the  Hague.  The  horses  were  taken  from
his  carriage  when  he  was  still  a  mile  from  the  town,  and  he  was
drawn  in  by  the  corps  of  Orange  burghers  amid  demonstrations
of  the  most  enthusiastic  welcome.  Great  crowds  wearing  orange
flowers  and  ribbons  thronged  the  streets,  and  the  colour  which
had  long  been  proscribed  streamed  from  every  window.  On
October  10  the  work  was  completed  by  the  surrender  of
Amsterdam.  England  now  declared  that  she  would  defend  the
Stadholder  if  he  were  attacked,  and  her  fleets  were  at  once  pr(v
pared  for  action,  while  France,  which  was  rapidly  approaching
her  Revolution,  shrank  from  open  intervention.  The  victor}^  wjis
used  with  much  moderation.  A  few  magistrates  were  deposed ;
a  few  officers  were  cashiered ;  a  few  conspicuous  members  of  the
*  patriotic '  party  were  exiled,  but  a  general  amnesty  calmed  the
minds  of  men,  and  an  '  Act  of  Mutual  Guarantee  of  the  Seven
United  Provinces,'  signed  by  the  various  States,  declared  it  to
be  an  essential  part  of  the  Dutch  Constitution  that  the  here-
ditary dignities  of  Stadholder,  Captain-General,  and  Admiral-
General,  should  be  vested  in  the  House  of  Orange.

Changes  in  constitutions  effected  by  foreign  intervention  are
rarely  lasting,  for  they  commonly  turn  the  national  feeling
against  the  ascendant  party.  In  a  few  years,  however,  the  storm
of  the  French  Revolution  swept  over  the  Dutch  Repul^lic,  and  it
not  only  effaced  the  old  lines  of  party  division,  but  also  almost

• Malmrghury Diaries, ii. .3.5."),  of  the  power  of  the  Stadholder,  see

367,  372. On  tlie  detenuiuation  of  the  Avcldand  Corrcsjjondence,  i.  Itti),

Pitt  to  declare  war  against  Ersince  if  204.
tiiat power  op[osed the restoration

VOL.  V.  O

82  ENGLA^'D IN THE ICIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xvm.

destroyed  tlie  animosities  and  passions  of  former  conflicts.  Sir
James  Harris  was  created  Lord  Malmesbnry  as  a  reward  for  his
services  during  the  events  that  have  been  described,  and  English
statesmen  had  every  reason  to  congratulate  themselves  on  the
issue  of  the  conflict.  The  menacing  alliance  between  France
and  Holland  was  dissolved.  The  party  which  most  valued  the
English  connection  regained  its  ascendency.  By  a  treaty  of
mutual  defence  between  Great  Britain  and  the  States-General,
which  was  signed  in  April  1788,  England  guaranteed  the  here-
ditary Stadholdership  to  the  House  of  Orange,  and  in  the  same
year  the  triple  alliance  of  Great  Britain,  the  Netherlands,  and
Prussia  was  signed,  which  during  the  following  years  exercised
a  great  influence  on  European  affairs.  The  policy  of  France
was  for  the  present  completely  defeated,  and  in  Holland  as  well
as  in  America  her  efforts  to  stimulate  democratic  revolution
reacted  powerfully  and  fatally  upon  herself.'

The  position  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands  continued,  how-
ever, to  be  a  matter  of  much  disquietude  to  the  small  number  of
English  statesmen  who  watched  with  real  care  and  knowledge
the  affairs  of  the  Continent.^  The  arrangement  of  the  Peace  of
Utrecht,  b}'  which  that  country  was  placed  under  the  dominion
of  the  House  of  Austria  on  the  condition  that  a  long  line  of  its
most  poweriul  fortresses  should  be  jointly  garrisoned  by  Imperial
and  Dutch  troops,  appeared  to  the  statesmen  of  that  day  eminently
fitted  to  guard  against  French  aggression  in  a  quarter  where
it  was peculiarly  dangerous and  would  otherwise have been

'  Tlie  fullest  accounts  of  these  tinent ;  and  if  any  good  is  ever  done
events  (written  from  the  two  opposite  there,  it  must  be  efl'ected  through  the
.sides)  will  he  found  in  an  anonjnirus  King's  ministers  abroad  and  not  by
sketch  of  The  Jlhionj  of  the  Dutch  tliose  about  liis  person.  Long  expe-
Jti'jiiihlicfor  the  IriKt  ten  yearx reckon-  ricmce  has  taught  me  this,  and  I  never
iiKj  from  the  ijear  1777  (London,  1788)  j'ct  received  an  instruction  that  was
written  Vjy  George  Ellis,  Secretary  to  worth  reading.'  It  is  curious  tocom-
the  English  Embassy  at  the  Hague,  pare  this  with  the  judgment  of  Burke.
and  in  a  meujoir  by  Caillaid,  French  Wrin'ngin  17!)1  he  said:  'I  have  long
Charge  d'Ad'aires  at  the  Hague,  been  jiersnadcMl  that  those  in  power
wliich  is  piilili>hed  in  the  third  heie,  instead  of  governing  their  mi-
volume  of  Segur's  Td.hleau  llhi.oriijiie.  nisters  at  foreign  courts,  are  en  ircly
See  too  the  Malniinhnrji  Jjitirieit,  the  swayed  by  them.  Tliat  corps  has  no
Anviiid  lletjiHter,  and  Adolplms.  oiic  point  of  manly policy  in  their

■■'  Sir, James  Harris,  writing  to  Mr.  whole  sj'stem; they  are a corps  of

Ewarfc, Finglish Secretary at Berlin  intriguers,  who  sooner  or  later  will

{jMtihiiexhiirii Diririix,  ii. 112), says:  turn our  oHices  into  an academy  of

Mhir  principiils  at  home  arc  too  much  calial  and  confusion.' Durkc's  CorrO'

occui)ied  wilji  tlie  House  of  (Jfimitmtis  Hixindcnce,  iii.  li(J8,  2Gy.
to  aitond  to  what  passes  on  I  lie  Con-

en.  xvni.  GEIiMAN CONFEDERATION, 1786.  83

peculiarly  easy.  It  was  iutended  to  secure  the  concurrence  of
the  two  powers  in  resisting  any  French  encroachments ;  to
make  it  impossible,  or  at  least  very  unlikely,  that  a  country
of  extreme  strategical  importance  should  be  governed  by  a
sovereign  devoted  to  French  interests,  and  at  the  same  time  to
bring  the  Emperor,  whose  chief  dominions  lay  in  a  distant  part
of  the  Continent,  into  close  union  and  connection  with  the
maritime  powers.  As  might,  however,  have  been  expected,
Austria  finding  herself  the  stronger  power  in  a  divided  and
restricted  dominion,  soon  made  it  her  main  object  to  emancipate
herself  from  her  restraints,  and  the  repudiation  of  the  Barrier
Treaty  by  Joseph  11.  completely  destroyed  this  part  of  the
system  established  by  the  Peace  of  Utrecht.  The  Emperor
now  treated  the  Austrian  Netherlands  as  if  they  were  in
exactly  the  same  relation  to  him  as  his  hereditary  states,  and
he  entered  into  a  course  of  hostilities  with  the  very  power
which  the  Austrian  dominion  in  Flanders  was  intended  chiefly
to  protect.

Another  project  speedily  followed.  Joseph  endeavoured  to
obtain  by  negotiation  the  object  at  which  his  mother  had  long
aimed  by  war,  the  annexation  of  Bavaria  to  his  dominions.  In
1785  he  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  Elector  Palatine  for
an  exchange  of  territory  of  the  most  extensive  kind.  The
Elector  was  to  cede  to  Austria,  Bavaria  and  the  Upper  Palati-
nate with  the  Principalities  of  Neuburg,  Sulzbach,  and  the
Landgravate  of  Leuchtenberg,  receiving  in  return  the  Austrian
Netherlands  with  the  title  of  King.  The  Empress  of  Russia
favoured  the  exchange,  and  France  was  to  be  pacified  by  the
cession  of  Namur  and  of  Luxemburg.  But  Frederick  the
Great,  who  saw  clearly  that  the  acquisition  of  Bavaria  and  the
Palatinate  would  give  Austria  an  overwhelming  preponderance
in  Germany,  and  that  the  acquisition  of  Luxemburg  by  the
French  might  greatly  imperil  his  own  dominions,  succeeded  in
defeating  the  project,  and  under  his  influence  the  German
Confederation  for  the  common  defence  of  the  German  Constitu-
tion w^as  formed  in  1785.  This  was  the  last  and  by  no  means
the  least  considerable  of  his  many  triumphs.^

'  See  De  Flassan,  Diplomatic  Political  Systrm  of  Ei/ropr,  ii.  B9-GI  l
F7-uii(;aisi; vi. .^TO-JiTS  ; llcereu  s jUalmeshuri/ Diaries,  ii.  H)2-\0*J.

Q  2

84  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEExNTII CENTUnY. c-h.  xviii.

All  these  things  had  naturally  unsettled  and  alienated  the
Flemish  subjects  of  Joseph.  The}"  had  caught  no  small  measure
of  the  democratic  and  unquiet  spirit  which  was  spreading
rapidly  through  Europe,  and  the  suppression  of  some  convents
and  ecclesiastical  schools,  the  removal  of  a  university  from
Louvain  to  Brussels,  an  edict  of  toleration  which  offended  the
ecclesiastical  powers,  and  a  number  of  hasty  and  ill-considered
innovations  which  trenched  upon  or  annulled  some  of  the
ancient  privileges  of  the  Netherlands,  increased  the  discontent.
In  1786  and  1787  there  were  serious  tumults  at  Louvain  and
Brussels,  and  secret  societies  began  to  ramify  through  the  pro-
vinces. The  actual  outbreak  did  not  take  place  till  about  two
years  later,  but  there  were  already  abundant  signs  of  danger  in
the  country  which  had  so  often  proved  the  centre  and  the
source  of  great  European  conflagrations.

As  yet,  however,  these  things  scarcely  disturbed  the  calm
sea  of  English  politics.  Nor  was  English  opinion  at  first  at  all
moved  by  the  re^dval  of  the  Eastern  question  and  the  declara-
tion of  war  by  Turkey  against  Russia  in  August  1787.  Foreign
politics,  which  a  few  years  later  became  so  prominent,  were  now
scarcely  mentioned  in  Pai"liament,  and  the  ascendency  of  Pitt
was  entirely  unshaken,  till  the  illness  of  the  King  raised  the
great  and  difficult  question  of  the  regency.

This  question,  which  for  a  time  threatened  to  produce  a
complete  change  in  the  Government,  owed  its  importance  almost
exclusively  to  its  relation  to  party  politics,  and,  in  order  to
understand  it,  it  will  be  necessary  to  review  from  a  somewhat
earlier  period  the  connection  between  the  Whig  leaders  and  the
heir  to  tlie  crown.  That  connection  had  already  existed  for
several  years.  When  little  more  than  a  boy,  the  Prince  of
Wales  had  plunged  into  a  career  of  extravagance  and  vice,  and
he  found  in  Charles  Fox  one  of  the  most  seductive  and  most
dangerous  of  friends.  He  was  so  intimate  with  him  that  he
liubitually  called  him  by  his  Christian  name,  and  a  close  political
as  w(ill  as  social  intercourse  subsisted  between  them.  At  eighteen
the  Prince  was  already  the  accepted  lover  of  Mrs.  Eobinson,
the  well-known  I^erdita.  Before  he  was  twenty  his  influence
was  employed  at  a  Windsor  election  in  opposition  to  the  Court.
An  wt;  liavc  already  seen,  when the  Coalition Alinistry  rose  to

cu.  xvni.  DKBTS OF THE TKLNX'E OV WALES.  85

[)()\ver  one  of  tlie  first  questions  on  wliich  it  came  into  collision
with  the  King  was  the  allowance  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  on  the
attainment  of  his  majority,  and  Fox  desired  to  make  that
allowance  much  larger  and  more  independent  than  the  King
would  allow.  The  political  sympathies  of  the  Prince  weret
sliown  without  the  smallest  disguise.  He  was  a  member  of
Brooks's  Club.  He  lived  habitually  in  a  circle  of  young  and
dissipated  Whigs,  among  whom,  as  was  well  known,  the  King
and  Court  were  continually  spoken  of  with  the  greatest  dis-
respect. He  voted  for  Fox's  India  Bill,  though  he  abstained,  in
deference  to  the  King's  express  wish,  from  the  final  division.
In  the  election  of  1784  he  ostentatiously  espoused  the  cause  of
Fox,  and  Lord  Corn\v-allis  mentions  that  the  friends  of  the
i\Iinistry  rarely  saw  him,  as  '  there  was  not  a  more  violent  Foxite
in  the  kingdom.'  '

He  was  now  completely  alienated  from  his  father,  who
appears  to  have  regarded  him  with  absolute  hatred,  and  he  was
overwhelmed  with  debt.  Of  the  60,000/.  which  Parliament  had
voted  to  him  in  1783,  half  was  intended  to  pay  the  debts  which
he  had  incurred,  but  in  1785  he  admitted  to  Sir  James  Harris
that  his  debts  then  amounted  to  no  less  than  100,000/.^  In  the
autumn  of  the  preceding  year  he  had  written  to  the  King-
stating  his  embarrassments  and  expressing  his  desire  to  ti"avel
and  to  economise,  but  the  King  received  his  overture  with
great  coldness,  refused  to  give  him  permission  to  leave  England,
and  gave  little  or  no  hope  that  the  Ministers  would  be  authorised
to  apply  to  Parliament  for  his  relief.  He  insisted  on  an  exact
account  of  the  debts  of  his  son,  but  there  was  one  debt  of
2-5,000?.  which  the  Prince  said  he  was  bound  in  honour  not
to  explain.

In  the  spring  of  1785  Sir  James  Harris  had  two  long  con-
ferences with  the  Prince  on  the  state  of  his  affairs.  He
was  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  task  ;  for,  while  he  was  one  of
the  ablest  and  most  discreet  diplomatists  in  the  service  of
the  Government,  he  was  at  the  same  time  a  warm  personal
friend  of  the  leaders  of  the  Opposition.  He  was  able  to  give
the  Prince,  not  indeed  a  positive  assurance,  but  at  least  some

'  Coniwalli.s's  Corres^nuidcuce, i.  '^  Jlalmciburi/  Diaries,  ii.  IL'2.

liJO,  lijl.

S6  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

hope  that  the  Ministry  would  move  an  increase  of  his  income
provided  he  would  appropriate  a  fixed  portion  to  the  payment
of  his  debts,  renounce  his  intention  of  leaving  England,  recon-
cile himself  with  the  King,  and  abstain  from  mixing  in  party
politics.  '  A  Prince  of  Wales,'  Harris  truly  said,  '  ought  to  be
of  no  party,'  and  he  was  enabled  to  assure  the  Prince  that  both
Fox  and  the  Duke  of  Portland  fully  acquiesced  in  this  opinion,
and  had  no  wish  to  see  him  a  Whig  partisan.  He  at  the  same
time  strenuously  recommended  a  speedy  marriage  as  a  duty  to '
the  nation  and  as  the  simplest  and  most  natural  way  of  rectify-
ing his  position.  The  Prince  vehemently  declai-ed  that  he  would
never  marry ;  he  repeated  again  and  again  that  the  King  hated
him,  and  would  never  consent  to  any  proposal  in  his  favour.
He  still  spoke  of  his  intention  of  leaving  England,  and  he
produced  a  number  of  letters  from  the  King  which  appeared  to
Harris  '  so  harsh  and  severe,'  so  '  void  of  every  expression  of
parental  kindness  or  affection,'  that  they  fully  justified  the
Prince's  judgment  of  the  sentiments  of  his  father.'

Nothing  resulted  from  these  interviews.  The  Prince  was
now  completely  under  the  influence  of  an  ungovernable  passion
for  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  a  young  and  beautiful  Catholic  lady  of
good  family  and  reputation,  who  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-five
had  been  left  for  the  second  time  a  widow.  The  acquaintance
began  at  Richmond  in  the  summer  of  1784,  when  the  Prince
was  twenty-three  and  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  twenty-eight.  She
appears  to  have  been  much  alarmed  at  his  advances  and  to
have  strongly  discouraged  them,  and  their  intercourse  is  said  for
a  time  to  have  ended  with  a  very  strange  scene,  which  is  thus
i-elated,  on  the  authority  of  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  by  her  relative  and
intimate  friend  Lord  Stourton  :  '  Keith  the  surgeon.  Lord  Onslow,
Lord  Southampton,  and  Mr.  Edward  Bouverie,  arrived  at  Mrs.
Fitzherbert's  liouse  in  the  utmost  consternation,  informing  her
that  the  life  of  the  Prince  was  in  imminent  danger — that  he  had
stabbed  hiinself — and  that  only  her  immediate  presence  could
save  liim.  She  resisted  in  tlio  most  peremptory  manner  all  their
iInportllniti(^s,  saying  that  nothing  should  induce  her  to  enter
CurlLuu  liouse. She  was  afterwards  brought  to  share  in  the

> Mdliiitabiirii  nia'irs.  ii. I'.'l liJU.

cii.  xvm.  MRS. FITZIIEKBERT.  87

ularm,  but,  still  fearful  of  some  stratagem  derogatory  to  her
repatation,  insisted  on  some  lady  of  high  character  accompany-
ing her,  as  an  indispensable  condition.  The  Duchess  of  Devon-
shire was  selected.  They  four  drove  from  Park  Street  to
Devonshire  House  and  took  her  along  with  them.  She  found
the  Prince  pale  and  covered  with  blood.  The  sight  so  over-
powered her  faculties  that  she  was  deprived  almost  of  all
consciousness.  The  Prince  told  her  that  nothing  would  induce
him  to  live  unless  she  promised  to  become  his  wife  and  per-
mitted him  to  put  a  ring  round  her  finger — I  believe  a  ring
from  the  hand  of  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  was  us<  d  upon
the  occasion  and  not  one  of  his  own.  .  .  .  They  returned  to
Devonshire  House.  A  deposition  was  drawn  up  of  what  had
occurred,  and  signed  and  sealed  by  each  one  of  the  party,  and
for  all  she  knew  to  the  contrary  might  still  be  there.  On
the  next  day  she  left  the  country,  sending  a  letter  to  Lord
Southampton  protesting  against  what  had  taken  place  as  not
being  then  a  free  agent.  She  retired  to  Aix-la-Chapelle  and
afterwards  to  Holland.  The  Prince  went  down  into  the  country
to  Lord  Southampton's  for  change  of  air.' '

Mrs.  Fitzherbert  remained  on  the  Continent  for  more  than
a  year,  but  the  passion  of  the  Prince  was  unabated.  Mrs.
Armitstead,  the  mistress,  and  afterwards  wife,  of  Fox,  assured
Lord  Holland  that  the  Prince  frequently  spoke  to  herself  and
Fox  upon  the  subject  with  paroxysms  of  despair,  '  that  he
cried  by  the  hour,  that  he  testified  the  sincerity  and  violence
of  his  passion  and  his  despair  by  the  most  extravagant  expres-
sions and  actions,  rolling  on  the  floor,  striking  his  forehead,
tearing  his  hair,  falling  into  hysterics,  and  swearing  that  he
would  abandon  the  country,  forego  the  crown,  sell  his  jewels
and  plate,  and  scrape  together  a  competence  to  fly  with  the
object  of  his  affections  to  America.'  He  constantly  corre-
sponded with  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  and  one  of  his  letters  entreating
her  to  marry  him  is  said  to  have  extended  to  no  less  than
thirty-seven  pages.^  At  last  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  consented^  and
in  December  1785  she  returned  to  England  for  the  purpose
of  marrying  the  Prince.

'  Langdale's Memoirs of Mrs.  "  Lord  Stourton  says  he  saw  this

Fitzherbert,  pp.  118,  110.  letter. Ibid.  p.  121.

88  ENGLAND IX THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xvm.

Tlie  resolution  was  a  serious  one.  In  tlie  first  place,  as  tlie
Prince  cf  Wales  was  still  under  twenty-five,  the  marriage^
according  to  the  Royal  Marriage  Act,  could  have  no  legal
validity  without  the  consent  of  the  King,  which  would  most
certainly  not  be  given.  In  the  next  place,  by  the  Act  of
Settlement,  marriage  with  a  Roman  Catholic  throws  the  Prince
contracting  it  out  of  the  succession  to  the  throne,  and  makes
the  other  parties  concerned  in  it  liable  to  the  penalties  of
prcemiinire,  and  it  was  very  doubtful  whether  the  invalidity  of
the  ceremony  would  save  the  Prince  from  the  legal  penalty.
The  second  marriage  of  a  bigamist  is  worthless  in  the  eyes  of
the  law,  but  this  does  not  exempt  him  from  the  penal  conse-
quences of  his  act,  and  it  was  at  least  a  question  whether  on  the
same  principle  even  an  invalid  marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales
with  a  Roman  Catholic  would  not  be  sufficient  to  deprive  him
of  his  right  to  the  succession  to  the  crown.  Rumours  of  the
intended  marriage  got  abroad,  and  Fox,  in  a  long,  able,  and
very  respectful  letter,  urged  in  the  strongest  terms  its  extreme
danger.  It  would  be  dangerous,  he  s^vid,  to  the  Prince,
dangerous  to  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  dangerous  to  the  nation  itself,
which  might  very  possibly  be  cursed  with  a  new  disputed  succes-
sion. '  Such  a  marriage,'  in  fact,  '  would  be  the  most  desperate
measure  for  all  parties  concerned  that  their  worst  enemies  could
have  suggested.'  The  Prince  answered  in  a  few  lines,  express-
ing his  gratitude  for  the  friendship  of  Fox.  '  Make  yourself
easy,  my  dear  friend,'  he  continued.  '  Believe  me,  the  world
will  now  soon  be  convinced  that  there  not  only  is,  but  never
was  any  grounds  for  these  reports  which  of  late  have  been  so
malevolently  circulated.'  He  then  turned  abruptly  from  the
subject.  *  I  have  not  seen  you  since  the  apostasy  of  Eden.  I
tliink  it  ouglit  to  h;ive  the  same  effect  upon  all  our  friends
that  it  has  upon  me,  I  mean  the  linking  us  closer  to  each
other. ' '

This  letter  was  written  on  December  11,  1785.  Just  ten
days  later,  without  tlie  knowledge  of  Fox,  the  Prince  was
rnarricfl  to  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  by  a  Protestant  clergyman.  Her
uncle  and bi'other  were  the  witnesses,  and  Lord  Onslow,  Lord

'  lloUimd'sMemoi/rHoftkc  U'kij  P.irfy,  ii.  127-137

c'l.  -viii.  jins.  riTznEKirr.RT.  sy

Soutlia'.iipton,  Mr.  Edward  Bouverie,  and  Mr.  TCeitli  were  also
present.  Although  there  was  no  Roman  Catholic  priest,  the
religious  ceremony,  from  a  Catholic  as  well  as  from  an  Anglican
point  of  view,  was  perfectly  valid.  The  sacrament  of  marriage,
according  to  the  Roman  Catholic  theory,  depends  merely  on  the
expressed  consent  of  the  two  contracting  persons  to  take  each
oi  her  as  husband  and  wife,  and  before  the  Council  of  Trent  a
purely  civil  marriage  effected  by  mere  consent  without  the
intervention  of  any  priest,  though  it  would  have  been  irregular,
would  have  been  fully  valid,  and  have  had  all  the  character  of
a  sacrament.  The  Council  of  Trent  for  the  first  time,  and  iu
order  to  prevent  the  abuses  which  arose  from  clandestine
marriages,  made  the  presence  of  a  priest  indispensable,  but
the  discipline  of  the  Council  had  not  yet  been  promulgated  iu
England,  and  was  therefore  not  binding  on  English  Catholics.'
The  secret  of  the  marriage  was  not  perfectly  kept.  In
society  JMrs.  Fitzherbert  seems  to  have  been  received  as  the  wife
of  the  Prince,  and  a  pamphlet  appeared,  written  by  Home  Tooke,
in  which  she  was  denominated  the  Princess  of  Wales.  In  tlie
meantime  the  embarrassments  of  the  Prince  increased.  In
1786  there  was  an  execution  for  6001.  at  Carlton  House,  and
the  Sheriff's  officers  remained  in  possession  for  two  days  before
a  responsible  surety  for  this  small  sum  could  be  found.  The
Prince  now  formally  applied  to  the  King  for  assistance,  and  was
formally  and  harshly  refused.^  In  the  spring  of  this  year  the
King  himself  came  to  Parliament  for  the  payment  of  a  new  debt
of  30,000^.  which  had  been  incurred  contrary  to  the  express
promise  made  in  the  royal  speech  as  late  as  1782,  and  in  the
course  of  the  debate  both  Sheridan  and  Fox  took  occasion  to
mention  the  inadequacy  of  the  allowance  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,
and  to  express  their  hope  that  the  minister  would  bring  iu
some  proposition  to  extricate  him  from  his  difficulties.  If  he
did  not.  Fox  intimated  that  he  would  himself  bring  the  subject
before  Parliament.  The  Prince  appears  to  have  had  in  this
respect  some  real  ground  for  complaint,  but  Pitt  shortly
answered  that  he  had  no  instructions  on  the  subject.^ Despair-

'  See  a  discussion  on  this  point  in Tkeolpgiqiie,  art.  '  Marriage.'
Langdale's  Life  of  Mrs.  FitzherheTt,  ?  Adolphus,  iv.  216.

pp.  iil-36,  and  Migne's  EncycJojiedie  '  Pari.  Hist.  sxv.  1351-1356,

90  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xtiii.

iiig  of  assistance,  the  Priuce  tlien  stopped  all  the  works  at
Carlton  House,  closed  the  greater  part  of  the  palace,  dismissed
his  court  officers,  sold  all  his  horses,  and  announced  his  inten-
tion of  assigning  40,000^.  a  year  of  his  income  to  the  payment
of  his  debts.  The  extreme  animosity  with  which  he  was  re-
garded at  Court  was  conspicuously  evinced  in  the  August  of
this  year,  when  Margaret  Nicholson  attempted  to  stab  the  King.
No  tidings  of  the  attempt  were  sent  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and
when,  on  hearing  of  it,  he  hastened  to  the  palace  to  congratulate
his  father  on  the  escape,  his  father  refused  to  see  him.

As  the  ministers  declined  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  the
Prince,  it  was  at  last  determined  to  introduce  the  question  with-
out their  countenance.  There  was,  however,  great  division
and  hesitation  on  the  subject  among  the  Opposition.  The  Duke
of  Portland  was  totally  opposed  to  an  application  to  Parliament.
Burke  stated  that,  as  he  had  formerly  taken  a  leading  part  in
opposing  the  payment  of  the  King's  debts,  and  as  he  was  the
author  of  the  Establishment  Bill  for  restricting  the  King's  ex-
penditure, it  was  impossible  for  him  to  advocate  the  payment  of
the  Prince  of  Wales's  debts  by  Parliament,  and  he  therefore
resolved  to  go  into  the  country  during  the  discussion,  and  in-
formed the  Prince  of  Wales  of  his  intention.  Many  other
leading  men  of  the  party,  and  especially  the  country  gentlemen
connected  with  it,  took  a  similar  view.  Fox  appears  at  first  to
have  agreed  with  them,  but  he  determined  to  support  the  ap-
plication when  it  became  evident  that  the  Prince  was  determined
that  it  should  be  made.  It  was  foreseen  clearly  that  the  diffi-
cult and  delicate  question  of  the  marriage  of  Mrs.  Fitzherbert
would  inevitably  come  into  discussion  if  the  demand  were
pi-essed,  and  the  event  showed  that  the  prediction  was  correct.'

On  April  20,  1787,  Alderman  Newnham  rose  and  asked
]Mtt  whether  the  Government  intended  to  bring  forward  any
proposition  for  the  pajnnent  of  the  Prince's  debts.  Pitt  an-
swered that  it  was  not  his  duty  to  do  so  except  by  the  command
of  the-  l\ing,  iiiid  that  he  had  received  no  such  command.
Newnham  then  gave  notice  that  ho  would  himself  introduce  a
motion. Sevei'al  short  conversations  subsc(iiicntly  t(xjk  phice,

•  Heo.  Homc  very  int  ureal  ing  IcLlcra  ul  8ir  G.  EllioL  on  Llic  subject. — Life  of
Sir  a.  KlUot,  i.  155-JGl.

cii.  xviii.  FOX DENIES  TUE MARRIAGE.  91

ami  in  the  course  of  one  of  them  Mr.  Rolle  — a  county  member
who  is  now  chiefly  remembered  as  the  hero  of  the  '  Rolliad ' —
made  a  short  speech  in. which  he  warned  the  Opposition  that  an
inquiry  into  the  affairs  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  might  involve
matters  by  which  '  the  constitution  both  in  Church  and  State
might  be  essentially  affected.'

The  words  flew  swiftly  to  their  mark.  It  was  at  once
understood  that  they  referred  to  the  alleged  marriage  of  the
IVince  of  Wales,  and  three  days  later,  when  there  had  been
ample  time  to  communicate  with  the  Prince,  Fox  made  a
remarkable  statement  on  the  subject.  Speaking,  as  he  said,
with  the  '  immediate  authority  '  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  he
declared  the  perfect  willingness  of  the  Prince  to  submit  his
pecuniary  affairs  and  his  correspondence  with  the  King  to  the
fullest  investigation,  and  he  then  proceeded  to  refer  to  the
observations  of  Rolle.  The  allusion  to  something  full  of  danger
to  Church  and  State,  referred,  he  supposed,  to  '  that  miserable
calumny,  that  low  malicious  falsehood  which  had  been  pro-
pagated without  doors  ...  an  invention  so  monstrous,  a  report
of  a  fact  which  had  not  the  smallest  degree  of  foundation,'  and
which  he  should  have  hoped  would  not  have  obtained  the
smallest  credit.  The  Prince  was  perfectly  prepared  to  afford
his  Majesty  and  his  Majesty's  ministers  '  the  fullest  assurances
of  the  utter  falsehood  of  the  fact  in  question,  which  never  had
and  which  common  sense  must  see  never  could  have  happened.'

The  denial  seemed  sufficiently  emphatic,  but  Rolle  was  not
satisfied.  The  matter  referred  to,  he  said,  had  been  discussed
in  newspapers  all  over  the  kingdom  and  had  made  an  impres-
sion on  men  of  all  ranks  who  valued  the  Constitution.  '  The
right  honourable  gentleman  had  said  it  was  impossible  to  have
happened.  They  all  knew  that  there  were  certain  laws  and
Acts  of  Parliament  which  forbade  it,  but  though  it  could  not  be
done  under  the  formal  sanction  of  law  there  were  ways  in  which
it  might  have  taken  place  .  .  .  and  it  ought  therefore  to  be
cleared  up.'  Fox  at  once  replied  that  'he  did  not  deny  the
calumny  in  question  merely  with  regard  to  the  effect  of  certain
existing  laws  alluded  to  by  the  honourable  gentleman ;  but  he
denied  it  in  toto,  in  point  of  fact  as  well  as  law.  The  fact
not only  never  cuuld have  happened legally, but never  did

92  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

happen  in  any  way  whatsoever,  and  had  from  tlie  beginning
been  a  base  and  malicious  falsehood.'  On  being  asked  whether
he  said  this  from  direct  authority,  Fox  answered  that  he  '  had
spoken  from  direct  authority.' '

AYhatever  may  have  been  his  faults  in  other  respects,  Fox
was  at  least  a  man  of  unquestionable  honour,  candour,  and
veracity,  while  it  is  unfortunately  perfectly  consistent  with  the
known  character  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  that  he  should  have
endeavoured  to  extricate  himself  from  difficulty  and  to  obtain  an
iiicreased  allowance  by  denying  a  marriage  which  had  actually
taken  place,  though  it  was  invalid  in  the  eyes  of  the  law.  The
immediate  impression  was  very  favourable  to  him.^  It  was
believed  that  he  had  been  grossly  calumniated.  Pitt,  whatever
may  have  been  his  private  sentiments,^  decorously  expressed
the  '  complete  satisfaction '  which  so  explicit  a  declaration  must
have  given  to  the  whole  House ;  the  opposition  to  an  increased
allowance  was  suddenly  allayed,  and  after  some  negotiations  the
King  was  induced  to  add  10,000Z.  a  year  from  the  Civil  List  to
the  income  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,'*  and  the  House  to  vote
101,000/.  for  the  payment  of  his  debts,  besides  20,000/.  for  com-
])leting  the  works  at  Carlton  House.  But  for  the  explicit  denial
of  the  marriage  with  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  which  the  Prince  of
AYales  had  authorised  Fox  to  make,  it  is  tolerably  certain  that
these  sums  would  not  have  been  granted.

It  remained  to  break  the  transaction  to  Mrs.  Fitzherbert.
'Phe  story  is  told  by  her  relative.  Lord  Stourton,  doubtless  from
information  derived  from  herself.  The  morning  after  the  denial
the  Prince  '  went  up  to  her,  and,  taking  hold  of  both  her  hands
and  caressing  her,  said,  "Only  conceive,  Maria-,  what  Fox  did
yesterday. He  went  down  to  the  House  and  denied  that  yuu

'  Pari.  Hut.  xxvi.  10G4-1070.  '  It  is  stated  that  when  Fox  made

^  Sir  G.  Elliot writes: 'I ihiiik  his declaration Pitt rejieated to a

yesterday  was  a very  good  day for  iieighliour  on  the  Treasury  Bench  the

the  I'riiice,  as  tlic  story  of  I\Irs.  Fitz-  line  from Othello, 'Villain,  be  sure

lierhert was wliat siajr^ered great  thou  prove  my  love  a  whore.'

numbers, find he offers such unre-  '  '  The ground,' Elliot writes,

served snti.ifaelion on every point  '  taken  to  reconcile  this  assent  of  the

which  lias  l)cen  started  against  him,  King's  with  his  former  and  late  posi-

that  thr-  natural  desire  of  every  man  li\e  jind  decided  refu.sal,  is  the  decla-

to  relieve  iiim  from  so  iiidieeoming  a  raiion  made  by  Eox  contra<licting  the

situation  seems  now  to  have  nothing  story  of  the  marriage.' — Life  of  Sir

to  contnidict  or  restrain  it.'—  Life  if  G.  KLliuL^  i.  1(J0.
titr  a.  EUtot,  i.  1&7.

nr.  Kviii.  SHKRIDAX'S EXPLANATION.  93

and  I  were  man  and  wife.  Did  you  ever  hear  of  sucli  a  thing  ?  "  '
^Irs.  Fit/herbert,  it  is  added,  made  no  immediate  repl}'.  She
never  forgave  Fox,'  and  appears  to  have  urged  the  Prince  to  take
some  step  to  procure  a  disavowal  of  a  declaration  which  he
knew  to  be  false.  The  Prince  naturally  avoided  an  explanation
with  Fox,  but  on  the  morning  after  Fox's  statement  he  sent
for  Gi-ey,  with  whom  he  was  then  on  intimate  terms,  told  him
that  Fox  had  gone  too  far,  and  at  last  with  great  agitation
frankly  confessed  that  a  ceremony  had  taken  place. ^  Grrey,
however,  would  give  him  no  help.  '  Mr.  Fox,'  he  said,  '  must
unquestionably  suppose  that  he  had  authority  for  all  he  said,
and  if  there  had  been  any  mistake  it  could  only  be  rectified  b}""
his  Royal  Highness  speaking  to  Mr.  Fox  himself  and  setting
him  right  on  such  matters  as  had  been  misunderstood  between
them.  No  other  person  can  be  emplo5^ed  without  questioning-
Mr.  Fox's  veracity,  which  nobody,  I  presume,  is  prepared  to  do.'
*  This  answer,'  continued  Lord  Stourton,  '  chagrined,  disap-
pointed, and  agitated  the  Prince  exceedingly,  and  after  some
exclamations  of  annovance  he  threw  himself  on  a  sofa  muttering-,
'Well,  then,  Sheridan  must  say  something.' ^  Sheridan  accord-
ingly, in  a  subsequent  discussion,  without  naming  Mrs.  Fitz-
herbert,  paid  a  few  vapid  and  unmeaning  compliments  to  her.
His  Eoyal  Highness's  feelings,  he  said,  had  been  sufficiently
considered,  but  '  there  was  another  person  entitled  in  every
delicate  and  honourable  mind  to  the  same  attention,'  a  person
'  whom  malice  or  ignorance  alone  could  attempt  to  injure,  and
wliose  character  and  conduct  claimed  and  was  entitled  to  the
truest  respect.'

The  subsequent  history  of  this  lady  was  chequered  and  some-
what singular.  More  than  once  in  later  life  George  IV.
declared  that  there  was  not  a  Avord  of  truth  in  the  story  of  the
marriage,  though  he  had  himself  confessed  it  to  Grey,  and  though
it  is  established  beyond  all  dispute.  There  were  fortunately  no
children,  and  shortly  after  the  denial  in  Parliament  the  Prince
deserted  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  for  a  new  attachment. Then  followed

•  Langdale's Life  of  Mrs.  Fitz-  Grey  himself. See  also  Lord  Grey's

hi-rlert,  pp.  29,  30,  123,  124.  note in llnsseH's 3Iemorials and

■  Lord  Holland's  Memoirs  of  the  Correspondence  of  Fox,  ii.  289.
Whifl  Pdriy/n.lol-lW. Lord' Hoi-  =*  Langdale's Life of  Mrs.  Fitz-

land  was  iufurmed o£ this fact  by  herhert,  pi^.  28-30.

9-4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xvnr.

his  marriage  with  Princess  Caroline  of  Brunswick,  and  then
again  a  new  connection  with  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  who  is  stated  to
have  obtained  from  Rome  an  express  sanction  for  consenting  to
it.  It  lasted  with  comparative  smoothness  for  about  eight
years,  and  was  unbroken  during  all  the  time  of  '  the  delicate
investigation '  into  the  alleged  misdeeds  of  Queen  Caroline.
At  last  the  star  of  Lady  Hertford  became  ascendant  and  tlie
Prince  finally  abandoned  Mrs.  Fitzherbert — characteristically
closing  his  long  connection  with  brutal  and  unfeeling  insult.^
She  survived  her  husband  nearly  seven  years,  dying  only  in
1837.  It  is  remarkable  that  both  George  III.  and  his  Queen
treated  her  with  marked  kindness  and  intimacy,  clearly  showing
that  they  knew  of  her  marriage,  and  the  same  feelings  were
displayed  by  other  members  of  the  royal  family,  especially  by
the  Duke  of  York  and  by  William  IV.  Her  modest  and
amiable  character,  the  decorum  of  her  manners,  the  sense  of
her  wrongs,  the  great  discretion  with  which  she  abstained
from  urging  claims  that  might  have  been  dangerous  to  the
dynasty,  and  the  influence  for  good  which  she  seems  to  have
always  tried  to  exercise  over  her  husband,  secured  for  her  a
degree  of  respect  which  might  perhaps  hardly  have  been
anticipated.^

It  is  stated  that  the  day  after  Fox  had  made  his  declaration
in  Parliament  a  gentleman  of  his  acquaintance  went  up  to  him
at  Brooks's  and  said,  'I  see  by  the  papers,  ]\rr.  Fox,  you  have
denied  the  fact  of  the  marriage  of  the  Prince  with  Mrs.  Fitz-
herbert. You  have  been  misinformed.  I  was  present  at  that
marriage.'^  Fox  perceived  that  he  had  been  duped,  and  his
situation was as painful and perplexing as could Avell be

'  Langdalc's Life of  Mrs.  F'dz-  Prince and Mrs. Fitzherbert was

Ji.erhfrt,y\).  \'•Vl-\'^^i■  wiiliout much love on either side.

-'  In  the  Dkitji  of  .Ifrx.  ITarcovrt  He  had his amusements  elsewhere,

(thf! wife of General, afterwards  but  he  had  much'  consideration  for

Karl  Harcourt,  efjucrry  to  the  Kiu}^),  her. She  was  sometimes  jealous  and

a  [)ortion  of  which  has  been  privatfsly  discontented; her temper violent,

printed by Mr. Frederick Locker,  thougli apparently so quiet. He

thrire is an  account  of a conversa-  lioped  the  Prince would remain in

lion  bf;t\veen  the  Ihike  of  Gloucester  hrr  hands,  as she was no ))olitieal

and  Mrs.  Harcourt  al)out  the  Prince's  intriguer,  and  probably  if  they  parted

affairs. It  fpvcs  a  .soniewhal  different  lie would fall into worse  hands.' —

notion  of  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  from  that  Mrs.  ilarcourt's  IHanj,  p.  41.
which  generally  prevailed. The  Duke  '*  Ku.s.^eirs  7>//i"  *»/i'(M',  ii.  ISfi.

tsuid  : '  The uiarria<;e between the

cii.  xvin.  FOX'S nP.LATlONS WITH THE PRIXCE.  9.5

conceived.  Ought  lie  to  leave  the  nonse  of  Commons  nnder
tlie  impression  of  the  perfectly  false  statement  which  he  had
unwittingly  made  ?  It  was  a  question  which  affected  not  only
his  own  honour  hut  also  the  honour  of  ]\Irs.  Fitzherbert,  who
had  been  cruelly  injured  by  his  words.  On  the  other  hand,  if
lie  stated  the  facts  as  they  occurred,  the  revelation  of  so  much
baseness  might  prevent  the  Prince  from  ever  ascending  the
throne,  and,  if  it  did  not  do  so,  it  would,  at  least,  overshadow
his  reign  with  an  enduring  cloud  of  obloquy.  It  might  be  con-
tended by  strong  and  plausible  reasoning  that  the  Prince  had
by  law  forfeited  his  title  to  the  crown,  and  it  was  not  impossible
that  this  forfeiture  might  be  enforced.  The  well-known  detesta-
tion with  which  the  King  regarded  his  eldest  son,  his  equally
well-known  preference  for  his  second  son,  the  anti-Catholic
feeling  of  the  country,  the  overwhelming  power  of  a  Government
to  which  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  openly  opposed,  made  a
change  in  the  succession  very  possible,  and  such  a  change  might
have  led  to  a  new  era  of  disputed  succession.  Under  these
circumstances  Fox  kept  silence,  but  it  is  stated  that  he  did  not
speak  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  for  more  than  a  year,  and  that
though  he  afterwards  acted  with  him  he  never  again  believed
in  him.^

The  question  how  far  considerations  of  State  necessity  or
of  overwhelming  political  expediency  may  legitimately  deflect
or  modify  our  moral  judgments  is  one  of  the  most  difficult
in  practical  ethics.  I  shall  not  venture  to  condemn  the  silence
of  Fox,  but  his  subsecjuent  conduct  was  surely  such  as  no
high-minded  man  would  have  pursued.  In  truth,  in  matters
in  which  women  were  concerned  he  was  very  far  from  high-
minded.  He  had  fully  adopted  that  capricious  and  fantastic
code  of  fashionable  honour  which,  while  condemning  some  forms
of  vice  with  an  almost  excessive  severity,  finds  little  or  nothing
to  censure  in  the  conduct  of  the  man  who  makes  the  honour
and  affections  of  a  woman  the  sport  of  his  passions  and  his
caprice.  The  conduct  of  the  Prince  could  not,  indeed,  be
justified  by  any  code  of  honour,  but  Fox  never  appears  to  have
regarded  it  with  the  degree  of  reprobation  w^hich  it  deserved.
He  continued  to  receive  letters  from  the  Prince  written  in  a
'  Russell's  Life  of  Fo.v,  ii.  1S7.

90  ENGLAND JN THE EIGIITKICNTII CENTURY. cii.  xviii.

Ktraiu  of  tlie  warmest  and  most  intimate  friendship.'  Any  cold-
ness wliicli  had  arisen  between  them  was  in  abont  a  year  to  all
appearance  completely  dispelled,  and  when  the  question  of  the
regency  arose,  the  Whig  party  placed  their  hopes  mainly  on
the  close  personal  intimacy  that  subsisted  between  their  leader
and  the  heir  to  the  crown.

During  the  whole  of  the  summer  of  1788  the  usually  robust
health  of  the  King  had  been  visibly  impaired,  but  it  was  not
luitil  October  that  unmistakable  signs  appeared  of  the  recur-
rence of  that  mental  malady  with  which  he  had  been  for  a  short
time  afflicted  in  1765.  The  immediate  cause  appears  to  have
been  the  injudicious  treatment  of  a  severe  bilious  attack,  exces-
sive exercise,  and  imprudence  in  keeping  on  wet  stockings
daring  an  entire  day.  During  October,  however,  the  King  was
able  to  transact  public  business,  though  imperfectly  and  at
intervals.  On  one  occasion  he  had  an  interview  with  Pitt  at
Kew  which  lasted  for  three  hours  and  forty  minutes,  and,  accord-
ing to  their  invariable  custom,  both  the  King  and  Pitt  remained
standing  the  whole  time.^  On  the  25th,  disquieting  rumours
having  gone  abroad,  the  King  endeavoured  to  check  them  by
holding  a  levee  at  St.  James's,  but  the  effort  was  manifestly
beyond  his  strength,  and  he  became  rapidly  worse.  There  was
a  period  of  abnormal  nervous  excitement,  accompanied  by
incessant  talking,  occasional  incoherence,  a  changed  voice,
and  much  physical  weakness,  and  at  last,  on  November  5,  he
burst  into  such  open  and  violent  delirium  that  it  became
necessary  to  place  him  under  strict  restraint.  The  Prince  of
AVales  and  the  Duke  of  York  at  once  took  up  their  abode  at
Windsor.  The  first  belief  was  that  the  King  was  suffering
from  brain  fever,  and  for  several  days  his  death  was  supposed  to
lie  imminent.  A  speedy  death,  a  speedy  recovery,  and  a  pro-
longed or  permanent  insanity  were,  however,  all  possible,  and
the  doubt  added  enormously  to  the  difficulties  of  the  situation.
Parliament  must  soon  meet,  but  it  could  not  regularly  proceed
to  business  without  the  session  being  opened  by  the  King  or  by
some  commission  authorised  by  liiiti,  nor  could  any  Act  of
i^arliament  be  complete  and  valid without  the  royal  sanction.

•  See  Russell's  Mcnnnrs  and  (Airrcsjiditdcncc  of  Fo.v,  ii.  287-28!).

*  Rose's  Diarij,  i.  iG.

cii xvni.  FOX RETURNS TO E^'GLAND.  97

I'itt  found  liimsclf  witli  no  precedent  to  guide  liira  ;  tlie  King
completely  incapable  of  discharging  the  royal  functions ;  the
prospects  of  his  recovery  entirely  uncertain ;  the  Prince  of
Wales  on  the  worst  terms  with  his  father,  his  mother,  and  the
ministers.

Cabinet  Councils  were  held  at  Windsor,  and  Pitt  as  well  as
the  Chancellor  had  more  than  one  interview  with  the  Prince
about  the  measures  to  be  taken  for  the  care  of  the  King.  Pitt
found  the  Prince  perfectly  civil,  but  the  intercourse  on  both
sides  was  distant  and  foi'mal,  and  gave  no  promise  of  reconcilia-
tion. There  were,  however,  many  rumours  of  a  junction  of
parties,  but  neither  side  appears  to  have  greatly  desired  it.
The  Prince  of  Wales  regarded  Pitt  with  an  intense  personal
animosity,  while  Pitt  on  his  side,  though  he  was  perfectly  pre-
pared for  the  contingency  of  his  dismissal,  was  firmly  resolved
that  he  would  make  no  overtures  to  his  opponents ;  that  he
would  not  resign  his  post,  and  that  he  would  not  be  the  in-
strument of  bringing  into  office  politicians  to  whom  the  King-
was  violently  hostile.  He  determined  to  postpone  the  Regency
as  long  as  it  could  be  done  with  propriety,  and,  if  the  continu-
ance of  the  King's  illness  made  it  necessary,  to  propose  the
Prince  of  Wales  as  Regent,  subject  to  limitations  which  were  to
be  determined  by  Parliament.

Fox  was  at  this  time  travelling  in  Italy  with  Mrs.  Armistead.
It  is  curiously  characteristic  of  his  tastes  and  habits  that,  although
there  were  then  two  weekly  posts  from  England  to  Italy,  he  had
not  received  a  single  line  from  England,  from  September  to
November.  He  had  given  no  address  to  his  friends,  and  is  said
to  have  only  once  looked  into  a  newspaper,  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining  whether  he  had  lost  or  won  his  wagers  at  New-
market.^ A  messenger  despatched  by  the  Duke  of  Portland
found  him  at  Bologna,  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  King's  illness.
He  at  once  set  out  on  his  return,  and,  after  nine  days'  incessant
travelling,  arrived  in  London  on  November  24.  Sheridan,  how-
ever, had  remained  in  London  during  the  recess,  and  as  he
was  very  intimate  with  the  Prince  of  Wales  he  obtained  an
ascendency  in  the  councils  of  Carlton  House.''

'  Lady Minto's Life  of Sir G.  "^  See Rose's Diary, i. 88-90.

milot,  i.  236-2.';8.  Moore's Life of Hheridtm. The

VOL.  V,  H

98  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xviii.

One  of  the  first  and  most  cliaracteristic  results  of  tlie  illness
of  the  King-  was  the  treacheiy  of  Thurlow,  who  began  to  fear
that  the  Ministiy  of  Pitt  would  fall,  and  who  accordingly
hastened  to  secure  his  own  position  by  a  secret  negotiation
with  the  Prince  and  Sheridan.  His  offer  was  to  declare  in
favour  of  an  unrestricted  regency.  His  condition  was  that  he
should  retain  the  woolsack  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  Govern-
ment. The  post  had  been  promised  or  half  promised  to  Lord
Loughborough,  who  had  for  some  years  been  co-operating  with
Fox,  and  attempts  were  vainly  made  to  satisfy  Thurlow  with
the  promise  of  the  Presidency  of  the  Council,  but  he  was  in-
exorable in  his  demand,  and  his  assistance  seemed  so  important
that  Sheridan  urged  that  he  should  be  bought  at  his  own  price.
The  Prince  consented,  and  the  negotiation  was  proceeding,  when
Fox  returned  to  England.  Fox,  who  detested  Thurlow,  and  had
a  well-merited  contempt  for  his  character,  acquiesced  with  great
reluctance.  '  I  have  swallowed  the  pill,'  he  wrote  to  Sheridan,
'and  a  most  bitter  one  it  was,  and  have  written  to  Lord  Lough-
borough, whose  answer  of  course  must  be  consent.  ...  I  am
convinced  after  all,  that  the  negotiation  will  not  succeed,  and
am  not  sure  that  I  am  sorry  for  it.  I  do  not  remember  ever
feeling  so  uneasy  about  any  political  thing  I  ever  did  in  my
life.'  Thurlow  as  yet  refused  to  commit  himself  decisively — the
course  of  the  King's  illness  was  still  much  too  uncertain — but
he  had  secret  interviews  with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  with
Sheridan,  and  with  Fox.^  He  at  least  secured  his  position  in
the  event  of  the  King's  recovery  being  pronounced  hopeless,
and  in  the  meantime  it  was  probably  through  his  communica-
lioiis  that  the  Prince  obtained  his  information  of  1he  pro-
ceedings in  the  Cabinet  relating  to  Ihe  proposed  Ivegency  Bill.

Thni-low  concealfd  from  his  colleagues  his  interviews  with
the  Whig  loaders,  and his  more confidential  interviews  with

ar^^'iimnntH  wliif.h  piobnl)ly  delcrmincfl  possible  never  to  have  anything  to  do

tliu  (invernrncnt  are  privon  very  fully  with I'ilt,  who was very absurdly

in  tt  Irtlcr  from  W.  (Jronvillc  to  [,ord  arropanl. in his good fortune,  and

nnckiiigharn. —  /"(»(//•//( and Cohinrts  insiilicd the I'rinco in his manner

of  (Iro.  III.  i.  \\'i<.\'y\. Sir  Gilbert  and  conduct  vvhenevor  he  could,  even

KMiot,  who  was  well  acqu.'iinted  with  in  public  and  in  his  presence.' — Lady

the M-iilinifnlH of Carlton House,  W\\\\ct\  J^ifr  of  Sir  G.  KU\ot,\.2'!t'A.
wrote to liis wife on November  '  See  Lorrl Ijongliboronch's  letter

Ji.'j  : 'The I'rince if, 1 believe,  to  Sheridan,  in  Cariipbeirs /,/(•<•«  o/fZ/e

as much determined at present a.s  Chancellor?,  vii.  1!'1S,  21S).

C7I.  xvin. TIIURLOWS RKLA'J'TONS WITH THE PRINCE.

9iJ

tlie  Prince ;  but  complete  secrecy  was  very  difficult  to  attain.
Ou  November  28,  belbre  the  King  was  removed  from  Windsor
to  Kew,  he  visited  him  in  company  with  Pitt,  and  Miss  Burney
has  given  a  curious  account  of  the  interview.^  Pitt  was,  as
always,  composed,  and  expressed  his  attachment  and  respect
with  simplicity  and  good  feeling,  but  Thurlow  presented  the
most  edifying  spectacle  of  passionate  and  uncontrollable  loyalty.
*  He  went  into  the  presence  of  the  King  with  a  tremor  such  as
before  he  had  been  only  accustomed  to  inspire  ;  and  when  he  came
out  he  was  so  extremely  affected  by  the  state  in  which  he  saw  his
I'oyal  master  and  patron  that  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks  and
his  feet  had  difficulty  to  support  him.'  He  perhaps  a  little  over-
acted his  part,  for  his  colleagues  were  quite  aware  of  his  character,
and  they  already  knew  or  suspected  his  treachery.^  A  slight
accident,  which  has  been  often  related,  soon  after  disclosed  to  them
the  relations  of  Thurlow  with  the  Prince.  A  council  was  one
day  held  at  Windsor,  and  Thurlow  had  been  there  for  some  time

'  Madame  D'Arblay's  Diary,  iv.
.'^.'?7,  :>88.  In  a  letter  from  Admiral
I'ayne  to  Sheridan  written  on  No-
vember 24,  he  says :  '  The  Prince  is  to
see  the  Chancellor  to-morrow.  Due
deference  is  had  to  our  former
opinion  upon  the  subject ;  no  court-
.sliip  will  be  practised  ;  for  the  chief
object  in  the  visit  is  to  show  him
tlie  King,  who  has  been  worse  the
two  last  days  than  ever.' — Moore's
JJfe  of  Sheridan,  ii.  29.  Lord  Lough-
liorough  talks  of  'the  tenderness  he
[Thurlow]  showed' — 'for  I  am  sure
it  is  not  his  character  to  feel  any  '
—  as  intended  to  win  the  confidence
t)f  the  queen. —  Campbell's  Lives  of
the  Chancellura,  vii.  249.

■^  Ou  November  2.5  Lord  Bulkeley
wrote  to  Buckingham  :  '  I  heard  for
certain  that  the  Chancellor,  who  was
suspected  of  heing  rati  tea  1 1 1/  inclined,
was  firm  as  a  rock,  and  that  the  whole
Cabinet  were  determined  to  die  to-
geiher.' — Mems.  of  the  Courts  and.
Cabinets  of  George  III.  ii.  15.  On
November  .30,  however,  Grenville
wrote  :  '  You  will  have  heard  in  all
probability  much  on  the  subject  of
tlie  Chancellor.  His  situation  is  a
singular  one.  It  is  unquestionably
true  that  he  has  seen  Fox,  and  I
believe lie h.as also seen JSheridau

repeatedly,  and  certainly  the  Prince
of  Wales.  And  of  all  these  conver-
sations he  has  never  communicated
one  word  to  any  other  member  of
the  Cabinet.  Yet  I  am  persuaded
that  he  has  as  yet  made  no  terms
with  them,  and  that  whenever  they
come  to  that  point  they  will  differ.
With  this  clue,  however,  you  will  lie
at  no  loss  to  guess  where  the  Prince
acquires  liis  knowledge  of  the  plans
of  regency  which  are  to  be  pro-
posed, because,  even  supposing  the
Chancellor  not  to  have  directly  be-
trayed the  individual  opinions  of  his
Colleagues,  yet  still  his  conversation
upon  tliese  points,  in  all  of  wliich
he  has  explicitly  agreed  with  the
opinions  of  Pitt,  must  lead  to  the
communication  of  the  plans  in  agi-
tation  Pitt  has  been  induced,  from

liis  regard  to  the  King,  to  dissemble
his  knowledge  of  Thurlow's  conduct
and  to  suppress  the  resentment  which
it  so  naturally  excites.  There  is  no
reason,  but  the  contrary,  for  believing
that  any  of  those  who  have  acttd
with  him  are  disposed  to  follow  his
example.  It  is  universally  reprobated
and  explicitly  by  them.' — lb.  pp.  2:>,
24.  See  too,  on  the  secret  negotiations
of  Thurlow  with  the  Prince,  Rose"s
Diunj,  i.  89,  90.

h2

100  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. c-h.  xviii.

before  his  colleagues  arrived.  "When  the  time  for  their  depar-
ture came,  the  hat  of  the  Chancellor  was  missing.  After  a  long
search  a  page  brought  it  into  the  hall  where  the  ministers  were
still  standing,  saying  with  great  simplicity,  '  My  Lords,  I  found
it  in  the  closet  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.'  The  confusion  of  the
Chancellor  was  evident,  and  his  colleagues  quite  understood  the
situation.  Pitt  appears  to  have  said  nothing,  but  he  confided
the  conduct  of  the  regency  measures  in  the  House  of  Lords  to
Lord  Camden.*

At  the  time  when  the  King  was  struck  down  by  illness
Parliament  stood  prorogued  to  November  20,  but  Pitt  on  that
day  procured  a  further  adjournment  till  December  4.  On  the
3rd  a  meeting  of  the  Privy  Council  was  held  at  Whitehall  to
inquire  into  the  state  of  the  King.  Members  of  all  parties
were  summoned,  and  among  those  who  were  present  were
twenty-four  who  sat  on  the  side  of  the  Opposition.^  The  five
physicians  who  were  in  attendance  were  examined  upon  oath,
and  they  testified  that  the  King  was  totally  incapacitated  for
transacting  public  business,  that  his  illness  was  not  incnrable,
but  that  it  was  at  present  wholly  impossible  to  predict  its  dura-
tion. Next  day  Parliament  met,  and,  the  report  of  the  Privy
Council  having  been  laid  before  it,  Pitt  moved  a  new  adjourn-
ment till  the  8th,  giving  notice  at  the  same  time  that  he  would
on  that  day  propose  the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  search
for  precedents  that  were  in  any  degree  applicable  to  the  present
state  of  affairs.

A  sufficient  period  of  deliberation  and  reflection  had  thus
been  secured,  and  on  December  8  the  leaders  of  the  two  parties
had  considered,  or  ought  to  have  considered,  fully  all  the  aspects
of  the  question.  Pitt  opened  the  proceedings  in  a  tone  of  the
greatest  conciliation  and  candour.  A  doubt,  he  said,  had
])<'(m  thrown  out.  on  the  former  occasion  whether  it  was  a
rt-giilar  and  proper  thing  for  Parliament  to  act  in  so  grave  a
case  merely  on  the  report  of  the  Privy  Council,  and  Fox  had
expressed  his  concurrence  witli  the  doubt.  For  lus  own  part,
Pitt  said,  he  thought  the  evidence  laid  before  the  House  suffi-

'  CampbeirH dhnnrrllnrg,  vii.  250,  C.  I>owis's  Admhunlrations  of  Great

251  ;  Stanhope's  Lifi;  of  fUt,  i.  :»i)7,  liritriin,  p.  122.
31*8, There is a slightly diircrent,  ^  Tciulino,  ii.  365,

vtTBion  of  tlie  anecdole  given  in  Sir

cii.  xvm.  BE. WILLIS.  101

cient,  but  lie  Lad  no  wish  to  press  the  point  if  any  member
thought  differently,  and  he  therefore  proposed  that  the  House  it-
self should  examine  the  physicians.  Such  a  course  might  indeed
appear  the  more  expedient  as  two  new  physicians — Dr.  "Willis
juid  Dr.  Gisborne — had  been  called  in  since  the  examination  by
the  Privy  Council.  The  readiness  with  which  Pitt  accepted  the
suggestion  of  the  Opposition  gave  great  satisfjxction,  and  on  the
proposal  of  Pitt  a  coiiunittee  was  at  once  formed  for  the  purpose
of  examining  the  physicians,  consisting  of  twenty-one  menibers,
nine  of  whom  were  taken  from  the  Opposition.

The  step  was  an  exceedingly  judicious  one.  It  was  so
iiijiuaged  as  to  give  the  strongest  impression  of  candour  and  of
respect  for  the  House  of  Commons,  while  it  was  at  the  same
time  of  great  advanta^'e  to  the  Government.  It  had  alreadv
become  evident  that  the  issue  of  the  impending  contest  de-
pended to  a  great  extent  on  the  prevailing  belief  about  the
probability  of  the  King's  recovery,  and  the  situation  had  in
this  respect  been  much  changed  by  the  appearance  of  Dr.
AVillis  on  the  scene.  This  gentleman  was  a  clei-gyman  as  well
as  a  physician,  and  he  had  for  the  last  twenty-eight  years  kept
an  asylum  for  insane  persons  in  Lincolnshire  and  had  treated
them  with  extraordinary  success.  Like  most  specialists  he  had
his  enemies,  and  he  was  considered  by  some  as  little  better
tlian  a  mountebank ;  '  but  though  the  other  doctors  about  the
King  may  have  ranked  higher  in  their  profession,  none  of  them
could  speak  on  a  question  of  insanity  with  so  great  a  weight  of
experience.  Dr.  Willis,  on  seeing  the  King,  at  once  declared
that  his  recovery  was  almost  certain,  and  that  it  was  likely  to
take  place  in  a  short  time.  The  management  of  the  case  was
placed  mainly  in  his  hands,  and  he  resided  permanently  at  Kew,
while  the  other  doctors  only  visited  the  King  at  intervals.  A
new  treatment  was  adopted;  it  was  noticed  that  Willis  at  once
obtained  a  complete  ascendency  over  his  patient,  and  some
slight  improvement  was  already  visible.  It  was  very  desirable
in  the  interests  of  the  Government  that  the  exceedingly  con-
fident opinion  of  Dr.  Willis  should  be  brought  fully  before
Parliament  and  the  country,^

' AueMand Corresi)omlencc, ii.  "  On  Dec.  7  (two  days  after  Dr.

'lot.  Willis  liad  liis  tirst  interview  witli  the

102  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

The  committee  met  on  tlie  9tli.  The  evidence  of  Dr.
Willis  was  ahnost  decisive  as  to  the  certainty  of  the  King's
speedy  recovery.  If  it  were  the  case  of  a  common  man,  he  said,
he  wonld  have  no  doubt  whatever,  but  it  was  possible  that  the
painful  reflections  of  the  King  on  his  own  situation,  and  on  the
many  interests  depending  on  him,  might,  when  he  began  to
recover  his  reason,  retard  his  cure.  Signs  of  convalescence
had  not  yet  appeared,  but  there  was  everything  leading  to  it,
and  especially  a  marked  decrease  of  irritation.  When  asked
about  his  own  experience,  Willis  answered  that  of  ten  patients,
brought  to  him  within  three  months  of  their  being  attacked,
nine  had  on  an  average  recovered ;  that  the  smallest  time  of
recovery  he  remembered  was  six  weeks  or  two  months  from  the
patient  being  brought  to  him ;  the  longest  a  year  and  a  half:
the  average  about  five  months.^  The  other  physicians,  and
especially  Dr.  Warren,  were  less  sanguine,  but  they  all  of  them
admitted  that  the  King's  ultimate  recovery  was  not  only  possible
but  probable.

On  the  10th  the  report  of  the  committee  was  presented  to
the  House,  and  Pitt  observed  that  it  was  now  fully  proved  that
the  King  was  wholly  incapable  of  transacting  the  necessary
business  of  his  office,  and  that  the  time  of  his  recovery  was
extremely  uncertain.  Under  these  grave  circumstances  it  was
the  duty  of  Parliament  to  provide  for  the  government  of  the
country.  The  point  to  be  agitated  was  dear  to  the  interests  of
tlie  people  and  affected  the  fundamental  principles  of  our  free
constitution,  and  it  was  most  important  that  nothing  should  be
done  rashly  or  inconsiderately.  He  proposed,  therefore,  that  a
committee  should  be  appointed  to  examine  and  report  what
j)recedents  there  were  of  measures  taken  to  carry  on  the  govern-
ment, wlien  the  personal  exercise  of  the  royal  authority  had

Kinj^) Grenville  wrote to  Bucking-  hnfore a Commit  tee  of the House.

liam : '  II. is  (|uit«  ridiculous  to  see  Tlie  object  of  Willis  being  examined

bow  an^ry  the  Opposition  are  at  the  is  so  great  that  I  think  we  shall  con-

ri|x»rt  of  the  physicians,  and  parti-  ^<ent  to  something  of  this  sort. Not

<uiarly  at  what  Warren  said,  wiiich  only liis opinion will have groat

I  nndeiHtand  was  very  dilTerent  from  woi^^ht,  but it will also make the

wliiit tliry liad (•x[)e(;trd. 'J'hcy  go  f)lhirs very cautious  what  they  say

^o  far  a><  to  hay  I  bat if  Kox  had  been  in f)pposition to it.'  —  Courts and

|iii:Hcnt  he  would  not  hjivc  dared  to  CahinrfK  of  Geo.  [11.  ii.  3G.
give  sinli  an  (evidence. They  hojio  to  '  Ibid.  ii.  17.

uu-iid  ii  by  a  subHCduent  cxaniinalion

en.  sviii.  FOX'S CLAIM OF RIGHT.  103

been  prevented  or  iuterrupted  by  infaucj,  sickness,  infirmity,
or  otherwise.

Up  to  this  point  the  proceedings  had  been  perfectly  har-
monious, but  now  the  iirst  note  of  discord  was  struck.  Fox
rose,  and  said  that,  while  it  was  undoubtedly  the  duty  of  Parlia-
ment to  lose  no  time  in  providing  for  the  exigency  of  the  situation,
the  motion  for  a  committee  appeared  to  him  wholly  unnecessary.
It  was  perfectly  known  that  there  was  no  precedent  which
could  throw  light  upon  the  present  case.  '  The  circumstance  to
be  provided  for  did  not  depend  upon  their  deliberations  as  a
House  of  Parliament.  It  rested  elsewhere.  There  was  a  per-
son in  the  kingdom  different  from  any  other  person  that  any
existing  precedents  could  refer  to — an  heir  apparent  of  full  age
and  capacity  to  exercise  the  royal  power.  ...  In  his  firm
opinion,  his  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  as  clear,
as  express  a  right  to  assume  the  reins  of  government  and
exercise  the  power  of  sovereignty  du]'ing  the  continuance  of  the
illness  and  incapacity  with  which  it  had  pleased  God  to  afflict
his  Majesty,  as  in  the  case  of  his  Majesty's  having  undergone
a  natural  and  perfect  demise  ;  and  as  to  this  right  which  he
conceived  the  Prince  of  Wales  had,  he  was  not  himself  to  judge
when  he  was  entitled  to  exercise  it;  but  the  two  Houses  of
J'arliament  as  the  organs  of  the  nation  were  alone  qualified  to
pronounce  when  the  Prince  ought  to  take  possession  of  and
exercise  his  right.  .  .  .  His  Royal  Highness  chose  rather  to  wait
the  decision  of  Parliament  with  a  patient  and  due  deference  to
the  Constitution,  than  to  urge  a  claim  which  he  was  persuadetl
could  not  reasonably  be  disputed.  But  ought  he  to  wait
unnecessarily  ?  .  .  .  He  should  not  oppose  the  motion  [for  a
committee],  but  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  say  it  was  incumbent
on  the  House  to  lose  no  time  in  restoring  the  third  Estate.'
His  Royal  Highness,  he  was  convinced,  must  exercise  the  royal
prerogative  during,  and  only  during,  his  Majesty's  illness.'  ^

'  This  phi-aseology  is  not  histori-  both  sides in the regency debates,

cally  accurate. The  three  estates  of  followed  the  common  usage,  and  spoke

the  realm  are  not  the  King,  Lords,  of  the  Crown  as  '  the  tliird  Estate,'

and  Commons,  but  the  Lords  Spiritual,  I  have  thought  it  best  to  retain  their

the Lords Temporal,  and the  Com-  language,  not  merely  when quoting

mons  (Blackstcne,  book  i.  ch.  ii.  §  2 ;  their  words  but  also  in  giving  sum-

Brubbs's  Const.  Jlii^f.  ii.  182  ISi). As,  maries  of  their  arguments,
however, the leading statesmen  on  -  I'arl.  Ilmt.  xxvii.  7U(;,  707.

10-i  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

It  is  said  that  wliile  Fox  was  delivering  this  memorable
speech  Pitt  smiled  triumphantly,  and,  slapping  his  thigh,  ex-
claimed to  a  colleague  sitting  near  him,  'I'll  unwhig  the  gentle-
man for  the  rest  of  his  life.'  ^  Nothing,  indeed,  in  the  history
of  parliamentary  debate  is  more  striking  than  the  skUl  with
which  he  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  which  was  given
him  of  turning  the  feeling  of  Parliament  and  country  with
overwhelming  force  against  his  opponents.  If  any  additional
reason,  he  said,  was  required  for  the  appointment  of  the  com-
mittee, the  strongest  and  most  unanswerable  would  be  found  in
the  speech  of  Fox.

'  If  a  claim  of  right  was  intimated  (even  though  not  formally)
ou  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  assume  the  government,  it
became  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  ascertain  from  precedent
and  history  whether  this  claim  was  founded.  If  it  was,  it  pre-
cluded the  House  from  the  possibility  of  all  deliberation  on  the
subject.  In  the  meantime  he  maintained  that  it  would  appear
from  every  precedent  and  from  every  page  of  our  history  that  to
assert  such  a  right  in  the  Prince  of  Wales  or  anyone  else  was
little  less  than  treason  to  the  Constitution  of  the  country.  .  .  .
He  pledged  himself  to  this  assertion,  that  in  the  case  of  the
interruption  of  the  personal  exercise  of  the  royal  authority  with-
out any  lawful  provision  having  been  made  for  carrying  on  the
government,  it  belonged  to  the  other  branches  of  the  Legislature,
on  the  part  of  the  nation  at  large — the  body  they  represented —
to  provide  according  to  their  discretion  for  the  temporary
exercise  of  the  royal  authoi'ity  in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  the
sovereign  in  such  manner  as  they  should  think  requisite ;  and
that,  unless  by  their  decision,  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  no  more
right  (speaking  of  strict  right)  to  assume  the  government  than
any  other  individual  subject  of  the  country.  .  .  .  Neither  the
wliole  nor  any  part  of  the  royal  authority  could  belong  to  him
in  the  present  circumstances  unless  conferred  by  the  Houses  of
J*Hrliumont.'  'On  the  interruption  of  the  personal  exercise  of
fbe  royal  autliority,'  he  repeated,  'it  devolved  on  the  remaining
brniiclios  of  the  Legislature,  on  the  part  of  the  people  of  England,
1/4)  e,\«M'ciHe  their  discretion  in  providing  a  substitute.  From  tho
mode  iu  which  the  riglil  iKiiinurablc  grMitlcniMii  had  treated  the

'  ISInorc'h  Life  nf  Slifridov,  ii.  ;{8.

en.  xvni.  FOX'S CLAD! OF EIGHT.  10.3

subject  a  now  question  presented  itself,  and  that  of  greater  mag-
nitude even  than  the  question  which  was  originally  before  them.
.  .  .  The  question  now  was  of  their  own  rights,  and  it  was  become
a  doubt,  according  to  the  right  honourable  gentleman's  opinion,
whether  that  House  had  on  this  important  occasion  a  deliberative
power.  .  .  .  Let  them  proceed,  therefore,  to  ascertain  their
rights.  .  .  .  On  their  proceeding  depended  their  own  interests
and  the  interests  and  honour  of  a  sovereign  deservedly  the  idol
»  of  the  people.'  ^

These  two  speeches  indicate  clearly  the  grounds  of  the  con-
troversy, and  each  speaker  in  the  course  of  the  same  debate
added  a  few  arguments  or  explanations.  In  reply  to  Pitt's
assertion  that  to  deny  the  right  and  the  sole  competence  of
]^arliament  to  appoint  a  regent  was  a  kind  of  treason  to  the
Constitution,  Fox  retorted  that  the  two  Houses  acting  without
the  concurrence  and  assent  of  the  third  estate  were  constitu-
tionally incompetent  not  only  to  limit  and  set  bounds  to  the
executive  power,  but  even  to  perform  the  most  ordinary  legis-
lative act.  It  may  be  doubted,  indeed,  whether  under  such
circumstances  they  ought  not  to  be  called  a  convention  rather
than  a  parliament.  As  all  the  world  knew,  he  was  no  advocate
for  the  exploded  doctrine  of  indefeasible  right.  He  admitted,
and  asserted,  that  political  power  in  all  its  grades  was  of  the
nature  of  a  trust,  but  by  the  law  of  England  the  crown  was
hereditary,  and  he  inferred  by  analogy  that  the  exercise  of  the
sovereign  power  was  hereditary  also.  '  He  had  said  before  that
the  Prince's  right  to  the  regency  was  indisputable.  He  would
now  go  farther  and  assert  that  it  so  belonged  of  right  during
what  he  would  call  the  civil  death  of  the  King,  that  it  could  not
be  more  completely  or  legally  his  by  the  ordinary  and  natural
demise  of  the  Crown.  The  Prince,  therefore,  who  maintained
that  right  and  yet  forebore  to  assume  it,  was  entitled  to  the
thanks  of  his  country.  Actuated  by  a  respectful  regard  to  the
principles  that  had  placed  his  illustrious  family  upon  the  throne,
he  waited  to  be  informed  of  the  sense  of  the  people,  before  he
would  assume  what  no  man  had  a  right  to  take  from  him,  what
the  law  and  the  Constitution  had  given  liim  a  right  to  talce
without  waiting  for  a  declaration  of  either  House  of  Parliament.
>  Fad.  I/ist.  xxvii.  70'J-711.

106 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. cu.  xvm.

It  was  not  decent,  therefore,  to  trifle  with  a  Prince  whose  con-
duct was  marked  with  such  meritorious  forbearance,  by  institu-
ting an  inquiry  into  precedents  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
case.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  two  Houses  to  restore  the  royal
authority,  and  that  immediately.  ...  If  they  took  advantage  of
the  present  calamitous  state  of  the  country  to  arrogate  to  them-
selves a  power  to  which  they  had  no  right,  they  acted  contrary
to  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  and  would  be  guilty  of  ti-eason,'

Pitt  also  added  a  few  words,  but  it  was  only  for  the  purpose
of  reiterating  and  defining  as  clearly  as  possible  the  question  at
issue.  According  to  his  own  doctrine,  '  to  make  a  provision  for
the  executive  power  of  the  Government  during  an  interruption
of  the  personal  exercise  of  the  royal  authority,  by  sickness,
infirmity,  or  otherwise,  rested  with  the  remaining  existing
branches  of  the  Legislature,  and  was  a  matter  entirely  in  their
discretion.'  According  to  Fox  'the  two  Houses  had  no  such
discretion,  but  his  Royal  Highness  had  a  claim  to  the  exercise
of  the  sovereign  power  which  superseded  the  right  of  either
House  to  deliberate  on  the  subject.'  ^

Fox  was  evidently  startled  at  the  opinion  which  showed
itself  both  in  Parliament  and  the  country,  and  without  abandon-
ing the  substance  of  his  contention  he  endeavoured  to  attenuate
the  difference  of  principle,  while  Pitt  showed  an  evident  desire
to  aggravate  it.  It  had  never.  Fox  said,  been  his  intention
to  assert  or  to  imply  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  the  right
to  assume  and  exercise  the  power  of  the  regency  without  the
adjudication  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament.  'If,  indeed,
there  was  no  Parliament  either  sitting  or  existing,  it  would  have
Ijcen  tlie  duty  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  have  called  a  convention
of  tlie  Lords  and  Commons,  to  whom  the  cause  of  their  being
called  might  have  been  explained,  and  by  whom  his  right,  and
tlie  circumstances  in  which  it  originated,  might  be  recognised,
and  the  two  Houses  being  met  by  him  as  exercising  the  dele-
gated functions  of  the  royal  power  would  then  become  a  legal
jt,irli;imi-iit .'  IJiit  iiiidcr  all  other  circumstances  it  was  for  the
two  Houses  to  tak(?  the  first  step.  Their  vote  must  precede  the
exercise  of  the  powers  of  tlie  regc^ncy,  and  it  was  therefore
wliolly  uiitjMie  lli;il  liis  doctfriiie  Miprrscdcd  or  annulled  their
' rarl.  in.st.  .Nxvii.  7)1 71:}.

en.  xYiii.  FOX'S EXPLANATIOX.  1()7

autliorit.y.  At  the  same  time  Fox  contended  that  the  right  to
exercise  tlie  royal  authority  with  all  its  functions  attached  to
the  Prince  of  Wales  from  the  moment  of  his  father's  incapacity,
by  virtue  of  the  law  which  made  the  sovereign  power  in  England
hereditary  and  not  elective,  and  that  the  function  of  Parliainent
in  the  matter  was  a  function  not  of  election  but  of  adjudication.
The  two  Houses  did  not  give  the  Prince  his  right,  but  they
were  the  appointed  tribunal  which  could  alone  pronounce  with
authority  that  the  occasion  had  arisen  for  its  exercise.  He
acknowledged,  however,  that  he  found  more  difference  of  opinion
than  lie  had  expected  about  the  right  of  the  Prince,  and  he
found  that  much  of  it  arose  from  very  subtle  distinctions  that
were  drawn  between  the  terms  right  and  claim— distinctions
which  were  to  his  mind  more  equivocal  than  solid  or  substantial,
and  which  rested  upon  arguments  which  he  confessed  himself  too
dull  to  comprehend.  He  found  it  admitted  on  the  other  side
that  the  Prince  must  be  made  Regent — that  his  claim  was  irre-
sistible. The  difference  between  an  '  inherent  right '  and  an
'  irresistible  claim '  to  the  regency  seemed  to  him  imperceptible,
or  at  least  '  extremely  minute.'  Both  parties,  in  fact,  agreed
that  the  Prince  of  Wales  must  be  Regent,  and  that  a  parlia-
mentary vote  must  precede  his  installation.  The  Prince  had
put  forward  no  claim  of  right,  and  although  Fox  believed  in  tliat
right  and  had  stated  it  as  an  argument  in  debate,  he  had  spoken
only  as  a  private  member  and  in  no  sense  as  a  representative  of
the  Prince.  '  What  signified  differences  about  abstract  points
when  the  substance  was  indisputable  ? '  It  was  extremely
desirable  that  the  proceedings  of  Parliament  in  this  grave  crisis
should  be  unanimous,  extremely  undesirable  that  Parliament
should  be  invited  to  vote  without  any  necessity  on  a  dangerous  and
disputable  question  of  inherent  right.  '  His  opinion  was  that  the
Prince  of  Wales  ought  to  be  declared  Regent  and  capable  of  exer-
cising all  the  royal  authority  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same
extent  as  it  would  have  been  exercised  by  his  ]\Iajesty  had  he
been  able  to  discharge  the  functions  of  the  sovereign  authority.'
The  assertion  of  Fox  that  he  had  not  raised  the  question  of
right  on  the  authority  of  the  Prince  of  AVales  was  strengthened
a  few  days  later  by  a  remarkable  speech  of  the  Duke  of  York  in
the  House  of  Lords. He  expressed  his  great  desire  to  avoid

108  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xtiii.

any  discussion  of  so  fruitless  and  unnecessary  a  question  as  the
abstract  right  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  the  regency.  In  point
of  fact  no  claim  to  such  a  right  had  been  asserted  by  the  Prince
or  even  been  hinted  at  by  him,  and  he  felt  a  full  and  most
assured  confidence  that  '  his  Royal  Highness  understood  too
well  the  sacred  principles  which  seated  the  House  of  Brunswick
on  the  throne  of  Clreat  Britain,  ever  to  assume  or  exercise  any
})ower,  be  his  claim  what  it  might,  that  was  not  derived  from
the  will  of  the  people  expressed  by  their  representatives  and
their  Lordships  in  Parliament  assembled.'  These,  he  stated,
he  knew  to  be  also  the  sentiments  of  his  royal  brother.

The  inexpediency  of  pronouncing  on  the  question  of  abstract
right  was  also  maintained  by  Lord  North  in  a  very  admirable
speech.  '  What  good,'  he  said,  '  can  arise  from  deciding  the
present  question?'  After  the  express  declaration  made  else-
where on  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  there  could  be  no
possible  danger  to  the  rights  of  Parliament,  and  the  House
would  do  well  to  follow  the  example  of  the  statesmen  of  the
Revolution,  who  proceeded  without  delay  to  take  practical
measures  to  place  the  Government  on  a  regular  footing  without
discussing  speculative  and  abstract  questions.  Without  the
third  branch  of  the  Legislature  they  had  no  power,  and  they
ought,  therefore,  immediately  and  in  the  shortest  way  to  fill  up
tlie  vacancy.  '  Sitting  in  a  maimed  and  imperfect  Legislature
they  ought  to  confine  themselves  strictly  to  the  necessity  of  tlie
case,  since  every  step  they  proceeded  beyond  that  necessity  was
a  step  in  error.'  '  They  ought  to  go  straight  to  tlieir  object.'
*  Nominate  a  Regent,  and  then  when  the  third  branch  of
the  Legislature  was  complete  they  would  become  a  Parlia-
jnent,  perfect  in  all  its  constitutional  forms,  and  might  legally
]iaHs  any  laws  either  of  limitation,  restriction,  or  of  any  other
kind.'

ritt,  liowcver,  emphatically  refused  to  adopt  this  course,  and
Jm-  insisfcfl  upon  Itringitig  the  constitutional  question  to  a  direct
vote.  Jlis  r)p|)(inriit,  li(!  said,  '  had  asserted  that  the  Prince  of
AVules  liad  a,  right  to  exercise  the  royal  authority  under  the
jiri'scnt  circumstances  of  the  country,  but  that  it  was  a  right
i\i>\  ill  possession  until  llu^  Prince  could  exercise  it  on  what
tlur riglif li'iiiouiablc ''•ciil  Irman called adindical  inn of I'ar-

en.  xviii.  TITK POSITION OF THE GOVKKNMllXT.  109

liameut.  He  on  liia  part  denied  that  the  l^-ince  of  Wales
had  any  right  whatever,  and  upon  that  point  the  right  honour-
able gentleman  and  he  were  still  at  issue,  and  this  issue,  in  his
opinion,  must  be  decided  before  they  proceeded  one  step  farther.'
'  It  was  impossible  to  let  the  question  of  right  which  had  been
started  undergo  admission  without  its  being  fully  discussed  and
decided.  It  was  a  question  that  shook  the  foundation  of  the
Constitution,  and  upon  the  decision  of  which  all  that  was  dear
to  us  as  Britons  depended.  It  was  their  first  duty  to  decide
whether  there  was  any  right  in  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  claim
the  exercise  of  the  royal  power  under  any  circumstances  of  the
country,  independent  of  the  actual  demise  of  the  Crown.'  '  The
danger  of  the  question  originated  in  its  having  been  stirred,  not
in  its  being  decided,'  and  it  was  the  Opposition  and  not  the
Government  which  had  raised  it.  To  leave  unsettled  such  a
claim  affecting  the  fundamental  rights  of  Parliament  would  be
highly  dangerous,  and  it  was  very  far  from  being  a  merely
abstract  or  speculative  opinion.  The  whole  question  of  the
power  of  Parliament  to  limit  the  regency  depended  upon  the
decision  on  the  question  of  right.  '  If  a  right  existed  to  repre-
sent the  King  it  must  be  perfect,  admitting  of  no  modification
whatever.'  In  that  case  the  two  Houses  had  no  right  to  restrict
the  power  of  the  Regent,  without  his  own  consent.  Their  function
was  to  adjudge,  and  not  to  deliberate  or  impose  conditions.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  it  was  the  legal  right  of  Parliament  to  con-
stitute the  regency,  they  could  discuss  the  powers  with  which
the  Regent  should  be  invested,  and  decide  how  much  of  the
rojal  prerogative  should  be  delegated,  and  how  nnich  it  was
prudent  to  reserve.  After  passing  a  resolution,  therefore,  assert-
ing that  the  King  was  incapable  of  discharging  his  royal  func-
tions, Parliament  was  asked  to  pass  a  second  resolution  copied
in  parts  fi'om  the  Bill  of  Rights,  and  stating  '  that  it  was  the
right  and  duty  of  the  Lords  spiritual  and  temporal,  and  Com-
mons of  Great  Britain  now  assembled,  and  lawfully,  fully  and
freely,  representing  all  the  estates  of  the  people  of  this  nation,
to  provide  the  means  of  supplying  the  defect  of  the  personal
exercise  of  the  royal  authority  arising  from  his  Majesty's  indis-
position in  such  a  manner  as  the  exigency  of  the  case  may
appear  to  require.'

110  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTH CENTUKY. cii.  xriTi.

Altliougli  tlie  debates  on  the  qnestiou  of  right  extended  to
great  length,  and  had  much  constitutional  importance,  the
arguments  which  were  really  relevant  and  valuable  lie  within  a
narrow  compass,  and  several  that  were  advanced  with  a  great
parade  of  learning  may  be  very  summarily  dismissed.  Little
or  no  weight  can  be  attached  to  the  argument  drawn  by  Lord
Loughborough  from  the  fact  that  the  King  and  the  Prince  of
Wales  are  in  some  cases  considered  by  tlie  law  as  one,  that  the
Prince  of  Wales  may  proceed  in  an  action  and  claim  judgment
as  King,  that  it  is  high  treason  to  attempt  his  life.  Nor  were
the  few  precedents  of  regencies  that  were  adduced  from  the
earlier  periods  of  English  history  des3rving  of  more  attention.
They  were  derived  from  times  of  semi-barbarism  and  violence,
w^hen  the  Constitution  was  almost  unformed,  when  the  balance
of  its  powers  was  completely  undetermined,  and  in  no  one  case
had  there  been  a  Prince  of  Wales  of  full  age  at  the  time  when
]iis  father  was  incapacitated.  Constitutional  precedents,  indeed,
are  very  rarely  of  any  real  value  if  they  are  taken  from  an
earlier  period  than  the  Revolution  of  1G88.  The  precedent  in
the  reign  of  Henry  VI.  was  most  relied  on,  for  in  that  case
there  was  a  king  who  w^as  incapacitated  by  imbecility,  and  a
regency  which  was  both  ratified  and  limited  by  Act  of  Parlia-
ment. It  was  an  ill-omened  precedent,  for  it  had  been  a
chief  cause  of  the  Wars  of  the  Roses,  but  the  simple  fact  that
the  House  of  Lords  alone  selected  the  Regent  is  sufficient  to
show  how  inapplicable  it  was  to  the  conditions  of  modern
politics.  The  Duke  of  York  on  this  occasion  accepted  the
oHice  of  '  Protector  of  the  Realm  '  in  obedience  to  the  wish  of
th(^  peerage,  in  whcjiii,  by  reason  of  the  King's  infirmity, '  resteth
tlie  exercise  of  his  authority,'  and  he  requested  the  advice  and
assistance  of  the  Lords  and  a  definition  of  liis  authority.  It  is
IriK!  that  the  resolution  of  the  iiOi-ils  dcfiniiig  his  position  and
j>()wer  was  subsequently  embodied  in  a  ]V\]\  which  received  the
ass(!nt  of  the  Commons  and  duly  l)ecame  law,  but  the  whole
proceeding  shows  a  conception  of  the  Constitution  altogether
different  from  tliat  of  modern  times."  'Were  the  rights  of  the
Jloiise  of  Commons,'  asked  Fox  when  speaking  of  this  prece-
dent, 'and  its  y)roceedings  in  one  of  the  most  difficult  moments

'  .Sec  Stiihlt.sH  Cims/i/'i/ii'/Ki/  //l.t/nn/,  iii.  IT'.t,  ISO.

CH.  xviii.  THE WHIG DOCTRINR.  HI

that  had  ever  occurred  to  be  maiutaiued  and  vindicated  by
the  example  of  the  House  of  Lords,  at  a  time  when  that  House
of  Lords  had  the  complete  dominion  of  the  executive  govern-
ment, which  they  exercised  with  no  unsparing  hand  ;  at  a  time
when  the  rights  of  the  Commons  House  of  Parliament  were  so
ill  understood  and  so  weakly  sustained  that  the  Speaker  was
actually  imprisoned  on  commitment  of  the  House  of  Lords  ? '
The  more  recent  conduct  of  the  Convention  Parliament,  in
calling  William  and  Mary  to  the  throne  by  an  address,  might
furnish  a  convenient  model,  but  scarcely  an  argument  or  a  pre-
cedent, for  the  interruption  of  the  exercise  of  the  royal  power
by  the  flight  of  James  IL  had  no  real  analogy  to  that  which  had
now  taken  place.

The  question,  in  truth,  was  one  on  which  both  law  and  prece-
dent were  silent,  and  it  could  only  be  argued  by  deductions
from  a  few  well-known  and  simple  maxims  of  the  Constitution.
The  English  monarchy  is  at  once  hereditary  and  parliamentary,
and  the  Whigs  maintained  that  these  two  characteristics  were
best  recognised  by  their  doctrine  that  when  the  King  is  in-
cupacitated  from  discharging  the  functions  of  his  office,  the  heir
to  the  crown  has  a  right,  if  of  full  age  and  capacity,  to  assume
the  sovereign  authority  as  in  the  case  of  his  father's  death,  but
only  during  the  period  of  his  father's  incapacity,  and  not  until  he
had  been  called  upon  to  do  so  by  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament.
The  crown  of  England — and  therefore,  they  maintained,  the
executive  power  and  government  of  the  country — is  hereditary
and  not  elective,  and  the  maxim  that  the  King  never  dies
implies  that  there  can  be  no  break  in  the  hereditary  sovereign
authority.  In  cases  when  the  royal  line  has  become  extinct,  or
when  the  sovereign  by  infringing  the  original  contract  between  the
King  and  the  people  has  abdicated  the  throne,  it  is  no  doubt  true
that  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  have  a  right  to  supply  the
deficiency.  In  all  other  cases  the  law  either  expressly  or  by  the
clearest  analogy  pointed  out  the  successor,  and  the  principle  of
heredity  must  operate.  Nor  has  this  doctrine  the  smallest
affinity  to  that  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings.  Pitt  said  that  the
question  was  whether  the  regency  was  a  right  or  a  trust.  Fox
answered  that  according  to  the  doctrine  established  at  the
Revolution  all  political  power,  including  that  of  the  sovereign

112  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviii.

himself,  is  a  trust,  and  may  be  resumed  if  it  is  essentially
abused.  The  regency  like  tlie  monarchy  is  unquestionably  a
trust,  and  on  that  very  ground  he  urged  '  the  Prince's  right  to
be  hereditary,  conceiving  an  hereditary  succession  the  best
security  to  the  people  for  the  due  discharge  and  faithful  execu-
tion of  the  important  trust  vested  by  them  in  their  governors.'
Hereditary  constitutional  monarchy  had  been  deliberateh^
adopted  in  England  as  the  form  of  government  most  fitted  to
secure  the  liberties  and  happiness  of  the  people,  and  in  such  a
government  it  is  as  unconstitutional  to  introduce  the  principle
of  election  into  the  first  branch  of  the  Legislature  as  it  would  be
to  introduce  the  principle  of  heredity  into  the  third.  The
assertion  of  Pitt  that  during  the  King's  incapacity  the  un-
doubted heir  to  the  throne,  being  of  full  age  and  capacity,  '  has
no  more  right  to  exercise  the  powers  of  government  than  any
other  person  in  these  realms,'  was  an  outrage  on  the  constitu-
tion and  on  the  feelings  of  the  people.  If  Pitt  doubted  it,  let
him  throw  this  assertion  into  Ihe  form  of  a  motion  and  ask
Parliament  to  vote  it.  He  knew  well  that  in  spite  of  his  great
majorities  he  dared  not  venture  on  the  experiment.  An  elective
regency  with  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  as  the  electors,
was  essentially  opposed  to  the  theory  of  hereditary  monarchy,
and  it  would  fundamentally  change  the  Constitution  of  the
countiy  during  periods  when  the  King  was  incapacitated.
It  made  the  sovereign  authority  during  these  periods  electiv^e.
It  invested  the  two  Houses  with  the  power  of  a  Polish  Diet.
Parliament  might  elect  two  regents.  It  might  elect  a  new
regent  every  year.  It  might  create  a  purely  aristocratic  form
of  government,  like  that  of  the  Mahrattas.  It  might  pass  over
the  royal  fiimily  and  invest  with  the  sovereign  power  an
ordinary  subject,  a  foreigner  or  a  Catholic,  and  a  regent  un-
connected with  the  royal  family  wovdd  be  competent  in  the
name  of  the  inca})acitated 'sovereign,  and  during  the  lifetime  of
a  Prince  of  Wales  of  lull  age  and  capacity,  to  give  the  royal
sanction  to  a  law  changing  the  order  of  succession.

And  what  was  the  body  for  which  Pitt  claimed  this  power
of  transforming  the  government,  suspending  or  transferring
the  snccession  of  an  hereditary  monarchy,  placing  a  person  in
the situation of king williout \]\v full royal power? It is

en.  xviii.  PARTY INTERESTS INVOLVED.  ll;i

undoubtedly  witliiu  the  power  and  option  of  Piirliament,  actin<i^
with  the  ro3^al  sanction,  to  alter  the  succession  to  the  throne  and
to  remodel  the  entire  Constitution.  But  the  two  Houses  acting-
without  the  royal  sanction  have  no  legislative  power  whatever.
They  cannot  legally  pass  so  much  as  a  turnpike  Bill.  "J'his  is
one  of  the  clearest  and  most  indisputable  principles  of  the  Con-
stitution, and  it  is  so  jealously  guarded  by  the  law,  that  an  Act
of  Charles  II.  has  made  any  person  who  m  writing  or  by  word
of  mouth  asserted  that  two  branches  of  the  Legislatuie  had
the  power  and  efficacy  of  all  three,  liable  to  the  penalties  of
2)ra'-mimire.  With  what  reason  then,  with  what  plausibility,
could  it  be  contended  that  a  Parliament  thus  maimed  and  im-
perfect was  competent  to  elect  or  appoint  a  regent,  and  by
elaborate  restrictive  legislation  to  divide,  limit,  and  portion  out
the  sovereign  authority  ?  The  simplest,  shortest,  and  most  con-
stitutional method  of  extricating  the  country  from  its  present
difficulty  was  an  address  of  the  two  Houses  calling  on  the
Prince  of  Wales  to  exercise  the  royal  functions  which  were  at
present  eclipsed.  The  legislative  machinery  would  then  be
restored,  and  if  it  were  thought  necessary  to  introduce  limita-
tions into  the  regency  there  would  be  a  Legislature  competent  to
enact  them.

This  reasoning  ajipears  to  me  extremely  powerful,  and  the
theory  of  Fox  was,  as  is  well  known,  actually  adopted  in
Ireland.  The  Irish  Parliament,  having  accepted  on  the  autho-
rity of  the  English  Parliament  the  fact  of  the  King's  incapacity,
presented  an  address  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  requesting  him  to
assume  in  Ireland  the  suspended  functions  of  royalty  in  the
name  of  his  father  and  during  the  period  of  his  father's  in-
capacity. If  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  been  popular  and  trusted,
if  he  had  been  in  harmony  with  the  English  ministry,  or  if  he
had  even  been  prepared  to  leave  matters  unchanged  till  his
father's  illness  had  taken  a  decisive  turn,  it  is  probable  that  a
similar  course  would  have  been  adopted  in  England,  aud  that
no  one  would  have  found  anything  in  it  dangerous 'to  the
liberties  of  the  nation.  But  personal  and  party  interests  of  the
most  powerful  nature  were  involved  in  the  decision,  and  the
regency  question  from  the  very  beginning  produced  in  England
the  keenest  of  party  conflicts. The  popularity  of  the  King  had

VOL.  V,  1

J  14 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cir.  xv:.i.

since  tlie  defeat  of  the  Coalition  been  steadily  rising,  and  tlie
calamity  which  had  struck  him  down  had  very  naturally  pro-
duced an  outburst  of  the  deepest  compassion  and  loyalty,  while
Pitt  still  maintained  an  undiminished  ascendency.  The  com-
mercial and  business  classes,  who  were  in  general  little  con-
cerned with  party  conflicts,  believed  that  his  fall  would  be  a
serious  blow  to  national  credit  and  prosperity ;  *  and  the  great
masses  of  the  people  regarded  him  with  an  enthusiasm  which
even  his  father  had  scarcely  excited.  '  Pitt,'  wrote  a  very  able
member  of  the  Opposition  with  great  bitterness,  '  is  the  only
object  the  nation  can  perceive  and  the  only  thing  they  think
valuable  in  the  world,  and  I  rather  think  they  would  be  content
and  pleased  to  set  aside  the  whole  royal  family,  with  the  Crown
and  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  if  they  could  keep  him  by  it.'  *
On  the  other  hand,  the  character  of  the  Prince  of  AVales  was
already  deeply  stained,  and  he  was  known  to  be  in  open  hostility
to  his  father  and  his  father's  Ministry,  and  in  constant  com-
munication with  an  unpopular  Oj^position.  It  was  his  obvious
duty,  and  indeed  interest,  in  assuming  the  regency  to  maintain
the  existing  political  situation  unchanged  during  the  very  few
months  which  were  likely  to  elapse  before  the  King's  illness
took  a  decisive  turn.  It  was  well  known,  however,  that  he  was
determined  not  to  take  this  course,  that  his  first  act  of  power  was
likely  to  be  to  dismiss  Pitt  and  summon  Fox  to  his  councils,  and
that  Fox  was  perfectly  prepared  under  these  circumstances  to
accept  office.^

The  contrast  between  the  two  parties  was  manifestly  capable
of  being  employed,  if  judiciously  managed,  in  a  manner  that
would  enlist  an  overwhelming  stress  of  popular  favour  in  the
cause  of  the  Government.  On  the  one  side,  it  was  said,  was
a  virtuous  King  struck  down  by  a  terrible,  though,  it  was  be-
lieved, only  a  temporary,  calamity;  and  a  young  minister  of
uiiinipeachuljle  character  and  splendid  genius,  who  had  enjoyed
1o  tlie  last  the  full  confidence  of  his  sovereign,  who  was  the
idol  both  of  ]'ai-liament  and  of  the  nation,  and  wlu)  was  now
cndc.'ivouring  to  fulfil  the  wishes  and  to  protect  the  interests  of

'  I'liclcinpfliam's  C'onrtg  and  Cahi-  '  Fox'.s lorrcfjuntdcncc, ii. 201),

»»//a.  ii.l7.  :J00.

•  J.i/e  uf  Sir  a.  J.l/iol,  i.  2 J 8.

CH.  xviii.  LETTERS OF GRENVILLE.  llo

his  incapacitated  master.  On  the  other  side  was  a  profligate
and  undutiful  son,  eager  to  climb  to  power  and  determined  to
bring  into  office  men  whom  his  sick  father  abhorred,  and  whom
the  nation  had  a  few  years  before  indignantly  rejected.  Nor
was  it  so  certain  that  their  tenure  of  office  would  be  a  brief  one,
even  in  the  event  of  the  King's  speedy  recovery.  It  was  still
the  popular  belief  that  the  India  Bill  of  the  Coalition  IMinistry
of  1784'  had  been  a  bold  and  skilful  attempt  of  the  ascendant
party  to  secure  for  itself  such  an  amount  of  permanent  patron-
age and  power  that  it  might  almost  balance  the  authority  of
the  Crown.  These  very  men  were  now  again  on  the  threshold
of  office.  If  through  the  illness  of  the  King  they  obtained,
though  only  for  a  few  months,  uncontrolled  power,  might  they
not,  it  was  asked,  in  another  form  resume  their  enterprise,  fill  the
House  of  Lords  with  their  creatures,  distribute  among  their
followers  so  many  great  and  permanent  places  of  emolument,
patronage  and  influence,  that  it  would  become  very  difficult  for
the  sovereign  on  his  recovery  to  displace  them  ?  Under  such
circumstances  there  was  a  wide  and  general  feeling  that  while
the  claim  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  exercise  the  regency  could
not  be  passed  by,  his  power  should  be  at  least  carefully  defined
and  restricted,  and  every  argument  which  supported  the  right
of  Parliament  to  impose  such  restrictions  was  accepted  with
delight.

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  difference  of  opinion  did  not
openly  break  out  in  Parliament  till  December  10,  but  the  letters
of  Grenville  to  his  brother  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  who
was  at  this  time  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  show  clearly
that  for  some  weeks  before  that  date  the  contest  had  been
violently  raging.  These  letters,  being  written  by  a  minister,  are
strongly  coloured  with  party  feeling,  but  they  are  the  letters  of
a  very  acute  judge,  who  had  more  than  common  means  of  in-
formation and  who  was  writing  in  strict  confidence  and  with'
perfect  sincerity.  As  early  as  November  15  he  was  convinced,
from  the  Prince's  general  demeanour,  that  he  was  determined  to
dismiss  Pitt  without  hesitation,  and  two  days  later  he  mentions
that  the  accounts  of  the  probable  gravity  of  the  King's  illness
were  very  opposite,  being  '  strongly  tinctured  by  the  wishes  of
those  who  sent  them  j '  and  that  although  on  reflection  the  idea

1  2

116  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xviit.

of  refusing  to  the  Regent  the  power  of  dissolving  Parliament
was  probably  impracticable,  other  limitations  were  likely  to  be
imposed  which  would  render  all  negotiations  impossible.  A
few  days  later  he  says  that  the  language  of  the  Opposition
seemed  to  point  to  a  coalition,  but  that  no  offers  had  as  yet  been
made,  and  that  '  the  conduct  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  marked  a
desire  of  avoiding  Pitt.'  '  Since  there  had  been  an  appearance
of  amendment,  the  Opposition  have  taken  inconceivable  pains  to
spread  the  idea  that  the  King's  disorder  is  incurable.'  '  The
indecency  of  any  language  held  on  your  side  of  the  water '  [in
Ireland],  he  says  in  another  letter,  '  cannot  exceed  that  of  the
universal  tone  of  opposition  within  the  last  four  or  five  days.  So
long  as  they  considered  the  case  desperate,  they  were  affecting
a  prodigious  concern  and  reverence  for  the  King's  unhappy
situation.  Now  that  people  entertain  hopes  of  his  recovejy
they  are  using  the  utmost  industry  to  combat  this  idea,  circu-
lating all  the  particulars  of  everything  which  he  does  or  says
under  his  present  circumstances  and  adding  the  most  outrageous
falsehoods.' '

The  Prince  of  Wales  was  accused  of  the  grossest  misconduct
— introducing  Lord  Lothian  into  the  King's  room  when  it  was
darkened  in  order  that  he  might  hear  his  ravings  at  a  time  when
Miey  were  at  the  worst,  drinking  and  singing  with  his  com-
panions when  his  father's  illness  was  at  its  height,  openly  and
on  all  occasions  displaying  his  political  bias.

'  The  behaviour  of  the  two  Princes,'  Grenville  writes  on
December  7,  '  is  such  as  to  shock  every  man's  feelings.  What
do  you  think  of  the  Duke  of  York's  having  a  meeting  of  the
Opposition  at  his  house  on  Thursday,  before  the  House  of  Lords
met,  and  then  going  down  there  to  hear  the  examinations  read  ?
A  fter  that  they  closed  the  day  by  both  going  in  the  evening  to
JJrooks's.  Tlie  truth  is  that  the  Duke  is  entirely  in  his  brother's
hands,  and  Ihat  the  latter  is  taking  inconceivable  pains  to  keep
him  so.'  Tlio  Oppf)sition  were  already  strongly  supporting  the
physicians  who  took  the  most  unfavourable  view  of  the  King's
disorder,  and  doing  everything  in  their  power  to  discredit  the
physicians  who  took  the  more  sanguine  view. 'There  seema

1  Biickingham's CmirtK  and  CahhiPts  of  Geo.  III.  ii.  3-10.

cn.  xvui.  LETTERS OE GRENVILLE.  117

great  reason  to  believe  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  is  inclined  to
go  to  all  lengths  to  which  that  party  are  pusliing  him.'  'The
prevailing-  idea  seems  to  be  that  of  a  general  dismission,  and  of
an  immediate  dissolution  of  Parliament.'  It  was  confidently
stated  that  the  future  Administration  was  already  settled  in
almost  all  its  details.  Another  report,  which  was  assiduously
spread  by  the  Opposition,  was  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  was
determined  to  refuse  the  regency  if  it  was  clogged  with  re-
strictions. '  By  such  a  step,'  Grenville  wrote,  '  the  Prince  will
do  himself  a  permanent  mischief  which  he  will  never  be  able  to
repair,  and  which  we  shall  probably,  all  of  us,  have  much  reason
to  regret.  It  is  quite  clear,  that  having  once  proposed  these
restrictions,  as  thinking  them  necessary  for  the  interest  of  the
King  (and  on  that  ground  only  coald  we  propose  them),  no  other
motive  whatever  can  be  a  justification  for  abandoning  them.'
The  alleged  threat  of  the  Prince,  however,  is  probably  '  nothing
more  than  a  bully  intended  to  influence  votes  in  the  House  of
Commons.  If,  however,  he  should  be  so  desperate,  I  should
hope  there  would  be  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Queen
would  be  induced  to  take  the  regency  in  order  to  prevent  the
King's  hands  from  being  fettered  for  the  remainder  of  his  life.'
It  was  probable,  however,  that  the  Prince  would  accept  the
regency  on  the  terms  proposed,  that  the  measure  would  be
carried  through  Parliament  by  about  January  10  or  12,  and  that
the  ministers  would  then  be  immediately  dismissed.^

Grenville,  however,  had  little  fear  for  the  ultimate  result  of
the  conflict,  and  his  letters  show  how  day  after  day  the  tide  of
popular  feeling  was  rising.  On  the  20th  of  November  he  wrote  :
'  There  seems  to  be  just  such  a  spirit  and  zeal  gone  forth
among  Pitt's  friends  as  one  would  most  desire,  and  whatever  is
now  the  event  of  this  anxious  moment,  I  am  persuaded  you  will
see  him  increase  from  it  in  point  of  character  and  lose  httle  in
point  of  strength.'  '  My  opinion,'  wrote  another  correspondent
on  the  25th,  '  is  that  the  .  .  .  present  Administration  will  retire
(if  so  necessitated)  merely  to  return  to  power  on  the  shoulders
of  the  nation.'  '  If  I  am  not  mistaken,'  wrote  Grenville  on  the
30th,  '  a  storm  is  rising  that  they  [the  Opposition]  little  expect,

'  Buckingham's  Courts  and  CaUncts  of  Geo.  III.  ii.  12,  25,  32,  3G.  o7,  10,  41 .

118  ENGLAND IN TUE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. en.  xvm,

and  tlie  sense  of  the  country  instead  of  being  nearly  as  strong
as  in  1784  will  be  miicli  stronger.  But  the  party  in  general
are  so  hungry  and  impatient  that  I  think  they  will  act  upon  the
better  judgment  of  their  leaders  and  prevent  them  from  doing
anything  which  may  allow  a  moment's  delay.'  '  If  they  do
dissolve  Parliament,'  he  wrote  on  December  4,  'in  such  a
moment  as  this,  when  the  ph3'sicians  concur  in  declaring  the
King's  recovery  probable,  I  am  persuaded  the  cry  will  be  as
strong  as  it  was  in  1784.'  '  We  receive  every  day  new  pro-
fessions of  attachment,' he  wrote  on  the  9th.  'There  is  every
reason  to  believe  that  the  country  will  continue  entirely  with  us,
and  that  addresses  will  be  presented  from  all  parts  to  the  Regent
to  continue  the  government.' '

All  these  letters  were  written  before  the  conflict  in  Parlia-
ment began.  The  declaration  of  the  Prince  of  Wales's  right  by
Fox  on  the  10th,  immensely  strengthened  the  Government,  and,
whatever  may  be  thought  of  its  constitutional  character,  there
can  be  no  question  that  it  was  an  enormous  tactical  error.  The
letters  of  the  Government  partisans  show  clearly  the  delight
with  which  on  their  side  of  the  House  it  was  received.  '  Of  the
momentous  business  opened  last  night,'  wrote  Sir  William
Young  the  day  after  the  debate, '  I  can  only  say  that  our  astonish-
ment is  only  to  be  equalled  by  the  spirits  we  are  in  on  viewing
the  grounds  Mr.  Fox  has  abandoned  to  us  and  left  our  own.  .  .  .
Talbot,  who  made  one  of  my  morning's  levee,  told  me  that  at
White's  last  night  all  was  hurra !  and  triumph.'  It  was  said
that  Fox,  '  having  on  a  former  occasion  sought  to  trespass  on
the  royal  just  prerogative,  had  now  completed  his  attack  on  the
Constitution,  in  denying  the  rights  of  Lords  and  Commons.'
'  Looking  back  to  the  history  of  this  man  of  the  people,'  con-
tinues Young,  'and  to  his  present  conduct,  in  despite  of  his
talents  of  logical  discrimination,  I  begin  almost  to  doubt
whether  his  weakness  or  profligacy  is  transcendent.'  Grenville
was  almost  equally  empluitic  :  *  You  will  be  as  much  surprised
UH  I  was,'  he  wrote,  '  to  find  that  the  motion  of  the  Prince  of
Wules's  right  was  brought  forward  yesterday  by  Fox  in  the
House  of  Commons.  It  was  a  matter  of  no  less  astonishment  to
many  of  his  own  friends.  .  .  .  One  should  lose  oneself  in  conjcc-
•  Backinghum's  Courts  and  Cahinrts  of  (!co.  III.  ii.  10,  17,  21,  :!2,  11.

en.  xvui.  PITTS POPULAR DOCTRINE.  119

tiire  by  attempting  to  find  out  what  motive  can  have  induced
him  to  take  exactly  the  most  unpopular  ground  on  which  their
side  of  the  question  can  be  rested.  .  .  .  Only  think  of  Fox's  want
of  judgment  to  bring  himself  and  his  friends  into  such  a
scrape  as  he  has  done,  by  maintaining  a  doctrine  of  higher
Tory  principle  than  could  have  been  found  anywhere  since  Sir
Robert  Sawyer's  speeches.'  •

The  matter  was  made  considerably  worse  by  Sheridan,  who
a  few  days  later,  while  asserting  the  right  of  the  Prince  of  Wales
to  the  unrestricted  regency,  reminded  the  House  of  '  the  danger
of  provoking  that  Prince  to  assert  his  right.'  It  was  such  a
blunder,  said  Grenville,  in  relating  the  scene,  '  as  I  never  knew
any  man  of  the  meanest  talents  guilty  of  before.  During  the
whole  time  that  I  have  sat  in  Parliament  I  never  remember  such
an  uproar  as  was  raised  by  his  threatening,'  ^  and  Pitt  carried
the  House  with  him  when  he  designated  such  language  as  '  an
indecent  menace  thrown  out  to  awe  and  influence  their  proceed-
ings.' '  To  assert  the  inherent  right  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to
assume  the  government,'  he  said  in  another  speech,  '  is  virtually
to  revive  those  exploded  ideas  of  the  Divine  and  indefeasible
authority  of  princes  which  have  so  justly  sunk  into  contempt
and  almost  oblivion.  Kings  and  princes  derive  their  power
from  the  people,  and  to  the  people  alone  through  the  organ  of
their  representatives  does  it  appertain  to  decide  in  cases  for
which  the  Constitution  has  made  no  specific  or  positive
provision.'  ^

These  were  words  well  fitted  to  waken  an  echo  in  the
country.  Placards  soon  appeared  in  the  streets  contain-
ing passages  from  the  rival  speeches,  headed  :  '  Fox  for  the
Pi'ince's  prerogative  and  Pitt  for  the  privileges  of  Parliament
and  liberties  of  the  nation.'*  By  a  strange  and  unexampled
fortune  Pitt  was  able  for  the  second  time  to  constitute  himself
on  the  most  popular  grounds  the  champion  of  the  Toiy  King,  to
appeal  both  to  the  special  advocates  of  the  royal  prerogative  and
to  the  special  advocates  of  the  democratic  elements  in  the
Constitution  as  the  most  faithful  exponent  of  their  respective

•  Courts  and Cabinets  of  Geo.  III. *  Ibid.  p.  89,
ii.  40,  50,  53,  54.  «  Ibid.  p.  58.

-  Ibid.  p.  5(i.

]-20 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xvm.

principles.  For  the  second  time  Fox,  whose  position  depended
wholly  on  the  fidelity  with  which  he  advocated  civil  and
religious  liberty,  was  suspected  by  the  nation  of  sacrificing  the
principles  of  the  Constitution  to  the  interests  of  his  party.
With  a  tact  that  never  failed,  with  an  eloquence  that  has  seldom
been  surpassed,  with  a  logical  discrimination  little  if  at  all
inferior  to  that  of  his  adversary,  Pitt  defended  the  far  more
popular  doctrine,  that  under  existing  circumstances  the  two
Houses  had  full  discretion  to  elect  and  limit  the  Regent.  The
temporary  exercise  of  royal  authority  on  behalf  of  the  sovereign,
he  argued,  is  an  essentially  different  thing  from  the  possession
of  the  throne.  The  throne  is  full.  No  one  without  treason  can
say  that  it  can  be  vacant  in  the  lifetime  of  a  King  who  has  not
forfeited  his  right,  and  it  is  no  less  unconstitutional  to  say  that
any  other  person  during  the  lifetime  of  the  King  has  an
inherent  right  to  assume  the  royal  authority.  The  hereditary
right  to  exercise  the  royal  functions,  like  every  other  hereditary
right,  can  only  come  into  force  on  the  death  of  the  person  in
possession.  The  doctrine  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  has  a  right
when  of  full  age  to  exercise  the  royal  authority  during  his
father's  incapacity  is  perfectly  new.  There  is  not  a  trace  of
it  in  the  Statute  Book.  No  lawyer  in  any  former  age  has
mentioned  it  as  part  of  the  common  law.  No  writer  on  the
Constitution  has  asserted*  it,  and  there  is  not  the  smallest
evidence  tb;i.t  it  had  ever  been  advanced  in  any  of  the  many
earlier  parliamentary  proceedings  relating  to  regencies.  How-
ever imperfect  might  be  the  precedents  that  have  been  adduced,
they  at  least  all  pointed  to  parliamentary  limitations,  and  the
precedent  of  Henry  VI.  was  very  closely  applicable.  Tlie  King
being  incnpable,  an  Act  of  Parliament  appointed  the  Duke  of
York  Protector  and  Regent,  but  it  at  the  same  time  recognised
the  futui-e  claim  to  the  regency  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who
was  at  this  time  only  one  year  old,  and  by  a  reversionary  patent
it  settled  what  should  be  his  situation  and  the  extent  of  the
powers  with  which  he  should  be  invested  when  he  came  of  age.
If  this  transaction  showed  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  the
opinion  of  that  Parliament  was  the  natural  person  to  hold  the
regency,  it  showed  also  that  lie  was  not  considered  entitled  to
as.sume  it  as  of  iuhcrciit  right. 'To  the  person  of  the  King

en xvui.  AEGUMENTS  OF  PITT.  IL'l

who  wears  tlie  crown  is  certfiiiily  confined  all  the  roj'ul  authority
of  the  Constitution,  and  in  his  name,  even  during  the  existence
of  the  Regency,  must  all  public  business  be  transacted.'  'His
jiolitical  capacity  remains  as  entire  and  as  perfect  as  ever,  though
from  a  natural  incapacity  he  cannot  act.'

The  task  to  be  accomplished,  therefore,  is  not  to  make  a
king,  but  to  revive  or  give  efficiency  to  the  suspended  action
of  the  third  estate.  The  case  is  unprovided  for  by  law,  and
for  that  reason  the  duty  and  the  right  belong  to  the  nation  at
large,  which  is  the  ultimate  source  of  all  political  power,  and
which  is  represented  by  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament.  '  Though
the  third  estate  of  the  Legislature  may  be  deficient,  yet  the
organs  of  speech  of  the  people  remained  entire  in  their  repre-
sentation by  the  Houses  of  Lords  and  Commons,  through  which
the  sense  of  the  people  may  be  taken.  The  Lords  and  Commons
represent  the  whole  estates  of  the  people,  and  with  them  it
rested  as  a  right  to  provide  for  the  deficiency  of  the  third  branch
of  the  Legislature  whenever  a  deficiency  arose.'  The  circum-
stances are  not  the  same  as  those  which  followed  the  abdication
of  James  II.  Then  the  throne  was  vacant.  Now  the  throne
is  full,  and  the  King's  political  capacity  is  whole  and  entire,
though  in  fact  the  functions  of  the  Executive  Government  are
for  the  time  suspended.  But  in  one  respect  there  is  an  un-
doubted resemblance.  It  is  as  impossible  to  abide  by  the  Act
of  Charles  II.  now  as  in  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  Then
it  was  impossible  on  account  of  the  absence  of  the  King.  Now
it  is  impossible  through  the  act  of  God.  The  King's  actual
consent  cannot  be  obtained,  and  if  Fox's  claim  for  the  Prince  of
Vv'ales  were  admitted,  it  would  not  solve  the  difficulty.  '  Was
the  Regent  so  appointed  to  act  in  his  own  name  or  in  that  of
the  King?  Cue  or  the  other  he  must  do.  If  in  his  own  name
he  dethroned  the  King.  If  in  the  name  of  the  King  it  must  be
without  his  consent.'

It  remained,  then,  for  the  two  Houses  to  provide  a  tem-
porary substitute  for  the  King's  assent,  and  to  do  so  devia-
ting as  little  as  possible  from  the  forms  of  the  Constitution.  No
legislative  act  can  be  done  without  the  formal  sanction  of  this
assent,  and  no  person  can  take  upon  him  to  give  that  assent
except  by  the  direction  and  authority  of  the  two  Houses,  who

122  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. as.  xviii.

liave  a  riglit  in  the  present  emergency  to  act  for  tlie  King.
What,  then,  are  the  means  by  which  the  King  exercised  his
parliamentary  prerogative  when  he  did  not  exercise  it  per-
sonally? The  legal  and  constitutional  mode  was  by  issuing
letters  patent  under  the  Great  Seal.  '  The  Great  Seal,'  said
Lord  Camden,  '  was  the  high  instrument  by  which  the  King's
fiat  was  irrevocably  given ;  it  was  the  mouth  of  the  royal
authority,  the  organ  by  which  the  sovereign  spoke  his  will.'
The  impress  of  the  Great  Seal  is  the  form  and  expression  of
the  King's  assent.  It  is  the  final  act  that  gives  every  legisla-
tive measure  its  validity  and  makes  it  part  of  the  statute  law
of  the  land.  Pitt  now  proposed  that  the  two  Houses  should
put  this  Great  Seal  in  commission,  and  should  authorise  that
commission  to  affix  it  to  the  Bill  which  was  to  be  passed,  creat-
ing and  defining  the  regency.

By  this  means,  he  contended,  the  third  estate  would  be  re-
stored to  action  with  as  little  violence  as  possible  to  the  Constitu-
tion, and  Parliament  would  again  become  a  perfect  legislative
body.  '  The  use  of  the  King's  name  without  his  consent,'  he
said,  '  had  been  asserted  to  be  a  gross  and  clumsy  fiction,  but  by
that  fiction  the  courts  of  law  were  now  upheld.  That  fiction
was  the  support  of  hereditary  monarchy  so  strenuously  argued
for.  The  grand  principle  and  foundation  on  which  hereditary
monarchy  had  rested  was  the  political  capacity  of  the  King
ever  remaining  entire,  and  it  could  never  be  set  aside  while
living  and  not  having  forfeited  the  crown.  That  was  the  grand
principle  that  supported  hereditary  riglit.  What  else  could
have  protected  the  infant  monarch  in  a  cradle,  or  the  infirm,
diseased  old  king  on  his  bed  of  sickness  ?  '

It  followed  from  these  arguments  that  it  was  the  right  and
duty  of  the  two  Houses  to  determine  what  portion  of  the  royal
authority  should  be  conferred  upon  the  Regent,  and  the  prin-
cii)les  on  which  they  should  proceed  were  very  simple.  Nothing
should  bo  granted  that  was  unnecessary  for  the  efficiency  and
dignity  of  the  temporary  governuieut  which  was  to  be  created,  or
that  could  by  any  possibility  restrict  or  endanger  the  power  of
the  recovered  King.  On  these  lines  the  ministers  were  resolved
to  act.  The  question  of  right  must  first  be  determined.  The
uiiuibtcrs  would  then  introduce  a  Il'^gency  Bill  accompanied  by

CH.  xviii.  THE  gri:at  seal.  123

sncli  limitations  as  tliey  deemed  necessary  or  expedient  in  the
interests  of  the  sovereign,  who,  though  for  a  time  struck  down
by  illness,  was  still  unquestionably  on  the  throne  and  still  un-
questionably their  master.

Such  is,  I  think,  a  complete  summary  of  the  arguments
urged  by  Pitt  and  his  colleagues  on  this  great  constitutional
question,  and  such  were  "the  doctrines  which  they  induced
Parliament  to  affirm.  It  is  evident  that  the  weakest  part  of
this  reasoning  is  that  relating  to  the  employment  of  the  Great
Seal.  The  phantom  king  which  was  thus  created  was  denounced
as  one  of  the  most  formidable  innovations  ever  made  upon  the
Constitution,  and  very  eminent  modern  lawyers  have  adopted
this  view.  Which  doctrine,  it  was  asked,  is  more  in  harmony
with  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  that  which  supposes  the  un-
doubted heir  to  an  hereditary  throne  to  possess  when  of  full  age
a  natural  right  to  act  for  his  father  during  the  period  of  his
father's  incapacity,  or  that  which  authorises  the  other  two
estates  to  create  a  fictitious  king,  the  shadow  and  the  expres-
sion of  their  own  will  ?  If  a  fiction  of  this  nature  might  be
tolerated  in  order  to  give  a  semblance  of  regularity  to  purely
formal  and  undisputed  proceedings,  ought  it  to  be  made  use  of
to  determine  a  constitutional  question  of  the  gravest  moment,
and  involving  issues  of  the  most  disputable  character?  The
essential  idea  of  the  third  estate  is  that  it  is  something  inde-
pendent of  the  other  two,  that  it  is  invested  with  prerogatives
of  its  own,  that  it  has  the  power  of  dissent  as  well  as  assent.
'  When  the  plan  of  the  G  overnment  was  carried  out,'  said  Lord
North,  '  there  would  not  be  three  estates — there  would  be
only  two,  the  Lords  and  Commons  and  their  deputy — in  fact,
therefore,  the  whole  Legislatui-e  would  consist  of  Lords  and
Commons  only.  The  mode  now  proposed  by  the  resolution
before  the  House  was  to  set  up  a  person  to  represent  the  royal
person  without  any  deliberative  power,  with  only  a  ministerial
authority,  a  tool  of  their  own,  a  creature  of  the  two  Houses,
obliged  to  act  in  subservience  to  them,  without  discretion,  with-
out the  power  to  dissolve  or  any  of  the  other  functions  of  the
third  estate.'  '  The  third  estate  to  be  set  up  on  the  present  occa-
sion,' said  Fox,  '  was  something  with  no  will  of  its  own,  no  dis-
cretion, but  acted  merely  as  the  two  Houses  thought  proper, lb

124  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUIiY. ch.  xvrii.

was  a  mere  cieature  of  tlieirs,  and  if  resorted  to  once,  might  be
resorted  to  again  and  again.'  '  In  despite  of  -the  statute  of
Charles  II.,'  said  Burke,  '  which  made  such  a  declaration  liable
to  the  penalties  of  prcemimire,  the  two  Houses  had  declared  their
right  to  legislate.'  '  It  was  intended,'  he  continued,  caricaturing
Lord  Thurlow,  'to  set  up  a  man  with  black  eyebrows  and  a
large  wig,  a  kind  of  scarecrow  to  the  two  Houses,  who  was  to
give  a  fictitious  assent  in  the  royal  name  ;  and  this  to  be  bind-
ing on  the  people  at  large !  .  .  .  They  declared  their  positive
determination  to  elect  a  creature  of  their  own,  and  to  invest  it
with  the  insignia  but  without  any  of  the  intrinsic  power  of
royalty.'  .  .  .  He  for  his  part  disclaimed  all  allegiance  to  such
a  political  monster.  .  .  .  This  farce  reminded  him  of  a  priest
among  savages  who  raised  an  idol  and  directed  its  worship,
merely  that  he  might  secure  to  himself  the  meat  that  was
offered  as  a  sacrifice.'

The  force  of  these  considerations  appears  to  me  undeniable.
The  precedent  established  was  a  revolutionaiy  one,  and  the  two
Houses,  as  Burke  truly  said,  acted  like  an  '  aristocratic  republic'
It  is  probable  that  if  England  should  ever  again  pass  through  a
period  of  revolution,  and  if  it  should  be  thought  desirable  to
throw  over  that  revolution  a  colour  of  precedent  and  legality,
this  page  of  history  will  not  be  forgotten.  The  best  that  can
be  said  of  the  device  which  was  adopted  is  that  it  was  employed
only  until  the  regency  had  been  created  and  defined,  and  that
without  some  such  contrivance  it  would  have  been  impossible
to  establish  the  limitations  which  both  Parliament  and  the
country  thought  necessary.  It  was  said  to  have  been  devised
and  it  was  chiefly  defended  by  Sir  John  Scott,  afterwards  Lord
Jjldon,  the  most  typical  and  unbending  of  Tory  la\v}'ers.  The
retirement  of  Lord  i\Iansfield  in  the  June  of  this  year  from  the
office  of  Cliief  Justice  of  King's  Bench  had  been  followed  by  a
series  of  promotions,  in  the  course  of  which  Scott  became
Solicitor-CJeufral,  and  in  the  debates  on  the  regency  he  was  a
conspicuous  defi^nder  of  the  Government.

Another  and  still  more  prominent  lawyer  had  also  begun  to
throw  himself  decisiv^ely  into  the  same  scale.  The  secret  ovei*-
tiircs  of  Thiirlow  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  been  intended  to
secure  his  position  at  a  tiiiu-  wlicii it  was  the  pix'vailing  opinion

cit.  Nvi.i.  TIIURLOW SUITOKTS PITT.  125

arnoug  the  best  judges  that  the  recovery  of  the  King  was  im-
probable. The  evidence,  however,  of  Dr.  Willis  soon  modified  his
course.  On  December  11  Lord  Loughborough,  who  was  through-
out the  chief  legal  adviser  of  the  Whigs,  maintained  in  an  elaborate
speech  the  inherent  right  of  the  Prince  to  the  regency,  and  it  was
necessary  for  the  Chancellor  to  answer  him.  He  dissented  from
his  view,  but  he  did  so  in  terms  that  were  studiously  moderate  and
temporising,  dwelling  mainly  on  the  danger  of  disunion  and  the
uselessness  of  prematurely  raising  questions  of  principle.  The
debate,  wrote  Lord  Bulkeley  to  Buckingham, '  had  one  good  effect,
that  the  Chancellor  opened  enougli  of  his  sentiments  to  show  tliat
he  means  to  stand  by  his  colleagues.'  '  He  seems  very  sour  and
crusty  and  certainly  does  not  like  Pitt,  but  I  cannot  believe  he
will  do  otherwise  than  riglit  on  this  momentous  occasion.' '
Thurlow,  however,  can  hardly  have  failed  to  be  conscious  that
while  he  would  be  inevitably  distrusted  and  disliked  by  the
Whigs,  he  had  gone  so  far  that  his  position  would  be  in  much
danger  if  the  King  recovered.  That  no  such  recovery  was
likely  to  take  place  was  still  the  prevailing  belief  among  the
Opposition,  and  Fox  was  convinced  that  he  would  be  in  office  in
about  a  fortnight,^  but  on  the  ministerial  side  the  chances  were
now  very  differently  calculated.  Dr.  Willis  was  there  trusted
more  than  Dr.  Warren,  and  his  reports  were  becoming  daily
more  encouraging.  Thurlow  determined,  therefore,  by  one
great  display  to  clear  his  position.  In  a  speech  on  December  15
he  not  only  expressed  his  strong  adhesion  to  the  doctrine  of  the
Government,  but  astonished  his  hearers  by  bursting  into  a  flood
of  tears  as  he  described  the  afflicted  condition  of  the  King,  his
own  unalterable  resolution  to  support  him,  and  his  boundless
gratitude  for  the  favours  he  had  received.  '  When  I  forget  my
King,'  he  exclaimed,  '  may  my  God  forget  me  ! '

' Courts  and Cahincts  of George  phant  way,  but  at  any  rate  the  Prince

III.  ii.  52.  must  be  Regent,  and  of  consequence

-'  On December 15 Fox wrote:  the  ministry  must  be  changed.  .  .  .

*  We  shall  have  several  hard  figlits  in  The  King  himself  (notwithstanding

the House of Commons this week  the  reports  which  you  may  possibly

and  next, in  some  of which  I  fear  hear)  is  certainly  worse  and  perfect!}''

we  shall  be  beat ; but  whether  we  mad. I  believe the  chance  of his

are  or  not,  I  think  it  is  certain  that  recovery  is  very  small  indeed,  but  I

in  about  a  fortnight  we  sliall  come  in.  do  not  think  there  is  anj'  probability

It  we  carry  our  questions  we  shall  come  of  his  dying.' — Fox's  Corresjiondence,

in  in  a  more  creditable  and  trium-  ii.  299.  300.

126  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. err.  xviii.

The  words  made  a  great  but  various  impression.  To  the
outside  world  they  seemed  a  touching  and  eloquent  expression
of  devoted  loyalty,  but  they  were  regarded  very  differently  by
those  politicians  who  knew  something  of  the  recent  proceedings
of  the  Chancellor.  '  Forget  you  ! '  exclaimed  Wilkes,  who  was
standing  on  the  steps  of  the  throne,  '  He  will  see  you  d — d
first!'  'Forget  you!'  said  Burke,  who  was  also  among  the
listeners,  '  the  best  thing  that  could  happen  to  you ! '  Pitt,  who
was  standing  a  few  paces  from  Thurlow  when  the  ejaculation
was  made,  turning  to  General  Manners  exclaimed  in  a  loud
voice,  '  Oh,  the  rascal ! ' '  The  speech,  however,  at  least  showed
the  opinion  of  a  very  acute  judge  on  the  probable  issue  of  the
conflict,  and  in  a  subsequent  debate  Thurlow  again  distinguished
himself  by  the  effusive  loyalty  and  pathos  with  which  he  sup-
ported the  Crown.  He  gained  the  full  confidence  of  the  Queen,
yet  he  never  wholly  lost  the  favour  of  the  Prince,  who  keenly
appreciated  his  convivial  qualities.  Complete  rupture  between
the  Chancellor  and  the  Opposition,  however,  could  not  long  be
delayed,  and  it  was  a  source  of  real  gratification  to  Fox  and  to  his
colleagues,  some  of  whom  appeared  to  have  entertained  a  notion,
which  was,  I  think,  certainly  untrue,  that  Thurlow  was  betray-
ing their  counsels  to  Pitt.'^  It  is  remarkable  that  even  after  the
King's  recovery  there  continued  to  be  a  friendly  feeling  and  coii-

'  Wraxall  states  tliat  this  was  told  made  about  the  part  he  should  take

him  by General Manners himself,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  he  still  per-

and  acknowledged  to  him  by  Pitt. —  sisted  in  sending  for  him  and  holding

J'osihumovs  Menioirx,  in.  220,  221.  long  conversations  with  him  on  the

'^  Sir  G.  Elliot  writes  to  his  wife,  business.  The  Cliancellor  by  this
December  27  :  '  The  day  before  yes-  moans  learned  the  interior  of  the
terday  there  was  a  final  explanation  Prince's  alTairs  and  intentions,  and
with  the  Chancellor,  which  lerniinated  was  betraying  him  all  the  time  to
in  a  decided  separation  between  him  Pitt.  Fox, at  last,  who  has  uniformly
and  our  party,  to  the  great  joy  of  been  against  any  connection  with  the
Fox  and  of  every  one  of  us  except  the  Chancellor,  of  whom  he  thinks  worse
I'rince  himself.  The  Chancellor  has  than  of  any  man  in  the  world,  had
been  the  whole  of  this  time  playing  an  explicit  conference  with  him,  in
a  sliabby  trimming  game,  keeping  which  he  drove  the  Chancellor  to
})irii».elf  open  to  Ijoth  parties,  till  one  final  and  full  declarations  of  his
hlioiild  be  completely  victorious.  'J"he  intentions ;  and  he  is  now  quite
I'rince,  wlio  has  always  had  a  par-  olf.  The  reason  of  our  satisfaction
tiality  for  the  Chancellor,  proVialily  on  this  event,  notwithftnnding  the
on  account  of  his  taMc  qualities,  has  strength  of  the  Chancellor's  interest
1  een  negotiating  and  intriguing  and  in  ihe  House  of  Lords,  is  that  he  is
f-anvassing  liim  incess.-intly,  wilh  very  considered  as  a  treacherous  and  dan-
little  discretion  or  jnudcnce,  all  tlie  gfirous  character  to  form  any  connec-
time;  and  in  Bpitc  of  many  dis-  lion  with  and  to  admit  into  a  Cabi-
appointmcnts  and  breaches  of  en-  net.' — Lady  I\linto's  J.i/e  of  Sir  G,
gagements  which  the  Cliancellor  had  llWut^  i.  21'.i,  250.

CH.  vvm.  VICTORIES OF THE GOVERXMI-NT.  127

nection  between  Tburlow  and  the  Prince,  of  Wales,  and  it  was
regarded  by  the  Whigs  with  great  bitterness  and  with  some  fear.
'  The  Chancellor,'  wrote  Sir  G.  Elliot  as  late  as  February  23,  '  is
again  getting  about  the  Prince  of  AVales,  persuading  him  that  he
is  attached  to  him  and  that  he  hates  Pitt,  which  latter  part  is  per-
fectly true  ;  but  he  is  the  falsest  and  most  treacherous  character
in  the  world,  and  much  more  likely  to  mislead  the  Prince  than
to  serve  him,  or  to  do  anything  else  that  is  consistent  or
honourable.' '

Tlie  main  contention  of  the  Opposition  speakers  was  the
extreme  inexpediency  of  pronouncing  a  formal  parliamentary
judgment  on  the  question  of  right,  and  they,  therefore,  met  the
second  resolution,  which  asserted  the  right  of  Parliament,  by  the
previous  question,  which  was  moved  in  a  very  able  speech  by
Lord  North.  In  addition  to  the  popular  feeling  that  ran
strongly  against  him.  Fox  had  to  contend  against  the  unfor-
tunate fact  that  he  was  urging  Parliament  to  abstain  from  pass-
ing a  judgment  on  a  question  which  he  had  himself  introduced.
His  followers  were  obliged  to  argue  that  the  right  of  the  Prince
of  Wales  had  been  very  unnecessarily  forced  into  debate,  and
that  it  was  giving  a  most  undue  and  unprecedented  impor-
tance to  a  statement  thrown  out  by  an  unofficial  member  in
the  course  of  his  argument,  to  make  it  the  basis  of  a  parlia-
mentary resolution.  The  Government,  however,  carried  their
second  resolution  by  a  large  majority,  the  previous  question
being  rejected  by  268  to  204.  The  victory  was  a  decisive  one,
for  the  best  judges  among  the  Opposition  had  anticipated  that
ministers,  if  not  defeated,  would  at  least  win  by  only  a  very
small  majority,  and  that  the  course  which  the  Opposition  had
adopted  of  deprecating  a  vote  upon  a  right  which  had  not  been
claimed,  would  draw  to  them  all  those  neutral  and  moderate
men  who  were  chiefly  anxious  for  public  tranquillity.^  The
third  resolution  was  then  introduced,  asserting  that  it  was
necessary  for  the  two  Houses  to  '  determine  on  the  means  where-
by the  royal  assent  may  be  given  in  Parliament  to  such  a  Bill

'  Lady Min+o's Life of Sir G.  at  Brooks's  this  night  are  even  against

Elliot,  i.  275,  276.  tlie  minister,  though the  Chancellor

2  Ibid. pp. 246, 247. On the  has declared for him.' — AucJdand

eve  of this  division  Sir  John Eden  Correxjwndencc,  ii.  259.
wrote to his brother  : '  The bets

128  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTn CENTURY. en.  xvin.

as  may  be  passed  by  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  respectiug
the  exercise  of  the  powers  and  authorities  of  the  Crown,  in  the
name  and  on  the  behalf  of  the  King,  during  the  continuance
of  his  Majesty's  present  indisposition.'  It  passed  through  the
House  of  Commons  in  a  single  sitting  on  December  22  by  251
to  178.  Next  day  the  three  resolutions  were  sent  up  to  the
House  of  Lords,  where  they  were  finally  agreed  to  on  tlie  29tli.
There  appears  to  have  been  only  one  division  on  the  resolutions
in  the  Upper  House,  and  the  numbers  were  99  to  CG  ;  but  some
powerful  speeches  were  made  against  them,  and  a  protest
embodying  the  chief  arguments  of  the  Opposition  was  signed
by  the  two  royal  Dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester  and  by  forty-
five  other  peers.  With  the  exception  of  a  protest  against  the
impeachment  of  Sacheverell  in  1709,  it  was  the  most  numerously
signed  in  the  journals  of  the  House.

At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings,  legislation  was  for  a  short
time  interrupted  by  the  sudden  illness  of  Cornwall,  the  Speaker,
and  by  his  death  on  January  2.  He  had  occupied  the  Chair
since  1780,  and  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  Lord  Grantley,
who,  as  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  had  preceded  him,  died  only  twenty-
four  hours  before  him.  On  the  5th,  William  Grenville,  who  was
Joint  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  was  elected  Speaker  by  215  votes,
while  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  the  candidate  of  the  Opposition,  received
only  144.

The  Government  having  now  obtained  in  the  form  of  resolu-
tions the  sanction  of  Parliament  for  their  policy,  their  path  was
comparatively  smooth,  though  some  serious  fluctuations  in  the
state  of  the  King,  the  undisguised  hostility  of  the  Prince  of
Wales  and  of  the  royal  dukes,  and  the  manifest  intention  to
cliange  the  Government  when  the  regency  was  established,
detached  a  few  waverers  and  shook  the  confidence  of  many.
With  a  weak  minister  the  parliamentnry  mnjority  might  have
crumbled  away,  but  the  discipline  and  tone  of  the  House  of
Commons,  like  that  of  an  army,  depends  mainly  on  the  character
of  its  leader,  and  Pitt  on  this  occasion  led  the  House  with  as
admirable  a  skill  as  in  the  great  struggle  of  1784.  It  was  in
these  periods  that  his  real  greatness  was  most  fully  seen,  and
there  can  be  no  better  study  in  the  art  of  parliamentary  manage-
ment than is  furnished  by  his  conduct. ^J'lio  frank'tuss  with

en.  xviii.  PITTS DIGNITY  AND JUDGMENT.  121)

which  he  dealt  with  the  House  ;  the  courage,  presence  of  mind,
good  sense,  and  moderation  with  which  he  met  every  question  as
it  arose;  the  skill  with  which  he  brought  into  relief  every
popular  point  on  his  own  side  and  every  unpopular  point  on  the
side  of  his  opponents  could  hardly  be  surpassed.  Always  firm
but  never  obstinate,  always  conciliatory  but  never  weak,  he
steadily  maintained  the  semblance  of  disinterestedness  and
patriotism  and  that  ascendency  of  character  which  was  the  true
cause  of  his  superiority  over  his  opponents.  In  soundness  of
constitutional  doctrine,  in  power  of  reasoning  and  power  of
language,  the  speeches  of  Fox  and  one  or  two  of  the  speeches  of
North  appear  to  me  to  be  at  least  equal  to  those  of  Pitt,  but
Pitt  possessed,  and  Fox  wanted,  the  confidence  of  the  House
and  of  the  nation,  and  Pitt  scarcely  ever  made  a  mistake  in
management,  w^hile  Fox  and  the  most  illustrious  of  his  sup-
porters were  frequently  guilty  of  the  gravest  imprudences.
'  There  certainly  never  was  in  this  country,  at  any  period,  such  a
situation  as  Mr.  Pitt's,'  wrote  Grenville  to  his  brother  on  one  of
the  last  days  of  1788.  'It  is  no  small  addition  to  the  satisfac-
tion which  we  derive  from  all  these  events,  to  observe  that  every
man  of  all  parties  seems  to  feel  how  well  the  game  has  been
played  on  our  side  and  how  ridiculously  it  has  been  mismanaged
by  our  opponents.' '  '  The  popular  opinion,'  he  wrote  in  another
letter,  '  shows  itself  every  day  more  and  more.  .  .  .  Fox's  de-
claration of  the  Prince  of  Wales's  right  has  been  of  no  small
service  to  us.  Is  it  not  wonderful  that  such  great  talents  should
be  conducted  with  so  little  judgment  ?'^

Nothing  could  be  more  admirable  than  the  dignity  and
measure  with  which  Pitt  met  the  most  violent  attacks  of  his
opponents.  On  one  occasion  Burke,  commenting  upon  the  de-
claration that  it  was  treason  to  the  Constitution  to  assert  the
Prince  of  Wales's  inherent  right  to  the  regency,  asked  '  where
was  the  freedom  of  debate,  where  was  the  privilege  of  Parlia-
ment, if  the  rights  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  could  not  be  spoken
of  in  the  House,  without  their  being  liable  to  be  charged  with
treason  by  one  of  the  Prince's  competitors  ? '  '  When  he  said
the  Prince  of  Wales  had  no  more  right  to  urge  such  a  claim  than
any  other  individual  subject,'  answered  Pitt,  '  he  appealed  to
'  Courti-  and,  Cabinets,  u.  81.  *  Ibid.  p.  6i.

VOL.  V.  E

130  ENGLAND IN TUE  EIGIITEENTU CENTURY. ck.  xvtii.

tlie  House  upon  the  decency  with  which  the  right  honourable
gentleman  had  charged  him  with  placing  himself  as  a  competitor
to  his  Royal  Highness.  At  the  period  when  the  Constitution
Avas  settled  on  its  present  foundation,  when  Mr.  Somers  and
other  great  men  declared  that  no  person  had  a  right  to  the
crown  independent  of  the  consent  of  the  two  Houses,  would  it
have  been  thought  either  fair  or  decent  for  any  member  of
either  House  to  have  pronounced  Mr.  Somers  a  personal  com-
petitor of  William  III.  ?  '  On  another  occasion  Fox  dilated  with
great  bitterness  on  the  conduct  of  Pitt  in  forcing  to  a  formal
parliamentary  decision  the  right  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  the
regency,  although  that  right  was  never  claimed  and  although
"he  himself  admitted  that  it  was  practically  impossible  to  choose
any  other  Regent.  Such  conduct,  Fox  said,  could  only  be  due
to  an  ignoble  desire  to  win  a  party  triumph,  '  and  to  insult  a
Prince  whose  favour  he  was  conscious  he  had  not  deserved.'
Pitt  at  once  answered  that  '  he  only  knew  one  way  in  which  he
or  any  other  man  could  deserve  the  confidence  of  the  Prince — by
doing  his  duty  to  the  King  his  father  and  to  the  country  at
large,  and  if,  in  having  thus  endeavoured  to  deserve  the  confidence
of  the  Prince,  it  should  in  fact  appear  that  he  had  lost  it,  however
mortifying  and  painful  that  circumstance  might  be  to  him,
though  he  might  regret  it,  he  would  boldly  say  that  it  was
impossible  he  should  repent  it.'

This  tone  of  dignity  was  not  sustained  on  the  opposite  side,
and  the  speeches  of  Burke  were  especially  characterised  by  the
defects  from  which  those  of  Pitt  were  most  free.  I  have  written
much  in  a  former  volume  on  the  character  and  intellect  of  Burke,
Ijut  it  is  impossible  to  dismiss  the  debates  on  the  regency  with-
out noticing  what  a  painful  and  humiliating  spectacle  his  speeches
on  this  question  present  as  they  appear  in  the  parliamentary
history.  'J'hoy  contain,  it  is  true,  some  examples  of  admirable
reasoning,  illustration,  or  expression,  and  it  is,  I  think,  evident
that  the  s]i('echcs  of  the  loaders  were  reported  with  more  care
jiiid  I'lilncss  lli;ni  the  speeches  even  of  the  most  eminent  of  their
Collowcrs,  and  also  that  the  eloquence  of  Burke  was  of  a  kind
peculiarly  unswitcd  to  I'cporters.  Tlio  great  rapidity  of  his
deliveiy,  thf;  iiinrkcd  inili\  idnulily  of  his  diction,  the  length  and
the  discursiveness  of  his  speaking  were  all  obstacles,  and  the

tn.  xvin.  INDISCRETIONS  OF  BURKE.  131

meagre  reports  we  possess  are  often  accompanied  by  remarks  of
reporters  which  intimate  how  much  we  have  lost.  '  lie  went
over  the  whole  ground  of  objection  to  the  Bill  with  wonderful
fluency  and  ability,  and  in  the  course  of  his  speech  expressed
many  noble  sentiments  in  most  elegant  and  pointed  language.'
'  Mr.  Burke  enlarged  upon  this  topic  considerably  and  with  his
customary  ardour  of  expression.'  '  Mr.  Burke  urged  this  argu-
ment very  strenuously  and  with  great  force  of  expression.'  Sir
Gilbert  Elliot  noticed  the  wonderful  beauty  and  power  of  one  of
these  speeches  and  the  gTeat  admiration  it  elicited.'  But  it  is
unfortunately  but  too  true  that  the  speeches  of  Burke,  on  this
as  on  many  other  occasions,  if  full  of  genius,  were  also  full  of  the
most  extraordinary  exhibitions  of  passion,  indiscretion,  exag-
geration and  ill  taste.

In  truth  this  great  and  good  man,  whose  judgment  in  the
retirement  of  his  cabinet  was  so  wise,  so  far-seeing  and  often
so  nobly  impartial,  was  subject  in  the  excitement  of  debate
to  paroxysms  of  passion  which  indicated  a  mind  profoundly
and  radically  diseased.  Pie  could  instruct,  dazzle  and  soiiie-
times  convince,  but  he  had  not  the  smallest  power  of  winning
and  conciliating,  and  his  luxuriantly  prolific  but  strangely
unchastened  imagination  often  hurried  him  into  images  that
were  both  revolting  and  grotesque.  It  was  thus  that  he  com-
pared the  fictitious  King  entrusted  with  the  Great  Seal  to
a  Priapus  set  up  by  the  Government  for  adoration ;  that  he
turned  the  expression  '  heaven-born  minister,'  which  a  foolish
follower  had  applied  to  Pitt,  into  a  claim  for  the  minister,  of
Divine  right,  one  of  '  the  idiot  abominations  of  the  Stuart  race  ; '
that  he  accused  Pitt,  who  had  described  the  incapacitated  King
as  still  undoubtedly  on  the  throne,  of  '  making  a  mockery  of
the  King,  putting  a  crown  of  thorns  on  his  head,  and  a  reed  in
his  hand,  and  dressing  him  in  purple  to  cry,  Hail,  King  of  the
British ! '  The  partition  of  the  royal  power  in  the  regency
scheme  he  described  as  '  cutting  and  carving  the  Government
as  you  would  cut  out  morsels  for  hounds.' He  again  and  again

'  Lady Minto's Life  of Sir G.  who  was  present,  and  who,  though

EUint,  i.  269. An  excellent  account  often  inaccurate  in details,  was  an

of  Burke's  speeches  on the  regency  admirable  observer  and  describer  of

and  of  their  effects  will  be  found  in  men  and  things,
the  Posthumous  Memoirs  of  Wraxall,

132  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITTZZNTH CENTUEY. en.  xviii.

charged  Pitt  with  a  design  to  degrade  tlie  royal  family  in  order
to  serve  the  purposes  of  ambitious  men.  Alluding  to  the  ex-
clusion of  the  royal  princes  from  the  care  of  the  royal  person  he
exclaimed,  in  a  strain  of  the  wildest  exaggeration,  '  The  Bill
meant  not  only  to  degrade  the  Prince  of  Wales  but  the  whole
House  of  Brunswick,  who  were  to  be  outlawed,  excommunicated,
and  attainted,  as  having  forfeited  all  claim  to  the  confidence  of
the  country.'  '  Some  gentlemen,'  the  reporter  adds,  '  smiling  at
the  extent  of  this  doctrine  and  the  vehemence  of  emphasis  with
which  it  was  delivered,  Mr.  Burke  burst  out  into  a  degree  of
warmth  that  was  scarcely  ever  before  witnessed,  reprobated  the
conduct  of  the  other  side  of  the  House,  charging  them  with  de-
grading the  royal  family,  sowing  the  seeds  of  future  distractions
and  disunion  in  that  family,  and  with  proceeding  to  act  treasons
for  which  the  justice  of  their  country  would  one  day  overtake
them  and  bring  them  to  trial.'  In  a  speech  in  which  he  depre-
cated the  proposal  of  the  minister  to  withhold  from  the  Regent
the  power  of  making  peers,  he  had  the  strange  indiscretion  to
enumerate,  amid  the  laughter  of  the  House,  a  list  of  members  of
great  Whig  families  on  whom  a  peerage  might  be  properly
conferred.  On  other  occasions  he  spoke  of  the  King  in
language  which  shocked  all  the  best  feelings  of  his  hearers.
He  denounced  Dr.  Willis,  who  took  the  most  sanguine  view  of
the  King's  recovery,  and  eulogised  Dr.  Warren,  who  took  the
opposite  view,  in  a  strain  that  gave  but  too  much  colour  to  the
remark  of  Pitt,  that  Burke  had  '  dis])layed  a  degree  of  warmth
that  seemed  to  have  arisen  from  his  entertaining  wishes  different
from  those  of  the  rest  of  the  House.'  He  described  the  King  as
'  a  monarch  smitten  by  the  hand  of  Omnipotence,'  declared  that
'  the  Almighty  had  hurled  him  from  his  throne  and  plunged  him
into  a  condition  that  drew  upon  him  the  pity  of  the  meanest
peasant  in  the  kingdom,' and  having  with  characteristic  industry
made  a  careful  study  of  the  literature  of  lunacy  he  horrified  and
revolted  the  House  by  predicting  the  probable  relapse  that  would
follow  a  f(rii])orary  recovery.  '  The  disorder  with  which  the
sovereign  was  a(nicted,'he  said,  'was  like  a  vast  sea  which  rolled
in,  and  at  low  tide  rolled  back  and  left  a  bold  and  barren  shore,'
and  lu-  proceeded  to  dilate  upon  1  lie  niiccrt.'iinty  of  the  symptoms
of  sanity  and  to  read  extracts  from  a  iricdical  work  showing  how

CH.  xviii.  INDISCRETIONS  OF  BURKE.  133

'  some  unfortunate  individuals  after  a  supposed  recovery  liad  com-
mitted parricide,  others  had  butchered  their  sons,  others  had
done  violence  to  themselves  by  hanging,  shooting,  drowning
themselves,  throwing  themselves  out  of  the  window  and  by  a
variety  of  other  ways,'  till  the  indignant  House  would  hear  no
more  and  the  voice  of  the  orator  was  lost  in  the  angry  tumult.

The  effect  of  such  language  was  what  might  have  been  ex-
pected. Burke,  even  in  some  of  his  greatest  speeches,  was  con-
stantly interrupted  by  cries  of  Order  '  and  derisive  laughter,  and
often,  when  he  rose  to  speak,  a  number  of  members  left  the
House.  Pitt  in  one  of  his  replies  was  able  to  say  that  '  he
seldom  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  interrupt  the  right
honourable  gentleman  and  call  him  to  order,  or  indeed  to  make
him  any  answer,  because  his  speeches,  from  their  extraordinary
style  and  the  peculiarly  violent  tone  of  warmth  and  passion  with
which  they  were  generally  delivered,  seldom  failed  to  give  that
impression  which  those  against  whom  they  were  directed  wished
them  to  give.'  Sir  Richard  Hill,  in  a  brutal  speech,  plainly
hinted  that  Burke  was  himself  insane  and  that  he  would  pro-
bably soon  be  an  inmate  of  a  lunatic  asylum.*  '  Edmund  Burke
arose  a  little  after  four,'  wrote  Sir  W.  Younw  to  Lord  Buckiny-
ham,  '  and  is  speaking  yet.  He  has  been  wilder  than  ever,  and
hiid  himself  and  party  open  more  than  ever  speaker  did.  He
is  Folly  personified,  but  shaking  his  cap  and  bells  under  the
laurel  of  genius.  .  .  .  He  finished  his  wild  speech  in  a  manner
next  to  madness.'  ^

It  is  necessary  to  bear  these  things  in  mind  if  we  would
form  a  just  estimate  of  Burke,  and  they  do  much  to  explain  and
palliate  the  small  amount  of  oflicial  rank  which  he  obtained.^ I

•  Pari.  Hist,  xxvii.  1249.  Why,  it  may  be  asked,  beinsf  gifted

*  BockingliH m's  Courts  and  Cahi-  with  acquirements  beyond  all  other
we^«,  ii.  71,  73.  So  too  Addington  wrote  men,  perhaps,  living  or  dead,  and
of  ore  of  the  debates  on  the  regency  :  surpassing  all  his  contemporaries  in
'  Burke  followed  him  [Pitt]  and  dis-  the  higliest  flights  of  eloquence,  was
credited  himself.  Indeed,  he  was  he  not  the  leader  of  his  party  ?  First,
violent  almost  to  madness.' — Pellew's  because  he  wanted  taste,  and  secondly
Life  of  Sldinoufh,  i.  60.  because  he  was  the  most  imjiractica-

^  '  Burke was undoubtedly the  ble  of men. He  never  knew  when

oracle  of  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham  not  to  speak ;  he  never  knew  when

and of all the pure Rockingham  to  speak  short ; lie  never  consulted

party,  but the House of Commons  the feelings and prejudices of liis

never  did,  nor  ever  could,  have  sub-  audience. I  remember  hearing  Lord

niitted to him as  a leader  of any  Thurlow  say  of  him  and  Fox,  t-iar  the

party,  and  this  his  best  friends  knew.  difference  between  them  during  tlie

134  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEr^NTII CENTUEY. cii.  xviii.

know  few  contrasts  more  extraordinary  than  that  whicli  is  pre-
sented by  Ms  speeclies  on  the  regency,  and  the  wonderful
speech  which  in  the  very  same  year  he  delivered  before  the
House  of  Lords  in  opening  the  impeachment  of  Wan-en  Hastings
— a  speech  which  in  some  of  the  highest  qualities  of  eloquence
has  never  been  surpassed,  and  which  it  is  probable  that  no
other  man  who  ever  appeared  in  English  political  life  could
have  delivered.

Burke  was  not  one  of  the  friends  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.
His  severely  moral,  decorous  and  laborious  life  was  little  suited
for  the  atmosphere  that  surrounded  the  Prince,  and  he  was  able
to  say  that  he  knew  as  little  of  Carlton  as  of  Buckingham
House,  and  that  if  he  obtained  any  place  by  a  change  of  ministry
it  was  likely  to  be  only  a  very  subordinate  one.^  His  health
was  at  this  time  much  shaken :  his  circumstances  were  much
embarrassed,  and  he  was  conscious  that  political  anxieties  acted
too  powerfully  on  his  mind.^  On  the  regency  question  he  was
little  consulted,  and  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  manner  in
which  it  was  conducted.  His  opinion  on  the  question  seems  to
have  been  substantially  the  same  as  that  of  the  Duke  of  Glou-
cester, the  brother  of  the  King.  He  maintained  that  as  soon
as  the  King  was  incapacitated,  it  was  for  the  Prince  of  Wales,
and  not  for  the  ministers,  to  take  the  lead ;  that  '  he  should  have
done  what  it  has  been  said  was  his  right  to  do,'  and  that  this
'  might  have  been  as  safely  done  as  it  was  unsafely  said.'  He
ought  to  have  at  once  gone  down  to  the  House  of  Lords,  to  have

American controvers)'  -was  that  Fox  rather  too  anxious,  and  had  begun  to

always spoke to the House, and  discover  to  myse^lf and  to  others  a

]}urke  spoke  as  if  he  was  speaking  to  solicitude relative to the present

himself.' — Lord  Liverp'Ol  to  Croker,  state  of  alTairs,  which,  though  their

Croher  Papers,  i.  281),  21)0.  strange  condition  might  well  warrant

'  It  ajipears,  however,  from  a  it  in  others,  is  certainly  less  suitable
letter  of  Sir  G.  Elliot,  that  Portland  to  my  time  of  life,  in  which  all
(who  had  a  profound  admiral  ion  for  emotions  are  less  allowed,  and  to
I'urke)  had  determined  to  bestow  on  wliich  most  certainly  all  human  con-
him  the  pay  office  with  a  pension  of  corns  ought  in  reason  to  become
2,O00Z  a  yr'ar  on  the  Irisli  Eslablish-  more  indiflercnt,  than  to  those  who
ment,  which  was  to  revert  after  liis  have  work  to  do  and  a  good  deal
death  to  his  wife  and  son.  I'hi.s  of  day  and  of  inexhaustcd  strength
arrangement  wa.s  made  entirely  witli-  to  do  it  in.  I  sincerely  wish  to  with-
out the  knowledge  of  Hiirke. —  Life  draw  myself  from  this  scene  for  good
of  Sir  O.  Elliot,  i.  201-203.  and all  ; but unluckily the India

*  In  a  long  and  striking  letter  to  business  binds  me  in  point  of  honour.'

Windham  (Jan. 24, 1789) he  says,  — Eurke's  Correal' oiulcwc,  iii.  89.
'I  began  to  find  tliut  I was  grown

CH.  xvni.  NEW EXAMINATION OE PHY'SICIANS.  135

communicated  tlie  King's  condition  to  that  House  in  pprson  and
to  the  House  of  Commons  by  message,  to  have  desired  the
advice  and  assistance  of  the  two  Houses,  and  to  have  himself
originated  the  proceedings  in  Council.  In  this  way,  Burke
contended,  the  Prince  would  have  placed  himself  with  advantage
before  the  eyes  of  the  people,  would  have  taught  them  to  look
upon  him  with  respect  as  a  person  possessed  of  the  spirit  of
command,  and  would  have  given  his  friends  the  strong  position
of  his  proposers  instead  of  the  inferior  position  of  a  mere  common
opposition.  This  counsel,  however,  was  rejected  by  Fox  and  by
the  other  leadei's  of  the  Opposition,  and  Burke  appears  then  to
have  expected  very  little  from  the  campaign.^  He  spoke,  how-
ever, often,  and  probably  not  to  the  advantage  of  his  cause.

It  would  have  been  difficult,  indeed,  with  the  utmost  dis-
cretion and  skill,  to  have  advocated  at  this  time  the  claims  of
the  Prince  of  Wales  without  revolting  the  popular  feelings,
which  were  raised  to  the  highest  point  of  pity  for  the  King  and
of  admiration  for  his  minister,  and  it  was  a  peculiar  infelicity  of
the  Opposition  that,  as  the  propriety  of  imposing  restrictions  on
the  Regent  depended  mainly  on  the  probability  of  the  speedy
recovery  of  the  King,  they  were  almost  forced  by  their  party
position  to  attenuate  that  probability,  and  to  make  themselves
especial  supporters  of  those  physicians  who  questioned  it.  On
January  6,  when  Pitt  had  intended  to  introduce  the  limitations,
the  Opposition  interposed,  and,  observing  that  a  month  had
elapsed  since  the  last  examination  of  the  physicians,  and  that
there  was  great  doubt  and  difference  about  their  opinions,  they
urged  that  a  new  examination  should  take  place,  and  that  the
prospects  of  recovery  should  be  more  clearly  ascertained  before
any  further  steps  were  taken.  Pitt  at  first  resisted,  but  finally
acquiesced  in,  an  inquiry,  which  occupied  five  days,  and  produced
a  report  of  nearly  four  hundred  pages.  It  appeared  from  it  that
the  King's  state  and  chance  of  recovery  were  substantially  un-
changed ;  that  all  the  doctors  admitted  the  possibility  of  recover}-,
but  that  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion  about  the  proba-
bility. Sir  George  Baker  and  Dr.  Warren  were  the  least  con-

'  Burke's  Correspondence,  iii.  81- Duke of Gloucester's opinion, seo
Bo,  88-101. See  too  Prior's  Life  of Fox's  Corresj}onde7ice,  ii.  319.
Burke (2ud  ed.)  ii. 6-21. On tbe

136  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUllY. ch.  xviii.

fident,  while  Dr.  Willis,  who  was  specially  conversant  with
insanity,  considered  the  recovery  almost  certain,  and  predicted
that  it  would  probably  take  place  at  some  date  between  three
months  and  a  year  and  a  half  after  the  first  attack.

The  restrictions  on  the  regency  were  first  introduced  in  the
form  of  resolutions,  which  were  afterwards  to  be  embodied  in  a
bill.  Among  the  ancient  precedents  which  had  been  adduced,
there  had  .been  instances  of  a  council  being  appointed  with  the
Regent,  to  control  his  acts  and  his  choice  of  servants,  and  there
were  some  rumours  that  Pitt  might  endeavour  in  such  a  way  to
secure  his  position.  Those  who  supposed  so,  however,  knew
him  but  little.  To  maintain,  as  far  as  was  possible  under  the
circumstances,  the  attitude  of  disinterested  patriotism  was  his
first  object,  and  he  accordingly  made  it  one  of  the  leading
features  of  his  scheme  that  the  Regent  should  have  a  full  and
uncontrolled  power  of  dismissing  the  ministers,  choosing  his
•own  servants,  and  dissolving  Parliament.  He  also  stated  in  the
plainest  and  most  emphatic  terms  that  he  introduced  his  scheme
of  limitations  only  through  a  belief  that  the  interruption  of  the
King's  personal  exercise  of  authority  was  likely  to  be  temporary
and  short.  In  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Willis,  the  malady  with  which
the  King  was  afflicted  very  rarely  continued  as  long  as  two
years,  and  its  average  duration  was  five  or  six  months.  If  the
hopes  of  the  nation  were  unhappily  disappointed,  if  the  illness
of  the  King  seemed  likely  to  be  permanent  or  of  great  duration,
it  would  be  for  Parliament  to  reconsider  the  restrictions.  As-
suming, however,  that  the  King  was  likely  in  a  short  time  to
resume  his  authority,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  ministers  to  provide
that  while  the  Regent  obtained  full  powers  for  carrying  on  the
government,  nothing  which  was  not  required  for  this  purpose
should  be  granted ;  nothing  which  could  restrict  the  power,
impair  the  dignity,  or  hurt  the  feelings  of  the  sovereign  when  he
recovered.

The  first  proposed  restriction  was  that  the  Regent  should
have  no  power  of  bestowing  peerages,  except  on  members  of  the
royal  fiiinily  who  had  attained  the  age  of  twenty-one  years.
Tliis  portion  of  liis  suljject  I'itt  introduced  with  a  short  consti-
tutional dissertation,  of  a  kind  wliich  is  very  seldom  found  in
Lis  speeches. The  power  of  making  peers,  he  said,  was  lodged

cii.  xviii.  THE  RESTRICTIONS.  137

with  tlie  sovei-eij^n  for  three  purposes.  The  first  was  to  reward
distinguished  merit.  *  The  second  was  that,  as  property  and  the
influence  which  accompanied  it  were  fluctuating,  and  as  the
dignity  of  the  peerage  would  be  lost  if  that  power  was  supposed
to  exist  elsewhere,  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  infused
into  the  peerage  gradually  as  it  arose.'  The  third  was  '  that  it
placed  a  strong  check  in  the  hands  of  the  Crown,  and  this  was
one  of  the  checks  against  oligarchy,  as  others  had  been  devised
by  the  Constitution  against  a  pure  monarchy  and  an  imperious
democracy.'  From  the  first  two  points  of  view,  a  brief  suspen-
sion of  the  right  of  making  peers  was  of  little  consequence,  and
although  it  might  be  argued  that  the  predominant  opinion  in
the  House  of  Lords  might,  if  no  longer  liable  to  be  counteracted
by  new  creations,  impede  the  Executive  Government  of  the
Regent,  yet  Parliament  was  bound  to  judge  the  question  accord-
ino^  to  the  balance  of  advantages  and  disadvantages.  It  would
be  a  still  greater  evil  if  the  sovereign  should  find  upon  his
recovery  that  a  large  number  of  peers  had  been  created,  to
whose  opinions  and  characters  he  strongly  objected,  and  that
one  branch  of  the  Legislature  had  thus  been  permanently  and
materially  modified  in  a  manner  that  was  contrary  to  his  wishes.
It  was  not  likely,  Pitt  said,  that  the  existing  peers  would  risk
their  reputation  'to  bring  in  any  set  of  ministers.'  'If  they
should  obstruct  the  executi\'e  authority  in  the  beginning,  they
certainly  would  not  after  an  interval  of  experiment,  and  when
the  King's  I'ecovery  might  become  less  probable.  At  all  events
the  remedy  was  in  the  hands  of  Parliament,  and  a  House  of
Commons  could  at  any  time  resolve  that  the  cause  of  the
restriction  had  lost  its  force,  and  the  measure  its  necessity.'

The  second  restriction  greatly  limited  the  patronage  of  the
Regent,  providing  that  he  should  have  no  power  to  grant  any
reversion,  or  any  office  or  pension,  for  any  other  term  than
during  his  Majesty's  pleasure,  except  in  a  few  unavoidable  cases,
like  that  of  the  judges,  when  the  law. required  the  office  to  be
filled  up,  and  to  be  granted  for  life  or  during  good  behaviour.
The  Regent  was  thus  deprived  of  almost  all  power  of  permanently
rewarding  his  supporters,  and  the  whole  patronage  he  had
exercised  would  be  annulled  by  the  recovery  of  the  King.

The  third  restriction  provided  that  he  might  not  grant  any

138  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUHY. ch.  xviii.

p;irt  of  the  King's  real  or  personal  estates,  except  as  far  as
relates  to  the  renewal  of  leases.

The  fourth  and  last  related  to  the  King's  person.  It  pro-
vided that  the  care  of  the  King's  person  should  be  entrusted  to
the  Queen,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  King's  household  should
be  maintained  and  should  be  put  under  her  sole  authority,  with
full  power  to  dismiss  and  to  appoint.  It  was  admitted  that
many  of  the  Court  officials  could  have  no  duties  during  the
King's  incapacit}',  but  it  was  a  matter  of  dignity  to  maintain
them,  and  it  would  be  manifestly  most  distressing  to  the  sove-
reign if  he  should  hereafter  find  that,  during  an  illness  of  a  few
months,  his  household  had  been  remodelled,  and  many  of  his
faithful  personal  attendants  dismissed.  A  council  was  to  be
appointed  to  assist  the  Queen  by  their  advice,  but  without  any
power  of  control,  and  it  was  to  have  the  right  of  examining
upon  oath  the  physicians  and  other  persons  attending  the  King,
'touching  the  state  of  his  Majesty's  health,  and  all  matters
relating  thereto.'  Pitt  at  the  same  time  announced  his  intention
of  introducing  at  a  future  time  propositions  for  providing  the
Kegent  with  a  retinue  suitable  to  his  new  position,  but  the
Prince,  a  few  days  after,  intimated  by  the  mouth  of  Fox  that  it
would  be  highly  irksome  to  him  to  add  anything  for  such  a
purpose  to  the  burdens  of  the  country.

The  scheme  of  restrictions  thus  defined  was,  in  the  course
of  its  long  passage  through  Parliament,  fully  and  vehemently
debated,  and  although  during  a  portion  of  the  discussions  Fox
was  incapacitated  by  serious  illness,  his  place  was  well  filled  by
Sheridan,  who  was  in  the  special  confidence  of  the  Prince,  and
by  North,  whose  speeches  appear  to  me  singularly  able  and
temperate.  To  some  portions  of  the  scheme  there  was  little  or
no  objection.  It  was  generally  admitted  that  the  care  of  the
King's  person  was  properly  confided  to  the  Queen,  though  it
was  contended  that  this  did  not  at  all  necessarily  imply  that  she
should  have  an  absolute  power  over  the  household.  The  clause
withholding  from  tlie  Regent  all  power  of  disposing  of  the  pro-
perty of  the  King  was  objected  to  so  far  as  it  related  to  the  real
property,  which  was  held  in  trust  for  the  nation,  and  the  Privy
J'urse,  wliich  came  directly  frojn  taxation,  but  the  personal
property  of  the  King  rested  on  a  different  basis. It  was  as

en.  xviii.  THE  RESTEICTIOXS.  139

completely  his  own  to  give  or  to  bequeath  as  the  property  of
any  private  gentleman.  If  his  son  appropriated  it  during  the
lifetime  of  his  father,  he  would  be  guilty  of  a  criminal  fraud,
and  the  only  objection,  therefore,  to  this  part  of  the  Bill  was
tiiat  to  make  a  special  enactment  on  the  subject  was  both
unnecessary  and  grossly  insulting  to  the  Prince.  Loughborough,
in  commenting  upon  it,  reminded  the  House  of  Lords  that  it
had  been  pronounced  a  libel  for  one  person  to  send  to  another
a  paper  with  the  words  from  Holy  Writ,  '  Thou  shalt  not  steal.'
The  appointment  of  a  council  to  assist  the  Queen  also  excited
no  criticism  until  its  nature  and  functions  were  more  fally
disclosed.  It  appeared  that  the  Government  intended  it  to
consist  of  the  chief  officers  of  the  household,  the  two  arch-
bishops, Lord  Thurlow,  and  one  or  two  other  high  officials,  but
no  member  of  the  royal  family  was  to  sit  in  it.  As  the  King
had  three  sons  in  addition  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  also  two
brothers,  it  was  pronounced  monstrous  that  no  member  of  his
family  should  be  admitted  to  a  council  which  was  to  assist  the
Qaeen  in  the  care  of  the  royal  person.  We  have  already  seen
the  violence  with  which  Burke  dilated  upon  this  exclusion ;  but
Pitt  successfully  resisted  the  attempts  of  the  Opposition  to
introduce  the  royal  family  into  the  council.  The  Queen,  it  was
said,  could  at  any  time  consult  the  members  of  her  family.  The
Prince  of  Wales,  as  the  heir  to  the  throne,  was  by  common
consent  excluded  from  the  care  of  the  King's  person,  and  it  was
therefore  more  becoming  that  his  younger  brothers  should  not
be  admitted.  It  was  also  more  respectful  to  the  royal  family
not  to  place  them  in  a  responsible  position,  which  made  them
liable  to  be  called  to  the  bar  of  the  House  to  answer  for  their
conduct.  'It  was  a  respect,'  Burke  sarcastically  observed,
'  which  was  a  perpetual  disqualification — much  like  the  respect
of  the  Epicureans  for  their  gods.'

Among  the  functions  bestowed  upon  the  new  council  was  that
of  pronouncing  on  the  recovery  of  the  King.  The  Queen  and  any
five  members  of  the  council  might  notify  to  the  President  of  the
council  and  to  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State  that  the  King  was
again  capable  of  exercising  the  royal  authority.  The  communi-
cation was  to  be  immediately  sent  to  the  Hegent ;  to  the  Lord
Mayor  of  London,  who  was  to  publish  it  in  the '  London  Gazette ; '

140  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. ch.  xviii.

aud  to  tlie  Pri\y  Council,  and  the  King  miglit  then  summon  a
council  of  not  less  than  nine  members  named  by  himself,  and
might  resume  the  government  by  a  proclamation  bearing  his
own  signature  and  that  of  six  Privy  Councillors.  The  Opposition
contended  that  by  this  machinery  it  was  very  possible  that  the
King  might  be  brought  back  into  authority  when  his  recovery
was  far  from  complete,  and  they  vainly  urged  that  as  a  pai'lia-
mentary  vote  had  established  the  fact  of  his  incapacity,  it
was  for  Parliament  also  to  ascertain  and  to  authenticate  the
fact  of  his  recovery.  The  members  were  significantly  re-
minded of  the  calamities  that  fell  upon  France  in  the  reign
of  Charles  VI.,  when  the  sovereign  was  habitually  insane  but
with  occasional  lucid  intervals,  and  when  the  Queen  and  a
faction  who  were  about  her  employed  his  name  and  his
authority  as  the}^  pleased.

These,  however,  were  minor  objections  to  the  scheme,  and
the  great  Aveight  of  the  argument  turned  upon  the  restriction
or  partition  of  the  royal  prerogatives.  This,  it  was  contended,
is  essentially  unconstitutional,  and,  although  it  was  advocated  in
the  interest  of  the  King,  it  tended  directly  to  lower  the  royal
authority.  The  Constitution,  it  was  said,  has  circumscribed
the  royal  prerogative  by  many  laws  written  and  unwritten,  anij
has  thus  provided  a  sufficient  control,  but  this  is  the  only  de-
scription of  control  which  it  recognises.  The  portion  of  power
which  is  confided  to  the  sovereign  is  a  trust  for  the  people ;  it
is  essential  to  the  balance  of  the  Constitution  and  to  the  strength
of  the  Executive,  and  it  ought  therefore  to  be  maintained  intact
and  undivided.  Was  it  for  the  interests  of  the  monarchy  '  to
appoint  a  person  to  the  royal  office,  and  to  separate  from  that
office  the  royal  authority ; '  to  endeavour  in  the  person  of  the
Regent  '  to  ascertain  with  how  small  a  portion  of  kingly  power
the  Executive  Government  of  this  country  may  be  carried  on  ; '
to  '  exhil)it  the  sovereign  power  of  the  nation  in  a  state  of
dogradation,  of  curtailed  authority,  and  diminished  energy?'
Und(!r  any  circumstances,  the  Government  of  a  regent  is  un-
avoidably weaker  than  that  of  a  king,  and  yet  the  whole
Hchome  of  the  regency  was  constructed  with  the  object  of
tying  the  hands  of  the  ministers  of  the  Regent  at  a  time
when  they  would bf  most  in  need  of  authority,  and  of  pro-

m.  >:vin.  THE EESTRICTIONS.  1-11

ducing  artificiiilly  and  deliberately  a  state  of  administrative
debility  and  instability.  The  Regency  Bill,  in  all  its  parts,
stamped  a  suspicion  on  the  character  of  the  Prince  of  Wales
and  was  evidently  founded  on  the  supposition  that  he  was
not  a  person  to  be  trusted.  It  was  no  less  evident,  it  was
said,  that  the  conduct  of  Pitt  was  governed  by  party  con-
siderations and  by  personal  ambition.  Could  any  one  sup-
pose that  if  it  had  been  thought  probable  that  the  present
ministers  would  have  been  kept  in  office  a  Bill  would  have  been
introduced  to  involve  them  in  such  a  maze  of  restrictions  ?  It
was  idle  for  Pitt  to  profess  himself  ready  to  concede  to  the
Regent  the  full  power  of  choosing  his  servants,  if  he  was  at  the
same  time  so  regulating  the  regency  as  to  throw  insupei-able
difficulties  in  the  path  of  any  ministry  but  his  own.  This,  it
was  said,  was  his  manifest  policy.  He  had  seen  that  it  was
impossible  to  pass  over  the  claims  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  the
regency.  He  had  not  succeeded  in  inducing  the  Prince  to
decline  an  office  which  was  surrounded  with  so  many  invidious
restrictions,  but  he  could  at  least  take  measures  which  would
make  his  own  political  ascendency  almost  certain.  He  had  him-
self created  more  than  forty  peers.  He  had  a  steady  majority  in
the  Upper  House,  and  he  withheld  from  his  successors  the  only
possible  means  of  overthrowing  it.  The  ministers  of  the  Regent
would  be  at  the  same  time  deprived  of  by  far  the  largest  and
most  valuable  portion  of  that  patronage  which  all  preceding
governments  had  possessed  and  had  deemed  absolutely  essential
to  the  conduct  of  affairs.  The  Regent  was  given  all  the  respon-
sibility of  royalty  and  all  its  invidious  duties,  but  scarcely  any
power  of  commanding  or  rewarding  service.

But  this  was  not  all.  The  place  assigned  to  the  Queen
tended  directly  to  divide  the  royal  family,  to  set  mother  against
son,  and  to  make  the  ministry  of  the  Regent  dependent  on  the
wishes  of  the  Queen.  The  whole  vast  patronage  of  the  house-
hold wa,s  in  her  hands.  It  consisted  of  mdre  than  200,000^.  a
year.  No  less  than  eighteen  peers  of  Parliament  belonged  to
the  household,  and  it  was  chiefly  by  votes  of  this  descrij^tion
that  the  early  ministries  of  the  reign  had  been  overthrown.
The  Court  was  separated  from  the  executive  power.  An  in-
dependent, a  rival,  and  a  superior  centre  of  influence  was  set  up,

■h

142  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEF.NTH CENTLT.Y. en.  xviii.

against 'n-hicli  it  would  beLopeless  for  an  enfeebled  and  restricted
ministry  to  contend.  It  was  tolerably  certain  from  the  known
sentiments  of  tlie  Queen  that  her  influence  would  be  exerted
against  the  Whigs,  and  it  was  most  pi'obable  that  the  whole
jDatronage  of  the  household  and  the  political  influence  connected
^yith  it  would  still,  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  ministry,  continue
to  be  directed  by  Pitt.  A  caricature  of  the  time  well  illustrated
the  situation  when  it  represented  Pitt,  Thurlow,  and  Dundas
as  three  weird  sisters  standing  on  a  heath  gazing  anxiously  on
the  half-eclipsed  orb  of  the  moon.  The  darkened  side  repre-
sented the  King's  countenance,  but  on  the  other  side  was  the
Queen's  face  still  bathed  in  light  and  graciously  regarding  the
three  gazers.  So  strongly  did  Fox  feel  the  hopelessness  of  the
position  that  he  positively  declared  that  he  would  not  accept  the
administration  of  affairs  unless  it  were  accompanied  by  all  the
patronage  and  all  the  emoluments  which  are  annexed  to  it  by
the  Constitution,  for  he  did  not  believe  that  the  government  of
the  country  could  on  any  other  conditions  be  conducted  with
efficiency  and  dignity.

It  is  true  that  Pitt  represented  the  restrictions  as  intended
only  for  a  short  period,  and  had  said  that  they  ought  certainly
to  terminate  if  the  King's  illness  appeared  unhappily  likely  to  be
permanent.  But  the  period  of  their  abolition  was  completely
uncertain,  and  Pitt  at  first  refused  to  introduce  any  limitation
into  the  Bill.  What  was  there,  it  was  asked,  to  prevent  such  a
form  of  government  from  continuing  for  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty
vears  ?  And  was  it  not  possible  that  the  difficulties  of  abolish-
ing it  might  be  much  greater  than  was  supposed  ?  The  power
of  adding  to  the  Upper  House  corresponds  to  the  power  of
dissolving  the  Lower  House,  and  it  is  the  only  efficient  consti-
tutional check  that  exists  upon  the  House  of  Lords.  This  check
the  Regency  Bill  would  abolish,  and  unless  the  King  recovered
or  died,  it  could  not  be  restored  without  the  assent  of  the  Upper
House.  Was  it  so  sure  that  this  assent  would  be  given  ?  The
nifijority  of  the  Upper  House  would  have  the  strongest  party
motives  for  refusal,  and  the  importance  of  the  existing  peers  of
all  part,if^s  would  l)e  greaily  increascnl  if  it  was  impossible  to  add  to
their  ininibcrs.  It  was  not  forgottcm  how  readily  the  peers  had
welcomed  the  I'eerage  Bill  under  Cenrge  L  which  by  siopijing

en.  xviii.  THE ItF.sTRICTIONS CAKRIED.  143

new  creatioias  was  likely  to  maguify  their  social  dignity  and
their  constitutional  power.  If  the  Regency  Bill  passed  in  the
form  in  which  it  was  introduced,  combinations  would  certainly
taJve  place  in  the  Upper  House,  against  which  it  would  be
totrilly  impossible  for  the  Government  of  the  Regent  to  contend.

These  objections  appear  to  me  in  a  great  part  sound  and
serious,  but  they  were  arguments  of  unpopular  men  in  an  un-
popular cause.  They  were  put  forward  with  much  force  in  the
debates  in  Parliament,  in  protests  in  the  House  of  Lords,  but
especially  in  the  admirable  reply  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to
Pitt's  letter  announcing  to  him  the  intended  scheme  of  the
Regency.  The  composition  of  this  reply  was  very  wisely  en-
trusted to  Burke,'  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  state  the  chief
objections  to  the  Regency  Bill  with  a  greater  cogency  of  argu-
ment, or  a  greater  force,  beauty,  and  dignity  of  language.  The
Prince  consented,  however,  to  accept  the  Government  on  the
terms  that  were  proposed,  on  the  understanding  that  the  limita-
tions were  for  no  long  period,  and  Pitt  consented  before  the  Bill
finally  passed  the  Commons  to  introduce  an  important  altera-
tion, limiting  the  restriction  on  the  creation  of  peers  to  three
3'ears.  In  agreeing  to  this  alteration  he  stated  that  he  had  no
idea  that  any  of  the  restrictions  should  continue  so  long.  There
was  every  reason  to  hope  for  the  King's  speedy  recovery,  but  if
unfortunately  this  hope  were  disappointed,  he  thought  that  all
the  restrictions  on  the  Regent  should  be  abolished  at  an  earlier
period.  It  was  impossible  to  assign  a  precise  limit,  but  he
would  agree  to  three  years,  as  a  period  the  most  extreme  and
distant  that  could  be  contemplated.

The  double  process  of  carrying  the  measure  through  the  two
Houses,  first  in  the  form  of  resolutions  and  then  in  the  form  of
a  bill,  caused  a  considerable  delay,  and  there  were  several  cum-
brous forms  to  be  gone  through.  It  was  deemed  necessary  to
give  the  King's  formal  sanction  to  the  opening  of  Parliament,
and  a  commission  was  accordingly  appointed  under  the  Great
Seal  to  open  it  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty.  The  sentiments
with  which  the  royal  family  regarded  the  proceedings  of  the

'  The  letter,  Sir  G.  Elliot  states, and other critics.' — Life  of A'r  G.
'  was originally Burke's,  altered a Elliot,  i.  268.
little,  but  not  improved,  by  Sheridan

144  ENGLAND IX THE EIGIITEEXTH CENTURY. ch.  xvni.

ministers  were  evinced  by  the  request  of  the  Prince  of  Wales
and  of  the  Dukes  of  York,  Cumberland,  and  Gloucester,  that
their  names  might  all  be  omitted  from  the  commission.  Among
the  subjects  that  were  discussed  during  the  debates  on  the  Bill,
was  the  very  embarrassing  one  of  the  reported  marriage  of  the
Prince  with  Mrs.  Fitzherbert.  Kolle  declared  that  he  only
'  gave  his  consent  to  appointing  the  Prince  of  Wales  Regent
upon  the  ground  that  he  was  not  married  to  Mrs.  Fitzherbert
either  in  law  or  in  equity,'  and  when  a  clause  in  the  Regency
Bill  was  introduced,  annulling  the  powers  of  the  Regent  if  he
either  ceased  to  live  in  England  or  married  a  Catholic,  Rolle
moved  an  amendment  excluding  from  the  regency  '  any  person
proved  to  be  married  either  in  law  or  in  fact  to  a  Papist  or  one
of  Roman  Catholic  persuasion.'  The  amendment  was  not
pressed  to  a  division,  but  it  produced  an  animated  and  scn^e-
what  remarkable  debate.  Fox  was  absent  through  real  and
serious  illness.  Pitt  declared  the  amendment  to  be  whvi^Uy
unnecessary,  but  he  dilated  in  terms  of  marked  eulogy  on  the
character  and  motives  of  Rolle  and  made  a  violent  attack  on
Lord  North,  who  had  ridiculed  the  pertinacity  with  which  Rolle
dwelt  on  '  dangers  to  Church  and  State  '  which  could  not  pos-
sibly exist,  as  by  the  Royal  Marriage  Act  there  could  be  no
marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  without  the  consent  of  the
King.  Welbore  Ellis  caused  the  Royal  Marriage  Act  to  be
read,  asserting  that  this  was  a  simple  and  suflicient  answer  to
the  rumours  that  had  been  spread.  Dundas  declared  that  the
positive  and  explicit  denial  of  the  rumour  which  Fox  had  been
authorised  to  make  two  sessions  before  had  decided  his  opinion.
He  greatly  regretted  the  absence  of  Fox  on  the  present  occa-
sion, but  he  added  that  he  had  so  high  an  opinion  of  his
sincerity  that  he  was  confident  that  he  would  have  come  down
to  the  House  even  at  the  risk  of  his  life  if  anything  had
occurred  to  alter  the  opinion  he  had  formerly  expressed.  But
the  most  remarkable  speeches  appear  to  have  been  those  of
Grey,  and  it  can  only  be  said  of  them  that  it  is  to  be  hoped  that
Ills  language  was  in  fact  somewhat  less  unqualified  and  emphatic
than  it  appears  in  the  meagre  report  of  the  parliamentary
history.  According  to  the  reporter,  he,  in  two  distinct  speeches,
denounced the ruindur wliidi Imd been circulated  about  tlio

nt.  xviii.  RECOVERY OF THE  KING.  145

Prince  of  Wtiles,  and  which  had  given  rise  to  the  amendment
before  the  House,  as  '  false,  libellous,  and  calumnious.'  '  He
admitted  the  justice  of  Mr.  Dundas's  remark  relative  to  Mr.
Fox,  and  assured  the  committee  that  it  was  due  to  the  character
of  his  right  honourable  friend  to  declare  that  no  consideration
of  health  or  any  other  circumstance  would  have  prevented  his
attendance  in  his  place,  if  he  had  not  at  that  moment  been  fully
satisfied  that  what  he  had  asserted  on  a  former  occasion  was
strictly  true.  Had  the  case  been  otherwise,  his  right  honour-
able friend  would  have  been  present,  even  at  the  risk  of  his
life.'  1

It  was  not  till  February  13  that  the  Bill  had  finally  passed
the  House  of  Commons,  and  by  this  time  a  marked  improvement
had  taken  place  in  the  condition  of  the  King.  After  many
fluctuations,  the  disease  took  a  decisive  turn  about  the  end  of
the  first  week  in  February,  but  still  it  was  for  some  time  the
prevailing  belief  that  the  regency  would  be  established  and  the
ministry  changed.  In  the  beginning  of  February  medals  to
commemorate  the  regency  were  already  struck  and  sold  in  the
streets.  Whig  ladies  appeared  in  society  with  caps  that  were
known  as  '  regency  caps '  and  with  ribands  indicating  their
politics.  Pitt,  who  possessed  no  private  fortune,  thought
seriously  of  resuming  his  practice  at  the  bar,  and  it  was  well
known  that  an  Administration  presided  over  by  the  Duke  of
Portland  had  been  already  settled  in  almost  all  its  details.^
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  King's  illness  it  was  believed
in  political  circles  that  his  chance  of  recovery  was  much
smaller  than  was  represented  to  the  public,^  and  the  accounts  of
his  improved  condition  were  scanned  with  great  suspicion.  The
animosity  that  divided  the  two  parties  w^as  singularly  strong,^
and  the  worst  inferences  were  drawn  by  the  Whigs  from  the
manner  in  which  the  King's  sons  were  excluded  from  the
presence  of  their  father,  and  from  the  fact  that  when  they  were

*  Pari.  Hist,  xxvii.  1191-1]  93.  quite  to  a  degree  of  passion  and  fury,

*  Buckingham's  Courts  and  Cabi-  is  to  consider  the  Prince  of  Wales,
nets,  ii.  11-33;  Lady  Minto's  Life  of  and  everything  that  is  suspected  of
Sir  G.  Elliot,  i.  260-263  tlie least attachment  to  him,  as a

^Auckland Correspondence, ii.  prey  to  be  hunted  do  \^ti  and  destroyed

240-242,  245,  256.  without  mercj*. This  1  assure  you  is

•*  Thus  Sir  G.  Elliot  writes:  •  The  the  private  conversation  of  the  minis-
prevailing  principle  not  only  with  ters  and  the  Queen's  whole  set.' — Life
ministers  but  with  all  the  party,  and  uf  Sir  G.  Elliot,  i.  272,  273,

VOL.  V.  L

146  ENGLAND IN THE  ETGHTEENTII CENTURY. en.  xvin.

at  last  admitted,  they  were  never  allowed  to  be  with  him  alone.
It  was  acknowledged  that  there  was  a  great  improvement,  ■
and  that  on  indifferent  subjects  he  could  talk  rationally,  but
it  was  said  that  this  was  merely  one  of  those  lucid  intervals
which  are  so  common  in  the  illness,  that  he  spoke  rationally
only  in  the  presence  and  under  the  restraint  of  a  physician,
that  he  showed  a  constant  tendency  on  particular  subjects  to
relapse  into  folly,  and  that  the  smallest  excitement  would  be
sufficient  to  overturn  the  balance  of  his  mind.  On  February  10
Sir  George  Baker,  after  visiting  Kew,  said  that  the  King's  state
Avas  encouraging,  but  that  it  was  too  soon  to  speak  of  conva-
lescence or  to  assert  anything  about  a  final  cure.  Dr.  Warren,
whose  judgment  had  greatly  influenced  the  Whig  party,  had
from  the  beginning  openly  expressed  his  opinion  that  the  King
was  not  likely  to  recover.  He  was  now,  it  is  true,  somewhat
shaken,  but  he  still  believed  a  perfect  recovery  to  be  improbable,
and  about  February  10  he  assured  the  Duke  of  Portland  that  it
would  be  wrong  not  to  accept  office,  for  it  was  impossible  that
the  King  could  resume  the  direction  of  affairs  in  less  than  a
year.^  On  the  12th  the  Archbishop  of  Cantei'bury  wrote  to
Eden  that  it  was  still  the  almost  universal  opinion  that  there
would  be  a  change  of  ministry  the  moment  the  regency  was
established,^  As  late  as  the  17th,  Fox,  who  was  still  ill  at  Bath,
wrote  to  Fitzpatrick  assuming  that  the  regency  was  certain,  and
asking  to  be  informed  by  return  of  post  on  what  day  it  was
likely  to  begin.  *  I  hope,'  he  added,  '  by  this  time  all  ideas  of
the  Prince  or  any  of  us  taking  any  measure  in  consequence  of
the  good  reports  of  the  King  are  at  an  end ;  if  they  are  not,
pray  do  all  you  can  to  crush  them.'  ^

The  improvement,  however,  steadily  continued.  Dr.  Willis
carae  to  town  and  informed  the  Chancellor  that  the  King  was
too  well  for  the  Regency  Bill  to  proceed,  and  Tlmrlow,  after  a
long  interview  with  the  King,  satisfied  himself  that  the  report
was  correct.  On  the  19th  he  announced  in  the  House  of  Lords
that  the  physicians  had  declared  the  King  to  be  convalescent,
and  he  proposed  an  adjournment.  It  would  be  impossible
under  these  circumstances  to  press  forward  the  Regency  Bill,

•  Lifeof  Sir  G.  Elliot,  i.  271,  27.^,  ^  Avcliland  CoTrespondevoe,u.2M.

274;  CorniraUin  CprreS2)ondence,\.  \'J>2.  *  Fox's  Coms^ondence,  ii.  302,

en.  xvni.  CONDUCT OF  THE  PEINX'ES.  147

but  a  few  days'  interval  was  desirable  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  the  recovery  was  fully  established.  On  the  23rd  the
Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Duke  of  York  were  at  length  permitted
to  visit  the  King,  but  only  in  the  presence  of  the  Queen,  and  no
political  conversation  was  allowed.  On  the  27th  recovery  was
so  complete  that  the  bulletins  were  discontinued,  and  at  last,  on
March  10,  1789,  the  session  was  formally  opened  by  a  speech
from  the  throne,  delivered  by  commission,  announcing  that  tlae
King  had  resumed  his  authority.

The  conduct  of  the  Prince  of  "Wales  and  of  the  Duke  of
York  during  this  crisis  excited  unbounded  reprobation,  and  it
appears  to  have  been  in  some  respects  very  scandalous,  though
I  think  that  the  accounts  of  it  which  are  found  in  the  letters  on
the  ministerial  side  should  be  received  with  considerable  scep-
ticism. It  was  noticed  that  no  other  political  contest  of  the
generation  had  produced  such  fierce  animosities  or  had  so  largely
affected  and  divided  social  intercourse,^  and  many  of  the  charges
against  the  Princes  were  of  the  nature  of  social  gossip,  which,
under  such  circumstances,  is  tolerably  sure  to  be  either  untrue
or  over-coloured.  In  the  first  stage  of  the  King's  illness  there
does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  just  ground  for  censuring
their  conduct.  They  went  to  Windsor ;  they  did  not  leave  the
palace  during  the  King's  residence  there  for  a  single  day,  and
there  is  no  sufficient  reason  to  believe  that  they  in  any  respect
neglected  him.^ Their  relations  with  the  Queen  were  already

'  Lord  Sidney  wrote  to  Corn wallis:  cation of the  Prince drawn up  by

•We  have  seen  no  times  when  it  has  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot— Fox's Correspon-

been  so  necessary  to  separate  parties  dence, ii. 308-338. In a private

in  private  company. The  acrimony  letter  Elliot  says:  'The  Prince  is,  I

is  beyond  anything  you  can  conceive.  suspect,  pretty  sick  of  his  long  con-

The  ladies  are  as  usual  at  the  head  of  finement  at  Windsor,  and  it  is  very

all  animosity,  and  are  distinguished  natural  he  should  be  so,  for,  besides

by caps, ribands, and other such  the  scene  before him,  he  has  been

ensigns  of party.' — Cornwallis  Cor-  under  greater  restraint  in  his  beha-

respondence,  i.  406. General Grant,  viour  and  way of  life  tlian he  has

describing the beginning of the  ever  known since he was his  own

King's  illness,  says  : '  Reports  varied  master. His  residence, however,  at

by  the  hour ;  party  ran  higher  than  Windsor  has  been  useful  in several

was  ever  seen  or  heard  of  ;  it  would  ways.  ...  It  has  given  a  favourable

hardly  have  been  safe— certainly  not  impression  of  the  Prince's  attention

pleasant — to  bring  men  of  different  to  his  father,  and  has  also  prevented

sides  to  meet  at  dinners  at  a  third  him  from  breaking  out  into  any  un-

place,  if such  a  neutral  place  could  seasonable  indulgence  of his  spirits

have  been  found  in  London.' — Ibid.  before  the  public,  which  misrht  have

431.  happened  if  he  had  residtd  in  Lon-

^  See  the  masterly  paper  in  vindi-  don. The  Duke  of York  has  been

•L  2

148  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGIITEEXTH CENTURY. en.  xviii.

far  from  cordial,  and  there  was  a  dispute  on  a  question  relating
to  the  King's  private  property  ;  but  the  conduct  of  the  Prince  of
Wales  was  sanctioned  by  the  Chancellor,  and  it  does  not  appear
to  have  been  at  all  indefensible.  The  removal  of  the  King  to
Kew  took  place  at  the  request  of  the  physicians  and  by  the
authority  of  a  Cabinet  Council,  and  from  this  time  the  care  of
the  King's  person  passed  wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  Queen.
On  the  question  of  the  regency,  the  Prince  of  Wales  cannot  be
truly  said  to  have  acted  with  impatience  or  to  have  prematurely
put  forward  his  claims.  There  were  not  wanting  counsellors
who  urged  him  to  do  so,  but  for  some  time  he  remained  per-
fectly passive.  Fox's  assertion  of  the  Prince's  right  to  the
regency  was  entirely  unprompted,  and  the  Duke  of  York  was
speedily  authorised  to  declare  in  the  House  of  Lords  that  the
Prince  of  Wales  had  no  wish  or  intention  to  put  forward  any
claim  of  right,  and  that  the  Eang's  sons  and  the  King's  brother
earnestly  desired  that  no  such  question  should  be  raised.  The
conduct  of  Pitt  towards  the  Prince,  on  the  other  hand,  was  from
the  first  as  haughty  and  unconciliatory  as  possible.  It  was
gaid — and  surely  with  some  reason — that  under  the  circum-
stances of  the  case  the  Prince  of  Wales  ought  to  have  been  con-
sulted about  the  intended  measure,  but  no  kind  of  confidence
was  given  to  him.  He  first  learnt  by  a  summons  from  the  minis-
ters that  the  Privy  Council  had  been  convened  to  examine  the
physicians  about  the  state  of  his  father's  health,  and  the  outlines
of  the  regency  plan  werfe  announced  to  Parliament  before  any
communication  had  been  made  about  them  to  the  Prince.  In
defiance  of  his  expressed  wish,  Pitt  insisted  on  bringing  the
question  of  the  Prince's  right  to  a  formal  issue,  and  obtaining  a

cniistantly  wilh  him,  and  tliey  liave  residence. On the other hand, I

bfith  conducted  tliomselvcs  in  u  most  have  already  quoted  Grenville's  story

e.xuinplary way.' — JJ/e of Sir G.  about the introduciion of Lord

ELlAot,  i.  2:59,  240. Mr.  Storer  wrote  liOthian into the Kind's chamber,

to  Eden,  Nov. H: 'It  is  universally  In 1790  Walter,  the  founder  of  the

a^ieed  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  has  Times, was imprisoned for sixteen

conducted himself with gntat pro-  months  for libelling the Prince  of

piif.ty.' — Ai(clil.tni(l Carres, ii. 212;  Wales  and  the  Duke  of  York — one  of

and Lord Sliellield wrote  : '  The  his  statements  being that  the  Duke

Prince gains much credit by his  of York had entered the King's

cnduct  at Windsor.' — Ibid.  ii.  244.  chamber and purposely disturbed

There  i.s nothing I think in Miss  him during his illness  ;  and Mrs.

Burney's Diarij inconsistent with  JJ;ircourt  asserts  that  this  statement

this,  and  Miss  IJnriiey  was  at  Wind-  was  perfectly  true.' — Mrs.  llarcourt's

bor all the time of the Prince's  Diary,  p.  47

en.  XVIII.  CONDUCT OF THE PRINCES.  149

vote  denying  it.  He  declared  before  Parliament  that  the  Prince
of  Wales  had  no  more  right  to  the  regency  during  his  father's
incapacity  than  any  other  subject,  and  a  number  of  restrictions
were  introduced  which  plainly  indicated  the  distrust  and  hostility
with  which  he  was  regarded.

Under  these  circumstances,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  surpris-
ing that  the  Prince  of  Wales  should  have  been  drawn  into  a
more  distinctly  political  attitude,  and  if  he  had  conducted  him-
self with  decorum  and  dignity  I  do  not  think  that  he  would
have  been  seriously  blamed.  But  no  sooner  had  he  been
released  from  the  restraint  of  his  attendance  at  Windsor  than
he  relapsed  into  his  old  habits.  Living  among  the  most  dissi-
pated members  of  the  Opposition,  spending  his  nights  in  drink-
ing, singing,  and  gambling,  at  a  period  which  demanded  the
strictest  retirement,  openly  attending  meetings  of  the  Opposi-
tion and  exhibiting  his  partisanship  without  a  shadow  of  dis-
guise, he  left,  in  the  words  of  General  Grenville,  '  an  impression
on  all  sober-minded  men'  that  could  never  be  effaced.'  It  may
not  be  true,  as  was  stated  in  Government  circles,  that  he  exer-
cised his  talents  of  mimicry  at  Brooks's  in  imitating  the  frenzy
of  his  father,  but  it  is  certain  that  a  considerable  section  of
Whig  society  dreaded  nothing  so  much  as  the  King's  recovery,
and  that  these  men  were  the  intimate  associates  of  the  King's  son.
The  Duke  of  York,  who  was  the  favourite  son  of  the  King,  was
completely  governed  by  the  influence  and  example  of  his  brother.
Their  conduct  when  the  King  was  recovering  seemed  equally
bad.  '  The  truth  is,'  wrote  Lord  Bulkeley,  '  that  they  ai-e  quite
desperate,  and  drown  their  cares,  disappointments,  and  internal
chagrin  in  wine  and  dissipation.'^  Grenville,  writing  confi-
dentially to  his  brother,  mentions  that  the  Princes  kept  the
King  waiting  for  a  considerable  time  on  the  occasion  of  their
very  first  interview  with  him  after  his  recovery ;  that  they  drove
direct  from  that  intex'view  to  the  house  of  Mrs.  Armistead  to
communicate  their  impressions  to  Fox ;  and  that  they  '  amused
themselves '  that  very  evening  '  with  spreading  about  a  report

• CorvwalUs Correspondence, i.  quotations from Mrs. Harcou.rt's

404. Numerous  allusions  to  ihe  con-  'Diaiy '  in  Jlassey's  Hist,  of  Gen.  III. ;

duct  of  the  Prince  will  be  found  in  and  in  Wraxall's  PosMw?«o«,<  J/^/«ot>,<:.

the  letters  in  the  Courts  and  Cahinets  -  Courts  aiicl  Cabinets  of  Geo.  III.

(f  Geo.  III.; in  the  Aiirldand  and  ii.  122,  123.
Cornwallis Correspondence  ; in the

150  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTH CENTL'RY. ch.  xvm.

that  the  Kiug  was  still  out  of  his  mind,  and  quoting  phrases  of
his  to  which  they  gave  that  turn.'  ^

The  King  had  received  his  sons  on  the  23rd  with  cordiality
and  apparent  aflfection,  but  the  aniraosity  which  divided  the
royal  family  was  intense.  The  Princes  were  constantly  refused
private  interviews  with  the  King,  though  several  other  persons
enjoyed  the  favour.  The  King  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Duke  of
Clarence  censuring  their  conduct,  and  when  a  concert  was
given  at  Windsor  after  the  recovery,  the  Queen  sent  a  mes-
senger to  inform  them  that  though  they  might  come  if  they
pleased,  it  was  right  that  they  should  know  that  the  entertain-
ment was  intended  for  those  who  had  supported  the  King  and
Queen  on  the  late  occasion.  In  May,  some  insulting  words
used  by  the  Duke  of  York  to  Colonel  Lennox  led  to  a  duel,
in  which  the  Duke  very  narrowly  escaped,  the  bullet  of  his
adversary  having  actually  carried  away  one  of  his  curls.  It
was  observed  that  the  challenge  to  the  Duke  was  carried  by
Lord  Winchilsea,  who  was  a  lord  of  the  bedchamber  and  who
still  retained  his  post ;  that  the  Queen,  on  hearing  of  the  escape
of  her  son,  did  not  utter  a  single  word  of  interest  or  affection ;
and  that  she  immediately  after  singled  out  his  opponent  for  her
special  attention.  A  long  memorial,  vindicating  the  conduct  of
the  Prince  of  Wales,  was  drawn  up  by  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  and
laid  in  the  Prince's  name  before  the  King,  and  it  was  intended

'  Cint/rU  and  CaHvefsof  Geo.  ITI.,  them  he  was  the  Chancellor. This

ii.  126.  Grenvilleadds: 'Itiscertfiinlya  circuiriNtaiice,  however,  is  not  to  be

decent  and  becoming  thing  that  when  mentioned  lor  the  reasons  just  given.'

all  the  King's  phy-sicians,  all  his  atten-  — Lnfc  of  Sir  G.  J'Muit,\.  215. Elliot

dants,  and  his  two  principal  ministers  subsequently mentions the  childish

agree  in  pronouncing  him  well,  his  two  and  unnatural  manner  of  the  King  at

sons  should  deny  it.  ...  I  bless  God  it  two  later  interviews  with  the  Duke

is  yet  some  time  before  \\\e\rviatnrcd  of  York. — Ibid.  277,  278. Lord  Raw-

and riiicncd virtues  will be  visited  don,  writing  on  February 28, says:

upon  us  in  the  f(jrm  of  a  government.'  '  It  is  acknowledged  that  the  King

Sir  G.  Elliot, on  the  other  hand,  after  could not, without incurring  great

di-scril)ing  to  his  wife  the  intcn-view  danger  of  relapse,  for  a  considerable

of  the  2:jrd.  says:  *  The  King's  mind  time  ajjply  himself  to  business,  even

is  totally  subdued  and  in  a  state  of  supposing  his  present  recovery  to  be

the greatest weakness and subjeo-  as  complete  as  is  asserted, and,  to

ti'in. It  is  given out  even  by  the  speak  truly,  I  am  very  doubtful  of  it.

rrincc's friends that  they  observed  Tliat  his  mind  is  at  present  tranquil

nothing  wrong  or  irratif)nal  in  tlieir  and  clear  upon ordinary  subjects  is

vi.sit, and it is material that they  without  dispute ;  but  tlie  suspicion  is

should  not  be  thou;^iit  to  publisli  the  tliat  there  are  certain  strings  wliicli

contrary. It is not entiiely true,  will,  whenever  they  are  touched,  pro-

bowever,  as  the  King  made  several  duce  false  music  again.' — CoviiwaHls

blips,  one  of  which was  thai  lie  told  Corrrsjxmdencc,  i.  '108.

CH.  xviii.  THE OPPOSITION DISCREDITED.  151

to  accompany  it  by  a  letter  composed  by  Burke,  wliicli  was  a
bitter  indictment  against  the  conduct  of  the  Queen.  By  the
advice  of  some  of  the  Whig  leaders  this  letter  was  suppressed.'
The  Opposition,  like  the  Prince  of  Wales,  suffered  greatly
in  the  public  estimation  during  the  crisis  that  has  been  related.
In  the  mere  matter  of  party  management  their  inferiority  was
very  marked.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  delays  that  were  pro-
duced by  the  discussion  on  the  claim  of  rights  and  by  the
additional  and  prolonged  examination  of  the  physicians  on
wiiich  the  Opposition  had  insisted,  the  regency  would  certainly
have  been  established  before  the  recovery  of  the  King.  With-
out any  necessity  or  any  advantage,  Fox  had  raised  a  question
of  abstract  right  which  weakened  him  in  every  stage  of  the
discussion  and  turned  the  whole  stream  of  popular  feeling
against  his  party.  The  recovery  of  the  King  blasted  his  hopes
of  power,  but  it  is  not  imjDrobable  that  it  saved  his  party  from  a
still  lower  depth  of  degradation.  It  was  universally  acknow-
ledged that  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  determined  to  dismiss
an  Administration  which  commanded  great  majorities  in  both
Houses,  which  had  of  late  suffered  no  single  defeat,  and  which
was  almost  certainly  as  popular  in  the  country  as  in  Parliament.
After  the  reforms  of  the  last  few  years,  which  had  made
Parliament  a  real  representative  of  public  feeling,  such  an
attempt  could  have  led  to  nothing  but  disaster  and  disgrace.
The  Whig  leaders  in  accepting  oflSce  would  have  shown  them-
selves instigators  and  accomplices  in  a  proceeding  which  was
grossly  unconstitutional,  and  they  could  have  scarcely  hoped  to
retain  their  power  except  by  means  that  would  have  been
ruinous  to  their  characters.  Their  manifest  readiness  to  accept
office  to  the  very  last,  and  at  a  time  when  the  King  was  rapidly

'  See Fox's Correspon>lenee, ii.  lected  to  pen  the  demand. When  lie

.S07-355. Croker  Pajjer^,  i.  289,  2!)0.  was  writing  the  letter  in  the  Duke's

'One day last week.' writes Mr.  presence  he  stopped,  and  looking  np

Croker, 'talking  with the  Duke  of  at  H.R.H.  said,  in his Irish accent

Clarence about Mr. Burke's mani-  and  quick  manner,  "  I  vow  to  God,

festo against the Queen after the  sir,  1  wish that instead  of writing

regency, . . .  H.R.H. said that  so  letters of this  kind you would  go

much  violence  was  a  little  inconsis-  every morning and breakfast with

tent  with  Mr.  B.'s  conduct  in  a  parti-  your  father  and  mother. It  is  not

cular  that  regarded  himself  (the  D.  decent  for  any  family,  but  above  all

of  C.)  about  the  same  lime. H.R  H.  the  royal  family,  to be  at  variance

was  advised  to  appl}- for  an  increased  as  vou  all unhappilj-  are."' — Croker

allowance,  and Mr. Burke was se-  I'avcrs,  i.  405.

152  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xvni.

recovering,  was  never  forgiven.  Irritation  at  tlie  kind  of  pro-
scription under  which  they  had  been  suffering,  and  a  strong
disbelief  in  the  reality  of  the  King's  recovery,  entered  largely
into  their  motives,  but  the  public  attributed  their  conduct  to
the  recklessness  of  desperate  gamblers,  to  a  desire  to  obtain  the
emoluments  of  office  for  themselves  and  their  followers,  to  an
unworthy  animosity,  and  to  a  determination  to  deepen  the
chasm  between  Pitt  and  the  Prince  of  Wales.

It  is  strange  to  think  how  easily  at  this  time  the  attitudes  of
parties  might  have  been  not  merely  changed  but  inverted.  If
the  Opposition  had  obtained  office,  and  if  the  King  had  either
died  or  become  permanently  insane,  we  might  have  found  Fox
attempting  to  maintain  his  power  mainly  by  borough  influence
and  by  the  influence  and  prerogative  of  the  Crown,  in  opposi-
tion to  the  genuine  course  of  public  opinion,  while  Pitt  might
have  stormed  the  Cabinet  as  the  most  brilliant  and  formidable
champion  of  popular  rights.  Nor  would  Pitt  in  assuming  such
an  attitude  have  been  in  any  degree  inconsistent  with  his  past.
To  the  end  of  his  life  he  was  accustomed  among  his  friends  to
call  himself  a  Whig,  and  up  to  the  period  of  which  I  am  now
writing  he  had  done  nothing  to  forfeit  his  title  to  the  name.

Fortune  had  been  very  kind  to  him  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,
the  extraordinary  skill  and  courage  with  which  he  had  conducted
his  party  through  this  difficult  crisis  was  universally  admitted,
and  nothing  seemed  wanting  to  his  triumph.  Vast  as  had  been
the  hopes,  splendid  as  had  been  the  popularity  that  had  sur-
rounded the  dawn  of  his  ministry,  there  were  as  yet  no  signs  of
failing  or  of  eclipse,  and  after  five  years  of  office  he  was  at  least
as  strong  as  at  the  beginning.  He  was  strong,  with  all  the
elements  of  political  power — the  confidence  of  the  great  trading
classes,  the  enthusiastic  devotion  of  the  populace,  the  favour
of  the  King,  assured  and  compact  majorities  in  both  Houses,  an
Opposition  more  than  ever  broken  and  discredited.  His  par-
liamentary eloquence  had  taken  a  maturer  tone.  His  experience
liud  been  enlarged,  and  there  was  as  yet  no  evidence  that  power
or  popularity  had  aflected  the  sobriety  or  the  justice  of  his
jiidgUKUit.  The  King,  at  the  first  dawn  of  his  recovery,  had
formed  a  prejudice  against  liini,  and  lio  blainod  the  ministry
fur  the  introduction  of  a  Regoncy  Bill,  but  the  ini[)i-essiou  soon

en.  XVIII.  POPULARITY OF TEE KING.  153

wore  off  under  tlie  influence  of  Dr.  Willis.'  He  wrote  to  Pitt
in  a  strain  of  genuine  and  dignified  gratitude,  and  he  expressed
Lis  hope  in  one  of  his  earliest  interviews  with  him,  that '  they
were  now  united  for  the  rest  of  his  life,  and  that  nothing  but
death  should  separate  them.'  ^

The  popularity  of  the  King  himself  was  unbounded.  All
the  clouds  that  gathered  round  him  during  the  period  of  the
influence  of  Bute  and  during  the  disaster's  of  the  American  War
had  passed  away,  and  it  was  impossible  to  mistake  the  earnest-
ness or  the  spontaneity  of  the  manifestations  with  which  he
was  welcomed  on  his  recovery.  On  the  evening  of  the  day  on
which  he  resumed  his  government,  illuminations,  unprompted
by  the  Government  or  by  the  authorities,  extended  from
liampstead  and  Highgate  to  Clapham,  and  even  as  far  as
Tooting,  and  over  the  whole  distance  between  Greenwich  and
Kensington;  and  it  was  especially  noticed  that  the  poorest
cottages,  the  humblest  stalls,  contributed  their  farthing  candles
to  the  blaze.  Similar  scenes  were  resumed  six  weeks  later,
when  the  King  went  in  state  to  St.  Paul's  to  return  thanks  for
liis  recovery;  and  they  extended  to  almost  every  town  and
village  in  the  kingdom.  It  is  probable  that  no  English  sove-
reign since  the  first  days  of  the  Restoration  had  enjoyed  such  a
genuine,  unforced  popularity,  and  it  is  certain  that  no  other
sovereign  of  the  House  of  Brunswick  had  ever  approached  it.

>  Mrs.  Harcourt's  Diary,  pp.  6,  11,  12,  14,  24,  25.
2  Ibid.  p.  17.

154  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.

CHAPTER  XIX.

The  period  of  tlie  King's  recovery  has  been  described,  probably
with  truth,  as  that  in  which  the  fortunes  of  Pitt  attained  their
acme.  There  was  indeed  a  later  period  when  his  opponents
became  much  fewer  than  in  1789,  but  the  horizon  was  then
thickly  overcast  with  foreign  dangers ;  the  extreme  hopefulness
which  characterised  the  early  years  of  the  Administration  had
passed  away,  and  admitted  failures  and  popular  discontent
threw  dark  shadows  over  the  prospect.  Less  than  four  years
had  to  run  their  course  before  the  great  French  AVar  broke  upon
England,  and  for  some  time  before  that  event  the  proceedings
in  France  had  produced  a  general  indisposition  to  reform.  Yet
in  these  years  something  of  importance  was  done,  and  some
great  questions  were  at  least  raised  which  it  shall  be  the  object
of  this  chapter  to  examine.

Several  years  had  elapsed,  during  which  no  questions  re-
lating to  religious  liberty  had  been  brought  before  Parliament.
I  have  shown,  in  former  volumes  of  this  work,  the  slow  but
steady  progress  which  had  been  made  towards  the  abolition  of
the  chief  grievances  of  the  Protestant  Dissenters  and  of  the
Catholics  ;  and  the  spirit  of  the  time,  and  especially  the  prevail-
ing tone  of  the  law  courts,  did  much  to  discourage  any  attempts
to  enforce  such  remnants  of  intolerance  as  remained.  But  the
grievance  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,  though  much  miti-
gated by  the  Annual  Indemnity  Acts,  was  still  felt  by  the  Pro-
testant Dissenters,  and  at  a  meeting  held  in  London,  in  the
beginning  of  1787,  the  deputies  of  the  three  great  denominations
— the  Presbyterians,  Independents,  and  Baptists — agreed  to
bring  it  again  before  Parliament.  Their  claim  had  been  con-
siderably strenglhfuiod  by  the  repeal  of  the  Test  Act  in  Ireland
in 177I*,  ;i)i(l  al.-io  by  the  warm  support  wliirli  they  had  given to

CH.  XIX.  TEST AND CORPORATION ACTS.  153

I*itt  in  the  critical  election  of  1784,  and  tliey  wisely  entrusted
their  cause  to  Mr.  Beaufoy,  a  member  of  the  Church  of  England
and  a  steady  supporter  of  the  ministry.  He  brought  it  before
Parliament  in  speeches  of  remarkable  ability  in  1787  and  1789.
Having  recounted  the  well-known  history  of  the  Acts  that  were
complained  of,  having  dilated  upon  the  acknowledged,  un-
varying and  zealous  attachment  which  from  the  time  of  the
Revolution  the  Dissenters  had  shown  to  the  dynasty  and
the  Constitution,  he  proceeded  to  give  a  startling  account  of  the
disabilities  and  penalties  to  which,  by  the  strict  letter  of  the
law,  they  were  still  liable.  They  could  hold  no  commission  in
the  army  or  navy,  no  civil  office,  no  seat  in  a  corporation,  no
corporate  office ;  they  could  not  take  part  in  the  direction  of
the  Bank  of  England,  of  the  Indian,  or  Russian,  or  South  Sen,
or  Turkish  companies  though  their  whole  fortune  might  be
invested  in  these  stocks.  Any  Dissenter  convicted  of  havin<j-
accepted  any  of  these  offices,  who  still  refused  to  qualify  by
taking  the  Anglican  sacrament,  was  not  only  liable  to  a  heavy
fine,  with  the  alternative  of  imprisonment,  but  was  also,  like
the  worst  of  criminals,  placed  almost  beyond  the  protection  of
the  law.  He  was  disabled  for  the  rest  of  his  life  from  brina-ino-
any  action  in  law,  from  prosecuting  any  suit  in  any  court  of
equity,  from  being  guardian  to  any  child,  from  being  an
executor,  from  receiving  a  legacy.  In  1745,  when  the  enemy
was  marching  into  the  heart  of  England,  and  when  the  Govern-
ment was  in  the  utmost  danger,  a  great  body  of  Protestant
Dissenters  took  arms  for  its  defence.  Their  reward  was  a
special  Act  of  Grace  pardoning  them  for  the  offence  they  had
committed.

It  was  true  that  these  laws  were  in  some  respects  constantly
violated,  and  that  Annual  Acts  of  Indemnity  were  passed  to
shelter  those  who  violated  them  ;  but  Beaufoy  was  able  to  show
that  these  Acts  were  far  from  being  a  complete  and  effectual
protection  to  men  who  had  accepted  office,  and  who  were  deter-
mined at  no  time  to  take  the  Anglican  sacrament.  It  was  pre-
tended that  these  penalties  wei-e  necessary  for  the  protection
of  the  Established  Church.  But  no  such  protection  for  the
Established  Church  existed  either  in  Scotland  or  Ireland.  The
Roman  Catholic,  whose  hostility  to  all  Protestant  Churches,  and

156 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cm.  xix.

the  Quaker,  whose  hostility  to  all  religious  establishments,
might  be  justly  feared,  were  already  excluded  from  power  and
office  by  the  oaths  of  supremacy  and  allegiance.  The  other
Dissenters  were  few,  diminishing,  and,  for  the  most  part,  sin-
gularly uufanatical ;  and  by  a  strange  fatuity  the  Legislature,
which  pronounced  it  dangerous  to  allow  them  to  be  tide-waiters,
or  directors  of  the  Turkish  company,  allowed  them  to  sit  in
Parliament  and  to  exercise  the  franchise.

Turning  to  another  aspect  of  the  subject,  Beaufoy  expatiated
with  great  force  and  eloquence  on  the  extreme  profanity  of  these
laws.  They  did  not,  it  is  true,  stand  alone.  The  Legislature,  by
its  reckless  and  lavish  multiplication  of  oaths,  '  by  compelling
every  petty  officer  of  the  revenue  and  every  collector  of  turnpike
tolls  to  swear  deeply  on  his  admission  into  office,  has  made  the
crime  of  perjury  more  frequent  than  it  ever  before  was  in  any
age  or  country.'  In  the  Sacramental  Test,  however,  there  was
a  profanity  which  was  almost  worse  than  perjury,  'The
Saviour  of  the  world  instituted  the  Eucharist  in  commemora-
tion of  His  death — an  event  so  tremendous  that  afflicted  Nature
hid  herself  in  darkness ;  but  the  British  Legislature  has  made
it  a  qualification  for  gauging  beer-barrels  and  soapboilers'  tubs,
for  writing  Custom  House  dockets  and  debentures,  and  for
seizing  smuggled  tea.'  History  furnishes  no  other  example  of
the  Legislature  of  a  country  deliberately,  and  by  express  enact-
ment, prostituting  the  most  sacred  ordinance  of  their  own  faith,
converting  the  temple  into  an  antechamber  to  the  excise  office,
degrading  the  altar  into  a  qualification  desk  for  tax-gatherers
and  public  extortioners,  and  pleading  as  a  reason  for  this  impious
defilement  the  interests  of  the  Church.  How  could  a  clergyman
be  expected  to  fulfil  his  duty  of  rej(;cting  from  the  sacred  table
open  ill-livers,  if  thoy  came  only  to  fulfil  a  legal  obligation,  to
qualify  for  offices  which  they  had  received  from  the  Crown?
As  a  matter  of  fact  such  men  were  never  rejected ;  were  it  other-
wise an  action  for  damages  would  ensue.  Nor  is  it  surprising
that  the  most  conscientious  clergyman  should  shrink  from  the
responsibility  that  was  imposed  on  him.  '  Our  fleet  is  prepar-
ing to  Kfiil ;  the  enemy  is  already  in  the  Channel ;  the  officer
a])pointcd  as  our  admiral  is  a  man  of  the  highest  professional
merit,  and is called to  the  coniniand  by  the  general  voice  of

en.  XIX.  DEBATE ON THEIR  EEPEAL.  157

the  people.  Debauclied,  however,  in  private  life,  living  in
avowed  fornication,  and  notoriously  profane,  he  approaches  the
holy  table.  If  the  sacrament  be  administered  to  him,  in  what
situation  is  the  clergyman  ?  If  it  be  refused,  in  what  situation
is  the  kingdom  ?  '

The  motion  for  the  repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts
at  once  divided  the  chiefs  of  the  Opposition.  North,  who  was
now  nearly  blind,  and  very  infirm,  came  down  to  oppose  it,  and
on  both  occasions  h©  spoke  against  it  with  a  strong  accent  of
sincerity.  The  principle  he  maintained,  that  all  offices  of  power
should  be  entrusted  to  men  who  either  belonged  to  or  were,  at
least,  not  actively  hostile  to  the  Established  Church,  is  essential
to  its  security,  and  an  Established  Church  is  an  essential  part
of  the  British  Constitution.  When  James  II.  conspired  against
the  religion  and  liberty  of  the  English  people,  he  did  so  chiefly
by  introducing  into  oSice  men  who  were  hostile  to  both ;  and
the  Test  Act  contributed  largely  to  his  defeat.  In  absolute
monarchies,  like  France  or  Prussia,  where  the  sovereign  may  at
any  moment  remove  officials,  it  may  perhaps  be  safe  to  promote
men  who  are  not  in  harmony  with  the  dominant  religion ;  but
in  a  limited  monarchy  such  promotions  will  always  be  dangerous
to  the  Church.  Fox,  on  the  other  hand,  while  reproaching  the  Dis-
senters with  having,  in  the  election  of  1784,  abandoned  the  prin-
ciples of  liberty,  strongly  and  eloquently  supported  their  claim.
He  had  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  the  existing  legislation
amounted  to  a  penalty,  and  a  very  serious  penalty,  imposed  on  a
particular  class  for  their  conscientious  adherence  to  their  religion,
and  that  this  class  was  in  morals  one  of  the  most  respectable,  in
political  antecedents  one  of  the  most  meritorious  in  England.

Speaking  of  the  alleged  dangers  to  the  Church,  he  said  that,
in  his  opinion,  every  country  should  have  an  Established  Church,
and  that  Church  ought  to  be  the  Church  of  the  bulk  of  the
people.  The  establishment  of  the  Kirk  in  Scotland  and  of
Episcopalianism  in  England  rested  on  this  firm  foundation.  It
was  very  unlikely  that  anything  but  a  great  change  of  opinions
could  shake  them,  and  '  if  the  majority  of  the  people  of  England
should  ever  be  for  the  abolition  of  the  Established  Church,  in
such  a  case  the  abolition  ought  immediately  to  follow.'

The  issue  of  the  contest  depended  mainly  on  the  attitude

]o8 ENGLAKD  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. rn.  xtx.

of  Pitt.  Personally  lie  liad  not  the  smallest  antipathy  to
Dissenters,  or  the  faintest  leaning  towards  intolerance;  but
he  was  not  prepared  to  enter  into  a  serious  conflict  with  the
Church  for  the  purpose  of  removing  disqualifications  that  were
of  little  practical  importance.  He  requested  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury  to  collect  the  opinions  of  the  bishops,  and  at  a  meeting
held  at  the  house  of  the  archbishop  the  maintenance  of  the  Acts
■was  voted  by  ten  to  two."  Pitt  dete:*mined  therefore  to  throw
out  the  motion  of  Beaufoy,  but  he  did  not  attempt  to  answer  all
his  arguments,  and  his  speeches  were  of  a  kind  that  left  it  fully
open  to  him,  on  another  occasion,  to  change  his  course.  He
entirely  agreed,  he  said,  that  religious  opinions  should  never  be
restrained  or  limited  by  law,  unless  they  were  likely  to  prove  a
source  of  civil  inconvenience.  He  warmly  eulogised  the  Dis-
senters, but  denied  that  the  Acts  that  were  complained  of  were
of  the  nature  of  a  stigma  or  a  penalty.  In  all  societies  and
constitutions  there  must  be  some  restriction  of  right,  some
mode  of  qualification  ;  and  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  govern-
ments should  retain  a  discretionary  power  of  excluding  from
offices  of  trust  and  influence  men  who,  though  personally  in  the
highest  degree  respectable,  are  on  principle  opposed  to  the
ecclesiastical  side  of  the  Constitution.  The  object  of  the
Sacramental  Test  was  not  to  make  the  oflaces  to  which  it
applied  exclusively  tenable  by  Churchmen,  nor  had  it  that
effect.  It  was  only  to  make  it  possible  to  exclude  the  compara-
tively small  section  of  Nonconformists,  who  thought  so  ill  of
the  Church,  and  were  so  disaffected  to  it,  that  they  refused  to
communicate  with  it.^  '  The  alliance  of  the  Church  and  State
is  founded  on  expediency ;  this  restriction  is  the  price  which
the  State  pays  the  Church  for  it,'  and  its  removal  would  cer-
1,'iiiily  alarm  a  large  and  respectable  section  of  the  community.
All  over  Europe  the  animosities  and  passions  that  spring  from
religious  differences  are  subsiding,  and  in  England  there  is
now  a  ha])py  quiet.  But  no  policy  is  so  likely  to  interrupt  it
as  one  which  would  revive  the  coiii])etition  of  sects,  and  thus
rekindle  the  smouldering  embers  of  their  ancient  virulence.

There  was  little in  these  speeches  to  discourage  the  Dis-
senters; and  while  Beaufoy  was defeated  in  1787  by  178  to

' Wivl.son's  Avccdiiti^  nf  lus  Own  Time.  -  I'arl.  Jlint.  xxix.  .'jOO.

CH.  XIX.  SPEECH OF BURKE.  1.59

100,  in  1789  he  was  only  defeated  by  122  to  102.  If  events
had  gone  on  in  their  accustomed  course,  it  is  probable  tliat  the
Test  Act  would  have  been  speedily  abolished;  but  the  French
Eevolution,  and  the  wholesale  confiscation  of  Church  property,
which  was  one  of  its  first  incidents,  produced  an  immediate  and
a  most  powerful  reaction.  In  1790  the  question  was  again  in-
troduced, and  this  time  the  Dissenters,  not  very  judiciously,
entrusted  their  motion  to  Fox,  and  thus  gave  it  a  more  distinctly
party  complexion.  Fox  spoke  with  his  accustomed  eloquence
and  force,  and  was  powerfully  supported  by  Beaufoy ;  but  it  was
evident  that  the  conditions  of  the  debate  had  changed.  The
language  of  Pitt  was  now  that  of  decided  and  uncompromising-
hostility.  There  were  constant  allusions  to  what  was  passing
in  France,  and  the  spirit  of  the  House  was  manifestly  hostile
to  the  Dissenters.

The  debate  was  especially  remarkable  for  a  speech  of  Burke,
which  discloses  very  clearly  the  manner  in  which  events  in
France  were  influencing  his  mind.  The  profanation  of  the
sacrament  by  employing  it  as  a  political  test,  which  appears  to
have  been  viewed  with  perfect  equanimity  by  the  bishops  and
clergy,  struck  Burke  as  forcibly  as  Beaufoy,  and  he  proposed
another  form  of  test  as  a  substitute.  Of  the  Dissenters,  as
a  body,  he  spoke  temperately  and  generously.  On  the  ab-
stract question  of  religious  tests  he  refused  to  argue.  Abstract
principles  he  said  he  had  always  detested,  and,  above  all,
abstract  principles  of  natural  right  seemed  to  him  among
the  most  idle  and  useless  topics  that  could  be  introduced
into  political  discvission.  They  had  long  since  been  given
up,  when  men  for  their  mutual  benefit  formed  themselves
into  societies  and  consented  to  accept  the  restrictions  and  limi-
tations of  the  law.  The  real  and  sole  question  was,  whether
the  test  was  expedient  or  the  reverse.  Ten  years  ago  he  would
have  readily  voted  for  its  repeal.  In  1787  and  1789  he  had
left  the  House  when  the  question  was  agitated,  being  unable
to  take  any  settled  decision  ;  now  he  was  reluctantly  convinced
that  the  circumstances  were  such  that  a  test  must  be  main-
tained. He  showed  how  Priestley,  who  was  perhaps  the  chief
writer  of  the  Dissenters,  had  lately  expressed  his  detestation
of  the  Establishment and  his  determination  to  do  all  in  his

160  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

power  to  subvert  it;  how  Price,  wlio  was  tlie  most  popular
preaclier  of  tlie  Dissenters,  had  in  a  well-known  sermon  warmly
eulogised  the  recent  events  in  France ;  how  catechisms  had  been
published  and  circulated  by  authority  through  the  Dissenting
bodies,  breathing  the  strongest  hostility  to  the  Established
Church,  and  he  inferred  that  this  was  at  present  the  acknow-
ledged sentiment  of  their  leading  preachers.  No  proposition
appeared  to  him  more  clear  than  that  an  Established  Church
was  of  vital  importance  to  England,  and  he  believed  that  at  the
present  time  there  were  strong  and  warrantable  grounds  for
serious  apprehension  for  its  safety.  Only  two  years  ago,  what
hierarchy  in  Europe  seemed  safer  or  more  powerful  than  that
of  France,  and  where  was  it  now  ?

The  weight  that  was  attached  to  these  considerations  was
clearly  shown  by  the  division.  Fox  was  defea,ted  by  no  less
than  294  to  105,  and  the  current  now  flowed  so  strongly  against
the  Dissenters  that  nearly  forty  years  Qlapsed  before  the  broad
question  of  the  repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts  was
again  agitated,  though  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  supporting  a  petition
of  the  Scotch  General  Assembly,  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt
in  1791  to  exempt  members  of  the  Scotch  Established  Church
from  the  provisions  of  the  former  Act.

A  similar  fate  attended  a  very  comprehensive  Toleration
Bill,  which  was  introduced  into  the  House  of  Lords  in  1789  by
Lord  Stanhope.  It  was  not  intended  to  affect  the  Test  and
Corporation  Acts,  and  Eoman  Catholics  were  expressly  excluded
from  its  operation ;  but  it  proposed  to  repeal  a  number  of  ancient
and,  for  the  most  part,  obsolete  laws,  which  were  plainly  incon-
sistent with  religious  liberty,  and  to  establish  the  principle  that
all  persons  except  papists,  who  were  excepted  on  account  of
tlieir  persecuting  and  dangerous  principles,  should  have  full
liberty  to  teach  and  exercise  their  religion,  and  by  speaking,
writing,  printing,  and  publishing  to  investigate  religious  sub-
jects. In  introducing  it.  Lord  Stanhope  gave  an  extremely
curious  account  of  the  persecuting  laws,  that  still  remained  on
the  Statute-book.  The  laws  wliich  he  especially  desired  to
repeal  were  those  making  attendance  at  Divine  service  com-
pulsory. By  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  every  person  who,  without
reasonable and hiwful cause,  did not  .'iftcnd  (•Iiiirch,  Ijolh  on

cir.  XIX.  STANHOPE'S TOLKRATION EILL.  161

Sundays  and  holy  days,  might  be  fined  one  shilling  for  each
occasion  on  which  he  was  absent.  By  another  law  of  Elizabeth
the  fine  was  raised  to  201.  a  month.  By  a  third  law,  any  person
who  obstinately  refused  to  go  to  church  was  to  be  committed  to
gaol  till  he  conformed ;  but  if  after  three  months  he  persisted  in
his  refusal  he  was  to  be  banished  from  the  realm,  his  property
was  to  be  confiscated,  and  he  was  liable  to  death  if  he  returned.
Under  James  I.  it  was  provided  that  the  fine  of  20/.  might  be
refused ;  that  two-thirds  of  the  lands  of  the  offender  miglit  be
taken  instead ;  that  every  householder  was  liable  to  a  fine  of
10/.  a  month  for  every  servant,  visitor,  or  visitor's  servant  who
abstained  from  church,  and  that  informations,  suits,  or  actions
against  those  who  did  not  attend  church  might  be  laid  in  any
county  and  at  the  pleasure  of  any  informer.  The  Toleration  Act
had  indeed  relieved  Protestant  Dissenters  who  believed  in  the
Trinity  from  these  penalties,  by  authorising  their  places  of  wor-
ship, but  it  did  not  include  those  who  rejected  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity,  and  it  left  those  who  from  conscientious  reasons,  or
from  taste,  abstained  from  attending  any  form  of  public  worship
liable  to  all  the  ancient  j)enalties.

In  addition  to  these  laws,  there  were  several  others  which
Stanhope  desired  to  repeal.  The  laws  of  Elizabeth  rendering  it
compulsory  to  eat  fish  on  fast  days  had  expired,  but  to  eat  meat
on  fast  days  was  still  an  ecclesiastical  offence,  punishable  in
ecclesiastical  courts.  The  power  of  excommunication,  with  all
the  penalties  I  have  enumerated  in  a  former  chapter,  still  re-
mained. An  Act  of  Charles  II.  still  made  any  peer  who  went
to  Court,  or  remained  in  the  King's  presence,  without  having
taken  the  Oath  of  Supremacy  and  Declaration  against  popery,  a
popish  recusant,  though  it  had  become  so  perfectly  obsolete  that,
as  Stanhope  observed,  the  whole  bench  of  Protestant  bishops
had  violated  it.  The  Canons  of  1603,  breathing  a  spirit  of  im-
placable intolerance,  were  still  believed  to  be  binding  on  tlie
clergy,  and  any  writing  which  impugned  the  supernatural  cha-
racter of  the  Christian  creed  was  a  criminal  offence.

The  measure  of  Stanhope  never  reached  the  House  of
Commons,  for  it  was  thrown  out  in  the  Upper  House  on  the
second  reading,  chiefly  through  the  opposition  of  the  bishops.
They  could  not,  indeed,  defend  all  the  Acts  that  it  was  proposed

VOL.  V.  u

1G2  ENGLAND IN THE EIGnTEENTII CENTURY.  cn.  xix.

to  repeal,  but  tliey  protested  against  the  sudden  removal  of  so
many  ancient  laws  from  the  Statute-book,  and  inveighed  in  the
strongest  terms  against  the  proposal  to  authorise  men  to  abstain
fi'om '  any  form  of  public  worship,  or  to  publish  writings  im-
pugning the  Trinity  or  the  Christian  faith.  '  Such  a  measure,'
said  Bishop  Horsley,  '  would  leave  our  mutilated  Constitution
a  novelty  in  the  annals  of  mankind,  a  prodigy  in  politics,  a  civil
polity  without  any  public  religion  for  its  basis.'  It  is  indeed
a  singular  and  characteristic  fact  that  the  laws  of  Elizabeth
making  it  a  criminal  oflFence  not  to  attend  public  worship  in
England  were  not  repealed  until  1844  and  1846.^

The  greater  part  of  this  legislation  had  no  doubt  become
completely  inoperative,  and  one  of  the  most  common  com-
plaints of  the  religious  writers  of  the  eighteenth  century  was
the  general  and  systematic  neglect  of  public  worship  by  a  large
section  both  of  the  upper  and  of  the  lower  class. ^  It  is  im-
possible to  write  the  history  of  English  religious  liberty  with
any  accuracy  from  the  Statute-book,  for  its  different  stages  had
often  been  attained  in  manners  or  practice  long  before  they
received  the  sanction  of  the  law.  On  the  other  hand,  several
of  these  laws  might  be  employed  by  individual  fanaticism  or
private  malevolence,  and  Stanhope  was  able  to  cite  more  than
thirty  cases  in  which  persecuting  laws  about  religion  had  been
put  in  force  during  the  twenty-six  years  before  he  spoke,  some-
times against  Roman  Catholics,  sometimes  against  Protestant
Dissenters,  sometimes  against  persons  who  simply  abstained
from  going  to  church.^  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  the  evil  was
.•iltogether  a  diminishing  one.  A  great  outburst  of  religious
passion  had  accompanied  the  Methodist  and  Evangelical  revival,
and  on  the  subject  of  Sunday  observance  a  stricter  code  was
coming  into  fashion.  Sunday  card  parties  now  began  to  fall  into
disfavour.*  There  were  already  signs  among  the  upper  classes
of  a  more  regular  attendance  on  public  worship,  which  increased
greatly  a  few  years  later  owing  to  the  panic  which  was  produced  by
the  French  Revolution.''  A  declaration  was  largely  signed  binding

'  See  iStf;j)hfTrs  llixt.of  the  Cri-  '  Pari.  Jlift.  xxviii.  114.

mi/ial  Law  af  Kitriland,  ii.  483.  *  Wilberforce,  however,  comjjlain-

'-  See  much  cvi<lcnce  of this  in  ed  in  1787  that  he  was  asked  to  one

AbV)ey  and  Overton's  EiitjlUli,  Chvrt^h  by  a  person  nigh  in  the  King's  ser-

in th4i  Eifjh't'jvntk C'ciUwy,  ii.  '\7h-  vice. —  L[fe,  i.  133.
4.",y.  '••  See u curious account of (lie

cii.  XIX.  SABBATARIAN STRICTNESS.  1G3

the  subscribers  to  observe  Sunday  strictly ;  to  give  and  accept
no  entertainment  on  that  day,  to  abstain  from  travelling  on  it
except  in  cases  of  urgent  necessity.^  Bishop  Porteus  tried,
though  unsuccessfully,  to  induce  George  III.  to  suppress  the
Sunday  bands  at  Windsor,  Kensington,  and  Weymouth ;  and
Wilberforce  made  an  equally  unsuccessful  attempt  to  induce  the
Speaker  to  give  up  his  custom  of  receiving  members  of  the
House  of  Commons  on  Sunday  evenings.^  There  were  bitter
complaints  that  '  Sunday  was  selected  by  the  fashionable  for
travelling  to  their  country  seats  or  to  the  watering-places ; '
that  '  on  no  other  day  do  so  many  coaches  with  coronets  pass
through  the  country  towns  and  villages ; '  that  multitudes  of  the
middle  or  poorer  classes  persisted  in  availing  themselves  of  the
facilities  which  improved  roads  and  vehicles  gave  them  for
Sunday  excursions,^  and  there  was  in  some  quarters  an  evident
disposition  to  enforce  strictly  the  laws  relating  to  Sunday,  and
even  to  extend  their  scope.  In  the  winter  of  1780  houses  were
opened  in  London  for  Sunday  promenades,  and  for  debating-
societies,  in  which  religious  questions  were  freely  discussed,  but
the  new  entertainment  was  at  once  brought  before  Parliament
by  Bishop  Porteus,  and  an  Act  was  passed  to  suppress  it."*
Bishop  Horsley,  in  opposing  Stanhope's  Bill,  urged  against  it,
as  a  decisive  argument,  that,  if  it  passed,  '  stage  coaches  and
waggons  will travel the road,  watermen  will ply upon  the

effect  of  the  alarm  produced  by  the  drink. I  have  had  an  opportunity  of

Revolution  on the  religious  deport-  observing  at  a  town  about  ten  miles

ment of the upper classes,  in the  from  the city, that  there are two

Anmial  Register,  1798,  pp.  229,  230.  stages  set  oat  on  the  weekdays,  but

'  Hodgson's  Life  of  Porteus,  pp.  on  Sundays  four  or  five  in  the  sum-

138,  139.  mer time, most of them crowded

2  Abbey and Overton's EiKjlhh  both within and without.' — Lloi/d'.-i

Church  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  ii.  Evening Post, March 22-25, 17G5.

519  ; Wilbcrfurcc's  Life,  ii.  272.  See  too  the  Coniioisseur,  No.  26. In

*  I have collected some facts  1802  James  Mill  wrote  from  London :

about  the early  history  of Sunday  '  Another very fine sight is Hyde

coaches (vol. ii. pp. 532, 533). A  Park,  especially  on  a  Sunday,  when

writer  in  1765  deplores  the  increas-  all the nobility and gentry  go to

ing  number  of  coaches  travelling  on  air  themselves. You  see thousands

Sunday. '  They are got to that  of  carriages  and  horsemen,  and  the

height  that  there  is  not  a  stage  with-  walks  for  miles  fiUetl  with  the  finest

in  ten  or  twelve  miles  of  London  but  dressed people.'— Bain's  James  Mill,

what  goes  as  regularly  on  that  day  as  p.  40. On  the  Sunday  travelling  of

on  the  weekdays. The  long  stages  the  upper  classes,  see  the  Essays  of

are  not  suffered  to  do  so,  though  the  Vicesimus  Knox,  No.  XX.
passengers travel out of necessity,  <  21 Geo. III. c. 49; Hodgson's

but  your  Sunday  traveller  does  it  out  Life  of  PoHeus,  pp.  71-83.
of pleasiue  and  many  times  to  get

M  2

1G4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xix.

Thames,  and  hackney-coaclimen  in  the  streets  upon  the  Lord's
Dav  as  upon  any  other,  under  the  express  sanction  of  the  law.' '
In  1784  Sir  R.  Hill  suggested,  among  other  taxes,  Sunday  tolls
and  a  special  tax  on  Sunday  newspapers.^  A  society,  imitated
from  the  '  Societies  for  the  Reformation  of  Manners,'  which  had
been  so  active  under  Anne,  was  founded  by  Wilberforce  and  some
other  leading  Evangelicals  about  1787,  and  spread  widely  over
England,  and  one  of  its  special  objects  was  to  enforce  by  pro-
secutions the  existing  laws  against  '  the  profanation  of  the
Sabbath,'  and  against  '  licentious  publications,'  and  to  induce
the  magistrates  in  these  matters  to  act  with  greater  strict-
ness and  activity.^  The  Evangelical  theology,  which  was  now
acquiring  an  ascendency  in  the  most  religious  classes,  was
widely  separated  both  in  doctrine  and  in  temperature  from  the
school  of  Tillotson,  and  from  the  school  of  Hoadley.  Salvp,-
tion  by  belief,  and  the  sinfulness  of  religious  error,  were  held
with  a  definiteness  and  an  emphasis  which  had  long  been  un-
known in  England,  while  the  French  Revolution  produced
among  the  upper  classes  an  enormously  increased  estimate  of
the  practical  and  political  dangers  that  may  result  from  specula-
tive opinions.

In  spite,  however,  of  these  influences,  the  spirit  of  English
government  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  but  slightly  affected
by  theological  considerations,  and  the  great  change  which  had  in
this  respect  been  for  some  centui-ies  in  operation  was  almost
completed.  The  old  Catholic  theory  of  the  duties  of  government
in  matters  of  religion  had  been,  in  my  opinion,  perfectly  logical
and  consistent.  It  rested  on  the  doctrines  of  the  infallibility  of
the  Church  and  of  the  damnable  criminality  both  of  religious
error  and  doubt.  When  governors  believed  themselves  to  be,
beyond  all  possibility  of  mistake,  in  possession  of  absolute
religious  truth,  and  when  they  were  equally  certain  that  heresy
in  the  sight  of  the  Divinity  was  a  crime  entailing  eternal
damnation, they  had no difliculty  in  believing that  all  the

'  Purl.  TTixt.  xxviii.  127.  of  the  four  Sunday  newspapers  sup-

^  A(\()\]>h\i^'»  /liKt.  of  /■J/if/In})d,iv.  ported the Government.  —  Wilber-

123. Jn 171)'.)  Wilberforce  made  an  force's  X?'/>%  ii.  338.

uni:<uccessful  attempt  to  carry  a  law  '  See  Wilberforce's  IJfe,  i.  132-

Biijipressing  Sunday  new.spapers. He  138;  Hodgson's  Life  of  J'orfri/s,  pp.

prciends  that Pitt was  induced  to  100,  101  ;  Watson's  Anccdofcn  of  Nh

refuse  his  suj^port  because  three  out  (Jw/i  Time,  ii.  60.

cii.  XIX.  PIIOVIN'GE OF  EELIGIOUS  LEGISLATIOX.  16.3

resources  of  government  sliould  bo  exerted  in  maintaiuiii;^''
religious  orthodoxy.  If  these  resources  can  be  efficaciously
employed  without  the  possibility  of  error  in  the  promotion  of
the  highest  of  human  interests,  such  an  employment  must  be  a
duty,  nor  is  there  anything  strange  or  startling  in  punishing
with  the  heaviest  known  punishment  a  crime  of  the  deepest
possible  dye  and  entailing  the  greatest  possible  calamities.  To
minds  in  this  condition  the  butcheries  of  De  Montfort,  of
Torquemada,  or  of  Mary  Tudor  could  give  no  greater  shock
than  the  execution  of  ordinary  murderers.  It  was,  indeed,
early  seen  that  the  power  of  governments  over  opinion  was  not
unlimited.  A  convinced  heretic  could  not  be  really  converted,
though  he  might  be  turned  into  a  hypocrite  by  penal  laws.
Persecution  kindles  a  heroism  of  resistance.  The  martyr's
death  inspires  many  to  follow  in  his  steps ;  and  when  opinions
have  found  a  lodgment  in  the  minds  of  a  large  section  of  a
nation,  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  civil  authority  to  destroy
them.  But  when  all  this  is  admitted,  both  reason  and  expe-
rience show  that  the  power  of  government,  when  uncompromis-
ingly employed  in  maintaining  particular-  opinions,  is  enormously
great.  It  may  extirpate  the  most  active  centres  of  adverse
propagandism.  It  may  immensely  restrict,  if  it  cannot  abso-
lutely prevent,  the  circulation  of  opposing  arguments  or  opinions.
It  may  direct  the  whole  gigantic  force  of  education  exclusively
in  one  direction,  and  if  it  cannot  prevent  a  change  of  doctrine,
it  may  at  least  postpone  it  for  generations.  As  a  consequence
of  these  principles,  the  maintenance  of  religious  orthodoxy  at
home,  and  the  support  of  religious  orthodoxy  abroad,  were  con-
sidered the  most  incontestable  duties  of  government ;  and  all
tolerance  of  heresy,  and  all  alliances  with  non-Catholic  powers,
were  deemed  criminal.

With  the  Reformation,  however,  a  new  set  of  principles
came  into  action ;  but  it  was  only  very  slowly,  and  with  innu-
merable logical  inconsistencies,  that  they  triumphed.  If  private
judgment  is  the  basis  on  which  all  religious  opinions  must  be
founded,  its  free  and  honest  exercise  cannot,  it  was  said,  be  a
crime,  but  must  be  a  duty  and  a  right  of  the  most  sacred  kind.
Every  influence  of  power  which  deflects  or  restricts  it  must  be
an  evil. The  unrestrained  comparison  of  arguments  and  opinions

IGO  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

is  necessary  to  the  discovery  of  truth,  and  as  governments  have
no  special  means  of  knowing  what  is  true  they  have  no  right
to  proscribe  opinions.  There  grew  up,  too,  among  many  a  belief
that  great  portions  of  very  widely  received  opinions  were
doubtful,  or  untrue ;  that  religious  unity  is  not  only  impossible,
but  not  even  desirable,  as  different  sets  of  opinion  are  specially
adapted  to  different  types  of  mind  and  stages  of  civilisation;
that  opinions  may  be  theologically  or  historically  untrue,  and
yet  very  conducive  to  human  happiness  and  goodness.  On  the
other  hand,  the  more  zealous  adherents  of  the  Protestant  Churches
neither  admitted  that  there  was  any  material  uncertainty  in
their  opinions,  nor  abandoned  the  doctrines  of  salvation  by
belief  and  of  the  criminality  of  religious  error,  and  they  en-
deavoured to  reconcile  them  with  their  principle  of  private
judgment  by  drawing  a  distinction  between  fundamental  and
non-fundamental  doctrines.  The  first  were  certain  and  essential
to  salvation,  and  they  ought  therefore  to  be  enforced  by  law.
The  second  were  uncertain,  comparatively  unimportant,  and  the
proper  subject  for  toleration.

A  number  of  political  inQuences  at  the  same  time  came  into
play,  some  of  them  acting  in  the  direction  of  intolerance  and
some  in  the  direction  of  religious  liberty.  Kings  and  parlia-
ments inlierited  a  great  part  of  the  spiritual  power  which  had
passed  away  from  the  Pope,  and  they  naturally  endeavoured  to
promote  the  more  subservient  Churches,  to  crush  forms  of  belief
which  had  revolutionary  or  anarchical  tendencies,  to  impose
some  check  upon  the  disintegrating  influences  of  Protestantism.
The  fierce  antagonism  between  the  Catholic  Church  and  the
Protestant  communities  was  carried  on  not  merely  or  mainly  by
argument  or  preaching,  but  by  open  war,  rebellions,  persecutions,
conspiracies,  and  assassinations,  and  it  made  a  great  mass  of
coercive  legislation  a  political  necessity.  Many  of  what  were
termed  persecuting  laws  were  intended  in  reality  not  to  enforce
or  propagate  opinions,  but  to  guard  against  sedition  or  hostile
political  influences.  On  tlie  oMier  hand,  one  of  tlie  effects  of
the  Reformation  was  to  throw  great  masses  of  men  of  different
creeds  into  juxtaposition,  and  it  was  necessary  to  arrive  at  some
system  under  which  they  could  live  together  in  peace.  Political
necessities  compelled  nations  of  different  religions  to  enter  into

cii.  XIX.  SECULARISATION  OF  GOVERNMENT.  1G7

close  bonds  of  friendship  and  alliance  ;  and  as  the  religion  which
was  in  a  minority  in  one  country  was  in  a  majority  in  another,
persecution  had  an  obvious  tendency  to  produce  retaliation.
Multitudes  of  refugees,  also,  drawn  for  the  most  part  from  the
very  flower  of  the  industrial  classes,  were  scattered  by  persecu-
tion over  Europe,  and  it  became  a  great  object  to  attract  them,
which  could  only  be  done  by  giving  them  full  liberty  of  practising
their  religion.  As  time  rolled  on,  classes  that  were  essentially
secular  in  theii*  spirit  rose  to  power ;  material  interests  and
political  habits  of  thought  began  to  dominate,  and  the  theo-
logical temperature  in  Europe  gradually  cooled.

Under  all  these  various  and  conflicting  influences  a  large
extension  of  toleration  was  slowly  attained,  and  governments,
by  the  force  of  circumstances,  were  compelled,  or  induced,  to
restrict  their  action  to  the  temporal  interests  of  mankind.
Francis  I.  by  allying  himself  with  the  Turks,  Richelieu  by
allying  himself  with  Protestants,  Elizabeth,  by  supporting
Dutch  Calvinists,  terminated  the  system  of  exclusively  orthodox
alliances.  Grotius,  while  admitting  that  alliances  with.  non-
Christian  powers  may  be  permitted  in  cases  of  extreme  neces-
sity, deplored  bitterly  the  facility  with  which  the  governments
of  his  day  contracted  them,  to  the  great  detriment  of  Christianity,
and  he  recalled  the  history  of  an  old  Duke  of  Savoy,  who  is  said
to  have  lost  Cyprus  rather  than  accept  the  alliance  of  the  Turks.'
The  Peace  of  Westpbalia  put  an  end  to  active  political  war
between  Protestants  and  Catholics,  as  such.  In  England  an
attempt  had  been  made  with  much  skill  to  maintain  a  religious
uniformity  in  a  national  Church,  partly  by  drawing  up  the
formulaiies  of  that  Church  in  such  a  way  as  to  include  men  of
widely  different  tendencies  and  opinions,  and  partly  by  coercive
legislation  directed  against  Nonconformists.  This  system,  how-
ever, after  many  vicissitudes,  completely  broke  down  under  the
Stuarts,  and  was  finally  abandoned  at  the  Revolution,  when
Presbyterianism  was  established  in  Scotland,  and  when  most
English  Dissenters  obtained  a  legal  position  through  the  Tolera-
tion Act.  From  this  time  it  became  a  settled  maxim  of  English
politics  that  government  is  intended  solely  to  promote  the  civil
or  temporal  interests  of  the  community,  that  the  sahation  of
•  Dc  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  Book  II.  c.  15.

168  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xix.

souls  is  not  within  its  legitimate  functions,  and  that  in  pro-
moting or  restricting  religious  tenets  it  should  be  governed
altogether  by  a  consideration  of  the  efi'ect  of  those  tenets  on  the
temporal  happiness  of  mankind.

It  is  obvious  that  this  is  an  essentially  different  theory  from
that  wliich  formerly  prevailed ;  but  it  is  also  obvious  that  it  is  a
theory  vrhich  admits  of  many  shades  of  actual  policy.  The
points  of  contact  between  religion  and  the  temporal  interests  of
society  are  very  numerous,  and  each  can  act  upon  the  other  in
many  obscure,  complicated,  and  indirect  ways.  It  was  generally
admitted  by  the  most  accredited  exponents  of  the  principles  of
the  Revolution  that  the  establishment  and  endowment  of  one
form  of  religion  was  fully  within  the  proper  functions  of  Govern-
ment. Religion,  considered  as  the  supreme  regulator  of  human
conduct,  passions,  and  motives,  is  of  the  very  highest  importance
to  the  well-being  of  society.  It  gives  law  its  moral  sanction.
It  reinforces  it  by  the  prospect  of  infinite  rewards  and  punish-
ments administered  b}^  an  Omniscient  Judge.  It  extends  the
empire  of  duty  over  wide  tracts  of  conduct  and  feeling  which
positive  law  can  never  touch.  It  is  therefore  a  matter  of  the
highest  political  and  social  importance  that  there  should  be  in
every  parish  an  instructed  clergyman,  set  apart  for  the  purpose
of  carrying  the  teaching  and  the  moralising  influence  of  religion
to  all  classes,  especially  to  those  who  would  never  provide  it  for
themselves.  Nor  was  it  forgotten  that  the  alliance  of  Church
and  State  enabled  the  governors  in  some  measure  to  regulate
and  moderate  a  force  which,  though  of  inestimable  value,  is
peculiarly  liable  to  dangerous  excesses  and  aberrations,  and
that  it  established  a  close  union  between  the  Goveriunent  of  the
country  and  the  strongest  moral  influence  in  society.  In  select-
ing, however,  from  among  contending  sects,  the  clergy  who  were
to  be  entrusted  with  this  function,  the  ruler  is  to  consider  not
liis  own  opinion,  but  that  of  the  nation.  The  end  to  be  attained
is  utility,  and  both  Warburton  and  Paloy  strongly  maintained
that  the  Established  Church  should  be  that  of  the  bulk  of  the
nation.

The  next  question  is  whetlier,  or  to  what  extent,  the  power
of governments  may  be  legitimately  emj)loyed  in repressing

en.  XIX.  LOCKE  AND WAHDURTON.  1G9

religious  opinions.  Locke,  wlio  more  than  any  other  man
framed  the  theory  of  the  English  Government  of  the  Revolution,
devoted  his  '  Letters  on  Toleration  '  chiefly  to  an  examination  of
this  question,  and  he  maintained  with  great  force  of  reasoning
that  the  suppression  of  opinion  as  being  theologically  erroneous,
can  never  be  within  the  legitimate  sphere  of  Government,  and
that  the  free  exercise  of  private  judgment  in  matters  of  religion
is  a  sacred  and  an  inalienable  right.  At  the  same  time,  he
contends  that  no  opinions  should  be  tolerated  by  the  magistrate
which  make  men  necessarily  hostile  to  the  State,  or  which
subvert  those  moral  rules  that  are  essential  to  the  preservation
of  civil  society.  Under  these  denominations  he  would  include
both  the  papist  and  the  atheist.  No  sect,  he  says,  will  openly
maintain  that  men  are  not  obliged  to  keep  their  promises,  or
that  princes  may  be  dethroned  by  those  who  differ  from  them
in  religion ;  but  if  a  Church  teaches  that  all  who  are  not  in
communion  with  her  are  heretics,  and  that  '  faith  is  not  to  be
kept  with  heretics ; '  if  it  asserts  that  '  kings  excommunicated
forfeit  their  crowns  and  kingdoms ; '  if '  all  those  who  enter  into  it
do  ipso  facto  deliver  themselves  up  to  the  protection  and  service
of  another  prince  .  .  .  who  has  not  only  power  to  persuade  the
members  of  his  Church  to  whatsoever  he  lists,  either  as  purely
religious,  or  in  order  thereunto,  but  can  also  enjoin  it  them  on
pain  of  eternal  fire,'  the  members  of  that  Church  have  no  right
to  claim  toleration  from  a  Government  of  another  creed.  Locke
does  not  specifically  state  that  these  opinions  are  held  by  Roman
Catholics,  and  he  would  have  probably  subscribed  to  the  dis-
tinction which  it  was  afterwards  customary  to  make  between
Roman  Catholics  and  papists ;  but  the  general  application  of
his  words  cannot  be  mistaken.  In  speaking  of  atheists  his
language  is  still  more  decisive :  '  Those  are  not  at  all  to  be
tolerated  who  deny  the  being  of  a  God.  Promises,  commands,
and  oaths,  which  are  the  bonds  of  human  society,  can  have  no
hold  upon  an  atheist.  The  taking  away  of  God,  though  but
even  in  thought,  dissolves  all.'  ^

This  letter  was  published  in  1689. A  substantially  similar
doctrine  was  maintained  just  fifty  years  later  by  Bishop  War-
'  First  Letter  concerning  Toleration.

170  ENTGLAXD IX THE EIGIITEEXTII CENTURY. cu xix.

burton,  in  that  treatise  ou  tlie  'xHliance  of  Cliurcli  and  State'
which  is  perhaps  the  most  really  valuable  of  his  works.  War-
burton  lays  down  in  the  strongest  terms  the  natural  right  of
every  man  to  worship  God  according  to  his  conscience,  and  the
criminality  of  every  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  State  to  interfere
with  his  religion.  'With  religious  errors,  as  such,  the  State  has
no  concern,'  and  it  may  never  restrain  a  religion,  except  when
it  produces  grave  '  civil  mischiefs.'  In  asserting,  however,  that
'  religion,  or  the  care  of  the  soul,  is  not  within  the  province  of
the  magistrate,  and  that  consequently  matters  of  doctrine  and
opinion  are  without  his  jurisdiction,  this  must  always  be  under-
stood with  the  exception  to  the  three  fundamental  principles  of
natural  religion — the  being  of  a  God ;  His  providence  over
human  affairs  ;  and  the  natural  essential  difference  of  moral
good  and  evil.  These  doctrines  it  is  directly  his  office  to
cherish,  protect,  and  propagate,  and  all  oppugners  of  them  it
is  as  much  his  right  and  duty  to  restrain  as  any  the  most
flagrant  offenders  against  public  peace.'  And  the  reason  of  this
exception  is  obvious.  '  The  magistrate  concerns  himself  with
tlie  maintenance  of  these  three  fundamental  articles,  not  as  they
promote  our  future  happiness,  but  our  present.'  '  They  are  the
very  foundation  and  bond  of  civil  policy.'  Without  them  oaths
and  covenants,  and  all  the  ties  of  moral  obligation,  upon  which
society  is  founded,  are  dissolved.

The  laws  against  popery  are  likewise  justifiable  '  not  as
being  directed  against  the  religious  errors  of  the  Church,  but
ii gainst  the  political  usurpations  of  the  Court  of  Rome,  which,
when  these  laws  were  made,  exhorted  men  by  papal  edicts  to
])arricide  and  rebellion.'  'The  papist  who  owns  a  foreign
ecclesiastical  power  superior  to  all  temporal  dominion  '  may  at
any  lime  become  a  political  danger,  and  therefore,  though  such
meu  have  at  present  a  liberty  of  connivance  under  suspended
penal  Acts,  those  Acts  are  justly  left  on  the  Statute-book.  Tests
and  disqualifications  for  the  benefit  of  the  Established  Church
are  not  penalties,  but  securities  wisely  intended  to  strengthen
an  institution  which  is  of  great  utility  to  the  nation.

The  next  very  important  work  which  appeared  in  England
on  this  subject  was  the  '  IMoral  and  J'olitical  Philosophy'  of
I'aley. It  was  [)ublislir(l  in 1785,  and  tlierefore  followed  the

CH.  XIX.  PALEY'S  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.  171

work  of  Warburton  by  almost  the  same  interval  as  that  which
separated  the  works  of  Warburton  and  Locke.

It  has  been,  I  think,  the  fortune  of  this  work  to  be  of  late
years  very  unduly  depreciated,  partly  because,  in  consequence  of
the  singular  charm  and  lucidity  of  its  style,  it  has  been  so
widely  read,  studied,  and  criticised  that  all  its  weak  points  have
been  fully  disclosed,  and  partly  also  because  the  particular  type
of  the  utilitarian  theory  of  ethics  which  it  teaches  has  been  gene-
rally abandoned.  It  is,  however,  both  in  form  and  substance,  one
of  the  masterpieces  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  the  author  was
much  too  shrewd  a  man  not  to  know  that  the  doctrines  which
he  taught  were  not  likely  under  George  III.  to  lead  a  clergy-
man to  the  bench.  In  this  work  Paley  rejects  as  a  fiction  or
unproved  hypothesis  the  theory  of  a  social  contract,  on  which
Locke  and  Warburton  based  much  of  their  reasoning ;  but,  like
them,  he  reduces  the  questions  of  an  establishment  and  of
toleration  to  simple  utility.  He  shows  the  extreme  importance
of  stationing  in  each  district  of  the  country  an  educated  man,
exclusively  employed  in  teaching  religion  ;  of  setting  a  class  of
men  apart  by  public  authority  for  the  study  as  well  as  for  the
teaching  of  an  historical  religion,  and  of  making  the  clergy  in
some  degree  independent  of  their  flocks.  The  Church,  however,
thus  selected  should  always  be  that  of  the  bulk  of  the  people,
and  it  should  be  made  as  comprehensive  as  possible,  consistently
wdth  the  maintenance  of  order  in  the  celebration  of  Divine
worship.  If  subscriptions  are  not  altogether  abolished — if  a
mere  promise  to  conform  to  the  rites,  liturgy,  and  offices  of
the  Church  is  not  found  to  be  sufficient — the  articles  which  are
admitted  should  at  least  be  made  as  simple  and  easy  as  possible.
They  '  should  be  adapted  from  time  to  time  to  the  varying
sentiments  and  circumstances  of  the  Church  in  which  they  were
received.'  They  should  be  articles  of  peace,  only  binding  men  not
to  preach  against  certain  doctrines.  Creeds  and  confessions  may
sometimes  be  necessary,  but  they  are  always  an  evil.  '  They  vio-
late liberty.  They  ensnare  the  consciences  of  the  clergy,  by  hold-
ing out  temptations  to  prevarication ; '  by  '  reason  of  the  changes
which  are  wont  to  take  place  in  the  judgment  of  mankind
upon  religious  subjects,  they  come  at  length  to  contradict  the
actual  opinions  of  the  Church  whose  doctrines  they  profess  to

172  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  cii.  xix.

contain,  and  they  often  perpetuate  the  proscription  of  sects
and  tenets  from  whicli  any  danger  has  long  ceased  to  be
apprehended.'

Passing,  then,  to  the  question  of  toleration,  the  views  of
Paley  show  a  great  advance  on  those  of  his  predecessors.  Laws
like  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,  excluding  Dissenters  in  the
interests  of  the  Established  Church  from  certain  offices  of  trust
and  emolument  in  the  State,  rest,  he  admits,  on  a  different  ground
irom  laws  forbidding  the  profession  or  exercise  of  some  form
of  religion ;  but  they  are  inconsistent  with  perfect  toleration,
obstacles  to  the  unbiassed  pursuit  of  truth,  and  only  to  be  justi-
fied on  the  ground  of  a  clear  preponderance  of  utility.  No  such
utility,  in  the  opinion  of  Paley,  exists.  If  the  Established
Church  contains  an  overwhelming  majority  of  the  English
people,  it  will  be  strong  enough  to  maintain  itself.  If  the  Dis-
senters ever  become  a  majority,  the  Establishment  itself  ought
to  be  altered,  or  qualified.  If  there  exists  among  the  different
sects  such  a  parity  of  numbers  or  power  as  to  make  the  choice
of  one  sect  a  matter  '  of  hazardous  success  and  of  doubtful  elec-
tion,' some  form  of  concurrent  endowment  should  be  adopted.

The  only  example  of  such  an  endowment,  with  which
Paley  was  acquainted,  was  in  the  newly  formed  States  in
North  America,  and  the  experiment  was  evidently  one  which
excited  great  interest  in  his  mind.  Judging  it  from  a  distance,
it  seemed  to  him  very  dlfTicult  on  such  a  scheme  to  arrange
the  parochial  system,  which  he  considered  the  chief  advantage
of  an  establishment,  and  he  feared  that  it  would  lead  to  ex-
cessive Government  expenditure,  and  a  feverish  and  unhealthy
competition  of  sects.  Tiie  principle,  however,  he  says,  is  a  just
one^  and  when  sects  are  nearly  balanced,  it  ought,  if  possible,
to  be  adopted.  Religious  disqualifications  in  politics  appear  to
him  altogether  unsound.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  enthusiasts
who  believe  that  Christianity  has  abolished  all  distinctions  of
property  should  not  be  made  judges  or  magistrates,  and  that
Quakers  should  not  be  trusted  with  military  administration  or
command  ;  but  on  the  whole,  among  existing  sects  of  Christians,
'  witli  the  single  exception  of  refusing  to  bear  arms,'  there  is  no
tenet  which  incapacitates  men  from  serving  tlie  State,  '  I  per-
ceive,' ho  writes,  'no  reason  wliy  men  of  different  religious  per-

cir.  XIX.  PALEY'S  MOPvAL  PHILOSOPHY.  173

suasions  moy  not  sit  upon  the  same  bench,  deliberate  in  the
same  council,  or  fight  in  the  same  ranks,  as  well  as  men  of
various  or  opposite  opinions  upon  any  controverted  topic  o'f
natural  philosophy,  history,  or  ethics.'

The  case  of  atheists,  or  other  unbelievers,  he  does  not  deal
with  directly,  but  only  by  implication.  He  fully  adopts  the
modern  doctrine,  that  the  law  is  concerned  only  with  the  actual
conduct  of  men,  and  not  with  the  course  of  conduct  which  may
seem  logically  deducible  from  their  principles.  He  makes  no
exception  to  his  claim  for  toleration,  and  says,  '  Under  the  idea
of  religious  toleration,  I  include  the  toleration  of  all  books  of
serious  argumentation.'  He  adds,  however — and  surely  with
good  reason — '  I  deem  it  no  infringement  of  religious  liberty  to
restrain  the  circulation  of  ridicule,  invective,  and  mockery  upon
religious  subjects.'

Nor  does  he  find  anything  in  Catholicism  to  exclude  it  from
toleration.  The  only  ground  upon  which  the  Legislature  at
the  time  of  the  Revolution  can  have  been  justified  in  proscribing
this  Church  was  the  belief  that  its  members  were  altogether,  or
for  the  most  part,  hostile  to  the  present  settlement  of  the  Crown.
If  this  be  the  case,  and  if  the  legislator  can  find  no  other  test
of  men's  inclination  to  the  State  equally  certain  and  notorious,
he  is  justified  in  enacting  restrictive  laws  against  popery.  It
should  be  remembered,  however,  that  in  this  case  it  is  not
popery  to  which  the  laws  object,  but  popery  as  the  mark  of
Jacobitism ;  that  the  connection  of  popery  and  Jacobitism  is
their  sole  justification  ;  that  as  this  connection  was  accidental
in  its  origin,  so  it  will  probably  be  temporary  in  its  duration ;
'  and  that  these  restrictions  ought  not  to  continue  one  day  longer
than  some  visible  danger  renders  them  necessary  to  the  preser-
vation of  public  tranquillity.' '

It  is  greatly  to  the  credit  of  the  liberal  spirit  of  England
that,  in  spite  of  the  reaction  produced  by  the  French  Revolution,
a  book  containing  these  opinions  should  have  passed  through
fifteen  editions  in  the  life  of  the  author,  and  that  it  should
have  been  made,  almost  immediately  after  its  publication,  a  text-
book at  Cambridge.^ Paley  was, indeed, one  of  the  ablest

'  Moral Philosu2)hy, Book VI.  ^  Meadley's  Life  of  Paleij,  pp.  77,

c.  10.  93.

174  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

repi*eseutatives  of  a  school  of  divines  whicli  is  the  pre-eminent
glory  of  the  English  Church  in  the  eighteenth  century — a
school  distinguished  throughout  Europe  for  its  unflinching  love
of  truth,  its  masculine  and  sober  reasoning,  its  wide  and  generous
tolerance.  In  some  respects  he  stood  greatly  in  advance  of  the
leading  poKticians,  and  anvjng  others  of  Burke.  Seventeen  years
before  the  outbreak  of  the  French  Revolution — at  a  time  when
the  free-thinking  spirit  in  Europe,  and  especially  in  England,
seemed  as  far  as  possible  from  allying  itself  with  any  form  of
sedition  or  political  turbulence — Burke,  in  a  letter  to  Lady
Huntingdon,  expressing  his  hostility  to  the  movement  which
had  been  set  on  foot  for  relieving  the  clergy  of  the  Established
Church  from  subscription  to  the  Articles,  added  these  very
remarkable  words  :  '  I  am  happy  in  coinciding  with  your  lady-
ship in  attachment  to  the  Established  Church.  I  Avish  to  see  her
walls  raised  on  the  foundations  laid  in  the  volume  of  Divine
truth,  that  she  may  crush  the  conspiracy  of  atheism  and  those
principles  which  will  not  leave  to  religion  even  a  toleration.'  ^

In  the  following  year,  Burke  strongly  supported  the  measure
for  relieving  the  Protestant  Nonconformist  ministers  from  the
obligation,  which  had  been  imposed  on  them  by  the  Toleration
Act,  of  subscribing  to  the  greater  part  of  the  Anglican  Articles ;
but,  while  defending  the  Dissenters,  he  turned  aside  to  make  a
most  violent  attack  upon  the  atheists.  He  was  replying  to  those
who,  arguing  for  connivance  rather  than  legal  toleration,  con-
tended that,  if  the  Nonconformists  were  formally  freed  from  the
obligation  of  subscription,  attacks  on  Theism  and  on  the  funda-
mental doctrines  of  Christianity  might  easily  be  made  under  the
shelter  of  Nonconformity.  '  If  this  danger  is  to  be  apprehended,'
rf-pliod  Burke,  '  if  you  are  really  fearful  that  Christianity  will
indirectly  suffer  by  this  liberty,  you  have  my  free  consent:  go
directly  and  by  the  straight  way,  and  not  by  a  circuit ;  .  .  .  point

'  Life of 1,(1(1  If lluntiwjilon ii.  consciences  of others;  but  the  man

287. ThiH  letter  wa,s  written  in  1772.  wlio thinks that conscience ought

I'rieKtlcy,  a  few  years  earlier,  wrote  :  always  to  be sacrificed to  political

•'Ihe  most  unrel'-ming  persecution  is  views  has  no  principle  on  which  an

to  br;  up[>r<ln:n<leil no from  Viignts,  urf^iiment in tavour of moderation

iMit  from  iiitiflels. A  bi^,'ot.  who  is  so  can lay hold.' — Essay on the First

from  a  [>rinr;i[)le  of  ccMisciencc,  may  J'rincijfles  of  OoveJ'nwent,  p.  2[)0.
j)osHil»ly  \i(i  moved  by  a  regard  to  the

cii.  XIX.  EURKE ON ATIIFJS^r.  17.5

your  arms  against  these  men  who  do  the  mischief  you  fear  pro-
moting ;  point  your  arms  against  men  .  .  .  who,  by  attacking
even  the  possibility  of  all  revelation,  arraign  all  the  dispensa-
tions of  Providence  to  man.  These  are  the  wicked  Dissenters
you  ought  to  fear  ;  these  are  the  people  against  whom  you
ought  to  aim  the  shaft  of  the  law ;  these  are  the  men  to  whom,
arrayed  in  all  the  terrors  of  Government,  I  would  say.  You  shall
not  degrade  us  into  brutes.  These  men — these  factious  men,
as  the  honourable  gentleman  properly  called  them — are  the  just
objects  of  vengeance,  not  the  conscientious  Dissenter.  .  .  .
Against  these  I  would  have  the  laws  rise  in  all  their  majesty  of
terrors  to  fulminate  such  vain  and  impious  wretches,  and  to
awe  them  into  impotence  by  the  only  dread  they  can  fear  or
believe.  .  .  .  The  most  horrid  and  cruel  blow  that  can  be  offered
to  civil  society  is  through  atheism.  Do  not  promote  diversity :
when  you  have  it  bear  it ;  have  as  many  sorts  of  religion  as  you
find  in  your  country  :  there  is  a  reasonable  worship  in  them  all.
The  others — the  infidels  or  outlaws  of  the  Constitution,  not  of
this  country,  but  of  the  human  race — they  are  never,  never  to
be  supported,  never  to  be  tolerated.  Under  the  systematic
attacks  of  these  people  I  see  some  of  the  props  of  good  govern-
ment already  begin  to  fail— -I  see  propagated  principles  which
will  not  leave  to  religion  even  a  toleration.  .  .  .  Those  who  hold
revelation  give  double  assurance  to  their  country.  Even  the
man  who  does  not  hold  revelation,  yet  who  wishes  that  it  were
proved  to  him,  who  observes  a  pious  silence  with  regard  to  it,
such  a  man,  though  not  a  Christian,  is  governed  by  religious
principle.  Let  him  be  tolerated  in  this  country.  Let  it  be  but
a  serious  religion,  natural  or  revealed — take  what  you  can  get —
cherish,  blow  up  the  slightest  spark.  .  .  .  By  this  proceeding
you  form  an  alliance,  ofieusive  and  defensive,  against  those
great  ministers  of  darkness  in  the  world  who  are  endeavour-
ing to  shake  all  the  works  of  God  established  in  order  and
beauty.  Perhaps  I  am  carried  too  far,  but  it  is  in  the  road  into
which  the  honourable  gentleman  has  led  me.  The  honourable
gentleman  would  have  us  fight  this  confederacy  of  the  powers
of  darkness  with  the  single  arm  of  the  Church  of  England.  .  .  ,
Strong  as  we  are,  we  are  not  equal  to  this. The  cause  of  the

176  EXGLAXD IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

Chnrcli  of  England  is  included  in  that  of  religion,  not  that  of
religion  in  the  Church,  of  England/  *

This  passage  is  in  more  than  one  way  remarkable.  It  shows
how  far  Burke  was  from  acknowledging  that  unlimited  right
of  serious  religious  discussion  which  has  become  the  received
doctrine  of  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  shows
that,  as  early  as  1773,  he  looked  forward  to  some  such  convulsion
as  that  which  was  at  its  height  in  France  twenty  years  later ;
and  it  is  one  of  the  many  proofs  that  his  attitude  during  the
French  Revolution  was  in  reality  only  what  might  have  been
expected  from  the  principles  he  had  laid  down  in  the  earlier
portion  of  his  career.

In  1792  an  attempt  was  made  by  Fox  to  repeal  the  Act
of  William  III.  under  which  the  Unitarians  were  still  liable  to
punishment,  and  to  secure  for  them  the  legal  position  which
other  Protestant  Dissenters  had  obtained  by  the  Toleration  Act.
Their  exclusion  from  the  benefits  of  this  Act  seemed  especially
anomalous  at  a  time  when  anti-Trinitarian  opinions  were
notoriously  rife,  both  among  the  Nonconformists  and  in  the
Established  Church;  and  in  1774  Theophilus  Lindsey,  a  very
estimable  clergyman  who  had  lately  seceded  for  conscience'  sake
from  the  Church,  set  up  the  first  avowedly  Unitarian  place  of
worship  in  London.^  He  ofiiciated  there  alone,  and  without
molestation,  for  about  twelve  years,  and  afterwards  in  conjunction
with  Dr.  Disney.  Priestley's  work  on  the  '  Corruptions  of  Chris-
tianity,' which  appeared  in  1782,  gave  a  considerable  impulse  to
the  movement.  Some  of  the  Unitarians  adopted  Arian  opinions,
and  admitted  the  pre-existence  of  Christ,  though  not  His  equa-
lity with  the  Father ;  but  the  gi*eater  number,  following  in  the
steps  of  Socinus,  believed  with  Priestley  that  Christ  was  a  mere
man,  though  they  fully  admitted  His  Divine  mission.  His  mira-
cles, and  His  resurrection.  It  was  very  unfortunate  for  their
claims  to  toleration  that  Priestley,  who  more  than  any  other
man  had  given  them  importance,  was  a  warm  admirer  of  the
Yrcuch  Revolution  and  a  vehement  opponent  of  Church  esta-
blishments.

It  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  debate  which  was  raised  on  the

•  Burke's  Workx,  x.  ?,r>_40.  Bolslmm's  'Sermon  on  the  Deatli  of

'  Kce the Memoir .-ijiiMiKled to J>iiicisey.'

CH.  XIX.  BURKE ON EELIGIOUS  LEGISLATIOxN.  177

Unitarian  petition  Lord  North  had  himself  brought  down  to  the
House  to  support  Fox.  Ou  the  subject  of  the  Test  and  Cor-
poration Acts,  the  old  Tory  chief  said  his  opinions  were  un-
changed. These  laws  were  laws  of  security,  intended  to  pro-
tect the  established  Church,  and  they  were  both  necessary  and
just.  But  the  laws  making  it  penal  to  reject  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity  were  laws  of  persecution,  and  as  such  directly
opposed  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  The  Unitarians,  he  said,
were  not  turbulent  or  seditious ;  and  if  they  ever  became  so,  it
was  for  the  ordinary  law  to  punish  them.  Pitt,  on  the  other
hand,  opposed  the  relief,  chiefly  on  the  ground  of  the  ferment
which  the  French  Revolution  had  produced.  No  practical  evil
had  resulted  or  was  likely  to  result  from  these  laws  to  any
description  of  men.  It  was  always  wise  to  touch  old  laws
relating  to  religion  with  extreme  caution,  and  it  would  be
especially  foolish  at  this  time  to  give  encouragement  to  avowed
enemies  of  the  established  Church  and  of  the  Constitution.
The  great  body  of  the  English  people,  he  was  convinced,  were
firmly  attached  to  the  Constitution  under  which  they  lived ;  but
an  active  section  were  animated  by  different  principles,  and
if  the  measure  of  Fox  were  carried,  these  men  would  most
certainly  represent  it  as  a  first  step  to  the  gradual  abolition
of  all  the  establishments  and  fundamental  principles  of  the
Constitution.

The  principal  speaker,  however,  against  the  motion  was
Burke ;  and  his  speech  was  evidently  most  carefully  prepared.
His  own  very  copious  notes  for  it  are  preserved,  and  they  are
well  worthy  of  careful  study,  thougli  in  a  work  like  the  present
I  must  confine  myself  to  a  brief  summary  and  a  few  extracts.
He  began  by  his  favourite  doctrine  that  no  rational  politician
will  ever  govern  himself  by  abstractions  and  universals,  by
general  rules  or  inflexible  principles.  '  Circumstances  are
infinite,  and  infinitely  combined,  variable,  and  transient ; '  and  a
statesman  who  refuses  to  be  guided  by  them  and  to  attend  to
the  exigencies  of  the  moment  may  ruin  his  country  for  ever.
To  a  great  part  of  the  current  speculation  about  the  relations
of  Church  and  State  he  expressed  himself  decidedly  opposed.
The  doctrine  of  Warburton,  that  Church  and  State  are  two  dis-
tinct bodies, which have entered into an alliance for  their

VOL.  V.  N

178  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix,

mutual  advantage,  lie  wliolly  rejected.  Like  Hooker  lie  main-
tained that  '  in  a  Christian  commonwealth  the  Church  and  the
State  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  being  different  integral  parts
of  the  same  whole,'  and  the  laity  are  as  much  an  essential  part
of  the  Church  as  the  clergy.  Nor  had  he  any  sympathy  with
the  doctrine  of  the  school  of  Hoadley,  that  the  State  has  no  right
to  interfere  with  religious  opinions.  '  Government  represent-
ing the  society,  has  a  general,  superintending  control  over  all
the  actions,  and  over  all  the  publicly  propagated  doctrines  of
men,  without  which  it  could  never  provide  adequately  for  all
the  wants  of  society.'  '  Religion  is  so  far  from  being  out  of  the
province  and  duty  of  a  Christian  magistrate,  that  it  is,  and  it
ought  to  be,  not  only  his  care,  but  the  principal  thing  in  his
care ;  because  it  is  one  of  the  great  bonds  of  human  society,  and
its  object  the  supreme  good,  the  ultimate  end  and  object  of
man  himself.  ...  It  is  his  right  and  duty  to  watch  over  it  with
an  unceasing  vigilance ;  to  protect,  to  promote,  to  forward  it,  by
every  rational,  just,  and  prudent  means.  It  is  principally  his
duty  to  prevent  the  abuses  which  grow  out  of  every  strong
and  efficient  principle  that  actuates  the  human  mind.  ...  It  is
the  interest,  the  duty,  and  the  right  of  Government  to  attend
much  to  opinions,  because,  as  opinions  soon  combine  with
passions,  even  when  they  do  not  produce  them,  they  have  much
influence  on  actions.  Factions  are  formed  upon  opinions,  which
factions  become  in  effect  bodies  corporate  in  the  State.'  '  A
reasonable,  prudent,  provident,  and  moderate  coercion  may  be  a
means  of  preventing  acts  of  extreme  ferocity  and  rigour ;  for
by  propagating  excessive,  and  extravagant  doctrines,  such  ex-
travagant disorders  take  place  as  require  the  most  perilous  and
fierce  corrections  to  oppose  them.'

What,  then,  is  the  nature  and  amount  of  coercion  that  may  be
justly  employed?  In  order  to  answer  this  question  at  any  time
it  is  necessary  for  the  legislator  to  know  '  the  peculiar  and  charac-
teristic situation  of  a  people,  their  opinions,  prejudices,  habits,  and
all  the  circumstances  that  diversify  and  colour  life.'  '  I  am  not,'
eaid  Burke,  '  fond  of  defining  with  precision  what  the  ultimate
rights  of  the  sovereign  supreme  power  in  providing  for  the  safety
of  the  commonwealth  may  1)0,  or  may  not  extend  to.'  '  If  religion
related  only  to  tlie  individual,  and  was  a  question  between  God

CH.  XIX.  OPPOSES THE UNITARIAN I31LL.  171)

and  the  conscience,'  human  authority  would  certainly  have  no
right  to  intervene.  If  men  '  limited  their  principles  to  their
own  congregations,  and  were  satisfied  themselves  to  abstain
from  what  they  thought  unlawful,  it  would  be  cruel  to  molest
them.'  '  It  would  not  be  just  even  to  trace  consequences  from
principles,  which,  though  evident  to  me,  were  denied  by  them.'
But  on  the  other  hand,  the  legislator  '  ought  to  look  strictly
to  it  when  men  begin  to  form  new  combinations,  to  be  dis-
tinguished by  new  names,  and  especially  when  they  mingle  a
political  system  with  their  religious  opinions.'  '  When  religion
is  embodied  into  faction,  and  factions  have  objects  to  pursue,  it
must,  more  or  less,  become  a  question  of  power,'  and  governors
have  no  right  to  permit  religion,  which  ought  to  be  one  of  the
bonds  of  society, '  to  be  made  the  pretext  of  destroying  its  peace,
order,  liberty,  and  security.'

These  principles,  Burke  argued,  had  been  hitherto  adopted
in  English  religious  legislation.  Parliament  had  never  laid
down  any  general  maxim  that  religion  was  not  its  concern,
but  directly  the  contrary.  It  had  always  examined  particular
grievances,  and,  with  a  due  regard  to  times  and  circumstances,
had  remedied  them  by  carefully  limited  laws.  The  Catholic  had
not  been  freed  from  the  obligation  of  an  oath  ;  the  Quaker  had  not
been  empowered  to  say  mass,  but  an  amount  of  liberty  had  been
given  to  each  which  was  strictly  measured  by  his  requirements.
Catholics,  Presbyterians,  Anabaptists,  Independents,  Quakers,
were  all  in  possession  of  defined  liberties,  and  possession  is  a
great  title  in  human  affairs.  Nor  were  any  serious  dangers  to
be  apprehended  from  them,  '  Old  religious  factions  are  volcanos
burnt  out ;  on  the  lava  and  ashes  and  squalid  scoheb  of  old
eruptions,  the  olive  and  the  vine  are  now  growing.  Such  was
the  first,  such  the  second  condition  of  Vesuvius.  But  when  a
new  fire  bursts  out,  a  face  of  desolation  comes  on,  not  to  be
rectified  in  ages.'  When,  therefore,  any  new  religious  body
rises  up,  claiming  to  be  recognised  by  law,  its  character  and
designs  should  be  carefully  scrutinised.

It  was  on  these  principles  that  he  opposed  the  petition  of
the  Unitarians  to  be  relieved  from  the  laws  directed  against
those  who  denied  any  Person  of  the  Trinity,  and  to  be  suffered
to  constitute  themselves  into  a  distinct  sect. The  records  of

N  2

180  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

Parliament,  be  said,  know  nothing  of  any  religious  congregation
or  association,  bearing  the  name  which  these  petitioners  had
assumed.  It  was  a  new  society  which  was  to  be  called  into
legal  existence ;  a  society  formed  for  the  express  purpose  of
proselytism ;  a  society,  whose  leading  members  openly  avowed
their  sympathy  with  French  principles,  and  especially  their
implacable  hostility  to  an  established  Church.  The  writings  of
Priestley  and  Dr.  Kippis  abundantly  proved  this,  and  Burke
quoted  from  an  apparently  authorised  report  of  a  recent  dinner
of '  the  Unitarian  Society '  which  had  been  held  at  the  King's
Head  Tavern,  under  the  presidency  of  Priestley.  It  had  been
arranged  on  that  occasion  to  celebrate  July  14,  the  anniversary
of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille.  The  speeches  were  filled  with
eulogies  of  the  proceedings  in  France  ;  and  among  the  toasts
drunk  were  '  The  National  Assembly  of  France  ;  and  may  every
tyrannical  Grovernment  undergo  a  similar  revolution ! '  '  Thomas
Paine,  and  the  Rights  of  Man ; '  '  May  no  society,  civil  or
religious,  claim  rights  for  themselves,  that  they  are  not  ready  to
concede  to  others.'  ^  It  is  evident,  Burke  argued,  that  this  sect
is  political,  and  not  merely  theological.  'The  principle  of  your
petitioners  is  no  passive,  conscientious  dissent  on  account  of  an
over-scrupulous  habit  of  mind.  It  is  fundamental,  goes  to  the
very  root,  and  is  at  issue  not  upon  this  rite,  or  that  ceremony,
but  upon  this  one  question  of  an  Establishment  as  unchristian,
unlawful,  contrary  to  Gospel,  and  to  natural  right,  popish  and
idolatrous.  These  are  the  principles  violently  and  fanatically
held  and  pursued.'

Ought  Parliament  to  suffer  a  society  animated  with  these
principles  to  acquire  the  augmented  influence  which  would
result  from  a  legalised  existence  ?  The  question,  he  s&js,
resolves  itself  into  a  question  of  facts.  Is  there  a  real  danger  ?
Is  it  true  that  there  is  a  design  against  tlie  Constitution  of  this
country,  carried  on  by  a  restless  faction  with  increasing  vigour
and  activity  ?  If  this  be  so,  Parliament  is  justified  in  being  on
its  guard,  and'  early  and  provident  fear  is  the  mother  of  safety.'
The  bulk  of  the  people  were  still  sound,  but,  in  the  opinion  of
J'lirke,  about  a  fifth  part  were  infected  with the  new  doctrines.

'  See  Annval  lierjistcr,  17t)2,  pp.  .",08,  .".09.

on.  xiK.  BUEKE  AND MONTESQUIEU.  181

Considering  what  had  happened,  what  was  happening,  in  France,
could  it  be  said  that  under  these  circumstances  there  was  not
a  grave  danger  ?  It  was  idle  to  assert  that  the  Establishment
must  be  in  security,  because  the  majority  were  in  favour  of  it.
Majorities  are  always  composed  chiefly  of  men  of  sluggish
tempers,  and  with  little  promptness  or  decision  of  action,  and
nearly  all  revolutions  are  the  work  of  resolute  and  active
minorities.  For  these  reasons,  and  with  a  sole  view  to  political
expediency,  he  refused  to  give  the  Unitarians  an  organic  exist-
ence. '  Let  them  disband  as  a  faction,  and  let  them  act  as
individuals ;  and  when  I  see  them  with  no  other  views  than  to
enjoy  their  own  conscience  in  peace,  I  for  one  shall  most  cheer-
fully vote  for  their  relief.'  ^

The  arguments  of  Burke  and  the  authority  of  Pitt  prevailed.
The  motion  of  Fox  was  defeated  by  142  to  63,  and  it  was  not
till  1812  and  1813  that  the  Unitarians  obtained  in  England  a
legal  toleration  for  their  opinions  and  their  worship.^  Like
most  of  the  more  important  speeches  of  Burke,  his  speech  on
this  occasion  contained  principles  of  a  much  wider  interest  and
application  than  the  immediate  subject  of  debate,  and  the
extracts  I  have  given  will  sufficiently  show  his  theory  of  the
relations  of  Church  and  State,  and  the  extent,  the  nature,  and
the  grounds  of  his  intolerance.  It  will,  however,  perhaps,  miti-
gate the  surprise  with  which  some  portions  of  his  speeches  in
1773  and  in  1792  may  be  read,  to  compare  them  with  the  views
of  some  of  the  most  advanced  and  most  popular  leaders  of
thought  upon  the  Continent.  Thus  Montesquieu,  who  has
written  with  admirable  force  on  the  iniquity  of  penal  laws  in
matters  of  religion,  while  he  maintains  that  it  is  the  duty  of  a
governor  to  tolerate  all  the  religions  which  he  finds  established
in  his  nation,  to  prevent  them  from  injuring  one  another,  and
to  secure  every  citizen  from  molestation  on  account  of  his  creed,
adds  nevertheless  that  the  introduction  of  a  new  religion  into  a
country  is  an  evil  which  he  is  perfectly  justified,  if  possible,  in
preventing.^  Voltaire  wi'ote  against  persecution  with  greater
persistence  and  success  than  any  other  writer  of  the  eighteenth

'  Burke's  WorJiff,  x.  41-61.  *  Et>j?rit  cles  Lois, livre  xxv.  ch.

^  Stephen's Histori/ of English 9-13.
Criminal  Law,  ii.  lU'J,  -183.

182  ENGLAND IX THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xi%.

century,  but  lie  had  no  sympathy  with  the  doctrine  that  the
regulation  of  religion  lies  outside  the  sphere  of  Govern-
ment. Actuated  chiefly  by  his  hatred  of  the  papacy,  but
partly  also  by  his  strong  leaning  to  authority,  he  maintained  in
one  of  his  works  that  the  prince  ought  in  every  country  to
be  absolute  master  of  the  whole  ecclesiastical  system ;  that  his
relation  to  ecclesiastics  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  head  of  a
family  to  the  tutor  who  is  employed  to  teach  his  children,  and
that  he  has  a  right  to  direct  them  authoritatively,  in  every-
thing in  any  degree  relating  to  public  order.  '  Religion  which
teaches  a  pure  and  useful  morality  the  philosophical  prince  will
encourage,  but  he  will  prevent  his  subjects  from  disputing  on
dogmas,  as  such  disputes  have  never  produced  anything  but
evil.'  *  '  The  functions  of  the  ministers  of  religion,'  he  elsewhere
says,  '  their  persons,  their  possessions,  their  pretensions,  their
manner  of  teaching  morals,  preaching  dogma,  and  performing
ceremonies,  their  spiritual  punishments,  everything  in  a  word
which  affects  the  civil  order,  should  be  submitted  to  the  authority
of  the  prince  and  to  the  inspection  of  the  magistrate.'  The
sovereign  has,  indeed,  no  right  to  employ  force  to  bring  men  to
any  religion,  nor  is  he  a  competent  judge  of  the  truth  of  dogma,
but  he  has  a  full  right  to  take  cognisance  of  dogma  if  there  is  any-
thing contrary  to  the  public  good  either  in  its  essence  or  in  the
manner  in  which  it  is  taught.  Dissenters  from  the  established
religion  should  always  be  obliged  to  apply  to  him  for  an  autho-
risation to  hold  their  religious  assemblies.  When  they  are  so
authorised,  no  one  should  be  suffered  to  molest  them,  but  the
sovereign  has  a  right  at  all  times  to  know  what  passes  in  their
assemblies,  to  reform  abuses  that  may  arise  and  to  dissolve  their
congregations  if  they  lead  to  disorder,  and  the  whole  of  their
worship,  their  formularies,  and  their  public  instruction  should
be  submitted  to  constant  Government  inspection.'^

Views  at  least  equally  removed  from  the  modern  ideal  of
religious  liberty  were  held  by  other  conspicuous  leaders  of
I'Vcnch  thought.  Thus  Bernardin  de  St.  Pierre,  while  strongly
asserting  in  gruieral  terms  the  right  of  religious  tolerance,
proceeds  to  argue  that  no  legislator  should  tolerate  a  super-

' La ]'oix  du  Sage  ct  dv  Pcuplc  ' Dicfinnnairp  PMlmtojyJiitine, art.

(1750;.  '  Proit  Canonifjue.'

cu.  xtx.  MABLY  AND  ROUSSEAU.  1R3

stitious  religion  which  makes  men  subject  to  men  rather  tliaii
to  God ;  or  an  intolerant  religion,  which  teaches  them  to  avoid,
hate,  or  oppress  one  another.'

Mably,  in  some  respects,  pushed  the  spirit  of  speculative
innovation  further  than  any  of  the  other  great  precursors  of  the
Revolution,  and  some  of  the  most  important  and  most  valuable
chapters  in  his  works  are  devoted  to  an  examination  of  the
relatious  of  religion  to  politics  and  morals.  He  had  himself
shown  the  sincerity  of  his  tolerance  by  sacrificing  a  political
career  and  the  patronage  of  the  Cardinal  de  Tencin  rather  than
acquiesce  by  his  silence  in  the  determination  of  that  prelate
to  dissolve  a  Protestant  marriage,  and  he  strenuously  main-
tained that  all  religions  which  have  acquired  a  footing  in  the
nation  should  be  tolerated,  and  that  legislation  on  religious
matters  should  be  inspired  solely  by  the  interests  of  society.
He  at  the  same  time  contended  that  all  atheists,  materialists,  and
epicureans,  who  persisted  in  maintaining  their  views,  should  ]ie
imprisoned  for  life ;  that  all  deists  who  attacked  the  religion  of
the  country  should  be  punished  by  shorter  periods  of  imprison-
ment, and  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  legislator  to  prevent  the
introduction  into  the  State  of  any  new  religions  or  any  altera-
tions of  existing  ones.^

Rousseau  held  substantially  the  same  opinions.  He  pro-
fessed and  believed  himself  to  be  a  warm  advocate  of  toleration,
but  he  states  that  every  Government  has  a  right  to  impose  certain
articles  of  belief  as  essential  qualifications  of  a  good  citizen  and
a  faithful  subject.  The  articles  of  this  civil  religion  are  the
existence  of  a  powerful,  intelligent,  and  benevolent  Divinity ;
a  providential  government ;  a  future  life ;  the  happiness  of  the
good  ;  the  punishment  of  the  bad ;  the  obligation  of  the  social
contract  and  of  the  laws.  Whoever  refuses  to  declare  his  belief
in  these  doctrines  should  be  banished  from  the  realm.  Who-
ever, having  publicly  accepted  them,  acts  as  if  he  did  not  believe
them,  should  be  punished  with  death.  One  doctrine  only
should  be  proscribed  by  law,  but  it  is  a  doctrine  that  is  pro-
fessedly held  by  a  vast  section  of  the  Christian  world :  '  Who-
ever dares  to  say,  Outside  the Church  there  is  no  salvation,

•  Vceuxirun  Solitaire — YauxjJoiir  *  Traife  dc  la  Ler/isIatio>i,livic  iv,

la  Nation.  ch.  2,  3,  4.

184  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

should  be  banished  from  the  State,'  unless  the  State  is  a  theo-
cracy governed  by  a  pontiff.  It  is  impossible  that  any  man
who  holds  such  a  belief  can  live  in  harmony  with  those  who  are
not  his  co-religionists.*

Although  the  efforts  of  the  English  Unitarians  and  other
Protestant  Nonconformists  were  at  this  time  unsuccessful,  an
important  step  was  taken  in  the  direction  of  religious  liberty  by
the  Catholic  Eelief  Bill  of  1791,  which  removed  some  of  the
extraordinary  hardships  and  anomalies  of  the  position  of  Catholics
in  England.  The  Act  of  1778  had  repealed,  for  the  benefit  of
Ihose  who  toot  an  oath  prescribed  by  the  statute,  the  legislation
of  William  III.,  which  subjected  to  perpetual  imprisonment
every  priest  found  guilty  of  celebrating  mass,  and  every  papist
who  kept  a  school;  which  offered  a  large  reward  for  the  appre-
hension and  conviction  of  popish  priests,  and  which  disabled
papists  from  either  purchasing  or  inheriting  land.  It  did
not,  however,  as  might  have  been  supposed,  give  the  Catholics
a  legal  toleration,  for  it  left  untouched  a  number  of  laws  of
Elizabeth  and  the  early  Stuarts,  which  made  any  priest  found
in  England  guilty  of  high  treason,  and  punished  with  fine  or
imprisonment  any  person  who  heard  mass,  absented  himself
without  lawful  reason  from  the  Anglican  service,  kept  or
attended  a  Catholic  school,  or  sent  his  children  to  be  educated
as  Catholics  on  the  Continent.  It  is  true  that  these  laws  had
been  virtually,  though  not  legally,  abolished  by  the  laws  of
William,  under  which  all  the  eighteenth-century  prosecutiona
before  1778  appear  to  have  taken  place,  but  while  they  re-
mained on  the  Statute-book  the  position  of  the  Catholics  could
hardly  be  otherwise  than  precarious,  and  there  were  many
existing  grievances  of  a  most  practical  kind.  Catholics  were
Btill  obliged  to  pay  a  double  land  tax,  and  to  enroll  by  an  ex-
pensive and  inquisitorial  process  the  deeds  of  their  estates,  and
they  were  subjt-ct  to  an  almost  universal  disqualification.  They
were  excluded  from  the  army  and  navy  3  from  the  whole  legal

' Contrat finnal,  livre  iv.  ch.  8.  puisse  L'gilimpment  introrlnire  en  un

In  liis  letter  to  M.rlc  J'.caiirnont,  l^ous-  piiys dcs roliyious fiiningeres sans

heau Hajs: '  Je  ciois  tju'iin  hoiiiDie  la permission du souverain ; car  si

de  bien,  dans  cjuelque  religion  qu'il  cc n'est  pas  diroctement  dusobuir  ^

vive  dc  Ix/nno  foi,  pent  etre  Panv6.  Dien,  c'est  di'sobi'ir  aux  lois,  et  qui

Wais  je  ne  crois  jias  pour  cela  qu'on  d(jsob6it  aux  lois,  dc.sobCit  tl  Dicu.'

CH.  XIX.  THE  CATHOLIC  PROTESTATION.  185

profession  ;  '  from  all  civil  and  military  posts ;  from  the  right
of  sitting  in  either  House  of  Parliament;  from  the  right  of
voting  for  representative  peers  or  for  members  of  the  House  of
Commons.

As  early  as  February  1788,  a  committee  of  English  Catho-
lics had  presented  a  memorial  to  Pitt,  enumerating  their  griev-
ances and  asking  his  assistance.  Pitt  answered  them  favourably,
but  urged  great  pressure  of  business  as  a  reason  for  delay,  and
recommended  them,  as  a  preliminary  step,  to  collect  authentic
evidence  of  the  opinions  of  the  Catholic  clergy  and  universities
with  respect  to  the  existence  and  extent  of  the  Pope's  dis-
pensing power.  Opinions  were  accordingly  obtained  from  the
Universities  of  the  Sorbonne,  Douay,  Louvain,  Alcala,  and
Salamanca,  asserting  that  neither  the  Pope,  cardinals,  nor  any
individual  or  body  of  men  in  the  Church  of  Rome  had  any
civil  authority,  jurisdiction,  or  pre-eminence  whatsoever  within
the  realm  of  England,  or  any  power  of  releasing  on  any  pre-
text the  King's  subjects  from  their  oath  of  allegiance,  and
d<^nying  that  there  was  anything  in  the  belief  of  Catholics
which  could  justify  them  in  not  keeping  faith  with  heretics.
At  the  suggestion  of  Lord  Stanhope,  the  great  body  of  the
English  Catholics,  including  the  four  Vicars-Apostolic  who
then  governed  the  Catholic  Church  in  England  and  almost  all
the  Catholic  clergy,  signed  a  protestation  which  was  laid  before
Parliament  with  their  petition  for  relief.  It  was  intended  to
disabuse  the  Protestant  mind  of  the  belief  that  there  was  some-
thing in  Catholicism  necessarily  hostile  to  the  civil  power  in  a
Protestant  country.  The  protesting  Catholics  denounced  in  the
strongest  terms  the  doctrines  that  either  the  Pope,  or  the  Pope
and  General  Council  combined,  had  any  power  of  deposing  kings  ;
of  causing  excommunicated  kings  to  be  murdered ;  of  absolv-
ing subjects  from  the  oath  of  allegiance  ;  of  commanding  subjects,
under  pain  of  damnation,  to  take  up  arms  against  their  sovereign  ;
of  making  any  act  justifiable  which  is  in  itself  immoral  or  dis-

'  Lord Campbell,  however,  says  :  their co-religionists, their industry

'  At this time conveyancing was  and  learning  forced  them  into  general

chiefly  in  the  hands  of  Roman  Catho-  business. Charles Butler,  whom I

lies. Being  long  prevented  by  their  well  knew,  may be considered the

religion  from  being  called  to  the  bar,  last  of  this  race.' — Campbell's  Lives

they  practised  successfully  in  cham-  of  the  Chancellors,  ix.  143.
bers  ;  and  being  employed  at  first  by

186  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUIIY.  ch.  xix.

honest ;  of  releasing  Catholics  from  the  obligation  of  any  oath
or  compact  whatsoever.  With  equal  energy  they  repudiated  as
contrary  alike  to  religion,  morality,  and  common  honesty,  the
doctrine  tliat  faith  is  not  to  be  kept  with  heretics  or  infidels,
and  they  veiy  boldly  asserted  that,  except  when  there  is  '  a
sincere  sorrow  for  past  sin,  a  firm  resolution  to  avoid  future
e"uilt,  and  every  possible  atonement  to  God  and  the  injured
neighbour,'  neither  Pope  nor  priest  had,  according  to  their  be-
lief, any  power  whatever  to  forgive  sins.^  'We  acknowledge,'
they  said,  '  no  infallibility  in  the  Pope.'  The  Catholic  Church
has  no  power  over  Protestants  except  that  of  excluding  them
from  its  sacraments  and  other  religious  privileges  ;  '  no  jurisdic-
tion or  authority  whatsoever  within  this  realm,  that  can  directly
or  indirectly  afibct  or  interfere  with  the  independence,  sove-
reignty, laws,  constitution  or  government  thereof,  or  the  rights,
liberties,  persons,  or  properties  of  the  people.'

This  protestation  was  afterwards  thro"\vn  into  the  form  of  an
oath,  and  embodied  in  the  Relief  Bill  as  it  was  first  introduced
into  Parliament ;  but  a  dispute,  into  the  details  of  which  it
would  be  too  long  to  enter  here,^  arose  between  the  bishops
and  the  great  body  of  the  Catholics,  chiefly  about  the  exact
terms  in  which  the  Pope's  jurisdiction  should  be  disclaimed.
The  Bill  was  introduced  by  Mr.  Mitford,  and  it  had  the  full
assent  of  the  Government.  The  only  part  of  the  existing  dis-
qualifications which  it  touched  was  that  relating  to  the  legal

'  Everj'one who is acquainted  tence. Catholic  priests  alone  do  not

with  the  administration  of  criminal  enjoin,  or  require, or encourage  it,

law  in  Ireland  can  test  this  assertion.  and  it  would  bcdillicult  to  exaggerate

It  is  well  known  that  the  immense  the pernicious intluence they have

m;ijority  of  Catholic  murden-rs  who  had  in  this  respect  in  weakening  the

are  convicted  in  that  country  go  to  respect  for  justice,  and  in  perverting

the  gallows  fortitied  by  the  religious  and  lowering the  moral  feelings  of

rites  of  their  Church, attended by  the  Irisli  people.

a  priest,  and  manifesting  the most  ^  The  whole  history — which  is  a

perfect  submission to his  teacliing.  somewhat  curious  one — of  the  nego-

Yet  nothing  can  be  more  rare  than  tiatinns  and  ditferences  of the  Ca-

for  any  Catholic murderer  to  malce  tholics,  previous  to  the  Act  of  1791,

tlie  one  possible  atonement  to  society  is  given  in  great  detail  by  Charles

and  his  neighbour  by  confessing  his  I'litler,  who  bore  a  large  part  in  them.

j,'nilt  and  the  justice  of  his  sentence.  See his Memoirs of the Ujifflisk

Keligious teachers of every other  Cntholics, ii. 9i)-i:58; the iSuyjde-

Christian creed  enjoin  such a  con-  mental Memoirs of his opponent,

les.sion  as  a  matter  of the  plainest  llishop  Milner;  and  the  recent  work

moral  duty,  and in  the  case  of  non-  of  Father  Amherst,  Hist,  of  CalhoUe

Catholic  criminals  it  is  the  usual  and  Emaiicii>a1\on,  vol.  i.  pp.  119-178.
the  natural result of sincere pcni-

en.  XIX.  CATHOLIC RELIEF EILL, 1791.  187

profession,  which,  from  the  rank  of  barrister  downwards,  was
now  thrown  open  to  Catholics  ;  but  the  Bill  abolished  for  the
benefit  of  the  protesting  Catholics  the  statutes  against  Popish
recusants.  It  granted  a  legal  toleration  to  the  Catholic  worship
and  schools,  and  it  freed  Catholics  from  the  necessity  of  enroll-
ing their  deeds  and  wills,  and  from  some  obsolete  but  insult-
ing liabilities  to  which  they  were  still  exposed.  They  could
no  longer  be  summoned  by  magistrates  to  take  the  oath  of
supremacy  and  declaration  against  transubstantiation.  Peers
who  had  not  taken  this  oath  and  declaration  were  no  longer
forbidden  to  enter  the  King's  presence,  and  it  was  no  longer  to
be  in  the  power  of  the  Government  to  order  the  removal  of
papists  from  London  and  Westminster.  It  was  provided,  how-
ever, that  not  only  Catholic  chapels  and  schools,  but  also  the
names  of  all  schoolmasters  and  officiating  priests,  must  be  regis-
tered J  that  no  Catholic  assembly  might  be  held  with  locked
doors ;  that  no  Catholic  chapel  should  have  a  steeple  or  a  bell ;
that  no  priest  should  wear  the  habits  or  perform  the  rites  of
his  religion  in  the  open  air,  or  anywhere  except  in  authorised
buildings  or  in  private  houses  where  not  more  than  five  persons,
in  addition  to  the  household,  were  present ;  that  no  child  of
a  Protestant  parent  should  be  admitted  into  a  Catholic  school ;
that  no  monastic  order  should  be  established  in  England ;  that
no  Catholic  school  or  college  should  be  endowed.  Subject  to
these  numerous  restrictions  and  limitations,  the  position  of
Catholics  who  took  the  prescribed  oath  was  now  a  secure  one.'

The  double  land  tax,  being  imposed  by  the  annual  Land-tax
Act,  could  not  be  included  in  the  Relief  Bill ;  but  from  this
time  the  clause  imposing  it  was  regularly  omitted.

The  Bill  passed  the  Commons  without  a  division,  and  in  the
House  of  Loi'ds  the  only  alteration  made  was  one  which  was
desired  by  the  Vicars- Apostolic.  The  oath,  formed  with  very
little  change  out  of  the  Protestation,  had  been  condemned
by  the  bishops,  and  another  and  somewhat  simpler  form  of
oath  was  in  consequence  substituted,  which  was  taken  almost
without  alteration  from  the  oath  in  the  Irish  Relief  Act  of  1774.
With  this  change  the  Bill  passed  unanimously  through  both
Houses.

»  31  Geo.  III.  c.  32.

188  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUHY.  ch.  xix.

Tlie  Catliolics  were  indeed  singularly  fortunate  in  the  time
at  whicli  they  urged  their  claims.  The  Relief  Bill  was  warmly
supported  as  a  measure  of  I'eligious  liberty  by  the  whole  body  of
the  Protestant  Nonconformists/  and  by  all  those  classes  who
welcomed  the  French  Revolution.  Under  the  Stuarts,  and  for
a  long  period  after  the  Revolution  of  1688,  the  Whig  party  had
been  intensely  anti-Catholic,  and  clear  traces  of  this  spirit  may
be  seen  even  in  the  speeches  of  Chatham ;  but  under  the  leader-
ship of  Fox  it  completely  passed  away.  From  this  time  re-
ligious liberty,  without  exception  or  restriction,  became  the
watchword  of  the  party ;  and  during  many  years  of  unpopularity
and  adversity  they  defended  the  Catholic  cause  with  a  consis-
tency and  self-sacrifice  which  have  been  rarely  equalled  in  the
history  of  parties,  and  for  which  they  have  often  been  rejDaid  by
the  basest  ingi-atitude.  As  might  have  been  expected,  the  Bill
was  not  all  that  Fox  could  have  desired.  He  entirely  objected
to  religious  tests  ;  he  wished  an  unlimited  toleration,  ii-respec-
tive  of  any  oath,  except  the  oath  of  allegiance ;  but  he  wisely
abstained  from  dividing  the  House.  '  His  sentiment,'  he  said,
'  was  that  the  State  had  no  right  to  inquire  into  the  opinions
of  people,  either  political  or  religious ;  they  had  a  right  only
to  take  cognisance  of  their  actions.'  '  The  public  might  pre-
scribe what  qualifications  and  restrictions  they  pleased  for  any
person,  before  the  King  could  employ  them  in  their  service,
but  .  .  .  toleration  in  religion  is  one  of  the  great  rights  of
man,  and  a  man  ought  never  to  be  deprived  of  what  was  his
natural  right.'  '  He  rejoiced  that  in  a  few  years  they  must
come  to  a  general  toleration,  for  the  times  were  too  much
enlightened  to  sufier  men's  minds  to  remain. shackled.  There
was  one  plain  road  to  pursue  ;  keep  in.  if  they  pleased,  all
their  statutes  for  the  Establishment  .  .  .  but  let  the  Statute-
book  be  examined,  and  strike  out  all  the  others  which  relate
merely  to  opinions.'  ^

While  these  were  the  views  of  the  chief  of  the  Opposition,
the  other  side  of  the  House  on  other  grounds  almost  equally

'  See  the speech of W. Smith,  Memoirs  of  the iinglish Catholics,

who  chiefly  rcj'ie.scnferl  tlie  Disst-iit-  ii.  111.

ing inl crest in J'lirliament. — Pari.  '■'  Purl. Hist, xxviii. 12C7, 13C5,

Hist,  xxviii.  1376. Bcc,  too,  Butler's  1308.

CH.  XIX.  CHANGED ESTIMATE OF CATHOLICISM.  189

sliared  tliem.  Tlie  no-Popery  panic  had  been  superseded  by  a
new  danger.  The  French  Revolution,  which  had  startled  and
alarmed  all  the  supporters  of  monarchical  and  ecclesiastical  esta-
blishments, had  been  directed  at  first  mainly  against  a  branch  of
the  Catholic  Church,  and  that  Church  was  now  regarded  as  the
most  powerful  bulwark  of  the  Conservative  party  throughout
Europe.  The  Anglican  bishops  fully  supported  the  Relief  Bill,
and  it  was  Bishop  Horsley  who  induced  the  House  of  Lords
to  change  the  form  of  oath  in  order  to  meet  the  objections
of  the  Vicars- Apostolic.^  Burke  very  strongly  supported  the
measure.  Without  the  smallest  disposition  to  believe  Roman
Catholic  theology,  he  had  always  a  strong  sympathy  with  the
Catholic  Church,  which  is  easily  explained  by  the  circumstances
of  his  family  and  his  nationality,  and  by  his  marked  natural
leaning  towards  antiquity  and  authority.  The  French  Revolu-
tion greatly  strengthened  it,  and,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  the
advocacy  of  the  claims  of  the  Irish  Catholics  was  one  of  the  last
works  of  his  great  and  admirable  career.  It  was  his  firm  con-
viction that  the  political  dangers  that  had  sprung  from  the
papacy  in  the  sixteenth,  and  in  some  measure  in  the  seventeenth,
century,  were  now  completely  extinct,  and  that  Catholicism
must  for  the  future  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  chief  conservative
elements  in  Europe.  '  It  is  a  great  truth,'  he  wi'ote  to  an
Irish  member  of  Parliament,  '  that  if  the  Catholic  religion  is
destroyed  by  the  infidels,  it  is  a  most  contemptible  and  absurd
idea  that  this,  or  any  Protestant  Church,  can  survive  the  event ; '
and  speaking  of  the  Irish,  he  added,  '  Let  them  grow  lax,
sceptical,  and  careless,  and  indifferent  with  regard  to  religion,
and,  so  sure  as  we  have  an  existence,  it  is  not  a  zealous  Anglican
or  Scottish  Church  principle,  but  direct  Jacobinism  which  will
enter  into  that  breach.'  ^

Pitt  had  himself  no  anti-Catholic  feeling,  and  the  Relief
Bill  of  1791  would  probably  have  been  much  more  extensive
but  for  one  unfavourable  influence.  It  could  hardly  be  argued
with  any  approach  to  plausibility  that  there  was  serious  political
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the  English  Catholics — a  small,
harmless,  insignificant,  and  most  pacific  class,  who  in  political

•  rarl  irist.  xxix.  678.  *  Prior's  Life  of  Burhe,  ii.  29(5,297.

120  ENGLAND IX THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

matters  were  generally  guided  hy  tlie  representatives  of  a
few  old  and  liiglily  respected  aristocratic  families.  In  Ireland,
however,  where  property,  political  power,  and  the  established
Church  were  in  the  hands  of  a  Protestant  minority,  the  situation
was  very  different,  and  the  Irish  Government  at  this  time  was
exceedingly  anti-Catholic.  They  continually  represented  to
Pitt  that  an  extended  Relief  Act  in  England  would  immensely
strengthen  the  demand  for  a  similar  measure  in  Ireland,  and
that  danofers  of  a  most  serious  kind  mi^^ht  thus  be  created.
This  consideration  appears  to  have  chiefly  decided  him  to  restrict
the  English  measure  to  the  provisions  that  have  been  described.
The  English  Act  produced  no  popular  ferment,  and  in  less
than  two  years  a  measure  was  carried  for  the  relief  of  the
Catholics  in  Scotland.  In  that  country,  as  in  England,  a  prac-
tical toleration  appears  to  have  been  at  last  attained,'  though  no
Relief  Bill  had  as  yet  been  passed,  as  Scotland  was  not  included
in  the  English  Acts  of  1778  or  1791.  At  the  beginning  of  the
French  Revolution,  the  Scotch  Catholics  were  reduced  to  great
distress  by  the  confiscation  of  the  Scotch  establishments  in
France,  from  which  the  payment  of  their  priests  was  largely
derived.  It  is  a  curious  illustration  of  the  changed  spirit  of  the
time  that  a  Catholic  bishop  brought  this  fact  before  the  English
Government,  and  that  the  Government  for  two  or  three  years
gave  secretly  small  salaries  to  all  the  Catholic  priests  in  Sqotland,
besides  contributing  to  two  Catholic  seminaries.^  The  toleration,
however,  which  the  Scotch  Catholics  enjoyed  was  still  of  a  very
precarious  kind.  Among  the  laws  that  were  unrepealed  was
one  enabling  the  nearest  Protestant  relation  to  tender  an  oath
which  was  inconsistent  with  Catholicism  to  any  Catholic  land-
owner, and  if  he  refused  to  take  it,  to  appropriate  the  estate.
The  law  was  so  odious,  that  it  was  very  rarely  put  in  force,  and
the  law  courts  appear  to  have  done  everything  in  their  power,
by  technical  difficulties,  to  make  it  inoporat  ive ;  but  a  case  of

'  A  writer  who  travelled  thrnush  priests and a bishop,  who, besides

the  Ilighhinds  in J 786,  says:  '  Wliile  the  contributions  I'rnm  their  hearers,

the I'rotestant  clergy have neither  have  a small allowance frona the

dwelling  houses  nor  places  to  preach  Church of Home.' — A Tour  in ihe

in,  those  of  ttie  Catholic  persuasion  Jlirihlands  in  1786, by  John Knox,

in the Hi>;hlands have both, and  p.  clxiii

wliieh(«tc)arekeptin  excellentrepjiir.  ^  Amherst's JTixt of Catholio

On  one  estate  only  th?re  are  seven  Ematieipatioii,  i.  271),  280.

CH.  XIX.  PARLI.iMENTARY IMPEACHMENT,  191

this  kind  was  actually  before  the  courts  when  the  Relief  Bill
of  1793  was  carried,  which  placed  the  Scotch  Catholics  in  a
position  substantially  similar  to  that  of  the  Catholics  of
England.^

One  other  measure  remains  to  be  noticed  in  this  review
of  reliffious  legfislation.  The  entire  extinction  of  Jacobitism
rendered  the  severe  laws  that  had  long  been  in  force  against  the
Protestant  Episcopalian  Church  in  Scotland  wholly  unnecessary.
The  death  of  Charles  Edward  in  1788  took  away  the  last  pretext
for  Jacobitism,  and  the  Scotch  bishops,  assembled  in  synod  at
Aberdeen,  agreed  to  submit,  and  to  pray  for  the  King  by  name.
A  measure  was  accordingly  framed  in  1795,  repealing  the
stringent  and  persecuting  Acts  of  the  first  two  Georges,  and
giving  the  Scotch  Episcopalians  a  perfect  toleration,  provided
their  ministers  took  the  usual  Scotch  oaths  and  prayed  for  the
King.  No  clergyman,  however,  in  Scotch  orders,  could  hold  a
benefice,  or  even  fill  a  curacy,  in  England.'^

We  may  now  pass  to  other  classes  of  questions  which  were
agitated  in  Parliament  between  the  King's  recovery  and  the
beginning  of  the  great  French  War.  In  the  constitutional
history  of  England  this  period  is  comparatively  barren;  but  two
important  questions  were  settled  by  the  concurrence  of  the
leaders  on  both  sides.  Among  the  extreme  remedies  provided
by  the  Constitution  for  extreme  abuses,  one  of  the  most  serious
is  parliamentary  impeachment ;  and  it  is  obviously  essential  to
its  efficacy  that  Parliament  should  have  the  power  of  carrying
it  through  to  its  end.  The  right  claimed  by  the  Crown  of
arresting  impeachment  by  a  pardon  was  condemned  by  a  vote
of  the  House  of  Commons  immediately  after  the  Revolution,
and  the  Act  of  Settlement  finally  enacted  '  that  no  pardon
under  the  Great  Seal  of  England  be  pleadable  to  an  impeach-
ment by  the  Commons  in  Parliament.'  It  was  still,  however,
undecided  whether  the  Crown  might  not  put  an  end  to  impeach-
ments by  proroguing  or  by  dissolving  the  House  of  Commons.
The  first  of  these  questions  was  raised  in  1717,  on  the  occasion

'  33 Geo. III. c. 44 ; Butler's  meration of the laws against  the

Mcvioirs  of  the  English Catholics,  ii.  Scotch  Episcopalians,  see  vol.  ii.  pp.

459-4()6.  67-69. See,  too.  Perry's  Hid.  of  tke

«  32  Geo.  III.  c.  63. For  an  enu-  Church  of  England,  iii.  52:2,  .523.

192 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xix.

of  the  impeachment  of  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  and  it  was  then
formally  resolved  that  a  prorogation  of  Parliament  does  not
determine  an  impeachment.  The  second  question  was  decided
in  connection  with  the  impeachment  of  Warren  Hastings.
There  was  a  dissolution  in  the  summer  of  1790,  and  when  the
new  Parliament  met  it  was  contended  that  the  proceedings  of
the  former  House  of  Commons  against  Hastings  were  null  and
void,  that  the  impeachment  was  at  an  end,  and  that  it  must  be
either  abandoned  or  begun  again  from  the  beginning.  It  is
remarkable  that  Pitt,  on  this  occasion,  held  a  conference  with
Fox  and  Burke,  the  only  occasion,  it  is  said,  since  the  Coalition
Ministry,  on  which  the  two  great  rivals  were  brought  together
in  private  life.^

Erskine  maintained,  in  a  long  and  elaborate  speech,  that
the  imjDeachment  was  at  an  end,  and  the  great  preponder-
ance of  lawyers,  including  the  Chancellor,  the  Chief  Justice
of  the  King's  Bench,  the  Master  of  the  Rolls,  the  Attorney-
General,  and  the  Solicitor-General,  were  on  the  same  side.'
They  argued  partly  from  precedents,  which,  however,  they
were  obliged  to  admit  to  be  conflicting,  and  partly  from
analogies  drawn  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Common  Law
Courts.  Pitt,  Fox,  and  Burke,  however,  concurred  in  the
opposite  view.  The  speech  of  Pitt  on  this  occasion  is  an  extra-
ordinary instance  of  the  superiority  with  which,  on  an  essen-
tially legal  question,  he  could  contend  with  the  foremost
lawyers  of  his  time;  and  in  accordance  with  his  opinion,  it
was  resolved  by  a  great  majority  that  a  dissolution  does  not
terminate  an  impeachment,  and  that  a  new  House  of  Commons
has  a  right  to  take  up  the  proceedings  at  the  point  at  which
they  had  been  left  by  its  predecessor.

The  second  question,  which  was  now  finally  settled,  was  the
long  dispute  about  the  rights  of  juries  in  cases  of  libel.  We
have  seen  in  a  former  part  of  this  work  how  Hardwicke,
Mansfii'ld,  Jmd  many  less  distinguished  judges  had  uniformly
contended  that  in  cases  of  libel  the  province  of  the  jury  was
merely  to  determine  the  fact  of  the  publication,  and  the  meaning
of  the  allusions;  and  that  wlien  these  points  wore  established,

'  Pcllcw's  Life  of  Sidmotith,  i.  80.  »  Toinline's  Life  of  Pitt,  iii.  100, 197.

CH.  XIX.  FLOOD'S  REFORM BILL.  193

it  was  for  the  judge  alone  to  pronounce  whether  the  incriminated
document  was  libellous.  A  Bill,  drawn  up  by  Burke  and  intro-
duced by  Dowdeswell,  had  been  brought  before  Parliament  in
the  beginning  of  1771,  with  the  object  of  giving  juries  the
right  of  deciding  on  the  whole  question ;  but  it  was  defeated,
and  Fox  was  one  of  the  majority  that  threw  it  out.  After  the
lapse  of  twenty  years,  however,  his  opinion  was  changed,  and
he  now  introduced  a  declaratory  Bill,  to  the  same  effect  as
the  measure  which  he  had  opposed  in  1771,  and  he  carried
it  with  the  full  assent  of  Pitt.  The  Chancellor,  Lord  Thurlow,
vehemently  opposed  it,  and  signed  a  protest  describing  its
doctrine  as  '  contrary  to  the  determination  of  the  judges  and
the  unvarying  practice  of  ages.'  It  is  curious  to  observe,
that  this  gi'eat  triumph  of  the  liberty  of  the  press  only  pre-
ceded by  a  very  short  time  a  series  of  press  prosecutions,  that
were  certainly  the  harshest  since  the  accession  of  the  House  of
Hanover.

The  question  of  parliamentary  reform  continued  almost
dormant,  and  the  outbreak  of  the  French  Revolution  had
strongly  indisposed  the  nation  to  reopen  it.  In  1790,  how-
ever, Flood  brought  forward  a  scheme  for  adding  to  the  House
a  hundi'ed  members  elected  by  the  resident  householders  of  the
counties,  and  he  suggested,  though  he  did  not  formally  pro-
pose, that  if  this  addition  to  the  numbers  of  the  House  were
deemed  too  large,  the  balance  might  be  redi'essed  by  taking
half  the  members  from  a  hundred  minute  boroughs  which
returned  two  members  each.  The  motion,  though  it  had
the  usual  fate  of  great  constitutional  changes  proposed  by
private  members,  at  least  led  to  an  interesting  debate.  Quoting
the  saying  of  Machiavelli  that  '  no  free  government  can  last
that  is  not  often  brought  back  to  its  first  principles,'  Flood
stated  that  the  English  Constitution  had  so  far  receded  from  the
ideal  of  popular  representation,  that  from  six  to  eight  thousand
electors  actually  returned  a  majority  of  the  members  of  the
House  of  Commons.  He  cited  the  opinion  of  Blackstone,  that
the  Crown,  since  the  Revolution,  had  gained  more  in  influence
than  it  had  lost  in  prerogative ;  the  prediction  of  Hume  that
arbitrary  government  was  likely  to  be  the  euthanasia  of  the
British  Constitution ; the  argument  of  Bishop  Sherlock,  w]io

VOL.  V.  -  O

194 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

had  defended  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts  on  the  ground  that
the  petty  boroughs  were  so  numerous  that,  if  the  Dissenters
ever  obtained  an  ascendency  in  them,  they  might,  though  only
a  twentieth  part  of  the  English  people,  command  a  majority  in
the  House  of  Commons.  He  contended  that  the  middle  class,
which  was  so  feebly  represented  in  English  politics,  and  which
it  was  his  special  object  to  strengthen,  was  more  likely  than  any
other  class  to  exercise  political  power  soberly,  honestly,  and
independently,  and  that  the  great  increase  of  taxation  was  a
strong  reason  for  enlarging  the  area  of  representation.  About
eight  millions  of  Englishmen,  he  said,  were  now  burdened  with
a  debt  of  240  millions,  and  paid  annually  in  taxation  fifteen
and  a  half  millions,  or  about  fifty  shillings  a  head.  The  evil
that  might  result  from  the  present  system  was  shown  by  the
conflict  between  the  House  of  Commons  and  the  public  opinion
of  the  nation  during  the  Middlesex  election  and  by  the  cala-
mitous American  War  which.  Flood  maintained,  would  have
been  impossible  if  the  House  had  adequately  represented  the
popular  will.  He  denied  that  the  disturbances  in  France
furnished  any  just  argument  against  reform.  Very  moderate
reforms  under  the  Tudors  might  have  prevented  the  civil  war
under  Charles  I.  Very  moderate  reforms  under  Charles  II.
might  have  made  the  Revolution  unnecessary;  and  'those  who
oppose  reform  may  be  enemies  to  revolution  in  their  hearts,
but  they  are  friends  to  it  by  their  folly.'

The  keynote  of  the  opposition  was  struck  by  Windham,
when  he  asked  whether  any  wise  man  would  '  select  the  hurri-
cane season  to  repair  his  house.'  Pitt  said  he  must  oppose  the
motion  as  inopportune,  though  he  was  still  a  friend  of  reform  ;
and  Fox,  while  supporting  Flood,  frankly  confessed  that  he  did
not  believe  that  the  majority,  either  within  or  without  the  House,
were  at  this  time  in  favour  of  reform.  He  still  held  his  old
of)inion  that  the  unpopular  side  of  the  Middlesex  election  ques-
tion was  the  true  one,  and  he  acknowledged  his  belief  that
public  opinion  in  England  was  in  favour  of  the  commencement
of  the  American  War,  though  a  popular  Parliament  might  have
shortened  its  duration.  Even  the  latter  proposition  was  denied
by  Burke.  'The  American  War,'  he  said,  'was  oi'iginally  Ihe
war  of  the  people,  and  was  put  a  stop  to,  not  by  them,  but  by

CH.  XIX.  QUEBEC GOVERNMENT  JilLL.  19o

the  virtue  of  a  British  House  of  Commons,  who,  without  any
petitions  from  the  people,  without  their  interference,  and  almost
without  their  consent,  had  the  magnanimity  to  take  upon  them-
selves to  put  an  end  to  it.'  ^

Flood's  motion  was  superseded  by  an  adjournment,  and  from
this  time,  for  nearly  forty  years,  the  stream  flowed  steadily
against  the  reformers.  Grey,  indeed,  as  the  representative  of
the  '  Society  of  the  Friends  of  the  People,'  brought  the  subject
before  Parliament  in  1792,  1793,  and  1797,  but  only  to  en-
counter complete  and  ignominious  defeat,  and  there  is  little
doubt  that  Pitt,  in  opposing  every  attempt  at  this  time  to  touch
the  framework  of  the  Constitution,  represented  the  genuine
sentiment  of  the  greater  part  of  the  nation.

An  important  constitutional  measure,  however,  was  carried
in  1791,  in  the  Quebec  Government  Act,  which  established
representative  government  in  Canada.  Since  1774,  the  admi-
nistration of  affairs  in  this  colony  had  been  in  the  hands  of  a
council  nominated  by  the  Crown,'''  but  the  time,  it  was  thought,
had  now  come  to  create  free  institutions  and  to  place  the
Government  on  a  permanent  basis.  The  presence  of  a  great
French  majority  in  the  colony,  and  the  fact  that  the  French
colonists  were  attached  to  French  laws,  while  the  English
preferred  those  of  their  own  country,  complicated  the  problem,
and  it  was  met  by  the  division  of  Canada  into  two  distinct
provinces — upper  and  lower,  corresponding  roughly,  but  sub-
stantially, with  the  nationalities.

The  new  Constitution  was  framed  partly  on  the  model  of
the  old  Crown  colonies  in  America,  and  partly  on  that  of
the  British  Constitution.  There  was  to  be  a  governor  and
a  lieutenant  governor,  and  in  each  province  a  council  and
an  assembly.  The  assemblies  were  to  be  elected  chiefly  by
freeholders,  or  101.  leaseholders  and  to  be  renewed  by  sep-
tennial elections.  The  members  of  the  councils  were  nomi-
nated by  the  governor  for  life,  and  a  power  was  at  the  same
time  reserved  to  the  Crown  of  annexing  to  certain  honours
an  hereditary  right  of  sitting  in  the  council.  The  Catholic
majority  had  already  obtained  a  full  title  to  their  old  Church
lands,  but  it  was  provided  in  the  Bill  that,  instead  of  tithes,  a
"  Farl.  Hist,  xxviii.  452-479.  *  14  Geo.  III.  c.  8.S

o  2

196  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

seventh  portion  of  all  the  newly  allotted  lauds  should  be
assigned  to  the  Protestant  clergy,  as  an  endowment.  In  cases
of  judicial  appeal,  the  judgment  of  the  Privy  Council  was  no
longer  to  be  final.  There  was  to  be  a  still  further  appeal  to  the
House  of  Lords.  The  possibility  of  disputes  like  those  which
had  produced  the  severance  of  the  other  American  colonies  from
England  was  carefully  guarded  against.  It  was  distinctly  pro-
vided that  the  British  Parliament  could  impose  no  taxes  on
Canada,  except  those  that  were  necessary  for  the  regulation  of
ti-ade  and  commerce,  and  that  even  those  must  be  levied  and
disposed  of  exclusively  by  the  Canadian  Legislature,

A  great  part  of  the  debate  on  the  Quebec  Bill  was  exceed-
ingly discursive  and  disorderly.  The  French  Revolution  now
coloured  every  discussion,  and  a  passing  sarcasm  of  Fox  turned
it  for  a  time  almost  wholly  in  that  direction.  Fox  accused  the
Government  of  endeavouring  to  call  into  existence  in  the  New
World  the  blue  and  red  ribands  which  had  so  lost  their  lustre
in  the  Old  World,  the  titles  of  honour  and  the  spirit  of  chivalry,
whose  extinction  in  the  neighbouring  country  had  been  so
greatly  deplored.  Bui-ke  retorted  by  accusing  Fox  of  endea-
vouring to  introduce  French  principles  into  Canadian  govern-
ment, and  he  entered  into  an  elaborate  disquisition  on  the
enormities  of  the  French  llevolution.  A  stranger  who  listened
to  the  debate  might  easily,  during  many  hours,  have  imagined
that  it  was  the  affairs,  not  of  Canada,  but  of  France  that  were
under  discussion.  Member  after  member  vainly  tried  to  turn
it  back  to  the  Quebec  Bill.  The  Speaker  seems  to  have  remained
perfectly  passive,  and  Pitt,  while  maintaining  that  a  discussion
of  the  French  Constitution  was  very  inexpedient,  denied  that
it  was  disorderly,  as  tlie  question  before  the  House  was  the
creation  of  a  new  form  of  government  and  the  principles  on
which  it  should  be  based.  It  was  in  the  course  of  this  debate
that  tJie  famous  breach  between  Fox  and  Burke  took  place,  and
the  interest  attaching  to  this  episode  has  diverted  the  attention
of  most  historians  from  the  merits  of  the  Bill.

The  Quebec  Government  Bill,  however,  was  quite  important
enough  to  be  considered  on  its  own  merits,  and  it  raised  ques-
tions of  the  most  far-reaching  interest.  Nearly  every  part  of
the  Government  scheme  was  objected  to  by  Fox. He  objected

en.  XIX.  FOX ON  ARISTOCRACIES.  197

to  the  division  of  tlie  provinces,  to  the  septennial  elections,
to  the  small  number  of  members  in  the  Legislature,  to  the
regulation  of  appeals,  to  the  amount  of  land  which  was  allotted
to  the  clergy;  but  the  part  against  which  his  most  serious
arguments  were  urged  was  the  composition  of  the  councils,  or
upper  chambers.  He  argued,  with  great  force,  that  it  was  an
act  of  folly  to  attempt  to  create  hereditary  aristocracy  in  a
new  country,  and  he  recommended  the  example  of  the  United
States,  in  which  the  councils  were  elective.  At  the  same  time
he  strenuously  disclaimed  the  levelling  principles  that  were
ascribed  to  him.  The  modern  democratic  creed  that  no  spe-
cial weight  should  be  given  in  the  elective  system  either  to
property  or  to  intelligence  ;  that  property  can  be  permanently
secure  where  the  poor  have  an  unchecked  and  unlimited  power
of  taxing  the  rich ;  that  a  great,  highly  complex,  and  hetero-
geneous empire  can  be  maintained,  and  safely  and  wisely
administered,  where  vast  majorities  of  the  most  ignorant  classes
of  the  community  are  the  ultimate  source  of  all  political  power
and  control,  finds  no  countenance  in  the  speeches  of  Fox.  His
language  on  this  subject  is  clear  and  decisive,  and  it  marks  out
the  true  principles  of  the  Whig  party.

'  It  was  always,'  he  said,  '  his  wish  rather  to  give  the  Crown
less  power  and  the  people  more,  where  it  could  be  done  with
safety  J '  and  '  he  was  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  Constitution  of
this  country  was  more  liable  to  be  ruined  by  an  increase  of  the
power  of  the  Crown  than  by  an  increase  of  the  power  of  the
people.'  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he  laid  it  down  '  as  a  principle
never  to  be  departed  from,  that  every  part  of  the  British
dominion  ought  to  possess  a  government,  in  the  constitution  of
which,  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy  were  mutually
blended  and  united ;  nor  could  any  government  be  a  fit  one  for
British  subjects  to  live  under  which  did  not  contain  its  due
weight  of  aristocracy,  as  this  is  the  proper  poise  of  the  Constitu-
tion— the  balance  that  equalised  and  meliorated  the  powers  of
the  two  other  extreme  branches,  and  gave  stability  and  firmness
to  the  whole.'  '  Aristocracy,'  he  continued,  '  in  its  true  sense,
is  an  indispensably  necessary  part  of  a  mixed  government
under  a  free  Constitution,  and  it  ought  to  be  made  as  essential  a
part  of  the  Canadian  Constitution  as  either  the  monarchical  or

198  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENin CENTUEY. en.  xix.

the  popular  brancli.  But  aristocracy,  in  its  true  meaning,
does  not  rest  solely,  or  even  mainly,  upon  birth.  In  England
the  House  of  Lords  formed  the  aristocracy,  and  it  con-
sisted partly  of  ancient  families,  and  partly  of  peers  newly
created  on  account  of  their  extended  landed  property.  That
prejudice  for  ancient  families,  and  that  sort  of  pride  which
belonged  to  a  nobility,  were  right  to  be  encouraged  in  a  country
like  this  ;  otherwise  one  great  incentive  to  virtue  would  be
abolished,  and  the  national  dignity  as  well  as  its  domestic
interests  would  be  diminished  and  weakened.'  '  The  British
House  of  Lords  stands  on  the  hereditary,  known,  and  acknow-
ledged respect  of  the  country  for  particular  institutions.'  It
would  be  folly  to  abolish  it,  and  exceedingly  unwise  to  mingle
the  hereditary  peers  with  life  peers,  as  such  a  measure  would
enable  the  Crown  '  to  overwhelm  the  hereditary  peerage,  and
thus  destroy  the  constitutional  control  of  the  aristocracy,  in  case
they  attempted  to  resist  it.'  '  It  was  impossible,  however,  to
put  an  infant  Constitution  on  the  same  footing '  as  the  House  of
Lords.  Hereditary  dignities  which  in  an  old  country  would
command  universal  respect,  in  the  colonies  would  be  ridiculous ;
and  the  French  '  seigneurs,'  who  were  the  nearest  approach  to  a
nobility,  '  were  utterly  unfit,  and  were  not  respected  enough,  to
be  made  hereditary  nobles.'

Under  these  circumstances,  the  true  method  of  creating  in
the  Canadian  Constitution  a  strong  and  permanent  aristocratic
balance  was  to  seek  it,  not  in  birth,  but  in  the  other  great
element  of  aristocracy.  *  Property,'  he  said,  '  was,  and  had
ever  been  held  to  be,  the  true  foundation  of  ai'istocracy.'  In
order  'to  put  the  freedom  and  stability  of  the  Constitution
of  Canada  on  the  strongest  basis,  he  proposed  that  the  council
should  bo  elective.  But  how  elective  ?  Not  as  the  members
of  the  House  of  Assembly  were  intended  to  be,  but  upon
another  footing.  He  proposed  that  the  members  of  the  council
should  not  be  eligible  unless  they  possessed  qualifications  infinitely
higher  tlian  those  who  were  eligible  to  be  chosen  members  of
the  IJouHB  of  Assembly.  And  in  like  manner  the  electors  of
the  mcniber.s  of  council  must  ])osf-;ess  qualifications  also  pro-
portionately higher  than  those  of  the  electors  of  representatives
in  tlie  iloiiKo  of  Assembly. By  this  mojins  they  would  have  a

cii.  XIX.  INDISCRETIONS  OF  FOX.  199

real  aristocracy,  choseu  by  persons  of  property  from  among
persons  of  the  highest  property,  and  who  would  thence  neces-
sarily possess  that  weight,  influence,  and  independence  from
which  alone  could  be  derived  a  power  of  guarding  against  any
innovation  that  might  be  made,  either  by  the  people  on  the  one
part,  or- the  Crown  on  the  other.'  '  A  true  aristocracy,'  he  con-
cluded Avith  great  emphasis,  'gave  a  country  that  sort  of  energy,
that  sort  of  spirit,  and  that  sort  of  enterprise  which  always
made  a  country  great  and  happy.' '

This  very  remarkable  speech  was  intended  by  Fox  as  an
answer  to  those  who  accused  him  of  being  a  mere  demagogue,
or  republican,  and  if  it  had  represented  the  general  tenor  of
his  speeches  it  would  be  difficult  to  understand  how  such  au
impression  could  have  prevailed.  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that
his  vehemence  and  indiscretioia  often  betrayed  him  into  expres-
sions in  advance  of  his  real  and  deliberate  opinions,  and  he  had
strangely  little  of  that  tact  in  observing  times  and  seasons
which  is  essential  to  a  successful  statesman.  As  Burke  happily
said,  a  very  moderate  speech  on  the  merits  of  Protestantism  and
the  demerits  of  popery  might  be  dangerous  and  incendiary  if
it  had  been  delivered  when  the  Gordon  riots  were  at  their
height.  Fox  was  perpetually  expressing  his  gratification  at  the
French  Revolution  at  a  time  when  English  public  opinion
was  not  only  horrified  by  its  atrocities,  but  also  panic-stricken
by  the  dangers  to  Church  and  State  which  might  ensue  from  its
example ;  and  he  was  perpetually  dilating  on  the  necessity  of
reform,  and  on  the  danger  of  the  excessive  power  of  the  Crown,
when,  in  the  opinion  of  the  great  mass  of  the  English  people,
all  the  pressing  dangers  were  from  the  opposite  quarter.  His
private  letters  show  that  he  was  far  from  insensible  to  the
horrors  that  were  being  perpetrated  in  France,  but,  through  his
indignation  at  what  he  deemed  opposite  exaggerations,  he  gave
no  adequate  expression  to  his  feeling.  The  founding  of  the
*  Friends  of  the  People,'  and  Grey's  most  unfortunate  campaign
in  favour  of  reform,  were  contrary  to  the  judgment  of  Fox,
though  he  confessed  that  he  had  not  the  resolution  to  discourage
them.  In  his  own  real  opinions  on  constitutional  questions
tliere  was  little  that  was  exaggerated,  and  they  often  showed  a
'  Pari.  Hist.  xxix.  419-121,  125.

200  ENGLAND IN THE EIGnXEENTII CENTURY. cii.  xix.

singularly  sound  political  judgment.  Few  persons  will  now
dispute  the  justice  of  liis  opinion  tliat  it  was  inexpedient  to
introduce  hereditary  aristocracy  into  a  country  which  had  none
of  the  materials,  traditions,  or  sentiments  out  of  which  true
aristocracies  are  formed ;  and  although  the  power  of  creating
hereditary  honours  in  Canada  was  reserved  to  the  Crown,  it  was
never  exercised.  The  division  of  French  and  English  Canada
may  have  been  the  best  expedient  under  the  circumstances,
but  it  ultimately  led  to  grave  disaffection  and  dissension  ;  and
the  union  of  1840,  which  put  an  end  to  it,  proved  perhaps  the
most  successful  measure  in  Canadian  history.  In  deference  to
the  wish  of  Fox,  Pitt  consented  to  increase  the  number  of
members  in  the  Assembly  of  Lower  Canada,  and  to  abolish  the
appeal  from  Canadian  law  courts  to  the  Privy  Council,  but
with  these  exceptions  the  original  scheme  of  the  Quebec
Government  Bill  was  carried  without  alteration,^  and  it
governed  Canada  till  the  rebellion  of  1837  and  1838  led  to  the
revised  Constitution  of  1840.

There  is  one  characteristic  of  the  Quebec  Government  Act
which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  adverted  to  in  debate,  but
which  is  peculiarly  worthy  of  the  attention  of  historians.  It  is
the  complete  abandonment  of  all  attempt  to  induce  or  compel
Canada  to  contribute  to  the  military  or  naval  forces  of  the  Empire.
It  cannot  be  too  clearly  understood  that  the  essential  object  of
George  Grenville  in  his  colonial  policy  was  not  to  establish  the
right  of  the  English  to  tax  America,  but  to  establish  the  principle
tliat  America  should  contribute  something  to  her  own  military
defence.  The  example  of  Ireland,  where  15,000  men  were
maintained  by  the  local  Parliament,  12,000  of  whom  could  not  be
moved  from  Ireland  without  the  consent  of  the  Irish  Parliament,
while  the  remainder  were  at  the  full  disposal  of  the  English
Executive,  was  continually  before  his  eyes ;  and  if  he  en-
deavoured to  establish  some  such  system  in  America,  by  means
of  tlie  Imperial  Parliament,  it  was  merely  because  there  was  no
single  legislature  for  the  American  colonies.  If,  however,  by
any  kind  of  negotiation  or  arrangement  he  could  have  induced
tlio  colonics  to  undertake  a  part  of  their  own  military  defence,
and  of  the  defence  of  the  neighbouring  islands,  he  would  have
•  31  Ceo.  III.  c.  31.

en.  XIX.  COLONIAL DEFENCE.  201

Leen  fully  satisfied.  It  is  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  degree  in
wliicli  the  British  Empire  would  have  been  strengthened  if  each
of  its  more  important  parts  could  have  been  persuaded  to
maintain  a  permanent  force  sufficient  to  secure  it  from  the
danger  of  a  sudden  attack,  and  perhaps,  in  times  of  extreme
need  and  difficulty,  to  give  some  small  help  to  the  parent  State.
Manifold  and  inestimable  as  are  the  advantages  which  England
derives  from  her  scattered  possessions  in  time  of  peace,  no
serious  statesman  can  fail  to  j)erceive  how  many  vulnerable
points  those  possessions  present  in  time  of  war ;  how  grave  may
be  the  dangers  resulting  from  the  dispersion  of  the  national  forces
which  is  necessary  for  their  defence ;  how  greatly  they  increase
the  temptations,  pretexts,  and  probabilities  of  war ;  how  easily
an  attack  upon  them,  without  any  attempt  at  annexation  or
occupation,  might  lead  to  the  disruption  of  the  empire.  The
attachment  of  the  most  loyal  colonists  to  the  mother  country
could  hardly  fail  to  be  dangerously  strained  if  they  found  their
coasts  invaded  and  t^ieir  towns  bombarded  on  account  of  an
Imperial  policy  in  which  they  had  no  voice  or  interest ;  while
the  cost,  difficulties,  and  dangers  of  colonial  defence  form  the
most  plausible  argument  of  those  who  have  sought  to  alienate
England  from  the  Greater  Britain  beyond  the  seas.  Before  the
American  Revolution,  it  seemed  by  no  means  impossible  that
by  tact  and  patience  a  system  of  colonial  defence  might  have
been  established  which,  without  imposing  a  serious  burden  on
the  English  colonies,  would  have  rendered  them  practically
secure  against  attack.  But  the  unfortunate  conduct  and  issue
of  the  American  dispute  made  such  an  attempt  impossible,
and  the  policy  of  Grenville  was  abandoned.  At  last,  however,
towards  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  an  attempt
has  been  made  in  another  form  to  realise  it  in  part.  England
still  undertakes  the  full  naval  defence  of  her  colonies,  but  she
has  withdi-awn  from  them  all,  or  nearly  all,  their  Imperial
garrisons,  and  they  in  their  turn  have  established  large
militia  and  volunteer  forces  which  are  intended  at  once  to
secure  them  from  the  possibility  of  successful  attack,  and  to
relieve  the  mother  country  from  the  burden  of  then'  military
defence.  Still  later  unequivocal  signs  appeared  that  those
intelligent, patriotic, and vigorous communities which have

202  ENGLAND IN  TJIE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

grown  up  under  tlie  sLadow  of  the  British  rule  were  not  indif-
ferent to  their  position  as  members  of  a  great  historic  empire
and  were  fully  prepared  to  take  their  part  in  its  defence.  Dis-
positions of  this  kind  have  of  late  years  shown  themselves
in  some  of  the  Colonial  Legislatures  which  form,  in  an  age
of  much  political  discouragement  and  scepticism,  the  most
auspicious  omen  for  the  future  of  the  empire.

I  have  now  enumerated  the  principal  measures  of  internal
policy  which  were  carried  during  the  years  we  are  considering  ;
but  perhaps  the  most  valuable  part  of  the  work  of  Pitt  was  that
complete  restoration  and  reorganisation  of  English  finance
which  we  have  already  in  part  considered.  The  fears  of  bank-
ruptcy which  had  pressed  so  heavily  upon  English  statesmen
in  the  closing  years  of  the  American  War  had  been  completely
dispelled,  and  at  a  time  when  France  was  plunged  in  hope-
less financial  embarrassments  the  English  finances  were  steadily
flourishing  and  improving.  In  his  Budget  speech  of  1790,
Pitt  was  able  to  state  that  since  1786^  only  1,000, OOOZ.  had
been  raised  in  the  form  of  loan,  and  that,  in  spite  of  very
considerable  extraordinary  expenses  beyond  those  of  a  peace
establishment,  5,184,000/.  of  the  3  per  cent,  loan  had  been
discharged  since  1785,  and  annuities  amounting  to  200,000/.
had  fallen  in.  '  The  country,'  he  said,  '  at  this  moment  is  in  a
situation  of  prosperity  far  greater  than  in  the  most  flourishing
period  before  the  last  war.'

England  was  so  far  from  ruined  by  the  loss  of  America  that
the  export  of  British  manuliicturcd  goods  in  the  last  year
exceeded  by  more  than  3,000,000/,  the  average  of  the  six
prosperous  years  which  immediately  preceded  the  American
War,  while  the  imports  into  British  harbours  were  larger  than
in  any  previous  year,  and  the  number  of  ships  and  sailors  had
proportionately  increased.'  Tlie  taxation  was  no  doubt  very
lieavy.  Nearly  ]  0,000,000/.  had  been  raised  during  each  of  the
last  three  years,'*  but  the  wealth  of  the  country  was  fully  able  to
bear  it,  and  in  nearly  all  its  branches  the  revenue  showed  a
tendency  to  increase.  In  the  preceding  year  the  shop  tax,
which  had  proved  exceeding  unpopular,  was  repealed,  and  some
cLhcr  taxes  were  imposed  to  replace  it,  among  others  a  tax  on
>  Pari.  Ilht.  xxviii.  G08-7O0,  ^  ihid.  G08.

en.  XIX.  EULGETS OF 1791 AND 1792.  203

newspapers  and  advertisements.  Tobacco,  which  had  become
the  great  article  for  smuggling,  had  been  transferred  from  the
Customs  to  the  Excise.  •  It  was  computed  that  the  revenue
would  gain  no  less  than  300,000Z.  a  year  by  this  change,  and
several  other  measures  had  been  taken  to  annihilate  smuggling.
The  budget  of  1791  was  in  one  respect  less  favourable,  for
the  danger  of  a  war  with  Spain  had  rendered  necessary  large
and  rapid  armaments,  and  an  additional  and  exceptional  ex-
penditure of  more  than  2,800,000Z.  had  been  incurred.  But
in  spite  of  this  expense  Pitt  was  able  to  assert  that  the  credit
of  the  country  had  never  stood  higher,  and,  unlike  most  of  his
predecessors,  he  determined  to  discharge  the  new  debt  by  taxa-
tion, spread  over  four  years. ^  The  anticipations  respecting  the
produce  of  these  new  taxes  were  amply  verified,  and  the  long
and  splendid  speech  with  which  he  introduced  his  budget  in
February  1792  glowed  with  the  richest  colours  of  hope  and
exultation.  It  was  indeed  a  magnificent  picture  of  the  growing
prosperity  of  England;  a  noble  monument  of  his  own  skill,
both  in  financial  statement  and  financial  legislation;  and,
at  the  same  time,  a  mournful  illustration  of  the  fallacy  and
imperfection  that  mingle  with  all  human  predictions.  The
total  revenue  of  the  country,  he  said,  from  January  5,  1791,
to  Januarys,  1792,  was  16,730,000Z.,  irrespectively  of  the  newly
imposed  temporary  taxes  ;  that  of  the  preceding  year  had  been
16,418,000L,  and  the  average  of  the  last  four  years  had  been
16,21 2, OOOZ.  Looking  back  to  a  longer  period  and  comparing
the  condition  of  the  country  with  that  of  1783,  the  first  year  of
peace  after  the  American  War,  the  revenue  had  increased  to  the
extent  of  little  less  than  4,000,000Z.  Of  this,  rather  more  than
1,000,000^  was  due  to  the  additional  taxes  which  he  had  im-
posed;  1,000,000^  had  been  gained  in  those  articles  in  which
special  and  separate  regulations  had  been  made  for  the  preven-
tion of  smuggling  and  other  fraud ;  the  remainder  was  diffused

■  Pari.  Hist,  xxviii.  1003-1009.  through  the  country  with  an  unex-
Tn  a  letter  to  Sir  R.  Keith,  dated  ampled  energy  and  activity  both  in
Feb.  9,  1791,  Lord  Auckland  wrote:  agriculture  and  manufactures.  .  .  .
'Notwithstanding  the  interruption  The  measures  for  paying  the  late  ex-
arising  from  the  Spanish  business,  penses  are  executing  without  ti'ouhle
the  net t  revenue  of  1790  was  sisteen  or  any  apparent  sensation  in  the
millions,  being  near  400,OOOZ.  more  country.' — Smyth's  Mems.  of  Sir  IL
than  ever  was  known  ;  and  a  de-  Keith,  ii.  377.
gree  of opulence  is  now  circulating

204:  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xix.

over  articles  of  general  consumption,  and  was  the  consequence
and  the  proof  of  the  rapidly  increasing  prosperity  of  the  country.
He  showed  that  the  imports  which  in  1782,  the  last  year  of
the  war,  amounted  to  9,714,000Z,,  had  increased  in  every  suc-
ceeding year,  and  amounted  in  1790  to  19,130,000Z.  The
total  of  the  exports  in  1782  was  12,2-39,000Z.  After  the
Peace,  it  rose,  in  1783,  to  14,741,000Z,  and  in  the  year  1790  it
was  20,120,000Z.  The  last  additional  duty,  included  in  the  Post
Office  Revenue,  had  been  imposed  in  1784.  In  1785,  the  Post
Office  yielded  238,000L  Last  year  it  produced  338,000Z.  In
the  mean  time,  a  progress  unprecedented  in  any  former  period
had  been  made  in  diminishing  the  National  Debt,  and  he  calcu-
lated that  in  fifteen  years  the  period  contemplated  in  the  Act  of
1786  would  have  arrived,  when  the  Sinking  Fund  would  amount
to  4,000,000Z.  a  year,  and  when  its  further  disposition  would
have  to  be  determined  by  fresh  legislation.  He  announced  that
he  had  now  a  surplus  of  rather  more  than  400,000Z.  to  dispose
of;  and  he  proposed  to  apply  it  in  equal  proportions  to  the
diminution  of  taxes  and  the  reduction  of  debt,  selecting  for
special  diminution  those  taxes  which  weighed  upon  the  poorer
classes.  The  reduction  of  the  debt,  he  still  maintained,  should
be  the  cardinal  object  of  financial  policy;  and  not  content  with
the  very  considerable  steps  which  had  been  already  taken,  he
now  announced  his  intention  to  introduce  a  prospective  law
intended  to  provide  a  permanent  remedy  against  the  danger  of
future  accumulations  of  debt,  by  enacting  that  every  additional
loan  should  be  accompanied  by  a  separate  sinking  fund,  suffi-
cient to  pay  it  off  in  a  defined  number  of  years,  and  appropriated
exclusively  to  that  purpose.

He  concluded  bis  speech  in  a  strain  of  justifiable  exultation.

*  The  present  prosperity  of  England,'  he  said, '  was  unexampled.'

*  The  season  of  our  severe  trial  is  at  an  end,  and  we  are  at
length  relieved  not  only  from  the  dejection  and  gloom  which  a
few  years  since  hung  over  the  country,  but  from  the  doubt  and
uncertainty  which,  even  for  a  considerable  time  after  our  pro-
spects had  begun  to  brighten,  still  mingled  with  the  hopes  and
expectations  of  tlio  public.  ...  As  far  as  there  can  be  any
reliance  on  human  speculations,  wo  have  the  best  ground  from
the  exjiericnce of  the  past  to  look with satisfaction to the

CH.  XIX.  PITTS  LOVE  OF  I'EACR.  203

present  and  with  confidence  to  the  future.'  Much  of  this
prosperity,  he  said,  was  due  to  causes  which  lay  beyond  the
sphere  of  political  acts ;  to  the  spontaneous  enterprise  and  in-
dustry of  the  country,  and  to  the  normal  increase  of  capital ;
but  much  also  must  be  ascribed  to  the  commercial  treaty  with
France,  and  to  the  wise  adjustment  of  the  whole  system  of
customs  and  taxation  on  principles  which  had  never  before  been
so  well  understood  or  so  skilfully  elucidated.  '  The  great  work
of  Adam  Smith,'  said  Pitt,  '  will,  I  believe,  furnish  the  best
solution  to  every  question  connected  with  the  history  of  com-
merce and  with  the  systems  of  political  economy.'  But  above
these  immediate  causes  of  industrial  prosperity  lay  others  which
were  still  more  important.  Sound  politics  are  the  essential  con-
dition of  permanent  material  prosperity.  The  security  and  pro-
sperity of  England  ;  the  solidity  of  credit ;  the  rapid  increase  of
capital ;  the  rapid  expansion  of  industry,  are  all  '  necessarily
connected  with  the  duration  of  peace,  the  continuation  of  which
on  a  secure  and  permanent  footing  must  ever  be  the  first  object
of  the  foreign  policy  of  this  country,'  and  with  the  mainte-
nance of  a  constitution  in  which  liberty  and  law  are  indissolubly
united  ;  which  '  practically  secures  the  tranquillity  and  welfare
both  of  individuals  and  of  the  public,  and  provides,  beyond  any
other  frame  of  government  which  has  ever  existed,  for  the  real
and  useful  ends  which  form  at  once  the  only  true  foundation
and  only  rational  object  of  all  political  societies.'  ^

No  one  can  read  this  speech  without  perceiving  that  it  was
the  speech  of  a  man  who  was  pre-eminently  marked  out,  both
by  his  wishes  and  by  his  talents,  to  be  a  great  peace  minister.
Pitt  had,  however,  learnt  too  much  from  his  father  to  suffer
an  exclusive  attention  to  financial  considerations  to  make  him
indifferent  either  to  the  security  or  to  the  dignity  of  England.
One  of  the  most  serious  dangers  of  modern  popular  politics  is
that  gambling  spirit  which,  in  order  to  lower  estimates  and
reduce  taxation,  leaves  the  country  unprotected,  trusting  that
the  chapter  of  accidents  will  save  it  from  attack.  The  reduction
of  taxes  is  at  once  felt  and  produces  an  immediate  reputation,
while  expenditure  which  is  intended  to  guard  against  remote,
contingentj  and  unseen  dangers  seldom  brings  any  credit  to  a
'  Pari.  Hist.  xxix.  81G-838.

206  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUHY. ch.  xix.

statesman.  It  is  very  possible  for  an  English  minister  to  go  on
year  by  year  so  starving  the  military  and  naval  estimates  a3
to  leave  the  country  permanently  exposed  to  invasion,  without
exciting  any  general  popular  apprehension.  The  warnings  of  a
few  competent  specialists  are  easily  drowned ;  each  successive
reduction  of  taxation  produces  increased  popularity,  and  if,  owing
to  the  course  of  politics,  an  invasion  does  not  take  place,  writers
are  sure  to  arise  who  will  maintain  that  the  event  has  justified
the  wisdom  of  the  statesman.  It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  argue
that,  because  a  house  does  not  happen  to  have  been  burnt,  the
owner  had  shown  wisdom  and  prudence  in  refusing  to  insure  it.
Among  the  many  noble  characteristics  of  the  ministry  of  Lord
Palmerston,  none  is  more  deserving  of  admiration  than  the
consistency  and  resolution  with  which  he  maintained  the  prin-
ciple that  it  is  the  first  duty  of  an  English  minister  to  provide
at  all  costs  that  his  country  shall  be  practically  secure  from  the
possibility  of  a  successful  invasion,  and  shall  not  be  found  in  a
condition  of  impotence  if  unforeseen  danger  should  suddenly
arise.  Pitt  was  of  the  same  school,  and  he  never  allowed  the
armaments  of  the  country  to  sink  into  neglect.  He  was  much
impressed  with  the  fact  that,  in  1761  and  1762,  Martinique,
with  a  garrison  of  only  800  men,  had  held  out  by  means  of  its
fortifications  for  a  whole  year  against  a  large  English  army,  and
that  in  the  last  war  Dominica  had  been  taken  by  the  French
merely  because  the  English  soldiers  had  no  fort  to  retire  to  till
the  fleet  could  afford  them  relief.  He  accordingly  carried  in
1789  an  important  scheme  for  extending  the  fortifications  of
the  West  Indies  ;  he  at  the  same  time  strengthened  the  naval
forces  both  in  the  East  Indies  and  in  the  Mediterranean ;  and
when,  two  years  later,  serious  complications  had  arisen  with
Spain,  it  was  the  promptness  and  eHiciency  of  the  British  naval
force  that  chiefly  averted  the  danger.

The  dispute  was  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  had  led  to
the  Spanisli  Wiir  under  Walpole.  Some  English  merchants  had
begun  to  seek  for  the  Chinese  market  furs  and  ginseng,  a
vi'gelablo  largely  employed  for  medicinal  purposes  in  China,
along  the  north-west  coast  of  America,  and  had  planted  an
English  trading  settlement  ut  Xo(<t.ka  Sound,  on  Vancouver's

CTt.  xir.  XOOTTv  A POUND.  207

Island,  near  the  coast  of  California.  It  was  a  country  which
had  been  discovered  by  Magellan,  and  first  seriously  explored
by  Captain  Cook,  and  it  had  hitherto  been  entirely  unoccupied
by  Europeans.  The  Spaniards  had  never  penetrated  to  it,  but
by  virtue  of  a  bull  of  Alexander  VI.  they  claimed  a  sovereignty
over  all  lands  comprised  between  Cape  Horn  and  the  60th
degree  of  north  latitude — in  other  words,  the  entire  western
coast  both  of  South  and  North  America,  and  when  after  a
considerable  interval  they  discovered  the  existence  of  a  British
settlement  in  these  distant  parts,  they  determined  to  suppress
it.  Two  Spanish  ships  of  war  accordingly  hastened  to  Nootka
Sound,  took  possession  of  the  British  settlement,  hauled  down
the  British  flag,  replaced  it  by  the  flag  of  Spain,  captured  four
English  vessels,  and  treated  their  crews  with  extreme  harshness
and  indignity.

These  events  took  place  in  the  April  of  1789.  A  few
months  later,  accounts,  at  first  dim  and  confused,  but  afterwards
more  complete,  arrived  in  Europe,  and  it  soon  appeared  likely
that  the  affair  would  assume  a  most  formidable  character.
Complaints  were  made  on  both  sides.  The  Spanish  ambassador
in  London  was  instructed  to  desire  that  the  subjects  of  Great
Britain  should  no  longer  be  allowed  to  trade,  settle,  or  fish  on
the  western  coast  of  America,  while  the  English  denied  the
rights  of  Spain  to  this  unoccupied  coast,  and  demanded  a
restitution  of  the  captured  vessels,  with  their  properties  and
crews,  an  indemnification  for  the  losses  they  had  suffered,  and
a  reparation  to  his  Majesty  for  the  insult  that  had  been  offered
to  the  British  flag.  The  money  value  of  the  Nootka  Sound
trade  and  settlement  was  very  small,  and  certainly  not  sufficient
to  compensate  for  a  week  of  war ;  but  a  question  of  honour  and
a  question  of  future  right  of  settlement  had  been  raised,  which
could  not  be  suffered  to  drop.  The  Spaniards  answered  the
remonstrances  of  England  by  stating  that  the  English  vessels
had  been  already  released  and  their  offence  condoned  on  the
ground  of  their  ignorance  of  the  rights  of  Spain,  but  they
would  give  no  satisfaction  or  indemnification ;  they  asserted  in
the  strongest  terms  their  exclusive  sovereignty  over  the  whole
of  the  western  coast  of  America,  and  they  rapidly  collected
and  equipped  a  great  fleet. Pitt  promptly  replied  by  a  general

208  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xtx.

inipressnieut  of  sailors,  and  by  a  message  to  Parliament  asking
for  assistance  to  defend  tlie  honour  and  interests  of  the  country.
A  vote  of  credit  for  a  million  was  at  once  passed ;  the  fleet  was  put
upon  a  war  footing ;  each  party  began  to  seek  for  alliances ;  and
it  seemed  possible  that  this  petty  dispute  would  lead  to  a  general
conflagration.  Holland  and  Prussia  were  appealed  to  by  England,
in  conformity  with  the  late  treaty  of  alliance.  Spain,  on  the  other
hand,  negotiated  with  Russia,  which  was  now  on  bad  terms  with
England ;  but  she  especially  relied  on  the  assistance  of  France,
which  was  bound  to  her  by  the  treaty  of  1762.  The  Revolution
was  now  running  its  course  in  that  country,  and  the  direction  of
its  policy  was  very  doubtful.  Montmorin,  the  Minister  of  Foreign
Affairs,  appears  to  have  inclined  to  war,  and  a  considerable
party  hoped  that  it  would  give  a  new  turn  to  the  popular
passions  which  had  become  so  formidable  at  home.  Montmorin,
in  obedience  to  the  treaty  of  alliance,  prepared  a  French  fleet,
but  he  held  an  ambiguous  and  undecided  language,  and  offered
or  suggested  a  French  mediation.  Lafayette,  whose  influence
was  at  this  time  very  great,  and  who  detested  England,  was  a
strong  partisan  of  war,  but  the  Jacobin  opposition  vehemently
repudiated  it.  Nothing,  they  maintained,  could  be  now  more
dangerous  to  the  Revolution,  nothing  would  be  more  likely  to
save  the  monarchy,  than  a  foreign  war.  D'Aiguillon,  Robes-
pierre, Lamotte,  and  above  all  Barnave,  denounced  the  policy
which,  in  order  to  stifle  the  Revolution,  was  about  to  plunge
France  into  bankruptcy,  and  invoke  the  spirit  of  conquest
in  opposition  to  the  spirit  of  liberty,  and  they  desired  to
take  the  power  of  declaring  war  from  the  King.  Mirabeau  on
other  grounds  was  opposed  to  war,  and  it  was  finally  agreed
that  peace  and  war  should  for  the  future  be  voted  by  the
Chamber,  though  only  on  the  proposal  and  with  the  sanction  of
the  King.'

This  decision  made  it  certain  that  France  would  not  assist
Spain  in  the  war,  and  the  latter  country  therefore  found  it
absolutely  necessary  to  recede.  A  skilful  negotiator,  named
Fitzherbcrt,  had  been  sent  to  ^Madrid,  and,  after  some  hesita-
tion, a  convention  was  drawn  up  and  signed  in  October  1790,
which  substantially  satisfied  the  English  demands.  It  was
•  See  Sybel,  Hist,  de  VEurojn;  i.  177-182.

CH.  XIX.  TIPPOO SAHIB.  209

agreed  that  Spain  should  restore  the  buildings  and  tract  of  laud
taken  from  British  subjects  on  Nootka  Sound  and  make  repara-
tion for  all  subsequent  acts  of  violence  ;  and  the  right  of  navi-
gating and  fishing  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  making  commercial
settlements  on  its  coasts,  was  secured  to  both  nations  under  the
following  restrictions.  British  vessels  were  forbidden  to  approach
within  ten  sea  leagues  of  any  part  of  the  coast  actually  occupied
by  the  Spaniards.  The  Spaniards  and  British  subjects  were  to
have  equal  and  unrestricted  liberty  to  trade  in  all  parts  of  the
north-west  of  America  and  of  the  adjacent  islands  situated  to  the
north  of  the  settlements  already  occupied  by  Spain ;  but  neither
were  to  form  any  settlement  on  the  east  or  west  coasts  of  South
America  southward  of  the  Spanish  settlements.  The  success  of
this  negotiation  added  greatly  to  the  reputation  of  Pitt  and
to  the  prestige  of  England  in  Europe,  though  the  cost  of  the
episode,  amounting,  as  we  have  seen,  to  nearly  three  millions,
remained  to  be  provided  for  in  the  Budget  of  1791.

In  other  quarters  the  aspect  of  affairs  outside  England  was
menacing  and  disquieting.  In  September  1786  Lord  Cornwallis
had  taken  possession  of  power  as  Governor-General  of  India.
His  administration  is  memorable  in  Indian  history  for  many
important  internal  reforms,  and  especially  for  a  settlement  of
land  ownership  and  land  taxation,  which  has  been  a  fertile
source  of  controversy  to  our  own  day.  It  is  also  memorable  for
one  of  the  most  formidable  native  wars  in  which  England  has
ever  been  engaged.  We  have  seen,  in  a  former  volume,  the  long,
desperate,  and  doubtful  conflict  which  Hyder  Ali,  the  Sultan
of  Mysore,  had  waged  against  the  power  of  England,  and  we
have  seen  also  that  after  his  death  it  was  continued  for  a  year
by  his  son  Tippoo  Sahib,  with  such  indecisive  results  that  the
Peace  of  Mangal ore,  which  terminated  it  in  1784,  left  both  of
the  contending  parties  the  whole  territory  they  had  possessed
before  the  war  began.  In  1790,  an  attack  which  Tippoo  Sahib
had  made  some  months  before,  upon  the  Rajah  of  Travancore,
who  was  allied  with  the  English,  again  brought  the  old  anta-
gonists into  the  field.  The  English  were  assisted  by  power-
ful native  alliances,  but  the  war  was  conducted  by  Tippoo  with
extraordinary  courage  and  ability,  and  it  was  marked  by  several
vicissitudes. At  first  the English  carried  everything before

VOL.  V.  P

210 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xix.

tliem,  but  they  encountered  a  serious  reverse  at  a  place  called
Sattimungul,  and  several  well-fougtit  conflicts  in  the  latter  part
of  1790  left  the  fortunes  of  the  war  still  divided  and  ambiguous.
Tippoo  Sahib  brought  armies  of  more  than  forty  thousand  men
into  the  field,  and  he  showed  no  inconsiderable  skill  in  strategy.
Cornwallis  commanded  the  English  in  person  during  the  greater
part  of  the  war,  and  after  several  bloody  and  obstinate  battles,
which  it  is  not  necessary  here  to  describe,  he  succeeded,  in
March  1792,  in  bringing  it  to  a  complete  and  glorious  termina-
tion. Seringapatam,  the  capital  of  Mysore,  was  invested  and
reduced  to  extremities,  and  Tippoo  Sahib  was  obliged  to  sign  a
peace,  surrendering  half  his  dominions  to  the  allies,  paying  a
sum  of  more  than  four  millions  sterling  in  compensation  for  the
war,  releasing  all  his  prisoners  of  war,  and  giving  up  two  of  his
three  sons  as  hostages  to  the  English.

In  Europe,  foreign  politics  had  long  been  obscured  and
troubled  by  the  ambition  of  Catherine  II.  This  extraordinary
woman,  the  daughter  of  a  poor  Prussian  prince,  had  obtained,
by  the  deposition  and  murder  of  her  husband  in  1762,  a  wider
and  more  perfect  range  of  absolute  authority  than  any  other
European  sovereign,  and,  in  spite  of  a  levity  and  a  caprice  which
were  the  despair  of  foreign  statesmen  and  diplomatists,  and
which  often  induced  them  greatly  to  underrate  her  capacities,'
her  reign  was  one  of  the  greo.test  and  most  successful  in  the
eighteenth  century.  Assimilating  with  extraordinary  rapidity
the  noblest  political  ideas  of  the  most  advanced  thinkers  of  her
time,  thoroughly  conversant  with  their  writings  in  a  country
where  serious  study  was  almost  unknown,^  enlightened,  tolerant
and  generous,  good-natured  and  forgiving  almost  to  a  fault,  a
warm  and  steady  friend,  delighting  in  the  happiness  of  those
who  were  immediately  about  lier,^  perfectly  free  from  all  kinds
of  superstition,  and  perfectly  undazzled  by  the  unrealities  and

'  See, e.g., the curious letters  incapable  of  pursuing  any  one  line  of

of  Sir  J.  Harris  in  the  Mabnc'sbiiri/  policy  by  system,  or  tlirouiih  a  sober

<'orri;Hj)ondeiice. That very able  and unimpassioned calculation of

diplomatist, while acknowledging  interests.

that  Cathtrine  was  a  woman  of  great  '■'  See  the  very  emphatic  remarks

talents, great courage, and some-  of that  most  competent judge, the

tiriie.s  of great  resolution,  evidently  I'lincess  Daschkaw. — Memoirs  of  ike

bi'lieved  tjiat  her  successes  were  in  a  J'rincrK^ Daschkaw  (edited  by  Mrs.

large  measure  those of a  fortunate  llradlurd),  i.  l.'<.

gambler,  and  that .she was vvliolljr  "  Mucli lii'.ht has been llnuwii

CH.  XIX.  CATHERINE II.  211

conventionalities  of  her  position, — she  retained,  amid  all  the
excesses  of  an  abandoned  and  shameless  life,  a  strange  power  of
wisely  measuring  and  employing  the  capacities  of  men,  and
of  pursuing,  with  rare  political  judgment  and  indomitable  re-
solution, certain  great  lines  of  policy.  In  a  few  years  she
made  the  dreams  of  Peter  the  Great  all  but  a  reality.  The  in-
ternal administration  of  Russia  in  nearly  all  its  branches  was
reformed.  A  new  code  of  legislation  was  established ;  torture
was  abolished ;  religious  toleration  was  extended  ;  hospitals  and
other  institutions  of  benevolence  were  extensively  founded  ;
measures  were  taken  to  encourage  the  arts  and  sciences,  and
improve  agriculture;  the  army  and  navy  were  reorganised;
an  attempt  was  even  made  to  form  a  third  estate,  and  at  the
same  time  a  skilful,  ambitious,  and  perfectly  unscrupulous
foreign  policy  gave  the  Empress  a  complete  ascendency  in
Northern  and  Eastern  Europe.  '  I  came  to  Russia,'  she  once
said,  '  a  poor  girl ;  Russia  has  dowered  me  richly,  but  I  have
paid  her  back  with  Azof,  the  Crimea,  and  the  Ukraine.'  In
1772,  by  the  first  iniquitous  partition  of  Poland,  she  acquired
a  territory  comprising  an  area  of  2,500  geographical  square
miles,  and  a  population  of  about  one  and  a  half  millions  ;  and
by  steadily  maintaining  anarchy  in  the  remainder  of  the  king-
dom she  prepared  the  way  for  its  future  downfall.  In  1774  she
terminated  her  first  Turkish  War  by  the  Treaty  of  Kainardji,
which  severed  the  Crimea  from  Turkey,  constituted  it  into  a
separate  khanate,  and,  beside  some  accession  of  territory,  gave
Russia  a  protectorate  over  Greek  Christians  at  Constantinople
and  admitted  Russian  commerce  to  the  Black  Sea.

In  the  beginning  of  1784  she  took  another  gigantic  stride,
and  without  a  war  she  succeeded  in  incorporating  the  whole  of

on these sides of the character  etre,  mais  que  f aire? Et  malgre  cela

of Catherine by  the recent publi-  j'aime  -k  la  folic  et  comme  un  enfant

cation  of her  very  confidential  cor-  de  cinq ans  -1 vqir  jouer  au  colin-

respondence  with  Grimm. One  pas-  maillard  et  -k  tons  les  jeux  d'enfants

sage I must quote as an illustra-  possibles. Les jeunes gens  et  mes

tion. The Empress  (she  is  writing  pet  its-tils et filles disent  qu'il  faut

in  1791) complains to  Grimm  that  cjue  j'y  soispour  que  la  gaitey  regnei

she  is  getting  so  old  that  there  are  leur  gre,  et  qu'ils  sont  plus  hardis  et

families  about  her  of  whom  she  has  a  leur  aise  quand  j"y  suis  que  sans

known  the  fifth  or  sixth  generations.  moi. C'est done moi qui suis le

'  Voila  de  grandes  preuves  de  vieil-  "  Lustigmacher."  ' — CorTesj).  de  Cath.

lesse,  et  mume  ce  recit  en  tient  pent-  et  Grimm,  p.  592.

212  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xiy.

the  Crimea  in  the  Russian  Empire.  Her  position  in  the  war
which  grew  out  of  the  American  Revolution  was  beyond  com-
parison the  proudest  in  Europe,  for  her  help  was  equally  and
almost  abjectly  courted  by  both  sides  ;  while,  as  the  originator
of  the  armed  neutrality,  she  placed  herself  at  the  head  of  the
neutral  Powers.  Her  commercial  treaty  with  England  in  176G,
with  Denmark  in  1782,  with  Austria  in  1785,  and  with  France
in  1787  increased  her  influence  and  power;  and  now  her  great
object  was  the  total  destruction  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  the  parti-
tion of  its  territory,  and  the  construction  of  a  Greek  empire,
which  would  be  subservient  to  her  influence.

The  policy  was  not  altogether  a  new  one.  Turkey,  Cathe-
rine once  said,  is  the  natural  enemy  of  Russia,  as  France  is  of
England  \  and  the  gradual  extension  of  Russian  dominion  along
the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea  toward  the  Mediterranean  had
been,  from  the  days  of  Peter  the  Great,  a  favourite  object  of
Russian  policy.  By  the  conquest,  in  1696,  of  the  strong  fortress
and  port  of  Azof,  by  the  fortification  of  the  port  of  Taganrog  on
the  Black  Sea,  and  by  the  commencement  of  a  Black  Sea  fleet,
Peter  himself  had  done  much  for  its  accomplishment;  but  a
few  years  later  a  great  Russian  defeat  in  Moldavia  undid  the
work,  and  in  1711  the  Peace  of  the  Pruth  deprived  him  of  all
that  in  this  quarter  he  had  won.  The  campaigns  of  Munich
between  1735  and  1739  gave  the  Russians  for  a  time  Azof  and
Oczakow,  and  complete  dominion  over  Moldavia,  and  a  Russian
army  penetrated  into  the  Crimea ;  but  at  the  Peace  of  Belgrade
in  1739  the  tide  was  again  rolled  back.  With  the  exception  of
Azof,  which  was  deprived  of  its  fortifications,  Russia  retained
scarcely  a  vestige  of  her  Turkish  conquests  ;  and  an  article  of
1  he  peace  specially  forbade  the  formation  of  a  Russian  fleet  in
the  Black  Sea.  The  struggle  between  the  two  rivals  was  not
renewed  till  the  war  of  Catherine,  and  it  was  at  this  time  that  the
project  of  making  serious  use  of  Greek  discontent  seems  first
to  have  arisen.'  'J'he  Orlofi*s,  whose  star  was  then  in  the  ascen-
dant, warmly  sup])orted  it;  and  a  Russian  fleet  from  the
J'.'illic,  c(jiiiiiiandr(l  by  Alexis  Di'IdIT,  the  murderer  of  Peter  III.,

'  Sorao slif,'ht cominiinicaLion.s  ponr  lo  have  had  much  importance.

h;wl  before  been  kept,  up  bclvvticn  the  Kce  Sorel,  La Question, d'Uricnt  au

Hussians  and  the  Gieok  priests  under  A'  FIT!"''  a't'cclc,  pp.  11,  12.
Turkish  rule,  but they  do not ap-

en.  XIX.  TUE TURKISH QUKSTION.  213

entered  the  Mediterranean  in  1770,  defeated  a  Turkish  ileefc
at  Scio,  burned  it  at  Tchcsme  near  the  Bay  of  Smyrna,  and
provoked  in  the  Morea  some  abortive  but  bloody  risings,  which
were  savagely  repressed.  The  expulsion  of  the  Mohammedans
from  Europe,  which  had  long  been  the  favourite  dream  of
Christian  fanaticism,  now  somewhat  strangely  found  its  warmest
advocate  in  Voltaire,  who,  in  letters  both  to  Catherine  and
to  Frederick,  set  forth  the  independence  of  Greece  and  the
partition  of  the  other  Ottoman  dominions  in  Europe  as  the
noblest  objects  for  their  ambition.  In  a  little  work,  called
'Le  Tocsin  des  Rois,'  which  was  written  in  1771,  he  en-
deavoured to  overcome  the  opposition  of  Maria  Theresa,  and
to  enlist  her  services  in  the  cause.  If  the  Continental
Christian  Powers  would  only,  he  said,  lay  aside  for  a  short  time
their  jealousies  and  join  against  the  Turkish  barbarians,  a
single  campaign  would  undoubtedly  give  Bosnia  and  Bulgaria
to  Austria,  while  the  victorious  armies  of  Catherine  would
march  upon  Constantinople.  The  project  of  establishing  a
Greek  empire  which  would  be  practically  dependent  on  Russia
was  passionately  adopted  by  Potemkin,  who  for  many  years
had  the  greatest  influence  over  Russian  foreign  policy,  and
in  the  latter  years  of  his  life  it  was  almost  the  only  object  at
which  he  aimed.

The  attitude  of  other  nations  on  the  Eastern  question
presents  some  singular  contrasts.  From  the  time  when
Francis  I.  defied  the  theological  passions  and  prejudices  of
Europe  by  allying  himself  with  the  Turks,  France  had
usually  openly  or  secretly  favoured  them,  and  she  had  gra-
dually obtained  the  greater  part  of  the  Levant  trade,  which
w^as  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  the  prosperity  of  Marseilles.
To  Russia  she  was  almost  always  hostile.  As  the  leading
Continental  Power  she  was  keenly  sensible  to  the  dangers
of  Russian  ambition  and  aggression.  She  usually  inspired
the  anti-Russian  party  at  Constantinople,  at  Stockholm,  and
in  Poland ;  and  the  complete  temporary  eclipse  of  French  in-
fluence that  followed  the  fall  of  Choiseul  was  one  of  the  chief
causes  of  that  great  crime  and  calamity,  the  first  partition
of  Poland.  As  the  leading  Mediterranean  Power,  France  was
especially  interested  in  protecting  Turkey,  and  she  was  quite

214  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

resolved  tliat  Russia  should  obtain  no  footing  in  the  southern
seas.

England,  on  the  other  hand,  during  the  greater  part  of  the
eighteenth  century  was  closely  allied  to  Russia,  both  commer-
cially and  politically.  Her  commerce  with  Russia  was  ex-
tremely profitable.  She  brought  to  her  the  goods  of  the  Indies
and  of  Western  Europe,  and  received  in  return  the  maritime
stores  that  were  essential  to  her  fleet.  Politically,  English
statesmen,  who  were  mainly  governed  by  jealousy  of  France,
looked  upon  Russia  as  a  great  counterpoise  to  that  State,  and  saw
with  pleasure  the  very  considerable  part  which  in  the  eighteenth
century  she  had  begun  to  take  in  Western  politics.  In  1766
Chatham  made  an  earnest,  though  unsuccessful,  attempt  to  form
a  Northern  Alliance  of  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Great  Britain  to
counteract  the  family  compact  of  the  House  of  Bourbon.'  In
1770,  when  a  Russian  fleet  for  the  first  time  appeared  with
hostile  intentions  in  the  Mediterranean,  Choiseul  proposed  to
despatch  a  French  fleet  to  destroy  it,  and  Spain  would  probably
have  supported  him ;  but  England  interposed  in  this  very
critical  moment  of  the  Eastern  question,  and  informed  the
cabinets  of  Versailles  and  Madrid  that  she  would  regard  any
attempt  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  Russian  fleet  as  an  act  of
hostility  to  herself.^  Three  years  later,  when  the  war  against
the  Turks  was  at  its  height,  Chatham  wrote  to  Shelburne:
'  Your  lordship  well  knows  I  am  quite  a  Russ.  I  trust  the
Ottoman  will  pull  down  the  House  of  Bourbon  in  his  fall;'^
and  he  always  maintained  that  it  ought  to  be  an  essential  part
of  Englisli  foreign  policy  to  enter  into  no  kind  of  connection
with  the  Turks.^  In  1781,  when  England  was  reduced  to
jilmost  the  lowest  state  of  depression  liy  the  American  War  and
by  the  hostility  of  France,  Spain,  and  Holland,  she  endeavoured
tx)  purchase  the  mediation  and  assistance  of  Russia  by  oflering
a  pci'pctual  defensive  alliance  and  the  island  of  Minorca,  which
would  have  given  her  a  secure  position  in  the  Mediterranean;
but  after  much  hesitation,  and  contrary  to  the  advice  of  Potem-

' Chatham Cnrrcxpandence, iii.  Pohliqve de tons h's Cdbinefs do

30-H2,  .'{6,  .'{7,  79,  HO,  174,  175.  V Europe,  ii.  174.

'  Malmctjhur3-'8  JHarirn  and  Cor-  ^  (Jhatham Corrcsjwtidcncey iv.

retpnndpnre, i. 256 ; Dyt^r's Ilixt.  208,  299.
oj Modern  L'uropc, iv.  207 ; ycgur,  *  Pari.  Hist,  xxix,  o'J,  02.

ENGLISH EASTERN POLICY.

21.5

kin,  Catherine  rejected  an  offer  which  would  have  probably
involved  her  in  an  immediate  war.^  The  resentment  produced
in  England  by  this  refusal,  and  by  the  unfriendly  conduct  of
Russia  in  the  matter  of  the  armed  neutrality,  was  still  further
increased  by  the  crushing  duties  which  Russia  imposed,  in  1783,
on  most  articles  of  British  produce,  and  by  a  navigation  law
which,  in  the  same  year,  cut  off  the  profitable  carrying  trade
between  Russia  and  Southern  Europe,  which  had  hitherto  been
enjoyed  by  British  vessels.^  Still  the  permanent  policy  of
England  and  France  remained  unchanged.  In  1783  and  1781,
when  Russia  took  complete  possession  of  the  Crimea,  France
strongly  and  earnestly  remonstrated ;  England  used  her  politi-
cal influence  steadily  in  favour  of  Russian  aggrandisement ;  and
it  was  probably  in  a  large  degree  owing  to  that  influence  that
Russia  was  able  without  a  war  with  France  to  establish  at
Sebastopol  her  ascendency  on  the  Black  Sea.^

The  annexation  of  the  Crimea  was  chiefly  accomplished
during  the  brief  period  of  the  Coalition  Ministry,  and  Fox,  who
then  directed  English  foreign  affairs,  showed  himself  as  Russian

'  Malmesbury's  Diaries  and  Cor-
rmpmidciice,  i.  315,  364,  373-375,
399-402,  438.

-  Macpherson's  Annals  of  Com-
merce, iv.  38,  39.

3  On  June  30,  1783,  Harris  wrote
from  St.  Petersburg  :  '  The  Emperor's
communication  of  his  having  formed
an  alliance  with  Russia,  and  of  the
Empress's  intentions  on  the  Crimea,
to  France,  has  produced  a  strong
representation  from  that  Court  to
this,  in  which,  after  expressing  di-
rectly their  surprise  at  her  Imperial
Majesty's  still  forming  new  claims  on
the  Turks,  and  indirectly  denying
tlie  justness  of  Iheir  claims,  the
Xing  of  France  makes  a  tender  of  his
mediation  .  .  .  pointing  out  the  un-
certainty of  the  success  of  war,  and
the  serious  and  '  incalculable '  con-
sequences with  which  her  persisting
in  this  measure  may  be  attended.  .  .  .
The  Empress  is  exceedingly  angry.'
Eight  weeks  later,  having  received
instructions  from  England,  Harris
reported  to  Fox  his  conversations
with  Russian  ministers  about  the
annexation  of  the  Crimea  and  the
attitude  of  France. 'I  confined  my-

self to  such  general  observations  as
naturally  present  themselves  on  such
an  occasion,  and  endeavoured  to
make  them  feel  that,  fatigued  by  a
long  and  expensive  war,  the  services
my  Court  could  render  her  Imperial
Majesty  by  a  strong  exertion  of  its
political  influence  would  be  both
more  efficacious  and  more  agreeable
than  any  others,  however  well  dis-
posed we  might  be  to  employ  them
in  her  behalf.  I  must,  in  justice  to
the  Russian  ministers,  say  that  they
admitted  entirely  these  ideas,  entered
in  the  most  proper  manner  into  our
situation,  and  gave  me  clearly  to
understand  that,  unless  either  of  the
Bourbon  Courts  should  take  such
steps  as  would  directlj'  attack  our
interests,  the  Empress  did  not  exoect
more  from  us  th;ui  what  we  had  done
for  her  in  the  last  Turkish  War.  On
Sunday,  previously  to  my  taking
leave,  the  Vice-Chancellor  told  mn
that  he  had  her  Imperial  Majesty's
ordeis  to  express  the  warmest  grati-
tude for  this  undoubted  mark  of  the
King's  attention  to  the  interests  of
her  Empire.' — ]Malmesbury's  I)iaric»
and  CorrcsfondcHce,  ii.  4S,  56.

216 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

as  CLatliam  had  been.  '  My  system  of  foreign  politics,'  he
wrote  to  Harris,  '  is  deeply  rooted.  Alliances  with  the  Northern
Powers  ever  have  been,  and  ever  will  be,  the  system  of  every
enlightened  Englishman.' '  His  favourite  policy,  he  said,  was  an
alliance  of  England  with  Prussia,  Denmark,  and  Russia ;  but  if
the  dissension  between  Russia  and  Prussia  rendered  this  im-
possible, he  was  prepared  to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  Den-
mark, Russia,  and  the  Emperor.^  One  of  the  reproaches  which
Fox  brought  against  Shelburne  was  that  he  appeared  at  this
time  to  prefer  a  French  to  a  Northern  alliance,  and  that  he  was
believed  to  share  the  views  of  Yergennes  about  the  Eastern
question.^

What  those  views  were  may  be  gathered  from  a  very
remarkable  confidential  paper  on  the  dangers  impending  in
Eastern  Europe,  which  was  drawn '  up  by  Vergennes  in  October
1 782,  shortly  before  the  termination  of  the  American  War,  for
the  instruction  of  Montmorin,  who  was  then  French  ambassador
at  Madrid.  The  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Prussia,  he  said,
were  competing  for  the  favour  of  Catherine,  and  although  Russia
was  at  this  time  occupied  with  troubles  in  the  Crimea,  it  was
probable  that  those  very  troubles  might  lead  in  the  near  future
to  most  serious  dangers.  If  the  three  Powers  should  ever
agree  to  give  a  mortal  blow  to  the  Turks,  France  would  soon
bitterly  regi'et  that  she  had  been  unable  to  prevent  it.  If  an
active  and  enlightened  Power  obtained  possession  of  the  Eastern
provinces  which  touched  the  Adriatic,  she  would  soon  become
the  mistress  of  Italy,  and  there  would  be  a  total  change  in  the
Continental  system  and  in  the  balance  of  power.  France  alone
was  not  strong  enough  to  oppose  it,  but  France  and  England
united  might  do  so,  and  it  was  plainly  for  the  interest  of  England
filso,  that  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe  should  not  be  over-
1 1I rued.  For  these  reasons  Vergennes  considered  tliat  it  was  of
groat  importance  to  France  tliat  the  war  with  England  should
be  speedily  terminated,  and  that  the  latter  Power  should  not  be
Ko  weakened  or  so hopelessly alienated as to  be unable  or

'  '^]H\rT\cnhn]Yti  IJ'uirirx  miff.  Corrr-  — J'arl.  //t.v/.  xxir.  63.
gpnnflent'fl,  ii.  40. tSne,  ton,  his  own  ^  Malmcsbiiry's  Jliaririt,  ii.  51,  52.

i-trikinjj  account  of  his  policy  ;it  tlie  •  Ibid.  ii.  50,  51,  54.

lime  of  the  annexation  of  Ihe  t'jimea.

CH.  XIX.  FIRST  PARTITION OF  POLAND.  217

unwilliug  to  co-operate  with  France  in  maintaining  the  European
Continental  system.^

A  triple  alliance  of  Russia,  Prussia,  and  the  Emperor  for  the
partition  of  Turkey,  which  Vergennes  so  greatly  feared,  and  which
Voltaire  had  done  his  best  to  effect,  seemed  at  one  time  very
probable.  In  1769  such  an  alliance  had  actually  been  pro-
posed by  Russia,  and  in  1772,  when  the  partition  of  Poland  was
impending,  Austria  had  suggested  the  partial  dismemberment
of  Turkey.  It  was  a  suggestion  of  aggravated  treachery,  for
scarcely  a  year  had  passed  since  Austria  had  allied  herself  with
Turkey,  had  promised  to  obtain  the  restoration  of  the  territory
which  Russia  had  invaded,  and  had  received  a  considerable
Turkish  subsidy.^  Frederick  the  Great,  however,  entirely  re-
jected this  policy.  He  calculated  that  Turkish  assistance
might  be  very  useful  to  Prussia  in  a  war  either  with  Russia
or  with  Austria,  and  that  another  field  of  spoliation  might  be
more  easily  and  more  profitably  secured.  In  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  Catherine  he  had  been  her  close  ally,  and  he  spared
no  flattery  to  win  her  favour  niid  no  expense  to  secure  her
counsellors.  Count  Panin  was  especially  at  ihe  head  of  the
Prussian  party  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  the  alliance  had  two  con-
sequences of  great  importance.  The  first  partition  of  Poland  was
mainly  due  to  Frederick  and  Catherine,  for  although,  when  it
had  become  inevitable,  Maria  Theresa  reluctantly  acquiesced  in
it  and  consented  to  accept  a  portion  of  the  territory,  the  whole
initiative  lay  with  the  other  two  conspirators.  It  is  difficult  to
exaggerate  the  extent  to  which  it  shook  the  political  system,
lowered  the  public  morals,  and  weakened  the  public  law  of
Europe,  for  it  was  an  example  of  strong  Powers  conspiring  to
plunder  a  feeble  Power,  with  no  more  regard  for  honour,  or
honesty,  or  the  mere  decency  of  appearances  than  is  shown  by

'  Circourt,  Hist,  de  V Action  cam-  1783,  but  Fox  peremptorily  declined.

mitne  dc  la  France ct  de  VAnicriqiie,  in.  -^Parl.  Hist.  xxix.  63. It  is  one  of

15:50-332. A  saying  of  Vergennes  on  the  many  proofs  of the  remarkable

the  Eastern  question  is  reported  to  prescience  of  this  French  statesman,

have  greatly  struck  Joseph  II.  :  '  Une  that he had expressed his alarm

partition  de  I'Empire  Ottoman  n'est  during  the  Turkish  War  of  1769  lest

pas  difficile,  mais  je  ne  vois  pas  la  tliat  war  should  lead  to  a  partition  of

compensation  pour  Constantinople.' —  Poland — a  prediction  which  was  per-

Avckland  Corresjjondence,!.  221. Ver-  fectlj'' verified by the event. See

gennes  had  proposed  to  Fox  to  join  Horel,  Qufstioii  d' Orient  an  XVII f'"*

him  in  his remonstrance to  Russia  sirclc,  p.  37.
against  the  seizure  of  the  Crimea  in  ^  Ibid.  pp.  18-51,  L'US,  213,217.

218  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xix.

a  burglar  or  a  footpad.  The  Prussian  alliance  had  also  a  very
serious  and  persistent  influence  in  alienating  Russia  from  Eng-
land during  the  very  critical  years  of  the  American  struggle,
for  Frederick,  from  the  time  when  he  was  deserted  by  Lord  Bute,
looked  upon  England  with  a  more  than  political  malevolence.
On  the  other  hand,  the  alliance  gave  Russia  no  assistance  in  her
projects  upon  Turkey,  while  Maria  Theresa,  as  sovereign  of
Austria  and  Hungary,  was  vitally  interested  in  preventing
a  Russian  ascendency  in  Eastern  Europe.  In  Catherine  s
first  Turkish  War  the  Russians  occupied  Moldavia  and  Walla-
chia,  but  the  Austrians  at  once  prepared  to  ally  themselves
with  the  Turks,  and  these  provinces  were  in  consequence
relinquished.

The  death  of  Maria  Theresa  in  1780  and  the  accession  of
Joseph  II.  to  his  full  power  gave  a  complete  change  to  Eastern
politics.  The  character  of  Joseph  is  a  curious  study.  He  was
vindoubtedly  superior  in  intelligence  to  the  average  of  European
monarchs  ;  he  was  as  exemplary  as  his  mother  in  the  industry
with  which  he  devoted  himself  to  the  duties  of  his  office,  and  he
had  a  most  real  desire  to  leave  the  world  better  than  he  found
it ;  but  a  deplorable  want  of  sound  judgment,  of  moral  scruple,
and  of  firmness  and  pei'sistency  of  will,  made  him  at  once  one  of
the  most  dangerous  and  most  unfortunate  sovereigns  of  his
time.  Ambitious,  fond  of  power,  and  at  the  same  time  fever-
ishly restless  and  impatient,  his  mind  was  in  the  highest  degree
susceptible  to  the  political  ideas  that  wore  floating  through
the  intellectual  atmosphere  of  Europe,  and  he  was  an  invete-
rate dreamer  of  dreams.  Large,  comprehensive,  and  startling
schemes  of  policy — radical  changes  in  institutions,  manners,
tendencies,  habits,  and  traditions — had  for  him  an  irresistible
fascination ;  and  when  he  saw,  or  thought  he  saw,  the  bourne  to
which  political  forces  were  tending,  it  was  his  natural  impulse
to  endeavour  to  attain  it  at  once.  Sometimes  skilful  in  design-
ing, but  never  skilful  in  executing,  the  sarcasm  of  Frederick,
that  Joseph  always  took  the  second  step  before  he  had  taken  the
first,  was  well  justified.  AVhat  obstacles  traditions,  prejudices,
iruuiners,  settled  beliefs  and  loues  of  thought  place  in  the  path
of  tlie  most  powerful  rffoi'mcr — how  necessary  it  is  even  for  a
despotic  Bovereign  to  consult tiinca  and  seusons,  and  to  seek  id

cii.  XIX.  JOSEPH AND CATHERINE.  219

Lis  reforms  for  the  line  of  least  resistance — Joseph  never  under-
stood, and  the  result  was  that  his  policy  in  nearly  all  its
parts  was  a  deplorable  failure.  In  foreign  affairs  it  consisted
chiefly  of  daring  and  adventurous  enterprises,  rashly  under-
taken and  fitfully  and  irresolutely  conducted.  In  domestic
affairs  it  consisted  partly  of  great  reforms  in  perfect  accordance
with  the  most  enlightened  political  speculation  of  his  time,  but
forced  into  a  precipitate  maturity,  with  no  regard  for  the  habits,
wishes,  and  prejudices  of  his  subjects,  and  partly  of  a  series
of  unjustifiable  attempts  to  destroy  the  restraints  which,  in  some
I)arts  of  his  dominions,  custom  and  law  had  imposed  upon  his
authority.

In  1780  he  first  met  Catherine  in  Poland,  and  he  afterwards
accompanied  her  to  St.  Petersburg.  His  object  was  to  weaken
the  Prussian  influence,  and  in  this  he  succeeded ;  but  he  soon
fell  under  the  spell  of  the  great  Empress,  and  his  romantic
nature  caught  up  with  eagerness  Voltaire's  idea  of  a  Greek
empire  and  a  partition  of  Turkey.  In  1783,  in  direct  opposi-
tion to  the  settled  policy  of  Austria,  and  especially  to  the  policy
of  his  mother  during  the  last  Turkish  War,  he  assisted  with  all
his  influence  the  Russians  in  acquiring  the  Crimea,  and  even
sent  an  army  to  the  frontier  to  intimidate  the  Turks. ^  The
death  of  Panin  in  1783,  and  the  death  of  Frederick  the  Great
in  August  1786,  strengthened  the  alliance,  and  in  1787  Joseph
accompanied  Catherine  in  her  triumphant  journey  to  Kherson
and  the  Crimea.  The  determination  to  revive  a  Greek  em-
pire at  Constantinople  was  no  longer  concealed.  Catherine
had  already  named  her  second  grandson  Constantino,  clothed
him  in  Greek  dress,  procured  Greek  nurses  to  instruct  him  in
the  language  of  his  future  subjects,  ordered  a  medal  to  be
struck  representing  on  one  side  the  head  of  the  young  Prince
and  on  the  other  a  cross  in  the  clouds,  from  which  a  flash  of
lightning  descended  upon  the  mosque  of  St.  Sophia.^  The
Turkish  names  of  the  newly  acquired  territory  on  the  Black
Sea  were  abolished,  and  their  Greek  names  revived.  A  great
body  of  trooTDS  was  collpcted  to  welcome  the  Empress.  At
Kherson  she  made  her  public  entry  through  a  magnificent  arcli,
which  bore  the  inscription,  '  The  way  to  Byzantium,'  and  at
'  Coxe's  House  of  Austria,  ii.  59i>,  oOi.  *  Ibid.  ii.  551.

220  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch,  xix.

Sebastopol  slie  reviewed  the  considerable  Russian  fleet  wliicli
now  rode  trimnpliantly  upon  the  waters  of  the  Euxine.

Throughout  the  Turkish  Empire,  Russian  agents  were  in-
cessantly employed  in  preparing  the  way  for  the  intended
enterprise.  They  excited,  or  assisted,  an  insurrection  which
had  broken  out  in  Egypt.  They  steadily  sowed  dissension  in
Greece.  The  Hospodar  of  Moldavia  had  long  been  in  the  pay
of  the  Courts  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Vienna,  and  when  his
treachery  was  discovered,  he  fled  to  Russian  territory  and  the
Empress  refused  to  surrender  him.  Russian  consuls  were  the
special  centres  of  intrigue,  and  the  Government  insisted  on
establishing  one  at  Varna,  within  120  miles  of  Constantinople.
There  were  constant  complaints  of  injustices  done  to  Turkisli
commerce,  of  violences  done  to  Turkish  sailors,  and  no  redress
could  be  obtained.  Demands  were  now  put  forward  by  Russia
for  a  total  renunciation  of  Turkish  sovereignty  over  Georgia ;
for  the  surrender  of  Bessarabia,  on  the  ground  that  it  had
once  belonged  to  the  Tartar  khans;  for  the  establishment  of
hereditary  governoi's  in  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  which  would
have  made  these  provinces  virtually  independent  of  the  Porte.'

As  early  as  1786  the  Sultan  had  issued  an  address  to  the
Mohammedan  world  describing  in  touching  and  eloquent  terms
the  seizure  of  the  Crimea  in  time  of  peace ;  the  steady  encroach-
ments of  Russia  on  the  Black  Sea  coast ;  the  attempts  of  Rus-
sian agents  to  withdraw  Turkish  vassals  from  Turkish  rule  and
to  produce  insurrection  among  the  beys  of  Egypt ;  and  he  had
warned  true  believers  that  a  struggle  was  at  hand,  when  their
reb'gion  and  all  that  was  dear  to  them  would  be  at  stake. ^  Tlio
condition  of  Europe  seemed  in  the  highest  degree  unfavour-
able to  them,  Poland  was  now  perfectly  tranquil,  and  was
likely  to  afford  no  assistance  and  no  diversion,  and  France
could  no  longer  be  count fd  on  as  a  friend,  and  might  possibly
even  be  feared  as  an  enemy.  There  was,  indeed,  a  party  in  the
French  ministry  wlio  contended,  in  accordance  with  the  ideas
of  Vergennes,  that  it  was  an  essential  French  interest  to  join
witli J"]iigland  for  the  preservation  of  the  Turkish  I'jiipire,-'  but

'  Sco  Aniwal  Reyixtcr,  1788,  pp.  *  Auckland  Cui-rcsjjuHdcuce,  i.'220,

2-)l.  232,  215-1'rj.

^  Il»i<I.  1780,  pp.  ITj],  152.

en.  XIX.  DANGER  TO TURKEY.  221

other  counsels  seemed  likely  to  prevail.  In  October  1787,  Pitt
wrote  confidentially  to  Eden,  who  was  then  envoy  in  France,
asking  whether  there  was  any  foundation  for  the  idea  prevalent
at  Paris,  that  France,  instead  of  supporting  Turkey,  was  medi-
tating a  junction  with  Austria  and  Russia,  and  he  intimated
tliat  such  a  policy  might  di^ag  England  into  the  Eastern  ques-
tion, in  which  she  desired  to  take  no  part.'  Soon  after,  alarm-
ing intelligence  was  received  from  St.  Petersburg  of  French
negotiations  in  that  city  with  the  object  of  forming  a  triple
alliance  of  France,  Austria,  and  Russia  against  Turkey,  and
there  were  rumours  that  France  might  possibly  be  bribed  by
the  possession  of  Egypt.^  She  appears  in  truth  to  have  been
undecided  and  divided  on  the  Eastern  question,  but  on  other
grounds  very  desirous  of  the  friendship  of  Russia.  The  close
union  of  England,  Prussia,  and  Holland  naturally  inclined  her
in  that  direction,  and  it  was  a  significant  fact  that  Russia
refused  to  renew  her  commercial  treaty  with  England,  which
expired  in  1786,  and  a  few  months  later  negotiated  one  with
France.^  The  policy  of  the  Emperor  was  not  doubtful,  and
it  was  certain  to  be  hostile  to  Turkey.  For  a  long  period
there  had  been  formal  and  perfect  peace  between  the  two
Empires,  and  the  Turks  had  fulfilled  their  treaty  obligations
with  the  most  scrupulous  and  honourable  fidelity.  During  the
whole  of  the  long  and  often  most  disastrous  war  of  Maria
Theresa,  when  the  House  of  Austria  had  been  reduced  to  the
most  desperate  straits,  when  Hungary  had  been  again  and
again  left  open  and  unprotected,  the  Turks  had  never  suffered
either  cupidity,  or  fanaticism,  or  a  desire  to  regain  their  ancient
power,  or  the  example  of  Christian  princes,  to  persuade  them
to  break  their  plighted  word  or  to  attack  their  defenceless
neighbour.  Their  reward  was  that,  without  a  shadow  of  pro-
vocation and  through  mere  greed  of  territory,  the  son  of  Maria
Theresa  was  now  prepariug  to  invade  them.

It  was  evident  that  the  cloud  which  was  gathering  must
soon  burst.  Thousands  of  Tartars,  driven  homeless  and  ruined
from  the  depopulated  plains  of  the  Crimea,  spread  the  flame  of
indignation  through  the  IMussulman  population,  and  the  mani-

'  Aucldand  Corresjnmdence,  i.  217.  ^  Macpherson's A?inals  of Com-

«  Ibid.  222,  293,  302,  303.  merce,  iv.  116.

222  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

fest  provocation  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Empress  in  the
Crimea,  and  the  new  Russian  demands  that  were  sent  to  Con-
stantinople, still  further  increased  it.  The  Turks  met  the
danger  like  a  military  and  semi-barbarous  people.  They  re-
jected absolutely  and  haughtily  the  Russian  demands ;  they
made  a  counter-demand  for  the  restoration  of  the  Crimea ;  they
imprisoned  the  Russian  ambassador;  and  in  August  1787  they
declared  war  against  Russia.

It  was  a  bold  step,  and  it  soon  involved  half  Europe  in  war.
France,  indeed,  declared  her  determination  to  be  neutral ;  she
announced  that  she  would  throw  no  obstacles  in  the  way  of
a  Russian  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean ;  she  made  an  unsuc-
cessful attempt  at  mediation,  and  for  a  few  months  the  struggle
was  confined  to  the  two  original  combatants.  It  consisted
chiefly  of  wholly  unsuccessful  attacks  by  the  Turks  on  Kinburn,
which  guards  the  mouth  of  the  Dnieper,  and  which  was  de-
fended with  great  skill  by  Suwarrow.  But  in  February  1788,
Joseph,  having  completed  his  preparations,  declared  war  against
the  Porte,  and  immense  forces,  both  of  Austrians  and  Russians,
streamed  across  the  frontier.  In  the  war  between  the  Rus-
sians and  Tui'ks  in  1788  the  former  were  almost  uniformly
successful.  The  chief  events  were  the  total  defeat  by  the
Russians  of  a  Turkish  fleet  in  the  Liman,  and  especially
the  capture  of  Oczakow  by  Potemkin.  The  siege  lasted  from
July  to  December.  Both  the  attack  and  the  defence  were
carried  on  with  extraordinary  resolution ;  but  the  Russians
had  almost  relinquished  their  enterprise  in  despair,  when
a  stray  shell  blowing  up  a  magazine  made  the  fortifications
untenable,  and  the  town  was  taken,  after  a  scene  of  appalling
carnage.

On  the  Austrian  side,  however,  the  course  of  events  was
very  chequered.  Up  to  tliis  period,  the  eighteenth  century
had  proved  exceedingly  disastrous  to  the  position  and  influence
of  Austria  in  Europe.  In  the  beginning  of  the  century,  Prus-
sia was  not  yet  a  kingdom,  and  Russia  scarcely  counted  in
Western  politics ;  but  both  of  these  nations  had  now  grown
into  military  Powers  of  the  first  rank.  France  had  experienced
ni;iny  vicissitudes,  but  she  had  at  least  consolidated  her  terri-
1(;i"y l)y ;K'<|uiiing  I  lie  inipnrl.-inl l)iicliy of  L(»nain(.' ;  slic  had

CH.  XIX.  THE  AUSTRIAN  INVASION.  223

put  an  end  to  the  chief  peril  that  menaced  her  by  severing-
Spain  from  the  Austrian  dominions  and  establishing  a  branch  of
the  House  of  Bourbon  on  the  Spanish  throne ;  she  had  still
further  strengthened  her  connection  with  Spain  by  the  family
compact  of  1761  ;  she  was  a  great  homogeneous  kingdom
situated  amid  weak  and  dependent  States,  and  if  signs  of  deca-
dence and  danger  might  now  be  traced,  they  were  at  least  half
concealed  by  the  brilliant  empire  which  French  literature  and
ideas  exercised  over  the  world.  But  the  House  of  Austria
during  this  long  period  had  gained  nothing  of  importance,
except  a  section  of  Poland ;  it  had  lost  Spain  and  Naples  and
Sicily,  Belgrade  and  Silesia,  Parma,  Placentia,  Guastalla  and
a  part  of  Lombardy;  and  a  great  part  of  the  vast  hereditary
dominions  which  it  retained  were  so  scattered,  isolated,  and  de-
fenceless that  they  were  rather  a  source  of  weakness  than  of
strength.  On  the  side  of  Turkey  the  vicissitudes  of  Austrian
power  had  been  peculiarly  galling  to  statesmen  at  Vienna.  The
great  victories  of  Eugene  and  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  in
1718  had  given  Austria,  Belgrade,  Temeswar,  the  Bannat,  and
a  part  of  Servia  and  Wallachia  as  far  as  the  Aluta.  But  the
war  of  1736  had  been  disastrous  to  Austria,  and  at  the  Peace  of
Belgrade  in  1739  she  lost  everything,  except  the  Bannat,  which
the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  had  given  her.

To  the  Turkish  War  the  Emperor  looked  for  compensation
for  the  losses  of  his  House,  and  he  had  hopes  of  acquiring  not
only  Bosnia  and  Servia,  but  also  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  and
thus  extending  his  borders  to  the  Dniester.  The  army  ho
brought  into  the  field  was  estimated  at  not  less  than  200,000
men,  with  2,000  pieces  of  artillery ;  but  partly  through  great
dilatoriness  and  indecision,  and  partly  through  the  excessive
prolongation  of  his  line  of  operations,  he  effected  nothing  this
year  at  all  commensurate  with  the  magnitude  of  his  prepara-
tions. Loudon  and  the  Prince  of  Coburg  succeeded  indeed,  at
great  cost  of  life,  in  capturing  several  important  fortresses,  and
at  the  close  of  the  year  a  large  part  of  Moldavia  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Austrians;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  two  wholly  un-
successful attempts — one  of  them  before  the  declaration  of  war —
were  made  to  capture  Belgrade.  A  victorious  Turkish  army
devastated  a  great  part  of  the  country  near  the  Bannat. More

224  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CFJNTURY. ch.  xix.

than  one  Turkish  governor  who  had  seemed  to  waver  in  his
allegiance  turned  finally  against  the  Austrians,  and  in  Sep-
tember a  successful  attack  was  made  on  the  camp  of  Joseph
near  Slatina.  The  Emperor  fled  precipitately  by  night,  leaving
4,000  men  on  the  field,  and  a  great  part  of  his  baggage  and
artillery  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy;  his  hopes  of  making  a
military  reputation  were  blasted,  and  he  returned  to  Vienna
disenchanted  and  profoundly  discouraged,  carrying  with  him
the  seeds  of  a  mortal  illness.

Difficulties  and  discouragements  were  indeed  multiplying
rapidly  round  his  path — the  refusal  of  Poland  to  suffer  Imperial
troops  to  march  through  her  territory ;  the  refusal  of  the  Re-
public of  Venice  to  join  in  the  league  against  Turkey  or  to
depart  from  the  strictest  neutrality ;  the  refusal  of  the  King  of
Piedmont  to  allow  any  recruiting  in  his  dominions ;  the  failure
of  an  attempt  to  negotiate  an  Imperial  loan  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries ;  the  formidable  discontents  that  had  shown  themselves  in
Hungary,  where  Joseph  had  subverted  the  ancient  Constitu-
tion; the  spreading  insurrection  in  Austrian  Flanders,  which
threatened  dangers  of  the  gravest  kind.  Potemkin  was  hostile
to  the  Austrian  alliance,  and  lost  no  occasion  of  ridiculing  the
defensive  system  of  his  ally,  and  the  Emperor  was  soon  made
aware  that  Russia  was  resolved  under  no  possible  circumstances
to  suffer  him  to  retain  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.*  It  had  be-
come evident,  from  the  powers  of  resistance  displayed  by  the
Turks,  that  a  Greek  empire  at  Constantinople  was  a  distant
dream,  but  a  less  ambitious  project  might  probably  be  at-
tained. Catherine  now  determined  to  unite  Moldavia,  Wal-
lachia,  and  Bessarabia  in  a  single  kingdom,  governed  by  a
prince  of  the  Greek  rite,  who  would  certainly  be  tlie  vassal
of  Russia.  It  was  not  openly  avowed,  but  it  was  well  known,
that  the  crown  was  reserved  for  Potemkni.'^  Bulgaria,  there-
fore, and  some  moderate  acquisitions  in  Bosnia,  seemed  all  that
Joseph  could  reasonably  expcjct.

In  the  meantime  the  circle  of  tlio  war  was  rapidly  widening.
A  century  before  the  time  of  which  I  am  now  writing,  Sweden

'  Ewart  to Leeds  (Prnssiaa De-  ^  Whitworth to Leeds (Russian

bpatches,  llccorU  Ollicc),  10,  17  Oct.  Despatchus,  Kecord  OJlice),  Feb.  i:^,
17Si»,  17'J0.

CH.  x\x.  SWEDISH REVOLUTION, 1772.  225

liad  been  indisputably  the  foremost  Power  of  the  North  ;  but
the  disastrous  day  of  Pultawa  had  shattered  her  sceptre,  and  the
Peace  of  Nystadt,  which  terminated  her  long  contest  with  Peter
the  Great,  stripped  her  of  her  most  valuable  provinces  and  made
Kussia  supreme  in  the  Baltic.  From  that  day  Sweden  was
never  the  successful  rival  of  Russia.  She  was  sometimes  little
more  than  her  obsequious  vassal.  In  1743  another  disastrous
war  was  terminated  by  another  humiliating  peace,  and  Russia
had  gradually  overcome  the  influence  of  France  and  acquired  a
dominating  authority  over  the  poor  and  numerous  nobles  who
chiefly  directed  the  government  of  the  country.  The  royal
authority,  after  the  death  of  Charles  XII.,  had  fallen  into
extreme  debility;  but  at  last,  in  Gustavus  III.,  the  young
nephew  of  Frederick  the  Great,  the  Swedes  obtained  a  sove-
reign boundless  in  his  ambition  and  his  courage,  and  with
extraordinary  powers  both  of  popular  eloquence  and  of  intrigue.
Relying  largely  on  the  support  and  subsidies  of  France,  but
constituting  himself  at  the  same  time  the  special  representative
and  champion  of  the  democracy  of  Sweden,  he  accomplished,  in
1772,  one  of  the  most  daring  and  successful  revolutions  of  the
eighteenth  century.  The  army,  with  the  exception  of  a  few
officers,  readily  followed  him ;  the  populace,  who  detested  the
corrupt  aristocracy,  and  who  were  electrified  by  the  eloquence
of  the  King,  welcomed  the  change  with  enthusiasm.  The
senators  were  arrested  in  their  chamber.  Stockholm  was
placed  under  martial  law.  The  Diet,  meeting  in  a  hall  sur-
rounded by  soldiers  and  commanded  by  cannon,  gave  its  sanction
to  a  new  Constitution  produced  by  the  King,  which  swept  away
the  old  oligarchical  ascendency  and  gi-eatly  strengthened  the
royal  authority,  and  the  whole  change  was  effected  within  three
days,  without  the  effusion  of  a  drop  of  blood,  and  with  the
manifest  approval  of  the  great  body  of  the  nation.'

'  A  graphic  account  of  this  anqf  Sauveur  d'un  peuple  libre  et  roi  d'un

d\Uat  will  be  found  in  Geffroy,  6h(s-  peuple  brave.

tave  IT  I.  et  la  Covr  de  France.- See  Tu  viens  d'executer  tout  ce qu'on  a

too  La  Croix,  CoiistttyMons  de  VEu-  prevu :

rope. Voltaire  addressed  a  congratu-  Gustave  a  triomphe  sitot  qu'il  a  paru,

latory  epistle  to  Gustavus,  in  which  On  t'admire  aujourd'hui,  cher  prince,

he  says  :  autant  qu'on  t'aime,

'  Jeune  et  digneheritier  dugrand  nom  Tu  vicns  de  lessaisir  les droit:- du

de  Gustave,  diadenae.'

VOL.  V.  Q

226  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

It  at  once  broke  tlie  iufluence  of  Russia  in  the  internal
affairs  of  Sweden,  and  in  the  Russo-Turkish  War  Gustavus  saw
a  chance  of  regaining  some  of  her  lost  provinces.  He  armed
rapidly  by  land  and  sea;  he  made  a  secret  treaty  with  the
Turks,  by  which  he  agreed  to  draw  the  sword  in  considera-
tion of  a  Turkish  subsidy,  and  in  the  summer  of  1788,  after
short  and  angry  preliminaries,  Russia  and  Sweden  were  at  war.
In  June  a  large  but  very  ill-equipped  Swedish  army,  under  the
command  of  the  King,  passed  the  frontier  of  Swedish  Finland,
captured  Nyslot  and  besieged  Frederickshamn,  while  on  sea
two  Russian  ships  of  war  were  taken,  and  a  formidable  fleet
threatened  St,  Petersburg.

The  attack  furnished  a  powerful  diversion  in  favour  of  the
Turks,  and  it  appears  to  have  been  strangely  unexpected.
Though  rumours  of  Swedish  armaments  had  occasionally  arrived
at  St.  Petersburg,^  no  serious  apprehension  seems  to  have  been
felt  till  the  Swedish  army  was  on  the  eve  of  marching.  Russia
was  making  preparations  for  a  great  naval  expedition  to  the
Mediterranean ;  she  had  officially  informed  Sweden  of  her
intention,  and  Finland  was  so  slightly  defended  that  at  the
outbreak  of  the  war  there  was  a  serious  question  of  detaching
15,000  men  from  the  army  of  Potemkin,  and  sending  them
through  the  whole  length  of  the  empire  to  defend  it.  To  those,
indeed,  who  did  not  fully  understand  the  character  of  the
Swedish  King,  an  attack  seemed  very  improbable.  Russia  was
by  fur  the  stronger  Power ;  she  had  given  no  kind  of  provoca-
tion ;  Sweden  had  no  ally  except  the  Turks ;  she  was  still  torn
by  the  dissensions  produced  by  the  revolution  of  1772  ;  her
exchequer  was  almost  empty  and,  through  the  expense  of  a
Court  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  wealth  of  the  nation,  and  the
King's  extreme  passion  for  operas  and  plays,  a  great  debt  had
been  contracted.  The  army  consisted  chiefly  of  militia,  with
little  discipline  and  few  efficient  officers;^  and  an  article  of  the
Constitution  wliicli  li;i,d  been  so  recently  ;ulopted  expressly  for-
b;Kl(;  till-  l\ing,  except  in  case  of  invasion,  from  engaging  in
war  willioiii  I  lie,  loriiijil  sanction  of  the  Diet.

For  a  tiuH^,  jiovvevor,  the  uneasiness  was  very  great,  and

'  Frascr  t,o  CarmarMioii,  A])ril  11,  ant  inns  in  Sweden,  SQni  by  Kccne  to
June  10,  27.  July  8,  17H8.  Engkinf],  Oct.  1788.

*  See  An  Acoeunl  of  laic  Trans-

en.  XIX.  MUTINY OF  SWEDISH OFFICERS.  227

there  was  some  panic  in  the  Russian  capital.  The  Russian
navy  had  of  late  years  been  gi'eatly  strengthened,  and  it  con-
tained several  able  foreign  officers.  Elphinstone,  Greig,  and
Dugdale,  who  were  all  English  or  Scotch,  had  borne  a  very
prominent  part  in  the  defeat  of  the  Turkish  fleet  in  the  Medi-
terranean in  1770.  The  famous  corsair,  Paul  Jones,  had  been
introduced  into  the  Russian  service  by  Segur,  and  he  was  em-
ployed on  the  Black  Sea  in  the  summer  of  1788,  but  in  the
following  year  he  committed  a  disgraceful  offence  and  was
obliged  to  fly  from  Russia.^  Greig,  who  had  now  become  an
admiral,  and  who  was  an  officer  of  great  ability,  commanded  the
Russian  fleet  in  the  Gulf  of  Finland,  and  he  prepared  promptly
to  encounter  the  Swedes.  The  intended  expedition  to  the
Mediterranean  was  at  once  abandoned ;  a  most  obstinately  con-
tested naval  battle  was  fought  for  several  hours  with  no  deci-
sive result ;  but  the  Russians,  who  had  the  advantage  of  being
nearer  to  their  naval  arsenals,  quickly  re-equipped,  augmented
their  shattered  fleet,  and  succeeded  in  shutting  up  the  Swedes
in  the  harbour  of  Sweaborg.

Nearly  at  the  same  time,  the  operations  in  Finland  were
totally  paralysed  by  the  mutiny  of  the  Swedish  officers,  who
belonged  to  the  noble  class.  They  had  been  brought  to  Finland,
they  said,  on  the  pretence  that  the  Russians  were  preparing  to
attack  the  Swedish  territory,  and  they  were  quite  ready  to  sacri-
fice their  lives  to  defend  that  territory  from  invasion.  They
saw,  however,  with  their  own  eyes  that  the  representations  of
the  King  were  absolutely  false — that  no  Russian  troops  had
been  collected  ;  that  there  were  no  signs  of  Russian  hostility  to
Sweden ;  that  they  were  expected  to  engage  in  an  offensive
war,  contrary  to  the  plain  letter  of  the  Constitution  to  which
they  had  sworn.  The  mutiny  began  with  a  few  men,  but  it
soon  spread  through  almost  the  whole  body  of  the  officers,  and
it  was  evident  that  without  their  assistance  nothing  could
be  done.  They  compelled  the  King  to  withdraw  his  army
within  his  own  frontiers,  and  they  actually  sent  a  deputation
to  St.  Petersburg  to  make  a  truce,  preparatory  to  a  peace.
The Empress, who had probably  promoted the  mutiny,  re-

'  Eraser  to  Carmarthen,  Jnlj'  S,  April  24,  1789.  Sherburne's  Life  nf
17SS. Whitworth to Carmarthen, Paul  Jones.

Q  2

228  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix,

ceived  them  very  favourably,  and  an  armistice  was  actually
signed.

The  ambitious  scheme  of  Gustavus  was  thus  suddenly
blighted.  The  shock  was  so  great  that  when  he  first  heard  of
the  mutiny  he  fell  into  a  fit  and  lay  for  some  time  unconscious.'
He  soon,  however,  recovered  and  formed  his  resolutions.  Aban-
doning his  Finland  army  to  the  care  of  his  brother,  he  returned
hastily  by  a  circuitous  route  to  Sweden,  where  another  and  a
most  formidable  danger  had  arisen.

This  danger  sprang  from  Denmark.  There  had  been  for
generations  a  bitter  national  animosity  between  the  Danes  and
the  Swedes,  which  more  than  sixty  years  of  peace  had  not
allayed,  and  the  disaffection  of  Norway,  which  then  belonged
to  Denmark,  and  which  was  believed  to  be  coveted  by  Sweden,
kept  the  wound  open.  Russia  and  Denmark,  on  the  other  hand,
were  close  allies.  By  the  politic  generosity  of  Russia,  Denmark
had  obtained  on  very  easy  terms  the  important  provinces  of
Schleswig  and  Holstein ;  and  she  had  in  her  turn  bound  herself
to  furnish  an  auxiliary  force  whenever  Russia  was  attacked  in
the  North.  Gustavus  III.  had,  however,  laboured,  as  he  hoped
with  success,  to  sever  the  alliance,  and  to  acquire  a  complete
influence  over  his  nephew  the  young  Prince  Royal,  who  governeel
Denmark,  as  the  King  was  out  of  his  mind.  He  had  represented
to  him  the  dangers  arising  from  the  growing  power  and  the
equally  growing  ambition  of  Russia,  and  the  identity  of  inte-
rests that  should  bind  the  two  Scandinavian  nations,  and  he
imagined  that  he  had  at  least  secured  the  neutrality  of  Denmark.
He  soon  found  that  he  was  mistaken.  The  Danish  Prince
determined  to  fulfil  his  treaty  obligations,  and  in  September
1788  a  large  Danish  army,  under  the  command  of  Prince
Charles  of  Hesse  Cassel,  invaded  Sweden  from  Norway.  The
King  appealed  to  his  people  to  rise  ngainst  the  invaders,  and  the
appeal  was  at  once  responded  to,  but  nearly  the  whole  Swedish
army  was  in  Finland.  It  was  iitloi-ly  iinpossible  to  organise  in
time  any  force  that  could  cope  with  any  chance  of  success  with
the  Danes  ;  and  the  position  was  so  desperate  that  it  seemed
as  if  the  last  vestige  of  Swedish  independence  must  have
perished.

'  Kccne  Lo  Fraser,  Aug.  20,  1788.

CH.  XIX.  THE TRIl'LK ALLIANCE.  2'2\}

It  Wiis  at  this  point  that  England  appeared  upon  the  scene,
and  an  obscure  and  difficult,  but  very  important,  period  of
English  foreign  policy  begins.  In  order  to  understand  it  clearly
it  will  be  necessary  to  revert  for  a  moment  to  events  which  have
been  described  in  the  last  chapter.

We  have  seen  that  the  policy  of  Joseph  II.,  in  abolishing  the
divided  sovereignty  which  the  Barrier  Treaty  had  established  in
the  Belgic  provinces,  in  beginning  a  course  of  open  hostilities
against  Holland,  and  in  endeavouring  to  exchange  his  Flemish
dominions  for  Bavaria,  which  would  have  given  Austria  an
overwhelming  power  in  Germany  and  would  have  been  accom-
panied by  the  cession  of  Luxembourg  and  Namur  to  France,
had  excited  the  gravest  alarm  in  both  England,  Holland,  and
Pnissia,  and  had  drawn  those  three  Powers  closely  together.
The  troubles,  almost  amounting  to  civil  war,  which  distracted
Holland  in  1785  and  the  two  following  years,  and  the  suc-
cessful interposition  of  Prussia  and  England  in  favour  of  the
House  of  Orange,  strengthened  the  connection,  and  led  to  the
Triple  Alliance  which  was  signed  in  the  summer  of  1788.
This  treaty  bound  the  three  contracting  Powers  to  an  unalter-
able defensive  alliance  for  '  preserving  the  public  tranquillity
and  security,  for  maintaining  their  common  interests,  and  for
their  mutual  defence  and  guaranty  against  every  hostile  at-
tack ; '  and  it  stipulated  in  great  detail  the  assistance  which
each  was  to  furnish  to  the  other.  The  first  great  task  which
the  allies  undertook  was  the  pacification  of  Europe  in  such  a
manner  as  to  leave  substantially  unchanged  the  existing  balance
of  power.

The  phrase  ^  the  balance  of  power '  is  one  which  has  now
fallen  into  great  disfavour,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  many  periods
of  history  it  has  been  grossly  abused.  The  belief  that  no
State  should  be  suffered  to  add  anything  to  its  territory  with-
out a  corresponding  adjustment  of  the  frontier  of  its  neighbours,
or  even  of  distant  States,  has  done  much  more  to  subvert  thsiu
to  promote  the  security  of  Europe,  and  it  has  produced  far
more  warfare  than  it  has  pi'evented.  Political  prescience  is  at
best  so  limited  and  imperfect  a  thing,  that  it  is  rarely  wise  to
encounter  the  certain  evils  of  a  European  war  in  order  to
avert dangers that are distant, doubtful, and obscure ;  ami

230 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  xix.

unforeseen  influences  of  dissolution  or  of  adjustment  continuuUy
neutralise  tlie  effects  of  the  most  foi-midable  political  combina-
tions. At  the  same  time,  within  certain  limits  the  wisdom  of
maintaining  a  balance  of  power  is  self-evident.  Europe  is  a
comity  of  nations,  in  Avliich  no  one  can  completely  isolate  itself
from  the  others.  It  is  possible  that  one  European  State  may  (as
in  the  period  of  Konian  greatness)  attain  such  an  inordinate
supremacy  that  all  others  may  be  at  its  mercy ;  and  if  the
ascendencies  of  Charles  V.,  Lewis  XIV.,  and  Napoleon  had
been  consolidated  when  at  their  height,  this  would  most  pro-
bably have  occurred.  It  is  possible  for  a  similar  power  to  be
attained  by  an  alliance  or  coalition  of  two  or  more  States,  and
it  is  also  possible  that  there  may  be  a  local  disturbance  of
the  balance,  which  places  certain  quarters  of  Europe  entirely
under  a  single  influence,  to  the  great  injury  of  other  nations.
In  addition  to  the  evils  which  inevitably  follow  from  the  exist-
ence of  a  European  war,  there  was,  at  the  time  I  am  writing  of,
much  probability  of  a  partition  of  territory,  which,  in  both  the
East  and  the  North,  would  profoundly  alter  the  relative  posi-
tion of  European  nations.  The  Emperor  and  the  Eussian
Empress  were  conspiring  to  partition  the  dominions  of  ,  the
Porte,  while  the  Swedish  provinces  were  in  great  danger  of;
falling  into  the  possession  of  Russia  and  Denmark.

The  latter  danger  was  the  most  pressing.  Denmark  was
completely  under  Russian  influence,  and  if  the  independence
and  power  of  Sweden  were  destroyed  the  Baltic  would  become
little  more  than  a  Russian  lake.  To  England  and  Holland  this
was  a  very  serious  commercial  question.  To  Prussia  it  was  a
f|U('stion  of  security,  for  she  had  a  long  lino  of  unprotected  coast.
With  the  Swedish  army  inactive  in  Finland  ;  with  the  Swedish
fleet  beleaguered  in  Sweaborg;  with  a  Danish  army  marching
rapidly  into  Sweden,  the  position  seemed  nearly  hopeless  ;  and  the
capture  of  Glothcnburg,  which  appeared  certain  and  imminent,
would  have  probably  made  it  irremediable  by  placing  the  chief
commercial  town  of  Sweden  in  the  hands  of  the  Danes.  But
the  intervention  of  the  allies  was  prompt  and  decisive.  Their
mediation  was  offered  to  and  accepted  by  the  King  of  Sweden,
iind  the  Danes  were  informed  that  unless  they  at  once  desisted
fruui  their  operations,  and  withdrew  fi'om  the  Swedish  territory,

CH.  XIX.  GROWING DIFFERENCES  WITH RUSSIA.  231

a  Prussian  army  would  enter  Holstein  and  an  English  fleet
would  appear  in  the  Sound.  The  force  which  lay  behind  these
threats  was  irresistible,  and  to  the  great  disappointment  of  the
Swedish  King,  who  would  have  gladly  continued  the  war  with
the  assistance  of  such  powerful  allies,  and  whose  conduct  at  this
critical  moment  was  evidently  designed  to  rekindle  the  contest,^
an  armistice  was  signed  between  Sweden  and  Denmark  in
October  1788.  It  was  prolonged  by  successive  extensions  till
the  definite  peace,  and  the  Danish  army  retired  beyond  the
frontier.

The  conduct  of  Hugh  Elliot,  the  English  minister  at  Copen-
hagen, who  was  chiefly  employed  in  conducting  this  difficult
business,  received  and  deserved  much  praise,  and  it  is  hardly  an
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  very  existence  of  Sweden  as  an
independent  Power  was  probably  due  to  the  rapid  and  decisive
intervention  of  the  allies.  The  supposition  that  Gustavus  in
first  declaring  war  had  been  prompted  by  them  ^  is,  I  believe,
entirely  untrue.  Their  intervention  was  mainly  due  to  an
anxiety  to  maintain  the  political  balance  in  the  Baltic,  a]id
partly,  perhaps,  to  the  fact  that  France,  which  had  always  tried  to
maintain  a  kind  of  protectorate  over  Sweden,  had  already  offered
her  mediation.^  Russia,  not  unnaturally,  bitterly  resented  it.
There  had  already  been  many  complaints  at  St.  Petersburg  of
an  order  which  had  been  issued  in  England  forbidding  the  hire
of  English  transports  to  carry  Russian  troops  from  the  Baltic  to
the  Mediterranean  and  of  English  pilots  to  guide  the  Russian
fleet,  and  it  was  acknowledged  that  military  stores  had  been
occasionally  sent  by  English  merchants  to  Constantinople.
The  English  Government  replied  that  the  former  measure  was
essential  to  their  neutrality,  and  that  it  was  impossible  tO'
prevent  private  merchants  sending  their  stores  to  an  advan-
tageous market. Russia  had  in  fact  profited  largely  by  this-

'  See  Lady  Miuto's  Life  of  Hugh  the  letters  in  the  Russian  Corresp^jn-

EUiot.  deuce  from Fraser  to  Carmarthen,

'^  This  was  asserted  by  G^iTroy  in  Aug. 20, and from Carmarthen to

his  Gustavo  III.  ct  la  Cour  de  France,  Fratier,  Aug.  29,  1788,  seem  to  me  to

ii. 65, 66, and it has been often  show clearly that the allies had

repeated. The confidential corre-  nothing  whatever  to  say  to  the  con-

ispondence,  however,  of Keene,  who  duct  of Gustavus  in  declaring  war,

was English consul at Slockhohn  and  tliat  they  did  not  approve  of  it.
when the war broke out  (Swcdisli  ^  Keene  to  Caruiarlhcn,  Sept.  26 ;

Correspondence,  Record  Ollice),  and  Fraser  to  Cai'marthen,.  Oct.  10,  1788.

232 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

very  trade,  and  more  than  one  English  ship  laden  with  military
stores  had  discharged  its  cargo  at  Cronstadt.^  It  was  added,  as
a  proof  that  England  did  not  lean  unduly  to  the  Turks,  that
the  Emperor  of  Morocco  had  actually  declared  war  against
her  on  the  pretence  that  she  was  assisting  the  Russians.'^  The
proceedings  relating  to  Sweden  caused  a  much  more  serious
alienation.  Count  Ostermann,  the  Russian  Vice-Chancellor,
complained  in  strong  terms,  both  through  the  Russian  minister
in  London  and  through  the  English  minister  at  St.  Petersburg,
of  the  unfriendly  conduct  of  England  and  Prussia.  He  dwelt
upon  the  unprovoked  aggression  of  the  King  of  Sweden  ;  upon
the  palpable  falseness  of  the  pretexts  he  had  advanced ;  upon
the  necessity  of  at  least  taking  measures  to  prevent  a  recurrence
of  such  attacks.  The  proposed  mediation  was  courteously  but
firmly  declined.^  The  Empress  would  not  make  peace  on  the
terms  of  the  status  quo,  or  on  any  terms  that  were  dictated  by
other  Powers.  For  the  present,  however,  her  energies  were
mainly  directed  to  the  Turkish  War,  and  for  some  months  an
unquiet  peace  reigned  in  the  Baltic.

As  Russia  refused  to  accept  the  mediation  of  the  allies,  their
next  attempt  was  to  negotiate  a  separate  peace  between  the
I'viuperor  and  the  Turks.  It  was  the  ambition  of  the  Emperor
which  had  first  drawn  England  and  Prussia  into  connection,  and
it  was  soon  found  that  the  task  of  effecting  a  peace  was  greatly
aggravated  by  the  at  least  equal  ambition  of  the  King  of  Prussia.
It  was  only  gradually  that  the  full  extent  and  significance  of  the
IVussian  designs  were  disclosed,  and  they  threatened  to  change
the  whole  aspect  of  the  war.

At  the  end  of  January  1789,  Ewart,  the  English  representative
at  Berlin,  wrote  to  Lord  Carmarthen  an  account  of  instructions
which  had  been  sent  to  Alvenslcben,  the  Prussian  minister  at
tlio  Hiigiie,  and  which  had  been  communicated  to  him  by  order
of  the  King  of  Prussia.  The  Prussian  minister  was  instructed
to  act  in  close  harmony  with  the  ministers  of  Great  Britain  and
Holland,  and  at  the  same  time  he  received  a  sketch  of  the  wishes

•  Cjirmarthen  to  Eraser,  Feb.  1788;  200  ;  Carmartlien  to  Eraser,  April  21),

Carmarthen  to  Woronzow,  March  2!>,  1788.

1788;  Eraser  to  Carmarthen,  June  3,  '  Ostormann  to  Woronzow,  Oct.  i:?;

1788. AvMvnl  Ri'ffiMpT.  Whit  worth  to  Carmarthen,  Dec.  20,

'  Auckland C'orrespondeiicc, ii.  1788.

cH.  XIX.  PRUSSIAN  DESIGNS.  2:53

and  plans  of  his  Court.  The  first  task  of  the  allies  had  been  to
save  Sweden  from  being  overpowered  by  the  Danish  invasion,
and  thus  to  preserve  the  balance  of  the  Baltic.  So  far  this  task
had  been  achieved.  The  Danes  had  retired  from  Swedish  terri-
tory and  had  signed  an  armistice,  and  the  conduct  of  the  Court
of  St.  Petersburg  in  dispensing  with  Danish  assistance  by  land
seemed  to  indicate  more  moderate  views.  The  neutrality  of
Denmark,  however,  must  be  clearly  and  definitely  established,
and  if  there  was  any  refusal  to  admit  it,  on  the  part  either  of
Bussia  or  of  Denmark,  it  might  be  necessary  for  Great  Britain
and  Holland  to  threaten  to  send  a  fleet  to  the  Baltic.  With
regard  to  Sweden,  the  object  should  be  to  restore  peace  on  the
same  footing  as  before  the  war  began.  The  King  of  Sweden  is
much  to  be  blamed  for  his  instability,  and  England  and  Prussia
must  endeavour  to  establish  a  permanent  interest  at  Stockholm.
In  dealing  with  Russia,  they  must  also  very  closely  co-operate,
and  the  King  of  Prussia  earnestly  hoped  that  Poland,  where
Prussian  influence  now  preponderated,  might  be  included  in  the
negotiations.  It  was  not,  however,  his  desire  that  the  war
between  Russia  and  Turkey  should  be  at  once  terminated.  On
the  contrary,  it  ought  to  be  made  a  main  object  to  prevent  the
Turks  from  making  '  a  precipitate  peace  without  the  concurrent
intervention  of  the  two  Courts.'  The  Russians  and  Turks  ought
to  be  left  to  themselves,  unless  the  Turks  should  be  overpowered ;
but  the  Russians  ought  if  possible  to  be  prevented  from  send-
ing a  fleet  to  the  Mediterranean.  Once,  however,  the  mediation
of  the  two  Courts  was  accepted  by  the  Porte,  '  our  influence  so
established  might  afterwards  be  employed  in  the  manner  best
suited  to  the  circumstances  and  to  our  common  interests.  The
guarantees  of  the  remaining  possessions  of  the  Turks  after  the
conclusion  of  the  peace,  and  their  subsequent  accession  to  our
defensive  alliance,  continue  likewise  to  be  considered  as  probable
consequences,  and  at  least  the  Porte  may  be  encouraged  to
expect  those  advantages,  provided  it  relies  solely  on  the  media-
tion of  England  and  Pi'ussia.'  The  King  of  Prussia  will  be
obliged  to  resist  all  attempts  of  the  Emperor  to  make  acquisitions
of  territory  ;  but  this  significant  qualifying  clause  is  added — '  He
trusts  England  will  concur  in  approving  this  resolution,  or  in
contributing  to  make  such  an  arrangement  as  may  procure  a

234 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xix.

compensation.'  '  In  all  probability,'  it  is  added,  '  Great  Britain
and  the  King  of  Prussia  will  have  it  in  their  power  to  settle  both
the  succession  of  Poland  and  the  election  of  the  King  of  the
KoraanSj  in  the  manner  best  suited  to  promote  their  common
interests.'

It  was  already  evident  that  the  Prussian  views  extended
much  beyond  a  simple  and  speedy  re-establishment  of  peace,  and
it  was  added  that  a  military  demonstration  of  Prussia  and  a
naval  demonstration  of  England  and  Holland  would  probably  be
needed.  It  was  not  likely,  the  Prussian  ministers  thought,  that
the  actual  employment  of  force  would  become  necessary,  for  the
two  Imperial  Courts  were  much  exhausted,  but  the  appearance
of  force  might  be  very  useful.  '  The  line  of  conduct,'  continued
Ewart,  '  pursued  towards  France,  in  the  affairs  of  Holland,  is
adduced  as  a  recent  and  striking  proof  in  support  of  this  con-
clusion and  of  the  great  probability  of  such  an  attempt  being
completely  successful,  since  the  risks  would  be  much  smaller
than  in  the  case  alluded  to.'  ^

In  the  course  of  the  spring  and  summer  of  1789  the
]'russian  designs  took  a  more  definite  shape.  The  King  of
I'russia  believed  himself  to  be  in  possession  of  overwhelming
military  power;  he  was  extremely  desirous  to  renew  the  long
contest  with  Austria  which  had  been  carried  on  by  Frederick
the  Great,  and  he  was  determined  to  avail  himself  of  the
present  war  to  obtain  special  advantages  for  Prussia.  He  had
two  great  objects  in  view.  One  was  to  compel  Austria  to
relinquish,  in  favour  of  Poland,  Galicia  and  its  other  pos-
sessions in  that  country  which,  the  Prussian  ministers  said,
'  from  their  situation  are  so  extremely  embarrassing  to  Prus-
sia.' ^  The  other  was  to  obtain  from  Poland,  as  a  compensa-
lioii  for  this  cession,  the  important  towns  of  Dantzig  and
Tliofii,  both  of  which,  but  especially  tlie  former,  seemed
rniiii  jlioir  position  to  belong  naturally  to  ]^]asteru  Prussia.^
Jti  oi-(l(;r  ihiit  those  objects  slioiild  bo  attnincd,  it  wiis  the
Klroiig  wish  of  tlie  King  'to  see  the  two  Imperi;i1  Conrts,
uihI I);ii-I  iciil.'irly  llir Ihiiperor,  embarked in a second  cam-

'  Kwart  to  Carmarthen,  Jan.  28,  title  of  Duke  of  Ijccds.
1 7HI).  •' 1 1  cit  zl  lerg,  liccucU  dcs  Mhiiolrrs,

■'  Ewart  to  T.cofls,  IMny  2S,  ITSIl.  ,Sc.  iii.  1;J-1G.
Caruiarllicu  liad  jusl  mliurilcd  the

i

CH.  XIX.  PROPOSED ALLIANCE WITH TURIiEY.  235

ptiign  with  the  Porte,' '  and  he  himself  resolved  to  make  a
demonstration  on  the  frontiers  of  Galicia  and  Bohemia.  'It
is  not  possible,'  wrote  Ewart,  'for  his  Imperial  Majesty  to
assemble  an  army  of  50,000  men  at  present  in  these  pro-
vinces, whereas  the  King  of  Prussia  has  actually  200,000
men,  in  the  very  best  order  and  discipline,  ready  to  take
the  field.' 2  Galicia  was  ripe  for  revolt.  Hitherto,  the  King
of  Prussia  said,  he  had  discouraged  insurrectionary  move-
ments, but  they  would  probably  break  out  without  his  con-
currence as  a  consequence  of  the  revolt  in  the  Austrian  Nether-
lands, and  they  would  also  probably  be  directed  and  assisted  by
the  Polish  States.  In  this  case  the  Emperor  would  hardly  be
able  to  subjugate  this  detached  portion  of  his  domiuioiis.
Poland  would  become  a  party  to  the  war,  and  Prussia  would  be
bound  to  support  her.^

But  this  was  not  all.  The  very  grave  resolution  was  now
taken  at  Berlin  of  offering  under  certain  circumstances  direct
assistance  to  the  Turks.  The  Sultan  had  died  in  the  spring  of
this  year;  his  successor  was  determined  to  carry  on  the  war
with  energy,  and  the  Prussian  minister  at  Constantinople  was
now  du'ected  to  negotiate  an  alliance  with  him  on  the  following
terms.  If  victorious,  the  Turks  were  to  consider  the  interests  of
Poland,  Sweden,  and  especially  Prussia;  but  if  fortune  de-
clared against  them,  and  they  were  driven  beyond  the  Danube,
the  King  of  Prussia  engaged  to  assist  the  Porte  with  his  whole
force  until  the  Porte  regained  'all  his  ancient  provinces,
situated  beyond  the  Danube  and  the  Cuban,  as  well  as  the
gr.e;itest  possible  security  for  Constantinople  on  the  side  of  the
Black  Sea.'  If,  however,  the  Ottoman  Court  was  ultimately
obliged  to  make  cessions  to  that  of  Vienna,  the  Prussian  minis-
ter was  enjoined  to  stipulate  that  this  should  only  be  on  the  ex-
press condition  '  that  the  Court  of  Austria  should  be  obliged  to
restore  to  the  Republic  of  Poland,  in  exchange,  Galicia  and  all
the  provinces  which,  by  the  treaty  of  partition,  she  had  secured
from  Poland ;  and  that  the  Courts  of  Vienna,  of  St.  Petersburg,
and  of  Poland  should  arrange  at  the  same  time  with  the  King
of  Prussia  about  their  respective  differences  and  interests  in  a

'  Ewart  to  Carmartheu,  Feb.  11,  *  Ibid.

178i3.  *  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Aug.  10,  1789.

236 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

manner  conforming  to  the  interests  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  Jis
the  principal  friend  and  ally  of  the  Porte.' '

This  very  serious  step  was  taken  by  Prussia  without  any
concert  with  her  allies.  It  was,  however,  at  once  frankly  com-
municated to  the  English  minister,  and  the  Prussians  distinctly
stated  that  they  did  not  consider  that  it  in  any  way  bound  or
implicated  England  and  Holland  under  the  terms  of  the  Triple
Alliance.  They  added,  at  the  same  time,  that  one  result  of  the
Prussian  policy  would  probably  be  that  Turkey  would  become
a  party  to  the  defensive  alliance  under  a  guarantee  of  her
dominions.

Even  this,  however,  was  not  the  full  extent  of  the  Prussian
designs.  For  some  time  affairs  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands  had
been  becoming  rapidly  worse.  The  disturbances  which  had
been  originally  produced  by  the  rash,  and  for  the  most  part
wholly  unjustifiable,  encroachments  of  Joseph  upon  the  ancient
privileges  and  customs  of  his  Flemish  subjects  had  been  com-
posed at  the  close  of  1787  ;  but  after  a  short  interval  they  re-
vived with  redoubled  violence.  An  obscure  quarrel,  which  has
long  since  lost  its  interest,  about  the  constitution  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Louvain,  was  the  immediate  cause,  and  after  many  acts
of  violence,  disorder,  and  military  repression,  a  serious  insurrec-
tion broke  out.  The  revolutionary  ideas  that  were  seething  in
France  were  in  full  vigour  in  Austrian  Flanders ;  an  insur-
rection in  the  neighbouring  bishopric  of  Liege  still  further
strengthened  them,  and  tlie  Flemish  insurgents  were  so  success-
ful, that  by  the  end  of  1789  the  Austrian  garrison  was  com-
pletely driven  out  of  Flanders,  the  dominion  of  the  Emperor
Avas  thi'own  off,  and  in  January  1790  an  Act  of  Union  of
tlie  Belgian  United  Provinces  was  drawn  up  and  signed  at
Brussels.

For  some  time  before  this  triumph  had  been  achieved  the
Kopai'ation  of  those  provinces  from  tlio  Empire  seemed  a  probnhlo
coiitiiigcncy,  and  it  soon  appeared  that,  provided  they  did  not
full  into  the  hands  of  France,  Prussia  was  prepared  both  to
welcome  and  to  accelerate  it.  If  Austria  could  be  deprived  oji
one  side  of  her  I'olish,  and on  the  other  side  of  her  Flomisli,

'  Ewart 1o r.cccls,  May  2S,  17K'.». (May  2(;)  1o  DicU,  llic  I'lussiuu  mi-
fcicc, loo, llic iuolobcd instruuiiuii.s uisLcr  al  ConstaaiLiuox'le.

i

CH.  XIX.  PRUSSIAN DESIGNS  ON  FLANDERS.  237

dominions,  while  Prussia  obtained  Dantzig  and  Thorn,  it  was
plain  that  the  relative  position  of  the  two  great  German
Powers  would  be  materially  changed;  and  it  was  insinuated
to  the  Eno'lish  minister  that  a  Prussia  so  a^sfrandised  would
give  a  much  greater  weight  and  importance  to  the  Triple
Alliance.'

It  was  reported  in  the  April  of  1789  that  France  was  en-
deavouring to  negotiate  an  alliance  with  Russia,  and  that  the
Emperor  strongly  supported  her ;  and  there  were  rumours  and
suspicions  at  Berlin  that  the  cession  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands
to  France  might  form  part  of  the  arrangement.^  Under  these
circumstances  the  Prussian  Government  represented  confiden-
tially to  England  that  the  three  Powers  should  form  some  plan
of  concert  about  the  affairs  of  the  Netherlands.  It  was  gene-
rally admitted  that  the  acquisition  of  these  provinces  by  France
must  be  resisted  at  the  cost  of  war ;  and  the  Prussians  urged
that,  in  the  not  improbable  contingency  of  the  French  entering
Flanders  as  the  allies  of  the  Emperor,  the  three  allied  Powers
should  actively  support  the  insurgents  in  resisting  them.  But
there  was  another  contingency  to  be  feared.  Was  it  not
probable  that  if  the  allies  now  refused  to  support  them,  the
insurgents  might  throw  themselves  into  the  arms  of  France,
and  that  a  French  alliance,  or  protectorate,  or  annexation
might  be  the  result  ?  On  the  whole,  the  Prussians  suggested
that  the  best  settlement  of  the  question  might  be  the  union  of
Austrian  Flanders  and  Holland  into  a  single  republic.  This
must,  however,  be  left  to  the  determination  of  the  people  and
to  discussion  with  Holland.  All  that  was  at  present  urged  was
that  the  existing  system  seemed  likely  to  be  overthrown,  and
that  the  common  interests  of  the  allies  would  suffer  extremelv
if  Austrian  Flanders  were  '  annexed  to  France,  of  which  there
seems  to  be  so  much  danger,  as  a  considerable  party  in  the
country  is  already  inclined  to  adopt  this  measure,  and  their
French  neighbours  use  every  means  to  encourage  it.'  England
and  Holland,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Prussian  King,  ought  at
once  to  consult  together  about  the  possibility  of  carrying  out
such  a  union  of  the  Low  Countries  as  was  suggested.  By  the
Peace  of  Utrecht  and  the  Barrier  Treaty  they  were  expressly
'  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Aug.  10,  1789.  =  Ibid.  April  20,  May  l(i,  1789.

238  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

authorised  to  prevent  Austrian  Flanders  from  falling  into  the
hands  of  France,  and  Prussia  had  also  a  right  to  interfere  as  a
party  to  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  and  as  a  member  of  the  German
Empire  '  to  which  the  Austrian  Netherlands  belonged  from  their
origin.' '

These  considerations  opened  to  the  English  Government  a
long  vista  of  dangerous  and  embarrassing  complications.  The
two  objects  of  England  in  interfering  with  the  existing  war
had  been  to  bring  about  as  speedily  as  possible  a  European
peace  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo  as  it  existed  before  the  war,
and  to  induce  as  many  Powers  as  possible  to  join  in  a  defensive
alliance  which  might  for  the  future  secure  the  peace  of  Europe
from  aggressive  enterprises.  The  Prussian  alliance  was  the
very  keystone  to  this  defensive  system,  and  the  King  of
Prussia  had  signally  displayed  his  good-will  to  England  by
consenting  that  a  war  in  the  East  Indies  in  which  any
European  Power  attacked  the  English  possessions  should  be
esteemed  a  casus  foederis.^  In  conjunction  with  Prussia,  England
had  already  in  some  degree  committed  herself  to  the  task  of
restricting,  with  a  view  to  ultimately  extinguishing,  the  pre-
sent war.  But  the  policy  which  the  Prussian  ministers  had
announced  was  almost  certain  both  to  prolong  and  to  extend  it,
by  suggesting  new  objects  of  contention  which  could  hardly  be
settled  except  by  arms,  and  which  might  very  easily  draw  every
important  country  in  Europe  into  the  contest.  It  was  in  the
highest  degree  improbable  that  Austria  could  be  induced  to
abandon  her  Polish  dominions,  unless  she  were  conquered  by  a
J  Russian  army ;  and  it  was  very  probable  that  a  war  with  France
would  be  the  consequence  of  any  attempt  to  alter  the  political
position  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  The  original  object  of
the  Triple  Alliance  had  been  to  maintain  and  consolidate  the
peace  of  Europe,  and  it  was  with  this  object  that  England  and
Holland  had  joined  in  it.  There  was  now,  however,  an  obvious
desire  on  the  part  of  Prussia  to  employ  it  with  the  object  of
remodelling  tiie  map  of  Europe  at  the  great  risk  of  an  ex-
tended war,  and  in  the  interests  of  Prussian  ambition. At  the

'  Ewfirt  to  Lceda,  Muy  l(j,  Augu.st  ^  Smyth's  Memoirs  of  Sir  liobcrt

10,  Mfi'J.  Keith,  ii.  225.

i

CH.  XIX.  THE  ENGLISH  REPLY.  239

same  time,  it  was  difficult  to  draw  back  without  seriously
eudangeriug  or  weakening  the  alliance.

Sir  Robert  Keith,  who  was  English  minister  at  Vienna  when
the  war  between  the  Emperor  and  Turkey  began,  has  furnished
us  with  an  extraordinary  illustration  of  the  laxity  and  negli-
gence with  which  English  foreign  politics  wei-e  at  this  time
sometimes  directed.  He  mentions  that  the  first  intelligence  be
received  of  the  impending  alliance  between  England  and  Prussia,
which  so  profoundly  changed  the  attitude  of  England  towards  the
Emperor,  was  derived  not  from  his  own  Government,  but  from
the  Prussian  minister  ;  that  at  the  time  when  this  alliance  and
the  entry  of  the  Emperor  into  the  Turkish  War  had  made  the
relations  of  England  to  the  Court  of  Vienna  peculiarly  delicate,
critical,  and  difficult,  he  was  left  for  five  whole  months  without
a  single  line  of  instruction  on  public  affairs,  and  that  no  less
than  fifty-two  successive  despatches  which  he  had  written  re-
mained unanswered.  On  an  average,  he  said,  he  obtained  one
answer  to  about  forty  despatches.'  On  very  grave  occasions,
however,  Pitt  appears  to  have  himself  intervened  in  foreign
politics,^  and  his  hand  may,  I  think,  be  traced  in  the  admirably
reasoned,  courteous,  but  at  the  same  time  somewhat  sarcastic
despatches  in  which  the  English  Government  now  dissected
tne  Prussian  proposals  and  indicated  their  own  policy.

The  first  of  these  despatches  relates  exclusively  to  the
Polish  and  Turkish  questions.  It  expresses  warm  apprecia-
tion of  the  courtesy  of  the  King  of  Prussia  in  communicating
the  instructions  to  the  Prussian  minister  at  Constantinople
to  the  English  minister,  and  also  of  his  care  not  to  implicate
England  and  Holland  in  his  policy.  The  chief  object,  the  writer
continues,  of  Prussian  policy  appears  now  to  be,  first  of  all,  to
deprive  the  Empire  of  those  provinces  which  Austria  acquired
by  her  share  in  the  partition  of  Poland ;  and,  secondly,  '  the
acquisition  of  some  considerable  place,  such  as  Dantzig  and
Thorn,  with  their  adjacent  territory,  in  the  more  northern  parts
of  Poland.  Other  arrangements  beneficial  to  Prussia  may  be  in
contemplation,  but  I  state  these  as  the  most  essential  objects  in
the  present  system  of  acquisition  of  that  Power.'

'  Smyth's  Memoirs  of  Sir  R.  Kdth,  ii.  213,  221,  225-232.  »  See  p.  24.

240  ENGLAND IN TKE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,  ch.  xix.

It  seemed  to  tlie  Euglisli  Government  highly  improbable
that  the  Porte  could  secure  these  ends,  or  that  she  would  secure
them  if  it  were  in  her  power.  It  can  hardly  be  reasonably
supposed  that  the  Ottoman  arms  could  be  so  successful  '  as  to
render  the  Porte  equal  to  the  task  of  not  only  making  terms
for  herself  and  Sweden,  but  likewise  of  settling  the  affairs  of
the  four  remaining  Powers  to  the  satisfaction  of  Prussia  and
Poland ; '  and  it  is  almost  equally  improbable  that,  in  case  of  a
serious  defeat,  she  would  be  able  to  carry  out  the  Prussian
design  of  making  any  cession  of  territory  she  was  obliged  to
make  to  Austria  conditional  on  that  power  restoring  Galicia
and  the  other  Polish  provinces  to  Poland.  The  King  of
England  would  be  delighted  at  any  advantages  that  could  be
attained  by  Prussia  '  without  danger  of  extending  those  hostili-
ties it  is  so  much  the  interest  of  all  Europe  to  put  an  end  to.'
It  is,  however,  very  plain,  that  the  intentions  now  disclosed
go  '  much  beyond  the  spirit  of  our  treaty  of  alliance,  which  is
purely  of  a  defensive  nature,  and  by  which  we  of  course  cannot
be  considered  as  in  any  degree  bound  to  support  a  system  of  an
offensive  nature,  the  great  end  of  which  appears  to  be  aggran-
disement rather  than  security,  and  which  from  its  very  nature  is
liable  to  provoke  fresh  hostilities,  instead  of  contributing  to  the
restoration  of  general  tranquillity.'  The  future  guarantee  of
the  Turkish  dominions  is  a  point  which  can  only  be  practically
and  beneficially  discussed  at  the  peace.  England  has  no  wish
to  act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  a  future  connection  with
Russia  impossil>le.  She  is  persuaded  that  the  Prussian  policy
would  greatly  diminish  the  chance  of  detaching  Russia  from
Austria.  '  In  discussing  these  points,'  the  minister  continues,
'  and  indeed  upon  every  other  occasion,  I  must  beg  you,  sir,
to  remember  that  it  is  by  no  means  the  idea  of  his  Majesty
and  of  his  confidential  servants  to  risk  the  engaging  this
country  in  a  war  on  account  of  Turkey,  either  directly  or
indirectly.  I  am  to  desire  you  would  be  particularly  careful  in
your  language  to  prevent  any  iuteutiou  of  that  nature  being
imputed  to  us.'  '

The  same  pacific  counsels  were  reiterated  in  a  despatch
which  was  sent  about  three  months  hiter.  England,  Leeds  said,
•  Lccdb  to  Ewarl,  June  L'l,  1789.

CH.  XIX.  ENGLISH REPLY,  SEPTEMBER 14.  241

fully  admitted  the  pernicious  consequences  that  would  ensue  if  the
Austrian  Netherlands  became  absolutely  dependent  on  France,
and  she  was  quite  prepared  to  co-operate  with  Prussia  and
Holland  in  preventing  it.  But  it  was  necessary  that  this
danger  should  be  clear  and  imminent.  '  As  yet,'  said  the  English
minister,  '  nothing  in  these  provinces  appears  to  call  for  such  a
degree  of  interference  on  the  part  of  the  allied  powers  as  to
threaten  the  interruption  of  that  tranquillity  wliieli  it  is  so
much  their  interest,  and  I  trust  their  intention,  to  preserve.'
The  Emperor  is  very  dangerously  ill,  and  his  death  would  pro-
bably produce  a  change  of  system  which  might  alter  materi-
ally the  problem  in  the  Netherlands.  '  The  idea  of  separating
Galicia  from  the  Emperor  is  certainly  one  which  is  in  all  respects
tempting  to  the  Court  of  Berlin,  and  in  proportion  as  it  would
add  to  the  security  and  strength  of  that  Court,  it  would  cer-
tainly be  considered  here  as  beneficial  to  our  general  system.
But  the  advantage  might  be  purchased  at  too  dear  a  rate.  It
would  be  so  if  the  attempt  led  to  involve  the  allies,  or  any  of
them,  in  a  war.  For  the  station  they  ht>ld  at  present,  and  the
benefits  to  be  derived  from  a  continuance  of  peace,  seem  likely
to  contribute  more  to  the  real  prosperity  of  their  dominions
than  the  most  brilliant  successes  which  could  be  expected  to
attend  their  arms.  These  considerations  make  it  appear  wiser
that  the  King  of  Prussia  should  avoid  taking  any  such  part  in
the  events  which  may  arise  in  Galicia  as  may  lead  to  a  rupture
with  the  Emperor.  .  .  .  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  his
Majesty's  earnest  wish  to  prevail  on  the  Court  of  Berlin  to
desist  altogether  from  any  enterprise  in  the  Netherlands  or  in
Galicia,  and  at  all  events  it  is  impossible  to  pledge  this  country
beforehand  to  the  consequences  of  measures  which  go  beyond
the  line  of  a  defensive  alliance,  and  which  might  incur,  with-
out any  sufficient  justification,  the  risk  of  a  general  war.'
'  When  the  independence  of  Sweden  seemed  in  danger  of  being
immediately  and  totally  subverted,  there  appeared  to  be  an
evident  and  urgent  interest  which  called  for  the  effectual
interposition  of  the  allies.  But  it  does  not  in  the  present
situation  of  things  appear  likely  that  any  event  should  arise
in  the  war  between  the  two  Imperial  Courts  and  Turkey  'which
can  be  considered  as  calling  upon  the  allies  in  tlie  same  manner,
VOL.  V.  K

242  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKV. en.  xix.

or  Tvluch  can  pi-ojjerly  iudiice  them  to  become  parties  in  tlie

'  1

war.

The  campaign  of  1789  was  on  the  whole  very  disastrous  to
the  Tm'ks.  In  addition  to  several  less  important  fortresses,
Belgrade  was  at  last  taken,  after  a  long  siege,  by  the  Austrians,
and  Bender  by  the  Russians,  and  some  very  considerable  battles
Avere  fought  and  won.  The  Russian  forces  moved  triumphantly
through  Moldavia ;  while  the  Austrians  took  possession  of
Bucharest,  the  capital  of  Wallachia  ;  overran  the  greater  part
of  Servia,  and  captured  most  of  its  fortresses,  though  they  at
length  received  a  check  at  Orsova.  These  successes,  combined
with  the  rapidly  extending  insurrection  in  Austrian  Flanders,
were  watched  very  keenly  at  Berlin,  and  a  few  extracts  from
the  letters  of  Ewart  to  the  English  Government  will  show  how
near  Europe  was  to  a  great  and  general  war  at  the  close  of  1789
and  in  the  first  months  of  1790.

In  October  he  reminded  the  Duke  of  Leeds  that  in  the
event  of  the  Turks  being  in  danger  of  being  pushed  beyond  the
Danube,  the  Prussian  minister  at  Constantinople  was  authorised
1o  offer  them  effectual  support,  and  that  this  would  become
almost  inevitable  if  Belgrade  and  Bender  fell.  '  On  the  other
liand,'  he  continued,  '  positive  advices  have  been  received  by
this  Court  that  the  Emperor  has  again  represented  strongly  to
the  Empress  of  Russia  the  necessity  of  making  peace,  proposing,
at  all  events,  that  Oczakow,  Belgrade,  and  Bender  should  be
restored  to  the  Porte,  on  condition  of  the  fortifications  of  the
two  former  being  razed  ;  that  he  would  keep  Chotzim,  a  dis-
1  rict  in  AVallachia,  and  another  in  Bosnia,  and  that  the  Turks
should  reimburse  to  both  the  Imperial  Courts  all  the  expenses
of  the  war.  But,  however  moderate  these  terms  may  appear  to
llie  Emperor,  Ihis  Court  is  persuaded  they  will  not  be  accepted
by  tlie  P.)i-le.'2

The  lOnglish  advice,  which  had  been  already  given,  was  re-
ceived V(!ry  courteously  Ijy  llio  King  of  l^russia.  F(;r  the  pre-
sent, he  fully  agreed,  nothing  short  of  a  French  interference  in
tlie  .'ifTairs  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands  would  require  the  inter-
poBitiori  of  Ihe  nllies; lie  ])roTnis(;d  not  to  make  any  entcM-jirise

»  Leedii  to  Ewart,  Sopt.  14,  I7K;).  '•'  Kw.-irt  to  T,oo(ls,  Oct.  1,  1789.

en.  XIX.  WARLIKE DISPOSITION OF PRUSSIA.  243

either  in  Galicia  oi"  the  Netherlands  witliout  English  advice,
but  he  represented  that  it  was  already  extremely  difficult  to
prevent  the  inhabitants  of  Galicia  from  revolting,  although  the
leading  patriots  in  Poland  had  been  exhorted  to  use  their
influence  in  the  cause  of  peace.  If,  however,  Poland  were
committed  with  Austria,  if  the  Emperor  made  acquisitions
dangerous  to  Prussia,  especially  if  he  took  possession  of  Mol-
davia and  Wallachia,  Prussia  would  be  obliged  to  intervene.
For  the  present  the  King  said  he  had  no  such  intention.
Russia  was  strongly  opposed  to  the  Emperor  obtaining  Mol-
davia and  Wallachia,  and  the  two  Courts,  but  especially  Austria,
were  so  impoverished  that  if  the  war  continued  in  the  following
year  a  favourable  crisis  would  probably  arise.  If  the  King
engaged  in  the  war  he  would  only. ask  of  his  allies  to  maintain
the  neutrality  of  France  and  Spain.'

In  November  and  December  the  prospect  darkened.  Count
Horn  had  arrived  at  Berlin  on  a  mission  from  the  States  of
Brabant,  and  the  Prussian  minister  now  maintained  that  if  the
insurgents  prevailed  so  completely  as  to  have  a  decisive  majority,
the  allies  ought  to  recognise  their  independence,  in  order  to
prevent  their  possible  union  with  the  French  provinces  of
Flanders.  The  King  was  exceedingly  elated  with  the  success  of
the  insurgents,  and  Ewart  was  now  convinced  beyond  all  doubt
that  he  hoped  to  deprive  Austria  both  of  the  Netherlands  and
Galicia,  and  that  an  insurrection  in  Galicia  would  speedily
break  out,  stimulated  by  the  success  of  the  revolt  in  Brabant.
In  Bohemia  and  Hungary  discontent  was  spreading.  Prussia
would  obtain  Dantzig  and  Thorn  when  Poland  got  back  Galicia  ;
the  King  contemplated  an  immediate  alliance  with  Poland  and
Turkey,  and  he  was  much  alienated  from  England,  on  the
supposition  that  she  was  opposed  to  the  severance  of  Galicia
and  the  Netherlands  from  the  empire.  '  His  Prussian  ^Majesty
continues  much  occupied  with  the  idea  of  taking  advantage  of
the  present  favourable  conjuncture  to  diminish  the  power  of  his
rival  as  much  as  possible,  but  his  ministers  hope  they  have
succeeded  in  convincing  his  Majesty  that  he  can  do  nothing
with regard  to the  Netherlands without  the  concurrence  of

1  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Oct.  6,  10,  17,  1789.

B  2

24-1  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGIITEENTU CENTURY.  ch.  xii.

his  allies.'  He  is,  however,  strongly  in  favour  of  the  inde-
pendence of  the  Austrian  Netherlands ;  he  thinks  it  unavoid-
able, and  is  delighted  to  hear  that  the  Dutch  Pensionary-
is  not  against  it.  The  allies  in  his  opinion  ought  at  once
authoritatively  to  interpose  to  prevent  either  France  from
interfering,  or  the  Emperor  himself  from  sending  troops  into
the  Netherlands.^

This  policy  evidently  meant  an  immediate  war.  Leeds
wrote  briefly  in  reply,  urging  delay.  The  British  Government
ao-reed  with  Prussia,  that  the  insurrection  in  the  Austrian
Netherlands  seemed  likely  to  produce  '  their  total  separation
from  their  present  sovereign,  and,  of  course,  establishing  a  new,
separate,  and  independent  power  amongst  the  States  of  Europe.'
As,  however,  an  armistice  had  been  established  between  the  con-
tending Powers  in  the  Netherlands,  there  seemed  for  the  pre-
sent nothing  to  be  done.  Leeds  earnestly  hoped  that  England,
Prussia,  and  Holland  might  remain  closely  united  on  the  question ;
he  expressed  without  disguise  his  own  opinion,  that  the  best
solution  would  be  a  recouciliatiou  of  the  Netherlands  with  the
Emperor,  coupled  with  a  full  acknowledgment  of  tlieir  ancient
privileges;  and  he  sti'ongly  represented  that  the  questions
relating  to  the  Netherlands  and  the  questions  relating  to
Galicia  were  completely  distinct,  and  that  it  would  be  very
unwise  to  connect  them.'^

Prussia  at  this  time  took  a  decisive  lend,  and  in  January
1 790  the  Prussian  minister  proposed  that  the  two  Imperial
Courts  should  be  summoned  to  make  an  immediate  peace  at  the
mediation  and  under  the  guarantee  of  England,  Holland,  and
rrnssifi,  on  the  condition  that  all  the  conquests  from  the  Porte
shoidd  be  restored.  While  making  these  propositions  the  King
was  determined  to  assemble  two  armies,  one  on  the  frontiers  of
Galicia,  the  other  in  Livonia,  !i,nd  to  m;ike  a  div'ersion  on  the
side  of  Galicia,  while  the  Turks  directed  their  principal  efforts
towards  Croatia  and  8tyria  on  the  one  side  and  the  Crimea  on
the  other.  As  the  price  of  (his  active  assistance  the  Porte
was  to  be  asked  to  agree  not  to  make  peace  witht)ut  including
Prussia,  and  without  Prussia  obtaining  such  advantages  as  the

'  Kwfirt  to  Locils,  Nov.  7,  2S,  Pco.  '•'  Leeds to Ewart, Dec. 8, 14,

1,  7,  1^2,  ;il,  178!».  17vsy.

ni.  XIX.  WARLIKE DISPOSITION OF PRUSSIA.  21o

circumstauces  adinitted,  particularly  the  restoration  of  CJalicia
to  Polaud.'

The  answer  of  Leeds  disclaimed  emphatically  on  the  part  of
England  and  Holland  any  responsibility  for  such  a  policy.  '  The
measures  which  his  Prussian  Majesty  seems  determined  to
adopt,  with  a  view  to  force  the  two  Imperiul  Courts  to  make
]K'ace  with  the  Porte  upon  moderate  terms,  not  having  been
adopted  in  consequence  of  any  concert  between  the  allies,  cannot
with  justice  be  ascribed  to  the  councils  either  of  Great  Britain
or  Holland ;  and  whatever  the  consequences  of  so  very  active
an  interference  may  be,  our  system  of  defensive  alliance  cannot
fairly  be  responsible  for  it.'  At  the  same  time  Ewart  was  in-
structed to  make  no  useless  complaints :  The  flourishing  con-
dition of  the  finances  and  of  the  army  of  Prussia  makes  her  suc-
cess very  probable,  and  England  will  hope  for  it,  but  it  is  very
])ossible  that  the  war  may  be  extended  rather  than  terminated
by  her  policy.  The  immediate  recognition  of  the  independence
of  the  Belgic  provinces  seemed  to  the  English  ministers  very
unwise.  They  may  become  independent,  but  it  is  important  not
to  precipitate  matters ;  and  there  is  much  reason  to  fear  that
when  severed  from  the  Austrian  rule  they  may  become  wholly
subservient  to  France.^

For  a  few  weeks  there  appears  to  have  been  a  pause  in
active  diplomacy.  Ewart  wrote  that  the  King  was  now  almost
certain  to  acknowledge  the  independence  of  the  Belgic  states
and  to  intervene  in  favour  of  Turkey;  that  the  proposed,
alliance  with  Turkey  was  actually  drawn  up,  and  that  the
relations  with  Poland  were  becoming  closer.^  Some  time  be-
fore Prussia  had  proposed  that  each  of  the  allies  should  lend  a  '
snuill  sum  to  the  King  of  Sweden  in  order  that  he  should  be
enabled  to  continue  his  struggle.'*

The  Prussian  ministers  determined  to  make  one  more  effort
to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  the  two  allies,  and  if  this  object
could  be  attained,  they  professed  themselves  ready  to  sacrifice
some  part  of  their  scheme  of  aggrandisement.  Their  proposal,
however,  was  one  which  was  hardly  likely  to  be  peacefully
effected,  and  if  it  failed,  England  and  Holland  could  not  have

'  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Jan.  2fi,  1700.  »  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Feb.  11,  17i)0.

»  Leeds  to  Ewart,  Feb.  9,  17U0.  *  Ibid.  Jan.  4,  1790,

246  ENGLAND IN TEE EIGKTEENTH CENTUEY.  crt.  xix.

refused,  after  accepting  it,  to  draw  the  sword.  It  was  sent  by
Ewart  to  England  on  February  25.  The  Prussian  Government,
he  stated,  had  arrived  definitively  at  the  following  conclu-
sions :

1.  It  was  indispensably  necessary  for  the  allies  to  assemble
an  army  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Netherlands  in  order  to
secure  the  direction  of  events,  and  especially  the  two  gi'eat
objects  of  preventing  France  from  interfering  with  the  Austrian
Netherlands,  and  of  preventing  the  Emperor  from  subduing
them  by  force  and  abolishing  their  ancient  privileges.

2.  If  this  step  were  taken,  the  King  of  Prussia  will  then
consent  to  Great  Britain  and  Holland  entering  into  a  negotia-
tion  with  the  Court  of  Vienna  for  restoring  the  Netherlands,
on  the  condition  of  that  part  of  Galicia  which  lies  at  this  side
of  the  Krapack  or  Carpathian  mountains  being  given  back  to
Poland,  and  in  that  case  Austria  may  likewise  have  the  limits
of  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  restored  on  the  side  of  Turkey.
By  this  last  provision  Austria  would  obtain  Belgrade,  and  a
portion  of  Servia  and  Wallachia  which  had  been  ceded  by  the
peace  of  1739.  They  were  already  by  conquest  in  her  hands,
but  Turkey  was  to  be  asked  or  compelled  to  surrender  them
formally  at  the  peace,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  acquisition  by
Poland  of  the  chief  part  of  Galicia.

3.  If  the  Emperor  should  refuse  these  conditions  the
Netherlands  ought  not  to  be  restored.  Prussia  in  this  case
'\N'ill  support  England  and  HoUaud  against  any  bad  conse-
quences that  may  ai-ise  from  this  refusal,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  if  Prussia  should  be  engngcd  in  war  with  the  two  allied
Imperial  Courts,  Great  Britain  was  expected  to  enforce  the
neutrality  of  France  and  Denmark,  and  to  prevent  any  Russian
fieet  from  attacking  the  Prussian  coast.

4.  If  the  Emperor  refuses  to  negotiate  on  the  above-men-
tioned conditions,  the  independence  of  the  Belgic  provinces
must  at  once  be  acknowledged.  The  King  of  Prussia  declared
that  he  would  even  prefer  to  allow  them  to  be  dependent  on
France,  ratlier  than  permit  '  sucli  an  opportunity  as  the  present
to  pass  without  taking  advantage  of  it  in  diminishing  the  power
of  Ilia  dangerous  riviil.'*

•  j;\vart  to  J.cc<Is,  Feb.  '2:>,  17U0.

CH.  XIX.  ENGLISH STATE.MICNT OF I'OLICY.  247

The  extreiuc  seriousness  of  the  sitiuitioii  disclosed  iu  these
despatches  is  very  plain.  Prussia  evidently  desired  and  was
deteriuiued  on  war  ;  and  England,  which  had  originally  entered
into  the  Triple  Alliance  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the
peace  of  Europe,  was  now  almost  driven  to  the  alternative  of
breaking  it  up  at  a  time  of  great  European  complication  and
danger,  or  of  embarking  in  a  very  serious  and  extended
struggle,  of  which  the  real  object  would  be  the  aggrandisement
of  Prussia  and  Poland.  The  difficulty  was  especially  great,
because  the  fate  of  the  Belgic  provinces,  which  was  now
hanging  in  suspense,  had  always  been  esteemed  a  matter  of
capital  importance  in  English  foreign  policy ;  while  the  ques-
tion of  the  frontier  of  Turkey  on  the  side  of  Austria,  and
of  the  frontier  of  Poland  on  the  side  of  Prussia,  lay  almost
wholly  beyond  the  range  of  English  interests.  Before,  how-
ever, the  despatch  which  has  just  been  quoted  arrived  in
England,  the  English  Government  sent  a  long  and  very  able
despatch  to  Berlin,  defining  and  defending  the  policy  they
had  adopted.  The  draft  of  this  despatch  is  corrected  in  the
handwriting  of  Pitt,  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  it  was  his
composition.

It  began  with  a  full  discussion  of  the  Prussian  proposal  for
the  immediate  recognition  of  the  independence  of  the  Belgic
provinces.  Having  reminded  the  Prussian  minister  that  '  the
object  of  the  convention  concluded  by  the  allies  on  this  subject
was  that  no  step  should  be  taken  in  a  point  of  so  great  impor-
tance but  by  common  consent,'  the  writer  proceeded  to  state
that  the  leading  men  in  Holland  were  strongly  opposed  to  tbe
Prussian  proposal,  and  that  the  English  ministers  fully  shared
their  view.  They  opposed  immediate  rc-cognition  because  there
was  still  such  confusion  and  dissension  in  these  provinces,  that
it  was  impossible  to  predict  any  permanence  of  government,
constitution,  or  alliance,  and  because  the  whole  state  of  affairs
might  be  changed  by  the  death  of  the  Emperor,  which  appeared
imminent.  There  were  two  dangers  which  the  allies  unanimously
agreed  must  be  guarded  against.  Europe,  for  great  purposes  of
public  order  and  security,  had  placed  these  provinces  under  the
Austrian  sceptre,  but  she  had  given  the  House  of  Austria  only  a
limited,  divided,  and  conditional  authority  over  them  ;  and  that

248  ENGLAND IN THE EIGUTEENTn CENTUEY.  cii.  xix.

House  must  not  be  suffered  to  establish  despotic  authority  in
them,  and  to  make  an  unrestrained  use  of  their  wealth  and
population.  Under  the  present  circumstances,  however,  this
danger  was  exceedingly  remote.  It  was  also  agreed  that
'  neither  under  the  dominion  of  the  House  of  Austria  nor  under
any  other  circumstances  should  these  provinces  be  allowed  to
become  an  accession  to  the  power  of  France.'  '  On  this  sub-
ject,' the  despatch  continued,  '  it  is  to  be  observed  that  what-
ever may  have  been  the  intrigues  or  the  promises  of  individuals,
no  public  encouragement  has  been  held  out  by  France  to  the
independence  of  the  Netherlands;  that  the  recent  example  of
what  has  passed  in  that  country  must  necessarily  inspire  the
noblesse  and  clergy  of  the  provinces  with  an  apprehension  of
the  danger  to  them  from  the  introduction  of  a  French  system,
and  that  the  present  apparent  and  increasing  weakness  and
distraction  of  that  country  must  prevent  any  body  of  men
from  looking  to  that  quarter  for  any  present  and  effectual  sup-
jjort.  It  is  also  a  material  circumstance  that  while  the  pro-
vinces feel  their  independence  in  danger  from  the  possible
attacks  of  the  Emperor,  they  will  be  fearful  of  taking  any
measures  which  might  be  offensive  to  those  powers,  by  whom
alone  they  can,  under  the  present  circumstances,  be  effec-
tually protected  against  him;  and  it  may  even  be  doubted
whether,  if  this  fear  were  once  removed,  by  the  allies  having
decisively  committed  themselves  on  that  important  point,  the
intrigues  of  France  would  not  have  a  better  field  to  work  in,  by
the  French  being  enabled  to  avail  themselves  of  those  points  of
jealousy  and  difference  which  must  be  expected  to  arise.'  All
that  seems  necessary  is  to  maintain  a  party  attached  to  the
allies,  just  as  there  is  a  party  attached  to  France,  and  the
allies  have  in  this  respect  quite  as  good  chances  and  means  as
the  French.  It  is  true  that  the  Bclgic  provinces  are  for  the
present  de  fado  indejiendcnt ;  but  there  has  as  yet  been  no
pulilic  declaration  that  the  Emperor  will  not  in  the  next  season
eiideavour  to  regain  his  dominion  in  them.

It  is  said  that,  as  guaranteeing  Powers,  we  liave  a  right  to
interpose.  We  undoubtedly  have  for  the  support  of  the  ancient
coHHtitulion,  but  not  fur  the  establishment  of  in(h'p(Midonce
*  wilhciut  havijig  iji  some  reguhir  mode  expi'cssed  our  sense  of

ni.  XIX.  ENGLISH STATEMENT OF TOLICY.  249

tiie  invasions  of  that  constitution,  and  without  having  sufficient
proof  that  no  measures  short  of  independence  can  prevent  its
subversion.'  If  we  now  recognise  Belgic  independence,  we  should
act  like  France  when  she  declared  the  independence  of  America.
England  treated  that  declaration  as  '  a  direct  and  open  avowal  of
liostilities,'  and  she  could  therefore  not  blame  the  Emperor  if
he  regarded  the  recognition  of  Belgic  independence  as  equi-
valent to  a  declaration  of  war.  The  English  ministers  earnestly
hope  that  Prussia  will  not  take  this  step,  for  England  cannot
concur  in  it.

Turning  then  to  the  other  aspects  of  the  question,  the
English  Government  fully  agreed  with  Prussia  that  the  object
of  the  allies  should  be  '  the  establishment  of  a  pacification  on
the  grounds  of  the  status  quo,'  and  they  were  prepared  to  con-
cur with  Prussia  and  Holland  in  drawing  up  a  memorial  to
tbat  effect  for  the  Courts  of  Sweden  and  Constantinople.  '  If
this  representation  should  be  unsuccessful,  we  would  willingly
comply  with  the  King  of  Prussia's  request  by  engaging  to  take
measures  to  prevent  his  being  attacked  either  by  France  or  Den-
mark .  .  .  considering  such  attack  on  these  grounds  as  a  casus
foederis.  ...  If  no  such  attack  should  take  place,  it  is  conceived
that  such  demonstrations  might  be  made  by  this  country  and  by
'Holland  as  would  materially  assist  the  King  of  Prussia  by  the
uncertainty  and  uneasiness  which  they  would  occasion  to  his
enemies.'  It  must,  however,  be  distinctly  understood  that  '  the
circumstances  and  interests  of  this  country  do  not  permit  us  to
join  in  offensive  operations  to  which  we  are  not  bound  by  treaty.
This  has  already  been  clearly  explained  in  several  of  the  com-
munications which  have  passed  between  the  two  Courts.  But
the  circumstances  of  the  present  moment  and  the  good  faith
Avhich  is  due  from  this  country  require  that,  at  a  time  when
the  King  of  Prussia  appears  to  be  on  the  eve  of  embarking  on
so  extensive  a  plan  of  operations,  he  should  again  distinctly
understand  the  degree  of  assistance  which  he  may  expect  from
this  country.'  Prussia  then  may  expect  the  approbation  of
England  in  all  efforts  to  make  peace  on  the  basis  of  the  status
quo.  She  may  expect  when  pursuing  this  enterprise  to  be  de-
fended from  attacks  by  France  and  Denmark  ;  '  the  necessity  for
enabling  Sweden  to  defend  herself  by  another  campaign  against

250  EXGL.1ND IN TUE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xix.

Russia  would  also  induce  this  country  to  take  lier  sliare  iu
such  reasonable  pecuniary  aid  as  might  be  requisite  for  this
purpose,  and  to  exert  herself  for  securing  the  neutrality  of
Denmark.'  But  hostilities  against  the  Imperial  Courts,  either
indirectly  by  recognising  Belgic  independence,  or  directly
'  by  our  joining  in  the  measures  of  offensive  operations  which
Prussia  may  feel  it  her  interest  to  adopt,  would  go  beyond  the
line  which  this  country  has  uniformly  laid  down.'  If  a  peace
on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo  is  made,  England  will  be  ready
'  to  include  Turkey,  Poland,  and  Sweden  in  the  alliance,  and  to
guarantee  to  them  the  terms  of  that  pacification.'  ^

This  despatch  laid  down  the  principles  of  English  policy
with  a  distinctness  that  left  little  to  be  desired.  But  almost
immediately  after  it  was  written  the  whole  aspect  of  affairs  was
changed  by  the  news  of  the  death  of  Joseph  II.  He  had  not
yet  completed  his  forty-ninth  year,  but  the  deadly  illness  which
he  had  brought  back  from  the  Turkish  frontier  had  never
passed  away,  and  those  who  were  about  him  saw  clearly  how
greatly  disappointment  and  sorrow  and  anxiety  had  aggravated
and  accelerated  its  effects.  A  Turkish  war  raging;  a  war
with  Prussia  and  Poland  manifestly  impending ;  the  Nether-
lands for  the  time  completely  lost ;  Hungary  on  the  verge  of
revolt ;  bitter  discontents"  and  animosities  revealing  themselves
in  every  part  of  his  dominions — the  dying  Emperor  saw  but  too
plainly  that  his  life  had  been  one  long  failure,  and  that  almost
all  his  schemes  had  been  abortive.  The  words  that  fell  from
liim  in  his  last  days  painted  vividly  his  profound  dejection.
'  Your  country,'  he  said  to  the  Prince  de  Ligne,  speaking  of
the  Flemish  revolt,  '  has  killed  me.'  '  God,  who  knows  the
heart,  knows  that  in  all  I  have  done  I  have  sought  only  the
good  of  my  people.  ]\lay  His  will  be  done!'  'Here  lies  a
sovereign  who,  with  the  best  intentions,  failed  in  everything  he
undertook.'  He  had  a  strong  craving  for  the  affection  of  his
sul)jects,  and  he  had  made  it  his  aim  to  relieve  the  poor  from
Berfdora  and  feudal  burdens,  to  break  the  power  of  ecclesias-
tical tyranny  and  establish  universal  toleration  throughout  his
doiJiijiions. Something  of  what  he  had  done  remained,  and

'  Leeds  to  Ewart ,  Vvh.  2r<,  1 700.

CM.  XIX.  ALLIANCE OF  PRUSSLA. WITH TUKKEY.  251

with  a  longer  aud  more  quiet  reign  much  more  might  have
been  permanently  accomplished,  but  as  yet  he  had  reaped  little
but  hatred  and  insurrection.  He  spent  his  last  days  partly  in
rewarding  his  soldiers  and  his  old  servants,  and  partly  in  endea-
vouring to  undo  some  of  the  measures  which  had  proved  most
unsuccessful.  The  ancient  constitution  of  Hungary  was  re-
established. The  Holy  Crown  of  St.  Stephen  was  sent  back
from  Vienna  and  carried  in  triumph  to  Buda.  Orders  were
issued  to  restore  privileges  which  had  been  taken  away  in  the
Tyrol  and  in  Galicia,'  and  proposals  for  a  peace  with  Turkey
were  sent  to  England.  His  favourite  generals.  Lacy  and
Loudon,  with  a  few  other  attached  friends,  gathered  round  the
deathbed  of  the  childless  Emperor,  but  his  brother  and  suc-
cessor was  absent,  and  his  favourite  niece,  the  Archduchess
Elizabeth,  to  whom  he  was  passionately  attached,  was  now
rapidly  approaching  her  confinement.  The  anxiety  with  which
she  followed  his  sufferings  produced  a  premature  delivery,  and
on  February  18  she  died  in  childbirth.  The  blow  was  more
than  the  Emperor  could  support.  He  bowed  his  head  in  an  agony
of  grief,  and  two  days  later  he  was  numbered  with  the  dead.

It  is  probably  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  his  death  saved
Europe  from  a  great  extension  of  the  war  ;  for  the  animosities
that  had  attached  to  him  were  such  that  a  policy  of  conciliation
in  his  hands  would  at  this  time  have  almost  certainly  failed.
His  brother  Leopold,  who  succeeded  to  the  title  of  King  of
Hungary,  had  already  shown,  as  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  great
administrative  ability,  and  he  made  it  his  first  object  to  arrive
at  a  peace.  For  several  months,  however,  the  prospect  was
exceedingly  doubtful  and  menacing,  and  just  before  the  death
of  Joseph,  Prussia  had  fulfilled  her  threat  and  taken  a  step
which  made  a  general  war  almost  inevitable.  At  the  end  of
January  the  Prussian  minister  at  Constantinople  had  signed
an  offensive  alliance  between  Prussia  and  Turkey.  It  declared
that  the  enemies  of  the  Turks  in  crossing  the  Danube  had  dis-
turbed the  balance  of  power;  that  the  King  of  Prussia  had
determined  to  declare  war  in  the  following  spring  against  Russia

'  Memoirs  of  Sir  M.  Keith,  ii.  251,  on  the  reign  of  Joseph,  in  Herman

2r)2 ; Coxe's Hist, of  the House of  ]\rcri\ale's  JTistoriral  Stut/ie.'^,  a  book

Austria,  vol.  ii. There  is  a  singularly  which  is  far  less  known  than  it  de-

beautiful and discriminating essay  serves  to  be.

252  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ai.  xix.

aud  Austria ;  aud  that  he  would  not  desist  till  the  Porte  had
obtained  a  desirable  peace  and  been  placed  in  perfect  security
bj  sea  and  land  ;  while  the  Turks,  on  their  side,  engaged  to  do
all  in  their  power  to  compel  Austria  to  restore  at  the  peace
Galicia  and  her  other  Polish  territory  to  Poland.  If  the  Otto-
man Court  was  successful,  its  intention  was  not  to  make  peace
till  it  had  regained  all  its  lost  fortresses  and  territory,  and
especially  the  Crimea.  The  Prussian  Court,  recognising  this
intention,  now  bound  itself  not  to  make  peace  until  Turke}"  did,
and  under  any  circumstances  to  guarantee  to  Turkey  all  the
territory  which  was  in  her  hands  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war ;
to  endeavour  to  induce  England,  Holland,  Sweden,  Poland,
and  other  Powers  to  join  in  the  guarantee,  and  to  enter  into
a  close  defensive  alliance  with  Turkey.  The  Turks,  on  their
side,  promised  to  make  no  peace  with  the  Austrians  and  Rus-
sians without  including  Prussia,  Poland,  and  Sweden,  and
under  certain  circumstances  to  support  those  Powers  in  the
field.'

Such  were  the  principal  articles  of  this  very  important
document — a  document  which  was  in  the  highest  degree  dis-
pleasing to  the  English  ministers,  and  which  greatly  aggravated
the  seriousness  of  the  situation.  It  was  pretended,  however,  at
Berlin  that  the  Prussian  minister  at  Constantinople  had  ex-
ceeded his  instructions  in  making  the  treaty  offensive,  and  for
the  present  its  ratification  was  withheld.

The  Prussians  at  the  same  time  strengthened  their  con-
nection with  Poland.  Their  first  object  was  the  acquisition  of
Dantzig  and  Thorn,  and  they  accordingly  proposed  a  treaty  of
commerce,  by  which  these  towns  were  to  be  given  to  them,  as
{in  ecjuivalent  for  a  considerable  reduction  of  commercial  duties.
]>iit  it  soon  appeared  that  the  proposal  was  exceedingly  un-
])M])iil,ir  in  Poland,  and  the  treaty  was  rejected  by  the  Diet.''
A  close  treaty  of  alliance,  however,  between  the  two  countries
was  concluded  at  "Warsaw  on  March  29.  Each  State  gua-
ranteed the  territories  of  the  other,  but  it  was  agreed  that
lliis  guarantee  was  not  to  prevent  an  amicable  arrangement  of
some  controversies  relating  to  questions  of  frontier  which  had

'  Rcc  for  tlu:  text  of  this  treaty, Jlrr/zfurr/,  iii.  .17-'12.
Jlccucll  de»  Mcmnires  ^'cdu  Comic  de  •'  llji'l.  iii y-2U.

cH.  MX.  LEOPOLD'S PACIFIC POLICY.  £03

existed  before  tlio  conc4nsiou  of  the  treaty.  The  contingents
to  be  furnished  by  each  State  in  case  of  attack  were  carefully
regulated.'

The  strong  feeling  which  the  proposed  cession  of  Dantzig
and  Thorn  excited  in  Poland  threatened  to  throw  considerable
difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  Prussian  projects  of  aggrandise-
ment, while  at  the  same  time  some  very  formidable  dissensions
which  broke  out  between  the  aristocratic  and  the  democratic
parties  in  the  newly  emancipated  Belgic  provinces,  and  the
evident  desire  of  the  latter  party  to  imitate  and  ally  themselves
with  the  French,  alarmed  the  allies,  and  shook  their  con-
fidence in  the  permanence  of  the  new  independence.^  Eng-
land and  Holland,  in  opposition  to  Prussia,  strongly  favoured  the
reconciliation  of  these  provinces  with  the  Emperor,  accompanied
by  an  amnesty  and  a  guarantee  of  their  ancient  constitution,
and  the  more  conciliatory  dispositions  of  Leopold  made  this
policy  seem  less  hopeless.  Leopold  at  the  same  time  desired
earnestly  to  terminate  the  Turkish  war.  He  had  never  favoured
it.  He  was  sensible  of  the  great  dangers  rising  on  the  side  of
Prussia,  and  he  desired  the  vote  of  the  King  of  Prussia  at  the
ensuing  election  for  the  position  of  King  of  the  Romans,  to
which  the  dignity  of  Emperor  was  attached.  Almost  immedi-
ately after  his  accession  he  wrote  to  the  King  of  Prussia  in  very
amicable  terms,  asking  his  good  offices,  regretting  the  dissen-
sions which  had  arisen  between  Austria  and  Prussia,  disclaiming
all  views  of  aggrandisement,  and  stating  that  he  would  be  con-
tent if,  as  a  compensation  for  the  expenses  of  the  war,  the  limits
of  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  were  restored.'

He  was  at  the  same  time  quite  aware  of  the  dangers  of  a
sudden  attack  froxu  Prussia,  and,  carrying  out  a  design  of  his
brother,  he  withdrew  a  portion  of  his  army  from  the  Danube,
and  concentrated  a  powerful  force  under  Loudon  in  Bohemia
and  Moravia."*  As  Russia  was  at  this  time  expressing  wishes
for  peace,  as  Sweden  was  ready  to  place  her  interests  in  the
hands  of  the  allies,  and  as  the  Turks  were  exhausted  by  suc-

'  Hertzberg,  iii.  1-8.  in  Hrrtzberg,  iii.  50-71.

*  Ewart  to  Leeds,  March  2,  8, 1790;  *  That  tbis resolution had  been

Coxe's  Hist,  of  the  House  of  Austria,  taken  just  before  the  death  of  Josepli

ii.  688-690.  appears  from  a  letter  of  Sir  R.  Keith

^  See  the  correspondence  between  fl'Leith's  Memoirs,  ii.  248).
the kings  of Hungaiy  and  Prussia,

254 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xix.

cessive  defeats,  there  seemed  much  hope  that  if  Prussia  could
be  induced  to  pursue  an  unselfish  policy,  peace  might  be  soon
restored.

Such  was  at  least  the  opinion  of  Ewart,  who  wrote  that  a
neo-otiation  might  now  soon  be  brought  to  a  successful  issue.
Russia's  '  increasing  embarrassments  would  make  her  satisfied
with  Oczakow  and  its  district.'  The  Porte  might  be  induced
to  accept  the  limits  of  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz,  and  there
would  be  still  less  difficulty  with  Sweden.'

The  King  of  Prussia  accepted  on  the  whole  favourably  the
English  despatch  of  February  26.  He  expressed  his  satisfaction
at  learning  the  exact  limits  of  the  assistance  that  might  be
expected  from  England,  approved  of  the  English  proposal  of  a
joint  memorial  in  favour  of  the  status  quo,  and  agreed  to  post-
pone the  recognition  of  Belgic  independence,  and  to  join  with
England  in  furnishing  some  pecuniary  aid  to  Sweden ;  but  he
still  thought  that  an  allied  army  should  be  assembled  on  the
frontiers  of  the  Low  Country.  Ewart  adds,  however,  somewhat
ominously,  '  Should  the  King  of  Prussia  be  engaged  in  a  war,
by  the  refusal  of  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  St.  Petersburg  to
make  peace  on  the  principle  of  the  status  quo,  and  should  Galicia
then  be  recovered  by  force  of  arms,  some  equivalent  would  be
expected  from  Poland  beyond  the  cession  of  Dantzig  and  Thorn.
But  even  this  would  consist  in  an  amicable  arrangement  of
frontier  of  no  great  extent,  and  all  idea  of  obtaining  the  Pala-
tinates of  Posen  and  Kalish  has  been  abandoned,  since  it  was
decidedly  preferred  to  have  a  preponderant  influence  in  Poland,
rather  than  entertain  views  of  acquisition.'  ^  The  King  had  no
objection  to  Great  Britain  taking  the  lead  in  endeavouring  to
effect  a  reconciliation  in  the  Netherlands  '  by  re-establishing  the
ancient  constitution  and  guarantee,'  but  he  endeavoured  to  sow
dissension  between  Russia  and  Austria  by  communicating  to
the  Russians  the  plan  of  peace  which  Joseph  a  few  days  before
liis  death  had  sent  to  London  without  consulting  with  St.
l^etersburg.  He  also  endeavoured  to  ascertain  Avhether  the
Courts  of  Vienna  and  St.  Pelcrsburg  would  negoliate  jointly
or  separately,  either  on  tlic  bnsis  of  the  sfatiis  quo  or  on  the
basis  of  the  cession  of  Calicia,. Foi-  liis  own  part  he  Ciirnestly

'  Ewart  to  LccOs,  Marcli  2,  1700.  «  Ibid.  Man-li  S,  171)0.

CH.  xrt.  ENGLAND PROrOSES AN ARIMISTICE.  255

hoped  that  Galkia  miglit  be  ceded  in  the  niauner  that  had
been  so  often  stated,  and  snggested  that  '  such  an  arrange-
ment might  be  rendered  more  acceptable  to  the  King  of  Hun-
gary than  the  humiliating  alternative  of  the  status  quo  towards
the  Porte,  especially  as  the  fate  of  the  Netherlands  still  remained
uncertain.'  At  the  urgent  request  of  the  English  minister  he
still  delayed  the  ratification  to  his  treaty  Avith  Turkey.'

The  English  ministers  saw  clearly  that  Prussia  had  no  real
wish  for  peace,  and  that  in  this  very  critical  moment  a  more
decided  policy  must  be  pursued.  Their  first  step  was  to  send  a
confidential  despatch  to  Berlin,  representing  that  the  King  of
Hungary  '  appears  sincerely  desirous  to  conclude  peace  upon
fair  terms,  having  no  object  of  ambition  or  aggrandisement  in
view  ; '  that  he  had  none  of  the  leaning  towards  Russia,  jealousy
of  Prussia,  or  dislike  to  English  mediation  that  characterised  his
predecessor;  and  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  English  Govern-
ment '  a  general  pacification,  or  at  least  a  separate  one  between
Austria  and  the  Porte  (in  case  Russia  still  persists  in  her  ex-
orbitant pretensions),'  may  soon  be  concluded  on  the  terms  of
'  the  status  quo,  or  nearly  such.'  ^  They  soon  after  informed
the  Prussian  ministers  of  the  King's  determination  to  bring
matters  to  an  issue  by  proposing,  on  his  own  authority,  an
armistice  to  each  of  the  belligerent  Powers  in  order  to  give
time  for  negotiation.  '  The  basis  of  a  negotiation,'  writes  the
minister,  '  ought  of  course  to  be  the  status  quo,  or  as  near  that
state  as  the  circumstances  of  the  several  Powers  will  admit.
At  the  same  time  his  Majesty  is  ready  to  mediate  a  separate
peace  on  this  basis,  and  to  press  its  immediate  conclusion
between  any  two  of  the  belligerent  Powers  who  maybe  ready  to
accede  to  it  without  waiting  for  the  rest.'  Keith  was  authorised
to  make  this  proposal  at  Vienna,  and  to  state  that  if  the  King
of  Hungary  accepted  it ;  if  he  agreed  in  no  case  to  attempt  any-
lliing  in  the  Netherlands  contrary  to  the  ancient  constitution  ;
and  if  he  also  admitted  the  renewal  of  the  guarantees  of  the
allied  Powers  in  those  provinces,  England  would  enforce  this
proposal  to  the  utmost  at  Constantinople. This  step  appeared

'  Ewart  to  Leeds,  March  8,  18,  27, and  the  accompanying  proposal  for
17nO. See  too  tlie  letter  of  the  King peace,  Hertzberg,  iii.  r>4-64.
of  Prussia  to  Leopold,  April  15,  17;iu,  -  Leeds  to  Ewart,  March  19,  1790,

25C)  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  nir..

to  the  King  especially  urgent  on  account  of  tlie  use  wliich  th(3
Prussian  Government  liad  thought  fit  to  make  of  the  secret
proposal  for  peace  made  by  the  late  Emperor  a  few  days  before
his  death.  If  it  became  known  at  Vienna  that  this  most
confidential  Austrian  communication  to  the  allies  had  been
betrayed  to  Russia,  in  order  to  sow  dissension,  a  distrust  and  a
resentment  would  be  aroused  which  might  easily  be  fatal  to
peace.

The  English  minister  expressed  his  great  gratification  that
the  King  had  withheld  his  ratification  from  the  treaty  which
had  been  signed  at  Constantinople,  but  he  commented  in  a
strain  of  grave  and  measured  severity  on  the  schemes  of  ag-
gi-andisement  which  Prussia  had  put  forward.  Ewart  was
directed  to  repeat  to  the  Prussian  ministers  'that  the  status
quo  appears  to  be  the  only  fair  and  natural  idea  which  can  be
proposed  as  the  general  basis  of  pacification.  Such  an  idea,
however,  does  not  necessarily  preclude  any  reasonable  modifica-
tions of  it,  should  any  such  come  in  question  in  the  course  of
the  negotiations.  It  will,  however,  be  proper  to  state  explicitly
that  at  all  events  the  idea  of  proposing  sacrifices  on  the  part  of
the  Porte  by  re-establishing  with  Austria  the  Peace  of  Passa-
rowitz,  and  by  making  cessions  of  some  sort  or  other  to  Russia,
on  condition  that  Austria  shall  agree  to  relinquish  Galicia,  &c.,
seems  totally  inconsistent  with  the  essential  object  (which  every
day  renders  more  pressing)  of  re-establishing  the  general  tran-
quillity. Nothing  but  the  most  extreme  necessity  could  bring
Austria  to  agree  to  such  a  proposal,  and  that  Court  would  cer-
tainly first  try  the  event  of  a  contest.  There  appears,  indeed,
to  be  so  little  justice  in  insisting  upon  such  an  arrangement
between  Powers  not  engaged  in  the  war  as  a  condition  of  peace
between  those  who  are  parties  in  it,  and  it  is  so  evidently
contrary  to  our  defensive  system,  that  on  the  principles  already
repeatedly  stated  it  would  be  impossible  for  this  country  to
give  any  expectation  of  supporting  Prussia  in  a  contest  on  such
grounds.'  How  could  the  Prussian  King,  it  was  asked,  defend
himself  from  the  gravest  reproach  if,  having  just  made  an
offensive  alliance  with  Turkey,  he  proceeded  to  sacrifice  Turkish
interests  'for  the  purpose  of  gaining  an  acquisition  for  Poland
and  an  additional  security  for  his  own  frontier?'

en.  XIX.  ENGLAND  AND  PRUSSIA  ALIENATED.  257

Most  amicably,  but  at  the  same  time  most  explicitly,  Ewart
was  directed  to  press  these  considerations  on  the  King  of
Prussia,  to  beg  that  instructions  conformable  to  them  should
be  sent  to  Vienna,  St.  Petersburg,  Stockholm,  and  Constan-
tinople, and  to  urge  that  measures  should  be  at  once  taken  in
the  latter  capital  '  for  setting  aside  by  mutual  consent  the  late
alliance,  and  for  procuring  an  immediate  armistice,  at  all  events
between  that  Court  and  Austria.'  ^

This  despatch  very  nearly  broke  up  the  Triple  Alliance.
The  King  of  Prussia  angrily  blamed  England  for  proposing  an
armistice  to  the  belligerent  Powers  without  any  previous  concert
or  communication  with  his  allies;  and  several  long  and  acrimoni-
ous discussions  ensued.^  He  now  saw  clearly  that  if  Prussia  pro-
voked a  war  she  would  be  isolated,  and  would  obtain  neither  moral
nor  material  support  from  England ;  and  he  resolved  reluctantly
to  follow  the  English  line  of  policy,  but  to  insist  upon  applying
it  with  such  a  degree  of  severity  that  a  rupture  was  likely  to  take
place  in  which  England  would  be  involved.  He  agreed  to  support
the  proposal  for  an  armistice,  but  insisted,  in  opposition  to  the
English  ministry,  that  it  should  be  limited  to  two  months,  and
also  that  the  Emperor  should  send  no  troops  to  the  Netherlands
during  the  negotiation.  He  consented  at  last  that  the  treaty
with  Turkey  should  be  set  aside  if  the  Court  either  of  Vienna
or  of  St.  Petersburg  agreed  to  make  peace  on  the  basis  of  the
status  quo.  He  consented  that  this  should  be  put  forward  as
the  basis  of  pacification  ;  but  he  would  not  hear  of  the  qualifica-
tions suggested  in  the  English  despatch,  and  insisted  '  on  the
strict  acceptance  of  the  status  quo  without  any  modification.'  ^
If  this  was  not  adopted,  the  alternative  must  be  either  war,  or  a
negotiation  founded  on  the  Prussian  plan  of  an  extended  ex-
change of  territory.  The  chief  object  of  the  war  party  was
now  to  provoke  a  refusal  from  the  King  of  Hungary.'*

The  feeling  between  the  ministers  of  the  two  countries  was
at  this  time  extremely  hostile,  and  in  the  opinion  of  the
English  Government  the  tortuous  and  ambitious  policy  of
Prussia  formed  the  main  danger  to  European  peace.  '  His
Prussian Majesty,' Lord Auckland wrote confidentially to

'  Leeds  to  Ewart,  March  .'^O,  1790.  «  Ibid.  April  18,  1790.

*  Ewart  to  Leeds,  April  IS,  1790.  ♦  Ibid.  Jul}-  18,  1790.

VOL.  V.  a

258  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  ch.  xix.

Keitli,  '  lias  brouglit  himself  to  acquiesce  in  our  objections  to
declaring  the  Independence ;  but  I  have  the  fullest  evidence
that  nothing  less  than  an  absolute  and  inevitable  necessity  will
induce  him  to  contribute  by  word  or  deed  to  replacing  the
Netherlands  under  their  old  government.  But,  besides,  his
treaty  with  the  Porte  commits  him  almost  irrevocably  to  every-
thinsr  that  can  tend  to  increase  the  confusion  of  the  world ;  and
without  any  other  provocation  than  the  Count  de  Hertzberg's
desire  to  deprive  Austria  of  Galicia  and  the  Netherlands,  and  to
give  to  Prussia  Thorn  and  Dantzig,  as  an  equivalent  for  Galicia
from  the  Poles.'  Auckland  spoke  bitterly  of  the  extreme  danger
of  a  new  and  wanton  war,  the  indecency  of  the  grounds  that  were
put  forward,  '  the  utter  unreasonableness  of  expecting  England
and  the  United  Provinces  to  support  these  projects,  to  which
they  are  not  called  by  any  sense,  either  of  interest,  or  of  policy,
or  of  justice.'  ^

It  was  necessary  for  the  King  of  Prussia  to  answer  the
Austrian  invitation  to  exercise  his  good  offices,  and  he  did  so  by
a  full  exposition  of  his  views.  The  Russian  proposal  to  esta-
blish, under  a  prince  of  the  Russian  rite,  a  new  kingdom,  in-
cluding Wallachia,  Moldavia,  and  Bessarabia,  was  pronounced
perfectly  inadmissible ;  and  the  only  feasible  plan  for  making
peace  was  the  status  quo,  advocated  by  England,  or  '  an  ar-
rangement.' The  meaning  of  the  latter  term  was  fully  developed
in  a  confidential  communication  made  to  the  Austrian  minister.
The  King  of  Prussia,  it  was  said,  has  negotiated,  but  not  yet
ratified,  a  treaty  with  Turkey,  which  involved  the  recovery  of
Galicia.  This  would  probably  bring  Poland  into  the  field,  and
would  lead  to  a  Prussian  recognition  of  the  independence  of  tho
Belgic  provinces.  Galicia  must  always,  while  in  the  hands  of
Austria,  be  a  danger  to  Prussia,  and  if  it  is  not  amicably  ceded,
sooner  or  later  Russia  and  Prussia  would  combine  to  drive  her
out.  It  was  suggested,  under  these  circumstances,  that  Austria,
Russia,  and  Prussia  should  make  an  arrangement  on  theso
lines.  Tho  two  Imperial  Courts  should  restore  Moldavia,  Wal-
lachia, and  Bessarabia  to  the  Porte.  Austria  should  restore
Galicia  to  I'oland,  with  the  exception  of  a  tract  contiguous
io  lluii^Mi-y,  on  co]idition  that  Poland  should  cede  Dantzig  and
»  Mmivlrx  0/  Sir  II.  Keith,  ii.  L'G7,  2G8.

CH.  XIX.  DANGERS OF WAR.  259

Thorn  to  Prussia ;  and,  iu  that  case,  Prussia  would  oblige  the
Turks  to  restore  the  limits  of  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz,  would
abstain  from  recognising  the  independence  of  the  Flemish  pro-
vinces, and  would  even  induce  them  to  submit  to  Austrian  rule
on  the  guarantee  of  their  Constitution.  The  Porte,  on  receiving
back  Moldavia,  Wallachia,  and  Bessarabia,  was  formally  to
abandon  all  claims  to  the  Crimea,  and  was  to  cede  to  Eussia
the  district  and  town  of  Oczakow  to  the  Dniester,  on  condition
of  Russia  re-establishing  in  favour  of  Sweden  the  limits  of
Finland,  on  the  footing  of  the  Peace  of  Nyslot.  If  the  King
of  Hungary  agrees  to  support  this  arrangement,  the  King  of
Prussia  will  vote  for  his  election  as  Emperor.  He  must  con-
sent, however,  with  little  delay ;  otherwise  Prussia  will  ratif}'-
her  treaty  with  Turkey,  and  will  acknowledge  the  Belgic  inde-
pendence.^

These  negotiations  were  not  favourably  received.  The  cession
of  Galicia  was  entirely  rejected  by  Leopold,  and  he  declared
that  it  was  impossible  for  him,  without  the  consent  of  Russia,  to
accept  the  armistice  which  England  demanded.  Prince  Kau-
nitz,  who  was  now  past  eighty,  and  whose  judgment  and  temper
were  said  to  have  been  somewhat  impaired  by  age,  still  retained
great  respect  and  influence  at  Vienna  as  the  most  illusti-ious  of
the  ministers  of  Maria  Theresa,  and  he  threw  serious  obstacles
in  the  way  of  peace  ;  but  his  policy  in  this  respect  was  counter-
acted with  skill,  and  at  the  same  time  with  singular  delicacy,  by
the  Vice -Chancellor,  Count  Cobenzel,  who  enjoyed  the  special
confidence  of  Leopold.^

For  some  weeks,  however,  Europe  was  on  the  verge  of  a  new
war,  and  Ewart,  in  reporting  the  doubts  entertained  at  Berlin  of
the  possibility  of  a  peaceful  solution,  added  '  that  this  circum-
stance is  by  no  means  disagreeable  here,  as  his  Prussian  Majesty,

'  Insinuation  veriale  lue  au  mi-  Pomerania,  though  the  Prussian  mi-

nistre  d'Autriche,  sent  to  England  by  nisters  do  not  avow  the  intention.' It

Ewart  in  April  1790. See,  too,  Hertz-  appears  from  Sybel  that  this  conjec-

berg, iii. 62-64. Ewart says to  ture  was  true,  and  that  the  Prussians

Leeds,  April  18  :  '  In  regard  to  the  re-  hoped  to  obtain  a  part  of  Pomerania

establishment  of the  limits  of  the  from  Sweden. — Hist,  de  VEurope,  i.

Peace  of  Nyslot  in  the  4th  Article  of  172.

the  inclosed  Insinuation,  I  have  good  ^  See the curious letters of Sir

reason  to  suspect  that  it  relates  to  the  R. Keith. — Mems. of  Sir  M. Keith,

idea  of negotiating  an  arrangement  ii.  277-293.
with  the  King  of  Sweden  respecting

8  2

260  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

his  generals,  and  his  confidants  are  daily  more  convinced  of  the
actual  superiority  of  the  foices  and  resources  of  this  country
over  both  Austria  and  Eussia,  which  of  course  increases  the  in-
clination for  war,'  '  The  ill-humour  and  complaints  of  Great
Britain  continue  very  violent  amongst  the  officers  about  his
Prussian  Majesty's  person.'  *  The  Russian  troops  were  at  this
time  very  inactive  ;  but  the  Austrians,  in  spite  of  the  diminution
of  their  forces  in  Turkish  territory,  continued  to  press  on  the
war.  In  consequence,  it  is  said,  of  the  panic  produced  by  an
earthquake,  Orsova,  which  had  been  blockaded  during  the
whole  winter,  was  suddenly  abandoned  by  the  Turks.  The
Austrians  prepared  to  besiege  Widdin  and  Giurgevo,two  strongly
fortified  places  on  the  Danube  ;  but  they  encountered  near  the
latter  fortress  a  severe  defeat.  It  was  feared  at  Berlin  that  they
would  protract  the  negotiation  till  a  decisive  blow  had  been
stiuck,  and  the  Prussian  King  accordingly  insisted  on  receiving
an  answer  from  Vienna  within  three  weeks,  placed  himself
at  the  head  of  a  great  army  which  he  had  concentrated  in
Silesia,  negotiated  actively  for  co-operation  with  Sweden,'^  and
secretly  despatched  a  messenger  to  Constantinople  to  ratify  his
treaty  with  the  Turks.  The  ratification  omitted  all  mention  of
the  Crimea ;  but  it  bound  the  King  of  Prussia  to  do  the  utmost
in  his  power  to  restore  to  Turkey  all  the  provinces  that  had  been
lost  in  the  present  war.  As  Ewart  observed,  this  promise  was
made  at  the  very  time  when  Prussia  was  endeavouring  to  make
an  arrangement  with  Austria  for  her  own  benefit  at  the  expense
of  Turkish  territory.^  '  I  observed  to  the  Prussian  Minister,'  he
continued,  '  that  this  measure,  however  modified,  was  expressly
contrary  to  the  former  assurances  I  had  so  often  received  in
official  papers,  and  verbally.  He  said  he  had  received  positive
orders  from  the  King,  his  master,  to  take  this  step,  though  he
concealed  it  from  me.'  *  Shortly  afterwards,  in  consequence  of
the  renewed  niprcsentations  of  the  English  minister  on  the  im-
propriety of  ratil'ying  this  treaty,  the  Prussian  minister  agreed
to  write  to  M.  de  KnobelsdorfF  to  represent  to  the  Porte  the  ex-
pediency of  setting  it  aside  for  the  present,  with  a  view  to  con-

'  Ewart  to  Leeds,  April  L'l,  17!)0.  »  Ihid.  July  8,  1790; ITcrtzberg,

2  Tbid. May 10,  LT;,  Juno  10,  21, iii.  12,  13.
17i)(>.  ■'  Ewarl.  to  Leeds,  July  8,  1700.

CH. XIX.

POLICY OF F/vMGLAXD.  2(51

eluding  a  defensive  alliance  after  the  peace  ;  '  but  the  treaty,
notwithstanding,  subsisted,  not  only  signed^  but  duly  ratified,
and  it  pledged  Prussia  to  a  speedy  declaration  of  war.

It  was  evident  to  the  English  minister  at  Berlin  that  the
King  desired  war  and  detested  the  policy  of  the  status  quo,
though,  having  once  accepted  it,  he  found  it  difficult  to  recede.^
On  the  Austrian  side,  too,  there  seemed  some  slight  prospect  of
'  an  arrangement '  being  preferred  to  the  status  quo,  for  the  King
of  Hungary,  though  he  would  not  hear  of  the  abandonment  of
(I alicia,  wished  to  keep  Belgrade  and  two  or  three  other  frontier
places,  and  appears  to  have  at  one  time  thought  that  this  might
be  attained  by  giving  a  part  of  Moldavia  to  Poland.^  At  an-
other time  he  made  overtures  to  the  Turks  for  a  separate  nego-
tiation, and  the  King  of  Prussia  learned  with  great  indignation
that  he  had  informed  the  Turks  of  the  Prussian  proposals  to
make  peace  at  their  expense.'*

Amid  this  maze  of  conflicting  interests  and  intrigues,
England,  supported  loyally  by  Holland,  laboured,  steadily  for
the  pacification  of  Europe.  A  speedy  peace  on  the  basis  of  the
status  quo  was  her  object,  and  she  hoped  that  it  might  be
effected  through  the  intervention  of  the  allies,  and  followed  by
the  inclusion  of  Turkey,  and  perhaps  Sweden,  in  the  defensive
system.  If,  however,  the  belligerents  chose  to  make  a  suitable
peace  without  mediation,  England  would  gladly  acquiesce ;  nor
did  she  wish  to  insist  upon  the  status  quo  with  an  extreme  or
pedantic  severity.  '  Such  moderate  alteration  as  may  be  substi-
tuted by  common  consent,'  without  altering  the  relative  strength
of  the  belligerent  Powers,  she  was  ready,  with  the  consent  of
Prussia,  to  accept,  and  she  trusted  that  small  and  unimportant
deviations  from  the  status  quo  would  not  be  made  a  cause  of
war.  She  had  accepted,  however,  the  status  quo  as  the  basis  of
negotiation,  and,  as  Prussia  interpreted  it .  strictly,  England
would  so  far  support  her  as  to  prevent  France  and  Denmark
from  attacking  her  while  pursuing  this  end.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Prussian  Government  was  again  distinctly  warned  that  it
must  expect  no  assistance  from  England  in  an  aggressive  war
undertaken  to  deprive  Austria  of  Galicia  and  the  Netherlands  ;

»  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Angu^L  1,  WM.  '  Ibid.  June  Ifi,  21,  U'Ji).

«  Ibid.  June  24,  17'J0.  *  Ibid.  July  8,  17U0.

262 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGnXEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xix,

that  the  treaty  between  Prussia  and  Turkey  was  wholly  opposed
to  the  original  policy  of  the  allies ;  and  that  an  attempt  to  deprive
Turkey  of  what  she  had  gained  since  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz
w^ould  very  naturally  make  the  Turks  believe  themselves  sacri-
ficed and  betrayed.  Dantzig  and  Thorn  were  the  chief  objects
of  Prussian  policy.  If  they  could  be  obtained  by  an  amicable
negotiation,  and  not  by  a  forced  cession  or  exchange,  England
would  rejoice ;  and  Leeds  threw  out  the  suggestion,  that  the
cession  might  be  coupled  with,  and  effected  by,  a  treaty  of
commerce  connecting  Poland  with  England  and  Holland  by
lowering  transit  duties  in  Prussia.  Such  a  treaty  would  be  a
great  advantage  to  both  Poland  and  England,  and  would  make
English  commerce  independent  of  Russia.^

The  idea,  however,  was  not  pressed,  and  the  main  object  of
English  foreign  policy  was  simply  to  put  an  end  to  the  war
between  Turkey  and  the  King  of  Hungary,  and  to  prevent  the
struggle  from  extending  to  Prussia  and  Poland.  These  ends
were  at  last  accomplished.  Leopold,  perceiving  the  dangers
that  surrounded  him,  resolved  at  last  to  consent  to  peace  without
obtaining  any  increase  of  territory  ;  and  in  the  August  of  1790
a  convention  was  signed  at  Reichenbach,  by  which  the  Emperor
agreed  to  enter  into  an  armistice  with  the  Turks,  to  open  a
negotiation  for  peace  under  the  mediation  of  the  maritime
Powers  on  the  basis  of  the  strict  status  quo,  as  before  the  war,
and  to  secure  the  ancient  constitution  and  privileges  of  the
Belgic  provinces  under  the  guaranty  of  the  allied  Powers.
Prussia  abandoned  for  the  present  her  designs  on  Dantzig  and
Thorn,  though  Hertzbcrg  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  clause  that,
if  Austria  extended  her  frontiers  on  the  side  of  Turkey,  Prussia
Bliould  obtain  some  equivalent  advantage.

By  this  convention,  and  the  armistice  that  followed  it,  the
great  evils  and  dangers  that  grew  out  of  the  Avar  between
Austria  and  Turkey  were  terininated.  A  considerable  period,
however,  still  elapsed  before  the  formal  peace  was  signed.  It
was  negotiated  by  a  congress  which  sat  for  about  eight  months
at  the  little  village  of  Sistova  in  Bulgaria.  The  letters  of  Keith,
who  very  ably  represented  England at  this congress,  give  a

»  Leedfi  to  Ewart,  May  21,  July  20 ;  Leeds  to  Jackson,  Oct.  8,  17'JO.

cu,  XIX.  PF.ACE  OF  SISTOVA.  263

vivid  picture  of  the  innumerable  delays  and  difficulties  that
were  encountered  in  accomplishing  a  task  which  the  convention
of  Reichenbach  seemed  to  have  rendered,  most  simple.  Many
of  them  arose  from  causes  that  were  childishly  futile.  Minute
questions  of  form  and  precedence  were  elaborately  disputed,
and  more  than  once  the  proceedings  of  the  congress  were
postponed  because  the  Turks  desired  important  steps  to  be
taken  only  on  days  which  their  astrologers  deemed  propitious.
There  were  objections,  however,  of  a  more  serious  character,
raised  chiefly  by  Austria,  and  this  Power  showed  a  manifest
desire  to  protract  or  obstruct  the  negotiations,  in  hopes  of
obtaining  more  favourable  terms.  The  last  and  most  formidable
difficulty  arose  from  a  subtlety  which  could  hardly  have  been
surpassed  by  the  Jesuit  casuists.  The  Austrians  had  accepted
the  '  strict  status  quo  as  it  existed  before  the  war'  as  the  basis
of  pacification,  but  they  now  raised  a  distinction  between  the
status  quo  de  facto  and  the  status  quo  de  jure,  and  demanded
not  a  simple  re-establishment  of  the  frontiers  as  they  actually
existed  before  the  war,  but  the  establishment  of  a  line  of
frontier  which  they  maintained  ought  to  have  existed  according
to  a  disputed  or  violated  article  of  the  Peace  of  Belgrade.  On
this  ground  they  claimed  old  Orsova  and  a  little  band  of  Croatia
Avhich,  long  before  the  war,  had  been  in  Turkish  hands.  The
dispute  rose  so  high  that  the  congress  was  for  a  time  broken
up,  and  a  renewal  of  hostilities  appeared  inevitable;  but  the
Austrians  at  last  receded,  and  the  Treaty  of  Sistova  was  signed
on  August  4,  1791,  restoring  peace  on  the  basis  of  an  exact  re-
establishment  of  the  frontier  before  the  war.  By  a  separate
convention,  however,  with  Turkey,  Austria  obtained  what  she
desired,  though  with  the  restriction  that  old  Orsova  must  not  be
fortified.^

The  troubles  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands  were  also  appeased,
but  very  slowly  and  with  great  difficulty.  There  was  a  long
dispute  about  the  Constitution  which  was  to  be  restored ;
Leopold  contending  that  it  was  the  Constitution  as  it  existed
under  Maria  Theresa,  Prussia  and  the  maritime  Powers  insist-
ing upon  the  more  perfect  Constitution  of  Charles  VI. The

'  See Coxe,  vol. ii.  ; Hertzberg, Mcms.  of  Sir  If..  Kritli ;  BuckinghaLa's
torn. iii.  J Kybel,  Uid.  dc l'Euroj^)e; Courts  and  Cabinets,  \i.  V^\i,

264  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

population  in  the  riemish  provinces  were  violently  divided;
and  the  question  was  ultimately  settled  by  force.  The  insur-
gents elected  the  Archduke  Charles,  third  son  of  the  Emperor,
hereditary  Grand  Duke  of  Belgium,  on  condition  that  their
provinces  should  no  longer  belong  to  the  dominions  of  the
Emperor;  but  they  were  soon  subdued  by  an  overpowering
Austrian  army.  A  convention,  signed  by  the  Austrian  minister
with  the  ministers  of  the  three  mediating  Powers,  in  December
1790,  granting  the  Constitution  of  Charles  VI.,  was  not  ratified
by  the  Emperor,  who  consented  only  to  restore  the  Constitution
as  it  existed  at  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Maria  Theresa,  and  on
this  basis  peace  was  at  last  established.  The  three  mediating
Powers,  however,  finding  their  counsels  rejected,  refused  their
ratifications,  though  Prussia  at  a  later  period  gave  her  adhesion
to  the  policy  of  the  Emperor.*

The  arrangement  was  not  all  that  the  allies  desired ;  but  it
at  least  established  a  peace  when  a  most  dangerous  war  had
appeared  inevitable,  and  it  was  the  more  acceptable  on  account
of  the  manifest  desire  of  the  Flemish  democrats  to  unite
their  cause  with  that  of  the  French.  It  also  reacted  speedily
upon  afiairs  in  the  North,  where  a  peace  between  Russia  and
Sweden  had  been  one  of  the  first  results  of  the  convention  of
lleichenbach.

In  order  to  understand  the  circumstances  that  produced  it,
we  must  retrace  our  steps  and  take  up  the  threads  of  Swedish
history  where  we  dropped  them  in  October  1788.  At  that
period  the  intervention  of  the  three  allied  Powers  had  arrested
the  Danish  invasion  of  Sweden  at  a  time  when  it  would  other-
wise almost  certainly  have  succeeded,  and  by  securing  the
neutrality  of  Denmark  had  saved  Sweden  from  imminent  ruin.
The  position,  however,  of  Gustavus  III.  continued  to  be  very
critical.  His  chief  fleet  was  confined  in  Sweaborg.  His  army
in  Finland  was  paralysed  by  the  mutiny  of  its  officers.  His
exchequer  was  nearly  empty,  and  Russia  and  Sweden  were  still
at  war,  though  Russia  as  yet  abstained  from  aggressive  mea-
sures. The  King,  however,  was  in  no  mood  for  peace.  A  policy
of  adventure,  no  matter  how  wild,  had  always  an  irresistible

'  Koch,  Ifist.  dcs  Traitcs  de  Faix,  torn.  iv.  127-152; Coxe's House  of
Austria,  ii.  6D0-698.

CH.  XIX.  GUSTAVUS  III.  2C)5

charm  to  Lis  mind ;  and  lie  had  two  great  objects  in  view.  He
hoped  to  draw  the  three  allied  Powers  into  the  war,  to  restore
by  their  assistance  the  ascendency  of  Sweden  in  the  Baltic,  and
recover  all  or  nearly  all  that  had  been  lost  in  1721  and  in  1743 ;
and  he  also  hoped  to  make  a  second  revolution  in  the  Constitu-
tion, which  would  break  the  power  of  the  nobility  and  make  his
own  power  almost  absolute.

Gustavus  III.  had  none  of  the  solidity  and  seriousness  of  a
really  great  politician ;  he  had  neither  the  patience,  the  industry,
the  judgment,  nor  the  economy  that  are  necessary  for  ordinary
government,  but  in  that  peculiar  turn  of  mind  and  character
that  fits  men  for  a  revolutionary  career,  he  has  seldom  been
surpassed,  and  he  was  in  fact  the  most  successful  revolutionist
of  the  eighteenth  century.  He  was  a  most  skilful,  daring,  and
unscrupulous  political  gambler  ;  wonderfully  quick  and  adroit  in
seizing  opportunities,  availing  himself  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of
popular  passion,  disguising  personal  ambition  under  popular
pretexts.  He  had  already,  in  1772,  directed  and  carried  through
with  complete  success  one  great  revolution,  and  he  now  saw  the
possibility  of  winning  a  new  victory  in  the  same  field.

At  the  time  when  the  Danes  invaded  Sweden,  his  fortunes
had  sunk  to  the  lowest  point.  In  the  wild  province  of  Dale-
carlia,  it  is  true,  the  people  had  risen  with  enthusiasm  at  his
summons  to  oppose  the  Danish  invasion,  and  among  the  lower
classes  he  still  enjoyed  a  great  popularity ;  but  Stockholm  was
full  of  his  enemies.  The  equestrian  order  was  violently  hostile
to  him.  The  burghers  distrusted  him  and  were  haunted  with
constant  fear  lest  he  should  seize  the  bank.  Edicts  of  tolera-
tion and  frequent  invasions  of  ecclesiastical  privileges  had
offended  the  clergy,  while  the  financial  embarrassments,  which
were  largely  due  to  his  excessive  extravagance,  and  still  more  the
unpopular  monopoly  by  the  Government  of  the  distilleries,  had
excited  a  wide-spread  discontent.  The  last  two  Diets  had  been
stormy  and  hostile,  and  immediately  after  the  mutiny  in  Finland
the  Senate  strongly  urged  the  necessity  of  convoking  the  States.
The  King  hesitated,  without  absolutely  refusing.  It  was  im-
possible with  any  colour  of  reason  to  deny  that,  in  beginnino-
without  the  authority  of  the  States  an  offensive  war  ao-aiust
Russia,  he  had  broken  the  plain  letter  of  the  Constitution. It

266  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. en.  xix.

was  equally  certain  that  by  this  unconstitutional  act  lie  Lad
brought  his  country  into  a  position  of  the  gi'avest  peril.

The  intervention  of  Prussia  and  England,  however,  produced
an  immediate  and  most  powerful  reaction  of  opinion,  and  was
popularly  regarded  as  fully  justifying  the  foresight  of  the  King.
'  The  offer  of  our  mediation,'  wrote  the  English  consul  at
Stockholm,  '  has  made  a  very  great  impression,  and  visibly
damped  the  spirits  of  the  anti-royalists.'  '  An  opinion  pre-
vails that  we  are  only  come  forward  to  support  the  King  and
encourage  him  to  continue  the  war  with  Russia.  All  those
who  oppose  it  J  as  being  begun  in  an  unjust  and  unconstitu-
tional manner,  seem  now  so  much  dejected  that,  if  his  Majesty
should  seize  this  opportunity  of  calling  a  Diet,  he  might,  I
am  confident,  make  what  change  he  pleased  in  the  Constitu-
tion.' •

The  King,  like  a  skilful  strategist,  availed  himself  of  every
method  of  intensifying  the  feeling.  The  national  animosity
against  the  Danes  was  stimulated  to  fever-point  by  highly
wrought  descriptions  of  their  treachery  and  of  their  violence
during  the  late  invasion  ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  tide  of
popular  feeling  was  turned  with  a  tremendous  force  against  the
nobles.  The  mutiny  of  the  officers  in  the  face  of  the  enemy  was
represented  as  an  act  of  the  basest  treason,  which  had  almost
accomplished  the  ruin  of  tlie  country,  and  which  was  due  to  tho
hostility  of  the  nobles  to  the  King,  Texts  from  Scripture,
denouncing  vengeance  against  traitors  who  had  sold  themselves
to  the  stranger,  were  posted  up  in  the  village  churches.  In
the  theatres  every  allusion  hostile  to  the  nobles  was  received
with  rapturous  applause.  Innumerable  pamphlets  of  a  similar
tendency  were  circulated  through  all  classes,  and  the  King
declared  that  the  reign  of  monopoly  must  terminate,  and  tliat
lie  would  now  throw  the  command  of  the  army  largely  into  the
liands  of  the  burghers,  whom  he  could  trust.  On  December  20,
I  788,  he  entered  Stockholm  amid  tlio  acclamations  of  tlic  people,
and  when  the  effervescence  was  still  at  its  lieight  tlie  Diet  was
convoked.  It  was  opened  on  February  2,  1789.  In  a  spoocli,
which was so  elofjuent  and so  admirably delivered that it

'  Kfonn  1o  CariuuiLlicu,  Sept.  2G,  1788;  Kcuuc  to  Fruaur,  Nov.  10,  1788;
Jan.  ;j,  178i>.

en.  XIX.  THE  SWEDISH  DIET.  2G7

excited  tte  applause  and  admiration  of  all  parties,  the  King
urged  tlie  necessity  of  continuing  the  war  till  an  honourable  peace
had  been  attained,  deplored  the  conduct  of  '  a  few  traitors  in
Finland'  who  had  yielded  to  the  machinations  of  the  enemy,
and  exhorted  all  classes  to  rally  in  defence  of  their  country.
He  at  the  same  time  had  the  chief  officers  engaged  in  the
mutiny  seized  and  thrown  into  prison.

It  soon  appeared  that  he  could  count  upon  the  unanimous
adhesion  of  the  order  of  the  peasants,  and  upon  commanding
majorities  in  the  orders  of  the  burghers  and  of  the  clergy,
w^hile  the  nobles  were  irreconcilably  hostile.  A  vote,  thanking
him  for  having  secured  the  safety  of  the  nation  by  declaring
war,  justified  his  recent  conduct,  and  outside  the  Diet  the
populace  and  the  common  soldiers  were  strongly  in  his  favour.
By  the  order  of  the  nobles,  the  conduct  of  the  King  was  vehe-
mently arraigned.  They  dwelt  on  his  extravagance  and  his
debts;  on  his  alleged  attempt  to  intimidate  Stockholm  by
introducing  a  body  of  Dalecarlians  as  a  garrison ;  on  the  per-
sistent and  virulent  attacks  which  had  recently  been  directed
against  themselves.  Count  Lowenhaupt,  an  old  general  who
was  a  strong  partisan  of  the  King,  was  appointed  by  him
Marshal  of  the  Diet,  and  therefore  president  of  the  nobles  ;  and
he  endeavoured  by  the  King's  orders,  but  without  success,  to
check  the  attacks.  A  fierce  wrangle  ensued,  and  at  length  the
old  marshal,  declaring  himself  insulted,  withdrew  from  the  Diet
and  laid  his  complaints  before  the  King.

On  February  17,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  four
orders  of  the  Diet  were  suddenly  summoned  to  assemble  in  the
same  hall,  to  meet  the  King.  He  received  them  in  great  state,
and  he  delivered  a  brilliant  but  most  singular  speech.  Fifteen
days  before,  he  said,  he  had  addressed  the  Diet,  representing  the
urgent  and  imperative  necessity  of  taking  immediate  measures
to  defend  the  coast  of  Sweden  from  Russian  invasion,  and  to
wipe  away  the  stain  which  the  late  treachery  in  Finland  had
left  on  the  Swedish  name.  The  clergy,  the  burghers,  and  the
peasants  had  responded  to  his  appeal,  and,  forgetting  all  other
considerations,  had  shown  themselves  faithful  representatives  of
the  patriotism  of  Sweden.  But  the  nobles  hacl  acted  differently.
And  then,  in  a  strain  of  the  fiercest  invective,  he  accused  thein

2G8  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

of  favoiu'iug  the  intrigues  and  interests  of  the  enemy ;  of
wasting  in  frivolous  recriminations  a  time  which  was  vital  to
the  defence  of  the  country ;  of  grossly  insulting  the  sovereign
in  the  person  of  the  old  marshal  who  presided  over  their
debates;  of  attempting  to  revive  the  hateful  and  hated  aristo-
cratic domination  which  had  been  shattered  in  1772.  He
declared  that  if  Finland  was  lost,  if  the  coasts  were  devastated,
and  if  the  capital  was  menaced,  the  responsibility  must  rest
upon  those  men  who,  rather  than  renounce  their  ambitions
and  their  resentments,  were  ready  to  see  the  Russians  enter
Stockholm  and  dictate  their  terms ;  and  he  concluded  by  com-
manding the  nobles,  in  an  imperious  voice  and  with  a  haughty
gesture,  at  once  to  leave  the  hall  and  prepare  a  deputation  to
carry  their  apologies  to  the  insulted  marshal.

A  few  fierce  words  were  bandied  to  and  fro,  but  at  length
the  nobles  retired  to  draw  up  a  protest  in  justification  of
their  acts,  and  left  the  King  with  the  other  three  orders.
He  again  ardently  eulogised  their  loyalty,  directed  them  to
prepare  a  deputation  to  receive  the  new  privileges  he  intended
to  confer  on  them,  and  declared  the  necessity  of  changing  the
Constitution  so  as  to  make  political  power  centre  in  those  who
were  truly  loyal  to  their  country.

Two  agitated  days  followed,  during  which  the  popular
feeling  ran  strongly  and  evidently  on  the  side  of  tlae  King  ;  and
on  the  20th  the  decisive  blow  was  struck.  More  than  twenty
nobles  of  the  first  rank  and  fortune  were  arbitrarily  arrested
and  imprisoned  by  order  of  the  King;  and  the  next  day,  the
JJict  having  been  summoned,  the  King  read  to  it  a  revised  form
of  tlie  Constitution,  which  gave  liini  little  less  than  iibsolute
power.  The  exclusive  power  of  declaring  peace  and  war  was
to  reside  with  him.  The  estates  were  not  to  be  permitted  to
discuss  any  suljject  which  he  had  not  laid  before  them,  and
most  of  the  privileges  of  the  nobles  were  taken  away.  "Jlie
j)ovver  of  voting  taxes  almost  alone  remained  of  the  ancient
(jonstitution,  yet  even  this  was  seriously  impaired,  for  the
King  was  enabled  to  make  an  agreement  with  any  town  or
jtrovince  wlien  the  Diet  was  not  sitting.  The  new  Consti-
tution was  accepted  wit,]i  acclamation  by  the  three  orders,  and
in  spite  of  some  treble  pi-olr>-;l,s  lVu)ii  the  nuljility  tlic Marshal

CH.  XIX.  SWEDISH KEVOLUTIOX, 1789,  2G9

of  the  Diet  signed  it  in  their  name,  and  it  was  received  as  law
throughout  the  country.

It  remained  to  extort  from  the  Diet  supplies  for  the  war.
The  three  orders  readily  voted  the  subsidies  for  an  unlimited
time,  but  the  order  of  the  nobles,  though  broken  and  greatly
intimidated,  attempted  to  limit  the  vote  to  two  years.  The
night  before  the  decisive  vote,  a  thousand  of  the  rabble  were
entertained  at  the  King's  expense,  and  they  marched  half
drunk  upon  the  house  of  the  nobles.  The  military  and  the
burghers  were  put  under  arms,  and  sixteen  rounds  of  shot  were
distributed  to  each  man.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  King,
accompanied  by  a  clamorous  crowd,  entered  the  chamber  of  the
nobles,  demanded  an  immediate  vote  of  credit,  and  declared
that  anyone  who  opposed  it  was  a  traitor  to  the  country.  After
some  vain  protests,  and  amid  a  scene  of  wild  confusion  and
irregularity,  the  nobles  yielded,  or  were  alleged  to  have
yielded ;  and  next  day  the  Diet  was  dissolved.  Three  weeks
later,  the  few  senators  who  had  not  already  resigned  were
dismissed.  The  Senate,  which,  though  crippled  and  enfeebled
by  the  revolution  of  1772,  still  retained  some  shadow  of  its
old  independence,  was  abolished,  and  a  new  council,  composed
partly  of  nobles  and  partly  of  commoners,  appointed  by  the
Crown.'

In  this  manner  Gustavus  III.  had  the  almost  unexampled
fortune  of  accomplishing  for  the  second  time  and  with  perfect
success  a  violent  revolution  in  the  Constitution  of  his  country.
The  nobles  who  had  been  imprisoned  without  any  colour  of  law
on  February  20  were  soon  released,  but  many  of  the  more  import-
ant officers  who  had  revolted  in  Finland  were  brought  to  trial ;
several  were  condemned  to  death,  and  a  few  were  actually  exe-
cuted. The  King  hastened  to  his  army  in  Finland,  where  the
armistice  signed  in  the  previous  j^ear  had  expired,  and  he  took
part  in  a  victorious  battle  which  was  fought  on  June  28.  The
campaign  of  1789,  however,  produced  no  results. There  were

'  Compare  the  descriptions  of  this  Record  Office  correspondence,  I  have

extraordinary  scene  by  M.  Pons,  the  made  use  of  Geyer's  Hist,  de  Suhde;

French  ambassador,  in  Geffrey's  Gus-  the  Ecrlts  2)uHtiques  de  Gnstave  III',

tare III  et  la Cour de  France,  ii.  tlie  account  in  the  Annual  lleglster

80-82 ;  and  in  a  letter  in  the  Record  and in De la  Croix's CousiitutioHS

Office  from  Keene  to  Fraser,  May  5,  de  VFurojje.
1789. In  addition  to  Geffroy  and  the

270  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

many  skirmishes,  with  various  fortunes,  and  the  King  exposed
himself  with  great  courage  and  temerity,  but  he  acquired  no
hold  upon  Russian  Finland ;  while  on  sea,  the  Prince  of  Nassau,
who  had  hastened  from  the  Black  Sea,  inflicted  a  severe  defeat
upon  the  Swedes  on  August  24.  This  was  the  last  naval  battle
of  the  year.^

In  spite  of  the  taxes  that  had  been  extracted,  the  King  was
now  in  desperate  financial  difficulties.  The  promised  subsidy
from  the  Turks  had  not  amved.  Attempts  to  raise  a  loan  in
Holland  failed;  and  in  May  1789  the  King  of  Prussia  resolved
to  lend  him  a  million  of  dollars,  hoping  that  this  would  induce
him  to  adhere  to  the  system  of  the  allied  Powers.^

From  this  time  till  the  close  of  the  war  the  King  of  Prussia
continued  secretly  at  short  intervals  to  supply  the  Swedish  King
with  small  sums  to  carry  on  the  war,  and  he  induced  England
to  join  in  the  subsidy.  It  was  alleged  that  without  this  assist-
ance Sweden  must  be  completely  crushed,  and  the  balance  of
power  in  the  Baltic  annihilated,  or  that  the  King  would  nego-
tiate a  separate  peace  with  Russia,  which  would  retard  a  general
pacification,  or  that  he  would  throw  himself,  as  he  sometimes
threatened,  into  the  arms  of  France.^  Whatever  Power,  the
English  consul  at  Stockholm  said,  gave  him  the  largest  subsidies
and  most  favoured  his  ambitious  designs  would  secure  his  alliance,
but  the  allies  agreed  that  his  schemes  of  aggrandisement  should
not  be  encouraged,  and  that  their  object  should  be  to  secure  the
independence  of  Sweden  by  a  peace  on  the  terms  of  the  status
quo  as  it  existed  before  the  war.*

The  war  between  Sweden  and  Russia  in  1790  consisted
chiefly  of  naval  battles  desperately  and  skilfully  contested.  On
May  13  the  Russians  repelled  with  severe  loss  an  attempt  to
destroy  the  fleet  which  lay  in  shelter  under  the  guns  of  Revel,
but  two  days  later  Gustavus  almost  annihilated  a  great  division
(A'  tliu  Russian  galley  fleet  at  Frederikshamn.  On  June  3  and  4
tliero  was  another  battle,  indecisive  in  its  results,  but  on  the

'  See  Annual  licgixlcr,  1789,  pp.  to Leeds, Jan. 4, May 10, 1790.

190-200.  Lo('(l3  to Ewart, Feb, 2G,  May  21,

^  Kwart  to  Leeds,  I^Iay  23,  1780.  M'M).

»  The.sc  ne;,'otiat  ions  and  subsidies  '  Ijceds  to  Ewart,  Juuc  21,  1789  ;

maybe  tniced  in  the  I'nissia  Coinv  May  21,  Aug.  11,  179U.
blioiidenccat  tiic  llecom  UUice.  EwaiL

en.  XIX.  SWEDEN  AND  RUSSIA  RECONCILED.  271

whole  unfavourable  to  the  Swedes ;  and  the  unexpected  arrival
of  a  second  Russian  fleet  for  a  time  made  the  total  destruction
of  the  Swedish  fleet  appear  inevitable.  It  was  extricated  at  last
by  a  sudden  change  of  wind  and  by  the  skilful  manoeuvres  of  its
commander,  the  Duke  of  Sudermania;  but  a  month  later  the  Rus-
sians gained  a  decisive  victory  at  Wyborg,  and  the  losses  of  the
Swedes  were  then  so  crushing,  that  their  navy  seemed  irretriev-
ably ruined.  Yet,  by  an  extraordinary  display  of  skill  and  energy,
the  King  of  Sweden  was  able  in  less  than  a  week  to  bring  the
remnant  of  his  fleet  again  into  battle  ;  and,  availing  himself  of  a
favourable  opportunity,  he  closed  the  war  by  a  brilliant  victory.^
A  few  weeks  later  Europe  was  startled  by  the  aainouncemenfc
that  he  had  made  a  peace  with  Russia  on  the  basis  of  the  status
quo  as  it  existed  before  the  war.

The  motives  of  both  parties  were  very  evident.  The  conven-
tion of  Reichenbach  had  just  deprived  the  Empress  of  the  co-
operation of  Austria,  and  it  seemed  probable  that  Prussia,  Eng-
land, and  perhaps  Holland  would  soon  be  in  arms  against  her,  and
that  an  English  fleet  would  be  in  the  Baltic.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances, Catherine  saw  that  it  was  necessary  to  yield  some-
thing. Her  main  object  was  to  acquire  territory  on  the  side  of
Turkey.  She  had  never  sought  or  eagerly  pursued  the  Swedish
war,  which  had  proved  most  detrimental  to  her  navy ;  and  as
early  as  the  May  of  1790  she  had  declared  that  she  was  quite
ready  to  make  peace  with  Sweden,  '  on  condition  of  the  former
treaties  being  renewed,  and  a  mutual  amnesty  being  agreed
upon.'  ^  She  was  most  anxious  to  avoid  what  she  deemed  tha
humiliation  of  making  peace  through  the  intervention  of  foreign
Powers,  and  a  separate  peace  would  probably  baSle  one  of  the
chief  designs  of  the  three  allies.  They  had  hoped  to  include
Sweden  in  their  alliance,  to  isolate  Russia  and  to  secure  one  of
the  Baltic  provinces  in  their  system  ;  but  if  a  separate  peace
could  be  negotiated,  Sweden  would  be  at  perfect  liberty  to  ally
herself  with  Russia  and  with  Denmark  for  the  protection  of  the
Baltic.  No  sooner,  therefore,  had  intelligence  arrived  at  St.
Petersburg  that  the  agreement  with  Austria  was  about  to  be
concluded,  than  the  Empress  despatched  a  courier  to  Finland

'  Annual  Hcfjister,  1791,  pp.  183-  -  Whitworth to  Leeds, May  16,

i'JO.  1790.

272 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

with  offers  of  peace  to  tlie  King  of  Sweden.  It  is  said  that  he
had  not  yet  heard  of  what  had  happened  at  Reichenbach ;  a
Prussian  subsidy  had  just  been  sent  to  him,  and  a  squadron  of
seventeen  English  ships  was  lying  in  the  Downs  ready  to  sail
for  the  Baltic.^

The  Russian  Empress  in  taking  this  step  showed  re-
markable political  sagacity,  and  Gustavus  readily  accepted  her
proposal.  As  she  offered  him  peace  on  the  exact  terms  which
the  allies  had  agreed  to  secure,  he  had  very  little  prospect  of
gaining  anything  by  continuing  the  war,  and  it  was  much
more  flattering  to  his  vanity  to  obtain  peace  for  himself  than  to
obtain  it  through  the  intervention  of  the  allies.  To  a  man  of
his  type  of  character  there  was  indeed  something  exceedingly
gratifying  in  the  whole  transaction.  He  had  made  war,  without
a  shadow  of  provocation,  against  a  Power  much  stronger  than
himself.  He  had  conducted  it  without  an  avowed  ally  in  the
North  of  Europe,  and  in  spite  of  the  most  formidable  domestic
dissensions.  The  last  battle  had  been  a  Swedish  victory,  and
lie  had  now  the  satisfaction  of  making  peace  without  any  loss  of
territory,  and  at  the  invitation  of  his  great  opponent.  On  the
other  hand,  Sweden  had  already  lost  50,000  men,  fifteen  ships
of  the  line,  and  a  great  many  smaller  vessels.^  Her  finances
were  utterly  exhausted,  and  she  had  everything  to  fear  from  a
continuation  of  the  war.

There  was  also  another  consideration  which  weighed  upon
his  mind.  For  some  time  he  had  been  watching  with  the
keenest  interest  the  great  revolutionary  drama  which  was  un-
folding itself  in  France.  He  had  himself  swept  away  almost
every  constitutional  limit  to  his  power  amid  the  general
applause  of  his  subjects,  and  he  had  done  so  chiefly  by  carrying
out,  of  his  own  free  will  one  of  the  great  objects  of  the  French
revolutionists,  by  destroying  feudal  and  aristocratic  privileges,
and  throwing  open  the  highest  positions  in  the  Government  to  all
ranks.^  He  always  maintained,  and  probably  with  justice,  that
if  lie  had  been  at  the  helm  instead  of  Lewis  XVI.,  he  would
have  weathered  the  storm. The  interest  of  events  in  France  had

'  See  a  very  remarkable  letter  of  ^  Sec  some strikiiif? remarks  on

Lord  Malmehbiiry,  JJUirles  and  Cor-  tliis aspect of liis policy in tiie

rrxixtwlence,  ii.  ■135-4:57.  Annual  Ilcglster,  IT'Jl,  p 17'J.

^  Oeyer,  Iliat.  dc  Sulde,  p r>20.

CH.  XIX.  "RESULTS OF  THE  TRIPLE ALLLVXCE.  273

eclipsed  that  of  his  war ;  he  was  impatient  at  finding  himself
far  from  news  in  a  distant  province  of  his  dominions,  and  he
was  now  eagerly  looking  forward  to  the  possibility  of  allyi
ing  himself  with  Eussia  in  a  great  counter-revolution  in  tha
interests  of  monarchy  in  Europe.^

The  Peace  of  Warela  was  signed  on  August  15,  1790,
and  although  some  questions  of  detail  remained  to  be  settled
between  Sweden  and  Russia,  it  restored  tranquillity  to  the
North,  and  closed  another  chapter  of  the  great  work  of  the
pacification  of  Europe.  Gustavus,  however,  did  not  long  sur-
vive his  success.  The  implacable  animosities  which  he  had
aroused  among  his  nobles  pursued  him  to  the  end  ;  a  con-
spiracy was  formed  against  his  life,  and  on  March  16,  1792,
he  was  shot  by  Anckarstrom  at  a  masked  ball  in  the  theatre  of
Stockholm.

Up  to  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Warela,  the  Triple  Alliance
between  England,  Prussia,  and  Holland,  in  spite  of  the  many
difficulties  and  differences  that  have  been  recounted,  had  proved
on  the  whole  eminently  successful.  Holland  had  been  pacified,
and  the  danger  of  French  ascendency  in  her  councils  had  been
averted.  Denmark  had  been  compelled  to  withdraw  from  her
attack  on  Sweden  and  to  declare  her  neutrality  during  the  war.
The  war  between  Austria  and  Turkey  had  been  terminated,  leav-
ing the  frontiers  of  the  two  empires  almost  unchanged.  Austrian
Flanders  was  rapidly  regaining  its  tranquillity ;  its  old  customs
and  privileges  had  been  substantially  secured,  and  now  peace  had
been  established  between  Russia  and  Sweden,  not  indeed  thi'ough
the  mediation  of  the  allies,  but  at  least  through  fear  of  their
intervention  and  on  the  terms  which  they  desired.  In  the
beginning  of  1789  there  had  been  serious  question  of  a  quadruple
alliance  of  France  and  Spain  with  Russia  and  the  Emperor,^
and  when  the  quarrel  with  England  about  Nootka  Sound  arose,
Spain  at  once  made  overtures  to  Catherine ;  ^  but  these  dangers
seemed  now  to  have  faded  away.  The  Emperor  had  made
peace.  France  was  too  occupied  with  internal  troubles  to  pay
much  attention  to  anything  beyond  her  border.  The  dispute  with

'  Geffroy,  Gxistave  III  et  la  Cour  a  letter  of  Ewart  to  Leeds,  April  20,

de  France.  1789.

^  Corresjjondance  diplomatique  du  '  Whitworth  to Leeds,  May  16,

Baron  de  Stael,  pp.  97,  98. See,  too,  June  1,  Nov.  11,  1790.

VOL.  V.  T

274 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

Spain  had  been  settled,  and  the  Empress  and  the  Turks  re-
mained alone  at  war.  But  the  success  of  the  allies,  and  the
foreign  policy  of  Pitt,  now  met  with  a  great  check.  The  at-
tempt to  induce  or  compel  Russia  to  make  peace  through  the
mediation  of  the  allies,  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo  as  it
existed  before  the  war,  surrendering  to  the  Turks  Oczakow  and
its  adjoining  territory  to  the  Dniester,  proved  a  complete  and
somewhat  ignominious  failure.

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  war,  the  acquisition  of  this
fortress  and  territory  by  the  Russians  seemed  pi'obable.  As
early  as  November  1787  Eden  had  discussed  with  Moutmorin
at  Pai'is  the  probable  course  of  the  Eastern  war,  and  the  French
minister  had  expressed  his  opinion  that  it  would  leave  Constan-
tinople secure  and  untouched,  but  would  give  Moldavia  and
Wallachia  to  the  Emperor,  Oczakow  and  one  or  two  other
places  to  Russia.^  The  capture  of  Oczakow  had  been  the  first
great  success  of  Potemkin.  It  had  been  the  result  of  a  siege
of  extraordinary  length,  conducted  with  extraordinary  resolution,
and  accompanied  by  extraordinary  bloodshed;  and  from  this
time  the  contingency  of  its  retention  by  Russia  had  been  con-
tinually referred  to.  In  February  1789,  when  the  Russians
had  made  comparatively  few  sacrifices,  Whitworth,  the  English
minister  at  St.  Petei'sburg,  wrote  that  Potemkin,  who  appeared
of  all  Russian  politicians  the  most  favourable  to  the  English
alliance,  would,  he  believed,  gladly  make  peace  at  once  through
the  intervention  of  the  allies ;  that  he  hoped  to  keep  Oczakow
and  the  adjoining  territory,  but  that,  if  necessary,  he  was  pre-
pared to  '  consent  to  the  town  and  fortifications  being  razed,
reserving  the  country  between  the  Dniester  and  the  Dnieper,
wliich  he  justly  considers  the  key  to  the  Crimea.'^  In  the  last
days  of  1789  and  in  the  beginning  of  1790,  Catherine  had  re-
quested the  interference  of  England,  and  expressed  her  willing-
ness to  make  peace  on  the  condition  of  including  in  her  empire
Oczakow  and  its  territory  to  the  Dniester,  and  of  creating  an
independent  kingdom  consisting  of  Bessarabia,  Wallachia,  and
Moldavia. The  latter  condition  was  emphatically  and  unequi-

'  Avrlilanfl  CnrrPi<pnnflr.ncf,\.2T,\.  tcmkin to  seize  Oczakow. — Malmes-

As  rarly  a.s 1781i,  JSir  Jarnc^.s ll;i,iri.s  hiiry  ('orrri^jxinilcnrtt^W.  ].'?.

had  warned  the  Englisli  Government,  ■'  Wliitwurth  to  Cariiiarllicn,  Feb.

of  the  desire  of Catherine  and  i'o-  fi,  IT'^'J.

CH.  XIX.  CESSION OF  OCZAKOW.  275

vocally  rejected,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  montlis  it  was
dropped ;  but  though  the  English  Government  suggested  the
status  quo  as  the  basis  of  peace,  and  described  the  article
relating  to  Oczakow  as  '  most  doubtful '  and  likely  to  induce
the  Turks  to  continue  the  war,  their  language  was  by  no  means
that  of  unqualified  hostility.^

On  certain  conditions,  wdiich  were  not  in  the  least  intended
for  the  protection  of  Turkey,  Prussia,  as  we  have  already  seen,
was  at  one  time  perfectly  ready  to  acquiesce  in  the  Russian
demand.  In  March  1790Ewart,  in  describing  the  negotiations
for  giving  Prussia  Dantzig  and  Thorn,  and  depriving  Austria
of  Galicia,  mentions  the  opinion  of  the  King  of  Prussia  that
an  armed  interference  of  the  allies  would  bring  about  a  speedy
peace.  Russia's  '  increasing  embarrassments  would  make  her
satisfied  with  Oczakow  and  its  district,  and  .  .  .  the  Porte
might  be  prevailed  on  to  accept  reasonable  conditions,  such  as
the  cessions  above  mentioned,  and  the  re-establishment  of  the
limits  of  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz.'  ^  If  a  peace  could  be
negotiated  on  the  basis  of  the  cession  of  Galicia  by  Austria,  the
King  of  Prussia  expressly  stated  that  he  '  would  have  no  objec-
tion to  the  Empress  obtaining  Oczakow.'  ^  I  have  mentioned
also  the  Prussian  project  which  was  suggested  about  this  time,
that  Russia  should  restore  to  Sweden  the  portion  of  Finland
which  she  had  lost  by  the  Peace  of  Abo  in  1743,  and  that
Russia  should  be  allowed  in  compensation  to  retain  Oczakow
and  its  territory.  This  proposal  was  actually  sent  by  the
Prussians  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  it  was  peremptorily  re-
jected.*

From  the  uniform  language  of  the  Russian  Government,
there  could  be  little  doubt  that,  unless  the  course  of  the  war  was
completely  reversed,  it  would  insist  on  retaining  Oczakow  and
its  territory  at  the  peace ;  nor  w^as  there  anything  unreasonable

'  See the letters of the Vice-  the Russian Correspondence,  dated

Chancellor Ostermann, May 1790,  May  1790. In  anotlier  letter  Ewart

and  a  letter  of  Leeds  to  the  Russian  says : '  It is much wished  by this

ambassador in London,  July 1790;  Court  (Berlin)  that  Russia  should  be

also  Pari.  Hist.  xxix.  906,  907,  9G0,  made to accept the utatus (pto,  or

997.  that  she  should  not  obtain  Oczakow

2  Ewart  to  Leeds,  March  2,  1790.  and its district without  making  a

'  Ibid.  May  25,  1790.  proportional  arrangement  with  Swe

*  Ibid.  April  18,  1790. See,  too,  den.' — Ewart  to  Leeds,  June  4,  1790.

some  letters  of  Count  Ostermann  in

276  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTR CENTURY. ch.  xix.

in  this  demand.  Wliatever  provocations  Russia  may  have  given,
Turkey  had  at  least  begun  the  war,  and  she  had  been  almost
invariably  defeated.  The  Empress  showed  her  moderation  by
receding  from  her  first  demand  for  the  constitution  of  Moldavia,
Wallachia,  and  Bessarabia  into  a  separate  kingdom,  and  by
consenting  to  give  up  all  her  conquests  between  the  Dniester
and  the  Danube ;  and  she  could  hardly,  as  a  victorious  Power,
with  any  credit  to  herself  or  any  regard  to  her  people,  surrender
Oczakow,  which  had  been  most  honourably  won  and  which  was
of  extreme  importance  to  the  security  of  her  dominions.  More
than  once  Turks  and  Tartars  had  availed  themselves  of  its
shelter  to  devastate  unprotected  parts  of  the  Russian  territory  ;
it  enabled  the  Turks  to  cut  off  Kherson  and  the  interior  Russian
dominions  along  the  Dnieper  from  all  communication  with  the
Black  Sea ;  and  it  placed  the  commerce  of  the  Crimea  almost  at
their  mercy.  These  were  sufficient  reasons  for  the  Empress
insisting  on  retaining  it,  and  it  was  not  clear  why  England
should  object.  Whatever  might  be  the  importance  of  Oczakow,
it  was  certainly  far  less  dangerous  to  Turkey  than  the  Crimea,
which  Russia  had  seized  with  the  full  approval  of  England.
Although  the  Russian  arms  had  been  steadily  successful  in
1788,  1789,  and  1790,  the  speeches  of  the  King  to  Parliament
expressed  no  anxiety.  On  the  contrary,  while  lamenting  the
continuance  of  the  war,  he  '  rejoiced  that  it  did  not  endanger
the  power  and  interests  of  his  kingdom.'  Under  these  circum-
stances, it  was  with  great  surprise  that  the  English  public
learned  that  Pitt  was  determined  to  demand  the  restitution  ot
Oczakow  and  its  territory  to  Turkey,  and  to  support  his  demand
by  force.

The  explanation  of  this  proceeding,  which  appeared  very
perplexing  to  contemporaries,  will,  I  think,  be  found  chiefly  in
the  Prussian  connection.  In  this,  as  in  most  of  the  plans  of
recent  foreign  policy,  the  two  allies  showed  themselves  widely
different  in  their  position  and  interests.  England  was  a  consti-
tutional moiiiirchy,  directed  by  a  minister  who  was  prepared  to
go  to  war  if  necessary,  who  was  always  ready  to  act  in  difficult
emergencies  with  proniptitiule  and  decision,  but  who  deprecated
war  a^  a  great  evil,  and  who  h;ul  attached  his  reputation  mainly
to  certain  schemes  of  linaiK  ial  and political  reform  \Yhich  could

rn.  xiM.  MOTIVES OF  PITT'S POLICY.  277

aiily  bo  realised  by  a  continuance  of  peace.  Prussia  was  a
despotic  monarchy,  and  its  sovereign,  believino-  himself  to  be  in
possession  of  the  best  army  in  Europe,  was  extremely  anxious
to  distinguish  himself  in  the  field,  and  full  of  plans  for  en-
larging his  territory.  On  the  other  hand,  Pitt  regarded  the
defensive  alliance  which  had  been  formetl  as  the  cardinal  fact
of  his  foreign  policy.  He  believed  it  to  be  of  the  highest  im-
portance to  the  security  and  stability  of  the  present  system  of
Europe;  and  he  hoped  that  if  Turkey,  Sweden,  and  perhaps  the
Emperor  were  included  in  it,  he  would  have  established  an
irresistible  barrier  against  the  ambition  both  of  Russia  and  of  the
House  of  Bourbon,  and  would  have  guaranteed  a  long  period
of  European  peace.  The  alliance,  however,  had  been  already
greatly  strained.  Prussia  had  with  much  difficulty  been  in-  »
duced  to  abandon  or  defer  schemes  of  ambition  which  she  had
most  unexpectedly  raised ;  and  England,  in  her  turn,  had  been
obliged  to  agree  with  Prussia  in  demanding  not  merely  an
approximate,  but  a  strict  statics  quo  as  the  basis  of  pacification.

This  had  actually  been  attained  in  the  peace  between
Turkey  and  the  Emperor,  and  in  the  peace  between  Russia  and
Sweden,  and  it  was  somewhat  difficult  not  to  ask  the  same
terms  in  favour  of  the  Turks.  It  was  especially  difficult,  as  the
Turks  were  so  elated  by  the  prospect  of  a  Prussian  alliance  that
they  now  declared  that  they  would  not  make  peace  till  they  had
recovered  the  Crimea.'  England  had  resisted  the  Prussian
project  of  making  Turkey  compensate  the  Emperor  for  the
sacrifices  he  was  asked  to  make  in  the  interests  of  Prussia,  and
she  had  undertaken,  in  conjunction  with  Prussia,  to  negotiate
with  Russia  in  the  interests  of  Turkey.  Could  she  under  these
circumstances,  and  in  opposition  to  the  v/ishes  of  her  ally,
require  Turkey  alone  of  the  belligerent  Powers  to  make  a
cession  of  territory  ?

It  is  manifest  that  all  the  recent  proceedings  of  the  English
Government  had  gone  far  beyond  the  strict  terras  of  a  defensive
alliance;  but  so  many  steps  had  been  already  taken  that  it
was  difficult  to  recede.  England  and  Prussia  had  practically
undertaken  in  common  the  pacification  of  Europe,  and  it  was
scarcely  possible  for  England  at  this  stage,  and  after  having
>  Ewart  to  LcecLs,  Scpf.  18,  1700.

278  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xix.

herself  repeatedly  insisted  on  tlie  status  quo,  to  refuse  her  con-
tinued co-opemtion  without  sacrificing  the  Prussian  alliance
and  all  the  benefits  to  be  expected  from  it.  How  great  those
benefits  might  be  had  just  been  signally  shown.  When  the
quarrel  about  Nootka  Sound  had  brought  England  to  the  verge
of  a  war  with  Spain,  the  Prussian  Government  was  reminded  of
the  obligation  of  the  defensive  alliance.  It  would  be  impos-
sible to  conceive  a  question  more  unconnected  with  Prussian
interests,  and  no  free  nation  whose  policy  was  controlled  by
national  opinion  would  have  permitted  its  rulers  to  go  to  war  in
such  a  cause.  But  the  King  of  Prussia  at  once  recognised  his
obligation,  and  Count  Hertzberg  was  directed  to  assure  the
English  envoy  that  '  the  King,  his  master,  was  determined  scru-
''  pulously  to  fulfil  bis  engagements  with  the  Court  of  London ;
and  that  he  (Count  Hertzberg)  had  been  expressly  authorised
to  say  that,  if  his  Majesty  should  think  proper  to  undertake  a
war  against  Spain,  in  case  that  Power  should  not  comply  with
the  terms  his  Majesty's  ambassador  at  Madrid  was  instructed
to  propose,  his  Prussian  Majesty  would  consider  a  commence-
ment of  hostilities  under  such  circumstances  a  casus  foederis
of  his  defensive  alliance  with  his  Majesty,  and  would  not  fail
to  furnish  him  the  succours  stipulated  in  the  said  alliance.' '

Such  was  the  loyalty  with  which  the  Prussian  King  was
prepared  to  fulfil  his  obligations,  and  it  rendered  it  specially
difficult  for  England  to  refuse  to  assist  Prussia  in  procuring
a  restitution  of  Oczakow,  which  Prussian  statesmen  regarded
as  both  a  European  and  a  Prussian  interest.

It  must  be  added  that  the  importance  of  the  Eastern  question,
the  danger  of  Constantinople  falling  into  the  hands  or  under
the  influence  of  Russia,  and  the  increasing  probability  of  such
an  event,  had  of  late  been  much  more  felt  than  formerly  by
English  statesmen,  and  had  given  a  direction  to  their  foreign
policy  widely  different  from  that  of  Chatham  and  of  the  Coali-
tion Ministry  .2 It  must  be  added,  too,  that  the  design  of  send-

'  Jackson  to  Leeds,  Oct.  22,  1790.  naval  power  in  the  Black  Sea,  and

Jackson  rijircscntod  England  at  Ber-  thcnco  he  drew  tlie  necessity  of  our

lin  during  the  absence  of  Ewart.  forming  a  connection with  Tuikey.

*  Pitt,  in  the  coiirse  of  one  of  (he  He  said  that  Montesquieu,  who  best

debates  on  this  question,  urged  '  that  understood the subject, expressly

the  systematic  poh'tical  aim  of  Russia  declared that the Turkish Empire,

had been the Cblablislimcnt of a  although  it  undoubtedly  contained  in

nr.  XIX.  NEGOTIATION WITH EUSSIA.  279

ing  a  British  fleet  to  the  Bultic  in  order  to  enforce  a  peace  had
been  formed  at  a  time  when  Sweden  and  Russia  were  still  at
war,'  and  English  ministers  believed  that  Russia  was  now  so
exhausted  that  a  simple  demonstration  of  force  would  be  suffi-
cient to  attain  their  ends.  Twice  already  within  a  very  few
years  such  a  policy  had  been  pursued,  and  on  each  occasion  with
eminent  success.  In  1787,  when  Prussia  restored  the  House  of
Orange  and  crushed  the  French  party  in  Holland,  a  French
interference  had  been  prevented  by  the  decided  attitude  of
England,  and  the  still  more  recent  difficulty  with  Spain  had
been  settled  triumphantly  without  a  war,  chiefly  through  the
promptitude  with  which  the  English  Government  had  prepared
itself  for  the  worst.

These  considerations  appear  to  me  to  supply  the  real
motives  that  governed  Pitt  in  a  step  which  the  event  showed
to  be  one  of  the  great  miscalculations  of  his  ministry.  The
offer  to  Russia  of  the  mediation  of  the  allies  to  effect  a  peace
with  Turkey  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo,  had  been  made  by
Prussia  in  September  1790.^  The  answer,  insisting  on  the
retention  of  Oczakow  and  its  district  to  the  Dniester,  had  been
given  to  Prussia  alone.  That  to  England  was  for  some  time
delayed,  and  in  the  meantime  the  English  Secretary  of  State,
being  evidently  anxious  if  possible  to  avert  violent  measures,
directed  Whitworth  to  employ  the  most  conciliatory  language.
The  proposal  of  England,  he  was  instructed  to  say,  was  a  friendly
proposal  for  the  purpose  of  putting  an  end  to  a  bloody  and  ex-
hausting war.  If,  however,  as  there  was  some  reason  to  believe,
the  Empress  thought  it  beneath  her  dignity  to  accept  peace
through  the  mediation  of  other  Powers,  the  allies  had  no  wish
to  insist  upon  a  formal  mediation.  They  would  gladly  use  their
good  offices  informally,  and  if  Russia  thought  fit  to  open  direct
negotiations  with  Turkey  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo  they
would  do  all  in  their  power  to  assist  her.  They  would  go  some-
what further. The  Turks  had  never  abandoned  their  claims  to

it  many  symptoms  of decay,  must  interest  to  come  instantly  to  its  aid

last  much  longer  than  was  generally  and rescue it  from  danger.'  —Pari.

imagined,  because when an attack  Jlist.  xsix.  996.

of an alarming nature should be  '  Leeds  to  Ewart,  August  14, 1790.

made  upon  it,  t  lie  European  iVIaritime  -Whitworth  to  Leeds,  Sept. 10,

Powers would feel it to be their  1790.

280  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

the  Crimea,  and  they  had  made  its  recovery  one  of  their  chief
reasons  for  declaring  war.  If  Russia  would  accept  a  peace  on
the  basis  of  the  status  quo  England  would  use  her  influence  to
obtain  from  the  Turks  a  formal  renunciation  of  the  Crimea
under  the  guarantee  of  the  allies.  '  A  concession  of  this  impor-
tant object,'  wrote  Leeds,  '  as  it  was  the  origin  and  an  avowed
purpose  of  the  war,  cannot  be  unacceptable  to  her  Imperial
Majesty,  and  should,  I  should  hope,  be  sufficient  to  answer  her
wishes.'  ^

There  are  few  things  less  beautiful  than  these  eighteenth-
century  wars,  begun  in  so  many  instances  through  the  idle  vanity
and  ambition  of  sovereigns  who  desired  to  round  off  their  domi-
nions ;  entailing  in  their  course,  over  vast  areas  of  population
and  territory,  the  most  multifarious  forms  of  suffering  and  ruin,
and  terminated  at  last  amid  a  profusion  of  congratulations  and
compliments  and  decorations  by  treaties  which  left  the  relative
position  of  the  belligerent  Powers  unchanged.  Catherine  was
fully  resolved  that  her  present  war  should  not  be  of  this  descrip-
tion. Her  Vice-Chancellor  was  directed  to  inform  the  English
minister  of  the  indignation  that  was  felt  by  the  Empress  at  the
'  unparalleled  conduct '  of  the  allies  in  attempting  to  '  dictate  in
so  arbitrary  a  manner  to  a  sovereign  perfectly  independent  and
in  want  of  no  assistance  to  procure  the  conditions  which  seemed
to  her  best  suited  to  satisfy  her  honour.'  Rather  than  tarnish
the  glory  of  a  long  and  illustrious  reign  by  accepting  the  terms
of  the  allies,  the  Empress  was  ready  to  encounter  any  risk,  and
she  would  only  accept  the  good  offices  of  the  Eling  of  England
'  inasmuch  as  they  may  tend  to  procure  for  her  the  indemnifica-
tion she  requires  of  Oczakow  and  its  district.'  *

It  was  soon  seen  that  these  were  no  idle  words.  The  forti-
fications of  Riga  and  Revel  were  at  once  strengthened,  and
orders  were  given  to  prepare  thirty-six  ships  of  the  line  for  sea.
Already,  at  the  close  of  1789,  Whitworth  had  noticed  how  a  ukase
of  the  P]m press  was  received  as  a  voice  from  heaven,  and  how
by  five  successive  levies  about  every  thirty-seventh  man  in  the
Eiiipiru  hud  been  drafted  into  the  unny.^ But  although  there

1  Leerls to Whit  worth, Oct. 10, 17^)0;  Jan.  10,  1701.
Nov.  14,  1700.  »  Ibid.  Nov.  U,  1789.

'  Wiiilwurtli to Lccdtt,  Nov. 18,

CH.  XIX.  PRUSSIAN OPINION.  281

were  many  signs  of  weariness  and  discontent,  and  many  libels
against  the  Empress,  tliere  could  be  no  doubt  that  in  the
struggle  she  contemplated  she  could  count  upon  all  the
forces  of  the  nation.  Nothing,  Whitworth  said,  except  absolute
necessity  would  oblige  her  to  yield ;  and  he  proceeded  to
describe  the  steps  which  were  necessary  to  success.  A  British
fleet  must  be  in  the  Baltic  early  in  spring.  The  King  of
Prussia  must  ratify  his  treaty  with  the  Turks,  and  send  an  army
into  the  field.  Every  effort  must  be  made  to  di-aw  the  King  of
Sweden  into  the  confederation.  His  harbours  would  be  most
important  for  the  British  fleet,  and  he  might  make  an  invaluable
diversion  in  Finland.  An  expedition  might  be  made  against
Archangel,  and  a  British  fleet  should  enter  the  Black  Sea,
where  there  were  now  lying,  in  the  harbour  of  Sebastopol,
eleven  or  twelve  Eussian  ships  of  the  line  and  as  many  frigates,
all,  it  was  said,  in  very  bad  condition.  Something  might  also
be  done  to  stop  the  supplies  of  money,  which  Russian  statesmen
found  it  much  more  difiicult  to  obtain  than  supplies  of  men.
Eussian  loans  were  raised  at  Amsterdam  by  means  of  the  gi'eat
banker,  Hope.  If  this  source  were  stopped,  she  would  soon,
through  want  of  funds,  be  obliged  to  make  peace. ^

While  these  communications  were  passing  under  cipher  from
the  English  minister  at  St.  Petersburg  to  the  Government  at
home,  the  English  envoy  at  Berlin  was  in  confidential  com-
munication with  the  Prussian  ministers,  and  especially  with
General  Mollendorf,  whose  opinions  both  on  political  and
military  questions  weighed  greatly  with  the  King  of  Prussia.
Their  decided  opinion  was  that  the  allies  were  bound  on  every
ground  to  insist  upon  the  surrender  of  Oczakow  and  its  district,
and  upon  a  peace  based  on  the  status  quo  as  it  existed  before
the  war.  The  Emperor  and  Sweden  having  made  such  a  peace,
the  allies  could  not  with  honour  demand  less  for  the  Turks.
Turkey  would  probably  refuse  peace  on  any  other  terms  :  if  she
yielded  to  necessity  she  would  consider  herself  botrayed,  and
would  be  so  alienated  from  the  three  allies  that  there  would  be
little  or  no  prospect  of  including  her  in  their  alliance,  while
Eussia  would  be  more  and  more  confirmed  in  the  haughty  dis-

'  Wliitworlh  to  Leeds,  Nov.  IS,  Dec.  28 17'JO;  Jan.  10,  Fob.  5,  18,  1791.

282  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  xix.

positions  slie  had  of  late  displayed.  The  prompt  and  decisive
intervention  of  the  allies  was  imperatively  needed.  The  Turkish
army  was  now  so  broken  and  demoralised  that,  in  the  opinion
of  Prussian  military  men,  it  would  not  be  able  to  resist  for
another  campaign ;  and  every  day  showed  more  clearly  the
danger  of  too  great  a  share  of  the  balance  of  power  falling  into
the  hands  of  Russia.  The  possession  of  Oczakow  by  Russia
was  a  matter  of  some  direct  interest  both  to  Prussia  and
England,  for  it  would  give  her  the  command  of  the  mouth  of  the
Dniester,  and  enable  her  to  combine  the  commerce  of  all  the
southern  provinces  of  Poland  with  her  other  resources  on  the
Black  Sea;  and  its  military  importance,  the  most  competent
judges  in  Berlin  were  agreed,  was  very  great.  It  was  now
evident  that  the  total  destruction  of  the  Turkish  Empire  and
the  expulsion  of  the  Turks  from  Europe  was  the  ultimate
object  of  Russia.  The  extension  of  her  empire  along  the  Black
Sea  was  a  great  step  towards  its  accomplishment;  and  Oczakow
would  materially  assist  the  Russians  in  any  future  expedition
against  Constantinople.  For  these  reasons,  the  allies  ought
jDromptly  to  intervene,  and  there  could  be  no  question  that  their
intervention  would  be  successful.  A  large  Prussian  force  was
already  concentrated  in  Silesia,  and  when  co-operating  with  the
Turks  it  would  prove  irresistible.  It  must  be  the  task  of
England  to  send  a  fleet  to  the  Baltic,  where  she  could  easily
crush  all  resistance.  None  of  the  Prussian  ministers,  the
English  envoy  said,  in  urging  these  points,  made  use  of  tho
promise  of  Prussia  to  support  England  in  her  quarrel  with
Spain,  as  an  argument,  but  he  added  that  he  knew  '  that  tlie
King  of  Prussia  considered  it  as  furnishing  an  additional  claim
to  the  assistance  of  Great  Britain  in  the  support  of  a  system
which  he  pledged  himself  to  maintain.' '

The  reply  of  the  English  Government  to  these  representa-
tions was  very  cordial.  Having  lately  been  attempting  to  es-
tablish commercial  relations  with  Poland,  they  admitted  that
they  had  some  commercial  interest  in  the  restoration  of  Oczakow,
and  I  liny  fully  concurred  with  the  military  authorities  of  Prussia
in  tln-ir  high  estimate  of  its  mililary  importance. The  fact  that

'  Jfwiirt  10  i.cccls,  .Sept.  26  i  Jack.suii  to  Lccd.s,  Dec.  Ks  21,  1700.

cii.  XIX.  AGREaiE>'T WITH PRUSSIA.  283

in  two  successive  Turkish  wars  the  Russians  had  to  undertake  a
long,  tedious,  and  wasting  siege  of  Oczakow  clearly  proved  that
it  was  a  real  barrier  to  Turkey.  It  would  probably  prove
equally  formidable  on  the  other  side,  if  it  became  a  stronghold
for  Russian  aggression,  and  it  would  certainly  enable  Russia  to
make  a  much  more  effectual  military  use  of  the  Crimea.  The
English  ministers  were  therefore  prepared  to  co-operate  with
Prussia  in  insisting  upon  its  surrender.  They  hoped  at  the  end
of  April  1791  to  send  to  the  Baltic  thirty-five  ships  of  the  line
and  a  proportionate  number  of  frigates,  while  a  Prussian  army
marched  into  Livonia,  and  they  would  also  send,  if  necessary,  a
squadron  of  ten  or  twelve  ships  of  the  line  to  the  Black  Sea.
They  desired,  however,  that  in  the  first  place  a  joint  representa-
tion should  be  made  to  the  Empress,  that  the  opinions  of  the
neutral  Powers  should  be  gathered,  and  especially  that  a  secret
treaty  should  be  negotiated  with  the  King  of  Sweden,  stipulating
his  neutrality  and  the  use  of  his  ports  in  return  for  a  secret
subsidy  of  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  pounds  to  be  raised
by  England  and  Prussia.  They  added,  too,  their  hope  that  both
England  and  Prussia  would  agree  to  take  nothing  for  them-
selves. If,  as  the  result  of  the  war,  it  was  deemed  necessary
to  insist  on  terms  beyond  the  status,  quo,  the  allies  should  in
these  '  look  to  no  acquisition  for  themselves,  but  to  procuring
a  still  greater  degree  of  security  for  the  Porte  on  the  Black
Sea.'  I

In  this  manner  a  plan  of  co-operation  was  laid  for  a  new
war.  There  were,  however,  still  some  misgivings  and  hesitations
at  Berlin.  Count  Hertzbera:  desired  a  war  with  Austria  much
more  than  a  war  with  Russia.  He  rejected  the  commercial
propositions  of  England  relating  to  Poland.  He  declared  that
England  would  ruin  Prussia  by  di'agging  her  into  a  wholly  un-
profitable war,  and  he  still  contended  that  the  acquisition  of
Dantzig  and  Thorn  must  be  made  the  leading  object  of  Prussian
policy.  As  the  Court  of  Berlin  was  in  negotiation  with  Poland  for
the  purpose  of  obtaining  permission  for  Prussian  troops  to  pass
through  that  country  to  Russia,  the  English  envoy  thought  that
in  some  way  the  desired  cession  might  be  still  attained.^

'  Leeds  to  Jackson,  Jan.  S,  Marcli  2  Jackson  to  Leeds,  Feb.  6,  March

27,1791.  17iJL

284  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

In  Russia,  military  preparations  were  pushed  on  with  des-
perate ardour.  The  finances  of  the  country  were  so  exhausted
that  paper  money  was  at  twenty-five  per  cent,  discount ;  but
the  supply  of  men  was  inexhaustible,  and  in  the  hands  of  an
imperious  despot  it  was  likely  to  be  employed  to  the  utmost.
The  philanthropist  Howard  had  made  his  last  journey  through
Russia  in  the  autumn  of  1789,  and  he  has  left  an  appalling
picture  of  the  reckless  waste  of  life  which  he  witnessed.  In  no
other  country,  he  said,  had  he  found  so  little  attention  paid  to
the  military.  In  the  hospitals,  the  soldiers  who  had  fought  so
bravely  at  Oczakow  were  dying  by  thousands  on  beds  of  hard
coarse  reeds,  without  linen  or  bedclothes  or  proper  medicines  or
any  but  the  coarsest  food.  Others,  but  half-recovered  from
wounds  or  sickness,  were  compelled  to  attempt  long  marches,  till
they  sank  dying  along  the  roads.  Upwards  of  70,000  soldiers
and  sailors  had  died  in  the  Russian  hospitals  in  a  single  year.'
But  the  stream  of  recruits  still  poured  in,  and  the  Turkish  war
was  pushed  on  with  great  vigour,  and,  of  late,  with  brilliant
success.  On  December  22,  1790,  after  a  siege  of  about  a  month,
kSuwarrow  succeeded  in  taking  by  assault  the  great  fortified
to\\Ti  of  Ismail.  More  than  38,000  Turks  perished  in  tlio
terrible  and  indiscrimiuate  butchery  that  ensued  when  the
Russians  poured  over  the  battlements ;  but  this,  like  many
other  hideous  pages  of  Eastern  warfare,  would  have  been  long
since  forgotten  had  not  an  old  history  describing  the  siege  and
massacre  of  Ismail  chanced  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  great
English  poet,  who  has  immortalised  them  in  two  admirable  cantos
of  his  '  Don  Juan.'  On  the  Cuban  and  in  the  Caucasus,  the
Russian  arms  were  likewise  successful,  and  Potemkin  was  busily
employed  in  strengthening  the  Black  Sea  fleet  and  inducing  skil-
ful ft^reign  ofiicers  to  serve  in  it.  Whitvvorth  believed  that  he
was  resolved  if  possible  to  make  peace  at  Constantinople,  and
that,  if  not  speedily  opposed,  he  might  succeed  in  his  dcsigji.
The  ['Impress  delayed  her  final  arrangements  of  territory  with
SwedfMi  in  order  to  draw  that  J'ower  more  closely  to  Russia,
and  she  proposed  a  Baltic  alliance  of  Russia,  Denmark,  and
iSi.vcden.

Among  the  many  schemes  iliat  were  about  this  time  devised
' t'icMV  Life  of  llotvard,  pp.  Ifjfj  4G5.

CH.  XIX.  DESIGNS  AGAINST INDIA.  285

was  one  wliich,  though  hopelessly  wild  uud  impracticable,  is
curious  as  showing  that  an  idea  was  already  in  the  air  which
was  destined  at  a  later  period  to  have  great  influence  on  inter-
national politics.  In  the  '  Secret  History  of  the  Court  of  Berlin,'
which  was  written  by  Mirabeau  in  1786,  there  is  a  very  remark-
able letter  on  the  possibility  of  Russian  armies  some  day  pene-
trating through  Central  Asia  into  India.  He  says  that  at  the
time  when  the  advance  of  Hyder  Ali  beyond  Orixa  had  deranged
the  course  of  commerce  in  Bengal,  some  Bengal  merchants,
seeking  new  markets,  succeeded  in  penetrating  to  the  frontiers
of  Siberia,  and  that  this  fact  suggested  to  the  Russian  Govern-
ment an  enterprise  which  was  unsuccessfully  undertaken  in
1783.  Availing  themselves  of  the  long  line  of  water  communi-
cation by  the  Volga  to  the  Caspian  Sea,  they  had  sent  an  ex-
pedition from  Astrakan  for  the  purpose  of  seizing  and  occupying
Astrabad  at  the  southern  point  of  the  Caspian,  with  the  object
of  ultimately  penetrating  from  that  point  into  India.  Though
the  expedition  had  not  succeeded,  the  design  was  not  abandoned,
and  Mirabeau  predicted  that  it  might  one  day  be  accomplished,
and  that  by  gravely  menacing  English  power  in  India,  Russia
might  produce  a  complete  change  in  the  European  system  of
politics ;  and  among  other  consequences  a  close  alliance  of
England  and  France  to  repress  her  growing  power. ^  In  1791
the  English  minister  mentions  that  a  French  adventurer  named
St.  Ginier  had  lately  arrived  from  France  with  particular  recom-
mendations from  the  Prince  of  Nassau.  He  proposed,  in  the
event  of  a  war  between  England  and  Russia,  to  go  with  a  corps
of  4,000  men  from  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Caspian  Sea,
through  Cashmere  to  Delhi,  and  from  thence  to  attack  the  English
settlements  in  Bengal.  '  This  fine  project,'  wi'ote  Whitworth,
*  has  been  presented  to  the  Empress  by  Monsieur  Nassau,  who,  I
must  in  justice  to  this  country  acknowledge,  is  the  only  man  in
it  mad  enough  to  think  it  practicable.'  ^

'  Mirabeau's  Hist, secrete de  la  pay. Two Irish Roman Catholics,

Cour  de  Berlin,  lettre  xxix.  named Keating  and Swanton, who

'■'  Whitworth to Leeds, Feb.  25,  had been in the French service,

March  25,  April  8,  15,  1791. In  July  and  who  were  acquainted  with  Eng-

Whitworth sent home a circum-  land  and with the town of Porls-

stantial  account  of  a  plot  to  burn  the  mouth,  were  to  conduct  the  enterprise,

English  fleet  at  Portsmouth  by  means  and were  at this time,  actually in

of several incendiaries  of ditVerent  London. — Whitworth to Grenville,

nationalities who were in Kussian  July  5,  17'J1.

286 ENGLA^'D  IN  THE  EIGHTEEXTH  CENTUEY. cii.  xix.

On  March  28,  1791,  a  message  was  delivered  to  the
English  Parliament,  stating  that  his  Majesty's  endeavours,  in
COD  junction  with  his  allies,  to  bring  about  a  pacification  be-
tween Eussia  and  the  Porte  having  failed,  his  Majesty  deemed
it  necessary,  for  the  purpose  of  adding  weight  to  his  representa-
tions, to  make  some  further  augmentation  to  his  naval  force,
and  on  the  following  day  Pitt  moved  an  address,  which  was  an
echo  of  the  message,  and  which  pledged  Parliament  to  give  his
Majesty  the  assistance  he  required.  Pitt,  in  introducing  it,
dwelt  much  in  generalities.  A  negotiation  was  in  progress,  and  it
could  not  yet  be  brought  in  detail  before  the  House ;  but  there
were  certain  evident  considerations  which  justified  the  necessity
of  the  step  which  was  to  be  taken.  With  perhaps  something
less  than  his  usual  felicity  he  based  his  defence  mainly  on  the
interests  of  Prussia  and  on  our  obligation  of  defending  her.
Prussia,  of  all  European  Powers,  was  the  one  who  could  be  the
most  useful  ally  to  England.  She  had  already  done  us  a  good
service  by  breaking  the  French  ascendency  in  Holland,  and  we
were  bound  to  her,  by  a  close  defensive  alliance,  which  was  the
best  guarantee  of  the  future  security  of  Europe.  The  events
that  were  taking  place  were  very  dangerous  to  her.  The  Turk-
ish Empire  is  of  great  weight  in  the  general  scale  of  European
Powers,  and  if  that  Empire  is  diminished  or  destroyed,  or  even
rendered  unstable  and  precarious,  the  situation  of  Prussia  would
be  seriously  affected,  and  so  far  from  concurring  with  England
in  protecting  the  Dutch  frontier,  and  in  general  the  existing
European  system,  she  would  be  obliged  to  concentrate  all  her
efforts  on  the  defence  of  her  own  frontiers.  Nor  would  the
danger  and  diminution  of  Prussia  be  the  sole  consequence.
*  Would  any  man  imagine  that  the  aggrandisement  of  Russia
would  not  materially  affect  the  disposition  of  other  Powers —
that  it  might  not  produce  an  alteration  in  Poland,  highly  danger-
ous to  Prussia  ?  ...  If  a  powerful  and  ambitious  neighbour
were  suffered  to  establish  hcn-sclf  upon  the  very  frontiers  of
Prussia,  what  safety  was  there  for  Poland ;  what  safety  for
Denmark,  or  what  for  Sweden,  whon  Prussia  shall  be  no  longer
in  a  condition  to  assist  them  ?  The  safety  of  all  Europe  might
afterwards  be  endangered.'  'Many  articles,  the  materials  of
iii!iMiir;iffuro, W(; rocoivcd from Kussia,  but of  tliose articles

CH.  XIX.  THE  RUSSIAN  ARMAMENT.  287

many  could  be  obtained  from  other  countries,  from  Poland  for
instance,  and  therefore  we  had  a  commercial  interest  in  cultivat-
ing a  trade  with  Poland,  and  preventing  Russia  from  obtaining
such  a  decided  command  of  the  articles  we  wanted  as  to  give
or  withhold  them  at  her  pleasure.'  *

These  allusions  to  the  danger  of  Poland,  coupled  with  the
fact  that  a  few  years  later  the  final  dismemberment  of  that
unhappy  kingdom  was  actually  accomplished,  have  been  some-
times cited  as  proofs  of  the  prescience  of  Pitt,  but  there  is  not,
I  think,  any  sufficient  reason  for  believing  that  the  political
security  of  Poland  entered  into  the  motives  of  his  policy,  though
he  did  undoubtedly  consider  the  importance  of  her  obtaining  a
vent  for  her  commerce  through  the  Black  Sea.  Nor  is  there
the  smallest  ground  for  believing  that  if  Oczakow  had  remained
a  Turkish  fortress,  Turkey  would  have  had  either  the  power
or  the  disposition  to  prevent  the  final  partition.  A  conflict
between  Russia  and  Prussia  might  no  doubt  have  retarded
it,  but  even  then  it  would  probably  have  been  carried  out  at
the  peace,  to  furnish  an  indemnity  for  the  expenses  of  the
war.^

It  soon,  however,  appeared  that  the  Opposition  were  prepared
to  resist  with  all  their  energies  the  anti-Russian  policy  of  Pitt,
and  that  they  were  likely  to  find  a  large  amount  of  support  in
the  country.  The  interest  in  Oczakow  and  in  the  barren  strip
of  land  that  lies  between  the  Bog  and  the  Dniester,  has  long
since  passed  away;  but  these  debates  have  even  now  a  real
importance,  for  they  bring  us  to  the  source  of  that  Eastern
question  which  is  still  one  of  the  gravest  cares  of  Western
statesmen.  Fox  and  his  followers  objected  in  the  first  place
to  an  armament  based  on  the  scanty  knowledge  which  was
furnished  to  the  House.  The  King  had  the  undoubted  pre-
rogative of  declaring  war;  but  Parliament  had  an  equally  un-
doubted check  upon  that  prerogative  in  its  right  of  withholding
supplies.  If,  then,  Parliament  was  asked  to  raise  the  navy  to  a
war  footing,  it  had  surely  a  right  to  demand  some  fuller  account
than  had  been  vouchsafed,  of  the  proposals  of  Russia ;  some
real  means  of  judging  how  far  a  war  which  was  manifestly  con-

"  Pari.  Hist.  xxix.  r)2-55,  70-75.

*  Sec  the  remarks  of  Lord  llus  sell,  Life  of  Fosr,  ii.  208.

288 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cu.  xix,

templated  was  becoming  necessary.  All  that  was  known  was
that  England  was  insisting  on  the  surrender  by  Russia  of
Oczakow  and  its  district,  and  this  demand  appeared  to  Fox  in
the  highest  degree  unjust  and  impolitic.  It  was  unjust,  because
Russia  had  not  been  the  aggressor  in  the  war,  and  because  in
spite  of  her  great  successes  she  was  understood  to  have  con-
sented to  concessions  which  displayed  her  signal  moderation.
It  was  impolitic  ;  for  the  only  result  of  an  expensive  and  danger-
ous war  would  be  to  alienate,  perhaps  for  ever,  a  most  valuable
ally  without  obtaining  any  object  in  which  England  had  a
real  interest.  Russia  was  the  natural  ally  of  England.  She
was  the  one  considerable  maritime  Power  who  was  likely
to  help  her.  She  was  in  a  great  part  of  Europe  the  most
serious  counterpoise  to  the  ascendency  of  France.  She  was
one  of  the  nations  with  which  England  had  the  closest  and
most  profitable  connection.  Though  the  commercial  treaty
had  not  been  renewed,  our  annual  exports  to  Russia  were  still
about  400,000^.,  and  our  annual  imports  from  Russia  about
2,500,000Z.  These  imports  consisted  chiefly  of  implements  of  war,
naval  stores,  and  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  and  above  three-
fourths  of  the  Russian  trade  with  England  was  carried  on  in
English  bottoms.  It  was  impossible,  therefore,  for  England  to
distress  the  trade  of  Russia  without  distressing  herself  in  a
much  higher  degree  ;  and  '  so  far  from  wishing  to  go  to  war
with  her,  we  ought  rather  to  wish  her  success  in  those  quarters
from  which  the  Turks  have  always  excluded  us,  at  least  for  the
last  fifty  years,  and  where  the  French  enjoyed  an  almost  com-
plete monopoly.'

And  what  had  England  to  gain  by  this  policy  ?  Of  all  the
countries  in  Europe,  Turkey  was  the  one  with  which  she  had
least  connection.  Of  all  the  seas  in  the  world  the  Black  Sea
was  probably  the  only  one  to  wliich  English  ships  never  pene-
trated. In  what  way  could  English  interests,  or  English  power,
be  affected  by  the  acquisition  by  Russia  of  a  fortress  on  the
Dniester  and  a  strip  of  biarren  land  along  the  northern  shore  of
the  J3]ack  Sea  ?  A  Russian  conquest  of  Constantinople  was  too
distant  and  too  doubtful  to  be  seriously  contemplated.  If  it
ever  became  imminent,  it  would  be  resisted  by  the  Mediter-
ranean Powers,  whose  interests  would  be  affected  much  more

CH.  XIX.  CASE OF THE OPPOSITIOIT.  289

directly  than  tliose  of  England.  If  it  were  ever  accomplislied,
it  would  almost  certainly  be  followed  by  a  division  of  the
Russian  Empire,  for  all  past  history  tended  to  prove  the  im-
possibility of  a  territory  extending  from  Kamtchatka  to  the
Mediterranean  being  held  together  under  a  single  government.

And  even  if  these  predictions  proved  false,  was  it  certain  that
Russian  progress  would  be  an  evil  to  England  ?  At  present
France  and  Spain  were  the  two  great  maritime  Powers  of
the  Mediterranean.  They  had  almost  always  been  hostile  to
England,  and  in  the  last  war  they  had  effectually  excluded  her
from  that  sea.  Was,  then,  the  intervention  of  a  third  naval
Power,  which  was  usually  friendly  to  England  and  hostile  to
France,  so  gi-eat  an  evil  ?  The  assertion  that  we  were  bound
by  the  spirit  of  our  defensive  alliance  with  Prussia  to  prevent
Russia  from  obtaining  Oczakow  from  the  Turks,  was  denounced
as  in  the  highest  degree  dangerous  and  absurd.  If  defensive
treaties  were  construed  in  such  a  manner,  they  would  have  all
the  evils  of  offensive  ones,  and  they  would  involve  us  in  every
quarrel  in  Europe.  We  bound  ourselves  only,  to  furnish  assist-
tance  to  Prussia  if  she  were  attacked.  She  had  not  been
attacked.  She  was  at  perfect  peace.  She  was  absolutely  un-
menaced.  It  was  doubtful  whether  the  new  acquisition  of  Russia
could  under  any  circumstances  be  injurious  to  her,  and  it  was
preposterous  to  maintain  that  it  was  the  duty  of  England  to  pre-
vent any  other  nation  from  acquiring  any  territory  which  might
possibly,  in  some  future  war,  be  made  use  of  against  Prussia.
That  England,  like  other  great  nations,  was  bound  to  attend  to
the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,  was  very  true ;  but  could  any
reasonable  man  maintain  that,  if  this  balance  was  not  deranged
when  Prussia  obtained  the  great  province  of  Silesia  lying  in
the  very  heart  of  Europe,  it  was  likely  to  be  disturbed  because
Russia  obtained  a  fortress  on  the  Dniester,  and  a  tract  of  almost
uninhabited  territory  along  the  remote  shores  of  the  Euxine  ?

The  conduct  of  Fox  during  the  American  War,  and  still  more
his  speeches  during  the  great  French  War,  make  it  impossible  to
acquit  him  of  the  most  serious  charge  of  employing  foreign
politics  and  great  national  disasters  for  purely  party  purposes
He  had,  however,  loyally  supported  the  Government  when  they

VOL.  V.  U

290  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

were  appeasing  tlie  dissensions  in  Holland  and  when  tliey  were
seeking  redress  for  tlie  Spanisli  outrage  in  Nootka  Sound ;  and
in  liis  opposition  to  tlie  present  Russian  policy  of  Pitt  lie
faithfully  represented  the  public  opinion  of  England.  Burke,
who  was  now  rapidly  diverging  from  him  on  the  question  of
the  French  Revolution,  and  w^ho  had  a  corresponding  leaning
towards  Pitt,  spoke  vehemently  and  eloquently  against  the
Russian  armament.  '  Considering  the  Turkish  Empire  as  any
part  of  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,'  he  said,  '  was  new.'
TUe  Turks  were  an  essentially  Asiatic  people,  who  completely
isolated  themselves  from  European  affairs,  and  'the  Minister
and  the  policy  which  should  give  them  any  weight  in  Europe
would  deserve  all  the  bans  and  curses  of  posterity.'  For  his
own  part,  he  confessed  that  he  had  seen  with  horror  the  beauti-
ful countries  that  bordered  on  the  Danube  given  back  by  the
Emperor  to  devastation  and  ruin.  '  Are  we,'  he  asked,  '  now
going  to  vote  the  blood  and  treasure  of  our  countrymen  to
enforce  similar  cruel  and  inhuman  policy  ? '  The  extension  of
the  power  and  territory,  and  the  direction  of  the  energies  of
Russia  towards  the  south  was  not  a  danger,  but  a  safeguard  to
Prussia;  and  if  she  ever  conquered  the  Chersonese,  its  settle-
ment would  abundantly  occupy  her  for  ten  or  twenty  years.
It  was  impossible  to  say  where  the  new  policy  might  end.  It
might  lead  to  an  expenditure  as  great  as  the  American  War.
The  King  of  Prussia  having  thought  fit  to  consider  the  Turks
as  useful  to  maintain  his  power,  we  might  be  asked  to  introduce
them  into  Poland  and  the  heart  of  Europe.  That  so  wise  a
man  as  Pitt  should  endeavour  on  such  slight  and  frivolous
grounds  to  commit  the  country  to  a  policy  of  unlimited  adven-
ture, sacrificing  the  friendship  of  one  of  our  most  useful  allies,
and  casting  to  the  wind  the  foreign  policy  of  his  own  father,
appeared  to  Burke  the  most  extraordinary  event  that  had  taken
place  in  Parliament  since  he  had  sat  within  its  walls.

Tlie  question  was  brought  before  the  House  of  Commons,
in  different  forms,  no  less  than  four  times.  The  Government
majorities  varied  from  ninety-four  to  eighty;  but,  large  as
they  were,  they  were  much  below  the  normal  figures  in  party
divisions,  and  it  was  impossible  to  mistake  the  preponderance  of
iibility  and  of  ind('[iendent  opinion  on  the  side  of  the  Opposition.

OH.  XIX.  ATTITUDE OF THE rOWERS.  291

lu  the  confidential  letters  of  the  Ministers  it  was  fully  admitted
that  the  armament  and  the  prospect  of  a  war  with  Russia  were
profoundly  unpopular,  and  all  the  news  that  arrived  from  the
Continent  was  discouraging.  Prussia,  alone  of  the  three  allies,
was  eager  for  a  war,  and  it  soon  became  plain  that  Holland
would  take  no  part  in  it.^  Like  England,  she  was  governed,
not  by  a  despotic  sovereign,  but  by  the  will  of  a  free,  com-
mercial, and  pacific  people,  and  the  Dutch  Ministers  maintained
that  it  could  be  of  no  possible  consequence  to  Holland  whether
Oczakow  belonged  to  the  Russians  or  the  Turks,  and  that  it  was
absurd  to  contend  that  their  defensive  alliance  with  Prussia
required  them  to  join  in  an  unprovoked  attack  upon  Russia.
Spain  was  now  again  on  good  terms  with  England,  and  Florida
Blanca,  who  directed  her  policy,  on  being  sounded  by  the
English  Envoy  at  Madrid,  expressed  a  strong  desire  to  see  peace
established  between  Russia  and  Turkey  on  the  basis  of  the
status  quo  as  it  existed  before  the  war,  and  he  directed  the
Spanish  Minister  at  St.  Petersburg  to  co-operate  with  the
English  Minister.-  It  soon  appeared,  however,  that  this  co-
operation did  not  extend  beyond  the  expression  of  an  opinion
and  a  wish,  and  the  Spanish  Minister  at  St.  Petersburg  dis-
tinctly informed  Whitworth  that  His  master  would  take  no  part
in  any  act  of  menace  or  hostility.^  The  Emperor,  to  the  great
disappointment  of  England,  leaned  strongly  towards  Russia,
and  there  was  much  reason  to  fear  that  he  would  actively
support  her  if  Prussia  entered  into  the  field.**  Sweden,  whose
co-operation  was  very  important,  leaned  to  the  same  side,  and
was  determined  not  to  reopen  her  quarrel  with  Russia  ;  -^  while
Denmark  oJBFered  to  mediate  on  the  basis  of  some  middle  course
described  as  '  a  limited  status  quo.'  ^  On  the  whole,  with
the  exception  of  the  Prussian  Minister,  Whitworth  found  no
cordial  co-operation  among  the  Ministers  at  St.  Petersburg.'^
Lord  Auckland,  whose  knowledge  of  the  Continent  was  very
great,  wrote  privately  to  Pitt,  urging  the  dangers  of  a  distant

'  Whitworth  to  Leeds,  March  11,  1791.
1791 ; Leeds  to  Jackson,  March  6,  *  Ibid.  April  8,  1791.

1791.  »  Ibid.  March  25,  1791,

2  Leeds to  Whitworth, Dec. 24,  «  Ibid.  April  8,  1791.

1790.  »  Ibid.  Feb.  25,  1791.

^  Whitworth to Leeds,  Jan. 14,

V  2

292  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xix.

war;  and  tlie  Dutch  admiral,  Kinsbergen,  who  was  well  ac-
quainted with  Oczakow  and  its  territory,  made  a  strong  repi'e-
sentation  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  proposed  motive  for  war.
Sebastopol,  he  said,  was  a  real  and  serious  danger  to  Turkey,  and
an  active  admiral  might  easily  burn  Constantinople  by  a  sudden
attack  from  that  port ;  but  Oczakow  had  but  little  real  import-
ance. Pitt  appears  to  have  been  much  struck  by  this  opinion,
and  it  contributed  to  shake  his  confidence  in  his  policy.^

The  situation  was  very  perplexing,  for  England  was  already
deeply  committed.  On  March  27,  the  day  before  the  King's  mes-
sage to  Parliament  had  been  delivered,  the  Duke  of  Leeds  wrote
to  Whitworth  informing  him  officially  that  Great  Britain  and
Prussia  had  resolved  upon  an  immediate  interference,  and  direct-
ing him  to  present  an  ultimatum  to  the  Russian  Government  and
to  insist  upon  an  answer  within  ten  days.  In  this  ultimatum,  the
two  Courts  state  the  gratification  with  which  they  had  seen  the
principle  of  the  status  quo  accepted  as  the  basis  of  pacification
in  the  peace  between  Austria  and  Turkey,  and  in  the  peace
between  Russia  and  Sweden,  and  they  added  that  any  accession
of  territory  by  Russia  on  the  side  of  Turkey  '  must  essentially
diminish  the  future  security  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  and  must
be  attended  with  consequences  highly  detrimental  to  the  in-
terests of  the  two  Courts  and  the  future  permanence  of  tran-
quillity in  Europe.'^

Pitt,  however,  saw  quickly  and  clearly  that  the  country  was
against  him,  and  he  resolved  to  recede.  The  Duke  of  Leeds,
Avho  was  most  closely  identified  with  the  recent  policy,  retired
from  office;^  Lord  Grenville,  the  Secretary  for  the  Home
Department,  wlio  had  boon  originally  the  only  minister  in  tlie
Cabinet  opposed  to  sending  a  fleet  to  the  Baltic,  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Foreign  Oflice ;  and  Dundas,  though  still  re-
taining the  Presidency  of  tlie  Indian  Board,  became  Home
Secretary.  A  messenger,  hastily  despatched  to  St.  Peters-
burg, was  in time to prevent Whitworth from laying the

'  Auckland Correxpmulrncr., ii.  Ix^en publishorl by the Camden

S81-3S3. See  Ion  pp.  3K7,  i{S,S.  Si)oict._y, and tliey contain several

*  Leeds  Lo  WhitworMi,  March  27,  iiil.ere.'Jting:  particulars  of  the  deli-
1791.  bcrations  oi the Ministers on thia

•  \\'\v.l>olUlcal  Memoran(la,^^\^('A  que.stion.
by  Mr.  t)scar  Browning,  have  lately

cn.  XIX.  PITT ACKNOWLKPGES HIS DEFEAT.  293

iiltimatnm  before  the  Empress  ;  and  Grenville  insfcrncted  Ewarc
to  inform  the  Prussian  ministers  that  although  the  strict  slatvs
quo  still  seemed  to  the  English  Cabinet  the  most  durable
basis  of  pacification,  the  manner  in  which  the  recent  Ad-
dress had  been  received  in  Parliament  and  in  the  country,
had  convinced  them  that  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,
to  attain  it.  The  King,  desirous  to  meet  the  wishes  of  his
people,  wished  to  find  a  middle  term,  which  might  attain  the
great  object  of  the  Allies,  '  the  future  security  of  Turkey,  and
the  maintenance  of  general  and  permanent  tranquillity.'  The
Danish  proposition  seemed  to  offer  such  an  opening,  and  Spain
had  been  making  overtures  in  the  same  line,  and  appeared  in-
clined, if  peace  could  be  established  on  some  middle  term,  to
join  in  guaranteeing  the  remaining  dominions  of  the  Porte.'

Pitt  himself,  in  a  letter  to  Ewart,  which  was  intended  to  be
brought  before  the  Prussian  Ministers,  stated  very  forcibly  and
frankly  the  motives  of  his  conduct.  *  No  one,'  he  wrote,  '  could
be  more  eagerly  bent  than  I  was  on  a  steady  adherence  to  the
line  which  we  had  at  first  proposed,  of  going  all  lengths  to  en-
force the  terms  of  the  strict  status  quo  ;  and  I  am  still  as  much
persuaded  as  ever  that  if  we  could  have  carried  the  support  of
the  country  with  us,  the  risk  and  expense  of  the  struggle,  even
if  Russia  had  not  submitted  without  a  struggle,  would  not  have
been  more  than  the  object  was  worth.  But,  notwithstanding
this  was  my  own  fixed  opinion,  I  saw  with  certainty  in  a  very
few  days  after  the  subject  was  first  discussed  in  Parliament,  that
the  prospect  of  obtaining  a  support  sufficient  to  carry  it  through
with  vigour  and  effect  was  absolutely  desperate.  .  .  .  From
what  I  know  of  the  sentiments  of  the  greatest  part  of  the
majority  and  of  many  of  the  warmest  friends  of  Govern-
ment, I  am  sure  that  if,  persisting  in  the  line  of  the  status  quo,
we  were  to  come  to  the  point  of  actually  calling  for  supplies  to
support  the  war,  and  were  to  state,  as  would  then  be  indispen-
sable, the  precise  ground  on  which  it  arose,  we  should  either
not  carry  such  a  question,  or  cany  it  only  by  so  weak  a  division
as  would  nearly  amount  to  a  defeat.  .  .  .  The  obvious  effect  of
our  persisting  would  have  been  to  risk  the  existence  of  the  pre-

»  Greuville  to  Ewart,  April  20,  1701.

294  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xix.

sent  Government,  and  with  it  the  whole  of  our  system  both  at
home  and  abroad.  The  personal  part  of  this  consideration  it
would  have  been  our  duty  to  overlook,  but  .  .  .  the  overthrow
of  our  system  here  .  .  .  must  have  shaken  the  whole  of  our
system  abroad.  It  is  not  difficult  to  foresee  what  must  have  been
the  consequence  to  Prussia  of  a  change  effected  by  an  opposition
to  the  very  measures  taken  in  concert  with  that  Court,  and  rest-
ing on  the  avowed  ground  of  our  present  system  of  alliance.  .  .  .
My  great  object  is  that  you  should  be  able  to  satisfy  the  King
of  Prussia  of  the  strong  necessity  under  which  we  have  acted,  and
that  we  really  had  no  other  choice,  with  a  view  either  to  his  in-
terests or  to  those  which  we  are  most  bound  to  consult  at  home,' '
The  determination  of  the  English  Government  was  received
at  Berlin  with  regret,  but  more  graciously  than  might  perhaps
have  been  expected.  The  King  of  Prussia  declared  himself  to
be  much  impressed  with  the  attitude  of  English  public  opinion,
but  he  was  extremely  desirous  that  if  the  Baltic  expedition  w^as
postponed,  England  should  at  least  send  a  squadron  to  the
Black  Sea.^  Whitworth  was,  perhaps,  not  a  very  skilful,  cer-
tainly at  this  time  not  a  conciliatory  or  a  successful  diploma-
tist ;  and  his  relations  with  the  Court  of  St.  Petersburg  were
very  strained.  The  Government  resolved,  without  removing  or
superseding  him,  to  send  out  a  new  envoy.  Fawkener  was
accordingly  sent  first  to  Berlin  and  then  to  St.  Petersburg,  to
endeavour  to  negotiate  a  peace.  He  was  instructed  to  abstain
from  all  language  of  menace,  but  to  attempt  to  induce  the
Empress  to  accept  some  one  of  several  proposed  modifications
of  the  original  demand.  It  was  suggested  that  the  Oczakow
district  should  be  made  neutral  and  a  barrier  between  Russia
and  Turkey  ;  or  that  it  should  be  added  to  Russia  on  the  condi-

'  Slanhojjo's  Life  of  J'Ut,  ii.  lir»,  wc  should  not  interfere  at  all  in  llie

116. I should add,  however, that  events of the Continent'  (Diaries

Lord  IMalmosbury  in  a  lellcr  to  the  avd  Corrasjwiidcnce  of  Lord  Malmest-

Duko  of  Portland  gives  a  somewliat  Imry,  ii.  441). The  PoUtwal  Memo-

dilTerent  view of the malter. He  randa, however, of the Duke of

hay.s: Mt  appear.s  very  clear  to  me,  Jjceds  show  tliat  Pitt,  in  opposition

from  Bome conlidcntial  conmiunica-  to  Lord  Gri-nvillc,  cordially  approved

tions  which  wore  niMdn  to  me,  lliat  of  scndino:  a fleet  to  the  Baltic,  but

Lord  Grenvillo  was  th<!  cause  of  Mr.  w.ns  alarmed  at  tlie  unpopularity  of

Pitt'B  givinf?  way,  and  that  he  acted,  t lie  measure.

rot  from  the  rea-son  which  wa.s given,  -'  Ewart to Crenville, April 30,

the nation's being against it, but  1701  : Fawkener to  Greuville,  May

from  it.s  being  his  lixed  opiiiicm  Dial  10,  171)1.

CH.  XIX.  CATHERINE AND FOX.  295

tion  tliat  no  towns  or  fortresses  should  be  established,  and  that
it  should  remain  uninhabited  ;  or  tliat  the  cession  should  be
confined  to  some  boundary  short  of  the  Dniester,  and  accom-
panied with  the  condition  that  the  fortress  of  Oczakow  should
be  demolished  and  that  no  new  fort  should  be  raised  ;  or,  finally,
that  the  cession  should  be  unrestricted  except  by  the  condition
that  it  should  not  extend  to,  or  interfere  with,  the  navigation  of
the  Dniester.

It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  Catherine  would  listen  to
no  such  restriction,  and  everything  contributed  to  encourage
her.  The  definitive  Peace  of  Sistova,  between  the  Emperor  and
Turkey,  had  not  yet  been  signed  ;  and  at  this  time  the  Emperor
was  strongly  supporting  Russia.  He  had  just  broken  off  the
Congress  by  his  unexpected  demand  for  old  Orsova  and  a
Croatian  frontier,  and  there  was  a  strong  probability  that  he
would  renew  the  war.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Turks  were
evidently  completely  broken,  and  in  July  1791  the  Russians
won  two  more  important  victories.  The  attitude  of  Sweden,
Denmark,  and  Holland  was  exceedingly  encouraging  to  the
Empress,  and  the  news  of  the  late  proceedings  in  England  and
of  the  abrupt  withdrawal  of  the  intended  ultimatum  convinced
her  that  there  was  little  serious  danger  from  that  quarter.

For  many  years  before  the  period  with  which  we  are  now
concerned,  Catherine  had  professed  a  kind  of  romantic  en-
thusiasm for  Fox.  She  had  placed  his  bust  in  her  palace  be-
tween the  busts  of  Demosthenes  and  Cicerc,  and  she  was
extremely  desirous  of  seeing  him  again  at  the  head  of  affairs.^
Fox  appears  to  have  to  a  considerable  extent  reciprocated  the
admiration,  and  a  very  grave  charge  relating  to  the  negotiations
about  Oczakow  was  afterwards  brought  against  him  by  Burke,
in  a  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Portland  which  was  published  with-
out the  consent  of  the  writer.  Burke  has  stated  that  Fox  at
this  time,  '  without  the  knowledge  and  participation  of  any
one  person  in  the  House  of  Commons  with  whom  he  was  bound
by  every  party  principle,  in  matters  of  delicacy  and  importance,
confidentially  to  communicate,  thought  proper  to  send  Mr.
Adair  as  his  representative  and  with  his  cipher  to  St.  Peters-
burg, there  to  frustrate  the  objects  for  which  the  minister  from

'  Malmcsbury's  Corrcsjiondcnce,  i.  Z2o  ;  Stanhope's  Z/^  (/A^^,  ii.  120.

296 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xix.

tlie  Crown  was  authorised  to  treat ; '  and  that  '  he  succeeded  in
this,  his  design,  and  did  actually  frustrate  the  King's  minister
in  some  of  the  objects  of  his  negotiation.' '

This  charge  was  reiterated  some  years  later  by  Bishop
Tomline,  who  stated  that  he  had  found  its  accuracy  '  attested
by  authentic  documents  among  Mr.  Pitt's  papers.'  ^  It  was,
however,  never  substantiated,  and  Adair,  whose  character  was
beyond  all  suspicion,  has  positively  denied  it,  and  has  at  the
same  time  clearly  explained  how  it  may  have  arisen.  It  is
quite  true  that  in  the  May  of  1791  he  made  a  journey  to  St.
Petersburg ;  that  he  received  some  letters  of  introduction  from
Fox  ;  .that  Fox  requested  him  to  send  back  to  England  all  the
news  that  he  could  gather,  and  that  he  recommended  him,  as  his
letters  were  likely  to  be  opened,  to  employ  a  cipher  which  had
been  used  by  Burgoyne  in  the  American  War.  But  it  is  also
true  that  Adair's  journey  was  undertaken  entirely  of  his  own
free  will  and  without  any  prompting  from  Fox ;  and  that  Fox
charged  him  with  no  message  whatever.  Adair,  not  very
judiciously,  held  conversations  with  Russian  Ministers  before
the  pending  dispute  had  been  settled,  on  the  advantages  of  a
future  Anglo-Russian  alliance,  but  he  spoke  to  them  altogether
from  himself,  and  without  any  instructions  from  Fox,  and  did
not  even  mention  these  conversations  to  Fox  upon  his  return.^
Nor  had  they  any  of  the  importance  that  has  been  ascribed  to
them.  The  Empress  was,  no  doubt,  glad  to  display  her  sym-
pathies by  showing  marked  favour  to  the  friend  of  Fox,*  but
before  Fawkener  had  left  England  she  had  received  from  her
ambassador  in  London  full  information  about  the  attitude  and
sentiments  of  the  Opposition,  about  the  tendencies  of  English
public  opinion,  and  about  the  great  difficulties  the  English
Minister  was  likely  to  encounter  in  Parliament  if  he  entered
into  war.'

The  truth  is  that  everything,  as  the  British  envoy  mourn-
fully said,  seemed  at  this  time  to  conspire  against  the  plans

> •  01)Horvations on  the ronflnot  .^8.3-387.

of  Hjo  JHiiority,'  Burke's Wor/cs,  vii.  ■*  fcjee  Stanhope's  Life  of  PUt,  ii.

221.  120.

^  Tomline's  Ufe  of  nu,  iii.  .SOt).  '-  Whitwoith  to  Grciivillc,  May  2,

»  S('c Ihf! letter of Sir Robert  17'J1.
Arhiir in Fox'a Corrcxjwndcnce, ii.

en.  XIX.  TRIUMPH OF  EUSSIA.  297

of  the  British  Government.  '  The  success  with  which  the
[Russian]  campaign  has  opened ;  the  vigorous  measures  which
appear  to  Le  carrying  on,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Danube  and
of  the  river  Cuban ;  the  perfect  concert  with  which  this  Court
has  acted  with  that  of  Vienna  in  a  scene  of  the  greatest  dupli-
city; the  nature  of  the  demands  made  by  the  Emperor;  the  break-
ing up  of  the  Congress  and  the  consequent  recommencement
of  hostilities,  the  blame  of  which  will  be  thrown  chiefly  upon  the
Turks;  the  rancorous  aversion  of  the  Empress  to  the  King  of
Prussia;  her  dislike  and  jealousy  of  England  ;  .  .  .  her  hope  of
perhaps  bringing  about  a  change  in  his  Majesty's  administra-
tion,' were  all  reasons  for  despondency.'  England,  at  last,
reduced  her  terms  to  merely  asking  a  promise  from  Russia  that
she  would  not  molest  the  navigation  of  the  Dniester,  but  in  the
meantime  the  Russians  opened  a  direct  negotiation  with  the
Porte,  and  an  agreement  was  made  on  the  basis  of  the  entire
cession  of  Oczakow  and  its  district  to  the  Dniester,  in  full  sove-
reignty, with  a  renewal  of  former  treaties.  No  stipulation  was
made  in  the  treaty  about  the  navigation  of  the  Dniester,  but
the  Empress  promised  of  her  own  free  will  that  she  would  not
interfere  with  it.  The  preliminaries  of  this  peace  were  signed
at  Galatz  on  August  1 1 .  The  definitive  peace  was  concluded  at
Jassy  on  Januaiy  9,  1792.

The  death  of  Potemkin,  which  took  place  near  Jassy,  rather
more  than  two  months  before  the  definitive  peace,  threw  a  dai'k
shadow  over  the  mind  of  Catherine,  but  politically  her  triumph
was  very  great.  She  had  completely  baffled  both  England  and
Prussia,  had  made  peace  on  her  own  terms  and  had  made  it
without  the  intervention  of  any  foreign  Power.  This  was  the
first  great  failure  in  the  administration  of  Pitt,  and  it  broke  the
spell  of  a  long  course  of  brilliant  and  uninterrupted  triumphs.
Russia  was  confirmed  in  her  ascendency  on  the  Euxine ;  neither
Turkey,  nor  Sweden,  nor  the  Emperor,  were  drawn  into  the
defensive  system ;  and  the  alliance  between  England  and
Prussia,  on  which  Pitt  had  placed  his  chief  hope  for  the  secu-
rity of  Europe,  came  practically  to  an  end.  There  was  no
open  breach,  but  confidence  and  co-operation  disappeared.  The
Prussian  King  and  Ministers  were  extremely  discontented  at
■  Fawkener  to  Grenville,  July  5,  1791.

298  ENGLAND IN TIIC EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cri.  xix.

tlie  course  whicli  European  politics  liad  lately  taken.  Though
the  youngest  of  the  Great  Powers,  Prussia,  they  said,  had  in  the
last  few  years  three  times  interposed,  at  serious  risk  and  by
considerable  military  demonstrations,  to  maintain  the  equilibrium
of  Europe.  She  had  put  down  the  revolution  in  Holland  at  the
risk  of  a  war  with  France.  She  had  enforced  by  threats  the
neutrality  of  Denmark  at  the  risk  of  a  war  with  Russia.  She
had  produced  a  peace  between  the  Emperor  and  Turkey  by
massing  her  troops  on  the  Austrian  frontier.  On  each  of  these
occasions  a  great  service  had  been  rendered,  and  on  each  of  them
heavy  expenses  had  been  incurred,  yet  Prussia  had  gained  abso-
lutely nothing  for  herself.  England  was  accused  at  Berlin  of
having  defeated  the  Prussian  projects  for  acquiring  Dantzig  and
Thorn  and  for  expelling  Austria  from  Galicia  and  from  Flanders,
and  the  final  triumph  of  Bussia  was  mainly  due  to  the  attitude
of  English  parties  and  of  the  English  Government.  For  some
months  Prussia  and  Austria  had  been  gravitating  towards  each
other.  English  diplomacy,  desiring  to  isolate  Russia,  had  en-
couraged the  tendency,  and  the  result  was  a  close  alliance  which
produced  new  political  combinations  in  which  England  had  no
part,  and,  among  other  consequences,  led  to  the  invasion  of
France.

It  is  difficult  even  now  to  say  whether  the  Ministry  of  Pitt
can  be  reasonably  blamed  on  account  of  the  somewhat  humilia-
ting rebuff  which  it  had  experienced.  In  the  long  and  intricate
course  of  foreign  policy  which  I  have  described,  and  which  ex-
tended far  beyond  the  terms  of  a  defensive  alliance,  more  than
one  step  was  taken  of  which  the  expediency  may  be  contested  ;
but  in  the  last  stage,  Pitt  seems  to  me  to  have  acted  the  part  of
a  wise  and  courageous  statesman  in  promptly  recognising,  and
frankly  acknowledging  the  facts  of  tlie  case.  The  collapse  of
Turkish  resistance,  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  Emperor,  and
llie  decisive  condemnation  by  English  public  opinion  of  a  war
lor  the  recovery  of  Oczakow,  made  such  a  policy  extremely
(l;ingerous;  and  considering  the  dispositions  and  designs  of
i'russia,  a  war  with  Russia  would  have  almost  certainly  extended
to  Austria  and  Poland.  Subsequent  events  have  not  shown
that  Oczakow  possessed  such  European  importance  as  to  justify
these  risks;  and  although  the  close  alliance  between  England

CH.  XIX.  IMrorvTAN'CE OF THE I'EACE.  299

and  Prussia  liad  been  on  the  whole  successful,  it  had  already  led
to  great  dangers,  and  would  probably  have  led  to  still  greater
in  the  following  year.  The  French  Revolution  was  now  the
main  fact  which  began  to  colour  and  direct  all  the  policy  of
Europe,  and  in  little  more  than  a  year  after  the  signature  of  the
Peace  of  Jassy  it  involved  Eiigland  in  a  struggle  which  was  the
most  desperate  and  dangerous  in  her  whole  history.  It  can
scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  conditions  of  that  struggle  would
have  been  materially,  perhaps  fatally,  modified  if  the  events  of
1793  had  found  England  already  trammelled  and  exhausted
by  a  European  war.

300  ENGLA2JD  IN  THE -EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CHAPTER  XX.

There  are  no  pages  in  liistoiy  more  instructive,  and  tliere  are
few  which  are  more  humiliating  and  depressing,  than  those
which  record  the  judgments  of  great  thinkers  and  politicians
on  the  verge  of  the  changes  that  have  most  profoundly  affected
the  destiny  of  mankind.  The  triumph  of  Christianity  in  the
Roman  Empire,  and  the  great  religious  reformation  of  the
sixteenth  century,  had  both  been  prepared  by  influences  that
had  interacted  and  co-operated  through  many  generations,  yet
each  of  them  appears  to  have  fallen  upon  the  governing  classes
of  Europe  almost  as  a  surprise.  The  French  Revolution,  at
which  we  are  now  arrived,  was  only  inferior  to  these  in  its
magnitude  and  its  significance,  and  I  propose  to  devote  the  pre-
sent chapter  to  a  brief  examination  of  the  causes  that  produced
it,  the  degree  in  which  it  was  predicted,  and  the  manner  in
which  it  was  judged.  Such  an  examination  can  hardly  be
regarded  altogether  as  a  digression,  for  the  French  Revolution
influenced  English  history  in  the  latter  years  of  the  eighteenth
century  more  profoundly  than  any  other  single  event.  It  gave
a  completely  new  direction  and  character  to  the  Ministry  of
l*itt;  it  determined  absolutely,  for  nearly  a  generation,  the
course  of  English  foreign  policy ;  and  while  it  was  itself  largely
influenced  by  political  speculations  of  English  origin,  it  in  its
turn  reacted  most  powerfully  on  the  internal  policy,  and  on  the
modes  of  political  thought  prevailing  in  England.

Of  its  antecedents  or  causes  the  literary  and  philosophical
were  those  which  attracted  most  attention.  Tlicre  is  no  more
Htriking  picture  in  intellectual  history  than  is  furnished  by  that
great  literature  which  arose  amid  the  profound  political  and
moral  decrepitude  of  the  reign  of  Lewis  XV.,  filling  Europe  with
its  splendour  and  its  inlluencc  ;  and  it  was  impossible  for  the
most  superficial  observer  to  overlook  the  imnionse  difference  of

CH.  XX.  VOLTAIRE AND MONTESQUIEU.  301

tendency  and  character  that  separated  it  from  the  French
literature  of  the  seventeenth  century.  A  few  writers  of  the
earlier  period  were,  no  doubt,  partial  exceptions.  The  '  Method '
of  Descartes,  the  '  Telemachus  '  of  Fenelon,  above  all  the  critical
writings  of  Bayle,  threw  out  ideas  which  appeared  to  belong  to
a  later  age,  but  in  general  there  runs  through  the  great  French
literature  of  the  seventeenth  century  a  profound  content  with
the  existing  order  in  Church  and  State,  an  entire  absence  of
the  spirit  of  disquiet,  scepticism,  and  innovation  that  leads  to
organic  change.  But  from  the  death  of  Lewis  XIV.  a  complete
change  of  spirit  may  be  detected.  The  mingled  austerity  and
hypocrisy  of  the  latter  days  of  Lewis  XIV.  had  produced  a
reaction  very  similar  to  that  which  followed  the  Commonwealth
in  England ;  but  it  was  supported  by  men  of  far  higher  in-
tellect and  of  far  loftier  aims.  At  this  time  Voltaire  began
that  wonderful  career,  unparalleled  in  its  brilliancy  and  versa-
tility, almost  unparalleled  in  the  deep  contrasts  of  its  good  and
evil.  The  '  OEdipus,'  which  was  his  first  tragedy,  was  repre-
sented in  1718,  and  it  contained  two  famous  lines  which  clearly
foreshadowed  the  mission  of  his  life.'  The  '  Epistle  to  Urania,'
which  was  written,  though  not  published,  before  Voltaire  visited
England,  already  expressed  in  the  clearest  and  fullest  form  botli
his  total  disbelief  in  the  Christian  faith  and  his  firm  and
genuine  theism.  The  '  Persian  Letters '  of  Moutesquieu,  which
were  published  in  1721,  contained  the  germ  of  a  great  part  of
the  characteristic  speculation  of  the  century,  and  the  remark-
able junction  of  the  French  and  English  intellect  which  took
place  in  the  next  few  years,  and  which  was  admirably  repre-
sented by  Voltaire's  '  Letters  on  the  English,'  strengthened  the
new  tendencies.  Montesquieu  spent  two  and  Voltaire  nearly
three  years  in  England,  and  the  effects  of  these  visits  may  be
Traced  through  the  whole  of  their  later  lives.  The  philosophies
of  Bacon,  Newton,  and  Locke ;  the  writings  of  the  English
deists;  English  notions  of  liberty;  English  canons  of  criticism,
Avere  soon  made  familiar  to  the  French  public,  and  up  to  the
very  eve  of  the  Revolution  nearly  all  the  best  works  of  Eno-lish
literature  were  translated  and  studied.

'  •  Nos  pretres  ne  sont  pas  ce  qu'un  vain  penple  pense,
Notre  crcdulitc  liiil  luute  leur  scieuce.'

302 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xx.

It  was  soon  seen  tliat  men  of  letters  were  rising  to  a  new
influence  and  importance  in  France,  but  until  the  middle  of  the
century  had  passed  they  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  openly  and
systematically  hostile  to  the  Church.  Religious  scepticism  had
indeed  already  spread  widely  through  Paris  society.^  A  church
in  which  Dubois  was  a  cardinal,  and  was  unanimously  elected
by  the  Bishops  president  of  their  general  assembly,^  neither  de-
served nor  obtained  respect,  and  in  all  the  many  departments  of
knowledge  that  were  now  explored  a  new  spirit  of  independence
was  displayed,  but  as  yet  literary  activity  in  France  was  turned
chiefly  to  imaginative  literature  or  to  departments  of  serious
literature  very  remote  from  theological  or  political  revolution.
The  two  great  works  of  Montesquieu — '  The  Causes  of  the
Decline  of  the  Roman  Republic,'  which  appeared  in  1734,  and
'  The  Spirit  of  the  Laws,'  which  appeared  in  1748 — were  books
to  teach  the  teachers,  but  certainly  not  to  inflame  the  passions
of  men  ;  and  most  of  the  writings  of  Voltaire  during  the  same
period  could  have  given  little  or  no  legitimate  offence.  In
addition  to  his  '  Letters  on  the  English '  it  was  during  these
years  that  he  produced  his  '  Henriade '  and  several  of  his  other
poems,  several  of  his  noblest  dramas,  his  popular  exposition  of
the  philosophy  of  Newton,  and  his  '  History  of  Charles  XII.,'  and
at  this  time  also  he  composed,  wholly  or  in  part,  though  he  did
not  yet  publish,  his  '  History  of  Lewis  XIV.,'  his  '  History  of
Manners,'  and  that  shameful  work  of  genius,  his '  Pucelle.'  During
the  fifteen  fruitful  and  happy  years  fj-om  1734  to  1749,  which  he
spent  chiefly  at  Cirey  with  Madame  du  Chatelet,  he  was  largely
occupied  with  pursuits  that  were  exceedingly  remote  from  revolu-
tion. One  of  his  great  objects  was  to  introduce  into  France  the
English  habit  of  burying  the  dead  outside  the  limits  of  towns  and
away  from  centres  of  population.  Another  was  to  diff'use  the
practice  of  inoculation.  He  wrote  a  scientific  memoir  on  the
nature  of  fire,  and  another  on  the  motive  forces,  and  he  occupied
liimsolf  keenly  with  geometry,  and  with  a  comparison  of  the
philosophies  of  Descartes,  Newton,  Leibnitz,  and  Euler.^

He  had  already  found  how  impossible  it  was  for  a  man  of
letters  to  live  unmolested  in  France. Immediately  after  the

'  Rocquain,-  JJEn/rrU Jd'-rohdinn.  -  Ibid.

va'iri;  avant  la  Ji.rro/i/li<iii,  ip.  ?,:i,'64..  "  y.-iigcy,  Zrt  Physiqvc  ile  Voltaire

CH.  XX.  VOLTAIRE AND THE GOVERKMENT.  303

death  of  Lewis  XIV.  he  had  been  confined  for  nearly  eleven
months  in  the  Bastille  on  a  false  charge  of  having  written
a  satire  on  the  memory  of  that  prince.  In  1725.  having
attempted  to  resent  an  outrageous  insult  by  the  Chevalier  de
liohan  Chabot,  he  was  again  arbitrarily  imprisoned  and  then
exiled  from  France.  On  his  return  he  was  refused  permission
to  print  his  tragedy  on  '  The  Death  of  Cassar,'  because  he  had
treated  Brutus  with  respect.  He  was  exiled  from  Paris  because
in  his  '  Elegy  on  the  Death  of  Lecouvreur  '  he  had  censured  the
bigotry  which,  on  account  of  her  profession,  denied  that  great
actress  Christian  burial.  His  '  Letters  on  the  English,'  though
a  most  temperate  and  truthful  description  of  the  tendencies  of
English  thought  and  character,  were  burnt  by  the  public  execu-
tioner. His  '  History  of  Charles  XII.'  was  printed  by  per-
mission, but  the  permission  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  and  he
was  obliged  to  go  to  Holland  to  print  his  '  Elements  of  the
Philosophy  of  Newton,'  as  the  French  Government  refused
permission  to  print  a  work  which  was  opposed  to  the  system  of
Descai'tes.  The  only  liberty  for  which  he  at  this  time  really
cared,  was  a  very  moderate  amount  of  liberty  of  thought  and
writing,  and  he  was  extremely  anxious  to  place  himself  under
the  protection  and  patronage  of  the  Court.  In  consequence  of
the  opera  ballet  of  '  The  Princess  of  Navarre,'  which  was  played
before  the  King,  and  through  the  favour  of  Madame  de  Pompa-
dour, he  for  a  time  succeeded  ;  he  was  made  Gentleman  of  the
Court  and  historiographer  to  the  King,  and  was  shortly  after
elected  to  a  seat  in  the  French  Academy,  purchasing  his  success
by  a  shameful  profession  of  his  attachment  to  the  Catholic  faith
and  to  the  Jesuits.  He  was  profuse  in  his  flatteries  to  the  King
and  the  King's  mistresses,  and  he  dedicated  his  '  Tragedy  of
Mahomet '  to  Pope  Benedict  XIV.  and  received  from  the  Pope  ?
complimentary  letter.

He  soon,  however,  fell  into  disfavour  with  the  French  Court.
Voltaire  indeed  could  flatter  grossly  ;  he  could  lie  shamelessly  ;
he  had  no  scruples  in  bafiling  tyrannical  laws  by  disavowing  or
denying  his  works,  and  in  professing  opinions  which  he  did  not
hold,  with  all  the  solemnities  of  a  religion  which  he  heartily
despised ;  but  a  life  of  continued  hypocrisy  and  reticence  was
impossible  to  his  nature. To  think  and  write  freely ;  to  utter

304  ENGLAND IN TEE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  ;tx.

every  thouglit  tliat  passed  tlirougli  tlie  most  fertile,  brilliant,
petulant,  and  capricious  of  human  brains,  was  with  him  an  im-
perative need,  and  he  soon  found  that  he  could  only  attain  it  in
a  foreign  land.  After  his  journey  to  Berlin  and  his  famous
quarrel  with  Frederick,  he  had  a  long  period  of  hesitation,  but
he  at  last  resolved  to  retire  to  Switzerland.  He  was  then  past
sixty,  but  his  energies  were  as  powerful  and  his  intellect  was  as
youthful  and  as  buoyant  as  when  he  had  visited  England.  He
had  now  wealth  and  a  real  independence,  and,  casting  aside
nearly  all  other  pleasures  and  ambitions,  he  threw  himself  into
the  task  of  his  life  with  an  industry  and  a  fertility  that  have
scarcely  ever  been  equalled.  To  this  period  belong  many  of  those
Avorks  which  are  among  the  most  enduring  monuments  of  French
literature.  To  this  period  belong  the  noble  efforts  in  favour  of
the  family  of  the  murdered  Galas  and  of  many  other  victims  of
ecclesiastical  or  judicial  persecution,  which  constitute  the  chief
moral  glory  of  his  life ; '  and  to  this  period  also  belong  his
systematic  and  persistent  attacks  upon  the  Christian  faith.  He
assailed  it  with  the  most  fiery  impetuosity  for  nearly  twenty
years ;  sometimes  by  serious  arguinent  and  in  works  of  con-
siderable value,  but  chiefly  by  showers  of  anonymous  pamphlets,
lampoons,  dialogues,  parodies,  or  letters,  which  were  printed  for
the  most  part  under  false  names  and  in  foreign  printing  presses,
but  were  eagerly  bought  and  read  throughout  France.  At  the
same  time  he  maintained  a  vast  correspondence  with  the  leading
writers  in  Paris,  and  it  was  his  main  object  to  combine  them  in  a
great  and  systematic  attempt  to  sap  the  creed,  which  he  believed
to  be  the  root  of  the  superstition  and  the  intolerance  of  France.
French  literature  had  never  been  so  brilliant  as  in  the  second
half  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Biilfon,  Diderot,  D'Alembert,
Rousseau,  Duclos,  Condillac,  Helvetius,  Holbach,  Raynal,  Con-
dorcet,  Mably,  and  many  others  adorned  it,  and  the  'Encyclo-
pujdia,'  which  was  begun  in  1 751  under  the  direction  of  Diderot,
became  the  focus  of  an  intcllrcl  ii;il  inllnence  which  has  rarely
been  orjualled.  The  name  and  idea  were  taken  from  a  work
published  by  Ephraim  Chambers  in  Dublin,  in  1728.  A  noble
preliminary  discourse  was  written  by  D'Alembert ;  and  all  the

'  Kce  a  vory  full  find  excellent  account  of  these  cdorts  in Jlr.  Partuu's
Lifeuf  Vol/zn/r,  ii.  :ir)2-l07.

cii.  XX.  ANTI- CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE.  305

best  pens  in  Franco  were  enlisted  in  the  enterprise,  which  was
constantly  encouraged  and  largely  assisted  by  Voltaire.  Twice
it  was  suppressed  by  authority,  but  the  interdict  was  again
raised.  Popular  favour  now  ran  with  an  irresistible  force  in
favour  of  the  philosophers,  and  the  work  was  brought  to  its
conclusion  in  1771.

This  is  not  the  place  to  estimate  the  immense  service  ren-
dered by  the  French  writers  of  this  time  to  physical  science,  to
jurisprudence,  to  political  economy,  to  nearly  every  branch  of
human  knowledge.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  mention  that  almost
the  whole  of  this  literature  was  opposed  to  the  recognised
religion  of  the  country,  though  the  writers  differed  greatly
both  in  the  degree  of  their  hostility  and  in  their  own  posi-
tive opinions.  Voltaire  and  Rousseau  were  firm  believers  in
the  truths  of  natural  religion,  and  Voltaire,  while  incessantly
attacking  revealed  religion  with  every  weapon  of  argument,
eloquence,  invective,  ridicule,  and  buffoonery,  has  left  many
admirable  pages  in  defence  of  the  existence  of  God,  the  freedom
of  the  will,  the  eternal  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,
and  the  absolute  necessity  of  religious  belief  to  the  well-being
of  society.  But  Holbach,  Diderot,  and  their  followers,  were
simple  atheists,  and  atheism  had  never  been  advocated  so
boldly  or  unequivocally  as  in  France  between  1758  and  177G.
The  treatise  of  Helvetius  on  '  Mind,'  which  appeared  in  1758,
and  which  traced  the  whole  superiority  of  man  over  the  ani-
mals to  the  structure  of  the  human  hand,  and  the  '  System  of
Nature'  by  Holbach,  which  appeared  in  1770,  and  which  was
perhaps  the  most  elaborate  defence  of  atheism  ever  published,
were  welcomed  with  enthusiasm  ;  a  system  of  metaphysics  which
reduced  all  knowledge  to  the  impressions  of  the  senses,  and  a
passion  for  physical  science  which  directed  attention  mainly  to
the  external  world,  strengthened  the  tendency,  and  there  is
overwhelming  evidence  that  at  the  eve  of  the  Revolution  almost
all  the  guiding  intellects  and  the  immense  majority  of  the
educated  classes  of  France,  however  they  might  be  divided  on
the  question  of  atheism  or  deism,  were  total  disbelievers  in  the
Church  which  was  alone  recognised  by  law,  and  which  was
endowed  with  vast  power,  privileges,  and  wealth.  There  were
etill,  indeed,  men  of  splendid  talents  in  its  ranks,  but  they  were

VOL.  V.  X

306  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xx.

men  wlio  liad  embraced  or  been  forced  into  tlie  ecclesiastical
profession  as  a  mere  lucrative  calling,  and  were  utterly  indif-
ferent to  its  doctrines.  Sucli  a  man  was  Talleyrand,  the  Bishop
of  Autan,  and  such  were  the  Abbe  St,  Pierre,  the  Abbe  Raynal,
the  Abbe  de  Condillac,  the  Abbe  Morellet,  the  Abbe  Sieyes,  the
Abbe  Deschamps.  But  since  the  destruction  of  Jansenism,  all
the  independent  characters,  and  all  the  honest  intellect  of
France,  seemed  alienated  from  the  Christian  faith.  Fashion,
which  in  no  other  country  was  so  powerful,  was  on  the  same
side.  The  most  brilliant  salons  of  Paris,  almost  the  whole  body
of  the  Court  aristocracy,'  a  great  part  even  of  the  higher  clergy,'^
had  caught  the  prevailing  tone.  Among  the  poorer  aristocracy,
who  were  still  thinly  scattered  over  the  country  districts,  and
especially  among  the  legal  or  parliamentary  nobility,  there
mio-ht  still  be  found  a  strong  attachment  to  the  old  decorous
manners,  and  to  the  forms  of  old  belief,  and  there  was  still  much
real  and  sober  religious  life  among  the  country  cures ;  but  the
utter  absence  of  any  considerable  literary  effort,  either  serious
or  satirical,  to  stem  the  tide,  showed  how  completely  the  philo-
sophical party  had  conquered  or  absorbed  the  intellect  of  France.
The  Desfontaines,  the  Frerons,  the  Palisots,  the  Linguets,  the
La  Beaumelles,  and  the  Bergiers,  the  '  Annee  litteraire '  and
the  '  Journal  de  Trevoux '  had  scarcely  any  real  influence  upon
opinion,  and  all  the  efforts  of  the  enemies  of  the  philosophers
have  been  unable  to  galvanise  them  into  any  semblance  of
reputation.

The  significance  of  these  facts  is  very  great,  but  it  is  much
increased  when  we  remember  that  the  Church  which  was  so
discredited,  so  corrupt,  and  at  the  same  time  so  intellectually
(l('S])icable,  was  a  persecuting  Church  connected  with  a  perse-
cnliiig  government.  I  have  elsewhere  described  the  atrocious
provisions  of  the  law  that  was  made  in  1724  against  the  French
] 'rotestants,  and  four  years  lutcr  Fleury  issued  a  declaration
co)i<lemuing  to  prison  or  to  Vhv  giiUeys  anyone  who  printed  any-
thing in  France  contrary  to  papal  bulls.'  In  the  full  blaze  of
tlie  civilisation  of  the  eighteenth  century,  hundreds  of  French

'  See  the  striking  and  vivid  pic-  381.

turc  in  the  Mhnoircs  de  Segur,  i.  20-  '  Vol.  i.  pp.  209,  270. Rocquain,

'ZVi ;  ii.  S.'i-ST.  Ij'' Eaprlt Itrnilvtionnairt; acaiU la

*  Tuini:,  A nrioi  lli(j\iitr,X)\}.  381-  It(riilntl(in,i>.  i'.).

cii.  XX.  PERSECUTION  OF  OPINION.  307

Protestants  were  condemned  to  the  galleys  or  to  long  periods  of
imprisonment  for  the  crime  of  attending  their  religious  worship  ;
women  were  flogged  ;  children  were  torn  from  their  parents,
and  more  than  one  Protestant  pastor  was  executed.^  In  1757  a
new  edict  was  issued  threatening  with  death  anyone  who  wrote,
printed,  or  sold  any  work  attacking  religion  or  the  royal
authority.^  Up  to  the  period  of  the  Revolution  nothing  could
be  legally  printed  in  France,  and  no  book  could  be  imported
into  France  without  Government  authorisation,  and  in  1789
there  were  no  less  than  169  persons  employed  in  the  censorship
of  books.^  The  severities  of  the  Government  were  exercised  not
only  against  books  on  religion,  or  government,  or  finance,  but
even  against  books  relating  to  the  most  abstruse  branches  of
physics  and  metaphysics.*  One  of  Voltaire's  printers  was  con-
demned to  nine  years  in  the  galleys,  and  eight  printers  and
binders  employed  in  the  same  printing  oflice  were  condemned
to  the  pillory  and  three  years  of  banishment.^  During  the  whole
of  the  reign  of  Lewis  XV.  there  was  scarcely  a  woi'k  of  impor-
tance which  was  not  burnt  or  suppressed,  while  the  greater
number  of  the  writers  who  were  at  this  time  the  special  and
almost  the  only  glory  of  France,  were  imprisoned,  banished,  or
fined.  Their  works,  however,  circulated  far  and  wide,  and  in
the  early  years  of  Lewis  XVI.  a  more  liberal  administration  and
the  overwhelming  pressure  of  public  opinion  broke  down  the  per-
secution. Still  the  toleration  was  precarious,  intermittent,  and
unsanctioned  by  law,  and  the  Church  was  openly  hostile  to  it.
In  1770  the  whole  body  of  the  French  bishops  drew  up  a
memoir  to  the  King  '  on  the  dangerous  consequences  of  liberty
of  thinking  and  printing.'^  In  1780  they  presented  a  new
memoir  protesting  against  the  admission  of  Protestants  to  public
employments,  and  against  any  relaxation  of  the  laws  against
heresy,  and  at  the  same  time  strenuously  demanding  an  increased
severity  against  anti-Christian  writings.'^  Up  to  the  very  eve  of
the  French  Revolution  the  marriages  of  French  Protestants  were

'  Vol. i. pp. 269, 270 ; Taine,  in Granier de Cassagnac,  i. 32-34.

Ancieu  Regime,  pp.  78-81 ;  Sismondi,  See,  too.  Buckle's  Hist,  of  Civillmtion,

Jllst.  (Us  Franqais,  xx.  178.  i.  671-682.

-  Rocquain,  p.  204.  ^  Parton's  Life  of  Voltaire,  ii.  299.

*  Granier de Cassagnac, Causes  *  Rocquain,  p.  275.

dc  U  Bh-olutlon,  i.  28,  29.  '  Ibid.  pp.  381-383.

^  See  tJie  list  of  condemned  books

308  ENGLA:SD in the eighteenth century.  ch.  XX,

invalid,  and  unrecognised  by  law ;  and  when  this  scandalous  abuse
was  at  last  abolished  in  1788  by  Brienne,  his  measure  giving
non-Catholics  the  rights  of  citizenship  in  France  was  carried
with  difficulty  through  the  Parliament,  in  the  face  of  a  furious
opposition  raised  by  an  important  section  of  the  French  clergy.^

The  spirit  of  reform  had  twice  appeared  in  France  associated
with  strong  positive  Christian  beliefs,  and  with  a  code  of  severe
and  even  austere  morality,  and  twice  by  the  assistance  of  the
State  the  French  Church  had  succeeded  in  crushing  it.  She
had  driven  from  the  land  the  Huguenots,  who  represented  the
very  flower  of  the  industrial  population.  She  had  humbled  and
suppressed  the  Jansenists,  who  included  the  finest  intellects  and
purest  characters  within  her  pale.  A  new  enemy  was  now  at
her  doors.  The  very  foundations  of  Christian  and  even  Theistic
belief  were  giving  way,  and  the  code  of  morals  was  by  no  means
untouched.  The  hostility  between  the  intellectual  classes  and
the  clergy,  the  collision  between  legal  authorities  and  public
opinion,  and  the  almost  total  destruction  of  Catholic  belief
among  educated  Frenchmen,  had  a  real  and  a  considerable  part
in  preparing  the  Revolution.  All  respect  and  reverence  had
ebbed  away  from  one  of  the  great  institutions  of  the  country.
The  empire  of  authority,  prescription,  and  tradition  over  the
minds  of  men  was  broken,  and  it  became  easy,  when  the  storm
of  Revolution  began,  to  turn  the  movement  against  Church
property.

At  the  same  time,  if  the  religious  movement  had  stood
alone,  it  is  exceedingly  improbable  that  it  would  have  led  to
any  sanguinary  convulsion.  History  furnishes  us  with  several
examples  of  periods  of  great  religious  decadence,  and  it  abun-
dantly shows  that  such  convulsions  are  by  no  means  their
natural  accompaniments.  Tho  evils  to  bo  feared  at  such  a  time
are  of  another  kind — the  decline  of  morals  when  the  dogmas  with
which  they  had  been  associated  are  abandoned,  a  relaxation  of
energy,  a  material,  selfish,  epicui-ean  cast  both  of  thought  and
character.  The  purest  and  noblest  blood  has  been  shed  like
water  in  connection  with  religious  beliefs;  but  it  has  not  been
shed  by  the  sceptic,  but  by  the  believer.  Mohammedan  fana-
ticism, the  Crusades,  the  massacres  of  the  Albigenses  and  of
'  (Jliercst,  La  Cludc  ilc  I'Ancicn  lii'rjime,  i.  i5S;i-yi)5.

cu.  XX.  CONSERVATISM OF FKKETI I  INKERS.  'M)0

St.  Bartholomew,  tlie  long  religious  wars  that  desolated  Europe,
the  savage  persecutions  of  Protestants  by  Catholics,  of  Catholics
by  Protestants,  and  of  witches  by  both,  were  due  to  a  spirit
which  was  very  different  from  that  of  Voltaire.  Regicide  has
found  its  strongest  advocates  in  the  writings  of  Jesuit  theolo-
gians, and  the  fanaticism  and  heroism  of  revolt  have  never  been
more  fully  displayed  than  among  the  Huguenots  of  France,  the
Anabaptists  of  Germany,  and  the  Covenanters  of  Scotland.  But
there  is  certainly  no  natural  or  necessary  affinity  between  free-
thinking  in  religion,  and  democracy  in  politics.  In  England,
Ilobbes,  who  was  the  first  very  considerable  freethinker,  con-
structed the  political  philosophy  which  is  beyond  all  others
favourable  to  despotism.  Bolingbroke  was  the  most  brilliant
leader  of  the  Tory  party.  Hume  was  the  best  exponent  of  the
Tory  view  of  English  history,  and  all  his  sympathies  were  with  a
benevolent  despotism.  Gibbon,  as  a  quiet  Tory  member,  steadily
supported  the  Amei'ican  policy  of  North ;  and  when  the  French
Revolution  broke  out,  his  judgment  of  it  was  precisely  similar
to  that  of  Burke.  In  France,  Bayle  wrote  with  horror  of  the
democratic  and  seditious  principles  disseminated  among  French
Huguenots,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  great
writers  of  the  period  of  the  '  Encyclopasdia '  were  animated  by  a
different  spirit.  Two  only,  Grimm  and  Raynal,  survived  till
the  Revolution.  The  first  left  France  in  disgust.  The  second
wrote  an  eloquent  letter,  denouncing  with  the  utmost  detesta-
tion the  events  that  were  occurring.  Of  all  the  great  French
writers  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Rousseau  had  the  largest  in-
fluence on  the  Revolution,  and  among  those  writers  Rousseau
was  in  religious  matters  one  of  the  most  conservative.

Voltaire  in  his  theoiy  of  government  was  essentially  mon-
archical. In  a  writer  who  was  so  voluminous,  and  at  the  same
time  so  infinitely  mobile  and  various,  a  perfect  consistency  can-
not be  expected;  but  in  spite  of  occasional  and  warm  eulogies
of  the  constitutions  of  England,  Holland,  and  Geneva,  this
aspect  of  his  teaching  Is  too  evident  to  be  overlooked.  His
admiration  of  the  English  Constitution  was  mainly  based  upon
the  freedom  of  thought  and  writing  which  it  secured,  and  he
seems  to  have  been  very  slightly  impressed  with  its  Parliament.
The  whole  tendency  of  his  mind  was  to  favour  administrative

310  EXGLAXD IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

reform  rather  tlian  organic  change.  His  political  writings
display  most  eminently  the  admirable  good  sense  and  modera-
tion of  opinion,  and  the  no  less  admirable  good  nature  and
humanity,  which  amid  all  his  caprices,  petulances,  and  mean-
nesses, never  wholly  abandoned  him;  but  they  are  quite  aa
remarkable  for  what  they  omit,  as  for  what  they  contain.  He
desired  a  complete  abolition  of  the  laws  restricting  or  destroying
the  liberty  of  the  press ;  of  the  laws  against  witches,  and  of  the
laws  of  religious  persecution.  It  might  not,  he  acknowledged,
be  prudent  or  necessary  to  admit  Protestants  to  municipal  or
other  dignities,  or  to  permit  them  to  build  public  churches ;  but
their  marriages  should  be  fully  legal ;  they  should  be  as  free  as
other  citizens  in  educating  their  children,  and  inheriting  pro-
perty, and  as  long  as  they  remained  peaceful  subjects,  they
should  enjoy  the  full  protection  of  the  law.  The  penal  code  he
desired  to  see  thoroughly  reformed.  He  advocated  the  aboli-
tion of  torture,  of  mutilation,  of  all  forms  of  agonising  or  pro-
longed death,  and  also  a  great  restriction  in  the  number  of
capital  offences.  He  wished  the  extravagant  penalties  which
French  law  decreed  against  sacrilege  to  be  mitigated,  and  the
law  which  insulted  the  body,  and  confiscated  the  property  of
the  suicide,  to  be  repealed.  No  one  wrote  better  on  the  folly  of
punishing  murder  and  robbery  b}^  the  same  capital  penalty,  and
thus  making  it  the  direct  interest  of  the  robber  to  assassinate
his  victim;  on  the  barbarity  of  making  confiscation  of  goods  an
element  of  punishment,  and  thus  beggaring  the  children  for  tlio
crime  of  the  father;  on  the  injustice  of  keeping  accused  persons
before  their  trial  in  solitary  confinement,  and  restricting  their
right  of  examining  their  witnesses ;  on  the  evils  of  the  excessive
intricacy  and  diversity  of  French  civil  law,  which  varied  in
almost  every  province ;  on  the  necessity  of  improving  the  ad-
ministration and  condition  of  the  prisons.  Turning  to  other
Bidijects,  he  wished  to  abolish  the  sale  of  offices,  to  diminish  the
taxes  on  articles  of  first  necessity,  to  equalise  taxation,  to  repeal
the  restrictions  on  the  internal  commerce  of  corn,  to  put  an  end
to  the  enforced  idleness  of  many  Church  holidays,  to  restrict  the
power  of  the  priests  in  proscriljing  degrading  penances,  and
excessive  abstinences,  lie  wrote  with  great  fervour  against
the  serfdom  which  still  lingered  in  Franche-Conite,  and  some

cii.  XX.  rOLITICS OF VOLTAITIE.  311

other  parts  of  France.  He  defended  the  right  of  the  serfs
iu  the  Jura  against  their  monastic  oppressors,  and  he  wel-
comed with  enthusiasm  the  administration  and  the  reforms  of
Turgot.

His  keen  and  luminous  intellect  judged  with  admirable  pre-
cision most  of  the  popular  delusions  of  his  time.  He  exposed
with  great  force  the  common  error  which  confounds  all  wealth
with  the  precious  metals.  He  wrote  against  sumptuary  laws.
He  refuted  Rousseau's  doctrine  of  the  evil  of  all  luxury.  He
liad  little  sympathy  with  the  prevailing  tendency  to  aggi'andise
immeasurably  the  functions  of  the  State,  and  he  protested
against  the  wild  notions  of  equality  that  were  coming  into
fashion.  What  should  be  aimed  at,  he  wrote,  is  not  '  the  ab-
surd and  impossible  equality  that  would  confound  the  servant
and  the  master,  the  workman  and  the  magistrate,  the  pleader
and  the  judge.  It  is  rather  equality  such  as  exists  in  Switzer-
land, where  every  citizen  depends  only  on  the  law,  which  main-
tains the  liberty  of  the  weak  against  the  ambition  of  the  strong.'
*  Men  are  essentially  equal,  but  they  are  intended  to  play  dif-
ferent parts  on  the  stage  of  Life.'  At  the  same  time,  while
strongly  maintaining  the  necessity  and  expediency  of  different
orders  and  ranks,  he  wrote  with  admirable  wisdom  about  the  ex-
cessive division  of  classes  that  prevailed  both  in  France  and  Ger-
many.' '  A  merchant  hears  his  profession  so  often  spoken  of  with
contempt  that  he  is  foolish  enough  to  blush  for  it  himself.  Yet
who  is  the  more  useful  to  the  State — a  well-powdered  nobleman
who  knows  exactly  when  the  King  rises  and  when  he  goes  to
bed,  and  who  gives  himself  airs  of  grandeur  while  playing  the
jiart  of  a  slave  in  the  antechamber  of  a  minister,  or  a  mer-
chant who  enriches  liis  country,  sends  his  orders  to  India  and
Egypt,  and  contributes  to  the  happiness  of  the  world  ? '  He
spoke  with  admiration  of  the  custom  in  England— a  custom,
which,  he  says,  was  passing  too  much  out  of  fashion — of  younger

'  The division of classes was,  I'eclat  de la  noblesse. Ces  mesal-

however,  gradually  diminishing  even  liances furent multipliees a  Texces

in France. Necker writes on the  sous  le  regne  de  Louis  XV,  et  Tamour

subject: '  Indiquons encore  les  me-  de  I'argent  mit  en  relation  de  con-

salliances  comme  une  alteration  aux  sanguinite  la  haute  noblesse et  les

vieilles  habitudes  et  aux  prejuges,  si  liommes  a  grande foirune,  la  haute

Ton  veut,  qui  servoient  a  entretcnir  noblesse  et  la  ?iautc  Jinaiicc;  car  ce

312  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xx.

sons  of  the  nobility  going  into  commerce.'  He  mentions  tliat
when  Lord  Townshend  was  Minister  of  the  Crown,  he  had  a
brother  who  was  a  merchant  in  the  City,  and  that,  while  Lord
Oxford  was  governing  England,  his  brother  lived  and  died  con-
tentedly as  a  factor  at  Aleppo,  and  he  predicted  in  a  few
admirable  sentences  the  necessary  growth  of  the  commercial
classes.  '  The  gains  of  commerce  having  increased,  and  the
revenues  from  public  offices  having  diminished  in  real  value,
tliere  is  less  wealth  than  formerly  among  the  great,  and  more
among  the  middle  class,  and  this  in  itself  diminishes  the  dis-
tance between  men.  There  was  once  no  resource  for  the  small
except  to  serve  the  great.  Now  industry  has  opened  a  thousand
ways  which  were  not  known  a  hundred  years  ago.'  -

And  in  perfect  accordance  with  these  ways  of  judging  the
present,  were  his  views  about  the  past.  No  previous  writer  can
compare  with  him  in  the  wideness  and  justness  of  his  concep-
tion of  history,  and  even  now  no  historian  can  read  without
profit  his  essays  on  the  subject.  No  one  before  had  so  strongly
urged  that  history  should  not  be  treated  as  a  collection  of  pictures
or  anecdotes  relating  to  Courts  and  battles,  but  should  be  made
a  record  and  explanation  of  the  true  development  of  nations,  of
tlie  causes  of  their  growth  and  decay,  of  their  characteristic
virtues  and  vices,  of  the  changes  that  pass  over  their  laws,
customs,  opinions,  social  and  economical  conditions,  and  over
the  relative  importance  and  well-being  of  their  different  classes.

Many  of  these  views  have  so  completely  triumphed  that
tliey  have  become  commonplace,  but  it  is  diilicult  to  over-esti-
mate the  services  of  the  great  man  who  did  the  most,  when  they
were  yet  unrecognised  or  contested,  to  popularise  and  to  defend
tliem.  But  beyond  tliese  Voltaire  refused  to  go,  and  he  had
not  the  smallest  sympathy  with  democratic  ideas.  Popular
representation,  and  government  by  mnjorities,  were  completely
forcjign  to  liis  thoughts,  and  at  a  time  when  despotism  was  the
prevailing  form  of  government  tlu'onghout  Europe  his  strongest
sympathies  were  with  royal  authority.  He  would  probably
Lave  agreed  with  the  saying  of  Plato,^  that  when  a  young,

dernier  nom  fut  alors  invcnt6  par  Ics  '  See his '  Lctlrcs sur la Com-

(,'ens  de  la  cour  alin  dVirncr  un  pou  mcTCc;^fICuvresdr.Volfairiuxx\vAi,4.5.

Icnrsnoiivoanx  fiarfns.'—  Ncckcr, '  Sur  "  Si'rcle  dc  Louis  XI  V,  ch.  xxx.

la  lltvolution,"  fl'Jurrcs,  ix.  125.  •  Latvs,  Vjook  iv.

CH.  XX.  POLITICS OF VOLTAIRE.  313

virtuous,  eriiig'litcned  and  magnanimous  despot  is  on  the  tbroiit^,
and  when  he  has  found  a  great  legislator  to  serve  him,  God
himself  can  do  little  more  for  the  happiness  of  the  State.  The
power  of  the  Sovereign  was  in  his  eyes  the  one  efficient  barrier
against  ecclesiastical  encroachments,  and  the  chief  instrument
in  effecting  reform .  '  Who  would  have  thought,'  he  wrote  to
D'Alembert  in  1765,  'that  the  cause  of  kings  would  be  that  of
philosophers  ?  but  yet  it  is  evident  that  the  sages  who  refuse  to
admit  two  powers  are  the  chief  support  of  the  royal  authority.' '
'  The  greatest  evil  that  can  befall  a  state,'  he  elsewhere  said,
*  is  a  contested  legislative  power.  The  happiest  years  of  the
monarchy  have  been  those  of  Henry  IV.,  Lewis  XIV.  and
]>iewis  XV.  when  these  kings  governed  by  themselves.  There
ought  never  to  be  two  powers  in  a  state.  .  .  .  The  presence  of
philosophers  is  of  great  use  to  a  prince  and  to  a  state,  .  .  .  for
philosophers  destroy  superstition,  which  is  always  the  enemy  of
princes.'  ^  Even  on  the  rare  occasions  when  he  leaned  towards
a  Republican  Government,  he  showed  himself  utterly  opposed  to
the  idea  of  universal  suffi-age  and  political  equality.  'There
never,'  he  once  wrote,  '  was  a  perfect  government,  for  men  are
always  influenced  by  passions,  and  if  they  had  no  passions  they
would  need  no  government.  The  most  tolerable  of  all  govern-
ments is  undoubtedly  the  republican,  because  it  is  that  which
places  men  most  in  their  position  of  natural  equality.  Every
father  of  a  family  ought  to  be, master  in  his  own  house  and  not
in  the  house  of  his  neighbour ;  as  a  country  is  composed  of
many  houses  and  many  landed  properties  attached  to  them,  it
is  contradictory  that  a  single  man  should  be  master  of  these
houses  and  of  these  properties,  and  it  is  natural  that  each
master  should  have  a  voice  in  deciding  on  the  welfare  of  the
society.  But  should  those  who  possess  neither  house  nor  land
in  the  society  have  a  voice  ?  They  have  no  more  right  to  it
than  a  clerk  paid  by  merchants  has  to  regulate  their  commerce,
but  they  may  be  made  partners  if  they  have  rendered  some
special  service  or  have  paid  for  their  partnership.' '

'  See Strauss' Vie de Voltaire,  pressed very frankly his genuine

pp.  280,  28 1 .  opinion  about  republics  :  '  Si  vous  vous

-  La  VoLv  dv  Sage  et  du  Peuple.  soavcnez que ies Hollandais ont

'  Idces  Repuhlicaines. In  one  of  mange  sur  le  gril  le cceur  des  deux

his  letters  in  1760  (Sept.  20)  he  es-  freres  De  Witt  ; si  vous  songez  que

314 ENGLAND  IX  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. cii.  xx.

In  general,  however,  Voltaire  was  quite  indifferent  to  re-
presentative government,  provided  the  Sovereign  regulated  his
conduct  by  fixed  law,  gave  religious  and  intellectual  liberty  to
his  people,  and  favoured  administrative  reform.  Democratic
government  was  equally  repugnant  to  his  judgment  and  to  his
tastes.  All  his  leanings  were  towards  rank  and  culture  and
refinement;  and  while  sincerely  desiring  to  improve  the  material
condition  of  the  masses  of  mankind,  he  had  very  little  genuine
sympathy  with  them,  and  an  utter  disbelief  in  their  capacities.
He  could  not  forgive  Shakespeare  for  his  close  contact  and
sympathy  with  common  types  of  life  and  character,  and  for  his
complete  disregard  of  the  conventional  elegancies  and  stateliness
of  the  French  stage ;  and  his  ignoble  sneers  at  the  humble
origin  of  the  Maid  of  Orleans,  and  at  the  poor  relations  of
Rousseau,  disclose  a  feeling  which  was  expressed  in  innumer-
able passages  in  his  confidential  letters.  '  We  have  never,'  ho
once  wrote,  '  pretended  to  enlighten  shoemakers  and  servants.'
'  The  true  public  is  always  a  minority.  The  rest  is  the
vulgar.  AVork  for  the  little  public'  'What  the  populace
requires  is  guidance  and  not  instruction — it  is  not  worthy  of
the  latter.'  '  It  is  not  the  day-labourer,  but  the  good  bourgeois
who  needs  instruction.'  ^  No  English  Tory  indeed,  of  the
eighteenth  century,  can  have  believed  less  in  popular  enlighten-
ment, and  especially  in  popular  government,  than  this  brilliant
Frenchman.  There  is  in  all  great  writers,  in  addition  to  their
definite  teaching,  a  certain  tone  which  runs  through  all  they
write,  and  greatly  determines  their  influence  on  the  world.
'I'hat  of  Voltaire  is  very  clearly  marked.  It  is  a  mixture  of
scepticism,  humanity,  and  practical" good  sense;  with  very  little
reverence  and  elevation,  and  without  a  tinge  of  mysticism  or

cos bons Suissns mos voisins ont  (Kiivrrs  dc  Voltnrre,  1.  410,  420.

vcri'lu  Ic  due  Louis Kforcc  pour  dc  ' (ICiirrcsi  de  Voltaire,  \\.  10.3;  liii.

I'arf^cnt comptant; si vous songcz  JJLS,  :5L'(i ;  Ixii.  4()0.  See  on  this  aspect

quo  Ic rcpublic^in Jean Calvin,  cc  of  Voitaii'e,  Dcsnoireslerres,  Voltaire

(iisrnc th6ologien, apr^s avoir 6crit  et  la  Sooirte  an  XVIII''  xircle,  tome

qu'il  ne ialloit  persuciiter  pcreonno,  vi.  pp.  237-240. Many  other  passages

p:is  memo  ceuxqui  niaient  la  Trinit6,  like those I have quoted, may be

(it  V)rdler  tout,  vif,  ct  avec  des  fagots  foinid  in  the  correspondence  of  Vol-

vcrlH,  un  Ks|iagnol  qui  s'oxprirnaiLsur  taire. Bishop Dupauloup, in his

la Trinile aulremcnt (pic lui ; en  virulent  but  able  Lrttrrx  aiir  k.  Cin-

v('rit<;.  Monsieur,  vous ox\ concluvoz  irnnirr  do  f7)//^///v' ( 1878),  has  iudua-

qu'ii  n'y  a  pas  phis  dc  vcrtu  dans  les  liiou.sly  collcclcd  ihcm.
ripubliqucs  que  dans  Ics  monarchies.'

i

cu.  XX.  THE  GENIUS  OF  VOLTAIRE.  315

fanaticism.  Aiming  at  no  higli  or  impracticable  ideal ;  turn-
ing away  from  self-analysis,  self-denial,  and  useless  speculation ;
meeting  the  perplexities  of  life  with  a  smile  of  high-bred  epi-
curean banter ;  seeking  in  all  things  for  clear  ideas  and  prac-
tical and  tangible  benefits,  he  accepted  cheerfully  the  facts  of
life,  applied  the  touchstone  of  his  criticism  to  all  the  beliefs  that
were  around  him,  and  laboured  steadily,  within  the  limits  of  his
ideals  and  of  his  sympathies,  to  make  the  world  a  wiser,  happier,
and  better  place  than  he  found  it.  It  is  a  philosophy  which
will  always  be  that  of  a  great  part,  and  by  no  means  the  worst
part  of  mankind,  but  it  is  not  a  philosophy  which  produces
either  passion,  heroism,  or  Utopia,  and  no  one  who  was
thoroughly  pervaded  with  the  Voltairian  spirit  was  ever  a
genuine  Ix evolutionist.

Voltaire  must  indeed  always  stand  out  as  the  most  truly
representative  figure  of  that  portion  of  the  eighteenth  century
which  preceded  the  Revolution,  and  he  was  not  less  representa-
tive in  his  limitations  than  in  his  qualities.  In  the  profound
insight  and  the  power  of  pursuing  long  trains  of  connected
thought  which  constitute  a  great  philosopher ;  in  the  higher
imaginative  gifts  of  a  great  poet ;  in  the  moral  depth,  purity,
and  seriousness  of  a  great  character;  in  the  strong  passions
and  sympathies  which  appeal  to  the  deepest  feelings  in  human
nature,  he  was  very  deficient,  but  the  world  never  saw  a  man
more  fitted  to  popularise  great  masses  of  obscure  knowledge,
and  to  influence  widely  and  variously  the  opinions  of  men.
Untiring  industry,  ah  extraordinary  variety  of  interests  and
aptitudes,  a  judgment  at  once  sound,  moderate,  and  indepen-
dent, a  rare  power  of  seizing  in  every  subject  the  essential
arguments  or  facts,  a  disposition  to  take  no  old  opinions  on
trust  and  to  leave  no  new  opinions  unexamined,  combined  in
him  with  the  most  extraordinary  literary  talent.  Never,  per-
haps, was  there  an  intellect  at  once  so  luminous,  versatile,  and
flexible ;  which  produced  so  much  ;  which  could  deal  with  such
a  vast  range  of  difiicult  subjects  without  being  ever  obscure,
tangled,  or  dull.  What  he  wrote  was  often  superficial  in  thought
and  knowledge,  and  marred  by  great  faults  of  temper  and
character,  but  it  was  always  transparently  clear,  almost  always
brilliant  and  graceful,  admirably  proportioned and  admirably

31 G  ENGLAI'TD IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ai.  xx.

arranged.  He  had  the  maiimers  and  some  of  the  tastes  of
Court  society ;  his  wit  was  almost  as  conspicuous  in  conversation
as  ill  his  writings,  and  though  he  was  looked  on  with  extreme
disfavour  by  the  rulers  of  France,  he  exercised  a  great  influence
on  the  chief  sovereigns  of  his  time.  Frederick  of  Prussia,
Catherine  of  Eussia,  Joseph  II.  of  Austria,  Gustavus  III.  of
Sweden,  Christian  VII.  of  Denmark,  Frederick  of  Hesse,  and
Stanislaus  of  Poland  were  among  his  friends,  correspondents,  or
admirers ;  and  chiefly  through  their  influence  a  new  spirit  of
enlightenment  and  tolerance  began  to  pervade  the  legislation  of
Europe.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  immense  stejDS  which  had  at
this  time  been  taken  in  the  direction  of  religious  toleration.'
It  had  been  formally  recognised,  not  only  in  the  chief  Pro-
testant countries,  but  also  in  the  wide  dominions  of  the  Em-
press of  Russia.  It  had  been  practically  admitted  through  the
Austrian  dominions.  Even  in  Italy  and  Spain  the  power  of
the  persecutor  was  effectually  bridled,  and  the  great  persecuting
order  of  the  Jesuits  was  expelled  from  most  European  countries
and  finally  suppressed  by  the  Pope.  In  the  half-century  before  the
llevolution  measures  were  taken  formally  abolishing  torture  in
Prussia,  Russia,  Austria,  Poland,  Switzerland,  Hesse,  Tuscan}^,
and  Sweden ;  where  it  was  not  abolished  it  fell  into  general
disuse,  and  over  a  great  part  of  Europe  the  penal  codes  were
revised  and  mitigated  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of
Beccaria  and  Voltaire.^  The  remnants  of  serfdom,  and  of  other
feudal  oppressions,  were  at  the  same  time  slowly  but  steadily
disappearing.  In  Italy  especially,  where  the  philosophical
movement  was  admirably  represented  by  the  writings  of
]3eccaria,  Filangieri,  Genovesi,  and  Galanti,  a  great  movement
had  long  been  in  progress  for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  feudal
;iii(l  jnediaaval  privileges  relating  to  land  or  to  exemptions  from
taxation.  It  had  been  begun  as  early  as  1723  by  Victor
Amadcus  in  Piedmont.  It  was  continued  by  the  Lorraine
])iinc('S  in  Tuscany,  and  il^  was  soon  carried  out  in  Naples,
Sicily, and  Savoy .•* hi Germany serfdom and many  feudal

'  Sec  vol.  iii.  pp.  TjO.'],  fiOl.  V  ffiimajiit/:,  art.  xxiv. ;  Lea,  Siipersil-

2  See  j\7inii(d  Itcqhlar,  1776,  pp.  i'um  and  Force,\^\i.?,%'c>-?>'6\);  I'.iicklc's

1  If.,  191; 17S<;,  p.  Kill;  17!)I,  p.  210.  Jiistorii  of  Ciribmtion,  li.  107-110.

Voltaire, I'rix  dc la  Judice  i:t do  *  fcjoo  the  Listoiy  ol  (liis  very  im-

CH.  XX.  PROGRESS OF REFORM.  317

obligations  still  existed  very  widely  up  to  the  time  of  the  Revolu-
tion,' but  the  State  serfs  in  Pomerania  had  been  enfranchised
as  early  as  1719. '■^  A  similar  measure  was  carried  out  on  the
State  domains  in  Austria,^  while  in  Denmark  the  last  traces
of  villenage  were  abolished  by  royal  authority.^  In  Poland,
though  serfdom  continued,  it  had  become,  under  the  patronage
of  the  King,  a  sort  of  fashion  among  the  more  enlightened
nobles  to  give  freedom  to  their  peasants,  and  in  the  words  of  an
excellent  observer,  '  The  peasantry  of  the  North  were  travelling
fast  towards  perfect  and  universal  liberty.'  ^  The  exclusiveness
of  rank  was  at  the  same  time  diminishing.  Never  before,  except
in  the  small  republics  of  Italy,  had  commercial  and  mercantile
interests  occupied  so  great  a  place  upon  the  Continent  of
Europe ;  and  in  France  especially,  the  immense  number  of  the
new  nobility  recruited  from  these  classes  and  from  the  profes-
sions, was  one  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of  the  time.
Men  like  Colbert  and  Louvois  and  Vergennes  and  Sartine  and
Necker,  whose  families  had  very  recently  risen  from  the  hum-
blest positions,  directed  in  a  great  measure  the  Government,
while  the  social  influence  of  literature  was  continually  increasing.
The  changed  spirit  I  have  described  was  everywhere  per-
ceptible in  the  laws.  It  was  still  more  perceptible  in  their
administration,  and  the  immediate  impulse  of  reform  all  over
Europe  appeared  to  come  from  the  sovereigns.  The  language  of
Condorcet  in  describing  the  condition  of  continental  Europe  in
the  period  between  the  death  of  Descartes  and  the  French
Revolution,  is  very  remarkable.  In  France,  Spain,  Hungar}',
and  Bohemia,  he  says,  the  feeble  traces  of  political  liberty  that
had  existed  had  disappeared,  but  these  more  or  less  real  losses
were  more  than  compensated  by  the  destruction  of  arbitrary
aristocracies.  The  quality  of  man  was  more  respected.  Royal
despotism  destroyed  the  more  grievous  oppressions  and  humilia-
tions of  feudalism.  A  new  spirit  of  equality  passed  into  the
laws.  A  kind  of  despotism  arose  wdiich  had  been  hitherto  un-
known in  Europe. It  was  almost  absolute  by  law,  but  it  was  at

portant movement in Doniol, La  ^  Doniol,  p.  174.

Bcvolution  Fraiiqahe  et  la  Feodalite,  *  Annual  licglxtpr,  1776,  p.  191.

pp.  190-200.  *  Gentz,  On  the  State  of  Europe,

'  Tocqueville, Ancien, Regime,  p.  81.
pp.  31,  oj.  *  Annual  liejlbter,  1791,  p.  207.

318  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

the  same  time  restrained  by  opinion,  directed  by  enlightened
views,  and  mitigated  by  a  regard  to  its  own  interest,  and  it
often  contributed  largely  to  the  increase  of  riches,  industry,
and  instruction,  and  sometimes  ^ven  to  that  of  civil  libei'ty.
Manners  were  softened  by  the  decay  of  prejudices ;  by  the
gi'owth  of  the  industrial  and  commercial  spirit ;  by  the  horror
which  the  recollection  of  the  religious  wars  had  produced ;  by
the  diffusion  of  philosophic  ideas  of  equality  and  humanity.
Religious  intolerance  still  lingered  in  the  Statute-book,  but  it
was  now  regarded  as  a  matter  of  human  prudence,  a  necessary
homage  to  popular  prejudices,  a  precaution  against  the  effer-
vescence of  popular  passions.  It  had  lost  its  old  character  of
ferocity  and  fanaticism.  It  took  milder  forms,  and  had  of  late
years  greatly  diminished.  Everywhere,  and  on  all  subjects,
though  slowly  and  perhaps  reluctantly,  the  practice  of  govern-
ments has  followed  the  march  of  opinion  and  even  the  ideas  of
the  philosopher.'

This  was  the  nature  of  the  reform  that  Voltaire  and  his
followers  desired,  and  the  revolution  to  which  they  looked  for-
ward was  a  peaceful  and  a  happy  destruction  of  superstition,
barbarous  laws,  and  feudal  oppression,  initiated  and  supported
l)y  royal  authority.  In  a  little  treatise  called  the  '  Voyage  of
Keason,'  which  he  wrote  as  late  as  1774,  he  enumerates  with
exultation  the  many  and  great  reforms  which  had  been  accom-
plished during  the  century,  and  boasts  that  the  spirit  of  en-
lightenment and  toleration  had  descended  upon  all  the  chief
Courts  in  Europe,  and  was  not  unknown  even  in  the  Vatican.^
'  Everything  I  see,'  he  once  wrote,  '  scatters  the  seeds  of  a
revolution  which  will  indubitably  arrive,  and  which  I  shall  not
Jiave  the  happiness  to  witness.'  .  .  .  '  The  young  are  indeed
liuppy,  for  they  will  see  groat  things.'  ^  '  The  general  weariness  of
Christianity,'  wrote  his  lollower  Grimm,  'which  is  manifested  in
Jill  parts,  and  ospcicially  in  Catholic  States,  the  disquiet  which  is
vaguely  agitating  the  minds  of  men,  and  leading  them  to  attack
religious  and  political  abuses,  is  a  phenomenon  as  characteristic

'  Condorcefc, Prngrhx  de VKxpr'it  the  State  of  Etirojx!,  pp.  69-88.
//,«/««/»,  p>p.  189-192 (abrirlgcd).  Com-  '•'  (liuvres de Voltaire, tonic xl.

j)'iro Iho  strikin[^  picture  of  the  re-  jjp.  A'M-AV.).

foriiiH in llie KcruTiition that pre-  •'  Sec  UoC(]uain,  p.  215. This  was

circled  tlic  licvohitiuii, izi  Geiitz, Uii  in  ITtil.

en.  \x.  THE FRENCH TARLIAMENTS.  319

of  our  century  as  the  spirit  of  reform  was  of  the  sixteenth,  and
it  foreshadows  an  imminent  and  inevitable  revolution.  One
may  say  that  France  is  the  centre  of  this  revolution,  wliich  will
at  least  have  this  advantage  over  the  preceding  ones,  that  it  will
be  effected  without  costing  any  blood.'  ^

It  will  appear,  I  think,  from  the  foregoing  considerations
that  the  influence  of  Voltaire  and  his  followers  in  producing  the
Revolution,  though  real,  has  been  greatly  exaggerated.  The  first
important  signs  of  political  opposition,  indeed,  are  not  to  be
found  in  the  writings  of  the  philosophers,  but  in  those  conflicts
between  the  Court  and  the  Parliaments  which  fill  a  great  part  of
the  French  history  of  the  first  seventy  years  of  the  eighteenth
century.

The  Parliament  of  Paris  and  the  twelve  provincial  parlia-
ments, which  at  this  time  existed  in  France,  were  not  re-
presentative and  legislative  assemblies.  They  were  judicial
and  magisterial  bodies — High  Courts  of  Justice  consisting  of
the  most  eminent  lawyers  nominated  by  the  Crown.  They
were  divided  into  different  chambers,  and  they  exercised  the
highest  jurisdiction  in  their  several  provinces,  but  they  also
exercised  two  functions  which  were  of  a  political  nature.  They
had  a  right  of  remonstrating  against  the  edicts  of  the  King,  and
they  claimed  the  much  more  important  power  of  a  veto  upon
leg-islation.  When  the  King  issued  an  edict  he  sent  it  to  the
Parliament  of  Paris  to  be  registered ;  it  only  acquired  the  force
of  law  after  this  registration,  and  the  Parliament  claimed  the
right  of  delaying  or  withholding  its  sanction.  This  power,  how-
ever, was  contested,  and  the  King  possessed  an  authority,  which,
when  fully  exerted,  completely  annihilated  it.  He  could  go
down  to  the  Parliament,  and  by  holding  what  was  called  •  a  bed
of  justice,'  could  by  his  simple  order  compel  the  Parliament  to
register  his  edict  on  pain  of  banishment  or  exile.  But  such
a  measure  was  an  extreme,  and  generally  an  unpopular  one,
and  the  fact  that  every  law  required  the  sanction,  and  was  ex-
posed to  the  criticism,  of  an  independent  judicial  body,  had  a
real  importance  in  mitigating  the  despotism  of  the  Government.
The  King  was  able  to  override  the  wishes  of  the  Parliament ;

'  Grimm  et  Diderot,  corresp.  Jan.  1768.

320  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

Lilt  if  that  body  was  supported  by  strong  public  opinion;  if
any  circumstances  had  contributed  to  weaken  the  authority  of
the  Crown;  and  especially  if  a  public  loan  depending  for  its
success  on  the  credit  of  the  Government  was  required,  the  parlia-
mentary opposition  became  very  serious.^

The  political  powers  of  the  Parliament  had  passed  through
several  phases,  which  are  not  altogether  free  from  controversy
and  obscurity.  At  first,  and  for  a  long  period,  the  registration
of  edicts  was  probably  nothing  more  than  a  legal  form  attesting
their  authenticity,  but  carrying  with  it  no  further  power  or
iv.spousibility.  Under  Lewis  XI.,  however,  the  Parliament  of
Paris  began,  before  registering  edicts,  to  make  remonstrances
or  observations  about  them  to  the  King,  and  this  grew  into  a
recognised  right.  The  dignity  of  the  Parliament  was  much
increased  under  Lewis  XIL,  when  the  Court  of  Peers,  drawn
from  the  highest  nobility,  and  exercising  the  highest  jurisdic-
tion, was  united  with  it ;  ^  and  during  the  civil  wars,  and  espe-
cially during  the  Fronde,  its  political  power  and  activity  were
enormously  increased.  The  strong  government  of  Lewis  XIV.
reduced  it  again  to  complete  political  impotence.  It  was  for-
bitlden  to  remonstrate.  It  was  at  last  allowed  to  make  repre-
sentations, but  only  eigHt  days  after  it  had  duly  registered  the
royal  edict,  and  it  was  now  mainly  confined  to  its  judicial  func-
tions. But  in  the  weak  Governments  that  followed  the  death  of
Lewis  XIV.  the  Parliament  regained  its  authority.  It  annulled
the  will  of  the  late  King ;  it  settled  the  Regency,  and  it  soon
made  itself  a  most  powerful  organ  of  opinion.  The  sale  of
offices  had  given  it  a  great  independence,  for  its  members  now
held  permanent  and  hereditary  posts  which  they  had  purchased,
and  which  they  regarded  as  their  absolute  property.^  The
Parliament  consisted  chiefly  of  men  who  had  sprung  from  the
richest  families  of  tlie  third  eslati'. ;  but  it  included  some  who

'  Tlie  part  played  by  tlie  ]'aili;i-  Jilanc,  Hist,  de  la  Bcvolution,  i.  437,

monls in fircpaiiiif^ the Uuvoliition  4:i8;  Mrne.  de Stael, Corisid.  snr  lii

has  been  recently  invesliiiated  with  Jti'voliitioii,\.\2\)-\bA]N<o\{Mrii,lIii<t.

hinpii];ir  learning  and  impartiality  by  du  Parhiiirnt  de  Parix.
two adiniriiiile historians, wiio are  '■'  Cassagiiac,  Causes  de  la  Rcvolu-

niiieh less  known in England  tli;in  tioii,  i.  34(i-355.

tiicy  ought  to  l)e. Kocquain,  L' I'hpnt  "  See  Tocqueville,  Anoien  lifriivie,

Jlridiiilwniialre  afantUi  Jt.ernhdion;  p. 1(52;  L.  Blanc,  Hist,  de  la  Jliro-

anrl Oheresi,  L/i. Chiitr di; I'Anairn  iiitwn,i.  435; Ch6rest,  La Chute  de

Jlvijiine,  i.  i!;H  LMl. See,  too, ^olli.^  iAnckn  Itrijiinc/i. '2'i'6,2\\'d.

CTT.  XX.  THE EULL UNIGENITUS.  321

belonged  or  were  allied  to  tlie  first  families  in  France,  while  its
influence  extended  to  the  subordinate  law  courts  and  to  all  the
humbler  members  of  the  legal  profession.^  With  the  growth  of
industry  and  commerce  that  profession  had  been  rising  rapidly
in  importance,  and  all  over  France  it  looked  up  to  the  Parlia-
ment of  Paris  as  if,s  supreme  representative.

A  body  so  constituted,  so  widely  connected,  and  with  such
great  powers  of  obstructing  and  directing  the  administration  of
justice,  only  needed  a  popular  cause  to  be  very  formidable.  It
found  this  in  the  dispute  between  the  Jesuits  and  the  Jansenists,
when  the  Court  supported  the  former,  and  the  Parliament,  re-
presenting a  great  body  of  public  opinion,  constituted  itself  the
champion  of  the  latter.  For  the  first  time  for  many  years  there
was  a  direct,  open,  and  serious  opposition  to  the  Crown.  The
immediate  cause  was  the  famous  Bull  Unigenitus,  which  had
been  promulgated  at  the  inspiration  of  the  Jesuits,  in  1713,
condemning  one  hundred  and  one  propositions  in  a  work  of  the
Jausenist  Quesnel,  and  among  others  several  relating  to  free
grace,  which  appeared  almost  literally  extracted  from  St.  Paul  and
St.  Augustine.  The  dispute  raged  incessantly  from  the  time  of
the  promulgation  of  the  Bull ;  and  in  1730  and  the  two  follow-
ing years,  it  took  a  very  acute  form.  An  Archbishop  of  Paris
attempted  to  compel  his  clergy  formally  to  accept  the  Bull,  and
he  excommunicated  some  who  resisted.  They  consulted  the
lawyers,  and  forty  Paris  advocates  drew  up  a  memorial,  inviting
an  appeal  to  the  Parliament,  and  at  the  same  time  containing
some  sentences  which,  in  a  despotic  monarchy,  were  deemed
absolutely  revolutionary.  '  By  the  constitution  of  the  kingdom,'
they  said,  'the  Parliaments  are  the  Senate  of  the  nation;  the
sovereign  depositors  of  the  laws  of  the  State ;  the  representa^
tives  of  the  public  authority.'  They  have  supreme  jurisdiction
over  all  the  members  of  the  State.  No  one  has  a  right  to  place
himself  above  their  decisions.  '  Laws  are  essentially  conventions
between  those  who  govern,  and  those  who  are  governed.'

These  doctrines  were  censured  by  the  Council  of  State
as  attacking  the  first  principle  of  the  French  monarchy,
which  is,  that  the  whole  supreme  power  rests  in  the  person  of

'  See the excellent remarks  of liaments,  Mem.  IlistorUptes,  vii.  2ri2,
Grimm  on  the  influence  of  the  Par- 233.

VOL.  V.  Y

322  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xx.

the  King.  The  advocates  in  their  reply  ackno\vledg(;ci  tltis
principle;  but  they  still  maintained  that  by  the  fundauieutal
laws  of  the  kingdom  the  Parliaments  had  a  right  of  judging  on
appeal  abuses  of  ecclesiastical  authority.  The  lawyers  of  Paris
and  Rouen  fully  supported  their  colleagues,  and  the  quarrel
was  envenomed  by  the  appearance  in  the  arena  of  several
Bishops  on  one  side,  and  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris  on  the
other.  The  Parliament  ordered  the  suppression  of  a  number  of
Episcopal  pastorals  denying  its  jurisdiction  and  censuring  the
advocates,  and  in  September  1731  it  issued  a  decree  asserting
in  the  very  words  of  old  French  laws  that  '  the  temporal  power
is  independent  of  all  other  powers,  that  it  alone  has  the  right  of
restraining  the  subjects  of  the  King,  and  that  the  ministers  of
the  Church  are  accountable  to  the  Parliament,  under  the  autho-
rity of  the  monarch,  for  the  exercise  of  their  jurisdiction.'

Cardinal  Fleury  at  this  time  directed  the  administration  of
France,  and  he  deej^ly  resented  these  proceedings.  By  the
advice  of  his  minister  and  of  his  Council,  the  King  exiled
eleven  of  the  recalcitrant  advocates ;  annulled  the  recent  decree
of  Parliament ;  forbade  the  Parliament  to  engage  in  any  dis-
cussion on  ecclesiastical  questions,  or  on  the  limits  between
the  temporal  and  ecclesiastical  power,  and  refused  to  see  the
members  when  they  went  to  remonstrate  against  this  restric-
tion of  their  rights.  On  the  other  hand,  the  advocates  of  Paris
refused  to  plead  in  the  law  courts  until  their  exiled  colleagues
were  recalled,  and  the  members  of  the  Parliament  threatened  to
resign  their  offices,  and  thus  stop  the  whole  administration  of
justice  if  their  jurisdiction  and  liberty  wei'e  curtailed.  They  were
summoned  to  Compifigne,  and  sternly  rebuked  by  the  King;
but  they  pursued  their  course  in  defiance  of  the  royal  commands.
They  censured  a  new  pastoral  issued  l)y  the  Archbishop  of  Paris,
and  forbade  its  distribution.  The  King  at  once  annulled  the
order,  and  caused  several  of  the  oflending  members  to  be  arrested
find  exiled.  One  hundred  and  fifty  magistrates  then  resigned,
leaving  the  Parliament  House  amid  the  acclamations  of  an  im-
mense crowd.  Threats  of  degradation,  exile,  and  confiscation,  were
freely  employee]  by  tlie  Court;  but  in  July  1732  a  kind  of  truce
was  made,  and  IIm^  i';irliament  consented  to  resume  its  functions.

The  quarrel, however, almost immediately revived. The

cii.  XX.  OPPOSITION OF  THE  PAPvLIAMENTS.  323

Court  again  attempted  to  prevent  the  Parliament  from  dis-
cussing ecclesiastical  matters,  and  it  determined  to  limit  its
power  both  of  appeal  and  remonstrance.  A  bed  of  justice  held
to  register  a  declaration  with  this  object,  was  pronounced  by
the  Parliament  to  be  invalid  on  account  of  a  technical  flaw,
and  the  Minister  at  once  replied  by  exiling  no  less  than  139
magistrates.  Public  opinion  was  now  highly  excited ;  the
administration  of  justice  was  seriously  impeded,  and  as  the  war
of  1733  was  just  breaking  out,  Fleury  feared  a  continuance  of
intestine  troubles.  The  sentence  of  exile  against  the  magis-
trates was  accordingly  recalled  in  November  1733.  The  de-
claration limiting  the  rights  of  the  Parliament  was  suspended,
and  that  body  having  for  the  present  substantially  triumphed,
the  conflict  was  for  a  time  terminated.

Barbier,  who  has  so  fully  related  the  proceedings  of  this
time,  notices  that  '  the  good  City  of  Paris  was  Jansenist  from
head  to  foot.'  The  Parisians  in  general,  he  admits,  knew  no-
thing, and  cared  nothing,  about  the  theological  distinctions  that
were  at  issue;  but  they  detested  Rome  and  the  Jesuits,  and
they  vehemently  applauded  the  resistance  of  the  magistrates.
A  political  doctrine  analogous  to  the  Galilean  theory  of  Catho-
licism now  came  into  fashion,  *  As  the  whole  Church,'  it  was
said,  'is  above  the  Pope,  so  the  nation  is  above  the  King.'  Like
James  II.  of  England,  Lewis  XV.  had  contrived  to  throw  into
opposition  the  political  forces  which  were  naturally  the  strongest
bulwarks  of  the  throne.  The  Galilean  form  of  Catholicism,  while
extremely  jealous  of  Eoman  meddling,  exalted  the  duty  of
passive  obedience  to  the  sovereign  as  highly  as  the  Church
of  England,  and  on  this  point  there  was  no  difference  between
the  Galilean  and  the  Jansenist.  A  Parliament  of  magistrates
invested  with  high  judicial  duties,  and  holding  by  right  of
purchase  hereditary  offices  which  conveyed  the  privileges  of
nobility,  was  an  essentially  aristocratic  and  conservative  hodj.
It  had  no  sympathy  with  the  school  of  freethinking^  which  had
ai'isen,  and  Voltaire's  '  Letters  on  the  English '  had  been  one  of
the  very  numerous  books  which  the  Parliament  of  Paris  had
ordered  to  be  burnt.  But  by  the  force  of  circumstances,  and  in
the  absence  of  any  real  representative  system,  this  body  had
now  become  the  chief  bulwark  against  despotism,  and  the  best

Y  2

324 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xx.

exponent  of"  tlie  popular  feeling,  and  there  was  a  great  desire  to
aggrandise  its  power.  A  memoir  was  circulated  arguing  that
the  French  Parliaments  were  coeval  with  the  monarchy,  and
rightful  representatives  of  the  people,  and  that  the  power
claimed  by  the  King's  Council  over  them  was  an  usurpation.
'  The  business  of  a  sovereign,'  it  continued,  '  is  to  maintain,  and
not  to  destroy  the  laws.  This  is  his  oath — this  is  the  contract
which  he  has  made  with  his  people.  As  he  cannot  make  laws
without  the  concurrence  of  Parliament,  he  ought  to  acquiesce  in
its  refusals  or  remonstrances.  If  the  magistrates  abandoned
their  right  of  resistance,  they  would  be  false  to  their  duties.'  ^

The  peace  of  1738,  giving  Lorraine  to  France,  threw  some
credit  over  the  Government  of  Lewis  XV. ;  but  it  was  almost
the  last  gleam  of  success  in  his  long  and  ignoble  reign.  During
the  war  that  preceded  it,  the  conflicts  between  the  Court  and
Parliament  were  suspended ;  but  they  revived  in  the  last  years
of  the  life  of  Fleury,  and  again  after  a  few  years'  interval,  in
1747  and  the  following  years.  The  questions  at  issue  still
related  chiefly  to  the  limits  of  ecclesiastical  and  temporal  juris-
diction, and  the  right  of  Parliament  as  a  judicial  body  to  con-
trol the  abuses  of  ecclesiastical  power ;  but  the  Parliament  also
made  some  real  attempts  to  check,  by  repeated  remonstrances
against  new  taxes,  the  financial  ruin  which  was  approaching.
The  tax  known  as  '  the  teftth '  had  been  imposed  as  a  war  tax,
and  an  attempt  to  continue  it  in  time  of  peace  caused  violent
and  general  discontent,  and  was  resisted  by  several  provincial
Parliaments.  A  modified  form  known  as  '  the  twentieth  '  was
at  last  adopted ;  but  it  was  only  sanctioned  by  the  Parliament
at  the  express  command  of  tlie  King,  and  it  was  only  collected
with  great  difliculty,  and  sometimes  by  force  of  arms.^  From
17'18  to  1758,  discontent  rose  in  Paris  almost  to  the  point  of
revolution.  The  popularity  of  the  King  had  totally  gone.  He
was  sunk  in  the  lowest  and  most  degraded  vice,  almost  indif-
ferent to  pyblic  afl'airs,  and  swayed  to  and  fro  by  a  succession  of
mistresses,  and  the  extravagance  of  his  Court  was  unchecked,
while  the  finances  of  tlif  country  were  all  but  ruined,  and  while

'  Sec  a  very  full  acnonnt  of  t.liis  TTT77"  .W^V/^  pp.  200-272;  Voltaire,

conflict  in  Koc(|a;iin,  J  J  Ex  fir  it Itvfo-  Jlittt.  du  J'arlcment.
lutionwiirc avitiit  In  llccolidion,  pp.  ''■  Koc<iu;iiii,  pp 128,  129.

54-72  ;  Aubcrtin,  UEsprit  2>u\)lic  au

ciu  XX.  OITOSITION OF  THE PARLIAMENTS.  325

its  inclustiy  was  cruslied  by  excessive  and  unequal  taxation.  The
peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  in  1748  was  extremely  unpopular,  for
it  terminated  a  costly  war  without  obtaining  for  France  a  single
advantage  for  the  sacrifices  she  had  made.

An  attempt  to  put  an  end  to  the  exemption  from  taxation
which  the  clergy  enjoyed,  was  resisted  and  failed,  and  the
fanaticism  of  De  Beaumont,  who  had  been  made  Archbishop  of
Paris  in  174G,  fanned  the  Jansenist  quarrel  into  a  flame.  He
ordered  his  priests  to  refuse  the  Sacrament,  even  in  the  agony
of  death,  to  any  one  who  could  not  show  a  ticket  of  confession,
proving  that  he  had  accepted  the  Bull  Unigenitus,  and  he  also
endeavoured  to  obtain  a  complete  control  over  the  hospitals  of
Paris.  On  both  points  he  was  resisted  by  the  Parliament.
Priests  who  had  refused  the  Sacraments  under  these  circum-
stances were  prosecuted,  imprisoned,  or  exiled.  The  Govern-
ment interposed  in  their  favour,  and  in  several  cases  annulled
their  condemnation,  and  there  were  vehement  recriminations
between  the  Court  and  the  Parliaments  in  which  public  opinion
was  unquestionably  with  the  latter.  Supported  by  the  pro-
vincial Parliaments,  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  in  1752,  formally
condemned  the  tickets  of  confession,  forbade  any  ecclesiastics  to
refuse  the  Sacraments  because  those  tickets  were  not  produced,
ordered  its  decree  to  be  posted  at  the  corners  of  every  street  in
Paris,  burnt  a  number  of  sermons  and  episcopal  mandates,
accused  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  of '  schismatic  manoeuvres,'  and
of  disobeying  its  orders,  and  even  seized  on  his  temporal  pos-
sessions. The  Government  in  February  1753  interposed  by  the
form  called  a  'main  levee'  to  prevent  the  confiscation,  and
ordered  the  Parliament,  by  letters  patent,  to  abstain  from  any
further  action  on  the  subject.  The  Parliament  refused  to
register  these  letters,  and  declared  its  determination  to  resist.
In  the  night  of  May  8  and  9,  1753,  letters  of  'cachet'  were
ii^sued,  and  all  the  members  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  except
those  who  formed  the  'gi'and  chamber,'  were  exiled,  and  ordered
to  leave  Paris  in  tAventy-four  hours.  The  '  grand  chamber '  was
the  first  of  the  seven  chambers  into  which  the  Parliament  of
Paris  was  divided,  and  it  was  hoped  that  its  members,  as  they
consisted  of  the  older  magistrates,  many  of  whom  received
pensions  from  the  Court,  would  prove  flexible. They  declared,

326  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xx.

however,  that  they  shared  the  sentiments  of  their  colleagues,
and  they  were  accordingly  exiled  to  Pontoise,  and  afterwards  to
Soissons.  The  remonstrances  drawn  up  by  the  Parliament
against  the  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the  civil  power  by  eccle-
siastics, and  of  the  rights  of  Parliament  by  the  Court,  were
widely  circulated,  and  exercised  a  great  influence  on  opinion.

The  provincial  Parliaments  supported  the  Parliament  of
Paris,  and  the  conflict  became  continually  more  bitter.  The
University  of  Paris  and  a  number  of  legal  bodies  sent  deputa-
tions congratulating  the  magistrates  on  their  firmness.  Swarms
of  anonymous  or  pseudonymous  pamphlets  and  lampoons  as-
sailed the  Government  and  the  clergy.  Seditious  placards  ap-
peared upon  the  walls.  Immense  assemblages  attended  the
funerals  of  those  who  had  been  refused  the  Sacraments  on  their
deathbeds.  Riots  broke  out  in  many  quarters  and  numerous
arrests  were  made.  A  spirit  of  fierce  persecution  seemed  to
animate  those  in  power.  Refusals  of  the  Sacraments  greatly
multiplied.  There  was  a  new  and  severe  persecution  of  Protes-
tants, and  a  greatly  increased  stringency  in  the  censorship  of
the  press.  For  eight  nights  after  the  disgrace  of  the  Parlia-
ment of  Paris,  the  streets  were  patrolled  by  cavalry,  and  the
palace  of  the  archbishop  was  protected  by  a  large  body  of
ficldiers.  It  was  at  this  time  that  D'Argenson  wrote :  '  The
loss  of  religion  in  France  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  English
philosophy ;  which  has  only  influenced  about  a  hundred  philo-
sophers in  Paris,  but  to  the  hatred  of  the  priests,  which  has
now  risen  to  excess.  The  ministers  of  religion  can  scarcely
show  themselves  in  the  streets  without  being  hooted,  and  all
this  comes  from  the  Bull  Unigenitus  and  from  the  disgrace  of
the  Parliament.' '  A  royal  court  established  to  fulfil  the  func-
tions of  the  Parliament  had  no  weight  or  influence,  and  words
were  spoken  which  seemed  to  belong  to  the  time  of  the  Revolu-
tion. There  were  rumours  that  all  the  Parliaments  uniteil
would  demand  the  assembly  of  the  States-General  to  represent
autlioritatively  the  whole  nation.  A  bishop  of  Montauban  in
]  753,  in  a  pastoral  which  was  suppressed  by  the  Parliament  of
Toulouse,  recalled  the  history  of  the  conflict  between  the  English
I'nrliuuirnt  and  Charles  I.,  and  insinuated  that  another  Parlia-
'  Lt'Argenson,  Mcinoircs,  viii.  ;i,5 ;  llocquain,  p.  170.

or.  XX.  PKEDICTIONS OF D'ARGENSON.  327

ment  might  be  the  means  of  conducting  another  king  to  the
scaffold.'  The  suppression  of  the  Chatelet,  the  law  court  which
fulfilled  some  of  the  suspended  functions  of  the  Parliament,  was
expected,  and  D'Argenson  relates  the  prediction  of  a  magistrate,
with  which  he  himself  agreed,  that  in  that  case  *  the  shops
would  at  once  be  closed,  barricades  would  be  thrown  up  in  the
streets,  and  in  this  way  the  Hevolution  would  begin.'  ^  '  Every-
thing,' wrote  that  very  acute  observer  in  March  1754,  'is  pre-
paring the  way  for  civil  war.  ...  It  is  the  priests  who  are
everywhere  pushing  on  these  troubles  and  this  disorder.  The
minds  of  men  are  turning  to  discontent  and  disobedience,  and
everything  seems  moving  towards  a  great  revolution,  both  in
religion  and  government.'  ^  '  The  evil  resulting  from  our  abso-
lute monarchical  Government,'  he  wrote  on  another  occasion,  '  is
persuading  all  France  and  all  Europe,  that  it  is  the  worst  of
Governments.  .  .  .  This  opinion  advances,  rises,  strengthens,
and  may  lead  to  a  national  revolution ; '  ■*  and  he  predicted  foi'ty
years  before  the  Revolution  actually  broke  out,  that  a  great
diminution  of  kingly  power  '  and  even  republicanism '  was  the
probable  issue  in  France.^

The  journals  of  D'Argenson  between  1740  and  1756  are  full
of  such  predictions,  and  they  paint  with  a  wonderful  sagacity
the  signs  of  the  times.  '  A  philosophic  wind  of  free  and  anti-
monarchical  government  blows  upon  us — it  is  passing  into  the
minds  of  men.  ...  A  revolution  may  be  accomplished  with
less  opposition  than  is  supposed,  ...  it  may  be  made  by  ac-
clamation. .  .  .  All  orders  are  at  once  discontented.  Everything
is  combustible.  A  riot  may  pass  into  revolt,  and  a  revolt  into
a  complete  Revolution.'  '  The  words  "  nation  "  and  "  State ''
were  never  heard  so  often  as  now.  They  were  never  pronounced
under  Lewis  XIV.  There  was  then  no  idea  corresponding  to
them.  .  .  .  This  comes  to  us  from  the  Parliament  and  from  the
English.'  '  Our  opinions  are  much  influenced  by  the  neigh-
bourhood of  England,  and  opinion  governs  the  world.  Who
can  say  whether  in  the  future,  despotism  will  increase  or
diminish  in  France  ? For  my  part,  I  look  forward  to  the  latter,

>  Rocqnain,  p.  175.  ■•  Thirl,  vii.  201,  295.

»  D'Argenson,  viii.  202,  203.  »  Ibid.  vii.  212.

*  Ibid.  viii.  2il,  212.

328  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTE CENTUEY.  en.  xx.

and  even  to  republicanism.  I  have  seen  in  my  life  the  respect
and  love  of  the  people  for  royalty  diminish.  Lewis  XV.  has  not
known  how  to  govern  either  as  a  despot  or  as  a  good  chief  of  a
republic,  and  woe  to  the  royal  authority  when  neither  course  is
taken.'  The  Government  is  'an  extravagant  anarchy.'  ' No
firmness,  no  resolution,  no  decision  of  any  kind.  It  is  a  weather-
cock blown  on  in  turns  by  the  courtiers  jvho  surround  it.'
'  Weakness  and  submission  to  ill-directed  impulses  injure
society  much  more  seriously  than  the  most  refined  malice.
This  reign  is  a  proof,  for  with  these  faults  it  has  produced  more
evil  than  the  much  more  tyrannical  reigns  that  preceded  it.' '

It  will  be  observed  that  the  whole  conflict  I  have  described
was  almost  unconnected  with  the  philosophical,  freethinking,
and  literary  movement  to  which  the  Revolution  has  been  too
largely  attributed.  It  had  risen  to  a  great  height  by  the  middle
of  the  century  before  Voltaire  had  made  any  serious  attack  on
the  Christian  faith,  before  the  publication  of  the  '  Encyclopa3dia,'
before  any  of  the  important  writings  of  Rousseau,  Diderot,
D'Alembert,  Helvetius,  or  Holbach.  At  the  same  time,  as
Voltaire  had  truly  said,  a  spirit  of  inquiry  and  reasoning,  un-
known in  the  previous  reign,  had  long  been  abroad,  and  it
weakened  the  empire  of  authority  and  tradition.  It  was  at  the
end  of  1753  that  Chesterfield  wrote  the  well-known  letter  to
his  son,  in  which  he  enumerates  the  signs  of  catastrophe  which
he  saw  gathering  in  France — the  King  at  once  despised  and
hated,  'jealous  of  the  Parliaments  who  would  support  his  autlio-
rit}^  and  a  devoted  bigot  to  the  Church  that  would  destroy  it ' —
his  ministers  disunited  and  incapable — the  people  poor  and
discontented — the  clergy  and  the  Parliaments  irreconcilable
enemies.  '  The  French  nation,'  he  continued,  '  reasons  freely,
wliich  they  nev&r  did  before,  upon  matters  of  religion  and  govern-
mrmt,  and  begins  to  be  spregiudicati :  the  officers  do  so  too :  in
sliort,  all  the  symptoms  which  I  have  ever  met  with  in  history
previous  to  great  changes  and  revolutions  in  government,  now
exist  and  daily  increase  in  France.''^

Madame  de  I^ompadour  perhaps  saved  the  country  from  an

'  D'Arf,'onfon, vi. 404,  vii. 242, by  Rocqnain  anrl  Auberlin.
viii. :510. Many  other passages to  *  Chesterlicld's Letters, ii. 318,

the  bame  cll'cct  have  been  collected yiy.

ai.  XX.  TRIUMPH OF  THE TARLIAMENT.  329

immediate  rising,  by  inducing  the  King  in  the  summer  of  175  L
once  more  to  reverse  his  policy.  Employing  as  a  pretext  the
birth  of  the  prince  who  was  afterwards  Lewis  XVI.,  he  sup-
pressed the  unpopular  royal  Court,  recalled  and  reinstated
the  Parliament  of  Paris,  and  released  the  magistrates  who  had
been  imprisoned.  There  was  for  a  time  great  exultation  in
Paris,  and  it  was  increased  when  the  King,  having  vainly  en-
deavoured to  induce  the  bishops  to  abandon  their  war  against
Jansenism,  and  especially  the  tickets  of  confession,  exiled  the
Archbishops  of  Paris  and  Aix  and  the  Bishops  of  Orleans  and
Troyes.  For  a  time,  the  policy  of  the  Court  seemed  completely
changed.  The  Parliaments  were  left  free  to  prosecute  and
punish  priests  who  refused  the  Sacraments  to  those  who  had  not
accepted  the  Papal  Bull.  The  persecution  of  Protestants  was
arrested.  The  '  Encyclopasdia,'  which  had  been  suppressed,  was
again  allowed  to  appear,  and  the  Parliament  of  Paris  was  once
more  in  close  alliance  with  the  Court,  and  took  no  resolution
without  consulting  the  King.  There  seldom  was  a  stranger
example  of  that  extreme  vacillation,  that  instability  of  policy
which  was  rapidly  educating  the  French  people  into  habits  of
insubordination  and  opposition,  and  it  is  also  curious  to  observe
even  at  this  time  the  complete  absence  of  moderation  and  mea-
sure which  is  now  the  characteristic  defect  of  French  poli-
tical life.  In  countries  where  constitutional  government  really
flourishes,  political  disputes  are  habitually  settled  by  compro-
mise, and  in  the  way  of  bargain.  In  France  all  political  life
is  modelled  after  war,  and  it  is  the  main  object  of  the  victorious
party  to  pursue  its  advantage  to  the  utmost.

Some  priests  were  condemned  by  the  Parliament  to  per-
petual banishment ;  some  who  refused  to  appear  before  it  were,
in  their  absence,  condemned  to  the  galleys ;  numerous  writings
against  the  Parliament  were  burnt ;  the  sentences  were  placarded
in  the  most  conspicuous  parts  of  Paris,  and  the  Parliament  even
went  so  far  as  to  issue  a  decree  declaring  that  the  Bull  was  not
a  rule  of  faith,  and  forbidding  any  ecclesiastic,  'of  whatever
order,  quality,  or  dignity  he  might  be,  to  attribute  to  it  this
character.'  The  decree  was  evidently  directed  against  the
bishops,  and  it  was  no  less  evidently  an  invasion  of  their  right-
ful spiritual  province. Public  opinion,  however,  strongly  sup-

330  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xx.

I^orted  it,  and  tlie  liatred  of  the  priests,  and  especially  of"  the
Jesuits,  was  such  that  they  could  scarcely  appear  without  insult
in  the  streets.  The  Archbishop  of  Paris,  availing  himself  of  the
September  vacation  of  the  Parliament  in  1756,  issued  an  in-
struction excommunicating  all  priests  who  administered  the
Sacrament  in  obedience  to  orders  from  a  secular  tribunal,  all
Catholics  who  asked  for  such  orders,  and  all  magistrates  who
granted  them,  and  he  announced  that  more  than  sixty  bishops
Avere  ready  to  support  him.  The  Chatelet,  as  the  Parliament
was  not  sitting,  took  up  the  matter,  and  the  instruction  of  the
Archbishop  was  publicly  burnt,  amid  the  applause  of  a  great
multitude.  The  Archbishop  retaliated  by  threatening  with
excommunication  all  who  read  the  sentence  of  the  Chatelet.
The  Chatelet  forbade  anyone  to  print  or  circulate  this  '  mande-
ment '  under  penalty  of  corporal  punishment,  and  in  the  space
of  a  fortnight  condemned  to  the  fire  the  pastorals  of  seven  other
bishops  who  had  expressed  their  concurrence  with  the  Arch-
bishop.'

The  Government,  alarmed  at  the  fury  of  the  religious  war
which  appeared  daily  increasing,  privately  appealed  to  Bene-
dict XIV.,  who  was  at  this  time  governing  the  Church  with
eminent  wisdom  and  moderation.  It  was  impossible,  however,
for  a  Pope  to  abandon  or  retract  a  Papal  Bull,  and  with  the  best
intentions  Benedict  only  fanned  the  flame.  He  issued  a  brief,
declaring  the  Bull  Unigenitus  to  be  a  law  of  the  Church  which
could  not  be  repudiated  without  danger  to  salvation  ;  but  in
order  to  avoid  scandal,  the  French  priests  were  directed  to
administer  the  Sacraments  to  suspected  Jansenists  '  at  their
own  risk  and  peril,'  and  to  refuse  them  only  to  'notorious'
Jansenists.  The  King  sent  this  brief  to  the  bishops  with  an
order  to  conform  to  it,  but  the  l^ai-liament  refused  all  concilia-
tion and  issued  a  decree  suppressing  the  Papal  bricf.-

It  was  evident  that  the  Parliament  was  obtaining  an  (mi-
tirely  new  position  and  authority  in  the  State,  and  it  was
f(|iially  evident  that  a  very  formidable  public  opinion  had  sud-
denly arisen.  Discussions  about  tlie  fundamental  laws  of  the
Slate  might  be  lieard  even  among  the  common  people  in  tlio
i!iafkft-)jl,'icf',  and  llic  (|iiesti(:>n  whether  France  was  a  teiiipercd
'  Ilocciuain,  pp.  1S;3-193.  »  Ibid.  p.  lO'J.

CH.  XX.  GROWING POWERS OF  RARLIAMENT.  331

and  representative  monarchy,  or  an  uncontrolled  despotism,
like  Turkey,  was  eagerly  debated.  If  the  King  possessed  the
power  he  had  frequently  exercised,  of  giving  his  edicts  the
force  of  law  by  means  of  '  beds  of  justice,'  in  spite  of  the  re-
monstrances of  the  Parliament,  France  was  in  fact  a  pure
despotism;  but  the  opinion  was  now  becoming  almost  universal,
beyond  the  limits  of  the  Court  and  of  the  clergy,  that  no  edict
had  the  force  of  law  which  had  not  been  registered  by  the  free
consent  of  the  magistrates.  'The  people,'  wrote  D'Argeuson,
'  are  become  great  lovers  of  Parliaments.  They  see  in  them  a
remedy  for  the  vexations  they  suffer  on  all  sides.  All  this
foreshadows  some  revolt  that  is  already  smouldering.'  '  If  it
should  become  necessary  to  assemble  the  States-Genei-al,  they
would  not  assemble  in  vain.'  The  Parliaments  were  spoken  of
as  the  '  National  Government,'  '  the  true  Monarch  of  France,'
'  the  source  of  legitimate  power.' '

The  provincial  Parliaments  had  also  begun  to  act  in  close
concert  with  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  and  the  doctrine  had
grown  up  that  they  were  all  only  parts,  or  according  to  tho
received  phrase  'classes''  of  a  single  organic  whole,  which,  in  the
absence  of  the  States-General,  was  the  permanent  and  legitimate
representative  of  the  nation.  The  Parliaments  themselves  sup-
ported this  claim,  and  it  was  evident  that  if  admitted  it  would
completely  transform  the  government  of  the  country.

Another  consequence  of  this  religious  war  was  a  porten-
tously rapid  spread  of  religious  scepticism.  Anyone  who  has
any  real  knowledge  of  life  will  have  perceived  that  great
changes  of  opinion  among  large  masses  of  men  are  almost
always  effected,  not  by  direct  argument,  but  by  a  change  of  pre-
dispositions and  sympathies.  When  the  tide  of  opinion  flows
strongly  against  a  class,  the  minds  of  men  will  be  prepared  to
question  or  reject  what  they  teach.  The  great  literary  move-
ment against  Christianity  was  conducted  with  genius  and  per-
severance ;  but  it  would  never  have  had  a  wide  and  popular
influence,  if  men  had  not  been  prepared  to  receive  it.  It  was
the  hatred  excited  by  arrogant,  persecuting,  and  meddling
priests;  it  was  the  wrangling  that  constantly  took  place  at
marriages  and  deathbeds ;  it  was  the  perpetual  interference  of
'  Rocquain,  pp.  r.U-106  ;  Aubcitin,  pp.  274-278.

332  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cir.  xx.

Jesuits  with  the  relations  of  domestic  life,  tliat  had  gradually
opened  the  French  mind.  It  was  noticed  at  the  Carnival  of
1756  that  the  most  popular  figures  were  ignoble  caricatures  of
ecclesiastics,  monks,  and  nuns,^  and  a  swarm  of  writings  were
now  circulated  from  hand  to  hand,  assailing  the  very  foundations
of  the  Christian  faith.

The  Court,  alarmed  at  the  growing  claims  of  the  Parlia-
ments, desirous  of  obtaining  a  voluntary  contribution  from  the
clergy  for  the  Seven  Years'  War,  which  was  just  breaking
out,  and  justly  indignant  at  the  treatment  by  the  Parliament
of  the  Papal  Bull,  which  had  been  recommended  to  it,  turned
violently  to  the  other  side.  In  December  1756,  the  King
went  down  with  great  ceremony  to  the  Parliament,  and  having
lield  a  bed  of  justice,  he  authoritatively  enjoined  the  reception
of  the  Bull  as  a  decree  of  the  Church;  curtailed  the  judicial
fanctions  of  Parliament  in  ecclesiastical  cases,  and  peremp-
torily declared  that  he  would  enforce  his  decision  by  the  full
weight  of  his  authority.  Menacing  signs  of  popular  indig-
nation appeared;  but  there  was  no  actual  outbreak,  and  the
attempt  of  Damiens  on  the  life  of  the  King  turned  for  the
moment  the  popular  sentiment.  The  next  few  years  present  a
confused  and  stormy  picture  of  conflict  and  vacillation.  Great
numbers  of  the  magistrates  resigned  their  oflices.  The  courts
of  justice  were  again  interrupted.  Seditious  placards  again
appeared  in  the  streets.  Nearly  every  new  tax  required  fur
the  war  produced  a  wrangle,  and  the  Parliament  of  Besanfon
having  distinguished  itself  by  its  opposition  to  an  unpopular
tux,  four  of  its  members  were  thrown  into  prison,  and  twenty-
eight  exiled.  The  Parliament  of  I'aris  now  described  arrests  by
letters  of  '  cachet '  as  '  the  irregular  methods  of  absolute  power,'
and  as  contrary  to  the  '  rights  of  the  nation.'  It  remonstrated
a^ain  and  afjain,  in  terms  which  excited  the  warm  admiration  of
liurke,^  against  the  extravagance  and  complete  absence  of  any
real  control,  that  prevailed  in  French  finances.  It  openly  ques-
tioned the  authority  of  beds  of  justice  to  compel  it  to  register
decrees,  to  which  it  had  not  fully  consented.  It  maintained  in
concurrence  with  the  provincial  Parliaments  the  doctrine  of  the

■  D'Argonson,  ix.  210.  Oharrrations on the State of tJie

*  beu  a  remarkable  passage  in  bis Aation.

cii.  XX.  SUPPRESSION OF THE JESUITS.  333

unity  of  all  the  Parliaments  of  the  nation,  and  of  the  existence
of  fundamental  laws  which  the  Sovereign  could  not  disregard.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Chancellor  in  the  name  of  the  King
sternly  blamed  the  remonstrances  of  the  Parliament,  and  empha-
tically asserted  that  the  whole  sovereign  power  of  the  country
resided  in  the  King.  The  Archbishop  was  recalled  from  exile ;
but  soon  on  new  provocation  was  again  exiled,  and  the  same
system  of  alternate  severity  and  indulgence  was  pursued  in
dealing  with  the  magistrates.  Freethinking  and  seditious
vv^riters  were  fiercely  pursued,  and  in  this  respect  there  was
little  difference  between  the  opposing  parties.  Among  other
instances  of  petty  persecution,  an  advocate  was  struck  off  the
rolls,  by  order  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  for  having  written
against  the  refusal  of  Christian  burial  to  actors.^

One  great  concession,  however,  was  made  to  public  opinion.
A  series  of  recent  scandals  had  strengthened  the  hostility  to
the  Jesuits,  which  had  now  become  one  of  the  strongest  passions
of  the  French  mind.  All  the  Parliaments  were  united  in  hatred
of  them,  and  the  immoral  or  seditious  sentiments  in  their
writings  were  abundantly  exposed.  Their  books  were  now
publicly  burnt.  Their  houses  were  suppressed.  Their  schools
were  closed,  and  at  last,  in  1764,  to  the  great  delight  of  the
nation  the  order  was  absolutely  banished  from  the  soil  of
France.

The  royal  power,  however,  seemed  evidently  sinking.  The
disasters  of  Eossbach,  Crevelt,  Minden,  Belleisle  and  Quebec
fell  with  crushing  effects,  and  the  Peace  of  176-3  was  the  most
calamitous  and  humiliating  in  modern  French  history.  It  was
more  so  even  than  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  for  then  at  least  the
original  object  of  the  war  had  been  accomplished  by  the  main-
tenance of  a  Bourbon  prince  on  the  Spanish  throne.  By  claim-
ing absolute  authority  the  monarchy  incurred  and  accepted
undivided  responsibility;  and  it  had  given  France  neither
internal  peace,  nor  financial  prosperity,  nor  military  glory,  and
had  led  her  into  a  disastrous  conflict  with  a  great  constitutional
kingdom.  The  splendour  with  which  the  genius  of  the  elder  Pitt
irradiated  English  Parliamentary  life,  the  soundness  of  English
finance,  the  magnificence  of  the  English  conquests,  had  all  their
*  Eocquain,  p.  226.

334  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xx.

part  in  discrediting  by  contrast  the  form  of  government  exist-
ing in  France.  It  had  of  late  years  become  very  common  to
compare  the  two  countries,  and  there  was  hardly  more  than
one  point  in  which  the  comparison  could  at  this  time  fill  a
Frenchman  with  legitimate  pride.  French  contemporary  lite-
rature, indeed,  was  in  influence  and  genius  the  first  in  the  world,
yet  almost  every  French  writer  had  been  treated  as  a  criminal,
and  almost  every  French  book  of  importance  had  incurred  the
hostility  of  the  Government,

The  question  of  taxation  again  gave  rise  to  serious  conflicts.
The  war  had  ended,  but  a  burden  of  overwhelming  weight  still
continued.  In  May  1763,  a  bed  of  justice  was  held  in  which
edicts,  removing  some  taxes  but  imposing  others,  were  registered
by  express  royal  command.  The  Parliament  of  Paris  pro-
tested against  these  forced  registrations  as  '  tending  to  the  sub-
version of  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom,'  and  some  of
the  provincial  Parliaments  positively  refused  to  register  the
edicts  until  detailed  accounts  of  the  finances  of  the  nation  had
been  laid  before  them.  '  The  magistrates,'  it  was  said,  '  were
not  called  together  to  register  the  royal  edicts  in  order  to  ap-
prove of  them  blindly,'  and  they  ordered  their  remonstrances
to  be  printed  and  disseminated.  Tlie  King  on  his  side  sup-
pressed these  remonstrances,  and  the  commanders  of  the  pro-
vinces were  directed  '  manu  militari '  to  obtain  the  registration
of  the  edicts.  Numbers  of  magistrates  were  arrested.  Some
signed  in  the  presence  and  under  the  intimidation  of  soldiers.
Eighty  members  of  the  Parliament  of  Rouen  resigned.  The
Pai-1  lament  of  Paris  in  a  strong  remonstrance  supported  the
provincial  Parliaments,  described  the  conduct  of  the  Govern-
ment in  imposing  its  edicts  by  force  of  arms  as  placing  the
French  nation  in  the  position  of  a  humiliated  and  subjugated
people,  and  declared  that  these  attacks  on  a  '  sacred  and  invio-
lable jnagistracy '  must  shake  the  stability  of  the  throne,  and
teiich  tlio  pcopio  that  what  was  m;iintaiiiod  by  force  might  bo
Overlliri)\VM  1)\'  Torcc.  No  cdicis,  tin;  l*;u'li;i,iiipnt  now  boUlly  s:nM,
were  lavvl'iilly  obligatory  whic^li  lind  not,  been  'freely  registered,'
not  only  by  the  Parhiiincnt  of  l';i,ris,  l)nt  by  all  the  Parliaments
iti  i'"r;iiifo.  The,  (lovci'iinn'iii ,  ;il;niric(l  ;it  the  resistance  it  on-
couiitcred,  nioililii'd  its  cdict.s,  aniKjunced  to  the  Parliaments  that

en.  XX.  PREDICTIONS OF REVOLUTION.  335

the  King  was  willing  of  his  clemency  to  pardon  their  rehellion,
invited  them  to  communicate  their  views  about  possible  im-
provements in  the  management  of  the  finances,  and  enjoined  an
absolute  silence  on  all  that  had  happened.'

If  the  Revolution  had  at  this  time  broken  out  it  would  pro-
bably have  excited  but  little  surprise.  In  the  '  Emile  '  of  Rous-
seau, which  was  published  in  17G2,  there  occurs  the  remarkable
prediction  that  '  Europe  was  approaching  a  state  of  crisis  and
the  age  of  revolutions,'  and  that  none  of  its  great  monarchies
were  likely  to  last  long.^  In  the  summer  of  the  following  year
Wilkes  was  in  Paris,  and  in  an  interesting  letter  to  Lord
Temple  he  described  the  violence  with  which  the  Parliaments
were  treated,  and  added,  'The  most  sensible  men  here  think
that  this  country  is  on  the  eve  of  a  great  revolution.'^  Burke,
looking  on  the  subject  from  another  side,  showed  clearly  in  a
pamphlet  published  in  1769  how  financial  disorders  were  pre-
paring the  way  for  a  great  convulsion  that  might  affect  not
only  France  but  all  Europe.'*  The  clergy,  indignant  at  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  Jesuits,  at  the  contempt  with  which  two  Papal
Bulls  in  favour  of  that  order  were  treated,  and  at  the  rapid  in-
crease of  sceptical  writings  and  opinions,  held  a  General  As-
sembly in  1765,  in  which  they  condemned  the  writings  of
Helvetius,  Diderot,  Voltaire,  and  Rousseau,  and  declared  that
'  the  spirit  of  the  century  seemed  to  threaten  the  State  with  a
revolution,  which  was  likely  to  result  in  a  general  ruin  and
destruction.'  ^

In  the  same  assembly  they  once  more  asserted  as  against  the
J'arliaments  the  entire  independence  of  the  ecclesiastical  power
in  all  things  relating  to  God,  and  especially  in  the  administra-
tion of  the  Sacraments,  and  declaring  that  the  Bull  Unigenitus
was  '  a  dogmatic  judgment  of  the  Universal  Church,'  they  pro-
nounced that  those  who  were  refractory  to  it  must,  like  other

'  Rocx^uain,  pp.  239-243.  affairs  with  any  degree  of  attention

'  Emile,  livre  iii.  or  information,  but  must  hourly  li dk

^  Grcnrille  Paj)ers,  ii.  99,  100.  for  some  extraordinary  convulsion  iti

*  'Indeed, under such extreme  that whole system; the erlect of

straitness  and  distraction  labours  the  which on F'rance and even on all

whole  body  of  their  finances,  so  far  Europe,  it  is  dilficult  to  conjecture/ —

does  their  charge  outrun  their  supply  Obscr  rat  Ions on the State of the

in  every  particular,  that  no man,  I  JS'atiou.

believe,  who has considered their  ^  Kocquain,  pp.  251-23-3.

336  ENGLAND IN THE  eighteenth"  CENTURY.  en.  xx,

public  sinners,  be  publicly  refused  the  Sacraments,  The  Parlia-
ment ordered  this  declaration  to  be  suppressed,  and  a  circular
letter  of  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  to  be  burnt.  The  King,  on
the  petition  of  the  bishops,  cancelled  this  decree.  The  cen-
sured writings  were  assiduously  circulated,  together  with  pam-
phlets accusing  the  magistrates  of  'deliberately  labouring  to
overthrow  the  throne  and  the  altar,'  and  petitions  asking  for  tho
restoration  of  the  Jesuits.  At  last  in  May  1766  an  order  of
Council  was  published,  ordering  the  observance  of  the  Galilean
maxims  of  1682  fixing  the  bounds  of  the  two  powers,  and  it
at  the  same  time  repeated  the  declaration  of  1731  prescribing
absolute  silence  on  these  questions.^

It  was  little  more  than  a  dead  letter,  and  the  contest  between
the  Parliaments  and  the  bishops  continued  with  unabated  viru-
lence ;  but  it  no  longer  excited  the  same  interest.  The  anti-
Christian  movement  was  now  at  its  height,  and  the  public  had
ceased  to  care  about  the  Bull  Unigenitus.  The  atrocious  punish-
ment of  the  Chevalier  de  la  Barre,  a  young  soldier  of  nineteen,
who  was  condemned  for  blasphemy  in  1766,  tortured  with
horrible  severity,  and  then  beheaded,  excited  a  deep-seated
indignation,  and  innumerable  writings  were  circulated  advoca-
ting complete  religious  toleration,  and  attacking  priests,  monks,
nuns,  Christianity^  and  even  Theism  itself.  Many  who  sold
these  writings  were  thrown  into  prison,  and  some  were  sent  to
the  galleys ;  but  it  was  plain  that  the  anti-Christian  literature
represented  the  opinions,  and  met  the  demands,  of  the  great
body  of  the  educated  classes,  and  that  crowds  of  administrators
in  all  departments  connived  at  or  favoured  its  circulation.
Atheism  had  penetrated  into  the  monasteries,  perhaps  even  into
the  episcopal  palaces,  and  the  sincere  Catholics  did  nothing  to
make  their  religion  respected.  The  faculty  of  theology  selected
this  time  to  declare  that  religious  intolerance  was  of  the  essence
of  Catholicism,  and  that  it  was  the  duty  of  princes  to  place
their  swords  at  tho  service  of  the  faith. '^  I  have  ah'eady  men-
tioned the  episcopal  memorial  of  1770,  'on  tho  evil  conse-
qiKUices  of  liberty  of  thinking  and  printing.' •*  What  littlo
devotion  remained  was  of  a  very  sickly  character.  A  skull
illiuiiiinilcd  with  tapers,  and  a(l<<i'ii(',d  with  ribbons  and  })o;n'ls,
' Ilocniaiii,  p[).  L':.2-L'5.'5,  ''■  Juid.  p.  202.  »  Ibid.  p.  1.'75.

CH.  XX.  AUTHORITY OF THE TARLIAMENTS.  337

might  at  tliis  time  be  commonly  found  in  a  devout  lady's
boudoir.  It  was  called  '  La  Belle  Mignonne,'  and  the  devotee
was  accustomed  to  spend  a  portion  of  every  day  in  prayer  and
meditation  before  it.  The  Queen  was  much  addicted  to  this
devotion,  and  the  skull  before  which  she  prayed  was  said  to  be
that  of  Ninon  de  I'Enclos.^

Nearly  everything  strong,  masculine,  and  intellectual,  was
opposed  to  the  Church,  and  the  great  favour  which  the  chief
sovereigns  of  Europe  showed  to  the  Encyclopasdists  reacted
upon  and  elevated  their  position  in  France.  Voltaire  boasted
with  some  truth,  that  their  ideas  were  in  the  ascendant  from
St.  Petersburg  to  Cadiz.  How  little  the  French  Government
itself,  regarded  papal  anathemas,  was  shown  by  its  conduct  in
1768,  when  having  quarrelled  with  the  Pope,  chiefly  on  a
matter  relating  to  Parma  and  Placentia,  it  seized  upon  the
papal  town  and  territory  of  Avignon,  incorporated  them  for  a
time  into  the  French  monarchy,  and  refused  to  restore  them  till
the  end  of  1773,  when  the  Pope  had  at  last  yielded  to  the
demand  of  France,  Spain,  and  Naples,  for  the  suppression  of
the  Jesuits.^

The  political  questions  at  issue  between  the  Parliaments  and
the  Court  were  of  a  graver  and  more  important  character.  Could
the  King  impose  taxes  without  the  free  consent  of  the  Parlia-
ment ?  Could  he  legitimately,  by  a  '  bed  of  justice,'  compel  the
magistrates  to  register  edicts  of  which  they  did  not  approve  ?
Could  he  arrest,  imprison,  and  exile  them  if  they  refused  to
obey  ?  Had  the  Council  of  State,  which  was  essentially  the
organ  of  the  King,  the  power  of  annulling  the  decrees  of  the
Parliament,  and  arresting  the  prosecutions  which  it  ordered  ?
What  was  the  nature,  and  what  were  the  relations,  of  the
Parliaments  ?  Were  they  merely  a  number  of  separate  law
courts,  deriving  all  their  force  and  authority  from  the  Sovereign,
or  were  they  branches  of  one  organic  whole,  of  an  institution
which  was  one  of  the  oldest  parts  of  the  French  Government,
and  which  had,  by  right,  original  and  independent  powers  ?
Was  the  registration  of  the  royal  edicts,  which  was  required
before  they  obtained  the  force  of  law,  a  mere  matter  of  form,

•  D'Argenson,  Mem.  vii.  16,  17.

*  Sorel,  L'A'uroj/e  ct  la  Ucrolution  Franqaisr,  pp.  G!),  70.

VOL.  V.  Z

338  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY,  ch.  xx.

attestation,  or  verification,  in  which  the  magistrates  acted  the
parts  of  witnesses  or  clerks,  or  did  it  mean  that  those  edicts
were  to  be  submitted  to  their  free  judgments,  and  that  they
might  be  annulled  by  their  veto  ?  It  is  obvious  that  such  ques-
tions touched  the  very  foundations  of  French  government,  and
they  were  not  likely  to  be  settled  by  archaBological,  historical,  or
juridical  arguments,  but  by  the  pressure  either  of  opinion  or  of
force.  If,  as  appeared  at  one  time  probable,  the  Parliaments
established  the  position  for  which  they  contended,  the  French
monarchy  would  at  once  cease  to  be  a  despotism.  The  Govern-
ment would  not  be  in  the  English  sense  representative ;  but  it
would  have  some  affinity  to  the  Government  of  Venice.  The
authority  of  the  King  would  be  tempered  and  controlled  by  a
powerful  and  independent  magistracy,  partly  concentrated  in  the
metropolis,  partly  diffiised  through,  and  in  some  sense  repre-
senting, the  different  provinces.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
claims  of  the  Parliaments  were  overthrown,  the  Government  of
France  was  essentially  a  pure  autocracy.

The  question  was  now  brought  clearly  to  an  issue.  '  If  they
succeed,'  writes  Barbier,  '  in  diminishing  the  authority  and  the
pretended  rights  of  Parliament,  there  will  no  longer  be  any
obstacle  to  a  solid  despotism.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Parlia-
ments unite  to  resist  by  strong  measures,  this  can  only  be
followed  by  a  general  revolution  in  the  State.'  ^  In  March
1766,  the  Parliament  of  Paris  having  issued  a  decree  protesting
asrainst  the  arrest  and  trial  of  some  members  of  the  Parliament
of  Brittany,  the  King  appeared  in  person  in  the  Parliament,
and  ordered  the  decree  to  be  expunged  from  their  records.  He
informed  the  magistrates  that  this  affair  in  no  way  concerned
them.  He  accused  them  of  disregarding  the  fundamental
riglits  of  the  Crown  in  pretending  that  they  formed  with  the
other  Parliaments  of  the  kingdom  an  indivisible  body  which
was  the  representative  of  the  nation  and  participated  with  the
monarch  in  making  the  laws ;  and  he  proceeded  in  the  most
emphatic  and  explicit  terms  to  affirm  that  the  monarchy  of
France  was  an  absolute  and  unlimited  despotism.  *It  is  in  my
person  alone,'  he  said,  '  that  the  sovereign  power  resides.  It  is
from  uie  alone  that  my  Courts  derive  their  existence  and  their
'  Roccjuain,  p.  210.

CH.  XX.  THE CONFLICT OF 1770.  339

authority ;  it  is  to  me  alone  that  the  legislative  power  belongs
without  dependence  and  without  division;  the  whole  public
order  emanates  from  me ; '  and  he  concluded  by  threatening  that
if  the  Parliament  continued  the  scandal  of  opposing  his  will,
he  would  find  himself  obliged  to  employ  the  power  he  had  re-
ceived from  God,  to  preserve  his  people  from  the  fatal  conse-
quences of  such  attempts.^

It  would  be  impossible  to  speak  more  plainly.  In  the  face
of  the  intense  intellectual  and  political  life  that  was  now  agita-
ting the  nation,  in  a  country  which  boasted  that  it  was  at  the
head  of  civilisation,  and  addressing  a  great  judicial  body  which
was  said  to  be  as  ancient  as  the  monarchy  itself,  the  King  of
France  claimed  a  power  which  was  essentially  that  of  an  Orien-
tal despot.  And  the  sovereign  who  used  this  language  was
not  a  Cgesar,  a  Frederick,  or  a  Napoleon.  He  was  contemptible
in  his  abilities,  sunk  in  sloth  and  in  degrading  vice,  and  he
spoke  not  in  the  moment  of  victory  or  of  brilliant  prosperity,
but  at  a  time  when  his  country  was  reduced  by  bad  government
to  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  and  still  lay  under  the  shadow  of  a
disastrous  war  and  of  an  ignominious  peace.  Yet  this  language
represented  real  power,  and  it  was  only  the  precursor  of  corre-
sponding action.  A  few  more  years  of  altercations,  remon-
strances, resignations,  imprisonments,  exiles,  and  vacillations
ensued,  but  at  last  the  blow  was  struck.  The  occasion  was  the
trial  of  the  Duke  of  Aiguillon,  who,  having  been  accused  of
gross  abuses  in  the  government  of  Brittany,  had  asked  for
a  trial  before  the  Court  of  Peers,  and  had  accordingly  by
the  King's  orders  been  arraigned  before  the  Parliament
of  Paris.  The  ti-ial  began  in  April  1770.  When  it  had
proceeded  in  its  regular  course  for  rather  more  than  two
months,  the  King  intervened,  annulled  the  proceedings  by
letters  patent,  and  declared  the  Duke  exonerated  from  every
chai'ge.  The  Parliament  retaliated  by  declaring  that  the
Duke  rested  under  grave  suspicion,  and  forbidding  him  to
exercise  any  of  the  functions  of  the  peerage,  till  he  was  for-
mally acquitted.  The  King  at  once  annulled  the  sentence,  and
going  down  to  the  Parliament  he  carried  away  the  registers
of  the  trial.

'  Kocquain,  pp.  255,  256.

z  2

340  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

The  period  of  vacation  followed,  and  soon  tlie  provincial
Parliaments  rallied  round  the  Parliament  of  Paris  and  pro-
nounced these  proceedings  a  gross  infringement  of  parliamen-
tary rights.  But  the  Chancellor  Maupeou,  who  now  guided  the
counsels  of  the  King,  was  prepared  to  carry  the  strife  to  ex-
tremities. On  December  7  a  new  bed  of  justice  was  held,  and
the  Chancellor  read  to  the  Parliament  a  royal  edict,  in  which
the  King  declared  that  'he  held  his  crown  from  God  alone,
that  to  him  alone,  without  dependence  or  partition,  belonged  the
legislative  power,  that  the  custom  of  making  representations
to  him  must  not  be  converted  by  the  magistrates  into  a  right  of
resistance,  that  these  representations  had  their  limits,  and  that
they  could  place  none  to  his  authority.'  He  accused  the  magis-
trates of  systematic  opposition  to  the  royal  will  and  to  his  pre-
rogative, and  he  peremptorily  forbade  the  Parliaments  of  France
by  the  use  of  the  terms  '  unity,'  '  indivisibility,'  and  '  classes '  to
describe  themselves  as  a  single  body.  He  declared  this  doctrine
seditious.  He  forbade  all  correspondence  between  the  Parlia-
ments of  the  kingdom,  all  joint  resignations  and  all  delays  in
registering  the  royal  edicts,  and  he  threatened,  if  these  offences
were  committed,  that  the  guilty  magistrates  should  be  de-
prived of  their  offices  and  punished  as  rebels.  After  vain
though  angry  remonstrances,  this  edict  was  transcribed  in  the
registers.

The  magistrates,  insulted  and  branded  before  the  country,
had  but  one  last  remedy — that  of  refusing  to  perform  their
judicial  functions.  Four  times  the  King  ordered  them  to  re-
sume these  functions,  and  four  times  they  refused  unless  they
received  a  pledge  that  the  laws  of  France  would  be  main-
tained, and  the  late  edict  revoked.  The  struggle  was  ended  by
a  coup  d'etat.  On  the  night  of  January  20,  1771,  soldiers
appeared  by  the  bedside  of  every  magistrate,  demanding  their
signature  to  a  paper  stating  whether  or  not  they  would  resume
their  functions.  A  few,  terror-stricken  at  the  thought  of  im-
prisonment !iiid  (!xil(!,  at  first  yielded,  but  afterwards  recanted,
while  the  gre;it  majority  refused.  A  royal  decree  was  then  issued
from  tlio  Council,  exiling  the  magistrates,  confiscating  their
offices,  declaring  them  and  their  children  incapable  of  filling
any  judicial  p(j.st. The  Parliament  of  Paris  was  absolutely  sup-

CH.  XX.  COUP DETAT OF  MAUPEOU.  341

pressed,  and  six  new  courts  of  justice  appointed  by  the  King
were  created  in  its  place.  The  '  Cour  des  Aides,'  which  refused
to  recognise  the  new  authority,  was  suppressed.  Its  magistrates
were  driven  by  soldiers  from  the  bench,  and  their  President
Malesherbes — the  same  who  in  after  years  so  nobly  distinguished
himself  by  his  defence  of  Lewis  XVI. — was  exiled.  The  Cha-
telet  was  reorganised  and  made  completely  subservient  to  the
Crown,  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  work  was  completed  by
the  suppression  of  the  provincial  Parliaments.  One  great  act
of  the  contest  that  led  to  the  Eevolution  was  thus  terminated,
and  the  royal  authority  remained  triumphant,  and  absolute  in
France.

As  might  have  been  expected,  public  opinion  was  excited  by
these  events.  Large  bodies  of  troops  were  assembled  in  the
capital,  and  the  new  authorities  put  under  strong  military  pro-
tection. Innumerable  seditious  placards  and  other  writings
appeared.  Most  of  the  subordinate  courts  of  justice  protested.
The  Cour  des  Aides  and  the  Parliament  of  Kouen  distinguished
themselves  by  demanding  a  convocation  of  the  States-General
to  decide  the  question  at  issue  between  the  King  and  the
magistracy.  With  a  single  exception,  the  princes  of  the  blood
were  opposed  to  the  policy  of  the  King,  and  six  of  them  headed
by  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  followed  by  thirteen  peers  of
France,  drew  up  a  protest  against  the  recent  violence,  declaring
that  '  it  had  ever  been  the  right  of  the  princes  and  peers  of
France  to  be  judged  only  by  the  first  and  indestructible  Cor-
poration of  the  nation,  and  by  judges  who  were  by  right  im-
movable.' Placards  and  anonymous  letters  urged  the  Duke  of
Orleans  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  Revolution,  and  it  was
the  opinion  of  a  well-informed  contemporary  observer,^  that
if  at  this  time  a  leader  had  been  found,  a  most  formidable
rebellion  might  have  broken  out.^  Mile.  Geuest,  who  was  after-
wards Mme.  de  Campan,  had  become  reader  at  the  Court  in
1767,  and  she  tells  us  that  twenty  years  before  1789  it  had
become  a  common  subject  of  discourse,  that  the  institutions
of  the  ancient  monarchy  were  falling  into  ruin,  and  that  the

'  Hardy.  pp.  403-425;  Rocquain,  V  Esprit  Rc-

2  See  on  this  whole  history  Sis-  rolutionnaire  avaiit  la  Itccolutioii,
montli,  Ultst.  des  Franqais,  tome  xs. pp.  2S2-297.

342 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xx.

century would not close without some great revolution in
France.'

The  fact,  however,  remains  that  this  great  change,  which
Bwept  away  the  last  semblance  of  constitutional  opposition  and
control  in  France,  was  effected  by  royal  authority  without  the
effusion  of  a  drop  of  blood.  It  made  a  deep  impression  both  in
France  and  in  other  countries  ;  from  this  time  the  predictions
of  revolution,  which  during  the  preceding  years  had  been  so  fre-
quent, almost  absolutely  ceased,  and  they  did  not  again  acquire
any  importance  till  the  convocation  of  the  Notables  in  1787.
On  both  sides  of  the  Channel  it  had  long  been  the  custom  to
contrast  the  loyalty  or  servility  of  the  French  to  their  sovereign
with  the  insubordination  and  jealousy  of  the  English,^  and  the
destruction,  without  a  serious  effort  of  resistance,  of  an  insti-
tution which  had  existed  for  many  centuries,  and  which  alone
distinguished  the  French  Government  from  pure  despotism,  ap-
peared to  contemporary  observers  to  show  that  no  real  oppo-
sition to  royal  authority  was  possible  in  France.  To  foreigners,
indeed,  who  could  not  follow  the  minor  currents  of  passion  and
opinion,  the  submission  seemed  even  greater  than  it  was. The

'  Mfm.  sur  la  vie  de  Marie-Antoi-  at  the  Revolution,  so as  to  prevent

neUe,  par  Mine,  de  Campan ;  avant-  the  ]ike  abuses  for  the  future. They

propos.  would  never  think  of  going  further,

■■^  See  some striking  examples  of  I  imagine,  than  placing  another  prince

this  in  Buckle's  Hhtory  of  Civilixa-  of  the  Bourbon  family  on  th«  throne,

Hon, i.  G8'J, and  Tamc's  A  ficien  Bcijime,  with the  same  power  that  his pre-

p. 15. An intelligent English tra-  docessor.s  had,  and  tlien quietly  lay

veller named Jloorc, who visited  down  their  arms,  satisfied  with his

France  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  royal  word  or  declaration  to  govern

of Lewis  XV. gives many  illustra-  with  more  equity. Tlie  French  seem

tions of the semi -adoration with  so delighted and  dazzled  with  the

which the French seemed then to  lustre  of  monarchj^  that  they  cannot

regard their king, and adds this  bear  the  tlioiight  of any  qualifying

curious prediction: 'The philoso-  mixture  which might  abate  its  vio-

phical idea  that kings liave bi;en  lence.' — IVloore's Trarch  in France,

af)pointed for public convenience,  4'^'. (5tli ed.) i. 44, 4.5. D'Argen-

tiiat they  are accountable to  their  son  writes: 'Louis  XV  est  clu'ri  do

subjcctB for maladministration and  son  peuplc,  sans  lui  avoir  fait  aucun

for  continued  acts  of injustice  and  bien . . . regardons  en cela nos

oppression,  is  a  doctrine  very  oppo-  Franr;ais comme le peuple le plus

Bite  to  the  general  prejudices  of  ihis  porte tl  I'amour  dcs rois qui sera

nation. If any  of  tlicir  kings  were  j.'imais. II  p6n^tre  leur  caract^re,  il

to  behave  in  sueli  an  imprudent  and  jirenri  les  intentions  pour  Taction.' —

outrageous  manner  as  to  occasion  a  D'Argenson,  Mfm.  iv.  p.  167. In  the

revolt,  and  if  the  insurgents  actually  d('sciii)tion  of the  French  character

got the better, I  question if they  given  long  after  (art.  '  CaracttVe ')  in

would  thiiik of  new  modelling tlie  the  EncyrlojM'dia,  Tamour  de  leurs

Oovcrnmiint,  and  limiting  the  power  rois  et  de  la  moiiarchie  memo 'has  a

of  the  Crown,  as  was  done  in  Britain  prominent  place.

CH.  XX.  ABOLITION OF  THE  PARLIAMENTS.  343

account  of  the  event  in  the  '  Annual  Register '  is  peculiarly-
interesting,  as  it  is  almost  certainly  from  the  pen  of  Burke.
'  The  noble  efforts,'  he  writes,  '  of  that  faithful  repository  of  the
laws,  and  remembrancer  of  the  ancient  rights  of  the  people,  the
Parliament  of  Paris,  in  the  cause  of  liberty  and  mankind,  have
fatally  terminated  in  its  own  final  destruction.  .  .  .  That  ancient
spirit  from  which  the  Franks  derive  their  name,  though  still
gloriously  alive  in  the  breasts  of  a  few,  no  longer  exists  in  the
bulk  of  the  people.  Long  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  a
magnificent  and  voluptuous  Court,  with  the  glare  of  a  vast
military  power,  and  with  the  glory  of  some  great  monarchs,
they  cannot  now,  in  the  grave  light  of  the  shade,  behold  things
in  their  natural  state ;  nor  can  those  who  have  been  long  used
to  submit  without  inquiry  to  every  act  of  power  .  .  .  suddenly
acquire  that  strength  and  tenor  of  mind,  which  is  alone  capable  of
forming  great  resolutions  and  of  undertaking  arduous  and  dan-
gerous tasks.  Thus  has  this  great  revolution  in  the  history  and
government  of  France  taken  place  without  the  smallest  commotion,
or  without  the  opposition  that  in  other  periods  would  have  attended
an  infraction  of  the  heritable  jurisdiction  of  a  petty  vassal.' '

The  public  feeling  on  the  question  was  stronger  than  Burke
imagined,  but  the  Parliament  had  powerful  enemies.  The
courtiers  and  the  priests  detested  it,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
Voltaire,  separating  himself  on  this  occasion  from  what  was
undoubtedly  the  popular  opinion,  warmly  and  repeatedly  ex-
pressed his  approval  of  the  act  of  the  Government.  In  his
eyes  any  political  merits  the  Parliaments  might  possess  were
much  more  than  counteracted  by  the  hostility  they  had  shown  to
toleration  and  to  reform.  As  late  as  1762  a  young  Protestant
minister  named  Pochette  had  by  order  of  the  Parliament  of
Toulouse  been  hung  in  his  shirt,  with  head  and  feet  naked,  '  for
having  performed  the  functions  of  a  minister  of  the  so-called
reformed  Church,'  and  it  was  the  same  Parliament  which  had
been  guilty  of  the  atrocious  judicial  murder  of  Calas. The

'  Annual  Begister,  1771,  p.  89. I  liament of Paris was very steady,

have  already  noticed Burke's  warm  Almost  in  tlie  last  words  he  uttered:

eulogy  of  the  remonstrances  of the  in iwblic— in the magniticent  por-

French  Parliaments,  expressed  in  his  oration to his  magniiicent  reply  on

Ohtter ratio II t> on the State of the  the  Hastings impeachment — he in-

Nation,. His  admiration  for  Mie  Par-  troduced  a  noble  eulog}-  of  it.

344 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CEHTUEY. en.  xx.

Parliament  of  Paris  had  borne  a  leading  part  in  the  earlier
persecutions  of  the  Huguenots ;  it  had  instituted  an  annual  pro-
cession in  honour  of  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew ;  it  had
steadily  persecuted  the  party  of  freethinkers  and  burnt  their
books ;  it  had  come  forward  conspicuously  in  condemning  loans
upon  interest,  and  in  opposing  the  practice  of  inoculation;
and  it  was  responsible  for  the  recent  disgraceful  sentences
against  La  Barre  and  against  Lally.^  The  abolition  of  the
venality  of  judicial  posts,  which  Voltaire  had  long  desired,  was
decreed  when  the  Parliament  was  abolished,  and  the  multiplica-
tion of  courts  of  justice  was  considered  a  real  reform.

One  of  the  most  important  results  of  the  suppression  of  the
Parliaments  was  that  the  opposition  to  the  Court  fell  almost
exclusively  into  the  hands  of  men  of  letters,  who  had  no  practi-
cal experience  in  the  conduct  of  affairs.  Political  writings
immensely  multiplied,  and  political  speculation  acquired  a  greatly
increased  importance.  The  events  which  have  been  hitherto
recorded  belong  strictly  to  French  history,  but  political  doctrines
at  this  time  acquired  an  ascendency  in  France  which  speedily  in-
fluenced surrounding  countries,  and  was  nowhere  felt  more  power-
fully than  in  England.  Voltaire  was  now  a  very  old  man,  and,
though  still  in  the  zenith  of  his  fame,  his  influence  had  greatly
declined.  He  was  looked  upon  as  belonging  to  a  bygone  genera-
tion, and  both  religious  and  political  thought  had  taken  forms
with  which  he  had  no  sympathy.  Believing  that  natural
religion  was  not  only  true,  but  indispensably  necessary  to  the
well-being  of  society,  he  detested  the  aggressive  atheism  which
had  arisen,  and  on  one  occasion  when  Condorcet  and  D'Alembert
expressed  such  opinions  at  a  supper  party,  Voltaire  ordered  his
servants  to  leave  the  room,  saying  that  he  did  not  choose  them
to  hear  such  doctrines,  as  he  had  no  desire  to  be  robbed  or
murdered.  On  the  other  hand,  he  had  a  complete  contempt
])(){h  for  speculative  and  democratic  politics.  His  aim,  as  he
once  said,  was  not  to  make  a  revolution  like  that  of  Luther  or
Calvin,  but  to  enlighten  the  minds  of  the  rulers  of  men.  He
totally  dls])eli(^vod  in  popular  political  judgments,  and  emphati-
cally denied to  his  own countrymen, and especially to  the

'  Sismondi,  f/ixfoln;  dcs  Fra/u;ai,ii,  xx.  'o2o-'327  ;  Mine,  de  .Stuul,  C'o7is.  sur
la  Ilinuluiion,  i.  Mo.

en.  XX.  THE  SOCIAL  CONTEACT.  345

Parisians,  the  qualities  of  wisdom  and  sobriety  that  are  necessary
for  self-government.  But  a  new  star  had  now  arisen  in  the
sphere  of  political  thought.  The  diseased  but  splendid  genius
of  Rousseau  was  acquiring  that  complete  ascendency  which  it
retained  undiminished  for  many  years.  His  wonderful  eloquence,
in  which  passion  and  reason  were  so  finely  blended,  appealed
with  a  transcendent  force  to  the  imaginations  and  the  feelings  of
his  contemporaries ;  and  if  Voltaire  continued  to  be  the  favouiite
of  good  society,  of  the  critic,  the  literary  epicurean,  and  the
sceptic,  Rousseau  had  an  immeasurably  stronger  influence  over
a  far  larger  section  of  the  French  people.^

It  is  a  well-known  saying  of  Napoleon,  that  if  Rousseau  had
never  lived,  there  would  have  been  no  French  Revolution  ;  and  in
spite  of  its  manifest  exaggeration,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  this
saying  is  not  without  plausibility.  That  which  distinguishes
the  French  Revolution  from  other  political  movements  is.  that
it  was  directed  by  men  who  had  adopted  certain  speculative,
d  'priori  conceptions  of  political  right,  with  the  fanaticism  and
proselytising  fervour  of  a  religious  belief,  and  the  Bible  of  their
creed  was  the  '  Contrat  Social '  of  Rousseau.

The  doctrine  of  the  social  contract  was,  indeed,  far  from  new.
It  had  been  fully  and  ably  expounded  by  Locke,  and  it  may  be
found  before  Locke  in  the  writings  of  Hooker,  of  the  Jesuits,
and  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas.  Society,  according  to  the  English
Whig  doctrine  of  the  Revolution,  was  originally  formed  for  the
protection  of  the  lives  and  properties  of  those  who  composed  it,
and  who  would  otherwise  have  been  perpetually  at  the  mercy  of
the  strongest.  Its  first  object  is  that  every  man  should  be
enabled  to  live  in  peace  and  security  as  long  as  he  does  not
molest  his  neighbour,  and  to  enjoy  without  disturbance  the  pro-
perty which  he  has  honestly  acquired  either  by  his  own  industry
or  by  the  favour  of  others.  To  attain  these  ends  it  is  necessary
for  men  to  agi-ee  upon  certain  settled  laws  which  are  to  be  the
standard  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  community,  the  common
measure  deciding  their  controversies.  It  is  also  necessary  to
create  an  organisation  which  can  execute and  enforce  these

'  See  an  extremely  able  discussion  seau,  on  the  Revolution,  by  Mallet
of  the  influence  of  the  philosophers,  du  Pan,  Mercure  liritanniq^^ue,  ii.
but  especially  of  Voltaire  and  Roue- 3i2-370.

346  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

laws,  and  punish  those  who  infringe  them.  This  cannot  be  clone
without  expense,  and  as  the  object  is  one  of  common  interest,  it
must  be  supported  by  common  contributions.  Everyone  who
enjoys  a  share  of  the  protection,  should  pay  his  proportion  out  of
his  estate,  and  this  should  be  as  far  as  possible  levied  by  his  own
consent.  Unanimous  consent,  indeed,  is  practically  impossible,
but  the  consent  of  the  majority  by  themselves  or  their  deputies
should  be  obtained.  There  is,  however,  such  a  thing  as  the
consent  of  acquiescence,  and  there  is  such  a  thing  as  virtual
representation,  and  all  that  is  really  necessary  is  that  the  acts
of  the  Government  should  tend  to  the  benefit,  and  express  the
wishes,  of  the  whole  community.  The  true  theory  of  taxation
is  that  society  is  a  great  joint-stock  company  in  which  all  have
shares,  some  more  and  some  less,  and  it  is  right  that  all  should
be  taxed  at  the  same  rate,  and  that  each  should  pay  in  propor-
tion to  the  number  of  his  shares.^  The  community  has  many
and  complex  relations  to  external  bodies,  and  it  is  found  that  in
addition  to  the  protection  of  life  and  property,  there  are  within
the  country  itself  many  ends  useful  to  the  whole  body,  which
can  be  better  accomplished  by  the  machinery  of  government
than  by  any  other  means,  and  in  this  manner  the  action  of
government  is  gradually  extended.  But  the  protection  of
property  and  the  pursuance  of  common  interests  by  common  con-
sent lie  at  the  basis  of  the  whole  conception  of  the  State,  and  no
measures  which  are  inconsistent  with  these  primary  ends  of
government  can  be  obligatory.

Such,  in  a  very  few  lines,  was  the  substance  of  that  Whig  philo-
Kophy  which  was  elaborated,  chiefly  by  Locke,  in  opposition  to
the  Tory  theory  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings,  and  which  gene-
rally prevailed  in  England  during  the  eighteenth  century.  It
is  open  to  considerable  criticism  both  from  an  historical  and  from
a  logical  point  of  view,  and  no  Government  has  ever  strictly
uclfd  up  to  its  requirements  ;  but  on  the  whole  it  furnishes
an  excellent  working  tlieory  for  i'ree  governinouts,  a  general
criterion  by  wliich  their  aims  and  principles  may  be  tested.  It
is  al(ogf!tlior  inconsistent  witli  absolute  monai'chy  ;  it  establishes,
as  far  as  a  (lorti-im;  c;iii,  the  indcCcasihli^  right  of  eveiy  ni;m  to
his  owji  pi-opei'ty,  subject  to  the  obligation  of  contributing  his
'  Thiers,  Jm  I'rojirUlc,

CH.  XX.  ENGLISH  AND  FKENCH  POLITICS.  347

proportion  to  the  expenses  of  its  protection  and  to  the  other
common  interests  of  society,  and  it  guards  against  the  general
and  most  subtle  vice  of  all  governments,  the  subordination  of
the  common  interests  to  the  interests  of  a  class.  At  the  same
time,  as  Burke  was  never  weary  of  urging,  speculation  has  had
only  a  slight  part  in  directing  the  course  of  English  politics.
There  have  been  fundamental  laws,  old  traditional  customs  and
understandings,  numerous  institutions  representing  with  more  or
less  fidelity  the  different  interests,  classes,  and  opinions  in  the
country,  and  determining  by  their  balance  the  preponderance  of
political  power  and  the  tendencies  of  political  development.  It
is  when  one  power  has  unduly  encroached  upon  the  others,  when
old  laws  or  traditional  observances  are  strained  or  violated,
when  a  conflict  arises  between  the  public  opinion  of  the  nation
and  some  of  its  institutions,  when  classes  or  interests  or  opinions
have  grown  up  which  find  no  adequate  recognition  in  the  old
framework  of  the  Government,  when  in  a  word  some  practical
grievance  or  uneasiness  has  disclosed  itself,  that  changes  are
usually  effected.  And  these  changes  have  been  commonly
enlargements  or  modifications  of  existing  institutions,  made  by
practical  politicians  in  obedience  to  the  strong  pressure  of
opinion,  with  very  little  regard  to  symmetry,  logic,  or  con-
sistency, but  with  the  object  of  remedying  particular  grievances
or  satisfying  particular  wants.  Speculative  writers  have  after-
wards defended  them  on  general  principles,  but  these  have  been
to  a  great  extent  afterthoughts.

In  France,  however,  the  course  of  events  was  entirely
different.  Absolute  monarchy  having  destroyed  almost  every
organisation  that  could  become  a  centre  of  opposition,  and
having  prevented  the  growth  of  a  school  of  practical  and  expe-
rienced reformers,  politics  came  to  be  treated  like  a  problem  of
geometry  or  ethics,  to  be  worked  out  on  general  principles,
with  a  complete  disregard  to  the  traditions  and  special  circum-
stances of  the  nation.  In  Rousseau,  the  French  found  one  of
the  most  eloquent  and  seductive  political  writers  who  have  ever
lived,  and  he  furnished  the  archetype  or  pattern  on  which  the
revolutionary  school  endeavoured  to  build.  The  '  Coutrat
Social '  ranks  with  the  '  Wealth  of  Nations '  as  one  of  the  two
political  works  of  the  eighteenth  century  which  have  had  the

348  .ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

greatest  practical  influence  upon  public  affairs ;  but  wliile  the
influence  of  Adam  Smith  has  been  almost  entirely  for  good,  the
political  influence  of  Eousseau  appears  to  me  to  have  been  almost
wholly  evil.

The  first  great  characteristic  of  the  theory  of  Rousseau,  is  the
distinction  which  he  di'aws  between  sovereignty  and  govei'n-
ment.  Sovereignty  in  every  country  resides  in  the  whole  mass
of  the  population,  and  no  government  is  morally  legitimate,
which  does  not  rest  upon  a  decision  in  which  the  whole  nation
takes  part.  The  sovereign  power  is  compelled,  by  the  nature  of
things,  to  construct  governments  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on
its  afiairs ;  but  its  sovereignty  can  never  be  fully  or  even  par-
tially alienated.  It  is  absolutely  inalienable.  Neither  conquest
nor  any  kind  of  compact  can  affect  it,  and  governments  subsist
only  as  its  agents.

The  inferences  drawn  from  this  proposition  are  as  much
opposed  to  the  English  notions  of  constitutional  government,
as  they  are  to  absolute  monarchy.  In  the  first  place,  the
English  theory  of  representative  government  is  wholly  erro-
neous. 'The  sovereignty  cannot  be  represented,  for  the  same
reason  that  it  cannot  be  alienated,  because  it  consists  essentially
in  the  general  will.  The  deputies  of  the  people  are  not,  and
cannot  be,  its  representatives ;  they  are  only  its  agents.  They
can  conclude  nothing  definitely.  Every  law  is  null,  which  the
people  have  not  directly  ratified.  It  wants  the  true  character
of  a  law.  The  English  people  imagines  itself  free;  but  it  is
wholly  mistaken.  It  is  free  only  during  the  election  of  its
members  of  Parliament.  Once  they  are  elected,  it  is  a  slave.
The  idea  of  representatives  is  modern ;  it  comes  to  us  from  the
feudal  government,  from  that  iniquitous  and  absurd  government
which  degraded  the  human  species.' '

This  doctrine  has  a  manifest  affinity  to  that  which  we  have
already  traced  among  the  Radicals  of  the  school  of  Home  Tooke
and  Sawbridge,  who  maintained  that  members  of  Parliament
were  simply  delegates,  that  their  constituents  should  furnish
them  with  binding  instructions,  and  had  a  right  to  dictate
,'Mithoritatively  their  conduct  on  every  question  that  arose.
Ko  English  Jiiidica],  however,  had  asserted  that  every  law  was
' (.'out.  Soc.  iii.  c.  15.

CH.  XX.  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  349

invalid,  which  had  not  been  directly  ratified  by  a  popular
vote.

A  very  important  doctrine  of  the  English  Constitution  is
that  the  Sovereign,  or  supreme  magisti'ate  of  the  State,  like  all
other  magistrates,  is  invested  with  a  political  power  which  is  at
once  guaranteed,  defined,  and  limited  by  contract.  In  opposi-
tion to  the  theory  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings,  the  statesmen
of  the  English  Eevolution  placed  the  royal  power  in  England  in
the  hands  of  a  dynasty,  which  received  by  parliamentary  autho-
rity hereditary  right  to  rule,  subject  to  clearly  defined  condi-
tions. Certain  fundamental  obligations  were  laid  down  by  law,
and  the  Sovereign  swore  that  he  would  fulfil  them.  If  he  broke
his  compact  with  his  subjects,  they  in  their  turn  were  released
from  their  allegiance.  As  it  was  possible  that  a  sovereign  with-
out breaking  any  fundamental  law  might  desire  to  act  in  a  way
very  injurious  to  the  State,  his  power  was  so  limited  by  the  two
Houses  of  Parliament,  that  his  political  action,  if  contrary  to
the  national  will,  is  speedily  checked  by  obstacles  which  cannot
be  constitutionally  surmounted.  If,  however,  the  Sovereign
fulfilled  the  conditions  of  his  trust,  he  reigned  by  a  full  and
perfect  right;  it  was  made  a  crime  of  the  first  magnitude  to
impugn  his  authority,  and  in  this  manner  the  society,  while
guarding  its  own  freedom,  maintained  the  dignity  of  its  ruler,
and  secured  for  itself  the  incalculable  advantage  of  stability  and
continuity  in  the  government.

In  opposition  to  this  doctrine,  Rousseau  maintained  that
there  can  be  no  contract  whatever  between  the  sovereign  nation
and  its  rulers  or  magistrates ;  that  such  a  contract,  though  it
may  be  expressed  in  words,  embodied  in  oaths,  and  enrolled  in
the  Statute-book,  is  absolutely  null.  '  The  sovereign  authority
can  be  no  more  modified  than  alienated.  To  limit  it  is  to
destroy  it.  There  can  only  be  one  contract  in  the  State,  the
original  contract  of  association,  and  this  alone  excludes  all
others.'  From  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  every  functionary  of
the  Government  depends  upon  the  immediate  will  of  the  peo-
ple, is  bound  absolutely  to  obey  them,  and  may  at  any  time  be
arbitrarily  dismissed.  Such  a  course  may  not  be  expedient;  but
it  is  always  legitimate.  '  If  the  people  institutes  hereditary
government,  either  monarchical  in  a  family,  or  aristocratical  in

350  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

ail  order  of  citizens,  this  is  not  an  engagement  wliich  it  takes.
It  is  a  provisional  form  which  it  gives  to  the  Administration,
until  it  pleases  it  to  ordain  otherwise.'  *

Voltaire,  commenting  on  these  passages,  described  them  with
great  truth  as  nothing  less  than  '  a  code  of  anarchy,'  ^  and
Burke  has  devoted  some  admirable  pages  to  exposing  their
fallacies  and  their  dangers.  '  By  this  unprincipled  facility,'  he
wrote,  '  in  changing  the  State  as  often,  and  as  much,  and  in  as
many  ways  as  there  are  floating  fancies  and  fashions,  the  whole
chain  of  continuity  of  the  commonwealth  would  be  broken.  No
one  generation  could  link  with  the  other.  Men  would  become
little  better  than  the  flies  of  a  summer.'  ^

A  few  more  extracts  will  complete  our  view  of  this  side  of
the  teaching  of  Rousseau.  In  the  first  place,  every  member  of
the  community  has  a  natural  and  inalienable  right  to  vote  in
every  act  of  sovereignty,  and  as  all  laws  are  acts  of  sovereignty,
those  only  are  valid  which  have  been  directly  sanctioned  by
universal  suffrage,  the  majority  binding  the  minority.^  '  The
moment  the  Government  usurps  the  sovereignty,  the  social
compact  is  broken,  and  all  the  simple  citizens  regaining  by
right  their  natural  liberty  are  forced,  but  not  morally  obliged,
to  obey.^  Whenever  the  people  are  lawfully  assembled  in  a
sovereign  body,  all  the  jurisdiction  of  Government  ceases,  and
the  executive  power  is  suspended.'  ^

It  will  be  evident  to  anyone  who  has  grasped  the  full  mean-
ing of  these  doctrines,  that  they  would  invalidate  the  legislation
and  the  authority  of  every  Government  in  Europe,  with  perhaps
the  exception  of  those  small  Swiss  cantons,  where  the  whole
people  assemble  to  make  their  laws ;  and  it  is  also  evident  that
they  would  make  all  settled  government  impossible,  and  all
authority  precarious,  and  would  multiply  incalculably  the  oppor-
tunities and  temptations  of  change.  This  was  one  aspect  of  the
teacliiiig  of  Rousseau.  But  if  his  doctrines  led  on  the  one  side
to  utter  anarchy,  tlioy  led  on  the  otlier,  not  less  clearly,  to  the
most  grinding  tyranny.  For  the  first  condition  of  the  social
compact  is,  '  the  total  alienation  of  each  associate,  with  all  his

■  {\mf.  Soc.  iii.  c.  16-18.  lut'ton.

'  lilitx  flrinihlicniiiex.  ' Cont.  Soc,.\n.  c.  12-15,  iv.  c.  1,  2.

■  Ilcjlcutlum  on  the  French  Rao-  "  Ibid.  iii.  c,  10. "  Ibid.  c.  14.

CH.  XX.  SOVEREIGNTY OF  THE  PEOPLE.  351

rights,  to  the  whole  community.'  '  As  nature  gives  each  man
absolute  power  over  his  own  limbs,  so  the  social  contract  gives
the  body  politic  absolute  power  over  its  members,'  and  makes  it
'the  master  of  all  their  possessions.'  'The  right  of  each  indi-
vidual to  his  own  property  is  always  subordinated  to  the  right  of  .
the  community  to  the  whole.' '

The  most  efficient  check  which  has  been  discovered  in  a  free
country  against  the  tyranny,  either  of  individuals  or  of  majori-
ties, is  found  in  a  strong  representation  of  classes  and  interests.
Montesquieu  had  especially  insisted  upon  the  importance  of
checks  of  this  kind.  Rousseau  utterly  repudiated  them.  The
unity,  the  indivisibility,  the  homogeneity  of  the  sovereign
power  is  one  of  his  favourite  tenets.  The  existence  of  any
separate  orders  or  interests  in  the  community,  any  division,
restriction,  or  balance  of  power,  he  emphatically  rejects.  The
absolute  equality  of  all  members  of  the  body  politic  is  one
of  his  great  doctrines.  The  absolute  authority  of  the  body
politic,  as  expressed  by  universal  suffrage,  over  its  members
is  another.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  religious  policy  which  he
deduced  from  these  principles — the  civil  religion  which  he  de-
sired to  impose,  on  pain  of  banishment  or  death,  on  every  mem-
ber of  the  community,  the  proposed  expulsion  from  the  State  of
all  who  held  the  doctrine  of  exclusive  salvation.  Opinions  in  as
far  as  they  relate  exclusively  to  another  world  are,  he  admits,
beyond  the  competence  of  the  legislator;  but  whenever  they
appear  likely  to  affect  the  conduct  of  men  as  members  of  the
State,  they  should  be  brought  under  civil  control.  '  Whenever
the  clergy  form  a  distinct  body,  that  body  is  master  and  legis-
lator in  their  country.  There  are,  therefore,  two  powers,  two
sovereigns  in  England  and  in  Russia,  as  elsewhere.  Of  all
Christian  writers,  the  philosopher  Hobbes  alone  saw  rightly
the  evil  and  the  remedy,  when  he  dared  to  propose  to  unite
the  two  heads  of  the  eagle,  and  bring  everything  back  to  that
political  unity,  without  which  no  State  or  Government  will  ever
be  well  constituted.'  ^

On  the  subject  of  education,  his  views  are  very  similar. The
father  should  be  wholly  lost  in  the  citizen. It  is  for  the  State
'  Cont.  Soc.  i.  c.  6,  9,  ii.  4.  -  Ibid.  iv.  c.  S.

352  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

to  prescribe  the  form  and  substance  of  education,  and  even  tlie
amusements  of  the  young,  and,  as  in  the  Republic  of  Plato,  to
mould  their  minds  systematically  to  its  ends.^

Such  sentiments  fell  in  perfectly  with  the  prevailing  tenden-
cies of  French  thought.  It  is  not  necessary  here  to  enter  into
any  discussion  of  the  theory,  which  attributes  to  the  Latin  as
distinguished  from  the  Teutonic  race  a  special  tendency  towards
centralisation  and  unity.  It  is  at  least  abundantly  evident  why
such  a  tendency  should  have  prevailed  in  France,  and  prevailed
in  it  to  a  much  greater  degree  than  in  the  other  Latin  nations.
Italy  had  been  for  many  centuries  divided  into  separate  princi-
palities differing  widely  in  their  character  and  government,  and
it  contained  several  cities  which  were  so  illustrious  from  their  art,
history,  commerce,  or  literature,  that  even  the  supreme  majesty
of  Rome  was  unable  to  reduce  them  to  moral  insignificance.
The  provinces  of  Spain  dijQfered  profoundly  in  their  histories,
characters,  and  institutions,  and  in  Spain  a  large  measure  of
local  and  provincial  self-government  had  survived  the  loss  of
political  freedom.  But  France  was  a  highly  centralised  despotism,
and  Paris  had  no  rival  or  counterpoise  in  its  attractive  influence.
France,  too,  was  a  great  military  monarchy.  The  habits  and
ideals  of  military  life  coloured  the  whole  thought  of  the  nation,
and  the  lines  of  national  character  were  still  further  deepened
by  the  unifying,  organising,  and  intensely  intolerant  spirit  of
the  Catholic  Church.  The  result  of  this  combination  of  in-
fluences has  been,  that  the  French  political  ideal  has  remained
substantially  unaltered  amid  the  most  violent  changes  of  Go-
vernment. Alike  under  the  despotism  of  Lewis  XIV.  and  under
tlie  despotism  of  the  Convention,  it  has  been  the  great  object  of
]'ronch  statesmen  to  attain  a  complete  unity  of  tyjoe ;  to  expel
or  subdue  all  interests,  elements,  and  influences,  that  do  not
assimilate  with  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  Government ;  to
mould  in  a  single  die,  to  concentrate  on  a  single  end,  all  the
forces  of  the  nation.

The  English  political  ideal  has  been  essentially  different.
'  I  know  but  one  policy,'  said  one  of  the  writers  of  the  time  of
the  English  Revolution,  '  whereby  to  establish  any  Government,

' flourcrnrvicnt  do  Puloijno,  c.  iv. ; Kinilf,  liv.  iv. ;  IJiscuurs  snr  V Economie
PolH.

CH XX.  ENGLISH PuLITICAL IDEAL.  353

of  what  sort  soever  it  be,  wliicli  is  to  take  away  all  causes  of
complaiut,  and!  make  all  the  subjects  easy  under  it,  for  then  the
Government  will  have  the  whole  strength  of  the  people  in  its
defence,  whenever  it  shall  want  it.' '  English  statesmen  have
commonly  aimed  at  a  Government,  in  which  different  interests,
opinions,  and  classes,  may  expand  as  much  as  possible  unmo-
lested, and  without  friction  or  restraint,  and  in  which  the  hand
of  authority  is  felt  as  lightly,  and  as  rarely,  as  possible.  They
have  believed  that  the  largest  sum  of  human  happiness  and
useful  performance,  the  highest  level  of  self-reliance,  the  broad-
est foundations  of  stability  and  content,  are  likely  to  be  at-
tained, when  each  member  of  the  community  is  given  the  fullest
latitude  and  opportunity  of  pursuing  the  course  w^hich  seems  to
him  most  fit,  of  gratifying  as  far  as  possible  his  tastes  and
idiosyncrasies,  and  even  his  weaknesses  and  prejudices,  as  long
as  he  does  not  injure  his  neighbour.  The  virtue  of  the  English
Government  has  lain  much  less  in  the  concentration  of  the
national  power,  and  the  expulsion  of  hostile  or  heterogeneous
elements,  than  in  the  strengthening  by  freedom  of  the  spon-
taneous energies  of  the  nation ;  in  a  diffused  sense  of  security
and  comfort,  and  in  the  attachment  to  the  Government  which  it
produces.

As  a  consequence  of  this  theor}^,  there  has  been  very  little
symmetry,  or  unity  of  plan,  in  English  government.  When
competing  interests  or  principles  cannot  both  be  fully  satisfied,
they  are  appeased  by  illogical  but  practical  compromise.  Many
different  types  of  institution  directed  to  the  same  ends  exist
simultaneously.  The  main  principles  of  measures  are  qualified.
Schemes  of  policy  are  deflected  now  in  this  direction,  now  in
that,  to  satisfy  as  far  as  possible  eccentric  forms  of  opinion,
and  while  the  general  scope  of  a  measure  is  governed  by  the
wish  of  the  majority,  particular  pi'o visions  are  nearly  always
introduced  to  disarm  the  hostility,  and  satisfy  the  desires,  of
minorities.

The practical effects, however, of this characteristic of
English  politics  have  been  greatly  qualified  by  another  influ-
ence, which  like  the  foregoing  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  general
tenor  of  the  philosophy  of  Rousseau. It  is  the  strong  conser-
'  Somers  Tracta,  xii.  242.

VOL.  V.  A  A

354 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. en.  xx.

vative  instinct,  wbicli  in  England  endeavours  to  preserve  a  con-
tinuity of  national  life,  by  governing  mainly  under  the  forms,
and  through  the  institutions,  of  the  past.  Never  to  destroy  an
institution  which  works  well ;  to  keep  up  institutions  if  they
discharge  efficiently  secondary  uses  even  though  their  original
and  primary  uses  have  become  wholly  obsolete ;  to  remove
abuses,  and  introduce  changes  according  to  immediate  necessi-
ties, and  not  according  to  any  settled  plan,  have  been  among
the  most  permanent  maxims  of  English  politics.  And  the
result  has  been  the  maintenance  of  an  immense  heritage  of  the
past,  which,  though  it  does  not  any  longer  act  in  the  way  of
restriction,  does  undoubtedly  act  in  the  way  of  bias  and  privi-
lege. Opinions  and  modes  of  life  may  all  develop  themselves ;
but  they  do  not  develop  on  the  same  plane,  and  with  equal  ad-
vantages. The  restraining  hand  of  authority  is  little  felt ;  but
the  ecclesiastical  and  aristocratical  institutions  of  the  past,  with
their  vast  ramifications,  their  multifarious  social,  educational,
political,  and  economical  influences,  form  deep  grooves  or
channels,  and  in  a  very  large  measure  determine  the  current  of
English  life.

The  destruction  of  the  controlling  influence  of  aristocra-
cies, and  of  all  local  bodies,  had  produced  upon  the  Continent
a  steadily  increasing  concentration  of  political  authority;  and
exaggerations  of  the  powers  and  functions  of  government
scarcely  less  extreme  than  those  of  Rousseau  may  be  found  in
the  writings  of  Bossuet,  and  of  the  chief  lawyers  of  the  monarchy.
In  the  case  of  Rousseau,  however,  this  exaggeration  was  largely
due  to  liis  adoption  of  the  old  Greek  doctrine  that  the  sphere  of
government  is  co-extensive  with  that  of  moral  education,^  and
especially  to  his  admiration  for  the  institutions  of  Lycurgus  at
Sparta,  ami  ol"  C:ilvin  at  Geneva. Its  evil  effects  were  greatly

'  'Formezdonodeslionmiossi  vous  pas  ccltc  importante  partie  de  I'ad-

voiiloz commander il des liommos.  iiiini.st  ration,  ct  on  Ics  voyoitattentifs

. . . C'6toit li\ le grand art dos  h  corrompre  les  moeurs  de  leurs  es-

Gouvernemens  anciens,  dans  ces  icms  claves avec aiitant de soin qu'en

rccidf's  oil  Ics  pliil(jsoj)lu:.s  donnoient  a  \  oicnt  ]cs  magistrals  si  corrigercelles

di;H  loix  aux  poiiplcs  t;t  nVitnployoient  d(; Icurs concitoycns. Mais nos

lour  aiilorit<i  qu'il  los  roii<lie  .sages  et  gfiuvornemens  modcrnes  qui  croient

licnircux. I)i;  ]ii  iant  do  loix  .somj)-  .'ivoir  tout  fait  quand  ils  ont  tire  de

tuair«;H, tant de riiglfinions Kur los  largcnt  n'iinagiiieiit  pas  ineme  qu'il

m<curH, tant de  maxinKjB pidiliques  soit n6ccssaire ou possible d'aller

admises  ou  rejetc'es  avec  le  phis  grand  jiisques  lA.' — Disconrs  stir  VEconomic

Boin. Les  tyrans  mt'me.s  n'ouVjIioient  jhdU'ujtte.

cii.  XX.  QUALIFICATIONS OF ROUSSEAU'S DOCTRINE.  355

increased  by  liis  persuasion  that  man  is  born  good  ;  that  all  his
vices,  and  nearly  all  his  calamities,  are  the  result  of  external
circumstances  ;  that  government  is  principally  responsible  for
them,  and  that  it  may  be  made  the  instrument  of  raising  him  to
almost  ideal  happiness.  At  the  same  time,  though  the  political
theory  of  the  '  Contrat  Social '  was  plain,  logical,  and  consistent,
and  was  accepted  by  great  multitudes  of  Frenchmen  in  its  broad
and  obvious  signification,  Rousseau  himself  recoiled  from  many
of  the  conclusions  that  were  drawn  from  it,  and  he  tried,  some-
times with  much  inconsistency,  to  evade  or  attenuate  them.
His  book,  he  said,  was  simply  an  abstract  or  ideal  theory  of
politics.  His  principles  were  exactly  the  same  as  those  of
Locke.  His  model  was  substantially  the  aristocratic  republic  of
Geneva.'  He  had  drawn  an  ideal  picture  of  a  free  nation ;  but
he  acknowledged  that  he  did  not  see  how  the  sovereign  people
could  preserve  its  rights  except  in  a  very  small  state,  in  which
all  the  citizens  could  asseinble  to  legislate.'*  In  his  '  Considera-
tions on  the  Government  of  Poland,'  he  admitted  the  validity  of
legislation  by  representatives,  provided  they  were  controlled
by  imperative  mandates.^  While  maintaining  under  all  forms
of  government  the  inalienable  sovereignty  of  the  nation,  his
sympathies  were  not  with  the  democratic  form.  '  A  democratic
government,'  he  says,  '  is  suitable  for  small,  an  aristocratic
government  for  moderate,  a  monarchical  government  for  great
states.'  '  A  democratic  or  popular  government  is  more  subject
than  any  other  to  civil  wars  and  internal  agitations,  for  there  is
no  other  government  which  tends  so  strongly  and  so  constantly
to  change  its  form,  and  which  requires  more  vigilance  and
courage  to  maintain.'  '  If  there  were  a  people  of  gods,  they  would
govern  themselves  as  a  democracy.  So  perfect  a  form  of  go-
vernment is  not  suited  for  men.'  '  It  is  contrary  to  the  order  of
nature,  that  the  many  should  govern,  and  the  few  be  governed.'
'  The  best  and  most  natural  order  is,  that  the  wise  should  govern,
the  multitude,  provided  one  is  sure  that  they  govern  it  for  the
profit  of  the  multitude,  and  not  for  their  own.'  * '  Government

•  See  his  Lettres  de  La  Montar/ne, Montesquieu had long before  said,
especially  letter  vi.  '  La propriete naturelle des petits

2  Contrat  Social,  iii.  c.  15.  etats est d'etre gouvernes en re-

'  Gouvern.  de  Pol.  c.  vii.  publiqiie,  celle  des  mediocres d'etre

*  Contrat Social, iii. c. 3, 4,  5. soumis k un monarque, celle des

356 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIOnTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xt.

belongs  to  the  small  number,  the  supei'intendence  of  govern-
ment to  the  people  at  large.'  '  There  is  no  freedom  where  anyone
is  above  the  law;  but  a  people  is  free,  whatever  may  be  the
form  of  its  government,  when  it  recognises  in  the  ruler,  not  the
man,  but  the  organ  of  the  law.'  ^  In  one  of  his  letters  he  says
that  '  the  two  main  principles  of  government  established  in  the
"  Contrat  Social "  are,  that  the  sovereignty  always  belongs  legi-
timately to  the  people,  and  that  aristocratic  government  is  the
best.' 2

He  shows  also  in  many  places  a  great  desire  to  qualify  his
very  dangerous  doctrine  of  the  omnipotence  of  the  sovereign
people.  The  people,  he  says,  must  always  act  by  law;  and  what
is  a  law  ?  '  It  is  a  public  and  solemn  declaration  of  the  general
will  on  an  object  of  common  interest.  I  say  on  an  object  of
common  interest,  for  the  law  would  lose  its  force  and  cease  to
be  legitimate  if  the  object  was  not  of  importance  to  all.'  ^  Ho
imagined  that  he  could  guard  against  the  dangers  of  a  tyranny  of
majorities  by  extinguishing  separate  interests  in  politics,  and
arbitrarily  restricting  to  purely  common  interests  the  sphere  of
the  power  which  he  had  made  omnipotent.  '  All  that  each
man  alienates  by  the  social  compact  of  his  power,  his  goods,
and  his  liberty,  is  the  .portion  of  which  Ihe  use  is  required  by
the  community  ;  '  '  but,'  he  adds,  '  it  must  be  acknowledged  that
the  Sovereign  alone  is  the  jutlge  of  this  requirement.'  When,
however,  the  people  of  Athens  decreed  penalties  or  honours
to  particular  individuals,  it  acted  not  as  a  sovereign,  but  as  a
magistrate.  '  By  the  nature  of  the  social  compact  every  act  of
sovereignty,  that  is,  every  authentic  act  of  the  general  will,
binds  or  favours  equally  all  the  citizens,  so  that  the  Sovereign
knows  only  the  body  of  the  nation,  and  does  not  distinguish
any  of  those  who  compose  it.  .  .  .  The  act  of  sovereignty  is
not  a  convention  of  a  superior  with  an  inferior,  but  a  convention
of  the  body  with  each  of  its  Tnemboi-s.  It  is  legitimate,  because
it  is  based  on  the  social  compjict ;  equitable,  because  it  is  common
to  all ;  useful,  because  it  can  have  no  other  object  than  the  general

gran'ls  empiros  fl'5tre  domin6s  par  mi  '  Ln  meillonr  dcs  Gouvernemons  est

dcHpotn.'— AV-  '■''■•''  -'-"'•'''  ^'i'^-  C.  20.  l';iristocratiquo. La  pire  des  .souve-

'  Ltdtrrs  iln  La  Mmifaf/nr.  raitu^trs  est  raristncr;itiqne.' — Lettres

*  To Marcel (1702), Corrc^pon-  ilc  La  Montague,  letter  vi.

rfarece,  ii.  78. So  he  e'sewhere  says:  »  Zcttresde La  3f onto g^ie,  letter  \i.

en.  XX.  ROUSSEAU ON I'KOPERTY.  3.'J7

good.  ...  It  cannot  pass  tlie  boundaries  of  general  conven-
tions, and  every  man  can  freely  possess  the  goods  and  the
liberty  which  these  conventions  have  left  him ;  so  that  the
Sovereign  has  never  a  right  to  burden  one  subject  more  than
another,  for  then  the  affair  becomes  individual,  and  his  power  is
no  longer  competent.'  ^

In  his  article  on  political  economy  in  the  '  Encyclopedia,'
following  exactly  in  the  steps  of  Locke,  he  says  that  '  the  foun-
dation of  the  social  compact  is  property,  and  that  its  first
condition  is  that  every  individual  should  be  protected  in  the
peaceful  enjoyment  of  that  which  belongs  to  him.'  'The  right
of  property '  he  describes  as  '  the  most  sacred  of  all  rights  of
citizens,  in  some  respects  even  more  important  than  liberty
itself.'  Taxation  can  only  be  legitimately  imposed  by  the
common  will  of  the  people,  or  by  their  representatives;  and
while  he  claims  for  the  Government  a  great  power  of  regula-
ting successions,  he  examines  the  principles  on  which  taxation
should  be  imposed  with  a  skill  and  equity  that  leave  little  to
be  desired.  As  a  general  principle,  he  maintains  that  taxation
should  be  exactly  proportioned  to  property,  so  that  a  man  who
possesses  ten  times  as  much  as  his  neighbour  should  pay  ten
times  more  than  him.  But  this  principle  should  be  modified
by  another — that  there  is  a  broad  distinction  between  the  neces-
saries and  the  superfluities  of  life,  and  that  he  who  possesses
only  what  is  strictly  necessary  should  pay  nothing.

On  the  great  question,  however,  whether  the  right  of  pro-
perty existed  antecedently  to  civil  society,  whether  it  was
created  or  merely  sanctioned  and  protected  by  the  social  con-
tract, he  shows  some  vacillation.  In  his  early  '  Discourse  on
Inequality,'  copying  very  closely  a  well-known  passage  of  Pascal,
he  speaks  of  the  first  man  who  enclosed  a  piece  of  land,  and
said  'this  is  mine,'  as  an  impostor  and  usurper  who  founded
civil  society  and  thereby  brought  countless  calamities  upon
mankind ;  but  in  the  very  same  discourse  he  shows  with  much
justice  how  the  necessity  of  cultivating  the  soil  necessarily  led
to  private  property  in  land.  In  one  passage  in  his  '  Social  Con-
tract,'he  describes  this  contract  as  'that  which  changes  usurpa-
tion into  right,'  but  in  man}^  other  passages  he  acknowledges
'  Contrat  Social,  ii.  c.  i.

358  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

fully  a  riglit  of  property  anterior  to  the  social  compact,  but  con-
tends tliat  by  that  compact  this  right  is  under  certain  conditions
surrendered  to  the  community,  and  tries  to  show  that  these  con-
ditions were  such  as  to  preclude  the  danger  of  inequitable  taxa-
tion and  of  partial  confiscation,  '  If  it  is  on  the  right  of  property,'
he  says,  '  that  the  sovereign  authority  is  founded,  this  right
is  that  which  ought  to  be  most  respected.  It  is  inviolable  and
sacred  so  long  as  it  remains  a  particular  and  individual  right.
As  soon  as  it  is  considered  as  common  to  all  the  citizens,  it  is
submitted  to  the  general  will,  and  that  will  can  annihilate  it.
So  the  Sovereign  has  no  right  to  touch  the  goods  of  one  or  of
many,  but  may  legitimately  take  the  goods  of  all,  as  was  done  in
Sparta  in  the  time  of  Lycurgus.  The  abolition  of  debts  by  Solon
was  an  illegitimate  act.'  *

The  real  difficulties  of  a  system  which  invests  a  mere
numerical  majority  with  absolute  power,  Rousseau  never  faced.
He  states  that  the  protection  of  property  is  a  primary  end  of
government,  but  realised  property  to  any  considerable  extent  is
necessarily  mainly  in  the  hands  of  a  few ;  and  if  an  overwhelm-
ing preponderance  of  unlimited  and  uncontrolled  voting  and
taxing  power  is  given  to  those  who  do  not  possess  it,  is  it  likely
that  this  power  will  not  be  abused  ?  Where  irresistible  power
is  given,  and  where  interest  or  passion  impel,  it  is  idle  to  trust
to  the  cobweb  barriers  of  metaphysical  or  ethical  distinctions.
The  assertion  of  Rousseau  that  '  the  condition  being  equal  for
all,  no  one  is  interested  in  making  it  burdensome  to  the  others,'
fails  almost  ludicrously  to  represent  the  real  facts  of  the  case.
Whether  legislators  like  it  or  not,  there  must  always  be  diver-
sities and  antagonisms  of  interests,  orders,  and  classes ;  there
must  always  be  envy,  jealousy,  covetousness,  and  hatred  in  the
State,  and  the  supreme  end  of  statesmanship  is  to  give  security
to  every  interest  and  class.  This  can  only  be  done  by  giving
to  each  some  share,  and  not  too  large  a  share,  of  political  power.
Uncontrolled  power  is  always  abused,  and  a  class  may  be  as
cfrcctually  reduced  to  impotence  by  being  swamped  as  by  being
disfranchised.  Is  it  probable,  too,  that  adequate  skill  can  be
ibund  in  the  legislators  when  no  special  competence  is  exacted

' /Cwili;,  livro  v. In  his  Dinconrs blie qnc pour  assurer  la propri6t6
tmr I'A'r/moi/iir ]inlAtirjve lie says: parUuulitirc  qui  lui  est  anturiuuie."
'  li'iulDiiiii.slratiuii  guutrulc  nest  cla-

en.  XX.  U^'IVEKSAL SUFFEAGE.  S.IO

from  tlie  electors  who  clioo.se  them?  It  is  the  inexorable  law
of  nature,  established  by  all  the  competitions  of  life,  that  sound
judgment  and  capacity  belong  to  the  few  and  not  to  the  many,
and  that  without  judgment  and  capacity,  human  affairs  can
never  be  successfully  conducted.  The  government  of  a  great
empire,  with  its  infinitely  various  and  intricate  characters,  rela-
tions, circumstances,  and  wants,  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  as
well  as  one  of  the  most  important  duties  that  can  be  imposed
upon  man.  The  qualities  of  mind  and  character  it  requires  are
so  numerous,  the  chances  of  error  are  so  great,  the  consequences
of  political  miscalculation  are  so  terrible  and  so  enduring,  that
the  greatest  intellect  might  well  shrink  from  the  task ;  and
there  is  no  other  sphere  in  which  superficial  appearances  are
more  often  at  variance  with  realities,  or  in  which  the  distorting
influence  of  passion  is  more  frequently  or  more  powerfully  felt.
Is  it  likely,  is  it  conceivable,  that  the  best  and  final  form  of
human  government  should  be  that  in  which  all  power  of  choice
and  of  control  is  ultimately  vested  in  the  least  instructed,  the
least  intelligent,  and  the  most  dependent  portion  of  the  com-
munity ?

This  was  the  system  which  Rousseau  advocated,  and  which
he  advocated  as  of  universal  application.  The  shape  or  structure
of  the  government  might  depend  upon  the  special  circumstances
of  the  nation,  but  the  sovereignty  of  the  nation,  its  right  to  de-
termine and  at  any  moment  to  change  its  government,  its  right
to  give  or  refuse  its  sanction  by  universal  suffrage  to  every  law
that  was  proposed,  was  absolutely  inalienable.  This  was  equally
true  of  the  rudest  barbarians  and  of  the  most  civilised  commu-
nities, of  nations  which  had  but  just  emerged  from  centuries  of
despotism  and  of  nations  that  had  enjoyed  for  centuries  the
education  of  self-government.  Under  such  a  system,  if  it  could
have  been  maintained,  the  fires  of  the  Inquisition  would  have
burnt  for  at  least  a  century  after  they  were  actually  extin-
guished, and  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  they  would  even
now  have  been  at  an  end.  In  truth,  however,  such  theories
bring  their  own  sharp  remedy,  for  they  would  speedily  reduce
any  nation  that  adopted  them  to  anarchy.

The  notion  that  universal  suffrage  is  an  inalienable  right
has  now  become  so  familiar  throughout  Europe,  that  few  persons

360  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY  en.  xx.

realise  liow  strange  it  seemed  in  the  writings  of  Rousseau.  It
is  obvious,  however,  that  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  points,  his
disciples  have  proved  very  inconsistent,  for  if  a  vote  be  a  matter
of  natural  right  it  is  impossible  to  justify  the  exclusion  from
the  franchise,  of  females  who  form  half  the  population.  In
neither  of  the  English-speaking  communities  had  this  theory
received  any  countenance.  The  right  of  voting  was  always
treated  in  them  as  a  strictly  civil  right,  to  be  regulated  by  each
society  in  the  manner  most  conducive  to  its  interests.  In
England,  the  qualification  for  the  counties  differed  from  the
qualification  in  the  boroughs,  and  in  these  latter  the  right  of
voting  was  extremely  various,  ranging  from  a  suffrage  which
was  nearly  universal,  to  a  suffrage  which  placed  the  election
of  a  borough  member  in  two  or  three  hands.  And  this  variety
of  qiialification  was  far  from  being  regarded  by  the  more  en-
lightened statesmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  as  an  anomaly  or
an  abuse.  It  was,  on  the  contrary,  defended  as  one  of  the  great
merits  of  the  Constitution.  It  is  of  the  highest  importance,  it
was  urged,  that  the  House  of  Commons  should  be  various  in  its
composition,  containing  representatives  of  many  different  orders,
interests,  capacities,  aspirations,  and  opinions,  and  in  no  other
way  can  a  well-balanced  and  intelligent  representation  of  the
various  classes  and  interests  of  society  be  so  successfully  and  so
easily  attained  as  by  making  the  electoral  bodies  very  dissimilar.
In  the  United  States  a  similar  policy  prevailed.  The  subject
was  carefully  considered  by  the  very  able  men  who  framed  the
Constitution  of  1787,  and  they  deliberately  determined  to  follow
the  English  principle,  and  to  leave  untouched  the  great  in-
equalities of  suffrage  prevailing  in  the  different  States.  In  no
two  State-Constitutions  was  the  qualification  of  voters  the  same,
l)ut  in  all,  or  nearly  all,  a  substantial  property  qualification  was
required.'

It  would,  however,  bo  doing  Rousseau  a  gi'eat  injustice  to
BuppoRe  1li.it  ]i(^  expected,  preached,  or  desired  any  violent
revolution.  J  lis  sympathies  with  the  wrongs  of  the  poor  were,
indeed,  very  vivid  and  very  generous.  Pie  sprang  from  among
them  himself. He  never  cared  for  the  atmosphere  of  Court  and

'  Compare  Story  <9»  the  Am.ei'ii'nn No. fi2; Yonnp's Tmtr  in  France ;
Chngl\tiitinit,\\.')'>  iVl;  The  Fcderalht, Tiiikiilnn,  iv.  I.'JO.

ai.  XX.  KOUSSEAU NO REVOLUTIONIST.  361

rashiou  in  which  the  most  eminent  of  his  literary  contempo-
raries moved.  His  own  life,  though  stained  with  much  ignoble
vice,  and  weak  and  morbid  even  to  insanity,  was  at  least  spent
in  honourable  poverty,  and  in  his  long  pedestrian  journeys  he
had  learnt  to  measure  the  great  mass  of  practical  oppression
that  still  rested  upon  the  poor.  He  has  himself  described,  in
his  own  inimitable  style,  the  effect  upon  his  mind  when  he
found  a  peasant  who  had  given  him  shelter,  carefully  conceal-
ing every  sign  of  comfort  and  well-being,  lest  it  should  expose
liim  to  the  exactions  of  subordinate  agents  of  the  Government.'
But  violence  and  bloodshed  of  every  kind  were  wholly  alien  to
his  character.  Nor,  indeed,  did  there  seem  much  danger  of  a
catastrophe,  if  unsophisticated  human  nature  was  as  pure  and
as  idyllic  a  thing  as  Rousseau  and  St.  Piei're  imagined.  He
taught,  it  is  true — and  surely  with  evident  reason — that  in
periods  of  extreme  danger,  and  when  the  ruin  of  the  State
could  not  otherwise  be  averted,  it  is  right  to  create  a  dictator-
ship, and  if  necessary  to  suspend  for  a  short  time  the  operation
of  the  laws.^  But  when  Helvetius  wrote  that  everything  was
justifiable  which  the  public  safety  required,  Kousseau  wrote
upon  the  margin  of  the  page  his  indignant  comment,  '  The
public  safety  is  nothing  if  all  the  individuals  are  not  secure.'^
'  If  it  is  meant  that  it  is  lawful  for  a  Government  to  sacrifice  an
innocent  man  for  the  safety  of  the  multitude,'  he  elsewhere
said,  'I  hold  this  maxim  to  be  one  of  the  most  execrable  that
tyranny  has  invented,  the  most  false  that  can  be  promulgated,
and  the  most  directly  opposed  to  the  fundamental  law  of  society.
So  far  from  its  being  right  that  one  should  perish  for  all,  all  have
engaged  their  lives  and  goods  for  the  defence  of  each,  in  order
that  individual  weakness  might  be  always  protected  by  public
force  and  each  member  by  the  whole  State.'  ^  It  is  a  memor-
able fact  that  the  writer  who  was  the  idol  of  Robespierre,  and
on  whose  works  Marat  was  accustomed  to  deliver  enthusiastic

'  Confessiovs,\\v.  iv.  Dieux.' — Ktj>rit  des  Lois,  xii.  c.  19;

'  Cimtrat  lSocial,iv.  c.G.  Compare  and  Pascal,  '  Les  Etats  periraient  si

Montesquieu, '  L'usage des peuples  on  ne  faisait  ployer  souvent  les  lois  i\

les  plus  libres  qui aient  jamais  ete  la  necessite.' — Pensces.
sur  la  terre,  me fait croixe qu'il  y  ^  See a note to  the Refutation

a  des  cas  ovl  il  faut  mettre  pour  un  cC TTclrHms. (Evvres de liousseau

moment un voile sur la liberte,  (ed lS2fi),  xii.  .59.
comme  Ton  cacbait les  statues des  ■*  Ui.scoiirtisiirr  Fcoiwviic  poJif.iqne.

362  ENGLA^^D IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xx.

commentaries,  has  left  on  record  liis  deliberate  conviction  tliat
'  the  blood  of  a  single  man  is  more  precious  than  tlie  liberty  of
the  whole  human  race.'  ^

It  is  also  a  most  curious  fact  that  while  the  leaders  of  the
French  Revolution  drew  from  the  waitings  of  Rousseau  a  system
of  cosmopolitan  politics,  which,  aiming  at  a  fraternity  of  demo-
cracies, discarded  all  national  traditions,  boundaries,  sentiments,
and  institutions,  it  was  the  earnest  desire  of  Rousseau  himself
to  accentuate  to  the  highest  degree  the  spirit  of  a  distinctive
and  exclusive  patriotism.  He  had  much  more  sympathy  with
the  small  Greek  republics  than  with  the  Roman  Empire,  and
his  Swiss  birth  and  education  deeply  coloured  his  views.
On  no  point  is  he  more  consistent  in  all  his  political  writings
than  in  his  preference  for  small  states.  He  believed  that  in
them  alone  true  liberty  could  be  attained ;  that  they  were  far
more  conducive  than  great  empires  to  the  growth  of  civic
virtue,  and  that  it  should  be  a  fundamental  object  of  the  legis-
lator in  each  country  to  deepen  as  much  as  possible  the  dis-
tinctive national  type.  When  Burke  showed,  in  opposition
to  the  cosmopolitanism  of  the  Revolution,  how  the  affections
dwindle  and  evaporate  if  they  are  withdrawn  from  the  imme-
diate and  natural  objects  of  home,  family,  class,  and  country,  in
order  to  be  expended  in  a  diffused  and  general  philanthropy,  he
did  little  more  than  repeat  the  arguments  of  Rousseau.^  No
writer  had  ever  urged  more  powerfully  that  the  moral  fibre
of  nations  is  fatally  relaxed  when  the  spirit  of  an  exclusive
jiatriotism  is  enfeebled ;  that  this  spirit  is  the  seed-plot  of  the
highest  virtues;  that  a  strong  and  ineffaceable  individuality  is
in  each  nation  the  best  security  of  continued  independence  and

•  A  Mme.  , Sept. 27, 17(i();  force  par  I'habitnde  de  se  voir  et  par

Correxjiondanvc.  I'intrrut  commun  qui  los  r§unit. II

*  'Jl  semble  que  le  scntimont  de  est  certain  que  les  plus  grands  pro-
rhumanit/j  s'evapore  et  s'airoibli.sse  di^'cs  de  verlu  ont  6t6  produits  par
en  sV'tendant  sur  toute  la  terre  et  I'arnour  de  la  patrie.  .  .  .  Voulons
que  nouH  no  saurions  otre  touches  des  nous  que  les  peuplcs  soient  vertueux ?
calamit^s  de  la  Tartaric  ou  du  Jajxin  Conimcnc/ons done  par  Icurfaire  aimer
eornmc  de  cellcs  d'un  peuple  ICuro-  la  jiatrie:  niais  comment  I'aimeront-
])(;cn.  II  faut  en  (juethiue  maiiierc  ils  si  la  patrie  ii'est  ricn  de  plus  pour
V)orner  ct  comprimer  I'interCt  et  la  cux  que  jiour  des  strangers  et  qu'elle
coninii.soration  pour  lui  donncr  de  no  leur  accorde  que  ce  qn'cllc  no  pent
I'activitfi.  ...  II  est  bon  que  I'liu-  refuser  i\  personue'/' — Disc,  swr  VKco-
rrianit6 concontr^je enlrc les con-  lunii'm  I'olitltiuo.

citoycns  prennc  cu  cu.\  une  nouvelle

en.  XX.  ROUSSEAU NO liEVOLUTIONlST.  3G3

liberty,  and  that,  at  least  for  the  purpose  of  maiutaining  that
individuality,  everything  that  is  local,  traditional,  and  distinctive
in  institutions  and  manners  should  be  carefully  preserved.  His
treatise  '  On  the  Government  of  Poland,'  which  is  one  of  the
most  instructive  of  his  writings,  is  specially  devoted  to  this
tlieme.  '  It  is  national  institutions,'  he  wrote,  '  which  form  the
genius,  the  character,  the  tastes,  and  the  manners  of  a  people ;
which  give  it  its  distinctive  and  exclusive  type ;  which  inspire
an  ardent  love  of  country,  founded  on  habits  that  can  never  be
uprooted ;  which  make  life  in  other  lands  an  intolerable  burden.' '
By  the  strong  discipline  and  organisation  of  government,  the
legislator  should  give  the  whole  community  the  cohesion  and
the  corporate  feeling  of  an  army.  A  broad  distinction  of  privi-
lege should  separate  the  citizen  from  the  alien,  while  education
should  be  specially  directed  to  strengthening  national  affections,
and  holding  up  national  examples  for  imitation.  Distinctive
traditions,  habits,  institutions,  dresses,  and  amusements  should
never  be  neglected,  for  they  have  all  their  part  in  giving  strong
individuality  to  the  nation.  It  is  curious  that  Rousseau  and
Burke,  who  so  seldom  agreed,  appear  to  have  both  looked  with
warm  favour  on  the  Spanish  bull  fights.^

What  I  have  written,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  although  the
works  of  Rousseau  had  an  enormous  influence  on  the  French
Revolution,  they  also  contain  much  that  is  utterly  and  irrecon-
cilably opposed  to  it,  and  it  is  probable  that  Rousseau  would
have  looked  with  loathing  and  indignation  on  his  disciples  of
the  Convention  and  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety.  The
name  of  '  country,'  he  once  wrote,  can  only  be  odious  and
ridiculous  where  the  citizens  do  not  enjoy  civil  security,  and
where  their  goods,  lives,  and  liberty  are  at  the  mercy  of  powerful
men,  and  he  added  that  as  a  matter  of  strict  right  the  whole
social  compact  would  be  dissolved  if  a  single  citizen  perished
who  might  have  been  succoured,  if  a  single  citizen  was  wrong-

'  Gom-crn.  de  Pologne,  c.  3.  superintenrlence  and  inspection. In

*  Ibid.  c. 3. There is nothing,  that  of  1786  there  is  a  most  curious

so far as I know,  on the sub-  page  on  the  advantages  of  bull  fights,

ject  written by Burke in his own  which  bad  in  the  previous  year  been

name,  but  the  historical  portion of  suppressed  in  Spain,  except  in  cases

the Annual liegistev, after it had  where the profits  were  assigned  to

ceased to be written wholly by  charitable or patriolic purposes. —

him,  was  for  many  years under his  Ann.  Ilcj.  1786,  p.  33.

364  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUliY.  ch.  xx.

fully  kept  in  prison,  or  a  single  trial  was  conducted  with  mani-
fest injustice.'  Even  the  '  Contrat  Social'  itself  is  in  truth
utterly  condemnatory  of  the  proceedings  of  the  French  Revolu-
tionists, for  one  of  its  fundamental  doctrines  is,  that  it  is  essential
to  every  act  of  sovereignty  that  it  should  be  submitted  to  the
free  and  unintimidated  vote  of  the  entire  community.

An  author,  however,  cannot  choose  what  part  of  his  teach-
ing will  take  root  in  the  minds  of  his  readers.  The  seed
will  germinate  which  suits  the  soil,  and  men  will  often  adopt
sweeping  principles  and  conclusions,  and  completely  neglect  all
the  qualifications,  safeguards,  and  counterpoises  by  which  they
had  been  elaborately  fenced  round.  No  one  experienced  this
truth  more  eminently  than  Rousseau,  and  few  writers  have  had
a  deeper  and  more  various  influence  both  on  the  passions  and
the  reason  of  their  contemporaries.  He  has  left  behind  him  much
false  and  overstrained  sentiment,  much  dangerous  paradox,
some  pages  of  odious  and  abject  indecency,  but  also  many  pages
which  in  the  purity  and  elevation  of  their  thought  as  well  as  in
the  splendour  of  their  language  are  among  the  very  noblest  iu
French  literature.  Some  great  men  owe  their  eminence  to  the
iidelity  and  skill  with  which  they  represent  the  previiiling  spirit
of  their  time.  Another  and  a  smaller  class  owe  it  to  the  power
with  which  they  can  breast  the  stream,  advocating  and  repre-
senting the  truths  and  aspects  of  things  that  had  hitherto  been
most  neglected  by  their  contemporaries.  To  this  class,  in  much
of  his  teaching,  Rousseau  pre-eminently  belongs.  It  may  be
said  of  him,  as  it  has  been  admirably  said  of  Carlyle,  that  he
was  the  great  alterative  medicine  of  his  time.^  In  the  midst  of
an  optimist,  epicurean,  sceptical,  factitious,  and  self-complaceut
society,  which  habitually  valued  refinement  more  than  nature,
and  intellect  more  than  character,  he  appeared  like  a  figure  of
another  age,  preaching  a  kind  of  belated  and  distorted  Puritanism ;
(lonouncing  the  usages,  tastes,  and  ideals  of  a  fastidious  and
intellectual  society;  uttering  words  of  warning  which  sounded
through  the  speculation  of  his  time  like  a  passing  bell  across  a
niarri;igc  feast. Like  Wordsworth  in  England,  ho  introduced

'  Dixpours  sur VJu-oiwmie Poll- bolieve, from the aullior  of many
titjiir.  ollior  admirable  sayings — Sir  Francis

*  This  admirable  H.iying  comes,  I Djyle.

en.  \-x.  INFLUENCE OF HIS WEITINGS.  3G5

iiito  literature  a  new  love  and  appreciation  for  natural  scenery,
for  country  tastes,  for  the  simpler  and  more  domestic  aspects  of
human  life.  The  fashion  of  morbid  sentiment  which  he  produced
has  for  the  most  part  passed  away  like  the  Byronic  ideal  or  the
Werther  sentimentality,  but  the  strain  of  deeper  earnestness
of  feeling  that  runs  through  his  works,  the  importance  he
attached  to  the  cultivation  of  character,  and  to  a  religious
attitude  of  mind,  were  very  healthy  elements  in  the  philosophy
of  the  eighteenth  century.  He  was  among  the  first  modern
writers  who  maintained  that  every  Government  should  treat
national  education  as  one  of  its  most  essential  duties.  His  own
work  on  education,  though  vitiated  in  many  respects  by  his
fundamental  error  of  the  essential  goodness  of  man  as  he  comes
from  the  hands  of  Nature,  gave  a  powerful  impulse  to  education
throughout  Europe,  and  it  is  to  the  '  Emile '  of  Rousseau  that  we
mainly  owe  the  great  reforms  of  Pestalozzi.  But  the  political
principles  which  he  planted  so  deeply  in  European  society
appear  to  me  to  have  produced  an  amount  of  evil  which  it  is  not
easy  to  over-estimate.  His  disciples  inferred  from  his  writings
that  no  government  is  legitimate,  which  is  not  in  accordance
with  the  fluctuating  wishes  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  nation ;
that  political  power  is  not  a  trust  but  a  right ;  that  absolute
political  equality  is  the  first  principle  of  all  just  government ;
that  all  limitations  of  the  sovereign  power  should  be  abolished ;
that  the  government  of  nations  can  be  treated  as  a  matter  of
speculation  and  abstract  reasoning  with  little  or  no  regard  to
traditions,  antecedents,  and  special  circumstances,  and  these
doctrines  are  the  true  essence  of  the  revolutionary  spirit  through-
out Europe.

They  have  never  been  carried  out  consistently  to  all  their  con-
sequences. No  sane  politician  would  apply  any  considerable  part
of  them  to  the  uncivilised  portions  of  the  world.  Some  of  them  are
manifestly  incompatible  with  any  settled  government ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  the  restrictions  by  which  Rousseau  endeavoured
to  prevent  their  more  dangerous  results  have  been  easily  swept
away  by  the  strong  currents  of  popular  interest  and  passion.
It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  States-General  of  1789,  which
assembled  at  a  time  when  the  worship  of  Rousseau  was  at  its
highest  point,  and which  consisted  chiefly  of  his  devoted  dis-

3GG ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGETEENTH  CENTUEY. en.  x?r.

ciples,  signally  violated  one  of  the  first  principles  of  his  philo-
sophy, by  pronouncing  the  binding  instructions  of  their  con-
stituents null  and  void,  and  by  asserting  their  own  competence
to  act in opposition  to them. Had they not done so,  the
Revolution might  have taken a  different  turn,  for  these  in-
structions expressly  bound  the  members  to  respect  the  monarchy
and  the  essential  portions  of  the  ancient  institutions  of  France.^
At  the  same  time  the  doctrines  of  Rousseau  had  an  enormous
practical  influence  during  the  Revolution,  and  they  have  since
then  passed  very  widely  into  the  political  thought  and  habits
of  the  leading  nations  of  Europe. Their  influence,  it  is  true,
is  not  wholly  or  mainly  due  to  anything  which  Rousseau  has
written. It  has  been  a  consequence  of  advancing  democracy,
and it is a proof of the sagacity with which Rousseau
divined its tendencies as well  as furnished its doctrines.
The Referendum in Switzerland, accoixling to which any
proposed  legislative  measure  may,  on  the demand  of  30,000
citizens  or  of  eight  cantons,  be  submitted  to  the  direct  vote  of
the  whole  people  ;  the  Napoleonic  plebiscite,  which  submitted
the  form  of  government  to  a  direct  and  universal  vote ;  the
establishment  of  manhood  suffrage  over  a  great  part  of  Europe  ;
the  growing  habit  of  treating  representatives  as  simple  delegates
and  binding  their  judgment  by  detailed  and  constant  instruc-
tions, as  well  as  the  manifest  decline  of  the  hereditary  pi'inciple
in  government,  all  belong  to  the  philosophy  of  Rousseau. And
the  same  influence  may  be  seen  in  other  forms. The  system  of
balancing  orders,  interests,  and  opinions,  and  guarding  against
the  tyranny  of  majorities  and  classes  by  artificial  restrictions  of
law  or  custom,  was  long  considered  an  essential  part  of  English
freedom. It  supplies  the  explanation  and  the  defence  of  a  great
part  of  the  irregularities  and  apparent  anomalies  of  the  British
Constitution. Its  importance  was  one  of  the  cardinal  articles  of
the  creed  of  Burke,  and  it  was  acted  upon  with  singular  ability
and  consistency  by  the  men  who  founded  the  Constitui  ion  of  the
TTiiilcMl  States. In  order  to  guard  against  the  tyranny  and  the
instal;ility  which  are  the  chfinicteristio  dangers  of  democracy,
llicy  esl!ihlisli<'(I  orgimic  laws  which  the  two  Houses  of  Congress
cannot  override,  nnd  a,  supreme  and  independent  tribunal  which
'  Mem.  dc  Malouni,  ii.  2Cr),  266.

en.  XX.  SPREAD OF  ROUSSEAU'S DOCTRINES.  367

has  a  rig-lit  to  determine  what  things  are  beyond  their  compe-
tence, and  they  introduced  articles  into  the  Constitution  forbid-
ding any  change  in  the  organic  laws  except  on  the  proposal
of  two-thirds  of  both  Houses  of  Congress  or  of  the  Legis-
latures of  two-thirds  of  the  States,  and  requiring  for  the  final
enactment  of  such  change  the  ratification  of  Legislatures  or  con-
ventions  in  three-fourths  of  the  States.'

In  1787  and  the  two  following  years,  when  the  philosophy
of  Rousseau  was  reigning  without  a  rival  in  France,  John
Adams  published  bis  'Defence  of  the  American  Constitutions'
for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  necessity  of  establishing  in
every  form  of  government  a  balance  of  powers,  and  Alexander
Hamilton,  Madison,  and  Jay  supported  the  same  position  in  the
'  Federalist,'  which  contains  some  of  the  strongest  arguments  in
defence  of  those  limitations  of  the  popular  power,  which  Rousseau
so  emphatically  repudiated.  But  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that
in  the  century  which  has  elapsed,  the  steady  tendency  has  been
to  discredit  in  theory,  and  to  weaken  in  fact,  all  those  institu-
tions which  were  intended  to  counterbalance  or  to  restrict  the  ab-
solute authority  of  the  majority.  The  tendency,  so  largely  due  to
Rousseau,  among  modern  democracies,  to  assume  like  the  demo-
cracies of  ancient  Greece  an  authoritative  or  paternal  character,
to  attempt  to  mould  the  type  of  the  community  by  regulating
education  and  contracts,  and  interfering  largely  with  indi-
vidual action  in  all  the  relations  of  life,  has,  happily,  encoun-
tered strong  opposing  influences,  but  it  is  at  least  sufiiciently

'  See  article  v.  of  the  Constitution  by  a  partial  participation  of  each  in

and the comments on these  provi-  the  powers  of  the  other,  and  by  in-

sions  in  the  Federalist,  Nos. xxxix.  troducing  into  every  operation  of  the

xliii.  liii.  Ixxviii.  Ixxxv.  Government, in all its branches,  a

As one  of the best exponents  system of checks and balances,  on

of American political  ideas  writes  :  which  the  safety  of  free  institutions

'  Each  department [of  government]  has ever  been found essentially  to

should have its own independence  depend. Thus,  for  instance,  a  guard

secured  bej^ond  the  power  of  being  against  rashness  and  violence  in  legis-

taken  away  by  either  or  both  of  the  lation  has  often  been  found  by  dis-

others. .  . .  There  should not  only  tributing  the  power  among  different

be  constitutional  means,  but  personal  branches, each having a negative

motives,  to resist encroachments  of  check upon the other. A guard

one or  either  of the others. Thus  against  the  inroads  of  the  legislative

ambition  should  be  made  to  counter-  power  upon  the  executive  has  been  in

act  ambition ;  the  desire  of  power  to  like  manner applied by  giving  the

check power, and the pressure of  latter  a  qualified  negative  upon  the

interest  to  balance  an opposing  in-  former.' — ^Xorj  On  the  Constitution  of

terest. There seems no adequate  the  Untied  States,  ii.  22.
method  of  producing  this  re.sult  but

3G8  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

accentuated  to  cause  grave  appreliensious  to  some  of  the  foremost
thinkers  of  our  time.

The  method  of  reasoning  in  politics  also,  which  has  been  in-
creasing, appears  to  me  to  belong  much  more  to  the  school  of
Eousseau  than  to  that  of  Burke.  No  good  observer  can  have
failed  to  notice  liow  common  it  has  become  to  treat  certain
democratic  formulee  of  representative  government  as  if  they  were
dogmas  of  religion  or  first  principles  of  morals,  to  be  applied,
with  a  total  disregard  for  expediency  or  particular  circumstances,
to  nations  that  are  wholly  dissimilar  in  race,  character,  social
conditions,  and  political  antecedents.  It  is  not  too  much  to
say  that  if  such  principles  of  government  become  dominant  in
Parliament,  the  speedy  dissolution  of  this  great  and  complex
Empire  will  be  inevitable.

In  purely  domestic  questions  the  influence  of  French
modes  of  thought  is  equally  apparent.  Thus  in  all  questions
relating  to  parliamentary  reform  or  the  extension  of  the
suffrage,  a  disciple  of  Burke,  starting  with  a  strong  sense  of
the  presumption  against  organic  change  and  of  the  many,  vari-
ous, and  often  unforeseen  evils  it  ma}^  produce,  would  ask  what
is  the  specific  disease  it  is  desired  to  remedy ;  what  part  of  the
existing  Parliament  is  peccant  or  an  evil ;  what  public  opinion
in  the  country  is  manifest  ly  unsatisfied  or  unrepresented  ;  how
far  the  proposed  measure  would  remedy  this  specific  evil ;  how
far  it  would  do  so  without  producing  other  and  greater  evils  ?
If  the  answers  to  these  questions  established  a  clear  case  in
favour  of  change  he  would  accept  the  necessity,  but  he  would
strictly  limit  the  change  to  the  requirements  of  the  case.  It
must  be  manifest  to  everyone  that  a  wholly  different  order  of
tJjought  and  reasoning  is  now  in  the  ascendant.  The  dread  of
organic  change  has  enormously  diminished.  Arguments  based
on  arithmetical  computations,  and  on  the  alleged  injustice  of  one
district  or  class  hciving  a  greater  share  of  political  power  than
another,  are  becoming  continually  more  popular.  Inequality  in
representation  is  morc^  and  more  regarded  as  a  synonym  for  in-
justice, and  this  method  of  reasoning  is  carried  so  far  that  we
have  seen  statesmen  expressing  their  opinion  tluit  although  the
extension  of  the  francliise  in  a  particular  quarter  of  the  Empire
wiMiId  undoubtedly  aggravate  tlie  very  evil  which  is  most  cou-

CH.  XX.  THE  ECONOMISTS.  369

spicuous  in  the  existing  parlianieutary  system,  it  ouglit  never-
theless to  be  granted  because  to  withhold  it  would  be  to  create
an  inequality.  The  old  English  doctrine  that  representation
should  be  based  not  only  on  population  but  upon  taxation  has
been  discarded.  Attempts  to  secure  the  competence  of  the
representative  body  by  maintaining  a  preponderance  of  intelli-
gence in  the  electoral  body,  and  to  secure  a  balance  and  variety
of  representation  by  maintaining  the  diversities  of  the  consti-
tuencies, are  becoming  completely  obsolete.  The  rightful  sove-
reignty of  a  mere  numerical  majority,  in  which  the  most  ignor-
ant and  the  least  capable  must  necessarily  preponderate,  is  becom-
ing the  first  principle  of  English  politics,  and  in  this  manner,  for
good  or  for  evil,  English  parliamentary  government  is  rapidly
drifting  from  its  ancient  moorings.  The  star  of  Burke  is  mani-
festly fading,  and  a  great  part  of  the  teaching  of  the  '  Contrat
Social '  is  passing  even  into  English  politics.

The  'Contrat  Social'  was  published  in  1762,  but  its  great
influence  dates  from  a  somewhat  later  period,  and  especially
from  the  destruction  of  the  Parliaments.  In  the  reign  of  Lewis
XVI.  and  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  Revolution  the  enthu-
siasm for  Rousseau  almost  amounted  to  adoration,  and  his  statue
was  the  first  erected  by  the  National  Assembly.^  The  school
of  the  Economists,  which  also  rose  mainly  in  the  third  quarter
of  the  eighteenth  century,  was  in  some  respects  a  rival  influ-
ence, for  these  writers  were  all  intensely  monarchical.  Some
of  them,  like  Mercier  de  la  Riviere,  were  enthusiastic  advo-
cates of  despotism,  and  none  of  them  had  by  temperament  or
taste  the  smallest  tendency  towards  anarchy.  But  Quesnay,
who  was  the  leading  figure  in  the  school,  though  he  utterly
rejected  Rousseau's  notion  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,
ao-reed  with  Rousseau  in  maintaining  that  the  sovereign  power
must  be  at  once  single  and  irresistible,  and  that  the  whole  system
of  a  division  and  balance  of  power  as  it  existed  in  England,  and  as
it  had  been  advocated  by  Montesquieu,  was  fundamentally  vicious.
Like  Voltaire,  the  Economists  considered  what  they  call  '  a  legal
despotism '  the  best  form  of  government  for  effecting  adminis-

'  See  the  striking  picture  of  this  .  Bnrke  adds  a  character  of  Rousseau
enthusiasm  iu  Burke's  Letter  to  a,  which  appears  to  me  very  iiiijusL  and
Member  of  the National Aisemhlij. overdrawn.

VOL. V.  B  B

370  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENXn CENTURY.  en.  xx.

trative  reforms,  and  Le  Trosne  argued  that  the  situation  of
France  '  was  infinitely  superior  '  to  that  of  England  because  the
French  Government  could  change  the  whole  state  of  the  country
in  a  moment  without  being  trammelled  by  constitutional  restric-
tions. The  Economists  contended  for  the  absolute  inviolability
of  private  property,  for  the  establishment  in  lieu  of  all  existing
imposts  of  a  single  tax  to  be  paid  by  every  man  in  strict  propor-
tion to  his  income,  for  universal  and  obligatory  education  by  the
State,  for  complete  liberty  of  industry  and  commerce,  for  a  total
transformation  of  the  internal  administration.  Severing  them-
selves, like  Rousseau,  from  the  historical  school  of  politicians,
they  had  an  utter  disregard  for  the  past,  and  they  anticipated
Bentham's  doctrine  that  the  great  secret  of  government  is  to  be
found  in  the  harmony  of  public  with  private  interest,  and  in  the
establishment  of  government  on  a  strictly  utilitarian  basis.  No
writers  had  before  pointed  out  so  clearly,  or  so  powerfully,  the
essential  evil  of  the  whole  existing  system  of  commercial  re-
straint, monopoly,  prohibition,  forced  labour,  fiscal  mismanage-
ment, and  feudal  burdens ;  and  their  doctrine  that  agriculture  is
the  sole  real  source  of  national  wealth,  led  them  to  bring  into  a
special  prominence  the  many  and  grievous  wrongs  of  the  country
population.  The  rise  of  this  school  immensely  increased  the
prevailing  passion  for  political  speculation,  the  desire  for  poli-
tical experiment,  the  disregard  for  traditions  and  customs,  the
deep  sense  of  the  intolerable  evils  of  existing  laws  aud  institu-
tions. '  There  is  scarcely  a  young  man,'  wrote  Grimm,  in  the
first  year  of  Lewis  XVL,  '  who  on  leaving  college  does  not  form  a
project  of  establishing  a  new  system  of  philosophy  and  of  govern-
ment, and  scarcely  a  writer  who  does  not  think  himself  obliged  to
enlighten  the  human  race  about  its  first  interests,  and  teach  the
powers  of  the  earth  the  best  method  of  governing  their  states.' '

And  what  was  the  nature  of  the  government  at  the  time
when  these  ideas  were  seething  and  spreading  through  the
nation  ?  It  was  a  despotism  so  absolute  that  Blackston(5  had  a
few  years  before  classed  Franco  and  Turkey  together,  as  examples
of  the  countries  in  which  the  personal  liberty  of  the  subject  was
most  completely  at  the  mercy  of  the  Crown.^ The  system  uf

'  Grimm  et  Diderot,  Correxi).  Lit.  August  1774.
*  IJlacLslone,  iv.  c.  27,  §  ">.

cii,  XX.  FRENCH  DESPOTISM.  371

arbitrary  exile  and  of  arbitrary  imprisonment  was  in  full  force.
There  was  nothing  analogous  to  the  English  Habeas  Corpus
Act ;  no  liberty  of  the  press  ;  no  legalised  religious  liberty  ;  no
trial  by  jury;  no  national  representation.  The  States-General
had  not  met  since  1614.  The  people  had  absolutely  no  voice  in
making  the  laws  they  obeyed,  and,  except  in  a  very  few  provinces,
with  the  destruction  of  the  Parliaments  the  last  semblance  of
control  on  the  taxing  powers  of  the  Crown  had  been  lost.

It  is  of  course  true  that  in  France,  as  in  all  other  despotisms,
there  were  some  unwiitten,  or  even  fully  recognised,  obstacles  to
the  omnipotence  of  the  Sovereign.  Long-continued  usage  and
precedent  established  lines  of  government  which  could  not  be
safely  abandoned.  There  were  classes  and  interests  and  currents
of  opinion  too  powerful  to  be  altogether  disregarded,  and  the
sale  of  hereditary  ofSces  had  given  a  great  number  of  officials  in
all  departments  vested  interests  and  a  large  measure  of  practical
independence.  Montesquieu  defended  this  venality  of  offices  as
a  means  of  establishing  permanent  orders  in  the  State,  and  as
distinguishing  monarchy  from  pure  despotism,  under  which  all
subjects  may  at  any  moment  be  ^^laced  or  displaced  by  the  will
of  the  Sovereign.^  The  clergy  retained  a  considerable  power  of
self-government,  and  large  classes  of  offices  were  reserved  by
law  to  the  nobles.  But  the  rightful  power  of  the  Sovereign  as
recognised  by  the  heads  of  the  French  Church,  and  of  the  French
law,  and  as  asserted  by  a  long  succession  of  French  kings,  was
almost  without  a  limit.  He  claimed  to  be  the  sole  representative
of  the  nation,  the  sole  source  of  legislative  as  of  all  other  poli-
tical power.  '  All  the  property  of  his  subjects  belongs  to  him,  and
in  taking  it  he  is  only  taking  what  is  his  own.'  ^  Under  a  strong
sovereign  like  Lewis  XIV.  this  unrestrained  power  was  concen-
ti'ated  in  the  King.  Under  weak  sovereigns  like  Lewis  XV.
and  Lewis  XVI.  it  passed  chiefly  into  the  hands  of  the  King's
ministers ;  of  the  King's  Council,  a  body  appointed  by  the  Crown
and  revocable  at  pleasure ;  of  the  intendants  and  their  delegates
who  carried  on  the  government  of  the  provinces.

'  Esprit  des Lois, liv. v. c. 1 9.  -  Tliis  was  formally  asserted  in  a

Voltaire  has  strongly  censured this  Consultation  of  the  Sorbonne  under

passage,  which  he  attributed to  the  Lewid  XIV. See  much  evidence  on

fact  that  Montesquieu  himself  held  this  subject  in  Garet,  Leg  Bicnfaits

a  magisterial  office  which  had  been  de  la  licrolutlon,  pp.  3-G.
purchased  by  his  uncle.

p  li  2

S72  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cti.  xx,

France  had  at  one  time  possessed  a  very  large  amount  of
local  and  provincial  self-government,  but  the  institutions  around
which  it  centred  had  been  one  by  one  either  annihilated  or  re-
duced to  impotence.  Each  province  had  formerly  been  under  the
direction  of  a  governor  who  was  a  great  local  nobleman  ap-
pointed for  life,  and  occupying  a  position  somewhat  similar  to
that  of  an  English  lord  lieutenant.  But  it  had  been  the  policy
of  Richelieu  to  take  the  government  of  the  country  from  the  aristo-
cracy, and  he  did  this  very  effectually  by  placing  all  real  power
in  the  hands  of  a  new  class  of  functionaries  called  Intendants,
who  were  removable  at  pleasure,  unconnected  for  the  most  part
with  the  provinces  they  ruled  and  frequently  changed  from  one
to  the  other.  Lewis  XIV.  gave  them  almost  unlimited  powers,
including  that  of  life  and  death.  It  was  for  them  and  for  their
delegates  to  adjust  the  burden  of  taxation,  to  regulate  all  matters
relating  to  the  militia,  the  roads,  the  internal  commerce,  the
public  works,  the  administration  of  justice  ;  and  their  power  was
so  absolute  that  Law  scarcely  exaggerated  when  he  said  '  that
the  kingdom  of  France  was  in  reality  governed  by  thirty  in-
tendants.' Appeals  to  the  Crown  against  abuses  in  the  provinces
were  only  illusory,  for  they  were  systematically  referred  to  the
intendants  themselves.^

In  the  Middle  Ages  each  province  liad  possessed  the  very
important  institution  known  as  the  Provincial  States.  With
some  diversity  of  form,  these  States  consisted  of  the  three  orders
of  nobles,  clergy,  and  commons,  and  they  had  the  right  of  voting
and  distributing  the  local,  and  even  a  part  of  the  general  taxa-
tion, and  of  directing  the  whole  administration  of  the  provinces.
But  chiefly  under  the  influence  of  Richelieu,  these  provincial
States  had  been  totally  abolished  over  three-fourths  of  France.
For  a  time  the  provinces  that  were  deprived  of  them  retained
the  power  of  electing  some  functionaries,  and  they  were  there-
fore called  '  pays  d'election,'  but  this  too  was  soon  abolished.
Three-fourths  of  Franco  was  now  divested  of  all  local  self-
government  and  lay  at  the  mercy  of  intendants  appointed  by
the  Crown,  and  of  delegates  ap|)ointed  by  the  intendants.
Of  the eight  provinces  called Ihe  '  pays  d'etat,'  which com-

'  Sc«  a  rnm;irkiil)lc  memoir  of  provincial  assemblies.  Garet,  pp*
Ncckor  in favour  of  the  c.rcatinn  of loS-llU.

CH XX.  FRENCH DESPOTISM.  373

prised  the  remainiag  fourtli,  and  still  possessed  provincial  States,
Languedoc  and  Bretagne  alone  retained  some  real  vestiges
of  their  old  independence.  The  overwhelming  powers  conferred
on  the  intendants  ;  the  severe  restrictions  imposed  on  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  provincial  States,  and  the  influence  the  Govern-
ment easily  acquired  over  a  lai*ge  proportion  of  their  members,
were  sufficient  to  reduce  those  bodies  to  complete  subservience.^
In  the  towns  the  right  of  electing  municipal  functionaries  had
been  abolished  in  1692  ;  municipal  independence  had  received
its  death-blow  when  Lewis  XIV.  for  the  purpose  of  raising
money  began  the  system  of  putting  up  municipal  offices  for  sale,
and  almost  all  real  power  in  the  towns  was  gradually  absorbed
by  the  central  government  and  exercised  through  intendants.^

The  judicial  tribunals  were  equally  dependent.  The  King  by
the  intervention  of  the  Grand  Council  claimed  the  power  of  re-
vising and  altering  their  decisions  in  the  interests  of  the  State
and  without  any  regard  to  the  letter  of  the  law.  Intendants
with  the  assistance  of  councillors  chosen  by  themselves  could
withdraw  trials  from  the  regular  tribunals,  and  condemn  men
to  the  galleys  or  even  to  death,  and  if  a  functionary  had  broken
the  law  the  power  of  the  Crown  was  almost  invariably  exerted
to  withdraw  him  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  law  courts.^

With  the  centralisation  of  government  the  division  of  classes
steadily  increased.  In  England  the  mixture  of  classes,  and  the
.presence  in  the  country  districts  of  a  great  number  of  families
of  the  gentleman  class,  may  be  largely  ascribed  to  three  very
dissimilar  influences,  the  unpaid  magisti-acy,  field  sports,  and  an
established  Church.  The  gratuitous  administration  of  county
government  provides  the  country  gentleman  with  an  important
sphere  of  duties  and  dignities;  the  national  passion  for  field
sports  forms  a  sufficient  counterpoise  to  the  pleasures  of  tlie
town  ;  the  established  Church  scatters  over  tlie  country  districts,
and  concentrates  in  the  small  cathedral  towns,  a  multitude  of
families  who  represent  i:i  the  most  graceful,  useful,  and  intelli-

•  On  the Provincial  Government  Miraheau,  ii.  103-132.
of  France,  see  Lavergne,  Les  Asxcm-  -  See  the  very  full  examination  of

Jilf'es Provlni'iales sons Louis XVI.  the  state of  Municipal  Goveriuneiit

c.  i. ;  Tocqueville,  Anrk?i  Mrf/ime,  pp.  in  Tocqueville,  L'Aiiclcii  Itajlinc,  pp.

313-327; Garet, Les  Licnfaifs  de  In,  Gj-7f).
Jirroliilion,  pp. lOti ll'O  ;  anrl  an  ad-  a  ibid.  pp.  77-So.

mirable chapter in Lomeuic, Les

S74  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xx.

gent  form  the  life  of  tlie  less  opulent  country  gentleman.  But
in  France  tlie  conditions  were  wholly  difierent.  A  celibate
priesthood  drawn  chiefly  from  the  humbler  classes  has  never  had
this  social  influence.  The  passion  for  field  sports  has  always
been  less  strong  and  less  diffused  than  in  England,  though
the  game  laws  were  in  some  respects  much  more  oppressive.'
The  French  country  gentlemen  had  themselves  no  magisterial
powers  or  duties,  though  they  possessed,  and  often  grossly  abused,
a  right  of  appointing  petty  judges  to  try  petty  cases  in  their
several  districts.^  With  increasing  centralisation  and  the  exces-
sive multiplication  of  Government  employments,  their  sphere  of
influence  had  grown  very  narrow,  and  Arthur  Young  noticed
that  gratuitous  public  service,  which  was  so  common  in  England,
was  utterly  foreign  to  French  ideas.^  It  had  been  one  of  the
objects  of  the  French  kings,  and  especially  of  Lewis  XIV.,  to
draw  all  the  leading  members  of  the  class  to  Paris,  and  to  attach
them  to  the  Court ;  and  before  the  Revolution  broke  out,  great
districts  had  been  completely  denuded  of  country  gentry.
Scarcely  any  but  the  poorer  nobles  lived  in  the  country,  and  if
members  of  the  richer  class  were  found  there,  it  was  almost  ex-
cUisivelyin  order  to  economise.''  Voltaire  explained  the  general
failure  of  French  poets  to  describe  rural  scenes  by  the  great  dis-
i'avour  with  which  country  life  was  regarded  by  the  educated
classes  in  France.^  And  besides  this,  the  crushing  taxation
vvliich  fell  upon  land  that  was  not  privileged,  and  the  heavy
and  degrading  duty  called  the  franc  fief  which  was  exacted  from
every  member  of  the  middle  class  who  purchased  privileged  or
seigneurial  lands,  drove  those  who  had  made  fortunes  in  indus-

'  A  striking!:  account  of  the  iniqui-  Lomcnic, Lrs Mirahcan, ii. 63-87.

tics of French game  laws will be  Jieaunuirchais  has  given  an  amusing

found in Arthur Young. Pinker-  picture  of  tliese  courts  in  the  J/aWt/'/tf

ion,  iv.  417,418. There were dis-  de  Fiijaro.

tricis  called  '  capitaneries '  extending  ^  Young's  Travels  in  France.  Pin-
over  400  leagues  of  country,  which  kerton,  iv.  100.

were  granted  for  sporting  purposes  to  *  The  inllucnce  of these  circum-

pHnces  of  the  hloofl,  in  which  game  stances  on  the  position  of  the  nobles

was  not  only  preserved  to  tiie  most  is  excellently  traced  by  Ncckcr  in  his

extravagant  extent,  but  many  of  the  work  on  the  llevuhition,  fFiivres,  ix.

njoft  ordinary  processes  of  agriculture  1 18-1'Jl.

were  prohibited  le.st  they  .should  in-  ''  Dincours dr. rccrpfion dans

terf'.re  with  it.  VAcadi'mic. O'Juvres de Voltaire,

■^  A  very  full  liist.ory  of  the  'Jus-  xlii.  6,  7.
tices  •Sci''neuriale.-.'  will  be  found  in

CH.  NX.  PEASANT PEOrEIETORS.  3/0

trial  life  from  the  land  market  unless  they  had  previously  pur-
chased titles  of  nobility.*

Among  the  peasants,  however,  the  desire  for  land  was  very
strong.  Their  savings  were  generally  invested  in  it.  Land  na-
turally sold  best  in  small  quantities,  and  the  landlords  were  in
general  very  willing  to  sell.  Many  of  them  had  ceased  to  take
any  interest  in  their  estates  and  had  been  ruined  by  the  extrava-
gance of  Paris  and  of  the  Court,  and  many  others  were  glad  to  gpt-
rid  of  large  ti-acts  of  unproductive  land  which  peasants  were  ready
to  purchase  and  cultivate,  or  had  found  profitable  openings  for
their  capital  in  the  purchase  of  Government  employments  and
in  the  rapidly  expanding  sphere  of  industrial  life.  If  the  pea-
sants were  unable  to  raise  the  whole  of  the  purchase  money,  it
was  usually  commuted  into  a  perpetual  fixed  rent.  Under
these  various  influences  possibly  a  fourth  part,  certainly  not
less  than  a  fifth  part,  of  the  soil  of  France  had  passed  before  the
Revolution  into  the  possession  of  peasant  proprietors.^

In  this  fact  there  was  laid  the  foundation  of  a  great  part  of
the  future  conservatism  of  France,  but  its  immediate  effects  were
as  far  as  possible  from  conservative.  The  small  proprietor,  wlio
had  usually  purchased  with  money  borrowed  on  hai'd  terms,  soon
found  himself  struggling  with  difiiculty  and  want,  and  exposed
to  various  exactions  from  which  as  a  tenant  he  had  been
exempt.  The  tithes  were  less  severe  than  in  England,^  but  fall-
ing on  a  much  poorer  population  they  were  bitterly  resented,
and they strengthened the anti-ecclesiastical spirit in the

' (Envrcs  de  Kcch'r,  ix.  90,  91.  pr5s egales, une possedee par la

'  Compare  Tocqueville,  pp.  55-58  ;  couronne  et  les  communes,  nne  par  ie

Cherest,  La  Chute  de  VAnclen  Rci/ime,  clerge,  une  par  la  noblesse,  uue  par  le

ii. 5o2-5B9  ; Taine,  Aneien  Begimo,  tiers  etat,  et  une  par  le  peuple  des

pp. 453-455. Arthur Young con-  campagnes.' — Lavergne, Len Ax.tem-

jectured  in  1789  that  a  third  part  of  hlees Pror'mciules soim Louis XVI.

the  land  was  in  the  hands  of  peasant  p.  19. See, too, on the  growth  of

proprietors. This  is  said  to  be  (ex-  peasant  proprietors  between  1760  and

elusive  of  communal  property)  about  1789  the  valuable  book  of  JI.  Gasquet,

the  present  proportion  ; but Arthur  Les  Insilf  iitioim  I'lditiques  et  Soritdes

Young  almost  certainl}'  exaggerated.  de  VAiiciewte  Fratice,  ii.  iJiSO-.S:!*'..

Taine quotes an estimate  of 1760,  ^  See  Arthur  Young. Pinkerton,

which  gives  a  fourth  part  of  the  soil  iv.  419,  449. It  is  curious  to  notice

to peasant proprietors, but M. L.  that there was  just the same dis-

dc Lavergne, who is probably the  pute as  in Ireland, about the old

best  authority  on  the  agricultural  his-  tithes and the tithes imp;)S(;d on

tory  of  France,  says, '  On  pent  se  faire  agricultural products more  recently

nne  idee  assez  exacte  de  Tetat  de  la  introduced. Cherest, La Chute de-

propricte  avaut  1789,  en  divisant le  VAiicicn  llegime,  i.  45.
Bol  national  en  cinq  portions  a  peu

376 ENGLAND  I^  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xx.

country  districts,  wliile  liatred  of  the  many  feudal  privileges  of
the  nobles  became  one  of  the  strongest  feelings  of  the  French
mind.  These  privileges  were  of  many  kinds,  and  they  had  many
diSerent  origins.  One  class  were  essentially  of  the  nature  of
property — rights  or  dues  or  tributes  which  had  been  reserved
when  the  land  was  conceded  to  the  peasant,  and  which  were  the
conditions,  and,  in  part  at  least,  the  price  of  the  purchase.
Another  large  class  were  derived  from  the  period  when  the
nobles  discharged  many  of  the  duties  of  sovereignty,  and  con-
ducted in  person  the  administration  of  the  provinces,  and  they
continued  to  be  exacted  when  the  services  for  which  they  had
originally  been  imposed  were  no  longer  rendered ;  while  others
again  were  relics  of  ancient  serfdom.  There  were  fixed  annual
payments  of  the  nature  of  ground  rents.  There  were  tributes
in  kind,  of  wine  and  corn  and  chickens.  There  were  duties  to  a
feudal  lord  when  a  farm  changed  hands ;  duties  or  tolls  oil
markets,  fairs,  auctions,  bridges,  ferries,  high  roads,  weights
and  measures.  There  were  rights  to  the  property  of  those  who
were  condemned  to  death ;  to  the  property  of  those  who  died
without  an  heir  ;  to  the  property  of  foreigners  who  died  on
the  domain  of  the  lord.  There  were  exclusive  rights  of  hunt-
ing, shooting,  keeping  pigeons  and  rabbit  warrens,  and  there
were  many  quaint,  antiquated,  and  sometimes  degrading  rights
of  homage  of  a  purely  honorary  description.  The  monopoly
which  the  feudal  lord  possessed  of  the  right  of  building  mills,
baking-ovens,  and  winepresses,  and  the  obligation  imposed  on
the  peasant  of  giving  annually  a  certain  number  of  days'  labour
gratuitously  to  his  feudal  lord,  were  among  the  most  oppressive
portions  of  the  system.  In  some  provinces  the  lord  had  the
right  of  selling  his  wine  for  thirty  or  forty  days  before  that  of
the  peasant  could  be  brought  into  the  market.

The  feudal  burdens  varied  greatly  in  their  amount ;  and  in
some  districts,  especially  Languedoc,  Dauphine,  and  the  Lyon-
nais,  much  land  was  'allodial'  or  exempt.'  But  over  by  far
the  greater  pai't  of  France  the  feudal  system  was  in  full  force.
Jt  was  less  severe  than  in  Germany  and  some  other  countries
where  serfdom  was  still  general,  jukI  it  hnd  l)een  sliglitly  alle-
viated in  the  course  of  the  century. The  number  of  the  days  of

'  bee  Loraonie,  Lcs  Mirabcnu,  ii.  l.'0-26.

en.  XX.  FEUD.\L  RIGHTS.  377

forced  labour  had  been  by  custom  reduced ;  many  ancient  tolls
had  been  abolished,  and  it  was  the  spirit  of  the  law,  courts  to
construe  strictly  the  right  to  feudal  services,  and  to  recognise
only  those  which  were  distinctly  authorised  by  title  deeds,  and
which  were  therefore  usually  due  to  an  ancient  contract.  But
when  all  this  is  admitted,  it  remains  true  that  the  small  pro-
prietor as  well  as  the  peasant  found  himself  involved  in  a  per-
fect maze  of  intricate,  vexatious,  oppressive,  and  often  ruinous
obligations  for  which  he  seemed  to  receive  no  corresponding
advantage.  While  some  parts  of  the  siystem  were  plainly  un-
just, being  payments  for  services  that  were  no  longer  rendered,
other  dues  were  strictly  of  the  nature  of  property,  being  elements
of  a  regular  sale.  Even  the  most  legitimate,  however,  were  now
resented,  and  the  resentment  became  the  stronger  because  those
to  whom  they  were  paid  lived  chiefly  in  the  towns  and  had  lost
the  power  and  the  popularity  both  of  landlords  and  administra-
tors. With  frequent  sales  of  land  the  feudal  rights  had  con-
stantly changed  hands.  They  often  passed  into  the  hands  of
men  who  had  no  other  connection  with  the  soil.  A  great  part
were  in  the  possession  of  the  Church.  Another,  and  perhaps
still  larger,  part  had  been  acquired  by  the  middle  classes.'  The
incessant  subdivision  of  small  farms  had  at  the  same  time  broken
many  feudal  dues  into  minute  fractions,  greatly  increased  the
cost  of  their  collection,  and  given  rise  to  a  vast  amount  of  com-
plication and  obscurity,  and  as  a  consequence  to  much  expensive
and  irritating  litigation.^

DArgenson  as  early  as  1751  had  very  wisely  recommended
their  compulsory  purchase,  and  such  a  measure  was  actually
carried  out  with  great  success  in  Piedmont  twenty  years  later
by  Charles  Emmanuel  III.  In  France,  however,  these  rights
were  preserved  with  little  change  till  the  Revolution,  and  they
gave  that  movement  some  of  its  worst  and  most  distinctive
characteristics. Famine,  avarice,  and  revolutionary  incitements

'  TiomoX.,  La  Rh-olution  FraDqaise  cialisme  contcmpornin. See,  too,  an

et  la  Feodaliie,  p.  39.  excellent  lecture  by  Sir  H.  Maine  in

"■  There is a lar<je  literature  on  his Early Law and Custom. The

the  subject  of  feudal  jights. I  have  chief  earlier  authorities  on  the  subject

chiefly made use of the works of  are Boncerf, Lex Inconi'hiicnfs drx

Doniol, Tocquevillc,  Taine,  Cherest,  Droits  ffodau.v,  and  tlie  report  pro-

liOmcnie  and tiaret,  Arthur Younfr's  scntcd to the  ('onslituent Assembly

Tour,  and Janet's Orifjiacs da So-  by  Rctif  de  Merlin  of  Douay.

378 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. rn.  xx.

conspired  in  producing  a  great  revolt  against  feudal  rights.
All  classes  were  thrown  into  the  same  category,  and  it  became
tlie  main  object  of  the  peasantry  to  annihilate  all  without  com-
pensation. Hence  the  atrocious  Jacquerie  which  formed  one  of
the  most  hideous  scenes  of  the  first  act  of  the  Revolution ;  the
burning  of  castles  in  order  to  destroy  the  muniment  rooms  and
the  title  deeds  they  contained ;  the  frequent  murder  of  the  feudal
lords.  The  Constituent  Assembly  attempted  to  abolish  feudal
obligations  by  a  discriminating  and  statesmanlike  measure  pur-
chasing that  portion  of  them  which  was  clearly  of  the  nature  of
property,  but  it  was  unable  to  induce  the  excited  peasantry  to
accept  the  decree,  and  at  last  in  1793  the  Convention  crowned
the  work  of  revolution  by  sweeping  away  without  compensation
the  whole  feudal  system,  including  many  money  dues  which  had
been  purchased,  and  as  it  was  believed  secured,  by  the  most
legitimate  contracts.

While  the  feudal  system  turned  the  peasantry  against  the
nobles,  other  causes  not  less  poAverful  were  arrayiug  them  against
tlie  Government.  If  there  had  been  at  this  time  a  really  strong,
intelligent,  and  reforming  despotism,  it  would  have  certainly
represented  a  large  portion  of  public  opinion.  Such  a  Govern-
jiient,  provided  it  is  not  under  clerical  influence,  has  always  been
popular  in  France,  and  it  would  have  found  a  wide  sphere  for
its  exertions.  It  might  have  employed  the  strength  of  the  Exe-
cutive in  placing  the  taxation  of  the  country  on  a  broad  and
equitable  basis  ;  sweeping  away  a  crowd  of  invidious  class  privi-
leges, obsolete  and  barbarous  laws,  commercial  and  industrial
restraints  ;  giving  a  very  iguoriuit  population  some  measure  of
technical  and  agricultural  education,  suid  stimulating  by  the  many
means  in  its  power  material  prospci'ity.  If  it  had  made  Franco
respected  abroad  and  prosperous  at  home,  if  it  had  given  lier  a
Kound  and  equal  administrative  system  as  well  as  religious  and
intellectual  liberty,  it  would  liavo  fulfilled  the  desire  both  of
Voltaire  and  the  Economists,  and  it  would  have  found  so  much
])nblic  support  that  it  might  ])r()b;ibly  have  dulled  all  the  efforts
of  the  revolutionary  school  of  ivc)uss(>au.

A  Government  of  tliis  kind,  however,  is  easily  conceived  but
rarely  realised,  and  tlio  despotism  of  France  was  weak  and  imbe-
cile, and  corroded  with  unrigliteous  privilege. Tlie  taxation  of

on.  XX.  UNJUST TAXATION.  379

the  countiy  had  grown  to  a  colossal  height  through  the  wars  of
Lewis XIV.,  and  subsequent  mismanagement  had  greatly  aggra-
vated the  burden.  There  are  few  subjects  of  inquiry  more
difficult  than  a  comparison  of  the  financial  condition  of  Franco
before  and  after  the  Revolution.  The  great  change  in  the  value
of  money  throughout  Europe ;  the  special  increase  in  the  national
wealth  of  France  ;  the  complete  alteration  of  the  whole  system  of
taxation ;  the  extreme  complexity,  obscurity,  and  confusion  in
which  the  finances  of  ancient  France  were  involved ;  the  habit
of  deferring  accounts  till  several  years  after  they  had  become
due,  and  the  frequent  false  representations  which  were  given
upon  authority,  create  many  pitfalls  for  the  historian.  Much
research  has,  however,  been  devoted  to  the  subject,  and  in  the
opinion  of  one  of  the  best  judges,  the  annual  imposts  borne  by
the  French  people  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  including
the  tithes  and  local  dues  and  taxes,  may  be  estimated  at  eight
hundred  and  eighty  millions  of  livres,  while  the  whole  wealth  of
the  country  was  less  than  one-third  of  what  it  became  eiglity
years  later.  According  to  this  estimate  the  taxation  of  France
in  1789  bore  a  higher  proportion  to  its  wealth,  than  under  any
of  the  Governments  up  to  the  fall  of  Napoleon  III.  with  the
single  exception  of  the  Reign  of  Terror.'

Under  any  circumstances  such  taxation  would  have  been
burdensome,  but  it  was  rendered  intolerable  by  its  enormous,  its
scandalous  injustice.  The  whole  noble  class  and  the  whole  body
of  the  clergy  were  exempted  from  the  greater  part  of  it.  I'rom
the  '  taille  '  or  personal  tax,  which  was  the  heaviest  tax  in  France
and  which  had  increased  tenfold  in  two  centuries,  they  were  in
nearly  all  cases  absolutely  free ;  and  although  they  did  pay  the
ciipitation  tax  and  the  tax  called  the  '  vingtieme,'  they  paid  it
on  a  separate  and  a  lower  scale.  The  number  of  the  so-called
'  privileged '  individuals  is  said  to  have  been  not  less  than
270,000,  and  it  was  continually  increasing  by  the  sale  of  offices
which  carried  with  them  the  privilege  of  nobility.  Necker
mentioned  that  in  his  time  there  were  no  less  than  4,000  of
these  offices.  Yet  even  this  does  not  by  any  means  measure  the
whole  amount  of  the  exemptions.  There  were  many  thousands
of  petty  offices  which  did  not  confer  the  rights  of  nobility,  but
'  Sybel,  Hist,  dc  la  Revolution,  i.  34,  38,  39.

380 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. cn.  xx.

Avliicli  freed  tliose  who  held  them  from  the  '  taille '  and  reduced
some  of  their  other  taxes  to  small  dimensions.^  There  were
Avhole  towns  which  had  secured  for  themselves  considerable  ex-
emptions,^ and  nearly  all  over  France  the  full  weight  of  the  taxa-
tion fell  mainly  upon  the  small  peasantry,  upon  the  classes  of  the
community  who  were  the  most  poor  and  the  most  helpless.  At  a
time  when  the  passion  for  equality  was  at  its  height  this  astound-
ing inequality  of  the  poor  crushed  by  taxation  in  order  that  tlie
rich  might  be  relieved,  was  continually  before  the  eyes  of  the
jieople.  There  was  probably  not  a  parish,  not  a  village,  in  the
country  districts  in  which  it  was  not  illustrated  by  examples.
An  historian  who  has  examined  with  great  care  the  details  of
French  taxation  has  estimated  that  over  a  great  part  of  France
the  class  which  was  '  taillable.'  and  which  consisted  chiefly  of
the  farmers  of  the  country,  paid  on  an  average  out  of  every  100
francs  of  their  nett  revenue  no  less  than  53  francs  in  direct
taxation,  14  francs  28  centimes  in  tithes,  and  14  francs  28
centimes  in  feudal  dues,  leaving  less  than  a  fifth  part  for  the
support  of  themselves  and  their  families.^

It  has  been  estimated  by  the  same  historian  that  the  pro-
portion of  taxation  to  revenue,  borne  in  several  provinces  by
those  who  were  '  taillable,'  was  about  five  times  as  great  as  at
present,"*  and  its  enormity  was  mainly  due  to  the  exemptions
enjoyed  by  almost  all  the  wealthier  members  of  the  community.
For  the  poor  there  were  no  such  exemptions.  The  capitation
tax,  especially,  pursued  the  humblest  and  the  most  helpless.  The
workman  who  gained  but  fivepence  a  day  for  his  labour,  some-
times paid  eight,  nine,  or  ten  livres  of  capitation,  and  the  tax
was  paid  even  by  those  wretched  beings  who  hovered  round  the
gutters  of  tlie  great  towns  in  search  of  rags  or  broken  bottles,
or  pieces  of  iron,  or  who  sold  old  hats  and  clothes  through  the
streets.-^

The  system  of  taxation  was  as  arbitrary  as  it  was  unjust.  The
King's  Council  decided  the  muniint  which  each  province  should
]);iy,  and liad even  the  right  of  incrensing  the  'taille'  by a

'  Tainn,  Aiirien  lirqime,  pp.  171-  *  Ibid.  p.  401.

481  ;  Tof;f|iinvillo,  pp.  1:58,  i:t!t.  »  Ibid.  pp.  4(>l-4fi3. Full  dolnils

^  Sec  tlic  (•.■>;;irn])lcs  in  'I'.nnc,  i>p.  ;ibont  these  annmnlics  will  be  found

47«,  47I».  in (he prcut works of Tainc .ind

■■'  J  bid.  pp.  I.vS-ltil,  512,  hi'o,  Tocfpicvillc.

CH.  XX.  REFORMS IN TAXATION.  381

simple  '  arret,'  until  Necker  in  1780  induced  the  King  to  con-
sent that  this  should  in  future  only  be  done  by  a  regular  law
registered  by  Parliament.^  In  the  '  pays  d'election '  the  inten-
dants  and  their  subordinates  exercised  an  almost  absolute  power
in  assigning  to  each  district  and  individual  their  proportion  of
the  burden.  Enormous  abuses  naturally  grew  up ;  despotic
power  was  encountered  by  concealment  and  falsehood,  but
on  the  whole  those  who  possessed  wealth  and  influence  were
usually  favoured.  Many  branches  of  the  revenue  were  farmed
out,  and  the  '  fermiers '  were  not  less  extortionate  and  oppres-
sive than  the  Irish  tithe  proctors,  to  whom  they  bore  a  marked
resemblance.

The  exemption  of  the  nobles  from  taxation  originated  at  a
time  when  they  were  a  small  body,  and  its  justification  was  the
gratuitous  military  service  they  were  then  bound  to  render.  But
after  the  institution  of  standing  armies  this  reason  no  longer
existed,  while  the  amount  of  the  taxes  was  vastly  increased.
]\Iontesquieu  described  the  gigantic  armies  of  his  day  as  '  a  new
malady,'  which  had  spread  over  Europe  and  which  was  threaten-
ing its  chief  countries  with  absolute  ruin.^  It  was  impossible
that  the  whole  burden  of  supporting  them  should  rest  per-
manently on  the  poor,  and  some  feeble  efforts  were  accordingly
made  to  diff'use  it.  The  taxation  of  the  privileged  classes  began
after  the  Peace  of  Ryswick  with  the  capitation  tax  and  the
'  tenths,'  and  from  this  time  French  finance  ministers  steadily
eiideavoured  to  mitigate  the  inequality.^  It  gradually  became
a  settled  maxim  among  them,  that  every  increase  of  taxation
should  be  met  by  augmenting  the  '  twentieth,'  'which  applied  to
the  property  of  all  classes,  rather  than  the  '  taille,'  from  which
the  privileged  classes  were  exempt,  and  a  serious  effort  was
made  to  amend  the  shamefully  low  valuation  upon  which  the

'  Lavergne, Assevihlcea Proviii-  pas  un  qui  n'ait  constamment  cherclie

dales,  p.  61.  a  restreindre  en  general  tons  les  pi'ivi-

-  Usjjrit  (les  Lois,  xiii.  c.  17.  leges,  sans en excepter  ceux de la

^  Turgot,  recommending  the  aboli-  noblesse  et  du  clerge.' — Turgot,  lif-

tion  of  corvees  for  the  repair  of  the  pauses  aux  Objections  du  Garde  drs

roads  and  the  substitution  for  them  Sceaux. (Kiirres (ed. 1809), viii.

of  a  tax  paid  by  all  classes,  says  :  '  II  226,  227. This  work  contains  a  great

faut  suivre  ...  la  marche  que  tous  deal of valuable information  about

les ministres  des finances  ont con-  the  inequalities  of  taxation  in  Fran(;e.

Ptamment  suivie  depuis  quatre  vingts  See,  too,  Lomenie,  Lvs  Mirahean,  ii.

ans,  et  davant;ige; car il n'y  en  a  it3-it9.

382  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTimY.  ch.  xx.

privileged  classes  paid  the  former  tax.  Sopietliing  was  done  in
this  direction,  though  slowly  and  iruperfectly,  but  the  further
prosecution  of  the  scheme  appears  to  have  been  abandoned  in
1782  through  the  opposition  of  the  Parliaments.'  In  the
mean  time  the  inequality  of  taxation  was  becoming  continually
more  intolerable  through  the  double  process  of  an  increasing
aggregate  burden  and  of  an  increasing  number  of  exemptions.
The  character,  numbers,  and  position  of  the  French  aristocracy
had  wholly  changed,  since  Richelieu  and  Lewis  XIV.  had  drawn
the  more  important  and  opulent  members  from  the  management
of  their  estates  to  the  dissipations  of  Paris,  and  since  Mazarin
had  begun  the  system  of  annexing  hereditary  titles  to  the
magistracy,  and  to  a  crowd  of  other  offices  purchased  from  the
King.2  It  had  become  so  easy  to  buy  nobility  with  money,  that
Turgot  scarcely  exaggerated  when  he  wrote  that  '  the  class  of
the  nobles  comprised  the  whole  class  of  the  rich,'  ^  and  it  was
this  class  which  was  refusing  to  bear  its  reasonable  proportion
of  the  burdens  of  the  State.

The  injustice  was  glaring  and  intolerable,  but  it  was  not  pecu-
liar to  France.  It  may  be  found  during  the  eighteenth  century  in
almost  every  leading  country  on  the  Continent,*  and  it  is  one  of
the  points  in  which  the  contrast  between  English  and  continental
Goverrnnents  is  most  remarkable.  The  predominating  influence  of
a  landed  aristocracy  in  England  may  indeed  be  plainly  seen  in  laws
which  artificially  foster  the  agglomeration  of  land.  It  may  be  seen
in  the  severity  of  the  game  laws.  It  has  been  seen  by  some
writers  in  the  continued  iowness  of  the  land  tax,  but  such  writers
forget  the  number  and  magnitude  of  the  special  burdens  on  land,
and  the  immense  change  which  has  taken  place  in  the  relative

'  See  the  history  of  this  transac-  du  roi  du  grand  et  du  petit  college,

i'lon  in  Chdrcst,  La,  C'/mte  de  rAncicii  et par d'autres charges encore;

Jii'ijiwii,  i.  38-40.  comine  aussi  par  des  places  de  capi-

'■*  Necker, (J'Jvrres, ix. 122, 123.  touls,  d'ochovins,  et  par  des  brevets

Necker  says, '  I'res  de  la  moitie  dc  emanes de la faveur des rois, des

I'ordre de la noblesse tel  qu'il ex-  niinistros et des premiers commis.

i'^tait  i\  rapi)roche  des  derniers  etals  On  doit  ajouter  encore  A.  tons  ces  jets

j,'(':iieraiix eiait  conijjose  do i'aiiiilles  do  noblesse  modcrno  Ics  droits  acquis

fnnoblics  depiiis  deux  slides  jwr  les  par une certaino suite de services

cliarKCs  de  conscillers  aux  parlemens,  niilitaircs combin6s avec  la  nature

de consoillers  iX  la cour  des aides,  des  grades.'
d'aiulileurs, dc correcteurs et dc  =• (I'Jucrcx  de  Tuniot,  viii.  234.

niaitrcs des compttss,  do  conseillors  '  Sorcl,  L'Kvrojir.  et  la  lUrolut'ioii

du  Gliiitclet,  do  mail  res  des  retiuetes,  I'Vant^'uisr,  pp.  O.j  '.ti>.
dc  truHoricrs  do  Frunci;,  de  sccrclaircs

cii.  XX.  ENGLISH AND FRENCH TAXATION.  383

importance  of  real  and  personal  property  since  the  Revolution,
and  they  forget  also  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  so-called  land
tax  was  originally  imposed,  not  solely  on  land,  but  also  on  per-
sonal property,  and  that  it  is  personal  property  and  not  land  which
has  since  been  exempted. •  Land  was,  however,  exempted  from
the  succession  duties  which  Pitt's  Acts  of  1789  and  1796
imposed  on  personal  property,  and  the  law  of  distress  gives
landlords  a  preferential  claim  as  creditors  in  the  case  of  the
insolvency  of  their  tenants.  But  in  general  the  richer  classes
in  England  have  never  claimed  any  exemption  from  taxation,
while  they  have  readily  accepted  many  special  burdens,  and  when
they  secured  for  themselves  a  virtual  monopoly  of  places  of
dignity  and  power  their  usual  method  was  to  make  those  offices
either  absolutely  gratuitous  or  exceedingly  underpaid.  As
Tocqueville  has  truly  said  :  '  For  centuries  the  only  inequalities
of  taxation  in  England  were  those  which  had  been  successively
introduced  in  favour  of  the  necessitous  classes.  ...  In  the
eighteenth  century  it  was  the  poor  who  enjoyed  exemptions
from  taxation  in  England,  in  France  it  was  the  rich.  In  the
one  case  the  aristocracy  had  taken  upon  its  own  shoulders  the
heaviest  public  charges  in  order  to  be  allowed  to  govern.  In
the  other  case  it  retained  to  the  end  an  immunity  from  taxation,
in  order  to  console  itself  for  the  loss  of  government.'  ^  It  is  true
that  the  position  of  the  English  working  classes  in  relation  to
taxation  was  not  quite  so  favourable  in  the  eighteenth  century
as  at  present,  when  all  the  articles  of  first  necessity  and  all  the
raw  materials  of  industry  are  untaxed,  but  still  they  had  no
special  burdens,  and  they  had  many  special  exemptions.  Arthur
Young  relates  the  enthusiasm  and  the  astonishment  with  which
a  French  mob  during  the  Revolution  received  a  short  speech
which  he  made  them,  on  the  difference  between  taxation  in
England  and  France.  '  We  have  many  taxes,'  said  the  English
ti'aveller,  '  in  England  which  you  know  nothing  of  in  France,
but  the  tiers  etat,  the  poor,  do  not  pay  them.  They  are  laid  on
the  rich.  Every  window  in  a  man's  house  pays,  but  if  he  has
no  more  than  six  windows  he  pays  nothing. A  seigneur  with

'  4 William and Mary, cap. i.  personal  property  was  abandoned  in

See  Mr.  Brodrick's  English  Land  and  1833.

Landimncrs, p.  246  ; M'Culloch on  *  iU«fJ<'»  i?ry!w<>,  pp.  14G,  147.

Ta.vat'iuH,  p.  02. T^ie  assessment  on

3S4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xx.

a  great  estate  pays  the  vingtiemes  and  tallies,  but  the  little  pro-
prietor of  a  garden  pays  nothing.  The  rich  pay  for  their  horses,
their  carriages,  their  servants,  and  even  for  liberty  to  kill  their
own  partridges ;  but  the  poor  farmer  pays  nothing  of  all  this,
and  Avhat  is  more  we  have  in  England  a  tax  paid  by  the  rich
for  the  relief  of  the  poor.'  ^

To  complete  the  picture  of  the  evils  of  French  administration,
we  have  to  remember  the  enormous  multiplication  of  pensions,
sinecures,  and  absurdly  overpaid  offices  reserved  exclusively
for  the  privileged  classes,  and  the  enormous  multiplication  of
judicial  and  other  offices  habitually  put  up  for  sale.  The  sale
of  offices  extended  to  the  army,  the  navy,  the  ordnance,  and
even  the  ecclesiastical  employments  about  the  household.^  The
burden  of  the  militia  fell  wholly  on  the  peasantry ;  and  as
married  men  were  exempted,  it  was  one  cause  of  the  common-
ness of  improvident  marriages  among  them,  which  contrasts  so
remarkably  with  the  rareness  of  such  marriages  in  our  day.^
Unpaid  labour  was  exacted  twice  a  year  for  making  and  re-
pairing the  roads.  The  sale  of  salt  was  a  strict  monopoly  of
the  Government,  and  its  price,  making  full  allowance  for  the
alteration  in  the  value  of  money,  was  eight  times  as  high  as  in
the  present  day.*  Bread  was  made  artificially  dear  by  the
restrictions  on  the  internal  commerce  of  corn ;  similar  re-
strictions were  imposed  on  the  internal  commerce  of  wine  and
brandy,  and  the  system  of  jurandes  placed  every  trade  on  the
basis  of  monopoly,  and  forbade  the  workmen  to  migrate  in
search  of  more  profitable  markets  for  their  industry.  Endless
tolls  and  restrictions  and  ancient  privileges  interlaced  and
impeded  industry  at  every  turn,  and  between  ignorance  and
poverty  and  oppression,  agriculture,  over  a  great  part  of  France,
was  little  more  advanced  than  in  the  Middle  Ages,  Arthur
Young  calculated  that  an  acre  of  laud  produced  in  England  on
an  average  from  twenty-four  to  twenty-five  bushels  of  grain,
l>iit  in  Franco  only  eighteen,  and  that  while  the  produce  of
arable  land  in  the  one  country  might  bo  estimated  at  50.s'.,  in
the  other  it  was  only  35s.''

'  Pinkerton,  iv.  200.  »  Pinkorton,  iv.  416.

*  (See an essay  by  St.  Pi(^rre  nn *  'J'liino,  p.  408.

•  Mariners  in  France,' .(l///i.  Reg.  iliVl, ■'  Atlluir Yonngj's Tovr  foriirinal

1>.  \-,\.  edition of 17'J2), i. lill,  AiVl. Very

CH.  XX.  FEEQUENT FAMINES.  385

In  this  manner  France,  in  spite  of  its  extraordinary  adv^an-
tages  in  soil  and  climate,  its  admirable  geographical  position,
and  the  great  energy  and  skill  of  its  manufacturers,  continued  to
be  a  poor  country,  and  while  its  towns  ranked  among  the  most
brilliant  in  Europe,  every  bad  season  reduced  a  great  part  of  its
country  population  to  absolute  famine.  Vauban  and  St.  Simon
have  drawn  in  imperishable  lines  the  picture  of  their  misery
under  Lewis  XIV.,  and  the  constant  and  formidable  bread  riots
during  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth  century,  show  how  per-
sistently that  misery  continued.  In  1739  and  1740  the  distress
was  such,  that  D'Argenson  expressed  his  belief  that  in  those
years  more  Frenchmen  died  of  misery  than  in  all  the  wars  of
Lewis  XIV.'  In  1750  and  1751  the  same  scenes  were  repro-
duced. Whole  villages  were  deserted.  At  least  20,000  work-
men fled  across  the  frontier.  In  some  districts  field  labour
could  hardly  be  accomplished,  for  the  few  remaining  peasants
were  so  extenuated  by  hunger  that  they  could  scarcely  hold  the
spade  or  direct  the  plough,  and  gaunt,  famine-stricken  crowds,
shouting  for  bread,  besieged  the  town  halls  and  followed  the
Dauphin  as  he  drove  to  Notre-Dame.^  In  one  month  in  1753,
and  in  one  quarter  of  Paris,  no  less  than  800  persons  died
of  misery.^  1770  and  1773  were  both  years  of  famine,"*  and
although  the  commercial  wealth  of  France  increased  rapidly
during  the  early  years  of  Lewis  XVI.  it  left  the  condition  of
the  peasantry  little  changed.

The  provinces,  it  is  true,  differed  greatly  in  taxation,  feudal
burdens,  soil,  cultivation,  and  general  well-being.  Turgot  de-
scribed Normandy,  Flanders,  Picardy,  and  the  districts  around
Paris  and  Orleans  as  flourishing,  but  he  added  that  at  least  four-
sevenths  of  France  was  cultivated  by  tenants  who  were  absolute
paupers,  who  held  their  land  for  the  most  part  by  the  metayer
tenure,  and  who  were  very  generally  reduced  to  the  most  abject
misery  through  the  burden  of  the  '  taille '  and  the  oppression  of
the  middleman.^ The  detailed  investigation  of  Arthur  Youug,

full  examinations  of  the  condition  of  quain,  pp.  103-105,  and  in  Taine,  pp.

the  French  peasantry  will  be  found  431-4H3.

in the works of Lavergne and of  "^  Eocquain,  pp. 144,  145 ; Taine,

B.abeau,  and  in  the  first  chapter  of  pp.  433-4.36.

Sybels  Hiit.  de  la  Bt'voluUnn.  ^  Rocquain,  p.  168.

'  Mhnoires, iii. 92. See several  *  Ibid pp 274,  306.

particulars of this famine iu Roc-  *  Memoires sur les Tmpoxifwns

VOL.  V.  (J  G

386  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  en.  xx.

about  twenty  years  later,  amply  corroborates  tlie  picture.  While
lie  found  a  few  provinces  fairly  prosperous,  he  estimated  that  there
were  in  France  not  less  than  40,000,000  acres  that  were  abso-
lutely or  nearly  waste,  that  country  labour  was  paid  seventy-
six  per  cent,  less  than  in  England,  that  the  metayers  who  formed
the  great  mass  of  the  French  tenantry  were  sunk  in  a  poverty  to
which  there  was  no  parallel  in  England,  and  which  was  certainly
not  exceeded  in  Ireland,  and  that  their  extreme  poverty  was
mainly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  arbitrary  and  excessive  '  taille,'
and  to  the  manifold  oppressions  of  the  feudal  system.  '  What  a
miracle,'  he  wrote, '  that  all  this  splendour  and  wealth  of  the  cities
of  France  should  be  so  unconnected  with  the  country.  There
are  no  gentle  transitions  from  ease  to  comfort,  from  comfort  to
wealth.  You  pass  at  once  from  beggary  to  profusion,  from
misery  in  mud  cabins  to  .  .  .  spectacles  at  500  livres  a  night ;
the  country  deserted,  or  if  a  gentleman  in  it,  you  find  him  in
some  wretched  hole  to  save  that  money  which  is  lavished  with
profusion  in  the  luxuries  of  a  capital.'  ^  As  in  the  Eoman
]^]mpire  in  the  period  of  its  decadence,  great  districts  fell  wholly
out  of  cultivation,  on  account  of  the  overwhelming  weight  of  the
burdens  on  agi'ieulture.

I  have  now  enumerated  the  chief  intellectual,  social,  poli-
tical, and  moral  influences  that  prepared  the  great  catastrophe
of  the  Revolution,  The  enumeration,  however  imperfect,  will
throw  some  light  on  the  contrasts  between  the  conditions  of
]<]ngland  and  France ;  the  alleged  danger  of  French  principles
spreading  to  England,  and  the  causes  which  made  the  Revolution
in  France  much  more  than  a  merely  national  or  merely  political
event.  It  is  unnecessary,  however,  for  my  present  purpose,  to
examine  with  the  same  detail  the  fifteen  memorable  years  be-
tween the  accession  of  Lewis  XVI.  and  the  final  catastrophe;
when,  under  a  virtuous  and  most  well-meaning,  but  feeble,  slug-
gish, !Uid  vacillating  King,  the  experiment  of  reform  was  tried
and  iailed.  Contraiy  to  the  wishes  of  Voltaire,  but  amid  great
pojMJJar  rejoicing,  the  Parliaments  and  other  law  courts  which
Ijiul  been  abolished  under  Lewis  XV.  were  restored,  and  in  the

danx la GvuhalUe. de Livtoudn  '  Tinkorton,iv.  158.  Sec,  too,  Tainc,

(l7<»'i_); (ihifrrs  dc  'L'wnjot,  turn.  iv.  Ancicn  lUijimc,  \}\y.  \'l\)-\')'>.

en.  XX.  TURGOT.  387

person  of  Turgot  the  best  and  greatest  of  the  Economists
assumed  the  reins  of  power.  Thoroughly  imbued  with  the  most
enlightened  economical  teaching  of  his  time,  thoroughly  ac-
quainted, through  his  thirteen  years'  experience  as  intendant  of
Limousin,  with  the  conditions,  wants,  and  misery  of  the  French
people,  this  great  minister  attempted  reforms  which  would  have
remedied,  or  at  least  alleviated,  nearly  all  the  more  important
abuses  that  have  been  described.  He  was  supported  warmly,  and
on  the  whole  loyally,  by  the  King,  and  in  Malesherbes  he  found  a
colleague  who  was  as  pure-minded  and  conscientious  as  himself-
The  Ministry  of  Turgot  lasted  little  more  than  twenty
months,^  and  during  a  considerable  part  of  it  he  was  confined  to
his  room  by  the  gout,  but  it  formed  oae  of  the  most  memorable
pages  in  the  century.  No  minister  ever  showed  a  more  un-
tiring energy,  a  more  single-minded  desire  for  public  good,  a
more  thorough  knowledge,  both  of  existing  abuses  and  of  the
remedies  by  which  they  might  be  cured ;  but  he  was  wholly
wanting  in  the  art  of  managing  and  conciliating  men,  and  in
the  art  of  measuring  his  reforms  by  the  state  of  public  opinion.
Austere,  absolute,  and  rigid  in  his  character  and  in  his  manners,
he  was  too  much  governed  by  general  maxims  and  by  considera-
tions of  abstract  utility,  and  his  conviction  of  the  precariousness
of  his  power,  and  of  the  probable  shortness  of  his  life,  gave  a
feverish  energy  to  his  policy,  and  led  him  to  attempt  far  more
than  he  could  possibly  have  accomplished.  The  enumeration  of
the  reforms  which  he  effected,  attempted,  or  proposed  makes  one
of  the  most  wonderful  pictures  of  political  activity  in  history.
They  comprised  the  suppression  of  the  corvees  and  of  the  ju-
randes,  a  complete  readjustment  of  the  taxation  of  France,  the
establishment  of  a  most  elaborate  system  of  local  self-govern-
ment in  the  form  of  assemblies  which  were  to  be  elected  in  every
province,  the  removal  of  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  barriers  on  inter-
nal commerce,  a  commutation  of  the  feudal  dues,  the  reorgani-
sation of  the  courts  of  justice,  the  concession  of  full  religious
liberty  to  the  Protestants,  a  general  system  of  national  secular
education.  Something  was  accomplished,  but  the  most  impor-
tant designs  were  defeated,  and  all  the  classes  whose  interests

'  This  was  as  Controller-General. He  had  been,  for  about  a  month  before,
Minister  for  the  Navy.

c  c  2

388  ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY.  cu.  xx.

and  privileges  were  menaced  soon  conspired  against  him.  The
■reconstituted  Parliaments,  fully  verifying  the  prediction  ol
Voltaire,  and  forgetting  their  old  quarrels  with  the  clergy,  made
themselves  the  most  formidable  defenders  of  the  old  privileges.
The  Parliament  of  Paris  burnt  the  work  in  which  Boncerf,  at
the  instigation  of  Turgot,  pointed  out  the  evils  of  the  feudal
system ;  and  it  protested  vehemently  against  the  abolition  of
the  corvees  and  jurandes,  and  against  the  equalisation  of  the
taxes.  The  clergy  rose  in  indignation  against  the  proposed
measures  of  toleration,  and  they  looked  with  horror  on  a
minister  who  was  in  open  sympathy  with  the  philosophers.
The  merchants  were  enraged  at  the  abolition  of  the  jurandes,
and  countless  particular  interests  were  alarmed  and  irritated
by  the  measures  of  equalisation  and  economy.  Courtiers  and
magistrates,  the  clergy  and  the  merchants,  were  soon  leagued
against  the  minister ;  and  although  Voltaire  defended  him  with
admirable  force,  he  could  not  turn  the  stream.  Even  among
the  poor,  whom  he  so  deeply  loved,  Turgot  was  not  wholly
popular.  One  of  his  best  measures  was  the  removal  of  the
restraints  upon  the  internal  commerce  of  corn ;  but  a  bad  year
happened  to  follow,  and  in  the  fierce  bread  riots  that  ensued,  the
cry  was  raised  that  Turgot  was  starving  the  people.

Though  one  of  the  greatest  of  reformers,  he  had  no  wish  to
strengthen  the  popular  element  in  the  French  Government.  He
entirely  rejected  the  advice  of  Malesherbes,  who  desired  the  con-
vocation of  the  States-General.  The  work  of  Boncerf,  which
he  inspired,  maintained  that  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  Sovereign
by  his  royai  authority  to  abolish  the  feudal  system.  The  bread
riots  were  suppressed  under  Turgot  quite  as  energetically  and
quite  as  severely  as  under  former  administrations,  and  his
attitude  towards  the  Parliaments  was  one  of  uncompromising
hostility.  He  had  never  approved  of  their  revival;  he  saw
plainly  that  their  doctrine  that  no  tax  was  obligatory  which
they  had  not  freely  registered,  was  the  most  formidable  obstacle
to  his  design  of  putting  an  end  to  the  exemptions  of  the  privi-
leged orders  from  taxation ;  and  his  two  greatest  measures — the
abolition  of  the  corv6e8  and  the  abolition  of  the  jurandes — were
forced  through  a  hostile  and  protesting  Parliament  by  beds  of
justice,  and wifh I  lie  strongest  possible  assertion  of  the  tjinni-

en.  XX.  FALL OF  TURGOT.  389

potence  of  the  royal  power.  The  whole  legislative  power  of  the
nation,  he  emphatically  declared,  was  rightly  concentrated  in  the
Sovereign ;  and  although  he  desired  to  confer  upon  local  bodies
large  powers  of  administration  and  of  advice,  he  was  inflexibly
opposed  to  any  restriction  or  partition  of  the  authority  of  the
King.'  But  the  party  at  Court  which  was  opposed  to  him,  and
the  party  of  the  privileged  orders,  daily  increased ;  and  the
Queen,  who  disliked  his  manners  and  still  more  his  economies,
used  her  influence  in  favour  of  the  opposition.  The  King
wished  to  support  him,  but  he  had  little  confidence  in  his  own
judgment,  and  found  that  nearly  all  with  whom  he  came  in  con-
tact were  hostile  to  the  minister.  He  was  himself  disturbed  by
Turgot's  religious  views,  disappointed  at  the  number  of  animosi-
ties that  he  aroused,  alarmed  at  the  effect  of  his  policy  in  pro-
ducing riots  of  peasants  against  their  feudal  lords,  and  of  work-
men against  their  masters.  Maurepas,  who  from  the  beginning
of  the  reign  had  a  great  influence  over  the  King's  judgnion(.,
was  hostile  to  Turgot.  The  Queen,  indignant  at  Turgot's
removing  one  of  her  favourites,  gave  the  last  blow.  Malesherbes
had  already  resigned  in  disgust ;  and  in  May  1776,  Turgot  was
dismissed  and  disgraced. '  '  I  shall  never,'  wrote  Voltaire,  '  con-
sole myself  for  having  seen  rise  and  perish  the  golden  age,  which
these  two  ministers  were  preparing  for  us.'

The  dismissal  of  Turgot  was  speedily  followed  by  the  restora-
tion of  the  corvees  and  jurandes,  amid  many  manifestations  of
popular  indignation.  The  influence  of  Maurepas  on  the  mind
of  the  King  was  strengthened,  but  the  vision  of  innumerable
great  reforms  unexpectedly  presented,  and  then  suddenly  with-
drawn, stimulated  the  restless  and  innovating  spirit  which  had
been  steadily  growing  in  France,  while  among  the  privileged
classes  a  feeling  of  insecurity  began  to  spread.  •  Madame  de
Stael  happily  described  or  defined  the  philosophical  spirit  of  tlie
time,  as  a  growing  habit  of  measuring  all  things  by  reason  and

'  See  Sorel,  L^Europe  et  la  Revo-  he  maintained  that  the  Americans
lution  Franqaise, -pTp.  206,  212.  It  is  should  havecollected  all authorityinto
characteristic  of  Turgot's  love  of  one  centre  instead  of  dividing  it  be-
strong  government,  that  he  altogether  tween  a  president  and  two  Houses
objected  to  the  provisions  in  the  of  Congress  with  defined  and  limited
Constitution  of  the  United  States  for  powers.  It  was  these  criticisms  whioli
restricting,  qualifying,  and  balancing  chieflyproduced  John  Adams'  remark-
the  democratic  element.  Having  &h\B  Difenci' of  the  Coustiiutions  of  the
adopted  the  )irinciple  of  democracy,  United  States.

390 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xx.

not  by  habit,  and  institutions  which  had  long  been  acquiesced
in  without  a  murmur,  were  now  submitted  to  a  jealous  scrutiny.
After  a  short  interval,  however,  the  policy  of  reform  was
resumed,  though  within  narrower  limits,  by  Necker,  whose
first  financial  ministry  extended  from  October  1776  to  May
1781.  The  Genevese  banker  was  beyond  all  things  a  financier^
and  he  viewed  the  whole  question  mainly  in  its  financial  aspect.
The  confidence  he  inspired  among  the  moneyed  classes  was
remarkably  shown  by  the  great  success  of  his  war  loans ;  he
introduced  many  skilful  economies  into  many  different  branches
of  public  service ;  he  endeavoured  with  praiseworthy  courage
to  check  the  enormous  and  criminal  extravagance  of  Marie
Antoinette,  and  he  took  the  bold  and,  in  truth,  somewhat
doubtful  step  of  making  the  nation  aware  of  the  magnitude  of
the  financial  crisis,  by  publishing  for  the  first  time  a  full  account
of  the  revenue  and  expenditure.  He  abstained  from  the  am-
bitious and  systematic  measures  of  Turgot,  but  a  reform  of  the
hospitals,  the  establishment  of  monts  de  piete  for  the  benefit  of
the  struggling  poor,  the  abolition  of  servitude  on  the  royal
domains,  a  royal  proclamation  inviting  the  feudal  lords  to  follow
the  royal  example,  and  the  abolition  of  torture  inflicted  previous
to  trial,  mark  the  spirit  of  his  administration.  He  was  deeply
sensible  of  the  enormous  injustice  inflicted  on  the  provinces  by
the  absolute  power  of  the  intendants  to  determine  the  amount  of
the  taille,  and  he  also  saw  clearly  that  the  financial  equilibrium
could  never  be  restored,  unless  the  existing  exemptions  from
taxation  were  abolished.  But  such  a  measure  could  not  be  car-
ried by  simple  royal  authority,  in  the  face  of  the  opposition  of
the  aristocratic  Parliaments,  which  had  been  violently  suppressed,
and  then  unwisely  restored.

His  plan  was,  in  part  at  least,  substantially  the  same  as
that  whicli  had  been  recommended  by  Fenelon  to  the  Duke  of
Ijurgundy.  Fenelon  liad  proposed  the  revival  in  each  province
of  the  provincial  States  consisting  of  the  three  orders,  and  he
desired  to  entrust  to  them,  and  ultimately  to  the  States-General,
which  they  were  to  elect,  the  reform  of  the  system  of  taxation.
With  a  foresight,  however,  which  subsequent  events  signally
justified,  he  perceived  that  the  usual  form  of  the  old  provincial
States,  in  which  the  three  orders  voted  separately,  gave  the  privi-

CH.  XX.  NECKEll'S PEOVINCIAL  ASSE]\IBLIES.  391

leged  orders  a  preponderance  which  would  be  fatal  to  the  scheme.
In  the  States  of  Languedoc  alone,  the  three  orders  voted  together,
and  the  representatives  of  the  third  order  equalled  those  of  the
other  orders  combined.  This  model  Fenelon  proposed  for  imita-
tion, and  he  recommended  at  the  same  time  the  abolition  of  the
intendants.

The  death  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  destroyed  the  prospects
of  a  scheme  which,  if  it  had  been  adopted  in  time,  might  have
introduced  into  French  administration  a  most  efficient  and
active  principle  of  freedom  and  of  reform.  Several  writers
recurred  to  the  proposal,  but  Turgot  sought  to  attain  the  ob-
jects of  Fenelon  in  another  way.  He  entirely  disregarded  the
existence,  division,  and  balance  of  orders  which  lay  at  the  root
of  the  old  States-General  and  provincial  States,  but  he  recom-
mended the  formation  of  a  hierarchy  of  elective  assemblies,
parochial,  municipal,  and  provincial,  culminating  in  a  National
Assembly,  all  resting  on  the  basis  of  landed  property  alone,  and
entrusted  merely  with  the  duty  of  advising  the  Government.
This  violent  dejoarture  from  the  traditional  form  of  French
assemblies  was  not  sanctioned  by  the  King,  and  Necker  pro-
posed to  recur  to  the  division  by  orders,  but  to  follow  the
precedent  of  the  States  of  Languedoc  in  the  manner  of  the
voting  and  in  the  number  of  the  representatives  of  the  commons.
His  provincial  assemblies  were  not,  however,  at  first  to  be
elective  bodies  though  they  were  ultimately  to  become  so.  The
King  was  to  choose  the  first  sixteen  members ;  they  were  them-
selves to  elect  their  colleagues  and  they  were  to  sit  for  two
years.  Necker  proposed  to  invest  them  with  very  considerable
powers  both  of  administration  and  taxation,  and  -gradually  to
confine  the  Parliaments  to  purely  magisterial  and  judicial
functions.  Three  provincial  assemblies  were  actually  esta-
blished, when  the  intentions  of  Necker  about  the  Parliaments
were  treacherously  disclosed.  The  Parliament  of  Paris  at  once
refused  to  register  the  edict  for  a  fourth  provincial  assembly,
and  such  a  storm  of  opposition  arose  that  Necker  abandoned
his  task. His  resignation  was  given  on  May  19,  1781.^

But  before  these  events  had  taken  place,  all  real  hope  of
restoring  the  finances  had  been  destroyed  by  the  war  into  which
'  See  Lavergne,  Lis  Assemilces  Provlncialcs.

392  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xx.

France  had  entered  in  support  of  tiie  American  Revolution.
Turgot  had  solemnly  warned  the  King  that  the  first  shot  from  a
French  cannon  would  make  bankruptcy  inevitable,  and  the  King
with  his  frequent  good  sense  clearly  saw  the  danger,  though
with  his  usual  weakness  he  suffered  himself  to  be  overruled  by
those  who  were  about  him.  The  American  War  surrounded  the
Court  and  the  Government  with  a  new  and  genuine  popularity.
It  turned  the  minds  of  men  for  a  time  from  internal  contests.
and  although  it  ended  with  a  crushing  naval  defeat,  and  was  at
no  period  particularly  glorioas  to  the  French  arms,  it  was  pur-
sued with  great  energy  and  crowned  with  ultimate  success.  The
loss  of  Canada  by  France,  in  1763,  was  more  than  balanced  by
the  severance  of  the  other  American  colonies  from  England.
But  the  war  which  so  humbled  and  depressed  England  left  her
rival  burdened  with  a  debt  which  she  could  never  pay,^  and
inoculated  with  a  passion  for  republicanism  and  revolution  which
it  was  no  longer  possible  to  resist.  '  The  American  Revolution,'
wrote  Arthur  Young  a  few  years  later,  '  has  laid  the  foundation
of  another  in  France,  if  Government  do  not  take  care  of  itself
'A  strong  leaven  of  liberty  has  been  increasing  every  hour
since  the  American  Revolution.'  ^

From  the  time  of  the  fall  of  Necker,  the  Government  of  France
drifted  for  several  years  under  a  succession  of  feeble,  extrava-
gant, and  incompetent  ministers  almost  idly  to  its  fate.  Yet  it  is
strange  to  observe  how  little  the  shadow  of  coming  evil  was  at
this  time  felt.  The  Court  and  capital  had  never  been  so  brilliant
and  so  charming.  The  King  was  very  popular.  The  Queen  was
adored  by  her  Court  and  not  yet  wholly  unpopular  with  the
nation ;  and  the  doctrine  of  the  infinite  perfectibility  of  man,
which  had  long  been  in  the  ascendant,  still  gave  the  charm  of
extreme  hopefulness  to  all  French  society  and  thought.  When
Turgot  proposed  his  plan  of  national  education  to  the  King,  he
predicted  that  if  it  were  adopted  '  the  French  people  in  ten  years
would  be  scarcely  recognisable,  and  would  indniloly  transcend
all  other  nations  in  their  enliglitenment,  goodness,  loyalty,  and
patriotism.'  ^ S6gur  has  described,  in  some  admirably  vivid  pages,

'  For  a  calculation  of  the  money Ri'gime,  i.  91.
cost  of  the  AiTifric'in  War  to  France,  *  IMnkerton,  iv.  1^0,  159.

see  ChurcHt, La Chuli; de VAiicien  •  lifiinrnic',  Lcs  Mirahcau,  ii.  426.

CH.  XX.  OPTIMISM OF  FEENCII SOCIETY.  393

the  optimism  and  the  enthusiasm  of  French  society  during  the
American  War.  It  was  the  time  when  the  passion  for  nature
and  simjDlicity,  and  the  revolt  against  all  factitious  and  conven-
tional distinctions,  produced  by  the  writings  of  Rousseau  and  by
the  imitation  of  English  customs,  was  at  its  height.  In  the
country  houses  the  gardens  of  Le  Notre  with  their  long  straight
alleys,  their  symmetrical  squares,  and  their  carved  trees  were  re-
placed by  the  wilder  beauties  of  the  English  garden.  In  society
uniforms  and  decorations  disappeared,  and  a  republican  simpli-
city of  dress  became  general.  In  the  theatres  the  absurd  habit
of  representing  ancient  heroes  and  heroines  in  modern  Court
dress  was  suddenly  discarded.  In  the  Court  the  Queen  syste-
matically threw  aside  etiquette,  and  introduced  a  freer  tone  of
manners  and  conversation.  '  A  word  of  praise  from  D'Alembert
or  Diderot  was  now  more  valued  than  the  highest  favours  of  a
prince.'  '  The  republican  maxims  of  "  Brutus  "  were  applauded
at  Court.  Monarchs  were  disposed  to  support  a  people  in  re-
bellion against  their  King ;  the  language  of  independence  might
be  heard  in  the  camps,  the  language  of  democracy  among  the
nobles,  the  language  of  philosophy  at  the  balls,  the  language  of
the  moralist  in  the  boudoir.'  '  Opinions  seemed  to  have  lost
their  influence  on  passions.  In  those  happy  days  men  could
always  love  those  who  thought  differently  from  themselves.'
'  Old  doctrines  and  manners  appeared  at  once  ridiculous  and
wearisome,  and  the  gay  philosophy  of  Voltaire  was  supreme.'
It  was  believed  that  the  '  spirit  of  liberty  would  change  the  face
of  the  world  by  enlightening  it.'  '  Everyone  foresaw  the  hap-
piest future.  No  one  dreamed  of  a  Revolution,  though  it  was
forming  rapidly  in  opinions.'  '  The  advantages  of  old  institu-
tions and  the  freedom  of  new  manners  seemed  to  subsist  to-
gether.' '  Never  was  a  more  terrible  awakening  preceded  by  a
calmer  sleep,  or  by  more  seductive  dreams.' '

The  genuine  popularity  of  the  American  War  greatly
strengthened  the  Government,  and  the  Peace  of  1783  appeared  to
have  secured  for  France  a  complete  preponderance  in  Europe.
The  political  and  commercial  alliance  with  Holland  at  the  end
of  1785  was  a  new  triumph  for  French  foreign  policy,  and  a
new  blow  to  what  was  believed  to  be  the  waning  influence  of
'  Mcmoircs  de  Srr/vr,  i.  22-28,  152-160.

394 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xx.

England ;  and  France,  as  we  have  seen,  fearlessly  supported  and
stimulated  the  revolutionary  and  democratic  spirit  that  had
arisen  in  the  Netherlands.  Industry  and  commerce  made  a
sudden  bound  after  the  Peace,  and  before  1789  the  foreign  com-
merce of  France  was  double  what  it  had  been  at  the  accession  of
the  Eang.^  Travellers  were  astonished  at  the  vast  works  of  in-
ternal navigation  that  were  designed  and  accomplished,  at  the  ex-
traordinary growth  of  the  commercial  importance  of  St.  Domingo,
at  the  new  docks  and  harbours  that  were  constructed  along  the
French  coast,  but  especially  at  Cherbourg,  at  the  splendour  a,nd
growing  opulence  of  the  great  provincial  towns.  Bordeaux
was  pronounced  by  Arthur  Young  in  1787  to  be  incomparably
superior  to  Liverpool  in  wealth,  commerce,  and  magnificence.
With  improved  roads  and  more  rapid  public  carriages  which
had  been  established  by  Turgot,  a  new  life  was  felt  in  the  pro-
vinces ;  and  though  agriculture  lagged  far  behind  commerce,  a
few  good  harvests  had  given  it  some  impulse.  The  multiplica-
tion of  agricultural  societies,  the  rapid  rise  of  rent,  the  rapid  in-
crease of  the  revenue  derived  from  the  duties  on  articles  of  food,
were  indisputable  signs  of  progress.^  It  was  about  this  time
that  the  use  of  the  potato  became  general  in  France,  and  that
Daubenton  introduced  the  Spanish  breed  of  sheep.^  Population
was  increasing  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  but  the  country  was
becoming  also  visibly  richer.  Caloane,  who  had  been  made  Con-
troller-General at  the  close  of  1783,  borrowed  in  time  of  peace
almost  as  largely  as  Necker  in  time  of  war,^  and  the  success  of
his  loans  gave  an  appearance  of  great  prosperity.

The  luxury  and  expenditure  of  the  Court  continued  unchecked,-^
and  the  millennial  dream  was  unbroken.  Intellectual  activity
was  never  greater.  In  1774  it  was  computed  that  the  book
trade  in  Paris  was  four  times  as  large  as  in  London.^  French
ideas  reigned  in  the  chief  Courts,  in  almost  all  the  universities

'  Lavergne, AKmmhUcn Provin-  ii.  .'553.
cialiex,  p.  9. See,  too,  'i'aine,  Aiwieii  '  Lavergne,  Economie  Rurale  de

Jli'l/ivic,  p.  402. 'The  French  trade,'  Francr,,\.  'A,  4.

wrote Arthur Young, 'has almost  ■•  '  Ginq  cents  millions  d'empnint

(lonhled  wince  the  peace  of  17G3,  but  en  trois  ann6cs  de  paix.' Michelet,

ours  has  increased  not  near  so  much.'  Jllst.  xvii.  ?A'>().
—Tour  in  France,  ch.  xix.  '  ^acMScholct,  Ilistoirc do  France,

''■  'J'ocfjuoville,  Aueirn  llrtpme,  \\'{).  xvii.  ;U)2,  ;i(>8.
2r>2-2'>r>; riasipict,  Instil  id  iiiiiH  jutli-  "  Aiibcrtin, Tj  Esprit puhlio au

iiqicesct  suoialai  dc  I'AuvicnniJ  I'Vanoe,  XVI I  line  Slide,  p.  462.

CH.  XX.  INTELLECTUAL  ACTIVITY.  395

and  academies  of  the  Continent,  and  boundless  vistas  seemed  on
all  sides  opening.  It  was  believed  that  the  invention  of  the
balloon  by  Montgolfier  was  about  to  give  men  the  empire  of  the
air,  and  that  Mesmer  had  found  a  cure  for  all  diseases.  Lavoisier,
with  several  other  less  distinguished  labourers,  now  raised  che-
mistry into  a  science.  Lagrange  and  Laplace  were  giving  a
vast  extension  to  astronomy ;  De  Lisle  and  Haiiy  to  mineralogy.
The  study  of  physiology,  botany,  comparative  anatomy,  and
electricity  advanced  with  gigantic  strides ;  and  in  the  enthusiasm
that  prevailed,  it  was  imagined  that  physical  science  would  soon
unlock  the  secret  of  the  universe  and  disclose  the  mystery  of
life.^  In  other  fields,  the  Oriental  researches  of  Volney,  the
sculpture  of  Houdon,  the  paintings  of  David,  the  many  noble
works  of  architecture  that  were  erected  in  Paris,  the  art  criticisms
which  Diderot  published  annually  between  1759  and  1781,  the
almost  unparalleled  success  of  the  '  Mariage  de  Figaro '  of  Beau-
marchais,  excited  a  corresponding  enthusiasm.  Political  clubs
came  into  fashion  about  1784,  and  gave  a  new  energy  to  the
movement  of  thought,  while  French  society  still  maintained  the
character  of  intellectual  brilliancy,  that  made  it  without  a  rival
in  Europe.  The  Due  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  the  Due  de  Niver-
nais,  the  Prince  de  Beauvau,  and  many  other  of  the  leaders  of
society  were  passionately  devoted  to  letters.*  A  spirit  of  innova-
tion and  speculation,  a  love  of  liberty  and  toleration,  an  immense
hopefulness,  and  a  disposition  to  underrate  all  difficulties,  almost
universally  characterised  French  society.

The  gi'eat  writers  indeed  were  passing  rapidly  away,  and
they  left  no  successors.  Montesquieu  had  died  in  1755;  Vol-
taire and  Rousseau  in  1778  ;  D'Alembert  in  1783;  Diderot  in
1784 ;  Mably  in  1785.  But  the  work  of  popularising  obscure  and
difficult  knowledge,  which  was  the  supreme  achievement  of  the
eighteenth  century,  was  never  so  industriously  pursued.  Bufibn,
illuminating  the  whole  field  of  natural  history  with  the  charm  of
the  most  brilliant  eloquence,  had  in  this  respect  a  transcendent

'  See  a  striking  pichire of the  given  an  admirable  picture  of  the

approaches that were believed to  passion  for  physical  science  that  im-

have  been  made  towards  discovering  mediately  preceded  the Kevolution.

the nature  and genesis of  life,  in  Mst.  of  Civilisation,  i.  796-836.
Cabanis, It'ajijMrts du Ph unique et  ^  Sugar,  ii.  34.

dii  Moral de I'Jlomme. Buckle  has

396  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xx.

influence,  and  the  popularity  of  literary  and  scientific  lectures
was  now  at  its  lieiglit.  The  lectures  of  La  Harpe  on  literature,
of  Fourcroy  on  chemistry,  of  Petit  on  anatomy,  of  Nollet  on
electricity,  were  thronged  by  all  that  was  most  brilliant  in  Pari-
sian society.  The  empire  of  superstition  seemed  passing  away
like  the  shadows  of  night  before  the  rising  sun.  The  questions
about  tickets  of  confession,  Jansenist  doctrines,  and  Ultramontane
pretensions  which  had  excited  such  an  interest  under  Lewis  XV.
had  disappeared  amid  general  contempt,  and  the  influence  of  the
clergy,  as  an  influence  of  superstition,  seemed  almost  extinct.
At  the  same  time,  though  religious  beliefs  were  rapidly  waning,
there  never  was  a  period  less  characterised  by  hardness,  coldness,
and  selfishness.  French  society  was  much  less  frivolous,  and
also  much  more  moral,  than  in  the  days  of  the  Regency  and  of
Lewis  XV.,  and  severe  moral  criticism  was  in  fashion.  It  was
noticed  that  the  novels  of  Orebillon  were  now  very  generally
excluded  from  the  salons  on  account  of  their  indecency,  and  that
the  '  Candide'  of  Voltaire  was  severely  censured.^  That  part  of
morals,  indeed,  which  grows  out  of  the  ascetic  conception  of  the
sinfulness  of  men,  and  which  advocates  self-restraint  as  the  first
of  duties,  was  little  taught ;  ^  but  the  excessive  sensibility  which
was  the  prevailing  affectation,  was  only  an  exaggeration  of  a  very
real  spirit  of  practical  humanity.

Many  new  institutions  of  charity  were  founded.  The  dif-
ferences of  rank  and  class  were  perceptibly  softening,  and  a  new
spirit  of  sympathy  was  abroad. Mothers  of  high  rank  were  now

'  S6gur,  ii.  3.S,  .34.  appetite.  These  are  at  least  nine
'  Burke,  who  hated  the  tendencies  out  of  ton  of  the  virtues.  In  the
of  French  philosophj',  has  dwelt  on  place  of  all  this  they  substitute  a
its  moral  dangers  with  great  power  virtue  winch  they  call  humanity  or
and  acuteness :  'The  greatest  crimes  benevolence.  By  these  means  their
do  not  arise  so  much  from  a  want  of  morality  has  no  idea  in  it  of  rchtiaint,
feeling  for  others,  as  from  an  over-  or  indeed  of  a  distinct  and  settled
Bcnsibility  for  ourselves,  and  an  over-  principle  of  any  kind.  When  their
indulgence  to  our  own  desires.  .  .  .  disciples  are  thus  left  free,  and
In  my  experience  I  have  observed  guided  only  by  i^rcscnt  feeling,  they
that  a  luxurious  softness  of  manners  are  no  longer  to  bc^  depended  upon
hardens  the  heart  at  least  as  much  as  for  good  or  evil.  'J'he  men  who  to-
an  over-done  abstinence.  .  .  .  I  have  day  snatch  the  worst  criminals  from
observed  that  the  philosophers,  in  justice,  will  murder  the  most  inno-
order  to  insinuate  their  polluted  cent  persons  to-morrow.' — Corrrxjion-
atheisrn  into  young  minds,  systnmati-  drnce,  iii.  213-215.  These  lines  were
rally  flatter  all  Iheir  passions,  natural  written  in  June  1791,  l)efore  llie  ter-
anrl  unnatural.  Th(;y  explode  or  rible  confirmation  of  the  last  sen-
render  odious  or  contemptible  that  tence  which  was  furnished  by  the
chuss  of virtues  which  restrain the  career  of  Robespierre.

CH.  XX.  CIIAEM OF FEENX'H SOCIETY.  397

eager,  in  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  Rousseau,  to  nurse  their
own  children.  The  Abbe  de  I'Epee  had  lately  invented  the  deaf
and  dumb  alphabet,  and  the  Government  threw  itself  ardently
into  the  work  of  disseminating  it.  Valentin  Haiiy  devoted  him-
self with  similar  enthusiasm  to  the  care  of  the  blind.  Pinel  had
begun  his  great  researches  into  the  cause  and  cure  of  insanity.'

There  never  was  a  period  to  which  men  afterwards  looked
back  more  fondly.  'He  who  did  not  live  before  1789,'  Talley-
rand once  said,  '  has  never  known  the  charm  of  life.'  '  The  best
and  most  virtuous  men,'  said  another  contemporary,  '  saw  the
beginning  of  a  new  era  of  happiness  for  France  and  for  all  the
civilised  world.'  ^  It  was  noticed  by  Malouet  that  the  tone  of  man-
ners had  never  been  so  gentle,  or  society  so  enchanting,  or  social
liberty  so  great,  as  a  few  years  before  the  horrors  of  the  Revolu-
tion.^ Segur,  returning  from  the  American  War,  found,  as  he
tells  us,  '  the  Court  and  society  of  Paris  more  brilliant  than  ever ;
France  proud  of  her  victories  and  satisfied  with  the  Peace ;  and
the  whole  aspect  of  the  kingdom  so  flourishing  that,  without  the
mournful  gift  of  prophecy,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to
foresee  the  abyss  towards  which  a  rapid  current  was  hurrying
us.'  It  was,  he  said,  as  when  one  has  just  climbed  a  high  tower,
looked  for  a  moment  on  a  boundless  and  glorious  prospect
stretching  beneath,  and  then  grown  dizzy,  stumbled  and  fallen.*

Madame  de  Stael,  when  describing  the  period  before  the
Revolution,  has  acutely  and  truly  remarked  that  there  is  often  a
special  charm  about  the  decadence  of  Governments,  for  the
feebleness  that  precedes  their  fall  gives  them  an  appearance  of
great  gentleness  and  liberality.^  That  important  changes  were
at  this  time  impending  over  France  was  indeed  very  evident.
A  close  observer  might  have  easily  seen  that  the  inequalities  of
taxation  must  before  long  be  abolished,  that  the  feudal  system
must  be  annihilated  or  mitigated,  that  the  question  of  finance
was  becoming  continually  more  desperate,  that  the  monarchy
must  some  day  acquire  something  of  a  representative  character.
It  was  evident,  too,  that  the  King  and  especially  the  Queen
were not blameless. England was a richer country than

'  See  Rocquain,  pp.  412,  413.  •  Mem.  de  Malouet,  i.  66,  67.

*  Mathieu Dumas, quoted by  *  Mvm.  de  Skjur,  ii.  28,  29.

T.iine,  p.  398.  *  Cons'ul.  snr  la  Rev.  i.  117.

398  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  or.  xx.

France,  but  the  English  Court  exhibited  little  or  nothing  of
the  ostentatious  extravagance  of  the  Court  of  Versailles,  and
foreigners  who  compared  the  noble  proportions  of  Greenwich
and  Chelsea  Hospitals  with  the  Palace  of  St,  James's,  declared
that  the  English  lodged  beggars  in  palaces  and  kings  in
almshouses.^  The  Prussian  Court,  on  which  political  and  lite-
rary influences  had  lately  concurred  to  throw  a  strong  light,
presented  a  still  more  impressive  contrast.  No  clerk  in  the
Prussian  dominions  worked  harder  than  Frederick  the  Great.
He  might  be  seen  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  in  uniform  and
in  his  top  boots,  seated  at  his  desk  examining  the  petitions  of
the  humblest  of  his  subjects,  regulating  the  minutest  details  of
civil  and  military  administration.  His  personal  expenses  were
managed  with  penurious  economy.  There  was  less  luxury  and
comfort  in  his  palace  than  in  the  home  of  an  English  nobleman,
and  it  was  the  first  principle  of  his  Government  that  public
revenues  should  be  as  much  as  possible  applied  to  public  pur-
poses. What  a  contrast,  it  was  said,  to  the  enormous  extrava-
gance and  the  elaborate  idleness  of  the  French  King,  to  the  end-
less succession  of  hunts  and  balls  and  receptions  and  unmeaning
ceremonies  that  filled  up  the  greater  part  of  his  life.

But  the  manners  of  the  French  Court  had  been  regulated
by  French  habits,  traditions,  and  tastes,  and  no  French  Sove-
reign seemed  less  likely  than  Lewis  XVI.  to  arouse  popular
Bnimosity.  In  the  events  which  have  been  related  and  in  the
events  which  have  still  to  be  told,  he  always  showed  himself
ready  to  support  if  not  to  originate  measures  of  reform,
amenable  almost  to  a  fault  to  the  judgments  of  his  ministers,
completely  free  from  any  tendency  to  harshness  or  cruelty  and
from  any  desire  to  overstrain  his  authority.  He  had  not  a  tinge
of  the  characteristic  faults  which  brought  Charles  I.  to  the  scaf-
fold and  drove  James  II,  into  exile.  As  Burke  truly  said,  he
was  '  a  prince  the  acts  of  whose  whole  reign  were  a  series  of  con-
cessions to  his  subjects,  who  was  willing  to  relax  his  authority,
to  remit  his  prerogatives,  to  call  his  people  to  a  share  of  freedom
not  known,  perliaps  not  desired,  by  their  ancestors.'  ^ No  throne

'  Hanway'a  Defects  of  the  Police  to  whom,  also,  Windsor  Castle  owes

(1773),  p.  2H1. It  will be rcuiem-  very  much  of  its  magnificence,

bcrcd  tliiit  the  fiicsont  IJuckinghjirn  '■'  Jlc[jlections  on  the  French  Rcco-

I'alacewa.'ifiiily  huill  under  George  IV.,  luiion.

en.  XX.  NO FEAR OF  DEVOLUTION.  399

in  Europe  was  surrounded  with  greater  traditional  respect  than
that  which  he  occupied ;  and  the  unbroken  loyalty  of  the  French
to  their  sovereigns,  through  every  vicissitude  of  fortune  and
character,  had  long  been  a  favourite  national  boast.  To  the
best  judges  it  would  have  seemed  incredible  that  the  nation
which  had  borne  so  patiently  the  despotism,  the  vices,  the
incompetence  and  the  political  disasters  of  the  long  reign  of
Lewis  XV.  should  have  brought  his  successor  to  the  scaffold,
and  that  France  with  her  wealth  and  greatness,  and  her  ancient
and  venerable  civilisation,  was  soon  to  lie  at  the  mercy  of  fero-
cious mobs,  fanatics,  and  adventurers.

I  have  already  quoted  the  curious  passage  in  which  John
Adams  in  1778  contrasted  the  popularity  of  the  French  King
and  Queen  in  Paris,  with  the  extreme  unpopularity  of  George
III.  in  London.'  Franklin  and  Frederick  the  Great  were  two
of  the  most  acute  observers  of  their  time.  They  had  both  of
them  special  reasons  and  special  opportunities  for  watching
French  affairs ;  but  there  is,  I  believe,  no  evidence  that  either  of
them  caught  the  faintest  glimpse  of  the  political  catastrophe
that  was  impending.  No  English  diplomatist  was  better
acquainted  with  continental  life  than  Sir  James  Harris,  but  as
late  as  the  close  of  1786  he  entirely  disbelieved  in  the  possibility
of  a  Eevolution  in  France.  '  A  Madame  de  Pompadour,'  he
wrote  to  Lord  Carmarthen,  '  or  even  a  Madame  de  Barri  will
never  effectually  diminish  or  hurt  the  grandeur  of  the  French
monarchy,  which  is  settled  on  a  foundation  beyond  the  reach  of
the  follies  of  the  Court  to  shake.'  ^  '  There  is  a  universal  agree-
ment,' wrote  one  of  the  ablest  German  contemporary  observers,
'  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1787  no  one  in  France  had.
the  faintest  presentiment  of  the  catastrophe  that  was  preparing.'^
'  I  doubt,'  said  an  excellent  French  observer, '  whether  any  period
can  be  named  in  which  the  French  monarchy  enjoyed  a  higher
degree  of  consideration  than  in  the  years  between  1783  and
1787,  that  is  from  the  end  of  the  American  War  till  the  Revolu-
tion of  Holland.'''

The  illusions  of  the  nation  were  suddenly  and  sharply  dis-

•  Vol.  iv.  49,  50.  Eevolution  Frangaise,'  Mercure  Bri-

^  Malmeshnry  Corresp.  ii.  248, 249.  tann,iciue,'\\\.  216.
^  Gentz, '  Examen  dela  Marche  de  ^  Segur,  Politiqrte  de  tons  les  Cahi-

ropinion  publinue  relativennint  ii,  la  nets  de  V Europe,  ii.  97. I  may  add

400  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xi.

pelled  in  the  last  montlis  of  1786,  when  Calonne  was  obliged  to
confess  that  there  was  a  deficit  which,  after  much  hesitation  and
variation,  was  at  last  reckoned  at  about  115  millions  of  livres,'
and  that  he  had  no  means  of  meeting  it.  As  Turgot  had  pre-
dicted, the  American  War  proved  a  fatal  turning-point  in  French
finance,  and  in  the  space  of  ten  years  not  less  than  1,630  millions
had  been  borrowed.^  The  system  of  deferring  accounts  from
year  to  year,  and  the  extreme  complexity  in  the  manner  of
levying  taxes,  had  led  to  almost  inextricable  confusion  ;  but  it
was  plain  that  there  had  been  for  a  long  time  such  a  deficit  in
the  ordinary  annual  revenue,  and  such  an  accumulation  of  extra-
ordinary expenses,  that  nothing  short  of  a  complete  reform  and
readjustment  of  taxation  could  save  the  country  from  bankruptcy.
In  order  to  meet  the  difficulty  Calonne  recommended  a  measure
which  had  not  been  adopted  since  the  reign  of  Lewis  XIII.
It  was  to  summon  by  royal  authority  an  assembly  called
the  Notables,  consisting  of  the  chief  persons  in  the  kingdom,
to  consult  upon  its  affairs.  This  assembly  was  composed  of
144  members  of  the  privileged  order.  Seven  princes  of  the
blood  were  among  them,  and  the  remainder  were  drawn  from
the  higlier  clergy  and  nobility,  the  Parliaments,  the  King's
Council,  the  provincial  States,  and  the  municipal  councils.^

They  began  their  sittings  in  February  1787,  and  Calonne  hoped
to  obtain  by  their  assistance  the  requisite  reforms,  and  especially
to  break  down  the  exemptions  of  the  privileged  orders  from
taxation  by  the  imposition  of  a  general  land  tax.  But  he  soon
found  that  the  Notables  were  less  unanimous  and  less  subservient

the  following  striking  passage  by  arc  to  come.  The  most  probable,  or,
John  Adams,  which  was  written  in  rather,  the  only  probable,  change
1787,  and  is  the  more  remarkable  is  the  introduction  of  democratical
because  it  was  written  in  Europe,  branches  into  those  Governments.
and  written  by  a  very  able  Ameri-  Jf  the  people  should  ever  aim  at  more
can  statesman  who  had  special  they  will  defeat  themselves ;  and,  in-
means  of  knowing  the  state  of  di-ed,  if  they  aim  at  this  by  any  other
tVance  :  'After  all  the  turbulence,  than  gentle  means,  and  by  gradual  ad-
wars,  and  revolutiona-which  compose  vances.' — Adams,  Defence  of  the  Con-
the  history  of  Europe  for  so  many  stitutioiiof  the  United  Slates,  Preface.
ages,  we  find  simple  monarchi(;s  '  Calonne,  Ktat  de  la  France  (ed.
established  everywhere.  Whether  1790),  pp.  36,  .37.  See,  too,  Rocquain,
the  systtm  will  now  become  sla-  pp.  4  81,  4Hi),  440 ;  Chassin,  Genie  de
tionary  and  last  for  ever,  by  means  of  Ui  Ilerolution,  p.  22.
a  few  further  improvements  in  inon-  '■'  Taine,  Anoicn  lieginie,  p.  403.
archical  Govern irn in ts,  we  know  not,  '  Lavei'gne,  Aisemhlivs  Procin-
or  whether still further  revolutions  cialc.i,  p.  102.

ciT.  XX.  THE NOTABLES.  401

tiiau  lie  had  hoped.  They  insisted,  in  the  first  place,  on  an
investigation  of  the  financial  proceedings  of  the  minister,  and
they  discovered  such  abuses  that  they  speedily  drove  Calonne
with  disgrace  from  power.  There  were  loud  cries  for  the
appointment  of  Necker  to  replace  him,  but  Necker  had  lately
been  exiled,  and  was  still  in  great  disfavour  with  the  Court,  and
in  an  ill-omened  hour  the  Queen  employed  her  influence  in
favour  of  Lomenie  de  Brienne,  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse.
This  supple,  ambitious,  immoral,  and  unbelieving  churchman
had  made  himself  very  acceptable  in  the  gay  circle  of  the  Trianon,
and  had  borne  a  conspicuous  part  in  opposition  to  Calonne  in
the  Assembly  of  Notables ;  but  his  talents  were  chiefly  those  of
a  courtier  and  an  intriguer,  and  he  was  now  placed  in  a  position
that  needed  the  highest  gifts  of  statesmanship  and  character-
He  attempted  to  imitate  Calonne,  as  Calonne  had  tried  to  imitate
Necker.  He  hoped,  among  other  measures,  to  induce  the  Notables
to  vote  a  considerable  land  tax  to  be  paid  by  all  classes.  But  the
Notables,  who  were  themselves  members  of  the  privileged  class,
though  quite  ready  to  recommend  many  reforms,  recoiled  from
this  measure,  alleged  that  they  were  incompetent  to  carry  it,
refused  even  to  recommend  it,  and  declared  that  they  left  it  to
the  King  to  determine  what  tax  was  most  suitable.  They  were
dissolved  on  May  25,  1787.

But  although  the  Government  failed  in  inducing  the  Notables
to  assist  them  in  dealing  with  the  vital  and  pressing  question  of
finance,  some  other  reforms  of  great  importance  were  effected.
Calonne,  following  in  the  steps  of  Fenelon,  Turgot,  and  Necker,
clearly  saw  that  a  wide  diffusion  of  local  self-government  and
representation  should  precede  the  establishment  of  any  general
system  of  constitutional  liberty  and  would  greatly  facilitate  the
reorganisation  of  taxation,  and  he  accordingly  recommended  to
the  Notables  the  establishment  of  a  provincial  State  in  every
'  generality '  ^  in  which  it  did  not  exist.  This  very  important
recommendation  received  the  warm  approbation  of  the  Notables,
and  it  was  carried  into  effect  in  1787  by  a  royal  edict  which  was
promulgated  by  Brienne.  The  Notables  did  not,  it  is  true,
approve  of  the  first  design  of  Calonne,  which  was  to  constitute

'  The  'generalite'  was  an  ancient litate  the  collection  of  taxes  and  for
division  of  France,  established  to  faci- all  matters  relating  to  finance.

VOL.  V.  D  D

-^02  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

provincial  asheiulilies  of  the  type  recommended  by  Tiirgot.
They  insisted  that  the  three  orders  should  be  represented  in  a
defined  proportion,  and  that  a  member  of  the  privileged  orders
should  preside  over  every  assembly,  but  they  agreed  without
difficulty  that  the  commons  should  have  a  double  representa-
tion, that  the  three  orders  should  vote  not  separately  but  to-
gether, and  that  elective  councils  should  be  established  in  every
parish.  At  the  same  time,  and  with  their  approval,  two  other
edicts  of  considerable  importance  were  issued.  Turgot  had
established  a  free  commerce  of  corn  within  the  kingdom :  but
Brienne  went  much  further,  and  an  edict  which  remarkably
anticipated  the  teaching  of  later  political  economists,  fully
authorised  its  exportation.  The  King  only  reserved  to  himself
the  power  of  suspending  it  in  case  of  necessity  for  a  year,  and
then  only  in  provinces  where  such  a  suspension  had  been  de-
manded by  the  provincial  States.  The  '  corvee '  also,  or  forced
labour  for  the  roads,  which  was  the  worst  practical  oppression  of
the  peasantry,  and  which  had  been  already  abolished  by  Turgot,
but  restored  after  his  fall,  was  now  commuted  into  a  money  pay-
ment and  passed  finally  out  of  the  list  of  French  grievances.
The  measure  was,  however,  a  less  liberal  one  than  that  of  Turgot,
for  the  commutation  was  provided  from  taxes  that  fell  solely  on
the  commons.

The  Kijig  by  the  mouths  both  of  Calonne  and  Brienne  had
formally  and  repeatedly  announced  his  wish  and  his  determina-
tion to  abolish  those  inequalities  of  taxation,  which  were  the
chief  cause  of  tlie  embarrassments  of  the  country,  and  the  great
and  just  grievance  of  his  poorer  subjects.'  The  main  object  of
his  whole  policy  was  to  put  an  end  to  a  ruinous  deficit,  by-
abolishing  exemptions  which  were  flagrantly  unjust.  He  hoped
that  the  Notables  representing  the  privileged  orders  would  have
assisted  him,  and  that  with  their  support  the  measure  could
easily  have  been  carried,  but  this  hope  was  disappointed.  At
the  same  time  it  was  noticed  that  no  member  of  the  Assembly
spoke  in  favour  of  inoquab'ties  of  taxation.  All  professed  their
full  willingness  to  make  large  sacrifices  of  their  class  privileges,
and  an  important  section  strenuously  urged  the  necessity  of
abolishing  the  'gabelle'  or  salt  tax,  which  pressed  most  severely
'  Sec  Chcrost,  La  Chute  dc  I'Aacioi  Itcijuiie,  i.  116,  1C3,  20i,  205.

CH.  XX.  THE NOTABLES.  403

upon  the  poor.  The  debates  did  not  turn  upon  the  question  of
equal  or  unequal  taxation,  but  upon  the  amount  of  the  deficit ;
on  the  right  of  the  Assembly  to  inquire  into  past  expenditure ;
on  the  natui'e  of  the  new  taxes  to  be  proposed  ;  on  the  possibility
of  imposing  a  general  and  uniform  tax  without  violating  the
privileges  of  the  Pays  d'Etat ;  on  the  amount  of  power  which
the  Notables  themselves  possessed.  Personal  and  factious
ambitions,  personal  antipathies,  and  mistakes  in  management
played  a  great  part  in  the  proceedings.  To  manage  a  deli-
berative Assembly,  and  especially  an  Assembly  which  is  itself
inexperienced,  is  an  art  which  requires  much  experience  as  well
as  much  skill,  and  skill  of  a  particular  kind  in  which  Calonne
was  wholly  wanting.  He  succeeded,  much  less  by  his  proposed
measures  than  by  his  language  and  demeanour,  in  irritatino-,
dividing,  and  disorganising  the  Assembly,

The  Notables  had  not  the  composition  or  authority  of  a  repre-
sentative body,  and  they  had  not  the  power  of  a  legislative  body ;
but  the  mere  fact  that  the  Crown  had  been  driven  by  financial
distress  to  seek  their  assistance ;  the  unaccustomed  spectacle  of
opposition  and  debate ;  the  strong  light  thrown  on  the  financial
difficulties  of  the  Government ;  and  the  failure  of  the  proposed
measures  for  alleviating  them,  had  an  immense  and  disquieting
influence  on  public  opinion.  The  Ministers  announced  to  the
Notables  in  the  clearest  terms  that  the  King  alone  had  a  sovereign
right  of  fixing  the  amount  and  proportion  of  the  taxes,  and  that
their  task  was  confined  to  carrying  out  the  royal  designs  and
meeting  the  difficulties  that  wei"e  created  by  the  extreme  variety
of  customs,  privileges,  and  administrations  in  the  different  pro-
vinces. But  the  Assembly  showed  much  indisposition  to  accept
so  humble  a  sphere,  and  a  theory  of  taxation  which  a  few  years
before,  would  have  been  perfectly  unchallenged,  now  provoked
much  hostile  criticism.  It  was  noticed  that  some  of  the  bishops
were  the  first  to  dispute  it.  The  word  *  States-General,'  which
had  been  for  generations  almost  unheard  in  France,  had  been  of
late  more  than  once  publicly  pronounced,  and  it  passed  rapidly
from  lip  to  lip.  A  fever  of  political  excitement  pei'vaded  the
country  and  seemed  daily  increasing,  and  as  bankruptcy  after
bankruptcy  took  place  the  condition  of  the  finances  became
clearly  understood. Necker  had  shortly  before  published  a  work

404 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xx.

in  three  volumes  on  the  administration  of  the  finances,  and  not
less  than  80,000  copies  of  it  were  sold.*

Grimm  at  this  time  noticed  the  very  ominous  fact  that  the
prevailing  spirit  of  agitation  and  insubordination  had  already
gained  the  army,  that  discipline  was  giving  way,  and  that  the
soldiers  were  no  longer  disposed  to  maintain  obedience.^  Many
causes  operating  through  many  years  had  contributed  to  this
result.  The  system  of  Prussian  discipline,  and  especially  of
corporal  punishment,  which  some  French  generals  in  their
admiration  for  Frederick  the  Great  had  incautiously  introduced,
excited  profound  discontent  in  the  ranks,  and  the  American  War
instead  of  strengthening  had  immensely  impaired  the  military
spirit.  In  general  a  considerable  period  of  active  service  in  a
foreign  country  effectually  extinguishes  all  jDolitical  feeling  in
an  army,  and  gives  it  such  a  degree  of  military  discipline  and
enthusiasm  that,  under  a  good  commander,  there  is  little  danger
of  the  contagion  of  civil  agitation  penetrating  to  the  ranks.  But
the  American  War  being  conducted  on  the  part  of  France  mainly
by  sea,  the  French  army  in  America  had  no  opportunity  of  dis-
tinguishing itself  in  the  field,  and  remained  almost  inactive  in
the.  centre  of  a  great  democratic  revolution.  It  returned  to
France  saturated  with  republican  ideas  and  fully  prepared  to
receive  the  seed  which  was  so  abundantly  scattered.  The  divi-
sion of  classes  that  separated  the  French  officers  from  the  sol-
diers made  the  latter  peculiarly  open  to  democratic  appeals,  and
this  division  had  very  recently  been  aggravated.  As  late  as
1  781,  in  the  reaction  that  followed  the  fall  of  Necker,  the  Govern-
ment had  committed  the  amazing  folly  of  issuing  an  ordi-
nance excluding  '  roturiers '  even  from  the  rank  of  sub-lieu-
tenant, and  providing  that  no  officer  could  obtain  the  rank  of
captain  who  had  not  been  noljlo  for  four  generations.  It  would
be  impossible  to  conceive  an  enactment  showing  a  more  com-
plete ignorance  of  the  tendencies  of  the  time,  and  it  was  one  of
the  great  causes  of  the  disorganisation  of  the  army.^ The  evil

•  "Mmc.dciitai-],  Co7i.iid.  siir la  IfiT.  '  Grimm  ct  Diderot, jVm. I/ixt.

i. 111. An excellent and very  dc-  vii.  2'M).

tailed  account  of  the  proceedinf^a  of  ^  Compare Rocqnnin, pp. ."0(i,

M,e Notables  will  be found  in tlie  397;  CWrest,  i.  14-25;  Scgur,  3[(m.

valuable  lii.stor;'  of  M.  Cli6rest. Sec,  et  Souvenirs,  i.  280-21)2.
too,  Kocquuin,  pp.  431—115.

cii.  XX.  STATE OF THE ARMY.  405

was  more  keenly  felt  on  account  of  the  enormous  and  scandalous
multiplication  of  posts  of  high  rank,  created  in  order  to  be  sold,
and  reserved  for  the  privileged  orders.  X)ubois-Crance,  who
took  a  leading  part  in  the  military  organisation  of  the  Revo-
lution, declared  that  in  1789  there  were  more  than  twelve
hundred  general  officers  in  the  French  army,  that  since  the
ministry  of  Choiseul  nearly  every  regiment  had  been  divided  for
the  express  purpose  of  multiplying  its  officers,  that  the  number
of  the  superior  officers  had  been  in  fact  quadrupled,  and  that
military  grades  had  been  created,  sold,  and  distributed  with  such
reckless  profusion  that,  in  one  day,  four  thousand  children  had
been  made  captains  without  troops  and  without  any  prospect  of
obtaining  them.^

Joseph  [I.,  shortly  before  his  death,  told  Segur  that  the
French  Ministers  had  committed  a  great  error  in  declining  to
throw  themselves  into  the  Eastern  war,  for  the  Parliament  would
then  have  been  unable  to  refuse  money  to  the  King,  and  the
ardour  of  the  nation  would  have  expended  itself  in  the  field  of
foreign  conquest.^  The  judgment  was  not  a  disinterested  one,
nor  was  it  that  of  a  really  wise  man ;  but  it  is  at  least  possible
that  a  foreign  war  might  have  restored  the  efficiency  of  the
army,  preserved  it  from  the  contagion  of  the  Revolution,  and
raised  up  some  popular  and  trusted  general  on  whom  the
Government  might  have  relied.  40,000  or  50,000  men  under  a
commander  like  Turenne  or  Conde  might  have  given  a  very
different  aspect  to  Parisian  politics.

On  the  dissolution  of  the  Notables,  the  Parliament  of  Paris
became  the  chief  centre  of  the  thickening  drama  of  French
politics.  While  the  Notables  were  still  sitting,  it  had  regis-
tered a  new  loan  of  sixty  millions ;  and  it  now  without  difficulty
registered  the  edicts  which  the  Notables  had  recommended  for
the  establishment  of  the  provincial  Assemblies,  for  free  trade  in
corn,  and  for  the  abolition  of  the  corvees ;  but  when  the  Govern-
ment put  forward  a  scheme  for  additional  taxation  in  the  form
of  a  stamp  duty  and  of  a  general  land  tax,  the  old  parliamen-
tary opposition  was  at  once  renewed.  The  Parliament  denounced
the  extravagance  of  the  Court, attempted  without  success  to

•  Dubois- Crance,  par  Jung,  i.  91,  107-110.

•  Scgur,  Man.  et  Suuvt'inrs,  iii.  553.

406  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xx.

extort  a  detailed  account  of  the  public  expenditure,  disobeyed
the  peremptory  order  of  the  King  to  register  the  stamp  duty,
and  finally  took  the  momentous  step  of  petitioning  the  King  to
convoke  the  States-General  before  imposing  any  new  tax  upon
his  people.  The  Government,  startled  and  as  usual  vacillating,
witJiout  giving  any  answer  to  the  petition  of  the  Parliament,
withdrew  for  the  jDresent  the  stamp  duty  which  had  been  first
proposed,  but  sent  back  the  land  tax  with  peremptory  orders
to  register  it.  The  Parliament  with  still  greater  emphasis  per-
sisted in  its  resolution.  It  complained  that  it  had  vainly  sought
for  information  showing  the  necessity  of  imposing  a  new  and
disastrous  tax  after  five  years  of  peace.  It  declared  that  the
nation  alone  through  the  States-General  had  the  right  of  im-
posing new  taxes,  and  it  again  petitioned  the  King  to  convoke
that  body.

It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  a  step  of  more  tremendous
significance  and  importance.  As  the  Court  of  Peers  sat  with  the
Parliament,  the  two  corporations  representing  with  the  highest
authority  the  privileged  classes  now  demanded  the  convocation  of
the  States-General ;  repudiated  formally  the  absolute  power  of  the
Crown,  as  it  had  existed  for  centuries,  and  branded  as  illegitimate
the  method  of  taxation  which  had  been  uniformly  pursued  in
France  for  about  three  hundred  years.'  The  act  of  the  Parliament
was  an  act  of  rebellion.  Its  motives  were  probably  very  mingled  ;
but  its  popularity  liad  never  been  so  great.  The  Government
resorted  to  the  old  measure  of  a  bed  of  justice,  and  the  edicts
establishing  the  stamp  duty  and  the  land  tax  were  duly  registered
at  Versailles.  Next  day  the  magistrates  formally  declared  the
registration  by  a  bed  of  justice  null  and  illegal.

The  war  was  thus  openly  declared,  and  fierce  manifestations
of  popular  applause  showed  that  the  Parliament  had  won  the
public  feeling  of  Paris  altogether  to  its  side.  The  Parliament,
])UHhing  its  advantages,  ordered  an  inquiry  into  the  administra-
tion of  Calonne,  pronounced  the  edicts  for  a  stamp  duty  and  a
hind  fax  '  null  and  illegal,'  and  issued  a  strong  protest  against
Ili(;ir  publication.  The  Government  responded  by  exiling  the
l^arliament  to  Troyes.

'  iSec  Moiinior,  Iicchercli£i  sur  leu  Causes  dui  out  emi'h'hc  les  Franrnis  fie
dcveiiir  llbrcs,  p.  Oij.

CH.  XX.  RECALL OF THE TARLLIMENT.  407

The  conflict  resembled  those  in  the  preceding  reign,  but  the
spirit  of  agitation  and  independence  in  the  country  had  enor-
mously increased,  and  the  aspect  of  Paris  in  the  autumn  of  1787
was  almost  that  of  a  revolution.  In  the  streets,  in  the  theatres,
around  the  chief  public  buildings  there  were  demonstrations  of
the  most  alarming  kind.  The  Government  at  once  closed  the
clubs,  and  the  streets  were  patrolled  by  a  large  military  force.
The  Cour  des  Comptes,  the  Cour  des  Aides,  and  the  Chatelet,
the  three  law  courts  that  ranked  next  after  the  Parliament  of
Paris,  all  supported  that  body  and  petitioned  for  its  recall,  and
the  two  former  strongly  asserted  the  new  and  astonishing  doc-
trine that  the  King  could  not  impose  taxes  by  his  edicts,  and
that  the  assent  of  the  States-General  was  necessary  to  their
validity.  All  the  provincial  Parliaments  assumed  an  attitude  of
the  most  virulent  hostility,  demanding  the  recall  of  the  Parlia-
ment to  Paris,  the  impeachment  of  Calonne,  above  all  the  con-
vocation of  the  States-General.  Serious  measures  of  retrench-
ment had  lately  been  adopted  in  the  Palace,  but  the  denunciation
of  Court  and  courtiers  was  unabated.  The  language  employed
had  all  the  violence  of  revolution,  and  it  was  employed  by  the
magistracy  of  France,  by  grave  judicial  bodies  which  were  the
most  authorised  exponents  of  the  law.  Once  more,  as  on  so
many  previous  occasions,  the  Government  flinched  before  oppo-
sition, and  thereby  fatally  weakened  its  authority.  It  entered
into  a  negotiation  with  the  exiled  Parliament,  and  agreed  on  cer-
tain conditions  to  recall  it  to  Paris.  The  Parliament,  in  flagrant
violation  of  the  new  doctrine  it  had  just  professed  about  its  own
incapacity  in  matters  of  taxation,  agreed  to  prolong  for  two  more
years  the  second  '  twentieth,'  and  to  extend  it  to  the  clergy,  who
had  hitherto  been  exempt,  while  the  Government  on  their  side
abandoned  the  two  obnoxious  taxes.  All  attempts  to  abolish
on  a  large  scale  the  exemptions  of  the  privileged  classes,  and  to
impose  additional  taxation  suflicient  to  restore  the  finances,  were
for  the  present  suspended.

The  Parliament  returned  to  Paris  in  September  1787  ami<1
great  manifestations  of  popular  triumph  and  applause,  mure
than  ever  confirmed  in  its  attitude  of  resistance  to  the  Court,
more  than  ever  deteniiiued  to  maintain  that  political  character
which  a  long  course  of  eveut^<  hud  so  strangely  given  to  a-  bndy

408  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

which  was  naturally  purely  magisterial  or  judicial.  It  is  not
surprising  under  these  circumstances  that  the  truce  should  havo
been  hollow  and  short.  The  clubs  were  still  kejDt  closed  and
the  troops  prepared  for  action.  The  King  annulled  the  order
for  an  inquiry  into  the  administration  of  Calonne,  and  there
were  rumours  of  a  possible  coup  d'etat.  Money  was  absolutely
wanted,  and  as  the  Parliament  refused  its  assent  to  new  taxes,  it
was  necessary  again  to  borrow.  The  Ministers  dreaded  greatly
the  convocation  of  the  States-General,  which  would  at  once  give
a  totally  new  character  to  the  Government  of  France,  but  they
saw  that  it  had  become  inevitable,  and  all  that  could  be  hoped
for  was  a  postponement.  Brienne  now  proposed  a  loan  of  no
less  than  420  millions  of  francs  to  be  issued  by  instalments  over
five  years,  at  the  end  of  which  period  he  promised  that  the
States-General  should  be  convoked.  All  efforts  to  obtain  a
ministerial  majority  in  the  Parliament  proved  vain,  and  on
November  19  after  a  long  and  anxious  debate  the  King  authori-
tatively forced  the  edict  for  the  loan  through,  by  a  bed  of  justice.
The  Duke  of  Orleans  protested  against  this  act  as  illegal,  and
next  day  the  Parliament  issued  a  similar  protest.  The  King
ordered  the  register  containing  their  protest  to  be  destroyed ;
banished  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  the  country,  and  imprisoned
two  active  members  of  the  Parliament  by  letters  of  '  cachet.'
The  Parliament  protested  against  these  measures  and  against
all  use  of  letters  of  '  cachet.'  The  provincial  Parliaments  at  once
joined  in  the  fray,  and  it  was  at  this  time  that  Mirabeau  wrote,
'  France  is  ripe  for  a  revolution.'  As  might  have  been  expected,
the  Government  loan  was  completely  discredited  by  these  pro-
ceedings and  proved  a  total  failure.

Two  facts,  somewhat  apart  from  the  chief  current  of  events,
must  here  be  noticed.  The  Government,  paralysed  by  internal
dissensions,  was  obliged  to  acquiesce  in  the  complete  destruction
of  the  French  influence  in  Holland  by  the  Prussian  invasion,  and
the  restoration  of  the  House  of  Orange  to  full  power  under  an
Anglo-]''ruKsian  guarantee ;  and  civil  rights  were  at  last  conceded
to  the  Protestants  of  France.  The  last  measure  had  been  advo-
cated before  the  Notables  by  Lafayette  and  the  Bishop  of  Langres,
and  had  been  very  favourably  received.  Brienne,  among  whose
faults  intolerance  cannot  be  reckoned,  issued  an  edict  for  carry-

CH.  XX.  AKTHUR  YOUNG'S  FOEECAST.  409

ing  it  into'  effect,  and  after  some  violent  opposition  it  was  re-
gistered by  the  Parliament  in  January  1788.

The  main  conflict,  however,  continued  without  abatement.
It  is  extremely  curious  to  observe  how,  at  this  advanced  stage,
the  popular  and  revolutionary  movement  was  mainly  guided  by
privileged  bodies  who  were  resisting  additional  taxation  which
was  absolutely  necessary,  who  were  contending  for  an  exemption
from  taxation  which  was  the  most  odious  and  indefensible  of
privileges,  and  who  nevertheless  by  their  revolt  against  the  theory
of  absolute  monarchy  and  by  their  demand  for  the  States-General
had  attained  to  the  highest  degree  of  popularity.  It  was  this
circumstance  which  explains  the  remarkable  uncertainty  of  the
forecast  of  at  least  one  most  competent  observer.  Arthur  Young
in  the  autumn  of  1787  noticed  how  the  best  judges  in  France
clearly  foresaw  that  they  were  on  the  eve  of  some  great  revolu-
tion in  the  Government,  that  a  bankruptcy  was  probable  if  not
inevitable,  that  the  States-General  alone  could  grapple  with  the
evil,  and  that  unless  '  some  master  hand  of  very  superior  talent
and  inflexible  courage  was  found  at  the  helm,  to  guide  events
instead  of  being  driven  by  them,'  a  great  catastrophe  was  pro-
bable. Having  faithfully  recorded  these  opinions,  he  adds  his
own  judgment.  '  All  agree  that  the  States  of  the  kingdom  can-
not assemble  without  more  liberty  being  the  consequence,  but  I
meet  with  so  few  men  who  have  any  just  ideas  of  freedom  that
I  question  much  the  species  of  this  new  liberty  which  is  to  arise.
They  know  not  how  to  value  the  privileges  of  the  people  ;  as  to
the  nobility  and  the  clergy,  if  a  revolution  added  anything  to
their  scale  I  think  it  would  do  more  mischief  than  good.'  ^

The  King  must  by  this  time  have  clearly  seen  the  mistake
that  he  had  made  in  restoring,  contrary  to  the  judgment  of  both
Turgot  and  Voltaire,  the  Parliaments  which  had  been  abolished
by  his  predecessor.  The  necessity, of  obtaining  their  assent  had
no  doubt  qualified  the  despotism  of  the  monarchy  and  had  given
France  a  kind  of  constitution,  but  no  constitution  could  have
possibly  been  less  adapted  to  her  wants.  Two  reforms  were  of
the  most  pressing  and  urgent  necessity.  If  bankruptcy  was  to
be  averted,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  new  taxation  should
without  delay  be  imposed  on  the  privileged  classes  ;  and  it  was
•  Young's  Tour. Pinkerton,  iv.  1-iO.

410 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. cii.  xx,

scarcely  less  necessary  that  the  feudal  system  should  be  speedily
commuted.  But  to  both  of  these  reforms  the  Parliaments  were
insuperable  obstacles.  They  were  aristocratic,  privileged,  judi-
cial bodies,  consisting  of  men  who  were  nearly  all  landowners,
who  themselves  enjoyed  the  exemptions  from  taxation  which  it
w^as  necessary  to  abolish,  who  had  for  the  most  part  purchased
their  privileges  with  money,  and  who  had  all  the  natural  leaning
of  judicial  bodies  towards  tradition,  precedent,  antiquated  forms
of  property  and  rights.  Their  circumstances,  their  professional
habits  of  thought,  the  narrowness  produced  by  their  purely  legal
education,  all  made  them  peculiarly  unfit  to  exercise,  in  the  in-
terests of  the  entire  community,  a  controlling  influence  over  the
vast  and  various  field  of  lesfislation,  and  beinw  much  smaller
bodies  than  the  nobles  and  the  clergy,  the  corporate  spirit  that
pervaded  them  was  much  more  concentrated  and  intense.'  It
is  impossible  to  read  the  account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  pro-
vincial Assemblies  throughout  France,  in  the  years  before  the
Revolution,  without  being  struck  with  the  degree  in  which  en-
lightened, reforming,  and  humane  principles  had  begun  to  per-
vade the  privileged  classes.  But  the  conservatism  of  the  Parlia-
ment was  much  more  than  the  conservatism  of  an  aristocracy.  It
was  the  conservatism  of  judges ;  of  judges  who  had  purchased
their  position ;  of  judges  who  were  in  the  highest  degree  tena-
cious of  their  privileges  ;  of  judges  who  claimed  an  absolute
right  of  veto.  The  conflicts  under  Lewis  XV.  had  accustomed
a  large  and  able  section  of  the  Parliament  to  habits  of  systematic
opposition  and  jealousy  of  the  Crown,  and  the  events  of  the  last
few  years  had  greatly  strengthened  these  feelings.  The  pro-
vincial Assemblies  of  Necker  were  manifi'stly  intended  to  super-
sede the  political  importance  of  the  Parliaments.  Keeker  him-
self had  stated  his  anxiety  to  reduce  them  to  purely  judicial
functions,  and  the  assembly  of  the  Notables  was  clearly  meant
to  counterbalance  the  influence  of  the  I'nrliament  of  Paris.

And  while  the  Parliaments  were  manifestly  unfit  to  carry  out
the  most  indispensable  refonns,  their  opposition  was  peculiarly
(hingerouH.  It  is  in  the  higlicst  degree  inexpedient  that  magis-
Irrial  and  judicial  Ijodics  should  take  a  leading  part  in  politics,

'  Soo  Honio  exccllc'iiL  jcmurk.-i  ou  lliis  in  Muckiuloijli, Vi/uliclcf  O'ciUicu;

cu.  XX.  DEMAND FOR Tin:  STATES-GENERAL.  411

and  a  systematic  opposition  to  the  Government  conducted  by  the
chief  exponents  of  the  law  is  of  all  oppositions  the  worst.  It  is
the  most  dangerous,  unnatural,  and  demoralising ;  the  most  fitted
to  lower  the  respect  both  for  law  and  for  government.  Few
causes  contributed  so  much  as  the  parliamentary  opposition  to
break  up  the  compact  edifice  of  the  French  monarchy,  to  sap
the  ancient  and  deep-rooted  traditions  of  obedience  and  loyalty.

The  whole  question  of  the  relations  of  the  Parliaments  to  the
Crown  was  still  unsettled.  On  the  one  side  was  the  royal  doc-
trine, confirmed  by  a  long  series  of  j)recedents,  that  the  King
had  the  right  by  holding  a  bed  of  justice  to  overthrow  the
plainest  wishes  of  his  Parliaments.  On  the  other  was  the  par-
liamentary doctrine  that  no  measure  was  obligatory  which  had
not  been  submitted  to  the  deliberations,  and  had  not  received
the  free  assent,  of  no  less  than  thirteen  Parliaments.  The  first
doctrine  led  directly  to  despotism.  The  second  led  no  less
clearly  to  anarchy,  and,  as  the  King  bitterly  said,  it  would  convert
the  monarchy  of  France  into  '  an  aristocracy  of  magistrates.'
And  now  the  Parliament  of  Paris  had  gone  still  further,  and
destroyed  both  its  own  authority  and  that  of  the  Sovereign,  l)y
declaring  that  no  tax  could  be  legitimately  imposed  on  France
except  by  the  States-General.

The  word  had  gone  forth,  and  it  was  impossible  to  recall  it.
From  all  sides  the  spirit  of  discontent  was  rising  with  the
suddenness  of  a  tropical  storm,  overcasting  a  political  sky  which
but  a  few  months  before  had  appeared  almost  without  a  cloud.
The  right  of  registering  edicts  by  a  bed  of  justice;  the  right  of
arbitrary  imprisonment  and  exile  ;  the  right  of  imposing  taxes
by  a  royal  edict,  had  been  for  generations  undisputed.  The  body
which  was  now  spoken  of  as  an  indispensable  agent  of  taxation
had  met  just  four  times  in  three  hundred  years,  and  none  of
these  later  States-General  had  claimed  the  power  which  the
l^arliament  attributed  to  them.  Whether  the  Parliament  in
launching  its  new  doctrine  had  merely  sought  for  a  ready
weapon  against  the  Crown,  or  whether  it  believed  that  a  body
in  which  the  privileged  orders  had  hitherto  had  an  indispu-
table ascendency  would  be  more  favourable  to  its  interests  than
assemblies  which  were  at  present  mainly  or  partly  nominated
by  the  Crown,  it  is  impossible  to  say. It  is  at  least  certain  that

412 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. cii.  xx.

the  seed  fell  on  a  soil  that  was  prepared  to  receive  it,  and  it
rapidly  became  the  doctrine  of  the  most  active  classes  in  France
that  the  States-General  formed  an  essential  part  of  the  French
Government,  and  that  they  should  exercise  habitually  the  same
powers  as  the  Parliament  of  England.  It  is  no  less  certain  that
the  Parliaments  gave  a  mighty  impulse  to  a  movement  which  in
a  few  months  swept  away  every  vestige  of  their  own  privileges
and  powers,  and  in  a  few  years  brought  some  of  the  most  con-
spicuous of  their  leaders  to  the  guillotine.

It  is  not  surprising,  it  is  certainly  not  unpardonable,  that
the  King  should  have  looked  with  much  dislike  on  the  demand
for  the  States-General.  Though  his  government  had  shown
deplorable  weakness  and  vacillation,  he  had  exercised  his  powers
with  uniform  moderation  and  with  an  earnest  desire  for  reform.
The  abolition  of  the  '  corvees,'  of  torture  before  trial,  of  serfdom
on  the  royal  domains  ;  the  reforms  that  had  been  introdaced
into  the  hospitals  and  prisons ;  the  civil  rights  conceded  to  Pi'O-
testants ;  the  considerable  economies  that  had  lately  been  made
at  the  Court ;  the  removal  of  the  restrictions  on  the  commerce  of
corn  and  wine ;  the  large  and  liberal  system  of  provincial  and
parochial  self-government  which  had  been  established,  and  his
avowed  determination  to  put  an  end  to  the  unjust  exemptions
from  taxation,  sufficiently  show  the  spirit  of  his  reign.  The
parliamentary  opposition  seemed  to  him  in  a  high  degree  un-
grateful, as  it  was  carried  on  by  bodies  which  he  had  himself  of
his  own  free  will  restored  ;  and  selfish,  as  it  was  a  struggle  for
class  privileges  by  a  section  of  the  privileged  class ;  and  he  pro-
bably underrated  the  strength  and  depth  of  the  national  dis-
content that  sustained  it.  But  although  he  desired  to  exercise
liis  rightful  powers  mildly  and  moderately,  he  desired  also  to
transmit  them  unimpaired  to  his  successors.  It  was  evident
that  they  were  being  one  by  one  assailed.  The  dark  unknown
future  of  the  States-General,  with  the  dangerous  questions  that
were  certain  to  arise  relating  to  their  powers  and  their  composi-
tion and  to  tlio  possible  transformation  of  the  monarchy,  filled
liim  wilh  alarm.  When  it  appcuircd  necessary,  he  consented,
ii:dec(l,  lo  ])romise  the  convocation  of  that  body,  and  there
AVJis  not  the  suTallest  reason  to  l)elievo  that  ho  would  fail  in  his
promise;  but  he  asserted  strongly  that  as  King  of  France  it  was

en.  XX.  THE  PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLIES.  413

for  him  and  for  him  alone  to  summon  it ;  his  language  in  pro-
mising it  seemed  to  foreshadow  an  assembly  that  would  be  rather
consultative  than  legislative  ;  and  he  postponed  the  convocation
till  1791.

By  that  time  it  was  hoped  that  the  present  effervescence
would  have  subsided,  and  the  provincial,  municipal,  and  paro-
chial councils  which  had  been  lately  established  would  have
taken  root.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  three-fourths  of
France  was  now  passing  through  a  great  and  fundamental
change  of  administration.  The  absolute  power  which  had  once
been  exercised  by  the  intendants  had  been  taken  away.  The
old  routine  of  administration  had  been  suddenly  broken.  New
assemblies  with  large  functions  of  local  government  had  been
created.  Provinces  which  were  totally  unaccustomed  to  self-
government  and  had  long  been  sunk  in  a  profound  political
apathy  were  violently  disturbed  by  a  great  experiment  in  govern-
ment ;  by  the  agitation  of  popular  election ;  by  the  rise  of  un-
tried men  to  power ;  by  the  inevitable  conflict  between  the  sup-
porters of  the  old  and  of  the  new  order.  The  proceedings  of  the
new  provincial  Assemblies  were  on  the  whole  very  encouraging
and  showed  great  promise  of  usefulness ;  there  was  every  reason
to  hope  that  a  real  step  had  been  taken  towards  putting  an  end
to  the  chaos  of  heterogeneous  and  conflicting  administrations
which  had  made  the  government  of  France  so  difficult,  but  as
yet  everything  was  in  a  state  of  transition.  When  the  new
provincial  bodies  were  consolidated,  they  might  bear  a  great
part  in  the  election  of  the  States-General.

If  time  had  not  been  pressing,  if  the  finances  had  been  in
such  a  condition  that  a  great  and  radical  change  in  the  system
of  taxation  had  not  been  a  matter  of  immediate  necessity,  the
policy  of  the  Government  would  probably  have  been  a  wise  one,
and  a  national  representation  might  have  arisen  securely  and
tranquilly  out  of  local  self-government.  But  this  essential  con-
dition was  wanting.  With  the  failure  of  the  loan  it  was  be-
coming evident  that  the  Government  must  choose  between
bankruptcy  and  the  discovery  of  some  method  of  uniform  and
productive  taxation  which  would  put  an  end  to  the  innumerable
exemptions  of  classes,  provinces,  and  towns.  But  what  chance
was  there  of  such  a  reform  when,  in  order  to  effect  it,  it  was

414  ENGLAND IN THE EIGITTEENTII CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

necessaiy  to  obtain  the  assent  of  tlie  Parliament  of  Paris,  of  tlie
provincial  Parliaments,  of  the  Pays  d'Etat,  and  perhaps  also  of
the  Cours  des  Comptes  and  of  the  Cours  des  Aides  ?  ^

The  situation  became  almost  daily  more  tense,  and  the  lan-
guage of  the  hostile  parties  was  such  that  reconciliation  seemed
impossible.  It  was  becoming  more  and  more  evident  to  Brienne
that  it  was  necessary  to  do  again,  but  under  circumstances  in-
finitely more  dangerous  and  difl&cult,  what  had  been  done  by
the  chancellor  Maupeou  in  the  last  reign.  The  word  bankruptcy
was  now  in  every  mouth.  Incendiary  placards  appeared  on  the
walls  of  Paris.  The  Queen  as  the  special  patron  of  Brienne  was
growing  daily  more  unpopular,  and  was  accused  of  exercising  a
preponderating  influence  in  the  councils.  Troops  were  pouring
from  the  provinces  into  Paris,  and  there  were  all  the  signs  of  a
coming  conflict.  On  May  5,1788,  the  first  great  blow  was  struck,
when  two  of  the  most  conspicuous  opponents  of  the  Court  were
by  order  of  the  King  arrested  by  soldiers  in  the  midst  of  the
Parliament.  On  May  8,  the  Parliament  was  summoned  to  Ver-
sailles, and  the  King  proceeded  to  hold  a  bed  of  justice.  After
severely  and  angrily  rebuking  the  Parliament  for  its  conduct
during  the  past  year,  he  ordered  six  edicts  to  be  read  and  re-
gistered, which  annihilated  its  political,  and  greatly  restricted
its  judicial,  functions.  By  the  first  two  edicts  a  number  of  new
law  courts  were  instituted,  to  which  all  civil  and  criminal  cases
hitherto  tried  by  the  Parliaments  were  transferred,  except  civil
cases  of  over  twenty  thousand  livres,  and  criminal  cases  relating
to  the  privileged  orders  of  nobles  and  ecclesiastics.  The  number
of  members  in  the  Parliaments  was  greatly  reduced.  The  third
and  fourth  edicts  were  intended,  like  the  abolition  of  the
venality  of  offices  in  the  time  of  IMaupeou,  to  conciliate  the
genuine  reformers.  They  abolished  the  '  tribunals  of  exception  *
and torture  after  condemnation.'^ The  fifth  edict,  wliicli  was

'  See  Necker,  (Euvres,  ix.  46,  47.  for  the  purpose  of  compelling  the  ac-

'  'J'lic;  'Qnoslion  pr('i)ariitoiri! '  hiul  ciiscd  piTson  to  avow  his  crime. The

been  iiboli.siicfl  by  Nuckcr  in  1780,  but  '  (.Question  prt'alable  '  was  torture  ap-

the 'Question pri'alai'ie  ' was not  pi ii;<l  alter  condemnation,  for  the  pur-

aboli.slurrl  till  17HH,  and  even  then  the  pose of  compelling the condemned

King  reserved  his  right  to  restore  it  man to name his accomplices. —

if,  after  a  few  years'  experience,  the  Chi'rest, Chute  de  VAncicn  Rigintc,

judg(!S  pronounced  it  necessary. The  i.  1.'34,  455.
'Question i^'paratoire '  v/as torture

en.  XX.  COUP D'ETAT, MAY 1788.  415

the  most  important,  constituted  a  new  tribunal  with  the  sole
rig-lit  of  verifying  and  registering  laws  for  the  kingdom.  It
was  to  be  called  the  '  Cour  Pleniere,'  and  to  be  composed  of  a
number  of  great  dignitaries  selected  by  the  King.  It  was  to
have  the  power  of  remonstrance,  but  the  King  was  to  have  the
right  of  overcoming  its  resistance  by  the  usual  method  of  a  bed
of  justice,  and  he  was  to  have  an  independent  and  exclusive
power  of  borrowing.  If  new  taxes  were  required  before  the
assembly  of  the  States-General,  they  were  to  be  registered  by
the  '  Cour  Pleniere,'  but  this  registration  was  only  to  have  a
j^rovisional  effect  till  the  States-General  had  actually  met.  The
taxes  were  then  to  be  definitely  enacted  by  the  King  '  on  the
deliberations  '  of  that  body.  The  sixth  edict  forbade  the  Par-
liaments to  unite  on  any  subject,  public  or  private,  till  further
orders.  •

Such  was  the  new  constitution  or  form  of  government  im-
posed on  France  by  the  sole  and  despotic  authority  of  the  King.
All  consideration  of  its  intrinsic  merits  and  defects  appeared  in-
significant in  comjDarison  to  this  fact,  and  it  was  immediately
followed  by  an  aristocratic  revolt  which  was  the  prelude  of  the
democratic  Revolution  of  1789.  Even  the  promise  of  a  more
speedy  convocation  of  the  States-General  had  no  effect  in  miti-
gating the  blow,  and  the  language  in  which  it  was  announced
was  understood  to  imply  that  the  Government  intended  this  body
to  be  little  more  than  the  assembly  of  Notables  and  invested
merely  with  consultative  powers.  The  Parliament  protested
vehemently  against  its  own  extinction,  and  the  various  law  courts
in  Paris  pronounced  all  that  had  been  done  to  be  illegal,  while
throughout  the  country  provincial  Parliaments  assembled  in  de-
fiance of  the  royal  mandate,  and  issued  proclamations  which  in
various  forms  and  with  various  degrees  of  emphasis  were  direct
appeals  to  revolution.  The  members  declared  any  Frenchman
'  infamous  and  a  traitor  to  his  country '  who  accepted  office  in  the
new  tribunals  '  illegally  established,'  bound  themselves  in  some
places  by  oath  never  to  lend  themselves  directly  or  indirectly  to
carrying  out  the  new  edicts,  stigmatised  the  ministers  who
had  advised  the  late  measures  as  '  traitors  to  the  King  and  the
nation,'  and  pronounced  the  ascription  of  despotic  power  to  the
'  Kocquain,  pp.  468,  469.

416  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

Sovereign  contrary  to  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom,
'  The  people,'  said  the  Parliament  of  Toulouse, '  having  no  longer
any  barrier  between  themselves  and  the  King,  there  remains  to
them  only  the  consciousness  of  their  strength.' '

Were  these  idle  words  ?  Could  the  Parliaments,  could  the
gentry  of  the  country  who  were  virtually  in  a  state  of  insurrec-
tion, count  upon  popular  support  ?  The  question  was  a  difficult
and  an  all-im^iortant  one,  but  it  seemed  at  first  probable  that  it
would  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  The  whole  legal  pro-
fession, nearly  all  the  public  writers  of  France,  seemed  on  the
side  of  the  Parliaments.  Paris  was  surging  and  seething  with
indignation,  but  as  yet  kept  down  by  an  overwhelming  military
force,  while  the  great  mass  of  the  peasantry  in  large  districts
seemed  prepared  to  take  arms  in  defence  of  their  provincial
Parliaments.  There  was  scarcely  any  province  where  the  new
edicts  did  not  produce  riots,  and  in  some  provinces  these  riots
amounted  to  insurrection.  In  Pau  the  people  compelled  by  ■
force  the  ejected  magistrates  to  resume  their  seats.  In  Brittany
the  abolition  of  the  Parliament  was  violently  resisted.  Almost
the  whole  province  was  under  arms,  and  a  number  of  Breton
noblemen  were  thrown  into  prison  for  petitioning  and  protest-
ing against  the  abolition.  In  Dauphiny  the  tocsin  sounded
from  the  church  towers,  and  thousands  of  peasantry  from  the
mountains  took  arms  to  defend  their  provincial  liberties.  There
were  furious  and  bloody  conflicts  with  the  soldiers,  and  the  in-
surgents so  far  succeeded  that  the  Government  consented  in  this
province  to  make  terms  with  them,  and  even  to  restore  the  old
provincial  States  wliicli  had  not  existed  for  a  century  and  a  half.

There  were  grave  signs  of  discontent  among  the  officers  of
the  army,  and  all  justice  was  suspended  by  the  impossibility  of
ii riding  lawyers  to  serve  in  the  new  courts.  Even  the  clergy
refused  to  support  Bricnne  and  to  vote  tlie  subsidies  lie  expected.
liishops  formally  protested  ag;|inst  the  extinction  of  the  Parlia-
ments and  the  establishment  of  the  '  Cour  Pleni6re,'  denied  that
taxes  could  be  imposed  by  the  will  of  the  Sovereign,  and  joined
with  the  rest  of  the  nation  in  demanding  the  States-General. '■^

'  Iiocrjujiin,  p.  472.  f'ruixns  qui  ont  empt'ch'.  lest  Fran.qals

*  Jioc,<|ii;iiri, Mioluilof, Sismiindi. <li'  (leccnlr  lihrcs,  i.  41,  15.
fcjoc,  tou,  Alouiiior,  llcchrrclica  xur  U:s

CH,  XX.  SECOND MINISTRY OF  NECKRR.  417

Deserted  by  almost  all  in  whom  lie  trusted,  Uriennc  at  last
bowed  before  the  storm.  On  August  8,  1788,  the  nation  was
startled  by  a  decree  suspending  the  new  *  Cour  Pleniere,'  and
convoking  the  States-General  for  May  1,  1789.  A  week  later
the  calamity  came  which  had  long  been  dreaded,  and  the
Government  acknowledged  and  declared  its  bankruptcy,  order-
ing that  for  sis  weeks  the  payments  of  the  State  should  be
partially  made  in  paper  with  a  forced  circulation.  On  Au-
gust 25,  Brienne  resigned  his  ofRce  amid  a  storm  of  execra-
tion, and  Necker  was  once  more  called  to  the  management
of  the  finances.

He  undertook  the  task  reluctantly,  for  he  well  knew  that  it
was  a  hopeless  one,  and  that  the  fifteen  precious  month"  which
had  been  wasted  under  Brienne  had  ruined  all  prospect  of  a
peaceful  solution.  He  found  not  more  than  a  few  hundred
thousand  francs  in  the  treasury,  the  taxes  anticipated,  credit
absolutely  ruined,  even  the  funds  which  had  been  recently
subscribed  for  the  hospitals  fraudulently  seized  by  the  late
Minister,'  several  millions  of  francs  required  for  the  first  week.
The  confidence,  however,  inspired  by  his  name  restored  the
State  to  solvency.  With  a  rare  patriotism  he  pledged  his  whole
private  fortune  for  the  public  payments,  and  a  number  of  large
capitalists  rallied  around  him.  In  one  morning  the  public  funds
rose  thirty  per  cent.^  The  exiles  were  recalled.  The  many
persons  who  had  been  flung  into  prison  during  the  late  troubles
were  released,  and  the  suppressed  Parliaments  were  once  more
restored.

The  constant  fluctuations  of  policy,  the  alternate  violence  and
concession  during  the  last  few  years,  had  by  this  time  produced
an  agitation  in  France,  which  it  was  impossible  to  repress,  and
extremely  diSicult  to  guide.  The  traditional  feelings  of  loyalty
and  respect  had  been  fatally  impaired.  The  privileged  classes
had  been  separated  from  the  Throne  and  driven  into  violent
opposition,  while  the  appearance  of  union  among  them  was  very
deceptive.  The  nobles,  who  had  caught  much  of  the  spirit  of  the
philosophic  movement,  were  in  general  very  anti-clerical,  while
among  the  clergy  the  bishops  and  the  cures  were  greatly  divided.
In  the  autumn  of  1787,  Arthur  Young  painted  the  situation  in
'  Sismondi,  xxi.  257.  *  Mme.  de  Stael,  Cons.  surlaRh'.  i.  159.

VOL.  V.  E  E

418 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xx.

a  single  phrase :  '  A  great  ferment  amongst  all  ranks  of  men,
who  are  eager  for  some  change  without  knowing  what  to  look
to  or  hope  for,' '  and  the  agitation  was  enormously  increased
when  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  stultifying  its  whole  history,
declared  that  no  tax  could  be  legitimately  imposed  without  the
consent  of  the  people  by  the  States-General,  and  when  Brienne
in  the  name  of  the  King  had  promised  the  speedy  convocation
of  that  body.  It  had  not  been  assembled  since  1614,  and  the
prospect  filled  France  with  the  wildest  hopes.  The  question  at
once  rose,  in  what  form  it  was  to  assemble.  The  former  States-
General  had  met  at  a  time  when  the  democracy  of  France  was
in  its  infancy ;  the  third  order  had  only  a  little  more  than  a
third  part  of  the  representation,^  and  the  three  orders  voted
separately,  so  that  the  two  privileged  orders  whenever  they  were
united  could  command  the  situation.  The  same  custom  of  the
three  orders  deliberating  apart,  had  subsisted  in  all  the  ancient
provincial  States,  with  the  exception  of  that  of  Languedoc,
where  the  three  orders  formed  only  a  single  chamber  and  voted
together,  and  where  the  number  of  the  deputies  of  the  third
estate  was  equal  to  that  of  the  nobles  and  clergy  combined.
We  have  seen  how  the  example  of  Languedoc  was  proposed  for
adoption  by  Fenelon,  and  how  it  was  actually  adopted  in  the
provincial  Assemblies,  that  were  formed  by  Necker  in  1778,
and  by  Brienne  in  1787.^  In  the  face  of  the  growing  importance
of  the  commons,  it  was  plain  that  the  third  order  would  never  be
content  with  the  position  it  held  in  the  States-General  of  1614.
It  would  have  probably  been  better  if  the  King  had  settled
by  his  own  authority  the  form  in  which  iihe  States-General
should  meet;  but  this  was  not  done,  and  Brienne  gave  an
enonnous  scope  to  political  discussion,  and  also  virtually  aban-
doned the  authority  of  the  Crown  by  formally  inviting  the
opinion  of  all  the  writers  and  bodies  corporate  in  the  kingdom,
on  the  subject.  Necker,  adopting  a  siniiUir  policy,  again  assem-
bled the  Notables  to  discuss  the  question. They  were  emphati-

'  Pinkcrton,  iv.  140.  ino,  72,  and  104. (Euvres  de  Necker,

»  In  the States-General of 1011  ix.  72.
there  were  192  bourgeois,  \?>'2,  noliles,  '  Lavergne, AsxemhUes Prm'in-

jind  140  eccle.sia.stics  ;  in the  .States-  r/flVc/f,  pp.  1 .5,  1 6  ;  Mine,  de  Staiil,  6W«.

V,(uct;\\  of 1.0H8  the  niimbers  wore;  itur  la  Iter.  i.  170.
\'J\,  104,  and  134; in  those  of  loGt),^

ciT.  XX.  THE THREE ORDERS.  419

cally  in  favour  of  the  precedent  of  1G14,  and  tlie  Parliament  of
Paris  tojk  the  same  view,  though  it  soon  after,  alarmed  by  the
unpopularity  of  its  advice,  partially  receded,  stating  that  neither
law  nor  constant  usage  fixed  the  number  of  each  order,  and  that
the  decision  must  rest  with  the  King.  But  the  immense  force
of  public  opinion,  expressing  itself  by  innumerable  pamphlets,
memoirs,  and  petitions  pouring  in  from  every  province  and  town,
now  turned  with  irresistible  power  in  the  democratic  direction.
Rousseau  had  specially  denounced  the  old  constitution  of  the
States-General ;  and  it  was  sufficiently  obvious  that  if  the  two
privileged  orders  had  a  complete  ascendency,  the  very  reforms
which  were  most  needed  might  never  be  carried.  The  Abbe
Sieves  in  a  book  which  produced  an  immense  impression,  and
of  which  30,000  copies  were  sold  in  three  weeks,  urged  that  the
third  estate,  or  commons,  had  hitherto  been  nothing,  and  that
it  ought  to  be  supreme;  and  the  question  immediately  became
the  most  pressing  in  French  politics.  The  long  indecision  on
the  subject  was  especially  unfortunate,  and  it  was  one  great
cause  of  the  democratic  and  levelling  direction  which  the  stream
now  took.

Immediately  after  the  separation  of  the  Notables,  all  the
princes,  with  the  exception  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  signed  a
memorial  to  the  King,  in  which,  in  the  name  of  the  nobles,  they
protested  against  any  deviation  fpom  the  forms  of  1614,  and
asserted  that  the  writings  which  were  pouring  in  from  almost
eveiy  corporation  in  France  showed  clearly  that  a  spirit  of
reasoned  insubordination  and  contempt  for  the  laws  was  abroad.
If,  they  continued,  the  ancient  privileges  of  the  two  upper  orders
in  the  States-General  were  curtailed,  those  orders  would  have  a
I'ight  to  refuse  to  confirm  their  degradation  by  appearing  in  that
body,  and  they  might  dispute  the  legality  of  its  proceedings.'

At  last,  after  some  hesitation,  a  royal  edict,  on  December  27,
partially  solved  the  qrestion.  The  King  decided,  in  opposi-
tion to  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  Notables,  that  the
commons  should  have  a  double  representation,  thus  making
their  representatives  equal  in  number  to  those  of  the  two  other
orders  united. Such  an  increase  of  numbers  was  of  no  impor-

'  Sismondi, xxi. 279, 280. See, Notables  on  this  subject,  Cht^rest,  ii.
too, on tlu' deliberations of the 195-207.

K  i;  2

•420  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEEXTn CENTUllY.  ch.  xx.

tauce  if  the  three  orders  voted  separately,  but  if  they  voted
either  habitually  or  occasionally  together  it  was  of  the  utmost
consequence.  But  this  vital  question  of  separate  or  joint  voting
was  left  undecided,  to  be  settled  only  when  the  States-General
met ;  and  it  continued  to  divide  France  fiercely,  and  to  dig  a
chasm  between  the  privileged  orders  and  the  people.  By  a
report  of  the  same  council  the  King  announced  the  future
suppression  of  letters  of  '  cachet,'  the  establishment  of  liberty  of
the  jDress,  and  a  periodic  meeting  of  the  States-General  for  the
revision  of  the  finances.^

It  was  followed,  on  January  24,  1789,  by  royal  letters  pre-
scribing the  method  of  election  for  the  States-General.  The
precedent  of  ]614  was  in  its  main  outlines  followed,  with  some
considerable  enlargements  that  had  been  recommended  by  the
Notables.  The  nobles  and  the  ecclesiastics  of  all  classes  were
to  elect  their  representatives  separate!}"  and  directly.  The  elec-
tions for  the  commons,  or  third  estate,  were  to  be  conducted
on  a  different  and  complicated  system.  The  suffrage  was  almost
universal,  a  vote  being  given  to  every  Frenchman  who  was
twenty-five  years  old,  who  had  a  settled  abode  and  who  paid
direct  taxes ;  but  these  voters  were  not  to  vote  directly  for
members  of  the  States-General,  but  for  members  of  numerous
electoral  bodies,  to  whom  the  ultimate  choice  was  entrusted.
The  elections  were  so  arranged  that  those  of  the  provinces  were
to  be  completed  before  those  of  Paris  began.

The  months  that  followed  were  among  the  most  agitated
and  critical  that  France  had  ever  undergone,  and  it  was  at  this
time  that  the  revolutionary  spirit,  which  had  hitherto  been
almost  confined  to  the  great  centres  of  population,  began  to
pervade  the  whole  country.  To  the  best  and  most  sagacious
judges,  the  conduct  of  Necker  during  this  crisis  has  appeared
very  blamable;  and  to  his  grave  faults  of  judgment  and  charac-
ter they  have  attributed  much  of  the  calamities  that  followed.
History  is  full  of  exam])les  of  men  who,  poss(>ssiug  to  an  eminent
degree  cr;rln,in  iii1cll('ci;i;il  and  UKiral  <ju;iJiti(^s  of  tlie  highest
value,  wore  phiccd  by  an  urili:ip])y  rate  in  situations  where  those
particular  qualities  were  almost  wholly  useless,  and  where  a
totally  different  set  were  urgently  required.  Such  was  at  this
'  Muie.  do  SIju'I,  CinuiuU'rdlinni^  siir  la  Ih'rdJvrton,  i.  177.

ni.  XX.  POLICY OF NECKER.  421

time  the  position  oi"  Necker.  In  a  regular  parliament;iry  Goveru-
ment  he  might  have  been  an  excellent  Chancellor  of  the
Exchequer,  or  a  safe,  sound,  and  sagacious  Prime  Minister ;  but
he  had  nothing  of  that  dazzling  personality  which  can  fascinate
and  lead  great  masses  of  excited  men  ;  nothing  of  that  spirit  of
command,  daring,  and  initiative,  which  was  at  this  time  im-
peratively needed.  French  public  opinion  was  now  like  a  ship
driven  before  a  furious  gale,  with  no  hand  at  the  helm.  Every-
thing was  undecided  and  in  question — the  nature  of  the  States-
General,  the  limit  of  their  powers,  the  reforms  they  were  to  effect.
The  nation  was  seething  with  agitation,  maddened  by  Uto-
pias and  subversive  political  theories,  which  were  disseminated
through  a  thousand  channels  and  through  every  province.  As
there  had  been  no  States-General  since  1614,  there  was  a  total
want  of  political  experience ;  and  there  were  none  of  the  party
lines,  organisations,  and  traditions,  which  in  a  settled  parlia-
mentary Government  at  once  direct  and  restrain  the  torrent  of
opinion.

It  was  pre-eminently  a  time  when  a  great  minister  would
have  boldly  assumed  the  direction  of  opinion,  placed  a  clear
programme  before  the  electors,  defined  and  limited  the  reforms
which  he  meant  to  ask  the  States-General  to  sanction.  But
Necker  adopted  a  totally  different  course.  He  had  no  sympathy
with  the  principles  of  the  '  Contrat  Social,'  which  were  now
dominant  in  France,  and  he  had  a  strong  constitutional  dislike
to  all  revolutionary  changes.  Considering,  he  has  himself  said,
the  dangers  attending  great  political  changes,  the  difiiculty  of
forecasting  their  issue  and  of  regulating  their  course,  he  would
never  have  convoked  the  States-General  had  he  not  found  that
body  solemnly  promised  under  his  predecessor.  If  he  could  have
followed  his  own  wishes  he  would  have  contented  himself  by
carrying  out,  with  the  assistance  of  the  provincial  Asstmblies,
a  long  series  of  administrative  reforms  which  might  have  greatly
timeliorated  the  condition  of  the  country  without  producing  any
strong  passions  or  convulsions.'  Such  a  policy  was  no  longer
open  to  him,  but  he  determined,  at  least,  to  restrict  as  much  as
l^ossible  the  circle  of  his  action,  and  to  postpone,  if  he  could  not
avoid,  the  most  important  decisions.

• QiJiivrcs  dc  A'ecker,  is.  38,  39.

422  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  en.  xx.

Timid,  irresolute,  and  cautious  to  a  fault,  it  was  the  character
of  his  mind  to  see  with  special  clearness  the  possible  dangers
and  evils  of  any  course  that  was  proposed,  and  he  shrank  in-
stinctively from  any  step  which,  by  bringing  him  into  opposition
to  strong  currents  of  opinion,  might  imperil  the  high  degree  of
esteem  which  he  enjoyed  and  to  which  he  most  tenaciously
clung.  By  assembling  the  Notables  he  had  shown  that  he  had
no  fixed  policy  of  his  own  on  the  great  question  of  the  composi-
tion of  the  States-General,  and  it  was  now  his  manifest  policy
to  ask  advice  on  all  sides,  to  commit  himself  to  nothing,  and  to
leave  the  nation  to  find  its  own  way  and  to  frame  its  own  pro-
gramme. Even  after  the  elections  had  been  completed  he  dis-
played the  same  fatal  inaction.  The  States-General,  from  the
complete  inexperience  of  their  members  and  from  the  circum-
stances of  excitement  under  which  they  were  elected,  required
more  than  almost  any  other  Parliament  firm  and  skilful  guidance.
But  Necker  met  them  without  any  clear  and  definite  plan  ;  and
when  Mirabeau,  who  alone  possessed  the  talents  that  might
have  ridden  and  directed  the  storm,  desired  to  support  him,  he
met  the  overtures  of  the  great  tiibune  with  freezing  and  con-
temptuous indifference.'

There  was  something  of  timidity,  something  of  pride,  some-
thing of  a  kind  of  constitutional  pedantry,  and  something  of
simple  miscalculation  in  the  attitude  he  assumed.  When  he
was  remonstrated  with,  he  said  that  he  considered  it  wrong  for
a  minister  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  popular  elections ;  and
when  he  was  further  pressed,  he  added,  '  What  would  you  have
me  do  when  there  is  no  longer  any  obedience  in  any  quarter,
and  when  we  are  not  sure  of  the  tr()f)ps  ? '  ^  Military  discipline,
indeed,  was  only  too  evidently  giving  way,  and  bands  of  soldiers
might  be  se<'n  in  the  early  summer  of  1789  marching  through
the  streets  of  Paris,  shouting,  '  Long  live  the  third  estate ! '
and  '  We  are  the  soldiers  of  the  nation  !  ' When  public  opinion

'  See  espcf'i.-illy  tlje Mc moires  da  co.f,'iiised.  Adam  Smith  was acqunintod

MuUniit, i. 24(;,  247, 2rjU-2.")3, 282,  with  Nocker,  and  lie  jiid.md  liiin  witli

'i'XW,  2'X',,  297,  and  many  other  pas-  miicli  severity. He  said,  '  He  is  but

iiag(«  in  tlie  same  work. Jt  must  be  a  man  of  detail,'  and  predicted  that

remembered,  however,  that  Mirabeau  lie  would  fail  totally  in  a  foremost

wa.s  at  this  time  a  man  whose  clia-  place. See  Mackintosh,  Vi/idio.  (Tall.

ractcr  wa.s  comiiletely  discredited  and  p.  :!().
whoKCgt-niuswasonly  veryp;irliallyre-  ^  jlfnii.  de  Malouct,  i.  251,  2'>o,

CH.  XX.  rOLICY OF NECKER.  423

was  SO  excited  and  disorgauised,  Necker  deemed  it  best  to  tem-
porise, to  be  governed  by  circumstances,  to  wait  until  the  nation
had  clearly  determined  its  wishes.  To  an  undecided  and  de-
sponding man,  who  was  conscious  that  he  was  surrounded  by
enemies  at  the  Court  and  in  the  Council,  who  knew  that  a  single
false  step  might  lead  to  a  catastrophe,  and  who  was  confronted
with  the  immediate  and  pressing  necessity  of  meeting  a  great
famine,  such  a  course  had  an  irresistible  attraction,  and  it  does
not  appear  to  have  been  as  much  condemned  by  contemporaries
as  by  posterity.  Malouet,  who  has  severely  blamed  it,  acknow-
ledges that  the  great  majority  of  the  more  moderate  of  the  poli-
ticians who  afterwards  formed  the  Constituent  Assembly,  agreed
with  Necker  that  the  King  should  propose  no  plan  and  adopt  no
important  measure  till  after  the  first  deliberation  of  the  States-
General.^  But  by  leaving  the  country  without  control  or  gui-
dance in  a  moment  of  supreme  crisis  and  agitation,  Necker
suffered  the  revolutionary  passions  to  acquire  a  force  and
a  scope  which  placed  them  beyond  the  reach  of  any  states-
manship.

Malouet,  who  was  one  of  the  most  sagacious  judges  of  this
period  of  the  Eevolution,  has  expressed  his  firm  conviction  that
at  this  time  popular  opinion  had  only  fixed  itself  irrevocably  on
two  points,  the  convocation  of  the  States-General  and  the  dou-
bling of  the  representatives  of  the  third  estate,  and  that  the
Government  could  in  all  other  points  have  effectually  guided  and
limited  the  movement  for  change.  The  sovereign  power  still
retained  its  authority,  and  it  was  as  yet  by  no  means  obnoxious
to  the  democratic  party.  The  recent  conflict  with  the  Parlia-
ments had  been  essentially  a  conflict  between  the  Crown  and
the  privileged  orders,  in  which  the  Crown  was  contending  for
a  system  of  taxation  which  would  lighten  the  burden  of  the
people.  Necker  has  borne  an  emphatic  testimony  to  the  com-
plete honesty  with  which,  both  in  public  and  private,  the  King
was  resolved  to  carry  out  his  promise  of  convoking  the  States-
(leneral,  though  he  must  have  well  known  that  it  would  give  a
representative  character  to  the  Government  of  France.^  The
doubling  of  the  number  of  the  representatives  of  the  third
estate,  which  was  the  first  great  triumph  of  the  popular  party,
•  Mem,  de  Malouet,  i.  2o0.  *  (Euvres  de  Necker,  ix.  3S.

424  ENGLA.\D IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xx.

Avas  carried  out  witli  liis  cordial  approbation,  and  contrary  to
the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  Notables;  and  it  was  re-
marked that  on  this  occasion  the  Queen  was  for  the  first  time
present  at  the  Council,  as  she  desired  tc  give  hei  sanction  to
the  measure.^  It  was  believed  that  the  situation  resembled  that
of  Sweden  under  Gustavus  III.,  when  a  popular  King,  sup-
ported by  the  democracy,  engaged  in  a  successful  struggle  with
the  privileged  orders.  All  over  the  Continent — in  Sweden,  in
Germany,  in  Poland,  in  Hungary,  in  Bohemia,  and  in  France —
the  diets,  assemblies,  or  parliaments  which  represented  the  privi-
leged orders  had  during  the  eighteenth  century  been  hostile  to
reform,  while  Catherine,  and  Frederick,  and  Joseph  11. ,  and
Leopold  of  Tuscany,  and  Gustavus  III,  of  Sweden,  and  Charles
III.  of  Spain  had  been  the  great  reformers  of  their  age.^  The
Prince  who  was  afterwards  Lewis  XVIII.,  addressing  the  muni-
cipality of  Paris  in  1789,  said  that  '  a  great  revolution  was  im-
pending, and  that  the  King  by  his  dispositions,  his  virtues,  and
his  supreme  rank,  was  its  natural  chief.'  ^  The  edict  and  report
of  December  27,  1788,  were  received  with  general  applause,^  and
Madame  de  Stael  has  even  stated  that  at  this  late  period  '  the
authority  of  the  King  over  the  minds  of  men  was  more  power-
ful than  ever.'  *  Nor  was  the  spell  quite  broken  in  the  agitated
weeks  that  followed.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  remarkable
fact  that  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  instructions  furnished  by  tlie
constituents  to  their  representatives  in  the  States-General,
while  urging  the  largest  and  most  searching  reforms,  expressly
directed  them  to  maintain  the  authority  and  dignity  of  the
King.^

It  seemed,  indeed,  as  if  the  monarchy  was  the  last  of  the
old  institutions  of  France  which  was  in  danger;  but  a  spirit  of
insubordination  and  passion  had  for  some  years  been  abroad,
and  the  unregulated  excitement  engendered  by  the  elections
was  not  likely  long  to  confine  itself  within  any  barriers.  *It
was  as  much  the  fashion,' the  Prince  of  Ligne  once  said,  *to

'  Mme. de Stael, C'onsidSraiions  *  Considerations,  i.  177,  173.

ear  la  Ilivolulion,  i.  180.  •  Malouet,  3Ivm.  i.  2G5. M.  Chas-

*  See  on  this  subject  Rorel,  sin,  who  is  a  violontly  democratic
L  liuTope  et  la  Revolution  Fran-  writer,  is  obliged  to  acknowledge
frt?»e,  pp.  107-13.3.  1  his  fact,  though  he  tries  to  attenuate

»  Mrno.  de  Staiil,  i.  177.  ils  inipnrlance.  — 6V«it'  dc  la  liivolu-

*  beu  Nc'.-ker,  OCuvrcs,  ix.  C8,  78. lion,  i>p.  '6.1'.\  '.i'','6.

cii.  XX.  POLITICAL AGITATION.  425

disobey  under  Lewis  XVI.  as  to  obey  under  Lewis  XIV.'  '  Under
Lewis  XIV.,'  the  old  Marshal  Kichelieu  said  to  Lewis  XVI,  'no
one  ventured  to  utter  a  complaint ;  under  Lewis  XV.  they  spoke
Jow;  under  your  Majesty  they  speak  aloud.''  ' The  universal
spirit,'  wrote  Malouet,  describing  the  elections  of  1789,  'was
that  of  independence.  Clergy,  nobles,  Parliament,  third  estate,
all  wished  an  increased  power.  .  .  .  The  nobles  of  the  provinces
would  no  longer  endure  the  superiority  of  those  of  the  Court.
The  inferior  clergy  wished  to  share  the  dignities  of  the  higher
clergy ;  the  officers  and  subalterns  of  the  army  used  a  similar
language.  .  .  .  The  word  liberty  was  for  ever  ringing  in  the  ears
of  an  ignorant  populace,'  and  they  understood  it  in  its  widest
and  most  extravagant  sense.^  The  electoral  meetings  in  every
parish  maintained  a  constant  fever  of  excitement.  In  three  or
four  months  there  are  said  to  have  been  at  least  40,000,^  and
they  carried  the  spirit  of  agitation  and  discussion  into  the  re-
motest village.  At  the  invitation  of  the  Government,  'cahiers,'
representing  the  grievances  and  conveying  the  instructions  of
the  three  orders,  were  prepared  in  every  parish,  and  all  over
France  the  busiest  brains  were  employed  in  collecting,  com-
paring, and  elaborating  grievances.

Innumerable  newspapers  sprang  into  existence,  and  the
activity  of  the  political  press  was  unequalled.  One  of  the  most
remarkable  signs  of  the  enormous  intensity  of  political  life  in
England  during  the  civil  war  and  the  Commonwealth,  is  to  be
found  in  the  vast  literature  of  pamphlets  and  broadsides  that
was  then  suddenly  produced.  In  France  and  on  a  larger  scale,
the  election  of  1789  at  once  produced  the  same  phenomenon,  and
it  continued  for  a  long  time  without  diminution.  In  the  last
months  of  1788  a  private  collector  is  said  to  have  accumulated
no  less  than  2,500  pamphlets  which  had  recently  appeared.*
Arthur  Young,  who  had  known  England  in  several  periods  of
great  political  excitement,  had  never  seen  anything  which  even
faintly  approached  the  activity  of  the  French  political  press
when  he  visited  Paris  in  the  summer  of  1789.  'The  business,'
he  says,  '  going  forward  at  present  in  the  pamphlet  shops  of

1  Aubertin,  p.  478.  *  Cherest,  ii.  254. See,  too,  Chas-

2  Mem.  de  3/alnitet,  i.  203,  294.  sin,  pp.  133-135.
»  Chassin,  p.  243.

426  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  en.  xx.

Paris  is  incredible.  I  went  to  the  Palais  Ivoyal  to  see  what
new  things  were  published  and  to  procure  a  catalogue  of  all.
Every  hour  produces  something  new.  Thirteen  came  out  to-
day, sixteen  yesterday,  and  ninety-two  last  week.  We  think
sometimes  that  Debrett's  and  Stockdale's  shops  in  London  are
crowded,  but  they  are  mere  deserts  compared  to  Desein's  and
i^ome  others  here,  in  which  one  can  scai-cely  squeeze  from  the  door
to  the  counter.  The  price  of  printing  two  years  ago  was  from
twenty-seven  to  thirty  livres  per  sheet,  but  now  it  is  from  sixty
to  eighty  livres.  The  spirit  of  reading  political  tracts,  they  say,
spreads  into  the  provinces,  so  that  all  the  presses  of  France  are
equally  employed.  Nineteen-twentieths  of  these  productions
are  in  favour  of  liberty,  and  generally  violent  against  the  clergy
and  nobility.  ...  Is  it  not  wonderful  that  while  the  press
teems  with  the  most  levelling  and  even  seditious  principles,
vrhich,  put  in  execution,  would  overturn  the  monarchy,  nothing
in  reply  appears,  and  not  the  least  step  is  taken  by  the  Court
to  restrain  this  extreme  licentiousness  of  publication  ?  It  is
easy  to  conceive  the  spirit  that  must  thus  be  raised  among  the
people.  But  the  coffee  houses  in  the  Palais  Royal  present  yet
more  singular  and  astonishing  spectacles;  they  are  not  only
crowded  within,  but  other  expectant  crowds  are  at  the  doors
and  windows  listening  d  gorge  deploijee  to  certain  orators  who
from  chairs  or  tables  harangue  each  his  little  audience.  The
eagerness  with  which  they  are  heard,  and  the  thunder  of
tipplause  they  receive  for  every  sentiment  of  more  than  common
liardiness  or  violence  against  the  present  Government,  cannot
easily  be  imagined.  I  am  all  amazement  at  the  Ministry  per-
mitting such  nests  and  hotbeds  of  sedition  and  revolt,  which
disseminate  amongst  the  people  every  hour  principles  that  by-
and-by  must  be  opposed  willi  vigour,  and  therefore  it  seems
little  sliort  of  madness  to  allow  the  propagation  at  present.' '

Another  agency,  more  terrible  and  more  powerful  than  any
mere  political  propagandism,  was,  however,  now  hastening  the
]lftvolution.  At  the  very  time  when  the  promise  of  the  States-
(Jeneral  had  let  loo.se  tho  torrent  of  speculations,  and  passions,
and  wild  hopes  and  fears,  a  great  famine  fell  upon  the  land.  A
long  drought  in  the  summer  of  1788,  and  a  hailstorm  almost

•  rinkcilmi,  iv.  Hi;).

CH.  XX.  FAMINE, 1788, 1789.  427

unexampled  iu  the  extent  of  its  devastations,  were  followed  by  an
extremely  bad  harvest  and  by  the  severest  winter  that  had  been
known  in  France  for  eighty  years.  The  olives,  the  mulberries,
the  chestnut  forests  over  great  districts  were  almost  totally
destroyed.  Bread  rose  quickly  to  famine  price.  The  distress
was  as  acute  in  the  towns  as  in  the  country.  Manufactures  and
industry  in  all  their  forms  had  already  suffered  deeply  from  the
tlerangement  of  the  national  finances.  The  English  competition
which  followed  the  recent  commercial  treaty  had  almost  anni-
hilated some  of  its  important  branches  and  thrown  thousands
of  workmen  out  of  employment,  and  the  destruction  of  the
mulberiy  trees  now  ruined  the  silk  manufacture.  In  Lyons
alone  40,000  workmen  employed  in  this  industry  were  left
without  bread.  Many  master  manufacturers  left  the  country,
and  countless  factories  were  closed.  Abbeville,  Amiens,  and
Rouen  were  equally  distressed,  and  great  numbers  of  workmen
are  said  to  have  died  of  literal  starvation.  Disease  springing
from  insufficient  nourishment  rapidly  spread.  The  roads  were
infested  with  famished  brigands.  The  bakers'  and  butchers'
shops,  the  mills,  the  offices  where  duties  were  levied  on  provisions,
were  everywhere  attacked.  There  were  almost  daily  conflicts
between  the  soldiers  and  the  populace,  and  all  the  great  towns
were  besieged  by  starving  countrymen  seeking  for  employment.
In  Paris,  where  great  public  works  had  already  produced  an
unnatural  agglomeration  of  workmen,  the  number  of  the  indigent
soon  tripled.  In  the  single  quarter  of  St.  Antoine  there  were
30,000.  A  fourth  part  of  the  population  of  the  city  are  said  to
have  been  driven  in  the  winter  of  1788-1789  to  sell  their
clothes  and  tools  and  furniture,  and  it  was  easy  on  the  smallest
pretext  to  collect  thousands  of  desperate  and  hungry  men,  ready
to  welcome  any  change  and  to  take  part  in  any  enterprise.  The
freezing  of  the  Seine  in  December  greatly  added  to  the  difficulty
of  supplying  the  city  with  food.  But  the  distress  was  never
greater  than  at  the  time  of  the  opening  of  the  States-General.
The  whole  country  was  disorganised  by  famine,  and  in  the  four
months  before  the  capture  of  the  Bastille  there  had  been  more
than  300  violent  outbreaks  in  France.'

'  Taine,  La  Itiiwlutiofi,  i.  4-14,  30,  33;  Cbassin,  pp.  202-2'JC;  Michelet,
svii.  4.')5,  456.

428  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

It  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  this
famine  among  the  causes  of  the  French  Revolution.  It  gave
the  revolutionary  movement  its  army,  and  its  impulse,  and  its
character  of  desperate  and  savage  earnestness.  The  presence
in  Paris  of  a  vast  multitude  of  idle  and  half-starving  men,
largely  recruited  from  the  provinces,  at  a  time  when  political
excitement  was  at  its  height,  and  when  the  discipline  of  the
army  had  been  fatally  corrupted,  amply  accounts  for  the  scenes
of  violence  that  followed.  Whenever  a  legislative  body  is
elected  on  a  very  low  sufirage,  a  bad  harvest  is  likely  to  have  a
great  influence  on  elections,  for  the  minds  of  men  are  then  full
of  uneasiness,  prone  to  change,  and  readily  turned  against  the
Government.  But  this  election,  which  was  beyond  all  others
critical  and  dangerous,  took  place  not  merely  amid  distress,
but  amid  famine.  Necker  showed  gi-eat  skill  and  energy  in
supplying  the  capital  with  food,  but  it  was  easy  to  persuade
an  ignorant  and  starving  populace  that  the  Government
were  responsible  for  all  they  suffered.  '  It  appears  plain  to
me,'  wrote  Arthur  Young,  'that  the  violent  friends  of  the
commons  are  not  displeased  at  the  high  price  of  corn,  which
seconds  their  views  greatly,  and  makes  any  appeal  to  the  com-
mon feeling  of  the  people  more  easy  and  much  more  to  their
pui-pose  than  if  the  price  were  low.'  ^  At  the  time  when
the  violent  scenes  of  1789  began,  food  in  Paris  was  almost  at
famine  rates,  and  it  was  computed  that  there  were  not  less
than  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  destitute  persons  in  the
city,  who  depended  wholly  on  public  works  for  their  employ-
ment.'^

The  aims  and  dispositions  of  the  electors  were  clearly  shown
by  the  '  cahiers '  of  the  three  orders.  It  was  plain  that  there
was  no  alliance  between  the  nobles  and  the  clergy,  and  among
tlie  wishes  most  strongly  expressed  in  the  cahiers  of  the  former
class  were  the  suppression  of  tithes  and  of  religious  orders,  the
establishment  of  perfect  liberty  of  conscience,  and  the  sale  of  a
poi-tion  c^  the  ecclesiastical  property,  in  order  to  restore  the
prosperity  of  the  finances.  It  was  evident,  too,  that  the  nobles
were  as  far  as  passiljlo  from  being  animated  by  a  general  hos-
tility to  reform.  They  desired  the  establishment  of  constitutional
•  rinkerlon,  iv.  J  (JO.  *  Tainc,  La  Bholutlon,  i.  ;J3.

CH.  XX.  CAHIERS  OF  THE  NOBLES.  429

government  by  periodic  assemblies  of  the  States-General,  com-
plete individual  liberty,  and  a  crowd  of  reforms  in  the  admi-
nistration of  the  finances  and  of  justice.  Almost  with  one  voice
they  announced  their  readiness  to  abandon  their  exemption  from
direct  taxation ;  their  determination  to  accept  a  reasonable  money
commutation  for  their  feudal  rights ;  their  wish  to  see  all  the
higher  ranks  in  the  army  thrown  open  to  commoners.  If  these
three  measures  had  been  accomplished,  almost  every  serious
grievance  which  the  country  suffered  from  its  aristocracy  would
have  been  removed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nobles  insisted
strongly  that  they  should  remain  a  separate  order  in  the  nation ;
that  they  should  retain  their  old  privilege  of  voting  separately
in  the  States-General ;  that  their  dignities  and  honorary  dis-
tinctions should  be  maintained.  Some  of  the  cahiers  even
asked  that  the  privileged  orders  should  wear  a  special  dress,
and  that  a  separate  order  of  peasants  should  be  constituted,  and
very  many  of  them  protested  against  the  sale  of  ofiices,  which
introduced  a  crowd  of  lawyers  and  other  functionaries  into  the
nobility.^

These  views  may  not  have  represented  everything  that
extreme  reformers  could  desire,  but  historians  must  be  very
false  or  very  prejudiced  if  they  describe  them  as  the  views  of  a
class  that  was  opposed  to  reform  and  incapable  of  discharging  a
useful  function  in  a  free  State.  It  was  a  remark  of  Sieyes  that
in  the  literature  that  preceded  the  Revolution,  the  most  powerful
defences  of  the  rights  of  the  commons  came  from  the  pens  of
members  of  the  privileged  orders,^  and  it  is  an  incontestable  fact
that  a  great  part  of  the  French  aristocracy  were  at  this  time
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and
prepared  to  make  serious  sacrifices  for  the  public  welfare.  The
Parliaments  had,  as  I  have  already  shown,  in  some  respects
misrepresented  their  spirit,  but  the  Parliaments  had  at  least  been
distinguished  by  two  great  qualities — a  strong  dislike  to  arbi-
trary power,  and  a  strong  desire  to  introduce  a  spirit  of  economy
into  the  State ;  and  in  the  provincial  councils  the  upper  class
had  of  late  years  shown  themselves  both  liberal  and  enlightened,
and  ready  to  perform  a  great  deal  of  useful  and  unobtrusive

'  See  an  excellent  analysis  of  the Anden  Bcgime,  pp.  .387-401.
cahiers  of  the  nobles  in  Tocqiievilie,  -  C'herest,  ii.  255-257.

430  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUP.Y.  cii.  xx.

work.*  The  cabiers  of  the  clergy  also  showed  a  frank  and
general  willinguess  to  surrender  all  privileges  in  matters  of
taxation;  and  wherever  the  cures  prepou derated,  there  was
displayed  a  genuine  sympathy  with  liberal  ideas.  A  better
administration  of  the  Church,  the  opening  of  all  offices  to
all  classes,  the  establishment  of  a  general  system  of  religious
national  education,  free  trade,  and  constitutional  government,
were  among  their  leading  demands,  and  some  of  them  expressed
a  wish  that  the  tools  of  workmen  should  never  be  seized  for
debt,  and  that  the  poorest  class  should  be  exempt  from  taxation.'^

Among  the  commons  the  language  was  more  vague,  and
while  the  monarchy  was  still  respected,  the  ideas  of  the  '  Contrat
Social'  were  very  apparent.  The  electors  for  the  third  order
asked  equality  before  the  civil  and  criminal  law,  unity  of  legis-
lation, liberty  of  the  press,  abolition  of  all  servitude  and  feudal
rights,  responsibility  of  ministers,  a  readjustment  of  taxation.^
In  this  class,  however,  the  desire  for  equality  was  still  stronger
than  the  desire  for  reform,  and  they  especially  urged  that  in  the
States-General  the  three  orders  should  vote  not  separately,  but
together.

If  the  prevailing  wish  had  been  simply  to  make  France  a
free  and  constitutional  country,  in  the  English  or  American
sense  of  those  terms,  the  victory  was  already  won.  The
peremptory  instructions  of  the  three  orders  were  of  such  a
nature,  that  there  was  no  doubt  whatever  that  this  end  could
have  been  attained  with  general  consent.  In  April  1 7iS9,Gouver-
ijcur  Morris,  whose  admirable  letters  give  one  of  the  truest  and
calmest  pictures  of  the  events  that  ensued,  wrote  to  Washington:
*The  elections  are  finished  throughout  this  kingdom  except  in  the
capital,  and  it  appears  from  the  instructions  given  to  the  repre-
sentatives that  certain  points  are  universally  demanded  which,
when  granted  and  secured,  will  render  France  perfectly  free  as
to  the  principles  of  the  Constitution.  I  say  the  principles,  for
one  generation  at  least  will  be  required  to  render  the  practice

'  See Jiaverfrne, JxB AsHemhU'cs  la  j;;uill<)tine  '  (p.  \'X>^.

Prmnmnaltix ; 'J'aine, La Riroln-  ■'  Louis  iJlanc.  Hist,  de  la  liiv.  ii.

turn, i. 1112, ];);{. M.  Tainc says:  221, 222; Chassin, pp. 253-25:> ;

'Jamais I'Arisiocratie ne fut pins  Tocqneville,  pp.  IGo-lTO.

1  i lit' ra](!,  plus  hiimaiiif,  plus  convert ie  •'  Sisinondi, xxi.  2!ifi  ;  Grille,  lic^

aux refonnes utiles; plusiours res-  v(ilii/;io?i  J''ra/igaisi',  i.  l'dij~l!)!>.
leront  lcl>  jusijiie  suns  le  couleau  dc

CH.  XX,  CONSTITUTIONAL  MONARCHY ATTAINALLE.  431

familiar.' '  Ou  the  part  of  the  King  there  was  nothing  to  be
feared.  Jefferson,  one  of  the  most  democratic  as  well  as  one  of
the  most  conspicuous  of  the  leaders  of  the  American  Revolution,
was  at  this  time  in  Paris  representing  the  American  Republic,
and  he  has  left  an  account  of,  his  own  experience,  which  throws
a  very  remarkable  light  on  the  secret  history  of  the  Erench
Revolution.  '  I  was  much  acquainted,'  he  writes,  '  with  the
leading  patriots  of  the  Assembly.  Being  from  a  country
which  had  successfully  passed  through  a  similar  refor;nation,
they  were  disposed  to  my  acquaintance,  and  had  some  confi-
dence in  me.  I  urged  most  strenuously  an  immediate  com-
promise to  secure  what  the  Government  were  now  ready  to
yield,  and  to  trust  to  future  occasions  for  what  might  still  be
wanting.  It  was  well  understood  that  the  King  would  grant
at  this  time,  first,  freedom  of  the  person  by  Habeas  Corpus  ;
second,  freedom  of  conscience  ;  third,  freedom  of  the  Press ;
fourth,  trial  by  jury ;  fifth,  a  representative  Legislature  ;  sixth,
annual  meetings ;  seventh,  the  origination  of  laws ;  eighth,  the
exclusive  right  of  taxation  and  appropriation ;  and  ninth,  the
responsibility  of  Ministers ;  and  with  the  exercise  of  these  powers
they  could  obtain  in  future  whatever  might  be  further  necessary
to  improve  and  preserve  their  Constitution.'  '  They  thought
otherwise,  however,'  continues  Jefferson,  '  and  events  have  proved
their  lamentable  error,  for  after  thirty  years  of  war  foreign  and
domestic,  the  loss  of  millions  of  lives,  the  prostration  of  private
happiness  and  the  foreign  subjugation  of  their  own  country  for
a  time,  they  have  obtained  no  more,  nor  even  that  securely.'^

The  representatives  of  the  three  orders  included  a  few  men
of  real  genius,  and  many  who  would  have  risen  into  prominence
in  any  Legislature.  It  is  remarkable  that  Mirabeau  and  the
Abbe  SieySs,  who  were  the  most  conspicuous  figures  in  the  third
order,  had  both  abandoned  their  own  orders  to  sit  in  it.  Among
the  steady  advocates  of  moderate  reform  in  the  commons  were
Mounier,  who  had  been  the  leading  member  of  the  States  of
Dauphine,  a  man  of  great  intellect  and  historical  knowledge,
and  one  of  the  best  political  writers  in  France  ;  Malouet,  the  ex-
perienced and  high-minded  intendant  of  Toulon ;  Tronchet,  a
veteran  lawyer  who  represented  Paris,  and  who  presided  over  the

'  Morris's  WorJis,  ii.  07.  '•'  Jefferson's  Memoirs,  i.  80.

432  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  en.  xx.

commission  for  framing  the  Constitution.  A  young  and  elo-
quent soldier  named  Cazales  represented  the  extreme  Royalist
party,  while  violent  democratic  opinions  were  supported  by  the
passionate  eloquence  of  Barnave,  by  the  logic  of  Dupont,  by
Rabaut  de  St.  Etienne,  a  Protestant  pastor  who  wrote  the  his-
tory of  the  Assembly  in  a  strain  of  the  highest  enthusiasm,  and
who,  like  so  many  of  the  enthusiasts  of  the  Revolution,  soon
ended  his  days  on  the  guillotine.  Another  distinguished  mem-
ber of  tjie  commons  who  underwent  the  same  fate  was  Bailly,
member  of  the  French  Academy,  a  distinguished  man  of  science,
twice  Mayor  of  Paris,  and  first  President  of  the  National  As-
sembly ;  and  there  was  a  group  of  darker  and  more  dangerous
spirits  who  were  as  yet  unnoticed  and  obscure,  including  Buzot
and  Petion,  and  the  young  advocate  of  Arras,  Maximilien
Robespierre.  The  clergy  had  a  brilliant  but  superficial  rheto-
rician in  the  Abbe  Maury  ;  an  eminently  wise  and  high-minded
statesman  in  Luzerne,  the  Bishop  of  Langres ;  a  political  in-
triguer of  deep  and  subtle  ability  in  Talleyrand,  Bishop  of
Autun.  Among  the  nobles  was  the  Duke' of  Orleans,  whose  evil
influence  may  be  traced  in  most  of  the  earlier  stages  of  the
Revolution;  and  there  too  might  be  seen  Lafayette,  still  glitter-
ing with  the  aureole  of  his  American  reputation ;  the  eloquent
and  chivalrous  Lally  Tollendal ;  the  two  Lameths,  vehement
advocates  of  revolutionary  change  ;  D'Espremenil,  who  had  once
enjoyed  boundless  popularity  as  he  led  the  opposition  to  the
King  in  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  and  who  was  soon  to  lose  his
head  as  a  Royalist.  A  characteristic  feature  of  the  Assembly
was  the  large  number  of  cures  among  the  clergy,  and  of  lawyers
among  the  commons.  Of  the  latter  profession  there  were  no
less  than  374.'

Though  containing  many  men  of  ability  and  high  character,
the  Assembly  was  for  the  most  part  almost  totally  destitute  both
of  the  education  of  intellect  and  of  the  educ  ation  of  character  that
fit  men  for  public  life,  and  it  was  completely  intoxicated  with
the  doctrines  of  Rousseau.  There  were  at  this  time  two  excellent
observers  in  Paris  who  had  watched  carefully  political  life  in
the  two  countries  where  it  was  the  most  active,  and  it  is  re-
markable liow  closely  they  agreed  in  their  independent  estimates

*  Carlyle's  Fllst.  of  the  French  Ilcrolittion,  i.  113.

en.  XX.  OriNION OF GOUVERXEUR MORRIS.  433

of  the  situation.  In  the  discussions  of  the  States-General
Arthur  Young  said,  '  I  find  a  general  ignorance  of  the  principles
of  government,  a  strange  and  unaccountable  appeal  on  one  side
to  ideal  and  visionary  rights  of  nature,  and  on  the  other  no
settled  plan  that  shall  give  security  to  the  people  for  being  in
future  in  a  much  better  situation  than  hitherto.'  '  The  spec-
tators in  the  galleries  are  allowed  to  interfere  in  the  debates
by  clapping  their  hands  and  by  other  noisy  expressions  of
approbation.  .  .  ,  More  than  once  to-day  there  were  one  hun-
dred members  on  their  legs  at  a  time,  and  M.  Bailly  absolutely
without  power  to  keep  order.' '

Gouverneur  Morris  compared  the  new  legislators  to  young
scholars  fresh  from  the  university,  who  would  bring  everything
to  a  Roman  standard.  They  desired,  he  said,  to  produce  an
American  constitution  without  having  American  citizens  to
support  it.  He  was  struck  with  the  large  number  of  members
who  had  '  much  imagination'  but  '  little  knowledge,  judgment,
or  reflection,'  with  their  '  romantic  spirit '  and  their  '  romantic
ideas  of  government.'  Further  experience  did  not  improve  his
estimate  of  the  Assembly.  '  It  may  be  divided,'  he  wrote  in
January  1790,  'into  three  parts,  one  called  the  aristocrats  .  .  .
another  which  has  no  name  but  which  consists  of  all  sorts  of
people  really  friends  of  good  government.  The  third  is  com-
posed of  what  is  called  here  the  enrages,  that  is,  the  madmen.
These  are  the  most  numerous,  and  are  of  that  class  which  in
America  is  known  by  the  name  of  pettifogging  lawyers,  together
with  a  host  of  curates  and  many  of  those  persons  who  in  all
revolutions  throng  to  the  standard  of  change  because  they  are
not  well.  This  last  party  is  in  close  alliance  with  the  popu-
lace here,  and  derives  from  that  circumstance  very  great
authority.'  ^

It  soon  appeared  that  the  quarrel  between  the  commons  and
the  two  privileged  orders  could  not  be  averted  or  even  deferred.
The  vital  question  was  whether  the  three  orders  should  vote  as
separate  bodies,  each  possessing  a  right  of  veto,  or  two  combined
exercising  it  on  the  third,  or  whether,  as  the  commons  desired,
the  three  orders  should  form  a  single  assembly  and  should  vote
by  head.  The  question  was  a  very  unhappy  one,  for  each
'  Pinkerton,  iv.  170,  174,  175.  *  Morris's  Worh<!,  ii.  75,  79,  88,  89.

VOL.  V.  l  ¥

434  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

alternative  led  to  grave  evils.  A  constitution  in  wliich  the
assent  of  tliree  distinct  legislative  assemblies  was  required  for
the  validity  of  a  law,  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  cumbrous
and  inefficient,  and  a  constitution  in  which  the  two  privileged
orders  could  always  by  a  coalition  outnumber  and  paralyse  the
order  which  represented  the  bulk  of  the  nation,  would  be  ex-
tremely unfavourable  to  liberty  and  utterly  inconsistent  with
democratic  ideas.  On  the  other  hand,  the  adoption  of  the  other
alternative  would  practically  place  the  whole  government  of
France,  without  any  control,  in  the  hands  of  a  single  popular
chamber,  and  such  a  government  is  the  very  worst  with  which  a
nation  can  be  cursed.  It  is  a  despotism  more  dangerous,  as
well  as  more  inefficient  for  good,  than  an  absolute  monarchy;  for
the  sense  of  responsibility  is  divided  and  deadened,  and  the
infamy  attaching  to  unjust  actions,  to  excesses  of  tyranny,  or
to  usurpations  of  power  is  comparatively  unfelt  when  diffused
among  many  instead  of  being  concentrated  on  one.  Besides
this,  every  large  assembly  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  mob.  It
is  sure  to  be  swayed  by  passion,  faction,  party  spirit,  personal
influence,  and  rhetorical  skill,  and  in  no  other  form  of  uncon-
trolled government  is  there  likely  to  be  so  little  of  the  higher
qualities  of  judgment  and  prescience  that  are  most  necessary  for
the  wise  and  temperate  administration  of  affairs.

These  remarks  apply  to  all  countries,  but  there  were  special
evils  to  be  feared  in  France  if  the  plan  of  the  commons  was
realised.  In  the  first  place  it  would  manifestly  make  the
democratic  element  supreme,  for  the  number  of  the  commons
was  equal  to  that  of  the  two  other  orders  combined,  and  a  con-
siderable proportion  of  the  nobles  and  a  still  larger  proportion
of  the  clergy  were  certain  to  join  them.  In  the  next  place
it  would  put  the  direction  of  affiiirs,  without  any  controlling,
revising,  or  modifying  senate,  in  the  hands  of  an  assembly  which
was  totally  without  experience ;  and  in  the  last  place  that
assembly  would  consist  of  twelve  hundred  members.  It  may
be  boldly  asserted  that  there  never  was  a  legislative  assembly
which  from  its  circumstances  and  its  composition  was  less  fitted
to  legislate  without  a  second  chamber  than  that  which  now
assembled  in  France ;  and  it  may  also  be  truly  said  that  even  in
the  most  phlegmatic  nation  and  in  the  nation  most  accustomed

CH.  XX.  BICAMERAL  ARRANGEMENT  REJECTED.  435

to  parliamentrry  usages,  a  parliameut  of  twelve  hundred  mem-
bers would  become  totally  unmanageable.

If  the  difficulty  had  arisen  either  in  England  or  America,  it
would  almost  certainly  have  been  met  by  the  obvious  com-
promise of  dividing  the  orders  into  two  chambers.  Necker
desired  this,  but  in  accordance  with  his  usual  timid  policy  he
refrained  from  bringing  it  forward,  and  contented  himself  with
trying  very  ineffectually  to  induce  the  contending  parties  to
adjourn  the  question  till  after  the  verification  of  powers.  A
small  party  headed  by  Luzerne,  the  Bishop  of  Langres,  argued
in  favour  of  a  bicameral  division,  and  the  project  was  strongly
supported  by  Malouet,  Mounier,  and  Lally  Tollendal.  It  was
soon,  however,  found  to  be  extremely  unpopular,  and  when  at  a
Bomewhat  later  period  it  was  formally  brought  before  the  National
Assembly,  it  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of  more  than  ten  to  one.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  aristocratic  section  of  the  Assembly
joined  with  its  opponents  in  voting  against  it.  If  the  bicameral
system  had  been  adopted,  the  upper  chamber  would  have  con-
sisted of  the  bishops  and  of  the  one  hundred  or  one  hundred
and  fifty  families  of  the  ancient  nobility  of  France.  The  cures
and  the  new  nobility  of  the  robe  would  have  sat  in  the  lower
chamber,  and  accordingly  these  classes  who  formed  the  greater
part  of  the  two  privileged  orders  at  once  repudiated  the  project.
On  the  other  hand  the  democratic  party  violently  opposed  it  as
an  imitation  of  the  aristocratic  government  of  England ;  as  con-
secrating and  strengthening  hereditary  distinctions ;  as  intro-
ducing into  the  Legislature  a  division  of  powers  which  was
directly  opposed  to  the  principles  of  Rousseau.  '  The  very
nature  of  things,'  it  was  said,  '  resists  this  division  of  the
legislative  authority.  The  nation  is  one,  so  should  then  be  the
body  that  represents  it.'  ^

The  result  of  all  this  was  that  when  the  States-General,  on
which  the  hopes  of  France  were  so  passionately  fixed,  met,  this
Assembly  found  itself  at  the  very  outset  of  its  proceedings  com-
pletely paralysed,  and  a  revolution  in  its  constitution  became
inevitable.  The  first  business  to  be  accomplished  was  the  veri-
fication of  the  elections  of  the  members. In  the  opinion  of  some

'  A  very  good  account  of  the  dis-  found  in  Smyth's  French  I?evolutio?i,
cussions on  these  questions  will  be lee.  xvii.

F  F  2

43G  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xx.

politicians,  tliis  verification  slionld  have  taken  place  Lefore  the
King  in  council,  but  he  left  it,  perhaps  unwisely,  to  the  Assem-
bly, and  it  at  once  produced  a  dispute  between  the  orders.

The  Third  Estate,  assuming  a  position  of  superiority  and
ascendency,  now  invited  the  other  orders  to  come  to  them  for
the  purpose  of  verifying  their  powers  conjointly.  The  invitation
was  refused,  and  from  May  5  till  the  middle  of  June  no  public
business  was  accomplished.  At  last,  however,  on  the  proposal
of  Sieyes  and  amid  a  storm  of  frantic  excitement,  the  Third
Estate  alone  voted  themselves  '  the  National  Assembly,'  invited
the  other  two  orders  to  join  them,  and  pushing  their  pretensions
to  sovei'eignty  to  the  highest  point,  declared  that  the  existing
taxes,  not  having  been  consented  to  by  the  nation,  were  all
illegal.  The  National  Assembly,  however,  allowed  them  to  be
levied  till  its  separation,  after  which  they  were  to  cease  if  not
formally  regranted.

This  great  revolution  was  effected  on  June  17,  and  it  at
once  placed  the  Third  Order  in  a  totally  new  relation  both  to
the  other  orders  and  to  the  Crown.  There  were  speedy  signs  of
}■  Holding  among  some  members  of  the  privileged  orders,  and
a  fierce  wave  of  excitement  supported  the  change.  Malouet
strongly  urged  that  the  proper  course  was  to  dissolve  the
Assembly  and  to  appeal  to  the  constituencies,  but  Necker
declined,  and  a  feeble  and  ineffectual  effort  of  the  King  to  ac-
eomplish  a  reunion,  and  at  the  same  time  to  overawe  the  Third
Order,  precipitated  the  Revolution.  The  King  announced  his
intention  of  holding  a  royal  session  on  June  22,  and  he  sum-
moned the  three  orders  to  meet  him.  It  was  his  design  to  direct
them  to  unite  in  order  to  deliberate  in  common  on  matters  of  com-
mon interest,  and  to  regain  the  royal  initiative  by  laying  down
the  lines  of  a  new  constitution.  He  hoped  to  effect  a  bicameral
urranuement,  and  he  determined  also  to  recommend  an  abolition
of  all  privileges  in  matters  of  taxation,  and  the  adrnissibility  of
all  citizens  to  civil  and  military  ('iii|iloymeuts.

On  Saturday,  the  20tli,  ho\ve\'er,  the  course  of  events  was
interrupted  by  the  famous  scene  in  the  tenuis  court.  Troops
had  lately  been  pouring  to  an  ahirming  extent  into  Paris,  and
exciting  much  suspicion  in  the  popular  pai-ty,  and  the  Govern-
ment ver)'  injudiciously  selected  for  the  royal  session  on  the

CH.  XX.  THE NATIONAL ASSEMULY.  437

following  Monday,  tlie  hall  in  which  the  Third  Order  a=!sembled.
The  hall  was  being  prepared  for  the  occasion,  and  therefore  no
meeting  could  be  held.  The  members,  ignorant  of  the  fact,
went  to  their  chamber  and  were  repelled  by  soldiers.  Furious
at  the  insult,  they  adjourned  to  the  neighbouring  tennis  court.
A  suspicion  that  the  King  meant  to  dissolve  them  was  abroad,
and  they  resolved  to  resist  such  an  attempt.  With  lifted  hands
and  in  a  transport  of  genuine,  if  somewhat  theatrical,  enthu-
siasm, they  swore  that  they  would  never  separate  '  till  the
constitution  of  the  kingdom  and  the  regeneration  of  public
oi'der  were  established  on  a  solid  basis.'  The  oath  was  proposed
by  no  less  a  man  than  Mounier,  and  Bailly  claimed  his  privilege
as  president  to  be  the  first  to  take  it.  One  single  member,
Martin  d'Auche,  refused  his  assent.

The  Third  Estate  had  thus  virtually  assumed  the  sole  legisla-
tive authority  in  France,  and  like  the  Long  Parliament  in  England
had  denied  the  King's  power  to  dissolve  them.  The  public
excitement  had  reached  fever  point,  and  in  the  council  of  the
King  there  were  grave  divisions.  A  powerful  section  accused
Necker  of  ruining  the  cause  of  the  King  and  of  the  privileged
orders,  and  there  was  a  widely  spread  impression  that  he  did
not  possess  the  qualities  of  command  and  decision  needed  for
the  occasion.  This  impression  was  probabl}^  a  just  one,  but  it
is  not  clear  that  the  King  had  any  servant  who  was  more  fit  to
meet  the  emergency ;  and  the  difficulties  of  a  minister  with  a
divided  council,  and  in  a  moment  of  revolution,  are  alwaj^s
greater  than  either  contemporary  opinion  or  historical  judg-
ments are  inclined  to  recognise.  Owing  to  the  dissension  that
had  arisen,  the  royal  session  was  postponed  till  the  23rd,  but
on  the  preceding  day  the  National  Assembly  met  in  a  church,
and  its  session  was  a  very  important  one,  for  on  this  occasion  a
great  body  of  the  clergy  formally  joined  it.  One  hundred
and  forty-eight  members  of  the  clergy,  of  whom  one  hundred
and  thirty-four  were  cures,  had  now  given  their  adhesion.  Two
of  the  nobles,  separating  from  their  colleagues,  took  the  same
course.'

Next  day  the  royal  session  was  held.  The  project  adopted
in  the  council  differed  so  much  from  that  of  Necker,  that  this
'  Louis  r>lanc,  ii.  301.

438 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xx,

minister  refused  to  give  it  the  sanction  of  his  presence.  Instead
of  commanding  the  three  orders  to  deliberate  together  in  the
common  interest,  it  was  determined  in  the  revised  project  that
the  King  should  merely  invite  them  to  do  so.  The  King,  in
the  scheme  of  Necker,  while  reserving  to  himself  the  right  of
sanctioning  or  rejecting  any  changes  in  the  constitution  of
future  States-General,  left  the  examination  of  the  faults  in  the
existing  constitution  of  the  States-General  to  the  Assembly  of
the  Three  Orders,  with  a  declaration  that  he  would  refuse  his
consent  to  any  legislative  organisation  which  was  not  composed
of  at  least  two  chambers.  It  was  now,  however,  determined  to
withdraw  altogether  from  the  common  deliberation  '  the  form  of
the  constitution  to  be  given  to  the  coming  States-General,'  and
to  recognise  fully  the  essential  distinction  of  the  three  orders  as
political  bodies,  though  they  might,  with  the  approval  of  the
Sovereign,  deliberate  in  common.  Necker  had  proposed,  too,
that  the  King  should  decisively,  and  of  his  own  authority,
abolish  all  privileges  of  taxation,  but  in  the  amended  article  the
King  only  undertook  to  give  his  sanction  to  this  measure  on
condition  of  the  two  orders  renouncing  their  privileges.'  On
the  other  hand,  the  King  announced  to  the  Assembly  a  long
series  of  articles  of  reform  which  would  have  made  France  a
thoroughly  constitutional  country,  and  have  swept  away  nearly
all  the  great  abuses  in  its  government.  They  gave  the  States-
General  complete  control  of  the  purse,  abolished  absolutely
letters  of  '  cachet,'  the  taille  and  the  corvee,  established  liberty
of  the  press  and  very  complete  local  self-government,  and,  in  a
word,  reformed  almost  the  whole  administration  of  France.  He
recommended  these  reforms  to  the  three  orders,  but  declared
that  if  they  unfortunately  could  not  agree  to  effect  them,  he
would  endeavour  to  carry  them  out  himself.

I  have  already  quoted  the  remarkable  passage  in  which
Jefferson  has  recorded  his  judgment  of  the  proposed  constitu-
lion.  At  Hie  same  time,  while  divesting  himself  for  the  future
of  some  of  tlio  most  important  of  his  prerogatives,  the  King
endeavoured  to  secure  and  assert  for  himself  that  share  of  power
which  rightly  belongs  to  a  constitutional  sovereign.  He  annulled
the  proceedings  of  June  17,  by  which  the  Third  Estate  alone

' (Euvrcs  dc  Acclur,  ix.  182-188.

CH.  XX.  DEFEAT 01< THE  KING.  43!)

declared  itself  the  Legislature  of  France.  He  reminded  the
Assembly  that  none  of  its  proceedings  could  acquire  the  force  of
law  without  his  assent,  and  he  asserted  his  sole  right  as  French
Sovereign  to  the  command  of  the  army  and  police.  He  con-
cluded by  directing  the  three  orders  to  withdraw  and  to  meet
next  day  to  consider  his  proposals.

The  King,  with  the  nobles  and  the  majority  of  the  clergy,
at  once  withdrew,  but  the  Third  Order  defiantly  remained.  It
was  evident  that  the  attempt  to  conciliate,  and  the  attempt  to
assert  the  royal  authority,  had  both  failed.  The  Assembly  pro-
claimed itself  inviolable.  It  confirmed  the  decrees  which  tlie
King  had  annulled.  Sieyes  declared,  in  words  which  excited  a
transport  of  enthusiasm,  that  what  the  Assembly  was  yesterday
it  still  was  to-day ;  and  two  days  later,  the  triumph  of  the
Assembly  became  still  more  evident  by  the  adhesion  of  forty-
seven  of  the  nobility.  After  this  defection  the  King  saw  the
hopelessness  of  resistance,  and  on  the  27th  he  ordered  the
remainder  of  the  nobles  to  take  the  same  course.

It  was  becoming  evident  that  force  alone  must  decide  the
issue,  and  it  was  also  daily  becoming  more  evident  on  which
side  that  force  lay.  Arthur  Young,  it  is  true,  believed  that
almost  to  the  moment  of  the  catastrophe,  vigour  and  ability
might  have  turned  everything  to  the  side  of  the  Court ;  that
not  only  the  majority  of  the  nobles,  the  higher  clergy,  and  the
Parliaments,  but  also  the  soldiers  would  have  been  with  the
King ;  and  that  a  resolute  and  military  ruler  might  still  have
triumphed.'  But  the  feeble,  amiable,  and  most  pacific  Sove-
reign, whom  an  unhappy  fate  had  placed  on  the  throne  in  this
great  crisis  of  French  history,  had  none  of  the  qualities  that  were
needed  to  rally  the  forces  of  the  Crown ;  and  day  by  day  the
defection  of  the  troops  became  more  apparent.  '  The  ferment
at  Paris,'  writes  Young  on  June  24,  '  is  beyond  conception ;
10,000  people  have  been  all  this  day  in  the  Palais  Royal.  .  .  .  The
King's  propositions  are  received  with  universal  disgust.  .  .  .  The

'  Pinkerton, iv. 184. Even a  meritait  par  la  bonte  de  son coeur

year  later  Malouet  believed this  to  une  autre  destinee ; 11  y  a  tel  capi-

be  true. '  Le  Koi,'  he  says,  '  ne  pou-  taine  de  grenadiers,  qui  I'eut  sauve,

vait  se  resoudre  ^  tirer  I'epee  contra  lui  et  I'Etat,  s'il  I'avait  laisse  faire.' — •

ses  sujets. Je  m'arrete  -k  regret  sur  Mem.  de  Malouet,  i.  305,  306.
les  fautes  de  ce  prince  infortunc,  g^ui

440  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xx.

people  seem  with  a  sort  of  frenzy  to  reject  all  idea  of  com-
promise. .  .  .  The  constant  meetings  at  the  Palais  Royal,  which
are  carried  to  a  degree  of  licentiousness  and  fury  of  liberty  that
is  scarcely  credible,  united  with  the  innumerable  inflammatory
publications  that  have  been  hourly  appearing  since  the  assembly
of  the  States,  have  so  heated  the  people's  expectations,  and  given
them  the  idea  of  such  total  changes,  that  nothing  the  King  or
Court  could  do  would  now  satisfy  them.'  ^

In  the  mean  time  the  real  rulers  of  the  country  were  coming
rapidly  to  the  surface.  All  nations  are  in  truth  governed  by
aristocracies,  but  these  aristocracies  vary  greatly  in  their  cha-
racter. The  '  Club  Breton,'  which  soon  became  the  '  Club  des
Jacobins,'  was  already  formed  ;  and  an  aristocracy,  half  criminal,
half  fanatic,  consisting  of  groups  of  local  agitators  and  of  the
scum  of  the  Paris  mob,  began  to  overawe  the  representatives  of
the  nation,  and  to  direct  the  course  of  its  policy.  Troops  were
poured  into  Paris,  but  their  presence  was  an  excitement  with-
out being  a  protection,  for  day  after  day  it  became  more  evident
that  their  discipline  was  gone,  and  that  they  shared  the  sym-
pathies and  the  passions  of  the  mob.  They  had  caught  the  con-
tagion of  the  time,  and  the  revolutionary  party  had  two  most
powerful  instruments  for  acting  upon  them.  They  promised
to  throw  open  all  ranks  to  the  private,  and  they  also,  in  accor-
dance with  the  instructions  of  many  of  the  cahiers,  promised
an  increase  of  pay.  At  the  same  time  famine  grew  daily  more
intense,  and  the  mobs  more  passionate  and  more  formidable.
The  dismissal  of  Necker  on  the  evening  of  July  11  was  the
spark  which  produced  the  fconllagration  that  had  long  been  pre-
paring. Next  day  Paris  flew  to  arms.  The  troops  with  few
exceptions  abandoned  the  King ;  and  when,  with  scarcely  any
serious  resistance,  the  Bastille  was  captured  on  the  14th,  and
the  head  of  its  murdered  governor  carried  by  a  triumphant  pro-
cession through  the  streets,  the  Revolution  may  be  said  to  have
definitely  triumphed.  Power  had  now  passed  both  from  the
King  and  from  the  Assembly  into  the  hands  of  the  mob.  As
was  truly  said,  it  was  not  a  revolt,  but  a  revolution ;  not  a
rliange  of  government,  but  a  dissolution  of  all  government;  and
Prance  began  that  terrible  cai'eer  of  anarchy  which  was  only
'  rinkcrLon,  iv.  180,  181.

cit.  XX.  HISTOniC FATALISM.  441

coTiipletely  termiuatecl  by  the  wars  and  tlie  despotism  of  Napo-
leon. For  the  next  few  years  she  lay  among  the  great  Powers
of  Europe  a  portent  and  a  wonder ;  cut  away  from  all  her
ancient  moorings,  drifting  without  a  compass  or  a  helmsman,
like  some  exploding  fireship,  scattering  terror  and  desolation
along  her  path.

There  has  been  in  the  present  generation  a  strong  reaction
against  the  old  habit  of  treating  history  merely  as  a  series  of
biographical  studies,  and  military  incidents  and  pictures,  and  it
has  become  the  special  delight  of  historians  to  trace  through  a
remote  past  the  causes  that  have  prepared  and  produced  great
changes.  It  is  possible,  however,  for  this  mode  of  writing  history
to  be  carried  too  far,  and  it  has  produced  a  school  of  historic
fatalists  who  appear  to  me  to  have  greatly  underrated  the  part
which  accident,  political  wisdom,  and  political  folly  have  borne
in  human  affairs.  To  me  at  least  it  appears,  from  the  facts  that
liave  been  related  in  this  chapter,  that  the  French  Revolution,
though  undoubtedly  prepared  by  causes  which  had  been  in
operation  for  centuries,  might,  till  within  a  very  few  years  of
the  catastrophe,  have  been  with  no  great  difficulty  averted.  A
profound  change  in  the  character  of  the  government  and  institu-
tions of  France  had  indeed  become  inevitable,  but  such  a  changH
need  not  have  been  a  revolution,  and  if  it  had  been  effected,  as
very  similar  changes  have  been  effected  in  other  countries,  with-
out the  subversion  of  the  monarchy  and  a  total  disorganisation
of  the  State,  its  influence  both  on  French  and  European  history
would  have  been  wholly  different.  In  spite  of  the  wars  and
debts  of  Lewis  XIV.,  in  spite  of  the  vices  and  incapacity  of  the
Regency  and  of  Lewis  XY.,  in  spite  of  much  class  selfishness
and  a  great  subversion  of  ancient  opinions,  the  position  of  the
French  monarchy  on  the  accession  of  Lewis  XVI.  was  far  from
desperate.  If  a  Henry  IV.  or  a  Frederick  the  Great  had  then
mounted  the  throne,  or  if  Lewis  XVI.  had  found  for  his  Minis-
ter a  Richelieu  or  a  Pitt,  a  Cavour  or  a  Bismarck,  France  would
never  have  drifted  into  anarchy.

The  chief  faults  that  made  the  situation  irremediable  may,
I  think,  be  easily  traced.  The  policy  of  Lewis  XV.  towards  his
Parliaments  was  of  the  kind  which  beyond  all  others  discredits

442  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUIIY.  ai.  sx.

and  weakens  governments.  Either  resistance  or  concession  if
consistently  and  skilfully  conducted  might  have  succeeded,  but
a  policy  of  alternate  resistance  and  concession,  of  bold  acts  of
authority  repeatedly  and  ignominiously  reversed,  could  have  no
other  effect  than  to  uproot  all  feeling  of  reverence  for  the  Crown.
The  same  weak  and  fluctuating  policy  was  pursued  under  much
more  critical  circumstances  by  Lewis  XVI.  The  restoration  of
the  Parliaments  by  that  Sovereign  appears  to  me  to  have  been
a  capital  mistake.  It  raised  up  without  necessity  an  opposition
to  the  Crown  of  the  most  dangerous  and  embarrassing  descrip-
tion ;  and  it  at  the  same  time  enormously  increased  the  diffi-
culty of  accomplishing  the  equalisation  of  taxation  and  the
commutation  of  the  feudal  system,  which  were  the  two  measures
most  absolutely  necessary  if  a  revolution  was  to  be  averted.
If  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  when  his  power  was  still  un-
contested and  when  his  popularity  was  at  its  height,  the  King
instead  of  restoring  the  Parliaments  had  summoned  the  States-
General  to  carry  these  measures,  or  if  without  summoning  the
States-General  he  had  decreed  them  by  his  own  royal  authority,
he  would  probably  have  succeeded.  But  the  propitious  moment
was  suffered  to  pass.  A  false  step  was  taken  which  produced
endless  embarrassments,  and  the  great  fault  of  the  American  War
soon  followed.  This  war  for  the  first  time  made  French  finances
irremediable.  It  inoculated  French  public  opinion  with  repub-
lican ideas,  and  it  produced  that  fatal  disorganisation  of  the
army  which  was  still  further  aggravated  by  the  decree  of  1781,
making  the  higher  ranks  a  strict  monopoly  of  the  nobles.  The
extravagance  of  Calonne  and  the  incapacity  of  Brienne  continued
the  work  of  ruin,  and  although  Lewis  XVI.  and  Necker  were
on  the  whole  greatly  superior  to  the  average  of  French  kings
and  ministers,  they  proved  totally  destitute  of  the  qualities  that
were  most  needed  in  the  crisis  of  a  revolution.  In  this  way
the  foundations  of  authority  were  completely  sapped.  Conces-
sions which  at  an  earlier  period  would  have  been  welcomed  with
ciilhusiasm,  only  whetted  the  appetite  for  change.  A  great
I'atnitie  occurring  at  a  time  of  great  political  excitement  im-
mensely strengthened  the  elements  of  disorder.  The  edifice  of
government  tottered  and  fell,  and  all  Europe  resounded  with  its
fall.

ENGLISH  AND  FEENCH  EIVALKY.  443

CHAPTER XXI.

In  tlie  remarkable  letter  written  in  1753,  in  wliicli  Lord
Chesterfield  described  the  signs  of  revolution  which  he  saw
already  gathering  in  France,  he  added,  '  I  am  glad  of  it ;  the
rest  of  Europe  will  be  quieter  and  have  time  to  recover.'  The
judgment  expressed  in  this  passage  was  very  generally  shared
by  English  statesmen  when  the  French  Revolution  actually
began.  It  was  believed  that  for  a  long  period  the  influence  of
France  would  be  withdrawn  from  European  politics,  and  that
this  withdrawal  was  certain  to  be  very  favourable  to  the  interests
both  of  England  and  of  peace.  With  the  exception  of  a  few
years  that  followed  the  accession  of  the  House  of  Hanover,
when  djmastic  and  Hanoverian  interests  conspired  to  bring  the
English  Government  into  close  connection  with  the  Government
of  France,  the  whole  course  of  foreign  policy  since  the  Revolu-
tion of  1688  had  been  one  continued  contest  against  French
power  and  ambition.  From  1689  to  the  Peace  of  Ryswick  in
1697,  and  from  1702  to  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  in  1713,  England
had  been  engaged  in  a  desperate  struggle  against  Lewis  XIV.
The  war  which  broke  out  in  1739  was,  it  is  true,  originally  a
Spanish  war,  produced  by  a  Spanish  trade  quarrel,  but  it  was
soon  merged  in  the  French  war  of  the  Austrian  Succession,  and
the  original  object  was  so  completely  forgotten  that  it  was  not
even  mentioned  in  the  Peace  of  Aix  la  Chapelle.  The  Seven
Years'  War,  which  terminated  in  the  glorious  peace  of  1763,  was
directed  against  French  influence  in  Germany ;  and  the  American
quarrel  only  became  really  formidable  when  France  threw  her
sword  into  the  scale  and  involved  England  in  a  great  European
and  Asiatic  struggle.  From  these  facts  it  was  naturally  inferred
that  England  was  likely  to  benefit  by  the  temporary  eclipse  of

444  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUItY.  en.  xxi.

her  rival ;  and  many  things  had  happened  since  France  had
entered  into  the  zone  of  revolution  which  appeared  to  justify  the
prediction.  In  the  autumn  of  1787  her  financial  and  other
internal  embarrassments  secured  the  success  of  the  Prussian
invasion  of  Holland,  and  enabled  England  and  Prussia  to  over-
throw the  French  ascendency  in  that  country.  In  the  summer
of  1788,  three  ambassadors  from  Tippoo  Sahib  arrived  in  Paris,
offering  the  French  great  commercial  privileges  if  they  would
support  that  chief  against  the  English,  as  they  had  supported
his  father,  Hyder  Ali,  and  would  send  3,000  men  to  his  assist-
ance. The  ambassadors  were  received  with  great  demonstra-
tions of  popular  enthusiasm,  but  the  condition  of  France  was  so
critical  that  the  Government  did  not  venture  to  assist  them,
and  England  was  enabled  to  carry  her  Indian  war  to  a  trium-
phant issue.'  In  1790,  the  threatened  war  between  England
and  Spain  on  account  of  Nootka  Sound  was  only  averted
because  France  was  unable  to  support  her  ally ;  and  during  the
whole  of  the  Eastern  war,  which  affected  so  deeply  the  interests
and  the  relative  power  of  Russia,  Turkey,  Austria,  Sweden  and
J'russia,  France,  contrary  to  all  previous  example,  remained
almost  absolutely  passive.^  As  we  have  already  seen,  the
English  Government  rejected  the  Prussian  project  of  inter-
ference with  the  revolt  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  on  the
ground  that  there  was  no  serious  danger  of  those  provinces
passing  under  the  influence  or  dominion  of  France,  as  recent
events  must  have  diverted  the  Flemish  noblesse  and  clergy  from
tlie  French  system,  and  as  '  the  present  apparent  and  increasing
weakness  and  distraction  of  that  country  must  prevent  any  body
of  men  from  looking  to  that  quarter  for  any  present  and  effec-
tual support.'  ^

Hostility  to  France,  and  especially  to  the  House  of  Bourbon,
liad  from  the  first  formation  of  the  great  English  parties  been  a
characteristic  sentiment  of  the  Whigs.  The  subservience  of  the
later  Stuarts  to  French  influence  had  been  one  of  the  great
grounds  for  grievance  against  them; and  the  Revolution  had

'  Soc  Mrm.  dp  Jifaloiirt,  i.  20fi.  efFoctunlly  from interforing in  any

'  On  July  2H,  17H9,  Kwart  wrofo  :  sliape in favour of the Imperial

'This Court, [I'russia] is porsiiadcd  Court.'

lli;it,  the  great  popular  revolut.if)n  in  *  Leeds  to  Ewart,  Ecb.  26,  17Ut>.

Ijauue will prevent tliat count ly

ai.  XXI,  ENGLISH AND FRENCH RIVALRY.  445

made  France  more  tlian  ever  a  natural  enemy.  It  was  said
that  a  French  king  had  once  asked  the  Abbe  Gaultier  the  dif-
ference between  a  Whig  and  a  Tory,  and  the  Abbe  had  answered,
that  the  Tories  were  the  French  King's  only  friends  in  England,
and  that  the  Whigs  were  all  his  enemies,  '  with  this  circum-
stance, that  it  is  possible  the  Tories  may  become  your  enemies,
but  impossible  the  Whigs  can  become  your  friends.'  ^  After
the  peace  of  1763,  it  had  indeed  been  noticed  that  there  had
been  a  considerable  tendency  to  approximation  between  the  two
nations.  A  writer  in  1767  observed  that  '  more  French  of  dis-
tinction had  visited  England  since  the  last  war  than  at  any
other  period  since  the  English  lost  their  great  possessions  iu
that  country,'  and  he  added  that  the  friendly  communication  of
knowledge  between  the  learned  of  all  countries,  even  in  time
of  war,  was  '  a  distinction  peculiar  to  the  present  age.'  ^
The  influence  of  English  thought  upon  French  literature  was
one  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  of  the  eighteenth  century;
and  although  French  literary  influence  was  much  less  aj)parent
in  England,  the  splendid  scientific  discoveries  of  Frenchmen
were  eagerly  welcomed.  But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the
popular  feeling  was  really  changed,  and  Pitt  had  seldom  shown
more  political  courage  than  when  he  introduced  his  commercial
treaty  with  France^  and  maintained  that  the  two  great  nations
which  confronted  each  other  across  the  Channel  were  intended
by  Nature  to  be  friends  and  not  enemies.  We  have  already
seen  with  what  vehemence  Fox  repudiated  the  assertion,  declar-
ing that  France  and  England  were  and  always  must  be  natural
enemies.

Before  the  capture  of  the  Bastille,  the  events  that  were
taking  place  in  France  appear  to  have  excited  only  a  rare
and  languid  interest  in  England. Parliamentary  government

'  Toland's  State  Anotoviy  of  Eng-  would willingly have waged per-

land. As  a  Radical  writer  says,  '  The  petual  war  with a nation  base  and

Whigs  of that day always beheld  abject  enough  to  hug  their  chains.'

France with an  invidious  eye,  and  Stephens'  Life  of  Home  Tooke,  i.  56.
rejoiced  at  her  humiliation  and  dis-  '^  Ann.  Reg.  1787,  p.  4. Horace

grace. Considering  the  example  of  Walpole  also  notices  that  great  num-

successful tyranny as contagious,  bors of French travellers visiteil

they  vowed  eternal  enmity  and  ever-  England, and some even Ireland,

lasting hatred against a king  who  after  the  peace. Mem.  of  Geo.  ITT.

kept  more  Ihan  twenty-iive  millions  iii.  107. See,  too,  his  letter  to  Mann,

of  his  subjfx'ts  in  slavery  ;  and  they  April  llO,  17()o.

446 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

carried  on  by  party  conflicts  has  many  merits,  but  it  greatly
narrows  the  horizon  of  political  knowledge  and  interests ;  for  the
constant  succession  of  domestic  questions  which  it  produces  is
quite  sufficient  to  absorb  the  amount  of  time  and  attention  that
ordinary  men  can  devote  to  public  affairs.  The  King's  illness,
and  the  Regency  question  that  grew  out  of  it,  fully  engrossed
the  popular  mind,  and  what  little  interest  was  felt  in  foreign
affairs  had  of  late  been  directed  much  more  to  St.  Petersburg
than  to  Paris.  The  only  question  relating  to  France,  which  at
this  time  came  before  the  public,  was  an  application  from  the
French  Government,  in  the  spring  of  1789,  for  permission  to
export  20,000  sacks  of  flour  from  England  to  the  northern
pro^ances  of  France,  which  were  suffering  severely  from  famine.
As  the  price  of  corn  in  England  was  higher  than  that  at
which  the  exportation  was  allowed  by  law,  the  French  request
could  not  be  granted  without  the  sanction  of  Parliament.
The  request  was  referred  to  a  committee,  and  apparently  care-
fully considered  on  its  merits,  and  it  was  finally  decided  that,  in
consequence  of  the  very  high  price  of  corn  in  England  and
the  very  bad  prospects  of  the  coming  harvest,  it  could  not
be  safely  granted.^

The  capture  of  the  Bastille,  however,  was  so  startling  and
so  dramatic,  that  it  at  once  excited  in  England  a  strong  and
general  interest,  which  the  events  that  followed  were  well  fitted
to  stimulate.  The  creation  of  a  great  national  army  indepen-
dent of  the  Crown ;  the  virtual  assumption  of  absolute  power
by  a  representative  body,  which  had  transformed  its  own  con-
stitution, placed  itself  above  the  instructions  of  its  constituents,
and  denied  the  King  the  right  of  dissolving  it;  the  strange
triumphal  procession  of  July  17,  when  the  King  was  carried
almost  a  captive  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville  and  compelled  to  assume
the  national  cockade ;  the  blazing  country  houses  and  the
innumerable  scenes  of  pillage  and  murder  that  accompanied
the  insurrection  of  the  country  people  against  their  feudal
lords ;  the  abolition  on  August  4  of  the  whole  feudal  system,
and  of  nearly  all  the  privileges  of  classes,  provinces,  and  towns ;
llie  decree  which  ordered  all  tithes  to  be  commuted  for  money,
fallowed  within  a  few  days  by  the  decree  which  abolished  thern
'  Pari.  Hist,  xxviii.  22C-230. Wilberforce's  Life,  i.  226-228.

CH.  XXI.  THE OCTOBER  DAYS.  447

without  compensation ;  and  finally,  tlie  promulgation  of  a
Declaration  of  Rights  of  the  most  abstract  and  far-reaching
character — all  indicated  the  complete  transformation  of  the
Government  of  France.  The  most  splendid  and  ancient
monarchy  of  Europe  was  virtually  overthrown.  The  Assembly
rejected  by  great  majorities  all  proposals  to  share  its  power
with  a  second  chamber,  and  it  denied  the  King  not  only  his
ancient  right  of  initiating  laws  and  of  dissolving  the  Assembly,
but  also  the  right  of  imposing  more  than  a  temporary  veto  on
its  proceedings.

Then  came  the  horrible  days  of  October  5  and  6,  when
Versailles  was  invaded  by  a  furious  and  famished  mob,  when
the  Queen  only  saved  her  life  by  flying  half-naked  from  her
room,  when  the  sentinels  and  several  gentlemen  of  the  Court
were  cut  down  and  murdered  in  the  palace,  and  when  at  last,
after  marvellous  escapes,  the  Royal  Family  were  conducted  as
prisoners  to  Paris  by  the  mob.  The  journey  lasted  for  six
hours,  and  in  the  course  of  it  muskets  were  more  than  once
levelled  at  the  royal  carriage.  In  front  were  borne,  transfixed
upon  pikes,  the  heads  of  two  gentlemen  of  the  Court.  The
disarmed  and  captive  body  guard  were  led  one  by  one.  Around
the  carriage  of  the  Royal  Family  the  mob  danced,  and  sang,  and
shouted,  '  All  bishops  to  the  lamp-post.'  On  the  arrival  of  the
procession  in  Paris,  it  was  met  by  Bailly  the  mayor,  who
described  the  scene  as  '  a  beautiful  day,'  while  in  the  Assembly
Mirabeau  declared  that  the  vessel  of  State,  instead  of  bein":
retarded  by  it,  would  only  advance  the  more  rapidly  towards
regeneration,  and  Barnave  replied  to  those  who  spoke  with
horror  of  the  murders,  by  asking  whether  the  blood  that  was
shed  was  indeed  so  pure.  From  this  time  the  King  of  France
was  a  helpless  prisoner  in  the  Tuileries,  with  scarcely  any  voice
or  power  in  the  government  of  France.

All  these  events  soon  had  their  influence  in  England,  Tlie
many  small  democratic  societies  which  had  arisen  during  the
Wilkes  troubles  and  during  the  American  War,  and  which  had
of  late  been  almost  dormant,  began  to  stir  again.  There  were
men  of  the  school  of  Cartwright  and  Jebb,  who  had  long  been
advocating,  amid  general  neglect,  parliamentary  reform  on
grounds  of  a  'priori  right,  and  who  now,  to  their  own  astonish-

448  ENGLAXD IN TIIK EIGHTEENTH CENTUIIY.  en.  xxr.

ment,  found  their  principles  triumphant  in  the  foremost  nation
of  the  Continent.  There  were  political  Dissenters  who  detested
the  Church  Establishment,  and  especially  the  system  of  tithes,
and  who  saw  with  unspeakable  delight  the  total  abolition  of
that  system  in  France.  The  principles  enunciated  in  the
Declaration  of  Eights  were  of  the  broadest  and  most  sweeping
character,  applicable  to  all  nations,  and  well  fitted  to  fascinate
unguided,  half-educated,  and  adventurous  enthusiasts ;  and  it
was  not  unpleasing  to  the  many  local  busybodies,  who  might  be
found  in  every  great  town,  putting  themselves  forward  as  repre-
sentatives of  the  people  and  trying  to  force  themselves  into
political  notoriety,  to  find  that  men  who  were  very  much  of
their  own  class  and  intellectual  calibre  were  practically  direct-
insr  the  Government  of  France.  The  unsuccessful  eSbrts  of  the
Dissenters  in  1787,  1789,  and  1790  to  obtain  a  repeal  of  the
Test  and  Corporation  Acts  had  given  a  new  energy  and  union
to  their  political  forces,  and  the  very  fact  that  the  events  in
France  were  already  beginning  to  throw  great  masses  of  men
into  violent  and  unreasonable  opposition  to  all  change  gave  a
corresponding  impulse  to  the  opposite  party.

A  few  men  of  station  and  ability  belonged  to  it.  Priestley
was  a  really  great  man  of  science,  and  though  his  works  on
other  subjects  have  little  value,  the  amazing  fertility  and  facility
of  his  pen  had  made  him  very  prominent,  and  he  was  a  bitter
enemy  of  the  Established  Church.  His  enthusiasm  for  the
Revolution  was  from  the  first  unbounded.  '  There  is  indeed,'
he  wrote  in  October,  '  a  glorious  prospect  for  mankind  before
us.  Flanders  seems  to  be  quite  ripe  for  a  similar  revolution ;
and  other  countries,  I  hope,  will  follow  in  due  time ;  and  when
civil  tyranny  is  all  at  an  end,  that  of  the  Church  will  soon  be
disposed  of.  .  .  .  Our  Court  and  courtiers  will  not  like  these
things,  and  the  bishops  least  of  all.' '  '  I  do  not  wonder,'  he
wrote  a  little  later,  '  at  the  hatred  and  dread  of  this  spirit  of
revolution  in  kings  and  courtiers.  Their  power  is  generally
usurpation,  and  I  hope  the  time  is  approaching  when  an  end
will  be  put  to  all  usurpation  in  things  civil  or  religious,  first
in  Europe  and  ilif-n  in  other  countries.''^  Dr.  Price,  who  had
a  still  groatf'r  weight  with  the  Nonconformists,  and  who  had
'  Rutl's  Zi/e  of  Pricdlry,  ii.  38.  ""  Ibid.  81.

CH.  XXI.  THE RF.VOLUTION SOCIETY.  449

obtained  a  considerable  political  importance  on  account  of  the
part  he  had  taken  in  the  American  contest,  and  on  account  of
the  popularity  of  his  financial  schemes,  threw  himself  passion-
ately into  the  same  side,  and  a  small  section  of  the  aristocracy
had  also  adopted  extreme  principles  of  democratic  reform.
Only  a  few  years  had  passed  since  the  Duke  of  Richmond
had  harang'ued  the  House  of  Lords  in  favour  of  universal
suffrage,  equal  electoral  districts,  and  annual  Parliaments.
Lord  Stanhope's  political  opinions  fell  little,  if  at  all,  short  of
republicanism,  and  there  was  a  strong  tinge  of  something  very
like  republicanism  in  no  less  a  person  than  Lord  Lansdowne.'
In  1793  Burke  wrote  to  the  Duke  of  Portland:  'It  is  truly
alarming  to  see  so  large  a  part  of  the  aristocratic  interest  en-
gaged in  the  cause  of  the  new  species  of  democracy.'  ^  A  few
years  later,  on  the  occasion  of  Fox's  birthday,  it  was  the  Duke
of  Norfolk,  the  head  of  the  English  aristocracy,  who  proposed
as  a  toast  '  The  health  of  our  Sovereign — the  Majesty  of  the
People.'

On  November  9,  1789,  a  not  very  important  body  of  ad-
vanced politicians  called  '  A  Society  for  Commemorating  the
Revolution  in  Great  Britain,'  or  more  shortly,  '  The  Revolution
Society,'  met  under  the  presidency  of  Lord  Stanhope  at  the
London  Tavern,  and  drew  up  an  address  of  congratulation  to
the  National  Assembly,  expressing  a  hope  that  'the  glorious
example  given  in  France'  might  'encourage  other  nations  to
assert  the  inalienable  rights  of  mankind,  and  thereby  introduce
a  general  reformation  into  the  Governments  of  Europe.'  It  was
on  this  occasion  that  Dr.  Price  preached  before  the  Society  the
famous  sermon  which  Burke  afterwards  made  the  text  of  his
'  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.'  It  was  an  enthusiastic
eulogy  of  all  that  had  taken  place  in  France.  The  preacher
declared  himself  ready  to  repeat  the  '  Nunc  Dimittis '  of  Simeon,
as  he  had  lived  to  see  thirty  millions  of  men  spurning  slavery ;
'  their  king  led  in  triumph,  and  an  arbitrary  monarch  surren-
dering himself  to  his  subjects,'  and  he  predicted  that  the
example  of  France  would  soon  destroy  the  dominion  both  of

'  See his very curious letler to  ''■  Letter  to  the  Dul^e  of  Portland,

Morellet about the Revolution, in  accompanying  the  '  Observations  on

Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shelhurne,  iii.  the  Conduct  of  the  Minority.'  Burke's

488-498.  Works,  vii.  220.

VOL.  V.  G  G

450  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xxi.

kings  and  of  priests,  aud  would  sweep  away  all  despotism  from
Europe.

These  proceedings  gradually  excited  a  large  share  of  public
attention.  The  National  Assembly  of  France  at  once  responded
by  a  warm  vote  of  thanks,  and  directed  the  Archbishop  of  Aix,
who  then  presided  over  it,  to  write  in  its  name  to  Lord  Stan-
hope, and  in  almost  every  considerable  town  in  France  pa-
triotic societies  took  the  same  course.  The  Revolution  Societ}^,
which  hitherto  had  been  very  little  known  in  England,  found
itself  suddenly  invested  with  an  extraordinary  importance,  and
treated  as  the  special  and  accredited  representative  of  the  Eng-
lish people.  It  printed  a  large  volume  of  its  con'espondenco
with  different  societies  in  France  ;  and  other  democratic  societies,
following  its  instigation  or  its  example,  began  to  spring  up  in
the  great  towns,  to  pass  resolutions  expressing  admiration  of
the  French  Revolution,  aud  to  send  complimentary  addresses
to  Paris.  '  The  press,'  wrote  one  of  the  principal  chroniclers
of  the  time,  '  teemed  with  the  most  daring  libels  upon  the  Con-
stitution of  this  country,  and  all  its  constituent  parts.  They
were  distributed  gratis,  and  circulated  with  astonishing  industry
not  only  amongst  the  lower  class  of  the  community,  but  through
the  army  and  the  navy.  In  these  writings,  the  people  were
invited  to  form  themselves  into  clubs  and  societies  after  the
manner  of  the  French ;  and  many  were  actually  formed  in  a
great  number  of  the  most  populous  towns  of  the  kingdom,
avowedly  affiliated  (to  use  an  expression  of  their  own)  by  the
democratic  clubs  in  France.' '  The  sermon  of  Price  was  pub-
lished, widely  distributed  and  translated  into  French.  Priestley
declared  that  it  '  moved  him  to  tears,'  and  he  predicted  that  it
would  have  as  great  an  effect  as  the  work  on  '  Civil  Liberty,'  by
wlii{;h  the  same  writer  had  so  powerfully  stirred  public  opinion
during  the  American  War.  The  Rev'olution  Society  resolved  to
celebrate  the  anniversaries  of  the  capture  of  the  Bastille,  and
at  the  first  anniversary  Price  made  a  speech  which  was  much
remarked.  '  Oh,  heavenly  philanthropists,'  he  exclaimed,  apo-
Htrophising  the  Revolutionists  in  France,  '  well  do  you  deserve
the  adniii-ati(jii  not  only  of  your  own  country,  but  of  all  coun-
tries! Vou  have  already  determined  to  renounce  for  ever  all
'  Animal  Ilvijidvr,  17'J0,  p.  05.

CH.  XXI.  HEALTHY CONDITION OF ENGLAND.  451

views  of  conquest  and  all  offensive  wars.  This  is  an  instance
of  wisdom  and  attention  to  human  rights  which  has  no  example.
But  you  will  do  more ;  you  will  invite  Great  Britain  to  join  you
in  this  determination,  and  to  enter  into  a  compact  with  you  for
promoting  peace  on  earth,  good  will  among  men.  .  ,  .  Thus
united,  the  two  kingdoms  will  be  omnipotent.  They  will  soon
draw  into  their  confederation  Holland  and  other  countries  on
this  side  of  the  globe,  and  the  United  States  of  America  on  the
other.' »

We  have  already  seen  that  in  the  debate  on  the  Unitarian
disabilities  Burke  had  brought  the  proceedings  of  the  Revolu-
tion Society  prominently  before  Parliament;  but  as  long  as  they
were  confined  to  mere  irresponsible  politicians  they  did  not
appear  deserving  of  much  serious  attention.  In  no  respect  is
the  sagacity  of  a  true  statesman  more  needed  or  more  displayed
than  in  distinguishing  between  the  strong,  permanent,  and  for
the  most  part  silent  currents  of  national  opinion,  and  the  noisy
and  frothy  imitations  which  small  knots  of  agitators  can  always
produce.  As  far  as  can  be  now  judged,  the  danger  of  England
being  seriously  affected  by  the  contagion  of  French  example
Avas  as  yet  very  small.  It  was  true,  indeed,  that  the  British
Constitution  in  nearly  all  its  parts  was  hopelessly  corrupt  if
measured  by  the  canons  of  Rousseau ;  but  the  philosophy  of
Rousseau  was  not  adapted  to  the  English  mind,  and  the  condi-
tions of  England  were  in  nearly  every  respect  the  extreme
opposite  of  those  of  France.  The  unpopularity  of  the  King,
which  had  been  very  great  during  the  ministry  of  Bute  and  dur-
ing part  of  the  American  War,  had  wholly  passed  away,  and  his
recent  illness  had  raised  the  spirit  of  loyalty  to  the  highest  point.
The  administration  of  public  affairs,  which  in  France  had  been  of
late  conducted  with  astonishing  weakness  and  astonishing  vacil-
lation,  was  in  England  in  the  hands  of  a  popular,  brilliant,  and
most  successful  statesman  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that
any  possible  change  in  the  suffrage  would  have  overthrown  or
even  seriously  weakened  his  power. The  approach  of  bank-

'  UntVs  Life  of  Priestlei/,  ii.  79,  80.  London  with  the  National  Assembly,

See,  too,  Morgan's  Life  of  Price,  pp.  and with rarious Societies  of the

161-163; and  a volume  (printed,  I  Friends  of Lihcrtij in France  and

believe,  privately)  called  The  Carre-  England, (London,  1792.)
spondcncc  of  the  Revolution  Society  in

a  o  2

452 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

ruptcy  was  one  main  cause  of  the  llevolution  in  France,  but
the  Ministry  of  Pitt  had  in  no  respect  been  more  distinguished
than  for  the  singular  skill  with  which  he  had  managed  the
national  finances.  There  was  in  England  no  genuine  republi-
canism, no  exemption  of  the  rich  from  taxation,  no  antagonism
between  the  law  courts  and  the  Government.  There  were  very
few  feudal  rights  which  were  seriously  oppressive,  and  although
there  was  a  great  aristocracy  and  an  established  Church,  with
many  privileges^  anomalies,  and  abuses,  there  was  little  or  nothing
of  that  profound  separation  of  classes  which  made  the  social  con-
dition of  France  so  dangerous.

Nor  were  the  intellectual  influences  in  the  two  countries
at  all  similar.  English  literature,  over  which  Dr.  Johnson
at  this  time  exercised  an  extraordinary  influence,  presented
a  strange  contrast  in  its  orthodox  and  conservative  tone  to
the  great  antichristian  literature  which  was  animated  by
the  spirit  of  Voltaire ;  and  the  political  philosophy  of  Hume,
Burke,  and  Adam  Smith  was  as  far  as  possible  removed
from  the  philosophy  of  Rousseau.  The  highly  conservative
Whiggism  of  Burke  and  the  highly  liberalised  Toryism  of
Pitt  seemed  equally  safe,  and  among  the  middle  and  lower
classes  the  Methodist  and  Evangelical  movement  was  now  at  its
height,  and  was  drawing  the  strongest  enthusiasm  in  directions
wholly  remote  from  politics  and  from  French  ideas.  In  Eng-
land it  is  true,  as  in  France,  there  was  at  this  time  a  series  of
bad  harvests  which  produced  much  distress  and  much  political
discontent,  but  distress  in  England  fell  far  short  of  famine.
The  general  level  of  well-being  was  very  high,  and  the  recent
developments  in  manufacturing  industry  had  opened  out  great
fields  of  employment  and  prosperity.  When  we  add  to  this  the
insular  and  unspeculative  habits  of  the  English  mind,  the  large
measure  of  political  experience  that  pervaded  all  classes,  and  the
•strong  English  distrust  for  evei'ything  French,  it  appeared  very
iinprobablo  that  the  French  Revolution  should  have  a  dangerous
influence  in  England.  The  Bastille  had  no  doubt  gathered
around  it  so  many  enormously  exaggerated  associations  of  op-
pression and  cruelty  '  that  its  destruction  produced  much  genuine

'  VVlion  tlif!  ]>;islill(!  was  taken,  it sonors,  lour  of  wliom  wcro  accused  of
WUb found  tucoiituiii  diil}' .seven  pri- foiyci-}';  uue  wii.suii  iiliul.and  one  was

nt.  XXI. LETTP^RS  OF  FOX  AND  EURKE,  453

enthusiasm.  Cowper  as  early  as  1785  had  predicted  tlie  exulta-
tion which  its  downtall  would  produce';  Dr.  Darwin  praised
French  insurrection  in  rapturous  strains,  and  the  early  enthu-
siasm of  Wordsworth,  Coleridge,  and  Southey  represented  a
feeling  which  was  widely  spread,  but  there  was  a  deep  chasui
between  such  a  feeling  and  any  wish  or  design  to  subvert  the
ancient  Constitution  of  England.

Much,  however,  depended  on  the  wisdom  and  discretion  of
the  party  leaders,  and  while  Pitt,  at  first  at  least,  maintained  a
studied  reticence,  the  French  Revolution  soon  led  to  a  complete
schism  among  the  Whigs.

We  are  fortunately  able,  from  private  letters  which  are  pre-
served, to  trace  from  the  very  beginning  the  impression  which
the  events  in  Paris  made  both  on  Fox  and  Burke.  A  curious
note  is  extant,  written  by  Fox  a  few  days  after  the  arrival  of
the  news  of  the  capture  of  the  Bastille,  to  Fitzpatrick,  who  was
about  to  go  to  Paris.  Referring  apparently  to  the  recent  ca])-
ture.  Fox  writes,  '  How  much  the  greatest  event  it  is  that  ever
happened  in  the  world  !  and  how  much  the  best ! '  He  sends
his  warm  compliments  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  who  was  in  violent
opposition  to  the  Court,  and  concludes,  '  Tell  him  and  Lauzun
that  all  my  prepossessions  against  French  connections  for  this
country  will  be  at  an  end,  and  indeed  most  part  of  my  European
S3^stem  of  politics  will  be  altered  if  this  Revolution  has  the  con-
sequences that  I  expect.'  '^

A  few  daj'^s  after  this  letter,  Burke  wrote  to  Lord  Charlemont,
'  Our  thoughts  of  everything  at  home  are  suspended  by  our
astonishment  at  the  wonderful  spectacle  which  is  exhibited  in
a  neighbouring  and  rival  country.  What  spectators  and  what
actors  !  England  gazing  with  astonishment  at  a  French  struggle
for  liberty,  and  not  knowing  whether  to  blame  or  applaud.  The
thing,  indeed,  though  I  thought  1  saw  -something  like  it  in  pro-
gress for  several  years,  has  still  somewhat  in  it  paradoxical  and
mysterious.  The  spirit  it  is  impossible  not  to  admire  ;  but  the
old  Parisian  ferocity  has  broken  out  in  a  shocking  manner. It

detained  at  the  reqiiest  of  his  family.  three  centuries. Mallet  du  Pan,  .1/cr-

Tame,  Anch'ii.  Bi'f/imc,  p.  ii^7.  Accord-  cure  Britaii)iiqve,\\\.  'Jl.'i.

ing  to  the  registers  which  were  pub-  '  Tlw  Taxk,  Book  v.

lished  in  ITSSt,  ?M\  persons  had  been  "  Fox's Correspond rnrr, ii. ?>C\.

confined  in  this  prison  in  the  space  of  This  was  written  July  ;>0,  1 7Si).

454  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xxi.

is  true  that  this  may  be  no  more  than  a  sudden  explosion  ;  if  so,
no  indication  can  be  taken  from  it;  but  if  it  should  be  character
rather  than  accident,  then  that  people  are  not  fit  for  liberty,  and
must  have  a  strong  hand  like  that  of  their  former  masters  to
coerce  them.  Men  must  have  a  certain  fund  of  natural  modera-
tion to  qualify  them  for  freedom,  else  it  becomes  noxious  to
themselves  and  a  perfect  nuisance  to  everybody  else.  What  will
be  the  event  it  is  hard,  I  think,  still  to  say.' '

The  doubts  that  were  expressed  in  this  characteristic  letter
deepened  rapidly  in  the  mind  of  Burke.  He  had  long  paid
much  attention  to  the  affairs  of  France  and  had  several  corre-
spondents in  that  country,  and  to  one  of  them  towards  the  end
of  September  he  expressed  his  antipathy  to  the  Revolution  in  no
ambiguous  terms.  The  freedom  at  which  the  French  were  aiming,
he  maintained,  was  a  spurious  freedom.  True  freedom  is  '  that
state  of  things  in  which  the  liberty  of  no  man  and  no  body  of
men  is  in  a  condition  to  trespass  on  the  liberty  of  any  person  or
any  description  of  persons  in  society.'  '  When  I  shall  learn  that
in  France  the  citizen,  by  whatever  description  he  is  qualified,  is
in  a  perfect  state  of  legal  security  with  regard  to  his  life,  to  his
property,  to  the  uncontrolled  disposal  of  his  person,  to  the  free
use  of  his  industry,  and  his  faculties  ;  that  he  is  protected  in  the
beneficial  enjoyment  of  the  estates  to  which,  by  the  course  of
settled  law,  he  was  born,  or  is  provided  with  a  fair  compensa-
tion for  them  ;  that  he  is  maintained  in  the  full  fruition  of  the
advantages  belonging  to  the  state  and  condition  of  life  in  which
he  had  lawfully  engaged  himself,  or  is  supplied  with  an  equit-
able equivalent ;  when  I  am  assured  that  a  simple  citizen  may
decently  express  his  sentiments  upon  public  affairs  without
hazard  to  his  life  or  liberty,  even  though  against  a  predominant
and  fashionable  opinion  ;  when  I  know  all  tliis  of  France,  I
t^hall  be  as  well  pleased  as  any  one  must  be  who  has  not  forgot
the  general  communion  of  mankind  ...  in  local  and  accidental
t^ympathics.'

It  was  evident,  however,  to  liim  that  France  was  advancing  to

no  such  i(l<'al. lie  predicted  that  'the  same  ferocious  deliglit

in  iniii-.Irr  nnd  the  same  Savage  cruelty  '  which  had  been  already

displayed  woiiUl  .'ipi)ear  again,  and  he  ridiculed  the  importance

«  Prior's  Life  oj  Burke  (2nd  ed.)  ii.  41,  42.

en.  xxT.  FOX'S  SPEECH, EKnUUARY 5,  179f>.  4.5')

that  was  attached  in  France  to  the  capture  of  the  Bastille.
'  As  a  prison  it  was  of  little  importance.  Give  despotism,  and
the  prisons  of  despotism  will  not  be  wanting,  any  more  than
lamp  irons  will  be  wanting  to  democratic  fury.'  In  his  judgment
the  new  system  in  France  was  '  a  most  bungling  and  unwork-
manlike performance,'  and  the  members  of  the  National  Assem-
bly had  constructed  little,  though  they  had  destroyed  much,  and
among  other  things,  '  completely  broken  up  their  country  as  a
State.'  The  '  Coutrat  Social '  he  considered  the  work  of  an  elo-
quent madman,  '  a  performance  of  little  or  no  merit.'  '  Little
(lid  I  conceive,'  he  said,  '  that  it  could  ever  make  revolutions
and  give  law  to  nations.  But  so  it  is.  I  see  some  people  here  are
willing  that  we  should  become  their  scholars  too,  and  reform  our
State  on  the  French  model.' '

Considering  the  vehement  characters  of  the  two  men,  it  was
scarcely  likely  that  these  grave  differences  should  be  suppressed
in  public,  and  the  first  provocation  was  given  by  Fox.  In  a
speech  on  the  army  estimates  on  February  5,  1790,  he  argued
in  favour  of  a  reduction  of  the  army,  partly  on  the  ground  that
the  new  form  of  government  which  had  arisen  in  France  was
likely  to  make  her  a  better  neighbour  than  she  had  been,  and
one  passage  of  his  speech  was  universally  understood  as  a  eulogy
of  the  conduct  of  the  French  army  in  taking  part,  during  the
insurrection,  with  the  people  against  the  Crown.  '  If  there  ever
could  be  a  period,'  he  said,  '  in  which  he  should  be  less  jealous
of  an  increase  of  the  army  from  any  danger  to  be  apprehended
to  the  Constitution,  the  present  was  that  precise  period.  The
example  of  a  neighbouring  nation  had  proved  that  former  impu-
tations on  armies  were  unfounded  calumnies,  and  it  was  now
universally  known  throughout  all  Europe  that  a  man  by  becom-
ing a  soldier  did  not  cease  to  be  a  citizen.'  ^

It  would  be  difficult  for  a  responsible  statesman  to  speak
more  mischievously,  and,  as  a  member  who  was  an  officer  in  the
army  justly  remarked,  Fox  would  have  found  a  much  more  sub-
stantial ground  for  panegyric  in  the  conduct  of  the  English  army
when  the  G-^rdon  riots  in  1780  had  threatened  for  a  time  to  re-
duce London  to  ruin.  Little  more  was  said  on  this  occasion,
but  on  the  9th  the  debate  was  resumed,  and  it  took  more  for-
'  Prior'.s  Burlir,\\.  4i>-50.  -  Pari.  ITlst.  xi'viii.  '.VM\.

456  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CEN'TURY. cii.  xxt.

midable  proportions.  Pitt  again  dwelt  on  the  necessity  of  keep-
ing up  the  army  at  its  present  level,  and  he  alluded  to  the
French  question  in  terms  which  were  both  generous  and  dis-
creet, France,  he  said,  was  now  passing  through  a  period  of
convulsion  and  of  trial,  and  was  temporarily  Avrecked,  but
sooner  or  later  the  crisis  must  terminate  in  regular  order.  The
period  seemed  to  him  distant,  but  if  the  result,  as  he  hoped,  was
the  establishment  of  that  freedom  which  results  from  order  and
good  government,  France  would  at  once  become  one  of  the
most  brilliant  Powers  in  Europe.  She  would  become  more
formidable  than  she  ever  had  been,  but  also,  he  hoped,  less  ob-
noxious as  a  neighbour,  and  for  his  part  he  refused  to  '  regard
with  envious  eyes  an  approximation  in  neighbouring  States  to
those  sentiments  which  were  the  characteristic  features  of  every
British  subject.'

Burke  then  arose  and  made  a  most  elaborate  speech.  He
spoke  ostensibly  on  the  side  of  Fox  and  in  opposition  to  Pitt,
for  he  argued  in  favour  of  a  reduction  of  the  military  expendi-
ture, but  the  main  portion  of  his  speech  was  devoted  to  a
consideration  of  the  events  that  had  taken  place  in  France.  A
large  army  in  England  he  thought  unnecessary,  for  he  could  not
find  that  England  was  in  the  smallest  danger  from  any  State  in
Europe.  '  France  had  hitherto  been  our  first  object  in  all  con-
siderations concerning  the  balance  of  power.  The  presence  or
absence  of  France  totally  varied  every  sort  of  speculation  relative
to  that  balance.  France  is  at  this  time  in  a  political  light  to  be
considered  as  expunged  out  of  the  system  of  Europe.  Whether
Khe  could  ever  appear  in  it  again  as  a  leading  Power  was  not
easy  to  determine ;  but  at  present  he.  considered  France  as  not
politically  existing,  and  most  assuredly  it  would  take  up  much
time  to  restore  her  to  her  former  active  existence.  "  Gallos
(juoque  in  bellis  floruisse  audivimus"  might  possibly  be  the
language  of  the  rising  generation.  .  .  .  The  French  had  shown
themselves  the  ablest  architects  of  ruin  that  had  hitherto  existed
in  the  world.  In  the  short  space  of  time  since  the  House  had
been  prorogued  in  the  summer,  they  had  completely  puU'^d
down  to  the  ground  tlieir  monarcliy,  their  Church,  their  nobility,
their  law,  their  revenue,  their  army,  then-  navy,  their  commerce,
their  arts,  and  their  manufactures. They  had  done  their  busi-

ar.  XXI.  BURKE'S SPEECH,  FEBEUARY 9, 1790.  457

ness  for  us  as  rivals,  in  a  way  which  twenty  Uamillies  or  Blen-
heims could  never  have  done  it.' '

But  if  France  was  no  Ioniser  dang'erous  from  her  power,  it  did
not  follow,  in  the  judgment  of  Burke,  that  she  was  not  dangerous
from  her  example.  France  had  always,  he  said,  exercised  to  an  ex-
traordinary degree  an  attractive  influence  on  surrounding  States.
He  described  vividly  the  system  of  splendid  military  despotism
established  by  Lewis  XIV,, and  how,in  consequence  of  itsexample,
'  the  same  character  of  despotism  insinuated  itself  into  every  Court
in  Europe ;  the  same  spirit  of  disproportioned  magnificence ;  the
same  love  of  standing  armies  above  the  ability  of  the  people.'
In  England  the  attractive  influence  of  France  gave  a  fatal  bias
to  the  Government  of  the  Stuarts ;  it  affected  in  some  degree
all  ranks  of  the  people,  and  in  consequence  it  became  a  main
object  of  English  patriots  of  the  seventeenth  century  '  to  break
oft"  all  communication  with  France,  and  to  beget  a  total  aliena-
tion from  its  councils  and  examples,'  which,  through  the  religious
animosities  that  divided  the  nations,  they  were  able  in  some
degree  to  effect.  '  This  day  the  evil  is  totally  changed  iii
France,  but  there  is  an  evil  there  .  .  .  and  the  natural  mental
habits  of  mankind  are  such  that  the  present  distemper  is  far
more  likely  to  be  contagious  than  the  old  one ;  for  it  is  not  quite
easy  to  spread  a  passion  for  servitude  among  the  people,  but
in  all  evils  of  the  opposite  kind  our  natural  inclinations  are
flattered.  .  .  .  Our  present  danger  from  the  example  of  a
people  whose  character  knows  no  medium  is,  with  regard  to
Government,  a  danger  from  anarchy — a  danger  of  being  led,
through  an  admiration  of  successful  fraud  and  violence,  to
the  excesses  of  a  .  .  .  proscribing,  plundering,  ferocious,  and
tyrannical  democracy.  On  the  side  of  religion,  the  danger  is
no  longer  from  intolerance,  but  from  atheism.'

He  then  proceeded  to  advert  to  the  recent  speech  of  Fox. In

his  own  opinion,  he  said, '  the  very  worst  part  of  the  example  set

'  It is  curious  to  compare  these  kingdom  will  be  cast  into  a  congeries

very  erroneous  predictions  with  the  of little democracies, laid out not

judgment  formed  about  the  same  time  according  to  the  rivers, monntains,

in  Paris  by  Gouverneur  Morris. Writ-  &c.,  but  with  the  square  and  compass,

ing  to  Washington  (Jan.  24,  1790)  he  . . . Their Assemblee Nationalo

says, 'It is very diliicult to  guess  will  be  something  like  the  old  Con -

whereaboiits the flock will settle  gress,  and the  King  will be called

wlien  it  flies  so  wild ;  but  as  far  as  it  is  E.KecutiveJlagistrate.'  Morris's  Wor/cs,

possible  to  guess  at  present,  this  (late)  ii.  91.

458  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cn.  xxi.

is  in  tlie  late  assumption  of  citizenship  by  the  army.'  It  was
with  '  inexpressible  pain '  that  he  heard  Fox,  whom  of  all  living
})oliticians  he  most  venerated  and  loved,  drop  some  expressions
eulogising  the  conduct  of  the  French  army.  He  attributed  his
language  wholly  to  a  '  zeal  for  the  best  of  all  causes — liberty,'
and  he  digressed  into  a  very  eloquent  eulogy  of  his  character
and  services.  If  he  came  forward  to  mark  '  an  expression  or
two  of  his  best  friend,'  it  was  on  account  of  his  anxiety  '  to  keep
the  distemper  of  France  from  the  least  countenance  in  England,
where  he  was  sure  some  wicked  persons  had  shown  a  strong
disposition  to  recommend  an  imitation  of  the  French  spirit  of
reform  ...  a  spirit  well  calculated  to  overturn  States,  but
perfectly  unfit  to  amend  them.'  That  he  was  himself  no  enemy
to  reformation  the  whole  of  his  parliamentary  career  abundantly
showed,  but  he  protested  against  those  who  gloried  in  making  a
revolution,  as  though  revolutions  were  good  things  in  themselves,
and  he  declared  that  '  everything  which  unnecessarily  tore  to
pieces  the  contexture  of  the  State,  not  only  prevented  all  real
reformation,  but  introduced  evils '  of  the  gravest  kind.  '  The
French  have  made  their  way,  through  the  destruction  of  their
country,  to  a  bad  constitution.  .  .  .  They  have  destroyed  all
the  balances  and  counterpoises  which  serve  to  fix  the  State  and
give  it  a  steady  direction,  and  which  furnish  sure  correctives  to
any  violent  spirit  which  may  prevail  in  any  of  the  orders.  .  .  .
^rii(y  have,  with  the  most  atrocious  perfidy  and  breach  of  faith,
laid  the  axe  to  the  root  of  all  property,  and  consequently  of  all
national  prosperity,  by  the  principles  they  established  and  the
example  they  set,  in  confiscating  all  the  possessions  of  the
Church,'  and  they  have  justified  tlieir  proceedings  by  '  a  sort  of
digest  of  anarchy,  called  the  Rights  of  Man,'  which  was  well
fitted  to  destroy  every  hold  of  authority  by  opinion,  religious  or
civil,  on  tlie  minds  of  the  people.

Having  dilated  at  considerable  length  on  this  theme,  and
especially  on  the  ruinous  consequences  of  emancipating  the
army  from  the  obligations  of  discipline  and  obedience,  Burke
])r()cef'(lfHl,  by  arguments  which  were  more  fully  developed  in  his
l;ilcr  wrilingH,  to  show  the  great  differences  between  tlio  Frencli
devolution  and  the  ]*]ngli.sh  llevolntion  of  1G8S;  and  he  con-
c-!ii(l(i|  ;l  viiy  eloquent  spcccli  by  declaring,  that  ("or  his  part  ho

CH.  XXI.  CLOSE OF THE  DEBATE.  4.39

wished  few  alterations  in  the  English  Constitution,  '  happy  if  he
left  it  not  the  worse  for  any  share  he  had  taken  in  its  service.'

It  was  a  strange  speech  to  have  been  made  upon  the  army
estimates,  but  it  foreshadowed  clearly  the  whole  course  of  Burke's
French  policy,  and  the  approaching  and  inevitable  disruption  of
the  Whig  party.  Fox  answered  in  a  strain  of  the  higl;est
personal  respect.  If  he  put,  he  said,  into  one  scale  all  the
political  information  he  had  derived  from  books,  from  science,
from  knowledge  of  the  world  and  its  affairs,  and  in  the  other
the  impi'ovement  which  he  had  derived  from  Burke's  instruction
and  conversation,  he  would  find  it  difl&cult  to  decide  which
scale  preponderated.  He  declared  himself  equally  the  enemy  of
all  absolute  forms  of  government,  whether  they  were  monarchies,
aristocracies,  or  democracies ;  and  he  deplored  the  recent  blood-
shed and  cruelty  in  France,  while  ascribing  these  evils  mainly  to
the  tyranny  of  the  old  monarchy.  At  the  same  time,  he  reite-
rated his  eulogy  of  the  conduct  of  the  French  soldiers,  and  his
gratification  at  the  events  in  France ;  and  he  maintained  that
there  was  a  closer  parallel  than  Burke  admitted  between  the
French  Revolution  and  the  English  Revolution  of  1688.  Sheri-
dan, apparently  nettled  by  some  observations  of  Burke,  greatly
aggravated  the  situation  by  a  speech  in  which  he  praised  the
French  Revolution  almost  without  reserve,  and  dilated  with
some  acrimony  on  the  inconsistency  of  Burke.  Pitt  in  a  short
speech  warmly  praised  Burke,  and  expressed  a  general  agree-
ment with  his  views.  ^

As  is  always  the  case,  many  personal  motives  were  attributed
to  the  principal  actors  in  the  drama.  Fox,  who  during  the
Regency  question  had  found  himself  in  a  great  measure  dis-
placed by  Pitt  as  the  representative  of  popular  opinions,  was
now  accused  of  endeavouring  to  revive  a  waning  popularity  by
appealing  to  strong  democratic  passions,  while  accusations  of  a
corresponding  character  were  more  persistently  urged  against
Burke.  It  was  noticed  that  for  the  last  three  years  his  confi-
dential intercourse  with  Fox  had  greatly  diminished ;  that  he
was  known  to  be  dissatisfied  with  the  manner  in  which  Fox  had
conducted  the  Regency  question ; that  he  was  much  alienated

'  Pari. Bist. xxviii. 337-374. this  debate  in  Lady  Minto's  Life  of
There is  an  interesting  account of Sir  G.  Ellwt,  i.  349-354.

460  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  kkt.

from  Sheridan,  wliose  character  he  disliked,  and  wlio,  through
his  personal  intimacy  with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  had  recently
acquired  a  new  prominence  in  the  party. ^  It  was  said,  too,
that  Burke  was  profoundly  disappointed  and  acidulated  by  the*
extreme  unpopularity  he  had  incurred  both  within  and  without
the  House  ;  tired  of  long  and  fruitless  opposition  in  company  with
men  who  were  growing  less  and  less  congenial  to  him ;  over-
whelmed with  pecuniary  embarrassments  from  which  there
seemed  no  outlet  in  opposition.  How  far  considerations  of  this
kind  may  have  given  any  bias  to  the  judgments  of  the  two
statesmen  it  is  impossible  to  say  ;  but  no  one,  I  think,  who  Ikis
studied  their  private  letters,  no  one  who  has  really  gauged  their
characters,  will  doubt  the  sincerity  or  the  energy  of  their  con-
victions. The  attitude  of  Fox  on  the  French  question  was  per-
fectly in  harmony  with  the  passionate  and  unqualified  partisan-
ship with  which  he  had  espoused  the  cause  of  the  American
Revolutionists;  and  all  that  I  have  written  on  the  character  and
opinions  of  Burke  has  been  written  to  no  effect,  if  it  has  left  any
doubt  in  the  minds  of  my  readers  that  his  later  opinions  were
the  natural,  if  not  the  legitimate,  outcome  of  his  earlier  ones.
The  opinions  he  had  invariably  urged  on  the  subject  of  parlia-
mentary refomi  and  triennial  or  annual  parliaments ;  his  abhor-
rence of  the  Bill  of  Rights  Men,  and  of  all  those  democratic
societies  which  had  been  for  some  years  advocating  in  England
political  theories  closely  resembling  those  of  Rousseau ;  his
repudiation  of  the  authority  of  instructions  by  constituents  in
elections ;  the  strongly  aristocratic  spirit  that  from  first  to  last
coloured  his  politics ;  the  emphasis  with  which  he  always  dwelt
on  the  necessity  of  counterpoises,  balances,  and  limitations  in
government;  on  the  political  value  of  habit,  ti-adition,  and
unbroken  continuity  in  institutions ;  on  the  danger  of  framing
political  measures  by  abstract  reasoning,  and  of  carrying  a
K])iritof  tlicory,  experiment,  and  Utopia  into  practical  politics —
■•ill  iiidicaled  a  nature  oi'ganically  and  profoundly  conservative.
Tiie  very  anomalies  and  inconsistencies  of  constitutions  were
veneral)le  in  his  eyes,  if  they  had  been  harmonised  and  conse-
crated by  time ;  if  they  were  compromises  resulting  from  the
pressure  of  multiform  and  conllicting  interests;  mitigations  or
•  Sec  Trior's  Li/c  o/  J?urkc,  ii.  2;J,  21 70,  71,  7()-78.

CH.  XXI.  BUIIKFS GROWING INFLUENCE,  4G1

.'uliiptations  created  by,  and  suited  to  the  feelings,  habits,  and
necessities  of  society.^

The  kind  of  politics  which  discards  the  traditions  and  insti-
tutions of  the  past,  and  endeavours  to  build  up  government
anew  on  a  logical  and  symmetrical  plan  furnished  by  political
speculators,  was  beyond  all  others  abhorrent  to  his  mind,  and  it
was  this  kind  of  politics  which  was  now  in  the  ascendant  in
France,  and  which  was  countenanced  by  some  considerable  men
in  England.  Nor  was  the  moral  vehemence  with  which  he
threw  himself  into  the  contest  other  than  might  have  been
expected  from  him.  No  man  ever  possessed  to  a  higher  degree
some  of  the  noblest  qualities  of  a  judicial  intellect ;  but  no  man
was  ever  more  wanting  in  the  calmness,  the  coldness,  and  the
discrimination  of  the  judicial  temperament.  Acts  of  cruelty  and
oppression  appealed  to  his  imagination  with  an  ungovernable
force ;  and  in  the  impeachment  of  Hastings,  which  w^as  wholly
unconnected  with  party  interests,  he  showed  exactly  the  same
kind  and  measure  of  vehemence  as  in  his  speeches  and  writings
on  the  French  Revolution.

His  speech  on  February  9  had  an  immense  and  immediate
elTect.  During  the  debates  on  the  Regency  question,  his  ebulli-
tions of  extravagance  and  bad  taste  had  almost  deprived  him  of
the  ear  of  the  House,  and  he  often  spoke  amid  an  incessant
clamour  of  scornful  interruption.  But  it  was  impossible  to
mistake  the  deep  thrill  of  approbation  which  now  passed  through
all  parts  of  the  House,  and  the  speech  of  the  Minister,  which
contrasted  curiously  with  that  which  he  had  made  a  few  days
before,  showed  clearly  that  Pitt  shared  the  general  feeling.  Nor
was  the  impression  confined  to  Parliament.  It  was  evident  that
r)arke  had  expressed  the  unspoken  fears  of  great  sections  of  the
couununity.  '  The  ferment  and  alarm  are  universal,'  wrote  Dr.
Parr  soon  afterwards. '  All  the  papers  are  with  Burke,  even

'  I  have  quoted  in  former  volumes  perfection  of  our  political  mechanism
much  Irom  Burke  in  this  sense,  but  1  that  some  defect  in  it— something
may  add  a  characteristic  and  beautiful  that  stops  short  of  its  principle,  some-
passage  in  a  letter  to  a  French  gentle-  thing  that  controls,  that  mitigates,
man  written  in  1789.  '  There  is,  by  that  moderates  it — becomes  a  neces-
the  essential,  fundamental  constitu-  sary  corrective  to  the  evils  that  the
tionofthings.a  radical  infirmity  in  all  theoretic  perfection  would  produce.'
luunan  contrivances,  and  the  weak-  Lurke's  Corres^wndence,  iii.  117.
Bess  is  often  so  attached  to  the  verj'

4G2 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxt.

the  Foxite  papers  which  I  have  seen.  .  .  ,  He  is  uucorrupt,  I
know,  but  his  passions  are  quite  headstrong.' '

From  this  time  the  division  in  the  Whig  party  rapidly-
deepened.  Two  days  after  the  debate  that  has  been  described,
there  was  a  long  interview  at  Burlington  House  between  the
Duke  of  Portland,  Fox,  Burke,  Sheridan,  and  one  or  two  others,
hut  no  agreement  was  arrived  at.^  There  was,  however,  still  no
open  breach.  Sheridan  and  Burke,  though  profoundly  alienated,
met  at  the  tables  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  of  the  Duke  of
Portland.  In  the  beginning  of  March,  when  Fox  introduced
his  motion  for  the  repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,
Burke,  as  we  have  already  seen,  opposed  it,  on  the  ground  that
revolutionary  opinions  had  extended  widely  among  the  Dis-
senters, and  that  additional  political  power  should  never  be
given  to  those  who  were  likely  to  misuse  it ;  but  in  the  course
of  his  speech,  he  spoke  warmly  of  Fox,  and  answered  an  attack
which  Pitt  had  made  on  that  statesman,  and  a  few  weeks  later
Sheridan  spoke  in  terms  of  high  eulogy  of  Burke.^

Burke  was  in  the  mean  time  busily  engaged  in  throwing
into  a  matured  and  highly  elaborated  form  his  opinions  on
French  affairs,  and  in  November  1790  he  published  his  'Re-
flections on  the  French  Revolution,'  one  of  the  most  famous  and
valuable  books  of  the  eighteenth  century.  His  earlier  political
.vorks  had  been  pamphlets,  speeches,  or  letters,  relating  for  the
most  part  to  passing  and  not  very  important  questions,  and
they  would  now  be  as  little  read  as  the  speeches  of  Pitt  and
Fox,  if  it  were  not  for  the  skill  with  which  Burke  was  accus-
1  limed  to  interweave  in  transient  controversies  political  prin-
ciples and  observations  of  perennial  interest.  But  the  French
Revolution  was  a  subject  worthy  of  all  his  powers.  Ifc
uiitniMlly  opened  out  the  great  questions  of  the  foundations  of
political  authority,  the  o])ject  and  scope  of  government,  the
principles  which  underlie  the  English  Constitution  as  esta-
lilished  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  fundamental  rights  of
prcjperty,  tlie  place  which  corporations  and  especially  ecclesias-
tical establishments  occupy  in  the  political  system. Like  nearly

'  I'rior's  J/iJc.  of  JUirhe,  ii.  72,  7!». Sir  G.  Mllot,  i.  .'{r)l-3.')4.
"  C'linp.'in;  Moore's  Life  of  Shrri-  '■'  I'arL  Jlisl.  xxviii.  133,  694.

dan, ii. 107. L;i(ly  iMiiiiu's f.ifr of

en.  XXI.  BURKE ON THE  REVOLUTION.  403

all  Burke's  works,  his  work  '  On  the  French  Revolution '  is  un-
fortunate in  its  form.  It  is  a  long,  undivided,  and  ill-arranged
letter  to  a  member  of  the  French  Constituent  Assembly,  and
some  parts  of  it  are  much  less  valuable  than  the  rest ;  but  it  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  it  contains  pages  of  an  eloquence
which  has  never  in  any  language  been  surpassed,  and  that  no
other  English  book  affords  so  many  lessons  of  enduring  value  to
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  study  either  of  the  British  Con-
stitution or  of  the  general  principles  of  government.  Together
with  the  '  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs,'  which  is
its  supplement  and  its  defence,  it  should  be  read,  re-read,  and
thoroughly  mastered  by  everyone  who  desires  to  acquire  wide
and  deep  views  on  political  questions,  and  to  understand  the
best  English  political  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century.

It  is  not  a  book  to  which  adequate  justice  can  be  done  by  a
simple  abstract.  Much  of  its  charm  lies  in  the  numerous  de-
tached observations — the  fruit  of  the  lifelong  experience  of  the
most  profound  intellect  that  has  ever  been  devoted  in  England
to  political  questions — which  are  scattered  over  its  pages,  and
in  the  wonderful  power  and  beauty  with  which  the  writer  ex-
panded lines  of  argument  which  had  been  clearly  foreshadowed,
though  less  completely  developed,  in  his  earlier  works.  His
main  object  was  to  contrast  the  system  of  government  existing
in  England,  in  its  principles  and  its  genius,  with  that  which
had  now  obtained  an  ascendency  in  France.  Dr.  Price  had  re-
presented the  French  Revolution  as  ouly  a  more  perfect  repeti-
tion of  the  English  Revolution  of  1688,  and  he  maintained  that
Englishmen  had  then  asserted  their  undoubted  and  unlimited
right  to  elect  their  governors,  to  cashier  them  for  misconduct,
and  to  form  their  Government  for  themselves.  In  opposition
to  this  doctrine,  Burke  undertook  to  demonstrate  the  essen-
tially hereditary,  prescriptive,  and  traditional  character  of  Eng-
lish freedom.  He  argued  that  the  authors  of  the  English
Revolution,  when  they  were  compelled  to  deviate  from  the
strict  line  of  succession  to  the  throne,  justified  this  deviation
on  no  plea  of  the  rights  of  men,  and  on  no  vague  and  general
charge  of  misconduct,  but  solely  on  the  ground  that  the  sove-
reign had  committed  a  grave  and  manliest  breach  of  the  com-
pact by  which  he  held  his  crown ;  and  he  showed  how  carefully

4G4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

they  studied  in  their  legislation  and  public  declarations  to  pre-
serve unimpaired  the  hereditary  character  of  the  English  mon-
archy, to  maintain  the  continuity  of  English  institutions  and
traditions,  and  to  avoid  grafting  any  alien  or  republican  ele-
ment on  the  old  English  stock.  Developing  this  view,  he  pro-
ceeded to  show,  with  a  power  of  insight  and  an  amplitude  of
illustration  which  no  previous  writer  had  approached,  how  in-
stitutions, laws,  and  governments  only  acquire  their  maximum
of  usefulness  and  strength,  when  they  grow  organically  out  of
the  traditions  of  the  past,  and  form  around  themselves  an  ap-
propriate atmosphere  of  habits  and  affections ;  how  political
institutions  have  indirect,  remote,  and  often  unforeseen  effects
which  are  frequently  more  important  than  their  direct  results ;
how  good  governments  are  formed  by  a  slow  and  gradual  pro-
cess of  adaptation  and  compromise  extending  over  many  gene-
rations, and  not  by  either  violent  revolutions  or  political  specu-
lations.

To  the  steadiness  with  which  this  method  had  been  main-
tained in  English  history  he  mainly  attributed  the  permanence  of
English  freedom  and  prosperity.  '  Our  political  system,'  he
wrote,  '  is  placed  on  a  just  correspondence  and  symmetry  with
the  order  of  the  world  and  with  the  mode  of  existence  decreed
to  a  permanent  body  composed  of  transitory  parts,  wherein  by
the  disposition  of  a  stupendous  wisdom,  moulding  together  the
great  mysterious  incorporation  of  the  human  race,  the  whole  at
one  time  is  never  old  or  middle-aged  or  young,  but  in  a  condi-
tion of  unchangeable  constancy  moves  on  through  the  varied
tenor  of  perpetual  decay,  fall,  renovation,  and  progression.  Thus
])y  preserving  the  method  of  nature  in  the  conduct  of  the  State,
in  what  we  improve  we  are  never  wholly  new,  in  what  we  retain
we  are  never  wholly  obsolete,'  and  it  has  been  '  our  old  settled
maxim  never  entirely  nor  at  once  to  depart  from  antiquity.'
Old  local  institutions  and  bonds  of  union  should  be  carefully
preserved,  for  '  to  be  attached  to  the  subdivision,  to  love  the
little  platoon  we  belong  to  in  society,  is  the  first  principle  (the
germ  as  it  were)  of  public  affection.'  Hereditary  institutions  in
Hfldition  to  their  other  merits  have  the  great  virtue  of  strengthen-
iiiLT  ihose  tradition.'il  I'rclings,  habits,  and  o])iiiions  which  at
OMC(^  sii])|)oi't,  initig;ili',  ;iii(l  rcstr.'iiii  aul  hority  and  bind  together

CH.  XXI.  EURKE  ON  THE  REVOLUTION.  4G.5

successive  generations  in  one  organic  whole.  The  union  of
Church  and  State  gives  a  moral  consecration  to  the  acts  of  Go-
vernment, and  sustains  and  diffuses  a  sentiment  of  reverence  and
a  tone  of  manners  very  conducive  to  political  stability.  Even
prejudice  and  superstition,  which  were  the  special  enemies  of  the
new  school  of  writers,  have  their  place  in  the  political  system
and  will  not  be  despised  or  neglected  by  a  wise  statesman.

The  language  of  Burke  on  this  subject  is  curiously  cha-
racteristic :  '  It  has  been  the  misfortune  (not,  as  these  gentlemen
think  it,  the  glory)  of  this  age,  that  everything  is  to  be  discussed,
as  if  the  Constitution  of  our  country  were  to  be  always  a  subject
rather  of  altercation  than  enjoyment.'  '  To  avoid  the  evils  of
inconstancy  and  versatility,  ten  thousand  times  worse  than  those
of  obstinacy  and  the  blindest  prejudice,  we  have  consecrated  the
State,  that  no  man  should  approach  to  look  into  its  defects  or
corruptions  but  with  due  caution,  that  he  should  never  dream
of  beginning  its  reformation  by  its  subversion,  that  he  should
approach  to  the  faults  of  the  State  as  to  the  wounds  of  a  father,
with  pious  awe  and  trembling  solicitude.  By  this  wise  prejudice
we  are  taught  to  look  with  horror  on  those  children  of  their
country  who  are  prompted  rashly  to  hack  that  aged  parent  to
pieces  and  put  him  into  the  kettle  of  magicians,  in  hopes  that
by  their  poisonous  weeds  and  wild  incantations  they  may  re-
generate the  paternal  constitution.'  '  You  see,  sir,'  he  continues,
'  that  in  this  enlightened  age  I  am  bold  enough  to  confess  that
we  are  genei'ally  men  of  untaught  feelings  ;  that  instead  of  cast-
ing away  all  our  old  prejudices  we  cherish  them  to  a  very  con-
siderable degree,  and  to  take  more  shame  to  ourselves  we
cherish  them  because  they  are  prejudices,  and  the  longer  they
have  lasted  and  the  more  generally  they  have  prevailed  the
more  we  cherish  them.' We  are  afraid  to  put  men  to  live  and

'  Compare  Pascal :  'L'artde  boule-  against  the  ecclesiastical  innovations

verser les Etats est cl'ebranler  les  which  the  Emperor  was  introducing

coutumesetablies  ;  en  sondant  jusques  into  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  Burke

dans  leur  source,  pour  y  faire  remar-  wrote  :  '  Whilst  he  is  destroying  pre-

quer  le  defaut  d'autorite  et  de  justice.  judices  which  (under  good  manage-

II  faut,  dit-on,  recourir  aux  loix  fon-  ment)  may  become  the  surest  support

damentales  et  primitives  del'Etat,  qu'  of  his  Government,  is  he  not  afraid

une  coutume  injuste  a  abolies C'est  that  the  discussion  may  go further

un  jeu  siir  pour  tout  perdre. Rien  ne  than  he  wishes  ? If  he  excites  men

sera  juste  h  cette  balance.' Peiisees,  to  inquire  too  scrupulously  into  the

'  Foiblesse  de  I'Homme.' In  a  very  foundation  of  all  old  opinion,  may  he

cliaraoteristic letter expostulating  not  have  reason,  to  apprehend  that

VOL.  V.  n  11

4G()  ENGLAJSD IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xxi.

trade  eacli  on  his  own  private  stock  of  reason  because  we  sus-
pect that  this  stock  in  each  man  is  small,  and  that  the  individuals
would  do  better  to  avail  themselves  of  the  general  bank  and
capital  of  nations  and  of  ages.  Many  of  our  men  of  speculation
instead  of  exploding  general  prejudices  employ  their  sagacity  to
discover  the  latent  wisdom  which  prevails  in  them.  If  they
find  what  they  seek,  and  they  seldom  fail,  they  think  it  more
wise  to  continue  the  prejudice  with  the  reason  involved,  than
to  cast  away  the  coat  of  prejudice  and  to  leave  nothing  but  the
naked  reason,  because  prejudice  with  its  reason  has  a  motive  to
give  action  to  that  reason,  and  an  affection  which  will  give  it
permanence.  Prejudice  is  of  ready  application  in  the  emer-
gency. It  previously  engages  the  mind  in  a  steady  course  of
wisdom  and  virtue,  and  does  not  leave  the  man  hesitating  in  the
moment  of  decision,  sceptical,  puzzled,  and  unresolved.  Pre-
judice renders  a  man's  virtue  his  habit  and  not  a  series  of  un-
connected acts.  Through  just  prejudice  his  duty  becomes  a
part  of  his  nature,'  It  is  true  that  certain  '  institutions  savour
of  superstition  in  their  very  principle,  and  they  nourish  it  by  a
permanent  and  standing  influence ;  .  .  .  but  this  ought  not  to
hinder  you  from  deriving  from  superstition  itself  any  resources
'A  hich  may  thence  be  furnished  for  the  public  advantage.  You
dt-rive  benefits  from  many  dispositions  and  many  passions  of  the
human  mind  which  are  of  as  doubtful  a  colour  in  the  moral  eye
us  superstition  itself.  ,  .  .  Superstition  is  the  religion  of  feeble
minds,  and  they  must  be  tolerated  in  an  intermixture  of  it
in  some  trifling  or  some  enthusiastic  shape  or  other,  else  you
will  deprive  weak  minds  of  a  resource  found  necessary  to  the
strongest.  .  .  .  Wise  men  ...  do  not  violently  hate  these
things.  Wisdom  is  not  the  most  severe  corrector  of  folly.
They  are  the  rival  follies  which  mutually  wage  so  unrelenting
a  war.'  Nothing  is  more  to  be  dreaded  by  statesmen  than  a
shock  in  which  old  and  traditional  manners  and  opinions  perish  :
'  public  affections  combined  with  manners  are  required,  some-
times as  supplements,  sometimes  as  correctives,  always  as  aids
to  law.  .  .  .  'J'here  ought  to be  a  system  of  manners  in  every

several  will  see  as  little  use  in  mon-  wliich  Icad.s  to  such  discussions  may

archH  jw  in  monks  7 Tlie  quontion  is  not  become  as  fatal  to  the  former  aa

not  whctlier  thoy  will  argue  lof^irally  1  he  latter.' Cori'esjiotitlciice,  iii.  20".>.
ui  not,  hut  wliiHier  tlie  turn  of  niina

oi.  XXI.  EURKE  ON  THE  REVOLUTION.  467

nation  which  a  well -formed  mind  would  be  disposed  to  relish.
.  .  .  When  ancient  opinions  and  rules  of  life  are  taken  away
the  loss  cannot  possibly  be  estimated.  From  that  moment  we
have  no  compass  to  govern  us.'

Applying  these  principles  to  political  action,  Burke  once
more  drew  in  strong  and  vivid  lines  his  picture  of  a  wise
statesman.  '  The  science  of  constructing  a  commonwealth  or
renovating  it  or  reforming  it  is,  like  every  other  experimental
science,  not  to  be  taught  a  'priori.  Nor  is  it  a  short  experience
that  can  instruct  us  in  that  practical  science,  because  the  real
effects  of  moral  causes  are  not  always  immediate.  That  which
in  the  first  instance  is  prejudicial  may  be  excellent  in  its
remoter  operation,  .  .  .  and  very  plausible  schemes  with  very
pleasing  commencements  have  often  shameful  and  lamentable
conclusions.  In  states  there  are  often  some  obscure  and  almost
latent  causes,  things  which  appear  at  first  view  of  little  moment,
on  which  a  very  great  part  of  its  prosperity  or  adversity  may
most  essentially  depend.  The  science  of  government  being  .  .  .
a  matter  which  requires  experience,  and  even  more  experience
than  any  person  can  gain  in  his  whole  life,  however  sagacious
and  observing  he  may  be,  it  is  with  infinite  caution  that  any
man  ought  to  venture  upon  pulling  down  an  edifice  which  has
answered  in  any  tolerable  degree  for  ages  the  common  purposes
of  society.  .  .  .  The  nature  of  man  is  intricate,  the  objects  of
society  are  of  the  greatest  possible  complexity,  and  therefore  no
simple  disposition  or  direction  of  power  can  be  suitable  either  to
man's  nature  or  to  the  quality  of  his  affairs.  .  .  .  The  simple
governments  are  fundamentally  defective,  to  say  no  worse  of
them.  If  you  were  to  contemplate  society  in  but  one  point  of
view,  the  simple  modes  of  polity  are  infinitely  captivating.  .  .  .
But  it  is  better  that  the  whole  should  be  imperfectly  and  ano-
malously answered,  than  that  while  some  parts  are  provided  for
with  great  exactness,  others  might  be  totally  neglected.'

'  The  fixed  form  of  a  constitution  whose  merits  are  confirmed
by  the  solid  test  of  long  experience,  and  an  increasing  public
strength  and  national  prosperity,'  can  never  be  too  sedulously
protected.  '  The  true  lawgiver*ought  ...  to  love  and  respect
his  kind  and  to  fear  himself.  ...  In  my  course  I  have  known,
and  according  to  my  measure  have  co-operated  with,  great  men,

4G8  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xxi.

and  I  have  never  yet  seen  any  plan  which  has  not  been  mended
by  the  observations  of  those  who  were  much  inferior  in  under-
standing to  the  person  who  took  the  lead  in  the  business.  By
a  slow  but  well-sustained  progress,  the  effect  of  each  step  is
watched ;  the  good  or  ill  success  of  the  first  gives  light  to  see
the  second,  and  so  from  light  to  light  we  are  conducted  with
safety  through  the  whole  series.  We  see  that  the  parts  of  the
system  do  not  clash.  The  evils  latent  in  the  most  promising
contrivances  are  provided  for  as  they  arise.  One  advantage  is
as  little  as  possible  sacrificed  to  another.  We  compensate,  we
reconcile,  we  balance.  We  are  enabled  to  unite  into  a  consis-
tent whole  the  various  anomalies  and  contending  principles
that  are  found  in  the  minds  and  affairs  of  men.  From  hence
arises  not  an  excellence  in  simplicity,  but  one  far  superior,  an
excellence  in  composition.'

In  opposition  to  this  spirit  of  cautious  and  experimental
legislation,  he  places  the  modes  of  political  thought  that  had
arisen  among  the  politicians  of  France,  '  who  think  little  or
nothing  has  been  done  before  their  time,  and  who  place  all
their  hopes  in  discovery;  who  conceive  very  systematically  that
all  things  which  give  perpetuity  are  mischievous,  and  are  there-
fore at  inexpiable  war  with  all  establishments ;  who  think  that
government  may  vary  like  modes  of  dress  and  with  as  little  ill
effect,  and  that  there,  needs  no  principle  of  attachment,  except
a  sense  of  present  conveniency,  to  any  constitution  in  the  State.'
'  A  good  patriot  and  a  true  politician  always  considers  how  he
shall  make  the  most  of  the  existing  materials  of  his  country ; '
he  is  animated  at  once  by  '  a  disposition  to  preserve,  and  an
ability  to  improve;'  his  supreme  merit  is  found  in  the  skill
with  which  he  corrects  the  errors  and  defects,  without  weaken-
ing the  foundations,  of  old  establishments,  and  cures  common
distempers  by  regular  methods.  But  the  Parisian  legislators
begin  by  making  a  clear  sweep  of  all  old  establishments.  They
at  once  deH])air  of  making  any  use  of  common  means  in  their
legislation.  They  treat  their  country  '  as  a  kind  of  carte  blanche
on  which  they  may  scribble  whatever  they  please.'  They  en-
deavour to  reconstruct  the  whoM  framework  of  government  and
society  from  its  basis,  on  principles  of  geometrical  equality,  with
a  total disregard for  the  antecedents  and traditions  of  their

(11.  XXI.  BURKE ON THE REVOLUTION.  469

couiilry ;  for  '  the  aucicnt  permanent  sense,'  and  '  great  in-
fluencing prejudices'  of  mankind;  for  that  prescription  which
is  the  chief  foundation  of  all  property,  and  which  alone  '  mel-
lows into  legality  governments  that  were  violent  in  their  com-
mencement.'

It  would  carry  us  too  far  to  follow  Burke  into  his  very
elaborate  and  skilful  examination  of  the  measures  of  the  National
Assembly  and  of  the  revolutionary  leaders  in  France.  The
magnificent  pages  in  which  he  described  the  outrages  which  the
King  and  Queen  had  received,  and  the  ingratitude  with  which
the  repeated  and  ample  royal  concessions  had  been  repaid,  are
well  known.  The  contrast  between  Lewis  XVI.  and  the  two
Stuart  sovereigns  who  had  been  dethroned  by  revolution  was
indeed  very  marked,  and  Burke  predicted  with  but  too  good
reason  that  the  fate  which  had  fallen  on  the  French  King,
Church,  and  aristocracy  would  put  an  end  to  that  enlightened
and  tolerant  spirit  which  had  of  late  been  so  signally  displayed
by  the  chief  sovereigns  of  Europe,  and  would  make  the  govern-
ing classes  eveiywhere  suspicious,  distrustful,  and  hostile  to
reform.  Reviewing  the  state  of  the  French  Government  as  it
existed  before  the  Revolution,  he  said  that,  '  though  usually,
and  I  think  justly,  reported  the  best  of  the  unqualified  or  ill-
qualified  monarchies,  it  was  still  full  of  abuses  ; '  but  he  argued
from  the  increase  of  French  population  and  wealth,  from  the
splendid  achievements  of  France  in  so  many  forms  and  fields
of  greatness,  that  these  abuses  were  far  from  intolerable.  The
Government  was  certainly  not  so  '  incapable  and  undeserving  of
refonn '  that  it  was  necessary  that  '  the  whole  fabric  should  be
at  once  pulled  down  and  the  area  cleared  for  the  erection  of  a
theoretic,  experimental  edifice  in  its  place,'  All  France,  he
says,  was  of  this  opinion  in  the  beginning  of  1789.  'The
instructions  of  the  representatives  to  the  States-General  from
every  district  in  that  kingdom  were  filled  with  projects  for  the
reformation  of  that  Government  without  the  remotest  sugorestion
of  a  design  to  destroy  it.  Had  such  a  design  been  even  then
insinuated,  I  believe  there  would  have  been  but  one  voice,  and
that  voice  for  rejecting  it  with  scorn  and  horror.'  He  showed
that  the  Sovereign  had  for  some  years  been  continually  favour-
ing reform,  that  although  there  were  great  abuses  in  the  French

4<0 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

Cliurcli,  tlie  spirit  of  intolerance  had  been  steadily  declining,
and  that  the  clergy  as  well  as  the  nobles  in  their  instructions
to  their  representatives  had  expressly  declared  their  willingness
to  abandon  their  exemptions  from  taxation.  It  was  no  doubt
a  great  and  scandalous  abuse  that  the  privileged  orders  in
France  should  be  exempt  from  the  payment  of  the  taille,  which
was  the  heaviest  tax ;  but  Burke  showed  the  gross  falsehood  of
the  assertion,  which  was  so  often  made  at  the  time  of  the  Revo-
lution, and  which  has  been  frequently  repeated  to  our  own  day,
that  the  privileged  orders  paid  no  taxes.  The  nobles  paid  the
capitation,  which  was  a  progressive  impost ;  they  paid  the
land  tax  known  as  the  '  20th  penny,'  '  to  the  height  sometimes
of  three,  sometimes  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound  ; '  they  paid
all  the  indirect  taxes  which  made  up  a  great  part  of  the  French
revenue.  The  clergy,  it  is  true,  except  in  certain  provinces,
did  not  pay  the  capitation  and  the  twentieths,  but  they  had
purchased  their  exemption  from  the  first  tax  by  a  large  sum,
and  they  were  accustomed  to  make  what  they  termed  '  free  gifts,'
which  were  a  partial  compensation  for  their  exemption  from
the  latter.  At  all  events,  by  the  free  act  of  the  clergy  and
nobles,  the  grievance  of  the  exemptions  was  now  at  an  end.

For  the  abuses  in  the  collection  of  the  revenue,  which
Burke  truly  described  as  the  most  serious,  the  privileged  orders
were  not  responsible.  The  sale  of  oflfices  was  in  some  respects  a
great  evil,  but  it  had  at  least  the  effect  of  bringing  a  constant
stream  of  new  men  into  the  French  nobility.  They  maintained,
however,  too  punctiliously  their  distinction  from  other  classes,
but,  as  Burke  truly  and  acutely  observed,  less  punctiliously  than
the  same  class  in  Germany  and  some  other  countries.  So  far
from  being  opposed  to  reform,  they  had  caught  to  an  excessive
degree  the  innovating  spirit  of  the  time.  The  theory  which
attributed  the  excesses  of  the  Revolution  to  the  desperation  of
a  downtrodden  people  struggling  against  intolerable  oppression,
sippeared  to  Burke  fundamentally  and  demonstrably  false.  Like
Governor  Morris  and  Jefferson  he  maintained  that,  when  the
States-General  mot  in  1789,  no  violence  whatever  was  required
to  make  France  a  free  country,  for  no  resistance  was  to  be  ap-
prehended. '  Read  the  instructions '  [of  the  nobility],  he  wrote,
'  to  their  representatives. They  breathe  the  spirit  of  liberty  as

en.  XXI.  BUKKE ON THE REVOLUTION.  471

■warmly,  and  tlicy  recommend  reformation  as  strongly,  as  any
other  order.  Their  privileges  relative  to  contribution  were
voluntarily  surrendered,  as  the  King  from  the  beginning  sur-
rendered all  pretence  to  a  right  of  taxation.  Upon  a  free
Constitution  there  was  but  one  opinion  in  France.  The  absolute
monarchy  was  at  an  end.  It  breathed  its  last  without  a  groan,
without  a  struggle,  without  convulsion.  All  the  struggle,  all
the  dissension  arose  afterwards,  upon  the  preference  of  a  despotic
democracy  to  a  Government  of  reciprocal  control.  The  triumph
of  the  victorious  party  was  over  the  principles  of  the  British
Constitution.'

The  English  admirers  of  the  Revolution  were  accustomed  to
enumerate  with  triumph  the  many  measures  of  incontestable  re-
form which  the  National  Assembly  had  carried.  It  was  un-
doubtedly true,  Burke  answered,  that '  among  an  infinite  number
of  acts  of  violence  and  folly  some  good  may  have  been  done.
They  who  destroy  everything  will  certainly  remove  some  griev-
ance. They  who  make  everything  new  have  a  chance  that  they
may  establish  something  beneficial.  But  to  give  them  credit
for  what  they  have  done  in  virtue  of  the  authority  they  have
usurped  ...  it  must  appear  that  the  same  things  could  not
have  been  accomplished  without  producing  such  a  revolution.
Most  assuredly  they  might ;  because  almost  every  one  of  the
regulations  made  by  them,  which  is  not  very  equivocal,  was
either  in  the  cession  of  the  King,  voluntarily  made  at  the  meet-
ing of  the  States,  or  in  the  concurrent  instructions  of  the  orders.'

Of  the  old  Constitution  of  France — if  indeed  that  could  be
regarded  as  a  constitution  which  had  never  more  than  a  shadowy
and  precarious  existence — he  spoke  with  more  respect  than  it
deserved.  '  You  had  the  elements,'  he  wrote,  '  of  a  constitution
very  nearly  as  good  as  could  be  wished.  In  your  old  states  you
possessed  that  variety  of  parts  corresponding  with  the  various
descriptions  of  which  your  community  was  happily  composed.
You  had  all  that  combination  and  all  that  opposition  of  interests
which  in  the  natural  and  in  the  political  world  from  the  reci-
procal struggle  of  discordant  powers  draws  out  the  harmony
of  the  universe.  Those  opposed  and  conflicting  interests  which
you  considered  as  so  great  a  blemisli  in  your  old,  and  our  pre-
sent, Constitution,  interpose  a  salutary  check  to  all  precipitate

472  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxr.

resolutions  ;  tliey  render  deliberation  a  matter  not  of  choice  but
of  necessity  ;  they  make  all  change  a  subject  of  compromise,
which  naturally  begets  moderation  .  .  .  preventing  the  sore
evil  of  harsh,  crude,  unqualified  reformations,  and  rendering  all
the  headlong  exertions  of  arbitrary  power  in  the  few  or  in  the
many  for  ever  impracticable.  .  .  .  You  had  all  these  advantages
in  your  ancient  states,  but  you  chose  to  act  as  if  you  had  never
been  moulded  into  civil  society  and  had  everything  to  begin
anew.'

What,  then,  was  likely  to  be  the  issue  of  the  Revolution  ?
The  wisdom  of  a  statesman  is  mainly  shown  in  the  justice  of  his
forecasts,  and  in  order  to  estimate  the  amount  of  sagacity  which
was  exhibited  by  Burke  we  must  remember  that  the  '  Reflections '
appeared  as  early  as  November  1790,  in  the  golden  days  of  the
Revolution,  before  the  September  massacres,  before  the  trial  and
execution  of  the  King,  before  the  Convention,  before  the  Reign
of  Terror.  The  work  of  the  Revolution  was  regarded  by  its  ad-
mirers as  substantially  achieved,  and  it  was  believed  that  the
National  Assembly  had  constructed  on  a  sure  basis  a  great  and
endui'ing  edifice  of  freedom.

The  opposition  of  Burke  to  these  views  was  fundamental.
He  not  only  predicted — which  perhaps  needed  but  little  sagacity
— that  the  paper  money,  with  which  the  new  governors  of  France
were  now  flooding  the  country,  could  not  possibly  maintain  its
value,  and  that  the  confiscation  of  Church  property  would  be
wholly  insufficient  to  avert  bankruptcy ;  but  he  also  maintained
that  the  new  system  of  government  in  all  its  parts  was  inevit-
iibly  transitory.  He  declared  that  the  position  assigned  to
the  King  was  an  impossible  one,  and  that  it  must  lead  to  the
complete  destruction  of  the  monarchy  ;  that  the  new  civic  consti-
tution of  the  clergy  could  only  be  considered  '  preparatory  to  the
utter  abolition  tinder  any  of  its  forms  of  the  Christian  religion ; '
that  the  present  constitution  of  the  legislative  power  could  not
possibly  last ;  and  that,  as  the  Revolution  proceeded,  power  would
])ass  more  and  more  into  the  moat  violent  hands.  'When  the
loaders  choose  to  make  themselves  bidders  at  an  auction  of  popu-
larity .  .  .  they  will  bi^coino  flatterers  instead  of  legislators ;
the  instrumfnts  not  the  guides  of  the  people.  I  fancy  if  any  of
thrill  should  hiippen  to  propose  a  scheme  of  liberiy,  soberly  limited

at.  XXI.  BURKE ON THE KEVOLUTION.  473

and  defined,  lie  will  be  immediately  outbid  by  his  competitors,
who  will  produce  something  more  splendidly  popular.  Suspi-
cions will  be  raised  of  his  fidelity  to  his  cause.  Moderation  will
be  stigmatised  as  the  virtue  of  cowards,  and  compromise  as  the
prudence  of  traitors.'  Already  in  the  National  Assembly  '  their
idea  of  their  powers  is  always  taken  at  the  utmost  stretch  of
legislative  competency,  and  their  examples  for  common  cases
from  the  exceptions  of  the  most  urgent  necessity.  The  future
is  to  be  in  most  respects  like  the  present  Assembly ;  but  by  the
mode  of  the  new  elections,  and  the  tendency  of  the  new  circula-
tions, it  will  be  purged  of  the  small  minority  chosen  originally
from  various  interests,  and  preserving  something  of  their  spirit.
If  possible,  the  next  Assembly  must  be  worse  than  the  present.'
All  these  predictions,  though  indignantly  repudiated  by  the
admirers  of  the  Revolution,  proved  literally  and  accurately
true.  But  beyond  the  immediate  future  there  were  other  con-
sequences which  it  was  perhaps  more  difficult  to  anticipate.
That  the  movement  was  not  in  the  direction  of  true  politic;il
liberty,  Burke  firmly  believed.  Political  liberty,  according  to
his  conception,  flourishes  when  various  interests  are  strongly
organised,  when  power  is  so  divided,  limited,  balanced,  and  con-
trolled that  no  single  element  can  obtain  omnipotence.  The
three  branches  of  legislative  power  in  the  British  Constitution,
the  federal  system  in  the  United  States  and  in  Switzerland,  the
independent  Parliaments  of  France,  and  the  three  orders  in
her  States-General,  supplied  the  indispensable  materials  for
compromise  and  control ;  but  the  path  which  was  taken  by  the
National  Assembly  was  a  path  that  Jed  to  despotism,  though  it
might  be  the  despotism  of  an  unqualified  democracy.  Nor  were
the  moral  conditions  more  favourable.  '  All  other  people  have
laid  the  foundations  of  civil  freedom  in  severer  manners  and  a
system  of  a  more  austere  and  masculine  morality.  France  when
she  let  loose  the  reins  of  regal  authority  doubled  the  licence  of  a
ferocious  dissoluteness  in  manners,  and  an  insolent  irreligioh  in
opinions  and  practice.'  In  the  opinion  of  Burke  the  probable
close  of  the  anarchy  of  the  Revolution  was  a  military  despotism.
'  The  army  will  remain  for  some  time  mutinous  and  full  of  faction,
until  some  popular  general  who  understands  the  art  of  conciliating
the  soldiery  and  who  possesses  the  true  spirit  of  command  shall

474  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xxi.

draw  the  eyes  of  all  men  upon  himself.  .  .  .  But  the  moment  in
which  that  event  shall  happen,  the  person  who  really  commands
the  army  is  your  master ;  the  master  (that  is  little)  of  your  King,
the  master  of  your  Assembly,  the  master  of  your  whole  republic' '
Should  such  a  despot  arise,  he  will  find  that  the  legislation  which
crushed  and  levelled  all  the  orders  in  the  State  has  greatly  facili-
tated his  career.  '  If  the  present  prospect  of  a  Republic  should
fail,  all  secJurities  to  a  moderated  freedom  fall  along  with  it ;  all
the  indirect  restraints  which  mitigate  despotism  are  removed ;
insomuch  that  if  monarchy  should  ever  again  obtain  an  entire
ascendency  in  France,  under  this  or  any  other  dynasty,  it  will
probably  be,  if  not  voluntarily  tempered  at  setting  out  by  the
wise  and  virtuous  councils  of  the  Prince,  the  most  completely
arbitrary  power  that  has  ever  appeared  on  earth.'  ^

But  while  Burke  as  early  as  1790  clearly  foresaw  the  pro-
bable rise  of  a  Napoleon,  he  did  not  undertake  to  forecast  the
final  issue.  A  revolution  which  destroyed  old  orders,  institu-
tions, traditions,  manners,  reverence,  and  beliefs,  and  which
concentrated  all  power  in  a  single  democratic  chamber,  seemed
to  him  to  destroy  the  essential  elements  that  give  permanence
and  security  to  Governments.  No  Government  in  Europe  had
hitherto  been  more  firmly  rooted  through  every  vicissitude  of
fortune  than  that  of  France,  but  in  the  judgment  of  Burke  a
new  principle  of  instability  was  now  passing  into  French  affairs.
'  You  are  young,'  he  wrote,  '  you  cannot  guide  but  must  follow
the  fortunes  of  your  country ;  but  hereafter  my  sentiments  may

'  This prediction may be com-  Gengis  ou  Tamerlan  la  mettre  4  la

pared  •with the forecast of Cathe-  raison.  Voila  son  sort,  soyez  en  assure.'

rine  11. as  it  appears in  that most  Lcttrf^xde  C'at/ierinra  (j?-im'm,pp.50ii,

curious  and most  unreserved  corre-  620,  5.^7,  6o5. John  Adams,  who,  like

Bpondcnce with  Grimm, which has  Morris,  looked  wilh  great  repulsion  on

recently  been  published  by  the  Societ  6  tlie  French  Revolution,  predicted,  in

Hist,  of  Ru.ssia. In  171ii  she  wrote:  1780,  that  it  would  probably  lead  to  the

'  Quand viendra ce C6sar  ? Oh  I il  destruction  of  a  million  of  human  be-

viendra,  gardcz  vous  d'en  douter.  II  ings.  Mor'^nn's  Z/i/e  of  Price,  p.  158.
faudrait  feuilletcr  I'histoire  et  voir  si  '^  So  Macliiavelli  maintained  that

jamais  pays ait  6l6  sauv6  par  autre  a usui-per who hiis  ac(iuired sove-

qu'un re('llcment grand  horanKs, et  rciguly  without  right,  and  who  does

fl'apres  celted6couvertc  jn  j^rtdiraisce  not  wish  to  govern  by  fixed  laws,  can

qu'il  en  SITE  de  la  France. "  Finis  co-  lind no better  way  of  maintaining

ronat  opus."  . . .  Selon  moi  ilssont  bien  himself  upon  the  throne  than  by  re-

proprestldiscr^jditer  pourlongtemps  la  voliitionisiiig  at  the  very  beginning  of

liberty  et  A  larcndrc  odicuse  A,tous  Ics  his  reign  all  the  old  institutions  of

peu|-)Ies.' '  Si  III,  H('!volution  Fra.ngaise  the State. Discorsi  soj>ra  Tito  Liv.

prend  en  Europe,  il  viendra  un  a\itre  lib.  i.  c.  20.

CH.  XXI.  EURKK ON THE REVOLUTION.  475

be  of  some  use  to  you  in  some  future  fm'm  which  your  Common-
wealth may  take.  In  the  present  it  can  hardly  remain,  but
before  its  final  settlement  it  may  be  obliged  to  pass,  as  one  of
our  poets  says,  "  through  great  varieties  of  untried  being,"
and  in  all  its  transmigrations  to  be  purified  by  fire  and  by
blood.'

Such  were  the  judgments  formed  by  Burke  of  these  new
and  startling  events  which  were  regarded  by  Fox  as  so  fortunate
and  so  glorious,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  more  striking
instance  of  sagacity  justified  by  the  event.  On  some  points,
however,  his  forecast  proved  mistaken.  Though  much  less
confident  than  when  he  spoke  in  Parliament,  he  had  not  yet
abandoned  the  opinion,  which  was  at  this  time  general  among
European  statesmen,  that  the  Revolution  would  reduce  Prance
to  a  long  period  of  military  and  political  impotence.  He  believed
— as  the  event  proved,  very  erroneously — that  she  would  lose  that
wonderful  recuperative  energy  which  she  had  displayed  after  the
civil  wars  of  the  Fronde,  and  he  shared  the  delusion  of  Morris
that  when  she  was  divided  into  eighty-three  independent  muni-
cipalities, all  animated  by  the  popular  spirit  of  insubordination,
those  municipalities  would  never  submit  to  the  central  Govern-
ment in  Paris.  Revolts  like  that  of  La  Vendee  seemed  to  him
likely  to  be  frequent,  and  like  Morris  he  thought  it  not
impossible  that  France  would  be  for  a  time  broken  up  into  a
number  of  small  republics.

His  estimate  also  of  the  effects  of  the  spoliation  of  Church
property  is  tinged  with  much  exaggeration  and  error.  It  is
closely  connected  with  his  views  of  the  nature  of  Church
establishments,  and  the  eloquent  pages  which  he  devoted  to
this  subject,  though  extremely  impressive  to  his  contemporaries,
are  very  alien  to  the  opinions  of  our  own  day.  On  this  subject,
as  we  have  already  had  some  occasion  to  see,  he  agreed  much
less  with  Hoadley,  Warburton,  and  Paley,  than  with  Hooker
and  the  Nonjurors.  His  opinions  were  in  truth  not  Whig,  but
Tory,  and  they  belonged  to  a  kind  of  Toryism  which,  though
once  very  prevalent,  has  now  almost  wholly  ceased  to  be  an
operative  principle  in  European  politics.  The  prevailing  Whig
doctrine  of  an  Established  Church  was  simply,  that  the  secular
State  of  its  own free  will  conferred  certain endowments  and

476  ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUllY.  ch.  xxi.

privileges  on  the  clergy  of  the  most  considerable  religious  body
in  the  community,  in  order  that  they  might  more  efficiently
discharge  functions  which  are  of  the  highest  importance  to  the
nation.  The  connection  between  Church  and  State  was  based
upon  expediency,  and  it  was  defended  by  purely  utilitarian
arguments.  These  arguments  have  been  rarely  stated  more
skilfully  than  by  Burke,  but  he  himself  always  looked  upon  the
connection  between  Church  and  State  as  something  of  a  mystical
and  transcendental  nature.  One  of  the  first  principles  of  his
political  philosophy  is  that  a  nation  is  a  distinct  corporate
entity,  bound  together  by  institutions,  habits,  opinions,  and
tendencies,  and  preserving  its  separate  and  continuous  indivi-
duality from  age  to  age.  One  of  the  supreme  ends  of  politics  is
to  strengthen  this  national  life ;  to  maintain  that  steady  stream
of  habit,  interest,  and  feeling,  without  which  '  the  Common-
wealth itself  would  in  a  few  generations  crumble  away,  be
disconnected  into  the  dust  and  powder  of  individuality,  and  at
length  dispersed  to  all  the  winds  of  heaven.'  Chief  among
thet-e  influences  is  the  national  religion,  and  without  it  the
nation  would  be  almost  like  a  body  without  a  soul.

But  not  only  is  a  National  Church  the  chief  cementing  influ-
ence in  the  State,  it  is  'the  oblation  of  the  State  itself  to  the
Divinity.  The  people  of  England,  he  said,  '  persuaded  that  all
i  lungs  ought  to  be  done  with  reference,  and  referring  all  to  the
point  of  reference  to  which  all  should  be  directed,  think  them-
selves bound  ...  in  their  corporate  character  to  perform  their
national  homage  to  the  Institutor,  and  Author,  and  Protector
of  civil  society,  without  which  civil  society  man  could  not  by
any  possibility  arrive  at  the  perfection  of  which  his  nature  is
capable,  nor  even  make  a  remote  and  faint  approach  to  it.  They
conceive  that  He  who  gave  our  nature  to  be  perfected  by  our  vir-
tue, willed  also  the  necessary  means  of  its  perfection.  He  willed,
tlierefore,  the  State.  He  willed  its  connection  with  the  source  and
original  Archetype  of  all  perfection.  .  .  .  It  is  on  some  such  prin-
ciples that  the  majority  of  the  peophi  of  England,  ftxr  from  think-
ing a  religious  National  Establishment  unlawful,  hardly  think  it
lawful  to  be  without  one.  .  .  .  They  do  not  consider  their  Church
KstabliHliinentas  convenient,  but  as  essential  to  their  State  ;  not
us  a  thing  heterogeneous  and  separable,  something  added  for

cit.  XXI.  BUEKE  ON  THE  REVOLUTION.  477

accommoclation  which  they  may  either  keep  up  or  lay  aside  ac-
cording to  their  temporary  ideas  of  convenience.  They  consider
it  as  the  foundation  of  their  whole  Constitution,  with  which  and
with  every  part  of  which  it  holds  an  indissoluble  union.  Church
and  State  are  ideas  inseparable  in  their  minds,  and  scarcely  is
the  one  ever  mentioned  without  mentioning  the  other,'  and  he
added,  proba,bly  with  perfect  truth,  that  in  attributing  this  high
religious  s.anctity  to  the  union  of  Church  and  State  he  faith-
fully represented  the  general  sentiments  of  the  English  people.
It  is  obvious  that  such  a  doctrine  has  a  vital  bearing  on  the
question  of  the  right  of  the  State  to  dispose  of  ecclesiastical
property.  The  doctrine  which  is  now  most  generally  received
is  that  the  property  of  an  Established  Church,  in  as  far  as  it  is
derived  from  public  sources,  is  national  property,  and  that  the
State  has  a  right  to  alienate  or  resume  it,  subject  to  the  obliga-
tion of  compensating  fully  the  life  interests  of  its  ministers.
A  doctrine  of  this  kind  was  clearly  implied  in  the  admirable
chapter  of  Paley  on  '  Religious  Establishments,'  and  in  the  no
less  admirable  article  on  Endowments  inserted  by  Turgot  in
the  '  Encyclopaedia.'  It  appears  to  have  been  widely,  perhaps
generally,  held  by  the  political  classes  in  England ; '  and  even
after  the  great  struggles  of  the  Reformation,  the  power  of  the
State  over  Church  property  had  been  repeatedly  and  sometimes
most  violently  exercised.  The  secularisation  of  some  of  the
richest  benefices  in  Germany  that  followed  the  Peace  of  West-
phalia ;  the  destruction  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  Scotland ;
the  suppression  of  some  hundreds  of  monasteries  by  Joseph  II. ;
and  the  confiscation  of  Jesuit  property  by  the  chief  Catholic
Governments  of  the  Continent,  are  conspicuous  examples. But

'  'When  I  entered  life,'  Wilber-  lAfe  of  Wilhcrforee,  i.  2fil.  The  ar-
force  once  wrote,  '  it  is  astonishing  guments  of  those  who  maintain  that
how  general  was  the  disposition  to  the  tithes  of  the  Anglican  Church  were
seize  upon  Church  property.  I  mixed  not  derived  from  the  8tate,  and  that
with  very  various  circles,  and  I  could  their  alienation  from  the  Church  is  be-
hardly  go  into  any  company,  where  yond  its  moral  competence,  and  would
there  was  not  a  clergA-man  present,  be  an  act  of  plunder,  will  be  found
without  hearing  some  such  measure  powerfully  stated  in  Dr.  Brewer's  E:>.-
proposed.  I  am  convinced  that  if  "the  doinnents  and  Estahlishnent  of  the
public  feeling  had  not  been  altered  by  Church  of  Enr/land,  and  in  Lord  Sel-
our  seeing  how  soon  every  other  kind  borne's  recent  work.  Defence  of  the
of  plunder  followed  the  destruction  of  Chvrch  of  England  against  Flsesta-
tithes  in  France,  our  clergy  would  by  hllshinent.
tliis  time  have  lost  their property.'

478 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. oh.  xxi.

Burke  treated  tlie  sale  of  Churcli  property  in  1789  as  if  it  was
exactly  equivalent  to  the  confiscation  of  private  property,  excejjt
that  it  carried  with  it  the  added  guilt  of  sacrilege.  Nor  did  he
base  his  argument  to  any  great  extent  upon  the  inadequacy  of
the  salaries  that  were  granted  to  a  portion  of  the  dispossessed
priests.  '  The  estate  of  the  Church '  he  considered  as  '  incorpo-
rated and  identified  with  the  mass  of  private  property,  of  which
the  State  is  not  the  proprietor,  either  for  use  or  dominion,  but  the
guardian  only  and  the  regulator.'  '  When  once  the  Commonwealth
has  established  the  estates  of  the  Church  as  property,  it  can  con-
sistently hear  nothing  of  the  more  or  the  less.  Too  much  and
too  little  are  treason  against  property.'  The  act  of  the  National
Assembly  in  seizing  the  ecclesiastical  property  appeared  to  him
a  '  dishonest,  perfidious,  and  cruel  confiscation  of  that  property
which  it  was  their  first  duty  to  protect,'  and  he  declared  that
the  paper  money,  which  was  issued  on  the  security  of  this  con-
fiscated property,  was  '  stamped  with  the  indelible  character  of
sacrilege.'

For  this  reason,  though  not  for  this  reason  alone,  he  con-
sidered the  Revolution  in  France  a  most  formidable  blow  to  the
rights  of  property.  It  was  one  of  his  firm  convictions  that
])roperty  never  can  be  secure  under  a  representative  Govern-
ment in  which  it  does  not  possess  a  preponderating  power, ^  and
the  property  qualification  which  was  exacted  from  the  French
electors  under  their  new  Constitution  seemed  to  him  wholly  in-
adequate. The  confiscation  of  Church  property,  he  considered

'  «  Nothing  is  a  due  and  adequate  natural  rampart  about  the  ksser  pro-
representation  of  a  State  that  does  perties  in  all  their  gradations.  The
not  represent  its  ability  as  well  as  its  same  quantity  of  property  which  is
property.  But  as  ability  is  a  vigorous  by  the  natural  course  of  things  di-
and  active  principle,  and  as  property  vided  among  many  has  not  the  same
is  sluggish,  inert,  and  timid,  it  never  operation.  Its  defensive  power  is
can  be  safe  from  the  invasion  of  weakened  as  it  is  diffused.  In  this
ability  unless  it  be  out  of  all  projior-  dilVusion  each  man's  portion  is  less
tion  predominant  in  the  representa-  tlian  what  in  the  eagerness  of  his  de-
fion.  It  must  be  rei)resented,  too,  in  sircjs  he  may  (latter  himself  to  obtain
j^reat  masses  of  accumuhilion,  or  it  is  by  dissipating  the  accumulations  of
not  rightly  protected.  The  chanic-  otliers.  The  plunder  of  the  few
leri.stic  essence  of  property  formcul  would  indeed  give  but  a  share  incon-
out  of  the  combined  principles  of  its  r.ivably  small  in  the  distribution  to
acquisition  and  conservation  is  to  be  Ww.  many,  but  the  many  are  not  capa-
unequal.  The  great  ma6s(!S,  there-  ble  of  making  this  calculation.'  See,
fore,  which  excite  envy  and  tempt  too,  Arf.stotle's  remarks  on  the  causes
rapacity  must  be  out  of  the  possi-  of  revolution  in  democracies,  P<//i^ifji,
biiity  of  danger. There  they  form  a  bi^ok  v.  c.  5.

cii.  XXI.  BURKE ON THE  liEVOLUTION.  479

an  act  of  robbery,  and  the  certain  precursor  of  still  greater
invasions  of  property.  I  have  quoted  the  passage  from  his
speech  in  February  1790,  in  which  he  denounced  the  French
Assembly  for  having  '  laid  the  axe  to  the  root  of  all  property  and
consequently  of  all  national  prosperity,  by  the  principles  they
established  and  the  example  they  set,  in  confiscating  all  the  pos-
sessions of  the  Church,' '  and  in  his  '  Eeflections  on  the  French
Revolution '  he  expressed  his  firm  belief  that  the  precedent  was
likely  to  be  followed,  and  applied  in  turn  to  other  large  denomi-
nations of  men.

It  was  not,  he  said,  so  much  the  confiscation  of  Church
property  that  he  dreaded,  though  this  would  be  no  trifling  evil.
What  he  feared  was  '  lest  it  should  ever  be  considered  in
England  as  the  policy  of  a  State  to  seek  a  resource  in  confisca-
tions of  any  kind,'  and  lest  '  one  description  of  citizens  should
be  brought  to  regard  any  of  the  others  as  their  proper  prey.'
The  danger  seemed  the  more  imminent  as  the  burden  of  national
debts  was  rapidly  increasing,  and  he  predicted  that  '  public
debts,  which  at  first  were  a  security  to  Governments  by  inte-
resting many  in  the  public  tranquillity,  were  likely  in  their
excess  to  become  the  means  of  their  subversion.'

But,  in  addition  to  these  considerations,  he  maintained  that
the  essential  principles  and  modes  of  reasoning  of  a  pure  demo-
cracy were  incompatible  with  the  security  of  property.  '  If
prescription  be  once  shaken,'  he  writes,  '  no  species  of  property
is  secure  when  it  once  becomes  an  object  large  enough  to  tempt
the  cupidity  of  indigent  power.'  But  '  with  the  National
Assembly  of  France  possession  is  nothing ;  law  and  usage  are
nothing.'  They  '  openly  reprobate  the  doctrine  of  prescription,
which  one  of  the  greatest  of  their  own  lawyers  tells  us,  with
great  truth,  is  a  part  of  the  law  of  nature.'  They  teach  their
followers  '  to  abhor  and  reject  all  feudality  as  the  barbarism  of
tyranny,'  and  the  people  will  soon  come  to  recognise  that
'  almost  the  whole  system  of  landed  property  in  its  origin  is
feudal,'  and  that  the  origin  of  the  oldest  properties  was  'the
distribution  of  the  possessions  of  the  original  proprietors,  made
by  a  barbarous  conqueror  to  his  barbarous  instruments.'

'The  peasants,'  he  continued,  'in -all  probability  are  the
•  Pari.  Hist,  xxviii.  3.jS,

480  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xxi.

descendants  of  these  ancient  proprietors,  Eomans  or  Gauls,  but
if  tliey  fail  in  any  degree  in  the  titles  which  they  make  on  the
principles  of  antiquaries  and  lawyers,  they  retreat  into  the
citadel  of  the  rights  of  men.  There  they  find  that  men  are
equal,  and  the  Earth,  the  kind  and  equal  mother  of  all,  ought  nob
to  be  monopolised  to  foster  the  pride  and  luxury  of  any  men
who  by  nature  are  no  better  than  themselves,  and  who  if  they
do  not  labour  for  their  bread  are  worse.  They  find  that  by  the
laws  of  nature  the  occupant  and  subduer  of  the  soil  is  the  true
proprietor,  that  there  is  no  prescription  against  nature,  that  the
agreements  (where  any  there  are)  which  have  been  made  with
their  landlords  during  the  time  of  slavery  are  only  the  effects
of  duress  and  force,  and  that  when  the  people  re-entered  into
the  rights  of  men,  these  agreements  were  made  as  void  as  every-
thing else  which  had  been  settled  under  the  prevalence  of  the
old  feudal  and  aristocratic  tyranny.  ...  As  to  the  title  by
succession,  they  will  tell  you  that  the  succession  of  those  who
have  cultivated  the  soil  is  the  true  pedigree  of  property  and  not
rotten  parchments  and  silly  substitutions ;  that  the  lords  have
enjoyed  their  usurpation  too  long ;  and  that  if  they  allow  to
these  lay  monks  any  charitable  pension,  they  ought  to  be
thankful  to  the  bounty  of  the  true  proprietor,  who  is  so  generous
towards  a  false  claimant  to  his  goods.'

Such  language  has  a  strangely  familiar  sound  to  a  modern
politician,  but  the  connection  of  nineteenth  century  socialism
with  the  French  Revolution,  though  probably  real,  is  not  very
close.  In  the  great  intellectual  and  speculative  movement  of
innovation  that  preceded  that  Revolution,  there  were  indeed
several  doctrines  which,  if  pushed  to  their  ultimate  conse-
(|uences,  were  very  unfavourable  to  the  existing  social  system.
^riie  doctrine  that  all  morals  spring  from  and  depend  on  utility,
and  that  therefore  there  can  be  no  consideration  of  right  in
opposition  to  a  well-ascertained  and  general  utility;  the  doctrine
that  the  State  is  omnipotent  over  its  members,  and  that  it  is  its
task  and  duty  to  exert  its  powers  to  raise  them  to  the  highest
level  of  virtue  and  happiness  ;  the  doctrine  that  man  is  essenti-
ally good,  and  that  his  vices  and  misery  are  mainly  the  result  of
the  social  system  ;  and  finally,  the  doctrine  that  equality  is  the  su-
picint'  idfjil  :it.  wliii'li  tlic  legislator  sliould  aim,  Avere  all  well  fitted

en.  XXI.  FRENCH  SOCIALISM.  481

to  prepare  the  way  for  socialistic  changes.  A  habit  of  mind
was  widely  diffused,  which  systematically  depreciated  custom
and  prescription,  and  the  great  prominence  which  the  writings
of  Plato  and  the  institutions  of  Sparta  had  obtained  in  political
speculation,  tended  in  the  same  direction.

But  on  the  whole,  in  the  immense  mass  of  speculation
which  appeared  in  France  in  the  fifty  years  before  the  Revolu-
tion, there  was  very  little  directed  against  the  institutions  of
property.  I  have  already  quoted  the  famous  passage  in  the
'  Discourse  on  Inequality,'  in  which  Rousseau  declared  that  the
earth  and  its  fruits  were  the  property  of  all,  and  that  the  man
who  first  claimed  a  portion  of  the  earth  as  his  own  was  the  true
founder  of  civil  society,  and  the  source  of  innumerable  calamities
to  mankind.  As  we  have  seen,  however,  this  passage  by  no
means  represents  the  true  opinions  of  its  author  when  he  had
arrived  at  his  maturity,  and  it  loses  much  of  its  significance
when  it  is  remembered  that  it  forms  part  of  an  argument  to
prove  the  superiority  of  savage  to  civilised  life.  Doctrines  of  a
more  consistently  and  violently  socialistic  character  had  been
pi'omulgated  by  Morelly  in  his  '  Code  of  Nature,'  and  in  one  of
the  early  writings  of  Brissot  de  Warville,  but  neither. of  these
works  had  much  importance  or  influence.  The  true  father  of
French  socialism  is  Mably,  who,  in  several  of  his  writings,
preached  the  necessity  of  a  social  revolution,  and  elaborately
attacked  the  whole  institution  of  property.'  Equality,  he
maintains,  is  the  first  object  at  which  the  legislator  should  aim,
but  equality  can  never  permanently  subsist  where  private  pro-
perty is  suffered  to  accumulate.  The  true  remedy  for  human
ills  is  to  be  found  in  a  community  of  goods  such  as  he  supposed
to  have  existed  in  Sparta.  Such  a  system,  he  admitted,  was  no
longer  practicable,  but  Government  can  at  least  do  much  to
mitigate  the  evil.  Instead  of  being  intended  to  protect  the
property  and  the  energies  of  individuals,  and  to  promote  the
deveh)pment  of  national  resources,  it  should  be  its  main  object
to  maintain  the  citizens  in  an  equality  of  fortune  and  of  posi-

'  See especially his Traite de  were  afterwards  made  by  Godwin,  and

la Legislation, his Entretiens de  by  one  or  two  other  less  known  writers.

Pliocion,  and  his  Doutes  sur  VOrdre  See  Godwin's  Political  Justice,  book

Natvrel des Societes. In England,  viii.
.similar  attacks  on  hereditar^^  property

VOL.  V.  II

482  ENGLAND JN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

tion ;  to  prevent  the  accumulation  either  of  individual  or  of
national  wealth,  and  to  extirpate  as  far  as  possible  from  society
the  passions  of  ambition  and  avarice.  A  poor  country  with  few
wants,  no  luxury  or  art,  and  no  division  of  classes,  is  the  best,
and  the  legislator  should  always  remember  that  private  property,
with  the  passions  and  the  inequalities  it  produces,  is  the  supreme
evil  in  the  State.  He  should  combat  it  systematically  by  severe
laws  of  succession  ;  by  sumptuary  laws  crushing  all  luxury  and
commerce ;  by  agrarian  laws  limiting  the  amount  of  land  which
each  man  may  possess  ;  by  a  system  of  education  discouraging
every  kind  of  luxury  and  inequality ;  by  imposing  every  trammel
in  his  power  on  those  natural  superiorities  of  intellect  and  cha-
racter that  enable  some  men  in  the  competitions  of  life  to  outrun
their  fellows.

Startling  and  systematic  paradox,  when  accompanied  by
some  real  literary  ability,  seldom  fails  in  attaining  a  speedy,
though  transient,  notoriety,  and  the  works  of  Mably  were  very
widely  read  by  the  generation  which  preceded  and  which  made
the  Revolution.  But  although  the  violence  of  class  warfare
and  the  extreme  necessities  of  the  State,  led  to  some  gigantic
measures  of  confiscation,  and  although  some  of  the  acts  and
language  of  the  Convention  were  clearly  socialistic,  the  Revolu-
tion did  not  ultimately  turn  in  this  direction.  In  the  Declara-
tion of  Rights  it  is  stated  that, '  property  being  an  inviolable  and
sacred  right,  no  one  can  be  deprived  of  it  except  when  public
necessity,  legally  established,  evidently  requires  it,  and  then  only
on  condition  of  a  just  indemnity  paid  in  advance,'  and  it  would
be  a  great  injustice  to  the  National  Assembly  to  regard  this
declaration  as  mere  idle  woi'ds.  In  abolishing  the  sale  of  ofiices,
and  suppressing  innumerabh?  functionaries  and  corporations,  it
fully  recognised  rights  to  indemnity.  It  granted  450,000,000
livres  for  the  magisterial  posts,  35,000,000  for  military  employ-
ments, and  52,000,000  foj-  places  in  tlio  King's  household.  It
laid  down  the  principle  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  nation  to
repay  the  price  of  every  purchased  office,  and  to  assume  the
debts  of  every  corporation  which  it  suppressed,'  and  it  carried
out  this  principle  with  an  integrity  which  contrasts  very  favour-

' (,afcrri(T(',  /A/.<^  f/r.v  Princij/cs,  da  InslUutiuas,  ct  da  Lois  iicndani  L%
l.'rni/iilio/i,  [<[).  lUl,  10.";.

en.  XXI.  THE REVOLUTION NOT  SOCIALISTIC.  483

ably  with  many  episodes  in  the  history  of  the  moiiarcliy.  lb
rejected,  as  inconsistent  with  the  public  faith,  a  proposed  tax
on  the  interest  of  the  national  debt,  and  it  entirely  abstained
from  the  favourite  socialistic  policy  of  imposing  excessive  or
confiscating  duties  on  successions.'  In  judging  its  legislation
about  the  feudal  system,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  revolt
of  the  peasantry,  reducing  a  great  part  of  France  to  anarchy,
and  making  the  collection  of  feudal  dues  almost  impossible,  had
pi-eceded  by  some  weeks  the  famous  sitting  of  August  4.  That
day  is  perhaps  the  most  glorious  in  the  French  Revolution,  and
it  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  that  it  was  the  Vicomte  de  Noailles
and  the  Due  d'Aiguillon,  two  conspicuous  members  of  the  privi-
leged orders,  who  took  the  leading  part  in  the  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights.  The  Assembly  declared  the  feudal  system  abo-
lished, but,  as  I  have  already  observed,  it  distinguished  clearly
the  rights  that  grew  out  of  ancient  servitude,  or  old  admi-
nistrative functions  which  were  no  longer  performed,  from
those  which  were  of  the  nature  of  property  and  sprang  for
the  most  part  from  contract.  The  former  it  abolished  with-
out compensation,  but  the  title  of  the  owners  of  the  latter
to  compensation  was  fully  recognised.  The  Assembly  may
be  blamed  for  having  decreed  the  abolition  of  the  feudal
system,  before  it  had  taken  measures  for  commuting  the
rights  it  recognised,  but  its  original  intention  was  a  perfectly
honest  one,  though  it  was  defeated  by  the  revolt  of  the  pea-
santry, and  abandoned  in  the  confiscating  legislation  of  the
Convention.''^

It  is  impossible,  also,  to  deny  the  extreme  and  pressing
necessity  under  which  the  measure  of  confiscating  the  eccle-
siastical property  was  adopted.  The  Assembly  had  inherited  a
financial  condition  which  was  nearly  desperate,  and  some  of  its
most  popular,  and  in  the  end  most  beneficial,  measures  contri-
buted to  make  it  hopeless.  It  abolished  the  gabelle,  or  salt
monopoly,  which  had  long  been  the  occasion  of  deep  popular
discontent,  and  an  amount  of  salt  which  had  previously  cost
fourteen  sous  could  now  be  purchased  for  one  sou. It  abolished

'  Laferri&re,  pp.  44,  45,  47.  Rerolutlon  Fraiiqaixe  et  la  Feodalitc,

■  The  history  of  the  abolition  of  and  by  Chenon,  Les  Demembrements

the  feudal  system  has  been  lately  very  dr. la Prnpri.ete fondcre avant et

carefully  examined by  JJonioi, La  aj^ra  la  Ec volution,

I  I  2

484  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

or  reduced  the  duties  on  tobacco,  oil,  leather,  soap,  and  some
other  articles  largely  used  by  the  poor.  It  put  an  end  to  the
sale  of  offices,  which  had  been  a  great  source  of  revenue  to  the
Crown,  and,  at  a  considerable  cost  to  the  State,  it  attached  the
army  to  the  Revolution  by  raising  its  pay.  Great  sums  were  at
the  same  time  required  for  the  indemnities  for  suppressed  offices,
and  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  famine.  In  the  sphere  of
finance,  as  in  all  else,  the  National  Assembly  effected  a  complete
revolution.  It  repealed  most  of  the  old  taxes,  and  imposed  a
new  stamp  duty  and  new  taxes  on  land,  capital,  and  industry,
and  it  abolished  all  the  old  exemptions  from  taxation,  the
arbitrary  methods  of  fixing  contributions,  and  the  abusive  and
wasteful  system  of  farming  the  revenue.  But  in  the  complete
social  and  moral  anarchy  that  prevailed,  it  was  found  scarcely
possible  to  collect  taxes,  and  every  source  of  revenue  diminished,
while  the  expenditure  was  rapidly  increasing.  Desperate
attempts  were  made  to  borrow ;  but  though  Necker  was  still  at
the  head  of  the  finances,  the  credit  of  the  country  was  gone.
In  August  1789  two  separate  loans,  one  of  thirty  and  the  other
of  eighty  millions,  were  decreed,  but  they  proved  almost  abso-
lute failures.  Necker  then  proposed,  as  the  only  hope,  an
extraordinary  contribution,  amounting  to  a  fourth  of  the  revenue
of  each  citizen  ;  but  although  this  brought  in  something,  it
proved  wholly  inadequate.  Bankruptcy,  complete  or  partial,
was  spoken  of,  and  there  were  abundaut  precedents  for  it  in  the
monarchy.  It  has  been  calculated  that  the  public  faith  had
been  violated  no  less  than  fifty-six  times  between  Henry  IV.
and  the  Revolution.'  But  the  Assembly  protested  strongly  and
earnestly  against  such  a  course,  and  it  was  as  the  one  possible
alternative,  that  it  appropriated  the  ecclesiastical  property  and
the  domains  of  the  Crown,  compensating  the  clergy  by  salaries,
and  the  King  by  a  very  liberal  civil  list.'^

These  are  not  the  proceedings  of  a  Legislature  that  was  indif-
ferent to  the  rights  of  property.  It  is  true,  however,  that  under
the  assemblies  that  followed,  tlie  prospect  rapidly  darkened.
Enormous  mob  outrages  unpunished  and  even  uncensured ;
en(;nnous  ?ind  almost  indiscriminate  confiscations ;  laws  of  maxi-

'  'l''<\\no.,  JJAticion  Iit'f/ime,  p.  405. pp. 105-190; Laforrit^rc,  pp.  37-49;
*  }liihu\i\ ,  Prcvix  Uc  la  Ilccolvtion, Uurut,  p^).  177-2i{.'J.

en.  XXI.  THE REVOLUTION NOT SOCIALISTIC.  485

mum  regulating  the  prices  of  commodities ;  a  forced  paper
currency,  reducing  to  a  small  fraction  all  ancient  debts ;  forced
loans ;  requisitions  on  the  rich,  and  the  plunder  of  all  charitable,
literary,  or  educational  corporations,  fill  the  later  history  of  the
Revolution ;  and  much  of  the  language  of  Robespierre  and  of
some  of  his  colleagues,  as  well  as  the  conspiracy  of  Baboeuf,
show  clearly  the  influence  of  the  socialistic  element.  That
element,  however,  proved  transitory.  It  was  never  the  most
powerful,  and  the  violence  of  civil  war,  the  necessities  of  a
country  engaged  in  a  desperate  contest  against  foreign  enemies,
and  the  hatred  of  the  rich  as  an  anti-revolutionary  class,  in-
spired the  violences  of  the  Revolution  much  more  than  any
deliberate  negation  of  the  legitimacy  of  private  property.  The
codes  of  law  that  have  sprung  out  of  the  Revolution  recognised
the  sanctity  of  property  and  the  stringency  of  contracts  at  least
as  fully  as  the  codes  of  the  ancient  monarchy ;  and,  contrary  to
the  anticipations  of  Burke,  the  Revolution  which  has  destroyed,
enfeebled,  or  remodelled  almost  all  French  institutions,  has  not
permanently  injured  either  French  credit,  French  industry,  or
French  property.

The  causes  of  this  fact  form  a  matter  of  curious  and  impor-
tant inquiry,  but  the  more  prominent  may,  I  think,  be  easily
ascertained.  On  no  other  subject  is  the  conservative  sentiment
so  powerful  and  so  sensitive  as  in  the  protection  of  property.
On  most  political  questions,  great  multitudes  of  quiet  and
moderate  men  exhibit  an  habitual  languor,  which  too  often
enables  fanatical  minorities  and  dexterous  leaders  to  carry  mea-
sures that  are  quite  opposed  to  the  genuine  sense  of  the  majority
of  the  nation ;  while  many  others  throw  their  influence  into
great  movements  of  change,  with  a  careless  and  unreflecting
levity  they  would  never  have  displayed  on  any  matter  directly
affecting  their  private  interests.  But  when  the  rights  of  pro-
perty are  touched  these  interests  are  at  once  alarmed.  The
iudiflerence  and  the  levity  in  a  great  measure  disappear,  and
an  unwonted  spirit  of  earnestness  and  caution  is  aroused.  In
France  there  was  a  stronof  bulwark  of  resistance  in  the  sveat
multitude  of  small  owners  of  land.  The  extent  to  which  pea-
sant proprietors  had  already  multiplied,  seems  to  have  been  almost
entirely  unknown  in  England  until  the  publication  in  1702  of

486 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxr.

Arthur  Young's  Tour ;  and  Burke,  though  in  general  singularly
well-informed  about  the  social  condition  of  France,  appears  to
have  been  altogether  ignorant  of  it. ^  This  class  was  still  further
strengthened  by  the  great  masses  of  Church  and  royal  property
thrown  into  the  market  at  the  Revolution,  and  by  the  extension
of  the  law  of  equal  division.  At  the  same  time,  the  sense  of
property  among  them  was  greatly  intensified  by  the  simplifi-
cation of  titles,  which  put  an  end  to  the  confused,  divided,  and
imperfect  ownership  growing  out  of  the  feudal  system.  The
destruction  of  the  feudal  obligations,  as  it  was  actually  accom-
plished, was  in  many  instances  an  act  of  the  most  barefaced
robbery,  A  crowd  of  money  rights,  which  had  been  for  ages
sold  and  purchased  under  the  full  sanction  of  the  law,  and  which
had  growai  out  of  the  most  legitimate  contracts,  were  swept
away  without  compensation.  But  one  of  the  results  was  the
creation  of  a  large  class  who,  themselves  enjoying  absolute  and
undivided  property,  exhibited  the  instincts  of  proprietors  in
their  utmost  intensity.  This  class  was  much  increased  at  a
later  period,  by  the  wide  diffusion  of  small  portions  of  the  obli-
gations of  the  national  debt.  Revolutionary  and  anarchical
doctrines  relating  to  property  have  again  and  again  risen  to  the
surface,  but  the  knowledge  that  an  immense  proportion  of  the
French  people  are  always  ready,  if  the  rights  of  property  are
seriously  menaced,  to  throw  themselves  for  protection  into  the
arms  of  a  military  despotism,  has  hitherto  proved  a  sufficient
check  upon  socialistic  tendencies  in  France.

In  estimating  the  relations  of  the  French  Revolution  to
otlifT  countries,  the  language  of  Burke  was  much  more  moderate
1 1 1.1  II  it  afterwards  became.  He  admitted  fully  that  the  English
]);iity  which  symjiathised  with  the  Revolution  was  a  small  one,
and  one  of  the  best  known  passages  in  the  '  Reflections  '  is  th;it
contrasting  the  half-dozen  grasshoppers  which  make  the  field

'  I  infer  tins  not,  only  from Mio  flint  of  England,  but  was  also  '  not  so

fiilrmco  of  Unrkc,  but  ulso from his  c'<iu:il  in  tlio  distribution,  nor  so  ready

Htatf;inc;nt that  'the gc^ncral  circula-  in  the  circ\ilalion.' Henry  SwinburiU',

tion of  j)rof)<',rty, and in parti(Uilar  who  travelled  from Bayonne  to  Mar-

the  mutual  convertibility  of  land  into  seilles in 177fi, and published his

money,  and  of  money  into  land,'  was  travels  in  1785,  noticed  the  passion  of

less  in  France  flian  in  Knf^daiid. In  the  people  of  liigorre  for  purchasing;

another  pfissapjc  of  his  ftrflrftionn  ho  little  plots  of  land  out  of  their  earn-

nays  that  the  cnmparalivo  wealth  of  ings,  and  their  pronrncss  to  run  into

France  was  not  only  much  inferior  to  debi  hn  thai  ['mpusc.

CH.  XXI.  BUP.KE ON FREN'CH rKOPAGANDISM.  4S7

ring  with  their  importunate  clink,  with  the  herds  of  gi'eat  cattle
that  chew  the  cud  in  silence  under  thfj  shelter  of  the  British
Oak.  He  maintained,  however,  that  the  beginnings  of  disorder
were  very  lately  even  more  feeble  in  France.  The  world  was  in
the  presence  of  '  a  revolution  of  sentiments,  manners,  and  moral
opinions,'  and  such  a  revolution  could  not  be  confined  to  one
country.  '  France  has  always  more  or  less  influenced  manners
ill  England ;  and  when  your  fountain  is  choked  up,  the  stream
will  not  run  long  and  not  run  clear  with  us,  or  perhaps  with
any  nation.'  '  Of  all  things  Wisdom  is  the  most  terrified  with
epidemical  fanaticism,  because  of  all  enemies  it  is  that  against
which  she  is  the  least  able  to  furnish  any  kind  of  resource.'  It
was  idle  to  say  that  French  affairs  did  not  concern  Englishmen,
when  they  were  steadily  and  persistently  held  up  as  a  model.
Nor  was  this  a  merely  spontaneous  and  unforced  admiration.
One  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  new  French  fanati-
cism was  its  proselytising  spirit.  '  They  have  societies  to  cabal
and  correspond  at  home  and  abroad,  for  the  propagation  of  their
tenets.  The  Republic  of  Berne,  one  of  the  happiest,  the  most
prosperous,  and  the  best  governed  countries  upon  earth,  is  one
of  the  great  objects  at  the  destruction  of  which  they  aim.  I  am
told  they  have  in  some  measure  succeeded  in  sowing  there  the
seeds  of  discontent.'  They  are  busy  throughout  Germany ;
Spain  and  Italy  have  not  been  untried.  England  is  not  left
out  of  the  comprehensive  scheme  of  their  malignant  charity,
and  in  England  we  find  those  who  stretch  out  their  arms  to
them.'

The  abstract  I  have  now  given  of  the  contents  of  the
'  Reflections  on  the  Fi-ench  Revolution  '  has  extended  to  con-
siderable, and  I  fear  somewhat  tedious,  length,  but  it  is  not,
I  think,  disproportioned  to  its  historical  importance.  '  The  first
considerable  check,'  wrote  the  French  writer  Dumont,  '  that  was
given  to  the  general  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,
came  from  the  famous  publication  of  Burke ;  when  he  attacked,
himself  entirely  alone,  the  gigantic  force  of  the  Assembly,  and
represented  these  new  legislators,  in  the  midst  of  all  their  power
and  glory,  as  maniacs  who  could  only  destroy  everything  and

'  Euike's  stateraent  about  Berne Pan, Uiisai Hldoriquc xw la Dc-
is  i'ullj'  corroborated by Mallet  du struction  de  la  Lvjm  Hcketiquc,  ch.  ii.

488  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

produce  nothing.'  Very  few  books  have  ever  combined  so  re-
markably the  wide  and  rapid  popularity  of  a  successful  political
pamphlet  with  the  enduring  influence  of  a  standard  political
treatise.  "With  the  doubtful  exception  of  Swift's  '  Conduct  of
the  Allies,'  it  had  probably  a  greater  immediate  effect  on  political
opinion  than  any  other  English  work  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury. With  the  exception  of  '  The  Wealth  of  Nations,'  no  other
English  book  of  the  eighteenth  century  has  so  deeply  and  per-
manently influenced  the  modes  of  thought  of  serious  political
thinkers.  Within  the  year  of  its  publication  about  19,000
copies  were  sold  in  England  and  about  13,000  in  France,  and
the  number  of  English  copies  sold  soon  rose  to  30,000.  It
became  the  main  topic  of  conversation  in  every  political  circle,
and  it  rarely  failed  to  produce  violent  feelings  either  of  admira-
tion or  dislike.

In  the  upper  circles,  both  in  England  and  on  the  Continent,
it  was,  in  general,  received  with  unbounded  enthusiasm.  The
King  spoke  of  it  with  the  warmest  admiration,  and  himself  dis-
tributed several  copies  ;  and  messages  or  letters  of  approval  soon
poured  in  to  the  author  from  the  sovereigns  assembled  atPilnitz,
from  Catherine  of  Russia,  from  Stanislaus  of  Poland,  from  the
French  Princes,  from  some  of  the  leading  members  of  the  French
clergy.  His  own  University  of  Dublin  conferred  on  him  an
honorary  degree ;  an  address  expressive  of  admiration  was  pre-
sented to  him  by  the  graduates  of  Oxford  ;  and  among  the  many
jn-ivate  persons  who  warmly  applauded  the  work  were  Gibbon
and  Reynolds.  In  Whig  circles,  however,  a  deep  division
of  opinion  was  already  shown.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  Lord
Fitzwilliam,  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  Lord  John  Cavendish,
^Montagu,  and  several  other  members  of  the  old  Rockingham
connection,  expressed  their  full  approbation  of  the  principles  of
tlie  work,  and  among  younger  men  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  was
emphatic  on  the  same  side.  On  the  other  hand  Fox,  Sheridan,
Fi'ancis,  Erskine,  and  Grey,  regarded  the  work  with  unconcealed
dislike.  Fox  not  only  expressed  in  private  his  entire  disappro-
bation of  it,  but  even  declared  that  in  point  of  composition  it
was  the  worst  which  Burke  had  ever  produced;  '  and  as  early

'  Sfte  a  Idler  of Burke,  in  T^ady and liurke's C'ortr.yw n denee,  iii.  171,
'Minlo'ti Life n/iSir  (,' .  L'Uiot,i.  '665-668, 171!. In  Ihc  famous  debate  on  May  (i.

CH.  XXI.  NEW PAKLIAMENT, NOVEMBER 1790.  489

as  December  1790  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  clearly  saw  in  the  leaniii,;^
of  Fox  towards  Sheridan  and  in  his  alienation  from  Burke  the
sign  of  the  approaching  disruption  of  the  Whig  party.^  In  the
Radical  party  there  was  a  moment  of  consternation,  and  it  was
noticed  that  the  attendance  at  the  revolutionary  clubs  for  a  time
greatly  fell  off,  but  a  host  of  pens  were  soon  employed  in  answer-
ing Burke.  Among  his  opponents  were  Priestley,  Price,  Mrs.
Macaulay,  and  Mary  Wollstonecraft,  but  the  only  answers  which
made  any  considerable  impression  were  the  '  Vindicise  Gallicao,'
which  was  the  earliest  and  one  of  the  best  works  of  Mackintosh,
and  the  '  Eights  of  Man,'  which  was  the  most  popular  work  of
Paine,

But  though  the  subject  was  rapidly  becoming  the  main
topic  of  political  discussion  in  thexountry,  it  was  still  kept  in  a
great  degree  out  of  Parliament.  As  we  have  already  seen,  in
the  early  session  of  1790  it  was  not  Burke  but  Fox  who  had
introduced  it,  and  the  one  great  speech  in  which  Burke  had  stated
his  views  on  the  subject,  cannot  be  accused  of  recklessness  or
violence.  Parliament  was  dissolved  in  the  autumn  of  1790,
and  the  new  Parliament  met  on  November  25.  In  the  short
session  between  its  first  meeting  and  the  Christmas  holidays,
no  allusion  appears  to  have  been  made  to  French  affairs.  The
difficulties  with  Spain  and  with  Tippoo  Sahib  were  the  chief
subjects  of  discussion,  and  Fox,  Burke,  and  Pitt  contended
side  by  side,  and  with  triumphant  ability,  for  the  doctrine
that  the  impeachment  of  Hastings  was  not  terminated  by  a
dissolution.

This  impeachment  and  the  French  Revolution  now  almost
equally  divided  the  attention  of  Burke.  From  the  time  when  the
events  of  October  5  and  6,  1789,  had  made  the  French  King  a
virtual  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  democracy,  the  movement  of
I'evolution  had  been  advancing  with  terrible  energy  towards  its
goal.  The  National  Assembly  as  well  as  the  King  had  beeii
transferred  from  Versailles  to  Paris,  and  it  was  now  exposed  to
the  ceaseless  intimidation  of  the  clubs  and  of  the  mob.  Soon
after  the  outrageous  scenes  of  October  5  and  6,  nearly  three

1791,  Fox  said  that  as  soon  as  Burke's  one of  the  doctrines it  contained.'

book  on  the  French  Revolution  was  Pa7-l.  Hist.  xxix.  389.
published,  '  he  condemned  that  book  '  Lady Minto'a Li/c of  Sir G.

both  in  public  and  private,  and  every  Elliot,  i.  368-370.

490  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xxj.

hundred  of  tlie  most  respectable  members,  including  Mounier,
Lally  Tollendal,  and  the  Bishop  of  Langres,  seceded  in  disgust,
and  power  fell  more  and  more  into  the  most  violent  hands.  Mea-
sure after  measure  was  pushed  on  with  a  feverish  haste,  blotting
out  all  the  institutions,  traditions,  and  characteristics  of  ancient
France.  The  privileges  enjoyed  by  particular  provinces  in
matters  of  taxation  had  been  already  abolished,  but  now  the
ancient  divisions  of  the  provinces,  with  their  names,  laws,  organi-
sations, usages,  customs,  and  infinite  diversities  of  administra-
tion, were  all  swept  away.  The  whole  country  was  reorganised
on  a  plan  of  perfect  uniformity  in  eighty-three  departments,
divided  symmetrically  into  districts,  cantons,  and  municipalities^
governed  by  an  entirely  new  set  of  administrative  and  judicial
institutions.  Functionaries  of  almost  every  order  were  made
elective,  and  the  basis  of  the  whole  fabric  was  an  electoral  body
comprising  all  Frenchmen,  except  domestics,  who  were  twenty-
five  years  of  age,  who  had  resided  in  one  district  for  a  year,  and
who  paid  direct  taxation  to  the  value  of  three  days'  labour.
The  old  Parliaments,  which  had  for  centuries  played  so  great  a
part  in  French  history,  were  destroyed.  The  judges  were  made
temporary  and  elective.  The  clergy,  who  had  shown  them-
selves imbued  with  the  liberal  ideas  of  the  age  to  a  degree
which  those  who  know  the  spirit  of  their  successors  find  it
difficult  to  realise  ;  who  had  so  readily  abandoned  their  privi-
leges in  taxation ;  who  had  been  the  first  of  the  privileged
orders  to  join  the  commons  in  the  States-General ;  and  who,  by
the  mouth  of  the  Archbishop  of  Paris,  had  consented  with
signal  generosity  to  the  abolition  of  their  tithes,  soon  found
that  they  had  gained  nothing  by  their  policy.  They  ceased  to  be
a  separate  corporation  in  the  State.  Their  Church  jiroperty  was
Kfized  and  sold,  and  they  were  reduced  to  the  position  of  mere
sjilaried  functionaries.  The  monasteries  were  abolished.  Mo-
nasl,ic  vows  were  forbidden,  and  soon  the  '  civil  constitution '
drove  the  clergy  to  the  alternntive  of  abandoning  either  their
cures  or  their  allegiance  to  the  Pope.

This  meiisure  was  not,  it  is  true,  altogether  unprecedented
in  its  general  character,  for  it  bore  a  striking  resemblance  to
tlic,  legislntion  of  Josepli  I!,  in  Austria.  The  State  by  its
own  uutiiority  diiniiii.-hnl  tlir  nuuilirr  oC  hislmprics,  rcai'niiigcd

CH.  XXI.  LAWS OF  THE  NATIONAL ASSE.MBLY.  491

the  dioceses  in  acconlance  witli  tlie  new  division  of  departments,
made  the  bishops  and  cures  eligible  by  the  same  electors  as
the  members  of  the  National  Assembly,  forbade  the  newly
elected  bishops  to  demand  their  confirmation  from  the  Pope,
and  finally  exacted  from  the  clergy  an  oath  of  adhesion  to  a
constitution  which  was  directly  opposed  to  the  principles  of
their  Church.  Out  of  138  bishops  only  four  consented  to  take
it.  Out  of  70,000  priests  46,000  were  deprived  of  their  cures,'
and  a  great  schism  divided  France.  The  nobles  had  lost  their
privileges,  their  political  power,  and  their  feudal  revenues.  It
was  decreed  that  there  should  be  no  longer  any  distinction  of
orders  in  France,  and  all  titles  were  forbidden.  The  great  com-
mercial companies  were  dissolved,  and  the  first  steps  were  taken
in  the  legislation  for  the  equal  division  of  successions.

The  moral  authority  of  the  King  had  been  totally  destroyed
by  successful  revolts,  and  although  the  Assembly  sincerely
desired  to  maintain  the  monarchical  constitution  of  the  Govern-
ment, it  had  left  him  scarcely  a  shadow  of  his  influence.  He
was  deprived  of  almost  all  patronage,  of  all  initiative  in  legis-
lation, of  the  right  of  pardon,  of  the  right  of  dissolving  the
Assembly.  His  ministers  were  excluded  from  the  Assembly,
and  superseded  in  their  chief  administrative  functions  by  com-
mittees appointed  by  it.  The  King  could  only  declare  peace
or  war  in  accordance  with  its  decrees.  His  veto  on  its  proceed-
ings was  limited  to  two  Legislatures.  At  the  same  time  the
condemnation  of  the  hereditary  principle  and  the  destruction
of  all  the  natural  bulwarks  of  the  throne  had  made  him  a
manifest  anomaly  in  the  State, ^  while  the  disorganisation  of
the  regular  army  and  the  creation  of  a  great  democratic
force  wholly  independent  of  the  Crown  had  deprived  him  of

'  Taine,  Hist,  de  la  devolution,  i.  the State, nor  combined  with any

237,  238.  sentiments  whatsoever  existing  in  the

-  '  Corporations  which  have  a  per-  minds  of  the  people.  It  is  a  soli-
petual  snccession,  and  hereditary  no-  tary,  unsupported,  anomalous  thins:.'
blesse  who  tliemselves  exist  by  sue-  Burke's  Cor>r:y)on//e)ice,  in.  212.  'To
cession,  are  the  true  guardians  of  think  of  the  possibilitj'  of  the  exist  -
monarchical  succession.  On  such  ence  of  a  permanent  and  hereditary
orders  and  institutions  alone  an  here-  royalty  where  nothing  else  is  here-
ditary monarchy  can  stand.  Where  ditarj' or  permanent  in  point  either  of
fdl  things  are  elective,  you  may  call  personal  or  corporate  dignity,  is  a
a  king  hereditary,  but  he  is  for  the  ruinous  chimera.'  'Remarks  on  tlic
present  a  cipher ;  and  the  succession  Policy  of  the  Allies,'  Uurke's  Wo/ /a,
is  not  supported  by  any  analogy  in  vii.  130.

492  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ai.  xxi.

every  element  of  power.  Even  tlie  right  of  commanding
the  army  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  new  municipal
bodies.*

It  is  strange  to  look  back  and  remember  how  lately  tho
Sovereign,  who  was  now  so  impotent,  had  been,  in  the  eyes  of
the  law  and  of  the  people,  the  absolute  ruler  of  France,  the  sole
initiator  of  legislation,  the  sole  source  of  political  power.  The
States-General  could  only  be  convened  by  his  free  will,  and
he  was  fully  authorised  by  the  precedents  of  French  history  to
regard  them  as  a  mere  consultative  body  which  had  no  legisla-
tive power  except  by  his  concession.  As  late  as  the  end  of  1788
Necker  in  his  report  to  the  King  had  declared  that  '  it  would
never  enter  into  the  mind  of  the  Third  Estate  to  diminish  the
seigneurial  and  honorary  prerogatives  that  distinguish  the  first
two  orders  in  their  properties  and  their  persons.'  In  the  royal
declaration  of  June  23,  1789,  the  King  had  formally  announced
that  all  properties  without  exception  must  be  respected,  and
that  under  the  name  of  property  were  comprised  tithes  and  all
the  feudal  and  seigneurial  rights  and  obligations,  all  the  useful
and  honorary  prerogatives,  attached  to  lands  or  fiefs  or  belong-
ing to  persons.  The  complex  and  balanced  Constitution  of  the
States-General,  as  it  had  existed  in  1614,  seemed  to  contain
ample  guarantees  that  the  change  from  an  absolute  to  a  represen-
tative Government  would  proceed  with  a  measured  and  orderly
course.  Under  such  a  Constitution  the  new  Assembly  would
be  like  one  of  those  engines  which  are  intended  to  descend
by  a  steep  declivity  from  the  mountain  to  the  plain,  and  are
furnished  with  elaborate  and  powerful  machinery  to  regulate
and  moderate  their  course.  But  the  rope  had  snapped.  Tlie
springs  had  broken.  The  whole  machinery  of  control  had  given
way,  and  it  was  now  hurrying  on  with  a  speed  which  no
power  could  check.  The  Third  Order  had  dominated  and  ab-
sorbed the  two  others.  The  Assembly,  which  was  convoked  to
give  a  moral  support  to  the  Crown,  had  destroyed  the  royal
prerogatives ;  it  had  set  aside  the  instructions  of  its  consti-
tuents; it  li ad  by  its  own  will  prolonged  its  tenure  of  power;
it  had  usurped  the  whole  authority,  it  had  transi'ormed  the
uholc  political  character  of  the  State.

'  b^bcl.pi).  'J2,  127,  128

CH.  XXI.  CONCENTRATION OF POWER.  493

All  tLe  old  orders,  corporations,  tribunals,  customs,  checks
and  counterpoises,  heterogeneous  and  complex  forms  of  adminis-
tration that  had  surrounded  and  restricted  the  most  absolute
sovereigns,  had  in  a  few  months  been  swept  away  by  the  resist-
less energy  of  one  democratic  chamber,  and  all  compromise  and
partition  of  power  had  been  rejected.  It  was  in  vain  that  the
King  at  the  very  outset  of  the  movement  had  agreed  to  accord
to  the  States-General  the  functions  of  a  complete  legislative
body,  with  annual  meetings  and  a  complete  control  of  the
purse ;  it  was  in  vain  that  the  nobles  had  formally  renounced
their  exemptions  from  taxation,  had  welcomed  the  opening  to
all  classes  of  the  higher  grades  in  the  army,  and  had  shown
themselves  on  August  4  perfectly  willing  to  abandon  one  class
of  their  feudal  rights  and  to  accept  a  reasonable  commutation  for
the  rest ;  it  was  in  vain  that  the  clergy  had  abandoned  all  their
privileges  relating  to  taxation,  had  consented  to  the  entire
abolition  of  their  tithes,  and  had  offered  to  raise  a  loan  of  400
millions  for  the  State,  if  their  other  property  was  maintained.
All  this,  together  with  a  complete  system  of  provincial  self-
government,  might  have  been  obtained  without  violence  or  re-
volution, but  all  this  proved  insufficient.  In  a  few  months  the
institutions,  traditions,  and  governing  maxims  of  centuries  had
been  overthrown.  In  the  total  destruction  of  the  political
power  of  the  King,  of  the  privileged  orders,  of  the  Parliaments,
and  of  all  provincial  corporations,  authority  seemed  wholly
concentrated  in  one  great,  unmanageable  assembly  ;  but  behind
that  assembly  were  the  Jacobin  clubs,  which  were  multiplying
rapidly  in  every  part  of  France  ;  the  Paris  mobs,  which  were
threatening  the  more  moderate  deputies,  and  shrieking  their
orders  from  the  galleries  of  the  Assembly ;  the  new  elective  and
almost  independent  councils  of  inexperienced  men,  which  were
springing  up  in  every  part  of  France,  pushed  on  by  fierce
democratic  passions  and  burning  to  realise  the  conceptions  of
Rousseau.

Much,  however,  was  done  by  the  Constituent  Assembly  which
was  of  great  and  permanent  value,  and  which  has  remained  un-
changed through  all  the  fluctuations  of  French  Governments.
The  abolition  of  the  feudal  system  with  its  manifold  and  intoler-
able abuses  proved  the  first  condition  of  the  prosperity  of  France.

494*  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

The  laws  wliicli  abolished  all  religious  disqualifications  and  all
exemptions  from  taxation,  which  opened  all  civil  and  mihtary
employments  to  all  Frenchmen,  which  emancipated  trade  and
industry  and  labour  from  the  countless  restrictions  and  mono-
polies that  encumbered  them,  and  which  remitted  some  of  the
taxes  that  were  most  wasteful,  and  most  oppressive  to  the  poor,
were  measures  of  incontestable  value.  The  Assembly  was  full
of  able  lawyers,  and  its  reforms  in  the  judicial  institutions  were
of  great  importance,  and  carried  out  some  of  the  chief  recom-
mendations of  Voltaire  and  Beccaria,  The  scandalous  abuses
of  the  sale  of  judicial  as  of  other  offices,  the  infinite  variety  and
complexity  of  the  administration  of  justice  in  the  different  pro-
vinces, the  exceptional  tribunals  by  which  the  King  could  with-
draw cases  from  the  ordinary  law  courts,  the  shameful  privi-
leges which  gave  the  upper  orders  lighter  penalties  for  crime,
all  disappeared.  The  same  system  of  law  was  now  established
through  the  whole  of  France,  and  it  was  enacted  that  all  privi-
lege in  matters  of  jurisdiction  should  cease,  and  that  all  citizens
without  distinction  should  plead  before  the  same  tribunals  and
in  the  same  form  and  should  be  liable  to  the  same  penalties.
The  admirable  institution  of  the  'juge  de  paix'  greatly  dimi-
nished litigation.  Juries  were  introduced  into  criminal  cases.
It  was  provided  that  the  reasons  of  every  judgment  should
be  fullv  set  forth.  Confiscation  of  goods,  and  penalties  inflict-
ing degradation  on  the  family  of  the  culprit,  were  abolished.
Corporal  punishment  was  no  longer  admitted  into  the  military
code.

It  is  idle  to  question  the  value  of  these  reforms,  but  many
of  them  might  easily  have  been  attained  without  revolution,
and  the  others  were  dearly  purchased  by  the  fatal  enfeeblement
of  the  great  pillars  of  order  in  the  State.  Through  the  whole
country  anarchy  was  rapidly  spreading,  and  it  was  anarchy  in-
tensified by  famine.  The  revolt  of  the  peasants  against  the
nobles,  which  seemed  for  a  time  to  have  diminished,  broke  out
again  with  redoubled  violence.  From  almost  all  parts  of  France
came  accounts  of  the  plunder  and  destruction  of  country  houses;
()(' the  refusal  of  peasniitis  to  pjiy  rents  or  any  of  those  feudal
«lues  which  the  Assembly  had  reserved  for  future  compensation  ;
ol' fierce  conflicts  between  the  faiipporters  of  the  old  and  new

CH.  XXI.  ANARCHY AND EMIGRATION.  495

order  of  tilings ;  of  the  revival  of  ancient  feuds  and  passions,  and
the  total  destruction  of  order  and  subordination.  The  events  of
the  last  months  had  spread  a  vague  and  unwonted  agitation
through  classes  which  had  very  rarely  been  touched  by  any
political  emotion,  and  the  French  peasants  were  now  as  passion-
ate supporters  of  the  Revolution  as  any  of  the  worshippers  of
the  '  Contrat  Social.'  For  forms  of  government  and  speculative
politics  they  cared  nothing,  but  they  hated  tithes ;  they  hated
the  feudal  system  with  an  intensity  which  neither  the  privileged
classes  nor  the  literary  politicians  had  ever  understood,  and
their  instinct  of  acquisition  was  aroused  to  the  utmost.  They
had  seen  with  astonishment  a  great  part  of  their  burdens  sud-
denly removed.  They  were  told  that  the  feudal  system  was
abolished,  and  they  were  resolved  that  like  the  system  of  tithes
it  should  be  abolished  absolutely  and  without  compensation.
The  Revolution  in  their  eyes  meant  simply  the  cessation  of  all
the  dues  and  services  to  which  they  were  liable,  and  with  the
complete  destruction  of  the  institutions  and  customs  under
which  they  had  grown  up,  all  their  landmarks  of  authority  and
of  morals  had  disappeared.  The  landed  gentry  were  for  the
most  part  ruined,  and  multitudes  were  flying  persecuted  and
panic-stricken  to  seek  shelter  in  the  towns  or  in  foreign  lands.
In  the  beginning  of  1790  six  thousand  estates  were  said  to  have
been  in  the  market,  and  they  could  find  no  purchasers.'  The
great  emigration  of  the  nobles  had  already  begun.  Some  had
gone  with  the  Prince  de  Conde  in  July  and  many  others  after
October  6,  and  it  was  already  known  that  a  large  party  were
imploring  foreign  princes  and  especially  the  German  Emperor
to  take  arms  for  the  restoration  of  the  monarchy  of  France.

In  November  1790  Morris  wrote  to  Washington:  'The
country  I  now  inhabit,  on  which  so  many  other  countries
depend,  having  sunk  to  absolute  nothingness  has  deranged  the
general  state  of  things  in  every  quarter.  .  .  .  This  unhappy
country,  bewildered  in  the  pursuit  of  metaphysical  whimsies,
presents  to  our  moral  view  a  mighty  ruin.  .  .  ,  The  Sovereign
humbled  to  the  level  of  a  beggar's  pity,  without  resources,
without  authority,  without  a  friend.  The  Assembly  at  once  a
master  and  a  slave,  new  in  power,  wild  in  theoi'V,  raw  in
*  Annual,  Rerjlster,  1 7i*0,  p,  121.

4'J6 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

practice.  It  engrosses  all  functions  though  incapable  of  exer-
cising any,  and  has  taken  from  this  fierce,  ferocious  people  every
restraint  of  religion  and  of  respect.  Sole  executors  of  the  law
and  therefore  supreme  judges  of  its  propriety,  each  district
measures  out  its  obedience  by  its  wishes,  and  the  great  interests
of  the  whole,  split  up  into  fractional  morsels,  depend  on  mo-
mentary impulse  and  ignorant  caprice.  Such  a  state  of  things
cannot  last.  But  how  will  it  end  ?  ,  .  .  One  thing  only  seems
to  be  tolerably  ascertained — that  the  glorious  opportunity  is  lost,
and  (for  this  time  at  least)  the  Revolution  has  failed.  .  .  .  But
I  think  from  the  chaos  of  opinion  and  the  conflict  of  its  jar-
ring elements  a  new  order  will  at  length  arise  which,  though  in
some  degree  the  child  of  chance,  may  not  be  less  productive
of  human  happiness  than  the  forethought  provisions  of  human
speculation.'  ^

The  enthusiasm  of  the  English  admirers  of  the  French
Revolution  was,  however,  still  unqualified,  and  they  admired  it
with  no  mere  speculative  or  Platonic  devotion.  It  was  as  a
lesson  to  Englishmen  that  Price  and  Priestley  especially  praised
it,  and  Mackintosh  declared  that  the  one  point  on  which  its
friends  and  enemies  were  agreed,  was  that  its  influence  could
not  be  confined  to  France,  but  must  produce  important  changes
in  the  general  state  of  Europe.^  This  brilliant,  conscientious,
and  on  most  subjects  moderate  writer,  did  not  hesitate  to  say
that  though  '  the  grievances  of  England  did  not  at  present
justify  a  change  by  violence,'  'they  were  in  a  rapid  progress  to
that  fatal  state,'  and  he  declared  that  '  whatever  may  be  the
ultimate  fate  of  the  French  Revolutionists  the  friends  of  freedom
must  ever  consider  them  as  the  authors  of  the  greatest  attempt
that  has  hitherto  been  made  in  the  cause  of  man.'  ^  By  far  tho
most  popular  answer  to  Burke  was  Paine's  '  Rights  of  Man,'  of
which  the  first  part  was  published  in  the  beginning  of  1791,
and  this  work  was  throughout  a  comparison  of  the  French  and
English  theories  of  government  to  the  infinite  advantage  of  the
former.  Burke,  Paine  said,  had  done  real  service  in  exhuming
the  servile  language  of  the  authors  of  the  Revolution  of  1G88,
for  he  had  shown  how  little  the  righti:  of  men  were  then  under-
fitood,  and  how  a])sui-(lly  tlio  English  Revolution  had  been
'  iVIojria's  H'or/,:s,  ii.  lh>-ll',». '•= Vindicia-  Gallkcc,  p.  ;5.'J8. '  Ihiil.  p.  852.

en.  XXI.  PAINE'S RIGHTS OF MAN.  497

overrated.  It  would  now,  however,  soon  find  its  level.  *It  is
already  on  the  wane,  eclipsed  by  the  enlarging  orb  of  reason
and  the  luminous  Revolutions  of  America  and  France.'  The
time  would  soon  come  when  '  mankind  would  scarcely  believe
that  a  country  calling  itself  free  would  send  to  Holland  for  a
man  and  clothe  him  with  power,  on  purpose  to  put  themselves
in  fear  of  him,  and  give  him  almost  a  million  sterling  a  year
for  leave  to  submit  themselves  and  their  posterity  like  bond-
men and  bondwomen  for  ever.'  '  Everything,'  he  continues,
*  in  the  English  Government  appears  to  me  the  reverse  of  what
it  ought  to  be,'  and  he  proceeded  to  show  how  the  true  model
for  Englishmen  was  the  new  French  Constitution,  and  to  con-
trast its  provisions,  clause  by  clause,  with  the  corruption  and
injustice  of  the  English  one.

In  France,  he  says,  every  man  who  pays  a  tax  of  sixty  sous
a  year  has  a  vote ;  the  number  of  representatives  bears  a  fixed
ratio  to  the  number  of  electors ;  the  National  Assembly  is  to
be  elected  every  two  years;  game  laws  and  monopolies  are
abolished ;  no  member  of  the  National  Assembly  is  suffered  to
be  an  ofiicer  of  the  Government,  a  placeman,  or  pensioner ;
the  right  of  making  peace  or  war  has  been  taken  from  the
King  and  vested  with  the  nation ;  all  titles  and  other  aristo-
cratic privileges  have  been  extinguished  ;  tithes  have  been  put
an  end  to ;  liberty  of  conscience  has  been  established,  not  as
a  matter  of  toleration  but  as  of  universal  right ;  and  while
the  King  is  still  retained  as  an  official,  the  sole  sovereignty  of
the  nation  itself  has  been  fully  and  formally  acknowledged.
'  Much  is  to  be  learned  from  the  French  Constitution.  Con-
quest and  tyranny  transplanted  themselves  with  William  the
Conqueror  from  Normandy  into  England,  and  the  country  is  yet
disfigured  with  the  marks.  May,  then,  the  example  of  all  France
contribute  to  regenerate  a  freedom  which  a  province  of  it  de-
stroyed.' '  From  the  Revolutions  of  America  and  France  and  the
symptoms  that  have  appeared  in  other  countries,  it  is  evident
that  the  opinion  of  the  world  is  changing  with  respect  to
systems  of  government.  .  .  .  All  the  old  Governments  have
received  a  shock  from  the  revolutions  that  already  appear,  and
which  were  once  more  improbable,  and  are  a  greater  subject  of
wonder,  than  a  general  revolution  iu  Europe  would  be  now.

VOL.  V.  K  K

498  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

When  we  survey  the  wretched  condition  of  man  under  the
monarchical  and  hereditary  systems  of  government  ...  it
becomes  evident  that  those  systems  are  bad,  and  that  a  general
revolution  in  the  principle  and  construction  of  Governments  is
necessary.' '

Such  was  the  character  of  the  work  which  the  Revolution
Society  was  zealously  disseminating.  The  leaven  was  rapidly
spreading.  Early  in  1791  there  was  a  branch  society  esta-
blished at  Norwich,  and  another,  which  was  especially  active  in
disseminating  the  works  of  Paine,  at  Manchester.  The  London
society  hired  Ranelagh  for  the  celebration  of  the  anniversary  of
the  French  Confederation  in  July,  and  it  was  announced  that
Sheridan  would  be  present.  A  flag  had  been  sent  from  France
to  be  used  on  the  occasion,  in  which  the  national  colours  of
France  and  England  were  blended,  but  as  it  was  composed  of
contraband  materials  it  was  seized  in  the  Custom  House. ^
The  addresses  of  the  Revolution  Society  to  the  French  patriots
continued  in  a  strain  of  the  most  devoted  enthusiasm.  '  The
admiration,'  they  said  in  April  1791,  '  with  which  you  French-
men have  long  beheld  the  British  Government  has,  we  believe,
arisen  from  your  having  hitherto  contemplated  with  more
attention  the  excellencies  of  our  Constitution  than  its  defects ;
a  moderate  portion  of  political  freedom  and  the  existence  of
bearable  oppressions  appeared  to  you  an  enviable  condition.'
*  Royal  prerogatives,'  they  wrote  a  few  months  later,  '  injurious
to  the  public  interest ;  a  servile  peerage ;  a  rapacious  and
intolerant  clergy ;  and  a  corrupt  representation,  are  grievances
under  which  we  suffer,  but  as  you  perhaps  have  profited  from
the  example  of  our  ancestors,  so  shall  we  from  your  lato  glorious
and  splendid  actions.'^

To  Burke,  on  the  other  hand,  the  dangers  of  the  Revolution
Rs  a  centre  of  malefic  contagion  appeared  continually  more  ter-
rible, and  he  soon  l)egan  to  change  his  first  opinion  of  the
military  impotence  to  which  France  had  been  reduced.  It  is
remarkable,  too,  and  I  tliink  melancholy  to  observe  how  en-
tirely he  shared  the  hopes  and  wishes  of  the  French  emigrants,

'  Jiiglitx  of  Man,  part  i.  iii.  ;{98.

'  lituly Mint()'.s JJfc of  Sir O.  '  Smyth's  Lrcturcs  on  the  French

L'lliot,i.'6TJ  ;  Burke's  C'orre.ywndcncc, Revolution,  iii.  36.

en.  XXI. EURKE  SUPPOKTS EUROPEAN INTERVENTION.  499

find  looked  forward  to  European  intervention  in  favour  of  iLe
King.  Turin  was  a  great  centre  of  the  French  emigration,  and
in  a  letter  to  the  English  Minister  at  that  city,  written  as  early
as  January  1791,  he  clearly  stated  his  views  on  the  subject.
He  urged  that  nothing  could  be  effected  in  France  without  a
great  force  from  abroad  ;  that  the  predominant  faction  was  un-
doubtedly the  strongest  and  not  likely  to  be  overturned  by  in-
ternal resistance.  '  Nothing  else,'  he  emphatically  added, '  but  a
foreign  force  can  or  will  do.  In  this  design  too  Great  Britain
and  Prussia  must  at  least  acquiesce.  Nor  is  it  a  small
military  force  that  can  do  the  business.  It  is  a  serious
design,  and  must  be  done  with  combined  strength.  Nor  must
that  strength  be  under  any  ordinary  conduct.  It  will  re-
quire as  much  political  management  as  military  skill  in  the
commanders.  France  is  weak,  indeed,  divided  and  deranged  ;
but  God  knows  when  the  things  came  to  be  tried  whether  the
invaders  would  not  find  that  the  enterprise  was  not  to  support
a  party  but  to  conquer  a  kingdom.  .  .  .  Every  hour  any  system
of  government  continues,  be  that  system  what  it  will,  the  more
it  obtains  consistency,  and  the  better  will  it  be  able  to  provide
for  its  own  support.  ...  If  the  powers  who  may  be  disposed  to
think,  as  I  most  seriously  do,  that  no  monarchy,  limited  or  un-
limited, nor  any  of  the  old  republics  can  possibly  be  safe  as  lonf*"
as  this  strange,  nameless,  wild,  enthusiastic  thing  is  established
in  the  centre  of  Europe,  may  not  be  in  readiness  to  act  in  con-
cert, and  with  all  their  forces — if  this  be  the  case,  to  be  sure
nothing  is  to  be  attempted  but  the  preluding  war  of  paper.  For
my  part  I  am  entirely  in  the  dark  about  the  designs  and  means  of
the  Powers  of  Europe  in  this  respect.  However,  this  I  am  quite
sure  of,  all  the  other  policy  is  childish  play  in  comparison.  .  .  .
Theoretic  plans  of  constitution  have  been  the  bane  of  France,
and  I  am  satisfied  that  nothing  can  possibly  do  it  any  real  ser-
vice but  to  establish  it  upon  all  its  ancient  bases.  Till  that  is
done  one  man's  speculation  will  appear  as  good  as  another's.' '

In  a  letter  written  about  the  same  time,  apparently  to  a  lady

in  attendance  on  the  Queen  of  France, he  expressed similar

views  with  equal  energy. '  I  feel,'  he  wrote,  '  as  an  Englishman

great  dread  and  apprehension  from  the  contagious  nature  of

'  Burke's  Correspondence,  iii.  182-186.

K  K  2

500  ENGLAND IN TUE EIGIITRRNTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

these  abomiuable  principles  and  vile  manners,  which  threateu
the  worst  and  most  degrading  barbarism  to  every  adjacent
country.  No  argument  can  persuade  me  that  if  they  are  suf-
fered finally  to  triumph  in  France  they  will  want  more  than  the
occasion  of  some  domestic  trouble  or  disturbance  ...  to  extend
themselves  to  us  and  to  blast  all  the  health  and  vigour  of  that
happy  Constitution  which  we  enjoy.  .  .  .  You  have  an  armed
tyranny  to  deal  with,  and  nothing  but  arms  can  pull  it  down.'  '

It  was  not  in  the  nature  of  Burke  to  conceal  views  which  he
strongly  held,  and  in  February  1791  he  publicly  stated  them  in
his  '  Letter  to  a  Member  of  the  National  Assembly.'  In  this
pamphlet  he  emphatically  declared  that  no  countiy  could  be
secure  while  there  was  established  in  the  centre  of  Europe  '  a
State  (if  so  it  may  be  called)  founded  on  principles  of  anarchy,
and  which,  is  in  reality  a  college  of  armed  fanatics.'  The  creed
of  Mohammed,  he  maintained,  in  the  first  days  of  its  fierce  and
proselytising  fanaticism  was  not  a  more  necessary  danger  to  the
Christian  communities  about  it  than  this  new  and  revolutionary
State  to  the  settled  Governments  of  Europe.  Nothing  but  a
force  from  without  would  be  sufficient  to  quell  it.  '  The  princes
of  Europe  in  the  beginning  of  this  century  did  well  not  to
sufier  the  monarchy  of  France  to  swallow  up  the  others.  They
ought  not  now,  in  my  opinion,  to  suffer  all  the  monarchies  and
commonwealths  to  be  swallowed  up  in  the  gulf  of  this  polluted
anarchy.  They  may  be  tolerably  safe  at  present,  because  the
comparative  power  of  France  for  the  present  is  little.  But
times  and  occasions  make  dangers.  Intestine  troubles  may
arise  in  other  countries.'  If  the  King  of  Prussia  was  justified
in  interfering  to  save  Holland  from  confusion,  much  more  would
he  be  justified  in  employing  the  same  power  to  rescue  a  vir-
tuous monarch  dethroned  by  traitors  and  rebels.

Burke,  at  the  same  time,  entirely  disclaimed  all  desire  to
sec  the  Enerlish  Constitution  established  in  France.  All  refor-
Illation  in  a  State,  he  contended,  should  be  based  upon  existing
materials,  and  the  traditions  iiiid  ancient  constitution  of  the
estates  in  France,  the  circumstances  of  the  country,  and  the
state  of  its  ])i-o]i(^rty  pointed  to  a  form  of  government  essentially
diiFerenl  li-uiu  that  prevailing  in  England.  Nor  was  the  English
'  Biirko'd  Currcxjwiulencc,  iii.  102,  11)3.

CH.  XXI.  DIVISION HJ'll'WEKN FOX AND 15UKKE.  /)()!

Coustitution  one  wliicli  could  be  easily  or  safely  imitated.  It  was
'  a  much  more  subtle  and  artificial  combination  of  parts  and
powers  than  people  were  generally  aware  of,'  and  depended  very
largely  for  its  efiicacy  on  restraints,  limitations,  understand-
ings, and  customs  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  Statute-book
*  The  parts  of  our  Constitution  have  gradually  and  almost  insen-
sibly, in  a  long  course  of  time,  accommodated  themselves  to
each  other  and  to  their  common  as  well  as  their  separate  pur-
poses.' It  was,  however,  in  the  opinion  of  Burke  a  total  mistake
to  suppose  tiiat  political  liberty  of  any  kind  can  be,  or  ought  to
be,  possessed  by  all  nations,  and  he  greatly  doubted  whether
France  was  ripe  for  it.  '  Men  are  qualified  for  civil  liberty  in
exact  proportion  to  their  disposition  to  put  moral  chains  upon
their  own  appetites  ...  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  disposed
to  listen  to  the  counsels  of  the  wise  and  good,  in  preference  to
the  flattery  of  knaves.  Society  cannot  exist  unless  a  controlling
power  upon  will  and  appetite  be  placed  somewhere,  and  the  less
ot  it  there  is  within,  the  more  there  must  be  without.  It  is
ordained  in  the  eternal  constitution  of  things  that  men  of  in-
temperate minds  cannot  be  free.  Their  passions  forge  their
fetters.'

Fox,  in  a  private  letter,  spoke  of  the  recommendation  in  this
pamphlet  of '  a  general  war  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the
present  Government  of  France'  as  'mere  madness;''  and  it
greatly  accelerated  the  breach.  It  is  i-emarkable,  however,  that
in  Parliament  the  provocation  still  came  steadily  from  Fox.  On
April  8,  1791,  in  a  debate  on  the  Quebec  Government  Bill,  when
Burke  was  not  present.  Fox  expressed  his  delight  at  the  en-
lightened principles  of  freedom  which  were  now  advancing  rapidly
over  a  considerable  part  of  the  globe ;  and  with  an  evident  allu-
sion to  the  treatise  of  Burke,  ridiculed  the  alleged  attempt  of
the  Ministers  to  revive  in  Canada  that  '  spirit  of  chivalry '  which
had  fallen  into  disgrace  in  the  neighbouring  country.  On  the
15th,  in  a  debate  on  the  Russian  armament,  he  again  most
gratuitously  introduced  the  subject,  declaring  that  he  '  admired
the  new  Constitution  of  France,  considered  altogether,  as  the
most  stupendous  and  glorious  edifice  of  liberty  which  had  been
erected  on  the  foundation  of  human  integrity  in  any  time  or
'  Fox'b  CorrL:-<2>o/ukncc,  ii.  363,

502  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

country.' '  Burke  at  once,  with  much  visible  emotion,  rose  to
reply,  but  it  was  the  end  of  a  long  debate,  and  the  cries  of
'  Question,'  chiefly  from  his  own  side  of  the  House,  were  so  loud
that  he  was  forced  to  resume  his  seat.

It  was  tolerably  certain  that  the  division  was  too  serious  to
be  closed.  It  was  impossible  that  Burke,  with  his  position  in
the  Whig  party,  with  his  opinions  of  the  French  Revolution,
and  after  the  writings  he  had  published,  could  acquiesce  by  his
silence  in  the  language  of  the  leader  of  his  party.  There  was  a
slight  skirmish  between  the  two  leaders  on  April  21,  in  the
course  of  which  Burke,  while  speaking  with  much  coui-tesy,
uttered  a  most  significant  warning :  '  Should  it  happen,'  he
said,  '  as  he  hoped  would  not  be  the  case,  that  he  and  his  right
honourable  friend  differed  from  each  other  on  principles  of
government,  he  desired  it  to  be  recollected  that,  however  dear
he  considered  his  friendship,  there  was  something  still  dearer  to
his  mind — the  love  of  his  country.'  ^

It  was  not,  however,  till  the  strange,  disorderly,  and  passionate
session  of  May  6,  that  the  breach  was  fully  consummated.  The
subject,  which  was  the  proposed  new  Constitution  for  Canada,
seemed  at  first  sight  wholly  unconnected  with  the  French  Revolu-
tion, but  Burke  privately  informed  Fox  that  he  intended  to  make
use  of  this  occasion  to  express  his  views  upon  French  affairs.  The
question  being  the  nature  of  the  Constitution  to  be  given  to  a
French  province  under  English  dominion,  a  comparison  of  French
and  English  ideas  of  government  appeared  to  him  not  irrelevant,
and  he  also  selected  the  occasion  because  the  House  being  in
committee,  each  member  had  a  right  to  speak  as  often  as  he
pleased.  Fox  called  upon  Burke,  and  endeavoured  without  suc-
cess to  induce  him  at  least  to  postpone  the  discussion  till  a
later  period.  Burke  urged  the  extreme  importance  of  the  sub-
ject; the  manner  in  wl)ich  it  had  been  already  more  than  once
introduced  into  Rjirliament;  the  impossibility  that  he  could,
with  his  opinions,  and  after  the  part  which  he  had  taken,  suffer
the  doctrines  that  had  been  propounded  to  pass  unchallenged ;
the  improbability  of  any  equally  favourable  opportunity  of  ex-
pressing Ills  views  occurring  during  the  present  session  of  Parlia-
ment. The  two  statesmen  entered  largely  into  the  question,  and
'  rarl.  IHsl.  xiix.  105-107,  ti'd.  ''■  Ibid.  xxix.  Wi.

ni.  XXI.  SESSION OF  MAY 6.  503

J.iurke  stated  fully  and  particularly  the  grounds  of  his  opinions ;
the  plan  of  his  intended  speech ;  the  limits  which  he  meant  to
impose  upon  himself  Neither  party  convinced  the  other,  but
there  was  no  quarrel,  and  they  walked  together  to  the  House
still  conversing  amicably  on  the  subject.

This  interview  took  place  on  April  21.'  The  Quebec  Bill
was  postponed  till  after  the  Easter  holidays,  and  when  on  May  6
the  House  went  into  committee,  Burke  opened  the  debate  by  a
speech  on  the  rights  of  man  as  illustrated  by  the  Constitutions
of  Canada,  the  United  States,  and  Great  Britain,  and  soon
launched  into  an  elaborate  dissertation  upon  the  measures  and
principles  now  prevailing  in  France,  and  upon  the  enormous
dangers  they  threatened  to  England.  '  If,'  he  said,  '  the  French
Revolutionists  were  to  mind  their  own  affairs,  and  had  shown
no  inclination  to  go  abroad  and  to  make  proselytes,  neither  he
nor  any  other  member  of  the  House  would  have  had  any  right
to  meddle  with  them,'  but  they  showed  as  much  zeal  in  making
proselytes  as  Lewis  XIV.  in  making  conquests.

It  was  soon  evident  that  his  own  party  were  anxious  that  he
should  not  be  heard.  At  least  seven  times  he  was  called  to
order,^  and  at  last  Lord  Sheffield  formally  moved  that  a  discus-
sion of  the  French  Constitution  when  the  House  was  in  com-
mittee on  the  Quebec  Bill  was  out  of  order.  Pitt,  however,  after
being  more  than  once  appealed  to,  interposed,  and  supported  the
contention  of  Burke  that  a  discussion  of  the  general  principles
on  which  political  power  should  be  based  was  germane  to  a  con-
sideration of  the  new  Constitution  to  be  established  in  Canada,

'  Annual  Be  fiister,\l'^\. See,  too,  Sweetheart;  see, they bark at  me.*

Biirke's  Appeal  from,  the  New  to  tlie  Pellevv's Life of Sidmouth, i. 85.

Old  Whigs The  intention  of  Burke  It  is  noticed  in  the  account  in  the

■was soon known. Windham men-  Annual  Ih'.gigter,  which  was  evidently

tions  {Diary,  p.  223)  that  on  the  22nd  drawn  up  under  Burke's  eye,  that  the

he  had  an  angry  dif^cussion  with  Sir  interruptions  all  came  from  his  own

Gilbert  Elliot  on  the  tiubject.  side,  and  it  is  plain  that  they  were

■■^  Lord  Sidmouth  was  accustomed  premeditated, for on April 21 Mr.

to  relate  a  strange,  characteristic  in-  Taylor  had  announced  that  he  would

cident in this debate,  which  is  not  call  anyone  to  order  who,  in  consider-

mentioned in the Pari. Hist. As  ing  the Quebec  Bill,  entered  into  a

long  as  the  interruptions  came  from  discussion of the constitutions of

the  leaders  of  the  party,  Burke  bore  other  countries. Compare  Pari.  If  int.

them  with  tolerable  composure,  but  xxix.  360,  and  Prior's  Life  of  Burhr,

when  the  lesser  lights ventured to  ii. 149. Burke  evidently  attributed

treat  him  in  the  same  way,  he  broke  the  interruptions  to  Fox,  but  Fox  very

out  in  tlie  words  of  Lear.  '  The  little  cmphaticnlly  repudiated  ihe iiuputa<

dogs  and all — Tray, Blanche, and  tion. Pari.  Hist.  xxis.,'i^l.

504  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xxi.

thougli  he  added  that  as  a  matter  of  discretion  he  greatly  wished
that  French  politics  had  not  been  introduced  into  the  debate.
But  Fox,  in  his  reply,  completely  threw  away  the  scabbard.
He  dilated  with  keen  irony  upon  the  disorderly  character  of  the
speech  of  Burke,  who,  he  said,  was  manifestly  seeking  to  force
on  a  quarrel  with  '  his  nearest  and  dearest  friend '  by  intro-
ducing a  subject  which  was  totally  alien  to  a  detailed  examina-
tion of  the  clauses  of  the  Quebec  Bill,  and  who  had  selected  as
the  occasion  for  that  quarrel  a  time  when  his  friend  had  been
'grossly  misrepresented  and  traduced'  as  a  Republican.  For
his  part  he  refused  to  countenance  such  an  irregularity  as  a
discussion  of  the  French  Constitution  in  a  committee  on  the
Quebec  Bill.  If  such  a  discussion  continued  he  would  leave  the
House.  At  the  same  time  he  had  no  hesitation  in  repeating  his
former  statement,  that  he  considered  the  French  Revolution,
'  on  the  whole,  one  of  the  most  glorious  events  in  the  history  of
mankind.'  He  accused  Burke  of  abandoning  the  principles  of
his  whole  life,  and  especially  those  which  he  held  during  the
American  Revolution ;  and  he  pronounced  his  recent  writings
and  speeches  to  be  libels  on  the  British  Constitution,  which
was  founded,  like  the  new  Constitution  in  France,  on  the
rights  of  man.  He  had  said  more,  he  added,  than  he  intended,
possibly  more  than  was  wise  and  proper ;  but  the  ministerial
side  of  the  House  had  encouraged  this  discussion  apparently  in
order  to  elicit  his  views.  It  was  very  unnecessary,  as  he  never
concealed  them.  On  the  French  Revolution  his  opinions  and
those  of  his  right  honourable  friend  '  were  wide  as  the  poles
asunder.'

The  sequel  of  the  debate  has  been  often  told.  Burke  began
Ills  reply  in  slow,  grave,  and  measured  tones,  but  rose  at  last  into
!i  perfect  tempest  of  passion.  He  had  not  introduced  the  topic  of
the  French  Revolution  into  Parliament ;  he  had  spoken  only  after
repeated  provocation,  and  he  now  complained  bitterly  of  the  viru-
lence of  the  attacks  of  one  who  had  for  twenty-two  years  been
his  intimate  friend ;  of  the  charges  of  something  like  treachery
tliat  were  brouglit  against  him,  though  he  had  fully  and  fairly
warned  his  opponent  of  his  deleruiinaiion  to  raise  this  dis-
cussion ;  of  the  persistent  and  organised  attempts  to  prevent
him  from  being  heard — attempts  which  seemed  doubly  ungrate-

cii.  XXI.  SESSION OF MAY G.  505

ful,  as  he  Lad  himself,  during  the  twenty-six  years  of  his  parlia-
mentary life,  never  called  a  member  to  order.  He  repeated  that
the  discussion  of  a  new  Constitution  to  be  provided  for  a  por-
tion of  the  British  Empire  was  a  proper  occasion  for  examining
the  principles  on  which  Constitutions  should  be  framed,  and  he
persisted  in  the  strain  of  argument  that  had  been  denounced.
He  expatiated  with  passionate  eloquence  on  the  revolutionary
doctrines  that  were  now  industriously  propagated  by  clubs  and
papers ;  the  perpetual  comparison  of  the  Constitutions  of  Eng-
land and  France  to  the  disparagement  of  the  former  ;  the  active
correspondence  established  between  English  demagogues  and
French  revolutionists  ;  the  enormous  aggravation  of  the  danger
when  French  principles  were  countenanced  and  eulogised  by  the
leader  of  one  of  the  great  parties  in  the  State.  He  had  on
several  previous  occasions  differed  from  Fox,  but  no  such  dif-
ferences had  ever  for  a  moment  interrupted  their  friendship.
He  now  knew  that  he  stood  in  Parliament  isolated  and  unsup-
ported, and  that  he  was  sacrificing  his  oldest  friendship  at  an
age  when  friendships  could  not  be  replaced.  But  the  call  of
public  duty  was  imperative,  and  if  it  was  with  his  last  breath
he  would  say,  '  Fly  from  the  French  Constitution.'  At  this  point
Fox  interposed  and  whispered,  '  There  is  no  loss  of  friends.'
*  Yes,'  Burke  fiercely  rejoined,  '  there  is  a  loss  of  friends ;  I
know  the  price  of  my  conduct. Our  friendship  is  at  an  end.'

It  was  but  too  true.  Fox,  over  whose  healthy,  affectionate,
and  not  very  profound  nature  political  passions  never  acquired  the
fierce  and  undivided  empire  they  obtained  in  Burke,  had  now
but  one  wish — to  appease  the  quarrel.  As  he  rose  to  answer,
the  tears  trickled  down  his  cheeks.  For  some  moments  he  was
nnable  to  speak,  and  men  who  were  but  too  apt  to  look  on  the
conflicts  of  party  as  they  looked  on  those  of  the  cock  pit  or  the
prize  ring,  were  moved  to  an  unwonted  emotion  by  the  pathos
of  the  scene.  '  It  was  painful,'  he  said  in  beginning  a  most
admirable  and  temperate  defence  of  his  views,  '  painful  to  be
unkindly  treated  by  those  to  whom  they  felt  the  greatest  obli-
gations, and  who,  notwithstanding  their  harshness,  they  must
Btill  love  and  esteem.  He  could  not  forget  that  when  little
more  than  a  boy  he  had  received  favours  from  his  right  honour-
able friend,  that  their  friendship  had  grown  with  their  years,

506  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. cir.  xxi.

that  it  had  continued  for  upwards  of  twenty-five  years,  and  that
for  the  last  twenty  years  they  had  acted  together  and  lived  on
terms  of  the  most  familiar  intimacy.  He  hoped  that,  notwith-
standing what  had  happened,  his  right  honourable  friend  would
think  on  those  past  times,  and  however  any  imprudent  or  in-
temperate words  might  have  offended  him,  it  would  show  that
he  had  not  been  intentionally  in  fault.'  Much  more  was  said  in
the  same  strain,  but  the  language  of  conciliation  had  no  longer
any  influence  on  Burke.  The  prophetic  fury,  whether  of  in-
spiration or  possession,  was  upon  him,  and  that  night  closed  a
friendship  which  was  one  of  the  most  memorable  in  English
history.  The  two  statesmen  met  and  co-operated  in  the  im-
peachment of  Hastings,  and  they  sometimes  conversed  amicably
together ; '  but  the  breach  was  never  healed,  and  the  Whig
party  for  at  least  a  generation  was  shattered  by  their  quarrel.*
A  trivial  incident  which  took  place  at  the  close  of  the  sitting
illustrated  but  too  plainly  the  morbid  excitement  under  which
Burke  was  labouring.  It  was  a  wet  night,  and  he  asked  a
member,  whose  carriage  was  standing  near,  to  set  him  down  at
his  house.  As  they  drove  they  began  to  speak  on  the  question
that  had  been  discussed,  but  when  Burke  discovered  that  his
friend  had  French  sympathies  he  seized  the  check  string  in  a
fury  and  was  with  difficulty  restrained  from  descending  into  the
rain.  When  the  carriage  at  length  arrived  at  his  house,  he
hurried  out  without  speaking  a  word,  nor  did  he  ever  renew
his  acquaintance.^

It  seemed  as  though  the  victory  lay  with  Fox.  The  news-
jiapers  of  the  party  in  general  assailed  Burke  with  great  bitterness
as  a  deserter — a  charge  which  must  have  been  especially  pain-
ful to  one  who  more  than  any  other  living  man  had  dwelt  upon
the  importance  and  the  obligation  of  party  discipline. In  the

'  In  a  letter  to  his  son  dated  Feb.  Hastings's  trial,  spoke  to  me  about
10,  1 702,  he  says:  'As  to  opposition,  the  bii^iiness  of  tlie  Catholics  of  Ire-
and  my  relation  to  them,  tilings  re-  land,  and  expressed  himself,  as  I
main  nearly  as  they  were  ;  no  approxi-  tlidught,  he  would,  very  strongly  in
Illation  on  the  part  of  Fox  to  lue,  or  their  favour;  but  with  liftlc  hopes  of
(if  me  to  him,  or  to  or  from  any  of  anytliing  being  done.'  Burke's  Co7'-
Iiis  people,  except  general  civility,  rcxjiinuleii-ce,  iii.  415.
when  seldom  we  meet.  I  never  stay  ^  Pari.  Hist.  Sec,  too,  the  excel-
in  the  House  to  hear  any  debates,  lent  account  in  the  ^7tww«^  Ilcgistrr,
rnucli  less  to  divide  on  any  question.  1791.

On  the  affair  of  Hastings  we  converse  '  Prior's  lAfc of  Ihirlic, ii. IHl,

jubl  as  we  did. Fox  sitting  by  mc  at  155.

ciT.  XXI.  ISOLATION OF EURKE.  507

debate  on  ]\Iay  6  the  interruptions  appear  to  have  all  come  from
his  own  party,  and  no  member  of  that  party  openly  supported
liim,  nor  did  any  yet  follow  him  in  his  secession.  In  a  debate
a  few  days  later  Fox  guarded  himself  against  the  imputation  of
republicanism  by  a  speech,  which  has  been  quoted  in  a  former
chapter,  strongly  asserting  the  necessity  of  a  monarchical  and
aristocratic  element  in  a  well-constituted  State,  while  Burke
spoke  of  himself  in  melancholy  terms  as  excluded  from  and  dis-
graced by  his  party.  This  language  w^as  hardly  exaggerated,
for  a  few  days  after  the  rupture  the  '  Morning  Chronicle,'  which
was  known  to  represent  especially  the  opinions  of  Fox,  contained
the  following  paragraph :  '  The  great  and  firm  body  of  the
Whigs  in  England,  true  to  their  principles,  have  decided  on  the
dispute  between  Mr.  Fox  and  Mr.  Burke,  and  the  former  is  de-
clared to  have  maintained  the  pure  doctrines  by  which  they  are
bound  together  and  upon  which  they  have  invariably  acted.  The
consequence  is  that  Mr.  Burke  retires  from  Parliament.'  ^

Scarcely  a  year,  however,  had  passed  when  all  this  was
changed.  The  signs  of  discontent  and  division  began  to  mul-
tiply rapidly  in  the  Whig  party,  and  at  length  in  1794  a  great
portion  of  it  adopted  the  principles  of  Burke  and  seceded  openly
from  Fox.  Public  opinion  warmly  supported  them,  and  the
minority  which  adhered  to  Fox  became  one  of  the  weakest  and
most  discredited  oppositions  ever  known  in  England.

The  position  of  Burke  for  some  time  after  his  quarrel  with
Fox  was  very  painful  and  isolated.  The  impeachment  of
Hastings  still  occupied  much  of  his  thoughts,  but  in  addition  to
Fox  he  was  now  much  alienated  from  Francis,  with  whom  this
impeachment  had  brought  him  into  close  contact,  and  for  whom
he  seems  to  have  entertained  a  warm  respect.  Francis,  who  had
seen  part  of  Burke's  book  on  the  French  Eevolution  before  its
publication,  had  expressed  his  strong  disapprobation  in  letters
of  very  powerful  and  skilful  criticism,  and  as  time  rolled  on  he
identified  himself  closely  with  Fox  and  with  the  democratic
section  of  the  party .^

^  Tnofs  Life  of  Burie,i'\.  169.  he saj's, after describing Fox, 'I

'  See  Parkes  and  Meri vale's  Life  would have mnch sooner trusted

of  Francis, ii. 458. In those very  Edmund  Burke  with  the  posthumous

acute notes in which Francis de-  care of my name and reputation,

lineated  some  of  his  contemporaries,  though  from  1701  we  had  been  almost

508  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. cii.  xxi.

Burke  himself  now  seldom  appeared  in  Parliament.  Much
has  been  said  of  the  extreme  horror  of  reform  which  the  French
Revolution  produced  in  his  mind,  but  on  this  subject  there  is  some
prevalent  exaggeration.  His  opposition  to  parliamentary  reform,
as  we  have  already  seen,  dates  from  a  much  earlier  period,  and
although  he  undoubtedly  now  thought  that  the  main  danger  was
not,  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign,  from  royal  influence  but
from  democratic  innovation;  although  he  was  now  strongly
opposed  to  any  measures  in  favour  of  the  Dissenters,  and  espe-
cially the  Unitarians,  which  might  either  furnish  a  precedent
for  attacks  against  the  Church  or  strengthen  the  political  power
of  the  partisans  of  the  Revolution,  there  was  still  a  large  class
of  questions  on  which  he  was  an  earnest  reformer.  He  spoke
powerfully  in  favour  of  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade.  He
advocated  the  abolition  of  imprisonment  for  debt,  and  he  threw
himself  with  great  ardour  and  effect  into  the  movement  for  the
relief  of  the  Irish  Catholics.  One  of  the  causes  with  which  he
had  especially  identified  himself  in  his  early  life,  now  triumphed
with  general  concurrence.  The  Bill  which  he  had  framed
in  1771  giving  juries  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  libel  was  revived
by  Fox  in  1791  with  very  slight  alterations,  and  was  carried
with  scarcely  any  opposition.  Fox  had  himself  opposed  this
measure  when  it  had  been  previously  introduced,  and  it  is  re-
nuirkablc  that  in  taking  up  the  question  he  appears  to  have
made  no  acknowledgment  whatever  of  the  previous  services
of  Burke,  who  treated  the  neglect  with  a  disdainful  silence.

Burke  did  not  join  Pitt,  and  his  relations  to  the  Whig  party
were  very  ambiguous.  In  his  '  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old
Whigs  '  he  not  only  defended  with  triumphant  power  the  con-
sistency of  his  own  political  career,  but  also  continued  the  line  of
argument  which  he  had  pursued  in  his  '  Reflections  on  the  French
]levolution,'  showing  that  the  original  doctrines  of  the  Whigs
of  ]  688  were  essentially  opposed  to  the  new  French  maxims.
J'Vom  the  words  of  the  Declaration  of  Rights  and  of  the  Act  of
►settlement;  from  the  language  of  kSomers;  iVom  the  speeches  of
the  managers  of  the  impeachment  of  JSacheverell,  when  the  WJiig

rnlircly  disunitorl  after  a  real  friond- iinflcrhikon  the  task  he  wonkl  have
hliip and iniiiriiiny  of many  years; itoiioiimud  ii  hc'Mlily  and  bond JiUu.'
bccauae X am tiuru that il  he liud

cn.  XXI.  APPEAL  TO THE OLD WllinS.  509

doctrine  of  resistance  w;is  defined  and  elaborated  with  special
care  by  the  most  accredited  lawyers  and  statesmen  of  the  party,
lie  showed  that  according  to  the  original  Whig  theory  the
English  Crown  was  in  no  sense  elective,  but  was  a  limited  and
hereditary  monarchy  settled  in  one  family  by  a  stringent,  per-
manent contract,  which  was  equally  binding  on  the  ruler  and
on  the  subjects.  He  showed  that  the  English  Revolution  was
justified  only  on  the  ground  that  the  Sovereign  had  broken  his
contract,  and  that  no  other  means  were  left  for  the  recovery,
maintenance,  and  security  of  the  ancient  Constitution,  and  that
those  who  made  it  took  the  utmost  pains  to  restrict  it  within
these  limits,  and  to  avoid  giving  the  smallest  countenance  to
the  doctrine  of  the  inalienable  right  of  nations  to  change  their
Government  when  they  pleased,  that  had  prevailed  during
the  Commonwealth.  '  Resistance,'  said  Walpole,  '  ought  never
to  be  thought  of  but  when  an  utter  subversion  of  the  laws  of
the  realm  threatens  the  whole  frame  of  our  Constitution,  and
no  redress  can  otherwise  be  hoped  for.  It  therefore  does,  and
ought  for  ever  to  stand  in  the  eye  and  letter  of  the  law  as  the
highest  offence.'  '  In  no  case,'  said  Sir  Joseph  Jekyll,  '  can  re-
sistance be  lawful  but  in  case  of  extreme  necessity  and  when
the  Constitution  cannot  otherwise  be  preserved ;  and  such  neces-
sity ought  to  be  plain  and  obvious  to  the  sense  and  judgment
of  the  whole  nation,  and  this  was  the  case  at  the  Revolution.'
'  Neither  the  few  nor  the  many,'  wrote  Burke,  '  have  a  right  to
act  merely  by  their  will  in  any  matter  connected  with  duty,
trust,  engagement  or  obligation.  The  Constitution  of  a  country
being  once  settled  upon  some  compact,  tacit  or  expressed,  there
is  no  power  existing  of  force  to  alter  it  without  the  breach  of
the  covenant  or  the  consent  of  all  the  parties.  Such  is  the
nature  of  a  contract.  And  the  votes  of  a  majority  of  the  people,
whatever  their  infamous  flatterers  may  teach  in  order  to  corrupt
their  minds,  cannot  alter  the  moral  any  more  than  they  can  alter
the  physical  essence  of  things.  The  people  are  not  to  be  taught
to  think  lightly  of  their  engagements  to  their  governors  ;  else  they
teach  governors  to  think  lightly  of  their  engagements  to  them.' '
It  will  hardly  be  denied  that  there  is  something  in  this  lan-
guage very  alien  to  the  tone  of  thought  now  prevailing  in
*  A^J^ieal  from  the  A\'W  to  the  Old  Whigs.

510  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

England,  and  especially  in  tbe  English  Liberal  party.  Their
sentiment  is  probably  expressed  with  much  greater  fidelity  by
Paine.  '  What  is  government,'  he  asked,  '  more  than  the
management  of  the  affairs  of  a  nation  ?  It  is  not,  and  from  its
nature  cannot  be,  the  property  of  any  particular  man  or  family,
but  of  the  whole  community  at  whose  expense  it  is  supported  ;
and  though  by  force  or  contrivance  it  has  been  usurped  into  an
inheritance,  the  usurpation  cannot  alter  the  right  of  things.
Sovereignty  as  a  matter  of  right  appertains  to  the  nation  only,
and  not  to  any  individual,  and  a  nation  has  at  all  times  an  in-
herent, indefeasible  right  to  abolish  any  form  of  government
it  finds  inconvenient,  and  establish  such  as  accords  with  its
interest,  disposition,  and  happiness.'

The  success  of  the  '  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs '
was  very  great,  but  the  leading  Whigs  kept  a  careful  silence,
and  without  disputing  Burke's  theory  of  the  Constitution
blamed  the  precipitance  with  which  he  had  brought  the  question
to  an  issue  in  Parliament.  Lord  Stomiont  had  a  long  interview
with  him,  in  which  he  said  that  the  breach  in  the  party  was
solely  due  to  the  mutual  imprudence  of  Fox  and  Burke.  There
was,  he  believed,  no  real  material  difference  of  principle  between
them,  and  on  the  subject  of  the  confiscation  of  Church  property
they  were  completely  at  one.  Fox  was  too  sensible  a  man  to
wish  for  the  destruction  of  the  Constitution,  and  as  for  the  rest
of  the  party,  he  had  not  seen  a  single  man  who  approved  of  the
doctrines  of  Paine,  or  of  anything  like  them,  or  who  differed  in
any  considerable  degree  from  the  principles  of  Burke.  It  was
therefore  in  the  highest  degree  imprudent  to  force  these  ques-
tions into  discussion,  and  exceedingly  unfavourable  to  the  in-
terests of  the  French  aristocracy  to  represent  a  great  English
party  as  adverse  to  them,  when  in  reality  it  was  not.

Burke  fully  admitted  that  there  was  some  force  in  these
views.  He  did  not  himself  believe  that  more  than  ten,  or  at
most  thirteen,  members  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  really
sympathised  with  the  French,  and  ho  believed  that  'inwardly
even  Fox  did  not  differ  from  him  materially,  if  at  all,'  but  he
answered  that  doctrines  of  the  most  dangerous  character,  and
absolutely  inconsistent  with  the  British  Constitution  and  with
the  original  principles  of  the  Whig  party,  were  now  industriously

en.  xxt.  TIIK  WITTG PARTY ARLSTOCrvATIC.  511

circulated  by  societies  and  newspapers  which  purported  to  re-
present that  party,  and  that  all  his  endeavours  to  induce  the
"VV^hig  leaders  to  disclaim  such  doctors  and  doctrines  had  proved
fruitless.  On  the  contrary,  Fox  had  repeatedly  pronounced
unqualified  eulogies  on  the  French  Revolution,  and  in  the  very
speech  in  which  he  had  endeavoured  to  heal  the  quarrel,  he  had
taken  occasion  to  express  his  entire  dissent  from  '  every  doctrine '
contained  in  the  book  in  which  Burke  had  most  fully  expressed
his  views  on  the  British  Constitution  as  well  as  on  French  affairs.'
Stormont  could  only  answer  that  Fox  could  not  really  have
meant  to  condemn  every  part  of  Burke's  book,  and  that  the
silence  of  the  other  Whig  leaders  was  due  to  their  fear  of  show-
ing that  there  were  divisions  among  them.  Burke  retorted  that
'  the  sort  of  unanimity  produced  was  a  supposed  common  ad-
herence to  sentiments  odious  to  the  best  of  them.'  ^

He  strenuously  and  fiercely  maintained,  in  his  private
correspondence,  that  it  was  '  now  absolutely  necessary  to  sepa-
rate those  who  cultivate  a  rational  and  sober  liberty  upon  the
plan  of  our  existing  Constitution,  from  those  who  think  they
have  no  liberty,  if  it  does  not  comprehend  a  right  in  them  of
making  to  themselves  new  Constitutions  at  their  pleasure.'
The  Whig  party,  he  urged,  as  it  had  been  originally  formed
and  as  he  had  always  defended  it,  was  as  far  as  possible
from  a  democratic  party ;  and  if  it  ever  became  a  democratic
party,  it  lost  all  right  to  the  allegiance  of  those  who  joined
it  on  its  original  principles.  '  The  party,'  he  wrote,  '  with  which
I  acted  had  by  the  malevolent  and  unthinking  been  reproached,
and  by  the  wise  and  good  always  esteemed  and  confided  in  as
an  aristocratic  party.  Such  I  always  understood  it  to  be  in  the
true  sense  of  the  word.  I  understood  it  to  be  a  party  in  its
composition  and  in  its  principles  connected  with  the  solid,  per-
manent, long-possessed  property  of  the  country  ;  a  party  which,
by  a  temper  derived  from  that  species  of  property  and  affording
a  security  to  it,  was  attached  to  the  ancient,  tried  usages  of  the
kingdom ;  a  party,  therefore,  essentially  constructed  upon  a
ground  plot  of  stability  and  independence,  .  .  .  equally  re-
moved from  servile  Court  compliances  and  from  popular  levity,

'  See  Pari.  Hist.  xxix.  389.

*  Burke's  Corre^wndence,  iii.  224-226,  235,  236,  274.

512 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xxi.

presumption,  and  precipitation.'  Its  members  were  bound  '  by
the  very  constitution  of  the  party  ...  to  support  these  aristo-
cratic principles  and  the  aristocratic  interests  connected  with
them  as  essential  to  the  real  benefit  of  the  body  of  the  people,
to  which  all  names  of  party,  all  ranks  and  orders  in  the  State,
and  even  Government  itself  ought  to  be  entirely  subordinate.'
'  Against  the  existence  of  any  such  description  of  men  as  our
party  is  in  a  great  measure  composed  of,  against  the  existence
of  any  mode  of  government  on  such  a  basis,  we  have  seen  a
serious  and  systematic  attack  attended  with  the  most  complete
success,  in  another  country,  but  in  a  country  at  our  very  door.
...  If  I  were  to  produce  an  example  of  something  diametri-
cally opposite  to  the  composition,  to  the  spirit,  to  the  temper,
to  the  character  and  to  all  the  maxims  of  our  old  and  unregene-
rated  party,  something  fitted  to  illustrate  it  by  the  strongest
opposition,  I  would  produce  what  has  been  done  in  France.  .  .  .
They  who  cry  up  the  French  Revolution,  cry  down  the  party
which  you  and  I  had  so  long  the  honour  and  satisfaction  to
belong  to.  .  .  .  My  party  principles,  as  well  as  my  general  poli-
tics and  my  natural  sentiments,  must  lead  me  to  detest  the
French  Revolution  in  the  act,  in  the  spirit,  in  the  consequences,
and  most  of  all  in  the  example.'

Among  the  many  examples  of  apostasy  from  the  old  Whig
creed  the  most  flagrant  was  furnished  by  the  Prince  of  Wales.
In  the  Regency  debates  no  one  had  taken  so  prominent  a  part,
no  one  had  incurred  so  much  odium  on  behalf  of  the  claims  of
the  Prince,  as  Burke,  and  he  had  argued  against  the  Govern-
ment measure  on  essentially  the  same  principles  as  those  on
which  he  was  arguing  against  the  French  Revolution.  '  I  en-
deavoured,' he  wrote,  '  to  show  that  the  hereditary  succession
could  not  be  supported  whilst  a  person  who  had  the  chief  in-
terest in  it  was,  during  a  virtual  interregnum,  excluded  from
the  Government ;  and  that  the  direct  tendency  of  the  measure,
us  well  as  the  grounds  upon  which  it  was  argued,  went  to  make
the  Crown  itself  elective,  contrary  (as  I  contended)  to  the  funda-
irnMital  settlement  made  after  the  Revolution.'  The  Prince  '  is
ijiucli  more  personally  concerned  in  all  questions  of  succession
1  liaii  tlie  King,  who  is  in  possession  ; '  yet '  he  has  been  persuaded
not  only  lo  lu'ik  willi  all  possible  culdness  on  myself,  but  to  lose

i

CH.  XXI.  CAMDEN ON WHIG PKINCIPLES.  513

no  opportunity  of  publicly  declaring  his  disapprobation  of  a  book
written  to  prove  that  the  Crown  to  which  (I  hope)  he  is  to  suc-
ceed is  not  elective.  For  this  I  am  in  disgrace  at  Carlton
House !  .  .  .  Those  the  most  in  his  favour  and  confidence  are
avowed  admirers  of  the  French  democracy.  Even  his  Attorney
and  his  Solicitor  General '  .  .  .  are  enthusiasts,  public  and
declared  for  the  French  Revolution  and  its  principles.  ...  A
Prince  of  Wales  with  democratic  law  servants,  with  democratic
political  friends,  with  democratic  personal  favourites  !  If  this
be  not  ominous  to  the  Crown,  I  know  not  what  is.'  ^

There  had  already,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  early  years  of  the
reign,  been  a  marked  divergence  of  tendency  between  the  more
aristocratic  Whigs  of  the  Rockingham  section  to  which  Burke
belonged,  and  the  more  democratic  Whigs  who  followed  the  stan-
dard of  Chatham.  It  is,  however,  a  remarkable  fact  that  Lord
Camden,  who  had  been  the  most  trusted  colleague  of  Chatham,
and  who  more  than  any  other  man  might  be  regarded  as  the
exponent  of  his  opinions,  now  wrote  to  Burke  expressing  his
warm  admiration  of  the  '  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs  '
and  his  '  perfect  concurrence  in  every  part  of  the  argument
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,'  'I  have  always,'  he  said,
'  thought  myself  an  old  Whig  and  held  the  same  principles  with
yourself;  but  I  suppose  none  or  very  few  of  us  ever  thought
upon  the  subject  with  so  much  correctness,  and  hardly  any
would  be  able  to  express  their  thoughts  with  such  clearness,
justness,  and  force  of  argument.'  ^

Burke  was  now  living  to  a  great  degree  among  French
gentlemen  who  had  been  driven  into  exile  by  the  Revolution.
The  fearful  sufferings  that  were  inflicted  in  France  during  its
first  stage  by  the  peasant  war  against  the  gentry,  by  the  cessa-
tion of  rents  and  feudal  dues,  by  the  violent  expulsion  of  im-
mense numbers  from  their  homes,  by  the  new  oath  which  drove
the  clergy  by  thousands  from  their  cures,  and  by  the  sudden
suppression  of  the  monasteries,  is  in  general  but  little  realised.
These  things  have  been  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  still
darker  and  more  dramatic  atrocities  of  the  Reign  of  Terror,  and
by  the  art  of  those  French  historians  of  the  Revolution,  who

'  Erskine  and  Piggott,  *  Burke's  Corresjjondence,  iii.  388-401.

»  Ibid.  228,  229.
VOL.  V.  L  L

514  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

have  laboured  to  persuade  the  world  that  the  horrors  which
incontestably  accompanied  the  movement  they  admire  were
mainly  due  to  the  emigration  of  the  gentry  and  to  the  fear  of
invasion.  This  is  a  theory  which  will  hardly  survive  among
educated  men  its  recent  crushing  exposure  by  Taine,  and  it  was
not  likely  to  occur  to  those  who  came  in  contact  with  the  innu-
merable fugitives  who  appeared  in  England  within  the  first  year
of  the  Revolution.  'Trance,'  said  Fox  in  the  debate  on  May  6,
'  has  established  a  complete,  unequivocal  toleration,  and  I  heartily
wish  that  a  complete  toleration  was  also  established  in  England.'
It  is  easy,  replied  Burke,  to  estimate  the  value  of  this  toleration
under  which  the  whole  French  clergy  have  been  deprived  of
their  bread,  unless  they  take  an  oath  inconsistent  with  the
teaching  of  their  Church,  while  Sisters  of  Charity,  engaged  in
tending  the  sick  in  the  hospitals,  have  been  dragged  into  the
streets  and  scourged,  for  no  other  crime  than  that  of  receiving
the  Sacraments  from  a  priest  who  had  not  submitted  to  the  re-
volutionary test.*

The  sufferings  of  the  ruined  gentry  of  France,  with  whom
he  was  constantly  associating,  filled  Burke  with  a  compassion
which  at  last  blinded  him  to  every  other  consideration,  and  ex-
cited his  passions  against  their  spoliators  to  the  very  verge  of
madness.  In  appeals  for  subscriptions  to  the  English  public  he
enumerated  their  wrongs  with  an  admirable  pathos,^  and  as
early  as  November  1790  he  described  the  Revolution  with  little
exaggeration  as  '  the  entire  destruction  (for  it  is  no  less)  of  all
the  gentlemen  of  a  great  country,  the  utter  ruin  of  their
property,  and  the  servitude  of  their  persons.'  His  indignation
was  all  the  greater  because  he  knew  as  few  Englishmen  knew
the  many  reforms  which  had  been  effected  in  France  in  the  pre-
ceding decade  ;  the  readiness  with  which  the  King  had  surren-
dered his  arbitrary  power,  and  the  privileged  orders  their  most
obnoxious  privileges ;  the  liberal  spirit  they  displayed  in  the
provincial  assemblies,  in  the  electoral  assemblies,  and  at  the
opening  of  tlie  States-General ;  and  the  perfect  facility  with
wliich  a  system  of  constitutional  liberty  could  have  been  esta-
blished with  their  concurrence. The  French,  he  wrote,  '  pos-

' /'iirl.  Ifid.  xxix.  393.  :5'J7.  Com-  '•'  Prior's Life  of  Burke,  ii. 171-

parc  'I'airK!,  Hist,  de  la  Jicvoiutiun,  i. 175.

pp.  laa-iss.

CH.  XXI.  THE  EMIGRANT GENTRY.  515

sessed  a  vast  body  of  nobility  and  gentry,  amongst  tlie  first  iu
the  world  for  splendour,  and  the  very  first  for  disinterested
services  to  their  country,  in  which  I  include  the  most  disin-
terested and  uncorrupt  judicature  (even  by  the  confession  of  its
enemies)  that  ever  was.  These  they  persecuted ;  they  hunted
them  down  like  wild  beasts  ;  they  expelled  them  from  their
families  and  their  houses  and  dispersed  them  into  every  country
in  Europe,  obliging  them  either  to  pine  in  fear  and  misery
at  home,  or  to  escape  into  want  and  exile  in  foreign  lands ;
nay,  .  .  .  they  abrogated  their  very  names  and  their  titular
descriptions  as  something  horrible  and  offensive  to  the  ears  of
mankind.  The  means  by  which  all  this  was  done  leaves  an
example  in  Europe  never  to  be  effaced  and  which  no  thinking
man,  I  imagine,  can  present  to  his  mind  without  consternation,
that  is,  the  bribing  of  an  immense  body  of  soldiers  taken  from
the  lowest  of  the  people  to  a  universal  revolt  against  their
ofiicers,  who  were  the  whole  body  of  the  country  gentlemen  and
the  landed  interest  of  the  nation.'  '  When  I  saw,' he  continued,
*  this  mingled  scene  of  crime,  of  vice,  of  disorder,  of  folly,  and  of
madness,  received  by  very  many  here  not  with  the  horror  and
disgust  which  it  ought  to  have  produced,  but  with  rapture  and
exultation  as  some  almost  supernatural  benefit  showered  down
upon  the  race  of  mankind ;  and  when  I  saw  that  arrangements
were  publicly  made  for  communicating  to  these  islands  their  full
share  of  these  blessings,  I  thought  myself  bound  to  stand  out
and  by  every  means  in  my  power  to  distinguish  the  ideas  of  a
sober  and  virtuous  liberty  (such  as  I  thought  our  party  had  ever
cultivated)  from  that  profligate,  immoral,  impious,  and  rebellious
licence  which,  through  the  medium  of  every  sort  of  disorder  aiad
calamity,  conducts  to  some  kind  or  other  of  tyrannic  domination.'
'  The  name  of  the  Monarchy  and  of  the  hereditary  Monarcliy,  too,
they  preserve  in  France  .  .  .  but  against  the  nobility  and  gentry
they  have  waged  inexpiable  war.  There  are  at  this  day  '  no  fewer
than  10,000  heads  of  respectable  families  driven  out  of  France. . . .
What  are  we  to  think  of  a  Constitution  as  a  pattern,  from  which
the  whole  gentry  of  a  country ...  fly  as  from  a  place  of  infection  ?'  *
The  extreme  terror  and  hatred,  however,  with  which  Burke
regarded  the  Revolution,  sprang  mainly  from  his  deep  conviction
'  Jan.  31,  1792.  *  Burke's  Corrc^wndcncc,  iii.  392-394,  40^,  401,  40G.

L  L  2

516  ENGLAND IN THE  EIOnTEENTIl CENTUEY. cii.  xxi.

that  its  intlneuce  must  be  necessarily  contagious,  and  probably
cosmopolitan.

The  English  Revolution  of  1688  had  been  a  purely  national
event,  turning  mainly  on  the  question  whether  James  II.  in  dis-
pensing with  the  penal  statutes  against  Roman  Catholics  and
committing  the  other  acts  complained  of  in  the  Declaration  of
Rights,  had  exceeded  the  defined  and  legitimate  powers  of  an
English  king.  The  American  Revolution  had  turned  mainly
on  the  constitutional  question  whether  the  Imperial  Parliament
in  imposing,  for  the  defence  of  the  Empire,  direct  taxation  on
the  colonies,  had  transgressed  its  lawful  province  and  invaded
that  of  the  local  Legislatures.  But  the  French  Revolution,  in  the
opinion  of  Burke,  was  of  a  wholly  different  kind.  It  belonged
to  the  same  category  of  events  as  the  foundation  of  Mohammed-
anism and  the  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  was
not  a  revolt  against  local  or  particular  grievances,  but  the  intro-
duction into  Euro]De  of  a  new  species  of  government  resting  on
doctrines  of  the  rights  of  man,  which  were  equally  applicable  to
all  nations,  and  absolutely  inconsistent  with  all  ancient  govern-
ments. It  was  emphatically  one  of  those  revolutions  of  doctrine
in  which  a  spirit  of  proselytism  makes  an  essential  part,  which
must  affect  not  only  the  external  relations  but  also  the  internal
constitutions  of  all  surrounding  countries,  must  introduce  into
them  new  interests,  passions,  and  divisions,  and  must,  like  the
religious  movement  of  the  sixteenth  century,  weaken  and  super-
sede the  spirit  of  local  patriotism,  and  combine  in  a  single
connection  the  inhabitants  of  many  countries.  'In  the  modern
world,'  it  is  true,  '  before  this  time  there  had  been  no  instance  of
this  spirit  of  general  political  faction,  separated  from  religion,
pervading  several  countries  and  forming  a  principle  of  union
Ijetwecn  the  partisans  in  each,' '  but  it  was  quite  in  accordance
with  lull  nan  nature  that  a  political  doctrine  should  act  as  widely
and  powerfully  upon  the  passions  and  interests,  as  a  religions
one.  '  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  multitude  when
they  act  against  their  Government  from  a  sense  of  grievance,  or
from  zeal  for  some  opinions.  When  men  are  thoroughly  pos-
sessed with  that  zeal  it  is  difficult  to  calculate  its  force.  It  is
certain  tliut  its  power  is  by  no  means  in  exact  proportion  to  its

'  TluiKijhls  OH  French  AJfuir$.

en.  XXI.  THE REVOLUTIONARY DOCTIIINE.  517

roasonaLleness.  It  must  always  have  been  discoverable  by  per-
sons of  reflection,  but  it  is  now  obvious  to  the  world  that  a
theory  concerning  government  may  become  as  much  a  cause  of
fanaticism  as  a  dogma  in  religion.' '

The  new  political  creed  which  it  was  attempted  to  establish
in  Europe  was  a  perfectly  definite  one.  It  was  'that  the
majority,  told  by  the  head,  of  the  taxable  people  in  every
country,  is  the  perpetual,  natural,  unceasiug,  indefeasible  sove-
reign ;  that  this  majority  is  perfectly  master  of  the  form  as  well
as  the  administration  of  the  State,  and  that  the  magistrates,
under  whatever  names  they  are  called,  are  only  functionaries  to
obey  the  orders  (general  as  laws  or  particular  as  decrees)  which
that  majority  can  make ;  that  this  is  the  only  natural  govern-
ment, and  that  all  others  are  tyranny  and  usurpation.'"  ^  '  The
principle  of  the  French  Revolution  admits  of  no  compromise,  no
temperament,  no  qualification.  Like  all  metaphysical  positions,
if  true  at  all,  it  must  be  true  at  all  times,  at  all  places,  and
under  all  circumstances  ;  and  it  is  a  principle  pointing  neces-
sarily to  practice,  inasmuch  as  it  requires  the  perpetual  exercise
of  the  sovereignty  by  the  existing  majority,  who  cannot  bind
their  good  faith  by  any  compact  however  solemn,  for  a  year,
a  month,  a  week,  or  a  single  day.'  '  All  forms  of  government
are  but  pi'ovisional  till  it  shall  please  the  sovereign  to  change
them,  which  he  may  do  without  any  motive  of  moral  or  political
necessity,  without  any  consideration  of  expediency.'  '  The  ten-
dency of  such  a  creed  is  obvious.  At  a  touch  it  crumbles  the
bond  of  every  political  society  now  in  existence  to  a  rope  of  sand.
It  is  a  sentence  of  deposition  to  all  the  kings  of  Europe,  who
claim  to  be  sovereigns  by  the  respective  constitutions  of  their
countries ;  it  is  an  edict  of  proscription  to  all  aristocratical
bodies,  which  must  be  always  dangerous  to  the  necessary  equality
of  this  new  system,  and  in  mixed  governments  have  a  share
in  legislation  directly  incompatible  with  the  right  of  a  majority
told  by  the  head ;  and  it  is  an  absolute  grant  of  every  kingdom
to  the  inferior  orders,  for  they  are  and  ever  will  be  the  many.'  ^

The  existence  in  the  centre  of  Europe  of  a  powerful  govern-

'  Apiieal  from  th&  New  to  the  Old  215. There is,  I think, very  little

Wlngx.  donbt  that  this  was  written  by  Burks

-  Thoitglitx  on  French  Affairs.  himself.
•  Annual  Itegister,  1791,  pp.  211-

518  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. cii.  xxi.

ment  resting  on  this  creed  was,  in  the  eyes  of  Burke,  the  most
tremendous  fact  in  modern  politics.  By  the  confiscation  and
division  of  great  masses  of  property,  by  the  annihilation  of  all  old
privileges  and  monopolies,  by  the  destruction  in  a  few  months
of  all  the  institutions,  corporations,  traditional  controls,  usages
and  settled  maxims  of  a  great  and  venerable  monarchy,  the
French  politicians  had  appealed  irresistibly  to  the  most  dangerous
passions  in  societies — cupidity,  envy,  extravagant  ambition,
inordinate  and  intoxicating  self-confidence.  If  a  government
founded  on  these  principles,  and  appealing  systematically  to
these  passions,  was  firmly  established  in  the  country  which,  from
its  geographical  position  and  from  the  character  of  its  people,
had  at  all  times  exercised  the  greatest  influence  over  its
neighbours,  no  government  in  Europe  would  be  safe.  French
emissaries  of  sedition  would  multiply  in  every  land.  French
examples  and  influence  would  be  everywhere  felt,  stimulating
into  activity  the  most  dangerous  classes,  shaking  the  whole
settled  order  of  EurojDe,  holding  out  ideals  of  spoliation  and
anarchy  which  would  make  sober  and  regulated  progress  impos-
sible. As  Athens  had  once  been  at  the  head  of  a  democratic,
and  Sparta  of  an  aristocratic,  faction  in  every  Greek  State,  as
the  King  of  Sweden  had  once  been  at  the  head  of  a  Protestant,
and  the  King  of  Spain  of  a  Catholic  interest  in  many  countries,
so  France  would  now  become  the  head  of  a  party  of  anarchy  in
every  land.  The  new  system  '  as  it  has  first  been  realised
dogmatically  and  practically  in  France,  makes  France  the
natural  head  of  all  factions  formed  on  a  similar  principle,
wherever  they  may  prevail.'  '  As  long  as  it  exists  in  France  it
will  be  the  interest  of  the  managers  there,  as  it  is  the  very
essence  of  their  plan,  to  disturb  and  distract  all  other  govern-
ments, and  their  endless  succession  of  restless  politicians  will
continually  stimulate  them  to  new  attempts.' '

'  Thmujlitu  on  French  Affairx.  bccnmc  poli(ic;il,  not  priinnrily  and
*  Wh(!rcv(;r  this  princi|)le  prevails  ncccs.s;irily,  but  secondarily  and  in-
more  or  less,  tliere  is,  and  must  cidentally.  Here  the  vcrj'  ground  of
l)e,  a  French  faction  proportionately  distinction  is  the  lirst  and  most  iin-
Blrontr;  and  it  will  be  much  more  portant  question  of  politics.  Tli.-it
closely  united  in  politics  to  tiie  great  spirit  of  ambition  which  was  formerly
liead  at  I'aris,  than  even  were  the  dreaded  in  the  French  Monarchy,  has
religious  factions  which  so  long  dis-  actuated  the  French  Republic  from
fracted  Europe,  and  have  been  so  its  birth,  and  with  such  a  pdwcrful
recently  laid  at  real. For  the  latter  lever  planted  under  the  fouiulatioas

cii.  XXI.  ITS PROSELYTISING CHARACTER.  511)

This  was  the  estimate  of  the  llevolutiou  which  now  oLtained
a  complete  empire  over  the  mind  of  Burke,  and  which  inspired
all  he  wrote.  The  activity  of  the  correspondence  between
English  democrats  and  French  revolutionists ;  the  multiplication
of  affiliated  societies  in  the  great  English  towns ;  the  constant
accounts  of  French  political  proseljtism  in  the  Netherlands,  in
Switzerland,  and  in  some  parts  of  Germany ;  and  the  avowed
intention  of  the  French,  if  a  European  war  broke  out,  to  make
an  encouragement  of  revolutionary  passions  in  other  countries
their  chief  weapon  in  the  conflict,  corroborated  and  intensified
his  fears,  and  he  was  fully  convinced  of  '  the  utter  impossibility
of  a  counter  revolution  from  any  internal  cause.'  All  the  calcu-
lations and  analogies  drawn  from  the  old  settled  governments
of  Europe  seemed  to  him  misleading  when  applied  to  this  new
and  portentous  phenomenon.  '  The  political  and  civil  power  in
France,'  he  wrote,  '  is  now  wholly  separated  from  its  property
of  every  description,  and  neither  the  landed  nor  the  moneyed
interest  possesses  the  smallest  weight  or  consideration  in  the
direction  of  any  public  concerns.'  Eeckless,  unscrupulous,
proselytising  fanatics,  commanding  all  the  energies  and  ambitious
unconnected  with  birth  and  property,  were  at  the  head  of  affairs ;
they  had  effectually  bribed  the  richer  peasantry  by  the  confis-
cation of  Church  property  and  of  feudal  dues ;  they  had  con-
structed in  the  municipalities  the  most  tremendous  engine  of
government  and  terrorism  ;  they  had  infused  into  politics  all  the
fanaticism  and  distempered  energy  of  a  new  religion,  and  thoy
taught  a  system  of  doctrine  which  was  certain  to  spread  if  it
was  recommended  for  but  a  short  time  by  the  authority  of  ex-
ample and  of  success.  It  had  already  '  very  many  partisans  in
every  country  in  Europe,  but  particularly  in  England.'  '  It  is
gaining  ground  in  every  country.  Being  founded  on  principles
most  delusive  indeed,  but  the  most  flattering  to  the  natural
propensities  of  the  unthinking  multitude,  and  to  the  speculations
t>f  all  those  who  think  without  thinking  very  profoundly,  it  must
daily  extend  its  influence.'  '

Such  were  the  opinions  and  such  the  feelings  that  animated

of  every  Government  In  Europe,  she 1791,  p.  215.

threatens sooner or later to shake  '  Thoitijhts  on  French  Affain.

them  all  to  pieces.' Annual  Register,

620 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cii.  xxt.

Burke  in  preac-liing  with  tlie  passion  of  another  Peter  the
Hermit  a  crusade  against  the  French  Eevolution.  He  had  from
the  beginning  watched  with  sympathy  the  great  combination  of
the  continental  Powers  that  was  forming  against  it,  and  at  the
request  of  Calonne,  who  acted  as  minister  for  the  emigrant
princes,  Burke's  son  paid  them  a  visit  in  the  summer  of  1701
as  the  representative  of  his  father.^

Of  the  legitimacy  of  the  intended  war  Burke  had  no  doubt.
It  was  to  be  undertaken  for  the  relief  of  the  oppressed  King,
Church,  and  landed  gentry  of  France.  All  treaties  with  France
had  been  made  with  the  monarch,  and  supposed  a  monarchy  to
be  the  legal  government  of  the  country,  and  they  were  all,
therefore,  in  his  opinion,  annulled  when  the  monarchy  was
virtually  destroyed.  He  quoted  the  opinion  of  Vattel,  that  when
any  country  is  divided  the  other  Powers  are  free  to  take  which
side  they  please,  and  that  when  any  country  in  the  great  federa-
tion of  Europe  has  made  itself  a  manifest  source  of  danger  and
disturbance  to  its  neighbours,  they  have  a  right  to  interfere.
He  pointed  to  the  recent  suppression  of  popular  movements  in
Holland,  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  and  in  the  bishopric  of
Liege,  and  he  contended  that  such  an  invasion  as  he  desired
would  be  welcomed  as  a  relief  by  all  that  was  best  in  the  French
nation.  Interference  in  a  divided  country  '  must  indeed  always
be  a  right  whilst  the  privilege  of  doing  good  to  others  and  of
averting  from  them  every  sort  of  evil  is  a  right.  Circumstances
may  render  this  right  a  duty.  It  depends  wholly  on  this,
whether  it  be  a  bond  fide  charity  to  a  party,  and  a  prudent  pre-
caution with  regard  to  yourself,  or  whether  under  the  pretence
of  aiding  one  of  the  parties  in  a  nation,  you  act  in  such  a
manner  as  to  aggravate  its  calamities  and  accomplish  its  final
destruction.'  ^

Of  tlie  magnitude  and  imminence  of  the  danger  to  all
nations,  but  especially  to  England,  ho  had  no  doubt,  and
although  he  did  not  at  first  urge  that  she  should  take  an  active
]);ii't,  lie  claimed  for  the  allies  her  moral  support,  and  he  pre-
dicted that  she  would  be  inevitably  drawn  into  the  conflict.
Never  before  in  the  long  history  of  the  antagonism  of  the  two

' I'urkc'tj  C(i7nnjwn(hnce,  iii.  220,  ^  Remarks  on the  Folicy  of  the

221.  Allies.

CH.  XXI.  BURKE'S  FRENCH ROLICY.  521

nations^  liad  France,  in  his  opinion,  been  so  niucli  a  danger  to
England,  and  none  of  the  many  struggles  to  maintain  the
balance  of  power  in  Europe  had  involved  more  vital  issues.
'  This  league  is  for  the  preservation  of  that  state  of  things  in
Europe,  to  which  we  owe  all  that  we  are,  and  which  furnished
just  grounds  of  expectation  for  further  and  safe  improvement.
]ts  foundation  is  just  and  honest.' '  '  This  evil  in  the  heart  of
Europe  must  be  extirpated  from  that  centre,  or  no  part  of  the
circumference  can  be  free  from  the  mischief  which  radiates  from
it,  and  which  will  spread  circle  beyond  circle,  in  spite  of  all  the
little  defensive  precautions  which  can  be  employed  against  it,'^
The  French  policy  of  Burke  will  now  find  few  defenders,
and  the  present  writer  is  cex'tainly  not  among  the  number.  It
is  incontestable,  indeed,  that  Burke  realised  the  true  character
and  the  wide  influence  of  the  French  Revolution  much  earlier
and  more  clearly  than  his  contemporaries ;  that  he  foresaw  in
the  palmy  days  of  1790  the  deepening  horrors  that  ensued,  and
that  he  alone  truly  estimated  the  tremendous  force  both  for
aggression  and  defence  which  the  revolutionary  movement  was
about  to  generate.  He  was  right  in  predicting  that  England
would  be  dragged  into  the  war,  and  whether  he  was  right  or
wrong  in  urging  the  necessity  to  the  peace  of  Europe  of  a
Bourbon  restoration,  it  is  at  least  certain  that  long  after  he  was
in  his  grave  the  great  Powers  of  Europe  adopted  and  acted  on
liis  opinion.  It  is  impossible  to  say  with  confidence  whether  he
exaggerated  the  evils  that  would  have  ensued  if  a  revolutionaiy
government,  such  as  Robespierre  conceived,  had  been  perma-
nently established  in  France.  The  experiment  was  not  tried,  and
after  a  brief  period  which  forms  one  of  the  most  hideous  pages  in
the  history  of  humanity,  a  great  military  despotism  arose,  which
terminated  the  anarchical  phase  of  the  Revolution,  at  the  cost
of  appalling  calamities  to  the  world.  To  a  discriminating  reader
even  the  most  violent  writings  of  Burke  on  the  French  Revolu-
tion are  full  of  interest  and  instruction,  but  it  is  impossible
to  deny  that  they  are  steeped  in  passion  and  exaggeration.
IMirabeau  and  Lafayette  were  scarcely  less  abhorrent  to  him.
than  Clootz  and  Robespierre ;  the  sale  of  Church  property  under

' Correspondence,  iii.  271.

• Considerations  on  the  Present  State  of  Affairs.

522  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEKNTH CENTURY. cii.  xxi.

manifest  and  pressing  necessity,  and  with  a  provision  foi; paying
salaries  to  the  life  tenants,  seemed  to  him  not  less  outrageous
than  the  wholesale  confiscations  of  the  revolutionary  tribunals ;
and  the  Constituent  Assembly,  with  its  manifest  good  intentions,
and  its  many  great  and  lasting  reforms,  was  denounced  in
language  scarcely  less  vehement  than  that  which  was  justly
applied  to  the  Convention.

It  showed  a  strange  flaw  in  his  judgment  that  he  should
have  ever  imagined  that  the  great  Powers  of  Europe  would
combine  in  a  disinterested  crusade  for  the  restoration  of  the  old
order  in  France,  or  that  a  foreign  invasion  could  fail  to  aggra-
vate the  evil  it  was  intended  to  cure.  For  the  reasons  already
stated,  Burke  appears  to  me  to  have  enormously  exaggerated  the
dangers  to  England  from  French  example.  A  policy  of  strict  non-
interference was  probably  that  which  would  have  given  France
the  best  chance  of  speedily  throwing  off  the  fever  under  which
she  was  suffering,  and  if  such  a  policy  was  not  pursued  by  the
other  Powers  it  was  at  least  in  the  highest  degree  for  the  advan-
tage of  England  to  remain  as  long  as  possible  neutral  in  the
conflict,  Avhile  preparing  herself  for  any  eventuality.  Whether,
however,  Burke  had  any  real  influence  in  ^^lunging  England  into
the  war  with  France  is  extremely  doubtful.  He  taught  the
nation  to  look  with  horror  on  the  Revolution,  and  to  wage  the
war  against  it  with  energy  and  unanimity,  but  it  is  not  probable
that  any  policy  could  have  avoided  it.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  he  strenuously  insisted  on
three  conditions  as  essential  to  the  justification  of  an  armed
interference.  The  first  was  that  the  war  should  not  bo  under-
taken for  any  territorial  aggrandisement,  but  for  the  sole  purpose
of  restoring  a  settled  order  of  government  to  a  leading  nation
in  Europe,  and  suppressing  a  system  of  rebellion,  and  contagious
and  proselytising  anarchy,  which  was  a  manifest  source  of
(laiigor  and  disturbance  to  surrounding  nations.  The  second
was  that  in  this  war  the  part  of  the  foz'cigner  should  not  be  that
of  a  principal  but  of  an  ally.  '  If  I  could  command  the  whole
military  arm  of  Europe,'  he  wrote,  '  I  am  sure  that  a  bribe  of
llio  l;est  province  in  that  kingdom  would  not  tempt  me  to  inter-
meddle in  their  affairs,  except  in  perfect  concurrence  and  concert
with  the  nuUii'al legal  interests of  the  couufry,  composed  of

en XXI.  BURKE'S CONDITIONS OF INTERVENTION.  523

tlie  ecclesiastical,  the  military,  the  several  corporate  bodies  of
justice  and  of  barghership,  making  under  a  monarch  (I  repeat
it  again  and  again)  the  French  nation  according  to  its  funda-
mental constitution.  No  considerate  statesman  would  under-
take to  meddle  with  it  upon  any  other  condition.' '

The  third  condition  was  that  the  war  should  not  be  one  for
the  restoration  of  despotism.  On  this  subject  he  wrote  most
earnestly  to  his  son,  who  was  advising  the  French  princes.  They
ought,  he  said,  to  promise  distinctly  and  without  ambiguity
the  restoration  with  the  monarchy  of  a  free  constitution;  the
meeting  of  the  States  freely  chosen,  and  voting  by  order,  according
to  the  ancient  legal  form ;  the  abolition  of  letters  of  '  cachet '
and  all  other  arbitrary  imprisonment.  All  taxes  shcfiald  be  voted
by  the  States ;  the  Ministry  should  be  made  responsible  ;  the
revenue  should  be  put  out  of  the  reach  of  malversation,  and  a
synod  of  the  Gallican  Church  should  be  summoned  to  reform  its
abuses.  '  Without  such  a  declaration,'  he  continued,  '  or  to  that
effect,  they  can  hope  no  converts.  For  my  part  for  one,  though
I  make  no  doubt  of  preferring  the  ancient  course,  or  almost  any
other,  to  this  vile  chimera  and  sick  man's  dream  of  govern-
ment, yet  I  could  not  actively,  or  with  a  good  heart  and  clear
conscience,  go  to  the  re-establishment  of  a  monarchical  despotism
in  the  place  of  this  system  of  anarchy.'  ^

If  these  three  conditions  were  observed,  Burke  believed  that
all  the  more  respectable  classes  in  France  would  welcome  an
invasion  which  freed  them  from  intolerable  terrorism,  but  he
soon  saw  that  his  views  were  little  likely  to  be  adopted.  '  I  fear,'
he  once  said,  '  that  I  am  the  only  person  in  France  or  England
\A'ho  is  aware  of  the  extent  of  the  danger  with  which  we  are
threatened.'  '  In  the  whole  hemisphere  of  politics  I  can  scarcely
see  a  ministerial  head  which  rises  to  the  level  of  the  circum-
stances.' ^

His  letters  are  full  of  complaints  of  the  supineness  of  the
French  King  and  nobles ;  of  the  inveterate  intrigues  of  the
French  Queen ;  of  the  selfishness  of  the  continental  Sovereigns,
who  thought  only  either  of  their  own  order  or  of  territorial
aggrandisement ; of  the  blindness  and the  levity  of  English

'  Remarks on the  Pulicy  of the  *  Burke's  Correspondence,  iii.  349.

Allies.  •  Butler's  licviinucences,  i.  171.

524  ENGLAJ^D IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xxi.

politicians.  While  Fox — tliongli  with  growing  misgiving — •
looked  upon  the  Revolution  as  a  millennial  dawn,  while  Pitt  con-
sidered it  as  little  more  than  a  passing  cloud,  Burke  saw  plainly
that  it  was  a  great  crisis  in  human  affairs,  portending  terrible
and  as  yet  unknown  calamities  to  mankind.  To  many  he
seemed  a  mere  dreamer  of  dreams,  but  the  event  soon  justified
his  forecast.  The  tyranny  of  the  Convention  and  the  Committee
of  Public  Safety  which  was  fast  approaching,  was  on  the  whole
the  most  sanguinary  and  odious  in  modern  history,  and  the
career  of  Napoleon,  which  was  a  direct  consequence  of  the  sub-
version of  the  old  order  of  French  government,  sacrificed  about
two  millions  of  human  lives,  and  all  but  ended  in  a  total  eclipse
of  the  liberties  of  Europe.

For  some  time,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Burke  had  been
painfully  conscious  that  he  was  unfit  to  bear  the  strain  of  political
excitement.  He  could  not  cast  it  off;  it  haunted  him  like  a
nightmare,  and  threw  his  nerves  into  a  morbid  irritation.  He
complained  that  he  was  not  well,  and  that  he  scarcely  slept.^
He  had  ardently  wished  to  leave  Parliament,  and  only  shrank
from  doing  so  on  account  of  the  Indian  business  which  he  had
undertaken,  and  which  had  more  and  more  assumed  in  his  mind
the  character  of  a  solemn  religious  duty.'^  In  private  life  Miss
Burney  noticed  that  while  no  one  on  other  subjects  could  be
more  attractive,  politics  had  to  be  carefully  avoided.  '  His
irritability  is  so  terrible  on  that  theme,  that  it  gives  immediately
to  his  face  the  expression  of  a  man  who  is  going  to  defend  himself
from  murderers.'  ^  Age  was  beginning  to  press  visibly  upon  him
and  although  it  had  taken  nothing  from  the  power  of  his  intel-
lect, although  it  seemed  to  have  even  imparted  a  richer  and  more
gorgeous  splendour  to  his  eloquence,  it  had  robbed  him  of  all

'  Pellew's  TJfe  of  Sidmovth,  i.  85.  who  reads  Burke's  later  letters  and
*  Seethe  faiiigularly  solemn,  touch-  spceclies,  can  have  any  doubt  about
ing,  and characteristic letter  whicli  the spirit in which Burlce under-
lie wrote,  wlien  he  knew  himself  to  be  took  it.

dying  (July  IT'.X")),  to  Dr.  Laurence,  »  Diary  of  Madame  D'Arblay,  1702.

who  had  been  one  of  the  counsel  of  Francis,  comparing  Vox  and Burke-,

tl  10  managers  for  the  i  mpeacliraent  of  says  Fox '  seldom  spoke  very  harshly  of

Ha-stinga. Cm'Tcxpondcnce  of  Jiurhe  any  individual. In this respect he

and Dr.  Laurence,  pp.  5;')-56. Com-  was  the  reverse  of  Burke,  with  whom

pare,  too,  in  Ihe  same  work  the  Intro-  all mankind, as far  as party and

dnction, pp.  22,  2'.\. There  may  be  politics went, were God or devil.'

jiMicli  controversy  about  llie  merits  of  I'arkes  and  IMori vale's  Life  of  Francis,

the  case  against  Hastings,  but  no  one  ii.  15.

cn.  XXI.  UNCERTAINTY OF TOLITICAL TEEDICTION.  525

ehisticity  of  spirits.  lie  felt  liimself,  and  his  friends  clearly  saw,
that  he  needed  absolute  repose,  but  French  affairs  plunged  him
into  a  condition  of  the  most  violent  and  painful  excitement,  and
the  correspondence  which  poured  in  upon  him  from  all  Europe,
and  his  constant  intercourse  with  men  who  had  lost  everythuig
by  the  calamities  in  France,  never  suffered  it  to  flag.

No  one  saw  so  deeply  or  so  accurately  into  the  future,  but
no  one  was  at  the  same  time  more  constantly  haunted  by  the
sense  of  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  all  political  predictions.'
In  his  '  Remarks  on  the  Policy  of  the  Allies,'  which  was  published
in  1793,  there  is  a  most  impressive  and  powerful  passage  on  the
little  weight  that  can  on  these  matters  be  attached  even  to  the
most  careful  inferences  drawn  from  history  and  speculation.
'There  are  some  fundamental  points  in  which  nature  never
changes,  but  they  are  few  and  obvious,  and  belong  rather  to
morals  than  to  politics.  But  so  far  as  regards  political  matters
the  human  mind  and  human  affairs  are  susceptible  to  infinite
modifications,  and  of  combinations  wholly  new  and  unlooked  for.
Very  few,  for  instance,  could  have  imagined  that  property,
which  has  been  taken  for  natural  dominion,  should  through  the
whole  of  a  vast  kingdom  lose  all  its  importance  and  even  its
influence.  How  many  could  have  thought  that  the  most  com-
plete and  formidable  revolution  in  a  great  empire  should  be
made  by  men  of  letters  ?  that  atheism  could  produce  one  of  the
most  violently  operative  principles  of  fanaticism  ?  that  in  a
Commonwealth,  in  a  manner  cradled  in  war,  and  in  an  extensive
and  dreadful  war,  military  commanders  should  be  of  little  or  no
account  ?  that  the  Convention  should  not  contain  one  military
man  of  name  ?  that  administrative  bodies  in  a  state  of  the
utmost  confusion  and  of  but  a  momentary  duration,  and  com-
posed of  men  with  not  one  imposing  part  of  character,  should  bo
able  to  govern  the  country  and  its  armies  with  an  authority
which  the  most  settled  senates  and  the  most  respected  monarchs

'  The same conviction  was  con-  ni  prevoir. Nous  sommes  des  aveugles

stantly expressed by  Frederick the  qui s'avancent en tatonnant dans

Great,  the  keenest  practical  observer  Tobscurite. Lorsqu'il se presente

of  his  time. Thus  in  one  of  liis  letters  des circonstances favorable.';, il se

he  writes,  '  II  y  a  une  sorte  de  fatalite,  fait  une  sorte  d'eclaircie  subite  dont

ou A,  defaut de fatalite des  causes  protitent  les  habiles. Tout  le  reste  est,

secondes tout aussi inconnues, qui  le  jonct  de  I'incertitude.' See  Sorely

tournentsouvent  les  evdnementsd'une  Question, d' Orient ait XVIlIine

mauicre  que  Ton  ne  pcut  ui  couccvoir  Siccle,  pp.  81,  82, 1U8.

526 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xxi

scarcely  ever  had  in  the  same  degree  ? '  The  possibility  that
the  French  Revolution  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  political
state  which  would  gradually  unfold  itself,  and  in  which  the  old
maxims  and  principles  on  which  the  ancient  freedom  of  Englaml
mainly  rested  might  become  inapplicable,  was  not  altogether
absent  from  his  mind.  '  If  a  great  change  is  to  be  made  in
human  affairs,'  he  wrote  in  1791,  'the  minds  of  men  will  be
fitted  to  it ;  the  general  opinions  and  feelings  will  draw  that
way.  Every  fear,  every  hope,  will  forward  it ;  and  then  they  who
persist  in  opposing  this  mighty  current  in  human  affairs  will
appear  rather  to  resist  the  decrees  of  Providence  itself  than  the
mere  designs  of  men.  They  will  not  be  resolute  and  firm,  but
perverse  and  obstinate.'  •

It  was  soon  evident  that  the  opinions  of  men  in  England
were  rapidly  veering  round  to  Burke,  and  testimonies  of  ad-
hesion came  from  many  sides.  His  old  friend  Sir  Joshua  Rey-
nolds, who  had  always  been  a  steady  Whig,  took  occasion  shortly
afler  the  breach  to  express  his  feelings,  by  appending  to  an
engraving  of  one  of  his  pictures  of  Burke  the  famous  lines  in
'Paradise  Lost,'  describing  the  solitary  fidelity  of  Abdiel.  A
considerable  number  of  impressions  had  been  worked  off  before
Burke  learnt  the  compliment,  and  with  characteristic  modesty
he  at  once  hastened  to  Reynolds,  and  insisted  that  the  lines
should  be  obliterated  on  the  plate  and  that  all  impressions  from
it  which  had  not  been  distributed  should  be  destroyed. ^  Some
of  his  warmest  personal  as  well  as  political  friends,  however,
for  a  time  stood  aloof  in  manifest  and  painful  perplexity.  Such
was  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  who  in  private  avowed  his  full  agreement
with  Burke's  estimate  of  the  Revolution,  and  who  retained  all
his  affection  for  him,  but  who  accused  him  of  disloyalty  to  his
party,  and  refused  on  this  ground  to  give  a  seat  in  Parliament
to  his  son.2  Such  was  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  who  shrank  from
seeing  him,  fearing,  as  he  frankly  said,  the  influence  which
Burke  seldom  failed  bo  obtain  over  his  judgment.*  Such  was
Windliam,  who  had  long  looked  on  Burke  as  the  wisest  and  best
of  living  men,  and  had  welcomed  with  onlliusinsni  his  '  Reflec-

'  T/itn/f/hts  on  French  Affairs.  '  Lndy Miuto's Life  of  Sir O

''  I'rior'u Life of  Burke, ii. IGii, KlVwi,  ii.  8.
IGl.  ♦  Ibid.  ».

cii.  XXI.  CITUROII IN DANGER.  527

tions  on  the  French  Revolution,'  but  who  now  refused  to  meet
him  at  a  dinner  party. ^  Yet  all  these  were  soon  reunited  to
him,  not  only  in  personal  friendship  and  affection,  but  also  in
political  agreement.  Miss  Burney  relates  a  characteristic  con-
versation she  had,  at  a  somewhat  earlier  period,  with  Windham.
She  had  spoken  of  Burke's  wonderful  abilities,  but  had  kept  a
significant  silence  about  his  judgment.  '  Suddenly,'  she  says,
'  and  with  a  look  of  extreme  keenness,  Mr,  Windham  turned  his
eyes  upon  me,  and  exclaimed,  "  Yes,  and  he  has  very  highly  also
the  faculty  of  being  right  .  .  .  not  the  world  alone,  even  his
friends  are  apt  to  misjudge  him.  What  he  enters  upon,  how-
ever, with  earnestness,  you  will  commonly  find,  turns  out  as  he
represents  it." '  ^

It  was  noticed  as  a  sign  of  the  direction  of  opinion,  that
Burke  now  seldom  appeared  in  the  popular  caricatures  as  the
*  Jesuit  of  St.  Omer,'  while  he  was  constantly  represented  as  a
patriot  denouncing  the  Revolution  and  its  apologists.^  The
cry  '  Church  in  danger '  was  fast  rising  as  it  had  not  done  since
the  days  of  Sacheverell.  In  spite  of  the  languor  of  the  English
Church  during  the  eighteenth  century,  and  the  powerful  anti-
ecclesiastical  influences  that  were  abroad,  Burke  had  probably
not  exaggerated  when  he  described  the  English  attachment  to
a  religious  national  establishment  as  '  above  all  other  things,
and  beyond  all  other  nations,'  *  and  although  the  destruction  of
a  popish  establishment  in  a  foreign  land  might  seem  a  matter
of  little  consequence  to  Englishmen,  it  was  too  industriously
held  up  as  an  example  to  be  regarded  with  indifference.  The
clergy  were  soon  thoroughly  alarmed,  and  the  pulpits  began  to
ring  with  denunciations  of  the  Revolution.  More  than  one
sermon  against  it  was  delivered  in  the  presence  of  Burke ;  but
though  they  echoed  his  views,  he  heard  them  with  undisguised
impatience.  '  Surely,'  he  said,  '  the  Church  is  a  place  where
one  day's  truce  may  be  allowed  to  the  dissensions  and  animosi-
ties of  mankind,'  ^

The  destruction  of  the  privileges  of  the  French  aristocracy,
and  especially  the  exciting  and  dramatic  episode  of  the  flight  to

'  Windham's  Diary,  p.  226.  ■*  Reflections  on  the  French  Eevo-

'  Madame  d'Arblay's  Dia?nj,  1790. lution.

»  rrior'a  Life  of  Burhe,  ii.  1G4.  *  I'rior's  Life  of  Burke,  ii.  1G2.

528  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

Varennes  and  the  recapture  of  the  King,  greatly  strengthened
the  popular  interest  in  French  affairs.  In  London  there  was
no  mistaking  the  delight  at  the  news  of  the  King's  escape,  and
the  dejection  at  his  recapture,  and  if  the  flight  had  succeeded,
there  would  probably  have  been  a  general  illumination.^  When
the  King  escaped  from  Paris,  the  Jacobins  in  that  city  at  once
addressed  a  circular  letter  to  all  the  societies  affiliated  with
them,  and  a  copy  of  this  letter  was  sent  to  the  Revoluticn
Society  in  London,  which  published  it  in  the  English  ncAvs-
papers.2  At  the  end  of  June  1791,  Priestley  wrote  from  Bir-
mingham to  Lindsey,  '  Our  anxiety  during  the  King  of  France's
escape,  and  our  joy  on  his  capture,  cannot  be  described.  .  .  .
The  High  Church  party  are  mortified  in  the  extreme.  ...  A
majority,  I  fear,  of  Englishmen  are  in  their  sentiments,  so  that
we  are  far  indeed  behind  the  French.  In  spite  of  all  we  can
write  or  do,  an  attachment  to  high  maxims  of  Government  gains
ground  here,  and  the  love  of  liberty  is  on  the  decline.'  ^

The  Society  at  Birmingham,  of  which  Priestley  was  the
most  prominent  member,  advei'tised  their  intention  of  meeting
at  an  hotel  on  Thursday,  July  14,  to  commemorate  the  taking
of  the  Bastille  ;  and  a  few  days  before  the  meeting,  an  exceed-
ingly seditious  and  inflammatory  handbill,  which  was  afterwards
disclaimed  by  the  Society,  had  been  circulated.  The  result  was
a  popular  rising,  which  on  a  smaller  scale  reproduced  nearly
all  the  features  of  the  Gordon  riots  in  London.  It  began  with
an  attack  on  the  hotel  where  the  members  of  the  Society  were
assembled,  but  before  the  day  had  closed,  the  mob  had  totally
destroyed  two  of  the  principal  meeting  houses  in  Birmingham,
as  well  as  the  house  of  Priestley,  his  library,  his  manuscripts,
and  his  philosophical  apparatus.  On  Friday  the  magistrates
enrolled  a  large  body  of  special  constables,  but  they  proved  too
weak  to  restrain  the  mob.  For  three  days  the  houses  of  promi-
nent dissenters  or  democrats  in  Birmingham  and  its  immediate
nciighbourliood  were  wrecked  or  burned.  Many  lives  were  lost,
and  as  in  London,  the  rioters  were  often  too  intoxicated  to  escape
I'loiii  the  flames  they  had  kindled.  Churchmen  and  Methodists
wci'o  in  general  unmolested,  but  there  were  bands  of  men  lovy-

'  JJiirko's  Corrtsj)oniU-nc(!.,  iii.  2L'5.  -  Toralinu's  lAJ'c  vf  I'Ut,  iii.  L'73.

»  Hull's  Life  of  rricstlcy,  ii.  HI.

DEATH OP  MI  RAF,  R  A  U.  5'2\)

iiig  iudiscrinnnaiely  contributions  of  drink  and  monoy.  It  was
not  till  Monday  morning  that  the  arrival  of  a  troop  of  cavalry
from  Nottingham  restored  order.'

The  tide  ran  so  high  that  Priestley  found  it  necessary  to
leave  Birmingham,  and  after  a  short  residence  in  London  he
took  refuge  in  America.  His  pecuniary  losses  were  compen-
sated by  private  contributions  and  by  a  rate  levied  on  the  dis-
trict where  they  had  occurred,^  but  the  loss  of  his  manuscripts
could  not  be  replaced,  and  he  could  not  console  himself  by  any
belief  in  his  popularity.  '  The  same  bad  spirit,'  he  wrote,  '  per-
vaded the  whole  kingdom,'  and  at  Hackney,  Manchester,  and
all  over  the  West  of  England  he  believed  it  to  be  nearly  as
powerful  as  at  Birmingham.-''  Burke  looking  at  the  situation
from  -another  point  of  view  corroborates  this  opinion.  He
noticed  tli,at  at  this  time  in  all  parts  of  England  the  Govern-
ment had  difficulty  in  protecting  the  affiliated  democratic
societies  from  the  attacks  of  the  mob.*

While  these  things  were  happening,  the  Constituent  Assem-
bly, which  fills  the  first  act  of  the  great  drama  of  the  French
Revolution,  was  drawing  rapidly  to  its  close.  The  reorganisa-
tion of  France  which  has  been  described  had  been  mainly  ac-
complished by  April  1791,  but  on  the  second  of  the  preceding
month  France  had  experienced  a  fatal  loss  in  the  death  of
Mirabeau,  the  only  really  great  leader  before  Napoleon,  pro-
duced by  the  Revolution,  the  only  man  whose  prescient  and
dazzling  intellect,  and  whose  indomitable  will,  might  have  at
once  guided  and  moderated  its  course.  If  his  moral  character
had  been  in  any  degree  on  a  level  with  his  abilities,  and  if  a
few  more  years  had  been  granted  him,  he  might  have  taken  a
foremost  place  among  the  rulers  of  men.  He  died  predicting
gi'eat  calamities  to  his  country.  '  Pigmies,'  he  once  said,  '  can
destroy,  but  it  needs  a  great  man  to  build,'  and  he  fully  saw
that  in  spite  of  all  that  had  been  done,  no  lasting  edifice  had  as
yet  been  constructed.

To  the  Court  with  which  he  had  of  late  been  negotiating,

'  See  a  full  account  of  the  riots,  ^  Taitt's  Life  of  Pric.4lrt/,  ii.  121,

Annual Rc//lxtcr, 1791, pp. 29-82.  »  Ibid.  ii.  l'25.

liutt's  Life  of  Prv'sUcy,  ii.  IIC,  117.  *  Burke's  Corrritjwndmcc,  iii.  225.

VOL.  V.  M  M

530  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xxi.

Lis  loss  was  irrepai'able.  Ever  since  October  5  and  G,  1 780,
the  position  of  Lewis  XVI.  had  been  an  intolerable  one.  De-
nuded one  by  one  of  his  royal  prerogatives,  wounded  deeply  in
his  religious  feelings  by  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy,
which  had  now  been  formally  condemned  by  the  Pope,  deprived
of  his  bodyguard,  restricted  in  his  movements,  and  repeatedly
menaced  and  insulted,  he  was  a  virtual  prisoner,  while  the
princes  of  his  family  were  in  Germany  endeavouring  to  form
a  league  for  his  deliverance.  At  last  after  long  and  painful
hesitation,  he  resolved  to  make  an  effort  to  recover  his  freedom
by  flying  to  the  frontier  town  of  Montmedy,  where  the  Marquis
de  Bouille,  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  troops  who  had  not  yet
swerved  from  their  allegiance,  was  ready  to  receive  him.  If
these  were  not  sufficient,  the  Emperor  Leopold  promised  an
Austrian  force.  On  the  night  of  June  20,  the  royal  fugitives
left  the  Tuileries  on  their  ill-fated  enterprise.  The  next  day
they  were  arrested  at  Varennes,  and  brought  back  prisoners  to
Paris.

The  danger  of  the  situation  was  much  aggravated  by  the
memorial  which  the  King  had  left  behind  him,  protesting
against  and  invalidating  all  that  had  been  done  during  his
captivity.  He  enumerated  in  this  remarkable  document  the
lonar  series  of  concessions  which  he  had  made.  He  had  of  his
own  free  will  summoned  the  States-General,  doubled  the  num-
ber of  the  deputies  of  the  third  estate,  invested  the  States-
General  in  the  session  of  June  23  with  the  essential  powers  of
a  free  Parliament,  put  an  end  to  the  long  conflict  of  orders  by
himself  directing  their  union,  introduced  large  and  searching
economies  into  his  Court.  But  all  his  acts,  he  complained,  had
been  misconstrued  and  perverted.  The  States-General,  usurping
the  character  of  a  Constituent  Assembly,  had  undertaken  to
remodel  the  whole  Constitution  of  France.  It  denied  the  King
the  right  of  withholding  his  assent  from  articles  which  were
constitutional;  it  assumed  to  itself  the  solo  right  of  deciding
what  articles  belonged  to  this  class,  and  it  had  reduced  his
authority  to  a  mere  phantom.  His  right  of  dissolving  the
Assembly,  and  his  right  of  pardon,  had  been  annulled.  His
veto  on  legislation  was  so  limited  as  to  be  purely  illusory.
Almost all his power, almost  all his  patronage  in the law

cu.  XXI.  THE SITUATION AFTER VARENNES.  531

courts,  in  the  ariny,  in  the  interior  administration  of  the
country,  in  the  depMrtnicut  of  finances,  in  the  management  of
foreign  afiairs,  had  been  taken  away,  and  for  nearly  two  years
he  had  been  a  prisoner,  exjjosed  to  gross  indignities  in  his  own
capitaL  In  the  mean  time  the  whole  country  had  been  thrown
into  unexampled  confusion  ;  '  all  the  powers  of  Government
disowned ;  all  property  violated ;  personal  safety  everywhere
endangered ;  crimes  remaining  unpunished ;  perfect  anarchy
triumphing  over  the  laws  ;  '  a  multitude  of  self-constituted  clubs
ruling  France  with  a  rod  of  iron.  The  decrees  which  he  liad
signed,  he  had  signed  because  he  had  no  power  to  resist,  and
he  had  withdrawn  for  a  time  from  his  capital  in  oi'der  to  appeal
freely  to  his  people.  With  their  assistance  he  hoped  to  give
France  well-established  liberty,  resting  on  a  Constitution  freely
accepted,  consistent  with  the  due  respect  for  religion  and  pro-
perty, and  with  the  firm  administration  of  the  law.^

Fox  afterwards  said  to  Madame  de  RtaSl  that  the  French
ought  at  this  time  to  have  suffered  the  King  to  escape,  and  to
have  established  a  Republic  in  his  absence.  It  seemed,  indeed,
as  if  the  restoration  of  the  monarchy  under  Lewis  XVI.  had
become  impossible,  and  if  the  National  Assembly  had  been  a
body  such  as  Burke  described  it,  there  was  everything  to  be
feared  from  its  exasperation.  But,  in  truth,  the  language  of
Burke  as  applied  to  the  first  Assembly  of  the  Revolution,
though  in  no  degree  stronger  than  that  of  Mounier  and  of  Lally
Tollendal,  was  both  exaggerated  and  misleading.  This  Assembly
had  indeed  done  some  things  which  were  grossly  tyrannical,
and  many  things  which  were  manifestly  foolish.  It  had  I'e-
mained  shamefully  passive  while  its  proceedings  were  systema-
tically interrupted  from  the  galleries,  while  its  most  respectable
members  were  intimidated  and  insulted,  while  scenes  of  intoler-
able outrage  and  violence  were  multiplying  throughout  France.
There  had  never,  as  Mounier  truly  said,^  been  an  example  in
Europe  '  of  a  country  of  equal  size  and  population  in  which  the
means  of  maintaining  order  were  so  completely  annihilated,  and
in  which  itnarchy  had  been  more  general  and  more  unbridled,'

'  See  for  this  document  and  the  " iVIounier, RecJierchat xvr h  x

reply  of  tlie  National  Asseml)ly,  the  rayxffi  cjni  out  enipvchr  Ic.s  !■'/■(/ /irn is
Animal  J{fijiy1<T,  17!'i,  pp.  217--!88.  de  dcrcnlr  Vilircs,  ii.  17!.

M.  ii  2

532  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENTU CENTLTvY. en.  xxi,

but  the  Assembly  had  as  yet  made  no  single  effort  to  arrest  the
evil  by  armed  repression,  or  even  by  serious  protest.  It  had
destroyed  or  paralysed  all  the  institutions  and  organisations  of
France  ;  it  had  usurped  the  whole  legislative  authority ;  it  had
made  the  Executive  so  feeble  that  anarchy  was  inevitable,  and
all  real  power  was  passing  fatally  and  swiftly  into  the  most
dangerous  hands.

All  this  may  be  truly  said,  but  it  is  also  true  that  this
Assembly,  though  seriously  weakened  by  the  secession  of  many
of  its  best  members,  still  consisted  for  the  most  part  of  men
who,  though  they  were  theorists  and  enthusiasts,  were  not  volun-
tary tyrants  or  voluntary  anarchists,  and  were  far  from  vicious
or  malevolent.  It  contained  a  very  unusual  amount  of  talent,
and  many  men  of  high  character  and  unobtrusive  knowledge ;
but  it  was  inexperienced  and  unguided,  and  divisions,  jealousies,
cowardice,  contagious  enthusiasm,  and  a  servile  devotion  to
general  maxims  and  abstract  principles  played  a  great  part  in
its  proceedings.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  lessons  which
history  teaches  is  how  difficult  it  is  to  infer  from  the  acts  of
legislators  their  dispositions  or  even  their  intentions.  It  is
quite  possible  for  measures  to  be  carried  by  a  Government,  a
party,  or  a  Parliament,  which  the  majority  of  the  members  who
compose  that  Government,  party,  or  Parliament,  heartily  dislike.
The  resolution  of  a  few  extreme  and  united  men,  the  admission
ill  uii  apparently  innocuous  form  of  some  principle  which  may
be  afterwards  extended,  the  surprises  and  unexpected  combina-
tions and  compromises  of  party  tactics,  the  lassitude  or  cowardice
or  want  of  foresight  of  majorities,  the  piecemeal  and  uncon-
nected manner  in  which  great  questions  are  debated,  often  give
a  turn  to  events  wholly  different  from  the  genuine  wishes  of  the
actors.  A  numerous  assembly,  inexperienced,  intoxicated  with
enthusiasms  and  wild  political  doctrines,  and  entirely  uncon-
trolled by  any  leading  statesman  or  well-established  party
organisations,  was  peculiarly  liable  to  blind,  sudden,  incon-
siderate and  dangerous  impulses.

But  there  is,  I  think,  abundaiat  evidence,  both  from  th&
writings  of  its  contemporaries  and  from  its  own  proceedings,
that  the  National  Assembly  was  an  essentially  well-moaning
body. Its  most  honnnralile  repudiation  of  bnnkniptcy  at  a  time

en.  XXI,  THE  SITUATION AFTER VARENNES.  533

when  bankruptcy  seemed  most  tempting,  its  refusul  to  protect
jtself  by  any  press  law  from  the  most  constant  and  virulent
attacks,  its  refusal  to  abridge  the  liberty  which  it  had  pro-
claimed by  any  permanent  measure  against  emigration,'  its  disin-
terested though  most  foolish  resolution  that  none  of  its  members
should  during  the  next  four  years  accept  any  office  under  the
Crown,  show  clearly  the  better  side  of  its  character,  and  its  pro-
ceedings after  the  capture  of  the  King  prove  decisively  that
although  it  had  completely  sapped  the  monarchy  it  had  no  real
wish  to  destroy  it.  A  strong  and  genuine  desire  was  shown  to
maintain  Lewis  XVI.  on  the  throne,  to  abstain  from  any  measure
which  might  give  occasion  for  a  foreign  invasion,  and,  above  all,
to  terminate  as  quickly  as  possible  the  Kevolution.  The  Repub-
lican party  under  Robespierre,  which  desired  the  deposition  of
the  King,  proved  wholly  insignificant  in  the  Chamber, ^  and
Barnave,  who  had  once  been  in  the  extreme  party  of  Revolution,
threw  all  his  eloquence  into  the  cause  of  the  King.  Among  the
Paris  clubs  a  more  violent  and  formidable  republican  party
appeared,  but  for  the  first  and  only  time  in  its  history  the
National  Assembly  nerved  itself  to  maintain  order  by  force.
Martial  law  was  proclaimed.  The  red  flag  was  hung  out  from
the  Town  Hall,  and  Lafayette,  at  the  head  of  the  National
Guard,  suppressed  energetically  and  with  some  bloodshed  a
republican  rising.  It  was  determined  that  the  Constitution
should  be  revised,  embodied  in  a  single  instrument,  and  formally
adopted  by  the  King,  and  that  if  he  consented  to  swear  to  it,  tlais
should  be  deemed  his  reconciliation  with  the  nation  and  his
captivity  should  cease.  Till  that  time  he  was  provisionally
suspended.

The  King  accepted  these  terms,  and  on  September  14,  1791,
he  solemnly  promised  to  observe  the  Constitution  containing
the  many  changes  that  have  been  already  described.  It  is  only
here  necessary  to  add  that  the  future  Legislatures  were  limited

'  Some  temporary  measures  were  publiqne  en  Europe  relativement  a,  la

taken after  the  flight to  Varennes,  Revolution  Frantjaise,'  Mercure Uri-

but  they  were  abolished  on  Sept.  14.  tannique,\\i.  209,  210. Brlssot  even

See  Laferritire,  Hut.  des  Prlncijyes  de  declared  (though  no  doubt  with  much

la  Rcvolutimi,  pp.  248,  249.  exaggeration)  that  in  the  August  of

2  On the  very small  number  of  that  year he  knew  but  two  liepub-

real Republicans  in  France  in  1701,  licans.  Potion  and  Buzot,  beside  hiui-

see  Gentz,  '  La  Marchc  de  I'Opinion  self.

534  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

to  periods  of  two  years,  which  the  King  had  no  power  to  abridge
l)y  a  dissolution ;  that  they  were  .to  consist  of  745  members,
irrespective  of  those  who  might  be  afterwards  granted  to  the
colonies ;  and  that  they  were  to  be  chosen  by  a  process  of  double
election,  primaiy  Assemblies  consisting  of  all  '  active  citizens,'
who  fulfilled  the  conditions  that  have  been  already  named,
electing  electors  who  in  their  turn  chose  the  deputies.  On  the
motion  of  Robespierre  all  property  qualification  for  the  deputies
Avas  abolished,  but  it  was  still  necessary  for  the  electors  in  the
primary  Assemblies  to  pay  a  small  direct  tax  equal  to  the  value
of  three  days'  labour,  and  a  substantial  property  qualification
Avas  exacted  from  the  members  of  the  electoral  Assemblies.  In
towns  of  more  than  6,000  souls,  it  consisted  of  a  revenue  equal
to  the  value  of  200  days'  labour,  drawn  from  property,  or  of  the
occupation  of  a  house  of  the  annual  value  of  500  days'  labour.
In  the  country  and  in  the  smaller  towns  the  qualification  was
somewhat  lower.  One  part  of  the  Constitution  is  curious,
because  it  shows  that  the  National  Assembly  was  not  absolutely
blind  to  the  lesson  which  the  experience  of  its  own  proceedings
had  abundantly  supplied,  of  the  facility  with  which  a  single
Chamber  can  change  all  the  institutions  of  a  country,  and  of  the
extreme  danger  of  such  a  facility  of  organic  change.  It  was
provided  that  no  change  could  be  made  in  the  Constitution  until
tliree  successive  Legislatures  had  asked  for  it,  and  until  it  had
ijeen  enacted  by  a  fourth  Legislature  specially  chosen  and
specially  enlarged  in  numbers  for  this  very  purpose.  'It  is  a
strange  thing  if  an  Assembly,  which  had  shown  itself  so  con-
temptuous of  all  the  limitations  of  its  own  authority,  and  which
had  so  effectually  destroyed  every  possible  counterpoise  to  its
power,  should  have  imagined  that  it  could  in  this  way  effectually
bind  its  successors.

One  other  act  of  the  first  National  Assembly  must  be  men-
tioned, which,  though  carried  with  excellent  intentions,  was
perhaps  in  its  consefpiences  the  worst  of  all.  It  was  the  act  of
abnegation  Ijy  which  it  dccrcH'd  that  none  of  its  members  should
be  eligible  for  tlie  succeeding  Legislature.  In  this  way  an
Assembly,  whoso  chief  faults  sprang  from  inexperience  in  the
management  of  pultlic  ad'airs,  and  wliich  had  at  last  acc|iiire(l
Eomo  experience,  coi.'dciii lied  (lie  c«nuitiy  to  fill  ag;iiti  into  tho

CH.  XXI.  FOREIGN IlKLATIONS.  535

liands  of  men  who  had  none,  and  the  French  people  were  for-
bidden to  select  as  their  representatives  any  of  those  eminent
and  respectable  men  to  whom  they  had  spontaneously  turned
at  the  time  when  the  elections  were  really  free,  and  before  the
tyranny  of  the  clubs  had  begun.  Hardly  any  other  single  step
contributed  so  largely  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  horrors  that
followed.  France  soon  presented  to  the  world  the  appalling
spectacle  of  a  great  nation  which  was  mainly  governed  by  its
criminal  classes,  and  by  fanatics  who  in  wisdom  and  sobriety  of
judgment  were  hardly  above  the  level  of  Bedlam.

At  the  time  when  the  Constituent  Assembly  dissolved
itself,  the  political  horizon  around  France  was  rapidly  darken-
ing. During  the  latter  half  of  1789,  during  the  whole  of  1790,
and  during  the  first  half  of  1791  it  appeared  probable  to  the
best  observers  that  whatever  effect  the  French  Revolution  might
have  upon  the  internal  constitutions  of  the  great  kingdoms  of
Europe,  it  would  not  lead  to  any  foreign  war.  It  is  true  that
some  signs  of  a  menacing  description  might  be  ah-eady  detected.
Several  of  the  German  princes  had  large  possessions  and  feudal
rights  in  Alsace  which  had  been  acquired  when  that  province
was  part  of  Germany,  but  which  had  been  recognised  when
Alsace  had  become  French,  and  had  been  formally  confirmed
and  guaranteed  by  the  Treaty  of  Westphalia  ;  and  the  abolition
of  these,  with  all  other  feudal  rights,  in  August  1789  produced
angry  protests  from  the  German  princes,  and  great  indignation
in  the  German  Diet.  There  were  also  many  disquieting  sym-
ptoms of  the  close  connection  between  French  demagogues  and
the  discontented  members  of  other  nations.  French  influence
was  clearly  traced  in  the  troubles  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,
and  in  Liege.  The  so-called  patriotic  party  in  Holland  began
to  revive.  There  were  signs  of  the  new  spirit  in  Poland,  in
Saxony,  in  the  ecclesiastical  electorates  of  Germany,  in  Berne,
and  in  Geneva.  Refugees  from  the  insurgent  provinces  of
other  Powers  were  received  with  ostentatious  favour  by  French
politicians,  and  letters  of  sympathy  were  read  in  the  Jacobin
Club  of  Paris  from  every  capital  in  Europe.  In  June  1790
the  Prussian  Anarcharsis  Clootz,  accompanied  by  a  number  of
adventurers  in  foreign  dresses,  appeared  in  the  National  Assem-
bly as  '  the  ambassador  of  the  human  race,'  claiming  in  the  name

536  ENGLAND IN TILE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  en.  xxi.

of  the  enslaved  nations  of  Europe  the  sympathy  of  emancipated
France,  and  the  Assembly  treated  this  grotesque  masquerade
with  perfect  seriousness,  and  welcomed  the  '  ambassador '  to  the
sitting.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  well  known  that  streams  of
emigrants  were  passing  from  France,  and  imploring  succour  in
the  chief  Courts  of  the  Continent.  Rumours  of  coming  inva-
sion were  frequently  circulated  and  readily  believed,  and  Lameth
declared  that  the  approaching  war  would  be  a  war  of  all  the
kings  against  all  the  nations.'

At  the  same  time  notliing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  the
bulk  of  the  first  National  Assembly  was  as  far  as  possible  from
desiring  any  foreign  conquest.  The  whole  enthusiasm,  the
whole  ambition  of  the  rising  party  was  directed  to  realising  in
France  a  Government  in  accordance  with  the  theories  of  Rous-
seau. The  one  serious  danger  of  war  was  that  which  arose  in
the  autumn  of  1790,  in  the  quarrel  between  England  and  Spain
on  the  question  of  Nootka  Sound,  when  Spain,  in  accordance
with  the  terms  of  the  still  subsisting  alliance,  claimed  tlie  as-
sistance of  France,  and  when  the  King's  Ministers  showed  some
inclination  to  accede  to  the  demand.  The  Assembly,  as  we  have
seen,  acting  in  this  case  at  the  instigation  of  the  most  revolu-
tionary party,  entirely  refused  its  assent.  It  marked  its  em-
phatically peaceful  policy,  by  enacting  that  the  King  could
never  proclaim  war  except  after  its  decree.  It  voted  a  solemn
declaration  that  it  disclaimed  in  the  name  of  the  French  nation
every  desire  for  conquest  or  aggression.  It  ordered  the  chained
figures  representing  conquered  nations  that  surrounded  the  statue
of  Lewis  XIV.  to  be  taken  away,  as  they  were  an  insult  to  other
countries  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  the  new  Government,
and,  what  was  more  important,  it  voted  after  some  months'  delay
an  indemnity  to  the  German  princes  in  compensation  for  their
fi'iidal  rights.  Tliese  things,  but  especially  the  extreme  inten-
sity with  which  the  national  mind  was  concentrated  on  internal
and  organic  changes,  seemed  to  foreshadow  a  long  period  of
peace,  and  tlie  impression  was  strengthened  by  the  utter  con-
fusion of  I'liMich  Hii;i,nces,  and  the  complete  disorganisation  of
the  Frencli  unny. All  discipline  and  subordination  seemed  to

'  Rce  Annnnl  licf/istcr,  1701,  i>p.  21:5,  L'l  1. Sybcl,  Hist,  dc  la  Itcvolution,
i.  Vdl,  I'JH,  2UI.

CH.  XXI.  EUSSIAN AND AUSTRIAN POLICY.  537

have  disappeared  from  the  ranks,  and  when  directions  were
g-iven  to  arm  tlie  fleet  at  Brest,  lu  consequence  of  the  English
preparations  for  war  with  Spain,  the  alarming  fact  was  disclosed
that  the  same  spirit  of  mutiny  was  equally  prevalent  among  the
sailors,  and  that  the  French  fleet  was  entirely  unfit  for  a  serious
war.

The  question  of  peace  or  war  seemed,  therefore,  to  de-
pend on  the  attitude  of  the  other  continental  Powers.  Their
combinations,  alliances,  and  antagonisms  had  during  the  last
few  years  been  continually  changing  like  the  patterns  in  a
kaleidoscope,  and  the  last  chapter  but  one  will,  I  hope,
have  given  a  sufliciently  clear  idea  of  the  objects  at  which
they  were  aiming.

The  policy  of  Russia  was  simple  and  perfectly  consistent.
She  desired  to  appropriate  as  much  as  she  could  of  the  territory  of
Turkey,  and  what  remained  of  the  territory  of  Poland,  and  as  a
means  to  the  latter  end,  to  maintain  in  that  unfortunate  country  a
general  anarchy  and  a  strong  Russian  interest.  Age  had  in  no
degree  diminished  the  energy  and  ambition  of  Catherine,  and  a
long  career  of  success  had  given  her  a  boundless  self-confidence.
No  sovereign  in  Europe  was  employed  in  enterprises  of  aggran-
disement so  incessantly  or  so  skilfully,  with  a  more  complete
disregard  for  all  moral  scruple,  with  a  more  absolute  and  cynical
indifference  to  the  sacrifice  of  hecatombs  of  human  lives.  When,
however,  the  French  Revolution  broke  out,  she  was  still  occu-
pied with  her  Turkish  war.

The  objects  of  the  Emperor  were  less  constant  and  more
various.  The  close  and  unnatural  connection  which  had  sub-
sisted between  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  St.  Petersburg  during
the  reign  of  Joseph  II.  was  diminished — it  was  at  first  thought
destroyed — by  the  death  of  that  sovereign  in  February  1790,
and  the  Convention  of  Reichenbach,  which  was  completed  in  the
following  summer,  withdrew  Austria  from  the  Turkish  War.  The
unexpected  protraction,  however,  through  more  than  a  year,  of
the  negotiation  for  the  definite  peace,  soon  showed  that  the  con-
nection between  Austria  and  Russia  was  not  at  an  end,  and  that
by  supporting  Russian  policy,  the  Emperor  still  hoped  to  gain
some  Turkish  territory  on  the  side  of  Orsova.  He  was  also
desirous  of  minimising  as  much  as  possible  the  popular  privi-

538  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. cii.  xxr.

leges  he  was  oLliged  to  concede  or  recognise  in  Flanders,  and
perhaps  of  reverting,  if  an  occasion  offered,  to  the  idea  of  Joseph
of  exchanging  Austrian  Flanders  for  Bavaria.  As  the  brother
of  the  French  Queen  he  was  more  interested  than  other  sove-
reigns in  French  affairs,  and  the  peculiar  dignity  of  his  position
as  the  head  of  the  Empire  made  him  the  natural  champion  of
monarchy,  and  of  the  interests  of  the  minor  German  princes
who  were  aggrieved  by  the  abolition  of  feudal  rights  in  Alsace.
Leopold  had  come  to  the  throne  with  the  reputation  of  an
eminently  far-seeing,  cautious,  and  sagacious  man,  and  his
phlegmatic  and  procrastinating  disposition  was  curiously  unlike
the  restless  and  impulsive  nature  of  his  brother ;  but,  like  most
men  of  his  temperament,  he  was  hesitating  and  irresolute,  and
these  faults  are  more  dangerous  in  foreign  than  in  domes-
tic policy.  The  bad  condition  of  Austrian  finances  greatly
strengthened  his  pacific  tendencies.  Since  1756  Austria  had
been  in  close  alliance  with  France,  and  Kaunitz,  who  was
the  chief  author  of  that  alliance,  though  in  extreme  old  age,
had  still  a  great  influence  on  Austrian  affairs.  With  Russia
the  Emperor  was  on  terms  of  alliance.  With  Poland  he  Avas  on
friendly  terms,  but  his  relations  with  Holland  were  still  troubled,
and  the  difficulties  which  had  arisen  about  the  negotiations  at
Sistova  made  it  for  some  months  very  probable  that  the
Eastern  war  might  again  extend  its  area,  and  that  Kussia  and
the  Emperor  might  be  found  in  armed  opposition  to  Prussia,
England,  and  Turkey.  Among  English  politicians  the  Emperor
was  at  this  time  regarded  with  extreme  distrust.

Prussia,  as  we  have  seen,  was  still  in  close  alliance  with
England  and  Holland,  but  her  national  policy  was  steadily
directed  to  two  objects.  The  first  was,  to  oppose  and  weaken
in  every  field  the  Austrian  power,  which  overshadowed  her  in
Germany.  The  second  was,  to  increase  her  Polish  possessions
by  the  annexation  of  Dantzig  and  Thorn.  She  was  much  dis-
<'i|)|ioiiil('d  by  the  failure  of  the  ingenious  combinations  by
wliicli  she  had  sought  to  obtain  this  end,  and  the  Triple
Alli.Mifre  Jiad  been  more  th;ni  once  severely  sirained.  J^ngland
jind  Holland  were  great  colonial  Powers,  bub  in  .l^urope  their
suprciiK!  intci'cst  w;is  ilic-  niiiintenance  of  a  permanent  and
fcecujT  jxacc. riMis.-ia,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  rising  Power

CH,  XXI.  rOLICY OF OTHER TOWEUS.  539

eagerly  bent  on  territorial  aggrandisement.  Unlike  the  other
continental  Powers,  she  possessed  a  regular  treasure  accumulated
with  a  view  to  war,  and  it  was  the  firm  conviction  of  her  King
that  his  army  was  the  best  in  Europe.  Under  such  circum-
stances it  is  not  surprising  that  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  a
united  policy  between  England,  Holland,  and  Prussia,  should
have  been  extremely  great ;  but  Pitt  attached  the  utmost  value
to  the  Prussian  alliance,  and  hoped,  by  gradually  drawing  the
Emperor  into  it,  to  establish  a  connection  which  would  secure
to  Europe  that  long  period  of  peace  which  he  most  ardently
desired.

It  was  on  the  action  of  these  three  Powers  that  the  question  of
peace  or  war  with  France  mainly  depended.  The  Kings  of  Spain
and  Naples,  indeed,  and  the  Duke  of  Savoy  were  ready  to  give
the  French  emigrants  some  hopes  and  even  some  money,  and
Gustavus  III.  of  Sweden  was  not  only  ready  but  eager  to  draw
the  sword  on  their  behalf.  Perfectly  incapable  either  of  lasting
attachment  or  resentment,  and  caring  for  little  but  the  excite-
ment of  adventure,  this  strange  sovereign  was  now  in  close
alliance  with  his  old  enemy  Russia,  and  was  burning  to  dis-
tinguish himself  in  new  fields.  But  his  exchequer,  as  usual,
was  empty,  and  he  could  do  nothing  without  the  subventions  of
his  neighbours.

The  real  interest  and  attention  of  the  three  great  conti-
nental Powers,  however,  were  now  directed  much  less  to  France
and  its  Revolution  than  to  another  revolution  which  appeared
to  them  much  more  closely  connected  with  their  interests,  and
which  it  will  now  be  necessary  very  briefly  to  describe.

Ever  since  the  death  of  Sobieski  in  1G9G,  the  condition  of
Poland  had  been  one  of  deplorable  and  increasing  anarchy.  In
an  open  country  surrounded  by  ambitious  and  intriguing  neigh-
bours, a  strong  internal  organisation  and  a  powerful  and  well-
disciplined  army  were  absolutely  essential,  but  Poland  was  cursed
with  the  most  miserable  Constitution  that  ever  enfeebled  and
demoralised  a  nation.  Her  elective  monarchy  continually  ex-
posed her  to  civil  war,  to  foreign  interference,  to  sovereigns  who
were  foreign  nominees  ;  while  the  fear  lest  the  reigning  sovereign
should  found  a  dvnastv  led  the  Diet  to  reduce  the  arniv  much

540  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

below  the  limits  which  were  essential  to  the  safety  of  the
country.  Political  power  was  almost  wholly  in  the  hands  of  a
numerous  and  poor  nobility,  while  the  absurd  institution  of  the
Liberum  Veto  enabled  a  single  dissenter  to  invalidate  the  pro-
ceedings of  a  whole  Diet.'  Never  was  there  a  Constitution
more  manifestly  framed  to  paralyse  national  prosperity,  and  to
invite  and  facilitate  foreign  intrigue.  Russia  carefully  and
with  great  expenditure  maintained  her  party  in  the  c^ountry,
and  Sweden,  Prussia,  Austria,  and  France,  had  all  at  different
times  pursued  the  same  policy.  Augustus  II.,  who  succeeded
Sobieski,  drew  Poland  into  close  alliance  with  Russia  in  her
long  conflict  with  Charles  XII.  of  Sweden,  and  the  Polish
crown  became  one  of  the  great  objects  of  the  war.  Twice
Augustus  was  dethroned.  Twice  he  regained  his  crown,  and
when  he  died  in  1 733  he  left  his  country  almost  ruined  by  war,
and  incurably  divided  intx)  hostile  factions.  Stanislaus,  who  was
then  elected,  was  dethroned  by  a  Russian  army,  and  Russian
power  placed  both  Augustus  III.  of  Saxony  and  his  successor,
Stanislaus  Poniatowski,  on  the  Polish  throne.

Already,  and  indeed  for  many  years,  there  had  been  frequent
plans  and  predictions  of  a  partition  of  Poland.^  Corruption
and  anarchy  had  greatly  weakened  the  national  character,  but
Poland  contained  many  true  patriots,  and  they  saw  clearly  that
a  reform  of  the  Constitution  was  indispensable  to  the  security
of  their  country.  If  the  nation  had  been  left  free  to  work  out
its  own  destinies  such  a  reform  would  probably  have  been
effected,  but  it  was  the  deliberate  and  systematic  policy  of  Russia
and  Prussia  to  maintain  anarchy  in  Poland  in  order  that  it
might  never  rise  to  prosperity  or  power  or  independence.  With
this  object  they  agreed  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Stanis-
laus Poniatowski,  that  they  would  maintain  by  force  the  existing
Constitution  and  oppose  any  attempt  to  abolish  the  Liberum  Veto
or  to  make  the  monarchy  hereditary. A  strong  and  earnest

'  In  cnsos  of  extreme  necessity,  it  Croix,  Constitutions  of  Iuiroj)c,{.?A'2-

was pos.siljle to 'confederate' the  315.

3)iet,  in  which  case  the  Liberum  Veto  -  For  an  intcrestinj?  collection  of

was  for  a  sliort  time  fiuspeiidcd,  and  predictions and schemes of parti-

<|iie.stions w';re carried by plurality  li(m, si^e SunO, Qiirsthm (V (hii'vt

of votes. See Coimt von IMdllke's  an XVIIIinc Sirck;  pp. ]'.)-2\, 37.

J 'iilaud  (Knn]i»h trans.),  pp. II,  lo.  Fh'tclicr's H'tstorij of I'oldnd, pp.

i{,o\XiiSca.\x,  Ciour.de I'oliifjnc,r.\\.  '\x. l-a  80-88.

cii.  XXI,  THE  POLISH QUESTION.  541

effort  was,  notwithstanding,  made  to  effect  the  former  object,
and  the  reform  was  so  powerfully  supported  that  it  would
have  undoubtedly  succeeded  liad  not  Russia  again  interfered,
and  re-established,  with  the  concurrence  of  Prussia,  the  Liberum
Veto  in  its  full  stringency.*  Religious  dissensions  which  now
broke  out  gave  new  pretexts  for  Russian  interference.  Russian
armies  menaced,  invaded,  ravaged,  and  occupied  the  country,  and
Polish  patriots  were  sent  by  Russian  authority  to  Siberia.  The
jealousy  of  the  three  great  Powers  alone  for  a  time  saved  Poland.
At  last  they  agreed  upon  their  share  of  the  spoil.  In  1772
they  signed  '  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  '  treaties  for  the
plunder  of  Poland,  and  in  a  few  months  the  first  partition  was
easily  effected.  It  was  justified  at  the  time,  and  has  been
defended  by  some  later  historians  on  the  ground  of  that  very
anarchy,  which  it  had  been  for  many  years  a  main  object  of  two
of  the  plundering  Powers  to  foment  and  to  perpetuate.

Poland  emerged  from  the  ordeal  weakened,  mutilated,  and
humiliated,  but  still  a  not  inconsiderable  Power,  and  for  a  time
there  seemed  some  hope  that  the  greed  of  her  neighbours  was
sated,  and  that  she  would  be  allowed  to  attain  some  measure  of
prosperity.  A  strong  national  spirit  was  aroused  by  disaster,
and  great  efforts  were  made  to  improve  the  army,  to  disseminate
education,  and  to  raise  up  a  party  favourable  to  administrative
reform.^  The  three  Powers  at  the  time  of  the  partition  formally
guaranteed  the  integrity  of  the  portion  of  Poland  which  re-
mained, but  Kaunitz  and  Frederick  the  Great  at  this  very  time
distinctly  foresaw  that  when  it  became  convenient  another  par-
tition would  follow.^  For  the  present,  however,  the  language  of
the  three  Powers  was  very  conciliatory,  and  as  the  Turkish  War
Avas  impending,  all  parties  desired  a  Polish  alliance.  In  177G  the
King  himself  urged  upon  the  Diet  the  necessity  of  revising  the
Constitution.  In  1780  the  Chancellor  Zamoiski  proposed  the
abolition  of  the  Liberum  Veto  and  of  the  election  of  the  soverei"-n,
but  the  propositions  were  rejected  by  the  Diet.  The  serfs,
however,  on  many  large  properties  were  emancipated,  and  there
was  a  strong  movement  towards  a  union  of  classes. In  1787,

'  Sorel,  pp.  15,  24. Fletcher,  pp. Manoires  stir  la  PnlogTie,  i.  23-20.
206,  218,  219.  -^  Sorel, Qiirsii.m (rOrirnt uu

-  See  on  these  reforms,  Oginski'.s XVIUmc  Silclc,  \)\y  271,  272.

£42  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. en.  xxi.

when  Catherine  was  making  her  triumphal  journey  througli
the  Crimea  and  preparing  another  invasion  of  Turkey,  Stanislaus
obtained  from  her  an  assurance  that  Russia  would  not  make  a
change  in  the  Constitution  of  Poland  a  pretext  for  a  new
partition,  and  a  similar  assurance  was  obtained  from  Joseph  of
Austria.'  Catherine  had  at  this  time  great  hopes  of  obtaining
an  alliance  of  the  Poles  against  their  old  supporters  the  Turks,
and  such  an  alliance  was  formally  tendered,  but  it  was  rejected
by  the  Poles,  who  had  suffered  intolerable  misery  from  the  semi-
barbarous  hordes  of  Russia,  while  the  Turks  had  observed  all
the  terms  of  the  Peace  of  Carlowitz  with  that  scrupulous  fidelity
which  so  remarkably  distinguished  them  from  Christian  Powers.

Another  alliance,  however,  was  speedily  formed,  which
seemed  to  promise  happier  days  for  Poland.  When  the  nego-
tiation with  Russia  was  pending,  the  Minister  of  the  King  of
Prussia  presented  to  the  Polish  Diet  in  the  name  of  his  Court  a
remarkable  paper,  solemnly  protesting  against  the  proposed
alliance.  It  could  add  nothing,  the  Prussian  Minister  said,  to
the  security  of  Poland,  for  both  Russia  and  the  Emperor  had
already  guaranteed  its  integrity.  Rumours,  it  is  true,  had  been
circulated,  deeply  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  the  King  of
Prussia,  imputing  to  him  designs  inconsistent  with  the  integrity
of  Poland.  Against  all  such  imputations  the  Prussian  Minister
solemnly  protested,  and  in  exchange  for  the  Russian  alliance
he  offered  Poland  a  close  alliance  with  Prussia  with  a  renewed
promise  to  defend  her  against  every  enemy.

This  alliance  was  speedily  accepted.  Prussia  solemnly
guaranteed  the  integrity  of  Poland.  She  promised  to  assist
her  against  all  hostile  attacks  and  all  interference  with  her
internal  concerns.  The  King  of  Prussia  not  only  fully  recog-
nised the  right  of  the  Polish  people  as  an  independent  nation
to  revise  their  Constitution,  Init  he  also  strongly  urged  them
to  do  so.

It  is  probable  that  thc^.  hope  of  obtaining,  by  some  amicable
arrangeinent,  Dantzig  and  Th^i-n  was  already  in  the  mimls  of
the  Prussian  statesmen,  but  this  question  was  not  as  yet  brought
forward,  and  the  immediate  motives  of  their  policy  were  of  a
rJiU'crciit  kind.  It  was  at  this  lime  llicii"  main  object  to  build
' .)/t'iiiiiirr.s  t/'()//i/i.s/,'i,  i.  L'.S  ; Mclolier,  ji.  2'.l7.

cn.  XXI.  POLISH CONSTITUTION. MAY 1791. '  543

np  a  system  of  alliances  in  opposition  to  Russia  and  the  Emperor ;
and  if,  as  appeared  probable,  the  chief  scene  of  the  conflict  waa
in  Turkey,  the  assistance  of  Poland  would  be  very  valuable.
The  Prussian  policy  of  detaching  Poland  from  Russia  was,
jiowever,  perfectly  successful,  and  relying  on  Prussian  support
the  Polish  Diet,  wJiich  first  met  in  September  1788  and  which
was  confederated  for  the  emergency,  carried  a  series  of  reforms
which  totally  changed  the  Constitution  and  condition  of  Poland.
It  was  decreed  that  the  army  should  be  raised  from  20,000
to  100,000  men.  The  system  of  taxation  was  thoroughly  re-
vised. A  considerable  representation  was  given  to  the  trading
towns.  The  excessive  powers  of  the  Dietines  Avere  abolished.
The  Liberum  Veto  was  swept  away,  and  finally  on  May  3,  1791,
a  new  Constitution  was  voted,  in  which,  after  the  reigning  King,
the  crown  was  offered  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and  to  his  heirs
for  ever.

It  became  evident  at  an  early  stage  of  these  reforms  how
greatly  the  consideration  of  Poland  in  Europe  had  been  raised.
Sweden  and  Turkey  now  eagerly  sought  her  alliance,  and  the
establishment  of  hereditary  monarchy  was  believed  throughout
Europe  to  have  laid  the  foundation  of  Polish  stability.  It  was,
however,  clear  to  all  close  observers  that  Polish  statesmen  were
playing  a  very  dangerous  game,  and  it  is  easy  in  the  light  of
subsequent  events  to  detect  the  grave  mistakes  of  their  policy.
It  was  certain  that  Russia  would  resent  bitterly  what  was  done,
and  she  early  announced  to  the  Diet  that  she  would  permit  no
change  whatever  in  the  Constitution  of  1775.  She  was  at
present  deeply  involved  in  the  Eastern  question,  but  the  Polish
reforms  were  prolonged  over  so  long  a  period  that  they  had  no
time  to  consolidate  themselves  before  Russia  was  again  free.
Everything  too  depended  upon  the  fidelity  of  Prussia  to  her
engagements,  but  the  Poles  had  neglected  one  powerful  means
of  attaching  her.  The  King  of  Prussia  had  offered  a  commercial
treaty  in  consideration  of  the  cession  of  Dantzig  and  Thorn,  and
English  mediation  was  urgently  employed  to  support  him.  Rut
the  national  feeling  of  Poland  was  so  strongly  opposed  to  the
cession  that  the  demand  was  refused.

It  is  not  surprising  that  it  should  have  been  so.  No
countrv  in  which  a  strong  national  sentiment  exists  has  evur

644  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu.  xxr.

voluntarily  consented  to  cede  a  well-affected  portion  of  iis
territory;  but  tlie  impolicy  of  the  refusal  was  not  the  less  con-
spicuous. There  was  a  perceptible  shade  of  coldness  intro-
duced into  the  relations  between  the  two  countries,  and  it  was
deepened  by  a  rumour  which  was  spread  in  Poland  that  Prussia
and  Russia  had  been  negotiating  another  partition,  and  by
jealousy  felt  at  Berlin  at  the  somewhat  more  friendly  rela-
tions of  the  Emperor  to  Poland.  At  the  same  time  there
was  no  breach  or  quarrel.  The  King  of  Prussia  on  perceiving
the  feeling  of  the  Poles  withdrew  his  demand.  The  treaty  of
alliance,  the  solemn  guarantee  of  the  integrity  of  Poland,  the
promise  so  recently  and  so  emphatically  made  that  Prussia
would  defend  Poland  from  any  attempt  to  meddle  with  her
internal  affairs,  still  remained,  but  Polish  statesmen  ought  to
have  learned  from  recent  experience  how  little  reliance  is  to  be
placed  on  national  honour  when  it  is  dissevered  from  national
interest.  It  was  extremely  probable  that  war  might  at  this
time  speedily  break  out  between  Prus.sia  and  Russia,  and  it  was
therefore  a  pressing  interest  of  the  former  Power  to  be  on  good
terms  with  Poland.  But  when  the  dangers  of  a  Turkish  war
had  passed  away,  when  the  changing  aspect  of  continental
policy  again  drew  Prussia  into  connection  with  Russia  and
Austria,  was  it  certain  that  Prussia  would  not  break  her  com-
pact, betray  the  country  which  had  trusted  to  her,  and  once
more  seek  for  her  aggrandisement  by  fomenting  and  maintain-
ing anarchy  in  Poland  ? '

To  many  the  imputation  would  have  seemed  too  gross  to
have  been  for  a  moment  entertained,  but  there  were  some  good
judges  to  whom  such  possibilities  seem  to  have  already  occurred.
Ilailes,  who  was  at  this  time  the  English  Minister  at  Warsaw,
had  formed  a  very  unfavourable  judgment  both  of  the  strength
of  Poland  and  of  the  character  of  her  political  classes,  and  his
bias  was  evidently  intensified  by  irritation  at  the  failure  of  his
attempts  to  negotiate  a  commercial  treaty  between  Great
Jiritaiu  nnd  l*oland,  and  to  induce  the  Poles  to  cede  Dantzig
and  '^^I'licji-n  to  l^russia. He  wrote  to  his  Government  that  lio

'  Sec Sylifl, Jnxt. de VEurope aclions  in  SyV'cl  is  naturally  writlon
prmihiiit la Itvroliition  Frav (;ai xr ,  i. wiLli  ji  strong  I'ru.sbiau  biod.
28r<  li'.)7. 'J'lie account  of  those  trans-

CH.  XXI.  POLISH REVOLUTIOX, 1791.  545

had  strongly  discuunigcd  t,lic  design  ol"  the  Polish  statesmen  to
establish  an  hereditary  monarchy.  The  Elector  of  Saxony,  he
predicted,  would  never  accept  the  crown  except  with  the  assent
of  the  three  Powers  and  the  unanimous  wish  of  the  nation,  and
these  conditions  could  never  be  attained.  The  enemies  of  order
and  the  friends  of  Russia  would  be  sure  to  intervene,  and  a  civil
war  would  probably  break  out.  '  The  nation  itself  has  neither
will  nor  opinion,  and  it  may  be  easily  led  into  any  system  which
those  who  guide  it  think  proper  to  adopt.'

His  warnings  were  not  attended  to.  It  was  answered,  he
?',aid,  that  as  long  as  the  crown  of  Poland  was  elective  there
could  be  no  stability,  no  security  against  a  civil  war  at  every
vacancy ;  that  the  present  moment,  when  the  three  Courts  were
occupied  with  more  material  concerns,  w^a  good  opportunity
ibr  settling  the  matter ;  that  the  condition  of  the  country  was
humiliating  and  precarious ;  that  all  foreign  Ministers  com-
plained of  the  want  of  system  and  concert  in  the  Government,
and  that  it  was  time  that  the  Polish  nation  should  be  freed  from
dishonourable  subjection  to  foreign  influence.'  Hailes  was
obliged  to  admit  that  in  some  respects  his  predictions  were
signally  falsified.  The  great  constitutional  change  was  carried
through  the  Diet  on  a  wave  of  enthusiasm,  and  was  received
with  perfect  acquiescence  by  the  country.  Not  a  drop  of  blood
was  shed.  '  Everything,'  wrote  Hailes,  two  months  later,  '  is
perfectly  quiet  at  Warsaw  and  in  the  provinces,  and  there  is  no
apparent  opposition  to  the  new  establishment,  and  the  Russian
party,  so  violent  a  short  time  since,  has  totally  disappeared.'  All
the  Dietines  ratified  the  new  Constitution  without  difficulty.
The  oath  of  fidelity  to  it  was  readily  taken.  There  was  not  the
smallest  attempt  at  insurrection,  and  it  seemed  evident  that  if
Poland  were  left  to  herself  the  change  would  be  completely  suc-
cessful.^

One  letter  of  Hailes  is  especially  significant.  The  answer,
he  said,  of  the  King  of  Prussia  to  the  letter  of  the  Polish  King
announcing  the  change  had  just  arrived,  and  it  was  '  perfectly
cordial  and  satisfactory.' This  fact,  Hailes  remarked,  was  sur-

'  Hailes  to  Leeds,  May  3,  5.  Hailes  1791;  March  11,  1792. See,  too,  the

to  Grenville,  May  28,  June  15,  1791.  account  of  the  Revolution,  by  Goltz,

Itecord  Office.  the  Prussian  Minister,  sent  to  Greu-

'■^  Hailes to Grenville, June 7,  vilie  by  Ewart.

VOL.  V.  N  N

54G  ENGLAND IN THE EIGIITEENTPI CENTURY.  ch.  xxr.

prising,  as  the  King,  '  two  years  ago  only,  whs  of  opinion  tliat
nothing  could  be  more  contrary  to  his  interests  than  the  esta-
blishment of  the  hereditary  succession  in  Poland,  and  indeed  his
expression  of  similar  sentiments  to  me  at  Berlin  at  that  time
has  constantly  been  uppermost  in  my  mind,  and  made  me  appre-
hensive for  the  effect  of  so  bold  a  measure.' '

The  letters  from  Berlin  were  at  first  equally  reassuring.  The
King  of  Prussia  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  what  had  occurred
to  the  Polish  Minister  at  his  Court,  to  the  King  of  Poland  and
to  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  He  urged  the  Elector  to  accept  the
Polish  crown  ;  he  offered  him  his  warm  alliance,  and  he  professed
himself  fully  determined  to  fulfil  his  own  treaty  obligations.^
The  relations  of  Poland  with  Leopold  were  at  this  time  very
good,  and  with  a  Prussian  alliance  and  a  people  to  an  unusual
extent  united,  its  prospects  appeared  to  foreigners  singularly
happy.  Burke  contrasted  the  bloodless  and  beneficent  Revo-
lution in  Poland  with  the  destructive  Revolution  in  France.
Fox  described  the  Polish  Revolution  as  a  work  in  which  '  every
friend  to  reasonable  liberty  must  be  sincerely  interested.'  Leeds,
representing  the  English  Government,  wrote  on  the  subject  in
friendly  though  cautious  terms.  He  instructed  Hailes  not  to
press  any  further  the  cession  of  Dantzig  and  Thorn  since  it  was
so  unpopular.  His  Majesty,  he  said,  had  never  meant  to  urge
it  except  with  the  full  assent  of  the  Polish  nation  and  in  return
for  commercial  advantages.  It  was  difficult  and  by  no  means
desirable  for  England  to  give  any  opinion  on  the  new  Constitu-
tion. There  could,  however,  be  very  little  doubt  that  the
peaceable  establishment  of  hereditary  monarchy  in  Poland  would
be  for  the  good  of  that  country  if  it  was  acquiesced  in.  '  The
present  situation  of  the  Imperial  Courts  may  render  them  less
likely  to  disturb  at  this  moment  than  at  any  other,  a  system
by  which  the  Government  of  Poland  may  acquire  that  degree
of  solidity  and  consistency  which  have  so  long  been  wanting
to  it.'  3

This  was  the  first  scene  of  a  momentous  drama  which,  as  we
shall  see,  soon  assimiod  very  different  aspects,  and  blended  to  a

' Ihiilos 1,0 Urcnvili'e, May HI, 171)1.
1 7'.)  I .  '  Leeds  to  llailcs,  Blay  25,  ITJl.

''■  EwarL  to  GrcnviUu,  Muy  7,  31,

CH.  XXI.  THE FRENCH PRINCES.  547

remarkable  degree  with  the  course  of  events  relating  to  France.
We  must  now  turn  to  this  latter  subject,  and  trace  the  causes
which  led  to  the  great  European  war.

The  multitude  of  ruined  French  gentry  who  had  fled  beyond
the  frontier  had  already  found  their  chiefs,  and  were  beginning  to
take  active  measures  for  preparing  their  return.  A  small  party
had  collected  round  the  Prince  de  Conde  at  Worms,  and  another
round  the  Count  d'Artois  at  Turin,  but  after  the  departure  of
dArtois  for  Coblentz  in  the  beginning  of  1791,  and  the  arrival
of  the  Count  de  Provence  in  the  following  July,  Coblentz
became  the  chief  centre  of  the  emigration.  With  the  assent  of
the  Elector  of  Treves  a  considerable  force  was  organised  and
armed,  and  the  exiled  princes  were  indefatigable  in  their  efforts
to  induce  the  chief  Powers  in  Europe  to  take  part  in  a  counter
revolution.  As  early  as  September  1790,  the  English  Minister
at  Berlin  wrote  to  his  Government  that  they  were  urging  at
Berlin,  Vienna,  and  Munich,  an  invasion  of  France  by  the  King
of  Prussia,  the  King  of  Hungary,  and  the  Elector  Palatine,  and
that  if  a  counter  revolution  was  effected  they  were  ready  that
Haynault  should  be  given  to  the  King  of  Hungary,  and  Alsace
to  the  Elector  Palatine,  who  was  in  his  turn  to  cede  to  Prussia
the  Duchies  of  Juliers  and  Berg.'  In  June  1791,  new
negotiations  on  the  part  of  the  Count  dArtois  were  carried  on
at  Berlin  and  Vienna,  and  shortly  after,  at  the  time  of  the
meeting  at  Pilnitz,  D'Artois  tried  to  induce  the  Emperor  to
draw  the  sword  by  the  offer  of  Lorraine.^

Except  from  England  the  French  princes  appear  to  have
met  with  no  positive  refusals  of  assistance,  but  they  found  few
cordial  friends.  The  King  of  Sweden,  it  is  true,  was  eager  for
the  war.  He  made  a  journey  to  Brunswick  for  the  purpose  of
concerting  it  with  the  Duke.^  He  wrote  to  the  Empress  of
,Pussia,  offering  to  furnish  a  corps  of  12,000  men  Avith  ships  to
carry  them,  for  the  assistance  of  the  French  Royal  Family,  if  the
Empress  would  pay  the  expenses.'' He  made  a  similar  offer  to

'  Ewart  to  Leeds,  Sept.  12,  1790.  of  Sweden  was  acting  'with  a  spirit

-  Sybel,  i.  .308.  of  chivalry  worthy  of  Charles XII.'

^  Ewart  to  Grenville,  June  8,  1791.  In England, however, he  seems to

*  Whitworth to Grenville, Sept.  have been less favourably  judged.

30,  1791. Whitworth  said,  the  King  Some  time  before  Whitworth's  letter

N N 2

5^8  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxi,

tlie  King  of  Spain  and  to  the  Emperor,  and  lie  urgently
but  vainly  begged  the  Emperor  to  grant  him  the  use  of
the  port  of  Ostend  as  the  basis  for  an  expedition  against
France.  Catherine  from  the  beginning  strongly  favoured  an
intervention  in  France,  but  her  chief  object,  from  first  to
last,  was  simply  to  entangle  her  neighbours  in  a  European
war,  which  might- leave  her  at  liberty  to  do  as  she  pleased  in
Poland.

The  question  of  intervention  or  non-intervention  depended
mainly  on  the  two  great  German  Powers,  and  these  Powers  had
of  late  been  steadily  approximating.^  The  movement  began
during  the  long  and  troubled  negotiations  which  preceded  the
Peace  of  Sistova,  and  which  had  at  one  time  brought  them  to
the  very  brink  of  war.  Leopold,  though  he  desired,  by  support-
ing Eussian  pretensions,  to  modify  in  his  favour  the  terms
which  had  been  agreed  on  at  the  Convention  of  Reichenbach,
Avas  unwilling  to  be  dragged  into  war  with  Prussia,  not  alto-
gether pleased  at  the  ascendency  Russia  was  acquiring  near
his  frontier,  and  perplexed  by  the  growing  difficulties  on  the
side  of  France  and  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  and  he  accordingly
made  secret  overtures  to  the  King  of  Prussia  to  close  their  long
rivalry  by  an  alliance.  The  King  of  Prussia  speedily  responded.
Kaunitz  and  Hertzberg,  who  on  opposite^  sides  chiefly  repre-
sented the  old  traditional  antagonism,  were  kept  almost  entirely
in  the  dark,*  and  the  latter  retired  from  office  in  July  1791.
The  negotiation  was  largely  conducted  by  the  sovereigns  them-
selves, almost  without  the  knowledge  of  their  Ministers.  It  was
the  object  of  the  King  of  Prussia  by  detaching  Austria  to
isolate  Russia.  Leopold  desired  to  secure  peace  on  the  side  of
Prussia ;  to  free  himself  from  the  domineering  influence  of
Russia,  and  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  Prussia  if  it  became
necessary  to  intervene  in  France.  Colonel  Bischoffswerder,  a
favourite  of  the  Prussian  King,  was  chiefly  employed  in  the

wfus  written,  Grcnville  wrote  to  Ewart:  object,  and  which  I  imao:ine  there  is

''J'licrc  ar(!  circuiristaiiccs  which  ap-  little  prospect  of  his  receiviiio;  from

pi  ar  to  furnish  ^jrou lids  for  an  opinion  the Enipress of lUissia.' (Jul^' 2'.\

tliat  the  King  of  .Sweden  has  actually  1791.)

engaged  in  the  project  of  the  French  '  See,  on the  policy  of  the  Em-

ciiuntcr  revolution,  and  that  he  looks  peror  at  this  time,  Keith  to  Grenville,

to  that  quarter  for  pecuniary  assist-  Sept.  10;  Oct.  1,  5,  8,  17i)l ;  Foriieiou,

aiice,  which  seems  to  be  his  principal  IJist.  (let  Enuyrcs,  i.  201.

cii.  XXI.  THE FKENCH PKINCES.  549

negotiation,  and  ho  for  some  time  in  a  great  measure
superseded  the  regular  Ministers  at  Berlin.  The  negotiation
began  in  May  1791,  and  among  the  questions  considered
was  the  possibility  of  intervention  in  France.  At  Berlin
every  member  of  the  Cabinet  is  said  to  have  been  at  first
opposed  to  such  intervention,  and  the  King  himself,  though
lie  was  violently  irritated  against  the  French  Jacobins,  ap-
peared resolved  to  leave  the  task  of  '  mounting  the  breach '  to
the  Emperor,'  but  it  was  at  last  agreed  that  the  two  sove-
reigns should  meet  at  Pilnitz  in  August,  and  consider  the
subject.

The  French  question  had  for  some  months  thrown  Leopold
into  a  state  of  great  perplexity  and  hesitation.  lie  was  ex-
tremely unwilling  to  involve  himself  in  new  complications  in
the  West,  while  the  Eastern  question  was  still  unsettled,  and
he  had  a  great  dislike  and  contempt  for  the  Count  d'Artois,
and  the  other  leaders  of  the  emigration.  The  part,  indeed,
which  these  personages  were  playing  was  a  very  strange  one.
They  were  endeavouring,  without  the  smallest  authority  or
countenance  from  their  own  sovereign,  to  provoke  an  invasion,
and  even  a  partial  dismemberment,  of  France.  The  King  of
France  repeatedly  wrote  to  discourage  and  disavow  their  pro-
ceedings, and  in  the  most  confidential  letters  of  Marie  Antoi-
nette to  her  brother,  as  well  as  in  her  conversations  ^ith  her
most  intimate  friends,  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  the  extreme
dislike  and  distrust  with  which  the  French  Court  regarded  the
plans  and  conduct  of  the  emigrant  princes,  and  of  their  constant
fear  lest  an  invasion  of  armed  emigrants,  or  some  rash  measure
due  to  emigrant  prompting,  should  complete  the  ruin  of  the
monarchy.^  On  the  other  hand,  the  princes  regarded  the  King
and  Queen  as  mere  puppets  in  the  hands  of  the  revolutionists,
and  they  acted  with  complete  independence.  They  detested
the  Queen  on  account  of  her  supposed  sympathy  with  revolu-
tion ;  refused  to  obey  the  royal  orders ;  deprecated  every  kind
of  compromise  with  the  Revolution,  and  at  last,  when  the  King
accepted  the  Constitution  in  September  1791,  they  desired  that

'  Evvart  to  Gremnlle,  June  8,  July JI.  und  Leopold  II.  pp.  143,  117,  lul
17,  1701.  166,  168,  204,  205,  207

-  Arneth,  Marie  Antoinette,  Joscjjk

550 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi

the  Emperor  should  treat  that  act  as  equivalent  to  an  abdica-
tion, and  should  recognise  the  eldest  brother  of  the  King  as
Kegent  of  France.^

To  all  this  policy  Leopold  was  strongly  opposed.  His  con-
fidential correspondence  with  Marie  Antoinette,  and  the  corre-
spondence also  between  the  Queen  and  Mercy,  who  had  formerly
been  Austrian  ambassador  at  Paris  but  was  now  established  as
Minister  Plenipotentiary  at  Brussels,  have  both  been  published,
and  they  enable  us  to  thread  with  considerable  confidence  the
perplexed  maze  of  the  secret  policy  of  the  time.  In  the  very
beginning  of  1791,  some  form  of  foreign  pressure  or  interven-
tion was  looked  forward  to  by  the  Court  of  France  as  the  sole
means  of  re-establishing  the  royal  power.  In  February,  the
Queen  wrote  to  her  brother :  '  Spain  has  answered  us  that  she
would  aid  us  with  her  forces,  if  you,  the  King  of  Sardinia,  and
the  [Swiss]  Cantons  would  do  the  same,  and  would  treat  toge-
ther and  directly  with  us  with  this  object;'^  but  the  Emperor
in  reply  urged  patience,  and  a  temporising  policy,  and  finally
declared  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  take  any  efficacious
step  in  her  fiivour  without  the  assistance  of  many  of  the  chief
Coui'ts  in  Europe.^  Mercy  Avrote  more  fully  explaining  the
difficulties — a  war  between  Austria  and  Prussia  probably  im-
pending ;  England  malevolent  and  opposed  to  intervention ;  the
uncertain  issue  of  the  Russian  War  keeping  all  Europe  in  per-
plexity ;  the  danger  to  the  lives  of  the  Royal  Family  if  a  foreign
intervention  took  place  when  they  were  helpless  prisoners  in
Pai'is.  If,  indeed,  they  could  escape  and  place  themselves  at
1lie  head  of  a  powerful  body  of  loyal  French  troops,  the  whole
aspect  of  affairs  would  change.  Foreign  assistance  might  then
iluw  in  from  all  sides,  and  it  was  even  possible  that  a  simple
demonstration  on  the  frontiers  of  France  might  accomplish  the
work  by  giving  the  loyal  party  an  irresistible  impulse  and
courage.'*  The  fact  that  Bouille  and  a  considerable  body  of
French  soldiers  were  still  faithful,  was  the  brightest  spot  on  the
horizon,  and  the  Emperor  would  gladly  mass  his  troops  on  such
points  near  the  frontier  that  they  would  be  of  use  if  required.

' l''orn(  ron, Hist,  dcs  Jim.itjri's,  i.  p.  147.
286-280,  2!)5.  •''  I'li'l-  P-  l-'^l  Cl^^''"'c^'  1'^)-

■■i  Arnelh,  nfarie  Antoincttr.,  Joitrph  *  Hud.  pp.  117-150,  152-154,  166-

77.  mid  Lcojiold  II.  (Feb.  27,  17 'J  1),  161.

cu.  XXI.  FJlENCn  POLICY OF  LEOPOLD.  55 1

The  lliglit  of  the  Royal  Family,  which  had  beeu  long  contem-
plated, and  which  was  at  last  effected  on  June  20,  was  taken
in  accordance  with  this  policy,  and  the  Emperor  promised,
if  necessary,  to  place  an  Austrian  force  at  the  service  of  the
fugitives.

Leopold  has  himself  described  his  policy  before  the  flight
to  Varennes.  It  was  his  object,  he  said,  first  of  all  to  dissuade
D'Artois  from  any  rash  step  which  might  endanger  the  life  of
the  captive  King,  and  next  to  form  an  agreement  with  the
Kings  of  Spain,  Sardinia,  and  Prussia,  the  Swiss  Cantons  and
the  Empire,  to  protect  the  Royal  Family  of  France  from  violence
by  a  joint  declaration,  by  a  military  demonstration,  and  if  abso-
lutely necessary  by  actual  force.  The  unanimous  declaration
which  he  desired  was  impossible,  for  England  refused  to  join ;
but  he  had  as  he  believed  secured  the  support  of  the  King  of
Sardinia,  the  Swiss,  and  the  Empire,  and  he  had  great  reason
to  expect  that  of  the  Kings  of  Prussia  and  Spain. ^

Leopold  was  in  Italy  when  the  flight  took  place,  and  the
first  accounts  that  arrived  stated  that  though  the  French  King
had  been  arrested,  he  had  been  again  released  and  was  in  safety
at  Metz.  On  the  arrival  of  this  news^  the  Emperor  at  once  de-
clared his  intention  of  giving  him  an  unequivocal  support.  He
directed  Mercy,  who  was  then  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  to
supply  him  with  money,  to  publish  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor
any  declaration  to  the  National  Assembly  which  the  King  judged
necessary,  to  send  Austrian  troops  to  the  French  frontier,  and,
if  Lewis  desired  it,  even  across  the  border.^  The  truth,  how-
ever, of  the  position  of  the  King  was  soon  known,  and  the
Emperor  speedily  reverted  to  his  former  policy.  He  sent  a
circular  from  Padua  to  the  princes  of  Europe,  calling  their  at-
tention to  the  outrages  to  which  the  French  Royal  Family  had
been  exposed,  and  inviting  them  to  meet  him  for  the  purpose
of  taking  common  measures  for  securing  the  freedom  of  the
King  of  France,  and  putting  bounds  to  the  dangers  that  might
spring  from  the  French  Revolution,^  but  in  the  meantime  he
positively  refused  the  military  assistance  against  France,  which

'  Feuillet  de  Conclies,  iii.  :)73-r)77.  licved  them  to  be  free,  in  Arneth,  pp.

■^  Ibid.  374,  375,  378  ;  ii.  152-L55.  181-184.

See,  too,  his  letters  to  Lewis  XVI.  ^  Feuillet  dc  Conches,  iii.  o8S-3'J0.

and  Marie  Antoinette  when  he be-

552 EXGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en. xxi.

the  emigrants  and  tlie  King  of  Sweden  urgently  requested.'
He  proposed,  however,  a  declaration  to  the  National  Assembly,
threatening  a  united  war  against  the  French  unless  they  set  at
liberty  their  King  and  Royal  Family,  and  re-established  the
power  of  the  monarch  on  a  reasonable  basis ;  but  he  professed
his  unwillingness  to  act  without  the  assent  of  England,  and  he
complained  that  he  was  not  adequately  supported  by  other
Powers.^

His  position  was  indeed  a  very  difficult  one.  He  was
strongly  opposed  to  an  invasion  of  France,  which  might  open
a  limitless  field  to  dangerous  ambitions.  He  knew  that  the
Austrian  Netherlands  were  seething  with  the  revolutionary
spirit,  and  had  been  fatally  weakened  for  the  purpose  of
defence  by  the  dismantlement  of  the  barrier  fortresses.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  the  question  of  the  feudal  rights  of  the  German
princes  in  Alsace  was  still  open.  The  seizure  of  Avignon  by
the  French,  in  July  1791,  was  a  new  complication,  for  Avignon
and  its  territory,  though  they  had  long  been  papal,  still  retained
a  nominal  connection  with  the  Empire.^  Revolutionary  agita-
tion radiating  from  Paris,  or  at  least  stimulated  by  Parisian
example,  appeared  in  several  parts  of  his  dominions.  The  emi-
gi'ant  princes,  the  King  of  Sweden,  the  Empress  of  Russia,  and
above  all  his  own  sister,  were  urging  him  to  action,  and  he  felt
that  an  obligation  of  affection  and  an  obligation  of  honour  lay
upon  him.

The  letters  of  Marie  Antoinette  to  her  brother  at  this  time,
are  painful  reading.  On  July  30  she  sent  him  a  long,  able,
and  statesmanlike  letter  deprecating  foreign  intervention.  The
moderate  party,  she  wrote,  had  obtained  an  indisputable  ascen-
dency in  the  Assembly.  The  revolutionary  section  had  been
defeated  by  a  great  majority.  There  was  an  urgent  desire
among  all  moderate  men  to  terminate  the  Revolution,  restore
peacefid  and  normal  government,  and  secure  the  constitutional
changes  that  had  been  effected,  and  with  quiet  times  the
monarchy  would  gradually  regain  its  dignity  and  much  of  its
autliority. A  foreign  invasion  would  destroy  all  these  happy

'  Feuillet rle Conches,  iii. 42i5-  ^  For  the  lli^^tol•y  oT  the  connec-

427.  tion of Avignon with the German

-  Ihifl.  i'M), i;jl, l'6i, liJO;  Sybcl,  Empire,  hoc  Coxc's  House  o/ Bourlxm,

i,  30:;,  301.  ii.  705.

CH.  XXI.  MARIE ANTOINETTE  AND LEOPOLD.  553

prospects,  and  it  would  be  far  more  formidable  to  the  invader
than  was  generally  imagined.  .  The  French  army  was,  it  is  true,
deficient  in  officers  and  discipline,  but  the  whole  country  was
covered  with  armed  and  excited  men,  who  would  cast  aside
every  other  consideration  to  defend  their  soil  against  the
foreigner.  It  was  not  an  armed  intervention,  but  the  confidence
and  respect  of  the  nation,  that  the  King  now  needed  for  the
restoration  of  his  dignity,  and  it  was  in  the  power  of  the
Emperor  to  give  him  what  he  required.  If  at  the  desire  of  the
French  King  the  Emperor  put  an  end  to  all  fears  of  invasion,  if
he  set  the  example  to  the  Powers  of  Europe  of  recognising  the
French  Constitution,  the  whole  situation  would  change.  All
moderate  Frenchmen  would  at  once  acknowledge  the  great  service
which  their  Royal  House  had  rendered  to  the  country.  The
period  of  passion,  panic,  and  uncertainty  would  terminate,  and
Austria,  being  the  first  country  to  recognise  the  Constitution  of
France,  would  become  her  natural  ally.^

The  letter  was  sent  to  its  destination,  but  it  was  speedily
followed  by  others,  chiefly  in  cipher,  in  which  the  Queen
passionately  declared  that  she  had  written  only  under  constraint,
and  that  she  would  be  in  despair  if  she  thought  that  her  brother
took  these  for  her  real  sentiments.  The  dangers  of  the  situa-
tion, she  said,  were  incalculable.  The  wretches  who  surrounded
her  were  in  convulsions  of  rage,  and  seeking  in  every  way  to
attack  her.  The  new  Constitution  was  '  a  tissue  of  impracti-
cable absurdities,'  but  the  King  had  no  power  of  resisting.  He
was  a  helpless  prisoner ;  he  could  do  nothing  but  make  a  few
criticisms  while  accepting  it,  criticisms  which  would  not  be
attended  to  now,  but  which,  like  the  protest  he  had  left  behind
him  when  he  fled  from  Paris,  might  hereafter  be  appealed  to.
'  The  moment,'  she  added,  '  is  terrible,  and  why  are  we  kept  in
total  ignorance  of  all  that  passes  beyond  France  ?  At  present
we  must  follow  a  course  which  diverts  suspicion  from  us,  and
which  may  at  the  same  time  serve  to  baffle  and  overthrow  as
soon  as  possible  the  monstrous  system  we  are  compelled  to
adopt.  We  have  no  resource  except  in  the  foreign  Powers.
They  must  at  all  hazards  come  to  our  assistance.  The  Emperor
must  place  himself  at  their  head,  and  he  must  insist  as  the  first

'  Arneth,  Marie  Antoinette,  Josej>h  II.  unci  Lco^iold  II.  pp.  188-102,

554  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

condition  that  the  brothers  of  the  King,  and  all  Frenchmen,
but  especially  the  first,  keep  in  the  background.'  France  is  in-
fested with  '  a  race  of  tigers.' '

Such  were  the  influences  pressing  upon  the  Emperor,  and  it
was  under  these  circumstances  that  the  alliance  with  Prussia,
negotiated  by  Bischoffswerder,  was  concluded.  Each  Power
guaranteed  the  possessions  of  the  other,  and  the  treaty  also  con-
tained a  formal  and  unqualified  engagement  that  both  Powers
would  respect  the  integrity  and  the  freedom  of  Poland;  an
engagement  that  no  Austrian  or  Prussian  prince  should  maiTy
the  Princess  of  Saxony,  and  a  promise  that  the  two  Powers
would  do  their  best  to  bring  about  a  European  agreement  on
the  French  question.^

In  the  memorial  which  the  Emperor  had  sent  from  Padua,
proposing  a  Congress  and  a  possible  intervention  in  French
affairs,  he  had  expressed  a  hope  that,  considering  the  great
cause  that  was  to  be  defended,  all  the  Powers  would  renounce
every  aim  of  aggrandisement.^  A  recommendation  so  little  in
harmony  Avith  their  prevailing  spirit,  and  also  the  earnestness
with  which  the  Emperor  insisted  on  the  concurrence  of  England,
which  was  most  unlikely  to  be  obtained,  gave  the  whole  trans-
action an  air  of  great  uncertainty  and  unreality.  As  early  as
March  7,  1791,  Mercy,  when  discussing  with  the  Queen  the
possibility  of  European  intervention  in  favour  of  the  French
Crown,  had  lifted  in  part  the  curtain  of  decorous  professions
which  concealed  the  real  sentiments  of  the  sovereigns.  '  It  is
a  generally  received  principle,'  he  wrote, '  that  the  Great  Powers
do  nothing  for  nothing,'  and  the  pretext  of  'reasons  of  State'
is  always  there  to  cover  their  covetousness.  His  master  the
]i]mperor,  he  said,  was  the  sole  example  of  a  sovereign  who
would  promise  disinterested  support.  Tlie  King  of  Sardinia
had  long  had  his  eye  on  Geneva,  and  an  extension  of  his  fron-
tier in  the  French  part  of  the  Alps  and  on  the  Var  would  be
very  gratifying  to  him,  and  of  little  consequence  to  France.
Spain  desired  some  rectification  of  the  limits  of  Navarre,  and
this,  too,  might  be  easily  granted  ;  while  the  German  princes
who  had  feudal  rights  in  Alsace  might  be  gained  '  at  a  small

'  ArncUi,  pp.  iy3-108,  203-208.  ^  y^.^cl,  i.  302,  303.

»  Ibid.  i.  304.

en.  XXI.  DESIGNS ON AL.SACE AND LORRAINE.  555

expense,' '  To  Prussia  tlio  self-denying  agreement  proposed  by
the  Emperor  was  certainly  not  likely  to  be  satisfactory,  and  in
the  English  diplomatic  correspondence  from  Berlin  we  may  trace
the  first  signs  of  the  ambitions  which  were  beginning  to  grow  up.
The  hope  of  recovering  Alsace  for  the  German  Empire  was
indeed  not  new.  It  was  an  old  grievance  against  the  House  of
IJapsburg  that  at  the  end  of  the  war  of  the  Spanish  succession
it  had  rejected  a  peace  which  would  have  restored  that  province
to  the  Empire,  because  it  only  offered  to  Austria,  Naples  and
Sicily  in  exchange  for  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  that  in  1738
the  Emperor,  in  order  to  recover  Tuscany,  consented  to  sacrifice
the  interests  of  Germany  by  allowing  France  to  obtain  Lorraine.^
Thirty-two  years  later  Frederick  the  Great  had  tried  to  turn
the  ambition  of  the  Emperor  in  this  direction,  and  he  even
drew  up  a  detailed  plan  for  the  conquest  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine
from  France.^  From  an  interesting  secret  letter  written  by
Ewart  to  Grenville,  it  appears  that  this  scheme  was  now  revived.
Ewart  describes  a  long  conversation  which  he  had  with  Count
Schulenburg,  the  Prussian  Minister,  from  which  he  learned  that
although  Schulenburg  himself  was  much  opposed  to  an  inter-
vention with  France,  the  King  of  Prussia,  under  the  influence
of  Bischofiswerder  and  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  had  committed
himself  much  more  than  he  at  first  intended.  In  the  course  of
this  conversation,  Ewart  continues,  '  we  considered  the  two
cases  stated  in  the  secret  despatch  to  Baron  Jacobi  ■*  of  the  com-
bination to  restore  the  French  monarchy  succeeding  or  failing.
Count  Schulenbui'g  thinks  it  would  be  impossible  to  subdue
France  by  foreign  Powers,  and  that  the  attempt  would  con-
tribute to  unite  and  strengthen  the  different  parties.  But,
supposing  it  to  be  otherwise,  he  conceived  each  of  the  Powers
concerned  would  require  an  indemnification  for  their  expenses.
He  thinks  the  same  thing  would  happen  in  the  case  of  their
failing,  as  some  conquests  would  always  be  made,  particularly
that  of  Alsace,  and  probably  Lorraine,  and  that  the  Emperor
would  be  disposed  to  keep  these  provinces,  after  restoring  their
rights  to  the  princes  of  the  Empire. The  King,  his  master,

'  Arneth,  p.  149.  XVIIIme  Si'celc,  pp.  104,  105.

-  Sybel,  i.  154,  155.  *  Piussian  Minister  at  Vienna.

'  Sorcl, Question d^  Orient au

556  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cu,  xxt,

Avonld  then,  lie  observed,  be  obliged  to  require  an  equivalejxt,
and  Ills  great  object  would  be  to  obtain  the  Austrian  part  of
Upper  Silesia.  Some  arrangement  with  the  Elector  Palatine
was  likewise  alluded  to,  by  which  he  might  receive  a  compen-
sation in  the  Netherlands  equal  to  the  cession  of  Juliers  and
Berg  to  Prussia.  .  .  .  The  day  after  I  had  this  conversation
with  the  Prussian  Minister,  Mr.  Jackson  learnt  from  an  indirect
source  that  Colonel  Bischoffswerder  had  actually  settled  a  con-
vention at  Vienna  for  an  effective  plan  of  operations  relative  to
French  affairs  .  .  .  that  upon  taking  Alsace  and  Lorraine  the
Prussian  troops  should  remain  there,  and  the  Austrians  penetrate
into  the  interior  provinces  of  France,  and  that  the  Emperor  was
bound  to  indemnify  his  Prussian  Majesty  in  any  case.' '

The  question  of  armed  intervention  in  France  was  now  con-
sidered very  seriously  in  Berlin,  and  it  is  evident  from  the
confidential  diplomatic  correspondence,  that  the  King  of  Prussia,
adopting  the  views  of  Bischoffswerder  in  opposition  to  those  of
some  of  the  most  prominent  of  his  Ministers,  was  increasingly
anxious  for  such  an  expedition,  while  the  Emperor  recoiled  from
it  more  and  more,^  and  would  have  gladly  abandoned  it  if  any
improvement  in  the  condition  of  French  politics,  and  in  the  posi-
tion of  the  French  Royal  Family,  could  be  alleged  as  a  pretext.
Bouille,  who  had  been  compelled  to  fly  from  France  after  the
capture  of  the  King,  had  taken  refuge  at  Coblentz,  and  was  now
in  close  co-operation  with  the  German  Powers,  and  furnished
them  with  military  intelligence,  and  he  may  possibly  have  sent
an  interesting  account  of  the  state  of  public  opinion  in  France
which  exists  in  the  ai'chives  of  Prussia.  According  to  this
])aper,  more  than  half  France  was  opposed  to  the  new  Constitu-
tion. In  the  country  districts  the  attachment  to  the  llevolution
was  due  to  the  cessation  of  the  old  imposts,  and  would  disappear
wlien  it  became  clear  to  the  peasantry  that  there  was  no  inten-
tion of  re-establishing  them,  and  when  the  banished  cures  had
returned.  The  small ?towns  were  more  revolutionary  than  the
great  ones. The  '  Ancien  llegime  '  was  universally  detested,  and

'  Ewart  to  Grcnvillc,  Aug.  4, 1791  Adairs,  liad  pfood  raeans  of  infnrma-

(rnost  secret). Snrol,  L'Evrope  rt  la  lion,  Jiland  Jiurocx  Paiicrs,  p.  184.
Jtirolnlion Fmnt^whi; p. 546. Sec,  -'  l<]\vart  to  (Ja-uville,  Aug.  J),  13,

too,  tho  .slaiemcni  of  Buries,  who,  as  17IM,
Lngli.sh  Under  Secrctaiy  for  Foreign

en.  XXI.  DECLARATION OF PTLNITZ.  55/

could  never  be  fully  restored.  The  army  was  entirely  witli  tin?
people.  This  was  due  to  the  general  opinion  among  the  soldiers
of  the  utter  incapacity  of  the  King,  and  to  the  influence  of  the
Assembly  which  had  raised  the  pay,  relaxed  discipline,  thrown
open  the  ranks,  and  diffused  amongst  the  soldiers  the  sentiment
of  equality.  But  the  army  was  now  so  disorganised  that  it
would  not  prove  more  formidable  than  the  National  Guard,  when
it  was  encountered  by  disciplined  soldiers.  At  the  same  time
the  only  way  of  subduing  France  was  by  a  general  coalition.
A  partial  attack  would  only  increase  the  evil.  France  must  be
surrounded  with  armies  from  Bayonne  to  Dunkirk.'

The  extreme  reluctance,  however,  of  the  Emperor  in  a  great
measure  paralysed  the  ardour  of  the  Prussian  King,  and  the
interview  between  the  two  sovereigns  at  Pilnitz  had  little
result.  DArtois  again  urged  his  plans  of  immediate  invasion,
and  the  recognition  of  the  Count  de  Provence  as  Eegeut,  but  his
views  were  emphatically  rejected.  A  public  declaration  was,
however,  issued  by  the  two  sovereigns  on  August  27,  1791,
stating  that  they  considered  the  present  situation  of  the  King
of  France  a  matter  of  common  interest  to  all  the  sovereigns  of
Europe;  that  they  claimed  the  assistance  of  those  sovereigns,
who  would,  they  trusted,  co-operate  with  the  signers  of  the
declaration  in  proportion  to  their  strength,  in  order  to  enable
the  King  of  France  to  establish  in  perfect  liberty  the  foun-
dations of  a  monarchical  Government,  equally  in  harmony  with
tlie  rights  of  sovereigns  and  the  prosperity  of  the  French  nation.
'  Then,  and  in  this  case,  their  Majesties  the  Emperor  and  the
King  of  Prussia  were  determined  to  act  promptly,  under  a
common  agreement,  and  with  the  forces  necessary  to  obtain  the
common  object  which  they  proposed,  and  in  the  mean  time  they
will  give  such  orders  to  their  troops  that  they  may  be  put
without  delay  into  activity.'

To  those  who  believed  that  sovereigns  reigned  by  a  Divine
right,  and  were  bound  to  one  another  by  personal  alliances,
the  Declaration  of  Pilnitz  must  have  seemed  natural  and
legitimate.  To  those  who  rejected  these  doctrines  it  must
have  appeared  an  insult  to  France  and  an  interference  with  her
internal  concerns,' which  was  amply  sufficient  to  justify  a  war.
'  Copy  sent  by  Ewart  to  Grenville,  August  1791.

558 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xxi.

It  at  the  same  time  left  the  action  of  the  sovereigns  who  signed
it  so  conditional  upon  the  general  concurrence  of  the  European
Powers  that  it  hound  them  to  nothing,  and  the  Emperor  and  his
Ministers  constantly  alleged  the  attitude  of  England  as  a  reason
for  abstaining  for  the  present  from  any  more  active  measure.

The  English  policy,  though  it  suited  the  purpose  of  some
foreign  politicians  to  describe  it  as  ambiguous  and  Machiavellian,
was  in  truth  from  first  to  last  perfectly  simple  and  consistent ,
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  French  troubles  it  was  the  deter-
mination of  Pitt  that  his  Government  should  take  no  part  directly
or  indirectly  in  the  internal  affairs  of  France.  In  public  declara-
tions, and  in  confidential  diplomatic  communications,  in  speeches
in  Parliament  and  in  the  most  private  letters,  this  policy  was
uniformly  and  emphatically  announced,  and  on  every  critical
occasion  it  was  reiterated.  Thus,  when  the  news  of  the  capture
of  the  King  after  the  flight  of  Varennes  arrived  in  England,
Grenville  at  once  wrote  to  the  ambassador  at  Paris,  '  I  have  for
the  present  only  to  recommend  to  your  Excellency  to  avoid  with
the  utmost  caution  any  step  which  may  have  the  appearance  of
committing  the  sentiments  of  this  country  on  any  point  respect-
ing the  internal  politics  of  France,  or  in  support  or  opposition  to
any  line  of  conduct  which  may  be  adopted  under  the  critical
circumstances  of  the  present  moment.' '  When  in  1791  the
Chevalier  de  la  Bintinaye  brought  to  England  a  letter  from  the
Count  de  Provence  to  the  King,  he  received  an  answer  which
was  perfectly  unambiguous.  It  was  a  formal  assurance  '  that  his
]\Iajesty's  resolution  extends  not  only  to  the  taking  no  part
either  in  supporting  or  opposing  the  measures  which  other
Powers  may  adopt,  but  also  to  the  not  influencing  in  any  manner
their  determination  in  that  respect.'  ^  The  close  relations  estab-
lished between  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the  Emperor,  without  any
frank  communication  with  England,  tended  manifestly  to  weaken

'  Grenville to Gower, June 28,  liniment au parti de I'opposition

1791. It  is  remarkable  that  Fox  at  qui dans  le parlcnient  d'Angleterre

this  time  wroti;  earnestly  to  Bariiave  soulient la revolution Franeaise.'

and  otiier  leadinj^  Krencli  politicians,  Tliis  appears  fron)  a  letter  of  Koederer

di.sMuaflinf^  the  anli-monarchical  party  sent  by  Gower  to  Grenville,  July  17,

froin  violence, and  warninj,' thcni  '(jue  171)1.

.si rAsh(;mb]re n'etait pas t n\s re-  ^  Grenville  to  Aust  (French cor-

Kerv6e ct tr6s ."^afjc non seulcmcnt  respondence at the Kecord Office),

c'lle  compromet trait  sa  revolution  do  Sept.  20,  1791.
France  mais  aussi  (ju'ellu  nuiroit  iu-

CH.  XXI.  ENGLISH  NEUTRALITY.  559

tbat  Prussian  alliance  wbicli  Pitt  regarded  as  of  the  highest  im-
)3ortance,  and  Grenville  instructed  Ewart  to  express  the  deep
resri'et  of  the  Eno^lisli  Government  at  the  reserve  and  coldness
which  had  arisen,  and  their  earnest  desire  to  maintain  the  defen-
sive alliance  altogether  unimpaired.  But  he  was  at  the  same  time
instructed  that  '  it  is  impossible  for  him  [the  King  of  England]
to  enter  into  any  stipulations  which  would  oblige  him  to  take  a
part  in  the  affairs  of  France,  with  respect  to  which  he  has  already
declared  his  intention  of  observing  a  strict  neutrality,' '  In
order  that  there  should  be  no  possible  misunderstanding,  Ewart
was  directed  not  to  accompany  the  King  of  Prussia  to  Piinitz.^
In  England  alone,  the  circular  of  the  Emperor  calling  for  the
advice  and  assistance  of  the  different  Powers  in  Europe  for  the
protection  of  the  King  of  France  from  violence,  was  met  by  a
distinct  refusal.  It  was  the  intention  of  the  English  Govern-
ment, they  officially  replied,  to  observe  on  the  French  question
'  the  strictest  neutrality.'  ^

Keith,  who  represented  England  at  Vienna,  was  instructed
at  the  time  of  the  Pilnitz  meeting  not  to  introduce  any  topics
relating  to  France,  but  if  the  Emperor  or  his  Ministers  re-
ferred to  them  his  language  must  be  such  as  to  leave  no
possible  opening  for  misconstruction.  He  must  say  that
'  during  the  whole  course  of  the  troubles  which  have  so  much
distracted  the  kingdom  of  France,  his  Majesty  has  observed
the  most  exact  and  scrupulous  neutrality,  abstaining  from
taking  any  step  which  might  give  encouragement  or  coun-
tenance to  any  of  the  parties  which  have  prevailed  there,  or
from  mixing  himself,  in  any  manner  whatever,  in  the  internal
dissensions  of  that  country.  It  is  his  Majesty's  intention  still
to  adhere  to  this  line  of  conduct,  unless  any  new  circumstance
should  arise  by  which  his  Majesty  should  be  of  opinion  that  the
interests  of  his  subjects  would  be  affected,  and  even  in  that  case
any  measures  to  be  taken  by  his  Majesty  would  be  directed  to
that  object  only.  With  respect  to  the  concert  which  has  been
proposed  to  his  Majesty  and  other  Powers  by  the  Emperor,  or  to
the  measures  of  active  intervention  which  appear  to  have  been

•  Grenville to Ewart, Aug. 26,  '  Dianesof  the  First  Lord  Malmcx-

1791  hury,  ii.  448. Burke's  CorriJsj)07idencey

■  Ibid.  Aug.  12,  1791.  iii.  200.

oGO  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cir.  xxi.

in  contemplatiou  for  the  restoration  of  the  French  monarcliy.
either  on  its  former  footing  or  at  least  in  a  state  of  more  digruty
and  authority  than  at  present,  the  King  has  determined  not  to
take  any  part  either  in  supporting  or  opposing  them.'  ^

Few  things  are  more  admirable  in  the  career  of  Pitt  than
the  fidelity  with  which  he  observed  this  neutrality  not  only  in
deeds  but  in  words,  and  the  latter  is,  perhaps,  the  more  difficult
in  a  free  Government,  which  is  largely  swayed  by  popular
passions,  and  in  which  it  is  in  the  power  of  any  member  of
Parliament  to  force  almost  any  subject  into  discussion.  In  our
own  generation,  when  the  American  Civil  War  deeply  divided
I^ublic  opinion  in  England,  we  have  seen  an  English  Govern-
ment  proclaiming  the  strictest  neutrality ;  maintaining  it  with
evident  good  faith,  and  preventing  by  its  refusal  of  concur-
rence a  French  intervention  which  would  have  almost  certainly
shattered  the  American  Union  ;  but  half  the  good  effects  of
this  neutrality  were  destroyed  by  the  indiscreet  and  offensive
language  of  English  public  men.  But  no  such  indiscretion
can  be  attributed  to  Pitt  or  to  his  colleagues,  and  their  speeches
up  to  the  close  of  3  792  are  models  of  what  in  difficult  times  the
speeches  of  the  Minister  of  a  neutral  Power  should  be.  Fox,
as  we  have  seen,  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  did
all  in  his  power  to  embarrass  their  policy  by  constant  and  per-
fectly needless  eulogies  of  the  proceedings  in  France,  and  by
systematically  holding  them  up  as  a  model  to  Englishmen.  On
the  other  hand,  Burke  had  given  an  anti-revolutionary  impulse
to  opinion  which  was  growing  almost  daily  in  intensity.
During  the  Nootka  Sound  difficulty,  when  the  relations  of  the
two  countries  were  for  a  time  very  strained,  there  was  a  great
temptation  to  deviate  from  this  neutrality.  Hugh  Elliot,  who,
though  without  any  diplomatic  position,  happened  to  be  in
Paris,  came  into  close  intercourse  with  some  of  the  leading
members  of  the  Diplomatic  Committee  which  the  National
Assembly  had  appointed,  and  which  then  governed  almost
absolutely  the  foreign  policy  of  France.  They  expressed  strongly
their  good  will  to  England,  and  Pitt,  who  was  most  anxious
that  France  sliould  not  join  Spain,  welcomed  their  overtures.
]jut  even  then,  he  insisted  that  two  points  were  essential  to  the
'  Grciivillc  to  Keitli,  Sept.  19,  1791.

CH.  XXI.  THE ENGLISH  NEUTEALITV.  5G1

wliolo  business — the  oue  tliat  the  ueo-otiatiou  shuuld  be  carried
ou  by  accredited  Ministers,  the  other  '  that  no  assurances  shall
be  given,  directly  or  indirectly,  which  go  farther  than  that  this
country  means  to  persevere  in  the  neutrality  which  it  has
hitherto  scrupulously  observed  with  respect  to  the  internal
dissensions  of  France,  and  from  which  it  will  never  depart
vmless  the  conduct  held  there,  should  make  it  indispensable  as
an  act  of  self-defence.' '

In  the  democratic  party  in  France,  Pitt's  honest  efforts  to
maintain  a  perfect  neutrality  appear  to  have  been  at  this  time
fully  acknowledged,  but,  as  usual  among  continental  statesmen,
motives  of  the  most  insidious  and  subtle  nature  were  con-
tinually ascribed  to  him.  Mercy  wrote  to  Marie  Antoinette  as
early  as  March  1791,  that  England  was  the  chief  obstacle  to
the  re-establishment  of  royal  power  in  France ;  that  she  con-
f^idered  herself  secure  from  the  effects  of  democracy,  and  that
she  wished  to  plunge  France  into  the  horrors  of  Revolution
in  order  to  complete  her  ruin.^  Sometimes  her  conduct  was
attributed  to  resentment  at  the  part  which  the  French  Court
had  taken  during  the  American  Revolution ;  sometimes  to  a
simple  desire  to  enfeeble  a  rival ;  sometimes  it  was  said  that
'  Mr.  Pitt  was  secretly  in  the  democratic  interest,  or  at  least
wishes  it  to  exist,  in  order  to  make  it  some  way  or  other  subser-
vient to  his  designs.'  The  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Sweden
believed,  or  pretended  to  believe,  that  the  attitude  of  England
was  less  neutral  than  hostile,  and  that  it  would  therefore  be
dangerous  for  them  to  support  the  French  King.  At  the  ^very
time  when  Keith  was  expressly  instructed  not  to  introduce
French  topics  into  his  conversations  with  the  Ministers  at
Vienna,  Calonne  imagined  that  English  influence  was  strenu-
ously opposing  the  emigrants  in  that  capital.^

Reports  of  this  kind  were  brought  under  the  notice  of  the
English  Government  both  by  Burke,'*  and  by  the  French  emi-

>  Stanhope's  Ufe  of  Pitt,  ii.  59.  239, 261, 291-302, 318. See, too,

This  contidential  communication  was  the  letters  of  Leopold  and  Gastavus

discovered  by  the  Russian  ambassa-  III.  in  the  collections  of  Arueth  and

dor. See  Burke's  Correspondence,  iii.  of  Feuillot  de  Conches. Also  Marsh's

267.  History of the Politics of Great

^  kmefh,  Marie  Antoinette,  Josejjh  Britain  and  France,  i.  39.
uud  Leopold,  p.  148.  ■*  Burke's  Corresjjondence,  iii.  34G.

'  See  Burke's  Correspondence,  iii.

VOL. V.  0  0

5iV2  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.  ch.  xxi.

grants,  but  on  this  side  also,  Grenville  guarded  himself  against
any  suspicion  of  deviating  from  neutrality.  Probably  the  best
view  of  the  real  sentiments  of  the  English  Government  is  to  be
found  in  the  confidential  correspondence  with  Berlin,  and  in
July  1791  Grenville  devoted  a  long  letter  to  the  question.
Calonne  had  recently  come  to  England  bearing  letters  from  the
emigrant  princes  to  the  King,  and  the  principal  object  of  his
mission  was  '  to  solicit  from  his  Majesty  an  assurance  of  his
neutrality  in  the  event,  which  M.  de  Calonne  represents  as
almost  certain,  of  an  attempt  being  made  by  the  Emperor  and
other  Powers  in  support  of  the  royal  party  in  France.  But
from  the  circumstances  of  M.  de  Calonne's  situation,'  Grenville
writes,  '  and  from  other  reasons  it  was  not  thought  proper  to
receive  M.  de  Calonne  as  having  any  formal  power  to  treat  upon
these  subjects,  or  to  authorise  him  to  convey  to  the  French
princes  such  an  assurance  as  he  requested,  especially  as  no  com-
munication had  been  made  by  the  Emperor  relative  to  his
intentions  on  this  subject.'

It  was  the  opinion  of  the  Government  that  it  was  not  for  the
interest  of  the  allied  Powers  to  enter  into  explanations  on  this
or  any  other  subject  till  the  Reichenbach  negotiations  were  com-
pleted and  confirmed.  As  it  was  likely,  however,  that  peace
would  soon  be  made  at  Sistova ;  that  the  Emperor  would  then
be  on  good  terms  with  the  Allies,  and  that  he  would  interfere
with  the  affairs  of  France ;  the  time  had  come  for  giving  an
explanation  which  had  been  hitherto  withheld.  '  The  measures
which  the  Emperor  seems  inclined  to  adopt  may  be  productive  of
consequences  advantageous  to  the  Allies,  and  on  the  whole  they
have  no  interest  in  preventing  or  discouraging  his  interference  in
French  affairs.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  King's  servants  are
far  from  thinking  that  there  exist  at  present  any  considerations
of  sufficient  weight  to  induce  his  Majesty  to  commit  himself  by
any  co-operation  or  assistance  to  be  given  to  the  attempts  which
may  be  made  in  favour  of  tlie  royal  cause  in  France,  either  by
foreign  Powers  or  by  any  description  of  persons  within  that  king-
dom. The  line  of  conduct  which  his  Majesty  is  disposed  to  adopt
on  tliis  subject  is,  to  observe  the  most  exact  and  rigorous  neu-
ti-ality  in  the  event  of  any  interference  by  other  Powers  in  the
aiiUirs  of  Franco.' England,  Grenville  says,  would  gladly  enter

CH.  XXI.  INSTRUCTIONS TO TUE AMBASSADORS.  5Q\\

into  alliance  with  the  Emperor  in  conjunction  with  Prussia  and
Holland ;  and  in  that  case  she  is  quite  ready  to  give  such
explanations  '  as  may  give  his  Imperial  Majesty  a  confidence  of
receiving  no  interruption  from  this  country  in  any  measures
which  he  may  pursue  on  that  subject.'  Grenville  did  not  know,
and  much  wished  to  know,  whether  Prussia  intended  to  follow
on  the  French  question  a  policy  of  interference,  or  the  English
policy  of  amicable  neutrality ;  but  in  any  case  negotiations  should
be  entered  into  with  the  Emperor  as  soon  as  peace  is  made  at
Sistova.  It  must,  however,  be  clearly  explained  that  '  the  object
and  stipulations  of  the  alliance  cannot  extend  to  induce  his
Majesty  to  take  any  part  in  the  Emperor's  measures  in  favour
of  the  royal  pai-ty  in  France,  although  the  conclusion  of  that
alliance  would  afford  the  strongest  additional  motive,  neither
directly  nor  indirectly  to  obstruct  those  measures.'  ^

The  instructions  of  Grenville  to  the  English  ambassador  afe
Vienna  were  very  similar.  He  wrote  to  him  that  La  Bintinaye,
who  had  been  charged  with  a  letter  from  the  Count  de  Provence
to  the  King,  had  represented  '  that  the  Emperor  alleged  to  the
French  princes  as  a  motive  for  his  not  taking  immediate  and
active  steps  in  support  of  their  cause,  that  he  was  retained  by
some  declaration  of  his  Majesty,  from  marching  any  of  the
troops  which  were  then  in  the  Netherlands,  and  that  he  was
therefore  under  the  necessity  of  delaying  his  measures  till  he
could  bring  forward  that  part  of  his  army  which  had  been  op-
posed to  the  Turks.'  If  anything  of  this  kind  was  said  at
Vienna,  Keith  was  instructed  to  reply  that  '  no  note  or  declara-
tion of  any  sort  has  passed  on  the  subject  between  this  Court
and  that  of  Vienna,  since  the  letter  of  his  Majesty  to  the
Emperor.'  It  was  true,  indeed,  that  in  some  conversations  with
the  Austrian  ambassador,  Grenville  had  spoken  of  '  the  anxiety
of  this  Government  for  the  maintenance  of  tranquillity  in  the
Netherlands,  to  the  re-establishment  of  which  his  Majesty  had
by  his  friendly  interposition  so  much  concurred,  and  in  the  pre-
servation of  which  he  feels  that  he  has  a  strong  interest,'  and
of  the  possible  danger  '  of  fresh  disturbances  if  the  Imperial
army  now  stationed  there  was  to  act  on  the  side  of  France.'
But  this  was  merely  urged  as  an  argument  to  induce  the
»  Grenville  to  Ewart,  July  26,  1791.

o  o  2

5G4  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

Emperor  to  bring  to  a  speedy  conclusion  tlie  constitutional  ar-
rangements in  the  Netherlands,  which  he  had  promised  and  had
hitherto  delayed.  It  was  never  for  a  moment  the  intention  of
the  English  Government  to  prescribe  to  the  Emperor  how  many
troops  were  wanted  in  the  Netherlands,,  or  to  make  any  formal
representation  on  the  subject.  On  French  affairs  the  policy  of
England  was  '  declared  neutrality.'  She  was  determined  not
only  not  to  second  and  not  to  oppose  any  measure  the  Emperor
might  take,  but  also  not  to  attempt  to  influence  his  decision  by
any  advice.  There  is  strong  reason,  Grenville  said,  to  believe  that
he  '  has  no  longer  the  same  desire  of  interfering  in  the  affairs  of
France,  which  he  had  a  short  time  since,'  and  that  he  is  making
use  of  the  English  conversations  as  a  pretext  for  inaction.  '  It  is
by  no  means  his  Majesty's  wish  to  take  any  step  for  altering  his
Imperial  Majesty's  disposition  on  this  subject,  whatever  it  be.'
He  only  wishes  it  to  be  clearly  known  that  he  has  himself  main-
tained, and  that  he  will  maintain,  '  the  most  strict  and  scrupu-
lous neutrality  on  the  subject.'  Keith  as  usual  is  directed  to
abstain  from  introducing  the  subject,  but  if  it  was  introduced,
this  was  to  be  his  answer.'

In  their  communications  with  Burke,  the  Ministers  showed
much  reserve,  and  Burke  was  for  a  time  so  doubtful  of  their
dispositions,  that  he  cautioned  his  son  not  to  trust  them  with
any  secrets  relating  to  the  French  princes.  The  fear  of  French
faction  in  England,  he  said,  was  disappearing  from  their  minds,
'i'liey  seemed  wholly  indifferent  to  its  prevalence  in  other  coun-
tries, and  they  were  much  governed  by  the  opinions  of  their
ambassadors.  The  Court  and  the  majority  of  the  people,  he
li.id  no  doubt,  were  opposed  to  the  Revolution,  but  Burke  was
by  no  means  certain  that  the  leaning  of  the  Ministry  was  not
in  its  favour.  Dundas,  however,  positively  assured  him  of
their  determination  to  be  strictly  neutral,  and  he  wrote  to  the
same  eflfect  to  Richard  Burke.  '  The  line  of  the  British  Govern-
ment,' he  said,  '  to  adhere  to  an  honest  and  fair  neutrality  being
taken  and  everywhere  announced,  it  is  impossible  for  any  mem-
ber of  Government  to  give  way  to  the  indulgence  of  any  specu-
lations on  the  subject  of  French  afiairs.  I  had  a  visit  from  your
lather  this  morning,  and  I  took  occasion  to  express  to  him  my
»  Urunvillc  to  Kcilli,  Supt.  27,  17'J1.

CH.  xxr.  INDIFFERENCE TO FOEEIGN AFFAIRS.  f)C)5

surprise  at  the  contents  of  your  last  letter  :  never  having  heard,
and  at  this  moment  not  believing,  that  this  country  ever  inter-
fered directly  or  indirectly  to  prevent  the  Emperor  moving  any
of  his  troops  in  any  manner  he  pleased.'  ^  Edmund  Burke  him-
self had  several  conversations  with  Pitt,  and  fully  recognised
that  there  was  no  moving  him  from  his  idea  of  '  a  neutrality,'  '  a
very  literal '  neutrality.^

It  is  impossible  to  resist  the  force  of  this  evidence.  The
Emperor  in  September  1791  informed  Bouille  that  he  had  re-
ceived replies  from  all  the  Powers  he  had  addressed  on  the
French  question,  assuring  him  of  their  co-operation,  '  with  the
exception  of  England,  which  is  resolved  to  preserve  the  most
strict  neutrality,'  ^  and  the  French  Minister  of  War  in  the  fol-
lowing month,  in  a  report  enumerating  in  great  detail  all  that
had  been  done  by  different  Powers  in  Europe  hostile  to  France,
made  no  charge  of  any  kind  against  England.*

During  the  whole  of  1791,  and,  indeed,  until  the  closing
months  of  1792,  French  affairs  occupy  a  curiously  small  place
in  the  correspondence  of  Pitt  and  of  the  other  Ministers,^  and
Lord  Auckland,  who  had  lived  long  on  the  Continent,  was
greatly  s.truck  with  the  general  indifference  to  foreign  politics.
Ewart  returned  to  England  in  November  1791,  and  Auckland
says,  '  He  thinks  that  on  coming  home,  he  will  be  listened  to
respecting  foreign  politics.  He  will  be  astonished  to  find  that
nobody  here  enters  into  such  subjects.'  '  This  indifference  to
foreign  affairs,'  he  wrote  five  months  later,  'is  general  through
the  kingdom.  You  may  find  it  even  in  our  newspapers;
perhaps  it  may  be  justly  attributed  to  the  great  prosperity  of
the  country,  which  confines  all  attention  to  interior  and  insular
details.'^  Lord  Malmesbury  was  persuaded  that  it  was  'the
fixed  opinion '  of  Lord  Grenville,  '  that  we  should  not  interfere
at  all  in  the  affairs  of  the  Continent,'  ^  Pitt  was  generally  be-
lieved to  know  and  cai-e  less  about  foreign  politics  than  abou4;  any

'  Burke's Correspondence,  iii.  224,  Pitt's correspondence  at  this  time.

265,  266,  268,  274,  336.  Diaries  and  Corresjjondence,  i.  108.

-  Ibid.  pp.  343,  347.  "  Auckland's Corre.sjjondencr, ii.

'  Marsh's  Politics  of  Great  Britain  392,  398.
and  France,  i.  36.  '  Malmesbury's  Correspondence,  ii.

*  Ibid,  pp.40,  41.  441,

*  See  the remarks of Rose, on

5G6 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

other  department  of  administration,  and  all  liis  correspondence
shows  that  his  thoughts,  were  at  this  time  mainly  directed  to
commercial  extension,  to  financial  reform,  and  especially  to  the
reduction  of  the  debt.  The  two  great  ends  of  his  foreign  policy
were  to  prevent  disturbances  in  Europe  and  to  multiply  com-
mercial treaties,  and  he  was  fully  convinced  that  a  long  period
of  peace  lay  before  England.

Opinions  on  the  French  Revolution  greatly  difiered,  but  the
one  point  on  which  the  vast  majority  of  statesmen  agreed,  was
that  for  a  long  period  France  was  not  likely  to  be  aggressive.
'  The  state  of  France,'  wrote  Pitt,  at  a  time  when  the  Revolu-
tion was  still  impending,  '  whatever  else  it  may  produce,  seems
to  promise  us  more  than  ever,  a  considerable  respite  from
dangerous  projects.' '  '  From  France,'  wrote  Lord  Malmesbury,
two  years  later,  '  I  fear  very  little.  Its  situation  puts  it  as  a
Power  quite  out  of  the  line,  and  it  is  not  worthy  to  be  reckoned
either  as  a  friend  or  foe.'  ^  By  strengthening  as  much  as
possible  the  internal  resources  of  England,  Pitt  and  his  col-
leagues believed  that  she  must  rise  steadily  and  spontaneously
in  the  European  system.  It  is  a  curious  illustration  of  the  spirit
of  his  Government  that  at  a  time  when  the  complications  of  the
Continent  were  rapidly  thickening,  one  of  his  great  pre-occupa-
tions  appears  to  have  been  the  arrival  of  a  few  shipwi'ecked
Japanese  at  St.  Petersburg.  In  a  long,  anxious,  and  able  de-
spatch, which  though  signed  by  Grenville  was  probably  written
by  Pitt  himself,  he  represented  to  Whitworth  the  extreme
importance  to  the  East  Indian  dominions  of  the  King,  of  making
nse  of  the  occasion  to  form  some  commercial  connection  with
Japan;  and  Whitworth  was  directed  to  employ  all  his  efforts  to
induce  the  Japanese  to  go  to  London,  where  their  presence
might  'possibly  lead  to  consequences  in  the  highest  degree
advantageous  to  the  commercial  interests  of  this  country.'  He
was  directed  to  negotiate  with  the  Empress  on  the  subject,  but
as  the  Empress  was  not  likely  to  consent,  the  object  must  be
disguised,  and  some  pretext,  such  as  the  convenience  of  embark-
ing in  Holland,  must  be  invented. This  is  perhaps  the  only

'  Rone's  Dinriex  and  Cnrrrspond-  ^  Malmcsbuiy's  Corresjynndcnce^W.

eneCf  i.  85.  This  was  written  in  A'M,  '138  (Oct.  1790).  ISco,  too,
Bcpt.  1788.  Auckland's  Correspondence,  ii.  377.

en.  XXI.  TACIFIC SPIRIT OF MINISTERS.  507

instance  in  the  Government  of  Pitt  of  a  diplomacy  wliicli  was
not  perfectly  straightforward.'

I  have  dwelt  long  on  this  subject,  for  in  order  to  judge  fairly
the  causes  of  the  outbreak  of  the  war  of  1793,  it  is  necessary  to
ascertain  what  were  the  dispositions  of  England  when  the  great
struggle  first  began  on  the  Continent.  It  is,  I  believe,  abso-
lutely impossible  to  study  the  evidence  with  candour  without
acknowledging  that,  up  to  this  time  at  least,  the  English  Govern-
ment was  thoroughly  pacific,  and  that  the  neutrality  which  it
professed  was  a  sincere  neutrality,  honestly  professed  and  faith-
fully observed.  If  Pitt  had  any  designs  of  aggression,  the
opportunity  was  not  wanting,  for  in  the  French  navy  insubor-
dination and  disorganisation  were  at  their  height,  and  the  great
negro  insurrection  at  St.  Domingo  in  the  summer  of  1791
almost  led  to  the  total  destruction  of  that  important  French
colony.  In  their  extreme  distress  the  colonists  appealed  for
assistance  to  Lord  Effingham,  the  Governor  of  Jamaica,  who
saved  them  from  almost  certain  massacre  by  sending  to  their
assistance  three  English  frigates  with  ammunition,  and  his
conduct  received  the  full  and  formal  approbation  of  the  British
Government.^

Though  he  made  no  efiicient  effort  to  prevent  it,  the  lan-
jjuage  of  Ewart  at  Berlin  tended  to  discourage  Prussia  from
embarking  in  a  war  with  France,^  and  the  evident  reluctance  of
the  King,  in  his  capacity  of  Elector  of  Hanover,  to  support  any
warlike  policy,  was  one  of  the  reasons  alleged  by  the  Emperor
for  shrinking  from  the  contest.^  There  is,  indeed,  little  doubt
that  the  English  Ministers  sincerely  regretted  the  continental
war.  In  a  conversation  with  Burke  shortly  before  it  broke  out,
Pitt  and  Grenville  observed  '  that  they  had  now  in  Europe  a
situation  in  which  it  never  stood  before  and  might  never  be
again — a  general  peace  among  the  Powers,  and  a  general  good
disposition  to  support  the  common  cause  of  order  and  govern-

'  Grenville to WTiitworth, April  '  "^^iTirsh's  Polities  of  Great  Britain

20,  1792. Whitwortli was not  able  and  From-e,  i.  \',\-:il.
to succeed,  for  .special orders  were  '  See  Eden  to  Grenville,  Feb.  14,

s^iven  to  keep  the  Japanese  from  all  1702.

contact  with  Englishmen  and  nutch-  ^  Burke's  Corresponrlrnee,  iii.  2-10,

men,  May  18, 1792. Wliitworth  to  2fiO,  261. Keith  to  Grenville,  Dec.  31,

Grenville.  1791.

568  ENGLA2s^D IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  en.  xxi.

ment.' '  They  feared  new  troubles  in  the  Netherlands,  which
lay  within  the  sphere  of  English  interests ;  they  profoundly
distrusted  the  Emperor,  and  they  entirely  rejected  Burke's
estimate  of  the  dangers  and  even  of  the  importance  of  the
Revolution.  After  a  long  conversation  with  Pitt  and  Grenville
in  September  1791,  Burke  wrote  to  his  son,  '  They  seem  to  be
quite  out  of  all  apprehension  of  any  effect  from  the  French
Hevolution  on  this  kingdom,  either  at  present  or  at  any  time  to
come.'  2  '  Do  not  fear,'  Pitt  once  said  to  Burke,  '  depend  upon
it  we  shall  go  on  as  we  are  till  the  day  of  judgment ; '  ^  and  he
recommended  him  to  praise  the  Constitution  of  Great  Britain  as
much  as  he  pleased,  but  not  to  attack  that  of  France.  The
Ministers  probably  agreed  with  Stanley  that  the  present  anarchy
could  only  be  very  transient,  and  must  lead  in  a  short  time  to
the  re-establishrnent  of  the  monarchy  under  constitutional
limitations ;  *  and  Pitt,  looking  on  the  whole  question  with  the
eye  of  a  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  believed  that  a  speedy
bankruptcy  must  destroy  the  credit  of  the  Assembly  and  ter-
minate the  crisis.'''  So  little  danger  did  he  fear  from  France,
that  almost  to  the  eve  of  the  great  struggle  which  lasted  for
more  than  twenty  years,  he  was  reducing  the  armaments  of
England.

The  attitude  of  England  was  very  little  calculated  to  disturb
or  influence  that  of  other  Powers  ;  but  the  attitude  of  Catherine
was  very  different.  She  had  just  concluded  her  Turkish  war,
and  was  able  to  turn  her  energies  to  the  destruction  of  the  new
Constitution  and  independence  of  Poland.  This  now  became
her  main  object,  but  in  order  more  easily  to  attain  it,  it  was  her
first  desire  to  embroil  the  Emperor  and  Prussia  with  France.
She  received  with  the  utmost  warmth  the  emigi-ant  princes.
She  issued  a  circular  to  all  the  princes  of  Europe,  calling  them
to  take  arms  for  the  common  cause  of  monarchy.  She  appealed
specially  and veJiemcntly  to  the honour  of  the  two  German

'  Burke's  CnrrfR/wn.dfnrf,  iii.  :^45.  of the  M'eakest  reasonings, because

^  Ibid.  iii.  .344,  :-!4.5.  thoy  discover  the  stronpei^t-  passions.'

"  Pellevv's Li//f of SidnMufh, i.  Letter  to  Sir  H.  Lanprishe.

72. '  Very  likely,  sir,' Burke  answered.  ^  Auckland's Correspondence, ii.

•  It  is  the  day  of  no  judgment  I  am  380.

afraid  of.' In polihcs,  Burke once  '  V-<wt'kQ'i<  CorresjwndcncftVn.  ?iio.

haid,  he  was  somclimes  'most  afraid

CH.  XXI.  DESIGNS OF CATHERINE.  509

sovereigns,  and  she  lost  no  occasion  of  protesting  tlie  ardour  of
her  enthusiasm  for  the  royalist  cause  in  Europe,  It  was  unfor-
tunate for  these  pi-otestations,  AVhitworth  somewhat  sarcastically-
observed,  that  the  two  revolutions  of  the  century  which  had
been  most  favourable  to  the  cause  of  hereditary  monarchy — the
Revolution  in  Sweden  and  the  rocent  Revolution  in  Poland —
had  both  found  in  the  Empress  the  most  implacable  enemy.
Those,  however,  who  will  read  those  singular  letters  to  Grimm,
in  which  Catherine  expressed,  apparently  without  a  shadow  of
reserve,  her  opinions  about  the  Revolution,  will,  I  think,  agree
with  me  that  the  English  ambassador  somewhat  underrated  her
sincerity.  She  had,  I  believe,  a  real  interest  in  the  royal  cause,
a  real  pity  for  the  Queen  of  France,  and  a  strong  dread  of  the
contagious  influence  of  the  Revolution  in  Europe.  She  was
quite  ready  to  take  some  part  as  a  member  of  an  anti-revolu-
tionary confederation,  but  she  was  never  likely  to  allow  her
enthusiasm  to  divert  her  from  the  objects  of  her  own  ambition.
In  one  of  her  confidential  letters  she  very  frankly  said,  '  I  am
breaking  my  head  to  make  the  Cabinets  of  Vienna  and  Berlin
intervene  in  the  affairs  of  France.  I  wish  to  see  them  plunged
in  some  very  complicated  question  in  order  to  have  my  own
hands  free.  I  have  before  me  so  many  enterprises  not  finished.
It  is  necessary  that  these  two  Courts  should  be  occupied,  in  order
that  they  may  not  prevent  me  from  bringing  them  to  a  good
ending.' '

Poland  by  herself  was  wholly  unable  to  resist  her  powerful
neighbour.  The  gi-eat  constitutional  changes  which  had  been
recently  effected,  had  indeed  been  carried  with  admirable  unani-
mity, and  they  promised  the  best  results,  but  very  little  had  been
done  to  put  the  country  in  a  condition  of  security.  With  an  in-
defensible frontier,  a  governing  class  by  no  means  destitute  of
real  patriotism,  but  corrupted  and  divided  by  a  long  period  of
anarchy  and  foreign  intrigue,  an  army  wholly  inadequate  to  the
wants  of  the  nation,  and  a  peasantry  cowed  and  broken  by
repeated  Russian  invasions  and  occupations,  the  safety  of  this
unhappy  country  was  certain  to  depend  for  some  years  on  the
abstinence  or  the  assistance  of  its  neighbours.  In  Leopold,
Poland had  a real friend. In  spite  of  the  participation  of

>  Sybel,  ii.  142.

570  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUK^.  rn.  xxt.

Austria  in  the  first  partition,  tlie  ]ong  alliance  between  the  two
countries,  strengthened  by  the  community  of  faith,  was  not
forgotten,  and  Leopold,  in  the  spirit  of  a  true  statesman,  recog-
nised the  importance  of  interposing  a  powerful  kingdom  between
IMuscovite  ambition  and  Western  Europe.  Prussia  also  was
attached  to  Poland  by  every  engagement  that  could  bind  the
honour  of  a  nation.  She  had  guaranteed  the  integrity  of
Poland.  She  had  bound  herself  by  a  solemn  treaty  to  prevent
any  foreign  interference  with  her  internal  concerns.  She  had
entered  into  alliance  with  her.  The  Prussian  Kinof  had  been
the  first  to  express  his  gratification  at  the  recent  changes  in  her
Constitution.  He  had  reiterated  his  assurances  of  friendship
again  and  again.  He  had  quite  recently  entered  into  a  new
agreement  with  the  Emperor  to  respect  the  integrity  and  the
Constitution  of  Poland,  and  to  induce  the  Elector  of  Saxony  to
accept  the  hereditary  crown.'  If  public  faith  was  more  than  an
empty  name,  Poland  seemed  likely  to  find  powerful  supporters
in  her  diflficulties.

It  is  one  of  the  great  interests  in  reading  history  in  original
diplomatic  despatches,  that  it  enables  us  to  trace  almost  from  the
beginning  the  rise  of  great  questions,  which  first  appear  like
small  clouds  scarcely  visible  on  the  horizon,  and  gradually  dilate
and  darken  till  the  whole  political  sky  is  overcast.  The  earliest
clear  notification  of  what  was  impending,  which  was  received
by  the  Ministers  in  England,  appears  to  have  come  from  a
secret  despatch  of  Ewart  written  in  August  1791.  He  relates
a  long  conversation  with  Count  Schulenburg,  the  Prussian
Minister,  chiefly  about  the  concerns  of  France,  but  in  the
course  of  it  there  was  a  digression  on  Polish  affairs  which  must
have  afforded  the  ambassador  grave  subject  for  thought.  Schu-
lenburg described  himself  as  much  pleased  that  the  Emperor
had  guaranteed  the  integrity  of  Poland  ;  but  he  expressed  his
lielicf  that  this  would  be  of  little  use  against  the  ambition
of  Russia  ;  that  Russia  having  obtained  an  advantageous  port
on  the  Black  Sea,  would  be  conliniii-d  in  the  idea  of  fixing  the
seat  of  errqiire  tlioi-e  ;  tliut  the  I'jiiporor,  finding  it  impossible
to  stop the  ambition  of  liussia, will  find himself  obliged  to

'  Sec  Sybcl,  i.  307,  iJU.

CH.  XXI.  EDEN ON TOLISII PROSrECTS.  571

participate  in  some  plan  for  the  partition  of  Poland,  and  that
I'russia  will  not  be  able  to  avoid  joining.'

Ewart  was  soon  after  recalled  from  Berlin  and  replaced  by
Eden,  a  brother  of  Lord  Auckland.  A  few  extracts  from  hia
confidential  despatches  will  carry  us  further  in  our  story.

At  the  end  of  November  he  wi'ote  :  '  In  several  of  my  letters
from  Dresden  I  informed  your  lordship  of  the  express  orders
sent  to  the  Prussian  Minister  there,  to  remove  if  possible  the
apprehensions  entertained  at  that  Court  of  the  evils  which
might  arise  to  Saxony,  should  the  Elector  accept  the  offered
succession  to  the  crown  of  Poland.  This  line  of  conduct
appears  contrary  to  that  ever  pursued  by  his  late  Prussian
Majesty,  who  looked  for  his  own  aggrandisement  from  the
anarchy  of  Poland.  The  Dutch  Minister  now  tells  me,  that  he
has  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  instructions  given  to  M.  de
Luchesini  are  to  endeavour  to  replunge  that  country  into  the
anarchy  from  which  it  is  scarcely  emerged.'"  -

The  more  Eden  saw  of  Prussian  statesmen,  the  worse  he
augured  for  the  future  of  Poland.  The  Court  of  St.  Peters-
burg, he  says,  will  never  be  brought  to  any  favourable  declara-
tion, and  the  King  of  Prussia  refuses  to  give  a  formal  guarantee
to  the  new  Constitution,  '  alleging  that  that  assurance  which  he
had  already  given  of  his  approbation,  when  it  was  communicated
to  him,  proceeded  merely  from  his  personal  regard  for  the
Elector.' '  That  sovereign  was  still  procrastinating,  and  it  is
believed  that  he  will  not  accept  the  succession  to  the  Polish
throne  until  the  three  Powers  give  their  consent.'*

'  With  regard  to  Poland,'  Eden  wrote  a  little  later,  '  I  shall
briefly  state  that  though  there  may  be  no  actual  concert,  yet  it
appears  to  be  equally  the  system  of  the  three  Courts  to  pre-
vent that  kingdom  from  rising  into  consequence.  The  Polish
Minister  at  Dresden  boasts,  I  understand,  of  his  country  being
assured  of  the  good  will  and  protection  of  his  Prussian  Majesty  ;
yet  the  language  of  his  Ministers  to  me  has  uniformly  been,
that  his  Majesty's  approbation  of  the  new  Constitution  was  in
as  much  only  as  it  regarded  the  choice  of  the  Elector.  .  ,  .

'  Ewart  to  Grenville  (most  secret),  '  Ibid.  Dec.  3,  1791.

Aug.  4, 1791.  «  Ibid.  Dec.  3,  5,  1791.

2  Eden  to  Grenville,  Nov.  26, 1791.

572  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

They  expect  tlie  Elector's  silence  or  his  refusal  will  produce  a  per-
fect anarchy  in  Poland,  and  they  add  that  as  the  Poles  formed  their
Constitution  without  foreign  intervention,  they  must  be  left  to
themselves  to  accomplish  it.  I  should  observe  that  the  little
bickerings  relative  to  trade  which  the  Poles  have  imprudently  too
much  given  rise  to,  will  strengthen  the  arguments  of  those  who
think  the  aggrandisement  of  this  country  can  be  secured  only
by  the  anarchy  and  spoils  of  that  unhappy  kingdom.'  ^  '  The
Poles  must  not  expect  any  support  from  hence.  Even  the
friendly  professions  of  this  Court  towards  Poland  ceased,  from  the
moment  that  all  appearance  of  war  with  Russia  was  at  an  end,
and  her  assistance  was  no  longer  wanted.'  ^

As  the  probabilities  of  war  with  France  increased,  the
situation  became  more  clearly  defined.  Count  Schulenburg
observed  that  '  he  did  not  suppose  her  Imperial  Majesty  would
give  a  decisive  answer  to  the  communication  of  the  Court  at
Warsaw,  nor  to  the  pressing  instances  of  the  Elector ;  but
that  she  would  order  the  troops  to  be  withdrawn  from  Moldavia
and  Wallachia,  to  be  stationed  on  the  frontier  of  Poland  to
encourage  the  malcontents ;  that  new  confederacies  will  be
formed,  and  anarchy  with  its  usual  train  of  ills  ensue.  He
added  that  the  Elector  was  aware  of  this,  and  would  not
venture  to  accept  the  crown.'  ^  A  week  later  Schulenburg  said
to  Eden  '  that  it  was  evidently  the  Empress's  intention  to
station  her  troops  on  the  frontiers  of  Poland,  that  she  might
encourage  her  partisans  and  foment  the  divisions  in  that
country.'  '  I  have  uniformly,'  Eden  continued,  '  described  to
your  lordship  the  disposition  of  this  Court  as  no  longer  favour-
able to  the  Revolution,  since  the  appearance  of  a  rupture  was
at  an  end,  and  I  stated  that  the  general  opinion  here  is  that
Prussia  can  alone  look  for  aggrandisement  from  the  spoils  of
that  unhappy  country.  In  the  Act  signed  at  Vienna  its  pre-
sent limits  are  indeed  fully  guaranteed.  This  I  fear  will  prove
but  a  feeble  barrier  ;  and  if  Russian  troops  overrun  the  country
and  the  Empress  proposes  a  new  partition,  plausible  arguments
will  easily  be  found  for  the  political  necessity  of  its  being
accepted. Resistance  even  would  be  difficult,  if  this  Court  and

•  Ivlcn  to  GienvJllc,  Doc.  17.  1791.  - ll.i<l.  ,I;in.  ii,  U'J^.

'  J  bid.  \\h.  7,  17'.)2.

CH.  XXI,  LEWIS XVI. ACCEPTS THE COIS'STITUTJON.  57:i

that  of  Vienna  be  once  fully  embarked  in  the  prospect  of  an
armed  negotiation  with  France,  for  as  in  that  business  it  does
not  appear  probable  that  the  Empress  can  take  any  effective
part,  she  will  be  left  the  sole  arbiter  of  the  fate  of  Poland.'  *

This  consideration  was  undoubtedly  one  of  those  which
made  the  Emperor  especially  reluctant  to  embark  in  a  French
war,  and  the  acceptance  of  the  Constitution  by  Lewis  XVI.
appeared  to  furnish  a  valid  reason  for  relinquishing  the  enter-
prise. It  was,  indeed,  the  opinion  of  a  great  part  of  the
European  world  that  this  acceptance  substantially  closed  the
Revolution.  On  September  14  the  King  went  down  in  state
to  the  Assembly  to  swear  to  the  Constitution,  and  he  returned
to  the  Tuileries  accompanied  by  the  members,  through  a  vast
and  applauding  multitude.^  An  amnesty  was  granted  on  the
occasion,  for  all  offences  connected  with  the  Revolution ;  and
the  King,  in  the  opinion  of  the  English  ambassador,  did
everything  in  his  power  to  win  popularity,  and  to  convince  the
people  that  the  course  he  was  pursuing  was  voluntary.  The
'J'uileries  were  twice  splendidly  illuminated.  The  King  and
Queen  drove  through  the  Champs  Elysees  to  see  the  illumi-
nations ordered  by  the  municipality.  They  appeared,  for  the
first  time  since  the  Revolution,  at  the  opera  and  in  the  theatres.
They  sent  50,000  livres  to  be  distributed  among  the  poor.  The
King  vn'ote  official  letters  to  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe,
notifying  his  acceptance  of  the  Constitution,  and  he  wrote  a
long  and  earnest  letter  to  the  emigrant  princes,  urging  them
to  abstain  from  any  measures  that  could  indicate  hostility  to  it,
or  lead  to  foreign  invasion  or  civil  war.^  When  the  King
closed  the  Constituent  Assembly  on  September  29,  he  was
received  with  enthusiasm,  and  one  of  the  last  acts  of  this
body  had  been  to  decree  that  the  members  of  any  club  or  other
society  which  should  oppose  any  act  of  legal  authority  should
lose  for  two  years  the  rights  of  French  citizenship.'*

But  in  spite  of  these  reassuring  signs,  a  careful  observer
could  easily  discern  the  growing  dangers  of  the  situation. It

'  Eden to Grenville,  Feb. 16,  ^  See  Feuillet  de  Conches,  ii.  328-

1792.  336.

''  Govver to Greuville,  Sept. 14,  *  Gower  to  Grenville,  Sept.  9,  14,

1791.  16,  23,  30  J  Oct.  7,  1701.

574  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

was  an  ominous  proof  of  tlie  little  confidence  felt  by  serious  men
in  the  permanence  of  the  new  Constitution,  that  the  funds  fell
when  the  King  signed  it.'  All  the  chief  municipal  posts  in
Paris  were  passing  into  the  hands  of  Republicans,^  and  when
Bailly,  in  November,  ceased  to  be  Mayor  of  Paris,  he  was
succeeded  in  that  great  office  by  Petion,  a  vehement  and  in-
tolerant Jacobin.  Lafayette  had  resigned  the  command  of  the
National  Guard,  which  was  then  divided  under  six  commanders,
and  it  could  no  longer  be  counted  on  to  support  the  cause  of
order.  Over  a  great  part  of  France  there  was  a  total  insecurity
of  life  and  property,  such  as  had  perhaps  never  before  existed
in  a  civilised  country  except  in  times  of  foreign  invasion  or
successful  rebellion.  Almost  all  the  towns  in  the  south — Mar-
seilles, Toulon,  Nimes,  Aries,  Avignon,  Montpellier,  Carpentras,
Aix,  Montauban — were  centres  of  Republicanism,  brigandage,
or  anarchy.  The  massacres  of  Jourdain  at  Avignon,  in  October,
are  conspicuous  even  among  the  horrors  of  the  Revolution.
Caen  in  the  following  month  was  convulsed  by  a  savage  and
bloody  civil  war.  The  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy  having
been  condemned  by  the  Pope,  produced  an  open  schism,  and
crowds  of  ejected  priests  were  exciting  the  religious  fanaticism
of  the  peasantry.  In  some  districts  in  the  south,  the  war  be-
tween Catholic  and  Protestant  was  raging  as  fiercely  as  in  the
seventeenth  century,  while  in  Brittany,  and  especially  in  La
Vendee,  there  were  all  the  signs  of  a  great  popular  insurrection
against  the  new  Government.  Society  seemed  almost  in  dis-
solution, and  there  was  scarcely  a  department  in  which  law
was  observed  and  property  secure.

The  price  of  corn,  at  the  same  time,  was  rising  fast  under  the
influence  of  a  bad  harvest  in  the  south,  aggravated  by  the  want
of  specie,  the  depreciation  of  paper  money,  and  the  enormously
increased  difficulties  of  transport.  The  peasantry  were  com-
l)Iriiiig  to  refuse  the  paper  money.  It  was  falling  rapidly  in  value,
and  montli  after  month  Lord  Gower  sent  the  English  Government
estimates  of  the  vast  excess  of  national  expenditure  over  national
income.  Tlie  now  Legislative  Assembly,  which  met  on  October  1 ,
(illedsober  men  with  alarm.  All  the  experienced  politicians  who
sat  in  the  Constituent  Assembly  had  been  disqualified.  The
'  Gowcr  lo  Gicuvill'j,  Supt.  IG,  17'JL  •  Ibid.  Nuv.  16,  171)1.

CH.  XXI.  THE  AKMING  OF  EUROPE.  5i5

elections  had  begun  amid  the  excitement  caused  by  the  flight  to
Varennes.  They  were  conducted  with  the  utmost  violence  and
dii'ected  mainly  by  Jacobin  clubs,  and  it  was  soon  evident  that
the  Republican  party,  which  in  the  first  Assembly  was  said
not  to  have  numbered  more  than  seven  members,  was  about  to
obtain  a  great  prominence.

In  the  mean  time  the  stream  of  emigrants  continued  un-
abated, and  it  included  the  great  body  of  the  officers  of  the  army
who  had  been  driven  from  the  regiments  by  their  own  soldiers.'
i^ouille,  one  of  the  best  French  generals,  was  among  them.
The  greater  part  of  the  Irish  regiment  of  Berwick  had  left  its
garrison  at  Landau,  and  gone  over  to  the  Prince  de  Conde.^  At
Brussels,  Worms,  and  Coblentz,  emigrants  were  forming  armed
organisations.  On  September  10,  when  the  intention  of  the
King  to  accept  the  Constitution  was  well  known,  the  King's
brothers  published  a  letter  to  the  King,  protesting  against  that
Constitution,  declaring  their  belief  that  if  the  King  accepted  it
this  would  be  only  through  compulsion,  denying  his  right  to
sacrifice  the  ancient  23rerogatives  of  the  French  monarchy,  and
threatening  France  with  invasion.^

And  while  the  emigrant  leaders  were  holding  this  language,

nearly  all  Europe  seemed  arming. Spain  appears  to  have  been

the  first  to  have  excited  serious  alarm,  for  Florida  Blanca,  who

then  directed  its  affairs,  was  in  complete  sympathy  with  the

emigrants. In  August  1791,  Lord  Gower  mentions  the  efforts

of  Fi"ench  Ministers  to  allay  the  alarm  arising  from  this  quarter.

'  They  own,'  he  says,  '  that  the  Spanish  Ministers  will  not  treat

with  their  Minister  at  the  Court  of  Madrid ;  they  acknowledge

the  defenceless  state  of  that  frontier  and  the  impossibility  of

sending  any  number  of  regular  troops  into  that  part  of  France,

owing  to  the  greater  necessity  for  them  in  other  parts  of  the

kingdom ;  they  acknowledge  also  the  danger  of  trusting  some  of

the  regular  regiments  on  the  frontiers  ;  they  have  been  obliged,

for  instance,  to  order  into  the  interior  part  of  the  kingdom  the

regiments  of  Berwick  and  Nassau,  or  rather  what  remain  of

those  regiments,  lest  the  fancy  should  take  them  to  join  their

fellow-soldiers  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine,  and  a  total  want

'  Gower  to  Greuville,  June  3,  10,  '  Bourgoing, Hist. DijjI. de  la

171)1.  Ecvulutiou,  i.  398.

^  Feuillet  de  Conches,  iv.  135.

576  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxr.

of  suLordiuatiou  will  render  useless  the  regiment  of  Auvergue
which  is  now  at  Phalsbourg.' '  The  negotiations  between  the
emigrant  princes  and  foreign  Powers  were  only  dimly  suspected,
till  the  Declaration  of  Pilnitz  flashed  a  sudden  light  upon  the
hostile  dispositions  of  Europe.  The  Emperor  was  believed  to
be  more  desirous  of  war  than  he  actually  was.  Prussia  had  a
great  army  ready  for  the  field.  The  Empress  of  Russia  and  the
King  of  Sweden  were  ostentatiously  preaching  a  crusade  against
revolutionary  France.  The  Kings  of  Sardinia  and  Spain  were
likely  to  be  on  the  same  side,  and  suspicions  were  now  indus-
triously circulated  that  England,  the  old  rival  of  France,  was
secretly  negotiating  the  alliance  between  Austria  and  Prussia,
and,  without  avowing  her  policy,  had  become  the  real  soul  of
the  leao'ue.^  When  the  news  arrived  of  the  neo-ro  insuri'ection
at  St.  Domingo,  it  appears  to  have  been  at  once  attributed  to
English  machinations.^

These  suspicions,  as  we  have  seen,  were  absolutely  unfounded,
and  I  have  already  adduced  abundant  evidence,  which  might  be
still  further  increased,'*  of  the  sincerity  of  English  neutrality  and
even  of  the  great  indifference  of  English  Ministers  to  foreign
affairs.  But,  as  is  usually  the  case,  England  was  suspected  on
both  sides,  and  on  opposite  grounds.  In  September,  Marie
Antoinette  expressed  her  belief  that  English  influence  was  being
secretly  exerted  for  the  ruin  both  of  the  Emperor  and  of  the
Royal  Family  of  France,*  and  Mercy,  in  whom  she  placed  the
greatest  confidence,  steadily  encouraged  the  idea.  This  diplo-
matist, during  a  short  journey  to  England  in  August  1791,  had
seen  the  King,  Pitt,  Burke  and  Grenville,  and  he  came  back
with  his  unfavourable  impressions  only  confirmed. '  Foreign

'  Gowerto  Grenville,  Aug.  19, 1791.  Majesty  had  invariably  observed  the

^  Lacretelle,  Precis  de  la  Itecnlu-  strictest  neutrality  respecting  them,

1i(iii,  pp.  58,  .59.  abstaining from mixing himself in

"  Gower to Grenville, Oct. 31,  any  manner  whatever  in  the  internal

]7'.n.  dissensions  of  that  country,  and  that

'  I  have  quoted  the  langiiase  of  with  respect  to  the  measures  of  active

1  he  English  !\iinisters  to  their  ambas-  intervention which other Powers

sadors  at Paris,  Vienna,  and  Ueilin.  might  liave  in  contemplation,  it  was

Ju  Sept.  1791,  wlien  Woronzow,  the  his Majesty's determination not  to

ilussian  amliassadfir  in  London,  made  take any part  either in  supporting

an  apiteal  to  the  English  Government  or  in  o])posing them.' Grenville to

re.spocting the aftairs of France,  Whitworth,  Sept.  27,  1791.
Grenville answered that  'from the  *  KrnvAh,  Marin  Anivinctte,Jos<'j)h

beginning  of  tlje Krcnch  li(»ublcs  his  iind  Lcopuld,  p.  21)9.

CH.  XXI.  THE KING SEEKS FOREIGN AID.  577

assistance,'  lie  wrote  to  the  Queen,  '  will  be  of  no  avail  unless
England  shares  all  the  chances ;  her  neutrality  is  not  sufficient,
and  there  is  little  appearance  of  her  departing  from  it.'  *  He
wrote  to  Kaunitz  that  the  affected  silence  maintained  on  political
matters  by  Pitt  and  Grenville  during  his  interview  with  them,
'  seemed  a  new  proof  that  it  was  the  decided  system  of  the
Cabinet  of  St.  James's  to  observe  a  passive  and  free  attitude  in
the  events  of  France,  so  as  to  derive  advantages  for  herself  from
the  measures  on  which  the  other  Powers  may  decide  ; '  and  he
believed  that,  in  spite  of  her  enormous  prosperity,  discontent
was  rapidly  gaining  ground  in  England,  and  that  she  was
menaced  by  the  same  doctrines  and  the  same  dangers  as  France.^
In  other  letters  he  accused  the  English  Government  of  dissuad-
ing Spain  from  joining  the  alliance  against  the  Revolution,  and
of  throwing  every  obstacle  in  her  power  in  the  way  of  the
coalition.^

Another  element  of  anxiety  was  the  deep  and  by  no  means
unfounded  distrust  of  the  King  and  Queen,  prevailing  in  France.
Could  it  be  doubted,  it  was  asked,  that  their  sympathies  were
with  a  league  which  was  formed  for  the  restoration  of  the  royal
prerogatives,  promoted  by  the  brothers  of  the  King,  directed  by
the  brother  of  the  Queen,  and  supported  by  the  head  of  the
Spanish  Bourbons  ?  In  truth,  after  the  flight  of  Varennes  and
the  total  destruction  of  the  chief  prerogatives  of  the  French
Crown,  the  monarchy  under  the  existing  sovereign  had  become
impossible,  and  it  would  have  been  probably  a  wise  policy  to
have  at  once  changed  the  form  of  government,  or  at  least  placed
a  new  sovereign  on  the  throne.  The  King  sincerely  dreaded
civil  war  and  foreign  invasion,  but  if  he  accepted  the  Constitu-
tion it  was  only  because  he  deemed  it  inevitable,  and  with  a  full
conviction  that  it  would  be  impracticable  and  ruinous  to  the
country.*  He  objected  to  most  of  the  proceedings  of  the
emigrants,  and  especially  to  their  designs  of  making  an  armed
incursion  into  France;  but  as  early  as  July  1791  he  gave
powers  to  his  brothers  to  negotiate  with  foreign  sovereigns  for
the  restoration  of  order  and  tranquillity  in  France,  though  he  at
the  same  time  added  his  hope  that  force  might  be  kept  in  the

>  Feuilletde  Conches,  ii.  2ii.  »  Araeth,  pp.  214,  231.

2  Ibid.  ii.  274.  ••  Ibid.  p.  218.

VOL.  V  P  P

578  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. vu.  xxi

background.'  The  Queeu,  who  played  a  far  more  active  and
important  part  in  the  political  correspondence  of  the  time,  never
for  a  moment  seriously  accepted  the  Constitution,  and  never
abandoned  the  hope  of  foreign  intervention.  We  have  already
seen  the  sentiments  she  expressed  in  the  weeks  that  followed
the  flight  of  Yarennes,  and  her  confidential  letters  show  that
durino-  the  whole  of  the  latter  half  of  1791,  while  she  dreaded
and  detested  the  emigrants  and  deprecated  any  immediate
invasion,  she  still  placed  her  one  hope  of  safety  in  a  European
Congress  supported  by  an  armed  force.

On  September  8,  only  a  few  days  before  the  King  formally
accepted  the  Constitution,  she  sent  the  Emperor  a  remarkable
memoir  clearly  indicating  her  policy  and  her  hopes.  The  Con-
stitution, it  was  argued,  cannot  possibly  endure,  and  the  danger
of  an  immediate  civil  war  was  extreme.  It  was  the  first  object
of  the  King  to  avert  such  a  calamity,  and  he  was  therefore
inflexibly  opposed  to  an  invasion  of  France  by  the  emigrants  or
to  a  declaration  of  Eegency,  either  of  which  measures  would
infallibly  produce  it.  At  the  same  time  nothing  but  armed
foreign  intervention  could  possibly  restore  France  to  tranquillity,
and  Europe  to  safety.  The  present  condition  of  France,  says  the
writer,  is  altogether  unparalleled.  The  King  has  no  liberty.
A  frantic  minority  is  ruling  by  undisguised  terrorism.  All  the
ancient  forms  and  modes  of  administration,  all  the  traditions  and
habits  of  the  nation,  have  been  destroyed,  and  the  disturbing  in-
fluence of  the  Revolution  will  certainly  not  be  confined  to  France.
Its  principles  are  of  a  nature  to  incite  all  nations  against  their
sovereigns,  and  to  sap  every  constitutional  authority.  It  has  esta-
blished a  great  centre  of  political  propagandism.  Its  emissaries
have  taken  a  leading  part  in  the  troubles  in  Brabant,  and  have
endeavoured  to  sow  seeds  of  anarchy  in  Switzerland,  Holland,
Turin,  Rome,  and  Spain.  The  whole  public  system  of  Europe
will  be  endangered  or  ruined  if  the  monarchy  of  France  is  sub-
verted, for  by  such  a  catastrophe  all  the  treaties,  engagements,
and  alliances  of  France  will  be  cancelled,  and  left  at  the  mercy
of  an  armed  democracy,  governed  by  abstract  notions  of  the
rights  of  men,  hbstile  on  principle  to  all  monarchies,  and  per-
fectly disdainful  of  the  compacts  of  the  pnst.  Nor  is  this  all.
'  Fcuillot  (le  Conches,  ii.  lad.

cH.  XXI.  LI'TTEIIS  OF  MAIJIE  ANTOINETTE.  579

There  is  a  tacit  agreement  among  nations  that  a  certain  pro-
portion must  be  maintained  between  their  armies,  and  no  sove-
reign can  be  allowed  to  increase  his  forces  to  such  a  point  as  to
become  a  menace  to  his  neighbours.  But  the  present  arma-
ments of  France  are  beyond  all  ancient  and  modern  example.
The  revolutionary  chiefs  have  armed  and  equipped  no  less  than
four  millions  of  men,  in  addition  to  the  troops  of  the  line,  which
amount  to  150,000  men  on  a  peace  footing,  and  to  more  than
250,000  men  on  a  war  footing ;  and  all  citizens  under  sixty
are  to  serve  in  the  National  Guard.  If  such  a  force  was  pro-
perly disciplined,  and  suffered  to  acquire  the  organisation  and
consistency  of  a  regular  army,  no  Power  in  Europe  wouki  be
safe.

It  is  impossible,  the  memoir  argues,  that  such  a  state  of
affairs  could  be  indifferent  to  the  continental  Powers.  Those
Powers  ought  clearly  to  lay  down  the  principle  that  they  will
not  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  internal  government  of  France
except  so  far  as  it  affected  its  neighbours.  But  it  was  a  vital
interest  to  the  public  system  of  Europe  that  France  should  con-
tinue a  monarchy ;  that  her  monarch  shou.ld  maintain  the
freedom  necessary  for  contracting  and  enforcing  engagements ;
that  her  institutions  should  not  be  established  on  principles
and  maxims  subversive  of  all  the  settled  Governments  of  the
world.  To  maintain  this  policy  a  Congress  of  the  European
Powers,  supported  by  overwhelming  force,  should  be  employed,
and  the  writer  of  the  memoir  hoped  that  without  the  necessity
of  actual  warfare  such  a  demonstration  would  be  sujBficient  to
restore  the  monarchy  to  its  proper  place  in  the  Government  of
France.'

The  same  policy  was  persistently  maintained  by  the  Queen
in  her  later  letters.  '  There  must  be  a  demonstration,'  she
Avrote,  '  of  armed  forces,  or  at  least  preparations  for  the  march
of  troops.  I  am  sure  that  if  the  Emperor  showed  himself
thus  the  other  Powers  will  not  hesitate.'  ^  '  I  insist  on  an
armed  Congress.  ...  It  alone  can  stop  the  follies  of  tlie
princes  and  the  emigrants,  and  I  see  on  all  sides  that  tliere
may  soon  be  such  a  degree  of  disorder  here,  that  every  one

»  Fenillet  de  Conches,  ii.  287-309. tlqrte  de  la  Mevolutian,  i.  400.
See,  too,  liotirgoing,  /fist.  Dijdoma-  '•'  Arneth,  pp.  219,  220.

i<  F  2

580  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. cii.  xxt

but  the  Republicans  will  be  delighted  to  find  a  superior  force
able  to  bring  about  a  general  settlement.  But  let  my  brother
be  well  persuaded  that  all  the  ostensible  steps  we  are  obliged
to  take  are  the  consequence  of  our  position ;  that  we  must
at  any  price  win  the  confidence  of  the  majority  here,  but  that
we  neither  will  nor  can  keep  to  a  Constitution  which  would
be  the  calamity  and  the  ruin  of  the  whole  kingdom.  We  desire
to  arrive  at  a  tolerable  condition  of  things,  but  this  cannot  be
established  by  the  French.  The  spirit  of  party  rules  exclusively
on  both  sides.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  Powers  should
come  to  our  assistance,  but  in  a  manner  both  useful  and  impos-
ing.'^

The  Queen,  however,  soon  saw  with  great  bitterness  that
there  was  little  hope  of  the  assistance  she  asked.  '  Since  the
almost  unqualified  acceptance  [of  the  Constitution]  by  the  King,'
wrote  Mercy,  in  November,  '  foreign  Powers  have  evidently
grow^n  somewhat  cold  about  the  affairs  of  France.'  ^

Kaunitz  sent  a  circular  to  the  different  Courts  to  whom  the
Emperor  had  appealed,  stating  that  the  free  acceptance  of  the
Constitution  had  essentially  changed  the  situation,  and  that  the
King  and  monarchy  of  France  were  no  longer  in  any  immediate
danger."*  The  plan  of  a  Congress  of  the  Powers  was  rejected  at
Vienna,  and  Marie  Antoinette  complained  with  much  pathos  of
her  abandonment,  and  of  her  almost  complete  ignorance  of  the
intentions  of  her  brother.

The  Legislative  Assembly  fully  justified  the  fear  of  those
who  anticipated  that  it  would  consist  mainly  of  violent,  ignorant,
and  incapable  men,  swayed  to  and  fro  by  mobs,  and  Jacobin
clubs,  and  childish  rhetoric.  The  most  conspicuous  fact  in  its
composition  was  the  almost  complete  absence  of  the  old  privi-
leged orders,  who  had  borne  so  large  a  part  in  the  previous
Assembly.  The  majority  of  the  members  were  petty  advocates
or  petty  writers  without  fortune  or  distinction.  They  began  by
voting,  by  a  large  majority,  that  when  the  King  came  down  to
open  formally  the  Session  he  should  not  be  addressed  by  the
terms  '  Sire'  and  '  Majesty,'  or  suffered  to  sit  on  a  gilt  chair;
but  next  day,  probably  because  it  became  known  that  the  King

' AriK'lIi,  ]).  L'L'O.  "  l'oiiri,'nin!j:, //isf. Dljilnniatiqiie

■  ll»iil.  p.  221.  de  la  JU- coin  I  ion,  i.  401.

en.  XXI.  THE  LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.  581

iiuder  these  circumstances  would  refuse  to  take  part  in  the
ceremony,^  they  rescinded  their  vote.  The  first  serious  legisla-
tion related  to  the  emigrants  and  the  refractory  priests.  The
Constituent  Assembly  in  the  preceding  June  and  July  had
forbidden  any  one  to  pass  the  frontier  without  passports,  and
had  subjected  every  Frenchman  who  did  not  return  to  France
within  an  assigned  period  to  a  triple  taxation  ;  but  when  tlio
Constitution  was  completed  these  measures  were  revoked,  and
the  Assembly  asserted  that  it  was  the  constitutional  right  of
every  Frenchman  to  leave  the  country,  as  well  as  to  travel  in  it
without  restriction.^  In  October  the  King  wrote  a  letter  to  his
brothers,  summoning  them  to  return  to  France,  and  he  issued
at  the  same  time  a  proclamation  against  the  emigration,  and
sent  letters  to  the  same  effect  to  his  commanders  by  land  and
sea.  The  Assembly,  however,  took  much  stronger  measui'es.
By  one  djcree  it  summoned  the  eldest  brother  of  the  King  to
return  to  France  within  two  months  on  pain  of  losing  all  riglit
to  the  Regency.  By  a  second  decree  the  French  princes  and  all
other  Frenchmen  assembled  beyond  the  frontiers  were  declared
suspected  of  conspiracy  against  France,  and  were  condemned  to
death  and  confiscation  of  their  property  unless  they  returned
before  January  1.  By  a  third  decree  all  the  priests  who  had
hitherto  refused  to  take  the  civil  oath  which  was  condemned  by
the  Church,  were  deprived  of  the  pensions  which  the  previous
Assembly  had  granted  them.  The  first  of  these  decrees  received
the  sanction  of  the  King,  but  to  the  second  and  third  he  opposed
his  veto,  and  the  result  was  that  in  November  1791  the  King
and  the  new  Chamber  were  already  at  enmity.

The  question  of  emigration,  however,  being  brought  into
such  prominence  could  not  be  neglected,  and  it  was  soon  evident
that,  unlike  the  Constituent  Assembly,  the  Legislative  Assembly
contained  a  strong  party  desirous  of  war.  That  it  should  have
been  so  was  not  surprising,  for  the  European  sovereigns  had
undoubtedly  given  to  France  a  kind  and  degree  of  provocation
which  no  powerful  monarchy  would  have  accepted  with  patience,

'  Bertrand  de  Molleville,  Annates  decree. Gower  to  Grenville,  Oct.  7,

de  la  Ritwhttion. According  to  Lord  1791.

Gower,  the  revocation  was  due  to  the  -  Laferriere,  Hist,  des  InsUUotions

sudden  fall  in  the  funds  caused  by  the  ct  des  Lois  de  la  Revolution,  p.  219.

582  ENGLAND IX THE EIGlITEENXn CENTUILY,  en.  xxi.

and  their  attitude,  wliicli  was  in  reality  menacing,  appeared
much  more  so  to  perfectly  ignorant  and  inexperienced  legislators
wiio  had  at  their  command  scarcely  any  of  the  secret  information
of  a  regular  diplomatic  service.  Montmorin,  indeed,  who  still
for  a  short  time  held  the  portfolio  of  foreign  affairs,  was  a  skilful
and  experienced  statesman,  and  he  was  fully  convinced  that
since  the  acceptance  of  the  Constitution  the  principal  Powers  of
Europe  had  given  up  every  idea  of  w^^r  against  France,  and  that
although  the  hopes  of  the  emigrants  were  kept  alive  by  vain
and  conditional  promises,  they  would  receive  no  real  support.'
When  the  King  informed  the  different  Powers  of  Europe  that
he  had  accepted  the  Constitution,  the  Kings  of  Spain  and
Sweden  and  the  Empress  of  Russia  refused  to  acknowledge  this
acceptance  as  the  act  of  a  free  agent,  and  the  Swedish  and
Russian  Ministers  soon  after  left  Paris  on  an  indefinite  leave  of
absence;  but  the  answers  of  the  other  Powers,  if  vague,  were
at  least  amicable  and  reassuring,  and  Montmorin,  on  the  last
day  of  October  1791,  presented  to  the  Assembly  a  report  on
the  relations  of  France  with  foreign  Powers,  in  which  he  showed
in  detail  that  the  position  had  very  greatly  improved.^

The  key-note  of  the  situation  lay  in  the  fact,  which  is  esta-
blished beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  Emperor  now  fully  shared  the
opinion  of  Kaunitz,  and  was  determined  to  do  the  utmost  in  his
power  to  avoid  a  war  with  France.  Such  a  war  he  clearly  saw
would  lead  to  two  of  the  events  which  he  most  dreaded,  a  revo-
lutionary explosion  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  and  a  Russian
invasion  of  Poland ;  and  the  new  Constitution  seemed  to  him  to
furnish  a  sufficient  pretext  for  abstaining.  Neither  Spain,  nor
Naples,  nor  Sardinia,  nor  the  smaller  German  Powers,  were  in
the  least  likely  to  take  any  part  against  France  except  as  very
subordinate  members  in  a  great  coalition.  The  King  of  Sweden
could  do  nothing  without  subsidies,  which  no  one  was  inclined
to  give  him.  The  Empress  of  Russia  wrote,  ardently  hoping
that  the  Allies  had  not  abandoned  the  French  princes,  and  pro-
claiming her  readiness  to  exert  herself  vigorously  in  their  cause  ;
l)ut  it  was  tolerably  clear  that  she  would  not  risk  a  man  or  a
rouble  in  the  enterprise  unless  the  two  German  Powers  embarked

'  TJertranrl  rln  Moll'ivillc,  AnnalfS,  Oct.  1701.
*  Il'id.  .'ij)pon(lix.

cii.  XXI.  MlLlTAKY  SITU.VLION OF TKANCE.  588

in  it,  Tlie  King  of  Prussia,  who  was  now  greatly  separated
from  his  own  Ministers,  and  very  much  under  the  influence  of
BischofFswerder,  appears  to  have  regretted  the  acceptance  of  the
Constitution  by  the  French  King,  and  to  have  really  desired  a
war;  but  he  distrusted  the  Emperor,  and  was  perfectly  resolved
not  to  engage  in  a  French  invasion  without  his  assistance,
especially  at  a  time  when  a  new  Polish  question  was  impending.
The  armed  emigrants  were  much  fewor  and  much  more  imper-
fectly equipped  than  was  supposed  in  France,  and  without
foreign  support  they  were  little  to  be  feared.

Under  these  circumstances  the  confidential  diplomatic  corre-
spondence of  Europe,  which  for  some  weeks  after  the  flight  of
Varennes  had  indicated  rapidly  approaching  war,  pointed  in
September,  October,  and  till  near  the  end  of  November,  with  a
striking  unanimity  to  peace.  If  France  desired  it,  or  if  the
decision  was  still  left  in  the  hands  of  the  Emperor,  it  would
almost  certainly  have  been  preserved.  But  the  tide  in  France,
impelled  by  many  and  very  various  influences,  was  now  begin-
ning to  run  violently  in  the  direction  of  war.

According  to  the  official  view,  which  prevailed  in  nearly  all
the  Courts,  Cabinets,  and  armies  of  Europe,  France  was  at  this
time  almost  helpless,  and  certainly  totally  unfit  to  encounter  a
European  coalition.  The  facts  of  the  situation  were  few  and
simple.  The  French  army,  which  had  lately  been  incontestably
the  first  in  Europe,  was  now  utterly  disorganised,  nearly  all  the
higher  officers  having  been  expelled  by  their  own  soldiers,
and  all  obedience  and  subordination  having  ceased.  The  fleet,
wliich  had  been  greatly  improved  by  Lewis  XVI.,  and  which
was  only  second  to  that  of  England,  was  in  a  very  similar  state.
The  finances  were  so  disordered  that  speedy  bankruptcy  seemed
inevitable,  and  there  was  scarcely  a  department  which  was  not
in  a  condition  of  anarchy  or  even  of  civil  war.  To  suppose  that
a  country  so  situated  could  encounter  with  any  prospect  of
success  the  settled  Governments  and  great  disciplined  armies  of
Europe,  seemed  to  most  statesmen  absurd.

There  was,  however,  another  order  of  considerations,  which
though  at  this  time  generally  neglected,  in  reality  governed  the
event.  It  was  true  that  the  French  army  was  in  a  condition  of
extraordinary  disorganisation,  but  it  was  also  true  that  there

584  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUfiY.  ch.  xxi.

never  had  been  a  period  in  wlaicli  so  large  a  proportion  of  the
nation  was  under  arms,  acquainted  witli  at  least  the  rudiments
of  the  military  art,  and  at  the  same  time  wound  up  to  the
highest  pitch  of  excitement.  Those  who  know  French  character,
know  how  quickly  in  a  great  emergency  Frenchmen  can  acquire
the  habits  and  capacities  of  military  life ;  how  large  a  part  the
element  of  enthusiasm  bears  amonj  the  conditions  of  their
military  success,  and  how  easily  strong  passions  when  once
excited  among  them  take  new  forms  and  directions.  In  spite
of  the  multitude  of  officers  who  had  fled  to  Coblentz,  France
was  still  rich  in  military  talent,  and  the  army  was  full  of
excellent  subordinate  officers,  who  were  thoroughly  capable  of
higher  commands  and  well  aware  that  a  war  would  open  to  them
fields  of  ambition  much  like  that  which  the  Fire  of  London  had
given  to  the  architectural  genius  of  Wren.  All  restrictions  on
promotion  having  been  abolished,  and  almost  all  the  superior
officers  having  been  removed,  there  seemed  a  boundless  prospect
to  an  ambitious  and  capable  soldier.  A  great  war  under  such
conditions  could  hardly  fail  to  stimulate  to  an  unexampled
degree  military  enthusiasm,  enterprise,  and  talent,  and  it
seemed  the  one  remaining  chance  of  restoring  the  tone  and  dis-
cipline of  the  army.

Bankruptcy,  again,  if  it  took  place  when  the  nation  was  at
peace,  would  be  manifestly  due  to  the  Revolution,  and  it  might
completely  discredit  it ;  but  bankruptcy  incurred  in  a  desperate
struggle  against  united  Europe  would  have  no  such  moral  effect,
and  was  not  likely  even  to  check  the  impetus  of  the  war.  A
settled  Government,  depending  mainly  on  the  owners  of  property,
Avill  calculate  carefully  material  consequences,  and  will  shrink
from  too  serious  sacrifices  of  the  present  resources  and  future
prospects  of  the  nation.  But  the  new  French  Government
could  not  be  judged  by  the  ordinary  methods  of  political  calcu-
lation, for  it  was  fast  passing  into  the  hands  of  men  who  were
wImjUv  unconnected  with  property,  who  were  at  violent  enmity
with  tlie  wealthier  classes,  who  shrank  from  no  measure  of
coniiscation  or  violence,  who  were  absolutely  iudillerent  to
every  end  except  tin;  Iriimiph  of  llicir  cnuse.  It  was  possible,
too,  tluit  the  very  excess  of  anarchy  into  which  the  country  had
fillcM,  and the  apparent  liopelessness  of  repressing  it, might

CH.  XXI.  TUE  PIIENCH WAR  SPIRIT.  585

lead  many  to  desire  a  foreign  war,  whicl'  by  giving  a  new  vent
or  channel  to  the  passions  of  the  nation,  might  enable  it  to  throw
off  the  internal  fever  that  was  consuming  it.

Nor  was  there  any  diJEEculty  in  exciting  a  military  enthusiasm.
It  was  only  necessary  to  say — what  was  partly  true — that  France
was  surrounded  by  despotic  Powers  who  were  conspiring  with
the  Royal  Family  and  the  anti-revolutionary  classes  against  it
on  account  of  its  Revolution ;  and  to  add — what  was  wholly
false — that  they  intended  to  reimpose  on  the  French  peasantry
the  feudal  and  ecclesiastical  burdens  which  had  been  abolished.
The  danger  seemed  the  more  imminent  from  the  obscurity
that  hung  over  the  dispositions  of  the  different  Courts  in
Europe.  The  attitude  the  French  Chamber  had  assumed  towards
monarchy  and  monarchical  institutions  had  excluded  Frencli
diplomatists  from  all  intimate  and  confidential  intercourse  with
foreign  Powers,  and  public  opinion  was  therefore  left,  unguided
and  unchecked,  to  its  own  suspicions  and  alarms.  It  was  not
likely  that  an  armed  and  excited  nation  would  remain  passive
in  such  a  position,  and  of  all  nations  France  was  the  least  likely
to  do  so.  No  nation  can  meet  approaching  dangers  with  a
swifter,  a  fiercer,  a  more  tiger-like  spring,  but  no  nation  is  con-
stitutionally less  fitted  to  endure  the  tension  of  long-continued
and  inactive  suspense.  Besides  this,  as  Burke  had  long  warned
the  world,  the  Revolution  was  an  essentially  cosmopolitan  thing,
aiming  at  a  fraternity  of  nations,  and  the  subversion  of  all
ancient  Governments.  Such  a  movement  passed  easily  into  a
military  phase.  To  carry  the  torch  of  liberty  through  benighted
l^hirope  was  now  preached  as  the  mission  of  France,  and  if  kings
and  armies  were  leagued  against  her,  she  was  to  look  to  insur-
gent nations  for  her  allies.  There  was  at  least  but  little  doubt
that  it  needed  but  a  spark,  to  throw  the  Austrian  Netherlands
into  a  flame.

With  these  considerations,  motives  of  national  ambition  were
blended.  Such  motives  did  not,  indeed,  occupy  a  foremost  place
in  the  revolutionary  movement,  but  it  would  be  an  entire  mis-
take to  suppose  that  they  were  ever  altogether  absent.  The
implacable  hatred  with  which  Marie  Antoinette  was  pursued,
was  not  wholly  due  to  the  extravagance  of  her  Court  or  to  her
sujiposed  hostility  to  the  Revolution. It  was  also  industriously

586  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  cii.  xxi,

fomented  by  politicians  who  regarded  the  daughter  of  Maria
Theresa  as  the  chief  support  of  that  Austrian  alliance  which  it
was  their  main  object  to  dissolve.  Through  the  whole  of  the
Revolution  there  were  a  few  able  and  cool-headed  men  who  were
never  dupes  of  the  passions  which  they  flattered  and  stimulated,
but  who  saw  in  them  a  great  force  that  might  be  directed  to  the
attainment  of  old  objects  of  French  ambition.  To  such  men  it
was  no  immaterial  circumstance  that  the  country  which  waa
likely  to  be  most  quickly  revolutionised  by  French  ideas,  was
tlie  country  over  which,  for  more  than  a  century,  French  states-
men had  most  desired  to  establish  their  ascendency  and  do-
minion.^ If  Austrian  Flanders  could  become  French,  a  capital
object  of  French  ambition  would  be  attained,  and  if  French
armies  could  overrun  Austrian  Flanders,  they  were  not  likely  to
stop  there.  One  of  the  most  humiliating  defeats  which  French
policy  had  of  late  years  undergone,  had  been  the  overthrow  of
the  French  party  and  influence  in  Holland,  and  there  is  some
evidence  that  as  early  as  1791  the  prospect  of  restoring  them
had  been  conceived.

It  was  a  daring  game,  but  the  men  who  took  the  most  pro-
minent part  in  the  Legislative  Assembly  were  not  men  from
whom  any  prudence  or  measui-e  could  be  expected.  Obscure
young  provincial  lawyers,  petty  writers  of  no  antecedents  or
character,  adventurers  and  fanatics  without  any  reputation  or
position  to  lose,  witliout  any  practice  in  affairs  or  any  serious
l^olitical  knowledge,  had  climbed  into  the  foremost  places,  com-
manded the  wealth  and  power  of  France,  and  found  themselves
able  to  defy  the  sovereigns  of  Europe.  Was  it  surprising  that
they  should  have  proved  arrogant  and  reckless,  eager  for  adven-
ture, ready  like  desperate  gamblers  to  risk  everything  on  a  throw  ?

There  was  also  one  clear  and  definite  calculation  among
them.  The  most  energetic  section  of  the  Assembly  desired  to
overthrow  the  new  Constitution,  which  had  in  their  eyes  the
great  fault  of  maintaining  the  monarchical  Ibrm  of  government.
Jf,  however,  a  war  with  the  Emperor  was  declared,  it  was  scarcely
possible  that  the  monarchy  could  continue. The  relations  of  the

'  On  the  stcndy  f)frsislr'n(-c  with vinnrs,  soo  Sorol,  Jj  Knropc  ft  la  Ilcvo'
which  Ki-fnch  pr)Ii<;y  was  flirccl.cfl to littiuii  Fraii(;iiisc,  \)i).'iih- '622,
iho  ac^uiMliou ol  Ihu JBclgio i>\o-

en.  XXI.  THE WAR TARTY TRIUMPH?.  587

Queen  to  tlic  Emperor  would  make  the  position  of  the  Court
intolerable.  A  war  of  nations  against  sovereigns,  it  was  calcu-
lated, would  speedily  turn  France  into  a  Republic,  and  give  the
more  violent  party  a  complete  command  of  the  Ministry.

The  Republican  party,  however,  was  divided  on  this  question.
Robespierre,  Couthon,  and  their  friends,  feared  that  a  war
might ,  concentrate  new  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  King,  ami
that  a  victorious  invasion  might  shatter  the  Revolution ;  but  the
party  of  the  Gironde,  which  had  now  obtained  the  ascendency
under  the  guidance  of  Brissot  and  A^ergniaud,  vehemently
advocated  a  war,  and  Brissot  has  himself  acknowledged  that  his
main  object  in  pushing  it  on  was  to  overthrow  the  monarchy.'
The  French  tribune  began  to  ring  with  passionate  appeals  to
arms,  with  denunciations  of  the  kings  and  Governments  of
Europe,  with  predictions  of  the  coming  war  between  insurgent
nations  and  despotic  sovereigns.  As  late  as  October  the  Austrian
Minister  had  replied  to  one  of  the  appeals  of  the  King  of  Swedeii
that  '  all  thoughts  of  active  interference  in  the  affairs  of  France
on  the  part  of  his  Imperial  Majesty  were  entirely  laid  aside,'  -
and  in  accordance  with  this  policy  the  Emperor  had  in  August
forbidden  any  enrolments  of  French  emigrants  in  his  dominions,
and  in  October  had  ordered  the  dispersion  of  emigrants  who  had
assembled  in  too  great  numbers  at  Ath  and  Tournay.^  The
Electors  of  Treves  and  Mayence,  however,  still  suffered  French
emigrants  to  arm  in  their  dominions,  and  on  November  29  the
Assembly  passed  a  decree  calling  on  the  King  to  demand  their
disbandment  within  a  short  period,  on  pain  of  war,  and  request-
ing the  Emperor  to  enforce  the  demand.  They  at  the  same
time  urged  the  King  to  settle  the  claims  of  the  German  princes
on  the  lines  indicated  by  the  Constituent  Assembly,  and  to
change  the  diplomatic  agents  who  had  not  efficiently  represented
French  demands."*

These  demands  were  not  in  themselves  unreasonable,  but
they  were  accompanied  by  speeches  of  the  most  violent  provoca-
tion against  the  sovereigns  of  Europe.  The  country  was  rapidly
arming ;  Narbonne,  the  young  Minister  of  War,  showed  extra-

'  See  a  remarkable  passage  fi-om  '  Taine,  Hist,  de  la  Revolution,  ii.

one  of  his  pamphlets,  quoted  in  (he  129,  ISO.
Animal  Eeffi,<fer,  1792,  part  i.  p.  27:5.  ■*  Bourgoing,  i.  421. Sybcl,  i.  o2i'>y

•  Kcilh  to  Grenville,  Oct.  8,  1791.  ;)27.

5H8  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY, en.  xx..

ordinary  power  and  promptitude  in  organising  three  armies
under  tJtie  command  of  Rochambeau,  Luckner,  and  Lafayette ;
and  a  manifesto  clearly  foreshadowing  war  was  addressed  to  all
the  Courts  of  Europe.  Refugees  from  the  Austrian  Netherlands
were  received  with  ostentatious  favour,  and  all  the  language  and
proceedings  of  the  dominant  party  in  the  Assembly  proved  that
they  were  not  only  ready  but  eager  for  war.

The  French  King  considered  that  he  had  no  alternative  but
to  yield  to  the  wishes  of  the  Assembly.  Montmorin,  who  repre-
sented the  policy  of  peace,  resigned,  and  soon  after  a  great
number  of  changes  were  made  in  the  diplomatic  body.  On
December  14,  the  King  announced  to  the  Assembly  that  in
accordance  with  their  decree  he  had  summoned  the  Elector  of
Treves  to  put  a  stop,  before  January  15,  to  all  enrolments  on
pain  of  immediate  war,  and  that  he  was  about  to  write  to  the
Emperor  desiring  him  if  necessary  to  exert  his  authority  as  head
of  the  Empire  to  avert  the  miseries  which  the  conduct  of  some
of  the  members  of  the  Germanic  body,  if  not  speedily  altered,
must  necessarily  produce.  An  immense  war  credit  was  voted,
and  a  French  army  marched  to  the  German  frontier.

But  while  tbe  King  was  thus  apparently  consenting  to  the
wishes,  and  making  himself  the  mouthpiece,  of  the  dominant
party  in  the  Assembly,  his  secret  wishes  and  policy  were  very
different,  and  he  now  for  the  first  time  formally  and  in  person
requested  the  assistance  of  foreign  Powers  against  his  subjects.
On  December  3,  he  wrote  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  stating  that
in  spite  of  his  acceptance  of  the  new  Constitution  there  was  a
manifest  determination  in  the  Assembly  to  destroy  altogether
what  remained  of  the  monarchy ;  that  he  accordingly  addressed
the  King  of  Prussia,  the  Emperor,  the  Russian  Empress,  and
tlie  Kings  of  Spain  and  Sweden,  and  that  he  suggested  to  tlieni
a  Congress  of  the  chief  Powers  of  Europe  supported  by  an  armed
force,  as  tlie  best  means  of  stopping  the  factions  in  France,
making  it  possible  to  establish  a  better  order  of  things,  and
preventing  the  evil  under  which  France  was  suffering  from
spreading  to  the  other  European  Powers.  He  trusted  that  the
King  of  Prussia  would  approve  of  his  ideas,  and  would  at  the
bumc  Lime  maintain  a  profound  secrecy  about  this  overture.'
«  Fcuillcl  (le  Conches,  iv.  2G9-271.

en.  XXI.  APPEAL TO THE EMPEROR.  589

To  tlie  same  effect,  but  in  language  still  more  compromising,
IMarie  Antoinette  wrote  to  Mercy  on  the  IGtli,  only  two  days
after  tlie  King  had  made  his  declaration  to  the  Assembly. She
reminded  the  Austrian  ambassador  that  ever  since  July  she  had
been  asking  for  a  Congress  of  the  Great  Powers  of  Europe,  but  that
her  brother  had  hitherto  abandoned  her. Even  now,  however,  it
was  not  too  late,  and  the  fate  of  the  Royal  Family  in  France  was  in
his  hands. He  had  seen  how  the  Assembly  in  its  late  message
had  invited  the  King  '  in  a  manner  to  declare  war  against  the
Electors  and  princes  of  Germany ; '  how  the  King  had  taken  the
only  course  open  to  him  in  declaring  that  he  would  comply  with
the  wishes  of  the  Assembly,  and  how  he  had  assured  them  that
if  in  the  fixed  period  he  did  not  receive  the  satisfaction  which
he  demanded  it  would  only  remain  for  him  to  propose  a  war.
'  No  comment  is  necessary,'  the  Queen  proceeded,  '  to  show  the
folly  of  this  step. Without  army,  or  discipline,  or  money,  it  is
we  who  wish  to  attack. But  the  King  is  not  free. He  must
obey  the  general  wish,  and  for  our  personal  safety  here,  it  is
necessary  for  him  to  follow  exactly  the  course  which  is  pre-
scribed to  him. It  is  for  the  Emperor  and  the  other  Powers
now  to  help  us. .  .  .  It  is  at  this  moment  that  an  armed  Con-
gi-ess  appears  to  us  likely  to  be  of  the  greatest  use. Let  my
brother  not  deceive  himself. Sooner  or  later  he  will  be  mixed
in  our  affairs. First  of  all,  if  we  are  fools  enough  to  attack,  he
will  be  obliged  as  chief  of  the  Empire  to  support  the  Germanic
body,  and  moreover,  with  soldiers  as  undisciplined  as  ours,  his
territory  will  soon  be  violated  on all  sides. It  is  no  longer
time to fear for  our  persons. The course which we have
adopted  here,  of  appearing  to  move  frankly  in  the  direction  they
desire,  places  us  in  safety,  and  the  greatest  danger  of  all  would
be  to  remain  always  as  we  are.  .  .  .  There  is  no  longer  any
time  to  procrastinate. The  moment  to  help  us  is  come. If  it  is
missed  there  is  no  more  to  be  said. The  Emperor  will  then
only  have  to  accept  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  universe  the  shame
and  the  reproach  of  having  suffered  his  sister,  his  nephew,  and
lus  ally,  to  be  dragged  through  the  very  depths  of  humiliation
when  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  saved  them.' '

>  Ameth,  pp.  231-235.

590 EXGLAXD  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xxi.

The  situation  of  the  Emperor  was  very  perplexing.  His
anxiety  for  peace  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted.  The  reader
will  remember  the  letter  deprecating  foreign  interference  which
the  French  Queen  had  written  after  the  acceptance  of  the  Con-
stitution, at  the  dictation  of  the  constitutional  party  ;  and  he
will  also  remember  the  passionate  manner  in  which  the  Queen,
almost  immediately  after,  wrote  to  her  brother  declaring  that
this  letter  did  not  contain  her  real  sentiments,  that  she  had
written  only  on  compulsion,  that  she  placed  all  her  hopes  on
foreign  assistance.  She  now  complained  bitterly  that  her
brother  had  taken  no  notice  whatever  of  these  latter  letters,
while  the  former  letter  had  been  made  use  of  all  over  Europe
as  a  justification  of  his  neutrality.'  But  in  addition  to  foreign
Powers,  the  German  Diet  was  now  pressing  upon  the  Emperor,
urging  him  to  support  the  claims  of  the  princes  to  their  rights
in  Alsace,  and  beginning  manifestly  to  resent  his  passive  endu-
rance of  the  insults  of  the  French  Assembly,^  and  the  French
Royal  Family  were  almost  as  much  prisoners  as  after  their
capture  at  Varenues.  The  Emperor,  indeed,  in  his  interviews
Avith  the  emigrant  princes  appears  to  have  denied  this,^  but  he
was  not  ignorant  of  their  real  position,  and  he  was  exceedingly
alarmed  lest  new  outrages  should  force  him  to  intervene.''  He
was  also  probably  troubled  and  irritated  by  learning  that  Segur
had  been  sent  from  Paris  to  Berlin,  if  not  to  obtain  a  Prussian
alliance  for  France,  at  least  to  detach  Prussia  from  Austria.

The  Prussian  King,  it  is  true,  entirely  rejected  the  French
overture,  but  there  was  an  uneasy  and  suspicious  feeling  at
Vienna.^  The  menace  and  the  influence  of  the  Revolution
were  beginning  to  be  felt  even  in  very  remote  parts  of  the
Austrian  dominions.  'The  tiers  etat  in  several  of  the  provinces
of  this  monarchy,'  wrote  Keith,  '  are  extremely  urgent  in  their
solicitations  to  the  Emperor  to  obtain  the  right  of  sending
representatives  from  their  body  to  their  provincial  States.  A
deputation  from  the  peasantry  of  Styria  has  been  sent  hither
with  a  petition  to  that  effect,  which  the  Emperor  has  referred
to  the  Bohemian  Chancery,  with  orders  to  each  councillor  of

'  ATTicth,  p.  2.32.  '  See  on  SCigur's  mission,  Arnnth,

'  Ibid.  p.  228.  p.  2:'.7. Kdf>n  to  (irenville,  .laii. 10,

'  Kciili  <o  (irenvillo,  Doc.  ?,,  M'.n.  1  I,  21,  I7U2.

*  llii.l.  ]hc.  17.  I  Till.

CH.  XXI.  POLICY OF THE IQirKKOR.  o91

tliat  board  to  deliver  to  liis  Imperial  Majesty  his  opinion  in
writing  and  sealed.  .  .  .  The  example  set  by  Styria  will  pro-
bably be  followed  by  the  other  countries  in  the  Emperor's
dominions.'  ^  The  Austrian  Netherlands  were  evidently  on  the
verge  of  revolt  under  the  influence  of  French  example  and
incitements,  and  a  French  irruption  into  the  territory  of  the
Empire  might  at  any  time  take  place.  '  If,'  wrote  Keith,  '  to
these  events  the  near  prospect  of  a  war  in  Poland  should  be
added  (which  appears  to  me  far  from  improbable),  the  wisdom
as  well  as  firmness  of  the  Austrian  Cabinet  will  be  put  to  hard
trials.'  2

Under  these  circumstances,  the  Emperor  tried  to  strike  out
a  middle  course  which  would  at  once  support  his  dignity,
satisfy  his  allies,  and  make  it  not  wholly  impossible  to  preserve
the  peace.  He  sent  the  most  urgent  and  peremptory  directions
to  the  Elector  of  Treves,  and  to  the  other  minor  German
princes,  to  put  an  end  to  all  enrolment,  organisation,  and
assembling  of  French  emigrants  in  their  dominions ;  and  his
injunctions  were  so  fully  carried  out,  that  in  January  the
French  Minister  at  Coblentz  informed  his  Government  that  this
grievance  had  been  entirely  removed.  On  the  other  hand,  the
Austrian  Chancellor  officially  informed  the  French  ambassador
at  Vienna  that  any  act  of  violence  to  the  Elector  would  be
immediately  repelled  by  an  Austrian  force.  The  Emperor,  he
said,  had  full  confidence  in  the  moderate  intentions  of  the
French  King,  but  he  had  daily  reason  to  fear  that  those  inten-
tions might  not  be  respected,  and  he  therefore,  while  officially
informing  the  French  Government  that  all  armed  assemblies  of
emigrants  had  been  dispersed  in  Germany,  as  they  had  pre-
viously been  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  thought  it  necessary
to  inform  them  also,  that  Marshal  Bender  had  received  orders  to
give  the  Elector  effectual  assistance  if  he  were  attacked.  Tlie
Emperor  also  wrote  a  letter  to  the  French  King,  reminding  him
that  the  feudal  rights  of  the  German  princes  in  Alsace  and
Lorraine,  which  had  been  swept  away  by  the  French  Chamber
in  August,  had  never  been  subject  to  the  sovereignty  or  legis-
lation of  France ;  that  they  had  been  expressly  reserved  in  a

•  Keith  to  Grcmille,  Dec.  21,  1791.  ^  ibi(3_  jy^^..  24,  1701.

592  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

long  series  of  international  treaties  ;  that  they  had  been  placed
under  the  protection  and  guarantee  of  the  German  Empire,
He  protested  against  the  decree  of  the  National  Assembly  as  an
arbitrary  usurpation  and  violation  of  the  rights  of  the  Empire,
and  he  declared  his  full  resolution  of  supporting  the  German
princes  and  the  Diet,  if  they  did  not  obtain  a  full  restoration  of
their  property  and  rights,  as  settled  by  treaties.

He  also  sent  a  declaration  to  the  different  Co  arts  of  Europe
suspending  and  explaining  away  the  Declaration  of  Pilnitz.
The  measures,  it  said,  taken  by  the  allied  Powers  at  that  time,
had  been  taken  on  the  supposition  that  the  King  of  France
was  a  prisoner.  But  the  situation  had  changed.  The  Em-
peror considered  that  the  King  of  France  should  now  be
deemed  free,  and  consequently  his  acceptance  of  the  Con-
stitution and  all  the  acts  which  had  ensued  from  it  as  valid.
He  hoped  that  the  acceptance  of  this  Constitution  would  restore
order  to  France,  and  raise  the  moderate  party  to  power.  As,
however,  it  was  possible  that  the  former  excesses  and  violence
might  be  renewed,  he  considered  that  the  Powers  should  hold
themselves  in  a  state  of  observation,  and  cause  their  respective
Ministers  at  Paris  to  declare  that  their  alliance  still  exists,  and
that  they  will  be  ready  on  every  occasion  to  support  in  concert
tlie  rights  of  the  King  and  of  the  French  monarchy.^  On
January  5,  1792,  almost  identical  notes  were  presented  at  Paris
by  the  ambassadors  o  the  Emperor  and  of  the  King  of  Prussia,
declaring  that  if,  in  spite  of  the  determination  of  the  German
princes  to  maintain  in  their  territory  the  regulations  relating
to  the  emigrants  which  were  in  force  in  the  Austrian  Nether-
lands, the  German  territory  was  violated,  the  two  sovereigns
would  consider  this  proceeding  a  declaration  of  war  against
themselves.'*

These  measures  left  the  French  Assembly  a  very  large
practical  latitude.  If  it  wished  for  war,  the  feudal  claims  of
the  German  princes  and  the  attempted  or  threatened  inter-
ference with  French  affairs  furnished  obvious  grounds.  If  it
desired  peace,  the  complete  concession  of  the  demands  about
the  emigrants  paved  the  way,  and  the  other  questions  uiiglit
easily  be  submitted  to  nogot,i;i-tions,  which  in  the  present  dis-
'  Uurtrand  dc  Mollcvillo,  Annalcs,  Deo.  17'J1. •'  i5ourgoing,  i.  450,  451.

i

CH.  XXI.  TUE GIRONDINS DKSIRE WAR.  593

position  of  the  Emperor  would  almost  certainly  be  successful.
The  French  were  at  the  same  time  clearly  informed  tliat  the
attempt  to  disunite  the  two  German  Powers  had  failed,  and
that  both  must  be  encountered  in  the  event  of  a  war.

There  was  soon  no  doubt  of  the  alternative  which  was  pre-
ferred. Brissot,  Isnard,  and  other  Girondins  who  now  led  the
Assembly,  at  once  attacked  the  Emperor  with  a  fury  of  invective
which  could  scarcely  be  surpassed,  and  they  openly  advocated
immediate  war.  '  The  one  calamity  to  be  feared,'  said  Brissot,
'  is  that  there  should  not  be  a  war.'  '  There  can  be  no  sincere
treaty  between  tyranny  and  liberty.  Your  Constitution  is  an
eternal  anathema  to  despotic  thrones.  All  kings  must  hate  it,
for  it  tries  them  and  it  sentences  them  ;'  and  his  answer  to  the
treaties  which  were  cited  in  support  of  the  feudal  rights  of  the
German  princes  was  that  the  '  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  not
bound  by  the  treaties  of  tyrants.'  The  Diplomatic  Committee,
in  a  report  which  was  presented  to  the  Assembly  on  January  14,
called  upon  the  King  to  exact  from  the  Emperor  before  February
10,  and  on  pain  of  immediate  war,  a  distinct  promise  to  do
nothing  against  the  French  nation  and  its  independence,  and  to
assist  France  in  accordance  with  the  treaty  of  1756  against  any
Power  that  attacked  her,  and  the  Assembly  itself  on  January
25,  after  several  days  of  the  most  insulting  and  frantic  denun-
ciation, formally  accused  the  Emperor  of  having  violated  the
treaty  of  1756  by  promoting  a  coalition  against  France,  and
called  upon  the  King  to  demand,  in  an  interval  which  was  now
prolonged  to  March  1,  a  full  explanation  and  satisfaction,  on
pain  of  war.

This  debate  and  vote  made  peace  impossible.  The  Emperor,
indeed,  determined  that  he  would  still  endeavour  to  temporise,
but  the  preliminary  treaty  of  July,  between  Austria  and  Prussia,
was  at  once  converted  into  a  close  definitive  alliance,  and  a  united
army  under  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  was  concentrated  on  the
French  frontier.  The  English  diplomatic  despatches  of  the
time  show  very  vividly  the  dispositions  of  the  different  parties.
*  Nothing  short  of  dire  necessity,'  wrote  Keith,  on  the  last  day
of  1791,  '  will  determine  his  Imperial  Majesty  to  unsheathe  the
sword  in  good  earnest  against  France  or  any  other  foreign
Power,'  and  he  described  the  anxiety  with  which  the  Austrian

VOL.  V.  Q  Q

594  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  xxi.

Court  sought  for  pretexts  to  avoid  immediate  action,  and  their
repeated  and  urgent  warnings  to  the  minor  German  princes  to
avoid  any  provocation  to  France.'  '  I  am  persuaded,'  he  wrote
a,  week  later,  'that  this  Court  at  length  conceives  imminent
danger  of  a  rupture  with  France,  and  will  proceed  to  make
serious  military  preparations.  .  .  .  With  this  I  remain  in  the
conviction  that  the  reluctance  of  the  Emperor  to  draw  the  sword
on  any  account,  is  in  no  shape  diminished,  notwithstanding  that
he  has  been  heard  to  say  within  these  ten  days,  that  if  the  French
madmen  are  determined  to  force  him  into  a  war,  they  should
find  that  the  pacific  Leopold  knew  how  to  wage  it  with  the
greatest  vigour,  and  would  oblige  them  to  pay  the  expenses  of
that  war  in  more  solid  coin  than  their  assignats.'  ^  No  formal
proposition  had  been  made  on  the  part  of  France  for  the  re-
establishment  of  the  rights  and  possessions  of  the  German
princes  in  Alsace  and  Lorraine,  '  who  by  the  Constitution  of  the
Empire  are  not  at  liberty  to  accept  any  pecuniary  compensation
for  those  rights ; '  but  even  after  the  hostile  vote  of  January  25,
there  was  still  hope  at  Vienna  that  France  would  propose  a
territorial  indemnification  to  the  princes,  '  The  Emperor  has  it
extremely  at  heart  to  preserve  peace  with  France  if  it  can  be
done  with  any  degree  of  dignity  and  propriety.  It  is  well
understood  here  that  the  French  King  has  not  put  a  direct
veto  on  the  hostile  decree  of  the  National  Assembly,  and  that
although  he  has  been  able  to  throw  a  momentary  barrier  in  the
(vay  of  the  democratical  impetuosity,  he  may  soon  find  himself
o1)liged  to  go  all  lengths  which  the  madness  of  that  party  may
dictate.'  ^  The  King  of  Spain,  Keith  reports,  had  said  he
could  take  no  more  part  in  French  affairs  than  to  form  a  cordon
around  his  own  frontiers,  and  pay  a  subsidy  to  the  troops  of
Russia  and  Sweden.  The  chances  of  Russian  and  Swedish
assistance  seemed  to  the  Emperor  doubtful  and  distant.  The
Imperial  treasury  was  very  low  ;  the  Emperor  would  be  obliged,
if  the  war  broke  out,  to  impose  a  heavy  war  tax  in  the  first
year ;  but  he  still,  in  the  opinion  of  Keith,  hoped  to  intimidate
the  French  by  making  his  war  prepnrations  very  public*

' K(■illlto^!r<•nvill(^I)cc.;51,17'Jli  ' lln.l.  .I;in.  18,  Feb.  11,  1792.

Jan.  7,  17'.>_'.  *  Ibid.  Feb.  15,  18,  1792.

^  llid.  Jan.  7,  I7U2.

CH.  XXI.  THEEE  GREAT  CHANGES.  595

Among  his  most  serious  causes  of  anxiety  were  bis  relations
with  Prussia  and  with  Poland.  Prussia  had  just  acquired  the
Margravates  of  Anspach  and  Baireuth  through  the  resignation,
of  their  sovereigns  and  by  right  of  succession,  a  good  deal  to  the
dissatisfaction  of  the  Emperor,'  and  she  was  beginning  to  lean
towards  Russia  in  a  manner  which  was  not  a  little  disquieting.
As  I  have  already  remarked,  it  was  the  sincere  and  earnest
desire  of  Leopold  that  the  integrity  and  independence  of  Poland
should  be  preserved,  and  he  was  perfectly  aware  that  the
Empress  of  Russia  was  plotting  against  both.  The  signature  of
the  definitive  Peace  of  Jassy  on  January  9,  by  putting  an  end  to
all  alarms  from  Turkey,  had  left  her  free  to  pursue  her  policy,
and  on  this  side  of  Europe  the  moment  of  crisis  was  at  hand.

At  this  anxious  period,  when  the  issues  of  peace  and  war
were  in  suspense,  Europe  was  startled  in  quick  succession  by
three  great  events — the  fall  of  the  Ministry  of  Florida  Blanca  in
Spain  on  February  28;  the  death,  after  an  illness  of  only  two
days,  of  the  Emperor  Leopold,  on  March  1  ;  and  the  assassina-
tion of  Gustavus  III.  sixteen  days  later  at  a  masked  ball  at
Stockholm.  Two  of  these  events  had  a  great  and  immediate
effect  on  French  affairs.  Florida  Blanca  had  been  one  of  the  first,
and  Gustavus  III.  had  been  the  most  zealous,  of  the  supporters
of  the  emigrants ;  but  Spain,  under  the  Ministry  of  Aranda,  and
Sweden,  under  the  Regency  of  the  Duke  of  Sudermania,  now
adopted  the  English  policy  of  complete  neutrality.  The  efifects
of  the  death  of  Leopold  were  somewhat  more  complex.  An
eminently  wise,  experienced,  cautious,  and  pacific  sovereign,  in
the  prime  of  his  powers  and  in  the  most  critical  period  of  his
reign,  disappeared  from  the  scene,  and  was  replaced  by  a  mere
boy  without  knowledge,  experience,  or  talent.  War  with
France,  however,  had  become  inevitable  before  the  death  of
Leopold,  and  it  is  not  probable  that  this  event  even  accelerated
it.  But  it  gave  Prussia  an  ascendency  in  the  new  alliance,
and  it  deprived  Poland  in  the  moment  of  her  extreme  need  of
her  only  friend.

The  English  diplomatic  correspondence  shows  clearly  how
quickly  the  Polish  question  was  coming  to  maturity. We  have
seen,  in  the  despatches  from  Berlin,  the  evident  signs  of  the
'  Keith  to  Greuville.  Feb.  8.

596  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.  ch.  xxi.

great  act  of  treachery  which  the  Prussian  King  was  ah'eady
meditating,  and  in  April  Count  Schulenburg  informed  Eden
that  he  would  never  admit  that  Prussia  had  guaranteed  the  new
Polish  Constitution,  which  he  considered  contrary  to  Prussian
interests,  '  since  the  Polish  monarch,  if  ever  he  should  become
hereditary,  might  rapidly  rise  into  a  very  formidable  neigh-
bour.' ^  At  Vienna,  Keith  learnt  from  the  Austrian  Ministers
that  they  had  certain  knowledge  that  the  Empress  of  Russia
had  already  sent  a  large  sum  of  money  to  her  Minister  at
Warsaw  for  the  express  purpose  of  fomenting  internal  troubles
in  Poland,^  and  it  was  the  belief  both  at  Vienna  and  St.  Peters-
burg that  the  new  King  of  Hungary  had  Russian  sympathies
derived  from  his  uncle  Joseph.^  Bischoffswerder  had  arrived
at  Vienna  shortly  before  the  death  of  Leopold,  and  it  was
noticed  that  he  was  in  close  and  constant  communication  with
the  Russian  Minister,  who  was  an  active  fomenter  of  the  discord
in  Poland.  '  Should  a  connection,'  wrote  Keith,  '  be  formed
between  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the  Czarina,  the  unhappy
kingdom  of  Poland  may  possibly  become  the  propitiatory  sacri-
fice,' He  observed  that  there  was  a  uTowino-  belief  in  Vienna
that  Bischoffswerder  was  instructed  to  make  an  alliance  with
Russia,  allowing  the  Empress  to  carry  out  her  designs  in
Poland ;  and  Keith  confessed  himself  at  a  loss  to  reconcile  the
proceedings  of  the  Prussian  favourite  '  with  the  very  friendly
professions  he  is  constantly  making  to  the  Polish  charge
cVafaires  here,  of  the  upright  intentions  of  the  King  his  master
towards  the  Republic  of  Poland.'  ■*

It  was  evident  that  some  kind  of  compact  was  established
between  Prussia  and  Russia,  and  the  terms  were  beginning  to
ooze  out.  '  The  first  principle,'  wrote  Keith,  '  laid  down  by
these  two  Courts  is  that  the  "  integrite  "  of  the  Polish  dominions
shall  be  invariably  preserved.  For  all  the  rest  a  very  wide
Bcope  will  be  left  to  the  Russian  efforts  to  bring  back  the  govern-
ment of  that  country  to  its  ancient  form.  Your  lordship  will
]j(^st  judge  liow  much  iJiat  cmuilcr  resolution  is  to  be  effected
willniiit  drawing  the  sword,  and whether  or  not, if  the  con-

' Ivl.n  to Grcnvillp, A\m\ 14, '  Ibid. March  8. Whitworth  to

1792.  Gronvillc,  M:av.li  ]C.,  17i»2.

''  KijitL  tu Urciivillc, Feb. 18, ' Krilh  to  Grcuville,  Jlarch  7,  10,

IVJ-J..  11,  171)-'.

cii.  XXI.  IMPENDING PARTITION OP POLAND.  5'J7

niviuice  of  Austria  {incl  Prussia  shall  be  carried  so  f;ir  as  to  abet
that  enterprise  (though  by  less  violent  means),  the  former  ideas
of  aggrandisemeut  m.'iy  not  once  more  creep  into  the  Cabinets  of
the  Triumvirate.'  Greuville,  on  the  other  hand,  wrote  that  many
circumstances  convinced  the  English  Government  that  it  was
tlie  intention  of  the  Empress  of  Russia  to  make  use  of  the  first
favourable  opportunity,  to  overthrow  by  arms  the  new  Constitu-
tion of  Poland,  and  that  she  was  only  restrained  by  the  Courts
of  Vienna  and  Berlin  ;  and  he  expressed  his  earnest  hope  that
this  restraint  might  continue.'

At  St.  Petersburg  the  extreme  and  general  corruption  gave
great  facilities  for  obtaining  information.  Whitworth,  the
English  ambassador,  appears  to  have  been  the  first  who  suc-
ceeded in  discovering  the  intentions  of  the  Empress.  He  had
once  believed  that  she  would  content  herself  with  protesting
against  the  new  Constitution,  but  he  soon  discovered  that  he
had  been  deceived.  '  I  have  learnt,'  he  wrote,  '  through  a  very
particular  but  sure  channel,  that  it  is  the  intention  of  this  Court
to  fall  upon  the  Republic  of  Poland  in  the  spring  with  an  army
of  130,000  men,  which  will  be  brought  from  Moldavia  and  con-
tinue on  the  frontier  till  the  proper  season.  .  .  .  Should  other
neighbouring  Powers  interfere,  as  they  naturally  will,  a  plan  of
partition  is  already  framed,  and  it  is  supposed  will  meet  with
the  concurrence,  as  it  will  do  the  convenience,  of  all  three.  In
this  plan  Dantzic  and  Thorn,  with  a  district  in  Great  Poland,  are
allotted  to  the  share  of  the  King  of  Prussia.  Advantages  in  the
same  proportion  (the  particulars  of  which  the  person  who  gave
me  the  intelligence  does  not  recollect)  are  made  to  the  Emperor,
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  her  Iinperial  Majesty  will  secure  to
herself  as  much  as  will  reduce  the  remains  of  the  devoted
Republic  to  a  state  of  the  most  wretched  and  humiliating  depen-
dence, and  indemnify  herself  fully  for  the  expense  of  the  war
with  the  Turks.'  Whitworth  had  reason  for  believing  that
this  scheme  was  still  unknown  to  most  of  the  Ministers  of
Catherine ;  that  the  Prussian  ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg
knew  nothing  of  it,  and  that  the  chief  Ministers  at  Berlin  were
equally  in  the  dark ;  but  he  added,  '  I  am,  however,  very  much
inclined  to  believe  that  those most in  the  confidence  of  his

'  Kcilli  to  Greuville,  March  17. Lircuville  to  Keith,  March  21J,  1702

598  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUIIY.  ch.  xxi.

Prussian  Majesty,  and  particularly  General  BischofFswerder,  are
acquainted  with  the  business,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  even
the  King  of  Prussia  himself  may  have  been  sounded  upon  it.  I
have  for  some  time  suspected  that  there  has  been  a  mysterious
negotiation  of  some  kind  or  other  on  foot  between  the  two
Courts,  unknown  to  the  Cabinets  of  either.'  ^

The  information  and  conjectures  of  Whitworth  appear  to
have  been  perfectly  correct.  Goltz,  the  Prussian  ambassador  at
St.  Petersburg,  contrived  to  see  an  autograph  letter  written  by
the  Empress  during  the  Turkish  war,  stating  that  as  soon  as
this  war  was  over  she  intended  to  send  a  Russian  force  into
Poland,  and  if  the  Emperor  and  Prussia  resisted,  to  bribe  them
by  an  indemnity  or  a  partition.^

It  soon  appeared  that  the  scheme  was  by  no  means  unwel-
come to  the  Prussian  King.  On  March  12,  1792,  he  wrote  a
confidential  letter  to  his  Ministers  on  the  affairs  of  Poland,
which  places  his  intentions  beyond  dispute.  '  Russia,'  he  said,
'  is  not  far  from  the  idea  of  a  new  partition.  It  would  be  in
truth  the  best  means  of  restricting  the  power  of  the  King  of
Poland,  whether  he  be  hereditary  or  elective,  but  I  doubt
whether  we  can  find  for  Austria  a  suitable  indemnity,  and
whether  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  after  such  a  diminution  of
power,  would  still  accept  the  crown  of  Poland.  Nevertheless,  if
Austria  could  be  indemnified,  the  Russian  plan  would  be  always
the  most  advantageous  for  Prussia.  It  is  well  understood  that
we  should  gain  all  the  left  bank  of  the  Vistula,  and  that  we
should  be  thus  perfectly  secure  on  that  frontier,  which  it  has
hitherto  been  so  difficult  for  us  to  protect.  Such  is  my  opinion
with  reference  to  Poland.'  ^

This  letter  has  been  truly  described  by  a  German  historian,
as  the  death  sentence  of  Poland.  It  did  not,  of  coui'se,  come  to
tlie  knowledge  of  the  English  Ministers;  but,  as  we  have  seen,
lliey  were  under  no  illusions  about  the  character  and  intentions
of  the  Prussian  King.  At  Vienna,  Keith  received  the  com-
munications of  Whitworth  without  surprise,  and  he  was  able  to
bring  strong  corroborative  evidence.  '  I  wish,'  he  wrote,  in
reporting  the  matter  to  Grenville,  'that  I  could  see  any  ground

'  Whil  worth  to  Grenville,  Jan.  'M,  ^  Syliol,  i.  455.

ai,  1702.  *  Jbid.  160,  'IGl.

CH.  XXI.  APPROACHING  FRENCH WAR.  599

for  supposing  that  his  Prussian  Majesty  will  oppose  an  effectiml
resistance  to  these  ambitious  views  of  Eussia.  .  ,  .  That  the
Court  of  Vienna  has  not  been  an  original  projector  in  this  new
system  of  depredation,  I  believe  I  may  safely  aver ;  but  where
this  Court  is  to  find  the  national  vigour  or  the  political  virtue
to  withstand  the  other  Powers,  I  cannot  see.'  ^

In  the  mean  time  the  inevitable  French  War  was  rapidly
approaching.  The  real  dispositions  of  the  different  parties  are
clearly  disclosed  in  the  correspondence  of  the  time.  The  King
of  Prussia,  who  was  governed  by  Bischoffswerder,  by  views  of
military  and  territorial  ambition,  and  by  a  violent  personal
hatred  of  the  Revolution,  was  resolved  upon  war ;  and  he
pushed  on  his  policy  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  his  most
experienced  counsellors,  and  especially  of  Count  Schulenburg
and  General  Mollendorf.  At  Vienna  the  young  Sovereign  was
more  warlike  than  his  father,  and  war  was  now  generally  looked
on  as  inevitable,  but  it  was  not  contemplated  with  pleasure.
The  French  decree  of  January  25,  and  the  despatch  which  was
based  on  it,  arraigning  the  recent  conduct  of  the  Emperor  and
demanding  an  immediate  explanation  on  pain  of  war,  could
hardly  be  looked  upon  in  any  other  light  than  as  an  insulting
ultimatum,  and  one  of  the  last  acts  of  Leopold  was  to  revise
the  Austrian  reply.  It  was  written  temperately  and  in  some
parts  almost  apologetically.  The  French  complained  that  the
Emperor  had  ordered  General  Bender  to  repel  any  attack  on  the
Elector  of  Treves.  It  was  answered  that  the  Emperor  had
only  taken  this  step  after  he  had  secured  the  full  satisfaction  of
the  French  demand  for  the  disbandment  of  the  emigrants,  and
that  he  had  only  authorised  his  general  to  draw  the  sword  in
case  of  an  actual  invasion  of  German  territory,  and  on  the
express  condition  that  all  provocation  to  France  had  ceased.
Such  a  policy  was  no  menace ;  it  was  only  a  fulfilment  of  his
strict  duty  as  head  of  the  Empire.  The  French  complained
that  by  the  circular  from  Padua  and  the  alliance  and  Declaration
of  Pilnitz,  the  Emperor  had  intei'fered  with  their  internal  affairs,
and  violated  the  treaty  of  alliance  of  1756.  The  Emperor
answered  that  he  had  taken  these  measures  solely  for  the  sup-

»  Keith  to  Grenville,  April  25,  17D2.

GOO  EN(.LAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTUIJY,  en.  xxi.

port  of  the  French  monarch  and  monarchy,  at  a  time  when  liis
brother-in-law  and  ally  was  so  manifestly  a  prisoner  that  he  had
fled  by  night  from  his  palace  and  had  been  brought  back  by  an
armed  force,  and  when  the  legal  Government  of  France  was
destroyed  by  usurpation.  No  sooner  had  the  King  regained
his  freedom,  accepted  the  Constitution,  and  thus  reconstituted  a
legal  Government,  than  the  Emperor  recognised  the  fact  and
ordered  that  all  active  measures  should  be  suspended.  The
coalition,  however,  still  existed  though  it  was  dormant,  for  France
was  still  a  cause  of  the  gravest  European  concern.  Its  justifica-
tion was  found  in  the  enormous  French  armaments,  continued
and  augmented  when  the  dispersion  of  the  emigrants  had  taken
away  every  reasonable  pretext ;  in  the  fury  of  the  republican
party  which  was  seeking  to  overthrow  both  the  monarchy  and
the  new  Constitution  ;  in  the  manifest  determination  of  the
Jacobins  to  force  on  a  war,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  King
and,  as  the  Emperor  believed,  of  the  great  majority  of  the
French  nation.  To  that  nation  the  Emperor  now  made  a
solemn  appeal  against  the  Jacobin  party.  In  the  interests  of
France  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  Europe,  he  denounced  this  per-
nicious sect  as  the  enemies  at  once  of  their  King,  their  Con-
stitution, and  the  peace  of  Europe.'

Keith  has  mentioned  the  curious  fact  that  '  in  a  moment  of
extreme  deference  to  his  Prussian  ally,  and  with  the  mistaken
hope  of  intimidating  France,'  tlie  Emperor  added  '  with  his  own
pen '  to  the  draft  drawn  up  by  Kaunitz,  those  expressions  re-
lating to  the  Jacobins  which  so  greatly  added  to  the  flame  in
J'aris.  After  the  death  of  Leopold,  Bischoffswerder  strongly
urged  upon  his  success^or  the  policy  of  immediately  declaring
war,  but  Kaunitz  resisted,  and  although  military  preparations
were  rapidly  pushed  on,  a  few  weeks  still  passed  before  the  sword
was  drawn  .-

In  France,  meanwhile,  the  movement  towards  war  was
sweeping  on  with  resistless  impetuosity.  'J'lic  lew  moderate
men  who  still  remained  in  the  ]\linislry  and  the  diplomatic
Hervice  were  now  weeded  out,  and  the  wlujle  direction  of  affairs
passed  into  the  hands  of  violent  Republicans. De  Lessart.  the

' lloilruiid  do Mollcvillc,  ai'pcn-  - Keith to GrLUviUi;, ^cpt. 10,

di.\  xiv.  1  7'.;-'.

CH.  XXI.  THE KVE  OF  THE WAR.  GOl

Minister  for  Foreign  Affjiirs,  was  not  only  displaced,  but  im-
peached on  the  ground  that  he  had  not  sufficiently  upheld  the
dignity  of  Franco,  and  Duniuuriez  took  his  place.  This  emi-
nently skilful,  daring,  and  ambitious  soldier,  while  echoing  in
their  extreme  forms  the  shibboleths  of  the  Revolution,  had
objects  of  his  own  which  were  perfectly  distinct.  He  wished,
if  possible,  to  isolate  Austria  from  Prussia,  and  from  the  minor
German  princes,  but  at  all  events  to  provoke  a  war  that  would
give  the  Austrian  Netherlands  to  France.  The  anarchy  and
excitement  of  the  country  were  now  at  their  height.  Nineteen
departments  were  in  a  state  of  open  insurrection.  Even
around  Paris  the  price  of  corn  in  the  markets  was  regulated  by
great  bands  of  armed  peasantry.  The  National  Guard  in  tlie
southern  provinces  not  only  connived  at,  but  assisted  in,  the
destruction  and  pillage  of  country  houses  ;  and  while  the  most
atrocious  murders  of  functionaries  and  suspected  Royalists  were
reported  from  all  sides,  the  Assembly  passed  an  Act  of  Amnesty
in  favour  of  Jourdain  and  his  fellow-murderers  at  Avignon,  and
suffered  them  to  return  in  triumph  to  the  scene  of  their  crimes.
A  great  civic  festival  was  given  to  forty  Swiss  soldiers  who  had
been  condemned  to  the  galleys  for  mutiny  at  Nancy.  The
monthly  deficit  in  December  was  above  35,000,000  livres,  and
it  rose  rapidly  in  January  and  February.  At  the  end  of
December,  Lord  Gower  stated  that  2,100,000,000  of  assignats
had  been  already  decreed,  and  that  on  the  best  calculation  the
whole  of  the  national  property  did  not  exceed  3,000,000,000.
Multitudes  of  forged  assignats  were  abroad,  and  in  spite  of  the
supplies  that  were  expected  from  the  sale  of  the  forest  lands  and
from  a  vast  confiscation  of  the  estates  of  the  emigrants,  the  pro-
spect to  any  statesman  formed  in  the  school  of  a  settled  Govern-
ment might  have  seemed  absolutely  desperate.  But  the  one
wish  of  the  great  majority  of  the  Assembly  was  for  immediate
war.  A  despatch  was  sent  to  Vienna  summoning  the  King  of
Hungary  at  once  to  renounce  all  alliances  unsanctioned  by,  or
hostile  to,  France,  and  to  withdraw  the  troops  that  menaced  her,
and  the  answer  being  evasive,  the  Assembly,  on  April  20,
declared  war  against  him.  Only  seven  members  opposed  the
decree.

In  this  way  the  war  was  begun  which  for  more  than  twenty

602 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  xxi.

years  deluged  Europe  with  blood.  Before  ten  days  had  passed
a  French  army  had  invaded  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  and
within  a  month  a  Russian  army  was  invading  Poland.  For  a
short  time,  however,  England  kept  clear  of  the  struggle,  and
she  still  looked  forward  to  a  long  course  of  political  and  financial
reforms.  We  must  now  trace  the  faults  and  the  misfortunes
that  baffled  the  hopes  of  her  statesmen,  drew  her  speedily  into
the  vortex,  and  soon  made  her  the  most  important  member  of
the  great  coalition  against  France.

END OF THE FIFTH VOLUME,

rni.VTRD DY

SJ0;T18Wti0X)l. AND f(i., NliW-8TREET SQUAIVB

LONDON

STANDAED  HISTOEICAL  WOEKS,

MACAULAY'S  (Lord) HISTORY  of  ENGLAND, from

the  ACCESSION  of  JAMES  the  SECOND.
Popiilar  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  5s. i  People's  Edition,  4  vols.  er.  8vo.  16a.
Student's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  12s.  |  Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  8vo.  48s.
Library  Edition,  5  vols.  Svo.  £4.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS:

Student's  Edition.  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  6s.  I  Trevelyan  Edition,  2  vols.  cr.  Svo.  9s.
People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  Svo.  8s.  |  Caljinet  Edition,  4  vols,  post  Svo.  24s.
Library  Edition,  3  vols.  Svo.  36s.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS,  with  LAYS  of  ANCIENT

HOME. In  1  vol.
Popular  P]dition,  crown  Svo.  2s.  6d.
Authorised  Edition,  crown  8vo.  2s.  Qd.  or  3s.  6d.  gilt  edges.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS:

People's  lidition,  1  vol.cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d.  |  Library  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  21s.

MACAULAY'S (Lord) MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS

and  SPEECHES:
Popular  Edition,  1  vol.  or.  Svo.  2s.6^.  |  Student's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  6s.
Cabinet  Edition,  including  Indian  Penal  Code,  Lays of  Ancient  Rome,  and
Miscellaneous  Poems,  4  vols,  post  Svo.  24s.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  COMPLETE  WORKS :

Cabinet  Edition,  16vols.  post  Svo.  £4.  16.s.  |  Library  Edition,  8  vols.  Svo.  £5.  5».

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  from  the  FALL  of  WOLSEY

to  the  DEFEAT  of  the  SPANISH  ARMADA.  By  James  A.  Froude.
12  vols,  crown  Svo.  42s.

The ENGLISH in IRELAND in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. By  James  A.  Feotjde. 3  vols,  crown  Svo.  18s.

SHORT STUDIES on  GREAT SUBJECTS. By  James

A.  Fhoude.
Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols.  cr.  Svo.  24s. |  Popular  Edition,  4  vols.  cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d.  each.

HISTORY of ENGLAND from the ACCESSION of

JAMES  I.  to  the  OUTBREAK  of  the  GREAT  CIVIL  WAR.  By  Samuel
Rawson  Gakdinee. 10  vols,  crown  Svo.  6s.  each.

HISTORY  of  the  GREAT  CIVH.  WAR,  1642-1649. By

Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner  (3  vols.)  Vol.  1.  1642-1644.  With  24  Maps.
8\o.  2ls.  {out  of  print). Vol.  II.  1644-1647. With  21  Maps. Svo.  24.?.

HISTORY of ENGLAND in the EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY.  By  W.  E.  H.  Leckt,  Svo.  Vols.  L  and  II.  1700-1760,  36s.
Vols.  III.  and  IV.  1760-1784,  36s.  Vols.  V.  and  VL  1784-1793,  36s.  Vols.
VII.  and  VIII.  1793-1800  (with  Index  to  the  complete  Work),  36s.

The  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  since

the  ACCESSION  of  GEORGE  IIL  1760-1870.  By  Sir  T.  Eeskine  Mat
(Lord  Farnborocgh). 3  vols,  crown  Svo.  18s.

London:  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

STANDARD  HISTORICAL  WOEKS.

HISTORY of ENGLAND from tlie CONCLUSION of

the  GREAT  WAR  in  1815  to  the  YEAR  1858. By  Spenceh  Walpole.
Library  Edition  (5  voh.). Vols.  I.  and  II.  1815-1832,  36s. Vol.  III.  1832-

1841,  18s. Vols.  IV.  and  V.  1841-1858,  36s.
Cabinet  Edition,  6  •vols,  crown  8vo.  6s.  each.

A  JOURNAL  of  the  REIGNS  of  KING  GEORGE  IV.

KING  WILLIAM  IV.  and  QUEEN  VICTORIA.  By  the  late  Charles
C.  F.  Grkyille,  Esq.  Clerk  of  the  Council  to  those  Sovereigns.  Edited  by
Henry  Eeeye,  C.B.  D.C.L. Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols. Crown  8vo.  6s.  each.

A  HISTORY  of  TAXATION  and  TAXES  in  ENGLAND,

from  the  EARLIEST  TIMES  to  the  YEAR  1885.  By  Stkphen  Dowell.
Vols.  I.  and  II.  The  History  of  Taxation,  21s. ;  Vols.  III.  and  IV.  The
History  of  Taxes,  21s.

The  ENGLISH  in  AMERICA :  Virginia,  Maryhand,  and

the  Carolinas. By  J.  A.  Doyle,  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford. 8vo.  18s

The  ENGLISH  in  AMERICA  :  the  Puritan  Colonies. By

J.  A.  Doyle,  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford. 2  vols.  8vo.  36s.

The  ENGLISH CHURCH  in  the  EIGHTEENTH  CEN-

TURY. By  Charles  J.  Abbey  and  John  H.  Overton. Crown  8vo.  7s.  6^^.

HISTORY  of  the  PAPACY  during  the  REFORMATION.

By  the  Rev.  Mandell  Creighton.  8vo.  ^Vols.  I.  and  II.  1378-1464,  32s.
Vols.  III.  and  IV.  1464-1518,  24s.

The HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY of EUROPE. By

Ej)WARD  A.  Freeman. With  65  Maps. 2  vols.  8vo.  31s.  6d.

HISTORY of  the ROMANS under the  EMPIRE. By

Dean  Merivale.  Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  crown  8vo.  48s.  Popular  Edition.
8  vols,  crown  8vo.  3s.  Gd.  each.

HISTORY of CIVILISATION in ENGLAND and

FRANCE,  SPAIN  and  SCOTLAND. By  H.  T.  Buckle. 3  vols.  cr.  8vo.  24s.

The HISTORY of EUROPEAN MORALS from

AUGUSTUS  to  CHARLEMAGNE. B/W.  E.  H.  Lkcky. 2  vols.  or.  8vo.  16.f.

HISTORY  of  tlie  RISE  and  INFLUENCE  of  the  SPIRIT

of  RATIONALISM  in  EUROPE. By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky. 2  vols.  or.  8vo.  16s,

DEMOCRACY in AMERICA. By  A.  De  Tocqueville.

Tninslated  by  H.  Reeve. 2  vols,  crown  8vo.  16s.

Tlie  HISTORY  of  PHILOSOPHY,  from  Tliales  to  Comte.

By  G.  IL  Li;wES. 2  vols.  8vo.  32,s.

The HISTORY of ISRAEL. By Heinrtch Ewald.

8vo.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  24s.  Vols.  111.  and  IV.  21s.  Vol.  V.  1 8s.  Vol.  VI.
16«, Vol.  VII.  2l8. Vol.  VIII.  18s.

London  :  LONG^IANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

July,  1895.

a  Classifieb CatalOijuc

OF WORKS IN

GENERAL LITERATURE

PUBLISHED BY

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.G.

AND 15  EAST  i6th  street,  NEW  YORK.

INDEX OF AUTHORS.

Page
Abbott  (Evelyn)  -  -  2,  13  :
(T.  K.)  - - -  10

(E.  A.)  - - -  10

Acland  (A.  H.  D.)  -  2
Acton  (Eliza)  -  -  21
Acvvorth  (H.  A.)  -  -  14
iEschylus  -  -  -  13
Allingham  (W.)  -  -  14,  22
Anstey  (F.)  -  -  -  15
Aristophanes  -  -  13
Aristotle  -  -  -  10
Armstrong  (E.)  -  -  2
(G.  F.  Savage) -  14

(E.  J.)  - - 5,  14,  22

Arnold  (Sir  Edwin) 6,  14,  20

(Dr.  T.) - -  2

Ashley  (W.  I.) - -  12

Astor(J.  J.)-  -  -  15
Atelier  du  Lys  (Author  of) 20

Babington  (W.  D.) -  13

Bacon - - - -  5,  10

Bagehot  (W.) - 5,  12,  22

Bagwell  (R.) - -  2

Bain  (Alexander)- -  10

Baker  (James) - -  i"^

(Sir  S.  W.) - -  6,  8

Balfour  (A.J.) - -  8,  24

Ball  (J.  T.) - - -  2

Baring-Gould  (S.)  -  22
Barnett  (S.  A.  and  Mrs.) 12

Battye  (Aubyn  Trevor)  22

Baylies  (T.  S.) - -  22

Beaconsfield  (Earl  of)  -  15

Beaufort  (Duke  of) -  8

Becker  (Prof.) - -  13

Beeslv  (A.  H.) - -  14

Bell  (Mrs.  Hugh)- -  14

Bent  (J.  Theodore) -  6

Besant  (Walter)  - -  2

Bickerdyke  (J-) - -  9

Boase  (C.  W.) - -  3

Boedder  (B.) - -  11

Boulton  (Helen  M.) -  15

Boyd  (A.  K.  H.) - 5,  22,  24

Brassey  (Lady) - -  6

(Lord) - - 2,  6,  8,  12

Brav  (C.  and  Mrs.) -  10

Bright  (J.  F.) - -  2

Buckle  (H.  T.) - -  2

Bull  (T.) ...  21

Burke  (U.  R.) - -  2

Burrows  (Montagu) -  3

Burv  (Viscount - -  8

Butler  (E.  A.) - -  17

(Samuel) - -  22

Campbell-\\'alker  (A.)-  9

Chesnev  (Sir  G.)  -  2
Cholmo'ndeley-Pennell(H.)  8

Cicero  - - - -  13

Clarke  (R.  F.) - -  11

Clegg  (J.  T.) - -  15

Clodd  (Edward) - -  13

Clutterbuck  (W.  J.) -  7

Comyn  (L.  N.) '- -  20

Cochrane  (A.) - -  14

Conington  (John)  -  13
Conybeare(\V.  J.)How-

son  (J.  T.) - -  20

Cox  (Harding) - -  8

Crake  (A.  D.) - -  19

Creiehton  (Bishop) -  2,  3

Curzon  (Hon.  G.  N.) -  2

Cutts  (E.  L.)  -  -  3
Davidson  (W.  L.) -  10,  12

24

15,20

8

De  la  Saussave  (C.)
Deland  (MrsI)
Dent  (C.  T.)

De  Sails  (Mrs.) -  -  21

De  Tocquevillc  (.*..)  -  3

Devas  (C.  S.) -  -  n

DougaIl(L.)- -  .  15

Dowell  (S.) - -  -  12

Doyle  (A.  Conan)  -  16

Ewald  (H.) - -  -  3

Falkener  (E.) -  "  9

Farnell  (G.  S.) -  -  13

Farrar  (Dean) -  -  12,  16

Fitzpatrick  (W.  J.)  -  3

Fitzwygram  Sir  F.  -  7

Ford  (H.) ...  9

Fowler  (Edith  H.)  -  16  i

Francis  (Francis)  -  9

Freeman  (Edward  A.)  -  3
Froude  (James  A.) 3,  5,  7,  16

Furneaux  (W.) -  -  17

Gardiner  (Samuel  R.)  -  3

Gerard  (D.  ) -  -  16

Gibson  (Hon.  H.)  -  g

Gilkes  (A.  H.) -  -  16

Gleig  (G.  R.) -  -  6

Goethe  - - -  -  14

Graham  (P.  A.) -  -  17

Graves  (R.  P.) -  -  5

Green  (T.  Hill) -  -  10

Greville  (C.  C.  F.)  -  3

Grev  (Mrs.  W.) -  -  20

Grove  (F.  C.) -  -  8

Gwilt  I  J.) - -  -  22

Haggard  (H.  Rider)  -  16,  20

HalHwell-PhiUipps  (J.)  5

Hapgood  (Isabel)  -  7

Hart  (A.  B.) -  -  22

Harte  (Bret) -  -  16

Hartwig  (G.) -  -  17,  18

Hassall  (A.)  . -  -  5

Hawker  (Col.  Peter)  -  g

Hayward  (J.  M.)  -  -  18

Hearn  (W.  E.) -  -  3

Heathcote(J.M.&C.  G.) 8

Helmholtz  (Hermann  von)  18

Herbert  (W.  V.)  -  -  3

Hillier  (G.  Lacy)-  -  8

Hodgson  (Shadworth  H.) 10

Hooper  (G.)  - -  .  5

Hornung  (E.  W.)  -  16

Howitt  (W.) .  -  7

Hudson  (W.  H.)  -  -  18

Hume  (David) -  -  10

Hunt  (\V.) - -  -  3
Hutchinson  (Horace  G.) 8

Ingclow  (Jean) -  -  14,  20

James  (C.  A.) -  -  22

Jefferies  (Richard)  -  21,  23

Johnson  (J.  &  J.  H.)  -  23

Joyce  (P.  W.) -  -  3

Justinian - -  -  10

Kalisch  (M.  M.) -  -  24

Kant  (L) - .  .  10

Kendall  (Mav) -  -  14

Killick  (A.  H.) -  -  10

Kitchin  (G.  W.) -  -  3

Knight  (E.  F.) -  - 7,  21

Kostlin  (J.) - -  -  5

Ladd  (G.  T.) -  -  11
Lang  (Andrew)

3,  8,  g,  10,  13,  14,  16,  19,  23

Lascelles  (Hon.  G.)  - S,  9

Laurie  (S.  S.) -  -  22

Lear  {H.  L.  Sidney)
Lecky  (W.  E.  H.)
Lees  (J.  A.)  -
Lemon  (Ida)
Leonard  (A.  G.) -
Lewes  (G.  H.)
Lodge  (H,  C.) -
Loftie  (VV.  J.) -
Longman  (C.  J.)  - 8
Longman  (F.  W.)
Lubbock  (Sir  John)
Lvall  (Edna)
Lyttelton  (Hon.  R.  H.)
Lytton  (Ear!  of)  -
Macaulay  (Lord)  - 4,
Macdonald  (George) -
Macfarren  (Sir  G.  A.)  -
Mack-ail  (J.  W.) -
Macleod  (H.  D.)  -
Macpherson  (H.  A.)
Maher  (M.)  -
Marbot  (Baron  de)
Marshman  (J.  C.)
Martineau  (James)
Maskelyne  (J.  N.)
Maunder  (S.)
Max  Miiller  (F.)  11,  12,
Mav  (Sir  T.  Erskine)  -
Meade  (L.  T.)
Melville  (G.  J.  Whyte)
Mendelssohn  (Felix) -
Merivale  (Dean)  -
Mill  (James)

(John  Stuart)

Milner  (G.) -
Molesworth  (Mrs.)
Montague  (F.  C.)
Moore"(J.  W.) -
Murdoch  (W.  G.Burn)
Murray  (R.  F.) -
Nansen  (F.)  -
Nesbit  (E.) -
O'Brien  (W.)
Oliphant  (Mrs.) -
Onslow  (Earl  of)  -
Osbourne  (L)
Parr  (Louisa)
Pa\n  (James)
Pavne-Galhvev  (Sir  R.)
Pearv  (I.  andk.) -
Peek  (H.) -
Phillips  (M.)
Phillipps-Wollev  (C.)  -
Piatt  (S.  &  J.  J.)  .
Pole  (W.) -
Pollock  (W.  H.) -
Poo'.e  (W.  H.  and  Mrs.)
Poore  (G.  V.)
Prendergast  (J.  P.)
Pritchett  (R.  T.)  -
Prince  (Helen  C.)
Proctor  (R.  A.) - 9,
Raine  (James)
Ransome  (Cyril)  -
Rhoades  (J.)
Rhoscomvl  (O.) -
Rich  (A.)" -
Richardson  (Sir  B.W.)
Rickaby  (John) -

(Joseph)

Riley  (J.  \V.)
Robertson  (A.)
Roget  (Peter  M.)  -
Romanes  (G.  T.l  -

Page

22  Ronalds  (A.)
3,  14 Roosevelt  (T.)

7,21 Rosaetti  (M.  F.) -
16 Saintsbury  (G.) -

23  Scholler  (L.  W.)

II Scott-Montagu  (Hon.  J
3 Seebohm  (F.)

3  Selous  (F.  C.)

,  9,  23 Sewell  (Eliz.  M.)  -
9 Shakespeare

13  Shand  (A.  J.  I.) -
16 Sharpe  (R.  R.) -

8  Shearman  (M.) -

14  Sheppard  (Edgar)
14,  21 Sinclair  (A.)-

24  Smith  (R.  Bosworth) -

23  : (W.  P.  Haskett)  -

13 Solovyofi  (V.  S.)  -

12,  21 Sophocles - . .

9  Soulsby  (Lucy  H.)
II Stanlev  (Bishop)  -

5  I  Steel  (A.  G.)

5  1 (J.H.)- - -

24  I  Stephen  (Sir  James) -
9  j (Leslie)

19  !  Stephens  (H.  Morse) -
23,  24  I  Stevens  (R.  W.)  -

4  Stephens  (W.  W.)
19  Stevenson  (R.  L.)
16  Stock  (St.  George)
23 ' Stonehenge '

4 Stuart-Wortley  (A.  J.)
II Stubbs  (J.  W.) -
II,  12 Sturgis  (J

Page
9
3

21,  23

9

24

.) 9

4-5

8

17
15
6

4
7
23

13
19

18
8
7
6
7
4

23

6

-  17.  19

II
7
9
4

15

23  Suffolk  &  Berkshire  (Earl  of)  8
ig Sullivan  (Sir  E.)  - -  8

4  Sully  (James)  -  -  11
4 Sutherland  (A.  and  G.)  5

7  ,  Suttner  (B.  von)  -  -  17
15  I  Swinburne  (A.  J.) - 11

7  I  Symes  (J.  E.) - - 12

15  !  Thomson  (Archbishop) 11

4  I  Todd  (A.) - - .  5

16  Toynbee  (A.) - - 12

8  I  Trevelyan  (Sir  G.  O.)  -  5

17  Trollope  (Anthony)  -  17
22  Tvrrell  (R.  Y.)  -  -  13
i6' Van  Dyke  (J.  C.)  - - 23

8,  9 Vernev  (Frances  P.  and

7 Margaret  M.) - -  6

15  '  Virgil - - . - 13

24  VVakeman  (H.  O.) -  5
;,  16 Walford  (Mrs.) - - 6,  17

15  Vvalkc-r  (jane  H.) - 22

9  Walpole  (Spencer) -  5

5  ,  Walsingham  (Lord) -  8

22  I  Walter  (J.) - - -  6

23  I  Watson  (A.  E.  T.)  -  8,  9
4  I  Webb  (S.  and  B.)  -  12
8 1  Weir  (R.) - . .  8

16  I  West  (B.  B.) . .  17,  23
18,23' (C.) - - - 22

3  I  Weyman  (Stanley) - 17
2  !  Whatelv  (.Archbishop)- 11
13,  15  ,1  Wilcocks  (J.  C.) - -  9

16 1  Wilkins  (G.)-  -  -  13
13  '  Willich  (C.  M.)  -  -  19
23  .  Wilson  {A.  J.)  -  -  12
II  ,  Wolff  (H.  W.) - -  5

II  .  V.'oodgate  (W.  B.) -  8

15  Wood  (J.  G.) - - i3

16  Wylie  (J.  H.) - -  5
12,  19 Your.tt  (V/.)  - . - 7

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

CONTENTS.

PAGE

Badminton  Library  (The) ...  8

Biography,  Personal  Memoirs,  etc. -  5

Children's  Books  -----  ig
Classical Literature, Translation,

etc. -------  13

Cookery,  Domestic  Management,  etc.  21

Evolution,  Anthropology,  etc.  - -  13

Fiction,  Humour,  etc. - - -  15

Fur  and  Feather  Series - - -  g
History,  Politics,  Polity, Political

Memoirs,  etc. -----  2

Index  of  Authors - . - -  i

Language,  History  and  Science  of -  12

Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philo-
sophy -----..
Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works -
Miscellaneous  Theological  Works  -
Poetry  and  the  Drama
Political  Economy  and  Economics
Popular  Science  -----
Silver  Library  (The) - . . -
Sport  and  Pastime ....
Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,
etc. ----...
Veterinary  Medicine,  etc.  -
Works  of  Reference - - . -

9
22

24
14
12

17
20

6

7
19

History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e.

Abbott. — A History of Greece. By
Evelyn Abbott,  M.A.,  LL.D.
Part  L — From the Earliest Times  to  the
Ionian  Revolt. Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.
Part  II. — 500-445  B.C. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d.

Acland  and  Eansome. — A  Handbook  in
Outline  of  the  Political  History  of
England  to  1894.  Chronologically  Ar-
ranged. Bjr  A.  H.  Dyke  Acland,  M.P.,
and  Cyril  Ransome,  M.A. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

ANNUAL  REGISTER.  (THE). A  Re-
view of  Public  Events  at  Home  and  Abroad,
for  the  year  1894. 8vo.,  i8s.
Volumes  of  the  Annual  Register  for  the
years  1863-1893  can  still  be  had. i8s.each.

Armstrong.— Elizabeth  Farnese  ;  The
Termagant  of  Spain.  By  Edward  Arm-
strong, M.A. 8vo.,  i6s.

Arnold.— Works  by  T.  Arnold,  D.D.,
jorincrly  Head  Master  of  Rugb}-  School.
Intkoductorv Lectures  on  Modern

History. 8vo.,  7s.  6J.
Miscellaneous  Works. 8vo.,  7s.  6d.

Bagwell.— Ireland  under  the  Tudors.
By  Richard  Bagwell,  LL.D.  (3  vols.)
Vols.  I.  and  II.  From  the  first  invasion  of
the  Northmen  to  the  year  1578.  8vo.,  ^2S.
Vol.  III. 1 578- 1 603. Svo.  1 8s.

Ball.— Historical  Review  of  the  Legis-
lative Systems  Operative  in  Ireland,
from  the  Invasion  of  Henry  the  Second  to
the  Union  (1172-1800).  By  the  Rt.  Hon.  J.
T.  Ball. 8vo.,  6j.

Be.sant. — The  History  of  London.  By
W'ai.tkk  Bicsant.  With  74  Illustrations.
Crown  Svo.,  is.  qd  Or  bound  as  a  School
Prize  Book,  2s.  6d.

Brassey.— Works  by  L(;kd  Bkasslv.
I'ai'lks  and  Addresses.
Naval  AND  Maritime.  1872-1893.  2  vols.

Crown  Svo.,  los.
Mercantile  Marine  and  Navigation,
from  1871-1894. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Brassey.— Works  by  Lord  Brassey — Cont.

Imperial  Federation  and  Colonisa-
tion from  iSSo  to  1894.  Arranged  and
Edited  by  Arthur  H.  Loring  and  R.  J.
Beadon. Crown  8vo.,  55.

Brigllt. — A  History of England. By
the  Rev.  J.  Frank  Bright,  D.  D.
Period I. Mediaeval Monarchy  : a.d.

449  to  1485. Crov.'n  8vo.,  4s.  6d.
Period  II. Personal  Monarchy. 1485  to

to  16SS. Crown  Svo.,  5s.
Period  III. Constitutional  Monarchy  :

1689  to  1837. Crown  8vo.,  7s.  6d.
Period  IV. The  Growth  of  Democracy.

1S37  ^^  i88o Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Buckle. — History  of  Civilisation  in
England  and  France,  Spain  and  Scot-
land. By  Henry  Thomas  Buckle.  3
vols. Crown  8vo.,  24s.

Burke. — A  History  of  Spain,  from  the
Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of  Ferdinand
the  Catholic.  By  Ulick  Ralph  Burke,
M.A. 2  vols. 8vo.,  32s.

Chesney. — Indian  Polity  :  a  View  of  the
S\'stem  of  Administration  in  India.  By
General  Sir  George  Chesney,  K.C.B.,  M.P.
With  Map  showing  all  the  Administrative
Divisions  of  British  India. 8vo.,  21s.

Creighton. -  History of the Papacy

DURING THE REFORMATION. By  MaNDELL

Creighton,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Bishop  of  Peter-
borough. Vols.  I.  and  II.,  1378-1464,  32s.
Vols.  III.  and  IV.,  1464-1518,  24s.  Vol.  V.,
1517-1527.  8vo.,  15s.

Curzon.— Works  by  the  Hon.  George  N.

CURZON,  M.P.

Problems  of  the  Far  East  :  Japan,
CoREA,  China. 8vo.,  21s.

Persia  and  the  Persian  Question.
With  g  Maps,  96  Illustrations,  Appendices,
and  an  Index. 2  vols. Svo.,  42s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &•  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. — continued.

De  TocCLUeville.— Democracy in Amer-
ica. By  Alexis  de  Tocqueville. 2  vols.
Crown  8vo.,  i6s.
Ewald.— Works by Heinrich Ewald,
Professor  in  the  University  of  Gottengen.
The  Antiquities  OF  Israel.  8vo.,i25.6(f.
The  History  of  Israel. 8  vols.,  Svo.,
Vols.  I.  and  II.,  245. Vols.  III.  and  IV.,
21S. Vol.  v.,  185. Vol.  VI.,  i6s. Vol.
VII. 21S. Vol.  VIII., iSs.
Fitzpatrick. — Secret Service under
Pitt. By  W.  J.  Fitzpatrick,  Svo.,  7s.  6rf.
Froude. — Works by  James  A. Froude.
The History  of England,  from  the
Fall of  Wolsey to the Defeat of the
Spanish  Armada.
Popular Edition. 12 vols. Cr.  Svo.

35.  Qd.  each.
Silver  Library Edition. 12 vols. Cr.
Svo.  3s.  6d.  each.
The  Divorce  of  Catherine  of  Ara-
GON : the  Story  as  told  by  the  Imperial
Ambassadors resident at the Court of
Henry  VIII. Crown  Svo.,  6s.
The  Spanish  Story  of  the  Armada,
and  other  Essavs.

Silver  Library  Edition,  Cr.  Svo.,  35  6d.
The English in Ireland in the
Eighteenth  Century.
Cabinet  Edition. 3  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  iSs.
Silver Library  Edition. 3 vols. Cr.
Svo.,  los.  6rf.  each.
English Seamen in the Sixteenth
Century. Lectures  delivered  at  Oxford,
1893-94. Cr.  Svo.,  6s.
Short  Studies  on  Great  Subjects.
Cabinet  Edition. 4  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  24s.
Silver Library Edition. 4  vols. Cr.
Svo.,  3s.  6d.  each.
C.^ssar:  a  Sketch. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.
Gardiner. — Works by Samuel Rawson
Gardiner,  M.A.,  Hon.  LL.D.,  Edinburgh.
History  of England,  irom the  Ac-
cession of  James  I.  to  the  Outbreak  of  the
Civil  War, 1603-1642. 10  vols. Crown
8vo.,  6s.  each.
A  History  of  the  Great  Civil  War,
1642-1649. 4  vols. Crown  Svo.,  6s.  each
A History of the Commonwealth
and the Protectorate. 1649-1660.
Vol.1.  1 649- 165 1.  With  14 Maps.  Svo.,  21s.
The  Student's  History  of  England.
With  378  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  12s.

Also  ill  Three  Volumes.
Vol. I. B.C. 55 — A.D. 1509. With 173

Illustrations. Crown  Svo.  4s.
Vol. II. 1509-1689. With  96 Illustra-
tions. Crown  Svo.  4s.
Vol. III.  1689-1SS5. With  109  Illustra-
tions. Crown  Svo.  4s.

Greville. — A  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of
King  George  IV.,  King  William  IV.,  and
Queen  Victoria.  By  Charles  C.  F.
Greville,  formerly  Clerk  of  the  Council.
8  vols. Crown  Svo.,  6s.  each.

Hearn. — The  Government  of  England:
its  Structure  and  its  Development.  By  W.
Edward  Hearn. Svo.,  i6s.

Herbert. — The  Defence  of  Plevna,
1877.  Written  by  One  who  took  Part  in  it.
By  William  V.  Herbert.  With  Maps.
Svo.,  i8s.

Historic  Towns.— Edited  by  E.  A.  Free-
man, D.C.L.,  and  Rev.  William  Hunt,
M.A.  With  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  Svo.,
3s.  6d.  each.

Bristol. By  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt.

Carlisle.  By  Mandell  Creighton,
D.D.,  Bishop  of  Peterborough.

Cinque  Ports.  By  Montagu  Bur-
rows.

Colchester. By  Rev.  E.  L.  Cutts.

Exeter. By  E.  A.  Freeman.

London. By  Rev.  W.  J.  Loftie.

Oxford. By  Rev.  C.  W.  Boase.

Winchester.  By  Rev.  G.  W.  Kit-
chin,  D.D.

York. By  Rev.  James  Raine.

New  York. By  Theodore  Roosevelt.

Boston  (U.S.)  By  Henry  Cabot
Lodge.

Joyce.— A  Short  History  of  Ireland,
from  tlie  Earliest  Times  to  160S.  By
P.  W.  Joyce,  LL.D. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d,

Lang.— St.  Andrews.  By  Andrew  Lang.
With  8  Plates  and  24  Illustrations  in  the
Text  by  T.  Hodge. Svo.,  15s.  net.

Lecky. — W^orks by William Edward

Hartpole  Lecky.

History  of  England  in  the  Eigh-
teenth Century.

Library  Edition. 8  vols. Svo.,  £'j  45.
Cabinet Edition. England. 7 vols.
Crown Svo., 6s. each. Ireland. 5
vols. Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each.

History  of  European  Morals  from
Augustus  to  Charlemagne.  2  vols.
Crown  Svo.,  i6s.

History  of  the  Rise  and  Influence
OF  the  Spirit  of  Rationalism  in
Europe. 2  vols. Crown  Svo.,  i6s.

The  Empire  :  its  Value  and  its  Growth.
An  Inaugural  Address  delivered  at  the  Im-
perial Institute,  November  20, 1893,  under
the  Presidency  of  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of
Wales. Crown  Svo.  is.  6rf.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &'  COrS  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

History,  Polities,  Polity,  Politieai  Memoirs,  &e.

Macaulay. — Works  by  Lord  Macaulay.

-contiraied.

Complete  Works  of  Lord  Macaulay.
Cabinet  Edition. i6 vols. Post 8vo.,

£4  16.
Library  Edition. 8  vols. 8vo., £^ 5s.

History  of  England  from  the  Ac-
cession OF  James  the  Second.
Popular  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  5s.
Student's  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  8vo.,  12s.
PiopWs  Edition. 4  vols. Cr.  8vo.,  i6s.
Cabinet  Edition. 8  vols.  Post  8vo.,  48s.
Library  Edition. 5  vols. Svo.,  £^.

Critical  and  Historical  Essays,  with
Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,  in  i  volume.
Popular  Edition. Crown  8vo.,  2S.  6d.
Aiitl:oriscd  Edition. Crov/n  8vo.,  2S.  6d.,

or  35.  6rf.,  gilt  edges.
Silver  Library  Edition. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

Critical and Historical Essays.
Student's  Edition, i  vol. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.
People's  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  8s.
Trevelyan  Edition. 2  vols.  Cr.  Svo.,  gs.
Cabinet  Edition. 4  vols. Post  8vo.,  24s.
Library  Edition. 3  vols. 8vo.,  36s.

Essays  which  may  be  had  separately
price  6d.  each  sewed,  is.  each  cloth.
Addison  and  Walpole.
Frederick  the  Great.
Croker's  Boswell's  Johnson.
Hallam's  Constitutional  History.
Warren  Hastings. (3^.  sevv'ed,  td.  cloth).
The  Earl  of  Chatham  (Two  Essays).
Ranke  and  Gladstone.
Milton  and  Machiavelli.
Lord  Bacon.
Lord  Clive.

Lord  Byron,  and  The  Comic  JJramatists  of
the  Restoration.

Miscellaneous  Writings

People's  Edition, i  vol.  Cr.  8vo.,  4s.  6d.
Library  Editio7i. 2  vols. Svo.,  2is.

Miscellaneous Writings and

Speeches.

Popular  Edition. Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6^/.

Cabinet  Edition.  Including  Indian  Penal
Code,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome, and  Miscel-
laneous Poems. 4  vols. Post  Svo.,  24s.

Selections  from  the  Writings  of
Lord  Macaulay.  Edited,  with  Occa-
sional Notes,  by  the  Right  lion.  Sir  G.  O.
Trevelyan,  Bart. Crown  Svo. ,6s.

May. — The  Constitutional  History  of
England  since  the  Accession  of  George  III.
1760-1870.  By  Sir  Thomas  Ekskine  May,
K.C.B.  (Lord  Farnborough).  3  vols.  Crown
8vo.,  1 8s.

Merivale.— Works by the Very Rev.
Charles  Merivale,  late  Dean  of  Ely.
History  of  the  Romans  under  the
Empire.

Cabinet  Edition. 8  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  4SS.
Silver  Library  Edition. 8  vols. Crown
Svo.,  3s.  6rf.  each.
The  Fall  of  the  Roman  Republic  :
a  Short  History  of  the  Last  Century  of  the
Commonwealth. i2mo.,  7s.  6(f.
Montague, — The  Elements  of  English
Constitutional  History,  from  the  Earliest
Time  to  the  Present  Day. By  F.  C.  Mon-
tague, M.A. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Moore. — The  American Congress  : a
History of National Legislation and
Political  Events,  1774-1895. By  Joseph
West  Moore. Svo.,  15s.  net.
O'Brien. — Irish  Ideas. Reprinted  Ad-
dresses. By William O'Brien, M.P.
Cr.  Svo.  2s.  6d.
Prendergast. — Ireland from the Re-
storation to  the  Revolution,  i66o-i6go.
By  John  P.  PRENDERG.-\r,T,  Author  of  '  The
Cromwellian  Settlement  in  Ireland '.  Svo.,  5s.

Seebohin. — W'orks  by  Frederic  Seebohm.
The English Village Community
Examined  in  its  Relations  to  the  Manorial
and  Tribal  Systems,  &c. With 13 Maps
and  Plates. 8vo.,  ifis.
The  Tribal System in Vv^ales: Being
Part  of  an  Inquiry  into  the  Structure  and
Methods of  Tribal Society. With 3
Maps. Svo.,  i2s.
Sharpe.— London and the Kingdom  :
a  History  derived  mainly  from  the  Archives
at  Guildhall  in  the  custody  of  the  Corpora-
tion of  the  City  of  London. By  Reginald
R. Sharpe, D.C.L.,  Records  Clerk  in  the
Office  of  the  Town Clerk  of  the  City  ot
London. 3  vols. Svo. Vols. I. and  II.,
los.  M.  each.

Sheppard. — Memorials  of  St.  James's
Palace.  By  the  Rev.  Edgar  Sheppard,
M.A.,  Sub-Dean  of  H.M.  Chapels  Royal.
With  41  Full-page  Plates  (8  Photo-Intaglio)
and  32  Illustrntions  in  the  Text.  2  vols.
Svo.,  36s.  net.

Smith. — Carthage  and  the  Carthagin-
ians. By  R.  Bosworth  Smith,  M.A.,
Assistant  Master  in  Harrow  School.  With
Maps,  Plans,  &c. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Stephens.— A  History  of  the  French

Revolution.  By  H.  Morse  Stephens,
lialliol  College,  Oxford.  3  vols.  Svo.  Vols.
I.  and  II.  1 8s.  each.
Stubbs. — History  of  the  University  of
Dublin,  from  its  Foundation  to  the  End  of
the  Eighteentli  Century.  ]5y  J.  W.  Stubbs.
8vo.,  I2S.  Oc/.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &■  CO.'S  STANDARD  AXD (}ESEliAL \VJi<K.

History,  PoiiLics,  l-Mlity,  Political  Memoirs,  k^. — couiinued.

Sutherland. — The  History  of  Aus-
tralia ANu  New  Zealand,  from  i6o5  to
i8go.  By  Alexander  Sutherland,  M.  A.,
and  George  Sutherland,  M.A.  Crown
8vo.,  2S.  bd.

Todd. — Parliamentary  Government  in
THE  British  Colonies.  I3y  Alpheus
Todd,  LL.D. 8vo.,  305.  net.

Wakeman  and  Ilassall.— Essays  Intro-
ductory to  the  Study  of  English  Con-
stitutional History.  By  Resident  Mem-
bers of  the  University  of  Oxford.  Edited  by
Henry  Offley  Wakeman,  M.A.,  and
Arthur  Hassall,  M.A. Crown  8vo.,  60.

Walpole. — Works  by  Spencer  Walpole.

History  of  England  from  the  Con-
clusion of  the  Great  War  in  1815  to
1S58. 6  vols. Crown  Svo.,  ^15.  each.

The  Land  of  Home  Rule  :  being  an
Account  of  the  History  and  Institutions
of  the  lale  of  Man. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Wolff. — Odd Bits of History  ;  being

Short Cliapters intended to Fill  Some

Blanks. By Henry W. Wolff.  Svo.,
Ss.  M.

Wylie. — History  of  England  under
Henry  IV.  By  James  Hamilton  Wylie,
M.A.,  one  of  H.  M.  Inspectors  of  Schools.
3  vols.  Crown  Svo.  Vol.  I.,  1399-1404,
105.  6f/. Vol.  II.,  15s. Vol.  III. \lnprcp.

Biography, Personal Memoirs, &e.

Armstrong. — The  Life  and  Letters  of
Edmund  J.  Armstrong.  Edited  by  G.  F.
Armstrong. Fcp.  Svo.,  75.  6ri'.

Bacon. — The  Letters  and  Life  of
F'rancis  Bacon,  including  all  his  Oc-
casional Works.  Edited  by  James  Sped-
DiNG. 7  vols. Svo.,  _^4  4s.

Bagehot. — Biographical Studies. By

Walter  Bagehot. Crown  Svo.,  35.  6(/.
Boyd.— Works  by  A.  K. H. Boyd,  D.D.,

LL.D.,  Author  of  '  Recreations  of  a  Country

Parson,'  &c.

Twenty-five  Years  of  St.  Andrews.

1865-1890. 2 vols. Svo. Vol. I. 125.

Vol.  II.  155.
St. Andrews and Elsewhere  :
Glimpses  of  Some  Gone  and  of  Things
Left. Svo.,  155.

Carlyle. — Thomas Carlyle  : a History
of  his  Life. B}'  James  Anthony  Fkoude."
1795-1S35. ■:;  vols. Crown  Svo.,  75.
1834-1S81. 2  vols. Crown  Svo.,  75.

Erasmus.— Life  and  Letters  of  Eras-
mus :  a  Series  of  Lectures  delivered  at  Ox-
ford. By  James  Anthony  Froude.  Crown
Svo.,  65.

Fabert.— Abraham  Fabert  :  Governor
of  Sedan  and  Marshal  of  France.  His  Life
and  Times,  1599-1662.  By  George  Hooper.
With  a  Portrait. Svo.,  105.  bd.

Fox. — The  Early  History  of  Charles
James  Fox.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  O.
Trevelyan,  Bart.

Library  F^diiion. Svo.,  i8s.

Cabinet  Edition. Crown  Svo.,  65.

Hamilton.  — Life  of  Sir  William
Hamilton.  By  R.  P.  G;;aves.  3  vols.
155.  eacli. Addendum. Svo.,  bd.  sewed.

Havelock. — Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry
Havelock,  K.  C.  B.  V,y  John  Clark
Makshman. Crown  8vo.,  35. "6d.

Lnther.  —  Life  of  Luther.  By  Julius
Kostlin.  With  Illustrations  from  Authentic
Sources.  Translated  from  the  German.
Crown  Svo.,  75.  6d.

Macaulay. — The  Life  and  Letters  of
Lord  Macaulay.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir
G.  O.  Trevelyan,  Bart.

Pupnlar  Edition.
Studenfs  Edition
Cabinet  Edition.
Library  Edition.

1  \'o\. Cr.  Svo.,  25.  61/.
I  vol. Cr.  Svo.,  65.

2  vols. Post  Svo.,  I2S.

2  vols. Svo.,  3G5.

Marbot.— The  Memoirs  of  the  Baron
DE  Marbot.  Translated  from  the  French
by  Arthur  John  Butler,  M.A.  Crown
Svo.,  75.  5(/.

Seebohm.— The  Oxford  Reformers —
John  Colet,  Erasmus  and  Thomas  More  :
a  History  of  their  Fellow- Work.  By  Fred-
eric Seebohm. Svo.,  i.]5.

Shakespeare. — Outlines  of  the  Life
OF  Sh.akespeare.  By  J.  O.  Halliwell-
Phillipps.  With  numerous  Illustrations
and  Fac-similes. 2  vols. Roval  Svo.,  fi  is.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &■  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Biography, Personal Memoirs, ^q,.~ continued.

Shakespeare's True Life. By  James

Walter. With 500 Illustrations by
Gerald  E.  Moira. Imp.  Svo., 2^'?.

Stephen.  —  Essays  in  Ecclesiastical
Biography.  By  Sir  James  Stephen.
Crown  Svo.,  7s.  bd.

Turgot. — The  Life  and  Writings  of
TuRGOT,  Comptroller-General  of  France,
1774-1776.  Edited  for  English  Readers  by
W.  Walker  Stephens. Svo.,  125.  bd.

Walford. — Twelve  English  Author-
esses. By  L.  B.  Walford.  Crown  Svo.,
45.  td.

Verney. —  Memoirs  of  the  Verney
Family.  Compiled  from  the  Letters  and
Illustrated  by  the  Portraits  at  Claydon
House,  Bucks.

Vols.  I.  &  II..  During  the  Civil  War.
By  Frances  Parthenope  Verney.  With
a  Preface  by  S.  R.  Gardiner,  M.A.,
LL.D.  With  3S  Portraits,  Woodcuts
and  Fac-simile.  Royal  Svo.,  42s.
Vol.  III.,  During  the  Commonwealth.
1650-1&50.  By  Margaret  M.  Verney.
With  10  Portraits,  &c. Royal,  Svo.,  21s.

Wellington. — Life  of  the  Duke  of
\\'elli\gton.  By  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig,
M.A. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6rf.

Seas  and  Lands.
tions.  Cr.  Svo.,  7^
Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6rf.

With 71 Illustra-
bd. Cheap  Edition.

Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e.

Arnold.— Works  by  Sir  Edwin  Arnold, Brassey.— V\'orks by the late Lady
K.C.  I.E.  Brassey.

The  Last  Voyage  to  India  and  Aus-
tralia in  the  '  Sunbeam.'  With  Charts
and  Maps,  and  40  Illustrations  in  Mono-
tone, and  nearly  200  Illustrations  in  the
Text  Svo.,  21S.

A  Voyage in the  '  Sunbeam  ' ; Our
Home on the Ocean for Eleven
Months.
Library Edition. With S Maps and

Charts,  and  118  Illustrations. Svo.  215.
Cabinet Edition. W'ith Map and 66

Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  td.
Silver  Library  Edition. With  66  Illustra-
tions. Crown  Svo.,  35.  bd.
Popular  Edition. With  60  Illustrations.

4to.,  bd.  sewed,  is.  cloth.
School  Edition. With 37 Illustrations.

Fcp.,  2s.  cloth,  or  3s.  white  parchment.

Sunshine and Storm in the East.

Library  Edition. With  2 Maps  and  141

Illustrations. Svo., 215.
Cabinet  Edition. With  2 Maps  and  114

Illu.strations. Crown  Svo.,  75.  6d.
Popular  Edition. With  103  Illustrations.

4to.,  bd. sewed, is. cloth.
In  the  Trades,  the  Tropics,  and  the
'Roaring  Forties'.
Cabinet Edition. With Map and 220

Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  bd.
Popular  Edition. With  1S3  Illustrations.

^)to.,  bd.  sewed,  is.  cloth.
Three Voyages in the  '  Sunbeam  '.
Popular  Edition. With  346  Illustrations.
4to.,  2s.  bd.

Brassey. — Voyages  and  Travels  of  Lord
Brassey,  K.C.B.,  D.C.L.,  1S52-1S94.
Arranged  and  lulited  by  Captain  S.Eardley-
WiLMOT. 2  vols. Crown  Svo.,  los.

Wandering  W'ords  :  Reprinted  by  per-
mission from  Papers  published  in  the
Daily  Telegraph  and  Foreign  Journals
and  Magazines.  With  45  Illustrations
from  Drav.ings  by  Ben  Bootmp.y  and  from
Photographs. Svo.,  iSs.

AUSTRALIA  AS  IT  IS,  or  Facts  and
Features,  Sketches,  and  Incidents  of
Australia  and  Australian  Life  with  Notices
of  .New  Zealand.  By  A  Clergyman,
thirteen  years  resident  in  the  interior  of
New  South  Wales. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Baker.— Works  by  Sir  S.  W.  Baker.
liicHT  Years  in  Ceylon. W'ith  G  Illus-
trations. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  bd.
The  Rifle  and  the  Hound  in  Ceylon.
6  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6c/.

Bent. Wfirks by J. Thecjdore Bent,
F.S.A.,  F.R.Ci.S.

The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashonaland:
being  a  Record  of  Excavation  and  Ex-
ploration in  i8gi.  With  Map.  13  Plates,
and  104  Illustrations  in  the  Text.
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Tni:  Sacred  City  of  the  Ethiopians:
being  a  Record  of  Travel  and  Research  in
Abyssinia  in  1893.  With  8  Plates  and  65
Illustrations  in  the  Text. Svo.,  i8s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &'  CO:S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &c. — continued.

Troude. — Works by James A.  Froude.

Oceana  :  or  England  and  her  Colonies.
With  9  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.,  2s.
boards,  zs.  td.  cloth.

The  English  in  the  West  Indies:  or,
the  Bow  of  Ulysses.  With  g  Illustrations.
Crown  Svo.,  25.  boards,  2s.  bd.  cloth.

Hapgood. — Russian  Rambles.  By  Isabel
J.  Hapgood. Crown  Svo.  6s.

Contents: — Passports,  Police,  and  Post  Office  in
Russia — The  Nevsky  Prospek; — My  Experience  with
the  Russian  Censor — Bargaining  in  Russia — Ex-
periences— A  Russian  Summer  Resort — A  Stroll  in
Moscow  with  Count  Tolstoy — Count  Tolstoy  at  Home
— A  Russian  Holy  City — A  Journey  on  the  Volga — The
Russian  Kumys  Cure — Moscow  Memories  —  The
Nizhni-Novgorod  Fair  and  the  Volga.

Howitt. — Visits  to  Remarkable  Places.
Old  Halls,  Battle-Fields,  Scenes,  illustrative
of  Striking  Passages  in  English  History  and
Poetry.  By  William  Howitt.  With  80
Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  j^s.  6d.

Knight— Works  by  E.  F.  Knight.

The  Cruise  of  the  '  Alerte  ' :  the  nar-
rative of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on  the
Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With  2  Maps
and  23  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Where  Three  Empires  Meet:  a  Nar-
rative of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir,
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Ladak,  Gilgit,
and  the  adjoining  Countries.  With  a
Map  and  54  Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Rhodesia  of  to-day:  a  Description  of
the  Present  Condition  and  the  Prospects
of  Matabeleland  and  Mashonaland. Cr.

Svo., 25.  6(/.

Lees  and  Clutterbuck.— B.  C.  1887  :  A
Ramble  in  British  Columbia.  By  J.  A.
Lees  and  W.  J.  Clutterbuck.  With  Map
and  75  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Murdoch. — From  Edinburgh  to  the
Antarctic:  an  Artist's  Notes  and  Sketches
during  the  Dundee  Antarctic  Expedition  of
iSg2-93.  By  W.  G.  Burn-Murdoch.  With
2  Maps  and  numerous  Illustrations.  Svo.,
iSs.

Nansen. — WorksbyDr.  FridtjofNansen.

The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland.
With  numerous  Illustrations  and  a  Map.
Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

Eskimo  Life.  Translated  by  William
Archer. With  31  Illustrations. Svo.,  i6s.

Peary,— My  Arctic  Journal  :  a  Year
among  Ice-Fields  and  Eskimos.  By
Josephine  Diebitsch-Peary.  With  ig
Plates,  3  Sketch  Maps,  and  44  Illustrations
in  the  Text. Svo.,  125.

Smith. — Climbing  in  the  British  Isles-
By  W.  P.  Haskett  Smith.  With  Illustra-
tions by  Ellis  Carr.

Part  I.  England. Fcp.  Svo.,  3s.  6d.
Part  II.  Wales.  [Li  preparation.

Part  III.  Scotland.  [Ih  preparation.

Stephen. — The  Play-Ground  of  Europe"

By  Leslie  Stephen.  New  Edition,  with
.Additions  and  4  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.,
65.  net.

THREE  IN  NORWAY.  By  Two  of  Them.
With  a  Map  and  59  Illustrations.  Crown
Svo.,  2s.  boards,  25.  6d.  cloth.

Veterinary  Medicine,  &e.

Steel. — Works  by  John Henry Steel.

A  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  the
Dog. With  SS  Illustrations. Svo.,  los.bd.

A  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  the
Ox. With  119  Illustrations. Svo.,  155.

A  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  the
Sheep. With  100  Illustrations. Svo.,  12s.

Outlines  of  Equine  .\natomy  :  a
Manual  for  the  use  of  Veterinary  Students
in  the  Dissecting  Room. Cr.  Svo.,  7s.  6d.

Fitzwygram. — Horses  and  Stables.  By
Major-General  Sir  F.  Fitzwygram,  Bart.
W'ith  56  pages  of  Illustrations.  Svo.,  25.  6d.
net.

"  Stonehenge." — The  Dog  in  Health  and
Disease.  By  "  Stonehenge  ".  With  84
Wood  Engravings. Square  cr.  Svo.,  ys.  6d.

Youatt. — Works  by  William  Youatt.
The  Horse. Revised  and  Enlarged  by
W. Watson, M.R.C.V.S. Woodcuts.
Svo.,  js.  5d.

The Dog. Revised and Enlarged.
Woodcuts. Svo.,  6s.

MESSRS.  LONGMA,\S  &-  CO:S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Sport  and Pastime.
THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY.

Edited  by  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  K.G
ARCHERY. By  C. J.  Longman  and
Col.  H.  Walrond.  With  Contributions  by
Miss  Legh  and  Viscount  Dillon. With
195  Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

ATHLETICS  AND  FOOTBALL.  By
Montague  Shearman.  With  51  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6(7.

BIG  GAME  SHOOTING.  By  Clive
Phillipps-Wolley,  Sir  Samuel  W.
Baker,  W.  C.  Oswell,  F.  C.  Selous,  &c.
Vol. I. Africa  and America. With  77

Illustrations. Crown  Svo. ,  los.  6d.
Vol. II. Europe, Asia, and the  Arctic

Regions. With 73 Illustrations. Cr.

8vo.,  I  OS.  6d.

BOATING.  By  \V.  B.  Woodgate.
With  a.i  Introduction  by  the  Rev.  Ed-
MOND  Warre,  D.D.,  and  a  Chapter  on
'Rowing at  Eton,'  by  R.  Harvey  Mason.
With  49  Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

COURSING  AND  FALCONRY. By

Harding  Cox  and  the  Hon.  Gerald
Lascelles.  76  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.,
10.';.  6d.

CRICKET.  By  A.  G.  Steel  and  the
Hon.  R.  H.  Lyttelton.  With  Contri-
butions by  Andrew  Lang,  R.  A.  H.
Mitchell,  W.  G.  Grace,  and  F.  Gale.
With  64  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

CYCLING.  By  Viscount  Bury  (Earl
of  Albemarle),  K.C.M.G.,  and  G.  Lacy
HiLLiER.  8g  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.,  ios.6(f.

DRIVING.  By  the  Duke  OF  Beaufort.
With  65  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

FENCING.  BOXING,  AND  WREST-
LING. By  Walter  H.  Pollock,  F.  C.
Gkove,  C.  Prevost,  E.  B.  Mitchell,
and  Walter  Armstrong.  With  42
Illustrations. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

FISHING.  By  H.  Cholmondeley-
Pennell.  With  Contributions  by  the
Marquis  OK  Exeter,  Henry  R.  Francis,
Major  John  P.  Traiierne,  G.  Christo-
pher Davies,  R.  B.  .Marston,  &c.
Vol. I. Salmon, Trout, and Grayling.

With  I5«  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6(/.
Vol. II. Pike and other Coarse I'ish.

With  133  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

GOLF.  By  Horace  G.  Hutchinson,
the  Ht.  Hon.  A.  J.  Baliour,  M.P.,  Sir  W.
G.  Simpson,  Bart.,  Lord  Wellwood,  II.
S.  C.  Everard,  Andrew  Lang,  and  other
Writers.  With  89  Illustrations.  Crown
8vo.,  I  OS.  6'/.

assisted  by  Alfred  E.  T.  Watson.

HUNTING.  By  the  Duke  of  Beau-
fort, K.G.,  and  Mowbray  Morris.  With
Contributions  by  the  Earl  of  Suffolk
and  Berkshire,  Rev.  E.  W.  L.  Davies,
DiGBV  Collins,  and  Alfred  E.  T.
Watson.  53  Illustrations.  Cr.Svo.,  los.  6(f.

MOUNTAINEERING.  By  C.T.Dent,

Sir  F.  Pollock,  Bart.,  W.  M.  Conway,
Douglas  Freshfield,  C.  E.  Mathews,
&c. 108  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.6f/,

RACING  AND  STEEPLE  -  CHAS-
ING. By  the  Earl  of  Suffolk  and
Berkshire,  Vv'.  G.  Craven,  Arthur
Coventry,  &c.  With  5S  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

RIDING  AND  POLO.  By  Captain
Robert  Weir,  J.  Moray  Brown,  the
Duke  of  Beaufort,  K.G.,  the  Earl  of
Suffolk  and  Berkshire,  &c.  With  59
Illustrations. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

SHOOTING.  By  Lord  Walsingham
and  Sir  Ralph  Payne-Gallwey,  Bart.
With  Contributions  by  Lord  Lovat,
Lord  C.  Lennox  Kerr,  the  Hon.  G.
Lascelles,  and  A.  J.  Stuart-Wortley,
Vol.  I.  Field  and  Covert.  With  105  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.
Vol.  II.  Moor  and  Marsh.  Witli  65  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

SKATING,  CURLING,  TOBOGGAN-
ING, AND  OTHER  ICE  SPORTS.  By
J.  M.  Heathcote,  C.  G.  Tebbutt,  T.
Maxwell  Vv'itham,  the  Rev.  John  Kerr,
Ormond  Hake,  and  Colonel  Buck.  With
284  Illustrations. Crown  ovo.,  los.  6d.

SWTMMING.  By  Archibald  Sinclair
and  William  Henry.  With  iig  Illustra-
tion.-i. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

T  E  N  N  I  S.  L  A  W  N  T  E  N  N  I  S,
RACKETS  AND  FIVES.  By  J.  M.
and  C.  G.  Heathcote,  E.  O.  Pleydell-
B()U\-Ei:iE  and  A.  C.  Ainger.  With  Con-
tributions by  the  Hon.  A.  Lyttelton,
W.  C.  Marshall,  Miss  L.  Dod,  &c.
With  79  Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  los.  6d.

YACHTING.
Vol.  1.  Cruising.  Construction,  Racing
Rules,  Fitting-Out,  &c.  By  Sir  Edward
Sullivan,  Bart.,  Lord  Brassey,
K.C.B.,  C.  E.  Seth-Smith,  C.B.,  &c.
Witii  114  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6d.
Vol.  I  (.  Yacht  Clubs,  Yachting  in  America
and  the  Colonies,  Yacht  Racing,  &c.
By  R.  T.  Pkitchett,  the  Earl  of
Onslow,  G.C.M.G.,  &c.  With  195
Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  COrS  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Sport  and Pastime — contimied.
FUR  AND FEATHER SERIES.

Edited  by  A.  E.  T.  Watson.

THE  PARTRIDGE.  Natural  History
by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  Macphekson  ;  Shooting,
by  A.  J.  Stuart-Wortley  ;  Cookery,  by
George  Saintsbury.  With  ii  Illustra-
tions by  A.  Thorburn,  A.  J.  Stuart-
Wortley,  and  C.  Whymper,  and  various
Diagrams  in  the  Text. Crown  8vo.,  5s.

WILDFOWL.  By  the  Hon.  John  Scott-
Montagu,  M.P.,  etc.  Illustrated  by  A.  J.
Stuart  -  Wortley,  A.  Thorburn,  and
others.  \In  pvcpavation.

THE  HARE  AND  THE  RABBIT.  By
the  Hon.  Gerald  Lascelles,  etc.

[/;;  preparation.

THE  GROUSE.  Natural  History  by  the
Rev.  H.  A.  Macpherson  ;  Shooting,  by  A.
J.  Stuart-Wortley  ;  Cookery,  by  George
Saintsbury.  With  13  Illustrations  by  J.
Stuart-Wortley  and  A.  Thorburn,  and
various  Diagrams  in  the  Text. Crown  8vo.,

THE  PHEASANT.  Natural  History  by
the  Rev.  H.  A.  Macpherson  ;  Shooting,
by  A.  J.  Stuart-Wortley  ;  Cookery,  by
Alexander  Innes  Shand.  With  10  Illus-
trations by  A.  Thorburn,  and  various
Diagrams  in  the  Text. Crown  8vo., 5s.

Bickerdyke.— Days  of  my  Life  on
Waters  Fresh  and  Salt  ;  and  other
Papers.  By  John  Bickerdyke.  With
Photo-Etched  Frontispiece  and  S  Full-page
Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  65.

Campbell-Walker.— The  Correct  Card  :
or,  How  to  Play  at  Whist ;  a  Whist  Cate-
chism. By  Major  A.  Campbell-Walker,
F.R.G.S. Fcp.  Svo.,  IS.  6(f.

DEAD  SHOT  (THE):  or,  Sportsman's
Complete  Guide.  Being  a  Treatise  on  the  Use
of  the  Gun,  with  Rudimentary  and  Finishing
Lessons  on  the  Art  of  Shooting  Game  of  all
kinds,  also  Game  Driving,  Wild-Fowl  and
Pigeon  Shooting,  Dog  Breaking,  etc.  By
Marksman. Crown  Svo.,  105.  6<f.

Ancient and Ori-
To Play Them. By

Palkener.— Games,
ental, and How

Edward Falkener. With numerous
Photographs,  Diagrams,  &c. Svo.,  215.

Ford. — The  Theory  and  Practice  of
Archery.  By  Horace  Ford.  New
Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Re-written
by  W.  Butt,  M.A.  With  a  Preface  by  C.
J.  Longman,  M.A. Svo.,  145.

Prancis.— A  Book  on  Angling  :  or,  Trea-
tise on  the  Art  of  Fishing  in  every  Branch  ;
including  full  Illustrated  List  of  Salmon
Flies.  By  Francis  Francis.  With  Por-
trait and  Coloured  Plates. Crown  Svo.,  15s.

Gribson. — Tobogganing  on  Crooked
Runs.  By  the  Hon.  Harry  Gibson.  With
Contributions  by  F.  de  B.  Strickland  and
•  Lady-Todoganner  '.  With  S  Full-page
Illustrations  and  32  Illustrations  in  the
Text. Crown  8vo.,  65.

Hawker. — The  Diary  of  Colonel  Peter
Hawker,  Author  of  '  Instructions  to  Young
Sportsmen."  With  an  Introduction  by  Sir
Ralph  Payne-Gallv,'ey,  Bart.  2  vols.
8vo.,  325.

Lang. — Angling  Sketches.  By  Andrew
Lang. With  Illustration. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  6<f.

Longman.  —  Chess  Openings.  By
Frederick  W.  Longman.  Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.

Maskelyne.— Sharps  and  Flats:  a
Complete  Revelation  of  the  Secrets  01
Cheating  at  Games  of  Chance  and  Skill.  By
John  Nevil  Maskelyne,  of  the  Egyptian
Hall.  With  62  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.,  65.

Payne-Gallwey.— Works  by  Sir  Ralph
Payne-Gallwey,  Bart.

Letters  to  Young  Shooters  (First
Series).  On  the  Choice  and  use  of  a  Gun.
With  41  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  6d.

Letters  to  Young  Shooters.  (Second
Series).  On  the  Production,  Preservation,
and  Killing  of  Game.  With  Directions
in  Shooting  Wood-Pigeons  and  Breaking-
in  Retrievers.  With  a  Portrait  of  the
Author,  and  103  Illustrations.  Crown
Svo.,  125.  6d.

Pole.— Works  by  W.  Pole,  F.R.S.

The  Theory  of  the  Modern  Scientific
Game  of  Whist. Fcp.  Svo.,  25.  6d.

The  Evolution  of  Whist  :  a  Study  of
the  Progressive  Changes  which  the  Game
has  undergone  from  its  Origin  to  the  Pre-
sent Time. Cr.  Svo.,  6.5.

Proctor. — Works  by  Richard  A.  Proctor.
Ho\v  to  Play  Whist:  with  the  Laws
and  Etiquette  of  Whist.  Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  6d.
Home  Whist:  an  Easy  Guide  to  Cor-
rect Play. i6mo.,  is.
EiOnalds. — The  Fly-Fisher's  Entomol-
ogy. By  Alfred  Ronalds. With  coloured
Representations  of  the  Natural  and  Artificial
Insect. With  20  coloured  Plates. Svo.,  14s.

Wilcocks. — The  Sea  Fisherman  :  Com-
prising theChief  Methods  of  Hook  and  Line
Fishing  in  the  British  and  other  Seas,  and
Remarks  on  Nets,  Boats,  and  Boating.  By
J.  C.  Wilcocks. Illustrated. Cr.  Svo.,  6j.

lo MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Abbott

T.  K.  Abbott,  B.D

Mental,  Moral,  and

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,
The  Elements  of  Logic. By

i2mo.,  35.

Aristotle.— Works  by.

The  Politics  :  G.  Bekker's  Greek  Text
of  Books  I.,  III.,  IV.  (VII.),  with  an  English
Translation  by  W.  E.  Holland,  M.A.  ;
and  short  Introductory  Essays  by  A.
Lang,  M.A. Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

The  Politics  :  Introductory  Essays.
By  Andrew  Lang  (trom  Bolland  and
Lang's  '  Polities'). Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6d.

The  Ethics:  Greek  Text,  Illustrated
with  Essay  and  Notes.  By  Sir  Alexan
DER  Grant,  Bart. 2  vols. Svo.,  32s.

The  Nicomachean  Ethics:  Newly
Translated  into  English.  By  Robert
Williams. Crown  Svo.,  ys.  6d.

An  Introduction  to  Aristotle's
Ethics.  Books  I. -IV.  (Book  X.  c.  vi.-ix.
in  an  Appendix).  With  a  continuous
Analysis  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  Edw.
Moore,  D.D.,  Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d.

BaQOn. — Works  by  Francis  Bacon.

Complete  Works.  Edited  by  R.  L.
Ellis,  James  Spedding  and  D.  D.
Heath. 7  vols. Svo.,  £2  13s.  6d.

Letters  and  Life,  including  all  his
occasional  Works.  Edited  by  James
Spedding. 7  vols. Svo.,  ^"4  45.

The  Essays  :  with  Annotations.  By
Richard  Whatelv,  D.D. 8vo.,  ios.  6d.

The  Essays:  with  Introduction,  Notes,
and  Index.  By  E.  A.  Abbott,  D.D.  2
Vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,65.  The  Text  and  Index
only,  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  in
One  Volume. P'cp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Bain.— Works  by  Alex.  Bain,  LL.D.

Mental  Science. Crown  Svo.  6s.  6d.

Moral  Science. Crown  8vo.,  4s.  6d.

The  two  works  as  above  can  be  had  in one

volume,  price  los.  6d.

Senses  AND  the  Intellect. 8vo.,  15s.
Emotions  and  the  Will. 8vo.,  15s.
Logic, Deductive and Inductive.
Part  I.  45. Part  II.  6s.  td.

Practical  Essays. Crown  Svo.,  3,9.

Bray. — Works  by  Charles  Bray.

The  Philosophy  of  Necessity:  or
Law  in  Mind  as  in  Matter. Cr.  8vo„  55.

The  Education  of  the  Feelings:  a
Moral  System  for  Schools. Cr.  8vo.,2s.6(/.

Political  Philosophy.

PSYCHOLOGY,  ETC.

I  Bray. — Elements  of  Morality,  in  Easy

I  Lessons  for  Home  and  School  Teaching.

By  Mrs.  Charles  Bray. Cr.  Svo.,  is.  6d.

I
Davidson. — The Logic  of  Definition,
Explained  and  Applied. By  William L.
Davidson,  M.A. Crown  Svo.,  ts.

G-reen. — The  Works  of  Thomas  Hill
Green. Edited  by  R.  L.  Nettleship.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Philosophical  Works.  Svo.,
i6s.  each.

Vol.  III.  Miscellanies.  With  Index  to  the
three  Volumes,  and  Memoir. Svo.,  21s.

Lectures  on  the  Principles  of
Political  Obligation.  With  Preface
by  Bernard  Bosaxquet. Svo.,  5s.

Hodgson. — Works  by  Shadworth  H.
Hodgson.

Time  and  Space  :  a  Metaphysical  Essay.
Svo.,  I 6s.

The  Theory  of  Practice  :  an  Ethical
Inquiry. 2  vols. Svo.,  24s.

The  Philosophy  of  Reflection.  2
vols. Svo.,  21s.

Hume. — The  Philosophical  Works  of
David  Hume.  Edited  by  T.  H.  Green
and  T.  H.  Grose.  4  vols.  Svo.,  56s.  Or
separately.  Essays.  2  vols.  2Ss.  Treatise
of  Human  Nature. 2  vols. 2Ss.

Justinian. — The  Institutes  of  Justin-
ian :  Latin  Text,  chiefly  that  of  Huschke,
with  English  Introduction,  Translation,
Notes,  and  Summary.  By  Thomas  C.
Sandars,  M.A. 8vo.,  iSs.

Kant. — Works  by  Immanuel  Kant.

Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  and
Other  Works  on  the  Theory  of
Ethics.  Translated  by  T.  K.  Abbott,
B.D. With  Memoir. Svo.,  12s.  td.

Introduction  TO  Logic,  and  HxsEssay

ON  the  Mistaken  Subtilty  of  the
Four  Figures.  Translated  by  T.  K.
Abbott. Svo.,  6s.

Killick.— Handbook  to  Mill's  System
oi-  Logic.  V>y  Rev.  A.  H.  Killick,  M.A.
Crown  Svo.,  },s.  6d.

MESSRS.  LONGMAXS  &-  CO:S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Mental,  Moral  and Political Philosophy — continued.

Ladd. — Works  by  Geo.  Trumbull  Ladd.

Elements  of  Physiological  Psy-
chology. 8V0.,  215.

Outlines  of  Physiological  Psychol-
ogy. A  Text-book  of  Mental  Science  for
Academies  and  Colleges. 8vo.,  12s.

Psychology,  Descriptive  and  Ex-
planatory :  a  Treatise  of  the  Phenomena,
Laws,  and  Development  of  Human  Mental
Life. 8vo.,  2 IS.

Primer  OF  Psychology.  Cr.  Svo.,  5.s.6i7.

Philosophy  of  Mind  :  an  Essay  on
the  Metaphysics  of  Psycholog)-.  Svo.,  165.

Lewes. — The  History  of  Philosophy,
from  T|jales  to  Comte.  By  George  Henry
Lewes. 2  vols. Svo.,  32s.

Max  Miiller.— Works  by  F.  Max  Muller.

The  Science  of  Thought. Svo.,  21s.
Three Introductory Lectures on
the  Science  of  Thought. 8vo.,  25.  6rf.

Mill. — Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of
the  Human  Mind.  By  James  Mill.
2  vols. Svo.,  2Ss.

Mill. — Works  by  John  Stuart  Mill.

A  System  of  Logic. Crown  8vo.,  ^s.  6d.

On  Liberty. Crown  Svo.,  is.  ^d.

On  Representative  Government.
Crown  Svo.,  25.

Utilitarianism. Svo.,  2s.  6d.

Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamil-
ton's Philosophy. Svo.,  i6s.

Nature,  the  Utility  of  Religion,
and  Theism. Three  Essays. Svo.,  5s.

Stock. — Deductive  Logic.  By  St.
George  Stock. Fcp.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

Sully. — Works  by  James  Sully.

The  Human  Mind:  a  Text-book  of
Psychology. 2  vols. Svo.,  21s.

Outlines  of  Psychology. Svo.,  gs.

The  Teacher's  Handbook  of  Psy-
chology. Crown  Svo.,  55.

Swinburne.— Picture  Logic:  an  Attempt
to  Popularise  the  Science  of  Reasoning.
By  Alfred  James  Swinburne,  M.A.
With  23  Woodcuts. Post  Svo.,  5s.

Thomson. — Outlines  of  the  Necessary
Laws  of  Thought  :  a  Treatise  on  Pure  and
Applied  Logic.  By  William  Thomson
D.D.,  formerly  Lord  Archbishop  of  York
Post  Svo.,  6s.

Whately.— Works  by  R.  Whately,  D.D.

Bacon's  Essays.  With  Annotation.
By  R.  Whately. Svo.  los.  6d.

Elements  of  Logic. Cr.  Svo.,  4s.  6d.

Elements  of  Rhetoric.  Cr.  Svo., 4s.  6d^

Lessonson  Reasoning.  Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.

Zeller. — Works  by  Dr.  Edward  Zeller,
Professor  in  the  University  of  Berlin.

The  Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Sceptics.
Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.  J.  Reichel,
M.A. Crown  Svo.,  155.

Outlines  of  the  History  of  Greek
Philosophy.  Translated  by  Sarah  F.
Alleyne  and  Evelyn  Abbott.  Crown
Svo.,  los.  6d.

Plato  and  the  Older  Academy.
Translated  by  Sakah  F.  Alleyne  and
Alfred  Goodwin,  B.A.  Crown  8vo.,
i8s.

Socrates  and  the  Socratic  Schools.
Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.  J.  Reichel,
M.A. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6(7.

MANUALS OF  CATHOLIC  PHILOSOPHY

(StonyhuYst  Scries).

A  Manual  of  Political  Economy. By
C.  S.  Devas,  M.A. Crown  Svo.,  65.  bd.

First  Principles  of  Knowledge. By
John  Rickaby,  S.J. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

General  Metaphysics. By  John  Rick-
aby, S.J. Crown  Svo.,  5s.
Logic. By Richard F. Clarke, S.J.
Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Moral  Philosophy  (Ethics  and  Natural
Law.  By  Joseph  Rickaby,  S.J.  Crown
Svo.,  5s.

Natural  Theology.  By  Bernard
Boedder,  S.J. Crown  Svo.,  6s.  M.

Psychology.  By  Michael  Maher,  S.J.
Crown  Svo.,  6s.  hd.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  <&>  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History  and  Science  of  Language,  &c.

Davidson. —  Leading  and  Important
English  Words  :  Explained  and  Exem-
plified. By  William  L.  Davidson,  M.A.
Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Farrar.  —  Language  and  Languages:
By  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  F.R.S.  Crown
Svc,  6s.

Max  Miiller.— Works  by  F.  Max  MIjller.

The  Science  of  Language,  Founded  on
Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution
in  1S61  and  1863. 2  vols. Crown  8vo.,  215.

Biographies  of  Words,  and  the  Home
OF  THE  Aryas. Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

Max  Miiller. — Works  by  F.  Max  Muller

— continued.

Three  Lectures  on  the  Science  of
Lamguagk,  and  its  Place  in  General
Education,  delivered  at  Oxford,  i88g.
Crown  Svo.,  3s.

Roget. — Thesaurus  of  English  Words
and  Phrases.  Classified  and  Arranged  so
as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression  of  Ideas
and  assist  in  Literary  Composition.  By
Peter  Mark  Roget,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Re-
composed  throughout,  enlarged  and  im-
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son.
John  Lewis  Roget. Crown  8-^).  los.  6(f.

Politieal  Economy  and  Economics.

Ashley.— English
and Theory. By
Crown  8vo.,  Part  I.,

Economic  History
W.  J.  Ashley,  M.A.
5s. Part  II.  los.  6rf.

Bagehot. — Economic  Studies.  By  Wal-
Ti  R  Bagehot. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  td.

Bamett — Practicable  Socialism  :  Es-
says on  Social  Reform.  By  the  Rev.  S.  A.
and  Mrs.  Barnett. Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Brassey — Papers  and  Addresses  on
Work  and  Wages.  By  Lord  Brassey.
Edited  by  J.  Potter,  and  with  Introduction
by  George  Howell,  M.P. Crown  8vo.,  5s.

Devas. — A  Manual  of  Political  Econ-
omy. By  C.  S.  Devas,  M.A,  Crown  8vo.,
6s.  6f/. (Manuals  of  Catholic  Philosophy .)

DoweU. — A  History  of  Taxation  and
Taxes  in  England,  from  the  Earliest  Times
to  the  Year  1885.  By  Stephen  Dowkll,
(4  vols.  8vo.)  Vols.  I.  and  II.  The  History
of  Taxation,  215.  Vols.  III.  and  IV.  The
History  of  Taxes,  215.

Macleod. Works by Henry Dunning
Maclkoi),  M.A.
Hi.vietamsm 8vo.,  5s.  net.
The Elements  oi- Banking. Crown

Svo. ,  3s.  bd.
The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking.

Vol.  I. Hvo.,  12s. Vol.  II, 14s.
Thi;  Theory  of  Credit. 8vo. Vol.  I.

los.  net.  Vol.  II.,  Part  I.,  los.  net.  Vol.  II.

Part  II..  ir,s.  (.d.

MiU, — Political  Economy.  By  John
Stuart  Mill.

Popular  Edition. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Library  Edition. 2  vols. Svo.,  30s.

Symes. — Political  Economy  :  a  Short
Text-book  of  Political  Economy.  With
Problems  for  Solution,  and  Hints  for  Sup-
plementary Reading.  By  Professor  J.  E.
SYMES,M..\.,of  University  College,  Notting-
ham. Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6d.

Toynbee.— Lectures  on  the  Industrial
Revolution  of  the  i8th  Century  in
England.  By  Arnold  Toynbee.  With
a  Memoir  of  the  Author  by  B.  Jowett.
Svo.,  lOS.  td.

Webb.  —  The  History  of  Trade
Unionism.  By  Sidney  and  Beatrice
Webb.  With  Map  and  full  Bibliography  of
the  Subject. Svo.,  i8s.

Wilson.  —  Works  by  A.  J.  Wilson.
Chiefly  reprinted from The  Investors' Re-

vieiv.

Practical  Hints  to  Small  Investors.
Crown  Svo.,  is.

Plain  Advice  aisout  Life  INSU1^'ANCE.
Crown  Svo.,  is.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

13

Evolution, Anthropology,  &c.

BabingtOn.-FALLACIESOFRACETHEORIES
AS  Ai'PLIED  TO  NaTIOXAL  CHARACTERISTICS.

Essays  by  William Dalton Babington,
M.A. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Clodd. — Works  by  Edward  Clodd.

The  Story  of  Creation:  a  Plain  Ac-
count of  Evolution.  With  77  Illustrations.
Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

A  Primer  of  Evolution  :  being  a
Popular  Abridged  Edition  of  '  The  Story
of  Creation '.  With  Illustrations.  Fcp.
8vo.,  IS.  6d.

Lang. — Custom  and  Myth  :  Studies  of
Early  Usage  and  Belief.  By  Andrew
Lang,  M.A.  With  15  Illustrations.  Crown
Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Lubbock. — The  Origin  of  CivilisatioXj
and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man.  By
Sir  J.  Lubbock,  Bart.,  M.P.  With  5  Plates
and  20  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 8vo.,  i8s.

Romanes.  —  Works by George John

Romanes,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.

Darwtn,  and  After  Darwin: an E.x-

position  of  the  Darwinian  Theory,  and  a

Discussion  on  Post-Darwinian  Questions.

Part  I.  The  Darwinian  Theory. With

Portrait  of  Darwin  and  125  Illustrations.

Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Part II. Post-Darwinian Questions:

Heredity  and  Utility.  [/«  the  Press.

An Examination of Weismannism.

Crown  Svo.,  6s.
Mind,  Motion,  and  Monism. Crown
Svo.,  4s.  6d.

Classicai  Literature  and  Translations,  &g.

Abbott. — Hellenica.  A  Collection  of
Essays  on  Greek  Poetry,  Philosophy,  His-
tor}',  and  Religion.  Edited  by  Evelyn
Abbott,  M.A.,  LL.D. Svo.,  i6s.

^schylus. — Eumenides  of  /Eschylus.
Witli  Metrical  Englisli  Translation.  By  J.
F.  Davies. Svo.,  7s.

Aristophanes.  —  The  Acharnians  of
Aristophanes,  translated  into  English
Verse. By  R.  Y.  Tyrrell. Crown  Svo.,  is.

Becker. — Works  by  Professor  Becker.

Gallus  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the  Time
of  Augustus.  Illustrated.  Post  8vo.,
3s.  6d.

Charicles  :  or,  Illustrations  of  the
Private  Life  of  the  Ancient  Greeks.
Illustrated. Post  Svo.,  3s.  6*/.

Cicero.— Cicero's  Correspondence.  By
R.  Y.  Tyrrell.  Vols.  I.,  IL,  III.,  Svo.,
each  I2S. Vol.  IV.,  15s.

Farneli. — Greek  Lyric  Poetry:  a  Com-
plete Collection  of  the  Surviving  Passages
from  the  Greek  Song-Writting.  Arranged
with  Prefator}' Articles,  Introductory  Matter
and  Commentary.  By  George  S.  Farnell,
M.A. With  5  Plates. 8vo.,  i6s.

Lang. — Homer and the Eric.
Andrew  Lang. Crown  Svo.,  gs.  net.

By

Mackail. — Select  Epigrams  from  the
Greek  Anthology.  By  J.  W.  Mackail,
Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Edited
with  a  Revised  Text,  Introduction,  Trans-
lation, and  Notes. Svo.,  i6s.

E.ich. — A  Dictionary  of  Roman  and
Greek  Antiquities.  By  A.  Rich,  B.A.
With  2000  Woodcuts. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  6d.

Sophocles. — Translated  into  English
Verse.  By  Robert  Whitelaw,  M.A.,
Assistant  Master  in  Rugby  School ;  late
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.,  8s.  6d.

Tyrrell.— Translations  into  Greek  and
Latin  Verse.  Edited  by  R.  Y.  Tyrrell.
Svo.,  6s.

Virgil. — The  .^neid  of  Virgil.  Trans-
lated into  English  Verse  by  John  Coning-
TON. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

The  Poems  of  Virgil.  Translated
into  English  Prose  by  John  Conington.
Crown  Svo.,  6s.

The  .^neid  of  Virgil,  frecl}-  translated
into  English  Blank  Verse.  By  W.  J.
Thornhill. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  6>d.

The  iENEiD  of  Virgil.  Books  I.  to
VI.  Translated  into  English  Verse  by
James  Rhoades. Crown  Svo.,  55.

Wilkins.-

POEMS.

-The  Growth  of  the  Homeric
By  G.  WiLKiNS. 8vo.,  6s.

14 MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Poetry  and  the  Drama.

With  Frontis-
. Fcp.  8vo.,  6.?.
With  Portrait
,  35.  6./.
AND Night
With  2  Designs  by
Fcp.  8vo.,  6s. large

Acworth, — Ballads  of  the  Marathas.
Rendered  into  English  Verse  from  the
Marathi  Originals.  By  Harry  Arbuth-
NOT  Acworth. 8vo.,  55.

AUingham.— Works  by  William  At.ling-
ham.
Irish  Songs  and  Poems.

of  the  Waterfall  of  Asaroe
Laurence  Bloomfield.

of  the  Author. Fcp.  8vo.
Flower Pieces; Day

Songs  ; Ballads.

d.  g.  rossetti.

paper  edition,  12s.
Life  and  Phantasy  :  with  Frontispiece

by  Sir  J.  E.  Millais,  Bart.,  and  Design

by Arthur Hughes. Fcp. Svo., 6s.;

large  paper  edition,  12s.
Thought and Word, and Ashby

Manor  : a  Play. Fcp. 8vo.,  6s. ;  large

paper  edition,  12s.
Blackberries. Imperial  i6mo.,  6s.
Sets  of  the  above  6  vols,  may  be  had  in  uni-
form Half-parclnncnt  binding,  price  30s.

Armstrong-— Works by G. F. Savage-
Armstrong.
Poems  : Lyrical  and  Dramatic. Fcp.

Svo.,  6s.
King Saul. (The  Tragedy  of  Israel,

Part  I.) Fcp.  8vo.,  5s.
King  David. (The  Tragedv  of  Israel,

Part  n.) Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.
King  Solomon. (The  Tragedy  of  Israel,

Part  HI.) Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.
Ugone  :  a  Tragedy. Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.
A Garland from Greece  : Poems.

Fcp.  8vo.,  7s.  6J.
Stories  of  Wicklow  : Poems. Fcp.

8vo.,  7s.  6d.
Mephistopheles in Broadcloth:

a  Satire. Fcp.  8vo.,  4s.
One  in  the  Infinite  :  a  Poem. Crown

bvc,  7s.  td.

Armstrong.— The  Poetical  Works  of
Edmcnu  J.  Armstrong. Fcp.  8vo.,  5s.

Arnold.— Works  by  Sir  Edwin  Arnold,
K.C.I.E.,  Author  of  '  The  Light  of  Asia,'  &c.
The Light of the  World: or the

Great  Consummation.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  td.  net.
Potiphar's Wife,  and other Poems.

Crown  8vo.,  5s.  net.
Ai);;uma:  orthe  Japanese  Wife. ;\  Play.

Crown  8vo.,  6s.  ()d.  net.
The  Ti;nth Muse,  and  other  I'ocms.

Crown  8vo.,  5$.  net.

Beesly.— Ballads and other Verse.
By  A.  H.  Bekslv. Fcp.  8vo.,  5s.

Bell. — Chamber  Comedies  :  a  Collection
of  Plays  and  Monologues  for  the  Drawing
Room. By  Mrs.  Hugh  Bell. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Coclirane. — The  Kestrel's  Nest,  and
other  Verses.  By  Alfred  Cochrane.
Fcp.  8vo.,  3s.  5(7.

Groethe.

Faust,  Part  I.,  the  German  Text,  with
Introduction  and  Notes.  By  Albert  M.
Selss,  Ph.D.,  M.A. Crown  8vo.,  5s.

Faust.  Translated,  with  Notes.  By  T.  E.
Webb.  Svo.,  12s.  6d.

Ingelow. — Works  by  Jean  Ingelow.

Poetical  Works.  2  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,i2s.

Lyrical  and  Other  Poems. Selected

from the Writings of Jean Ingelow.

Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  M.  cloth  plain,  3s.  cl.  gilt.

Kendall. — Songs  from  Dreamland.  By
May  Kendall. Fcp.  Svo.,  5s.  net.

Lang. — Works  by  Andrew  Lang.

Ban  and Arriere Ban  : a Rally  of

Fugitive  Rhymes. Fcp.  8vo.,  5s.  net.
Grass  of  Parnassus. Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6rf.

net.
Ballads  of  Books. Edited  by  Andrew

Lang. Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.
The  Blue  Poetry  Book. Edited  by

Andrew  Lang. With  12  Plates  and  88

Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford

and  Lancelot  Speed. Crown  8vo.,  6s.
Special Edition, printed on India paper.

With Notes, but without Illustrations.

Crown  Svo.,  7s. 6d.

Lecky,— Poems.  By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky.
Fcp.  Svo.,  5s.

Lytton.— Works  by  The  Earl  of  Lytton
(Owen  Meredith).
Marah. Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.  <bd.
King  Poppy:  a  Fantasia. With  i  Plate

and  Design  on  Title-Page  by  Ed.  Burne-

JoNES,  A.R.A. Crown  8vo.,  los.  6</.
The  Wanderer. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6tf.
LuciLE. Crown  Svo.,  los.  (yd.
SicLECTED  Poems. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d.
Macaulay.— Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,  ike.
By  Lord  Macaulay.

Illustrated  by  G.  Scharf.  Fcp.  4to.,  los.  6d.
Bijou Edition.

i8mo.,  25.  td.  gilt  top.
'. Popular Edition.

I'cp.  4to.,  6(/.  sewed,  is.  cloth.
Illustrated by  J. R. Weguelin. Crown

Svo  ,  3s.  bd.
Annotated  Edition. Fcp.  Svo., is.  sewed,

IS.  bd.  cloth.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO:S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS. 1  =

Poetry  and the Drama — continued.

Murray.— (Robert  F.),  Author  of  '  The
Scarlet  Gown  '.  His  Poems,  with  a  Memoir
by  Andrew  Lang. Fcp.  8vo.,  5s.  net.

Nesbit. — Lays  and  Legends.  By  E.
Ne-sbit  (Mrs.  Hubert  Bland).  First
Series.  Crown  Svo.,  3s.  M.  Second  Series.
With  Portrait. Crown  Svo  ,  5s.

Peek.— Works  by  Hedley  Peek  (Frank
Leyton)

Skeleton  Leaves  :  Poems.  With  a
Dedicatory  Poem  to  the  late  Hon.  Roden
Noeh Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.  net.

The  Shadows  of  the  Lake,  and  other
Poems. Fcp.  Svo.,  25.  6d.  net.

Piatt. — Works  by  Sarah  Piatt.

An  Enchanted  Castle,  and  other
Poems  :  Pictures,  Portraits,  and  People  in
Ireland. Crown  Svo.  3s.  6d.

Poems  :  With  Portrait  of  the  Author.
2  vols. Crown  Svo.,  los.

Piatt. — Works by John James Pla.tt.

Idyls  and  Lyrics  of  the  Ohio
Valley. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Little  New  World  Idyls.  Cr.  Svo.  5s.

Rhoades. — Teresa  and  other  Poems.
By  James  Rhoades. Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

Riley. — Works  by  James  Whitco.mb
Riley.

Old  Fashioned  Roses:  Poems. i2nio.,

Poems:  Here  at  Home. Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.  net.

Shakespeare.  —  Bowdler's  Fa  m  i  l  y
Sh.'vkespeare.  With  36  Woodcuts,  i  vol.
Svo.,  14s. Or  in  6  vols. Fcp.  Svo.,  21s.

The  Shakespeare  Birthday  Book.  By
Mary  F.  Dunbar.  32mo.,  is.  6<f.  Draw-
ing  Room Edition, with Photographs.

Fcp. Svo., I05. 6d.

Sturgis-— A  Book  of  Song.  By  Julian
Sturgis. i6mo.  5s.

Works of  Fiction, Humour, &e.

Anstey. — Works  by  F.  Anstey,  Author  of
'  Vice  Versa  '.

The  Black  Poodle,  and  other  Stories.
Crown  Svo.,  2s.  boards,  2s.  6d.  cloth.

Voces  Populi.  Reprinted  from  '  Punch'.
First  Series.  With  20  Illustrations  by
J.  Bernard  Partridge.  Crown  Svo.,
3s.  6d.

The  Tr.welling  Companions.  Re-
printed from  '  Punch  ".  With  25  lUust.
by  J.  Bernaud  Partridge. Post  410.,  5s.

The  Man  from  Blankley's  :  a  Story
in  Scenes,  and  other  Sketches.  With  24
Illustrations  by  J.  Bernard  Partridge.
Fcp.  4to.,  65.

Astor.— A  Journey  in  Other  Worlds.
a  Romance  of  the  Future.  By  John  Jacob
Astor. With  10  Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  6s.

Baker. — By  the  Western  Sea.  By
James  Baker,  Authorof  John  Westacott'.
Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

Beaconsfield. — Works  by  the  Earl  of
Beaconsfield.

Novels  and  Tales. Cheap  Edition.
Complete  in  11  vols. Cr.  Svo. .  is.  6^/.  each.
Vivian  Grey.  I  Henrietta  Temple.

The  Young  Duke,  &c.  \  Venetia. Tancred.
Alroy,  Ixion,  &c.  I  Ccr.ingsby. Sybil.

ContariniFleming.&c.  |  Lothair. Endymion.
Novels  and  Tales. The  Hughenden
Edition. With 2 Portraits  and  11  Vig-
nettes. II  vols. Crown  Svo.,  42s.

Boulton. — Josephine  Crewe.  By  Helen
M.  Boulton.

Clegg. — David's  Loom  :  a  Story  of  Roch-
dale life  in  the  early  3'ears  of  the  Nineteenth
Century.  By  John  Traffokd  Clegg.  Cr.
Svo.,  2s.  6d.

Deland. — Works  by  Margaret  Deland,
Author  of  'John  Ward'.
The  Story  of  a  Child. Cr.  Svo.,  5s.
Mr. Tommy Dove, and other Stories.

Crown  Svo.  6s.
Philip  and  his  Wife. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Dougall. — Works  by  L.  Dougall.
Beggars  All Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.
What  Necessity  Knows. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

i6 MESSRS. LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

&C .  — continued.

Works  of  Fiction, Humour,

Haggard. — Works  by  H.  Rider  Haggard.

Doyle.— Works  bj'  A.  Conan  Doyle.

MiCAH  Clarke  :  A  Tale  of  Monmouth's
Rebellion.  With  Frontispiece  and  Vig-
nette. Cr.  8vo.,  3S.  6(/.

The  Captain  of  the  Polestar,  and
other  Tales. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

The  Refugees:  A  Tale  of  Two  Conti-
nents. With  Illustrations.  Cr.Svo.,  3s.  6(f.
Farrar. — Darkness  and  Dawn  :  or,
Scenes  in  the  Days  of  Nero.  An  Historic
Tale.  By  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  Dean  of
Canterbury. Cr.  8vo.,  7s.  5(f.

Fowler.— The Young Pretenders.

A  Story  of  Child Life. By Edith  H.

Fowler. With 12 Illustrations by

Philip  Burxe-Jones. Crown  8vo.,  6s.
Froude.— The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy  :

an  Irish  Romance  of  the Last  Century.

By  J.  A.  Froude. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Garari.— A^^  Arranged  Marriage. By

Dorothea  Gerard. Crown  Svo. ,  6s.
Gilkes.— The  Thing  That  Hath  Been  :

or, a Young  Man's Mistakes. By  A.  H.

Gilkes,  M.A.,  Master  of  Dulwich  College.

Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Hagga,rd. —Works  by  H.  Rider  Haggard.

Joan  Haste.  With  Illustrations  by  T.
S.  Wilson. Cr.  Svo.,  6s.  {Nearly  ready.

The  People  of  the  Mist.  With  16
Illustrations  by  .-Arthur  Layard.  Crown
8vo.,  65.

She.  With  32  Illustrations  by  M.
Greiffenhagen  and  C.  H.  M.  Kerr.
Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  t)d.

Allan  Ouatermain.  With  31  Illus-
trations" by  C.  H.  M.  Keki;.  Cr.  8vo.,
3s.  td.

Maiwa's  Revenge  :  or,  The  War  of  the
Little  Hand.  Cr.  8vo.,  is.  boards,  is.  bd.
cloth.

Colonel  Quaritch,  V.C.  Cr.  Svo.
3s.  bd.

Cleopatra.  With  29  Full-page  Illus-
trations by  M.  Greiffenhagen  and  R.
Caton  Woodville.  Crown  8vo.,  3s.
bd.

Beatrice. Cr.  8vo.,  3.S.  fx/.

Ekic  Bkighteves.  With  17  Plates
and  34  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by
Lancelot  Speed. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Naua  the  Lily.  With  23  Illustra-
tions by  C.  H.  M.  Kerk. Cr.  8vo.,  35.  bd.

Montezuma's  Daughter.  With  24
Illustrations  by  M.  Cxkiiienhagkn.
Crown  Svn. ,  6s.

.Allan's  Wifi:.  With  34  Illustrations
bv  M.  Gkeii-kenmagen  and  C.  \\.  M.
Kerr. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

-continut

The  Witch's  Head.  With  16  Illustra-
tions. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Mr.  Meeson's  Will.  With  16  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Dawn.  With  16  Illustrations.  Crown
Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Haggard  and  Lang.— The  World's  De-
sire. By  H.  Rider  Haggard  and
Andrew  Lang.  With  27  Illustrations  by
M.  Greiffenhagen.  Cr.  Svo.  3s.  bd.
Harte. — In  the  Carquinez  Wocds  and
other  stories.  By  Bret  Harte.  Cr.
Svo.,  3s.  bd.
Hornung. — The  Unbidden  Guest. By

E.  \V.  Hornung. Crown  8vo.,  35.  iid.
Lemon.— Matthew Furth. By Ida

Lemon. Crown  Svo.,  6s.
Lyall. — Works  by  Edna  Lyall,  Author
of '  Donovan,'  &c.

The  Autobiography  of  a  Slander.
Fcp.  Svo.,  IS.  sewed.

Presentation  Edition. With 20  Illustra-
tions by Lancelot Speed. Crown
Svo.,  2s.  6'/.  net.
Doreen. The Story of a Singer.
Crown  Svo.,  6s.
Melville.— Works  by  G.  J.  Whyte Mel-
ville.
The  Gladiators.

Holmby  House.
Kate  Coventry.
Digby  Grand.
General  Bounce.

The  Interpreter.
Good  for  Nothing.
The  Queen's  Maries.
Cr.  Svo.,  IS.  bd.  each.

Olipliant.— Works  by  Mrs.  Oliphant.
iViADAM. Cr.  Svo.,  IS.  bd.
In  Trust. Cr.  Svo.,  is.  bd.

Prince. — The Story of Christine
Rochefort. By  Helen  Choate  Prince.
Crown  Svo.,  6s.
Payn.— Works  by  James  P.vyn.

The  Luck  OF  the  Darrells. Cr.  Svo.,

is.  5d.
Thicker  than  Water. Cr.  Svo.,  is.
bd.
Phillipps-Wolley.— Snap:  a  Legend  of  the
Lone  .Mountain. ByC.  Phillii'I's-Wol-
LEV. Witii 13 Illustrations by H. G.
Willink. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  bd.
Ehoscomyl.— The  Jewel  of  Yns  Galon:
being  a  hitherto  unprinted Chapter  in  the
Histc;ry of  the Sea Rovers. By Owen
RiioscoMYL. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.
Robertson.  —  Nuggets  in the Devil's
Punch  Bowl,  and  other  Australian  Tales.
Bv  Andrew  Robertson. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  GO'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 17

Works  of  Fiction, Humour, &e. — continued.

Sewell.— Works

Sewell.

by Elizabeth M.

A  Glimpse  of  the  World. Amy  Herbert.
Laneton  Parsonaj^e.  Cleve  Hall.

Margaret  Percival.  Gertrude.

Katharine  Ashton.  Home  Life.

The  Earl's  Daughter.  After  Life.

The  Experience  of  Life. Ursula. Ivors.
Cr.  8vo.,  IS.  bd.  each  cloth  plain, is.  6d.
each  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.

Stevenson.— Works  by  Robert  Louis
Sten'enson.

Strange  Case  of  Dr.  Jekyll  and  Mr.
Hyde.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed,  is.  6d.
cloth.

The  Dynamiter. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

Stevenson  and  Osbourne.— The  Wrong
Box.  By  Robert  Louis  Stevenson  and
Lloyd  Osbourne. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

Suttner. — Lay  Down  Your  Arms  (Die
Wnjf'i'ii  Nicder):  The  Autobiography  of
Martha  Tilling.  By  Bertha  von  Sutt-
ner. Translated  by  T.  Holmes.  Cr.
8vo.,  IS.  5d.

Trollope.— Works by Anthony Trol-

LOPE.

The  Warden. Cr.  8vo.,  is.  bd.
Barchester  Towers. Cr.  8vo.,  is.  bd.

True  (A)  Relation  of  the  Travels
and  Perilous  Adventures  of  Mathew
Dudgeon,  Gentleman:  Wherein  is  truly
set  down  the  Manner  of  his  Taking,  the
Long  Time  of  his  Slavery  in  Algiers,  and
Means  of  his  Delivery.  Written  by  Himself,
and  now  for  the  first  time  printed.  Cr.  8vo.,5s.

Walford.— Works by L. B. Walford.
Mr.  Smith:  a  Part  of  his  Life. Crown

8vo.,  2.S.  6d.
The  Baby's  Grandmother. Cr.  8vo.,
2s.  6d.

Cousins. Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.
Troublesome Daughters. Cr.  8vo.,

2s.  6d.
Pauline. Crown  8vo.,  zs.  6d.
Dick  Netherby. Crown  8vo.,  2S.  6d.
The  History  of  a  Week. Cr.  8vo.,

2s.  6d.

A  Stiff-necked  Generation.  Cr.  8vo.,

2S.  bd.
Nan,  and  other  Stories. Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  bd.
The  Mischief  of  Monica. Cr.  8vo.,

2s.  bd.
The  One Good  Guest. Crown  8vo.,

2s.  bd.
'  Ploughed,' and  other  Stories. Crown

8vo.,  6s.
The  Matchmaker. Cr.  8vo..  6s.

West. — W^oRKs  BY  B.  B.  West.

Half-Hours  with  the  Millionaires  :
Showing  how  much  harder  it  is  to  spend
a  million  than  to  make  it. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Sir  Simon  Vanderpetter,  and  Mind-
ing his  Ancestors  :  Two  Reformations.
Crown  8vo.,  5s.

Weyman.— Works  by  Stanley  Weyman.

The  House  of  the  Wolf. Cr.  8vo.,

3s.  bd.
A  Gentleman  of  France. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Popular  Science  (Natural  History,  &e.).

Butler. — Our  Household  Insects.  An
Account  of  the  Insect-Pests  found  in
Dwelling-Houses.  By  Edward  A.  Butler,
B.A.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.).  With  113  Illustra-
tions. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Furneaux.

F.R.G.S.

-Works bv  W. Furneaux,

The  Outdoor  World  ;  or  The  Young
Collector's  Handbook.  Witii  18  Plates,
16  of  which  are  coloured,  and  549  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text. Crown  Svo.,  js.  bd.

Butterflies  and  Moths  (British).
With  12  coloured  Plates  and  241  Illus-
trations in  the  Text. los.  bd.  net.

Graham.— Country  Pastimes  for  Boys.
By  P.  Anderson  Graham.  With  numerous
Illustrations  from  Drawings  and  Photo-
graphs. Crown  Svo.  6s.

Eartwig.— Works  by  Dr.  George  Hart-

WIC.

The Sea and its Living  Wonders.

With  12  Plates  and  303  Woodcuts, bvo.,

7s.  net.
The  Tropical  World. With  8  Plates

and  172  Woodcuts. Svo.,  7s.  net.
The  Polar  World. With  3  Maps,  8

Plates  and  85  Woodcuts. Svo.,  7s.  net.
The  Subterranean  World. With  3

Maps  and  So  Woodcuts. 8vo.,  7s.  net.

i8 MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Popular Science (Natural  History,  &c.) — continued.

Hartwig. — Works  by  Dr.  George  Hakt-

wiG — continued.

The  Aerial  World.  With  Map,  8
Plates  and  60  Woodcuts. 8vo.,  7s.  net.

Heroes  of  the  Polar  World.  19
Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  25.  I

Wonders  of  the  Tropical  Forests.  |
40  Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  2J.  '

Workers  under  the  Ground.  29
Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  is.

Marvels  Over  our  Heads.  29  Illus-
trations. Cr.  Svo.,  2s.

Sea  Monsters  and  Sea  Birds.  75
Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6rf.

Denizens  of  the  Deep.  117  Illustra-
tions. Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6rf.

Volcanoes  and  Earthquakes.  30
Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6<f.

Wild  Animals  of  the  Tropics.  65
Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Hayward.— Bird  Notes.  By  the  late
Ja.ne  Mary  Hayward.  Edited  by  Emma
Hubbard.  With  Frontispiece  and  15  Illus-
trations by  G.  E.  Lodge. Cr.  Svo.,  6j.

Helmholtz,  —  Popular  Lectures  on
Scientific  Subjects.  By  Hermann  von
Helmholtz.  With  68  Woodcuts.  2  vols.
Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  td.  each.

Hudson.— British  Birds.  By  W.  H.
Hudson.  C.M.Z.S.  With  a  Chapter  on
Structure  and  Classification  by  Frank  E,
Beddakd,  F.R.S.  With  17  Plates  (8  of
which  are  Coloured),  and  over  100  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text. Crown  Svo.

\Ncarly  ready.

Proctor.-  Works  by  Richard  A.  Proctor.

Light  Science  for  Leisure  Hours.
Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  3
vols. Cr.  8vo.,  5s.  each.

Chance  and  Luck  :  a  Discussion  of
the  Laws  of  Luck,  Coincidence,  Waj^ers,
Lotteries  and  the  Fallacies  of  Gambling,
(ic. Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  boards. 25.  bd.  cloth.

Rough  Ways  made  vSmooth.  Familiar
Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  Silver
Library  Edition. Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6<f.

Pleasant Wavsin  Science.  Cr.8vo.,5s.
Silver  Library  Edition. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

The  Great  Pyramid,  Ohservatory,
Tomk  and  Temple.  With  Illustrations.
Cr.  8vo.,  5s.

Nature  Studies.  By  R.  A.  Proctor,
Grant  Allen,  A.  Wilson,  T.  Foster
and  E.  Clodu.  Cr.  8vo.,  5s.  Silver
Library  Edition. Crown  8vo.,  35,  bd.

Proctor. — Works  by  Richard  A.  Proctor.
— continued.

Leisure  Readings.  By  R.  A.  Proc-
tor, E.  Clodd,  a.  Wilson,  T.  Foster
and  A.  C.  Ranyard. Cr.  Svo.,  5s.

Stanley. — A  Familiar  History  of  Birds.
By  E.  Stanley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop  of
Norwich.  With  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,
3s.  bd.

Wood.— Works  by  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood.
Homes  without  Hands  :  a  Description
of  the  Habitation  of  Animals,  classed
according  to  the  Principle  of  Construc-
tion. Vv'ith  140  Illustrations.  Svo.,  7s.,
net.

Insects  at  Home:  a  Popular  Account
I  of  British  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits

and  Transformations. With  700  lUustra-
I  tions. Svo. ,  7s.  net.

Insects  Abroad: a  Popular  Account
1  of  Foreign  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits

i  and  Transformations. With  600  Illustra-

1  tions. Svo.,  75.  net.

I Bible  Animals  :  a  Description  of  ever}'
j  Living  Creature  mentioned  in  the  Scrip-

tures. With 112  Illustrations. Svo.,  7s.

I  net.

1

Petland  Revisited.  With  33  Illus-
trations. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Out  of  Doors:  a  Selection  of  Original
Articles  on  Practical  Natural  History.
With  II  Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Strange  Dwellings:  a  Detcription  of
the  Habitations  of  Animals,  abridged  from
'  Homes  without  Hands '.  With  60  Illus-
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6^/.

Bird  Life  of  the  Bible.  32  Illustra-
tions. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6rf.

Wonderful  Nests.  30  Illustrations.
Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Homes  under  the  Ground.  28  Illus-
trations. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Wild  Animals  of  the  Bible.  29
Illustrations. Cr.  Svo.,  3s.  bd.

Domestic  Animals  of  the  Bible.  23
Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6(7.

The  Branch  Builders,  z^  Illustra-
tions. Cr.  8vo.,  2X.  bd.

Social  Habitations  and  Parasitic
Nests. 18  Illustrations. Cr.  8vo.,  2J.

MESSRS.  LONGJ\IANS  &'  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 19

Works  of  Reference.

Maunder's  (Samuel)  Treasuries.

Biographical  Treasury.  With  Sup-
plement brought  down  to  1889.  By  Rev.
James  Wood. Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

Treasury  of  Natural  History:  or»
Popular  Dictionary  of  Zoology.  With
900  Woodcuts. Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

Treasury  of  Geography,  Physical,
Historical,  Descriptive,  and  Political.
With  7  Maps  and  16  Plates.  Fcp.  8vo.,
6s.

The  Treasury  of  Bible  Knowledge.
By  the  Rev.  J.  Ay  re,  M.A.  With  5
Maps,  15  Plates,  and  300  Woodcuts.
Fcp. 8vo., 6s.

Historical  Treasury:  Outlines  of
Universal  History,  Separate  Histories  of
all  Nations. Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

Treasury  of  Knowledge  and  Library
OF  Reference.  Comprising  an  English
Dictionary  and  Grammar,  Universal
Gazeteer,  Classical  Dictionary,  Chrono-
logy, Law  Dictionary,  &c. Fcp.  8vo..  6s.

Maunder's  I Sainuel)Treasuries--co«f/;i»f(/.

Scientific and Literary  Treasury.

Fcp.  Svo., 6s.
The  Treasury  of  Botany. Edited  by

J.  Lindlev,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  Moore,  F.L.S.

With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel  Plates.

2  vols. Fcp.  8vo.,  I2S.

Roget. — Thesaurus  of  English  Words
and  Phrases.  Classified  and  Arranged  so
as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression  of  Ideas
and  assist  in  Literary  Composition.  By
Peter  Mark  Roget,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Re-
composed  througliout,  enlarged  and  im-
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son,
John  Lewis  Roget. Crov/n  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Willich.— Popular  Tables  for  giving
information  for  ascertaining  the  value  of
Lifehold,  Leasehold,  and  Church  Property,
the  Public  Funds,  &c.  By  Charles  M.
Willich.  Edited  by  H.  Bence  Jones.
Crown Svo., los. 6d.

Children's  Books.

Crake. — W^orks  by  Rev.  A.  D.  Crake.

Edwy  the  Fair  ;  or.  The  First  Chro-
nicle of  .^scendune. Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6d.

Alfgar  the  Dane  :  or,  the  Second
ChronicLof  ^scendune. Cr.  Svo.  2s.6d.

The  Rival  Heirs  :  being  the  Third
and  Last  Chronicle  of  ^scendune.  Cr.
8vo.,  25.  6d.

The  House  of  Walderne.  A  Tale  of
the  Cloister  and  the  Forest  in  the  Days
of  the  Barons'  Wars. Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6(/.

Brian  Fitz-Count.  A  Story  of  Walling-
ford  Castle  and  Dorchester  Abbey.  Cr.
Svo.,  2s.  6(7.

La.ng.— Works  edited  by  Andrew  Lang.

The  Blue  Fairy  Book.  With  8  Full
page  Illustrations  and  130  Illustrations  in
the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford  and  G.  P.  Jacomb
Hood. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

The  Red  Fairy  Book.  With  4  Full
page  Illustrations  and  96  Illustrations  in
the  Text  b}'  H.  J.  Ford  and  Lancelot
Speed. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

The  Green  Fairy  Book.  With  11
Full  page  Illustrations  and  88  Illustrations
in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford  and  L.  Bogle.
Crown  8vo.,  5s.

The  Yellow  Fairy  Book.  With  22  Full
page  Illustrations  and  82  Illustrations  in
the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford. Crown  Svo.,  6s.

The  Blue  Poetry  Book.  With  12
Full  page  Illustrations  and  88  Illustrations
in  the  Text  by  H.  J.  Ford  and  Lancelot
Speed. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Lang.— Works  edited  by  Andrew  Lang.
— continued.

The  Blue  Poetry  Book.  School  Edi-
tion, without  Illustrations.  Fcp.  8vo.,
2s. 6(7.

The  True  Story  Book. With  8  Full

page  Illustrations  and  58  Illustrations  in

the  Text,  by  H.  J.  Ford,  Lucien  Davis,

C.  H.  M.  Kerr,  Lancelot  Speed,  and

i  Lockhart  Bogle. Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Mea,de.— Works  by  L.  T.  Meade.

Daddy's  Boy.  With  Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6(7.

Deb  and  the  Duchess.  With  Illus-
trations by  M.  E.  Edwards.  Crown  8vo.,
3s.  6(7.

The  Beresford  Prize. Crown  2,s.  6rf.

Molesworth. — Works by Mrs. Moles-
worth.
Silverthorns. Illustrated. Crown

8vo., 5s.
The Palace  in  the  Garden. Illus-
trated. Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6(7.

Soulsby. — Stray  Thoughts  for  Girls.  By
Lucy  H.  M.  Soulsby,  Head  Mistress  of
Oxford  High  School. i6mo. ,  is.  6(7.  net.

Stevenson. — A  Child's  Garden  of
Verses.  By  Robert  Louis  Stevenson.
Fcp. Svo.,  5s.

20 MESSRS.  LONGMANS  cS-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Longmans'  Series  of  Books  for  Girls.

Crown  8vo.,  price  2s.  6d.  each.

Atelier (The) Du Lys  : or, an Art
Student  in the  Reign  of  Terror.

By  thk  same  Author.

Mademoiselle  Mori  :  a  Tale  of  Modern
Modern  Rome.

That  Child.

Under  a  Cloud.

The  Fiddler  of  Lugau.

A  Child  of  the  Revolution.

Hester's  Venture.

In the Olden Time  : a  Tale of the

Peasant  War  in Germany.
The  Younger  Sister.

The  Third  Miss  St.  Quentin.
molesworth.

By  Mrs.

Atherstone  Priory. By  L.  N.  Comyn.

The  Story  of  a  Spring  Morning,  etc.

By  Mrs.  Molesvvorth. Illustrated.
Neighbours. By Mrs. Molesworth.
Very Young  ; and Quite Another

Story. Two  Stories. By  Jean  Ingelow.
Can  this  be  Love  ? By  Louisa  Pare.
Keith Deramore. B}'  the Author of

'  Miss  Molly  '.
Sidney. By  Margaret  Deland.
Last Words to Girls on Life at

School  and  after  School. By  Mrs.  W.

Grey.

The  Silver  Library.

Crown  8vo. 3s.  6d.  each  Volume.

Arnold's  (Sir  Edwin)  Seas  and  Lands. With

71  Illustrations. 3.?.  61/.
Bagehot  (W.)  Biographical  Studies. 3^.  6d.
Bagehot  iW.)  Economic  Studies, y.  bd.
Bageliot  (W.I  Literary  Stndies. 3  vols,  lo.f.  bd.
Baker's (Sir S. W.)  Eight Years  In Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations. 35-.  bd.
Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Rifle  and  Hound  In  Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations, -^s.  bd.
Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Curious  Myths  of  the

Middle  Ages. 3^.  bd.
Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Origin  and  Develop-
ment of  Religious  Belief. 2  vols. 3J-.  6(/.  each.
Becker's  (Prof.)  Callus  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the

Time  of  AugTistus. Illustrated, y.bd.
Becker's  (Prof.)  Charicles:  or.  Illustrations  of

the Private Life of the Ancient Greeks.

Illustrated. 3,1.  bd.
Bent's  (J.  T.)  The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashona-

land  :  being  a  Record  of  Excavation  and  Ex-
ploration in 1891. With 117 Illustrations.

3-f.  bd.
Brassey's  (Lady)  A  Voyage  in  the  'Sunbeam'.

With  bb  Illustrations. 3.?.  bd.
Clodd's  (E.)  Story  of  Creation:  a  Plain  Account

of  lOvolution. With  -jj  Illustrations. 3.?.  6a'.
Conybeare  (Rev.  W.  J.)  and Howson's  (Very

Rev. J. S.) Life  and Epistles  of St.  Paul.

46  l!lu  Ir.ilions. 33.  6(/.
Dougall's  (L.)  Beggars  All:  a  Novel. 3J.  6d.
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  Mlcah  Clarke. A  Tale  of

Monmnuth's  Rrlu'lliou. 3?.  bd.
Doylo'B  (A.  Conan)  The  Captain  of  the  Polestar,

;mr|  r,ih.T  Tales. 3*.  b,!.
Doyle's  lA.  Conan)  The  Refugees:  A  Tale  of

Two  ( 'orititii-nls. Willi  I  lln-.trations. ybd,
Froude'B  (J.  A.)  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub-
jects. .(  vols. 31.  ful.  >:\r\\.
Froudo'8  (J.  A.)  ThomaH  Carlyle:  a  History  of

his Life.

1795- '835' 2  vols. 7.t.

1834-1881. 2  vols. 7.f.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Crasar :  a  Sketch. 2>^.  bd.
Froude's (J. A.) The Spanish Story of the

Armada,  and  other  Essays, y.  bd.
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy  :  an

Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  ('enturv. 3^'.  bd.
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  History  of  England,  from

the Fall  of  Wolsey to the Defeat of the

Spanish  Armada. 12  vols. 35.  bd.  each.
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  English  in  Ireland. 3  vols.

lO.f.  bd.

Gleig's (Rev. C. R.) Life of the Duke of

Wellington. With  Portrait. 3.f.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  She :  A  History  of  Adventure.

32  illustrations. 35.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.) Allan Quatermain. With

20  Illustrations, y.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Colonel  Quaritch,  V.C.  : a

Tate  ol  t'onntrv  Life. 3.V.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Cleopatra. With  29 FuU-

pa;;e  Illustrations, y.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Eric  Brighteycs. With  51

Ilhu  trations. 3.(. bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Beatrice. 3^-.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan's  Wife, With  34  Illus-
trations. 3.y.  bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  Witch's  Head. With

llhistiations. 3^'.  bd.
Haggard's  (H. R.) Mr.  Meeson's  Will. With

lllusli  atioiis. 3.V.  bd.
Haggard's (H.R.) Dawn.  With  i6Illusts. -^s.bd.
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  and  Lang's  (A.)  The  World's

Desire. With  27  Illustrations. 3J".  bd.
Haggard's iH. F.) Nada  the Lily. With 23

lliiistialioiis  by  ('.  M.  Kl'-.KK, y.bd.
Harte's  (Bret)  In  the  Carquinez  Woods  and

other  Stories, y.  bd.
Hclmholtz's  (Hermann  von)  Popular  Lectures

on  Scientific  Subjects. With  68  Woodcuts.

2  vols. 3,s.  (1,/.  eaeh.
Howitt'B (W.) Visits to Remarkable Places

Ho  Illustrations. 3.f.  bd .
Hornung's  (E.  W.)  The  Unbidden  Guest. 3.?.  bd.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS. 22

The  Silver  LihrsiYy—co72^27med.

Jefferies' (R.) The Story  of  My  Heart: My

Autobiography. With  Portrait, y.  6d.
Jefferies' (R.) Field and Hedgerow. Last

E.ssays  of. With  Portrait. 3^.  6d.
Jefferies'  (R.)  Red  Deer. With  17  Illustrations

by  J.  Chaklton  and  H.  Tunaly. 3^.  6d.
Jefferies' (R.) Wood Magic: a Fable. With
Frontispiece  and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B. 35.  6d.
Jefferies  (R.)  Tlie  Toilers  of  the  Field. With

Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury  Cathedral.

3^.  6d.
Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  Cruise  of  the 'Alerte':

the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on

the Desert Island of Trinidad. With 2

Maps  and  23  Illustrations. 35.  6d.
Knight  (E.  F.)  Where  Three  Empires  Meet:  a

Narrative of Recent Travel in Kashmir,
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Gilgit,  and  the  ad-
joining Countries. With  a  Map  and  54  Illus-
trations. 3.f.  6d.
Lang's  (A.)  Angling  Sketches. 3.?.  6d.
Lang's  (A.)  Custom  and  Myth  :  Studies  of  Early

Usage  and  Belief. 3^.  6d.
Lees  (J.  A.)  and  Clutterbuck's (W. J.)  B.  C.

1S87,  A  Ramble  in  British  Columbia. V/ith

Maps  and  75  Illustrations, y.  6d.
Macaulay's  (Lord)  Essays  anU  Lays  of  Ancient

Rome. With Portrait and Illustration.

3^.  6d.
Macleod's  (H. D.)  The Elemar.ts  of  Bankiaig.

35.  6d.
Marshman's (J. C.) Memoirs of Sir Henry

Havelock. 35.  6d.
Max  Miiller's  (F.)  India,  what  can  it  teach  us  ?

y.  bd.
Max  Miiller's  (F.)  Introduction  to  the  Science

of  Religion, y.  6d.
Merivale's (Dean) History of the Romans

under  the  Empire. 8  vols. y.  6d.  each.
Mill's  (J.  S.)  Principles  of  Political  Economy.

y.  6d.
Mill's  (J.  S.)  System  of  Logic. 35.  6d.

Milner's  (Geo.)  Country  Pleasures  :  the  Chroni-
cle of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden, y.  6d.

Hansen's  (F.)  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland.
With  Illustrations  and  a  xMap. y.  6d.

Phillipps-Vifolley's  (C.)  Snap  :  a  Legend  of  the
Lone  Mountain.  With  13  Illustrations.
3.f.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Orbs  Around  Us  :  Essays
on  the  Moon  and  Planets,  Meteors  and
Comets,  the  Sun  and  Coloured  Pairs  of  Suns.
3s.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Expanse  of  Heaven:
Essavs  on  the  Wonders  of  the  Firmament.
y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  y.6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Rough  Ways  made  Smooth.
3.f.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Pleasant  Ways  in  Science.
y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Myths  and  Marvels  of  As-
tronomy. 2s.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Nature  Studies. 3J.  6d.

Eosset;ti"s  (Maria  F.)  A  Shadow  of  Dante :  being
an  Essay  towards  studying  Himself,  his
World  and  his  Pilgrimage, y.  6d.

Smith  (R.  Bosworth)  Carthage  and  the  Cartha-
ginians. With  Maps,  Plans,  6cc. 3.f.  6d.

Stanley's  (Bishop)  Familiar  History  of  Birds.
160  Illustrations, ^s.  6d.

Stevenson  (R.  L.)  and  Osbourne's  (LI.)  The
Wrong  Box. 3^-.  6d.

Stevenson  (Robert  Louis)  and  Stevenson  1  Fanny
van  dc  Grift)  More  Nav/  Arabian  Nights.—
The  Dynamiter, y.  bd.

\¥eyman's  (Stanley  J.)  The  House  of  the
V/olf :  a  Romance. 3.?.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Fetland  Revisited.  W^th
33  Illustrations. 3^-.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  0.)  Strange  Dv/eliings.  With
60  Illustrations. 35.  6d.

Wooers  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Out  of  Doors.  11  Illustra-
tions, y.  6d.

Cookery, Domestic  Management, etc.

Acton. — Modern  Cookery.  By  Eliza
Acton.  With  150  Woodcuts.  Fcp.  Svo.,
■^s.  6d.

Bull.— Works  by  Thomas  Bull,  M.D.
Hints  to  Mothers  on  the  Manage-
ment OF  their  Health  during  the
Period  of  Pregnancy.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.
The  Maternal  Management  of  Chil-
dren IN  Health  and  Disease.  Fcp.
8vo.,  IS.  6(1.

De  Salis. — Works  by  Mrs.  De  Salis.
Cakes  and  Confections  X  la Mode.

Fcp.  8vo.,  IS.  6d.
Dogs  ;  A  Manual  for  Amateurs. Fcp.

Svo.
Dressed Game and Poultry a la

Mode. Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.
Dressed Vegetables a la Mode.

Fcp.  8vo.,  IS.  6(/.
Drinks  a  la  Mode. Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.
Entries  X  la  Mode. Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  Gd.

De  Salis.— Works  by  Mrs.  De  Salis— cont.
Floral Decor.ations. Fcp. 8vo.,

IS.  6d.
Gardening a La Mode. Fcp. Svo,

Part I., Vegetables, is. 6d. Part II.,

Fruits, IS.  6d.
National  Viands  a  la  Mode. Fcp.

S^'o.,  IS.  6d.
New-laid Eggs: Hints for  Amateur

Poultry  Rearers. Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.
Oysters  a  la  Mode.  '  Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.
Puddings and Pastry a la Mode.

Fcp.  Svo.,  IS.  6d.
Savouries  A  LA  Mode.  Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.
Soups  and  Dressed  Fish  a  la  Mode.

Fcp.  Svo.,  is.  6d.
Sweets and Supper Dishes X la

Mode. Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.
Tempting  Dishes  for  Small  Incomes.

Fcp.  8vo.,  IS.  6d.
Wrinkles and Notions for every

Household. Crown  Svo..  is.  6d.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Cookery  and  Domestic  Management — continued.

Lear.— Maigre Cookery. By H. L.

Sidney  Leaf. i6mo.,  2s.
Poole.— Cookery  FOR  THE  Diabetic. By

\V.  H.  and  Mrs.  Poole. With  Preface  by

Dr.  Pavy. Fcp.  Svo.,  2s.  M.
West. —  The Mother's Manual of

Children's  Diseases. By  Charles  West,

M.D. Fcp.  Svo.,  2y.  6rf.

Walker. — A  Handbook  for  Mothers  :
being  Simple  Hints  to  Women  on  the
Management  of  their  Health  during  Preg-
nancy and  Confinement,  together  with
Plain  Directions  as  to  the  Care  of  Infants.
By  Jane  H.  Walker,  L.R.C.P.  and  L.M.,
L.R.C.S.  and  M.D.  (Brux).  Crown  Svo.,
2S. 6./.

Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works.

AUingham.— Varieties  in  Prose.  By  |
William  Allingham.  3  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  j
i8s.  (Vols.  I  and  2,  Rambles,  by  Patricius  !
Walker. Vol.  3,  Irish  Sketches,  etc.)

Armstrong.— Essays  and  Sketches.  By  j
Edmund  J.  Armstrong. Fcp.  8vo.,  55.

Bagehot.- Literary  Studies.  By
Walter  Bagehot.  3  vols.  Crown  Svo.,
los.  6(f.

Baring-Gould.— Curious  Myths  of  the
Middle  Agf.s.  By  Rev.  S.  Baring-Gould.
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Ba,ttye.— Pictures  in  Prose  of  Nature,
Wild  Sport,  and  Humble  Life.  By
AuBYN  Trevor  Battye,  B.A. Cr.  Svo.,  6s.

Baynes.  —  Shakespeare  Studies,  and
other  Essays.  By  the  late  Thomas  Spencer
Baynes,  LL.B.,  LL.D.  With  a  Bio-
graphical Preface  by  Professor  Lewis
Campbell. Crown  Svo.,  7s.  M.

Boyd  {'  A.  K.  H.  B. ').— Works  by  A.  K.  H.
Boyd,  D.D.,  LL.D.

And  set  Miscellaneous  Theological  Works,  p.  24.

Autumn  Holidays  of  a  Country
Parson. Crov/n  Svo., 3s. 6d.

Commonplace  Philosopher.  Crown
Svo.,  3s.  (id.

Critical  Essays  of  a  Country  Parson.
Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.

East  Coast  Days  and  Memories.
Crown  Svo., 3s. td.

Landscapes,  Churches  and  Morali-
ties. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  td.

Leisure  Hours  in  Town.  Crown  8vo.,
3s.  fid.

Lessonsof  Middle  Age.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  (>d.

OuH  Little  Life.  Two  Series.  Cr.
Svo.,  3s.  dd.  each.

Our  Homely  Comedy:  and  Tragedy
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  td.

Boyd  (' A.  K.  H.  B.').— Worksby  A.  K.  H,
Boyd,  D.D.  LL.D. — continued.

Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson.
Three  Series.  Crown  Svo..  35.  (bd.  each.
Also  First  Series. Popular  Ed. Svo.,  6rf.

Butler. — Works  by  Samuel  Butler.
Erewhon. Cr.  8vo.,  5s.
The  Fair  Haven. A  Work  in  Defence

of  the  Miraculous  Element  in  our  Lord's

Ministry. Cr.  Svo.,  js.  6d.

Life  and Habit. An Essay  after  a

Completer  View  of  Evolution. Cr.  Svo..

75.  bd.
Evolution,  Old  and  New. Cr.  Svo..

105.  6d.
Alps  .\nd Sanctuaries  of  Piedmont

and  Canton  Ticino. Illustrated. Pott

4to.,  los.  6d.

Luck,  or  Cunning,  as  the  Main
Means  of  Organic  Modification  ?
Cr.  Svo.,  ys.  6d.

Ex  VoTo.  An  Account  of  the  Sacro
Monte  or  New  Jerusalem  at  Varallo-Sesia.
Crown  Svo.,  105.  6d.

GrWilt.— An  Encyclop.^iDIa  of  Architec-
ture. By  Joseph  Gwilt,  F.S.A.  Illus-
trated with  more  than  iioo  Engravings  on
Wood.  Revised  (1888),  with  Alterations
and  Considerable  Additions  by  Wyatt
Papworth. Svo.,  £2  12s.  6d.

Hart.— Studies  in  American  Educa-
tion. By  Albert  Bushnell  FIart,
Ph.D. Crown  Svo.,  55.

James.— Mining  Royalties:  Ihcir  Prac-
tical Operation  and  Effect.  By  Charles
Ashworth  James,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Bar-
rister-at-Law. I'cp.  4to.,  5s.

Laurie.— Historical  Survey  of  Pre-
Christian  Education.  By  S.  S.  Laurie,
A.M.,  LL.D. Crown  8vo.,  12s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO:S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS. 23

Miscellaneous  and  Critical  ^ ov^s— continued.

Jefferies. — Works  by  Richard  J  EFFERiES.

Field  and  Hedgerow:  last  Essays.
With Portrait. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6(f.

The  Story  of  My  Heart  :  my  Autobio-
graphy. With  Portrait  and  New  Preface
by  C.  J.  Longman. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  bd.

Red  Deer.  With  17  Illustrations
by  J.  Charlton  and  H.  Tunaly.  Crown
Svc,  3s.  6<f.

The  Toilers  of  the  Field.  With
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury
Cathedral. Crown  Svo.,  35.  bd.

Wood  Magic:  a  Fable.  With  Frontis-
piece and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B.  Crown
8vo.,  35.  6rf.

Thoughts  from  the  Writings  of
Richard  Jefferies.  Selected  by  H.  S.
Hoole  Waylen. i6mo.,  3s.  bd.

Johnson. — The  Patentee's  Manual  :  a
Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Letters
Patent.  By  J.  &  J.  H.  Johnson,  Patent
Agents,  &c. Svo.,  los.  6(7.

Lang.— Works  by  Andrew  Lang.

Letters to Dead Authors. Fcp.

Svo., 2s. bd.  net.
Books  and  Bookmen. With  2  Coloured

Plates  and  17  Illustrations. Fcp.  Svo.,

25. bd. net.
Old  Friends. Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.
Letters  on  Literature. Fcp.  8vo.,

IS.  bd.  net.
Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense. Fcp.

Svo.,  6s.  bd.  net.

Leonard. — The  Camel  :  Its  Uses  and
Management.  By  Major  Arthur  Glyn
Leonard,  late  2nd  East  Lancashire  Regi-
ment. Royal  Svo.,  21s.  net.

Max  Miiller.— Works  by  F.  ]\Iax  Muller.
India  : What can it Teach Us  ?

Crown  Svo., 35.  bd.
Chips from a German Workshop.
Vol. I. Recent Essays and Addresses.

CrownSvo.,  6s.  bd.  net.
Vol.  IL Biographical  Essays. Cr.  Svo.,

6s.  bd.  net.
Vol.  III.  Essays  on  Language  and  Litera-
ture. 6s.  bd.  net.
Vol.  IV.  Essays  on  the  Sciences  of  Lan-
guage, of  Thought,  and  of  Mytholog>-.
\ln  prcpc.raiton.

Macfarren.  — Lectures  on  Harmony.
By  Sir  George  A.  Macfarren. Svo.,  12s.

Mendelssolin. — The  Letters  of  Felix
Mendelssohn.  Translated  by  Lady  Wal-
lace. 2  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  los.

Milner. — Works  by  George  Milner.

Country  Pleasures  :  the  Chronicle
of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden.  Cr.  Svo.,
35.  bd.

Studies  of  Nature  on  the  Coast  of
Arran.  With  10  Full-page  Copperplates
and  12  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  W.
Noel  Johnson. Crown  Svo.,  6s.  bd.  net.

Poore. — Essays  on  Rural  Hygiene.
By  George  Vivian  Poore,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.
With  13  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  6s.  bd.

Proctor. — Works  by  Richard  A.  Proctor.
Strength and Happiness. With 9
Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  5s.

Strength  :  How  to  get  Strong  and
keep  Strong,  with  Chapters  on  Rowing
and  Swimming,  Fat,  Age,  and  the  Waist.
With  9  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.,  25.

Richardson.  —  National  Health.  A
Rtviev.-  of  the  W'orks  of  Sir  Edv.in  Chad-
wick,  K.C.B.  By  Sir  B.  W.  Richardson,
M.D. Crown  Svo.,  4s.  bd.

Rossetti. — A  Shadow  of  Dante  :  being
an  Essay  towards  studying  Himself,  his
World  and  his  Pilgrimage.  By  Maria
Francesca  Rossetti.  With  Frontispiece
by  Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti.  Cr.  Svo.,
I  OS.  bd. Cheap  Edition,  3s.  bd.

Solovyoff. — A  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis
(MADA^iE  Blavatskv).  Abridged  and
Translated  on  Behalf  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research  from  the  Russian  of
VsEVOLOD  Sergyeevich  Solovyoff.  By
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.  With  Appendices.
Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Stevens. — On  the  Stowage  of  Ships  and
THEIR  Cargoes.  With  Information  regard-
ing Freights,  Charter-Parties,  &c.  By
Robert  White  Stevens,  Associate-Mem-
ber of  the  Institute  of  Naval  .Architects.
Svo.,  21S.

Van  Dj'ke. — A  Text-Book  of  the  His-
tory of  Painting.  By  John  C.  Van  Dyke,
of  Rutgers  College,  U.S.  With  Frontispiece
and  109  Illustrations  in  the  Text. Crovn

Svo.,  6s.

West.— Wills,  and  How  Not  to  Make
Thkm.  With  a  Selection  of  Leading  Cases,
Frontispiece.  By  B.  B.  West,  Author  of
"  Half-Hours  with  the  Millionaires".  Fcp.
Svo.,  2s. bd.

24 MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &-  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL WORKS.

Miseellaiieous  Theological  Works.

For  Church  oj  England  and  Roman  Catholic Worbs  see Messrs.

Special Catalogues.

Longmans  &  Co.'s

Unchanged
6d.

A Country
Crown 8vo. ,

Crown  8vo.,

Balfour.— The  Foundations  of  Belief  :
being  Notes  Introductory  to  the  Study  of
Theology.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.
Balfour,  M.P.  8vo..  12s.  6d.
Boyd— Works  by  A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.,
First  Minister  of  St.  Andrews,  author  of
'  Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson,.'  &c.
Counsel  and Comfort  from  a  City

Pulpit. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.
Sunday  Afternoons in the Parish
Church of a Scottish University
City. Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.
Changed Aspects of

Truths. Crown  8vo.,  3s.
Graver Thoughts of
Parson. Three Series.
35.  6d.  each.
Present  Day  Thoughts.

3s.  6(f.
Seaside  Musings. Crown  8vo.,  ^s.  6d.
'To Meet the Day' through the
Christian  Year  :  being  a  Text  of  Scripture,
with  an  Original  Meditation  and  a  Short
Selection  in  Verse  for  Every  Bay. Crown
8vo.,  45.  6d.
Darmesteter.  —  Selected Ess.^ys of
James  Darmesteter. With  Portrait. Cr.
8vo.,  65.  6d.

Contents  : — The  Supreme  God  in  the  Indo-Euro-
pean Mythology — Ernest  Renan — The  Kehgions  of  the
Future — An  Essay  on  the  History  of  the  Jews — Afghan
Life  in  Afghan  Songs  —  Race  and  Tradition  —  The
Prophets  of  Israel.

De  la  Saussaye.— A  Manual  of  the
Science  OF  Religion.  By  Professor  Chan-
TEPiE  DE  LA  Saussaye.  Translated  by
Mrs.  Colyer  Fergusson  (juV  Max
Muller). Crown  8vo.,  12s.  6d.

Kalisch.— Works  by  M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.
liinLE  Studies.  Part  I.  The  Pro-
phecies of  Balaam.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  Part
II.  The  Book  of  Jonah.  Svo.,  los.  6(f.
Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament:
with  a  New  Translation.  Vol.  I.  Genesis.
8vo.,  i8s.  Or  adapted  for  the  General
Reader.  125.  Vol.  II.  Exodus.  15s.
Or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  125.
Vol.  111.  Leviticus,  Part  I.  15s.  Or
adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  Ss.  Vol.
IV.  Leviticus,  Part  II.  15s.  Or  adapted
for  llie  General  Reader. 8s.

Macdonald. Works by  George Mac-

DONALIi,  LL.D.
Unspoken Sekmons. Three Series.

Crown  8vo.,  3s.  Cd.  each.
The  Miracles  of  Ouk  Lord. Crf)wn

8vo.,  3s.  ()d.
A Book  of  Strife,  in  the  Form  of

THE  Diary of an Old Soul: Poems.

i8mo.,  6s.
tn.n')()/6,'g5.

Martineau. — Works by James Mar-
tineau,  D.D.,  LL.D.
Hours  of  Thought  on  Sacred  Things  :

Sermons,  2  vols. Cr.  Svo.,  7s.  6d.  each.
Endeavours after the Christian
Life. Discourses. Crown  Svo. ,  7s.  6d.
The  Seat  of  Authority  in  Religion.

8vo. ,  14s.
Essays,  Reviews,  and  Addresses. 4
Vols. Crown  S\'o.,  7s.  6/!.  each.
I. Personr.l  ; Political.
II.  Ecclesiastical; Historical.

III.  Theological  ;  Philosophical.

IV.  Academical  ;  Religious.

Home  Prayers,  with  Two  Services  for
Public  Vs'orship. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  6d.
Max  Miiller.— Works  by  F.  Max  Muller.
Hibbert  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and
Growth  or  Religion,  as  illustrated  by
the  Religions  of  India. Crown  8vo.,  7s.  6rf.
Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Re-
ligion : Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the
Royal  Institution. Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.
Natural  Religion. The  Gifford  Lec-
tures, delivered  before  the  University  of
Glasgow  in  iSSS. Crown  Svo.,  los.  6(/.
Physical  Religion. The  Gifford  Lec-
tures, delivered  before  the  University  of
Glasgow  in  iSqo. Crown  Svo.,  los,  dd.
Anthropological Religion. The
Gifford  Lectures,  delivered  before  the  Uni-
versity of  Glasgow  in  iSqi.  Cr.Svo.,  los.dd.
Theosophy or Psychological Re-
ligion. The  Gifford  Lectures,  delivered
before  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1892.
Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d.
Three Lectures on the Vedanta
Philosophy, delivered at the Royal
Institution  in  Marcli,  1894. Svo.,  5s.
Phillips. — The  Teaching  of  the  Vedas.
What  Light  does  it  Throw  on  the  Origin
and  Development  of  Religion  ? By  Maurice
Phillii'S,  London  Mission,  Madras. Crown
cSvo.,  Gs.
Scholler. — A  Chapter  of  Church His-
tory FROM South Germany  : being
Passages  from  the Life of  Johann Evan-
gelist  Georg Lutz,  formerly Parish Priest
and  Dean  in  Oberroth,  Bavaria. By  L.  W.
Scholler. Translated from  the German
by  W.  Wallis. Crown  Svo.,  3s.  bd.
SUPERNATURAL RELIGION  : an
Inquiry  into  the  Reality  of  Divine  Revela-
tion. 3  vols. Svo.,  36s.
Reply  (A)  to  Dr.  Lightfoot's  Essays.
By  tb.e  Author  of  Supernatural  Religion  '.
Svo.,  6s.
The  Gospel  according  to  St.  Peter  :
a  rtiuiv. I'y  the  Author  of  '  Supernatural
Religion  '. Svo.,  f^s.

1

WSs

-
:;;'

pis

!  .■  •  ■

!

[
i

1

^5..M  B-  rH

; ;  tHji  H  U  li  H  h

Tp'trn??f!tt  Ttnn

iiiiiiiiJio

.fl]UlJI.H.,it!i.'|i

r,

1

','■■

;■'■ '

'-;•

.J

1 ^'

i- !• 'M if'

i 1 \\ '

I'll

»  I'li  y  1^.  •  VL'/rt/,*-*-!*.
