I

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2019  with  funding  from
Kahle/Austin  Foundation

https://archive.org/details/historyofengland0007leck

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

IN  THE

XVIIIth  CENTURY

VOL.  VII.

I

/

A

A

HISTORY  op  ENGLAND

IN  THE

EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY

WILLIAM  ED  WALD  HAETPOLE  LECKY

VOLUME  VII

NEW  YORK

D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY
1,  3,  and  6  BOND  STREET

1891

\

v,  ?

PEEFACE

TO  THE

SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  VOLUMES.

—  »C»  ■■■  .

I  stated  in  nay  last  volume  tliat  the  outbreak  of  the  great
French  War  in  1793  appeared  to  me  the  best  and  most  natural
termination  of  a  History  of  England  in  the  eighteenth  century,
and  that  'it  was  not  my  intention  to  carry  the  English  portion
of  my  narrative  beyond  this  limit.  For  the  Irish  portion,  how¬
ever,  a  different  limit  must  be  assigned,  and  in  order  to  give
it  any  completeness  or  unity,  it  is  necessary  to  describe  the
rebellion  of  1798,  the  legislative  Union  of  1800,  and  the  defeat
or  abandonment  of  the  great  measures  of  Catholic  conciliation
which  Pitt  had  intended  to  be  the  immediate  sequel  of  the
Union.  I  had  hoped  to  do  this  in  the  compass  of  a  single
moderate  volume,  but  a  moi’e  careful  examination  has  con¬
vinced  me  that,  in  order  to  do  justice  to  this  eventful  period
of  Irish  history,  it  is  necessary  to  treat  it  on  a  larger  scale.
It  is  a  period  which  has  been  very  imperfectly  written,  and
usually  under  the  influence  of  the  most  furious  partisanship.
There  is  hardly  a  page  of  it  which  is  not  darkened  by  the  most
violently  contradictory  statements.  It  is  marked  by  obscure
agrarian  and  social  changes,  by  sudden,  and  sometimes  very
perplexing,  alterations  in  the  popular  sentiment,  which  can  only
be  elucidated  and  proved  by  copious  illustration.  It  is  also  a
pei'iod  of  great  crimes  and  of  great  hoi’rors,  and  the  task  of
ti’acing  their  ti-ue  causes,  and  measuring  with  accuracy  and
impartiality  the  different  degrees  of  provocation,  aggravation,
palliation,  and  comparative  guilt,  is  an  extremely  difficult  one.

In  oi-der  to  accomplish  it  with  any  success,  it  is  necessary

85867

VI

PREFACE  TO  THE

to  bring  together  a  much  larger  array  of  original  evidence,
drawn  from  the  opposite  camps,  than  would  be  required  in  deal¬
ing  with  a  history  of  which  the  outlines,  at  least,  were  well
established  and  generally  admitted.  This  is  especially  necessary,
as  our  judgments  must  be,  in  a  great  degree,  formed  from
manuscript  materials  which  are  not  easily  accessible,  and  as
many  of  these  manuscripts  are  the  letters  of  men  who,  though
they  have  all  the  authority  of  eyewitnesses,  often  wrote  under
the  influence  of  panic  or  strong  party  passion.  It  is  only  by
collecting  and  comparing  many  letters,  written  by  men  of
different  opinions  and  scattered  over  wide  areas,  that  it  is
possible  to  form  a  true  estimate  of  the  condition  of  the  country,
and  to  pronounce  with  real  confidence  between  opposing  state¬
ments.  Such  a  method  of  inquiry  tends  greatly  to  lengthen  a
'  book  and  to  impair  its  symmetry  and  its  artistic  charm ;  but  in
the  particular  period  with  which  I  am  now  concerned,  it  is,  I
believe,  the  one  method  of  arriving  at  truth ;  it  brings  the
reader  in  direct  contact  with  the  original  materials  of  Irish
history,  and  it  enables  him  to  draw  his  own  conclusions  very
independently  of  the  historian.

In  these,  as  in  the  preceding  volumes,  I  have  made  much
use  of  the  correspondence  between  the  English  and  Irish
Governments  that  exists  in  the  Record  Office  in  London,
and  I  have  derived  some  side-lights  from  the  papers  in  the
French  Foreign  Office,  which  have  been  kindly  opened  to  my
inspection.  Several  other  manuscript  sources  have  been  of  use
to  me.  By  far  the  most  important  is  a  vast  collection  of  papers
in  Dublin  Castle,  ranging  from  1795  to  1805,  which,  through
the  kindness  of  Sir  Bernard  Burke,  I  have  been  enabled  to
spend  many  weeks  in  exploring.  For  more  than  sixty  years
these  papers  were  deposited  in  two  very  large  oases  in  the
Birmingham  Tower,  carefully  fastened  down  with  the  Govern¬
ment  seal,  and  with  the  inscription,  ‘  Secret  and  confidential ;
not  to  be  opened.’  They  remained  in  this  state  until  after  the
passing  of  the  Records  (Ireland)  Act,  in  1867,  when  it  was
thought  desirable  to  open  these  cases,  and  to  classify  their  con¬
tents.  The  work  occupied  some  years,  but  it  was  at  last  accom¬
plished,  and  the  whole  collection  is  now  excellently  arranged,
in  no  less  than  sixty-eight  boxes.  A  great  proportion  of  it  is

SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  VOLUMES.

Vll

of  little  or  no  historical  value,  but  it  contains,  among  other
things,  numerous  letters  from  informers,  written  during  the
progress  of  the  United  Irish  conspiracy,  and  during  and  after
the  rebellion,  and  also  a  large  and  exceedingly  interesting  series
of  letters  from  magistrates  and  Government  officials  in  different
parts  of  Ireland,  describing  in  detail  the  state  of  the  country.
These  letters  have  the  same  kind  of  value  as  the  cahiers ,
describing  the  state  of  France  on  the  eve  of  the  Revolution,
from  which,  since  the  days  of  Tocqueville,  the  best  French
historians  have  derived  some  of  their  most  valuable  materials.
Occasionally,  too,  amid  this  great  mass  of  serious,  formal,  and
depressing  documents,  there  may  be  found  others  of  a  very
different  character,  which  were  seized  among  the  papers  of  the
conspirators,  and  which  have  sometimes  a  strangely  pathetic
interest.  There  are  love-letters  and  rude  poems ;  passionate
expressions  of  youthful  friendships  ;  note-books  in  which  eager
scholars  described  their  studies  or  recorded  their  passing
thoughts ;  day-dreams  of  young  and  ardent  natures,  too  often
destined  to  end  in  exile  or  the  gallows.

Another  source  from  which  I  have  derived  much  information
has  been  the  Pelham  Papers,  which  have  recently  been  deposited
in  the  British  Museum.  Pelham  was  Irish  Secretary  from  March
1795  to  November  1798.  His  long  and  frequent  visits  to
England  while  he  was  in  office,  made  his  correspondence  un¬
usually  copious ;  and  when  he  ceased  to  be  Irish  Secretary  he
still  continued  to  correspond  with  leading  persons  in  Ireland.
The  British  Museum  also  possesses  an  interesting  series  of
letters  written  by  Percy,  Bishop  of  Dromore — the  well-known
author  of  the  £  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry’ — to  his
wife,  during  the  rebellion,  and  daring  the  debates  on  the
Union.

It  remains  for  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  some  private
collections  of  papers  which  have  been  opened  to  me.  Lady
Bunbury  has  kindly  placed  in  my  hands  a  very  interesting
correspondence  of  Lady  Louisa  Conolly  and  her  friends;  and
Lord  Colchester,  the  whole  correspondence  of  Abbot,  who  wras
Chief  Secretary  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  during  the  Administra¬
tion  of  Addington.  To  Lady  Louisa  Fortescue  I  am  indebted
for  permission  to  read  the  correspondence  of  Lord  Grenville  at

Vlll

PREFACE  TO  VOLUMES  VII.  AND  VIII.

Dropmore,  and  to  Lord  George  Hamilton  for  some  curious
papers  describing  the  different  interests  and  connections  in  the
Irish  Parliament.

It  will  be  objected,  that  the  addition  of  two  long  volumes
to  the  large  amount  of  Irish  history  already  contained  in  this
book  has  completely  destroyed  the  proportion  of  my  work.  It
must,  however,  be  remembered,  that  the  present  volumes  form
in  reality  a  supplementary  history,  dealing  with  Irish  affairs
during  eight  eventful  years  which  are  not  comprised  in  my
English  narrative.  The  sketch  of  Irish  history  which  has  been
given  in  the  preceding  volumes  would  be  imperfect  and,  per¬
haps,  even  misleading,  if  it  were  not  continued  to  the  close
of  the  Irish  Parliament  and  to  the  resignation  of  Pitt,  in  March
1801.  But  if  the  fiercely  contested  events  of  those  last  years
are  related  at  all,  it  is  very  desirable  that  they  should  be  related
in  a  manner  that  may,  if  possible,  raise  them  above  the  distort¬
ing  atmosphere  of  party  strife,  and  place  the  reader  in  a  position
to  judge  them  in  all  their  aspects.  There  is  a  method  of  dealing
with  historical  facts  which  has  been  happily  compared  to  that
of  a  child  with  his  box  of  letters,  who  picks  out  and  arranges
those  letters,  and  those  only,  which  will  spell  the  words  on
which  he  has  previously  determined,  leaving  all  others  un¬
touched.  In  Irish  history  this  method  has  been  abundantly
practised,  and  among  the  many  crimes  and  errors  that  have
been  committed  by  all  parties,  it  is  not  difficult  to  select  on
either  side  the  materials  of  a  very  effective  party  narrative.  I
have  endeavoured  to  write  this  History  in  a  different  spirit.
Perhaps  another  generation  may  be  more  capable  than  the
present  one,  of  judging  how  far  I  have  succeeded.

London  :  July  18SO.

CONTENTS

OP

THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  XXVI.

PAGE

Contrast  between  the  sentiments  of  Parliament  and  of  the  country

in  1793  . 1

Irish  overtures  to  France —Mission  of  Oswald  .  .  .  .  .  2

Preparations  for  rebellion . 3

Leading  United  Irishmen  chiefly  Protestants . 4

Changes  in  the  Catholic  body. — Rise  of  a  Catholic  seditious  party  .  5

McKenna  on  the  state  of  Ireland . 6

Character,  objects,  and  proceedings  of  the  Dublin  Committee  .  8

Exile  of  Tandy. — Imprisonment  of  Rowan . 9

The  arming  of  the  people  discussed  in  the  Dublin  Committee  .  10

First  results  of  the  Relief  Act  of  1793  .  10

Defenderism

Its  early  history  and  growth  .  ,  .  ,  .  .  .  .11

Strengthened  by  the  Militia  Act . .  14

Its  purely  Catholic  character  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16

Opinion  of  Westmorland. — Report  of  the  Lords  Committee  .  .  17

At  first  distinct  from  and  hostile  to  the  United  Irish  movement  .  19

Attempts  of  United  Irishmen  to  suppress  religious  dissension  .  .  19

Defenderism  at  first  not  political. — French  influence  ...  20

Popular  sympathy  for  France . 21

The  couutry  more  peaceful. — FitzGibbon  made  Viscount  .  .  21

Quiet  of  Ireland  in  1794. — Grattan  supports  the  war  .  .  .  .  22

Protest  of  Parsons . 24

Proposed  commercial  treaty. — Ponsonby’s  Reform  Bill. — Attitude

of  Grattan . 25

Close  of  the  Session. — Reports  of  an  informer  ....  26

Mission  of  Jackson . 27

His  arrest . 28

Escape  of  Rowan— Growth  of  disloyalty  . . 29

Decline  of  the  influence  of  Grattan  . . 31

X

CONTENTS  OF

The  Fitzmilliam  Episode

Whig  secession  in  1794  ....»•••

Ministerial  changes — the  direction  of  Ireland  ....

Fitzwilliam  designated  as  future  Viceroy .

Rising  hopes  of  the  Catholics .

Fitzwilliam  communicates  with  Thomas  Grenville  and  Grattan  .
Grattan  refuses  office. — Negotiations  in  England  .

The  time  of  the  appointment  of  Fitzwilliam  and  the  extent  of  his

powers  disputed . .  •

Opinion  of  Burke  . .

Probable  motives  of  Pitt  ........

Dispute  settled. — Appointment  of  Fitzwilliam. — His  instructions
The  Catholics  determine  to  bring  forward  their  claims
Fitzwilliam  desires  to  yield — proposes  a  yeomanry  .  .  .

Announces  his  intention  to  accept  the  Catholic  Bill  .  .  .

Dismissal  of  Hamilton  and  Cooke  ......

And  of  Beresford  . .

Anger  of  the  Castle  Party .

Alarming  state  of  Europe. — Parliament  meets  ....

Grattan  moves  the  Address  .......

Recognition  of  Irish  prosperity  .......

Extraordinary  supplies  voted. — Fitzwilliam  urges  the  necessity  o.
Emancipation  .........

Strength  of  the  Irish  opinion  in  favour  of  it
Conduct  of  the  English  Ministers— Progress  of  the  dispute  .

Last  remonstrance  of  Fitzwilliam .

Fitzwilliam  ordered  to  stop  the  Catholic  Bill  ....

Review  of  his  conduct  about  it .

His  recall. — Inquiry  into  its  motives  .....
Fitzgibbon  argues  that  the  King  could  not  assent  to  Emancipation

Memorandum  of  the  King  against  it .

Memorandum  of  the  Ministers  .  .

Memorandum  of  Fitzgibbon  .......

Alarm  in  Ireland  when  the  recall  was  announced

Speech  of  Parsons .

Parliament  votes  its  thanks  to  Fitzwilliam  .....
Camden  appointed  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  Pelham  Secretary  ,
State  of  the  country. — Great  Catholic  meeting  in  Dublin  .  .

Departure  of  Fitzwilliam .

Effects  of  his  recall

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Camden  arrives  March  81,  1795. — Riot  in  Dublin  .  .  .  .

Replies  of  Grattan  to  addresses .

English  Ministers  stimulate  the  anti-Catholic  feeling

Instructions  to  Camden  . .

Portland  on  Fitzgibbon’s  letters  to  the  King  .  .  .  .  ,

Pitt’s  forebodings. — Letter  of  Windham .

Dangerous  state  of  the  country  .......

Meeting  of  Parliament  (April  13). — Speech  of  Gfhttan  .  .  .

Debate  on  the  second  reading  of  the  Catholic  Bill .  .  .

pa  on

32

33

35

36

37

38

40

45

48

50

52

64

56

57

58
60'
62

63

64

65
68
70
75

78

79

80

84

85

86
88

90

91
93

93

94

96

97

99

100

101

101

103

104

105
105
108

THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.

Defeated  by  155  to  84. — Effect  on  Irish  history  .  .  .  .  .

Fitzgibbon  made  Earl  of  Clare  .  .  ,  .  .  .

Maynooth

Foreign  education  of  the  priesthood .

Views  of  Hutchinson  and  Burke .

Project  of  a  Catholic  college  connected  with  Dublin  University

Petition  of  the  Catholic  bishops  in  1794  .

Correspondence  of  Burke  and  Grattan  on  the  subject  .  .  .

Wolfe  Tone’s  prediction  of  the  effect  of  home  education  on  the

priests .

Character  of  the  Irish  priests  before  Maynooth .

Improvement  under  George  III. — Patronage  exercised  by  laymen  .

Government  of  the  Church .

Decline  of  clerical  influence .

Foundation  and  object  of  Maynooth .

Magee’s  evidence  relating  to  it .

Petition  of  Catholics  against  its  sectarian  character  .

Burke’s  dislike  to  the  Maynooth  scheme  .  .  .  .  .  .

His  letter  shown  to  the  Government .

Letter  of  Burke  on  the  Jacobin  tendencies  appearing  among  the
Catholics  ............

Confidential  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond  advocating  an  Union.
Trial  and  suicide  of  William  Jackson  .......

Wolfe  Tone  sails  for  America  ........

Leonard  McNally — his  career  and  treason .

His  picture  of  the  state  of  Irish  opinion .

Reconstruction  of  United  Irish  Society — its  organisation  .  .  .

A  conference  of  the  parliamentary  Opposition  .  .  .  .

Rapid  spread  of  Defenderism — its  character  and  effects  .  .  .
Lawrence  O’Connor .

Agrarian  system  of  Ireland

Tenure  of  land  after  the  revolution. — The  Timber  Acts  .  .  .

The  middleman .

Causes  that  aggravated  the  competition  for  land  in  Ireland  .  .

Between  the  completion  of  the  Penal  Code  and  the  accession  of

George  III.  the  changes  chiefly  economical .

After  that  date  powerful  political  causes  come  into  play  .  .  .

The  Irish  rental .

Rapid  rise  in  rents.— Canting .

Subdivision  of  land— its  causes

Modem  parallels .

Extreme  poverty  in  parts  of  Ireland .

Influence  of  landlords— its  history  and  decline .

The  deportation  of  suspected  Defenders .

Rise  of  Orangism

Disputes  of  Peep  of  Day  Boys  and  Defenders  .  .  .  .  .

Jackson’s  charity .

Mutilation  of  Berkeley  and  his  wife  .  •  •

xi

PAGE

115

116

117

118

119

120
120

121

122

124

124

125

126

127

128
129
131

132

134

136

137

138

143

144

145

146
151

152

153
155

157

157

158
160
163
165
167
169
172

174

174

176

CONTENTS  OF

xii

The  battle  of  the  Diamond  (Sept.  21)  •  •*•••

Foundation  and  objects  of  the  Orange  Society — its  precursors  .  .

Early  celebrations  of  the  revolution .

Persecution  of  Catholics  in  Ulster — resolutions  and  letters  of  north¬
ern  magistrates  .

Growth  of  religious  animosity

The  Ulster  refugees  in  Connaught .

Agrarian  aspects  of  the  Orange  disturbances  .  .  .

Summary  of  their  extent  .........

They  counteracted  the  United  Irish  policy  of  combining  Catholics
and  Presbyterians  ..........

But  contributed  largely  to  the  disaffection  of  the  Catholics  .
Camden’s  judgment  of  them — the  pretended  Orange  oath  of  exter¬
mination  . .

Use  made  of  Orangism  by  the  United  Irishmen  ,  .  .  .

PAGB

177

177

178

179

187

188

191

192

192

193

194

195

Parliamentary  proceedings  -Spring  of  1796

Indemnity  Act. — Demand  for  free  trade  with  England  .  .  .  195
Insurrection  Act  .........  .  196

Attitude  of  Grattan . 197

New  Orange  disturbances . 199

Crimes  connected  with  the  United  Irish  and  Defender  movements .  201

Intelligence  of  an  intended  invasion . 201

Spread  of  disaffection  among  the  Catholics . 202

Parliamentary  proceedings,  Oct.  and  Nov.  1796

Suspension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act. — Speech  of  Grattan  .  .  203

Catholic  Emancipation  introduced  for  the  last  time  in  the  Irish

Parliament . .  .  205

Other  measures  of  the  session . 206

Extreme  anarchy  in  the  country . 206

Different  classes  concerned  in  it . 208

Letters  of  McCarry . 209

Francis  Higgins . 210

Em  olment  of  the  yeomanry — their  character . 213

Potato  diggings  in  Ulster . 215

Alarming  state  of  a  great  part  of  Ireland . 216

Political  assassinations . 222

Junction  of  United  Irishmen  and  Defenders . 223

O’Connor,  Emmet,  and  McNevin  join  the  society — its  military

organisation . 224

Letter  of  O’Connor  to  Fox . 225

Organisation  and  strength  of  the  United  Irishmen  .  .  .  .  226

English  and  Irish  Governments  differ  about  the  Insurrection  Act  .  227

State  of  Ulster  at  the  end  of  1796  228

Influence  of  foreign  affairs  on  Ireland

Condition  of  Europe . 229

Failure  of  Lord  Malmesbury’s  negotiation  at  Paris  .  .  .  .  231

THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.  xiii

PAGE

Proceedings  of  Wolfe  Tone  in  America . 231

Undertakes  a  mission  to  France.— Report  of  De  la  Croix  .  .  .  233

Tone’s  memoir  to  the  French  Government . 234

Mission  of  Fitzgerald  and  O’Connor  to  Hamburg  .  .  .  .  236

Arrival  of  Tone  in  France — his  journals . 238

Character  of  Tone’s  patriotism . 241

His  representations  of  the  prospects  of  invasion  ....  242

The  Irish  in  the  British  navy . 246

Mission  of  O’Shea  to  Ireland . 249

French  desire  that  rebellion  should  precede  invasion  .  .  .  .  250

Hoche’s  expedition . 252

Small  number  of  naturalised  Irishmen  in  it. — Later  history  of  the

Irish  Brigade . 253

French  expedition  sails  Dec.  15 . 255

Arrives  at  Bantry  Bay  .  . . 256

Preparations  to  meet  it . 258

The  great  storm . 259

Departure  of  the  fleet  .  263

Conduct  of  the  people . 266

Concluding  remarks . 270

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Superficial  character  of  much  Irish  disloyalty . 272

Probability  that  Ireland  would  for  a  time  have  been  lost  if  Hoche  had

landed . 273

Increased  loyalty. — Dr.  Hamilton . 274

Meeting  of  Parliament  (Jan.  16). — First  debates  .  ,  .  .  275

Absentee  tax  proposed  and  rejected . 277

Bank  of  Ireland  suspends  cash  payments . 278

Disturbances  in  the  North

Their  general  character . 278

State  of  Donegal  and  Roscommon . 279

Tyrone  and  Donegal — Murder  of  Hamilton . 280

Derry . 281

Armagh. — Letters  of  McNally  .  282

Grattan’s  proposed  volunteers . 284

Lake  ordered  to  disarm  the  North . 285

His  proclamation . . 286

Opposition  of  Grattan . 288

Fox,  with  Grattan’s  assent,  brings  the  state  of  Ireland  before  the

British  Parliament . 289

The  necessity  of  conciliating  the  Catholics  urged  ....  291

Determination  of  the  Government  to  refuse. — The  King’s  message

to  Camden . 293

Ireland  considered  in  a  state  of  rebellion. — Seizure  of  arms  .  .  294

Dean  Warburton’s  letters  from  Armagh  .  .  .  .  .  .  295

Letters  from  other  parts  of  Ulster  .......  296

Military  force  in  Ireland.— Difliculties  of  disarming  .  .  .  .  299

XIV

CONTENTS  OF

Situation  and  sentiments  of  the  yeomanry  .  .  •  •

Military  outrages  inevitable  ........

The  Ancient  Britons  near  Newry .

Other  military  outrages. — Lord  Moira’s  speech  .....

Rebels  sent  to  the  fleet  .........

Transformation  of  Orangism. — It  becomes  the  chief  counterpoise
to  the  United  Irishmen  .........

Lake  on  the  methods  that  should  be  employed  in  Ulster  .
Correspondence  of  General  Knox  with  Pelham  .  .  .  .  .

Dissatisfaction  of  the  Government  with  the  Ulster  gentry

Attitude  and  wishes  of  the  gentry .

Addresses  in  favour  of  reform .

Possibility  that  reform  might  have  prevented  rebellion  ,  ,  .

The  Irish  Government  consider  that  it  would  be  useless  .  .

Their  estimate  of  the  parties  in  Ireland  .  .  .  .  .  .

Their  opposition  to  Catholic  emancipation — Ponsonby’s  reform

resolutions .

Grattan’s  last  speech  on  reform . .  .

His  secession  from  Parliament. — Debates  no  longer  published  at
length  ............

Grattan’s  conduct  and  position  in  1797  .

He  acknowledges  the  failure  of  parliamentary  government  in  Ireland
Disaffection  among  the  troops. — Orangemen,  Archbishop  Troy  and
other  priests  suspected  .........

Arrest  of  O’Connor  &c. — The  ‘Northern  Star’  stopped. — Newell's
information  ...........

Alleged  complicity  of  the  United  Irishmen  with  assassination  .  .
The  Union  Star. — Cox’s  confessions  .......

Improvement  in  Ulster. — Proclamation  of  May  17— many  captures
Command  of  Ireland  and  Viceroyalty  offered  to  Lord  Cornwallis  .
Refused  on  account  of  his  views  on  the  Catholic  question. — Offer
repeated  .

Revival  of  Orange  outrages .

Flight  of  the  Catholics  .........

The  Disarming

Lord  Blayney’s  severities — events  in  Westmeath  ....
At  Multifarnham  and  Charleville

*  •  •  •  •  •  •

State  of  Tyrone  and  Dungarvan  &c.  .....

Evidence  of  increase  of  the  religious  hatreds  in  the  North  .  .
Green  and  Orange  badges— Religious  riots  ....
Distrust  of  the  militia. — Success  of  the  disarming  in  Ulster  .

The  September  Assizes .

The  case  of  William  Orr .

Examination  of  the  degree  of  responsibility  of  the  Government  in
producing  the  rebellion  ......

Spread  of  sedition  to  Catholic  Ireland — its  first  centres  .

Influences  that  aoted  on  the  Catholic  masses

Catholic  emancipation  and  parliamentary  reform  had  little  part
The  tithe  question

PAGB

301

302

303
305

307

308

310

311

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

328

329

330

331

332

333
336

338

339

340

340

341

343

344

345

347

348

349

350
352

361

3C4

365

365

THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.  XV

PAGE

The  question  of  rent . 366

The  revived  sentiment  of  nationality . 367

Comparison  between  1641  and  1797. — Prophecies  of  Columkill  .  368

Fear  of  Orange  massacres. — The  pretended  Orange  oath  .  .  .  369

Defenderism  in  the  King’s  County . 370

Carlow,  Kilkenny,  Kildare,  Wexford,  and  Wicklow  tainted  .  .  371

Political  opposition  of  Kildare  gentry . 372

Pollock’s  report  of  the  condition  of  the  central  counties  .  .  .  373

Illustrations  of  the  panic  about  the  Orangemen  ....  373

Troubles  near  Dublin. — State  of  Tipperary . 374

Cork  and  Bandon . 375

Mallow. — Reports  about  the  Methodists . 376

Appalling  spread  of  crime . 377

Connaught  less  tainted  than  the  other  provinces— Sligo— Ennis —

Mayo  ............  379

General  state  of  Ireland . 380

New  hope  of  foreign  assistance — Mission  of  Lewins  .  .  .  .  381

Dutch  fleet  in  the  Texel — Mission  of  Jagerhorn  ....  383
Mission  and  memoir  of  McNevin  .  ......  384

Negotiations  at  Lille

Vicissitudes  of  the  war  in  1796,  1797  .  386

Preliminaries  of  Loeben . 387

Pitt  oilers  to  negotiate. — The  plenipotentiaries  at  Lille  .  .  .  387

Pitt’s  ardent  desire  for  peace . 388

Majority  of  the  Directory  hostile  to  peace _ Their  demands  .  .  390

Secret  understanding  between  Lord  Malmesbury  and  Maret  .  ,  .  390

Double  object  of  Pitt . 392

Peace  signed  between  Portugal  and  France. — Indignation  of  Gren¬
ville  ............  393

Possibility  of  corrupting  the  Directors . 394

Revolution  of  18  fructidor  ........  394

Lord  Malmesbury  ordered  (September  16)  to  quit  France  .  .  395

Lingering  hopes  of  peace  dispelled  .......  396

Proofs  that  Irish  interests  had  no  real  place  in  French  diplomacy  .  397

Parallel  from  the  history  of  the  Irish  Brigade . 398

Death  of  Burke  ...........  398

Renewed  French  negotiations  in  Ireland.  Channels  of  information
of  the  Government  .  . . 399

Disaffection  in  the  Fleet

Mutiny  at  Spithead . 403

Mutiny  of  the  Nore . 404

Its  suppression. — The  1  Hermione  ’ . 405

Restoration  of  the  tone  of  the  navy.  The  British  sailor  .  .  406

The  Dutch  .fleet  in  the  Texel . 407

Long-continued  adverse  winds . 408

Reports  received  from  Ireland . 409

Probable  effects  of  the  invasion.— Postponement  of  the  expedition  .  410

Battle  ol  Camperdown . 411

xvi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.

Death  of  Hoche.  Indifference  of  Buonaparte  to  Irish  affairs
Dissolution  of  the  Irish  Parliament  .....
Honours  conferred. — The  Kenmare  peerage  .  .  .  .

Election  of  the  last  Irish  Parliament  .....
Grattan’s  ‘  Letter  to  the  Citizens  of  Dublin  ’  .  .  .  .

State  of  Ireland  at  the  end  of  1797. — Pelham’s  estimate
Clare’s  estimate  of  the  situation. — Expectations  of  invasion  .

Alarming  reports  from  McNally .

Establishment  of  ‘  The  Press’  .......

Abercromby  made  Commander-in-Chief  ....

His  estimate  of  the  state  of  Ireland .

Attempts  to  restore  discipline  and  legality  .

The  general  orders,  February  26,  1798  .

Cabal  against  Abercromby .

His  resignation  and  letters  .......

His  expedition  through  Leinster  and  Munster. — Martial  law
Lake  made  Commander-in-Chief  ......

Abercromby  on  the  prospects  of  Ireland  ....

Concession  to  Catholics  ref  used. —Higgins  pleads  their  cause
Letter  from  the  Bishop  of  Derry  .....

Meeting  of  Parliament,  January  9. — Speech  of  Parsons  .

Acts  of  military  violence  .  .

The  Opposition.— Plunket  .

The  absentee  tax  . .

Calm  in  Ulster  ....

Anarchy  and  growing  sedition  in  the  other  provinces
Letters  of  Beresford

*  •  •  J  •  •  •

Change  of  sentiment  among  the  gentry .

Knox’s  correspondence  with  Bell .

Rapid  growth  of  religious  animosity  ....

The  Spring  Assizes,  1798  .

The  trials  at  Maryborough .

No  resolution  yet  taken  in  England  about  the  introduction  of  an
Union  Bill .

English  ministerial  policy  towards  Ireland— favourable  to  the
Catholics  .......

Close  connection  between  England  and  Rome. — Lord  Hood’s  fleet
&c.  ....

Burke  desires  diplomatic  connection  with  the  Vatican
Hippisley  and  Erskine .

Signs  of  friendly  feeling  between  the  Vatican  and  the  Court  of
St.  James  ........

Views  of  Camden .

Conclusion .

PAGB

412

412

413
416
416

421

422

423

424

425

426
428
430

432

433
436

438

439

439

440

442

443
445

447

448

449

452

453

454

455

456

458

459

460

461

461

462

463

464

465

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

IN

THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CHAPTER  XXVI.

In  the  concluding  chapter  of  the  last  volume  I  noticed  the
remarkable  contrast  which  was  presented  between  the  attitude
of  the  Irish  Parliament  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1793  and
the  general  condition  of  the  country.  In  Parliament  the  Govern¬
ment,  at  the  outbreak  of  the  great  French  war,  was  supported
with  an  almost  absolute  unanimity.  Grattan  had  declared  in
the  strongest  terms  that  it  was  both  the  duty  and  the  interest
of  Ireland  to  give  England  an  unequivocal  support,  and  all  the
important  measures  of  this  memorable  session  for  the  purpose  of
maintaining  the  war,  of  repressing  sedition  and  insurrection,
and  of  relieving  the  Catholics  from  their  disabilities,  were  either
carried  without  a  division  or  by  overwhelming  majorities.  But
in  the  meantime,  throughout  the  country,  sedition  and  anarchy
were  rapidly  spreading.  Demonstrations  in  favour  of  France
and  in  opposition  to  the  war  were  constantly  multiplying.  An
extremely  seditious  press  had  arisen,  and  Paine’s  writings  were
profusely  distributed.  Clubs  of  United  Irishmen  were  formed
in  numerous  counties,  and  were  actively  engaged  in  democratic
and  revolutionary  propagandism.  The  Defender  movement  was
assuming  a  new  character  and  a  new  importance,  and  efforts
were  made  in  the  towns  to  enroll  national  guards  modelled  after
those  of  France.

The  relations  between  discontented  Irishmen  and  French
agents  were  becoming  very  frequent,  and  from  this  time  Irish
244

2

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

affairs  began  to  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  tbe  archives  of  the
French  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs.  There  is  reason  to  believe
that  one  at  least  of  the  Catholic  delegates  who  came  to  London
in  December  1792  to  present  to  the  King  the  petition  of  the
Catholic  Convention  had  on  that  occasion  a  secret  interview
with  Chauvelin,  who  does  not,  however,  appear  to  have  given
much  encouragement.1  Nearly  at  the  same  time  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald  came  to  Paris  on  a  visit  to  Paine,  and  he  is  said  to
have  assured  him  that  if  the  French  could  enable  4,000  volun¬
teers  to  subsist  in  Ireland  for  a  few  months,  a  revolution  could
be  effected.  Lebrun,  who  was  then  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,
was  so  much  impressed  with  the  statement  that  he  resolved  to
send  another  secret  agent  to  Ireland,  and  selected,  at  the  re¬
commendation  of  Paine,  an  American  named  Oswald,  who  had
volunteered  in  the  French  service  and  had  risen  to  be  colonel  of

artillery.  Oswald  passed  over  to  Scotland,  and  at  last  succeeded,
with  much  difficulty,  in  reaching  Ireland  in  June.  He  had
received  instructions  from  the  French  Minister  to  enter  into

communications  with  disaffected  Irishmen,  and  to  offer  men  and
money  if  an  insurrection  could  be  made,  but  his  report  to  the
French  Government  was  not  altogether  encouraging.  He  had
found,  he  said,  both  in  Scotland  and  Ireland  the  people  in  great
confusion  through  the  numerous  bankruptcies,  the  interruption
of  commerce,  and  the  dismissal  of  workmen,  occasioned  by  the
war,  but  he  thought  there  was  at  present  little  to  be  expected
from  Ireland.  The  people  were  discontented  and  agitated,  but
the  volunteers  had  been  successfully  suppressed,  and  Oswald  saw
no  immediate  prospect  of  active  insurrection.2

The  Gunpowder  Act  and  the  proclamation  against  volun¬
teering  had  been  imperatively  needed  to  check  a  most  formidable

1  The  authority  for  this  statement
is  a  letter  from  Reinhard  to  De  la
Croix,  29  fiorfal,  aniv  (May  18,  1796),
French  Foreign  Office.  Reinhard
says  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald  re¬
minded  him  of  certain  communica¬
tions  which  the  deputies  fr  m  Ireland,
sent  to  make  ‘  reclamations  ’  to  the
English  Government  in  December
1792,  had  with  Chauvelin,  and  adds
that  Chauvelin  had  not  received  them
with  all  the  interest  the  importance
of  the  matter  demanded.  This  nego¬
tiation,  I  imagine,  is  alluded  to  in  a

disjointed  fragment  of  Wolfe  Tone’s
journal,  written  in  March  1793.  After
referring  to  the  deputation  to  Eng¬
land  &c.  he  writes :  ‘  Motives  of
Catholic  leaders;  not  corruption.  Some
negotiations  carried  on  by  one  of
them  in  London  unknown  to  the
others.  The  others  probably  un¬
willing  to  risk  their  estates.’  (Tone’s
Life ,  i.  108,  Washington  edition.)

2  See  the  papers  of  Oswald,  June
and  July  1793,  French  Foreign  Office.
See,  too,  McNevin's  Pieces  of  Irish
History,  p.  7 1.

CH.  XXVI.

PREPARATIONS  FOR  REBELLION./

3

scheme  for  arming,  under  the  guise  of  volunteers,  the  great
body  of  the  republican  and  disaffected  party  in  Ireland,  and
placing  them  under  leaders  of  their  own  opinions.  An  incendiary
address,  urging  the  volunteers  to  arm,  and  to  make  Catholic
emancipation  and  the  extension  of  the  elective  franchise  to  the
whole  body  of  the  people  their  leading  objects,  had  been  issued
by  the  United  Irishmen  in  December  1792.1  In  the  following
February  delegates  from  thirty-five  volunteer  companies,  repre¬
senting  more  than  2,000  men,  had  assembled  at  Antrim  and
agreed  on  a  scheme  for  a  general  arming  of  volunteers  thrdughout
the  kingdom,  for  the  appointment  of  committees  and  officers  to
direct  them,  and  for  the  accumulation  of  military  stores  ;  and  they
had  issued  a  significant  circular  to  all  the  volunteers  of  the  coun- '
try,  recommending  them  not  to  publish  any  resolutions.2  In  a
report  drawn  up  in  the  following  month  by  the  House  of  Lords
it  was  stated  that  prayers  for  the  success  of  the  French  arms
had  been  offered  up  at  Belfast  from  the  pulpit,  in  the  presence  of
military  associations  which  had  been  newly  raised  in  that  town ;
that  bodies  of  men  composed  mostly  of  the  lowest  classes  of  the
people,  and  armed  and  disciplined  under  officers  chosen  by  them¬
selves,  had  been  enrolled  in  different  parts  of  the  North ;  that
great  supplies  of  arms  and  gunpowder  had  been  collected  and
were  collecting  at  Belfast  and  Newry ;  that  constant  efforts  were
made  to  seduce  the  soldiery  and  obtain  military  men  to  discipline
the  new  levies ;  that  at  Belfast  bodies  of  men  were  drilled  and
exercised  almost  every  night  for  several  hours  by  candlelight.
The  declared  object  of  these  military  bodies,  the  report  said,
was  to  procure  a  reform  of  Parliament,  but  there  was  an  obvious
intention  to  overawe  the  Parliament  and  the  Government,  and
hopes  were  held  out  of  assistance  by  a  French  descent  upon
Ireland.3  The  establishment  in  Dublin  of  national  guards
closely  imitated  from  those  in  France  has  been  already  men¬
tioned,  and  the  formation  of  similar  bodies  was  contemplated  at
Belfast,  Derry,  and  Galway.  In  Dublin  their  suppression  was
not  effected  without  some  difficulty ;  it  was  found  necessary  to
call  out  the  troops,  and  the  condition  of  Ulster  in  the  spring  of

1  Madden’s  United  Irishmen,  i.  mittee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  1793.

234-237.  See  Tone’s  comments  on  the  report,

2  Tone’s  Life,  i.  2G8.  i.  108.

8  Report  from  the  Secret  Com-

4  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvt.

1793  was  so  serious  that  the  Government  strongly  urged  the
necessity  of  sending  reinforcements  to  that  province.1

The  great  majority  of  the  more  conspicuous  United  Irishmen
at  this  period,  as  well  as  in  the  subsequent  periods  of  the  move¬
ment,  were  nominally  either  Presbyterians  or  members  of  the
Established  Church,  though  a  large  proportion  of  them  were
indifferent  to  theological  doctrines.  Tone,  Butler,  Emmet,
Hamilton  Kowan,  Napper  Tandy,  Arthur  O’Connor,  Lord
Edward  Fitzgerald,  Bond,  Bussell,  Drennan,  Neilson,  and  the
two  Sheares  were  all  Protestants,  and  Belfast  and  other  parts  of
Presbyterian  Ulster  were  the  special  centres  of  Irish  republi¬
canism.  On  this  point  the  Government  despatches  and  the
writings  of  the  United  Irishmen  were  perfectly  agreed.  The
Test  Act  and  the  disabilities  relating  to  marriage  which  especi¬
ally  affected  the  Presbyterians,  and  the  commercial  restrictions
which  were  peculiarly  felt  by  a  section  of  the  population  that
was  essentially  commercial,  had,  it  is  true,  of  late  years  been
abolished,  but  the  resentments  they  had  produced  had  not  passed
away.  The  republican  religion  of  the  northern  Presbyterians
gave  them  some  bias  towards  republican  government,  and  their
sympathy  with  the  New  England  Puritans  in  their  contest
against  England  had  been  passionate  and  avowed.  They  had
scarcely  any  part  among  the  landed  gentry  of  Ireland,  and  were
therefore  less  sensible  than  other  Protestants  of  the  necessity  of
connection  with  England  for  the  security  of  their  property,
while  they  were  more  keenly  sensible  than  any  other  class  to
the  evils  of  the  existing  system  of  government.  They  claimed  to
outnumber  the  members  of  the  Established  Church,2  but  under
the  existing  system  of  monopoly  they  had  scarcely  any  political
power,  and  scarcely  any  share  in  the  patronage  of  the  Crown.
An  intelligent,  educated,  energetic  middle-class  community
naturally  resented  such  a  system  of  exclusion  and  monopoly  far

1  Westmorland  to  Dundas,  March
29,  1793.

2  Wolfe  Tone  pretended  that  the
Protestant  Dissenters  were  twice  as
numerous  as  the  members  of  the
Established  Church  (Tone’s  Life,  i.
277,  278),  but  this  must  have  been
an  enormous  exaggeration.  In  the
census  of  1834  tbe  former  were  com¬
puted  at  664, 1G4,  and  the  latter  at

852,064.  Mr  Killen,  however,  gives
some  reason  for  believing  that  the
Episcopalians  were  then  overrated
and  the  Presbyterians  underrated ;
and  he  even  claims  a  slight  superiority
of  numbers  for  the  Presbyterians.
(Continuation  of  Reid’s  History  of
the  Irish  Presbyterians,  iii.  576-
579.  See,  too,  Lewis’s  Irish  Dis¬
turbances,  pp.  342-344.)

CH.  XXYI.

CATHOLIC  UNITED  IRISHMEN.

5

more  keenly  than  a  poor,  dependent,  and  perfectly  ignorant
Catholic  peasantry,  and  they  especially  detested  the  legal  obliga¬
tion  of  paying  tithes  to  an  Episcopalian  Church.  The  growth
of  religious  scepticism  or  indifference  in  the  intelligent  town
populations  had  at  the  same  time  prepared  the  way  for  the  re¬
ception  of  the  doctrines  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  for  that
alliance  with  the  Catholics  which  the  United  Irishmen  preached
as  the  first  condition  of  obtaining  a  democratic  reform.  We
have  seen  the  powerful  assistance  which  the  northern  Protes¬
tants  had  given  to  the  Catholic  cause  in  the  latter  stages  of  its
struggle,  and  their  strenuous  support  of  the  democratic  party  in
the  Catholic  body,  and  it  is  an  undoubted  and  most  remarkable
fact  that  almost  the  wkole  guiding  influence  of  the  seditious
movement  in  1793  was  Protestant  or  Deistical,  while  the
Catholic  gentry,  the  Catholic  prelates,  and,  as  far  as  can  now  be
judged,  the  bulk  of  the  Catholic  priesthood  were  strongly  opposed
to  it.

The  power  of  the  priesthood,  however,  in  Ireland,  as  in  all
other  countries,  had  been  diminished  by  the  influences  that  led
to  the  French  Revolution.  The  Catholic  gentry  were  too  small
a  body  to  exercise  much  authority,  and  their  weight  had  been
in  the  last  months  steadily  declining,  partly  through  the  growth
of  a  great  Catholic  trading  interest  in  the  towns,  and  partly
through  the  secession  of  Lord  Kenmare  and  his  followers  from
the  committee,  and  the  triumph  of  the  democratic  party  in  that
body.  It  is  probable,  too,  that  the  prediction  of  Parsons  was
verified,  and  that  the  Relief  Act  of  1793  still  further  weakened
them.  As  they  could  be  neither  members  of  Parliament,  sheriffs,
nor  sub-sheriffs,  they  could  not  assume  their  natural  place  as
the  leaders  of  the  great  political  power  which  the  new  Act  had
suddenly  called  into  existence.  It  is  incontestable  that  a  party
had  arisen  among  the  Catholics  which  was  in  full  sympathy
with  the  United  Irishmen,  not  only  in  their  desire  for  Catholic
emancipation  and  parliamentary  reform,  but  also  in  the  spirit
that  animated  them,  and  in  the  ulterior  objects  which  were
gradually  dawning  on  their  minds.  We  have  seen  that  the  aims
and  wishes  of  Wolfe  Tone  had  been  from  the  beginning  directed
to  a  complete  separation  of  Ireland  from  England,1  and  he  tells

1  See  vol.  vi.  p.  467.

6

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvi.

us  that  he  had  privately  communicated  his  genuine  political
sentiments  without  any  reserve  to  John  Keogh  and  Richard
McCormick,  the  two  men  who,  after  thesecession  of  Lord  Kenmare
and  of  his  party,  were  most  powerful  in  the  Catholic  Committee.
It  was  observed  by  a  Government  informer  in  l/9o  that  Keogh
was  a  most  regular  attendant  at  the  meetings  of  the  committee  of
the  United  Irishmen  in  Dublin.  Tone  notices  that  almost  from
the  first  formation  of  the  United  Irish  Society  1  the  Catholics
flocked  in,  in  crowds,’  and  he  had  no  more  doubts  than  Duigenan
or  Clare  about  the  future  sedition  of  the  Catholic  democracy.

£  I  well  knew,’  he  wrote,  ‘  that  however  it  might  be  disguised  or
suppressed,  there  existed  in  the  breast  of  every  Irish  Catholic
an  inextinguishable  abhorrence  of  the  English  name  and
power.’ 1

Early  in  1793,  and  before  the  Catholic  Relief  Bill  had  been
carried,  a  pamphlet  appeared  from  the  pen  of  Theobald  McKenna,
who  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  literary  representatives  of
the  Catholic  party  of  Lord  Kenmare,  which  has  much  interest
as  expressing  their  sentiments.  It  was  called  4  An  Essay  on
Parliamentary  Reform  and  the  Evils  likely  to  ensue  from  a
Republican  Constitution  in  Ireland,’  and  it  is  a  solemn  protest
against  the  revolutionary  and  republican  tenets  which  Wolfe  Tone
and  the  other  United  Irishmen  were  diffusing  through  Ireland.
It  was  true  indeed,  he  admitted,  that  a  parliamentary  reform
was  much  needed  in  Ireland,  and  its  nature  and  limits  were  not
difficult  to  ascertain.  The  first  and  most  essential  defect  of  the
Irish  Legislature  was  the  exclusion  of  Catholics  from  political
power.  The  next  was  the  practical  exclusion  of  merchants,
which  left  the  trading  interest  destitute  of  its  natural  influence
and  weight.  To  these  two  causes  most  of  the  real  evils  of  the
Irish  parliamentary  system  may  be  traced.  Corruption  was  the
natural  result  of  the  narrowness  of  the  constituencies,  and  4  in
many  counties  a  great  proportion  of  the  men  of  property  were
disfranchised  under  pretext  of  religion.’  The  relation  of  classes
was  injuriously  affected  by  the  same  cause,  for  4  when  the  gentry
feel  not  any  necessity  to  court  the  favour  of  their  inferiors,  they
are  deficient  in  offices  of  protection  and  tenderness.’  The  4  bar¬
barous  feudal  notion  ’  that  still  lingered  in  Ireland,  ‘that  the
1  Tone’s  Memoirs,  i.  52,  55,  63.

CH.  XXVI.

THEOBALD  McKENNA.

7

mercantile  is  less  honourable  than  other  occupations,’  was  due  to
the  fact  that  a  House  of  Commons,  which  was  full  of  lawyers,
scarcely  contained  a  single  merchant.

At  the  same  time  McKenna  urged  that  the  Revolution  of
France  should  act  rather  as  a  warning  than  an  example,  and
that  the  dangers  of  the  age  sprang  rather  from  democratic  than
monarchical  excess.  He  dwells  on  the  peril  of  weakening  the
Crown ;  of  endangering  the  connection  with  England ;  of  throw¬
ing  the  political  guidance  of  the  country  into  the  hands  of  con¬
ventions  and  military  associations  ;  of  sacrificing  the  distinctive
merits  of  constitutional  government  in  the  pursuit  of  an  im¬
possible  equality.  ‘  It  matters  little,’  he  said,  ‘  how  men  are
appointed  to  seats  in  Parliament  provided  they  be  eminent  and
deserving  persons,  selected  from  the  different  professions  of  im¬
portance.  This,  in  fact,  and  not  the  parcelling  of  the  country
into  districts  of  nominally  equal  importance,  is  a  fair  and  im¬
partial  representation.’  He  denied  in  'the  most  emphatic  terms
that  Ireland  was  on  the  whole  an  ill-governed  country,  and  that
its  people  were  in  the  deplorable  condition  represented  by  Wolfe
Tone.  1  We  are  indeed,’  he  said,  ‘  peculiarly  well  circumstanced
in  Ireland.  We  have  the  advantages  of  a  limited  monarchy
without  incurring  anything  near  the  degree  of  expense  which
in  other  countries  is  annexed  to  the  maintenance  of  royalty.’
‘  The  taxes  of  Ireland  even  compared  with  its  means  are  lower
than  those  of  any  other  country.’  ‘  No  class  of  men  or  branch
of  manufacture  languishes  in  this  country  under  national  imposts.
These  fall  on  the  superfluities,  not  on  the  necessaries  of  life,  and
a  reduction  of  them  would  not  augment  the  poor  man’s  comfort.’

‘  If  the  connection  were  dissolved,  or  if  we  adhered  so  loosely  to
England  that  she  should  learn  to  consider  us  a  separate  nation,
the  expense  of  a  distinct  Government  would  amount  to  much
more  than  our  present  revenue.’  The  county  cess  for  the  main¬
tenance  of  the  roads  is  often  scandalously  or  unnecessarily  ex¬
travagant,  but  at  least  there  is  no  compulsory  labour  as  in  France.

‘  The  bounties  on  tillage  have  advanced  prosperity  in  Ireland.’

4  The  moneyed  interest  is  rising  rapidly.’

On  one  point,  however,  McKenna  fully  agreed  with  Tone.
It  was  that  the  French  Revolution  had  entirely  changed  the
character  of  Irish  politics.  ‘  The  first  and  greatest  of  all  revo-

8

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUIIY.  ch.  xxvi.

lutions,’  lie  says,  ‘  lias  been  produced  among  us,  without  the  aid
of  plan  or  project.  The  public  spirit  of  the  Catholics  has  been
excited.  The  controversy  on  the  French  Revolution  extended
more  universally  in  Ireland  than  any  other  literary  discussion.
The  public  mind  was  prepared  by  the  diffusion  of  general  prin¬
ciples.’

The  United  Irish  movement  in  the  North  was  chiefly  directed
by  a  secret  committee  which  sat  at  Belfast,  and  which  had  esta¬
blished  a  small  sub-committee  of  correspondence  for  the  purpose
of  entering  into  communications  with  sympathisers  in  other  parts
of  Ireland.  In  Dublin  there  was  another  committee,  which  met
at  fortnightly  and  sometimes  weekly  intervals.  The  Government
had  secured  one  of  its  members,  whose  subscription  to  the  society
was  paid,  and  who  received  from  time  to  time  remittances  in
money  from  the  Castle,  and  in  return  forwarded  anonymous  re¬
ports  of  the  proceedings  of  every  meeting.1  The  society  as
yet  differed  very  little  from  the  democratic  clubs  that  had  long
existed  in  Great  Britain.  Several  of  its  members  were  un¬
doubtedly  speculative  republicans.  All  of  them  were  advocates
of  a  measure  of  very  democratic  reform,  warm  admirers  of  the
French  Revolution,  and  strong  opponents  of  the  war,  and  they
were  bound  together  by  a  resolution  which  stated  that  the  weight
of  English  influence  was  the  master  evil  in  the  Government  of
Ireland,  and  that  it  could  only  be  resisted  by  a  cordial  union  of
Irishmen  of  all  religious  persuasions.  But  their  real  and  final
object  at  this  time  was  parliamentary  reform  on  a  democratic
and  unsectarian  basis,  though  some  of  them  were  from  the  first
convinced  that  this  could  only  be  obtained  by  separation,  while
others  believed  that  it  would  be  attained,  like  the  Constitution
of  1782,  by  a  menace  of  force.  This  had  been  the  object  of
the  attempted  organisation  of  the  National  Guards,  and  two
sentences  of  Flood  were  often  quoted  among  the  United  Irish¬
men  :  £  When  have  you  negotiated,’  he  had  once  said,  ‘  that  you
have  not  been  deceived  ?  When  have  you  demanded,  that  you
have  not  succeeded  ?  ’

About  forty  or  fifty  members  were  usually  present  at  the

1  He  was  a  Dublin  silk  merchant,
and  can  be  identitied  by  a  letter  from
Cooke  to  Nepean,  May  26,  1794,  in
the  Kecord  Office.  His  reports  will

be  found  in  the  ‘Secret  and  Confi¬
dential  Correspondence  ’  in  the  Irish
State  Paper  Office.

CH.  XXVI.

THE  SPRING  OF  1793.

9

meetings  of  tlie  Dublin  Committee.  The  chief  business  was
electing  new  members,  corresponding  with  societies  in  England
and  Scotland,  drawing  up  addresses  which  were  chiefly  written
by  Dr.  Drennan,  elaborating  a  plan  of  parliamentary  reform
which  Irishmen  of  all  classes  were  exhorted  to  hang  up  in  their
houses  or  cabins.  The  quarrel  of  Napper  Tandy  with  the  House
of  Commons  had  made  {  undefined  parliamentary  privilege  ’  a
leading  grievance,  and  when  the  House  of  Lords  in  the  spring
of  1793  established  a  committee  of  secrecy  for  investigating  the
disturbances  in  some  counties,  and  when  this  committee  assumed
the  power  of  compelling  attendance  and  enforcing  answers  upon
oath  to  interrogatories  tending  to  criminate  the  person  examined,
the  United  Irishmen  issued  a  paper  contending  that  it  had  ex¬
ceeded  its  legal  power.  The  House  of  Lords  promptly  took  up
the  matter,  and  Simon  Butler,  the  chairman,  and  Oliver  Bond,
the  secretary  of  the  society,  who  signed  the  paper,  were  imprisoned
by  their  order  for  six  months  and  fined  500 1.  each.  The  fines
were  paid  by  the  society.1

Two  other  important  members  of  the  society  about  this  time
passed  for  a  short  period  from  the  scene.  Napper  Tandy,  the
most  indefatigable  of  the  agitators  in  Ireland,  being  threatened
with  prosecutions  for  libel  and  for  having  taken  the  Defender
oath,  sought  safety  on  the  Continent,  and  soon  after  Hamilton
Ttowan  was  prosecuted  for  seditious  libel  on  account  of  an
address  to  the  volunteers.  He  was  defended  by  Curran  in  one
of  the  most  eloquent  speeches  ever  delivered  at  the  bar,  but  was
found  guilty  and  sentenced  to  two  years’  imprisonment  and  to

a  fine  of  500Z.

%

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  United  Irishmen  were  as  yet
bound  by  no  oath,  and  the  pledge  which  every  member  took  was
a  very  innocent  document,  merely  binding  him  to  use  all  his
abilities  and  influence  ‘  to  obtain  an  impartial  and  adequate  re¬
presentation  of  the  Irish  nation  in  Parliament,’  and  as  a  means
to  that  end  to  promote  a  brotherhood  of  affection  among  Irish¬
men  of  all  religious  persuasions.  In  April  1792,  however,  a
proposal  was  made  to  abolish  this  pledge,  ‘  as  it  is  found  by
experience  that  it  prevents  a  number  of  very  warm  friends  to  a

1  Madden’s  United  Irishmen ,  i.  248-253 ;  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish
History,  pp.  49,  50.

10

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvi.

reform  from  joining  us ;  but,’  adds  tbe  Government  agent,  ‘  I
shall  oppose  it,  as  we  have  no  business  with  any  of  your  luke¬
warm  fellows  who  may  hesitate  at  going  as  great  lengths  as  our¬
selves.  If  the  test  should  be  abolished,  the  members  will  increase
amazingly.  Therefore  resist  it.’ 1

The  first  openly  seditious  movement  appears  to  have  coma
from  a  branch  society  at  Lisburn,  which  applied  to  the  parent
society  in  the  first  days  of  1793  for  assistance  to  purchase  arms
and  ammunition.  The  Dublin  Committee,  after  a  discussion,
resolved  ‘  that  it  was  impossible  to  comply  with  their  request.’
‘  In  the  course  of  a  debate  on  the  above  measure,’  writes  the
informer,  1  it  was  strongly  urged  that  it  would  be  highly  im¬
proper  for  the  society  to  arm  other  bodies  of  men  without  first
adopting  the  measure  themselves;  and  as  their  sole  intent  of
first  forming  themselves  into  a  society  was  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  a  full  representation  of  the  people  in  Parliament,
that  great  object  should  be  obtained  if  'possible  without  recourse
to  arms.  Councillor  Emmett  agreed  in  the  propriety  of  the
resolution,  but  hoped  the  society  would  reserve  to  itself  the
expediency  of  resorting  to  arms  if  necessity  required  the  mea¬
sure.’  It  was  proposed  at  the  same  time  to  get  rid  of  the
buttons  and  cockades,  as  they  kept  many  from  joining.  1 1
shall  oppose  the  alteration,’  wrote  the  informer,  ‘  for  a  very
substantial  reason,  which  I  can  explain  if  necessary  to  my
friends.’ 2  In  the  summer  ‘  a  gentleman  waited  on  Mr.  Grattan
by  the  desire  of  Messrs.  Butler  and  Bond,  with  a  petition  to  the
House  of  Commons  from  them,  and  praying  him  to  present  it,
which  he  declined,  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  he  did  not
approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  United  Irishmen  in  many  in¬
stances.’  3

The  materials  for  writing  the  secret  history  of  the  United
Irishmen  are  very  ample,  but  there  were  important  movements
at  this  time  among  the  Catholics  which  are  much  less  easy  to
describe,  for  the  evidence  relating  to  them  is  at  once  scanty,
conflicting,  and  prejudiced.  I  have  mentioned  the  probable
effect  of  the  Belief  Act  of  1793  on  the  influence  of  the  loyal
Catholic  gentry.  As  far  as  can  now  be  judged,  the  Protestant

1  April  13,  1702  (Irish  State  *  January  4,  1793.

Paper  Office).  »  May  31,  1793.

CH.  XXVI.

THE  DEFENDERS.

11

gentry  were  ready  to  carry  out  tlie  Act  with  liberality,  and  it  is
remarkable  that  in  this  very  year,  out  of  the  twenty-three  grand
jurors  returned  by  the  high  sheriff  for  the  county  of  Dublin,  no
less  than  twelve  were  Catholics,1  but  the  clause  enabling  corpora¬
tions  to  elect  Catholics  was  in  many,  probably  in  most  cases,
defeated  by  the  municipal,  class  or  trade  jealousy  of  the  existing
members.2  The  Corporation  of  Dublin  continued,  as  it  had  long
been,  violently  anti-Catholic ;  and  as  the  Government  exercised  an
overwhelming  influence  in  that  body,  the  Government  bore,  in
the  eyes  of  the  public,  a  great  part  of  the  blame.  The  Catholic
prelates,  however,  seemed  more  than  satisfied,  and  they  all,  to
the  great  indignation  of  the  United  Irishmen,  joined  in  an
address  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  expressing  unbounded  loyalty
and  unqualified  gratitude.3  Munster,  most  of  Connaught,  and
a  great  part  of  Leinster  were  very  free  from  political  troubles ;
but  several  counties  of  Ulster,  and  some  adjoining  parts  of
Leinster  and  Connaught,  were  the  scenes  of  most  serious  dis¬
turbances  which  amounted  to  little  less  than  civil  war.

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  quarrel  between  the  Defenders
and  the  Peep  of  Day  Boys  appears  to  have  been  at  first  of  the
nature  of  a  faction  fight,  originating  in  1784  or  1785  in  the
hatred  which  had  long  subsisted  between  the  poorer  Catholics
and  the  poorer  Presbyterians  in  the  county  of  Armagh,  and  it
principally  took  the  form  of  the  plunder  of  arms,  and  the  wreck¬
ing  of  Catholic  chapels  and  houses.  The  name  taken  by  the
Catholics  implies  that  the  Protestants  were  the  aggressors,  and
the  stress  of  evidence  favours  the  conclusion  that  in  the  northern
counties  this  was  the  case,4  but  many  atrocious  crimes  were
perpetrated  on  each  side,  and  many  lives  were  lost.  The  dis¬
turbances  rose  and  fell  during  several  years.  For  a  time  they

1  Anthologia  Ilibernica,  i.  323.

2  A  few  curious  particulars  of
what  took  place  in  Dublin  will  be
found  in  the  Anthologia  Hibernica,
ii.  74,  75,316.  The  ‘Corporation  of

Cutlers,  Painters,  Stainers,  and  Sta¬
tioners,  or  Guild  of  St.  Luke,’  in

1793  unanimously  admitted  nine
Catholics  to  their  freedom.  The
Guild  of  Merchants  rejected  the  pe¬
tition  of  some  Catholics  for  admission
and  adjourned  the  others.  The  ‘  Cor¬
poration  of  Shoemakers  ’  acted  in  the

same  way.  The  *  Corporation  of
Apothecaries  ’  admitted  some  Catho¬
lics.

3  McNevin,  p.  61.

*  See  McNevin,  p.  62 ;  Wolfe
Tone’s  Memoirs,  i.  174.  Musgrave,
who  has  devoted  a  good  deal  of  at¬
tention  to  the  matter,  says  it  began
with  a  quarrel  between  two  indivi¬
duals  in  the  county  of  Armagh  in  1784,
and  speedily  expanded,  first  into  a
faction  fight,  and  then  into  a  religious
war.

12

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvi.

appear  to  have  been  suppressed  by  the  volunteers,1  but  in  1791
and  1792  they  broke  out  again  on  a  much  larger  scale  in  the
counties  of  Tyrone,  Down,  Louth,  Meath,  Cavan,  and  Monaghan.
There  were  frequent  combats  of  large  bodies  of  armed  men,
numerous  outrages,  rumours  of  intended  massacres  of  Catholics
by  Presbyterians  and  of  Presbyterians  by  Catholics,  threatening
letters  which  showed  by  clear  internal  evidence  that  they  were  the
work  of  very  ignorant  men.  In  the  county  of  Louth  the  Catholics
appear  to  have  been  the  chief  offenders,  for  it  is  stated  that  in  the
spring  assizes  of  1793  at  Dundalk  twenty-one  Defenders  were
sentenced  to  death  and  thirty-seven  to  transportation  and  im¬
prisonment,  while  thirteen  trials  for  murder  were  postponed.2  In
the  county  of  Meath,  also,  which  was  during  several  months  in  a
condition  of  utter  social  anarchy,  it  is  admitted  by  the  best  Catholic
authority  that  the  Catholics  were  the  aggressors.3  The  distur¬
bances  broke  out  near  the  end  of  1792,  in  a  part  of  the  county
adjoining  the  county  of  Cavan,  where  there  were  large  settlements
of  Presbyterians,  between  whom  and  the  Catholics  there  had  long
subsisted  a  traditional  animosity.  At  first  the  Catholics  plun¬
dered  the  Protestants  of  their  arms  with  impunity,  but  soon  a
large  body  of  well-armed  Presbyterians,  or,  as  they  were  still
commonly  called,  ‘  Scotch,’  came  from  the  county  of  Cavan,  ac¬
companied  by  some  resident  gentry,  and  turned  the  scale.  There
were  pitched  battles  in  broad  daylight ;  soldiers  were  called  out
and  many  persons  were  shot.  The  Presbyterians  were  accused
of  having  ‘  overrun  the  country,  pillaged,  plundered,  and  burned
without  requiring  any  mark  of  guilt  but  religion.’  Magistrates
were  alternately  charged  with  apathy,  connivance,  timidity,  and
violent  oppression.  There  was  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  legal
evidence,  and  two  or  three  informers  were  murdered.

For  six  or  eight  months  Defender  outrages  continued  in  this
county  almost  uncontrolled,  and  it  was  noticed  that  every  kind  of
crime  was  perpetrated  under  the  name.  It  was  found  that  the
most  efficient  means  of  suppressing  the  Defenders  was  the  for-

1  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  History,
p.  46.

2  Musgrave’s  Pebellions  in  Ireland,
(2nd  edition),  p.  63.

3  Candid  Account  of  the  Disturb¬
ances  in  the  County  of  Meatli  in  1792,
1793,  and  1794,  by  a  County  Meath

Freeholder  (Dublin,  1794).  This
pamphlet,  which  is  evidently  written
by  a  well-informed  and  moderate
Catholic,  is  the  '  fullest  account  I
know  of  the  Defender  movement  at
this  period.

CH.  XXVI.

DEFENDERS  IN  MEATH.

13

mation  of  a  secret  committee  of  gentlemen — one  of  whom  was  a
Catholic, — who  bound  themselves  not  to  disclose  the  names  of
informers.  At  last  the  gang  was  broken  up  and  several  members
turned  approvers.  A  clergyman  named  Butler  appears  to  have
shown  admirable  courage,  judgment,  and  skill  in  his  capacity  as
magistrate,  and  it  was  said  to  have  been  chiefly  due  to  him  that
in  a  few  months  Defenderism  scarcely  appeared  on  the  western
side  of  the  Boyne  and  Blackwater.  In  October  1793  he  was
shot  dead  near  the  palace  of  the  Bishop  of  Meath  at  Ardbrackan.
Two  or  three  leading  Catholic  shopkeepers  of  Navan  were  arrested
on  suspicion  of  being  concerned  in  a  popish  conspiracy  for  mur¬
dering  him,  and  one  of  them,  of  the  name  of  Fay,  was  put  on
his  trial.  He  had  been  secretary  of  a  Catholic  meeting  at  Trim
in  the  preceding  year,  and  appears  to  have  been  exceedingly  re¬
spected  by  his‘  coreligionists.  They  alleged  that  his  detention
was  very  harsh  and  his  trial  very  unfair,  and  it  is  at  least  certain
that  the  evidence  against  him  completely  broke  down,  and  that
with  the  full  assent  of  the  judge  he  was  honourably  acquitted  by
a  Protestant  jury.  Large  rewards  had  been  offered  for  informers,
and  it  appears  that  some  perjured  evidence  was  brought  against
respectable  Catholics.  One  informer  was  actually  transported
for  perjury,  and  several  prisoners  were  acquitted.1  In  the  county
of  Meath  it  was  noticed  with  much  indignation  that  while  the
juries  had  previously  consisted  chiefly  of  Catholics,  they  were
now  almost  wholly  Protestants;  but  those  who  have  any  real
knowledge  of  Irish  life  will  probably  hesitate  to  pronounce
that  such  an  exclusion  under  such  circumstances  was  in  the
interests  of  public  justice  unnecessary.

Lord  Bellamont  at  this  time  showed  great  activity  both  in
Cavan  and  Meath,  but  in  general  the  great  proprietors  were
absentees,  and  the  difficult  and  dangerous  duty  of  suppressing
the  disturbances  was  thrown  chiefly  on  the  smaller  Protestant
gentry.  The  motives  that  were  at  work  in  convulsing  the
country  were  evidently  of  many  kinds.  There  was  an  extreme

1  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  159.  A  re¬
port  of  Fay’s  trial  was  published  in
Dublin  in  1794.  There  was  only  a
single  witness  for  the  prosecution,
and  he  was  a  man  of  infamous  cha¬
racter,  and  was  contradicted  on  oath

as  to  several  parts  of  his  evidence.
I  do  not,  however,  see  any  evidence
of  unfairness  on  the  part  of  Judge
Downes,  who  tried  the  case,  and  he
certainly  summed  up  strongly  for  an
acquittal.

14

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyi

chronic  lawlessness  which  a  spark  could  at  any  moment  ignite.
There  was  some  religious  animosity  and  a  great  deal  of  race
hatred,  for  the  Scotch  Presbyterians  and  the  Irish  Catholics  were
still  like  separate  nations.  The  late  measure  of  enfranchisement
had  aroused  wild  hopes  and  expectations  on  one  side,  exaggerated
fears  and  resentments  on  the  other,  and  the  new  position  acquired
by  Catholic  forty-shilling  freeholders  was  likely  to  affect  to  a
considerable  degree  the  competition  for  land.  There  was  also
much  keen  and  real  distress,  for  the  year  1793  was  eminently  a
‘  hard  year,’  and  great  numbers  of  labourers  were  out  of  employ¬
ment.  Defenderism  soon  ceased  to  be  either  a  league  for  mutual
protection  or  a  mere  system  of  religious  riot.  It  assumed  the
usual  Irish  form  of  a  secret  and  permanent  organisation,  held
together  by  oaths,  moving  under  a  hidden  direction,  attracting
to  itself  all  kinds  of  criminals,  and  making  itself  the  organ  of
all  'kinds  of  discontent.  It  became  to  a  great  extent  a  new
White  Boy  movement,  aiming  specially  at  the  reduction  and
abolition  of  tithes  and  the  redress  of  agrarian  grievances,  and
in  this  form  it  passed  rapidly  into  counties  where  the  poorer
population  were  exclusively  Catholic,  and  where  there  was  little
or  no  religious  animosity.  It  was  also  early  noticed  that  it
was  accompanied  by  nightly  meetings  for  the  purposes  of  drill,
and  by  a  profuse  distribution  of  incendiary  papers.

Another  element  of  disturbance  of  a  different  nature  broke
out  about  the  same  time.  The  creation  of  a  militia  was  intended
by  the  Government  to  be  a  great  measure  of  pacification ;  but
the  new  system  of  compulsory  enlistment,  which  was  wholly
unnecessary  in  a  country  where  voluntary  recruits  were  always
most  easily  obtained,  was  fiercely  resented  and  resisted.  Truly
or  falsely  it  was  generally  believed  that  in  the  American  war
the  Irish  Government  had  shamefully  broken  faith  with  a  regi¬
ment  nicknamed  the  Green  Linnets,  which  had  been  enlisted  on
the  understanding  that  it  was  not  to  serve  out  of  Ireland,  and
which  had  notwithstanding  been  transported  to  America.  A
report  was  now  spread,  and  readily  believed,  that  they  meant  to
act  with  still  greater  perfidy  towards  the  new  militia.  It  was
said  that  they  wished  to  expatriate  or  banish  those  who  had
signed  the  declarations  originated  by  the  Catholic  Committee,
and  that  they  were  accordingly  forcing  them  into  the  militia  in

CH.  XXVI.

RESISTANCE  TO  THE  MILITIA  ACT.

15

order  to  send  them  to  Botany  Bay.  The  officers  of  the  new
force  were  all  Protestants,  while  the  privates  were  Catholics,  and
there  was  a  growing  belief  that  the  Ministers  were  hostile  to
the  Catholics  and  had  not  forgiven  their  recent  agitation.  The
attitude  of  the  grand  juries,  and  the  speeches  of  Foster,  and  still
more  of  Fitzgibbon,  had  ci’eated  suspicions  which  were  indus¬
triously  fanned,  and  which  passed  swiftly  and  silently  from  cabin
to  cabin.  In  nearly  every  county  there  was  resistance,  and  in
some  it  was  very  formidable.  At  Athboy,  in  the  county  of
Meath,  1,000  men  took  arms.  They  searched  the  country  houses
for  guns,  and  resisted  the  soldiers  so  effectually  that  the  result
was  a  drawn  battle  in  which  several  men  were  killed.  An  attack
was  made  on  the  town  of  Wexford  in  order  to  rescue  some
prisoners.  The  expense  of  soldiers  billeted  among  the  people,
the  fines  exacted  when  the  Act  was  not  obeyed,  the  severe
punishment  of  rioters,  many  of  whom  besides  long  periods  of
imprisonment  were  publicly  and  severely  whipped,  and  the  acts
of  violence  and  injustice  which  were  tolerably  certain  to  be  occa¬
sionally  perpetrated  by  soldiers  and  perhaps  by  magistrates  in  a
society  so  convulsed  and  disorganised,  all  added  to  the  discon¬
tent.  In  three  or  four  months,  it  is  true,  the  military  riots  were
allayed  by  a  measure  encouraging  voluntary  enlistments  and
making  some  provision  for  the  families  of  those  who  were  drawn
by  lot,  but  they  contributed  largely  to  the  growing  disaffection
and  to  swell  the  ranks  of  the  Defenders.1

There  are  numerous  letters  about  these  disturbances  among
the  Government  papers,  but  in  reading  them  we  must  remember
the  great  difficulty  Irish  magistrates  have  always  had  in  pene¬
trating  the  secret  motives  and  intentions  of  the  Catholic
population,  and  the  strong  fear  which  actuated  many  who  had
bitterly  opposed  the  recent  Relief  Acts.  In  Sligo  and  Ros¬
common  it  was  reported  that  ‘  almost  the  whole  of  the  lower
orders  of  Roman  Catholics  are  in  a  state  of  insurrection’
about  the  Militia  Act ;  and  although  by  the  prompt  and  ener¬
getic  action  of  the  magistrates  in  those  counties  the  move¬
ment  was  soon  checked,  it  was  spreading  to  Mayo,  and  it  had
become  ‘  obvious  that  under  one  pretext  or  another  the  minds  of

1  McNevin ;  Candid  Account  of  the  p.  60  ;  Gordon,  History  of  Ireland,
Disturbances  in  the  County  of  Meath,  ii.  335,  336.

16

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvi.

the  lower  classes  of  Roman  Catholics  have  become  unfortunately
formed  to  a  readiness  for  insurrection.’ 1  One  officer  4  would  be
tempted  to  attribute  the  source  of  these  disorders  to  the  Roman
Catholics,  for  the  oath  of  the  insurgents  chiefly  runs  to  be  true
to  the  Catholic  cause,  if  he  did  not  know  that  some  Protestants
were  among  the  most  daring  depredators.’  ‘  The  decent
Catholics  in  Sligo,’  wrote  a  magistrate  from  that  county,  4  have
joined  the  Protestants,’  and  sixteen  insurgents  have  been  taken.
The  beginning  of  the  trouble  was  the  Militia  Act,  but  the  hopes
raised  by  the  Popery  Act,  he  thinks,  had  much  to  say  o  it.
The  people  hoped  ‘  that  not  only  religious  equality  but  one  of
property  would  be  produced.  They  now  find  this  to  be  a  dream,
and  they  are  determined  to  effect  by  force  that  equality  of
property  they  vainly  hoped  for.’  4  However,  the  militia  is  the
pretext,’  wrote  a  magistrate  from  Enniskillen  ;  4  not  one  Protes¬
tant  is  concerned  in  Leitrim,  and  prisoners  have  been  heard
to  say  that  not  one  Protestant  should  be  alive  in  a  month.’  In
the  county  of  Wexford  the  oath  bound  the  Defenders  4  to
cut  down  their  own  clergy  to  a  certain  rate  of  parish  dues,
not  to  take  tithes  from  tithe  proctors,  nor  pay  more  than
sixpence  per  acre  for  tillage,  to  be  true  to  each  other,  not  to
divulge  who  has  administered  the  oath,’  and  4  all  smiths  and
carpenters  are  sworn  not  to  work  for  any  man  who  had  not
taken  the  oath.’  Some  of  the  rioters  said  they  would  return
peaceably  to  their  homes  if  they  were  sure  that  they  would  not
be  kidnapped  and  forced  into  the  militia.  Some  were  sworn  to
be  true  to  the  Catholic  cause,  and  to  pay  no  rent  for  three
months.  Many  pikes  were  found  among  the  Defenders,  and  on
several  occasions  they  encountered  the  soldiers.  Rumours  were
flying  about  the  country  of  an  impending  insurrection,  of  a
massacre  of  Protestants,  of  a  division  of  property,  of  an  abolition
of  rents  and  taxes,  of  a  secret  alliance  with  the  French,  who
were  coming  over  to  sweep  away  the  tithes  and  free  the  people
from  every  grievance.  In  the  May  of  1794  about  seventy
persons  were  killed  in  a  single  conflict  at  Ballina.2

To  the  Irish  Government  it  must  have  been  extremely  mor-

1  Westmorland  to  Dundas,  May  on  the  subject  in  May,  June,  and

25,  29,  1793.  July.  See,  too,  the  Beresford  Corre-

2  See  Westmorland  to  Dundas,  sjxmdence,  ii.  35.

March  29,  and  very  numerous  letters

CH.  XXVI.

SPREAD  OF  DEFENDERISM.

17

tifying  to  contrast  the  condition  of  Ireland  during  the  spring  and
summer  of  1793  with  her  condition  during  the  wars  of  George  II.
and  even  during  the  American  war,  when  it  had  been  found
both  possible  and  easy  to  send  the  whole  Irish  army,  except
about  5,000  men,  to  fight  the  battles  of  England.  Westmor¬
land  attributed  the  evil  mainly  to  the  republicans  of  Belfast
and  Dublin  ;  to  1  the  levelling  principles  of  the  French  Revolu¬
tion;’  to  associations  connected  with  the  United  Irishmen
which  were  propagating  sedition  with  unceasing  activity  in
various  parts  of  Ireland  ;  and  to  1  the  agitation  of  the  Catholic
question,  which  was  so  managed  as  to  throw  the  lower  orders  of
that  persuasion  into  a  state  of  fermentation.’  He  mentions  that
at  a  time  when  the  condition  of  Ulster  made  it  most  necessary  to
send  additional  troops  to  that  province,  he  had  been  prevented
from  doing  so  ‘  by  the  breaking  out  of  an  insurrection  of  the
lower  Catholics  in  the  county  of  Louth,  who,  being  privately
instigated  by  the  leaders  of  seditious  associations  in  Dublin  and
the  North,  proceeded  to  plunder  the  houses  of  Protestants  of
their  arms.’  ‘  Their  meetings,’  he  continued,  £  and  their  attacks
were  by  night ;  they  arrayed  themselves  under  different  captains,
enlisted  all  the  lower  Catholics,  imposed  an  oath  of  secrecy,  and
endeavoured  to  learn  the  use  of  arms.  Their  expeditions  were  so
secret  for  some  time  as  to  elude  the  military.  .  .  .  The  disorders
spread  through  the  counties  of  Louth,  Meath,  Dublin,  Cavan,
Monaghan,  and  Armagh.  All  the  Protestants  were  driven  into
the  towns ;  no  gentleman  could  be  in  security  without  a  guard
in  his  house,  and  whenever  their  attacks  were  successful  the
arms  were  carried  off.’1

In  a  discussion  on  the  subject  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  the
February  of  1793,  Lord  Clonmel  stated  his  belief  that  French
emissaries  whre  already  active  among  the  Defenders,  and  a  Secret
Committee  which  was  appointed  by  the  House  of  Lords  to  in¬
vestigate  the  subject,  and  which  is  said  to  have  consisted  mainly
of  very  anti-Catholic  members,  threw  some  suspicion  on  the
Catholic  Committee  in  Dublin.  ‘  The  people  at  this  time  called
Defenders,’  the  report  said,  ‘  are  very  different  from  those  who
originally  assumed  that  appellation,  and  are  all,  as  far  as  the
committee  could  discover,  of  the  Roman  Catholic  persuasion ;

1  Westmorland  to  Dundas,  March  29,  1793.

245

18

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

in  general  poor,  ignorant,  labouring  men,  sworn  to  secrecy
and  impressed  with  an  opinion  that  they  are  assisting  the
Catholic  cause ;  in  other  respects,  they  do  not  appear  to  have
any  distinct,  particular  object  in  view,  but  they  talk  of  being
relieved  from  hearth  money,  tithes,  county  cesses,  and  of  lower¬
ing  their  rents.  .  .  .  They  assembled  mostly  in  the  night,  and
forced  into  the  houses  of  Protestants  and  took  from  them  their

arms.  ...  At  first  they  took  nothing  but  arms,  but  afterwards

*

they  plundered  the  houses  of  everything  they  could  find.’  The
committee  acknowledged  that  they  had  no  reason  to  believe  that
the  body  of  the  Roman  Catholics  in  Ireland  in  any  way  promoted
or  countenanced  the  movement,  but  they  mentioned  as  suspicious
circumstances  the  regularity  and  system  with  which  the  outrages
were  committed,  the  large  sums  of  money  that  were  collected
by  the  authority  of  the  Catholic  Committee  in  the  chapels  in  all
parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  especially  the  fact  that  a  conspicuous
member  of  the  Catholic  Committee  had  made  inquiries  into  the
trials  of  the  Defenders,  and  had  employed  an  agent  and  counsel
to  act  for  several  persons  who  were  accused  of  that  offence.1

There  does  not,  however,  appear  to  me  to  be  any  evidence
that  French  emissaries  were  in  connection  with  the  Defenders
during  the  year  1793.  The  charges  against  the  Catholic  Com¬
mittee  were  at  once  and  indignantly  repudiated.  It  was  shown
that  the  avowed  and  legitimate  objects  of  the  committee  fully
accounted  for  the  chapel  collections ;  that  the  committee,  instead
of  promoting,  had  made  earnest  efforts  to  allay  a  religious  ani¬
mosity  which  was  directly  opposed  to  the  alliance  with  Protes¬
tants  they  were  endeavouring  to  establish,  and  that  if  they  had
undertaken  to  support  in  the  law  courts  a  Catholic  whom  they
believed  to  have  been  unjustly  accused,  they  had  abandoned  their
intention  when  further  inquiry  led  them  to  believe  that  they
had  been  deceived.2

The  Defender  movement  is  extremely  important  in  Irish
history,  for  it  appears  to  have  been  mainly  through  this  channel
that  the  great  mass  of  the  poorer  Roman  Catholics  passed  into
the  ranks  of  disaffection.  It  was  ultimately  connected  with  and

1  This  report  is  reprinted  in  the  toi 7/,  pp.  52,53.  See,  too,  the  Catholic

appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Com-  address  in  January  1793  (Grattan's
mittee  of  Secrecy,  in  1798.  Life,  iv.  133).

2  McNevin's  Pieces  of  Irish  His-

CH.  XXVI,

THE  UNITED  IRISHMEN  IN  DOWN.

19

absorbed  in  tbe  United  Irish  movement,  and  it  formed  one  of
the  chief  Catholic  elements  in  the  rebellion  of  1798.  The
parallel  between  what  was  then  taking  place  in  Ireland  and
what  we  have  ourselves  witnessed  is  very  striking.  There  were
two  movements  which  were  at  first  completely  distinct.  One
was  purely  political,  and  was  directed  by  educated  men,  influenced
by  political  theories  and  aiming  at  political  ends.  The  other
was  a  popular  movement  which  speedily  became  agrarian,  and
was  to  a  great  extent  directed  against  the  owners  of  property.
These  two  movements  at  last  combined,  and  the  result  was  tbe
most  bloody  rebellion  in  modern  Irish  history.

They  were,  however,  in  their  origin  not  only  distinct  but  vio¬
lently  antagonistic.  It  was  the  main  object  of  the  United  Irish¬
men  to  put  an  end  to  the  dissension  between  Catholics  and  Prot¬
estants,  and  especially  to  unite  the  Presbyterians  and  the  Catho¬
lics  in  the  closest  alliance,  for  the  purpose  of  breaking  the  influ¬
ence  of  England  in  Irish  politics,1  and  obtaining  a  democratic
and  unsectarian  measure  of  parliamentary  reform.  This  was  the
very  purpose  for  which  their  society  had  been  constituted,  and
they  had  met  with  great  success  in  the  large  towns  of  the  North,
and  especially  among  the  Dissenting  ministers.  Nothing  could
be  more  disconcerting  to  their  plans  than  a  new  and  violent
outburst  of  religious  animosity  in  the  country  districts.  Wolfe
Tone  declared  that  it  was  c  certainly  fomented  by  the  aristocrats
of  this  country/2  and  he  himself,  in  conjunction  with  Neilson,
Keogh,  and  Leonard  McNally,  went  on  a  mission  to  the  county
of  Down  for  the  purpose  of  putting  an  end  to  the  quarrel,  and
of  directing  the  energies  of  both  parties  into  the  cause  of  the
United  Irishmen.  He  found  the  soil  to  a  considerable  extent
prepared  for  his  seed.  In  one  place  there  had  been  a  meeting
of  eighteen  Dissenting  ministers  from  different  parts  of  Ulster,
who  were  all  of  them  well  disposed  towards  Catholic  liberty.
At  Ballinahinch  a  United  Irishman  named  McClokey  had
laboured  so  effectually,  that  a  corps  of  volunteers  which  had  been

1  ‘  My  theory  of  Irish  politics,’  the  spirit  of  internal  dissension
wrote  Wolfe  Tone,  ‘is  comprised  in  grounded  on  religious  distinctions,
these  words.  I  trace  all  the  miseries  How,  then,  is  it  to  be  obviated  ?  By
of  Ireland  ...  to  the  blasting  influ-  a  cordial  union  of  all  the  people.'
ence  of  England.  How  is  that  influ-  ( Memoirs ,  i.  285.)
ence  maintained?  By  perpetuating  2  Ibid.  i.  171.

20

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

originally  raised  on  Peep  of  Day  principles  had  chosen  him  as
their  lieutenant,  and  the  Catholics  now  lent  the  Protestants  arms
for  their  exercises  and  came  to  see  them  on  their  parade.  At
Newry  the  delegates  induced  a  large  party  of  Catholics,  who  had
been  bickering,  to  meet  them  at  the  inn,  where  Keogh  preached
peace  and  union,  and  advised  them  to  direct  their  animosities
against  the  common  enemy,  the  monopolists  of  the  country,  and
the  whole  company  rose  with  enthusiasm  and  shook  hands,
promising  to  bury  all  past  feuds  in  oblivion.  At  Rosstrevor  a
number  of  Catholics  and  Protestants  were  brought  together  at  a
public  dinner,  and  a  Dissenting  minister  pronounced  the  bene¬
diction,  and  the  toasts  of  the  United  Irishmen  were  received
with  enthusiasm.1  Nap  per  Tandy  made  similar  efforts  to  turn
the  Defender  movement  into  the  United  Irish  channel,  and  he
appears  to  have  actually  taken  the  Defender  oath  in  order  to
penetrate  into  the  secrets  of  the  organisation.  The  Government
discovered  the  fact,  and  this,  as  we  have  seen,  was  one  cause  of
his  flight  to  the  Continent.2

As  far  as  can  now  be  ascertained,  however,  there  was  as  yet
scarcely  any  political  element  in  the  religious  riots  of  the  North,
or  in  the  outrages  that  were  perpetrated  in  other  parts  of  Ireland.
The  rioters  belonged  almost  exclusively  to  classes  sunk  in  the
deepest  ignorance  and  poverty,  and  a  village  schoolmaster  of
Naas,  who  was  hanged  in  1796,  is  said  to  have  been  the  only
educated  person  who  is  known  to  have  been  identified  with  them.3
At  the  same  time  it  was  not  difficult  to  predict  that  illegal
organisations  at  war  with  the  Government,  in  the  existing  con¬
dition  of  Ireland  and  of  Europe,  would  ultimately  become  poli¬
tical.  The  contagion  of  the  great  centres  of  agitation  established
at  Dublin  and  Belfast;  the  influence  of  the  ‘Northern  Star;’
the  writings  of  Paine,  which  were  disseminated  at  an  extremely
low  price,  and  the  proclamations  of  the  ‘  United  Irishmen  ’
inviting  the  co-operation  of  the  Catholics,  were  sure  to  affect  an
anarchical  population  suffering  under  some  grievances  and  much
poverty.  Besides  this,  rumours  of  French  invasion  were  already
spreading,  and  the  connection  between  France  and  Ireland  was
so  close  that  any  agitation  in  the  greater  country  produced  a

1  Memoirs,  i.  IG9-177.  2  Madden’s  United,  Irishmen,  i.  115;  iv.  15.

8  Ibid.  i.  115.

CH.  XXVI.

POPULAR  INTEREST  IN  FRANCE.

21

responsive  pulse  in  the  smaller  one.  Among  educated  men,  and
especially  among  those  of  the  middle  class,  the  French  Revolu¬
tion  had  been  from  the  beginning  a  subject  of  the  keenest
interest  and  discussion,  but  the  interest  was  not  restricted  to
them.  The  ideas  of  an  English  peasant  seldom  extended  beyond
his  county  town,  and  the  continental  world  was  to  him  almost
as  unknown  as  the  world  beyond  the  grave.  But  tens  of  thou¬
sands  of  young  Irishmen  had  passed  from  the  wretched  cabins
of  the  South  and  West  to  the  great  armies  of  the  Continent,
From  almost  every  village,  from  almost  every  family  of  Catholic
Ireland,  one  or  more  members  had  gone  forth,  and  visions  of
sunny  lands  beyond  the  sea,  where  the  Catholic  was  not  looked
upon  as  a  slave,  and  where  Irish  talent  and  ambition  found  a
welcome  and  a  home,  continually  floated  before  the  imaginations
of  the  people.  The  letters  of  the  Irish  exiles,  the  active
smuggling  trade  which  was  carried  on  around  the  Irish  coast,
the  foreign  education  of  the  innumerable  priests  and  monks
who  moved  among  the  poor,  kept  up  the  connection,  and  it  was
strengthened  by  the  strong  natural  affinity  of  character  between
the  Irish  and  the  French.  Names  of  great  battles  where  Irish
soldiers  had  borne  an  honoured  part  under  a  foreign  flag  were
remembered  with  pride,  and  vague  and  distorted  images  of  the
events  that  were  happening  in  France — of  the  abolition  of
tithes,  of  the  revolution  in  landed  property,  of  the  offer  of  French
assistance  to  all  suffering  nations — soon  began  to  penetrate  to
the  cottier’s  cabin,  and  to  mingle  with  the  cottier’s  dreams.

For  the  present,  however,  the  danger  seemed  averted,  and  in
the  latter  part  of  1793  the  militia  riots  appear  to  have  wholly
ceased,  while  the  disturbances  of  the  Defenders  had  greatly
diminished.  In  July,  Hobart  wrote  to  England  that  the  country
was  in  so  alarming  a  state  that  he  was  quite  unable  to  con¬
jecture  whether  a  rebellion  would  not  break  out  in  every  corner
of  the  kingdom.1  In  August  he  pronounced  the  country  almost
quiet,  and  he  was  already  preparing  to  send  a  powerful  rein¬
forcement  of  Irish  troops  to  the  war.2  Ten  promotions  in  the
Irish  peerage  were  made  as  the  reward  of  services  during  the
past  session,  and  among  the  promoted  peers  was  Fitzgibbon,  the
Chancellor,  who  now  became  a  viscount.  Westmorland  had
1  Hobart  to  Nepean,  July  21, 1793.  *  Ibid.  August  17,  1793.

22

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvi.

spoken  in  the  strongest  terms  of  the  value  of  his  services,  and
had  especially  insisted  on  the  sacrifice  he  had  made  in  voting  for
the  Catholic  Relief  Bill  in  spite  of  his  conviction  of  its  dangers,1
but  the  promotion  at  this  critical  time  of  a  man  who  was  justly
regarded  as  the  most  formidable  enemy  of  the  Catholics  was,  in
my  judgment,  a  great  political  mistake.  Before  the  Parliament
met  for  the  session  of  1794,  Hobart  himself  had  been  created  a
peer  and  had  resigned  his  office  in  Ireland.

The  quiet  continued  with  little  intermission  during  1794.
Emmet,  who  had  the  best  means  of  information,  confessed  that  a
great  inaction  on  the  question  of  reform  had  at  this  time  fallen
upon  the  nation.2  It  was  partly  due  to  the  defeats,  and  partly
to  the  excesses,  of  the  French,  and  partly  also  to  the  great
measures  of  the  last  session,  and  to  the  political  attitude  of  Grat¬
tan.  While  on  all  occasions  maintaining  with  the  most  fervid
eloquence  the  cause  of  nationality  and  the  cause  of  Catholic
emancipation,  it  was  his  strongest  conviction  that  the  true
interests  of  England  and  Ireland  were  inseparable,  and  that  no
greater  calamity  could  befall  the  lesser  country  than  the  growth
of  the  spirit  of  disloyalty  to  the  connection.  He  hated  French
ideas  almost  as  cordially  as  Burke,  and  on  the  question  of  the
French  war  it  soon  became  apparent  that  he  had  completely
separated  from  Fox.  In  the  session  of  1793  this  was  rather
gathered  from  his  tone  than  expressly  asserted,  but  in  speaking
on  the  address  in  the  January  of  1794  his  language  was  en¬
tirely  unambiguous.  He  had  always,  he  said,  maintained  that
Ireland  should  improve  its  constitution,  correct  its  abuses,  and
assimilate  it  as  nearly  as  possible  to  that  of  Great  Britain,  but
that  ‘  this  general  plan  of  conduct  should  be  pursued  by  Ireland,
with  a  fixed,  steady,  and  unalterable  resolution  to  stand  or  fall
with  Great  Britain.  Whenever  Great  Britain,  therefore,’  he
continued,  ‘  should  be  clearly  involved  in  war,  it  is  my  idea  that
Ireland  should  grant  her  a  decided  and  unequivocal  support,
except  that  war  should  be  carried  on  against  her  own  liberty.’ 3

1  Westmorland  to  Nepean,  March  secretary,  Douglas,  in  reporting  the

21,  1793.  speech  to  England,  said  that  Grattan

2  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  His-  said  ‘that  the  errors  of  the  Govern-

tory,  pp.  66-69.  ment  in  this  kingdom  had  been  in  a

3  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  145.  The  great  degree  corrected  by  laws  of  the
report  in  the  Parliamentary  Debates  last  session;  that  he  deemed  other
is  exceedingly  abridged.  The  new  measures  of  reform,  and  particularly

CH.  XXVI.

GRATTAN  SUPPORTS  THE  WAR.

23

The  speech  was  not  pleasing  to  all  Grattan’s  friends,  and
it  was  a  profound  disappointment  to  the  United  Irishmen.

‘  Politics  do  not  go  on  well,  I  think,’  wrote  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald.  ‘  The  leaders  of  Opposition  are  all  afraid  of  the
people  and  distrusted  by  them.  .  .  .  Grattan’s  speech  last  night
on  the  address  was  very  bad,  and  the  worst  doctrine  ever  laid
down,  viz.  that  this  country  is  bound,  right  or  wrong,  without
inquiry  to  support  England  in  any  war  she  may  undertake.’ 1
The  Government  view  of  it  was  clearly  shown  in  a  very  confi¬
dential  letter  which  was  written  shortly  after,  by  Cooke.  ‘  You
are  doubtless  extremely  pleased,’  he  said,  1  in  England  with  the
conduct  of  the  Irish  Parliament.  I  now  write  just  to  put
you  in  mind  of  the  measures  which  passed  in  the  last  session.
They  were  the  seed,  you  are  now  reaping  the  fruits.  If  the
Place  Bill,  the  Pension  Bill,  and  the  Treasury  Board  had  not
been  granted,  Mr.  Grattan  could  not  with  honour  have  sup¬
ported.  .  .  .  What  would  have  been  the  effect  of  a  strong-
parliamentary  Opposition  which  could  add  the  discontent  of  the
moderate  to  the  plots  of  the  factious,  is  easy  to  be  conjectured.
But  now  the  support  of  the  moderate,  conjoined  to  the  force  of
Government,  is  able  to  extinguish  sedition.  .  .  .  Much  credit  is
due  to  Mr.  Grattan.  He  told  Sir  J.  Parnell  last  year  privately,
that  if  the  concessions  in  agitation  were  granted,  he  would  no
longer  give  any  vexatious  opposition.  He  has  more  than  made
good  his  word,  for  he  has  given  decided  support.  Previous  to
the  opening  of  the  session,  it  was  known  from  his  private  con¬
versation  in  the  country  that  he  would  support  the  war,  but  I
believe  he  did  not  fully  communicate  to  the  members  acting
with  him  in  opposition,  the  decided  part  he  intended  to  take.’
His  speech,  in  the  opinion  of  Cooke,  spread  consternation  among
his  own  followers,  but  its  result  was  that  the  address  was  carried
without  dissent  or  amendment.  ‘  What  use,’  continues  Cooke,
‘  are  we  to  make  of  this  conjuncture  ?  My  best  opinion  is  that
Grattan  is  the  most  important  character  in  Ireland,  and  that

a  proper  reform  of  Parliament,  to  be
necessary,  and  trusted  that  the  ser¬
vants  of  the  Crown  would  concur  in
them ;  that  he  did  not,  however,
mean  to  propose  such  measures  as
matters  of  stipulation,  but  should
give  his  unconditional  support  to  the

assistance  of  Great  Britain  engaged
in  a  war  with  our  natural  enemy,
France,  without  questioning  the
merits  or  conduct  of  that  war.’
(Douglas  to  Nepean,  Jan.  21,  1794.)

1  Moore’s  Life  of  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald,  i.  234,  235.

24

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

attaching  him  to  Mr.  Pitt’s  Government  would  be  essential.
This  is  difficult.  He  is  very  high-minded  and  resentful,  and
suspicious.  He  is,  however,  very  steady  and  honouraole,  and
will  act  up  to  his  professions.  He  has  great  sway  over  the
public  mind,  and  he  must  play  such  a  part  as  not  to  lose  his
authority.  He  wants  not,  perhaps  would  not  take,  situation ;
he  would  stipulate  for  measures.  If  any  compliment  were  shown
him,  he  would  like  it  immediately  from  Mr.  Pitt.  In  the  un¬
certainty  of  events  his  conduct  here  might  be  decisive,  and
therefore  he  should  be  early  thought  of.  Government  is  strong
in  numbers!  They  want  not  aristocratical  addition.  They  want
the  chief  of  the  people.  .  .  .  The  lower  classes  are,  however,
still  indisposed  in  many  parts,  and  there  is  an  active  French
party  which  we  are  endeavouring  to  watch.’ 1

Although  the  authority  of  Grattan  for  a  time  quelled  all
opposition  to  the  war,  an  indirect  protest  was  a  few  days  later
made  by  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons.  This  very  able  man  had  been  a
devoted  friend,  follower,  and  admirer  of  Flood,  and  if  the  Govern¬
ment  was  rightly  informed  he  was  far  from  friendly  to  Grattan.
He  moved  an  address  asking  that  copies  of  all  the  treaties  and
conventions  which  had  been  laid  before  the  British  Parliament
should  be  laid  before  the  Parliament  of  Ireland,  and  he  appears
to  have  supported  his  motion  on  the  ground  that  it  was  the  right
and  duty  of  the  Irish  Parliament  to  discuss  the  cause  and  con¬
duct  of  the  war.  Grattan,  however,  strongly  and  eloquently
opposed  him.  The  right  of  the  Irish  Parliament  to  call  for
treaties,  he  said,  was  universally  admitted,  but  to  exercise  that
right  at  this  critical  moment  would  be  to  tell  France  that
Ireland  had  not  made  up  her  mind  on  the  war.  It  would  check
military  efforts  and  chill  the  military  spirit  at  a  time  when  the
promptest  energy  was  supremely  necessary,  and  it  would  give  a
new  vitality  to  the  French  party  in  the  country.  Only  nine
members  voted  for  the  address,  while  one  hundred  and  twenty-
eight  opposed  it.2

There  were  only  two  other  subjects  of  considerable  importance
discussed  in  Parliament  during  this  year.  Grattan  again  brought
forward  his  motion  asserting  the  necessity  ot  establishing  a

1  Cooke  to  Nepean,  Feb.  7,  1794.  Cooke  notices  the  debate  (to  Nepean,

*  The  Parliamentary  Debates  (xiv.  Feb.  7),  and  Grattan’s  speech  is  given
Hi)  do  not  report  the  speeches,  but  in  his  Collected  Speeches,  iii.  119-122.

CH.  XXVI.

PONSONBY’S  REFORM  BILL.

25

definite  and  final  commercial  understanding  between  tlie  two
countries  on  tlie  basis  of  perfect  reciprocity,  the  manufactures
of  Ireland  being  received  in  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  on  the
same  terms  on  which  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain  were
received  in  the  ports  of  Ireland.  His  speech  on  the  subject  was
strongly  hostile  to  protecting  duties  on  either  side,  and  his  views
of  commercial  policy  appear  to  have  been  not  less  enlightened
than  those  of  Pitt.  The  proposition  was  received  on  the  part  of
the  Government  with  a  profusion  of  compliments,  but  with  an
earnest  plea  for  delay,  and  it  was  accordingly  at  their  desire  with¬
drawn.  We  shall  see  that,  a  few  years  later,  one  of  the  minis¬
terial  arguments  employed  for  the  Union  was  that  no  such
commercial  arrangement  existed.1

The  other  important  measure  of  the  session  was  Ponsonby’s
Reform  Bill.  It  was-  substantially  the  same  as  that  of  last  year,
its  principal  features  being  the  addition  of  a  third  member  to
each  of  the  thirty-two  counties,  and  to  the  cities  of  Dublin  and
Cork,  and  the  opening  of  the  boroughs  by  extending  the  right
of  voting  in  them  to  all  lOh  freeholders  in  a  specified  section  of
the  adjoining  country.  There  was  little  more  to  be  said  about
the  anomalies  of  the  Irish  parliamentary  system,  but  it  had  been
recently  shown  by  a  detailed  statement,  that  out  of  the  300
members  of  the  House  of  Commons  124  were  actually  nominated
by  52  peers,  and  64  by  36  commoners,  while  13  others  were
said  to  owe  their  return  in  a  great  measure  to  the  influence  of
single  families.2  The  debate  on  the  subject  was  very  able,
and  the  transcendent  importance  of  meeting  the  democratic
and  revolutionary  spirit  by  removing  indefensible  abuses,  and
placing  the  representation  on  a  broad  and  safe  basis,  was  strongly
urged.  Grattan,  Jephson,  and  Parsons  spoke  with  admirable
force  upon  this  theme,  but  the  first  at  the  same  time  repudiated
emphatically  the  democratic  Reform  Bill  of  the  United  Irishmen,
and  exposed  the  dangers  of  the  theory  of  personal  representa¬
tion  with  a  strength  of  reasoning  and  language  which  Burke

1  Irish  Pari.  Del.  xiv.  48-53.
Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.  122-127.

2  Anthologia  Hibernica,  ii.  268-71.
In  a  pamphlet  published  in  1797  there
is  a  slightly  different  analysis  of  the
representation.  According  to  this
account,  forty-one  temporal  peers  re¬

turned  112  members;  four  spiritual
peers  8  ;  private  persons  96  ;  thirty-
two  counti-  s  64;  three  cities  10;  four
boroughs  6 ;  potwalloping  boroughs
4.  (Aw  Appeal  to  the  Understanding
of  Englishmen  on  the  State  of  Ireland,
London,  1797.)

26  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvi.

himself  could  hardly  have  surpassed.  The  principal  argument
on  the  other  side  was  the  danger  of  reform  in  time  of  revolution,
and  the  fate  of  the  moderate  reformers  in  France.  The  Govern¬
ment  resisted  the  Bill,  and  it  was  rejected  by  142  votes  to  44.*

In  justifying  the  reintroduction  of  a  Bill  which  had  been
rejected  in  the  preceding  year  Ponsonby  said,  ‘  There  was  one
capital  objection  which  then  existed  against  the  measure,  but
which  is  now  done  away.  The  country  was  then  in  a  state  of
disturbance,  it  is  now  in  perfect  tranquillity.’ 2  This  assertion
is  fully  corroborated  by  a  private  letter  from  Parnell,  the  Chan¬
cellor  of  the  Exchequer,  to  Lord  Hobart.  He  speaks  emphati¬
cally  of  the  great  tranquillity  of  Irish  politics.  ‘  Nothing  but
some  mistaken  principles  of  politics  can  now  disturb  us.  We
have  got  a  loan  of  near  1,400,000?.,  and  new  taxes  necessarily
affecting  the  bulk  of  the  people  without  murmur,  and  there  is
no  appearance  at  present  of  the  revival  of  the  sedition  which
lately  prevailed.’ 3  The  short  and  peaceful  session  was  terminated
on  March  25.

The  proceedings  of  the  United  Irishmen  in  the  early  part  of
the  year,  as  they  were  reported  by  the  Government  informer,
were  not  very  important.  The  usual  attendance  at  the  Dublin
meetings  seems  to  have  sunk  to  thirty  or  thirty-four.  A  sus¬
picion  had  spread  that  Government  spies  were  abroad,  and  the
informer  describes  a  curious  scene  which  took  place  at  a  meeting
on  the  last  day  of  January.  After  some  ordinary  business  had
been  transacted,  ‘Mr.  Nelson  said  that  though  a  stranger  in
town  and  almost  so  to  every  member  of  the  society,  except  in
sympathy  of  sentiments,  he  boldly  declared  that  he  had  the
strongest  assurances  that  there  were  traitors  in  the  society,  who
constantly  conveyed  whatever  passed  in  it  within  a  few  hours
after,  nay  a  few  moments,  to  the  Castle ;  and  in  order  at  this
very  solemn  crisis  to  guard  against  the  effect  of  treason,  he
would  recommend  the  society  to  appoint  a  committee  of  twelve,
to  be  called  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  with  powers  to
transact  all  the  business  of  the  society.  .  .  .  Mr.  Simon  Butler
declared  that  he  wished  the  hall  to  be  uncovered,  and  all  the
people  of  Dublin,  of  all  Ireland,  to  be  present  at  their  debates,

1  Pari.  Debates  ,  xiv.  62-10  8.  2  Ibid,  p  62.

3  Parnell  to  Lord  Hobart,  March  1791.

CK.  XXVI.

MISSION  OF  JACKSON.

27

as  he  knew  of  nothing  having  been  agitated  but  what  was
perfectly  constitutional.  .  .  .  Nothing  material,’  continued  the
informer,  ‘  will  be  attempted  but  through  the  committee  pro¬
posed  by  Nelson,  and  you  may  depend  on  it  that  such  a  one,
self-elected,  now  exists.  If  you  have  any  idea  of  the  cause  of
those  suspicions,  for  God’s  sake  let  me  know.  ...  I  will  see  you
towards  evening  at  eight  o’clock.’  A  fortnight  later  the  same
subject  of  traitors  in  the  camp  was  brought  forward  by*  John
Sheares,  who  proposed  a  dissolution  of  the  society,  and  a  new
ballot.  He  afterwards  consented  to  withdraw  his  proposal,  and
Butler  again  asserted  that  all  their  proceedings  were  perfectly
legal.  There  was  evidently  great  distrust  and  much  discourage¬
ment  in  the  party,  and  when  Grattan  made  his  attack  on  their
reform  scheme,  both  Sheares  and  Emmet  considered  the  in¬
cident  a  fortunate  one,  as  the  parliamentary  notice  had  ‘  rescued
the  society  from  that  state  of  insignificance  into  which  it  had
lately  fallen.’ 1  A  reply  was  issued  by  the  society  which  com¬
mented  in  very  bitter  terms  on  the  conduct  of  Grattan  and  of
the  Opposition.

The  measures  of  the  United  Irishmen,  however,  were  not
all  so  innocuous.  The  events  of  the  last  session  had  fully  con¬
vinced  them  that  no  party  in  Parliament  was  in  the  least  likely
to  accept  their  scheme  of  universal  suffrage  and  equal  electoral
districts,  while  the  triumphant  march  of  the  French  arms  made
French  assistance  continually  more  probable.  In  the  spring  if
1794  a  new  and  important  overture  was  made  to  them.  The
agent  chosen  by  the  French  Committee  of  Public  Safety  was  an
Anglican  clergyman  named  William  Jackson,  who  had  once
been  a  popular  preacher  in  London,  had  afterwards  been  em¬
ployed  by  the  notorious  Duchess  of  Kingston  in  her  quarrel  with
Foote,  and  had  attained  an  infamous  notoriety  as  the  chief  insti¬
gator  of  a  groundless  and  atrocious  charge  against  that  drama¬
tist.2  After  these  transactions  Jackson  had  long  lived  in  France,
where  he  professed  strong  revolutionary  sentiments,  and  he
undertook  to  ascertain  what  support  might  be  expected  from
the  English  democratic  party  in  the  event  of  an  invasion.
Finding  the  result  of  his  inquiry  in  England  very  discouraging,

i  February  1,  15,  22;  March  8,  2  See  Cooke’s  Life  of  Foote ,  i.

1791  (I.S.F.O.).  209-231.

28

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CH.  XXVI.

he  determined  to  proceed  to  Ireland,  and  he  confided  his  mission
and  his  intention  to  an  attorney  named  Cockayne,  with  whom
he  had  long  been  on  terms  of  friendship,  and  who,  like  him¬
self,  had  been  in  the  service  of  the  Duchess  of  Kingston.
Cockayne  at  once  betrayed  him,  and  by  the  direction  of  the
Government  pretended  to  enter  into  his  scheme,  and  accom¬
panied  him  to  Dublin.  Cockayne  had  formed  a  professional
friendship  with  Leonard  McNally,  a  Dublin  barrister,  who  was
much  mixed  in  the  proceedings  of  the  United  Irishmen,  and  at
the  table  of  McNally  the  two  travellers  met  several  of  the
leaders  of  the  party,  who  received  them  cordially  and  spoke
freely  of  their  hopes.  They  obtained  without  difficulty  access  to
Hamilton  Rowan,  who  was  still  in  prison  and  who  threw  him¬
self  heartily  into  the  French  designs,  and  a  representation  of  the
state  of  Ireland,  written  by  Wolfe  Tone,  but  copied  by  Rowan,
was  given  to  Jackson  to  be  presented  to  the  French  Govern¬
ment.  Jackson  was  delighted  with  it,  and  desired  Tone  himself
to  go  to  France  to  lay  his  views  before  the  Committee  of  Public
Safety.  Tone  at  first  accepted,  but  afterwards  refused,  and
Jackson  did  not  encourage  the  proposal  of  Rowan  that  Dr.
Reynolds,  another  leading  member  of  the  party,  should  under¬
take  the  charge.  In  the  meantime,  through  the  instrumentality
of  Cockayne,  the  representation  of  Tone  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  Government,  and  on  April  24,  1794,  Jackson  was  thrown
into  prison  on  a  charge  of  treason.  The  perfidy  of  Cockayne
was  still  unsuspected.

A  whole  year  elapsed  before  Jackson  was  tried,  and  the
Government  for  some  time  doubted  what  course  they  would
pursue.  There  was  a  chance  that  Jackson  might  turn  king’s
evidence  against  the  leading  conspirators,  but  even  in  that  case
the  evidence  against  them  seemed  very  slender,  so  it  was  deter¬
mined  to  prosecute  Jackson.1  The  knowledge  of  his  arrest

1  ‘  The  Attorney- General  is  afraid
if  Drennan  is  caught  that  we  have
not  a  tittle  of  evidence  against  him,
and  as  little  against  Tone,  for  you
observe  Cockayne,  whose  evidence
will  be  taken  oum  grano ,  will  not
speak  positively  to  the  different  con¬
versations  of  these  persons,  but  only
caught  the  substance  by  hints  and
accidental  words.  I  cannot  agree  in

thinking  it  wise  to  save  Jackson  and
punish  the  others.  Jackson  is  sure
to  be  convicted ;  with  him  we  should
very  likely  fail  in  punishing  either  of
the  other  two.  With  how  bad  an  ap¬
pearance  of  evidence  (Cockayne  and
Jackson,  hardly  a  corroborating  cir¬
cumstance),  we  should  go  into  court.
Not  a  person  in  court  but  would  attri¬
bute  the  whole  scheme  to  a  snare,  and

CH.  XXVI.

ESCAPE  OE  ROWAN.

29

spread  much  alarm  among  the' United  Irishmen.  Tone  indeed
remained  to  brave  the  consequences,  and  no  prosecution  against
him  was  instituted,  but  Reynolds  fled  to  America,  and  Rowan,
who  had  hitherto  taken  a  very  prominent  part  among  the
United  Irishmen,  contrived  on  May  1  to  escape  from  prison
and  make  his  way  to  France.  Unlike  most  of  those  who  were
engaged  in  the  conspiracy,  he  was  a  gentleman  of  fortune
and  position.  He  was  foolish  and  impulsive,  but  also  brave,
honourable,  chivalrous,  energetic,  and  charitable,  a  man  of  great
physical  strength  and  beauty,  always  ready  to  meet  any  op¬
ponent  with  his  pistol,  and  to  throw  himself  headlong  into
adventures.  A  proclamation  was  at  once  issued  and  widely
disseminated  offering  a  reward  of  1,000Z.  from  the  Government
and  of  500£.  from  the  City  for  his  capture,  but  a  friend  named
Sweetman  procured  a  small  fishing  boat  manned  by  three  poor
sailors  to  take  him  to  France.  The  sailors  had  not  been  in¬
formed  of  the  service  for  which  they  were  engaged,  but  before
they  started  on  their  long  and  perilous  journey  one  of  them  drew
from  his  pocket  the  Government  proclamation  and  asked  if  this
was  Mr.  Rowan  they  were  carrying  to  France.  ‘  Yes/  said
Sweetman,  ‘  and  here  he  is.’  1  By  God,’  was  the  reply,  ‘  we  will
land  him  safely ;  ’  and  turning  to  Rowan  he  said,  ‘  Our  boat  is
small,  but  God  watches  over  those  who,  like  you,  have  the
blessings  of  the  poor.’ 1  They  kept  their  word,  and  placed  him
on  shore  near  Brest.  A  few  days  after  his  flight,  the  Govern¬
ment,  acting  on  the  information  of  their  habitual  informer,
seized  the  room  where  the  United  Irishmen  met,  took  possession
of  their  papers,  and  for  a  time  broke  up  the  organisation.

A  more  marked  tone  of  disloyalty  was  now  manifestly
spreading  through  the  country.  A  large  proportion  of  the
Belfast  party  had  long  been  theoretical  republicans,  but  they
always  declared  that  they  would  have  been  content  with  a
democratic  parliamentary  reform.  The  attitude  of  the  Govern¬
ment  and  of  the  Parliament  during  the  last  session  convinced
them  that  it  would  be  easier  to  obtain  a  republic  than  a  reform
under  the  existing  Government ;  that  without  foreign  aid  they

the  Government  would  be  sadly  dis-  1  Rowan’s  Autobiography .  Letter

graced.’ (Westmorland to Dundas, May  of  H.  Rowan  to  the  Committee  of
12,  1791.)  Cockayne  had  previously  Public  Safety,  10  vend^miaire,  an  iii.
been  tried  for  perjury,  but  acquitted.  (Oct.  1,  1791),  F.F.O.

30

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

could  never  effectually  resist  the  coalition  between  the  English
Government  and  the  Irish  aristocracy,  and  that  their  chance  of
obtaining  such  aid  was  now  very  considerable.  They  had  at  the
same  time  begun  to  argue,  as  Adams  and  his  colleagues  had
argued  in  the  beginning  of  the  American  troubles,  that  the
French  would  only  assist  them  in  a  struggle  for  independence.
The  reform  of  the  Irish  Parliament  could  be  no  object  to
France.  The  establishment  of  an  independent  Irish  republic
would  be  a  great  triumph  of  French  policy.  With  the  vast
dissemination  of  seditious  or  republican  literature  the  area  of
discontent  was  enlarging,  and  it  was  spreading  more  and  more
among  the  Catholics.  The  signs,  indeed,  were  not  yet  clear  and
unequivocal,  and  some  months  were  still  to  elapse  before  they
became  so ;  but  it  was  impossible  that  the  new  doctrines  of
political  equality,  of  the  indefeasible  right  of  majorities  to
govern,  of  the  iniquity  of  tithes  and  other  religious  endowments
should  not  have  their  influence  upon  men  who  would  gain  so
greatly  by  their  triumph.  The  gentry  and  the  higher  clergy
reflected  very  faithfully  the  Catholic  conservatism  of  Europe ;
but  the  tradesmen  and  merchants,  who  were  so  active  in  the
towns,  were  of  a  different  type.  Some  of  the  most  important
members  of  the  Catholic  Committee  were  unquestionably  sedi¬
tious,  and,  in  spite  of  the  very  earnest  remonstrance  of  Grattan,
the  committee  retained  Wolfe  Tone  as  its  secretary.  Colonel
Blaquiere  in  the  session  of  1794  startled  and  scandalised  the
House  of  Commons  by  declaring  his  belief  that  ‘  there  was  not
a  man  among  them  who,  in  case  of  commotion,  could  And  fifty
followers  on  his  estate  perfectly  attached  to  the  Constitution.’
‘  What,’  he  continued,  ‘  had  the  poor  to  defend  ?  Was  it  because
their  landlord  now  and  then  gave  them  a  dinner,  or  treated
them  civilly  when  he  met  them,  that  they  should  be  attached
to  him  ?  ’ 1  He  believed  that  half  the  nation,  or  more  than  half,
were  attached  to  the  French.  His  words  were  drowned  in
indignant  denials.  In  no  country,  it  was  said,  were  the  landlords
less  oppressive  than  in  Ireland ;  but  an  uneasy  feeling  was
abroad,  and  although  outrages  and  riots  appear  to  have  somewhat
diminished,  those  who  knew  the  country  best  believed  that  the
Defender  system  was  advancing  with  a  rapid  though  stealthy

1  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xiv.  37.

CH.  XXVI.

DECLINE  OF  GRATTAN’S  INFLUENCE.

31

progress.  Our  best  evidence  seems  to  show  that  it  was  not  yet
connected  with  the  United  Irish  movement,  and  that  it  aimed
chiefly  at  Whiteboy  objects,  but  a  political  element  was  begin¬
ning  very  perceptibly  to  mingle  with  it.  The  idea  was  spreading
that  the  redress  of  all  grievances  would  be  effected  by  a  French
invasion,  and  that  in  the  event  of  such  an  invasion  it  was  the
duty  of  the  Defenders  to  assist  it.  Oaths  pledging  them  to  do
so  were  in  some  districts  largely  taken,  and  in  others  the  project
was  well  understood.1  That  it  had  not  taken  as  much  hold
upon  the  people  as  was  sometimes  thought,  is  proved  by  the
most  decisive  of  all  arguments,  by  their  actual  conduct  when  an
invasion  took  place ;  but  there  were  at  least  signs  that  what
was  to  be  feared  among  the  poorest  Catholic  population  was
not  merely  turbulence  and  lawlessness,  but  also  a  positive  hos¬
tility  to  the  connection.

The  influence  of  Grattan  also  had  been  fatally  weakened.
His  position  was  at  this  time  one  of  the  most  difficult  that  can
fall  to  the  lot  of  any  statesman,  and  he  was  maintaining  it  with
admirable  courage  and  skill.  At  a  time  when  the  enthusiasm
for  the  French  Revolution  was  at  its  height,  when  French  ideas
and  theories  of  reform  were  making  numerous  proselytes  among
the  adventurous  and  enthusiastic,  he  was  steadily  opposing  the
stream,  preaching  at  once  the  duty  of  a  close  connection  with
England  and  the  Whig  theory  of  the  Constitution.  But  unlike
those  who  occupied  a  corresponding  position  in  England,  Grattan
continued  to  be  a  zealous  and  consistent  reformer,  contending
that  without  the  abolition  of  political  distinctions  on  account  of
religion  and  a  temperate  reform  of  Parliament  there  could  be  no
security  in  Ireland.  In  one  aspect  of  his  policy  he  resembled
Burke  ;  m  the  other  he  resembled  Fox.  It  was  inevitable  under
these  circumstances  that  his  position  should  have  been  somewhat
isolated.  The  coalesced  interests  opposed  to  all  reform  detested
him  as  the  most  formidable  enemy  to  their  monopolies,  and  much
of  the  enthusiasm  which  had  in  old  days  supported  him  was
passing  into  new  channels.  His  loyalty  to  the  connection,  his
support  of  the  war,  his  inflexible  opposition  to  the  United  Ireland
scheme  of  radical  and  democratic  reform,  had  alienated  the  class

1  See  the  interesting  sketch  of  (McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  History,
Defenderism  in  1793,  by  Emmet.  p.  71.)

32

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

cn.  xxvi.

of  mind  which,  naturally  bends  with  the  dominant  enthusiasm
of  the  time.  With  the  better  class  of  Catholics  he  had,  it  is
true,  still  great  authority,  and  his  influence  was  perhaps  even
greater  with  his  own  class — with  the  great  body  of  Protestant
gentlemen  of  moderate  fortune  who  were  unconnected  with  the
chief  borough  owners,  and  who,  though  they  were  very  in¬
adequately  represented  in  Parliament,  comprised  perhaps  the
largest  part  of  the  patriotism,  the  intelligence,  and  the  energy
of  Ireland.

It  seemed,  however,  for  a  time  as  if  his  policy  and  his  power
were  about  to  rise  higher  than  ever.  In  July  1794  the  long-
pending  secession  from  the  Whig  party  in  England  took  place,
and  the  Duke  of  Portland,  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  Lord  Spencer,  and
Windham  joined  the  Government.  By  this  change,  at  a  time
when  the  aspect  of  affairs  on  the  Continent  was  peculiarly
menacing,  parties  in  England  were  virtually  united  in  support
of  the  war,  and  opposition  sank  into  complete  insignificance ;
but  if  the  adhesion  of  the  Whig  leaders  gave  Pitt  a  great  acces¬
sion  of  strength,  it  also  brought  with  it  some  embarrassments.
The  section  of  the  Whig  party  which  joined  him  was  so  impor¬
tant  that  it  was  entitled  to  claim  a  large  share  both  of  patronage
and  power,  but  Pitt  was  scarcely  less  autocratic  in  his  cabinet
than  his  father  and  Walpole,  and  Dundas  appears  to  have  been
the  only  minister  to  whose  judgment  he  greatly  deferred.  With
a  prime  minister  of  this  character  it  might  easily  be  foreseen
that  the  introduction  into  the  Cabinet  of  politicians  of  great
rank,  great  parliamentary  following,  great  pretensions  and  very
moderate  abilities,  drawn  from  the  opposite  party,  was  likely  to
lead  to  difficulties.  The  negotiations  that  preceded  and  imme¬
diately  followed  the  coalition  were  carried  on  almost  entirely  by
conversations,  and  when  this  is  the  case  it  will  nearly  always  be
found  that  misunderstandings  arise  even  among  men  of  the  most
indisputable  honour.  The  general  drift  of  propositions  is  re¬
membered,  but  qualifications  and  limitations  by  which  they  had
been  guarded  are  neglected  or  underrated.  Something  is  tacitly
assumed  on  one  side  which  the  other  side  had  not  meant  to  con¬
cede,  and  men  who  starting  from  opposite  points  are  anxious  to
come  to  an  agreement,  will  often  half  unconsciously  omit,  atte¬
nuate,  or  evade  topics  of  difference.  Add  to  this  that  the  Whig

CH.  XXVI.

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  COALITION.

33

leaders  never  professed  to  have  abandoned  any  of  their  old  views
of  domestic  policy,  though  they  undertook  to  support  the  war ;
that  the  King,  though  glad  to  break  up  the  Whig  party,  still
looked  on  all  who  had  supported  that  party  with  suspicion  and
aversion,  and  that  a  great  portion  of  Pitt’s  own  followers,  as
Burke  truly  said,  ‘  considered  Mr.  Pitt’s  enlarging  his  bottom  as
an  interloping  on  their  monopoly,’1  and  it  will  be  easily  under¬
stood  that  there  were  abundant  elements  of  disagreement.

These  considerations  will  not  appear  irrelevant  when  we  at¬
tempt  to  thread  our  way  through  the  perplexed  and  contradic¬
tory  evidence  relating  to  the  viceroyalty  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam.
When  the  coalition  was  formed  in  July,  the  third  Secretaryship
of  State,  which  had  been  abolished  in  1782,  was  revived.  Lord
Grenville  was  now  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  Dundas
for  War  and  the  Colonies,  and  Portland  for  the  Home  Depart¬
ment,  which  comprised  Ireland  as  well  as  Great  Britain.  It  is
a  significant  fact  that  at  the  very  outset  of  the  coalition  a  grave
misunderstanding  arose  between  Dundas  and  Portland  about  the
limits  of  their  respective  provinces,2  but  it  is  at  least  certain
that  Ireland  lay  within  the  department  of  Portland  ;  it  is  equally
certain  that  it  was  agreed,  or  believed  by  the  Whig  leaders  to
have  been  agreed,  that  Portland  was  to  have  the  chief  direction
of  Irish  politics,  that  Lord  W estmorland  was  to  be  replaced  by
a  Lord  Lieutenant  belonging  to  the  Whig  party,  and  that  some
change  of  system  favourable  to  the  Catholics  was  to  be  effected.
It  is  true,  indeed,  that  Pelham,  who  was  Chief  Secretary  in  Ire¬
land  in  the  administration  that  succeeded  that  of  Lord  Fitz¬
william,  asserted  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons  that  the  Duke
of  Portland  had  coalesced  with  Pitt  ‘  unconditionally,’  ‘  without
any  stipulation  whatever,’3  but  the  evidence  in  contradiction  to
this  assertion  appears  to  me  overwhelming.  On  July  27,  at  a
time  when  no  dispute  had  yet  arisen,  Lord  Auckland,  who  hated
the  Portland  party,  sent  the  following  account  to  Beresford
of  the  secret  history  of  the  coalition.  ‘  If  Mr.  Pitt  felt  that  the
calamities  of  the  times  required  this  change  (for  such  it  is)  in
his  administration,  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said.  I  can

1  See  a  very  remarkable  letter  in  2  Stanhope’s  Life  of  Pitt,,  ii.

Windham’s  Diary ,  p.  326.  252-255.

3  Irish  Pari.  Del.  xv.  184,  190.

246

34

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxw.

freely  confide  to  you  my  persuasion,  that  he  has  made  a  had  move
on  his  political  chess-board.  I  believe  that  Dundas  was  the
only  person  of  his  old  friends  materially  consulted  on  the  occa¬
sion.  He  will  find  that  he  has  destroyed  the  weight  of  a  party
which  was  material  to  be  preserved,  and  which  will  now  become
at  least  insignificant,  and  he  will  also  find  that  he  has  gained
nothing  in  point  of  talents  and  efficiency ;  and  lastly,  that  he  is
in  a  decided  minority  in  his  own  Cabinet.  I  understood  that
when  this  coalition  was  formed,  Ireland  was  offered  to  the  Port¬
land  party  together  with  the  other  offices,  which  were  accepted ;
and  I  have  heard  (which  I  mention  in  great  confidence)  that  an
apology  was  made  to  Lord  Camden,  to  whom  Ireland  had  before
been  destined.  Lord  Spencer  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  and
Lord  Fitzwilliam  having  declined  the  viceroyalty,  it  may  possibly
remain  for  the  present  in  Lord  Westmorland,  but  that  tenure
cannot  be,  I  think,  long,  and  in  short  it  is  under  the  Duke  of
Portland’s  department.’ 1

It  may  be  said  that  Auckland,  though  in  intimate  connection
with  the  leading  statesmen  of  the  Tory  party,  had  no  official
knowledge  of  what  had  occurred,  but  the  evidence  of  those  who
had  the  most  incontestable  means  of  knowing  is  equally  decisive.
Ponsonbv,  who  had  the  most  intimate  private  and  official  rela¬
tions  with  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  declared  in  Parliament  that  the
‘  coalition  would  never  have  taken  place  had  not  his  Grace  re¬
ceived  ample  authority  to  reform  the  abuses  which  he  knew
existed  in  the  Government.’2  Grattan,  as  his  son  reports,  stated
that  the  words  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  him  on  the  subject
were :  ‘  I  have  taken  office,  and  I  have  done  so  because  I  knew
there  was  to  be  an  entire  change  of  system.’3  Burke  assured
Windham  that,  from  a  conversation  with  Portland  shortly  after
the  coalition,  he  gathered  that,  rightly  or  wrongly,  he  £  considered
without  a  doubt  that  the  administration  of  Ireland  was  left
wholly  to  him,  and  without  any  other  reserves  than  what  are
supposed  in  every  wise  and  sober  servant  of  the  Crown ;  ’ 4  and
Fitzwilliam  himself,  who  took  a  leading  part  through  the  whole
negotiation,  has  left  a  most  emphatic  statement  to  the  same
effect.  ‘  When  the  Duke  of  Portland,’  he  wrote,  ‘  and  his  friends

1  Beresford  Correspondence  (pri-  s  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  193.
vately  printed),  ii.  37,  38.  *  Windham's  Diary,  p.  322.

*  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  184.

ch.  xxvi.  FITZWILLIAM  ACCEPTS  THE  VICEROYALTY.

35

were  to  be  enticed  into  a  coalition  with  Mr.  Pitt’s  administra¬
tion,  it  was  necessary  to  hold  out  such  lures  as  would  make  the
coalition  palatable,  or  even  possible,  for  them  to  accede  to.  If
the  general  management  and  superintendence  of  Ireland  had
not  been  offered  to  his  Grace,  that  coalition  would  never  have
taken  place.  The  sentiments  that  he  had  entertained  and
the  language  he  had  held  so  publicly  for  many  years  back  on
the  subject,  rendered  it  a  point  that  could  not  be  dispensed
with.  Accordingly  it  was  offered  from  the  beginning  of  the
negotiation,  as  was  also  the  Home  Department  of  Secretary  of
State.’1

When  the  coalition  took  place,  Fitzwilliam  was  appointed
President  of  the  Council ;  but  as  there  appears  to  have  been  a
difficulty  in  finding  a  Whig  Lord  Lieutenant,  in  fulfilment  of
the  arrangement  that  has  been  indicated,  Fitzwilliam,  after  long
hesitation  and  with  great  reluctance,  consented  to  accept  the
post.  It  was  stipulated  that  Lord  Westmorland  must  first  be
provided  for,  but  subject  to  this  condition  the  nomination  was
fully  accepted  by  Pitt.  It  was  settled,  at  least  as  early  as
August  11, 2  and  the  arrangement  seems  to  me  quite  inexpli¬
cable,  except  on  the  supposition  that  some  real  change  of  policy
was  contemplated,  and  that  Irish  affairs  were  in  a  very  special
sense  under  the  direction  of  the  Whig  section  of  the  Cabinet.
Lord  Fitzwilliam  had  scarcely  a  month  before  accepted  a  Cabinet
office  in  England.  He  had  no  wish  to  go  to  Ireland,  and  Lord
Westmorland  never  appears  to  have  intimated  any  intention  of
resigning.  If  it  was  intended  to  make  no  change  in  the  system
of  governing  Ireland,  the  whole  proceeding  is  unintelligible.

1  Second  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,
pp.  25,  26.  Grattan,  in  one  of  his
speeches  on  the  subject,  said  :  ‘It  has
been  said  that  the  reform  of  abuses
in  Ireland  formed  no  part  of  the
ground  of  the  coalition.  I  do  not
pretend  to  say  what  did  form  that
ground,  but  I  do  say  that  one  quarter
of  the  Cabinet  did  assert  that  a  prin¬
cipal  inducement  to  his  acceptance
of  office  was  a  reform  in  the  abuses
of  the  Irish  Government.  .  .  .  One
great  motive  to  the  acceptance  of
office  was  stated  to  be  very  extensive
powers  in  Ireland.’  (Irish  Pari.  Deb.
xv.  191.)  Lord  Holland  says  that

the  Duke  of  Portland  distinctly  en¬
couraged  these  hopes.  ‘  “  At  least  we
have  secured  the  Catholics,”  said  he
to  some  English  friends  ;  and  he  did
not  scruple  to  affirm  to  Mr.  Grat¬
tan  that  his  chief  object  in  taking
office  was  to  secure  the  objeots  which
the  Irish  Whigs  had  pursued,  and  a
large  share  of  the  patronage  and
power  in  Ireland  to  their  party.
Nearly  thus  did  Lord  Fitzwilliam
understand  it.’  ( Meins .  of  the  Whig
Party,  i.  74.)

2  See  Buckingham’s  Courts  and
Cabinets  of  George  III.  ii.  281.

36

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI,

Independently  of  all  negotiations,  the  mere  fact  of  the  acces¬
sion  of  a  great  portion  of  the  Whig  party  to  office  had  a  powerful
and  an  immediate  effect  in  Ireland.  Portland  had  been  Lord
Lieutenant  when  the  independence  of  the  Irish  Parliament  had
been  conceded  in  1782  he  was  known  to  be  in  favour  of  Catholic
emancipation,  and  Grattan  had  long  regarded  him  with  an  ad¬
miration  which  he  would  scarcely  have  felt  if  he  had  had  the
advantage  of  perusing  his  confidential  despatches.  Fitzwilliam
was  extremely  popular  in  Ireland  from  his  large  property,  his
decided  advocacy  of  the  Catholics,  and  his  close  friendship  with
Grattan.  Ponsonby,  who  had  publicly  committed  himself  to  the
admission  of  Catholics  to  Parliament,  and  to  a  moderate  parlia¬
mentary  reform,  and  Grattan,  who  was  the  most  powerful  advo¬
cate  of  both  measures,  had  long  been  in  closer  connection  and
correspondence  with  the  party  which  had  joined  the  Government
than  with  any  other  section  of  English  politicians.  They  were
essentially  Whigs,  and  it  was  inevitable  that  their  influence  and
their  policy  should  appear  to  have  gained  by  the  coalition  of  the
Whig  leaders  with  the  Government.  Nor  did  there  seem  any
reason  for  believing  that  the  completion  of  the  Act  of  1793  would
be  distasteful  to  the  other  section  of  the  Cabinet.  The  policy
of  admitting  the  Catholics  to  political  power  was  the  policy  of
Pitt.  It  had  been  steadily  advocated  by  his  Government.  The
opposition  which  restricted  or  delayed  the  measure  did  not  come
from  England,  or  from  the  Irish  Parliament,  or,  to  any  consider¬
able  extent,  from  the  Irish  Protestants,  but  from  a  small  junto
of  high  officials  in  Ireland  under  the  guidance  of  Fitzgibbon.
Irish  public  opinion  was  now  in  so  dangerous  and  critical  a  con¬
dition  that  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  calamitous  to  raise
hopes  and  then  refuse  to  fulfil  them,  and  the  simple  fact  of  the
accession  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Lord  Fitzwilliam  to  power
at  once  brought  the  Catholic  question  again  to  the  forefront.
CI  have  the  best  grounds  for  believing,’  Lord  Fitzwilliam  after¬
wards  wrote,  ‘  that  on  the  day  of  the  Duke  of  Portland’s  kissing
hands,  it  was  determined  to  bring  it  [the  Catholic  question]
forward  this  session.  All  the  old  friends  with  whom  he  had
acted  when  he  was  here  as  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  whom,  it  was
concluded,  he  would  again  call  to  his  councils  on  taking  to  him¬
self  the  government,  of  which  there  was  at  that  time  a  general

CH.  XXVI.

APPLICATION  TO  GRATTAN.

37

expectation,  were  known  from  their  public  declarations  and
from  their  proceedings  in  Parliament  to  intend  a  full  and  com¬
plete  emancipation  ;  his  own  opinions  were  universally  believed
to  coincide  with  his  Irish  friends’,  as  to  my  knowledge  they
certainly  did.  Immediate  measures  were  therefore  taken  by  the
Catholics  preparatory  to  the  expected  change  of  administration
here.’1

The  first  proceeding  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  after  he  had  con¬
sented  to  be  the  future  Lord  Lieutenant,  is  very  significant,  and
shows  decisively  how  fully  his  position  was  recognised  by  Pitt’s
section  of  the  Cabinet.  As  early  as  August  11  he  wrote  to
Thomas  Grenville,  who  was  then  in  a  diplomatic  capacity  at
Vienna,  offering  him  the  post  of  Chief  Secretary  in  his  coming
administration.  Thomas  Grenville  was  brother  of  Lord  Gren¬
ville,  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  one  of  the  most
important  colleagues  of  Pitt  before  the  coalition  had  taken  place.
It  must  also  be  noticed  that  he  had  been  offered  and  had  refused
this  office  in  1782,  when  the  Duke  of  Portland  had  been  made
Lord  Lieutenant.2  Thomas  Grenville  would  have  greatly  pre¬
ferred  an  English  post,  but  he  was  very  anxious  to  leave  the
Continent ;  and  after  consultation  with  his  brother,  and  with  the
full  assent  of  his  brother,  he  accepted  the  office,  expressing,  how¬
ever,  at  the  same  time  his  hope  that  if  an  English  office  became
vacant,  Portland  would  not  forget  his  claims.3

Not  quite  a  fortnight  after  he  had  written  to  Thomas  Gren¬
ville,  Lord  Fitzwilliam  wrote  to  Grattan.  He  stated  that,  though
he  was  not  yet  appointed  to  succeed  Lord  Westmorland,  there
was  certainly  ‘  great  probability  of  that  event  taking  place  very
soon ;  ’  that  he  intended  to  pursue  the  same  system  as  the  Duke
of  Portland  had  pursued  when  he  was  Lord  Lieutenant ;  that
his  main  object  would  be  ‘  to  purify,  as  far  as  circumstances  and
prudence  will  permit,  the  principles  of  government,  in  the  hopes
of  thereby  restoring  it  to  that  tone  and  spirit  which  so  happily
prevailed  formerly,’  but  that  he  despaired  of  succeeding  in  this
attempt  unless  he  obtained  the  support  of  distinguished  Irish¬
men.  ‘It  is,  sir,  to  you,’  he  added,  ‘and  your  friends  the
Ponsonbys,  that  I  look  for  assistance.  .  .  .  Without  the  hope,

1  First  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,  p.  16.

*  Buckingham’s  Courts  and  Cabinets ,  ii.  2'J'J  3  Ibid.  pp.  277,  300.

38

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

ch.  xxvr.

which  I  am  vain  enough  to  entertain,  of  that  assistance,  I  should
decline  engaging  in  so  hopeless  a  task  as  the  government  of
Ireland.  It  is  that  assistance  wrhich  I  am,  therefore,  now  solicit¬
ing.  I  know  well  the  honourable,  the  useful,  the  important
support  Government  has  received  at  your  hands  on  many  cri¬
tical  occasions  and  at  different  periods ;  but  except  during  the
momentary  administration  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  I  believe  it
has  so  happened  that  you  never  have  approached  the  Castle  in
confidence  and  avowed  friendship ;  great  obstacles  have  always
stood  in  the  way.  Should  these  obstacles  be  removed,  I  trust
that  distance  will  no  longer  be  necessary,  and  that  I  may  enter¬
tain  a  hope  of  seeing  you  form  with  the  Castle  that  sort  of  inti¬
mate,  direct,  and  avowed  connection  as  will  render  support
doubly  efficacious.’  In  a  postscript  he  added :  £  I  beg  not  to  be
quoted  as  having  announced  myself  in  the  character  of  a  Lord
Lieutenant  elect ;  my  name  not  having  yet  been  mentioned  to
the  King,  on  account  of  his  absence  at  Weymouth.’ 1

Grattan,  however,  persisted  in  the  resolution  which  he  had
early  formed  that  he  would  not  take  office  under  the  Crown,
and  would  content  himself  with  giving  an  independent  support.
He  appears  to  have  considered  that  he  had  pledged  himself  to
such  a  course  when  he  accepted  a  grant  from  Parliament,  and
he  probably  thought  that  in  the  very  difficult  position  he  had
assumed  as  at  once  the  head  of  the  reform  party  in  Parliament
and  one  of  the  chief  opponents  of  the  republican  party  in  Ulster,
it  was  essential  to  his  authority  that  his  disinterestedness  should
be  beyond  possible  suspicion.  At  the  same  time  he  could  not
neglect  the  invitation  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam.  Early  in  September
he  went  over  to  London  to  consult  with  the  leading  statesmen.
The  two  Ponsonby  brothers,  Sir  John  Parnell  the  Irish  Chan¬
cellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  some  other  Irish  politicians  were
there,  and  they  had  conferences  not  only  with  the  Portland
section  of  the  Cabinet,  but  also  with  Pitt  and  with  the  Gren¬
villes.  As  far  as  can  now  be  gathered,  Grattan  does  not  appear
to  have  at  all  desired  the  removal  of  all  who  held  office  under
Lord  Westmorland’s  administration.  With  Sir  John  Parnell,
at  least,  he  was  on  terms  of  the  most  intimate  friendship,  and
he  insisted,  in  opposition  to  some  of  his  own  friends,  that  Parnell

1  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  173.  (The  letter  was  written  August  23,  1794.)

CH.  XXVI.

NEGOTIATIONS  IN  ENGLAND.

39

should  continue  in  office,  but  he  seems  to  have  represented
that  if  any  serious  advance  was  to  be  made  in  the  direction
either  of  parliamentary  reform  or  of  Catholic  emancipation,  it
would  be  necessary  to  remove  some  prominent  officials,  and
especially  the  Chancellor,  Lord  Fitzgibbon.  These  men  had
been  the  most  persistent  and  vehement  opponents  of  all  changes
in  those  directions.  They  had  defeated  the  efforts  of  the
English  Government  in  1792,  and  in  1793  Fitzgibbon  had  done
his  utmost  to  destroy  the  conciliatory  effect  of  the  Relief  Bill
by  a  speech  fraught  with  the  bitterest  invective  against  the
Catholics.  He  had  asserted,  with  a  cynical  boldness  that  no
other  politician  had  approached,  the  propriety  of  governing
Ireland  by  corruption,  and  he  was  at  the  head  of  a  small  group
who  were  virtually  controlling  the  Executive  and  using  all  their
power  for  the  maintenance  of  monopolies  and  abuses.

The  particulars  of  the  interviews  in  England  are  very  im¬
perfectly  preserved.  Grattan  noticed  that  the  Grenvilles  and
Ponsonbys  seemed  cold  and  hostile  to  each  other,  and,  although
Pitt  treated  all  parties  with  courtesy,  some  disquieting  sentences
fell  from  him.  When  Parnell  spoke  with  congratulation  of  the
union  that  was  being  accomplished  between  the  Protestants  and
the  Catholics,  Pitt  answered,  ‘  Very  true,  sir;  but  the  question
is,  whose  will  they  be  ?  ’  1  What  does  Ireland  want  ?  ’  he  said

on  another  occasion  to  Grattan ;  ‘  she  has  already  got  much.’ 1
At  the  same  time,  for  some  weeks  neither  Portland  nor  Fitz-
william,  nor  any  member  of  their  party,  appears  to  have  had  the
smallest  doubt  that  the  contemplated  arrangements  would  be
effected.  The  details,  however,  were  still  in  the  stage  of  confi¬
dential  negotiation,  and  it  is  a  singular  fact  that  no  communi¬
cation  on  the  subject  from  the  responsible  minister,  appears  as
yet  to  have  been  made  to  the  Irish  Government.  In  a  letter
written  on  September  5  to  Auckland,  Lord  Sheffield  mentions
an  interview  which  he  had  had  with  Douglas,  the  Chief  Secre¬
tary  of  Lord  Westmorland,  and  adds  :  4  It  is  curious  that  he
seems  to  know  nothing  of  the  appointment  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam
to  the  viceroyalty  of  Ireland.’ 2

It  appears  to  me  evident  from  these  statements,  that  there

1  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  174-177.  237.  Compare  Buckingham’s  Courts

*  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.  and  Cabinets,  ii.  313.

40

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

had  been  much  less  frankness,  fullness,  and  precision  than  there
ought  to  have  been  in  the  discussion  of  Irish  affairs.  The  system
of  government  to  be  pursued  had  not  been  clearly  defined  or
settled,  nor  had  the  limits  of  the  powers  of  the  new  minister
been  formally  ascertained.  On  the  other  hand,  the  department
of  Ireland  had  been  definitely  placed  under  the  direction  ot
Portland,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  Whig  section  of  the
Cabinet.  Fitzwilliam  as  the  representative  of  that  section  had
been  offered  and  had  accepted  the  viceroyalty.  Although  the
post  was  not  yet  vacant,  he  was  actually  engaged,  with  the  full
knowledge  of  Pitt,  in  framing  the  outline  of  his  Government,
and  the  ministerial  Whigs  had,  as  it  seems  to  me,  ample  reason
to  conclude  that  Pitt  was  prepared  to  place  the  general  direction
of  Irish  affairs  in  their  hands,  and  to  assent  to  the  system  of
policy  which  they  notoriously  advocated.  The  negotiation  with
Ponsonby  and  Grattan  was  carried  on  with  perfect  openness,  and
it  could  have  but  one  significance.  It  must  have  meant  that
the  Government  was  inclined  to  look  with  favour  on  moderate
parliamentary  reform,  and  on  the  admission  of  the  Catholics  into
the  Irish  Parliament,  or  at  least  upon  one  of  these  measures.
It  was  impossible  that  the  steps  which  had  been  taken  could  be
disclosed  without  raising  in  Ireland  hopes  which  it  would  be
most  dangerous  to  disappoint.

In  the  letters  of  Lord  Grenville  we  may  trace  the  first  signs  of
the  dissension  which  soon  became  so  formidable.  On  September
15  he  wrote  to  Thomas  Grenville :  ‘I  am  afraid  there  is  less  dis¬
cretion  on  that  subject  [Ireland]  than  there  should  be.  The
intended  successor  of  Lord  Westmorland  is  talked  of  more
openly  than  I  think  useful  at  a  time  when  there  is  yet  no
arrangement  made  for  his  quitting  his  station.  But,  what  is
worse  than  that,  ideas  are  going  about,  and  are  much  encouraged
in  Dublin,  of  new  systems  there,  and  of  changes  of  men  and
measures.  Whatever  it  may  be  prudent  to  do  in  that  respect,  I
know  that  you  will  agree  with  me,  that  till  the  time  comes  when
that  question  is  to  be  considered  with  a  view  to  acting  upon  it
immediately,  the  less  said  about  it  the  better.’ 1

Twelve  days  later,  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Buckingham,  he  complains

1  Buckingham’s  Courts  and  Cabinets,  ii.  302.

CH.  XXVI.

PORTLAND  AND  PITT  DIFFER.

41

that  Buckingham  had  too  readily  believed  vague  reports  about
the  Government  of  Ireland.  ‘  I  know  of  no  such  measure  as  you
say  we  have  adopted.  I  have  never  varied  in  my  opinion  as  to
the  impolicy  of  the  conduct  held  in  Ireland  during  the  time  of
Lord  Rockingham’s  administration,  nor  do  I  believe  that  anyone
is  disposed  to  repeat  that  conduct  now.  ...  I  certainly  have
not,  for  one,  consented,  as  you  express  it,  to  surrender  Ireland
to  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  under  the  Govern¬
ment  of  Mr.  Ponsonby.’  At  the  same  time  he  does  not  see  why
the  Government  should  feel  any  particular  interest  in  the  exist¬
ing  system  in  Ireland,  and  he  added  some  enigmatical  words
which  probably  pointed  to  a  great  change  in  the  constitutional
relation  of  the  two  countries,  that  was  already  in  the  minds  of
the  Ministers.  c  It  has  long  appeared  to  me,  and,  I  believe,  to
you  also,  that  to  make  the  connection  with  Ireland  permanently
useful  to  Great  Britain,  that  connection  must  be  strengthened  by
a  systematic  plan  of  measures,  well  considered  and  steadily  pur¬
sued.  Whether  the  present  moment,  or  any  other  moment  that
is  in  near  prospect,  would  be  favourable  to  such  a  plan,  is  another
and  a  more  difficult  question,  but  I  am  sure  tbat  every  year  that
is  lost  increases  the  hazard  of  our  situation  as  with  respect  to
Ireland.  ...  I  cannot  conceive  what  other  interest  you  or  I
have,  or  ought  to  have,  on  that  subject  except  that  Ireland  should
be  so  managed,  if  possible,  as  not  to  be  an  additional  difficulty
in  our  way,  when  so  many  others  are  likely  to  occur.’ 1

It  was  not,  however,  till  about  the  middle  of  October  that  the
storm  burst.  The  Duke  of  Portland  urged  the  immediate  appoint¬
ment  of  Fitzwilliam  as  a  thing  already  arranged,  and  explanations
speedily  ensued,  which  disclosed  an  entirely  unexpected  amount
of  disagreement,  and  for  more  than  a  fortnight  made  it  probable
that  the  coalition  would  fall  to  pieces.

The  evidence  concerning  this  quarrel  is  not  very  abundant  or
very  consistent,  but  the  chief  points  at  issue  may,  I  think,  be
ascertained  with  tolerable  clearness.  Pitt  did  not  dispute  that
Lord  Fitzwilliam  had  been  duly  designated  as  the  future  Lord
Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  but  he  maintained  that  Portland  and
Fitzwilliam  had  exceeded  their  powers  when  they  communicated

1  Buckingham’s  Courts  and  Cabinets,  ii.  305,  306.

42

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxr«

with  the  Ponsonbys  and  other  persons  in  Ireland,  on  the  under¬
standing  that  a  change  of  administration  was  immediately  to
take  place,  and  especially  when  they  intimated  that  Fitzgibbon
was  to  be  removed,  and  that  a  change  in  the  system  of  govern¬
ment  in  Ireland  was  to  be  made.  £  I  am  fully  determined,  he
wrote  to  Dundas,  1  that  I  will  not  give  way  either  to  Lord  West¬
morland’s  recall  without  a  proper  situation  for  him  here,  or  to
Lord  Fitzgibbon’s  removal  on  any  terms.’  1 1  am  confirmed,’  he
wrote  to  Windham,  £  in  the  impossibility  either  of  consenting  to
the  Chancellor’s  removal,  or  of  leaving  either  him  or  any  of  the
supporters  of  Government  exposed  to  the  risk  of  the  new  sys¬
tem.’  ‘Besides  the  impossibility  of  sacrificing  any  supporters  of
Government  or  exposing  them  to  the  risk  of  a  new  system,  I
ought  to  add  that  the  very  idea  of  a  new  system  (as  far  as  I
understand  what  is  meant  by  that  term),  and  especially  one
formed  without  previous  communication  or  concert  with  the  rest
of  the  King’s  servants  here,  or  with  the  friends  of  Government
in  Ireland,  is  in  itself  what  I  feel  it  utterly  impossible  to  accede
to.’  In  a  memorandum  which  he  appears  to  have  drawn  up  for
his  own  use  during  the  discussion,  he  expresses  his  opinion  that
the  best  solution  of  the  difficulty  would  be  that  Lord  Fitzwilliam
should  not  go  to  Ireland,  but  that  it  was  impossible,  if  satisfaction
were  given  on  other  points,  to  put  a  negative  on  his  going.  The
change  of  administration  in  Ireland,  however,  could  only  be  per¬
mitted  on  four  conditions.  First,  all  idea  of  a  new  system  of
measures  or  of  new  principles  of  government  in  Ireland,  as  well
as  of  any  separate  and  exclusive  right  to  conduct  the  department
of  Ireland  differently  from  any  other  in  the  King’s  service,  must
be  disclaimed  and  relinquished;  second,  complete  security  must  be
given  that  Lord  Fitzgibbon  and  all  the  supporters  of  Government
shall  not  be  displaced  on  the  change,  nor  while  they  continue  to
act  fairly  in  support  of  such  a  system  as  shall  be  approved  in
England ;  third,  a  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  and  also  a  great  Court
office,  must  be  found  for  Lord  Westmorland;  and  fourth,  an
adequate  provision  must  be  made  for  Douglas,  the  present  Chief
Secretary.1

The  dispute  on  both  sides  was  extremely  angry.  The
transfer  of  the  chief  management  of  Ireland  to  the  Whig  section
1  Stanhope’s  Life  of  Pitt,  ii.  283,  289-291.

CH.  XXVI.

INDIGNATION  OF  THE  WHIGS.

43

of  the  Cabinet  had,  it  was  said,  been  one  of  the  main  conditions
of  the  coalition ;  the  selection  from  that  section  of  a  future  Lord
Lieutenant  had  been  one  of  its  first  results,  and  it  could  never
have  been  intended — though  Pitt  now  evidently  desired  it — that
the  actual  change  should  be  postponed  to  a  distant  and  indefinite
future.  The  offer  of  the  Chief  Secretaryship  to  the  brother  of
Lord  Grenville,  and  the  interviews  of  Pitt  with  Ponsonby  and
with  Grattan,  furnished  on  this  point  conclusive  arguments.  It
had,  it  is  true,  been  stipulated  that  Westmorland  was  to  receive
another  office  before  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  appointed,  but  it  was
understood  that  Pitt  would  at  once  make  it  his  business  to  create
a  vacancy,  and  it  could  not  be  seriously  contended  that  he  was
unable  to  do  so.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  as  a  former  Lord
Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  had  his  own  political  connections  in  that
country,  and  it  had  been  very  naturally  assumed  that  when
Ireland  was  again  placed  under  his  direction,  those  connections
would  be  again  entrusted  with  a  great  part  of  the  administra¬
tion;  in  other  words,  that  a  change  of  power  and  patronage
would  take  place,  in  some  degree  resembling  that  which
follows  a  change  of  ministry  in  England.  Grattan,  it  is  true,
who  acted  during  the  whole  of  this  crisis  with  an  admirable
temper  and  moderation,  appears  to  have  cared  very  little
what  men  were  in  office,  but  some  of  the  other  leaders  of  his
party  placed  no  control  upon  their  indignation.  They  accused
Pitt  of  having  duped  them,  of  having  obtained  their  alliance  on
false  pretences.  The  management  of  Ireland,  they  said,  had
been  expressly  offered  to  them,  and  offered  without  reservation.
The  right  of  appointing  to  offices  in  Ireland  naturally  belonged
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department,  and  it  was  fully  within  their  province  to  pension
off  a  secretary  or  even  a  chancellor.  From  the  fact  that  the
new  ministers  had  a  well-known  Irish  policy  and  a  well-known
set  of  Irish  connections,  it  plainly  followed  that  when  they
were  entrusted  with  power,  that  policy  and  those  connections
would  be  in  the  ascendant,  and  they  asserted  that  it  had  been
clearly  intimated  at  the  time  of  the  junction  that  a  change  of
system  must  take  place.  To  offer  the  management  of  Ireland
was  perfectly  nugatory,  if  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Lord
Lieutenant  were  divested  of  their  natural  right  of  appointing

44

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyi.

or  removing  officials.  Pitt,  it  was  said,  had  allowed  his  new
colleagues  to  go  on  week  after  week  till  they  had  so  committed
themselves  that  they  could  not  recede  without  dishonour,  and
he  had  then  withheld  from  them  the  powers  of  which  they  had
every  reason  to  believe  themselves  possessed.  The  question  was
not  a  mere  question  of  men.  Serious  reforms  in  Ireland  would
never  be  accomplished  if  the  chief  posts  of  influence  and  power
were  in  the  hands  of  their  opponents,  and  a  viceroyalty  was
likely  to  be  little  more  than  a  prolonged  humiliation  if  there
was  no  cordiality  between  the  head  and  his  subordinates.

The  substantial  justice  of  these  complaints  appears  to  me
incontestable.  On  the  other  side  it  was  denied  that  any  change
of  system  such  as  was  described  had  been  contemplated  or
promised  at  the  time  of  the  coalition,  or  that  the  new  Ministers
had  any  right  to  displace  the  old  and  faithful  servants  of  the
Crown.  The  Whigs  were  accused  of  treating  the  government
of  Ireland  as  a  mere  departmental  question  which  might  be
determined  without  the  consent  or  even  the  knowledge  of  the
remainder  of  the  Cabinet.  £  The  system  of  introducing  English
party  into  Ireland,’  wrote  Grenville,  ‘  the  principle  of  connecting
changes  of  Government  here  with  the  removal  of  persons  high
in  office  there,  ...  is  so  utterly  irreconcilable  with  any  view  that
I  have  of  the  state  of  that  country,  that  I  should  be  inexcusable
if  I  could  make  myself  a  party  to  such  a  measure,  and  in  this
opinion  Pitt  entirely  concurs.’  If  1  a  new  system  of  men  and
measures’  had  been  intended  before  the  junction,  it  ought
surely  to  have  been  stated  then ;  if  it  had  only  been  conceived
since  that  event,  it  ought  to  have  been  communicated  to  the
Cabinet  £  before  any  pledge  or  assurance  was  given  to  individuals
who  might  be  concerned  in  it’  in  Ireland.  The  removal  of
Lord  Pitzgibbon  was  completely  inadmissible.  Lord  Grenville
asserted — what  it  is  utterly  incredible  that  any  man  who
knew  Ireland  can  have  believed — that  £  the  only  ground  on
which  the  Ponsonbys  can  desire  the  Chancellor’s  removal  is  the
conduct  he  held  during  the  Kegency,’  and  that  it  would  be
therefore  dishonourable  and  degrading  for  those  who  had  been
ministers  during  that  contest  to  permit  it.  The  question  was
treated  on  this  side,  as  merely  a  question  of  patronage.  £  The
Portland  set,’  said  Lord  Auckland,  £  are  absorbed  in  the  old  and

cn.  xxvi.

OPINION  OF  BURKE.

45

sleepy  game  of  patronage,  in  the  pursuit  of  which  they  are  at
this  instant  risking  the  convulsion  of  Ireland.’ 1

Burke  was  at  this  time  removed  from  active  politics,  and
overwhelmed  with  grief,  on  account  of  the  very  recent  death  of
his  son ;  but  Windham,  who  was  the  most  devoted  of  all  his  dis¬
ciples,  was  one  of  the  recent  adherents  to  the  Ministry,  and  the
old  statesman  tore  himself  from  his  private  sorrow  to  write  some
admirable  letters  on  the  crisis  that  was  pending.  He  viewed  it
with  profound  grief,  but  also  with  much  impartiality.  To  Pitt
he  was  under  great  recent  obligation,  and  he  looked  upon  him
as  the  one  man  who  could  resist  the  invasions  of  Jacobinism.
To  the  Whig  leaders  who  had  taken  part  in  the  secession  he  was
attached  by  many  years  of  private  friendship  and  political  co¬
operation  ;  their  junction  with  Pitt  had  been  the  realisation  of
his  most  ardent  wish,  and  he  at  the  same  time  followed  Irish
politics  with  a  greater  interest  and  knowledge  than  any  other
statesman  in  England.  He  considered  the  dispute  that  had
arisen,  a  calamity  of  the  first  magnitude.  There  were  politicians,
no  doubt,  who  would  tell  Pitt  that  ‘  the  disgracing  his  colleagues
would  be  to  him  a  signal  triumph,’  ‘  a  splendid  mark  of  his
power  and  superiority,’  but  such  politicians  were  very  short¬
sighted.  Pitt  could  have  gone  on  without  a  junction  with  the
Whigs,  but  his  Ministry,  which  was  of  such  transcendent  im¬
portance  to  Europe,  could  hardly  long  survive  a  new  disrup¬
tion  ;  yet  Burke  did  not  see  how  Portland  and  Fitzwilliam  could
remain  in  office  without  utterly  discrediting  their  characters.
What  were  the  exact  terms  of  the  arrangement  between  the
Whig  leaders  and  Pitt  on  the  subject  of  Ireland,  he  did  not  pre¬
tend  to  say.  All  he  knew  Was  that  Portland  and  Fitzwilliam
considered  without  a  doubt  that  the  administration  of  Ireland
was  left  wholly  to  them,  and  £  proceeded  as  if  there  was  no
controversy  whatever  on  the  subject;’  that  Fitzwilliam  ‘  hesi¬
tated  a  long  time  whether  he  should  take  the  station ;  ’  that
when  he  agreed  to  it,  he  thought  he  had  done  a  real  service  to
the  Ministry,  and  that,  anticipating  no  difficulties  from  his  col¬
leagues,  he  ‘  invited  several  persons  to  converse  with  him  in  all
the  confidence  with  which  men  ought  to  open  themselves  to  a

1  Auckland  Tapers,  iii.  253 ;  Buckingham’s  Courts  and  Cabinets,  ii.  312-316.

46

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

person  of  honour,  who  though  not  actually,  was  virtually  in
office.’  It  was  not  in  accordance  with  strict  prudence,  or  ‘  with
an  entire  decorum  with  regard  to  the  other  Cabinet  Ministers,  to
go  so  far  into  detail  as  has  been  done,  until  all  the  circumstances
of  the  appointment  were  settled  in  a  more  distinct  and  specific
manner  than  they  had  been.’  The  Whig  leaders  undoubtedly
‘  thought  that  a  very  large  discretion  was  committed  to  them,’
but  they  must  have  been  strangely  mistaken,  for  ‘  it  seems  Mr.
Pitt  had  no  thought  at  all  of  a  change  in  the  Irish  Government,
or,  if  he  had,  it  was  dependent  on  Lord  Westmorland’s  sense
of  the  fitness  of  some  other  office  to  accommodate  him  on  his
resignation.  .  .  .  These  are  some  of  the  mischiefs  which  arise
from  a  want  of  clear  explanation  on  the  first  digestion  of  any
political  system.’

The  great  question  was  whether  Lord  Fitzwilliam  could
honourably  consent  either  to  continue  in  his  present  office,  aban¬
doning  his  claims  to  the  viceroyalty,  or  to  accept  the  viceroyalty
on  the  terms  on  which  it  was  now  offered  to  him  ?  ‘  With  in¬

finite  sorrow  ’ — ‘  with  sorrow  inexpressible,’  Burke  concluded
that  both  courses  were  impossible.  ‘  He  has  consulted  with
many  people  from  Ireland  of  all  descriptions  as  if  he  were
virtually  Lord  Lieutenant.  The  Duke  of  Portland  has  acted
upon  that  supposition  as  a  fundamental  part  of  his  arrange¬
ment.  Lord  Fitzwilliam  cannot  shrink  into  his  shell  again,
without  being  thought  a  light  man,  in  whom  no  person  can
place  any  confidence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  takes  the
sword  not  only  without  power,  but  with  a  direct  negative  put
upon  his  power,  he  is  a  Lord  Lieutenant  disgraced  and  degraded.’
He  must  resign,  and  those  who  entered  into  the  Ministry  with
him  must  accompany  him.

Englishmen  with  little  knowledge  of  Ireland,  considered
the  question  a  mere  personal  one,  and  asked  why  Fitzgibbon
might  not  continue  Chancellor  while  Fitzwilliam  was  Viceroy.

‘  After  what  has  passed,  the  true  question  is,  which  of  the  two  is
to  govern  Ireland.’  No  position  can  be  more  helpless  or  de¬
grading  than  that  of  a  Lord  Lieutenant  who  is  not  effectually
supported  by  the  English  Minister,  who  is  surrounded  by  sub¬
ordinates  opposed  to  him,  and  is  liable  to  be  thwarted  at  every
turn  by  the  parties  in  Ireland.  If  this  is  the  position  intended

CH.  XXVI.

OPINION  OF  BUKKE.

47

for  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  a  worse  choice  could  not  have  been  made,
and  it  would  have  been  far  better  to  keep  Lord  Westmorland  in
Ireland.  1  It  is  not  to  know  Ireland  to  say  that  what  is  called
Opposition  is  what  will  give  trouble  to  a  real  viceroy.  His  em¬
barrassments  are  upon  the  part  of  those  who  ought  to  be  the
supports  of  English  Government,  but  who  have  formed  them¬
selves  into  a  cabal  to  destroy  the  King’s  authority,  and  to
divide  the  country  as  a  spoil  amongst  one  another.  Non
regnum  sed  magnum  latrocinium — the  motto  ought  to  be  put
under  the  harp.’

‘  Ireland,’  he  continued,  ‘  is  no  longer  an  obscure  depen¬
dency  of  this  kingdom.  What  is  done  there,  vitally  affects
the  whole  system  of  Europe.  ...  It  will  be  a  strong  digue  to
keep  out  Jacobinism,  or  a  broken  bank  to  let  it  in.  .  .  .  By  the
meditated  and  systematic  corruption  ...  of  some,  and  the  head¬
long  violence  and  tyrannical  spirit  of  others,  totally  destitute  of
wisdom,  and  the  more  incurably  so  as  not  being  destitute  of
some  flashy  parts,1  it  is  brought  into  a  very  perilous  situa¬
tion.’  If  the  junto  who  were  governing  it  were  not  speedily
checked,  Burke  clearly  predicted  that  a  calamity  was  inevitable
which  might  involve  the  ruin  of  the  Empire.  1  There  is  a  set
of  men  in  Ireland  who  ...  by  their  innumerable  corruptions,
frauds,  oppressions,  and  follies  were  opening  a  back  door  for
Jacobinism  to  rush  in.  .  .  .  As  surely  as  you  and  I  exist,  so
surely  this  will  be  the  consequence  of  their  persisting  in  their
system.’ 2

In  reviewing  this  whole  controversy,  it  appears  to  me
evident  that  the  Whig  leaders  had  just  reason  to  complain  of
the  conduct  of  Pitt — that  they  had  real  grounds  for  believing
that  powers  had  been  promised  them,  which  were  afterwards
withdrawn  or  denied.  It  seems  as  if  Pitt  had  either  failed  to
realise  the  full  import  of  the  concessions  he  had  made,  or  else
had  changed  his  mind,  and  desired  to  withdraw  from  a  position
which  was  disadvantageous  to  him.  The  secret  motives  that
governed  him,  must  always  be  a  matter  of  conjecture.  What
motives  were  likely  tfc  be  attributed  to  him,  Burke  very  clearly
stated.  The  Whig  leaders  had  been  warned  before  they  made
the  alliance,  that  it  was  not  in  the  character  of  Pitt  to  give  them
1  An  evident  portrait  of  Fitzgibbon.  2  Windham’s  Diary,  pp.  321-333.

48

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

any  real  confidence  or  any  real  share  of  power — that  he  would
•  accept  their  alliance,  but  on  the  first  difference,  when  they  had
broken  with  their  friends  and  original  connections,  and  had  lost
all  credit  with  the  independent  part  of  the  country,  and  all
power  of  formidable  opposition,  would  turn  them  out  as  objects
of  universal  scorn  and  derision.

It  is  not,  however,  necessary,  or,  I  believe,  just,  to  attribute
such  calculations  to  Pitt.  Like  most  English  statesmen,  he  had
a  very  slight  and  superficial  knowledge  of  Irish  affairs,  which
depended  upon  conditions  of  character  and  circumstances  wholly
unlike  those  with  which  he  was  familiar,  and  from  the  moment
the  contemplated  change  was  announced,  a  constant  stream  of
the  most  alarming  letters,  which  were  evidently  intended  to  be
laid  before  him.  poured  over  from  the  high  officials  in  Ireland.  If
the  proposed  changes  were  effected,  it  was  said,  Ireland  would
pass  completely  into  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  and  the
Government  in  England  would  never  be  able  to  take  it  out  of
them  again.  The  Ponsonbys  were  already  boasting  that  they
were  the  masters  of  the  country.  The  whole  of  the  highly
artificial  system  by  which  the  Irish  Government  was  kept  in
permanent  subjection  to  the  English  Executive  would  be
broken.  Popular  questions  would  acquire  a  momentum  that  it
would  be  henceforth  impossible  to  withstand.  Those  men  who
had  for  years  made  it  their  policy  to  resist  the  popular  wishes,
and  to  act  on  all  occasions  as  the  exclusive  servants  of  the
English  Government,  would  consider  themselves  betrayed,  and
would  either  sink  into  complete  impotence,  or  enlist  under  new
banners.  The  main  object  of  Pitt’s  Irish  policy  was  to  keep
the  country  at  once  quiet  and  subservient,  and  he  was  most
anxious  that  no  new  field  of  domestic  embarrassment  should  be
opened  at  a  time  when  the  condition  of  the  Continent  and  the
prospects  of  the  war  were  so  alarming.  He  was  full  of  doubt
about  the  dispositions  and  future  tendencies  of  the  Irish  people.
He  could  give  Irish  affairs  but  a  small  share  of  his  attention,  and
he  was  told  that  if  he  carried  out  the  arrangement  that  was  pro¬
posed,  they  would  pass  wholly  and  for  ever  beyond  his  control.
The  demand  for  the  removal  of  Fitzgibbon  must,  also,  have  been
peculiarly  unpalatable  to  him.  It  was  quite  true  that  the  part
which  this  able  man  had  taken  both  on  the  question  of  Reform  and

CH.  XXVI.

THE  PROJECTED  UNION.

49

on  the  question  of  the  Catholics  had  made  his  removal  a  matter  of
the  first  political  importance  or  necessity  if  a  policy  of  concilia¬
tion  was  to  be  pursued,  and  in  this  consideration  the  path  of  duty
was,  I  think,  clearly  indicated.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Fitz-
gibbonin  1788,  almost  alone  among  prominent  Irish  politicians,
and  at  the  imminent  risk  of  the  ruin  of  his  career,  had  supported
Pitt  on  the  Regency  question,  and  had  supported  him  against
the  very  men  who  now  asked  for  his  removal.  We  have  seen,  from
the  letter  of  Lord  Grenville,  that  it  was  already  pretended  that  the
part  taken  by  Fitzgibbon  in  the  Regency  debates  was  the  real
reason  of  the  demand.  It  was  quite  in  the  character  of  Pitt  that
the  dread  of  such  an  imputation  or  misconstruction  should  have
weighed  with  him  more  heavily  than  the  great  political  issues
that  were  at  stake.

It  is  possible  that  another  consideration  may  have  entered
into  his  calculations.  We  have  seen  that  the  project  of  a
legislative  union  was  already  in  his  mind  as  the  ultimate  solu¬
tion  of  Irish  politics,  and  that  it  had  been  warmly  encouraged
by  Lord  Westmorland.  Fitzgibbon,  next  to  Castlereagh,  was
the  Irishman  who  did  most  to  carry  it ;  and  although  there  is,
I  believe,  no  absolute  proof  that  he  at  this  time  knew  the  designs
of  the  Government,  it  is,  at  least,  highly  probable.  Westmorland
confided  in  him  more  than  in  any  other  Irish  politician.  Fitz¬
gibbon  had  always  Strongly  maintained  the  necessity  of  keeping
the  whole  machinery  of  Irish  politics  in  complete  and  permanent
subordination  to  the  English  Executive ;  and  he  has  himself
stated,  that  ever  since  the  Relief  Act  of  1793  he  had  looked  for¬
ward  to  a  legislative  union,  and  had  uniformly  pressed  its  urgent
necessity  on  the  English  Ministers.1  The  astronomer  can  detect
the  attracting  or  disturbing  presence  of  an  invisible  planet  by
the  aberrations  of  the  bddies  that  are  in  sight,  and  Irish  writers
have  long  believed  that  the  secret  design  of  an  union  was  the  cause
and  the  explanation  of  much  that  appears  mysterious  in  the
proceedings  of  Pitt.  We  shall  find,  I  think,  some  confirmation
hereafter  of  the  suspicion.  It  is,  at  least,  certain,  that  if  the
Irish  representative  system  had  been  reformed,  the  chances  of
carrying  such  a  measure  would  have  been  enormously  diminished.
Pitt  may  not  have  believed  those  who  told  him,  with  perfect  truth,
]  Auckland  Correspondence ,  iv.  8  ;  Clare’s  Speech  on  the  Union ,  p.  3.

*47

50

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  oh.  xxvi.

that  if  that  system  were  not  reformed,  a  rebellion  would  in  a
short  time  become  inevitable.

The  quarrel  between  Pitt  and  his  new  allies  lasted  for  some
weeks,  but  it  was  finally  composed  by  an  imperfect  and  unsatis¬
factory  compromise.  The  recall  of  Lord  Westmorland  was  has¬
tened  ;  he  was  transferred  to  the  position  of  Mastership  of  the
Horse,  and  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  appointed  to  succeed  him.
Thomas  Grenville  declined  the  office  of  Chief  Secretary,  and
it  was  conferred  upon  Lord  Milton.  It  was  agreed  that  Fitz-
gibbon  should  remain  Chancellor,  and  that  no  general  change
should  be  made  in  the  Irish  administration.  It  is  extraordinary
and  most  inexcusable  that,  after  the  experience  he  had  just  had,
Lord  Fitzwilliam  did  not  insist  on  the  exact  terms  of  his  powers
being  clearly  defined,  and  defined  in  writing,  but  so  it  was.
He,  at  least,  fully  believed  that  he  was  authorised  to  remove  some
men  in  whom  he  could  not  place  confidence,  though  probably  not
without  compensation.  We  shall  see  that  this  power  was  after¬
wards  disputed.

Apart  from  questions  of  patronage,  the  great  pressing  ques¬
tion  was  that  of  the  admission  of  Catholics  to  Parliament,  and
on  this  question  the  line  indicated  to  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was
tolerably  clear.  He  was  instructed  not  to  bring  it  forward  as  a
Government  measure,  and  if  possible  to  prevent  its  agitation,
and  to  obtain  its  postponement  till  the  peace.  At  the  same
time,  Pitt  announced  himself  in  principle  favourable  to  the
measure,  and  if,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  Government,  Lord
Fitzwilliam  found  it  so  pressed  that  it  could  not  be  evaded,  he
was  authorised  to  accept  and  to  support  it.

It  may  be  advisable  to  give  the  exact  words  of  some  of  the
chief  persons  concerned  in  the  question,  as  a  controversy  sub¬
sequently  arose  upon  it.  ‘  I  was  decidedly  of  opinion,’  Lord  Fitz¬
william  afterwards  wrote,  ‘  that  not  only  sound  policy,  but  justice,
required,  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain,  that  the  work  which  was
left  imperfect  in  1793  ought  to  be  completed,  and  the  Catholics  re¬
lieved  from  every  remaining  disqualification.  In  this  opinion  the
Duke  of  Portland  uniformly  concurred  with  me  ;  and  when  this
question  came  under  discussion  previous  to  my  departure  for  Ire¬
land,  I  found  the  Cabinet,  with  Mr.  Pitt  at  their  head,  strongly
impressed  with  the  same  conviction.  Had  I  found  it  otherwise,  I

CH.  XXVI.

STIPULATIONS  ABOUT  THE  CATHOLICS.

51

never  would  have  undertaken  the  government.  I  at  first  pro¬
posed  that  if  the  additional  indulgences  should  be  offered  from
the  Throne,  the  very  best  effects  would  be  secured  ;  .  .  .  but  to
this  proposal  objections  were  stated,  that  appeared  of  sufficient
weight  to  induce  the  adoption  of  another  plan.  I  consented  not
to  bring  the  question  forward  on  the  part  of  Government,  but
rather  to  endeavour  to  keep  back  until  a  period  of  more  general
tranquillity,  when  so  many  material  objects  might  not  press  upon
the  Government ;  but  as  the  principle  we  agreed  on,  and  the
necessity  of  its  being  brought  into  full  effect,  was  universally
allowed,  it  was  at  the  same  time  resolved,  that  if  the  Catholics
should  appear  determined  to  stir  the  business,  and  to  bring  it
before  Parliament,  I  was  to  give  it  a  handsome  support  on  the
part  of  Government.’ 1

This  statement  of  fact  has  never  been  disputed,  though  after
the  quarrel,  which  is  to  be  described,  the  Government  accentuated
somewhat  more  strongly  than  Lord  Fitzwilliam  had  done,  the
undoubted  fact  that  they  had  desired  that  the  question  should,
if  possible,  be  adjourned.  ‘  As  to  the  Catholic  question,’  wrote
Portland,  1  it  was  understood  that  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  to  exert
his  endeavours  to  prevent  its  being  agitated  at  all.’2

Lord  Fitzwilliam  arrived  in  Ireland  on  January  4, 1795  ;  but
before  his  arrival,  the  agitation  for  Catholic  emancipation  had
fully  begun.  The  knowledge  that  statesmen  who  were  avowedly
favourable  to  it  were  in  power,  and  the  belief,  that  was  rapidly
spread,  that  they  had  full  authority  to  carry  the  measure,  had
very  naturally  an  instantaneous  effect.  The  Catholic  Committee,
which  had  fallen  into  a  somewhat  dormant  state,  at  once  became

1  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,  pp.  3,  4.
In  a  debate  in  1799,  speaking  of
his  administration,  Fitzwilliam  said  :
‘  Yielding  to  the  argument  of  not
wishing  to  entangle  Government  in
difficulties  upon  the  subject  at  that
period,  I  admit  that,  under  orders,
clearly  understood  by  me,  not  to  give
rise  to  or  bring  forward  the  question
cf  Catholic  emancipation  on  the  part
of  Government,  I  assumed  the  govern¬
ment  of  Ireland.  But,  in  yielding  to
this  argument,  I  entered  my  pro¬
test  against  resisting  the  question,  if
it  should  be  brought  forward  from
any  other  quarter ;  and  I  made  most
distinct  declarations,  that,  in  case  of

its  being  so  brought  forward,  it  should
receive  my  full  support.  With  these
declarations,  I  assumed  the  govern¬
ment  of  Ireland.  This  I  state  upon
my  honour.’  (Pari.  Hist,  xxxiv.  672.)
In  perfect  harmony  with  this  state¬
ment  were  the  words,  describing  his
intentions  on  the  Catholic  question,
used  by  Pitt  to  Grattan,  which
the  latter  at  once  wrote  down,  and
which  were  published  by  his  son :
‘  Not  to  bring  it  forward  as  a  Govern¬
ment  measure,  but,  if  Government
were  pressed,  to  yield  to  it.’  (Grat¬
tan’s  Life,  iv.  177.)

2  Secret  insrructions  to  Lord
Camden,  March  26,  1795.

62  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvi.

%

active,  and  in  December  1794  it  was  resolved  that  in  the  en¬
suing  session  an  application  should  be  made  to  Parliament,
praying  for  a  total  repeal  of  the  penal  and  restrictive  laws
affecting  the  Catholics  of  Ireland,  that  this  address  should  be
entrusted  for  presentation  to  Grattan,  that  the  Catholics  all  over
Ireland  should  be  recommended  to  petition  for  the  measure,  and
that  an  address  should  be  presented  to  Lord  Fitzwilliam  on  his
arrival.  ‘  I  was  no  sooner  landed,’  he  afterwards  wrote,  ‘  and
informed  of  the  real  state  of  things  here,  than  I  found  that  this
question  would  force  itself  upon  my  immediate  consideration.’ 1

There  was  an  interval  of  not  quite  three  weeks  before  the
meeting  of  Parliament,  and  Fitzwilliam  employed  it  in  en¬
deavouring  to  obtain  full  information  on  the  subject,  and  in  re¬
porting  the  result  of  his  inquiries  to  the  Duke  of  Portland.
On  January  8  he  wrote  :  ‘  I  tremble  about  the  Roman  Catholics.
I  mean,  about  keeping  them  quiet  for  the  session,  because  I  find
the  question  already  in  agitation,  and  a  committee  appointed  to
bring  forward  a  petition  for  the  repeal  of  the  penal  and  restric¬
tive  laws.  I  will  immediately  use  what  efforts  I  can  to  stop  the
progress  of  it,  and  bring  them  back  to  a  confidence  in  the  good
intentions  of  Government,  and,  relying  on  that,  to  defer  for  the
present  agitating  the  question.’  Lord  Shannon  agreed  in  think¬
ing  it  ought  to  be  postponed,  and  if  it  is  brought  on,  1 1  think,’
said  Fitzwilliam,  £  he  will  be  against  it,  more,  I  see,  for  the  sake  of
consistency,  than  from  any  fear  of  mischief  arising  from  its  being
granted ;  and,  indeed,  he  expressed  very  explicitly  an  opinion,
that  if  its  stop  could  not  be  negotiated  on  grounds  of  temporary
expediency,  it  ought  not  to  be  resisted  by  Government.’2

The  Lord  Lieutenant  had  no  means  of  acting  on  the  Catholic
Committee,  but  he  hoped  to  put  off  the  question  by  availing
himself  of  the  influence  of  the  leading  Catholic  gentry.  In  a
letter  of  the  15th,  after  describing  the  successful  efforts  that
were  being  made  to  enlist  soldiers  for  the  war,  both  among  the
Catholics  and  the  Protestants,  and  the  loyal  addresses  he  had
received,  both  from  the  Dissenters  and  from  the  Catholics  of
Dublin,  he  adds  :  ‘  Towards  the  latter,  the  Catholics,  I  have  en¬
deavoured  to  keep  clear  of  any  engagement  whatever,  though

1  Plowden,  ii.  468-470.  Fitz-  2  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  8,
william’s  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,  p.  4.  1795.

CH.  XXVI.

CONDITION  OF  THE  COUNTRY.

4

53

tliere  is  nothing  in  my  answer  that  they  can  construe  into  a  re¬
jection  of  what  they  are  all  looking  forward  to,  the  repeal  of  the
remaining  penal  and  restrictive  laws.  I  say  all,  because  I  mean
not  only  the  Dublin  Committee,  but  the  seceders — that  is,  the
noblemen  and  gentlemen  of  landed  property.’  He  had  sounded
Lord  Kenmare  and  Lord  Fingall,  and  found  them  both  moderate
and  anxious  to  avoid  embarrassing  the  Government,  but  they
both  looked  forward  to  the  removal  of  all  disabilities.  Lord
Fingall  especially  dwelt  on  the  impossibility  of  abandoning  the
hope.  ‘  I  conversed  with  him,’  said  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  c  upon
the  general  state  of  those  of  his  persuasion ;  how  completely  the
great  mass  were  already  in  possession  of  equal  rights  with  their
fellow-subjects,  and  upon  that  ground  with  what  justice  we  might
expect  perfect  loyalty  and  attachment  on  the  part  of  the  general
mass.  He  admitted  the  justice  of  our  expectation,  but  observed
that  the  reason  of  the  thing  did  not  decide  the  multitude ;  that
what  it  w'as  they  probably  did  not  know  and  did  not  inquire,
but  they  did  know  that  something  remained  undone  for  those
of  their  persuasion,  and  that  if  there  was  disaffection  to  be  found
among  that  class  (which  he  admitted,  and  which  not  one  man  of
any  sort  or  description  hesitates  to  admit),  he  conceived  this  to
be  the  ground  of  it.’ 1

The  very  serious  condition  of  the  country  impressed  itself
more  and  more  upon  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  he  clearly  saw
that  without  considerable  and  permanent  remedies,  there  was
everything  to  be  feared.  ‘  Not  a  day,’  he  said,  ‘  has  passed
since  my  arrival,  without  intelligence  received  of  violence  com¬
mitted  in  West  Meath,  Meath,  Longford,  and  Cavan.’  He  found
the  whole  texture  of  government  miserably  weak ;  scarcely  any
real  responsibility  among  officials ;  half  a  dozen  governors
sometimes  presiding  over  a  single  county ;  magistrates  invari¬
ably  appointed  by  private  favour.  In  many  parts  o'f  the  country
general  officers  were  employed  as  civil  magistrates,  and  this
system,  though  it  approached  closely  to  martial  law,  was  by  no
means  inexpedient,  as  the  soldiery  were  often  ‘  the  only  magis¬
tracy  in  real  authority,’  and  the  only  power  who  could  repress
the  Defenders.  They  could,  however,  give  no  permanent  pro¬
tection.  ‘An  outrage  is  committed.  Government  sends  a

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  15,  1795.

54  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

military  force  to  animate  tlie  magistrates ;  they  act  under  that
protection ;  the  outrage  is  put  an  end  to  ;  all  appears  submission ;
the  military  retire,  and  the  house,  life,  or  family  of  the  magis¬
trate  instantly  pays  the  penalty  of  his  activity.’ 1  The  Defender
outrages  were  not  political,  but  they  derived  much  of  their  im¬
portance  from  a  feeling  of  sullen  and  bitter  discontent,  which
had  spread  through  the  Catholic  population — a  discontent  which
Fitzwilliam  was  more  and  more  convinced  could  only  be  effec¬
tually  met  by  the  abolition  of  all  religious  disqualifications.  He
had  not  been  more  than  ten  days  in  the  country,  before  he  ex¬
pressed  his  judgment  and  decision  on  that  point.  ‘  I  shall  not
do  my  duty,’  he  wrote,  4  if  I  do  not  distinctly  state  it  as  my
opinion,  that  not  to  grant  cheerfully  on  the  part  of  Government
all  the  Catholics  wish,  will  not  only  be  exceedingly  impolitic,
but  perhaps  dangerous.  The  disaffection  among  the  lower
orders  is  universally  admitted  (though  the  violences  now  com¬
mitted  from  time  to  time  are  not  the  violences  arising  from  dis¬
affection  or  political  causes,  but  merely  the  outrages  of  banditti,
fostered,  however,  under  that  pretended  cause).  Though  the
higher  orders  are  certainly  firmly  attached,  and  to  be  relied
upon,  and  perhaps  the  wealthy  of  the  second  class  hardly  less
so,  because  they  are  fearful  for  their  property,  yet  the  latter,  at
least,  have  certainly  shown  no  forwardness  to  check  these  out¬
rages  and  to  reconcile  the  affections  of  the  lowest,  which  is  to
be  imputed,  and  can  be  imputed,  to  no  other  cause  than  that
there  is  something  left  behind  that  rankles  in  their  bosoms.
They  conceive,  as  they  express  themselves,  that  they  are  marked
people,  but  this  done  away,  ...  I  feel  confident  of  their  zealous
and  hearty  support  in  the  worst  of  exigencies.’ 2

If  the  disabilities  were  removed,  a  measure  might  be  carried
out,  which  Fitzwilliam  was  convinced — and  on  this  point  the
Chancellor  fully  agreed  with  him — would  be  the  only  possi¬
ble  remedy  for  the  chronic  but  spasmodic  outbreaks  of  violence
which  had  become  so  formidable.  It  was  the  creation  of
‘  an  armed  constabulary  composed  of  the  better  orders  of  the

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  10,  Defenders  were  drilling  every  night
15,31,1795.  The  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  in  the  county  of  Meath.  {West-
in  a  letter  to  Lord  Westmorland,  morland  Correspondence,  I.S.P.O.)
mentions  the  astonishment  and  alarm  2  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  15,
of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  on  learning  that  1795.

CH.  XXVI.

PROPOSAL  OF  A  CONSTABULARY.

55

people,  of  those  who  have  an  interest  in  the  authority  of  the
law.’  Hitherto  the  police  system  in  Ireland  had  been  utterly
inefficient,  and  when  Whiteboys  or  other  depredators  became
formidable,  either  the  military  were  called  in,  or  the  country
gentlemen  associated  themselves  together,  raised  volunteers
among  their  tenantry,  hunted  down  the  banditti,  and  dealt  in  a
very  summary  manner  with  those  who  fell  into  their  hands.1
The  Peace  Preservation  Act  of  1787  had  empowered  the  Lord
Lieutenant  to  appoint  a  chief  constable  in  each  barony,  and  the
grand  juries  to  appoint  sixteen  Protestant  sub-constables  in
each  of  the  same  districts,  to  pay  them,  in  addition  to  fixed
salaries,  threepence  a  mile  for  the  conveyance  of  each  prisoner
whom  they  apprehended,  from  the  place  of  arrest  to  the  county
gaol,  and  to  give  the  same  sum  to  any  Protestant  who  assisted
them  in  this  duty.  The  Act  was  permissive,  and  many  counties
failed  to  adopt  it.  A  few  new  regulations  about  the  ‘  baronial
constables’  were  made  by  an  Act  of  1792.  These  men  wore
no  uniform,  were  under  no  regular  supervision  or  discipline,
and  followed  their  usual  occupations  when  they  were  not  called
out  for  public  duty.  They  were  manifestly  inadequate  to  the
task  of  preserving  the  peace  of  the  country,  in  a  time  of  wide¬
spread  and  organised  lawlessness.2  One  of  the  first  necessities
of  Ireland  was  a  large  and  disciplined  constabulary,  which  could
habitually  discharge  the  duties  that  were  now  thrown  upon
soldiers  or  upon  volunteers.  ‘  But  of  what  description  of  men,’
asked  Fitzwilliam,  ‘ must  this  constabulary  be  composed ? ’  ‘Of
the  first  tenants,  that  is,  the  middle  man  between  the  landlord
and  the  tenant.  Who  are  they,  and  what  are  they  ?  In  three
provinces  all  Catholics.  Shall  we  wait  till  they  have  arms  in
their  hands,  and  then  grant  them  their  requests;  or  shall  we
begin  by  making  them  content,  and  then  confide  in  them  ?

That  the  Catholics  would  some  day  obtain  what  they  desired,
he  considered  indisputable;  but  by  deferring  the  concessions,
Ireland  was  exposed  to  the  risk  that,  in  the  event  of  invasion,
the  mass  of  the  people  would  be  found  disaffected.  He  then
sums  up  his  views,  and  states  his  intentions  in  language  which

1  See  vol.  iv.  p.  342.  See,  too,  2  27  Geo.  III.  c.  40 ;  32  Geo.  III.
an  example  of  these  associations  in  c.  16.  Curtis  s  Hist,  of  the  Royal

Lord  Cloncurry’s  Personal  Recollcc-  Irish  Constabulary ,  pp.  2, 3.
tions,  p.  23.

56

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUHY.

CH.  XXVIi

it  was  impossible  to  misunderstand.  ‘All  this,’  be  writes,  ‘1
submit  to  your  consideration ;  no  time  is  to  be  lost ;  the  busi¬
ness  will  presently  be  at  hand,  and  the  first  step  I  take  is  of
infinite  importance  (pray  do  not  delay  to  talk  with  Pitt  on  the
subject).  If  I  receive  no  very  peremptory  directions  to  the
contrary,  I  shall  acquiesce  with  a  good  grace,  in  order  to  avoid
the  manifest  ill  effect  of  a  doubt,  or  the  appearance  of  hesita¬
tion,  for  in  my  opinion  even  the  appearance  of  hesitation  may
be  mischievous  to  a  degree  beyond  all  calculation.  Two  evils
it  would  inevitably  produce,  the  loss  to  Government  of  the  con¬
fidence  and  affection  of  the  Catholics,  and  the  giving  rise  to  a
Protestant  cabal,  which  will  be  a  certain  consequence.  On  the
other  hand,  a  cheerful  acquiescence  on  the  part  of  Government
will  keep  that  down  perhaps  altogether ;  for  in  truth  the  great
body  of  the  Protestants  feel  the  necessity,  and  indeed  propriety,
of  the  measure,  and  the  opposition  to  it,  being  among  a  very
few,  never  can  have  the  semblance  of  being  formidable  but  inas¬
much  as  Government  appears  to  waver.  Convinced  as  we  all
are  of  the  necessity  as  well  as  fitness  of  the  measure  taking
place  at  no  distant  period,  to  attempt  to  defer  it,  is  to  incur  the
certain  inconvenience  of  rendering  the  Catholics  useless  at  least,
if  not  dangerous,  of  making  them  unwilling  to  act  for  external
defence,  unsafe  to  have  committed  to  their  hands  the  means  of
restoring  law,  order,  and  tranquillity,  which  can  only  be  restored
by  the  means  of  a  strong  police,  universally  established  under
the  mask  of  a  yeomanry  cavalry,  about  which,  as  I  stated  before,
there  is  not  to  be  found  a  second  opinion,  provided  the  relief  to
the  Catholics  precedes  it ;  but  the  one  done  and  the  other  esta¬
blished,  I  should  feel  a  great  load  off  my  mind.  I  should  look
forward  to  great  security  from  an  external  enemy,  to  much  good
order  within.’ 1

In  a  letter  written  a  few  weeks  later,  he  recurred  in  very  em¬
phatic  terms  to  the  growing  disaffection  of  the  lower  classes  in  the
country  districts,  and  warned  the  Government  to  be  under  no
illusions  on  the  subject.  1  A  shameful  want  of  protection  for  the
lower  orders  of  the  people,  a  partial  and  harsh  measure  of  law,
together  with  a  variety  of  oppressions,  have  alienated  them  from
the  Government,  and  rendered  them  indifferent  to  the  interests
1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  15,  1795.

CH.  XXVI.

CHANGES  IN  ADMINISTRATION.

57

of  their  country.  That  full  and  ample  extent  of  right  and  pri¬
vilege  lately  granted  to  this  class  of  subjects,  has  failed  to  recon¬
cile  their  affections.  .  .  .  No  man  acquainted  with  the  circum¬
stances  of  this  country,  if  he  speaks  frankly  and  honestly,  can
give  any  other  than  this  account,  that  the  whole  body  of  the  lowest
orders  of  the  people  are,  at  the  time  of  my  writing,  and  have
been  long,  in  rebellion  ;  that  is,  if  oaths  and  engagements  entered
into  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  Government,  and  of  assist¬
ing  any  foreign  invaders,  may  be  said  to  be  a  state  of  rebellion.’
The  want  of  arms  and  leaders,  and  the  disappointment  of  the
hopes  of  foreign  assistance,  alone  prevented  a  rebellion.1

In  addition  to  his  inquiries  into  the  Catholic  question,
Fitzwilliam,  before  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  either  made  or
proposed  a  few  changes  in  the  administration.  William  Pon-
sonby  was  recommended  for  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State.
Sackville  Hamilton,  and  Cooke,  who  were  in  subordinate  but  very
confidential  positions,  were  at  once  removed.  ‘  Neither  I  nor  my
Chief  Secretary,’  wrote  Fitzwilliam,  ‘  with  whom  they  were  in
hourly  intercourse,  felt  inclined  to  give  them  that  confidence,
or  to  suffer  the  business  of  their  respective  offices  to  be  con¬
ducted  on  the  system  which  we  found  had  been  lately  introduced
there ;  ’  and  he  complained  of  Cooke,  that  ‘  his  tone  and  style
rendered  his  approach  to  a  superior  not  to  be  supported.’
Hamilton  was  one  of  the  oldest  servants  of  the  Crown  in  Ireland,
and  he  had  been  Under  Secretary  for  about  twenty-five  years.
He  appears  to  have  acquiesced  in  his  dismissal,  and  to  have  been
contented  with  the  compensation  that  was  promised  to  him  ;  but
Cooke,  who  was  Secretary  for  War,  complained  bitterly  that  a
pension  of  1,200Z.  a  year,  which  was  bestowed  on  him,  was
a  wholly  inadequate  reward  for  his  services,  and  he  at  once
carried  his  complaint  to  England.  He  was  an  able  man,  who
bore  a  very  important  and  confidential  part  in  the  Irish  politics
of  the  last  years  of  the  century,  and  was  distinguished  for  his
hostility  to  Catholic  emancipation  in  the  Irish  Parliament,  for
his  support  of  the  harshest  measures  that  preceded  and  imme¬
diately  followed  the  rebellion,  and  for  his  powerful  advocacy  of
the  Union.  Fitzwilliam  also  proposed  to  the  English  Govern-

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Pitt,  Feb.  14, 1795.  he  mentions  the  general  expectation '
In  a  letter  to  Portland  on  the  13th,  of  a  coming  rebellion.

58

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvu

ment  that  Wolfe  and  Toler,  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  General,
should  be  removed,  and  replaced  by  George  Ponsonby  and  Curran,
who  were  greatly  their  superiors  in  debating  talent,  and  who  were
also  in  harmony  with  the  new  administration.  In  case  the'  ar¬
rangement  was  carried  out,  ample  provision  was  to  be  made  for
the  removed  law  officers,  and  the  promotion  of  George  Ponsonby
appears  to  have  been  recommended  by  the  Duke  of  Portland.1

The  change,  however,  which  was  really  important  from  its
consequences,  was  the  removal  of  John  Beresford,  who  held  the
not  very  prominent  office  of  Commissioner  of  the  Revenue.
Beresford  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  examples  of  a  class
of  politicians  who  were  a  peculiar  and  characteristic  product  of
the  Irish  political  system.  He  belonged  to  a  family  which,
though  entirely  undistinguished  in  Parliament  and  in  respon¬
sible  statesmanship,  had  secured  so  large  a  proportion  of  the
minor  offices  in  administration,  had  employed  its  patronage  so
exclusively  for  the  purpose  of  building  up  a  family  influence,
and  had  formed  in  this  manner  so  extensive  a  system  of  political
connections  and  alliances,  that  it  had  become  one  of  the  most
powerful  controlling  and  directing  influences  in  the  Government
of  Ireland.  In  a  curious  and  valuable  paper  drawn  up  for  or  by
Lord  Abercorn  in  1791,  called  an  ‘Analysis  of  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment/  in  that  year,  the  party  which  was  called  the  Beresford
party  is  reckoned  at  only  eight  members,  but  it  is  added  that
the  Chancellor,  the  Attorney-General,  and  Cooke  were  allied
with  it.  John  Beresford,  the  writer  says,  was  the  First  Com¬
missioner,  with  an  official  house  and  a  salary  of  2,000k  a  year,
and  he  had  obtained  the  office  of  Taster  of  Wines,  with  a  salary
of  1,000L  a  year,  for  his  own  life  and  that  of  his  eldest  son.
His  son  Marcus — an  active  and  useful  member  of  the  House —
was  first  counsel  to  the  commissioner,  with  a  salary  of  2,000k
His  second  son,  John  Claudius,  had  a  very  lucrative  office  in

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  8,
15, 1795  ;  Fitzwilliam’s  Letter  to  Lord
Carlisle.  The  case  of  the  removed  offi¬
cials  will  be  found  in  the  letters  of
Cooke  to  Buckingham.  ( Courts  and
Cabinets,  ii.  329-333.)  Several  par¬
ticulars  relating  to  these  changes
will  be  found  in  a  memorandum  on
what  passed  between  the  Ministers
and  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  before  the

departure  of  the  latter  for  Ireland,
which  is  among  the  Pelham  papers.  It
is  there  stated  that  the  Ministers
thought  the  position  of  Secretary  of
State  ought  to  be  combined  with  that
of  Chief  Secretaiy,  and  another  posi¬
tion  found  for  W.  Ponsonby,  and  also
that  Fitzwilliam  had  not  mentioned
his  intention  of  promoting  Curran.

CH.  XXVI.

JOHN  BERESFORD.

59

the  revenue.  His  son-in-law  would  probably  be  provided  for  in
the  first  law  arrangement.  William  Beresford  was  Bishop  of
Ossory,  he  looked  for  the  highest  Church  preferment,  and  he
was  married  to  the  Chancellor’s  sister.  The  son  of  the  Bishop
was  member  for  the  episcopal  borough.  The  Chancellor  had  a
large  following,  and  the  Attorney-General  sat  in  the  House  of
Commons  with  his  son  and  his  nephew.  Lord  Waterford  had
the  patronage  of  the  counties  of  Waterford  and  Derry.  ‘This
party,’  it  was  added,  ‘  undoubtedly  govern  the  kingdom.’  ‘  Lord
Waterford  is  said  to  stand  remarkably  well  with  the  King,  and
to  have  had  a  constant  connection  with  England,  with  the
persons  who  had  the  ear  of  the  Minister,  such  as  Mr.  Robinson,
Mr.  Rose,  &c.’ 1

The  influence  was  steadily  growing.  A  few  years  after  the
viceroyalty  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  it  was  said  that  at  least  a  fourth
of  all  the  places  in  the  island  were  filled  with  dependants  or  con¬
nections  of  the  Beresfords,2  and  during  Fitzwilliam’s  time  the
influence  of  John  Beresford  was,  or  was  believed  to  be,  so  over¬
whelming,  that  he  was  called  the  King  of  Ireland.3  He  was
politically  closely  allied  with  the  Chancellor,  who  was  bitterly
and  notoriously  hostile  to  Fitzwilliam  and  his  policy,  and  among
his  correspondents  and  supporters  in  England  were  Auckland,  and
the  last  two  viceroys,  Buckingham  and  Westmorland.  From
the  first  announcement  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s  appointment,
Beresford  had  written  of  it  to  England  with  undisguised  hostility
and  apprehension,  and  he  and  his  family  were  strenuously
opposed  to  the  Catholic  policy  of  the  Government.  It  was  not
in  the  character  of  Fitzwilliam  to  brook  this  rivalry.  He  said
that  his  confidential  servants  must  be  men  in  whom  he  could
confide ;  that  it  was  essential  to  the  consequence  and  dignity  of
the  English  Government,  that  family  cabals  for  monopolising

1  I  am  indebted  for  my  knowledge
of  this  curious  paper  to  the  kindness
cf  its  possessor,  Lord  George  Hamil¬
ton.

2  Wakefield’s  Ireland,  ii.  384.

3  Beresford  himself,  in  relating
his  interview  with  Daly,  who  came  to
inform  him  of  the  intention  of  the
Government  to  remove  him,  reports
that  Daly  said  :  ‘  No  Lord  Lieutenant
could  exist  with  my  power ;  that  I

had  made  a  Lord  Chancellor,  a  Chief
Justice  of  the  King’s  Bench,  an
Attorney-General,  nearly  a  Primate,
and  certainly  a  Commander-in-Chief  ;
that  I  was  at  the  head  of  the  revenue,
and  had  the  law,  the  army,  the
revenue,  and  a  great  deal  of  the
Church,  in  my  possession;  and  he
said  expressly  that.  I  was  considered
the  King  of  Ireland.’  ( Beresford  Cor -
resjjondence ,  ii.  51.)

60

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxyi.

the  Government  should  be  broken  up ;  and  that  the  Govern¬
ment,  and  Government  patronage,  in  all  its  branches,  should  be
in  the  hands  of  the  representative  of  the  Sovereign.  One  of  his^
first  acts  after  his  arrival  in  Ireland  was  the  dismissal  of  Beres-
ford.  He  acted  in  this  matter  hastily,  curtly,  and  probably
injudiciously,  and  without  waiting  for  any  act  of  overt  opposi¬
tion  ;  but  Beresford  was  granted  for  life  his  entire  official  salary,
and  he  received  an  assurance  that  none  of  the  other  members  of
his  family  would  be  removed.  ‘  They  were  still  left,’  wrote
Fitzwilliam,  ‘in  the  full  enjoyment  of  more  emoluments  than
ever  were  accumulated  in  any  country  upon  any  one  family.’1

Fitzwilliam  believed  that  this  proceeding  was  within  his  un¬
doubted  powers;  and  if  he  had  ever  any  doubts  on  the  subject,
they  had  been  removed  by  an  interview  with  Pitt  which  took
place  before  his  departure  for  Ireland.  He  expressly  states,
that  he  then  told  Pitt  that  it  might  be  necessary  for  him  to
remove  Beresford,  and  that  Pitt  had  made  no  objection.2  The
veracity  of  Fitzwilliam  is  beyond  dispute,  but  there  wras  probably
on  this,  as  on  other  points,  a  misunderstanding.  In  a  memor¬
andum  relating  to  these  proceedings  which  is  among  the  Pelham
papers,  and  which  is  known  to  have  been  corrected  by  Pitt  him¬
self,  the  following  passage  occurs  :  ‘  It  appears  that  Lord  F.
conceives  himself  to  have  stated  to  Mr.  Pitt,  in  their  first  con¬
versation  on  the  subject  of  Ireland,  that  he  was  apprehensive
Mr.  Beresford  must  be  removed,  and  that  Mr.  Pitt  made  no  ob¬
jection  in  reply  to  this.  Mr.  Pitt  has  no  recollection  of  any¬
thing  having  been  said  to  him  which  conveyed  to  his  mind  the
impression  that  Mr.  Beresford’s  removal  from  his  office  was
intended.’  Beresford,  on  his  side,  wrote  letter  after  letter  to
his  friends  in  England,  describing  himself  as  an  injured  and
persecuted  man ;  he  appealed  passionately  to  Pitt  to  support
him,-  and  he  went  over  to  England  to  lay  his  complaint  before
the  Ministers.3

The  hatred  with  which  Fitzwilliam  was  regarded  by  the  old
permanent  officials  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  The  Bishop
of  Cloyne  gave  Lord  Westmorland  a  curious  account  of  the
dinners  at  the  Castle.  They  were,  he  said,  ‘  miracles  of  stu¬
pidity.’  ‘As  half  the  company  tremble  for  their  places,  and

1  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle.  2  Ibid.  *  Beresford,  Correspondence ,  vol.  ii.

CH.  XXVI,

COOKE’S  LETTERS.

61

have  been  for  so  many  years  hostile  to  the  other  half,  not  a
word  is  spoken,  and  Lord  F.  never  speaks  himself.’  On  one
.occasion,  the  Bishop  says,  a  long  silence  was  broken  by  the
Speaker,  who  suddenly  called  for  a  bumper  ‘  to  the  immortal
memory  of  King  William,  who  delivered  us  from  popery.’  Cooke
.  wrote  to  Lord  Westmorland  constant  accounts  of  the  proceed¬
ings  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  which  were  probably  laid  before
Ministers  in  England,  and  which  give  a  vivid  picture  of  the
consternation  and  indignation  that  prevailed.  The  Ponsonbys,
he  said,  were  now  all-powerful,  and  boasted  that  the  kingdom
was  in  their  hands.  Everything  was  managed  by  the  Lord
Lieutenant,  Lord  Milton,  the  two  Ponsonbys,  Grattan,  and
Yelverton.  The  Ponsonbys  will  now  secure  their  old  friends,
gain  many  new  ones,  and  make  government  impracticable  in
any  form  not  connected  with  them.  Lord  Fitzwilliam  is  laying
‘the  crown  at  the  feet  of  Ned  Byrne  [of  the  Catholic  Com¬
mittee],  by  offering  him  full  powers  on  the  three  conditions
of  supporting  the  war,  which  the  committee  have  hitherto
opposed ;  of  opposing  parliamentary  reform,  to  which  they  are
pledged;  and  of  supporting  the  peace  of  the  country,  which
they  have  notoriously  disturbed  these, four  years.’  £  The  uni¬
versal  idea  is,  that  what  is  proposed  must  inevitably  lead  to
union  or  separation.’  ‘  Mr.  Pitt  seems  to  have  tied  all  the  old
friends  of  Government  to  the  stake,  for  Lord  Fitzwilliam  to  flog.’
‘Mr.  Pitt’s  character  depends  upon  his  support  of  Mr.  Beres-
ford.’  The  dismissal  of  Beresford  is  ‘  one  of  the  sorest  wounds
English  Government  could  receive.’  ‘  Whatever  Government
shall  take  place  in  England,  it  must  in  Ireland  crouch  to  Grattan
and  the  Ponsonbys.  They  have  at  length  defeated  the  Crown.
They  have  rooted  up  all  confidence  in  the  Crown,  and  all  confi¬
dence  in  any  minister  deriving  from  .the  Crown.’  For  himself,
he  says,  after  twenty-five  years  of  service,  and  after  all  his
fidelity  to  Mr.  Pitt,  he  had  lost  l,300h  a  year  ‘  by  this  new
system  of  coalition  and  cordiality.’ 1

While  these  things  were  happening  in  Ireland,  the  political
horizon  of  Europe  was  rapidly  darkening.  'The  close  of  1794
saw  the  great  coalition  against  France  torn  by  division  and

1  Bishop  of  Cloyne  to  Westmor-  morland,  Jan.  9,  15,  18,  23,  23;  Feb.
land,  Jau.  12,  1795;  Cooke  to  West-  2,  1795  {Westmorland  Papers).

62

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CH.  XXVI.

treachery,  and  almost  hopelessly  shattered  by  repeated  defeats.
The  Belgic  provinces,  which  had  been  recovered  by  the  Austrians
in  1793,  were  once  more  completely  French.  The  Austrians
and  the  Prussians  were  in  full  retreat.  The  French  flag  floated
over  every  town  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  except  Mayence
and  Luxemburg;  the  cloud  of  invasion  was  manifestly  impending  »
over  Holland,  and  it  was  the  belief  of  the  most  sagacious  judges
in  England,  that  if  the  Dutch  ports,  shipping,  and  magazines  fell
into  French  hands,  an  invasion  of  the  British  Isles  would  almost
certainly  follow.  £  There  is  a  gloom  over  this  country,’  wrote
Auckland  in  November,  £  such  as  I  cannot  describe.  It  is  a  mix¬
ture  of  rage  at  the  triumphs  of  the  Jacobins,  of  mortification  at  our
own  disgraces,  of  extreme  indignation  and  horror  at  the  infatuated
turpitude  of  some  of  the  allied  Powers,  of  grief  and  alarm  at  the
ruin  which  is  coming  upon  Holland  and  upon  the  whole  European
continent,  and  all  this  with  .  .  .  the  doubt  whether  we  can  prose¬
cute  the  war,  and  the  doubt  whether  it  is  possible  to  make  any
step  towards  peace.’  In  England  this  acute  judge  did  not  believe
that  the  spirit  of  Jacobinism  had  made  much  way,  but  in  parts
of  Scotland  it  already  prevailed,  and  in  Ireland  there  was  a
restlessness  and  a  disaffection  which  a  French  invasion  would
assuredly  kindle  into  a  blaze.  £  The  attachment  of  the  country
at  large  to  Government,’  he  added,  £is  naturally  weakened  by
the  long  course  of  calamities  which  has  baffled  and  disappointed
all  the  measures  of  Government.  .  .  .  The  horror  which  justly
belongs  to  the  wickedness  and  atrocities  of  the  French  Conven¬
tion,  insensibly  loses  itself  in  admiration  of  the  French  successes,
and  in  a  forced  acknowledgment  of  the  perseverance,  courage,
and  conduct  of  the  French  armies.’ 1  In  the  first  weeks  of  1795
the  dreaded  catastrophe  arrived.  On  January  11  the  French
troops  crossed  the  Waal,  and  within  a  fortnight  the  Prince  of
Orange  had  been  compelled  to  fly  for  refuge  to  England  ;  the
Dutch  fleet,  which  was  frozen  in  the  Texel,  was  captured,  and
all  resistance  to  the  French  arms  in  Holland  had  ceased.

It  was  under  these  gloomy  circumstances  that  the  Irish
Parliament  met  on  January  22,  1795.  The  ports  and  fleets  of
Holland  being  now  in  the  hands  of  the  French,  Fitzwilliam
wrote  that  he  expected  a  speedy  invasion,  and  he  added  that
1  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.  2G1,  271,  272,

ch  xxvi.

MEETING-  OF  PARLIAMENT.

(13

the  prospect  of  the  defence  depended  mainly  on  the  attitude  of
the  Catholics.1  The  speech  from  the  throne  spoke  with  unusual
solemnity  of  ‘  the  present  awful  situation  of  affairs,’  and  urged
upon  the  Parliament  to  make  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to  meet
the  great  and  pressing  danger.  These  efforts,  the  speech  ob¬
served,  would  be  facilitated  by  the  encouraging  fact  that  even
1  during  the  existence  of  such  a  war  as  the  present,  the  public
revenue,  together  with  the  commerce  of  the  kingdom,  has  kept
up,  and  has  even  been  augmented,’  and  that  ‘  the  great  staple
manufacture  of  this  kingdom  has  increased  beyond  the  most
sanguine  expectations.’  In  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the
English  Cabinet,  nothing  was  said  on  the  Catholic  question,  but
a  hope  was  expressed  that  the  ‘  united  strength  and  zeal  of  every
description  of  subjects  ’  would  be  elicited,  and  the  Lord  Lieu¬
tenant  expressed  his  own  ‘  cordial  affection  to  the  whole  of
Ireland.’  Parliament  was  at  the  same  time  invited  to  consider
the  state  of  education,  with  the  object  of  establishing  some
extended  system  which  might  confer  its  benefits  on  ‘  the  several
descriptions  of  men  which  compose  his  Majesty’s  faithful  subjects
in  Ireland.’

The  address  was  moved  by  Grattan.  In  a  long  and  eloquent
speech  he  reiterated  his  doctrine  that  the  Irish  Parliament
should  abstain  from  entering  into  any  investigation  of  the
causes  of  the  war,  and  should  accept  the  simple  fact  that
England  was  engaged  in  it,  as  a  sufficient  reason  for  supporting
her.  He  painted  in  vivid  colours  the  dangers  that  menaced
Europe  from  French  ambition,  the  impotence  of  continental
Europe,  which  could  oppose  nothing  to  the  revolutionary  spirit
but  1  a  chaos  of  forms  without  force,’  the  ruin  that  would  fall
upon  Ireland  if  England  succumbed,  the  darkening  cloud  of
invasion  that  was  gathering  rapidly  upon  the  horizon.  ‘  You
know  enough,’  he  said,  ‘  of  the  levels  of  Europe  to  foresee  that
that  inundation  of  barbarity  and  infidelity,  that  dissolution  of
government,  and  that  sea  of  arms,  if  it  swells  over  the  Continent,
must  visit  our  coast.’  The  French  party  in  Ireland  he  believed
to  be  still  1  contemptible  and  inconsiderable ;  ’  but  if  Parliament
showed  any  hesitation  or  division,  it  might  become  formidable.
The  King,  he  said,  by  his  recommendation  to  ‘  national  harmony,’
*  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  23,  1795.

64

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvi.

‘  touched  with  the  sceptre  those  troubled  waters  which  had  long
shattered  the  weary  bark  of  your  country,  under  her  various  and
false  pilots,  for  ages  of  insane  persecution  and  impious  theology.’
It  was  ‘  a  pious  and  profound  recommendation,’  ‘  the  olive  de¬
scending  from  the  throne.’  Let  Parliament  act  on  the  lines
which  were  indicated  to  it.  The  present  was  eminently  a  time
for  ‘the  union  of  all  the  property  of  the  country  in  support  of
the  laws,  and  all  the  talents  in  support  of  the  property,  with
measures  to  redress  and  to  unite.’ 1

Scarcely  a  discordant  voice  was  heard.  Duquerry  and  Lord
Edward  Fitzgerald  alone  ventured  to  say  something  in  favour  of
peace  and  of  the  French  ; 2  but  they  found  no  support,  and  the
loyal  addresses  to  the  King  and  Lord  Fitzwilliam  were  carried
with  enthusiasm.  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  feature  in
these  addresses  is  their  emphatic  testimony  to  the  substantial
and  growing  prosperity  of  the  country,  even  in  time  of  war.
After  promising  to  make  adequate  provision  for  the  war,  the
Commons  continued:  ‘We  learn  with  the  greatest  satisfaction
that  the  present  state  of  the  commerce  and  revenue  of  the  king¬
dom  will  much  facilitate  our  efforts  in  making  that  provision,
and  do  most  gratefully  acknowledge  that  an  increasing  com¬
merce  and  a  rising  revenue  during  the  existence  of  such  a  war
as  we  are  now  engaged  in,  are  advantages  which,  under  the  Divine
Providence,  we  owe  to  the  care  and  vigilance  of  our  Sovereign.
.  .  .  We  view  with  peculiar  joy  the  increase  of  our  great  staple
manufacture,  an  increase  commensurate  with  our  efforts,  but
exceeding  our  most  sanguine  expectations.’ 3

The  loyalty  of  the  Parliament  did  not  expend  itself  in  empty

1  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  4-11.

2  Lord  Milton  to  J.  King,  Jan.  22,
1795.

3  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  17,18.  In
presenting  the  money  bills  the  Speaker
said  :  ‘  It  is  owing  to  the  unexampled
prosperity  and  growing  resources  of
the  nation  that  they  [the  Commons]
now  offer  to  his  Majesty,  without
laying  much  additional  burthen  on
the  people,  or  lessening  those  bounties
and  pecuniary  encouragements  under
which  trade  and  manufactures  have
increased  and  are  increasing;  and  the
same  causes  have  allowed  them  amidst
these  liberal  supplies  to  gratify  his

Majesty's  paternal  benevolence  and
their  own  anxious  feelings  by  re¬
lieving  all  the  poorer  classes  from  the
tax  of  hearth  money.’  (Ibid.  p.  155.)
In  the  course  of  the  debates  Mr.
Cuffe  said :  ‘  What  was  the  state  of
Ireland  at  this  moment  ?  A  state  of
unexampled  prosperity.  The  landlord
gets  his  rent  to  the  hour.  The  tenant
finds  money  for  the  produce  of  his
land  the  moment  he  brings  it  to
market,  and  the  manufacturer  finds
employment  and  payment  to  his
satisfaction.  Ireland  has  the  consti¬
tution  of  England,  without  its  debt.’
(Ibid.  p.  158  ;  see,  too,  p.  182.)

cn.  xxvi.

CONFIDENTIAL  LETTEBS  OF  FITZWILLIAM.

65

words.  It  at  once  made  greater  provisions  than  any  previous
Parliament  in  Ireland  had  ever  done  for  carrying  on  the  war.
The  combined  force  of  regulars  and  militia  was  raised  to  a  little
more  than  40,000  men,  and  a  vote  of  200,000k,  moved  by  Grat¬
tan,  for  the  British  navy,  was  speedily  carried.  For  this  last  vote
the  only  precedent  was  that  of  1782,  when  a  vote  of  half  that
amount  had  been  proposed  by  Grattan,  as  a  testimony  of  grati¬
tude  and  loyalty  after  the  concession  of  independence.  It  was
in  vain  that  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons  urged,  in  an  impressive  speech,
that  the  House  should  accompany  its  grant  with  a  stipulation
for  the  equalisation  of  duties  and  the  reform  of  Parliament.
The  grant  was  carried,  Fitzwilliam  wrote,  ‘  without  a  thought
of  stipulation,’  ‘  all  subjects  of  bargain  between  the  countries  as
to  this  point  being  kept  out  of  sight.’ 1  Whatever  doubt  there
might  be  about  the  feeling  of  the  country,  there  could,  at  least,
be  none  about  the  loyalty  of  the  Protestant  Parliament,  or  about
the  popularity  of  the  administration  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam.

We  must  now  follow  the  confidential  letters  of  Fitzwilliam.
The  Catholic  question  was  rapidly  coming  to  a  climax.  On
January  28,  he  again  recurred  to  his  plan  of  a  yeomanry
cavalry,  as  being  the  most  effectual  means  of  suppressing  local
disturbances,  but  he  added  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  adjourn
the  measure  for  the  present,  ‘  for  should  the  Catholic  question
fail,  we  must  think  twice  before  we  put  arms  into  the  hands  of
men  newly  irritated.’  He  was,  however,  more  and  more  confident
that  there  was  no  serious  obstacle  to  be  encountered  in  the  Irish
Parliament,  or  from  the  Irish  Protestants,  to  the  complete  and
immediate  settlement  of  that  question.  ‘  I  have  little  doubt,’
he  says,  c  the  Catholic  business  will  be  carried  easily.’  In  a
conversation  with  the  Chancellor,  £  I  stated  distinctly  to  him
that,  now  that  the  question  was  in  agitation,  I  should  not  hesi¬
tate  to  give  my  full  support.’  The  objections  of  Fitzgibbon  were
undiminished :  he  c  entered  fully  and  earnestly,  but  with  perfect
temper,  on  the  subject,  .  .  .  but  he  concluded  by  saying,  that
if  it  was  my  intention  to  give  support  to  the  petition,  there
was  no  doubt  of  its  being  easily  carried.’  Fitzwilliam  was
confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  an  address  which  he  had  just  re¬
ceived,  from  the  pre-eminently  Protestant  Corporation  of  London-
1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  31;  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  77,  78.

248

66

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.

CH.  XXVI.

deny,  expressing  their  wish  ‘  to  see  all  Ireland  united  in  one
interest.’ 1

On  February  10,  he  again  wrote  confidentially  and  very
fully  on  the  subject :  the  Catholic  Committee  were  deter¬
mined  to  bring  on  the  question  at  once,  and  Fitzwilliam  found
that  Lord  Kenmare,  and  the  other  Catholic  gentry  who  had
seceded  from  the  committee,  were  fully  resolved  to  support  it,
and  fully  convinced  that  it  was  necessary  to  the  security  of  the
country  that  it  should  be  speedily  settled.  ‘  This  subject,  there¬
fore,’  continued  Fitzwilliam,  ‘  is  now  before  the  public  unavoid¬
ably  in  public  discussion,  and  ought  to  be  finally  and  conclusively
settled.’  ‘  Any  distinction  or  difference  [between  the  religions]
that  is  suffered  to  exist,  will  not  be  simply  the  cause  of  disaffec¬
tion  and  jealousy  to  the  Catholics,  but  it  will  continue  to  be,
what  is  much  more  mischievous,  a  cloak  to  the  machinations  of
a  very  different  nature  of  the  factious  and  designing.  If  equality
of  rights  between  the  Protestants  and  Catholics  is  dangerous,  all
the  danger  is  already  incurred  by  the  Act  of  ’93.  .  .  .  The  body
of  the  lower  orders  of  the  people  in  this  country  is,  in  three  pro¬
vinces  out  of  four,  composed  altogether  of  Catholics,  whilst,  on
the  other  hand,  in  the  higher  orders  you  find  none  but  Protest¬
ants.  The  number  of  Catholics  of  this  description  is  beneath
calculation.  To  the  class,  therefore,  in  which  Catholicism  prevails,
perfect  equality  is  already  granted.  It  remains  now  to  consider
whether  the  symbol  of  it  shall  be  granted  to  or  withheld  from
that  class  in  which,  to  a  moral  certainty,  they  never  can  receive
but  the  shadow.  They  are  not  capable  of  the  reality  on  account
of  the  circumstances  I  have  just  mentioned.  It  is  therefore  my
earnest  recommendation,  that  this  point  may  no  longer  be  a  sub¬
ject  of  eager  contention  and  animosity,  but  that  the  peace,  tran¬
quillity,  and  harmony  of  the  country  may  now  be  sealed  and
secured  for  ever.  ...  We  have  occasion  enough  for  having
unanimity  among  the  higher  orders.  We  cannot  depend  upon

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Jan.  28,
1795.  Cooke,  who  was  strongly  op¬
posed  to  the  measure,  wrote  about
this  time :  ‘  Lord  Shannon  has  de¬
clared  against  the  attempt  to  give
anything  to  the  Catholics.  I  believe
Lord  Hillsborough  has  done  the
same.  The  Speaker  holds  his  own

language;  but  I  never  saw  an  in¬
stance  that  Government  could  not
carry  a  single  measure,  if  there  was
no  general  opposition,  and  of  that  I
see  no  probability.’  (Cooke  to  West¬
morland,  Jan.  23,  1795,  Westmorland
Pajjers.)

t'H.  XXVI.

CONFIDENTIAL  LETTERS  OF  FITZWILLIAM.

67

the  affection  and  attachment  of  the  lower.  The  whole  nnited
strength  of  the  higher  may  he  necessary  to  control  and  keep  the
lower  in  order.  .  .  .  We  must  unite  the  higher  orders  in  our
common  cause.  The  time  I  believe  propitious  to  the  purpose ;
not  a  single  petition  against  it  to  the  House  of  Commons  from
any  Protestant  body,  though  the  subject  has  already  been  six
weeks  in  agitation.  Individuals  who  dislike  it,  and  who  perhaps,
from  a  desire  of  maintaining  a  line  of  consistency,  may  say  a
feeble  word  against  it,  I  believe  have  no  intention  to  defeat  it,
and  this  opinion  they  decidedly  entertain,  that  if  anything  is  to
be  done,  the  business  should  be  completed,  and  the  question
closed  for  ever.  .  .  .  The  Catholics  having  put  the  business  into
the  hands  of  Grattan,  I  have  desired  him  not  to  proceed  in  it
before  his  plan  has  been  first  laid  before  the  Cabinet  in  London,
and  his  Majesty’s  pleasure  taken  on  it.  His  plan  is  a  short  and
simple  one  :  a  general  repeal  of  all  restrictive  and  disqualifying
laws;  and  that  done,  a  complete  change  in  the  oath  of  disqualifi¬
cation.  .  .  .  The  great  reason  is,  that  the  people  may  be  made
one  people,  one  Christian  people,  binding  themselves  in  one
common  cause  by  one  civil  oath.  ...  It  is  upon  the  large
principle  of  leaving  not  a  point  of  distinction  in  rights  and
capacities  between  Protestants  and  Catholics,  that  I  propose,  as
I  do,  that  no  reserve  should  be  made,  not  even  of  the  highest
offices  of  the  State,  not  even  the  seals  nor  the  bench.  To  make
the  reserve,  would  be  to  leave  a  bone  of  contention.  It  would
be  leaving  a  splinter  in  the  wound  that  would,  ...  to  a
certainty,  sooner  or  later,  break  out  again.  It  would  mar  the
great  object  of  laying  the  question  to  rest  for  ever.  It  would
frustrate  that  great  desideratum  at  this  critical  juncture,  unani¬
mity  and  harmony  among  all  the  higher  orders  of  the  kingdom.
Should  any  melancholy  event  happen,  should  we  see  an  enemy
landed  upon  our  shore,  the  safety  of  the  kingdom  depends
upon  that,  and  upon  that  only;  such  is  the  insubordination
of  the  lower  orders,  such  their  disaffection,  that  nothing  will
control  them,  nothing  retain  them  in  their  duty  and  allegiance,
but  the  unanimity,  harmony,  and  joint  efforts  of  the  better
orders.  ...  I  trust  you  will  endeavour  to  impress  his  Majesty
with  the  extent  of  the  mischief  that  may  arise,  that  probably
will,  by  any  attempt  on  my  part,  as  acting  in  his  Government,

68

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUBY.

CH.  XXVI

to  oppose  or  circumscribe  tbe  measure  of  favour  to  the  Catho¬
lics.’  1

Two  days  later  he  wrote  :  ‘  I  despatched  a  messenger  with
my  letter  of  the  night  before  last,  in  hopes  of  obtaining  an  im¬
mediate  answer  to  it,  and  an  approbation  of  granting  an  equal
participation  of  rights  to  Catholics,  to  the  full  extent  of  what  is
proposed.  Nothing  short  of  it  will  produce  the  desirable  end
of  a  perfect  harmony  and  a  hearty  unanimity  in  the  general
cause.  I  press  it  the  more,  because  I  feel  that  it  is  not  simply
expedient  but  necessary ,  and  it  is  further  necessary  that  a  most
gracious  and  unequivocal  support  should  be  given  on  the  part
of  Government,  for  two  forcible  reasons  :  first,  that  the  measure
may  meet  with  no  opposition,  for  nothing  but  the  appearance
of  backwardness  and  reserve  on  the  part  of  Government  will
raise  an  opposition;  and  the  next  is,  that  Government  may  re¬
cover  the  confidence  and  affection  of  the  Catholics.  ...  I  think
myself  fully  authorised  to  decide  for  myself  on  the  subject,  but
still,  considering  the  extent  proposed,  I  am  desirous  to  have  the
mode  considered  in  England  in  the  present  stage,  while  I  hope
it  is  still  within  my  reach  to  have  it  limited  and  modified  before
the  Bill  itself  is  introduced,  and  before  the  plan  is  yet  known  to
the  Catholics  themselves.  Leave  for  bringing  in  the  Bill  is
moved  to-day.’2

The  condition  of  the  country  was  at  this  time  very  remark¬
able.  The  Catholics  all  over  Ireland  were  evidently  thoroughly
aroused,  and  their  hopes  were  raised  almost  to  the  point  of
certainty.  For  some  days  a  perpetual  stream  of  petitions  for
relief  had  been  pouring  in  from  every  quarter,  and,  although
they  were  perfectly  loyal  and  respectful  in  their  tone,  they
clearly  showed  that  a  complete  removal  of  religious  disabili¬
ties  must  be  carried  if  Catholic  loyalty  was  to  be  retained.
Above  half  a  million  of  signatures  are  said  to  have  been  appended
to  the  petitions  for  complete  emancipation  of  the  Catholics,  which
lay  upon  the  table  of  the  House  of  Commons.3

All  classes  of  Catholics — the  committee  and  the  seceders,
the  Tories  and  the  democrats — were  on  this  question  united,
and  never  since  1782  had  an  expression  of  national  will  so

1  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Feb.  10,
1795.

2  Ibid.  Feb.  12, 1795.

3  This  is  the  statement  of  Dr.
Hussey  (Burke's  Correspondence ,  iv.
277).

ch.  xxvi.  THE  PROTESTANTS  FAVOUR  EMANCIPATION.

69

genuine,  so  strong,  and  so  unequivocal,  been  brought  to  the
threshold  of  Parliament.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Protestants
of  Ireland  as  a  body  were  perfectly  ready  to  concede  what  was
asked.  An  aristocratic  faction,  very  powerful  from  its  borough
influence,  disliked  the  measure  as  threatening  their  monopoly,
but  it  was  plain  that  they  would  not  resist  the  determination  of
the  Government.  A  furious  sectarian  spirit  raged  among  the
farmers  and  labourers  in  some  counties  of  the  North,  but  it
found  scarcely  any  echo  in  political  life.  The  great  mass  of  the
Protestants  were  plainly  convinced  that  the  time  had  come  for
completing  the  Act  of  1793.  That  Act  had  given  the  Catholic
body  the  substance  of  power,  but  had  left  the  badge  of  degrada¬
tion  and  inferiority  unremoved.  It  had  granted  power  to  the
most  ignorant,  most  turbulent,  and  most  easily  disaffected,  and
it  had  confirmed  the  incapacities  of  a  loyal  and  conservative
gentry,  whose  influence  over  the  lower  classes  of  the  com¬
munity  it  was  vitally  important  to  maintain.  The  Protestant
gentry  of  Ireland  had  many  faults,  but  they  were  at  this
time  remarkably  free  from  religious  bigotry,1  and,  unlike  the
English  Ministers,  they  at  least  knew  Ireland.  They  saw  that
the  United  Irishmen  were  successfully  using  the  Catholic  ques¬
tion  as  a  lever  for  uprooting  the  masses  from  their  old  allegiance ;
that,  under  the  influence  of  the  democratic  spirit,  which  the
French  Revolution  had  engendered,  the  ascendency  of  property,
rank,  and  intelligence,  was  strained  and  weakened ;  that  mul¬
titudes  of  ignorant  and  turbulent  men  were  drifting  away  from
their  old  moorings,  and  were  beginning  to  follow  new  and  dan¬
gerous  leaders  ;  that  classes  which  had  hitherto  at  worst  been
only  lawless  and  riotous,  were  rapidly  becoming  steadily  and
systematically  disaffected.  The  evil  could  only  be  met  by  at
once  depriving  the  agitator  of  his  most  formidable  weapon,  by

1  I  have  collected  much  evidence
of  this  in  former  volumes.  I  may
add  one  passage  from  Sir  Richard
Musgrave,  which  will  appear  singu¬
larly  curious  when  it  is  remembered
that  the  writer  represented  the  ex¬
treme  anti-Catholic  spirit  produced
by  the  rebellion  of  1798,  and  that  he
apparently  approves  of  what  he  re¬
lates.  ‘  The  Roman  Catholics  of  a
parish  frequently  solicit  Protestant

gentlemen  for  ground  to  build  chapels
on,  and  I  never  heard  of  the  request
being  refused ;  and  in  many  cases
they  built  them  at  their  own  expense.
Whenever  a  popish  chapel  is  to  be
built  by  subscription,  the  Protestants
never  fail,  when  solicited,  to  contri¬
bute  largely  to  it.’  (Musgrave’s  Rebel¬
lions  in  Ireland,  2nd  edition,  1801,
p.  635.)

70

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.

CH.  XXVI.

conferring  political  power  on  men  who  were  tolerably  certain  not
to  misuse  it,  by  uniting  the  upper  ranks  of  all  denominations  in
support  of  the  Constitution.  There  were  doubtless  many  who
wished  that  the  Catholic  question  had  never  been  raised,  but  such
regrets  were  now  very  idle.  A  revolution  of  power  had  been
made  in  1793.  A  revolution  of  opinion,  which  was  much  more
formidable,  had  followed  or  accompanied  it.  The  Catholics  had
become  keenly  sensible  of  their  rights,  their  degradation,  and
their  power.  It  remained  for  the  Government  to  decide  between
a  policy  of  concession,  and  a  policy  of  resistance,  which,  in  the
excited  state  of  Ireland,  was  almost  certain  to  lead  to  bloodshed.

The  former  policy  would  have  encountered  no  serious  diffi¬
culty  in  Ireland.  As  we  have  already  seen,  the  Chancellor,  who
was  the  ablest  of  all  its  opponents,  admitted  that  it  could  easily
be  carried.  When  Grattan  moved  for  leave  to  introduce  the
Bill  into  Parliament,  Duigenan  and  Ogle  were  the  sole  oppo¬
nents,  and  there  was,  as  yet,  not  a  single  petition  to  Parliament,
not  a  single  address  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  on  the  part  of  any
Protestant  body,  against  it.1  There  may  be  endless  controversy
about  the  effects  that  woul d  have  followed  Catholic  emancipation
in  1795,  and  about  the  propriety  of  the  conduct  of  Lord  Fitz-
william.  One  fact,  however,  is  as  certain  as  anything  in  Irish
history — that  if  the  Catholic  question  was  not  settled  in  1795,
rather  than  in  1829,  it  is  the  English  Government,  and  the
English  Government  alone,  that  was  responsible  for  the  delay.

It  is  necessary,  in  order  to  understand  the  sequel,  to  follow
closely  the  dates  of  the  correspondence,  and  on  the  most  charitable
supposition  they  certainly  disclose,  on  the  part  of  the  English
Ministers,  a  neglect  of  duty  which  is  simply  astounding.  We
have  seen  that,  as  early  as  January  8,  Fitzwilliam  had  warned
Portland  that  the  Catholic  question  was  in  full  agitation  in  the
country,  and  that  he  found  it  would  be  impossible  to  prevent  it
from  being  introduced  in  the  ensuing  session  of  Parliament.  We
have  seen  that,  on  January  15,  he  had  informed  Portland  that

1  ‘  Not  a  petition  to  the  House  of
Commons,  not  an  address  to  me,  has
yet  come  up  against  it  [the  Catholic
Bill],  on  the  part  of  any  Protestant
body ;  bi  t,  on  the  contrary,  the  fair
construction  of  some  of  their  ad¬

dresses  has  been  an  approbation  of  the
measure.  I  hope  this  favourable  oo-
portunity  of  making  the  people  of
Ireland  one  people,  may  not  be  lost.'
(Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Feb.  13.
1795.)

CH.  XXVI.

THE  LETTERS  FROM  ENGLAND.

71

the  Catholic  question  had,  in  his  opinion,  become  one  of  the
most  urgent  and  vital  importance,  that  it  was  impossible  to
defer  its  solution  without  extreme  danger  to  the  country,  that  it
would  inevitably  be  one  of  the  first  measures  introduced  in  the
session  of  Parliament  which  was  to  open  within  a  week,  and
that,  if  he  did  not  receive  peremptory  instructions  to  the  contrary,
he  would  acquiesce  in  the  Catholic  claims.  The  English  Govern¬
ment  were  thus  fully  apprised  of  the  situation,  of  the  opinion,
of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  of  the  course  which  he  meant  to  pursue,
and  of  the  supreme  importance  of  an  immediate  decision.  Yet
for  weeks  they  left  him  without  the  faintest  clue  to  their  opinion,
or  the  smallest  indication  that  they  disapproved  of  his  conduct
or  his  intentions.  On  January  13,  Portland  acknowledged
Fitzwilliam’s  letter  of  the  8th.  He  informed  him  that  the  King
consented  to  the  peerage  for  Wolfe,  but  he  made  absolutely  no
reference  to  the  Catholic  question.  Fitzwilliam’s  letter  of  the
15th  must  have  arrived  in  London  on  the  18th  or  19th.  It
might  have  been  supposed  that  Portland  would  not  have  lost  a
day  in  consulting  with  Pitt,  and  in  sending  instructions  that
might  have  arrived  before  the  opening  of  the  Irish  Parliament,
which  was  fixed  for  the  22nd.  Yet  after  Fitzwilliam’s  letter  of
the  15th  had  been  received,  two,  if  not  three,  letters  arrived  in
Dublin  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  without  a  word  of  instruc¬
tion  on  the  Catholic  question,  or  the  slightest  intimation  that
Fitzwilliam  had  been  acting  upon  it  without  sufficient  caution
and  discretion.

The  natural,  and,  it  seems  to  mo,  the  inevitable,  inference
drawn  by  Fitzwilliam  from  this  strange  silence,  was  that
the  Government  did  not  dispute  his  judgment,  or  intend  to
interfere  with  his  policy.  It  was  only  on  February  8  and  9,
when  Parliament  had  been  sitting  for  nearly  three  weeks,
when  the  extraordinary  supplies  had  been  voted,  when  the
Catholic  hopes  were  excited  to  the  highest  point,  and  when
petitions  for  emancipation  were  pouring  in  from  every  part  of
Ireland,  that  a  discordant  note  was  struck.  On  the  9th,  Pitt
wrote  to  Fitzwilliam,  expostulating  with  him  on  the  dismissal  of
Beresford,  and  on  the  negotiations  with  Wolfe  and  Toler.  The
letter  contained  no  allusion  to  the  Catholic  question,  and  it  con¬
cluded  with  an  apology  for  withdrawing  his  attention  ‘  from  the

72

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvl

many  important  considerations  of  a  different  nature,  to  which  all
our  minds  ought  to  he  directed.’  By  the  same  mail  a  letter  ar¬
rived  from  Portland,  dated  on  the  preceding  day,  in  which,  for
the  first  time,  he  expressed  an  opinion  on  the  question  which
during  a  whole  month  had  been  pressed  upon  him  by  the  Lord
Lieutenant,  as  of  the  most  vital  and  the  most  urgent  conse¬
quence.  He  cautioned  Fitzwilliam  not  to  commit  himself  by
‘  engagements,’  or  even  by  1  encouraging  language,’  to  giving
his  countenance  to  the  immediate  adoption  of  the  measure.  The
deferring  it,  he  added,  would  be  c  the  means  of  doing  a  greater
service  to  the  British  Empire  than  it  has  been  capable  of
receiving  since  the  Revolution,  or,  at  least,  since  the  Union.’ 1

Fitzwilliam  was  greatly  and  not  unnaturally  irritated  by
these  letters.  In  his  reply  to  Pitt,  after  describing  in  a  few
words  the  extremely  dangerous  and  disaffected  state  of  the
country,  he  expressed  his  surprise  at  the  objections  that  were
made  to  the  dismissal  of  Beresford.  Before  leaving  for  Ireland,
he  said,  he  had  told  Pitt  that  he  feared  he  must  take  that  step,
and  Pitt  had  made  no  objection.  He  found  that  the  influence
of  Beresford  was  so  great  as  seriously  to  injure  the  Government
if  thrown  against  it,  and  it  was  quite  necessary  for  him  at  this
critical  time  to  have  subordinates  on  whom  he  could  rely.  As
Beresford  retained  his  full  salary,  and  received  an  assurance
that  his  family  and  connections  should  not  be  removed  from  ‘  any
of  their  innumerable  offices,’  there  was  no  hardship.  Pitt  must
choose  between  him  and  Beresford.  If  English  Ministers  did
not  mean  to  support  the  King’s  representative  in  Ireland,  the
sooner  they  recalled  him,  the  better.2

To  Portland  he  wrote,  lamenting  in  bitter  terms  that,  while
the  urgency  of  the  Catholic  question  appeared  to  those  who
were  on  the  spot  to  increase  from  hour  to  hour,  it  appeared  to
English  Ministers,  who  were  at  a  distance,  to  grow  less  and  less,
and  that  he  was  now  for  the  first  time  pressed  to  defer  it  to
some  future  occasion.  He  positively  refused  to  attempt  it.
‘  All  I  have  to  add,’  he  wrote,  ‘  is,  that  I  will  not  be  the  person

1  Tbpse  two  letters  are  not  in  the  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle.  Lord  Stan-
Record  Office,  and  that  of  Portland,  I  hope  has  printed  Pitt’s  letter  in  his
believe,  has  never  been  printed.  The  Miscellanies ,  pp.  19-23.
substance  and  extracts,  however,  are  2  Fitzwilliam  to  Pitt,  Feb.  14,  l'lQS.
given  by  Fitzwilliam  in  his  Second

CH.  XXVI.

CHARGE  AGAINST  BERESFORD.

73

eo  to  put  it  off  on  the  part  of  Government.  I  will  not  be  the
person  who,  I  verily  believe,  would  by  doing  so  raise  a  flame
in  the  country  that  nothing  short  of  arms  would  be  able  to  keep
down.’ 1

In  a  second  letter  to  Portland,  marked  c  secret  and  confi¬
dential,’  he  again  justified  his  conduct  towards  Beresford,  and
he  took  a  false  step,  which  afterwards  led  him  into  much
trouble.  In  addition,  he  said,  to  the  dangerous  power  of
Beresford,  and  the  impossibility  of  relying  on  him,  there  was
another  reason  which  justified  his  dismissal.  His  conduct  in
the  sale  of  a  public  lease  under  Lord  Westmorland’s  adminis¬
tration  had  left  a  serious  imputation  on  his  character,  and  extra¬
ordinary  measures  had  been  taken  to  baffle  inquiry.  It  was  in
order  to  prevent  this  inquiry,  he  said,  that  Westmorland  had
brought  the  last  session  of  Parliament  to  a  sudden,  unexpected,
and  premature  close.  The  transaction  has  never  been  clearly
elucidated,  certainly  never  established,  and  it  was  wholly  un¬
necessary,  for  the  justification  of  Fitzwilliam,  to  refer  to  it.2

These  letters  from  Fitzwilliam  crossed  two  from  Portland,
which  were  both  written  on  the  16th.  The  first,  though  marked
1  private,’  was  intended  to  be  shown  if  necessary.  The  second
was  for  Lord  Fitzwilliam  alone.  In  the  first  letter  the  Lord

1  Fitzwir.iain  to  Portland,  Feb.
14.  Writing  soon  afterwards  to  Car¬
lisle,  Fitzwilliam  said:  ‘As  to  resist¬
ing  altogether,  I  should  have  belied
my  own  conviction,  and  betrayed  my
situation,  if  I  did  not  represent,  as
I  have  repeatedly  done,  that  it  would
not  only  defeat  every  hope  I  had
formed  for  the  general  security  and
defence  of  the  country,  but  be  attended
with  a  certainty  of  the  most  alarming
and  fatal  consequences.  Of  this  (as
I  have  already  observed  to  you),  every
day  presented  me  with  additional  in¬
disputable  proofs.  The  alarm  that
has  been  universally  spread  by  the
rumour  of  the  measures  beingto  be  re¬
sisted,  the  language  of  every  person
with  whom  I  converse,  even  of  the
boldest  of  its  former  opposers,  the
resolutions  and  addresses  from  the
City,  echoed  already  from  the  cities
of  Cork,  Londonderry,  and  the  county
of  Kildare,  and  actually  adopted
through  every  part  of  the  kingdom,

the  debates  of  these  last  days  in  the
House  of  Commons — all  these  must
prove  to  you,  that  my  representations
were  at  least  nothing  short  of  the
truth.’  (Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,  p.  20.

2  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Feb.
13,  1795.  In  his  published  letter  to
Lord  Carlisle,  Fitzwilliam,  speaking
of  Beresford,  said  :  ‘  I  decided  at  once
not  to  cloud  the  dawn  of  my  adminis¬
tration  by  leaving,  in  such  power  and
authority,  so  much  imputed  malver¬
sation.’  In  consequence  of  these
words,  a  duel  was  arranged  between
Fitzwilliam  and  Beresford  ;  but  the
combatants  were  interrupted  on  the
field,  and  Fitzwilliam  then  made  an
apology.  ( Beresford  Correspondence,
ii.  111-120.)  Fitzwilliam  declared,
in  one  of  his  letters  to  Portland,  that
there  had  been  much  scandalous  job¬
bing  in  reversions  in  the  last  weeks
of  Lord  Westmorland’s  administra¬
tion.

74

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

Lieutenant  is  instructed  to  send  a  fuller  enumeration  of  the
arguments  against,  as  well  as  in  favour  of,  Catholic  concession,
and  also  the  various  estimates  of  the  probable  strength  of  the
Catholics  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons  in  case  they  were
emancipated.  Portland  hopes  that  Fitzwilliam  will  act  ‘very
deliberately  ’  on  the  Catholic  question,  and  he  doubts  the  neces¬
sity  for  the  proposed  yeomanry  cavalry,  now  that  the  Irish
Parliament  had  voted  a  force  of  soldiers  and  militia  amounting
to  no  less  than  40,000  men.  He  feared  much  the  ultimate
consequences  of  yielding.  The  last  great  concessions  to  the
Catholics  had  not  stopped  demands,  and  was  it  likely  that  those
now  contemplated  would  be  more  efficacious?  He  hoped  that
the  establishment  of  Catholic  seminaries  might  do  some  good,
and  also  that  a  provision  ‘  might  be  made  for  their  parochial
clergy,  by  which  they  would  in  some  degree  be  removed  from
the  state  of  dependence  in  which  they  are  kept  by  even  the
lowest  orders  of  their  parishioners,  and  that  rank  of  the  people
would  be  proportionately  relieved  at  the  same  time  from  some
part  of  the  burden  of  maintaining  their  clergy.’  In  this  way,
he  trusted  that  all  classes  might  be  disposed  to  rely  with  con¬
fidence  on  the  good  intentions  of  the  Government  towards  them.1

This  letter  evidently  foreshadowed  a  course  of  policy  alto¬
gether  different  from  that  which  was  contemplated  in  Ireland.
In  his  second  letter,  which  was  long  and  elaborate,  Portland
entered  in  detail  into  his  reasons  for  opposing  the  whole  policy
of  Catholic  emancipation.  They  are  almost  identical  with  those
which  had  been  urged  a  few  years  before  by  Lord  Westmorland.
The  chief  argument  in  favour  of  the  Catholics  was  their  supe¬
riority  of  numbers,  but  this  argument  was  only  too  likely  to
overthrow  both  the  parliamentary  system  and  the  ecclesiastical
establishment  now  existing  in  Ireland.  The  most  striking
feature  in  the  constitution  of  the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  was
the  great  number  of  boroughs  in  which  the  right  of  election
was  vested  in  not  more  than  twelve  electors.  These  boroughs
secured  the  Protestant  ascendency ;  but  was  it  in  accordance
with  common  sense  and  with  human  nature  to  suppose  that,  if
the  Catholics  were  admitted  to  Parliament  on  the  plea  of  num¬
bers,  they  would  not  use  all  their  efforts  to  overthrow  these
1  PortlaDd  to  Fitzwilliam,  Feb.  16, 1795.

ch.  xxvi.  PORTLAND  DECLARES  AGAINST  EMANCIPATION.

7  5

oligarchical  monopolies  ?  With  what  better  confidence  could
statesmen  hope  that  the  present  Protestant  establishment  would
be  preserved  ?  In  every  country  the  established  religion  must
be  that  which  is  professed  by  those  who  are  in  possession  of  the
civil  government,  and  ‘  all  the  declarations,  all  the  assurances,
all  the  obligations  and  oaths  that  ever  were  or  can  be  devised,’
will  fail  to  save  a  Protestant  establishment  if  the  dominant  power
in  the  civil  government  is  transferred  to  Catholics.  Then  follows
a  passage  which  is  peculiarly  significant.  ‘  I  want  to  preserve
the  Protestant  establishment  in  Church  and  State,  and  am  will¬
ing  and'  desirous  to  give  the  Catholics  every  right  and  every
benefit  which  good  subjects  are  entitled  to,  but  I  wish  not  to
attempt  it  until  I  can  be  sure  that  the  present  establishment  in
Church  and  State  are  unquestionably  secured,  and  that  the  par¬
ticipation  to  which  I  would  admit  the  Catholics  would  be  as
little  likely  to  be  called  in  question.’  The  proposed  yeomanry
cavalry,  being  chiefly  Catholic,  would  place  the  real  power  of  the
country  in  the  hands  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  and  the  tithe
system,  which  was  already  disliked  by  so  many  Protestants,  was
not  likely  long  to  survive  the  admission  of  Catholics  to  the
Legislature.  ‘  In  the  attack  on  it,’  indeed,  £  there  is  but  too
much  reason  to  apprehend  the  countenance  and  co-operation  of
one,  at  least,  of  our  most  able  and  best  friends.’ 1

It  was  evident  that  the  Government  was  completely  opposed
to  the  measure  which  the  Irish  Catholics,  with  great  reason,  had
believed  to  be  almost  certainly  attained.  Fitzwilliam  perceived
it  plainly,  but  in  one  more  long  and  earnest  despatch  he  at¬
tempted  to  avert  the  calamity  which  he  foresaw.  Rightly  or
wrongly,  the  inference  which  he  drew  from  the  last  despatch,
and  from  a  passage  which  I  have  cited  from  the  letter  of  the
8th,  was  that  the  English  Government  desired  to  delay  the
measure,  in  hopes  of  obtaining  that  legislative  union  2  which  had

1  Portland  to  Fitzwilliam,  Feb.  16,
1795.  The  last  sentence,  no  doubt,  al¬
ludes  to  Grattan.

2  In  his  Second  Letter  to  Carlisle,
Fitzwilliam  quoted  the  passage  from
Portland’s  confidential  letter  of  the
8th,  for  which  he  was  much  blamed.
He  afterwards  said  ( Beresford  Cor¬
respondence,  ii.  113),  that  his  letters
to  Carlisle  were  printed  without  his

knowledge  or  consent.  Pelham,  com¬
menting  upon  the  quotation,  wrote  to
Portland :  ‘  The  construction  that  is
put  by  many  people  (though  falsely,  in
my  opinion),  is,  that  the  intention  of
his  Majesty’s  Ministers  was  to  keep
the  question  of  the  Catholics  alive  and
in  suspense  until  a  peace,  and  that
then  it  was  to  be  employed  as  the
means  of  forming  an  union  between

76

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

undoubtedly  been  for  a  long  time  in  their  minds,  and  which
Westmorland  had  assured  them  could  only  be  accomplished  by
maintaining  the  division  between  Protestants  and  Catholics.  ‘I
am  at  a  loss,’  he  wrote,  ‘to  conjecture  what  those  benefits  are
which,  it  is  expected,  will  accrue  to  the  British  Empire  by
deferring  the  consideration  of  this  question.  .  .  .  Can  it  be
in  the  contemplation  of  any  man,  that  a  state  of  disturbance  or
rebellion  here  will  tend  to  the  desirable  end  (which,  1  think,  I
discover  to  be  alluded  to  in  your  letter)  of  an  union  between
the  two  kingdoms  ?  Doubtless  the  end  is  most  desirable,  and
perhaps  the  safety  of  the  two  kingdoms  may  finally  depend  upon
its  attainment;  but  are  the  means  risked  such  as  are  justifiable,
or  such  as  any  man  would  wish  to  risk  in  hope  of  attaining  the
end  ?  Through  such  a  medium  I  look  for  an  union,  I  am  ready
to  grant,  but  it  is  not  the  union  of  Ireland  with  Great  Britain,
but  with  France.  .  .  .  But  supposing  the  object  may  be  thought
attainable  in  the  end  by  such  means,  still,  it  must  be  allowed  to
be  at  a  distance,  and  must  be  admitted  not  to  be  a  moral  cer¬
tainty.  Who,  then,  will  advise  to  be  hunting  after  a  distant  and
contingent  good,  at  the  evident  and  admitted  price  of  a  certain
and  immediate  evil  ?  ’

He  then  proceeds  to  examine  one  by  one  the  arguments
against  emancipation.  It  was  said  that  it  would  lead  to  a
Catholic  ascendency,  dangerous  to  property  and  to  the  whole
constitution  of  the  country.  But  what  additional  danger  is  to
be  apprehended  from  the  admission  of  the  higher  orders,  who  in

the  two  countries.  Whether  the
quotation  was  made  with  a  view  of
sounding  an  alarm  upon  that  subject,
I  will  not  pretend  to  say,  but  it  is
suspected  by  those  who  are  unfriendly
to  Lord  Fitzwilliam.  .  .  .  Hearing
the  subject  discussed  in  society,  I
thought  it  right  to  mention  it  to  the
Lord  Chancellor,  who  was  convinced
that  great  use  would  be  made  of  it
in  Parliament,  and  seemed,  I  think,
to  entertain  some  suspicion  of  that
being  the  real  design  of  the  British
Cabinet.  I  did  not  think  it  necessary
to  discuss  that  point  with  him  further
than  to  say,  that  I  was  convinced
your  Grace  never  intended  to  convey
that  idea ;  and  that  I  was  ready  to
say,  that  I  never  would  be  concerned
in  an  administration  in  Ireland  that

would  attempt  it.  .  .  .  He  thought
it  would  be  very  proper,  in  some
general  words,  to  express  a  determina¬
tion  “to  support  the  Constitution  as
established  in  1782,  and  still  further
assimilated  to  that  of  Great  Britain
by  Acts  that  have  since  passed.”
These  were  the  Chancellor’s  own
words,  which,  I  think,  convey  the  idea
of  his  Majesty’s  Ministers,  that  the
Catholics  should  not  be  admitted  to
any  share  of  legislative  authority,
and  refute  the  notion  of  any  sinister
attempt  to  force  an  union.’  (Pelham
to  Portland,  March  30,  1795.)  There
is,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  evidence  that
Portland,  either  in  public  or  private,
disclaimed  the  meaning  which  had
been  attached  to  his  words.

CH.  XXVI.

FITZWILLIAM’S  LAST  REMONSTRANCE.

77

number  and  property  must  always  be  insignificant  compared
with  the  Protestants  ?  If  there  is  danger  of  this  kind,  it  springs
from  the  admission  to  power  of  the  class  which  is  at  once
numerous  and  ignorant,  turbulent  and  poor,  but  that  class  is
already  admitted.  ‘  Those  to  whom  anything  remains  to  be
granted,  have  the  same  evils  to  dread  from  the  misuse  of  those
rights,  and  from  the  subversion  of  law  and  establishment  as  the
Protestants.  .  .  .  I  go  further,  and  I  say  that  should  an  union
with  Great  Britain  be  necessary  for  Ireland  in  order  that
property  may  be  preserved,  they  will  call  as  loudly  for  it,  and
act  as  zealously  towards  its  attainment,  as  the  Protestants.’  The
only  danger  to  be  feared  from  the  upper  classes  of  Catholics  is,
that,  if  they  are  thrown  into  a  state  of  disappointment,  discon¬
tent,  and  irritation,  they  may  possibly  be  induced  to  act  more
under  the  influence  of  passion  than  of  enlightened  self-interest.

The  next  argument  is  the  danger  to  the  Protestant  Church.
‘  Its  property,  as  well  as  the  property  of  every  other  corporation,
is  fenced  and  guarded  by  the  same  laws  that  preserve  the
property,  and  the  same  opinions  that  preserve  all  settlements,
and  I  venture  to  say  that  things  never  will  be  ripe  for  the  sub¬
version  of  the  one  till  they  are  ripe  for  the  subversion  of  the
other.  .  .  .  Oaths  and  obligations  enforced  by  law,  and  resting  all
their  efficiency  upon  the  respect  for  law,  are  the  only  security  you
can  have  either  for  property,  the  Protestant  establishment,  or  the
Protestant  succession,  and  if  ever  they  fall,  they  will  fall  together.’

‘  The  third  point  is,  I  suppose,  the  jealousy  and  dissent  of
the  Protestant  body.  From  this  quarter  I  do  not  see  how  any
danger  is  to  arise,  and,  forming  my  judgment  upon  the  conver¬
sation  of  those  I  have  talked  with,  and  upon  every  other  appear¬
ance,  just  as  little,  or  indeed  no  difficulty  to  the  question.  I
hear  no  expressipn  of  alarm.  I  receive  no  remonstrance  from
the  Protestant  corporate  bodies,  I  perceive  no  stir  among  them ;
no  preparations  made  to  resist  and  defeat  it  by  parliamentary
or  other  petitions,  though  the  subject  has  now  been  two  whole
months  fairly  in  agitation.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  addresses
presented  to  me  from  Protestant  corporations,  particularly  from
Londonderry  and  Waterford,  very  different  sentiments  from  those
of  jealousy  and  dissent  are  expressed.  They  mark  a  pprobation
of  the  principle,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  it  is  called

78

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  I XVI.

for  by  the  exigencies  of  the  times,  and  anticipate  the  happiest
consequences  from  its  being  carried  into  effect.  But  I  desire
not  to  be  understood  to  convey  that  the  approbation  of  the
Protestants  goes  to  the  length  that  no  individuals  are  to  be
found  who  still  retain  their  ancient  prejudices  and  old  jealousies,
but  only  that  they  are  not  sufficient  in  numbers  to  create  the
least  difficulty  about  carrying  the  measure  into  effect.’

‘  I  feel  that  I  have  personal  weight  and  influence  enough  to
carry  it  through  without  difficulty;  and  carrying  it  through,  I
am  confident  of  uniting  cordially  in  the  defence  of  the  country
all  its  weight,  property,  and  influence,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to
except  a  certain  description  of  Protestants  whose  views  will
never  permit  them  to  unite  with  the  friends  of  a  system  that
has  such  a  share  of  monarchy  and  aristocracy  in  its  composition
as  ours  has.  Of  the  real  and  hearty  support  of  all  other  descrip¬
tions,  I  feel  myself  confident.’ 1

The  appeal  was  a  weighty  one,  but  Fitzwilliam  himself  can
have  scarcely  believed  that  it  could  be  successful,  and  before  it
was  written  the  decision  of  the  Ministers  had  been  taken.  In
a  tone  which  completely  broke  the  private  and  political  friend¬
ship  that  had  long  subsisted  between  them,  Portland  wrote  to
Fitzwilliam  expressing  his  astonishment  that,  with  the  full  assent
of  the  Government,  leave  had  been  given  by  Parliament  to  in¬
troduce  a  Catholic  Relief  Bill.  The  Cabinet  unanimously  agreed
that  the  matter  must  not  be  pressed  on  so  quickly ;  that  the
arguments  of  both  sides  must  be  sent  to  England ;  that  they
could  give  no  assent  till  the  draft  of  the  Bill  was  laid  before
them.  They  were  astonished  that  the  Lord  Lieutenant  should
have  suffered  a  Bill  of  such  magnitude  to  receive  the  counte¬
nance  of  Parliament,  when  it  had  not  even  been  laid  before  the
Cabinet  of  England.  He  had  never  been  authorised  to  commit
himself  so  far,  and  it  was  the  earnest  wish  of  Ministers  that  the
question  should  be  deferred  to  the  peace.  ‘  In  the  plainest  and
most  direct  terms,’  Fitzwilliam  was  now  ordered  to  take  the  most
effectual  means  in  his  power  to  prevent  any  further  proceedings
being  taken  on  the  Bill  before  the  House,  till  the  King’s  pleasure
was  signified.2

1  Fi'z william  to  Portland,  Feb.  2  Portland  to  Fitzwilliam,  Feb
20,  1795.  18,  1795.

CII  XXVI.

REVIEW  OR  EITZ WILLIAM’S  CONDUCT.

79

Tliis  letter  has  a  plausible  sound,  and  to  those  who  have  not
followed  the  course  of  events  with  the  necessary  minuteness,  the
charge  of  having  unduly  pressed  on  the  question,  and  committed
the  Government,  may  appear  established.  After  the  best  con¬
sideration,  however,  I  can  give,  I  can  see  no  other  course  which
Fitzwilliam  could  have  adopted.  The  agitation  had  acquired
formidable  dimensions  before  he  arrived  in  Ireland.  He  lost  no
time  in  informing  the  Government  most  fully  of  its  pressing
character,  and  as  early  as  January  15  he  clearly  told  them  that  he
would  exercise  the  discretion  which  he  had  received  when  he
was  appointed,  and  would  accede  to  the  Catholic  demands,  un¬
less  he  received  peremptory  instructions  to  the  contrary.  The
Government  sent  him  no  such  instructions,  though  the  Catholic
movement  was  acquiring  almost  hourly  additional  strength :
they  pronounced  no  hostile  opinion,  when  they  had  been  em¬
phatically  told  that,  in  the  judgment  of  those  who  were  respon¬
sible  for  the  government  of  Ireland,  the  rejection  or  postpone¬
ment  of  the  measure  would  probably  throw  the  country  into  a
flame  of  rebellion  ;  they  never  proposed  that  the  meeting  of
Parliament,  which  was  appointed  for  January  22,  should  be
deferred,  and  they  suffered  Fitzwilliam  to  meet  that  Parliament
under  the  full  impression  that  his  representations  of  the  state  of
the  country  had  been  accepted  by  the  Cabinet.  When  Parlia¬
ment  met,  it  was  totally  impossible  that  the  introduction  of  the
Catholic  question  could  have  been  prevented.  The  country  was
thrilling  with  the  most  passionate  excitement  on  the  subject.
Even  if  Grattan  had  consented  to  relinquish  it  for  the  session,
there  were  many  members  who  were  desirous  of  introducing  it,1
and  in  that  case,  as  Lord  Fitzwilliam  truly  said,  c  the  measure
might  come  into  hands  with  which  neither  he  nor  the  King’s
Ministers  had  any  connection,  which  would  leave  the  Govern¬
ment  only  the  disagreeable  part  of  altering  or  modifying,  if  any
alteration  or  modification  had  been  thought  necessary  by  the
British  Government,  depriving  his  Majesty  thereby  of  the  whole
grace  and  effect  of  what  was  done.’2  The  only  possible  way  in
which  Fitzwilliam  could  have  prevented  the  Bill  coming  before
the  House  of  Commons,  would  have  been  by  openly  opposing  the

1  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle ,  p.  18.

1  See  his  protest  in  the  House  of  Lords  (Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  206,  207).

80  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

leave  to  introduce  it,  and  in  that  case  he  would  have  thrown
himself  into  violent  opposition  to  the  whole  current  of  excited
Catholic  feeling,  would  have  precipitated  the  very  evils  of  which
he  had  warned  the  Government,  and  would  have  acted  in  direct
contradiction,  not  only  to  his  own  sentiments,  but  to  the  instruc¬
tions  which  he  had  received  when  he  was  appointed.

Under  these  circumstances,  he  had  adopted  the  most  judicious
course  in  putting  himself  in  connection  with  Grattan,  who  was
not  in  office,  who  had  been  entrusted  with  the  petition  of  the
Catholic  Committee,  but  who  at  the  same  time  was  in  the  close
confidence  of  his  administration,  and  anxious  to  do  all  that  was
in  his  power  to  smoothe  its  path.  As  we  have  seen,  Grattan
consented  to  postpone  introducing  the  measure  till  its  leading
provisions  had  been  sent  to  England.  As  early  as  February  10,
the  Cabinet  had  been  fully  apprised  of  them,  as  well  as  of  the
opinion  of  the  Irish  Parliament  upon  them,  in  order  that  the
English  Government  should  be  able  to  limit  and  modify  the  Bill
if  it  appeared  to  them  too  unrestricted.  When  leave  was  given
to  introduce  it,  its  terms  were  kept  back  from  Parliament  and
from  the  Catholics  until  the  opinion  of  the  Cabinet  had  been
received  upon  it,  and  they  had  not  yet  been  communicated  when
the  censure  of  the  Cabinet  arrived.  If  the  measure  was  not
sufficiently  discussed,  this  was  entirely  the  fault  of  the  English
Ministers,  who  had  so  strangely  neglected  it  during  the  whole
interval  before  Parliament  met,  and  during  the  first  fortnight  of
its  session.  If,  with  the  usual  ignorance  of  their  class,  they
understood  Ireland  so  little  as  to  imagine  that  the  question  was
one  which  might  safely  be  indefinitely  postponed,  they  had  only
themselves  to  blame,  for  nothing  could  be  clearer  or  more  em¬
phatic  than  the  warning  they  had  received.  The  censure,
therefore,  which  they  sent  to  Fitzwilliam  on  February  18,
appears  to  me  perfectly  unmerited.  The  next  day  the  Cabinet
agreed  to  recall  Fitzwilliam,  and  on  the  23rd  he  was  directed  to
appoint  lords  justices  to  conduct  the  government  till  the  arrival
of  his  successor.

After  all  that  has  been  written  on  the  subject,  a  consider¬
able  obscurity  still  hangs  over  the  real  motives  that  induced  the
English  Government  to  take  a  step  which,  they  were  repeatedly
assured,  must  bring  down  upon  Ireland  a  train  of  calamities  of

CH.  XXVI.

CAUSES  OF  THE  DISMISSAL.

81

the  most  appalling  description.  The  final  opinion  of  Fitzwilliam,
which  was  strongly  shared  by  the  Ponsonbys  and  by  Grattan,
was  that  the  Catholic  question  had  in  reality  nothing  to  say  to
their  decision.  The  question  they  considered  was  merely  one
of  family  influence.  The  great  social  and  political  weight  of  the
Beresfords,  supported  by  Westmorland,  Buckingham,  and  Auck¬
land  in  England,  and  by  Fitzgibbon  in  Ireland,  was  strained
to  the  utmost  against  the  Ponsonbys,  and  the  influence  they
brought  to  bear  was  such  that,  although  Pitt  was  believed  by
Fitzwilliam  to  have  acquiesced  in  the  removal  of  Beresford  when
it  was  first  proposed,  he  now  determined  at  all  hazards  to  resist  it.

1  Bet  my  friends  no  longer  suffer  the  Catholic  question  to  be
mentioned,’  wrote  Fitzwilliam,  c  as  entering  in  the  most  distant
degree  into  the  causes  of  my  recall.  .  .  .  Had  Mr.  Beresford
never  been  dismissed,  ...  I  should  have  remained.’ 1  1  In  my

opinion,’  said  George  Ponsonby,  ‘  the  Catholic  question  had  no
more  to  do  with  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  than  Lord
MacCartney’s  embassy  to  China.  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  to  be
recalled,  and  this  was  considered  the  most  popular  pretext  for
the  measure.’2  The  Ministers,  said  Grattan,  ‘excited  a  domes¬
tic  fever  at  the  hazard  of  the  general  interest,  for  no  object,  or
for  an  object  too  despicable  or  too  criminal  to  be  mentioned.’ 3

The  arguments  in  support  of  this  grave  charge  are  very
strong.  The  fact  that,  before  Fitzwilliam  went  to  Ireland,  both
Pitt  and  Portland  professed  themselves  in  principle  favourable
to  Catholic  emancipation  ;  the  discretion  they  had  given  to  Fitz¬
william  to  support  the  measure  if  he  believed  it  to  be  necessary  ;
the  complete  silence  with  which  week  after  week  they  received
his  representations  that  it  could  not  be  deferred,  and  that  he  in¬
tended,  unless  he  received  directions  to  the  contrary,  to  accept
it ;  the  manner  in  which  he  was  permitted  to  meet  a  Parlia¬
ment,  which  must  necessarily  have  been  mainly  occupied  with
this  very  question,  without  any  instructions  to  oppose  or  to  dis¬
countenance  it — all  these  things  form  a  chain  of  evidence  which
it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  resist.  In  the  letters  of
Portland,  the  Catholic  question  is  given  the  first  place,  and  it  is
,  probable  that  it  had  a  real  if  not  the  chief  influence  over  his

1  Second  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle,  2  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  175.

p.  21  '  Ibid.  192.

249

82

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.

CK.  XX VT.

mind ;  but  the  earliest  intimation  Fitzwilliam  received  that
English  Ministers  were  discontented  with  him,  was  a  private
letter,  written  on  February  2,  by  Windham  to  Lord  Milton,  stating
that  Pitt  was  displeased  at  the  removal  of  Beresford,  though  the
Duke  of  Portland  appears  not  yet  to  have  been  aware  of  that  fact.1
Pitt  is  said  to  have  described  the  dismissal  as  ‘  an  open  breach
of  a  most  solemn  promise.’ 2  His  letter  to  Fitzwilliam  of  the
9th  was  wholly  occupied  with  the  Beresford  question,  and  the
negotiations  relating  to  Wolfe  and  Toler  ;  and  when  Fitzwilliam
in  his  reply  said  that  Pitt  must  choose  between  Beresford  and
his  Lord  Lieutenant,  Pitt  accepted  the  challenge  on  that  issue.
In  a  letter  of  February  21,  he  stated,  it  is  true,  that  he  con¬
curred  with  the  general  desire  of  the  Cabinet,  that  Grattan’s
Bill  should  not  be  allowed  to  make  any  further  progress,  and
that  the  Cabinet  ‘  should  receive  and  consider  the  information
which  they  thought  it  their  duty  to  call  for ;  ’  but  he  places  the
dismissal  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  mainly  upon  the  ground  of  the
removal  of  former  supporters  of  the  Government,  which  he
stated  himself  bound  to  resist,  ‘  from  a  regard  to  the  King’s  ser¬
vice  and  to  his  own  honour.’3  The  Chancellor,  Lord  Lough-
borough,  wrote  to  Grattan  concerning  the  trouble  that  had
arisen,  and  this  letter  does  not  contain  a  word  about  the  Catholics,
but  is  exclusively  occupied  with  the  dismissal  of  Beresford.4

‘  A  certain  family  cabal,’  wrote  Burke,  ‘  are  in  the  sole
possession  of  the  ear  of  Government.’ 5  Pitt  was  surrounded  by
followers  who  hated  his  new  Whig  allies.  He  was  himself,
directly  or  indirectly,  in  constant  intercourse  with  the  leading
supporters  of  monopoly  in  Ireland,  and  with  the  last  two  Lords
Lieutenant,  both  of  whom  were  violently  hostile  to  Lord  Fitz¬
william  and  his  system.  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  the
kind  of  arguments  that  may  have  influenced  him.  Fitzgibbon
had  been  his  most  powerful  and  unflinching  Irish  supporter

'  Second  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle ,

p.  12.

2  Stanhope’s  Life  of  Pitt ,  ii.  p.  301;
Second  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle ,  p.  23.

3  Letter  to  Lo id  Carlisle.

4  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  197,  198.

5  Ibid.  p.  202.  Just  after  Lord
Fitzwilliam’s  recall,  Pelham,  the
secretary  of  his  successor,  wrote  to
Portland  about  the  unpopularity  of
the  Beresfords.  He  said  :  ‘  If  any
sacrifices  are  necessary  (which,  you

know,  I  never  admit  a  pri ori  in  poli¬
tics),  Pitt  must  submit  to  Beresford’s
removal.  I  am  sorry  to  say  .  .  .  that
Pitt  s.eems  more  animated  about  men
on  this  occasion  than  he  ought'  to  be ;
I  am  by  no  means  satisfied  with  his
conduct  about  Beresford,  when  I  met
him  at  his  house  with  Lord  Camden.
I  very  much  wished  to  have  seen
Lord  Grenville  upon  that  subject
before  I  left  London.’  (Pelham  to
Portland,  March  22,  1795.)

cn.  xxvt.

CAUSES  OF  THE  DISMISSAL.

83

during  the  evil  days  of  the  Regency  debates.  Beresford  had
taken  a  considerable,  if  not  a  prominent,  part  in  framing  the
commercial  propositions  of  1785.  Cooke  had  been  appointed  to
his  present  office  by  the  brother  of  Pitt’s  favourite  colleague,
Lord  Grenville.  Hamilton  had  served  for  nearly  fifty  years  in
the  Government  of  Ireland.  The  powers  possessed  by  Lord
Fitzwilliam  when  he  went  to  Ireland  were  only  described  by
word  of  mouth,  through  the  intervention  of  the  Duke  of  Port¬
land,  and  grave  misunderstandings  had  arisen.  It  was  clearly
understood,  indeed,  on  both  sides,  that  Fitzgibbon  was  not  to  be
removed,  and  that  there  was  not  to  be  any  complete  change  of
men,  though  room  was  to  be  made  for  the  introduction  of  the
Ponsonbys  into  the  Government ;  but  Fitzwilliam  contended
that  he  had  full  power  of  pensioning  off  officials  in  confidential
positions  who  were  notoriously  in  opposition  to  his  policy  and
his  appointment,  and  that  such  a  power  was  absolutely  indis¬
pensable  to  the  efficiency  of  his  administration.  He  urged  that
it  was  possessed  and  exercised,  in  their  respective  departments
in  England,  by  the  other  members  of  the  Whig  party  who  joined
the  administration,  though  in  England  it  was  far  less  necessary
than  in  Ireland,  and  he  declared  that  he  had  obtained  in
England  the  tacit  assent  of  Pitt  to  the  probable  necessity  of  the
removal  of  Beresford.

Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  understood  that  no  important  change
of  men  or  measures  was  to  be  effected  without  previous  com¬
munication  with  the  English  Cabinet,  and  that  no  old  servants
of  the  Crown  were  to  be  removed  contrary  to  their  wish,  unless
they  had  entered  into  a  course  of  insubordination  or  opposition
to  the  Government.  But  Fitzwilliam  had  not  been  more  than
two  days  in  Ireland  when  he  removed  Beresford,  peremptorily
and  curtly,  and  it  seemed  probable  that  the  changes  which  were
proposed  or  effected  would  amount  to  a  most  serious  displace¬
ment  of  power  in  the  permanent  administration  of  Ireland.
Appeals  were  made  to  Pitt,  by  men  who  had  great  weight  with
his  party,  ‘to  hold  up  a  shield  for  the  shelter  of  persons  who  had
merited  the  favour  of  the  last  Lord  Lieutenant  by  their  services,
and  on  whose  conduct  no  blame  or  censure  had  been  attached ;  1

1  The  very  active  part  which  ville’s  brother),  Westmorland,  and
Buckingham  (who  was  Lord  Gren-  Auckland  took  at  this  ciisis,  the  con-

84

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  oh.  xxvi.

and  they  were  accompanied  by  the  most  alarming  pictures  of
the  dangerous  fermentation  which  the  measures  of  Lord  Fitz-
william  were  producing  in  Ireland.

Other  political  motives,  which  I  have  already  indicated,  very
probably  blended  in  his  mind  with  these  considerations.  He
was  told  that  if  the  Ponsonbys,  who  were  usually  connected
with  the  Whigs,  obtained  a  real  ascendency  in  Ireland,  the  whole
department  of  Irish  influence  and  patronage  would  pass  into
Whig  hands.  He  may  have  believed  that  the  easiest  and  safest
way  of  governing  Ireland  was  through  that  system  of  family
monopoly  which  enabled  the  Government  to  count  at  all  times,
and  amid  all  political  changes,  upon  a  subservient  majority  in
the  House  of  Commons.  He  shared  the  prevailing  sentiment
in  England,  that  in  the  agonies  of  a  revolutionary  war,  all  great
political  changes  should  be  as  far  as  possible  avoided  or  post¬
poned,  and  he  may  have  foreseen  that  if  Grattan  and  Ponsonby
carried  the  promised  reforms,  and  gave  a  comparatively  popular
character  to  the  Parliament  of  Ireland,  the  whole  system  of  its
past  government  would  be  infallibly  destroyed,  and  the  chances
of  obtaining  a  legislative  union  indefinitely  diminished.

These  were  probably  leading  motives  in  producing  the  re¬
call,  but  I  do  not  think  that  the  Catholic  question  was  as  com¬
pletely  foreign  to  it  as  the  viceroy  supposed.  As  far  as  ‘  the
Irish  clique  ’  were  concerned,  it  is  probable  that  Burke  did  not
greatly  misjudge  them  when  he  wrote  that  their  one  object  was
‘  to  derive  security  to  their  own  jobbish  power.  This  is  the
first  and  the  last  in  the  piece.  The  Catholic  question  is  a  mere
pretence.’1  They  employed  it  most  skilfully  for  their  purpose,
and  Fitzgibbon  deserves  to  be  remembered  in  history  as  probably
the  first  very  considerable  man  who  maintained  the  doctrine
that  the  King  would  violate  the  coronation  oath,  the  Act  of
Settlement,  and  the  Act  of  Union  with  Scotland,  if  he  consented
to  a  measure  allowing  the  Catholic  electors  to  send  Catholic  re¬
presentatives  into  Parliament.2  Even  the  English  Chancellor,  he

stant  letters  of  Beresford,  Cooke,  and
Fitzgibbon  against  the  administration
of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  and  the  great
jealousy  with  which  the  old  Tories
looked  upon  their  Whig  allies,  will
be  evident  to  an3rone  who  compares
Buckingbam’s  Courts  and  Cabinets
of  George  III.  vol.  ii. ;  the  Auckland

Correspondence  ;  the  Beresford  Cor¬
respondence  ;  Stanhope’s  Life  of  Pitt ;
and  the  Westmorland  (or,  as  it  is  now
called,  Fane')  Correspondence  in  the
I.S.P.O.

1  Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  204.

2  I  have  noticed  (vol.  iii.  pp.  498,
499)  how  the  doctrine  that  the  Scotch

CH.  XXVI.

THE  KINQ  FORBIDS  EMANCIPATION.

85

wrote,  would  ‘  stake  liis  head  ’  if  lie  affixed  the  great  seal  of
England  to  such  a  measure.1  No  more  extravagant  doctrine
has  ever  been  maintained  by  a  responsible  statesman,  but  it  fell
upon  a  soil  which  was  prepared  for  its  reception,  and  it  has  had
a  great  and  most  fatal  influence  on  English  history.

Even  before  Fitzgibbon  had  written  to  this  effect,  the  King
had  declared  his  emphatic  hostility  to  Catholic  emancipation,
and  drawn  up  an  elaborate  memorandum  in  opposition  to  it.
It  was  dated  on  February  6,  and  in  it  the  King  mentioned  that
it  was  only  on  the  preceding  day  that  he  heard,  to  his  great  as¬
tonishment,  that  Fitzwilliam  had  proposed  a  total  and  immediate
change  of  the  system  of  government  which  had  been  followed  in
Ireland  since  the  Revolution.  The  admission  of  Catholics  to  sit
in  Parliament,  and  the  formation  in  Ireland  of  a  yeomanry  which
would  be  essentially  Catholic,  were  measures  which,  in  the  opi¬
nion  of  the  King,  could  not  fail,  sooner  or  later,  to  separate  the
two  kingdoms,  or  lead  England  into  a  line  of  conduct  which  it
was  the  very  object  of  the  English  Revolution  and  of  the  Act  of
Settlement  to  prevent.  Such  a  measure,  the  King  continued,
was  beyond  the  decision  of  a  cabinet  of  ministers ;  even  if  they
favoured  it,  ‘  it  would  be  highly  dangerous,  without  previous
concert  with  the  leading  men  of  every  order  in  the  State,  to  send
any  encouragement  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  on  this  subject;  and
if  received  with  the  same  suspicion  I  do  (sic),  I  am  certain  it

Union  and  the  coronation  oath  pre¬
cluded  the  King  from  assenting  to
any  law  modifying  the  ecclesiastical
establishments,  appeared  in  the  Eng¬
lish  Parliament  in  1772.  In  the
Westmorland  Papers  there  is  an
argument,  drawn  up  by  the  Arch¬
bishop  of  Cashel,  against  the  aboli¬
tion  of  the  remaining  restrictions  on
Catholics,  based  on  the  same  grounds.
It  is  undated,  but  was  probably
written  during  Lord  Westmorland’s
struggle  with  the  English  Cabinet
about  the  measures  in  favour  of  the
Catholics  then  contemplated,  for  it
states  that,  ‘It  is  notorious  that  at
least  nineteen-twentieths  of  the  Pro¬
testants  of  Ireland  are  utterly  averse
from  the  Popery  Bill  now  in  agita¬
tion,’  which  could  hardly  have  been
said  by  the  most  violent  partisan,  and
certainly  not  with  ihe  faintest  colour
of  plausibility,  in  1795.

1  See  two  remarkable  letters  in
the  Beresford  Correspondence,  ii.  70-
76.  He  says  :  ‘  The  only  Acts  which
now  affect  Irish  papists  are  the  Act
of  Supremacy  and  Uniformity,  the
Test  Act,  and  the  Bill  of  Rights.
The  King  cannot  give  his  assent  to
a  repeal  of  any  of  these  without  a
direct  breach  of  his  coronation  oath.
.  .  .  Whenever  Mr.  Grattan  brings  in
his  Bill — and  it  is  printed — I  mean  to
send  it  over  to  England,  with  com¬
ments  in  reference  to  British  statutes
which  certainly  bind  the  King  upon
this  subject.  In  their  Bill  for  esta¬
blishing  papist  colleges,  they  will  find
the  same  difficulties,  if  they  do  not
take  more  precautions  than  they  are
capable  of.’  It  will  be  observed  in
these  letters, that  Fitzgibbon  suggests
no  doubt  whatever,  that  the  Irish
Parliament  would  carry  the  Bills.

8G

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi.

would  be  safer  even  to  change  the  new  administration  in  Ireland,
if  its  continuance  depends  on  the  success  of  thi*S  proposal,  than
to  prolong  its  existence  on  grounds  that  must  sooner  or  later
ruin  one,  if  not  both  kingdoms.’ 1

It  is  obvious  what  a  formidable  obstacle  the  attitude  of  the
King  threw  into  the  way  of  Fitzwilliam ;  and  while  the  King
was  in  this  state  of  mind,  Fitzgibbon’s  views  about  the  corona¬
tion  oath  were  communicated  to  him  by  Lord  "W estmorland.2
He  readily  embraced  them,  and  he  ever  after  employed  them  as
the  best  reason  or  pretext  for  resistance.

I  have  referred  to  a  memorandum  giving  the  case  of  the
Ministers,  which  was  drawn  up  by  Grenville,  corrected  by  Pitt,
and  afterwards  sent  for  their  approval  to  the  other  members  of
the  Cabinet.  It  describes  the  course  of  the  transaction  much
as  I  have  told  it,  but  with  some  further  details  relating
to  the  disputes  about  patronage.  It  mentions  that  when  the
coalition  had  been  formed  in  England  in  July  1794,  the  govern¬
ment  of  Ireland  was  destined  for  Lord  Fitzwilliam  as  soon  as  a
sufficient  post  could  be  found  for  Lord  Westmorland ;  that  the
intention  had  been  prematurely  divulged,  and  a  notion  got  abroad
that  an  entire  change  of  the  system  of  Irish  government,  both
as  to  men  and  measures,  was  contemplated,  and  that  this  suspi¬
cion  was  much  confirmed  when  it  was  found  that  Fitzwilliam  in¬
tended  to  remove  Fitzgibbon.  It  adds,  that  explanations  took
place  in  -which  it  was  clearly  settled  that  Fitzgibbon  should  not
be  removed,  and  an  explicit  assurance  was  given  by  Fitzwilliam,
‘  that  he  had  not  in  view  the  establishment  of  any  new  system
in  Ireland,  but  that  he  was  desirous  of  strengthening  his  Govern¬
ment  by  the  accession  of  Mr.  Ponsonby  and  his  friends,  and  the
support  of  Mr.  Grattan.’  Shortly  before  the  departure  of  Fitz¬
william,  a  Cabinet  meeting  was  held  at  Pitt’s  house  to  discuss
doubtful  or  disputed  points.  In  addition  to  Fitzwilliam  and
Pitt,  Portland,  Spencer,  Grenville,  and  Windham  were  present.
They  discussed  at  great  length  many  questions  of  patronage —
the  appointment  of  a  Primate,  and  of  a  Provost  for  Trinity

1  Stanhope’s  JAfe  of  Pitt,  ii.  304  ;
appendix,  xxiii-xxv.

2  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.
303.  We  shall  have  additional  evi¬
dence  of  tills  communication  in  the

next  chapter.  Westmorland,  in  the
debates  on  May  8,  adopted  precisely
the  argument  of  Fitzgibbon  against
Catholic  emancipation.  (Pari.  Hist.
xxxi.  1511.)

CH.  XXVI.

CABINET  MEMORANDUM.

87

College,  the  posts  to  be  given  to  the  two  Ponsonbys,  the  pro¬
vision  to  be  made  for  Wolfe  and  Toler,  who  were  not  to  be  re¬
moved  unless  such  places  were  provided  for  them  as  there  was
just  reason  to  believe  they  would  have  accepted  under  West¬
morland.  These  points  were  easily  settled,  but  more  division
arose  upon  the  contention  of  Fitzwilliam  that  some  of  the  new
offices,  especially  in  the  revenue  board  which  had  been  esta¬
blished  by  Lord  Buckinghamshire  and  which  had  been  so  often
and  so  severely  condemned  by  Grattan,  should  be  abolished.
Pitt  and  Grenville  said,  1  that  they  considered  themselves  parties
to  the  measures  of  Lord  Buckinghamshire  in  Ireland,  and  could
not  on  that  account,  independently  of  other  considerations,  con¬
cur  in  any  measure  which  would  appear  to  reflect  on  him.’
Fitzwilliam  disowned  any  intention  of  making  such  a  reflection,
but  he  still  thought  that  the  revenue  board  ought  to  be  remo¬
delled  and  reduced.  In  discussing  the  question,  however,  they
soon  found  that  none  of  them  understood  the  details,  and  it  was
finally  determined  that  it  must  be  adjourned  till  the  arrival  of
Fitzwilliam  in  Ireland,  and  ‘  that  after  his  explicit  disavowal  of
all  intention  to  introduce  a  new  system,  or  to  countenance  im¬
putations  on  the  former  Government,  his  colleagues  would
willingly  leave  it  to  him  to  consider  the  subject  .  .  .  desiring
only  that  before  any  such  measure  was  adopted,  they  might  have
an  opportunity  of  deliberating  upon  it.’  '  Nothing,’  the  memo¬
randum  continues,  ‘  was  intimated  in  this  conversation  of  any
idea  of  removing  Mr.  Beresford,  nor  was  even  his  name  men¬
tioned  by  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  although  the  different  means  which
might  be  adopted  for  lessening  the  number  of  the  commissioners
of  the  revenue  board  formed  a  part  of  what  he  stated  on  the
subject  of  those  boards.’

After  discussion  of  these  and  of  some  less  important  points,
the  conversation  passed  to  measures,  and  the  conclusions  may
be  stated  in  the  words  of  the  memorandum.  1  It  was  understood
that  on  all  important  subjects  Lord  F.  should  transmit  all  the
information  he  could  collect,  with  his  opinion,  to  the  King’s
servants  here,  and  that  he  should  do  nothing  to  commit  the  King’s
Government  in  such  cases  without  fresh  instructions  from  hence.
It  is  also  distinctly  recollected  by  some  of  the  persons  present,
that  the  Catholic  question  was  particularly  mentioned,  though

88

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvi

not  discussed  at  much  length ;  that  no  decided  sentiment  was
expressed  by  anyone  as  to  the  line  which  it  might  be  right
ultimately  to  adopt ;  but  that  the  same  general  principles  before
stated  were  considered  as  applying  to  this  as  well  as  to  the  other
questions  of  importance,  and  that  a  strong  opinion  was  stated
that  Lord  Fitzwilliam  should  if  possible  prevent  the  agitation  of
the  question  at  all  during  the  present  session.’ 1

This  appears  to  have  been  the  last  conversation  which  took
place  between  Fitzwilliam  and  the  Ministers  before  the  former
departed  for  Ireland.  The  memorandum  corroborates  in  all
essential  points  the  evidence  that  has  been  already  adduced,  and
it  seems  to  me  rather  to  strengthen  the  view,  that  the  Catholic
question  had,  in  the  minds  of  the  Ministers  at  least,  only  a
secondary  part  in  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  though  it  is
probable  that  the  opposition  of  the  King  to  that  measure  weighed
considerably  in  the  balance.  Among  the  Pelham  papers  of  this
date,  there  is  a  very  elaborate  legal  argument  to  prove  that
Catholic  emancipation  was  essentially  inconsistent  with  the
Constitution  and  the  coronation  oath.  It  was  evidently  drawn
up  by  a  lawyer,  and  is  probably  a  copy  of  a  paper  submitted  by
Fitzgibbon  to  the  King.  After  a  full  and  interesting  historical
survey  of  the  chief  English  and  Irish  statutes  relating  to  the
connection  between  Church  and  State,  both  before  and  after  the
Revolution,  and  an  argument  to  prove  that  the  Catholics,  though
freely  admitted  to  the  Irish  Parliament  before  the  Restoration,
were  excluded  by  the  Act  of  Supremacy  from  the  Parliament
which  sat  from  1661  to  1666,  the  writer  proceeds  to  argue  that
the  legislation  of  the  Revolution,  and  the  clause  in  the  Act  of
Union  with  Scotland  providing  that  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  and  all
other  Acts  of  Parliament  then  in  force  for  the  establishment  and

preservation  of  the  Church  of  England,
full  force  for  ever,’  made  Catholic
the  competence  of  the  Legislature  to  carry,
writes,  ‘  that  the  crown  having  been  conferred  at  the
under  the  express  compact  of  maintaining  a

1  This  memorandum  is  dated
March  1795.  A  copy  with  a  state¬
ment  of  its  origin  is  in  the  Grenville
MSS.  There  is  another  copy  in  the
Pelham  MSS.  In  one  of  Pelham’s
first  letters  from  Ireland  he  says  the
recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  a  for¬
tunate  event,  for  ‘  the  notion  of

‘  shall  remain  and  be  in

emancipation  a  question  beyond

‘  It  appears,’  he

Revolution

Protestant  religion

forming  a  popular  administration
had  given  such  an  encouragement  to
democracy,  and  so  unhinged  all  the
common  machinery  of  government,
that  I  really  believe  the  business
of  Parliament  would  have  stopped.’
(Pelham  to  Windham,  May  17,  1795.)

CH.  XXTI.

DUTY  OF  TIIE  KING.

89

and  Government,  and  the  Irish  Parliament  having  recognised
that  principle,  a  Bill  to  endanger  the  Protestant  Government
and  religion  could  not,  consistently  with  the  Revolution,  he  enter¬
tained  in  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  that  the  King  could  not,
consistently  with  the  Declaration  of  Rights,  his  coronation  oath,
and  the  Act  of  Union,  order  the  great  seal  to  be  put  to  such  an
Act,  unless  his  Majesty  should  be  thereto  authorised  by  a  special
Act  of  Parliament.  The  Roman  Catholic  petitions  demand  the
repeal  of  all  penal  and  restrictive  laws  whatsoever.  If  this  were
agreed  to,  it  would  go  to  the  repeal  of  the  Act  of  Supremacy  and
Uniformity.  It  would  go  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  papal
jurisdiction,  and  would  be,  in  fact,  a  reconciliation  with  the  Church
of  Rome,  to  which  the  King  could  not  agree  consistently  with
the  tenure  of  his  crown.  ...  It  is  my  opinion  that  an  Act  of
Parliament  to  capacitate  any  person  to  sit  in  either  House  of
Parliament  without  making  and  subscribing  the  ‘  Declaration
against  Popery,’  and  ‘  taking  the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  supre¬
macy,’  would  be  a  direct  violation  of  the  Constitution  as  esta¬
blished  at  the  Revolution,  and  a  breach  of  the  solemn  contract
then  made  between  the  King  and  the  people,  which  contract
every  king  and  queen  swears  to  preserve  inviolate  at  his  or  her
coronation,  and  which  oath,  I  am  of  opinion,  renders  it  the
indispensable  duty  of  such  king  to  refuse  his  assent  to  any  such
Bill,  should  it  pass  through  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament.’ 1

1  Memorandum  as  to  the  Catholic
claim  to  sit  in  Parliament,  April  3,
1795;  Pelham  MSS.  (‘Miscellaneous
Irish  Papers  ’).  This  memorandum
contains  some  curious  information
about  the  Act  which  was  introduced
by  Yelverton,  Grattan,  and  Fitzgib-
bon,  immediately  after  the  question
of  independence  had  been  raised  in
1782,  in  order  to  allay  the  doubts
of  those  who  feared  that  Irish  titles
to  property  derived  under  Eng¬
lish  Acts  of  Parliament,  might  be
affected  by  the  repudiation  of  the
right  of  England  to  legislate  for
Ireland.  ‘  The  framers  of  this  Bill
merely  proposed  to  quiet  Irish  titles,
but  Lord  Auckland,  then  Chief  Secre¬
tary,  signified  to  them  privately,  that
he  could  not  answer  for  the  Bill  being
returned  from  Great  Britain,  unless
they  should  insert  in  it  clauses  for
confirming  such  statutes  as  -went  to
the  connection  of  the  t.vo  kingdoms  ;
and  the  3rd  of  William  III.  [the  Act

which  excluded  Catholics  from  the
Irish  Parliament]  was  particularly
mentioned  at  the  time.  Accordingly,
after  much  reluctance,  the  Bill  was
extended  in  its  provisions,  and  the
following  proviso  was  introduced :
“  And  whereas  a  similarity  of  laws,
manners,  and  customs  must  naturally
conduce  to  strengthen  and  perpetuate
that  affection  and  harmony  which  do,
and  at  all  times  ought  to  subsist  be¬
tween  the  people  of  Great  Britain
and  Ireland  ’’—and  then  the  Bill
enacts,  that  all  such  clauses  and  pro¬
visions  contained  in  any  statutes
made  in  England  as  relate  to  the
taking  any  oath  or  oaths,  or  making
or  subscribing  any  declaration  or
affirmation  in  this  kingdom  &c.  shall
be  accepted,  used,  and  executed  in
this  kingdom  according  fo  the  present
tenor  of  the  same  respectively.’  The
whole  of  this  memorandum  (which  is
too  long  for  me  to  quote  in  full)  is
well  worthy  of  study.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

CO

When  the  news  arrived  that  the  English  Government  had
determined  to  recall  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  and  to  dash  to  the  ground
the  hopes  which  the  Catholics  had  been  given  every  reason  to
entertain,  those  who  knew  Ireland  best  foresaw  nothing  but  ruin.
Fitzwilliam  himself  predicted  that  the  English  Ministers  must
face  ‘  almost  the  certainty  of  driving  this  kingdom  into  rebel¬
lion.’  1  Forbes,  who  was  one  of  the  most  acute  members  of  the
Irish  Parliament,  wrote  to  a  private  friend  :  ‘  It  is  reported  that
Pitt  intends  to  overturn  the  Irish  Cabinet  by  rejecting  Catholic
claims.  Should  he  pursue  that  line,  ...  it  will  end  in  the
total  alienation  of  Ireland.’ 2  The  ablest  English-speaking
Catholic  bishop  of  the  time  was  Dr.  Hussey,  who  was  largely
employed  by  the  Government  in  negotiations  with  the  Irish
Catholics,  and  who  was  a  constant  correspondent  of  Burke.  At
the  end  of  January,  when  the  Catholic  question  seemed  certain
to  triumph  under  the  auspices  of  the  English  Government,  he
wrote  to  Burke,  that  he  found  the  loyal  spirit  of  the  Irish  Catho¬
lics  so  strongly  roused,  that  he  believed  that  there  were  not  five
of  them  in  the  kingdom  worth  10k  who  would  not  spill  their
blood  to  resist  a  French  invasion.  Three  weeks  later,  when
doubts  about  the  policy  of  the  Government  had  begun  to  circulate,
he  wrote  very  solemnly  that  the  question  of  this  Emancipation
Bill  involved  another  very  awful  one — whether  the  Cabinet
‘  mean  to  retain  Ireland,  or  to  abdicate  it  to  a  French  Govern¬
ment,  or  to  a  revolutionary  system  of  its  own  invention.’  When
the  decision  was  taken,  he  wrote  in  absolute  consternation  :  ‘  The
disastrous  news  of  Earl  Fitzwilliam’s  recall  is  come,  and  Ireland
is  now  on  the  brink  of  civil  war.’3  From  a  wholly  different
point  on  the  political  compass,  Charlemont,  who  had  been  so  firm
and  steady  an  opponent  of  the  concession  of  political  power  to
the  Catholics,  pronounced  that  in  the  existing  state  of  Ireland
the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  e  utterly  ruinous,’  and  he
predicted  that  by  next  Christmas  the  mass  of  the  people  would
probably  be  in  the  hands  of  the  United  Irishmen.4

The  remarkable  memoir  on  the  history  of  the  United  Irish¬
men  which  was  drawn  up  in  1798  by  O’Connor,  McNevin,  and
Emmet,  fully  confirms  the  judgment  of  Charlemont.  ‘  Whatever

1  Letter  to  Lord  Carlisle.  278,  282.

2  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  197.  4  Hardy’s  Life  of  Charlemont,  ii.

3  Durke’s  Correspondence,  iv.  2G8,  347,  348.

CH.  XXVI.

SPEECH  OE  PARSONS.

91

progress,’ they  say,  1  this  united  system  had  made  among  the  Pres¬
byterians  of  the  North,  it  had,  as  we  apprehend,  made  but  .little
way  among  the  Catholics  throughout  the  kingdom,  until  after  the
recall  of  Earl  Fitzwilliam.’ 1

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  add  here  the  opinion  of  a  great
English  statesman  on  the  transaction.  £  As  to  the  Catholic  Bill,’
wrote  Fox,  ‘  it  is  not  only  right  in  principle,  but,  after  all  that
was  given  to  the  Catholics  two  years  ago,  it  seems  little  short  of
madness  to  dispute  (and  at  such  a  time  as  this)  about  the  very
little  which  remains  to  be  given  them.  To  suppose  it  possible
that,  now  they  are  electors,  they  will  long  submit  to  be  ineligible
to  Parliament,  appears  to  me  to  be  absurd  beyond  measure,  but
common  sense  seems  to  be  totally  lost  out  of  the  councils  of  this
devoted  country.’ 2

Never  at  any  other  period  of  Irish  history  had  the  recall  of
a  Lord  Lieutenant  struck  such  consternation  through  the  country.
In  Parliament,  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons  made  himself  the  chief
mouthpiece  of  the  prevailing  feeling.  W e  have  seen  that,  when
the  supplies  were  voted,  this  very  able  man  had  warned  the
Parliament,  with  a  sagacity  which  the  event  only  too  fully  justi¬
fied,  against  excessive  confidence  in  the  English  Cabinet,  and  had
vainly  tried  to  induce  them  to  unite  their  grants  with  stipula¬
tions  for  redress  of  grievances.  He  had  not  forgotten  that,  only
ten  years  before,  large  additional  supplies  were  voted  by  the
Parliament  of  Ireland,  in  response  to  the  offer  of  the  English
Minister  to  grant  free  trade  between  England  and  Ireland,  and
that,  after  those  supplies  had  been  granted,  the  commercial  pro¬
positions  were  so  mutilated  that  they  were  ultimately  aban¬
doned.  On  February  26  he  rose  to  ask  if  the  prevailing
rumours  of  the  recall  of  Fitzwilliam,  and  of  the  withdrawal  of
the  concessions  to  the  Catholics,  were  well  founded.  ‘  If  those
measures,’  he  said,’  were  now  to  be  relinquished  which  gentlemen
had  promised  with  so  much  confidence  to  the  country,  and  on  the
faith  of  which  the  House  had  been  called  on  to  vote  the  enormous
sum  of  one  million  seven  hundred  thousand  pounds,  he  must
consider  this  country  as  brought  to  the  most  awful  and  alarming
crisis  she  had  ever  known  in  any  period  of  her  history.’ 3  On

1  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  i.  356.

2  Fox’s  Correspondence,  iii.  100,  101.  3  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  133,  134.

92

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

ch.  xxvr.

March  2,  when  the  news  was  confirmed,  he  took  the  extreme
efep  of  moving  a  short  supply  Bill,  prefacing  his  motion  by  a
speech  of  great  violence.  ‘The  state  of  the  kingdom,’  he  said,
‘was  most  alarming.  The  people,  under  the  auspices  of  their
old  friends,  had  been  taught  to  expect  measures  which  he  feared
would  be  shortly  resisted.  .  .  .  The  first  he  believed  to  be  the
Catholic  Bill,  and  if  a  resistance  to  any  one  measure  more  than
another  was  likely  to  promote  dreadful  consequences,  it  was  this.
He  said  nothing  as  to  the  original  propriety  of  the  measure,  but
this  much  he  would  say,  that  if  the  Irish  Administration  had
countenanced  the  Catholics  in  this  expectation  without  the  con¬
currence  of  the  British  Cabinet,  they  had  much  to  answer  for.
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  British  Cabinet  had  held  out  an  assent
and  had  afterwards  retracted — if  the  demon  of  darkness  should
come  from  the  infernal  regions  upon  earth  and  throw  a  firebrand
amongst  the  people,  he  could  not  do  more  to  promote  mischief.
The  hopes  of  the  public  were  raised,  and  in  one  instant  they  were
blasted.  If  the  House  did  not  resent  that  insult  to  the  nation
and  to  themselves,  they  would  in  his  mind  be  most  contemptible ;
for  although  a  majority  of  the  people  might  submit  to  have  their
rights  withheld,  they  would  never  submit  to  be  mocked  in  so  bare¬
faced  a  manner.  The  case  was  not  as  formerly,  when  all  the
Parliament  of  Ireland  was  against  the  Catholics,  and  to  back  them
the  force  of  England.  Now,  although  the  claim  of  the  Catholics
was  well  known  and  understood,  not  one  petition  controverting
it  had  been  presented  from  Protestants  in  any  part  of  Ireland.
No  remonstrance  appeared,  no  county  meeting  had  been  held.
What  was  to  be  inferred  from  all  this,  but  that  the  sentiments  of
the  Protestants  were  for  the  emancipation  of  the  Catholics  ?  .  .  .
Was  the  British  Minister  to  control  all  the  interest,  talents,  and
inclinations  of  this  country  ?  He  protested  to  God  that,  in  all
the  history  he  had  read,  he  had  never  met  with  a  parallel  of  such
ominous  infatuation  as  that  by  which  he  appeared  to  be  led.
Let  him  persevere,  and  you  must  increase  your  army  to  myriads ;
every  man  must  have  five  or  six  dragoons  in  his  house.  .  .  .
The  House  had  voted  additional  taxes  in  the  present  session  to
the  amount  of  250,000 1.  .  .  .  This  was  a  charge  of  6,000 1.  a
year  upon  every  county  in  Ireland,  over  and  above  all  other
taxes.  Such  a  sum  would  never  have  been  voted,  without  a

CH.  XXYI.

APPOINTMENT  OF  CAMDEN.

93

dissenting  voice,  in  support  of  a  calamitous  war,  if  Ireland  had
not  been  deceived  either  here  or  in  the  British  Cabinet ;  he  was
inclined  to  suspect  the  latter.’ 1

The  proposal  of  a  short  money  Bill  was,  however,  easily
defeated,  and  Grattan  concurred  with  Lord  Milton  in  persuading
Conolly  to  withdraw  a  resolution  protesting  against  the  pro¬
rogation  of  Parliament  before  the  grievance  complained  of  was
redressed.  The  House  contented  itself  with  voting  unanimously,
that  the  viceroy  had  merited  the  thanks  of  the  House  and  the
confidence  of  the  people.  When  Lord  Fitz william  had  left  Ire¬
land,  there  were  debates  on  his  recall  both  in  the  English  and
Irish  Parliaments,  but  the  Government  refused  all  detailed  ex¬
planations,  and  entrenched  themselves  behind  the  undoubted
prerogative  of  the  King  to  recall  his  representatives.  In  a  long
protest  which  was  placed  on  the  books  of  the  House  of  Lords  by
Fitzwilliam  and  Lord  Ponsonby,  the  chief  facts  of  the  case  were
clearly  stated,  and  Fitzwilliam  once  more  gave  his  emphatic
testimony  to  the  condition  of  Irish  opinion  on  the  Catholic
question.  1  He  found  the  relief,’  he  said,  £  to  be  ardently  desired
by  the  Catholics,  to  be  asked  for  by  very  many  Protestants,
and  to  be  cheerfully  acquiesced  in  by  almost  all.’ 2

Lord  Camden  was  appointed  successor  to  Fitzwilliam,  with
Mr.  Pelham  as  Secretary.  Pelham  had  already  held  this  position
during  Temple’s  short  administration  in  1783  and  1784.  His
health  was  now  much  broken,  but  he  resumed  the  office  at  the
urgent  request  of  Portland,  and  with  the  warm  approbation  of
Fitzgibbon.3

1  Irish  Pari.  Pei.  xv.  137-141.
So  Fitzwilliam  wrote  :  ‘  I  have  had
the  good  fortune  not  only  to  obtain
larger  and  more  considerable  supplies
.  .  .  than  were  ever  before  granted
in  this  kingdom ;  but  I  must  and
shall  have  the  additional  boast  of
laying  at  the  feet  of  his  Majesty,  on
the  part  of  his  zealous  and  faithful
subjects  of  Ireland,  a  most  munifi¬
cent  aid  for  the  general  defence  of
his  empire — an  aid  large  beyond  any
example.  I  have  the  pride  further
to  say,  that  all  this  has  been  effected,
in  its  progress  thus  far,  with  a  degree
of  harmonjr,  cordiality,  and  unanimity
scarcely  ever  before  experienced,  and
never  under  circumstances  similar  to
those  in  which  I  found  the  country.’

(Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  Feb.  28,
1795.)  It  was  ‘no  proof  of  wisdom
nor  generosity,’  wrote  Grattan,  ‘  when
this  country  came  forward,  cordial
and  confident,  with  the  offering  of
her  treasure  and  blood,  and  resolute
to  stand  or  fall  with  the  British
nation,  ...  to  select  that  moment  to
dash  away  her  affection  .  .  .  and  to
plant  a  dagger  in  her  heart.’  (Grat¬
tan’s  Life ,  iv.  220.)

2  Pari.  Hist.  xxxi.  1527.

3  When  the  report  that  the  Secre¬
taryship  had  been  offered  to  Pelham,
arrived  in  Ireland,  Fitzgibbon  wrote
to  him:  ‘If  such  an  application  is
made  to  you,  for  God’s  sake  do  not
form  your  opinion  of  the  state  of  this
country  from  newspaper  exaggera-

94

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

The  interval  between  the  announcement  of  the  recall  and
the  arrival  of  Camden  was  a  very  anxious  one.  A  great  meeting
of  the  Catholics,  summoned  by  the  Catholic  Committee,  was  held
in  Dublin,  to  petition  the  King  that  Parliament  should  not  be
prorogued  till  the  Catholic  question  had  been  settled,  and  a
petition  for  the  continuance  of  Fitzwilliam  in  office  was  taken
by  delegates  to  London.  Meetings  of  Protestant  freeholders  and
freemen  cf  Dublin,  and  of  the  merchants  and  traders,  with  a
governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ireland  at  their  head,  were  held  for  the
same  purpose,  and  they  expressed  their  entire  concurrence  in
the  removal  of  religious  disabilities.  Kildare,  Wexford,  Antrim,
Londonderry,  and  other  counties  followed  the  example,  while
addresses  from  numerous  counties  and  corporations,  and  from  the
students  of  Trinity  College,  were  presented  to  Fitzwilliam  and
Grattan.1

The  delegates  sent  on  the  part  of  the  Catholics  to  London,  to
petition  the  King  to  continue  Lord  Fitzwilliam  in  office,  were
graciously  received,  but  obtained  no  answer ;  and  shortly  after
their  return,  the  Catholic  Committee  convened  another  great  and
very  important  meeting.  Its  resolutions  expressed  the  regret  of
the  Catholics  at  the  removal  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  ‘  contrary  to
the  unanimous  wish  of  the  whole  people ;  ’  their  consolation  £  in
contemplating  the  rising  spirit  of  harmony  and  co-operation
among  all  sects  and  descriptions  of  Irishmen,  so  rapidly  ac¬
celerated  by  that  event ;  ’  their  earnest  wish  that  the  Catholics
of  Ireland  should  ‘  cultivate  by  all  possible  means  the  friendship
and  affection  of  their  Protestant  brethren,’  and  their  desire  that
Grattan  should  reintroduce  the  Catholic  Bill  in  the  next  session
of  Parliament.  The  two  memorable  passages  I  have  already
cited  from  the  letters  Of  the  English  Minister,  pointing,  as  was
universally  believed,  to  the  desire  of  Government  to  postpone
the  Catholic  question,  with  the  object  of  effecting  a  legislative
union,  were  then  read,  and  this  great  and  representative  Catholic

tion.  Believe  me,  that  firmness  and
moderation  on  the  part  of  English
Government  will  very  soon  re-establish
tranquillity  in  Ireland ;  and  I  do  not
know  a  man  who  could  come  here
that  would  be  so  likely  to  succeed  in
composing  the  country  as  you.  Be
assured  that,  if  you  will  come  to  us,
you  will  have  an  opportunity  of  doing

essential  service  to  both  countries,
and  acquiring  a  solid  and  permanent
political  character.’  (Fitzgibbon  to
Pelham,  March  12,  1795,  Pelham
MSS.)

1  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  215-224 ;
McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  History,
pp.  92-95  ;  Plowden,  ii.  503,  504.

CH.  XXVI.

THE  LETTERS  TO  CARLISLE.

V5

meeting  proceeded  to  pass,  without  a  single  dissentient  voice,  the
following  resolutions  :  ‘  That  we  are  sincerely  and  unalterably
attached  to  the  rights,  liberties,  and  independence  of  our  native
country ;  and  we  pledge  ourselves  collectively  and  individually
to  resist  even  our  own  emancipation,  if  proposed  to  be  conceded
upon  the  ignominious  terms  of  an  acquiescence  in  the  fatal
measure  of  an  union  with  the  sister  kingdom.  That,  while  we
make  this  undisguised  declaration  of  our  sentiments,  in  order  to
satisfy  the  public  mind,  we  are  of  opinion  that  a  measure  so  full
of  violence  and  ruin  will  never  be  hazarded;  convinced  as  we  are
that  no  set  of  men  will  arrogate  to  themselves  a  power  which  is
contrary  to  the  ends  and  purposes  of  all  government — a  power
to  surrender  the  liberties  of  their  country,  and  to  seal  the
slavery  of  future  generations.’ 1

The  publication  of  the  letters  to  Lord  Carlisle,  and  especially
of  the  confidential  passage  from  Portland’s  despatch  referred  to
in  the  foregoing  resolutions,  undoubtedly  added  largely  to  the
dangerous  excitement,  and  it  is  not,  I  think,  possible  to  justify  it.
The  mind  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  was  evidently  in  a  state  of  mor¬
bid  irritation,  which  was  probably  greatly  aggravated  by  the  fact
that  he  had  received  no  support  from  his  Whig  colleagues  in  the
Ministry  ;  and  though  he  disclaimed  the  publication,  these  letters
appear  to  have  been  widely  distributed  with  his  sanction.2  A
singularly  curious  letter,  written  on  the  day  of  his  departure,  to
Westmorland  by  the  Chancellor,  shows  vividly  the  indignation
this  publication  had  produced,  and  at  the  same  time  casts  some
light  on  the  meaning  of  the  Duke  of  Portland’s  words.  After
describing  the  departure  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  Fitzgibbon
proceeds  :  ‘  So  much  malignity  and  folly  and  falsehood,  and  such
notorious  violation  of  public  trust  and  private  faith,  never  have
been  exhibited  by  any  man  to  whom  the  management  of  a  great
kingdom  was  committed,  as  this  infatuated  man  has  manifested
in  these  letters  to  his  friend,  Lord  Carlisle.  In  one  of  these,
your  lordship  wdll  see,  he  has  published  a  very  serious  and  im¬
portant  passage  in  a  private  and  confidential  despatch,  as  he
candidly  states  it  to  be,  which  he  had  received  from  the  Duke  of
Portland — a  passage  intimating  broadly  his  opinion,  that  if  the

•  Seward’s  Collectanea  Pnlitica,  iii.  133—135.

*  JJcresford  Correspondence ,  ii.  88,  89,  118.

96

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

Catholic  claims  could  be  postponed  for  consideration  till  there
should  be  a  peace,  they  might  induce  the  Protestants  of  Ireland
to  consent  to  an  union  with  the  Parliament  of  England.  I  do
most  strongly  suspect  that  this  idea  was  drawn  out  from  the
Duke  of  Portland,  by  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s  representation  of  a  con¬
versation  which  I  had  with  him  upon  the  subject  of  his  popish
projects,  in  which  I  stated  to  him  distinctly  my  opinion  that  an
union  with  the  Parliament  of  England  was  the  only  measure
which  could  give  Great  Britain  a  chance  of  preserving  this  coun¬
try  as  a  member  of  the  Empire.  I  told  him,  however,  that  till
Great  Britain  was  at  peace,  and  we  had  a  strong  army  in  Ireland,
it  would  be  impossible  to  carry  such  a  measure,  however  necessary
it  might  be.  He  told  me,  more  than  a  month  since,  that  he  had
reported  my  opinions  on  this  subject  to  the  British  Government.1

The  signs  of  disaffection  were  so  menacing,  that  Fitzwilliam,
who  desired  immediately  to  leave  Ireland,  was  obliged,  at  the
urgent  request  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Irish  Government,
to  postpone  his  departure  for  a  fortnight,  as  it  was  represented
to  him  that  the  country  would  not  be  safe  in  the  weak  hands
of  the  lords  justices,  till  his  successor  arrived.2  He  at  first
peremptorily  refused  to  adjourn  the  Parliament ;  but  Fitzgibbon
declared  that  unless  such  an  adjournment  took  place,  he  would
not  be  responsible  for  twenty-four  hours,  for  the  government  of
Ireland.3  The  twenty-fifth  of  March,  when  he  sailed  for  England,
was  one  of  the  saddest  days  ever  known  in  Ireland.  The  shops
of  Dublin  were  shut.  All  business  was  suspended.  Signs  of
mourning  were  exhibited  on  every  side.  The  coach  of  the  Lord
Lieutenant  was  drawn  by  some  of  the  most  respectable  citizens
to  the  waterside,  and  the  shadow  of  coming  calamity  cast  its
gloom  upon  every  countenance.  It  was  indeed  but  too  well
justified.  From  that  time  the  spirit  of  sullen  and  virulent
disloyalty  overspread  the  land,  ‘  creeping,’  in  the  words  of
Grattan,  £  like  the  mist  at  the  heels  of  the  countryman.’

1  Fitzgibbon  to  Westmorland,
March  25,  1795  (I.S.P.O.).

2  Fitzwilliam  to  Portland,  March

7 ;  Fitzgibbon  to  Westmorland,
March  7,  1795.  Fitzgibbon  says

that  he  himself,  with  the  Primate  and
the  Speaker,  told  Fitzwilliam  that  the
state  of  the  country  was  too  dangerous
for  him  to  leave  it  till  his  successor

arrived.  On  receiving  a  written
opinion  from  Fitzgibbon  to  that  effect,
he  consented  to  delay  his  departure.

3  Fitzgibbon  to  Westmorland,
March  25,  1795.  The  Speaker,  the
Primate,  and  Pelham  (who  had  just
arrived)  supported  Fitzgibbon,  and
the  Parliament  was  accordingly  ad¬
journed  to  April  13.

cn  xxvi.

EFFECTS  OF  THE  RECALL.

97

It  has  been  strongly  maintained  by  some  modern  English
writers,  that  the  importance  of  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam
in  Irish  history  has  been  greatly  overrated.  That  some  exag¬
geration  mingled  with  the  first  excited  judgments  on  the  subject,
is  no  doubt  true,  and  something  of  it  may  have  passed  into
later  history.  Long  before  the  arrival  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  some
of  the  most  active  members  of  the  Catholic  Committee  were  in
full  sympathy  with  Wolfe  Tone,  and  in  large  districts  of  Ireland
the  Defender  movement  had  drawn  great  bodies  of  the  Catholic
peasantry  into  an  armed  organisation,  aiming  at  Whiteboy
objects,  but  already  looking  forward  to  French  assistance  and  in¬
vasion  as  the  means  of  attaining  them.  No  one  can  read  the
letters  of  Westmorland,  and  especially  of  Fitzwilliam,  without
perceiving  that  the  condition  of  Ireland  was  very  serious,  and
that  the  danger  would  have  been  extreme  if  a  French  army  had
succeeded  in  establishing  itself  firmly  on  the  soil,  and  had  pro¬
mised  the  abolition  of  tithes  and  the  subversion  of  the  existing
system  of  landed  property.  Lawlessness,  ignorance,  extreme
poverty,  and  a  complete  separation  in  character  and  sentiment  of
the  Catholic  tenantry  in  a  great  part  of  Ireland  from  the  owners  of
the  soil,  were  evils  on  which  Catholic  emancipation  could  have
had  little  direct  influence,  though  national  education,  and,  still
more,  a  commutation  of  tithes,  might  have  done  much  to  mitigate
them.  Under  any  circumstances,  the  condition  of  Ireland  in  the
last  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  must  have  been  exceedingly
dangerous.  Nothing  disorganizes  and  demoralises  a  country  in
which  there  are  great  internal  elements  of  disorder,  so  certainly
as  a  constant  menace  of  invasion,  prolonged  through  many  years  ;
and  the  situation  was  enormously  aggravated  by  the  fact,  that
the  probable  invaders  were  the  soldiers  of  a  great  and  contagious
Revolution,  whose  first  object  was  to  set  the  poor  against  the
rich,  to  sweep  away  established  churches,  and  to  destroy  the
whole  existing  distribution  of  property  and  power.  Ireland
was  full  of  sympathisers  with  this  Revolution,  and  no  moderate
reform  would  have  contented  them.  Whether  the  introduction
of  a  few  Catholic  gentry  into  the  Legislature,  and  the  moral
effect  of  the  abolition  of  religious  disabilities,  would  have
enabled  Ireland  successfully  to  meet  the  storm,  is  a  question
v  250

98

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI.

which  may  be  easily  asked,  hut  which  no  wise  man  will  confi¬
dently  answer.

It  appears  to  me,  however,  undoubtedly  true,  that  the  chances
were  immensely  diminished  by  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam.
Great  classes  who  were  as  yet  very  slightly  disaffected,  now
passed  rapidly  into  republicanism,  and  Catholic  opinion,  which
had  been  raised  to  the  highest  point  of  excited  hope,  experienced
a  complete,  a  sudden,  and  a  most  dangerous  revulsion.  The
recall  of  Fitzwilliam  may  be  justly  regarded  as  a  fatal  turning
point  in  Irish  history.  For  at  least  fifteen  years  before  it
occurred,  the  country,  in  spite  of  many  abuses  and  disturbances,
had  been  steadily  and  incontestably  improving.  Religious
animosities  appeared  to  have  almost  died  away.  Material  pros¬
perity  was  advancing  with  an  unprecedented  rapidity.  The
Constitution  in  many  important  respects  had  been  ameliorated,
and  the  lines  of  religious  disabilities  were  fast  disappearing  from
the  statute  book.  The  contagion  of  the  French  Revolution  had
produced  dangerous  organisations  in  the  North,  and  a  vague
restlessness  through  the  other  provinces,  but  up  to  this  time  it
does  not  appear  to  have  seriously  affected  the  great  body  of
Catholics,  and  Burke  was  probably  warranted  when,  in  estimat¬
ing  the  advantages  which  England  possessed  in  her  struggle
with  France,  he  gave  a  prominent  place  to  the  loyalty,  the
power,  and  the  opulence  of  Ireland.1  With  the  removal  of  the
few  remaining  religious  disabilities,  a  settlement  of  tithes,  and
a  moderate  reform  of  Parliament,  it  seemed  still  pi’obable  that
Ireland,  under  the  guidance  of  her  resident  gentry,  might  have
contributed  at  least  as  much  as  Scotland  to  the  prosperity  of  the
Empire.  But  from  the  day  when  Pitt  recalled  Lord  Fitzwilliam,
the  course  of  her  history  was  changed.  Intense  and  growing
hatred  of  England,  revived  religious  and  class  animosities,  a
savage  rebellion  savagely  repressed,  a  legislative  union  pre¬
maturely  and  corruptly  carried,  mark  the  closing  years  of  the
eighteenth  century,  and  after  ninety  years  of  direct  British
government,  the  condition  of  Ireland  is  universally  recognised
as  the  chief  scandal  and  the  chief  weakness  of  the  Empire.

1  First  Letter  on  a  Iiey  icide  Peace .

CH.  XXVII.

ARRIVAL  OF  CAMDEN.

99

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Lord  Camden  arrived  in  Ireland  on  March  31,  1795.  His
Chief  Secretary,  Pelham,  had  been  already  there  for  some  days,
and  the  state  of  the  country  was  so  evidently  dangerous,  that
there  were  great  fears  for  the  safety  of  the  viceroy  on  his  entry
into  Dublin.  In  consequence,  it  is  said,  of  secret  information
furnished  by  Francis  Higgins,  the  proprietor  of  the  ‘  Freeman’s
Journal,’  the  arrangements  for  the  entry  were  at  the  last  moment
changed,  and  it  was  deemed  a  matter  of  no  small  congratulation
that  the  procession  passed  almost  unmolested  through  the  streets.
When  Lord  Fitzgibbon  and  the  Primate  were  returning  from
the  Castle,  their  carriages  were  attacked  by  a  furious  mob,  and
the  Chancellor,  who  was  especially  obnoxious  to  the  popular
party,  was  wounded  by  a  stone,  which  struck  him  upon  the  fore¬
head.  The  riot  rapidly  spread.  The  mob  attacked  the  custom¬
house,  and  the  houses  of  the  Chancellor,  the  Primate,  the
Speaker,  and  Beresford.  It  was  found  necessary  to  call  out  the
soldiers,  and  two  men  were  killed.

It  was  an  ill-omened  beginning  of  a  disastrous  viceroyalty.
On  the  day  when  Grattan,  who  was  regarded  as  the  mouthpiece
of  the  Government  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  obtained  leave  to  bring
in  a  Bill  for  Catholic  emancipation,  the  loyalty  of  the  Catholic
population  seemed  to  rise  higher  than  it  had  ever  risen  since
the  Revolution,  and  it  was  believed  that  the  policy  of  religious
disqualification  was  for  ever  at  an  end.  On  the  day  when  the
English  Government  disavowed  the  acts  of  its  Irish  representa¬
tives,  recalled  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  and  again  brought  to  the  helm
the  most  violent  opponents  of  the  Catholics,  a  cloud  seemed
to  fall  on  the  spirit  of  the  nation  which  has  never  been  removed.
Just  before  the  arrival  of  Camden,  Pelham  wrote  to  England  that
he  had  received  very  alarming  accounts  of  the  proceedings  of  the

100

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

Catholic  Committee.  A  select  and  secret  committee,  consisting
of  a  very  few,  and  entrusted  with  a  larger  power,  was  forming,
and  they  were  to  be  bound  by  an  oath  of  secrecy  and  perseve¬
rance.  c  It  is  said/  he  continued,  ‘  that  upon  a  closer  investigation
of  their  strength  and  influence  upon  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitz-
william,  they  [the  Catholic  Committee]  are  led  to  despair  of
anything  effectual  without  the  assistance  of  the  French,  and  it
is  seriously  in  their  contemplation  to  send  an  embassy  to  Paris,
if  the  Catholic  question  should  be  lost  in  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment.’  1

The  replies  of  Grattan  to  the  numerous  addresses  presented
to  him  were  eagerly  scanned.  They  were  marked  by  a  great
deal  of  that  strained  and  exaggerated  mannerism  of  expression
which  was  habitual  to  him,  and  they  speak  in  no  doubtful  tones
of  his  indignation  at  what  had  occurred ;  but  they  were,  at  the
same  time,  in  substance  eminently  moderate,  and  evidently  in¬
tended  to  maintain  the  Catholics  in  their  allegiance.  Their  true
policy,  he  told  them,  was  to  maintain  strictly  their  union  with
Protestants,  and  to  press  on  their  claims  steadily  within  the  lines
of  the  Constitution.  ‘  Your  emancipation  will  pass,’  he  said,

‘  rely  on  it,  your  emancipation  must  pass ;  it  may  be  death  to  one
viceroy  ;  it  will  be  the  peace-offering  of  another,  and  the  laurel
may  be  torn  from  the  dead  brow  of  one  governor  to  be  craftily
converted  into  the  olive  for  his  successor.’  If,  however,  the  old
‘  taskmasters  ’  and  the  old  system  of  government  were  restored,
he  predicted  that  they  would  ‘  extinguish  this  country.’  He
asserted  that  the  public  measures  of  the  late  administration,  and
especially  that  which  was  now  disputed,  had  been  stipulated  and
agreed  to,  and  he  pledged  himself  to  bring  in  the  Emancipation
Bill  of  which  he  had  given  notice.  Language  was  employed,
which  excited  much  alarm  among  the  English  Ministers,  about
the  independence  of  the  Irish  Cabinet  as  a  body  responsible
directly  to  the  King,  and  not  a  mere  subordinate  department  of
the  English  Ministry.

It  had  been  one  of  the  great  misfortunes  of  the  English
Government  that,  during  a  considerable  period  of  its  history,  it
had  been  either  compelled  or  persuaded  to  adopt  as  its  method
of  managing  Ireland,  the  worst  of  all  expedients,  that  of  endea-
1  Pelham  to  Portland,  March  30,  1795.

ch.  xxvu.  ANTI-CATHOLIC  APPEALS.  101

vouring  to  inflame  tlie  animosities  and  deepen  the  divisions  be¬
tween  the  Protestants  and  Catholics.  This  was  the  policy  of
Cromwell,  and  it  was  the  policy  which  was  systematically  pursued
for  a  long  period  after  the  Revolution.  The  exclusion  of  Catholics
by  an  English  Act  from  the  Irish  Parliament ;  the  lament  of
Bishop  Burnet  that  the  division  of  Whig  and  Tory  was  begin¬
ning  to  appear  in  a  country  where  the  sole  divisions  had  hitherto
been  those  between  Protestants  and  Papists ; 1  the  habitual
employment  by  the  governors  of  Ireland,  in  the  early  years  of
the  eighteenth  century,  of  the  terms  1  common  enemy  ’  and
‘  domestic  enemies  ’  when  speaking  of  the  Roman  Catholics,
clearly  indicate  a  policy  which  was  steadily  carried  out.  For  a
long  time,  as  we  have  already  seen,  this  spirit  had  almost  wholly
passed  away.  The  relations  of  the  English  Government  to  the
Irish  Catholics  had  become  very  friendly.  The  penal  laws  had
for  the  most  part  fallen  into  desuetude  before  they  had  been
formally  abolished,  and  the  influence  of  English  Ministers  had
been  usually  exerted  in  favour  of  the  Catholics.  The  declara¬
tions  of  the  grand  juries  in  1792  against  the  admission  of  the
Catholics  to  political  power  had,  no  doubt,  been  chiefly  inspired
by  men  who  were  high  in  office  in  Ireland,  but  this  was  at  a
time  when  the  Irish  Administration  on  this  very  question  was
endeavouring  to  defeat  the  tolerant  views  of  the  English  Cabinet.
On  the  accession  of  Lord  Camden,  however,  a  great  and  most
pernicious  change  took  place.  The  English  Cabinet  had  deter¬
mined  to  resist  the  emancipation  of  the  Catholics,  contrary  to
the  dominant  sentiments  of  the  Irish  Protestants,  and  it  there¬
fore  directed  its  Irish  representatives  to  endeavour  to  kindle  an
anti-Catholic  feeling  in  Ireland,  and  exert  its  enormous  influence
to  organise  an  Irish  party  of  resistance.

The  secret  instructions  to  Lord  Camden  clearly  indicate
this  intention.  The  policy,  the  Duke  of  Portland  said,  which
Lord  Fitzwilliam  ought  to  have  pursued,  was  to  have  prevented
if  possible  the  Catholic  question  from  being  agitated  at  all,  and
if  this  proved  impossible,  to  have  collected  the  opinions  of  all
parties,  on  the  subject,  for  the  information  of  the  Ministers,  and
to  have  awaited  their  decision  before  committing  himself  in  any
way  upon  it.  ‘  Although  the  business  is  far  from  being  in  the
1  Burnet’s  History  of  his  own  Times,  ii.  360.

102

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvu.

same  state,  the  outline  which  I  have  to  mark  out  for  your  lord¬
ship’s  conduct  must  be  the  same,  as  nearly  as  circumstances
will  admit.’  The  agitation  of  the  question  cannot  now  be  pre¬
vented,  but  the  Lord  Lieutenant  must  endeavour  to  convince
the  most  important  persons,  that  the  contemplated  concessions
must  be  either  subversive  of  the  Protestant  establishment,  or
else  wholly  insignificant.  He  must  do  his  utmost  to  rally  the
Protestant  interest  against  the  concessions.  He  must  hold  a
firm  and  decided  language  of  hostility  to  them,  but  he  must
also  tell  the  Protestants  that,  without  their  concurrence,  the
Government  cannot  effectually  resist ;  that,  with  their  concur¬
rence,  the  Government  ‘  will  be  ready  to  make  every  exertion
they  can  desire,  to  prevent  the  admission  of  Catholics  to  seats  in
the  Legislature.’

Such  instructions,  in  the  existing  state  of  Ireland,  meant
nothing  less  than  a  revival  of  the  old  religious  warfare.  They
meant  that,  while  the  United  Irishmen  were  seeking  to  obliterate
the  distinction  between  Protestant  and  Catholic,  the  English
Government,  in  order  to  perpetuate  a  system  of  proscription,
were  endeavouring  to  make  that  distinction  indelible,  and  to
stimulate  and  manipulate  Protestant  jealousies.  The  extreme
centralisation  of  Irish  administration  had  placed  most  posts  of  in¬
fluence  and  power  in  a  few  easily  managed  hands,  and  the  whole
machinery  was  to  be  worked  in  hostility  to  the  Catholics.  If
Lord  Camden  was  convinced  that  resistance  would  be  dangerous
or  ineffectual,  he  must  even  then  abstain  from  taking  any  step  in
favour  of  concession  till  he  had  received  explicit  instructions
from  England,  and  he  must  not  suffer  anyone  connected  with
his  Government  to  bring  forward  or  to  countenance  any  measure
which  had  not  been  expressly  sanctioned.

While,  however,  the  Lord  Lieutenant  was  directed  to  place
himself  at  the  head  of  the  Protestant  interest,  and  to  adopt  a
policy  of  open,  energetic,  and  uncompromising  resistance  to
Catholic  emancipation,  he  was  also,  as  far  as  it  could  be  done
consistently  with  this  course,  to  conciliate  the  Catholics,  and  for
this  purpose  Portland  suggested  measures  which  had  been  already
mentioned  to  Lord  Fitzwilliam.  These  measures  were,  the  esta¬
blishment  of  seminaries  for  the  education  of  priests,  and  a  pro¬
vision  for  the  parochial  clergy,  by  which  they  might  be  relieved

CH.  XXVII.

LETTERS  OF  FITZGJBBON.

103

from  their  present  state  of  dependence,  and  their  parishioners
from  a  portion  of  the  burden  to  which  they  were  subject.  ‘  If
beside  these,’  wrote  the  English  Minister,  1  any  mode  should
occur  to  your  lordship,  by  which  the  education  of  the  lower
ranks  of  the  Catholics  could  be  facilitated,  so  as  to  put  them  in
that  respect  on  a  par  with  their  Protestant  brethren,  your  lord-
ship  may  be  sure  of  the  fullest  countenance  and  support  of  the
Government.’

On  the  constitutional  question,  he  speaks  with  no  faltering
accents.  ‘  A  notion  has  arisen  within  these  few  years,  and  has
latterly  but  too  generally  prevailed,  of  the  propriety  of  the  exist¬
ence  of  an  Irish  Cabinet.  I  therefore  think  it  necessary  to  pro¬
test,  and  caution  your  lordship  against  it,  in  the  strongest  and
most  explicit  terms,  for  to  me  it  appears  unconstitutional  in  the
highest  degree,  and  directly  subversive  of  English  government,
and  of  the  unity  of  the  British  Empire.’  It  would  annihilate
the  responsibility  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  to  the  English  Govern¬
ment,  and  would  ‘  more  immediately  tend  to  the  separation  of
the  two  countries,  and  the  introduction  of  anarchy  into  Ireland,
than  any  other  means  that  could  be  devised.’ 1

In  the  confidential  correspondence  of  Pelham,  there  are
three  letters,  written  at  this  time,  which  throw  a  considerable
though  casual  light  upon  the  feelings,  motives,  and  divisions  of
the  principal  actors  in  this  obscure  period  of  political  history.
The  first  tells  very  plainly  its  own  tale,  and  it  is  a  tale  of  deep
significance  in  Irish  history.  ‘  I  cannot  but  inform  you,’  wrote
Portland,  ‘  for  the  purpose  of  putting  you  upon  your  guard,  that
we  have  learnt  from  the  most  unquestionable  authority,  that  a
correspondence  has  been  carried  on,  or  at  least  letters  have  been
written  by  Lord  Fitzgibbon  to  the  King  (to  whom  they  have
been  delivered  by  Lord  Westmorland),  with  a  view,  and  with
more  effect  than  could  be  wished,  to  prejudice  his  mind  and  to
alarm  his  conscience  against  the  concession  to  the  Catholics.  I
don’t  know  how  your  friend  Pitt  feels  this,  but  if  this  is  to  be
the  practice,  no  Government  can  go  on  in  Ireland,  and  I  believe
there  are  not  two  opinions  in  the  greatest  part  of  the  Cabinet
respecting  it.’ 2

1  Portland  to  Camden,  March  26,  1795  (secret).  The  words  in  italics

1795.  are  underlined  in  the  original.

2  Portland  to  Pelham,  March  21,

104

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

A  second  letter  seems  to  me  clearly  to  show,  that  Pitt  was  full
of  grave  doubts  and  forebodings  about  the  policy  he  was  pur¬
suing.  Portland  mentions,  that  he  had  been  present  at  a  meet¬
ing  at  Lord  Grenville’s,  £  for  the  purpose  of  finally  settling  the
minutes  of  the  conversation  which  passed  at  Mr.  Pitt’s  seme
time  previous  to  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s  departure.’  ‘  I  found  Mr.
Pitt  and  Mr.  W.’  [Windham],  he  says,  ‘  full  of  apprehensions,  and
gloom.  I  communicated  to  them  both  your  letters,  revived  their
spirits,  and  created  in  them  both  a  degree  of  confidence  which  I
think  even  Pitt  was  much  further  from  feeling  at  my  entering
the  room,  than  I  have  almost  ever  observed  upon  any  former  oc¬
casion.  He  caught  with  some  sort  of  avidity  at  the  opinion
expressed  by  the  Chancellor  and  Speaker  on  the  subject  of  the
Catholic  question,  but  soon  abandoned  it,  on  its  being  observed
that  some  allowance  was  to  be  made  in  the  weight  of  their
opinions,  for  the  known  prejudices  of  the  persons  by  whom  they
were  given.’  In  the  same  letter  the  duke  adds,  that  he  had
heard  from  Ireland,  ‘that  the  idea  of  Grattan's  being  sacrificed
and  made  a  scapegoat  has  been  very  generally  and  industriously
circulated,’  and  he  adds  somewhat  ambiguously,  £  after  what  you
tell  me,  I  see  Grattan  is  not  less  an  Irishman  than  the  rest  of  his
countrymen.’ 1

A  third  letter  shows  the  anxiety  of  at  least  one  of  the  ablest
members  of  the  Cabinet  to  minimise,  as  much  as  possible,  the
effects  of  the  change  of  Government  in  Ireland,  and  to  prevent
it  from  assuming,  either  in  reality  or  in  appearance,  the  cha¬
racter  of  a  complete  change  of  system.  The  writer  was  Wind¬
ham.  £  It  is  my  earnest  hope,’  he  wrote,  £  that  you  will  still  be
able  to  preserve  a  good  intelligence  with  Grattan,  and  to  satisfy
him  that  both  in  respect  to  men  and  measures,  except  in  the
single  point  of  an  immediate  and  unlimited  concession  to  the
Catholics,  Lord  Camden’s  Government  will  be  such  as  he  will
not  feel  it  necessary  to  be  in  opposition  to.  You  will  then,  I
think,  be  of  opinion  that  it  is  a  debt  due  in  justice  to  Grattan,
not  to  suffer  the  consequences  of  his  fairness  and  real  regard  for
the  public  welfare  to  operate  to  his  disadvantage,  nor  pass  in  the
eyes  of  the  world  as  a  want  of  power,  rather  than  as  a  want  of
will,  to  do  mischief.  I  say  this,  because  in  the  minds  of  some  of
1  Portland  to  Pelham,  March  28,  1795.

CH.  XXVII,

LETTER  OE  WINDHAM.

105

our  friends  on  this  side  of  the  water,  justice  is  not  done  to  him
in  that  respect,  nor  sufficient  credit  given  him — at  least,  as  I
have  sometimes  thought — for  that  forbearance  which  he  mani¬
fested  during  all  the  latter  period  of  Lord  Westmorland’s  ad¬
ministration.  Few  public  men  have,  to  my  mind,  given  such  an
honourable  proof  of  their  willingness  to  sacrifice  even  their  im¬
mediate  political  consequence — the  last  sacrifice  that  such  men
are  in  general  willing  to  make — to  the  general  interests  of  the
country.  ...  A  steady  hand  held  by  Lord  Camden  between  the
two  parties,  with  a  turn  even  of  the  scale  in  favour  of  those
newly  ejected  .  .  .  joined  to  a  pure  and  upright  system  of
government,  will,  I  am  persuaded,  disarm  the  hostile  dispositions
that  may  be  at  present  felt,  and  place  Mr.  Grattan  in  a  situation
in  which  at  worst  he  may  think  it  sufficient  to  preserve  a  sort
of  armed  truce.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  bear  the  thought  of
being  on  any  other  terms  with  him,  than  those  of  confidence  and
co-operation  in  the  great  cause  to  which  he  has  shown  himself
so  truly  attached.  ...  I  should  be  sorry  to  have  him  suppose
that  anythiug  that  has  passed,  or  anything  that  I  am  persuaded
can  pass,  can  .  .  .  make  me  otherwise  than  ambitious  of  his
friendship  and  good  opinion.’1

It  was  decided  that  Parliament  should  meet  without  any
speech  from  the  throne,  and  that  no  explanation  should  be
given  of  the  passage  from  the  confidential  despatch  cited  by
Fitzwilliam,  which  wras  generally  interpreted  as  pointing  to  an
union.  The  silence  maintained  by  Portland  on  this  subject,  in
private  as  well  as  in  public,  is  a  strong  presumption  that  this  in¬
terpretation  was  a  correct  one,  and  it  is  difficult  on  any  other
supposition  to  find  any  sufficient  explanation  for  his  conduct  to¬
wards  the  Catholics  and  towards  Fitzwilliam.  Two  or  three
passages  from  the  first  letters  of  Camden  and  Pelham,  show  that
they  were  aware  of  the  danger  of  the  task  they  had  undertaken,
though  they  had  great  hopes  of  surmounting  it.  ‘  The  quiet  of
the  country  depends  upon  the  exertions  of  the  friends  of  the
established  Government,  backed  by  a  strong  military  force.’  ‘  I
confess,  I  am  more  alarmed  at  the  general  want  of  attachment  to
Government,  than  at  any  consequences  that  may  arise  from  any
violent  or  bigoted  attachment  to  religious  opinions.’  ‘  All  will
1  Windham  to  Pelham,  April  21, 1725.

10G  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cn.  xxvii.

be  quiet  if  there  is  no  invasion,  and  if  troops  are  immediately
sent.’  But  reinforcements  must  on  no  account  be  delayed.
Government  could  easily  obtain  enough  parliamentary  support
to  secure  the  rejection  of  the  Catholic  Bill,  and  the  better  Catho¬
lics  have  no  wish  to  embarrass  the  administration.  The  danger
lies  chiefly  in  ‘  the  correspondences  which  persons  of  another
description  have  established  throughout  the  whole  country.
These  persons  are  connected  with,  and  directed  by,  the  Society
of  United  Irishmen,  who,  to  promote  their  own  views,  have
chosen  that  Catholic  emancipation  (as  it  is  termed  by  them)
should  become  the  watchword  of  their  party.’  '

Parliament  met  on  April  13.  The  customary  congratulatory
address  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  passed  without  a  division,  though
Grattan  expressed  his  personal  dissent,  speaking,  as  Lord  Cam¬
den  noticed,  ‘  moderately  and  civilly,  and  with  great  temper.’
On  the  21st,  however,  he  moved  for  a  Committee  on  the  State  of
the  Nation,  and  a  debate  ensued,  in  which  the  whole  question  of
the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  discussed.  Grattan  professed
himself  unable  to  fathom  the  real  motives  of  that  measure,  but
he  asserted  that  the  removal  of  certain  officials,  and  the  accept¬
ance  of  Catholic  emancipation,  which  were  the  reasons  alleged,
had  both  been  clearly  stipulated  before  the  Government  was
formed.  Portland  had  formally  declared  to  those  whose  support
in  Ireland  he  solicited,  that  he  had  ‘  accepted  office  principally
with  a  view  to  reform  the  abuses  in  the  Government  of  Ireland,
that  the  system  of  that  Government  was  execrable,  so  execrable
as  to  threaten  not  only  Ireland  with  the  greatest  misfortune,  but
ultimately  the  Empire,’  and  that  he  would  have  himself  gone
over,  if  he  had  not  persuaded  Lord  Fitzwilliam  to  accept  the
chief  post  in  the  Government  of  Ireland  with  the  object  of
reforming  its  manifold  abuses.  Portland  had  assured  his  sup¬
porters,  that  he  had  obtained  1  extraordinary  power  ’  with  re¬
ference  to  Ireland.  He  had  consulted  members  of  the  Irish
Opposition,  touching  his  arrangements  of  men  and  measures.
He  had  sanctioned  ‘those  principal  removals  which  are  supposed
to  have  occasioned  the  recall  of  the  deputy.  An  explanation
and  limitation  of  his  powers  did,  indeed,  afterwards  take  place,
but  no  such  limitation  or  explanation  as  to  defeat  either  the
1  Camden  to  Portland,  April  6,  7 ;  Pelham  to  Portland,  April  6,  1795.

CH.  XXVII.

DEBATE  ON  THE  EEC  ALL.

107

stipulated  measures  or  tlie  stipulated  removals,  one  only  ex¬
cepted,1  which  never  took  place.’

As  to  the  Catholic  question,  Grattan  and  his  friends  had
repeatedly  declared  that  they  never  would  support  a  Government
that  would  resist  Catholic  emancipation,  though  they  had  ac¬
quiesced  in  the  decision  of  the  Cabinet  that  the  Bill  should  not
be  introduced  by  Ministers.  Their  support  of  the  administra¬
tion  had  been  the  result  of  {  a  precise  engagement,’  that  ‘  if  the
Catholics  insisted  to  carry  forward  their  Bill,  Government  would
give  it  a  handsome  support.’  ‘  Not  to  bring  it  forward  as  a
Government  measure,  but  if  Government  were  pressed,  to  yield
it  ’ — these,  Grattan  afterwards  said,  were  the  very  words  of  Pitt
when  speaking  to  him  on  the  Catholic  Bill.2

He  enumerated  several  measures  of  reform  which  had  been
intended  by  the  administration  of  Fitzwilliam,  some  of  which
had  actually  been  introduced.  They  comprised  a  simplification
and  completion  of  Lord  Westmorland’s  measure  for  relieving  the
poorest  classes  from  the  hearth  tax,  an  attempt  to  diminish
drunkenness  by  increasing  the  duties  on  spirits  and  removing
those  on  beer,  a  plan  of  education,  a  more  equal  trade  between
England  and  Ireland,  a  reform  in  the  system  of  the  Dublin
police,  a  more  stringent  regulation  of  the  public  expenditure.
The  United  Irishmen  remarked  with  some  bitterness  that
parliamentary  reform  had  no  place  in  this  catalogue,3  and  it  is
evident  that  no  power  had  as  yet  been  given  to  concede  it,  but
it  was  almost  certain  soon  to  follow  Catholic  emancipation.
The  Ministers  refused  all  detailed  explanations,  alleging  that
the  King  had  an  undoubted  right  to  recall  a  Lord  Lieutenant,
and  that  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  his  Secretary  act  under
written  instructions  from  the  Cabinet.  In  his  reply,  Grattan,
while  admitting  that  there  must  be  a  close  correspondence
between  the  executives  in  England  and  Ireland,  denied  that  the
viceroy’s  function  was  simply  to  obey  orders,  and  to  be  the
agent  of  the  English  Cabinet.  He  was  the  representative  of
the  King,  and  not  of  the  Ministry.  It  was  becoming  the  custom
to  establish  in  Ireland  ‘  a  monarchy  of  clerks,  a  government  carried
on  by  post,  and  under  the  dominion  of  spies,’  ‘  a  system  where

3  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  His¬
tory,  p.  97.

1  Fitzgibbon.

2  Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  177.

108

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxtii.

the  clerks  dominated,  and  their  betters  obeyed.’  c  The  Cabinet
had  heard  appeals  against  the  Lord  Lieutenant  from  the  persons
removed,  and  tried  unsummoned,  on  the  testimony  of  partial
witnesses,  the  representative  of  the  King.’  This  was  at  least  one
cause  of  the  recent  recall.  ‘It  is  a  matter  of  melancholy  reflection,
to  consider  how  little  the  Cabinet  knows  of  anything  relating  to
Ireland.  Ireland  is  a  subject  it  considers  with  a  lazy  contumely,
and  picks  up  here  and  there,  by  accident  or  design,  interested
and  erroneous  intelligence.’

The  statements  of  Grattan  about  the  terms  on  which  the
Irish  Whigs  had  agreed  to  support  the  administration  of  Lord
Fitzwilliam,  were  fully  confirmed  by  the  two  Ponsonbys.  The
concluding  speech  of  Gi’attan  had  such  an  effect,  that  the
galleries  burst  into  uncontrollable  applause,  and  the  House  was
cleared,  but  it  had  no  appreciable  influence  upon  the  vote,  and
his  motion  was  rejected  by  158  to  48.1

The  second  reading  of  the  Catholic  Bill  came  on  for  discus¬
sion  on  May  4,  and  the  debate  which  ensued  lasted  during  the
entire  night,  and  only  terminated  at  ten  o’clock  on  the  morning
of  the  5th.  It  shows  with  a  painful  vividness  the  character  of  the
Irish  House  of  Commons — a  body  which  contained  a  group  of
statesmen  who  in  ability,  patriotism,  and  knowledge  would  have
done  honour  to  any  legislature,  but  also  a  body  in  which  elo¬
quence  and  argument  dashed  uselessly  and  impotently  against  a
great  purchased  majority.  ‘  In  1792/  said  Parsons,  ‘  a  majority
decided  against  giving  any  further  privileges  to  the  Catholics.
In  1793  the  same  majority  passed  the  Catholic  Bill.  At  the
beginning  of  this  session,  everyone  believed  that  a  majority  would
have  voted  for  this  Bill.  Everyone  believes  that  a  majority  will
vote  against  it  now,  and  should  the  English  Ministers  in  the
next  session  wish  it  to  pass,  who  does  not  believe  that  a  majority
will  vote  for  it  ?  Besides,  if  the  English  Ministry  should  be
changed,  an  event  perhaps  not  very  remote,  this  Bill  would  be
immediately  adopted.’  The  absolute  necessity  of  completing,  by
a  final  abolition  of  disqualifications,  the  legislation  of  1774,
1778,  1782,  1792,  and  1793,  was  abundantly  shown.  It  was
argued,  once  more,  that  as  certainly  as  the  concession  of  landed
property  in  1778  and  1782  led  to  the  concession  of  the  suffrao-e

1  Pari.  Deb.  xv.  165-192.

CH.  XXVII.

THE  CATHOLIC  BILL.

10D

which  is  attached  to  this  kind  of  property,  so  certainly  the  right
of  voting  must  lead  to  the  right  of  sitting  in  the  House;  that,  for  the
sake  of  excluding  from  political  power  afew  highly  educated,  able,
and  loyal  men,  distinguished  beyond  all  others  for  their  hatred  to
revolution  and  attachment  to  hereditary  monarchy,  the  Govern¬
ment  were  rapidly  throwing  the  bulk  of  the  Catholics  into  the  arms
of  a  revolutionary  democracy ;  that  the  policy  of  relaxation  had
already  gone  so  far,  that  the  remaining  disqualifications  were
impotent  to  restrain,  and  only  powerful  to  irritate  and  to  insult.
Catholics  were  already  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  they  could  not  be
King’s  counsel  or  judges.  They  were  admitted  in  the  army  even
to  the  command  of  regiments,  but  they  might  not  rise  to  the  rank
of  general.  They  were  admitted  to  the  subordinate  revenue  offices,
but  not  to  the  higher  office  of  commissioner.  They  were  given  the
right  of  voting  for  members  of  Parliament,  but  they  could  not  be
members  of  Parliament  themselves.  They  were  allowed  to  become
a  great  power  in  the  State,  but  they  were  still  treated  as  separate,
hostile,  and  inferior.  And  these  disqualifications  were  maintained
in  a  time  of  revolution  and  of  war,  when  the  army,  the  navy,  and
the  militia  were  crowded  with  Catholics,  and  when  England  was
in  close  alliance  with  the  most  Catholic  Powers  of  the  Continent.

The  fatal  consequences  that  would  inevitably  follow  the  re¬
jection  of  the  Bill,  were  most  clearly  seen.  The  policy  of  the
statesmen  of  the  Revolution,  argued  George  Knox,  in  an  admi¬
rable  speech,  was  from  their  own  point  of  view  perfectly  con¬
sistent.  Believing  it  necessary  to  keep  the  Catholics  in  a  con¬
dition  of  impotence,  they  very  prudently  deprived  them  of  edu¬
cation  and  property ;  and  they  established  by  such  means  an
undisturbed  Protestant  ascendency,  but  £  sank  this  country  below
the  political  horizon,  in  order  that  they  might  exclusively  possess
its  eminences.’  For  good  or  for  ill,  that  policy  has  been  irrevo¬
cably  abandoned.  The  Irish  Parliament  justly  thought  that  ‘  we
could  not  be  a  powerful,  prosperous,  and  happy  people,  if  three-
fourths  of  us  were  ignorant  and  beggars.’  It  ‘  opened  the  gates
of  knowledge  and  opulence,’  and  by  doing  so,  it  created  in
Ireland  ‘unexampled  and  rapidly  increasing  prosperity,’  and
‘  discovered  with  what  usury  protected  and  enfranchised  industry
repays  its  obligations.’  But  politically  this  enfranchisement
was  an  act  of  infatuation  or  madness,  unless  it  is  carried  further.

110

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

‘  The  great  body  of  the  people  is  Catholic.  Much  of  the  real,
and  no  small  share  of  the  personal,  property  of  the  country  is  in
Catholic  hands.  The  lower  class,  ignorant  and  turbulent,  are  fit
instruments  in  the  hands  of  irritated  and  unsubdued  ambition.
In  a  few  years,  if  trade  increases,  the  Catholics  must  possess
almost  a  monopoly  of  the  personal  wealth  of  the  kingdom,  a
control,  therefore,  over  the  numerous  class  of  manufacturers  and
mechanics — a  description  of  people  the  most  prone  to  turbulence.
...  If  we  drive  the  rich  Catholic  from  the  Legislature  and  from
our  own  society,  we  force  him  to  attach  himself  to  the  needy
and  disaffected.  We  oblige  him,  if  pride  and  ambition  have
their  usual  operation,  to  breed  and  nourish  discontent,  and  keep
alive  a  religious  quarrel.’  It  is  impossible  that  the  question  can
rest  there.  ‘  Take,  then,  your  choice  ;  re-enact  your  penal  laws,
risk  a  rebellion,  a  separation,  or  an  Union,  or  pass  this  Bill ;  for
the  hour  is  nearly  arrived  when  we  must  decide.  The  hour  is
already  come  when  we  ought  to  decide.  .  .  .  There  are  objections
to  it  not  to  be  overlooked ;  but  the  dangers  which  would  follow
its  rejection  are  inevitable  and  tremendous,  being  rooted  in  the
very  nature  of  men  and  of  society,  and  those  to  which  its  reception
exposes  us  are  doubtful,  distant,  and  avertible.  .  .  .  Let  us  not
delay  that  entire  political  union  on  which  without  doors  all
ranks  are  now  agreed.  ...  If  we  continue  to  exclude  and
irritate  the  Catholic,  we  can  have  no  real  security  against  the
subversion  of  property  and  religion,  but  an  unconditional  sub¬
mission  to  Great  Britain,  and  a  resignation  of  the  crown  of
Ireland  into  the  hands  of  the  British  Parliament.  But  if
we  adopt  the  measure  now,  we  shall  gradually  liberalise  the
Catholic  gentry ;  they  will  see  how  much  their  property,  their
liberty,  and  their  lives  depend  upon  the  Constitution  ;  how  much
that  Constitution  depends  upon  our  connection  with  Great  Bri¬
tain,  and  how  much  that  connection  rests  on  the  uniformity  of
the  State  religion.’

‘  We  shall  admit  the  Catholic,’  he  continued.  ‘I  foresee  it
well.  But  we  shall  withhold  that  admission  so  long,  that  at
length  we  shall  give  without  generosity  what  will  be  received
without  gratitude;  we  shall  yield,  not  to  reason,  but  to  clamour;
what  ought  to  be  the  result  of  wisdom  and  reflection,  will  be  the
work  of  panic  and  precipitation ;  and  that  day  which  shall  record

CH.  XXVII.

PONSONBY  AND  O'CONNOR.

Ill

..  the  last  triumph  of  the  Constitution  will  be  to  us  a  day  of
humiliation  and  disgrace.’

George  Ponsonby,  who  had  been  designated  by  Fitzwilliam
for  the  post  of  Attorney-General,  and  whom  Fitzwilliam  had
pronounced  to  be  the  ablest  debater  after  Grattan  in  the  House
of  Commons,  reminded  the  House  with  great  bitterness  that  the
fluctuation  of  the  Government  was  no  new  thing,  and  that  it
had  been  already  abundantly  shown  in  1792  and  1793.  ‘We
have  seen,’  he  said,  ‘  an  administration  encourage  the  Protestant
against  the  Catholic  pretensions.  We  have  seen  the  same  ad¬
ministration  excite  the  claims  of  those  same  Catholics,  and  ulti¬
mately  we  have  seen  that  very  administration,  after  having  alter¬
nately  encouraged  each  party  against  the  other,  pass  a  Bill  in
favour  of  those  Catholics,  in  opposition  to  the  sentiments  of  the
Protestants,  which  that  administration  had  excited.’  He  entirely
disbelieved  that  the  last  change  was  due  to  any  conscientious
scruples,  or  to  any  fear  of  danger  from  Catholic  members  of  Par¬
liament.  The  Catholic  question  was  made  use  of,  he  believed,
either  to  colour  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  or  to  keep  the
country  weak  by  keeping  it  divided.  The  argument  from  the
coronation  oath,  which  had  suddenly  risen  to  an  extraordinary
prominence,  he  treated  with  the  contempt  of  a  sound  constitu¬
tional  lawyer.  The  oath  was  enacted  before  the  laws  were
passed  which  this  Bill  would  repeal.  It  did  not  bind  the  King
to  refuse  his  assent  to  laws  that  might  be  enacted,  but  merely  to
execute  those  laws  which  were,  or  should  be  enacted,  to  preserve
the  Protestant  religion.  ‘  Could  any  gentleman  seriously  be¬
lieve  that  this  oath  tied  up  the  King  in  his  legislative  capacity?
It  would  be  a  strange  constitution,  indeed,  which  could  be  guilty
of  such  an  absurdity.  Unquestionably,  it  was  in  his  executive
capacity  only  that  this  oath  restrained  him.  No  men  were  ever
so  preposterous  as  to  think  of  binding  up  one  branch  of  the
legislature,  by  oath,  to  all  futurity.’

One  of  the  most  remarkable  speeches  in  this  debate  was  de¬
livered  by  Arthur  O’Connor.  Like  Emmet,  McNevin,  and  Fitz¬
gerald,  he  had  not  yet  joined  the  United  Irishmen;1  but  he  was
already  at  heart  a  rebel ;  his  speech  is  in  a  different  key  from
the  others  that  have  been  quoted,  and  it  shows  clearly  both  the
1  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  i.  309,  359.

112

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

influence  of  the  new  French  ideas,  and  the  process  by  which  so
many  were  now  passing  rapidly  into  rebellion.  A  great  part  of
it  consisted  of  rhetorical  but  powerful  descriptions  of  the  abuses
which  had  made  Irish  representation  the  monopoly  of  a  few
families;  of  the  steady  evanescence  throughout  Europe  of  cleri¬
cal  influence  and  intolerant  restrictions  ;  of  the  effects  of  the
exaggerated  and  ill-portioned  endowments  of  the  Established
Church,  in  diverting  clergymen  from  parochial  duties,  and  turn¬
ing  them,  to  the  great  injury  not  only  of  religion,  but  of  morals,
into  mere  men  of  fashion  and  pleasure.  ‘  It  is  no  longer  a
secret,’  he  said,  ‘  that  the  men  who  oppose  the  abolition  of
religious  distinctions  in  our  civil  and  military  concerns,  when
the  general  voice  of  the  nation  has  concurred  in  so  wise,  so  just,
and  so  politic  a  measure,  are  the  men  who  usurp  the  wThole
political  power  of  the  country,  and  who  have  converted  the
whole  representation  of  Ireland  into  a  family  patrimony.’  But
if  the  people  of  this  country  are  convinced  that  the  Constitution
of  1782,  which  they  so  highly  prized,  ‘has  been  destroyed  by
the  bribery  of  a  British  Minister,  and  the  unexampled  venality
of  an  Irish  Parliament;’  if  they  are  convinced  ‘that,  instead  of
reciprocal  advantage,  nothing  is  to  be  reaped  from  their  con¬
nection  with  England  but  supremacy  and  aggrandisement  on
the  one  side,  and  a  costly  venality,  injury,  insult,  degradation,
and  poverty  on  the  other,’  is  it  not  inevitable  that  they  will
begin  to  seek  for  foreign  alliances  against  the  connection?  This,
said  O’Connor,  is  the  true  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  mission
of  Jackson,  and  from  the  papers  that  were  found  in  his  pos¬
session.  The  time  is  past,  and  past  for  ever,  when  public
opinion  would  torpidly  acquiesce  in  political  monopolies  and
religious  disqualifications.  ‘  Do  not  imagine  that  the  mind  of
your  countrymen  has  been  stationary,  while  that  of  all  Europe
has  been  rapidly  progressive  ;  for  you  must  be  blind  not  to  per¬
ceive  that  the  whole  European  mind  has  undergone  a  revolution,
neither  confined  to  this  nor  that  country,  but  as  general  as  the
great  causes  which  have  given  it  birth,  and  still  continue  to  feed
its  growth.’  For  Ireland,  he  believed,  issues  of  the  most  mo¬
mentous  and  far-reaching  kind  depended  on  the  decision  of  the
House.  ‘You,  none  of  you,  can  be  ignorant  that  the  British
Minister  has  designs,  in  procrastinating  this  question,  to  procure

CH.  XXVII.

ATTITUDE  OF  GRATTAN.

113

advantages  for  his  own  country,  at  the  expense  of  yours,  greater
than  she  was  capable  of  receiving  ‘  since  the  Revolution,  at  least,
since  the  Union/  And  so  strongly  impressed  is  this  on  the
public  mind,  that  you,  who  shall  on  this  night  vote  for  the  re¬
jection  of  the  Bill,  will  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the  Irish  nation,
not  only  as  men  voting,  in  obedience  to  the  British  Minister,
against  the  voice  of  the  people,  but  as  men  voting  for  an  union
with  England,  by  which  this  country  is  to  be  everlastingly
reduced  to  the  state  of  an  abject  province.’

It  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,  that  the  Government  speakers
never  attempted  to  deny  the  repeated  assertion  of  the  Opposi¬
tion,  that  Protestant  opinion  was  in  favour  of  emancipation,  nor
did  they  endeavour  to  dispel  the  suspicion,  which  was  spread¬
ing  fatally  and  rapidly,  that  the  Government  were  steering  their
bark  through  corruption,  through  revived  religious  animosities,
through  almost  certain  rebellion,  towards  a  legislative  union.
Grattan  skilfully  availed  himself  of  the  resolution  of  the
Catholic  Committee,  declaring  that  they  would  rather  forego
their  emancipation  than  purchase  it  at  the  price  of  a  legislative
union,  as  an  additional  argument  in  favour  of  the  former.  ‘  The
Roman  Catholic,’  he  said,  ‘  far  from  being  dangerous,  has  borne
his  testimony  in  favour  of  the  institution  of  the  Irish  Parliament,
for  he  has  resolved  to  relinquish  his  emancipation  rather  than
purchase  his  capacities  by  an  union.  He  has  said,  let  the
Catholic  be  free,  but  if  his  freedom  is  to  be  bought  by  the  ex¬
tinction  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  we  waive  the  privilege,  and  pray
for  the  Parliament.’

The  speech  of  Grattan  was  on  the  whole  hopeful,  more  hope¬
ful  than  wisdom  could  justify.  He  accused  the  administration
of  having  begun  a  religious  war  in  1792,  but  he  maintained
that  they  had  wholly  failed  to  produce  any  serious  division  in
Ireland.  ‘  The  Protestants  of  a  number  of  the  counties,  of  all
the  great  cities,  and  all  the  mercantile  interests,’  have  petitioned
in  favour  of  the  Catholics.  With  the  single  exception  of  the
Corporation  of  Dublin,  there  had  been  no  application  against
them.  Nothing  prevents  their  success  but  the  influence  of  the
Government.  ‘  Catholic  emancipation  ceases  to  be  a  question
between  the  Irish  Protestant  and  Catholic,  and  is  now  a
question  between  the  Ministers  of  another  country  and  the
251

114

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

people  of  Ireland.’  It  was  a  cheering  sign,  though  perhaps  not
so  important  as  Grattan  represented  it,  that  on  the  recall  of
Lord  Fitzwilliam  the  students  of  Trinity  College  had  presented
an  address  in  favour  of  emancipation.  ‘  These  young  men,’  said
Grattan,  1  in  a  few  years  must  determine  this  question.’  ‘  They
will  soon  sit  on  these  seats  blended  with  Catholics,  while  we,
blended  with  Catholics,  shall  repose  in  the  dust.’

No  one,  I  think,  can  read  thisdebhte  without  acknowledging
that  the  immense  preponderance  of  argument  and  ability  was  on
the  side  of  emancipation.  Duigenan  and  some  of  the  other
genuine  opponents  of  the  Catholics  restated  their  old  arguments,
but  the  Government  case  was  entrusted  to  Toler,  the  Solicitor-
General.  He  was  one  of  those  officials  whom  Fitzwilliam  had
desired  to  replace;  and  having  been  long  known  as  a  selfish,
violent,  and  unprincipled  advocate,  he  was  made  Chief  Justice  of
the  Common  Pleas,  was  created  Lord  Norbury,  and  has  left  a
most  scandalous  judicial  reputation  behind  him.  He  placed
the  Government  opposition  to  the  admission  of  Catholics  to
Parliament,  on  the  highest  possible  grounds.  It  would  violate
the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Constitution  as  established  by
the  Revolution.  It  would  be  contrary  to  the  coronation  oath
by  which  the  King  held  his  throne,  to  the  Bill  of  Rights,  to
the  compact  on  which  the  connection  of  the  two  countries
depended.  The  Roman  Catholic  was  asking  that  the  Constitu¬
tion  should  be  changed.  ‘  He  has  no  right  to  demand  it,  nor
have  the  Crown  and  Parliament,  who  are  but  trustees  for  its
preservation,  a  right  to  alienate  what  has  been  confided  to  them
as  a  trust.’  1  In  other  words,  the  Catholics,  at  a  time  when
the  most  cautious  and  conciliatory  policy  was  imperatively
required,  were  told  on  high  Government  authority  that  their
disqualifications  were  permanent  and  indelible,  essential  to
the  connection  of  their  country  with  England,  essential  to
the  maintenance  of  the  monarchical  constitution  under  which
they  lived.  The  independent  voices  in  Parliament,  and  the
voices  of  the  Protestants  beyond  its  walls,  had  spoken  in  no

1  Marcus  Beresford,  in  a  letter  to  Bill  could  not  be  carried  without  the
his  father  describing  this  debate,  repeal  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  the
says:  ‘Toler  spoke  for  above  two  breach  of  the  coronation  oath,  and
hours,  and  left  the  question  without  of  the  compact  between  the  two
an  attempt  to  argue  it,  but  concluded  countries.’  (Beresford  Correspondence .
with  a  vehement  assertion,  that  the  ii.  109.)

ch.  xxvii,  CATHOLIC  BILL  DEFEATEI^  115

dubious  terms  ;  but  the  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons,  who
a  few  months  before  had  been  perfectly  ready  to  carry  the  Bill,
were  now  equally  ready  to  reject  it,  and  it  was  thrown  out  by
155  votes  to  84. 1

From  this  time  the  Catholic  question  lost  most  of  its  promi¬
nence  in  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  from  this  time  there  is  scarcely
a  page  of  Irish  history  on  which  a  good  man  can  look  with  plea¬
sure.  Anarchy  and  bloodshed,  religious  and  class  warfare,  great
measures  almost  wholly  failing  to  produce  their  expected  results,
disaffection  widening  and  deepening  as  grievances  were  removed,
public  opinion  more  and  more  degraded  and  demoralised,  politi¬
cal  life  turned  more  and  more  into  a  trade  in  which  the  vilest
men  are  exalted — these  are  the  chief  elements  in  the  miserable
story  which  the  historian  of  modern  Ireland  is  called  upon  to
relate.  It  is  impossible  to  say,  with  just  confidence,  whether
this  train  of  calamities  could  have  been  averted  if  all  religious
disqualifications  had  been  removed  in  1793  or  1795.  The
Protestants  then  undoubtedly  desired  it.  Political  agitation
was  almost  unknown.  The  indispensable  ascendency  of  pro¬
perty  and  loyalty  was  still  unbroken ;  the  relations  of  classes
and  creeds,  which  were  hopelessly  convulsed  by  the  rebellion
of  1798,  and  by  the  long  agitation  that  followed  it,  were  not  yet
essentially  unsound,  and  more  than  a  century  had  passed  since
Ireland  had  witnessed  the  clash  of  arms.  In  my  own  judgment,
little  permanent  good  could  have  been  effected  unless  a  moderate
parliamentary  reform  and  a  commutation  of  tithes  had  been  added
to  the  abolition  of  religious  distinctions  ;  but  with  these  measures,
Ireland  would  probably  have  weathered  the  revolutionary  storm.
But  though  the  chapter  of  what  might  have  been,  lies  beyond
human  sagacity,  the  actual  train  of  cause  and  effect  is  sufficiently
evident,  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that  the  undecided  and
contradictory  policy  of  these  critical  years  was  a  leading  cause
of  the  rebellion  of  1798,  and  of  the  fatal  consequences  that
flowed  from  it.

One  more  step  remained  to  be  taken,  in  order  fully  to  impress
the  Catholics  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Government.  It  was

1  See  the  full  report  of  this  long  few  passages.  ( Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xv.
and  most  remarkable  debate,  from  208-3tll.)
which  I  have  only  room  to  select  a

116  ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvu.

flr

again  to  single  out  for  conspicuous  favour  tlie  man  who  was
known  to  be  their  ablest  and  most  implacable  enemy.  There  is
no  reason  to  doubt  that  Fitzgibbon  was  perfectly  honest  in  his
opposition  to  the  Catholics,  and  he  unquestionably  often  proved
himself  a  very  useful  servant  of  the  English  Government,  but
few  judgments  are  more  absurd  than  those  which  have  represented
him  as  a  type  of  disinterested  or  self-sacrificing  statesmanship.
He  had  a  great  income,  which  he  spent  with  the  lavish  profusion
so  characteristic  of  the  Irish  gentry,1  and  though  wholly  free  from
the  taint  of  personal  corruption,  he  was  keenly  ambitious.  His
rise,  during  the  last  few  years,  had  been  surprisingly  fast.  He
had  been  made  Chancellor  and  peer  in  1789,  chiefly  as  a  reward
for  his  services  on  the  Regency  question.  Lord  Westmorland
had  given  him  a  reversion  of  2,300Z.  a  year  for  two  lives.2  Al¬
most  immediately  after  his  mischievous  attack  upon  the  Catho¬
lics  in  1793,  he  had  been  made  a  viscount ;  and  having  borne  a
leading  part  in  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  he  was  now  made
Earl  of  Clare.  Camden,  in  recommending  him  for  the  promotion,
dwelt  upon  his  services  to  the  Government,  and  upon  the  attack
which  had  been  made  on  him,  but  he  based  his  recommendation
chiefly  on  the  necessity  of  supporting  and  consolidating  the
anti-Catholic  party,  lielverton,  he  said,  who  had  been  always
on  the  side  of  the  Catholics,  had  just  been  made  a  peer,  and  it
was  therefore  peculiarly  advisable  to  promote  Fitzgibbon,  who
had  strongly  opposed  them.  Ho  measure  would  do  more  to
encourage  those  Protestants  who  were  opposed  to  emancipation.
They  found  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Government  were  in
earnest.  This  would  do  much  to  convince  them.  Lord  Fitzgibbon,
Camden  said,  had  previously  asked  for  advancement  in  the  peerage,
but  ‘  begged  to  leave  the  time  entirely  to  my  convenience.’ 3

1  In  the  Westmorland  Correspond¬
ence  there  are  melancholy  letters,
written  when  Clare  was  dying,  and
immediately  after  his  death,  by  Lady
Clare,  asking  for  some  Government
provision.  Lord  Clare,  she  says,  by
the  will  of  his  father  could  only  settle
on  her  a  small  provision  out  of  his
hereditary  property.  ‘  He  certainly
had  a  great  income,  but  he  lived  up
to  and  above  it,  and  has  not  left
more  money  than  will  pay  his  debts.’
(Lady  Clare  to  Westmorland  Jan.  26,

Feb.  8,  27,  March  1,  1802.)  Lord
Redesdale,  in  a  letter  in  1802,  recom¬
mending  for  some  a  sistance,  a  first
cousin  of  Lord  Clare  who  was  left
completely  destitute,  expressed  his
regret  ‘  that,  with  all  the  advantages
possessed  by  the  late  Lord  Clare,  so
many  of  his  family  should  be  in  a
state  to  sue  for  the  public  bountv  *
(I.SP.O.)

2  Pari.  Hist.  xxxi.  1512.

a  Camden  to  Portland,  May  4
1795.

ch.  xxvn.  EDUCATION  OF  THE  PRIESTS.  1 1  7

The  significance  of  the  promotion,  indeed,  could  not  be  over¬
looked.  The  Catholics  and  Reformers  of  Ireland  were  once
more  taught,  that  the  man  in  whom  the  Government  placed  the
greatest  confidence,  was  the  politician  who  had  justified,  with
scarcely  a  qualification,  the  whole  penal  code,  who  had  contended
that  it  was  a  fatal  error  to  admit  any  class  of  Catholics  to  any
share  of  political  power,  who  had  at  the  same  time  shown  him¬
self  the  most  powerful  enemy  of  every  attempt  to  reform  the
Parliament,  to  diminish  corruption,  and  to  abolish  or  mitigate
the  tithe  grievances.

Portland,  as  we  have  seen,  had  instructed  Camden  to  con¬
ciliate  the  Catholics,  as  far  as  was  compatible  with  the  main
lines  of  his  policy.  The  recommendation,  under  the  circum¬
stances,  seemed  little  less  than  derisory  ;  but  Camden  was  ready
to  act  upon  it,  and  the  measure  which  was  taken  with  this  object
was  the  foundation  of  an  ecclesiastical  seminary  at  Maynooth.

During  the  greater  part  of  the  century,  the  ecclesiastical
education  of  the  Catholic  priesthood  was  carried  on,  contrary  to
law,  but  without  any  serious  attempt  at  molestation,  in  conti¬
nental  colleges  and  seminaries,  and  in  many  of  these,  foundations
for  their  support  had  been  established,  either  by  private  liberality
or  by  the  munificence  of  foreign  sovereigns.  It  appears  from  a
return  made  to  Parliament  in  1808,  1  of  the  state  of  the  esta¬
blishments  on  the  Continent  for  the  education  of  Irish  Catholic
secular  clergymen  previous  to  the  French  Revolution,’  that  at  the
time  when  the  Revolution  broke  out,  there  were  478  Irish  eccle¬
siastical  students  on  the  Continent,  of  whom  348  were  in  France,
and  the  remainder  at  Louvain,  Antwerp,  Salamanca,  Rome,  and
Lisbon.  They  had  received  the  rudiments  of  education  in
Ireland,  and  the  greater  number  had  been  ordained  before  they
were  sent  abroad  to  complete  their  studies,  so  that  they  were
usually  able  to  contribute  to  their  own  support,  by  officiating  in
petty  chaplaincies,  and  discharging  for  small  gratuities  other
offices  of  religion.  The  expense  of  their  journey  to  the  Continent
was  commonly  defrayed  by  the  Catholic  gentry,  and  sometimes
by  collections  in  the  chapels  of  their  districts.

The  deficiency,  the  hardships,  and  the  dangers  of  this  mode
of  education,  had  for  some  time  attracted  the  attention  of  pa¬
triotic  Irishmen.  I  have  quoted  in  a  former  volume  the  very

118

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvii.

remarkable  speech  which  was  made  on  the  subject  in  1782  by
Iiely  Hutchinson,  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons.  Hutchinson
censured  in  the  strongest  manner  the  existing  laws  about
Catholic  education,  but  he  equally  insisted  on  the  danger  of
establishing  separate  popish  colleges.  It  was  a  matter,  he
maintained,  of  the  very  first  political  importance  that  the
Catholics,  and  especially  the  Catholic  priesthood,  should  receive
the  best  possible  education  at  home,  and  that  they  should  not
be  educated  altogether  apart  from  their  fellow-countrymen.  He
desired  that  their  higher  education  should  be  carried  on  at  the
University  of  Dublin ;  that  diocesan  schools  should  be  esta¬
blished  at  public  expense,  in  which  Catholics  might  receive
gratuitously  an  education  to  prepare  them  for  the  university ;
that  a  grant  should  be  made  for  the  establishment  of  sizarships,
and  other  premiums  for  the  special  benefit  of  their  poor  stu¬
dents  ;  and  that  they  should  have  a  divinity  professor  of  their
own  creed,  to  educate  them  in  their  own  theology.  In  secular
education,  he  would  establish  no  distinction.  1  I  would  have
them,’  he  said,  1  go  into  examinations,  and  make  no  distinction
between  them  and  the  Protestants,  but  such  as  merit  might
claim.’ 1

Burke,  in  the  same  year,  wrote  a  letter  to  Lord  Kenmare,  in
which  he  dwelt,  from  a  different  point  of  view,  on  the  same  sub¬
ject.  Seven  years  before,  when  visiting  Paris,  he  had  paid
special  attention  to  the  college  which  existed  in  that  city  for
the  education  of  Irish  priests,  and  he  had  been  struck  with  its
efficiency.  The  very  worst  part  of  the  penal  code,  he  truly
said,  was  that  relating  to  education,  for  while  the  Catholics
were  deprived  of  the  means  of  education  at  home,  they  were
forbidden  to  seek  education  abroad.  Burke,  however,  strongly
dissented  from  that  portion  of  the  scheme  of  Hutchinson,  which
related  to  the  education  of  the  priesthood.  It  was  impossible,
he  urged,  that  men  who  were  intended  for  a  life  of  celibacy,  and
for  the  delicate  and  dangerous  duties  of  the  confessional,  could  be
properly  educated  in  common  with  lay  students,  and  in  a  Pro¬
testant  university.  History  and  reason  abundantly  showed
that  the  Catholic  priesthood  might  become  an  intolerable
nuisance  to  a  country,  if  they  had  not  been  formed  to  their  pro-
1  Vol.  iv.  pp.  530,  531  ;  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  i.  309,  310.

CH.  XXVII,

PEOPOSED  CATHOLIC  COLLEGE.

119

%

fession  by  an  altogether  special  and  separate  system  of  disci¬
pline  and  education,  and  the  establishment  of  such  a  system,
in  separate  seminaries,  had  been  the  most  valuable  moral
result  of  the  Council  of  Trent.  Burke  considered  it  a  great
grievance  that  no  such  seminaries  existed  in  Ireland,  but  until
they  were  established,  he  wished  the  present  system  of  educa¬
tion  on  the  Continent,  to  be  fully  legalised.  Men  in  power,  he
hoped,  would  at  last  learn  £  to  consider  the  good  order,  decorum,
virtue,  and  morality  of  every  description  of  men  among  them,*. . .
of  more  importance  to  religion  and  to  the  State,  than  all  the
polemical  matter  which  has  been  agitated  among  men,  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  this  hour.’  1

In  the  twelve  years  that  followed,  most  of  the  more  serious
grievances  of  the  Irish  lay  Catholics  relating  to  education  were
removed.  Their  admission  to  degrees  in  Dublin  University
carried  out  one  great  part  of  the  policy  of  Hutchinson,  and  al¬
though  no  provision  had  been  made  for  the  education  of  the
priesthood  in  Ireland,  it  seemed  as  if  a  compromise  between  the
views  of  Burke  and  of  Hutchinson  might,  with  no  great  diffi¬
culty,  have  been  devised.  A  project,  as  we  have  seen,  was  much
discussed  of  establishing  a  Catholic  college  in  connection  with
Dublin  University,  and  it  might  have  secured  for  the  ecclesias¬
tical  students  the  discipline  and  the  professional  education  of  a
seminary,  without  withdrawing  them  altogether  from  the  lec¬
tures  and  examinations  of  the  university.2  The  singular  libe¬
rality  which,  at  this  time,  prevailed  among  the  authorities  of
Dublin  University,  and  the  great  moderation  of  the  Irish  pre¬
lates,  made  some  such  scheme  appear  very  feasible,  and  it  would
be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  benefit,  both  moral  and  political,
which  Ireland  might  have  derived  from  a  priesthood  imbued
with  the  best  liberal  education  of  their  time,  and  associated  in
some  measure  with  the  most  cultivated  and  enlightened  of  theii
countrymen.

The  French  Revolution  and  the  war  of  1793  forced  the

1  Letter  to  a  peer  of  Ireland  on
the  penal  laws.  (Burke’s  Works,  vi.
280-289.)

2  See  vol.  vi.  pp.  451,  452.  A  pam¬
phlet  called  Considerations  upon  the
Establishment  of  an  Univ er sit i/  in  Ire¬
land  for  Educating  Roman  Catholics,

advocating  a  purely  Catholic  univer¬
sity  for  both  lay  and  clerical  students,
was  published  in  Dublin  in  1784.  It
contains  an  interesting  account  of
the  scanty  education  of  the  existing
priests,  and  of  the  evils  that  resulted
from  their  illiteracy.  •

120

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

question  into  sudden  ripeness,  by  making  the  foreign  education
of  ecclesiastical  students  impossible.  In  the  beginning  of  1794,
the  Catholic  bishops  presented  a  memorial  to  Lord  Westmor¬
land,  stating  that  400  students  were  constantly  maintained
and  educated  in  France  for  the  ministry  of  the  Roman  Catholic
religion  in  Ireland ;  that  in  the  troubles  which  had  broken  out
in  France,  these  seminaries  had  been  abolished  and  their  revenues
confiscated,  and  that  there  was  great  danger  that  students
educated  in  that  country  would  be  exposed  to  the  ‘  contagion  of
sedition  and  infidelity,’  and  would  introduce  ‘  a  licentious  philo¬
sophy  ’  into  Ireland.  They  argued  that  an  education  at  Dublin
University,  however  well  adapted  for  an  ambitious  laity,  was
not  suited  to  men  who  ‘  were  restricted  to  the  humble  walk  of  a
subordinary  ministry.’  Certain  branches  of  learning  must  be
taught  the  priesthood,  which  were  not  included  in  the  university
course.  Even  in  Catholic  countries,  candidates  for  holy  orders
received  the  most  important  part  of  their  education  in  seminaries
distinct  from  the  public  universities.  A  great  proportion  of  the
students  for  orders  were  too  poor  to  bear  the  expense  of  edu¬
cation  at  the  university,  and  of  a  constant  residence  in  Dublin  ;
‘  and  although  the  liberality  of  the  present  heads  of  the  uni¬
versity  might  induce  them  to  receive  persons  on  the  foundation,
yet  neither  could  a  sufficient  number  be  thus  accommodated,  nor
would  it  prove  grateful  to  the  feelings  of  the  parties.’  Under
these  circumstances,  the  prelates  petitioned  for  a  royal  licence,
to  endow  ecclesiastical  seminaries  in  Ireland  under  ecclesiastical
superiors  of  their  own  communion.1

In  the  September  of  the  same  year,  Burke  wrote  to  Grattan
urging  his  own  opinion  and  that  of  his  son,  that  if  provision  was
not  made  for  the  instruction  of  ecclesiastical  students  in  Ireland,
‘  barbarism  and  Jacobinism  will  almost  certainly  enter,  by  the
breach  made  by  the  atheistic  faction  in  France  in  the  destruc¬
tion  of  the  Irish  seminaries  in  that  kingdom.’ 2  Grattan  fully
concurred  in  this  view.  ‘  It  is  absolutely  necessary,’  he  wrote,
‘  to  allow  the  Catholic  clergy  a  Catholic  education  at  home.  If
they  can’t  have  a  Catholic  education  at  home,  they  can  have
none  at  all,  or  none  which  is  not  dangerous.  I  don’t  think  any

1  Plowden,  ii.  446-448  ;  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  iii.  72-75.

8  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  155.

CH.  XXVII,

THE  PROPHECY  OF  TONE.

121

time  should  be  lost ;  too  much  time  has  been  lost  already,  both
with  regard  to  their  education  and  Irish  education  in  general ;
for  which  great  funds  of  public,  royal,  and  private  donations
have  been  granted  and  eaten.  There  is  not  one  great  public
school  in  Ireland ;  and  yet  the  funds  are  great,  but  sunk  in  the
person  of  the  Master.  ...  At  the  time  when  our  Government
were  assuming  public  ignorance  as  an  argument  against  Catholic
emancipation,  there  lay  before  them  a  report  of  a  committee
with  authentic  evidence  of  this  misapplication,  in  which  they
persisted  to  connive.  .  .  .  Such  subjects  are  now  peculiarly
interesting,  when  the  fortunes  of  the  world  are  in  the  scale,  and
the  intellectual  order  in  some  danger  of  kicking  the  beam.’ 1
In  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s  speech  from  the  throne,  new  measures  for
Catholic  education  were  promised.  Seventeen  Catholic  bishops
met  to  consider  the  subject  in  Dublin,  and  Dr.  Hussey  came
over  from  England  to  consult  with  them,  but  nothing  had  been
finally  arranged  when  the  viceroy  was  recalled.2

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  while  Burke,  and  other  states¬
men,  saw  in  the  home  education  of  the  Irish  priesthood  the  best
means  of  securing  them  from  the  contagion  of  democracy  and
sedition,  Wolfe  Tone,  with  an  incomparably  juster  forecast,  advo¬
cated  the  same  measure  for  exactly  opposite  reasons.  He  in¬
variably  represented  the  Catholic  clergy  of  his  time  as  men  who
were  essentially  Tory  in  their  principles ;  who  were  in  natural
alliance  with  the  aristocracy  of  their  creed,  and  who  were  a  most
formidable  obstacle  to  the  seditious  and  anti-English  movement
it  was  his  object  to  foment.  1  This  country  never  will  be  well,’  he
wrote,  1  until  the  Catholics  are  educated  at  home,  and  their  clergy
elective.  Now  is  a  good  time,  because  France  will  not  receive
their  students,  and  the  Catholics  are  afraid  of  the  Revolution.’
He  feared  that  the  higher  clergy  would  not  be  favourable  to  the
change,  and  rejoiced,  from  his  own  point  of  view,  that  the  break¬
ing  up  of  the  seminaries  in  France  obliged  them  to  consent.
‘  In  this  light,’  he  wrote,  ‘  as  in  ten  thousand  others,  the  Revolu¬
tion  was  of  infinite  service  to  Ireland.  .  .  .  This  education
business  appears  to  me  of  infinite  importance  for  a  thousand
reasons.’ 3

1  Burke’s  Correspondence,  iv.  245.  5  Wolfe  Tone’s  Memoirs,  i.  173,

1  Ibid.  pp.  267,  282,  283.  195.

122

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

On  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  Dr.  Hussey,  at  the  earnest
request  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  remained  in  Ireland  to  assist
in  elaborating  the  plan,1  and  although  there  was  some  divergence
about  the  details,  and  especially  about  the  degree  to  which  it
was  to  be  placed  under  Catholic  episcopal  authority,  the  scheme
itself  was  very  generally  welcomed.  The  war  and  the  destruction
of  French  seminaries  made  some  change  plainly  necessary,  and
even  in  normal  times  it  was  a  great  hardship  that  the  members
of  a  very  poor  Church  should  be  unable  to  educate  their  clergy
in  their  own  country.  At  the  same  time  the  evil  was  not  with¬
out  mitigations,  and  no  subsequent  generations  of  Irish  priests
have  left  so  good  a  reputation  as  the  better  class  of  those  who
were  educated  in  the  seminaries  of  France,  Italy,  and  Flanders,
or  at  the  Irish  college  at  Salamanca.2  They  grew  up  at  a  time
when  Catholicism  throughout  Europe  was  unusually  temperate,
and  they  brought  with  them  a  foreign  culture  and  a  foreign
grace,  which  did  much  to  embellish  Irish  life.  Their  earlier
prejudices  were  corrected  and  mitigated  by  foreign  travel.  They
had  sometimes  mixed  with  a  society  far  more  cultivated  than  an
Irish  Protestant  country  clergyman  was  likely  to  meet,  and  they
came  to  their  ministry  at  a  mature  age,  and  with  a  real  and  varied
knowledge  of  the  world.  If  they  produced  little  or  nothing  of
lasting  value  in  theology  or  literature,  they  had  at  least  the  manners
and  feelings  of  cultivated  gentlemen,  and  a  high  sense  of  clerical
decorum  ;  they  had  no  sympathy  with  insurrection,  turbulence,
or  crime,  and  they  were  saved  by  their  position  from  the  chief
vices  and  temptations  of  their  class  upon  the  Continent.  The
leaders  of  a  poor  and  unendowed  Church,  which  was  appealing
to  the  principles  of  religious  liberty  in  order  to  obtain  political
enfranchisement,  were  not  likely  to  profess  the  maxims  of  per¬
secutors  or  to  live  the  lives  of  epicureans.

This  type  of  priest  might  be  frequently  met  with  in  Ireland
in  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  in  the  first
quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  its  disappearance  has  been
an  irreparable  loss  to  Irish  society.  ‘  Mild,  amiable,  cultivated,

1  Burke’s  Correspondence,  iv.  297.

2  The  prominence  of  Salamanca
as  a  place  for  the  education  of  Irish
priests,  is  curiously  shown  by  the  fact
that  between  1808  and  1816  no  less

than  six  priests,  educated  there,  were
made  bishops  in  Ireland.  See  that
very  interesting  work,  The  Life  of
Mary  Aikenhead,  by  S.  A.  (2nd  edit.),
p.  143.

CH.  XXVII,

EIGHTEENTH-CENTUliY  PEIESTS.

123

learned,  and  polite,’  wrote  one  wlio  knew  them  well, c  uniting  the
meek  spirit  of  the  Christian  pastor  to  the  winning  gentleness
of  the  polished  man  of  the  world,  these  men  were  welcome  guests
at  the  tables  of  the  Protestant  gentry.  ...  In  their  own  com¬
munion  they  lent  their  influence  to  soothe  the  asperities  of
the  time,  and  they  brought  their  knowledge  of  mankind  and  of
their  own  and  foreign  nations,  to  enforce  their  lessons  of  patience,
fortitude,  and  forbearance.’ 1

It  is  probable  that  such  priests  were  most  common  in  the
latter  half  of  the  century,  when  religious  persecution  had  prac¬
tically  ended.  In  its  earlier  years,  when  the  penal  laws  were
in  force,  and  when  the  Catholic  community  was  very  poor
and  very  much  oppressed,  a  different  type  predominated,  and
it  continued  in  the  later  years  of  the  century,  among  the  poor
curates  and  mendicant  monks,  coexisting  with  the  type  I  have
described.  Boys,  springing  from  the  very  humblest  peasant
class,  learnt  their  letters  and  a  little  Latin  at  a  hedge  school,
and  then  travelled  through  Ireland  as  mendicant  scholars  till
they  had  obtained  the  means  of  going  to  France,  where  by  the
performance  of  servile  duties  and  by  the  assistance  of  some  old
endowments  they  obtained  their  education  for  the  priesthood.
They  usually  returned  to  Ireland  with  a  slight  tincture  of
scholastic  and  controversial  theology,  a  large  store  of  extravagant
legends,  all  the  zeal  of  an  impassioned  missionary,  and  most  of
the  tastes,  passions,  and  prejudices  of  an  ignorant  peasant.2  They
formed  the  democratic,  and  certainly  not  the  least  important,
element  in  the  Irish  Catholic  Church.  Their  fanaticism,  their
credulity,  their  coarse,  violent,  and  grotesque  sermons,  their
frequent  pretensions  to  thaumaturgic  powers,  their  complete
sympathy  with  the  ideas  and  feelings  of  the  peasantry,  gave  them
an  influence  often  much  greater  than  that  of  the  learned  and
polished  ecclesiastic,  and  neither  their  prej  udices  nor  their  inte¬
rests  inclined  them  to  the  side  of  the  law.  M  en  of  this  description
are  often  mentioned  as  implicated  both  in  agrarian  and  in  revo¬
lutionary  disturbances,  though  there  is,  I  think,  no  good  evidence

1  See  a  vivid  description  of  these  2  Newenham’s  View  of  the  Circum-
priests,  and  of  the  difference  between  stances  of  Ireland ,  pp.  179-181.  That
them  and  the  generation  formed  by  charming  tale  of  Carleton,  The  Poor
Maynooth,  in  O’Driscoll’s  Views  of  Ire-  Scholar,  throws  a  faithful  light  on
land  (1823),  ii.  112-115.  this  aspect  and  period  of  Irish  life.

124

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvii.

that  any  class  of  priests  in  the  eighteenth  century  were  guilty  of
the  systematic  encouragement  of  crime,  which  has  been  charged,
on  very  serious  authority,  against  not  a  few  of  their  successors.1

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  type  of  priests  in  Ireland
should  have  greatly  improved  in  the  early  years  of  George  III.
The  growing  wealth  of  the  Catholic  community  attracted  men
of  a  somewhat  higher  class  to  the  priesthood,  and  provided
better  means  of  education  and  subsistence,  and  in  settled
times,  and  under  the  influence  of  religious  liberty,  the  en¬
forcement  of  ecclesiastical  discipline  became  more  easy.  The
Catholic  gentry  were  also  now  a  more  considerable  body,  and  it
was  a  common  thing  for  a  Catholic  landlord,  when  he  found  the
son  of  a  deserving  tenant  desirous  of  entering  the  priesthood,  to
defray  the  expenses  of  his  outfit  and  of  his  journey  to  the
Continent,  and  afterwards,  by  his  influence  with  the  bishop,
to  obtain  for  him  some  desirable  professional  situation.  Much
real  though  unrecognised  patronage  was  thus  exercised  by  the
leading  Catholic  laymen,  and  kindly  relations  of  friendship
and  gratitude  grew  up,  which  greatly  softened  and  elevated
the  tone  of  Irish  life.  One  of  the  first  and  most  evident  results
of  the  establishment  of  Maynooth,  was  to  weaken  or  destroy
these  relations.2

The  Church  was  governed  by  four  archbishops  and  twenty-
two  bishops,  appointed  by  the  cardinals  of  the  Congregation  De
Propaganda  Fide,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Pope,  but  nearly

1  See  the  very  remarkable  state¬
ment  of  Lord  Clarendon  (Nov.  26,
1847),  which  was  sent  to  Rome,  and
the  accompanying  letter  of  Lord
Palmerston  to  Lord  Minto.  Lord
Palmerston  did  not  hesitate  to  say :
‘You  may  safely  go  further  than
Clarendon  has  chosen  to  do,  and  you
may  confidently  assure  the  papal  au¬
thorities,  that  at  present  in  Ireland
misconduct  is  the  rule,  and  good  con¬
duct  the  exception,  in  the  Catholic
priests ;  that  they  in  a  multitude  of
cases  are  the  open,  and  fearless,  and
shameless  instigators  to  disorder,  to
violence  and  murder,  and  every  week
the  better  conducted,  who  are  by
constitution  of  human  nature  the
most  quiet  and  timid,  are  being
geared  by  their  fellow-priests,  as  well
as  by  their  flocks,  from  a  perseverance

in  any  efforts  to  give  good  counsel,
and  to  restrain  violence  and  crime.
...  I  really  believe  there  never  has
been  in  modern  times,  in  any  country
professing  to  be  civilised  and  Chris¬
tian,  nor  anywhere  out  of  the  central
regions  of  Africa,  such  a  state  of
crime  as  now  exists  in  Ireland.  There
is  evidently  a  deliberate  and  extensive
conspiracy  among  the  priests  and  the
peasantry,  to  kill  off  or  drive  away  all
the  proprietors  of  land,  to  prevent
and  deter  any  of  their  agents  from
collecting  rent,  and  thus  practically
to  transfer  the  land  of  the  country
from  the  landowner  to  the  tenant.’
(Ashley’s  Life  of  Lord  Palmerston,  ii.
49-53.)

2  See  the  evidence  of  Archbishop
Magee  before  a  parliamentary  com¬
mittee  in  1825,  p.  785.

CH.  XXVII.

DIMINUTION  OF  CLERICAL  INFLUENCE.

125

always  selected  from  among  a  few  names  that  were  sent  to  Rome
by  the  clergy  of  the  diocese  and  by  the  bishops  of  the  province.
Old  and  infirm  bishops  were  accustomed  to  choose  coadjutors,
who  were  almost  invariably,  on  their  recommendation,  appointed
their  successors.  The  bishop  usually  held  the  best  parish  in  his
diocese,  and  in  addition  to  the  revenue  derived  from  this  source,
he  received  a  small  sum,  varying  from  a  crown  to  a  guinea,  for
every  marriage  licence,  and  a  yearly  tribute,  varying  from  two  to
ten  guineas,  from  each  parish  priest.  The  parish  priests  were
appointed  solely  by  the  bishops,  but  after  a  certain  tenure  of
office,  they  could  not,  except  under  extreme  circumstances,  be
dispossessed.  They  were  paid  by  Easter  and  Christmas  dues,  by
fees  at  weddings,  christenings,  and  generally  at  the  visitation  of
the  sick,  and  by  masses,  which  were  usually  charged  at  the  rate
of  two  shillings  each.  In  some  parts  of  the  country,  tributes  of
hay,  oats,  and  fish  were  given  to  the  priest  instead  of  money
dues,  and  his  turf  was  cut,  his  corn  reaped,  and  his  meadow
mowed  gratuitously.  The  curate  had  usually  a  third  part  of
the  general  receipts  of  the  parish.1

The  clergy  formed  a  well-organised  and,  to  a  great  extent,  a
self-governed  body,  but  it  seems  certain  that  their  influence  over
their  people  had  much  diminished  during  the  period  between
the  accession  of  George  III.  and  the  rebellion  of  1798.  This
was  largely  due  to  causes  that  affected  Ireland  in  common  with
all  Europe,  and  had  led  a  great  proportion  of  the  best  intellects
of  the  day  to  believe  that  clerical  influence,  as  a  serious  element
in  human  affairs,  could  scarcely  survive  the  eighteenth  century.
The  lowering  of  the  theological  temperature,  the  spread  of  free-
thinking  tenets,  the  contempt  for  superstition  in  all  its  forms,
the  growing  tendency  to  value  religions  on  account  of  their
common  morality,  and  not  on  account  of  their  distinctive
dogmas,  was  felt  in  Ireland  as  it  was  felt  elsewhere,  and  it  was
pronounced,  on  good  Roman  Catholic  authority,  that  the  relaxa¬
tion  of  the  popery  laws  had  greatly  weakened  the  hold  of  the
priests  over  their  people.  In  another  class,  and  in  another  way,
the  Whiteboy  convulsions  of  178G  had  a  similar  effect,2  and  the

1  See  a  detailed  and  valuable  ac-  ham  (written  in  1806).  (Newenham's
count  of  the  organisation  and  position  View  of  the  Circumstances  of  Ireland ,

of  the  clergy,  in  a  letter  from  a  priest  append.  39-42.)
of  the  diocese  of  Cork  to  Newen-  2  Ibid.  The  account  which

126

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

spirit  of  the  new  political  movement  which  had  arisen  among
the  Catholics  was  essentially  unclerical.  We  have  had  much
evidence  in  the  course  of  this  work  how  erroneously  some  of  the
most  eminent  statesmen  and  thinkers  of  the  eighteenth  century
forecast  the  religious  future,  but  those  who  judge  mainly  by  the
event  will  probably  greatly  underrate  their  sagacity.  Among
the  changes  of  history  there  are  some  which  are  due  to  causes  so
powerful,  so  widespread,  and  so  deep-rooted,  that  they  could  not
have  been  averted  or  even  greatly  modified,  but  there  are  many
which  were  clearly  preventible,  and  which  may  be  largely  traced
to  accidental  circumstances,  and  especially  to  political  blunders.
Had  the  inevitable  changes  in  France  at  the  close  of  the
eighteenth  century  been  effected  in  a  peaceable  and  orderly
manner,  and  by  a  well-organised  Government,  Europe  might
have  been  spared  the  great  reaction  which  was  the  consequence
of  the  horrible  crimes  that  disgraced  the  French  Revolution,  and
of  the  long  and  sanguinary  wars  that  followed  it.  In  Ireland
the  revival  of  ecclesiastical  influence  was  largely  due  to  events
which  were  certainly  not  inevitable — to  the  rebellion  of  1798,
which  rekindled  all  the  passions  of  religious  war ;  to  the  legis¬
lative  union,  which  diverted  a  great  part  of  the  energies  of  the
community  from  national  to  sectarian  channels ;  to  the  agitation
of  O'Connell,  which  united  the  democracy  of  Ireland,  under  the
guidance  of  their  priests,  in  a  fierce  struggle  for  that  Catholic
emancipation,  which  the  Parliament  of  the  gentry  of  Ireland
had  been  perfectly  ready  to  grant  in  1793  and  in  1795.

A  Catholic  college  on  a  small  scale  had  been  established  at
Carlow  in  1793,  and  it  counted  among  its  professors  some
French  refugee  priests.1  It  was  intended,  however,  for  the
education  of  laymen,  and  the  College  of  Maynooth  was  the  first
Irish  establishment  since  the  Revolution  for  the  education  of  the
priesthood.  Though  instituted  primarily  for  the  education  of
that  body,  there  was,  at  first,  some  question  of  including  Catho-

Newenham’s  correspondent  gives  of
the  decline  of  ecclesiastical  influence,
is  corroborated  by  several  passages  in
Wolfe  Tone’s  diary  and  autobiography,
and  by  several  statements  in  the  Irish
debates.  It  is  curious  to  observe  that
as  late  as  1806,  Alexander  Knox,  one
of  the  most  earnest  and  profound  re¬
ligious  writers  of  his  time,  wrote  to

Hannah  More:  ‘I  have  little  doubt
that  a  time  will  come  when  the
Roman  Catholic  clergy  of  Ireland,
will,  in  a  body,  propose  to  conform  to-
our  Church.’  (Knox’s  Remain *  iii
188.)

1  llrenan’s  Ecclesiastical  History
of  Ireland ,  ii.  321.

CH.  XXVII.

OPPOSITION  TO  SECTARIAN  COLLEGES.

127

lie  lay  students  in  the  establishment,  and  although,  apparently,
through  the  influence  of  Archbishop  Troy,  this  project  was
dropped,1  no  further  restriction  was  introduced  into  the  Bill
than  that  the  college  was  to  be  ‘  for  the  better  education  of
persons  professing  the  popish  or  Roman  Catholic  religion.’  Its
government  was  placed  in  the  bands  of  a  body  of  trustees,  to
which  the  Chancellor  and  the  three  other  chief  judges  officially
belonged,  but  which  consisted  mainly  of  the  Catholic  bishops,
who,  however,  were  elected  as  individuals,  and  not  as  enjoying
any  titular  rank  or  dignity.  They  were  empowered  to  purchase
lands  to  the  annual  value  of  1,000/.,  and  to  receive  private  sub¬
scriptions  and  donations  without  limit,  for  the  purposes  of  the
college.  There  was,  at  first,  no  Government  endowment  for
the  education  of  the  students,  but  an  immediate  parliamentary
grant  of  8,000/.  was  voted  to  purchase  a  house  and  other
necessary  buildings  for  their  accommodation.  Dr.  Hussey  was
appointed  President.2

Hely  Hutchinson,  who  had  so  clearly  foreseen,  and  so  power¬
fully  stated,  the  danger  of  establishing  in  Ireland  separate
sectarian  colleges,  was  no  longer  on  the  stage.  He  had  died  in
September  1794,  and  the  nation  thus  lost,  in  a  most  critical  moment,
the  wisest  and  ablest  advocate  of  liberal  education.  The  dis¬
cussion  on  the  Maynooth  Bill  in  the  Irish  Parliament  is  not
reported,  and  I  cannot  tell  whether  any  speaker  dwelt  upon  the
great  evil  of  dissociating  Irish  clerical  education  from  the  edu¬
cation  of  the  university.  A  very  able  man,  who  was  then  a
fellow  of  Trinity  College,  and  afterwards  Archbishop  of  Dublin,
in  evidence  which  he  gave  before  the  House  of  Lords  in  1825,
has  mentioned  the  strong  objections  which  he  and  others  out¬
side  Parliament  had  expressed  to  the  scheme,  and  the  pres¬
sure  they  put  upon  the  members  of  the  university  to  oppose
it.  ‘  The  disadvantages,’  he  said,  ‘  of  the  contracted  and  monas¬
tic  plan,  which  a  separate  college  for  Roman  Catholic  priests
would  require,  were  strongly  contrasted,  in  my  mind,  with  the
advantages  which  would  redound  both  to  the  character  of  the
Roman  Catholic  clergy  itself,  and  to  society  at  large,  from  the

i  See  on  this  subject  the  state-  2  Camden  to  Portland,  April  14,

ments  of  Lord  Kilwarden  and  of  Lord  1795  ;  Pelham  to  Portland  April  24;
Clare.  (Cornwallis  Correspondence,  35  Geo.  HI.  c.  21.  ( Cornwallis

iii.  368,  369,  371,  372.)  Correspondence,  in.  371,  372.)

128

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyii,

mixture  of  the  two  denominations,  Protestant  and  Roman
Catholic,  in  the  same  university.  At  that  time,  Roman  Catho¬
lic  students  abounded  in  Trinity  College,  and  there  was  nothing
of  the  hostility  between  the  two  religious  descriptions  that  has
since  unhappily  prevailed.  It  seemed,  then,  most  desirable  to
bring  the  two  classes  together  within  the  same  seminary,  and
for  this,  great  facility  was  afforded,  there  being  nothing  in  the
regulations  of  our  university  that  could  throw  impediments  in
the  way.  ...  It  appeared  to  me  and  others  at  that  day,  that
under  these  circumstances  an  arrangement  might  be  formed,
whereby  the  Roman  Catholic  students  might  have  every  benefit
of  a  liberal  university  education,  and,  at  the  same  time,  be  pro¬
vided,  through  some  distinct  scheme  of  religious  institution  of
their  own  formation,  with  the  instruction  peculiarly  requisite
for  their  future  profession,  the  heads  of  the  university  being  at
all  times  ready  to  offer  facilities  for  such  a  plan.’ 1

The  most  remarkable  fact,  however,  connected  with  the  dis¬
cussion,  that  has  come  down  to  us,  is  a  Catholic  petition,  which
was  presented  by  Grattan,  protesting  against  two  parts  of  the
scheme.  The  first  objection  of  the  petitioners  was  to  the  power
which  was  given  to  the  trustees  to  regulate  the  studies  and
make  all  appointments  in  the  college.  The  end  of  education,
they  said,  is  £  the  full  and  free  development  of  human  faculties,
and  the  formation  of  a  virtuous  character,’  and  it  should,  there¬
fore,  be  as  little  shackled  as  possible  by  any  external  restraint.
They  desired  that  both  admission  into  the  college,  and  all  pro¬
fessorships  and  posts  of  dignity  in  it,  should -be  thrown  open  to
examination,  and  should  thus  be  made  the  rewards  of  superior
merit,  without  any  possibility  of  jobbing.  They  cited  the  pub¬
lic  examinations  for  fellowships  and  sizarships  in  Trinity  Col¬
lege  as  examples,  and  they  earnestly  asked  that  a  similar  system
should  be  introduced  into  their  own  Catholic  college.  The  second
objection  is  still  more  remarkable.  It  was  to  the  clauses  which
provided  that  the  college  should  be  exclusively  Roman  Catholic
— that  no  Protestant  should  be  admitted  among  its  students  or
among  its  teachers.  Such  an  exclusion  was  pronounced  by  the
Catholic  petitioners  to  be  ‘  highly  inexpedient,  inasmuch  as  it

1  See  the  evidence  of  Archbishop  Magee  in  1825  before  the  Committee  on
the  State  of  Ireland,  p.  786.

ch.  xxvn.

burke’s  letters  on  maynooth.

129

tends  to  perpetuate  that  line  of  separation  between  bis  Majesty’s
subjects  of  different  religions,  which  the  petitioners  do  humbly
conceive  it  is  the  interest  of  the  country  to  obliterate ;  and  the
petitioners  submit  that,  if  the  youth  of  both  religions  were  in¬
structed  together  in  those  branches  of  classical  education  which
are  the  same  for  all,  their  peculiar  tenets  would,  in  all  proba¬
bility,  be  no  hindrance  hereafter  to  a  friendly  and  liberal  inter¬
course  through  life.’  ‘Having,’  they  added,  ‘in  common  with  the
rest  of  their  brethren,  the  Catholics  of  Ireland,  received,  as  one
of  the  most  important  and  acceptable  benefits  bestowed  on  them
by  his  Majesty  and  the  Legislature,  the  permission  of  having
their  youth  educated  along  with  the  Protestant  youth  of  the
kingdom  in  the  University  of  Dublin,  and  experience  having
fully  demonstrated  the  wisdom  and  utility  of  that  permission,
they  see  with  deep  concern  the  principle  of  separation  and  ex¬
clusion,  they  hoped  removed  for  ever,  now  likely  to  be  revived
and  re-enacted.’ 1

We  can  hardly  have  a  more  striking  proof  of  the  change  that
has  passed  over  the  spirit  of  Irish  Catholicism  than  is  furnished
by  this  petition,  and  if  its  recommendations  had  been  carried
out,  the  Irish  priesthood  might  have  been  a  very  different  body
from  what  it  has  become.  On  wholly  dissimilar  grounds,  Burke
also  looked  on  the  new  foundation  with  distrust.  The  strong
bias  in  favour  of  sacerdotalism,  which  broadly  distinguishes  him
from  Grattan,  appears  to  me  to  have  often  deflected  his  judg¬
ment,  and  I  cannot  regard  the  remarkable  letters  which  he  wrote
to  Dr.  Hussey,  who  was  now  negotiating  on  the  side  of  the
Catholic  priesthood,  as  evincing  real  prescience  or  wisdom.
Burke  was  extremely  anxious  that  Catholic  colleges  should  be
established,  but  he  would  have  gladly  placed  them  altogether
under  priestly  control.  The  prelates,  he  said,  should  accept,
from  any  Government,  money  for  the  establishment  of  such  col¬
leges  ;  they  should  consent  that  accounts  of  the  expenditure
should  be  annually  laid  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of
Commons,  to  prevent  all  suspicion  of  jobbing.  But  they  should
resist  every  other  interference,  and  decline  any  offer  which  re¬
served  to  the  members  of  the  Irish  Government  a  power  of
direction  or  control  over  clerical  education.  ‘  I  would  much
1  Irish  Pari.  Del.  xv.  201-203.

252

130

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvli.

rather  trust,’  he  wrote,  c  to  God’s  good  providence  and  the  con¬
tributions  of  your  own  people,  for  the  education  of  your  clergy,
than  to  put  into  the  hands  of  your  known,  avowed,  and  implac¬
able  enemies — into  the  hands  of  those  who  make  it  their  merit
and  their  boast,  that  they  are  your  enemies — the  very  fountains
of  your  morals  and  your  religion.  .  .  .  The  scheme  of  these  col¬
leges,  as  you  well  know,  did  not  originate  from  them.  But  they
will  endeavour  to  pervert  the  benevolence  and  liberality  of  others
into  an  instrument  for  their  own  evil  purposes.  Be  well  assured
that  they  never  did,  and  that  they  never  will,  consent  to  give
one  shilling  of  money  for  any  other  purposes  than  to  do  you
mischief.  If  you  consent  to  put  your  clerical  education,  or  any
other  part  of  your  education,  under  their  direction  or  control,
then  you  will  have  sold  your  religion  for  their  money.  There
will  be  an  end,  not  only  of  the  Catholic  religion,  but  of  all
religion,  all  morality,  all  law,  and  all  order,  in  that  unhappy
kingdom.’

He  begs  his  correspondent,  not  to  be  misled  by  childish
discussions  about  the  rights  of  states  and  governments  to  control
education.  The  real  question,  he  said — and  in  this  respect,  his
words  were  profoundly  true,  and  have  a  much  wider  application
than  he  gave  to  them — is,  who  are  the  men  who  would  exercise
this  power.  1  Know  the  men  you  have  to  deal  with,  in  their
concretes,  and  then  you  will  judge  what  trust  you  are  to  put  in
them,  when  they  are  presented  to  you,  in  their  abstract.’  Such
men  as  the  Archbishop  of  Cashel,  or  Cooke,  or  Duigenan,  or  the
Speaker,  or,  above  all,  Fitzgibbon — ‘  you  best  know  whether  they
are  your  friends  or  your  enemies.’ 1

With  these  sentiments,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Burke  should
have  been  displeased  with  the  Maynooth  Bill.  ‘  I  hear,’  he
wrote,  ‘  and  am  extremely  alarmed  at  hearing,  that  the  Chan¬
cellor  and  the  chiefs  of  the  benches  are  amongst  your  trustees.
If  this  be  the  case,  so  as  to  give  them  the  power  of  intermed¬
dling,  I  must  fairly  say,  that  I  consider,  not  only  all  the  benefit
of  the  institution  to  be  wholly  lost,  but  that  a  more  mischievous
project  never  was  set  on  foot.  I  should  much  sooner  make  your
college  according  to  the  first  act  of  Parliament,  as  a  subordinate
department  to  our  Protestant  University — absurd  as  I  always
1  Burke’s  Correspondence,  iv.  295-306.

CH.  XXVII,

BURKE'S  LETTERS  ON  MAYNOOTH.

131

thought  that  plan  to  he — than  make  you  the  instrument,  or
instruments,  of  the  jobbing  system.  I  am  sure  that  the  constant
meddling  of  the  bishops  and  clergy  with  the  Castle,  and  of  the
Castle  with  them,  will  infallibly  set  them  ill  with  their  own
body.  All  the  weight  which  hitherto  the  clergy  have  had  in
keeping  the  people  quiet,  will  be  wholly  lost.’

In  the  same  letter,  Burke,  while  expressing  his  regret  at  the
Jacobinical  tone  which  had  appeared  in  the  Catholic  lay  com¬
mittee,  protested  against  its  dissolution,  on  the  ground  that  the
Catholics,  without  a  complete  organisation,  would  be  unable  to
contend  with  their  enemies.  He  strongly  advocated  a  project,
which  had  been  formed,  for  making,  with  the  assistance  of  their
clergy,  a  religious  census,  in  order  to  show  their  great  numerical
superiority ;  and  he  quoted,  with  approbation,  a  saying  of  Lord
Fitzwilliam,  that  ‘  the  depression  of  the  Catholics  is  not  the  per¬
secution  of  a  sect,  but  tyranny  over  a  people.’  He  concluded
his  letter,  by  desiring  that  some  books,  which  had  been  left  by
his  deceased  son,  should  be  presented  as  a  memorial,  either  to
the  new  Catholic  college,  or  to  that  of  Carlow.1

This  letter  appears  to  have  been  shown  about  in  Catholic
circles,  and  it  came  to  the  knowledge  of  one  of  the  agents  of
the  Government,  who  took  a  copy  and  sent  it  to  the  Castle.
Pelham  was  at  that  time  in  England,  but  Cooke  transmitted  to
him  this  copy  with  injunctions  of  profound  secrecy,  and  as  a
document  of  the  highest  importance.  ‘  If  it  be  true,’  he  said,
‘  that  the  author  has  been  the  chief,  if  not  sole,  mover  of  all
the  measures  with  respect  to  the  Irish  Catholics,  his  real  creed,
principles,  and  object  can  no  longer  be  misunderstood,’  and  he  de¬
clared  that  the  letter  showed  clearly  that  the  design  of  Burke,
and  of  his  Irish  followers,  was  to  bring  about  a  revolution  in
Ireland,  and  to  make  Ireland  a  popish  country.  In  truth,  how¬
ever,  this  letter,  though  naturally  exceedingly  displeasing  to  the
knot  of  men  who  had  just  obtained  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitz¬
william,  contained  absolutely  nothing  which  was  not  in  full  ac¬
cordance  with  the  well-known  opinions  of  Burke,  and  Pelham
wrote  back  to  his  alarmed  correspondent,  that  he  had  already
seen  it,  as  it  had  been  shown  to  him  by  Dr.  Hussey.2  Burke’s

1  Burke’s  Correspondence ,  iv.  320-  2  Cooke  to  Pelham,  October  6

323.  (most  secret),  23,  1795.

132

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyii.

extreme  distrust  of  Fitzgibbon  and  several  other  leading  mem¬
bers  of  the  Irish  administration,  had  long  been  expressed,  and  he
believed — as  it  appears  to  me  very  erroneously — that  a  system
of  separate  clerical  education  which  was  wholly  under  ecclesias¬
tical  influence,  would  prove  an  antidote  to  the  Jacobin  spirit,
which  he  saw  rising  among  the  Irish  Catholics.

In  another  letter,  written  at  this  time,  he  expressed  fully  to
Dr.  Hussey  the  alarm  with  which  he  saw  Catholic  Ireland,  or
at  least  the  lay  leaders  of  Catholic  Ireland,  drifting  into  disaffec¬
tion.  c  I  do  not  like,’  he  wrote,  ‘  the  style  of  the  meeting  at
Francis  Street.1  The  tone  was  wholly  Jacobinical.  .  .  .  The
language  of  the  day  went  plainly  to  a  separation  of  the  two
kingdoms.  God  forbid  that  anything  like  it  should  ever  happen.
They  would  both  be  ruined  by  it ;  but  Ireland  would  suffer  most
and  first.  ...  It  is  a  foolish  language,  adopted  from  the  United
Irishmen,  that  their  grievances  originate  from  England.  ...  It
is  an  ascendency  which  some  of  their  own  factions  have  obtained
here,  that  has  hurt  the  Catholics  with  this  Government.  It  is
not  as  an  English  Government,  that  Ministers  act  in  that  manner,
but  as  assisting  a  party  in  Ireland.  When  they  talk  of  dissolv¬
ing  themselves  as  a  Catholic  body,  and  mixing  their  grievances
with  those  of  their  country,  all  I  have  to  say  is,  that  they  lose
their  own  importance  as  a  body,  by  this  amalgamation,  and  they
sink  real  matters  of  complaint  in  those  which  are  factious  and
imaginary.  For,  in  the  name  of  God,  what  grievances  has
Ireland  as  Ireland,  to  complain  of,  with  regard  to  Great  Britain  ;

unless  the  protection  of  the  most  powerful  country  upon  earth _

giving  all  her  privileges,  without  exception,  in  common  to  Ire¬
land,  and  reserving  to  herself  only  the  painful  pre-eminence  of
tenfold  burthens — be  a  matter  of  complaint  ?  The  subject,  as  a
subject,  is  as  free  in  Ireland  as  he  is  in  England.  As  a  member
of  the  Empire,  an  Irishman  has  every  privilege  of  a  natural-
born  Englishman.  .  .  .  No  monopoly  is  established  against  him
anywhere.  The  great  staple  manufacture  of  Ireland  .  .  .  is  privi¬
leged  in  a  manuer  that  has  no  example.  The  provision  trade  is
the  same.  Nor  does  Ireland,  on  her  part,  take  a  single  article
from  England,  but  what  she  has  with  more  advantage  than  she

1  The  assembly  of  Catholics  on  April  9,  at  which  the  resolutions  about  the
Union  were  carried.

CH.  XXVII.

TRUE  POLICY  OE  THE  CATHOLICS.

133

could  have  it  from  any  nation  upon  earth.  I  say  nothing  of  the
immense  advantage  she  derives  from  the  use  of  the  English
capital.  .  .  .  The  tenor  of  the  speeches  in  Francis  Street,  attack¬
ing  the  idea  of  an  incorporating  union  between  the  two  king¬
doms,  expressed  principles  that  went  the  full  length  of  a  separa¬
tion,  and  of  a  dissolution  of  that  union  which  arises  from  their
being  under  the  same  crown.  .  .  .  Ireland  constitutionally  is  in¬
dependent  ;  politically  she  can  never  be  so.  It  is  a  struggle
against  nature.  She  must  be  protected,  and  there  is  no
protection  to  be  found  for  her,  but  either  from  France  or
England.’

He  proceeded  to  dilate  updn  the  ruin  which  would  befall
Ireland  if  she  placed  herself  under  the  dependence  of  France  ;
the  danger  of  the  new  Irish  Jacobins,  ‘  who,  without  any  regard
to  religion,  club  all  kinds  of  discontents  together,  in  order  to
produce  all  kinds  of  disorders  ;  ’  the  madness  and  wickedness  of
Catholics  who  ally  themselves  with  a  power  which  is  the  invete¬
rate  enemy  of  all  religions,  but  especially  of  Catholicism,  and
he  warned  the  Catholic  leaders  that  some  of  their  members  were
entering  on  a  course  which  would  deprive  them  of  their  oldest
and  most  trusted  allies.  ‘  Catholics,  as  things  now  stand,  have
all  the  splendid  abilities,  and  much  of  the  independent  property,
in  Parliament,  in  their  favour,  and  every  Protestant  (I  believe,
with  very  few  exceptions)  who  is  really  a  Christian.  Should
they  alienate  these  men  from  their  cause,  their  choice  is  amongst
those  who  indeed  may  have  ability,  but  not  wisdom  or  temper
in  proportion,  and  whose  very  ability  is  not  equal,  either  in
strength  or  exercise,  to  that  which  they  lose.  They  will  have  to
choose  men  of  desperate  property,  or  of  no  property,  and  men
of  no  religious  and  no  moral  principle.’

There  is  much  more  in  this  letter  which  deserves  quotation,
but  my  extracts  have  already  extended  too  far.  One  sentence,
however,  with  which  Burke  concluded  his  survey  of  Irish  poli¬
tics,  must  not  be  omitted.  ‘  If  Grattan,  by  whom  I  wish  the
Catholics  to  be  wholly  advised,  thinks  differently  from  me,  I
wish  the  whole  unsaid.’ 1

It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  letter  of  Burke  with  a  very

1  Burke’s  Correspondence ,  iv.  30S-317.  This  letter  was  written  May  18,
1795.

134

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

confidential  and  very  elaborate  letter,  which  was  written  nearly
at  the  same  time  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  his  sister,  Lady
Louisa  Conolly,  for  the  purpose  of  being  laid  before  her  husband,
who  was  one  of  the  most  important  members  of  the  Irish  House
of  Commons.  This  letter  discloses  very  clearly  another  order  of
ideas  about  Ireland,  which  was  certainly  influencing  the  minds
of  some  prominent  English  statesmen,  and  it  is  especially
curious,  as  the  writer  had  himself  been  at  one  time  a  parlia¬
mentary  reformer  of  the  most  extreme  democratic  type.  The
duke  expressed  his  deep  conviction  that  the  existing  bond
between  the  two  countries  was  uttei’ly  precarious,  and  could
not  possibly  be  permanent,  and  that  the  full  admission  of  the
Catholics  to  political  power  in  the  independent  Parliament  of
a  country  in  which  they  are  the  great  majority,  must  lead,
in  time,  to  their  ascendency,  to  the  ruin  of  the  Protestants,  to
the  ruin  of  the  British  Empire.  Its  first  consequence,  he  said,
would  be  the  downfall  of  the  Protestant  establishment.  The
next  would  be  the  ruin  of  the  landlords,  for  the  Protestant  owner¬
ship  of  land,  which  had  been  established  by  the  Act  of  Settle¬
ment  the  confiscations  and  the  penal  laws,  could  not  long  survive
a  political  revolution.  The  ascendant  Catholics  would  then,
very  naturally,  claim  a  Catholic  king  and  government,  which
would  mean  separation  from  Great  Britain,  and  separation  would
inevitably  pass  into  hostility.  All  these  calamities  seemed  im¬
pending  in  the  near  future,  and  the  only  possible  way  of  avert¬
ing  them,  was  the  speedy  enactment  of  a  legislative  union  of
the  two  countries.  Under  such  an  union,  the  Catholics  would
‘  only  become  a  partial  majority  of  a  part  of  the  Empire,  and
their  claims  must  give  way  to  the  superior  ones  of  the  ma¬
jority  of  the  whole.  .  .  .  The  whole  argument  and  justice  of  the
case,  which  was  before  in  their  favour,  becomes  against  them,
and  the  Protestant  king,  religion,  and  government  may  be  main¬
tained  in  Ireland.’

It  may  be  said  that  the  Catholics,  perceiving  this,  will
always  resist  an  union,  ‘  and  that  they  will  be  joined  by  the
Protestants,  in  opposing  a  measure  so  unpopular  in  Ireland,  by
which  all  parties  will  lose  so  much  of  their  consequence.  .  .  .
But  let  the  Protestants  choose.  It  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  only  alter-

CK  XXVII.

RICHMOND  PROPOSES  AN  UNION.

135

native  they  have,  to  carry  such  a  measure,  or  to  submit  to  the
evils  I  have  foretold,  which  will  come  on  with  rapid  steps,  and
if  they  delay  it,  there  will  soon  be  no  longer  the  Government
that  can  do  it.  They  had  better,  therefore,  make  this  use  of
their  power,  while  they  yet  have  it,  to  secure,  by  one  bold  mea¬
sure,  their  property  and  future  consequence.’  *  But,’  continues
the  duke,  ‘  I  think  the  Catholics,  too,  might  in  the  present
moment  be  got  to  concur  in  the  plan,  by  bribing  them  high.  .  .  .
Bribed  they  must  be,  as  after  all  it  is  clear  that  an  union  is  the
deathblow  of  their  vast  hopes,  which  they  will  only  give  up  for
some  certain  present  and  considerable  advantage,  and  Great
Britain  cannot  be  too  liberal  in  its  terms  of  union  with  Ireland,
as  England  was  with  Scotland,  for  although  the  lesser  nation
should  gain  many  preferences  and  peculiar  benefits,  the  larger
obtains  that  great  security,  which  overbalances  every  little  dis¬
tinction  that  can  be  granted.’

A  passage  follows  which  some  readers  will  regard  as  very  sig¬
nificant.  ‘  If  there  should  be  such  opposition  and  resistance  to
this  measure  in  Ireland,  as  to  occasion  a  civil  war,  even  that  ex¬
tremity,  provided  the  Protestant  interest  of  Ireland  is  hearty
with  us  in  the  cause,  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  better,  now  that
it  can  be  fought  on  advantageous  terms  for  such  an  object,
than  to  let  it  arise  a  few  years  hence,  inevitably  as  I  think  it
must,  on  grounds  we  cannot  maintain.’  The  question,  however,
though  it  is  one  of  deep  importance  to  the  future  of  the  British
Empire,  is  primarily  a  question  for  the  Irish  Protestants.
‘  England  may  subsist  without  Ireland,  but  the  Protestant  in¬
terest  in  Ireland  can  be  preserved,  in  my  opinion,  by  no  means
but  an  union.’  •

1  If  Conolly,’  continues  the  duke,  ‘  should  see  this  business
in  the  light  that  I  do,  I  would  advise  him  to  say  nothing  about
it  to  Mr.  Grattan,  but  to  confer  privately  upon  it  with  the  Chan¬
cellor  of  Ireland,  Lord  Fitzgibbon,  who  will  be  best  able  to
say  what  can  or  ought  to  be  done  to  unite  the  Protestant  interest
for  an  union.  Then  the  Chancellor  might  come  over  here,  and
talk  to  Mr.  Pitt  about  it.  Possibly  our  Government  here,  might
have  the  weakness  to  be  afraid  of  undertaking  the  only  plan
that  can  save  Ireland,  and  preserve  the  connection.  ...  If  it

136

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvu.

fails  of  success,  there  will  be  at  least  this  comfort,  that  one  has
done  what  one  could.’ 1

On  April  23,  the  long-deferred  trial  of  William  Jackson
for  high  treason  took  place.  He  was  defended  by  Curran  and
by  several  other  counsel,  and  among  them  by  Leonard  McNally,
at  whose  table  he  had  met  the  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen.
The  evidence  of  Cockayne,  corroborated  by  the  documents  that
had  been  seized,  was  conclusive,  and  after  a  trial  which  appears
to  have  been  perfectly  fair,  the  prisoner  was  found  guilty,  but
recommended  to  mercy.  He  had  during  his  long  imprisonment
rejected  a  promising  chance  of  escape,  and  appears  to  have  been
very  weary  of  his  wasted  and  discreditable  life.  He  was  brought
up  to  receive  judgment  on  the  30th.  The  spectators  were
struck  with  his  ghastly  pallor,  with  the  convulsive  twitches  of
his  countenance,  and  with  the  perspiration  that  rose  from  him
almost  like  a  steam,  but  his  arms  were  crossed  and  his  features
set  with  a  desperate  resolution.  When  asked  why  sentence
should  not  be  pronounced,  he  bowed  silently  and  pointed  to  his
counsel,  who  raised  a  technical  objection  and  argued  it  at  length.
Before  the  discussion  had  terminated,  Jackson  fell  down  in  the
agonies  of  death.  He  had  received  that  morning,  apparently
from  the  hand  of  his  wife,  a  dose  of  arsenic,  and  he  died  in  the
clock.  It  is  said  that,  as  he  entered  the  court,  he  had  whispered
with  mournful  triumph  to  one  of  his  counsel,  the  dying  words  of
Pierre,  in  Otway’s  ‘Venice  Preserved,’  ‘We  have  deceived  the
Senate.’  Perhaps  a  truer  picture  of  his  last  feelings  may  be
gathered  from  some  verses,  copied  in  his  handwriting,  which  were
found  upon  him  and  produced  at  the  inquest.  ‘  Turn  Thee  unto
me,  and  have  mercy  upon  me ;  for  I  am  desolate  and  afflicted.  The
troubles  of  my  heart  are  enlarged :  0  bring  Thou  me  out  of  my
distresses.  Look  upon  mine  affliction  and  my  pain,  and  forgive
me  all  my  sins.  Consider  mine  enemies  ;  for  they  are  many  ;  and
they  hate  me  with  cruel  violence.  0  keep  my  soul,  and  deliver
me  :  let  me  not  be  ashamed ;  for  I  put  my  trust  in  Thee.’

The  career  of  Jackson  was  not  one  to  excite  sympathy  or
enthusiasm,  but  his  trial  had  the  important  effect  of  convincing

1  The  Duke  of  Richmond  to  Lady  letter  is  among  the  papers  of  Lady
L  Conolly,  June  27,  1795.  This  Bunbury.

cn.  xxyii.

TONE  GOES  TO  PHILADELPHIA.

13?

the  Irish  people,  that  the  French  Government  was  seriously
attending  to  their  affairs,  and  that  a  speedy  invasion  was  very
probable,  and  it  also  produced  some  considerable  changes  among
the  United  Irishmen.  Wolfe  .Tone,  though  he  had  founded  the
society,  had  lately  quarrelled  with  its  leaders,  had  devoted  him¬
self  almost  exclusively  to  the  Catholic  question,  and  had  not
attended  a  meeting  or  taken  part  in  the  concerns  of  the  United
Irishmen  since  May  1793!  He  was  now  deeply  compromised,
for  though  he  had  refused  the  mission  to  France,  his  intercourse
with  Jackson  was  known,  and  his  representation  of  the  state  of
Ireland  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Government.  He  did  not,
however,  believe  that  there  was  any  sufficient  evidence  to  en¬
danger  his  life,  and  the  law  officers  were  of  the  same  opinion.
He  was  a  popular  man,  and  the  large  circle  of  his  friends  in¬
cluded  several  who  differed  widely  from  his  politics ;  among
others,  Marcus  Beresford,  the  son  of  the  all-powerful  John
Beresford.  Through  the  kindly  intervention  of  the  Beresfords,
and  with  the  assent  of  the  Attorney-General,  Wolfe  Tone  made
a  compact  with  the  Government.  He  acknowledged  that  he
had  held  conversations  of  a  very  criminal  nature  with  Jackson ;
he  drew  up  in  writing  a  minute  account  of  all  that  had  passed
between  Jackson,  Rowan,  and  himself,  and  he  agreed  to  leave
Ireland,  provided  that  he  was  not  himself  brought  to  trial,  that
he  was  not  called  as  a  witness,  and  that  his  confession  was  not
made  use  of  against  either  Rowan  or  Jackson,  or  to  the  pre¬
judice  of  any  other  person  mentioned,  except  for  the  purpose  of
preventing  a  renewal  of  treasonable  practices.  In  May  1795  he
sailed  for  Philadelphia,  where  he  not  long  after  met  Napper  Tandy
and  Hamilton  Rowan.1 2

A  less  known  but  more  important  result  of  the  arrest  of
Jackson,  remains  to  be  told.  Hitherto  the  information  which
the  Government  had  obtained  about  the  proceedings  of  the
United  Irishmen,  had  been  of  a  very  slight  and  superficial  cha¬
racter,  but  they  now  obtained  the  services  of  a  man  who  had  a
real  knowledge  of  the  inner  mechanism  of  the  agitation,  and  whose

1  Wolfe  Tone’s  Memoirs,  i.  121.  sidered  it  a  great  object  to  get  Tone

2  Tone’s  own  account  of  the  trans-  out  of  the  country  Tone’s  confession
action  ( Memoirs ,  i.  114-121),  must  be  appears  to  have  been  ultimately  given
compared  with  the  Beresford  Corre-  to  Lord  Clare.

sj)ondence,  ii.  24-34.  Beresford  con-

138

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyii.

letters  form  one  of  tlie  best  pictures  of  the  events  that  are  to
be  related.  Leonard  McNally  had  been  for  sometime  the  most
conspicuous  lawyer  connected  with  the  movement.  He  was
born  in  Dublin  in  1752,  and,  in  addition  to  his  legal  career,
he  mixed  much  both  in  literature  and  politics.  He  practised
for  a  short  time  at  the  English  bar.  He  edited  a  newspaper
called  the  ‘  Public  Ledger.’  He  published  several  plays  and  comic
operas,  some  of  which  were  very  successful,  and  he  attained
considerable  practice  at  the  Irish  bar,1  though  he  was  not  quite
in  the  first  rank,  and  though  some  cloud  of  suspicion  aud  dis¬
credit  seems  to  have  always  hung  over  his  reputation.  Nature
had  not  dealt  kindly  with  him,  and  there  was  much  in  his
appearance  and  manner  that  provoked  ridicule  and  contempt.
Sir  Jonah  Barrington  had  quarrelled  with  him,  and  his  accuracy
in  narrative  can  never  be  trusted,  but  he  had  a  keen  eye  for
personal  characteristics,  and  his  picture  of  McNally  seems  con¬
firmed  by  other  evidence.  He  described  him  as  ‘  a  good-natured,
hospitable,  talented,  and  dirty  fellow,’  with  a  fine  eye,  but  a
grotesque  figure  nearly  as  broad  as  it  was  long,  with  legs  of  un¬
equal  length,  a  face  that  no  washing  could  clean,  a  great  deal  of
middling  intellect,  a  shrill,  full,  good  bar  voice,  great  quickness  at
cross-examination,  and  sufficient  adroitness  in  defence.  He  had,
however,  higher  qualities  than  this  sketch  would  imply — a  singu¬
larly  wise,  just,  and  luminous  judgment  in  politics,  a  genuine
humanity  of  disposition  and  generosity  of  impulse,  which  never
wholly  deserted  him  in  the  midst  of  a  base  and  treacherous  career.

He  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  many  men  who  have
been  impelled  by  an  eager  intellectual  temperament  into  situa¬
tions  of  danger,  which  their  nervous  organisation  was  quite  unfit
to  endure,  and  there  is,  I  think,  no  reason  to  doubt  that  for  many
years  he  was  sincerely  attached  to  the  popular  cause.  He  wrote
a  pamphlet  on  the  claims  of  Ireland,  as  early  as  1782.  He  was
counsel  for  Napper  Tandy  in  his  quarrel  with  the  House  of

1  In  a  letter  to  the  Government  in
1805,  asking  tor  one  of  the  places
created  by  a  new  Police  Bill,  McNally
said  that  he  had  then  been  twenty-
nine  years  at  the  bar ;  that  for  sixteen
years  he  had  been  in  constant  practice
in  the  courts  of  criminal  jurisdiction
in  Ireland,  and  that  he  had  been  em¬

ployed  for  the  defendant  in  almost
every  important  trial  in  Ireland  since
1790.  He  had  published  a  successful
book  on  ‘  the  law  of  evidence,’  and
had  written,  but  not  yet  published,
another  on  ‘the  laws  for  preserving
the  peace,’  (July  4,  1805, I.S.P  O.)

CH.  XXVII.

LEONARD  McNALLY.

139

Commons.  He  was  an  original  member  of  the  United  Irish
Society,  and  when  Barrington  in  1793  made  some  imputation  on
that  society,  McNally  challenged  him,  and  was  severely  wounded
in  the  duel.  Shut  out  from  all  Crown  patronage  and  greatly
injured  in  his  practice  at  the  bar,  by  the  imputation  of  disloyalty
and  by  the  disfavour  of  those  in  authority,  NcNally  lost  much
more  by  his  politics  than  he  ever  gained  from  the  Government,
and  he  was  a  trusted  member  of  the  National  party.  Like  most
of  the  first  United  Irishmen,  he,  however,  probably  only  aimed
at  parliamentary  reform ;  and  he  saw  with  dismay,  that  the
movement  to  which  he  had  committed  himself,  and  which  was
at  first  perfectly  legal,  was  sweeping  on  rapidly  to  revolution.
In  a  letter,  written  in  May  1794,  the  informer  who  has  already
been  cited,  mentions  the  great  and  evident  terror  shown  by
McNally  at  the  meetings  of  the  committee  when  matters  began
to  assume  a  treasonable  tone.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  ground
for  the  suspicion,  that,  when  with  his  accustomed  hospitality  he
received  Jackson  and  Cockayne  at  his  table,  and  introduced  them
to  the  leaders  of  the  movement,  he  was  acting  as  a  Government
agent.  Much  treason,  however,  appears  to  have  been  talked  on
the  occasion,  and  when  the  timid  and  nervous  lawyer  learnt  that
it  had  been  all  overheard,  and  noted  down  by  a  spy,  he  perceived
that  he  was  in  the  power  of  the  Government,  and  he  resolved  to
save  himself  from  ruin  by  betraying  the  cause.

His  first  service  was  a  peculiarly  shocking  one.  Jackson,
shortly  before  his  death,  had  found  an  opportunity  of  writing
four  short  letters,  recommending  his  wife  and  child,  and  a  child
who  was  still  unborn,  to  two  or  three  friends,  and  to  the  care  of
the  French  nation,  and  he  also  drew  up  a  will,  leaving  all  he
possessed  to  his  wife,  and  entrusting  McNally  with  the  protec¬
tion  of  her  interests.  He  wrote  at  the  bottom  of  it,  ‘  Signed
and  sealed  in  presence  of  my  dearest  friend,  whose  heart  and
principles  ought  to  recommend  him  as  a  worthy  citizen —
Leonard  McNally.’  These  precious  documents  he  entrusted,  when
dying,  to  his  friend,  and  about  three  weeks  after  the  death  of  J ack-
son,  McNally  placed  them  in  the  hands  of  the  Irish  Government.

A  few  days  later,  Camden  sent  a  copy  of  them  to  England,
with  a  ‘  most  secret  and  confidential  letter.’  1  The  paper  which
accompanies  this,’  he  said,  ‘  was  delivered  to  Counsellor  McNally,

140

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch  xxvii,

from  whom  Government  received  it.  There  is  so  much  evidence
against  this  person,  that  he  is  (I  am  informed)  completely  in
the  power  of  Government.  Your  Grace  will  observe,  that  the
care  of  Mrs.  Jackson  is  recommended  by  her  husband  to  the
National  Convention,  and  that  Mr.  McNally  is  desired  to  assist
her  by  every  means  in  his  power  to  procure  her  assistance  from
them.  It  has  occurred  to  me,  that  an  excuse  might  be  made  for
Mr.  McNally’s  being  allowed  to  enter  France  for  the  purpose  of
attending  to  this  woman’s  fortunes,  that  he  should  go  through
London,  and  in  case  your  Grace  should  wish  to  employ  him,  I
would  inform  you  when  and  where  he  will  be  found.’ 1

Portland  replied  that  he  was  perfectly  ready  to  make  use  of
the  services  of  McNally  in  France,  if  Camden  thought  that  he
might  safely  be  trusted,  but  he  suggested  that  this  was  very
doubtful.  The  control  which  Government  possessed  over  him
depended  entirely  upon  the  conclusive  evidence  of  treason  they
had  against  him.  Would  that  control  continue  in  a  foreign
country  ?  Camden,  on  reflection,  agreed  that  it  would  not  be
safe  to  try  the  experiment.  McNally,  however,  he  was  convinced,
would  be  very  useful  at  home.2

Of  this,  indeed,  there  could  be  little  doubt.  As  confidential
lawyer  of  the  United  Irishmen,  he  had  opportunities  of  informa¬
tion  of  the  rarest  kind.  It  is  certain  that  he  sometimes  commu¬
nicated  to  the  Government  the  line  of  defence  contemplated  by  his
clients,  and  other  information  which  he  can  only  have  received
in  professional  confidence,  and  briefs  annotated  by  his  hand,  will
be  found  among  the  Government  papers  at  Dublin.  He  was  also
able,  in  a  manner  which  was  not  less  base,  to  furnish  the
Government  with  early  and  most  authentic  evidence  about  con¬
spiracies  which  were  forming  in  France.  James  Tandy,  son  of
Napper  Tandy,  had  been  a  brave  and  distinguished  officer  in
the  service  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  although  he  had  been
a  United  Irishman  in  the  beginning  of  the  movement,  he  appears

1  Camden  to  Portland,  May  20,
1795  (Record  Office).  At  the  bottom
of  the  copy  sent  by  Camden  is  written,
*  True  copies  from  the  originals  deli¬
vered  to  me,  May  14,  1795,  by  J.  W.’
J.  W.  is  the  signature  under  which
McNally  invariably  wrote  to  the  Go¬
vernment.  I  am  unable  to  say  what

had  happened  to  him  between  Jack¬
son’s  death  (April  30)  and  May  14,
whether  fresh  evidence  had  been
brought  against  him,  and  under  what
circumstances  he  was  induced  to  sur¬
render  the  papers  of  Jackson.

2  Portland  to  Camden,  May  22 ;
Camden  to  Portland,  May  26,  1795.

CH.  XXVII.

LEONARD  McNALLY.

141

to  have  been  very  unlike  his  father  both  in  character  and  opinions.
McNally  was  his  intimate  friend,  and  by  his  means  saw  nearly
every  letter  that  arrived  from  Napper  Tandy,  and  some  of  those
which  came  from  Rowan  and  Reynolds.  The  substance  of  these
letters  was  regularly  transmitted  to  the  Government,  and  they
sometimes  contained  information  of  much  value.  Besides  this,  as
a  lawyer  in  considerable  practice,  constantly  going  on  circuit,  and
acquainted  with  the  leaders  of  sedition,  McNally  had  excellent  op¬
portunities  of  knowing  the  state  of  the  country,  and  was  able  to
give  very  valuable  warnings  about  the  prevailing  dispositions.

Pew  men  would  have  been  thought  less  capable  of  long-con¬
tinued  deception  than  this  good-humoured,  brilliant,  and  mer¬
curial  lawyer ;  and  in  times  when  public  feeling  ran  fiercely
against  all  who  were  suspected  of  disloyalty,  he  was  the  most
constant,  and  apparently  the  most  devoted,  defender  of  the
United  Irishmen.  Curran,  after  a  friendship  of  forty-three  years,
spoke  of  his  ‘  uncompromising  and  romantic  fidelity,’  and
Curran’s  son  has  left  an  emphatic  testimony  to  his  ‘  many  en¬
dearing  traits.’  Yet  all  this  time  he  was  in  constant  secret
correspondence  with  the  Government,  and  there  are,  I  believe,
not  less  than  150  of  his  letters  in  the  Castle  of  Dublin.  He  re¬
ceived  strangely  little  for  his  services.  Though  an  excellent
lawyer,  and  a  man  of  much  undoubted  ability,  he  was  over¬
whelmed  with  debts,  which  were  largely  due  to  his  supposed
politics.1  In  letter  after  letter  he  describes  himself  as  reduced
to  utter  destitution ;  but  from  time  to  time  he  obtained  from
the  Government  some  small  subsidy,  which  extricated  him  from
his  immediate  difficulties.  It  was  doled  out,  however,  with  a  most
tardy,  penurious,  and  uncertain  hand.2  At  last,  his  crowning

1  In  one  of  his  letters  to  the  Go¬
vernment  he  writes  :  ‘  Why  will  not

- answer  my  request  ?  I  am  in

deep  distress  for  money.  He  can  in¬
form  you  of  my  services.  I  had  no
resource  but  in  the  assistance  of  my
friends.  Everything  professional  is
lost  on  account  of  my  politics.’  (Jan.
9,  1797.)  In  recommending  McNally
for  a  pension,  Cooke  (if  he  was  the
writer  of  the  paper  in  the  Cornwallis
papers)  adds :  ‘  He  was  not  much
trusted  in  the  rebellion,  and  I  believe
has  been  faithful.’  (Cornwallis  Cur-

respondence ,  iii.  320.)

2  The  smallness  of  his  subsidies  is
very  remarkable.  In  one  letter  he
says :  1 P.  [Pollock]  assured  me  some
considerable  time  ago  that  theL.  Lnt.
had  promised  me  200Z.  a  year  for  the
life  of  myself  and  children,  yet  I  still
remain  without  having  this  business
settled.’  (J.  W.,  Sept.  3,  1796.)  Shortly
after,  Pollock  writes  that  J.  W,  should
have  some  money  for  Cork.  A  guinea
a  week  had  been  stipulated.  ‘  He  has
not  got  anything  for  the  last  twenty
weeks.’  (J.  Pollock,  July  9,  1796.)

142

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxtii.

reward  arrived  in  the  form  of  a  secret  pension  of  300£.  a  year,
which  was  disclosed  after  his  death.  Had  his  politics  from  the
beginning  been  of  a  different  type,  his  professional  talents  would
probably  have  raised  him  to  the  bench.

The  interest,  the  singularity,  and  the  melancholy  of  his  career
will  certainly  be  enhanced  by  reading  his  letters.  Written  for
the  most  part  in  great  haste,  without  regular  beginning  or  end¬
ing,  but  in  the  most  beautiful  of  handwritings  and  in  the  tersest
and  happiest  English,  they  reveal  with  great  fidelity  a  strangely
composite  character,  in  which  the  virtues  of  impulse  seemed  all
to  live,  though  the  virtues  of  principle  had  wholly  gone.  Though
his  revelations  were  very  important,  it  was  evidently  his  object
to  baffle  plots  without  injuring  individuals,  and  he  retained  all
the  good  nature  and  native  kindness  of  his  disposition.  He  re¬
tained  also,  to  a  very  remarkable  degree,  the  calmness  and  inde¬
pendence  of  a  most  excellent  judgment,  a  rare  discrimination  in
judging  the  characters  of  men  and  the  changing  aspects  of  events.
From  no  other  quarter  did  the  Government  obtain  so  many  useful
warnings,  and  if  the  advice  of  McNally  had  been  more  frequently
listened  to,  some  of  the  worst  consequences  of  the  rebellion  might
have  been  avoided.

The  country  was  now  passing,  with  a  portentous  rapidity,
into  a  condition  of  hopeless  moral  and  political  disorganisation,
and  disaffection  was  spreading  through  all  classes.  The  memo¬
rial  of  Wolfe  Tone,  which  had  been  brought  in  evidence  against
Jackson,  and  which  was  presented  to  the  French  Government  in
the  beginning  of  1796,  described  it  as  completely  ripe  for  revo¬
lution.  The  Protestants  of  the  Established  Church  alone,  he  said,
supported  England,  and  they  only  comprised  about  450,000  of
the  population.  The  Protestant  Dissenters,  whom  he  believed  to
be  twice  as  numerous,  and  who  formed  the  most  intelligent
portion  of  the  middle  class,  were  almost  all  republicans.  Re¬
publican  ideas  had  spread  widely  among  the  Catholic  leaders  ;
and  the  bulk  of  the  Catholic  peasantry,  ‘  who  had  been  trained
from  their  infancy  in  an  hereditary  hatred  and  abhorrence  of
the  English  name,’  and  were  in  a  condition  of  the  most  abject
misery,  had  almost  all  passed  into  the  organisation  of  the  De¬
fenders.  The  picture  seemed  an  exaggerated  one,  but  McNally
assured  the  Government  that  it  was  ‘justly  conceived  and  accu-

CH.  XXVII.

McNally’s  picture  of  Ireland.

143

rately  written.’  ‘  The  wliole  body  of  the  peasantry,’  McNally
said,  ‘  would  join  the  French  in  case  of  an  invasion,  or  rise  in  a
mass  against  the  existing  Government  if  any  men  of  condition
were  to  come  forward  as  their  leaders ;  and  in  either  of  these
events,’  it  was  very  doubtful  whether  the  militia  or  even  the
regular  army  could  be  fully  depended  on.

‘  The  sufferings  of  the  common  people,’  he  continued,  £  from
high  rents  and  low  wages,  from  oppressions  of  their  landlords,
their  sub-tenants,  the  agents  of  absentees,  and  tithes,  are  not
now  the  only  causes  of  disaffection  to  Government,  and  hatred
to  England ;  for  though  these  have  long  kept  the  Irish  peasant
in  the  most  abject  state  of  slavery  and  indigence,  yet  another
cause,  more  dangerous,  pervades  them  all,  and  is  also  indeed
almost  universal  among  the  middle  ranks,  by  whom  I  mean  the
upper  classes  of  artists  and  mechanics  in  the  cities,  and  farmers
in  the  country.  This  cause  is  an  attachment  to  French  princi¬
ples  in  politics  and  religion  lately  imbibed,  and  an  ardent  desire
for  a  republican  Government.  Rest  assured  these  principles,  and
this  desire  to  subvert  the  existing  Government  of  the  country,
are  more  strongly  rooted,  and  more  zealously  pursued  by  the
Roman  Catholics,  than  even  by  their  teachers  and  newly  acquired
allies,  the  Dissenters.  A  contempt  for  the  clergy  universally
prevails.  Deism  is  daily  superseding  bigotry,  and  every  man
who  can  read,  or  who  can  hear  and  understand  what  is  read  to
him,  begins  in  religion  as  in  politics  to  think  for  himself.’  This
is  shown,  not  only  by  the  language  of  the  peasants,  and  by  the
rapid  spread  of  Defenderism,  but  also  by  the  contempt  with
which  Archbishop  Troy’s  address  against  the  Defenders  was
generally  received,  though  it  was  read  publicly  by  the  priests
from  the  altars.  ‘This  address,  which,  a  few  years  ago,  would
have  operated  with  the  terrors  of  thunder  on  an  Irish  congrega¬
tion  of  Catholics,  is  now  scoffed  at  in  the  chapels,  and  reprobated
in  private.  ...  So  sudden  a  revolution  in  the  Catholic  mind  is
easily  accounted  for.  I  impute  it  to  the  press.  The  publication
of  political  disquisitions,  and  resolutions  by  the  societies  of
United  Irishmen  of  Belfast  and  Dublin,  written  to  the  passions
and  feelings  of  the  multitude,  affected  them  with  electrical
celerity.  These  papers  prepared  the  way  for  Paine’s  politics
and  theology.  Several  thousand  copies  of  his  various  writings

144

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch  xxvtt.

were  printed  at  Belfast  and  Cork,  and  distributed  gratis.  .  .  .
I  am  assured,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  true,  that  in  the  county  of
Cork,  Paine’s  works  are  read  by  the  boys  at  almost  every  school,
and  that  in  most  houses  they  now  supply  the  place  of  the  Psalter
and  Prayer  Book.’ 1

The  United  Irishmen,  whose  meetings  had  been  forcibly
suppressed  in  1794,  reconstructed,  their  society,  in  1795,  on  a
new  basis,  and  it  now  became  distinctly  republican  and  treason¬
able.  An  oath  of  secrecy  and  fidelity  was  substituted  for  the
old  test,  and  great  precautions  were  taken  to  extend  and  perfect  its
organisation.  The  inferior  societies,  which  had  at  first  consisted
of  thirty-six,  were  now  composed  of  only  twelve  members  each,
and  an  elaborate  hierarchy  of  superior  directing  committees  was
created.  There  were  lower  baronial  committees,  upper  baronial
committees,  district  and  county  committees,  and  provincial
directories,  each  being  formed  of  delegates  from  the  inferior
bodies ;  and  at  the  head  of  the  whole  there  was  a  general  executive
directory  of  five  members,  elected  by  ballot  from  the  provincial
directories,  sitting  in  Dublin,  and  entrusted  with  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  whole  conspiracy.  The  oath  bound  the  members  to
form  a  bond  of  affection  between  Irishmen  of  every  opinion,  and
to  endeavour  to  obtain  a  ‘  full  representation  of  all  the  people.’
This  phrase  was  substituted  for  ‘  an  equal  representation  of  the
people  in  Parliament,’  which  was  used  in  the  original  test,  and
the  suppression  of  all  mention  of  Parliament  was  not  with¬
out  its  significance.  In  order  to  preserve  secrecy,  the  names  of
the  members  of  the  supreme  directory  were  only  communicated
to  a  single  member  of  each  provincial  directory,  and  orders
were  transmitted  from  committee  to  committee  by  a  secretary
appointed  in  each.  Emissaries  were  sent  out,  and  much  seditious
literature  disseminated,  to  propagate  the  system.  A  subscription
of  one  shilling  a  month  was  paid  by  every  member.  Nightly
drilling  took  place  in  many  districts;  arms  were  collected,
and  the  prospect  of  a  French  invasion  was  kept  continually  in
view.  According  to  the  Government  information,  there  were
sixteen  societies  in  Belfast,  a  vast  number  in  the  counties  of

1  J.  W.,  Sept.  12, 1795  (Irish  State  in  the  following  pages  are  in  the  col-
Paper  Office).  In  order  to  shorten  lection  »of  private  and  confidential
my  references,  I  may  mention  that  correspondence  in  Dublin,
all  the  letters  of  McNally  referred  to

CH.  XXVII.

GRATTAN'S  ADVICE.

145

Antrim,  Down,  Derry,  Armagh,  and  Dublin,  and  between  two
and  three  thousand  in  all  Ireland.  At  Cork,  the  Government
was  informed,  there  were,  in  1795,  about  600  United  Irishmen —
‘  shopkeepers,  merchants’  clerks,  one  or  two  physicians,  farmers
residing  in  all  parts  of  the  county,  and  very  young  men  who
attend  for  the  pleasure  of  debate.  .  .  .  They  are  mostly  Pro¬
testant.  The  mayor  and  sheriffs  are  suspected  of  being  friendly
to  them.’ 1

Contempt  for  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  distrust  of  constitu¬
tional  agitation,  were  rapidly  spreading.  In  the  beginning  of
September,  Grattan,  Ponsonby,  Curran,  and  one  or  two  other
leaders  of  the  parliamentary  Opposition,  had  a  very  private  con¬
ference  with  the  principal  members  of  the  democratic  party
among  the  Dissenters  and  the  Catholics,  which  (probably  through
the  medium  of  McNally)  was  speedily  reported  to  the  Govern¬
ment.  Several  of  the  leading  Dissenters  were  there,  and  six
Catholics,  including  Keogh  and  Byrne.  Grattan  spoke  to  them
of  the  dangerous  state  of  the  country,  the  spread  of  Defenderism,
and  the  necessity  of  forming  a  plan  of  action  for  the  next
session  of  Parliament,  and  he  suggested  an  aggregate  meeting
of  all  classes,  and  an  address  to  the  King.  The  project  was
received  with  much  coolness,  and  Grattan  soon  saw  that  he
would  receive  no  support.  He  can  hardly  have  been  ignorant
of  the  hopes  and  sympathies  of  some  of  those  who  were  before
him,  and  his  language  to  them — even  as  it  appears  through  the
untrustworthy  medium  of  a  secret  Government  report — seems
to  me,  to  have  been  very  honourable  to  him,  and  excellently
calculated  to  influence  the  kind  of  men  he  was  addressing.  He
said  he  would  not  persevere  in  the  plan  which  he  had  prepared,
since  it  found  so  little  favour,  but  he  also  said,  ‘  every  exertion
should  be  made  to  put  an  end  to  the  spirit  of  insurrection,  and
to  resist  invasion,  as  the  French  would  merely  treat  Ireland  in
a  manner  most  calculated  to  weaken  England ;  that  they  would
halloo  the  lower  class  against  the  higher,  and  make  the  whole
country  a  scene  of  massacre  ;  that  in  a  year  or  two,  it  would  be
given  up  by  the  French  again  to  Great  Britain,  and  that  the
convulsion  would  be  the  ruin  of  the  country.’  ‘  My  reporter,’

1  First  Digest  of  the  Reports  on  the  United  Irishmen  and  Defenders  (Record
Office).

253

146

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  cir,  xxvit.

writes  Cooke  to  Pelham,  ‘  had  the  whole  from  a  leading  man  of
the  Catholics  who  was  present.  They  consider  it  as  a  plunge
of  Grattan’s,  who  they  think  in  a  cleft  stick.  You  will  be  cau¬
tious  of  mentioning  how  this  information  comes  to  you.’ 1

Much  more  serious  than  the  United  Irish  movement,  was  the
rapid  spread  of  Defenderism  among  the  Catholic  peasantry.  It
radiated  in  the  first  instance  from  the  county  of  Armagh,  and
grew  out  of  the  local  quarrel  between  Protestants  and  Catholics,
but,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  almost  immediately  lost  in  most
places  its  first  character,  and  became  a  revived  Whiteboy
system,  with  the  very  serious  difference,  that  a  strong  political
element  now  mingled  with  it,  through  the  belief  that  a  French
invasion  was  the  most  probable  method  by  which  its  different
objects  might  be  attained.  Numerous  letters  in  the  Government
correspondence,  show  the  terrible  rapidity  and  simultaneity  with
which  it  broke  out  in  many  counties,  the  various  forms  of  out¬
rage  that  were  perpetrated,  the  manner  in  which  all  agrarian
and  ecclesiastical  grievances  were  drawn  into  the  system,  and
the  utter  demoralisation  that  it  produced.  ‘  One  of  the  first
acts  of  violence,’  said  Lord  Camden,  ‘  and  of  system,  was  to  put
all  the  smiths  into  requisition,  compelling  them  to  make  pikes
and  spears,  some  new,  and  others  out  of  old  scythes.’  Parties
went  about  plundering  gentlemen’s  houses  of  arms,  and  their
information  was  so  good,  that  it  was  evident  that  they  were  in
correspondence  with  the  servants.  There  were  instances  of
servants  quitting  their  master  with  tears,  saying  that  they  would
be  murdered  if  they  remained.  In  many  parts  of  Leitrim,  Sligo,
Galway,  Longford,  and  Mayo,  depredations  were  taking  place  in
the  early  summer  of  1795.  In  Roscommon,  the  great  graziers
were  ‘  so  afraid  of  their  cattle  being  houghed  and  killed,  that
they  yielded  to  the  demands  of  the  people,  by  agreeing  to  raise
their  wages  and  lower  the  rent  of  the  potato  ground.’  ‘  Both
these  measures,’  writes  Camden.,  ‘  were  very  just  and  necessary
in  themselves,  but  very  improper  and  impolitic,  forced,  as  they
were,  by  intimidation,’  and  the  concession  naturally  gave  an  im¬
mense  encouragement  to  the  rioters.  ‘  In  Galway,’  it  was  no¬
ticed,  ‘  there  was  not  an  equal  pretence  for  discontent,  the  rent
of  the  potato  ground  being  lower,  though  the  wages  were  higher,’
1  Cooke  to  Pelham,  Sept.  3,  1795.  ( Polliam  MSS.)

cn.  xxvir.

THE  DEFENDER  CONSPIRACY.

147

and  the  disturbances  there,  were  for  a  time  at  least,  quelled
when  the  adjournment  of  Parliament  enabled  the  principal
gentlemen  of  the  county  to  return  to  their  estates.  The  usual
Irish  type  of  an  agrarian  code  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land
and  enforced  by  outrages,  was  very  apparent.  The  rioters
‘  summoned  people  to  appear  before  Captain  Stout,  the  nick¬
name  for  their  leaders,  and  settled  differences  about  wages  and
rent  by  a  jury,  and  imposed  fines.’  ‘  I  fear,’  wrote  the  Lord
Lieutenant,  1  there  is  too  general  an  expectation  among  the
common  people,  of  some  good  that  they  are  to  derive  from  fra¬
ternity,  and  they  have  lately  assumed  the  name  of  brothers,  and
they  are  encouraged  with  the  hope  of  being  what  they  call  up,
or  getting  uppermost,  which  is  totally  unconnected  with  any
religious  sentiment,  except  so  far  as  it  serves  as  a  pretext  for  in¬
fluencing  them  at  particular  times.’ 1

The  circle  of  disorder  in  a  few  weeks  spread  over  Meath,
West  Meath,  and  Kildare.  Emissaries,  it  was  said,  ‘  swear  the
lower  Roman  Catholics  to  secrecy,  and  to  the  French  when  they
land,’  and  there  were  nightly  meetings,  and  constant  robberies
of  firearms.  In  most  of  the  counties  in  Ireland  the  better  sort
of  people  showed  but  little  energy,  and  there  were  many  large
districts  without  a  single  important  resident  gentleman.  Very
much,  therefore,  was  thrown  on  the  Central  Government,  who  were
obliged,  as  far  as  they  could,  to  create  ‘  an  artificial,  if  they  can¬
not  establish  a  natural,  civilisation.’  ‘  The  greatest  pains  appear
to  be  taken  to  infuse  a  spirit  of  discontent  through  all  the  lower
orders  of  people  ;  ’  and  although  the  disturbances  were  not  likely
to  be  seriously  dangerous  unless  an  invasion  took  place,  they
made  it  impossible  to  withdraw  the  troops.  From  the  North  it
was  reported,  that  Defender  lodges  were  everywhere  multiply¬
ing,  the  principal  one  being  at  Armagh.  There  was  an  active
correspondence  kept  up,  but  never  through  the  post  office.
Everywhere  the  Defenders  were  administering  unlawful  oaths
and  seizing  arms.  They  were  accustomed  to  burn  the  turf  and
root  up  the  potatoes  of  those  who  refused  to  be  sworn,  cut  down
plantations  for  pike  handles,  dig  up  meadows,  level  banks,
hough  cattle,  rob  or  set  fire  to  houses,  ravish  or  murder.  In
eight  months  there  were  147  acts  of  murder,  robbery,  or  rape,
1  Camden  to  Portland,  May  28,  1795.

148

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyii.

in  the  single  county  of  Longford.  All  the  Protestants  for  forty
miles  round  Carrick-on-Shannon  were  disarmed.  Bodies  of
Defenders  numbering  2,000  or  3,000  appeared  in  arms,  and  no
less  than  thirteen  counties  in  the  course  of  this  year  were  infected.
There  were  notices  put  up  threatening  all  who  paid  tithes  or
taxes,  or  let  potato  grounds  for  more  than  four  guineas  an  acre.
There  were  attempts  to  regulate  the  price  of  land  and  lower
priests’  dues.  According  to  one  proclamation,  labour  was  to  be
paid  one  shilling  a  day  for  half  the  year,  and  tenpence  a  day  for
the  other  half,  and  though  tithes  might  be  paid  to  the  clergy¬
men,  they  might  not,  under  pain  of  death  and  destruction  of
goods,  be  paid  to  tithe  proctors  or  tithe  farmers.1

The  Government  were  very  anxious  to  ascertain  whether
there  was  any  connection  between  the  United  Irishmen  and  the
Defenders ;  but  after  several  hesitations  of  opinion,  Camden  at
this  time  acknowledged  himself  unable  to  discover  any  clear
proof  of  such  connection.  A  careful  digest  was  made  of  the
evidence  relating  to  both  societies,  and  a  comparison  was  sent
over  to  England  of  their  plans  and  objects.  Personal  represen¬
tation,  Camden  said,  was  an  aim  peculiar  to  the  United  Irishmen.
Using  signs  and  catechisms  was  peculiar  to  the  Defenders ;  and
abolishing  taxes  and  Church  cess,  lowering  the  priests’  fees,
lowering  the  prices  of  land,  of  potatoes,  and  of  meal,  raising
the  price  of  labour,  equalising  property,  and  restoring  popery,
were  Defender  objects,  of  which  there  was  no  trace  among  the
United  Irishmen.  The  characteristics  or  objects  common  to
both  were  fraternising,  numbering  their  committees,  naming
delegates,  providing  by  all  means  pikes  and  guns,  seducing  the
military,  abolishing  tithes  and  royalties,  separating  the  two
kingdoms,  expecting  assistance  from  France,  looking  forward  to
a  general  rising.

The  outrages  came  and  went,  and  sometimes  almost  dis¬
appeared  in  some  of  the  infected  counties,  but  then  again  broke
out  in  neighbouring  districts.  On  the  whole,  in  the  latter  part
of  the  year  they  appear  to  have  perceptibly  diminished,  but
they  were  still  very  serious,  and  wherever  they  had  appeared
they  left  behind  them  sedition  and  demoralisation.  ‘  It  is  diffi¬
cult,’  wrote  Camden, 1  to  overcome  the  impression,  so  general  in

1  June  and  July  letters.

CH.  XXVII.

THE  DEFEEDER  CONSPIRACY.

149

the  kingdom,  of  its  inhabitants  considering  it  a  conquered
country,  and  the  jealousy  of  the  English  can  only  be  lessened
by  the  greatest  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  lower  ranks,  who
in  many  parts  of  the  kingdom  are  grievously  neglected.’  He
suggested  that  the  old  power  once  exercised  by  English  justices
at  quarter  sessions,  of  proportioning  the  price  of  labour  to  that  of
food,  might  be  of  great  use  in  Ireland.1

At  a  trial  of  some  militiamen  for  having  leagued  themselves
with  the  Defenders,  it  came  out  in  evidence  that  many  had
taken  the  Defender  oath,  simply  because  they  then  obtained  a
certificate  which  enabled  them  to  travel  throughout  the  kingdom
free  of  expense,  being  lodged  and  provided  with  food  gratui¬
tously  by  their  colleagues.  ‘To  establish  a  solemn  league,’
wrote  one  informant,  ‘  with  gradations  and  authority,  seems  to
be  their  first  object ;  .  .  .  and  this  league  is  confined  to  Roman
Catholics,  and  directed  in  the  most  violent  degree  against  the
whole  body  of  Protestants,  .  .  .  whose  extirpation  they  confess
to  be  resolved.’  ‘  By  their  extreme  ferocity,  of  which  there  are
too  many  horrid  instances,  they  have  established  such  an  ascen¬
dency  over  the  lower  orders  of  people,  that  Government  has
never  been  able  to  obtain  an  entire  scheme  of  intelligence.’
Labourers  were  prevented  from  working  except  at  rates  esta¬
blished  by  Defenders.  Petty  juries  could  not  be  relied  on  in  De¬
fender  cases.  Arms  were  never  refused,  except  by  some  of  the
gentry.  The  Protestants  in  many  of  the  disturbed  parts  were
wholly  disarmed.  No  traces  had  yet  been  found  of  any  French
correspondence,  but  the  whole  movement  was  evidently  prepara¬
tory  to  a  rising  in  case  of  French  invasion.  A  great  desire  was
shown  to  seduce  the  military  and  militia,  but  both  had  on  the
whole  been  very  loyal.  At  Enniskillen,  however,  nine  soldiers  of
the  South  Cork  Militia  had  been  found  guilty  of  Defenderism,
and  there  were  a  few  other  cases.  No  one  with  any  stake  in  the
country  seemed  involved  in  the  movement,  and  the  proclamations

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Sept.  25,
1795.  ‘  Defenderism,’  wrote  Cooke

at  this  time,  ‘puzzles  me  more  and
more;  but  it  certainly  grows  more
alarming  daily,  as  the  effect  of  execu¬
tions  seems  to  be  at  an  end,  and  there
is  an  enthusiasm  defying  punishment.
The  secret  committee  of  gentlemen  in

West  Meath  have  this  day  recom¬
mended  the  taking  up  and  sending
off,  as  sailors,  the  suspected,  as  the
only  way  left  to  act.  The  late  punish¬
ments  of  informers  has  struck  such
terror,  that  they  cannot  hope  for  legal
conviction.’  (Cooke  to  Pelham,  Sept.
12,  1795.)

150

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvii.

were  evidently  tlie  work  of  very  illiterate  men.  1  Alehouse
keepers,  artisans,  low  schoolmasters,  and  perhaps  a  few  middling
farmers,  seem  to  be  the  leaders  in  the  country  and  in  the  pro¬
vincial  towns,  and  inferior  Roman  Catholic  priests  its  principal
instigators.’  In  Dublin,  Defenderism  had  taken  great  hold  of  the
weavers  in  the  Liberties,  and  generally  of  the  lower  mechanics.
Many  attempts  had  been  made  to  tamper  with  the  soldiers,  and
many  deserters  were  concealed  in  the  Liberties,  and  supplied
with  money  and  employment  as  weavers.

No  direct  communication,  said  the  same  writer,  has  been
discovered  between  the  Defenders  and  the  United  Irishmen.  The
latter  are  simply  acting  on  the  principles  of  pure  French  demo¬
cracy,  while  the  former  are  actuated  by  a  great  variety  of  motives.
The  successors  of  a  class  of  people  who  had  never  been  much
attached  either  to  the  Government  or  to  the  landed  proprietors,
they  had  now  caught  the  contagion  of  the  seditious  doctrines  of
the  time,  while  religious  animosities,  and  impatience  of  political
restrictions,  intensified  their  discontent.  Under  these  circum¬
stances,  the  soil  was  fully  prepared  for  an  explosion,  and  a  pro¬
vincial  dispute  between  the  Presbyterians  and  papists  proved
sufficient  to  annihilate  any  little  regard  for  good  order  that  re¬
mained.1

The  tension  of  anxiety  in  some  parts  of  Ireland  was  intoler¬
able,  and  it  continued  unabated  for  several  years.  Country
gentlemen  and  respectable  farmers  found  life  impossible  without
a  military  guard,  while  among  the  lower  classes  conspiracy
in  many  districts  was  universal,  though  it  is  probable  that  most
of  the  conspirators  took  the  Defender  oath  merely  in  order  to
save  themselves  from  depredation.  The  whole  framework  of
society,  and  all  the  moral  principles  on  which  it  rests,  seemed
giving  way.  Habits  of  systematic  opposition  to  the  law  were
growing  up  ;  outrages,  sometimes  of  horrible  cruelty,  were  looked
upon  merely  as  incidents  of  war,  and  savage  animosities  were
forming.  It  is  difficult,  in  a  tranquil  and  well-organised  coinmu-
nity,  adequately  to  realise  the  strain  of  such  a  state  of  society  on
the  nerves  and  characters  even  of  the  most  courageous  men.
Isolated,  or  almost  isolated,  in  the  midst  of  an  alien  population,
not  knowing  whom  they  could  trust,  or  how  far  the  conspiracies
1  Second  Digest  of  Letters  relating  to  Defenderism.

C'H.  XXVII.

LAWRENCE  O’CONNOR.

151

around  them  extended,  with  perpetual  rumours  of  invasion,
rebellion,  and  intended  massacre  floating  around  them,  the  Irish
country  gentlemen  were  supported  by  none  of  the  fierce  excite¬
ment  which  nerves  the  soldier  in  the  hour  of  battle.  McNally
mentions  the  acquittal,  in  Londonderry,  by  a  jury  of  wealthy
men,  of  several  persons  charged  with  Defenderism,  against  the
evidence  and  a  strong  charge  by  the  judge.  The  judge  ordered
the  sheriff  to  post  up  the  jurors’  names  in  the  court  house,  as
of  persons  unfit  to  serve  in  future.  The  sheriff  obeyed,  and
several  of  the  jurors  determined  to  bring  actions  against  him
for  libelling  them.1

In  Kildare,  which  had  hitherto  been  a  very  peaceable  and
prosperous  county,  with  a  large  resident  gentry,  the  Defender
movement  almost  assumed  the  dimensions  of  a  rebellion,  and  it
was  noticed  that  some  of  the  magistrates  against  whom  the
popular  feeling  ran  most  furiously,  were  Catholics.2  The  magis¬
trates  in  this  county  appear  to  have  acted  with  great  energy,
and  Lawrence  O’Connor,  a  Naas  schoolmaster,  was,  with  some
others,  found  guilty  of  administering  an  oath  to  be  true  to  the
French.  He  appears  to  have  been  leader  of  the  movement.
Desperate  attempts  were  made  by  several  hundred  armed  men  to
rescue  him.  Vengeance  was  vowed  against  all  who  were  con¬
cerned  in  his  arrest,  and  one  magistrate  was  three  times  fired
at,  and  severely  wounded.  The  law,  however,  was  carried  out,
and  O’Connor  was  hanged.  He  was  evidently  a  genuine  en¬
thusiast,  and  after  his  condemnation  he  made  a  speech  to  the
court,  which  is  very  interesting  as  explaining  the  motives  that
inspired  him.  There  appears  to  have  been  nothing  in  it  either
of  politics  or  of  religion.  He  dwelt  exclusively  on  the  miseries
and  grievances  of  the  poor — landholders  refusing  land  for
cottages,  rack  rents,  land  jobbers,  potato  plots  let  for  six  guineas
an  acre.  In  the  course  of  his  speech,  there  was  an  incident
which  could  hardly,  at  such  a  moment,  have  occurred  out  of
Ireland.  Judge  Finucane  interrupted  the  prisoner  by  saying,
that  he  at  least  ‘  had  always  let  his  lands  to  cottagers,  and  not  to
men  who  relet  them  to  rack  renters,  by  which  his  tenants  pros¬
pered.’  ‘  God  bless  your  lordship  for  that !  ’  exclaimed  O’Connor  ;
‘  you  will  yet  feel  the  benefit  of  it ;  but  you  must  allow  there  are
1  J.  W.  to  Pelham,  Sept.  17,  1795.  2  Plowden,  ii.  537,

152

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvii.

few  rich  men  like  yourself  in  the  country.’  McNally,  who  was
engaged  in  the  defence,  relates  that  O’Connor,  after  his  condem¬
nation,  was  offered  a  provision  for  his  family  if  he  would  make
discoveries.  He  answered,  £  He  who  feeds  the  young  ravens  in
the  valley,  will  provide  for  them.’ 1

One  of  the  most  enduring  effects  of  these  disturbances  was
the  diminution  of  the  influence  of  the  gentry  over  their  tenantry.
I  have  in  former  chapters  described  at  some  length  the  agrarian
circumstances  of  Ireland,  and  it  is  constantly  necessary,  even
at  the  risk  of  wearisome  repetition,  to  keep  these  circumstances
before  our  eyes,  and  to  watch  their  obscure  and  often  most  per¬
plexing  changes,  when  relating  political  events.  As  we  have
already  seen,  the  actual  owner  of  the  soil,  in  Ireland,  rarely
made  or  directly  paid  for  improvements,  but  he  threw  the  task
of  making  them  upon  large  tenants,  who  on  this  condition  re¬
ceived  great  tracts  at  very  low  rents,  on  leases  for  lives,  some¬
times  renewable  for  ever  on  the  payment  of  a  small  fine  at  the
fall  of  each  life,2  but  more  frequently  extending  over  fifty,
sixty,  seventy,  or  even  eighty  years.  This  system  of  land  tenure
grew  out  of  the  social  and  political  conditions  of  the  country  at
a  time  when  the  population  was  exceedingly  scanty,  and  what¬
ever  may  have  been  its  disadvantages,  it  was  at  least  not  in  any
sense  inequitable.  After  the  first  few  years,  the  contract  was
exceedingly  lucrative  to  the  farmer,  and  an  undisturbed  enjoy¬
ment  for  perhaps  half  a  century,  amply  compensated  him  for  his
original  outlay.  By  a  remarkable  series  of  laws  known  as  1  the
Timber  Acts,’  the  Irish  Parliament  endeavoured  to  encourage
planting,  by  giving  tenants  for  life,  or  for  years,  a  partial  or  abso-

1  J.  W.  to  Pelham,  Sept.  17,  1795.
An  interesting  account  of  this  trial
will  be  found  in  Walker’s  Hibernian
Magazine  for  November  1795.  The
judges  appear,  as  far  as  1  can  form  an
opinion,  to  have  tried  the  case  both
fairly  and  mercifully.  In  the  Pelham
Correspondenee  there  is  a  letter  from
the  Castle  giving  some  further  parti¬
culars.  ‘  O’Connor  was  executed  yes¬
terday  at  Naas.  He  was  extremely
penitent,  acknowledged  the  veracity
of  the  witnesses  against  him,  and  the
justice  of  his  sentence.  The  Roman
Catholic  clergy  refused  to  attend  him
at  the  time  of  his  execution,  or  to  ad¬

minister  the  Sacraments  to  him.  His
carcase  is  buried  in  the  courtyard  of
the  gaol,  and  his  head  is  to  be  set  up
upon  a  pole  in  the  front  of  the  build¬
ing.’  (S.  Hamilton,  Sept.  8,  1796.)

2  At  the  time  of  the  Devon  Com¬
mission,  it  was  estimated  that  one-
seventh  of  Ireland  was  held  under
this  tenure,  and  there  were  complaints
that  landlords,  who  found  the  rent
paid  to  them  absurdly  below  the  value
of  the  land,  frequently  availed  them¬
selves  of  the  negligence  of  tenants  or
of  technical  flaws  to  break  these  con¬
tracts.  ( Digest  of  Evidence  on  Occu¬
pation  of  Land,  i.  232,  233.)

CH.  XXVII.

THE  AGRARIAN  SYSTEM.

153

lute  property  in  the  trees  they  planted.  The  first  of  these  Acts
entitled  them  to  one-third,  and  the  second  to  one-half,  of  these
trees.  A  third  gave  them  the  entire  property  in  them,  provided
they  were  publicly  registered,  and  it  enabled  them  to  cut  them
down  at  the  expiration  of  the  lease  or  at  the  maturity  of  the
timber,  unless  the  landlord  or  reversioner  elected  to  purchase
them  at  a  price  settled  by  a  jury  of  freeholders  at  the  sessions.
A  fourth  Act  still  further  extended  the  power  of  the  tenant,
enabling  him  to  cut  down,  sell,  and_  dispose  of  the  trees  he  had
planted,  if  duly  registered,  at  any  period  during  the  term  of  the
lease.1

It  was  under  this  system  that  most  of  the  improvements  in
Ireland  appear  to  have  been  made,2  and  if  the  first  tenants  had
continued  to  occupy  and  to  cultivate  the  soil,  Ireland  would  have
had  one  of  the  most  flourishing  tenantries  in  Europe.  In  some
cases  this  actually  happened.  The  great  grazing  farmers,  whose
condition  contrasted  so  strongly  with  that  of  the  small  tenants,
were  probably  often  original  tenants.  Under  any  circumstances,
however,  it  would  be  a  rare  thing,  amid  the  many  vicissitudes  of
life,  for  an  original  tenant  and  his  descendants  to  remain  attached
to  the  same  farm  for  seventy  or  eighty  years ;  and  it  was  almost
inevitable,  when  the  demand  for  land  had  increased,  and  when

the  long  leaseholder  found  a  great  margin  between  his  profits  and
his  rent,  that  he  should  have  proceeded  to  sub-let.  If  he  was  a
man  of  an  inferior  stamp,  he  did  so  in  order  to  become  the  idle,
sporting,  dissipated,  and  worthless  squireen  so  graphically  de¬

scribed  in  the  pages  of  Young,
ambition,  he  probably  took  the

1  8  Geo.  I.  c.  8 ;  9  Geo.  II.  c.  7  ;

5  Geo.  III.  c.  17 ;  23  &  24  Geo.  III.
c.  39.

2  Another  method  was  thus  de¬
scribed  by  a  very  competent  authority.

‘  Lord  Redesdale,  once  Lord  Chancel¬
lor  in  Ireland,  states  that  leases  with
covenant  of  perpetual  renewal  arose
in  Ireland,  instead  of  fee  farms,  in
consequence  of  persons  purchasing
improvable  estates,  without  having
money  to  carry  on  their  improvements,
and  then  procuring  it  in  this  manner :
they  paid,  for  example,  15,000Z.  for  an
estate,  and  conveyed  it  to  another  in
fee  simple  for  10,000Z.,  taking  a  lease
of  the  whole,  with  covenant  for  per-

If  he  was  a  man  of  energy  and

same  course,  for  he  obtained  a

petual  renewal,  at  a  rent  equal  to  the
interest  of  the  10,000Z.’  (Ferguson  and
Vance’s  Report  on  the  Tenure  and  Im¬
provement  of  Land  in  Ireland,  1851,
p.  8.)  It  is  probable  that,  in  the  early
part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the
improvements  were  almost  always
made  by  the  leaseholders.  In  Arthur
Young’s  time,  there  were  evidently
many  very  enterprising  and  improving
landlords.  In  modem  times  the
drainage  works  have  been  in  general
chiefly  paid  for  by  the  landlord,  and
a  considerable  proportion  of  other
improvements  are  often  made  jointly
by  landlord  and  tenant.

154

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

considerable  profit  rent  from  bis  sub-tenant,  and  was  thus  en¬
abled,  with  the  advantage  of  a  secure,  independent  income,  to
enter  into  the  paths  of  trade  or  professional  life.  A  very  com¬
petent  writer  in  1787  has  noticed  that  it  was  chiefly  these  large
leaseholders  who  ‘  formed  that  middle  race  of  men  from  which  the
bar,  the  pulpit,  and  the  public  offices  are  supplied  with  their  most
distinguished  ornaments.’ 1

Sometimes  too,  but  especially  in  the  later  years  of  the  century,
the  great  leaseholder  was  put  over  an  estate  which  was  already
subdivided  into  numerous  small  tenancies,  in  order  to  act  as  the
managing  agent,  and  to  secure  without  trouble  a  fixed  and  steady
though  moderate  income  to  the  landlord,  instead  of  a  larger  but
fluctuating  income  collected  with  difficulty  from  small  tenants.
Sometimes  he  was  a  land  jobber,  who  made  it  his  business  to  take
large  tracts  of  land  at  a  low  rent,  subdividing  them,  and  letting
them  to  small  tenants  at  a  great  profit ;  and  very  often  he  was  a  con¬
sequence  of  the  embarrassments  of  the  landlord.2  It  was  a  common
thing  for  an  owner  who  desired  to  raise  at  once  a  large  sum  of

1  Considerations  on  the  Present
Disturbances  in  Munster,  by  Domi¬
nick  Trant  (1787).  Settlements  in
Ireland,  says  the  same  writer,  ‘  al¬
most  always  leave  the  possessor  of  the
estate  a  power  of  leasing  for  three
lives  or  thirty-one  years  ;  ihe  farmer
taking  a  lease  for  lives  (as  was  always
the  case  among  Protestant  farmers,
and  is  now  the  general  usage  since
the  late  relaxation  of  the  popery
laws),  chooses  them  among  the
healthiest  of  his  own  children  or  those
of  his  neighbour.’

2  Whitley  Stokes  described  the
middleman  as  made  ‘  necessary  by
the  indolence  of  the  landlord,  who  will
not  be  at  the  trouble  of  judging  for
himself  of  the  character  and  respon¬
sibility  of  his  tenants,  nor  of  keeping
small  accounts.  He  is  a  most  expen¬
sive  agent,  as.  his  profit  generally
amounts  to  Is.  in  the  1/.’  ( Projects
for  re-establishing  Internal  Peace  in
Ireland,  by  Whitley  Stokes,  1799,  p.
6.)  Archbishop  Magete,  in  his  funeral
sermon  on  Lord  Clare,  eulogised
him  for  having  always  refused
to  surrender  the  peasants  on  his
estate  to  the  middleman,  who  ‘  views
the  cultivator  like  the  clod  he
tills,  but  as  a  subject  of  profitable

traffic,’  and  who  ‘  constitutes  one  of
the  most  perniciously  operating  causes
of  the  wretchedness  ’  of  the  poor.
(Magee's  Works,  ii.  H89.)  ‘  This  most
pernicious  system  of  middlemen,’  says
another  well-informed  writer,  ‘  origi¬
nated  in  the  idleness  and  poverty  of
the  Irish  gentry.  A  gentleman  in¬
volved  in  extravagance,  and  unable
to  provide  for  his  immediate  wants,
would  often  let  a  portion  of  his
estate  on  a  long  lease  at  a  rent  as
small  as  three,  four,  or  five  shillings
an  acre,  on  condition  of  receiving  a
sum  of  money  at  the  moment.  The
immediate  lessee,  either  too  proud  or
too  lazy  to  cultivate  this  land  himself,
would  let  it  on  lease  to  another  at  a
profit  rent  of  ten  or  fifteen  shillings  an
acre ;  and  the  next  lessee  would  dis¬
pose  of  it  at  an  advanced  rent  to  a
third  person,  until  at  last  the  most
ignorant  and  indigent  of  the  people
became  the  occupiers  and  cultivators
of  that  land,  which,  in  the  hands  of
an  English  yeoman,  would  have  pro¬
duced  double  the  quantity  of  what  it
was  in  their  power  to  make  it  yield.’
(Bell’s  Description  of  the  Peasantry
of  Ireland  between  1780-1790  [1801],
p.  37.)

CH.  XXVII.

THE  AGRARIAN  SYSTEM.

155

money,  to  offer  as  an  equivalent  a -long  lease  at  a  very  low  rent,  or
to  reduce  the  rent  of  an  existing  leaseholder.  A  great  proportion
of  the  low  perpetuity  rents  which  are  so  common  in  Ireland,  may
be  traced  in  this  way  to  the  necessities  of  a  spendthrift  heir.  From
one  or  other  of  these  causes  it  resulted,  that  by  far  the  greater  part
of  Ireland  was  let  by  the  landowner  at  long  leases,  and  at  rents  so
low  that  sub-letting  was  almost  universally  profitable,  and  the
controlling  power  and  management  passed  out  of  the  hands  of
the  owners,  into  the  hands  of  men  of  a  much  lower  social  type.1
But  below  the  landlord  and  below  the  first  tenant,  land  was  again
and  again  sub-let,  and  in  these  lower  grades  the  competition  be¬
came  so  fierce,  the  system  of  1  canting,’  or  putting  up  farms  to
auction  without  any  regard  to  the  old  tenants,  was  so  general,
that  rents  were  forced  up  to  the  highest  point,  and  the  cottier
who  held  a  little  plot  of  potato  ground  from  the  farmer,  and
worked  out  his  rent  by  labour,  was  one  of  the  most  miserable  of
mankind.

This  economical  condition  was  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Ire¬
land.  We  have  already  seen  it  in  Scotland,  and  it  may  probably
be  found  in  the  early  agricultural  history  of  many  countries,  but
the  special  circumstances  of  Ireland  had  contributed  to  aggravate
it.  The  old  legislative  destruction  of  manufactures,  and  the  de¬
pressing  influence  of  certain  portions  of  the  penal  code,  had  thrown
too  many  for  subsistence  on  the  soil,  taken  away  some  of  the
chief  spurs  to  industry,  and  produced  moral  effects  which  con-

1  Miss  Edgeworth,  in  her  very  in¬
structive  sketch  of  the  farming  system
at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,
says  :  ‘  There  was  a  continual  struggle
between  landlord  and  tenant  upon  the
question  of  long  and  short  leases. .  .  .
The  offer  of  immediate  high  rent,  or
of  fines  to  be  paid  down  directly,
tempted  the  landlord’s  extravagance,
or  supplied  his  present  necessities  at
the  expense  of  his  future  interests;
and  though  aware  that  the  value  of
improvable  land  must  rise,  or  that  he
was  letting  it  under  its  actual  value,
yet  if  the  landlord  was  not  resident
on  his  estate,  and  if  he  merely  wanted
to  get  his  rents  without  trouble,  he
was  easily  tempted  to'  this  impru¬
dence.  Many  have  let  for  99  years,
and  others,  according  to  a  form
common  in  Ireland,  for  three  lives
renewable  for  ever,  paying  a  small

fine  on  the  insertion  of  a  new  life,  at
the  failure  of  each.  These  leases,  in
course  of  years,  have  been  found  ex¬
tremely  disadvantageous  to  the  land¬
lord,  the  property  having  risen  so
much  in  value  that  the  original  rent
was  absurdly  disproportioned.  .  .  .
My  father,  in  the  course  of  his  life,
saw  the  end  of  two  leases  of  99  years.
.  .  .  In  these  and  all  cases  where  long
leases  had  been  granted,  he  did  not
find  that  the  land  had  been  improved
by  the  tenants,  or  that  they  felt  any
gratitude  for  what  had  been  originally
desired  and  granted  as  a  favour.  On
the  contrary,  long  possession  had
made  the  occupier  almost  forget  that
he  was  a  tenant,  and  consider  his
being  forced  to  surrender  the  land  at
the  expiration  of  the  lease  as  a  great
hardship.’  ( Memoirs  of  It.  L.  Edge-
worth.,  ii»  21-23.)

156

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ce.  xxvii.

tinued  long  after  the  laws  that  created  them  were  repealed.
Absenteeism  not  only  drew  away  a  large  proportion  of  Irish  rents
to  England  or  to  Dublin ;  it  also  produced  or  rendered  possi¬
ble  many  infamous  abuses  in  the  management  of  property.
The  tithe  system,  and  especially  the  exemption  of  graziers,
was  exceedingly  unfair  to  the  poor,  who  were  compelled  to  sup¬
port  the  clergy  of  two  religions,  and  the  county  cess,  which
was  levied  by  the  grand  juries,  and  chiefly  paid  by  the  occupying
tenants,  was  often  scandalously  excessive  and  scandalously  misap¬
plied.1  It  is  admitted,  indeed,  on  all  hands  that  Irish  roads  were
exceedingly  good,  but  many  of  the  contracts  for  making  them  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  grossly  corrupt.  Not  unfrequently,  it  is  said,
grand  jurors  got  for  their  own  tenants  contracts  for  making  or  re¬
pairing  portions  of  road  at  twice  the  proper  price,  and  the  tenants
were  thus  enabled  to  pay  off1,  out  of  public  money,  arrears  of
rent.2  Parliamentary  taxation,  on  the  other  hand,  was  very
light,  and  after  the  repeal  of  the  penal  laws  the  Irish  Parliament,
as  we  have  seen,  showed  no  disposition  to  throw  the  burden
unduly  on  the  unrepresented  classes.  The  hearth  tax  was  the  only
direct  tax  paid  by  the  poor,  and  in  the  latter  years  of  the  century
about  two  millions  of  persons  appear  to  have  been  exempted
from  paying  it.3  A  very  low  standard  of  comfort,  extreme  and
barbarous  ignorance,  the  early  and  improvident  marriages  which
naturally  accompany  these  conditions,  and  the  gregarious  and
domestic  habits  which  made  multitudes  cling  desperately  to  one
small  spot,  often  of  miserable  soil,  were  the  real  root  of  the  evil,
and  great  moral  changes  were  necessary  before  it  could  be  removed.

The  agrarian  changes  which  took  place  after  the  completion
of  the  penal  code,  and  before  the  accession  of  George  III.,  con-

1  In  a  very  able  pamphlet,  called
Lachry  true  Hiber niece,  or  the.  Grievances
of  the  Peasantry  of  Ireland ,  published
in  1822  by  Ensor  (the  author  of  a
remarkable  book  on  moral  philosophy),
it  is  said  that  about  that  date,  ‘  in
many  parishes  the  grand  jury  cess
exceeds  the  whole  amount  of  the
money  collected  for  tithes,  in  the
proportion  of  three  to  one,  sometimes
more.  This  is  the  case,  with  few,  if
any,  exceptions,  in  the  province  of
Connaught.’  (P.  16.)  See,  too,  O’Dris-
coll’s  Views  of  Ireland  (1823),  ii.  394-
396.

2  See  the  description  of  the  system
in  MiSs  Edgeworth’s  Absentee  (ch.  x.),
and  in  the  Life  of  her  father  (ii.  31,
32).

s  ‘  Of  these  millions  [the  Catholic
population  of  Ireland],  it  is  a  known
fact  that  two  millions  one  hundred
thousand  are,  by  the  late  Hearth
Money  Act,  excused,  on  account  of
poverty,  from  paying  a  tax  of  about
fourpence  a  year  each  to  the  State.’
(Mr.  R.  Johnson,  Irish  Pari.  l)eb.  xv.
278.)  According  to  Mullala  (  View  of
Irish  Affairs,  ii.  202,  203),  about  a
million  and  a  half  were  exempted.

CH.  XXVII.

AGRARIAN  CHANGES.

157

sisted  chiefly  of  violent  fluctuations  in  the  proportion  between
arable  and  pasture  land,  resulting  from  fluctuations  in  the  price
of  cattle.  Since  the  accession  of  George  III.  powerful  political
influences  had  come  into  play.  Such  were  the  Octennial  Act,
making  it  a  more  pressing  interest  for  landlords  to  multiply  the
voters  upon  their  estates;  the  legislation  of  1778,  enabling
Catholics  to  take  leases  for  lives,  instead  of  being  restricted  to
leases  for  thirty-one  years;  the  legislation  of  1782,  bringing
Catholic  purchasers  into  the  land  market,  and  the  corn  bounties,
which,  in  conjunction  with  the  English  demand  for  corn,  greatly
raised  the  value  of  land,  and  made  Ireland  an  essentially  arable
country.  The  Dublin  Society  laboured  with  zeal  and  intelli¬
gence,  during  the  greater  part  of  the  century,  to  correct  the
extreme  ignorance  of  agriculture  that  generally  prevailed  among
the  farmers ;  and  I  have  mentioned  the  desire  which  Arthur
Young  noticed,  and  so  warmly  praised,  among  the  more  improv¬
ing  landlords  and  in  the  more  prosperous  parts  of  the  country,  to
put  an  end  to  the  system  of  middlemen  when  leases  fell  in,  and
to  bring  the  occupying  tenant  into  immediate  relations  with  his
landlord.  This  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  landlord,  and  in
general  a  still  greater  advantage  to  the  tenant,  who  usually  found
the  farmer  of  his  own  race  and  creed  immeasurably  more  oppres¬
sive  than  the  Protestant  gentleman;  but,  as  I  have  already  hinted,
it  had  political  and  social  effects  which  were  not  so  good.  Re¬
moving  a  connecting  link  between  the  highest  and  lowest
classes,  it  brought  two  classes  into  direct  juxtaposition  who
were  deeply  separated  by  religion,  by  race,  and  by  bitter  memo¬
ries  of  old  confiscations.  It  also  altered  in  some  degree  the
character  of  the  management  of  land,  placing  it  much  more
than  formerly  in  the  hands  of  bailiffs  and  {  drivers,’  who  had  no’
direct  interest  in  the  soil.1  It  must  be  added,  too,  that  a  great

1  The  arguments  in  favour  of
middlemen  are  stated  powerfully,  but
with,  I  think,  an'  undue  leaning  to¬
wards  the  middlemen,  in  the  Lachrymce
Hibernieee  (p.  23).  Writing  in  1822,
the  author  describes  the  middlemen
as  having  ‘  nearly  disappeared.’  There
is  an  excellent  account  of  the  different
classes  of  middlemen,  in  Ferguson
and  Vance’s  Report  on  the  Tenure
and  Improvement  of  Land  in  Ireland
(1851).  These  writers,  after  speaking

of  the  extortionate  rents  exacted  from
the  under-tenant,  say,  what  is,  I  be¬
lieve,  indisputably  true  :  ‘  These  rents
were  higher,  were  sooner  called  for,
and  more  rigidly  exacted,  in  propor¬
tion  as  the  middleman  descended  in
the  scale  of  society,  and  approximated
to  the  degree  of  the  peasant.’  (P.  184.)
On  the  other  hand,  the  middlemen
often  took- their  rents  in  produce  or
labour,  and  this  system  was  not  un¬
popular  in  Ireland.

158

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxrir.

wave  of  extravagance  had  lately  passed  over  the  gentry,  both  of
the  first  and  second  degrees.  The  sudden  rise  in  the  value  of
land  which  followed  the  American  war  and  the  corn  bounties  ;
the  substitution  of  annual  for  biennial  sessions  of  Parliament,
which  led  to  an  increased  residence  in  Dublin  ;  and  also  the  more
extravagant  hospitality  which  became  the  fashion  during  the  ad¬
ministration,  and  through  the  example,  of  the  Duke  of  Rutland,
are  said  to  have  been  the  chief  causes.  The  volunteer  movement,
which  obliged  many  country  gentlemen  to  raise  large  loans  upon
their  land,  added  seriously  to  the  encumbrances  of  property ;  and
when  the  war  broke  out,  great  changes  occurred.  A  very  com¬
petent  writer  has  expressed  his  belief,  that  in  the  twenty  or  thirty
years  from  1790,  more  land  was  sold  under  decrees,  than  during
the  preceding  eighty  years.1

This  was  certainly  by  no  means  an  unmixed  evil,  and  in
many  cases  it  was  the  large  leaseholders  who  became  the  owners.
A  very  large'  part  of  the  present  smaller  landowners  of  Ireland
are  probably  the  descendants  of  tenants,  who  originally  held  their
land  under  leases,  and  at  last  obtained  possession  of  it  subject
to  the  payment  of  a  small  head  rent.  Two  other  closely  con¬
nected  agrarian  changes,  however,  of  a  much  more  doubtful
character,  took  place  at  the  same  time — a  raising  of  rent  perhaps
more  rapid  and  general  than  in  any  other  period  of  Irish  history,
and  a  great  subdivision  of  farms.

Of  the  first  fact  there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  it  is  an  extremely
difficult,  if  not  an  impossible  thing,  to  measure  with  accuracy  its
amount  and  its  consequences.  Looking  broadly  over  Irish  agra¬
rian  history  for  the  last  two  centuries,  it  may,  I  think,  be  con¬
fidently  asserted  that  it  has  not  been  the  general  custom  of  the
real  owners  of  Irish  land  to  ask  the  full  market,  or  competitive,
rent  from  their  tenants.  This  custom  has  prevailed,  and  does
prevail,  over  a  great  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  in
Ireland  it  has  prevailed  to  a  terrific  extent,  in  the  relations  of
the  middlemen  and  the  farmers  with  their  sub-tenants  and
cottiers,  but  the  rent  paid  by  the  tenant  to  the  landlord  has
usually  been  governed  by  other  principles.  This  is  the  con¬
clusion  which  must,  I  think,  be  forced  upon  everyone  who  reads

1  See  a  very  able  pamphlet,  called  A  Detail  of  Facts  relating  to  Ireland  for
tlui  last  Forty  Years  (Dublin,  1822),  p.  02.

CH.  XXVII.

IRISH  RENTS.

159

the  account  of  Arthur  Young  in  the  eighteenth  century,1  and  it
is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  best  contemporary  investigators
have  also  arrived.2  It  does  not  rest  merely  on  the  testimony  of
isolated  and,  perhaps,  prejudiced  observers.  As  I  have  already
urged,  it  is  proved  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  by  the  fact  that,
for  more  than  a  century,  the  immediate  tenant  almost  invariably
sub-let  his  tenancy  at  an  enhanced  rent,  and  that  the  same  pro¬
cess  was  continued  two  or  three  deep  ;  and  also  by  the  fact  that,
wherever  it  has  been  the  custom  to  allow  the  tenant  to  sell  his
right  to  occupy  his  farm  on  the  terms  agreed  on  with  his  land¬
lord,  this  sale  of  tenant-right  has  become  a  constant  and  lucra¬
tive  transaction.  In  our  own  day  we  have  seen  a  number  of
valuable  legal  rights,  which,  a  few  years  ago,  incontestably  be¬
longed  to  the  landlord,  transferred  without  compensation  by
English  legislation  to  the  tenant,  with  the  result,  that  an  estate
which,  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  was  the  sole  property  of  the
nominal  owner,  and  which,  in  innumerable  cases,  had  been
recently  sold  to  him  by  the  Government  itself,  under  a  parlia¬
mentary  title,  has  become,  both  in  law  and  in  fact,  a  joint  pro¬
perty  of  landlord  and  tenant.  I  do  not  here  dilate  upon  the
essentially  confiscatory  character  of  this  legislation.  I  refer  to
it  only  because  it  has  been  mainly  justified  on  the  ground  that
the  rights  of  tenants,  which  recent  legislation  has  established,
had,  for  many  generations,  been  generally  recognised  by  custom,
though  entirely  without  the  sanction  of  the  law.  We  can
hardly  have  a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  blindness  and

1  I  have  examined  this  subject
more  fully  (iv.  315-317).  In  Dean
Tucker’s  tract  on  Union  or  Separa¬
tion,  which  was  written  in  1785,  but
published  by  Dr.  Clarke  in  1799,  there
is  an  interesting  note  on  the  agrarian
system  in  Ireland.  The  writer  notices
(pp.  11,  12)  that  the  rents  received
in  Ireland  by  the  owners  in  fee,
are  ‘  extremely  low  and  moderate,’
but  that  the  rents  paid  by  the  actual
cultivators  are  much  higher  than  in
England.  He  says:  ‘  The  great  tracts
of  land  that  are  given  in  lease,  and
divided  by  the  lessee,  to  be  subdivided
by  other  lessees,  until  the  cottager  is
crushed  by  the  number  of  those  he
has  to  suppoit  above  him,  is  a  sore
and  crying  evil.’

2  Thus  the  Bessborough  Commis¬
sion  in  1881  summed  up  the  results
of  a  careful  examination  into  this
point.  ‘  Though  the  amount  of  rent
was  always  at  the  discretion  of  the
landlord,  and  the  tenant  had,  in
reality,  no  voice  in  regulating  what
he  hacl  to  pay,  nevertheless  it  was
unusual  to  exact  what  in  England
would  have  been  considered  as  a  full
or  fair  commercial  rent.  Such  a  rent
over  many  of  the  larger  estates,  the
owners  of  which  were  resident,  and
took  an  interest  in  the  welfare  of
their  tenants,  it  has  never  been  the
custom  to  demand.  The  example  has
been  largely  followed,  and  is,  to  the
present  day,  rather  the  rule  than  the
exception  in  Ireland.’  ( Report ,  p.  3.)

160

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

the  dishonesty  that  party  spirit  can  produce,  than  the  fact  that,
the  very  politicians  who  have  contended  that  such  rights  should
be  transferred  by  law,  on  the  ground  of  immemorial  usage,  have
also,  in  many  instances,  described  the  men  on  whose  properties
such  rights  had  for  generations  existed  without  legal  sanction,
as  a  class  of  rapacious  and  extortionate  tyrants.

These  facts  are,  indeed,  quite  compatible  with  great  and
general  faults  of  negligence  on  the  part  of  the  landlord  class,
with  many  instances  of  casual  oppression,  and  with  much  defect
of  sympathy  between  the  landlord  and  tenant,  but  they  are  not
compatible  with  a  state  of  society  in  which  the  relations  between
these  two  classes  are  generally  regulated  on  the  principles  of
strict  competition.  There  have  been,  however,  short  periods  in
Irish  history  which  were,  in  this  respect,  exceptional,  and  in
which  the  sharp  competition  that  existed  in  the  lower  stages  of
the  Irish  land  markets  extended  to  the  direct  relations  between
landlord  and  tenant,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  last
fifteen  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  formed  such  a  period.
The  corn  bounties  and  the  war  prices  had  raised  suddenly  and
immensely  the  profits  of  farming,  and  the  landlords  were  be¬
coming  acutely  sensible  of  how  large  a  proportion  of  the  profits
of  their  estates  had  been  intercepted  by  middlemen.  A  traveller
mentions  one  case — which  was  probably  by  no  means  extra¬
ordinary — of  a  single  large  middleman,  who  derived  a  revenue  of
not  less  than  4,000Z.  a  year  from  the  difference  between  the  rent
which  he  paid  to  the  owner  of  the  soil  and  the  rent  which  he
exacted  from  his  sub-tenants.1  It  appeared  from  an  inquiry  in¬
stituted  in  1799,  that  cottiers  paid  in  rent  to  the  farmers  on
an  average  three  times  as  much,  and  sometimes  four  times  as
much,  as  the  farmer  paid  for  the  same  quantity  of  land  to  the
landlord  ;  2  and  as  the  old  leases  fell  in,  the  pernicious  system  of
canting,  which  had  long  flourished  in  the  lower  strata  of  the
agrarian  community,  began  to  extend  widely  to  the  dealings  of
landlords  with  their  tenants.

It  is  stated,  indeed,  by  some  considerable  authorities,  to  have
been  at  this  time  extremely  general.  Thus,  when  the  Catholics
complained,  in  1793,  that  without  the  suffrage  they  were  at  a

1  Hoare’s  Tour  in  Ireland,  p.  308.  the  Population  and  Resources  of  Ire •

2  Whitley  Stokes’s  Observations  on  land  (1821),  pp.  25-27.

cn.  xxvii.

IRISH  RENTS.

161

disadvantage  as  farmers,  because  Protestant  landlords  naturally
gave  the  preference,  in  the  competition  for  farms,  to  those  who  could
support  them  at  the  elections,  Duigenan  answered :  ‘  It  was  now
the  almost  universal  mode  of  letting  land  in  Ireland,  for  the  land¬
lord  to  advertise  his  lands  at  the  expiration  of  a  lease,  to  be  let  to
the  best  and  highest  bidder,  and  to  let  them  accordingly,  without
considering  the  religion  of  the  tenant,  but  merely  his  solvency  and
the  price  he  offers.’ 1  ‘  There  is  hardly  an  estate,’  said  Ogle  a  few

years  earlier,  1  which  is  not  let  to  the  highest  penny,  and  much
above  its  value.’ 2  This  may  refer  mainly  to  the  dealings  of  middle¬
men  with  sub-tenants  ;  but  Crumpe,  wrho  published  his  ‘  Essay  on
the  best  Means  of  Employing  the  People  ’  in  1793,  strongly  main¬
tained,  in  opposition  to  Arthur  Young,  that  ‘  the  proportionate
rent  ’  derived  by  the  landlord  was  higher  in  Ireland  than  in
England.  It  is  true,  he  said,  that  the  middlemen  ‘  are  the  class
from  which  the  poor  principally  experience  that  oppression  to
which,  we  have  asserted,  they  are  still  subject,’  but  he  described
the  system  pursued  by  the  landlords  when  leases  fell  in,  as  wholly
different  from  that  in  England.  ‘  When  a  lease  is  expired,  in
place  of  such  an  amicable  adjustment  [as  takes  place  in  England],
the  lands  are  advertised  to  be  let  to  the  highest  bidder;  the
proposals  of  each  are  kept  secret,  and  by  this  unfair  species  of
auction,  a  promise  of  exorbitant  rent  is  obtained,  very  frequently
to  the  exclusion  of  the  former  occupier,  who  is  considered  as
having  no  stronger  claim  to  them  than  the  most  perfect  stranger,
unless  he  exceed  him  in  the  amount  of  the  proposed  rent.’ 3

Several  other  almost  equally  emphatic  statements  may  be
collected,  especially  from  the  speeches  and  writings  of  those
who  endeavoured  to  defend  the  tithe  system  in  Ireland,  and  who
usually  made  it  their  object  to  prove  that  rent  rather  than  tithe
was  the  great  burden  on  the  poor.  That  these  statements  were

1  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xiii.  114.

2  Ibid.  vi.  435.

3  Crumpe’s  Essay,  pp,  232-235.  The
reader  may  find  some  more  informa¬
tion  on  ihe  subject,  and  a  very  strong
statement  of  the  extent  to  which
‘canting’  preva  led,  in  a  pamphlet
called  Reflections  on  the  best  Means
of  securing  Tranquillity,  submitted  to
the  Country  Gentlemen,  by  P.  Winter,
Esq.  (Dublin,  1736.)  As  early  as
1731,  Dobbs  stated  that,  ‘  Agents,

particularly  of  those  noblemen  or
gentlemen  who  reside  in  England,  of
at  a  distance  from  their  estates,  who
have  been  empowered  to  treat  with
tenants  and  give  leases,  to  ingratiate
themselves  with  their  employers  .  .  .
have,  in  some  places,  taken  proposals
sealed  up,  under  a  promise  to  divulge
none  of  the  names  but  that  of  the
person  who  ottered  most,  whose  pro¬
posal  was  to  be  accepted.’  (Dobbs
On  Irish  Trade,  part  ii.  p.  79.)

254

162

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.

CH.  XXVIT,

far  too  general,  appears  to  me  evident.  The  great  part  which
leaseholders  played  in  the  management  of  estates,  gave  them
enormous  advantages  in  bargaining  for  renewals  with  a  negli¬
gent  landlord  class.  The  records,  traditions,  and  customs  of
most  Irish  estates,  and  the  judgment  of  the  most  careful  in¬
vestigators,  will,  I  believe,  show  that  a  long  continuance  of  the
same  families  as  tenants  on  the  same  estates  1  has  been  at  least
as  characteristic  of  Ireland  as  of  England ;  and  the  fact,  which
appears  universally  admitted,  that  agriculture  in  all  its  grada¬
tions  was  steadily  improving  in  the  last  decades  of  the  cen¬
tury,  proves  that  though  rents  had  risen  rapidly,  they  had  not
reached  a  point  which  is  incompatible  with  prosperity.2  Much
of  the  change  probably  took  place  only  in  the  upper  tenancies,
and  left  the  condition  of  the  occupiers  of  the  soil  unaltered ;
and  it  must  be  added  that,  within  certain  limits,  the  raising  of
rent  was  not  merely  consistent  with,  but  powerfully  productive
of,  increased  agrarian  prosperity.  Arthur  Young — who  con¬
sidered  the  rental  of  Ireland  in  his  time  abnormally  low — is  but

1  See,  e.g.,  the  remarks  of  Dr.
Sigerson  (a  writer  who  is  violently
prejudiced  against  the  landlord  class),
on  the  confidence  of  the  tenants  on
some  large  estates,  ‘  in  a  good  old
modus — namely,  that  their  land  would
never  be  given  to  another  tenant  [on
the  expiration  of  their  lease],  so  long
as  they  were  able  and  willing  to  pay
a  reasonable  raised  rent.’  (Sigerson’s
Hist,  of  Land  Tenures  in  Ireland ,  pp.
296,  297.)  See,  too,  Miss  Edgeworth’s
account  of  her  father’s  policy  in  re¬
newing  leases.  ( Life  of  Ii.  L.  Edge-
worth.,  ii.  16,  16.)

2  Newenliam,  in  his  View  of  the
Circumstances  of  Ireland,  published
in  1809,  says:  ‘About  thirty  years
ago,  when  Mr.  Young  travelled
through  Ireland,  the  average  price  of
day  labour  was  6 \d.  It  now  appears,
by  the  statistical  surveys  of  sixteen
counties,  by  parochial  returns  from
three  others,  and  by  information  from
different  parts  of  the  rest,  to  be  10^<7.
So  that  in  thirty  years  it  has  risen
about  two-thirds,  which  is  infinitely
more  than  it  had  risen  in  any  former
period  of  equal  extent.  .  .  .  Since
the  year  1782,  the  rent  of  land,  which,
a  short  time  before  that  year,  had
begun  to  fall  in  many  places,  has  been
much  more  than  doubled  in  all  parts

of  Ireland  one  with  another,  more
than  trebled  in  many.  ...  If  Mr.
Young  .  .  .  was  grounded  in  compu¬
ting  the  rental  of  Ireland  at  six  mil¬
lions  in  1778,  there  can  be  no  hesita¬
tion  in  stating  it  as  upwards  of  fifteen
millions  at  present,  exclusive  of  the
ground  rent  of  the  houses  in  the
different  towns.  .  .  .  Since  the  year
1782,  the  imports  have  more  than
doubled  ;  the  exports  also,  if  the  real
value  be  taken,  have  more  than
doubled.’  (Pp.  2.80-231.)  Crumpe,
while  maintaining  that  the  rental
of  Ireland  was  unduly  high,  ac¬
knowledges  at  the  same  time  that,
‘  The  situation  of  the  peasant  has,
since  the  pacification  of  the  king¬
dom,  but  more  especially  since  the
settlement  of  its  constitution  in  1782,
been  daily  improving.’  ( Essay  on  the
Employment  of  the  Poor,  p.  201.)  Miss
Edgeworth’s  father,  writing  about
1 808,  and  resuming  his  experience  of
Ireland  since  1769,  says  :  ‘  Since  the
time  of  which  I  write,  the  people  of
Ireland  have  improved  more  than  any
other  people  in  Europe  ’  {Life  of  II.
L.  Edgeworth,  i.  229  )  See,  too,  his
daughter’s  testimony  (ii.  1,2);  and  the
facts  I  have  myself  collected,  vol.  vi
pp.  437,  438.

CH.  XXVII.

SUBDIVISION  OF  LAND.

163

one  of  many  observers,  who  noticed  how  little  the  system  of  long
leases  at  very  low  rents  contributed  to  the  prosperity  of  the
country  and  the  comfort  of  the  tenants.  It  was  remarked  that
it  was  precisely  on  estates  so  situated  that  there  was  most  sub¬
division  and  least  improvement,  the  most  slovenly  cultivation,
and  the  lowest  standard  of  comfort,  and  that  they  often  presented
in  these  respects  a  striking  contrast  to  adjoining  estates  let  at
reasonable  rents  and  for  terms  of  twenty-one  years.1  It  must
be  added  also,  that  the  period  we  are  considering  was  not  a
period  of  great  evictions,  dissociating  an  agricultural  population
from  th-e  soil.  When  pasture-land  was  gaining  on  tillage,  a
great  displacement  of  population  necessarily  occurred.  But
with  the  strong  impetus  towards '  tillage  in  the  closing  years  of
the  eighteenth  century,  the  tendency  was  reversed,  and  there  was
therefore  as  yet  no  want  of  farms  for  industrious  farmers.

The  process  of  subdivision,  and  the  rapid  increase  of  popula¬
tion  which  accompanied  it,  had  begun,  and  the  most  powerful
motives,  moral,  economical,  and  political,  were  hastening  the
change.  The  priests,  partly  from  considerations  of  morality,
and  partly  from  obvious  considerations  of  self-interest,  have
always  encouraged  early  marriages;  and  the  strong  domestic
feeling,  which  is  one  of  the  most  amiable  characteristics  of  the
Irish  peasants,  has  always  led  the  Irish  farmer  to  desire  to  settle
his  children  on  detached  portions  of  his  farm.  The  increase  of
tillage,  through  the  English  demand  for  corn,  through  the  corn
bounties,  and  through  the  high  prices  that  followed  the  war,
made  it  for  the  advantage  of  the  landlords  to  take  the  course
which  was  incontestably  the  most  popular,  and  place  no  restraint

1  This  is  very  emphatically
stated  in  Ferguson  and  Vance’s
Report  on  the  Relation  of  Landlord
and  Tenant  in  Ireland  (1851),  p.  62.
I  may  add  two  authorities  who  will
not  be  suspected  of  any  landlord  pre¬
judice.  Wolfe  Tone  writes  in  his
diary  :  1  A  farm  at  a  smart  rent  al¬
ways  better  cultivated  than  one  at  a
low  rent — probable  enough.’  (Tone’s
Memoirs,  i.  148.)  Theobald  McKenna,
in  his  Essay  on  Parliamentary  Pie-
form,  which  was  published  in  1793,
says  :  ‘  In  several  parts  of  Ireland  the
rents  have  been  tripled,  nay  quadru¬
pled,  within  forty  years  past.  And

this  was  not  so  much  the  effect  as  the
cause  of  national  prosperity,  for  the
great  wealth  of  a  country  may  fre¬
quently  lie  dormant, if  theinhabitants,
residing  listlessly  upon  the  surface,
will  not  exert  themselves  to  investi¬
gate  its  resources.  Before  the  above-
mentioned  period,  when  rent  was  very
low  and  other  taxes,  little  known,  half
the  year  was  lavished  in  carousing.
But  so  soon  as  labour  became  compul-
sor3q  fortunes  have  been  raised  both
for  the  tenantry  and  landlords,  and
the  civilisation  of  the  country  has
advanced  materially.’  (McKenna’s
Political  Essays,  p.  187.)

164

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,

CH.  XXVII,

upon  subdivision.  The  bias  of  the  law  was  in  the  ' same  direc¬
tion.  It  was  still  the  prevailing  belief,  that  a  rapidly  multiply¬
ing  population  was  the  first  condition  of  national  prosperity.
Clauses  in  leases  forbidding  sub-letting  under  penalties,  were
looked  upon  as  tyrannical,  and  contrary  to  the  public  interest.
The  law  courts  frequently  decided  against  their  validity  ;  the
difficulty  of  obtaining  formal  legal  proof  of  sub-letting  was  very
great,  and  it  was  found  almost  impossible  to  induce  juries  to
find  verdicts  enforcing  the  penal  covenants.1

Whitley  Stokes,  who  decidedly  favoured  the  movement  of
subdivision,  and  whose  tracts  throw  much  light  upon  this  period
of  agrarian  history,  gives  an  illustration  of  the  process  which
was  going  on.  1  A  gentleman  in  the  county  of  Cork,’  he  says,

‘  made  a  fortune  by  purchasing  or  renting  large  tracts  of  land,
and  setting  it  in  as  small  portions  as  the  people  wished.  He
informed  me  in  the  year  1798  that  he  had  eighty  tenants,  who
paid  each  12L  or  less  for  their  entire  rent,  and  he  found  that
they  paid  more  regularly  than  those  who  had  larger  farms,2
and  he  thought  this  was  generally  the  case  in  the  county  of
Cork.  ...  It  very  seldom  happened  in  his  neighbourhood  that
the  immediate  occupiers  of  the  land  broke  ;  they  who  did  were
oftener  farmers  who  paid  from  50 1.  to  1 00Z.  a  year,  than  those
who  paid  12Z.  or  under.’  Stokes  insists  much  on  the  value
of  small  farms  in  preventing  mendicancy,  and  he  adds  some
remarks  which,  coming  from  an  excellent  man  of  science,  whose
sympathies  were  strongly  popular,  and  who  actually  joined  the
United  Irishmen  through  the  purest  motives  of  philanthropy,
throw  an  instructive  light  on  the  ideas  of  the  time.  He  con¬
sidered  that  the  gentry  erred  rather  by  repressing  than  by  en¬
couraging  sub-letting,  and  that  the  system  of  middlemen  was
highly  advantageous  to  the  country.  ‘  If  we  could  prove,’  he
says,  ‘  to  the  satisfaction  of  impartial  persons,  that  further  sub¬
division  of  land  is  valuable  to  the  working  people  of  Ireland,
and  that  they  are  willing  to  pay  largely  for  the  advantage,  it  is
not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  landlords  should  be  slow  to  adopt

1  See  the  remarks  of  Mr.  H.  Jeph-  2  Arthur  Young  had  noticed  that
son,  Notes  on  Irish  (Jvestions,  p.  25.  It  the  smaller  farmers  were  1  the  best
was  not  till  after  the  war,  that  this  pay’  on  the  estates,  ‘  the  intermediate
policy  was  reversed.  See,  too,  Fergu-  gentleman  tenants  the  worst,’  ( Tour
son  and  Vance’s  Report,  pp.  178-189.  in  Ireland,  ii.  99.)

cii.  xxvii.

SUBDIVISION  OF  LAND.

165

such  a  plan.  They  dread  with  reason  the  dealing  with  great
numbers  of  the  lower  class  of  people.  The  attempt  is  painful,
hazardous.  It  is.  not  every  gentleman  who  is  fit  for  it.  Fortunes
have  been  made  by  this  process,  but  the  difficulties  will  not  be
encountered  by  those  who  have  inherited  property,  and  have
been  reared  in  refinement  or  indulgence.  This  state  of  things
produces  the  middleman.  The  middleman  is  necessary  to
Ireland,  as  the  shopkeeper  is  necessary  to  London.  The  London
consumer  cannot  deal  conveniently  with  the  merchant,  nor  the
Irish  small  farmer  with  the  nobleman  or  gentleman  who  possesses
a  large  estate.  ...  If  you  impede  the  appointment  of  middle¬
men,  there  will  be  fewer  small  farms,  and  higher  prices  will  be
given  for  them.  ...  So  far  from  discouraging  middlemen,  I
would  venture  to  recommend  again,  as  I'  did  twenty-one  years
ago,  that  a  company  should  be  formed  for  purchasing  estates  as
they  came  to  market,  and  subdividing  them.’ 1

The  Act  of  1 793,  granting  votes  to  Catholic  forty-shilling
freeholders,  gave  an  additional  impulse  to  the  movement  of  sub¬
division,  by  making  it  the  interest  of  each  landlord  to  multiply
the  votes  that  he  could  command.  By  many  writers,  indeed,
this  Act  has  been  represented  as  the  main  cause,  but  this  view
is  a  gross  and  manifest  exaggeration.2  When  the  tenant  class
were  anxious  to  subdivide,  and  when  the  landlord  class  had
strong  economical  reasons  for  allowing  them  to  do  so,  the  result
could  hardly  have  been  doubtful,  and  political  motives  can  have
only  slightly  accelerated  it.  Land  jobbers  multiplied  in  the  last
years  of  the  century,  because  the  trade  had  become  very  profit¬
able  ;  leaseholders  subdivided  because  it  was  their  plain  interest
to  do  so,  and  in  similar  circumstances  similar  evils  will  inevit¬
ably  appear.  It  is  not  necessary  to  look  to  remote  or  barbarous
countries  for  a  parallel.  In  the  last  few  years,  parliamentary
inquiries  have  disclosed  exactly  the  same  evils,  springing  from
the  same  cause,  in  great  districts  of  London  and  of  our  provincial
towns.  We  find  there,  all  the  leading  features  of  the  Irish

1  Stokes’s  Observations  on  the
Population  and  Resources  of  Ireland
(1822),  pp.  29-31.  Edgeworth  seems
to  have  been  one  of  the  few  landlords
■who  set  his  face  against  subdivi¬
sion,  by  inserting  in  all  his  leases,
and  stringently  enforcing,  ‘  alienation

fines.’  ( Memoirs ,  ii.  17,  18.)

2  I  have  seen  it  stated,  that  the
subdivision  of  farms  was  nowhere
greater  than  on  glebe  and  other
Church  lands,  where  political  mo¬
tives  can  hardly  have  applied.

166

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xsvn.

agrarian  system  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century :  land¬
lords  who  have  let  their  land  for  a  long  period,  and  have  thus
lost  all  power  of  management  and  control ;  leaseholders  who,  as
the  pressure  of  population  becomes  more  intense,  find  it  their
interest  to  subdivide  their  holdings  into  minute  fractions ;  a
whole  race  of  speculators  in  poor  men’s  dwellings  ;  rents  forced
by  the  competition  of  the  very  poor  to  an  enormous  height ;
an  excessive  congestion  of  population ;  an  utter  neglect  of
the  conditions  of  comfort  and  health.  In  Paris,  under  land
laws  very  different  from  those  of  England,  precisely  similar
signs  have  appeared.  An  excellent  observer,  who  has  lately  de¬
scribed  the  condition  of  the  overcrowded  workmen’s  quarters
there,  writes:  ‘The  wretched  houses  they  contain,  are  generally
constructed  by  a  speculator  of  a  low  order,  who  has  taken  the
land  at  a  long  lease,  and  built,  in  the  most  economical  and  defec¬
tive  manner,  cabins  of  wood  and  plaster,  which  he  lets  at  ex¬
orbitant  prices — 140  or  200  francs  a  year  for  a  room.  He  ob¬
tains  from  his  speculation  20  to  25  per  cent.,  which  assures  him  a
little  fortune  at  the  expiration  of  his  lease,  especially  if  he  has
also  carried  on  the  trade  of  spirit  dealer.  ...  It  is  curious  to
observe  tbe  analogy  between  these  Paris  quarters  and  the  pesti¬
lential  courts  in  London,  where  a  principal  tenant,  who  also
makes  20  to  25  per  cent,  by  the  transaction,  and  who  holds  his
houses  under  a  very  long  lease,  extorts  enormous  rents  from
wretched  sub-tenants.’ 1

It  is  not  less  curious,  I  think,  or  less  instructive,  to  trace  the
analogy  of  these  things  with  the  excessive  subdivision  of  land,
the  rapid  rise  of  rents,  and  the  multiplication  of  a  pauper  tenan¬
try  in  Ireland  in  the  closing  years  of  the  eighteenth  century.
The  change  was  still  far  from  its  maturity,  and  the  effects  were
as  yet  very  various.  Farmers  who  held  their  farms  underleases
made  before  the  corn  bounties  and  the  war,  made  rapid  fortunes.
The  high  price  of  farm  produce,  increased  wages,  and  the
general  alteration  of  all  the  conditions  of  agriculture,  opened  out
many  paths  of  wealth  to  skill,  enterprise,  cunning,  and  industry  ;
but  the  great  majority  of  the  Irish  farmers  had  none  of  these
qualities,  and  the  sudden  rise  in  rents  and  prices,  and  the  displace-

1  Much  evidence  on  this  subject  went  de  VOvvrier.  See  especially
is  collected  by  R1  Ratfalovich  in  his  pp.  97,  138,  139,  2G9,  270.
very  valuable  little  work,  Le  Loje-

CH.  XXVII.

MISERY  OF  THE  COTTIERS.

167

ment  of  old  tenants  by  others  who  offered  larger  rents,  contri¬
buted  much  to  swell  the  agrarian  discontent  which  found  its
expression  in  the  Defender  outrages.  At  the  basis  of  the  Irish
agrarian  system  there  was  still  a  great  mass  of  abject  poverty,
and  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  it  had  diminished.  The
price  of  labour  had  indeed  risen  considerably,  but  notin  all  parts
of  the  island,  and  there  had  been  a  considerable  and  general  rise
in  the  price  both  of  oatmeal  and  potatoes,  the  two  principal
articles  of  the  food  of  the  labourer.1  The  pictures  of  the  misery
and  the  oppression  of  the  cottiers  and  migratory  labourers,  which
I  have  extracted  from  writings  twenty  or  thirty  years  earlier,
might  all  be  paralleled  in  the  period  we  are  considering  ;  and  if  the
area  of  prosperity  was  enlarged,  reckless  marriages,  and  the  con¬
sequent  rapid  increase  of  population,  were  then,  as  always,  most
conspicuous  among  the  most  wretched,  the  most  ignorant,  and
the  most  improvident.  It  was  still  true  that,  at  the  beginning
of  every  autumn,  the  roads  were  crowded  with  barefooted  and
half-naked  mountaineers,  who  were  travelling  on  foot  150  or  200
miles,  to  work  for  the  harvest  in  England,  where  they  commonly
fell  into  the  hands  of  contractors  known  as  £  spalpeen  brokers,’
who  distributed  them  among  the  farmers,  intercepted  a  sub¬
stantial  part  of  their  scanty  wages,  and  imposed  on  them  an
amount  of  labour  which  few  West  Indian  planters  would  have
exacted  from  their  negroes.2  It  was  still  true,  that  it  was  a
common  thing  for  large  farmers,  whose  land  included  barren
mountain  tracts,  to  place  cottiers  on  these  lands  in  order  to
reclaim  them,  and  to  turn  them  adrift  as  soon  as  by  hard
labour  they  had  made  them  productive.3  It  was  still  true,  that
cottiers  were  often  obliged  to  work  out  the  extravagant  rents

1  See  the  report  of  a  committee
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  labour¬
ing  poor,  appointed  by  the  Whig  Club
in  1796.  (Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  246-248.)
Whitley  Stokes  was  of  opinion  that,
though  the  price  of  labour  had  nomi¬
nally  risen,  it  had  not  done  so  in  pro¬
portion  to  the  cost  of  provisions.  The
landlord  and  the  farmer,  he  said,  were
doing  well,  through  the  increase  of  the
valueof  landandfarm  produce, but  not
the  cottier.  ( Projects  for  re-establish-
inq  Internal  Peacein  Ireland.  Dublin,
1799.)

2  See  Bell’s  Description  of  the

Condition  and  Manners  of  the  Peasan
try  of  Ireland  between  1780  and  1790
(London,  1804),  pp.  10-12— a  book  of
great  and  painful  interest— and  also
the  report  of  the  Whig  Club  on  the
state  of  the  labouring  poor.  (Grattan’s
Life,  iv.  246-248.)

3  Bell’s  Description,  p.  7.  In  that
remarkable  book.  Uncle  Pat’s  Cabin,
by  Upton,  which  is  one  of  the  truest
and  most  vivid  pictures  of  the  present
condition  of  the  Irish  labourer,  ex¬
actly  the  same  grievance  is  described
as  still  existing.

168

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CH.  XXVITi

that  were  charged  for  their  potato  plots,  at  the  rate  of  fourpence
and  fivepence  a  day ;  that  their  sole  food,  in  many  districts,  was
potatoes  mixed  with  the  milk  that  remained  when  the  butter
had  been  made  ;  that  during  part  of  the  year  they  were  often
reduced  to  potatoes  and  water  •  and  that  even  potatoes  could
not  always  be  counted  on.

In  one  of  the  tracts  of  Whitley  Stokes,  there  is  a  terrible
picture  of  the  condition  of  the  poorest  Irishmen,  at  a  time
which  has  been  considered  the  most  prosperous  in  Irish  history.
‘  Generally,’  he  wrote,  ‘  the  cottier  has  but  an  acre.  Sometimes,
I  know  it  from  personal  inquiry,  in  situations  remote  from  any
town,  he  pays  three  guineas  a  year  for  a  house  whose  first  cost
was  certainly  not  five,  and  a  rood  of  ground.  In  some  places  the
cottier  pays  four  times  the  rent  of  the  farmer,  and  in  one  place
where  this  happened,  the  cottiers  were  so  distressed,  that  they
could  afford  themselves  but  one  meal  a  day,  and  that  consisted
of  potatoes  and  of  butter  milk,  for  which  they  paid  a  penny  a
quart,  and  they  could  never  afford  to  procure  themselves  turf ;
and  that  place  was  the  hill  of  Oulart,’  the  spot  in  Wexford
where  the  most  formidable  portion  of  the  rebellion  of  1798  took
its  rise.  In  many  places,  the  same  writer  tells  us.  the  poor
were  exposed  to  a  variety  of  diseases,  and  especially  to  putrid
diseases,  from  the  poorness  of  their  diet  or  the  exclusive  use  of
the  potato.  ‘  In  Kerry,’  he  says,  1  they  live  so  low,  that  I  am
assured  by  a  medical  man,  that  the  addition  of  any  small  quan¬
tity  of  butter  to  their  potatoes,  is  used  as  a  cordial  when  they
are  ill,  with  evident  advantage.’ 1

This  mass  of  extreme  and  chronic  poverty  was  now  begin¬
ning  to  surge  with  wild  and  indefinite  hopes,  and  busy  mission¬
aries  were  actively  fanning  the  flame.  As  outrages  multiplied,
the  landlord  had  every  inducement  to  leave  his  estate,  and  the
system  of  tenure  existing  in  Ireland  made  his  absence  peculiarly

1  Whitley  Stokes’s  Projects  for  re¬
establishing  Internal  Peace  in  Ireland,
p.  9.  ‘  One  of  the  principal  cause*  of

the  rebellion,  though  not  hitherto
mentioned  by  any  person,  is  the  ex¬
traordinary  increase  in  the  population
of  Ireland,  which  has  furnished  an
opportunity  to  greedy  jobbers  in  land
to  raise  the  price  of  small  fauns  infi¬
nitely  beyond  their  real  value.  This

has  brought  distress,  poverty,  and
disaffection  on  the  wretched  peasan¬
try,  who  are  under  an  absolute  neces¬
sity  (from  their  total  want  of  all
other  means  of  existence),  to  promise
whatever  rent  their  immediate  land¬
lord  shall  fix  upon  their  hovel  or  little
farm.’  (E.  Griffith  to  Pelham,  July
31,  1798.  Pelham  MSS .)

CH.  XXVII.

INFLUENCE  OF  LANDLORDS.

'  169

easy.  Since  tlie  world  began,  no  large  class  of  men  liave  ever
discharged  efficiently,  dangerous,  distasteful,  and  laborious  func¬
tions,  if  they  had  no  inducement  to  do  so  except  the  highest
sense  of  duty,  and  this  was  rapidly  coming  to  be  the  position  of
the  landlord,  whose  lot  was  cast  in  the  midst  of  the  anarchy  of
Defenderism.  It  was  not  a  natural  thing  that  a  landlord  should
have  great  power,  when  his  land  was  placed  beyond  his  control
by  the  system  of  long  leases,  and  the  authority  which  Irish  land¬
lords  had  for  so  many  years  exercised  under  this  system,  was  to
a  great  degree  artificial.  Among  the  many  contradictions  and
anomalies  of  Irish  life,  nothing  is  more  curious  than  the  strong
feudal  attachment  and  reverence  that  frequently  grew  up  be¬
tween  the  resident  Protestant  landlord  and  his  Catholic  tenantry,
in  spite  of  all  differences  of  race  and  creed  and  traditions.  It  is
a  fact  which  is  attested  by  everything  we  know  of  Irish  life  in
the  eighteenth  century,  and  it  subsisted  side  by  side  with  the
TVhiteboy  outrages,  with  vivid  memories  of  the  old  confiscations,
and  with  many  other  indications  of  war  against  property.  The
country  gentleman  had  many  qualities,  not  all  of  them  very
estimable,  that  were  eminently  popular  among  the  people— a
lavish  hospitality,  keen  sporting  tastes,  great  courage  in  duels,
a  careless,  thriftless,  good-natured  ostentation,  a  tone  of  absolute
authority  and  command,  mixing  curiously  with  extreme  fami¬
liarity,  in  dealing  with  inferiors ;  a  great  knowledge  of  their
character,  and  a  great  consideration  for  their  customs  and  preju¬
dices.  In  the  management  of  his  property  there  was  a  combina¬
tion  of  negligence  and  indulgence,  which  has  always  been
peculiarly  popular  in  Ireland.  His  kitchen  was  open  to  all
comers  from  his  estate  ;  he  seldom  or  never  interfered  when  his
tenants  wished  to  settle  their  children  on  a  portion  of  his  land,
or  insisted  on  much  punctuality  of  payment,  and  he  laid  great
stress  on  hereditary  attachment  to  his  family.  The  pride  of
family  and  of  county  influence  was  nowhere  stronger  than  in
Ireland,  and  it  was  fully  shared  by  the  humblest  dependant.

The  feudal  spirit  was  clearly  reflected  in  the  customs  and
contracts  of  land  ;  clauses  were  constantly  inserted  in  leases,
obliging  tenants  to  furnish  their  landlords  with  horses  or  labour
for  several  days  in  the  year,  or  with  tributes  of  poultry,  turkeys,
or  geese ;  there  were  sometimes  clauses,  which  fully  coincided

170

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

cn.  xxvn.

with  the  political  ethics  of  the  Irish  tenant,  obliging  the  lease¬
holder  to  vote  always  with  his  landlord ;  there  was  the  curious
custom  of  ‘  sealing  money  ’—-a  perquisite  given  to  the  squire’s
wife  b^  the  tenant  on  the  sealing  of  their  leases.1  The  penal
code  concentrated  immense  magisterial  and  administrative
powers  in  the  hands  of  the  landlord  class,  and  formed  a  tradition
which  long  survived  the  laws,  while  the  middlemen  diverted
from  them  much  of  the  unpopularity  which  in  times  of  distress
might  have  attached  to  them.  The  landlord  was  the  arbiter  of
innumerable  disputes  ;  he  often  exercised  his  influence  as  magis¬
trate  to  protect  his  tenants  who  were  in  difficulties  through
faction  fights  or  illicit  distilling,  and  they  in  their  turn  were
always  ready  to  keep  the  bailiff  from  his  door.  There  was  on
neither  side  much  regard  for  law,  but  the  landlord  usually  main¬
tained  both  his  authority  and  his  popularity.

A  governing  type  was  developed  in  the  class,  which  was
very  remote  from  modern  English  ideas,  but  which  was  well
adapted  to  the  conditions  under  which  they  lived.  The  admira¬
ble  picture  which  Miss  Edgeworth  has  drawn  in  ‘  Ormond,’  of  the
relations  between  King  Corney  and  his  people,  will  enable  the
reader  to  understand  it.  The  Irish  landlords  were  able,  without
the  assistance  of  any  armed  constabulary,  to  keep  the  country
quiet  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  even  in
times  of  war,  when  it  was  almost  denuded  of  troops.  They  again
and  again  suppressed  Whiteboy  disturbances,  by  parties  raised
among  their  own  tenantry  ;  and  when  they  placed  themselves  at
the  head  of  the  volunteer  movement,  the  nation  followed  them
with  enthusiasm.  A  class  who  were  capable  of  these  things
may  have  had  many  faults,  but  they  can  have  been  neither  im¬
potent  nor  unpopular.

I  have  already  quoted  the  well-known  description,  which
Arthur  Young  gave  in  1779,  of  the  absolute  authority  exercised
at  that  time  by  a  Protestant  landlord  over  his  Catholic  tenantrv.

1  Miss  Edgeworth  describes  most
of  these  customs  in  Castle  Rackrent.
See,  too,  the  very  curious  and  instruc¬
tive  pictures  of  Irish  country  life,  in
her  continuation  of  the  life  of  her
father,  and  also  in  Ormond  and  the
Absentee.  A  gentleman  informed  me,
only  a  few  years  ago,  that  he  found

the  clause  relating  to  votes  in  one  of
his  old  leases.  Maxwell’s  Wild  Sports
of  the  West  belongs  to  a  somewhat
later  period,  but  it  illustrates,  1  be¬
lieve  very  truly,  the  kind  of  feeling
that  often  prevailed  between  the
gentry  and  tlieir  tenants.

CH.  XXVII.

DECLINING  INFLUENCE  OF  LANDLORDS.

171

‘  The  power  and  influence  of  a  resident  landlord,’  he  said  in
another  place,  ‘  is  so  great  in  Ireland,  that  whatever  system  he
adopts,  be  it  well  or  ill  imagined,  he  is  much  more  able  to  intro¬
duce  or  accomplish  it,  than  Englishmen  can  well  have  an  idea
of.’ 1  But  under  the  influence  of  the  Defender  movement,  this
state  of  things  in  many  districts  was  rapidly  changing.  How
great  an  alteration  had  taken  place  in  fifteen  years,  is  clearly
shown  by  the  diagnosis  which  Camden  sent  to  England  of  the
causes  of  Irish  disturbances.  ‘  From  the  nature  of  the  tenures
they  grant,’  he  writes,  ‘  the  gentry  who  inhabit  this  kingdom
have  not  the  weight  they  might  otherwise  have  in  the  country.
From  the  uncultivated  state  of  considerable  parts  of  the  kingdom,
the  landlords  are  induced  to  give  leases  for  years  under  the  terms
of  houses  being  built  and  improvements  made  upon  the  land.
This  mode  puts  the  tenant  out  of  the  power  of  the  landlord,  and
he  considers  himself  as  possessing  such  a  right  in  the  land,  and
for  so  long  a  term,  as  to  make  him  extremely  indifferent  to  the
good  opinion  of  his  lord ;  and  in  proportion  as  feudal  notions  have
been  dissipated,  the  rights  of  man  have  been  promulgated,  and
these  independent  tenants  have  opportunities  enough  of  being
informed  of  the  little  influence  which  their  landlords  have  over
them.  These  persons  having  seen  that,  in  times  of  danger,  Eng¬
land  has  been  induced  to  give  way  to  the  threatening  appearances
in  this  country,  they  are  encouraged  by  the  possibility  of  their
being  again  able  to  carry  their  favourite  notions  by  a  per¬
severance  in  tumult  and  outrage,  which  they  conceive  will
weary  instead  of  exasperate  the  more  quiet  parts  of  the  king¬
dom.’  2

These  last  words  might  have  been  written  in  our  own  day,
and  they  illustrate  curiously  the  persistence  of  the  same  morbid
influences  in  Irish  affairs.  The  state  of  the  country  required
strong  remedies,  remedies  beyond  the  law  as  it  was  administered
in  England.  Nothing  can  be  more  fatuous  than  to  suppose,  that
it  is  possible  to  govern  a  disaffected  country  on  exactly  the  same
principles  or  by  the  same  methods  as  a  loyal  country ;  that
organised  crime,  taking  a  form  nearly  akin  to  rebellion,  and
supported  by  the  sympathies  of  a  great  portion  of  the  popula¬
tion,  can  be  mastered  by  a  machinery  which  is  intended  only

1  Young’s  Tour,  ii.  105.  8  Camden  to  Portland,  Sept.  25,  1795.

172

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

ch.  xxvir.

to  deal  with  the  isolated  instances  of  individual  depravity.  It
was  perfectly  reasonable,  too,  and  perfectly  in  accordance  with
the  best  English  precedents,  that  new  outbursts  of  crime  should
be  encountered  by  special  laws  of  unusual  severity.  Such  had
been  in  England  the  1  Stabbing  Act,’  attributed  to  the  frequent
quarrels  between  English  and  Scotch  at  the  court  of  James  I.  ;
the  Coventry  Act  of  Charles  II.  against  maiming  and  disfiguring
the  person ;  the  ‘  Waltham  Black  Act  ’  of  George  I.,  intended  to
repress  the  cruelties  and  depredations  of  the  Hampshire  poachers.
Legislation  of  this  kind  has  been  frequent  in  Ireland,  and  it  may
be  abundantly  justified.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  the  first  duty
of  the  Government,  in  combating  the  spirit  of  illegality,  to  be  itself
legal,  and  no  more  fatal  blow  could  be  given  to  the  cause  of  order,
than  for  those  who  were  charged  with  supporting  it,  to  defy  the
restraints  of  the  law.  This  was  what  actually  happened  in  Ire¬
land.  Lord  Carhampton  was  charged  with  the  pacification  of
Connaught,  and  under  his  direction  the  magistrates  took  a  great
number  of  those  whom  they  suspected  of  being  Defenders,  and
without  sentence,  without  trial,  without  even  a  colour  of  legality,
they  sent  them  to  serve  in  the  King’s  fleet — a  tender  sailing
along  the  coast  to  receive  them.1

The  measure  was  as  completely  illegal  as  the  proceedings  of
the  Defenders  themselves,  and  it  must  not  be  confounded  with
an  ordinary  press.  It  was  not  professional  sailors,  but  for  the
most  part  agricultural  labourers,  many  of  whom  had  never  even
seen  the  sea,  who  were  suddenly  torn  from  their  families  and

1  Plowden,  ii.  537,  538  ;  Grattan's
I\fe,  iv.  240 ;  McNevin’s  Pieces  of
Irish  History,  p.  112.  Lord  Camden
says  :  ‘  A  measure  which,  I  am  afraid,
is  not  very  defensible,  and  to  which  I
have  taken  the  utmost  care  not  to
give  either  my  own  individual  consent
or  that  of  Government,  has  contri¬
buted  very  much  to  alarm  these  per¬
sons  [the  Defenders],  The  magistrates
in  several  districts,  not  finding  that
the  regular  mode  of  endeavouring  to
convict  these  offenders  had  the  effect
which  was  expected,  have,  in  cases
where  they  were  convinced  of  the
guilt  of  the  person,  sent  them  on
board  the  tender,  and  entered  them
for  the  King’s  service.  I  am  afraid
some  of  the  magistrates  have  been
incautious  enough,  not  to  carry  on  this

measure  so  secretly  as  to  have  escaped
the  notice  of  the  public.  .  .  .'  It  has
certainly,  however,  done  much  to
quiet  the  country,  and  I  shall  of
course  take  care  to  protect  these
gentlemen  as  far  as  I  am  enabled
with  propriety  to  do  so.’  (Camden  to
Portland,  Nov.  6,  1795.)  In  another
letter  he  speaks  of  ‘  the  proceeding
of  the  magistrates  in  sending  ac¬
quitted  Defenders  to  sea;’  and  adds:
‘  Lord  Carhampton,  whom  I  sent
during  the  last  year  into  the  province'
of  Connaught,  found  it  necessary  to
act  in  some  instances  in  a  summary
manner,  and  certainly  did  not  confine
himself  to  the  strict  rules  of  law.’
(Ibid.  Jan.  22,  1796.)  See,  too,  the
letter  I  have  quoted,  p.  149.

CH.  XXVII.

DISTURBANCES  IN  ARMAGH.

173

their  homes,  and  sent  to  the  war-ships,  to  pestilential  climates,
and  to  a  great  naval  war.  To  such  men  the  fate  was  more
terrible  than  death,  and  if  the  measure  produced  for  a  time  the
tranquillity  of  consternation,  it  left  behind  it  the  seeds  of  the
most  enduring  and  vindictive  animosity.  It  has  been  stated,
that  more  than  one  thousand  persons  were  thus  illegally  trans¬
ported.  In  general  the  victims  and  their  friends  were  too  poor
and  helpless  to  seek  legal  redress,  but  in  a  few  cases  writs  of
Habeas  Corpus  were  applied  for  and  granted,  when  the  Govern¬
ment  interposed,  and  induced  Parliament  to  pass  an  Act  of  in¬
demnity  stopping  the  prosecutions,  and  legalising  all  that  had
been  done.  Thus,  in  the  words  of  Grattan,  c  the  poor  were
stricken  out  of  the  protection  of  the  law,  and  the  rich  out  of  its
penalties.’ 1

In  the  meantime,  another  and  most  formidable  and  persistent
element  of  disturbance  was  growing  up  in  the  North.  The  year
1795  is  very  memorable  in  Irish  history,  as  the  year  of  the
formation  of  the  Orange  Society,  and  the  beginning  of  the  most
serious  disturbances  in  the  county  of  Armagh.

It  is  with  a  feeling  of  unfeigned  diffidence  that  I  enter  upon
this  branch  of  my  narrative.  Our  authentic  materials  are  so
scanty,  and  so  steeped  in  party  and  sectarian  animosity,  that  a
writer  who  has  done  his  utmost  to  clear  his  mind  from  prejudice,
and  bring  together  with  impartiality  the  conflicting  statements  of
partisans,  will  still,  if  he  is  a  wise  man,  always  doubt  whether  he
has  succeeded  in  painting  with  perfect  fidelity  the  delicate  gra¬
dations  of  provocation,  palliation,  and  guilt.  The  old  popular  feud
between  the  lower  ranks  of  papists  and  Presbyterians  in  the
northern  counties  is  easy  to  understand,  and  it  is  not  less  easy

1  36  Geo.  III.  c.  6.  Writing  to
Pelham,  Camden  says  :  ‘  The  country
is  much  quieter,  and  I  believe  Lord
Carhampton’s  doctrine  has  done  a
great  deal  of  good,  although  he  has
carried  it  on  rather  too  publicly.  I
understand  he  will  certainly  have
actions  brought  against  him  for  his
conduct  in  Roscommon  ;  and  I  think
it  probable  that  this  measure  is  so
notorious,  that  it  will  be  a  subject
for  parliamentary  inquiry,  and  that  a
Bill  of  indemnity  may  be  necessary
to  cover  the  magistrates,  who  have
exerted  themselves  so  zealously  and

yet  so  indiscreetly.’  (Camden  to
Pelham,  Oct.  30,  1795.)  In  a  pamph¬
let,  which  had  a  great  circulation,
defending  Lord  Carhampton’s  treat¬
ment  of  the  Defenders,  it  is  said :
‘  If  it  please  your  Excellency  to  per¬
mit  them  to  go  to  war  with  us,  and
will  permit  us  only  to  go  to  law  with
them,  it  will  not  require  ihe  second
sight  of  a  Scotchman  to  foretell  the
issue.’  ( Considerations  of  the  Situa¬
tion  to  which  Ireland,  is  reduced  by
the  Government  of  Lord  Camden,  6th
edit.  1798.)

174

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,

CH.  XXVII*

to  see  how  the  recent  course  of  Irish  politics  had  increased  it.
A  class  which  had  enjoyed  and  gloried  in  uncontested  ascen¬
dency,  found  this  ascendency  passing  from  its  hands.  A  class
which  had  formerly  been  in  subjection,  was  elated  by,  new
privileges,  and  looked  forward  to  a  complete  abolition  of  political
disabilities.  Catholic  and  Protestant  tenants  came  into  a  new
competition,  and  the  demeanour  of  Catholics  towards  Protestants
was  sensibly  changed.  There  were  boasts  in  taverns  and  at  fairs,
that  the  Protestants  would  speedily  be  swept  away  from  the  land
and  the  descendants  of  the  old  proprietors  restored,  and  it  was
soon  known  that  Catholics  all  over  the  country  were  forming
themselves  into  committees  or  societies,  and  were  electing  repre¬
sentatives  for  a  great  Catholic  convention  at  Dublin.  The  riots
and  outrages  of  the  Peep  of  Day  Boys  and  Defenders  had  embit¬
tered  the  feeling  on  both  sides.  In  spite  of  the  strenuous  efforts
of  some  of  the  principal  gentry  of  the  county,  and  especially  of
Lord  Charlemont  and  Mr.  Richardson,  and  in  spite,  too,  of  the
hanging  or  public  flogging  of  several  culprits  of  both  creeds,
these  riots  had  continued  at  short  intervals  for  ten  years  before
the  Orange  Society  was  established.1

Members  of  one  or  other  creed  were  attacked  and  insulted  as
they  went  to  their  places  of  worship.  There  were  fights  on  the
high  roads,  at  fairs,  wakes,  markets,  and  country  sports,  and  there
were  occasionally  crimes  of  a  much  deeper  dye.  At  a  place  called
Forkhill,  near  Dundalk,  a  gentleman  named  Jackson,  who  died  in
1787,  left  a  considerable  property  for  the  purpose  of  educating  a
number  of  children  of  the  Established  Church  as  weavers  or  in
other  trades;  providing  them  with  looms  when  their  education
was  finished,  and  settling  them  upon  the  estate.  No  displace¬
ment  of  old  tenants  was  contemplated,  but  some  park  and  waste
land  was  colonised  with  industrious  Protestants  ;  and  the  terms
of  the  will  directed,  that  when  vacancies  occurred,  the  pupils  in
Jackson’s  schools  should  be  settled  in  small  holdings  in  prefe¬
rence  to  other  claimants.  The  object  was  to  plant  a  nucleus  of
industry  and  order  in  the  midst  of  a  savage,  bigoted,  idle,  and

1  Yol.  vi.p.  450.  Many  curious  par-  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Government,
ticulars  ahout  these  riots,  and  the  but  written  with  considerable  know-
means  taken  to  suppress  them,  will  be  ledge,  called,  A  View  of  the  present
found  in  a  manuscript,  Historical  View  State  of  Ireland ,  and  of  the  Distur-
of  Orangbsmt'm  the  Stowe  MSS.  in  the  lances  in  that  Country.  (London,
Irish  Academy.  See,  too,  a  pamphlet,  1797.)

CH.  XXVII.

JACKSON'S  CHARITY.

175

entirely  lawless  population,  who  seem  to  have  been  allowed  for
many  years  to  live  and  to  multiply,  without  any  kind  of  inter¬
ference,  guidance,  or  control.

Among  the  trustees  of  the  charity  was  a  very  intelligent  and
liberal-minded  clergyman  named  Hudson,  who  was  an  intimate
friend,  and  a  frequent  correspondent,  of  Lord  Charlemont.  In
an  interesting  letter,  written  at  the  end  of  1789,  he  describes  how
he  was  endeavouring  to  introduce  some  decent  manufacturers
into  this  wild  district,  and  what  formidable  obstacles  he  encoun¬
tered.  ‘  I  hope,’  he  adds,  ‘  to  make  our  savages  happy  against
their  will,  by  establishing  trade  and  industry  among  them.’  He
noticed  ‘  how  many  traces  of  savage  life  ’  still  remained  in  the
population ;  £  the  same  laziness  and  improvidence,  the  same  un¬
relenting  ferocity  in  their  combats,  the  same  love  of  intoxica¬
tion,  the  same  hereditary  animosities,  handed  down  from  gene¬
ration  to  generation.  Add  to  this,  that  they  are  all  related  to
each  other,  and  I  believe  there  are  not  at  this  moment  ten
families  in  the  parish  which  are  not  related  to  every  other  in  it. . . .
It  unfortunately  happened  that  this  estate  was  for  thirty-five  years
possessed  by  the  most  indolent  man  on  earth.  He  kept  more
than  half  of  it  waste  duringthat  time,  on  which  they,  in  fact,  sub¬
sisted.  The  idea  of  its  being  let,  set  them  mad.  A  report  has
been  industriously  spread,  that  several  of  the  old  tenants  had
been  dispossessed,  and  that  this  gave  rise  to  a  combination  here.
I  do  most  solemnly  assure  your  lordship,  that  in  no  one  instance
has  even  an  acre  been  taken  from  any  man.  .  .  .  They  were  not
only  continued  in  their  old  possession  with  some  addition,  but
an  abatement  of  rent  to  the  amount  of  117k  was  to  have  been
made  them  at  the  very  time  they  broke  out,  and  some  hundreds
of  arrears  were  actually  forgiven.  All  would  not  do.  They
found  some  Protestants  had  taken  land,  whom  they  determined
to  drive  out.  They  therefore  assembled  the  Defenders  from  all
parts  of  the  country,  and  struck  such  horror  that  none  of  those
Protestants  but  half  a  dozen  ever  appeared  here  afterwards.’ 1

The  school,  however,  still  went  on  and  flourished,  and  at
last,  in  the  beginning  of  1791,  a  long  series  of  outrages  culmi-

1  Charlemont  MSS.  (Irish  Aca-  statute,  29  Geo.  III.  c.  3.  Jackson’s
demy).  See,  too,  the  report  of  the  charity  is  still  flourishing,  and  cele-
Endowed  Schools  Commissioners  for  brated  its  centenary  in  1888.

Ireland  (1858),  iii.  460,  and  the  Irish

176

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvii.

nated  in  one  of  those  ghastly  crimes  which  make  men’s  blood
boil  in  their  veins.  A  very  excellent  Protestant  schoolmaster
named  Berkeley  was  the  most  successful  of  the  teachers.  Hudson
notices  that,  though  he  was  only  paid  by  the  trustees  for  teach¬
ing  sixty  scholars,  he  had  for  six  months  been  teaching  upwards
of  a  hundred  without  any  additional  charge.  At  last  one
evening  a  party  of  forty  or  fifty  men  entered  his  house.  They
stabbed  him  in  several  places.  They  cut  out  his  tongue,  and  they
cut  off  several  of  his  fingers.  They  mangled  his  wife  in  the  same
way  and  in  other  ways  also,  and  they  then  proceeded  to  mutilate
hideously  a  boy  of  thirteen.  Ho  other  reason  was  assigned,  except
that  Berkeley  was  a  prominent  member  of  the  new  colony  which
had  been  planted  in  the  district.  The  party  plundered  the  house,
and  they  then  marched  triumphantly  along  the  road  with
lighted  torches.  The  feeling  of  the  neighbourhood  was  indis¬
putably  with  them.  Only  one  of  the  culprits  was  brought  to
justice;  he  would  give  no  evidence  against  his  accomplices,  and
he  went  to  the  gallows  attended  by  his  priest,  and  maintaining,
it  is  said,  all  the  demeanour  of  a  martyr.1

Outrages,  however,  were  by  no  means  confined  to  one  side,
and  the  violent  alternation  of  hope  and  despondency  that
followed  the  appointment  and  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,
the  constant  rumours  of  rebellion  and  invasion,  and  the  great
extension  of  the  Defender  movement  through  Ireland,  contri¬
buted  to  aggravate  the  situation.  In  the  county  of  Armagh  the
Protestants  were  decidedly  jn  the  ascendant,  but  there  was  a
considerable  minority  of  Catholics,  who  were  generally  Defenders,
and  there  were  numerous  collisions  between  the  two  parties.

1  See,  for  the  particulars  of  this
crime,  a  letter  of  Hudson  to  Francis
Dobbs  (Jan.  29,  1791),  in  the  Charle-
montMSS.,as  wellassome  later  letters
from  Hudson,  and  from  a  gentleman
named  Prentice,  to  Charlemont.  See,
too,  the  documents  on  the  subject'
collected  by  Musgrave.  ( Rebellions
in  Ireland,  pp.  59-63.)  Colonel  Verner
related  all  the  circumstances  of  this
crime,  before  the  Pari  amentary  Com¬
mittee  on  the  Orange  Society,  in  1835.
(Ueport, quest.  30.)  He  says,  Berkeley
asked  those  who  were  torturing  him,
whether  he  had  ever  injured  them.
They  said  not;  ‘but  t his  was  the
beginning  of  what  all  his  sort  might

expect-.’  Colonel  Verner  says  that  this
crime,  and  especially  this  declaration,
chiefly  produced  the  hostility  to  the
Catholics  in  the  North.  He  acknow¬
ledges,  however,  that  the  Peep  of  Day

Boys  had  previously  existed. During  the
disturbances  of  1798,  Dean  Warburton
wrote  urging  the  expediency  of  arrest¬
ing  two  priests  of  infamous  character,
and  he  mentioned  that  one  of  them
had  been  parish  priest  at  Forkhill,  and
was  removed  by  his  bishop,  as  he  was
supposed  to  have  been  concerned  in
the  outrage  on  the  schoolmaster  there.
(Dean  Warburton  to  Cooke,  May  29
1798.  I.S.P.O.)

CH.  XXVII,

THE  ORANGE  SOCIETY.

177

In  September  1795  riots  broke  out  in  this  county,  which
continued  for  some  days,  but  at  length  the  parish  priest  on  the  one
side,  and  a  gentleman  named  Atkinson  on  the  other,  succeeded
in  so  far  appeasing  the  quarrel  that  the  combatants  formally
agreed  to  a  truce,  and  were  about  to  retire  to  their  homes,  when
anew  party  of  Defenders,  who  had  marched  from  the  adjoining
counties  to  the  assistance  of  their  brethren,  appeared  upon  the
scene,  and  on  September  21  they  attacked  the  Protestants  at  a
place  called  the  Diamond.  The  Catholics  on  this  occasion  were
certainly  the  aggressors,  and  they  appear  to  have  considerably
outnumbered  their  antagonists,  but  the  Protestants  were  better
posted,  better  armed,  and  better  organised.  A  serious  conflict
ensued,  and  the  Catholics  were  completely  defeated,  leaving  a
large  number — probably  twenty  or  thirty — dead  upon  the  field.1

It  was  on  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  the  battle  of  the
Diamond  was  fought,  that  the  Orange  Society  was  formed.  It
was  at  first  a  league  of  mutual  defence,  binding  its  members  to
maintain  the  laws  and  the  peace  of  the  country,  and  also  the
Protestant  Constitution.  No  Catholic  was  to  be  admitted  into
the  society,  and  the  members  were  bound  by  oath  not  to  reveal
its  secrets.  The  doctrine  of  Fitzgibbon,  that  the  King,  by  assent¬
ing  to  Catholic  emancipation,  would  invalidate  his  title  to  the
throne,  was  remarkably  reflected  in  the  oath  of  the  Orangemen,
which  bound  them  to  defend  the  King  and  his  heirs  ‘  so  long  as
he  or  they  support  the  Protestant  ascendency.’ 2  The  society
took  its  name  from  William  of  Orange,  the  conqueror  of  the
Catholics,  and  it  agreed  to  celebrate  annually  the  battle  of  the
Boyne.

In  this  respect  there  was  nothing  in  it  particularly  novel.
Protestant  associations,  for  the  purpose  of  commemorating
the  events  and  maintaining  the  principles  of  the  Revolution,
had  long  been  known.  Such  a  society  had  been  founded
at  Exeter  immediately  after  the  Revolution.  Such  a  society,
under  the  name  of  ‘  The  Old  Revolution  Club,’  had  long  existed

1  See,  for  the  particulars  of  the
battle  of  the  Diamond,  the  Parlia¬
mentary  Report  of  1835  on  the  Orange
Association,  questions  80-84,  8937-
8955.  See,  too,  McNevin's  Pieces  of
Irish  History ,  pp.  114,  115  ;  Plowden,
ii.  539.  The  evidence  collected  in  the

255

Parliamentary  Report  referred  to,
furnishes  the  fullest  particulars  about
the  history  of  Orangism.

2  The  conditional  oath  of  alle¬
giance  was  exchanged,  about  1821,
for  the  ordinary  oath,  and  that  was
abolished  in  1825.

178

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUK Y.  ch.  xxvii.

in  Scotland.1  In  Ireland,  too,  tlie  Revolution  of  1688  was  so
closely  connected  with  the  disposition  of  property  and  power,  that
it  naturally  assumed  a  transcendent  importance,  and  the  com¬
memorations  which  are  commonly  associated  with  the  Orange
Society  were  in  truth  of  a  much  earlier  date.  The  twelfth  of
July — which  by  a  confusion  between  the  old  and  new  styles  was
regarded  as  the  anniversary  of  both  the  battle  of  the  Boyne  and
the  battle  of  Aghrim  2 — and  the  relief  of  Londonderry  were
annually  commemorated  in  Ireland  long  before  the  Orange  Society
existed.  From  the  time  of  the  Revolution  till  the  beginning  of
the  nineteenth  century,’ November  4,  which  was  the  birthday  of
William  III.,  was  celebrated  in  Dublin  with  the  greatest  pomp.
The  Lord  Lieutenant  held  a  court,  and  followed  by  the  Chan¬
cellor,  the  judges,  the  lord  mayor,  and  a  long  train  of  the  nobi¬
lity  and  gentry,  he  paraded  in  state  round  the  statue  of  William
III.  in  College  Green.  At  the  drawing-room  the  ladies  appeared
decorated  with  orange  ribbons,3  and  orange  cockades  were  worn
by  the  soldiers.  These  commemorations  were  universally  re¬
cognised  as  mere  manifestations  of  loyalty  to  the  Constitution
and  the  dynasty,  and  were  fully  countenanced  by  men  who  were
very  friendly  to  the  Catholics.  The  volunteers,  who  did  so  much
to  bridge  the  chasm  between  the  two  sects,  held  some  of  their
chief  assemblies  around  the  statue  of  William  III.  Every  year,
during  the  great  period  of  the  volunteer  movement,  they  met
there  on  the  birthday  of  William,  decorated  with  orange  lilies
and  orange  cockades  ;  and  the  4  Boyne  Water  ’  was  played,  and
a  feu  de  joie  was  fired  in  honour  of  the  occasion.  Wolfe  Tone
has  noticed,  as  a  most  significant  fact,  that  in  1792,  for  the
first  time  since  the  institution  of  the  volunteers,  this  cere¬
mony  was  objected  to,  and  omitted.  It  was  on  the  occasion  of
the  commemoration  of  July  12,  that  the  Ulster  volunteers

1  On  the  English  and  Scotch  so¬
cieties,  see  Orangism,  its  Origin,  Con¬
stitution,  and  Objects,  by  Kichard
Lilburn  (1866).  The  Orange  Society
at  first  called  itself,  ‘  The  Boyne
Society,  commonly  called  Orangemen.’
See  Cupple's  Principles  of  tlie  Orange
Association,  pp.  19,  20.

2  The  battle  of  the  Boyne  was

fought  on  July  1,  old  style,  which

corresponds  to  July  12,  new  style.
The  battle  of  Aghrim  was  fought  July
12,  old  style.

3  This  was  the  occasion  of  Lord
Chesterfield’s  well-known  lines  to  Miss
Ambrose :

‘  Say,  lovely  traitor,  where’s  the  jest
Of  wearing  orange  in  your  breast  ;
While  that  breast,  upheaving,  shows
The  whiteness  of  the  rebel  rose  l  ’

ClI.  XXVII.

EXPULSION  OE  THE  CATHOLICS.

179

assembled  at  Belfast,  presented  their  famous  address  to  Lord
Charlemont  in  favour  of  the  admission  of  Catholics  to  the
suffrage.1

A  very  different  spirit,  however,  animated  the  early  Orange¬
men.  The  upper  classes  at  first  generally  held  aloof  from  the
society  ;  for  a  considerable  time  it  appears  to  have  been  almost
confined  to  the  Protestant  peasantry  of  Ulster,  and  the  title  of
Orangeman  was  probably  assumed  by  numbers  who  had  never
joined  the  organisation,  who  were  simply  Peep  of  Day  Boys
taking  a  new  name,  and  whose  conduct  was  certainly  not  such
as  those  who  instituted  the  society  had  intended.2

A  terrible  persecution  of  the  Catholics  immediately  followed.
The  animosities  between  the  lower  orders  of  the  two  religions,
which  had  long  been  little  bridled,  burst  out  afresh,  and  after  the
battle  of  the  Diamond,  the  Protestant  rabble  of  the  county  of
Armagh,  and  of  part  of  the  adjoining  counties,  determined  by
continuous  outrages  to  drive  the  Catholics  from  the  country.
Their  cabins  were  placarded,  or,  as  it  was  termed,  £  papered/
with  the  words,  ‘  To  hell  or  Connaught,’  and  if  the  occupants  did
not  at  once  abandon  them,  they  were  attacked  at  night  by  an
armed  mob.  The  webs  and  looms  of  the  poor  Catholic  weavers
were  cut  and  destroyed.  Every  article  of  furniture  was  shat¬
tered  or  burnt.  The  houses  were  often  set  on  fire,  and  the
inmates  were  driven  homeless  into  the  world.  The  rioters
met  with  scarcely  any  resistance  or  disturbance.  Twelve  or
fourteen  houses  were  sometimes  wrecked  in  a  single  night.
Several  Catholic  chapels  were  burnt,  and  the  persecution,
which  began  in  the  county  of  Armagh,  soon  extended  over  a
wide  area  in  the  counties  of  Tyrone,  Down,  Antrim,  and  Derry.3

1  Compare  Gilbert’s  History  of
Dublin ,  iii.  40-53  ;  Tone’s  Memoirs,  i.
203  ;  Grattan’s  Life,  iii.  228  ;  and  an
article  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  Dec.
1849,  on  the  Orange  Society.

2  The  later  Orangemen  have  been

extremely  anxious  to  disclaim  all
connection  with  the  outrages  of  1795
and  1796,  which  they  attribute  wholly
to  the  Peep  of  Day  Boys.  See  the
evidence  of  the  Orange  leaders  before
the  Parliamentary  Committee  of  1835,
and  also  Mortimer  O’Sullivan’s  Case
of  the  Protestants  of  Ireland,  pp.  173-

176.  It  seems  clear  that  the  society
was  originally  founded  with  a  defensive
object.  On  the  other  hand,  the  de¬
predators  called  themselves,  and  were
called  by  others,  Orangemen,  and  the
Peep  of  Day  Boys  rapidly  merged  into
Orangemen,  and  ceased  to  exist  as  a
separate  body.  See  the  evidence  of
Mr.  Chrislie  in  the  Pari.  Rep.  on  the
Orange  Society,  quest.  5575-5578.
We  shall  have  further  evidence  on  this
matter  as  we  proceed.

3  Pari.  Rep.  Orange  Society,  quest.
5567-5600.

180

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvu.

On  December  28,  about  three  months  after  the  battle  of  the
Diamond,  the  Earl  of  Gosford,  who  was  governor  of  the  county  of
Armagh,  and  a  large  number  of  magistrates  of  great  property
and  influence,  met  at  Armagh  to  consider  the  state  of  the
country.  With  a  single  exception,  they  were  all  Protestants,
and  among  them  were  three  clergymen  of  the  Established  Church,
who  were  afterwards  raised  to  the  bench.1  The  opening  speech
of  Lord  Gosford  has  often  been  quoted,  and  it  furnishes  the
clearest  and  most  decisive  evidence  of  the  magnitude  of  the
persecution.  £  It  is  no  secret,’  he  said,  1  that  a  persecution,  ac¬
companied  with  all  the  circumstances  of  ferocious  cruelty  which
have  in  all  ages  distinguished  that  dreadful  calamity,  is  now
raging  in  this  county.  Neither  age,  nor  even  acknowledged
innocence  as  to  the  late^  disturbances,  is  sufficient  to  excite
mercy,  much  less  afford  protection.  The  only  crime  which  the
wretched  objects  of  this  merciless  persecution  are  charged  with,
is  a  crime  of  easy  proof.  It  is  simply  a  profession  of  the  Roman
Catholic  faith.  A  lawless  banditti  have  constituted  themselves
judges  of  this  species  of  delinquency,  and  the  sentence  they  pro¬
nounced  is  equally  concise  and  terrible;  it  is  nothing  less  than
a  confiscation  of  all  property,  and  immediate  banishment.  It
would  be  extremely  painful,  and  surely  unnecessary,  to  detail  the
horrors  that  attended  the  execution  of  so  wide  and  tremendous
a  proscription,  that  certainly  exceeds,  in  the  comparative  number
of  those  it  consigns  to  ruin  and  misery,  every  example  that
ancient  and  modern  history  can  afford.  For  where  have  we
heard,  or  in  what  history  of  human  cruelties  have  we  read,  of
more  than  half  the  inhabitants  of  a  populous  country  deprived  at
one  blow  of  the  means,  as  well  as  of  the  fruits,  of  their  industry,
and  driven,  in  the  midst  of  an  inclement  winter,  to  seek  a  shelter
for  themselves  and  their  helpless  families  where  chance  may
guide  them  ?  This  is  no  exaggerated  picture  of  the  horrid  scenes
now  acting  in  this  county.  .  .  .  These  horrors  are  now  acting,
and  acting  with  impunity.  The  spirit  of  impartial  justice  (with¬
out  which  law  is  nothing  better  than  tyranny)  has  for  a  time
disappeared  in  this  county,  and  the  supineness  of  the  magis-

1  One  of  them  was  Mr.  Warburton,
Rector  of  Lough  Gilly,  afterwards
Dean  of  Armagh,  and  Bishop  of
Cloyne,  a  man  who  was  certainly  one

of  the  very  ablest  magistrates  in
Ireland .  See  Pari.  Rejj.  1835,  quest
3251-3277.

CTt.  XXVII.

APATHY  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.

181

tracy  of  this  county  is  a  topic  of  conversation  in  every  corner  of
the  kingdom.’

This  terrible  picture  appears  to  have  been  fully  acquiesced
in  by  the  assembled  gentlemen.  Resolutions  were  unanimously
carried,  to  the  effect  that  the  Roman  Catholic  inhabitants  of  the
county  of  Armagh  were  1  grievously  oppressed  by  lawless  per¬
sons  unknown,  who  attack  and  plunder  their  houses  by  night,
unless  they  immediate^  abandon  their  lands  and  habitations.’
A  committee  was  at  once  formed,  and  several  measures  were
taken  to  repress  the  disturbances.1

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  law  was  silent  about  such
crimes.  One  of  the  Whiteboy  Acts  had  already  made  them
capital,  and  directed  the  grand  juries  to  grant  compensation  to
the  victims.2  It  was  said  in  Parliament,  in  October  1796,  that  a
considerable  number  of  Catholics  had  obtained  compensation,
but  it  was  also  said,  and  apparently  with  great  truth,  that  these
were  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  sufferers.  The  law  had  the
defect  of  leaving  a  large  option  to  the  grand  juries  ;  it  seems
certain  that  in  some  districts,  and  especially  in  the  earlier  stage
of  the  outrages,  these  showed  themselves  shamefully  apathetic,
and  the  Government  were  very  generally  accused  of  conniving
at  their  apathy.3 * * * * 8  In  spite  of  the  resolutions  of  Lord  Gosford

1  Lord  Gosford’s  speech,  and  the
resolutions  of  the  magistrates,  will
be  found  in  the  Pari.  Rep.  of  1835,
and  have  been  printed  by  Plowden
(appendix,  xcix),  and  many  other
writers.  When  sending  the  resolutions
to  Pelham,  Gosford  wrote  :  ‘  Of  late
no  night  passes  that  houses  are  not
destroyed,  and  scarce  a  week  that

some  dreadful  murders  are'  not  com¬
mitted.  Nothing  can  exceed  the
animosity  between  Protestants  and

Catholics  at  this  moment  in  this
county.  .  .  .  When  I  came  here  in
the  month  of  October,  I  found  the

country  in  a  state  of  extreme  disorder,
and  that  of  a  nature  peculiar  to  itself.

The  Protestant  and  Catholic  inhabi¬
tants  were  inflamed  to  the  highest
pitch  of  animosity ;  but  the  former

were  greatly  superior  in  strength,  and
made  no  scruple  of  declaring,  both  by
words  and  actions  that  could  not  be
misunderstood,  a  fixed  intention  to
exterminate  their  opponents. ’(I.  S.P.O.)

.  2  15  &  16  Geo.  III.  c.  21.

8  Sea  the  remarkable  extracts  on

this  subject  from  the  speeches  of
Parsons,  Grattan,  and  others,  in  Plow¬
den,  ii.  553-557.  In  the  Pelham
Correspondence  there  is  a  letter  from
General  Dalrymple,  dated  from  near
Armagh,  ‘  Aug.  8,’  and  probably  writ¬
ten  in  1796.  He  said :  ‘  The  effects
of  the  want  of  energy  at  the  last
assizes  have  been  most  severely  felt,
and  total  inaction  on  the  part  of  the
magistrates,  and  despondency  on  the
part  of  the  Catholics,  has  followed.
Many  of  them  are  preparing  for
flight  the  moment  their  little  harvests
are  brought  in.  .  .  .  Their  houses  are
placarded,  and  their  fears  excessive.
All  this  I  have  stated  many  times  to
the  Government,  but  no  answer  have
I  received.  At  this  moment  almost
all  are  absent,  and  business  sleeps.
The  Catholics  conceive  the  fault  to  be
mine,  and  that  I  am  partial,  and  at¬
tached  to  their  enemy,  supposing  me
to  possess  powers  not  in  me.  .  .  .
Laws  exist,  but  their  explanation  and
execution  are  in  the  hands  of  those
who  approve  not  of  them  ’

182

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvil

and  liis  brother  magistrates,  the  outrages  continued  with  little
abatement  through  a  great  part  of  the  following  year.  As  might
have  been  expected,  there  were  widely  differing  estimates  of  the
number  of  the  victims.  According  to  some  reports,  which  were
no  doubt  grossly  exaggerated,  no  less  than  1,400  families,  or  about
7,000  persons,  were  driven  out  of  the  county  of  Armagh  alone.
Another,  and  much  more  probable  account,  spoke  of  700  families,
while  a  certain  party  among  the  gentry  did  their  utmost  to
minimise  the  persecutions.

The  most  conspicuous  document  of  this  latter  kind  with  w7hich
I  am  acquainted,  is  an  elaborate  and  interesting  paper,  1  On  the
Disturbances  in  the  County  of  Armagh,’  by  Mr.  Alexander  of
Boragh,  dated  November  1796.  This  gentleman  dwells  strongly
on  the  evident  and  menacing  change  of  demeanour  which  had
been  displayed  by  the  Catholics,  on  the  great  spread  of  Defender-
ism  among  them,  on  the  conspiracies  and  outrages  of  the  North¬
ern  Defenders  in  previous  years,  on  the  undoubted  fact  that  the
Catholics  were  the  aggressors  in  the  battle  of  the  Diamond.  If
it  had  not  been,  he  said,  for  the  Orangemen,  and  for  the  issue  of
that  battle,  the  county  of  Armagh,  with  some  neighbouring
counties,  would  have  been  practically  under  the  dominion  and  the
terrorism  of  committees  of  Defenders  and  United  Irishmen.
He  admits  that  barbarities  had  been  perpetrated  by  the  Protest¬
ants,  who,  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  battle  of  the  Diamond,
destroyed  the  habitations  of  the  Defenders,  and  would  not  suffer
them  to  return  to  their  neighbourhood  or  cultivate  their  land.
He  admits  also,  that  some  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  county  had
shown  great  indolence  and  supineness,  partly  from  c  a  real  desire
that  the  Defenders  should  be  banished  from  the  country,  as  a
set  of  men  hostile  to  its  peace.’  The  outrages,  however,  had,  he
said,  been  grossly  exaggerated,  and  he  believed  that  the  number
of  families  driven  from  the  county  of  Armagh  was  less  than  200,
that  the  stories  of  rapes  and  mutilations  perpetrated  by  Protest¬
ants  were  wholly  untrue,  and  that,  exclusive  of  those  w*ho  fell  in
the  battle  of  the  Diamond,  only  about  six  lives  had  been  lost.
Some  of  the  fugitives  had  been  able  to  return,  and  many
had  not  fled  on  account  of  acts  of  violence  directed  personally
against  themselves.  The  panic  had  extended  to  districts  where
there  had  been  no  actual  violence,  and  prophecies  (which  needed

CH.  XXVII.

EXTENT  OF  THE  OUTRAGES.

183

no  supernatural  illumination)  of  great  calamities  impending  over
tlie  Catholics,  had  been  Widely  circulated  and  readily  believed.
He  adds  that,  1  not  a  family  left  the  country  without  disposing
of  such  tenures  as  they  had  of  their  lands,  to  the  highest  advan¬
tage.’  ‘  The  Orangemen,’  he  continued,  ‘  are  almost  entirely
composed  of  members  of  the  Established  Church,  attached  to  the
established  Government  of  this  kingdom,  and  its  connection
with  England,  .  .  .  and  all  they  have  of  late  done,  has  originated
from  those  attachments,’  and  from  the  jealousies  very  justly
produced  by  the  associations  and  conspiracies,  the  language  and
the  conduct  of  the  Defenders.  Such  men  must  be  prevented
from  committing  outrage,  but  they  must  not  be  treated  as  dis¬
loyal  conspirators.  The  worst  acts  had  been  done  by  ‘  an  armed
peasantry,  undisciplined  and  unofficered,’  by  a  small  gang  of
‘  boys  and  idle  journeyman  weavers,’  and  ‘  the  name  of  Orange¬
men  has  been  frequently  assumed  by  a  plundering  banditti,
composed  of  all  religious  denominations,  whose  sole  object  was
robbery.’ 1

Even  in  this  picture,  the  colours  are  sufficiently  dark,  but
the  authority  of  Alexander  certainly  cannot  compete  with
that  of  Lord  Gosford  and  the  magistrates  who  assembled  at
Armagh,  and  the  correspondence  in  the  possession  of  the  Govern¬
ment  appears  to  me,  to  do  little  or  nothing  to  attenuate  the
picture.  It  was  in  the  beginning  of  1796,  that  Camden  first
informed  the  English  Government  that  the  Protestants,  in  the
county  of  Armagh,  1  finding  themselves  the  most  numerous,
have  been  induced  to  commit  acts  of  the  greatest  outrage  and
barbarity  against  their  Catholic  neighbours ;  ’  and  he  adds  very
significantly,  ‘  this  circumstance  has  been  owing  to  the  magis¬
trates  of  that  county  having  imbibed  the  prejudices  which
belong  to  it,  and  having  been  swayed  by  their  predilections  in
the  discharge  of  their  duty.’ 2  At  the  Armagh  Assizes  which
were  held  at  the  end  of  March  1796,  Wolfe,  the  Attorney-
General,  was  piesent.  He  appears  on  this,  as  on  all  other  occa¬
sions,  to  have  discharged  his  duties  with  ability,  impartiality,
and  humanity,  and  the  information  which  was  sent  to  the  Govern-

•  I.S.P.O.  I  may  here  mention,  following  pages,  are  in  Dublin  Castle,
that  nearly  all  the  magistrates’ letters  8  Camden  to  Portland,  Jan.  22,

and  other  local  reports  quoted  in  the  1796.

184

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVI I.

ment  was  on  the  whole  encouraging.  •  ‘  The  witnesses  of  both
parties  and  religions,’  wrote  a  prominent  gentleman,  1  have,  in
giving  their  testimony  against  each  other,  displayed  a  candour
and  a  temperate  honesty  that  bespeak  dispositions  the  most
favourable  to  future  peace.  Congratulations  on  that  circumstance,
and  on  the  fortunate  selection  of  the  petty  juries,  are  in  the
mouths  of  all  parties.’  Both  Protestants  and  Catholics  sat  on
the  juries,  and  two  Defenders  and  two  Orangemen  were  capitally
convicted.  One  whole  day  was  occupied  in  examining  the  peti¬
tions  of  men  whose  property  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Protest¬
ant  banditti.  One  hundred  and  fifty  persons  proved  themselves
entitled,  under  the  Statute  of  Compensation,  to  damages,  and  rather
more  than  2,000£.  was  distributed  among  them.  At  the  same
time,  W olfe  was  sorry  to  learn  that  the  outrages  continued  even
during’  the  assizes,  and  that,  a  few  days  before  he  wrote,  several
houses  had  been  1  papered  and  pulled  down,’  near  Lurgan.1

In  the  county  of  Down,  the  evil  seemed  extending.  ‘  The
wreckers,’  wrote  a  magistrate  from  that  county  in  June,  ‘  are
again  at  work.  Last  night  .  .  .  they  wrecked  and  destroyed
eight  houses,  used  the  people  with  great  cruelty,  and  stole  a  large
quantity  of  yarn.  These  fellows  disgrace  the  revered  name  of
Orange  by  taking  it  to  themselves,  and  I  can  safely  affirm  that
getting  possession  of  arms  is  not  their  only  object,  as  they  have
wrecked  all  and  robbed  most  of  the  houses  they  went  into.  .  .  .
My  list  of  houses  burned  or  wrecked  since  Armagh  Assizes,  in
this  county,  amounts  to  fifty-eight,  and  I  dare  say  some  I  have
not  heard  of.’ 2

Another  magistrate,  writing  from  Waringstown  in  the  same
county,  urged  that  a  distinction  must  be  drawn  between  the
Orangemen,  who  were  simply  a  loyal  body  enlisted  for  self-
defence,  and  the  depredators  who  had  assumed  the  name.  2,500
or  3,000  Orangemen,  with  many  flags  and  emblems  of  loyalty,
had  lately  marched  through  the  town.  Their  conduct  was  per¬
fectly  regular  and  sober,  and  they  de'clared  themselves  ‘  ready  to
turn  out  upon  all  occasions  to  assist  the  civil  power.’  At  the
same  time  depredations  of  the  Armagh  type  occasionally  took
place,  and  ‘  six  or  eight  people  of  this  neighbourhood,  whose  houses

1  The  .Right  Hon.  J.  Corry  to  April  1 ,  5,  1796.

Pelham,  April  1,  3  ;  Wolfe  to  Pelham,  2  J.  Waddell,  June  14,  20,  1796.

CH.  XXVII.

DOWN  AND  ARMAGH.

185

had  been  destroyed,  got  presentments  for  about  COOL  to  be
levied  off  the  parish.’  ‘  I  have  not  a  doubt,’  wrote  this  magis¬
trate,  ‘  of  Defenderism  and  that  hellish  system  of  United  Ire¬
land  spreading  rapidly  through  this  country.  .  .  .  Within  these
eight  days  a  general  terror  prevails  amongst  the  Protestants  in
this  neighbourhood  that  their  throats  are  to  be  cut  by  the  papists,
aided  by  the  militia,  and  they  now  seem  to  place  their  salvation
on  the  Orangemen  solely.  ...  I  lament  as  much  as  you  can,  the
emigrations  that  the  wrecking  of  the  Roman  Catholic  houses  has
occasioned.  They  will  naturally  carry  with  them  the  strongest
resentment  for  the  injuries  they  have  sustained,  into  a  country
where  their  religion  preponderates,  and  retaliation  will  and  must
be  the  consequence.  As  to  the  loyalty  of  the  Roman  Catholics,
I  differ  from  you  in  opinion.  They  never  can  forget  that  they
have  been  the  proprietors  of  this  country,  wrested  from  them  and
withheld  by  the  strong  arm  of  power.  .  .  .  Sorry  am  I  to  say,  that
the  establishment  of  a  militia  has  turned  out  a  most  unfortunate
measure.  .  .  .  They  have  in  general  by  their  behaviour,  wherever
they  have  been  quartered,  disgusted  the  people  beyond  measure,
and  by  their  actions  and  declarations  have  given  the  strongest
proofs  of  disloyalty.’ 1

In  J uly  two  Orangemen  were  capitally  convicted  at  Armagh
Assizes.  Several  others,  a  magistrate  reported,  were  acquitted,
though  there  was  the  clearest  evidence  against  them,  and  in  spite
of  the  charges  of  the  judges.2  ‘  On  the  whole,’  wrote  Lord  Gos-
ford  about  this  time,  ‘  this  county  in  all  appearance  is,  in  my
opinion,  in  rather  a  quiet  state,  and  growing  more  so  since  the
last  assizes.’  At  the  same  time  he  adds  :  ‘  The  people  here,  I
fear,  wait  for  a  favourable  opportunity  to  revive  the  spirit  of  re¬
ligious  quarrel.  .  .  .  On  the  borders  of  this  county,  in  the  county
of  Down,  outrages,  I  fear,  are  getting  to  an  alarming  height.’
Great  Orange  meetings  with  scarfs  and  banners  were  held  on
July  12,  and  the  Orangemen  professed  themselves  very  loyal  to
the  Crown.3

‘  As  to  the  Orangemen,’  wrote  a  very  efficient  magistrate
at  Dungannon,  1  we  have  rather  a  difficult  card  to  play ;  they

1  H.  Waring  to  Cooke,  July  23,  1796.

1796.  3  Lord  Gosford,  July  10, 1796.

3  J.  Kernmis  (Armagh),  July  24,

186

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII*

must  not  be  entirely  discountenanced — on  tbe  contrary,  we  must
in  a  certain  degree  uphold  them,  for  with  all  their  licentiousness,
on  them  must  we  rely  for  the  preservation  of  our  lives  and  pro-
perties  should  critical  times  occur.  We  do  not  suffer  them
to  parade,  but  at  the  same  time  applaud  them  for  their  loyal
professions.' 1

In  September  a  dreadful  tragedy  is  stated  to  have  taken
place  near  Lord  Gosford’s  residence,  and  eighteen  Catholics,
tenants  of  Lord  Charlemont’s,  were  said  to  have  been  attacked
in  the  night  and  killed.  I  can  find  no  further  particulars
of  this  affair,  which  was  probably  greatly  exaggerated,  but  the
correspondent  of  the  Under  Secretary  who  mentions  it,  states
that  the  supineness  with  which  it  was  treated  by  the  Government
was  much  blamed.2

Rightly  or  wrongly,  it  was  believed  that  the  Government
wished  to  interfere  as  little  as  possible  with  the  outrages  in
Armagh.  Curran  introduced  the  subject  in  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  on  more  than  one  occasion,  and  he  tried  in  vain  to  induce
the  Ministers  to  consent  to  a  special  inquiry  into  them.  He  stated
that  not  fewer  than  1,400  families  had  been  driven  from  their
homes ;  that  this  system  went  on  in  broad  daylight,  and  that
the  existing  law  was  quite  inadequate  to  remedy  the  evil.  Like
Grattan,  he  believed  that  nothing  short  of  a  compulsory  com¬
pensation  would  be  sufficient.  The  debate  had  a  special  interest
from  a  speech  of  Mr.  Verner,  who  represented  the  extreme  Pro¬
testant  party  among  the  Ulster  gentry.  He  said  that  the
number  of  the  expelled  had  been  enormously  exaggerated ;  that
the  Orangemen  were  a  very  loyal  body,  and  that  the  outrages
they  had  no  doubt  committed,  had  been  committed  under  great
provocation.  The  Catholics  in  1795  had  systematically  attempted
to  deprive  the  Protestants  of  their  arms.  They  had  assembled
together,  in  their  own  language,  1  to  destroy  man,  woman,  and
child  of  them  ; 5  they  had  treacherously  attacked  them  in  the
battle  of  the  Diamond,  and  they  had  been  beaten  in  open  fight.
Many,  he  said,  who  fled,  had  been  active  in  the  Defender  distur¬
bances  ;  and  others  had  gone  with  the  idea  of  getting  cheap  land
in  the  West.  ‘  These  persons  sold  the  interests  of  their  farms

1  Tbos.  Knox,  Aug.  13,  1796.

*  Edward  Boyle  to  Cooke,  Sept.  6,  14,  1796.

CH.  XXVII.

LETTER  OE  LORD  MOIRA.

187

at  a  high  price,  and  emigrated  to  the  West  at  the  instance  of
persons  who  had  large  tracts  of  waste  land,  and  employed
agents  to  invite  people  to  take  farms  from  them.’  Armagh  was
now  quite  quiet.1

Some  remarks  of  Pelham,  which  tended  to  m  inimise  the  im¬
portance  of  these  outrages,  produced  a  letter  from  Lord  Moira
which  gives  some  very  precise  and  important  information.  ‘  The
newspapers,’  he  wrote,  ‘  mention  you  as  having  said  in  your  speech
on  the  first  day  of  the  session,  that  the  violence  suffered  by  his
Majesty’s  Catholic  subjects  in  the  county  of  Armagh  had  been
much  exaggerated.  Lest  false  information  should  have  been
designedly  given  to  you  upon  so  serious  a  point,  I  cannot  but
feel  it  incumbent  to  assure  you,  sir,  .  .  .  that  the  outrages  have
gone  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  I  ever  heard  stated  in  Dublin,
and  the  persecution  is  even  inow  continuing  with  unabated
activity.  I  have  a  detached  estate  bordering  upon  the  county
of  Armagh,  which,  though  in  an  inferior  degree,  has  felt  the
effects  of  that  licentious  barbarity.  Upon  reading  your  speech,
I  deemed  it  advisable  to  procure  an  authenticated  account  of  the
number  of  my'tenantry  who  have  been  driven  within  the  last  year
from  only  four  townlands  within  the  parish  of  Tullylish.  I  have
the  honour  to  inclose  a  list  of  ninety-one  persons  who  have  been
expelled  in  that  manner  from  their  possessions,  and  I  have  to  add,
that  most  of  them  have  had  their  little  property  either  destroyed
or  taken  ;  many  of  them  have  been  cruelly  wounded.  .  .  .  The
place  where  this  has  happened  is  in  the  heart  of  the  linen  manu¬
factories,  and  is  one  of  the  most  industrious  parts  of  Ireland.’ 2

The  manner  in  which  religious  animosity  was  fast  creating
a  new  line  of  cleavage,  and  running  counter  to  the  schemes  of
the  United  Irish  party,  is  curiously  shown  in  a  letter  from  a
gentleman  at  Omagh.  He  mentions  that  after  Divine  service,
he  had  been  addressing  a  meeting  of  nearly  2,000  Presbyterians
on  the  necessity  of  forming  volunteer  corps,  in  order  to  resist
the  French,  and  also  ‘  the  Belfast  principle.’  The  strongest
spirit  of  loyalty,  he  says,  prevailed  among  them  :  ‘  hatred  of  the
Roman  Catholics  is  very  great,  so  much  so  that  should  one  be

1  Irish  Pari.  Del.  xvii.  147-154.  2  Lord  Moira  to  Pelham,  Oct.  19,

This  debate  was  on  Oct.  26  and  Nov.  1796.

7,  1796.

188

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

admitted  in  any  corps,  they  declared  they  never  would  join
with  them,  as  a  spirit  of  Defenderism  and  revenge  exists  in  that
body  against  administration.  This  violent  change  has  been
wrought  within  the  year — a  change  fraught  with  the  best  con¬
sequences  to  our  King  and  Constitution.’ 1

We  must  now  pass  to  evidence  derived  from  another  quarter.
The  great  majority  of  the  Ulster  refugees  took  refuge  in  Con¬
naught,  and  Lord  Altamount  was  one  of  the  largest  proprietors
and  one  of  the  most  active  magistrates  in  that  province.  In
July  1796,  he  wrote  to  the  Under  Secretary  at  the  Castle.

1  The  emigration  from  the  northern  counties  to  these  parts  still
continues,  and  I  consider  it  the  more  alarming  because  the  extent
of  it  does  not  seem  to  be  understood,  nor  the  causes  to  have
been  sufficiently  investigated  by  Government.  ...  I  can  see
most  clearly,  that  the  causes  and  the  consequences  are  highly
dangerous  to  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  kingdom.  Plunder,
religious  prejudices,  and  a  wish  for  disturbance  from  disaffection
to  the  State,  appear  to  me  to  have  been  the  groundwork  of  the
persecution  that  has  been  raised  against  the  Catholics.  The
result  has  been,  that  many  of  the  well-affected,  many  of  the  in¬
dustrious,  and  all  of  the  timid,  have  fled  from  the  danger  that
hung  over  them,  and  taken  refuge  where  the  numbers  of  their
own  persuasion  gave  them  more  confidence  and  security.  That
ill-intentioned  persons  have  mixed  with  them,  I  think  more  than
probable  ;  and  that  they  may  themselves  be  ultimately  led  to
disturb  those  parts  in  which  they  have  neither  interest,  connec¬
tion,  nor  property,  I  think  much  to  be  apprehended.  All  the
unhappy  sufferers  that  I  have  seen,  have  been  in  various  ways
deprived  of  the  principal  part  of  their  subsistence  ;  and  though,
from  the  cheapness  of  provisions  here,  they  have  been  able  to
hold  out  intolerable  comfort  hitherto,  with  the  little  means  they
brought  with  them,  these  must  soon  be  exhausted  .  .  .  and
the  desire  for  revenge  may  follow.’  Emissaries,  Lord  Alta¬
mount  believes,  had  already  come,  from  other  parts  of  the  king¬
dom,  to  incite  the  refugees,  and  he  strongly  suspected  some  men
who  were  carrying  crucifixes  and  pretending  to  be  prophets.
Then  follows  an  extremely  significant  and  important  paragraph.
‘  There  is  another  matter  to  which  I  must  call  your  atten-
1  Mr.  Buchanan,  Sept.  19,  1796.

CI1.  XXVII.

THE  EEEUGEES  IN  CONNAUGHT.

189

tion,  and  it  is  of  the  most  serious  importance.  You  may  perhaps
receive  it  with  some  doubts,  because,  though  I  advance  it  as  a
positive  fact  that  I  know,1  I  cannot  commit  to  paper  my  autho¬
rity,  nor  must  I  be  quoted  for  it  myself.  An  idea  has  gone
abroad,  that  the  persecutions  in  the  North  have  been  fomented
by  Government,  and  however  diabolical  and  absurd  such  a  measure
would  be  for  any  purpose  of  politics,  it  has  gained  belief,  and  has
disaffected  a  great  body  of.  the  Catholics  of  every  rank  through¬
out  the  kingdom.’  2

A  few  months  after  this  letter,  Denis  Browne,  the  brother
of  Lord  Altamount,  sent  the  Government  a  list  of  the  fugitives
who  were  on  Lord  Altamount’s  estate,  and  especially  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Castlebar.  He  described  them  as  very  un¬
willing  to  give  information,  ‘  from  suspicion  of  the  motive  of
inquiry,  natural  enough  in  their  aggrieved  and  distressed  situa¬
tion.’  ‘  You  maybe  assured,’ he  continued,  ‘that  though  the  list
I  send  you  of  names  in  this  part  of  Mayo  amounts  to  950,  yet  that
it  is  short  of  the  numbers  about  here.  .  .  ,  It  is  certaiijly  of
the  greatest  consequence  to  the  well-being  of  this  country,  the
Government  should  be  informed  accurately  of  the  circumstances
of  a  matter  so  new  and  alarming  as  this  strange  and  cruel  persecu¬
tion.  .  .  .  Be  assured  that  no  circumstance  that  has  happened
in  Ireland  for  a  hundred  years  past,  has  gone  so  decidedly  to
separate  the  mind  of  this  country  from  the  Government.  .  .  .
The  emigration  from  the  North  continues ;  every  day  families
arrive  here  with  the  wreck  of  their  properties.’  3

‘  I  am  assured,’  wrote  Lord  Altamount  a  few  days  later,  ‘  and
I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  it,  that  near  4,000  of
those  unhappy  fugitives  have  sought  shelter  in  the  county  of
Mayo,  and  a  number  that  I  cannot  take  on  me  to  compute,  in
other  parts  of  the  province  of  Connaught.  All  of  them  that
have  come  within  my  reach  have  conducted  themselves  peace¬
ably,  or  very  generally  so,  and  I  have  the  most  positive  assurances
from  the  priests,  that  intimation  will  be  given  if  any  ill  inten¬
tions  should  be  found  among  them  ;  .  .  .  but  nevertheless  I
cannot  but  recommend  that  every  additional  precaution  should
be  used,  having  in  consideration  the  cruel  injuries  they  allege

1  Underlined  in  the  original.  27,  1796.

2  Lord  Altamount  to  Cooke,  July  3  Denis  Browne,  Nov.  5,  1796.

190

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

OH,  XXVII.

themselves  to  have  received,  and  the  suspicious  quarter  from
whence  they  have  come.’ 1

Another  centre  of  the  refugees  was  the  little  town,  or,  as  it
then  was,  village,  of  Ballina,  in  the  county  of  Mayo,  and  a  magis¬
trate  named  Cuffe,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  went  over
there  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances.  ‘  About  sixty  men,’  he
says,  ‘  as  nearly  as  I  could  guess,  attended,  and  I  must  own  the
account  they  gave  of  themselves  and  their  sufferings  was  most
melancholy,  and  affected  me  much.  I  examined  them  very
particularly,  and  received  from  every  one  of  them  the  fairest  and
most  satisfactory  answers.  They  told  me  the  place  from  whence
they  came,  the  landlords  under  whom  they  had  lived,  and  such
as  had  leases  stated  the  nature  of  their  interests,  and  named  the
persons  to  whom  they  had  sold,  and  the  sums  they  had  received.
They  all  produced  certificates  of  their  good  conduct,  and  referred
me  besides  to  gentlemen  of  the  country  from  whence  they  came,
for  their  characters.  In  short,  they  have  satisfied  me  most  clearly,
that  they  are  all  of  them  honest  and  industrious  men.  All  of
them  I  have  yet  seen  are  of  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  and
almost  all  from  the  county  of  Armagh.’  It  did  not  appear  to  Mr.
Cuffe  that  the  fugitives  at  Ballina  were  in  any  degree  disloyal,  or
had  taken  any  seditious  oath,  and  he  found  them  quite  ready  to
take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  but  in  the  mountainous  districts  of
Mayo  there  were  said  to  be  Northerners  of  a  different  description.2

A  month  later,  and  after  a  fuller  inquiry,  he  sent  the  Govern¬
ment  a  complete  list  of  the  refugees  at  Ballina,  with  what
appears  to  me  to  be  a  very  candid  and  temperate  estimate  of  the
causes  of  their  exile.  ‘  These  people,’  he  writes,  ‘  are  all  of  the
Roman  Catholic  religion,  and  almost  all  of  them  weavers.  .  .  .
I  found  them  all  decent,  well-behaved  men,  and  much  more
intelligent  than  the  natives  of  the  place.  .  .  .  Four  of  them  had

1  Lord  Altamount,  Nov.  27,  1796.
In  the  Dublin  Evening  Post,  Aug.
27,  1796,  it  is  stated  that  ‘  a  sin¬
gle  gentleman  (Col.  Martin,  of  the
county  of  Galway)  has  given  asylum
to  more  than  1 ,000  souls  on  his  own
estate,  all  peaceable,  inoffensive,  and
living  by  the  labour  of  their  hands.’
I  cannot  find  any  statistics  about  the
exiles  in  the  South.  In  a  letter  from
the  county  Kerry,  it  is  said :  ‘  The

account  given  by  Mr.  Frizell  of  the
four  men  taken  up  at  Tralee  is  exactly
the  truth.  They  were  innocent,  ig¬
norant  people,  whose  fears  made  them
leave  this  country  for  fear  of  being
destroyed  by  the  Presbyterians.  I
believe  they  had  not  the  smallest  idea
of  doing  any  mischief.’  (John  Miller
(Moneymore),  Dec.  17,  1796.)

2  James  Cuffe  to  Pelham,  Nov.  26,
1796.

CH.  XXVtl.

AGRARIAN"  ELEMENT  IN  ORANGISM.

191

been  plundered,  and  as  many  more  bad  been  “  noticed  ”  (sic).
Tbe  others  honestly  owned  to  me  that  they  had  not  been
injured  or  persecuted,  but  had  left  their  country  of  their  own
free  will.  As  far  as  I  can  judge  from  what  they  told,  the  cause
of  their  emigration,  in  general,  was  that  the  Peep  of  Day  Boys
(with  whom  they,  under  the  name  of  Defenders,  have  been  in  a
constant  state  of  warfare  for  above  thirty  years)  have  lately  be¬
come  too  powerful  for  them,  and  they  therefore  thought  they
would  be  happier  in  any  other  county.  Many  of  them  owned
to  me  candidly,  that  they  had  been  in  fault  in  the  beginning,
and  they  all  agreed  that  if  the  gentlemen  of  their  country  had
been  as  attentive  to  the  police  of  it  as  I  was  to  that  of  my
country,'  they  might  have  remained  at  home  unmolested.  .  .  .
Upon  the  whole,  the  result  of  my  inquiry  was,  that  none  of  them
appeared  to  have  fled  from  justice,  very  few  from  persecution,
and  the  bulk  of  them  because  their  antagonists,  the  Peep  of  Day
Boys,  are  become  too  powerful,  and  likely  to  worst  them  at
fairs  and  other  places  where  they  meet  them.’ 1

The  flight  of  the  Catholics  from  some  districts  was  sufficiently
considerable  to  affect  seriously  the  agrarian  condition.  A  Catholic
historian  asserts  that,  some  months  after  the  disturbances  broke
out,  it  was  found  that  when  a  farm  was  to  be  let,  the  number  of
bidders  was  so  reduced,  that  not  much  more  than  half  the  former
rent  could  be  obtained,  and  he  malevolently  ascribes  to  this  fact
the  strong  resolutions  of  the  magistrates  under  the  presidency  of
Lord  Gosford.2  The  insinuation  is  probably  unfounded,  but  it
is,  I  believe,  perfectly  true  that  in  these,  as  in  most  Irish  dis¬
turbances,  the  agrarian  element  had  a  considerable  part.  The
Catholics  and  the  Presbyterians  in  the  North,  had  long  confronted
each  other  as  two  distinct  and  dissimilar  nations,  and  the  low
standard  of  comfort  which  accompanied  the  inferior  civilisation
of  the  Catholics,  enabling  them  to  offer  higher  rents  than  the
Protestants,  gave  them  an  advantage  in  the  competition  for
farms.  There  had  been,  as  I  have  already  noticed,  in  certain
districts,  a  great  displacement  of  the  Protestant  by  the  Catholic
element  owing  to  this  cause,  and  although  it  was  not  the

1  James  Cuffe  to  Pelham,  Dec.  22,  Wexford,  p.  39  (edit.  1803).  A  similar
1796.  assertion  is  made  in  O’Driscoll’s  Views

*  Hay’s  Insurrection  of  the  County  of  Ireland,  ii.  152,  153.

192

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

immediate  and  direct  motive  of  the  disturbances,  it  no  doubt
intensified  the  animosity  which  difference  of  religion,  dif¬
ference  of  race,  and  great  difference  of  civilisation  had  already
produced.

The  reader  is  now  in  possession  of  evidence  which,  although
of  a  somewhat  fragmentary  description,  is  sufficient  to  enable
him  to  form  his  own  judgment  of  the  Orange  disturbances  in
Ulster.  It  is  plain,  I  think,  that  these  disturbances,  considered
as  a  whole,  cannot  be  regarded  as  unprovoked.  They  were  a
continuation  or  revival  of  the  war  between  the  Peep  of  Day
Boys  and  the  Defenders,  which  had  raged  fiercely  in  Ulster
for  many  years  before  the  Orange  Society  was  founded.  The
Defender  movement  had  long  ceased  to  be  a  mere  league  for  self-
defence.  It  was  distinctly  treasonable,  for  it  was  intended  to
assist  and  provoke  a  French  invasion  ;  it  was  accompanied  by
numerous  and  horrible  outrages,  and  in  1795  it  had  spread  over
twelve  counties,  or  more  than  a  third  part  of  Ireland.  It  is
also  true  that  in  the  battle  of  the  Diamond,  which  was  the
immediate  cause  of  the  Orange  outbreak,  the  Catholics  were  the
aggressors.  It  is,  I  think,  no  less  evident  that  the  Protestant  re¬
taliation  soon  assumed  the  form  and  dimensions  of  a  most  serious
religious  persecution  ;  that  through  violence,  or  through  fear  of
violence,  multitudes  of  industrious  and  inoffensive  men  were
compelled  to  abandon  their  homes,  driven  from  the  trades  by
which  they  lived,  despoiled  of  almost  all  they  possessed,  and
obliged  to  seek  refuge  in  remote  Catholic  districts.  It  is  probably
no  exaggeration  to  say,  that  the  exiles  may  be  numbered  by
thousands,  and  it  is  impossible  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  some
of  the  magistrates  shamefully  tolerated  or  connived  at  the  out¬
rages.  Nothing  of  this  kind  had  occurred  in  Ireland  since  the
days  of  Cromwell,  and  the  consternation,  the  panic,  the  wildly
exaggerated  rumours  it  produced,  exercised  an  enormous  influence
on  Irish  politics.

In  the  first  place,  the  fierce  revival  of  religious  animosity  was
a  fatal  obstacle  to  that  co-operation  of  Protestants  and  Catholics
for  the  purposes  of  revolution,  which  it  was  the  object  of  the
United  Irishmen  to  produce.  The  revolutionary  movement  in
its  earlier  stages  existed  mainly  among  the  Protestants  of  the
North,  and  in  1795  nothing  would  have  appeared  more  impro-

CH.  XXVII#

GROWTH  OF  CATHOLIC  SEDITION.

1 93

bable  than  that  the  rebellion  should  have  been  chiefly  Catholic,
and  chiefly  confined  to  Leinster.  The  course  which  it  ultimately
took  was  largely  due  to  the  distrust  which  the  events  in  the
North  had  sown  between  Protestants  and  Catholics,  and  which
was  afterwards  intensified  by  the  crimes  in  Wexford.  On  the
other  hand,  the  religious  animosities  which  were  thus  engendered
left  an  enduring  root  of  bitterness  in  Irish  life,  and  the  dis¬
loyalty  of  the  Catholic  masses  advanced  with  gigantic  strides.
Up  to  the  period  of  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  though  there
was  great  positive  lawlessness,  and  almost  complete  alienation  of
sympathy  from  the  Government,  there  appears  to  have  been,  in
these  masses,  but  little  active  political  disaffection.  After  that
period,  a  change  passed  over  their  spirit ;  but  although  the
Defenders  looked  forward  to  a  French  invasion,  as  likely  to  re¬
dress  their  tithe  and  agrarian  grievances,  the  political  element
in  their  combinations  was  still  a  subordinate  one.  The  numer¬
ous  poor  peasants  who  were  dragged  from  their  homes,  and  sent
without  trial  to  serve  in  the  King’s  fleet,  produced  a  new  and
fiercer  spirit  of  resentment,  which  the  outrages  in  Armagh
raised  to  fever  heat.  The  plundered  fugitives  from  the  North,
as  they  recounted  their  wrongs  among  the  Catholic  peasantry  of
Connaught  and  Munster,  preached  rebellion  more  powerfully
than  any  other  missionaries,  and  it  was  soon  believed,  in  the
words  of  a  Catholic  historian,  ‘  that  about  five  thousand  (some
say  seven  thousand)  Catholics  had  been  forced  or  burned  out  of
the  county  of  Armagh,  and  that  the  ferocious  banditti  who  had
expelled  them,  had  been  encouraged,  connived  at,  countenanced,
instigated,  or  protected  by  the  Government.’ 1  In  this  belief,
the  United  Irishmen  at  last  found  an  effectual  means  of  arousing
the  Catholics,  and  it  was  industriously  diffused  from  one  end  of
Ireland  to  the  other.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  with  some  of  the  subor¬
dinate  members  of  the  Government,  it  is  certainly  not  true  that
Lord  Camden  looked  upon  these  outrages  with  any  other  feeling
than  horror  and  dread,  and  one  of  his  letters,  written  in  August
1796,  shows  how  clearly  he  foresaw  their  effects.  The  Govern¬
ment  had  by  this  time,  he  hoped,  stopped  the  outrages  in
Armagh,  but  not,  he  says,  before  £  a  multitude  of  families  fled

1  Piowden,  ii.  563.

256

194

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

from  the  country,  and  were  obliged  to  resort  for  new  settlements
to'other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  where  they  related  their  sufferings,
and,  I  fear,  have  excited  a  spirit  of  revenge  among  their  Catholic
brethren.  The  Committee  of  Belfast,  which  had  been  long  en¬
gaged  in  forming  democratic  societies  and  clubs  upon  the  princi¬
ples  of  the  French  Revolution,  took  advantage  of  this  ill  conduct
of  the  Dissenters  in  Armagh,  to  form  a  junction  with  the
societies  of  Defenders  in  the  western  and  midland  counties,  and
to  revive  their  committees.  ...  I  am  concerned  to  add,  that
their  endeavours  have  been  attended  with  much  success.  .  .  .
Their  conduct  is  cautious,  and  they  are  never  guilty  of  outrage,
so  that  the  part  of  the  country  whence  most  danger  is  to  be  ap¬
prehended,  is  apparently  most  quiet  and  peaceable.’  They  boast
of  their  success  in  seducing  the  military,  and  these  boasts  ‘  are
too  well  grounded,  especially  among  the  militia  men,  who  are
Catholics,  and  whose  feelings  may  have  been  irritated  by  the  ill
behaviour  of  the  Dissenters  and  Orangemen  in  Armagh.  .  .  .
Emissaries  have  been  among  them  [the  Catholics],  to  influence
them  against  the  Dissenters  of  Armagh,  to  instil  into  their  minds
that  the  persecution  of  the  Catholics  is  protected  by  Govern¬
ment.  .  .  .  The  party  of  Dissenters  called  Orangemen  keep  up
a  system  of  terror  at  least,  if  not  of  outrage,  in  Armagh,  and  have
begun  to  carry  their  vexation  of  the  Catholics  into  the  county  of
Down.  Some  of  them  were  recently  apprehended  by  a  spirited
magistrate,  but  on  prosecution  at  the  late  assizes,  the  Catholics,
on  whose  examinations  they  had  been  taken  up,  through  terror
or  other  causes,  prevaricated  on  trial,  and  the  offenders  escaped.’
These  outrages,  though  ‘  not  aimed  immediately  at  Government,
are  perhaps  more  dangerous  than  even  direct  conspiracies,  as
they  justly  irritate  the  Catholics,  and  give  a  pretence  for  the
disaffected  to  act  upon.’ 1

The  terror  inspired  by  the  Orangemen  was  extreme.  As  the
Armagh  depredators  had  taken  that  name,  their  outrages  were
naturally  regarded  as  the  deliberate  acts  of  the  society,  which  was
said  now  to  be  intended  for  the  extermination  of  the  Catholics,
and  to  have  embodied  this  object  in  its  secret  oath.  Of  this
charge  no  evidence  has  been  adduced.  The  society  in  its  first
conception  was  essentially  defensive,  and  at  a  later  period,
1  Camden  to  Portland,  Aug.  6,  171)6.

cii.  xxyii.

PARLIAMENTARY  PROCEEDINGS,  1736.

195

when  many  respectable  country  gentlemen  joined  it,  they
solemnly  declared  that  no  such  oath  had  ever  been  taken  by
its  members.  But  the  false  report  had  struck  too  deep  a  root
to  be  eradicated,  and  the  United  Irishmen  very  skilfully  put
themselves  forward  as  the  champions  of  the  oppressed.  Catholic
fugitives  were  sheltered  and  protected  by  Presbyterian  families
in  Down  and  Antrim,  and  prosecutions  were  carried  on,  though
with  little  or  no  success,  by  the  United  Irish  Committee  in
Ulster  against  the  rioters,  and  even  against  conniving  magis¬
trates.1  It  was  sworn  that  some  of  these  latter  had  actually
refused  to  take  the  examinations  of  aggrieved  Catholics,  and
had  themselves  threatened  them  with  banishment.2  ‘  To  the
Armagh  persecution,'  wrote  the  United  Irish  leaders,  in  the
memoir  which  they  afterwards  drew  up  in  prison,  for  the
Government,  £  is  the  union  of  Irishmen  most  exceedingly  in¬
debted.  The  persons  and  properties  of  the  wretched  Catholics
of  that  county,  were  exposed  to  the  merciless  attacks  of  an
Orange  faction,  which  was  certainly,  in  many  instances,  un¬
controlled  by  the  justices  of  the  peace,  and  claimed  to  be  in  all
supported  by  the  Government.  .  .  .  Wherever  the  Orange  system
was  introduced,  particularly  in  Catholic  counties,  it  was  uni¬
formly  observed  that  the  numbers  of  United  Irishmen  increased
most  astonishingly.’ 3

The  parliamentary  proceedings  in  the  spring  and  in  the
winter  of  1796  did  little  to  improve  the  situation.  The  reports
for  this  year  are  much  more  imperfect  and  fragmentary  than
those  for  previous  years,  but,  as  far  as  can  be  judged,  the
strength  of  the  Government  and  the  violence  of  the  Opposition
had  both  greatly  increased.'  The  short  session,  which  began  on
January  21,  and  ended  on  April  15,  1796,  was  mainly  occupied
with  the  Act  of  indemnity  for  such  persons  as  had  in  the  pre¬
ceding  half-year  exceeded  their  legal  powers  in  the  preservation
of  the  public  peace,  and  with  the  Insurrection  Act,  but  Grattan
also  brought  forward,  as  an  amendment  to  the  address,  a  reso¬
lution  demanding  free  trade  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,
on  the  basis  of  equalisation  of  duties.  He  was  defeated  in  one

1  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  His-  2  Seward’s  Collectanea  Politico,

tory,  p.  117.  iii.  168.

3  McNevin,  p.  178.

196

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

division  by  122  to  14,  and  in  another  division  by  82  to  16.  In
his  speech  on  the  address,  he  adopted  the  tone  of  violent
opposition,  and  enumerated,  in  a  bitter  retrospect,  the  chief
grievances  of  several  successive  years — the  sale  of  peerages
under  Lord  Buckinghamshire  ;  the  efforts  of  conspicuous  mem¬
bers  of  the  Westmorland  Government  in  1792,  to  excite  a  spirit
of  hostility  to  the  Catholics;  the  violation  during  several  months,
by  Lord  Westmorland,  of  the  law  which  expressly  ordered  that
an  effective  force  of  12,000  men  should  be  retained  in  Ireland;
the  conduct  of  the  same  viceroy,  in  creating  fourteen  new
places  tenable  by  members  of  Parliament,  and  in  granting  no
less  than  thirteen  reversions ;  the  fact  that  some  of  the  most
valuable  of  these  reversions  were  granted  after  his  successor  had
actually  been  appointed ;  and  finally,  the  crowning  grievance  and
perfidy  of  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam.

The  power  of  the  Government  was,  however,  perfectly  un¬
broken,  and  its  chief  measures  were  carried  almost  without'
divisions.  The  Act  of  indemnity  was  justified  chiefly  by
English  precedents.  Such  an  Act  had  been  carried  by  the
English  Parliament  in  the  first  year  of  William  III.,  after  the
Jacobite  rebellions  of  1715  and  1745,  and  after  the  Gordon
riots  in  1780,  and  the  Irish  Act  now  passed  with  apparently  no
further  formal  opposition  than  a  motion  of  Grattan,  that  the
judges  should  first  be  summoned  to  give  information  to  the
House.1

The  Insurrection  Act,  that  accompanied  it,  is  one  of  the
most  severe  and  comprehensive  in  Irish  history,  and  it  was
preceded  and  justified  by  some  resolutions,  describing  the  ex¬
tremely  dangerous  and  anarchical  condition  of  some  parts  of  the
country.  The  Attorney-General  mentioned  that  in  three  coun¬
ties  in  Connaught,  the  Defenders  in  open  day  had  attacked  the
King’s  troops,  that  on  one  occasion  forty  or  fifty  of  the  Defenders
fell,  and  that  the  operation  of  the  ordinary  law  was,  in  many
places,  almost  paralysed  by  intimidation,  and  especially  by  the
frequent  murder  of  witnesses.  The  Act  made  it  death  to  ad¬
minister,  transportation  for  life  voluntarily  to  take,  a  seditious

1  Grattan  condensed  the  argu-  that  the  measure  was  violently  op-
ments  against  it  with  preat  power,  in  posed  by  the  minority.  See,  too,
a  petition  which  he  drew  up  for  the  Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.  204-208.'
Whig  Club.  Musgrave  states  (p.  145)

CH.  XXVII.

THE  INSURRECTION  ACT.

197

oath.  It  compelled  the  production  of  all  arms  for  registration,
changed  in  several  important  respects  the  criminal  procedure,
and  enabled  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Council,  upon  a  memorial
from  the  magistrates,  to  proclaim  particular  districts  as  in  a
state  of  disturbance.  In  proclaimed  districts,  the  inhabitants
were  forbidden  to  be  out  of  their  houses  from  one  hour  after
sunset  until  sunrise,  and  justices  of  the  peace  were  empowered
to  search  all  houses  during  the  prohibited  hours,  to  ascertain
whether  the  inmates  were  abroad,  or  whether  arms  were  con¬
cealed.  They  might  also  demand  the  surrender  even  of  regis¬
tered  arms,  and  there  were  stringent  clauses  against  ‘tumultuous
assemblies  ’  by  daytime,  against  meetings  by  night  in  public-
houses,  against  men  and  women  who  sold  seditious  and  un¬
stamped  papers.1  All  these  clauses  might  be  fully  justified.
The  part  of  the  Insurrection  Act  which  appears  to  me  objec¬
tionable,  and  which  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons  strongly  opposed,  is
that  which  enabled  the  magistrates  in  the  proclaimed  districts
to  do  by  law  what  had  already  been  done  without  law  and  in
defiance  of  law — to'  send  men  whom  they  considered  disorderly
characters,  untried,  to  the  fleet.  Under  this  comprehensive
category  were  comprised  all  who  were  out  of  doors  in  the  pro¬
hibited  hours  and  who  could  not  give  a  satisfactory  account  of
their  purpose,  all  who  had  taken  unlawful  oaths,  all  who  could
not  prove  that  they  had  lawful  means  of  livelihood.  This  treat¬
ment  of  disorderly  persons  was  justified,  on  the  ground  that  a
power  to  send  vagabonds  to  the  fleet  or  army  had  been  granted
to  English  magistrates.  The  circumstances  of  the  two  countries,
however,  were  very  different,  and  it  was  only  too  evident  how
great  were  the  probabilities  in  Ireland  of  scandalous  oppression
and  abuse.

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  Grattan,  though  he  delivered  two
or  three  speeches  on  the  Insurrection  Bill,  does  not  appear  to
have  objected  to  any  of  its  enactments  except  the  last,  and  with
this  exception  he  confined  himself  to  censuring  its  omissions.2
As  the  reader  has  by  this  time  discovered,  he  had,  at  no  period
of  his  life,  any  sympathy  with  those  politicians  who  look  with
indifference  on  outrage  and  crime,  or  imagine  that  ordinary

1  3r>  Geo.  III.  c.  20.

*  Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.  218-229.

198

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

remedies  are  sufficient  to  meet  extraordinary  diseases.  He  con¬
tended,  however,  with  much  justice,  that  the  Government  showed
a  scandalous  partiality,  in  directing  their  measures  solely  against
one  class  of  crime,  and  keeping  a  complete  and  shameful  silence
about  the  outrages  in  Armagh — outrages,  the  magnitude  and
atrocity  of  which  had  been  formally  attested  by  the  governor  of
the  county,  and  by  the  resolutions  of  the  magistrates — outrages
which  Government  had  taken  no  adequate,  stringent,  or  suc¬
cessful  measures  to  suppress.  It  was  a  scandalous  thing,  he
said,  that  they  should  have  justified  this  Insurrection  Bill,  by
resolutions  specifying  the  attempts  to  assassinate  magistrates ;
to  murder  witnesses ;  to  plunder  houses ;  to  seize  arms  by  force ;
and  should  have  kept  an  absolute  silence  about  attempts  to  seize
the  persons  of  his  Majesty’s  subjects,  and  to  force  them  to  aban¬
don  their  lands  and  habitations,  though  these  crimes  were  not
less  great  or  less  notorious,  and  demanded  still  more  emphatically
the  interposition  of  the  State,  since  they  had  hitherto  triumphed
over  the  supineness  of  the  magistracy.  He  desired  to  insert
among  the  crimes  which  the  Insurrection  Bill  was  specifically  de¬
signed  to  punish,  that  of  forcing  his  Majesty’s  subjects  to  aban¬
don  their  lands  and  habitations,  and  he  also  wished  to  make  it
obligatory  upon  the  county  to  indemnify  fully  the  sufferer  for
the  injury  he  received,  when  beaten,  or  abused,  or  driven  from
his  land  and  habitation.  Experience,  he  argued,  had  only  too
clearly  shown,  that  in  the  state  of  feeling  existing  in  the  North,
this  compensation  should  not  be  left  optional  with  the  grand
juries,  and  both  in  Armagh  and  elsewhere,  the  houses  of  the
poorest  class  of  the  people  had  been  burned  without  any
redress  whatever.  The  Government,  however,  refused  to  ac¬
cept  his  proposals,  and  the  Bill  was  carried  in  the  original
form.

‘  I  believe  it  is  not  possible,’  wrote  Camden,  1  to  explain  to
others  the  necessity  of  certain  measures,  which  a  residence  in
this  country  forces  me  to  feel.’  And  he  gives,  as  an  example,
the  Insurrection  Bill,  ‘  which  seems  to  alarm  the  finer  feelings
of  British  legislators,’  though  it  had  passed  ‘  without  a  division
in  an  Irish  House  of  Commons,  and  in  the  presence  of  an  active
and,  in  some  respects,  of  a  spirited  and  intelligent  Opposition,  whose
chief  objection  to  it  was,  that  it  did  not  meet  every  possible  case

CII.  XXVII.

LETTERS  TO  PELHAM.

199

of  aggression.’1  ‘  Of  your  Insurrection  Act,’  replied  Portland,  ‘I
will  only  say  tliat,  though  the  necessity  of  such  a  measure  is  but
too  well  established  by  the  facility  of  its  passage  through  Par¬
liament,  my  astonishment  at  the  existence  of  such  a  necessity  in
a  country  enjoying  the  same  form  of  government  as  this,  is  not
abated  by  the  event.’2

Pelham,  whose  health  was  exceedingly  bad,  hastened,  after
the  adjournment  of  Parliament,  to  England,  where,  indeed,  he
appears  to  have  spent  more  time  than  any  other  Secretary  since
the  establishment  of  the  Constitution  of  1782.  Several  letters
show  the  anxiety  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  for  his  return,  but  his
absence  is  not  without  some  compensation  for  an  Irish  historian,
who  has  the  great  advantage  of  reading  the  full  and  confidential
reports  that  were  sent  to  him  from  Ireland.3  They  show  how
fast,  in  spite  of  a  few  condemnations  at  the  Armagh  Assizes,  the
Orange  movement  in  its  worst  form  was  extending,  and  how
fatally  it  was  inflanping  Catholic  disaffection.  They  amply
justify  Grattan’s  complaints  of  the  supineness  of  the  magistracy
and  the  inadequacy  of  the  laws,  and  they  are  especially  signifi¬
cant,  as  they  come  chiefly  from  Cooke,  who  was  himself  in  sym¬
pathy  with  the  strong  Protestant  and  anti-reforming  spirit  of
Clare.

On  July  12,  a  new  and  irritating  Orange  commemoration
was  kept,  in  a  procession  to  the  Diamond.  It  passed  off  quietly,
but  5,000  Orangemen  took  part  in  it,  parading  without  arms,
but  with  banners  representing  King  George  on  one  side,  and
William  III.  on  the  other.  ‘  The  Orangemen,’  added  Cooke,
1  are  beginning  persecution  in  the  county  of  Down,  and  the
magistrates  are  not  sufficiently  active.  The  effect  of  this  perse¬
cution  works  on  the  Catholics  in  other  places,  and  they  natu¬
rally  breathe  revenge.  The  United  Irishmen  are  very  active  in
enlisting  and  embracing  the  Catholics.  ...  I  have  just  seen
Mr.  Brownlow.  He  says,  when  the  Orange  boys  were  passing,  a

1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  21.

2  Portland  to  Camden,  March  24.

‘  I  cannot  conceive  that  any  man  can
doubt  the  necessity  of  such  a  measure
[as  the  Insurrection  Act],  who  had
read  the  accounts  which  have  been
transmitted  from  this  country  of  the
machinations  and  designs  of  the

United  Irishmen,  the  Catholic  Com¬
mittee,  the  Defenders,  Peep  of  Day
Boys,  and  other  disturbers  of  the
public  peace.’  (Pelham  to  Portland,
March  31,  1796.)

3  These  letters  are  in  the  Pelham
MSS.  in  the  British  Museum.

200

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyij.

party  of  the  Queen’s  County  Militia  broke  away  from  their  officers,
and  began  taking  out  the  Orange  cockades.  An  Orangeman
struck  one  of  the  soldiers.  The  soldier  bayoneted  him.  ...  I
fear  the  militia  will  be  tainted,  from  this  religious  quarrel,  and
the  United  Irishmen,  in  order  to  seduce  the  militia  and  Catholics,
promise  to  join  them  both  against  the  Orange  boys.  .  .  .Nothing
can  be  done  till  the  heads  of  the  United  Irishmen  can  be  taken
up.’  ‘  The  United  Irishmen  are  very  active,  and  uniting  with
the  Defenders  daily.’  ‘  The  irritating  conduct  of  the  Orangemen,
in  keeping  up  persecution  against  the  Catholics,  does  infinite
mischief.  It  has  been  made  the  handle  for  seducing  many  of
the  militia,  and  by  information  I  have  just  received,  I  fear  appre¬
hensions  respecting  the  militia  are  too  true.  Two  fellows  I  em¬
ploy,  and  who  never  deceive  me,  assure  me  that  there  are  700
militia  in  the  garrison,  Defenders,  and  that  several  of  the  officers
are  infected.’  ‘ 1  own,  I  see  nothing  for  the  safety  of  this  king¬
dom  but  an  addition  of  English  troops,  particularly  cavalry,  an
arming  of  the  gentry,  some  scheme  for  reforming  the  militia,  and
an  effective  staff,  and  1  think  a  bold  measure  should  be  struck
against  the  persons  and  papers  of  the  chief  United  Irishmen  and
Defenders.’ 1  ‘  In  consequence  of  the  shameful  supineness  of

the  magistrates,’  wrote  another  important  official  from  theCastle,
‘  the  Orange  boys  are  still  permitted  to  continue  their  depreda¬
tions  in  the  North,  with  impunity.  If  this  system  of  spoliation
is  much  longer  acquiesced  in  by  the  magistrates,  the  sufferers
must  be  driven  to  despair,  and,  considering  themselves  put  out
of  the  protection  of  the  law,  they  will  necessarily  associate  for
their  own  defence,  and  will  become  recruits  to  the  Jacobin  Club
established  at  Belfast.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  some
very  vigorous  measures  should  be  adopted  for  the  redress  of  this
crying  grievance.’ 2

‘We  are  aware,  on  our  part,’  wrote  Camden  himself,  ‘that
the  Orangemen  in  the  North,  and  the  Defenders,  are  only  kept
down  by  the  force  which  is  stationed  there ;  it  is  impossible  to
have  much  confidence  in  some  of  the  militia  regiments,  .  .  .  not
much  dependence  is  to  be  placed  upon  our  generals.’ 3

Crimes,  that  were  manifestly  connected  with  the  United

1  Cooke  to  Pelham,  July  14,  19,  27.  2  William  Elliot  to  Pelham,  Aug.  4.

3  Camden  to  Pelham,  July  30,  1796.

CII.  XXVII.

INVASION  EXPECTED.

201

Irish  and  the  Defender  movements,  were  multiplying,  and
especially  murders  of  informers.  Cooke  sent  to  Pelham  two
long  lists  of  the  most  recent.  Two  or  three  men  who  had  given
evidence,  had  saved  their  lives  by  flying  from  the  country,  but
their  relations  at  home  were  sometimes  pursued.  The  house
of  the  wife  of  one  of  them  was  nearly  destroyed ;  his  brother
was  obliged  to  fly  from  the  country ;  his  brother-in-law  was
fired  at.  A  militia  soldier,  who  was  supposed  to  be  an  informer,
was  made  drunk  in  Belfast,  flung  over  the  bridge  and  drowned.
A  sergeant  of  the  Invalids  was  waylaid,  and  shot  through  the
body.  A  magistrate  named  Johnson  was  shot  through  the  body
at  Lisburn  ;  two  men  were  shot  at  Newtown  Ards,  and  another
in  the  streets  of  Belfast.  Many  persons  had  been  wounded  be¬
cause  they  had  enlisted  as  yeomen,  and  one  so  badly  that  his  life
was  despaired  of.  A  witness  who  had  been  sheltered  in  the  house
of  Lord  Carhampton  himself,  was  imprudent  enough  to  take  a
short  walk  with  his  uncle  on  Sunday,  about  midday.  They
were  both  murdered  in  the  middle  of  a  field.  Two  or  three
other  cases  had  occurred.  ‘  A  Derry  jury,’  adds  Cooke  in  ter¬
minating  the  dismal  catalogue,  ‘  acquitted  a  man  clearly  proved
guilty  of  administering  oaths.  The  other  Crown  prosecutions  in
Derry  are  put  off.’ 1

There  were  at  the  same  time  constant  intimations  that  a  French
invasion,  to  be  followed  by  an  Irish  rebellion,  was  very  near.  At
the  end  of  May,  McNally  informed  the  Government  that  he  had
received  clear  hints  that  an  invasion  was  meditating,2  and  Cooke
wrote  two  months  later  :  ‘  All  my  information  coincides  in  the
unceasing  activity  of  the  disaffected,  and  their  projects  for  join¬
ing  the  United  Irishmen  and  Defenders,  and  of  insurrection  after
harvest,  aided  by  rebellion.’ 3  Wickham,  the  English  minister
in  Switzerland,  wrote  two  letters  in  July  apprising  his  Govern¬
ment  that  a  formidable  French  expedition  was  preparing,  and
warning  them  that  Ireland  was  likely  to  be  one  of  the  objects  of
attack.4  In  September,  however,  James  Tandy  received  letters,
written  from  America  by  Rowan  and  Reynolds,  which  stated
that  ‘the  French  resident  at  Philadelphia  had  informed  his
confidential  friends  of  the  Irish  party  there,  that  France  will

1  Cooke  to  Pelham,  July  27,  Aug.  3  Ibid.  July  27,  1796.

10,  1796.  4  Wickham’s  Correspondence,  i.

■2  Ibid.  May  31,  1796.  403,  406,  436,  437.

202

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

not  attempt  an  invasion  of  Ireland  till  after  a  peace  with
Germany.  This  being  accomplished,  it  will  be  their  first,  as  it
is  their  favourite,  object.’ 1

The  letters  of  McNally  at  this  time  dwell  strongly  on  the
rapid  spread  of  disaffection  among  the  Catholics.  The  original
agitators,  he  said,  in  the  Catholic  Committee  and  Convention,
had  never  aimed,  like  the  Defenders,  at  £  plunder  and  mas¬
sacre.’  But  many  of  them,  through  the  rejection  of  their  claims,
were  now  ready  to  risk  the  consequences  of  invasion,  and  all
of  them  had  made  ‘  total  separation  from  Great  Britain  ’  their
grand  object.  Of  this  fact,  from  an  intimate  personal  acquaint¬
ance  with  them,  he  was  fully  convinced.  Their  immediate  aim
was  to  cement  the  union  between  Presbyterians  and  Catholics.
Grattan  and  the  parliamentary  minority  had  almost  wholly  lost
their  influence.  At  a  recent  interview  with  the  parliamentary
leaders,  ‘the  Catholics  declared,  that  though  there  was  a  time
when  they  looked  no  further  than  a  reform  in  Parliament,  and  a
full  emancipation  of  the  Catholic  body,  yet  now  their  interests
were  general  and  not  confined  to  themselves  ;  the  question  to  be
determined  was  no  longer  a  Catholic  question,  but  a  national
question — the  freedom  of  Ireland.  They  had,  in  consequence
of  former  disappointments  and  ill  treatment,  united  with  the
friends  of  liberty  in  the  North,  wfith  whom  they  would  stand  or
fall.’  They  spoke  of  the  abolition  of  tithes,  and  the  confiscation
of  the  property  of  absentees  ;  but  their  language,  and  their  hopes,
and  their  policy,  all  pointed  to  separation.2

The  organisation,  McNally  said,  was  spreading  with  por¬
tentous  rapidity.  Most  of  the  lower  priests,  and  village  school¬
masters,  were  active  agents.  Numerous  missionaries,  supported
by  subscriptions  from  their  several  societies,  had  gone  forth  to
organise  the  other  provinces.  It  was  reported  that  15,000  men
had  already  taken  the  test  in  Munster,  and  several  agents  had
been  sent  to  Connaught  to  organise  the  Catholic  refugees.  Arms
were  being  everywhere  collected,  and  it  was  believed  that
not  les3  than  40,000  well-armed  men  could  be  counted  on  in
the  North.  It  was  determined  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of  the
French,  and  it  was  believed  that  an  invasion  would  greatly
accelerate  the  revolution ;  but  the  conviction  was  fast  spreading

1  J.  W.f  Sept.  16,  1796.  2  Ibid.  July  24,  Sept.  3,  26,  Oct.  1,  1796.

CH.  XXV II.

GRATTAN’S  CATHOLIC  RESOLUTION.

203

tliat  a  general  insurrection,  even  unassisted  by  the  French,  must
prove  successful.1

Parliament  sat  again  for  a  few  weeks  in  the  October  and
November  of  1796,  and  its  principal  measure  was  a  suspension
of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  which  was  carried  through  with  extra¬
ordinary  rapidity,  and  was  justified  by  the  danger  of  permitting
treason  to  spread,  when  the  dangers  of  invasion  were  imminent.
Grattan  was  one  of  the  minority  of  seven  who  opposed  the
measure,  and  his  speeches  at  this  time  appear  to  me  to  have  been
the  most  violent  he  ever  delivered.  It  is  evident  from  them
that  he  considered  the  country  hastening  to  a  catastrophe,  and
that  he  felt  wholly  impotent  to  avert  it.  In  sentences  of  con¬
densed  power,  worthy  of  Tacitus,  he  described  the  triumphs  of
the  French,  the  military  inefficiency  of  the  Ministry,  the  urgent
necessity  for  peace,  the  continuous  and  systematic  corruption  by
which  the  Irish  Parliament  was  governed,  the  folly  and  the
perfidy  with  which  the  Catholics  had  been  at  one  time  en¬
couraged  and  at  another  repelled  ;  and  he  insisted,  in  spite  of
the  manifest  hopelessness  of  the  attempt,  on  again  introducing
the  question  of  Catholic  emancipation.  The  Chief  Secretary,  he
reminded  the  House,  had  very  recently  said  that  ‘  the  exclusion
of  Catholics*  from  Parliament  and  the  State,  was  necessary  for
the  Crown  and  the  connection,  .  .  .  that  he  was  ready  to  sup¬
port  it  with  life  and  fortune.’  1  What  dictation,’  asked  Grattan,
1  could  France  have  suggested  more  opportune  in  time,  and  more
pregnant  in  disaffection,’  than  such  language  ?  £  Eternal  and

indefeasible  proscription  denounced  by  a  minister  of  the  Crown,
speaking  to  three- fourths  of  his  Majesty’s  subjects  in  Ireland’ !
‘  The  Catholic  question  was  made  by  Government  a  matter
between  the  people  of  Ireland  and  the  Crown  of  England.’  1  An
English  gentleman,  on  the  part  of  the  British  Cabinet,  comes  to
this  country,  to  tell  us  that  it  is  necessary  for  his  country  that
we  should  exclude  ours,  or  a  principal  part  of  ours.’  And  this
language  was  used  at  a  time  when  every  effort  was  being  made
to  seduce  the  Catholics  from  their  allegiance  ;  at  a  time  when
the  Government  was  calling  on  all  denominations  of  men  to
make  extraordinary  exertions  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the
Crown  and  the  Constitution ;  at  a  time  when  England  was  in
1  J.  W.,  July  24,  Sept.  26,  Oct.  5,  1796.

204

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

the  closest  alliance  with  the  chief  Catholic  Powers  of  the  Conti¬
nent,  including  the  Pope  himself.  Grattan  expressed  his  deep
conviction  that,  in  the  present  awful  crisis,  nothing  could  save
Ireland  and  the  Empire  from  ruin  except  the  unanimity  of  its
people,  and  that  the  Government  was  fast  making  that  unanimity
impossible.  ‘  The  Minister  who  separates  the  Roman  Catholics
from  the  Constitution,  separates  them  from  the  Empire.’  ‘  If
they  are  forced  from  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  the  Constitu¬
tion,  .  .  .  they  will  at  length  repose  under  the  shade  of  the
dreadful  tree  of  liberty.’

The  notion  that  popery,  as  such,  was  any  longer  a  danger,
he  treats  with  contempt.  He  who  maintains  such  a  position,

‘  totally  mistakes  the  principles  of  human  action  at  this  day.
Controverted  points  of  religion  are  a  principle  of  human  action
no  longer,  and  least  of  all  the  points  which  are  renounced  in  the
disqualifying  oath — the  worship  of  the  Virgin  Mary  and  the
belief  in  the  Real  Presence.’  But  if  religious  controversies  have
ceased  to  be  operative  in  politics,  they  have  been  abundantly  re¬
placed.  ‘  A  new  spirit  of  reformation  has  gone  forth,  and  the
objects  of  its  wrath  are  the  abuses  of  the  European  Governments,
abuses  in  their  Churches,  and  abuses  in  their  States.  ...  In
other  countries  it  is  the  despotism,  in  these  the  corruption,  of
monarchical  government  that  is  complained  of.’  Such  a  spirit,
he  said,  could  only  be  met  by  an  energetic  reformation  of  abuses.
In  Ireland  it  was  met  ‘  by  selling  the  peerage,  creating  nameless
offices  to  purchase  the  Parliament,  influencing  the  corporations,
intimidating  popular  meetings,  and  making  all  the  constitutional
authorities  as  corrupt  as  possible,  and  afterwards  by  making
them  proscriptive.’

On  the  subject  of  the  outrages  in  the  county  of  Armagh,
Grattan  dwelt  with  extreme  bitterness,  and  accused  the  Govern¬
ment  of  gross  supineness  and  gross  partiality.  ‘  Government
had  not  exerted  all  the  powers  which  the  law  gave  it.  Had
Government  dismissed  any  of  the  magistrates?  .  .  .  Will
Government  say  that  in  a  year  and  a  half,  with  40,000  soldiers
and  with  summary  laws  that  would  have  enabled  them  to  pull
down  the  liberties  of  the  whole  island,  they  could  not  reduce
that  county  to  order  ?  I  cannot  but  think,  the  audacity  of
the  mob  arose  from  a  confidence  in  the  connivance  of  Govern-

CH.  XXVII.

LAST  DIVISION  ON  EMANCIPATION.

205

ment.  Under  an  administration  sent  here  to  defeat  a  Catholic
Bill,  a  Protestant  mob  very  naturally  conceives  itself  a  part  of
the  State.’  Some  magistrates,  he  said,  had  retired  from  the
scene ;  others  had  secretly  fomented  or  openly  encouraged  the
outrages,  and  when  the  Government  in  their  recent  resolutions
classed  and  recited  the  different  kinds  of  outrage  in  the  country,
they  took  no  notice  of  those  which  were  perpetrated  by  the
Orangemen,  and  they  defeated  a  clause  for  compensating  the
sufferers.

Such  language  contained  unfortunately  much  truth,  but  it
was  not  calculated  to  pacify  the  public  mind.  The  resolution  in
favour  of  Catholic  emancipation,  was  evidently  thought  ill  timed.
George  Ponsonby  indeed  observed  that,  of  all  who  opposed  it,

‘  only  two  opposed  it  on  its  merits — the  rest  acknowledged  the
propriety  of  the  measure,  and  objected  only  to  the  time  of  bring¬
ing  it  forward.’  But  on  the  latter  ground,  the  feeling  seems  to
have  been  very  general.  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe,  the  oldest,  and
one  of  the  steadiest,  of  the  friends  of  the  Catholics,  spoke  in  favour
of  the  Government,  and  tried  to  calm  the  troubled  waters.  1  In
the  course  of  the  last  twenty  years,’  he  said,  ‘  the  magnanimity
of  Parliament  has  made  great  concessions  to  our  Catholic  bre¬
thren  ;  no  less  than  an  entirely  equal  condition  of  property,  and
almost  entirely  an  equal  measure  of  privilege,  and  as  to  the  great
body  of  the  people,  total  equality.  What  little  of  concession
still  remains  behind  (which  is  little  more  than  pride  and
punctilio),  must  be  the  work  of  conciliation  and  not  contention,
and  will  not  be  achieved  by  carrying  on  a  war  of  passions  and
of  party.  .  .  .  Leave  a  good  cause,  for  some  time,  to  the  opera¬
tion  of  reason  and  retiring  ■  passion,  and  do  not  by  premature
efforts  unite  your  opponents  by  new  bonds  of  confederacy,  by
the  pride  of  consistency,  or  the  obligation  of  engagements  re¬
peatedly  interchanged.  .  .  .  Postpone  a  question  of  disputation
and  division,  and  proceed  to  the  Bill  before  you,  for  the  defence
of  the  country.’  The  advice  was  taken,  and  Grattan’s  resolution
was  defeated  by  143  to  19.  This  was  the  last  occasion  on  which
the  question  of  Catholic  emancipation  was  raised  in  the  Parlia¬
ment  of  Ireland.

In  addition  to  the  Indemnity  Act,  the  Insurrection  Act,  and
the  suspension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  a  few  measures  were

206

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xxvii.

carried  in  1796,  wliicii  deserve  a  brief  notice.  There  was  an
Act  which,  in  my  opinion,  ought  never  to  have  been  altered,
making  conspiracy  to  murder,  a  felony  of  the  same  nature  as
murder  itself.  It  might  indeed  be  reasonably  contended  that
this  offence,  whether  measured  by  its  effects  upon  society,  or  by
the  moral  guilt  it  implies,  is  the  more  heinous  of  the  twTo,  and
in  a  country  like  Ireland,  where  a  very  large  proportion  of  the
worst  crimes  are  prepared  in  secret  societies  and  committed  by
deputy,  it  is  especially  dangerous.  A  new  Act  was  passed,  pre¬
venting  the  importation,  and  regulating  the  sale,  of  arms  and
ammunition  ;  the  salaries  of  the  judges  were  again  raised ;  the
punishment  of  hanging  was  substituted  in  Ireland,  as  it  had  a
few  years  before  been  in  England,  in  the  execution  of  women,
for  the  much  more  horrible  punishment  of  burning ;  and  the
greater  part  of  the  Dublin  Police  Act,  which  was  still  exceed¬
ingly  unpopular,  was  repealed,  thus  restoring  to  the  Corporation
the  chief  control  over  the  maintenance  of  order.1

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  coercive  legislation  of  1796,
no  one  who  reads  the  correspondence  of  the  time  can  doubt,  that
remedies  of  a  most  exceptional  and  drastic  character  were  impera¬
tively  needed.  At  the  same  time,  during  the  whole  of  this  year,
the  disease  appears  to  have  been  mainly,  though  certainly  not
exclusively,  in  the  North.  In  August,  when  a  project  of  raising
a  yeomanry  force  was  entertained,  Toler,  the  Solicitor-General,
wrote  :  c  I  think  I  can  venture  to  say,  from  what  I  know  of  the
South  and  West  of  Ireland,  that  Government  may,  with  safety
and  effect,  appeal  to  the  gentry  and  farmers  in  those  parts  to
act  under  commissions  from  the  Crown,  prudently  issued.  ...  It
is  evident  to  demonstration,  that  the  opinion  of  the  multitude,
and  of  all  descriptions  in  the  provinces  of  Munster,  Leinster,  and
Connaught,  has  grown  infinitely  more  loyal  during  the  war,
which  evidently  saved  Ireland,  by  the  exclusion  of  Jacobins,  and
by  bringing  the  idle  and  dangerous  under  the  control  of  military
discipline.’ 2  But  the  state  of  the  North  was  extremely  alarm¬
ing,  and  insurrection  was  constantly  expected.  Frequent  efforts
were  made  to  tamper  with  the  loyalty  of  the  soldiers  and
the  militia ;  several  militiamen  were  found  to  have  taken  the

1  36  Geo.  III.  c.  26,  27,  30,  31,  42.

2  Aug.  10,  1796.  (I.S.P.O.)

CH.  XXVII.

STATE  OF  ULSTER.

207

United  Irishman's  oath,  and  the  dispute  between  Protestant  and
Catholic,  which  originated  at  Armagh,  soon  extended  to  the
forces,  and  showed  itself  in  a  violent  quarrel  between  the  Mayo
and  Kilkenny  Militia,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Tyrone  Militia
on  the  other.1

In  August,  Camden 2  described  the  state  of  the  country  as  grow¬
ing  rapidly  worse.  Trees  of  liberty  had  been  planted  in  Antrim,
and  bonfires  lit  in  consequence  of  French  victories.  Officers  of  the
County  Limerick  Militia  declared  that  they  could  place  very  little
dependence  on  their  men.  There  were  great  fears  about  the  Queen’s
County  and  the  West  Meath  Militia,  which  were  both  Catholic,
and  two  men  of  the  latter  regiment  had  been  punished  for  attempt¬
ing  to  plant  a  tree  of  liberty  in  the  camp.  Many  of  the  artillery
soldiers  quartered  at  Belfast,  were  believed  to  be  infected,  and  four
informers  had  been  recently  murdered.  ‘  Since  Derry  Assizes,’
wrote  a  magistrate  from  Tyrone,  ‘  where  all  the  United  Irishmen
were  tried  and  acquitted,  everyone  that  will  not  instantly  join
that  set,  is  threatened  with  destruction.  .  .  .  God  knows  how
and  when  this  will  terminate ;  no  man  will  pay  one  penny  of
debt,  so  sure  are  they  of  an  immediate  rising.’  3

‘  The  Protestants  about  me  bordering  on  the  county  of
Antrim,’ wrote  another  magistrate,  from  Dromore,  ‘  are  in  a  most
horrid  panic  about  those  United  people  rising.  They  absolutely
dare  hardly  go  to  bed  at  night,  and  never  without  a  watch.  .  .  .
They  tell  me  plainly,  that  they  expect  every  night  to  be  mur¬
dered.’4  Lord  Castlereagh,  after  a  journey  through  Ulster,
wrote  that  it  was  impossible  to  doubt  the  seriousness  of  the  con¬
spiracy  in  the  northern  counties.  1  Belfast  is  its  centre,  it  is
very  general  towards  Lisburn,  the  county  of  Antrim  has  been
largely  infected,  and  the  county  of  Down  is  by  no  means  exempt.
There  is  sufficient  information  to  ascertain  that  the  societies  gain
ground  rapidly,  and  that  they  have  formed  very  sanguine  and  ex¬
tensive  hopes  in  consequence  of  the  fatal  turn  affairs  have  taken  on
the  Continent.  .  .  .  The  same  infernal  system  which  prevailed
in  this  neighbourhood,  of  murdering  witnesses,  is  pursued  there,
with  the  additional  address,  which  I  fear  will  distinguish  any

>  E.  Boyle  to  Cooke,  June  21.  8  Andrew  Newton,  August  15.

8  Camden  to  Portland,  Aug.  24,  4  Captain  Waddell,  Aug.  29,  1796.

1796.

208

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII*

attempt  against  the  peace  of  the  country  which  the  people  of
the  North  may  undertake.’ 1  Poor  men  working  in  the  fields  in
the  dusk  of  the  evening,  were  accosted  by  armed  parties,  and
compelled,  on  pain  of  death,  to  swear  that  they  would  assist  the
French.  Tithes  were  refused.  Tithe  receivers,  or  valuers,  were
attacked,  and  threatening  notices  sent  to  clergymen  who  claimed
their  due.  Large  subscriptions  were  raised  for  prisoners ;  jurors
were  carefully  marked,  and  many  were  challenged  in  the  box
because  they  did  not  understand  certain  secret  signs.2

Several  different  classes  were  concerned  in  the  disturbances —
a  lawless  rabble,  to  whom  scenes  of  confusion  and  plunder  had
the  same  attraction  as  carrion  to  the  vulture ;  half-maddened
Catholics,  infuriated  by  the  proceedings  in  Armagh,  and  burning
for  revenge  ;  adventurers,  looking  only  for  excitement  or  for  gain ;
fanatics,  who  would  be  content  with  nothing  short  of  a  purely
democratic  government;  half-educated  and  unsettled  men  of  all
descriptions,  who  in  Ireland  so  commonly  play  with  treason,
though  they  are  seldom  prepared  to  make  any  real  sacrifice
for  it.  It  was  noticed  by  an  excellent  observer,  that  the  ranks
of  the  United  Irishmen  were  largely  recruited  by  men  of
desperate  fortunes,  whose  small  estates  were  mortgaged  beyond
their  value,  and  who  hoped  in  a  general  convulsion  to  extricate
themselves  from  their  debts.3  With  these  were  mingled  some
honest  and  even  moderate  men,  who  had  been  reluctantly
driven  into  rebellion  by  the  conviction,  that  in  no  other  way
could  even  the  most  constitutional  reform  be  obtained ;  and
also,  as  a  Derry  magistrate  remarked,  a  few  able  and  industrious
men,  usually  of  good  characters,  who  had  made  fortunes  of
from  1,000k  to  6,000Z.,  and  who  resented  the  social  superiority
of  the  landed  gentry.  Such  men  were  sedulously  cultivated  by
the  United  Irishmen,  but  a  little  attention  might  easily  conciliate
them.  The  jobs  of  grand  juries  about  roads,  the  Church  collec¬
tions  imposed  upon  sturdy  Presbyterians,  and  the  manifold
oppressions  of  the  agents  of  great  absentee  proprietors,  all  con¬
tributed  to  swell  the  ranks  of  the  disaffected.4

1  Castlereagh  -to  Pelham,  Aug.  23.  Emmet  stated  before  the  Committee

(I  S.P.O.)  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  1798,  that  a

2  H.  Alexander,  Aug.  1,  179(3.  great  many  large  middleman  tenants

3  F.  H.  [Higains],  Jan.  30,  1798.  had  joined  the  United  Irishmen.

4  H.  Alexander,  Aug.  1,  1796.  (McNevin,  p.  234.)

CH.  XXVII.

REPORTS  OF  McCARRY.

209

Carrickfergus  was  one  of  the  great  centres  of  disturbance.1
An  active  and  loyal  soldier  was  fired  at  and  wounded ;  another
loyalist  was  shot  dead  in  the  streets,  and  it  was  stated  that  a  re¬
gular  assassination  club  bad  been  formed.  By  the  assistance  of
a  very  energetic  Protestant  loyalist  named  McNevin,  the  Govern¬
ment  obtained  the  services  of  a  Catholic  priest  named  McCarry,  in
that  town.  ‘  Notwithstanding  his  priestcraft,’  wrote  McNevin,
4  he  would  go  to  hell  for  money.’  4  He  knows  all  the  principals
except  a  few  great  men,  who  are  kept  a  secret  from  all  but  one
or  two.’  4 1  am  sure  he  will  give  such  real  and  useful  informa¬
tion  as  must  effectually  serve  Government ;  he  being  at  the  head
of  every  infamous  and  rebellious  transaction  here,  and  a  man  of
great  mischief.’  Cooke  had  an  interview  with  him,  and  described
him  to  Pelham  as  4  a  cunning,  bigoted,  low  papist,’  who  was  not
himself  a  United  Irishman  or  personally  acquainted  with  the
leaders,  but  who  knew  well  what  was  going  on  in  the  conspiracy,
and  who,  being  an  artful,  inflammatory  preacher,  had  great  in¬
fluence  upon  the  lower  Catholics.  He  became  an  assiduous  cor¬
respondent  of  the  Government,  and  extorted  many  small  sums
from  them,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  ever  really  wished  to
serve  them,  and  his  letters  give  the  impression  of  an  illiterate,
cunning,  rapacious  man  who  was  deserving  of  very  little  credit.
The  United  Irishmen,  he  reported,  believed  that  the  French
were  about  to  land  20,000  men  in  Cushendall  Bay,  and  20,000
in  the  West,  on  condition  of  obtaining  the  revenue  of  Ireland
for  five  years.  There  was  a  plot  for  seizing  Dublin  Castle,  and
the  castles  of  Carrickfergus,  Down,  Athlone,  and  Limerick.
Antrim,  Down,  and  Derry  were  ripe  for  revolt.  4  Here,’  he  said,
4  we  are  not  certain  to  live  for  an  hour.  Murders  are  daily  com¬
mitted.’  He  appears  to  have  pointed  out  a  house  in  which  bullets
were  cast,  and  he  promised  to  reveal  where  cannon  were  con-
■  cealed ;  to  procure  information  against  the  leading  conspirators,
and  to  use  his  own  influence  as  a  preacher  to  turn  the  Catholics
in  favour  of  the  Government.  Whether  he  fulfilled  any  of  these
promises,  is  more  than  doubtful.’ 2 *

1  See  several  letters  from  Carrick-
fergus,  July  1796.  (I  S.P.O.)

2  McCarry,  July  29,  Oct.  24  ;  A.

NcNevin,  Oct.  26,  1796  (T  S.P  O.) ;

Cooke  to  Pelham.  July  19,  1796.
Another  ecclesiastic,  who  is  spoken  of

257

as  ‘  Friar  Philips,’  appears  to  have
given  the  Government  some  really
valuable  assistance  in  detecting  De¬
fender  leaders.  (Cooke  to  Pelham,
Dec.  4,  1795.  Pelham  MSS.)

210

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

cn.  xxvii*

A  much  more  useful  and  important  correspondent  of  the
Castle,  was  Francis  Higgins,  a  man  who  is  still  vividly  re¬
membered  in  Ireland  under  the  title  of  the  Sham  Squire.  He
obtained  this  nickname  from  a  discreditable  episode  of  his  early
life,  when  he  formed  a  rich  marriage  by  pretending  to  be  a  pos¬
sessor  of  landed  property,  and  heir  to  a  wealthy  lawyer.  He  was
a  man  of  great  energy,  and  of  much  coarse  talent,  and  had  been
for  some  years  the  proprietor  of  the  ‘  Freeman’s  Journal,’  which
was  one  of  the  principal  newspapers  in  Ireland,  and  which  under
his  influence  passed  completely  into  the  ranks  of  the  Government.
For  this  service,  he  had  obtained  a  small  annual  subsidy  some
time  before  the  administration  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  and  it
was  subsequently  increased.  He  was  also  an  attorney  and  a
magistrate ;  he  held  two  or  three  small  offices  from  Government,
and  he  took  an  active  part  in  municipal  affairs.  Possessing  to
an  eminent  degree  the  peculiar  talent  of  a  newspaper  editor  for
forming  and  maintaining  useful  connections  in  many  quarters,
and  hunting  out  obscure  information,  his  knowledge  of  Dublin
life  made  him  very  useful  to  the  Government,  and  his  influence
was  increased  by  the  fact,  that  he  was  owner  of  some  houses  in¬
habited  by  manufacturers  in  the  Earl  of  Meath’s  Liberty  in  Dublin,
and  had  acquired  popularity  by  acts  of  kindness  to  Dublin
workmen.  His  timely  warning  of  an  intended  attack  upon  Lord
Camden  on  his  first  entry  into  Dublin,  has  been  already  mentioned ;
and  at  a  later  period,  as  we  shall  see,  he  was  able  to  render  a
service  to  the  Government,  of  transcendent  importance.

He  appears  to  have  been  a  warm  and  steady  friend,  and  liberal
in  his  charities,  but  his  general  reputation  was  not  good  ;  he
had  many  enemies,  and  he  was  furiously  lampooned  in  prose
and  verse.  His  low  birth ;  his  imprisonment  for  fraud  when  a
young  man;  his  alleged  connection  with  a  gambling  house;
his  almost  deformed  person;  his  coarse,  pushing,  ostentatious
manners,  were  abundantly  commemorated ;  but,  in  spite  of  all
opposition,  he  rose  to  wealth,  and  being  a  man  of  much  humour
and  of  very  convivial  tastes,  he  easily  gathered  men  of  all
parties  to  his  great  house  in  Stephen’s  Green.  In  Ireland,
even  more  than  in  most  countries,  when  the  bottle  flows  freely,
information  is  easily  obtained.  In  enumerating  his  services  to
the  Government,  Higgins  especially  mentions  the  expense  he

CH.  XXVII.

FRANCIS  HIGGINS.

211

had  incurred  in  entertaining  priests  and  other  persons  of  the
higher  class,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  intelligence,1  and
he  also  adds  that  he  retained  and  paid  weekly  from  his  own
means  as  many  as  seven  persons,  ‘  belonging  to  and  among
the  different  United  societies,  clubs  &c.’  His  informants  were
men  who  could  never  have  been  induced  to  appear  in  the  wit¬
ness  box,  but  they  enabled  him  to  supply  the  Government  with
regular  accounts  of  the  proceedings  of  some  of  the  societies  in
Dublin,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  most  important  information
about  the  aims  and  conduct  of  the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy.
Nearly  a  hundred  and  forty  letters  from  his  pen  are  preserved
in  the  Government  records,  and  they  furnish  valuable  materials
for  the  history  of  the  time.  Though  himself  a  convert  to
Protestantism,  he  had  much  communication  with  priests,  and
singularly  full  and  accurate  information  about  Catholic  affairs,
and  he  was  on  terms  of  warm  friendship  with  Arthur  O’Leary.
Among  his  other  intimate  friends  were,  the  Chief  Justice  Lord
Clonmell,  Lord  Carhampton,  and  John  Beresford ;  and  it
was  mentioned  as  a  proof  of  the  fastidious  haughtiness  of
Lord  Clare,  that  he  would  never  be  present  at  his  dinners.
Higgins  employed  many  informers,  but  he  was  not  himself  in
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  an  informer,  for  he  professed  in
the  strongest  terms  his  devotion  to  the  Government,  his  news¬
paper  was  a  Government  organ,  and  he  was  accustomed  to  go
openly  and  frequently  to  the  Castle.2

1  There  is  a  series  of  anonymous
reports  about  the  United  Irishmen,
from  an  informer  in  1796,  in  the
London  Record  Office.  In  one  of
them  the  informer  makes  an  amusingly
candid  confession :  ‘  There  is  one  thing
wherein  they  puzzle  me,  which  is,  that
they  seldom  say  much  till  they  are
nearly  drunk,  and  by  the  time  I  get
them  in  that  plight  I  am  little  better
myself,  and  though  they  were  to  open
their  hearts  ever  so  liberally,  I  stand
a  fair  chance  of  forgetting  it  by  morn¬
ing.’  McNally,  in  his  requests  for
money,  frequently  dwells  on  the  im¬
portance  of  being  able  to  entertain
the  conspirators.  *  Without  money,’
he  says,  in  one  of  his  letters,  ‘  it  is
impossible  to  do  what  is  expected.
Those  Spartans  wish  to  live  like
Athenians  in  matters  of  eating  and

drinking.  They  live  so  among  each
other,  and  without  ability  to  entertain,
I  cannot  live  with  them,  and  without
living  with  them  I  cannot  learn  from
them.’

2  See,  on  Higgins,  Madden’s  United
Irishmen,  and  especially  Mr.  Fitz-
Patrick’s  interesting  little  volumes.
The  Sham  Squire,  and  Ireland  before
the  Union.  These  wi iters  seem  to  me,
however,  to  exaggerate  not  a  little
the  turpitude  of  Higgins,  and  to  at¬
tach  a  great  deal  too  much  importance
to  ‘  traditional  anecdotes  ’  of  a  very
worthless  and  malevolent  gossip.  His
warning  on  the  occasion  of  Camden's
entry  into  Dublin,  has  escaped  the
notice  of  his  biographers,  and  rests  on
his  own  statement ;  but  as  he  con¬
tinually,  in  his  letters  to  the  Castle,
puts  forward  this  service  as  his  chief

212

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxtit

He  informed  the  Government  that  the  recent  French  victories
had  greatly  raised  the  spirits  of  the  seditious  ;  and  accounts  of
them,  copied  from  an  English  ministerial  paper,  were  circulated
widely  through  the  country.  Several  small  seditious  clubs,  which
he  pointed  out,  met  in  different  parts  of  the  city,  and  there  were
not  fewer  than  four  servants’  clubs  in  Dublin,  which  might
become  very  dangerous  from  the  peculiar  facilities  for  information
possessed  by  their  members.  Immediate  invasion  was  expected,
and  the  Catholics,  he  believed,  would  be  at  best  neutral.  One
of  them  had  said  in  his  hearing,  that  probably  the  devastations
of  the  French  would  not  be  worse  than  those  of  the  tithe  proctor
— and  some  honest  men  might  obtain  their  own  again.  At  the
meetings  of  the  Catholic  committees,  strong  hopes  were  expressed
that  there  might  be  at  least  a  change  of  ministry.  It  might  do
the  Catholics  good,  and  no  Government  could  be  worse  than  that
in  which  Lord  Clare  was  a  leading  member.  Grattan  had  pro¬
mised  constantly  to  urge  the  Catholic  claims.  A  proposal  to
petition  the  King,  was  abandoned  in  consequence  of  the  earnest
opposition  of  Keogh.  The  new  yeomanry  force  was  believed  to
be  intended  to  override  the  Catholic  influence  and  claims,  and
the  committee  determined,  by  all  the  agencies  at  their  disposal,
to  dissuade  the  Catholics  from  enlisting  in  it.  Higgins  com¬
plained  that  the  poor  in  Dublin  were  much  oppressed  by  the
dearness  of  bread,  in  spite  of  a  very  good  harvest,  which  he  at¬
tributed  to  the  combination  of  the  corn  merchants,  and  he  pre¬
dicted  that  this  would  one  day  produce  disorder.  The  Govern¬
ment  had  not,  he  thought,  been  very  judicious  in  their  selection
of  an  agent  for  acting  on  the  Catholics.  £  The  Roman  Catholic
body  hold  a  superficial  opinion  of  Dr.  Hussey  as  a  courtly  priest.
If  anything  was  to  be  effected  or  wished  to  be  done  in  the  Roman
Catholic  body,  Dr.  O’Leary  would  do  more  with  them  in  one
hour,  than  Hussey  in  seven  years.  Of  this,  I  am  perfectly  as¬
sured — and  O’Leary  not  ten  days  since  wrote  me  word,  he  would
shortly  claim  a  bed  at  my  house.’ 1

claim  for  favour,  and  as  it  never  appears
to  have  been  disputed,  it  is  no  doubt
true.  He  bequeathed  a  great  portion
of  his  property  to  charities,  Catholic
as  well  as  Protestant,  and  O’Leary
was  one.  of  those  to  whom  he  left  a
legacy.  He  himself  enumerates  his
services  in  letters  of  March  2,  June

18,  30,  1798,  Dec.  2,  21,  1799,  March
18,  Nov.  18,  1801.  There  is  also,  in
the  I.S.P.O.,  an  unsigned  and  undated
memorandum  about  the  services  and
rewards  of  Higgins  and  some  other
persons  connected  with  the  press.

1  F.  Higgins,  Aug.  1,  15,  Sept.  27,
30,  Oct.  11,  16,  24, 1796.  (I.S.P.O.)

cn.  xxvn.

ENROLMENT  OF  YEOMANRY.

213

‘  The  suspicions,’  wrote  Lord  Camden,  £  which  the  gentry
entertain  of  the  militia,  even  were  an  invasion  not  to  take  place,
have  induced  great  numbers  to  wish  to  associate  for  the  preserva¬
tion  of  their  properties  and  to  form  corps  of  yeomanry  cavalry
and  infantry,  for  their  own,  and  for  the  protection  of  the  country,
all  under  commissions  from  the  Crown.  I  believe  your  Grace
will  agree  with  me,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  refuse  an  assent
to  propositions  of  this  nature.’ 1  This  was  the  very  plan  which
Lord  Fitzwilliam  had  proposed,  and  which  the  English  Govern¬
ment  had  rejected  ;  but  Camden,  though  he  had  at  first  been
hostile  to  it,  now  recognised  its  necessity.  That  there  were
difficulties  and  dangers  attending  it,  he  clearly  saw.  It  would  be
very  necessary,  and  at  the  same  time  very  invidious,  to  reject  the
services  of  many  who  would  gladly  obtain  arms  from  the  Govern¬
ment.  It  was  possible  that  the  militia  might  be  affronted.
It  was  certain  that  a  project  for  arming  the  property  of  the  country
might  be  construed  into  a  project  for  arming  the  Protestants
against  the  Catholics.  But  £  when  there  is  reason  to  apprehend
an  attack  from  the  enemy,  when  a  very  considerable  district  is
organised  in  disaffection,  as  is  the  case  at  Belfast  and  in  its
vicinity,  when  there  is  a  general  disaffection  amongst  the  lower
orders,  both  of  Catholics  and  Dissenters,  to  English  Government,’
such  a  measure  was  absolutely  necessary.  The  Speaker  still
doubted  its  expediency,  but  the  Chancellor,  the  Attorney-
General,  and  Lord  Carhampton,  all  favoured  it.2

In  the  autumn  and  winter  of  1796,  great  progress  was  made
in  enrolling  the  new  force.  Charlemont  and  Conollv,  who  had
much  influence  in  the  North,  warmly  supported  it,  and  a  large
number  of  country  gentlemen  volunteered  their  services.  Con¬
sidering  the  strongly  anti- Catholic  policy  of  the  Government,
which  presided  over  the  movement,  and  considering  also  that
the  yeomanry  were  intended  chiefly  as  a  protection  against
the  Catholic  Defenders,  and  against  the  United  Irishmen  who
placed  Catholic  emancipation  in  the  forefront  of  their  programme,
it  was  inevitable  that,  in  the  North  at  least,  it  should  consist
to  a  large  extent  of  the  most  violent  Protestants — of  men  who,

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Aug.  24,  Cooke  to  Pelham,  May  31 ;  Camden

1796.  to  Pelham,  July  30,  Aug.  6,  179G.

2  Ibid.  Sept.  3,  1796.  See,  too,

214

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

cn.  xxvii,

by  faction  fights,  or  by  Defender  outrages  or  menaces,  had  been
inflamed  to  the  highest  point  of  animosity  against  their  Catholic
fellow-countrymen.  It  was  equally  certain,  that  a  force  raised
so  hastily,  under  such  circumstances,  and  from  such  materials,
would,  in  time  of  trial,  prove  very  undisciplined  and  prone  to
unnecessary  violence.  Lord  Downshire,  who  was  actively  em¬
ployed  near  Newry  in  enrolling  yeomanry  cavalry,  wrote,  ‘  I  am
happy  to  say,  that  there  are  some  very  respectable  and  loyal
papists  among  them  but  he  added,  i  the  yeomanry  infantry  are
not  so  liberal  as  the  cavalry ;  their  condition  of  service  is,  that
no  papist  should  be  enrolled  with  them.  .  .  .  They  are  chiefly
Orangemen,  and  all  agree  in  not  admitting  a  papist,  however
recommended.’ 1  All  who  were  in  known  sympathy  with  the
United  Irishmen  and  their  policy,  were  of  course  excluded,  and
this  shut  out  the  great  body  of  those  who  composed  the  volun¬
teers  of  1782.  The  Catholic  Committee  strongly  discouraged
their  co-religionists  from  enlisting,  and  the  United  Irishmen
exerted  all  their  influence  to  paralyse  the  movement.  A  power¬
ful  address,  signed  ‘  Common  Sense,’  urging  the  folly  of  division
between  Catholics  and  Protestants,  was  at  this  time  circulated
widely  through  Ulster.  ‘  Look  to  America,’  said  the  waiter,
‘  where  every  persuasion  pays  its  own  clergy,  and  all  are  in  har¬
mony.  Let  distinctions  be  forgot,  unite  with  each  other,  and
remember  that  you  have  a  common  interest  not  to  pay  useless
and  oppressive  taxes  to  bribe  the  men  that  oppress  you  all,  or
tithes  to  pastors  who  never  instruct  you.  Try  the  blessings
that  will  follow  union,  and  trust  me,  you  will  in  one  single  ses¬
sion,  and  that,  if  you  please,  the  very  next,  put  an  end  to  coi-rupt
taxes,  and  to  tithes  under  which  the  Presbyterian  and  Catholic
equally  groan.’2

The  yeomanry  movement  appears  to  have  been  principally
in  the  North,  and  to  have  been  directed  principally  against
internal  enemies,  and,  as  Camden  had  feared,  it  was  looked  upon,
or  at  least  represented,  as  giving  a  Government  organisation  and
sanction  to  the  Orange  movement  in  the  province.  In  the  other
provinces,  there  was  as  yet  much  less  disturbance  and  much  less
enlisting.  When,  however,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  a  French
descent  in  the  South  seemed  imminent,  a  considerable  yeomanry
1  Nov.  25,  1796.  (I.S.P.O.)  2  S.  Close  to  Toler,  Oct.  1796.  (Ibid.)

CH.  XXYII.

THE  POTATO  DIGGINGS.

215

force  was  speedily  created  in  tbat  part  of  Ireland,  and  tlie
Catholics  showed  themselves  quite  ready  to  be  enrolled  in  it.
Lord  Camden  at  this  time  wrote  to  the  English  Government,
that  ‘  offers  of  more  than  20,000  yeomanry  corps  had  been  made
and  accepted,  and  that  on  December  7,  9,000  of  them  were
actually  armed ;  ’ 1  and  Lord  Clare  himself  has  borne  an  emphatic
testimony  to  the  loyalty  then  shown  by  the  Catholic  peasantry
in  the  southern  and  midland  districts.  ‘  During  all  the  dis¬
turbances,’  he  says,  £  which  prevailed  in  other  parts  of  the
kingdom,  we  were  in  a  state  of  profound  tranquillity  and  con¬
tentment  there.  .  .  .  When  the  enemy  appeared  on  the  coast
...  a  general  sentiment  of  loyalty  prevailed  in  all  ranks  and
degrees  of  the  people,  who  vied  with  each  other  in  contributing
to  defend  their  country  against  the  invaders.’2

The  letters  describing  the  state  of  Ulster  form  a  striking
contrast  to  this  picture.  A  new  feature,  which  now  came  into
prominence,  was  a  system  of  great  gatherings  of  the  disaffected,
under  the  pretest  of  digging  potatoes  or  performing  other  agricul¬
tural  operations.  A  letter  from  Sir  George  Hill,  an  active  magis¬
trate  in  the  county  of  Derry,  gives  a  graphic  account  of  one
of  these  meetings,  which  he  witnessed.  The  ostensible  object
was  to  dig  the  potatoes  of  a  prisoner,  but  there  were  not  less  than
6,000  men  assembled.  They  were  clean,  well-appointed  men,  from
many  quarters,  acting  systematically  together.  They'  carried
their  spades  like  muskets,  and  marched  with  an  erect  and
defiant  mien;  bat  when  ordered  by  the  soldiers  to  disperse,  they
at  once  obeyed,  saying  with  an  affected  humility,  that  it  was  hard
to  be  impeded  in  their  charitable  purpose  c  of  digging  a  forlorn
woman’s  potatoes,’  and  asking  if  they  were  allowed  to  dig  their
own.  No  other  provocation  was  given.  No  seditious  language
or  imprecation  was  used.  About  1,500  men  had  crossed  the
mountains  during  the  night,  to  be  present  at  the  meeting.
‘  What  alarmed  me  most  completely,’  wrote  the  magistrate,  ‘  was
to  perceive  the  calmness  observed  by  the  people  assembled  in
such  multitudes,  from  such  various  quarters,  and  yet  acting  with
one  common  system,  most  evidently  by  previous  arrangement,
and  under  the  control  of  an  invisible  guidance.’  Sir  George

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Dec.  26,  1796.

2  Speech  in  the  debate  of  Feb.  19,  1798.

21(5

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch,  xxvii.

asked  some  of  them,  if  they  would  resist  the  French  in  case  of
an  invasion.  They  answered,  in  a  tone  that  it  was  impossible
either  to  resent  or  misunderstand  :  ‘  Our  arms  have  been  taken
away;  the  volunteers  have  been  put  down;  we  must  not  talk
politics ;  we  pay  dearly  for  the  militia ;  Government  has  taken
everything  into  its  own  hand  :  if  the  French  come,  we  cannot
resist ;  we  are  good  Christians,  resigned  to  our  fate.’  The  soldiers
were  out  from  one  in  the  morning  till  three  in  the  afternoon ;
but  as  soon  as  they  retired,  one  or  two  hundred  of  the  neigh¬
bours  dug  the  potato  field.  ‘  The  system  of  rebellion,’  continued
the  magistrate,  ‘  is  planned  deeply,  and  all  that  is  wanting  to
give  it  opportunity  of  breaking  forth,  is  the  landing  of  a  few
Frenchmen.  ...  I  do  believe  that  more  than  ’  two-thirds  of
the  country  has  been  sworn.’  The  main  object  of  the  potato
digging  is  probably  to  enable  the  leaders  to  ascertain  how  their
men  will  act  at  the  word  of  command.1

It  is  easy  to  conceive  the  disquiet  which  such  an  incident
must  have  produced,  and  letters  from  most  parts  of  Ulster  con¬
firmed  the  impression  of  imminent  danger.  From  Coleraine  a
magistrate  wrote  :  ^ £  People  assemble  in  bands  of  hundreds,  and
sometimes  even  thousands,  for  the  ostensible  purpose  of  cutting
corn  and  digging  potatoes,  but,  in  my  opinion,  for  the  real  pur¬
pose  of  settling  their  plans  and  accustoming  themselves  to  rise
in  great  bodies  at  the  shortest  notice.’ 2  c  From  what  I  can
collect,’  -wrote  a  magistrate  from  the  county  of  Armagh,  ‘  there
is  as  much  a  system  of  terror  on  foot  in  this  neighbourhood,  as
ever  was  in  France.  No  neighbour  dare  tell  his  opinion  to
another,  hardly  to  his  wife.  There  has  not  been  a  person  here
that  has  not  received  the  most  threatening  letters— -even  to  the
lowest  cottager- — to  force  them  to  unite.  ...  No  man  will  dare
to  be  out  at  night,  but  those  that  are  for  bad  purposes.’  The
better  class  of  farmers  detested  the  movement,  but  they  were  so
terrified,  that  they  had  nearly  all  taken  at  least  the  oath  of
secrecy,  after  which,  if  they  were  known  to  be  resolute  and  loyal
men,  they  were  usually  left  in  peace.  A  new  method  had  been
devised  to  evade  the  law  against  administering  unlawful  oaths.

1  Sir  G.  Hill  to  Cooke,  Nov.  15,  magistrates’ letters  are  in  the  I.S.P.O.
1796.  This  letter  was  sent  to  England,  2  Alexander  McNaughten,  Oct,  20,
and  is  in  the  Record  Office.  The  other  1 796.

CH.  XXVII.

ANARCHY  IN  ULSTER.

217

A  man  is  applied  to,  and,  if  lie  consents  to  be  sworn,  be  attends
a  meeting,  where  he  finds  a  number  of  men  seated  round  a  table
drinking,  in  perfect  silence.  One  of  them  points  to  a  Bible,  and
the  stranger,  acting  on  instructions  he  has  before  received,  takes
it  himself,  and  swears  not  to  disclose  anything  that  he  sees  or
hears.  The  silence  is  then  broken,  and  the  others  begin  to  talk,
and  produce  the  constitution  of  the  society.  If  the  new  comer
is  prepared  to  obey,  he  says  so,  pointing  to  the  Bible  which  lies
on  the  table.  If  not,  he  has  only  to  keep  the  oath  of  secrecy.1

All  the  guns  in  the  neighbourhood,  writes  a  magistrate  from
Croagh,  in  the  county  of  Antrim,  have  been  seized  by  the  United
Irishmen.  Ash  trees  are  everywhere  cut  down  to  make  pike
handles.  The  magistrates  are  so  unprotected,  that  they  dare  not
act.  There  are  very  few  soldiers  in  the  neighbourhood.  Many  of
the  militia  cannot  be  depended  on,  and  the  post  office  is  no  longer
safe,  on  account  of  the  disloyalty  of  the  postmasters.2  Lord  Castle-
stewart,  writing  from  his  house,  in  the  county  of  Tyrone,  reported
that  numbers  of  men  were  accustomed  to  meet  in  his  district  by
night,  and  that  smiths  were  employed  in  making  pike  heads.
1  They  all  declare,’  he  says,  ‘  that  though  a  Frenchman  should  not
land  in  the  kingdom,  they  will  shortly  rise  in  a  mass  and  attempt
to  execute  their  designs,  that  for  this  purpose  they  are  swearing
their  different  bodies  to  be  ready  at  an  hour’s  warning  to  go
wherever  they  are  ordered.  .  .  .  The  impression  of  terror  is  so
great  all  over  the  country,  that  no  one  dares  give  the  least  degree
of  information.’  A  number  of  ash  trees  on  his  own  domain  had
been  cut  down,  probably  to  form  pike  handles,  and  bodies  of  men
were  traversing  the  country  in  all  directions  on  horseback,  plun¬
dering  arms.3  About  Derry,  reported  Conolly,  the  people  are  as
wicked  and  rebellious  as  in  any  part  of  the  North.  It  was  impos¬
sible  to  get  them  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  A  man’s  ears  had
been  cut  off  near  Garvagh  ;  corn  stacks  had  been  stripped,  houses
attacked,  men  knocked  down  and  robbed  on  the  highways.4

Communications  of  this  kind  were  pouring  incessantly  into
the  Castle,  during  the  last  few  weeks  of  1796.  1  Systematic

plans  of  assassination  seem  to  have  been  established  to  stop  the

1  N.  Alexander  (of  Boragh),  Nov.  undated,  but  apparently  November

15,  1796.  1796.

2  Andrew  Newton,  Nov.  25,  1796.  4  Thos.  Conolly,  Nov.  19,  1796.

*  Lord  Castlestewart,  Stewart  Hall,

218

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXY1I.

channels  of  justice.’ 1  1  The  poor  people  now  dare  not  put  their

webs  into  their  looms,  lest  they  should  have  them  cut  to  pieces.
.  .  .  There  is  not  a  night,  almost,  passes  without  racking
[wrecking],  robbery,  burning  of  houses,  sometimes  murder,  and
often  very  near  it.’ 2  £  Assassinations  are  still  getting  more  fre¬

quent  in  this  country — a  man  was  shot  the  day  before  yesterday,
on  suspicion  of  being  an  informer.’1 2  3  ‘  Almost  the  whole  coun¬

try,  for  many  miles  round,  is  disarmed.  The  disaffected  have
robbed  every  one  of  their  guns.’4  The  newly  enrolled  yeomanry
were  attacked  in  the  county  of  Tyrone  by  a  large  mob,  and
several  wounded,  and  £  this  disinclination  to  yeomanry  corps
manifested  by  liberty  men  is  not  confined  to  Stewartstown,  but
may  be  said  to  be  general  in  this  part  of  the  country.’5  ‘There
was  not  a  single  individual  of  a  townland  of  mine,  within  a
quarter  of  a  mile  of  Garvagh,  that  was  not  visited  the  night  be¬
fore  last,  and  seven  stand  of  arms  taken  from  them,  and  last
night,  several  more  were  taken  within  a  mile  of  this  place.’  A
man  is  going  through  that  country  as  an  itinerant  astronomer,
who  is  known  to  be  a  Dissenting  minister,  and  is  believed  to  be
a  Belfast  emissary.  £  The  cloth  merchants  in  this  county  are
sending  off  their  half-bleached  linen  to  places  of  safety.  .  .  .
Everyone  is  looking  forward,  with  anxiety  and  dread,  to  the  crisis.’ 6

‘  The  Presbyterian  ministers,’  said  Lord  Downshire,  £  are  un¬
questionably  the  great  encouragers  and  promoters  of  sedition,
though,  as  yet,  they  have  had  cunning  enough  to  keep  their
necks  out  of  the  halter.’  7  The  degree  to  which  the  disloyalty
had  spread  was  strongly  expressed  by  a  Tyrone  gentleman,  who
declared,  though  with  evident  exaggeration,  that  two  years,  or
even  one  year,  before,  he  could  have  enrolled  10,000  men,  for
the  support  of  the  civil  power,  but  that  now,  *  the  bad  policy  and
conduct  of  gentlemen  had  united  all  parties.’ 8  The  Coleraine
magistrates  adopted  the  plan  of  giving  licences  only  to  inn¬
keepers  who  consented  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Ten  of
the  most  respectable  took  it,  but  they  lost  all  their  custom,  and
the  plan  was  accordingly  abandoned.9

1  Geo.  Macartney,  Antrim,  Nov.  12.

2  R.  Waddell,  Islanderry,  Nov.  8.

3  Lord  Downshire,  Hillsborough,
Nov.  2.

4  Alex.  Newton,  Croagh,  Dec.  2.

5  Hon.  Thos.  Knox,  Nov.  2.

6  L.  Heyland,  Boragh,  Dec.  8.

7  Lord  Downshire,  November  7.

6  Mr.  Welsh,  Cookstown,  Nov.  3.
9  N.  Alexander,  Nov.  15,  1796.

cn.  xxvii.

STATE  OF  CATHOLIC  IRELAND.

219

A  general  disarming  liad  been  suggested,  but  Lord
Castlereagh  wrote  to  Pelham,  that  he  did  not  think  such  a
measure  would  be  expedient,  or,  perhaps,  possible.  He  added,
however,  some  remarks,  to  which  later  events  gave  a  peculiar
significance.  ‘  Certainly,’  he  said,  1  since  I  came  to  the  country,
I  have  had  evidence  of  the  extent  and  danger  of  the  conspiracy,
beyond  what  I  was  prepared  to  find,  and  it  is  impossible  to
know  that  a  country  is  armed  in  the  degree  this  is,  and  to  have
a  moral  certainty  that  the  people  are  preparing,  and  look  for¬
ward  to  employ  those  arms  against  the  State,  without  entertain¬
ing  the  question  whether  it  is  wise  to  anticipate  them,  or  to
wait  for  their  attack  in  the  gross — for  in  the  detail,  we  are  at
present  suffering  from  it.  The  policy  entirely  depends  upon  the
contingency  of  their  receiving  foreign  assistance.’ 1

One  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  in  this  period  Qf  Irish
history  is  the  tranquillity  of  the  greater  part  of  Catholic  Ireland,
at  the  time  when  both  Protestants  and  Catholics  in  Ulster  were
in  a  condition  so  nearly  approaching  anarchy.  How  far  it  was
loyalty,  apathy,  or  calculation,  may  be  disputed,  but  the  fact
cannot  be  denied.  £  I  do  really  believe,’  wrote  a  clergyman,  who
was  accustomed  to  correspond  greatly  with  the  Government,  ‘  that
the  Catholic  priests  have  more  influence  than  they  are  willing
to  acknowledge,  and  I  am  fully  persuaded,  notwithstanding  the
apparent  calm  in  the  southern  provinces,  that  the  papists  there,
many  families  of  whom  have  lately  emigrated  from  the  North,
are  fully  acquainted  with  the  designs  of  the  same  party,  who
have  remained  behind.’2  Seditious  violence,  however,  was  at
this  time  confined  to  Ulster,  to  a  very  few  points  in  Leinster,
and  to  a  somewhat  larger  •  area  of  Connaught.  A  gentleman
from  Ballinarobe,  in  the  county  of  Galway,  wrote  that  he  had
been  trying  to  get  up  a  district  corps  of  yeomen,  and  had  sum¬
moned  his  tenants,  and  asked  them  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,
but  they  all  positively  refused,  and  he  did  not  venture  to  p’ace
Government  arms  in  their  hands.  The  hills  about  were  said  to
be  full  of  arms.  Contraband  cargoes  from  France  were  con¬
stantly  run  into  the  Ivilleries,  and  numerous  deserters  found  a
shelter  among  the  mountains.  ‘  The  vast  numbers  of  people
from  the  county  of  Armagh,  who  have  resided  for  some  time
1  Castlereagh  to  Pelham  Nov.  4.  2  The  Rev.  J.  Asher,  Nov.  22.

220

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

among  them,  may  liave  instilled  into  the  minds  of  these  people
some  of  their  own  principles.’ 1  Sir  Edward  Newenham  stated,
in  the  early  part  of  this  year,  that  a  magistrate  near  Ballintub-
ber,  in  the  county  of  Roscommon,  was  accused  of  having  given
the  Defenders  a  grove  of  ash  trees,  to  make  pike  handles,  and
that  many  men  in  comfortable  circumstances  had  joined  them
openly.  A  day  or  two  before  the  Defenders  appear  in  any  dis¬
trict,  he  said,  a  man  of  decent  appearance  goes  through  the
country,  telling  the  people  that  the  French  will  soon  come  to
their  assistance,  that  ships  have  already  arrived  in  the  North,
that  Napper  Tandy  and  Hamilton  Rowan  will  lead  them,  and
that  Grattan  will  defend  them  in  Parliament.  When  the  way
is  thus  prepared,  the  Defenders  appear  in  small  detached  bodies,
first  disarming,  and  then  swearing  in  the  people.

For  many  miles  round  Castleblakeney,  in  the  county  of  Galway,
he  said,  there  are  very  few  magistrates,  and  not  more  than  one  or
two  who  have  the  least  idea  of  their  duty.  Many  are  ‘  trading
justices,’  1  if  not  themselves,  at  least  through  the  means  of  some
ignorant  servant  or  clerk,  to  whom  they  often  refer  the  parties
for  justice.  Nothing,  I  assure  you,  sir,  excites  the  discontent  of
the  lower  classes  so  much  as  such  conduct;  and  so  accustomed
are  they  to  such  a  traffic,  that  they  make  no  scruple  of  offering
a  bill  to  any  magistrate.  It  is  not  taxes  that  drain  the  poor.
It  is  their  own  priests ;  it  is  their  landlords,  changing  them
from  one  place  to  another,  and  never  giving  a  lease  ;  it  is  the
under  agents,  or  stewards,  that  fleece  them.  .  .  .  When  their
mock  patriots  cease  to  inflame  the  minds  of  the  people  with  the
idea  of  Catholic  emancipation,  raising  wages,  taking  off  all  taxes,
and  various  other  ideas,  equally  absurd,  and  thereby  allow  peace
and  harmony  to  return  to  the  country,  industry  wall  flourish.  .  .  .
The  innumerable  little  unlicensed  whisky-houses  are  the  de¬
struction  of  the  labourers,  and  a  n§st  for  Defenders  and  every
kind  of  vagabond.’ 2

The  anarchy  in  Ulster  did  not  extend  over  the  whole  pro¬
vince.  From  some  counties  the  Government  seem  to  have  re¬
ceived  no  communications,  and  from  two  or  three  they  received
communications  differing  widely  from  those  I  have  quoted.  Lord
Blayney,  in  sending  to  the  Government  a  list  of  the  yeomanry

1  W.  Birmingham,  December  24.

3  E.  Newenham,  Feb.  26,  17y6.

ch.  xxvii.  CAUSES  Or  DISCONTENT.  221

cavalry,  enlisted  near  Castleblaney,  contrasted  the  ‘  shameful
state  of  riot  which  has  so  long  existed  in  more  northern  coun¬
ties,’  with  the  perfect  quiet  of  his  own  county  of  Monaghan.

‘  There  is  there,’  he  says,  ‘  the  greatest  tranquillity  and  happi¬
ness.  No  soldiey  is  ever  permitted  to  interfere  with  the  laws ;
and  during  three  assizes  and  quarter  sessions,  there  never
has  been  occasion  to  have  an  examination  returned.’  ‘  In  the
North,’  he  adds,  ‘  the  inhabitants  are  generally  wealthy  and
obstinate  ;  therefore,  all  require  a  plain  and  proper  explanation
of  all  matters  from  Government,  and  to  be  able  to  place  some
degree  of  confidence  in  their  landlords.  I  am  sorry  to  observe,
that  confidence  between  landlord  and  tenant  throughout  Ireland
in  general,  is  very  much  lost  from  the  shameful  abuse  on  the  part
of  the  former.  It  will,  therefore,  behove  Government,  this  ses¬
sion  of  Parliament,  to  adopt  some  wise  and  salutary  laws  which
meet  the  approbation  of  the  people,  and  whatever  the  laws  are,
let  them  be  rigidly  enforced.’ 1

From  Ballinahinch,  Lord  Moira  wrote  in  the  same  spirit.  The
disaffection,  he  thought,  was  much  exaggerated,  and  with  large
classes,  the  agitation  did  not  spring  from  a  desire  for  separation.
£  It  is  not  here  as  in  England,  where  I  am  sure  the  notion  of  a
parliamentary  reform  does  not  at  all  awaken  the  interest  of
the  people.  Here  the  middling  and  lower  orders  have  had  it
anxiously  in  view,  and  have  been  encouraged  to  look  to  it  by  dis¬
tinct  avowals  in  Parliament,  of  existing  abuses.  The  Association
of  United  Irishmen  professed  to  have  no  other  view  than  the  attain¬
ment  of  that  object;  and  whatever  nefarious  purposes  some  of
them  might  have  covered  under  that  veil,  they  have  succeeded
in  persuading  the  country,  that  such  was  their  sole  pursuit.’
‘  There  are  persons  in  this  country,  who  have  not  adverted  to
the  progress  that  information  has  been  making,  and  to  the
knowledge  of  their  own  rights,  .  .  .  which  individuals  draw
from  it.  Those'  gentlemen  have  used  a  tone  and  manner  with
the  common  people  which  might  have  answered  here  twenty
years  ago,  although  the  peasantry  in  England  would  not  have
borne  it  within  the  century.  The  people  here  have  resisted  that
domineering  pretension;  by  their  resistance  have  irritated  the
men  of  rank,  and  in  some  places  the  quarrel  has  produced  deep
1  Lord  Blayney,  Nov.  15,  179C.

222

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

animosity.  ...  To  my  j  udgment,  there  is  no  other  policy  than
conciliation ;  and  from  what  I  have  seen  of  the  country,  I  can
have  no  doubt  that  such  a  tone  would  quiet  everything.’ 1

It  was,  no  doubt,  true,  as  Lord  Moira  thought,  that  some
of  the  United  Irishmen  were  rebels  because  they  believed
that  rebellion  alone  could  give  them  a  tolerable  system  of
parliamentary  representation.  At  the  same  time,  the  society,  as
a  whole,  had  now  become  undoubtedly  seditious  and  undoubtedly
republican.  Thomas  Emmet,  in  his  remarkable  sketch  of  the
history  of  the  movement,  observes  that  in  the  beginning,
Catholic  emancipation  and  parliamentary  reform  were  the  real
and  ultimate  objects  of  the  leaders;  that  when  the  first  had
been  to  a  great  degree  acquired,  and  when  the  latter  appeared
desperate,  a  change  of  objects  took  place,  and  that  this  change
was  mainly  due  to  the  lower  classes,  who  had  become  vehement
republicans  and  separatists,  and  who  forced  the  educated  and
moderate  reformers  to  adopt  their  views.  Even  after  the  leaders
had  fully  agreed  to  aim  at  a  republic,  Emmet  believed  that  they
would  have  been  more  ready  than  their  poor  associates,  to  aban¬
don  the  pursuit  if  reform  had  been  granted.2

The  leaders  of  the  party  emphatically,  and  I  believe  sincerely,
disavowed  all  sympathy  with  assassination ;  but  there  is  no
doubt  that  murders,  and  especially  murders  of  witnesses  and
informers,  were  frequent  in  1796,  and  they  became  still  more
common  in  the  following  year.  The  crime  was  one  already  well
known  in  Ireland,3  and  a  clause  had  been  introduced  into  the
Insurrection  Act  to  meet  it,  by  making  the  information  of  a
murdered  witness  evidence  on  a  trial.  Whether  these  murders
were  chiefly  due  to  local  exasperation,  or  to  combinations  among
friends  of  the  accused,  or  whether  they  were  instigated  and
authorised  by  societies  of  United  Irishmen,  it  is  not,  I  think,  now
possible  to  determine.  There  were  at  this  time,  many  hundreds
of  these  societies  scattered  over  the  country,  each  of  them  being
a  centre  of  local  sedition  and  agitation,  and  each  of  them

1  Lord  Moira,  Nov.  6,  179(5.

2  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  His¬
tory,  p.  104.

3  Several  instances  (outside  Ul¬
ster)  were  given  by  Sir  Lawrence
Parsons,  in  his  speech  on  the  Insur¬
rection  Bill.  Thus,  about  four  years

before  that  Bill  was  passed,  ‘three
persons  were  murdered  in  succession
in  the  county  Tipperary.  The  first
was  a  witness,  the  second  a  wit¬
ness  of  his  murder,  and  the  third  a
witness  of  the  second  murder.’  (Se¬
ward's  Collectanea  Politico,  iii.  168.)

cn.  xxyh.

DEFENDERS  AND  UNITED  IRISHMEN.

223

acting  very  independently  of  Belfast  and  Dublin.  There  was
little  communication  ;  writing  of  every  kind  was  discouraged  in
order  to  avoid  detection,  and  it  is  extremely  probable  that  in
some  of  them,  murders  were  discussed  and  planned.  On  the
other  hand,  such  a  condition  of  society  as  I  have  described,
would  naturally  produce  murders  independently  of  any  regular
organisation,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  Ulster  outrages,  which
were  not  due  to  the  Orangemen,  appear  to  have  been  due  to  the
Defenders,  who  were,  at  first,  entirely  distinct  from  the  United
Irishmen.1

These  two  bodies,  however,  were  now  steadily  gravitating  to
one  another.  Defenderism  had  everywhere  become  more  or  less
political,  and  it  was  especially  so  in  Ulster.  The  Catholics  in
this  province  seem  to  have  been  both  more  political  and  more
anti-English  than  those  of  other  parts,  and  the  United  Irish
leaders,  who  were  chiefly  Protestant,  and  whose  very  slight
knowledge  of  the  Catholic  mind  was  chiefly  derived  from
Ulster,  appear  to  me  to  have,  in  consequence,  greatly  exagge¬
rated  both  the  intensity  and  the  amount  of  Catholic  disaffection.
With  the  exception  of  a  few  traders  in  the  chief  towns,  the
Catholics  in  three  provinces  seem  to  have  cared  very  little  for
politics  up  to  the  period  of  Lord  Fitz william’s  administration,
and  their  uniform  conduct  during  many  troubled  years,  cer¬
tainly  betrays  nothing  of  the  rooted  antipathy  to  British  rule,
which  Tone  and  Emmet  ascribed  to  them.2  A  change,  how¬
ever,  was  now  passing  over  their  dispositions,  and  in  1796  the
United  Irishmen  very  generally  succeeded  in  their  efforts  to
incorporate  the  Defenders  into  their  own  body.  For  some
time,  the  United  Irish  emissaries  had  been  going  among  them,
endeavouring  to  learn  their  views  and  intentions.  They  reported
that  Defenderism  was  not  so  much  an  association,  as  a  mass  of

1  The  opposite  views  of  Madden
and  of  McSkimmin  (the  historian  of
Carrickfergus)  on  this  subject,  will  be
found  in  Madden’s  United  Irishmen,
i.  534-536.  McSkimmin,  who  had  a
Very  great  local  knowledge,  has  col¬
lected  ten  cases  of  murder,  or  at¬
tempted  murder,  which  took  place
in  Ulster  in  1796,  and  were  ascribed
to  the  United  Irishmen.  Two  of
the  victims  were  magistrates.  Most

of  the  others  were  informers  or
soldiers.

2  Thus  Emmet  says  :  ‘  In  Ireland,
the  Catholics  in  general,  particularly
the  poor,  had  long  entertained  a
rooted  wish  for  separation,  which
they  considered  as  synonymous  with
national  independence.’  (McNevin,
p.  104.)  We  have  already  seen
the  similar  statements  of  Tone  and
McNally.

224

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

associations,  with  little  or  no  nniformity  of  views  and  action,
differing  in  different  counties  in  its  tests  and  signs,  and  for  the
most  part  wasting  its  strength  in  partial  and  ill-directed  insur¬
rections  against  local  grievances.  As  the  Defender  organisa¬
tion  owed  its  origin  to  religious  animosities,  and  consisted
exclusively  of  the  most  ignorant  Catholics,  it  was  very  likely  to
be  turned  into  a  mere  engine  of  bigotry,  and  very  unfit  for
political  enterprise.  The  United  Irishmen  now  made  it  their
business  to  impress  upon  the  Defenders  the  great  superiority  of
the  United  Irish  organisation,  the  necessity  of  an  alliance  with
the  Protestants,  the  expediency  of  pursuing  only  one  thing,  ‘  an
equal,  full,  and  adequate  representation  of  the  people,’  which
would  put  an  end  to  religious  distinctions  and  to  most  of  the
grievances  of  which  they  complained.  They  at  last  succeeded,
and  the  Defenders  in  great  bodies  took  the  oath,  and  were  incor¬
porated  into  the  Union.  The  most  turbulent  Catholic  element
in  Ireland  thus  passed  into  it,  and  its  introduction  into  the
Catholic  militia  regiments  was  greatly  facilitated.1

It  was  in  the  autumn  and  winter  of  1796  that  Arthur
O’Connor,  Thomas  Addis  Emmet,  and  Dr.  McNevin  first  formally
joined  the  society,  which  from  this  time  was  to  a  large  extent
under  their  guidance.  Tone,  Napper  Tandy,  and  Rowan,  the
most  prominent  of  the  original  members,  had  been  driven  from
Ireland,  and  Rowan  appears  to  have  given  up  all  politics.
About  the  same  time,  the  United  Irishmen  began  to  give  a
military  organisation  to  their  society.  This  military  organisa¬
tion  was  grafted  on  the  civil  one,  and  it  was  fully  elaborated  at
the  close  of  1796  and  in  the  beginning  of  1797.  The  secretary
of  each  ordinary  committee  of  twelve  was  appointed  a  non¬
commissioned  officer ;  the  delegate  of  five  societies  to  a  lower
baronial  committee  was  commonly  made  a  captain,  with  sixty
men  under  him.  The  delegate  of  ten  lower  baronials  to  the
upper  and  district  committee  became  a  colonel,  commanding  a
battalion  of  600  men ;  the  colonels  in  each  county  sent  in  the
names  of  three  persons,  one  of  whom  was  appointed,  by  the
executive  Directory,  adjutant-general  for  the  county,  and  it  was
the  duty  of  these  adjutant-generals  to  communicate  directly

1  Se.e  Emmet’s  account  of  the  fusion ;  NcNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  History
pp.  117-121.

cir.  xxvii.

O'CONNOR’S  LETTER  TO  FOX.

225

with,  the  executive.  Orders  were  given  that  every  member  of
the  society  should  endeavour  to  procure  a  gun,  bayonet,  and
ammunition,  or,  if  this  was  not  possible,  a  pair  of  pistols,  or  at
least  a  pike.1

In  a  letter  from  Arthur  O’Connor  to  C.  J.  Fox,  a  copy  of
which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Government,  the  following
description  is  given  of  the  state  of  public  opinion  in  Ulster.
‘The  people  of  the  North,’  he  wrote,  ‘though  perhaps  the  best
educated  peasantry  of  Europe,  were  violently  against  any  con¬
nection  with  the  papists,  and  the  linen  manufacture  has  always
been  esteemed  a  peace  offering  to  the  Northerners  for  the  in¬
justice  our  trade  and  manufactures  have  suffered,  to  aggrandise
England.  This  was  the  state  of  things  before  this  war,  but  now
it  has  undergone  a  total  change.  The  Presbyterians  of  the
North  have  sought  with  uncommon  zeal  an  union  with  the
Catholics  and  Protestants.  They  have,  instituted  societies  in
the  nature  of  masons  and  friendly  brothers,  which  have  spread
rapidly  throughout  the  whole  island  ;  they  bind  themselves  by
a  voluntary  oath  to  promote  brotherly  love  and  affection  amongst
Irishmen  of  every  religious  persuasion,  to  promote  a  reform,  and
never  to  disclose  anything  that  passes  in  the  society.  This,  you
may  rely  on  it,  is  the  whole  of  the  test  which  is  termed  treason¬
able,  and  for  which  so  many  of  the  most  respectable  people  in
trade  and  manufacture  have  been  imprisoned.  I  speak  from  cer¬
tainty,  having  myself  taken  the  test.’  The  United  Irishmen,  he
says,  wait  for  ‘  an  opportunity  to  speak  their  sentiments,’  which
will  only  be  when  they  have  ‘  a  decided  majority  of  the  nation.’

‘  The  Defenders,  who  were  an  unthinking,  oppressed  people,  act¬
ing  without  any  rational  view,  have  seen  their  errors,  and  are
mostly  become  United  Irishmen.  But  their  opponents  in
Armagh  are  of  a  new  description.  They  have  an  oath  which
binds  them  to  support  the  Protestant  ascendency,  and  every
underhand  means  have  been  used  by  Government  to  instigate
them  against  the  United  Irishmen  ;  but  they  have  begun  to
see  their  error,  and  are  joining  the  Union  in  great  numbers.’  2

Among  the  Government  informers  there  was  an  English

1  See  the  Report  of  the  Committee  McNevin,  and  Emmet,
of  Secrecy  of  the  House  of  Lords  2  A.  O’Conner  to  C.  J.  Fox,  Dec.
(1798),  and  the  evidence  of  O’Connor,  24,1796.  (I.S.P.O.)

258

226

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvii.

Radical,  wlio  came  over  professedly  to  establish  relations  between
the  democrats  in  the  two  countries,  and  who  appears  to  have
succeeded  in  winning  the  confidence  of  Neilson,  the  editor  of  the
‘  Northern  Star,’  as  well  as  of  several  other  members  of  the  party.
Neilson,  in  conversation  with  him,  expressed  his  belief  that  in
England  the  Republicans  were  a  minority,  but  in  Ireland  a
majority,  and  that  the  fatal  error  of  the  English  democratic
societies  had  been  their  custom  of  keeping  written  journals.
‘We,’  he  said,  ‘commit  nothing  to  paper.  We  assemble  in
small  numbers,  and  without  any  predetermined  place,  and  when
our  numbers  exceed  thirty-five  wTe  split,  and  the  overplus  lays
the  foundation  of  a  new  society.’  The  independence  of  Ireland,
he  thought,  must  necessarily  come,  and  it  ‘  would  be  no  more  in¬
jurious  to  England  than  the  emancipation  of  America  was,  which,
says  Neilson,  by  increasing  her  exports,  has  increased  her  wealth.

.  .  .  What  England  lost  in  prerogative,  she  would  gain  in  com¬
merce.’  The  informer  asked  his  opinion  about  the  Catholics
and  the  Defenders.  ‘  The  Catholics,’  Neilson  answered,  ‘  have
many  enlightened  men  and  true  patriots  among  them,  but  he
feared  the  great  mass  were  bigots  to  monarchy.  Their  number,’
says  Neilson,  ‘  makes  them  very  formidable  ;  their  wrongs  make
them  desperate,  and  though  they  would  most  probably  render
no  good  by  themselves,  yet  with  proper  rulers  they  might  be
made  of  very  great  service  to  the  cause,  and  so  might  the
Defenders,  c<?uid  they  be  properly  organised  ;  at  present  they
are  nothing  more  than  an  undisciplined  rabble.’  According  to
the  information  received  by  this  informer,  there  were  nearly
forty  United  Irish  societies  in  Belfast  alone.  They  consisted
generally  of  thirty-five  members  each,  never  of  more  than  forty.
Belfast  and  Dungannon  were  both  centres  of  authority,  and
each  had  several  hundred  clubs  depending  on  it.  Neilson  was
confident  that  35,000  men  could  be  brought  into  the  field  in
Ulster,  ‘  mostly  armed  and  disciplined.’  If  the  clubs  were
divided  into  three  equal  parts,  two  would  be  found  to  consist  of
Presbyterians  and  Deists,  the  third  of  Catholics  and  members  of
the  Established  Church.  When  a  new  society  was  introduced
into  any  place,  printed  instructions,  copies  of  the  test  &c.,  were
sent  from  Belfast.  When  the  society  was  full,  it  gave  notice  to
Belfast,  and  was  empowered  to  form  a  new  one.  No  one  was

Cl!,  xxvii.

LETTER  OE  McNALLY.

227

permitted  to  form  a  club  who  was  not  furnished  with  a  certificate
from  the  central  committee  at  Belfast.  With  this  certificate,  a
man  might  take  tests  and  create  new  clubs  in  any  part  of
Ireland.  Any  member  who  completed  ten  clubs  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  chief  committee.1

Our  information  about  the  proceedings  of  the  United  Irish¬
men  outside  Ulster  is  less  complete,  but  on  the  first  day  of  1 7  9  7
McNally  wrote  a  very  alarming  letter  on  the  subject.  1  The
county  of  Meath,’  he  said,  4  though  everywhere  quiet,  is  not  the
less  resolved  upon  the  principle  of  separation  from  England.
...  As  I  told  you  before,  it  pervades,  and  it  rises  into,  the  upper
classes  everywhere.’  It  was  calculated  by  the  United  Irishmen
that,  irrespectively  of  the  militia  and  yeomanry,  there  were  at
this  time  only  20,000  soldiers  in  Ireland,  and  that  a  rising  might
succeed  without  French  assistance.  Such  a  rising,  McNally
said,  was  certainly  in  contemplation,  and  the  first  step  would  be
to  seize  those  who  were  in  high  Government  situations.  Very
few  of  the  original  United  Irishmen  had  fallen  away.  ‘That
principle,’  he  continued,  ‘  I  conceive  to  be  now  so  general  and
so  rooted,  that  in  my  opinion  no  change  of  administration,  no
representation  of  the  people  with  which  a  Rouse  of  Lords  could
possibly  exist,  would  have  force  or  influence  to  weaken  it.  The
principle  springs  from  republicanism,  and  demands  .  .  .  that
all  honours,  stations,  offices  &c.  shall  rise  up  from  the  people
through  the  medium  of  election,  and  not  flow  down  from  the
executive  power.’ 2

The  difference  of  opinion  between  the  English  and  the  Irish
Governments  relating  to  the  Insurrection  Act  still  continued.
Camden  wrote  strongly  asserting  the  necessity  of  putting  it  into
immediate  action  over  a  great  part  of  the  North.  The  state  of
the  neighbourhood  of  Belfast,  and  of  the  counties  of  Down,
Antrim,  and  Armagh,  was  very  bad.  There  was  an  organised
system  of  terrorism.  Magistrates  could  get  no  information.
Active  magistrates,  informers,  and  even  men  who  had  merely

1  Information  of  Edward  Smith,  J.  W.,  Oct.  9,  1796.)  Like  some
1796.  (I.S.P.O.)  The  true  name  of  others,  he  played  a  double  game,  and

this  informer  was  Bird.  He  appears  at  last  quarrelled  with  the  Govern-
to  have  been  a  man  of  very  bad  ment.  Many  particulars  about  him
character,  and  the  United  Irishmen  will  be  found  in  Madden,
soon  found  out  his  true  objects.  (See  2  J.  W.,  Jan.  1,  1797.

228

ENGLAND  IN  T1IE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  oh.  xxvii.

taken  the  oath  of  allegiance,  were  threatened  with  assassination.
Within  ten  days,  two  magistrates  had  been  fired  at ;  two  in¬
formers  had  lately  been  murdered,  as  well  as  a  man  who  insisted
on  remaining  with  his  troop.  ‘  Immense  crowds  have  assembled,
have  cut  the  corn,  and  dug  the  potatoes  of  the  persons  now  con¬
fined  for  high  treason  in  the  county  gaols,  and  in  Dublin.’  Ten
barrels  of  gunpowder  had  just  been  stolen  from  the  stores  at
Belfast.1  In  Down,  at  least,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  issue
the  proclamation,  and  twenty-four  magistrates  of  the  county
asked  for  it.  Portland,  on  the  other  hand,  expressed  his  earnest
hope  that  ‘  the  tremendous  power  of  proclaiming  districts  out  of
the  King’s  peace,  which  the  law  of  last  session  very  wisely  placed
in  the  hands  of  Government,  may  remain  suspended,  and  that
the  awe  of  it  may  be  sufficient  to  restore  subordination  and
tranquillity,  without  having  recourse  to  more  exemplary  acts  of
severity.’ 2  He  yielded,  however,  to  the  representation  of  the
Irish  Government;  some  large  districts  were  put  under  pro¬
clamation,  and  Lord  Carhampton  was  sent  to  take  the  command
in  the  North.

The  last  confidential  reports  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  during
1796  seem  to  indicate  some  slight  improvement  in  Ulster.  The
districts  round  Newry,  he  said,  had  been  proclaimed  with  com¬
plete  success,  and  were  now  quiet.  Belfast  was  equally  so,
probably  through  fear  of  the  Insurrection  Act.  In  the  county
of  Antrim,  the  magistrates  were  disinclined  to  adopt  the  Act,
and  no  acts  of  outrage  had  lately  been  committed  there,  though
the  dispositions  of  the  people  were  unchanged.  ‘  I  am  sorry  to
add,’  writes  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  ‘  that  Lord  O’Neil  and  some
principal  gentlemen  of  that  county  seem  to  have  partaken  of  the
frenzy  of  that  neighbourhood  [Belfast],  so  far  as  to  wish  to  pass
some  resolutions  at  a  county  meeting  expressive  of  their  opinion,
that  a  reform  of  Parliament  is  necessary  to  reconcile  the  minds
of  the  people  at  this  period.’  Lord  Carhampton  is  doing  his
utmost  to  prevent  such  resolutions  from  being  brought  forward.
At  Belfast,  where  Carhampton  has  been  in  his  magisterial
capacity,  he  believes  that  he  has  discovered  c  the  designs  of  a
set  of  men  called  the  Assassination  Committee,  who  marked  out

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Nov.  1.  2  Portland  to  Camden,  Nov.  6,

1796.  1796.

cn.  xxvu.

ULSTER  IN  DECEMBER  1796.

229

and  actually  ordered  the  assassination  of  various  persons.  Four
of  the  principal  persons  have  been  taken  up  upon  the  charge  of
conspiring  to  murder,  .  .  .  upon  information  which  I  hope  will
certainly  lead  to  their  conviction.’

The  terrorism  was  such,  that  for  some  time  ‘  scarcely  one  of
Lord  Londonderry’s  tenants  would  dare  to  speak  to  him,  if  they
met  him  on  the  road,  or  would  even  show  him  the  slightest  mark
of  respect.  ...  In  the  county  of  Tyrone,  Mr.  Stewart,  the
member  of  it,  has  experienced  the  same  sort  of  treatment,’  though
‘  he  has  always  been  the  strenuous  advocate  of  parliamentary
reform,  and  has  wished  to  substitute  some  other  mode  of  paying
the  clergy,  for  tithes.’  On  Lord  Londonderry’s  estate,  however,
there  had  been  a  sudden  change,  owing  in  a  great  degree  to  the
ability  of  his  son,  Lord  Castlereagh.  1,700  men  had  come
forward  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  he  could  easily  raise
a  corps  of  yeomanry,  if  he  could  only  select  those  who  were  to
be  depended  on.  On  the  whole,  the  state  of  Ulster  seemed  better,
except  the  county  of  Derry,  where  there  was  much  difficulty  to
be  encountered,  ‘  from  the  almost  total  dearth  of  gentlemen  who
inhabit  that  county.’ 1

Still,  it  seemed  impossible  to  be  sure  that  a  spark  might  not
produce  explosion,  and  the  condition  of  Europe  was  such,  that
an  Irish  insurrection  would  at  this  time  have  been  peculiarly
terrible.  On  sea,  indeed,  the  flag  of  England  still  flew  very
high,  and  she  had  added  largely  to  her  colonial  possessions.
The  French  had  been  defeated  by  Howe  in  a  great  battle  at
Ushant  on  June  1,  1794  ;  they  had  been  defeated  in  the  follow¬
ing  year  by  Hotham  at  Savona,  and  by  Bridport  at  L'Orient  and
at  the  Hyeres  islands.  In  August  1796,  Elphinstone,  with  a
superior  force,  had  surrounded  and  captured  a  Dutch  squadron
of  six  ships  of  war  in  Saldhana  Bay.  Pondicherry  in  the  East
Indies,  Tobago,  Martinique,  Guadaloupe,  and  San  Lucia  in  the
West  Indies,  had  been  taken  from  the  French ;  and  when  Holland
passed  under  French  domination,  England,  with  little  difficulty,
had  seized  all  her  colonies — Ceylon,  the  Malacca  Isles,  the  Dutch
establishments  on  the  Malabar  coast ;  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;
Demerara,  Essequebo,  and  the  Moluccas.  But  on  the  continent
of  Europe,  the  star  of  France  seemed  now  rising  rapidly  to  the
1  Camden  to  Portland,  Dec.  13,  1796.

‘230

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXV1T.

ascendant.  The  coalition  against  her  was  shattered  and  dis¬
solved,  and  England  was  entering  into  one  of  the  darkest  periods
of  her  history  Belgium  had  been  annexed  to  France.  Hol¬
land  was  completely  subdued,  and  early  in  1795  the  newly
constructed  Batavian  Republic  concluded  an  offensive  alliance
against  England,  which  gave  France  the  command  of  the  navy
of  a  people  who  had  always  proved  themselves  among  the  best
sailors  in  Europe,  and  of  all  the  ports  and  maritime  resources
of  a  coast  extending  from  Texel  to  the  Pyrenees.  Tuscany
about  the  same  time  made  a  separate  peace,  and  a  few  months
later  the  whole  aspect  of  Europe  was  changed  by  the  news,
that  Prussia  and  the  other  Northern  States  of  Germany  had
broken  away  from  the  coalition,  and  had  signed  a  peace  at
Basle  which  left  France  the  undisputed  mistress  of  the  left
bank  of  the  Rhine.  The  Royalist  insurrection  which  England
had  supported  in  Brittany,  was  crushed.  Spain  made  peace
with  France  in  July  1795,  and  in  the  October  of  the  following
year  she  declared  war  against  England,  bringing  a  new  and
considerable  fleet  to  dispute  the  English  empire  of  the  sea.  In
Germany,  it  is  true,  the  tide  of  victory  more  than  once  ebbed
and  flowed,  but  the  great  victories  of  the  Archduke  Charles  in
1796  were  much  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  victories  of
Buonaparte  in  Italy.  In  the  course  of  1 796  and  the  first  months
of  1797,  almost  all  its  states  had  been  either  crushed  or  intimi¬
dated  into  treaties  of  submission,  and  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies
and  the  Republic  of  Genoa  had  conspicuously  closed  their
ports  against  British  ships.

At  home,  meanwhile,  discontent,  disaffection,  and  financial
embarrassment  were  steadily  increasing,  and  the  English  national
debt,  swollen  by  enormous  subsidies  to  faithless  allies,  augmented
with  appalling  rapidity.  Pitt  anxiously  looked  forward  to  peace,
but  his  efforts  met  with  no  success.  In  the  February  of  1796,
Wickham,  who  was  British  minister  in  Switzerland,  had  been
instructed  to  sound,  through  Barthelemy,  the  disposition  of  the
Directory,  but  his  overtures  were  promptly  and  scornfully
rejected.1  In  the  following  October,  Lord  Auckland  published,
with  the  sanction  of  Pitt,  a  pamphlet  which  was  intended  to

1  See  Wickham’s  Correspondence ,  i.  269-271,  312-314 ;  Annual  Btnister,
1795,  pp;  125,  126.

Cvt.  xxvii.

NEGOTIATION  OF  MALMESBURY,  1796.

231

prepare  the  public  mind  for  a  peace,  and  at  the  same  time  a
new  English  application  was  made  to  the  Directory.  It  was
most  ungraciously  received,  but  they  at  length  agreed  to  grant
passports  for  an  official  negotiation,  and  under  these  circum¬
stances  Lord  Malmesbury  went  to  Paris.

The  negotiation,  however,  was  almost  hopeless.  The  Direc¬
tory  had  no  real  wish  for  peace,  and  they  from  the  beginning
declared  their  belief  that  England  was  insincere  in  her  inten¬
tions,  and  only  sought,  by  an  apparent  desire  for  peace,  to
obtain  increased  supplies,  and  to  quell  the  murmurs  of  a  dis¬
contented  nation.  Fox  and  the  rest  of  the  separate  Whig  party
took  up  the  same  cry,  while  Burke  bitterly  denounced  the
negotiation  as  a  new  humiliation  to  England.  When  some  one
said  that  Lord  Malmesbury  found  the  road  to  Paris  a  long  one,
Burke  answered  that  this  was  not  surprising,  c  as  he  went  the
whole  way  on  his  knees.’  It  was  soon  evident  that  England  would
not  make  a  separate  peace,  which  alone  the  Directory  desired ;
and  when  the  question  of  the  restoration  of  Belgium  to  the
Emperor  was  raised,  the  negotiations  speedily  terminated.
England,  indeed,  was  ready  to  purchase  that  cession  by  the  sur¬
render  of  all  her  own  conquests  from  France  ;  but  the  Directory
at  once  refused,  and  on  December  19  they  ordered  Lord  Malmes¬
bury  to  leave  Paris  in  forty-eight  hours.  It  was  noticed
that  the  funds  at  this  time  sank  lower  than  at  any  period  of
the  American  war,  and  the  drain  of  specie  had  already  begun,
which  soon  after  obliged  the  Bank  of  England  to  suspend  cash
payments.  It  was  under  such  circumstances,  that  the  news  ar¬
rived  that  a  great  French  fleet  had  reached  the  coast  of  Ireland,
and  had  cast  its  anchors  in  Bantry  Bay.

In  order  to  understand  the  circumstances  under  which  this
fleet  was  despatched,  it  will  be  necessary  to  recur  for  a  few
moments  to  the  proceedings  of  Wolfe  Tone.  We  have  seen  that
this  conspirator  had  been  deeply  implicated  in  the  affairs  of
Jackson,  and  that  after  the  suicide  of  Jackson,  in  the  spring  of
1795,  he  had,  through  the  influence  of  the  Beresfords,  obtained
permission  from  the  Government  to  emigrate  to  America.  The
journey  was  safely  accomplished,  though  the  ship  was  boarded
by  an  English  man-of-war,  and  Tone  was  very  nearly  pressed
for  the  navy.  A  curious  letter,  which  he  wrote  to  his  dear  friend

232

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvir.

Thomas  Russell  just  after  his  arrival,  was  intercepted  and  seized
by  the  Government,  and  it  gives  a  graphic  picture  of  his  first
impressions.  Like  many  later  revolutionists,  he  speedily  learnt
that  it  is  a  profound  error  to  regard  the  Americans  as  a  revo¬
lutionary  people,  less  attached  to  order  and  authority,  and  more
prone  to  political  innovation  and  experiment,  than  the  English  ;
and  he  frankly  confessed  that  he  had  seen  enough  of  them,  or
at  least  of  the  Philadelphians,  to  regard  them  with  1  unqualified
dislike.’  Public  affairs  in  America,  appeared  to  him  nearly  as
much  under  the  influence  of  an  aristocracy  as  at  home,  only  it
was  an  aristocracy  of  merchants  and  money  makers.  Washington
was  1  a  very  honest  man,  and  a  sincere  American  according  to
his  own  theory,’  but  he  was  ‘  a  high-flying  aristocrat,’  and  it  was  a
matter  of  great  congratulation  that  his  influence  seemed  waning.
For  his  own  part,  Tone  said,  the  subversion  of  all  forms  of
aristocracy  seemed  to  him  the  first  essential  of  liberty.  1  To
borrow  Grattan’s  expression,  when  he  was  surprised  by  his
passion  into  a  fit  of  honesty,  “  Liberty  must  extinguish  aristo¬
cracy,  or  aristocracy  will  extinguish  her.”  ’ 1

Philadelphia,  where  Tone  now  found  himself,  was  at  this  time
a  great  centre  of  Irish  immigration  and  influence  in  America.  c  It
is  a  fact,’  wrote  Franklin  in  1784,  ‘  that  the  Irish  emigrants  and
their  children  are  now  in  possession  of  the  government  of
Pennsylvania  by  their  majority  in  the  Assembly,  as  well  as  of  a
great  part  of  the  territory ;  and  I  remember  well  the  first  ship
that  brought  any  of  them  over.’ 2  The  success,  however,  of  a
considerable  minority  of  Irishmen  in  this  colony,  must  not  dis¬
guise  the  fact  that  the  large  majority  were  penniless  immigrants,
who,  at  the  very  moment  of  landing,  fell  into  the  hands  of
dishonest  contractors,  and  were  reduced  for  long  periods  to  a
condition  but  little  removed  from  slavery.  Hamilton  Rowan

1  September  1,  1795.  (I.S.P.O.)
Rowan  also  greatly  disliked  America.
‘  The  aristocracy  of  wealth  here,’  he
wrote,  ‘  is  insupportable,  for  it  is
mixed  with  the  grossest  ignorance.
.  .  .  The  House  of  Congress  is  be¬
come  a  boxing  school,  the  Speaker
giving  challenges  from  the  chair.  .  .  .
If  this  is  a  specimen  of  a  democratic
republic,  Lord  help  us,  sufferers  in  the
cause  1  .  .  .  The  moment  I  can  leave

this  country  without  injuring  my
family,  I  will  do  so.  .  .  .  Over  and
over  again  do  I  say,  if  I  am  to  live
under  the  lash  of  arbitrary  power,  at
least  let  the  whip  be  in  the  hands  of
those  accustomed  to  use  it,  not  picked
up  by  a  foot  passenger,  who,  unaccus¬
tomed  to  ride,  keeps  flogging  every
post  and  rail  he  comes  near.’  (Rowan’s
Autobiography,  pp.  300,  321,  323.)

2  Franklin’s  Works,  x.  131.

CH.  XXVII,

TONE'S  MISSION  TO  EEANCE.

233

speaks  bitterly  of  the  ‘  harpies  ’  that  awaited  them,  and  added,
‘  The  members  of  the  Society  for  the  Abolition  of  Slavery  have
not  the  least  objection  to  buying  an  Irishman  or  a  Dutchman,  and
will  chaffer  with  himself  or  the  captain  to  get  him  indented  at
about  the  eighth  part  of  the  wages  they  would  have  to  pay  a
country  born.’1

Although  no  stipulation  appears  to  have  been  made  with
Tone  about  abstaining  from  politics,  a  man  of  high  and  delicate
honour,  who  had  left  his  country  under  such  circumstances  as  I
have  described,  would  have  considered  himself  under  a  tacit  ob¬
ligation.  Such  feelings,  however,  are  very  rarely  found  among
men  who  have  once  drunk  of  the  intoxicating  cup  of  political
conspiracy,  and  Wolfe  Tone  was  no  exception  to  the  common
rule.  He  found  at  Philadelphia  his  old  friends  and  fellow  con¬
spirators,  Dr.  Reynolds,  Napper  Tandy,  and  Hamilton  Rowan.
He  immediately  entered  into  close  relations  with  the  French
minister  to  the  United  States,  and  soon  after,  in  obedience  to
urgent  letters  from  Ireland,  he  undertook  a  mission  to  France  for
the  purpose  of  inducing  the  French  Government  to  invade  Ireland.

The  missions  of  Bancroft,  Coquebert,  Oswald,  Jackson,  and
perhaps  other  agents,  had  already  shown  the  interest  of  the
French  in  Irish  affairs,  but  it  was  not  until  the  December
of  1795  'that  an  invasion  of  Ireland  appears  to  have  been
seriously  contemplated  in  Paris.  A  long  report  was  in  that
month  presented  to  the  Directory  by  De  la  Croix,  the  French
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  representing  the  enormous  advan¬
tages  France  would  derive  from  a  separation  of  Ireland  from
England,  and  informing  them  that  despatches  had  been  received
from  Adet,  the  French  minister  at  Philadelphia,  announcing  the
arrival  in  that  city  of  Wolfe  Tone,  to  ask  in  the  name  of  his
countrymen  for  the  assistance  of  France.  Adet  strongly  recom¬
mended  Tone  to  the  consideration  of  the  French  Government ;
reminded  them  that  he  had  a  brother  who  had  recently  enlisted
in  the  French  service,  and  inclosed  a  memoir,  written  by  Tone  in
the  preceding  summer,  representing  insurrection  in  Ireland  as
certain  if  the  French  would  assist.  De  la  Croix  considered  the

1  Rowan's  Autobiography,  p.  318.  the  spring  vessels,  and  the  brisk  trade
In  another  letter,  Rcwan  writes  :  for  Irish  slaves  here  is  to  make  up  for
4  Swarms  of  Irish  are  expected  here  by  the  low  price  of  tiax  seed  I  ’  (Ibid.)

234

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CH.  XXVII.

project  of  invasion  worthy  of  the  most  serious  consideration,
and,  as  it  must  be  prepared  in  France,  he  demanded  the  autho¬
risation  of  the  Directory  to  invite  Tone  to  Paris.

A  French  translation  of  the  memoir  accompanied  the  despatch,
Ireland,  the  writer  boldly  said,  was  the  chief  source  of  the
astonishing  power  which  England  had  hitherto  displayed.  In
the  eighteen  months  of  the  present  war,  she  had  furnished  to
England  120,000  soldiers;  and,  according  to  the  most  accurate
computations,  two-thirds  of  the  sailors  in  the  British  navy  were
Irishmen.  From  Ireland,  England  derives  the  whole  of  the
salted  provisions  required  for  her  fleet  and  her  West  Indian
colonies  ;  much  the  largest  part  of  her  skins  and  tallow  ;  a  great
part  of  the  stuffs  with  which  she  clothed  her  sailors.  By
separating  Ireland  from  England,  France  would  give  a  vital
blow  to  her  rival,  and  the  time  for  such  an  achievement  had  fully
come.  Since  the  Devolution  of  1688,  the  Government  of  Ireland
had  been  a  continued  tyranny,  and  it  had  been  the  main  object
of  English  statesmen,  by  corrupting  the  Legislature  and  sowing
division  between  the  sects,  to  prevent  her  from  shaking  off  the
yoke.  For  a  time  during  the  American  war  their  policy  was
baffled,  but  they  succeeded  at  last  in  suppressing  and  disarming
the  volunteers,  and  substituting  for  them  a  militia,  and  from  that
date  the  eyes  of  Irish  patriots  were  steadily  turned  to  France.
The  Irish  had  taken  every  means  to  acquaint  France  with  their
anxiety  to  be  helped,  and  the  French  Committee  of  Public
Safety  had  responded  by  sending  Jackson  to  Ireland.  Hamilton
Rowan  was  the  chief  man  in  the  conspiracy.  But  the  arrest  of
Jackson  had  disconcerted  the  plot;  those  who  were  mentioned
in  his  letters  were  obliged  to  fly,  and  they  were  now  at  Phila¬
delphia.

A  passage  follows  which  is  extremely  curious  as  showing
the  light  in  which  the  Fitzwilliam  episode  was  now  regarded  or
represented  in  Ireland.  ‘The  British  Government,’  says  the
writer,  ‘terrified  at  the  danger  their  despotism  had  just  incurred
in  the  attempt  of  the  Irish  to  shake  off  their  yoke,  adopted  the
secret  resolution  to  crush  them  altogether,  by  suppressing  their
Parliament,  and  bringing  them  under  the  laws  of  the  Parliament
of  England.  In  order  to  succeed  in  this  enterprise,  it  was
necessary  to  gain  the  Catholics,  and  to  make  use  of  them  as  an

cn.  xxvii#

MEMOIR  OF  TONE.

235

instrument  to  force  the  Anglicans  and  Dissenters  to  consent  to
an  union.  The  moment  seemed  propitious,  as  the  Catholics  were
at  this  very  time  soliciting  their  emancipation  ;  that  is,  their
restoration  to  the  full  rights  of  citizenship,  of  which  they  had
for  centuries  been  deprived.  The  Government  did  not  doubt
that  the  Catholics  would  gladly  accept  any  condition  of  which
this  emancipation  was  the  price.  .  .  .  Lord  Fitzwilliam  was  ac¬
cordingly  sent  as  viceroy  to  Ireland,  to  treat  with  them,  and  to
effect  the  union  as  soon  as  possible.’  Fitzwilliam,  however,  the
writer  continues,  perhaps  shocked  at  the  treacherous  task  im¬
posed  on  him,  suffered  the  secret  to  leak  out,  and  the  Irish,
warned  of  the  danger  that  menaced  them,  joined  more  closely
against  their  oppressor.  The  Catholics  led  the  way.  ‘Assembled
in  the  month  of  April  last,  to  deliberate  on  the  object  of  their
petition,1  they  unanimously  determined  that  no  offer  on  the  part
of  the  Government,  however  advantageous  it  might  be,  even
though  it  were  complete  and  absolute  emancipation,  should
separate  them  from  their  brethren  the  Anglicans  and  Presby¬
terians,  and  prevent  them  from  making  common  cause  with
them,  in  opposing  with  all  their  force,  and  to  the  last  drop  of
their  blood,  the  projected  union.  Deputations  of  the  Anglicans
and  Dissenters  assisted  at  this  assembly,  and  from  this  moment
the  three  parties,  so  violently  opposed,  became  one.’  From  this
time,  the  memoir  concludes,  ‘  the  Irish  have  in  different  coun¬
ties  centres  of  revolution,  and  their  ramifications  extend  to  the
principal  towns  in  North  America,  where  there  may  be  found  a
prodigious  number  of  their  fellow-countrymen  quite  as  much  in¬
terested  as  themselves,  in  the  happikess  and  regeneration  of
their  mother  country  ;  but  it  is  principally  at  Philadelphia  that
the  most  important  meetings  are  held.  It  is  from  there  that
their  arms  are  constantly  stretched  towards  France,  demanding
her  aid.’ 2

1  lieclam/ition.

2  French  Foreign  Office.  The  only
signature  to  this  memoir  is  that  of
Madgett,  who  was  employed  to  make
the  translation,  but  it  is  acknowledged
by  Tone,  who  says :  ‘  It  was  written
in  the  burning  summer  of  Pennsyl¬
vania,  when  my  head  was  extremely
deranged  by  the  heat.’  ( Memoirs ,  ii.
36.)  About  (he  same  time  as  this

memoir,  two  other  independent  me¬
moirs,  on  the  alfairs  of  Ireland,  were
presented  to  the  French  Government
by  an  Irishman  named  Duckett,  who
represented  himself  as  having  recently
travelled  through  Ireland,  and  who
appears  to  have  been  much  about  the-
French  Government.  Tone  suspected
him  of  being  a  spy,  but  there  was  no
foundation  for  the  suspicion,  though

236

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUBY.  ch.  xxvii.

The  great  improbability  of  Irish  agents  being  able  to  go  to
Paris  without  being  detected  by  English  spies,  had  induced
the  Irish  seditious  party  to  carry  on  their  negotiations  with
the  French  Government  mainly  through  French  ministers  in
neutral  countries.  Shortly  after  the  negotiation  at  Phila¬
delphia,  another  independent  and  very  important  one  took
place  at  Hamburg.  The  reader  may  remember,  in  the  negotia¬
tions  that  preceded  the  French  war,  the  part  which  was  played
by  Reinhard,  who  was  then  secretary  to  Chauvelin  ;  he  was
now  French  minister  plenipotentiary  to  the  Hanseatic  Towns,
and  his  letters  from  Hamburg  and  from  Altona  form  an  im¬
portant  part  of  the  secret  history  of  Ireland,  in  the  period
immediately  preceding  the  rebellion.

On  May  18,  1796,  he  wrote  to  De  la  Croix  that  he  had
received  a  visit  from  an  Irishman,  who  was  very  auxious  that
his  name  should  be  concealed,  but  whose  name  Reinhard
considered  it  his  duty  to  disclose  in  confidence  to  the  French
minister.  It  was  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald,  who  had  just  arrived
at  Hamburg.  Reinhard  had  already  made  his  acquaintance  in
London,  and  Fitzgerald  reminded  him  of  certain  communications,
which  some  of  the  Irish  deputies  sent  over  to  petition  the  Eng¬
lish  Government  in  December  1792,  had  then  had  with  Chauve¬
lin.  Chauvelin  had  not  received  them  with  all  the  interest  the
importance  of  the  matter  demanded.  At  that  time,  too,  the
Irish  did  not  dare  to  propose  or  promise  what  they  had  decided
to  do  now  ;  they  still  hoped  for  a  redress  of  grievances,  and  the
French  Republic  was  scarcely  formed.  Now,  however,  Lord
Edward  said,  the  French  Republic  is  consolidated.  Ireland  is
ripe  for  insurrection.  The  discontent  is  no  longer  confined  to  a
party.  The  whole  nation  has  been  deceived,  and  since  the  recall
of  Lord  Fitzwilliam  no  further  reserve  is  necessary.1  Lord  Ed¬
ward  added,  that  he  had  come  to  Hamburg  specially  to  open  a
negotiation  with  Reinhard,  and  determined  to  risk  the  journey
to  Paris  if  Reinhard  was  not  accessible,  and  he  begged  Reinhard
to  obtain  authority  from  Paris  to  conduct  it.  He  talked  of
150,000  men  rising;  of  10,000  Defenders  who  were  armed  and
ready.  Cannon,  guns,  and  gunpowder,  however,  were  urgently

Duckett  seems  to  have  acted  very  1  ‘  Nous  n’avons  plus  rien  4  mena-
much  for  himself,  independently  of  ger  depuis  le  rappel  de  Lord  Fits-
tiie  United  Irishmen,  william.’

cn.  xxyii.

NEGOTIATIONS  AT  HAMBURG.

237

needed,  for  during  the  past  year  the  Government  had  been  dis¬
arming  the  Irish.  The  appearance  of  a  French  fleet  would  be
the  signal  for  a  general  insurrection ;  but  until  the  French  ar¬
rived,  an  unarmed  people  could  do  nothing.  The  Irish  priests
would  not  oppose,  and  would  even  favour,  the  movement ;  and
Fitzgerald  counted  much  on  Paine  to  frame  a  plan  of  internal
organisation.

Reinhard  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  much  ability  and
judgment,  and  he  read  the  character  of  Fitzgerald  very  truly.
He  was  a  young  man,  he  said,  incapable  of  falsehood  or  perfidy,
frank,  energetic,  and  likely  to  be  a  useful  and  devoted  instru¬
ment,  but  with  no  experience  or  extraordinary  talent,  and
entirely  unfit  to  be  chief  of  a  great  party,  or  leader  in  a  difficult
enterprise.  At  the  same  time,  if  an  insurrection  could  be  pro¬
duced  in  Ireland,  it  would  be  of  the  utmost  importance  to
France.1

In  the  following  month,  however,  Lord  Edward  reappeared,
with  a  companion  who  impressed  Reinhard  as  a  far  abler  man.
Reinhard  thought  the  matter  so  important,  that  he  not  only
wrote  the  account  to  his  Government  in  cipher,  but  added  an
urgent  note,  begging  that  only  the  most  confidential  official  in
the  French  Foreign  Office  should  be  entrusted  with  the  duty  of
deciphering  it.  The  new  arrival  was  Arthur  O’Connor — one  of
the  first  orators,  Reinhard  said,  in  Ireland,  a  man  of  great  posi¬
tion  and  weight.  He  fully  confirmed  all  that  Lord  Edward  had
said  about  the  disposition  of  the  Irish,  and  the  certainty  of  the
success  of  a  French  intervention.  Representing  the  Catholics  of
the  South,  he  had  recently  travelled  among  the  Dissenters  of  the
North,  and  found  the  latter  even  more  determined  than  the
former  to  rebel.  He  said  that  the  militia  would  go  with  the  people  ;
that  it  would  be  perfectly  easy  to  seize  Cork,  Waterford,  and
even  Dublin  ;  that  the  country  was  ripe  for  a  general  insurrec¬
tion,  and  that  the  manner  in  which  the  English  Government
were  seizing,  almost  without  distinction  of  rank  and  age,  all
suspected  persons  for  the  navy,  had  raised  the  indignation  of
the  people  to  the  highest  point.  Guns,  munitions,  artillery
officers  and  a  few  troops  were  needed.  O’Connor  believed  that
the  effective  English  soldiers  in  Ireland  were  not  more  than
1  Reinhard  to  De  la  Croix,  29  floreal,  an  iv.  (F.F.O.)

233

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.

CH.  XXTIJ,

10,000  or  12,000,  and  that  an  insurrection  in  Ireland  would
make  it  impossible  for  England  to  continue  the  war.  £  We  only
want  your  help,’  he  said,  ‘in  the  first  moment ;  in  two  mouths
we  should  have  100,000  men  under  arms  ;  we  ask  your  assist¬
ance  only  because  we  know  it  is  your  own  clear  interest  to  give
it,  and  only  on  condition  that  you  leave  us  absolute  masters  to
frame  our  government  as  we  please.’  O’Connor  announced  his
intention  of  going  secretly  with  Fitzgerald  to  Paris.  He  had
told  his  friends  in  London  that  he  was  going  to  travel  in
Switzerland,  and  he  begged  to  receive,  through  Barthelemy,
who  was  French  minister  in  that  country,  a  permission  from
the  Directory.  Reinhard  adds,  that  O’Connor  had  dispelled  every
doubt  in  his  mind  about  the  accuracy  of  the  representations  of
Fitzgerald,  and  that  he  would  answer  for  the  sincerity  of  Fitz¬
gerald  with  his  head.1

The  French  Government  were,  by  this  time,  very  seriously
engaged  in  planning  an  Irish  expedition,  and  were  acting,  in  a
great  measure,  upon  the  information  they  received  from  Wolfe
Tone.  He  had  sailed  from  Sandy  Hook  on  the  first  day  of
1796,  arrived  at  Havre  a  month  later,  and  at  once  proceeded  to
Paris.  He  knew  no  one  there.  He  was  almost  wholly  ignorant
of  the  language,  and  he  had  very  little  money,  but  the  letters  of
Adet  had  prepared  his  way,  and  by  the  assistance  of  Monroe,  the
American  minister  at  Paris,  he  at  once  obtained  access  to  De  la
Croix,  and  soon  after  to  Carnot,  the  great  military  organiser  in
the  Directory.  By  Carnot  he  was  put  in  connection  with  a
French  general  named  Clarke,2  who,  being  the  son  of  an  Irish¬
man,  spoke  English  perfectly,  and  who  bore  a  large  part  in  pre¬
paring  the  expedition.  The  French  Ministers  were  evidently
much  impressed  with  the  ability,  the  energy,  and  the  disin¬
terestedness  of  Tone,  and  when  the  project  had  nearly  come  to
its  maturity,  they  gave  him  the  rank  of  adjutant-general  in  the
French  army.  He  desired  French  rank  greatly,  partly  on  ac¬
count  of  the  pay,  of  which  he  was  in  urgent  need,3  and  of  the
recognised  place  it  would  give  him  in  the  expedition,  but  partly,

1  Reinhard  to  De  la  Croix,  18
prairial,  1  messidor,  an  iv.  (June  (5, 19,
179G.  F.F.O.)

2  Afterwards  Due  de  Feltre.

3  ‘  Here  I  am  with  exactly-  two

louis  in  my  exchequer,  negotiating
with  the  French  Government,  and
planning  revolutions.VTone’s  Memoirs

ii.  147.)

CH.  XXVII.

THE  JOURNALS  OF  TONE.

239

also,  because  be  trusted  that  it  would  save  him,  in  the  event  of
a  capture,  from  the  ignominious  death  of  a  traitor — a  death  from
which  Tone,  though  an  eminently  brave  man,  shrank  with  even
more  than  common  horror.1  Many  months,  however,  passed  in
weary  expectations  and  disappointed  hopes,  rendered  doubly  bit¬
ter  by  that  intense  home  sickness,  that  continual  longing  for  his
absent  wife  and  children,  and  for  two  or  three  Irish  friends,
which  was  the  most  amiable  feature  of  his  character.  ‘  1  will
endeavour,’  he  wrote  on  his  thirty-third  birthday,  ‘  to  keep  my¬
self  as  pure  as  I  can,  as  to  the  means.  As  to  the  end,  it  is  sacred
— the  liberty  and  independence  of  my  country  first,  the  establish¬
ment  of  my  wife  and  of  our  darling  babies  next,  and  last,  I  hope,
a  well-earned  reputation.’  ‘  It  is  now,’  he  wrote,  some  time
later,  ‘  exactly  seven  months  and  five  days  since  I  arrived  in
Paris — a  very  important  era  in  my  life;  whether  it  was  for  good
or  evil  to  my  country  and  to  myself,  the  event  must  determine  ;
but  I  can  safely  say,  I  Lave  acted  all  through  to  the  very  best  of
my  conscience  and  j  udgment,  and  I  think  I  have  not  conducted
myself  ill.’ 2

The  journals  which  he  kept  during  this  period,  for  the  sake  of
his  wife  and  children  and  of  a  few  intimate  friends,  are  singularly
interesting,  not  only  for  their  bearing  on  Irish  history,  but  also
as  furnishing  an  excellent  example  of  self-portraiture,  and  an
admirably  vivid  picture  of  the  aspect  of  Paris  in  the  stirring
days  of  the  Directory.  It  was  a  time  when  France  had  no  less
than  fourteen  armies  on  foot ;  when  Naples  and  Spain  had  just
detached  themselves  from  the  great  alliance  against  her ;  when
Montenotte,  and  the  conquest  of  Italy  which  so  speedily  followed,
first  revealed  to  the  world  the  rising  genius  of  Buonaparte.  The
boundless  spirit  of  adventure,  the  reckless  gaiety,  the  genuine
though  theatrical  heroism  and  patriotism,  that  inspired  the  nation,
filled  the  young  Irishman  with  astonishment  and  delight.  He
was  present  at  the  Fete  de  la  Jeunesse,  in  the  church  of  St.
Roch,  when  the  statue  of  Liberty,  surrounded  with  a  blaze  of
lights,  stood  before  the  altar,  and  the  walls  were  decorated  with
the  national  colours,  and  the  municipality  were  assembled,  and
all  the  youth  of  the  district  who  had  attained  the  age  of  sixteen
were  led  in  procession  to  receive  from  veteran  soldiers  their  arms,

1  Tone’s  Memoirs,  p.  71.  2  Ibid.  pp.  130,  180.

240

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUBY.

CH.  XX YU.

while  the  church  rang  with  the  thunders  of  the 1  Marseillaise,’  and
he  contrasted  the  scene  with  the  gangs  of  wretched  recruits  he
had  seen  in  Ireland,  marched  handcuffed  to  the  regiments.  He
described  with  a  few  skilful  touches  the  soldiers  of  the  Revolu¬
tion — ill  mounted,  slovenly  in  their  march  and  their  manoeuvres,
each  soldier  wearing  much  what  he  pleased,  provided  his  coat
was  blue  and  his  hat  cocked,  the  Grenadiers  insisting  on  having
their  cravats  tied  in  the  height  of  the  fashion,  and  on  wearing
their  hats  in  whatever  shape  or  form  they  conceived  became  them
the  best ;  every  sentinel  with  his  little  bouquet  in  his  hat,  or  in
his  breast,  or  in  the  barrel  of  his  firelock,  but  all  glowing  with
high  spirits,  with  sharp,  quick,  penetrating  countenances,  and  a
fire  and  animation  ot  manner  that  plainly  indicated  ardent  and
impetuous  courage  ;  and  he  remarked  with  justice  the  peculiar
character  of  adventure  and  enthusiasm  imparted  to  a  war  in
which  all  the  leaders  were  very  young  men.  Pichegru,  he  said,
who  was  the  oldest  general,  was  about  thirty-six,  Jourdain  was
thirty-five,  Hoche  was  thirty-two,  Moreau  was  about  thirty,
Buonaparte  was  only  twenty-nine.  He  was  astonished  to  find
in  France  a  gaiety  equal  to  any  in  Ireland,  without  that  hard
drinking  from  which  in  Ireland  it  was  deemed  almost  insepa¬
rable;  shocked  at  a  dissoluteness,  both  in  principle  and  practice,
in  all  matters  relating  to  women,  to  which  he  had  been  wholly
unaccustomed  at  home  ;  perplexed  at  the  strain  of  sentiment,  that
could  bear  without  flinching  the  execution  of  hundreds  on  the
guillotine,  but  at  the  same  time  made  it  necessary  to  rewrite
‘  Othello,’  saving  the  life  of  Desdemona,  as  the  catastrophe  in
Shakespeare  would  offend  ‘  the  humanity  of  the  French  nation.’
The  theatres  had  never  been  more  brilliant  or  more  popular,  and
Tone  has  left  admirable  descriptions  of  the  acting,  and  of  the
military  displays  which  now  replaced  the  ballets  of  the  monarchy
upon  the  stage  ;  and  he  wandered  among  the  masterpieces  in  the
Louvre,  and  with  true  eighteenth-century  taste  pronounced  Guido
to  be  the  first  of  painters,  and  the  Magdalen  of  Lebrun  to  be
worth  all  the  other  pictures  in  the  gallery.

All  this  time,  however,  he  never  for  a  moment  forgot  the
mission  he  had  undertaken,  and  in  the  perfect  candour  of  his
journals  we  can  trace  most  clearly  the  various  motives  that
actuated  him.  There  was  much  of  the  spirit  of  an  ambi-

CII.  XXVII.

tone’s  character  and  motives.

241

tious  adventurer,  who  hoped  to  carve  his  way,  amid  the  stormy
scenes  that  were  opening,  to  wealth  and  power  and  fame.  There
was  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  revolutionist,  to  whom  the  demo¬
cratic  ideal  of  Rousseau  had  become  almost  what  religion  is
to  a  devotee.  There  was  also  a  true  strain  of  self-sacrificing
patriotism ;  a  real  sense  of  the  degradation  of  his  country,  the
corruption  of  her  Government  and  the  poverty  of  her  people,  but,
like  much  Irish  patriotism,  that  of  Tone  was  mixed  with  great
levity,  and  was  largely  compounded  of  hatreds.  He  hated  and
despised  the  Parliament  of  Ireland.  He  hated  the  Irish  country
gentry.  He  hated  the  Whig  Club,  and  always  remembered
with  bitterness  how  Grattan  had  warned  the  Catholic  Com¬
mittee  against  him  ;  but  above  all  things  he  hated  England  as
the  main  cause  of  the  evils  of  Ireland,  and  looked  forward  with
passionate  eagerness  to  her  downfall.  Yet  not  many  years  had
passed  since  Tone  had  sent  to  Pitt  and  Grenville  memorials  of  a
project  for  establishing  a  military  colony  in  the  South  Sea,  for
the  purpose  of  assisting  England  in  war  with  Spain,  and  if  these
memorials  had  been  acted  on,  and  Pitt  had  thrown  the  young
adventurer  into  a  career  of  enterprise  under  the  English  flag,  he
has  himself  acknowledged  that  it  is  extremely  improbable  that
he  would  have  ever  been  heard  of  as  an  Irish  rebel.1 2  Even  after
he  had  been  deeply  immersed  in  the  conspiracy,  even  at  the  time
when  he  was  obliged  to  leave  Ireland,  he  appears  to  have  been
perfectly  prepared  to  abandon  Irish  politics  if  the  Government  he
deemed  so  odious  would  provide  for  him  in  the  East  Indies.'^
He  was  not  a  bloodthirsty  man,  and  he  was  sincerely  anxious
that  rebellion  in  Ireland  should  be  as  little  sanguinary  as  pos¬
sible,  but  he  distinctly  contemplated  a  massacre  of  the  gentry
as  a  possible  consequence  of  what  he  was  doing,  and  he  became

1  Memoirs,  i.  26,  27,  36,  37.  His
friend  Russell  (who  was  afterwards
hanged  for  treason)  joined  him  in  this
overture  to  Pitt.  ‘  The  Minister’s  re¬
fusal,’  he  says,  ‘  did  not  sweeten  us
much  towards  him.  I  renewed  the
vow  1  had  once  before  made,  to  make
him,  if  I  could,  repent  of  it,  in  which
Russell  most  heartily  concurred.’

2  His  son,  speaking  of  Wolfe
Tone’s  conduct  after  the  arrest  of
Jackson,  says :  ‘  He  considered  his

259

duty  to  his  country  paramount  to  any
personal  feeling  or  consideration.  .  .  .
Even  in  that  extreme  peril,  he  con¬
stantly  refused  to  tie  his  hands  by  any
engagement  for  the  future.  He  would,
however,  have  accepted  t  he  offer  which
they  made  at  first,  to  send  him  to  the
East  Indies,  out  of  theroad  of  European
politics ;  perhaps  they  feared  him
even  there,  when  they  altered  their
minds.’  ( Memoirs ,  i.  120.)

242

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.

cir.  xxvir.

more  and  more  callous  about  tbe  means  that  were  to  be  employed.
He  opposed  a  French  project  for  landing  a  devastating  force  in
Ireland  to  prey  upon  the  property  of  the  country,  but  he  sup¬
ported,  though  not  without  evident  qualms  of  conscience,  an
atrocious  scheme  for  landing  some  thousand  criminals  in  England,
and  commissioning  them  to  burn  Bristol,  and  commit  every  kind
of  depredation  in  their  power.  ‘  My  heart,’  he  wrote  very
candidly,  £  is  hardening  hourly,  and  I  satisfy  myself  now  at  once
on  points  which  would  have  staggered  me  twelve  months  ago.’
1  I  do  not  think  my  morality  or  feeling  is  much  improved  by  my
promotion  to  the  rank  of  adjutant-general.  The  truth  is,  I  hate
the  very  name  of  England.  I  hated  her  before  my  exile,  and  I
will  hate  her  always.’ 1

He  represented  to  the  French  Ministers  that  it  was  hopeless
to  expect  a  successful,  or  even  a  considerable,  independent  Irish
rebellion,  but  that  if  a  French  army  effected  a  lodgment  in  Ire¬
land,  and  if  they  brought  with  them  a  large  quantity  of  arms
for  distribution,  they  would  certainly  be  joined  at  once  by  the
great  body  of  the  Presbyterians  and  of  the  Catholic  peasantry,
and  on  the  first  reasonable  prospect  of  success,  by  the  whole,  or
the  majority,  of  the  Irish  militia.  If  20,000  French  troops  were
landed,  success,  he  said,  would  be  certain,  and  almost  without
resistance.  In  that  case,  the  landing  should  be  effected  near
Dublin,  which  could  most  easily  be  captured.  The  smallest
force  that  could  be  expected  to  succeed  was  5,000  men,  and  if
the  French  determined  not  to  exceed  this  number,  they  must
land  as  near  Belfast  as  possible,  push  forward,  so  as  to  secure
the  Mourne  Mountains  and  the  Fews,  which,  with  Lough  Erne,
would  enable  them  to  cover  the  whole  province  of  Ulster,  and
then  endeavour  to  hold  their  ground  till  the  country  was  in
arms  to  support  them.  The  chance  of  success,  in  that  case,
would  be  greatly  increased  if  a  small  additional  force  could  be

1  Memoirs,  ii.  89,  211.  The  in¬
structions  drawn  up  by  Carnot  for
what  he  termed  the  Chouanerie,  in
England,  are  printed  in  full  by  the
Marquis  de  Grouchy  in  his  little
work  called,  Le  General  de  Grouchy
et  I  Irlande  en  1796,  pp.  16-28.  A
book  of  much  value  for  this  period
of  Irish  history.  See  also  a  num¬
ber  of  curious  despatches  from  the
French  archives,  in  M.  Guillon's  La

France  et  VIrlande  pendant  la
Revolution.  Twelve  or  fifteen  hundred
French  bandits,  under  the  command
of  an  American  adventurer  named
Tate,  were  actually  landed  in  Pem¬
brokeshire  in  Feb.  1797,  but  the
volunteers  and  militia,  assisted  by  the
countrymen,  captured  them  all  with¬
out,  the  loss  of  a  man.  (See  Stanhope’s
Life  of  Pitt,  iii.  9  ;  Guillon,  pp.  296,
2y7.)

CIS.  XXVII.

PRESENT  STATE  OF  IRELAND.

243

landed  in  Galway  Bay,  could  secure  a  line  of  defence  on  the
Shannon,  and  could  produce  a  rising  in  Connaught.  If  a  smaller
force  was  sent,  he  begged  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  accom¬
pany  it,  but  he  was  of  opinion  that  success  would  be  hopeless,
as  it  would  be  crushed  before  a  rising  could  be  effected.  There
were,  he  believed,  exclusive  of  the  militia,  nine  regiments  of
dragoons,  two  regiments  of  troops  of  the  line,  and  eighteen  of
fencibles  in  Ireland,  but  the  regiments  of  the  line  were  pro¬
bably  mere  skeletons,  sent  to  Ireland  to  recruit ;  there  were
certainly  not  more  than  500  men  in  each  regiment  of  fencibles,
and  he  doubted  whether  the  whole  regular  military  force  ex¬
ceeded  12,000  men.  There  were  18,000  militia,  but  16,000
of  them  were  Catholics,  and  a  great  proportion  were  sworn
Defenders.

He  found,  among  the  French  Ministers,  an  extreme  igno¬
rance  of  Irish  affairs.  He  was  asked,  to  his  great  astonishment,
whether  some  use  might  not  be  made  in  the  rebellion  of  Lord
Clare,  whether  Lord  Ormond  would  not  take  part  in  it,  whether
the  aristocracy  would  not,  as  in  1782,  put  themselves  at  the
head  of  the  popular  movement,  whether  Ireland  was  not  still
devoted  to  the  Stuarts  ?  He  urged  upon  the  French  authorities
that  the  reports  on  Irish  affairs,  which  had  been  for  many  years
in  their  archives,  could  only  mislead  them,  for  France,  herself,
had  hardly  changed  more  essentially  than  Ireland,  since  1789.
c  As  to  royalty  and  aristocracy,’  he  said,  ‘  they  were  both  odious
in  Ireland  to  that  degree,  that  I  apprehended  much  more  a
general  massacre  of  the  gentry,  and  a  distribution  of  the  entire
of  their  property,  than  the  establishment  of  any  form  of  govern¬
ment  that  would  perpetuate  their  influence,’  and  he  assured  the
French  that  there  was  no  living  Irishman  the  least  likely  to  be
raised  to  the  throne,  and  that  the  establishment  of  an  Irish
republic  would  be  the  certain  consequence  of  separation.  On
the  religious  aspect  of  the  question,  he  was  equally  confident.
There  was  no  disposition  to  set  up  a  Catholic  establishment.
Tithes  would  be  simply  abolished,  and  each  sect  would  pay  its
own  clergy  voluntarily.  The  priests  hated  the  French  Revo¬
lution,  and  they  should  never  be  employed,  and  never  trusted;
but,  with  a  little  tact,  no  serious  opposition  from  them  was  to
be  feared.  Their  influence,  also,  had  of  late  years  enormously

244

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvn.

declined.  The  real  leaders  of  the  Catholics  were  ardent  repub¬
licans,  closely  allied  with  the  Presbyterians  of  the  North,  and
the  mass  of  the  Catholic  peasantry  had  enrolled  themselves  as
Defenders,  and  steadily  persisted  in  the  organisation,  though  all
who  belonged  to  it  had  been  excommunicated  by  the  legate  of
the  Pope,  and  though  the  priests  refused  them  the  Sacraments,
even  in  articulo  mortis.  Few  things  gave  Tone  more  pleasure
than  the  conquest  of  the  Pope  by  the  armies  of  the  Revolution.
‘  I  am  heartily  glad,’  he  wrote,  ‘  that  old  priest  is  at  last  laid
under  contribution  in  his  turn.  Many  a  long  century,  he  and
his  predecessors  have  been  fleecing  all  Europe,  but  the  day  of
retribution  is  come  at  last;  and  I  am  strongly  tempted  to  hope
that  this  is  but  the  beginning  of  his  sorrows.’  He  suggested
that  pressure  might  now  be  put  upon  him,  to  make  him  influ¬
ence  the  priests,  in  favour  of  the  French  designs  in  Ireland.  In
one  of  his  addresses  to  the  people  of  Ireland,  Tone  urged  that
republicanism  must  finally  subvert  monarchy,  ‘  as  the  Mosaic
law  subverted  idolatry ;  as  Christianity  subverted  the  Jewish
dispensation ;  as  the  Reformation  subverted  popery.’ 1

He  presented  two  memorials  on  the  state  of  Ireland,  which
appear  to  have  represented  his  genuine  opinions,  though  the
event  clearly  showed  them  to  be  full  of  the  grossest  miscalcula¬
tions  of  the  popular  feeling.  The  population  of  Ireland,  he
said  in  1796,  was,  according  to  the  best  computations,  about
4,500,000.  Of  these,  450,000  were  members  of  the  Established
Church,  who  were  still  ‘  a  colony  of  strangers  ’  in  the  country,
possessing,  chiefly  through  confiscation,  five-sixths  of  its  landed
property,  holding  in  their  hands  all  the  force  of  the  Govern¬
ment,  all  the  appointments  in  the  Church,  the  army,  the  law,
the  revenue,  and  every  department  of  the  State,  and  constantly
looking  to  England  for  protection  and  support.  From  these,
nothing  could  be  expected  but  uncompromising  resistance,  but
they  were  only  a  tenth  part  of  the  population,  and  their
strength  was  entirely  artificial,  composed  of  the  power  and
influence  which  the  patronage  of  the  Government  gave  them.

The  second  division  consisted  of  the  Protestant  Dissenters,

1  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  274.  See,  and  the  temporal  power  destroyed,
too,  p.  144,  and  also  his  outburst  of  (Pp.  464  466.)
delight  when  the  Pope  was  dethroned,

cit.  xxvii.

TONE’S  MEMORIALS.

245

who  numbered  900,000  souls.1  They  were  especially  powerful  in
the  middle  classes ;  they  formed  the  bulk  of  the  volunteer  army  of
1782,  and  they  were  the  most  intelligent,  the  best  informed,  the
most  energetic  section  of  the  population.  £  They  are  all,  to  a
man,  sincere  republicans,  and  devoted,  with  enthusiasm,  to  the
cause  of  liberty  and  France.  They  would  make,  perhaps,  the
best  soldiers  in  Ireland,  and  are  already,  in  a  considerable
degree,  trained  to  arms.’  Hitherto,  £  in  all  the  civil  wars  of
Ireland,  they  ranged  themselves  under  the  standard  of  England,
and  were  the  most  formidable  enemies  of  the  Catholic  natives,
whom  they  detested  as  papists,  and  despised  as  slaves.’  In
1790,  however,  the  French  Kevolution  produced  a  great  revul¬
sion  of  opinion  among  them.  They  saw  that  the  danger  from
popery  had  disappeared.  They  caught  the  contagion  of  the  new
spirit  of  liberty  that  was  abroad.  They  perceived  the  fatal  con¬
sequences  of  division,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Eng¬
lish  Government  and  the  native  aristocracy,  they  had  formed  an
union  with  the  Catholics,  which  was  the  capital  fact  of  the  present
situation  of  Ireland.

The  Catholics,  who  form  the  third  class  in  Ireland,  number
about  3,150,000.  1  These  are  the  Irish  properly  so  called,  trained

from  their  infancy  in  an  hereditary  hatred  and  abhorrence  of  the
English  name,  which  conveys  to  them  no  ideas  but  those  of  blood
and  pillage  and  persecution.’  They  have  little  landed  property,
but  a  large  share  of  the  commerce  of  Ireland,  and  it  was  Catholic
merchants  and  traders  who  chiefly  composed  the  Catholic
Committee.  From  his  ‘  personal  knowledge  ’  Tone  states  that  a
great  majority  of  the  members  of  that  committee  were  £  sincere
republicans,  warmly  attached  to  the  cause  of  France.’  The
bulk  of  the  Catholics,  however,  are  £  in  the  lowest  degree  of
misery  and  want ;  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  wa  ter.
Bread  they  seldom  taste  ;  meat  never,  save  once  in  the  year  ;  .  .  .
their  food  all  the  whole  year  round  is  potatoes ;  their  drink
sometimes  milk,  more  frequently  water ;  ...  in  addition  to  a
heavy  rent,  they  pay  tithes  to  the  priests  of  the  Protestant
religion,  which  they  neither  profess  nor  believe  ;  their  own  priests
fleece  them.’  These  men  are  prepared  for  any  change,  for  they
feel  that  no  change  can  make  their  situation  worse.  For  five

1  An  enormous  exaggeration.

246

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

years  they  have  looked  up  to  France  as  the  champion  of  the
oppressed,  and  £  I  will  stake  my  head,’  writes  Tone,  ‘  there  are
500,000  men  who  would  fly  to  the  standard  of  the  Republic,  if
they  saw  it  once  displayed  in  the  cause  of  liberty  and  their
country.’  ‘  The  whole  Catholic  peasantry  of  Ireland,  above
3,000,000  of  people,  are  to  a  man  eager  to  throw  off  the  English
yoke.’  The  Defender  organisation  has  already  prepared  the
way,  and  it  includes  the  great  body  of  the  Catholic  peasantry
in  Ulster,  Leinster,  and  Connaught,  and  is  spreading  through
Munster.

The  advantages  to  France  of  the  separation  of  Ireland  from
England  appear  obvious,  and  Tone  especially  and  most  emphati¬
cally  insisted,  that  it  would  inevitably  lead  to  the  downfall  ot
the  naval  ascendency  of  England.  It  would  place  her  ‘  under
insuperable  difficulties  in  recruiting  her  army,  and  especially  in
equipping,  victualling,  and  manning  her  navy,  which,  unless  for
the  resources  she  drew  from  Ireland,  she  would  be  absolutely
unable  to  do.’  ‘  From  the  commencement  of  the  present  war
to  the  month  of  June  1795,  not  less  than  200,000  men  were
raised  in  Ireland,  of  whom  80,000  were  for  the  navy  alone.  It
is  a  fact  undeniable,  though  carefully  concealed  in  England,  that
two-thirds  of  the  British  navy  are  manned  by  Irishmen.’  If
Lewis  XIV.  had  made  it  a  main  object  of  French  policy  to  sepa¬
rate  Ireland  from  England,  he  would  have  for  ever  sapped  that
naval  ascendency  to  which  England  owed  her  superiority  in  all
succeeding  wars.

The  assertion  that  two-thirds  of  the  so-called  British  seamen
were  Irishmen,  was  constantly  made  by  Tone  and  by  other
United  Irishmen,  and  it  derives  some  support  from  a  passage  in
one  of  the  speeches  of  Grattan.1  Its  extreme  improbability  will  at
once  strike  the  reader,  who  knows  how  small  a  proportion  of
the  ships  in  the  British  navy  sail  from  or  ever  touch  at  an
Irish  port ;  how  miserably  the  fisheries,  which  are  one  of  the

’  In  his  speech  on  the  Catholic
Bill  in  1793,  Grattan  said:  ‘In  the
last  war,  of  80,000  seamen,  50,000
were  Irish  names  ;  in  Chelsea,  near
one-third  of  the  pensioners  were  Irish
names  ;  in  some  of  the  men-of-war,
almost  the  whole  complement  of  men

were  Irish.  .  .  .  The  Irish  Catholics
have  supplied  his  Majesty’s  fleets  and
armies  so  abundantly,  and  in  so  great
a  proportion,  that  the  recruiting  ser¬
vice  could  not  well  go  on  without
them.’  (Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.  46.)

CH.  XXVII,

NUMBER  OF  IRISH  SAILORS.

247

chief  natural  resources  of  Ireland,  have  at  all  times  been
neglected,  and  how  little  taste  or  aptitude  for  maritime  life  the
Irish  people  have  displayed.  The  military  annals  of  England
are  crowded  with  illustrious  Irish  names,  and  not  a  few  may  be
found  in  those  of  France  and  Austria  and  Spain  ;  but  in  the
roll  of  distinguished  sailors  such  names  are  conspicuously  rare.
Recruiting  for  the  navy,  however,  in  the  eighteenth  century  was
largely  effected  by  the  press  gang  or  by  poverty,  and  it  is  pro¬
bable  that  the  suspected  persons  who  had  been  recently  sent  to
the  fleet  from  the  disturbed  districts  had  increased  the  pro¬
portion  of  Irish  sailors.  Tone  himself  justified  his  assertion
on  three  grounds.  ‘  First,  I  have  myself  heal’d  several  British
officers,  and  among  them  some  of  very  distinguished  reputation,
say  so.  Secondly,  I  know  that  when  the  Catholic  delegates,  whom
I  had  the  honour  to  attend,  were  at  St.  James’s  in  January
1793,  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  with  Henry  Dundas,
Principal  Secretary  of  State,  they  asserted  the  fact  to  be  as  I
have  mentioned,  and  Mr.  Dundas  admitted  it,  which  he  would
most  certainly  not  have  done  if  he  could  have  denied  it ;  and
lastly,  on  my  voyage  to  America,  our  vessel  was  boarded  by  a
British  frigate,  whose  crew  consisted  of  220  men,  of  whom  no
less  than  210  were  Irish.’

The  question  is  sufficiently  curious  and  important  to  justify
a  short  digression,  and  there  is  some  evidence  on  the  subject
which  is  more  precise  and  trustworthy  than  that  which  was
within  the  knowledge  of  Tone.  Pelham,  being  convinced  of
the  great  exaggeration  of  the  language  employed  by  Grattan
caused  an  exact  return  to  be  made  1  of  the  number  of  men  fur¬
nished  by  Ireland  for  general  service,  including  army  and  navy,
from  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  1793  to  November  1,
1796.’  It  appeared  to  Pelham,  and  it  appeared  to  the  Com-
mander-in-Chief,  the  Duke  of  York,  to  show  that  Ireland
contributed  comparatively  little,  and  it  certainly  falls  far  short
of  the  estimate  of  Tone,  but  the  impression  it  leaves  on  my  own
mind  is  rather  the  great  military  energy  which  Ireland  at  this
time  displayed.  Its  population  in  1796  can  hardly  at  the  utmost
have  exceeded  four  millions  and  a  half.  Including  the  militia,
but  exclusive  of  the  yeomanry,  rather  more  than  30,000  men
were  required  for  the  protection  of  the  country ;  but  over  and

248

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUBY.

CH.  XXVII.

above  this  number,  Ireland  furnished  within  the  period  that
has  been  mentioned,  38,653  men  for  the  service  of  the  war.
11,457  of  them  were  for  the  navy,  and  4,058  for  the  marines.1

On  the  whole,  Tone  maintained  that  there  could  be  no  reason¬
able  doubt  that  if  France  could  succeed  in  landing  a  considerable
force  with  a  large  quantity  of  arms  for  distribution,  Ireland  must
be  lost  to  England.  Catholics  and  Dissenters,  whose  mutual
animosities  had  been  the  radical  weakness  of  the  country,  were
now  cordially  united,  and  they  constituted  nine-tenths  of  the
population.  The  whole  body  of  the  militia  would  probably  go
over  to  the  iuvader,  and  in  such  a  contest  England  could  not
fully  rely  either  on  her  army  or  her  navy.  The  French  on
landing  should  issue  a  proclamation  disavowing  all  idea  of
conquest  for  themselves,  guaranteeing  perfect  religious  freedom,
and  the  abolition  of  all  connection  between  Church  and  State,
promising,  on  the  one  hand,  protection  to  the  persons  and  property  •
of  those  who  supported  them,  and,  on  the  other,  the  confiscation  of
the  property  both  of  those  who  opposed  them  and  of  those  who
did  not  return  to  Ireland  by  a  specified  date,2  and  inviting  the
people  to  take  arms  and  to  organise  a  National  Convention.  All
property  belonging  to  Englishmen  in  Ireland  should  be  imme¬
diately  confiscated,  and  Tone  dwelt  especially  upon  the  great
sums  which  some  Englishmen  had  invested  in  mortgages  on  Irish
land.3

Such  were  the  schemes,  and  such  the  hopes,  of  the  ablest
organiser  of  the  United  Irishmen.  The  representation  of  the
state  of  Ireland  which  he  laid  before  the  French  Government,

1  See  two  valuable  reports  among
the  miscellaneous  Irish  papers  in  the
Pelham  MSS.  The  Duke  of  York,  in
acknowledging  them,  says  :  ‘  Many
thanks  for  the  papers  concerning  the
number  of  men  furnished  by  Ireland
to  Great  Britain  since  the  beginning
of  the  war  They  are  exceedingly
curious  and  interesting,  and  clearly
prove  what  very  little  assistance,
in  proportion,  Ireland  has  afforded.’
(Duke  of  York  to  Pelham,  Dec.  3,
1796.)  Pelham  says  he  found  that
‘  the  men  who  had  enlisted  were
mechanics,  and  inhabitants  of  towns,
and  that  the  peasants  could  seldom  be
persuaded,  under  any  circumstances,
to  quit  their  families  and  place

of  nativity.  ...  I  could  hardly  be¬
lieve,  until  I  made  a  minute  inquiry,
that  even  in  the  militia  they  were
chiefly  manufacturers  and  mechanics.
To  ascertain  the  fact,  I  called  for  a
return  from  the  regiments  in  garrison
who  happen  to  come  from  the  different
provinces  of  the  kingdom,  and  I  find
that  two-thirds  or  three-fourths  of
each  regiment  were  of  that  descrip¬
tion.’  (Pelham  to  the  Duke  of  York,
Nov.  14,  1796.)

2  This  clause  was  apparently  copied
from  the  Jacobite  Parliament  of
1689.

3  See  these  two  memorials  in
Tone’s  Memoirs ,  ii.  181-204.

cn.  xxvn.

MISSION  OF  O’SIIEA.

249

was  remarkably  confirmed  by  the  independent  testimony  of  Lord
Edward  Fitzgerald  and  of  Arthur  O’Connor.  Another  memoir,
apparently  unconnected  with  them,  came  nearly  at  the  same  time
from  Ireland,  asserting  that  fourteen  counties  in  the  North  were
already  fully  organised  for  revolution,  that  the  organisation  was
rapidly  advancing  in  the  other  counties,  that  the  lower  orders
obeyed  those  who  led  them  without  knowing  who  they  were,  and
that  17,000  out  of  the  20,000  militia  were  secretly  sworn  to  go
with  the  people.1

The  French  Ministers  were  now  fully  resolved  to  attempt  tho
enterprise,  but  they  determined  in  the  first  place  to  send  to
Ireland  a  trusted  agent  to  study  the  situation,  and  to  apprise
the  revolutionary  organisations  of  their  intention.  The  difficulty
of  finding  such  an  agent  proved  very  considerable.  Tone  him¬
self  was  too  well  known,  and  he  strongly  urged  the  French  not
to  send  a  priest,  and  if  possible  to  choose  a  military  man.2  A
Count  Richard  O’Shea  was  at  last  selected,  and  he  received  very
elaborate  instructions.  He  was  to  find  out  the  leaders  of  the
Defenders ;  to  take  if  necessary  the  Defender  oath  ;  to  discover
their  numbers  and  their  strength ;  and  to  ascertain  whether  they
were  really  allied  with  the  Presbyterians,  or  led  by  priests  or  great
landlords.  He  was  also,  himself,  as  an  agent  of  the  French  Go¬
vernment,  to  regulate  and  direct  their  organisation.  A  sketch
was  given  of  the  different  districts  in  Ulster  which  should  be
placed  under  separate  commanders.  Internal  correspondence  was
to  be  carried  on  chiefly  through  the  instrumentality  of  women
and  children,  and  on  foot,  but  never  through  the  Post  Office,
and  it  was  to  be  made  a  special  object  to  seduce  Post  Office
officials  in  order  to  become  acquainted  with  the  Government
correspondence,  and  to  introduce  Defenders  as  servants  into
the  houses  of  men  of  position.  No  member  of  Parliament  was  to
be  admitted  into  the  organisation,  and  rich  proprietors  should
be  in  general  excluded.  O’Shea  was  authorised  to  promise  that
a  force  of  at  least  10,000  French  soldiers,  with  arms  for
20,000  men,  would  speedily  arrive  either  in  the  North  in  the
counties  of  Derry  or  Antrim,  or  else  in  the  West  on  the  coast  of
Galway.  All  partial  insurrections  in  Ulster  and  Connaught,

1  MSS.,  French  Foreign  Office.  See,  too,  on  this  men- o rial,  Tone’s  Memoirs,
ii,  137.  .  2  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  45.

250

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvii.

before  the  arrival  of  the  French,  must  be  avoided,  but  disturb¬
ances  might  be  excited  in  Munster  and  Leinster,  and  especially
in  Dublin,  so  as  to  draw  the  British  forces  to  the  South  and  to
the  capital.  The  best  men,  however,  must  not  be  risked  till  the
French  arrived.1

Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald  and  Arthur  O’Connor  had  by  this
time  gone  to  Switzerland.  At  first  De  la  Croix  was  suspicious
of  the  former,  and  he  expressed  his  fear  lest  the  husband  of
Pamela  should  be  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  the  Orleans
faction  and  of  Pitt.  The  assurances  of  Reinhard,  which  were
strongly  confirmed  by  Bartkelemy,  appear  to  have  satisfied  his
mind,  but  he  wrote  that  the  proposed  visit  to  Paris  would  be
dangerous  and  impolitic,  for  it  would  certainly  be  discovered,  and
its  object  guessed  by  the  spies  of  Pitt.  De  la  Croix  mentioned
that  he  had  laid  the  despatches  of  Reinhard  before  the  Directory,
and  he  now  in  their  name  made  a  proposal  which  Wolfe  Tone
had  already  rejected  as  impracticable.  It  was,  that  an  insurrec¬
tion  in  Ireland  should  precede  a  French  expedition.  The  Direc¬
tory,  he  said,  authorised  him  to  promise  that,  ‘  as  soon  as  the
insurrection  had  broken  out,’  the  Irish  should  be  seconded  by
15,000  French  soldiers  with  arms  and  munitions,  and  that  if,  as
there  seemed  every  reason  to  believe,  the  English  were  expelled
from  Ireland,  France  would  exert  all  her  power  to  secure  their
independence,  and  would  leave  them  perfectly  free  to  organise
their  Government  as  they  pleased.2

This  plan,  however,  wTas  decisively  rejected  by  the  Irish
delegates,  and  a  powerful  memorial,  probably  written  by  Arthur
O'Connor,  stated  fully  their  reasons.  It  might,  he  admitted,  at

1  Secret  instructions  to  Citizen
O’Shea.  (F.F.O.)  Accompanying
these  instructions  there  is  a  paper  of
comments  in  French,  but  evidently
written  by  an  Irishman.  It  states
that  religion  had  nothing  to  say  to
the  Defender  movement ;  that  the
priests  had  done  all  they  could  to
suppress  it,  but  that  their  influence
(to  the  great  regret  of  the  partisans
of  the  Government)  was  much  dimi¬
nished.  The  Catholic  landlords  and
noblemen,  the  writer  says,  had  no
influence ;  their  houses  were  plun¬
dered  of  arms  just  as  much  as
the  houses  of  Protestants ;  once

the  revolutionary  movement  was  en
train ,  the  Presbyterians,  by  virtue  of
their  superior  intelligence,  would
necessarily  take  the  lead,  and  royalty
was  out  of  the  question  in  an  inde¬
pendent  Ireland.  O’Shea  appears  to
have  started  from  Hamburg,  and  re¬
ceived  instructions  from  Reinhard.
Reinhard  to  De  la  Croix,  1  messidor,
an  iv  (June  19,  1790).  It  is,  I  sup¬
pose,  this  mission  which  is  alluded  to
in  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  224.

2  De  la  Croix  to  Barthelemy,  4
messidor,  an  iv  (June  22,  1796).

(F.F.O.)

cii.  xxvii.

MEMORIAL  OF  O’CONNOR.

251

first  sight,  appear  reasonable,  that  in  a  country  where  the  over¬
whelming  majority  of  the  population  were  disaffected,  an  insur¬
rection  should  precede  a  foreign  expedition,  but  it  must  be
remembered,  that  the  whole  legislative  and  executive  power  in
Ireland  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Protestant  aristocracy;  that
England  would  support  them  with  all  her  strength ;  that  the
two  Governments  had  been,  for  many  months,  fully  aware  that
the  Irish  people  were  binding  themselves  by  secret  societies  and
oaths  to  establish  a  separate  republic,  and  that  they  had  been
taking  all  the  measures  in  their  power  to  paralyse  the  scheme.
By  the  Gunpowder  Act,  the  people  were  prevented  from  obtain¬
ing  gunpowder,  or  transporting  arms  from  place  to  place.  By
the  Insurrection  Act,  they  were  obliged  to  register  all  arms  in
their  possession.  By  the  same  Act,  any  four  magistrates  might
seize  suspected  persons  and  send  them  to  the  fleet.  Six  magis¬
trates  might  declare  a  county  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  and  then
the  Government  might  do  what  it  pleased,  make  domiciliary
searches,  seize  all  who  were  out  of  their  houses  between  8  p.m.
and  4  A.M.,  and  take  possession  of  all  arms  whether  registered
or  not.  The  great  majority  of  the  militia,  it  is  true,  were
in  the  interest  of  the  revolution,  but  they  were  scattered ;
they  had  no  munitions,  and  all  their  officers  belonged  to  the
anti-revolutionary  aristocracy.  Under  such  circumstances,  the
arrival  of  a  French  force  must  precede  the  insurrection.  The
Directory  fear  the  superiority  of  the  English  fleet,  but  they
should  remember  that  half  its  sailors  are  Irish,  and  it  is  hoped
that  by  their  means  a  part  of  it  may  be  seized.  On  two  points,
said  O’Connor,  the  Irish  leaders  are  inexorably  resolved.  The
first  is,  that  they  will  undertake  nothing  till  the  whole  scheme
of  the  alliance  has  been  fully  arranged.  The  second  is,  that
the  arrival  of  French  aid  must  be  the  signal  of  the  insurrec¬
tion.  If  the  Directory  refuse  to  agree  to  these  points,  the  Irish
will  wait  till  the  probable  wreck  of  English  finance,  or  till  the
moment  of  peace  relaxing  the  vigilance  of  the  Government,
makes  it  possible  for  them  to  supply  themselves  with  arms  and
ammunition.  Oral  communication  with  the  French  Ministers,
O’Connor  thought  of  the  highest  importance.  Fitzgerald  was
well  known  in  Paris,  and  it  might  therefore  be  wise  that  he
should  not  go  there,  but  O’Connor  was  a  complete  stranger  in

252

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

the  French  capital,  and  if  the  Directory  would  receive  him,  he
promised  not  to  leave  his  rooms  except  at  night.  He  would
await  their  reply  in  Switzerland.1

By  this  time,  however,  the  preparations  for  the  expedition
were  nearly  ready.  The  command  was  entrusted  to  Hoche,  one
of  the  most  brilliant  and  chivalrous  of  the  young  generals  of
France.  The  recent  pacification  of  La  Vendee  had  given  him  a
reputation  which  was  only  surpassed  by  that  which  Buonaparte
was  now  gaining  in  Italy,  and  he  adopted  the  Irish  project  with
a  passionate  eagerness.  O'Connor  did  not  go  to  Paris,  but  he
appears  to  have  had  an  interview  with  Hoche,  near  the  French
frontier.2  It  was  hoped  that  the  expedition  -would  be  able  to
sail,  by  September  1,  from  Brest,3  but  many  delays  and  disap¬
pointments,  which  it  is  not  here  necessary  to  recount,4  retarded
it  till  midwinter.  Shortly  before  it  started,  Tone  learnt,  with
much  consternation,  that  John  Keogh,  Russell,  Neilson,  and
some  others  of  the  United  Irishmen,  on  whose  co-operation  he
had  counted,  had  been  arrested  for  high  treason,  but  there  were
other  rumours,  which  seemed  to  confirm  his  most  sanguine  hopes.
It  was  reported  that,  in  the  North,  an  explosion  was  daily  ex¬
pected,  that  a  powder  magazine  at  Belfast  had  been  broken
open,  that  15,000  arms  had  just  been  smuggled  successfully
into  Ireland,  that  an  insivrrect.ion  had  actually  broken  out,  that
the  arsenal  of  Dublin  had  been  seized.  Tone  was  commis¬
sioned  to  offer  liberty  to  the  prisoners  of  war,  who  were  im¬
prisoned  near  Brest,  if  they  would  serve  on  board  the  French
fleet;  and  while  all  the  Scotch,  and  nearly  all  the  English,  re¬
fused,  the  offer  was  accepted  by  fifty  out  of  the  sixty  Irish.  If
they  were  a  fair  sample  of  the  Irish  sailors  in  the  British  navy,
there  was  much  to  be  hoped  from  disaffection  in  the  fleet ;  but
Tone  evidently  did  not  count  upon  it,  and  he  expressed  his  pri-

>  F.F.O.

2  Report  of  the  Secret  Committee
in  1798,  p.  13.  It  appears  to  have
been  at  Basle.  (See  Guillon,  p.  171.)

3  Le  General  de  Grouchy  et  Vlr-
lande,  p.  43.

*  The  Marqnis  de  Grouchy  has
shown,  that  Hoche  himself  was  so
disgusted  with  the  inefficiency  and
delay  of  the  naval  department,  that
he  wrote  a  letter  on  December  8,  re¬

commending  the  abandonment  of  the
enterprise  ;  and  the  Directory  at  last
resolved  to  act  upon  his  advice  ;  but
their  letter,  ordering  that  abandon¬
ment,  only  arrived  at  Brest  after  the
fleet  had  sailed.  (Ibid.  pp.  65,  66. )
See,  too,  on  the  details  of  this
expedition,  the  recent  work  of  M.
Guillon,  La  France  et  VIrlande  pen*
dant  la  Revolution.

CH.  XXVII.

THE  OLD  IltlSH  BEIGADE.

253

vate  belief,  in  his  journal,  that  if  a^uperior,  or  even  an  equal,
English  fleet  encountered  the  French,  the  latter  would  infallibly
be  beaten.

In  order  to  lessen  the  danger  of  an  encounter  by  sea,  the
project  of  an  invasion  of  Ulster  was  abandoned,  but  it  was  hoped
that  a  sufficient  force  had  been  collected  to  make  an  invasion  of
Munster  decisive.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  in  the  history  of  this  ex¬
pedition,  is  the  almost  entire  absence  of  those  naturalised  Irish¬
men,  who  had  so  long  and  so  bravely  fought  under  the  French
standard.  Great  numbers  of  the  very  flower  of  the  Irish  race
had,  during  the  past  century,  taken  refuge  in  France,  and  the
three  regiments  of  Dillon,  Berwick,  and  Walsh,  which  had  been
formed  in  1689  out  of  the  Jacobite  refugees,  and  replenished  by
the  many  Irish  Catholics  who  fled  from  Ireland  during  the  penal
laws,  continued  to  the  eve  of  the  Revolution.  No  regiments  in
the  French  army  had,  for  a  hundred  years,  a  higher  record  of
honourable  service;  but  since  the  peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  their
character  hakl  gradually  changed.  The  severe  law  passed  by  the
Irish  Parliament  against  those  who  enlisted  under  the  French
flag,  coupled  with  the  abolition  of  the  penal  laws  against  the
Catholics,  and  with  the  great  increase  of  industrial  prosperity  in
Ireland,  had  checked  the  tide  of  emigration  to  France,  and  the
Irish  element  among  the  soldiers  had  been  reduced  to  small
proportions.  The  officers,  however,  were  still  urish,  or  of  Irish
origin,  and,  to  a  large  extent,  representatives  of  distinguished
Catholic  families.1  There  was  a  time  when  such  men  would
have  borne  a  foremost  part  in  a,  French  expedition  for  emanci¬
pating  Ireland  from  English  rule.  But  the  same  desperate
fidelity  with  which  their  fathers  had  sacrificed  home,  and  coun¬
try,  and  fortune,  for  their  faith  and  for  their  king,  still  conti¬
nued,  and  the  children  of  the  exiles  of  1689  were  now,  themselves,
enduring,  for  the  same  cause,  proscription,  confiscation,  and
exile.  With  few  exceptions,  they  ranged  themselves  against

1  See  O’Callaghan’s  Hist,  of  the
Irish  Brigade ,  pp.  479,  503,  630.  Mr.
O'Callaghan  attributes  more  influence
than  I  should  do,  to  the  decline  of  the
Stuart  cause,  in  accounting  for  the
diminution  of  the  Irish  element  in
these  regiments.  Grattan  said,  in

1793,  that  the  Irish  brigade  was
‘  chiefly  composed  of  Dutch,  and  of
the  recruits  of  various  nations,  of  very
few  Irish,’  and  that  even  the  officers,
though  of  Irish  families,  were  not
generally  of  Irish  birth.  (Grattan’s
Speeches,  iii.  45,  46.)

25  i  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

the  Revolution.1  Many  had  gathered  round  the  Prince  de
Conde,  in  the  first  stage  of  the  struggle,2  and  now,  by  a
strange  and  most  pathetic  turn,  the  exiled  descendants  of  the
Irish  Jacobites  found  a  refuge  under  the  British  flag.  In
September  1794,  the  Duke  of  Portland  invited  the  Duke  of
Fitzjames  into  the  English  service,  £  with  the  regiment  of  the
Marshal  de  Berwick,  and  with  the  Irish  Brigade,  on  the  same
footing  as  it  had  been  in  the  service  of  his  Christian  Majesty,’
and  he  stated,  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  King  to  add  a
fourth  regiment  to  the  Irish  brigade,  and  to  place  it  under  the
command  of  O’Connell — -one  of  the  most  distinguished  officers
in  the  old  French  army.3  The  offer  was  gladly  accepted,  and
soon  after,  some  of  the  officers  came  to  Ireland  to  recruit.

They  found  it  seething  with  disaffection  and  revolutionary  ideas.
Grattan,  it  is  true,  spoke  with  entire  approbation  of  the  enlist¬
ment,  though  he  expressed  his  wonder  that  the  Government
should  think  that  the  presence  of  twenty  or  thirty  Irish  Catholic
gentlemen  in  tbe  Irish  Parliament  endangered  the  throne,  while
they  were  prepared  to  arm  a  brigade  of  6,000  Catholics,  under
Catholic  and  French  officers.4  But  Grattan’s  influence  was  now,
for  a  time,  eclipsed.  The  United  Irishmen  did  all  in  their
power  to  discredit  them,  and  the  Catholic  Committee,  which
was  pervaded  by  the  same  spirit,  utterly  repudiated  them.  The
representatives  of  the  old  Catholic  gentry  of  Ireland  found  them¬
selves  strangers  and  aliens  among  their  people,  and  were  exposed
to  gross  insults,  which  Tone  afterwards  related,  to  the  keen  de¬
light  of  his  French  friends.5  Nor  were  they  well  treated  by  the
English  Government.  It  was  determined  to  raise  the  Irish
regiments  to  six,  but  it  was  soon  found  that  recruits  did  not
come  in  in  sufficient  numbers  to  fill  them ;  and  an  order  was
given  that  the  regiments  which  were  numerically  weakest  should
be  drafted  into  those  that  were  strongest,  and  the  superfluous
officers  reduced  to  lialf-pay.  The  regiment  of  Berwick  was  one
of  those  which  it  was  proposed  to  abolish  in  favour  of  a  new
regiment,  and  Fitzjames  complained  bitterly  that  the  compact

1  Among  these  few,  the  most  dis-  3  He  was  an  uncle  of  Daniel

tinguished  was  Geneial  Clarke,  who  O’Connell.

had  served  for  two  years  in  Lerwick’s  4  Grattan’s  Speeches ,  iii  254,  255.

regiment.  (Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  70.)  5  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  70,  71.’

-  See  v.  575;  O’Callaghan,  p  633.

CH.  XXVII.

FRENCH  FLEET  SETS  SAIL.

255

'  was  violated,  under  wliicli  he  and  his  brother  officers  had  en¬
listed  in  the  English  service.1  Many  officers  were  reduced  to
abject  poverty ;  the  new  regiments  were  sent  to  the  West  Indies
and  North  America,  but  the  brigade  was  not  kept  up  as  a
separate  body,  and  it  now  disappears  from  history.2

It  was  on  December  15,  1796,  that  the  French  expedition  at
last  set  sail  from  Brest.  It  consisted  of  seventeen  ships  of  the
line,  thirteen  frigates,  and  a  number  of  corvettes  and  transports,
making  in  all  forty-three  sail,  and  carrying  about  15,000  soldiers,
as  well  as  a  large  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition  for  distribution.
Admiral  Morard  De  Galles  commanded  the  fleet,  and  Hoche
the  troops.  Wolfe  Tone,  who  was  now  known  as  Adjutant-
General  Smith,  was  on  board  the  ‘  Indomptable,’  which  also
carried  Cherin,  the  chief  of  the  staff.

As  far  as  the  English  were  concerned,  the  French  had  every
reason  to  congratulate  themselves,  for  the  bulk  of  the  fleet  never
appear  to  have  seen  an  English  sail  during  the  expedition;  but
the  profound  scepticism  which  Tone  frequently  expressed  of  the
capacities  of  the  French  sailors,  was  amply  justified  by  the  event.
The  weather  when  the  fleet  set  sail  was  enchanting ;  the  sun
was  bright  as  May,  and  the  wind  soft  and  favourable,  but  some
of  the  vessels  speedily  came  into  collision.  The  £  Seduisant,’  a
ship  of  the  line  carrying  seventy-four  guns,  when  endeavouring
to  thread  the  dangerous  passage  called  the  Raz,  ran  upon  a  rock,
and  sank  with  almost  all  the  soldiers  who  were  on  board  her ;

other  ships  missed  their  way,

1  See,  in  the  Pelham  MSS.,  the
very  interesting;  memorial  of  the  Duke
of  Fitzjames,  Sept.  1796,  and  a  letter
of  Pelham  to  Colonel  Brownrigg,  May
11,  1797.  In  an  earlier  letter,  Pelham
writes;  ‘I  have  never  troubled  you
about  the  Irish  brigade,  but  it  is
really  a  most  shocking  and  disgrace¬
ful  thing.  I  have  been  obliged  to
advance  1,5007.  upon  my  own  credit
for  the  bare  subsistence  of  the  officers,
who  otherwise  would  have  starved,
and  I  very  much  fear  that  the  oppor¬
tunity  of  recruiting  is  lost,  unless
some  of  the  rioters  in  Roscommon
should  be  induced  to  enlist,  to  save
themselves.’  (Pelham  to  Windham,
May  17,  1795. 1  Something  was  said
in  the  Irish  House  of  Lords,  by  Lord
IJlaney,  about  the  French  emigrant

and  on  the  17th  there  were  but

officers,  which  the  Duke  of  Fitzjames
considered  an  insult,  and  a  duel  took
place  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  in  which
the  duke  was  slightly  wounded.
(Annual  Begister,  1797,  pp.  9,  10.)

2  An  ‘  Irish  legion  ’  had  been  formed
by  Napoleon  in  1804.  It  continued
in  the  French  service  till  1814,  and
served  with  distinction  in  many  cam¬
paigns  ;  but  it  was  mainly  formed
of  revolutionary  elements,  and  was
quite  different  in  its  spirit  and  cha¬
racter  from  the  old  Irish  brigade.
Mr.  O’Callaghan  states  (I  know  not  on
what  authority),  that  Lord  Castlereagh
exerted  his  influence  at  the  time  of
the  Bourbon  restoration,  to  prevent
the  reconstruction  of  the  old  Irish
brigade.  (  Hist,  of  the  Irish  Brigade  s
in  the  Service  of  France ,  p.  634.)

256

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cm  xxyii.

eighteen  sail  together,  the  general  and  the  admiral  in  command
being  among  the  absent.  Admiral  Bouvet,  and  General  Grouchy
who  was  second  to  Hoche  in  the  command,  were  still  there.  On
the  18th  there  was  a  dense  fog,  followed  on  the  19th  by  a
complete  calm.  Bouvet  opened  his  instructions  in  case  of
separation,  and  found  that  they  ordered  him  to  cruise  for
five  days  off  Mizen  Head,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  to  pro¬
ceed  to  the  mouth  of  the  Shannon,  to  remain  there  for  three
days,  and  if  the  fleet  did  not  appear,  to  return  to  Brest.  As
Tone  strongly  urged,  it  would  be  almost  a  miracle  if  under  such
circumstances  the  English  did  not  attack  them,  and  he  hoped
that  there  was  still  a  sufficient  force  to  effect  a  landing.  Some
of  the  missing  vessels  reappeared,  but  the  ‘  Fraternite,’  which
carried  Hoche,  Morard  De  Galles,  and  the  whole  treasury  intended
for  the  expedition,  was  not  among  them,  and  it  was  not  seen
again  till  the  fleet  returned  to  France.  On  the  19th  the  wind
became  unfavourable,  though  the  weather  was  still  moderate,  and
that  night  there  was  a  new  separation,  but  on  the  21st  there
were  once  more  thirty-five  sail  in  company,  only  seven  or  eight,
including  the  ‘  Fraternite,’  being  absent.  On  this  day  the  French
saw  Mizen  Head,  which  they  at  first  took  for  Cape  Clear.  They
coasted  it  with  a  favourable  wind  and  a  smooth  sea,  sailing  at
one  time  so  close  to  land,  that  it  was  possible  to  throw  a
biscuit  on  shore ;  they  then  stood  out  to  sea,  directing  their
course  to  Bantry  Bay,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  fifteen
vessels,  containing  between  six  and  seven  thousand  soldiers,
cast  anchor  off  Beer  Island,  which  lies  just  within  its  mouth,  and
about  four  leagues  from  the  point  where  the  landing  was  intended.
Nineteen  or  twenty  ships  lagged  behind,  and  failed  to  enter  the
bay,  but  they  were  still  within  sight  of  the  ships  that  were
anchored  within.

So  far  most  things  had  gone  favourably  for  the  French,  but
Tone’s  experience  of  the  manner  in  which  the  expedition  was
conducted,  filled  him  with  apprehension.  ‘  It  is  scandalous,’
he  wrote  in  his  journal,  1  to  part  company  twice  in  four  days,
in  such  moderate  weather  as  we  have  had  ;  but  sea  affairs,
I  see,  are  not  our  forte.’  ‘  I  believe  this  is  the  first  in¬
stance  of  an  admiral  in  a  clean  frigate,  with  moderate  weather
and  moonlight  nights,  parting  company  with  his  fleet.’  4  All

CH.  XXVII.

DALRYMPLE  RECEIVES  THE  NEWS.

257

now  rests  upon  Grouchy.’  ‘  I  do  not  at  all  like  the  countenance
of  the  Etat-Major  in  this  crisis.  When  they  speak  of  the
expedition,  it  is  in  a  style  of  despondency.  ...  I  see  nothing
of  that  spirit  of  enterprise,  combined  with  strong  resolution,
which  our  present  situation  demands.’ 1

It  was  on  the  night  of  the  22nd  that  Dalrymple,  who  com¬
manded  the  English  force  at  Cork,  first  learnt  the  danger  that
was  impending.  The  news  came  from  several  independent
quarters.  His  Majesty’s  sloop  ‘  Kangaroo,’  commanded  by  the
Hon.  Captain  Boyle,  had  been  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into
Bantry  Bay,  had  left  it  on  the  20th,  and  had  soon  after  sighted
a  French  fleet,  which  the  captain  believed  to  consist  of  from
nineteen  to  twenty-two  sail.  He  at  once  sent  Mr.  Talbot,  his
second  lieutenant,  by  land  from  Crookhaven  with  the  news,  and
himself  set  all  sail  and  hastened  to  England  to  inform  the  Admi-
ralty.  The  news  had  but  just  arrived,  when  Dalrymple  received
a  despatch  from  Richard  White,  the  chief  resident  proprietor  near
Bantry,  containing  an  affidavit  sworn  by  three  sailors  at  Beer-
haven,  and  also  a  letter  written  by  one  of  them  to  a  relative  at
Bantry.  They  stated  that  on  Wednesday,  the  21st,  they  had  seen
a  fleet  between  the  Dorsays  and  the  Mizen,  which  they  supposed
to  be  English  ;  that  a  party  of  them  had  sailed  in  a  hooker
to  meet  it,  but,  not  liking  its  appearance,  had  endeavoured  to
return  to  shore,  when  they  were  brought  to  by  a  cannon  shot,  and
compelled  to  go  on  board  what  proved  to  be  a  French  man-of-
war.  Five  of  the  crew  were  kept  on  board,  and  the  others  detained
till  nightfall.  The  French  treated  them  with  much  civility,  and
told  them  the  fleet  was  bound  for  Bantry,  and  that  it  carried
80,000  men.  The  writer  expressed  his  own  belief,  that  there
could  not  have  been  half  so  many.  The  same  night  a  second
courier  arrived  from  Mr.  White,  with  the  information  of  the
custom-house  officer  at  Beerhaven,  reporting  the  appearance  of
a  French  fleet  with  many  soldiers  on  board,  making  for  Bantry.
Some  French  sailors,  it  appears,  had  gone  ashore,  and  had  been
detained  and  examined  by  a  magistrate,  and  they  stated  that
they  had  come  direct  from  France,  and  that  it  was  believed  on
board  that  a  portion  of  the  fleet  had  gone  to  the  North  of  Ire¬
land.  An  officer  was  at  once  sent  by  Dalrymple  to  Bantry,
1  Tone’s  Memoirs ,  ii.  255-257.

2C0

258

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvii.

and  he  met  Mrs.  White  upon  the  road,  and  learnt  from  her
that  twenty- five  French  ships  were  beating  to  windward  in
Bantry  Bay.1

There  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  imminence  of  the  danger,
but  it  was  completely  uncertain  what  force  the  French  had
brought,  and  whether  the  expedition  to  Bantry  Bay  was  isolated,
or  part  of  a  concerted  scheme  directed  simultaneously  to  different
parts  of  the  island.  Every  possible  measure  of  defence  appears
at  once  to  have  been  taken.  The  cattle  were  driven  inland,  lest
they  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  French.  Immediate  orders
were  given  to  concentrate  troops,  and  to  make  use  of  every
means  to  retard  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  Mr.  White  at  once
called  together  the  yeomanry  under  his  command,  organised
his  tenantry,  made  arrangements  for  establishing  outposts  upon
the  mountains,  and  took  great  pains  to  obtain  and  transmit
information  and  to  make  preparations  for  the  English.  The
promptitude,  energy,  and  intelligence  which  he  displayed,  were
repeatedly  and  warmly  recognised  by  Dalrymple,  and  they  were
soon  afterwards  rewarded  by  his  elevation  to  the  peerage  with  the
title  of  Lord  Bantry.  ‘  I  will  stand,’  he  wrote  on  the  24th,  1  with
my  faithful  fellows  to  the  last,  certain  of  your  support.  All
ranks  here  nobly  support  me.  They  [the  French]  cannot  land
for  some  hours — the  wind  is  against  them.’  Two  gentlemen
near  Bantry,  of  the  name  of  McCarthy,  undertook  to  supply  the
expected  English  force  with  potatoes,  and  the  best  spirit  was
shown  by  the  surrounding  peasantry.  But  the  letters  of  Dal¬
rymple  plainly  show  how  almost  desperate  the  situation  would
have  been  if  14,000  or  15,000  good  French  soldiers  had  at
once  landed. .  ‘  Our  numbers,’  he  wrote,  ‘  will  probably  fall  so
short  of  those  of  the  enemy,  that  a  diversion  is  all  to  be  expected.
Some  artillery  are  now  at  Bandon,  as  well  as  tents  ;  ...  we  will
have  at  or  near  Bandon  towards  2,000  men  in  some  days,
if  the  prospect  of  affairs  does  not  clear.’  With  every  effort  to
concentrate  the  troops,  it  would  be  impossible  to  collect  more
than  8,000  men  near  Cork  before  the  enemy  had  reached  it.
‘  His  light  troops,  at  least,  may  be  expected  to  reach  it  in  four
days  from  the  landing  of  the  main  body  at  Bantry.  Whatever

1  Hon.  Captain  Boyle  to  Admiral  Pelham,  Dec.  22,  23,  26,  1796.  ( Pel-

Kingsmill,  Dec.  21;  Dalrymple  to  hum  MSS.)

CH.  XXVII,

STORM  OF  THE  22ND.

259

can  be  done  by  pickaxe  and  spade  upon  tbe  three  approaches  from
Bantry,  may  occasion  a  further  delay  of  two  days,  if  artillery
accompanies  the  march.  In  eight  days,  supposing  Cork  to  be
abandoned,  by  falling  back  towards  the  Blackwater  with  the
troops  previously  advanced,  12,000  infantry  may  be  formed  in
a  strong  position  near  Ivil worth  and  Fermoy,  besides  a  consider¬
able  corps  of  cavalry  and  artillery.’ 1

It  was  not  the  first  time  that  French  ships  of  war  had
appeared  in  Bantry  Bay.  In  1689,  Chateau  Benaud  had  sailed
into  it  with  a  powerful  fleet,  had  succeeded  in  landing  the  money
and  munitions  of  war  that  were  necessary  for  the  French  army,
and  had  returned  triumphantly  to  Brest,  in  spite  of  the  opposi¬
tion  of  an  English  fleet.  On  that  occasion,  however,  the  French
were  favoured  both  by  good  seamanship  and  by  propitious  winds.
Both  of  these  conditions  were  now  wanting,  and  an  obstacle
more  powerful  than  any  that  Dalrymple  could  oppose  to  them,
baffled  their  designs.

On  the  night  of  the  22nd  a  strong  easterly  gale  arose,  accom¬
panied  with  snow.  It  blew  directly  from  the  shore,  and  not
only  prevented  a  landing,  but  threw  the  whole  expedition  into
confusion.  For  the  fourth  time,  the  fleet  was  separated.  The
twenty  ships  which  lay  outside  the  bay,  drifting  fiercely  before
the  storm,  were  soon  lost  to  sight,  while  the  remainder  tossed  in
wild  confusion  and  no  small  danger  in  the  bay.  An  English
fleet,  flying  before  the  favouring  gale,  might  appear  at  any
moment,  but  Tone  observed  with  much  bitterness  that  the  French
did  not  even  take  the  common  precaution  of  stationing  a  frigate
at  the  harbour  mouth  to  give  warning.  If  the  enterprise  was
to  be  pursued,  it  must  be  done  with  the  fifteen  or  seventeen  ships
that  were  stationed  near  Beer  Island,  and  the  responsibility  of
deciding  rested  with  Grouchy  and  Bouvet,  who  commanded
respectively  the  land  and  sea  forces.  Grouchy — who  was  now
fully  supported  by  the  Etat-Major — was  strongly  in  favour  of
attempting  to  land,  even  with  the  greatly  diminished  force.  He

1  White  to  General  Coote,  Dec.  24;
Dalrymple  to  Pelham,  Dec.  23,  24  ;
Captain  Cotter  to  Dalrymple,  Dec.  25,
1796.  See,  too,  the  account,  de¬
rived  from  many  different  sources,  of
the  measures  taken,  and  the  spirit

displayed,  in  Crofton  Croker’s  admir¬
able  history  of  the  Pantry  Bay  ex¬
pedition,  in  his  Popular  Songs  illus¬
trative  of  the  French  Invasions  of
Ireland,  part  iii.

260

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

assumed  the  full  responsibility  of  the  step  by  sending  a  formal
order  to  Bouvet,  and  on  the  24th  he  wrote  a  despatch  intended
for  the  Directory,  inclosing  this  order,  and  stating  very  clearly
the  motives  that  governed  him,  and  the  difficulties  of  his  position.
He  had  now  only  between  6,000  and  7,000  men  at  his  disposal,
a  force  which  was  les3  than  half  of  that  which  had  been  sent
from  Brest.  In  the  absence  of  Hoche,  he  knew  nothing  of  the
military  plans  which  had  been  adopted  in  France ;  nothing  of
the  information  which  had  been  so  laboriously  collected ;
nothing  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  relations  that  had
been  established  with  discontented  Irishmen.  Under  such
circumstances,  and  after  a  delay  which  had  given  the  English
time  to  mass  their  forces,  the  landing  of  so  small  an  army  in  an
unknown  country  was  very  perilous,  but  Grouchy  considered  it
preferable  to  the  alternative  of  abandoning  the  enterprise,  when
they  had  almost  touched  the  Irish  coast,  and  he  believed  that  he
could  at  least  effect  a  diversion  that  would  be  useful  to  the
Republic.  Tone  described  vividly  the  desperate  character  of
the  attempt.  The  French  had  not  a  guinea,  not  a  tent,  not  a
horse  to  draw  the  four  cannon  which  were  their  sole  artillery.
Their  general  intended  to  march  on  foot.  They  proposed  to
leave  their  baggage  behind  them,  and  with  nothing  but  their
arms,  and  the  clothes  on  their  backs,  to  sally  forth  to  encounter
an  unknown  enemy.  But  the  near  prospect  of  adventure  filled
them  with  delight,  and  Tone  had  never  so  much  admired  the
invincible  buoyancy  of  the  French  character  as  in  that  hour  of
peril.  They  hoped  to  obtain  provisions  and  means  of  transport
at  Bantry  ;  to  reach  Kinsale  and  Cork  by  forced  marches,  and  to
receive  the  support  of  an  armed  population.

The  anchors  were  drawn  up  on  the  afternoon  of  the  24th,
and  the  fleet  stood  for  the  land.  It  was  at  first  intended  to
disembark  at  Beerhaven,  but  the  Irish  sailors,  who  had  been
taken  on  board,  pronounced  the  road  thence  to  Bantry  to  be  im¬
possible  for  artillery,  and  it  was  in  consequence  resolved  to  sail
to  Bantry  itself.  An  hour  and  a  half  of  good  wind  would,  in
the  opinion  of  Tone,  have  carried  them  there ;  but  the  wind
was  in  their  teeth,  and  in  three  or  four  hours  they  seemed
hardly  to  have  gained  a  hundred  yards.  In  the  evening  the
wind  slightly  abated,  but  in  the  night  it  rose  again  into  a  furious

CH.  XXVII.

CHRISTMAS  IN  BANTRY  BAY.

261

storm,  and  the  waves  soon  ran  so  high  that  no  small  boat  could
live.

There  could  hardly  have  been  a  more  melancholy  Christmas,
than  that  which  now  dawned  upon  an  expedition  which  had
been  so  lately  flushed  with  the  assurance  of  success.  The  hurri¬
cane  showed  no  sign  of  abatement,  and  its  fury  was  such  that
the  whole  squadron  was  in  imminent  danger  of  being  dashed  in
pieces  on  the  rocks.  For  at  least  another  day  a  landing  was
utterly  impossible ;  if  it  was  at  length  effected,  the  French  had
great  reason  to  fear  that  an  English  force  would  by  this  time
have  been  assembled  which  would  be  amply  sufficient  to  annihi¬
late  their  little  army,  while  a  powerful  English  fleet  might  at
any  moment  appear  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay.  The  wind,  which
was  so  unfavourable  to  the  French,  would  have  assisted  it,  and
had  it  arrived,  the  French  would  have  been  caught  as  in  a  trap,
and  not  a  ship  could  have  escaped.  Tone  discussed  the  situa¬
tion  with  General  Cherin  and  the  rest  of  the  Etat-Major,  and
acknowledged  that  it  was  now  all  but  desperate ;  but  he  urged
that  it  was  still  possible  to  fly  before  the  gale  from  Bantry  Bay
to  the  mouth  of  the  Shannon,  and  there  to  land  the  troops  and
march  to  Limerick,  which  would  probably  be  undefended,  as  the
garrisou  would  have  hastened  to  Bantry  Bay.  The  proposition
was  favourably  received,  but  the  general  and  admiral  were
nearly  two  leagues  away.  The  storm  made  all  communication
or  consultation  impossible,  and  the  whole  day  passed  in  painful
suspense.  At  half-past  six,  when  the  dark  and  stormy  winter
evening  had  well  closed  in,  to  the  extreme  astonishment  of  the
Etat-Major,  the  frigate  carrying  Bouvet  and  Grouchy  ran  swiftly
before  the  wind  alongside  of  the  ‘  Indomptable,’  and  a  voice  from
on  board  it,  hailed  the  captain  through  a  speaking  trumpet,  and
ordered  him  at  once  to  cut  his  cable  and  put  to  sea.  No  signal
of  any  kind  had  been  seen  or  heard  preparing  them  for  the  step,
and  the  first  impression  was  that  the  ship,  which  had  disappeared
so  rapidly  through  the  gloom,  was  an  English  frigate,  which  had
been  concealed  in  the  bay,  had  availed  itself  of  the  storm  and
darkness  to  escape,  and  had  adopted  this  stratagem  to  separate
the  fleet.  After  a  hasty  consultation,  it  was  resolved  at  least  to
wait  till  the  day,  and  the  vessel  bearing  the  admiral  and  the
general  was  soon  alone  in  the  open  sea.

262

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

This  proceeding,  which  afterwards  gave  rise  to  much  angry
recrimination,  was  due  to  Bouvet,  and  it  is  easy  to  explain,  if  not
to  justify,  it.  He  was  not  on  cordial  terms  with  Grouchy,  and
although  he  had  reluctantly  acquiesced  in  the  order  to  disembark
the  troops,  the  storm  of  the  25th  had  convinced  him  that  the
enterprise  was  now  impracticable.  In  the  afternoon  one  of  the
cables  of  his  frigate  had  broken,  through  the  strain,  and  the  ship
was  for  a  time  in.  extreme  danger.  The  hour  of  sunset  came,
and  the  storm,  instead  of  diminishing,  as  had  been  hoped,
rather  increased.  Bouvet  considered  that  he  was  responsible
for  the  fleet,  and  that,  even  apart  from  the  danger  of  its  being
captured  by  the  English,  it  was  not  likely,  if  it  remained  in  a
narrow  and  rock-bound  bay,  to  outlive  the  night.  He  therefore
resolved  at  all  hazards  to  gain  the  open  sea,  and  endeavour  to
bring  his  squadron  to  Brest.  Without  even  informing  Grouchy
of  his  intention,  he  ordered  two  cannon  to  be  fired  as  a  signal
for  departure  to  the  fleet ;  but  amid  the  howling  of  the  tempest,
the  signal  appears  to  have  been  unheard  in  the c  Indomptable,’  and
no  other  ship  left  the  bay.

Grouchy  angrily  but  vainly  protested,  and  when  the  morning
broke,  and  it  was  found  that  their  vessel  was  alone  on  the  sea,  he
vehemently  urged  Bouvet  to  return  to  Bantry  Bay  to  seek  the
fleet,  or  else  to  make  for  the  mouth  of  the  Shannon,  where,  in
obedience  to  the  instructions  that  had  been  issued,  some  of  the
missing  vessels  were  likely  to  be  found.  The  first  suggestion
appeared  impracticable,  for  no  vessel  could  have  sailed  in  the
teeth  of  such  a  hurricane  as  was  blowing  ;  and  Bouvet  rejected
the  second,  refusing  to  run  any  further  unnecessary  risk,  and
alleging  that  the  missing  ships,  if  they  had  not  sunk  or  been
captured,  had  probably  by  this  time  made  their  way  to  France.
On  January  1,  1797,  the  frigate  carrying  the  admiral  and  the
general,  who  were  now  at  deadly  enmity,  arrived  safely  but  alone
at  Brest.

Contrary  to  expectation,  the  ships  that  remained  in  Bantry
Bay  rode  out  the  night,  but  the  next  day  the  gale  still  continued,
and  an  additional  horror  was  added  to  the  situation  by  a  fog,
which  was  so  dense  that  it  was  for  some  time  impossible  to  see
more  than  a  ship’s  length  ahead.  Several  of  the  ships,  including
the  ‘  Indomptable,’  repeatedly  dragged  their  anchors,  and  were

CH.  XXVII.

FRENCH  SHIPS  AGAIN  APPEAR.

2G3

in  the  utmost  clanger.  In  the  afternoon  one  of  the  largest
'could  hold  out  no  longer,  and  sought  the  only  possible  safety
by  putting  to  sea.  At  night  three  others  were  compelled  to
take  the  same  course,  and  on  the  27th  the  remainder  of  the
squadron,  availing  themselves  of  a  slight  improvement  in  the
wind,  left  Bantry  Bay.  They  sailed  through  a  furious  sea
towards  the  mouth  of  the  Shannon,  but  as  none  of  the  missing
ships  were  in  sight,  they  speedily  turned  their  helms  towards
France,  and  succeeded  in  reaching  Brest  soon  after  Bouvet  and
Grouchy.

The  danger,  which  had  been  so  threatening,  had  passed,  but
many  days  elapsed  before  the  English  general  felt  any  security.
On  the  25th,  Captain  Cotter,  who  had  been  sent  down  to  Bantry
to  reconnoitre,  wrote  describing  the  storm,  and  informed  the  com¬
mander  with  evident  perplexity  that  not  more  than  seventeen
vessels  were  in  sight.  As  the  fleet  had  been  originally  reckoned
at  fifty  or  sixty  sail,  he  inferred  that  only  a  portion  was  in  the
bay,  and  that  it  was  either  awaiting  a  powerful  reinforcement,
or  playing  a  secondary  part  to  an  expedition  the  nature  and  ob¬
ject  of  which  were  not  yet  known.  ‘  Whatever  troops,’  he  added,
£  may  be  on  board  this  fleet  of  seventeen  vessels,  I  presume  could
never  be  expected  to  make  much  impression  on  this  country,
unless  they  rely  upon  powerful  assistance  from  the  inhabitants,
which  I  am  happy  to  say,  for  the  honour  of  this  part  of  Ireland,
they  have  not  the  most  distant  chance  of  obtaining.’  Dalrymple
on  the  following  day  wrote  to  Pelham,  that  unless  the  English
fleet  speedily  came  and  conquered,  he  had  little  doubt  that  on
the  first  fair  day  the  French  fleet  would  be  brought  together  and
a  landing  effected ;  and  although  the  French  would  now  find  many
difficulties  in  their  way,  he  feared  there  were  none  which  a  con¬
siderable  body  of  good  troops  could  not  surmount.  The  French
fleet  disappeared,  but  on  December  30,  four  large  French  ships
and  one  or  two  smaller  ones  were  again  seen  making  for  the
bay.  They  entered  it,  cast  anchor,  sent  out  a  boat  to  a  small
island  belonging  to  Mr.  White,  and  took  away  some  sailors.
Next  day  a  second  boat  was  seen  to  leave  one  of  the  ships,  and
the  little  garrison  which  was  now  posted  at  Bantry  was  drawn
out  on  the  shore  to  oppose  a  landing,  but  it  was  not  attempted,
and  in  the  course  of  the  day  all  the  sailors  who  had  been  taken

264

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVII.

were  released  except  one,  who  was  kept  as  a  pilot.  They  were
examined  by  an  English  officer,  and  they  reported  that  they  had
been  on  board  two  ships,  neither  of  which  contained  any  soldiers,
and  had  been  told  that  these  ships  had  never  before  been  in  the
bay,  and  that  they  would  leave  it  on  the  first  fair  day  unless
the  vanguard  of  the  fleet  appeared.  The  officer  greatly  doubted
whether  the  sailors  told  the  truth,  and  on  the  first  day  of  1797
two  more  French  ships  appeared.  ‘  Their  size,’  wrote  Dalrymple,
‘  I  know  not ;  they  drop  in  gradually,  and  if  they  sail  not  to-day,
the  wind  being  fair,  they  certainly  mean  to  remain  in  the  bay,
and  form  a  junction  with  those  absent.’  It  is  probable  that  these
vessels  were  some  of  those  which  had  formerly  failed  to  enter  the
bay,  and  had  been  driven  from  its  mouth  by  the  storm  on  the
night  of  December  22.  On  the  2nd  they  sailed  farther  out,  and
cast  anchor  off  Beer  Island  near  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  where  they
were  shrouded  from  view  by  a  thick  mist.  On  the  3rd  or  4th
they  set  sail  for  France.1

In  the  first  week  of  January,  most  of  the  ships,  which  had
been  so  widely  and  so  strangely  scattered,  had  returned  to  Brest,
but  the  French  had  some  considerable  losses  to  deplore.  One
transport  and  one  ship  of  war  had  been  taken  by  the  English,
and  six  other  vessels  perished  in  the  course  of  the  expedition
either  from  striking  against  rocks,  or  from  the  violence  of
the  waves,  or  through  isolated  encounters  with  English  ships.
The  last  ship  to  return  to  France  was  the  ‘  Fraternite,’  carrying
Hoche  and  the  admiral  of  the  fleet.  It  had  parted  from  the
remainder  of  the  fleet  shortly  after  leaving  Brest,  and  it  soon
after  was  descried  by  a  much  more  powerful  English  frigate,
which  chased  it  for  more  than  twelve  hours,  far  from  its  intended
course.  When  it  endeavoured  to  regain  it,  it  encountered  the
great  storms  of  the  27th  and  29th,  which  partially  disabled  it,
and  drove  it  far  from  the  Irish  coast.  After  much  hardship
and  some  adventures,  which  it  is  not  here  necessary  to  relate,
the  admiral  at  last  succeeded,  on  January  14,  in  bringing  his

shattered  frigate  to  Rochelle.2

1  Cotter  to  Dalrymple,  Dec.  25  ;
Dalrymple  to  Pelham,  Dec.  26,  27,
28,  30,  31,  Jan.  1,  2,  3,  6,  1797  ;  Col.
French  to  General  Coote,  Dec.  31,
1796;  Jan.  2,  1797;  John  Brown  to
Dalrymple,  Jan.  3,  1797.  ( Pelham

MSS.)  See,  too,  Croker’s  Narrative,
pp.  27-29.

2  Wolfe  Tone’s  Journal  gives  an
admirably  graphic  and,  on  the  whole,
an  accurate  account  of  this  expedi¬
tion  ;  but  Tone  naturally  saw  only

CII.  XXVII.

GEEAT  DANGER  OF  IRELAND.

265

It  is  not  surprising  tliat  men  who  seek  to  trace  in  human
history  the  operations  of  a  Divine  hand,  should  have  deemed  the
storm  which  dispersed  the  French  fleet,  when  it  lay  within  a
cannon  shot  of  the  Irish  shore,  as  manifestly  providential  as  that
which  two  centuries  before  had  shattered  the  proud  Armada  of
Spain.  Except  perhaps  in  the  beginning  of  the  rebellion  of  1641,
the  connection  between  England  and  Ireland  had  never  been  in
such  peril  as  in  the  last  weeks  of  1796.  If  the  expedition  had
started  but  a  few  days  earlier,  when  the  weather  was  still  propi¬
tious;  if  it  had  not  encountered  a  storm  of  extraordinary  violence
and  duration,  at  a  time  when  success  had  almost  been  attained ;
if  the  wind  had  blown  from  any  other  point  of  the  compass,  or
if  the  naval  part  of  the  expedition  had  been  conducted  with
common  skill,  it  is  certain  that  an  army  of  some  fifteen  thou¬
sand  French  soldiers  would  have  been  landed  without  difficulty
within  forty-five  miles  of  Cork  before  there  was  any  considerable
force  to  oppose  them,  and  it  is  scarcely  less  certain  that  the
second  city  in  Ireland  must  have  fallen  into  their  hands.  It  is
only  too  probable,  that  such  a  success  would  have  been  im¬
mediately  followed  by  a  rebellion  in  Ulster,  if  not  in  the  other
provinces.

It  was  a  strange  and  startling  thing,  that  a  great  French
fleet  should  have  been  able  to  sail  unmolested  to  the  coast  of
Ireland,  to  remain  in  an  Irish  bay  for  five  whole  days,  and  then
to  return  to  France  without  encountering  an  English  fleet.  In
one  respect,  however,  the  expedition  was  very  reassuring.  It

what  took  place  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  vessel  in  which  he  sailed.  He
was  notalways  acquainted  with  the  de¬
signs  and  motives  of  the  commanders,
and  there  are  a  few  slight  errors
in  his  narrative.  I  have  compared  it
carefully  with  the  valuable  series  of
documents  published  by  the  Marquis
de  Grouchy,  which  include  the
journals  of  Grouchy  and  Cherin,  the
official  despatches  and  some  of  the
private  letters  of  Grouchy,  the  reports
of  the  generals  of  the  different  divi¬
sions  of  the  expedition,  and  several
other  documents  of  great  value.  The
marquis  has  conclusively  disproved
the  charge  which  had  been  brought
against  his  father,  of  having  caused
the  abandonment  of  the  expedition,
and  shown  a  want  of  zeal  or  energy

in  his  command:  and  the  Journal  of
Tone  fully  supports  his  view.  If  any
charge,  indeed,  can  be  truly  brought
against  Grouchy,  it  is  much  more  that
of  rashness  than  of  timidity.  The
Directory  censured  the  conduct  of
Bouvet,  and  M.  Guillon,  in  his  recent
work,  adopts  their  view  ;  but  in  the
extremely  difficult  circumstances  in
which  he  was  placed,  it  appears  to  me
far  from  clear  that  the  course  which
he  adopted  was  not  the  wisest.  The
proceedings  on  land  may  be  best
traced  in  the  many  letters  in  the
Pelham  MSS.,  and  in  the  various
notices  brought  together  in  the
excellent  narrative  of  Croker.
( Popular  Sonus,  illustrative  of  the
French  Invasions  of  Ireland,  part
hi.)

266

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cu.  xxvn.

furnished  a  most  valuable,  if  not  decisive,  test  of  the  disposition
of  the  Catholics  in  the  South  of  Ireland,  and  some  test  of  the
disposition  of  those  in  the  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  their
conduct  appears  to  me  to  show  clearly  that,  although  treason
had  of  late  years  been  zealously  propagated  among  them,  its  in¬
fluence  was  as  yet  very  superficial.  An  invasion  had  long  been
expected.  Rumours  of  a  coming  French  army,  which  was  to
emancipate  the  people  from  tithes  and  rents,  and  English  rule,
had  been  industriously  spread  thtough  the  Catholic  population,
and  as  soon  as  the  fleet  appeared  in  Bantry  Bay,  the  gravity  of
the  crisis  was  fully  understood.  If  disloyalty  had  really  reached
the  point  which  the  United  Irish  leaders  imagined,  and  which
some  subsequent  historians  have  supposed,  it  could  scarcely  have
failed  under  such  circumstances  to  have  risen  to  the  surface,  and
an  immediate  explosion  might  have  been  expected.  But  all  the
evidence  we  possess  concurs  in  showing,  that  the  great  body  of
the  Catholics  did  not  at  this  time  show  the  smallest  wish  to
throw  off  the  English  rule,  and  that  their  spontaneous  and  un¬
forced  sympathies  were  with  the  British  flag.

c  The  people,’  wrote  Dalrymple  from  Bandon  when  the  arrival
of  the  French  had  become  known,  £  behave  most  charmingly,
and  are,  I  am  sure,  faithful  to  their  King,  and  do  not  aid  his
enemies.’ 1  £  I  must,’ he  wrote  a  few  days  later,  £  in  justice  to  the

inhabitants  of  the  country  we  have  passed  through,  assure  you
that  their  good  will,  zeal,  and  activity  exceed  all  description.’2
‘  The  conduct  of  the  people  of  this  country  is  most  meritorious
and  praiseworthy.’3  General  Smith  wrote  from  Limerick  :  1  The
country  is  reported  to  me  to  be  infinitely  more  attached  to
Government,  than  common  report  ever  allowed  of.  Your
yeomanry  are  guardians,  and  infuse,  by  their  appearance  and
indefatigable  activity  and  exertions,  the  most  loyal  spirit  through¬
out  each  barony.  The  cabins  of  every  town  are  reported  to  me
to  be  boiling  their  potatoes  for  the  soldiers.’4  Camden,  in  the
middle  of  the  crisis,  was  able  to  congratulate  Portland  on  £  the
zeal  which  has  been  manifested  throughout  the  country  in  the
raising  of  yeomanry  corps,  and  the  temper  of  those  parts  of  the
kingdom  which  have  been  made  acquainted  with  the  probability  of

1  Dalrymple  to  Pelham,  Dec.  24,  3  Ibid.  Dec.  28.

1796.  4  General  Smith  to  Pelham,  Dec.

2  Ibid.  Dec.  27.  30,  1796.

CH  XXVII.

LOYALTY  OF  THE  COUNTRY.

267

a  descent ;  *  and  lie  adds :  1  Lord  Shannon  informs  me,  that  it  is  im¬
possible  to  conceive  more  loyalty  than  appears  in  his  part  of  the
county  of  Cork.  The  situation  and  temper  of  this  town  is  so  im¬
portant,  that  it  must  give  your  Grace  satisfaction  to  be  informed
of  the  very  general  loyalty  and  spirit  which  has  appeared.’ 1

Dr.  Moylan,  the  Catholic  Bishop  of  Cork,  at  once  issued  a
useful  and  very  loyal  address.  Lord  Kenmare  exerted  his  great
influence  in  Kerry  in  favour  of  the  Government,  and  the
chief  bankers  and  traders,  both  of  Cork  and  Limerick,  came
forward  with  offers  of  money.2  Lord  Donoughmore  wrote  from
Cork  that  his  brother,  General  Hutchinson,  had  just  been  to
Galway.  The  merchants  there  immediately  subscribed  9001.
which  was  wanting  for  military  purposes.  ‘  The  whole  of  the
yeomanry  corps -offered  to  march  with  him  anywhere,  even  with¬
out  arms,  which  they  were  satisfied  with  the  hope  of  receiving
on  their  march  at  Limerick,  and  he  is  persuaded  that,  in  the
course  of  two  or  three  days,  he  would  have  had  it  in  his  power
to  have  marched  a  thousand  men  from  Galway.  All  ranks  of
people  were  equally  zealous  and  well  affected,  and,  he  said,  I  could
not  speak  too  highly  to  you  of  the  loyalty  of  all  that  part  of
the  kingdom.  ...  Of  the  spirit,  zeal,  and  loyalty  of  the  people
of  this  city  [Cork]  of  every  description,  it  is  not  possible  by  any
words  to  convey  too  strong  an  impression.’3  From  the  wilds
of  Mayo,  Denis  Browne  sent  a  very  similar  account.  ‘  This
county,’  he  wrote,  1  is  perfectly  quiet,  and  the  disposition  loyal
even  beyond  my  expectation.  The  inhabitants  of  this  part  of
Mayo  have  connected  the  French  and  the  Presbyterians  of  the
North,  who,  they  hear,  have  invited  the  French  over ;  conse¬
quently  they  have  transferred  a  portion  of  their  hatred  to  the
enemy,  who,  they  are  persuaded,  are  coming  with  their  northern
allies  to  drive  them  from  their  habitations  and  properties  ;  and  so
strongly  does  this  operate,  that  I  am  persuaded  they  would  beat
the  French  out  of  this  country  with  stones.  The  unfortunate
emigrant  Northerners  are  acting  quietly  and  inoffensively.’4

It  is  a  memorable  fact  that  Cork,  Galway,  and  Limerick,  the
great  centres  of  Irish  Catholicism,  the  cities  where  at  the  present

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Dec.  26.  29,  1796.  (I.S.P.O.)

2  Ibid.  Jan.  10,  1797 ;  General  4  Denis  Browne,  Westport,  Dec.

Smith  to  Pelham,  Dec.  30,  1796.  30,  1796.  (I.S.P.O.)

3  Lord  Donoughmore  (Cork),  Dec.

268

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch,  xxyii.

time  the  spirit  of  sedition  is  probably  most  formidable,  vied  with
one  another  in  1796  in  proofs  of  loyalty  to  the  English  Govern¬
ment  when  a  French  fleet  was  on  the  coast.  It  is  a  not  less
memorable  fact,  that  the  town  which  then  showed  the  worst
spirit  was  undoubtedly  Belfast,  the  capital  of  the  most  advanced
Irish  Protestantism,  and  in  the  present  day  one  of  the  most  loyal
cities  of  Ireland.  Camden  described  it  as  the  only  town  where
bad  dispositions  had  been  shown.1  A  meeting  of  the  principal
inhabitants  was  convened  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  corps  for
defence  against  the  French,  but  the  only  result  was  the  appoint¬
ment  of  a  committee,  which,  by  a  majority  of  seven  to  two,  passed
strong’  resolutions  in  favour  of  parliamentary  reform ;  and  Brown,
the  Sovereign  of  Belfast,  wrote,  that  in  this  moment  of  danger
there  was  extreme  difficulty  in  enlisting  any  yeomen,  and  that
the  disaffection  was  grave  and  general.2

‘  I  am  not  without  expectation,’  wrote  Camden  on  January  3,
‘  that  a  partial  landing  will  be  made  in  order  to  feel  the  pulse
of  the  North  of  Ireland,  which  I  am  convinced  is  ripe  for  revolt.’
On  the  whole,  however,  looking  back  on  the  anxious  period  that
had  passed,  he  was  able  to  congratulate  the  English  Government
very  sincerely  on  the  attitude  of  Ireland.  ‘  Notwithstanding
the  suspicions  I  entertain,’  he  wrote,  ‘  of  the  North,  and  notwith¬
standing  the  attempts  of  the  disaffected  here,  I  may,  without
being  too  sanguine,  assure  your  Grace  of  the  loyalty  and
spirit  of  the  rest  of  the  kingdom.  The  towns  of  Limerick  and
Galway  have  vied  with  each  other  in  expressions  of  loyalty  and
attachment,  and  in  actions  corresponding  with  these  sentiments.
The  utmost  hospitality  has  been  shown  by  all  descriptions  of  per¬
sons  to  the  troops,  and  the  peasants  of  the  counties  of  Cork  and
Limerick  have  anticipated  their  wants  by  preparing  potatoes  for
them  on  the  road.’ 3  A  few  days  later,  he  wrote  that  ‘  the  best

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Deo.  30.

2  G.  Brown  to  Pelham,  Dec.  28,

1796  ;  Jan.  2,  1797  ;  Historical  Collec¬
tions  relating  to  the  Town  of  Belfast,
pp.  460-467.  Beresford,  in  two  pri¬
vate  letters  to  Lord  Auckland,  Dec.
27,  29,  1796,  fully  corroborates  the
statements  in  the  text.  He  says  :
‘All  our  accounts  bring  the  most
pleasing  intelligence  of  a  most  uni¬
versal  zeal  and  ardour;  the  yeomen
are  anxious  to  move  against  the

enemy  ;  they  are  doing  garrison  duty
everywhere.  The  farmers  of  Munster
are  assisting  the  military  as  much  as
they  can.’  ‘  Everything  is  quiet,  and
loyalty  apparent  every  where,  except
in  the  North.’  ( Beresford  Correspond¬
ence,  ii.  142,  146.)  I  have  already
quoted  the  remarkable  passage  to  the
same  effect,  in  Lord  Clare’s  speech  in
the  debate  of  Feb.  19,  1798.

3  Camden  to  Portland,  Jan.  3.
1797.

ch.  xxvit.  LOYALTY  OP  THE  COUNTRY.  2  (19

spirit  ’  had  been  manifested  both  by  the  regulars  and  the  militia ;
and  be  added  :  ‘  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  if  a  landing
had  taken  place,  the  latter  would  have  displayed  the  utmost
fidelity.’  The  Antrim  and  Down  regiments,  which  had  been
suspected,  seemed  unanimously  loyal,  and  the  population,  where-
ever  the  troops  passed,  showed  the  best  dispositions.  ‘  The  roads,
which  in  parts  had  been  rendered  impassable  by  the  snow,  were
cleared  by  the  peasantry.  The  poor  people  often  shared  their
potatoes  with  them  [the  troops],  and  dressed  their  meat  with¬
out  demanding  payment,  of  which  there  was  a  very  particular
instance  iu  the  town  of  Banagher,  where  no  gentleman  or  prin¬
cipal  farmer  resides  to  set  them  the  example.  At  Carlow  a  con-
sidei’able  subscription  was  made  for  the  troops  as  they  passed,
and  at  Limerick  and  Cork  every  exertion  was  used  to  facilitate
the  carriage  of  artillery  and  baggage  by  premiums  to  the  carmen  ;
and  in  the  town  of  Galway,  which  for  a  short  time  was  left  with
a  very  inadequate  garrison,  the  zeal  and  ardour  of  the  inhabitants
and  yeomanry  was  peculiarly  manifested.  ...  In  short,  the
good  disposition  of  the  people  through  the  South  and  West
was  so  prevalent,  that  I  have  no  doubt,  had  the  enemy  landed,
their  hopes  of  assistance  from  the  inhabitants  would  have  been
totally  disappointed.  From  the  armed  yeomanry,  Government
derived  the  most  honourable  assistance.  Noblemen  and  gentle¬
men  of  the  first  property  vied  in  exerting  themselves  at  the  head
of  their  corps.  Much  of  the  express  and  escort  duty  was  per¬
formed  by  them.  In  Cork,  Limerick,  and  Galway,  they  took  the
duty  of  the  garrisons.  Lord  Shannon  informs  me  that  men  of
3,000L  to  4,000(.  a  year  were  employed  in  escorting  baggage  and
carrying  expresses.  Mr.  John  La  Touche,  who  was  a  private  in
his  son’s  corps,  rode  twenty-five  miles,  in  one  of  the  severest
nights,  with  an  express.  .  .  .  The  merchants  of  Dublin,  many  of
them  of  the  first  eminence,  marched  sixteen  miles  with  a  convoy  of
arms  to  the  North.  .  .  .  The  appearance  of  this  metropolis  has
been  highly  meritorious,’  and  it  has  been  found  possible  ‘greatly
to  reduce  the  garrison  with  perfect  safety  to  the  town.  The
number  of  yeomanry  fully  appointed  and  disciplined  in  Dublin
exceeds  2,000,  above  400  of  whom  are  horse.  The  whole
number  of  corps  approved  by  Government  amounts  to  440,  exclu¬
sive  of  the  Dublin  corps.  The  gross  number  is  nearly  25,000.

270

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cn.  xxvn.

Of  these,  8,359  cavalry  have  been  armed,  and  6,046  infantry.  .  .  .
In  reply  to  a  circular  letter  written  to  the  Gommandants  of  the
respective  corps,  their  answer  almost  universally  contained  a
general  offer  of  service  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom.  ...  I  am
sorry  in  being  obliged  to  say  that  in  Belfast,  and  in  some  parts
of  the  Nouth,  a  different  temper  was  manifested.’1

My  task  in  the  present  chapter  has  been  to  a  great  extent
that  of  an  editor,  selecting  from  the  vast  mass  of  Government
correspondence  such  letters  as  most  fully  paint  the  condition  of
the  country.  This  method  of  writing  history  is  necessarily
wanting  in  stirring  and  dramatic  interest,  but  it  has  the  ad¬
vantage  of  enabling  the  reader  to  form  his  own  judgment  of
events,  very  independently  of  the  historian,  and  it  is,  I  think,
peculiarly  valuable  where  the  chief  facts  to  be  recorded  are
changes  in  social  conditions,  new  turns  and  modifications  of
popular  sympathies  and  passions.  The  main  problem  of  Irish
history  is  the  fact  that  Ireland,  after  a  connection  with  England
of  no  less  than  700  years,  is  as  disaffected  as  a  newly  conquered
province,  and  that,  in  spite  of  a  long  period  of  national  education,
of  the  labours  of  many  able  and  upright  statesmen,  of  a  vast
amount  of  remedial  legislation,  and  of  close  contact  with  the  free,
healthy,  and  energetic  civilisation  of  Great  Britain,  Irish  popular
sentiment  on  political  subjects  is  at  the  present  hour  perhaps
the  most  degraded  and  the  most  demoralised  in  Europe.  The
year  1796  contributed  largely  to  this  demoralisation.  Anarchy
and  organised  crime  had  greatly  extended,  and  they  were
steadily  taking  a  more  political  form,  while  Grattan  and  the  other
really  able,  honest,  moderate,  and  constitutional  reformers,  had
lost  almost  all  their  influence.  The  discredit  which  was  thrown
on  the  Constitution  of  1782,  and  the  utter  failure  of  Grattan  to
procure  either  parliamentary  reform  or  Catholic  emancipation,
had  combined  with  the  influences  that  sprang  from  the  French
Revolution  to  turn  many  into  new  and  dangerous  paths,  and  to
give  popularity  and  power  to  politicians  of  another  and  a  baser
type.  Still  the  mass  of  people  seem  as  yet  to  have  been  but  little
touched,  and  the  problem  of  making  Ireland  a  loyal  and  consti¬
tutional  country  was  certainly  not  an  impossible  one.  But  the
men  in  whose  hands  the  direction  of  affairs  was  placed,  were  de-
1  Camden  to  Portland,  Jan.  10,  1797.

C1I.  XXVII.

O’LEAEY’S  WARNING.

271

termined  to  resist  the  most  moderate  and  legitimate  reforms,  and
they  made  the  perpetual  disqualification  of  the  Catholics,  and
the  unqualified  maintenance  of  all  the  scandalous  and  enormous
abuses  of  the  representative  system,  the  avowed  and  foremost
objects  of  their  policy.  Their  parliamentary  majority  was  over¬
whelming,  and  with  the  existing  constituencies  there  seemed  no
prospect  of  overthrowing  it.  Yery  naturally,  then,  the  reforming
energy  of  the  country  ebbed  more  and  more  away  from  the
constitutional  leaders,  and  began  to  look  to  rebellion  and  foreign
assistance  for  the  attainment  of  its  objects.  Arthur  O’Leary,  who
was  by  far  the  ablest  of  the  Catholic  clergy  and  writers,  in  a  letter
to  a  supporter  of  the  Government,  expressed  his  opinion  of  the
situation  and  prospects  of  the  country  in  words  which  appear  to
me  both  weighty  and  unexaggerated.  £  Ireland,’  he  said,  £  owes
its  present  security  to  the  inconstant  elements,  and  to  the  con¬
stant  loyalty  of  the  majority  of  the  people,  a  loyalty  which,  I  am
sorry  to  find,  a  blind,  blundering,  and  tyrannical  policy  is  con¬
stantly  endeavouring  to  shake,  if  not  entirely  to  annihilate  ;  as
is  manifestly  evident  from  some  late  proceedings  of  the  Irish
House  of  Commons,  declaring  in  the  face  of  Europe,  and  within
three  days’  sailing  of  a  powerful  and  vigilant  enemy,  that  the
emancipation  of  the  Catholics  of  Ireland  is  inconsistent  with
the  security  of  the  kingdom  and  its  connection  with  England.
This  is  as  much  as  to  say  to  the  French,  ££  As  their  emancipation
is  inconsistent  with  the  security  of  this  kingdom,  it  is  natural
to  expect  that  they  will  fly  into  your  arms  from  ours,  always
uplifted  to  oppress  them.”  ’ 1

1  Arthur  O’Leary,  Jan.  30,  1797.  (I.S.P.O.")

272

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyiit.

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

The  loyalty  displayed  by  the  militia  and  the  Catholic  peasantry
when  the  French  lay  in  Bantry  Bay,  made  a  great  impression  on
all  classes  of  politicians.  The  United  Irishmen,  indeed,  urged
that  the  French  had  attempted  to  land  in  one  of  the  parts  of
Ireland  where  the  organisation  was  least  extended ;  that  they
had  sent  no  intimation  to  the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  which
could  render  it  possible  to  prepare  for  their  reception,  and  that
if  a  French  fleet  had  appeared  in  the  North  or  North-west
the  result  would  have  been  very  different.  In  these  statements
there  was  no  doubt  much  truth,  but  still  the  attitude  of  positive
and  even  enthusiastic  loyalty  exhibited  in  so  many  parts  of  Ire¬
land  seemed  to  show  that  the  seditious  spirit  was  less  formidable
than  might  have  been  imagined,  and  that  a  large  element  of
unreality  mingled  with  it.  It  by  no  .means  followed  from  the
fact  that  the  bulk  of  the  peasantry  in  any  district  had  been
sworn  in  as  United  Irishmen  or  as  Defenders,  that  they  were
prepared  to  appear  in  arms  for  the  French,  or  even  seriously
desired  an  invasion.  The  intimidation  exercised  by  small  bands
of  conspirators  induced  multitudes  to  take  an  oath  which  they
had  very  little  intention  of  keeping,  and  even  where  intimidation
did  not  come  into  operation,  disloyalty  was  often  a  fashion,  a
sentiment,  and  almost  an  amusement,  which  abundantly  coloured
the  popular  imagination,  but  was  much  too  feeble  and  unsub¬
stantial  a  thing  to  induce  men  to  make  any  genuine  sacrifice  in
its  cause.  Everyone  who  has  any  real  knowledge  of  Irish  life,
character,  and  history  knows  how  widely  a  sentiment  of  this
kind  has  been  diffused,  and  knows  also  that  districts  and  classes
where  it  has  been  most  prevalent  have  again  and  again  remained
perfectly  passive  in  times  when  the  prospects  of  rebellion  seemed
most  favourable,  and  have  furnished  thousands  of  the  best  and

CH.  XXVIII.

NATURE  OF  IRISH  DISAFFECTION.

273

most  faithful  soldiers  to  the  British  army.  Genuine  enthusiasts,
like  those  who,  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  were
sending  skilful  memoirs  to  the  French  Government,  represent¬
ing  all  Ireland  as  panting  for  revolution,  or  like  a  few  brave
men  who  in  later  times  have  sacrificed  to  their  political  convic¬
tions  all  that  makes  life  dear,  have  usually  miscalculated  its  force,
and  have  learnt  at  last,  by  bitter  experience,  that,  except  when
it  has  been  allied  with  religious  or  agrarian  passions,  it  usually
evaporates  in  words.

There  is  indeed,  perhaps,  only  one  condition  in  which  its
unassisted  action  can  be  a  serious  danger  to  the  State.  It  is
when  legislation  breaks  down  the  influence  of  the  educated  and
propertied  classes  of  the  community,  and  then  by  a  democratic
suffrage,  under  the  shelter  of  the  ballot,  throws  the  preponderat¬
ing  voting  power  of  the  country  into  the  hands  of  the  most
ignorant  and  the  most  disaffected.  A  majority  of  votes  repre¬
sents  very  imperfectly  deliberate  opinion.  It  represents  still
more  imperfectly  the  course  which  men  desire  with  real  earnest¬
ness,  and  for  which  they  will  make  real  sacrifices ;  but  a  languid
preference  or  an  idle  sentiment  may  be  quite  sufficient  to  place
desperate  and  unscrupulous  men  in  power,  and  to  give  them
the  means  of  dislocating  the  whole  fabric  of  the  State.  It  has
been  reserved  for  the  sagacity  of  modern  English  statesmanship
to  create  this  danger  in  Ireland.

But  after  all  that  can  be  said,  it  is  impossible  to  read  this
narrative  without  being  impressed  with  the  extremely  precarious
tenure  upon  which  British  dominion  in  Ireland  at  this  time
rested.  With  a  little  better  weather,  and  a  little  better  seaman¬
ship  on  the  part  of  the  French,  the  chances  were  all  against  it.
If  an  army  of  14,000  good  French  soldiers,  under  such  a  com¬
mander  as  Hoche,  had  succeeded  in  landing  without  delay,  and
if  a  rebellion  had  then  broken  out  in  any  part  of  the  country,
Ireland  would  most  probably  have  been,  for  a  time  at  least,
separated  from  the  British  Empire.  After  the  danger  was  over,
Beresford  described  the  situation  to  Auckland  with  great  candour.
‘  We  had,  two  days  after  they  [the  French]  were  at  anchor  in
Bantry  Bay,  from  Cork  to  Bantry  less  than  3,000  men,  two
pieces  of  artillery,  and  no  magazine  of  any  kind,  no  firing,  no
hospital,  no  provisions,  &c.  &c.  No  landing  was  made.  Pro-
261

2  74

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvui.

vidence  prevented  it ;  if  there  had,  where  was  a  stand  to  be
made  ?  It  is  clear  that  Cork  was  gone ;  who  would  answer
afterwards  for  the  loyalty  of  the ,  country,  then  in  possession  of
the  French  ?  W ould  the  northern  parts  of  the  country  have
remained  quiet  ?  Not  an  hour.’  1

The  danger,  however,  was  past,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  some
of  the  best  judges,  the  near  prospect  of  the  horrors  of  a  foreign
invasion  and  occupation  had  exercised  a  sobering  effect  on
popular  feeling.2  A  strong  reaction  of  loyalty  was  unquestion¬
ably  aroused,  and  it  was  felt  even  in  the  North,  where  the  dis¬
affection  was  far  deeper  and  more  venomous  than  in  the  other
provinces.  One  of  the  ablest  men  at  this  time  living  in  Ulster,
appears  to  me  to  have  been  a  clergyman  named  William
Hamilton,  who  was  an  active  magistrate  in  Donegal,  and  whose
letters  to  the  Government  furnish  a  -remarkably  vivid  picture  of
the  condition  of  a  great  portion  of  the  North.  Hamilton  was  a
man  of  some  scientific  eminence,  a  former  fellow  of  Dublin  Uni¬
versity,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Irish  Academy,  a  frequent
contributor  to  its  c  Proceedings,’  and  the  author  of  a  singularly
interesting  little  work  on  the  social  condition  and  antiquities  of
Antrim.  He  appears  from  his  writings  to  have  been  a  man  of
great  liberality  and  humanity ;  of  distinguished  talent,  and  of
indomitable  courage  and  energy.  In  the  beginning  of  1797,  he
wrote  :  ‘  I  have  rallied  the  entire  body  of  Protestants,3  and  de¬
tached  almost  the  whole  of  the  Romans  from  the  Dissenters —
whom  I  soon  found  to  be  alone  the  active  emissaries  of  Belfast —
from  the  moment  the  French  appeared  on  the  coast,  and  in  the
course  of  a  few  days  such  a  tide  of  loyalty  has  been  raised  as
beai's  down  all  opposition.  One  hundred  and  twenty  Protestants
and  a  hundred  and  ten  Romans  have  in  two  days  taken  the  oath
of  allegiance  before  me ;  and  such  is  the  unpopularity  of  dis¬
loyalty  at  present,  that  my  time  is  occupied  in  writing  tickets
in  evidence  of  individual  loyalty.  The  Dissenting  elders  and
leaders  have  tried  in  vain  to  stem  the  torrent.  Nineteen  of  the
number  have  been  driven  in  to  take  the  oath  under  the  penalty

1  Auckland  Correspondence ,  iii.  3  The  reader  will  remember  that

376.  Beresford  erroneously  estimated  in  Ireland  the  term  ‘  Protestant  ’  was
the  French  army  at  25,000  men.  at  this  time,  always  givtn  exclusively

2  Beresford  Correspondence ,  ii.  1 46 ;  to  members  of  the  Established  Church.

Hardy’s  Life  of  Charlemunt,  ii.  379.

CH.  XXVIII.

MEETING  OF  PARLIAMENT.

275

of  broken  heads  or  banishment,  and  by-and-by  it  is  possible  1
may  see  the  body  yield.’ 1

Parliament  met  on  January  16.  The  speech  from  the  Throne
announced  the  Spanish  declaration  of  war  against  England,  and
the  failure  of  Lord  Malmesbury’s  negotiations  at  Paris  ;  con¬
gratulated  Ireland  on  the  failure  of  the  expedition  to  Bantry
Bay,  and  acknowledged  in  emphatic  terms  the  loyal  spirit  shown
on  that  occasion,  by  all  classes  of  the  people.  As  in  the  two
previous  sessions,  the  language  of  Grattan  in  dealiug  with  the
Prench  war  bore  a  greater  resemblance  to  that  of  Fox,  than  at
the  beginning  of  the  war.  He  urged  the  mismanagement  of
military  affairs  and  the  pressing  necessity  for  peace,  and  he  ex¬
pressed  doubts  of  the  sincerity  of  the  recent  negotiation,  and  a
strong  opinion  that  it  was  the  democratic  character  of  the
French  Government  that  made  the  English  Ministers  disinclined
to  negotiate  with  it.  These  two  last  imputations,  which  were
equally  made  by  the  Whig  party  in  England,  appear  to  me  to
have  been  essentially  unfounded  ;  but  Grattan  stood  on  much
firmer  ground  when  he  denounced  the  negligence  that  had  b.een
shown  in  leaving  Ireland  during  twelve  critical  days  unpro¬
tected  by  an  English  fleet,  although  the  intended  expedition  to
Ireland  had  been  for  months  foreshadowed  by  the  Paris  news¬
papers.  This  was  the  second  war,  he  complained,  within  fifteen
years  in  which  Ireland  had  been  involved  by  England,  and  then
entirely  abandoned.  ‘In  1779,’  he  said,  ‘your  army  was  sent
away,  and  you  had  no  naval  protection  from  England,  and  yet
then,  as  now,  you  voted  large  sums  and  poured  out  your  popula¬
tion  to  man  the  fleets  and  armies  of  Great  Britain.  Your  volun¬
teers  then,  as  your  yeomen  now,  were  assigned  as  your  sole
protectors.  Two  years  back,  the  British  Minister  played  the
same  game  in  Ireland.  By  a  dispensing  power  he  withdrew
from  the  kingdom  the  troops  allotted  by  law  for  your  defence,
and  left  you  but  7,000  men,  and  that,  too,  at  a  time  when  you
had  no  volunteers.’  ‘  And  now,  a  third  time  have  they  left  us
without  the  protection  of  the  British  fleet,  with  raw  troops,  and
to  the  accident  of  wind  and  weather  for  safety.’  If  the  French
had  reached  Cork,  even  though  they  had  then  met  with  a  final
defeat,  this  event  would  have  thrown  back  beyond  calculation
1  Rev.  W.  Hamilton,  Jan.  14,  1797.  (I.S.P.O.)

276

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

tlie  prosperity  of  Ireland.  The  first  Irish  interest  was  now  to
accelerate  the  peace,  and  he  therefore  strongly  censured  the
position  of  the  Government,  that  the  surrender  of  Belgium  by
the  French  must  at  all  hazards  be  insisted  on.  4  It  is  not  that
I  do  not  wish  to  recover  Belgium,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  hazard
Ireland.  The  Minister  is  now  gambling,  not  with  distant
settlements  and  West  India  Islands,  but  with  the  home  part
and  parcel  of  the  British  Empire.’  He  moved  an  amendment
to  the  Address,  pointing  to  peace,  which  only  found  six  sup¬
porters,  but  the  proposed  intervention  of  the  Irish  Parliament
in  foreign  politics  was  probably  not  without  its  effect  in
deepening  Pitt’s  conviction  of  the  possible  dangers  which  such  a
Parliament  might  produce.

It  was  admitted  that  the  most  strenuous  and  speedy  efforts
should  be  made  to  put  the  country  into  a  state  of  defence,  and
it  is  remarkable  that  in  this  respect  the  language  of  the  Opposi¬
tion  was  much  more  emphatic  than  that  of  the  Administration,
who  appear  to  have  greatly  dreaded  an  increase  of  any  purely
Irish  force.  A  motion  of  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons  for  increasing
the  yeomen  by  50,000,  was  warmly  supported  by  Grattan,
but  rejected  by  the  Government.  A  proposal  of  Sir  John
Blaquiere  authorising  the  Government  to  raise  10,000  additional
troops,  who  were  to  serve  only  in  the  British  Isles,  gave  rise  to
much  discussion.  Grattan  desired  that  this  force  should  be
exclusively  devoted  to  the  defence  of  Ireland,  predicting  that  if
this  were  not  done  it  would  be  withdrawn  in  time  of  danger

O  ?

to  England;  but  the  measure  was  ultimately  carried  in  its
original  form,  though  not  yet  put  in  force.  On  February  21,
Pelham,  introducing  the  estimates  of  the  year,  stated  that  the
military  expenses  amounted  to  a  million  more  than  in  the  pre¬
ceding  year,  and  he  proposed  to  borrow  2,800,000£.,  and  to
raise  305, 0001.  of  additional  taxes  to  pay  the  interest.  This
sum  was  to  be  obtained  by  increased  duties  on  sugar,  tea,  wines
and  salt ;  by  imposing  licences  on  malt-houses,  and  by  some
slight  changes  in  the  Post  Office  and  in  the  import  duties,  and
he  strongly  urged  the  propriety  of  making  every  practicable
economy,  by  suppressing  or  diminishing  bounties.  In  the
course  of  this  session,  the  bounty  on  the  inland  carriage  of  corn
to  Dublin,  which  had  continued  since  1759,  was  abandoned

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  ABSENTEE  TAX.

277

after  some  curious  and  instructive  debates,  and  in  spite  of  the
strenuous  opposition  of  Parsons.

The  question  which  was  most  debated  in  the  first  weeks  of
the  session,  was  the  revived  proposal  of  Vandeleur  to  impose  a
tax  of  two  shillings  in  the  pound  on  the  estates  of  absentees.
Camden  mentioned  in  his  confidential  correspondence,  that  it
gave  him  great  anxiety,  as  he  found  that  ‘  there  was  a  general
disposition  in  favour  of  it  among  the  servants  of  the  Crown.’
‘It  was  not-,’  he  said,  ‘  the  mere  drain  of  rents  into  Great
Britain  which  affected  their  opinions,  but  the  convulsed  state  of
the  lower  classes,  which  they  attributed  entirely  to  the  want  of
influence  which  arises  from  resident  landlords.’  Yandeleur
urged,  in  supporting  the  tax,  that  the  Irish  debt  would  rise  in
the  course  of  this  year  to  little  less  than  ten  millions  ;  that  the
new  taxes  on  salt  and  leather  would  press  very  heavily  on  the
poor,  and  that  it  was  unjust  that  a  considerable  body  of  rich
men  should,  in  this  time  of  great  national  difficulty,  contribute
nothing  to  the  country  which  defended  their  property.  An
Irish  landowner  who  resided  in  England,  paid  neither  the
English  land-tax  nor  the  Irish  duties  on  consumption.  Yande¬
leur  estimated  the  number  of  these  proprietors  at  eighty-three,
and  he  supported  his  case  by  citing  the  law  which  prevented
‘  poor  artificers  ’  from  leaving  their  country.  The  proposal  was
defended,  among  others,  by  Grattan  and  Parsons,  and  opposed
by  Castlereagh,  who  argued  against  the  tax  chiefly  on  the
ground  that  it  tended  to  separate  the  two  countries.  Grattan
ridiculed  this  plea,  and  dwelt  especially  on  the  danger  and  the
injustice  of  exempting  a  rich  class  from  taxation,  when  it  was
found  necessary  to  impose  new  and  severe  taxes  on  the  poor ;
but  Camden  reported  to  the  Government  that  he  spoke  feebly,
as  if  he  were  half-hearted,  and  only  when  the  House  was  ex¬
hausted.  Forty-nine  members  supported,  and  122  opposed  the
tax,  and  this  is  said  to  have  been  the  best  division  obtained  by
the  Opposition  during  the  whole  session.  ‘  You  can  hardly  con¬
ceive,’  wrote  Camden,  ‘  how  very  extensively  the  determination
to  impose  that  tax  had  spread,  and  with  how  much  difficulty  I
was  enabled  to  withstand  the  torrent  of  public  opinion.’ 1

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Feb.  20,  xvii.  378-403  ;  Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.
March  1,  2,  1797;  Irish  Pari.  Bel?.  292-296;  Plowden,  ii.  698,  599.

278  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

On  February  26,  in  accordance  witb  an  order  of  the  English
Privy  Council,  the  Bank  of  England  suspended  cash  payments;
and  on  March  2,  by  the  direction  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and
Irish  Privy  Council,  a  similar  course  was  taken  by  the  Bank  of
Ireland.  The  directors,  however,  in  announcing  their  inten¬
tion  of  following  the  injunctions  of  the  Governments  of  England
and  Ireland,  added  that  they  were  ‘  happy  in  being  able  to
inform  the  public  that  the  situation  of  the  Bank  is  strong,  and
its  affairs  in  the  most  prosperous  situation,  and  that  the
governors  and  directors  will  accommodate  the  public  with  the
usual  discounts,  paying  the  amount  in  bank  notes.’  A  meeting
was  at  once  held  of  the  chief  merchants  and  traders  in  Dublin,
who  declared  their  approval  of  the  measure,  their  full  confi¬
dence  in  the  solvency  of  the  Dublin  banks,  and  their  readiness
to  receive  their  notes.1

Much  more  serious,  however,  than  the  shock  to  public
credit,  was  the  anarchy  which  was  now  rapidly  spreading
through  the  North,  and  which  in  a  few  weeks  rose  to  the  point
of  virtual  rebellion.  In  order  to  estimate  the  coercive  measures
that  were  taken  by  the  Government,  it  is  necessary  to
endeavour  to  obtain  a  clear  notion  of  the  extent,  and  the  kind
of  the  evil.  The  subject  is  one  which  lends  itself  easily  to
opposing  exaggerations,  and  it  has  been  chiefly  dealt  with  by
historians  who  are  violent  partisans.  There  exists,  however,  in
the  confidential  letters  of  magistrates,  which  are  now  in  Dublin
Castle,  a  large  amount  of  authentic  and  entirely  unused
material,  and  by  pursuing  the  sure,  though  I  fear  very  tedious,
process  of  bringing  together  a  multitude  of  detailed  contemporary
testimonies,  it  will,  I  think,  be  possible  to  arrive  at  some  just
conclusions.

The  disturbances  were  clearly  organised,  and  their  centres
were  innumerable  small  societies  of  United  Irishmen,  which
acted  very  independently  of  one  another,  and  which  were
multiplied  by  incessant  propagandism.  They  consisted  of
men  who,  either  through  French  principles,  or  through  disgust
at  the  corrupt  and  subservient  condition  of  the  Government
and  Parliament  in  Dublin,  now  aimed  distinctly  at  a  separate

*  Seward’s  Collectanea  Pulitica,  iii.  185-187.

cn.  xxvni.

STATE  OE  DONEGAL.

279

republic,  and  hoped  to  attain  it  by  armed  rebellion.  This
rebellion  was  not  to  take  place  till  a  French  army  had  landed.
In  the  mean  time,  their  business  was  to  prepare  for  the  French
by  nightly  drilling,  by  the  manufacture  of  pikes,  by  the
plunder  of  arms,  by  preventing  the  farmers  from  enlisting  in
the  yeomanry,  by  seducing  the  soldiers  and  the  militia,  by
systematically  paralysing  the  law.  But  with  the  political
movement,  there  was  now  combined  the  whole  system  of
Whiteboyism  and  Defenderism — all  the  old  grievances  about
tithes,  and  taxes,  and  rent,  which  had  so  often  stirred  the
people  to  outrage — and  on  the  outskirts  of  the  whole  move¬
ment  hung  a  vast  assisting  mass  of  aimless  anarchy ;  of
ordinary  crime  ;  of  the  restlessness  which  is  the  natural  conse¬
quence  of  great  poverty.

Donegal  and  Roscommon  appear  at  first  to  have  been  the
worst  counties.  The  improvement  which  Dr.  Hamilton  noticed
in  the  middle  of  January  soon  passed  away,  and  in  several
graphic  letters,  he  paints  the  utter  anarchy  that  prevailed  near
Lough  Swilly,  where  he  was  magistrate.  In  one  of  those
letters,  written  in  the  beginning  of  February,  he  describes  how,
between  his  house  and  Raphoe,  houses  were  everywhere  robbed
of  arms  and  money,  corn  destroyed,  turf-stacks  burnt,  windows
broken.  He  succeeded  in  capturing  some  of  the  depredators,
and  confining  them  with  a  guard  in  his  own  house,  but  from
150  to  200  men  speedily  assembled  and  attempted  a  rescue.
Hamilton  sought  for  assistance,  but  found  that  all  the  boats  on
Lough  Swilly  were  destroyed,  and  that  the  whole  country  was
watched.  He  succeeded,  however,  together  with  a  certain
Captain  Smyth,  in  making  his  way  to  Derry.  Lord  Cavan  gave
him  a  reinforcement  of  thirty-two  men  ;  he  returned  with  these
by  a  night  march  to  his  home,  found  the  prisoners  still  safe,
and  began  to  scour  the  country.  1  The  principal  offenders,’
he  wrote,  1  who  are  almost  universally  Dissenters,  have  fled.’
‘  Paine’s  “  Rights  of  Man,”  French  support,  immunity  from  revenue
laws,  from  tithes,  &c.,  and  the  overthrow  of  the  King  and  our
form  of  government  in  general,  seem  all  to  have  been  resorted
to,  as  principles  and  topics  to  influence  their  party.  .  .  .  From
common  and  poor  men  I  have  followed  up  the  association  to
comfortable  farmers ;  from  them  to  Dissenting  ministers,  not  in

280

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTHRY.  ch.  xxrm.

employment.’ 1  £  Not  a  single  night,’  wrote  another  informant,

£  has  past  for  this  last  week  in  the  part  of  the  barony  of  Raphoe
which  is  near  Letterkenny,  unmarked  by  outrage.  Every
house,  with  a  few  exceptions,  in  the  parishes  of  Ray  and  Leek,
has  been  plundered  of  their  arms  and  pewter ;  and  what  makes
the  matter  more  awful,  no  argument  can  induce  anyone  wdio
has  been  robbed,  to  give  the  slightest  hint  that  may  lead  to  the
discovery  of  the  marauders.  Nay,  their  conduct  rather  argues
an  easy  satisfaction  at  the  loss,  than  a  wish  to  recover  the  arms
and  bring  the  ruffians  to  justice.’1  2

From  Strabane,  which  was  in  the  adjoining  county  of
Tyrone,  a  Scotch  colonel  writes,  £  Unless  speedy  measures  are
adopted  to  separate  the  soldiery  from  the  inhabitants,  the  most
fatal  consequences  are  to  be  apprehended,  .  .  .  scattered  as
they  are  through  the  houses  of  the  inhabitants,  who  are  com¬
pletely  organised  to  overthrow  the  Government  of  the  country.’
He  states  that  the  most  assiduous  efforts  were  being  made  to
seduce  the  soldiers,  that  the  area  of  disaffection  was  increasing
with  the  greatest  rapidity,  and  that,  either  through  fear  or
through  a  desire  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the  people,  the  magis¬
trates  were  shamefully  supine.  Through  the  system  of  terror,
he  says,  4  which  has  in  this  country  unbounded  influence,’  c  the
civil  power  is  becoming  totally  destitute  of  energy.’  United
Irishmen,  who  demand  arms,  are  never  resisted.  He  had
arrested  some  plunderers  wearing,  like  the  old  Whiteboys,
white  shirts  over  their  dress.  It  is  £  most  indispensably  neces¬
sary,’  he  thinks,  £  to  proclaim  the  whole  of  the  North  of  Ireland
without  loss  of  time.’ 3

A  melancholy  letter  soon  followed,  written  from  Derry  by  the
Earl  of  Cavan,  describing  the  murder  of  the  courageous  magis¬
trate  in  Donegal.  Dr.  Hamilton  had  been  from  home  for  some
days  on  business,  and  on  his  return  he  stopped  at  the  house  of
a  clergyman  named  Waller,  who,  like  himself,  had  been  a  fellow
of  Trinity  College,  and  who  was  now  the  rector  of  a  parish  half¬
way  between  Derry  and  Letterkenny,  and  six  miles  from  Raphoe.
In  the  evening  he  was  sitting  playing  cards  with  the  family  of

1  I.S.P.O.  This  letter  was  written  ‘  State  of  the  Barony  of  Raphoe.’

on  Feh.  I.  3  Colonel  James  Leith,  Feb.  7,

2  Feb.  26,  1797.  Paper  headed,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII,

MURDER  OF  HAMILTON.

281

his  host,  when  the  house  was  attacked.  Mrs.  Waller  was  shot
dead.  Hamilton  fled  to  the  cellar,  but  the  marauding  party
declared  that  they  would  burn  the  house,  and  kill  everyone  in  it,
unless  he  was  given  up.  A  man  and  two  women  servants  dragged
him  from  his  place  of  concealment.  He  clung  desperately  to  the
staple  of  the  hall-door  lock,  but  the  application  of  fire  compelled
him  to  loose  his  hold.  He  was  thrust  out,  and  in  a  moment
murdered,  and  his  body  hideously  mangled.

Lord  Cavan  described  the  situation  of  the  country  as  getting
continually  worse,  and  the  few  magistrates  and  resident  gentry
as  so  terrified  by  recent  outrages  and  murders,  that  they  had
fled  to  the  towns.  There  were  nightly  assemblies  of  rebels.
The  stacks  and  houses  of  obnoxious  persons  were  burnt  with¬
in  a  few  miles  of  Derry.  Lord  Cavan  firmly  believed  that  a
rebellion  was  ready  to  break  out,  and  that  nothing  could  pre¬
vent  it  except  a  reinforcement  of  troops  and  a  proclamation  of
martial  law.  .  He  urged  also  the  necessity  of  £  emptying  the
gaols  of  their  present  crowded  numbers,  by  sending  them  to  the
fleet,  or  disposing  of  them  any  way  but  by  trial  in  this  country,
where  no  jury  could  be  found  to  convict  them,  and  by  granting
an  amnesty  to  those  who  come  forward  and  acknowledge  their
error.’ 1  It  was  stated  in  Parliament,  that  ‘  such  was  the
audacity  of  the  United  Irishmen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Derry,
that  Lord  Cavan,  who  commanded  there,  was  obliged  to  order
the  garrison  men  to  deposit  their  arms  every  night  in  the  court¬
house,  to  prevent  them  from  being  taken  by  force.  Above  400
families  had  been  robbed  of  their  arms  in  that  neighbourhood
in  one  night.’ 2  This  county  had,  indeed,  for  some  time  been
perhaps  the  most  disturbed  in  Ireland,  and  a  letter  of  Camden

1  Earl  of  Cavan  to  Pelham,  March
3,  13,  1797.  There  is  also  a  memorial
from  the  Provost  and  Fellowsof  T.C.D.
begging  the  Lord  Lieutenant  to  pro¬
vide  for  the  family  of  Dr.  Hamilton,
and  speaking  in  very  warm  terms  of
liis  character.  A  few  more  particulars
about  this  murder  will  be  found  in
the  speech  of  Lord  Clare  in  the  debate
in  the  House  of  Lords,  Feb.  19,  1798,
pp.  82,  83  ;  and  in  a  speech  of  Dr.
Browne,  the  M.P.  for  Trinity  College,
Pari.  Deb.  xvii.  411.  An  Act  of  Par¬
liament  was  passed  enabling  the  King

to  give  an  annuity  of  700 1.  a  year
to  the  family  of  Dr.  Hamilton,  and
another  Act  authorised  a  grant  of
300Z.  a  year  to  the  family  of  Mr.
Knipe,  a  clergyman  who  had  been
murdered  on  account  of  his  perfor¬
mance  of  his  magisterial  duties  in
the  county  of  Meath,  37  Geo.  lit.
c.  62,  63.  A  short  life  of  Hamilton
is  prefixed  to  an  edition  of  his  Letters
concerning  the  Northern  Coast  of  An¬
trim,  which  was  published  at  Coleraine
in  1839.

2  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xvii.  164.

282

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXV III.

clearly  indicates  one  cause  of  tlie  evil.  ‘Several  companies  in
the  City  of  London  own  large  tracts  of  ground  in  it ;  they  have
lately  refused  to  renew  leases,  except  at  exorbitant  fines  or
great  increase  of  rent.  The  consequence  has  been,  that  the  few
gentlemen  who  resided  there,  and  were  disposed  to  improve
their  estates,  have  been  driven  from  that  county.’  The  great  pro¬
prietors,  Lord  Waterford,  Lord  Londonderry,  and  Mr.  Conolly,
lived  in  other  parts  of  Ireland,  so  that  over  a  very  large  and
wild  district  there  was  not  a  resident  gentleman  of  1,500Z.  a
year.1

In  the  county  of  Armagh  similar  disturbances  were  rapidly
extending.  This  county  also  had,  for  several  months,  been  in
a  state  of  extreme  turbulence,  and  some  portions  of  it  had
been  proclaimed  under  the  Insurrection  Act  in  the  preceding
December.2  Large  armed  parties  were  going  about  the  country.
Detachments  of  soldiers  had  been  attacked  by  parties  of  200  or
300  men.  More  soldiers,  and  a  general  disarming  of  the  people,
it  was  said,  were  imperatively  required.3

The  system  of  carrying  away  untried  men  to  serve  in  the
fleet,  which  had  been  first  illegally  practised  by  Lord  Car-
hampton,  then  indemnified  by  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  then
formally  sanctioned  in  proclaimed  districts  by  the  Insurrection
Act,  gave  a  fiercer  tinge  to  the  disaffection  of  the  North.
Higgins,  who  was  well  informed  about  the  proceedings  of  the
seditious  party  in  Dublin,  mentions  that  many  letters  had
been  received  from  Belfast,  and  from  the  county  of  Down,  ex¬
pressing  a  belief  that  this  system  was  about  to  be  again  largely
practised,  and  that  it  would  be  resisted  to  the  death,  and
adding  that  the  arrival  of  a  French  expedition  in  the  northern
province  was  confidently  expected.4  McNally  nearly  at  the
same  time  warned  the  Government,  that,  from  daily  intercourse
with  ‘  the  leading  men  who  informed  the  Catholic  Committee
in  Dublin  and  the  fraternity  of  reformers  in  Belfast,’  he  knew
beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt  that  their  real  object  was  the
establishment  of  a  separate  republic.  The  persecutions  of  the
Catholics  in  the  North  were  largely  made  use  of.  A  song

1  Camden  to  Portland,  April  3,  3  W.  Sykes,  March  3.  (Newtown

1797.  Hamilton.)

2  Seward’s  Collectanea  Politica,  4  F.  Higgins,  March  14,  1797.
iii.  177-179

CH.  XXVIII.

OPPOSITION  TO  ENLISTMENTS.

283

describing  them  was  printed  and  widely  circulated,  and  Coun¬
sellor  Sampson  was  writing  a  history  of  the  county  of  Armagh
in  which  he  would  dilate  upon  the  oppressions  of  the  poor.1

The  letters  of  the  same  correspondent  at  this  time,  give
several  other  particulars  about  the  secret  history  of  the  conspi¬
racy.  I  have  mentioned  the  efforts  of  the  leaders  in  the
Catholic  Committee,  and  generally  of  the  United  Irishmen,  to
prevent  their  followers  from  enlisting  in  the  regiments  which  the
Government  was  endeavouring  to  raise  for  the  purpose  of  defend¬
ing  the  country.  This  policy,  however,  was  not  adopted  without
much  discussion  and  division.  Some  even  of  those  who  were
looking  forward  most  eagerly  to  a  French  invasion  and  an  Irish
republic,  favoured  the  policy  of  enlisting.  They  dwelt  on  the
possibility  of  the  yeomanry  force  becoming  a  new  volunteer  army,
and  obtaining  reform  and  emancipation  by  a  menace  of  force ;
upon  the  importance  of  giving  their  partisans  by  every  means
arms  and  discipline  j  upon  the  danger  of  permitting  a  new  armed
Protestant  ascendency  to  grow  up.  Many  Catholics,  according  to
McNally,  actually  enlisted  under  these  motives,  retaining  their  old
aims  and  sentiments  though  wearing  the  British  uniform.  The
majority  of  the  leaders,  however,  took  the  other  side.  Looking
forward  to  invasion  and  separation,  they  resolved  if  possible  to
paralyse  resistance,  and  those  amongst  them  who  best  knew
their  countrymen  probably  suspected,  with  good  reason,  that  men
who  enlisted  into  a  yeomanry  regiment  with  the  intention  of
playing  the  part  of  rebels  and  traitors,  would  be  likely  to  play
a  very  different  part  when  they  found  themselves  in  the  battle¬
field,  commanded  by  loyal  officers,  with  the  British  flag  flying
above  their  heads,  and  under  the  spell  of  military  discipline  and
enthusiasm.  Keogh,  Braughall,  Jackson,  and  several  other
leaders  very  strongly  urged  that  every  effort  should  be  made
to  prevent  the  Catholics  or  United  Irishmen  from  enlisting.
In  September  1796,  McCormick  went  on  a  mission  through
Munster  for  the  express  purpose  of  preventing  Catholic  enlist¬
ment.  To  assist  this  object,  letters  were  sent  through  the  North

1  J.  W.,  Feb.  4.  The  writer  ends
by  asking  for  money.  Sampson,  who
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  defence
of  the  United  Irishmen,  and  who  was
in  a  position  to  know  a  great  deal

about  what  passed  in  Ulster,  after¬
wards  published  his  memoirs,  with
accounts  of  the  affairs  of  1798,  at  New
York.  The  book  appears  to  me  very
mendacious  and  incredible.

284

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

saying,  that  the  Government  intended  to  exclude  bcth  the
Catholics  and  the  Dissenters.  Grattan  desired  above  all  things
that  the  country  should  arm  to  resist  invasion,  and  at  his  sug¬
gestion  a  paper  was  placed  in  a  well-known  coffee-house,  in  which
those  who  were  prepared  to  volunteer  might  write  down  their
names.  It  was  soon,  however,  found  necessary  to  withdraw  it.
£  While  Grattan’s  resolution,’  wrote  McNally,  £  lay  at  the  Old
Exchange  Coffee-house,  a  number  of  Catholics  and  Dissenters
attended  daily  to  prevent  signatures.’ 1

McNally  had  specially  good  opportunities  of  learning  the  sen¬
timents  of  Grattan,  for  he  had  himself  accompanied  his  friend
James  Tandy  to  Tinnehinch  to  consult  with  him  about  a  project
of  Tandy  for  raising  volunteers.  He  found  Grattan  exceedingly
alarmed  both  at  the  internal  condition  of  the  country,  and  at  the
prospect  of  invasion,  and  exceedingly  anxious  that  a  strong
volunteer  force  should  be  speedily  created.  In  order  to  set
the  example,  he  himself  joined  a  small  party  of  cavalry,  which  was
formed  for  preserving  the  peace  of  his  neighbourhood.  McNally
reported  to  the  Government,  that  Grattan  declared  that  the  only
wise  and  safe  policy  was  to  revive  the  old  volunteers  of  1778,
with  their  old  name,  their  old  principles,  and  as  far  as  possible
their  old  leaders  and  organisation.  Such  a  body,  he  thought,
would  carry  with  it  a  weight  and  a  prestige  that  might  repress
disloyalty  and  anarchy,  and  it  would  secure  the  country  against
invasion.2

It  will  usually  be  found  that  men  who  have  borne  a  conspi¬
cuous  part  in  some  great  outburst  of  national  enthusiasm,  under¬
rate  the  subsequent  changes  that  pass  over  public  sentiment,  and
imagine  that  under  wholly  different  conditions  the  same  enthu¬
siasm  may  be  reproduced.  It  is  difficult  to  think  that  Grattan
can  have  failed  to  see  that,  in  the  existing  condition  of  Ireland,

1  J.  W.,  Sept.  3,  28,  Oct.  1,  Dec.
8,  12,  26,  1796  ;  Jan.  1,  1797.

2  1  Mr.  Grattan  is  of  opinion,  that
the  salvation  of  the  country  depends
on  the  immediately  calling  out  the
old  volunteers,  to  appear  under  arms
on  the  old  establishment  and  prin¬
ciples.  Government,  he  thinks,  will
act  unwisely  in  not  adopting  the
measure.  The  yeomanry  will  be  found
inadequate  to  repel  an  invasion  and
keep  the  country  quiet.  The  old

volunteers,  he  said,  would  be  equal  to
both.  Their  appearance  would  infuse
a  general  spirit,  and  repress  the  con¬
vulsions  of  the  lower  orders.  The
latter  would  look  on  the  volunteers
as  friends ;  they  consider  the  yeo¬
manry  as  enemies.  If  the  Dublin
volunteers  are  called  out,  Mr.  Grattan
will  appear  as  a  private,  or  in  any
station  his  friends  may  please  to  call
him.’  (J.  W.,  Jan.  31,  1797.)

CH.  XXVIII.

MARTIAL  LAW  IN  ULSTER.

2S5

a  great  loyal,  united,  constitutional,  and  national  movement,
guided  by  the  gentry  of  the  country,  like  that  of  1778  and  the
four  following  years,  was  wholly  impossible.  It  was  certain  that
the  Government  would  not  consent  to  a  movement  on  the  lines  of
the  old  volunteers,  and  even  if  it  had  been  otherwise  all  the  condi¬
tions  out  of  which  that  movement  grew  had  altered.  Jacobinism,
Defenderism,  and  Orangism  had  changed  the  whole  course  of  Irish
sentiments,  had  left  Irish  life  with  rifts  and  fissures  that  could
never  again  be  filled.  It  was  becoming  more  and  more  evident,
that  while  an  enrolment  of  the  loyal  was  absolutely  necessary
for  the  safety  of  the  country,  such  an  enrolment  would  place
arms  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  men  who  were  fiercely  opposed  to  a
great  portion  of  the  citizens.

On  the  9th  of  March,  Camden  wrote  a  very  important  letter
to  the  Government  in  England,  announcing  a  new  and  momen¬
tous  step.  He  began  by  describing  the  alarming  condition  of
the  North.  ‘  The  most  outrageous  and  systematic  murders
have  been  committed  in  the  counties  of  Down  and  Donegal.’
A  farmer  had  been  murdered  for  having  joined  the  yeomanry,
and  many  others  had  been  obliged  by  terror  to  resign  their  posts
in  that  body.  He  mentioned  the  murder  of  Dr.  Hamilton,  and
added  that  it  was  the  system  of  the  United  Irishmen  to  prevent
the  magistrates  from  acting  and  the  yeomen  from  assembling.
Several  districts,  on  the  requisition  of  the  magistrates,  had  been
placed  under  the  Insurrection  Act,  and  there  was  an  almost
unanimous  voice  in  the  country  that  no  mild  measures  could
eradicate  the  disease.  ‘  The  endeavour  to  arrest  the  progress  of
this  system,’  he  added,  ‘  if  it  be  possible,  is  the  more  necessary
as  infinite  pains  are  taken  to  spread  its  influence  over  other
parts  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  counties  of  Fermanagh,  Louth,
Kildare,  and  in  the  King’s  County  it  has  appeared,  and  also
in  the  county  of  Mayo,  and  if  effectual  means  are  not  taken  to
stop  it,  I  think  .  .  .  that  the  North  of  Ireland  will  not  be  the
only  part  of  this  kingdom  in  a  state  little  short  of  rebellion.’
Under  these  circumstances,  General  Lake  was  ordered  to  dis¬
arm  the  districts  in  which  outrages  have  taken  place.  Patrols
were  to  arrest  all  persons  assembling  by  night,  and  all  assemblies
were  prohibited.  ‘  If,’  he  adds,  £  the  urgency  of  the  case  demands
a  conduct  beyond  that  which  can  be  sanctioned  by  the  law,  the

286

ENGLAND  IN  TEE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

General  has  orders  from  me  not  to  suffer  the  cause  of  justice  to
be  frustrated  by  the  delicacy  which  might  possibly  have  actuated
the  magistracy.’ 1

This  letter,  as  it  appears  to  me,  scarcely  describes  in  adequate
terms  the  gravity  of  the  step  that  had  been  taken,  which  was,  in
effect,  to  place  the  whole  of  Ulster  under  martial  law.  On  March
3,  Pelham  had  written  to  General  Lake  an  official  letter  of  in¬
structions,  describing  at  the  same  time. the  nature  and  magni¬
tude  of  the  evil.  In  the  counties  of  Down,  Antrim,  Derry  and
Donegal,  secret  and  treasonable  associations  still  continued  to  an
alarming  degree,  attempting  to  defeat  by  terror  the  exertions  of
the  well  disposed,  and  threatening  the  lives  of  all  who  gave  any
evidence  against  the  seditious.  There  were  constant  nocturnal
assemblings  and  drillings  ;  peaceful  inhabitants  were  disarmed  ■
the  magistrates  were  openly  resisted,  and  many  kinds  of  out¬
rage  were  perpetrated.  The  depredators  had  collected  vast
stores  of  arms  in  concealed  places  ;  cut  down  innumerable  trees
on  the  estates  of  the  gentry  to  make  pike  handles ;  stolen  great
quantities  of  lead  to  cast  bullets  ;  prevented  numbers  by  intimi¬
dation  from  joining  the  yeomanry.  ‘  They  refuse,’  he  continued,

‘  to  employ  in  manufactures  those  who  enlist  in  said  corps,  they
not  ouly  threaten,  but  ill-treat  the  persons  of  the  yeomanry,  and
even  attack  their  houses  by  night,  and  proceed  to  the  barbarous
extremity  of  deliberate  and  shocking  murder:  .  .  .  and  they
profess  a  resolution  to  assist  the  enemies  of  his  Majesty  if  they
should  be  enabled  to  land  in  this  kingdom.’  The  General  was
accordingly  commanded  to  disarm  all  persons  who  did  not  bear
his  Majesty’s  commission  ;  to  employ  force  against  all  armed
assemblages  not  authorised  by  law ;  to  disperse  all  tumultuous
assemblages,  though  they  may  be  unarmed,  ‘  without  waiting  for
the  sanction  and  assistance  of  the  civil  authority,’  if  such  a
course  appeared  to  him  necessary  or  expedient,  and  finally  to
consider  those  parts  of  the  country  where  the  outrages  took
place,  as  requiring.all  the  measures  ‘which  a  country  depending
upon  military  force  alone  for  its  protection  would  require.’  Lake
was  therefore  fully  empowered  to  act  as  in  a  country  under
martial  law,  and  he  was  authorised  to  call  on  all  loyal  subjects
to  assist  him.  On  the  13th,  Lake  accordingly  issued  a  procla-
1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  9,  1797.

CH.  XXY1II.

PROCLAMATION  OP  LAKE.

287

mation  at  Belfast,  ordering  all  persons  in  that  district  who  were
not  peace  officers  or  soldiers,  to  bring  in  their  arms  and  ammu¬
nition,  and  inviting  information  about  concealed  arms.1

This  proclamation  was  made  the  subject  of  elaborate
debates,  in  both  the  Irish  and  English  Houses  of  Commons  ;
Grattan  taking  the  most  conspicuous  part  in  the  one,  and  Fox  „
in  the  other.  In  the  strange  evolutions  and  transformations  of
Irish  history,  it  is  curious  to  observe  how  the  active,  energetic,
dangerous  sedition  against  which  the  proclamation  was  directed,
was  represented  as  essentially  Northern  and  Protestant.  As
yet  only  portions  of  Ulster  had  been  proclaimed,  and  they  were,
for  the  most  part,  portions  which  were  emphatically  Protestant.

‘  Who  are  the  people,’  said  Grattan, £  whom  the  Ministers  attaint
of  treason,  and  consign  to  military  execution  ?  They  are  the
men  who  placed  William  III.  on  the  throne  of  this  kingdom.’

‘  The  Government  have  declared  they  will  persist  in  proscribing
the  Catholics,  and  they  now  consign  the  Protestants  to  military
execution.’  1  The  character  of  the  people  who  inhabit  the  North
of  Ireland,’  said  Fox,  ‘  has  been  severely  stigmatised.  ...  It
is  said  that  these  men  are  of  the  old  leaven.  They  are  indeed
of  the  old  leaven  that  rescued  the  country  from  the  tyranny  of
Charles  I.  and  James  II.  .  .  .  the  leaven  which  kneaded  the
British  Constitution.2

It  was  contended  that  the  Proclamation  of  General  Lake  was
plainly  and  palpably  illegal — as  illegal  as  the  recent  conduct  of
Lord  Carhampton — so  illegal,  that  Grattan  declared  that  £  any
person  who  broke  into  a  house  and  took  out  arms  under  this
order  was  guilty  of  felony.’  This  proposition  was  not  seriously
disputed.  Something,  indeed,  was  said  by  a  lawyer,  of  a  judg¬
ment  of  Lord  Mansfield,  during  the  Gordon  riots,  to  the  effect
that  £  it  was  perfectly  legal  for  the  executive  authority  to  call
forth  the  military  power  to  suppress  treason  and  rebellion,  when
the  civil  power  was  overborne,  and  the  magistrates  were  either
intimidated  or  unwilling  to  do  their  duty,’  and  something  by  a
member  who  was  not  a  lawyer,  about  the  prerogative  of  the
Crown  ‘  to  act  according  to  discretion  for  the  public  good,  with¬
out  the  direction  of  the  law,  and  sometimes  even  against  it.’ 3

1  Seward,  iii.  188-190.  2  Pari.  Bid.  xxxiii.  151.

3  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  xvii.  133.

288

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvui.

But  the  Government  soon  abandoned  this  line  of  defence.  The
Attorney-General  and  the  Chief  Secretary  frankly  acknowledged
‘  that  the  prerogative  was  extended  beyond  the  letter  of  the  law,’
but  they  contended  that  it  was  justified  ‘  by  the  most  powerful
necessity,’  4  by  that  supreme  law  (salus  populi  suprema  lex),  that
«  extreme  necessity  which  supersedes  every  particular  obligation.’ 1

Much  was  said  in  illustration  of  this  view.  Papers  had  been
seized,  one  Northern  member  observed,  expressing  the  determi¬
nation  of  the  rebels  4  to  abolish  all  taxes  and  tithes,  and  reduce
all  rents  to  a  certain  standard,  ten  shillings  an  acre  for  the  best
land,  and  so  downwards,  and  to  continue  in  arms  till  these  things
were  accomplished.’  4  The  law  in  the  province  of  Ulster  could
not  be  executed.’  4  The  United  Irishmen,  it  was  notorious,  had
more  influence  than  the  Government,’  and  B.eresford,  in  some
imprudent  words  which  were  afterwards  much  repeated,  said,
4  They  must  have  recourse  to  arms,  ...  he  wished  they  were
in  open  rebellion — then  they  might  be  opposed  face  to  face.’

Similar  language  was  held  by  at  least  one  other  member,
and  it  was  severely  reprobated  by  Grattan.  4  The  French
threatening  to  invade  you,  the  Catholics  refused  their  claims,
and  the  Protestants  of  the  North  informed  that  it  is  wished  they
should  rise  in  rebellion  that  Government  itself  might  act  upon
them  at  once  !  ’  Such  a  policy,  he  maintained,  could  lead  only
to  ruin,  and  he  strongly  urged  that  the  irritation  of  Ulster
would  never  have  risen  to  its  present  height,  but  for  the  flagrant
corruption  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  the  obstinate  resistance
of  the  Government  to  the  most  moderate  reform.  Grattan,  as
we  have  seen,  more  than  once  supported  strenuous  measures  of
exceptional  coercive  legislation  directed  against  crime,  but  he
now  maintained  that  the  whole  course  of  the  Government  policy
relating  to  Ulster,  was  essentially  wrong.  He  censured  the
proclamation  of  martial  law  ;  the  suspension  of  the  Habeas
Corpus  Act ;  the  Convention  Act,  and  the  Insurrection  Act.
He  described  the  Government  policy  in  a  skilful  phrase  as  4  law¬
making  in  the  spirit  of  law-breaking,’  and  he  formally  pledged
himself  never  to  connect  himself  with  any  Government  which
did  not  support  4  the  total  emancipation  of  the  Catholics,  and  a
radical  reform  of  the  representatives  of  the  people.’

1  Irish  Pari.  Deb.  144,  146.

CH.  XXVIII.

GRATTAN’S  APPEAL  TO  ENGLAND.

289

Camden  noticed  that  the  tone  of  Grattan’s  speech  evidently
showed  that  he  was  acting  in  conjunction  with  Fox,  and  it  was
clear  that  he  now  looked  forward  eagerly  to  the  downfall  of  the
Ministry.  A  curious  illustration  of  his  changed  attitude  was
the  encouragement  he  gave  to  Fox  to  bring  forward  the  discus¬
sion  of  Irish  affairs  in  the  British  Parliament.  No  one,  it  may
be  boldly  said,  would  a  few  years  before  have  reprobated  such  a
course  more  vehemently  as,  in  spirit  if  not  in  letter,  a  plain
violation  of  the  Constitution  of  1782.  But  he  now  spoke  with
scorn  of  those  who  described  as  unconstitutional  *an  inquiry  by
a  British  Parliament  into  a  conduct  which  tends  to  bring  the
connection  into  danger,  and  which  derives  its  -principle  of
motion  from  the  British  Ministry,  as  if  the  connection  were  not
a  question  of  empire,  or  a  question  of  empire  were  not  a  question
for  a  British  Parliament.’  He  appears  indeed  to  have  been  at
this  time  firmly  convinced  that  an  invasion  accompanied  by  a
rebellion  would  lead  Ireland  to  absolute  ruin ;  that  without  a
complete  reversal  of  the  Government  policy,  such  a  catastrophe
was  extremely  probable,  and  that  even  if  it  did  not  take  place,
the  most  intelligent  and  most  energetic  portion  of  the  nation
was  drifting  rapidly  into  Republicanism.  The  mismanagement
of  the  war,  the  dissolution  of  the  confederacy  against  France,
the  isolation  of  England,  and  the  overwhelming  triumph  of
French  arms,  filled  him  with  unfeigned  alarm,  and  he  believed
that,  unless  Protestant  Ulster  could  be  conciliated,  neither
Ireland  nor  the  Empire  would  weather  the  storm.  In  the  Irish
Parliament,  he  was  at  last  convinced  that  nothing  could  be
done.  The  scornful  name  of  ‘the  seven  wise  men,’  which  was
now  given  to  the  Opposition,  sufficiently  revealed  their  impo¬
tence,  and  there  was  only  one  division  during  the  session  in
which  a  body  approaching  fifty  votes  could  be  rallied  against  the
Government.1

In  the  British  Parliament,  Fox  dilated  on  the  familiar  topics
of  the  subservience  to  which  the  Irish  Parliament  had  been
reduced  by  the  enormous  accumulation  of  Crown  influence ;  the
consequent  alienation  of  a  Northern  population, 1  as  well  informed,
as  intelligent,  as  enlightened  as  the  middle  classes  in  Great

1  This  very  interesting  debate  took  place  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons
on  March  20.

2G2

290

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxtiii.

Britain  or  any  otter  country;  ’  tte  toast  of  Fitzgibbon,  ttat  half
a  million  had  once  been  expended  in  defeating  an  Opposition,
and  that  the  same  sum  might  be  expended  again  ;  the  strange
vacillation  which  had  been  shown  on  the  Catholic  question  ;
the  exertion  of  Government  influence  to  exclude  Catholics  from
the  corporations  which  had  been  formally  opened  to  them  ;  the
hopes  that  had  been  held  out  to  the  Catholics  when  Lord  Fitz-
william  had  been  sent  over,  and  the  fatal  consequences  of  his
recall.  He  concluded  by  moving  an  Address  to  the  King,  pray¬
ing  him  to  take  into  consideration  the  disturbed  state  of  Ireland,
and  to  endeavour  to  tranquillise  and  conciliate  it  by  healing
measures.

Such  a  proposal  had  no  chance  of  being  carried,  and  Pitt
opposed  it  with  great  power,  as  a  flagrant  violation  of  the  in¬
dependence  of  the  Irish  Parliament.  England,  he  said,  had
recognised  beyond  all  doubt  and  cavil  the  principle  that  the
sole  power  of  legislating  for  Ireland  was  in  the  Parliament  of
Ireland,  ‘which  is  as  entirely  distinct  and  incapable  of  being
controlled  by  us  as  we  are  independent  of  them.’  The  proposed
Address  is  ‘  nothing  less  than  an  attempt  directly  to  control  the
legitimate  authority  of  the  Parliament  of  another  country  ;
to  trespass  on  the  acknowledged  rights  of  another  distinct  legis¬
lative  power.’  ‘  Having  renounced  all  power  over  the  Legisla¬
ture  of  Ireland,  having  solemnly  divested  ourselves  of  all  right
to  make  laws  in  any  respect  for  Ireland,  having  given  to
Ireland  a  distinct  and  independent  Legislature,  and  having,  with
every  solid  testimony  of  good  faith,  laid  aside  all  pretensions  to
interference  in  her  internal  concerns,’  can  we  undertake  to
prescribe  the  laws  by  which  she  should  be  governed,  or  the
changes  that  should  be  made  in  her  Legislature  ?  The  King’s
good  disposition  towards  Ireland  needs  no  proof.  The  most
minute  attention  has  been  paid  to  her  commerce,  agriculture,  and
manufactures.  The  independence  of  her  Parliament  has  been
recognised  beyond  a  possibility  of  doubt.  The  whole  reign  has
been  one  continued  series  of  concessions,  and  they  have  ex¬
ceeded  the  sum  of  all  the  preceding  ones  since  the  Revolution.
If  something  more  is  required,  is  not  his  Majesty  bound  to  act,
in  what  concerns  the  internal  regulation  of  Ireland,  upon  the
advice  of  the  Legislature  of  that  country  ?  To  assent  to  the

ch.  xxvm.

DEMANDS  FOR  CATHOLIC  RELIEF.

291

Address  would  be  highly  unconstitutional  with  respect  to
Ireland,  an  unwarrantable  interference  in  the  duties  of  the
legislative  and  executive  government  of  that  nation.1

It  was  a  strange  thing  to  see  the  founder  of  the  Constitution
of  1782  so  eager  to  induce  the  British  Parliament  to  intervene
in  Irish  legislation,  while  the  men  who  had  originally  opposed
that  Constitution,  and  the  men  who  at  last  strangled  it  by  cor¬
ruption,  stood  forward  as  the  champions  of  the  parliamentary  in¬
dependence  of  Ireland.  The  motives,  however,  of  both  parties
were  obvious,  and  the  two  widely  opposed  policies  which  were
advocated  for  dealing  with  disaffection  in  Ulster  might  both  be
defended  by  plausible  arguments.  The  Irish  Government  had
now  firmly  resolved  to  employ  to  the  utmost  the  resources  of
military  coercion,  and  at  the  same  time  to  oppose  all  constitu¬
tional  concession,  and  a  large  deputation  of  the  most  respectable
and  moderate  of  the  Catholic  peers,  who  went  to  the  Castle  to
ask  for  some  measure  of  relief,  were  curtly  and  decisively  refused.2

Portland  had  just  before  reported  to  Camden  a  saying  of  Lord
Moira,  1  that  there  was  not  a  gentleman  in  Ireland  who  did  not
think  it  right  and  necessary,  and  did  not  anxiously  wish,  that
the  Catholics  should  be  admitted  to  a  full  and  unreserved  parti¬
cipation  of  every  right  that  was  enjoyed  by  their  fellow-subjects
of  the  Established  Church,’ 3  and  in  the  course  of  the  spring  and
summer  the  Irish  Ministers  received  more  than  one  letter  from
men  who  were  certainly  no  partisans  of  the  Opposition,  urging
the  supreme  necessity  of  dealing  with  this  question  without
delay.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  came  from  the  Bishop  of
Ossory.  Whatever  evil  there  might  be,  he  said,  in  conceding
political  power  to  Catholics,  had  been  already  incurred  when
Lord  Westmorland  gave  the  suffrage  to  the  lowest  and  most
ignorant  among  them,  and  thus  1  prepared  for  himself  the  abso¬
lute  and  unavoidable  necessity  of  going  through  with  that
question,  and  placed  the  Government  in  the  situation  of  one
who  would  still  keep  a  man  at  enmity  after  having  furnished

1  Pari.  Hist,  xxxiii.  157-165.  the  year.

Another  and  slightly  different  version  2  Camden  to  Portland,  March  21,
of  Pitt’s  speech  will  be  found  in  a  1797.

report  of  this  debate  in  the  British  3  Portland  to  Camden,  March  15,
House  of  Commons,  which  is  bound  1797.  See,  too,  Camden  to  Portland,
up  with  the  Irish  Purl.  Delates  of  April  3,  1797.

292

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ck.  xxtih.

him  with  arms  both  of  defence  and  offence.’  ‘  The  unfortunate
and  unlooked-for  Revolution  which  had  taken  place  in  Europe,
and  the  insurrection  of  the  lower  orders  against  the  higher,  and
of  those  who  have  no  property  against  those  who  have,’  furnish
additional  and  powerful  reasons  for  combining  in  the  general
defence  all  the  representatives  of  property,  irrespective  of  their
creed.  Those  who  argue,  from  the  small  number  of  Catholics  in
the  higher  ranks,  that  the  boon  could  have  no  widespread  in¬
fluence,  forget  ‘  the  effects  of  opinion,  of  pride,  of  the  difference
between  any  great  body  of  men  considering  themselves  as
marked  by  any  exclusions,  or  as  admitted  into  all  privileges ;
as  suspected  or  trusted.’  To  incorporate  the  authority
and  guiding  influence  of  the  Catholic  gentry  in  the  existing
Constitution,  was  the  best  means  of  strengthening  it;  and
while  the  Constitution  lasted,  Protestant  ascendency  was  in  no
serious  danger,  for  it  rested  on  an  overwhelming  preponder¬
ance  of  property.  ‘  In  all  the  conversations  which  I  have  ever
had  with  the  Duke  of  Portland  on  this  subject,’  said  the  Bishop,
‘  I  understood  that  neither  he  nor  any  other  person  doubted  but
that  some  time  or  other  the  question  must  end  in  gratifying  the
Roman  Catholics,’  and  every  reason  of  policy  points  out  the
danger  of  delay.1

A  still  more  significant  letter  came  from  Cork  in  the  June
of  1797.  Signs  of  disaffection  and  disturbance  had  during  the
last  few  weeks  been  multiplying  in  the  South,  and  it  was  plain
that  the  seed  which  the  United  Irishmen  had  scattered  was
taking  root.  Among  those  whom  Pelham  confidentially  con¬
sulted  about  the  feelings  of  the  Munster  Catholics,  was  Brigadier-
General  Loftus.  ‘  I  think  them,’  he  replied,  ‘  loyal,  and  at¬
tached  to  good  order  and  government.  I  do  not  believe  that
parliamentary  reform  has  at  all  entered  into  their  ideas,  or  is
an  object  to  them,  but  it  is  very  plain  to  me  that  they  look  to,
and  expect  for  a  certainty,  emancipation  in  toto.  I  scarcely
know  an  instance  of  a  Catholic  of  consequence  being  the
agitator  of  any  disturbance  here ;  the  promoters  of  sedition
either  come  from  Dublin  or  the  North,  some  originally  from

1  Bishop  of  Ossory  to  Pelham,  had  been  private  secretary  to  Lord
May  30,  1797.  The  writer  of  this  Fitzwilliam.  See  Mant’s  Hist,  of  the
letter  was  O'Beirne,  who  was  after-  Irish  Church,  ii.  785
wards  Bishop  of  Meath,  and  who

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  KING’S  ORDERS.

293

Manchester.  .  .  .  The  Catholics  expect  emancipation,  and  they
certainly  believe  that  it  is  intended  to  free  them.  If  they  did
not,  I  am  much  inclined  to  think  that  they  would  visit  everything
to  attain  this  object;  but  give  it  to  them,  and  they  will,  in  my
opinion,  be  your  firm  friends.’ 1

Camden,  however,  was  firmly  resolved  not  to  concede
emancipation  ;  and  he  clearly  told  the  Government  that  if  they
adopted  a  different  course,  he  would  resign.2  His  policy  was
fully  supported  in  England.  Portland  wrote  to  him  that  the
expressions  in  the  letter  offering  his  resignation  seemed  to
imply  that,  ‘  the  King’s  servants  on  this  side  of  the  water  had
it  in  contemplation  to  depart  from  the  system  for  the  support
of  which  your  Excellency  was  prevailed  on  to  undertake  the
administration  of  the  King’s  Government  in  Ireland.’  He
assured  him  that  there  was  no  ground  for  such  a  suspicion,  and
that  ‘  not  the  least  alteration  or  variation  of  opinion  ’  on  the
subject  had  taken  place  in  the  Ministry.  He  then  added  these
very  important  words :  ‘  His  Majesty,  under  his  own  hand,
commands  me  <£  to  express  to  you  most  positively  his  approbation
of  your  conduct,  as  stated  in  your  private  letter  on  transmitting
the  memorial  from  the  Roman  Catholics,  and  authorises  me  to
assure  you  that  His  sentiments  are  those  of  the  year  1795,  and
that  you  are,  therefore,  not  to  give  any  other  answer  to  that
already  judiciously  given  by  you,  of  having  transmitted  the
memorial.”  His  Majesty’s  servants  most  perfectly  concur  in
the  sentiments,  the  communication  of  which  I  have  made  to
you  by  His  particular  orders ;  and  as  long  as  the  friends  and
supporters  of  the  Protestant  interest  and  present  Establishment,
and  the  connection  between,  the  two  countries,  continue  to  be
of  opinion  that  it  is  inexpedient  and  daugerous  to  give  any
further  indulgences  to  the  Roman  Catholics,  so  long  am  I
convinced,  that  no  reason  will  be  given  to  your  Excellency  for
renewing  the  very  liberal,  but  I  trust  not  to  be  accepted  offer,
which  you  have  made  in  your  letter  of  the  21st  upon  this
subject.’3

The  belief  of  Camden  that  no  policy  of  conciliation  could

1  Loftus  to  Pelham,  June  2,  1797.  March  27,  1797.  A  pencil  annotation

2  Camden  to  Portland,  March  21,  on  this  letter  observes,  that  the  two

1797.  little  words  ‘  I  trust  ’  ‘  seem  to  let

3  Portland  to  Camden  (secret),  down  the  force  of  the  sentence.’

294

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvin.

now  be  efficacious,  was  strengthened  by  the  reports  from  Ulster.
General  Lake,  who  held  the  chief  command  in  the  province,
wrote  from  Belfast  at  the  time  of  the  proclamation,  to  the  effect
that  all  the  information  he  received  tended  to  convince  him
that  matters  were  rapidly  coming  to  a  crisis ;  that  a  speedy
rising  was  fully  determined  on ;  that,  although  it  would  probably
not  take  place  till  the  landing  of  the  French,  there  could  be  no
certainty,  and  that  every  precaution  must  be  taken.  Scarcely
an  hour,  he  said,  passed  without  accounts  of  the  success  of  the
United  Irishmen  in  swearing  in  men  of  the  militia.  ‘  The
lower  order  of  the  people,’  he  continued,  1  and  most  of  the
middle  class  are  determined  Republicans,  have  imbibed  the
French  principles,  and  will  not  be  contented  with  anything
short  of  a  Revolution.  My  ideas  are  not  taken  up  hastily,  but
from  conversation  with  men  of  all  descriptions,  maDy  of  whom,
though  strong  for  Parliamentary  Reform,  are  now  frightened,
and  say  we  have  been  the  cause  of  this  measure  originally,  and
have  now  no  power  over  our  tenants  and  labourers.’  £  Frothing,’
adds  Lake,  1  but  coercive  measures  in  the  strongest  degree  can
have  any  weight  in  this  country.’ 1

The  great  Irish  Rebellion  of  the  eighteenth  century  is
always  called  the  Rebellion  of  1798  ;  but  the  letters  from  Ulster
in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1797,  habitually  speak  of  the
province  as  in  a  state  of  real,  though  smothered  rebellion,  and
the  measures  superseding  civil  by  military  law  were  justified  on
that  ground.

Ihe  first  military  raid  for  the  purpose  of  seizing  unregistered
arms,  appears  to  have  come  upon  the  people  as  a  surprise.  Be¬
tween  March  10  and  25,  more  than  5,400  guns,  more  than  600
bayonets,  and  about  350  pistols,  besides  other  arms  and  military
accoutrements,  were  seized  ;  2  but  very  soon  there  was  a  general
concealment  of  arms  which  baffled  the  soldiers,  while  the  con¬
dition  of  the  province  became  continually  worse.  It  is  ex¬
tremely  difficult  within  a  short  compass  to  give  a  vivid  and
unexaggerated  description  of  it.  It  varied  in  different  districts,
and  it  is  only  by  the  perusal  and  comparison  of  great  numbers
of  confidential  letters,  written  by  magistrates  and  military

1  Lake  to  Pelham,  March  13, 1797.

a  From  returns  among  the  Pelham  MSS.

CH.  XXYIII.

DEAN  WAEBUETON.

295

authorities  to  the  Government  in  Dublin,  that  a  clear  picture  is
gradually  formed.  A  few  pages  devoted  to  extracts  from  these
letters  during  the  three  months  which  followed  the  proclamation
of  General  Lake,  will,  I  think,  enable  the  reader  to  form  a
tolerably  distinct  conception  of  a  state  of  society  which  was  as
anarchical  as  any  in  Europe.

One  of  the  ablest  magistrates  in  the  North  of  Ireland  at
this  time,  was  Dean  Warburton.  He  had  been  recommended
for  a  bishopric  by  Lord  Fitz william,  but  the  recommendation
was  not  attended  to,  and  he  had  a  parish  at  Lough-Gilly,  near
Newry,  in  the  county  of  Armagh,  where  he  appears  to  have  dis¬
charged  his  duties  as  a  resident  magistrate  with  the  same
energy  and  skill  as  Butler  and  Hamilton.  When  the  burning
of  houses  by  the  yeomen  afterwards  began,  he  set  himself
steadily  against  it,  and  he  seems  to  have  exercised  an  extra¬
ordinary  influence  over  his  parishioners.  He  wrote  in  March,
that  the  United  Irish  movement  was  being  rapidly  organised
around  him,  that  nearly  the  whole  population  were  bound
by  the  oath  of  secrecy,  and  that  murder  was  the  penalty  for
breaking  it.  The  belief  had  been  widely  spread,  that  the
French  would  arrive  on  St.  Patrick’s  Day.  Not  a  gun  was
now  to  be  found  in  any  house  in  the  county.  ‘  From  the
moment  the  disarming  took  place  at  Newry  on  Monday  last,
every  gun  has  been  concealed  in  bogs  and  other  places  which
we  shall  not  be  able  to  discover,  but  where  the  owners  can  get
at  them  at  a  moment’s  warning.’  Many  of  the  organisers  of
treason  came  from  a  distance.  Two  had  lately  been  captured,
each  carrying  a  weapon  like  a  scythe  fixed  on  a  pole.  ‘  After
'  all,’  he  said,  1  the  exertions  of  Government  will  signify  but
little  here,  unless  they  are  seconded  by  the  immediate  presence
and  personal  exertions  of  all  the  landed  proprietors.  I  begin
to  think  that  experience  is  of  no  use  to  man.  We  have  read
an  awful  lesson  in  the  weak  and  pusillanimous  conduct  of  the
French  gentry  and  clergy  in  the  early  stages  of  that  Revolution
— and  what  are  we  profiting  by  it  ?  This  part  of  the  country
is  peculiarly  unfortunate  in  the  absence  of  almost  all  its  pro¬
prietors.’

He  attended  the  Armagh  Assizes,  and  came  back  with  the
most  melancholy  impressions.  ‘  The  game.’  he  wrote, ‘  is  nearly

296

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

up  in  the  North.’  £  No  juries,  no  prosecutions,  no  evidences
against  any  person  under  the  denomination  of  a  United  Man,  the
men  of  property  and  clergy  completely  alarmed,  and  instead  of
residence  all  flying  away  into  garrison  towns,  the  mobs  plunder¬
ing  every  gentleman’s  house.’  £  I  am  just  now  sending  off  every
article  of  value,  and  I  plainly  see  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  hold
my  post  many  days  longer.  Every  young  tree  has  been  cut
down  in  this  neighbourhood  for  handles  of  pikes.  They  are
persuaded  the  French  will  land  before  the  first  of  May,  and  they
are  making  every  preparation  by  collecting  arms.  ...  A  few
of  my  parishioners,  who  have  been  forced  to  unite  in  order
to  save  themselves  and  families  from  destruction,  have  been
privately  with  me.  .  .  .  From  them  I  have  got  such  informa¬
tion  as  renders  it  necessary  to  take  my  family  into  Armagh.'
Threatening  letters,  especially  breathing  vengeance  against  any
juryman  who  convicted  a  United  Irishman,  were  industriously
circulated,  and  they  were  completely  successful.  Neither  in
Monaghan  nor  in  Armagh  would  any  jury  in  such  cases  convict.
A  system  of  terror  was  triumphant.  £  It  is  impossible  to  give
you  an  idea  of  how  ferociously  savag  „  the  people  have  become
in  these  parts.’ 1

About  Letterkenny  in  Donegal,  where  Dr.  Hamilton  was
murdered,  there  was  no  improvement.  That  country  was  re¬
ported  to  be  full  of  insurgents,  but  no  evidence  could  be  pro¬
cured,  £  the  fear  of  assassination  has  so  thoroughly  got  possession
of  the  minds  of  the  people.’  £  You  can  have  no  idea,’  wrote  a
magistrate,  £  of  the  terror  that  pervades  the  whole  country,  .  .  .
entirely  by  the  absence  of  the  great  landed  gentlemen,  for  where
they  are  settled  on  their  estates  and  have  been  active,  the  country
round  them  is  quiet.’  The  magistrate  who  gave  this  informa¬
tion,  though  lately  one  of  the  most  popular  men  in  the  country,
could  now  go  nowhere  without  military  protection.  Loyal
people  were  taking  the  United  Irish  oath  as  the  only  means  of
safety.  No  one  would  buy  from  a  loyalist,  or  pay  debts  to  him.2

From  Tyrone  it  was  reported  that  the  people  were  daily
growing  more  disloyal.  The  informant  of  the  Government  had
tried  to  discover  their  objects.  They  told  him  they  desired  a

1  Dean  Warburton,  March  13,  16,  2  John  Rae,  March  27,  1797;  also

17,  April  12,  1797.  (I.S.P.O.)  a  paper  dated  May.

CH.  SLXYI1I.

ULSTER.  MARCH— MAY  1797.

297

reform  of  Parliament,  and  they  complained  of  the  salt  tax,  and
the  non-taxation  of  the  absentees.1

9

At  Ballybay,  in  the  county  of  Monaghan,  a  party  of  militia
consisting  of  a  corporal  and  ten  privates  had  a  scuffle  with  the
populace,  fired  on  them  and  killed  several.  Their  arms  were
taken  from  them,  on  the  understanding  that  the  gentlemen  would
protect  them,  but  a  mob  of  about  1,000  men  fell  upon  them  and
cut  them  to  pieces.  Every  man'was  either  killed  or  wounded.2

From  Cavan,  a  magistrate  writes  that,  in  the  space  of  a
month,  a  total  change  had  taken  place  in  the  dispositions  of  the
people.  They  formerly  enlisted  readily  in  the  yeomanry,  but
now  recruits  were  very  rare.  The  whole  population  were  United.
£  I  almost  doubt  whether  there  is  one  in  forty  that  is  not.  They
publicly  declare  themselves,  and  such  people  as  wish  to  be  well
affected  are  obliged  to  join  them.’3

From  West  Meath,  a  correspondent  writes,  that  not  a  night
passed  without  Defender  outrages,  and  that  arms  were  everywhere
plundered.4

£  Almost  all  the  peasantry  of  every  religious  description,’
writes  an  informant  from  Downpatrick,  £  are  United  Irishmen,’
and  he  believed  that  even  many  wealthy  men  sympathised  with
them,  and  that  nothing  but  a  French  invasion  was  needed  to
produce  a  general  rising.5

£  Several  hundreds  of  men,’  wrote  a  gentleman  from  Newbliss
in  the  county  of  Monaghan,  £  for  this  week  past  have  gone  about
the  country  under  the  pretence  of  setting  potatoes,  carrying
white  flags,  and  singing  republican  songs.’  He  had  been  told
that  a  great  assemblage  was  to  be  held  on  the  following  Friday,
and  that  they  intended  to  cut  him  and  his  troop  to  pieces.  He
had  been  living  for  a  month  in  a  state  of  blockade.  The  dis¬
affection  he  believed  to  be  universal,  and  opposition  to  it  had
almost  ceased.  The  few  magistrates  who  tried  to  do  their  duty
were  in  hourly  danger  of  assassination.  A  rumour  had  been
spread,  that  after  a  certain  date  no  one  would  be  sworn  in  as  a
United  Irishman,  and  that  all  who  by  that  date  had  not  taken  the
oath  would  be  put  to  death,  and  this  rumour  had  brought  great

1  Edward  Moore,  March  1797.  4  Edward  Purdon,  May  14.

2  Ballybay,  April  17.  *  John  Macartney,  April  26,  1797.

3  Mr.  Clements,  April  18.

298

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

multitudes  into  the  conspiracy.  ‘  Were  I  to  presume  to  offer
my  opinion  to  Government,’  he  continued,  ‘  in  a  matter  of  such
moment,  it  would  be  this,  either  to  propose  granting  a  reform,
or  to  proclaim  military  law  in  the  North  of  Ireland.’ 1

The  co-operation  established  between  the  different  maraud¬
ing  parties  was  now  shown  by  signal  fires,  that  might  be  seen
blazing  during  the  night  on  every  hill.2  The  whole  country
about  Fintona  near  Omagh,  writes  a  clergyman  from  that  town,
is  in  the  hands  of  the  disaffected.  ‘  The  insurgents  now  go  about
in  numerous  gangs,  swearing,  plundering,  burning,  maiming.’
‘No  tithes,  half  rent,  and  a  French  constitution,  is  the  favourite
toast.’  Last  week  about  one  hundred  men,  well  armed  and
officered,  paraded  the  streets  of  Dromore.  ‘  Yesternight  the
hills  between  this  and  Clogher  exhibited  a  striking  scene.  The
summits  topped  with  bonfires — bugle  horns  sounding  and  guns
occasionally  firing,  no  doubt  as  signals  to  the  marauding  parties
who  were  employed  seeking  for  weapons  in  the  neighbourhood.’
‘  The  populace  are  now  so  powerful  and  desperate,  that  for  any
individual  to  attempt  resistance  would  be  both  imprudent  and
romantic.’  There  is  no  legal  punishment,  for  witnesses  are  com¬
pletely  intimidated.  ‘Well-meaning  people,  more  especially
those  of  the  Established  Church,  literally  dragooned  into  revolt.’
‘  The  spirit  of  opposition  spreads  in  all  directions.  .  .  .  Matters
are  no  longer  carried  on  clandestinely,  but  with  a  strong
hand.  .  .  .  Nor  can  anyone  form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  wanton
violence,  outrage,  and  brutality  which  prevail.’  Every  morning
a  fresh  list  of  outrages  is  reported.  A  family  in  which  there
were  three  sons  stood  a  siege,  and  next  morning  above  forty
balls  were  found  in  a  sack  of  tow  with  which  they  had  barricaded
their  window.  The  more  well-to-do  inhabitants  were  defend  in  or

O

their  houses  with  gratings  and  bars  of  iron ;  ‘  but  what,’  wrote
the  informant,  ‘  must  be  the  situation  of  those  who  inhabit
thatched  cabins,  which  a  single  spark  can  fire  ?  ’  The  seduction
of  the  military  was  steadily  pursued,  and  there  were  great  doubts
about  the  loyalty  of  the  yeomanry.3

Many  lives  were  lost,  and  serious  skirmishes  took  place.  I

'  Alexander  Ker,  April  28,  May  Park,  probably  in  Westmeath).

8,  1797.  3  Letters  sent  by  the  Bishop  of

2  See  letters  from  Mr.  White  (Red-  Clogher,  May  9,  14,1797,
hill),  and  George  Lambert  (Beau

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  MILITARY  FORCES.

299

have  already  mentioned  the  sanguinary  attacks  on  militiamen
at  Bally  bay.  At  a  place  called  Cross-Moylan,  not  far  from
Dundalk,  a  few  British  fencibles  with  forty  yeomen  encountered
a  body  of  about  250  United  Irishmen,  killed  fourteen,  and
brought  ten  prisoners  into  Dundalk.1  On  several  occasions
escorts  with  prisoners  were  attacked,  and  on  one  of  them  the
soldiers  killed  a  prisoner  to  prevent  a  rescue.

The  military  forces  in  Ireland  were  at  this  time  very  con¬
siderable.  In  February  1797  there  was  an  effective  force  of
about  15,000  regular  soldiers,  18,000  militia,  and  30,000
yeomanry,  of  whom  18,000  were  cavalry.2 3  But  an  invasion  was
continually  expected,  and  the  country  was  exposed  on  all  sides.
There  were  scarcely  any  fortresses  in  which  troops  could  be  con¬
centrated.  Soldiers  were  habitually  employed,  to  a  far  greater
extent  than  in  England,  to  discharge  police  functions,  such  as
suppressing  riots,  and  enforcing  revenue  laws,  and  they  were
now  called  on  to  put  down  innumerable  concerted  outrages,
carried  on  by  night  over  an  immense  area  of  wild  country,  and
to  disarm  a  scattered  and  disloyal  population.  Lake  wrote  in
the  strongest  terms  about  the  inadequacy  of  his  force.  1 1
believe,’  he  wrote,  ‘  this  district  requires  more  than  half  the
troops  in  Ireland  to  manage  it,  as  there  is  no  part  of  it  that  does
not  require  double  the  number  we  have.’  3  A  meeting  of  magis¬
trates  and  yeomanry  officers  in  the  counties  of  Down  and  Armagh
drew  up  a  remarkable  memorial,  stating  that  the  late  vigorous
measure  of  disarming  the  people — ‘  which,  however,’ they  added,

‘  has  in  many  parts  disarmed  only  the  well  affected,  the  others
hiding  their  arms ’—would  be  useless  without  a  very  large  standing
force  to  follow  it  up  by  constant  piquets  and  patrols,  both  of
horse  and  foot,  ‘  and  this  force,’  they  said,  ‘  should  be  the  greater,
as  the  yeomanry  even  in  towns  are  assembled  with  much  diffi¬
culty  and  delay,  require  so  long  notice  that  the  design  is  often
foreseen  and  frustrated,  and  being  scattered  in  their  private
houses  they  may  (as  is  now  openly  threatened)  be  either  dis-

1  Thomas  Gataker,  May  14,  1797.  be  found  in  the  Pelham  MSS.  at

2  From  a  memorandum  in  the  the  British  Museum.  The  letters  of

Pelham  MSS.  the  magistrates  and  informers  are,

3  Lake  to  Pelham,  March  17,  1797.  for  the  most  part,  in  the  secret  and
I  may  mention,  that  nearly  all  the  confidential  correspondence  at  Dublin,
letters  of  the  generals  to  Pelham  will

300

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

armed  or  murdered  in  their  houses,  or  on  their  way  to  parade
ground.’  They  added,  ‘that  the  daily  threats  (actually  executed
in  many  late  instances  here)  of  personal  and  other  injury  to
those  continuing  yeomen  or  supporters  of  them  ;  and  the  loss  of
all  trade  or  employment  from  the  numerous  body  United,  or
affecting  to  be  so  through  fear  or  interest,’  had  weakened  the
yeomanry,  and  that  the  protection  of  the  country  in  a  time  of
extreme  danger,  and  when  measures  of  desperate  vigour  might
be  required,  could  not  be  safely  entrusted  to  mere  volunteers,
liable  to  no  coercion  except  honour  and  regard  to  character.1

It  will  be  sufficiently  evident  to  anyone  who  considers  the
subject  with  common  candour,  that  under  such  circumstances
numerous  military  outrages  were  certain  to  occur.  The  only
method  by  which  the  disarming  could  be  carried  out  and  the
men  who  were  eugaged  in  nightly  outrages  detected,  was  by
nightly  raids,  in  rebellious  districts.  The  Chief  Secretary
strongly  pressed  upon  the  commander  in  the  North,  that  the
soldiers  searching  for  arms  should  always  be  accompanied  by  a
superior  officer;  but  Lake  answered  that,  though  he  would  do
what  he  could  to  prevent  abuses,  this,  at  least,  was  absolutely
impossible.  Success  could  only  be  attained  by  surprise,  by  the
simultaneous  search  of  innumerable  widely  scattered  cabins.
If  it  was  known  that  a  search  was  proceeding  in  one  place,  arms
were  at  once  concealed  in  fifty  others.  It  was  impossible  that
an  officer  could  be  present  in  every  cabin  which  was  being
searched,  and  the  task  had  to  be  largely  entrusted  to  little
groups  of  private  soldiers*.  No  one  who  knows  what  an  army
is,  and  how  it  is  recruited,  could  expect  that  this  should  go  on
without  producing  instances  of  gross  violence  and  outrage,  and
without  seriously  imperilling  discipline.

This,  however,  was  by  no  means  the  worst.  The  danger  of
invasion  and  armed  rebellion  was  so  great,  and  the  regular
troops  in  Ireland  were  so  few,  that  it  was  necessary  to  collect
them  in  points  of  military  importance,  and  to  entrust  services
which  did  not  require  a  serious  display  of  force  to  militiamen
and  yeomen,  newly  eurolled  and  most  imperfectly  disciplined.
The  yeomen,  from  their  knowledge  of  the  country  and  its  people,

1  Memorial  of  magistrates  of  the  officers  of  the  yeomanry,  to  General
counties  of  Down  and  Armagh,  and  Lake,  March  18,  1797.

CH.  XX VIII.

THE  YEOMANRY.

301

were  peculiarly  efficient  in  searching  for  arms,  and  they  were  the
force  which  was  naturally  and  primarily  intended  for  the  pre¬
servation  of  internal  security,  as  the  regular  troops  were  for  the
defence  of  the  country  against  a  foreign  invasion.  The  creation
of  a  large  yeomanry  force  for  the  former  purpose  had  been,  as
we  have  seen,  one  of  the  projects  of  Fitzwilliam.  It  had  been
strongly  and  repeatedly  urged  by  Grattan  and  by  Parsons,  and,
as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  most  liberal  and  enlightened
English  commander  entirely  agreed  with  the  most  liberal
members  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  that  the  suppression  of  outrage
which  did  not  rise  to  the  height  of  actual  armed  rebellion,  ought
to  be  the  special  province  of  the  yeomanry.  But  such  a  force  was
at  this  time  perfectly  certain  to  be  guilty  of  gross  violence.  It
was  recruited  chiefly  in  districts  which  had  been  for  years  the  scene
of  savage  faction  fights  between  the  Defenders  and  the  Peep  of
Day  Boys ;  between  the  United  Irishmen  and  the  Orangemen;
aud  it  was  recruited  in  the  face  of  the  most  formidable  obstacles.
The  United  Irishmen  made  it  one  of  their  main  objects  to  pre¬
vent  the  formation  of  this  new  and  powerful  force,,  and  they  pur¬
sued  this  object  with  every  kind  of  outrage,  intimidation,  abuse,
and  seduction.  There  had  been  not  a  few  murders.  There  were
countless  instances  of  attacks  on  the  houses  of  the  yeomen.
Their  families  were  exposed  to  constant  insult,  and  to  constant
peril.  The  system  had  already  begun  in  some  disaffected  dis¬
tricts  of  treating  the  yeomen  as  if  they  were  lepers,  and  refusing
all  dealings  with  them  ;  while  in  other  districts  every  art  was
employed  to  seduce  them  from  their  allegiance.

That  a  powerful  yeomanry  force  should  have  been  created  in
spite  of  all  these  obstacles,  and  at  a  time  when  Irishmen  were
pouring  into  the  regular  army,  the  militia,  and  the  navy,
appears  to  me  to  be  a  striking  proof  both  of  the  military  spirit
and  of  the  sturdy  independence  and  self-reliance  which  then
characterised  the  loyalists  of  Ireland.  The  estimate  first  laid
before  Parliament  was  for  20,000  men,  but  in  six  months  above
37,000  men  were  arrayed,  and  during  the  rebellion  the  force
exceeded  50,000,  and  could,  if  necessary,  have  been  increased.1

1  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Origin  of  the  Irish  Yeomanry,  by
Secrecy  of  1798,  p.  5.  Some  interest-  W.  Richardson,  D.D.,  late  Fellow
ing  particulars  about  the  Irish  yeomen  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  (1801).
will  be  found  in  a  History  of  the  Dungannon,  which  was  so  conspicuous

302

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvm.

But  although,  the  United  Irishmen  failed  in  preventing  the
formation  of  this  great  force,  they  at  least  succeeded  in  pro¬
foundly  affecting  its  character.  In  great  districts  which  were
torn  by  furious  factions  it  consisted  exclusively  of  the  partisans
of  one  faction,  recruited  under  circumstances  well  fitted  to  raise
party  animosity  to  fever  heat.  Such  men,  with  uniforms  on
their  backs  and  guns  in  their  hands,  and  clothed  with  the
authority  of  the  Government,  but  with  scarcely  a  tinge  of  disci¬
pline  and  under  no  strict  martial  law,  were  now  let  loose  by
night  on  innumerable  cabins.

These  circumstances  do  not  excuse,  but  they  explain  and
largely  palliate,  their  misdeeds,  and  they  do  much  to  divide  the
blame.  Disarming  had  plainly  become  a  matter  of  the  first
necessity  at  a  time  when  a  great  portion  of  the  population  were
organising,  at  the  command  of  a  seditious  conspiracy,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  co-operating  with  an  expected  French  invasion,  and  it
could  hardly  be  carried  out  in  Ireland  without  excessive  violence.
Martial  law  is  always  an  extreme  remedy  of  the  State,  but  when
it  is  administered  by  competent  officers  and  supported  by  an
overwhelming  and  well-disciplined  force,  its  swift  stern  justice
is  not  always  an  evil.  But  few  things  are  more  terrible  than
martial  law  when  the  troops  are  at  once  undisciplined,  inade¬
quate  in  numbers,  and  involved  in  the  factions  of  the  country
they  are  intended  to  subdue.

That  many  and  horrible  abuses  took  place  before  the  outbreak
of  the  Rebellion  of  1798  is  not  open  to  doubt,  but  it  is  very
difficult  to  form  a  confident  opinion  of  the  extent  to  which  they
prevailed  in  Ulster  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1797.  In  his
earliest  letters,  after  the  disarming  had  begun,  Lake  wrote,  ' I
really  do  not  know  of  any  excesses  committed  by  the  military
since  this  unpleasant  mode  of  warfare  has  commenced,’  but  he
acknowledged  that  ‘  some  irregularities  (though  I  really  believe
very  few)  may  have  been  committed  .  .  .  chiefly  by  the  yeo¬
manry,  .  .  .  whose  knowledge  of  the  country  gives  them  an
opportunity  of  gratifying  their  party  spirit  and  private  quarrels  ;  ’
and  he  added,  ‘  I  fear  they  will  be  of  very  little  use  if  they

in  the  history  of  the  volunteers,  ap-  considerable  review  of  yeomanry  was
pears  to  have  been  the  cradle  of  the  held  there  by  General  Knox,
yeomanry  movement,  and  the  first

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  ANCIENT  BRITONS.

303

are  not  put  under  military  law,  as  at  present  they  are  under
very  little  control,  either  officers  or  men.’ 1  Pelham,  at  first  at
least,  fully  accepted  this  statement,  and  wrote  a  few  weeks  after
the  disarming,  ‘  I  am  perfectly  convinced  that  so  strong  a
measure  could  not  have  been  carried  into  execution  with  more
temper,  mildness,  and  firmness.’ 2  In  June,  however,  he  wrote
to  Lake  that  he  had  heard  with  great  regret,  that  many  of  the
public-houses  in  Belfast  which  were  centres  of  the  United  Irish¬
men  had  been  wrecked  by  the  Monaghan  Militia,  and  some
soldiers  of  the  same  regiment  attacked  and  destroyed  the  offices
and  types  of  the  ‘  Northern  Star,’  which  was  the  chief  seditious
organ  at  Belfast.3

But  in  the  process  of  seeking  arms  in  the  country  districts,
far  worse  acts  seem  to  have  been  perpetrated.  A  Welsh  regi¬
ment  of  fencible  cavalry  called  the  ‘  Ancient  Britons,’  stationed
at  Newry,  reduced  a  country  which  was  probably  the  most
seditious  and  disorganised  in  Ulster  to  complete  submission,  but
it  did  so  by  means  which  left  an  ineffaceable  impression  of
horror  and  resentment  on  the  popular  mind.  In  the  absence  of
any  searching  judicial  investigation,  it  is  impossible  to  say  how
much  of  exaggeration  there  was  in  the  popular  reports ;  but  the
very  absence  of  such  investigation  is  in  itself  a  condemnation  of
the  Government,  and  it  is  but  right  to  say  that  there  is  a  confi¬
dential  letter  written  by  an  eye-witness,  in  the  Government
archives,  which  sustains  the  worst  charges  against  it.  It  was
written  by  a  certain  John  Giffard,  who  was  an  officer  in  the
Dublin  Militia,4  engaged  in  the  task  of  searching  for  arms.  He
mentions  that  he  had  been  present  at  numerous,  but  invariably
unsuccessful,  expeditions  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  and
arresting  insurgents  with  arms  in  their  hands,  but  that  another
practice  was  now  adopted.  The  Britons  ‘  burned  a  great  number
of  houses,  and  the  object  of  emulation  between  them  and  the
Orange  yeomen  seems  to  be,  who  shall  do  most  mischief  to

1  Lake  to  Pelham,  March  17,  19,  Militia,  concerning  whom  the  reader

1797  may  find  some  particulars  in  Madden’s

2  Pelham  to  Lake,  March  29, 1797.  United  Irishmen,  ii.  291-299.  He

3  Pelham  to  Lake  (secret  and  con-  held  several  appointments  under  the

fidential),  June  6,  1797;  Madden’s  Government,  edited  a  newspaper,  and
United  Irishmen,  iv.  22,  23.  is  furiously  abused  by  Dr.  Madden  as

4  I  suppose  this  to  be  the  John  a  persecuting  Orangeman.

Giffard,  a  captain  in  the  Dublin

304

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvm.

wretches  who  certainly  may  have  seditious  minds,  but  who  are
at  present  quiet  and  incapable  of  resistance.’  He  describes  an
expedition  to  the  mountains  to  search  for  arms  :  His  party
returned  to  the  main  body  of  the  Ancient  Britons,  1  to  which,’  he
says,  ‘  I  was  directed  by  the  smoke  and  flames  of  burning
houses,  and  by  the  dead  bodies  of  boys  and  old  men  slain  by  the
Britons,  though  no  opposition  whatever  had  been  given  by  them,
and,  as  I  shall  answer  to  Almighty  God,  I  believe  a  single  gun
was  not  fired,  but  by  the  Britons  or  yeomanry.  I  declare  there
was  nothing  to  fire  at,  old  men,  women,  and  children  excepted.
From  ten  to  twenty  were  killed  outright ;  many  wounded,  and
eight  houses  burned.’  Sixteen  prisoners  wTere  taken,  ‘  poor
wretched  peasants,  whom  they  marched  into  Newry,  and  were
asked  why  they  made  any  prisoners  at  all,  meaning  that  we
should  have  killed  them.  The  next  day  they  were  all  proved
perfectly  innocent.  .  .  .  But  the  worst  of  the  story  still  remains ;
two  of  the  Britons  desiring  to  enter  a  gentleman’s  house,  the
yard  gate  was  opened  to  them  by  a  lad,  whom  for  his  civility
they  .shot  and  cut  in  pieces.  These  men  had  straggled  away
from  their  officers.’  A  scuffle  had  taken  place  between  two  of
the  Ancient  Britons  and  two  members  of  Giffard’s  regiment,  in
which  one  of  the  latter  was  killed  and  another  desperately
wounded ;  a  coroner’s  inquest  had  brought  in  a  verdict  of  murder
against  the  Welsh  soldiers,  and  Giffard  much  feared  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  restrain  his  own  soldiers  from  reprisals.1

This  letter  throws  a  ghastly  light  on  the  condition  of  Ulster,
and  the  levity  with  which  these  things  appear  to  have  been
regarded  is  even  more  horribly  significant.2  There  are  frequent

1  John  Giffard  to  Cooke  (most
private),  Dundalk,  June  5,  1797,
I.S.P.O.  The  following-  is  Plowden’s
account  of  this  transaction  :  ‘  Infor¬

mation  had  been  lodged  that  a  house
near  Newry,  contained  concealed
arms  ;  a  party  of  the  Ancient  Britons
repaired  to  the  house,  but  not  finding
the  object,  of  their  search,  they  set  it
on  tire.  The  peasantry  of  the  neigh¬
bourhood  came  running  from  all  sides
to  extinguish  the  Haines,  believing  the
fire  to  have  been  accidental.  It  was
the  first  military  conflagration  in  that
part  of  the  country.  As  they  came
up,  they  were  attacked  in  all  direc¬

tions  and  cut  down  by  the  Fencibles.
Thirty  were  killed,  among  whom  were
a  woman  and  two  children.  An  old
man  of  seventy,  seeing  the  dreadful
slaughter  of  his  neighbours  and
friends,  fled  for  safety  to  some  ad¬
jacent  rocks;  he  was  pursued,  and
though  on  his  knees  imploring  mercv,
his  head  was  cut  off  at  a  blow.’  (Plow-
den,  ii.  626,  627.)

2  In  a  long  letter  on  the  accusa¬
tions  brought  against  soldiers  in
Ireland,  Camden  says,  ‘  The  Ancient
Britons,  commanded  by  Sir  W.  Wynne,
did,  on  their  first  landing,  act  per¬
haps  with  too  much  attachment  to

CH.  XXVIII.

MILITARY  EXCESSES  IN  ULSTER.

305

allusions  to  the  multitude  of  prisoners  who  thronged  the  gaols,
and  many  of  them  were  sent,  without  trial,  to  the  fleet.  In  one
of  the  proclamations  of  the  United  Irishmen,  the  Government
were  accused  of  attempting  ‘  by  a  premeditated  persecution  ’  to
drive  the  people  into  rebellion  ;  conniving  at  the  persecution  of
Catholics  by  Orangemen  in  Armagh ;  carrying  men  on  board
the  fleet  illegally  ;  causing  women  to  be  dragged  from  their
beds  to  see  their  houses  burned  ; 1  and  accusations  not  less  serious
were  made  by  very  responsible  politicians  in  their  own  names.
A  meeting  of  Dublin  freeholders,  in  July  1797,  passed  a  series
of  resolutions,  signed  by  Valentine  Lawless — afterwards  the
first  Lord  Clonfiurry — in  which  they  asserted  that,  ‘  through  the
recent  introduction  and  violent  exercise  of  military  power,’  great
numbers  of  persons  ‘  have  had  their  houses  burned,  or  been
themselves  transported  or  put  to  death,  without  even  the  form
of  accusation  or  trial.’ 2  Grattan  himself  speaks  of  ‘  barbarities
committed  on  the.  habitations,  property,  and  persons  of  the
people,  .  .  .  barbarities  and  murders  such  as  no  printer  will
now  dare  to  publish,  lest  he  should  be  plundered  or  murdered  for
the  ordinary  exercise  of  his  trade.’ 3  In  November,  Lord  Moira,
who  spoke  with  the  authority  of  a  great  Ulster  landlord,  brought
the  proceedings  in  Ulster  before  the  English  House  of  Lords  in
a  remarkable  speech,  in  which  he  declared  that  this  province  was
suffering  under  ‘  the  most  absurd  as  well  as  the  most  disgust¬
ing  tyranny  that  any  nation  ever  groaned  under  ’ — a  tyranny
which  if  persevered  in  must  inevitably  lead  to  ‘the  deepest  and
most  universal  discontent,  and  even  hatred  of  the  English  name.
He  was  himself,  he  said,  a  witness  of  much  that  he  described,
and  he  challenged  an  investigation  before  the  Privy  Council.

the  sword  exercise,  which  they  had
recently  learnt,  but  their  protection
is  now  anxiously  sought  by  all  the
gentlemen,  and  by  the  various  towns
and  villages  in  the  neighbourhood.’
(Camden  to  Portland,  Nov.  3,  1797.)
Pelham  writes,  ‘  The  Ancient  Britons
from  their  activity  and  loyalty,  and
particularly  from  the  success  of  one
dragoon,  who,  being  attacked  by  two
men  with  pikes,  was  enabled  by  his
dexterity  in  the  sword  exercise  to
parry  both  and  kill  one,  soon  became
the  terror  of  the  disaffected,  and
might  in  some  instances  have  pro¬

263

ceeded  too  far,  but  I  have  written
to  General  Lake  to  make  particular
inquiries.’  (Pelham,  Nov.  1,  1797.)
The  address  of  this  letter  is  not  given,
nor  can  I  find  anything  about  the
result  of  Lake’s  inquiries.  In  the
C/iarlemont  Papers  there  is  a  letter
from  Robert  Livingston  to  Lord
Charlemont,  describing  the  ‘wreck¬
ings,’  and  other  outrages  committed
by  the  Ancient  Britons  on  the  Charle¬
mont  estates.

1  I.S.P.O.

2  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  301.

3  Ibid.  p.  303.

306

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxrai.

‘  I  know,’  he  continued,  ‘  instances  of  men  being  picketed  in
Ireland  till  they  fainted ;  when  they  recovered,  picketed  again
till  they  fainted — recovered  again,  and  again  picketed  till  they
fainted  a  third  time  ;  and  this  in  order  to  extort  from  the  tortured
sufferers  a  confession,  either  of  their  own  guilt  or  of  the  guilt  of
their  neighbours.  I  can  even  go  farther.  Men  have  been  half
hanged  and  then  brought  to  life,  in  order,  by  the  fear  of  having
that  punishment  repeated,  to  induce  them  to  confess  the  crimes
with  which  they  have  been  charged.’  The  following,  he  said,
is  the  regular  punishment  to  which  every  man  is  subject  who
refuses  to  bring  in  arms  under  the  proclamation  of  General  Lake.

£  A  party  of  the  military  may  go  and  burn  his  house,  and  totally
destroy  his  property.  I  know  of  instances  where  this  has  been
practised  because  the  district  in  which  the  property  has  been
situated  has  not  brought  in  such  a  number  of  arms  as  it  was
conceived  were  contained  in  the  district.’  1  Such  outrages,’  he
declared,  ‘  daily  happen,’  and  he  was  convinced  that,  if  the
present  system  was  not  speedily  terminated,  ‘  all  hope  would  be
lost  of  seeing  Ireland  connected  five  years  longer  with  the  British
Empire.’ 1

General  Lake,  when  the  report  of  this  speech  arrived  in
Ireland,  wrote  confidentially  to  Pelham,  declaring  in  the  most
earnest  language  that  he  had  never  heard  of  any  instance  either
of  picketing  or  half  hanging,  and  did  not  believe  that  anything
of  the  kind  had  happened  in  Ulster  ;  that  he  had  endeavoured
‘  on  all  occasions  to  prevent  as  much  as  possible  any  acts  of
violence  on  the  part  of  the  troops  ;  ’  and  that,  £  considering  their
powers  and  provocations,’  he  believed  they  had  acted  £  so  as  to
deserve  the  good  opinion  of  the  public,  rather  than  their
reproaches.’ 2  There  is  little  doubt  that  enormous  falsehoods
and  exaggerations  were  scattered  through  Ulster,  but  as  little
that  the  authorities  did  all  in  their  power  to  prevent  inquiry
and  to  hush  up  such  abuses  as  actually  occurred.  When  Lord
Moira,  in  the  beginning  of  1798,  brought  the  subject  before  the
Irish  House  of  Lords,  the  charges  of  picketing  and  half  hanging
resolved  themselves  into  a  single  well-attested  instance — that
of  a  blacksmith  who  had  been  largely  engaged  in  manufacturing

1  Pari.  Hist,  xxxiii.  1059-1062.

2  Lake  to  Pelham  (confidential),  Nov.  30, 1797.

CH.  XXV1I1.

MILITARY  EXCESSES  IN  ULSTER.

307

pikes  in  Downpatrick,  and  wko  was  compelled  by  picketing,  by
the  threat  of  immediate  death,  and  perhaps  by  half  hanging,  to
reveal  the  persons  to  whom  he  had  given  them.1  We  have,
however,  abundant  evidence  that  great  numbers  of  poor  men’s
houses  were  at  this  time  burnt  on  slight  reasons,2  and  without  a
shadow  of  legal  justification;  and  there  is  much  reason  to
believe  that  in  the  midnight  raids  many  persons  were  shot  by
soldiers,  or  more  probably  by  yeomen,  in  a  manner  that  differed
little,  if  at  all,  from  simple  murder.’  3

All  these  things  naturally  tended  to  stir  up  fierce  and  en¬
during  animosities,  and  the  condition  of  Ulster  at  this  period
was  almost  as  horrible  and  as  critical  as  can  be  conceived,
except  in  the  case  of  open  war  or  rebellion.  The  gaols  and
guard-houses  were  thronged  with  untried  prisoners,  who  were
often  detained  for  many  months.  Many  were  sent  to  the  fleet,
but  it  was  soon  found  that  grave  dangers  attended  this  course.
The  signs  of  mutiny  which  this  year  appeared  in  the  British

1  See  the  speeches  of  Lord  Clare
and  Lord  Moira  in  the  Debate  in  the
Irish  House  of  Lords,  Feb.  19,  1798,
pp.  97,  98,  154.  There  was  a  conflict
of  testimony  about  the  half  hanging,
though  it  was  admitted  that  a  rope
was  put  round  the  culprit’s  neck.

2  In  the  beginning  of  November,
when  it  was  known  by  the  Govern¬
ment  that  the  English  Opposition  in¬
tended  to  bring  forward  examples  of
atrocities  in  Ireland,  Pelham  sent
over  confidentially  to  England  a  list
of  the  incidents  which  might  be  the
subject  of  attack.  He  said,  ‘  It  can¬
not  be  denied  that  some  things  have
been  done  which  are  to  be  regretted.
At  the  same  time,  I  believe  that
no  army  ever  behaved  better  under
similar  circumstances,  and  I  will
venture  to  say  that  no  army  ever
was  placed  in  exactly  the  same  situa¬
tion  ;  and  with  regard  to  the  British
troops,  I  can  assure  you  that  they  are
not  only  sought  for  by  those  who
want  protection,  but  even  those  who
by  their  conduct  expose  themselves
to  any  military  rigour,  acknowledge
the  humanity  of  the  British  soldiers.’
He  adds,  ‘  Several  houses  have  cer¬
tainly  been  burnt  in  many  parts  of
the  country,  but  in  no  instance,  I
believe,  excepting  where  arms  and

pikes  have  been  concealed,  and  where
the  troops  have  been  attacked.’  (Nov.
1,  1797.)

3  Lord  Dunsany  in  the  Irish  House
of  Lords  said,  that  if  the  Government
wished  for  an  inquiry,  ‘  he  could  re¬
late  to  them,  not  simply  the  burning
of  houses,  but  the  murder  in  cool
blood  of  their  inhabitants.  He  could
give  them  an  account  of  three  men
particularly,  who,  after  having  had
their  houses  burned  to  the  ground,
were  shot  by  the  military,  whose
prisoners  they  had  for  some  time
been ;  and  he  could  add  to  these
accounts  numerous  instances  of  men
torn  from  their  family  and  country,
and  without  the  form  of  a  trial  trans¬
ported.’  ( Debate ,  Feb.  19,  1798,  p.
141.)  In  the  House  of  Commons
Dr.  Browne,  one  of  the  members  for
Dublin  University,  asserted  that  he
was  prepared  to  prove  that  there  had
been  ‘  numerous  instances  ’  of  the
houses  of  persons  who  were  not  at
home  by  a  particular  hour  of  the
night  being  burnt  by  the  military
and  yeomanry  ;  and  of  men  supposed
to  be  guilty  of  treasonable  offences,
but  against  whom  there  was  no  evi¬
dence,  being  shot  in  cold  blood.  Some
cases  of  this  kind  are  mentioned  with
particulars  by  Plowden,  ii.  (123,  624.

308

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

fleet,  and  which  at  last  culminated  in  the  mutiny  of  the  Nore,
were  believed  to  be  not  unconnected  with  the  number  of  seditious
Irishmen  who  had  been  sent  to  it.  There  is  even  some  evidence
of  a  secret  correspondence  between  the  Ulster  rebels  and  the
mutineers.1  In  more  than  one  letter,  Lake  complained  that  he
was  overburdened  with  prisoners,  whom  he  could  not  prosecute
with  any  hope  of  conviction,  but  who  were  notorious  villains,
quite  unfit  to  be  let  loose  or,  through  physical  defects,  to  serve  in
the  fleet,  and  who,  if  they  were  sent  there,  would  probably  do
their  utmost  to  corrupt  the  sailors.  ‘  These  villains,’  he  wrote,
‘pretend  to  rejoice  at  going  to  sea,  as  they  say  by  that  means
they  will  be  able  to  corrupt  the  sailors,  and  completely  settle  the
business.  ...  I  believe  the  whole  country,  at  least  the  lower
orders  of  it,  are  the  same  in  every  particular.’ 2

Another  fact,  which  added  greatly  to  the  anarchy  of  the
North,  and  had  ultimately  a  most  serious  influence  on  the
remainder  of  Ireland,  was  the  growing  importance  of  the  Orange
movement,  and  the  alliance  which  was  gradually  forming
between  it  and  the  Government.  At  first,  as  we  have  seen,
Orangism  was  simply  a  form  of  outrage — the  Protestant  side
of  a  faction  fight  which  had  long  been  raging  in  certain  coun¬
ties  of  the  North  among  the  tenants  and  labourers  of  the  two
religions — and  the  Protestants  in  Armagh  being  considerably
stronger  than  the  Catholics,  Orangism  in  that  county  had
assumed  the  character  of  a  most  formidable  persecution.  Ma¬
gistrates  were  frequently  accused  of  being  shamefully  passive
during  these  outrages ;  .but  the  movement,  in  its  earlier  stages,
appears  to  have  been  wholly  unprompted  by  and  unconnected
with  the  gentry  of  the  country.  It  was  a  popular  and  democratic
movement,  springing  up  among  the  lowest  classes  of  Protestants,
and  essentially  lawless.  As,  however,  it  was  the  main  object  of
the  United  Irishmen  to  form  an  alliance  between  the  Presby¬
terians  and  the  Catholics ;  as  in  pursuance  of  this  policy  they  con¬
stituted  themselves  the  champions  of  Catholics  who  had  been
persecuted  by  Orangemen ;  and  as  the  Defenders  steadily  gravi-

1  See  a  letter  from  Lord  West-  Government  to  appease  the  mutineers
morland  to  Cooke,  June  1G  ;  and  also  at  the  N ore.  See  Hippisley’s  Speech
a  letter  of  F.  Higgins,  May  18,  1797.  May  18,  1810,  p.  55.

(I.S.P.O.)  It  is  worthy  of  notice  *  Letter  to  Pelham,  April  23,  1797*

that  a  Catholic  priest  was  sent  by  the  see,  too,  March  25,  April  16.  ’

cn.  xxviii.

TRANSFORMATION  OF  ORANGISM.

309

tated  to  the  ranks  of  the  United  Irishmen,  the  Orangemen,
by  a  natural  and  inevitable  process,  became  a  great  counterpoise
to  the  United  Irishmen,  and  the  civil  war  which  raged  between
the  two  sects  a  great  advantage  to  the  Government.  The
successful  efforts  of  the  United  Irishmen  to  prevent  their  party
from  enlisting  in  the  yeomanry,  resulted  in  that  force  being
largely  composed  of  men  with  Orange  sympathies ;  and  when
the  outrages  of  the  Defenders  and  United  Irishmen  multiplied,
and  when  the  probability  of  invasion  became  very  great,  several
considerable  country  gentlemen  in  Ulster  changed  their  policy,
placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  their  Orange  tenantry,  and
began  to  organise  them  into  societies.  The  name  of  Orange  was
not,  even  at  this  time,  associated  in  Ulster,  only  with  the
outrages  in  Armagh.  Its  primary  meaning  was  simply  loyalty
to  the  Eevolution  settlement,  and  before  the  battle  of  the
Diamond  it  appears  to  have  been  sometimes  assumed  by  loyal
societies  which  had  no  connection  whatever  with  the  disputes
between  the  Peep  of  Day  Boys  and  the  Defenders.1  The  country
gentlemen  who  now  took  the  name  of  Orangemen  were  mainly,
or  exclusively,  strong  opponents  of  the  admission  of  Catholics
to  Parliament,  though  some  of  them  were  of  the  school  of  Flood,
and  desired  a  parliamentary  reform  upon  a  Protestant  basis.
The  society  as  organised  by  them,  emphatically  disclaimed  all
sympathy  with  outrage  and  all  desire  to  persecute.  It  was
intended  to  be  a  loyal  society  for  the  defence  of  Ulster  and  the
kingdom  against  the  United  Irishmen  and  against  the  French,
and  also  for  maintaining  the  Constitution  on  an  exclusively
Protestant  basis,  but  it  included  in  its  ranks  all  the  most
intolerant  and  fanatical  Protestantism  in  the  province,  and  it
inherited  from  its  earlier  stage,  traditions  and  habits  of  violence
and  outrage  which  its  new  leaders  could  not  wholly  repress,

1  In  Bowden’s  Tour  through  Ire¬
land,  which  was  published  in  1791
(four  years  before  the  battle  of  the
Diamond),  the  author  says,  ‘I  was
introduced  [at  Belfast]  to  the  Orange
Lodge  by  a  Mr.  Hyndeman,  a  merchant
of  this  town.  This  lodge  is  composed
of  about  300  gentlemen,  amongst
whom  are  the  Hon.  Mr.  O’Neil,  the
Marquis  of  Antrim,  the  Marquis  of
Downshire,  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,

and  many  others  of  the  first  conse¬
quence  and  property.  Mr.  Hyndeman
informed  me  this  lodge  was  founded
by  a  Mr.  Griffith,  who  held  a  lucrative
appointment  here  under  Government.
At  a  contested  election  he  supported
the  popular  candidate,  contrary  to
the  ministerial  interest,  which  some
of  his  great  brethren  represented  in
such  colours  to  Government  that  he
was  dismissed.’  (Pp.  236,  237.)

310

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvm.

and  which  the  anarchy  of  the  time  was  well  fitted  to  en¬
courage.

A  few  extracts  from  the  confidential  letters  of  the  generals
commanding  in  the  North  will  paint  the  situation,  and  show
the  ideas  and  tendencies  that  were  prevailing.  Lake,  who
commanded  the  province,  strongly  maintained  that  nothing  but
the  extreme  exertion  of  military  law  could  cope  with  the  evil.
‘  I  much  fear,’  he  wrote,  ‘  these  villains  will  not  give  us  an
opportunity  of  treating  them  in  the  summary  way  we  all  wish.
You  may  rest  assured  they  will  not  have  much  mercy  if  we  can
once  begin.’ 1  £  If  we  had  a  large  body  of  troops  in  this  district

with  martial  law  proclaimed,  I  think  we  should  very  shortly
have  all  the  arms  in  the  country,  and  put  an  immediate  stop  to
the  rebellion.  I  see  no  other  way  of  entirely  disarming  the
province,  which  certainly  should  be  done  instantly,  and  is  not)
I  fear,  practicable  without  great  force  and  such  powers  as  I
mention.  The  contagion  spreads  fast,  and  requires  most
desperate  remedies.  I  think  if  they  once  knew  military  law
was  proclaimed,  and  that  one  or  two  of  their  large  towns  were
threatened  to  be  burnt  unless  arms  of  every  kind  were  produced,
it  would  have  a  great  effect ;  and  if  they  did  not  bring  in  their
arms,  it  would  be  advisable  the  houses  of  some  of  the  most  dis¬
affected  should  be  set  on  fire.  You  may  think  me  too  violent,
but  I  am  convinced  it  will  be  mercy  in  the  end.  .  .  .  Surely  the
££  Northern  Star  ”  should  be  stopped.  The  mischief  it  does  is
beyond  all  imagination.  May  I  be  allowed  to  seize  and  burn  the
whole  apparatus  ?  Belfast  ought  to  be  proclaimed  and  punished
most  severely,  as  it  is  plain  every  act  of  sedition  originates  in
this  town.  I  have  patrols  going  all  night,  and  will  do  everything
I  can  to  thin  the  country  of  these  rebellious  scoundrels  by  send¬
ing  them  on  board  the  tender.’2  He  laments  that  complete
martial  law  was  not  proclaimed.  It  is,  he  says,  £  very  necessary,
I  assure  you,  though  I  believe  it  will  not  be  long  before  it  is  in
force  here,  as,  if  my  information  is  right,  .  .  .  these  villains  do
most  undoubtedly  meditate  a  rising,  and  that  very  shortly.
...  I  cannot  help  wishing  that  we  had  full  powers  to  destroy
their  houses,  or  try  some  of  them  by  our  law,  if  they  did  not

1  Lake  to  Pelham,  March  25, 1797.

*  Ibid.  April  16.

CH.  XXVIII,

LETTERS  OF  KNOX.

311

bring  in  their  arms.  .  .  .  Nothing  but  terror  will  keep  them
in  order.’ 1

A  much  more  instructive  correspondence  was  at  this  time
carried  on  between  the  Chief  Secretary  and  Brigadier-General
Knox,  a  man  who,  in  addition  to  his  military  talents,  had  great
family  influence  in  the  North,  and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  its
social  and  political  condition.  He  commanded  at  Dungannon,
where  he  seems  to  have  been  remarkably  successful  in  pacifying
the  country.  He  furnished  the  Government  with  elaborate  plans
for  the  defence  of  Ulster  against  ipvasion,  and  he  was  much
consulted  on  political  matters  by  Pelham.  He  was  evidently  a
man  of  a  hot  temper :  quarrelling  at  one  time  with  Lord  Car-
hampton,  and  at  another  with  Pelham  himself,  and  he  appears
to  have  been  of  that  stern  Cromwellian  type  which  flinches  from
no  degree  of  violence  that  seems  necessary  to  secure  the
country.  A  few  extracts  from  his  letters  will  show  the  new
place  which  Orangism  was  beginning  to  take  in  Irish  politics,
and  also  the  judgment  of  an  honest  and  very  able  man  about
the  state  of  feeling  in  Ulster,  and  the  measures  by  which  Ireland
•  could  be  pacified.

In  March,  he  wrote  strongly  objecting  to  the  policy  of
general  and  indiscriminate  disarming.  ‘  In  the  counties  of  Down,
Antrim,  Derry,  and  parts  of  Donegal  and  Tyrone,’  he  wrote,  £  the
whole  people  are  ill  disposed ;  consequently  it  should  be  the
object  of  Government  to  seize  all  their  arms  ;  but  in  the  counties
of  Armagh,  Cavan,  Monaghan,  Fermanagh,  and  part  of  Tyrone,
through  which  my  brigade  is  at  present  quartered,  a  proportion
of  the  people  are  hostile  to  the  United  Irishmen — particularly
those  calling  themselves  Orangemen.’  If,  which  was  not  the
case,  the  troops  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  make  a  general
search,  the  measure  would  do  more  harm  than  good.  ‘  On  the
first  alarm  the  United  Irishmen  would  conceal  their  arms,  and
the  soldiery  would  find  and  seize  the  arms  only  of  those  who
were  well  inclined,  thereby  leaving  them  to  the  mercy  of  their
enemies.  This  actually  happened  near  Omagh.’  In  one  parish
the  Protestant  inhabitants,  ‘  though  not  embodied  in  yeomanry
corps,  associated  to  defend  their  property,  and  to  keep  the  peace

1  Lake  to  Pelham,  May  18,  1797.

312

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

of  their  neighbourhood.  Their  arms,  and  theirs  only,  were
seized  by  the  military.’  ‘  I  have  arranged,’  he  says,  ‘  a  plan  to
scour  a  district  full  of  unregistered  arms,  or  said  to  be  so.  .  .  .
And  this  I  do,  not  so  much  with  a  hope  to  succeed  to  any
extent,  as  to  increase  the  animosity  between  the  Orangemen
and  the  United  Irishmen,  or  liberty  men  as  they  call  them¬
selves.  Upon  that  animosity  depends  the  safety  of  the  centre
counties  of  the  North.  Were  the  Orangemen  disarmed  or  put
down,  or  were  they  coalesced  with  the  other  party,  the  whole
of  Ulster  would  be  as  bad  as  Down  and  Antrim.’  ‘  In  re¬
spect  to  the  county  of  Armagh,  I  hope  no  attempt  may  be
made  towards  a  genuine  search  and  seizure  of  arms.  Except  in
the  wild  country  about  the  Fews  mountains,  it  might  do  great
mischief.’ 1

‘  The  state  of  affairs,’  he  wrote  a  few  weeks  later,  ‘  I  am
sorry  to  say,  has  within  these  few  days  become  very  alarming.
Disaffection  has  spread  into  districts  that  have  hitherto  been
considered  as  loyal.  The  loyalists  are  under  the  impression  of
terror  ;  ’  the  minds  of  nearly  all  classes  are  wavering.  Nothing
but  a  large  additional  supply  of  English  troops  can  secure  the
province.2  £Mr.  Verner  informed  me  that  he  could  enroll  a
considerable  number  of  men  as  supplementary  yeomen,  to  be
attached  to  his  corps  without  pay,  if  Government  would  give
them  arms.  They  would  consist  of  staunch  Orangemen,  the
only  description  of  men  in  the  North  of  Ireland  that  can  be  de¬
pended  upon.  He  reckons  upon  two  or  three  hundred.  May
I  encoui'age  him  to  proceed  ?  ’ 3

Other  proposals  of  the  same  kind  were  pressed  from  other
quarters  on  Pelham,  and  he  wrote  to  Knox  in  great  perplexity,
begging  his  advice.  It  was  urged  that  the  Armagh  Orangemen
might  be  organised  into  a  new  fencible  corps ;  that  their  loyalty
was  incontestable  ;  that  if  they  were  not  armed,  they  would  be
in  much  danger  in  case  of  an  insurrection.  1  At  the  same  time,’
he  continued,  ‘  I  am  sure  that  you  will  see  many  difficulties  in
forming  them  into  corps,  which  have  the  appearance  of  esta¬
blishing  religious  distinctions.’  On  the  whole,  he  concluded
that  the  best  line  of  conduct  he  could  follow,  was  to  leave  the

1  Knox  to  Lake,  March  18,  1797.

*  Knox  to  Pelham,  April  11,  1797.  a  Ibid.  April  19.

CH.  XXVIII.

LETTERS  OE  KNOX.

313

matter  to  the  discretion  of  Knox.  The  object  of  suppressing
the  United  Irishmen  is  so  great,  ‘that  one  can  hardly  object  to
any  means  for  gaining  it.  At  the  same  time,  party  and  religious
distinctions  have  produced  such  consequences  in  the  county  of
Armagh,  that  it  will  require  infinite  prudence  and  dexterity  in
the  management  of  such  an  undertaking.’ 1

Knox  strongly  encouraged  the  arming  of  the  Orangemen,
though  he  was  by  no  means  insensible  to  the  objections  to  that
course.  ‘  If  I  am  permitted,’  he  wrote,  c  as  I  am  inclined,  to
encourage  the  Orangemen,  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  put  down
the  United  Irishmen  in  Armagh,  Monaghan,  Cavan,  and  part
of  Tyrone.’  He  sent  to  Pelham  a  series  of  resolutions,  which
had  just  been  carried  at  Armagh,  by  the  masters  of  the  different
Orange  lodges  of  Ulster,  showing  that  the  society  had  now
assumed  the  character  of  a  legitimate  political  association.  In
these  resolutions  the  Orangemen  expressed  warm  loyalty  to  the
Crown,  detestation  of  rebels  of  all  descriptions,  and  determination
to  support,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  the  existing  constitution
of  Church  and  State,  dwelling  especially  on  the  Protestant
ascendency.  They  recommended  the  gentlemen  of  the  country
to  remain  on  their  estates,  offered  to  form  themselves  into  dis¬
tinct  corps  under  their  guidance,  and  invited  subscriptions  for
the  necessary  expenses.  They  also  declared  that  the  object  of
the  Orange  Association  was  to  defend  themselves,  their  pro¬
perties,  the  peace  of  the  country,  and  the  Protestant  Constitu¬
tion,  and  they  solemnly  and  authoritatively  denied  that  they
had  sworn  to  extirpate  the  Catholics.  ‘  The  loyal,  well-
behaved  men,’  they  said,  1  let  their  religion  be  what  it  may,
need  fear  no  injury  from  us.’2

It  was  obvious  that  a  society  of  this  kind  was  very  different
from  the  tumultuous  rabble  which  has  been  described,  and  a
book  of  rules  and  regulations  was  drawn  up  and  circulated
among  the  Orangemen,  which  clearly  showed  the  desire  of  its
leaders  to  give  the  society  a  character  not  only  of  legality,  but
of  high  moral  excellence.  Every  Orangeman,  it  was  said,  was
expected  to  have  a  sincere  love  and  veneration  for  his  Maker,
and  a  firm  belief  in  the  sole  mediatorship  of  Christ.  He  must

1  Pelham  to  Knox,  May  20,  23,  1797.

J  These  resolutions  (May  1797)  were  printed  and  circulated.

314  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

be  humane  and  courteous,  an  enemy  to  all  brutality  and  cruelty,
zealous  to  promote  the  honour  of  his  King  and  country.  He
must  abstain  from  cursing,  swearing,  and  intemperance,  and
he  must  carefully  observe  the  Sabbath.  The  society  was  ex¬
clusively  Protestant,  and  it  was  based  upon  the  idea  of  Protes¬
tant  ascendency,  but  it  was  intended  also  to  be  actively  loyal,
and  to  combat  the  forces  of  atheism  and  anarchy.  Like  the
Freemasons,  the  Orangemen  had  secret  signs  and  pass-words,
but  the  only  object  of  these  was  to  prevent  traitors  from  mix¬
ing  with  them  in  order  to  betray  them,  and  also  to  recom¬
mend  each  Orangeman  to  the  attention  and  kindness  of  his
brethren.1

£  If  the  Government  is  resolved,’  wrote  Knox,  ‘  to  resist
Catholic  emancipation,  the  measure  of  adding  strength  to  the
Orange  party  will  be  of  the  greatest  use.  But  they  are  bigots,
and  will  resist  Catholic  emancipation.’  ‘  The  Orangemen,’  he
says  in  another  letter,  ‘  were  originally  a  bigoted  set  of  men,
who  were  ready  to  destroy  the  Roman  Catholics.  They  now
form  a  political  party,  and  are  the  only  barrier  we  have  against
the  United  Irishmen.  I  do  not  by  any  means  wish  the  Govern¬
ment  should  give  them  an  avowed  protection,  as  it  might  do
mischief  in  the  South,  but  that  protection  may  be  given  silently,
by  permission  to  enroll  themselves  in  the  district  corps,  and  by
having  it  generally  understood  that  their  meetings  (a  sort  of
freemasonry)  shall  not  be  disturbed  as  long  as  the  Orangemen
refrain  from  outrage.’ 2

This  policy  appears  to  have  been  in  fact  pursued,  and  two
considerable  bodies  of  avowed  Orangemen,  raised  by  Mr.  Yerner
and  Mr.  Atkinson,  were,  with  the  consent  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,
now  incorporated  into  the  yeomanry.3  At  the  same  time  Knox
strongly  maintained  that  Ulster  could  only  be  reduced  to  peace
by  the  most  extreme  measui’es,  and  that  an  additional  force  of
eight  or  ten  thousand  English  troops  was  required  for  its
security.  The  first  step,  he  urged,  was  the  proclamation  of
martial  law.  Pelham  answered  that  this  had  already  in  effect
been  done,  for  General  Lake  had  been  furnished  with  all  the

1  See  The  Principles  of  the  Orange  2  Knox  to  Pelham,  May  21,  22,
Association  Vindicated.  By  the  28,1797.  The  Orange  resolutions  will
Rev.  S.  Cupples,  Rector  of  Lisburn  be  found  in  the  I.S.P.O.

(1799).  8  Pelham  to  Knox,  May  26,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

LETTERS  OF  KNOX.

315

powers  that  martial  law  could  give  him,  when  he  was  authorised
to  act  without  the  civil  magistrate ;  hut  Knox  very  justly
replied  that  this  position  was  not  tenable.  ‘  Two  distinct  laws
of  contrary  nature  cannot  exist  at  the  same  moment.  The
judges  are  now  on  the  circuit.  The  magistrates  are  in  possession
of  their  powers.  There  is  not  an  act  committed  by  a  soldier  for
which  he  is  not  answerable  to  civil  law.  General  Lake  can
have  no  authority  to  proclaim  martial  law.  The  order  must
come  from  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Council.  All  civil  power
then  ceases.  The  military  commanding  officer  has  power  of  life
and  death,  with  or  without  court-martial.  He  may  give  his
soldiers  free  quarters.  He  may  lay  waste  districts,  and  take
such  measures  of  coercion  as  he  may  think  proper,  without
being  amenable  to  any  tribunal  for  his  conduct.  Nothing  less
than  this  authority  with  a  powerful  British  force,  will  ever  dis¬
arm  and  subdue  the  North  of  Ireland.  .  .  .  The  present  system
is  that  of  irritation,  and  the  rebels  are  getting  confidence,  arms,
and  accession  of  numbers.’  ‘  Nothing  but  authority  to  the
military  to  make  war  upon  property  till  the  arms  and  ammuni¬
tion  are  given  up,  will  answer.  It  must  be  resorted  to,  or  the
country  will  remain  in  a  state  of  smothered  war.  If  the  only
object  of  the  British  Government  were  to  settle  Ireland,  it  might
be  done  in  two  months.’  1

This  last  sentence  was  somewhat  enigmatical,  and  in  reply
to  an  inquiry  of  Pelham,  Knox  developed  his  views  in  a  letter
which  shows  clearly  how  powerfully  the  example  of  the  French
Revolution  was  acting  on  the  loyal  as  well  as  on  the  disloyal.

‘  The  country,’  he  wrote,  1  never  can  be  settled  until  it  is
disarmed,  and  that  is  only  to  be  done  by  terror  .  .  .  authorising
the  general  officers  to  declare  war  upon  property  until  the
surrender  is  made.  Arms  may  be  hid,  ringleaders  may  conceal
themselves,  but  houses  and  barns  cannot  be  removed.  In  every
other  species  of  warfare  the  assailing  army  has  the  disadvantage
against  a  hostile  people.  The  bloody  scenes  of  La  Vendee
would  not  have  happened,  had  the  French  Convention  adopted
immediately  that  mode  of  attack.  When  Hoche  did  act,  the
rebellion  was  at  an  end.’  1  It  appears  to  me,’  however,  he
added,  £  that  our  British  Ministers  have,  at  this  moment,  an
1  Knox  to  Pelham,  April  19,  May  22,  1797.

316

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyiii.

object  more  material  to  the  Empire  than  the  immediate  settle¬
ment  of  Ireland,  viz.  a  peace,  the  negotiation  of  which  might
be  impeded  by  a  public  avowal  that  Ireland  was  in  rebellion,
and  I  do  not  know  how  far  the  Ministers  would  think  it  prudent
to  risk  so  bold  a  step,  which,  perhaps,  in  the  opinion  of  England,
success  even  could  not  justify.’ 1

It  would,  however,  be  a  great  injustice  to  General  Knox  to
suppose  that  he  had  no  other  remedies  to  suggest,  or  that  he
regarded  the  evil  as  a  mere  passing  malady  which  could  be
easily  dispelled.  ‘  The  present,’  he  writes,  ‘  is  a  contest  of  the
poor  against  the  rich,  and  of  the  Irishman  against  the  British
Government.  Many  foolish  men  of  property  have  joined  in  the
rebellion  from  the  latter  motive,  but  the  loyalty  of  every  Irish¬
man  who  is  unconnected  with  property  is  artificial.’ 2  To  deal
with  this  condition  of  society  great  organic  changes  appeared
to  him  necessary,  and  his  views  seem  to  have  coincided  remark¬
ably  with  those  which  were  adopted  by  Pitt.  {  As  long  as  there
are  two  distinct  Legislatures  in  England  and  Ireland,  no  measures
can  be  adopted  to  procure  a  solid  peace  between  them.  The
great  object  should  therefore  be  an  Union,  to  obtain  which  is
now  within  our  reach.  The  first  step  is  by  strong  military
coercion  to  subdue  the  people ;  and  while  Ireland  is  yet  full  of
British  or  foreign  troops,  to  offer  the  people  parliamentary
reform ;  emancipation  of  Catholics  ;  abolition  of  sinecure  places
&c.  &c.  on  condition  of  their  acceding  to  an  Union;  thereby  sub¬
duing  the  aristocracy  with  the  assistance  of  the  people.  One
hundred  members  of  Parliament  freely  chosen  by  the  counties
and  principal  towns  of  Ireland,  would  not  operate  upon  the
British  House  of  Commons.  By  reducing  the  number  of  both
Houses  of  Parliament,  the  Minister  would  be  enabled  to  offer
such  sacrifices  as  would  be  acceptable  to  the  people.  The
venality  of  the  Irish  aristocracy  is  of  more  detriment  to  the
British  Government  here,  and  of  more  annoyance  to  the  British
Minister,  than  a  few  Democrats,  chosen  perhaps  by  Belfast  and

1  Knox  to  Pelham,  May  28,  1797.  about  the  Government  were  urging
This  letter,  and  one  of  Lake’s  which  that  the  town  of  Belfast  should  be
I  have  quoted,  will  show  that  there  burnt  to  the  ground.  See  Historical
was  some  colour  of  plausibility  in  the  Collections  relating  to  Belfast ,  p.  453.
reports  which  were  at  this  time  in-  2  Knox  to  Pelham,  April  14,  1797,
dustriously  circulated,  that  persons

CH.  XXVIII.

LETTERS  OF  KNOX.

317

Newry  and  two  or  three  other  towns,  could  possibly  be  in  a  joint
Parliament  of  the  two  countries.  I  shall  now  point  out  one
popular  and  just  law  which,  at  a  future  period,  it  would  be
desirable  to  pass — for  now  all  laws  of  concession  would  have  a
bad  effect.  This  law  is  to  oblige  all  landlords  in  letting  leases  to
give  a  preference  of  ten  per  cent,  to  the  old  tenant.  ...  I  think
the  interest  of  Great  Britain,  of  Ireland,  and  of  the  Empire,  is
first  to  subdue  the  people  of  the  North  of  Ireland ;  secondly,  to
subdue  the  aristocracy  of  Ireland,  and  force  an  Union.  Within
my  memory,  the  measures  of  England  towards  this  country  have
been  to  remove  an  existing  difficulty  without  looking  forward.
It  is  time  to  put  a  stop  to  the  jarring  of  the  two  coun tries  ;  to
adopt  a  plan,  and  pursue  it  with  perseverance,  to  obtain  an  Union
of  the  two  Legislatures.’ 1

Pelham,  referring  to  a  passing  allusion  to  the  Catholic  ques¬
tion  in  one  of  the  letters  of  Knox,  begged  the  General  to  write
frankly  to  him  on  that  question,  for  although,  he  said,  the  time
was  not  propitious  to  any  discussion  of  it  in  Parliament,  yet
‘  every  man  who  interests  himself  about  the  country  must  look
to  some  permanent  settlement  beyond  the  mere  suppression  of
the  existing  rebellion,  and  therefore  must  be  discussing,  in  his
own  mind  at  least,  the  situation  of  the  different  religious
sects.’ 2

1  The  mass  of  the  Roman  Catholics  of  Ireland,’  answered
Knox,  ‘  feel  little  interest  in  the  question  of  Catholic  emancipa¬
tion.  It  is  of  consequence  only  to  the  Catholics  of  property,  of
whom  there  are  very  few  in  Ulster.  When  the  question  was
started,  and  Catholic  emancipation  supported  by  the  Presby¬
terians  of  the  North,  it  failed  of  the  effect  of  rousing  the  lower
order  of  Roman  Catholics,  and  the  Republicans  were  therefore
obliged  to  throw  in  the  bait  of  abolition  of  tithes  and  reduction
of  rents.  This  has  completely  answered  the  purpose,  and  the
whole  mass  of  the  Catholics  of  Ulster  are  United  Irishmen.
The  effect  of  Catholic  emancipation  unaccompanied  by  complete
parliamentary  reform,  would  be  the  loss  of  the  whole  body  of
Orangemen,  without  the  acquisition  of  the  Catholics.  The
Presbyterians  would  tell  them  it  was  a  mockery.  ...  In  my
letter  written  some  time  ago,  I  ventured  to  give  an  opinion  that
1  Knox  to  .Pelham,  April  19,  1797.  2  Pelham  to  Knox,  May  20,  1797.

318

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cn.  mm,

Catholic  emancipation  and  parliamentary  reform  should  he
reserved  as  douceurs  to  the  people  of  Ireland  to  agree  to  an
Union  of  the  Legislatures  of  the  two  countries.  The  interest  of
the  aristocracy  and  of  the  city  of  Dublin  alone  oppose  an  Union.
The  former  are  now  of  no  weight,  and  the  latter  deserves  punish¬
ment.  I  look  upon  it  that  Ireland  must  soon  stand  in  respect
to  England  in  one  of  these  three  situations — united  with  her,
the  Legislatures  being  joined  ;  separated  from  her,  and  forming
a  republic,  or  as  a  half-subdued  province.’ 1

The  views  which  were  expressed  in  these  remarkable  letters,
appear  to  me  to  have  been  very  much  those  which  were  held
in  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  by  some  of  the  ablest
men  connected  with  the  Government.  In  the  correspondence  of
this  time,  the  magistrates  and  gentry  in  the  North  of  Ireland  are
constantly  spoken  of  with  great  severity.  They  are  represented
as  flying  from  their  estates  to  the  towns,  or  as  remaining  passive
in  the  midst  of  the  popular  outrages,  and  Dean  Warburton  in
more  than  one  letter  compares  their  conduct  to  that  of  tho
French  gentry  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  Revolution.  There
were,  indeed,  a  few  conspicuous  exceptions.  Lord  Downshire
and  Lord  Cavan  were  specially  noted  for  their  zeal  and
courage  ;  Charlemont,  though  his  health  was  now  much  broken,
hastened,  in  a  manner  which  the  Chief  Secretary  recognised  as
extremely  honourable  to  him,  to  use  his  influence  in  the  cause
of  order,  even  under  a  Government  from  which  he  was  wholly
separated ; 2  and  other  men  in  less  prominent  positions  took  tho
same  course.  But  in  general,  Lake  pronounced  that  ‘tho
system  of  terror  practised  by  the  United  Irishmen  ’  had  ‘  com¬
pletely  destroyed  all  ideas  of  exertion  in  most  of  the  magistrates
and  gentry  throughout  the  country.’  3

The  fact  is  especially  remarkable  when  it  is  remembered

1  Knox  to  Pelham,  May  28,  1797.
The  reader  will  notice  a  striking  and
instructive  analogy  to  contemporary
history.  In  our  day  it  has  been  found
that  an  agitation,  based  on  purely
Nationalist  grounds,  signally  failed
to  rouse  the  farming  classes;  and
the  Nationalist  leaders  accordingly
adopted  with  success  the  plan  of  con¬
necting  with  it  an  attack  on  rents.

2  ‘  Lord  Charlemont  and  Conolly

have  offered  their  services  in  the

handsomest  manner.  The  former  is
going  down  to  Armagh  with  his  son,
Lord  Caulfield,  having  accepted  a
commission  of  captain,  which  is  a
circumstance  peculiarly  advantageous
to  Government  and  honourable  to  him,
as  he  was  a  general  in  the  corps  of
volunteers  ;  and  he  has  been,  on  this
occasion,  desired  to  take  the  command
of  two  counties.’  (Pelham  to  the
Duke  of  York,  Sept.  22,  1796.)

s  Lake  to  Pelham,  March  21, 1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  ULSTER  GENTRY.

319

wliat  a  prominent  part  the  Ulster  gentlemen  had  taken  twenty
years  before  in  organising  the  volunteers,  and  how  admirably
they  had  then  secured  the  province  not  only  from  invasion,  but
also  from  internal  disorder.  It  is  possible  that  some  consider¬
able  moral  and  political  decadence  may  have  set  in  among  them,
but  it  is  at  least  certain  that  the  spread'  of  republican  idea
had  enormously  aggravated  the  situation.  A  .country  gentle¬
man,  in  a  wild  district,  who  could  no  longer  count  upon  the
support  of  his  tenantry,  was  almost  helpless  in  the  midst  of  the
armed  anarchy  that  was  surging  around  him,  and  he  had  the
strongest  motives  to  avoid  as  much  as  possible  a  conflict  with  his
people.  Every  active  magistrate  was  inconstant,  immediate  danger
of  murder,  and  in  the  forecast  of  events  the  separation  of  Ireland
from  England  seemed  now  extremely  probable.  The  landing  of
any  considerable  French  force  in  Ulster  would  almost  certainly
have  effected  it,  and  it  was  not,  perhaps,  astonishing  that  many
men  of  influence  and  property  should  have  hesitated  under
these  circumstances  to  hazard  everything  they  possessed  in  the
defence  of  a  Government  which  had  taken  the  administration  of
affairs  out  of  their  hands,  and  which  was  pursuing  a  policy  that
they  regarded  as  absolutely  ruinous.  Pelham  had  not  only
permitted,  but  expressly  directed  the  military  authorities  to  act
without  the  participation  or  advice  of  the  civil  magistrates,1  and
there  are  many  indications  that  the  resolution  of  the  Govern¬
ment  to  resist  every  degree  of  parliamentary  reform  was  highly
displeasing  to  the  Irish  gentry,  and  especially  to  the  Northern
gentry,  who  had  so  long  supported  Grattan  in  the  cause.  Lord
Blayney,  who  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of  militia  or  yeomanry
was  one  of  the  most  active  men  engaged  in  pacifying  Ulster,
wrote  very  earnestly  to  Pelham  disclaiming  any  wish  to  oppose
or  embarrass  the  Ministry,  but  at  the  same  time  expressing
his  conviction,  that  ‘  some  plan  might  be  struck  out  which  would
satisfy  the  moderate  party,’  and  that  it  would  be  then  possible
‘to  obtain  information  against  the  Jacobins.’  Such  a  reform,
he  said,  might  prevent  a  revolution,  not  only  in  the  North,  but  in

1  ‘  Your  instructions  about  em-  upon  a  magistrate,  from  being  too
ploying  the  military  without  the  as-  well  acquainted  with  their  indecision
sistance  of  the  civil  power,  were  per-  and  timidity.’  (Lake  to  Pelham,
fectly  explicit.  I  have  ever  acted  April  16,  1797.)
since  I  received  them,  without  calling

320

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  it  ought  to  consist  of  opening
the  close  boroughs,  with  compensation  to  the  owners,  and  of  a
material  reduction  in  the  number  of  placemen  and  pensioners.1
Another  informant  warned  the  Government,  that  multitudes  of
the  rich  of  the  middle  classes  were  avowedly  United  Irishmen,  and
that  many  of  the  principal  gentry  inclined  that  way.2 *  ‘  Men  who
have  hitherto  reprobated  the  conduct  of  the  disaffected,’  wrote
a  very  active  magistrate,  ‘  have  totally  changed  their  sentiments,
and  now  avow  that  concessions  must  be  made,  and  that  the  rea¬
sonable  requests  of  the  people  for  the  reform  of  Parliament  being
refused  has  been  the  sole  cause  of  the  distracted  state  we  are
in.’ 3  £  I  have  good  reason  to  believe,’  said  another  magistrate,

‘  that  many  respectable,  well-intending  people,  who  are  connected
with  this  uniting,  would  be  glad  of  any  good  apology  to  withdraw
from  it,  but  they  are  pledged  in  such  a  way  that  they  cannot,
unless  some  reform  is  proposed  by  Government.’ 4

There  was  at  the  same  time  an  evident  desire  among  many
magistrates  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  martial  law,  and  there
were  complaints  of  the  facility  with  which  they  permitted  persons
under  suspicion  of  disaffection  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and
then  gave  them  certificates  without  exacting  a  surrender  of
arms.5  It  is  melancholy  to  observe,  Camden  wrote,  that  ‘  the
more  respectable  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  coun¬
ties  and  the  gentlemen  are  so  blind  to  their  own  interests  .  .  .
that  they  are  beginning  to  talk  the  language  of  encouragement
to  the  pretended  principles  of  the  United  Irishmen.’6  In  the
very  Protestant  county  of  Armagh,  at  a  large  meeting  convened
by  the  High  Sheriff  and  attended  by  the  principal  freeholders  of
the  county,  an  address  to  the  King  of  the  most  violent  character
was  carried.  It  declared  that  the  British  Constitution  in  Ireland
was  enjoyed  only  in  name;  that  a  system  of  organised  corrup¬
tion  had  been  established,  which  made  the  Irish  Parliament  a

1  Lord  Blayney  to  Pelham,  Mayl.

2  John  Macartney,  April  26.

8  Andrew  Newton  (Croagh),  May  3.

4  Alexander  Ker,  May  8,  1797.

To  these  testimonies  I  may  add  that

of  MacNally.  ‘  I  find  many  among
those  who  have  been  long  considered
aristocrats,  decidedly  for  parliamen¬
tary  reform.  .  .  .  Many,  very  many,
among  the  yeomanry,  and  par  ocularly

among  the  attorneys’  and  lawyers’
corps,  though  they  do  not  hint  it  in
the  aggregate,  yet  individually  and  in
private  conversation  speak  "of  their
arms  as  a  means  of  obtaining  reform  ’
(J.  W„  Feb.  9,  1797.)

5  Knox  to  Pelham.  June  16,  1797.

6  Camden  to  Portland  ( most  secret).
April  13.

CH.  XXVIII*

LOYALIST  DESIRE  FOR  REFORM.

321

mere  passive  instrument  in  tlie  hands  of  the  English  Cabinet;
that  the  people  were  being  goaded  to  madness  by  accumulated
oppressions ;  that  in  the  richest  and  most  prosperous  province
of  Ireland,  military  coercion  had  taken  the  place  of  common  law,
and  useful  citizens  were  dragged  to  the  fleet  without  trial  by
jury,  like  the  most  atrocious  felons.  Most  of  these  evils,  the
petitioners  said,  would  have  been  prevented  if  the  people  had
been  fairly  and  adequately  represented  in  Parliament ;  and  they
added,  that  the  restrictions  still  maintained  upon  the  Catholics
were  disgraceful  to  the  age,  and  that  the  Government  had  been
deliberately  propagating  religious  animosities  and  persecutions.
Addresses  and  resolutions  of  a  very  similar  character  came  from
the  freeholders  of  the  great  Protestant  county  of  Antrim  ;  from
the  King’s  County  and  the  county  of  Kildare ;  from  the  cities
of  Dublin  and  Cork  ;  from  the  Whig  Club  and  from  the  Bar.1
The  Duke  of  Leinster  protested  against  the  military  law  in
Ulster  by  giving  up  his  command  of  the  Kildare  Militia,  and
was  soon  after  removed  from  his  post  of  Clerk  of  the  Hanaper.
Lord  Bellamont  retired  from  the  Cavan  Militia,  and  Grattan
resigned  his  position  in  the  yeomanry.2

These  signs  were  very  serious,  and  they  appear  to  me  to  show
clearly  that  the  Government,  though  supported  almost  unani¬
mously  by  the  Irish  Parliament  in  their  policy,  was  not  carry¬
ing  with  it  the  genuine  sentiments  of  the  Irish  gentry.  Thomas
Emmet,  in  speaking  of  this  period  in  his  evidence  before  the
Secret  Committee  in  August  1798,  most  solemnly  declared,  that
if  after  the  Bantry  Bay  expedition  there  had  been  any  reasonable
hope  of  reform  being  adopted,  he  had  determined  to  propose  to
the  Executive  Committee  of  the  United  Irishmen,  that  a  messenger
should  be  sent  to  France  to  say  that  the  differences  between  the
people  and  the  Government  were  adjusted,  and  to  ask  that  no
second  invasion  might  be  attempted,  and  he  added  that  he  was
certain  his  resolution  would  have  been  carried.3  How  far  a
moderate  measure  of  reform,  such  as  that  which  was  proposed
by  Ponsonby  and  Grattan,  could  still  have  prevented  the  rebel-

1  Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  293-301.

2  Camden  to  Portland,  April  28,
1797.  (Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  304.)  Among
the  papers  of  the  United  Irishmen
published  by  the  Secret  Committee  of
1798  (Appendix,  No.  II.)  there  is  a

264

list  of  contributions  headed  by  the
curious  item,  ‘  Received  from  the
aristocrats  of  Belfast,  374Z.  4s.  6 d.’

3  McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  Hist.
p.  215.

322

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch  xxvm.

lion,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  say.  Republicanism  and
anarchy,  and  a  passion  for  a  pure  democracy,  which  in  Ireland
would  mean  a  revolution  of  property,  had  spread  very  far.  But
the  policy  of  Grattan  would  almost  certainly  hav|  detached  from
the  United  Irishmen  a  great  number  of  the  ablest  and  most
energetic  leaders ;  it  would  have  given  many  others,  who  were
alarmed  at  the  approach  of  civil  war,  and  at  the  prolonged  and
demoralising  anarchy,  a  pretext  to  drop  away ;  and  it  is  difficult
to  believe  that  some  compromise  might  not  have  been  devised,
as  long  as  the  chief  seat  of  disaffection  was  the  province  in  which
an  intelligent  and  industrious  Protestant  population  predomi¬
nated.

The  Government,  however,  thought  otherwise.  It  appears
to  me  very  probable  that  the  intention  to  carry  an  Union  was  one
of  their  leading  motives,  and  the  ideas  of  Irish  policy  which  we
have  seen  a  few  years  before,  in  the  letters  of  Lord  Westmorland,
were  still  in  the  ascendant.  ‘  The  severity  of  the  measure  which
has  been  pursued  in  the  North,’  wrote  Camden  to  Portland,  £  is
much  descanted  upon  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament  in  England.
My  doubt  is  whether,  if  the  measure  of  severity  was  right,  that
which  has  been  adopted  is  severe  enough.  The  only  alternative  in
the  present  conjuncture  of  affairs,  therefore,  which  it  appears  pos¬
sible  to  consider,  is  whether  you  shall  grant  to  a  disaffected  people
that  boon,  the  want  of  which  they  pretend  is  the  cause  of  their
discontent.  In  the  province  of  Ulster  there  are  certainly  several
most  respectable  persons  who  look  to  a  change  in  the  representa¬
tion  as  an  object  of  just  expectation.  These  would  be  contented
with  a  moderate  reform  in  Parliament,  but  that  must  be  upon  the
narrow  scale  of  excluding  all  those  Catholics  who  are  not  by  the
present  law  entitled  to  vote.  None  of  these  persons  will  venture
to  say  that  the  mass  of  the  Reformists  (sic)  in  the  North  will
be  satisfied  with  so  limited  a  change,  and  no  one  can  say  that  it
will  give  any  relief  and  satisfaction  to  the  Catholics.  I  conceive
it,  therefore,  to  be  necessary  to  connect  together  both  the  ques¬
tions  of  Parliamentary  Reform  and  Catholic  Emancipation,  and
to  consider  if  it  would  be  advisable  (which  must  be  the  case  if
both  measures  are  adopted)  to  change  the  system  upon  which
Ireland  has  been  governed  for  many  years.  There  are  certainly
objections  to  the  present  Constitution  of  Ireland.  It  is  a  subject

CH  XXVIII.

CAMDEN  ON  PARLIAMENTARY  REFORM.

323

of  complaint,  that  individuals  have  so  much  influence  in  the
decisions  of  Parliament ;  but  as  long  as  Ireland  remains  under
circumstances  to  be  useful  to  England,  my  opinion  is  that  she
must  be  governed  by  an  English  party.  There  must  be  such
an  engine  to  counteract  that  jealousy  which  will  always  be
entertained  of  the  principal  seat  of  empire,  and  I  am  convinced
that  you  cannot  let  the  Catholics  into  a  participation  of  political
power  without  looking  to  a  change  in  all  the  establishments  of
the  country.  The  narrow  sphere  in  which  the  more  enlightened
and  better  educated  persons  move  in  this  country,  and  the  un¬
informed  state  in  which  many  of  the  lower  orders  live,  render
the  first  not  fit  to  govern,  and  the  last  not  fit  to  be  trusted
with  the  right  to  elect ;  and  illiberal  as  the  opinion  may  be  con¬
strued  to  be,  I  am  convinced  it  would  be  very  dangerous  to
attempt  to  govern  Ireland  in  a  more  popular  manner  than  the
present.’ 1

‘  The  change  which  has  taken  place  within  the  last  fortnight,’
he  wrote  shortly  after,  ‘  has,  I  confess,  surprised  and  alarmed
me,  and  the  rather,  as  impressions  appear  to  have  been  made
upon  the  minds  of  the  better  description  of  persons,  and  particu¬
larly  of  some  gentlemen  of  independent  principles  and  conduct.’
‘  I  think  that  I  perceive  a  different  sensation  in  the  country,  but
I  fear  it  is  one  even  more  alarming  to  Government.  A  better
description  of  persons,  and  some  gentlemen,  have  been  led  into
the  adoption  of  the  principles  of  the  United  Irishmen  as  far  as
Reform  and  Catholic  Emancipation.  They  have  also  joined  in
the  wish  for  a  change  of  government.  ...  I  think  it  more  for¬
midable  to  good  order  than  the  other  system,  because  as  long
as  the  gentlemen  remained  united  against  these  societies,  and
the  military  were  uncorrupted,  the  danger  was  not  very  formid¬
able  ;  but  since  an  impression  appears  to  have  been  made  upon
the  better  description  of  persons  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  I
conceive  the  points  of  Reform  and  Emancipation,  which  are  ex¬
tremely  dangerous,  and  which  they  mean  to  attempt  to  carry,
may  more  probably  be  adopted ;  and  I  also  conceive  it  to  be
very  questionable,  whether,  when  once  the  gentry  have  given
themselves  up  to  these  associations,  they  will  be  able  to  counter¬
act  their  more  extended  and  dangerous  intentions.  2

1  Camden  to  Portland  (private  and  secret),  April  3,  1797.

2  Ibid.  April  22,  28,  1797.

324

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvm.

The  policy  of  the  Irish  Government  was  acquiesced  in  in
England,  but  not  without  misgiving.  Portland  again  asked
confidentially  whether  something  might  not  be  done  for  the
Catholics,  which  would  break  their  alliance  with  the  Dissenters,
secure  their  ‘  cordial  exertions  in  support  of  the  present
establishment,’  or,  at  least,  baffle  all  attempts  to  set  up  a
republican  government,'  but  Camden  gave  him  no  encourage¬
ment.  ‘  Whether  his  Majesty  should  be  advised,’  he  wrote,  ‘  to
accede  to,  or  withhold,  any  concessions,  which  are  made  the
excuse  for  rebellion,  or  not,  that  rebellion  which  it  has  excited,
should  be  overcome,  if  possible.  It  will  afterwards  be  a  subject
of  consideration,  in  what  manner  this  country  is  to  be  governed.
As  long  as  it  remains  upon  its  present  establishment,  I  fear  it
will  be  found  a  most  troublesome  appendage  to  England  in
times  of  difficulty.’  It  appeared  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  that  a
measure  in  favour  of  the  Catholics,  would  be  ‘  merely  an  expe¬
dient  to  avert  a  present  danger,  and  that  the  country  should
either  be  governed  according  to  its  present  system,  or  that  a
change  more  extensive  must  be  adopted.’  ‘  I  cannot  conceal
from  your  Grace,’  he  continued,  ‘  with  how  melancholy  a  presage
I  consider  the  system  to  which  we  appear  to  have  been  forced,
of  yielding  to  the  demands  of  persons  who  have  arms  in  tbeir
bands.’ 2

The  question  was  once  more  introduced  by  Ponsonby  into
the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  on  May  15,  in  a  series  of  reso¬
lutions,  asserting  that  it  was  necessary  ‘to  a  fundamental
reform  of  the  representation  that  all  disabilities  on  account  of
religion  be  for  ever  abolished,  and  that  Catholics  shall  be
admitted  into  the  Legislature  and  all  the  great  offices  of  State,
in  the  same  extent  as  Protestants  now  are,’  ‘  that  it  is  the
indispensable  right  of  the  people  of  Ireland  to  be  fully  and
fairly  represented  in  Parliament,’  that  ‘  the  privilege  of  return¬
ing  members  for  cities,  boroughs  &c.  in  the  present  form,  shall
cease ;  that  each  county  shall  be  divided  into  districts,  consist¬
ing  of  6,000  houses  each,  each  district  to  return  two  members
of  Parliament.’  He  proposed  that  all  persons  who  possessed
freehold  property  to  the  amount  of  40Z.  per  annum  ;  all  who

1  Portland  to  Camden  (secret  and
confidential),  May  19,  1797.

2  Camden  to  Portland  (private).
May  18,  1797.

cn.  xxviii.

REFORM  DEBATE  IN  PARLIAMENT.

325

possessed  leasehold  interests,  or  houses,  of  a  value  which  was
to  be  subsequently  determined  by  Parliament ;  all  freemen  of
cities,  and  all  who  had  resided  in  a  city  for  a  certain  number
of  years,  following  a  trade,  should  be  entitled  to  vote.  The
duration  of  Parliament  was  to  be  reserved  for  further  considera¬
tion.

The  Government  met  these  proposals  by  an  adjournment,
arguing  that  a  time  of  war,  and  tumult,  and  seditious  con¬
spiracy,  was  very  unsuitable  for  their  discussion,  and  that  no
constitutional  measures  could  meet  the  demands  of  a  party
which  was  plainly  revolutionary  and  republican.  On  the  other
hand,  it  was  contended  that  nothing  but  a  measure  of  reason¬
able  reform,  which  might  satisfy  the  moderate  reformers,  could
check  revolutionary  propagandism,  and  save  the  country  from
the  horrors  of  rebellion.  In  the  course  of  the  debate,  one  mem¬
ber  quoted  these  pregnant  lines,  from  a  private  letter,  which  he
had  received  two  years  before,  from  Burke.  ‘  Against  Jaco¬
binism,  this  grand  and  dreadful  evil  of  our  times  (I  do  not  love
to  cheat  myself  or  others),  I  do  not  know  any  solid  security
whatsoever ;  but  I  am  certain  that  what  will  come  nearest  to  it,
is  to  interest  as  many  as  you  can  in  the  present  order  of  things;
to  interest  them  religiously,  civilly,  politically,  by  all  the  ties
and  principles  by  which  men  are  held.’

Grattan  spoke  on  this  subject  with  great  power  and  with
great  bitterness.  Most  of  his  speech  consisted  of  a  restatement
of  facts,  which,  by  this  time,  must  have  become  very  familiar
to  my  readers — that  in  a  Parliament  of  300  members,  more
than  200  were  returned  by  venal  and  close  boroughs ;  that  of
all  the  towns  and  cities  of  Ireland,  not  more  than  twelve  were
free  ;  that,  by  means  of  the  nomination  boroughs,  the  Minister,
who  was  himself  the  representative  of  the  Cabinet  of  another
country,  had  a  permanent  and  overwhelming  ascendency  in  the
Parliament  of  Ireland ;  that  this  borough  system  was  not  a  part
of  the  ancient  Constitution,  but  had  been  mainly  created  by  the
Stuarts  for  the  express  purpose  of  securing  the  subserviency  of
Parliament,  and  that  it  was  largely  responsible  for  the  com¬
mercial  disabilities,  the  penal  laws,  and  the  long  extinction  of
parliamentary  liberties.  The  plan  before  the  House,  he  said,
goes  to  the  root  of  the  evil,  and  is  no  half  measure.  It  would

326

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

CH.  XXVill,

make  the  House  of  Commons  what  it  ought  to  be— a  real
representation  of  the  people.  But  if  it  gave  votes  to  population,
it  was  only  to  population  £  mixed  with  property  and  annexed  to
residence.’  If  Parliament  thought  fit  to  give  votes  to  40s.  free¬
holders,  why  should  they  exclude  from  the  franchise  farmers
for  years,  householders  and  leaseholders  of  a  higher  amount,
and  established  and  resident  tradesmen  ?  There  are  members,
who  seem  to  think  ‘  that  the  mass  of  property  should  be  as  little
represented  as  the  mass  of  population ;  that  representation
should  be  founded  on  neither,  but  should  itself  be  what  it  is — a
property  and  a  commerce.’

Turning  to  the  objections  that  were  drawn  from  the  war
and  insurrection,  he  reminded  the  House  that  reform  had  been
equally  resisted  when  it  was  brought  forward  in  time  of  peace.
‘  There  are  two  periods,  it  seems,  in  which  reform  should  not  be
agitated;  one  is  the  period  of  war,  and  the  other  is  that  of
peace.  .  .  .  You  will  never  persuade  a  borough  majority  that  it
is  seasonable  for  them  to  surrender  their  borough  interest.’
‘  With  respect  to  insurrection,  the  original  cause  of  discontent
is  to  be  found  in  the  inadequate  representation  of  our  people,’
and  that  discontent  can  only  be  removed  by  a  removal  of  the
cause.  The  Ministers  argued  from  the  report  of  the  Secret
Committee,  that  the  real  object  of  the  United  Irish  leaders
was  not  reform,  but  separation  and  a  republic,  and  that  re¬
form  could,  in  consequence,  have  no  pacifying  effect.  Grattan
admitted  the  premise,  but  denied  the  conclusion.  ‘  In  that
report,  and  from  the  speeches  of  gentlemen,  we  learn  that  a
conspiracy  has  existed  for  some  years  ;  that  it  was  composed,
originally,  of  persons  of  no  powerful  or  extensive  influence,  and
yet,  these  men,  under  prosecution  and  discountenance,  have
been  so  extended,  as  to  reach  every  county  in  the  kingdom ;  to
levy  a  great  army;  to  provide  arms  and  ammunition,  and  to
alarm,  as  the  report  states,  the  existence  of  the  Government
with  the  number  of  its  proselytes  procured  by  these  two  popu¬
lar  subjects — parliamentary  reform  and  Catholic  emancipation.
They  have  recruited  by  these  topics,  and  have  spread  their
influence,  notwithstanding  your  system  of  coercion,  everywhere.
.  .  .  You  have  loaded  Parliament  and  Government  with  the
odium  of  an  oppressive  system,  and  with  the  further  odium  of

CH.  XXVIII.

GRATTAN’S  SPEECH.

327

rejecting  these  two  popular  topics,  which  are  the  most  likely  to
gain  the  heart  of  the  nation.’  By  reversing  this  policy,  Parlia¬
ment  may  not  reconcile  all,  but  it  will  reconcile  the  bulk  of  the
nation,  and  if  the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  remain  unsatisfied,
they  will,  at  least,  have  lost  their  proselytes.

It  was  said  that  no  Reform  Bill  which  was  not  purely
democratic,  and  founded  on  the  new  French  model,  would  now
satisfy  the  people.  The  answer  was,  that  Ponsonby’s  plan  had
been  sent  to  different  persons  who  are  much  in  the  confidence
of  the  people,  and  who  have  a  leading  influence  among  the
different  sects  ;  and  after  a  full  discussion  had  been  approved
by  them.

£  I  have  in  my  hand,’  said  Grattan,  c  a  paper  signed  by  900
persons,  considerable  men  of  business  and  northern  merchants,
containing  the  following  resolutions  in  substance.  “  That  they
conceive  the  cause  of  the  present  discontent  to  be  the  miserable
state  of  the  representation  •  tfhat  the  discontent  and  suffering
will  continue  until  Parliament  shall  be  reformed ;  and  that  they
will  persist  in  the  pursuit  of  that  object,  and  will  not  lose  sight
of  it  by  cavils  at  the  plan,  but  will  expect  and  be  satisfied  with
such  a  plan  as  does  substantially  restore  to  the  community  the
right  of  electing  the  House  of  Commons,  securing  its  inde¬
pendence  against  the  influence  of  the  Crown ;  limiting  the
duration  of  Parliament,  and  extending  to  his  Majesty’s  sub¬
jects  the  privileges  of  the  Constitution  without  distinction
of  religion.”  ’ 1

The  concluding  passages  of  Grattan’s  speech  were  in  a
tone  of  solemn  warning,  and  they  appear  to  me  to  breathe  an
accent  of  the  deepest  patriotism  and  sincerity.  Recalling  the
precedent  of  the  American  war,  he  said  that  there  were  now  also,
but  two  possible  policies,  a  policy  of  reform  and  a  policy  of  force.
By  adopting  the  latter,  Parliament  was  losing  the  people  while
it  sought  to  strengthen  the  Throne.  ‘  Suppose  you  succeed,  what
is  your  success  ?  A  military  government !  a  perfect  despotism  !
.  .  .  a  Union !  But  what  may  be  the  ultimate  consequence  of
such  a  victory  ?  A  separation  !  Let  us  suppose  that  the  war
continues,  and  that  your  conquest  over  your  own  people  is  inter-

1  See  on  these  discussions  Grat-  the  Confinement  and  Exile  of  W.  S.
tan's  Life,  iv.  285-287  ;  Narrative  of  Dickson,  D.D.,  pp.  36,  37,

328

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cir.  mm,

rupted  by  a  French  invasion,  what  would  be  your  situation
then  ?  I  do  not  wish  to  think  of  it,  but  I  wish  you  to  think  of
it.  .  .  .  When  you  consider  the  state  of  your  arms  abroad,  and
the  ill-assured  state  of  your  government  at  home,  surely  you
should  pause  a  little.  Even  in  the  event  of  a  peace,  you  are
ill  secured  against  a  future  war,  which  the  state  of  Ireland  under
such  a  system  would  be  too  apt  to  invite ;  but  in  the  event  of
the  continuation  of  the  war,  your  system  is  perilous  indeed.  I
speak  without  asperity  or  resentment.  I  speak  perhaps  my
delusion,  but  it  is  my  heartfelt  conviction ;  I  speak  my  appre¬
hension  for  the  immediate  state  of  our  liberty,  and  for  the  ulti¬
mate  state  of  the  Empire.  I  see,  or  imagine  I  see,  in  this  system
everything  which  is  dangerous  to  both.  I  hope  I  am  mistaken  ;
at  least,  I  hope  I  exaggerate,  possibly  I  may.  ...  I  cannot,
however,  banish  from  my  memory  the  lesson  of  the  American
War.  ...  If  that  lesson  has  no  effect  on  Ministers,  surely  I  can
suggest  nothing  that  will.  We  have  offered  you  our  measure.
You  will  reject  it.  We  deprecate  yours;  you  will  persevere.
Having  no  hopes  left  to  persuade  or  dissuade,  and  having  dis¬
charged  our  duty,  we  shall  trouble  you  no  more,  and  after  this
day  shall  not  attend  the  House  of  Commons.’

The  House  was  deaf  to  this  appeal ;  the  adjournment  was
carried  by  117  to  30, 1  and  Grattan  fulfilled  his  promise.  Ac¬
companied  by  Ponsonby,  Curran,  and  a  few  others,  and  following
the  example  of  Fox  and  his  immediate  followers  in  England,  he
seceded  from  parliamentary  life,  and  did  not  again  appear  upon
the  scene  till  the  stirring  debates  upon  the  Union.  This  seces¬
sion,  among  other  effects,  had  that  of  taking  away  almost  all
public  interest  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Irish  House  of  Com¬
mons.  From  1781  to  the  close  of  the  session  of  1797  there  are
excellent  reports  of  its  debates,  which  were  evidently  revised  by
the  speakers,  and  which  are  of  the  greatest  possible  value  to  every
serious  student  of  this  period  of  Irish  history.  They  are  a  source
from  which  I  have  drawn  largely  in  this  work,  and  there  are  even
now  few  books  on  Irish  politics  which  are  either  so  interesting
or  so  instructive.  From  this  period  to  the  period  of  the  Union
debates,  our  knowledge  of  what  passed  in  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  is  of  the  vaguest  or  most  fragmentary  character,  derived

1  Irish  Pari.  Delates,  xvii.  551-570;  Grattan’s  Speeches,  iii.  332-843.

OH.  XXviii.

CONDUCT  OF  GRATTAN.

329

chiefly  from  short  newspaper  reports,  and  we  almost  wholly  lose
the  invaluable  check  which  parliamentary  criticism  imposes  on
the  extravagances  of  partisan  statements.

Of  the  conduct  of  Grattan  himself  at  this  time,  there  is
little  more  to  be  said.  I  have  stated  that  since  the  recall  of
Fitzwilliam  his  speeches  had  assumed  a  more  violent  and  mote
distinctly  party  character,  and  that  all  his  hopes  were  placed  in
a  change  of  ministry.  Peace  he  believed  to  be  vitally  necessary,
and  he  shared  the  belief  which  was  then  very  prevalent,  though
the  publication  of  confidential  documents  has  now  shown  it  to
be  unfounded,  that  Pitt  did  not  sincerely  desire  it.  Like  Pox,
with  whom  he  was  in  close  correspondence,  he  feared  the
imminent  ruin  both  of  the  Empire  and  of  Ireland.1  No  one
could  doubt  that  if  the  war  continued,  a  French  invasion  of
Ireland  was  in  the  highest  degree  probable,  and  Grattan  well
knew  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  exaggerate  or  to  measure
the  calamities  it  might  produce.  But  even  apart  from  this,
there  was  the  danger  of  national  bankruptcy,  the  growing
probability  of  a  great  rebellion,  the  certainty  of  a  complete  and
rapid  demoralisation  of  public  opinion.  The  new  revolutionary
spirit  was  sweeping  over  the  country  like  an  epidemic,  destroy¬
ing  the  social  and  moral  conditions  on  which  all  sound  self-
government  must  rest.  In  the  judgment  of  Grattan,  there  was
but  one  policy  by  which  it  could  be  effectually  stayed.  It  was,
in  his  own  words,  1  to  combat  the  wild  spirit  of  democratic
liberty  by  the  regulated  spirit  of  organised  liberty  ’ — to  carry
as  speedily  as  possible  through  the  Irish  Parliament  measures
of  parliamentary  reform,  Catholic  emancipation,  and  a  commuta¬
tion  of  tithes.  It  was  now  evident  that  the  existing  Govern¬
ment  was  inexorably  opposed  to  these  measures,  and  it  was
dimly  seen  that  if  they  were  ever  to  be  conceded,  it  was  likely
to  be  in  connection  with  or  subsequent  to  a  legislative  Union.
Such  an  Union,  Grattan  had  foreseen  as  early  as  1785,  and  he

1  In  a  curious  letter  to  Grattan
(April  7,  1797),  Fox  speaks  of  his
little  hope  of  either  of  them  1  being
able  to  eti  ect  any  good,  or  prevent  the
absolute  ruin  of  the  two  countries.’
He  adds :  ‘  The  truth  is,  that  without
a  change  of  ministry  no  good  can  be
done,  either  with  you  or  with  us —
without  it  we  cannot  have  peace ;  you

cannot  have  reform  nor  real  indepen¬
dence.  ...  I  really  think  that  the
existence  of  the  funded  property  of
England,  and  the  connection  between
our  two  countries,  depend  upon  the
measures  to  be  taken  in  a  few,  in  a
very  few,  months.’  (Grattan’s  Life ,
iv.  315,  316.)

330

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxtui.

regarded  it  with,  implacable  hostility.  But  his  own  ideal  was
visibly  fading,  and  it  was  becoming  evident  that  the  policy  of
1782  was  not  destined  to  succeed.  In  spite  of  the  Place  Bill,
the  Pension  Bill,  and  the  Catholic  Bill  of  1793,  the  Parliament
was  sinking  in  character,  influence,  and  popularity,  and  the
independent  minority  had  greatly  diminished.  This  may  be
attributed,  partly  to  the  more  determined  attitude  of  hostility
to  reform  which  the  Government  had  assumed,  but  in  part  also
to  a  genuine  feeling  of  panic  and  reaction  which  the  French
Revolution  had  produced  in  all  privileged  classes,  and  which
had  reduced  to  insignificant  proportions  the  reform  party  in  the
English  Legislature.  '

Outside  the  House,  also,  the  position  of  Grattan  was  no
longer  what  it  had  been.  He  was  still  followed  by  a  large  body
of  the  country  gentry,  and  of  the  more  intelligent  farmers  and
tradesmen  of  the  North,  but  he  was  no  longer  sustained  by  a
strong  force  of  national  enthusiasm.  Another  policy,  other
leaders  and  other  principles,  were  in  the  ascendant,  and  they
were  hurrying  the  nation  onward  to  other  destinies.  In  all  the
utterances  of  Grattan  at  this  time,  private  as  well  as  public,  a
profound  discouragement  and  a  deep  sense  of  coming  calamities
may  be  traced.  In  after  years  he  spoke  eloquently  of  the
material  prosperity  that  had  grown  up  under  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment,  and  of  the  many  wise,  liberal,  and  healing  laws  that  it
had  passed,  but  his  language  at  the  time  we  are  considering
was  in  a  different  strain.  He  spoke  of  an  experiment  which
had  lasted  for  fourteen  years,  and  which  had  failed.  He  declared
that  a  general  election  in  Ireland  meant  no  more  than  ‘  an.
opportunity  to  exercise  by  permission  of  the  army  the  solitary
privilege  to  return  a  few  representatives  of  the  people  to  a
House  occupied  by  the  representatives  of  boroughs,’  and  his
owu  secession  from  that  House  was  the  most  eloquent  confession
of  defeat.1

One  of  the  most  alarming  signs  of  the  dangerous  condition
of  Ireland  was  the  disaffection  wbich  now  constantly  appeared
in  the  militia,  and  was  not  unfrequently  discovered  or  suspected
among  the  yeomanry  and  the  regular  troops.  The  seduction  of
soldiers  was  a  main  object  of  the  United  Irishmen,  and  Lake
1  See  Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  302.

cu  xxviii.

SPREAD  OF  THE  CONSPIRACY.

331

and  Knox  urged  in  many  letters  tliat  it  had  proceeded  so  far
that  little  or  no  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the  militia,  and
that  the  introduction  of  a  large  additional  force  from  England
was  imperatively  needed.  c  It  answers  no  end,’  wrote  an  active
magistrate,  £  to  station  small  parties  of  the  military  in  different
cantonments,  for  they  are  regularly  corrupted.’ 1  This  evil  was
by  no  means  confined  to  the  North.  Infinite  pains  were  taken
in  Dublin  to  secure  the  presence  of  at  least  one  United  Irishman
in  every  company,  and  sedition  spread  so  fast  that  one  regiment
was  actually  removed,  and  the  Lord  Lieutenant  doubted  whether
it  would  not  be  necessary  to  move  a  second  from  the  capital,
for  the  express  purpose  of  checking  the  contamination.  There
were,  in  May,  courts-martial  sitting  at  the  same  time  on  dis¬
affected  soldiers,  in  Cork,  Limerick,  and  Belfast.  Several  militia¬
men  were  condemned  and  shot ;  no  less  than  seventy  men  in
the  Monaghan  Militia  confessed  that  they  had  been  seduced
into  taking  the  oath  of  the  United  Irishmen,2  and,  as  might
have  been  expected,  the  air  was  charged  with  vague  rumours
and  suspicions,  magnifying  and  multiplying  the  real  dangers.
Lake  believed  that  many  United  Irishmen  had  enlisted  in  the
yeomanry  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  arms.3  Even  the  Orange¬
men  were  at  one  time  suspected,  and  apparently  not  quite
without  reason,  of  having  been  tampered  with.4  At  another
time,  Camden  wrote  that  he  had  heard,  and  was  inclined  to
believe,  that  Archbishop  Troy  with  six  other  priests  had  been
sworn  in.5  As  the  Archbishop,  during  a  long,  upright,  and

1  Alexander  Ker,  May  8,  1797.
This  gentleman  adds  :  ‘  I  am  assured
that  the  party  of  Fencibles  stationed
at  Ballibay  received  pay  as  regularly
from  the  United  Irishmen  as  from
his  Majesty.’

2  Camden  to  Portland  (secret  and
confidential),  April  28,  May  6,  1797  ;
see,  too,  J.  W.,  Oct.  5,  1796.

3  This  is  corroborated  by  a  letter
of  Henry  Alexander,  Feb.  6,  1797.

4  *  Even  the  Orangemen,  on  whose

loyalty  and  firmness  I  had  the  most
perfect  reliance,  are  shaken.’  (Knox
to  Pelham,  April  1,  1797.)  ‘  The  Pro¬
testants  of  the  county  Armagh,  who
call  themselves  Orangemen,  and  who
had  for  some  time  been  deluded  by
the  United  Irishmen,  have  renounced

these  societies,  and  are  returning  to
their  loyalty.’  (Camden  to  Portland
(secret),  May  30,  1797.)  Among  the
papers  of  the  United  Irishmen  seized
at  Belfast  in  April,  was  one  urging
them  ‘  to  make  friends  of  the  Catho¬
lics  and  Orangemen,  as  that  was  doing
good  in  Armagh.’  (I.S.P.O.)

6  Camden  to  Portland  (private
and  confidential),  May  6,  1797.  Arch¬
bishop  Troy  was  a  Dominican,  and
the  regular  priests  were  believed  to
be  much  more  dangerous  than  the
secular  priests.  (bee  Castlereagk
Correspondence,  iii.  88,  89.)  McNally
was  questioned  about  Troy,  but  could
give  no  information.  ‘  It  is  very  pro¬
bable,’  he  wrote,  ‘  he  [Troy]  may  be
up,  but  by  whom  is,  I  think,  a  matter

332

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

consistent  life,  always  showed  himself  one  of  the  steadiest
supporters  of  the  law,  and  one  of  the  strongest  opponents  of
secret  societies,  this  report  may,  I  think,  be  most  confidently
discredited  ;  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  many  priests  were  in
the  conspiracy.  Higgins  expressed  his  belief,  that  there  were
not  twenty  loyal  priests  in  Dublin.1  ‘  The  Catholic  clergy,’
McNally  wrote  in  April,  ‘  are  to  a  man  with  the  people,’  and
both  he  and  Higgins  warned  the  Government  that  the  lower
clergy  were  among  the  most  active  organisers  of  sedition,  and
also  that  the  United  Irishmen  were  taking  special  pains  to
enroll  domestic  servants,  and  to  distribute  them  as  spies  through
the  chief  houses  in  Ireland.2  Even  in  the  Castle,  and  in  the
immediate  circle  of  the  Chief  Secretary,  it  was  boasted  among
the  United  Irishmen  that  they  had  sources  of  information.3

Among  the  numerous  arrests  that  were  made  in  the  North,
there  were  several  which  had  great  importance.  In  February,
Arthur  O’Connor  was  imprisoned  for  a  seditious  libel,  as  well  as
two  brothers  of  the  name  of  Simms,  who  were  proprietors  of  the
1  Northern  Star.’  The  paper  was,  for  some  months,  continued,
under  the  editorship  of  Neilson;  but  after  its  offices  had  been
wrecked,  and  its  types  destroyed  by  the  Monaghan  Militia,  it
was  not  revived.  In  April,  on  the  information  of  a  miniature
painter  named  Newell,  who  had  been  at  one  time  a  Defender,
and  at  another  an  United  Irishman,  the  Government  succeeded
in  arresting,  in  a  single  swoop,  at  Belfast,  two  whole  committees,
consisting  of  about  forty  persons,  and  in  seizing  a  number  of
important  papers,  disclosing  the  organisation,  objects,  and  extent
of  the  society.  A  portion  of  these  papers  was  soon  after  pub¬
lished  by  Parliament.  They  furnished  decisive  evidence  that
separation  and  a  republic  were  the  real  ends  of  the  con¬
spiracy,  and  that  a  negotiation  and  correspondence  with  France

not  to  be  discovered,  as  a  priest  most
probably  was  the  operator,  and  you.
may  be  assured  he  attends  no  organ¬
ised  society.’  (J.  W.,  May  22,  1797.)

1  F.  H.,  May  25,  1797.

2  J.  W.,  April  28,  May  22,  29,

Sept.  11,  1797.  1  The  spirit  of  dis¬

affection  is  so  great,  that  no  gentle¬
man  can  trust  his  Eoman  Catholic
servants.  A  plot  has  been  discovered
(in  which  several  of  Mr.  Conolly’s
servants  were  concerned),  to  let  the

Defenders  into  the  house  of  Castle¬
town  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and
some  of  these  servants  had  been  bred
in  his  family  from  children.  ...  It
appears  that  one  of  the  chief  objects
of  the  United  Irishmen  is  to  corrupt
the  servants  universally,  so  as  to  ob¬
tain  an  avenue  to  every  gentleman
whose  opposition  they  may  dread.'
(Camden  to  Portland  (secret),  May
30,  1797.)

s  F.  Higgins,  May  30,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

NEWELL'S  INFORMATION.

333

had  long  been  going  on,  and  they  also  furnished  some  more  or
less  trustworthy  evidence  of  the  extent  of  its  ramifications.  It
appeared,  from  the  reports  of  the  baronial  committees,  that
rather  more  than  72,000  men  had  been  enrolled  in  Ulster,  and
that  the  whole  province  was  organised  for  revolt,  by  a  multitude
of  small  societies,  each  of  which  was  limited  to  thirty-five  mem¬
bers.  The  papers  that  were  seized  belonged  to  the  eightieth  of
these  societies  in  Belfast.  Outside  Ulster,  only  Dublin,  West¬
meath,  and  Kildare  appear  to  have  been,  at  this  time,  fully
organised,  though  emissaries  were  busily  extending  the  con¬
spiracy  through  other  parts  of  Ireland.1

Newell  told  more  than  was  published  by  Parliament,  and  he
is  said  to  have  been  taken  masked  to  various  places  in  Belfast,
to  point  out  those  whom  he  knew  to  be  connected  with  the
conspiracy.  His  most  startling  statement  was,  that  he  had
himself  been  one  of  a  secret  committee  of  twelve  members,
which  was  formed  for  the  express  purpose  of  assassinating  mem¬
bers  of  the  society  who  were  suspected  of  having  betrayed  it  to
the  Government.  There  was  a  trial,  he  said,  but  not  in  the
presence  of  the  accused  person,  and  if  that  person  was  found
guilty,  one  or  more  members  of  the  committee  were  chosen  by
lot  to  murder  him.  Newell  mentioned  that  he  had  known  of
the  assassination  of  several  persons,  and  had  himself  been
present  when  a  soldier  was  first  made  drunk,  and  then  flung
over  a  bridge  near  Belfast,  with  weights  in  his  pockets.2

It  is  certain  that  assassinations,  and  threats  of  assassination,
constantly  accompanied  the  United  Irish  movement,  but  it  was
pretended  that  these  were-  mere  isolated  instances  of  private
vengeance,  provoked  by  the  severities  of  the  troops  and  of  the
Government,  and  the  leading  members  of  the  society  in  Dublin
have  left  on  record  a  solemn  protest  against  the  charge  of

1  Report  of  Secret  Committee
(Aug.  1798),  Appendix,  pp.  xii,  xxi,
xxii.

2  Several  papers  relating  to  Newell
will  be  found  in  the  Irish  State  Paper
Office.  He  afterwards  quarrelled  with
the  Government,  and  appears  then  to
have  pretended  that  his  information
had  been  false.  A  kind  of  autobio¬
graphy,  in  which  he  accused  himself
of  all  kinds  of  enormities,  and  Cooke

of  having  incited  him  to  perjury,  was
published  in  his  name.  It  is  re¬
printed  by  Dr.  Madden,  who  contends
that  it  is  genuine.  ( United  Irish¬
men,  i.  531-580.)  Newell  is  said
to  have  been  ultimately  murdered.
See,  too,  on  Newell’s  information  and
retractation,  Lord  Clare’s  speech  in
the  Delate  in  the  Irish  House  of
Lords,  Feb.  19,  1798,  pp.  100,  101.

334

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ca.  xxvm.

having  given  any  countenance  or  favour  to  them.  They
declared  that  they  entirely  disbelieved  in  the  existence  of  a
committee  of  assassination ;  that  they  had  heard  persons  men¬
tioned  as  being  members  of  it,  whom  they  knew,  from  £  the  most
private  and  confidential  conversations,  to  be  utterly  abhorrent
from  that  crime  ;  ’  ‘  that  in  no  communications  from  those  who
were  placed  at  the  head  of  the  United  Irishmen  to  the  rest  of
that  body,  and  in  no  official  paper,  was  assassination  ever  incul¬
cated,  but  frequently  and  fervently  reprobated  ;  ’  £  that  it  was
considered  by  them  with  horror,  on  account  of  its  criminality,
and  with  personal  dread,  because  it  would  render  ferocious  the
minds  of  men  in  whose  hands  their  lives  were  placed.’ 1  In  the
case  of  Emmet,  this  statement  is  corroborated  by  a  document
which  was  found  among  his  papers,  strongly  censuring  any
resort  to  assassination,  and  it  is,  1  believe,  perfectly  true,  that  the
leaders  of  the  conspiracy  never,  as  a  body,  either  publicly  or
secretly,  gave  any  sanction  to  that  crime.  They  comprised  men
with  very  various  objects  and  characters.  Some  of  them  aimed
only  at  the  avowed  and  original  objects  of  the  society — a  reform
of  Parliament,  and  an  union  of  friendship  and  politics  between
the  divided  sects,  and  had  become  rebels  only  because  they
believed  that  English  influence  was  being  steadily  employed  to
prevent  both  reform  and  emancipation.  But  others  were  pas¬
sionate  disciples  of  the  French  Revolution,  at  a  time  when
tyrannicide  was  a  favourite  doctrine  in  France ;  they  argued
that  the  Insurrection  Act,  the  imprisonments  without  trial  and
the  burning  of  houses,  had  emancipated  them  from  all  restraint,
and,  if  they  may  be  judged  by  their  language,  they  would
gladly,  in  the  event  of  a  successful  insurrection,  have  reproduced
in  Ireland  the  French  Reign  of  Terror.  Of  these  men,  John
Sheares,  who  was  on  the  Directory  of  the  United  Irishmen  from
March  to  May  1798,  was  a  typical  example.  When  O’Connell
was  a  young  man,  he  crossed  over  with  him  from  France,  and
learnt  that  he  had  been  present  at  the  execution  of  Lewis  XVI.,
attracted,  as  he  said,  by  c  the  love  of  the  cause,’  and  the  same
spirit  continued  to  animate  him  in  Ireland.  He  wrote  for  the

1  See  the  memorial  of  Emmet,  spondence ,  i.  358,  359)  ;  and  also  the
O’Connor,  and  McNevin  to  the  Go-  evidenceof  Emmet.  (MeNevin’s  .Pieces-
vernment  in  1798  ( Castlereayh  Corre-  of  Irish  History,  p.  219.)

cn.  xxvin.

ASSASSINATIONS.

335

‘  Press  ’  a  letter  to  Lord  Clare,  which  was  a  distinct  incitement
to  assassination,  and  the  draft  of  an  unfinished  proclamation
was  found  among  his  papers  urging  the  rebels,  when  the  insur¬
rection  began,  to  give  no  quarter  to  any  Irishman  who  persisted
in  resisting  them.1

It  would  perhaps  be  a  mistake  to  interpret  such  language
too  seriously.  Irish  rebellion  has  usually  been  a  very  rhetorical
thing,  in  which  language  far  outstrips  meaning,  and  it  has  had
neither  the  genuine  fanaticism  nor  the  genuine  ferocity  of  French
revolution.  Many  young  enthusiasts,  who  talked  much  about
Brutus  and  Cassius,  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton,  would  pro¬
bably  have  proved  in  the  hour  of  action  neither  very  heroic  nor
very  ferocious  ;  and  Thomas  Emmet  stated  that  the  plan  of
the  Executive  of  the  United  Irishmen,  in  the  event  of  a  successful
insurrection,  was  simply  to  seize  the  leading  members  of  the
Irish  Government,  and  retain  them  as  hostages  till  the  struggle
was  over,  and  then  to  banish  them  from  the  country,  confiscating
their  property,  but  reserving  an  allowance  for  their  wives  and
children.2  Whether  such  moderation  would  have  been  observed
in  the  hour  of  triumph,  may  be  much  doubted,  and  it  is  certain
that  some  of  the  informers  who  had  best  means  of  knowing,
represented  the  conspirators  as  looking  forward  to  a  proscription
and  massacre  of  their  most  conspicuous  enemies.  The  movement,
too,  if  it  comprised  at  one  extremity  educated  enthusiasts,  com¬
prised  at  the  other  great  numbers  of  men,  of  the  ordinary  White-
boy  type,  who  pursued  their  ends  by  the  old  Whiteboy  methods.
Among  the  innumerable  small  committees  of  half-educated  men
which  were  acting  very  independently  in  every  quarter  of  Ulster,
it  is  in  a  high  degree  probable  that  plans  of  murder  were  dis¬
cussed  and  organised.  Informers,  or  suspected  informers,  were
frequently  murdered,  and  threats  of  assassination  were  habitually
employed  to  deter  jurymen,  witnesses,  and  magistrates  from
discharging  their  duty.  In  May,  a  conspiracy  to  murder  Lord
Carhampton  was  detected,  and  two  of  the  conspirators  were

1  See  Madden’s  United  Irishmen ,  304).

iv.  208,  222,  227,  305,  30G.  The  letter  2  See  the  statement  of  Emmet
to  Lord  Clare  was  in  print,  but  not  in  his  examination  before  the  Secret
published,  when  the  Pr«was  seized.  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords.
Madden  quotes  an  equally  outrageous  (McNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish  History,
proclamation  of  Napper  Tandy  (iv.  P-  219.)

336

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  cii  xxvm.

brought  to  justice.1  In  one  of  the  trials  of  the  United  Irishmen,
it  appeared  that  at  a  baronial  committee  near  Carrickfergus,
the  question  of  assassination  had  been  formally  discussed,  that
a  resolution  had  been  moved  and  supported,  among  others  by
William  Orr,  demanding  that  any  man  who  either  recommended
or  practised  it  should  be  expelled  from  the  society,  but  that  this
resolution  had  been  rejected.  In  one  of  the  papers  seized  at
Belfast,  the  following  sentence  occurs,  which  is  not  the  less
significant  because  its  grammar  shows  the  class  of  persons  from
whom  it  emanated.  ‘  Your  county  committee  thinks  that  if  there
is  any  United  Irishman  on  the  jury,  that  will  commit  any  of  the
prisoners,  that  is  confined  for  being  United  Irishman,  ought  to
lose  their  existence.’ 2

In  the  summer  of  1797,  a  secretly  printed  paper,  called  the
‘Union  Star,’  appeared  in  Dublin,  openly  advocating  assassination,
and  holding  up  to  popular  vengeance  many  particular  persons.
Its  owner,  editor,  and  printer,  was  a  gunsmith  named  Walter
Cox,  and  it  was  printed  on  only  one  side  in  order  that  it  might
be  affixed  to  the  walls.  In  December,  the  Government  succeeded
in  suppressing  it,  the  editor  having,  it  appears,  voluntarily  given
himself  up,  and  promising,  on  condition  of  pardon,  to  disclose  all
that  he  knew.  The  terms  were  accepted,  and  Cooke  had  a  cu¬
rious  conversation  with  him,  which  he  reported  at  length  to
Pelham.  Cox  stated  that  he  was  the  sole  author  and  publisher
of  the  paper,  and  that  he  had  latterly  continued  the  publication
‘  more  from  vanity  than  mischief.’  ‘  He  says,’  continues  Cooke,
‘  that  he  has  been  for  some  time  against  continuing  the  scheme
for  making  a  separation  from  England,  because  he  thought  it
would  not  succeed  ;  thinks  it  will  if  there  be  an  invasion.  Lord
Edward  Fitzgerald  and  O’Connor  have  been  often  with  him.

1  Pelham  to  Colonel  Brownrigg,
May  20  ;  Camden  to  Portland,  May
30.  Pelham,  writing  to  England,
says :  1  The  proneness  to  murder  is
sufficiently  proved  in  the  trials  of  the
conspirators  against  Lord  Carhamp-
ton.  The  assassination  of  all  in¬
formers  is  part  of  the  system  of  the
United  Irishmen,  and  too  many  have
fallen  victims  to  it.  Dunn,  who  was
convicted  of  having  intended  to
murder  Lord  Carhainptou,  acknow¬
ledged  that  he  planned  .  .  .  the
murder  of  a  father  and  son  in  one  of

Lord  Carhampton’s  lodges,  and  that
he  actually  murdered  two  other  men  ’
(Nov.  1,  1797).  Dunn,  in  his  confes¬
sion,  stated  that  the  murder  of  Lord
Carhampton  was  regularly  discussed
in  a  baronial  committee.  This  trial
was  published.  Some  particulars
relating  to  it  will  be  found  in  a
pamphlet  called  Application  of  Bar-
rucl's  Memoirs  of  Jacobinism  to  the
Secret  Societies  of  Ireland  and  Great.
Britain  (London,  1798),  pp.  18-21.

2  Madden,  i.  537 :  Secret  Com¬
mittee,  Appendix,  p.  xxvii.

CH.  XXVIII.

‘THE  UNION  STAR.’

337

They  knew  of  his  writing  the  “  Star.”  He  says  Lord  Edward  is
weak  and  not  fit  to  command  a  sergeant’s  guard,  but  very  zeal¬
ous.  O’Connor,  he  says,  has  abilities  and  is  an  enthusiast,  but
he  thinks  they  want  system.  Lord  Edward  told  him  .  .  .  that
letters  had  arrived  from  France  giving  assurance  of  invasion.
Cox  thinks  the  press  is  doing  much  mischief,  for  he  says  it  is
not  conceivable  with  what  avidity  the  lower  classes  read  it.  He
is  a  Catholic,  says  the  priests  are  much  concerned,  and  that  the
lower  Catholics  are  universally  indisposed  to  the  Protestants  on
account  of  the  oppression  they  have  received,  and  the  insolence
they  have  been  treated  with  for  a  century.  He  is  angry  with
the  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen.  He  says  they  keep  them¬
selves  behind  their  curtain,  urge  on  the  lower  classes  to  their
destruction,  and  only  mean  to  take  the  lead  and  come  forward  if
insurrection  should  be  successful.  He  is  a  clever  man,  and  deep.’ 1

The  intimacy  of  Fitzgerald  and  O’Connor  with  Cox,  is  a  very
suspicious  circumstance,  though  it  must  be  added,  that  O’Connor
stated  that  ‘  The  Union  Star  ’  had  been  set  up  during  his  imprison¬
ment,  that  on  leaving  prison  he  at  once  remonstrated  with  Cox
upon  the  evil  he  was  doing,  and  that  it  was  by  his  advice  that  Cox
surrendered  himself.2  Emmet,  too,  as  might  have  been  expected
from  his  character,  strongly  reprobated  £  The  Union  Star,’  and  did
all  in  his  power  to  suppress  it.3  At  the  same  time,  the  Government
had  information  which  may  have  been  untrue,  and  which  may
have  been  exaggerated,  but  which  cannot  be  lightly  cast  aside,
that  projects  of  a  very  sanguinary  description  were  discussed  in
the  inmost  circles  of  the  conspiracy,  and  were  supported  by  some
of  its  principal  members.  In  a  confidential  letter  from  Camden
to  Pelham  towards  the  close  of  1797,  the  following  passage
occurs.  ‘  J.  W.  [McNally]  informs  us  that  the  moderate  party
have  carried  their  point,  and  that  the  intended  proscription  is
given  up.  O’Connor,  Lord  E.  F.  and  McNevin  are  the  advocates
for  assassination, the  rest  are  for  moderate  measures.’4

1  Cooke  to  Pelham,  Dec.  14,  1797.
Cox  was  afterwards  accused,  but  I
believe  without  any  just  reason,  of
being  concerned  in  the  arrest  of  Lord
Edward  Fitzgerald.  It  appears,  how¬
ever,  from  a  letter  of  Cooke  to  Wick¬
ham  (March  10,  1798),  that  he  gave
the  Government  occasional  informa¬

265

tion,  and  he  ultimately  received  a
small  pension.  Some  particulars
about  his  later  life  will  be  found  in
Madden,  ii.  270-288.

-  Madden,  ii.  277.

3  This  is  mentioned  in  an  undated
letter  of  McNally.

4  Camden  to  Pelham,  Dec.  20, 1797.

338

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvnr.

In  the  course  of  the  summer,  there  was  some  improvement
in  Ulster.  The  arrest  of  so  many  of  the  leading  conspirators
had  given  a  severe  blow  to  the  conspiracy  ;  and  on  May  17,  a
new  proclamation  was  issued  by  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Council,
placing  the  whole  country  more  strictly  under  martial  law.  Having
asserted  that  a  seditious  conspiracy  notoriously  existed,  and  that
a  rebel  army  was  being  organised  and  disciplined  for  the  purpose
of  subverting  the  authority  of  the  King,  the  Parliament,  and
the  Constitution,  the  proclamation  mentioned  the  assemblage  of
great  bodies  under  pretext  of  planting  or  digging  potatoes,  or
attending  funerals ;  the  armed  parties,  who  in  different  parts  of
the  kingdom  were  attacking  houses  and  plundering  arms ;  the
innumerable  trees  that  had  been  cut  down  for  the  purpose  of
making  handles  of  pikes ;  the  attempts  that  had  been  made  to
disarm  the  yeomanry ;  the  frequent  forcible  resistance  offered
to  the  King’s  troops,  and  the  failure  of  the  civil  power  to
grapple  with  an  evil  which  was  so  formidable  and  so  wide¬
spread.  It  had  therefore  become  necessary  to  employ  military
force  ;  and  all  officers  commanding  his  Majesty’s  troops  were
accordingly  empowered  and  ordered,  1  by  the  exertion  of  their
utmost  force,’  to  suppress  the  conspiracy  ;  1  to  use  their  utmost
endeavour’  to  discover  concealed  arms  ;  to  put  down  all  traitorous,
tumultuous,  and  unlawful  assemblies,  and  to  bring  to  punish¬
ment  all  persons  disturbing,  or  attempting  to  disturb,  the  public
peace.  At  the  same  time,  while  the  proclamation  foreshadowed
a  greatly  increased  severity  of  repression,  it  offered  a  free  pardon
to  all  persons  who  had  joined  the  conspiracy,  and  had  not  been
guilty  of  certain  specified  crimes,  provided  they  went  to  a  magis¬
trate  of  the  county  before  June  25,  took  the  oath  of  allegiance,
and,  if  required  by  the  magistrate,  gave  recognisances  for  their
future  good  behaviour.1

Almost  immediately  after  this  proclamation,  several  members
of  different  inferior  committees  were  captured.  Some  were
sent  as  vagabonds  to  the  fleet.  At  Newry  a  great  number  of
pikes  and  other  arms  were  discovered ;  some  of  the  principal
traders  were  apprehended,  and  many  of  the  country  people,  terri¬
fied  by  the  Ancient  Britons,  gave  up  their  arms  and  asked

1  Seward.  Collectanea  Politiea ,  iii.  196-199.

CH.  XXVUI.

COMMAND  OFFERED  TO  CORNWALLIS.

339

pardon  under  tlie  proclamation.1  Dean  Warburton  wrote  that
a  very  favourable  change  had  appeared,  which  he  ascribed  partly
to  the  disappointment  of  hopes  from  the  French,  partly  to  the
proclamation  of  military  law,  and  perhaps  still  more  to  the
revival  of  the  Orangemen,  1  who,’  he  said,  1  are  now  beginning
to  appear  in  vast  numbers.’  ‘  I  should  earnestly  advise,’  he
continued, 1  the  return  of  every  gentleman  to  his  home  and  to  his
estate,  to  cherish  as  well  as  to  regulate  the  rising  spirit  of
loyalty,’  and  he  believed  that  by  such  a  course  the  very  name  of
United  Irishmen  might  be  extinguished.  ‘  Unless  the  French
appear,’  he  said,  1 1  am  convinced  we  shall  not  only  be  safe,  but
triumphant,’  and  he  mentions  that  in  a  single  day  1,474  of  his
parishioners  came  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  about  400
stand  of  arms  were  surrendered.2

The  military  powers  which  were  entrusted  to  the  Com-
mander-in-Chief  were  at  this  time  very  terrible,  and  it  was
felt  by  the  Government  that  they  ought  to  be  placed  in
stronger  and  more  skilful  hands  than  those  of  Lord  Car-
hampton  and  Lake.  An  offer  of  the  command  in  Ireland  was
accordingly  made,  in  the  May  of  1797,  to  Lord  Cornwallis,
and  Lord  Camden  very  wrnrmly  supported  it.  Camden,  indeed,
desired  to  resign  into  the  hands  of  Cornwallis  the  Viceroyalty
itself,  believing  that,  in  the  very  critical  condition  of  Ireland,
all  power  should,  as  much  as  possible,  be  concentrated  in
the  hands  of  a  competent  soldier.  If,  however,  Cornwallis
refused  to  accept  the  Viceroyalty,  Camden  implored  him  to
accept  the  military  command,  and  promised  to  relinquish  into
his  hands  all  the  military  control  and  power  which  the  Lord
Lieutenant  possessed.3  It  was  extremely  unfortunate  for  Ire¬
land  that  this  negotiation  failed.  Cornwallis  differed  radically
from  the  political  conduct  pursued  there,  and  he  believed  that

1  Camden  to  Portland,  May  30.
There  is  a  curious  account  of  the
arrest  at  Newry  of  a  man  named
Lawson ,  in  whose  house  fifty-six  pike
heads  were  found.  As  soon  as  the
arrest  was  known,  a  panic  spread
through  the  town,  and  ‘  an  immense
number  fled.’  Lawson  was  ‘  marched
through  the  town  with  the  pikes
strung  round  his  neck  and  arms.’  It
was  at  first  reported  that  he  was
about  to  give  information,  but  ‘  it

was  soon  known  that,  in  reply  to  an
observation  made  to  him  that  life
was  sweet,  he  said  it  was,  but  to  him
it  was  not  sweet  on  the  terms  offered,’
and  when  this  saying  became  known,
the  fugitives  returned.  (George  An¬
derson  (Newry),  June  11,  1797.)

2  Dean  Warburton,  May  27,  June
1,  1797.

3  Cornwallis  Correspondence,  ii.
325-327.

340

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxyiii.

it  was  not  possible  to  dissociate  the  defence  of  the  country  from
political  measures.  As  Portland  wrote  to  Camden,  he  refused  to
undertake  the  command  in  Ireland,  ‘  unless  means  were  taken
to  separate  the  Catholics  from  the  Dissenters,  and  it  was  evident
that  the  bias  of  his  opinion  strongly  inclined  him  to  suppose  that
very  great  concessions,  little,  if  at  all,  short  of  what  is  termed
Catholic  emancipation,  were  necessary  for  that  purpose,  and
ought  not  to  be  withheld.’  Cornwallis  declared  that,  in  the  event
of  actual  or  imminent  invasion,  he  was  prepared,  if  necessary,
to  cross  the  Channel,  but  that  nothing,  in  his  opinion,  could  put
Ireland  in  a  state  of  obedience  and  security,  unless  strong  measures
were  taken  ‘to  prevent  the  union  between  the  Catholics  and
Dissenters,  and  that  he  should  not  act  honestly  in  countenancing
a  contrary  opinion,  by  undertaking  a  task  which,  he  believed  in
his  conscience,  could  never  be  accomplished.’  Portland  com¬
municated  this  answer  to  Pitt  and  Dundas,  and  the  proposed
appointment  was  abandoned.1

A  similar  offer  was  made  to  Cornwallis  on  the  eve  of  the
outbreak  of  the  rebellion,  and  was  again  declined.2  It  is  not
probable  that  if  it  had  been  accepted  on  either  occasion,  the
rebellion  could  have  been  averted;  but  if  a  general  of  real
and  commanding  ability  had  at  this  time  presided  over  the
defence  of  Ireland,  the  military  excesses  that  took  place
might  at  least  have  been  diminished.  The  almost  unlimited
discretion  that  was  actually  left  to  subordinate  military  au¬
thorities  inevitably  led  to  gross  abuses,  and  it  was  in  the
summer  of  1797  that  the  practice  of  burning  houses,  as  a
measure  of  punishment  or  police,  came  into  use.  Sometimes
they  were' burnt  because  arms  were  not  surrendered;  some¬
times  because  arms  had  been  discovered  ;  sometimes  because  a
great  crime  had  been  committed  in  the  district ;  sometimes
because  they  were  found  empty  at  night  in  proclaimed  districts,
where  the  inhabitants  were  forbidden  to  leave  them  after  sunset,
and  because  their  owners  were  believed  to  be  absent  on  marauding
expeditions.  At  the  same  time,  in  many  quarters,  the  Orange
movement  burst  out  afresh  in  its  old  form  of  outrage  and  per¬
secution,  while  the  United  Irishmen  made  a  skilful  use  of  the

1  Portland  to  Camden  (most  secret  2  Cornwallis  Correspondence,  ii.
and  confidential),  June  10,  1797.  334.

cn.  xxvni.

THE  ORANGE  BOYS.

341

partial  alliance  of  the  Government  with  the  more  respectable
Orangemen,  to  lash  the  Catholics  into  madness  and  rebellion.
The  state  of  Ulster  can  only  be  truly  realised  by  collecting  much
fragmentary  information  ;  but  if  the  reader  has  the  patience  to
follow  with  me  the  casual  lights  furnished  by  officers  and
magistrates,  it  will,  I  think,  gradually  dawn  upon  him,  and  he
will  certainly  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  the  dangers
and  the  animosities  that  were  arising.

‘  I  have  received  information,’  wrote  Lord  Blayney  from
Castleblaney,  in  the  county  of  Monaghan,  ‘  of  several  depreda¬
tions  committed  by  Orange  boys ;  one  man  murdered,  and  two
badly  wounded.  They  say  they  are  sanctioned  by  Government,
and  I  am  sorry  to  say,  that  formerly  sufficient  notice  was  not
taken  of  them.  Why  sanction  a  mob  of  any  kind  ?  .  .  .  The
report  is  general  through  the  country,  that  Government  pro¬
tects  them.  You  should  not  lose  a  moment  in  contradicting
the  assertion.  The  United  business  is  fast  on  the  decline,  so
don’t  revive  it,  and  the  scene  of  civil  war  and  bloodshed  which
may  hereafter  ensue  by  creating  distinctions  and  parties  of  that
nature  in  the  country,  may  be  very  dangerous.’1  ‘I  am  in¬
formed,’  wrote  a  brother  of  the  Bishop  of  Ossory,  ‘  and  it  is
generally  understood  by  everyone,  that  the  depredations  com¬
mitted  all  round  here  (which  are  shocking  to  humanity),  by  what
they  call  Orange  boys,  are  done  by  the  sanction  of  Government.
Were  I  to  enumerate  the  robberies,  murders,  and  shameful  out¬
rages  committed  on  the  Catholics  of  this  place  by  those  Orange
boys,  headed  by  officers  in  full  yeomanry  uniform,  it  would  be
an  endless  business,  and  if  Government  has  countenanced  them,
I  humbly  conceive,  and  pardon  me  for  the  remark,  that  they
ought  to  act  within  bounds.’ 2  The  flight  of  Catholics  from
Ulster,  which  had  for  a  time  ceased,  began  again.  Bodies  of
100  or  150  men  often  crossed  in  a  single  day  from  the  North  of
Ireland  to  Portpatrick,  and  dispersed  in  every  direction  through
the  country ;  and  the  Duke  of  Portland  suggested  to  the  Lord
Advocate  of  Scotland,  that  those  who  could  not  give  a  good
account  of  themselves  should  be  treated  as  vagrants  and  sent
back.3  Lord  Altamount  and  his  brother,  with  whose  excellent

1  Lord  Blayney  (Castleblayney),  The  name  of  the  place  is  illegible.
June  2,  1797.  3  Charles  Greville  (Secretary  of

2.  Captain  O’Beirne,  June  3, 1797.  the  Duke  of  Portland)  to  Pelham,

342

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyiii.

letters  we  are  already  familiar,  wrote  that  a  new  stream  of
Catholics  was  pouring  into  Mayo ;  and  although  the  country
about  them,  they  said,  was  still  in  a  state  of  ‘  the  most  perfect
tranquillity,’  and  although  they  had  no  reason  to  attribute  any
bad  intentions  to  the  immigrants,  they  feared  that  these  might
become  highly  dangerous,  when  their  means  were  exhausted,
unless  some  method  for  giving  them  employment  could  be  dis¬
covered.1

Lord  Blayney’s  warnings  about  the  excesses  of  the  Orange¬
men,  and  about  the  reports  that  the  Government  were  favour¬
ing  them,  were  answered  by  Pelham  with  the  somewhat  idle
generality,  that  ‘  Government  did  not  wish  to  favour  one  party
more  than  another,  but  to  do  equal  justice  to  all.’  Lord  Blayney
replied,  that  the  management  of  this  matter  required  the
utmost  caution.  c  Orangemen  ought  certainly  to  be  shown  some
countenance,  but  under  that  cloke  robbers  and  assassins  will
shelter  themselves,  and  the  most  conspicuous  who  countenance
them  will  be  held  forward  as  their  leaders.’ 2  In  the  same  letter

he  gives  an  account  of  his  own  conduct  in  burning  houses.

Probably  the  earliest  instance  of  this  practice,  and  the  instance
which  was  accompanied  by  the  most  atrocious  circumstances,  was
that  of  the  Ancient  Britons  near  Newry  which  has  been  already
related.  It  appears  to  have  taken  place  in  the  last  days  of  May.
Five  days  after  the  letter  describing  it,  Lord  Blayney  gave  the
Government  an  account  of  his  own  measures  to  pacify  the  county
Armagh,  and  the  portion  of  Monaghan  about  Castleblayney.
He  had  obtained  by  surrender  or  capture  a  vast  quantity  of
pikes ;  had  disarmed  many  men  by  force  ;  had  administered  the

June  15.  Greville  does  not  sa3r  that
these  were  Catholics,  bur,  the  evidence
of  the  flight  of  the  Catholics  makes  it
probable.

1  Denis  Browne,  June  17 ;  Lord
Altamount  (Westport),  August  9, 1797.
Occasionally  disaffected  persons  were
found  in  this  country,  and  Lord  Alta-
mount  gives  a  curious  account  of  a  man
named  McMullet :  ‘One  of  the  most
incorrigible  villains  I  have  ever  heard
of,  with  extensive  abilities  such  as
might  most  usefully  beemployed,  with
a  better  disposition.’  He  was  im¬
prisoned,  and  it  was  soon  discovered
that  ‘  he  had  sworn  every  prisoner  in
the  jail  with  him,  and  seduced  them

all  to  his  own  doctrines.’  He  was,
therefore,  removed  to  solitary  con¬
finement,  and  it  was  found  that  he
‘  employed  his  leisure  in  designing
new  improvements  for  a  guillotine.’
Another  Mayo  magistrate,  writing
from  Newport,  mentions  that  emis¬
saries  from  the  North  had  been  dis¬
covered  trying  to  swear  men  in,  as
United  Irishmen.  He  added  that,
after  the  strictest  inquiry,  this  seemed
to  be  the  first  attempt  of  the  kind  in
that  country,  and  that  ‘  this  part  of
the  country  is  in  the  most  peaceable
condition,  and  likely  to  continue  so.’
(Mr.  O’Donnel,  May  21,  1797.)

2  Lord  Blayney,  June  10,  1797.

cn.  xxvni.

BURNING  OF  HOUSES.

343

oath  of  allegiance  to  multitudes,  and  liad  on  one  occasion  him¬
self  mounted  the  pulpit  in  a  church,  and  exhorted  the  congre¬
gation  against  French  principles.  In  one  district,  however,
which  he  knew  from  ample  and  trustworthy  information  to  be
the  main  source  of  the  disturbances  in  Louth,  Armagh,  and  the
adjacent  parts  of  Monaghan,  he  admits  that  he  had  used  very
harsh  measures.  ‘  I  had  four  people  to  give  information,  but  no
one  dare  venture  to  go  into  the  country,  for  fear  of  being  mur¬
dered.  I  could  not  go  very  wrong,  so  burned  several  houses,
the  inhabitants  of  which  were  not  at  home,  and  I  had  informa¬
tion  of  three  drills  that  night  which  I  could  not  come  at.’  In
one  case  he  burned  the  house  and  destroyed  the  property  to  the
amount  of  800/.  of  a  noted  ringleader  whom  he  was  unable
to  capture.  In  the  other  cases  he  had  only  set  fire  to  the  roofs,
and  the  damage  done  did  not  exceed  40/.  He  had  taken  these
extreme  measures,  he  said,  in  order  to  stop  the  intimidation  of
witnesses,  and  to  show  the  people  what  they  must  expect  if  they
did  not  surrender  their  arms.  ‘  Should  it  prove  that  any  of
these  persons  were  innocent,  you  will  have  no  objection  to  my
making  good  that  loss,  it  being  only  for  example.’ 1

The  outrages  had  begun  to  spread  into  the  midland  coun¬
ties,2  and  Westmeath  was  at  this  time  at  least  as  disturbed  as
any  county  in  Ulster.  Scarcely  a  night  passed  without  Defender
outrages.  The  plunder  of  arms  was  systematically  carried  on,
and  the  administration  of  justice  was  almost  paralysed  by  out¬
rage  and  intimidation.  A  gentleman  from  that  county  writes  a
horrible  account  of  the  murder  of  a  man  named  McManus,  who
had  been  a  witness  in  a  recent  trial.  He  escaped  from  the
place  where  he  was  first  attacked,  and  fled  for  half  a  mile  before
his  pursuers,  who  repeatedly  fired  at  him.  Being  at  last  wounded,
he  darted  into  a  cabin  and  defended  himself  desperately.  The
murderers  took  off  .the  thatch,  and  the  wounded  man  again
tried  to  run.  He  caught  up  a  girl,  thinking  that  this  would

1  Lord  Blayney,  June  10,  1797.
There  is,  in  the  I.S.P.O  ,  a  letter  from
another  magistrate  (Norman  Steel,
Carrickmacross,  June  8),  protesting
strongly  against  this  burning  of  houses
by  Lord  Blayney.

2  ‘  In  great  parts  of  the  North,
the  disaffected  are  so  c  impletely
organised  and  arranged  under  leaders,

that  the  conspiracy  is  extremely
formidable,  and  might  be  destructive
if  assisted  by  an  invading  enemy
The  Defenders  also  in  the  Midland
counties  of  Longford,  Westmeath,
Leitrim,  Cavan,  Meath,  and  Kildare
are  spreading  their  outrages,  and
seizing  the  arms  of  the  gentry.’
(Camden  to  Portland,  May  30,  1797.)

344

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

prevent  liis  pursuers  from  firing,  but  they  shot  her  through  the
arm,  killed  McManus,  and  then  beat  his  skull  into  a  hundred
pieces.  £  Surely,’  continues  the  writer,  ‘  there  cannot  be  measures
too  harsh  adopted  in  respect  to  this  accursed  people.  I  am  de¬
termined  to  risk  a  violent  one  to-morrow,  and  burn  the  whole
quarter  where  the  men  •  suspected  of  this  live.  It  is  impossible
an  innocent  person  can  suffer,  for  such  a  person  is  not  to  be
found.  They  are  all  implicated  in  active  or  passive  guilt.’ 1

From  Multifarnham,  near  Mullingar,  an  officer  reported  the
proceedings  of  his  soldiers  day  by  day.  On  Monday  two  soldiers
overheard  five  persons  plotting  against  the  military.  Two
houses  in  the  town  which  belonged  to  them  were  in  consequence
immediately  burnt.  On  Wednesday  night  an  avowed  leader  of
the  Defenders  was  taken,  and  his  house  burnt.  He  attempted
to  escape,  and  was  instantly  shot.  1  In  executing  this  truly  un¬
pleasant  business,’  the  officer  adds,  ‘  every  humanity  consistent
with  my  orders  was  strictly  observed.  The  beds,  furniture,  and
goods  of  each  house  burnt,  were  previously  removed  and  safely
delivered  to  their  unfortunate  families.  A  Mr.  Dodd  (a  person
of  suspected  character  and  a  supposed  Committee  man)  had
been  pointed  out  to  me  at  an  early  stage  of  the  depredations
that  have  disgraced  this  country.  On  going  to  his  house  in
consequence,  he  was  found  absent,  and  as  ...  it  was  thought
necessary  to  make  an  instant  example,  his  offices  were  consumed.’
On  Thursday  a  notice  was  posted  up  that  unless  the  arms  that '
had  been  plundered  were  restored,  the  town  would .  be  burnt.
Twenty-eight  stand  of  arms  were  brought  in.2

An  officer  sent  down  by  Lord  Carhampton  to  pacify  the
country  round  Charleville  in  the  same  county,  wrote  to  his  com¬
mander  that  for  six  weeks  before  his  arrival  no  respectable
person  there  had  dared  to  leave  his  house  after  dusk ;  that  loyal

1  Mr.  Rochfort  (co.  Westmeath),
June  1797).  McNally,  who  frequently
pointed  out  abuses  to  the  Government,
wrote  at  this  time:  ‘The  conduct  of
Mr.  Nugent  in  the  co.  Westmeath
makes  much  noise.  He  hung  up  a
man  to  make  him  confess,  and  has
burned  eight  or  ten  houses.  This
terrifies  but  does  not  reclaim,  and
probably  will  produce  retaliation.’
(J.  W-,  June  21,  1797.)  Mr.  Low,
the  chief  constable  at  Gayville,  in  this

county,  wrote  that  a  man  named
Dunor  unguardedly  said  he  knew  the
Defenders  who  robbed  Charles  Roch¬
fort.  His  body,  with  his  skull  broken,
was  soon  after  found  in  a  bog
hole.  ‘  The  Wicklow  Militia  and
Carribineers  burned  seven  houses  of
the  Defenders  in  this  district  yester¬
day.  This  kind  of  business,  I  think,
will  soon  stop  the  Defenders.’  (Mr.
Low,  June  25,  1797.)

2  George  Bell,  June  19,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

STATE  OF  TYEONE.

345

subjects  were  in  constant  fear  of  their  lives  ;  and  that  the  hopes
of  the  disaffected  had  been  immensely  raised  by  the  mutiny  in
the  British  fleet.  He  had  gone  to  the  chapel,  and  after  mass
addressed  a  congregation  of  800  persons,  as  he  believed  with
some  good  results.  A  robber  named  Plunket,  when  on  the  point
of  being  shot,  turned  informer.  ‘  The  consequent  shooting  of
six  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  neighbourhood  the  following  day,
and  the  burning  of  a  part  of  Moyvore,  upon  the  information  of
Plunket,  completed  the  business.  ...  Of  the  thirty-five  houses
burned,  I  believe  at  least  thirty  of  them  deserved  their  fate,  and
the  remainder  being  the  poorest  cabins  in  the  place,  compensa¬
tion  can  easily  be  made  to  their  owners.  ...  I  will  conclude
with  giving  joy  of  the  restored  peace  and  tranquillity  of  this  part
of  your  district.’ 1

Other  letters  were  in  a  somewhat  different  strain.  Lord
Mountjoy,  who  was  a  great  proprietor  in  Tyrone,  wrote  that  his
tenants  were  very  prosperous,  but  exceedingly  disaffected  owing
to  a  chain  of  sub-committees  extending  over  the  estate.  The
system  of  the  United  Irishmen  was  to  get  all  the  arms  on  the
estate  into  their  hands,  returning  those  of  their  friends,  keeping
those  of  the  loyalists.  Lord  Mountjoy  had  threatened  to  bring
in  the  military  if  the  arms  that  had  been  taken  were  not
restored.  Disaffection,  he  believed,  in  his  part  of  the  country
was  at  best  only  smothered,  and  he  had  little  doubt  that  if  a
foreign  force  landed  and  gained  any  success,  the  people  would
rise  to  support  it.  At  present,  however,  the  country  was
getting  quieter.  It  was  reported  from  Mountjoy  that  ‘the
Homan  Catholics  are  all  taking  measures  to  leave  it ;  I  suppose
through  apprehensions  of  the  Orange  boys.’  ‘  As  yet,’  he  says,

‘  I  have  heard  no  well-founded  complaint  of  the  conduct  of  the
military.  The  Cambridge  Fencibles  are  commanded  by  officers
who  are  extremely  attentive  to  prevent  any  outrage.  .  .  .  How¬
ever,  the  fact  is,  that  the  republican  spirit  of  the  Presbyterians
does  not  brook  well  military  law,  which,  however,  has  been  the
real  cause  of  the  restoration  of  peace.’ 2

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Dungannon  the  animosities  between
Protestants  and  Catholics  appear  to  have  run  especially  high,

1  Charles  Sheridan  to  Lord  Car-  2  Lord  Mountjoy  to  Pelham,

hampton,  June  22,  1797.  June  11,  21,  1797.

346

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

and  there  is  reason  to  think  that  the  magistrates  there,  were
far  from  approving  of  the  proceedings  of  the  military.1  A  letter
from  one  of  them  gives  us  a  terrible  glimpse  of  the  abuses  that
occurred.  1 1  will  grant  you  the  excursions  of  the  yeomanry
at  the  beginning,  when  headed  by  their  officers,  had  a  happy
effect  in  forcing  in  the  arms  and,  to  appearance  at  least,  turning
the  country  to  its  duty  and  allegiance.  But  for  a  set  of  armed
men,  without  any  gentlemen  at  their  head,  to  be  permitted  at
their  pleasure  day  after  day,  and  what  is  worse,  night  after
night,  to  scour  whole  tracts  of  country,  destroy  houses,  furniture,
&c.,  and  stab  and  cut  in  a  most  cruel  manner  numbers  that,
from  either  private  resentment  or  any  other  cause,  they  may
take  a  dislike  to,  will,  if  permitted  to  go  on,  depopulate  and
destroy  the  trade  of  this  country.  We  are  beginning  anew  the
county  Armagh  business,  papering  and  noticing  the  Romans
to  fly  on  or  before  such  a  day  or  night,  or  if  found  afterwards
in  their  houses,  certain  death.’ 2

From  Omagh  in  Tyrone  another  magistrate  wrote  that  the
country  around  him,  and  also  as  he  hears  the  country  around
Dungannon,  was  perfectly  quiet.  More  than  three  weeks  had
passed  without  a  single  attack  by  United  Irishmen  on  houses.
1,514  persons  had  come  before  him  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,
and  to  qualify  under  the  proclamation ;  yet  still  he  had  received
trustworthy  intelligence  of  the  burning  of  houses.  Such  un¬
necessary  severity  at  a  time  when  the  country  was  quiet,  he
said,  could  not  fail  to  alienate  the  King’s  subjects,  and  ‘  if  per¬
sisted  in  will,  in  all  probability,  insure  a  rebellion.’ 3

1  ‘  The  return  of  the  people  to
their  allegiance  is  everywhere  fal¬
lacious,  unless  where  it  is  attended
by  a  surrender  of  arms.  Magistrates,
as  usual,  are  doing  much  mischief  by
administering  the  oaths  of  allegiance
to  the  people  of  districts  known  to  be
full  of  arms,  without  insisting  upon
their  being  given  up,  and  granting
certificates  which  the  people  consider
as  a  protection  to  their  concealed
^arrns.  Generally  speaking,  I  do  assert
that  the  people  will  perjure  them¬
selves  over  and  over  again,  rather
than  part  with  a  gun.  By  terror
only  they  can  be  disarmed.’  General
Knox  (Dungannon)  to  Pelham,
June  16,  1797.

2  Robert  Lowry  (Dungannon),
June  29,  1797.  This  account  is  con¬
firmed  by  a  later  letter  from  Captain
LiDdsey  (near  Dungannon),  Sept.  14,
who  says  that  excesses  had  been  com¬
mitted  on  the  houses  of  several  Boman
Catholics  of  that  neighbourhood ;
that  they  were  in  great  distress,  and
asking  for  military  protection.

8  Mr.  Eccles  (Ecclesville,  near
Omagh),  June  30, 1797.  There  appears
to  have  been  a  great  difference  in
different  localities  in  the  number  of
people  who  came  in  to  take  the  oath
of  allegiance.  From  Granard  a
magistrate  wrote,  that  not  more  than
three  persons  in  that  part  of  the
country  had  yet  done  so,  and  he  added,

CH.  XXVIII,

KELIGIOUS  ANIMOSITY.

347

Many  incidental  signs  show  clearly  how  swiftly  and  how
fiercely  religions  animosities  were  rising.  On  one  occasion
some  Orange  yeomen  were  accused  of  taking  part  in  the
destruction  of  a  Catholic  chapel.  It  appeared  that  they  had
been  purely  passive  spectators,  but  the  officer,  while  insisting
on  this  point,  very  candidly  adds,  ‘  I  entertain  no  doubt  that
almost  all  the  corps  of  yeomen  in  this  county  would  look  on
and  possibly  encourage  such  an  act,  from  the  great  animosity
that  exists  between  the  Protestants  of  the  Established  Church
and  the  Catholics.’ 1  Sir  George  Hill  wrote  from  Derry,  that
application  had  been  made  to  him  from  many  quarters  to  know
whether  he  would  £  countenance,  or  at  least  wink  at,  the  intro¬
duction  of  the  Orange  business  ’  into  that  neighbourhood.  He
answered,  that  he  would  oppose  the  Orange  system  as  strenuously
as  that  of  the  United  Irishmen.  ‘  The  restless  disposition  and
discontented  nature  of  the  Presbyterians  are  such  as  to  impel
them  to  embrace  turbulence  on  any  terms.  If  one  could  engage
them  in  a  good  and  necessary  cause,  they  are  excellent,  per¬
severing  friends ;  but  as  we  have  nothing-  in  this  country  to
dread  from  the  Catholics,  and  knowing  so  well  the  determined
spirit  of  republicanism  which  exists,  I  apprehend  by  encou¬
raging  Orangemen  at  this  period  we  should  only  continue
treasonable  associations  under  a  changed  name.  The  spirit  of
this  country  might,  at  any  moment  it  became  necessary,  be
roused  against  the  Catholics.’ 2  Anonymous  letters  were  circu¬
lated,  accusing  the  Orangemen  of  concealing  arms  in  the  houses
of  Catholics,  in  order  to  have  a  pretext  for  burning  them.3
The  report  that  the  Orangemen  had  sworn  an  oath  to  extirpate
Catholics  was  industriously  spread,  and  although  it  had  been
explicitly  and  solemnly  denied  by  the  heads  of  all  the  Orange
lodges,  it  was  persistently  repeated  and  readily  believed.  There
were  rumours  that  the  Orangemen  were  about  to  massacre  the
Catholics,  and  other  rumours  that  not  a  Protestant  would  be
left  alive  in  Ireland  in  the  following  March,  and  there  were

‘  Never  was  there  a  wiser  measure
adopted  in  a  moment  of  great  peril,
than  the  order  of  the  20th  May,
leaving  the  military  to  their  own
discretion,  instead  of  criminal  pro¬
secutions,  generally  the  mockery  of
common  sense  and  justice.’  (Alexander

Montgomery,  June  17,  1797.)

1  Mr.  Verner  to  Pelham,  July
1797.

2  Sir  G.  Hill  to  Cooke,  Sept.  23,
1797.

3  July  14,  1797.

348

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

vague,  disquieting  reports,  of  great  movements  of  religious
fanaticism  agitating  the  Catholic  masses.1  On  both  sides  the
habit  of  wearing  distinctive  colours  had  already  begun,  and  it
added  greatly  to  the  prevailing  anarchy.  General  Knox,  whose
masculine  mind  often  leant  towards  stem  measures,  but  never
towards  trivial  ones,  mentions  that  Lord  Carhampton  himself  had
taken  a  green  handkerchief c  from  the  neck  of  one  of  the  enrages,’
and  asked  what  possible  good  such  proceedings  could  effect.2
On  one  occasion  a  female  patriot  accosted  one  of  the  Ancient
Britons  who  was  on  guard  at  Newry,  and  was  very  roughly
handled.  She  boasted  that,  though  they  might  prevent  her
from  wearing  a  green  handkerchief,  they  could  not  prevent  her
from  wearing  green  garters,  and  the  soldiers  then  tied  her
petticoats  round  her  neck,  and  thus  sent  her  home.3

Such  things  naturally  produced  fierce  riots.  On  one  occasion,
on  a  fair  day,  at  Stewnrtstown,  in  the  county  of  Tyrone,  some
yeomen  began  to  tear  off  promiscuously  every  green  ribbon  and
handkerchief,  from  men  and  women.  In  a  moment,  the  whole
market-place  was  in  a  blaze.  Swords,  bayonets,  spades,  and
every  other  weapon  that  could  be  found,  were  employed,  and  a
•  number  of  men  were  soon  seriously  wounded.4  On  the  following
12tli  of  duly,  when  the  people  of  the  same  town  were  celebrating
the  usual  Protestant  anniversary,  a  large  body  of  the  Catholic
Kerry  Militia  attacked  them  with  bayonets  in  the  market-place.
The  dragoons  and  yeomen  were  called  out.  Seven  of  the  militia
were  killed,  six  wounded,  and  the  remainder  captured,  while
five  of  the  dragoons  and  yeomen,  as  well  as  two  countrymen,
were  killed,  and  many  others  badly  wounded.5  On  the  following
day,  a  party  of  dragoons,  under  Lord  Blayney,  who  were  sent  to
pacify  the  country,  encountered  a  party  of  the  North  Kerry
Militia,  and  either  through  resentment,  or,  as  the  court-martial
decided,  through  confusion  and  panic,  at  once  attacked  them,
and  killed  three.6  At  Cookstown,  the  Newry  Militia  attacked
the  yeomen,  who  wore  orange  ribbons  in  honour  of  the  Battle

1  Cooke  to  Pelham,  Dec.  23.  J.
Brownrigg  (Edenderry),  Aug.  27.

2  Knox  lo  Pelham,  April  19.

3  See  a  letter  of  Pelham  to  some

member  of  the  Government  in  Eng¬

land,  Nov.  1.

4  Andrew  Newton,  May  3.
s  W.  Hamilton,  July  14 ;  Lord
Castlestewart,  July  15,  1797.

6  Camden  to  Portland,  Nov.  3,
1797.

ch.  xxviii.  PACIFICATION  PARTIALLY  ACCOMPLISHED.

349

of  the  Boyne,  and  a  scuffle  ensued,  in  which  two  lives  were
lost.1

The  religions  animosity  still  further  increased  the  prevail¬
ing  distrust  of  the  militia,  who  were  mainly  Catholics.  ‘  Be
assured,’  wrote  Lord  Blayney,  c  the  yeomanry  of  the  North  are
your  sheet  anchor.  Was  it  not  for  the  confidence  the  United
Irishmen  have  in  the  militia,  matters  would  not  have  gone  the
lengths  they  have.  Therefore,  beware  of  the  militia.  I  have
strong  reasons  for  saying  so.  .  .  .  Among  the  observations  I
have  made,  the  Roman  Catholics  alone  have  universally  been
guilty  of  robbery  and  murder.’ 2

At  the  same  time,  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1797,
real  steps  had  been  made  towards  the  pacification  of  the  North.
The  process  of  disarming  was  steadily  carried  on,  and  it  met
with  some  considerable  success.  It  appears,  from  a  confidential
Government  report,  that  in  the  first  twenty  days  of  July,  there
were  surrendered  in  the  northern  district  and  in  Westmeath
8,300  guns,  and  about  1,100  pikes,  besides  a  large  number  of
swords,  pistols,  and  bayonets,  while  about  2,500  other  guns,
and  about  550  pikes,  were  seized  by  force.3  Several  quarters
which,  in  the  spring,  had  been  great  centres  of  disaffection,  had
become  at  least  passively  loyal.  From  Belfast,  Lake  wrote,  ‘  The
town  is  more  humbled  than  it  has  ever  been,  and  many  of  the
villains  have  quitted  it.’4  Newry,  which  was  only  second  to
Belfast  as  a  centre  of  disturbance,  seems  to  have  been  effectually
pacified.  Dundalk  and  its  surrounding  country  were  pro¬
nounced  perfectly  quiet.5  The  courage  and  moderation  with
which  Dean  Warburton  laboured  to  pacify  his  district  of  the
county  of  Armagh  received  its  reward,  when  he  was  able  to
announce  to  his  parishioners  in  July,  that  the  proclamation  was
revoked  which  placed  that  county  under  the  Insurrection  Act.6
Dungannon  also,  but  not  its  neighbourhood,  had  been  pacified
by  General  Knox.  ‘  We  are  under  no  apprehensions,’  wrote  a
clergyman  from  that  town,  ‘  but  to  the  north  of  us  it  is  quite
lost.  Dungannon  is  frontiered  by  Stewartstown,  an  advanced
post  in  the  enemies’  country,  with  many  royalists  in  it.  Thence,

1  Pelham  to  one  of  the  officials  in  guns  were  said  to  be  unserviceable.
England,  Nov.  2,  1797.  4  Lake  to  Pelham,  June  4,  1797.

3  Lord  Blayney,  July  21,  1797.  5  August  1797.

3  I.S.P.O.  More  than  4,000  of  the  6  Dean  Warburton,  July  21,  1797.

350

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxyiii.

to  the  northern  sea,  scarce  a  friend.  ...  Be  assured  Orange  is
now  loyal.’ 1  ‘  In  consequence  of  threats  and  some  rigour,’

wrote  General  Nugent,  from  Hillsborough,  ‘  the  country  people
are  bringing  in  their  arms  very  fast,  and  taking  the  oath  of
allegiance.  .  .  .  Accounts  from  all  parts  of  the  country  are
very  favourable,  and  agree  that  the  lower  orders  of  people  are
dropping  off  rapidly  from  the  cause  of  the  United  Irishmen,  and
we  have  every  reason  to  think  that,  with  the  assistance  and
continuance  of  the  system  which  has  been  lately  adopted  against
them,  we  shall  have  nothing  to  apprehend  from  their  machina¬
tions.’  2

The  happiest  sign,  however,  of  returning  peace,  was  found
in  the  revived  efficiency  of  the  law  courts.  The  prosecutions  in
the  North  were  judiciously  entrusted  to  Arthur  Wolfe,  the
Attorney-General,  a  man  who  was  already  known  in  the  House
of  Commons,  and  at  the  bar,  as  a  most  upright  and  able  lawyer ;
who  afterwards,  as  Lord  Kilwarden,  presided  over  the  Court  of
King’s  Bench,  with  conspicuous  wisdom  and  humanity,  and  who
at  last  closed  an  honour-able  life  by  one  of  the  noblest  and  most
pathetic  of  deaths.3  His  letters  to  the  Government  during  the
September  Assizes,  fully  confirm  the  high  opinion  which  was
formed  of  his  character.  At  the  Monaghan  Assizes,  he  says,

1  Kev.  W.  Kichardson,  Nov.  2,
1797.

2  Inclosed  by  Lake  to  Pelham,
June  24,  1797.  In  another  letter

Pelham  wrote  :  ‘  I  believe  I  am  not
too  sanguine  when  I  say,  that  if  there
is  no  invasion,  we  shall  suppress  the
spirit  of  insurrection  in  this  country.
The  troops  have  u  iversally  shown
the  greatest  loyalty  and  spirit,  and
there  have  been  fewer  excesses  than
could  have  been  imagined.  Sir  Wat-
kin  Wynne  and  the  Ancient  Britons
have  completely  terrified  the  rebels
near  Newry,  and  are  the  objects  of
universal  admiration  amongst  the
loyal.  The  firmness  and  temper  of
General  Lake  have  been  equally  suc¬
cessful  at  Belfast,  and  that  town  is
now  under  complete  subjection.  At
a  special  commission  held  there  by
Lord  Yelverton  and  another  judge,
above  3,000  people  came  in  and  took
the  oath  of  allegiance  in  open  court.
.  .  .  In  other  parts  of  the  North,  there

is  a  great  change  for  the  better,  and
the  loyal  inhabitants  are  no  longer
afraid  of  avowing  their  sentiments.
.  .  .  Insurrection  is  becoming  every
day  less  likely  and  less  practicable.’
( Telham  to  the  Duke  of  York,  June
15,  1797.)

8  He  was  butchered,  as  is  well
known,  by  Robert  Emmet’s  mob  in
the  rising  of  1803.  Among  the  Pel¬
ham  papers  will  be  found  a  letter,
describing  his  last  words,  written  by
Baron  Smith  to  a  friend  in  England.
H  is  friends  had  gathered  round,  seeing
the  end  to  be  close  at  hand.  ‘Just
then  a  person  came  in  and  said  to
Swan  in  Lord  Kilwarden’s  hearing,
“  We  have  taken  four  of  the  villains,
what  is  to  be  done  with  them  ?  ”
Swan,  “Executed  immediately”
Lord  Kilwarden  (stretching  out  his
hand  with  effort  and  difficulty),  “  Oh,
no,  Swan,  let  the  poor  wretches  at
least  have  a  fair  trial,”  and  almost
instantly  expired.'

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  SEPTEMBER  ASSIZES.

351

both  the  juries  and  witnesses  discharged  their  duty.  Ten  men
were  capitally  convicted.  In  one  case  there  was  a  disagree¬
ment,  one  juror  dissenting,  ‘but,’  writes  the  Attorney-General,

‘  upon  the  best  inquiry,  I  am  certain  he  is  an  honest  man,  and
that  he  was  actuated  solely  by  opinion  and  conscience,  and,
indeed,  I  think  that  there  was  room  for  a  juror  to  hesitate.’
Many  of  the  prisoners,  ‘  some  of  them  men  of  wealth,  and,  I
believe,  justly  suspected,’  were  released  on  bail,  as  an  informer,
who  was  the  sole  witness  against  them,  did  not  appear,  and
Wolfe  expressed  his  opinion  that  this  informer  was  ‘  a  man  of
bad  character,’  who  had  ‘  certainly  charged  men  not  only  inno¬
cent,  but  meritoriously  active  in  resisting  and  detecting  sedition.’
At  Armagh,  there  were  151  prisoners.  Some  who  were  accused
of  murder,  were  acquitted,  as  Wolfe  thought,  ‘  very  properly,’
the  evidence  being  insufficient,  and  the  juries  appear  to  have
discharged  their  duty  with  fidelity  and  discrimination.  It  was,
however,  a  terrible  illustration  of  the  condition  of  the  North,
that,  in  spite  of  the  large  amount  of  undetected  crime,  Judge
Chamberlain  was  compelled  to  perform  ‘  the  awful  and  most
unexampled  duty  of  pronouncing  the  sentence  of  death  on
twenty  men  together.’  Wolfe  took  the  occasion  to  address  the
people  on  their  duty.  ‘  I  left  Dublin,’  he  wrote,  ‘  a  sort  of
lawyer ;  I  shall  become  a  preacher.  In  truth,  I  have  more  to
enforce  of  moral  duty  than  to  encounter  of  legal  argument.’ 1

In  one  case,  though,  apparently,  only  in  one,  an  officer  was
at  this  time  prosecuted  for  illegal  conduct.  He  was  a  lieu¬
tenant  of  the  army,  who  had  acted  with  great  and  summary
violence  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  accused  of  tamper¬
ing  with  the  soldiers.  The  Government  appear  to  have  done
what  they  could  to  discountenance  such  prosecutions,  but  Lord
Yelverton  sentenced  the  officer  to  three  months’  imprisonment.2

And  yet  these  assizes,  which  appeared  on  the  whole  to  have
been  so  properly  and  so  humanely  conducted,  are  memorable  for
what  a  crowd  of  Irish  writers  have  described  as  one  of  the  black¬
est  of  judicial  murders  ;  for  a  trial  which  certainly  left  behind
it  more  bitter  and  enduring  memories  than  any  that  had  occurred
in  Ireland  since  that  of  Father  Sheehy.  The  cry,  4  Remember

1  Arthur  Wolfe,  Sept.  1,  4, 10,  12,  13,  17,  1797.

*  Ibid.  Sept.  4,  1797.

352

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

Orr,’  which  was  put  forward  to  rally  the  insurgents  of  1798;
the  noble  and  pathetic  lines  of  Drennan,  called  ‘The  Wake
of  William  Orr ;  ’  the  great  speech  of  Curran  when  defending
the  newspaper  which  had  assailed  the  execution ;  the  toast  given
by  Fox  at  an  English  banquet  ‘  to  the  memory  of  the  martyred
Orr,’  and  the  sentiment  which  another  English  politician  is  said
to  have  proposed  at  the  same  banquet,  ‘  that  the  Irish  Cabinet
may  soon  take  the  place  of  William  Orr,’  sufficiently  show  the
violence  of  the  indignation  which  it  aroused.  This  case  is  in¬
volved  in  not  a  little  obscurity  and  contradiction,  and  it  is  not
without  some  misgiving  that  I  undertake  to  place  an  outline  of
it  before  the  reader.

William  Orr  was  a  young  Presbyterian  yeoman  or  farmer  of
considerable  property,  high  character,  and  great  local  popularity
and  influence.  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  mention  him  as
a  strong  opponent  of  assassination  at  a  Committee  of  the  United
Irishmen,  and  it  appears  to  be  universally  admitted,  even  by
those  who  most  strenuously  assert  his  innocence  of  the  offence
for  which  he  was  executed,  that  he  was  an  active  member  of
that  society.1  He  was  indicted  for  administering  the  oath  to
two  soldiers  named  Wheatley  and  Lindsay.  The  Insurrection
Act  had,  for  the  first  time,  made  that  offence  a  capital  one,  and
the  trial  of  Orr  was  the  first  instance  in  which  a  prisoner  was
tried  for  it.  In  one  of  the  papers  of  the  United  Irishmen  which
had  been  seized  by  the  Government,  the  names  of  these  two
soldiers  were  given  as  ‘  being  up,’  which  was  the  usual  phrase
for  being  sworn.  They  were  immediately  put  under  arrest,  and
examined  separately.  They  both  agreed  in  the  details  of  their
evidence,  and  they  both  swore  before  a  magistrate  that  the  oath
had  been  administered  by  Orr.  The  prisoner  was  left,  according
to  an  evil  custom  which  was  then  but  too  common  in  Ireland,
for  a  whole  year  untried  in  prison,  and  he  was  at  last  indicted

1  Thus,  Dr.  Madden,  who  strongly
maintains  that  the  execution  of  Orr
was  a  judicial  murder,  says,  ‘  He  was
a  noted,  active,  and  popular  country
member  of  the  Society  of  the  United
Irishmen.  He  was  executed  on  ac¬
count  of  the  notoriety  of  that  circum¬
stance,  but  not  on  account  cf  the
sufficiency  of  the  evidence,  or  the
justice  of  the  conviction  that  was  ob¬

tained  against  him.’  ( United  Irish¬
men,  ii.  254.)  Orr  never  appears  to
have  denied  that  he  was  a  United
Irishman.  Drennan  writes  of  him  :

4  Why  cut  off  in  palmy  youth  ?

Truth  he  spoke,  and  acted  truth.

“  Countrymen,  unite  !  ”  lie  cried,

And  died  for  what  his  Saviour  died.’
The  1 1  'a  he  of  William  Urr.

CH.  XXVIII,

TRIAL  OF  ORR.

353

in  September  1797.  Both  soldiers  distinctly  swore  at  the  trial
to  the  facts,  and  they  stated  that  the  oath  was  administered  at  a
baronial  committee  before  several  persons  whom  they  mentioned
by  name.  None  of  these  persons  appeared  to  rebut  the  charge.
An  attempt  was  made  to  shake  the  credit  of  Wheatley,  but  in
the  opinion  of  the  presiding  judge  it  signally  failed.  The  testi¬
mony  of  Lindsay  was  unimpeached,  but  he  acknowledged,  on
cross-examination,  that  he  understood  nothing  of  the  nature  of
the  oath  which  he  swore.  The  prosecution  was  conducted  by
Wolfe,  the  Attorney-General,  and  the  presiding  judge  was  Lord
Yelverton,  one  of  the  most  accomplished  and  merciful  men  on
the  Irish  Bench.  After  his  death,  Curran  finely  said  of  him,
that  £  he  could  on  his  deathbed  have  had  no  more  selfish  wish,
than  that  justice  should  be  administered  to  him  in  the  world  to
come,  in  the  same  spirit  with  which  he  distributed  it  in  this
and  although  good  critics  complained  that  Yelverton  was  too
rapid  in  forming  his  impressions  when  on  the  bench,  no  one
ever  questioned  his  uprightness,  his  ability,  and  his  conspicuous
humanity.  A  few  months  after  the  execution,  Lord  Clare  in  the
Irish  House  of  Lords  related  the  circumstances  of  Orr’s  trial  as  I
have  told  them,  in  the  presence  of  Yelverton,  and  he  begged  that
if  he  fell  into  any  inaccuracy,  Yelverton  would  correct  him.’ 1

The  jury,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  had  not  agreed  on
their  verdict.  They  were  locked  up,  as  was  the  custom,  for  the
night,  but  early  next  morning  they  were  summoned  into  court.
Truly  or  falsely,  it  was  stated,  in  a  contemporary  account  of  the
trial  which  was  published,  that  the  foreman  twice  refused  to  pro¬
nounce  the  word  guilty,  saying  only,  ‘  We  leave  him  in  your
Lordship’s  mercy.’  At  last,,  however,  he  pronounced  Orr  to  be
guilty,  but  accompanied  the  verdict  with  a  recommendation  to
mercy,  which  Yelverton  at  once  transmitted  to  Dublin.

So  far,  it  appears  to  me  impossible  to  conceive  a  trial  more
perfectly  fair  or  more  calculated  to  inspire  confidence,  and  no
two  men  could  be  mentioned  less  likely  than  Yelverton  and
Wolfe  to  be  concerned  in  anything  of  the  nature  of  a  judicial
murder.  Two  days  later,  when  the  sentence  was  to  be  pro¬
nounced,  Curran  appeared  to  move  an  arrest  of  judgment  on  some
legal  points.  At  the  request  of  Lord  Yelverton,  J udge  Chamber-

1  Debate  in  the  Irish  House  of  Peers,  Feb.  19,  1798,  pp.  110-117.

266

354

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

lain  assisted  on  this  occasion  on  the  bench.  The  first  legal
points  that  were  raised,  were  speedily  dismissed,  and  Curran
then  produced  two  most  extraordinary  affidavits.  .The  first,
which  was  sworn  by  two  of  the  jurymen,  stated  that  when  the
jury  retired  to  consider  their  verdict,  two  bottles  of  very  strong
whisky  had  been  passed  in  to  them  through  the  window ;  that
they  had  drunk  the  greater  part  of  them,  and  that  some  of  them
‘  became  very  sick  and  unwell,  which  occasioned  their  vomiting
before  they  gave  their  verdict,’  and  one  of  the  two  jurymen  wTho
signed  the  affidavit,  swore  also  that  by  age  and  infirmity,  and  the
intimidation  of  another  juryman,  he  had  been  induced  to  concur
in  the  verdict  contrary  to  his  opinion.  A  third  juryman  signed
alone  another  affidavit  which  was  of  much  less  importance.
There  was  nothing  in  it  about  drinking  or  intimidation,  nor  did
the  deponent  assert  that  he  believed  Orr  to  be  innocent  of  the
charge  on  which  he  was  indicted,  but  he  stated  that  he  had  resolved
to  acquit  him,  and  had  only  agreed  to  concur  in  the  verdict  of
the  majority,  on  the  representation  of  some  of  his  fellow-jurors
that  a  verdict  of  guilty  would  not  be  followed  by  an  execution.
It  was  probably,  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  this  juryman,
by  a  kind  of  compromise  which  constantly  takes  place  in  jury
boxes,  that  a  recommendation  to  mercy  was  appended  to  the
verdict.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  question  of  punishment
is  wholly  beyond  the  functions  of  a  jury,  and  that  this  last
affidavit  was  not  only  exceedingly  irregular,  but  was  also  of  a
kind  to  which  no  weight  ought  to  have  been  attached.

The  two  judges  pronounced  that  the  affidavits,  delivered
after  the  verdict  had  been  duly  given  and  formally  received,
were  no  reason  for  refusing  to  pass  sentence,  and  Orr  was  accord¬
ingly  condemned  to  death.  In  this  matter  there  is,  I  believe,
no  doubt  that  the  judges  acted  in  strict  accordance  with  the
law,  but  a  very  grave  responsibility  now  passed  to  the  Execu¬
tive.  Was  it  right,  was  it  decent,  to  hang  a  prisoner  when  two
members  of  the  jury  which  condemned  him,  swore  that  a  part
at  least  of  the  jury  were  intoxicated  when  they  delivered  their
verdict,  and  when  one  juryman  swore  that  he  had  been  coerced
by  violence  and  intimidation  into  giving  a  verdict  contrary  to
his  belief?

The  question  was  a  more  difficult  one  than  perhaps  might  at

CH.  XXV11I.

ATTEMPTS  TO  SAVE  ORR.

355

first  sight  appear.  One  part  of  it — though  not  the  only  one
which  had  to  be  considered — was,  to  which  of  two  very  different
categories  the  case  of  Orr  belonged.  Was  it  the  case  of  a  man
who  was  probably  or  possibly  innocent,  and  who  had  been  wrong¬
fully  convicted  on  insufficient  evidence  ?  Or  was  it  a  case,  such
as  frequently  occurs  in  Ireland,  of  a  treasonable  conspiracy  which
had  failed  to  procure  an  acquittal  or  a  disagreement,  and  which
was  now  making  a  last  desperate  effort  to  save  the  life  of  a
popular  and  important  member,  and  by  doing  so  to  inflict  a
damaging  defeat  on  the  administration  of  justice  ?

It  was  the  strong  opinion  of  the  Government  that  the  case
belonged  to  the  second  category,  and  that  the  affidavits  were
incredible  and  procured  by  undue  pressure.  Lord  Yelverton
was  consulted  about  the  recommendation  of  the  jury.  It  was
stated  that  for  a  hundred  years  there  had  been  no  instance  in
Ireland  of  such  a  recommendation  not  being  attended  to  if  it  was
supported  by  the  presiding  judge.1  But  in  this  case  Yelverton
declared  that  the  evidence  appeared  to  him  to  be  so  clear,  and
the  guilt  of  the  prisoner  so  undoubted,  that  he  could  not  con¬
scientiously  support  the  recommendation.2  The  opinion  of  Wolfe
was  only  second  in  importance  to  that  of  Yelverton,  and  it  is
certain  that  he  also  was  fully  satisfied  with  the  justice  of  the
verdict.3

The  execution  was  fixed  for  October  7.  Almost  immediately
after  the  condemnation,  General  Lake  discovered  that  a  sum  of
no  less  than  900  guineas  had  been  collected,  and  offered  to  the
gaoler  if  he  would  allow  Orr  to  escape.4  This  attempt  being
frustrated,  two  other  extraordinary  efforts  were  made  to  save  the
prisoner.  The  first  was  an  affidavit  which  was  voluntarily  sworn
by  a  Dissenting  minister  named  Elder.  He  stated  that  in  April
1796,  which  was  the  very  time  when  Wheatley  laid  his  first  in¬
formation  against  Orr,  he  was  sent  for  to  visit  a  soldier  who

1  This  was  stated  by  the  Attorney-
General  in  the  (rial  of  Finerty.  See
McNevin ’s  Lives  and  Trials  of  Eminent
Irishmen ,  p.  504.

2  Lord  Clare’s  Speech ,  pp.  113, 114.

3  Immediately  after  it  was  given,

he  wrote  a  letter  to  Cooke,  in  which
he  said,  ‘  I  have  nothing  to  add,  ex¬
cept  that  the  defence  made  upon  Orr’s
trial  was,  in  my  judgment,  supported

by  subornation  only,  and  that  Mr.
Curran  is  to-morrow  to  move  in  arrest
of  judgment  upon  two  grounds,  both
of  which,  I  am  confident  enough  to
say,  will  fail  him.’  (Sept.  19,  1797.
I.S.P.O.)

*  Lake  to  Pelham,  Oct.  3,  1797.
The  deposition  of  the  gaoler  is  in¬
closed.

356

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvju.

appeared  to  be  deranged  in  his  mind,  and  who  had  attempted  to
commit  suicide.  This  soldier  was  Wheatley.  Elder  found  him
in  a  state  of  extreme  excitement  and  despondency,  and  he  accused
himself  of  a  number  of  grave  crimes.  He  had  seduced  women
in  Scotland.  In  Ireland  he  had  run  a  man  through  the  body
with  his  bayonet,  in  an  affray  which  had  occurred  at  the  capture
of  an  unlicensed  still.  In  this  affray  the  revenue  officer  in  com¬
mand  was  wounded,  and  afterwards  sent  to  gaol,  where  he  died
of  his  wounds,  and  the  affidavit  further  states  ‘  that  he  the  said
Wheatley  was  prevailed  on  to  swear  against  some  of  the  persons
who  were  taken  prisoners,  a  false  oath,  for  which  he  was  afraid
they  would  suffer,  which  also  hung  heavy  on  his  mind.’  A
second  affidavit,  sworn  by  a  person  named  Montgomery,  who  was
present  at  the  interview,  corroborated  the  statement  of  Elder.
Nothing  in  these  affidavits  had  any  direct  bearing  on  the  case
of  Orr,  but  the  evidence  if  it  had  been  produced  in  court  would
undoubtedly  have  done  much  to  shake  the  credibility  of  Wheatley ;
and  a  third  affidavit,  sworn  by  the  magistrate  wTho  had  taken
Wheatley’s  earliest  deposition,  attempted  to  carry  the  defence  a
step  farther.  It  stated  that  at  the  spring  assizes  of  1797,  when
there  had  been  a  question  of  bringing  Orr  to  trial,  Wheatley
had  spoken  with  much  alarm  about  the  presence  of  Elder  in
Carrickfergus,  and  had  expressed  his  conviction  that  c  he  was
brought  there  to  invalidate  his  testimony  against  Orr  from  a
conversation  that  had  passed  between  him  and  said  Elder  ’  in
April  1796.

It  is  a  very  common  thing  after  the  conclusion  of  a  trial  which
arouses  strong  popular  passions,  to  find  some  piece  of  evidence
stated  in  public  at  the  last  moment  in  order  to  invalidate  the
verdict,  which  might  have  been  brought,  but  which  was  not
brought,  into  court  during  the  trial,  and  which  was,  therefore,
never  submitted  to  the  searching  test  of  cross-examination.
Few  things  in  the  eyes  of  a  lawyer  are  more  suspicious  than
such  evidence,  and  it  is  only  in  very  rare  cases,  and  usually  when
some  grave  doubt  had  already  hung  over  the  issue  of  the  trial,
that  any  stress  is  placed  upon  it.  Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  it
would  be  in  the  highest  degree  detrimental  to  the  interests  of
justice  if  prisoners  were  encouraged  to  hold  back  a  portion  of
their  defence  until  it  could  no  longer  be  tested  by  inquiry,  or  with

CH.  XXVIII.

ATTEMPTS  TO  SAVE  ORR.

357

the  object  of  obtaining  a  second  trial.  Tn  this  case  it  will  be
observed  that  the  evidence  of  Lindsay  was  absolutely  unim¬
peached  ;  that  no  motive  for  the  pretended  perjury  of  Wheatley
was  suggested;  that  the  confession  of  perjury  which  Wheatley
was  represented  as  having  made,  related  solely  to  another  case,
in  which  he  was  personally  implicated,  and  that  he  was  alleged
to  have  made  it  when  suffering  from  mental  derangement.  The
execution,  however,  was  respited  till  the  10th,  and  afterwards
till  the  14th  of  October,  in  order  that  further  inquiry  should  be
made.  ‘  Orr’s  respite,’  wrote  a  Government  official  from  Belfast,
‘  has  caused  great  exultation  through  every  disaffected  part  of
the  northern  district,’  and  the  same  official  proceeds  to  describe
the  desperate  efforts  that  were  made  to  save  the  prisoner.  Two
of  the  jurymen  who  condemned  him,  did  not  dare  to  leave  their
homes  after  nightfall.  Every  effort  of  intimidation  as  well  as  of
solicitation  was  employed  to  procure  signatures  to  a  petition  to
the  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  the  writer  concluded  by  expressing  his
own  belief  that  if  Orr  was  pardoned,  no  jury  would  convict.1

The  second  step  taken  to  prevent  the  execution  was  of  a  dif¬
ferent  kind.  Orr’s  brother  made  an  application  to  the  High
Sheriff  of  the  county,  and  to  one  of  the  members  for  Belfast,  to
sign  a  memorial  for  the  pardon  of  the  prisoner.  These  gentle¬
men  adopted  a  course  which  was  certainly  humane,  and  which
under  the  circumstances  appears  to  me  to  have  been  wise.  They
promised  that  they  would  sign  such  a  memorial,  but  only  on  the
condition  that  Orr  confessed  his  guilt,  and  in  that  case  one  of  them
further  promised  to  endeavour  to  procure  the  signatures  of  the
other  members  of  the  grand  jury.  A  full  confession  of  guilt
was  accordingly  drawn  up.  It  was  stated  to  have  been  submitted
to  Orr,  and  to  have  been  signed  by  him.  It  was  sent  to  the
Lord  Lieutenant,  and  its  substance  was  published,  as  ‘  from  the
best  and  most  respectable  authority,’  in  the  ‘  Belfast  News  Letter.’2
Orr,  however,  soon  after  its  publication  is  said  to  have  written
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  thanking  him  for  the  respite  that  had
been  granted,  but  at  the  same  time  reasserting  his  innocence
and  formally  denying  that  he  had  signed  this  confession ; 3  and

1  Lucius  Barber  (Belfast),  Oct.  10,
1797.

2  Sept.  29,  1797.

*  This  letter  is  dated  Oct.  10.  It

was  first  printed  in  the  Press,  and  will
be  also  found  in  McCormick’s  Life
and  Trial  of  William  Orr.  There  is
no  allusion  to  it,  either  in  the  speech  of

358

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

in  the  Declaration  which  was  distributed  at  his  execution,  but
which  had  been  drawn  up  nearly  ten  days  previously,1  he  reite¬
rated  this  repudiation  with  great  emphasis.  ‘  A  false  and  un¬
generous  publication,’  he  wrote,  ‘  having  appeared  in  a  news¬
paper  stating  certain  alleged  confessions  of  guilt  on  my  part,  and
thus  striking  at  my  reputation,  which  is  dearer  to  me  than  life,
I  take  this  solemn  method  of  contradicting  that  calumny.  I
was  applied  to  by  the  High  Sheriff  and  the  Rev.  W.  Bristow,
Sovereign  of  Belfast,  to  make  a  confession  of  guilt,  who  used  en¬
treaties  to  that  effect.  This  I  peremptorily  refused.  Did  I
think  myself  guilty,  I  should  be  free  to  confess  it ;  but,  on  the
contrary,  I  glory  in  my  innocence.’

The  truth  of  this  statement  is  open  to  very  grave  doubt.
When  it  was  published  immediately  after  the  death  of  Orr,  the
two  gentlemen  referred  to  at  once  denied  it,2  and  they  wrote  to  the
‘BelfastNews  Letter  ’  giving  their  version  of  what  had  occurred.
On  the  27th  of  the  preceding  month  they  said  they  had  together
visited  Orr  in  gaol.  ‘  Mr.  Bristow  said  to  him,  “  Sir,  I  have  seen
a  paper  which  your  brother  and  another  gentleman  brought  to
the  Sheriff  on  Monday  last,  with  your  name  annexed  to  it,  in
which  you  acknowledged  the  justice  of  your  sentence,  and
cautioned  others  against  being  led  into  bad  practices  by  wicked
and  designing  men.”  Mr  Bristow  added  that  “  it  was  expected,
from  what  your  brother  and  that  gentleman  told  the  Sheriff,  that
it  would  have  been  published  in  last  Monday’s  Belfast  paper.”
“  I  am  confident,”  said  Mr.  Bristow  to  Mr.  Orr,  “  that  this
acknowledgment,  which  you  had  for  some  time  withheld,  must
now  afford  you  great  comfort!”  Mr.  Orr  replied,  “Yes,  sir,  it
has  relieved  my  mind  very  much.”  ’  The  two  gentlemen  then
proceed  to  say  that  Mr.  Bristow  urged  Orr  to  reveal  any  further
fact  that  might  throw  light  on  the  conspiracy,  but  that  Orr  said
that  he  could  at  present  remember  nothing  more.  This,  the
High  Sheriff  and  the  Sovereign  of  Belfast  declared,  was  to  the
best  of  their  recollection  exactly  what  occurred,  and  in  order  to

Clare  in  the  House  of  Lords,  or  in  the  added  :  *  Mr.  Skiffington  and  the  Rev.
speech  of  Curran  in  the  Finerty  trial.  Mr.  Bristow  can  testify  on  oath,  that

1  Oct.  5.  the  declaration  or  confession  for-

2  Andrew  McNevin  (Carrickfer-  warded  to  his  Excellency  was  acknow-
gus)  sent  to  the  Government,  Orr’s  ledged  by  W.  Orr  to  be  his,  and  that
dying  declaration ;  mentioned  his  em-  his  mind  was  light  after  it.’  (Oct.  14,
phatic  denial  of  the  confession,  but  1797.)

CH.  XXVIII.

ORR’S  EXECUTION  ORDERED.

359

give  their  statement  the  utmost  weight,  they  attested  it  on  oath
before  a  magistrate.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  brother  of  Orr
published  a  letter,  to  the  truth  of  which  he  said  he  also  was  pre¬
pared  to  swear,  in  which  he  stated  that  he  had  tried  in  vain  to
induce  the  condemned  man  to  sign  the  confession  of  guilt,  and
that  having  failed  in  all  his  efforts,  and  in  hopes  of  saving  his
brother’s  life,  he  had  himself  signed  it  in  his  brother’s  name,  but
without  his  privity  or  consent.2

The  reader  must  form  his  own  estimate  of  these  conflicting
statements.  Notwithstanding  the  hopes  which  had  naturally
been  raised  by  the  repeated  respites,  the  Government  ultimately
decided  that  the  sentence  should  be  carried  out.  A  paragraph,
which  was  inserted,  no  doubt,  by  authority,  in  the  ‘  Belfast  News
Letter,’  announcing  this  decision,  stated  that  Pelham  had  written
to  the  High  Sheriff  intimating  that  the  respite  had  been  granted
for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  Lord  Lieutenant  to  consult  Lord
Yelverton  and  Judge  Chamberlain,  £  as  to  certain  papers  which
had  been  transmitted  relative  to  one  of  the  witnesses  on  whose
testimony  Mr.  Orr  was  condemned ;  ’  that  both  judges  were  of
opinion  that  these  papers  did  not  impeach  the  verdict,  and  that
the  law  must,  therefore,  take  its  course.3  From  the  statement
of  Lord  Clare,  it  would  appear  that  the  affidavits  which  had
been  made  after  the  verdict  had  been  delivered,  were  not  brought
formally  before  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  that  the  decision  was
taken  mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  judge  who  presided  at  the
trial  declared  himself  fully  satisfied  with  the  verdict.4  Orr  met

1  Belfast  News  Letter,  Oct.  16,  20,
1797.

2  Ibid.  Oct.  20,  1797 ;  McNevin’s
Trials,  p.  493.

3  Belfast  News  Letter ,  Oct.  13,
1797.

4  The  following  is  Lord  Clare’s
own  defence  of  the  Government.
‘  His  Excellency,  not  withstanding  the
declaration  of  the  learned  Lord  [the
judge],  respited  Mr.  Orr;  to  give
time  for  inquiry  whether  any  justifi¬
able  ground  could  be  laid  for  extend¬
ing  mercy  to  him ;  and  finding  that
nothing  could  be  substantiated  to
shake  the  justice  of  his  conviction,
the  unhappy  man  was  left  for  execu¬
tion.  The  affidavits  which  I  have
stated  never  were  laid  before  the

Lord  Lieutenant,  but  if  they  had,  is
there  a  man  with  a  trace  of  the  prin¬
ciples  of  justice  in  his  mind,  who  will
say  that  such  affidavits  ought  to  be
attended  to  ?  Is  it  to  be  supposed
that  a  j  udge  would  receive  a  verdict
from  a  jury  in  a  state  of  intoxication  ?
or  was  it  ever  heard  that  a  juryman
was  received,  by  voluntary  affidavit,
to  impeach  a  verdict  in  which  he  had
concurred  ?  Will  any  man  with  a
trace  of  criminal  justice  in  his  mind,
say  that  a  voluntary  affidavit  of  a
person  not  produced,  unexamined  at
the  trial,  ought  to  be  received  after
conviction,  to  impeach  the  credit  of
a  witness  who  was  examined  and
cross-examined,  and  whose  credit
stood  unimpeached  by  legal  evidence  ?

360

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

his  fate  with  courage  and  dignity,  professed  with  his  last  breath
that  he  died  in  the  true  faith  of  a  Presbyterian,  and  distributed
as  he  went  to  the  gallows  his  dying  declaration,  in  which  he
asserted  his  innocence  and  declared  the  informer  to  be  for¬
sworn.  ‘  If  to  have  loved  my  country,’  he  wrote,  ‘  to  have
known  its  wrongs,  to  have  felt  the  injuries  of  the  persecuted
Catholics,  and  to  have  united  with  them  and  all  other  religious
persuasions  in  the  most  orderly  and  least  sanguinary  means  of
procuring  redress — if  these  be  felonies,  I  am  a  felon,  but  not
otherwise.’  It  was  observed,  however,  that  these  declarations
were  not  wholly  unequivocal.  The  prisoner  who  protested  his
innocence  had  always  maintained  that  the  oath  of  the  United
Irishmen  was  not  only  innocent,  but  laudable,  and  the  witness
who  was  said  to  be  forsworn  had  sworn  an  obligation  of
secrecy.1

I  have  now  laid  before  the  reader  a  very  full  account
of  this  memorable  and  most  unhappy  case.  If  by  a  judicial
murder  be  meant  the  execution  of  a  man  who  was  probably
innocent  of  the  charge  for  which  he  was  condemned,  that  term
does  not,  in  my  opinion,  apply  to  the  death  of  Orr.  On  the
other  hand,  to  execute  a  criminal  after  two  members  of  the  jnry
which  condemned  him  had  sworn  that  intoxication  had  pre¬
vailed  in  the  jury  box  when  the  verdict  was  considering,  and
that  intimidation  had  been  successfully  employed  to  obtain

If  such  an  affidavit  were  to  lay  the
necessary  foundation  of  a  pardon  after
conviction,  I  will  venture  to  say  there
is  no  man  who  may  be  convicted  here¬
after  of  any  crime,  however  atrocious,
that  will  not  be  able  to  obtain  a  simi¬
lar  affidavit.’  (Lord  Clare’s  speech,
Debate  in  the  House  of  Peers,  Feb.  19,
1798,  p.  114.)

1  A  short  contemporary  account
of  the  trial  of  William  Orr  was  printed
in  17'J7.  Clare  spoke  of  it  as  ‘a
partial  and  garbled  report.’  It  is  now
very  rare,  but  the  substance  was  re¬
printed  in  a  little  book  called  McCor¬
mick’s  Life  and  Trial  of  Orr.  The
affidavits  and  other  leading  docu¬
ments  connected  with  the  case  will
be  found  in  McNevin’s  Lives  and
Trials  of  Eminent  Irishmen,  in  the
introduction  to  the  trial  of  Peter
Finerty  (the  editor  of  the  Press').
That  trial  arose  out  of  an  attack  on

Lord  Camden’s  conduct  relating  to
the  case.  The  speech  of  Curran  in
defence  of  Finerty  is  the  best  state¬
ment  of  the  case  for  Orr,  while  the
opposite  side  was  fully  stated  by  Lord
Clare  in  his  speech  in  the  House  of
Lords.  See,  too,  Madden’s  United
Irishmen,  ii.  253-258 ;  and  the  Bel¬
fast  News  Letter,  Oct.  1797.  Musgrave
says  that  Father  Quigly  and  two  Pres¬
byterian  ministers,  who  attended  Orr
after  his  condemnation,  ‘  persuaded
him  that  he  was  not  guilty  of  any
crime,  and  that  they  could  reanimate
him  ;  ’  that  his  body,  after  being  hung,
was  brought  to  a  Presbyterian  meeting
house,  where  a  medical  man  vainly
tried  to  restore  him  to  life  by  trans¬
fusing  the  blood  of  a  calf  into  his
veins  ;  and  that  pieces  of  his  clothing
were  afterwards  preserved  as  relics  in
every  part  of  the  kingdom.  ( Rebel¬
lions  in  Ireland,  p.  178.)

CH.  XXVIII.

SPEECH  OF  CURRAN.

361

unanimity  ;  to  treat  sucli  an  affidavit,  after  it  had  been  formally
laid  before  the  court,  with  simple  neglect,  was  a  course  which
appears  to  me  to  have  been  well  fitted  to  shake  confidence  in
the  administration  of  justice.  Great  as  might  have  been  the
evils  that  would  have  arisen  from  the  escape  of  Orr,  I  can
hardly  think  that  they  would  have  been  so  great  as  those  which
arose  from  the  feeling  of  deep,  passionate,  indignant  sympathy
which  the  fate  of  this  young  Presbyterian  farmer  evoked,  not
only  throughout  Ulster,  but  throughout  the  whole  of  Catholic
Ireland.  I  have  given,  in  Lord  Clare’s  own  words,  the  defence
of  the  Government.  The  speech  in  which  Curran  defended  the
writer  in  the  ‘  Press  ’  who  had  denounced  the  execution  as  a
judicial  murder,  shows  how  powerfully  the  other  side  could  be
presented  by  a  great  advocate.  If,  he  said  in  effect  to  the  jury,
you  had  known  that  Orr  was  apprehended  on  the  charge  of
abjuring  the  bigotry  which  had  torn  and  disgraced  his  country,
pledging  himself  to  restore  the  people  to  their  place  in  the
Constitution,  and  binding  himself  never  to  betray  his  fellow-
labourers  in  that  enterprise ;  that  he  had  been  left  untried  in
prison  for  twelve  tedious  months  ;  that  he  had  been  condemned
by  a  drunken  and  worn-out  and  terrified  jury  ;  that  members  of
this  j  ury,  when  returning  sobriety  had  brought  back  their  con¬
sciences,  had  implored  the  humanity  of  the  bench  and  the  mercy
of  the  Crown  to  save  them  from  eternal  self-condemnation,  and
their  souls  from  the  indelible  stain  of  innocent  blood  ;  that  new
and  hitherto  unheard-of  crimes  had  been  discovered  against  the
informer ;  that  a  respite  had  been  granted  no  less  than  three
times,  and  the  hopes  of  the  prisoner  and  his  family  thus  raised
to  the  highest  point,  and  that,  notwithstanding  this,  he  had
been  brought  to  the  gallows,  and  had  died  with  a  solemn
declaration  of  his  innocence,  and  uttering  with  his  last  breath
a  prayer  for  the  liberty  of  his  country — if  you  had  known  all
this,  and  had  then  been  asked  to  describe  it,  what  language
would  you  have  used  ?

The  general  judgment  which  will  be  formed  of  the  policy
and  proceedings  of  the  Irish  Government  at  thie  time,  and  of
the  share  of  responsibility  that  belongs  to  them  in  hastening  on
the  rebellion  which  was  manifestly  impending,  will  vary  much
according  to  the  character  of  the  reader,  and  perhaps  still  more

3G2

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cn  xxvm.

according  to  the  political  predisposition  with  which  he  reviews
the  facts  that  have  been  related.  It  is  manifestly  absurd  to
describe  the  severities  in  Ulster  as  if  they  were  unprovoked  by
a  savage  outburst  of  anarchy  and  crime,  or  to  deny  that  in  the
midst  of  a  great  war,  and  with  the  extreme  probability  of  a
French  invasion  of  Ireland,  the  disarming  of  a  disaffected
province  had  become  urgently  necessary.  The  rigour  and
violence  of  the  measures  that  were  adopted  were  chiefly  due  to
the  complete  inadequacy  of  normal  means  for  repressing  wide¬
spread  and  organised  revolt ;  to  the  want  of  any  such  body  as
the  modern  constabulary  ;  to  the  military  exigency  which  made
it  necessary  in  time  of  war  to  entrust  semi-police  functions  to
an  undisciplined  yeomanry.  Those  measures  were  judged'  as
might  have  been  expected  in  a  country  which,  for  more  than
a  hundred  years,  had  known  nothing  of  martial  law.  In
countries  which  were,  in  this  respect  at  least,  less  happily  situated,
they  would  have  excited  less  astonishment,  and  they  will  appear
pale  and  insignificant  when  compared  with  the  proceedings  of
those  French  revolutionists  who  were  extolled  by  the  United
Irishmen  as  ideal  champions  of  Liberty  and  Progress.  The
Insurrection  Act  was  an  extreme  remedy  for  a  desperate  disease,
limited  to  a  brief  period  and  to  the  proclaimed  districts.  Even
the  burning  of  houses,  though  unauthorised  by  law  and  eminently
fitted  to  infuriate  the  people,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  in¬
defensible  as  a  military  measure,  if  it  was  found  to  be  the
necessary  condition  of  carrying  out  a  necessary  disarming.

But  although  all  this  may,  I  think,  be  truly  said,  the  faults
of  Irish  government  during  the  few  years  before  the  rebellion
of  1798  appear  to  me  to  have  been  enormously  great,  and  a
weight  of  tremendous  responsibility  rests  upon  those  who  con¬
ducted  it.  By  habitual  corruption  and  the  steady  employment
of  the  system  of  nomination  boroughs,  they  had  reduced  the
Irish  Legislature  to  a  condition  of  such  despicable  and  almost
ludicrous  subserviency,  that  a  policy  which  was  probably  sup¬
ported  by  the  great  majority  of  educated  Irishmen,  could  not
command  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  votes  in  the  House  of
Commons.  They  had  done  this  at  a  time  when  the  French
Revolution  had  made  the  public  mind  in  the  highest  degree
sensitive  to  questions  of  representation;  at  a  time  when  the

CH.  XXVIII,

FAULTS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.

363

burden  of  the  war  was  imposing  extraordinary  hardships  on  the
people.  They  had  resisted  the  very  moderate  Reform  Bills  of
Ponsonby  and  Grattan,  which  would  have  left  the  overwhelming
preponderance  of  political  power  in  the  hands  of  property,
loyalty,  and  intelligence,  as  strenuously  as  the  wild  democratic
schemes  of  the  United  Irishmen,  and  they  had  thus  thrown  into
the  path  of  treason  a  crowd  of  able  and  energetic  men,  who
might  have  been  contented  by  reform.  Ho  one  who  follows  the
history  of  the  long  succession  of  dangerous  conventions  which
had  existed  in  Ireland  since  1782,  can  doubt  that  the  Conven¬
tion  Act,  making  illegal,  delegated  and  representative  assemblies
other  than  Parliament,  was  required;  but  it  could  be  justified
and  acquiesced  in,  only  on  the  condition  that  the  popular  branch
of  the  Legislature  was  in  some  real  sense  a  representative  body ;
and  to  this  condition  the  Irish  Government  was  inexorably
opposed.

The  management  of  the  Catholic  question  had  been  still
more  disastrous- — disastrous  not  only  in  what  was  denied,  but
also  in  much  that  was  granted.  The  Relief  Act  of  1793  had
deluged  the  county  constituencies  with  an  overwhelming  multi¬
tude  of  illiterate  Catholic  40s.  freehold  voters,  who  were  totally
unfit  for  the  exercise  of  political  power ;  who  were  certain  at
some  future  time  to  become  a  great  political  danger,  and  whose
enfranchisement  added  enormously  to  the  difficulty  and  danger
of  reforming  the  Parliament,  while  it  still  left  the  Catholics
under  the  brand  of  inferiority,  excluded  the  Catholic  gentry
from  Parliament,  and  thus  deprived  them  of  political  influence
at  the  very  period  when  their  services  were  most  needed.  At
the  same  time,  by  the  fatal  error  of  not  connecting — as  might
then  most  easily  have  been  done — the  college  for  the  education
of  the  priesthood  with  the  University  of  the  country,  they  pre¬
pared  the  way  for  an  evil  of  the  most  serious  kind.

The  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  under  circumstances  that
were  calculated  to  inflame  to  the  utmost,  popular  passions  ;  the
deliberate  appeal  by  the  Government  to  the  sectarian  spirit
among  the  Protestants,  and  Pelham’s  language  of  eternal  pro¬
scription  against  the  Catholics,  soon  completed  the  work.  The
loyal  and  respectable,  though  unfortunately  small  and  timid,
body  of  Catholic  gentry  lost  all  power  and  influence,  and  the

364

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cn,  xxvm.

guidance  of  the  Catholics  passed  into  the  hands  of  seditious
demagogues  in  the  towns,  who  were  in  close  alliance  with  the
United  Irishmen.  At  the  same  time  the  transportation  by
Lord  Carhampton  of  multitudes  of  suspected  persons  to  the
fleet,  without  a  shadow  of  legal  justification  ;  the  Act  of  Indem¬
nity,  by  which  the  Irish  Parliament  closed  the  doors  of  the  law
courts  against  those  who  sought  for  redress,  and  the  shameful
apathy  shown  towards  the  earliest  outrages  of  the  Orange
banditti  in  the  North,  convinced  great  masses  of  the  poor,  that
they  were  out  of  the  protection  of  the  law.  It  is  not  true  that
the  Government  inspired  or  approved  of  those  outrages  ;  but
when  it  was  found  that  a  proclamation  which  specifically  con¬
demned  the  crimes  of  the  Defenders,  was  silent  about  those  of
the  Orangemen ;  that  a  parliamentary  inquiry  into  these  out¬
rages,  though  repeatedly  asked  for,  was  always  refused ;  and  that
hundreds,  and  possibly  thousands,  of  Catholics,  -were  obliged  by
terror  to  fly  from  their  homes,  at  a  time  when  Ulster  was  full  of
English  troops,  it  cannot  be  wmndered  at  that  the  Catholics  should
have  come  to  look  on  themselves  as  completely  unprotected,  and
should  have  been  well  prepared  to  receive  the  seditious  teaching
which  was  so  abundantly  diffused.  In  the  summer  and  autumn
of  1797  Ulster  had  grown  more  quiet,  but  evidence  was  almost
daily  pouring  in,  that  all  Catholic  Ireland  was  passing  rapidly
into  active  sedition.

It  is  not  surprising  that  it  should  have  been  so.  Anarchy
is  like  a  cancer,  which,  once  it  has  effected  a  lodgment  in  one
portion  of  the  body  politic,  wall  inevitably  spread.  Already,
the  Catholics  of  Ulster,  as  well  as  of  one  or  two  adjoining
counties,  and  the  Catholic  leaders  in  Dublin,  were  thoroughly
disaffected,  while  in  many  other  counties  the  great  mass
of  the  Catholic  peasantry  were  organised  as  Defenders ;  and
Defenderism,  as  we  have  seen,  though  essentially  a  Whiteboy
movement,  and  aiming  at  Whiteboy  objects,  was  now  in  con¬
nection  or  alliance  with  the  United  Irishmen,  and  hoped  to
attain  its  objects  by  a  French  invasion  and  a  consequent
revolution.

It  is  important,  however,  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  the  true
motives  that  agitated  the  great  Catholic  masses.  Catholic  eman¬
cipation  and  parliamentary  reform,  which  were  the  original  and

CH.  XXVIII,

MOTIVES  OE  CATHOLIC  DISLOYALTY.

365

ostensible  objects  of  the  United  Irishmen,  had  probably  no  place
among  them.  The  refusal  of  emancipation  had  been  important
in  decisively  turning  a  number  of  active  Catholics  in  the  towns
to  rebellion.  It  had  a  negative  influence  in  withholding  from
loyal  leaders  influence  and  power,  and  in  maintaining  the  broad
political  distinction  between  the  two  creeds ;  but  both  Lord
Clare  and  the  most  intelligent  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen
fully  agreed  with  General  Knox,  that  to  the  overwhelming
majority  of  the  Catholic  people  of  Ireland,  it  was  a  matter  of
utter  indifference.  At  a  much  later  period,  the  combined
influence  of  O’Connell  and  the  priests  made  it  a  really  popular
question,  but  this  time  had  not  yet  come.1

A  very  similar  remark  may  be  made  about  parliamentary
reform.  To  the  illiterate  Catholic  cottiers  and  small  farmers,
who  covered  three  out  of  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland,  questions
of  this  kind  could  have  but  little  significance.  For  itself,  they
cared  nothing,  but  the  United  Irishmen,  who  clearly  saw  this,
tried  to  persuade  them  that  a  reform  of  Parliament  must  be
followed  by  the  abolition  of  tithes.

The  tithe  question,  on  the  other  hand,  was  one  of  real  and
passionate  popular  interest,  and  it  had  borne  a  prominent  part
in  almost  every  agrarian  disturbance  of  the  century.  The  object
of  the  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen  was  a  complete  abolition
of  religious  establishments,  as  in  France ;  they  continually,  and,

1  In  the  very  instructive  examina¬
tions  of  Emmet  and  McNevin  by  the
Secret  Committee  in  1798,  this  fact
was  clearly  brought  out.  ‘  Lord  Chan¬
cellor  :  “  Pray  do  you  think  Catholic
emancipation  and  parliamentary  re¬
form  any  objects  with  the  common
people?”  Emmet:  “As  to  Caiholic
emancipation,  1  don’t  think  it  matters
a  feather,  or  that  the  poor  think  of  it.
As  to  parliamentary  reform,  I  don’t
think  the  common  people  ever  thought
of  it  until  it  was  inculcated  to  them,
that  a  reform  would  cause  a  removal
of  those  grievances  which  they  actually
do  feel.  From  that  time,  I  believe,
they  have  become  very  much  attached
to  the  measure.”  ’  McNevin ’s  evidence
(which  he  republished  in  full,  as  he
thought  it  unfairly  abridged  in  the
parliamentary  report),  is  to  the  same
effect.  ‘  Lord  Chancellor :  “  Do  you
think  the  mass  of  the  people  in  the

provinces  of  Leinster,  Munster,  and
Connaught  care  the  value  of  this  pen,
or  the  drop  of  ink  it  contains,  for
parliamentary  reform  or  Catholic
emancipation  ?  ”  McNevin  :  “  I  am
sure  they  do  not,  if  by  the  mass  of
the  people  your  Lordship  means  the
common  illiterate  people  ;  they  do  not
understand  it.  What  they  very  well
understand  is,  that  it  would  be  a  very
great  advantage  to  them  to  be  relieved
from  the  payment  of  tithes,  and  not
to  be  fleeced  by  their  landlords  ;  but
there  is  not  a  man  who  can  read  a
newspaper,  who  has  not  considered
the  question  of  reform.  ...  As  to
Catholic  emancipation,  the  impor¬
tance  of  that  question  has  passed
away  long  since ;  it  really  is  not  worth
a  moment’s  thought  at  the  present
period.”’  (MoNevin’s  Pieces  of  Irish
History,  pp.  199,  200,  221 ;  see,  too,

p.  206.)

366

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

no  doubt.,  sincerely,  denied  that  they  had  the  smallest  wish  to
set  up  a  Catholic  establishment,  or  that  they  believed  such  an
idea  to  be  entertained  by  the  Catholics ;  and  they  added,  that
any  such  attempt  would  encounter  their  strenuous  resistance.
With  the  mass  of  the  Catholic  peasantry,  the  question  was  not,
I  believe,  one  of  privilege  or  establishment.  It  was  a  desire  to
be  relieved  from  a  heavy  and  unequal  burden,  which  pressed
most  severely  on  the  poorest  cottiers ;  which  was  greatly
aggravated  by  the  system  of  tithe  proctors,  and  by  the  constant
disputes  about  new  and  old  tithes ;  which  was  levied  directly
on  the  produce  of  the  soil,  and  which  was  levied  for  the  benefit
of  the  clergy  of  another  creed.  To  abolish  this  impost  was  one
of  their  most  earnest  and  unwavering  desires,  and  it  is  probable
that  if  this  had  been  done  they  would  have  cared  very  little  for
the  existence  of  the  Establishment.  We  have  seen  how  earnestly,
in  three  successive  years,  Grattan  had  pressed  upon  the  Irish
Government  and  Parliament  the  vital  necessity  of  dealing  with
this  question  ;  how  he  had  proposed  schemes  for  commutation,
which  would  probably  have  completely  allayed  the  discontent ;
how  Pitt,  at  a  still  earlier  period,  had  suggested  the  same
policy ;  and  how  the  Irish  Government  had  steadily  resisted  it.1
The  tithe  grievance  was  now  the  chief  political  bond  between
the  Presbyterians  of  the  North  and  the  Catholics  of  the  South ;
and  the  fact  that  the  French  had  begun  their  Revolution  by
abolishing  tithes,  was  one  of  the  chief  motives  put  forward  for
welcoming  a  French  invasion.

After  the  question  of  tithes,  but  after  it  at  a  considerable
distance,  came  the  question  of  rent.  I  have  described  the  great
and  sudden  increase  of  rents  which  corn  bounties  and  war  prices
had  produced,  and  the  way  in  which  it  acted  on  different  classes
of  the  community.  The  many  instances  of  hardship  and  distress

'  Yol.  vi.  pp.  410-412.  Both
McNevin  and  Emmet  in  their  exami¬
nations  strongly  expressed  their  per¬
sonal  desire  to  abolish  all  religious
establishments  in  Ireland,  but  both
of  them  acknowledged  that  the  great
mass  of  the  Catholics  would  have
been  contented  with  a  much  smaller
measure.  ‘  Sure  I  am,  sir,’  said
McNevin,  ‘  that  if  tithes  had  been
commuted  according  to  Mr.  Grattan’s

plan,  a  very  powerful  engine  would
have  been  taken  out  of  our  hands.’
‘  If  any  other  way  of  paying  even
a  Protestant  establishment,’  said
Emmet,  ‘  which  did  not  bear  so
sensibly  on  their  industry,  were  to
take  place,  I  believe  it  would  go  a
great  way  to  content  them  [the
Catholics]  ;  though  I  confess  it  would
not  content  me.’  (McNevin’s  Pieces
of  Irish  History,  pp.  212,  22S.)

CH.  XXVIII*

MOTIVES  OF  CATHOLIC  DISLOYALTY.

307

which,  followed,  had  an  undoubted  part  in  producing  Catholic
disaffection  ;  and  hopes  of  a  lowering  of  rents,  and,  still  more,  of
a  great  agrarian  revolution,  or  confiscation  of  lands,  to  be  carried
out  by  French  assistance,  were  abroad.  At  the  same  time,
while  the  question  of  tithes  appeared  habitually,  the  question  of
rents  only  appeared  occasionally,  in  the  popular  appeals,  and  it
was  not,  in  the  main,  a  question  between  the  owner  and  the
occupier  of  land.  The  frequent  conduct  of  landlords  in  setting
up  leases  to  auction,  had,  no  doubt,  contributed  to  the.  evil,  but
the  great  majority  of  extortionate  rents  were  exacted  not  by
landlords,  but  by  tenants — by  the  race  of  middlemen  and  land-
jobbers,  who  held  tracts  of  land  upon  lease,  subdivided  them
into  small  plots,  and  sublet  them,  at  an  enormous  profit.

There  was  another  influence,  which  was  not  the  less  serious
because  it  was  somewhat  more  indefinite  in  its  character.  It
was  a  vague  feeling  of  separate  nationality,  which  was  thrilling
powerfully  through  the  Catholic  masses.  The  events  of  history  had
divided  the  inhabitants  of  Ireland  into  two  distinct  and  separate
nations,  divided  broadly  in  creed,  and,  in  some  measure,  in
character  and  in  race,  and  one  of  these  was  an  ascendant  and
governing  nation,  which  had  displaced,  by  conquest,  the  old
rulers  and  possessors  of  the  soil.1  A  keen  sense  of  the  danger
of  this  situation  was  the  keynote  of  the  whole  policy  of  Grattan.
In  all  that  he  accomplished,  and  in  all  that  he  aimed  at,  it  was  his
main  object  to  make  the  Irish  one  people,  instead  of  two,  to
soften  and  efface  the  old  lines  of  distinction,  by  blending  in  the
Government  and  in  the  Legislature,  the  representatives  of  the
rival  creeds.  For  some  years,  this  policy  seemed  destined  to
succeed.  Time  had  dimmed  the  memory  of  old  conflicts  and
confiscations.  Religious  animosities  had  subsided.  Nearly  all
the  penal  code  had  been  abolished.  A  large  share  of  political
power  had  been  conceded  to  the  Catholics.  Although  the
ownership  of  land  was  still,  almost  exclusively,  in  Protestant
hands,  there  was  no  longer  any  law  to  prevent  Catholics  from
acquiring  it,  and  a  great  amount  of  Catholic  property,  in  mort¬
gages  and  other  forms,  was  now  identified  with  the  established

1  See  a  very  remarkable  letter  of  and  the  conquered  race  in  Ireland
Alexander  Knox  upon  the  unexampled  have  both  preserved  their  separate
clearness  with  which,  owing  to  their  identities.  ( Castlereayh  Corresjwn-
religious  difference,  the  conquering  dence,  iv.  221,  222.)

368  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvm.

disposition  of  property.  Increasing  material  prosperity  was
raising  up  a  wealthy  class  among  them,  and  their  most  energetic
and  ambitious  members  no  longer  sought  a  career  in  France,  or
Austria,  or  Spain.  It  was  the  dream  of  Grattan  that  a  loyal
Irish  gentry  of  both  denominations  could  form  a  governing  body
who  would  complete  the  work,  and  that,  although  a  Protestant
ascendency  would  continue,  it  would  be  the  modified  and  miti¬
gated  ascendency  which  naturally  belongs  to  the  most  educated
section  of  the  community  and  to  the  chief  owners  of  property,
and  not  an  ascendency  defined  by  creeds,  and  based  on  dis¬
qualifying  laws.  But,  from  the  time  when  the  principles  of  the
French  Revolution  took  root  in  Ireland,  and,  still  more,  after
the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  events  had  taken  another  turn.
The  new  democratic  leaders  were  chiefly  Protestants,  and  they
aimed,  like  Grattan,  though  by  very  different  methods,  and  on
a  very  different  basis,  at  union  between  Catholics  and  Protestants,
and  the  abolition  of  religious  disqualifications ;  but  the  result  of
their  movement  was  a  furious  revival  of  religious  animosities,
and  a  panic  among  the  possessors  of  property,  which  greatly
deepened  the  division  of  classes.  At  the  same  time,  the  extreme
probability  of  a  French  conquest  of  Ireland,  and  the  tremendous
events  on  the  Continent,  which  foreshadowed  nothing  less  than
a  total  destruction  of  the  whole  political  and  social  order  in
Europe,  and  the  downfall  of  the  British  Empire,  aroused  hopes
in  the  Catholic  population  which  had  slumbered  for  more  than
a  century.  Prophecies,  attributed  to  St.  Columkill,  pointing
to  the  reinstatetnent  of  the  old  race,  and  the  expulsion  of  the
stranger,  had  circulated  in  Ireland  during  the  great  troubles
of  1641.  They  were  now,  once  more,  passing  from  lip  to  lip,
and  vague,  wild  hopes,  of  a  great  coming  change  were  rapidly
spreading.

Another  point  in  which  the  situation  resembled  that  of
1641,  was  the  belief  which  was  fast  growing  among  the  Catholics,
that  they  were  marked  out  for  massacre.  In  the  seventeenth
century  the  Catholic  population  had  been  driven  to  madness,  by
the  belief  that  the  English  Puritans  were  about  to  exterminate
their  creed.  At  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  similar  fear
prevailed,  but  the  object  of  terror  was  the  Orangeman.1  It  was
1  The  following  is  part  of  one  of  the  depositions  sworn  in  1643:  ‘They

CH.  XXVIII.

PRETENDED  ORANGE  OATH.

369

asserted  by  the  newspapers  of  the  United  Irishmen,  and  it  was
taught  and  believed  in  every  quarter  of  Ireland,  that  the  secret
oath  sworn  by  every  Orangeman  was,  ‘  I  will  be  true  to  the
King  and  Government,  and  I  will  exterminate,  as  far  as  I  am
able,  the  Catholics  of  Ireland.’

Whether  such  a  statement  was  a  pure  calumny,  or  whether
any  such  oath  may  have  been  in  use  among  the  banditti,  who
were  wrecking  by  night  the  homes  of  Catholic  farmers  in
Armagh  and  in  some  adjoining  counties,  it  is  impossible  to  say.
The  charge  was  like  that  which  was  afterwards  brought  against
the  Catholic  insurgents,  of  designing  nothing  less  than  a
massacre  of  the  whole  Protestant  population.  In  both  cases  it
was  essentially  false,  but  in  both  cases  it  may  have  derived  some
colour  of  plausibility  from  the  frantic  utterances  and  the  fero¬
cious  actions  of  excited  fanatics.  In  the  Orange  Society,  as
organised  by  the  Ulster  gentry,  there  was  no  oath  even  distantly
resembling  what  was  alleged,  and  the  masters  of  all  the  Orange
lodges  in  Ulster  had,  as  we  have  seen,  most  emphatically  dis¬
claimed  any  wish  to  persecute  the  Catholics.  But  the  seed  had
been  already  scattered  among  an  ignorant,  credulous,  and
suspicious  peasantry.  The  United  Irishmen  persistently  repre¬
sented  the  Orange  Society  as  a  society  created  for  the  exter¬
mination  of  the  Catholics,  by  men  high  in  rank  and  office,  and
under  the  direct  patronage  of  the  Government,  and  they  were

told  this  deponent  that  the  Scotch
had  petitioned  the  Parliament  Houses
of  England  that  there  should  not  be
a  papist  left  alive  in  England,  Ireland,
or  Scotland ;  and  that  some  of  the
committee  employed  out  of  Ireland
in  England  for  Irish  affairs,  having
notice  thereof,  writ  over  unto  them
in  Ireland  to  rise  in  arms  and  take
all  the  strongholds  and  forts  herein
to  their  hands,  or  to  that  effect ;  and
that  they  commanding  the  rebels  now
expected  the  fulfilling  of  ColumkiH’s
prophecy,  which,  as  they  did  construe
it,  was  that  the  Irish  should  conquer
Ireland  again,  or  to  that  effect.’
(Hickson’s  Irish  Massacres  of  1641,
ii.  142,  143.)  Compare  with  this,  a
letter  of  C.ooke  to  Pelham  (Dec.  23,
1797) :  ‘  Reports  are  propagated  among
the  lower  Catholics,  that  the  Orange¬
men  are  to  rise  and  murder  them.
Other  reports,  that  not  a  Protestant  is

267

to  be  left  in  Ireland  by  the  26th  of
March.  Confraternities  of  Carmelites
are  establishing  near  Dublin  by  the
priests,  and  some  old  silly  prophecy
of  Columkill  is  circulated  among  them,
which  gives  Ireland  this  year  to  the
Spaniards.’  The  Committee  of  Secrecy'
printed  an  example  of  the  pretended
Orange  rules,  which  were  fabricated
for  the  purpose  of  exciting  the  pas¬
sions  of  the  Catholics.  (Appendix
No.  xxvi.)  Some  curious  particulars
about  the  pretended  prophecies  that
were  circulated  on  the  eve  of  the
rebellion  of  1 798,  will  be  found  in
that  interesting  book,  McSkimin’s
History  of  the  Irish  Rehellion  in  An¬
trim,  Dorcn,  and  Derry,  pp.  48-60.
Among  them  were  some  attributed  to
Thomas  the  Rhymer,  and  others  of
the  Scotch  Covenanter,  Alexander
Peden.

370

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ca.  xxvm.

accustomed  to  contrast  its  pretended  oatli  with  that  of  the
United  Irishman,  which  bound  him  only  to  endeavour  to  form
a  brotherhood  of  affection  among  Irishmen  of  every  religious
persuasion  ;  to  labour  for  the  attainment  of  an  equal,  full,  and
adequate  representation  of  all  the  people  of  Ireland  in  Parlia¬
ment  ;  and  never,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  to  inform  or  give
evidence  against  any  member  of  the  society.1  This  was  pro¬
bably  their  most  successful  mode  of  propagandism,  and  the  panic
which  it  created  had,  as  we  shall  see,  a  great  part  in  producing
the  horrors  that  followed.  It  is,  however,  a  curious  fact,  that
the  fear  of  the  Orangemen  appears  to  have  been  most  operative
upon  populations  who  came  in  no  direct  contact  with  them.
The  worst  scenes  of  the  insurrection  were  in  Wexford,  where
the  Society  had  never  penetrated ;  while  in  Ulster,  and  in  Con¬
naught,  which  was  full  of  fugitives  from  Ulster,  the  rebellion
assumed  a  far  milder  form.

In  the  beginning  of  1797,  the  United  Ireland  movement  was
powerful  in  Dublin,  and  had  overspread  all  or  the  greater  part
of  Ulster,  but  beyond  these  limits  it  had  probably  no  consider¬
able  influence,  except  in  the  counties  of  Westmeath  and  Meath,
where  it  entered  in  the  wake  of  Defenderism.  In  the  first
months  of  the  year,  there  was  a  sudden  and  most  ferocious  and
alarming  outburst  of  Defenderism  in  the  King’s  County.  All
the  houses  over  a  large  area  were  plundered.  The  depredators
c  put  several  of  the  honest  inhabitants  on  the  fire,  to  induce
them  to  deliver  up  their  arms  and  money.’  The  house  of  a  Mr.
Bagenal  was  set  on  fire.  The  owner  and  his  wife  were  both
murdered,  and  shots  were  fired  at  his  children.  The  magistrates,
as  early  as  February  17,  petitioned  the  Lord  Lieutenant  to  pro¬
claim  certain  portions  of  the  county,  but  more  than  two  months
passed  before  their  request  was  attended  to.  In  the  mean  time
they  succeeded  in  capturing  some  fifty  prisoners,  and  in  obtain¬
ing  two  witnesses;  but  when  the  assizes  came,  these  witnesses
were  so  intimidated,  that  they  denied  in  the  witness  box  every¬
thing  they  had  sworn  before  the  magistrate.  Confident  in
impunity,  the  outrages  now  burst  out  with  renewed  violence.
Every  night  there  were  robberies  ;  the  robbers  brought  fire  to
the  farmers’  houses,  and  threatened  to  put  it  on  the  thatches,
1  See  e.g.  The  Beauties  of  the  Press,  pp.  152,  153.

CH.  XXY11I.

THE  CENTRAL  COUNTIES  TAINTED.

371

and  to  treat  the  owners  ‘  as  they  did  the  Bagenals,’  unless  they
surrendered  their  money  and  arms  ;  and  they  made  it  a  special
object  to  seize  the  swords  and  pistols  of  the  yeomanry,  who
generally  lived  in  small  thatched  houses.  The  magistrates
wrote,  that  if  this  continued,  the  yeomen  would  soon  be  totally
disarmed,  and  therefore  useless  ;  that  it  was  hopeless  attempting
to  get  evidence  ;  that  great  numbers  of  the  peasantry  were  being
sworn  into  the  organisation ;  that  nothing  short  of  the  pro¬
clamation  of  a  portion  of  the  county  could  stay  the  evil,  and  that
there  were  already  signs  that  it  was  spreading  to  the  adjoining
county  of  Kildare.  One  serious  check  was  encountered  by  the
Defenders  in  the  King’s  County.  A  large  party,  after  midnight,
attacked  Castle  Carberrynear  Clonard,  the  house  of  a  gentleman
named  Sparks,  but  they  found  the  owner  fully  prepared,  and
after  a  heavy  fire,  which  lasted  for  more  than  an  hour,  they
retired,  leaving  six  of  their  number  dead,  and  several  others
badly  wounded.1

The  circle  of  contagion  was  rapidly  expanding.  A  letter
written  on  May  1  by  a  magistrate  of  Enniscorthy,  in  the  county
of  Wexford — the  town  which  was  afterwards  the  centre  of  the,
most  horrible  scenes  of  the  rebellion — described  that  county  as
being  still  ‘  perfectly  quiet  and  well  disposed,’  and  the  writer
said  that,  although  he  knew  of  some  turbulent  and  disaffected
characters,  and  had  heard  of  some  attempts  to  administer  oaths,
he  did  not  believe  that  a  single  person  had  yet  been  sworn  in,
though,  he  added,  ‘  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the  counties  of
Carlow  and  Kilkenny  are  by  no  means  so  quiet.’  Very  soon,
however,  we  find  seditious  papers  industriously  scattered  through
this  county  and  through  the  county  of  Carlow ;  and  by  November,
Carlow,  Kildare,  Kilkenny,  Wexford,  and  Wicklow  were  all
tainted.2  One  Carlow  magistrate  wrote,  that  in  that  county
alone  there  were  at  least  3,000  United  Irishmen,  that  almost  the
whole  district  that  lay  between  the  counties  of  Wicklow,  Wex¬
ford,  and  Kilkenny  was  ‘  United,’  and  that  additional  troops  were
urgently  required.3  An  intercepted  letter  of  a  United  Irishman

1  John  Tyrell  (Clonard),  April  26;  2  Csesar  Colclough  (Enniscorthy),

Mr.  Everard  (near  Edenderry),  April  May  1,  29  ;  Edward  Croker,  May  15  ;
26  ;  Mr.  Sparks,  May  1 4, 1 797.  There  Rev.  T.  Hardwick,  May  18 ;  Hon.  B.  O.
are  several  other  papers  written  in  Stratford,  June  1 797.

May,  about  the  King’s  County,  in  the  3  Mr.  Rochfort,  Nov.  2,  1797.

i.s.r.o.

372  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ca.  xxviit.

boasted  tbat  in  a  single  week  26,741  persons  had  been4  United’
in  the  counties  of  Meath,  Wicklow,  Louth,  and  Dublin ;  and
predicted  that  1  in  a  little  time  all  the  people  of  Ireland  would
be  of  one  way  of  thinking.’ 1  In  Wexford,  Wicklow,  and  for
the  most  part  in  Carlow,  the  spread  of  disaffection  appears  at
this  time  to  have  been  unaccompanied  by  crime;  but  in  Kilkenny,
Defender  outrages  were  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  in  the
county  of  Kildare  there  was  a  perfect  reign  of  terror.  A  man
named  Nicholson,  who  had  assisted  in  conducting  a  prisoner  to
gaol,  had  his  house  burnt ;  he  was  afterwards  dragged  out  of  a
farmer’s  house  and  pierced  by  some  fifty  pikes  ;  the  murderers
then  returned  to  the  farmhouse  and  deliberately  murdered  his
wife  ;  and  such  was  the  terror  that  reigned,  that  it  is  stated  that
there  would  have  been  no  inquest  or  inquiry  of  any  sort,  but  for
the  intervention  of  a  party  of  soldiers  from  Kildare.  Letter
after  letter  came  to  the  Castle  describing  the  growing  anarchy,
and  imploring  the  Government  to  send  down  fresh  troops.2

In  Kildare  the  situation  was  much  aggravated  by  the  strong
political  opposition  of  the  chief  gentry  to  the  Government.  In
#  May,  the  Duke  of  Leinster  and  most  of  the  principal  magistrates
of  the  county  signed  a  requisition  to  the  High  Sheriff,  asking
him  to  call  a  meeting  of  the  magistrates  and  freeholders  ;  and
on  his  refusal,  they  resolved  to  meet  without  his  consent.  The
meeting  was  prohibited  by  the  Government,  and  they  then  drew
up  the  petition  to  the  King  to  which  I  have  already  alluded,
accusing  tfce  Ministry  of  having,  by  their  corruption  and  system
of  irritation,  produced  the  disorders  of  the  country,  and  predict¬
ing  that,  unless  reform  and  Catholic  emancipation  were  speedily
granted,  the  contest  must  lead  to  bloodshed  and  rebellion,  and
might  terminate  in  a  complete  alienation  of  affection  from
England,  and  in  the  separation  of  Ireland  from  the  Empire.3

1  J.  C.  Hamilton,  May  1797.

2  Captain  Neville  (Naas),  Nov.  2  ;
Lord  Carrick  (Kilkenny),  Nov.  16;
John  Wolfe  (Balbriggan),  Nov.  22,
1797.  This  last  writer,  who  describes
the  murder  of  Nicholson  and  his  wife,
adds,  that  about  twenty- seven  years
before,  the  great  smuggler,  Morty

Oge  O’Sullivan,  was  much  annoyed
by  a  revenue  officer  named  Puxley.
O’Sullivan  with  his  brother-in-law

Connell,  waylaid  and  killed  Puxley,
who  had  his  wife  with  him.  Connell
wanted  to  kill  the  woman  also,  but
O’Sullivan  replied,  ‘  What,  do  you
think  me  so  base  a  scoundrel  as  to
lift  my  hand  to  woman  !  ’  ‘  Strange

alteration,’  adds  the  writer,  ‘  in  the
Irish  character,  long  noted  for  hu¬
manity  !  ’

3  Wogan  Brown  (high  sheriff)  to
Pelham  May  29,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

KILDARE  AND  CARLOW.

373

An  attorney  of  no  very  high  character,  named  John  Pollock,
was  at  this  time  Crown  prosecutor  for  Leinster,  and  much  in
the  confidence  of  the  Government,  and  he  has  left  an  interest¬
ing,  though  probably  a  somewhat  partisan,  description  of  the
summer  assizes  in  a  considerable  part  of  Leinster.  In  Carlow
he  found  1  no  appearance  of  any  political  party  whatever,’  but
in  Kildare  there  was  ‘  a  most  decided  and  unequivocal  deter¬
mination  to  subvert  the  King’s  Government.’  In  every  case
growing  out  of  the  disturbances,  the  prisoner  was  supported  by
the  countenance  of  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald,  Lawless,  and  every
Roman  Catholic  on  the  grand  jury.  The  agent  and  confidential
friend  of  Lord  Edward  £  challenged  the  jurors  for  the  prisoners,
and  appeared  the  executive  officer  of  sedition  and  rebellion.’
‘A  rooted  and  desperate  rebellion’  had  been  planted  in  the
county.  There  were  ‘  notorious  and  decided  rebels  on  the
grand  jury,’  who  disclosed  the  evidence  of  the  Crown  to  the
prisoners,  and  openly  encouraged  refractory  jurymen.  In  the
King’s  County  outrages  were  numerous  and  sanguinary,  but  the
adjoining  Queen’s  County  was,  as  usual,  perfectly  tranquil.1

The  reports  disseminated  about  the  murderous  intentions  of
the  Orangemen,  played  a  great  part  in  these  disturbances.
No  other  means  were  so  successfully  employed  to  drive  the
Catholics  to  desperation.  In  the  county  of  Carlow,  some  of  the
Protestant  gentry,  combining  to  maintain  the  peace  of  the
county  in  the  midst  of  smothered  rebellion,  very  injudiciously
affiliated  their  association  to  the  Orange  organisation  in  Ulster,
and  thus  gave  a  pretext  to  the  agitators  which  was  abundantly
used.2  On  one  occasion  two  well-dressed  men  rode  in  the
dead  of  night  through  a  village  about  three  miles  from
Carlow,  and  rapping  at  every  door,  warned  the  inhabitants  to
fly,  as  the  Orangemen  were  on  the  march  from  Carlow  to  burn
their  houses,  and  slaughter  every  Catholic  they  met.  The  panic
was  so  intense,  that  the  whole  population  fled  for  shelter  and

1  J.  Pollock,  Aug.  30,  1797.  Pol-  he  conducted  himself  in  dealing  with
lock  was  aware  of  McNally’s  connec-  prisoners,  will  be  found  in  the  Narra-
tion  with  the  Government ;  he  com-  tive  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Dickson,  a  Pres-
municated  constantly  with  him,  and  byterian  minister  implicated  in  the
reports  that  McNally  thought  himself  conspiracy.  (Pp.  65-75.)
cruelly  neglected  by  his  friends.  An  2  See  a  letter  from  W.  Elliot  to
extremely  unfavourable  account  of  Pelham,  Aug.  7,  1798.

Pollock,  and  of  the  manner  in  which

374

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

protection  to  a  neighbouring  magistrate.1  At  Nenagh,  in  the
county  of  Tipperary,  a  placard  was  posted  on  the  chapel  door
informing  the  people  that  every  Orangeman  was  bound  by  his
oath  to  exterminate  the  Catholics,  and  pointing  out  by  name  to
the  popular  vengeance  a  number  of  persons  in  the  town  who
were  said  to  be  Orangemen.2  ‘  The  terror,’  wrote  Lord  Camden,
‘  which  was  occasioned  in  a  part  of  the  county  of  Wicklow  not
seventeen  miles  from  Dublin,  from  the  report  which  has  been
sent  into  that  county  by  the  Dublin  committees,  that  the
Orangemen  were  to  march  into  it  and  murder  the  Catholics,  was
such,  that  those  miserable,  ignorant,  and  deluded  persons  left
their  houses  and  lay  in  the  fields,  and  at  last  assembled  in  large
numbers  for  their  own  protection.’  ‘  This  alarm,’  the  Lord
Lieutenant  continues,  ‘  of  the  designs  of  the  Orangemen  was
really  created  in  some  parts  ;  in  others  it  was  used  as  a  pretext
for  mutiny.’ 3

The  anarchy  and  disaffection  in  Leinster  prevailed  chiefly
in  the  counties  I  have  mentioned,  but  even  outside  this  area
there  were  disquieting  symptoms.  At  Clondalkin,  within  a
few  miles  of  Dublin,  housebreaking  outrages  were  going  on
which  bore  an  ominous  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Defenders  ; 4
and  a  curious  and  interesting  letter  of  Sir  Edward  Newenham,
who  had  been  recently  staying  in  the  hill  country  of  Tipperary,
throws  some  light  on  the  state  of  that  county.  He  had  been
talking,  he  said,  very  freely  to  the  farmers,  and  found  that  they
expected  many  thousands  of  French  soon  to  come,  and  the
Protestants  of  the  North  to  assist  the  Catholics  of  the  South.
A  number  of  pedlars,  speaking  an  accent  which  was  not  that
of  the  county,  had  recently  been  distributing  multitudes  of
seditious  papers,  which  they  carried  in  secret  drawers  under
their  boxes,  and  there  was  a  widely  spread  belief  that  tithes
would  never  again  be  paid,  and  that  land  would  be  equally
divided.  ‘  From  the  unreserved  manner,’ concluded  Newenham,
;  in  which  these  mountaineers  spoke  to  me,  I  am  confident  the
northern  spirit  of  rebellion  has  got  generally  among  them,  and

1  Faulkner's  Journal,  Jan.  13,  of  Ireland,  ii.  357 ;  Gordon’s  His-

1798.  tory  of  the  Rebellion  of  1798,  pp.

2  Camden  to  Portland,  Nov.  15,  30-32.

1797.  *  Mr.  Caldbeck  (Dublin),  Nov.  17,

*  Ibid.  See,  too,  Gordon’s  History  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

DISAFFECTION  IN  MUNSTEE.  '

•  375

if  they  get  any  strength,  they  will  endanger  the  peace  of  the
whole  island  ■  for,  led  by  their  clergy,  they  will  be  more  fatal
in  assassination  (sic)  than  those  of  the  North.’ 1

We  may  now  turn  to  Munster,  which  had  been  so  signally
loyal  when  a  French  fleet  lay  in  Bantry  Bay,  and  when  the  land¬
ing  of  the  French  army  seemed  a  question  of  hours.  For  some
weeks  after  that  alarm  had  passed,  all  remained  quiet  in  the
South,  and  the  most  serious  incident  in  General  Dalrymple’s
letters  was  the  flight  to  France  in  an  American  vessel  of  the
military  secretary  of  General  Massey,  who  was  well  acquainted
with  military  affairs  in  the  South  of  Ireland.2  In  April,  however,
the  clouds  of  disaffection  were  beginning  to  creep  stealthily,  but
visibly,  over  the  horizon.  Dalrymple  wrote  from  Cork,  that  ‘  a
large  proportion  of  the  country  people  are  disaffected,  and  in¬
dustrious  to  render  others  so ;  ’  that  Lord  Bandon  reported  signs
of  perfidy  among  the  yeomen ;  that  a  spirit  of  disorder  was  in¬
creasing,  he  knew  not  why,  and  that  some  woods  had  been  lately
cut  down  to  make  pikes.  ‘  The  character  of  the  times  taken  at
Cork  is  indifference ;  the  loss  of  trade  and  its  advantages  seems
to  have  much  done  away  that  ardour  so  much  boasted  of
formerly.’ 3  Still,  in  the  beginning  of  May,  Camden  wrote  :  ‘  The
South  of  Ireland  is  not  in  any  considerable  degree  of  forwardness
in  this  spirit  of  disaffection.  ’ 4

But  in  a  few  weeks,  the  aspect  of  affairs  had  become  much
more  serious.  In  the  camp  at  Bandon,  Brigadier-General  Coote
discovered  grave  signs  of  disaffection  among  the  soldiers,  while
two  whole  committees  of  United  Irishmen  were  arrested  at  Cork.
‘  The  fruits  of  our  investigation,’  wrote  General  Dalrymple,  ‘  are
bitter  indeed :  they  only  tend  to  prove  the  excess  of  the  corrup¬
tion  of  the  people,  civil  and  military.  I  should  be  sorry  that
lists  of  persons  of  this  description  were  given  to  the  world,  for
it  would  serve  to  prove  the  state  of  matters  being  far  more
dangerous  than  is  at  present  believed.  Our  endeavours  to
counteract  this  business,  however  well  directed  and  executed,
are  but  very  unavailing  when  opposed  to  the  torrent  of  disaffec¬
tion  that  is  hourly  increasing.  .  .  .  This  is  the  result  of  much

1  Sir  E.  Newenham,  May  31, 1797.  2  Dalrymple  to  Pelham,  March  19,

Higgins  notices  the  great  use  made  1797.

of  pedlars  by  the  chief  conspirators.  s  Ibid.  April  15,  20,  22,  1797.

(F.  H.,  Sept.  27,  1797.)  *  Camden  to  Portland,  May  2, 1797.

376

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

inquiry  made  by  myself  and  others.  .  .  .  The  evil  increases  with
rapid  strides,  and  is  far  from  being  confined  to  the  wretched  or
needy.’  On  the  29  th  of  May,  two  militia  soldiers  were  executed
withgreat  solemnity  for  sedition.  Five  thousand  men  were  present
under  arms,  and  the  culprits,  kneeling  on  their  coffins,  acknow¬
ledged  their  guilt.  But  the  evil  was  far  from  checked,  and  the
investigation  a  few  weeks  later  at  Bandon,  showed  that  an  ex¬
tensive  plot  had  been  formed  among  the  inhabitants  of  that  town
to  seduce  the  soldiers  in  the  camp,  murder'  General  Coote  and
his  officers,  and  produce  a  rising.  About  thirty  soldiers  and  as
many  civilians  were  arrested,  and  Coote  considered  that  many
of  the  soldiers  ought  to  suffer  capitally,  and  that  the  inhabitants
of  the  town  were  at  the  bottom  of  the  business.  General  Loftus,
however,  wrote  from  Cork,  e  I  scarcely  know  an  instance  of  a
Catholic  of  consequence  being  the  agitator  of  any  disturbance
here ;  the  promoters  of  sedition  either  come  from  Dublin  or  the
North,  some  originally  from  Manchester.’ 1

In  May,  reports  were  sent  to  the  Castle  of  the  appearance  of
the  United  Irish  movement  at  Mallow,2  and  there  were  also
alarming  rumours  of  disloyalty  among  the  Methodists.  It  ap¬
pears,  however,  from  an  interesting  letter  of  Dr.  Croke,  who  pre¬
sided  over  them,  that  the  only  foundation  for  these  rumours,  was
the  strong  reluctance  of  some  Methodist  yeomen  to  go  through
military  exercises  on  Sunday.  Dr.  Croke  added,  that  his  co¬
religionists  were  now  a  large  body  among  the  middle  and  poorer
ranks  of  Protestants  in  Ireland,  and  that  the  communicants  in
the  country  churches  were  almost  entirely  composed  of  Metho¬
dists.  They  were  attached  to  the  Established  Church,  but
thought  themselves  neglected  and  despised  by  it,  and  something
should  be  done  to  conciliate  them.  In  England,  he  said,  a  small
part  of  the  society  had  broken  away  from  the  Establishment,  and
appeared  to  have  imbibed  French  principles.3

1  Coote  to  Pelham,  May  22,  June
25,  27,  29,  July  3;  Dalrymple  to  Pel¬
ham,  May  24 ;  Pelham  to  Loftus,
May  27 ;  Loftus  to  Pelham,  June  3 ;
B.  Shaw  (Cork),  May  29  ;  Col.  Massey
(Cork),  May  31,  1797.

2  May  26.

3  Dr.  Croke,  Limerick,  May  23,
1797.  The  separation  of  the  Wesleyan

Methodists  in  Ireland  from  the  Church
did  not  take  place  till  1808  or  1809,
about  fifteen  years  after  a  similar
separation  had  taken  place  in  Eng¬
land.  See  a  letter  from  Alexander
Knox  to  Hannah  More,  Knox’s  Re¬
main*,  iv.  231-233,  and  also  Crook-
shank  s  Hist,  of  Methodism  in  Ireland,
ii.  110.

CH.  XXVIII.

OUTRAGES  IN  MUNSTER.

377

As  usual,  political  agitation  in  Munster  was  soon  followed
by  its  attendant  shadow— agrarian  crime,  organised  intimida¬
tion,  and  frequent  murder.  Tithe  grievances  and  oppression  by
middlemen  were,  in  this  province,  especially  flagrant,  and  they
prepared  the  way  for  the  agitators,  and  determined  the  character
of  the  movement.  The  people  were  told  that  a  successful  rebel¬
lion  would  put  an  end  to  all  such  grievances,  and  that  it  would'
be  immediately  followed  by  a  great  confiscation  and  division  of
lands,  and  they  pursued  their  ends  by  the  usual  Whiteboy
methods.1  In  the  September  Assizes  at  Cork,  the  juries  are
said  to  have  done  their  duty,  and  several  persons  were  convicted,
but  many  undoubted  criminals  were  acquitted  because  witnesses
either  refused  to  appear  or  grossly  prevaricated,2  and  almost
immediately  after,  a  large  area  around  Lismore  and  Boyle  be¬
came  the  scene  of  Defender  outrages.  There  was  a  general  con¬
spiracy  to  refuse  tithes.  The  houghing  of  cattle  and  the  burn¬
ing  of  corn  became  common.  Every  night  marauding  parties
traversed  the  country,  and  in  a  few  weeks  at  least  five  atrocious
murders  were  committed.3  Lord  Shannon,  the  chief  resident
landlord  in  the  county  of  Cork,  wrote  to  the  Government :  ‘  I
am  persuaded  that  there  are  few,  if  any,  of  the  lower  orders  in
this  country  who  have  not  taken  the  United  Irish  oath,  and,
though  not  over-scrupulous  about  breaking  every  other  solemn
tie,  they  are  faithful  to  that,  as  the  most  immediate  and  barbar¬
ous  assassination  is  the  certain  consequence  of  even  the  least
suspicion  of  having  violated  it ;  shocking  instances  of  which
have  happened  in  parts  of  the  county  of  Waterford,  bordering
on  the  county  of  Cork.  By  the  prevailing  system  of  terror,

1  Higgins,  having  gone  down  to
Cork  to  receive  some  rents,  wrote  to
the  Government  describing  the  war
against  tithes,  the  houghing  of  cattle,
and  the  promises  that  were  held  out
of  a  division  of  land  among  the  rebels.
He  adds :  ‘  I  made  the  most  strict
inquiry,  if  there  existed  any  colourable
cause  for  complaint  among  the  poor
as  to  tithe-gathering,  and  it  appeared
that  the  incumbent  or  owner  of  tithes
lets  them  at  the  highest  value  to  a
tithe  farmer.  The  farmer  lets  to  the
tithe  proctor,  and  each  of  them  must
receive  an  increased  profit.  This,
with  the  enormous  acreable  rent

charged  for  potato  ground  to  the
lowest  order  of  the  peasantry  by  the
middlemen,  is  the  occasion  of  great
discontent,  and  renders  the  peasantry
ready  instruments  in  the  hands  of
wicked  and  designing  men.’  (F.  H.,
Oct.  15,  1797.)

2  Robert  Day(Cork),  Sept.  29, 1797.

3  Sir  R.  Musgrave  (Lismore),  Oct.
6,  Nov.  12;  General  Loftus  to  Pelham,
Oct.  26 ;  Lord  Mountcashell  (near
Boyle),  Nov.  11.  Several  other  docu¬
ments  illustrating  the  outrages  will
be  found  in  the  I.S.P.O.,  Sept.,  Oct.,
Nov.  1797.  Among  them  are  many
requests  for  troops.

378

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxvni.

resident  gentlemen  of  property  have  lost  the  influence  they
formerly  had  over  the  lower  order  of  peasantry,  and  I  can  say
from  my  own  observation,  that  men  who  are  dependent  on  me,
and  frequently  had  resorted  to  me  for  kindnesses,  are  now  visibly
terrified  at  being  seen  alone  with  me,  lest  they  may  incur  sus¬
picion  and  its  consequences.  It  has  been  represented  to  me,
that  large  bodies  of  horse  have  been  seen  parading  at  night  in
sequestered  parts,  well  mounted  and  armed,  the  main  body  pre¬
ceded  by  an  advanced,  and  followed  by  a  rear  guard.  ...  I  am
satisfied  the  whole  country  is  united  in  one  league,  and  devoted
to  the  mandates  of  committees,  which  I  understand  sit  at  Cork
and  the  different  baronies  of  the  county.  .  .  .  All  this  seems  to
me,  to  lead  clearly  to  rebellion  and  a  general  rising  on  the  first
opportunity  that  offers.’  1

This  picture  appeared  to  Camden  in  no  way  exaggerated.
One  of  his  confidential  letters  to  Portland,  written  in  November,
paints  in  vivid  colours  the  horrors  of  the  scene.  ‘  It  is  melan¬
choly,’  he  wrote,  ‘  to  observe  how  much  accustomed  the  mind
becomes  to  histories  of  outrage  and  of  cruelty,  and  it  is  for  that
reason  only  that  I  can  account  for  my  despatches  to  your  Grace
not  being  filled  with  the  dreadful  information  I  every  day  receive
of  the  murders  of  magistrates,  the  assassination  of  informers  and
yeomen,  and  the  conspiracies  against  persons  of  rank,  conse¬
quence,  and  station.  ...  I  have  further  been  informed  of  a
conspiracy  to  assassinate  Lord  Shannon  and  Lord  Boyle;  and  it
is  a  melancholy  observation  to  make  to  your  Grace,  that  where
these  noblemen  reside,  and  in  a  neighbourhood  extremely  well
inhabited  by  gentlemen,  there  are  and  have  been  more  signs  of
disturbance  than  in  almost  any  part  of  the  kingdom.  The  pre¬
tence  of  the  county  of  Cork  is  the  exorbitancy  of  tithes,  and  the
cattle  are  houghed  and  the  corn  burnt  of  all  those  who  shall  pay
them,  or  who  shall  draw  the  corn  to  the  barns  of  the  rector.
This  pretence  is,  however,  quickly  followed  by  notices  to  pay  no
rent.  Those  persons  who  have  entered  into  the  yeomanry  corps
are  deserted  as  tradesmen,  and  there  is  a  combination,  which  is
most  alarming,  against  all  those  who  attempt  to  support  the  King
and  the  Constitution.  Information  was  given  of  some  persons
in  the  county  of  Waterford  who  were  concerned  in  these  trans-
1  Lord  Shannon  (Castle  Martyr),  Nov.  9,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

STATE  OE  CONNAUGHT.

379

actions,  and  those  miscreants  who  suspected  the  informer,  not
content  with  murdering  the  informer  himself,  murdered  his  wife
and  daughter ;  and  that  nothing  alive  should  be  left  in  the  house,
the  dog  that  belonged  to  the  family  was  killed  also.’  ‘  As  long
as  the  war  lasts,  I  fear  I  cannot  promise  your  Grace  any  settled
tranquillity  in  Ireland  ;  and  even  when  it  shall  cease,  the  seeds
of  discontent  have  been  so  industriously  sown,  the  method  of
communicating  real  or  supposed  grievances  is  so  extensively
established,  that  it  will  be  long  before  the  kingdom  regains
its  former  tranquillity;  and  if  the  French  shall  be  able  to  effect
a  landing,  I  apprehend  much  blood  will  be  shed  and  many
atrocities  committed.’ 1

Connaught  of  all  the  four  provinces  was  by  far  the  most
peaceful,  but  there,  too,  the  traces  of  the  agitators  may  be  found.
Around  Sligo,  the  process  of  swearing  in  United  Irishmen  was
actively  going  on,  and  outrages  were  beginning,  though  they
appear  to  have  been  much  less  serious  and  frequent  than  in  the
three  other  provinces.2  From  Ennis,  in  Clare,  a  magistrate  wrote
that  he  had  believed  that  his  county  had  escaped  the  contagion,
but  had  just  discovered  that  about  100  persons,  chiefly  young
men,  shepherds,  and  servants,  had  in  June  been  sworn  in  by  some
northern  emigrants.3  From  Newport,  in  the  county  of  Mayo,
another  magistrate  reported  that  some  men  from  the  North  had
lately  appeared  in  the  county  trying  to  swear  in  United  Irish¬
men,  but  they  had  been  detected  and  arrested.  ‘  I  am  happy,’
adds  the  writer,  ‘  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  observe  that  this
part  of  the  country  is  in  the  most  peaceable  condition,
and  likely  to  continue  so,’  and  this  appeared  to  him  to  be  the
first  attempt  to  seduce  the  people  of  that  district  from  their
loyalty.4  Lord  Altamount,  who  watched  so  wisely  and  so
humanely  over  the  state  of  his  great  property  around  Westport,
writes  in  October :  ‘  All  is  perfectly  quiet  here  now,  but  I  am
sorry  to  know  there  is  a  great  deal  of  bad  disposition  around
me — I  know  it  from  those  from  whom  secrets  are  not  concealed—
and  that  those  ill  intentions  are  not  confined  to  the  lower  classes.’
At  all  times,  he  said,  Mayo  and  Connemara  were  so  wild  and

1  Camden  to  Portland,  Nov.  15,  May  24,  1797.

1797.  3  H.  Sankey,  Oct.  5,  1797.

2  0.  Wynne  May  17 ;  T.  Soden,  4  Mr.  O’Donnell,  May  21,  1797.

380

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvm.

uncivilised  that  they  were  the  asylum  of  deserters,  robbers,  and
murderers  from  the  whole  kingdom  ;  but  his  special  subject  of
anxiety  was  the  great  mass  of  immigrants  from  the  North,  whose
state  was  now  almost  desperate.  Most  of  them  were  supported
by  public  or  private  charity,  but  he  feared  they  would  soon  be
necessarily  driven  to  plunder.1

It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  a  more  dreary  or  a  more
ignoble  picture  than  Ireland  at  this  time  presented.  The  Par¬
liament  had  lost  almost  every  quality  of  a  representative  body ;
the  Government  was  at  once  bigoted  and  corrupt,  and  steadily
opposed  to  the  most  moderate  and  most  legitimate  reforms;  and
in  three  provinces  almost  every  county  was  filled  with  knots  of
conspirators  and  incendiaries,  who  were  trying  to  bring  down  on
their  country  a  foreign  invasion,  and  were  stirring  up  the  people
to  rebellion  and  to  crime.  A  few  of  them  were  men  of  genuine
enthusiasm,  and  rejal,  though  certainly  not  extraordinary,  talent ;
but  the  great  majority  were  mere  demagogues,  adventurers,  and
criminals — such-  men  as  in  days  of  anarchy  and  revolution  ever
rise  to  the  surface — and  scarcely  one  of  them  had  the  smallest
right  or  title  to  speak  as  the  representative  of  the  nation.  In
the  mean  time,  the  country  as  a  whole  presented  the  most
melancholy  of  all  spectacles,  that  of  general,  rapid,  and  profound
demoralisation.  Religious  animosities  were  steadily  increasing.
The  old  ties  of  reverence  and  affection,  which,  in  spite  of  many
unhappy  circumstances,  had  bound  the  poor  to  the  rich,  were
giving  way.  Crimes  were  multiplying,  and  they  were  constantly
assuming  a  character  of  savage  ferocity,  while  organised  outrage
was  encountered  by  a  military  repression  which  often  exceeded
the  limits  of  the  law,  led  to  horrible  abuses,  and  was  fast
demoralising  the  forces  that  were  employed  in  it.  It  was
evident  that  there  was  no  sentiment  in  the  great  mass  of  the
poorer  Catholics  that  was  sufficiently  powerful  to  be  turned
into  a  serious  political  movement,  or  to  bring  armed  forces  into
the  field,  though  there  was  a  vague  dislike  to  the  English  race
and  name,  which  was  now  being  steadily  fanned.  But  in  1797,
as  in  later  periods,  political  agitators  found  it  necessary  for  their
purposes  to  appeal  to  other  than  political  motives — to  agrarian
grievances  and  agrarian  cupidity  ;  to  religious  passions  ;  to  the
1  Lord  Altamount,  Oct.  1797.

cn.  xxviii.

POSTPONEMENT  OF  THE  REBELLION.

381

discontent  produced  by  the  pressure  of  poverty  in  a  population
which  was  very  poor;  to  the  panic  which  skilful  falsehood  could
easily  create  in  a  population  which  was  very  ignorant.  All  these
engines  were  systematically,  unscrupulously,  and  successfully
employed,  and  what  in  one  sphere  was  politics,  in  another  soon
turned  into  ordinary  crime.  Camden  noticed  in  June,  that  the
first  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  seemed  to  have  in  some  degree  lost
their  ascendency,  and  that  £  a  set  of  lower  mechanics  ’  had  £ the
greatest  sway.’  ‘  The  plan  of  acting  under  an  oath  of  secrecy,’
he  added,  ‘induces  in  itself  such  necessary  caution,  and  the
regular  system  of  committees  is  so  detailed,  that  it  becomes  ex¬
tremely  easy  to  act  upon  it,’ 1  and  the  intervention  of  the  leaders
was  in  consequence  little  needed.  McNally  noticed  that  the
plan  of  committees  and  £  splits  ’  2  was  carrying  the  wish  for
French  invasion,  the  military  spirit,  and  the  hatred  of  England
through  all  the  common  people.3

In  the  first  months  of  1797,  an  insurrection  in  the  North  of
Ireland  was  frequently  expected,  and  there  was  a  fierce  dissen¬
sion  on  the  subject  among  the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy;  but  in
the  summer,  the  party  which  desired  to  postpone  the  revolt  till
the  arrival  of  the  French,  obtained  a  decisive  ascendency,  and
orders  to  avoid  all  provocation  to  military  action  were  issued,
which  probably  contributed  something  to  the  lull  in  Ulster.'4
New  and  brilliant  hopes  of  foreign,  assistance  had  by  this  time
arisen,  and  the  negotiation  with  France,  which  had  been  for  some
months  suspended,  was  again  active.  In  April  a  Catholic  attorney
named  Edward  Lewins,  who  had  been  originally  intended  for
the  priesthood,  and  educated  in  a  French  seminary,  and  who
was  therefore  a  complete  master  of  the  French  language,  was
sent,  by  the  executive  of  the  United  Irishmen,  to  Hamburg,
to  renew  with  Eeinhard  the  negotiation  which  in  the  previous
year  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald  and  Arthur  O’Connor  had  begun.
For  greater  security  he  was  entrusted  with  no  letter  accrediting
him  to  the  French  Minister,  but  he  brought  a  letter  and  a  gown
from  Lady  Edward  Fitzgerald  to  a  female  relation  who  was

1  Camden  to  Portland,  June  17,

1797.

3  That  is,  as  I  have  already  ex¬

plained,  dividing  every  committee
into  two  when  it  attained  the  number

of  thirty-six  members.

3  J.  W.,  Oct.  2,  1797.

4  See  a  letter  from  Reinhard,
Castlereagh  Corresjjoridence,  i.  278;
also  J.  W.,  Jan.  21,  June  10,  1797.

382

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvin.

living  at  Hamburg,  and  having  thus  established  his  connection
with  the  family,  he  authenticated  his  mission  by  relating  the
substance  of  letters  and  private  conversations  that  had  passed
between  Reinhard  and  Lord  Edward.  He  represented  Ireland
as  fully  prepared  for  insurrection,  and  some  parts  even  of
England  as  pervaded  by  secret  societies,  and  he  was  instructed
to  ask  from  France  armed  assistance,  and  a  promise  that  she
would  make  no  peace  with  England  till  the  £  British  troops  had
been  withdrawn  from  Ireland,  and  the  people  left  at  full  liberty
to  declare  whether  they  wished  to  continue  the  connection  with
England  or  not ;  ’  he  was  also  directed  to  endeavour  to  obtain
a  loan  of  500,000k  and  a  supply  of  arms  from  Spain,  and  an
alliance  with  the  newly  formed  Batavian  Republic.1

Lewins  appears  from  his  own  letters,  and  from  the  testimony
of  Tone,  to  haVe  been  a  man  of  real  capacity,  disinterestedness,
and  sincerity,  and  to  have  conducted  his  mission  with  skill  and
with  some  measure  of  success.  He  remained  nearly  two  months
at  Hamburg,  and  succeeded,  through  the  medium  of  a  Spanish
naval  officer,  who  had  been  sent  on  a  diplomatic  mission  to  that
town,  in  opening  a  negotiation  with  Spain,2  while  communi¬
cating  frequently  with  Reinhard,  who  forwarded  copies  of  his
papers  to  Hoche.  When  he  left  Ireland,  he  hoped  to  attain  his
objects  by  a  brief,  and  not  very  dangerous,  secret  negotiation
with  the  French  Minister  in  a  neutral  towm,3  but  he  soon  found
that  a  longer  and  more  perilous  mission  was  before  him.
Hoche,  who  was  burning  to  renew  the  abortive  enterprise  of  the
preceding  December,  summoned  him  to  the  Rhine,  and  he  went
there  in  company  with  Tone.4  He  learnt  that  Hoche  had  already
sent  one  of  his  adjutant-generals  to  Paris,  to  press  the  Execu-

1  Reinhard  to  De  la  Croix,  25,  30
floral,  an  5  (May  14,  19,  1797).
(French  Foreign  Office.)  Wolfe  Tone’s
Memoirs ,  ii.  407-409.

2  Wolfe  Tone,  ii.  408.

3  The  report  of  the  Committee  of

Secrecy  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
1879  gives  in  general  a  very  true
account  of  Lewins’  mission,  but  it  is
mistaken  in  supposing  that  he  was
originally  intended  to  be  a  resident
Irish  Minister  at  Faris.  Lewins  him¬
self  (under  his  assumed  name  of
Thompson)  wrote  a  full  account  of
his  mission,  13  fructidor,  an  6  (Aug.  30,

1797),  which  is  at  the  French  Foreign
Office,  and  which  I  have  followed.

4  There  is  here  a  curious  though
not  important  discrepancy  of  evi¬
dence.  Wolfe  Tone,  in  his  journal,
says  that  they  met  Hoche  on  June  21
at  Coblentz.  He  makes  no  mention
of  having  been  at  Frankfort,  and  it
is,  I  think,  impossible  from  his  diary
that  he  can  have  been  there.  Lewins
in  his  letter  to  the  French  Minister
(13  fructidor,  an  6),  says  that  he  went
to  Frankfort  to  meet  Hoche,  and  the
same  statement  is  made  in  the  report
of  the  Committee  of  Secrecy.

CH.  XXVIII.

DUTCH  FLEET  PREPARED.

383

tive  Directory  and  Minister  of  Marine ;  that  he  had  forwarded
to  them  all  the  necessary  papers,  including  those  which  had
been  drawn  up  by  Lewins ;  and  that  he  had  received  from
them  a  very  encouraging  reply,  and  a  distinct  assurance  that
France  ‘would  make  no  peace  with  England,  wherein  the
interests  of  Ireland  should  not  be  fully  discussed,  agreeably  to
the  wishes  of  the  people  of  that  country.’  He  learnt  also  the
important  fact,  that  preparations  were  now  making  in  Holland
for  a  great  expedition  against  England,  under  the  command  of
General  Daendels  and  Admiral  de  Winter,  and  that  its  destina¬
tion  was  likely  to  be  Ireland.  Hoche  himself,  accompanied  by
the  two  Irishmen,  went  in  June  to  the  Hague  to  assist  in  orga¬
nising  it.

It  was  intended,  at  first,  to  be  a  joint  French  and  Dutch
expedition,  but  the  Dutch  Government  placed  obstacles  in  the
way  of  French  co-operation,  and  it  appears  to  have  been  ex¬
tremely  anxious  that  the  new  Batavian  Republic  should  by  its
unassisted  efforts  strike  a  blow  which  would  establish  its  reputa¬
tion  throughout  Europe.  Hoche  with  great  magnanimity  with¬
drew  his  claim  to  participate  in  the  expedition,  and  it  was  finally
determined  that  it  should  be  purely  Dutch,  but  that  it  should  be
speedily  followed  and  supported  by  a  second  expedition,  which  was
preparing  at  Brest.  At  the  end  of  June  a  powerful  Dutch  fleet  of
twenty-five  ships  of  the  line  and  frigates,  with  transports  carry¬
ing  nearly  14,000  soldiers,  was  collected  at  the  Texel.  It  was
arranged  that  Tone  should  accompany  it.  Hoche  promised  to  send
him  his  instructions  for  carrying  on  the  war  in  La  Vendee,  which
appeared  to  the  French  general  the  exact  model  to  be  followed
in  Ireland,  and  he  expressed  his  belief  that  a  French  army
would  reach  the  Irish  coast  in  about  a  fortnight  after  the  arrival
of  the  Dutch.  In  the  first  week  of  July,  Tone  and  Lewins  left
the  Hague,  the  first  proceeding  to  the  Texel  and  the  latter  to
Paris.1

The  French  Government  in  the  mean  time  sent  a  Swede  of
the  name  of  Jagerhorn  to  England,  with  instructions  to  proceed
to  Ireland  to  communicate  the  intentions  of  the  French  Govern¬
ment;  to  obtain  an  assurance  that  Lewins  possessed  the  full

1  The  most  detailed  account  of  all  this  is  in  Wolfe  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  409-
416.

384

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxyiu.

powers  from  the  United  Irishmen  which  he  claimed,  and  also  to
form  a  more  sober  and  unprejudiced  estimate  of  the  situation  in
Ireland,  than  they  were  likely  to  obtain  from  Irish  envoys.
Jagerhorn  failed  in  procuring  a  passport  to  Ireland,  but  he  suc¬
ceeded  in  sending  a  companion  there,  and  he  had  himself  an
interview  with  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald  in  London.  His  report
to  the  French  Government  was  very  satisfactory  as  to  the  dis¬
position  of  the  Irish  people  in  favour  of  rebellion,  but  not  equally
so  as  to  the  means  at  their  disposal.  About  100,000  persons,
he  believed,  had  been  enrolled  in  the  conspiracy,  and  almost  the
whole  nation  sympathised  with  it ;  but  he  doubted  whether  there
were  more  than  from  12,000  to  15,000  men  who  had  any  arms,
and  he  believed  that  without  artillery  and  competent  officers,
and  in  the  presence  of  a  garrison  of  some  40,000  men,  no  suc¬
cessful  insurrection  was  possible  except  by  the  assistance  of  the
French.1

The  Irish  had  meanwhile  resolved  to  send  a  second  messenger
to  stimulate  the  efforts  of  the  French.  They  selected  for  that
purpose  McNevin,  a  Catholic  physician,  and  one  of  the  ablest
members  of  the  United  Irish  Executive.  He  left  Ireland  for
Hamburg  on  June  27,  and  on  his  arrival  drew  up  for  the  Direc¬
tory  a  very  elaborate  memoir  on  the  state  of  Ireland,  and  on  the
means  of  invading  it.  He  recommended  Oyster  Haven  as  the
best  point  for  a  landing  in  the  South,  and  Lough  Swilly  in  the
North,  and  gave  many  military  and  topographical  details  of
much  value  ;  but  he  urged  especially,  that  it  was  only  in  the
North  and  North-west  of  the  island  that  the  French  could  expect
really  efficacious  co-operation  from  the  United  Irishmen.  In
Ulster,  he  said,  not  less  than  150,000  men  were  enrolled,  and  a
great  part  of  them  were  so  organised  that  they  could  become
serious  soldiers.  Outside  Ulster  the  organisation  had  spread,
and  was  spreading  rapidly  ;  but  arms  were  still  greatly  wanting.
Bandon,  however,  was  now  another  Belfast ;  Cork,  Tipperary,
Limerick,  Galway,  Roscommon,  Meath  and  Westmeath,  Kildare,
the  King’s  County,  and  the  city  of  Dublin  were  all  largely
organised.  ‘  Even  in  those  places  where  the  United  Irish  system
is  not  entirely  adopted,  the  co-operation  of  the  poor  and  middle
classes  may  be  counted  on.  Their  hatred  of  the  English  des-

1  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  i.  277,  286-288.

CH.  XXVIII.

McNEVIN’S  MEMOIR.

385

i

potism,  and  the  vexations  they  endure  from  their  lords,  cause
the  most  ignorant  among  them  to  act  in  the  same  sense
as  the  most  enlightened  republicans.  The  Catholic  priests  are
no  longer  alarmed  at  the  calumnies  diffused  about  the  irre-
ligion  of  the  French ;  they  have  adopted  the  principles  of  the
people  on  whom  they  depend ;  they  are  in  general  good  re¬
publicans  ;  they  have  done  good  service  by  propagating  with  a
discreet  zeal  the  system  of  union,  and  they  have  persuaded  the
people  to  take  the  oath  [of  allegiance]  imposed  on  them  by  force,
without  in  any  respect  renouncing  their  principles  and  their
projects.’

The  memoir  then  proceeds  to  state  that  very  lately  the
Prince  of  Wales,  who  was  closely  connected  with  three  of  the
chiefs  of  the  Opposition,  sent  over  a  confidential  agent  in  hopes
of  creating  a  movement  for  making  him  Lord  Lieutenant,  on
the  understanding  that  he  would  support  the  emancipation  of
the  Catholics,  parliamentary  reform,  the  abolition  of  the  coercive
legislation  of  the  last  three  years,  and  a  complete  change  of
men  and  things  ;  but  the  leaders  of  the  Opposition  refused  to
take  part  in  this  scheme.  MdSTevin  attributes  their  refusal
to  their  belief  that  a  French  invasion  was  probable,  though
they  had  no  direct  information  on  the  subject.  Both  the  Prince
of  Wales,  he  said,  and  Lord  Moira,  were  moving  heaven  and
earth  to  change  the  existing  system  in  Ireland,  and  to  content
the  people  in  order  to  withdraw  them  from  French  influence.
They  had,  however,  met  with  no  response.  The  people  were
resolved  to  aim  at  independence  and  a  republican  Government,
and,  in  the  event  of  an  invasion,  the  bulk  of  the  militia  would
undoubtedly  join  the  French.  The  immediate  measure  which
would  act  most  powerfully  on  the  situation,  would  be  a  declara¬
tion  on  the  part  of  France,  that  she  would  make  no  peace  with
the  English  Government  which  did  not  contain  a  provision  for
the  independence  of  Ireland.1

1  F.F.O.  The  greater  part  of  this
memoir  will  be  found  in  the  Castle-
reagh  Correspondence,  i.  295-301,  but
the  passage  relating  to  the  Prince  of
Wales  is  omitted.  It  appears  to  be
perfectly  true  that  the  Prince  of  Wales
in  the  beginning  of  1797  had  wished
to  be  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  with

268

the  object  of  pacifying  Ireland  by
concessions,  and  had  made  a  proposi¬
tion  to  that  effect  to  the  Government.
Bee  Lord  Colchester’s  Diary  and  Cor¬
respondence,  i.  91 ;  Plowden,  ii.  589,
590 ;  Buckingham’s  Court  and
Cabinets  of  Geo.  III.  ii.  366.

386  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvui,
0

This  last  sentence  probably  refers  to  the  negotiations  for
peace  which  had  j  ust  begun  at  Lille ;  and  in  order  to  understand
the  situation,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us  again  to  cast  a  rapid
glance  over  continental  affairs.  We  have  seen  that  in  August
1796,  Spain  had  been  forced  into  an  alliance  with  France,  and
two  months  later  into  a  war  with  England,  and  French  states¬
men  then  imagined  that,  having  command  of  the  Dutch  and
Spanish  navies  as  well  as  of  their  own,  they  would  at  last  be
able  to  contend  on  equal  if  not  superior  terms  with  England
upon  the  sea.  Wolfe  Tone  hoped  that  the  Spanish  fleet  would
arrive  in  time  to  give  an  overwhelming  strength  to  the  expedi¬
tion  to  Bantry  Bay  ;  but  it  was  miserably  equipped  and  manned,1
and  it  lingered  long  in  the  Mediterranean.  Its  appearance
there,  in  alliance  with  the  French,  obliged  Admiral  Jervis  to
quit  that  sea,  and  led  to  the  recovery  of  Corsica  by  the  French,
and  to  the  establishment  of  peace  between  France  and  Naples.
At  last,  on  February  14,  1797,  Jervis  attacked  and  totally
defeated  the  Spaniards  off  Cape  St.  Vincent.  The  English  were
far  inferior  to  the  enemy  in  the  number  of  their  ships  and  guns,
but  the  Spanish  crews  consisted  chiefly  of  hastily  draughted
landsmen,  who  were  -  almost  helpless  in  a  naval  battle ;  the
victory  was  won  with  less  loss  and  less  resistance  than,  perhaps,
any  other  of  equal  importance  during  the  war,  and  from  this
time  the  Spanish  navy  ceased  to  be  a  serious  danger.  Cadiz
was  afterwards  bombarded.  A  few  prizes  were  captured,  and
the  war  was  carried  on  with  various  results  against  the  colonies
of  Spain.  Trinidad,  one  of  the  richest  of  her  West  Indian
isles,  was  captured  in  February,  but  an  attack  upon  Porto  Rico
in  April,  and  an  attack  upon  Teneriffe  in  July,  were  both  re¬
pelled.  The  last  expedition  is  memorable  as  the  one  great
failure  of  Nelson,  and  it  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  lost  his
right  arm.

The  career  of  victory  which  Buonaparte  had  pursued  in
Italy  in  1796  was  still  unbroken.  In  February  1797,  Mantua
the  strongest  Austrian  fortress,  surrendered,  and  the  Pope  was
compelled  to  sign  a  peace,  ceding  not  only  Avignon  and  the
Venaisin,  but  also  Bologna,  Ferrara,  and  the  Romagna,  placing
Ancona  in  French  hands  till  the  close  of  the  war,  and  paying  a
1  See  James’s  Naval  History ,  ii.  47.

CH.  XXVIII.

LEOBEN  AND  CAMPO  FORMIO.

387

large  sum  to  the  conqueror.  Buonaparte  then  turned  his  un¬
divided  forces  against  the  Archduke  Charles ;  he  drove  him
within  a  few  days’  march  of  Vienna,  and  he  extorted  in  April  the
preliminaries  of  a  peace  at  Leoben.  The  definitive  peace  of  Campo
Formio  was  not  signed  until  October,  and  it  contained  some
important  articles  which  were  not  in  the  preliminaries,  but  the
preliminaries  of  Leoben  put  an  end  to  the  war  and  established
the  complete  continental  ascendency  of  France.  Austria  now
formally  acquiesced  in  the  incorporation  into  the  French  Re¬
public,  of  Belgium  and  Savoy.  She  renounced  all  her  Italian
possessions  beyond  the  Oglio,  ami  acknowledged  the  new  Cis-
Alpine  Republic,  but  she  stipulated  that  she  should  be  in¬
demnified  by  the  plunder  of  the  neutral  Republic  of  Venice.
At  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace  this  plunder  was  consummated
by  a  partition  as  complete  and  as  iniquitous  as  that  of  Poland.
The  Italian  territory  of  Venice  passed  to  Austria;  the  Greek
islands  and  the  Albanian  possessions  that  had  belonged  to  her
passed  to  France,  and  thus,  after  an  existence  of  more  than
1,400  years,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  glorious  of  European
States  vanished  from  the  world.

The  preliminaries  of  Leoben  were  signed  in  opposition  to
the  wishes  of  the  Archduke  Charles.  They  left  England
without  any  continental  ally  except  Portugal,  but  they  at  the
same  time  took  away  one  of  her  chief  reasons  for  continuing  the
war.  The  negotiations  of  1796  had  broken  off  principally  on
the  demand  of  the  English  for  the  restoration  of  the  Austrian
Netherlands  to  the  Emperor ;  but  though  the  expulsion  of  the
French  from  that  territory  was  of  vital  importance  to  England,
it  had  now  become  plainly  impracticable.  Pitt,  who  still
ardently  desired  peace,  and  who  was  especially  alarmed  at  the
financial  aspects  of  the  war,  resolved  to  make  another  attempt,
and,  contrary  to  the  wish  both  of  the  King  and  of  Lord  Grenville,
an  overture  was  made  to  De  la  Croix,  the  French  Minister  of
Foreign  Affairs.  It  was  accepted,  though  in  very  ungracious
terms,  and  three  French  ministers  plenipotentiary  were  appointed
to  meet  Lord  Malmesbury  at  Lille.  They  were  Le  Tourneur,
who  had  recently  left  the  Directory,  the  Admiral  Pleville  lo
Peley,  and  Maret,  whose  skill  in  negotiation,  and  whose  anxiety

388

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

to  avert  the  war  in  1793,  we  have  already  seen.  The  first  con¬
ference  took  place  on  July  6.

It  is  unnecessary  to  relate  in  minute  detail  the  negotiations
that  followed.  On  the  English  side  the  extreme  desire  of  Pitt
to  make  peace  is  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  Canning,  who  was
now  his  closest  confidant,  wrote  a  melancholy  private  letter  to
Ellis,  who  was  attached  to  Lord  Malmesbury’s  embassy,  in  which
he  disclosed  the  situation  with  perfect  frankness.  ‘Were  I
writing  to  you,’  he  said,  ‘on  December  13  last,  instead  of  the
present  July  13,  could  I  have  thought  with  patience  of  re¬
nunciation  and  restitution  unaccompanied  by  cessions  to  balance
and  compensate  them  ?  But  we  cannot  and  must  not  disguise
our  situation  from  ourselves.  If  peace  is  to  be  had,  we  must
have  it.  I  firmly  believe  that  we  must,  and  it  is  a  belief  that
strengthens  every  day.  When  Windham  says  we  must  not,
I  ask  him,  “  Can  we  have  war  ?  ”  It  is  out  of  the  question,
We  have  not  the  means ; .  we  have  not  what  is  of  all  means  the
most  essential,  the  mind.  If  we  are  not  at  peace,  we  shall  be  at
nothing.  .  .  .  For  my  part,  I  adjourn  my  objects  of  honour  and
happiness  for  this  country,  beyond  the  grave  of  our  military  and
political  consequence  which  you  are  now  digging  at  Lille.  I
believe  in  our  resurrection,  and  find  my  only  comfort  in  it.

.  .  .  We  can  break  off  upon  nothing  but  what  will  rouse  us
from  sleep  and  stupidity  into  a  new  life  and  action.  ...  We
are  now  soulless  and  spiritless.’  1

How  strangely  imperfect  is  all  political  prescience  !  Who
could  have  imagined  from  such  a  picture,  that  England  was  still
destined  to  struggle  on  through  no  less  than  eighteen  years  of
desperate  warfare,  to  a  final  triumph  ?  Or,  looking  backwards,
who  could  have  imagiuedwhen  Pitt  reluctantly  engaged  in  1793,
with  the  support  of  almost  all  Europe,  in  a  conflict  with  a
country  which  seemed  utterly  disorganised  by  revolution,  that
the  great  and  haughty  minister  of  England  would  be  compelled
within  four  years,  and  in  almost  absolute  isolation,  to  sue  for  a
peace  not  less  really  disadvantageous  and  scarcely  less  humi¬
liating  to  England,  than  that  of  1783?  Pitt  was  prepared  to
acknowledge  Belgium  to  be  a  French  province,  and  Holland  a
French  vassal ;  to  acknowledge  all  the  French  conquests  in
1  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.  397,  398.

CH.  XXVIII.

PITT'S  DESIRE  FOR  PEACE.

389

Germany  and  Italy  ;  to  restore  to  France,  without  compensation,
all  the  colonial  possessions  which  England  had  taken  from  her
during  the  war.  He  stipulated  only  that  she  should  retain  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  Trinidad ;  that  she  should  retain  Ceylon
and  Cochin,  in  exchange  for  the  restoration  of  Negapatnam
on  the  coast  of  Tanjore;  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  should  be
indemnified  for  his  private  property ;  and  that  Portugal,  the  last
ally  of  England,  should  be  included  in  the  peace.

If  the  French  Directory  had  accepted  peace  on  these  terms,
they  would  have  closed  the  wars  of  the  Revolution  by  placing
France  in  a  prouder  position  than  she  had  ever  reached  during
the  monarchy.  Having  baffled  and  plundered  all  their  enemies
on  the  Continent,  they  would  have  compelled  their  old  rival,  who
was  still  invincible  on  the  sea,  to  acknowledge  herself  vanquished
in  the  struggle  of  centuries.  From  generation  to  generation,
it  had  been  a  main  object  of  English  foreign  policy  to  maintain
the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,  and  above  all  to  preserve
Belgium  and  Holland— the  two  countries  that  were  most  essen¬
tial  to  English  security — free  from  French  aggrandisement.  It
was  left  to  the  son  of  the  great  Lord  Chatham,  to  the  minister
whose  genius  had  raised  England,  after  the  humiliating  peace  of
1783,  to  an  almost  unexampled  height  of  prosperity  and  power,
to  accept  and  even  to  solicit  a  peace,  leaving  France  supreme  in
Europe,  the  absolute  mistress  of  Belgium,  the  virtual  mistress
of  Holland.  But  Pitt,  having  taken  his  resolution,  did  not
flinch,  and  he  assured  Lord  Malmesbury  that  ‘  he  would  stifle
every  feeling  of  pride  to  the  utmost,  to  produce  the  desired
result.’ 1

It  is  not  difficult  to  seethe  overwhelming  force  of  the  reasons
that  impelled  him.  The  enormous  increase  of  expenditure  and
debt  threatened  England  with  ruin,  and  would  certainly,  if  not
speedily  checked,  cripple  her  for  generations.  The  Bank  of'
England  had  been  obliged  to  stop  cash  payments.  The  three
per  cents  in  May  sank  to  forty-eight,  the  lowest  point  they
had  ever  touched.  In  Ireland,  the  continuance  of  the  war  would
almost  certainly  lead  to  prolonged  and  ruinous  anarchy,  and
probably  to  the  dangers  and  horrors  of  a  great  rebellion.  Every
ally  of  England,  except  Portugal,  had  dropped  away,  and  some
1  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.  369.

390

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvm.

of  them  were  in  arms  against  her.  It  was  impossible,  by  the
most  lavish  subsidies,  any  longer  to  resist  France  on  the  Continent,
or  to  drive  her  within  her  ancient  limits,  and  the  security  of
England  herself  from  invasion  depended  on  the  constant  supe¬
riority  of  her  navy  to  the  united  navies  of  France,  Spain,  and
Holland.  The  war  was  unpopular  ;  the  nation  was  discouraged,
and  the  mutiny  of  the  Nore  had  disclosed  the  new  and  terrible
danger  of  disaffection  in  the  fleet.

It  soon,  however,  appeared  that  the  chances  of  obtaining  peace
were  very  small.  Of  the  five  members  of  the  Directory,  three
were  evidently  opposed  to  it,  and  two  at  least  of  the  French
Commissioners  were  fully  prepared  to  carry  out  their  views.
The  French  at  once  demanded  the  relinquishment  by  the  King
of  England  of  his  old  title  of  King  of  France,  the  restoration
of  the  ships  that  had  been  taken  at  Toulon,  and  an  equivalent
for  those  which  had  been  destroyed  ;  and  they  raised  a  question
about  a  mortgage,  which  they  erroneously  imagined  to  be  held
by  England  on  the  Netherlands  for  money  granted  to  the
Emperor.  But  discussion  had  not  proceeded  far  on  these  points,
before  a  new  demand  was  made,  which  appeared  absolutely  to
close  the  door  to  peace.  It  was,  that  England  should  imme¬
diately,  and  as  a  preliminary  to  all  negotiation,  restore  every¬
thing  she  had  conquered,  not  only  from  France,  but  also  from
the  Batavian  Republic  and  from  Spain.

Lord  Malmesbury,  unwilling  at  once  to  break  off  the  confer¬
ence,  asked  for  further  explanations  and  instructions,  and  he  was
confirmed  in  this  course  by  a  very  strange  and  characteristic  in¬
cident.  On  July  14,  an  English  gentleman,  who  had  been  long
residing  at  Lille,  called  on  the  Secretary  of  the  Legation,  and
showed  him  a  note  from  M.  Pein,  who  was  an  intimate  friend  of
his  own,  and  a  near  relation  of  Maret.  It  contained  these  some¬
what  enigmatical  words  :  ‘  It  would  perhaps  be  necessary,  in
order  to  press  on  the  negotiation,  that  Lord  Malmesbury  should
have  the  means  of  coming  to  an  understanding,  and  preparing
materials  with  the  person  who  is  in  truth  the  only  one  in  a
position  to  conduct  the  affair.  In  that  case  it  would  be  possible
to  procure  for  Lord  Malmesbury  an  intermediary  who  has  the
entire  confidence  of  the  person  in  question,  and  who,  like  that
person,  has  no  other  end  than  the  interest  of  all,  and  an  arrange-

CH.  XXVIII.

NEGOTIATIONS  AT  LILLE.-

391

ment  equally  suitable  to  both  parties.’  The  gentleman  then
proceeded  to  explain,  that  Pein  was  in  the  full  confidence  of
Maret,  and  that  this  overture  was  made  with  the  authorisation
of Maret.  Inconsequence  of  this  communication,  Ellis  had  a
secret  interview  with  Pein,  who  fully  confirmed  what  had  been
said,  and  added  that  Maret’s  opinions  on  all  political  subjects
were  very  different  from  those  of  the  other  plenipotentiaries;
that  he  had  been  appointed  by  his  intimate  friend  Barthelemy,
who,  with  Carnot,  was  resolved,  if  possible,  to  gratify  the  ardent
desire  of  the  French  nation  for  peace ;  that  the  other  three
Directors  were  of  other  sentiments,  but  that  if  the  negotiation
was  prolonged  and  prudently  conducted,  they  must  in  the  end
give  way.

A  change  of  ministers  in  France,  which  happened  within  the  *
next  few  days,  appeared  slightly  to  improve  the  prospect.  De
la  Croix,  who  had  shown  himself  violent  and  impracticable,  and
personally  hostile  to  Lord  Malmesbury,  was  replaced,  as  Minister
of  Foreign  Affairs,  by  Talleyrand ;  and  Pleville  le  Peley  was
made  Minister  of  Marine,  thus  reducing  the  French  plenipoten¬
tiaries  at  Lille  to  two,  one  of  whom  seemed  sincerely  anxious
for  peace.  It  was  reported  from  Paris,  that  the  Government
there  was  extremely,  unstable,  that  a  large  and  increasing  party
in  the  legislative  councils  were  hostile  to  the  Directory,  and
that  another  revolution  was  very  probable,  and  Malmesbury
justly  said  that  the  chances  of  peace  depended  much  more  on
what  took  place  at  Paris,  than  on  what  took  place  at  Lille.

A  secret  understanding  between  Lord  Malmesbury  and
Maret  was  speedily  formed.  It  was  chiefly  arranged  between
Ellis  and  Pein,  and  the  latter  brought  an  assurance  that  Maret
utterly  disapproved  of  the  recent  demands  of  the  Directory.
Signs  were  devised  by  which  Maret  could  communicate  with
Malmesbury  at  the  conference,  without  being  suspected  by  his
own  colleague.  At  the  request  of  Maret,  the  reply  of  the
English  Cabinet  to  the  French  demand  was  privately  submitted
to  him,  before  it  was  presented,  and  at  his  suggestion  one  of  its
arguments  wTas  strengthened.  A  confidential  letter,  in  which
Barthelemy  expressed  to  Maret  his  deep  sense  of  the  absolute
necessity  of  peace  ;  of  the  absurdity  of  the  recent  demands  ;  of
the  folly  and  instability  that  surrounded  him,  and  of  the  supreme

392

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

importance  of  gaining  time,  was  duly  read  to  the  English  Minister.
The  delay  now  came  from  the  French  side,  and  it  was  explained
that  it  was  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  French  were  putting
pressure  on  their  allies,  in  order  to  compel  them  to  acquiesce  in
cessions  to  the  English.  This  explanation  was  given,  not  by
Maret,  but  by  Le  Tourneur,  who,  though  he  was  not  in  the
secret  of  his  colleague,  appears  at  this  time,  and  during  the
remainder  of  the  negotiation,  to  have  been  sincerely  desirous  of
peace.  It  was  added,  that  on  the  side  of  Spain  the  French  found
little  difficulty,  but  that  the  Batavian  Republic  was  obstinately
opposed  to  cessions.  In  England,  only  Pitt,  Grenville,  and
Canning  were  aware  of  the  strange  by-play  that  was  going
on,  and  two  distinct  series  of  despatches  were  written  by  Lord
Malmesbury,  one  of  which  was  intended  to  be  laid  before  the
Cabinet,  while  the  other  was  intended  only  for  the  three
Ministers.

The  English  negotiators  doubted  the  sincerity  of  the  over¬
tures  that  were  made  to  them,  and  the  reality  of  the  causes  of
delay  that  were  assigned,  but  it  was  plain  that  the  official  pro¬
positions  of  the  Directory  must  destroy  all  hopes  of  peace.  It
was  probable,  or  at  least  possible,  that  Maret  and  Talleyrand,  and
the  two  members  of  the  Directory,  or  at  least  some  of  them,
were  sincere  in  wishing  for  peace,  and  if  the  pressure  of  French
public  opinion  or  of  the  legislative  councils,  or  the  influence  of
Talleyrand,  or  any  of  the  numerous  political  intrigues  that  were
agitating  Paris,  displaced  the  majority  in  the  Directory,  and  gave
a  casting  vote  to  the  peace  party,  the  whole  aspect  of  affairs
might  change.  Pitt  desired  above  all  things  peace,  if  it  could
be  accompanied  by  the  retention  of  such  a  portion  of  the  many
conquests  of  England  as  would  in  some  degree  save  the  dignity
of  a  nation  which  had  been  everywhere  triumphant  upon  the  sea,
and  in  some  degree  compensate  by  its  commercial  advantages
for  the  ruinous  sacrifices  that  had  been  made.  If,  however,  such
a  peace  could  not  be  obtained,  he  desired  that  the  French  should
make  requisitions  so  manifestly  unreasonable  that  the  necessity
for  carrying  on  the  war  should  be  apparent  to  every  Englishman.1
On  the  whole,  the  situation  seemed  hopeful,  though  not  suffi¬
ciently  so  to  inspire  confidence.  ‘  Shall  we  be  sent  back  or  not,
1  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.  430.

CH.  XXVIII.

NEGOTIATIONS  AT  LILLE.

393

this  time  ?  ’  wrote  Ellis.  £  Seriously,  tire  Directory  is  so  strange
a  body,  and  this  so  strange  a  nation,  that  I  have  my  doubts,  and
yet  this  letter  surely  contains  some  reasonable  grounds  for  hope.’
1 1  am  not  without  my  apprehensions,’  wrote  Malmesbury,  ‘  that
you  infer  too  much  from  what  we  transmit  to  you  ;  that  you  get
too  sanguine,  or  at  least  sanguine  too  soon.  .  .  .  Pray  check  this
too  eager  hope.  It  is  not  to  be  justified.  We  may  and  probably
shall  have  peace,  but  not  soon,  not  on  our  own  terms  (I  mean
original  terms),  and  it  will  be  a  work  of  labour  and  altercation  to
obtain  some  not  very  different  from  them.’ 1

There  are  few  more  curious  pages  in  diplomatic  history  than
the  account  in  Lord  Malmesbury’s  papers  of  these  proceedings.
Ellis  and  Pein  continued  to  have  frequent  conferences,  in  which
the  affairs  of  the  two  nations  seem  to  have  been  discussed  with
complete  apparent  frankness,  and  Malmesbury  and  his  French
colleagues  were  soon  on  the  most  cordial  terms,  and  had  more
than  one  strangely  undiplomatic  conversation  in  their  boxes
in  the  theatre.  But  suddenly,  like  a  thunderclap,  the  news
broke  upon  the  English  plenipotentiary,  that  on  August  10  the
Portuguese  Minister  at  Paris  had  signed  a  separate  peace  for
Portugal,  and  that  one  of  its  articles,  in  direct  defiance  of  the
English  treaty  of  1703,  forbade  the  English  fleet  to  receive
supplies  in  Portugal,  and  excluded  during  the  war  all  but  a
limited  number  of  English  vessels  from  the  Portuguese  ports.
The  Court  of  Lisbon,  it  is  true,  ultimately  refused  to  ratify  this
treaty,  but  from  the  time  it  was  signed,  the  hopes  of  peace
began  to  dwindle.  Combined  with  the  negotiations  which  were
rapidly  pressing  on  for  a  definitive  peace  with  the  Emperor,  and
with  the  preparations  that  were  known  to  be  making  at  the
Texel,  the  Portuguese  treaty  fully  confirmed  Lord  Grenville  in
his  distrust  of  French  diplomacy.  ‘  The  clandestine  and  pre¬
cipitate  manner,’  he  wrote,  ‘  in  which  the  business  has  been  con¬
ducted,  affords  indisputable  proofs  of  the  total  absence  of  a  sincere
and  candid  disposition  for  peace  on  the  part  of  his  Majesty’s
enemies ;  ’  and  he  drew  up  an  official  note  about  the  proceedings
of  the  Directory,  in  a  strain  which  was  so  haughty,  and  so
manifestly  calculated  to  break  off  the  negotiation,  that  Malmes¬
bury  took  the  very  grave  step  of  disobeying  his  instructions,
1  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.  434,  464.

394

ENGLAND  IN  TEE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvih.

and  not  presenting  it.1  Malmesbury  was  supported  by  Pitt,
who  still  wished  to  negotiate,  and  still  hoped  for  peace,  and
who,  though  startled  and  irritated  by  the  Portuguese  treaty,
refused  to  look  upon  it  as  an  insuperable  obstacle.  ‘  I  think
it,’  he  wrote,  £  a  natural,  though  an  unworthy  game,  in
those  we  are  treating  with  ;  but  I  do  not  much  expect  that)
if  other  points  could  be  settled,  this  would  stand  in  the  way
of  peace.’ 2

At  the  beginning  of  the  negotiation,  Malmesbury  had
received  a  message  which  purported  to  come  from  Barras,  one
of  the  majority  in  the  Directory,  ^offering  peace  in  return  for  a
bribe  of  500,000k  ;  but  Malmesbury,  believing  the  offer  to  be
either  unauthorised  by  Barras,  or  a  trap  laid  by  the  Directory,
took  no  notice  of  it.  In  the  middle  of  August,  a  new  message
was  brought  to  him  by  an  American,  who  stated  that  the  Por¬
tuguese  peace  had  been  purchased  by  a  gift  of  ten  or  twelve
millions  of  livres  to  the  Directors,  and  that  fifteen  millions  of
livres,  distributed  between  Rewbell  and  Barras,  would  secure  a
similar  peace  for  England.  He  appears  to  have  had  no  creden¬
tials,  and  nothing  resulted  from  the  overture.  Extreme  cor¬
ruption,  however,  in  French  Government  circles  was  one  of  the
elements  to  be  calculated  on,  and  the  English  Ministers  had
some  evidence  that  Barthelemy,  and  convincing  evidence  that
Talleyrand,  was  at  this  time  stockjobbing  largely  in  the  English
funds.3

The  hopes  of  peace  were  soon  shattered  by  the  coup  d'etat  of
the  18th  fructidor,4  when  the  Triumvirate,  who  formed  the
majority  of  the  Directory,  brought  a  great  body  of  troops  into
Paris,  surrounded  and  dispersed  the  two  legislative  councils,
and,  on  the  pretext  of  a  royalist  plot,  arrested  a  multitude  of
members  who  were  opposed  to  them,  and  ordered  the  immediate
imprisonment  of  their  two  colleagues.  Carnot  succeeded  in
escaping,  and,  at  last,  made  his  way  to  Geneva,  but  Barthelemy
was  arrested,  and,  next  day,  the  triumvirs  issued  a  law  of  pro¬
scription,  which  was  sanctioned  by  the  partisan  remnant  of  the

1  Malmesbury  Corre pondence,  iii.  obedience  expressed  by  Canning,  who

489,  490,  497  was  at  this  time  Pitfs  mouthpiece.

2  Ibid.  p.  491.  That  Pitt  approved  (Ibid.  p.  520  )

of  Malmesbury’s  disobedience,  I  infer  3  Ibid.  pp.  439,  453,  520.
from  the  full  approval  of  that  dis-  4  Sept.  4.

♦

CH.  xxviii.  EXPULSION  OF  MALMESBURY.  395

legislative  councils,  and  which  condemned  Bartlielemy  and
Carnot,  forty-two  members  of  one  legislative  council,  and
eleven  members  of  tbe  other,  to  a  perpetual  banishment  to
Cayenne,  or  to  the  pestilential  swamps  of  Guiana.  -The  pro¬
prietors  and  editors  of  forty-two  journals,  and  about  180  priests,
were,  soon  after,  condemned  to  the  same  fate.  A  few,  like
Carnot,  succeeded  in  concealing  themselves,  but  in  general  the
savage  sentence  was  savagely  executed,  and  a  majority  of  the
prisoners  perished  by  hardship  or  pestilence.  Barthelemy
escaped  from  Guiana,  in  an  American  vessel,  and  took  refuge  in
England.

It  was  the  strong  opinion  of  Malmesbury  and  Canning,  on
the  one  side,  and  of  Maret  and  Talleyrand,  on  the  other,  that  if
this  revolution  had  not  taken  place,  the  majority  in  the  Directory
would  have  been  compelled  by  the  legislative  councils,  and  by
the  pressure  of  French  public  opinion,  to  consent  to  a  peace  on
the  lines  which  England  had  proposed.  The  18th  fructidor,
however,  at  once  destroyed  the  influence  of  the  Moderate  party.
The  French  legation  at  Lille  was  recalled,  and  replaced  by  two
violent  Jacobins,  with  peremptory  instructions.  They  arrived
at  Lille  on  September  13,  and  almost  immediately  after,  they
demanded  whether  Malmesbury  had  power  to  consent  to  ‘  a
general  restitution  of  every  possession  remaining  in  his
Majesty’s  hands,  not  only  belonging  to  them,  but  to  their
allies,’  as  a  preliminary  to  any  further  negotiation ;  and  they
added,  that  when  this  had  been  accomplished,  there  were  still
many  articles  to  be  proposed.  The  reply  being  naturally  in  the
negative,  Lord  Malmesbury  was,  on  September  16,  ordered,
within  twenty-four  hours,  to  quit  France.1

It  is  curious  to  observe,  how  long  it  was  before  the  last
faint  gleam  of  hope  disappeared,  and  all  prospect  of  negotiation
was  abandoned.  Immediately  on  heai’ing  of  the  new  revolution,
Pitt  wrote  to  Malmesbury,  expressing  his  unaltered  determina¬
tion  to  continue  the  negotiation,  and  his  belief  that  it  was  still
possible  to  attain  a  peace ; 2  and  even  after  Lord  Malmesbury  had
been  ignominiously  sent  back  to  London,  he  exchanged,  by  the
wish  of  the  Government,  two  or  three  notes  with  the  French

1  Malmesbury  Correspondence ,  iii.  561-569,  576.

2  Ibid.  p.  554.

396

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

plenipotentiaries,  who  were  still  at  Lille,  in  hopes  of  finding
some  possible  basis  for  resuming  the  negotiations.  Rewbell
and  Barras,  or,  perhaps,  Bai’ras  alone,  had  made  another  over¬
ture,  promising  peace,  in  return  for  a  large  bribe.  In  a  letter
to  the  King,  dated  September  22,  Pitt  stated  that  £  he  had
received  communications  from  a  person  (who  produces  as  strong
proofs  as  can,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  given,  of  the  authen¬
ticity  of  his  mission),  stating  that,  notwithstanding  what  had
passed  at  Lille,  the  Directory  will  still  agree  to  an  immediate
peace,  giving  to  this  country  both  the  Cape  and  Ceylon,  on
condition  of  their  receiving  a  large  sum  of  money  for  their  own
use.  The  sum  named  is  1,200,000Z.  for  Ceylon,  or  2, 000,000Z.
for  both,’  and  Pitt  strongly  recommended  that  the  proposal
should  be  encouraged,  and  was  even  sanguine  about  its  success.1
Whether  it  was  ever  seriously  intended,  whether  Barras  found
himself  unable  to  carry  his  colleagues  with  him,  or  whether,  as
Lord  Malmesbury  believed,  the  whole  proposal  was  merely  a
stockjobbing  device,  must  always  be  doubtful.  A  French  note
of  September  25,  distinctly  stated,  that  a  resumption  of  the
negotiations  would  only  be  permitted,  if  the  English  absolutely
submitted  to  the  French  demand  for  the  restitution  of  all  the
English  conquests,2  and  from  this  time,  all  hope  of  peace  dis¬
appeared.

It  was  an  assertion  of  Lord  Clare,  that  the  £  Irish  Directory
had  three  accredited  ministers,  resident  at  Lille,  during  the  late
negotiations  for  peace,  to  counteract  the  King’s  minister,  Lord
Malmesbury.’ 3  This  statement  is  unsupported  by  any  evidence,
and  it  is  contradicted  by  Wolfe  Tone,  but  Tone  adds  that  Lewins
was  actively  employed  in  Luxemburg  and  elsewhere,  with  that

1  There  appear  to  have  been  two
distinct  negotiations,  one  coming
from  Talleyrand,  and  the  other  from
one  or  more  of  the  Directors.  Com¬
pare  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt ,  iii.,
Appendix,  vii-ix  ;  Malmesbury  Corre¬
spondence ,  iii.  580-584.

2  Malmesbury  Correspondence ,  iii.
587,  088.  There  was  a  later  note  of
Oct.  1,  intended  to  throw  the  blame
of  the  rupture  on  the  English,  but  it
in  no  degree  modified  the  French
terms.  (Pp.  588,  589.)

s  Debate  in  the  House  of  Peers,

Feb.  19,  1798,  p.  120.  ‘Not  a  word
immediately  from  Napper  Tandy  as
yet,  but  a  person  whom  J.  Tandy  will
not  name,  but  whom  he  describes  as
in  the  confidence  of  Government,  has
assured  him,  there  is  an  account  at
the  Castle  that  he  is  now  at  Lisle  with
Tone  and  others,  and  that  they  have
been  protracting  peace  between  Great
Britain  and  France.’  (J.  W.,  Aug.  11,
1797.)  Higgins  also  stated  that
McNevin,  Tone,  and  Tandy  were  at
Lille  during  the  negotiation.  (F.  H.,
Oct.  24,  1797.)

CH.  XXV. II.

FRENCH  NEGLECT  OF  IRELAND.

397

object,1  and  Lewins,  himself,  has  mentioned  that,  about  this
time,  he  received,  at  Paris,  formal  assurances  from  the  French
Government,  that  they  -would  make  no  peace,  without  stipulating
for  Irish  independence.2  The  conferences  at  Lille  sufficiently
show  the  worthlessness  of  such  assurances.  Ireland,  as  far  as
is  known,  was  never,  from  first  to  last,  even  mentioned  in  them,
and  the  lesson  derived  from  this  silence  is  made  much  stronger,
by  a  document  which  has  not  yet  passed  into  history.  It  will
be  remembered,  that  the  French  demand  for  the  restitution  of
all  English  conquests,  made  during  the  war,  was  put  forward
as  a  mere  preliminary  to  negotiation,  and  Maret  candidly  told
Malmesbury,  that  the  original  instructions,  which  were  drawn
up  for  the  legation,  by  De  la  Croix,  were  so  extravagant,  that
they  did  not  venture  to  bring  them  forward.3  They  may  be
found  in  the  French  Foreign  Office,4  and  they  amply  justify  the
description.  In  addition  to  the  demands  which  have  been
mentioned,  the  French  plenipotentiaries  were  to  insist  on  the
surrender  of  Jersey  and  Guernsey;  on  the  restoration  of  Canada,
and  the  N  ewfoundland  fishery ;  on  the  cession  of  Gibraltar  to
Spain,  and  they  were  even  to  endeavour  to  obtain  the  restoration
of  those  great  Indian  dominions  which  had  been  wrested  from
France  in  1754.  But  this  document,  which  enumerated,  in
the  most  extravagant  form,  all  that  France  hoped  to  extort  from
a  humiliated  England,  keeps  an  absolute  silence  about  Ireland
and  Irish  independence.  What  clearer  proof  could  there  be
that  Ireland  was,  in  truth,  but  a  pawn  in  the  game ;  that  in
endeavouring  to  convulse  her  with  civil  war,  the  French  Govern¬
ment  looked  to  no  other  object,  than  the  temporary  embarrass¬
ment  of  the  enemy  ;  that  even  if  a  French  invasion  had  proved
successful,  Ireland  would  probably,  as  Grattan  warned  his
countrymen,  have  been  abandoned  at  the  peace,  in  compensa¬
tion  for  some  real  object  of  French  ambition  ?

It  would  not  have  been  altogether  the  first  experience  of  the
kind.  In  1728,  Marshal  Broglie  had  obtained  permission  to
recruit  for  the  French  service  in  Ireland,  and  great  numbers  of
Irishmen  had  passed  under  the  French  flag.  A  melancholy  and

1  Memoirs,  ii.  469.  3  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.

2  Memoir  of  Thompson  [Lewins]  621,  640,  557.

to  the  French  Government,  26  pri-  4  Tome  Supplementaire,  xv.

maire,  an  8.  (F.F.O.)

398

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxvin.

striking  memoir,  which  was  presented  to  D’Argenson  in  1757,
complains  that,  £  at  the  peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  the  Irish  were
abandoned  to  their  evil  fortune.  No  stipulation  was  made  for
the  revocation  of  an  Act  passed  by  the  Irish  Parliament  during
the  war,  which  incapacitated  all  Irishmen  who  were  then  in  the
French  service,  or  who  subsequently  entered  it,  from  succeeding
to  property.  The  French  Government  did  not  even  stipulate
for  an  amnesty  for  those  who  had  already  incurred  the  penalty
pronounced  by  the  Act,  and  yet,’  continues  the  memoir, £  he  who
will  read  the  second  article  of  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  will  find
that  Holland  formally  stipulated  an  amnesty  for  all  the  officers,
soldiers,  and  subjects  of  France,  who  had  served  the  Republic
during  the  whole  course  of  the  war,  with  permission  for  them
to  re-enter  into  the  enjoyment  of  their  goods,  privileges,  rights,
&c. — and  it  is  well  known  that  there  were  many  of  those  sub¬
jects — even  entire  corps.  What  Holland  then  exacted  from  a  king
of  France,  a  king  of  France  might  assuredly  have  exacted  from
a  king  of  England.’  He  did  not  do  so,  and  to  this  conspicuous
abandonment  and  neglect  the  memorialists  ascribed  the  Act  of
Parliament  of  1757,  which  condemned  to  death  all  English,
Irish,  and  Scotch  subjects,  who  were  found  in  the  French  service
after  September  29,  1757,  or  who  should  hereafter  enter  it.1

It  was  in  the  midst  of  the  conferences  of  Lille,  that  the
greatest  Irishman  of  the  eighteenth  century — one  of  the  great¬
est  and  best  men  who  have  ever  appeared  in  English  politics —
vanished  from  the  scene.  The  last  days  of  Edmund  Burke,
though  soothed  by  that  deep,  passionate,  and  devoted  friendship,
which  he  had  pre-eminently  the  gift  of  inspiring,  were  very  sad.
The  death  of  his  only  son  had  broken  his  heart;  and  in  the
triumph  of  the  Revolution,  he  saw  the  eclipse  of  all  that  he
valued  the  most  in  public  life.  ‘  If  I  shall  live  much  longer,
he  wrote  shortly  before  his  death,  £  I  shall  see  an  end  of  all  that
is  worth  living  for  in  this  world.’  Among  the  subjects  that
occupied  his  thoughts  during  the  last  months  of  his  life,  Irish
affairs  took  a  prominent  place,  and  he  watched  them  with  the
gloomiest  forebodings.  £  The  Government,’  he  wrote,  £  is  losing
the  hearts  of  the  people,  if  it  has  not  quite  lost  them.  .  .  .  The
Opposition  in  that  country,  as  well  as  in  this,  is  running  the

1  French  Foreign  Office.

CH  XX Tin.

DEATH  OF  BURKE.

399

whole  course  of  Jacobinism,  and  losing  credit  amongst  the
sober  people,  as  tbe  other  loses  credit  with  the  people  at  large.’ 1
The  United  Ireland  movement  he  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest
calamities  that  could  have  befallen  the  country,  and  he  predicted
utter  ruin  if  it  succeeded.  ‘  Great  Britain,’  ho  wrote,  ‘  would  be
ruined  by  the  separation  of  Ireland  ;  but  as  there  are  degrees
even  in  ruin,  it  would  fall  the  most  heavily  on  Ireland.  By
such  a  separation,  Ireland  would  be  the  most  completely  undone
country  in  the  world ;  the  most  wretched,  the  most  distracted,
and  in  the  end,  the  most  desolate  part  of  the  habitable  globe.
Little  do  many  people  in  Ireland  consider  how  much  of  its  pros¬
perity  has  been  owing  to,  and  still  depends  upon,  its  intimate
connection  with  this  kingdom.’2  Burke  died  on  July  9,  and  at
his  own  urgent  request  he  was  buried,  without  pageantry  or
ostentation,  in  the  quiet  churchyard  of  Beaconsfield,  and  in  the
same  grave  as  his  son  and  brother.  ‘  There  is  but  one  event,’
wrote  Canning  to  Malmesbury,  ‘  but  that  is  an  event  for  the
world.  Burke  is  dead.  .  .  .  He  had  among  all  his  great
qualities,  that  for  which  the  world  did  not  give  him  sufficient
credit,  of  creating  in  those  about  him,  very  strong  attachments
and  affection,  as  well  as  the  unbounded  admiration,  which  I  every
day  am  more  and  more  convinced  was  his  due.  .  .  .  He  is  the
man  that  will  mark  this  age,  marked  as  it  is  itself  by  events,  to
all  time.’3

The  intrigues  of  the  French  Revolutionists  with  the  United
Irishmen,  which  had  been  in  some  degree  suspended  by  the
probability  of  peace,  received  a  new  stimulus  from  the  rupture
of  the  negotiations,  but  only  a  small  part  of  them  escaped  the
notice  of  the  English  Ministers.  Their  channels  of  information
were  numerous  and  very  good.  In  the  middle  of  May,  they  re¬
ceived  from  McNally  an  account  of  the  mission  of  Lewins,4  and

1  Burke’s  Correspondence,  iv.  433.

2  Prior’s  Life  of  Bur  lie,  ii.  393.

8  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.
398,  399.

4  J.  W.,  May  16,  1797.  On  June
20  the  Prince  de  Bouillon,  who  ap¬
pears  to  have  frequently  given  valu¬
able  information,  wrote  to  Dundas,
on  the  authority  of  one  of  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  Council  or  Committee  at
Paris,  that  a  ‘  project  against  Ireland,

digested  by  Buonaparte,  and  intended
to  be  committed  to  his  direction  and
execution  in  the  event  of  a  separate
peace  being  signed  with  the  Emperor,
had  been  under  consideration  and  ac¬
cepted.’  This  letter-  was  at  once  for¬
warded  to  Camden,  and  it  was  cor¬
roborated  in  July  by  a  letter  from
Wickham,  who  stated  that  an  expedi¬
tion  to  Ireland  had  been  finally  de¬
termined  on  ;  that  the  command  had

400

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

they  learnt  from  the  same  informant  in  July,  that  McNevin  had
disappeared,  and  was  believed  by  James  Tandy  to  have  gone
to  France.  Later  letters  informed  them,  that  a  man  named
Chambers  had  brought  from  France  assurances,  that  the  French
Government  would  make  no  peace  which  did  not  include  the
independence  of  Ireland ;  that  an  invasion  was  promised  when
the  first  fair  winds  blew  after  the  equinoctial  gales ;  that  Tone
and  Napper  Tandy  were  to  take  part  in  it,  and  that  the  French
Government  had  agreed  to  give  Ireland  complete  independence.
‘  All  mouths,’  said  McNally,  ‘were  spreading  this  news  through
every  village  in  the  kingdom,’  and  preparations  were  busily
making  to  receive  the  invaders.1  Higgins  furnished  an  inde¬
pendent  corroboration  of  these  statements,  and  he  mentions  a
meeting  in  Dame  Street,  in  which,  in  the  presence  of  Emmet,
Arthur  O’Connor,  and  other  leaders,  letters  were  read  from
McNevin,  and  from  Browne  of  Antrim,  giving  the  most  abso¬
lute  and  unequivocal  assurance  of  the  French  Directory  having
agreed  to  an  invasion  of  Ireland,  ‘  for  the  purpose  of  assist¬
ing  the  natives  to  rise  in  arms,  and  throw  off  the  English
yoke.’ 2

The  Government  were  perfectly  aware  that  Hamburg  was
the  great  centre  of  Irish  diplomacy ;  they  discovered  the  part
which  Lady  Edward  Fitzgerald  took  in  the  correspondence,  and
the  lady  to  whom  her  letters  were  addressed ;  and  they  even
derived  some  of  their  best  information  about  the  conspiracy  in
Dublin,  from  Hamburg  letters.  Lord  Grenville  had  a  corre¬
spondent  in  that  town,  from  whom  he  obtained  much  informa¬
tion  in  the  August  of  1797,  and  a  still  more  important  channel
of  information  was  soon  afterwards  opened  by  Lord  Downshire.
The  new  informer  was  Samuel  Turner,  who  was  the  son  of  a
person  of  some  property  near  Newry,  and  who  had  taken  a  con¬
spicuous  part  in  a  committee  of  Ulster  United  Irishmen,  formed
in  the  spring  of  1797  for  the  purpose  of  baffling  Government
prosecutions.  He  fled  from  Ireland,  went  to  Hamburg  in

been  offered  to  Buonaparte,  who  (on  ii.  41,42.)  Other  letters  of  the  Prince
the  advice  of  Barras)  declined  it ;  de  Bouillon,  about  the  intended  in-

that  it  was  then  assigned  to  Hoohe,  vasion  of  Ireland,  had  been  written
and  that  the  chiefs  of  the  conspiracy  Oct.  4,  1796,  Feb.  14,  1797,
in  Ireland  had  received  directions  to  1  J.  W.,  July  28,  Sept.  11,  26

remain  quiet  till  the  beginning  of  Dec.  8,  1797.

August.’  (Wickham’s  Correspondence,  2  F.  H.,  Oct.  17,  20,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

SECEET  INFORMATION.

401

June,  lived  there  under  the  name  of  Furnes,  and  seems  to  have
obtained  the  confidence  of  Reinhard,  who  gave  him  a  pass¬
port,  with  which  he  went  to  Paris  at  the  end  of  July.  It
appears  to  have  been  in  the  winter  of  1797,  that  he  first  under¬
took,  through  the  medium  of  Lord  Downshire,  to  give  informa¬
tion  to  the  English  Government,  and  he  gave  them  full  and
valuable  details,  not  only  about  the  proceedings  of  the  con¬
spirators  on  the  Continent,  but  also  about  the  names,  characters,
and  objects  of  the  leading  United  Irishmen  in  Ireland.  From
no  other  source,  indeed,  does  the  Government  appear,  at  this
time,  to  have  received  accounts  which  were  at  once  so  ample  and
so  accurate,  for  Turner  was  quite  free  from  the  anxiety  to  screen
individuals,  which  was  manifest  in  the  letters  of  McNally.1

After  the  illustrations  that  have  been  given,  of  the  characters
of  the  men  who  held  the  first  positions  in  Paris,  it  will  not  appear
surprising  that  there  also  the  English  Government  were  able  to
obtain  abundant  information.  The  names  of  the  informers  were
carefully  concealed  by  the  few  persons  who  were  in  the  secret,
even  in  their  confidential  correspondence,  but  they  will  probably,
some  day,  be  found  among  their  unpublished  papers,  and  the
mystery  might  perhaps  be  even  now  unravelled  from  accessible
documents,  if  something  of  the  patience  and  ingenuity  that  have
been  applied  to  the  authorship  of  Junius,  were  devoted  to  the
task.  Most  of  this  information  was  probably  ultimately  due  to
William  Wickham,  who  had  been  sent  to  Switzerland  on  a
special  mission  in  October  1794,  and  had  been  appointed,  about
nine  months  later,  minister  in  that  country.  It  was  his
special  task  to  assist,  with  money  and  with  advice,  the  French
emigrants,  and  the  conspirators  and  insurgents  against  the
Revolutionary  Government  in  the  interior  of  France,  and  he
succeeded  in  opening  communications  with  great  numbers  of
Frenchmen,  in  confidential  and  important  positions.2  Among

1  Turner’s  letters  to  Lord  Down¬
shire  and  to  the  Ministers  were  signed
‘  Richardson,’  but  his  true  name  was
sent  by  Camden  to  Portland,  Dec.  9,
1797.  His  full  and  interesting  re¬
velations  are  at  the  Record  Office.
See  especially  Dec.  9,  19,  1797,  and
also  a  letter  from  ‘  Richardson  ’  to
Lord  Downshire,  dated  Nov.  19,  1797,
sent-  by  Camden  to  Portland,  Jan.  5,

269

1798.  See,  too,  the  Castlereagh  Cor¬
respondence,  i.  277-288.

2  See  that  curious  and  very  in¬
structive  book,  the  Correspondence  of
William  Wickham  ;  and  also  Malmes¬
bury  Correspondence,  Yii.  454,  531.  A
quantity  of  letters,  addressed  in  cipher
and  under  false  names,  fell  into  the
hands  of  Moreau,  who,  however,  foi
a  long  time  thought  tit  to  conceal  the

402

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cn.  xxviii.

them,  was  Pichegru,1  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  French  generals,
who,  as  early  as  1795,  appears  to  have  meditated  a  Royalist
restoration,  and  to  have  looked  forward  to  playing  the  part  which
Monk  played  in  England ;  which  Benedict  Arnold  wished  to
play  in  America,  and  Dumouriez  in  France.  Pichegru’s  negotia¬
tions  with  the  Royalists  were  in  part  discovered,  and  he  was  re¬
moved  from  his  military  command,  but  he  was  speedily  elected
a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  Five  Hundred,  which  was  strongly
opposed  to  Jacobin  violence,  and  he  was  president  of  that  body
when  the  Revolution  of  the  18th  fructidor  ruined  his  prospects,
and  condemned  him  to  transportation  to  Guiana.  Barthelemy
had  been  French  minister  in  Switzerland,  when  Wickham  was
in  that  country.  Wickham  describes  him  as  very  hostile,2  but
the  English  minister  succeeded  in  opening-  some  channel  of  in¬
formation  which  enabled  him  to  see  the  most  confidential  corre¬
spondence  and  instructions  of  his  rival.3  Whether  this  source
of  information  was  still  available  when  Barthelemy  became  one
of  the  Directors,  I  am  not  able  to  say ;  but  there  is  at  least  good
reason  for  believing,  that  men  in  very  confidential  positions,  both
in  the  French  Foreign  Office  and  about  the  Directors,  were  in
English  pay.  The  arrete  of  the  French  Directory,  ordering
the  expulsion  of  Malmesbury  from  French  soil,  was  communi¬
cated  at  once  by  a  secret  channel  to  London,  and  was  known  to
Pitt  even  before  it  was  known  to  Malinesbui-y,4  and  two  import¬
ant  letters  from  Reinhard  to  De  la  Croix,  relating  to  the  mission  of
Lewins,  and  also  a  French  translation  of  McNevin’s  memorial  to
the  Directory,  speedily  found  their  way  into  the  English  archives.5

fact,  probably  because  he  had  him¬
self  been  mixed  up  with  Royalist
conspiracies.  Wickham’s  Correspon¬
dence,  i.  416 ;  ii.  28.  Lacretelle,  Precis
Historique  de  la  Revolution.  JHrec-
toirc,  ii.  49-67,  109.

1  Wickham’s  Correspondence,  i.
184,  274,  276,  282,  283,  326,  327,  356,
357,  369,  374-378,  472,  492-495;  ii.
40.

2  Ibid.  i.  65-67.

3  Ibid.  i.  31,  155,  339,  356,  462,
463.

4  Malmesbury  Correspondence,  iii.
580,  581.  It  is  said  to  have  been  com¬
municated  to  Pitt  by  a  banker  named
Boyd.  In  the  Irish  State  Paper  Office
there  is  a  letter  (Sept.  9, 1796),  signed

N.  Madgett,  containing  some  (not
very  important)  information  from
Paris.  The  writer  seems  to  have
been  a  relation  of  the  Madgett  often
mentioned  by  Tone,  who  was  very
confidentially  employed  in  the  French
Foreign  Office.

5  See  Castlereagli  Correspondence ,
i.  272-310.  Compare  Malmesbury  Cor¬
respondence,  iii.  520,  580.  In  a  letter-
written  as  early  as  Aug.  30,  1797,
Camden  comments  upon  McNevin's
plan  for  a  descent  on  Ireland,  which,
he  says,  ‘is  conceived  very  ably,
and  shows  a  thorough  knowledge
of  the  dispositions  of  the  country.’
(Camden  to  Portland,  Aug.  30,  1797.)

CH  XXVIII.

MUTINY  IN  THE  FLEET.

403

The  hopes  of  the  conspirators  were  now  principally  directed
to  the  spread  of  disaffection  in  the  English  navy,  and  to  the
Dutch  expedition  for  the  invasion  of  Ireland  which  was  prepar¬
ing  at  the  Texel.  The  first  evil  had  attained  its  climax  before
the  conferences  of  Lille,  and  had  probably  been  one  of  the  reasons
which  made  the  English  Ministers  so  anxious  to  negotiate.
Some  serious  signs  of  mutiny,  which  had  appeared  in  the  fleet
before  Cadiz,  had  been  repressed  with  great  courage  and  energy,
and  five  of  the  mutineers  had  been  hanged  ; 1  but  in  the  April  of
1797,  a  mutiny  broke  out  in  the  Channel  fleet  at  Spithead,  which
in  its  magnitude  and  success  had  no  precedent  in  English  his¬
tory.  The  grievances  alleged  by  the  seamen  were  serious,  and
for  the  most  part  only  too  well  founded.  Their  pay  had  been
unchanged  since  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  though  the  price  of
provisions  had  greatly,  and,  since  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  enor¬
mously  risen,  and  though  the  allowances  both  of  the  army  and
the  militia  had  been  recently  increased.  The  Greenwich  pen¬
sions  for  sailors  were  still  but  71.  a  year,  while  the  Chelsea  pen¬
sions  for  soldiers  were  13Z.  Unfair  and  unequal  distribution  of
prize  money ;  defects,  both  in  quality  and  quantity,  in  the
allowance  of  food  ;  the  excessive  severity  of  some  of  the  rules
of  the  service,  and  the  harsh  and  tyrannical  conduct  of  many
officers,  were  also  alleged.  Reports  of  spreading  discontent
came  to  the  Admiralty,  and  orders  were  given  to  send  the  fleet
to  sea,  but  an  immediate  revolt  was  the  result.  It  was  so  per¬
fectly  concerted,  that  the  whole  Channel  fleet,  on  which  the
security  of  the  English  coast  mainly  depended,  passed  without
a  blow  into  the  hands  of  the  mutineers,  and  it  remained  in  them
from  the  fifteenth  to  the  twenty-third  of  April.  The  Admiralty
were  obliged  to  negotiate,  and  the  offer  of  a  general  pardon,  and
the  concession  of  all  the  chief  demands,  induced  the  sailors  to
return  to  their  allegiance.  Doubts,  however,  soon  spread,  and
false  reports  were  circulated,  and  on  May  7,  wrhen  a  rumour  had
arrived,  that  a  French  fleet  had  left  Brest  harbour,  and  when
orders  were  given  to  the  British  fleet  to  set  sail,  the  mutiny  broke
out  again.  After  a  slight  resistance,  it  was  perfectly  successful ;
the  unpopular  officers  were  sent  on  shore,  and  for  several  days
the  situation  seemed  desperate.  On  the  14th,  however,  Admiral
1  James’s  Naval  History,  ii.  60,  61.

404

ENGLAND  IN  TIIE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  oh.  xxvih.

Howe,  who  was  very  popular  with  the  sailors,  went  down  to  the
fleet,  and  succeeded  in  bringing  it  back,  but  only  on  condition
that  a  large  number  of  the  officers  were  superseded.  The  fleet
then  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Brittany.

A  precedent  so  fatal  to  all  discipline  threatened  an  utter
disorganisation  of  the  British  navy,  at  a  time  when  the  very
salvation  of  the  Empire  depended  upon  its  efficiency.  The  con¬
tagion  of  successful  insubordination  naturally  spread.  On  May
10,  while  Howe  was  quelling  the  mutiny  at  St.  Helen’s,  another
broke  out  in  the  ships  at  Sheerness,  and  it  was  soon  evident
that,  unlike  the  former  mutiny,  a  strong  political  element
mingled  with  it.  Revolutionary  handbills  had  been  industriously
circulated,  and  active  agitators  appeared  among  the  sailors.
The  mutineers  chose  a  bold,  ambitious,  and  educated  sailor
named  Parker  for  their  admiral.  Under  his  orders  the  revolted
fleet  sailed  to  the  Nore,  and  partly  by  persuasion,  and  partly  by
force,  all  the  ships  of  war  in  the  Nore  and  in  the  Medway  were
brought  into  the  conspiracy.  The  news  spread  to  the  northern
fleet,  which  was  blockading  the  Dutch  near  Texel ;  the  red  flag
of  revolt  was  speedily  hoisted,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  fleet
abandoned  Admiral  Duncan  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  aud  sailed
for  the  Nore.  The  Board  of  Admiralty  went  to  Spithead,  and
tried  to  negotiate  with  the  mutineers,  but  without  success.
The  revolted  squadron  was  raised  by  the  ships  from  the  North
to  twenty-four  sail.  It  proceeded  to  blockade  the  mouth  of
the  Thames  and  seize  merchant  vessels,  and  the  inhabitants  of
the  towns  along  the  coast  began  moving  their  families  and  their
goods,  in  hourly  expectation  of  a  bombardment,  not  by  a  foreign,
but  by  an  English  fleet.

Never,  perhaps,  in  the  long  history  of  England,  had  there
been  a  period  when  the  peril  was  so  great.  Happily,  both  the
French  and  the  Dutch  were  unprepared,  ill  informed,  and  per¬
fectly  passive,  for  if  an  invasion  of  the  North  of  Ireland  had
been  undertaken  in  these  critical  weeks,  it  could  not  possibly
have  been  prevented.  The  Government  and  country  met  the
danger  with  courage  and  determination.  A  flotilla  of  gun¬
boats  was  fitted  out.  Volunteers  were  raised.  The  buoys  and
beacons  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames  were  removed.  Soldiers
were  massed  along  the  threatened  parts  of  the  coast ;  batteries

CH.  XXVIII.

END  OF  THE  MUTINY.

405

were  constructed,  and  furnaces  for  heating  shot  red  hot  pre¬
pared.  In  response  to  a  King’s  message,  the  Parliament
hastily  passed  a  stringent  law  for  repressing  treason  in  the
army  and  navy,  and  a  royal  proclamation  forbade,  under  pain  of
death,  all  intercourse,  either  personal  or  by  letter,  with  the
ships  that  were  in  rebellion.

These  methods  gradually  succeeded.  The  difficulties  of
obtaining  water  and  provisions ;  the  divisions  and  insubordi¬
nation  that  soon  broke  out  in  the  revolted  fleet ;  the  feeling  of
loyalty  and  patriotism,  which  was  by  no  means  extinct  among
the  sailors,  and  the  clear  signs  that  the  nation  repudiated  and
reprobated  their  conduct,  had  soon  their  effect.  Parker  speedily
lost  his  authority,  and  every  ship  was  left  to  its  own  guidance.
In  each  of  them  there  was  a  loyal  element,  and  in  most  of  them
there  was  soon  one  of  those  strong  reactions  of  feeling  to  which
impulsive  sailors  are  peculiarly  liable.  It  was  a  strange  and
touching  fact  that,  on  June  4,  the  King’s  birthday,  the  red  flag
was  hauled  down  on  every  ship  except  that  of  Parker,  and  a
royal  salute  was  fired,  and  the  royal  colours  were  hoisted.  Soon
ship  after  ship  began  to  drop  away.  Lord  Northesk,  the  captain
of  one  of  them,  who  had  been  detained  as  prisoner,  was  sent  on
shore  to  carry  a  letter  to  the  King.  The  sailors  in  the  fleet  at
Plymouth,  and  the  sailors  in  the  fleet  at  Spithead,  exhorted
their  revolted  comrades  to  make  their  submission.  The  ships
from  the  northern  fleet  went  back  to  Admiral  Duncan,  and  the
whole  fleet  at  last  returned  to  its  allegiance.  On  June  14,  the
mutiny  of  the  Norewas  terminated  by  the  arrest  of  Parker,  and
a  few  days  later  he  was  tried  and  hauged.  Some  of  the  other
ringleaders  were  either  executed  or  flogged.

It  is  not  surprising  that,  after  such  an  episode,  all  the
enemies  of  England  should  have  entertained  sanguine  hopes
that  the  invincible  fleet  would  soon  perish  by  internal  decay.
Few  persons  could  have  expected  that  its  tone  and  discipline
and  efficiency  could  be  speedily  restored,  and  some  months
elapsed  before  all  dangerous  symptoms  had  passed.  In  Sep¬
tember,  the  crew  of  a  frigate  called  the  ‘  Hermione,’  which  was
quartered  in  the  West  Indies,  being  exasperated  by  the  gross
tyranny  of  their  captain,  rose  in  mutiny,  murdered  their
officers  and  carried  the  ship  into  a  Spanish  port,  and  in  the

406

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

following  month  serious  signs  of  insubordination  appeared  in
the  ships  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.1  The  reputation  of
British  sailors  had  never  sunk  so  low  as  in  the  spring  and
summer  of  1797.  But  the  grievances  that  were  felt,  were  much
more  professional  than  political ;  the  evil  was  much  more
riotous  insubordination  than  deliberate  disaffection ;  and  good
administration,  the  redress  of  grievances,  and  perhaps,  still  more,
active  service  under  commanders  in  whom  the  sailors  had  un¬
bounded  confidence,  soon  effected  a  cure.  It  is  a  memorable
fact,  that  the  few  years  that  immediately  followed  the  mutiny  of
the  Nore,  form  one  of  the  most  glorious  periods  in  the  whole
history  of  the  British  navy.

That  history  is,  indeed,  a  very  singular  one,  when  we  con¬
sider  at  once  the  elements  of  which  the  British  navy  was
composed,  the  treatment  it  underwent,  and  the  services  it
rendered.  Criminals  whose  offences  were  not  very  great,  or
against  whom  the  legal  evidence  was  not  perfectly  conclusive,
were  at  this  time  constantly  permitted  to  escape  trial,  by  en¬
listing  in  it,  and,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  press-gangs  hung
specially  around  the  prison  doors,  to  seize  upon  discharged
prisoners  when  their  sentences  had  expired.  The  navy,  too,
was  usually  the  last  resort  of  tainted  reputations  and  broken
careers.  Scapegraces  in  respectable  families,  disqualified
attorneys,  cashiered  excisemen,  dismissed  clerks,  labourers
who  through  idleness  or  drunkenness  had  lost  their  employ¬
ments,  men  from  every  walk  of  life,  who,  through  want  of
capacity  or  want  of  character  had  found  other  careers  closed
to  them,  poured  steadily  into  it.2  With  these  were  mixed
multitudes  of  United  Irishmen,  and  of  other  Irish  peasants,  who
had  been  torn  from  their  cabins  by  the  illegal  violence  of  Lord
Carhampton,  or  under  the  provisions  of  the  Insurrection  Act ;  3

1  James’s  Naval  History,  ii.  102-
104.

2  See  the  Annual  Itvyister,  1797,
p.  208  ;  James’s  Naval  History,  ii.  65.

3  I  have  already  noticed  the  large
proportion  of  Irish  sailors  in  the
British  navy  in  some  periods  of  the
war.  I  may  add  a  passage  from  the
very  interesting  speech  on  the  Catho¬
lic  question  by  Sir  J.  Hippisley,  pub¬
lished  in  1810.  ‘  Sir  J.  H.  held  In  his
hand  a  list  of  forty-six  ships  of  the

line,  which  at  two  different  periods
had  belonged  to  the  Plymouth  divi¬
sion,  and  in  the  majority  of  which
the  Catholics  greatly  exceeded  the
Protestants  ;  in  some  of  the  first  and
second  rates  amounting  even  to  two-
thirds;  in  one  or  two  first-rates  nearly
the  whole  ;  and  in  the  naval  hospital,
about  four  years  since,  of  470  sick,
303  were  Catholics.’  (Substance  of
the  speech  of  Sir  J.  Hippisley,  May
18,  1810,  p.  53.)

CH.  XX Y Ill*

DUTCH  FLEET  AT  TEX  EL.

407

and  multitudes  of  merchant  seamen  who  were  victims  of  the
press-gangs.  The  ships  were  often  hells  upon  earth.  The  pay
was  miserable.  The  allowances  were  inadequate.  The  lash
was  in  constant  use,  and  in  no  other  English  profession  were
acts  of  brutal  violence  and  tyranny  so  common.  Yet  it  was
out  of  these  elements,  and  under  these  circumstances,  that  a
navy  was  formed,  which  under  Duncan,  and  Collingwood,  and
Nelson,  covered  England  with  undying  glory,  carried  her
triumphantly  through  the  struggle  with  the  united  navies  of
the  Continent,  swept  every  sea,  aud  defeated  every  rival.  Reck¬
less  courage  and  contempt  for  death,  a  boundless  spirit  of
adventure,  complete  devotion  to  every  chief  who  was  fully
trusted,  discipline  and  fertility  of  resource  in  the  hour  of  battle,
kindliness  and  chivalry  in  the  hour  of  victory,  were  seldom
wanting,  and  the  careless,  dauntless,  generous,  childlike  sailor
type,  which  shines  so  brightly  in  the  life  of  Nelson,  and  in  the
songs  of  Dibdin,  is  perhaps  more  popular  than  any  other  with
the  English  people.

All  the  qualities  of  the  British  navy  were  now  needed  to
guard  against  the  storm  which  was  brewing  in  the  North.
Wolfe  Tone  arrived  at  the  Texel  on  July  8,  and  his  journals
furnish  a  vivid  and  authentic  picture  of  the  expedition.1  The
admiral,  De  Winter,  and  still  more,  General  Daendels — a  man
who,  in  after  years,  played  a  great  part  as  Governor  of  Java —
at  once  impressed  him  by  their  manifest  resolution  and  ability,
and  he  was  no  less  struck  by  the  enormous  superiority  of  the
Dutch  fleet  at  the  Texel  to  the  French  fleet  at  Brest;.  The
Dutch  expedition  for  the  invasion  of  Ireland,  now  consisted  of
fifteen  ships  of  the  line,  besides  ten  frigates  and  sloops,  and
1 3,544  soldiers,  a  force,  in  the  opinion  of  Tone,  amply  sufficient
to  accomplish  the  task ;  and  a  French  expedition,  in  which
Hoche  was  to  take  part,  was  intended  to  follow  it.  The  number
of  the  ships  with  Duncan  varied  greatly,  and  the  intelligence
relating  to  them  was  very  scanty.  At  the  period  of  the  mutiny
of  the  Nore,  the  desertion  of  many  ships  appears  to  have
reduced  the  fleet  almost  to  a  skeleton,2  but  at  that  time  the

1  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  419-441.  cealed  the  desertion  from  the  Dutch

2  James  states  that  Admiral  Dun-  by  making  signals,  ‘  as  if  to  the  main
can  then  found  himself  with  only  one  body  of  his  fleet  in  the  offing.’  ( Naval
ship  besides  his  own,  but  that  he  con-  History,  ii.  66.)  In  the  very  elabo*

408

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvm.

Dutch  expedition  was  still  unprepared.  On  July  9,  all  was
ready  at  the  Texel,  and  at  this  date  the  Dutch  admiral  estimated
that  the  ships  of  the  line  in  the  English  fleet  were  at  the  utmost
not  more  than  thirteen,  and  he  believed  that  they  could  make
no  effectual  opposition.1  This  forecast  may  have  been  too
confident,  but  English  sailors,  who  knew  how  immeasurably
superior  the  Dutch  navy  still  was  to  the  navies  of  France  and
Spain,  in  seamen,  ships,  and  discipline,  and  how  stubbornly  it
had  always  contended  with  England  for  the  empire  of  the  sea,
would  hardly  think  lightly  of  a  combat  with  a  superior  Dutch
fleet,  commanded  by  a  very  competent  admiral,  and  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  enemies’  coast.

But  the  winds,  which  had  so  signally  defeated  the  French
expedition  to  Bantry  Bay,  when  success  seemed  almost  within
its  grasp,  once  more  assisted  the  English,  in  a  way  which,  in
another  age,  would  have  been  deemed  manifestly  providential.
Day  after  day,  week  after  week,  with  a  monotony  which  rather
resembled  the  trade  winds  of  the  tropics,  than  the  inconstant
climate  of  the  North,  the  wind  blew  steadily  against  the  Dutch,
making  it  impossible  for  their  fleet  to  sail  out  of  the  Texel.  A
concurrence  of  wind  and  tide  was  necessary  for  it  to  do  so,  and
for  more  than  six  weeks,  this  concurrence  never  once  occurred.
In  the  mean  time,  Duncan  received  reinforcements,  and  the
favourable  season  was  fast  passing  away.  The  diary  of  Tone
describes  graphically  the  rage  of  disappointed  hope  that  was
gnawing  at  his  heart.  ‘  At  Brest,  we  had,  against  all  pro¬
bability,  a  fair  wind  for  five  days  successively,  during  all  which
time  we  were  not  ready,  and  at  last,  when  we  did  arrive  at  our
destination,  the  wind  changed,  and  we  missed  our  blow.  Here
all  is  ready,  and  nothing  is  wanting,  but  a  fair  wind.  .  .  .
Everything  now  depends  upon  the  wind,  and  we  are  totally
helpless.  ...  I  am,  to-day,  eighteen  days  aboard,  and  we  have
not  had  eighteen  minutes  of  fair  wind.  ...  I  am,  to-day,
twenty-five  days  aboard,  and  at  a  time  when  twenty-five  hours
are  of  importance.  There  seems  to  be  a  fate  in  this  business.
Five  weeks,  I  believe  six  weeks,  the  English  fleet  was  paralysed

rate  account,  however,  of  the  mutiny  the  other  ships  remained  with  him.
in  the  Annual  Register,  it  is  said  that  ( Annual  Register,  1797,  pp.  214,  215.)
Duncan  was  deserted  by  only  four  1  Tone's  Memoirs,  ii.  433.

xnen-of-war  and  one  sloop,  and  that

CJI.  XXVIII,

REPORTS  FROM  IRELAND.

409

by  the  mutinies  at  Portsmouth,  Plymouth,  and  the  Nore.  The
sea  was  open,  and  nothing  to  prevent  both  the  Dutch  and
French  fleets  to  put  to  sea.  Nothing  was  ready  ;  that  precious
opportunity,  which  we  can  never  expect  to  return,  was  lost ;  and
now  that  we  are  ready  here,  the  wind  is  against  us,  the  mutiny
is  quelled,  and' we  are  sure  to  be  attacked  by  a  superior  force.  .  .  .
Had  we  been  in  Ireland,  at  the  moment  of  the  insurrection  of
the  Nore,  we  should,  beyond  a  doubt,  have  had,  at  least,  that
fleet.  .  .  .  The  wind  is  as  foul  as  ever,  viz.  south-west,  in  or
near  which  point  it  has  now  continued  thirty-six  days  that  I  am
aboard.’ 1

Two  United  Irishmen,  fresh  from  Ireland,  arrived  at  the
beleaguered  fleet,  and  their  news  was  not  encouraging.  The
people,  they  said,  were  losing  confidence  in  the  organisation,
and  in  French  assistance,  especially  since  the  French  Govern¬
ment  had  suffered  the  great  crisis  of  the  mutiny  to  pass,  without
making  the  smallest  attempt  to  profit  by  it.  They  waited,  in
general,  till  the  last  day  allowed  by  the  proclamation,  and  then
made  their  submission,  took  the  oath  of  allegiance,  received  their
pardon,  and  surrendered  their  arms.  There  were  fewer  guns
than  was  supposed,  among  the  United  Irishmen,  and  their
leaders  seemed  wanting  in  promptitude  and  courage.  Three
months  ago,  the  United  Irishmen  said,  an  expedition  to  Ulster
with  only  500  men  would  have  succeeded,  but  1  public  spirit
was  exceedingly  gone  back  in  that  time,  and  a  great  number  of
the  most  active  and  useful  chiefs  were  either  in  prison  or  exile.’
Still,  Down  and  Antrim  were  ready  to  rise,  and  it  was  reported
that  there  were,  last  June,  in  the  former  county,  ‘  twenty-four
regiments  of  1,000  men  each,  ready  organised,  with  all  their
officers  and  sub-officers.’  Tone  himself  believed,  that  if  either  the
Dutch  or  the  French  effected  a  landing,  the  submissive  attitude
of  the  people  would  speedily  cease.  ‘  If  no  landing  can  be
effected,  no  part  remains  for  the  people  to  adopt  but  submission
or  flight.’ 2

One  other  judgment  of  the  probable  effects  of  an  invasion,
given  about  the  same  time,  by  a  man  who  was  very  competent
to  estimate  them,  may  here  be  cited.  McNally  reported  a  con-

.  1  Tone’s  Memoirs,  ii.  421,  424,  427,  435.  3  Ibid.  ii.  428,  436.

410  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii,

versatiou  between  Keogh,  Braughall,  and  himself,  in  which
Keogh  said,  ( that  an  invasion  some  time  since  would  have
settled  the  government  of  the  country  without  bloodshed,  for
men  of  influence  would  have  stood  forward  between  the  adherents
of  Government  and  the  enemy ;  but  now?  who  could  venture  to
say,  he  could  control  the  resentment  of  a  people,  whose  injuries
accumulate  every  day  ?’  ‘  He  thought,’  continues  McNally,  ‘  an
invasion  would  be  attended  with  great  bloodshed.  I  think  so,
too.  I  have  no  doubt,  but  every  man  who  has  taken  an  active
part  against  the  Northern  insurgents,  and  the  Catholic  claims,
stands  proscribed.’ 1

In  the  middle  of  August,  Tone  learnt,  what  he  had  long
feared,  that  the  expedition  to  Ireland,  at  least  on  its  original
scale,  was,  for  the  present,  abandoned.  The  Dutch  admiral
represented  that,  owing  to  the  long  enforced  delay,  the  provisions
of  the  fleet  were  falling  short ;  that  the  favourable  season  had
almost  passed ;  that  the  English  fleet  was  now  stronger  than
the  Dutch  one,  and  that,  under  these  circumstances,  an  expedition
encumbered  with  the  great  number  of  slowdy  sailing  transports,
that  was  required  for  an  army  of  14,000  men,  would  be  exceed¬
ingly  rash,  if  not  absolutely  impracticable.  Various  alternative
plans  were  proposed.  One  was  to  place  two  or  three  thousand
soldiers  on  board  the  frigates,  and  with  them  to  endeavour  to
reach  the  Irish  coast.  Another  was,  that  the  fleet,  alone,  should,
on  a  favourable  opportunity,  sail  out,  and  encounter  that  of
Duncan,  and  that  if  it  won  the  day,  and  the  English  fleet  was
seriously  weakened,  the  enterprise  should  be  resumed,  but  the
troops,  in  the  first  place,  at  any  rate,  landed  on  the  nearer  coast
of  Scotland.  A  third  was  to  land  the  troops  where  they  might
be  collected  in  forty- eight  hours;  to  give  out  that  the  expedition
was  abandoned,  and  then,  when  the  vigilance  of  the  English
was  relaxed,  and  the  equinoctial  gales  obliged  them  to  seek  a
port,  to  seize  a  favourable  opportunity  to  reach  the  coast  of
Scotland.  It  was  proposed  that  a  French  expedition  should  be
directed  to  the  same  point,  and  it  was  hoped  that  a  powerful
army  might  be  assembled  in  Scotland,  part  of  which  might
menace  England  with  invasion,  while  the  remainder  was
despatched  to  Ulster.  In  the  beginning  of  September,  Tone

1  J.  W.,  Sept.  19,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

BATTLE  OF  CAMPERDOWK

411

was  sent  by  the  Dutch  general,  to  communicate  this  plan  to
Hoche.1

Little  more  than  a  month  later,  all  such  schemes  were  crushed
by  the  great  battle  of  Camperdown.  On  October  8,  the  Dutch
fleet  sailed  out  with  a  favourable  wind,  and  on  the  11th,
it  encountered  Duncan,  nine ‘leagues  from  Scheveningen.  In
ships,  the  fleets  were  about  equal,  but  the  English  were  superior
in  the  number  of  men,  and  in  the  weight  of  metal.  The  battle
was  a  very  obstinate  one.  It  was  afterwards  noticed,  that
whereas  in  most  battles  with  the  French  and  Spaniards,  the
English  masts  and  riggings  .were  shattered  and  torn,  in  this
action,  nearly  every  shot  from  the  enemies’  guns  struck  the
opposing  hulls,  and  the  great  and  almost  equal  bloodshed  on
each  side  2  showed  how  stubbornly  the  day  was  fought.  It
ended,  however,  in  a  complete  English  victory.  The  sailors,
who  had  so  lately  been  in  open  mutiny,  fought  with  all  the
valour  of  their  forefathers.  The  flagship  of  Duncan  and  the
flagship  of  De  Winter,  which  were  equal  in  size,  lay  for  three
hours  alongside  of  each  other,  within  the  distance  of  a  pistol  shot,
and  when  at  last  the  Dutch  admiral  struck  his  flag,  he  is  said  to
have  been  the  only  man  on  board  unwounded.  Nine  Dutch  ships
of  the  line,  and  two  Dutch  frigates,  were  captured.  The  shat¬
tered  remnant  of  the  fleet  took  refuge  in  the  Texel,  and  another
of  the  great  dangers  that  had  menaced  England  passed  away.3

A  new  and  not  less  serious  stroke  had  just  fallen  on  the
United  Irishmen  and  on  their  cause.  Two  Frenchmen,  who  had
seemed  destined  to  play  foremost  parts  in  Revolutionary  France,
had  thrown  themselves  heartily  into  the  scheme  for  the  invasion
of  Ireland.  One  of  them  was  Carnot,  who  had  fallen  in  the

1  Tone’s  Mevioirs.  On  Aug-.  30,
Camden  wrote  that  Cooke  had  heard
from  ‘  a  clever  man,  high  in  confidence
among  many  of  the  leaders  of  the
United  Irishmen,  that  a  French  inva¬
sion  was  definitely  determined  on ;  th  at
it  was  to  take  place  in  the  first  fine
weather  after  the  storms  of  the  autumn
eq  uinox ;  that  Tandy,  Tone,  and  Le wins
were  the  principal  agents,  but  that
there  were  other  subordinate  ones  em¬
ployed  in  carrying  intelligence  ;  that
Tandy  was  to  have  a  military  com¬
mand,  and  Tone  to  be  secretary  to
the  commander  of  the  land  forces ;

and  finally,  that  all  intelligence  from
France  had  come  through  London  and
by  parole.  ‘All  mouths,’  he  added,
‘  are  at  work  whispering  the  intelli¬
gence  from  France,  and  thereby  spread¬
ing  it  through  the  country.’  ‘  Peace¬
able  conduct  is  the  order  of  the  day.’
(Camden  to  Portland,  Aug.  30,  1797.)
For  the  sources  of  this  information,
see  p.  400.

2  The  Dutch  lost  more  than  1,100,
the  English  more  than  1,000.

3  See  James’s  Naval  History  \  Stan¬
hope’s  Life  of  Pitt,  iii.  69-71.

412

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

Revolution  of  the  18  th  fructidor.  The  other  was  Hoche,  who
was  looked  upon  as  the  most  serious  probable  rival  of  Buona¬
parte,  and  in  whom  Tone  placed  his  highest  hopes.  Tone  now
found  the  young  general  so  weak,  that  he  had  to  be  assisted
from  room  to  room  by  his  grenadiers,  and  with  that  diy,  hollow
cough,  which  indicates  the  final'  stage  of  rapid  consumption.
He  died  on  the  morning  of  September  19,  and  with  him  perished
the  last  serious  hope  of  French  assistance.  French  statesmen
still,  as  we  shall  see,  endeavoured  to  raise  embarrassments  to
England  in  Ireland  ;  but  Buonaparte  was  completely  sceptical
about  Irish  revolution,  and  no  extended  scheme  for  the  separa¬
tion  of  Ireland  from  Great  Britain  was  again  undertaken.  At
the  end  of  1799,  Lewins  presented  a  remarkable  memoir  to  the
French  Government,  on  the  effects  of  the  legislative  Union  which
was  then  impending.  ‘  After  the  formal  and  reiterated  assur¬
ances,’  he  said,  ‘  given  me  from  the  moment  when,  on  the  invita¬
tion  of  General  Hoche,  I  went  from  Frankfort  to  Paris,  I  cannot
doubt,  that  it  is  the  fixed  resolution  of  France  in  all  ways  to
assist  the  Irish  in  shaking  off  the  English  yoke,  and  to  make  no
peace  in  which  this  great  object  was  not  accomplished,’  and  ‘  yet,’
he  continued,  ‘  when  I  think  of  the  little  attention  paid  by  the
French  to  Irish  affairs,  since  the  death  of  Hoche,  in  spite  of  my
pressing  requests,  and  the  indifference  with  which  the  Union
seems  regarded,  it  needs  my  unlimited  faith  in  the  promises  of
the  French  Government  to  sustain  my  hope.’ 1

We  must  now  return  to  the  course  of  events  in  Ireland
itself.  The  Irish  Parliament  was  prorogued  on  July  3,  and  shortly
after  dissolved.  This  was  the  last  dissolution  before  its  final
abolition,  and  it  was  not  due  to  any  signs  of  opposition.  Camden
wrote,  that  the  House  of  Commons  had  shown,  during  a  critical
period,  ‘  the  most  marked  firmness  and  spirit,  and  the  most  un¬
bounded  liberality  ;’  a  determination  ‘  to  stake  their  existence
with  that  of  the  sister  kingdom.’  2  For  a  time  he  was  inclined
to  think  that  it  would  be  better  that  the  House  should  meet  once
more  ;  but  it  was  ultimately  decided,  that  the  present  moment  was
very  propitious  for  a  dissolution.  As  usual,  one  of  the  first  tasks

1  Memoir  of  Thompson  (Lewins)  2  Camden  to  Portland,  June  17,
on  the  effects  of  the  Union,  26  primaire,  1797,

an  8.  (F.F.O.)

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  KENMARE  PEERAGE.

413

of  the  Ministers  was  to  provide  for  a  long  list  of  parliamentary
supporters,  in  order  ‘  to  carry  into  execution  those  promises  which
Government  was  under  the  necessity  of  contracting  in  the  course
of  that  Parliament.’  Camden  accordingly  recommended  that
three  viscounts  should  be  made  earls,  and  three  barons,  viscounts.
Lady  O'Neil  was  made  a  viscountess,  and  Mrs.  Toler,  the  wife
of  the  Solicitor-General,  a  baroness ;  and  six  new  peers,  as  well
as  five  baronets,  were  created.  To  the  great  displeasure  of  the
Lord  Lieutenant,  two  of  the  new  peers  were  Englishmen,  who
were  apparently  unconnected  with  Ireland,  and  who  were
rewarded  for  English  services  with  Irish  peerages.1

Another  peerage  shortly  after  followed,  which  gave  rise  to
some  curious  letters,  and  which  has  real  interest  and  importance.
Few  names  appear  more  frequently  in  the  Irish  history  and
Government  correspondence  of  the  eighteenth  century,  than  that
of  Lord  Ivenmare,  but  the  person  so  designated  had  in  reality
no  right  to  the  title  which  he  assumed,  and  which  by  social
usage  was  invariably  given  to  him.  His  ancestor,  Sir  Valentine
Browne,  had  been  made  Viscount  Kenmare  and  Baron  Castle-
rosse  by  James  II.  immediately  after  his  abdication,  and  these
titles  had  never  been  recognised  or  ratified  by  the  new  Govern¬
ment.  The  present  head  of  the  family  had  eminent  claims  upon
the  Government,  from  his  services  in  maintaining  order  and
loyalty  in  Kerry,  and  perhaps  still  more  from  his  conduct  as  the
leader  of  the  moderate  party  in  the  Catholic  Committee,  and  he
had  long  been  extremely  anxious  to  obtain  a  legal  right  to  the
titles  which  he  bore.  He  had  petitioned  for  this  under  Lord
Westmorland  ;  but  though-  supported  by  the  Lord  Lieutenant,
no  answer  appears  to  have  been  returned.  In  1795,  Camden
made  an  application  in  his  favour,  but  Portland  answered  that
the  King  had  said,  1  Lord  Kenmare  certainly  deserves  attention,
but  has  any  Roman  Catholic  in  this  country  been  created  a  peer  ?  ’
and  Portland  himself  believed  the  request  to  be  impracticable.
Camden,  however,  now  again  urgently  pressed  the  claim  of
Kenmare  ;  and  in  a  letter  to  Pitt  himself,  he  suggested  the  pos¬
sibility  of  ‘  some  management  which  should  make  the  peerage
devolve  upon  him.’

The  meaning  of  this  last  suggestion  will  be  explained  by  the
1  Camden  to  Portland,  July  8,  Aug.  7,  Oct.  1797.

414

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

sequel.  Portland  wrote,  that  there  were  two  serious  objections
to  the  proposal.  In  the  first  place,  an  arrangement  was  con¬
templated,  which  would  have  the  effect  of  giving  a  peerage  to
another  Catholic.  Under  Lord  Westmorland’s  Government,  a
Galway  Catholic  gentleman,  named  Sir  Thomas  French,  had  been
asked  to  make  use  of  his  influence  upon  certain  members  of  his
persuasion  in  the  Catholic  Committee,  and  he  had  done  so  in  a
way  which  the  Government  deemed  so  valuable,  that  Lord  West¬
morland  promised  to  recommend  him  for  a  peerage.  This  peer¬
age,  however,  was  not  to  be  given  personally  to  himself,  but  to
his  mother,  Lady  French,  who  was  a  Protestant,  and  from  whom
it  would  in  due  course  descend  to  him.  The  peerage  had  not
yet  been  conferred,  but  Portland  wrote,  that  ‘  Pitt  considers
Government  to  have  been  so  pledged,  as  not  to  make  it  possible
to  deny  or  resist  Lady  French’s  claim.’

Portland  added,  however,  that  there  was  another  and  still
graver  obstacle  to  the  proposal  of  Camden.  ‘  Such  I  know  to
be  the  King’s  opinion  with  regard  to  the  admission  of  Roman
Catholics  to  seats  in  the  Legislature,  that  I  am  sure  I  do  not
say  too  much,  in  declaring  it  to  be  my  belief  that  there  is  not
any  measure  whatever,  from  which  he  would  so  determinately
withhold  his  sanction,  as  that  by  which  he  would  give  directly ,
and  by  his  own  act,  to  a  Roman  Catholic  the  right  of  sitting
and  voting  in  Parliament,  aud  I  do  not  believe  that  he  could
reconcile  himself  to  it,  except  in  a  circuitous  way,  even  for  the
sake  of  Lord  Kenmare,  whose  merits  are  most  certainly  as
highly  appreciated  by  his  Majesty  as  by  your  Excellency,  or  by
any  person  whatever.  But  when  your  Excellency  recollects,
that  his'  Majesty’s  objections  to  granting  the  privilege  to  which
Lord  Kenmare  would  be  entitled  by  the  grant  of  a  peerage,  are
founded  not  on  principles  of  policy  only,  but  of  conscience,  it
must  be  unnecessary  for  me  to  insist.’

Camden  was  exceedingly  disconcerted  by  this  letter.  All
additions  to  the  Irish  peerage  were  made  on  the  formal  recom¬
mendation  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  and  he  therefore  spoke  on
the  subject  with  authority.  He  answered,  that  the  claims  of
Lord  Kenmare  were  greatly  and  manifestly  superior  to  those  of
Sir  Thomas  French,  and  that  there  was  no  difference  in  principle
between  giving  a  Catholic  a  peerage  on  account  of  his  services

CH.  XXVIII.

THE  KEN  MAKE  PEERAGE.

415

on  tlie  Catholic  question,  and  giving  a  peerage  to  the  Protestant
mother  of  a  Catholic,  on  account  of  the  services  of  her  son  on
the  same  question,  and  in  order  that  the  peerage  should  devolve
on  him.  There  was  no  question  of  ashing  the  King  to  give
Lord  Kenmare  a  right  of  sitting  or  voting  in  the  House  of  Lords.
He  was  excluded  from  the  Legislature  by  oaths,  which  could
only  be  repealed  by  Act  of  Parliament.  Neither  the  King  nor
the  English  Government  could  suspect  the  Administration  of
Camden  of  any  partiality  towards  Catholics,  or  of  any  wish  to
increase  their  political  importance.  He  had  more  than  once
refused  to  recommend  Lady  French  for  a  peerage,  but  as  a
distinct  pledge  appeared  to  have  been  given  to  her,  he  would
submit ;  but  he  could  not  too  strongly  express  his  opinion,  that
if  this  peerage  was  granted,  the  other  could  not  with  any
propriety  be  withheld.  If  directly  or  indirectly  any  Catholic
was  made  a  peer,  Kenmare  had  indisputably  the  first  claim.
Camden  did  not  now  press  for  either  peerage,  but  he  said,  he
must  decline  to  recommend  that  for  Lady  French,  c  unless  the
creation  is  accompanied  by  that  of  Lord  Kenmare,  or  unless
some  means  are  found  which  may  cause  the  title  to  devolve
upon  him.’

The  King  yielded  to  the  desire  of  Camden.  In  the  February
of  1798,  both  Kenmare  and  Lady  French  were,  on  the  same
day,  raised  to  the  peerage,  and  the  title  of  baron,  which  the
King  was  at  first  disposed  to  give  to  Lord  Kenmare,  was,  at  the
request  of  Camden,  exchanged  for  a  viscountcy.1  The  cor¬
respondence  is  especially  important,  as  furnishing  clear  and
unequivocal  evidence,  that  if  the  King  only  hesitated  about  con¬
ferring  merely  honorary  distinctions  upon  Catholics,  he  had,  at
least,  to  the  full  knowledge  of  his  English  Ministers,  formed  a
fixed  resolution,  grounded  upon  religious  scruples,  that  he  would
never  consent  to  their  admission  into  the  Legislature.  I  his
fact  had  a  fatal  influence  on  the  future  history  of  the  Catholic
question,  and  it  appears  to  me  to  make  the  conduct  of  the
Ministers  inexcusable  in  having,  at  the  time  of  the  Union,
endeavoured  to  win  Catholic  support  by  holding  out  hopes  of
emancipation,  without  taking  any  step  to  shake  the  resolution

1  Camden  to  Pitt,  Sept.  23;  to  land,  Jan.  12,  22,  1798.  The  earlier
Portland,  Oct.  26  ;  Portland  to  Cam-  applications  appear  from  some  letters
den,  Oct.  19,  1797;  Camden  to  Port-  of  June  1795.

416

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  cn.  xxviii.

of  the  King ;  without  the  knowledge  of  the  King ;  without
communicating  the  royal  sentiments  to  the  Catholic  leaders.

The  election  for  the  last  Irish  Parliament  passed  off  quietly,
and  the  influx  of  a  great  multitude  of  Catholic  voters  into  the
county  constituencies  appeared,  for  the  present  at  least,  to  have
made  very  little  difference,  and  to  have  excited  very  little
attention.  Grattan  refused  to  stand  for  this  Parliament,  and
he  gave  his  reasons  in  a  long  ‘  Letter  to  the  Citizens  of  Dublin,’
which  was  published  as  a  pamphlet.  It  is  a  curious  and  most
characteristic  performance ;  eloquent,  ingenious,  full  of  sentences
of  condensed  wisdom  and  beauty ;  but  full  also  of  overstrained
metaphor  and  antithesis,  of  exaggerated  and  unexpected  turns
of  phrase,  of  passages  which  were  very  little  fitted  to  accomplish
any  useful  and  healing  end.  He  mentions  that,  at  the  close  of
the  American  War,  it  had  been  a  common  saying  in  Tory  circles,
that  Lord  North  ought  to  have  admitted  the  claims  of  the  Colonial
Legislatures,  and  then  to  have  endeavoured  to  re-establish
British  dominion  by  building  up  a  dominant  influence  within
them.  This,  Grattan  said,  had  been  the  precise  policy  which
had  been  pursued  in  Ireland  since  the  declaration  of  indepen¬
dence.  It  had  been  the  deliberate  object  of  the  Government,  by
systematic  corruption,  1  to  give  the  monarch  a  power  which  the
Constitution  never  intended  ;  to  make  the  King  in  Parliament
everything,  and  the  people  nothing,’  and  thus  to  render  abso¬
lutely  abortive  the  parliamentary  rights  that  had  been  nominally
conceded.  This  attempt  to  regain  by  corruption  what  had  been
lost  in  prerogative,  was  the  true  cause  of  the  disaffection  which
had  now  become  so  formidable.  There  had  been  concessions,  it
is  true,  but  they  had  been  of  little  avail,  on  account  of  the  spirit
in  which  the  Ministers  had  made  them.  ‘  In  every  Bill  of  a
popular  tendency,  they  resisted  at  first;  they  yielded  at  last,
reluctantly  and  imperfectly,  and  then  opposed,  condemned,  and
betrayed  the  principle  of  their  own  acquiescence.’  They  agreed
to  the  independence  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  then  created  a
multitude  of  offices  to  make  that  independence  an  idle  name.
They  agreed  to  a  place  Bill,  and  yet  contrived,  after  it  was
passed,  to  add  largely  to  their  patronage.  They  agreed,  with
extreme  reluctance  and  after  extreme  vacillation,  to  a  Bill  giving
the  franchise  to  the  Catholics,  and  they  at  the  same  time

CH.  XXVIII.

GRATTAN’S  ADDRESS,  1707.

417

maintained  tlieir  exclusion  from  Parliament,  and  used  their  in¬
fluence  to  prevent  their  election  to  the  corporations.  ‘  It  is  an
observation  of  Lord  Bacon,  that  the  fall  of  one  of  the  Roman
emperors  was  due,  not  to  his  tyranny  nor  his  relaxation,  but  to
both  ;  and  that  the  fluctuating  system  is  ever  fatal.  .  .  .  Un¬
happily,  our  Ministers  differed  from  Bacon ;  their  system  was
faithful  to  no  one  principle,  either  of  violence  or  concession.’
‘  Had  the  Government,  instead  of  aggravating,  restrained  abuses,
they  would  have  put  the  State  at  the  head  of  a  spirit  of  reform
which  they  could  no  longer  resist,  and  could  only  hope  to
moderate.  It  was  to  such  a  policy,  adopted  by  Queen  Elizabeth,
that  the  Church  of  England  owes  principally  what  it  retains  of
power  and  splendour,  preserved  by  the  Government  of  the
country,  who  took  the  lead  in  the  Reformation.’

These  words  appear  to  me  profoundly  true.  I  shall  not
follow  the  Address  through  its  summary  of  past  Irish  history,
and  through  its  well-worn  arguments  in  favour  of  Catholic
emancipation  and  parliamentary  reform.  Grattan  seemed  blind
to  the  strength  of  the  religious  animosities  that  were  rising)
and  still  clung  to  the  illusion,  which  he  shared  with  so  many
leading  statesmen  and  thinkers,  that  Catholicism,  or  at  least
£  Popery,’  had  for  ever  passed  away  as  a  distinct  and  dangerous
political  force,  and  that  £  priestcraft  ’  was  a  mere  ‘  superannuated
folly.’

1  The  only  impediment  to  the  Catholic  claim  as  the  law  now
stands,  is  the  oath  requiring  the  abjuration  of  the  worship  of
the  Virgin  Mary,  and  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence.  To
make  these  points  at  such  a  time  as  this,  matter  of  alarm  to  the
safety  of  the  King,  is  ...  a  mockery  of  the  situation.’  £  The
Irish  Catholic  of  1792  does  not  bear  the  smallest  resemblance
to  the  Irish  Catholic  of  1692.  The  influence  of  Pope,  priest,
and  Pretender  are  at  an  end.  Other  dangers  and  other  in¬
fluences  might  have  arisen,  .  .  .  but  those  new  dangers  were  to
be  provided  against  in  a  manner  very  different  from  the  pro¬
visions  made  against  the  old.’  £  The  Ministry,  however,  thought
proper  to  persist  in  hostility  to  the  Catholic  body,  on  a  false
supposition  of  its  bigotry.  The  consequence  was  that  .  .  .  the
most  popular  and  energetic  [Catholics],  disappointed,  suspected,
reviled  and  wearied,  united  with  that  other  great  body  of  the
270

418

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviii.

reformers  and  formed  a  Catholic,  Presbyterian,  and  Protestant
league,  for  the  freedom  of  the  religion,  and  the  free  and  full
representation  of  the  people.  Out  of  this  league  a  new  political
religion  arose,  superseding  in  political  matter  all  influence  of
priest  and  parson,  and  burying  for  ever  theological  discord  in
the  love  of  civil  and  political  liberty.  This  is  at  present  in  all
political  matters  the  Irish  religion.’  ‘  The  progress  of  the
human  mind  in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty-five  years  has
been  prodigious  in  Ireland.  I  remember  when  there  scarcely
appeared  a  publication  in  a  newspaper  of  any  degree  of  merit,
which  was  not  traced  to  some  person  of  note  on  the  part  of
Government  or  the  Opposition ;  but  now  a  multitude  of  very
powerful  publications  appear  from  authors  entirely  unknown  ;

.  .  .  and  when  once  the  powers  of  intellect  are  possessed  by
the  great  body  of  the  nation,  it  is  madness  to  hope  to  impose  on
that  nation  civil  or  religious  oppression.’

But  the  danger  did  not  spring  simply  from  the  conditions  of
Irish  life.  The  ‘  democratic  principle  ’  was  now  sweeping  over
Europe,  and,  ‘  like  the  Government,  we  wished  to  provide  against
the  storm.’  ‘  Democracy,  a  gigantic  form,  walks  the  earth,
smiting  crowns  with  a  hundred  hands,  and  opening  for  the
seduction  of  their  subjects  a  hundred  arms.’  ‘  We  implored
Ministers  against  such  an  enemy  to  ally  and  identify  the  King
with  all  his  people,  without  distinction  of  religion.’

There  were  some  things  in  the  letter  much  more  questionable
than  these.  No  candid  man  can,  I  think,  deny  that  acts  of
illegal,  criminal,  shameful,  and  exasperating  violence,  were,  at
this  time,  committed  in  Ireland  with  the  full  sanction  of  the
Government ;  but  it  seems  to  me  equally  impossible  to  deny  that
a  conspiracy  existed,  with  which  ordinary  law  was  utterly
unable  to  cope,  that  the  prompt  disarming  of  a  large  section  of
the  people  had  become  imperatively  necessary,  and  that,  at  a  time
when  a  French  invasion  might  at  any  moment  lake  place,  it
would  have  been  suicidal  madness  to  permit  an  unlimited  sale
of  arms.  Grattan,  however,  made  no  allowance  for  the  enormous
difficulties  of  this  situation,  and  massed  together  the  whole
system  of  ‘  coercion  ’  in  an  equal  and  undiscriminating  condem¬
nation.  He  was  not  content  with  denouncing  £  the  imprison¬
ment  of  the  middle  orders  without  law ;  the  detaining  them  in

CH.  XXVIII.

GEATTAN’S  ADDRESS,  1797.

419

prison  without  bringing  them  to  trial ;  the  transporting  them
without  law,  burning  their  houses,  burning  their  villages,  mur¬
dering  them,  .  .  .  preventing  the  legal  meetings  of  counties  to
petition  his  Majesty,  .  .  .  and  finally,  the  introduction  of
practices  not  only  unknown  to  law,  but  unknown  to  civilised
and  Christian  countries.’  The  Convention  Act,  the  Gunpowder
Act,  the  Insurrection  Act,  the  suspension  of  the  Habeas
Corpus,  the  proclamation  of  General  Lake,  for  disarming  the
people,  were  all  equally  condemned.  Many  magistrates  and
officers  had,  no  doubt,  acted  with  excessive  violence;  but  it
was  absurd  and  mischievous  rant,  to  accuse  the  Government  of
endeavouring  ‘  to  blood  the  magistracy  with  the  poor  man’s
liberty,  and  employ  the  rich,  like  a  pack  of  Government  blood¬
hounds,  to  hunt  down  the  poor ;  ’  it  was  uncandid  and  untrue
to  deny  that  c  a  spirit  of  plunder,’  as  well  as  of  ‘  politics,’  was
abroad,  and  that  a  great  portion  of  the  outrages  that  were
taking  place,  were  utterly  unconnected  with  any  desire  for
mere  ‘  political  reformation ;  ’  it  was  very  useless  to  inveigh
against  the  war  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  power,  either  in
England  or  Ireland,  that  could  have  stopped  it.

A  few  more  sentences  will  show  Grattan’s  view  at  its
strongest.  1  The  trade  of  Parliament  ruins  everything ;  your
Ministers  rested  their  authority  entirely  on  that  trade,  till  now
they  call  in  the  aid  of  military  power,  to  enforce  corruption  by
the  sword.  The  laws  did,  in  my  judgment,  afford  the  Crown
sufficient  power  to  administer  the  country,  and  preserve  the
connection  with  Great  Britain,  but  our  Ministers  have  despised
the  ordinary  tract.’  ‘  The  historian  of  these  melancholy  and
alarming  times  .  .  .  will,  if  a  candid  man,  close  the  sad  account
by  observing  that,  on  the  whole,  the  cause  of  the  Irish  dis¬
traction  of  1797  was  the  conduct  of  the  servants  of  Government
endeavouring  to  establish,  by  unlimited  bribery,  absolute  power ;
that  the  system  of  coercion  was  a  necessary  consequence  and
part  of  the  system  of  corruption ;  and  that  the  two  systems,
in  their  success,  would  have  established  a  ruthless  and  horrid
tyranny,  tremendous  and  intolerable,  imposed  on  the  Senate  by
influence,  and  the  people  by  arms.’

This  remarkable  paper  closed  with  a  series  of  eloquent
aspirations.  ‘  May  the  kingly  power,  that  forms  one  estate  in

420

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  cn.  xxviii.

our  Constitution,  continue  for  ever ;  but  let  it  be,  as  it  pro¬
fesses  to  be,  and  as,  by  the  principles  and  laws  of  these
countries,  it  should  be,  one  estate  only ;  and.  not  a  power
constituting  one  estate,  creating  another,  and  influencing  a
third.

£  May  the  parliamentary  Constitution  prosper  ;  but  let  it
be  an  operative,  independent,  and  integral  part  of  the  Consti¬
tution,  advising,  confining,  and  sometimes  directing  the  kingly
power.

c  May  the  House  of  Commons  flourish ;  but  let  the  people
be  the  sole  author  of  its  existence,  as  they  should  be  the  great
object  of  its  care.

‘  May  the  connection  with  Great  Britain  continue ;  but  let
the  result  of  that  connection  be  the  perfect  freedom,  in  the
fairest  and  fullest  sense,  of  all  descriptions  of  men,  without  dis¬
tinction  of  religion.

‘  To  this  purpose  we  spoke ;  and  speaking  this  to  no  pur¬
pose,  withdrew.  It  now  remains  to  add  this  supplication,
However  it  may  please  the  Almighty  to  dispose  of  princes  or
of  parliaments,  may  the  liberties  of  the  people  be  immortal.’ 1

These  words  were  well  fitted  to  sink  deeply  into  the  popular
mind.  Whether,  amid  the  fever  and  distraction  of  the  times,
they  were  likely  to  fulfil  any  good  purpose,  is  another  question.
Grattan  himself,  in  after  years,  reviewed  this  portion  of  his
career  with  the  transparent  candour  which  was  one  of  his  most
beautiful  qualities.  The  secession  from  Parliament  appeared  to
him  to  have  been  a  simple  duty.  He  and  his  friends  could
not  approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  United  Irishmen  nor  of  that
of  the  Government,  and  they  feared  to  encourage  the  former  by
making  speeches  against  the  latter.  From  the  summer  of  1795,
when  the  old  rulers  and  the  old  system  came  back  ;  when  mili¬
tary  law  was  virtually  established,  and  when  poor  men  were
transported  without  trial,  the  state  of  Ireland  was,  in  truth,  a
state  of  war;  the  people  looked  to  France,  and  the  Government
to  arms ;  rebellion  had  become  almost  inevitable ;  its  success
would  consign  Ireland  to  French  despotism  and  revolution,  and
its  failure  would  probably  be  followed  by  the  extinction  of  all
popular  influence  and  control.  ‘  Our  error,’  he  said,  ‘  was  in
1  Grattan’s  Miscellaneous  Works,  pp.  40-64.

CH.  XXVIII.

GRATTAN,  PELHAM,  AND  CLARE.

421

not  having  seceded  sooner,  for  the  Opposition,  I  fear,  encouraged
the  United  men  by  their  speeches  against  the  Government.  .  .  .
There  was  high  treason,  certainly,  but  the  measures  of  the
Government  were  so  violent,  that  no  man  would  sanction  them.
Nothing  could  excuse  the  torture,  the  whippings,  the  half  hang¬
ing.  It  was  impossible  to  act  with  them,  and  in  such  cases  it
is  always  better  that  a  neutral  party  should  retire.  We  could
do  no  good.  We  could  not  join  the  disaffected  party,  and  we
could  not  support  the  Government.’

Coming  to  his  letter  to  the  citizens  of  Dublin,  he  says  that
it  was  considered,  at  the  time,  imprudent,  and  he  acknow¬
ledged  that  the  charge  was  a  just  one.  ‘It  was  true;  it  was
well  written,  but  it  tended  to  inflame.  I  had  also  written
strongly  to  the  Catholics.  I  had  just  returned  from  England,
and  we  smarted  under  the  disappointment  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s
recall.  ...  We  were  angry.  It  was  not  wise,  but  there  is  no
man,  who,  in  a  long  public  life,  will  not  be  guilty  of  some
political  errors.’ 1

Except  perhaps  in  Ulster,  where  matters  had  been  for  some
time  subsiding,  the  last  months  of  1797  produced  no  alleviation
in  the  state  of  Ireland,  and  Grattan  and  the  Government  differed
little  about  its  gravity,  though  they  differed  much  about  its  causes
and  its  remedies,  Pelham,  in  a  desponding  private  letter  to
Portland,  complained  that  the  language  of  the  Opposition  tended
to  alienate  the  people  from  England,  and  that  absenteeism  had  a
similar  effect,  but  he  laid  special  stress  upon  ‘  the  religious  dis¬
tinctions,  which  will  always  make  the  lower  class  of  the  people
more  open  to  seduction  than  the  same  class  of  men  in  other
countries,  and  will  make  it  impossible  to  expect  any  permanent
security,  either  in  peace  or  war,  without  a  great  military  force.’
Nothing,  he  thought,  short  of  an  establishment  of  the  Catholic
religion,  would  satisfy  them  ;  and  he  added  with  more  truth,  ‘  As
long  as  the  poor  and  the  rich  are  of  different  persuasions  in
religious  matters,  there  will  always  be  a  jealousy  between  the
democratic  and  aristocratic  parts  of  the  Constitution.’ 2

Clare,  who  knew  the  country  much  better,  expressed  the
Government  view  with  force  and  candour.  ‘  Emancipation  and

1  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  345-347.

*  Pelham  to  Portland,  Sept.  29,  1797.

422

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvih.

reform,’  he  said,  c  were  far  short  of  the  designs  of  the  disaffected  ;
the  separation  of  the  country  from  her  Imperial  connection  with
Great  Britain,  and  a  fraternal  alliance  with  the  French  Republic,
were  the  obvious  purposes  of  the  insurgents.  The  Government
of  Ireland  had,  by  measures  necessarily  strong,  at  length  quieted
that  part  of  the  country  in  which  the  conspiracy  originated.
These  measures  were,  to  his  knowledge,  extorted  from  the  nobleman
who  governed  this  country  ;  they  had  been  successful,  and  the
state  of  the  North  at  that  day,  was  a  proof  of  their  wisdom.  The
county  from  which  he  had  lately  returned  [Limerick],  and
which  had  formerly  been  a  loyal  and  industrious  county,  was
infested  by  emissaries  from  the  North,  exciting  the  peasantry  to
insurrection.  Emancipation  and  reform  were  not  the  means
which  they  employed  for  the  seduction  of  the  peasant.  The
suppression  of  tithes,  the  abolition  of  taxes,  and  exemption  from
the  payment  of  rent,  were  the  rewards  they  promised.  Emanci¬
pation  and  reform  were  only  used  to  delude  the  better  classes.’ 1
‘  It  is  one  great  misfortune  of  this  country,’  he  said  in  another
speech,  1  that  the  people  of  England  know  less  of  it  than  they
know  perhaps  of  any  other  nation  in  Europe.  Their  impressions
I  do  verily  believe  to  be  received  from  newspapers,  published  for
the  sole  purpose  of  deceiving  them.  There  is  not  so  volatile  or
so  credulous  a  nation  in  Europe  as  the  Irish ;  the  people  are
naturally  well  disposed,  but  are  more  open  to  seduction  than  any
man  would  credit  who  had  not  lived  among  them ;  .  .  .  and
therefore  the  kingdom  of  Ireland  is,  of  all  the  nations  of  Europe,
the  most  dangerous  to  tamper  with  or  to  make  experiments  upon.
Her  present  disturbed  and  distracted  state  has  certainly  been
the  consequence  of  a  series  of  experiments,  practised  upon  her
for  a  course  of  years.’ 2

In  spite  of  the  battle  of  Camperdown,  the  expectation  of
invasion  was  very  constant.  The  rupture  of  the  negotiations  at
Lille,  and  the  definitive  peace  between  France  and  the  Emperor,
had  reduced  the  war,  for  the  present,  to  a  duel  between  France
and  England.  Buonaparte  himself  was  at  Paris,  organising  an
‘  English  army,’  which,  it  was  thought,  might  be  directed  wholly
or  partly  to  Ireland.  He  had  interviews  both  with  Lew  ins  and

1  Plowden,  ii.  652.

2  Debate  in  the  Irish  House  of  Pears,  Feb.  19,  1798,  pp.  132,  133.

CH.  XXVIII.

RUMOURED  INVASION  AND  REBELLION.

423

Tone,  and  more  than  one  assurance  was  sent  to  Ireland,  that
French  soldiers  would  speedily  arrive.1  Dean  Warburton  dis¬
covered  that  in  his  district,  which  had  a  few  weeks  before  become
quite  peaceful,  men  were  going  from  house  to  house  whispering
the  news,  and  telling  the  people  that  tithes  and  taxes  would
soon  be  abolished  ;  and  although  he  had  reason  to  believe  that
he  was  himself  personally  popular,  he  feared  that  the  people
welcomed  ‘  every  circumstance  that  afforded  the  smallest  hope  of
an  invasion.’ 2  McNally  assured  the  Government  that,  at  a  party
at  Grattan’s  house,  the  opinion  was  unanimously  expressed  that
an  invasion  would  be  attempted,  and  that  if  it  succeeded,  the
only  course  would  be  to  form  a  convention,  exclusive  of  Parlia¬
ment,  to  treat  for  the  country  with  the  French.3  There  were  ru¬
mours  of  plots  to  seize  Dublin  Castle  and  barracks;  confident
assertions  that,  in  a  few  weeks,  all  Ireland  would  be  in  a  blaze ;
reports  that  a  French  expedition  was  about  to  start  for  Lough
S willy  ;  that  Lawless,  Lord  Cloncurry’s  son,  had  gone  over  to
London  to  confer  with  a  French  agent ;  that  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald  and  Arthur  O’Connor  desired  an  immediate  out¬
break.4

Pelham  was  at  this  time  in  England,  but  Cooke  sent  to  him,
near  the  end  of  the  year,  a  most  circumstantial  and  alarming
story  which  had  come  from  McNally.  It  was,  ‘  that  Lord  Edward
received,  some  days  since,  orders  from  Paris  to  urge  an  insurrec¬
tion  here  with  all  speed,  in  order  to  draw  troops  from  England.
In  consequence  of  it,  there  was  a  meeting  of  the  head  commit¬
tee,  where  he  and  O’Connor  urged  immediate  measures  of  vigour.
They  proposed  arming  a  body  of  500  with  short  swords ;  that
this  body  should  repair  to  all  the  mass-houses  at  midnight  mass
on  Christmas  morning;  that  by  false  attacks  they  should  per¬
suade  the  people  to  raise  a  cry  that  the  Orangemen  were  murder¬
ing  the  Catholics ;  that,  having  raised  the  uproar,  they  should
begin  their  attack  on  the  Castle,  &c.  Many  priests  were  anxious
for  this  plan,  but  Emmet,  Chambers  &c.  opposed,  and  in  con¬
sequence,  the  bishops,  who  were  against  outrage,  put  off  mass
till  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning.  The  moderate  party  are  against

1  J.  W.,  Sept.  11,  Oct.  2  ;  Tone’s  3  J.  W.,  Nov.  19.

Memoirs,  ii.  464-456.  /’  Pelham  to  King,  Nov.  7  ;  F.  H.

2  Dean  Warburton,  Nov.  12, 1797;  (Uigg'ns)’  Dec.  9,  29;  J.  W.,  Nov.  19,

Jan.  29,  1798.  Dec.  26,  1797.

424  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

insurrection  till  the  French  land.  .  .  .  Our  friend  received  his
intelligence  from  James  Tandy,  son  of  Napper  ;  who  was  alarmed
beyond  expression  at  the  scheme,  and,  being  consulted,  had
opposed  it.’ 1  Next  day,  however,  the  Lord  Lieutenant  himself
wrote  that,  1  the  account  which  J.  W.  gave  in  writing,  fell  far
short  of  the  verbal  communication  made  to  me  by  Pollock.’  lie
added,  however,  that  he  was  glad  that  he  had  at  once  summoned
the  Speaker  and  Attorney-General  to  Dublin,  to  consult  about
the  measures  to  be  taken,  as  the  intention  to  produce  an  insur¬
rection  on  Christmas  Eve  was  undoubted.  The  propriety  of
arresting  at  once  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald  and  Arthur  O’Connor
was  seriously  discussed ;  but  Camden  reported  that,  ‘  under  all
the  circumstances  of  our  chance  of  further  information,  and  under
the  impression  of  the  disadvantage  of  taking  up  persons  without
bringing  them  to  trial,’  the  idea  was,  for  the  present,  relin¬
quished.2  It  was  observed,  that  there  was,  about  this  time,  a
strangely  sudden  diminution  in  the  number  of  outrages  ;  but  it
was  doubtful  whether  this  was  due  to  the  Government  measures,
or  to  the  orders  that  came  from  the  chiefs  of  the  rebellion  to
avoid  all  provocation  on  the  eve  of  the  rising.3

Two  other  facts  may  be  noticed,  before  drawing  our  account
of  the  year  to  its  close.  Since  the  violent  suppression  of  the
‘Northern  Star,’  in  May  1797,  the  United  Irishmen  had  no
recognised  organ  till  the  end  of  September,  when  a  newspaper
called  ‘  The  Press’  was  established,  which  for  the  next  six  months
represented  their  aims  with  conspicuous  ability.  Its  registered
proprietor  was  an  obscure  printer  named  Finnerty,  but  it  be¬
longed  in  reality  to  a  group  of  shareholders,  among  whom
Lawless  had  the  chief  part,  but  which  included  also,  Arthur
O’Connor,  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald,  Bond,  Chambers,  and  Jack-
son.  Among  the  shareholders  and  occasional  contributors,  was

1  Cooke  to  Pelham  ( Pelham
MSS.),  Dec.  26,  1797.

2  Camden  to  Pelham,  Dec.  27.
See,  too,  J.  W.,  Dec.  26,  1797.  By  ‘  our
friend,’  McNally  always  means  him¬
self.  In  the  Memoirs  of  Miles  Byrne
there  is  a  case  of  United  Irishmen
acting  for  their  own  purposes  the  part
of  Orangemen,  and  thus  producing  a
panic  (i.  14,  15.)

s  ‘  Except  the  robbing  of  arms,  no

serious  outrage  has  lately  taken  place
in  any  part  of  the  kingdom ;  but  I
believe  this  apparent  calm  is  the  con¬
sequence  of  very  strict  orders,  which
have  been  issued  to  the  United  Irish¬
men  not  to  be  guilty  of  any  excess.
These  orders  are  accompanied  with
the  assurance  of  assistance  from
France.’  (Camden  to  Portland,  Jan,
22,  1798.)

CH.  XXVIII.

APPOINTMENT  OF  ABERCROMBY.

425

Leonard  McNally,  whose  share  was  probably  paid  by  the  Govern¬
ment,  and  who  was  thus  able  to  obtain  much  additional  informa¬
tion  for  his  employers.1

The  other  fact  was  the  arrival  of  a  new  Commander-in-
Chief  in  Ireland.  For  some  time  Camden  had  felt  that  Lord
Carhampton,  though  a  man  of  undoubted  zeal  and  courage,  had
neither  the  ability  nor  the  tact  required  for  his  very  difficult
position,  and  he  was  much  disappointed  that  Lord  Cornwallis
could  not  be  induced  to  accept  the  military  government  of
Ireland.  A  new  overture,  however,  was  more  successful,  and  in
November,  Carhampton ‘was  removed  to  the  post  of  Master  of
the  Ordnance,  and  replaced  by  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby.  This
distinguished  soldier  had  just  returned  from  the  West  Indies.
He  knew  Ireland  well,  having  been  quartered  there  before  the
outbreak  of  the  war  of  the  American  Revolution,  and  having
remained  there  during  the  whole  period  of  its  continuance.  He
was  a  man  of  a  very  independent  and  honourable  character,  and
of  liberal  opinions,  and  he  had  the  reputation  of  a  commander
who  was  not  only  skilful  in  the  field,  but  also  eminently  suc¬
cessful  in  maintaining  a  high  standard  of  discipline  among  his
soldiers.

Such  an  officer  was  peculiarly  wanted  in  Ireland,  but  such
an  officer  was  very  unlikely  to  find  his  task  a  smooth  one.
Dalrymple,  who  commanded  in  the  South  of  Ireland,  showed
himself  profoundly  disappointed  at  not  being  promoted  to  the
first  place.  Knox  informed  Pelham  that  Lake,  who  commanded
in  the  North,  was  not  on  good  terms  with  Abercromby ;  and
almost  immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  new  Commander-in-
Chief,  signs  of  friction  began.  Abercromby  wrote  to  England,
that  he  had  accepted  the  command  with  great  reluctance,  owing
to  the  nature  of  the  Government ;  that  he  understood  that,  with
the  exception  of  the  patronage,  the  army  was  to  be  totally  under
his  command;  and  that  he  must  come  to  a  clear  understanding
on  this  point,  as  a  command  divided  between  himself  and  the
Lord  Lieutenant  was  entirely  incompatible  with  good  military
administration ;  while  Camden  wrote  confidentially  that  Aber-

1  J.  W.,  Oct.  17,  31,  Nov.  19,  28,
Dec.  15,  1797 ;  Madden’s  United
Irishmen,  ii.  241-216.  McNally  posi¬
tively  states  that  it  was  Lawless,  not

Arthur  O’Connor,  who  advanced  most
of  the  capital  for  the  undertaking,
but  he  says  that  O’Connor  acted  as
editor.

426

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvur.

cromby  was  not  easy  to  get  on  with,  and  very  peremptory  about
managing  military  matters  himself.1

All  these  signs  were  ominous,  and  the  more  Abercromby
studied  the  state  of  affairs  in  Ireland,  the  less  he  was  satisfied
with  them.  The  first  thing  which  appeared  to  him  absolutely
necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  country  in  case  of  invasion,  and
for  the  enforcement  of  military  discipline,  was  a  concentration
of  the  troops  on  a  few  points.  Like  Fitzwilliam,  and  Ponsonby,
and  Grattan,  he  believed  that  the  suppression  of  riot  and
outrage,  and  the  maintenance  of  internal  tranquillity,  must
necessarily  be  entrusted  chiefly  to  the  yeomanry,  and  that  the
regular  troops  ought  only  to  be  employed  on  rare  and  serious
occasions.  Almost  immediately  after  bis  arrival  he  went  on  a
tour  of  inspection  through  the  South  of  Ireland,  and  in  that
part  of  the  country,  at  least,  the  danger  from  disaffection  ap¬
peared  to  him  to  be  exaggerated.  A  few  extracts  from  his
letters  will  give  a  clear  view  of  his  judgment  of  the  situation,
and  of  the  course  which  he  determined  to  adopt.

‘  The  disturbances  which  have  arisen  in  the  South,’  he  wrote,
‘  are  exactly  similar  to  those  which  have  always  prevailed  in
that  part  of  the  country,  and  they  hold  out  the  old  grievances
of  tithes  and  oppressive  rents.  The  country  gentlemen  and
magistrates  do  not  do  their  duty  ;  they  are  timid  and  distrustful,
and  ruin  the  troops  by  calling  on  them  upon  every  occasion  to
execute  the  law,  and  to  afford  them  personal  protection.’  c  With
an  army  composed  of  so  various  a  description  of  troops,  and  in  a
country  so  unprepared  for  war,  it  requires  all  the  authority  that
the  Lord  Lieutenant  can  give  me,  to  enable  me  to  carry  on  the
King’s  service.’  ‘  As  far  as  my  information  goes,  the  country
through  which  I  have  passed  [the  neighbourhood  of  Cork]  is  in  a
state  of  tranquillity.  ...  It  would  now  be  very  desirable  if  the
troops  could,  without  alarming  the  gentlemen,  be  collected,  and
their  discipline  restored,  which  suffers  exceedingly  from  their
dispersed  state.  I  am  morally  certain  that  many  of  the  regi¬
ments  could  not  at  present  take  the  field,  from  their  various
wants,  which  cannot  be  known  or  supplied  till  more  brought
together.  The  yeomanry  appear  to  advantage ;  they  are  well

1  Dalrymple  to  Pelham,  Nov.  19;  cromby  to  Elliot,  Dec.  25  ;  Camden  to
Knox  to  Pelham,  Nov.  29  ;  Aber-  Pelham,  Dec.  26,  1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

MEASURES  OF  ABERCROMBY.

427

clothed  and  mounted,  and  express  great  willingness  and  zeal.
I  am,  however,  nearly  convinced  that  to  bring  them  together,
and  to  appoint  officers  to  command  them,  must  not  be  attempted.
They  must  be  left  at  home,  and  appointed  to  the  defence  of  the
interior.’  ‘  The  dispersed  state  of  the  troops  is  really  ruinous
to  the  service.  The  best  regiments  in  Europe  could  not  loug
stand  such  usage.  ...  If  I  could  be  informed  what  number  of
regiments  in  aid  of  the  yeomanry  would  be  wanted  in  each
province  for  the  preservation  of  the  peace  of  the  country,  I
would  willingly  abandon  a  certain  proportion  for  that  peculiar
purpose,  provided  the  remainder  were  to  be  kept  together,  and
in  a  situation  to  move  if  a  foreign  enemy  should  appear.  I
have  found  the  cavalry  in  general  unfit  for  service,  and  more
than  one-half  of  the  infantry  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the
country,  in  general  under  officers  very  little  able  to  command
them.  At  Fermoy  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  light  infantry
are  “  on  command.”  ’ 1

Although  a  great  part  of  the  country  was  apparently  in  a
state  of  tranquillity,  there  was,  he  said,  reason  to  believe  that
the  minds  of  the  people  were  neither  softened  nor  subdued,  and
there  was  a  serious  possibility  of  a  French  invasion.  ‘  On  the
yeomanry  and  the  exertions  of  the  gentlemen,  and  of  the  well-
disposed  inhabitants  of  the  country,  its  internal  security  must
principally  depend ;  ’  and  he  mentioned  the  great  good  which
had  been  done  in  Scotland  by  loyalist  associations,  that  had  been
formed  in  each  county  in  1792  and  1793. 2

Abercromby  might  have  found  quite  as  good  an  example
in  the  Irish  volunteers  during  the  period  of  the  American  War  ;
and  if  Ireland  in  the  last  years  had  been  governed  on  the  prin¬
ciples  of  Grattan  instead  of  on  the  principles  of  Clare,  the  gentry
of  all  creeds  might  have  still  been  able  and  willing  to  maintain
the  order  of  the  country.  Camden  expressed  his  perfect  agree¬
ment  with  this  portion  of  Abercromby’s  recommendations.  He
mentions  that  he  had  communicated  them  to  several  gentlemen
connected  with  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  found  them
very  ready  to  adopt  the  suggestions  ;  and  he  expressed,  on  his  own
part,  his  appreciation  of  the  great  good  sense  and  knowledge

'  Dunfermline’s  Life  of  Aber-  2  Abercromby  to  Pelham,  Feb.  21,
crumb!/,  pp.  84-86.  1798.

428

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

of  the  world  that  were  combined  with  the  military  talents  of
Abercromby.1  But  no  one,  who  has  perused  the  letters  which
were  pouring  in  from  most  parts  of  the  country  asking  for  mili¬
tary  protection,  can  doubt  that  Abercromby’s  policy  was  likely
to  be  far  from  popular,  and  in  some  of  the  worst  districts  the
scattered  yeomanry  appear  to  have  been  almost  disarmed  by
nocturnal  parties.

Abercromby  had  another  object  before  him,  which  brought
him  speedily  into  conflict  with  the  men  who  had  the  leading
influence  in  the  Government  of  Ireland.  It  was  to  bring  back
the  army  into  the  limits  of  legality,  and  to  put  a  stop  to  the
scandalous  outrages  which  were  constantly  occurring,  if  not
under  the  direct  prompting,  at  least  with  the  tacit  connivance,  of
Government  officials.  Almost  immediately  after  his  arrival  in
Dublin,  he  issued  an  order  reminding  the  officers  that,  though
they  might  sometimes  be  called  upon  to  aid  the  magistrates,
‘they  must  not  forget  that  they  are  only  called  upon  to  support
the  laws  of  the  land,  and  not  to  step  beyond  the  bounds  of  them.
Any  outrage  or  excess,  therefore,  on  their  part  is  highly  culpable,
and  they  are  strictly  enjoined  to  observe  the  greatest  modera¬
tion  and  the  strictest  discipline  when  they  are  called  upon  to
execute  this  part  of  their  duty.’  2

The  outrages  which  took  place  were  of  different  kinds.  Many
were  mere  isolated  acts  of  drunken  or  half-disciplined  soldiers,
scattered  in  small  parties  among  the  peasantry,  and  had  little  or
no  relation  to  politics.  But  a  large  class,  of  which  the  burning
of  houses  formed  the  most  conspicuous  example,  were  illegal
acts  of  violence  deliberately  carried  out  in  places  where  murders
had  been  committed  or  where  arms  had  been  concealed,  and  de¬
liberately  screened  by  men  in  authority  from  the  intervention  of
the  law  courts.  Against  the  whole  of  this  system,  Abercromby
resolutely  set  his  face.  In  one  case,  when  the  sergeant  of  a
fencible  regiment  had  been  murdered,  and  when  the  usual
military  excesses  had  followed,  he  wrote  to  Pelham :  ‘It  is
much  to  be  regretted  that  the  civil  magistrate  has  not  hitherto
discovered  the  murderer  of  the  sergeant,  and  I  still  more  lament
that  no  evidence  has  been  brought  forward  sufficient  to  convict
the  authors  of  the  notorious  acts  of  violence  which  have  been  in

1  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby,  pp.  95,  96.  2  Ibid.  p.  77.

CH.  XXVIII,

MEASURES  OF  ABERCROMBY.

429

some  measure  the  consequence  of  the  murder.  It  is  to  he  hoped,
sir,  that  the  magistrates  of  the  county  of  Kildare  will  be  in¬
structed  to  prosecute  still  further  the  investigation  of  this  busi¬
ness.  Although  they  may  not  discover  the  murderer  of  the
sergeant,  they  cannot  fail  to  discover  the  soldiers  who  first  set
fire  to  the  houses  and  committed  several  acts  of  violence  at
noonday,  and  in  face  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Newbridge.  The
soldiers  are  all  at  Kildare,  and  every  assistance  shall  be  afforded
in  the  further  prosecution  of  the  inquiry.  The  future  discipline
of  the  army  may  depend  on  the  conduct  observed  in  this  affair.
If  the  civil  power  should  decline  taking  any  further  steps,  it
must  be  taken  up  in  a  different  point  of  view.’

On  another  occasion,  writing  to  General  Johnston,  who  com¬
manded  at  Fermoy,  he  fully  approved  of  the  assistance  that
general  had  given  to  the  civil  magistrates  in  their  attempts  to
seize  the  perpetrators  of 'two  horrible  murders  which  had  just
taken  place,  but  added,  £  I  have  always  wished  that  the  law
should  be  supported  by  the  troops  when  called  on  properly,  but
I  have  as  strongly  wished  that  they  should  not  take  any  part
that  was  not  strictly  legal.  ...  I  hope  the  magistrates  have  not
put  their  intention  of  burning  houses  in  force.  I  hope  the
soldiers  have  taken  no  part  in  it.’  £  I  have  endeavoured,’  he
wrote  to  the  Duke  of  York,  £  as  far  as  possible  to  resist  the  in¬
terference  of  the  troops  in  all  matters  where  the  civil  magistrate
ought  alone  to  have  interfered.  I  clearly  saw  that  the  discipline
of  the  troops  would  be  completely  ruined,  and  that  they  would
be  led  into  a  thousand  irregularities  contrary  to  law,  which
would  bring  disgrace  upon  them  selves,  and  in  which  they  ought
not  to  be  supported  by  the  Government  of  the  country.’ 1

Charlemont  wrote  about  this  time  to  Halliday,  that  Sir
Ralph  was  acting  £  with  the  strictest  propriety  in  his  most  diffi¬
cult  situation,  and  has  the  happiness  of  being  cordially  disliked
and  abused.’  2  It  is  evident,  indeed,  how  offensive  his  conduct
must  have  been  to  men  like  Lake  and  Knox,  who  had  steadily
advocated  the  policy  of  burning  houses  ;  to  Clare  and  Foster,
who  supported  every  measure  of  rigour  in  the  Council ;  and  to
the  many  magistrates  whose  proceedings,  frankly  communicated
to  the  Government  in  Dublin,  have  been  already  related.

'  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby ,  pp.  90-93.  2  Ibid.  p.  90.

430

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

These  differences  culminated  in  the  famous  general  orders
issued  on  February  26,  1798,  from  the  Adjutant-General’s  Office.
‘  The  very  disgraceful  frequency  of  courts-martial,  and  the  many
complaints  of  irregularities  in  the  conduct  of  the  troops  in  this
kingdom,’  they  said,  ‘  having  too  unfortunately  proved  the  army
to  be  in  a  state  of  licentiousness  which  must  render  it  formidable
to  everyone  but  the  enemy,’  it  had  become  necessary  to  enjoin
all  commanding  officers  £  to  compel  from  all  officers  under  their
command  the  strictest  and  most  unremitting  attention  to  the
discipline,  good  order,  and  conduct  of  their  men,  such  as  may
restore  the  high  and  distinguished  reputation  the  British  troops
have  been  accustomed  to  enjoy  in  every  part  of  the  world.’
‘  It  becomes  necessary,’  the  writer  added,  £  to  recur  and  most
pointedly  to  attend  to  the  standing  orders  of  the  kingdom,
which,  at  the  same  time  that  they  direct  military  assistance  to
be  given  at  the  requisition  of  the  civil  magistrate,  positively
forbid  the  troops  to  act  (but  in  case  of  attack)  without  his
presence  and  authority,  and  the  most  clear  and  precise  orders
are  to  be  given  to  the  officer  commanding  the  party  for  the
purpose.’ 1

These  orders,  though  certainly  not  uncalled  for  by  the  cir¬
cumstances  of  the  case,  produced  a  feeling  approaching  to  con¬
sternation  in  Government  circles  both  in  England  and  in  Ireland.
They  were  issued  without  consultation  with  either  Camden  or
Pelham,  and  at  a  time  when  Lord  Moira  had  just  brought  for¬
ward  his  motion  deploring  the  violent,  tyrannical,  and  illegal
proceedings  in  Ireland.  They  supplied  the  most  decisive  con¬
firmation  of  his  charges,  and  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  they
were  in  direct  conflict  with  the  proclamation  of  May  1  8,  by  which
the  military  were  instructed  to  act  without  waiting  for  the  civil
magistrate.  The  storm,  however,  did  not  immediately  burst.
In  Parliament,  Pelham  defended  the  document  as  £a  military
order  called  for  by  the  relaxation  of  discipline  in  the  army,  com¬
posed  as  it  is  of  very  bad  militia  and  fencible  officers ;  ’ 2  and
Abercromby  himself  repeatedly  and  earnestly  disclaimed  any
political  object,  declaring  that  he  had  no  sympathy  with  Lord

1  Seward’s  Collectanea  Politico,,  iii.  2  Camden  to  Portland,  March  15
214,  215.  These  orders  have  been  1798.  ’

often  reprinted.

CH,  XXVIII,

CABAL  AGAINST  ABERCROMBY.

431

Moira’s  politics,  and  had  not  even  read  his  speech  or  the  Chan¬
cellor’s  reply.

Abercromby  immediately  after  issuing  his  orders  went  on  a
tour  of  inspection  in  Ulster ;  and  during  his  absence  a  cabal  of
the  most  formidable  kind  was  instigated  against  him,  which  was
greatly  assisted  by  the  serious  illness  of  Pelham.  Among  the
Pelham  Papers  there  is  the  draft  of  a  curious  letter,  written  but
not  sent  by  Pelham  to  the  Duke  of  Portland,  detailing  what
occurred.  Pelham  asserts  that  he  had  himself  much  reason  to
complain.  His  health  in  the  beginning  of  1798  was  so  broken,
that  he  had  begged  to  be  relieved  of  his  post ;  but  he  received  no
answer  till  the  eve  of  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  when  he  was
entreated  to  continue  in  office,  and  was  obliged  to  undertake  the
management  of  the  session,  and  among  other  things  to  give  the
official  view  of  Abercromby’s  orders.  In  his  own  opinion,  the
description  Abercromby  gave  of  the  state  of  the  army  was  per¬
fectly  true,  although  the  word  ‘licentiousness  ’  was  an  injudicious
one  to  use,  and  although  part  of  the  orders  could  not  be  recon¬
ciled  with  the  proclamation  of  May  18.  Pelham,  by  travelling
through  Ireland,  had  painfully  convinced  himself  that  the  disci¬
pline  of  the  army  had  been  steadily  declining  up  to  the  period
of  the  arrival  of  Abercromby.  He  had,  therefore,  no  hesitation
in  justifying  Abercromby  completely  in  Parliament,  and  his
‘  open  and  explicit  justification’  there,  was  at  the  time  unanswered
and  uncensured.  But  no  sooner  had  his  illness  become  so  serious
that  he  was  confined  to  his  bed,  than  the  Chancellor,  the  Speaker,
and  many  others  talked  openly  of  impeaching  Abercromby,  and
employing  every  means  to  punish  and  degrade  him.  Dinners
were  got  up  to  bring  together  politicians  of  different  types
with  this  object,  and  a  fixed  resolve  was  expressed  ‘to  get  rid
of  him.’  The  Speaker,  standing  at  the  bar  of  the  House  of
Lords  to  deliver  the  money  Bills,  took  occasion,  in  the  course  of
his  address  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  to  commit  the  House  of
Commons  against  Abercromby  by  expressing  the  full  confidence
of  the  House  in  ‘  the  high  discipline  ’  of  the  army.  The  mea¬
sure,  however,  Pelham  wrote,  was  not  full  till  ‘Your  Grace
thought  fit,  in  declaring  the  sentiments  of  the  British  Cabinet,
to  give  countenance  to  the  cabal  here,  ...  to  condemn  without
hearing,  not  only  Sir  Ptalph  Abercromby,  but  Lord  Camden.’  It

432

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

was  evident,  Pelham  added,  that  Portland  received  private
reports  from  members  of  the  Irish  Cabinet.1

‘  The  hue  and  cry  has  been  raised  in  London,’  wrote
Abercromby,  ‘  by  letters  from  hence,  and  has  been  carried  on,  as
I  hear,  principally  by  that  immaculate  character,  Lord  Auck¬
land.’  2  This  information  seems  to  have  been  quite  true,  and
the  part  which  Auckland  played  at  this  time  was  an  extremely
mischievous  one.  Having  been,  when  Mr.  Eden,  Chief  Secretary,
under  Lord  Carlisle,  he  had  formed  Irish  connections,  and  was
in  close  correspondence  with  Clare,  Beresford,  and  Cooke,  the
men  who  had  taken  the  chief  part  in  producing  the  recall  of
Lord  Fitzwilliam,  and  who  were  the  centre  of  nearly  every¬
thing  that  was  reactionary  and  tyrannical  in  Irish  government.
Auckland  was  intimate  with  Pitt,  and  through  his  intervention
these  men  had  a  constant  channel  of  communication  with  Pitt,
independently  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Chief  Secretary.
They  were  at  this  time  busily  intriguing  against  Aber¬
cromby.  Clare  especially  wrote  furiously  about  ‘  the  peevish
indiscretion  of  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby’s  orders,’  declared  that
‘  he  must  have  lost  his  senses,’  and  that  it  was  ‘  provoking  that
the  critical  situation  in  which  we  stand  made  it  ineligible  to
resent  his  intemperance  as  it  merited,’  and  he  added,  in  charac¬
teristic  phraseology,  that  ‘  if  Lord  Moira  had  not  retracted  his
charges  against  the  Irish  army,  .  .  .  this  Scotch  beast  certainly
would  have  given  him  strong  grounds  to  stand  upon.’3

The  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  which  Pelham
refers,  was  written  on  March  11.  In  it  Portland  expresses  his
astonishment  at  the  general  order  ascribed  to  Abercromby,
about  the  conduct  of  the  army  ;  asks  whether  it  is  genuine,  and
declares  that  it  is  considered  a  great  triumph  for  Lord  Moira’s
party  over  that  of  the  Chancellor,  and  that  the  Irish  in  London
inferred  from  it  that  the  loyalists  were  abandoned  to  ruin.4

Camden  was  evidently  perplexed.  He  thought  it  right  to
communicate  the  substance  of  Portland’s  despatch  to  Aber¬
cromby,  and  he  was  himself  exceedingly  annoyed  at  the  pub¬
lication  of  the  orders-,  but  he  was  also  extremely  anxious  that

1  April  1799,  393-397.  See,  too,  p.  411.

2  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby,  p.  4  Portland  to  Camden,  March  11

126.  1798.

’  Auckland  Correspondence ,  iii.

CH.  XXVIII.

RESIGNATION  OF  ABERCROMBY.

433

Abercromby  should  not  resign  his  command.  Such  a  resignation,
he  said,  would  deprive  him  in  a  very  dangerous  moment  of  a
commander  of  tried  military  capacity,  and  would  also  add  the
weight  of  a  most  respectable  opinion  ‘  to  the  representations  of
those  who  are  endeavouring  to  attack  the  system  which  has
been  pursued  in  Ireland.’  He  urged  the  English  Ministers  to
be  as  conciliatory  as  possible  towards  Abercromby ;  and  he
wrote  to  Abercromby  declaring  his  full  confidence  in  him,
absolving  him  from  all  imputation  of  having  been  actuated  by  a
political  motive,  expressing  a  most  earnest  wish  that  he  should
continue  at  his  post,  but  at  the  same  time  clearly  stating  his
dissent  from  one  portion  of  the  orders.  ‘  You  have  had  the
candour,’  he  wrote,  £  to  acknowledge  that  you  did  not  consider
the  proclamation  of  May  18  as  then  in  force.  There  is  no
doubt  that  until  such  a  proclamation  is  recalled,  or  until  the
state  of  the  country  is  so  altered  that  it  is  a  dead  letter,  the
proclamation  exists.  Under  that  proclamation  the  military
received  orders  to  act  without  waiting  for  the  civil  magistrate.
.  .  .  That  necessity  exists,  and  since  it  does  exist,  it  appears
to  me  that  the  proclamation  must  be  acted  on.’ 1

If  it  was,  as  Pelham  stated,  the  object  of  Clare  and  Foster
to  ‘  get  rid  of  Abercromby,’  that  object  was  most  easily  attained.
He  had  accepted  the  command  with  great  reluctance,  and  he
was  not  a  man  who  would  acquiesce  with  the  smallest  patience
in  the  censure  of  his  superiors  or  the  restriction  of  his  powers.
On  the  very  day  on  wrhich  he  received  the  letter  from  Camden
he  sent  in  his  resignation,  and  all  the  efforts  of  Camden  and
Dundas  were  unable  to  induce  him  to  withdraw  it.  ‘  I  feel  the
most  perfect  conviction,’  he  wrote  to  Dundas,  ‘  that  the  principal
members  of  Lord  Camden’s  Cabinet  have  lost  their  confidence,
if  they  ever  had  any,  in  me ;  that  they  did  during  my  absence
attempt  my  ruin  by  machinations  here  and  in  England,  is  a
matter  beyond  all  doubt.’ 2  In  two  private  letters  to  relations
he  threw  off  the  reticence  required  in  official  correspondence,  and
stated  his  case  with  a  clearness  that  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.
‘  The  struggle,’  he  said,  ‘  has  been,  in  the  first  place,  whether  I
was  to  have  the  command  of  the  army  really  or  nominally,  and

1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  15,  2  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby,  p.

1798.  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby ,  p.  106.

101. .

271

434

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxvnr.

then  whether  the  character  and  discipline  of  it  were  to  be
degraded  and  ruined  in  the  mode  of  using  it,  either  from  the
facility  of  one  man,  or  from  the  violence  and  oppression  of  a  set
of  men  who  have  for  more  than  twelve  months  employed  it  in
measures  which  they  durst  not  avow  or  sanction.  .  .  .  Within
these  twelve  months  every  crime,  every  cruelty  that  could  be
committed  by  Cossacks  or  Calmucks,  has  been  transacted  here.
The  words  of  the  order  of  February  26  were  strong ;  the
circumstances  required  it.  It  has  not  abated  the  commission  of
enormities,  and  I  will  venture  to  predict  that  when  the  moment
for  calling  forth  the  Irish  army  arrives,  one-half  of  it  will  dis¬
solve  in  a  month.  .  .  .  Within  less  than  two  months  since  the
issuing  of  my  orders,  a  private  man  has  thrown  a  chair  at  the
colonel  of  his  regiment,  when  sent  for  to  be  reprimanded.
Houses  have  been  burned,  men  murdered,  others  half  hanged.
A  young  lady  has  been  carried  off  by  a  detachment  of  dragoons,
and  in  the  room  where  she  was,  an  officer  was  shot  through  the
thigh,  and  a  blunderbuss  snapped  at  another  gentleman’s  head.
These  are  but  a  few  of  the  enormities  which  have  disgraced  us
of  late ;  were  the  whole  to  be  collected,  what  a  picture  would  it
present !  Such  a  degree  of  insubordination  has  been  allowed,
that  the  general  officers  write  directly  to  the  Castle,  overlooking
every  decency  and  order.  Almost  all  those  who  were  here
before  me  have  a  plot  and  a  conspiracy  which  they  cherish,  and
which  is  the  subject  of  their  correspondence  and  consequence ;
and  instead  of  attending  to  their  duty  and  to  the  discipline  of
their  troops,  they  are  either  acting  as  politicians  or  as  justices
of  the  peace.  .  .  .  There  must  be  some  change,  or  the  country
will  be  lost.  The  late  ridiculous  farce  acted  by  Lord  Camden
and  his  Cabinet  must  strike  everyone.  They  have  declared  the
kingdom  in  rebellion,  when  the  orders  of  his  Excellency  might
be  carried  over  the  whole  kingdom  by  an  orderly  dragoon,
or  a  writ  executed  without  any  difficulty,  a  few  places  in  the
mountains  excepted.’  £  Since  my  arrival  here,  I  have  been
under  the  necessity  of  supporting  myself  by  great  exertions  and
strong  representations,  otherwise  I  should  have  been  a  mere
cipher,  or,  what  is  worse,  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  a  party  who
govern  this  country.  Their  dislike  to  me  has,  of  course,  been
visible,  and  in  my  absence  they  took  the  opportunity  of  attempt-

CH.  XXVIII,

EFFECTS  OF  THE  RESIGNATION.

435

ing  to  crush  me.  The  Speaker,  at  the  head  of  a  junto,  met  in
his  chamber,  canvassed  and  censured  my  order,  and,  interfering
with  a  matter  which  did  not  belong  to  him,  sent  a  deputation
to  Mr.  Pelham  to  convey  to  him  their  opinion,  and  their  deter¬
mination  to  bring  it  before  Parliament.  This  was  only  part  of
their  plan  ;  they  wrote  the  most  furious  representations  against
me  to  the  Duke  of  Portland,  and  to  others  of  high  rank  in
England.  .  .  .  After  this  there  can  be  no  mutual  confidence.
In  times  so  difficult  it  is  next  to ,  impossible  to  separate  the
civil  and  military  business  of  the  country;  and  with  all  the
wisdom,  all  the  vigour,  that  can  be  shown,  it  is  impossible  for
any  general  to  answer  for  success.  Should,  therefore,  any  one
thing  go  wrong,  I  could  expect  nothing  but  the  fullest  effects  of
their  resentment.  .  .  .  The  abuses  of  all  kinds  I  found  here
can  scarcely  be  believed  or  enumerated.  I  tried  various
means  with  little  success ;  it  was  necessary  to  speak  out ;  the
order  is  strong,  but  be  assured  it  was  necessary.  The  way  in
which  the  troops  have  been  employed,  would  ruin  the  best  in
Europe.  Here  are  35,000  yeomanry,  raised  for  the  express
purpose  of  protecting  the  country.  ...  I  therefore  restricted
the  troops  to  the  standing  orders  of  the  kingdom,  that  their
discipline  might  be  pursued  if  possible,  and  that  the  gentlemen
might  be  obliged  to  trust  to  the  yeomanry,  on  whom  they  must
ultimately  depend  in  case  the  troops  should  be  called  away  to
oppose  a  foreign  enemy.’ 1

I  have  quoted  these  passages  at  much  length,  as  they  have
a  great  historical  importance.  The  resignation  of  Abercromby
completed  the  fatal  policy  which  the  recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam
had  begun,  and  it  took  away  the  last  faint  chance  of  averting  a
rebellion.  If  the  French  had  arrived,  no  human  power  could
have  prevented  a  rising ;  but  in  the  absence  of  French  assistance,
it  was  perhaps  still  just  possible  that  it  might  have  been  avoided.
Many  and  various  influences  concurred  to  produce,  accelerate,
or  extend  it;  but  among  them,  the  burning  of  houses,  and
other  lawless  acts  of  military  violence,  which  were  countenanced
by  the  Government,  had  an  undoubted  part.  The  resignation
of  a  Commander-in-Chief,  mainly  because  he  endeavoured  to
repress  them,  and  because  he  had  been  censured  for  that
1  Dunfermline’s  Alercrumly,  pp.  10S-110,  112-114.

436

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

endeavour,  was  one  of  the  most  calamitous  events  that  could
at  this  time  have  happened.  Lord  Camden  was  not  blind
to  its  probable  effects.  Scarcely  any  other  event,  he  wrote  to
Portland,  could  have  been  so  calculated  ‘  to  shake  his  Majesty’s
interest  in  Ireland,’  and  he  strongly  urged  that,  as  Abercromby
could  not  be  induced  to  withdraw  his  resignation,  he  should  be
at  once  replaced  by  a  very  good  general,  as  £  the  nature  of  the
government  is  now  become  so  military,  that  it  is  absolutely
essential  that  an  officer  of  the  most  approved  ability  and
experience  should  be  sent  to  this  kingdom.’  1

Abercromby,  though  he  refused  to  withdraw  his  resignation,
spoke  with  great  personal  warmth  and  respect  of  Lord  Camden,
and  consented,  before  leaving  the  country,  to  revoke  the  chief
part  of  his  general  orders,  and  himself  to  go,  armed  with  the
full  powers  of  martial  law,  to  quell  certain  disturbances  which
had  broken  out  in  some  counties  of  Leinster  and  Munster.  The
little  town  of  Cahir,  in  Tipperary,  had  been  occupied  at  noon¬
day  by  a  party  of  armed  and  mounted  rebels,  numbering,  accord¬
ing  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  1,000, 2  and,  according  to  the
lowest  estimate,  at  least  300  men,  and  they  had  proceeded
systematically  to  disarm  the  inhabitants,  and  had  carried  away
more  than  100  stand  of  arms.  Great  robberies  of  arms  were
taking  place  in  the  county  Kildare.  Lord  Clare,  in  a  letter
burning  with  hatred  of  Abercromby,  declared  that  the  whole
province  of  Munster,  and  many  of  the  counties  of  Leinster,  were
in  a  complete  state  of  anarchy,  if  not  of  open  rebellion  ;  that  the
system  of  robbery  was  rapidly  extending,  and  that  the  gentry
over  large  districts  had  universally  fled  for  refuge  to  the  towns.

‘  Under  these  circumstances,’  he  said,  ‘  Lord  Camden  was
obliged  to  issue  a  peremptory  command  to  Sir  Ralph,  to  revoke
his  general  order,  and  to  give  immediate  directions  to  the
troops  to  reduce  the  rebels,  for  which  desirable  purpose  he  has
been  invested  with  full  discretionary  powers.’  Abercromby  had
undertaken  to  put  down  the  disturbances  in  a  fortnight,  and  Clare
wrote  that  if  he  did  not  do  so,  the  King  should  disgrace  him.3

1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  26,  2  Camden  to  Portland,  March  30

1798.  Cornwallis  wrote  two  days  1798.

later :  ‘  For  your  private  ear,  A  her-  3  Auckland  Correspondence  iii
cromby  is  coming  from  Ireland.  He  396-397.  Cooke  wrote  very  signifi-
has  been  exceedingly  wrong-headed.’  cantly :  ‘  Sir  Ralph  ...  is  gone  into
{Cornwallis  Correspondence,  ii.  333.)  Munster  with  full  martial  law  powers

CH.  XXVIII,

LAST  MEASURES  OF  ABERCROMBY.

437

The  military  were  now  ordered  to  act  without  waiting  for
directions  from  the  civil  magistrates,  in  dispersing  tumultuous
assemblies.  Abercromby  received  express  orders  to  disarm  the
rebels,  to  recover  the  arms  that  had  been  taken,  and  to  crush
rebellion,  in  whatever  shape  it  might  show  itself,  and  wherever
it  might  appear,  by  the  most  summary  military  measures ;  and  a
proclamation  issued  on  March  30,  established  the  most  stringent
martial  law.1  Of  this  proclamation,  and  of  the  measures  that
resulted  from  it,  we  shall  learn  more  in  the  following  chapter.

Abercromby  agreed  to  act  as  the  Government  desired,  but
he  at  the  same  time,  instead  of  waiting,  as  he  ought  to  have
done,  till  his  resignation  had  been  accepted  by  the  King,  at
once  informed  his  brother  officers  that  he  expected  soon  to  be
relieved.  It  became,  therefore,  well  known  that  the  military
command  was  about  to  be  changed,  and  that  the  Commander-
in-Chief  disapproved  of  the  measures  he  was  obliged  to  enforce.
In  the  mean  time,  he  issued  instructions  to  the  generals,  direct¬
ing  them  to  disarm  the  people ;  authorising  free  quarters  in
disaffected  districts,  but  also  limiting  and  defining  these
measures,  and  taking  every  precaution  that  martial  law  should
be  exercised  with  leniency  and  moderation.2

In  the  opinion  of  Camden,  he  did  not  always  execute  his  task

judiciously.  He  was  accused  of  refusing  to  consult  with  the

country  gentry,  and  treating  those  whom  he  met  with  marked

coldness,  and  he  appears  to  have  greatly  affronted  Sir  Lawrence

Parsons,  by  his  strictures  on  the  King’s  County  Militia.3  He

went  through  Kildare,  the  Queen’s  County,  the  King’s  County,

Tipperary,  and  a  considerable  part  of  Munster,  encountering

little  or  no  open  opposition.  The  word  had  evidently  gone  forth

that  all  should  be  quiet,  and  although  Abercromby  was  not

blind  to  the  existence  of  deep-seated  disaffection,  he  found

the  actual  disturbances  much  exaggerated,  and  was  more  and

more  convinced  of  the  impolicy  of  the  steps  which  had  been

taken.  There  is,  I  think,  little  doubt  that  he  greatly  underrated

the  extent  of  the  conspiracy,  and  the  real  imminence  of  the

to  quell  the  rebellion  there,  which  is  2  Dunfermline’s  Life  of  Aber-
more  dangerous  to  individuals  than  eromby,  pp.  116-121.
the  State,  for  I  think  its  breaking  out  3  Camden  to  Portland,  April  23,
will  do  good.’  (Ibid.  p.  400.)  1798  ;  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.

1  Castlereagli  Correspondence,  i.  401.

164,  168,  169.

438

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

danger.  ‘I  Lad  reason,’  he  wrote,  ‘  from  the  proclamation  and
instructions  I  received,  to  believe  that  an  insurrection  Lad  taken
place  in  the  province  of  Munster.  I  Lave  been  through  all  the
disaffected  districts,  and  found  nothing  but  tranquillity,  the
people  employed  in  cultivating  their  lands,  and  following  their
usual  avocations.  They  were  civil  and  submissive,  and  although
I  never  took  any  escort,  or  anything  more  than  one  servant,  I
was  under  no  apprehension,  even  the  most  distant,  of  any  danger.
Several  robberies  have  been  committed,  as  has  been,  at  all  times,
the  custom  in  this  country ;  some  private  quarrels  have  been
avenged,  and  arms  have  been  taken  from  the  Protestants.  The
people,  however,  are  induced  to  give  them  up  partly  through
fear,  partly  through  persuasion.  I  do  not,  however,  doubt,  that
if  an  enemy  should  land,  the  Roman  Catholics  will  rise,  and  cut
the  throats  of  the  Protestants.  I  really  think  Lord  Camden  is
ill  advised  to  declare  the  kingdom  in  rebellion,  and  to  establish
something  more  than  martial  law  over  the  whole  kingdom.  It
was,  perhaps,  right  to  do  something  in  that  way,  in  some  par¬
ticular  districts  where  the  greatest  outrages  had  been  committed,
and  where  the  magistrates  had  fled  from  their  duty.  I  am  now
convinced  that  a  writ  may  be  executed  in  any  part  of  Ireland.
Do  not,  therefore,  be  under  any  immediate  apprehension  about
this  country.’ 1

Abercromby  is  nearly  the  last  figure  of  any  real  interest
that,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  flitted  across  the  troubled  scene
of  Irish  politics.  He  left  Ireland  towards  the  end  of  April,  just
a  month  before  the  rebellion  broke  out,  and  he  was. replaced  by
Lake,  who,  more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  military  man,  was
associated  with  the  abuses  which  Abercromby  had  tried  to  check.
The  reign  of  simple  force  was  established  beyond  dispute,  and
the  men  whose  policy  had  driven  Lord  Fitzwilliam  from  Ireland,
and  Grattan  from  Parliament,  were  now  omnipotent.

Abercromby  himself  in  after  years  looked  back  on  his  brief
Irish  command  as  the  most  meritorious  page  of  his  long  and
brilliant  career.  After  the  scene  of  blood  that  was  opening  in
Ireland  had  closed,  and  when  the  measure  of  a  legislative  Union
was  in  contemplation,  he  wrote  some  melancholy  lines,  giving
his  impressions  of  Irish  life.  To  the  illiberal,  the  unjust,  and
1  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby ,  pp.  127,  128.

CH.  XXVIII.

ALL  CATHOLIC  CONCESSION  REFUSED.

439

the  unwise  conduct  of  England  during  the  long  period  of  her
government,  he  mainly  attributed  the  profoundly  diseased  cha¬
racter  of  Irish  life.  The  Legislature  and  the  Executive  had
become  corrupt ;  the  upper  classes  dissipated,  neglectful  of  duty,
and  too  often  oppressive  to  the  poor ;  the  peasantry  cunning,
deceitful,  lazy,  and  vindictive.  ‘  Although,’  he  said,  ‘  the  French
Revolution  and  Jacobin  principles  may  be  the  immediate  cause
of  the  events  which  have  lately  taken  place  in  Ireland,  yet  the
remote  and  ultimate  cause  must  be  derived  from  its  true  origin,
the  oppression  of  centuries.’  It  will  need  a  long  period,  and
the  wisest  system  of  government  that  can  be  devised,  to  cure
the  evil.  ‘  In  the  mean  time  you  must  trust  to  the  due  execu¬
tion  of  the  law,  and  to  a  powerful  and  well-disciplined  army,  for
your  protection.  .  .  .  Till  a  new  system  has  begun  to  take
effect,  the  Irish  people  will  remain  the  tools  of  a  foreign  enemy,
or  of  domestic  agitators  and  demagogues.  God  grant  that  the
measures  on  the  affairs  of  Ireland,  which  they  say  are  now  under
consideration,  may  be  well  weighed,  and  that  the  spirit  of  party
may  give  way  to  true  wisdom  !  ’ 1

It  will  not  be  surprising  to  the  reader,  that  everything  of
the  nature  of  political  concession  was  at  this  time  obstinately
refused,  though  representations  often  came  to  the  Government,
pointing  out  its  importance  and  its  necessity.  Pelham  wrote
from  London,  in  the  last  days  of  1797,  that  he  found  a  strong
disposition  in  English  ministerial  circles,  to  endeavour  to  alienate
the  Catholics  from  the  conspiracy  by  some  measures  of  conces¬
sion,  if  the  Irish  Government  would  consent ;  and  he  begged
Camden  to  consult  with  the  Chancellor  on  the  subject ;  but  the
answer  was  an  absolute  refusal.2  Francis  Higgins,  the  shrewd
proprietor  of  the  ‘  Freeman’s  Journal,’  was  at  this  time  much
about  the  Government,  and  gave  them  very  valuable  information.
No  one  who  was  not  himself  a  United  Irishman  knew  better  the
movements  and  changes  of  popular  Irish  feeling,  and  he  strongly
urged  the  importance  of  doing  something  to  conciliate  the
Catholics.  He  told  them  that  there  had  been  a  meeting  of  United
Irishmen,  in  which  Emmet,  Sampson,  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald,
and  others,  had  expressed  extreme  alarm  lest  the  speech  from

1  Dunfermline’s  Abercromby,  pp.  2  Pelham  to  Camden,  Dec.  21  j

127;  129,  130,  216.  Camden  to  Pelham,  Dec.  26,  1797.

440

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvm.

the  Throne  should  give  hopes  of  a  measure  of  Catholic  emancipa¬
tion,  declaring  that  in  that  case  ‘  there  would  be  an  end  to  free¬
dom  and  their  design.’  In  the  opinion  of  Higgins,  the  wisest
thing  the  Government  could  do,  would  be  to  enter  on  such  a
course,  and  especially  to  make  use  of  the  services  of  his  illus¬
trious  friend  Arthur  O’Leary.  ‘  I  know,’  he  said,  ‘  O’Leary
would  be  a  tower  of  strength  among  them.  He  was  their  first
champion,  and  is  most  highly  respected  by  the  multitude.  His
writings  and  preaching  prevented  the  White  Boys  and  insurgents
of  the  South  from  joining  the  rabble  of  Cork,  and  rising  en  masse
at  the  period  when  the  combined  fleets  of  Spain,  France  &c.  were
in  the  English  Channel.’ 1

Another  letter  arrived,  to  which  no  great  weight  can  have
been  attached,  but  which  may  be  noticed  in  passing,  as  it  is,  I
believe,  with  one  exception,  the  last  appearance  in  Irish  politics
of  a  strange,  wild  figure,  which  fills  a  considerable  space  in  an
earlier  portion  of  this  narrative.  Lord  Bristol,  the  Bishop  of
Derry,  now  lived  entirely  in  Italy,  from  whence  accounts  of  his
mad  pranks  were  from  time  to  time  brought  back  by  travellers.2
In  the  spring  of  1797,  his  palace  at  Derry  had  been  occupied  by
soldiers  under  Lord  Cavan,  and  he  wrote  a  furious  letter,  order¬
ing  that  legal  proceedings  should  be  immediately  taken  against
that  officer.3  In  the  beginning  of  1798,  Pelham  received  a  long
letter  from  him,  dated  from  Venice,  and  giving  his  views  of  the
state  of  Ireland.  It  is  full  of  poetical  quotations,  and  very  ex¬
travagant  in  form,  but  not  in  substance.  The  diocese  of  Derry,
he  said,  was  the  real  centre  of  rebellion  in  Ireland,  and  the
present  was  the  third  paroxysm  which  had  taken  place  in  the
last  thirty  years.  The  Hearts  of  Oak,  the  Hearts  of  Steel,  and
the  Defenders  were  all  symptoms  of  the  same  deep-seated  dis¬
content  and  disease ;  and  as  he  had  gained  the  confidence  of  his
turbulent  people  more  completely  than  any  other  member  of  his
cloth,  he  could  tell  the  Ministers  confidently,  that  there  were
only  two  measures  which  could  ever  effect  a  real  and  radical  cure.

1  See  the  letters  of  F.  H.,  Dec.  9,
22,  29,  1797;  Jan.  2,  12,  16,  1798.
The  Freeman's  Journal  wrote,  on  the
whole,  favourably  towards  the  Catho¬
lics.  See  Madden’s  History  of  Irish
Periodical  Literature,  ii.  480-482.

2  See  vol.  vi.  p.  387.  Some  curious

additional  anecdotes  of  the  Bishop’s
proceedings  in  Italy,  will  be  found  in
the  Personal  Memoirs  of  Pryoe  Pock-
hart  Gordon,  i.  172-177.

3  Lord  Cavan  to  Pelham,  May  27.
1797.

CH.  XXVIII.

LETTER  OF  LORD  BRISTOL.

441

The  first  was,  a  complete  change  in  the  law  of  tithes.  He
described  at  length  the  hardship  and  irritation  the  existing  system
produced  in  Ulster,  and  continued  :  ‘  My  remedy  for  all  this  evil
is  simple.  I  proposed  it  in  1774,  and  it  was  accepted  by  the
Bench  of  Bishops  assembled  at  the  late  Primate’s,  but — by  way
of  experiment — confined  to  the  diocese  of  Derry  ;  but  my  illness
and  other  circumstances  made  me  drop  it.  This  was  the  remedy,
grounded  on  the  English  statute  for  inclosing  parishes,  ...  an
Act  to  enable  every  rector  and  vicar,  with  consent  of  the  patron
of  the  parish  and  the  bishop  of  the  diocese,  to  exchange  his
tithe,  or  any  portion  of  his  tithe,  for  land  of  the  same  value,  so
that  the  exchange  will  only  be  gradual  in  the  parish.’

He  explained  the  process  by  which  such  a  measure  could  be
made  to  work,  but  added  that  it  must  be  accompanied  by  an¬
other  great  change,  the  payment  of  the  priests  and  Dissenting
ministers.  The  Presbyterians,  who  had  a  few  years  before,  so
enthusiastically  supported  the  Bishop  as  the  great  champion  of
religious  liberty,  would  have  been  somewhat  startled  had  they
seen  the  very  plain  language  in  which  he  now  expressed  his
views  on  this  subject.  £  Is  it  not  a  shame  that  in  any  civilised
country,  and  where  there  is  an  established  religion  as  well  as  a
Government,  there  should  be  teachers  professedly  paid  by  their
hearers  for  preaching  against  both  the  one  and  the  other  ?
Neither  popish  nor  Presbyterian  parson  should,  in  my  opinion,
be  permitted  by  law  to  preach  or  pray  indoors  but  under  the
Great  Seal  of  Ireland.  The  Crown  should  be  the  patron  of  all
Dissenters,  seceders,  and  schismatics  whatever,  and  the  Crown
should  either  pay  them,  or  be  the  cause  of  their  being  paid,  and
then  Government  would  be  certain  of  the  people  they  appoint,
and  the  doctrines  they  would  teach.’  The  payment  might  be
made  either  by  a  direct  grant,  or  by  a  county  or  baronial  rate,
or  by  dividing  the  Church  funds  as  livings  became  vacant.
‘  This  would  effectually  tear  up  rebellion  by  the  roots.  .  .  .  Where
the  treasure  is,  there  would  be  the  heart  likewise.  .  .  .  Anything
so  anomalous  as  a  man  in  a  civilised  state  paid  for  preaching
anarchy,  confusion,  and  rebellion,  I  do  not  conceive.’  Unless
‘  some  radical  antidote  ’  is  very  speedily  applied  to  the  diseased
body  politic,  that  body  will  infallibly  burst.1

1  Lord  Bristol  to  Pelham,  Jan.  16,  1788.

442  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvm.

In  the  new  Parliament  also,  which  met  on  January  9,  voices
of  protest  and  remonstrance  were  not  wanting.  I  have  already
spoken  of  Lord  Moira’s  motion  in  the  House  of  Lords ;  and  in
the  same  House,  Lord  Bective,  in  a  maiden  speech,  on  the  motion
for  the  Address,  strongly  urged  the  necessity  of  conceding
both  parliamentary  reform  and  Catholic  emancipation.1  In  the
House  of  Commons,  Sir  Lawrence  Parsons  moved  for  a  Commit¬
tee  of  the  House  to  inquire  into  the  discontent  of  the  nation,  and
he  prefaced  his  motion  by  an  elaborate  and  very  powerful  speech.
He  reminded  the  House  that,  at  the  time  of  Lord  Fitz william’s
recall,  he  had  predicted,  amid  a  storm  of  derision  and  dissent,
that  the  effect  of  that  fatal  measure  would  be,  that  each  gentle¬
man’s  house  would  soon  have  to  be  protected  by  four  or  five
soldiers,  and  he  asked  whether  in  very  many  cases  this  prediction
had  not  proved  literally  true.  To  that  recall ;  to  the  obstinate
refusal  of  the  Government  to  concede  Catholic  emancipation
and  parliamentary  reform  ;  and  to  the  settled  design  to  divide
and  corrupt  the  country,  he  attributed,  not  indeed  the  existence
of  the  United  Irish  conspiracy,  but  the  immense  success  which
had  attended  it.  There  were,  however,  other  reasons.  ‘  To
make  the  people  respect  the  laws,  the  Government  should  itself
obey  them.  Such  had  not  been  the  conduct  of  Government,  and
to  that  misconduct  were  the  outrages  and  the  assassinations
which  had  disgraced  the  country  to  be  traced.  A  general  officer
had  in  a  western  district  taken  out  of  the  gaols  a  number  of
prisoners,  whom  the  law  would  perhaps  have  pronounced  inno¬
cent,  and  by  his  own  authority  transported  them.  A  Bill  of
Indemnity  was  passed  to  protect  this  violation  of  law,  and  upon
that  Bill  being  debated,  he  well  recollected  an  honourable  gentle¬
man  [Mr.  G.  Ponsonby]  observing,  that  by  thus  proving  to  the
common  people,  that  the  law  might  be  broken  with  impunity,  by
taking  from  them  the  resource  of  its  protection,  the  practice  of
assassination  would  become  as  common  in  Ireland  as  it  was  in
modern  Rome ;  and  that  prediction  had  been  unhappily  fulfilled.
Parliament  went  farther.  In  the  Insurrection  Bill,  the  conduct
which  had  been  thus  indemnified,  was  made  the  law  of  the  land,
and  it  was  notorious  that  almost  every  assassination  which  had
taken  place,  had  occurred  in  the  districts  in  which  that  law  had
'  Camden  to  Portland,  Jan.  16,  1798.

CH.  XXVIII,

MILITAEY  OUTEAGES.

443

been  enforced.’  But  Castlereagh,  on  the  part  of  the  Govern¬
ment,  absolutely  opposed  all  inquiry  and  all  concession,  and  the
House  supported  him  by  156  to  19,  and  then  carried  an  address
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  praising,  in  unqualified  terms,  the
measures  that  had  been  pursued  in  Ulster,  and  asserting  that
they  had  been  attended  with  complete  success.1

Equally  unsuccessful  were  the  attempts  of  the  Opposition  to
impose  some  restraint  on  military  violence.  Dr.  Browne,  one
of  the  members  for  the  University,  asked  ‘  by  what  authority,
Act  of  Parliament,  or  proclamation,  the  house  of  every  person  was
burned  who  was  not  at  home  at  a  particular  hour  at  night ;  ’
and  he  asserted  that  there  were  many  instances  of  persons  who
were  supposed  to  be  guilty  of  treasonable  offences,  but  against
whom  there  was  no  evidence,  having  been  deliberately  shot  in
cold  blood.  But  the  only  answer  he  received  was,  that  ‘if  some
of  the  irregularities  complained  of  had  been  committed,  they
were  without  the  sanction  and  approbation  of  the  .Government.
The  military  had  been  moderate,  and  so  had  the  Administration.’2

It  is  no  doubt  true  that  such  acts  of  illegal  military  violence
were  usually  provoked  by  great  crimes,  or  by  serious  dangers,
and  that  their  number  has  been  much  exaggerated  ;  but  it  is
also  true  that  the  power  of  the  Government  was  constantly  em¬
ployed  to  shelter  them.  In  one  case,  a  certain  Colonel  Sparrow,
who  was  found  guilty  of  having,  without  sufficient  reason,  killed
a  prisoner  whose  rescue  he  feared,  and  committed  other  acts  of
violence,  produced  the  King’s  pardon  immediately  after  the  sen¬
tence  was  pronounced.3  In  the  county  of  Kildare,  there  was  a
case,  which  is  apparently  well  attested,  of  a  respectable  old  man,

r  Seward’s  Collectanea  Politica,  iii.
215-220;  Camden  to  Portland,  March
6,  1798.

2  Grattan’s  Life ,  iv.  340,  341.  One
of  the  members  for  the  county  of
Westmeath  refused  to  attend  the
debate  in  which  the  military  violence
was  discussed,  and  he  gave  Pel¬
ham  an  account  of  the  state  of  his
county,  which  seems  to  me  very
impartial.  ‘  Great  enormities,  I  do
confess,  were  practised  by  the  sol*
diery  at  the  other  side  of  this  county,
which  I  can  by  no  means  defend.
Were  I,  therefore,  in  my  place,  my
silence  would  be  a  sanction  to  the
Opposition.  ...  It  may,  perhaps,  be

some  extenuation  of  these  facts  to
state,  that  the  most  horrid  barbarities
had  been  previously  practised  by  the
insurgents,  that  witnesses  had  been
cruelly  murdered  (one  of  them  in
open  daylight),  and  that  the  minds
of  the  soldiery  had  been  exasperated
by  the  recent  fact  of  attacking
twenty-four  houses  in  one  night,  and
almost  in  the  same  hour,  which
seemed  to  indicate  a  general  rising.
Other  cruelties  might  be  cited,  such
as  the  roasting  of  three  women  in  one
parish,  to  force  them  to  confess  where
their  money  was  deposited.’  (Mr.
Smyth,  March  4,  1798.)

8  Plowden,  ii.  623.

444

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ca.  xxvm.

who,  intending  to  go  on  the  morrow  to  Dublin,  was  mending  his
cart  after  sunset,  in  a  district  which  was  perfectly  peaceful,  and
not  included  in  the  proclamation,  when  an  officer  of  a  Scotch
fencible  regiment,  who  had  drunk  too  freely,  mistaking  either  the
district  or  the  law,  arrested  him  on  the  supposition  that  he  was  out
of  doors  after  the  legal  hour.  At  the  first  turnpike,  the  officer
got  into  an  altercation  with  the  turnpike  keeper.  While  it
was  continuing,  the  prisoner  endeavoured  to  return  to  his  own
home,  but  was  at  once  cut  down,  killed  and  mangled  with  no
less  than  sixteen  wounds,  nine  of  which  were  pronounced  to  be
mortal.  The  coroner’s  inquest  returned  a  verdict  of  wilful
murder,  but  the  military  authorities  refused  to  give  up  the  cul¬
prit.  The  magistrate  was  driven  back  by  force,  and  the  Govern¬
ment  refused  to  interfere.  At  last,  when  the  scandal  became
very  grave,  the  officer  marched  into  Athy  with  a  band  playing
before  him,  and  gave  himself  up  for  trial.  Toler,  the  Solicitor-
General,  was  then  acting  as  Judge  of  Assize,  and  in  a  charge,
which  appears  to  have  been  abundantly  garnished  with  the  judi¬
cial  buffoonery  for  which,  as  Lord  Norbury,  he  was  afterwards  so
notorious,  he  directed  the  jury  to  acquit  the  prisoner,  on  the
ground  that £  he  was  a  gallant  officer,  who  had  only  made  a  mis¬
take.’  1

On  a  third  occasion,  twelve  persons  were  released  by  the
Court  of  King’s  Bench  from  an  imprisonment  which  the  judges
pronounced  entirely  illegal.2  Some  persons,  whose  property  had
been  destroyed  in  the  search  for  arms,  applied  to  the  King’s
Bench  for  redress,  and  legal  proceedings  were  instituted  against
some  magistrates  and  yeomen.3  But  the  Government  interfered
to  obstruct  the  action  of  the  law  courts,  and  a  new  Act  of  In¬
demnity  was  carried,  which  sheltered  all  magistrates,  and  other
persons  employed  to  preserve  the  peace,  from  the  consequences
of  every  illegal  act  they  had  committed  since  the  beginning  of

1  See  the  account  of  this  trial  in
Lord  Cloncurry’s  Personal  Recolleo-
tions,  pp.  49-51.  Lord  Cloncurry,
then  Mr.  Lawless,  was  present  at  the
trial,  and  the  murdered  man  was  a
tenant  of  his  father.  McNally,  ref  er¬
ring;  to  this  case,  wrote  :  ‘  The  refusal
of  Mr.  Pelham  to  give  the  aid  of  Go¬
vernment  towards  apprehending  Lieu¬
tenant  Eraser, of  the  Scotch  Fencibles,

is  considered,  or  at  least  represented,
as  a  gro.-s  instance  of  partiality  and
injustice,  particularly  as  the  inquest
brought  in  a  verdict  of  wilful  murder.’
‘  The  conduct  of  Toler  on  circuit,’  he
says  in  another  letter,  *  is  the  princi¬
pal  topic.’  (J.  W.,  July  24,  Sept.  19,
1797.)

s  Plowden,  ii.  639,  640.

5  Knox  to  Pelham,  Nov.  29,  1797.

CH.  XX Y I II ■

PLUNKET.

445

tlie  year  1797,  with  the  object  of  suppressing  insurrection,  pre¬
serving  peace,  or  securing  the  safety  of  the  State.1  The  Opposi¬
tion  endeavoured  to  add  a  clause  granting  compensation  to
honest  injured  men  whose  property  had  been  destroyed  by
such  illegal  violence,  but  this  clause,  though  inspired  by  the  most
obvious  and  indisputable  justice,  was  opposed  and  rejected.2

Such  a  policy  could  hardly  fail  to  drive  the  country  into
rebellion,  and  to  plant  in  it  savage  animosities  and  a  distrust
of  law  more  dangerous,  because  more  enduring,  than  rebellion.
The  efforts  of  the  Opposition  were  hopeless,  but  not  inglorious.
The  eloquent  voices  of  Grattan,  Ponsonby,  and  Curran  were
indeed  no  louger  heard ;  but  Parsons,  Browne,  and  Knox  main¬
tained  their  cause  with  eminent  ability,  and  they  were  reinforced
by  Lord  Caulfield,  the  son  of  Charlemont ;  by  Charles  Kendall
Bushe,  one  of  the  most  graceful  and  attractive  of  speakers  ;  and
by  another  young  lawyer  of  still  higher  powers,  who  was  now
brought  into  Parliament  by  Lord  Charlemont,  and  who  at  once
took  his  natural  place  among  the  very  greatest  of  debaters.
William  Conyngham  Plunket,  the  last  of  that  remarkable  group
of  statesmen  and  orators  produced  by  the  Irish  Protestants  in
the  closing  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  can  perhaps  hardly  be
called  a  great  man.  He  had  neither  the  glow  of  imagmation,
nor  the  warmth  and  disinterestedness  of  character,  that
kindle  the  enthusiasm  of  nations.  He  has  left  no  serious  con¬
tribution  to  human  thought  or  knowledge ;  and  devoting  himself
mainly  to  professional  ends,  he  neither  sought  nor  won  the  fame
of  a  party  leader  or  of  a  great  legislator.  Even  as  an  orator —
though  his  place  is  in  the  foremost  rank — his  popularity  was
somewhat  limited  by  the  extreme  severity  of  a  taste  which  rarely
stooped  to  ornament,  or  indulged  in  anything  that  was  merely
rhetorical  or  declamatory.  But  in  the  power  of  rapid,  lucid,  and
most  cogent  extemporaneous  argument ;  in  the  grave,  dignified,
reasoned,  and  persuasive  eloquence,  which  is  most  fitted  to  charm
and  subjugate  an  educated  audience,  he  has  very  seldom  had  an
equal,  scarcely  ever  a  superior.

As  a  politician,  he  belonged  essentially  to  the  school  of
Grattan,  with  whom  he  was  linked  in  the  closest  friendship,
whom  he  succeeded  in  the  conduct  of  the  Catholic  question  in
1  37  Geo.  III.  cap.  39.  2  Grattan’s  Life,  iv.  343.

446

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  xxviii.

the  Imperial  Parliament,  and  of  whom  he  was  accustomed  to
speak  to  the  end  of  his  long  life  as  the  greatest  and  best  man  he
had  ever  known.  He  agreed  with  Grattan  in  his  hostility  to
the  Union  and  in  his  views  on  the  Catholic  question,  and  he
equally  agreed  with  him  in  his  detestation  of  the  United  Irish
conspiracy ;  in  his  dislike  and  distrust  of  the  democratic  cha¬
racter  which  O’Connell  afterwards  gave  to  Irish  politics ;  in  his
freedom  from  all  French  sympathies ;  in  his  genuine  hatred  of
anarchy  and  disorder.  In  the  Imperial  Parliament  he  was  at
once  recognised  as  one  of  the  very  greatest  of  orators  and
debaters,1  but  he  confined  himself  to  a  few  questions,  and  was
never  a  keen  party  politician.  The  affinity  of  his  intellect  and
character  drew  him  naturally  to  the  moderate  Whigs  who  followed
Lord  Grenville,  and  like  most  of  Lord  Grenville’s  followers  he
joined  the  Government  of  Lord  Liverpool  in  1821,  and  supported
the  liberalised  Toryism  of  Canning.  On  two  memorable  occa¬
sions,  he  separated  himself  from  the  bulk  of  those  with  whom  he
usually  acted.  In  1815,  when  the  great  body  of  the  Whig  party
were  prepared  to  sacrifice  the  fruits  of  twenty  years’  war  by
acquiescing  in  the  restoration  of  Napoleon,  Plunket,  with  Grattan
and  with  Lord  Grenville,  strenuously  advocated  the  renewal  of
the  war,  and  in  1819  he  surprised  many  of  his  friends  by  main¬
taining  the  necessity  of  the  six  Acts  of  Castlereagh.  In  the
session  of  1798,  his  main  object  seems  to  have  been  to  restrain
illegal  violence,  and  he  was  the  proposer  of  the  clause  for  grant¬
ing  compensation  to  the  innocent  victims  of  military  violence.

The  discontent  produced  by  the  refusal  of  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  to  grant  any  measure  of  redress  or  of  reform,  was  seriously
increased  by  the  renewed  rejection  of  the  absentee  tax.  The
arguments,  both  of  principle  and  policy,  which  Burke  had  urged
against  this  tax,  were  very  powerful,  and  in  ordinary  times  they
might  have  been  accepted  as  conclusive,  but  Ireland  was  now
struggling  with  no  ordinary  difficulties.  It  was  scarcely  pos-

1  I  may  here  mention,  that  Lord
Bussell  once  told  me  that,  looking
back  on  his  long  life,  he  considered
that  there  were  two  men  in  his  early
days,  w  ho  excelled  as  orators  any  in
the  generation  that  succeeded  them.
They  were  Canning  and  Plunket ;  and
of  these  two,  he  considered  Plunket

the  greater.  There  is  an  admirable
description  of  Plunket’s  speaking  in
Bulwer’s  St.  Stephen’s ,  part  3.  See,
too,  much  on  the  subject  which  is
collected  in  Plunket’s  Life ,  by  his
distinguished  grandson,  the  member
for  Dublin  University.

CH.  XXVIII.

FINANCIAL  DIFFICULTIES.

447

Bible  that  any  small  and  poor  country  could  bear,  for  many
successive  years,  the  financial  strain  of  such  a  war  as  that  which
was  now  raging.  England  herself  staggered  under  the  burden,
and  seemed  to  many  good  judges  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy  ;
and  in  Ireland  the  situation  was  aggravated  by  the  necessity  of
immense  military  preparations  to  maintain  the  Government  at
home,  and  by  the  collapse  of  credit  and  paralysis  of  industry
that  always  follow  extreme  anarchy  and  imminent  danger  of
invasion  and  rebellion.  I  have  described  the  excellent  financial
condition  of  Ireland  when  the  war  began,  and  the  very  moderate
and  equitable  taxation  imposed  by  the  Irish  Parliament.  But
in  1797,  the  fifth  year  of  the  war,  the  condition  of  affairs  had
become  very  serious.

The  Government  deemed  it  necessary  to  raise  nearly  four  mil¬
lions  by  loan,  and  they  found  the  operation  exceedingly  difficult.
They  were  obliged  to  issue  five  per  cent.  100L  debentures  at  63,
and  they  obtained  with  some  difficulty  a  loan  of  a  million  and  a
half  from  England.1  Itwas  no  longer  possible  to  exempt  the  poor
from  taxation,  and  the  salt  tax  and  the  leather  tax  fell  upon  them
with  great  severity.  Some  of  the  principal  articles  of  Irish
manufacture,  it  is  true,  still  showed  a  surprising  vitality,  and  high
prices  gave  prosperity  to  agriculture,  but  those  prices  greatly
aggravated  the  distress  of  large  classes,  and  it  was  stated  that
in  1797  there  were  no  less  than  37,000  persons  in  Dublin  alone,
in  a  state  of  extreme  destitution.2

Under  these  circumstances,  and  at  a  time  when  the  poor
were  suffering  so  severely,  the  exemption  of  the  great  absentee
proprietors  from  all  taxation  for  Irish  purposes  seemed  peculiarly
unjust.  Another  year  of  war  was  now  opening ;  there  was  no
prospect  of  returning  peace,  and  it  was  certain  that  new  sacrifices
would  be  required.  The  tax  was  proposed  by  Latouche,  the
principal  banker,  and  one  of  the  most  respected  characters  in
Dublin,  but  he  desisted,  when  he  found  the  Government
inflexibly  opposed  to  it.  It  was  then  taken  up  again  by
Yandeleur,  and  it  was  defeated  by  104  to  40.  In  this  case,  the
real  opposition  came  not  from  Ireland,  but  from  England,  and

1  See  the  financial  debates  in  Ti~i.sk  History  of  England,  vi.  547,  548.

Pari.  Del.  xvii.  part  2.  Adolphus’  2  Plowden,  ii.  644.

I

448

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxvm.

Portland  gave  the  Lord  Lieutenant  peremptory  orders  that  the
tax  must  be  rejected.  ‘  It  is  impossible,’  writes  Camden,  ‘  to
describe  the  ill  humour  which  pervades  all  descriptions  of
persons,  from  finding  Government  determined  to  oppose  this
measure.  It  will,  however,  I  trust,  be  defeated  by  a  larger
majority  than  your  Grace  might  have  supposed;  but  I  must
repeat  the  great  disgust  with  which  most  of  the  friends  of
Government  support  it  upon  the  present  occasion.’ 1

This  session  of  Parliament  did  nothing  to  quiet  the  country,
and  nothing  to  regain  the  affections  of  the  people,  and  the
shadow  of  great  coming  calamity  fell  darkly  on  the  land.  In
Ulster,  it  is  true,  there  was  a  sudden,  mysterious,  perplexing
calm.  Cooke  wrote  to  England  in  March,  that,  although  the
leading  agitators  were  still  busy  there,  the  lower  classes  were  at
work,  and  peaceable  and  industrious,  and  he  added,  £  I  believe
no  part  of  the  King’s  dominions  more  apparently  quiet,  or  more
evidently  flourishing,  than  the  North  of  Ireland.’ 2  Clare,  as  we
have  seen,  boasted  of  it  in  the  House  of  Lords,  as  a  clear  proof
of  the  success  of  martial  law.  Lake  wrote  from  Belfast,  ‘  The
natives  continue  quiet,  waiting  with  anxious  expectation  for  the
arrival  of  the  French,  which,  they  are  taught  to  believe,  will
happen  very  shortly;  their  dispositions  remain  precisely  the
same.  The  flame  is  smothered,  but  not  extinguished.’ 3  Others
believed  that  the  very  calm  of  Ulster  was  an  evil  sign,  for  it
only  showed  how  perfectly  the  people  were  organised,  how  fully
they  obeyed  the  order  to  remain  passive  till  the  French  invasion,
which  was  confidently  expected  in  the  early  spring.4  But  over

1  Portland  to  Camden,  Jan.  29 ;
Camden  to  Portland,  Feb.  6,  15,  23,
1798.

2  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.
392.

3  Lake  to  Pelham,  Jan.  27,  1798.

4  Among  the  papers  in  Ireland
there  is  an  information  endorsed,  4  V.
(secret),  March  27,  1798,’  from  some
one  who  professes  that  4  all  the  plans,
resolutions,  and  correspondence  of
the  United  Irishmen  ’  were  communi¬
cated  to  him.  He  says  that  the  North
seems  quiet,  but  it  is  only  because  it
is  awaiting  orders  from  France,  and
adds :  4  It  was  in  the  North  that  the
spirit  of  rebellion  took  its  birth.  It
is  in  the  North  it  is  fostered.  It  is

there  that  it  is  brought  to  maturity.
It  is  there,  in  line,  lie  the  hopes,  the
spring,  the  wealth,  the  force  of  the
United  Irishmen.’  Another  very  im¬
portant  informer,  who  can  be  shown
to  be  Magan,  wrote:  ‘The  North  is
now,  more  than  at  any  former  period,
held  out  as  an  example  to  the  other
provinces.  To  their  perfect  state  of
organisation  there,  is  their  apparent
tranquillity  owing.’  (April  22,  1798  ;
Anon  ,  but  dated  from  Stephen’s  Green
and  endorsed  4  Mag.  [secret.’])  We
have  already  seen  that  orders  had  been
issued  in  France,  that  Ulster  was  to
remain  quiet  till  the  rebellion,  but
that  efforts  were  to  be  made,  by  ex¬
citing  disturbances  in  other  quarters,

CH.  XXYI1I,

SPREAD  OF  THE  CONSPIRACY.

449

a  great  part  of  Leinster  and  Munster,  horrible  murders  were  of
almost  daily  occurrence,1  and  an  extreme  terror  prevailed.  Lord
Longueville,  writing  from  the  county  Cork,  to  report  the  murder
of  Sir  Henry  Merrick,  said  that  Abercromby’s  order  forbidding
the  military  to  act  without  the  presence  of  a  magistrate,  would
be  fatal,  as  the  magistrates  would  not  dare  to  expose  themselves
to  the  lasting  vengeance  that  would  pursue  them,  and  he  men¬
tioned  that,  in  a  single  week,  three  men  had  been  shot  in  clear
daylight,  within  eight  miles  of  his  own  house.2  Even  the  sentinels
on  guard  in  Dublin  were  frequently  fired  at.3  Dr.  Lanigan,
the  Catholic  Bishop  of  Ossory,  wrote  in  March  to  Archbishop
Troy,  describing  the  condition  of  the  Queen’s  County,  and  some
charges  that  had  been  brought  against  the  priests,  and  his  letter
contains  this  very  significant  sentence  :  1  The  priests  told  me,  and
I  believe  them,  that  the  fear  of  assassination  prevents  them  from
speaking  as  much  as  they  wished  against  United  Irishmen.’4

In  the  towns,  the  United  Irish  ranks  were  rapidly  recruit¬
ing.  McNally  writes  that  men  in  respectable  and  independent
positions,  and  even  £  of  considerable  property,’  were  ‘  daily
Uniting ;  ’  that  the  conspiracy  was  making  rapid  progress  in
the  public  offices,  and  among  the  yeomen ;  that  nearly  all  the
clerks  in  banks  and  great  merchant  and  trading  houses  were
involved  in  it;  that  there  was  hardly  a  house  with  three  men
servants  which  had  not  a  domiciliary  committee ;  that  the
United  Irishmen  had  already  their  agents  and  their  spies  in  the
most  confidential  departments  of  the  Castle  and  the  law  courts,
and  that  they  were  actively  introducing  them  into  the  post
offices.5  In  Trinity  College,  seditious  sentiments  were  spreading
among  the  young  men,  and  a  visitation  was  held  by  the  Vice-
Chancellor  Lord  Clare,  and  by  Dr.  Duigenan,  who  was  deputed
to  act  in  the  place  of  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin.  Several

to  draw  the  troops  from  the  quarter
which  was  intended  to  be  the  chief
scene  of  the  rebellion.

1  Beresford’s  Correspondence,  ii.
154 ;  Musgrave’s  Rebellions  in  Ire¬
land,  pp.  196,  197,  203.

2  Lord  Longueville,  March  8, 1798.

3  Musgrave,  p.  203.

*  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  i.
160-162.

5-See  the  letters  of  J.  W.  for  Feb.
272

and  March  1798.  An  Athlone  magis-
tra'e,  named  Parker,  wrote  that  he
had  been  sending  a  confidential  agent
to  attend  a  mendicant  friar  in  his
annual  circuit  through  a  great  part
of  the  co.  Roscommon,  and  that  he
found  that  nearly  all  the  servants  in
gentlemen’s  houses  were  disaffected,
and  acquainted  with  the  Defenders’
signs.  (T.  Parker,  April  6,  1798.)

450

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviii.

students  were  expelled,  and  among  those  who  were  examined
was  young  Thomas  Moore,  who  has  left  a  graphic  description  of
the  scene.1  An  informer  wrote,  that  the  leaders  of  the  con¬
spiracy  believed  that  the  expulsions  from  Trinity  College  would
have  the  happiest  effect  on  their  cause,  and  that  it  was  £a  master
stroke  to  have  thus  committed  the  Government  with  the  youth
of  the  country.’  2

Printed  papers  were  now  widely  chculating,  warning  the
people  to  be  prepared,  and  telling  them  that  the  moment  of
deliverance  was  at  hand,  when  all  their  troubles  would  be  over.
Itinerant  pedlars  were  going  to  and  fro,  busily  spreading  the
contagion.  A  translation  of  a  tract  by  Yolney,  called  ‘  The
Torch,’  was  widely  distributed.  Women,  paid  by  the  United
Irishmen,  went  through  every  town  and  village,  singing
seditious  songs.  There  were  handbills,  exhorting  the  people  to
abstain  from  spirituous  liquors,  partly  in  order  to  starve  the
revenue  but  chiefly  in  order  to  diminish  the  danger  of  the
betrayal  of  secret  designs,  and  a  marked  diminution  of  drunken¬
ness  is  said  to  have  followed.  Other  handbills  forbade  the
people  to  purchase  the  quit  rents  of  the  Crown,  which  were
being  sold  to  raise  supplies,  and  recommended  them  to  refuse
all  paper  money  in  their  commercial  dealings.  There  were,  at
the  same  time,  incessant  efforts  to  seduce  the  soldiers,  the  militia¬
men,  and  the  yeomen.3

It  was  a  state  of  society  in  which  no  man  knew  whom  he
could  trust,  or  what  was  the  true  extent  of  the  danger,  and
panic  and  passion,  were  steadily  increasing.  Camden  was
honest  and  humane,  but  weak,  incapable,  bewildered,  and
utterly  desponding.  1  Your  Grace  can  hardly  conceive,’  he
wrote,  ‘  the  timidity  which  prevails  in  many  parts  of  the  country,
and  the  intemperance  which  is  felt  and  expressed  by  the  friends
of  Government  in  Dublin.  It  is  as  difficult  to  repress  the
zealous,  as  to  give  courage  to  the  timid.’  £  A  jealousy  of

1  See  the  preface  to  the  Irish
Melodies  in  the  Collectt  d  Edition  of
Moure's  Works ;  and  also  Camden  to
Portland,  March  6,  1798.  Many  par¬
ticulars  about  this  visitation,  and
about  the  spread  of  disaffection  in
Trinity  College,  will  be  found  in  the
recently  published  History  of  the  Uni¬

versity  of  Dublin,  by  Dr.  Stubbs,  pp.
294-299.

2  Mag.  [Magan],  April  22,  1798.

3  February,  March,  and  April
letters,  I. S.P.O. ;  Memoirs  of  Miles
Byrne,  i.  13,  14  ;  Deport  of  the  Secret
Committee,  Appendix,  No.  xxviii.

CH.  XXV11I.

SPEEAD  OF  THE  CONSPIRACY.

451

English  influence;  a  nonsensical  and  short-sighted  pride  of
independence ;  religious  differences ;  carelessness  towards  their
inferiors,  which,  in  the  higher  classes,  is  general;  cruelty
towards  them,  which  is  too  frequent  amongst  some  of  them;
the  want  of  parochial  communication;  the  non-residence  of  the
clergy  of  the  Established  Church,  and  the  influence  acquired  by
a  discontented  and,  frequently,  a  seditious  priest,  render  this
kingdom  peculiarly  adapted  to  receive  the  impressions  it  has
done,’  and  the  success  of  the  French  Revolution  had  kindled
the  discontent  into  a  flame.  The  kingdom  was  becoming  more
and  more  disturbed.  In  Kildare,  very  lately,  two  magistrates
were  shot  in  broad  daylight,  and  not  one  of  the  labourers  who
were  standing  near  made  a  single  effort  to  arrest  the  murderers.
In  the  Queen’s  County,  which  had  lately  been  very  peaceful  and
prosperous,  and  which  contained  a  large  resident  gentry,  houses
were  now  being  continually  broken  open  and  plundered,  and
outrages  and  murders  were  multiplying.  1  Add  to  this,  most
extravagant  party  prejudices.  The  eager  Protestants,  calling
the  present  conspiracy  a  popish  plot,  and  indulging  in  language
and  in  conduct  revolting  to  the  Catholics,  are  encouraging  the
Orangemen,  avowing  themselves  of  their  society,  and  averring
that  until  the  penal  laws  against  the  Catholics  are  again  enacted,
the  country  cannot  be  safe.’  Grants  of  25 1.  a  year  to  200
students  at  Maynooth,  had  lately  been  carried  by  the  Govern¬
ment,  against  the  opinion  of  the  Speaker  and  of  several  other  of
their  usual  supporters ;  yet  it  was  noticed,  with  some  bitterness,
that  when,  soon  after,  there  was  a  proposal  before  the  Bank  of
Ireland,  for  granting  a  sum  of  money  for  the  prosecution  of  the
war,  not  one  Roman  Catholic  among  the  Bank  proprietors  voted
for  it,  and  that  the  minority  who  opposed  it  consisted  almost
entirely  of  Roman  Catholics.1  In  a  letter  written  a  few  weeks
later,  to  announce  and  j  ustify  the  proclamation  of  military  law,
Camden  speaks  of  innumerable  houses  plundered  of  arms ;  attacks
on  villages  in  noonday;  yeomen  disarmed  by  night;  loyalists
driven  in  multitudes  from  their  homes.2

We  have  seen  that  Abercromby,  while  acting  in  obedience  to
the  Government,  believed  that  there  was  no  small  measure  of

1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  6,  1798.

2  Ibid.  March  30,  1798.

452

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxyiil

exaggeration  in  such  descriptions  of  the  country.  Other  accounts,
however,  which  were  even  more  highly  coloured,  came  to  England
from  the  great  placemen  and  borough  owners,  who  were  the
real  governors  of  Ireland,  and  they  were  no  doubt  intended  to
be  laid  before  Pitt,  if  not  before  the  King.  Of  these  men,
Beresford  was  perhaps  the  most  powerful,  and  also  the  most
violent.  ‘  The  country,’  he  wrote  to  Auckland,  ‘  is  in  a  desperate
state  ;  the  seeds  of  rebellion  are  sown  far  and  wide,  and  the
Irish  Directory  have  now  so  organised  every  part  of  the  kingdom,
that  they  can  make  them  rise  when  they  please.  In  Munster,
Leinster,  and  Connaught,  it  is  a  popish  plot ;  in  Ulster,  a  Pres¬
byterian  plot ;  but  in  each  case  the  end  is  the  same — a  separation
from  Great  Britain,  and  a  republican  government.  The  popish
and  Presbyterian  clergy  are  deep  in  the  business,  and  the  former
have  actually  persuaded  the  people  in  Munster,  that  their  salva¬
tion  depends  upon  murdering  and  massacring  every  person  who
stands  in  their  way  ;  and  they  have  established  such  a  system
of  terror,  that  it  is  with  the  greatest  difficulty  any  magistrate
can  be  got  to  act,  or  any  witness  to  come  forward.  They  murder
every  man  whom  they  suspect,  in  the  slightest  manner,  to  be
inclined  to  give  evidence  against  them.’

To  such  a  state  of  society,  Beresford  contended  that  Lord
Moira’s  system  of  conciliation,  and  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby’s
system  of  leniency,  were  utterly  unsuited.  The  rebels  ‘  show
us  how  they  think  they  can  carry  their  point,  viz.  by  terror ;
and  that  points  out  to  us  how  to  counteract  them,  and  experience
in  the  North  confirms  the  fact.  The  people  are  persuaded  that
everything  they  have  obtained  has  been  given  them  through
fear,  and  that  it  is  fear  ot  them  alone,  which  prevents  us  from
taking  the  same  measures  in  the  other  three  provinces  which
were  taken  in  Ulster — that  was  forcing  them  to  give  up  the  arms
they  had  plundered  ...  by  threatening  to  throw  down  or  burn
their  houses  and  destroy  their  property ;  that  stopped  them  at
once,  without  the  necessity  of  destroj  ing  more  than  a  dozen
houses,  rhey  had  destroyed  ten  times  as  many,  and  had  plun¬
dered  innumerable  others,  and  murdered  many  persons,  and  con¬
tinued  to  do  so  until  they  found  retaliation  begin,  when  they
stopped  directly.  They  are  now  in  Leinster,  Munster,  and
Connaught,  plundering  and  burning  houses,  murdering  witnesses

CH.  XXVI [1.

SENTIMENTS  OF  THE  GENTEY.

453

and  magistrates  .  .  .  and  in  the  middle  of  the  noonday,  in  the
streets  of  towns,  obliging,  by  force  and  threats,  men  to  take
their  oaths  and  pay  contributions  for  their  plans.  .  .  .  They
murder  people  merely  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  their  system
of  terror.  We  are  thus  deprived  of  witnesses  ;  we  see  and  know
everything  that  is  doing,  but  cannot  bring  legal  evidence  to  con¬
vict  these  people.  ...  If  in  such  circumstances  we  should  use  the
power  which  the  law  gives  us  to  counteract  such  outrages  by  the
military — even  if  we  did  in  some  instances  exceed  the  law — it  is
probable  that  a  dozen  acts  of  severity  may  have  happened  on  our
side — how  many  hundreds  have  been  performed  by  the  rebels  ?

.  .  .  How  many  of  the  military  have  been  shot  within  six  months,
and  not  one  of  their  murderers  brought  to  punishment  ?  ’ 1

We  have  had  much  evidence,  in  the  course  of  the  present
work,  that  the  political  sentiments  of  the  main  body  of  the  Irish
gentry  differed  widely  from  those  of  the  great  borough  owners
who  controlled  the  Parliament;  that  they  viewed  with  impatience
and  disgust  the  prevailing  system  of  corrupt  monopoly,  and  that
up  to  the  date  of  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  and  even  up  to  the
recall  of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  they  would  have  gladly  accepted
Grattan’s  policy  of  a  moderate  reform,  and  an  abolition  of  the
chief  remaining  religious  disqualifications.  Their  sentiments,
however,  were  now  materially  changed.  A  considerable  but
much  diminished  body  still  followed  Grattan.  Some  were  in
sympathy  with  the  United  Irishmen,  and  looked  forward  either
with  hope  or  with  acquiescence  to  a  separate  republic ;  others,
panic-stricken  by  the  turn  which  events  had  taken,  both  in
France  and  Ireland,  had  lost  all  faith  in  reform,  and  had  con¬
vinced  themselves  that  there  was  no  longer  any  prospect  of  a
popular  Government  in  Ireland,  consistently  with  the  main¬
tenance  of  order  and  the  security  of  property,  while  a  few  had
begun  to  look  forward  to  a  legislative  Union  as  the  only  possible
solution.  A  curious  incident,  which  has  never  been  related,  but
which  at  this  time  greatly  occupied  the  Government,  throws
some  light  upon  this  subject,  and  at  the  same  time  brings  into

1  Auckland  Correspondence,  iii.  ganised,  quiet  appears.  Where  the
401-405.  This  letter  was  written  organisation  is  going  on,  there  is  dis-
April  10.  In  a  let  ter  written  a  month  turbance.  It  appears  in  Kildare  there
later,  he’ says:  ‘At  present  the  quiet  are  complete  regiments.’  {Auckland
which  appears  in  certain  parts  is  de-  Correspondence ,  iii.  412.)

ceptive.  Where  the  country  is  or-

454

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  &ENTUEY.

CH.  XXVIII.

clearer  relief  tlie  character  and  opinions  of  a  remarkable  man,
with  whom  we  have  been  already  concerned.

Among  the  suspected  persons  in  England  was  a  gentleman
named  Bell,  who  was  known  to  be  on  intimate  terms  with
Arthur  O’Connor.  His  letters  were  seized  or  intercepted,  and
the  Duke  of  Portland  was  startled  to  find  among  them  a  corre¬
spondence  from  General  Knox.  The  letters  are  not  disclosed,
but  they  showed  that  Knox  was  a  warm  friend  both  of  Bell  and  of
Arthur  O’Connor ;  and  it  is  evident  from  the  description  of  them
that  he  had  written  with  perfect  candour,  and  had  expressed
very  fully  his  contempt  for  the  men  and  the  system  of  govern¬
ment  that  prevailed  in  Ireland.  Knox,  from  his  connections,
his  abilities,  and  his  military  command,  was  ODe  of  the  most
important  persons  in  Ulster.  He  had  been  largely  employed  by
the  Government  in  drawing  up  plans  for  the  defence  of  the
province,  and  we  have  seen,  from  his  letters  to  Pelham,  how
intimate  he  at  one  time  was  with  the  Chief  Secretary,  and  how
ready  he  was  to  counsel  the  most  drastic  measures  of  repression.
Portland  asked  with  dismay,  whether  this  distinguished  general
was  among  the  traitors  ? 1

Camden  wrote  two  letters  on  the  subject,  which  appear
to  me  very  interesting  and  significant,  and  quite  consistent
with  the  letters  of  Knox,  which  the  reader  has  already
perused.  He  in  the  first  place  expressed,  in  the  strongest
terms,  his  perfect  confidence  in  the  integrity  of  Knox,  and
he  desired  that  the  discovery  of  the  correspondence  should  be
most  carefully  concealed,  lest  any  breath  of  suspicion  should
attach  to  him.  Knox,  he  said,  was  a  very  able  and  honest
officer,  of  great  influence  in  the  North,  and  of  the  highest
personal  honour ;  but  he  was  ‘  a  man  of  speculative  and  capri¬
cious  independency ;  ’  of  ‘  a  busy  speculative  mind  ;  ’  indiscreet,
and  apt  to  communicate  his  ideas  much  too  freely.  Camden
then  adds  some  general  remarks,  which,  wdien  due  allowance  is
made  for  the  point  of  view  from  which  he  naturally  wrote,  are
not  a  little  instructive.  ‘  I  know  that  at  the  beginning  of  the
French  Revolution  there  was  much  free  and  theoretic  specula¬
tion  here,  not  only  on  general  political  topics,  but  particularly
on  the  state  and  relative  situation  of  Ireland,  and  I  am  confident

1  Portland  to  Camden,  March  7,  1798.

CH.  XXVIII.

INCREASE  OF  RELIGIOUS  FANATICISM.

455

that  if  the  French  Revolution  had  taken  a  humane  and  genial
turn,  and  had  not  degenerated  into  such  a  rapid  succession  of
tyranny  upon  tyranny,  the  speculative  minds  among  the  edu¬
cated  and  superior  classes  of  this  kingdom  would  have  hearkened
eagerly  to  democratic  novelties.  It  is  the  failure  of  the  French
Revolution  to  produce  happiness  which  has  generated  opposition
to  it  here.’  There  was,  however,  another  cause  which  had  been
lately  changing  the-  sentiments  of  the  educated  and  propertied
classes  in  Ireland.  £  The  great  point  which  General  Knox
broadly  states,  that  a  revolution  here  would  give  the  power  of
the  country  to  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Irish,  and  destroy
every  vestige  of  British  settlement,  begins  to  open  itself  to  all
of  English  origin.’  The  opinions  expressed  by  Knox,  were  not
new  or  surprising  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant.  ‘  He  has  often
mentioned  the  decidedly  mean  opinion  he  has  of  the  aristocracy
of  this  country,  and  the  necessity  of  such  an  Union  of  the  two
kingdoms,  as  would  correct  the  flightiness  of  Ireland  by  the
introduction  of  English  sobriety.’ 1

Amid  the  blinding  mists  of  passion,  prejudice,  and  exaggera¬
tion  that  sweep  over  this  dismal  period  of  Irish  history,  one
great  change  may  be  distinctly  discerned.  The  movement
which  owed  its  origin  in  a  great  measure  to  the  decline  of
theological  fanaticism,  which  was  chiefly  originated  by  Protes¬
tants  and  freethinkers,  and  which  aimed  at  the  political  union
of  Irishmen  of  all  religious  denominations,  was  gradually  turning
into  a  religious  war  ;  reviving  fierce  religious  passions  which
had  been  for  generations  subsiding,  and  which  had  at  last
become  almost  dormant.  Beresford  spoke  of  Ireland  as  suffering
from  a  Presbyterian  plot,  and  also  from  a  popish  plot,  but  it
was  not  possible  that  two  such  plots  could  co-exist  in  alliance,
though  it  was  quite  possible  that  members  of  the  two  denomina¬
tions  might  be  blended  in  one  political  conspiracy.  I  have  traced
the  beginning  of  the  change  which  was  taking  place— the  rise
and  rapid  extension  of  the  Orange  movement ;  the  attempts  of
some  conspicuous  loyalists  to  organise  it  for  the  defence  of  the
country  ;  the  partial  alliance  between  it  and  the  Government ;

1  Camden  to  Portland  (private),  may  find  some  additional  particulars
March  10,  19,  1798.  There  is  also  a  about  General  Knox  in  Richardson  9
letter  on  this  subject  from  Wickham  History  of  the  Irish  heoma/iry  (1800).
to  Cooke,  March  20,  1798.  The  reader

456

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviii.

the  persistent  efforts  of  the  United  Irishmen  to  goad  the  Catholic
masses  into  rebellion,  by  representing  the  Orange  society  as  a
conspiracy  to  massacre  them,  and  by  representing  the  English
Government  as  supporting  it.  The  United  Irish  conspiracy
when  it  passed  into  a  perfectly  ignorant  Catholic  population  at
once  changed  its  character,  and  its  original  political  objects
almost  disappeared.  ‘The  popish  spirit,’  wrote  Cooke,  ‘has
been  set  up  against  the  Protestants,  by  reporting  every  Protestant
to  be  an  Orangeman,  and  by  inculcating  that  every  Orangeman
has  sworn  to  exterminate  the  papists ;  to  these  fictions  are
added  the  real  pressure  of  high  rents  from  the  undertakers  of
land,  and  high  tithes  from  tithe  proctors.’1  Fanaticism  was
rapidly  rising,  and  it  was  rising  on  both  sides.  ‘  The  most
alarming  feature  of  the  movement,’  Camden  wrote  in  April,  is
‘  the  appearance  of  the  present  contest  becoming  a  religious
one.’ 2  Loyalty  in  Ireland  was  beginning  more  and  more  to
rally  round  the  Orange  standard,  and  to  derive  a  new  energy
and  courage  from  religious  passion.  At  the  same  time,  the
essentially  popish  character  which  the  revolution  was  assuming
in  Leinster  and  Munster,  had  begun  to  shake  the  confidence  of
the  conspirators  in  Ulster.

In  a  letter  written  a  few  weeks  before  the  proclamation  of
martial  law,  Camden  described  the  terror  which  the  frequent
murders  were  producing  among  the  loyal  classes,  and  expressed
great  fear  that  the  juries  in  the  approaching  assizes  would  not
have  the  courage  to  do  their  duty.3  It  is  possible  that  the
proclamation  may  have  done  something  to  check  the  panic,  but
it  is  at  least  certain  that  this  forebodiug  was  somewhat  signally
falsified.  The  spring  assizes,  which  immediately  preceded  the
outbreak  of  the  rebellion,  were,  on  the  whole,  very  satisfactory,
and  their  character  was  scarcely  consistent  with  the  representa¬
tions  that  had  been  made  of  the  state  of  the  country.  Camden
at  this  time  summed  up  in  a  few  lines  the  condition  of  a  great
part  of  Ireland.  In  the  King’s  County  there  were  more  signs
of  repentance  than  anywhere  else  in  the  South.  One  hundred
pikes  had  been  given  up,  and  there  were  many  convictions  at
the  assizes.  In  Tipperary  there  was  more  open  rebellion  than

1  Auckland  Correspondence ,  iii.  392.

*  Camden  to  Portland,  April  23,  1798.  s  Ibid.  March  11,  1798.

CH.  XXVI  IT.

ASSIZES,  APRIL  1798.

457

in  other  counties,  but  the  outrages  were  now  somewhat  checked,
though  the  progress  towards  quiet  was  slow.  ‘  At  the  assizes
which  were  held  in  Kildare,  the  juries  in  general  did  their
duty ;  but  there  appeared  no  good  disposition  among  the
Catholics,  as  I  am  informed,  during  the  trials,  and  it  was
reported  to  me  that  those  juries  who  did  not  act  with  pro¬
priety  were  of  that  persuasion.’  The  Queen’s  County  had  been
‘  harassed  with  constant  nocturnal  pillage  and  many  murders.’
c  The  assizes  in  this  county  were  remarkably  well  attended,  and
if  any  fault  is  to  be  found  in  the  administration  of  justice  there,
it  is  that  the  juries  were  almost  too  anxious  to  convict.  Many
very  desperate  villains  were  condemned  and  executed.’  ‘  From
the  counties  of  Waterford,  Cork,  Limerick,  Carlow,  Kilkenny,
Meath  and  Westmeath,  all  of  which  have  been  disturbed,  I
hear  the  most  satisfactory  accounts  from  the  judges,  of  the
behaviour  of  the  juries.’  The  accounts  from  the  North  were
also  good,  but  Camden  was  not  sanguine  that  there  was  a  real
political  improvement,  and  he  knew  from  secret  intelligence
that  many  and  dangerous  agitators  were  abroad.  At  the  same
time,  he  wrote,  1  Your  Grace  ought  to  be  informed  that  the
general  observation  of  those  who  have  gone  that  circuit  [Ulster],
as  well  as  other  well-informed  men,  is,  that  a  much  better  spirit
pervades  it.  Industry  is  restored  ;  trade  is  flourishing  ;  there  are
great  quantities  of  linen  on  their  bleach  greens,  which  was  not
the  case  last  year,  no  outrages,  and  apparent  content,  and  the
judges  and  bar  all  declare  that  they  never  remember  so  much
civil  and  so  little  criminal  business  upon  that  circuit.’  In
Connaught  there  were  some  disquieting  signs.  £  Very  suspicious
appearances  were  observed  in  the  county  of  Galway,  and  I  can¬
not  do  the  gentlemen  of  that  county  too  much  justice.  Upon
the  first  rumour  of  the  possibility  of  disturbance,  they  repaired
to  their  houses.  All  sects  and  all  religions  united  themselves,
and  have  checked  completely  the  system.  .  .  .  Mayo  has  been
disturbed  only  in  a  trifling  degree,  and  the  rest  of  Connaught
is  yet  quiet.’ 1

Other  letters  from  different  sources  corroborate  the  statement,
that  the  juries  over  a  great  part  of  Ireland  no  longer  feared  to
convict,  and  that  many  of  the  worst  criminals  were  detected

1  Camden  to  Portland,  April  23,  1798.

458

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  ch.  xxviit

and  punished.1  I  must  not,  however,  omit  to  mention,  that
there  is  painful  evidence  that  in  at  least  one  county,  Orange
fanaticism,  and  the  blind  passion  and  resentment  produced  by  a
long  course  of  outrages,  had  begun  to  invade  the  law  courts.
The  reader  will  have  noticed  a  significant  sentence  in  the  letter
of  Lord  Camden,  which  has  been  just  quoted,  relating  to  the
Queen’s  County.  This  county  had  usually  been  one  of  the
most  prosperous,  peaceful,  and  apparently  best  administered  in
Ireland,  and  it  contained  a  large  resident  gentry,  but  for  several
weeks  parties  of  savage  banditti  had  been  ranging  through  it
by  night,  attacking  and  plundering  houses,  and  committing
many  murders.  McNally,  though  secretly  in  the  pay  of  the
Government,  was  the  favourite  advocate  of  the  prisoners,  and
he  wrote  from  Maryborough  an  earnest  remonstrance  to  Cooke
about  the  manner  in  which  the  trials  in  this  county  were  con¬
ducted.

He  wrote,  he  said,  in  court,  with  the  shrieks  of  men,  women,
and  children  sounding  in  his  ears.  £  Thirteen  men  have  received
sentence  of  death — a  sight  most  piteous,  however  just,  and  two
of  them  are  to  die  on  Monday.  ...  In  my  opinion,  many  of
the  convictions  were  not  so  much  owing  to  conclusive  evidence,
as  promptitude  of  juries,  determined  on  making  examples ;
for  the  defences  set  up  by  the  prisoners  were  treated  too  often
with  inattention,  laughter,  and  contempt;  everything  against
them  received  as  truth.  In  some  cases  the  judge's  authority
could  scarcely  preserve  the  decorum  necessary  to  a  court  of
justice,  and  this  conduct  was  severely  felt,  and  bitterly  com¬
plained  of  by  the  lower  people  to  those  in  whom  they  could
confide.  I  apprehend  it  has  instilled  more  resentment  than
terror,  and  that  they  consider  the  sufferers  under  sentence,
objects  of  vengeance  rather  than  of  justice.’  In  the  Queen’s
County,  McNally  says,  1  the  plan  of  insurrection  ’  was  rather  of
the  Defender  than  of  the  United  Irishman  type,  though  the
latter — which  was  politically  by  far  the  more  dangerous — would
probably  follow  ;  and  the  fact  that  there  was  no  subscription  for

1  See  the  statements  of  Coobe  and  Catholics  of  property  who  have  been
Beresford  (Auckland  Correspondence,  on  the  juries  have  done  their  duty,
iii.  392,  401).  Beresford  says  :  ‘  Our  There  was  but  one  man  escaped  as
gentry  have  acted  well  this  assizes,  yet,  who,  in  my  opinion,  ought  not,
.  .  .  and  I  must  say  the  Roman  and  that  by  direction  of  the  j  udge.’

cm.  xxviii.

ENGLISH  POLICY  TOWARDS  IRELAND.

459

lawyers  to  defend  the  prisoners,  proved  to  him  that  the  northern
organisation  did  not  yet  exist.  He  added,  ‘  The  landed  men  in
this  county  are  strongly  connected.  In  my  judgment,  they
have  strength  and  influence  sufficient  to  quiet  the  people.  Yet
I  never  knew  a  peasantry  bear  a  more  inveterate  antipathy  to
their  superiors,  owing,  as  I  understand,  to  great  oppressions
under  which  many  of  them  suffer ;  but  I  do  not  say  this  is
general.  I  observe  that  in  this  county,  the  distinction  between
Protestant  and  papist  is  more  inveterately  and  invidiously  kept
up  than  in  any  other  place.  Some  gentlemen  of  fortune  wore
orange  ribands,  and  some  barristers  sported  orange  rings  with
emblems.  Such  ensigns  of  enmity,  I  assure  you,  are  not  conducive
to  conciliation.  Are  they  necessary  to  any  good  purpose  ?  On
several  of  the  trials  the  witnesses  were  Roman  Catholics,  and  a
family  of  that  persuasion  beat  and  apprehended  the  leader  of  a
most  dangerous  gang.’ 1

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  few  remarks  illustrating  the
designs  and  the  secret  dispositions  of  the  English  Government
towards  Ireland  at  the  eve  of  the  rebellion.  There  is,  I  believe,
no  evidence  that  they  at  this  time  contemplated  a  legislative
Union  as  likely  to  be  introduced  in  the  immediate  future,  or  even
that  they  had  formed  any  fixed  determination  that  the  existing
Parliament  was  to  be  the  last  in  Ireland.  It  is  indeed  abun¬
dantly  evident,  that  they  looked  forward  to  an  Union  as  the  ulti¬
mate  solution  of  the  Irish  question  ;  that  with  that  view  they
were  determined,  in  accordance  with  the  Irish  Government,  to
maintain  unaltered  the  borough  system,  which  made  the  Irish
Legislature  completely  subservient  to  the  Executive  ;  and  that
they  wished  Catholic  emancipation,  as  well  as  parliamentary
reform,  to  be  adjourned  till  an  Union  had  been  carried.  But  in
none  of  the  confidential  correspondence  which  took  place  at  the
time  of  the  election  for  the  Parliament  which  met  at  the  begin*
ing  of  1798,  is  there,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  any  mention  of  a
legislative  Union ;  no  opinion  appears  to  have  been  as  yet  formed
about  the  time  or  circumstances  of  introducing  it,  and  beyond
the  lines  that  I  have  indicated,  it  is  not,  I  think,  true,  that
English  Ministers  were  directing  Irish  policy  with  that  object.
In  general,  they  allowed  the  administration  of  Ireland  to  be
1  J.  W.  (Maryborough),  April  8,  1798.

4G0

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  xxviu.

almost  wholly  shaped  by  the  Irish  Government ;  and  even  when
they  interfered  with  advice,  they  did  so  with  little  energy  or
persistence.  When  Fox  and  Lord  Moira  introduced  into  the
British  Parliament  a  discussion  upon  the  military  outrages,  the
Ministers  replied  that  those  matters  were  within  the  sole  compe¬
tence  of  the  Irish  Parliament  and  Government.  If  they  resented
Sir  Ralph  Abercromby’s  order,  it  was  because  it  was  certain
to  furnish  a  formidable  weapon  to  the  English  Opposition  ;  if  they
opposed  an  absentee  tax,  it  was  chiefly  because  it  would  affect
men  who  had  great  political  influence  in  England.  They
assisted  the  Irish  Government,  by  intercepting  the  correspond¬
ence  of  suspected  rebels,  and  by  collecting  evidence  through
confidential  agents  on  the  Continent,  and  they  more  than  once
assisted  them  by  loans  in  the  great  financial  crisis  of  the  war.
On  the  other  hand,  they  insisted  that  a  considerable  though
much  diminished  number  of  lucrative  Irish  posts  should  be
bestowed  on  Englishmen,  and  they  wished  to  make  the  Irish
peerage  in  some  measure  a  reward  for  English  services.  For
the  rest,  they  only  asked  that  Ireland  should  not  be  an  embar¬
rassment;  that  England  should  derive  trade  advantages  from
her  connection  with  her,  and  that  Ireland  should  contribute
larger  forces  to  cany  on  the  war,  than  were  needed  for  keeping
her  in  her  allegiance.

The  advice  of  the  English  Government  was  usually  in  the
direction  of  moderation,  and  especially  in  the  sense  of  concilia¬
ting  the  Catholics.  To  separate  as  much  as  possible  the  Catholics
from  the  Dissenters,  and  the  Catholic  question  from  the  question
of  reform,  was  for  some  considerable  time  the  keynote  of  the
Irish  policy  of  Portland.  He  was  much  struck  with  the  fact  that
Protestant  Ulster  was  the  most  disaffected  of  the  four  provinces ;
that  at  least  five-sixths  of  the  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen
were  Protestants ;  that  Munster,  though  now  profoundly  dis¬
turbed,  had  shown  itself  perfectly  loyal  during  the  French
expedition  at  the  end  of  1796  ;  that  Connaught,  the  most  purely
Catholic  province  in  Ireland,  was  the  one  province  which  was
still  almost  untainted.  He  believed  with  good  reason  that  the
genius  of  the  Catholic  Church  was  essentially  opposed  to  the
revolutionary  spirit,  and  that  the  higher  clergy,  at  least,  were
sincere  in  their  hostility  to  it,  and  he  probably  hoped  that  the

CH.  XXTIII.

RELATIONS  WITH  THE  VATICAN.

461

influence  of  the  papacy  might  contribute  something  to  the  peace
of  Ireland.

The  great  French  war  which  was  raging,  had  among  its
other  consequences  produced,  for  the  first  time  since  the  Revolu-  ‘
tion  of  1688,  a  close  and  friendly  communication  between  the
English  Government  and  the  V atican .  In  1 7 94  the  1 2th  Lancers
had  gone  from  Corsica  to  Civita  Vecchia,  where  they  remained
for  three  months,  mounted  guard,  and  discharged  other  garrison
duty.  Their  officers  were  presented  to  Pius  VI.,  who  took  one
of  their  helmets  in  his  hands  and  blessed  it,  and  who  on  the
departure  of  the  regiment  gave  each  commissioned  officer  a  gold
medal,  and  each  non-commissioned  officer  a  silver  one,  as  an
expression  of  his  gratitude  for  the  excellent  behaviour  of  the
English  troops.1  Lord  Hood’s  fleet,  when  excluded  from  the
other  ports  in  the  Mediterranean,  was,  with  the  approval  of  the
Pope,  provisioned  in  the  papal  dominions.2  Burke  at  this  time
strongly  urged  the  policy  of  establishing  a  formal  diplomatic
connection  with  Rome.  ‘  I  would,’  he  wrote,  1  if  the  matter
rested  with  me,  enter  into  much  more  distinct  and  avowed
political  connections  with  the  Court  of  Rome,  than  hitherto  we
have  held.  If  we  decline  them,  the  bigotry  will  be  on  our  part,
and  not  on  that  of  his  Holiness.  Some  mischief  has  happened,
and  much  good  has,  I  am  convinced,  been  prevented,  by  our
unnatural  alienation.’ 3

The  English  Ministers  were  not  prepared  to  face  the  outcry
which  might  have  followed  such  a  step,  and  it  was  still  forbidden
under  an  unrepealed  statute  of  Elizabeth  ;  but  it  is  a  remarkable
and  little  known  fact,  that  in  the  reign  of  George  III.  a  real
though  unofficial  diplomatic  connection  subsisted  for  some  years
between  London  and  the  Vatican.  The  English  representative
was  Mr. — afterwards  Sir  John — Hippisley,  who  had  been  at-

1  See  Cannon's  Historical  Records
of  the  British  Army,  12th  Royal
Lancers,  p.  19.  Sir  J.  Hippisley,
Substance  of  Additional  Observations
intended  to  hare  been  delivered  in  the
House  of  Commons  on  May  13  or  14,
1805,  pp.  93,  94 ;  Hippisley’s  Statement
of  Facts  presented  to  Pius  VII.  pp  73,
74;  Bullen’s  Historical  Outlines  of
Political  Catholicism,  pp  92,  93  In
1799  British  sailors  cleared  the  papal
dominionsof  their  enemies  the  French,

and  British  marines  were  sentries
at  Rome  till  the  evacuation  by  the
French.

2  Sir  J.  Hippisley,  Substance  of  a
Speech  on  the  Motion  of  the  Right
Hon.  H.  Grattan,  April  24,  1812
(with  Appendix),  pp.  102-104.

3  This  letter  was  written  Oct.  10,
1793,  to  Hippisley.  See  his  Substance
of  Additional  Observations,  pp.  91,
95.

462

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  ch.  xxviiu

tached  to  the  embassy  at  Naples,  and  who  negotiated  at  Eome,  not
only  on  the  common  interests  of  the  two  Powers  in  their  struggle
with  France,  but  also  on  various  matters  connected  with  the
interests  of  the  Catholic  subjects  of  the  King.  The  regulation  of
the  Catholic  churches  in  Corsica  and  Minorca;  the  appointment
of  a  bishop  in  St.  Domingo,  and  the  nomination  of  the  superiors
of  the  British  and  Irish  seminaries  at  Rome,  were  all  made
matters  of  very  amicable  arrangement,  and  ITippisley  succeeded
in  obtaining  from  Cardinal  Antonelli  an  assurance,  that  no
friar  should  in  future  be  appointed  to  the  Irish  episcopacy.1
His  position  was  clearly  recognised  in  letters  of  the  Con¬
gregation  de  Propaganda  Fide,  and  of  the  Congregation  of
State;2  and  on  his  recommendation,  the  Pope  in  1793  sent
over  to  London,  Monsignor  Erskine,  a  member  of  the  great
Scotch  family  of  Mar,  and  the  grandson  of  an  Earl  of  Kellie,
as  resident  at  the  Court  of  England.  Erskine  was  not  of  course
officially  recognised,  and  his  mission  was  not  generally  known,
but  he  appears  to  have  been  received  unofficially  at  Court,  and
he  resided  in  London  for  several  years.3  Bishop  Douglas,  the
Catholic  prelate  who  presided  over  the  London  district,  had
previously  held  confidential  communications  with  Lord  Gren¬
ville;4  and  Hippisley,  after  his  return  to  England,  was  much
employed  in  negotiating  with  the  Irish  prelates.  Catholic
chaplains  were  appointed,  under  the  royal  sign-manual,  for
the  new  Franco-Irish  brigade  in  the  English  service.5  At

1  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  iii.
82,  83,  89,  92,  117  ;  Hippisley’s  Sub¬
stance  of  a  Speech,  May  1 8, 1810,  pp.  21,
23;  Hippisley’s  Letters  to  Lord,  Fin  gall,
pp.  68,  69  ;  Statement  of  Facts  pre¬
sented  to  Pius  VII.  (1818),  pp.  66,67.

2  Hippisley’s  Statement  of  Facts

presented  to  Pius  VII.  (1818),  p.  68.

Hippisley  adds  :  ‘  After  two  centuries
and  a  half,  during  which  no  political
or  ecclesiastical  intercourse  between
the  two  Courts  was  permitted,  or  at
least  avowed,  with  an  exception  to  a
few  letters  which  had  passed  between
the  Cardinals  de  la  Lanze  and  Buon-
compagni,  and  the  late  Mr.  Dutens,
at  that  time  appointed  Secretary  of

Embassy  to  the  Court  of  Spain.  Sir
J.  II.  had  the  gratification  of  finding
that,  through  his  own  instrumentality,
this  slate  of  estrangement  was  inter¬
rupted  and  an  intercourse  revived.

.  .  .  He  had  also  the  gratification
of  having  his  conduct  on  that  occasion
distinctly  approved,  both  by  the  Go¬
vernment  of  his  own  country  and  that
of  his  Holiness.’  The  earlier  com¬
munications  referred  to  in  this  pas¬
sage,  were  in  1777  and  1786.  Hippis¬
ley’s  pamphlets,  and  his  letters  in  the
third  volume  of  the  Castlereagh  Cor¬
respondence,  throw  much  light  on  this
curious  page  of  eighteenth-century
history.

3  Several  interesting  particulars
about  Monsignor  Erskine  and  his  mis¬
sion  will  be  found  in  Moroni,  Dizio-
nario  Fcclesiastico,  tome  xxii.  (Ers¬
kine).  See,  too,  Castlereagli  Corre¬
spondence,  iii.  87,  88.

*  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  iii.

88.

5  Hippisley’s  Statement,  p.  126;
Supplementary  Note,  p.  66.

CH.  XXVIII.

PORTLAND'S  CATHOLIC  POLICY.

463

the  suggestion  of  Hippisley,  the  Irish  prelate?  introduced  into
the  ordinary  catechism  employed  in  Ireland,  some  additional
clauses,  enforcing  the  duty  of  obedience  to  the  civil  power.1  In
the  Canadian  Catholic  Church,  the  King  seems  to  have  virtually
possessed  the  nomination  of  the  bishops  ; 2  and  when  the  Cardinal
of  York,  the  last  direct  heir  of  the  Stuarts,  was  plundered  by  the
French,  he  was  relieved  by  a  liberal  pension  from  George  III.3

All  these  things  show  the  very  friendly  relations  that  sub¬
sisted  between  the  Vatican  and  the  Court  of  St.  James,  in  spite
of  the  strong  sentiments  of  George  III.  about  Catholic  emanci¬
pation.  The  English  Ministers  saw  in  this  good  understand¬
ing,  a  powerful  instrument  for  one  day  pacifying  Ireland.
Archbishop  Troy  appears  at  this  time  to  have  been  much
suspected  by  the  Irish  Government,  and  his  letters  were  opened
at  the  Post  Office.  Among  them  was  found  one  from  Mon¬
signor  Erskine,  urging  the  Archbishop  ‘to  prevail  on  his
brethren  and  his  flock,  to  exert  themselves  on  behalf  of  the  law
and  Government.’  Camden  communicated  this  gratifying  fact
to  Portland,  but  he  found  that  Portland  was  already  aware  of  it,
for  Monsignor  Erskine  had  been  in  communication  with  the
Ministers,  and  had  informed  them  of  what  he  had  written.4  In
reply  to  one  of  the  letters  that  have  been  quoted,  Portland  wrote
that,  ‘  notwithstanding  the  very  unpromising  return  which  was
made  by  the  Catholic  proprietors  of  the  Bank  to  the  liberality
which  the  Parliament  has  manifested  in  the  course  of  the  session
to  the  Seminary  of  Maynooth,  the  meritorious  and  exemplary
conduct  of  the  whole  province  of  Connaught  ’  induced  him  to
recur  to  a  suerg'estion  which  he  had  before  made,  that  it  would
be  in  a  high  degree  useful  to  the  State,  to  make  a  provision  for
the  Catholic  clergy.5  In  another  letter  he  wrote,  that  he  had
been  informed  of  ‘  the  spoliation  and  sacrilege  which  had  been
committed  in  several  of  the  Roman  Catholic  chapels,  for  the  ex¬
press  purpose,’  as  he  believed,  ‘  of  exasperating  the  lower  orders
of  these  people  against  the  present  Establishment  of  Govern¬
ment  ;  ’  and  he  suggested  that  the  Irish  Government  should  offer

1  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  iii.  332;  iii.  14-16,  385,  386.

134-136.  4  Portland  to  Camden,  April  20,

2  Hippisley’s  Letters  to  Lord  Fin-  1798.  Camden  called  Erskine  the

gall,  p.  68.  __  Pope’s  Nuncio.

3  Castlereagh.  Correspondence,  ii.  5  Ibid.  March  20,  1798.

/

464

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.'  ch.  xxviii.

rewards  for  the  discovery  of  the  perpetrators  of  such  outrages.1
At  the  same  time,  he  desired  to  encourage,  as  much  as  possible,
all  voluntary  loyalist  efforts  in  Ireland,  even  when  they  assumed
an  ultra-Protestant  character.  From  two  quarters,  he  said,  he
had  heard  ‘  that  an  association  is  formed  by  the  Orangemen  of
Ulster,  which  consists  already  of  170,000  persons,  and  has  been
joined  by  all  the  principal  gentry  and  well-affected  persons  of
property  in  that  province,  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  them¬
selves  against  the  combinations  which  have  been  formed  by  the
United  Irishmen ;  ’  and  he  added,  1  It  seems  to  me,  that  such  a
proof  of  energy  on  the  part  of  the  country,  would  be  likely  to
do  more  than  all  the  military  force  you  could  apply.’ 2

There  is  nothing  said  in  the  replies  of  Lord  Camden,  about
the  spoliation  of  Catholic  chapels,  and  the  letter  of  the  Duke  of
Portland  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  earliest  allusion  to  the  revival
of  a  form  of  outrage  wrhich,  a  few  weeks  later,  became  com¬
mon.3  The  policy  of  paying  the  priests,  though  a  profoundly
wTise  one,4  was  naturally  not  acceptable  to  such  men  as  Clare,
Foster,  and  Beresford  ;  and  Camden,  while  stating  that c  the  ser¬
vants  of  the  Crown  ’  were  wholly  opposed  to  it,  added,  £  I  am
indeed  convinced  that  the  strong  prejudices  now  entertained  by
the  House  of  Commons  against  the  Catholics,  would  prevent
Government  from  carrying  the  measure  were  it  thought  expedient
to  introduce  it.  Indeed,  there  seems  much  reason  to  think  the
Catholics  in  general  are  not  hostile  to  these  commotions,  and
that  even  some  of  the  most  loyal  of  them  wait  with  some  hope
that  a  revolution  in  Ireland  will  restore  them  to  those  posses¬
sions,  and  that  consequence,  they  have  lost.’  The  strength  of  the
Orange  Society,  also,  was  much  less  than  Portland  had  been
told.  There  were  perhaps  40,000  men  enrolled  in  it,  and  Cam¬
den  thought  that  much  caution  must  be  used  in  dealing  with

1  Portland  to  Camden,  April  2,
1798.

2  Ibid.  March  24,  1798.

8  I  have  already  mentioned  that  it
was  one  of  the  Peep  of  Day  Boy  out¬
rages.

4  McNally,  in  a  letter  dated  Sept.
22,  1802,  gives  the  outline  of  a  very
elaborate  and  skilfully  devised  plan
for  paying  the  priests,  which  he  had
drawn  up  and  submitted  to  the  Go¬

vernment  several  years  before  the  re¬
bellion.  He  says  that  at  that  time
he  took  great  pains  to  ascertain  the
sentiments  of  the  priests,  and  that
he  found  the  secular  clergy  favourable,
but  the  regulars  strongly  opposed  to  a
Government  endowment ;  and  he  adds,
the  latter  description  of  clergy  were,
in  general,  active  fomenters  of  the
rebellion.  (I.S.P.O.)

CB.  XXVIII,

CONCLUSION.

465

them,  for  it  was  very  dangerous  for  a  Government  to  employ  one
party  in  the  kingdom  to  put  down  another.  ‘  I  think  them
likely  to  increase,’  he  wrote ;  1  and  although  it  is  possible  they
may  be  useful,  if  the  disorders  in  this  country  should  take  a  still
more  serious  turn,  at  present  any  encouragement  of  them  much
increases  the  jealousy  of  the  Catholics,  and  I  should  therefore
think  it  unwise  to  give  an  open  encouragement  to  this  party,
although  it  is  certainly  not  expedient  to  suppress  them.’ 1

I  must  now  draw  this  long  and  melancholy  chapter  to  a
close.  Like  that  which  preceded  it,  it  is  a  record  of  steadily
growing  disorganisation ;  of  many  distinct  forms  of  anarchy  and
discontent,  combined  and  directed  by  one  seditious  conspiracy.
Much  of  the  evil  had  long  existed  in  Ireland,  though  it  had  for
some  generations  been  steadily  diminishing.  It  was  quickened
into  a  new  vitality  by  the  French  Revolution,  and  by  the  near
prospect  of  invasion,  but  it  also  owed  a  great  part  of  its  energy
to  enormous  political  faults,  and' to  many  acts  of  illegal  and  op¬
pressive  violence.  We  have  now  arrived  at  the  brink  of  the
catastrophe.  A  scene  of  blood  was  about  to  open,  which  not
only  left  an  indelible  stain  on  the  page  of  history,  but  also  gave
a  fatal  and  enduring  bias  to  the  future  of  the  nation.

1  Camden  to  Portland,  March  29,  1798.

END  OF  THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME.

273

r»

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES,  OCTAVO.

HISTORY  OF1  THE

UNITED  STATES,

From  the  Discovery  op  the  Continent  to  the  Establishment
*  of  the  Constitution  in  1789.

By  GEORGE  BANCROFT.

The  Author’s  last  revision.  Complete  in  six  volumes,  8vo,
cloth,  library  style,  uncut,  with  gilt  top,  $2.50 ;  sheep,
$3.50  ;  half  calf,  $4.50  per  volume.

The  author  has  made  extensive  changes  in  the  text ,  condensing  in  places,  enlarging
in  others,  and  carefully  revising.  It  is  practically  a  new  work,  embodying  the  results
of  the  latest  researches,  and  enjoying  the  advantage  of  the  author's  long  and  mature
experience.

The  six  volumes  of  this  new  and  fully  revised  edition  of  Bancroft's  “  History  of
the  United  States,"  now  complete,  comprise  the  twelve  volumes  of  the  original  octavo
edition,  including  the  “  History  of  the  Formation  of  the  Constitution,"  last  pub¬
lished,  and  are  issued  at  just  half  the  price.  Volume  VI.  contains  a  new  Portrait
of  Bancroft  engraved  on  Steel.

“  A  comparison  of  this  installment  of  the  revised  edition  with  its  equivalent
in  the  former  edition  impresses  us  with  the  candor,  the  thoroughness,  and  the  con¬
scientiousness  of  Mr.  Bancroft’s  revision.  Every  page  reveals  some  touch  of  the
artist’s  hand,  softening  the  language  where  it  had  run  into  needless  asperity,  but
without  detracting  from  its  sinewy  vigor,  pruning  redundancies,  rounding  off  or
smoothing  down  ruggednesses  or  infelicities,  modifying  statementS’SO  as  to  cause
them  to  conform  more  exactly  to  newly  discovered  evidence — in  fine,  practically
producing  a  new  work  while  preserving  the  substantial  integrity  of  the  old  one.”
— Harper's  Magazine.

“  The  work  as  a  whole  is  in  better  shape,  and  is  of  course  more  authoritative
than  ever  before.  This  last  revision  will  be  without  doubt,  both  from  its  desirable
form  and  accurate  text,  the  standard  one.” — Boston  Traveller.

“  It  has  not  been  granted  to  many  historians  to  devote  half  a  century  to  the
history  of  a  single  people,  and  to  live  long  enough,  and,  let  us  add,  to  be  willing
and  wise  enough,  to  revise  and  rewrite  in  an  honored  old  age  the  work  of  a  whole
lifetime.  This  good  fortune  has  been  granted  tp  Mr.  Bancroft,  and  he  has  largely
profited  by  it,  as  have  also  the  majority  of  readers  among  his  own  countrymen,
who,  when  American  history  is  in  question,  go  at  once  to  his  volumes  as  to  an
authoritative  tribunal,  and  abide  by  his  decisions,  which  in  no  case  of  any  conse¬
quence,  we  believe,  have  ever  been  seriously  or  for  long  disturbed.” — Hew  York
Mail  and  Express.

“  The  extent  and  thoroughness  of  this  revision  would  hardly  be  guessed  with¬
out  comparing  the  editions  side  by  side.  The  condensation  of  the  text  amounts
to  something  over  one  third  of  the  previous  edition.  There  has  also  been  very
considerable  recasting  of  the  text.” — The  Independent  (New  York).

“There  is  nothing  to  be  said  at  this  day  of  the  value  of  ‘Bancroft.’  Its
authority  is  no  longer  in  dispute,  and  as  a  piece  of  vivid  and  realistic  historical
writing  it  stands  among  the  best  works  of  its  class.  It  may  be  taken  for  granted
that  this  new  edition  Rill  greatly  extend  its  usefulness.” — Philadelphia  North
American.

[See  next  page.]

New  Revised  Edition  of  Bancroft’s  History  of  tie  United  States— (Continued.)

“We  have  made  a  comparison  of  the  first  volume  with  the  edition  of  1876,
and  find  that  the  work  has  been  largely  recast,  the  arrangement  of  the  chapters
and  the  minor  divisions  has  been  changed,  many  portions  have  been  rewritten,
and  no  pains  have  been  spared  in  making  necessary  corrections  as  the  result  of
criticism  on  the  work  or  of  further  investigation.  Many  who  purchased  the  last
edition  will  regret  that  they  did  not  wait  for  the  author’s  final  revisions ;  but  we
presume  that  he  had  no  intention  at  the  time  it  was  issued  of  going  over  his  work
again,  even  if  he  had  the  hope  of  living  so  long.  It  is  a  matter  of  general  con¬
gratulation  that  his  life  and  vigor  have  been  spared,  and  that  he  is  still  engaged
with  all  the  energy  of  youth  in  his  important  literary  works.  The  octavo  volume,
just  issued,  is  a  fine  specimen  of  book-making,  in  clear  type,  on  good  paper,  and
is  neatly  bound.” — New  York  Observer.

“During  the  half-century,  or  almost  that  time,  since  the  issue  of  Mr.  Ban¬
croft’s  first  volume,  much  new  light  has  been  shed  upon  the  characters  and  events
of  the  period  covered  by  the  ‘  History,’  and  no  small  proportion  of  it  is  due  to
the  controversies  aroused  by  the  volumes  as  they  successively  appeared.  Mr.
Bancroft  stood  stoutly  by  his  original  text  until  the  time  came  for  the  issue  of  the
revised  edition  of  1876,  when  it  was  evident  that  he  had  carefully  studied  the
criticisms  his  work  had  received  during  the  preceding  forty-two  years  and  had
profited  by  them.  Now  comes  the  announcement  that  he  is  engaged  in  a  thorough
and  last  revision  of  the  whole  work.  The  ten  volumes  of  the  original  edition,
and  the  two  volumes  issued  last  year,  are  to  be  wholly  revised,  rewritten  where
necessary,  and  the  twelve  volumes  of  the  former  issues  comprised  in  six  handsome
octavo  volumes.  The  entire  work  will  thus  be  given  at  exactly  half  the  price  of
the  original  edition,  while,  judging  by  the  first  installment,  it  will  certainly  lose
nothing  by  comparison  so  far  as  appearance  goes,  and  will  be  more  valuable  as
embodying  the  latest  information  and  containing  the  last  touches  of  the  author’s
hand.” — Cleveland  ( Ohio )  Herald.

“The  edition  of  1876  exhibited  no  little  pruning  and  correction;  but  the
author  has  again  gone  over  the  entire  field,  and,  with  a  care  and  devotion  worthy
of  the  theme  and  of  his  reputation,  has  wrought  what  he  says  must  be  his  last
revision.  This  latest  edition  will  be  sought  by  many  who  have  for  years  been
familiar  with  its  predecessors.” — Utica  (N.  Y.)  Herald.

“  The  merits  of  this  standard  work  are  too  well  known  to  need  recapitulation,
and  the  present  edition  will  comprise  the  entire  original  work,  complete  in  six
volumes,  and  published  at  half  the  price  of  the  original  edition.  On  the  whole,
the  work  is  much  improved  in  its  new  dress  and  revised  form,  and  will  be  wel¬
comed  by  all,  for  Bancroft’s  history  of  our  country  is  still  facile  princeps  among
histories  of  our  land.” — Chicago  Tribune.

“On  comparing  this  work  with  the  corresponding  volume  of  the  ‘Centenary’
edition  of  1876,  one  is  surprised  to  see  how  extensive  changes  the  author  has
found  desirable,  even  after  so  short  an  interval.  The  first  thing  that  strikes  one
is  the  increased  number  of  chapters,  resulting  from  subdivision.  The  first  volume
contains  two  volumes  of  the  original,  and  is  divided  into  thirty-eight  chapters  in¬
stead  of  eighteen.  This  is  in  itself  an  improvement.  But  the  new  arrangement
is  not  the  result  merely  of  subdivision :  the  matter  is  rearranged  in  such  a  man¬
ner  as  vastly  to  increase  the  lucidity  and  continuousness  of  treatment.  In  the
present  edition  Mr.  Bancroft  returns  to  the  principle  of  division  into  periods,
abandoned  in  the  ‘  Centenary’  edition.  Bis  division  is,  however,  a  new  one.  As
the  permanent  shape  taken  by  a  great  historical  work,  this  new  arrangement  is
certainly  an  improvement.” — The  Nation  (New  York).

For  sale  by  all  booksellers  ;  or  sent ,  post-paid ,  on  receipt  of  price.

New  York:  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,  1,  8,  &  5  Bond  Street.

VOLUMES  I  AND  II  NOW  READY,

A.  HISTORY

OF  TIIB

PEOPLE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,

FROM  THE  REVOLUTION*  TO  THE  CIVIL  WAR.

By  JOHN  BACH  McMASTER.

To  be  completed  in  five  volumes.  Volumes  I  and  II  now  ready.
Octavo,  cloth,  gilt  top.  Price,  $2.50  each.

“  The  second  volume  of  ‘  A  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States,  from  the
Eevolution  to  the  Civil  War,’  by  John  Bach  McMaster,  well  sustains  the  reputation

gained  by  the  author  in  the  preceding  installment  of  the  work.  The  fascinating
ow,  brilliancy,  and  animation  of  the  style,  the  admirable  and  comprehensive
arrangement,  the  excellent  thought  and  judgment  that  distinguish  the  reflective
portions  of  the  book,  the  vast  amount  of  interesting  information  regarding  the  social
condition  of  the  country  in  the  various  stages  of  its  progress,  and  hitherto  unused
in  any  previous  history  of  the  country,  make  the  work  one  of  the  most  important
and  most  valuable  stories  of  our  nation’s  career  that  has  as  yet  appeared.  It  com¬
bines  the  wide  scope  of  Macaulay  in  its  recourse  to  the  daily  newspapers,  the  broad¬
sides,  the  pamphlets,  and  the  diaries  of  the  eras  treated  in  turn,  and  the  broad  aim
of  Green  in  relating  the  history  of  a  people  instead  of  its  governments.  The  churches,
their  ministers  and  visitors  ;  the  theatres,  their  actors  and  audiences  j  the  sports  ana
holidays  of  the  people  ;  the  influences  of  political  events  upon  the  inner  life  of  the
different  sections  of  the  country ;  the  courts,  newspapers,  magazines,  books,  are  all
dealt  with  in  that  bright,  masterly,  and  attractive  manner  which  the  author  has
brought  with  such  skill  and  such  delightful  effect  to  bear  for  the  first  time  upon  our
historical  literature.  There  is  not  a  page  in  the  volume  that  can  not  be  read  with
eager  interest,  and,  when  the  work  shall  have  been  completed,  there  can  be  but
little  doubt  that  it  will  take  its  place  among  our  foremost  standard  classics  in  its
kind.” — Boston  Evening  Gazette.

“  Professor  McMaster’s  second  volume  covers  the  fourteen  years  from  1790  to
1803,  a  period  not  only  rich  in  interest  for  its  own  sake,  but  in  many  respects  unsur¬
passed  m  importance  by  any  other  portion  of  American  history  of  similar  length.
Such  a  period  is  a  crucial  test  for  the  historian.  The  two  volumes  are  already  a  his¬
tory  sm  generis ,  which  has  made  and  will  keep  its  own  place  in  our  literature.” —
JVeui  York  Evening  Post.

“  The  second  volume  of  ‘A  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States,’  by  John
Bach  McMaster  (Appletons),  satisfies  the  high  expectations  raised  by  its  prede¬
cessor.  Although  the  period  depicted  offers  "many  temptations  for  divergence,  he
has  refrained  from  departing  from  the  carefully  defined  limits  of  his  original  plan,
and  has  never  suffered  himself  to  forget  that  he  is  aiming,  not  at  a  political  discus¬
sion,  but  at  a  social  study  ;  at  a  history,  not  of  government  and  legislation,  but  of
the  community  at  large,  the  thoughts,  feelings,  works,  and  ways  of  the  plain  people
who  made  up  a  century  ago,  as  they  clo  now,  a  vast  majority  of  the  American  citi¬
zens.  No  reader  ■will  fail  to  be  impressed  by  the  huge  mass  of  materials  in  the
diverse  forms  of  pamphlets,  contemporary  newspapers,  and  published  or  unpub¬
lished  letters  which  has  been  ransacked,  winnowed,  weighed,  and  condensed  by  the
indefatigable  weaver  of  this  narrative.  There  are  in  this  volume  more  than  630
large  8vo  pages,  yet  we  could  not  spare  one,  for  every  one  is  crammed  with  facts,
which,  whenTiot  new  themselves,  contribute  by  their  collocation  to  a  new  and  vivid
picture.” — Few  York  Sun.

McMaster’s  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States. — (Continued.)

“  Amply  fulfills  the  promise  of  the  first  volume,  and  will  increase  Mr.  McMas¬
ter’s  popularity  as  an  historian.” — Boston  Advertiser.

“  Instead  of  the  dry  bones  of  history,  Mr.  McMaster  gives  us  flesh  and  blood.
In  his  ‘  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States’  (the  second  volume  of  which  has
just  been  issued),  he  goes  over  ground  previously  traversed  by  grave  writers  of  the
older  school.  But,  except  the  landmarks  of  indispensable  dates,  events,  and  per¬
sonages,  which  are  the  same  in  all  histories  of  our  countiy,  the  contents  of  the
volumes  thus  far  produced  are  substantially  new.  Mr.  McMaster  has  found  an
abundance  of  unused  materials  in  old  newspapers,  controversial  pamphlets,  pulpit
addresses,  State  laws,  unpublished  letters,  and  other  odds  and  ends  of  the  past,
which  he  has  been  industriously  collecting  for  many  years..  He  examines  these
accumulations  to  discover,  first  of  all,  what  the  people  were  doing.  Their  houses,
their  food,  their  drink,  their  clothes,  their  ornaments,  their  religious  opinions,  their
political  views,  their  weddings  and  funerals,  their  charities,  their  amusements,  their
vices  as  well  as  their  virtues,  the  state  of  their  commerce,  trade,  manufactures,  and
agriculture — all  these,  and  hundreds  of  other  things  which  we  ought  to  know  in
order  to  understand  tne  forefathers  as  they  actually  lived  and  moved,  are  minutely
and  graphically  portrayed  in  this  work.  The  style  of  the  historian  is  entirely  suited
to  this  purpose.  His  primary  object  is  to  interest  his  readers  while  incidentally
instructing  them.  With  this  object  he  excludes,  ao  far  as  possible,  all  dry  and  dull
statistics.  His  matter  being  good  to  begin  with,  he  adds  to  it  the  charm  of  a  crisp,
bright  narrative  style.” — New  York  Journal  of  Commerce.

“  But  his  best  work,  that  on  which  his  reputation  will  rest  with  future  historians,
who  will  always  hereafter  be  forced  to  consult  the  valuable  material  he  has  gathered
with  so  much  care — his  best  work  is  in  the  field  of  descriptive  writing.  He  has
evidently  left  no  contemporary  record  untouched — newspaper  files,  rare  pamphlets,
obscure  books  of  travel,  heretofore  only  within  reach  of  the  specialist,  are  pressed
into  service,  and  their  treasures  of  information  spread  forth  with  lavish  generosity.”
— Literary  World.

“  If  anything,  the  latest  volume  of  Mr.  McMaster’s  work  may  be  said  to  he  more
interesting  than  the  first.  The  book  is  ably  written,  and  contains  a  fund  of  informa¬
tion,  much  of  which  will  be  new  to  many  readers.” — Philadelphia  North  American.

11  It  would  be  difficult  to  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  intense  interest  aroused
in  the  reader’s  mind  by  the  style  and  character  of  this  history.” — Utica  Herald.

“Wc  know  of  no  historical  writer— Macaulay  not  excepted — better  able  to  pre¬
sent  a  vivid,  realistic,  living  conception  of  the  period  of  which  he  may  be  writing,
of  the  people  in  their  private  and  their  public  lives,  of  their  manners  and  customs,
and  of  such  features  as  set  them  apart  in  their  own  epoch  as  representative  out¬
growths.” — Eclectic  Magazine.

“Yet  no  one  can  deny  the  intense  interest  of  this  second  volume.  It  sparkles
and  glows  on  every  page.” — Christian  Advocate.

“  Mr.  John  Bach  McMaster’s  1  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States,’  which
has  now  reached  its  second  volume,  more  than  sustains  the  promise  of  the  first  vol¬
ume,  and  suggests,  besides,  several  reflections  ns  to  the  American  historical  manner
when  compared  with  the  modern  European  mode  and  contrasted  with  the  grand
style  of  the  ancients.” — Mail  and  Express.

“  While  the  author  has  by  no  means  neglected  the  political  aspects  of  the  inter¬
esting  period  covered  by  the  present  volume,  but  has  treated  them  carefully  and  on
the  whole  impartially,  it  is  that  portion  of  his  work  which  is  distinctively  a  history
of  the  people,  which  portrays  their  social  customs,  manners,  and  habits,  which  tells
us  how  they  lived,  which  gives  us  an  insight  into  their  modes  of  thought,  that  gives
it  its  chief  value.” — Boston  Traveller.

For  sale  by  all  booksellers  ;  or  sent,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price.

New  York:  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,  1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Street.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.’S  PUBLICATIONS.

HISTORY  OF  HENRY  THE  FIFTH:  KING  OF  ENGLAND,
LORD  OF  IRELAND,  AND  HEIR  OF  FRANCE.  By  George
M.  Towle.  8vo.  Cloth,  $2.50.

RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  CONSTITUTION.

By  Sir  Edward  S.  Creasy.  12mo.  Cloth,  $1.50.

A  very  interesting  subject,  treated  with  great  learning  and  skill.  It  should  take  its
place  in  all  libraries  as  a  most  useful  commentary  on  English  history.  As  an  account  of
the  gradual  development  of  tree  institutions  in  England,  it  connects  itself  with  our  own
history,  especially  with  the  progress  of  opinion  in  the  early  part  of  our  Revolutionary
struggle.

“As  a  manual  for  the  use  of  the  historical  student  while  he  is  laying  the  foundation  for
a  knowledge  of  the  English  Constitution,  this  little  book  is  without  a  superior.  It  com-
biues  accuracy  with  vivacity,  and  should  be  constantly  used  by  the  student  in  the  early
period  of  his  studies.” — Dr.  0.  K.  Adams's  Manual  of  Historical  Literature.

A  CHILD’S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  By  Charle3  Dickens.
New  Household  Edition.  With  Illustrations.  Square  8vo.  Paper,
75  cents ;  cloth,  $1.25.

THE  ENGLISH  REFORMATION.  HOW  IT  CAME  ABOUT,
AND  WHY  WE  SHOULD  UPHOLD  IT.  By  Cunningham  Geikie,
D.  D.,  author  of  “The  Life  and  Words  of  Christ.”  12ino.  Cloth,
$2.00.

“Dr.  Geikie’s  work  sustains  the  reputation  which  his ‘Life  and  Words’  had  given
him  as  a  clear  historical  writer.  It  is  impossible  to  comprehend  the  conflicts  for  spiritual
liberty  of  the  present  without  tracing  them  back  to  their  origin  in  the  past;  and  there  is
no  single  volume  which  will  better  enable  us  to  do  this  than  Dr.  Geikie’s  *  History  ol  the
English  Reformation.’  ” — New  York  Christian  TJnion.

u  His  group  in  2  of  facts  is  often  masterly,  his  style  is  bold  and  incisive,  and  his  sketches
of  eventful  periods  or  eminent  personages  are  vivid  and  graphic.”  Harper  s  New  Monthly
Magazine.

ANECDOTAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  BRITISH  PARLIAMENT.

From  the  Earliest  Periods  to  the  Present  Time,  with  Notices  of
Eminent  Parliamentary  Men  and  Examples  of  their  Oratory.  Com¬
piled  by  G.  H.  Jennings.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth,  $2.50.

“As  pleasant  a  companion  for  the  leisure  hours  of  a  studious  and  thoughtful  man  as
anything  in  hook-shape  since  Selden.” — London  Telegraph.

“It  would  be  sheer  affectation  to  deny  the  fascination  exercised  by  the  'Anecdotal
History  of  Parliament.’  "—Saturday  Review.

YOUNG  IRELAND :  A  FRAGMENT  OF  IRTSH  nTSTORY,  1840
to  1850.  By  the  Hon.  Sir  Charles  Gayan  Duffy,  K.  0.  M.  G.  8vo.
Cloth,  $3.00;  cheap  edition,  $1.50.

“Ably  written  by  one  who  has  since  had  large  and  successful  experience  iu  the  British
colonies  in  the  South  Pacific.”— Dr.  0.  K.  Adams's  Manual  of  Historical  Literature.

CAMEOS  FROM  ENGLISH  HISTORY.  By  Charlotte  M.  Yonge.
12mo.  Cloth,  $1.00.

New  York :  D.  APPLETON  &  GO.,  1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Street.

WORKS  ON  FRENCH  HISTORY

Memoirs  of  Madame  de  Remusat.

1802-1808.  Edited  by  her  Grandson,  Paul  de  Remusat,  Senator.  In  3
yoIs.,  half  red  cloth,  $2.25.

“Notwithstanding  the  enormous  library  of  works  relating  to  Napoleon,  we  know  of
none  which  cover  precisely  the  ground  of  these  Memoirs.  Madame  de  Remusat  was
not  only  lady-in-waiting  to  Josephine  during  the  eventful  years  1802-1808,  hut  was  her  in¬
timate  friend  and  trusted  confidante.  Thus  we  get  a  view  of  the  daily  life  of  Bonaparte  and
his  wife,  and  the  terms  on  which  they  lived,  not  elsewhere  to  be  found.’’ — New  Yoi'k  Mail.

“These  Memoirs  are  not  only  a  repository  of  anecdotes  and  of  portraits  sketched  from
life  by  a  keen-eyed,  quick-witted  woman  ;  some  of  the  author's  reflections  on  social  and
political  questions  are  remarkable  for  weight  and  penetration.” — New  York  Sun.

Memoirs  of  Napoleon,

His  Court  and  Family.  By  the  Duchess  d’Abrantes.  In  2  vols.,  12mo,
cloth,  $3.00.

The  interest  excited  in  the  first  Napoleon  and  his  Conrt  by  the  “  Memoirs  of  Madame
de  Remusat”  has  induced  the  publishers  to  issue  the  famous  “Memoirs  of  the  Duchess
d’Abrantes,”  w'hich  have  hitherto  appeared  in  a  costly  octavo  edition,  in  a  much  cheaper
form,  and  in  style  to  correspond  with  the  12mo  edition  of  De  Remusat.  This  work  will
be  likely  now  to  be  read  with  awakened  interest,  especially  as  it  presents  a  much  more
favorable  portrait  of  the  great  Corsican  than  that  limned  by  Madame  de  Remusat.

The  French  Revolutionary  Epoch.

Being  a  History  of  France  from  the  Beginning  of  the  First  French  Revolu¬
tion  to  the  End  of  the  Second  Empire.  By  Henri  Van  Laun,  author
of  “  History  of  French  Literature,”  etc.  In  2  vols.,  12mo.  Cloth,
$8.50.

“  As  a  history  for  readers  who  are  not  disposed  to  make  an  exhaustive  study  of  the
subject  treated,  the  book  impresses  us  as  eminently  good.” — Now  York  Evening  Post.

“This  work  throw’s  a  flood  of  light  on  the  problems  which  are  now  perplexing  the
politicians  and  statesmen  of  Europe.” — New  York  Daily  Graphic.

“  This  is  a  work  for  which  there  is  no  substitute  at  present  in  the  English  language.
For  American  readers  it  may  be  said  to  have  secured  a  temporary  monopolv  of  a  most  in¬
teresting  topic.  Educated  persons  can  scarcely  afford  to  neglect  it.”— New  I  rrk  Sun.

History  of  the  French  Revolution.

By  Louis  Adolphe  Thiers.  4  vols.,  8vo.  Illustrated.  Cloth,  $8.00 ;  half
calf,  $18.00.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  Frederick  Shoberl.

History  of  France.

From  the  Earliest  Times  to  1848.  By  Rev.  James  White,  author  of  “  Eight¬
een  Christian  Centuries.”  8vo,  cloth,  $3.00.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Street,  New  York.

.  .

■

.

-

:

I

OAi+80  .L455  v.  7

”Uliam  Ed™«  Hartpole

DATE  ISSU

ISSUED

85867
