I James  Thornton. 1.

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Arciiive

in  2008  with  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation

http://www.archive.org/details/englandineightee02leck

■Z-

HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

XVJiiTH CENTUEY

VOL. II.

ISAAC  f-UUI
[ LIBRARY

PRINTED BY

SPOniSWOODE AND CO., NLW-SllLEET SQUARE

LONDON

HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

BY

WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY

NEW EDITION

VOLUME n.

LONDON
LONGMANS, GEE  EN, AND CO.

1892

All riijhls reserved

mo

I  ^^Q^

CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.
CHAPTER  IV.

I'AGK

The  new  Ministry 1

Convention  of  the  Austrians  with  Frederick ...  '2

Austrian  victories  in  Bohemia  and  Bavaria . . . .  '6

Cliaries  VII.  crowned  Emperor 3

Frederick  breaks  the  Convention. Battle  of  Czaslau . .  4

Peace  of  Breslau 4

Expulsion  of  the  French  from  Bohemia ....  5

Death  of  Fleury ^

Rapid  changes  of  fortune  in  Italy 6

Services  of  the  British  fleet .7

The  Austrians  completely  victorious  in  Germany  . . .  y

The  Dutch  enter  the  war 8

Battle  of  Dettingen 9

Revulsion of feeling in England. Ambitious  views of

Maria  Theresa 9

Exaggerated  war  measures  of  England . . . .  10

Alleged  subordination  of  English  to  Hanoverian  interests  12

Unpopularity  of  Carteret 15

Death  of  Lord  Wilmington. Ascendency  of  the  Pelhams  IG

Henry  Pelham 16

Abortive  attempt  of  the  French  to  invade  England  .  .  18
French  and  Spanish  fleet  escapes  from  Touion  in  spite  of

the  English . 18

BriUiant  campaign  of  the  French  in  Flanders ...  19

Interrupted  by  the  Austrian  invasion  of  Alsace . . .  20

CONTENTS OF

Frederick  renews  the  war ......

Capture  of  Prague  with  its  garrison . . , .
The  Emperor  reinstated  in  Munich ....

Frederick  driven  into  Silesia  .....

French  capture  Friburg

Italian  campaigns  in  1744 ......

1745. Ott'ensive  alliance  between  England,  Holland,  Aus

tria,  and  Saxony

Death  of  Charles  VII

Peace  between  Austria  and  Bavaria. The  Duke  of  Lorraine

elected  Emperor ....,-•
Victories  of the  Prussians. Peace  of Dresden  between

Austria  and  Prussia

Insurrection  of  Genoa. French  and  Spaniards  victorious

in  Italy

French  campaign  in  Flanders. Battle  of  Fontenoy  and

its  results ........

The  Jacobite  insurrection  of  1745 ....

General  incapacity  of  the  British  commanders
Successes  of  the  navy ......

Italian  campaigns  of  1746

Victories  of  the  French  in  Flanders  and  Holland

PA  OK

•21
22
22
23
23
23

24
25

25

26

26

27
28
28
31
32
32

Failure  of  the  attempt  of  the  King  to  displace  Pelham ,  34

Re-establishment  of  the  Ministry 34

Condition  of  Europe  called  urgently  for  peace . . .  35

Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle 37

Eeduction  of  the  army  . . . . . . . .  40

Foundation  of  Halifax 41

Financial  measures  of  Pelham . . . . . .  41

Great  predominance  of  the  commercial  spirit  in  Parliament  44

Anxiety  for  Parliamentary  reform  in  the  country . .  45

Parliamentary  Corruptimi  and  Tyranny

Simultaneous  growth  of  the  power  of  the  Commons  and
the  influence  of Government  upon  its  members  since

the  Revolution .........  45

Arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  Lower  House. The  Kentish

petitioners .........  47

The  Aylesbury  election 49

Parliamentary  censorship  of  the  Press ....  50

Parliamentary  privilege 51

Scandalous  proceedings  in  the  trials  of  disputed  elections  52
Parliamentary  reporting  forbidden. Its  history . .  55
Measure  against  bribery . . . . • . .  61
Measures  diminishing  the  number  of  pensioners  and  place-
holders in  Parliament 61

THE SECOND VOLUME.  Vll

PA«K.

Attempts  to  shorten  the  duration  of  Parliament. Effects
of  the  Septennial  Act 'j-^

Redeeming  Features  of  Parliament

Character  of  the  English  upper  classes

Constant  infusion  of  young  members ....

The  representation  of  the  counties  and  of  the  large  towns

Fear  of  the  Pretender

Attention  paid  to  poi^ular  wishes .....

Comparative  simplicity  of  English  politics

Low  standard  of  political  honour  ....

Exclusive employment of Government patronage for

political  ends  ........

Danger  of  leaving  science  and  literature  to  the  unrestricted

operation  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand
Methods  that  have  been  adopted  for  encouraging  them
Government  patronage  of  literature  under  Anne .
Effects  of  the  degradation  of  literature  under  the  first

Georges  .........

Patronage  of  Queen  Caroline  ....

Decline  of  political  enthusiasm  .....

Attitude  of  the  nation  in  1745 ....

Browne's  '  Estimate  '  ......

Superiority  of  the  English  Government  to  most  Continental

ones

Confusion  of  party  qualities .....
National  history  of  Whigs  and  Tories ...
Reforms  in  Scotland  .......

Legislation  about  Public  Order

On  gin-drinking. History  of  Drunkenness .
Extreme  danger  of  London  streets. The  Mohock
The  inefficiency  of  the  watchmen  .
Street  robberies  ......

Abolition  of  the  privileges  of  the  Mint .
Measures  for  the  better  lighting  of  London
Formation  of  a  new  police  force .
Frequency  of  riots .....

Wrecking. Laws  to  repress  it . . .

66
66
67
68
69

69

70

71

72
76
79

81
83
85
88
89

91
93
94
97

97
105
106
107
109
110
111
113
113

The  Marriage  Act  of  Lord  Hardwicke

Clandestine  marriages . . . . . . .115

English  legislation  on  marriage 117

Difference  between  the  secular  and  the  theological  aspects
of  marriace 118

Vlll  CONTENTS OF

PAGK

Divorce 119

Growth  of  the  secular  view  of  marriage  in  English  law .  l'2i

Success  of  Lord  Hardwicke's  Act 125

Decline  of  the  spirit  of  philanthropy  and  reform .  126

Berkeley 126

Oglethorpe ..........  127

Condition  of  debtors'  prisons . . . . . .  128

Foundation  of  Georgia 131

Neglected  condition  of  the  navy  and  army . . . .  133

Atrocious  penal  system .......  134

The  nation  assuming  rapidly  its  modern  aspect . . .  137

Growth  of  the  Modern  Military  System

Improvements  in  the  art  of  war  led  to  standing  armies .  140

History  of  the  IMutiny  Act 140

Opinion  of  Blackstone 143

Jealousy  of  the  Army 144

History  of  barracks 146

CHAPTER  V.

Natio7ial  Tastes  and  Manners

Growth  of  newspapers  and  magazines .....  151

Coarseness  of  manners .......  163

Gambling 155

Gardening  ..........  158

Architecture IGl

Painting 161

Music. Growth  of  the  Opera. ......  168

Career  of  Handel 169

The  Drama. Its  immorality 177

Legislation  on  the  subject  .......  181

'  The  Beggars'  Opera  ' 182

Depression  of  taste ........  183

The  Shakespearean  revival 184

Garrick 185

Puritanical  opposition  to  the  theatre 189

Amusements  with  animals  .......  192

Watering-places 198

Bise  of  sea-bathing 11)9

Character  of  country  life 200

Condition  of  the  poor 203

Increase  of  London  . .  . .  . .  211

THE SECOND VOLUME.  IX

PAGR

Town  amusements 216

Fashionable  hours  .........  217

Domestic  service. ........  218

Sanitary  condition  of  London . . . . . .  221

Gro\\i;h  of  medicine ........  228

Anatomy 22,3

Inoculation. .........  224

Conclusion . 226

CHAPTER VI.

The  Colonies  and  Scotland.

TJie  Colonies

Favourable  circumstances  of  those  in  America . . .  229

Their  early  dillicalties ........  231

Invasion  of  charters  under  the  Stuarts ....  232

Effect  of  the  Eevolution  on  the  Colonies . . . .  232

Forms  of  government .......  233

Eivalry  with  Spain,  Holland,  and  France . . . .  235

Commercial  policy  of  the  mother  country  ....  237

Eliects  of  the  commercial  laws  in  producing  disaffection .  241

Introduction  of  criminals  into  America ....  242

Introduction  of  slavery. First  English  slave-hunters . .  242

Growth  of  the  institution  after  the  Peace  of  Utrecht . .  243

Pielations  of  the  Home  Government  to  slavery . . .  246

Illustrations  of  public  opinion  on  the  subject . . .  247

Causes  whicli  drove  American  slavery  southwards  . . .  249

Puritanical  customs ........  249

The  theatre 250

Inoculation .........  250

Intellectual  progress 251

Other  colonies  of  England 252

Scotland

Condition of  the Highlands at the beginning of the

eighteenth  century  ........  255

Highland  superstitions  ........  263

Illustrations  of  Highland  fidelity .....  265

Other  Highland  virtues 269

Inverness ..........  271

Aberdeen 272

Educational  establishments 272

The  Lowlands. Edinburgh 274

Miserable  state  of  the  Lowlands 277

CONTENTS OF

PAGE

Eeligious  persecution 277

Commercial  disabilities .......  278

Great  poverty  and  disorder  throughout  Scotland . . .  278

Proposals  of  Fletcher  of  Saltoun 279

Remedial  Measures

Ecclesiastical. Establishment  of  the  Kirk .
The  parish  schools ......

Condition  of  education  in  Scotland . . .
The  Act  of  Toleration  .....

Discontent  of  the  Presbyterians . . . .

Industrial. The  Union  :  its  commercial  clauses
Measures  of  the  Scotch  tending  to  independence .
Difficulties  in  carrying  the  Union
Great  commercial  prosperity  following  it
Comparison  between  the  Scotch  and  Irish  Unions
Prolonged  hostility  to  the  Union  in  Scotland

280

282
283
286
289
292
293
296
300
302
306

Improvement  of  the  Highlands

Decrease  of  the  Gaeli tongue  under  the  influence  of  the

parish  schools .........  310

The  Highland  roads . . . . . . . .  311

Causes  lowering  the  position  of  the  Highland  chiefs  . .  312

Abolition  of  hereditary  jurisdiction . . ...  312

Abolition  of  the  national  dress . . . . . .313

Severe  measures  against  the  Episcopalians . . . .  313

The  Highland  regiments .......  315

Transition  from  the  feudal  to  the  commercial  conception

of  landlords 315

Improvement  in  agriculture ......  318

Decline  of  mendicancy ........  319

How  far  legislation  can  civilise  nations ....  320

Scotland  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  still  in

many  ways  behind  England . . . . . .  322

Torture. Serfdom. Judicial  and  political  corruption .  323

Character  of  Scotch  politicians . . . • • •  324

Character  of  Scotch  religion ......  327

Narrowness  and  intolerance .......  329

Witchcraft 330

Ascetic  tendencies  .........  33-1

Gradual  change  of  manners  and  belief ....  336

Scotch  virtues  partly  due  to  industrial  habits . . .  342

Effects  of  the  Highlands  on  Scotch  character . . .  343

THE SECOND VOLUME.  XI

CHAPTER  VII.

TAGK

Death  of  Pelham  leads  to  the  ascendency  of  the  Duke  of

Newcastle .........  345

His  character ..........  345

Competition  for  the  leadership  of  the  House  of  Commons  .  347

Murray— Fox— Pitt 347

Appointment  of  Sir  Thomas  Eobinson . ....  350

Conduct  of  Pitt  and  Fox 350

Reconciliation  of  Fox  and  Newcastle 351

Hostilities  break  out  between  the  French  and  English  in

America  ..........  352

General  distrust  of  Newcastle 353

Recall  of  the  French  ambassador. English  aggressions  in

America ..........  355

Seizure  of  French  ships 356

German  subsidies ........  357

Opposed  by  Pitt 357

Dismissal  of  Pitt 358

Changes  in  the  Ministry. Treaty  with  Prussia . . .  358

Alliance  between  Austria,  Russia,  and  Saxony . . .  359

Acceded  to  by  France ........  360

Frederick  discovers  the  plot  against  him ....  362

Great  panic  in  England. Fears  of  invasion  . . . .  362

French  expedition  against  Minorca 363

Conduct  of  Byng. Minorca  taken  by  the  French . . .  364

Disasters  in  America  ........  365

Progress  of  the  French  in  India. Policy  of  Dupleix . .  366

English  triumph  in  the  Carnatic 367

Surajah  Dowlah  captures  Calcutta 367

Frederick  takes  Dresden 368

Battle  of  Lobositz. Capitulation  of  Saxon  Army  . . .  368

Resignation  of  Fox . . . . . . . '  .  369

And  of  Newcastle 369

Fox  fails  in  attempting  to  form  a  Ministry ....  3(J9

Ministry  of  Devonshire  and  Pitt 370

Weakness  of  the  Ministry. Hostility  of  the  King . .371

Execution  of  Byng 372

Dismissal  of  Temple  and  Pitt. Popularity  of  Pitt . .  375

Interregnum ..........  375

Formation  of  the  Coalition  Ministry  of  Newcastle  and  Pitt  376

Condition  of  parties  in  England 377

Antipathy  of  the  King  to  Pitt .379

Their  reconciliation 380

Xll

CONTENTS OF

William  Pitt

Character  of  his  eloquence

Effect  of  reporting  on  Parliamentary  eloquence  .
Nobility  of  the  character  of  Pitt . . . .

His  general  sympathy  with  the  popular  sentiment
His  courage  in  opposing  it .... .

His  inconsistencies. Retrospect  of  his  career .
Ingratitude  to  Newcastle  . . . . .

His  arrogance .......

His  theatrical  character ......

His  attitude  to  royalty .....

The  ostentation  of  his  vuiues  . . . .

TAGK

381

388
389

3yu

391
392

399
400
401
402
404

His  war  pohcy. Disasters  that  preceded  his  Ministry .  404

Convention  of  Closterseven .......  406

The  Duke  of  Cumberland. Noble  conduct  of  Pitt  towards

him 408

General  despondency  in  the  country .....  408

Militia  riots 410

Battle  of  Eossbach 411

Battle  of  Leuthen 411

The  Convention  of  Closterseven  broken 412

Attacks  of  the  English  on  the  French  coast . . .  413

German  Campaign  of  1758

Battle  of  Zorndorf  .

Battle  of  Hochkirchen

Relief  of  Dresden  by  Frederick

Battle  of  Crefeld  .

French  successes  in  Hesse

English  conquest  of  Canada
Its  ultimate  consequences
English  naval  victories
New  colonies  conquered

Ccniqucst  of  Hindosfan

Capture  of  Calcutta  and  Hooghly

Indecisive  battle  with  Surajah  Dowlah

Battle  of  Plassy  .....

Death  of  Surajah  Dowlah. Growing  power  of  Clive

The  French  in  Madras. Lally .

Discord  among  the  French  commanders

English  victory  at  sea

Difficulties  of  Lally  ....

Battle  of  Wandewash  ....

Destruction  of  Pondieherrv

419
419
420
420
422
424
425
425
42()
427

THE SECOND VOLUME.

XIU

Fate  of  Lally .

Great  sacritices  of  the  English  under  Pitt

Oerman  Campaign  of  1759

Perilous  position  of  Frederick. Battle  of  Ziillichau
Kussians  take  Frankfort. Battle  of  Kunersdorf
Dresden  taken  by  the  Austrians  ....

New  Prussian  disasters ......

Battle  of  Minden

PAGB

428
429

4:0
431
431
431
432

Oerman  Campaign  o/  1760

Measures  of  Frederick  to  restore  his  army
Unsuccessful  attack  on  Dippoldiswalde
Laudohn  invades  Silesia  .....

Unsuccessful  attack  on  Dresden. Battle  of  Liegnitz
Austrians  plunder  Berlin. Battle  of  Torgau  .
Proceedings  of  Prince  Ferdinand

Charges  of  i-ecklessness  brought  against  Pitt  .
Prosperity  of  England  during  his  administration
Pitt's  love  of  war .......

Bloodlessness  of  the  English  victories

Power  of  Pitt  to  raise  the  spirits  of  the  nation

His  character  as  a  home  minister

The  strength  he  imparted  to  English  democracy .

His  moral  influence. Comparison  with  Wesley  .

Relation  of  Pitt  and  Walpole

Death  and  character  of  George  II, ,

433
433
434
434
435
435

435

437
437
438
438
440
443
443
445
447

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

IK THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY.

CHAPTER  IV.

The  political  changes  wMch  immediately  followed
the  retirement  of  Walpole  may  be  speedily  dismissed.
For  several  years  they  consisted  chiefly  of  the  antago-
nism of  Carteret  and  Pulteney  with  the  Pelhams.  Pul-
teney,  as  I  have  said,  though  accepting  a  seat  in  the
Cabinet,  at  first  declined  office,  but  at  his  desire  the
Earl  of  Wilmington,  the  old  colleague  of  Walpole  ^  and
a  man  of  the  most  moderate  intelligence,  became  the
nominal  head  of  the  Government.  He  had  broken  away
from  Walpole  on  the  question  of  the  Spanish  war,  but
was  otherwise  thoroughly  identified  with  the  former
Government.  Carteret  obtained  the  Secretaryship  of
State  for  the  Northern  Department,  which  involved  the
direction  of  foreign  afiairs.  Newcastle  occupied  the
corresponding  post  in  home  affairs ;  his  brother,  Henry
Pelham,  was  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  and  Lord  Hard-
wicke  continued  to  be  Chancellor.  With  two  or  three
exceptions  the  Tories  were  still  excluded  from  office,  as

1  See  vol.  i.  p.  378.
VOL.  II.

2  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  IV.

were  also  Chesterfield  and  Pitt,  who  were  personally
displeasing  to  the  King,  and  the  offices  of  the  Govern-
ment were  divided  in  tolerably  fair  proportions  between
the  followers  of  the  great  Whig  leaders  and  the  personal
adherents  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  In  spite  of  all  the
clamour  that  had  been  raised  about  the  abuses  under
Walpole,  the  system  of  home  government  continued
essentially  the  same.  The  Septennial  Act  was  main-
tained against  every  attack ;  and  if  there  was  a  little
more  decorum  in  the  government,  there  was  probably
quite  as  much  corruption.

The  foreign  policy  of  the  Government,  however,
gained  considerably  in  energy,  and  the  change  was  but
one  of  many  circumstances  that  favoured  Maria  Theresa.
We  have  already  seen  that  by  October  1741  her  fortunes
had  sunk  to  the  loAvest  ebb,  but  a  great  revulsion
speedily  set  in.  The  martial  enthusiasm  of  the  Hunga-
rians, the  subsidy  from  England,  and  the  brilliant  military
talents  of  General  Khevenhtiller,  restored  her  armies.
Vienna  was  put  in  a  state  of  defence,  and  at  the  same
time  jealousies  and  suspicion  made  their  way  among  the
confederates.  The  Electors  of  Bavaria  and  Saxony  were
already  in  some  degree  divided ;  and  the  Germans,  and
especially  Frederick,  were  alarmed  by  the  growing  as-
cendency of  the  French.  In  the  moment  of  her  extreme
depression,  the  Queen  consented  to  a  concession  which
England  had  vainly  urged  upon  her  before,  and  which
laid  the  foundation  of  her  future  success.  In  October
1741  she  concluded  a  secret  convention  with  Frederick,
by  which  that  astute  sovereign  agreed  to  desert  his  allies,
and  desist  from  hostilities,  on  condition  of  ultimately  ob-
taining Lower  Silesia,  with  Breslau  and  Neisse.  It  was
arranged  that  Frederick  should  continue  to  besiege
Neisse,  that  the  town  should  ultimately  be  surrendered
to  him,  that  his  troops  should  then  retire  into  winter
quarters,  and  take  no  further  part  in  the  war,  that  the

CH,  IV.  SECESSION OF FREDEKICK  6

truce  should  be  kept  a  profound  secret,  and  that  no
formal  peace  should  for  the  present  be  signed.  As  the
sacrifice  of  a  few  more  lives  was  perfectly  indifferent  to
the  contracting  parties,  and  in  order  that  no  one  should
suspect  the  treachery  that  was  contemplated,  Neisse,
after  the  arrangement  had  been  made  for  its  surrender,
was  subjected  for  four  days  and  four  nights  to  the
horrors  of  bombardment.  Frederick  at  the  same  time
talked,  with  his  usual  cynical  frankness,  to  the  English
ambassador  'about  the  best  way  of  attacking  his  allies
t]ie  French ;  and  observed,  that  if  the  Queen  of  Hungary
prospered  he  would  perhaps  support  her,  if  not — every-
one must  look  for  himself.^  He  only  assented  verbally
to  this  convention,  and  manifestly  hesitated  which  Power
it  was  his  interest  finally  to  betray ;  but  the  Austrians
obtained  a  respite,  which  enabled  them  to  withdraw
their  army  from  Silesia,  and  after  a  short  interval
to  throw  their  whole  forces  upon  their  other  enemies.
Two  brilliant  campaigns  followed.  The  greater  part  of
Bohemia  was  recovered  by  an  army  under  the  Duke  of
Lorraine,  and  the  French  were  hemmed  in  near  Prague ;
while  another  army,  under  General  Khevenhliller,  in-
vaded Upper  Austria,  drove  10,000  Frencli  soldiers
within  the  walls  of  Linz,  blockaded  them,  defeated  a
body  of  Bavarians  who  were  sent  to  the  rescue,  com-
pelled the  whole  French  army  to  surrender,  and  then,
crossing  the  frontier,  poured  in  a  resistless  torrent  over
Bavaria.  The  fairest  plains  of  that  beautiful  land  were
desolated  by  hosts  of  irregular  troops  from  Hungary,
Croatia,  and  the  Tyrol;  and  on  the  12th  of  February
the  Austrians  marched  in  triumph  into  Munich.  On
that  very  day  the  Elector  of  Bavaria  was  crowned  Em-
peror of  Germany,  at  Frankfort,  under  the  title  of
Charles  VII.,  and  the  imperial  crown  was  thus,  for  the

See  Carlyle's  Frederick,  book  xiii.  ch.  v.

B  2

4  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  iv.

first  time,  for  many  generations,  separated  from  the
House  of  Austria.

Though  the  existence  of  the  secret  convention  was
made  sufficiently  manifest  by  its  effects,  Frederick
formally  and  upon  his  honour  denied  it,  and  with  a  rare
refinement  of  treachery,  only  two  days  after  he  had  ob-
tained Neisse  by  his  agreement  with  Maria  Theresa,  he
signed  a  treaty  for  the  partition  of  her  dominions,  which
gave  him  Glatz  and  some  additional  territory.^  Which
of  the  two  engagements  he  would  observe  depended  upon
events,  and  he  ultimately  decided  to  break  the  conven-
tion. The  Austrians,  he  said,  had  not  kept  it  secret,
and  it  was  therefore  no  longer  binding,  and  he  soon
captured  Glatz  and  Olmutz.  He  now  held  almost  all  he
was  likely  to  obtain ;  he  had  little  to  hope  and  much  to
fear  from  a  continuance  of  the  war.  He  dreaded  almost
equally  an  Austrian  triumph  and  a  French  ascendency
in  Germany,  and  he  was  extremely  anxious  again  to
betray  his  allies  and  secretly  to  negotiate  a  separate
peace.  His  efforts,  however,  proved  vain,  until  on  the
17th  of  May  he  defeated  the  Austrians  under  Prince
Charles  of  Lorraine  in  a  great  battle  at  Czaslau,  or
Chotusitz,  in  Bohemia.  The  Prussians  suffered  very
severely,  but  the  Austrians  were  driven  back,  with  the
loss  of  18  cannon  and  about  7,000  men.

The  Queen  of  Hungary  at  last  yielded  to  the  urgent
representations  of  England.  She  saw  that  the  inter-
vention or  non-intervention  of  Prussia  decided  the
fortunes  of  the  war.  She  feared  that  the  French,  unless
speedily  checked,  would  regain  their  ascendency  in
Bohemia,  and  she  at  last  very  reluctantly  consented  to
the  Peace  of  Breslau,  by  which  Austria  ceded  to  Prussia
all  Lower  and  the  greater  part  of  Upper  Silesia  as  well

'  See  the  admirable  account  of  TMr&se  d'aprds  des  documents
these  transactions  in  the  Due  de  nouveaux,  ii.  107,  111-113,  119-
Broglie's  Fridiric  II.  et  Marie- 122.

CH.  IV.  RETREAT OF BELLEISLE.  5

as  the  country  about  Glatz,  while  Frederick  on  his  part
ceased  from  all  hostility,  and  completely  abandoned  the
Emperor  and  the  French.  The  preliminaries  of  this
peace  were  signed  on  June  11,  and  the  definite  peace
was  accepted  on  July  28,  1742.  The  Elector  of  Saxony
also  acceded  to  it,  and  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity
of  withdrawing  from  the  war.

The  conditions  of  the  contest  were  thus  profoundly
altered.  The  first  consequence  was  the  almost  complete
expulsion  of  the  French  from  Bohemia.  Suddenly  de-
serted by  their  allies,  outnumbered  by  their  enemies,
and  wasted  by  sickness  and  by  famine,  they  were
driven  from  place  to  place,  and  the  whole  army  was  at
last  blockaded  in  Prague.  An  army  sent  to  its  relief,
under  the  command  of  Maillebois,  was  repulsed  and
compelled  to  fall  back  on  Bavaria,  and  the  surrender  of
the  French  appeared  inevitable.  This  fate  was  averted
by  the  masterly  strategy  of  Belleisle,  who  succeeded,  in
the  midst  of  a  dark  December  night,  in  evading  the
Austrians,  and  who  conducted  the  bulk  of  his  army  un-
broken for  a  twelve  days'  march  over  a  waste  of  ice  and
snow  and  through  the  midst  of  a  hostile  country.  They
had  no  covering  by  night  and  no  subsistence  except
frozen  bread,  and  they  were  harassed  at  every  step  by
the  enemy.  Hundreds  died  through  cold  and  hardship.
The  roads  were  strewn  with  human  bodies  stiffening  in
the  frost,  but  every  cannon  and  banner  was  brought  in
safety  to  Eger,  a  frontier  town  of  Bohemia,  which  was
still  in  the  hands  of  the  French.  Prague  held  out  a
little  longer,  but  it  soon  succumbed.  The  French  com-
mander declared  that  unless  he  obtained  honourable
terms  he  would  burn  the  city,  and  in  order  to  save  the
capital  of  Bohemia,  the  French  garrison  of  6,000  men
were  suffered  to  march  out  with  the  honours  of  war,  and
to  join  their  comrades  at  Eger.  On  January  2,  Belleisle
began  his  homeward  march,  and  the  campaign  had  been

6 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

SO  deadly  that  of  40,000  men  who  had  invaded  Ger-
many only  8,000  recrossed  the  Ehine.  Fleury,  who  had
been  dragged  into  a  war  which  he  had  never  desired,
and  which  he  was  unfit  to  conduct,  had  already  vainly
sued  for  peace.  His  overtures  were  spurned ;  and  the
Austrian  Government,  in  order  to  sow  dissension  among
its  enemies,  published  the  letter  he  had  written.  His
long  life  had  been  for  the  most  part  upright,  honourable,
and  useful ;  and  if  he  assented  in  his  last  years  to  acts
which  were  grossly  criminal,  history  will  readily  forgive
faults  which  were  due  to  the  weakness  of  extreme  old
age.  He  died  in  January  in  his  ninetieth  year.  In
May  1743,  Maria  Theresa  was  crowned  in  Prague.

The  effects  of  the  change  of  government  in  England
were  felt  in  almost  every  quarter.  Carteret  at  once
sent  Maria  Theresa  the  assurance  of  his  full  support,
and  a  new  energy  was  infused  into  the  war.  The  struggle
between  England  and  Spain  had  altogether  merged  in
the  great  European  war,  and  the  chief  efforts  of  the
Spaniards  were  directed  against  the  Austrian  dominions
in  Italy.  The  kingdom  of  Naples,  which  had  passed
under  Austrian  rule  during  the  War  of  the  Succession,
had,  as  we  have  seen,  been  restored  to  the  Spanish  line
in  the  war  which  ended  in  1740,  and  Don  Carlos,  who
ruled  it,  was  altogether  subservient  to  Spanish  policy.
The  Duke  of  Lorraine,  the  husband  of  Maria  Theresa,
was  sovereign  of  Tuscany ;  and  the  Austrian  possessions
consisted  of  the  Duchy  of  Milan  and  the  provinces  of
Mantua  and  Placentia.  They  were  garrisoned  at  the
opening  of  the  war  by  only  15,000  men,  and  their  most
dangerous  enemy  was  the  King  of  Sardinia,  who  had
gradually  extended  his  dominions  into  Lombardy,  and
whose  army  was,  probably,  the  largest  and  most  efficient
in  Italy.  '  The  Milanese,'  his  father  is  reported  to  have
said,  '  is  like  an  artichoke,  to  be  eaten  leaf  by  leaf,'  and
the  skill  and  perseverance  with  which  for  many  genera-

CH.  IV.  AUSTJUAN SUCCESSES.  7

tions  the  House  of  Savoy  pursued  that  policy,  have  in
our  own  day  had  their  reward.  Spanish  troops  had
landed  at  Naples  as  early  as  November  1741.  The  King
of  Sardinia,  the  Prince  of  Modena,  and  the  Eepublic  of
Genoa  were  on  the  same  side.  Venice  was  completely
neutral,  Tuscany  was  compelled  to  declare  herself  so,
and  a  French  army  was  soon  to  cross  the  Alps.  The
King  of  Sardinia,  however,  at  this  critical  moment,  was
alarmed  by  the  ambitious  projects  openly  avowed  by  the
Spaniards,  and  he  was  induced  by  English  influence  to
change  sides.  He  obtained  the  promise  of  certain  terri-
torial concessions  from  Austria,  and  of  an  annual  subsidy
of  200,000Z.  from  England ;  and  on  these  conditions  he
suddenly  marched  with  an  army  of  30,000  men  to  the
support  of  the  Austrians.  All  the  plans  of  the  con-
federates were  disconcerted  by  this  defection.  The
Spaniards  went  into  winter  quarters  near  Bologna  in
October,  fought  an  unsuccessful  battle  at  Oampo  Santo
in  the  following  February,  and  then  retired  to  Rimini,
leaving  Lombardy  in  complete  tranquillity.  The  British
fleet  in  the  Mediterranean  had  been  largely  strengthened
by  Carteret,  and  it  did  good  service  to  the  cause.  In
1742  it  burnt  a  Spanish  squadron  in  the  French  port  of
St.  Tropez,  compelled  the  King  of  Naples,  by  the  threat
bombardment,  to  withdraw  his  troops  from  the  Spanish
of  army,  and  sign  an  engagement  of  neutrality ,  destroyed
large  provisions  of  corn  collected  by  the  Genoese  for  the
Spanish  army,  and  cut  ofi"  that  army  from  all  communi-
cations by  sea.

The  same  good  fortune  attended  the  Austrians  in
every  field.  In  the  north,  Russia  was  completely  vic-
torious over  the  Swedes,  and  the  war  was  terminated  by
the  Peace  of  Abo  in  August  1743.  A  defensive  alliance,
concluded  between  Elizabeth  of  Russia  and  George  II.
of  England,  materially  diminished  the  influence  of  France
in  the  north  of  Europe,  and  a  considerable  sum  was  sent

b  ENGLAJSD IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  iv.

from  Russia  to  tlie  Queen  of  Hungary,  as  a  pledge  of
her  active  support.  In  May  1743  Bavaria,  whicii  had
been  reoccupied  by  its  sovereign  the  Emperor  in  the
October  of  the  preceding  year,  was  again  invaded,
and  it  was  soon  completely  subjugated.  Six  thousand
Bavarians,  with  their  baggage,  standards,  and  cannons,
were  captured  at  Erlbach.  A  French  army  under
Broglie  was  driven  beyond  the  Rhine.  Another  French
army  was  expelled  from  the  Upper  Palatinate.  Eger,
the  last  Bohemian  post  occupied  by  the  French,  was
blockaded,  and  in  September  it  fell.  The  unhappy
Emperor  fled  hastily  from  Munich,  and  being  defeated
on  all  sides,  and  having  no  hope  of  assistance,  he  signed
a  treaty  of  neutrality  by  which  he  renounced  all  preten-
sions to  the  Austrian  succession,  and  yielded  his  here-
ditary dominions  to  the  Queen  of  Hungary,  till  the
conclusion  of  a  general  peace.  His  army  was  with-
drawn to  Franconia,  and  he  himself  retired  to  Frank-
fort.

The  Peace  of  Breslau  had  been  chiefly  the  work  of
Carteret,^  and  he  disj)layed  equal  zeal  in  urging  the
Dutch  into  the  war.  This  object  was  at  last  so  far  ac-
complished that  they  very  reluctantly  consented  to  send
a  contingent  to  a  great  confederate  army  which  was
being  formed  in  Flanders,  under  the  direction  of  Eng-
land and  the  command  of  the  Earl  of  Stair,  for  the
purpose  of  acting  against  the  French,  and,  if  possible,
of  invading  France.  It  ultimately  consisted  of  some
44,000  men,  and  was  composed  of  about  an  equal
number  of  British  and  Hanoverian  soldiers,  of  6,000
Hessians,  in  English  pay,  and  of  a  contingent  of  Austrians
and  of  Dutch.  It  started  from  Flanders  in  February
1742-43,  marched  slowly  through  the  bishopric  of  Li^ge,
where  it  was  joined  by  the  Austrians,  under  the  Duke

•  Frederick,  Hist,  de  vion  Temps,  ch.  vii.

CH.  IV. GROWING UNPOPULARITY OF THE WAR.  9

of  Ahremberg,  and  by  16,000  Hanoverians  in  British
pay,  crossed  the  Rhine  on  May  14,  and  encamped  on
the  23rd  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Frankfort.  It  was,
however,  soon  after  hemmed  in  by  a  superior  French
force  under  Noailles.  The  defiles  above  Aschaffenburg
and  the  posts  of  the  Upper  Maine  were  occupied  by  the
French,  The  allies  were  out-manoeuvred  and  cut  off
from  succours,  and  their  difficulty  in  obtaining  pro-
visions was  so  great  that  a  capitulation  seemed  not
improbable.  Under  these  disastrous  circumstances,
George  II.,  accompanied  by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland
and  Carteret,  joined  the  army.  A  great  battle  was
fought  at  Dettingen,  on  June  27,  and  the  bravery  of
the  allied  forces  and  the  rashness  of  the  Duke  of  Gram-
mont,  which  disconcerted  the  plans  of  Noailles,  gave
the  victory  to  the  confederates,  extricated  the  army
from  its  embarrassments,  and  compelled  the  French  to
recross  the  Maine.  No  other  important  consequences
followed.  Innumerable  divisions  paralysed  the  army.
The  King  of  Prussia  showed  hostile  intentions.  The
other  German  princes  were  divided  in  their  views.  The
Dutch  discouraged  all  prosecution  of  the  war,  and
the  allied  forces,  after  successively  occupying  Hanau,
Worms,  and  Spire,  at  last  retired  to  wintei-  quarters  in
Flanders.  A  deadly  hostility  had  sprung  up  between
the  British  and  the  Hanoverian  troops,  and  public
opinion  at  home  was  now  violently  opposed  to  Carteret
and  to  the  war.

This  great  revulsion  of  feeling  is  to  be  ascribed  to
many  causes.  The  war  I  am  describing  was  one  of  the
most  tangled  and  complicated  upon  record,  but  amidst
all  its  confused  episodes  and  various  objects,  one  great
change  was  apparent.  It  had  been  a  war  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  and  of  the  integrity
of  Austria.  It  had  become  a  war  for  the  conquest  and
dismemberment  of  France. Few  sovereigns  have  been

10 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

more  deeply  injured  than  Maria  Theresa,  and  her
haughty,  ambitious,  and  somewhat  vindictive  nature,
now  flushed  with  a  succession  of  conquests,  was  burning
to  retaliate  upon  her  enemies.  She  desired  to  deprive
the  Emperor  of  the  imperial  crown,  and  to  place  it  on
the  head  of  her  husband,  to  annex  Bavaria  permanently
to  the  Austrian  dominions,  to  wrest  Alsace  and  Lor-
raine from  France,  and  Naples  from  the  Spanish  line ;
and  if  it  was  in  her  power  she  would  undoubtedly  have
attempted  to  recover  Silesia.  Her  impracticable  temper
and  her  ambitious  views  had  become  the  chief  obstacle
to  the  pacification  of  Europe.  She  had  scornfully  re-
jected the  overtures  of  Fleury  for  peace.  She  refused,
in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  England,  to  grant  the
Emperor  a  definite  peace,  although  he  asked  only  the
recognition  of  his  perfectly  legal  title  as  Emperor  of
Germany,  and  the  security  of  his  old  hereditary  domi-
nions. She  long  refused  to  grant  the  King  of  Sardinia
the  concessions  that  had  been  promised,  and  it  was  not
until  a  whole  summer  had  been  wasted,  and  until  the
King  had  threatened  to  go  over  to  her  enemies,  that  she
consented,  in  September  1743,  to  sign  the  Treaty  of
Worms.  By  this  treaty  she  at  last  relinquished  in  his
favour  her  pretensions  to  the  Marquisate  of  Finale,
which  was  then  in  the  possession  of  the  Genoese,  ceded
Placentia  and  some  small  districts  in  Austrian  Italy,
and  made  an  ofiensive  alliance  with  the  King  for  the
prosecution  of  the  war.  Her  present  object  was  the
invasion  of  France  by  two  great  armies,  that  of  Prince
Charles,  which  was  massed  upon  the  frontiers  of  Alsace,
and  that  of  the  confederates,  who  had  taken  up  their
quarters  at  Hanau  and  Worms.

England  had  gone  far  in  supporting  her  in  this
policy,  but  it  was  open  to  the  very  gravest  objections.
It  was  one  thing  to  fulfil  the  obligations  of  a  distinct
treaty  and  to  prevent  the  dismemberment  of  an  empire

CH.  IV.  ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE WAR,  11

which  was  essential  to  the  balance  of  power.  It  was  quite
another  thing  to  support  Austria  in  projects  of  aggran-
disement which  alarmed  all  the  conservative  instincts  of
Europe,  and  could  only  be  realised  by  a  long,  bloody,  and
expensive  war.  England  had  entered  into  the  struggle
as  a  mere  auxiliary  and  for  a  definite  purpose,  and
her  mission  might  reasonably  be  looked  upon  as  fulfilled.
Silesia  had,  it  is  true,  been  ceded  to  Prussia,  but  both  the
Emperor  and  France  would  have  been  perfectly  willing
to  accept  a  peace  leaving  the  Queen  of  Hungary  in  un-
disturbed possession  of  all  the  remainder  of  the  Austrian
dominions.  It  was  maintained,  and  surely  with  reason,
that  England  should  have  insisted  on  the  acceptance  of
such  a  peace,  and  that  if  she  could  not  induce  Maria
Theresa  to  acquiesce,  she  should  at  least  herself  have
withdrawn  from  the  war.^  She  had  not  done  so.  She
had,  on  the  contrary,  plunged  more  and  more  deeply
into  continental  affairs.  By  the  Treaty  of  Worms  she
bound  herself  to  continue  the  subsidy  of  the  Eang  of
Sardinia.  She  was  still  paying  Austrian  troops,  and  a
secret  convention  binding  her  to  continue  the  subsidy  to
the  Queen  of  Hungary,  '  as  long  as  the  war  should  con-
tinue, or  the  necessity  of  her  afiairs  should  require,'  as
well  as  a  project  for  bestowing  a  subsidy  on  the  Emperor,
on  condition  of  his  joining  the  Austrians  against  his
allies  the  French,  had  both  been  recently  proposed  by
Carteret  and  the  King,  and  had  only  been  defeated  by
the  Pelham  influence  at  home.  The  army  of  Flanders
was  an  English  creation,  and  most  of  its  soldiers  were
either  English  or  in  English  pay.  By  forming  it,  Eng-
land had  completely  abandoned  the  wise  policy  of  con-
fining herself  as  much  as  possible  to  maritime  warfare,
and  she  had  also,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  wishes  of

*  See these arguments powerfully  stated  in  a speech by Pitt,
Dec.  1,  1743  {Anecdotes  of  Chatham,  vol.  i.).

12 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch,  iv.

the  Dutch,  added  very  seriously  to  the  dangers  of  the
war  by  gratuitously  attracting  it  towards  the  Dutch
barrier.

But  that  which  made  the  war  most  unpopular  was
the  alleged  subordination  of  English  to  Hanoverian
interests.  On  no  other  subject  was  English  public
opinion  so  sensitive,  and  the  orators  of  the  Opposition
exerted  all  their  powers  to  inflame  the  feeling.  The
invective  of  Pitt,  who  declared  that  '  it  was  now  too
apparent  that  this  great,  this  powerful,  this  formidable
kingdom  is  considered  only  as  a  province  to  a  des-
picable Electorate ; '  the  sarcasm  of  Chesterfield,  who
suggested  that  the  one  effectual  method  of  destroying
Jacobitism  would  be  to  bestow  Hanover  on  the  Pre-
tender, as  the  English  people  would  never  again  tolerate
a  ruler  from  that  country ;  the  bitter  witticism  of  a
popular  pamphleteer,^  who,  alluding  to  the  white  horse
in  the  arms  of  Hanover,  selected  for  his  motto  the  text
in  the  Revelation,  '  I  looked,  and  behold  a  pale  horse,
and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and  Hell
followed,'  only  represented  in  an  emphatic  form  the
common  sentiment  both  of  the  army  and  of  the  people.
The  English  and  Hanoverians  who  fought  side  by
side  at  Dettingen,  probably  hated  each  other  more
intensely  than  they  hated  the  French,  and  the  alleged
partiality  of  the  King  to  the  Hanoverians  even  led
to  the  angry  resignation  of  Lord  Stair.

It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  amid  much  misre-
presentation and  exaggeration  there  was  some  real
ground  of  complaint,  and  that  England,  as  was  said,
was  too  often  '  steered  by  a  Hanoverian  rudder.'  As
the  sovereign  of  a  small  continental  state  constantly
exposed  to  French  ambition,  as  a  German  prince  keenly
interested  in  German  politics,  and  especially  anxious

'  Dr.  Shebbear.

CH.  IV.  THE HANOVERIAN TROOPS.  13

to  have  no  superior  in  Germany  except  the  Emperor,
George  II.  had  a  far  stronger  interest  in  desiring,  at  one
time  the  invasion  and  dismemberment  of  France,  and
at  another  the  repression  of  the  growing  power  of
Prussia,  than  he  could  have  had  as  a  mere  sovereign  of
England.  The  Electorate  lay  nearest  his  heart.  Hano-
verian interests  undoubtedly  coloured  his  foreign  policy,
and  he  had  a  strong  disposition  to  employ  the  resources
of  his  kingdom  in  the  interests  of  his  Electorate.  The
manner  in  which  in  the  former  reign  England  had  been
embroiled  with  both  Sweden  and  Russia  on  account  of
Bremen  and  Verden,  the  Treaty  of  Hanover,  the  ex-
aggerated German  subsidies  which  had  followed  it,  and
the  undoubted  fact  that  many  of  those  subsidies  were
rendered  necessary  only  by  the  position  of  Hanover,
had  already  produced  a  jealousy  which  the  events  of
the  new  war  greatly  increased.  The  treaty  of  neutrality
was  regarded  as  a  disgraceful  abandonment,  and  the  pro-
longation of  the  war,  the  attempted  multiplication  of
German  subsidies,  and  the  too  frequent  custom  of  taking
important  resolutions,  affecting  England,  on  the  Con-
tinent with  little  or  no  consultation  with  the  English
ministers,  were  all  cited  as  examples  of  the  partiality  of
the  King.  The  most  flagrant  case,  however,  was  his
determination  to  throw  the  chief  expense  of  the  Hano-
verian army,  in  time  of  war,  upon  England.  After  the
Treaty  of  Breslau  he  declared  his  intention  of  reducing
the  Hanoverian  army  to  its  peace  footing,  as  his  Ger-
man dominions  were  then  unmolested,  and  the  expense
was  too  great  for  their  resources,  and  his  ministers  in
England  then  proceeded  to  prevent  this  measure  by
taking  16,000  Hanoverian  troops  into  British  pay.  No
measure  of  the  time  excited  such  violent  hostility,  and
the  intervention  of  Lord  Orford  was  required  to  carry  it.
Pitt  openly  declared  that  the  interest  of  England  im-
peratively required  complete  separation  from  Hanover.

14 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  rv.

In  the  House  of  Lords  twenty-four  peers  signed  a  pro-
test against  it,  in  language  so  bitterly  offensive  to  the
Sovereign  that  it  almost  savoured  of  revolution.  They
stated  that  some  of  the  Hanoverian  troops  had  refused
to  form  the  first  line  at  Dettingen,  that  others  disobeyed
the  English  general  after  the  battle,  that  the  greater
number,  '  not  contented  to  avoid  being  of  any  use  either
in  front  or  in  the  rear,  determined  to  be  of  use  nowhere,
and  halted  as  soon  as  they  came  within  sight  and  reach
of  the  battle,  though  pressed  by  the  British  ofiicers,  and
invited  by  the  British  soldiers,  to  share  the  glory,  and
complete,  as  they  might  have  done,  the  victory  of  the
day.'  They  contended  that  '  the  future  co-operation  of
our  national  troops  with  these  mercenaries  has  been
rendered  impracticable,  and  even  theii'  meeting  dan-
gerous ; '  they  complained  of  '  the  many  instances  of
partiality  by  which  the  Hanoverians  were  unhappily
distinguished,  and  our  brave  fellow-subjects,  the  British
forces,  undeservedly  discouraged  ; '  of  '  the  constant
preference '  given  to  the  former  '  in  quarters,  forage,
&c. ; '  of  the  fact  that  '  the  Hanoverian  Guards  had  for
some  days  done  duty  upon  his  Majesty  at  Aschaffen-
burg,'  which,  they  added,  '  we  look  upon  as  the  highest
dishonour  to  his  Majesty  and  this  nation ; '  of  '  the
abject  flattery  and  criminal  misrepresentation  which
this  partiality,  blameless  in  itself,  has  unhappily  given
occasion  to,  and  by  which  in  its  turn  it  has  been
fomented  ; '  of  the  many  instances  '  wherein  the  blood
and  treasure  of  this  nation  have  been  lavishly  employed
when  no  British  interest,  and,  as  we  conceive,  some
foreign  interest  alone,  was  concerned.'  That  '  the  in-
terests of  one  country  are  carried  on  in  subordination
to  those  of  another,  constitutes,'  they  said,  '  the  true
and  mortifying  definition  of  a  province,'  and  they
insinuated,  in  no  obscure  terms,  that  England  was
actually in this position, that '  an inferior  German

CH.  IV. UNPOPULARITY  OF  CARTERET.  15

principality  was  really,  and  Great  Britain  only  nomi-
nally, the  director  '  of  the  policy  of  the  Empire.^

Pamphlets,  the  most  remarkable  of  which  were  as-
ciibed  to  the  pen  of  Chesterfield,  containing  similar
accusations  in  even  stronger  language,  were  widely
circulated,^  and  no  agitation  was  necessary  to  streng-then
the  indignation  at  the  German  policy  of  the  Court.  Of
that  policy  Carteret  was  the  special  representative.  He
was  usually  abroad  with  the  King.  He  based  his
power  chiefly  on  his  influence  upon  the  Bang's  mind,  he
cordially  threw  himself  into  the  King's  views  about  the
German  war,  and  he  aimed  at  a  German  coalition,  for
the  purpose  of  wresting  Alsace  and  Lorraine  from
France,  and  thus  compensating  Maria  Theresa  for  the
loss  of  Silesia.  His  arrogance  or  recklessness  offended
all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  Newcastle,  espe-
cially, he  treated  with  habitual  insolence,  and  he  con-
temptuously neglected  that  traffic  in  places  which  was
then  so  essential  to  political  power. He  speedily  be-

'  Uogevs'  Protest  of  the  Lords,  "Sir,  it  will  be  as  a  message
ii.  37-42.  Speaker  Onslow  re-  from  Heaven."  He  replied,  "  It
lates  the  following  remarkable  will  be  done,"  but  it  was  not
dialogue  with  Walpole  on  the  done,  and  I  have  good  reason  to
subject.  '  A  little  while  before  believe  it  would  have  been  op-
Sir  E.  Walpole's  fall,  and  as  a  posed  and  rejected  at  this  time,
popular  act  to  save  himself  (for  because  it  came  from  him,  and
he  went  very  unwilhngly  out  of  by  the  means  of  those  who  had
his  offices  and  power),  he  took  always  been  most  clamorous  for
me  one  day  aside  and  said :  it.' — Speaker  Onslow's  remarks,
"What  will  you  say.  Speaker,  if  in  Coxe's  Walpole,  ii.  571,  572.
this  hand  of  mine  shall  bring  a  "  See  The  Case  of  the  Hanover
message  from  the  King  to  the  Troops,  the  Interest  of  Hanover,
House  of  Commons  declaring  his  the  Vindication  of  the  Case  of  the
consent  to  having  any  of  his  Hanover  Troops.  A  curious  col-
family  after  his  own  death  to  be  lection  of  passages  from  the  prin-
made  by  Act  of  Parliament  in-  cipal  pamphlets  against  these
capable  of  inheriting  and  en-  troops  will  be  found  in  Faction
joying  the  crown  and  possessing  Defeated  hy  the  Evidence  of
the  Electoral  dominions  at  the  Facts,  pp.  124,  125  (7th  ed,).
same  time?" My  answer  was  :

16 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

came  the  most  unpopular  man  in  the  country,  and  his
unpopularity  was  not  atoned  for  by  any  very  splendid
success.  There  was  undoubtedly  abundance  of  vigour,
and  considerable  ability,  displayed  in  the  measures  I
have  enumerated  5  but  Carteret  did  not,  like  Pitt,  pos-
sess the  art  of  inspiring  the  nation  or  the  army  with  a
high  military  enthusiasm,  of  selecting  the  ablest  men
for  the  most  important  commands,  or  of  directing  his
blows  against  the  most  vulnerable  points  of  the  enemy.
The  formation  of  the  army  of  Flanders  was  probably  a
mistake.  The  issue  of  the  campaign  was  miserably
abortive,  and  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  New-
castle judged  wisely  in  refusing  to  associate  England
with  a  project  for  the  invasion  and  the  dismemberment
of  France.

Under  these  circumstances  a  conflict  between  the
two  sections  of  the  Government  was  inevitable.  Lord
Wilmington  died  in  July  1743,  having  held  the  chief
power  for  little  more  than  sixteen  months.  Lord  Bath,
who  clearly  perceived  the  mistake  he  had  made  in  de-
clining office,  now  eagerly  aspired  to  the  vacant  place,
and  he  was  warmly  supported  by  Carteret,  who  designed
to  retain  for  himself  the  direction  of  the  war,  and  to
strengthen  his  position  by  bringing  into  office  a  con-
siderable number  of  Tories.  Bath  was  personally  al-
most equally  obnoxious  to  the  King  and  to  the  people,
but  the  influence  of  Carteret  over  the  royal  mind  was
so  great  that  he  would  probably  have  gained  his  point
had  not  the  pojoular  clamour  been  supported  by  the  still
powerful  voice  of  Orfoi'd,  who  represented  to  the  King
the  danger  of  admitting  Tories  to  office,  and  the  ex-
treme and  growing  unpopularity  of  his  Government.
By  the  influence  of  the  old  statesman,  the  Pelham
interest  became  supreme,  Henry  Pelham  obtaining  the
position  of  Prime  Minister.  Being  the  younger  brother
of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  he  was  supported  by  a  vast

CH.  IV.  THE PELHAM MINISTRY.  17

amount  of  family  and  borough  influence,  and  without
any  great  or  shining  talents  he  succeeded  in  playing  a
very  considerable  part  in  English  history.  He  had
been  first  brought  into  office  chiefly  by  the  recommenda-
tion of  Walpole,  had  supported  his  patron  faithfully  in
the  contest  about  the  excise,  and  in  the  disastrous
struggle  of  1740  and  1741,  and  was  looked  upon  as  the
natural  heir  of  his  policy.  Like  Walpole,  he  had  none
of  the  talents  that  are  necessary  for  the  successful  con-
duct of  war,  and  was,  perhaps  for  that  very  reason,
warmly  in  favour  of  peace.  Like  Walpole,  too,  he  was
thoroughly  conversant  with  questions  of  finance,  and
almost  uniformly  successful  in  dealing  with  them.  A
timid,  desponding,  and  somewhat  fretful  man,  with  little
energy  either  of  character  or  intellect,  he  possessed  at
least,  to  a  high  degree,  good  sense,  industry,  knowledge
of  business,  and  parliamentary  experience ;  his  manners
were  conciliatory  and  decorous,  and  he  was  content  to
hold  the  reins  of  power  very  loosely,  freely  admitting
competitors  to  office,  and  allowing  much  divergence  of
opinion.  Lord  Hardwicke,  the  greatest  lawyer  of  his
day,  and  one  of  the  greatest  who  ever  took  part  in
English  politics,  was  his  warm  friend,  and  he  attached
to  liis  cause  both  Chesterfield  and  Pitt.  After  a  pro-
tracted struggle  in  the  Cabinet,  Carteret,  who,  by  the
death  of  his  mother,  had  become  Lord  Granville,  was
compelled  to  yield,  and  resigned  office  in  November
1744.

The  ascendency  of  the  Pelhams  in  England,  how-
ever, was  far  from  leading  to  peace.  On  the  contrary,
in  no  other  stage  of  the  war  did  the  martial  energies  of
Europe  blaze  so  fiercely  or  extend  so  widely  as  in  1744
or  1745.  The  death  of  Fleury  removed  the  chief  pacific
influence  from  the  councils  of  France ;  and  Cardinal
Tencin,  who  succeeded  him,  and  who  is  said  to  have
obtained his  hat  by  the  friendship  of  the  Pretender,

VOL. II.  C

18 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  IV.

resolved  to  signalise  his  government  by  the  invasion  of
England.  15,000  men,  under  the  command  of  Mar-
shal Saxe,  were  assembled  for  that  purpose  at  Dunkirk.
A  powerful  fleet  sailed  from  Brest  and  Rochefort  for
their  protection,  and  the  young  Pretender  arrived  from
Rome  to  accompany  the  expedition.  In  England  every
preparation  was  made  for  a  deadly  struggle.  The  forts
on  the  Thames  and  Med  way  were  strengthened.  Several
regiments  were  marched  to  the  southern  coast;  the
Kentish  Militia  were  put  under  arms  ;  troops  were  re-
called from  the  Netherlands,  and  application  was  made
to  the  States-General  for  the  6,000  men  which  in  case  of
invasion  Holland  was  bound  by  treaty  to  furnish.  For
a  few  weeks  party  warfare  almost  ceased,  but  in  order
to  guard  against  eveiy  attempt  at  rebellion,  the  Habeas
Corpus  Act  was  suspended,  and  a  proclamation  issued
for  enforcing  the  laws  against  Papists  and  Nonjurors.
Towards  the  end  of  February  1744,  the  French  fleet  ap-
peared in  the  Channel ;  and,  perceiving  no  enemy,  the
commander  sent  ofl"  a  rapid  message  to  Dunkirk,  to
hasten  the  embarkation,  and  soon  after  anchored  ofl"
Dungeness  Point.  At  this  critical  moment  the  English
fleet,  which  was  greatly  superior  in  numbers,  doubled
the  South  Foreland.  An  action  seemed  imminent,  but
wind  and  tide  were  both  unfavourable,  and  Sir  John
Norris,  who  commanded  the  English,  resolved  to  post-
pone it  till  the  morrow.  That  night  a  great  tempest
arose,  before  which  the  French  fleet  fled  in  safety,  but
which  scattered  far  and  wide  the  transports,  and  put
an  end  for  the  present  to  all  projects  of  invasion.

It  is  a  somewhat  curious  coincidence,  that,  almost  at
the  same  time  when  a  French  fleet  escaped  from  the
English  in  the  Channel,  another  fleet  had  a  similar  for-
tune in  the  Mediterranean.  The  combined  fleet  of  the
French  and  Spaniards  was  blockaded  in  Toulon  by  the
British,  under  Admiral  Matthews. On  February  9  it

CH.  IV.  THE WAR IN 1744.  19

sailed  from  the  harbour,  and  a  general  engagement
ensued.  The  battle  on  the  part  of  the  English  officers
appears  to  have  been  grossly  mismanaged  ;  and  the  mis-
management was  in  a  great  degree  due  to  a  deadly-
feud,  which  prevented  all  cordial  co-operation  between
the  commander  and  the  Vice-Admiral  Lestock.  Night
closed  on  the  action  without  any  decisive  result,  but
next  morning  the  fleet  of  the  enemy  was  in  flight.  A
pursuit  was  ordered,  and  the  Vice-Admiral  had  gained
considerably  upon  the  fugitives,  when  the  EngHsh  ships
were  somewhat  unaccountably  ordered  to  return,  and
the  enemy  made  their  way  in  safety  to  Carthagena  and
Alicante.  The  escape  of  these  two  fleets  threw  much
discredit  upon  the  naval  enterprise  of  England,  and  the
Admiral  and  Vice-Admiral  of  the  Mediterranean  fleet
mutually  accused  each  other.  There  appear  to  have
been  grave  faults  on  both  sides  ;  but  the  decision  of  the
court-martial  was  given  against  Admiral  Matthews,  who
was  removed  from  the  service,  and  several  commanders
of  ships  were  cashiered.

England  and  France,  though  taking  a  leading  part
in  the  war,  had  hitherto  been  engaged  only  as  auxiliaries,
and,  though  they  had  met  in  so  many  fields,  they  were
still  nominally  at  peace.  This  unnatural  state  of  things
now  terminated.  In  March  1744  France  declared  war
against  England,  and  in  April  against  Austria,  and  she  at
the  same  time  prepared  to  throw  her  full  energies  upon
the  Austrian  Netherlands.  A  French  army  of  about
80,000  men,  under  the  able  leadership  of  Marshal  Saxe,
animated  by  the  presence  of  Lewis  XV.,  and  accompanied
by  a  train  of  artillery  that  was  said  to  have  been  superior
to  any  hitherto  known,  poured  over  the  frontier,  and
was  everywhere  victorious.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that
among  its  officers,  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  and  suc-
cessful was  by  profession  a  Churchman.  The  Prince  of
Clermont,  the  great-grandson  of  the  illustrious  Conde,

0  2

20 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

Was  the  Abbe  of  St.  Germain  des  Pres,  but  the  Pope,
Clement  XII.,  gave  him  a  dispensation  to  take  part  in
the  war,  and  he  directed  the  principal  attacks  upon  the
fortress  of  Ypres.  The  allies  were  weak,  divided,  and
incapable.  In  two  months,  Ypres,  Courtrai,  Menin,  and
Purnes  were  taken,  and  the  whole  of  the  Low  Countries
would  probably  have  been  conquered,  had  not  the  in-
vaders been  arrested  by  sinister  news  from  Alsace.

That  province  had  been  left  under  the  protection  of
Marshal  Coigny,  and  of  the  Bavarian  General  Secken-
dorf,  whose  combined  armies  were  believed  to  be  suffi-
cient to  guard  the  passes  of  the  Rhine.  General
Khevenhiiller  had  died  in  the  previous  winter;  but
Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine,  who  commanded  the  Aus-
trians,  and  who  was  accompanied  by  Marshal  Traun,  one
of  the  ablest  soldiers  in  the  Austrian  service,  succeeded
in  deceiving  his  enemies,  and  his  army  in  three  bodies
crossed  the  Rhine.  The  war  raged  fiercely  around  Spire,
Weissenburg,  and  Saveme,  in  that  unhappy  country
which  has  been  fated  in  so  many  contests  to  be  the
battle-field  of  Europe.  The  Austrians,  with  an  army  of
60,000  men,  eflected  a  secure  lodgment  in  Alsace,  and
advanced  to  the  frontiers  of  Lorraine  ;  and  the  French
king,  leaving  Marshal  Saxe  with  30,000  men,  to  main-
tain his  conquests  in  the  Netherlands,  hastened  with  the
remainder  of  the  army  to  its  relief.  The  King  fell  ill  at
Metz,  and  appeared  for  a  time  at  the  point  of  death,  but
after  a  somewhat  dangerous  delay,  his  troops  arrived  by
forced  marches  in  Alsace,  which  seemed  destined  to  be
the  scene  of  the  decisive  struggle  of  the  year,  when  a
new  enemy  suddenly  appeared  in  the  field,  and  again
diverted  the  course  of  the  war.

This  enemy  was  Frederick  of  Prussia.  No  prince  of
his  time  perceived  his  interests  more  clearly,  or  acted  on
them  with  such  combined  secrecy,  energy,  and  skill ;  and
as  he  was  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  best  armies  in  Europe,

CH.  IV.  FREDERICK RENEWS HOSTILITIES.  21

and  as  it  cost  Mm  nothing  to  break  a  treaty  or  to  aban-
don an  ally,  he  succeeded  in  a  very  great  degree  in
making  himself  the  arbiter  of  the  war.  By  the  Peace  of
Breslau  he  had  once  already  suddenly  changed  its  for-
tunes, and  brought  about  the  almost  complete  destruc-
tion of  one  of  the  armies  of  the  ally  whom  he  had  de-
serted, and  he  had  hitherto  resisted  all  overtures  to  break
the  peace.  He  calculated,  as  he  himself  informs  us,
that  'the  longer  the  war  should  continue  the  more
would  the  resources  of  the  House  of  Austria  be  ex-
hausted, while  the  longer  Prussia  remained  at  peace
the  more  strength  she  would  acquire.'  But,  on  the
other  hand,  it  was  one  of  his  maxims  that  'it  is  a
capital  error  in  politics  to  trust  a  reconciled  enemy ; '
and  there  was  much  in  the  present  aspect  of  affairs  to
excite  both  his  cupidity  and  his  fears.  He  was  alarmed
by  the  ascendency  the  Austrians  had  obtained  in  Alsace,
and  by  the  prospect  of  the  annexation  of  Lorraine  ;  by
the  growing  ambition  of  the  Queen  of  Hungary,  which
made  it  peculiarly  unlikely  that  she  would  permanently
acquiesce  in  the  alienation  of  Silesia,  and  by  intelligence
that  Saxony  had  agreed  to  join  in  the  league  against
France.  It  was  a  suspicious  circumstance  that  the
Treaty  of  Worms,  while  enumerating  and  guaranteeing
many  other  treaties,  had  made  no  mention  of  the  Peace
of  Breslau,  by  which  he  held  Silesia ;  and  George  II.
was  reported  to  have  used  some  language  implying  that
he,  at  least,  would  not  be  reluctant  to  see  that  province
restored.  Even  before  the  close  of  1743  Frederick
had  been  in  secret  negotiation  with  France,  and  the
events  in  Alsace  strengthened  his  determination,  Maria
Theresa  had  not  committed  the  smallest  act  since  the
Peace  of  Breslau  that  could  be  construed  into  hostility
to  Prussia,  but  Frederick  concluded,  with  reason,  that
she  had  never  forgiven  his  past  treachery,  and  he  feared
that  if  she  became  too  strong,  she  would  endeavour  to

22 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH,  IV,

drive  him  from  Silesia.  This  might  be  the  result  if  she
were  victorious  in  Alsace.  It  might  be  equally  the  re-
sult if  France,  alarmed  at  her  progress,  made  peace,  and
retired  from  the  war.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wars  of
Alsace,  the  Netherlands,  and  Italy  had  left  the  Austrian
provinces  almost  undefended,  and  the  King  saw  the
possibility  of  effecting  a  new  spoliation  by  annexing  a
portion  of  Bohemia  to  his  dominions.  After  some  un-
successfal  negotiation  with  Russia,  he  signed  secret
conventions  with  the  Emperor,  Prance,  the  Elector
Palatine,  and  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse ;  and  engaged  to
invade  Bohemia,  stipulating  that  a  considerable  portion
of  that  country  which  adjoined  Silesia  should  be  annexed
to  his  dominions.  In  August  1 744  he  issued  a  mani-
festo, declaring  that  he  had  taken  arms  to  support  the
rights  of  the  Emperor,  to  defend  the  liberty  and  restore
the  peace  of  the  Germanic  Empire.  He  marched
through  Saxony,  in  defiance  of  the  wishes  of  the  Elector,
invaded  Bohemia,  captured  Prague,  with  its  entire
garrison,  on  September  16,  and  speedily  reduced  all
Bohemia  to  the  east  of  the  Moldau.  At  the  same  time
a  united  army  of  Bavarians  and  Hessians  expelled  the
Austrians  from  the  greater  part  of  Bavaria,  and  on
October  22  reinstated  the  Emperor  in  Munich.

At  this  point,  however,  his  usual  good  fortune  aban-
doned Frederick.  Maria  Theresa  again  fled  to  Hungary,
and  was  again  received  with  an  enthusiasm  that  com-
pletely disconcerted  her  enemies.  An  army  of  44,000
men  was  speedily  equipped  in  Hungary,  while  on  the
other  side  Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine  and  Marshal  Traun
hastened  to  abandon  Alsace,  effected,  with  scarcely  any
loss,  a  masterly  retreat  over  the  Rhine,  in  the  presence
of  the  united  French  army,  and  marched  rapidly  upon
Bohemia.  The  irregular  troops,  which  played  so  pro-
minent a  part  in  Austrian  warfare,  assisted  as  they  were
by  the  good  wishes  of  the  whole  population,  and  by  the

CH.  IV.  WAR  IN BOHEMIA AND ITALY.  23

nature  of  the  country,  soon  reduced  the  Prussians  to
extreme  distress.  The  villages  were  deserted.  No
peasant  came  to  the  camp  to  sell  provisions.  The  de-
files of  the  mountains  that  surround  Bohemia  swarmed
with  hussars  and  Croats,  who  intercepted  convoys  and
cut  off  intelligence  ;  and  their  success  was  so  great  that
on  one  occasion  the  King  and  army  remained  for  four
weeks  absolutely  without  news.  To  add  to  their  disas-
ters, 20,000  Saxon  troops  marched  to  the  assistance  of
Prince  Charles,  while  a  severe  winter  greatly  aggravated
the  sufferings  of  the  invaders.  A  rapid  retreat  became
necessary,  and  the  Prussians  were  compelled  to  abandon
all  their  conquests,  and  to  retire  broken,  baffled  and
dispirited  into  Silesia.  The  French  and  the  Emperor
were  the  only  gainers.  Marshal  Saxe  maintained  his
position  in  the  Netherlands.  Alsace  was  freed  from  its
invaders,  and  the  French,  crossing  the  Rhine,  laid  siege  to
the  important  town  of  Friburg.  The  Austrian  General
Damnitz  defended  it  for  thirty-five  days,  till  it  was  little
more  than  a  mass  of  ruins,  and  till  half  the  garrison  and
15,000  of  the  besiegers  had  been  killed;  and  its  cap-
ture concluded  the  campaign.

While  these  events  were  happening  in  Germany,
Italy  also  was  the  theatre  of  a  bloody,  desolating,  but
utterly  indecisive  war.  Maria  Theresa  and  the  King  of
Sardinia  were  now  professedly  united,  but  they  insisted
on  pursuing  separate  ends.  The  interests  of  the  King
were  in  the  north,  and  his  immediate  object  was  the
conquest  of  Finale.  The  Austrians,  on  the  other  hand,
drove  the  Spaniards  southwards  from  near  Eimini  to  the
Neapolitan  frontier,  when  the  King  of  Naples,  breaking
the  neutrality  he  had  signed,  marched  to  the  war  with
an  army  of  15,000  men.  The  Austrians,  outnumbered
and  baffled,  made  one  daring  effort  to  retrieve  their
fortunes,  and  succeeded,  in  the  night  of  August  10,  in
surprising  the  head-quarters  of  the  King  of  Naples  at

24 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

Velletri.  The  King  and  the  Duke  of  Modena  were  all
but  killed,  and  a  long  and  most  bloody  fight  ensued.  At
last  the  Austrians,  who  had  been  disorganised  by  the
opportunities  of  plunder,  gave  way,  and  the  victory  re-
mained with  the  allies.  The  malaria  arising  from  the
Pontine  marshes  soon  did  its  work  among  the  German
soldiers,  and  in  November  the  army  retired,  in  a  greatly
reduced  condition,  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Rimini,  while
their  enemies  were  quartered  between  Viterbo  and  Oivita
Vecchia.  The  King  of  Sardinia,  in  the  meantime,  was
engaged  in  a  desperate  contest  with  an  invading  army
of  French  and  Spaniards,  which  forced  its  way  through
Nice,  fighting  almost  at  every  step,  invested  Coni,  and
defeated  a  large  force  that  was  sent  to  its  relief.  Genoa
would  have  assisted  the  invaders,  but  was  intimidated  by
the  English  fleet ;  and,  in  spite  of  many  successes,  the
French  were  unable  to  take  Coni,  and  on  the  approach
of  winter  they  recrossed  the  Alps,  having  lost,  it  is  said,
not  less  than  10,000  men  in  the  campaign.

So  ended  the  year  1744,  during  which  a  fearful
sum  of  human  misery  had  been  inflicted  on  the  world.
Bohemia,  Bavaria,  the  Austrian  Netherlands  and  Italy
had  been  desolated  by  hostile  forces.  Tens  of  thousands
of  lives  had  been  sacrificed,  millions  of  pounds  had  been
uselessly  squandered,  all  the  interests  of  civilisation  and
industry  had  been  injured  or  neglected,  but  it  can
scarcely  be  said  that  a  single  important  result  had  been
achieved.  The  relative  forces  of  the  belligerents  at  the
end  of  the  year  were  almost  the  same  as  they  had  been
at  the  beginning,  and  there  was  as  yet  no  sign  of  the
approach  of  peace.

In  1745,  however,  the  clouds  began  in  some  degree
to  break.  On  January  8,  an  oflfensive  alliance  was  con-
cluded between  England,  Holland,  Austria,  and  Saxony,
by  which  the  King  of  Poland  agreed,  as  Elector  of
Saxony,  to  furnish 30,000 troops  for  the  defence  of

CM.  IV.  EVENTS OF 1745.  25

Bohemia  on  condition  of  receiving  asubsidy  of  100,000^.
from  England,  and  of  50,000/.  from  Holland.  On
January  20  the  Emperor  Charles  VII.  died,  broken
alike  by  sorrow  and  by  sickness;  and  the  young
Elector,  refusing  to  become  a  candidate  for  the  Imperial
dignity,  made  earnest  overtures  for  peace.  The  Duke
of  Lorraine,  the  husband  of  Maria  Theresa,  was  candi-
date for  the  Empire,  and  the  Elector  agreed  to  support
him,  to  withdraw  his  troops  from  the  war,  and  to  re-
cognise the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  provided  his  Bavarian
dominions  were  secured,  and  the  validity  of  his  father's
election  was  recognised.  On  April  22  a  peace  between
Austria  and  Bavaria  was  signed  on  these  conditions  at
Fiissen,  and  in  September,  to  the  great  disappointment
of  French  politicians,  the  Imperial  dignity  reverted  to
the  House  of  Austria  by  the  almost  unanimous  election
of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  as  Emperor  of  Germany.  Still
more  important  was  the  peace  between  Austria  and
Prussia,  which  was  negotiated  at  the  end  of  the  year.  As
may  very  easily  be  understood,  Maria  Theresa  felt  towards
Frederick  more  bitterly  than  towards  any  other  enemy.
The  recovery  of  Silesia  was  the  object  now  nearest
her  heart.  Upon  the  failure  of  Frederick's  last  cam-
paign the  war  had  been  carried  into  that  province,  and,
as  all  the  forces  that  had  been  employed  in  Alsace  were
directed  to  its  conquest,  success  appeared  very  probable.
The  reputation  of  Frederick  was  lowered  by  defeat.  The
French  were  concentrating  all  their  efforts  upon  the
Netherlands.  Bavaria  had  seceded  from  the  war,  and
the  King  of  Poland,  having  at  last  extorted  from  Maria
Theresa  the  promise  of  some  territorial  cessions  in  Silesia
in  the  event  of  success,  now  threw  himself  heartily  into
the  struggle.  The  extraordinary  military  abilities  of
the  Prussian  king,  and  the  strenuous  exertions  of  the
Pelham  ministry  in  favour  of  peace,  overcame  this
combination. After  several  inconsiderable  skirmishes,

26 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

Frederick,  on  June  3,  defeated  the  Austrians  tinder
Prince  Charles  in  the  great  battle  of  Hohenfriedberg,
and  soon  after  followed  them  in  their  retreat  into
Bohemia.  England  then  urgently  interposed  in  favour
of  peace.  Her  ambassador  urged  that  the  Austrian
Netherlands  would  inevitably  succumb  before  the  French
if  the  German  war  continued,  and  he  represented  how
impossible  it  was  for  England  to  continue  the  payment
of  subsidies  to  the  allies,  which  in  this  year  amounted
to  not  less  than  1,178,753?.  The  Queen  refusing  to
yield,  England  for  her  own  part  signed  on  August  26
a  preliminary  convention  with  Prussia  for  the  purpose
of  re-establishing  peace,  by  which  she  guaranteed  to
Prussia  the  possession  of  Silesia  according  to  the  Treaty
of  Breslau,  and  promised  to  use  every  effort  to  obtain
for  it  a  general  guarantee  by  all  the  Powers  of  Europe.
The  Queen  of  Hungary  was  indignant  but  still  unshaken,
and  she  resolved  to  continue  the  war.  On  September
30,  however,  the  Austrians  were  again  completely  de-
feated at  Sohr.  On  December  15  the  Saxons  were
routed  at  Kesseldorf,  and  the  Prussians  soon  after
marched  in  triumph  into  Dresden.  Maria  Theresa  at
last  yielded,  and  on  December  25  she  signed  the  Peace
of  Dresden,  guaranteeing  Frederick  the  possession
of  Silesia  and  Glatz,  while  Frederick  for  his  part
evacuated  Saxony,  recognised  the  validity  of  the  Im-
perial election,  and  acknowledged  the  disputed  suffrage
of  Bohemia.

But  before  this  peace  was  signed  events  had  occurred
very  disastrous  to  the  interests  both  of  Austria  and  of
England.  In  Italy  Genoa  now  openly  declared  herself
on  the  side  of  the  French,  and  the  accession  of  10,000
Genoese  soldiers,  combined  with  the  great  military
talents  of  General  Gages,  who  commanded  the  Spaniards,
determined  for  the  present  the  fortunes  of  the  war.
The  French,  Spaniards,  and  Neapolitans  were  every-

CH.  IV.  FONTENOY.  27

where  triumphant,  Tortona,  Placentia,  Parma,  Pavia,
Cazale,  and  Asti  were  taken,  Don  Philip  entered  Milan
in  triumph  and  blockaded  the  citadel,  and  the  King  of
Sardinia  was  driven  to  take  refuge  under  the  walls  of
his  capital.

In  Flanders  Marshal  Saxe,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of
80,000  men,  was  equally  successful.  The  Austrians,
in  their  zeal  for  the  conquest  of  Silesia,  spared  little
more  than  8,000  men  for  the  defence  of  this  province,
and  the  task  of  opposing  the  French  rested  chiefly  upon
the  English  and  the  Dutch.  In  April  Marshal  Saxe
invested  Tournay,  and  on  May  11  he  fought  a  great
battle  with  the  allies  at  Fontenoy.  The  Dutch  gave
way  at  an  early  period  of  the  struggle,  but  the  English
and  Hanoverians  remained  firm,  and,  gradually  forming
into  a  solid  column  of  about  16,000  men,  they  advanced,
through  a  narrow  passage  that  was  left  between  the
fortified  village  of  Fontenoy  and  the  neighbouring
woods,  full  against  the  centre  of  the  French.  Regi-
ment after  regiment  assailed  them  in  vain.  Their
sustained  and  deadly  fire,  their  steady  intrepidity  and
the  massive  power  of  their  charge  carried  all  before  it,
and  the  day  was  almost  lost  to  the  French,  when  Mar-
shal Saxe  resolved  to  make  one  last  and  almost  despair-
ing efibrt.  Four  cannon  were  brought  to  play  upon
the  English,  and  at  the  same  time  the  order  to  advance
was  given  to  the  household  troops  of  the  French  king,
who  had  hitherto  been  kept  in  reserve,  and  to  the  Irish
brigade,  consisting  of  several  regiments  of  Irish  Catholics
who  had  been  driven  from  their  country  by  the  events
of  the  Revolution  and  by  the  Penal  Code,  and  who  were
burning  to  avenge  themselves  on  their  oppressors.
Their  fiery  charge  was  successful.  The  British  column
was  arrested,  shattered,  and  dissolved,  and  a  great
French  victory  was  the  result.  In  a  few  days  Tournay
surrendered,  and  its  fall  was  followed  by  that  of  Ghent,

28 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

Bruges,  Oudenarde,  Dendermonde,  Ostend,  Nieuport,
and  Ath.

An  immediate  consequence  of  the  defeat  of  Pontenoy
was  the  Jacobite  rebellion  in  Scotland.  On  July  25  the
young  Pretender  landed,  without  the  support  or  know-
ledge of  the  French,  relying  only  on  the  popularity  of
his  manners  and  of  his  name,  and  on  the  assistance  of  a
few  Highland  chiefs,  to  recover  the  throne  of  his  ances-
tors. A  wilder  or  more  hopeless  enterprise  never  con-
vulsed a  great  empire.  The  Highlands,  where  alone  he
could  count  upon  warm  support,  contained  at  this  time
about  one-twelfth  of  the  population  of  Scotland.'  Even
there  many  powerful  chiefs  were  bound  to  the  reigning
dynasty  by  the  strongest  ties  of  interest.  The  clans,
though  they  were  ever  ready  to  take  up  arms,  and  would
follow  their  chiefs  in  any  cause,  were  utterly  destitute
of  the  discipline  and  subordination  of  a  regular  army.
Their  great  object  was  plunder,  and  after  their  first
victory  more  than  half  the  army  disbanded  to  secure  the
spoil.  In  the  Lowlands  the  balance  of  opinion  was
probably  hostile  to  Jacobitism.  The  Episcopalians,  it
is  true,  were  generally  disaffected ;  the  Union  had  left
much  discontent  behind  it,  and  the  Scotch  origin  of  the
Stuarts  was  not  forgotten,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the
Highlanders  were  detested  as  a  race  of  marauders  ;  the
commercial  and  industrial  classes  dreaded  change,  and
the  great  city  of  Glasgow  was  decidedly  Hanoverian.
In  England,  as  the  event  showed,  net  a  single  real  step
had  been  taken  to  prepare  an  insurrection.  The  King
was  in  Hanover  when  the  movement  began,  and  the
greater  part  of  the  English  army  was  endeavouring  to
protect  the  Netherlands,  yet  nothing  but  the  grossest
incapacity  on  the  part  of  the  military  authorities  at
home,  and  an  extraordinary  want  of  public  spirit  in  the

'  See  Chambers'  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion.

CH.  IV.  JACOBITE REBELLION OF 1745.  29

nation,  could  have  enabled  the  rebellion,  unaided  as  it
was  from  abroad,  to  acquire  the  dimensions  which  it  did.
On  August  19  the  standard  of  the  Stuarts  was  raised,
and  before  the  end  of  September  Prince  Charles  was  in-
stalled in  Holyrood  Palace,  the  army  of  Sir  John  Cope
was  completely  defeated  in  the  battle  of  Preston  Pans,
and  almost  the  whole  of  Scotland  acknowledged  the
Pretender,  At  the  end  of  October  he  prepared,  at  the
head  of  an  army  of  less  than  6,000  men,  to  invade  Eng-
land. He  crossed  the  frontier  on  November  8,  took  Car-
lisle, after  a  short  resistance,  on  the  15th,  marched  with-
out opposition  through  most  of  the  great  towns  of  Lan-
cashire, penetrated  as  far  as  Derby,  and  had  produced
in  London  a  disgraceful  panic  and  a  violent  run  upon
the  Bank  of  England,^  when  the  chiefs  insisted,  in  de-
fiance of  his  wishes,  in  commencing  a  retreat.

Three  considerable  ai-mies  were  formed  to  oppose
him.  One  of  these,  commanded  by  Marshal  Wade,  was
assembled  in  Yorkshire,  and  might  easily,  with  common
skill,  have  cut  off  his  retreat.  Another,  under  the  Duke
of  Cumberland,  was  prepared  to  intercept  him  if  he
marched  upon  Wales,  while  a  third  was  assembled  on
Finchley  ComDion  for  the  protection  of  London.  Dutch
soldiers  were  brought  over  to  support  the  Government.^
There  was  no  prospect  of  serious  assistance  from  France,
and  in  England,  if  the  Pretender  met  with  little  active
opposition  among  the  people,  he  met  with  still  less  sup-
port. In  Preston,  where  the  Catholics  were  very  nume-
rous, there  was  some  cheering.  In  Manchester  several  of
the  clergy  and  a  great  part  of  the  populace  received  him
with  enthusiasm,  and  a  regiment  of  about  500  men  was
enlisted  for  his  service,  the  first  person  enrolled  being

'  See the  graphic  description  in  sixpences.
of  this  panic  in  Fielding's  Tnie  -  They were afterwards re-

Patriot. It was reported that  placed  by  Hessians. See  Stan-

the  Bank  saved  itself  by  paying  hope's  Hist,  of  England,  iii.  299.

so ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHXy.ENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

Captain  James  Dawson,  whose  mournful  fate  has  been
celebrated  in  the  most  touching  ballad  of  Shenstone.
But  the  recruits  were  scarcely  equal  to  half  the  number
of  the  Highlanders  who  had  deserted  in  the  march  from
Edinburgh  to  Carlisle.  Liverpool  was  strongly  Hano-
verian, and  its  citizens  subscribed  6,0001.  for  equipping
a  regiment  in  the  service  of  the  Government.  In  general,
however,  the  prevailing  disposition  of  the  people  was  fear
or  sullen  apathy,  and  few  were  disposed  to  risk  anything
on  either  side.  The  retreat  began  on  December  6.  It  was
skilfully  conducted,  and  in  several  skirmishes  the  Scotch
were  victorious,  but  their  cause  was  manifestly  lost.  They
regained  their  country,  were  joined  by  a  few  French  and  a
few  Irish  in  the  French  service,  and  succeeded  on  January
17  in  defeating  a  considerable  body  of  English  at  Fal-
kirk. This  was  their  last  gleam  of  success.  Divisions
and  desertion  speedily  thinned  their  ranks.  Enemies
overwhelming  from  their  numbers  and  their  discipline
were  pressing  upon  them,  and  on  April  16,  1746,  the
battle  of  Culloden  for  ever  crushed  the  prospects  of  the
Stuarts.  The  Hanoverian  army,  and  the  Duke  of  Cum-
berland who  commanded  it,  displayed  in  their  triumph
a  barbarity  which  recalled  the  memory  of  Sedgemoor
and  of  the  Bloody  Assize,  while  the  courage,  the  loyalty,
and  the  touching  fidelity  of  the  Highlanders  to  their
fallen  chief  cast  a  halo  of  romantic  interest  around  his
cause.

The  extraordinary  incapacity  of  English  commanders,
both  by  land  and  sea,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  facts
in  the  war  we  are  considering.  Frederick  in  Prussia,
Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine,  General  IQievenhuller,  and
Marshal  Traun  in  Austria,  General  Gages  in  the  service
of  Spain,  and  Marshal  Saxe  in  the  service  of  Finance,
had  all  exhibited  conspicuous  talent,  and  both  Noailles
and  Belleisle,  though  inferior  generals,  associated  their
names  with  brilliant  military  episodes ;  but  in  the  Bng-

Cfi.  IV.  ENGLISH SUCCESSES.  31

lish  service  mismanagement  and  languor  were  general.
The  battle  of  Dettingen  was  truly  described  as  a  happy-
escape  rather  than  a  great  victory ;  the  army  in  Flan-
ders can  hardly  be  said  to  have  exhibited  any  military
quality  except  courage,  and  the  British  navy,  though  it
gained  some  successes,  added  little  to  its  reputation.
The  one  brilliant  exception  was  the  expedition  of  Anson
round  Cape  Horn,  for  the  purpose  of  plundering  the
Spanish  merchandise  and  settlements  in  the  Pacific.  It
lasted  for  nearly  four  years,  and  though  it  had  little
efiect  except  that  of  inflicting  a  great  amount  of  private
misery,  it  was  conducted  vnth  a  skill  and  a  courage
equal  to  the  most  splendid  achievements  of  Hawkins  or
of  Blake.  The  overwhelming  superiority  of  England
upon  the  sea  began,  however,  gradually  to  influence  the
war.  The  island  of  Cape  Breton,  which  commanded
the  mouth  of  Gulf  St.  Lawrence,  and  protected  the  New-
foundland fisheries,  was  captured  in  the  June  of  1 745 .  In
1747  a  French  squadron  was  destroyed  by  a  very  supe-
rior English  fleet  ofi"  Cape  Finisterre.  Another  was  de-
feated near  Belleisle,  and  in  the  same  year  as  many  as
644  prizes  were  taken.^  The  war  on  the  part  of  the
English,  however,  was  most  efiiciently  conducted  by
means  of  subsidies,  which  were  enormously  multiplied.
The  direct  payment  of  the  Hanoverian  troops,  against
which  so  fierce  a  clamour  had  been  raised,  was,  indeed,
for  a  time  suspended,  but  the  Queen  of  Hungary  was
induced  to  take  those  troops  into  her  pay.  In  order
that  she  should  do  so  her  subsidy  was  increased,  and
next  year  the  Government,  without  producing  any  con-
siderable disturbance,  reverted  quietly  to  the  former
policy.  The  war,  however,  was  now  evidently  drawing
to  a  close,  and  the  treaties  of  1745  had  greatly  re-
stricted its  theatre. Austria,  freed  from  apprehension

Smollett's  Hist,  of  England,  ch.  is.

32 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

on  the  side  of  Prussia  and  Bavaria,  was  enabled  in  1746
to  send  30,000  additional  soldiers  into  Italy,  where  she
speedily  recovered  almost  everything  she  had  lost  in  the
preceding  year,  and  defeated  the  united  French  and
Spaniards  in  the  battle  of  Placentia.  The  death  of
Philip  v.,  which  took  place  in  July,  made  the  Spaniards
desirous  of  peace.  The  command  of  their  army  was
taken  from  General  Gages,  and  their  troops  were  soon
after  ordered  to  evacuate  Italy.  Finale  was  occupied
by  the  Sardinians.  Genoa  itself  was  captured  by  the
Austrians,  but  rescued  by  a  sudden  insurrection  of  the
populace.  The  project  of  the  invasion  of  Naples  was
abandoned,  in  consequence  of  the  opposition  of  the  King
of  Sardinia,  who  had  grown  jealous  of  Austria,  and
feared  to  see  her  omnipotent  in  Italy.  Provence,  how-
ever, was  invaded  and  devastated  in  the  November  of
1746,  and  Antibes  besieged;  but  soon  after  the  revolt
of  Genoa  the  Austrians  were  recalled.  A  second  siege
of  Genoa  was  raised  by  a  French  army,  under  Belleisle,
which  burst  through  Nice,  took  town  after  town  in  that
province,  and  compelled  the  Austrians  and  Sardinians
to  retire.  An  attempt  was  then  made  to  capture  Turin
by  a  French  corps,  commanded  by  the  brother  of  Belle-
isle,  which  endeavoured  to  force  its  way  through  the
valley  of  Susa,  but  it  was  defeated  with  great  loss  at  an
entrenchment  called  the  Assietta,  the  commander  was
killed,  and  Marshal  Belleisle,  who  had  counselled  the
expedition,  and  who  intended  to  co-operate  with  it,  fell
back  upon  Nice.

While  the  fortune  of  the  war  was  thus  rapidly  fluc-
tuating in  Italy,  in  the  Netherlands  it  was  uniformly  in
favour  of  the  French.  The  Scotch  rebellion,  which
compelled  England  for  a  time  to  withdraw  her  troops,
confirmed  the  military  ascendency  wliich  Marshal  Saxe
had  already  acquired.  In  1746  Brussels  with  its  whole
garrison  was  captured,  and  soon  after  Mechlin,  Louvain,

CH.  IV, DISASTERS AND REVOLUTION IN HOLLAND.  33

Antwerp,  Mons,  Cliai'leroi,  and  Namur  succumbed.
This  last  town,  on  whose  fortifications  the  rival  genius
of  Cohorn  and  Vauban  had  been  in  turn  employed,  now
yielded  after  a  siege  of  six  days.  The  superiority  of
the  French  in  numbers  and  especially  in  artillery,  the
genius  of  Marshal  Saxe,  and  the  paralysing  eflect  of  a
great  domestic  sorrow  upon  Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine,
who  commanded  the  Austrians,  made  the  campaign  an
uninteri-upted  triumph  for  the  French,  who,  soon  after
the  arrival  of  a  British  force,  defeated  the  allies  in
the  battle  of  Roucoux,  and  became  masters  of  all  the
Austrian  Netherlands,  except  Limburg  and  Luxemburg.
Next  year  they  invaded  the  Dutch  Republic.  Zealand
was  overrun  by  troops,  5,000  prisoners  were  taken  in
less  than  a  month,  and  several  towns  and  fortresses
were  occupied.  The  Dutch,  who  found  their  republican
institutions  much  more  adapted  for  securing  their  liberty
in  time  of  peace  than  for  giving  energy  and  concentra-
tion to  their  forces  in  time  of  war,  adopted  a  policy  which
they  had  before  pursued.  During  their  long  conflicts
with  the  Spaniards  they  had  confided  the  executive
power  to  the  House  of  Orange,  but  soon  after  the  Peace
of  Westphalia  had  given  Holland  a  recognised  place
among  European  States,  the  hereditary  Stadtholdersliip
was  abolished  and  purely  republican  institutions  were
created.  When  the  country,  in  1672,  was  reduced  to
the  verge  of  ruin  by  the  invasion  of  Lewis  XIV.,  it
reverted  to  the  former  system  and  retained  it  for  thirty
years.  It  now  again  recurred  to  it,  and  a  popular  in-
surrection made  the  House  of  Orange  hereditary  rulers.
The  war,  however,  continued  to  be  disastrous.  The
allies,  under  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  the  Prince
of  Orange,  .were  defeated  in  a  great  battle  at  LaufFeld,
near  Maestricht,  on  July  2 ;  Sir  John  Ligonier,  who
commanded  the  English  cavalry,  and  who  displayed
extraordinary courage in the struggle, was taken

VOL.  II.  D

34  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  iv.

prisoner,  and  the  campaign  ended  with  the  surprise
and  capture  of  the  almost  impregnable  fortress  of
Bergen-op-Zoom,  by  Count  Lowendahl.  It  is  a  curious
feature  of  this  campaign  that  Ligonier,  who  distinguished
himself  most  highly  in  the  English  ranks,  was  a  French
refugee,  while  of  the  French  commanders  Marshal  Saxe
was  by  birth  a  German,  and  Lowendahl  a  Dane.

In  the  meantime  the  Pelham  Government,  though
unsuccessful  abi'oad,  had  acquired  a  complete  ascendency
at  home.  The  martial  enthusiasm  of  the  country  had
gone  down,  and  public  opinion  being  gratified  by  the
successive  deposition  of  Walpole  and  of  Carteret,  and
being  no  longer  stimulated  by  a  powerful  Opposition,
acquiesced  languidly  in  the  course  of  events.  The  King
for  a  time  chafed  bitterly  against  the  yoke.  He  had
been  thwarted  in  his  favourite  German  policy,  deprived
of  the  minister  who  was  beyond  comparison  the  most
pleasing  to  him,  and  compelled  to  accept  others  in  whom
he  had  no  confidence.  He  despised  and  disliked  New-
castle. He  hated  Chesterfield,  whom  he  was  compelled
to  admit  to  ofiice,  and  who  had  been  made  Lord
Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  and  he  was  especially  indignant
with  Pitt,  who  had  described  Hanover  as  '  a  beggarly
Electorate '  and  accused  its  soldiers  of  cowardice,  and
whose  claims  to  oflace  Pelham  was  continually  urging.
At  length,  in  February  1745-46,  while  the  rebellion
was  still  raging,  the  perplexed  monarch  tried  to  extricate
himself  from  his  embarrassments  by  holding  private
communications  with  Bath  and  Granville.  The  ministers
were  apprised  of  it  and  at  once  resigned.  The  impotence
of  their  rivals  was  speedily  shown,  and  in.  forty-eight
hours  they  were  obliged  to  acknowledge  themselves  in-
capable of  forming  a  Government.  The  Pelhams  re-
turned to  power,  but  their  position  was  immeasurably
strengthened.  The  few  remaining  adherents  of  Bath
were  driven  from  office. The  King  acknowledged  with

CH.  IV.  PEACE OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE.  35

great  irritation  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  resist.
He  refused,  indeed,  to  make  Pitt  Secretaiy  of  War,  but
sanctioned  his  appointment  to  the  lucrative  office  of
Joint  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland,  and  soon  after  to  the
still  more  important  position  of  Paymaster  of  the
Forces.

The  great  work  of  the  Government  was  the  pacifica-
tion of  Europe  by  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.  Another
campaign  had  actually  begun  when  the  preliminaries
were  signed.  Eussia  had  at  last  been  brought  into
the  war,  and  30,000  Russian  soldiers  subsidised  by
the  maritime  Powers  were  on  the  march  to  rescue  the
Netherlands.  It  was  not  impossible  that  this  powerful
reinforcement  might  have  given  a  new  course  to  the
war.  In  Italy  the  balance  of  success  was  on  the  whole
in  favour  of  the  Austrians.  The  commerce  of  France
had  been  almost  annihilated  by  the  English ;  her  re-
sources were  nearly  exhausted  by  the  extraordinary
exertions  she  had  made,  and  the  returning  prosperity
produced  by  the  long  pacific  government  of  Fleury  had
been  completely  overcast.  On  the  other  hand,  Nice  and
Savoy  were  still  occupied  by  the  French  and  Spaniards.
The  French  were  almost  absolute  masters  of  the  Austrian
Netherlands ;  the  capture  of  Bergen-op-Zoom  and  the
svibsequent  investment  of  Maestricht  had  rendered  the
condition  of  the  Dutch  republic  nearly  desperate,  and  it
would  probably  have  been  crushed  before  any  succour
could  arrive.  Maria  Theresa,  it  is  true,  ardently  de
sired  the  continuance  of  the  war,  hoping  to  obtain  in
Italy  some  compensation  for  the  loss  of  Silesia,  and  the
Duke  of  Newcastle  was  inclined,  in  opposition  to  his
brother,  to  support  her ;  but  she  waged  war  chiefly  by
the  assistance  of  the  subsidies  of  England,  and  her
ambition  was  clearly  contrary  to  the  general  interests
of  Europe.  Like  many  absolute  sovereigns  she  appears
to  have  been  completely  indiflerent  to  the  misery  and

j>  2

36 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

desolation  she  caused,  provided  only  she  could  leave  her
empire  as  extended  as  she  had  received  it.  She  was
resolved  also  to  throw  the  defence  of  the  Austrian  Nether-
lands almost  exclusively  on  the  maritime  Powers  ;  she
employed  the  subsidies,  which  she  received  on  the  ex-
press condition  of  keeping  a  large  army  in  those  pro-
vinces, mainly  in  a  war  of  aggression  in  Italy  ;  and  she
was  bitterly  aggrieved  because  the  English,  under  these
circumstances,  diminished  her  remittances.

But  the  King  of  Sardinia,  who  saw  prospects  of
pushing  his  fortunes  in  Italy,  and  who  was  determined,
if  possible,  to  avoid  restoring  the  Duchy  of  Finale,  was
perhaps  the  only  ruler  who  shared  her  hostility  to  peace.
Spain  was  now  governed  by  a  perfectly  unambitious
sovereign,  who  wished  for  nothing  but  repose.  Hol-
land was  reduced  to  such  a  condition  that  peace  was
her  first  necessity.  England  was  ruled  by  an  eminently
pacific  minister ;  and  there  was  hardly  any  opposition
to  impede  his  policy.  The  enormous  subsidies  which
England  had  been  for  years  scattering  through  Europe
were  rapidly  adding  to  her  debt  and  impairing  her
prosperity,  and  it  was  not  clear  what  object  she  had
to  gain.  The  quarter  in  which  the  French  arms  were
most  successful  was  precisely  that  most  dangerous  to
England ;  and  except  the  capture  of  Cape  Breton,  and
of  a  number  of  prizes,  she  had  obtained  little  or  nothing
as  a  compensation  for  her  sacrifices.  Even  in  India,
where  the  small  settlements  of  France  appeared  almost
at  the  mercy  of  England,  she  had  encountered  reverses.
Two  Frenchmen  of  great  abilities  and  enterprise,  but
separated  from  each  other  by  a  bitter  jealousy,  then
presided  over  French  interests  in  India.  Dupleix,
after  a  brilliant  industrial  career  upon  the  Ganges,
had  been  made  Governor  of  the  French  settlement  of
Pondicherry,  while  La  Bourdonnais,  one  of  the  bravest
and most skilful seamen  France  has  ever  produced,

CH.  IV,  PEACE OF  AiX-LA-CHAPELLE.  37

dii^ected  affairs  in  the  islands  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius.
La  Bourdonnais  succeeded,  in  the  course  of  1746,  in
repelling  an  English  squadron  under  Admiral  Barnet,
and  in  besieging  and  taking  Madras.  As  express
orders  from  the  ministry  at  home  prohibited  him  from
occupying  permanently  any  conquests  that  might  be
made  in  India,  a  capitulation  was  signed  by  which  the
town  was  to  be  restored  on  the  payment  of  a  specified
ransom.  It  passed,  however,  under  the  dominion  of
Dupleix,  who  shamefully  broke  the  capitulation  and
subjected  the  English  to  scandalous  outrages,  while  La
Bourdonnais  returned  to  France  and  was  soon  after,  on
false  charges,  flung  into  the  Bastille,  where  he  remained
for  nearly  three  years.  In  1748  the  English  made  a
formidable  attempt  to  retaliate  upon  the  French,  and
a  large  force  of  English  and  Sepoy  troops,  under  the
command  of  Admiral  Boscawen  and  of  Major  Lawrence,
besieged  Pondicherry.  It  was  defended,  however,  by
Dupleix  with  great  energy  and  genius.  The  rainy  sea-
son came  on,  sickness  decimated  the  besiegers,  and  the
enterprise  was  at  last  abandoned.

It  was  plain  that  the  time  for  peace  had  arrived.
France  had  already  made  overtures,  and  she  showed
much  moderation,  and  at  this  period  much  disinterested-
ness in  her  demands,  and  the  influence  of  England  and
Holland  at  length  forced  the  peace  upon  Austria  and
Sardinia,  though  both  were  bitterly  aggrieved  by  its
conditions.  Prance  agreed  to  restore  every  conquest
she  had  made  during  the  war,  to  abandon  the  cause  of
the  Stuarts,  and  expel  the  Pretender  from  her  soil,  to
demolish,  in  accordance  with  eai-lier  treaties,  the  fortifica-
tions of  Dunkirk  on  the  side  of  the  sea,  while  retaining
those  on  the  side  of  the  land,  and  to  retire  from  the
contest  without  acquiring  any  fresh  territory  or  any
pecuniary  compensation.  England  in  like  manner  re-
stored the  few  conquests  she  had  made,  and  submitted

38 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

to  the  somewhat  humiliating  condition  of  sending  hos-
tages to  Paris  as  a  security  for  the  restoration  of  Cape
Breton.  The  right  of  search,  in  opposition  to  which
she  had  originally  drawn  the  sword  against  Spain,  and
the  debt  of  95,000Z.  which  the  Convention  of  1739
acknowledged  to  be  owing  to  her  by  Spain,  were  not
even  mentioned  in  the  peace.  The  disputed  boundary
between  Canada  and  Nova  Scotia,  which  had  been  a
source  of  constant  difficulty  with  France,  was  left  alto-
gether undefined.  The  Assiento  treaty  for  trade  with
the  Spanish  colonies  was  confirmed  for  the  four  years
it  had  still  to  run,  but  no  real  compensation  was  ob-
tained for  a  war  expenditure  which  is  said  to  have
exceeded  sixty-four  millions,^  and  which  had  raised  the
funded  and  unfunded  debt  to  more  than  seventy-eight
millions.^  Of  the  other  Powers,  Holland,  Genoa,  and
the  little  State  of  Modena  retained  their  territory  as
before  the  war,  and  Genoa  remained  mistress  of  the
Duchy  of  Finale,  which  had  been  ceded  to  the  King  of
Sardinia  by  the  Treaty  of  Worms,  and  which  it  had
been  a  main  object  of  his  later  policy  to  secure.  Austria
obtained  a  recognition  of  the  election  of  the  Emperor,  a
general  guarantee  of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  the
restoration  of  everything  she  had  lost  in  the  Nether-
lands, but  she  gained  no  additional  territory.  She  was
compelled  to  confirm  the  cession  of  Silesia  and  Glatz  to
Prussia,  to  abandon  her  Italian  conquests,  and  even  to
cede  a  considerable  part  of  her  former  Italian  dominions.
To  the  bitter  indignation  of  Maria  Theresa,  the  Duchies
of  Parma,  Placentia,  and  Guastalla  passed  to  Don
Philip  of  Spain,  to  revert,  however,  to  their  former  pos-
sessors if  Don  Philip  mounted  the  Spanish  throne,  or
died  without  male  issue.  The  King  of  Sardinia  also
obtained  from  Austria  the  territorial  cessions  enume-

1  Chalmers'  Estwiate,  p.  105.  -  Coxe's  Pelham,  ii.  77

CH.  IV.  PEACE OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE.  39

rated  in  the  Treaty  of  Worms,  with  the  important  ex-
ceptions of  Placentia,  which  passed  to  Don  Philip,  and
of  Finale,  which  remained  with  the  Genoese.  For  the
loss  of  these  he  obtained  no  compensation.  Frederick
obtained  a  general  guarantee  for  the  possession  of  his
newly  acquired  territory,  and  several  old  treaties  were
formally  confirmed.^

Thus  small  were  the  changes  effected  in  Europe  by
so  much  bloodshed  and  treachery,  by  nearly  nine  years
of  wasteful  and  desolating  war.  The  design  of  the  dis-
memberment of  Austria  had  failed,  but  no  vexed  ques-
tion had  been  set  at  rest.  International  antipathies
and  jealousies  had  been  immeasurably  increased,  and
the  fearful  sufferings  and  injuries  that  had  been  inflicted
on  the  most  civilised  nations  had  not  even  purchased
the  blessing  of  an  assured  peace.  Of  all  the  ambitious
projects  that  had  been  conceived  during  the  war,  that
of  Frederick  alone  was  substantially  realised,  and  France,
while  endeavouring  to  weaken  one  rival,  had  contributed
largely  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  greatness  of  another.

The  definitive  peace  of  England  and  Holland  with
France  was  signed  on  October  18,  1748,  and  the  other
Powers  acceded  to  it  before  the  close  of  the  year.
From  this  time  till  the  death  of  Pelham  in  March  1754,
political  rivalry  in  England  almost  ceased.  The  Tories
were  gratified  by  a  few  places,  and  almost  every  poli-
tician of  talent  and  influence  was  connected  with  the
Government.  The  Prince  of  Wales,  who  kept  up  some
faint  semblance  of  opposition,  died  in  March  1751.
Three  months  later  Lord  Granville,  sated  with  ambition
and  broken  by  excessive  drinking,  joined  the  ministry,
accepting  the  dignified  but  uninfluential  post  of  Presi-

'  See  on  this  war  Frederick,  Louis  XV.,  and  the  Histories  of
M&moires  cle  mon  Temps,  the  Smollett,  Coxe,  Carlyle,  Eanke,
Mimoires de Valori, Voltaire, Martin,  and  Lord  Stanhope.

40 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

dent  of  the  Council,  which  he  continued  to  hold  through
many  ministerial  changes  until  his  death  in  1763.

While  Pelham  lived  the  leading  ideas  of  the  policy
of  Walpole  were  steadily  pursued.  The  land  tax,  which
had  been  raised  to  4s.  during  the  war,  was  reduced  in
1750  to  3s.,  and  in  1753  to  2s.,  though  several  other
taxes  which  had  been  recently  imposed  were  retained.^
Europe  being  at  peace,  and  the  dynasty  firmly  esta-
blished by  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion,  the  army
and  navy  were  both  rigorously  reduced ;  20,000  soldiers
and  34,000  sailors  and  marines  were  discharged,  and
some  serious  distress  having  in  consequence  arisen,  it
was  met  by  the  bold  and  novel  expedient  of  a  system  of
emigration,  organised  and  directed  by  the  Government.
As  early  as  1735  Captain  Coram,  in  a  memorial  to  the
Privy  Council,  had  called  attention  to  the  deserted  and
unprotected  state  of  Nova  Scotia,  to  the  ease  with  which
the  French  carried  their  encroachments  into  that  pro-
vince, and  to  the  insufficiency  of  the  small  British
garrison  which  was  collected  at  Annapolis  for  its  pro-
tection. Nova  Scotia  was  justly  regarded  as  the  key  to
North  America,  equally  important  in  time  of  war  for
attacking  Canada  and  for  defending  New  England.
The  adjacent  sea  teemed  with  fish,  and  its  magnificent
forests  supplied  admirable  timber  for  the  royal  navy.
It  was  accordingly  determined  to  strengthen  the  colony
by  encouraging  the  officers  and  men  lately  dismissed
from  the  land  and  sea  service,  to  settle  there  with  or
without  their  families.  To  every  private  was  ofiered  a
free  passage,  a  free  maintenance  for  twelve  months,  the
fee  simple  of  fifty  acres  of  land,  an  additional  grant  of
ten  acres  for  every  member  of  his  family,  and  an  im-
munity from  taxation  for  ten  years.  The  officers  re-
ceived still  larger  grants,  varying  according  to  their

'  See  Dowell's  Hist,  of  Taxation,  ii.  125.

Ch.  IV.  THE  INTEREST OF  THE DEBT.  41

rank.  The  scheme  was  eminently  successful.  About
4,000  men,  many  of  them  with  their  families,  embraced
the  Government  offers.  The  expedition  sailed  in  May
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Oornwallis,  and  with
the  protection  of  two  regiments.  It  was  joined  on  its
arrival  by  an  additional  force,  which  had  lately  been
withdrawn  from  Cape  Breton,  and  soon  after  the  new
colonists  founded  the  important  town  of  Halifax,  which
derived  its  name  from  Lord  Halifax,  who,  as  President
of  the  Board  of  Trade,  was  a  principal  person  in  or-
ganising the  expedition,  and  which  soon  became  the
capital  of  a  flourishing  colony.^

Not  less  successful  was  the  financial  policy  of  Pel-
ham.  The  measures  which  were  carried  in  1717  and
1727  for  reducing  the  interest  of  the  debt  have  been
already  recounted,  and  another  efibrt  in  the  same  direc-
tion had  been  made  by  Sir  John  Barnard  in  1737.  He
had  proposed  to  reduce  gradually  that  portion  of  the
debt  which  bore  four  per  cent,  interest  to  three  per  cent.,
enabling  the  Government  to  borrow  money  at  the  lower
rate  in  order  to  pay  off  those  creditors  who  refused  to
accept  the  reduction.  As  the  three  per  cents,  were  at
this  time  at  a  premium,  and  as  it  was  part  of  the  scheme
of  Sir  John  Barnard  that  the  contributors  to  the  new
loan  should  be  guaranteed  from  payment  of  any  part  of
the  principal  for  fourteen  years,  there  is  not  much
doubt  that  the  plan  in  its  essential  features  could  have
been  carried  out,  nor  yet  that  it  would  have  been  very
beneficial  to  the  nation.  It  was,  however,  exceedingly
unpopular.  The  great  companies  who  contributed  so
powerfully  to  support  the  ministry  of  Walpole  were  op-
posed to  it.  A  deep  impression  was  made  throughout
the  country  by  a  statement  that  a  very  large  proportion
of  the  four  per  cent,  funds  was  in  the  possession  of

Smollett's  Hist,  of  England. Coxe's  Life  of  Pelham.

42 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

widows  and  orphans  and  trustees,  who  would  suffer
greatly  by  the  reduction.  The  growing  complications
with  Spain  made  it  probable  that  the  Government
would  soon  be  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  new  loans,
and  especially  important  that  it  should  take  no  step
that  could  alienate  the  moneyed  classes,  or  injure,  how-
ever unjustly,  the  credit  of  the  country.  Besides  this,
the  Government  was  now  too  weak  to  bear  the  strain  of
additional  unpopularity,  and  Sir  John  Barnard,  who
originated  the  measure,  was  a  prominent  member  of  the
Opposition.  Under  these  circumstances  Walpole,  after
some  hesitation,  placed  himself  in  opposition  to  the  Bill.
He  showed  even  more  than  his  usual  financial  know-
ledge in  pointing  out  the  weak  points  in  its  details,
and  he  succeeded  without  difficulty  in  defeating  it.*

The  question  of  how  far  he  was  justified  in  this
course  by  the  special  political  circumstances  of  the
time  is  one  which  can  hardly  be  answered  without  a
more  minute  knowledge  of  the  dispositions  of  Mem-
bers of  Parliament  and  of  the  currents  of  feeling  in  the
country  than  it  is  now  possible  to  attain.  The  strong
ministry  of  the  Pelhams  was  able  to  carry  a  somewhat
similar  measure,  in  spite  of  the  strenuous  opposition
both  of  the  Bank  and  of  the  East  India  Company,  in
1749.  By  far  the  larger  part  of  the  National  Debt
was  at  4  per  cent.,  a  part  was  at  3^  per  cent.,  and  an-
other part  at  3  per  cent.  As  the  3  per  cents,  were
selling  at  par,  and  the  3^  per  cents,  above  par,^  the

'  Compare  Coxe's  Life  of  Wal-  was  said  at  this  time  to  have  pur-

polc,  ch.  xlvii. ; Sinclair's  ifis^.  chased  3  per  cents,  at  109  j.  This,

of  the  Revenue,  i.  500-502  ; and  however,  must  have  been  quite

Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs,  ii.  325-  an  isolated  transaction,  and  the

332. It  is  remarkable  that  this  ordinary  price  appears  to  have

was  almost  the  only  question  on  been  from  par  to  101. Coxe's

which  Henry  Pelham  ever  voted  Pelham,  ii. 77-85. Sinclair's

against  Walpole.  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  i.  504-507.
Coxe  states  that  an  individual

Ctt,  IV.  FINANCIAL  LEGISLATION OF  PELHAM.  43

time  had  evidently  come  when  a  reduction  was  feasible.
Availing  himself  largely  of  the  assistance,  without  abso-
lutely adopting  the  plan,  of  Sir  J.  Barnard,  Pelham  in-
troduced and  carried  a  scheme  by  which  such  holders  of
4  per  cent,  stock  as  consented  by  February  28,  1749-
50,  to  accept  the  arrangement  were  to  receive  3^  per
cent,  interest  from  December  1750  to  December  1757,
with  a  security  that  no  part  of  their  stock  should  be
redeemed  before  the  latter  date,  except  what  was  due  to
the  East  India  Company.  After  December  1757  the
interest  was  to  sink  to  3  per  cent,  till  reduced  by  the
Government,  while  those  who  refused  the  arrangement
were  to  be  paid  off  by  a  loan  raised  at  3  per  cent.  The
offer  does  not  appear  very  tempting,  but  the  normal
rate  of  interest  was  then  so  low,  commercial  invest-
ments were  so  few,  and  the  attraction  of  the  Govern-
ment security  was  so  great,  that  the  majority  of  holders
accepted  it,  and  when  February  arrived  only  eighteen
or  nineteen  millions  had  not  been  brought  under  the  ar-
rangement. The  success,  of  course,  increased  its  popu-
larity, and  Pelham  accordingly  renewed  the  offer,  though
on  less  favourable  conditions,  for  in  the  case  of  these
second  subscribers  the  3^  per  cent,  interest  was  to  be
exchanged  for  3  per  cent,  interest  in  December  1755.
The  result  of  this  prolongation  was,  that  not  much  more
than  three  millions  remained  excluded,  and  the  holders
of  this  stock  were  paid  off  in  1751.  For  seven  years
after  1750  an  annual  saving  was  thus  made  of  288,51 7Z.,
and  after  1757  it  amounted  in  the  whole  to  577,034L,
which  was  to  be  applied  to  the  reduction  of  the  National
Debt.  The  success  of  this  measure  reflected  great  credit
on  the  Government,  and  it  furnished  a  remarkable  proof
of  how  prosperous  and  wealthy  the  country  remained  at
the  close  of  a  long  and  exhausting  war.  In  1752  Pel-
ham completed  his  financial  reforms  by  a  measure  sim-
plifying and  consolidating  the  different  branches  of  the

44 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

National  Debt,  and  tlius  removing  a  cause  of  much  per-
plexity and  some  expense  both  to  the  public  and  to
individuals.^

It  was  in  this  department  of  legislation  that  the
Governments  of  the  Walpole  and  Pelham  period  were
most  successful.  In  very  few  periods  in  English  poli-
tical history  was  the  commercial  element  more  conspi-
cuous in  administration.  The  prevailing  spirit  of  the
debates  was  of  a  kind  we  should  rather  have  expected
in  a  middle-class  Parliament  than  in  a  Parliament  con-
sisting in  a  very  large  measure  of  the  nominees  of  great
families.  A  competition  of  economy  reigned  in  all  par-
ties. The  questioTis  which  excited  most  interest  were
chiefly  financial  and  commercial  ones.  The  increase  of
the  National  Debt,  the  possibility  and  propriety  of  re-
ducing its  interest,  the  advantages  of  a  sinking  fund,
the  policy  of  encouraging  trade  by  bounties  and  pro-
tective duties,  the  evils  of  excise,  the  reduction  of  the
land  tax,  the  burden  of  continental  subsidies,  were
among  the  topics  which  produced  the  most  vehement
and  the  most  powerful  debates.  Burke,  in  a  letter
which  he  wrote  in  1752,  describing  the  House  of  Com-
mons during  the  Pelham  administration,  summed  up
the  requirements  of  a  Member  of  Parliament  in  one
pregnant  sentence,  which  would  hardly  have  been  true
of  the  next  generation :  '  A  man,  after  all,  would  do
more  by  figures  of  arithmetic  than  by  figures  of  rhe-
toric' ^  Even  the  religious  questions  which  produced
most  excitement  throughout  the  country,  the  naturali-
sation of  Jews  and  the  naturalisation  of  foreign  Protes-
tants, were  argued  chiefly  in  Parliament  upon  commer-
cial grounds. The  question  in  home  politics,  however.

»  Coxe's  Felliam. Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Bevenue. Macpherson's
Annals  of  Commerce.

-  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  i.  38.

CH.  IV.  PARLIAMENTAEY CORRUPTION.  45

wliich  excited  most  interest  in  the  nation  was  of  a  differ-
ent kind,  and  it  was  one  wliich,  for  very  obvious  reasons,
Parliament  desired  as  much  as  possible  to  avoid.  It
was  tlie  extreme  corruption  of  Parliament  itself,  its
subserviency  to  the  influence  of  the  Executive,  and  the
danger  of  its  becoming  in  time  rather  the  oppressor  than
the  representative  of  the  people.

This  danger  had  been  steadily  growing  since  the
Revolution,  and  it  had  reached  such  a  point  that  there
were  many  who  imagined  that  the  country  had  gained
little  by  exchanging  an  arbitrary  King  for  a  corrupt
and  often  a  tyrannical  Parliament.  The  extraordinary
inequalities  of  the  constituencies  had  long  attracted  at-
tention. Cromwell  had  for  a  time  remedied  the  evil  by
a  bold  measure,  sweeping  away  the  rotten  boroughs,
granting  members  to  the  greatest  unrepresented  towns,
strengthening  the  county  representation,  and  at  the
same  time  summoning  Irish  and  Scotch  Members  to
the  Parliament  in  London ;  but  although  Clarendon  de-
scribed this  as  '  a  warrantable  alteration,  and  fit  to  be
made  in  better  times,'  the  old  state  of  things  returned
with  the  Restoration.  The  Revolution  had  been  mainly
a  conflict  between  the  Crown  and  the  Parliament,  and
its  effect  had  been  greatly  to  increase  the  authority  of
the  latter  ;  but,  with  the  exception  of  the  Triennial  Act,
nothing  of  much  real  value  had  been  done  to  make  it  a
more  faithful  representation  of  the  people.  Locke,  in  a
memorable  passage,  complained  that  'the  bare  name  of
a  town,  of  which  there  remains  not  so  much  as  the  ruins,
Avhere  scarce  so  much  housing  as  a  sheepcot,  or  more  in-
habitants than  a  shepherd,  is  to  be  found,  sends  as  many
representatives  to  the  grand  Assembly  of  lawmakers,  as
a  whole  county,  numerous  in  people  and  powerful  in
,  riches  ;'  but  he  could  discover  no  safe  remedy  for  the  evil.*

On  Civil  Government,  bk.  ii.  ch.  xiii.

46  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  nr.

Defoe  ^  and  the  Speaker  Onslow  ^  both  desired  an  ex-
cision of  the  rotten  boroughs,  but  there  was  no  general
movement  in  this  direction,  and  the  party  which  was
naturally  most  inclined  to  change  shrank  from  a  re-
form which  might  have  been  fatal  to  the  Government  of
the  Eevolution.  The  Scotch  union  aggravated  the  evil
by  increasing  the  number  of  sham  boroughs  and  of  sub-
servient Members.  If  the  anomalies  were  not  quite  so
great  as  they  became  after  the  sudden  growth  of  the
manufacturing  towns  in  the  closing  years  of  the  eigh-
teenth century,  and  in  the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth
century,  the  Parliament  was  at  least  much  more  arbi-
trary and  corrupt.  Only  a  fraction  of  its  members  were
elected  by  considerable  and  independent  constituencies.
The  enormous  expense  of  the  county  elections,  where
the  poll  might  be  kept  open  for  forty  days,  kept  these
seats  almost  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  a  few  families,
while  many  small  boroughs  were  in  the  possession  of
rich  noblemen,  or  were  notoriously  offered  for  sale.  The
Government,  by  the  proprietary  rights  of  the  Crown
over  the  Cornish  boroughs,  by  the  votes  of  its  numerous
excise  or  revenue  officers,  by  direct  purchase,  or  by  be-
stowing places  or  peerages  on  the  proprietors,  exercised
an  absolute  authority  over  many  seats, ^  and  its  means
of  influencing  the  assembled  Parliament  were  so  great

•  To^lr  in  England.  sentatives, and make such an

2  Note  to  Burnet's  Own  Times,  arbitrary  use  of  it  that  they  often

ii.  458.  order  them  to  choose  gentlemen

'  Thus,  in  a  debate  in  1743,  whom  they  never  saw,  nor  heard

Chesterfield  said :  '  Many  of  our  of,  perhaps,  till  they  saw  their

boroughs  are  now  so  much  the  names  on  the  minister's  order

creatures of the Crown that  for  choosing  them. This  order

they  are  generally  called Court  they  always  punctually  obey,  and

boroughs,  and  very  properly  they  would,  I  believe,  obey  it,  were  the

are  called  so. For  our  ministers  person  named  in  it  the  minister's

for  the  time  being  have  always  footman.' — Pari.  Hist.  xiii.  90.
the nomination of  their  repre-

CH.  IV.  PAELIAMENTARY  CORRUPTION.  47

that  it  is  diflficult  to  understand  how,  in  the  corrupt
moral  atmosphere  that  was  prevalent,  it  was  possible  to
resist  it.  The  legal  and  ecclesiastical  patronage  of  the
Crown  was  mainly  employed  in  supporting  a  parlia-
mentary influence.  Great  sums  of  secret-service  money
were  usually  expended  in  direct  bribery,  and  places  and
pensions  were  multiplied  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  on
record  that  out  of  550  Members  there  were  in  the  first
Parliament  of  George  I.  no  less  than  271,  in  the  first
Parliament  of  George  II.  no  less  than  257,  holding
offices,  pensions,  or  sinecures.^  And  the  body  which
was  thus  constituted  was  rapidly  becoming  supreme  in
the  State.  The  control  of  the  purse  was  a  prerogative
which  naturally  would  make  it  so  ;  but  during  the  tri-
ennial period  the  frequency  of  elections  made  the  Mem-
bers, to  a  great  extent,  subservient  to  the  people  who
elected,  or  to  the  noblemen  who  nominated  them,  and
gave  each  Parliament  scarcely  time  to  acquire  much
self-confidence,  fixity  of  purpose,  or  consistency  of  or-
ganisation. The  Septennial  Act  and  the  presence  of
Walpole  in  the  House  of  Commons  during  the  whole  of
his  long  ministry,  gradually  made  that  body  the  un-
doubted centre  of  authority.^  In  the  reign  of  Anne  it
was  thought  quite  natural  that  Harley  and  St.  John
should  accept  peerages  in  the  very  zenith  of  their
careers.  In  the  reign  of  George  II.  Walpole  only  ac-
cepted a  title  in  the  hour  of  defeat,  and  Pulteney,  by
taking  a  similar  step,  gave  a  death-blow  to  his  political
influence.

It  is  obvious  that  a  body  such  as  this  might  become
in  the  highest  degree  dangerous  to  the  liberties  it  was

•  Sir  E.  May's  Const.  Hist.  i.  tion  of  the Commons  from  its

317.  former  dependence  on  the  Crown

-  Onslow  has  left  on  record  his  and  on  the  House  of  Lords.' —

opinion  that  the  Septennial  Act  Coxe's  Life  of  Walpole,  i.  75.
formed  '  the  era  of  the  emancipa-

48 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  iv.

supposed  to  protect,  and  it  showed  itself  in  many  re-
spects eminently  arbitrary  and  encroaching.  The  cases
of  Fenwick  and  Bernardi  were  sufficiently  alarming  in-
stances of  the  assumption  by  the  Legislature  of  judi-
cial functions,  but  in  these  cases  at  least  all  the  three
branches  had  concmTed.  In  other  cases,  however,  the
Lower  House  acted  alone.  One  of  the  rights  of  the  sub-
ject specially  guaranteed  by  the  Bill  of  Rights  was  that
of  petition,  but  it  was  not  then  foreseen  that  the  House
of  Commons  might  prove  as  hostile  to  it  as  the  King.
The  case  of  the  Kentish  petitioners,  however,  clearly
showed  the  reality  of  this  danger.  In  1701,  when  a
Tory  House  of  Commons,  in  bitter  opposition  to  the
King  and  to  the  House  of  Lords,  had  impeached  Somers,
delayed  the  supplies,  and  thwarted  every  attempt  to  put
the  country  in  a  state  of  security,  a  firm,  but  perfectly
temperate  and  respectful,  petition  to  the  House  was
signed  by  the  grand  jury  and  other  freeholders  of  Kent,
recalling  the  great  services  of  William,  and  imploring
the  House  to  turn  its  loyal  addresses  into  Bills  of  sup-
ply, and  to  enable  the  King  to  assist  his  allies  before  it
was  too  late.  A  more  strictly  constitutional  proceeding
could  hardly  be  imagined,  but  because  this  petition  re-
flected on  the  policy  of  the  majority,  the  House  voted
it  scandalous,  insolent,  and  seditious,  ordered  the  five
gentlemen  who  presented  it  into  custody,  and  kept  them
imprisoned  for  two  months,  till  they  were  released  by
the  prorogation.  Nor  was  this  all.  At  the  ensuing
dissolution  Mr.  Thomas  Colepepper,  who  had  been  one
of  the  five,  stood  for  Maidstone,  but  was  defeated  by
two  votes.  He  petitioned  the  new  House  of  Commons
for  the  seat,  but  it  at  once  condemned  him  as  guilty  of
corruption,  and  proceeded  to  show  the  spirit  in  which
it  had  tried  the  case  by  reviving  the  question  of  the
Kentish  petition,  passing  a  new  resolution  to  the  effect
that  the  petitioner  had  been  guilty  of  '  scandalous,  vil-

CH.  IV.  THE AYLESBURY ELECTION.  49

laiious,  and  groundless  reflections  upon  the  late  House
of  Commons,'  directing  the  Attorney-General  to  prose-
cute him  for  that  offence,  and  committing  him  to  New-
gate, where  he  remained  until  he  had  made  a  formal
apology.^

No  less  scandalous,  in  a  different  way,  was  the  case
of  the  Aylesbury  election.  In  1703  an  elector  at  Ayles-
bury, being  denied  his  right  to  vote  at  an  election,
carried  his  case  before  the  law  courts.  At  the  assizes
his  right  to  vote  was  aflirmed,  and  damages  were  given
against  those  who  had  denied  it;  but  the  Queen's
Bench  quashed  the  proceedings,  the  majority  of  the
Judges  maintaining,  in  opposition  to  Chief  Justice
Holt,  the  very  dangerous  doctrine  that  the  House  of
Commons  alone  had  jurisdiction  in  all  cases  relating  to
elections.  The  case  was  then  carried  before  the  House
of  Lords  as  the  highest  judicial  tribunal  in  the  realm.
By  a  large  majority,  it  reversed  the  judgment  of  the
Queen's  Bench,  and  decided  that,  the  franchise  being
a  right  conferred  by  law,  upon  certain  specified  con-
ditions, the  law  courts  had  the  power  of  determining
how  far  those  conditions  were  fiilfilled.  But  far  from
acquiescing  in  this  judicial  sentence,  the  House  of  Com-
mons at  once  passed  resolutions  defying  it,  threatened
severe  punishment  against  all  who  carried  questions  of
disputed  votes  into  the  law  courts,  and  against  all
lawyers  who  assisted  them,  and  actually  tlirew  four
persons  into  Newgate  for  taking  measures  in  accordance
with  the  formal  judgment  of  the  supreme  law  court  of
the  nation.  The  dispute  between  the  two  Houses  ran
so  high  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  end  it  by  a  pro-
rogation.^

In  many  other  ways  the  same  spirit  was  shown.

'  Pari.  Hist.  vol.  v. ;  Somers'  -'  Pari. Hist. vol. vi  ; State

Tracts,  xi.  242. Hallam's  Const.  Trials,  vol.  xiv.  Hallam's  Const.

Hist.  vol.  ill.  Hist.  vol.  iii.

VOL. II.  E

50 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

For  a  considerable  time,  and  especially  during  the  reign
of  Anne,  the  House  of  Commons  assumed  a  regular
censorship  over  the  Press.  I  have  already  referred  to
the  number  of  acts  of  severity  against  public  writers  in
that  reign,  and  it  is  one  of  the  worst  features  connected
with  them  that  in  numerous  cases  they  were  simply
party  measures  effected  by  the  mere  motion  of  the
House  of  Commons.  Thus  Steele  was  expelled  for
political  libels,  and  Asgill  on  the  pretext  of  an  absurd
book  '  On  the  Possibility  of  Avoiding  Death.'  Defoe
was  prosecuted  by  the  House  of  Commons  for  his
'  Shortest  Way  with  Dissenters.'  Tutchin,  by  order  of
the  House,  was  whipped  by  the  hangman,  Wellwood,
the  editor  of  the  '  Mercurius  Rusticus,'  Dyer,  the  editor
of  the  well-known  '  News  Letter,'  and  Fogg,  the  pro-
prietor of  '  Mist's  Journal,'  were  compelled  to  express  on
their  knees  their  contrition  to  the  House.  Whitehead's
poem  called  '  Manners '  was  voted  a  libel.  The  sermon
of  Binckes,  comparing  the  sufferings  of  Charles  I.  to
those  of  Christ,  a  treatise  by  a  physician  named  Coward,
asserting  the  material  nature  of  the  soul,  the  sermons
of  Fleetwood,  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  were  all,  by
order  of  the  House,  burnt  by  the  hangman.  Occasion-
ally, as  in  the  case  of  Hoadly,  the  House  passed  reso-
lutions of  approval.^  Of  the  value  of  its  approbation
and  of  its  censure  we  have  a  curious  illustration  in  an
incident  which  took  place  long  after  the  period  I  am
now  describing.  In  1772  Dr.  Nowell  was  appointed  to
preach  the  customary  sermon  before  the  House  on  the
anniversary  of  the  execution  of  Charles  I.  Only  three
or  four  Members  were  present,  and  they  are  said  to
have  been  asleep  during  the  sermon,  but  the  House,  as
usual, passed,  unanimously, a  vote of  thanks  to  the

'  Hunt's  Fourth  Estate. An- ism. Townsend's  Hist, of  tlu
clrews'  Hist,  of  British  JoJimal- House  of  Conwions,  ii.  194-196.

CH.  IV.  PARLIAMENTARY  PRIVILEGES.  51

preacher,  and  in  terms  of  high  eulogy  ordered  the  ser-
mon to  be  printed.  When  it  appeared  it  was  found
that  the  preacher,  being  an  extreme  Tory,  had  availed
himself  of  the  occasion  to  denounce  in  the  strongest
language  the  Puritans  and  their  principles,  to  extol  the
royal  martyr  in  terms  of  which  it  can  be  only  said  that
they  were  a  faithful  echo  of  the  Church  service  for  the
day,  and  to  urge  that  the  qualities  of  Charles  I.  were
very  accurately  reproduced  in  the  reigning  sovereign.
The  House  of  Commons,  which  was  at  this  time  strongly
Whig,  was  both  exasperated  and  perplexed.  It  was
felt  that  it  would  be  scarcely  becoming  to  condemn  to
the  flames  a  sermon  which  had  been  printed  by  its
express  order  and  honoured  by  its  thanks,  and  it  ac-
cordingly contented  itself  with  ordering,  without  a
division,  that  its  vote  of  thanks  should  be  expvmged.^

There  were  many  other  prerogatives  claimed  by  the
House  of  Commons  which  savoured  largely  of  despot-
ism. The  term  privilege  comprised  an  extended  and
ill-defined  domain  of  power  external  to  the  law.  The
House  claimed  the  right  of  imprisoning  men  to  the
end  of  the  current  session  by  its  sole  authority,  and  its
victims  could  be  neither  bailed  nor  released  by  the  law
courts.^  It  even  claimed  for  itself  collectively,  and  for
each  of  its  Members  in  his  parliamentary  capacity,  a
complete  freedom  from  hostile  criticism.^  Its  Members,
though  they  were  presumed  by  the  property  qualifica-

'  Pari. Hist. xvii. 311-318.  '  '  That  to  printer  publish  any

Gibbon's Miscellaneous Works,  books or  libels reflecting  upon

ii.  78.  the  proceedings  of  the  House  of

-  Thus  in  1699  the  Commons  Commons or of any Member

resolved,  '  That  to  assert  that  the  thereof,  for  or  relating  to  his  ser-

House of Commons have no  vice  therein,  is  a  high  violation

power  of  commitment  but  of  their  of  the  rights and privileges  of

own  Members,  tends  to  the  sub-  the  House  of  Commons.'  Burgh's

version  of  the  constitution  of  the  Political  Disguisitions,  i.  208.
House  of  Commons.'

£  2

52 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cs.  iV.

tion  to  be  men  of  means,  enjoyed  an  immunity  from
all  actions  of  law  and  suits  of  equity,  and  were  thus
able  to  set  their  creditors  at  defiance,  and  the  same
privilege,  till  the  reign  of  George  III.,  was  extended  to
their  servants.^  An  immense  amount  of  fraud,  vio-
lence, and  oppression  was  thus  sheltered  from  punish-
ment, and  the  privilege  appeared  peculiarly  odious  at
a  time  when  the  ascendency  of  law  was  in  other  depart-
ments becoming  more  complete.  Almost  every  injury
in  word  or  act  done  to  a  Member  of  Parliament  was,
during  the  reign  of  George  II.,  voted  a  breach  of
privilege,  and  thus  brought  under  the  immediate  and
often  vindictive  jurisdiction  of  the  House.  Among  the
offences  thus  characterised  were  shooting  the  rabbits  of
one  Member,  poaching  on  the  fishponds  of  another,
injuring  the  trees  of  a  third,  and  stealing  the  coal  of  a
fourth.2

The  abuse  of  the  judicial  functions  that  were
properly  and  reasonably  assumed  by  the  House  was
scandalous  and  notorious.  Even  the  occasional  expul-
sions of  Members  for  corruption  were  often  themselves
the  corrupt  acts  of  a  corrupt  majority,  perfectly  in-
different to  the  evidence  before  them,  and  intent
only  on  driving  out  an  opponent.  The  decisions  on
disputed  elections  were  something  more  than  a  scan-
dal. They  threatened  to  subvert  the  whole  theory  of
representation.  The  trial  of  disputed  elections  had
been  originally  entrusted  to  select  committees  specially
nominated,  and  afterwards  to  a  single  body  called  the
Committee  of  Privileges  and  Elections,  chosen  by  the
House,  and  composed,  for  the  most  part,  of  Privy  Ooun-

'  See  much  curious  informa-  ^  Lord Stanhope's Hist, of

tion  about  these  abuses  of  privi-  England,  iv.  20,  21. See,  too,

lege  in Burgh's  Political Dis-  the  chapters  on Parliamentary

quisitions ;  or,  an  Inquiry  into  Privilege  in  HaUam  and  Towns-

Public  Errors  and  A  buses  (Lond.  end.
1774),  i.  205-2a5.

CH.  IV.  DISPUTED ELECTIONS.  53

cillors  and  eminent  lawyers.  In  1672,  however,  it  was
delegated  to  an  open  committee,  in  which  all  who  came
were  allowed  to  have  voices,  and  afterwards  elections
were  tried  at  the  bar  of  the  House,  and  decided  by  a
general  vote.^  This  vote  was  soon  openly  and  almost
invariably  given  through  party  motives.  It  is  impos-
sible to  conceive  a  more  grotesque  travesty  of  a  judicial
proceeding  than  was  habitually  exhibited  on  these  occa-
sions, when  private  friends  of  each  candidate  and  the
memliers  of  the  rival  parties  mustered  their  forces  to
vote  entirely  irrespectively  of  the  merits  of  the  case,
when,  the  farce  of  hearing  evidence  having  been  gone
through  in  an  empty  House,  the  Members,  who  had
been  waiting  without,  streamed  in,  often  half  intoxi-
cated, to  the  division,  and  when  the  plainest  and  most
incontestable  testimony  was  set  aside  without  scruple
if  it  clashed  with  the  party  interests  of  the  majority. ^
The  evil  had  already  become  apparent  in  the  latter  days
of  William,^  but  some  regard  for  appearances  seems  then
to  have  been  observed,  and  the  partiality  was  shown
chiefly  in  the  very  different  degrees  of  stringency  with
which  corruption  was  judged  in  the  case  of  friend  and
foe.  Soon,  however,  all  shame  was  cast  aside.  In  the
Tory  Parliament  of  1702,  the  controverted  elections,  in
the  words  of  Burnet,  '  were  judged  in  favour  of  Tories
with  such  a  barefaced  partiality,  that  it  showed  the
party  was  resolved  on  everything  that  might  serve  their
ends.'*  When  the  Whigs  triumphed  in  1705  they
exhibited  the  same  spirit,  and  in  the  few  cases  in  which
they  did  not  decide  in  favour  of  the  Whig  candidate
the  result  was  ascribed  exclusively  to  some  private  ani-
mosity.^ Speaker  Onslow,  who  for  thirty-three  years

'  Sir  E.  May's  Const.  Hist.  i.  ^  Burnet's  Own  Times,  ii.  162,

307,  308.  259.  "  Ibid.  p.  334.

=  Pari.  Hist.  xvii.  1064.  ^  Ibid.  p.  429,

54 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  it.

presided  over  tlie  House  with  great  dignity  and  in-
tegrity, declared  that  it  had  '  really  come  to  be  deemed
by  many  a  piece  of  virtue  and  honour  to  do  injustice  in
these  cases.  "  The  right  is  in  the  friend  and  not  in  the
cause  "  is  almost  avowed,  and  he  is  laughed  at  by  the
leaders  of  parties  who  has  scruples  upon  it,'  '  and  yet,'
he  adds,  '  we  should  not  bear  this  a  month  in  any  other
judicature  in  the  kingdom,  in  any  other  object  of  juris-
diction, or — in  this ;  but  we  do  it  ourselves,  and  that
sanctifies  it,  and  the  guilt  is  lost  in  the  number  of  the
guilty  and  the  support  of  the  party  without  doors,' '
In  the  Parliament  which  met  in  1728  there  were  nearly
seventy  election  petitions  to  be  tried,  and  Lord  Hervey
has  left  us  an  account  of  how  the  House  discharged  its
functions.  '  I  believe,'  he  says,  '  the  manifest  injustice
and  glaring  violation  of  all  truth  in  the  decisions  of  this
Parliament  surpass  even  the  most  flagrant  and  infamous
instances  of  any  of  their  predecessors.  They  voted  in
one  case  forty  more  than  ninety ;  in  another  they  cut
off  the  votes  of  about  seven  towns,  and  some  thousand
voters,  who  had  not  only  been  determined  to  have
voices  by  former  Committees  of  Elections,  but  had  had
their  right  of  voting  confirmed  to  them  by  the  express
words  of  an  Act  of  Parliament  and  the  authority  of  the
whole  Legislature.  There  was  a  string  of  these  equit-
able determinations  in  about  half  a  dozen  instances,
so  unwarrantable  and  indefensible  that  people  grew
ashamed  of  pretending  to  talk  of  right  and  wrong,
laughed  at  that  for  which  they  ought  to  have  blushed,
and  declared  that  in  elections  they  never  considered  the
cause  but  the  men,  nor  ever  voted  according  to  justice
and  right,  but  from  solicitation  and  favour.'  ^  The  true
character  of  these  professedly  judicial  proceedings  was

'  Onslow's  note  in  Burnet,  ii. 102, 103. See,  too, Walpole's
410.  Memoirs of George  II. ii. 14,

*  Lord Hervey's Memoirs,  i. Pari.  Hist.  vi.  49,  50.

CH.  IV.  PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING.  55

SO  clearly  recognised  that  a  defeat  in  a  division  about
the  Chippenham  election  was  the  immediate  cause  of
the  resignation  of  Walpole,  and  the  votes  of  the  '  King's
friends '  against  the  Government  in  election  cases
formed,  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  reign,  one  of  the
great  complaints  of  Rockingham,  A  small  majority,
consisting  mainly  of  the  representatives  of  rotten
boroughs,  could  thus  easily  convert  itself  into  a  large
one,  and  override  the  plainest  wishes  of  constituencies ;
and  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  a  considerable
proportion  of  the  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons
owed  their  seats,  not  to  the  electors,  but  to  the  House
itself.

Next  to  the  existence  of  open  constituencies,  and  a
fair  mode  of  election,  the  best  security  a  nation  can
possess  for  the  fidelity  of  its  representatives  is  to  be
found  in  the  system  of  parliamentary  reporting.  But
this  also  was  wanting.  The  theory  of  the  statesmen  of
the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  that  the
electors  had  no  right  to  know  the  proceedings  of  their
representatives,  and  it  was  only  after  a  long  and  dan-
gerous struggle,  which  was  not  terminated  till  the
reign  of  George  III.,  that  the  right  of  printing  debates
was  virtually  conceded.  A  few  fragmentary  reports,
as  early  as  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  have  come  down  to
us;  but  the  first  systematic  reporting  dates  from  the
Long  Parliament,  which  in  1641  permitted  it  in  a
certain  specified  form.  The  reports  appeared  under
the  title  of  '  Diurnal  Occurrences  of  Parliament,'  and
continued  until  the  Restoration;  but  all  unlicensed
reporting  was  stringently  forbidden,  and  the  House
even  expelled  and  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  one  of  its
Members,  Sir  E.  Bering,  for  printing,  without  per-
mission, a  collection  of  his  own  speeches.  The  secrecy
of  debate  was  originally  intended  as  a  protection  from
the  King,  but  it  was  soon  valued  as  a  shelter  from  the

5G ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH,  iv.

supervision  of  the  constituencies.  At  the  Restoration,
all  reporting  was  forbidden,  though  the  votes  and  pro-
ceedings of  the  House  were  printed  by  direction  of  the
Speaker,  and  from  this  time  till  the  Revolution  only
a  few  relics  of  parliamentary  debates  were  preserved.
Andrew  Marvell,  the  friend  of  Milton,  and  his  assistant,
as  Secretary  to  Cromwell,  sent  regular  reports  to  his
constituents,  from  1660  to  1678.  Locke,  at  the  sug-
gestion of  Shaftesbury,  wrote  a  report  of  a  debate  which
took  place  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  1675,  and  he
printed  it  under  the  title  of  '  A  Letter  from  a  Person  of
Quality  to  his  Friend,'  but,  by  order  of  the  Privy  Council,
it  was  burnt  by  the  hangman.  Shaftesbury  himself
wrote  some  reports.  Anchitell  Grey,  a  Member  for  Derby,
was  accustomed  for  many  years  to  take  notes  of  the  de-
bates, which  were  published  in  1769,  and  which  form  one
of  our  most  important  sources  of  information  about  the
period  immediately  following  the  Revolution.  Occasion-
ally a  news-letter  published  an  outline  of  what  had
occurred,  but  tliis  was  done  in  direct  defiance  of  the
resolutions  of  the  House,  and  was  often  followed  by
a  speedy  punishment.  In  the  latter  years  of  Anne,
however,  the  circle  of  political  interests  had  very  widely
extended,  and,  to  meet  the  demand,  short  summaries
of  parliamentary  debates,  compiled  from  recollections,
began  to  appear  every  month  in  Beyer's  '  Political  State
of  Great  Britain,'  and  in  the  following  reign  in  the
'  Historical  Register.'  Cave,  who  was  one  of  the  most
enterprising  booksellers  of  the  eighteenth  century,  per-
ceived the  great  popularity  likely  to  be  derived  from
such  reports,  and  he  showed  great  resolution  in  pro-
curing them.  In  1728  he  was  brought  before  the
House  of  Commons,  confined  for  several  days,  and
obliged  to  apologise  for  having  furnished  his  friend
Robert  Raikes  with  minutes  of  its  proceedings  for  the
use  of  the  '  Gloucester  Journal,'  and  at  the  same  time

CH,  IV.  PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING.  57

the  House  passed  a  strong  resolution,  declaring  such
reports  a  breach  of  privilege.  They  were  too  popular,
however,  to  be  put  down,  and  in  the  next  year  Raikes
again  incurred  the  censure  of  the  House  for  the  same
offence.  In  1731  Cave  started  the  '  Gentleman's  Maga-
zine,' which  was  soon  followed  by  its  rival  the  '  London
Magazine,'  and  in  1736  Cave  began  to  make  parlia-
mentary reports  a  prominent  feature  of  his  periodical.
He  was  accustomed  to  obtain  entrance  to  the  gallery  of
the  House  with  a  friend  or  two,  to  take  down  secretly
the  names  of  the  speakers  and  the  drift  of  their  argu-
ments, and  then  to  repair  at  once  to  a  neighbouring
coffee-house,  where,  from  the  united  recollections  of
the  party,  a  rude  report  was  compiled,  which  was
afterwards  elaborated  and  adorned  by  a  more  skilful
writer.  This  latter  function  was  at  first  fulfilled  by
a  now  forgotten  historian  named /^  Guthrie.  From  Jl^'
November  1740  to  February  1742-43  it  was  discharged  I'^l-'i^
by  Dr.  Johnson,  and  afterwards  by  Hawkesworth,  the
well-known  editor  of  '  Travels '  and  biographer  of  Swift.
Reports  compiled  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner,  by  a
Scotch  Presbyterian  minister,  named  Gordon,  appeared
in  the  '  London  Magazine,'  and  they  speedily  spread
into  different  newspapers.  To  elude,  if  possible,  the
severity  of  the  House,  they  only  appeared  during  the
recess,  and  only  the  first  and  last  letters  of  the  names
of  the  speakers  were  given.^

The subject  was brought before the House  of
Commons  by  the  Speakerj^Onslow,  in  April  1738,  and I /^v!
a  debate  ensued,  of  which  a  full  report  has  been  pre-
served. It  is  remarkable  that  the  only  speaker  who
adopted  what  we  should  now  regard  as  the  constitutional

'  See  Dr.  Johnson's Life  of  the History of Eeporting, in

Cave ;  Nichols' Literary  Anec-  Hunt's  Fourth  Estate,  and  An-

dotes,  V.  1-18 ;  May's  Constitu-  drews'  Hist,  of  British  Journal-

tional  History,  i.  421,  422  ;  and  ism.

<A/^«.

lit,  [ i/^^  ^*-5-^
58 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

view  of  the  subject  was  the  Tory  leader,  Sir  W.  Wind-
ham. He  concurred,  indeed,  in  the  condemnation  of
the  reports  that  were  appearing,  but  only  on  the  ground
of  their  frequent  inaccuracy,  and  took  occasion  to  say
that  '  he  had  indeed  seen  many  speeches  that  were  fairly
and  accurately  taken  ;  that  no  gentleman,  where  that
is  the  case,  ought  to  be  ashamed  that  the  world  should
know  every  word  he  speaks  in  this  House,'  '  that  the
public  might  have  a  right  to  know  somewhat  more  of
the  proceedings  of  the  House  than  what  appears  from
the  votes,'  and  that  if  he  were  sure  that  the  sentiments
of  gentlemen  were  not  misrepresented,  he  '  would  be
against  coming  to  any  resolution  that  would  deprive
them  of  a  knowledge  that  is  so  necessary  for  their  being
able  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  their  representatives.'
The  language,  however,  of  the  other  speakers  was  much
more  unqualified.  '  If  we  do  not  put  a  speedy  stop  to
this  practice,'  said  Winnington,  '  it  will  be  looked  upon
without  doors  that  we  have  no  power  to  do  it.  .  .  ,  You
will  have  every  word  that  is  spoken  here  misrepresented
by  fellows  who  thrust  themselves  into  our  gallery.  You
will  have  the  speeches  of  this  House  every  day  printed,
even  during  your  Session,  and  we  shall  be  looked  upon
as  the  most  contemptible  assembly  on  the  face  of  the
earth.'  '  It  is  absolutely  necessary,'  said  Pulteney,  '  a
stop  should  be  put  to  the  practice  which  has  been  so
justly  complained  of.  I  think  no  appeals  should  be
made  to  the  public  with  regard  to  what  is  said  in  this
assembly ;  and  to  print  or  publish  the  speeches  of  gentle-
men in  this  House,  even  though  they  were  not  mis-
represented, looks  very  like  making  them  accountable
without  doors  for  what  they  say  within.'  Walpole  was
equally  unqualified  in  his  condemnation,  but  he  dwelt
exclusively  on  the  inaccuracy  and  dishonesty  of  the  re-
ports, which  were,  no  doubt,  very  great,  and  were  a
natural  consequence  of  the  way  in  which  they  were

CH,  IV,  PARLIAMENTARY REPOKTING.  59

taken.  '  I  have  read  debates,'  he  said, '  in  which  I  have
been  made  to  speak  the  very  reverse  of  what  I  meant.  I
have  read  others  of  them  wherein  all  the  wit,  the  learning,
and  the  argument  has  been  thrown  into  one  side,  and  on
the  other  nothing  but  what  was  low,  mean,  and  ridicu-
lous, and  yet  when  it  comes  to  the  question,  the  division
has  gone  against  the  side  wliich  upon  the  face  of  the
debate  had  reason  and  justice  to  support  it.'  'You
have  punished  some  persons  for  forging  the  names  of
gentlemen  on  the  backs  of  letters  ;  but  this  is  a  forgery
of  a  worse  kind,  for  it  misrepresents  the  sense  of  Parlia-
ment, and  imposes  on  the  understanding  of  the  whole
nation.'  The  result  of  the  debate  was  a  unanimous
resolution  '  that  it  is  a  high  indignity  to,  and  a  notorious
breach  of  the  privileges  of  this  House '  to  print  the  de-
bates or  other  proceedings  of  the  House  '  as  well  during
the  recess  as  the  sitting  of  Parliament,  and  that  this
House  will  proceed  with  the  utmost  severity  against
such  offenders.' '

The  threat  was  only  partially  effectual.  Cave  con-
tinued the  publication  in  a  new  form,  as  '  Debates  in  the
Senate  of  Great  Lilliput,'  and  substituted  extravagant
fancy  names  for  the  initials  of  the  speakers.  In  the
'  London  Magazine,'  debates  '  of  the  Political  Club '
appeared,  and  the  affairs  of  the  nation  were  discussed
under  a  transparent  disguise  by  personages  in  Roman
history.  Meagre,  inaccurate,  and  often  obscure,  as
these  reports  necessarily  were,  they  were  still  very
popular ;  but  there  was  no  small  risk  in  producing
them.  Careful  disguise  was  necessary,  and  Cave
thought  it  henceforth  advisable  to  print  under  the  name
of  his  nephew.  In  1747  the  editors  of  both  magazines
were  summoned  before  the  House  of  Lords  for  having
given  an  account  of  Lord  Lo vat's  trial,  and  they  only

'  Pari.  Hist.  x.  800-811. Coxe's  Life  of  Walpole,  ch.  1.

60 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

escaped  imprisonment  by  an  abject  apology.  In  1752
Cave  returned  to  the  former  plan  of  inserting  initials  of
the  speakers,  and  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  again
molested  during  the  short  remainder  of  his  life.^  Many
other  printers,  however,  were  summoned  before  the
battle  was  finally  won.  So  jealous  was  the  House  of
everything  that  could  enable  the  constituencies  to  keep
a  watchful  eye  upon  their  representatives,  that  it  was
only  in  the  eighteenth  century  that  the  votes  of  the
House  were  printed  without  formal  permission,^  while
the  names  of  the  Members  who  had  voted  were  wholly
concealed.  In  1696  the  publication  of  the  names  of  a
minority  was  voted  a  breach  of  privilege '  destructive  to
the  freedom  and  liberties  of  Parliament.'  During  almost
the  whole  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  publication  of
division  lists  was  a  rare  and  exceptional  thing,  due  to
the  exertions  of  individual  Members,  and  it  was  not
until  1836  that  it  was  undertaken  by  the  House  itself.^
The  system  of  parliamentary  reporting  contributed,
perhaps,  more  than  any  other  influence  to  mitigate  the
glaring  corruption  of  Parliament,  for  although  several
laws  dealing  directly  with  the  evil  were  enacted  in
obedience  to  the  clamour  out  of  doors,  they  were  allowed

'  He  died  Jan.  1754.  to  be  dropped  I  cannot  so  well
2  In  the  discussion  on  the  account  for,  but  I  think  it  high
publication  of  debates,  to  which  time  for  us  to  prevent  any
I  have  just  referred,  Pulteney  is  further  encroachment  upon  our
reported  to  have  said  :  '  I  remem-  privileges.'^ParZ.  Hist.  x.  806,
ber  the  time  when  this  House  807.  In  1703,  during  the  discus-
was  so  jealous,  so  cautious  of  sions  of  the  House  of  Commons
doing  anything  that  might  look  with  the  Lords,  the  former
like  an  appeal  to  their  con-  passed  a  resolution  '  that  the
stituents,  that  not  even  the  votes  votes  of  the  House  should  not  be
were  printed  without  leave.  A  printed,  and  that  this  might  be
gentleman  every  day  rose  in  his  a  standing  order.' — 'Boyex^aQusen
place  and  desired  the  Chair  to  Anne,  p.  47.
ask  leave  of  the  House  that  their  ^  May's  Constitutional  Hist.  i.
votes  for  that  day  should  be  439-441,
printed. How  this  custom  came

ca.  IV.

PLACE BILLS.  61

to  a  very  large  extent  to  remain  inoj)erative.  It  was
useless  to  arraign  offenders  before  a  tribunal  of  accom-
plices, and  as  long  as  the  Executive  and  the  majority
in  Parliament  conspired  to  practise  and  to  shelter  cor-
ruption, laws  against  it  were  a  dead  letter.  Bribery  at
elections  had  been  condemned  by  a  law  of  William
III.,^  and  another  measure  of  great  stringency  was
carried  against  it  in  1729.  By  this  law  any  elector
might  be  compelled  on  demand  to  take  an  oath  swearing
that  he  had  received  no  bribe  to  influence  his  vote,  and
any  person  who  was  convicted  of  either  giving  or  re-
ceiving a  bribe  at  elections  was  deprived  for  ever  of  the
franchise  and  fined  500^.  unless  he  purchased  indemnity
by  discovering  another  offender  of  the  same  kind.^  Some
measures  had  also  been  taken  to  limit  the  number  of
placemen  and  pensioners  in  Parliament.  In  1692  a
Bill  for  expelling  all  who  accepted  places  after  a  certain
date  from  the  House  of  Commons  passed  that  House,
but  was  rejected  in  the  Lords.  In  1693,  after  under-
going material  alterations,  it  was  carried  through  both
Houses,  but  vetoed  by  the  Crown.  In  1694  a  new
Place  Bill  was  introduced,  but  this  time  it  was  defeated
in  the  Commons.  A  clause  of  the  Act  of  Settlement,
however,  carried  out  the  principle  in  the  most  rigid
form,  providing  that  after  the  accession  of  the  House  of
Hanover  no  person  who  held  any  office,  place  of  profit,
or  pension  from  the  King  should  have  a  seat  in  the
House  of  Commons ;  but  this  clause,  which  would  have
banished  the  ministers  from  the  popular  branch  of  the
Legislature,  never  came  into  operation.  It  was  repealed
in  1706,  while  Anne  was  still  on  the  throne,  and  replaced
by  a  law  providing  that  every  Member  of  the  House  of
Commons  who  accepted  office  under  the  Crown  should

'  7  William  III.  c.  4.  Abuse  of  Parliaments,  ii.  382-

2  2  George  II.  c.  24. See  Pari. 384
Hist.  xii.  648. Kalph's  Use  and

62 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

be  compelled  to  vacate  his  seat  and  could  only  sit  after
re-election.  Occasionally,  when  a  new  class  of  offices
was  created,  its  members  were  incapacitated  by  law
from  sitting  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Thus  in  1694,
when  certain  duties  on  salt,  beer,  and  other  liquors  were
granted  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  the  war  with
France,  it  was  enacted  that  no  Member  of  the  House
of  Commons  might  be  concerned  in  farming,  collecting,
or  managing  any  of  the  sums  granted  to  his  Majesty
by  this  Act '  except  the  Commissioners  of  the  Treasury,
Customs,  and  Excise,  not  exceeding  the  present  num-
ber in  each  office,  and  the  Commissioners  of  the  land
tax.'  In  1700  all  Commissioners  and  other  officers  of
the  Customs  were  disqualified  from  sitting  in  the  House,
and  the  Act  of  1706  extended  the  disability  to  all  offices
created  after  that  date,  limited  the  number  of  Commis-
sioners appointed  to  execute  any  office,  and  excluded
all  who  held  pensions  from  the  Crown  during  pleasure.
Under  George  I.  this  exclusion  was  extended  to  those
who  held  pensions  during  a  term  of  years.

Had  these  laws  been  enforced,  they  would  have  done
very  much  to  purify  Parliament,  but  the  pension  Bills
at  least  were  treated  with  complete  contempt.  The
pensions  were  secret.  The  Government  refused  all  in-
formation concerning  them.  A  Bill  was  three  times
brought  forward  compelling  every  Member  to  swear
that  he  was  not  in  receipt  of  such  a  pension,  and  that  if
he  accepted  one  he  would  within  fourteen  days  disclose
it  to  the  House,  but  by  the  influence  of  Walpole  it  was
three  times  d efeated.  A  similar  fate  during  the  Walpole
administration  befell  Bills  for  restricting  the  number  of
placemen  in  the  House,  but  in  the  great  outburst  of
popular  indignation  that  followed  his  downfall  one
measure  of  this  kind  was  carried.  The  Place  Bill  of
1743  excluded  a  certain  number  of  inferior  placeholders
from  Parliament, and  in  some degree  mitigated  the

CH.  IV.  THE  SEPTENNIAL  ACT.  63

evil.'  It  wr^s,  however,  the  only  step  that  was  taken.
Pelliam  would,  probably,  never  have  corrupted  Parlia-
ment had  he  found  it  pure,^  but  he  inherited  a  system
of  corruption,  and  he  bequeathed  it  almost  intact  to
his  successors.

The  efforts  that  were  made  to  shorten  the  duration
of  Parliament  were  still  less  successful.  We  have
already  seen  the  chief  reasons  that  induced  the  Whig
party  to  pass  the  Septennial  Act,  and  some  of  the
results  which  it  produced.  Its  beneficial  effect  in  re-
pressing disorder  and  immorality,  in  giving  a  new
stability  to  English  policy,  a  new  strength  to  the
dynasty,  and  a  new  authority  to  the  House  of
Commons,  can  never  be  forgotten.  It  was  accom-
panied, however,  by  no  measure  of  parliamentary  re-
form, and  it  had  the  inevitable  effect  of  greatly  in-
creasing corruption  both  at  elections  and  in  the  House.
The  price  of  seats  at  once  rose  when  their  tenure  was
prolonged,  and  the  change  in  the  class  of  candidates
which  had  been  in  progress  since  the  Revolution  was
much  accelerated.  In  most  rural  constituencies  it
was  impossible,  when  elections  were  very  frequent,  for
any  stranger  to  compete  with  the  steady  influence  of
the  resident  landlord.  When,  however,  elections  be-
came comparatively  rare,  money  became  in  many  dis-
tricts more  powerful  than  influence.  The  value  of  the
prize  being  enhanced,  men  were  prepared  to  give  more
to  obtain  it ;  and  rich  merchants,  coming  down  to  con-

'  See  Hallam's Const. Hist.  Sir  R.  Walpole  had  not  dipped

ch.  XV.  and  xvi. Fischel  on  the  up  to  the  elbow ;  but  as  he  did

English  Constitution,  p.  433.  dip,  and  as  Mr.  Pelham  was  per-

^  Horace  Walpole,  who  hated  suaded  that  it  was  as  necessary

Pelham, and always put the  for  him  to  be  minister  as  it  was

worst  colouring  on  his  acts,  ad-  for  Sir  R.  Walpole,  he  plunged  as

mittedthis. He  says  :' I  believe  deep.'— Horace Walpole's Me-

Ki\ Pelham  would  never  have  moirs  of  George  II.  i.  235.
wet  his  finger  in  corruption  if

64 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  iV.

stituencies  where  they  were  perfect  strangers,  were
able,  by  the  expenditure  of  large  sums  at  long  intervals,
to  wrest  the  representation  from  the  resident  gentry.
At  the  same  time,  the  means  of  corruption  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  Government  were  enormously  increased.  It
was  a  common  thing  for  a  minister  to  endeavour  to  buy
the  vote  of  a  new  Member  by  the  offer  of  a  pension.
Under  the  old  system  the  Member  knew  that  in  three
years  he  would  be  called  to  account  by  his  constituents,
and  might  lose  both  his  pension  and  his  seat.  By  the
Septennial  Act  the  value  of  the  bribe  was  more  than
doubled,  for  its  enjoyment  was  virtually  secured  for
seven  years.

To  these  arguments  it  was  added  that  the  Septennial
Act  had  a  social  influence  which  was  far  from  beneficial.
Then  as  now  Parliament  contributed  largely  to  set  the
tone  of  manners.  Under  the  former  system  a  landlord
who  aspired  to  a  political  position  found  an  almost
constant  residence  on  his  estate  indispensable.  When
Parliaments  became  less  frequent  the  necessity  grew
less  stringent,  and  it  was  noticed  as  a  consequence  of
the  Septennial  Act  that  country  gentlemen  were  accus-
tomed to  spend  much  more  of  their  time  and  fortune
than  formerly  in  the  metropolis.

There  can,  however,  I  think,  be  little  doubt  that  the
Government  were  right  in  maintaining  the  Septennial
Act,  and  that  a  return  to  the  system  which  had  ren-
dered English  politics  so  anarchical  in  the  closing  years
of  the  seventeenth  and  the  opening  years  of  the  eigh-
teenth century  would  have  produced  more  evils  than  it
could  have  cured.  It  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the
changes  that  may  pass  over  party  warfare,  that  the
Eepublican  Milton  at  one  time  advocated  the  appoint-
ment of  Members  for  life  ;  ^  that  the  Tory  party  under

See  his  Ready  and  Easy  Way  to  establish  a  Commmiwealth.

en.  IV.  CHARACTER OF THE PARLIAMENT.  65

Walpole  and  Pelham  advocated  triennial  and  even
annual  Parliaments,  which  afterwards  became  the  watch-
words of  the  most  extreme  Radicals ;  that  the  Whigs,
taking  their  stand  upon  the  Septennial  Act,  contended
against  the  Tories  for  the  greater  duration  of  Parlia-
ment, and  that  a  reform  which  was  demanded  as  of
capital  importance  by  the  Tories  under  George  I.  and
George  II.,  and  by  the  Radicals  in  the  succeeding  reigns,
has  at  present  scarcely  a  champion  in  England.^  It
must,  however,  be  added  that  recent  reforms  have  con-
siderably diminished  the  average  duration  of  Parlia-
ments, and  that  during  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth
century  premature  dissolutions  were  extremely  rare.  In
the  early  part  of  the  century  the  proposed  reduction  of
the  duration  of  Parliaments  was  very  popular  through-
out the  country.  It  was  supported  with  great  power
by  Sir  W.Windham  in  1734,  and  in  1745  a  motion  for
annual  Parliaments  was  only  defeated  by  145  to  113.

It  is  not  easy  to  understand  how  a  Parliament  so
thoroughly  vicious  in  its  constitution,  so  narrow,  corrupt,
and  often  despotic  in  its  tendencies  as  that  which  I
have  described,  should  have  proved  itself,  in  any  de-
gree, a  faithful  guardian  of  English  liberty,  or  should
have  produced  so  large  an  amount  of  wise,  temperate,
and  tolerant  legislation  as  it  unquestionably  did.  Rea-
soning from  its  constitution  and  from  some  of  its  acts,
we  might  have  supposed  that  it  would  be  wholly  in-
accessible to  public  opinion,  and  would  have  established
a  system  of  the  most  absolute  and  most  ignoble  tyranny;
yet  no  one  who  candidly  considers  the  general  tenour  of
English  administration  during  the  long  period  of  Whig
ascendency  in  the  eighteenth  century  can  question  that
Voltaire  and  Montesquieu  were  correct  in  describing  it
as greatly  superior  to the chief  governments  of  the

'  Written  about  1873.
VOL. II.

Q6  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

Continent.  In  truth,  the  •  merits  of  a  government  de-
pend much  more  upon  the  character  of  men  than  upon
the  framework  of  institutions.  There  have  been  legis-
lative bodies,  constructed  on  the  largest,  freest,  and
most  symmetrical  plan,  which  have  been  the  passive
instruments  of  despotism ;  and  there  have  been  others
which,  though  saturated  with  corruption  and  disfigured
by  every  description  of  anomaly,  have  never  wholly  lost
their  popular  character.  The  parliamentary  system  at
the  time  we  are  considering  was  a  government  by  the
upper  classes  of  the  nation  ;  those  classes  possessed  in
an  eminent  degree  political  capacity,  and  although
public  spirit  had  sunk  very  low  among  them,  it  was  by
no  means  extinguished.  Men  who  on  ordinary  occa-
sions voted  through  party  or  personal  motives  rose  on
great  emergencies  to  real  patriotism.  The  enthusiasm
and  the  genius  of  the  country  aspired  in  a  great  degree
to  political  life ;  and  large  borough-owners,  who  dis-
posed of  some  seats  for  money  and  of  others  for  the
aggrandisement  of  their  families,  were  accustomed  also,
through  mingled  motives  of  patriotism  and  vanity,  to
bring  forward  young  men  of  character  and  promise.
Even  if  they  restricted  their  patronage  to  their  sons
they  at  least  pi'ovided  that  many  young  men  should  be
in  the  House,  and  they  thus  secured  the  materials  of
efficient  legislators.  Statesmanship  is  not  like  poetry,
or  some  of  the  other  forms  of  higher  literature,  which
can  only  be  brought  to  perfection  by  men  endowed
with  extraordinary  natural  genius.  The  art  of  manage-
ment, whether  applied  to  public  business  or  to  assem-
blies, lies  strictly  within  the  limits  of  education,  and
what  is  required  is  much  less  transcendent  abilities
than  early  practice,  tact,  courage,  good  temper,  cour-
tesy, and  industry.  In  the  immense  majority  of  cases
the  function  of  statesmen  is  not  creative,  and  its  excel-
lence lies  much  more  in  execution  than  in  conception.

CH.  IV.  CHARACTER OF THE PARLIAMENT.  67

In  politics  possible  combinations  are  usually  few,  and
the  course  that  should  be  pursued  is  sufficiently  ob-
vious. It  is  the  management  of  details,  the  necessity  of
surmounting  difficulties,  that  chiefly  taxes  the  abilities
of  statesmen,  and  these  things  can  to  a  very  large  degree
be  acquired  by  practice.  The  natural  capacities  even
of  a  Walpole,  a  Palmerston,  or  a  Peel,  were  far  short  of
prodigy  or  genius.  Imperfect  and  vicious  as  was  the
system  of  parliamentary  government,  it  at  least  secured
a  school  of  statesmen  quite  competent  for  the  manage-
ment of  affairs,  and  the  reign  of  corruption  among  them,
though  very  threatening,  was  by  no  means  absolute.

Among  the  rich  who  purchased  their  seats  there
were  always  some  few  who  weie  actuated  by  an  earnest
desire  to  benefit  their  country,  and  who,  like  Eomilly
and  Flood,  chose  this  way  of  entering  Parliament  as
that  which  made  them  most  independent.  The  county
representation  continued  tolerably  pure ;  ^  of  the  other
constituencies  a  proportion,  though  a  small  proportion,
were  really  free,  and  some  of  these,  through  the  opera-
tion of  the  scot  and  lot  franchise,  which  was  equiva-
lent to  household  suffrage,  were  eminently  popular.
All  placemen  did  not  always  vote  with  the  Govern-
ment, and  all  the  forms  of  corruption  did  not  act  in  the
same  direction.  There  was  not  much  public  spirit  ex-
hibited, but  there  was  always  some,  and  there  was  much
of  that  spirit  of  moderation  and  compromise,  that  aver-
sion to  raising  dangerous  questions  or  disturbing  old
customs,  that  anxiety  not  to  strain  allegiance  or  abuse
strength, or carry political conflicts to  extremities,

'  Chatham,  in  a  speech  which  rupted,  that  of  the  great  cities  is
he  made  in  1770,  while  dwelling  upon  a  footing  equally  respect-
strongly  on  the  corruption  of  the  able,  and  there  are  many  of  the
small  boroughs,  added :  '  The  larger  trading  towns  which  still
representation  of  the  counties  is,  preserve  their  independence.'—
I think, still  pure and  uncor-  Anecdotes  of  Chatiuim,  ii.  35.

F  2

68 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  IV.

which  has  almost  always  characterised  English  politics,
and  which  Walpole  had  done  more  than  any  other  single
man  to  sustain.  Besides  this,  the  influence  of  the
House  of  Lords  and  a  network  of  old  customs,  asso-
ciations, and  traditions  opposed  formidable  barriers  to
precipitate  or  violent  action.  As  Burke  once  said  with
profound  truth,  '  it  is  of  the  nature  of  a  constitution  so
formed  as  ours,  however  clumsy  the  constituent  parts,
if  set  together  in  action,  ultimately  to  act  well.'

But  perhaps  the  most  important  guarantee  of  toler-
able government  in  England  was  the  fear  of  the  Pre-
tender. During  all  the  early  years  of  the  Hanoverian
dynasty,  it  was  more  probable  than  otherwise  that  the
Stuarts  would  be  restored,  and  it  was  only  by  care-
fully and  constantly  abstaining  from  every  course  that
could  arouse  violent  hostility,  that  the  tottering  dynasty
could  be  kept  upon  the  throne.  This  was  the  ever
present  check  wpon  the  despotism  of  majorities,  the
great  secret  of  the  deference  of  Parliament  to  the
wishes  of  the  people.  The  conciliatory  ministry  of
Walpole  turned  the  balance  of  probabilities  in  favour
of  the  reigning  family,  but  the  danger  was  not  really
averted  till  after  Culloden,  and  the  Jacobite  party  did
not  cease  to  be  a  political  force  till  the  great  ministry
of  Pitt.  There  were  persons  of  high  position — the  most
noted  being  the  Duke  of  Beaufort — who  were  believed
every  year  to  send  large  sums  to  the  Pretender.  Jacobite
cries  were  loud  and  frequent  during  the  riots  that  fol-
lowed the  Bill  for  naturalising  Jews  in  1753.  The
University  of  Oxford  was  still  profoundly  disaffected.
Complaints  were  made  in  Parliament  in  1754  of  treason-
able songs  sung  by  the  students  in  the  streets,  of
treasonable  prints  sold  in  its  shops.^  Dr.  King,  whose
sentiments  were  not  doubtful,  in  his  speech  on  opening

*  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George II.  i.  413. See,  too,  Smollett's
Hist.  bk.  iii.  ch.  i.

CH.  IV,  DEFERENCE TO PUBLIC OPINION,  69

the  Radcliffe  Library  in  1754,  introduced  three  times
the  word  '  redeat,'  pausing  each  time  for  a  considerable
space  while  the  crow^ded  theatre  rang  with  applause.'
As  late  as  1756,  when  Lord  Fitzmaurice  travelled
through  Scotland,  he  observed  that  the  people  of  that
country  were  still  generally  Jacobite,'^

Such  a  state  of  affairs  was  well  fitted  to  moderate
the  violence  of  parties.  The  people  had  little  power  of
controlling  or  directly  influencing  Parliament,  but  when-
ever their  sentiments  were  strongly  expressed  on  any
particular  question,  either  by  the  votes  of  the  free  con-
stituencies or  by  more  irregular  or  tumultuous  means,
they  were  usually  listened  to,  and  on  the  whole  obeyed.
The  explosions  of  public  indignation  about  the  Sache-
verell  case,  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  the  commercial  treaty
with  France,  the  South  Sea  Bubble,  the  Spanish  out-
rages, the  Bill  for  naturalising  the  Jews,  the  Hano-
verian policy  of  Carteret,  foolish  as  in  most  instances
they  were,  had  all  of  them,  at  least,  a  great  and  imme-
diate effect  upon  the  policy  of  the  country.  It  should
be  added  that  the  duties  of  Government  were  in  some
respects  much  easier  than  at  present.  The  vast  deve-
lopment of  the  British  Empire  and  of  manufacturing
industry,  the  extension  of  publicity,  and  the  growth  of
an  inquiring  and  philanthropic  spirit  that  discerns  abuses
in  every  quarter,  have  together  immeasurably  increased
both  the  range  and  the  complexity  of  legislation.  In
the  early  Hanoverian  period  the  number  of  questions
treated  was  very  small,  and  few  subjects  were  much
attended  to  which  did  not  directly  affect  party  interests.

The  general  level  of  political  life  was,  however,
deplorably  low. Politics  under  Queen  Anne  centred

'  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Slid-  riots. Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs,

hurne,  i.  35. See,  too,  on  Oxford  i.  205.

disaffection  at  an  earlier  period,  ^  Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shcl-

the description of the Excise  burne,  i.  50.

70 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  iv.

chiefly  round  the  favourites  of  the  Sovereign,  and  in
the  first  Hanoverian  reigns  the  most  important  influ-
ences were  Court  intrigues  or  parliamentary  corruption.
Bolingbroke  secured  his  return  from  exile  by  the  assist-
ance of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal,  one  of  the  mistresses  of
George  I.,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  bribed  with  10,000L
Carteret  at  first  based  his  hopes  upon  the  same  support,
but,  imagining  that  he  had  met  with  coldness  or  infi-
delity on  the  part  of  the  Duchess,  he  transferred  his
allegiance  to  her  rival,  the  Countess  of  Platen.^  On
the  death  of  George  I.  a  crowd  of  statesmen  and  writers
— Chesterfield,  Pulteney,  Swift,  Bolingbroke,  and  Gay —
were  at  the  feet  of  Mrs.  Howard,  the  mistress  of  the  new
king.  A  curious  letter  has  been  preserved,  in  which
Mrs.  Pitt,  the  mother  of  the  great  Lord  Chatham,  en-
deavoured by  a  bribe  of  1,000  guineas  to  obtain  from
her,  for  her  brother,  the  position  of  Lord  of  the  Bed-
chamber.^ Chesterfield,  towards  the  end  of  his  career,
intrigued  against  Newcastle  with  the  Duchess  of  Yar-
mouth ;  and  Pitt  himself  is  stated,  on  very  good  autho-
rity, to  have  secured  his  position  in  the  Cabinet  in  a  great
degree  by  his  attentions  to  the  same  lady.^  The  power
of  Walpole  and  Newcastle  rested  upon  a  difierent  but
hardly  upon  a  nobler  basis — upon  the  uniform  employ-
ment of  all  the  patronage  of  the  Crown,  and  of  a  large
proportion  of  the  public  money  at  their  disposal,  for
the  purpose  of  maintaining  a  parliamentary  majox'ity.
Weapons  we  should  now  regard  as  in  the  highest  de-
gree dishonourable  were  freely  employed.  The  secrecy
of  the  Post  Office  was  habitually  violated.  The  letters
of  Swift,  Bolingbroke,  Marlborough,  and  Pope  are  full
of  complaints  of  its  insecurity,  and  we  know  from  Wal-

'  Marchmont  Papers,  i.  3-5.  sages on  this  subject  in  Lord

*  Suffolk Correspondence, i.  Shelburne's Atitobiography,  pp.
102.  83,  84. Mrs.  Montagu's  Letters,

*  See  the  very  remarkable  pas-  iv.  46.

CH.  IV.  NEGLECT OF LITERATURE.  71

pole  himself  that  he  had  no  scruple  in  opening  the  letters
of  a  political  rival.*

Of  these  facts  that  which  is  most  really  important
is  the  manner  in  which  the  Crown  patronage  and  secret
service  money  were  disposed  of.  The  system  of  habitu-
ally neglecting  the  moral  and  intellectual  interests  of
the  country,  and  of  employing  the  resources  of  the
Government  solely  with  a  view  to  strengthening  poli-
tical influence,  was  chiefly  due  to  Walpole  and  New-
castle, and  it  was  one  which  had  very  wide  and  very
important  consequences.  The  best  argument  that  has
ever  been  urged  in  favour  of  leaving  at  the  disposal  of
the  Government  large  sums  of  money  in  the  form  of
pensions,  sinecures,  and  secret  service  money,  is  that
the  Government  is  the  trustee  of  the  nation,  and  that  it
should  employ  at  least  a  portion  of  these  funds  in  en-
couraging those  higher  forms  of  literature,  science,  or
art,  which  are  of  the  greatest  value  to  mankind,  which
can  only  be  attained  by  the  union  of  extraordinary
abilities  with  extraordinary  labour,  and  which  are  at  the
same  time  of  such  a  nature  that  they  produce  no  ade-
quate remuneration  for  those  who  practise  them. It

'  Writing  to  Lord  Townshend,  very  strong  m  general  terms  up-
Nov.  29, 1725,  Walpole  says  :  '  It  on  what  is  transacting  with  you.
is  fit  you  should  likewise  be  ac-  Wise  Daniel  fills  all  his  inland
quainted  that  the  Pulteneys  build  correspondence  with  reflections
great  hopes  upon  the  difficulties  of  the  same  kind.'— Coxe's  Wal-
they  promise  themselves  will  ^:)oZe,  ii.  492,  493.  See,  too,  March-
arise  from  the  foreign  affairs,  mont  Papers,  ii.  205,  245,  248.
and  especially  from  the  Hanover  Coxe's  Marlborough,  ch.  xcvii.,
treaty.  I  had  a  curiosity  to  open  c.  Chatham  Correspondence,  i.
some  of  their  letters,  and  found  167, 168.  Swift's  Correspondence.
them  full  of  this  language.  The  In  1723  Walpole  even  sue-
last  foreign  mail  brought  a  letter  ceeded  in  making  an  arrange-
from  Count  Staremberg  to  WilHam  ment  with  the  Postmaster-
Pulteney,  giving  him  great  ex-  General  in  Brussels  to  open  and
pectations  of  the  materials  he  send  him  copies  of  all  the  cor-
could  furnish  him  with,  when  it  respondence  of  Atterbury.  Coxe's
might  be  done  with  safety,  and  Walpole,  ii.  284.

72 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  iv.

has  been  contended,  with  reason,  that  it  is  neither  just
nor  politic  that  great  philosophers,  or  poets,  or  men  of
science  should  be  driven  by  the  pressure  of  want  from
the  fields  of  labour  to  which  their  genius  naturally  called
them,  or  should  be  tempted  to  degrade  the  rarest  and
most  inestimable  talents,  in  order  by  winning  popularity
to  obtain  a  livelihood,  or  should  be  deprived,  when  pur-
suing investigations  of  the  highest  moment  to  mankind,
of  the  means  of  research  which  easy  circumstances  can
furnish.  That  each  man  should  obtain  the  due  and  pro-
portionate reward  of  his  services  to  the  community  is  an
ideal  which  no  society  can  ever  attain,  but  towards  which
every  society  in  a  healthy  condition  must  endeavour  to
approximate ;  and  although  in  matters  of  material  pro-
duction, of  which  common  men  are  good  judges,  the  law
of  supply  and  demand  may  at  least  be  trusted  to  produce
the  requisite  article  in  sufficient  quantity  and  of  tolerable
quality,  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  things  of  mind.
In  these  fields  reward  is  often  in  inverse  proportion  to
merit,  and  many  of  the  qualities  that  are  of  the  most  in-
contestable value  have  a  direct  tendency  to  diminish
popularity.  As  a  great  writer  has  truly  said,  '  the
writings  by  which  one  can  live  are  not  the  writings
which  themselves  live.'  To  infuse  into  a  book  deep
thought  that  will  strain  the  attention  of  the  reader,
to  defend  unpopular  opinions,  or  open  new  veins  of
thought,  to  condense  into  a  small  space  the  reflections
and  researches  of  a  lifetime,  to  grapple  with  subjects
that  involve  subtle  distinctions  or  close  and  complicated
reasoning,  is  a  course  plainly  contrary  to  the  pecuniary
interest  of  an  author.  The  discoveries  and  the  books
which  have  proved  of  the  most  enduring  value  have
usually  at  first  been  only  appreciated  by  a  very  few,
and  have  only  emerged  into  general  notoriety  after
many  years  of  eclipse.  A  skilful  writer  who  looks  only
to  the  market  will  speedily  perceive  that  the  taste  of

CH.  IV.,  SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN LITERATURE.  73

the  great  majority  of  readei'S  is  an  uncultivated  one,
and  that  if  he  desires  to  be  popular  he  must  labour  de-
liberately to  gratify  it.  If  his  talent  take  the  form  of
books  he  will  expand  his  thoughts  into  many  brilliant,
gaudy,  and  superficial  volumes,  rapidly  written  and
easily  read,  and,  remembering  that  most  men  read  only
for  amusement,  he  will  avoid  every  subject  that  can
fatigue  attention  or  shock  prejudices,  and  especially
every  form  of  profound,  minute,  and  laborious  investi-
gation. There  are  demagogues  in  literature  as  well  as
in  politics.  There  is  a  degradation  of  style  springing
from  a  thirst  for  popularity,  which  is  at  least  as  bad  as
the  pedantry  of  scholars,  and  a  desire  to  conform  to
middle-class  prejudices  may  produce  quite  as  real  a
servility  as  the  patronage  of  aristocracies  or  of  courts.
The  inevitable  result  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand,
if  left  without  restriction,  is  either  to  degrade  or  destroy
both  literature  and  science,  or  else  to  throw  them  exclu-
sively into  the  hands  of  those  who  possess  private  means
of  subsistence.

This  is  not  a  matter  of  speculation  or  of  contro-
versy, but  of  fact,  and  anyone  who  is  even  moderately
acquainted  with  literary  or  scientific  biography  may
abundantly  verify  it.  It  is  certain  that  the  higher
forms  of  literature  and  science  are  as  a  rule  unsup-
porting,  that  men  of  extraordinary  abilities  have  spent
the  most  useful  and  laborious  lives  in  these  pursuits
without  earning  the  barest  competence,  that  many  of
the  most  splendid  works  of  genius  and  many  of  the
most  fruitful  and  conscientious  researches  are  due  to
men  whose  lives  were  passed  between  the  garret  and
the  spunging  house,  and  who  were  reduced  to  a  penury
sometimes  verging  upon  starvation.  Neither  Bacon,
nor  Newton,  nor  Locke,  nor  Descartes,  nor  Gibbon,  nor
Hume,  nor  Adam  Smith,  nor  Montesquieu,  nor  Berke-
ley, nor  Butler,  nor  Coleridge,  nor  Bentham,  nor  Mil-

?4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iV.

ton,  nor  Wordsworth,  could  have  made  a  livelihood  by
their  works,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  all,  or  nearly
all,  writers  on  mathematics,  metaphysics,  political  eco-
nomy,  archaeology ,  and  physical  science  in  all  its  branches,
as  well  as  of  the  great  majority  of  the  greatest  writers
in  other  fields.  Very  few  of  those  men  whose  genius
has  irradiated  nations,  and  whose  writings  have  become
the  eternal  heritage  of  mankind,  obtained  from  their
works  the  income  of  a  successful  village  doctor  or  pro-
vincial attorney.

In  truth,  the  fact  that  for  many  years  a  main  object
of  English  politicians  has  been  to  abolish  the  foolish
restrictions  by  which  commerce  was  hampered,  has  pro-
duced among  large  classes,  by  a  process  of  hasty  gene-
ralisation which  is  very  familiar  to  all  who  have  studied
the  history  of  opinions,  a  belief  in  the  all-sufficiency  of
the  law  of  supply  and  demand,  and  in  the  uselessness
of  Government  interference,  which  in  speculation  is  one
of  the  most  superficial  of  fallacies,  and  in  practice  one
of  the  most  deadly  of  errors.  Even  in  the  sphere  of
material  things  this  optimist  notion  egregiously  fails.
No^  portions  of  modern  legislation  have  been  more  useful
or  indeed  more  indispensable  than  the  Factory  Acts  and
the  many  restrictive  laws  about  the  sale  of  poisons,
vaccination,  drainage,  railways,  or  adulteration,  and
few  men  who  observe  the  signs  of  the  times  will  ques-
tion that  this  description  of  legislation  must  one  day  be
greatly  extended.  But  in  other  spheres  of  the  utmost
importance  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  is  far  more
conspicuously  impotent.  Thus  education  in  its  simplest
form,  which  is  one  of  the  first  of  all  human  interests,  is
a  matter  in  which  Government  initiation  and  direction
are  imperatively  required,  for  uninstructed  people  will
never  demand  it,  and  to  appreciate  education  is  itself  a
consequence  of  education.  Thus  the  higher  forms  of
literature  and  science  cannot  be  left  to  the  unrestricted

CH.  IV. THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND. 75

law  of  supply  and  demand,  for  tlie  simple  reason  that,
while  they  are  of  the  utmost  importance  to  mankind,
most  of  their  professors  under  such  a  system  would
starve.  No  reasonable  man  will  question  either  that  a
civilisation  is  mutilated  and  imperfect  in  which  a  con-
siderable number  of  men  of  genius  do  not  devote  their
lives  to  these  subjects,  or  that  the  world  owes  quite  as
much  to  its  writers  and  men  of  science  as  it  does  to  its
statesmen,  its  generals,  or  its  lawyers.  No  reasonable
man  who  remembers  on  the  one  hand  how  small  a  pro-
portion of  mankind  possess  the  strong  natural  aptitude
which  produces  the  highest  achievements  in  science  or
literature,  and  on  the  other  hand  how  inestimable  and
enduring  are  the  benefits  they  may  confer,  will  desire
that  the  cultivation  of  these  fields  should  become  the
monopoly  of  the  rich.  To  evoke  the  latent  genius  of  the
nation,  and  to  direct  it  to  the  spheres  in  which  it  is
most  fitted  to  excel,  is  one  of  the  highest  ends  of  en-
lightened statesmanship.  In  every  community  there
exists  a  vast  mass  of  noble  capacity  hopelessly  crushed
by  adverse  circumstances,  or  enabled  only  to  develop
in  a  tardy,  distorted,  and  imperfect  manner.  Every
institution  or  system  that  enables  a  poor  man  who  pos-
sesses a  strong  natural  genius  for  science  or  literature,
to  acquire  the  requisite  instruction,  and  to  develop  his
distinctive  capabilities  instead  of  seeking  a  livelihood  as
a  second-rate  lawyer  or  tradesman,  is  conferring  a  benefit
on  the  human  race.  The  benefit  is  so  great  that  an
institution  is  justified  if  it  occasionally  accomplishes  it,
even  though  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  it  proves  a
failure.  It  is,  no  doubt,  true  that  these  unremunerative
pursuits  may  often  be  combined  with  more  lucrative
employments,  but  only  where  such  employments  are
congenial,  and  allow  an  unusual  leisure  for  thought  and
study,  and  even  then  a  divided  allegiance  is  seldom
compatible  with  the  highest  results. It  is  also  true

76  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  iv.

that  men  of  great  natural  powers  will  sometimes  follow
their  guiding  light  in  spite  of  every  obstacle.  The
martyrs  of  literature  who  pursued  their  path  through
hopeless  poverty  to  ends  of  the  greatest  value  to  man-
kind, have  been  scarcely  less  memorable  than  those  of
religion.  But  apart  from  all  nobler  and  more  generous
considerations,  it  is  not  for  the  benefit  of  society  that
these  fields  of  labour  should  be  cultivated  only  by  those
who  possess  a  far  higher  amount  of  self-sacrifice  than  is
demanded  in  other  spheres,  or  that  men  whose  influence
may  mould  the  characters  of  succeeding  generations
should  exercise  that  influence,  with  hearts  acidulated
and  perhaps  depraved  by  the  pains  of  poverty  or  the
sense  of  wrong.  It  is  diflicult  to  over-estimate  the
amount  of  evil  in  the  world  which  has  sprung  from
vices  in  literature  that  may  be  distinctly  traced  to  the
circumstances  of  the  author.  Had  Rousseau  been  a
happy  and  a  prosperous  man,  the  whole  history  of
modern  Europe  might  have  been  changed.

A  curious  and  valuable  book  might  be  written
describing  the  provisions  which  have  been  made  in
difierent  nations  and  ages  for  the  support  of  these  un-
remunerative  forms  of  talent.  In  Germany  at  the
present  day  the  immense  multiplication  of  professor-
ships provides  a  natural  sphere  for  their  exertions ;  but
the  results  of  this  system  would  have  been  less  satis-
factory had  not  the  general  simplicity  of  habits,  the
cheapness  of  living,  and  the  low  standard  of  professional
remuneration  made  such  a  life  hitherto  attractive  to  able
men.  In  England  several  agencies  combine  directly  or
indirectly  to  the  same  end.  The  vast  emoluments  of
the  Universities  enable  them  to  do  something.  In  the
eyes  of  a  superficial  economist  no  institution  will  appear
more  indefensible  than  an  English  fellowship  to  which
no  definite  duties  whatever  are  attached.  A  real  states-
man will  probably  think  that  something,  at  least,  may

en.  IV. ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  INTELLECTUAL  PURSUITS. 77

be  said  for  emoluments  which,  won  by  severe  competi-
tion, give  a  young  man  a  subsistence  during  the  first
unproductive  years  of  a  profession,  render  possible  for
him  lines  of  study  or  employment  from  which  he  would
otherwise  be  absolutely  excluded,  and  enable  him,  if  he
desires  it,  during  some  of  the  best  years  of  his  life,  to
devote  his  undivided  energies  to  intellectual  labours.
The  endowments,  whether  derived  from  public  or  private
sources,  which  are  attached  to  scientific  careers,  at  least
furnish  the  means  of  subsistence  to  some  men  who  are
engaged  in  studies  of  transcendent  importance.  They
are,  however,  miserably  inadequate,  and  this  inadequacy
diverts  from  scientific  pursuits  many  who  are  admirably
fitted  to  follow  them,  compels  many  others  to  turn  away
from  original  investigation,  and  depresses  the  whole
subject  in  the  eyes  of  those  large  classes  who  estimate
the  relative  importance  of  different  branches  of  know-
ledge by  the  magnitude  of  the  emoluments  attached  to
them.  Hardly  any  other  of  the  great  branches  of  human
knowledge  is  at  present  so  backward,  tentative,  and
empirical  as  medicine,  and  there  is  not  much  doubt
that  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  is  a  main  cause  of
the  defect.  Almost  all  the  finer  intellects  which  are
devoted  to  this  subject  are  turned  away  from  indepen-
dent investigations  to  the  lucrative  paths  of  professional
practice  ;  their  time  is  engrossed  with  cases  most  of
which  could  be  treated  quite  as  well  by  men  of  inferior
capacity,  and  they  do  little  or  nothing  to  enlarge  the
bounds  of  our  knowledge.  For  literature  of  the  graver
kinds  the  Church  provides  important,  though  indirect,
assistance.  In  many  country  parishes  the  faithful  dis-
charge of  clerical  duties  is  quite  compatible  with  the
life  of  a  scholar ;  and  the  valuable,  dignified,  and  almost
sinecure  appointments  connected  with  the  cathedrals
are  peculiarly  suited  for  literary  rewards.  Solid  lite-
rary attainments  usually  lead  to  them,  and  to  the  tran-

/O  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, CH,  iv.

quil  leisure  which  they  secure  we  owe,  perhaps,  the
greater  number  of  those  noble  monuments  of  learning
which  are  the  truest  glory  of  the  Anglican  Church.

The  disadvantages  attaching  to  this  system  of  pro-
viding for  literature  by  ecclesiastical  appointments  are
sufficiently  obvious.  Such  rewards  are  restricted  to
men  of  only  one  class  of  opinions,  are  offered  for  pro-
ficiency only  in  special  forms  of  literature,  and  have  a
direct  tendency  to  discourage  independence  of  thought.
They  are  open  to  the  grave  objection  of  constituting  a
gigantic  system  of  bribery  in  favour  of  a  certain  class
of  opinions,  and  of  inducing  many  who  are  not  con-
scious hypocrites  to  stifle  their  doubts  and  act  falsely  with
their  intellects.  To  the  poor,  ambitious,  and  unbelieving
scholar,  the  Church  holds  out  prospects  of  the  most
seductive  nature,  and  he  must  often  hear  the  voice  of
the  tempter  murmuring  in  his  ear,  '  All  these  things
will  I  give  thee  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me.'
But,  grave  as  are  these  disadvantages,  the  literary  bene-
fits resulting  from  Church  sinecures,  in  my  judgment,
outweigh  them,  and  they  will  continue  to  do  so  as  long
as  the  Church  maintains  her  present  latitude  of  belief
and  as  long  as  a  considerable  proportion  of  able  men
can  conscientiously  join  her  communion.  These  appoint-
ments have,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  produced  many  works
of  great  and  sterling  value,  which  would  never  have
been  written  without  them,  and  which  are  of  great
benefit  to  men  of  all  classes  and  opinions.  They  dis-
charge a  function  of  the  utmost  importance  in  English
life,  for  they  form  the  principal  counterpoise  to  the
great  prizes  attached  to  the  law  and  to  commerce,  which
would  otherwise  divert  a  very  disproportionate  amount  of
the  talent  of  the  community  into  these  channels.  They
are  especially  valuable  as  encouraging  deep  research  and
considerable  literary  enterprise  at  a  period  when,  under
the  influence  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand,  literary

CH.  IV.  PATRONAGE IN CHURCH AND STATE,  79

talent  is  passing,  to  a  most  excessive  and  deplorable
degree,  into  ephemeral  or  purely  critical  writing.  Apart
from  all  its  other  effects,  valuable  Church  patronage,  if
judiciously  employed,  may  be  of  inestimable  intellectual
advantage  to  the  nation.  An  ingenious  man  may  easily
imagine  institutions  that  would  confer  the  same  advan-
tages without  the  attending  evils ;  but  ecclesiastical
appointments  exist ;  they  actually  discharge  these  func-
tions, and  it  would  be  practically  much  more  easy  to
destroy  than  to  replace  them.  Strong  popular  enthu-
siasm may  be  speedily  aroused  for  the  defence  or  the
destruction  of  an  establishment,  but  considerations  such
as  I  am  now  urging  are  of  too  refined  a  nature  ever  to
become  popular.  They  are  never  likely  to  furnish  election
cries  or  party  watchwords,  and  the  creation  of  lucrative
appointments,  without  adequate  and  engrossing  duties
being  definitely  attached  to  them,  is  too  much  opposed  to
all  democratic  notions  to  be  in  our  day  a  possibility.

Among  the  means  of  encouraging  the  higher  in-
tellectual influences,  direct  Government  patronage  was
in  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  conspicuous,
and  it  was  bestowed,  on  the  whole,  with  much  disregard
of  party  considerations.  Whigs  and  Tories  were  in  this
respect  about  equally  liberal,  the  Whigs  Somers  and
Montague,  and  the  Tories  Harley  and  St.  John  being,
perhaps,  the  ministers  to  whom  literature  owed  most.
It  was  the  received  opinion  of  the  time  that  it  was  part
of  the  duty  of  an  English  minister  to  encourage  the
development  of  promising  talent,  and  that  a  certain  pro-
portion of  the  places  and  pensions  at  his  disposal  should
be  applied  to  this  purpose.  No  doubt,  this  system  was
sometimes  abused,  and  sometimes  had  a  bad  effect  upon
the  character  of  the  recipient ;  but  in  itself  it  implied
no  degradation.  Many  of  the  kinds  of  labour  assisted
were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  leave  no  room  for  syco-
phancy, and  could  not  otherwise  have  been  carried  on,

80 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

and  the  practical results  were  in general  eminently
beneficial. The  splendid  efflorescence  of  genius  under
Queen Anne was in a very great  degree due to
ministerial  encouragement,  which  smoothed  the  path  of
many  whose  names  and  writings  are  familiar  in  count-
less households,  where  the  statesmen  of  that  day  are
almost  forgotten. Among  those  who  obtained  assist-
ance  from the Government, either in the form of
pensions,  appointments,  or  professional  promotion,  were
Newton  and  Locke,  Addison,  Swift,  Steele,  Prior,  Gay,
Rowe,  Oongreve,  Tickell,  Parnell,  and  Phillips,  while
a  secret  pension  was  offered  to  Pope,  who  was  legally
disqualified  by his religion from receiving Govern-
ment favours. Upon  the  accession  of  the  Hanoverian
dynasty, however, Governmental encouragement of
literature  almost absolutely ceased. It  is  somewhat
singular  that  the  son  of  the  Electress  Sophia,  who  had
been  the  devoted  friend  of  Leibnitz,  and  the  nephew  of
Elizabeth  of  Bavaria,  who  had  been  the  most  ardent
disciple of Descartes, should have proved himself,
beyond  all  other  English  sovereigns,  indifferent  to  in-
tellectual interests  ;  but  George  I.  never  exhibited  any
trace  of  the  qualities  that  had  made  Ms  mother  one  of
the  most  brilliant,  and  his  aunt  one  of  the  most  learned,
women  in  Europe. The  influence  of  Walpole  was  in
this  respect  still  more  fatal. Himself  wholly  destitute
of  literary  tastes,  he  was  altogether  indifferent  to  this
portion  of  the  national  development,  and  he  looked  upon
the  vast  patronage  at  his  disposal  merely  as  a  means
of  parliamentary  corruption,  of  aggrandising  his  own
family, or  of  providing  for  the  younger  sons  of  the
aristocracy. It  has  been  said  that  one  of  the  great  dis-
tinctions between  ancient  and  modern  political  theories
is,  that  in  the  one  the  ends  proposed  were  chiefly  moral,
and  in  the  other  almost  exclusively  material ;  and  this
last description,  though  it does  not  apply to every

CH.  IV.  SOCIAL DEGRADATION OF LITERATURE.  8i

portion  of  English  history,  was  eminently  true  of  the
reigns  of  George  I.  and  of  his  successor.

It  can  never  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  a  country
what  qualities  lead  naturally  to  social  eminence,  and  it
was  a  necessary  consequence  of  this  neglect  of  literature
that  a  great  change  passed  over  the  social  position  of
its  possessors.  Formerly  high  intellectual  attainments
counted  in  society  for  almost  as  much  as  rank  or  wealth.
Addison  had  been  made  a  Secretary  of  State.  Prior
had  been  despatched  on  important  embassies.  Swift
had  powerfully  influenced  the  policy  of  a  ministry.
Steele  was  a  conspicuous  Member  of  Parliament.  Gay
was  made  Secretary  to  the  English  ambassador  at  the
Court  of  Hanover.  In  the  reign  of  the  first  two
Georges  all  this  changed.  The  Government,  if  it
helped  any  authors,  helped  only  those  who  would
employ  their  talents  in  the  lowest  forms  of  party  libel,
and  even  then  on  the  most  penurious  scale.  The  public
was  still  too  small  to  make  literature  remunerative.
The  great  nobles,  who  took  their  tone  from  the  Court
and  Government,  no  longer  patronised  it,  and  the  men
of  the  highest  genius  or  of  the  greatest  learning  were
the  slaves  of  mercenary  booksellers,  wasted  the  greater
part  of  their  lives  in  the  most  miserable  literary  drud-
gery, lived  in  abject  poverty,  and  rarely  came  in  con-
tact with  the  great,  except  in  the  character  of  sup-
pliants. It  was  in  the  reign  of  George  I.  that  Steele,
struck  down  by  the  ingratitude  of  the  party  he  had  so
faithfully  served,  closed  a  career,  which  had  been  pre-
eminently useful  to  his  country,  in  poverty  and  neglect ;
that  Ockley  concluded  his  '  History  of  the  Saracens  '  in
a  debtors'  prison ;  that  Bingham  composed  the  greater
part  of  his  invaluable  work  on  the  '  Antiquities  of  the
Christian  Church  '  in  such  necessity  that  it  was  with
the  utmost  difficulty  he  could  obtain  the  books  that
were  indispensable  to  his  task. It  was  in  the  reign  of

VOL. U.  Gr

82 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

George  II.  that  Savage  used  to  wander  by  night  through
the  streets  of  London  for  want  of  a  lodging,  that  Johnson
spent  more  than  thirty  years  in  penury,  drudgery,  or
debt,  that  Thomson  was  deprived  by  Lord  Hardwicke
of  the  small  place  in  the  Court  of  Chancery  which
was  his  sole  means  of  subsistence.  And  at  this  very
time  literature  in  the  neighbouring  country  had  acquired
a  greater  social  influence  than  in  any  other  period  of
recorded  history.  No  contrast,  indeed,  can  be  more
complete  than  that  which  was  in  this  respect  presented
by  England  and  France.  That  brilliant  French  society
which  Rousseau  and  so  many  others  have  painted,'  was,
no  doubt,  in  many  respects  corrupt,  frivolous,  and
chimerical,  but  it  had  at  least  carried  the  art  of  in-
tellectual conversation  to  an  almost  unexampled  perfec-
tion, and  it  was  pervaded  and  dignified  by  a  genuine
passion  and  enthusiasm  for  knowledge,  by  a  noble,  if
delusive  confidence  in  the  power  of  intellect  to  re-
generate mankind.  This  intellectual  tone  was  wholly
wanting  in  society  in  England.  Horace  Walpole,  who
reflected  very  faithfully  the  fashionable  spirit  of  his
time,  always  speaks  of  literary  pursuits  as  something
hardly  becoming  in  a  gentleman,  and  of  such  men  as
Johnson  and  Smollett  as  if  they  were  utterly  con-
temptible. The  change  in  the  position  of  writers  was
at  least  as  injurious  to  society  as  to  literature.  It  gave
it  a  frivolous,  unintellectual,  and  material  tone  it  has
never  wholly  lost.^

'  Nouvelle  Hilo'ise,  2me  partie.  tion  of  the  men  and  women  of

See,  too,  the  admirable  sketch  of  fashion in Paris, though not

French  society  at  this  period  in  always  very  deep,  is  much  less

Taine's  Ancien  Biginie.  futile and frivolous than ours

-  Chesterfield  has  noticed  the  here. It turns at least upon

contrast  in  the  usual  conversa-  some  subject,  something  of  taste,

tion  of  the  fashionable  circles  of  some  point  of  history,  criticism,

the  two capitals. '  It  must be  and even philosophy ; which,

owned  that  the  polite  conversa-  though probably not quite so

CH.  IV.  QUEEN  CAROLINE.  83

We  must,  however,  make  an  exception  to  this
censure.  The  influence  of  Queen  Caroline  in  patronage
was  for  many  years  most  judiciously  exercised.  This
very  remarkable  woman,  who  governed  her  husband
with  an  absolute  sway  in  spite  of  his  infidelities,  and
who  often  exhibited  an  insight  into  character,  a  force  of
expression,  and  a  political  judgment  worthy  of  a  great
statesman,  was  the  firmest  of  all  the  friends  of  Walpole,
and  deserves  a  large  share  of  the  credit  which  is  given
to  his  administration.  She  first  fully  reconciled  her
husband  to  him.  She  supported  him  through  innumer-
able intrigues,  and  every  act  of  policy  was  determined
together  by  the  minister  and  the  Queen  before  it  was  sub-
mitted to  the  King.  Unlike  Walpole,  however,  and  un-
like her  husband,  who  despised  every  form  of  literature
and  art,  she  had  strong  intellectual  sympathies,  which  she
sometimes  displayed  with  a  little  pedantry,  but  which
on  the  whole  she  exercised  to  the  great  advantage  of
the  community.  She  was  the  friend  and  correspondent
of  Leibnitz,^  and,  in  spite  of  the  ridicule  of  many  of  the

solid  as  Mr.  Locke's,  is,  however,  '  It  is  curious  how  extremely

better and more  becoming  ra-  badly she  wrote  French. Her

tional  beings  than  our  frivolous  letters are  so  misspelt  and  un-

dissertations  upon  the  weather  grammatical  as  to  be  sometimes

or  upon whist.' — Letters  to  his  nearly unintelligible, and she

Son,  April  22,  1752.  always  chose  that  language  for

So another  writer  observes:  corresponding  with  Leibnitz.  The

'  A  knowledge  of  books,  a  taste  in  following  specimen  from  one  of

arts,  a  proficiency  in  science,  was  her  letters  to  Leibnitz  gives  an

formerly  regarded as a  proper  idea  of  her  attainments  in  two

qualification  in  a  man  of  fashion.  languages  in  1715  :  '  Vous  aurais

...  It  will  not,  I  presume,  bo  remarqu6  dans  le  raport  contre

regarded as any  kind  of  satire  le dernier  minister que le  feu

on  the  present  age  to  say  that  Lord  Boulinhrouck dit  que  les

among the higher ranks this  fvancois sont ausy mechant

literary spirit is generally  poette  que  les  anglois  politicien.

vanished. Beading  is  now  sunk  Je  suis  pourtant  fort  pour  ceu  de

at  best  into  a  morning's  amuse-  cornelle,  Eacine,  beaulau,  E6ni6.

ment.' — Browne's  Estimateofthi  II  se  peut  que  ne  possitan  pas  sy

Times,  i.  41,  42.  bicn la  langue anglois que la

a  2

84

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

English  nobles,  the  warm  and  steady  patron  of  Handel.
By  her  influence  the  poet  Savage,  when  under  sentence
of  death,  received  his  pardon,  the  Nonjuror  historian
Carte  was  recalled  from  exile,  the  Arian  Whiston  was
assisted  by  a  pension.  Her  generosity  was  at  once
wide  and  discriminating,  and  singularly  unfettered  by
the  prejudices  of  her  time.  She  secured  for  the  Scotch
Jacobites  at  Edinburgh  permission  to  worship  in  peace ;
and  although  her  own  views  were  as  far  as  possible
removed  from  their  theology,^  she  was  a  special  bene-
factress of  the  persecuted  Catholics.  She  contributed
largely  from  her  private  means  to  encourage  needy
talent,  and  she  exercised  a  great  and  most  useful  in-
fluence upon  Church  patronage.  There  has  seldom
been  a  time  in  which  the  religious  tone  was  lower  than
in  the  age  of  the  first  two  Georges,  but  it  is  a  remark-
able fact  that  this  age  can  boast  of  the  two  greatest
intellects  that  have  ever  adorned  the  Protestant  Episco-
pate. Butler  was  drawn  from  his  retirement  by  Caro-
line, was  appointed  chaplain,  and  recommended  by  her
on  her  death-bed,  and  to  that  recommendation  he  him-
self attributed  his  subsequent  promotion.  Berkeley  was
first  offered  a  bishopric  by  the  Queen,  but  being  at  this
time  absorbed  by  his  famous  missionary  scheme  he
declined  it.  She  tried  also  earnestly  and  repeatedly  to
induce  Clarke  to  accept  a  seat  on  the  bench,  but  he
resolutely  refused,  declaring  that  nothing  would  induce
him  again  to  subscribe  the  Articles. She  secured  the

francoise  j 'admire  plus  se  que
j'antan.' — Kemble's  State  Papers
and  Letters,  p.  532.

'  She  had  refused  to  marry
the  Archduke  Charles,  afterwards
Emperor,  because  he  was  a
Catholic,  and  she  could  not
change  her  faith.  Gay  wrote  of
her —

Tbe  pomp  of  titles  easy  faith  might

shake ;
She scorned an  empire  for  religion's

sake.

She  appears,  however,  to  have
had  very  little  religious  feeUng,
and  her  opinions  on  those  sub-
jects, as  far  as  shehad  any,  were
of  a  latitudiuarian  cast.

CH.  IV.  DECLINE OF  PUBLIC  SPIRIT.  85

promotion  of  Sherlock,  contrary  to  the  wish  of  Walpole.
She  favoured  the  promotion  of  Hoadly  and  of  Seeker,
and  she  endeavoured  to  draw  the  saintly  Wilson  from
his  obscure  diocese  in  the  Isle  of  Man  to  a  more
prominent  and  lucrative  position,  but  he  answered  that
'  he  would  not  in  his  old  age  desert  his  wife  because  she
was  poor.'  On  the  death  of  the  Queen,  however,  Church
patronage,  like  all  other  patronage,  degenerated  into  a
mere  matter  of  party  or  personal  interest.  It  was  dis-
tributed for  the  most  part  among  the  members  or
adherents  of  the  great  families,  subject  to  the  conditions
that  the  candidates  were  moderate  in  their  views,  and
were  not  inclined  to  any  description  of  reform.'

It  is  not  surprising  that  under  such  circumstances
the  spirit  of  the  nation  should  have  sunk  very  low.  In
the  period  between  the  Reformation  and  the  Revolution,
England  had  been  convulsed  by  some  of  the  strongest
passions  of  which  large  bodies  of  men  are  susceptible.
The  religious  enthusiasm  that  accompanies  great  changes
and  conflicts  of  dogmatic  belief,  the  enthusiasm  of  patriot-
ism elicited  by  a  deadly  contest  with  a  foreign  enemy,
the  enthusiasm  of  liberty  struggling  with  despotism,  and
the  enthusiasm  of  loyalty  struggling  with  innovation,
had  been  the  animating  principles  of  large  bodies  of
Englishmen.  Different  as  are  these  enthusiasms  in  their
nature  and  their  objects,  various  as  are  the  minds  on
which  they  operate,  and  great  as  are  in  some  cases  the
evils  that  accompany  their  excess,  they  have  all  the  com-

'  '  I  would  no  more  employ  a  them  who  was  always  haranguing

man  to  govern  and  influence  the  against  the  inconveniences  of  a

clergy,' said  Sir  E.  Walpole, '  who  standing  army,  or  make  a  man

did  not flatter the  parsons,  or  Chancellor who  was  constantly

who either talked, wrote, or  complaining  of the grievances

acted against their authority,  of  the  Bar  and  threatening to

their  profits,  or  their  privileges,  rectify  the  abuses  of  Westminster

than  I  would  try  to  govern  the  Hall. '-^  Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs,

soldiery  by  setting  a  general  over  i.  453,  454.

86 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

mon  property  of  kindling  in  large  bodies  of  men  an  heroic
self-sacrifice,  of  teaching  them  to  subordinate  material  to
moral  ends,  and  of  thus  raising  the  tone  of  political  life.
All  these  enthusiasms  had  now  gradually  subsided,  while
the  philanthropic  and  reforming  spirit,  which  in  the  nine-
teenth century  has  in  a  great  degree  taken  their  place,
was  almost  absolutely  unfelt.  With  a  Church  teaching  a
cold  and  colourless  morality,  and  habitually  discouraging
every  exhibition  of  zeal,  with  a  dynasty  accepted  as  neces-
sary to  the  country,  but  essentially  foreign  in  its  origin,
its  character,  and  its  sympathies,  with  a  Government  mild
and  tolerant,  indeed,  but  selfish,  corrupt,  and  hostile  to
reform,  the  nation  gradually  sank  into  a  condition  of
selfish  apathy.  In  very  few  periods  was  there  so  little
religious  zeal,  or  active  loyalty,  or  public  spirit.  A  kin-
dred tone  pervaded  the  higher  branches  of  intellect.  The
philosophy  of  Locke,  deriving  our  ideas  mainly,  if  not
exclusively,  from  external  sources,  was  supreme  among
the  stronger  minds.  In  literature,  in  art,  in  speculation,
the  imagination  was  repressed ;  strong  passions,  elevated
Qiotives,  and  sublime  aspirations  were  replaced  by  critical
accuracy  of  thought  and  observation,  by  a  measured  and
fastidious  beauty  of  form,  by  clearness,  symmetry,  so-
briety, and  good  sense.  We  find  this  alike  in  the  prose
of  Addison,  in  the  poetry  of  Pope,  and  in  the  philosophy
of  Hume.  The  greatest  wit  and  the  most  original  genius
of  the  age  was  also  the  most  intensely  and  the  most
coarsely  realistic.  The  greatest  English  painter  of  the
time  devoted  himself  mainly  to  caricature.  The  archi-
tects could  see  nothing  but  barbarous  deformity  in  the
Gothic  cathedral,  and  their  own  works  had  touched  the
very  nadir  of  taste.

The  long  war  which  began  in  1739  failed  signally
to  arouse  the  energies  of  the  nation.  It  involved  no
great  principle  that  could  touch  the  deeper  chords  of
national  feeling. It  was  carried  on  chiefly  by  means

CH.  IV.  DECLINE OF PUBLIC SPIRIT.  87

of  subsidies.  It  was  one  of  the  most  ill-directed,  ill-
executed,  and  unsuccessful  that  England  had  ever
waged,  and  the  people,  who  saw  Hanoverian  influence
in  every  campaign,  looked  with  an  ominous  supineness
upon  its  vicissitudes.  Good  judges  spoke  with  great
despondency  of  the  decline  of  public  spirit  as  if  the
energy  of  the  people  had  been  fatally  impaired.  Their
attitude  during  the  rebellion  of  1745  was  justly  re-
garded as  extremely  alarming.  It  appeared  as  if  all
interest  in  those  great  questions  which  had  convulsed
England  in  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth  and  of  the
Eevolution  had  died  away — as  if  even  the  old  courage
of  the  nation  was  extinct.  Nothing  can  be  more  sig-
nificant than  the  language  of  contemporary  statesmen
on  the  subject.  '  I  apprehend,'  wrote  old  Horace  Wal-
pole  when  the  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  Pretender  was
issued,  '  that  the  people  may  perhaps  look  on  and  cry
"  Fight  dog  !  fight  bear  !  "  if  they  do  no  worse.'  ^
'  England,'  wrote  Henry  Fox,  '  Wade  says,  and  I
believe,  is  for  the  first  comer,  and  if  you  can  tell
whether  the  6,000  Dutch  and  ten  battalions  of  English,
or  5,000  French  and  Spaniards  will  be  here  first,  you
know  our  fate.'  '  The  French  are  not  come — God  be
thanked!  But  had  5,000  landed  in  any  part  of  this
island  a  week  ago,  I  verily  believe  the  entire  conquest
of  it  would  not  have  cost  them  a  battle.'  Alderman
Heathcote,  writing  to  the  Earl  of  Marchmont  in  Sep-
tember 1745,  and  describing  the  condition  of  the  coun-
try, no  doubt  indicated  very  truly  the  causes  of  the
decline.  '  Your  Lordship  will  do  me  the  justice,'  he
writes,  '  to  believe  that  it  is  with  the  utmost  concern  I
have  observed  a  remarkable  change  in  the  dispositions
of  the  people  within  these  two  years ; for  numbers  of

*  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vi.  236-238. Walpole's
Letters,  ii.  65  (note).

88 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv_

them,  who,  during  the  apprehensions  of  the  last  inva-
sion, appeared  most  zealous  for  the  Government,  are
now  grown  absolutely  cold  and  indiflferent,  so  that  ex-
cept in  the  persons  in  the  pay  of  the  Government  and  a
few  Dissenters,  there  is  not  the  least  appearance  of  ap-
prehension or  concern  to  be  met  with.  As  an  evidence
of  this  truth,  your  Lordship  may  observe  the  little  in-
fluence an  actual  insurrection  has  had  on  the  public
funds  ;  and  unless  some  speedy  stop  be  put  to  this  uni-
versal coldness  by  satisfying  the  demands  of  the  nation
and  suppressing  by  proper  laws  that  parliamentary  prosti-
tution which  has  destroyed  our  armies,  our  fleets,  and
our  constitution,  I  greatly  fear  the  event.' '  The  Govern-
ment looked  upon  the  attitude  of  the  people  simply  as
furnishing  an  argument  for  increasing  the  standingarmy,
but  the  fact  itself  they  admitted  as  freely  as  their  oppo-
nents. '  When  the  late  rebellion  broke  out,'  says  Lord
Hardwicke  in  1749,  '  I  believe  most  men  were  convinced
that  if  the  rebels  had  succeeded.  Popery  as  well  as  slavery
would  have  been  the  certain  consequence,  and  yet  what
a  faint  resistance  did  the  people  make  in  any  part  of  the
kingdom  ! — so  faint  that  had  we  not  been  so  lucky  as
to  procure  a  number  of  regular  troops  from  abroad  time
enough  to  oppose  their  approach,  they  might  have  got
possession  of  our  capital  without  any  opposition  except
from  the  few  soldiers  we  had  in  London.'  ^

These  statements  are  very  remarkable,  and  they  are
especially  so  because  the  apathy  that  was  shown  was
not  due  to  any  sympathy  with  the  Pretender.  The  dis-
graceful terror  which  seized  London  when  the  news  of
the  Jacobite  march  upon  Derby  arrived  was  a  sufficient
evidence  of  the  fact.  '  In  every  place  we  passed  through,'
wrote  the  Jacobite  historian  of  the  rebellion,  '  we  found
the English very  ill-disposed towards us, except at

'  Marchmont  Papers,  ii.  342,  -  Campbell's Lives of the

343.  CJuincellors,  vi.  256,  257.

CH.  IV.  DECLINE OF PUBLIC SPIRIT.  89

Manchester.  .  .  .  The  English  peasants  were  hostile
towards  us  in  the  highest  degree.' '  When  a  prisoner
who  was  for  a  time  believed  to  be  the  Young  Pretender
was  brought  to  London,  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty
that  his  escort  could  conduct  him  to  the  Tower  through
a  savage  mob,  who  desired  to  tear  him  limb  from  limb.^
Even  in  Manchester,  the  day  of  thanksgiving  for  the
suppression  of  the  rebellion  was  celebrated  by  the  popu-
lace, who  insulted  the  nearest  relatives  of  those  who
had  perished  on  the  gallows,  and  compelled  them  to
subscribe  to  the  illuminations.  In  Liverpool  a  Roman
Catholic  chapel  was  burnt,  and  all  who  were  supposed
to  be  guilty  of  Jacobite  tendencies  were  in  serious
danger.^  Nor  did  the  executions  which  followed  the
suppression  of  the  movement  excite  any  general  com-
passion. '  Popularity,'  wrote  Horace  Walpole  at  this
time,  '  has  changed  sides  since  the  year  '15,  for  now  the
city  and  the  generality  are  very  angry  that  so  many
rebels  have  been  pardoned.'  •*

The  impression  which  this  indifference  to  public
interests  produced  in  the  minds  of  many  observers  was
well  expressed  in  a  work  which  appeared  in  1757  and
1758.  Browne's  'Estimate  of  the  Manners  and  Prin-
ciples of  the  Times '  is  now  hardly  remembered  except
by  brief  and  disparaging  notices  in  one  of  the  later
writings  of  Burke  and  in  one  of  the  '  Essays '  of  Macau-
lay  ;  but  it  had  once  a  wide  popularity  and  a  consider-
able influence  on  public  opinion.  Its  author  was  a
clergyman  well  known  in  the  history  of  ethics  by  his
answer  to  Shaftesbury,  which  contains  one  of  the  ablest
defences  in  English  literature  of  the  utilitarian  theory

•  Johnstone's  Memoirs  of  the  *  Picton's  Memorials  of  Liver-
Rebellion,  pp.  70,  81.  pool,  vol.  i.

-  Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,  *  Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,

Dec.  9,  1745,  August  12,  174G.

90  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  iv.

of  morals.  His  object  was  to  warn  the  country  of  the
utter  ruin  that  must  ensue  from  a  decadence  of  the
national  spirit,  which  he  maintained  was  only  too  mani-
fest, and  which  he  attributed  mainly  to  an  excessive
development  of  the  commercial  spirit.  He  fully  admits
that  constitutional  liberty  had  been  considerably  en-
larged, that  a  spirit  of  growing  humanity  was  exhibited
both  in  manners  and  in  laws ;  that  the  administration
of  justice  was  generally  pure,  and  that  the  age  was  not
characterised  by  gross  or  profligate  vice.  Its  leading
quality  was  '  a  vain,  luxurious,  and  selfish  effeminacy,'
which  was  rapidly  corroding  all  the  elements  of  the
national  strength.  '  Love  of  our  country,'  he  com-
plained, '  is  no  longer  felt,  and  except  in  a  few  minds
of  uncommon  greatness,  the  principle  of  public  spirit
exists  not.'  He  appealed  to  the  disuse  of  manly
occupations  among  the  higher  classes,  to  their  gene-
ral indifference  to  religious  doctrines  and  neglect  of
religious  practices,  to  the  ever-widening  circle  of
corruption  which  had  now  passed  from  the  Parlia-
ment to  the  constituencies,  and  tainted  all  the  ap-
proaches of  public  life ;  to  the  prevailing  system  of
filling  the  most  important  offices  in  the  most  critical
times  by  family  interest,  and  without  any  regard  to
merit  or  to  knowledge.  The  extent  of  this  evil,  he
maintained,  was  but  too  plainly  shown  in  the  contrast
between  the  sjDlendid  victories  of  Marlborough  and  the
almost  uniform  failure  of  the  British  arms  in  the  late
war,  in  the  want  of  fire,  energy,  and  heroism  manifested
in  all  public  affairs,  and,  above  all,  in  the  conduct  of
the  nation  during  the  rebellion,  '  when  those  of  every
rank  above  a  constable,  instead  of  arming  themselves
and  encouraging  the  people,  generally  fled  before  the
rebels  ;  while  a  mob  of  ragged  Highlanders  marched
unmolested  to  the  heart  of  a  populous  kingdom.'  He
argued  with  much  acuteness  that  the  essential  qualities

CH.  IV. COMPARISON  BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  CONTINENT.  91

of  national  greatness  are  moral,  and  that  no  increase  of
material  resources  could  compensate  for  the  deterioration
which  had  in  this  respect  passed  over  the  English  people.
It  is,  perhaps,  difficult  for  us,  who  judge  these  pre-
dictions in  the  light  which  is  furnished  by  the  Methodist
revival,  and  by  the  splendours  of  the  administration  of
Chatham,  to  do  full  justice  to  their  author.  He  ap-
pears to  have  been  constitutionally  a  very  desponding
man,  and  he  ended  his  life  by  suicide.  The  shadows
of  his  picture  are  undoubtedly  overcharged,  and  the
marked  revival  of  public  spirit  in  the  succeeding  reign,
when  commerce  was  far  more  extended  than  under
George  II,,  proves  conclusively  that  he  had  formed  a
very  erroneous  estimate  of  the  influence  of  the  com-
mercial spirit.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  the  disease,  though
it  might  still  be  arrested,  was  a  real  one,  and  its  causes,
as  we  have  seen,  are  not  difficult  to  trace.  There  was,
undoubtedly,  less  of  gross  and  open  profligacy  than  in
the  evil  days  of  the  Restoration,  and  less  of  deliberate
and  organised  treachery  among  statesmen  than  in  the
years  that  immediately  followed  the  Revolution.  The
fault  of  the  time  was  not  so  much  the  amount  of  vice  as
the  defect  of  virtue,  the  general  depression  of  motives,
the  unusual  absence  of  unselfish  and  disinterested  action.
At  the  same  time,  though  there  had  been  a  certain  sus-
pension of  the  moral  influences  that  had  formerly  acted
upon  English  society,  the  conditions  of  that  society  were
at  bottom  sound,  and  contrasted  in  most  respects  favour-
ably with  those  of  the  greatest  nations  on  the  Continent.
In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  peasants  of
Germany  were  uniformly  serfs,  and  the  peasantry  of
France,  though  freed  from  the  most  oppressive,  were
still  subject  to  some  of  the  most  irritating  of  feudal
burdens,  while  in  both  countries  political  liberty  was
unknown,  and  in  France,  at  least,  religious  and  intel-
lectual freedom  were  perpetually  violated. In  France,

92 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

too,  that  fatal  division  of  classes  which  has  been  the
parent  of  most  subsequent  disasters,  was  already  accom-
plished. The  selfish  infatuation  of  the  Court  which
desired  to  attract  to  itself  all  that  was  splendid  in  the
community,  the  growing  centralisation  of  government,
the  want  in  the  upper  classes  of  all  taste  for  country
sports  and  duties,  and  the  increasing  attraction  of  town
life,  had  led  the  richer  classes  almost  invariably  to
abandon  their  estates  for  the  pleasures  of  the  capital,
where,  in  the  absence  of  healthy  political  life,  they
lost  all  sympathy  with  their  fellow-countrymen,  and
speedily  degenerated  into  hypocrites  or  profligates.
Their  tenants,  on  the  other  hand,  deprived  of  the  soften-
ing influence  of  contact  with  their  superiors,  reduced  to
penury  by  grinding  and  unequal  taxation,  and  finding
in  the  village  priest  their  only  type  of  civilisation,  sank
into  that  precise  condition  which  transforms  some  men
into  the  most  implacable  revolutionists,  and  others
into  the  most  superstitious  of  bigots.  But  in  England
nothing  of  this  kind  took  place.  The  mixture  of  classes,
on  which  English  liberty  and  the  perfection  of  the
English  type  so  largely  depends,  still  continued.  The
country  gentlemen  were  actively  employed  upon  their
estates,  administering  a  rude  justice,  coming  into  con-
stant and  intinjate  connection  with  their  tenants,  and
acquiring  in  the  duties,  associations,  and  even  sports  of
a  country  life,  elements  of  a  practical  political  know-
ledge more  valuable  than  any  that  can  be  acquired  in
books.  Habits  of  hard  and  honest  industry,  a  respect
for  domestic  life,  unflinching  personal  courage,  were  still
general  through  the  middle  classes  and  among  the  poor,
and  if  the  last  was  suspected  during  the  rebellion,  it  was
at  least  abundantly  displayed  by  the  British  infantry
at  Dettingen  and  Fontenoy.  While  all  these  subsisted,
there  remained  elements  of  greatness  which  might  easily,
under  favourable  circumstances,  be  fanned  into  a  flame.

CH.  IV. CONDITIONS OF CONSTITUTIONAL  GOVEKNMENT. 93

It  must  be  added,  too,  that  the  qualities  most  needed
for  the  success  of  constitutional  government,  are  not  the
highest,  but  what  may  be  called  the  middle  virtues  of
character  and  intellect.  Heroic  self-sacrifice,  brilliant
genius,  a  lofty  level  of  generosity,  intelligence,  or
morality,  a  clear  perception  of  the  connection  and  logi-
cal tendency  of  principles,  have  all,  no  doubt,  their
places  under  this  as  under  other  forms  of  government ;
but  it  is  upon  the  wide  diffusion  of  quite  a  different
category  of  qualities  or  attainments  that  the  perma-
nence of  constitutional  government  mainly  depends.
Patience,  moderation,  persevering  energy,  the  spirit  of
compromise,  a  tolerance  of  difference  of  opinions,  a
general  interest  in  public  affairs,  sound  sense,  love  of
order,  a  disposition  to  judge  measures  by  actual  work-
ing and  not  by  any  ideal  theory,  a  love  of  practical
improvement,  and  a  great  distrust  of  speculative  poli-
tics, a  dislike  to  change  as  change,  combined  with  a
readiness  to  recognise  necessities  when  they  arise,  are
the  qualities  which  must  be  generally  diffused  through  a
community  before  free  institutions  can  take  firm  root
among  them.  Judged  by  these  tests  the  period  we  are
considering  exhibited,  no  doubt,  in  several  respects  a
great  decadence  and  deficiency,  but  not  so  great  as  if  we
measured  it  by  a  more  ideal  standard,  and  it  may  be
safely  asserted  that  in  no  other  great  nation  were  these
qualities  at  this  time  so  commonly  exhibited.

A  very  similar  judgment  may  be  passed  upon  the
system  of  government.  It  was  corrupt,  inefficient,  and
unheroic,  but  it  was  free  from  the  gross  vices  of  conti-
nental administrations ;  it  was  moderate,  tolerant,  and
economical ;  it  was,  with  all  its  faults,  a  free  government,
and  it  contained  in  itself  the  elements  of  reformation.

I  have  examined  in  a  former  chapter  the  theory
according  to  which  the  rival  English  parties  have  ex-
changed their  principles  since  tlie  early  years  of  the

94  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  iv.

eighteenth  century,  and  I  have  endeavoured  to  show-
that  it  is  substantially  erroneous,  and  that  the  historic
identity of each party may be clearly established,
whether  we  consider  the  interests  it  represented,  or  the
leading  principles  of  its  policy. We  are  now,  however,
in  a  position  to  see  more  clearly  the  facts  which  have
given  that  theory  its plausibility. The  ministries  of
Walpole  and  Pelham represented  especially  the  com-
mercial classes  and  the  Dissenters,  aimed  beyond  all
things  at  the  maintenance  of  the  type  of monarchy
established  by  the  Revolution,  and  leaned  almost  uni-
formly towards  those  principles  of  religious  liberty  which
the  Tory  party  detested  ; but  undisputed  power  had
made  them  corrupt,  selfish, and  apathetic, and  they
sought,  both  in  their  own  interest  and  in  that  of  the
dynasty,  to  check  every  reform  that  could  either  abridge
their  power  or  arouse  strong  passions  in  the  nation.
They  also  made  it  a  great  end  of  their  policy  to  humour
and  conciliate  to  the  utmost  the  country  gentry,  who
were  the  natural  opponents  of  their  party. Though  not
Tory,  they  were  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  Conser-
vative, Governments ; that  is  to  say.  Governments  of
which  the  supreme  object  and  preoccupation  was  not  the
realisation  of  any  unattained  political  ideal,  or  the  re-
dressing of  any  political grievances, but merely  the
maintenance  of  existing  institutions  against  all  assail-
ants. The  lines  of  party  division  were  blurred  and  con-
fused, and  while  only  those  who  called  themselves  Whigs
were  in  general  admitted  to  power,  many  were  ranked
in  that  category  who,  in  a  time  of  keener  party  struggles,
would  have  been  enrolled  among  the  Tories.

The  characteristics  of  the  two  great  parties  have  varied
much  with  difierent  circumstances.  The  idiosyncrasies
of  leaders  whose  attachment  to  their  respective  parties
was  often  in  the  first  instance  due  to  the  mere  accident  of
birth  or  of  position,  the  calm  or  louring  aspect  of  foreign

CH.  IV.  ORIGIN OF PARTIES.  95

affairs,  the  dominant  passion  of  the  nation,  the  question
whether  a  party  is  in  office  or  in  opposition,  whether  if  in
power  i1  s  position  is  precarious  or  secure,  and  if  in  oppo-
sition it  is  likely  soon  to  incur  the  responsibilities  of
office,  have  all  their  great  influence  on  party  politics.
Still  there  is  a  real  natural  history  of  parties,  and  the  di-
vision corresponds  roughly  to  certain  broad  distinctions  of
mind  and  character  that  never  can  be  effaced.  The  dis-
tinctions between  content  and  hope,  between  caution  and
confidence,  between  the  imagination  that  throws  a  halo
of  reverent  association  around  the  past  and  that  which
opens  out  brilliant  vistas  of  improvement  in  the  future,
between  the  mind  that  perceives  most  clearly  the  advan-
tages of  existing  institutions  and  the  possible  dangers
of  change  and  that  which  sees  most  keenly  the  defects
of  existing  institutions  and  the  vast  additions  that  may
be  made  to  human  well-being,  form  in  all  large  classes
of  men  opposite  biases  wliich  find  their  expression  in
party  divisions.  The  one  side  rests  chiefly  on  the  great
truth  that  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  good  govern-
ment is  essential  stability,  and  on  the  extreme  danger
of  a  nation  cutting  itself  off  from  the  traditions  of  its.
past,  denuding  its  government  of  all  moral  support,  and
perpetually  tampering  with  the  main  pillars  of  the  State.
The  other  side  rests  chiefly  upon  the  no  less  certain  truths
that  government  is  an  organic  thing,  that  it  must  be
capable  of  growing,  expanding,  and  adapting  itself  to
new  conditions  of  thought  or  of  society ;  that  it  is  sub-
ject to  grave  diseases,  which  can  only  be  arrested  by  a
constant  vigilance,  and  that  its  attributes  and  functions
are  susceptible  of  almost  infinite  variety  and  extension
with  the  new  and  various  developments  of  national  life.
The  one  side  represents  the  statical,  the  other  the  dy-
namical element  in  politics.  Each  can  claim  for  itself
a  natural  affinity  to  some  of  the  highest  qualities  of  mind
and  character,  and  each,  perhaps,  owes  quite  as  much  of

96  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  IV.

its  strength  to  mental  and  moral  disease.  Stupidity-
is  naturally  Tory.  The  large  classes  who  are  blindly
wedded  to  routine,  and  are  simply  incapable  of  under-
standing or  appreciating  new  ideas,  or  the  exigencies  of
changed  circumstances,  or  the  conditions  of  a  reformed
society,  find  their  natural  place  in  the  Tory  ranks.  Folly,
on  the  other  hand,  is  naturally  Liberal.  To  this  side
belongs  the  cast  of  mind  which,  having  no  sense  of  the
infinite  complexity  and  interdependence  of  political  pro-
blems, of  the  part  which  habit,  association,  and  tradition
play  in  every  healthy  political  organism,  and  of  the
multifarious  remote  and  indirect  consequences  of  every
institution,  is  prepared  with  a  light  heart  and  a  reckless
hand  to  recast  the  whole  framework  of  the  constitution
in  the  interest  of  speculation  or  experiment.  The  co-
lossal weight  of  national  selfishness  gravitates,  naturally
to  Toryism.  That  party  rallies  round  its  banner  the
great  multitude  who,  having  made  their  position,  desire
merely  to  keep  things  as  they  are,  who  are  prepared  to
subordinate  their  whole  policy  to  the  maintenance  of
class  privileges,  who  look  with  cold  hearts  and  apathetic
minds  on  the  vast  mass  of  remediable  misery  and  in-
justice around  them,  who  have  never  made  a  serious
effort,  or  perhaps  conceived  a  serious  desire,  to  leave  the
world  in  any  respect  a  better  place  than  they  found  it.
Even  in  the  case  of  reforms  which  have  no  natural  con-
nection with  party  politics,  and  which,  by  diverting  atten-
tion from  other  clianges,  would  be  eminently  beneficial
to  the  Tories,  that  party  has  usually  been  less  efiicient
than  its  rival,  because  its  leaders  were  paralysed  by  the
atmosphere  of  selfishness  pervading  their  ranks,  and  be-
cause most  of  the  reforming  and  energetic  intellects  were
ranged  among  their  opponents.  On  the  other  hand,  the
acrid  humours  and  more  turbulent  passions  of  society
flow  strongly  in  the  Liberal  direction.  Envy,  which
hates  every  privilege  or  dignity  it  does  not  slmr-e,  is  in-

1

c:i.  IV.  LEGISLATIVE MEASUllES OF PELHAM.  97

tensely  democratic,  and  disordered  ambitions  and  dis-
honest adventm"ers  find  their  natural  place  in  the  party
of  progress  and  of  change.

The  Wliig  Governments,  from  the  accession  of
George  I.  to  the  death  of  Henry  Pelham,  only  exhibited
in  a  very  subdued  and  diluted  form  both  the  virtues  and
the  vices  of  Liberalism  ;  and  though  this  period  is  very
important  in  the  history  of  English  politics,  its  import-
ance lies  much  more  in  the  silent  and  almost  insensible
growth  of  parliamentary  government  than  in  distinct
remedial  measures.  The  measures  of  reform  that  were
actually  passed  were  usually  such  as  were  almost  im-
peratively demanded  by  critical  circumstances,  or  by  the
growth  of  some  great  evil  in  the  nation.  Some  of  them
were  of  great  importance.  The  rebellion  of  1 745  made
it  absolutely  necessary  to  put  an  end  to  the  anarchy  of
the  Highlands,  and  to  the  almost  complete  indepen-
dence which  enabled  the  Highland  chief  to  defy  the  law,
and  to  rally  around  him  in  a  few  days,  and  in  any  cause,
a  considerable  body  of  armed  men.  The  Acts  for  the
abolition  of  hereditary  jurisdictions,  for  disarming  the
Highlanders,  and  for  depriving  them  of  their  national
dress,  were  carried  with  this  object,  and  the  first,  which
made  the  English  law  supreme  throughout  the  island,
has,  as  we  shall  see  in  another  chapter,  proved  one  of
the  most  important  measures  in  Scotch  history,  the  chief
cause  of  the  rapid  progress  of  Scotland  in  wealth  and
civilisation.

Another  measure  of  the  Pelham  ministry  was  in-
tended to  check  a  still  graver  evil  than  Highland  an-
archy. The  habit  of  gin-drinking — the  master  curse  of
English  life,  to  which  most  of  the  crime  and  an  immense
proportion  of  the  misery  of  the  nation  may  be  ascribed —
if  it  did  not  absolutely  originate,  at  least  became  for  the
first  time  a  national  vice,  in  the  early  Hanoverian  period.
Drunkenness,  it  is  true,  had  long  been  common,  thougb

VOL.  II.  H

98 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

Camden  maintained  that  in  his  day  it  was  still  a  recent
vice,  that  there  had  been  a  time  when  the  English  were
'  of  all  the  northern  nations  the  most  commended  for
their  sobriety,'  and  that '  they  first  learnt  in  their  wars  in
the  Netherlands  to  drown  themselves  with  immoderate
drinking.'  ^  The  Dutch  and  German  origin  of  many
drinking  terms  lends  some  colour  to  this  assertion,  and
it  is  corroborated  by  other  evidence.  '  Superfluity  of
drink,'  wrote  Tom  Nash  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  '  is  a
sin  that  ever  since  we  have  mixed  ourselves  with  the
Low  Countries  is  counted  honourable  ;  but,  before  we
knew  their  lingering  wars,  was  held  in  the  highest  de-
gree of  hatred  that  might  be.'  '  As  the  English,'  said
Chamberlayne,  '  returning  from  the  wars  in  the  Holy
Land  brought  home  the  foul  disease  of  leprosy  ...  so
in  our  fathers'  days  the  English  returning  from  the
service  in  the  Netherlands  brought  with  them  the  foul
vice  of  drunkenness.'  But  the  evil,  if  it  was  not  indi-
genous in  England,^  at  least  spread  very  rapidly  and
very  widely.  '  In  England,'  said  lago,  '  they  are  most
potent  in  potting.  Your  Dane,  your  German,  and  your
swag-bellied  Hollander  are  nothing  to  your  English.'  ^
'  We  seem,'  wrote  a  somewhat  rhetorical  writer  in  1657,
'  to  be  steeped  in  liquors,  or  to  be  the  dizzy  island.
We  drink  as  if  we  were  nothing  but  sponges  ...  or
had  tunnels  in  our  mouths.  .  .  .  We  are  the  grape-
suckers  of  the  earth.'  ^

The  dissipated  habits  of  the  Eestoration,  and  especi-
ally the  growing  custom  of  drinking  toasts,  greatly
increased  the  evil,  but  it  was  noticed  that  the  intro-
duction of  cofiee,  which  spread  widely  through  Eng-

'  Camden's  nist.  of  Elizabeth,  cdhn's  Manners  and  Customs  of

A.D.  1581.  Lo7idon,  i.  285-289.

*  See  the  early  history  of  Eng-  '  Othello,  act  ii.  scene  iii.

lish  drmking,  in  Disraeli's  C«-  ■•  Eeeve's 'Plea  for  Nineveh,'

riosities  of  Literature ;  Drmking  quoted  in  Malcolm's  Manners  and

Customs  in  England  ;  and  Mai-  Ctistoms  of  Londo^i,  i.  286.

CH.  IV. .  HISTORY  OF DRUNKENNESS.  99

land  in  the  last  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  had
a  perceptible  influence  in  diminishing  it,^  and  among
the  upper  classes  drunkenness  was,  perhaps,  never
quite  so  general  as  between  the  time  of  Elizabeth
and  the  Eevolution.  French  wines  were  the  favourite
drink,  but  the  War  of  the  Eevolution  for  a  time
almost  excluded  them,  and  the  Methuen  Treaty  of
1703,  which  admitted  the  wines  of  Portugal  at  a  duty
of  one-third  less  than  those  of  France,  gradually  pro-
duced a  complete  change  in  the  national  taste.  This
change  was,  however,  not  fully  accomplished  for  nearly
a  century,  and  it  was  remarked  that  in  the  reign  of
Anne  the  desire  to  obtain  French  wines  at  a  reasonable
rate  greatly  strengthened  the  opposition  to  Marlborough
and  the  war.^  The  amount  of  hard  drinking  among
the  upper  classes  was  still  very  great,  and  it  is  remark-
able how  many  of  the  most  conspicuous  characters  were
addicted  to  it.  Addison,  the  foremost  moralist  of  his
time,  was  not  free  from  it.^  Oxford,  whose  private
character  was  in  most  respects  singularly  high,  is  said
to  have  come,  not  unfrequently,  drunk  into  the  very
presence  of  the  Queen.'*  Bolingbroke,  when  in  office,
sat  up  whole  nights  drinking,  and  in  the  morning,
having  bound  a  wet  napkin  round  his  forehead  and  his
eyes,  to  drive  away  the  effects  of  his  intemperance,  he
hastened,  without  sleep,  to  his  official  business.^  When
Walpole  was  a  young  man  his  father  was  accustomed

*  Chamberlayne. See,  too,  a  of  Commerce,  ii.  165,  166,  180,

curious  testimony  on  this  sub-  181. Davenant's Bejport  to  the

ject  quoted  in  Jesse's  London,  Commissioners  for  Stating  the

iii.  250.  Public  Accounts.

-  Cunningham's  Hist.  ii.  200,  ^  Spence. Swift's Correspon-

201. Dr.  Kadcliffe  is  said  to  have  deiice.

ascribed  much  of  the  sickness  of  *  E.  Lewis  to  Swift,

the  time  to  the  want  of  French  ^  Mrs. Delany's Correspon-

wines. See,  too,  on  the  history  dence,  vi.  168.
of  French wines,  Craik's Hist.

H  2

100 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  IV.

to  pour  into  his  glass  a  double  portion  of  wine,  sapng,
'  Come,  Robert,  you  shall  drink  twice  wHle  I  drink
once  ;  for  I  will  not  permit  the  son  in  his  sober  senses
to  be  witness  of  the  intoxication  of  his  father.'  This
education  px'oduced  its  natural  fruits,  and  the  entertain-
ments of  the  minister  at  Houghton  were  the  scandal  of
his  county,  and  often  drove  Lord  Townshend  from  his
neighbouring  seat  of  Rainham.^  The  brilliant  intellect
of  Carteret  was  clouded  by  drink,^  and  even  Pulteney,
who  appears  in  his  later  years  to  have  had  stronger
religious  convictions  than  any  other  politician  of  his  time,
is  said  to  have  shortened  his  life  by  the  same  means.^

Among  the  poor,  however,  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  popular  beverage  was  still  beer  or
ale,  the  use  of  which — especially  before  the  art  of  noxious
adulteration  was  brought  to  its  present  perfection — has
always  been  more  common  than  the  abuse.  The  con-
sumption appears  to  have  been  amazing.  It  was  com-
puted in  1688  that  no  less  than  12,400,000  barrels  wei-e
brewed  in  England  in  a  single  year,  though  the  entire
population  probably  little  exceeded  5,000,000.  In  1 695,
with  a  somewhat  heavier  excise,  it  sank  to  11,350,000
barrels,  but  even  then  almost  a  third  part  of  the  arable
land  of  the  kingdom  was  devoted  to  barley.^  Under
Charles  I.  a  company  was  formed  with  the  sole  right  of
making  spirits  and  vinegar  in  the  cities  of  London  and
Westminster  and  within  twenty-one  miles  of  the  same,

*  Coxe's  Walpole,  i.  5, 758, 759.  of  tlie  inhabitants  were  forced  to

*  Chesterfield's  Characters.  retire  to  the  country,  no  less  than

*  Speaker Onslow's Remarks  1,522,781  barrels  of  beer  and  ale
(Coxe's  Walpole,  ii.  559).  were  brewed  in  the  City,  each  of

■*  Gregory  King's  State  of  Eng-  them  containing  from  32  to  36

land,  pp.  55,  56.  In  an  edition  of  gallons,  that  the  amount  brewed

Ch amber layne's  Magnce  Britan-  annually  in  London had  since

nice  Notitia,  published  in  1710,  risen to near two millions of

it  is  stated  that  in  1667,  when  barrels, and that the excise

the  greater  part  of  London  was  for  London  was  farmed  out  for

in  ashes  after  the  Fire,  and  many  120,000Z.  a  year  (p.  219).

CH.  IV.  INCREASE OF DRUNKENNESS.  101

but  tliis  measure  had  little  fruit;  the  British  distilleries  up
to  the  time  of  the  Revolution  were  quite  inconsiderable,
and  the  brandies  which  were  imported  in  large  quanti-
ties from  France  were  much  too  expensive  to  become
popular.  Partly,  however,  through  hostility  to  France,
and  partly  in  order  to  encourage  the  home  distilleries,
the  Government  of  the  Revolution,  in  1689,  absolutely
prohibited  the  importation  of  spirits  from  all  foreign
countries,*  and  threw  open  the  trade  of  distillery,  on  the
payment  of  certain  duties,  to  all  its  subjects.^  These
measures  laid  the  foundation  of  the  great  extension  of
the  English  manufacture  of  spirits,  but  it  was  not  till
about  1724  that  the  passion  for  gin-drinking  appears  to
have  infected  the  masses  of  the  population,  and  it  spread
with  the  rapidity  and  the  violence  of  an  epidemic.
Small  as  is  the  place  which  this  fact  occupies  in  English
history,  it  was  probably,  if  we  consider  all  the  conse-
quences that  have  flowed  from  it,  the  most  momentous
in  that  of  the  eighteenth  century — incomparably  more
so  than  any  event  in  the  purely  political  or  military
annals  of  the  country.  The  fatal  passion  for  drink  was
at  once,  and  irrevocably,  planted  in  the  nation.  The
average  of  British  spirits  distilled,  which  is  said  to  have
been  only  527,000  gallons  in  1684,  and  2,000,000  in
1714,  had  risen  in  1727  to  3,601,000,  and  in  1735  to
5,394,000  gallons.  Physicians  declared  that  in  ex-
cessive gin-drinking  a  new  and  terrible  source  of  mor-
tality had  been  opened  for  the  poor.  The  grand  jury  of
]\liddlesex,  in  a  powerful  presentment,  declared  that
much  the  greater  part  of  the  poverty,  the  murders,  the
robberies  of  London,  might  be  traced  to  this  single
cause.  Retailers  of  gin  were  accustomed  to  hang  out
painted  boards  announcing  that  their  customers  could
be  made  drunk  for  a  penny,  and  dead  drunk  for  two-

>  Pari.  Hist.  xii.  1212.  pherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,

2  Ibid. xii.  1211-1214. Mac- ii.  639.

102 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  iv.

pence,  and  should  have  straw  for  nothing ;  and  cellars
strewn  with  straw  were  accordingly  provided,  into  which
those  who  had  become  insensible  were  dragged,  and
where  they  remained  till  they  had  sufficiently  recovered
to  renew  their  orgies.

The  evil  acquired  such  frightful  dimensions  that
even  the  unreforming  Parliament  of  Walpole  perceived
the  necessity  of  taking  strong  measures  to  arrest  it,  and
in  1736  Sir  J.  Jekyll  brought  in  and  carried  a  measure,
to  which  Walpole  reluctantly  assented,  imposing  a  duty
of  20s.  a  gallon  on  all  spirituous  liquors,  and  prohibit-
ing any  person  from  selling  them  in  less  quantities  than
two  gallons  without  paying  a  tax  of  601.  a  year.^  Such
a  scale,  if  it  could  have  been  maintained,  would  have
almost  amounted  to  prohibition,  but  the  passion  for
these  liquors  was  now  too  widely  spread  to  be  arrested
by  law.  Violent  riots  ensued.  In  1737,  it  is  true,  the
consumption  sank  to  about  3,600,000  gallons,  but,  as
Walpole  had  predicted,  a  clandestine  retail  trade  soon
sprang  up,  which  being  at  once  very  lucrative  and  very
popular,  increased  to  such  an  extent  that  it  was  found
impossible  to  restrain  it.  In  1742  more  than  7,000,000
gallons  were  distilled,  and  the  consumption  was  steadily
augmenting.  The  measure  of  1736  being  plainly  in-
operative, an  attempt  was  made  in  1743  to  suppress
the  clandestine  trade,  and  at  the  same  time  to  increase
the  public  revenue,  by  a  Bill  lowering  the  duty  on  most
kinds  of  spirits  to  Id.  in  the  gallon,  levied  at  the  still-
head,  and  at  the  same  time  reducing  the  price  of  retail
licences  from  501.  to  20s.^  The  Bill  was  carried  in  spite
of  the  strenuous  opposition  of  Chesterfield,  Lord  Her-
vey,  and  the  whole  bench  of  Bishops,  and,  while  it  did
nothing  to  discourage  drunkenness,  it  appears  to  have
had  little  or  no  effect  upon  smuggling. In  1 749  more

'  9  Geo.  11.  c.  23.  "  16  Geo.  II.  c.  8.

CH.  IV.  INCREASE OF DRUNKENNESS.  103

than  4,000  persons  were  convicted  of  selling  spirituous
liquors  without  a  licence,  and  the  number  of  the  private
gin-shops  within  the  Bills  of  Mortality  was  estimated
at  more  than  17,000.  At  the  same  time  crime  and
immorality  of  every  description  were  rapidly  increasing.
The  City  of  London  urgently  petitioned  for  new  mea-
sures of  restriction.  The  London  physicians  stated  in
1750  that  there  were,  in  or  about  the  metropolis,  no
less  than  14,000  cases  of  illness,  most  of  them  beyond
the  reach  of  medicine,  directly  attributable  to  gin.
Fielding,  in  his  well-known  pamphlet  '  On  the  late
Increase  of  Robbers,'  which  was  published  in  1751,
ascribed  that  evil,  in  a  great  degree,  '  to  a  new  kind  of
drunkenness,  unknown  to  our  ancestors  ; '  he  declared
that  gin  was  '  the  principal  sustenance  (if  it  may  be  so
called)  of  more  than  100,000  people  in  the  metropolis,'
and  he  predicted  that,  '  should  the  drinking  of  this  poison
be  continued  at  its  present  height  during  the  next
twenty  years,  there  will,  by  that  time,  be  very  few  of
the  common  people  left  to  drink  it.'  It  was  computed
that,  in  1750  and  1751,  more  than  11  millions  of  gal-
lons of  spirits  were  annually  consumed,  and  the  increase
of  population,  especially  in  London,  appears  to  have
been  perceptibly  checked.  Bishop  Benson,  in  a  letter
written  fi'om  London  a  little  later,  said  '  there  is  not
only  no  safety  of  living  in  this  town,  but  scarcely  any  in
the  country  now,  robbery  and  murther  are  grown  so
frequent.  Our  people  are  now  become  what  they  never
before  were,  cruel  and  inhuman.  Those  accursed  spiri-
tuous liquors,  which,  to  the  shame  of  our  Government,
are  so  easily  to  be  had,  and  in  such  quantities  drunk,
have  changed  the  very  nature  of  our  people  ;  and  they
will,  if  continued  to  be  drunk,  destroy  the  very  race  of
people  themselves.'  ^

»  Eraser's  Life  of  Berkeley,  pp.  332,  333.

104 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

In  1751 ,  however,  some  new  and  stringent  measures
were  carried  imder  the  Pelham  ministry,  which  had  a
real  and  very  considerable  effect.  Distillers  were  pro-
hibited under  a  penalty  of  101.  from  either  retailing
spirituous  liquors  themselves,  or  selling  them  to  un-
licensed retailers.  Debts  contracted  for  liquors  not
amounting  to  twenty  shillings  at  a  time  were  made
irrecoverable  by  law.  Eetail  licences  were  conceded
only  to  101.  householders  within  the  Bills  of  Mortality,
and  to  traders  who  were  subject  to  certain  parochial
rates  without  them,  and  the  penalties  for  unlicensed
retailing  were  greatly  increased.  For  the  second  of-
fence, the  clandestine  dealer  was  liable  to  three  months'
imprisonment  and  to  whipping;  for  the  third  oifence
he  incurred  the  penalty  of  transportation.^  Two
years  later  another  useful  law  was  carried  restricting
the  liberty  of  magistrates  in  issuing  licences,  and  sub-
jecting public-houses  to  severe  regulations. ^  Though
much  less  ambitious  than  the  Act  of  1736,  these
measures  were  far  more  efficacious,  and  they  form  a
striking  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  legislation,  if
not  over-strained  or  ill-timed,  can  improve  the  morals
of  a  people.  Among  other  consequences  of  the  Acts  it
may  be  observed  that  dropsy,  which  had  risen  in  Lon-
don to  a  wholly  unprecedented  point  between  1718
and  1751,  immediately  diminished,  and  the  diminution
was  ascxibed  by  physicians  to  the  marked  decrease  of
drunkenness  in  the  community.^  Still  these  measures
formed  a  palliation  and  not  a  cure,  and  from  the  early
years  of  the  eighteenth  century  gin-drinking  has  never
ceased  to  be  the  main  counteracting  influence  to  the
moral,  intellectual,  and  physical  benefits  that  might  be

24  Geo.  II.  c.  40.  the  Increase  and  Decrease  of  dif-

26  Geo.  II.  c.  13.  ferent  Diseases  (1801),  p.  45.

Heberden's  Observations  on

CH.  IV.  THE MOHOCKS.  105

expected  from  increased  commercial  prosperity.  Of  all
the  pictures  of  Hogarth  none  are  more  impressive  than
those  in  which  he  represents  the  different  conditions  of
a  people  whose  national  beverage  is  beer  and  of  a  people
who  are  addicted  to  gin,  and  the  contrast  exhibits  in  its
most  unfavourable  aspect  the  difference  between  the
Hanoverian  period  and  that  which  preceded  it.^

Something  also  was  done  to  secure  the  maintenance
of  order,  but  there  was  still  very  much  to  be  desired.
The  impunity  with  which  outrages  were  committed  in
the  ill-lit  and  ill-guarded  streets  of  London  during  the
first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  can  now  hardly  be
realised.  In  1712  a  club  of  young  men  of  the  higher
classes,  who  assumed  the  name  of  Mohocks,  were  accus-
tomed nightly  to  sally  out  drunk  into  the  streets  to  hunt
the  passers-by  and  to  subject  them  in  mere  wantonness
to  the  most  atrocious  outrages.  One  of  their  favourite
amusements,  called  '  tipping  the  lion,'  was  to  squeeze
the  nose  of  their  victim  flat  upon  his  face  and  to  bore
out  his  eyes  with  their  fingers.  Among  them  were  the
'  sweaters,'  who  formed  a  circle  round  their  prisoner  and
pricked  him  with  their  swords  till  he  sank  exhausted  to
the  ground,  the  '  dancing  masters,'  so  called  from  their
skill  in  making  men  caper  by  thrusting  swords  into
their  legs,  the  '  tumblers,'  whose  favourite  amusement
was  to  set  women  on  their  heads  and  commit  various
indecencies  and  barbarities  on  the  limbs  that  were  ex-
posed. Maid-servants  as  they  opened  their  masters'
doors  were  waylaid,  beaten,  and  their  faces  cut.  Matrons

'  See on this subject the  Chesterfield,  p.  209. Walpole's

Gentleman's  Magazine,  lliJl,  pp.  George  II.  i.  66,  67. Smollett's

136,282,283,321,322;  1760,  pp.  Hist. Fielding's Increase of

18-22. Short's  Hist,  of  the  In-  Eobbers. Mandeville's  Fable  of

crease  and  Decrease  of  Mankind  the  Bees,  Eemark  G. Pari.  De-

171  England, -p.  21.  Coxe's  Life  of  bates.
Pelham,  ii.  182. Maty's  Life  of

106 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

inclosed  in  barrels  were  rolled  down  the  steep  and  stony
incline  of  Snow  Hill.  Watchmen  were  unmercifully
beaten  and  their  noses  slit.  Country  gentlemen  went
to  the  theatre  as  if  in  time  of  war,  accompanied  by
their  armed  retainers.  A  bishop's  son  was  said  to  be
one  of  the  gang,  and  a  baronet  was  among  those  who
were  arrested.^  This  atrocious  fashion  passed  away,
but  other,  though  comparatively  harmless,  rioters  were
long  accustomed  to  beat  the  watch,  to  break  the  citi-
zens' windows,  and  to  insult  the  passers-by,  while  rob-
beries multiplied  to  a  fearful  extent.  Long  after  the
Revolution,  the  policy  of  the  Government  was  to  rely
mainly  upon  informers  for  the  repression  of  crime,  but
the  large  rewards  that  were  offered  were  in  a  great  de-
gree neutralised  by  the  popular  feeling  against  the  class.
The  watchmen  or  constables  were  usually  inefficient;
they  were  to  be  found  much  more  frequently  in  beer-
shops  than  in  the  streets,  and  they  were  often  them-
selves a  serious  danger  to  the  community.  Fielding^
who  knew  them  well,  has  left  a  graphic  description  ot
one  class.  '  They  were  chosen  out  of  those  poor  de-
crepit people  who  are,  from  their  want  of  bodily  strength,
rendered  incapable  of  getting  a  livelihood  by  work.
These  men,  armed  only  with  a  pole,  which  some  of  them
are  scarcely  able  to  lift,  are  to  secure  the  persons  and
houses  of  his  Majesty's  subjects  from  the  attacks  of
gangs  of  young,  bold,  desperate,  and  well-armed  villains.
If  the  poor  old  fellows  should  run  away,  no  one,  I  think,
can  wonder,  unless  it  be  that  they  were  able  to  make
their  escape.'  ^  Of  others  an  opinion  may  be  formed
from  an  incident  related  by  Horace  "Walpole  in  1742.
'  A  parcel  of  drunken  constables  took  it  into  their  heads
to  put  the  laws  in  execution  against  disorderly  persons,

'  Swift's Journal to Stella. pp.  324,  335,  347.
Gay's Trivia. The S;pectator,  '  Amelia,  bk.  i.  ch.  ii.

CH.  IV. INSECUEITY  OF  THE  STREETS. 107

and  so  took  up  every  woman  they  met,  till  they  had
collected  five  or  six  and  twenty,  all  of  wliom  they  thrust
into  St.  Martin's  roundhouse,  where  they  kept  them  all
night,  with  doors  and  windows  closed.  The  poor  crea-
tures, who  could  not  stir  or  breathe,  screamed  as  long
as  they  had  any  breath  left,  begging  at  least  for  water
.  .  .  but  in  vain.  ...  In  the  morning  four  were
found  stifled  to  death,  two  died  soon  after,  and  a  dozen
more  are  in  a  shocking  way.  .  .  .  Several  of  them
were  beggars,  who,  from  having  no  lodging,  were  neces-
sarily found  in  the  street,  and  others  honest  labouring
women.  One  of  the  dead  was  a  poor  washerwoman,  big
with  child,  who  was  retiring  home  late  from  washing.
One  of  the  constables  is  taken,  and  others  absconded  ;
but  I  question  if  any  of  them  will  suffer  death,  though
the  greatest  criminals  in  this  town  are  the  officers  of
justice ;  there  is  no  tyranny  they  do  not  exercise,  no
villany  of  wliich  they  do  not  partake.'  ^  The  magis-
trates were  in  many  cases  not  only  notoriously  ignorant
and  inefficient,  but  also  what  was  termed  '  trading  jus-
tices,' men  of  whom  Fielding  said  that  '  they  were  never
indifferent  in  a  cause  but  when  they  could  get  nothing
on  either  side.'  ^  The  daring  and  the  number  of  robbers
increased  till  London  hardly  resembled  a  civilised  town.
'  Thieves  and  robbers,'  said  Smollett,  speaking  of  1730,
'  were  now  become  more  desperate  and  savage  than  they
had  ever  appeared  since  mankind  were  civilised.'  ^  The
Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  London  in  1744  drew  up  an
address  to  the  King,  in  which  they  stated  that  '  divers
confederacies  of  great  numbers  of  evil-disposed  persons,
armed  with  bludgeons,  pistols,  cutlasses,  and  other  dan-

'  To  Sir  H.  Mann,  July  1742.  See, too, Lawrence's Life of

^  See  his picture  of  Justice  Fielding, pp. 236-239, and

Thrasher,  in Amelia, and his  Harris's Life  of Hardwicke,  i.

sketch  of  Justice  Squeezum,  in  390,  891.

The Coffee  -  house Politician.  ^  Hist,  of  England.

108 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iV.

gerous  weapons,  infest  not  only  the  private  lanes  and
passages,  but  likewise  the  public  streets  and  places  of
usual  concourse,  and  commit  most  daring  outrages  upon
the  persons  of  your  Majesty's  good  subjects  whose  affairs
oblige  them  to  pass  through  the  streets,  by  robbing  and
wounding  them,  and  these  acts  are  frequently  perpe-
trated at  such  times  as  were  heretofore  deemed  hours  of
security.'  ^  The  same  complaints  were  echoed  in  the  same
year  in  the  '  Proposals  of  the  Justices  of  the  Peace  for
Suppressing  Street  Eobberies,'  and  the  magistrates  who
drew  them  up  specially  noticed,  and  ascribed  to  the  use
of  spirituous  liquors,  '  the  cruelties  which  are  now  exer-
cised on  the  persons  robbed,  which  before  the  excessive
use  of  these  liquors  were  unknown  in  this  nation.'  ^
They  recommended  an  extension  of  the  system  of  re-
wards, the  suppression  or  restriction  of  gaming-houses,
public  gardens,  fairs,  and  gin-shops,  and  also  measures
for  systematically  drafting  into  the  army  and  navy  sus-
pected and  dangerous  persons  against  whom  no  positive
crime  could  be  proved.

The  evil,  however,  appears  to  have  continued.  '  One
is  forced  to  travel,'  wrote  Horace  Walpole  in  1751,
'  even  at  noon  as  if  one  were  going  to  battle.'  ^  The
punishments  were  atrocious  and  atrociously  executed,
but  they  fell  chiefly  on  the  more  insignificant  and  inex-
perienced offenders.  On  a  single  morning  no  less  than
seventeen  persons  were  executed  in  London.*  One  gang
of  robbers  in  1753  kept  the  whole  city  in  alarm  from
the  number  and  skill  of  their  robberies  and  the  savage
wounds  they  inflicted  on  their  victims.  A  recompense
of  lOOZ.  was  offered  for  the  apprehension  of  each  of  them,
but  it  schief  effect  was  to  encourage  men  who  delibe-

'  Andrews' Eighteenth Cen-  *  To  Sir  H.  Mann. March  23,

tury,  p.  230.  1752.

*  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  *  Ibid.
u.  97-99.

en.  IV.  INSECURITY OF THE STREETS.  109

rately  decoyed  poor  and  unwary  wretches  into  robbery  in
order  that  by  informing  against  them  they  might  obtain
the  reward.'  The  more  experienced  robbers  for  a  time
completely  overawed  the  authorities.  '  Officers  of  jus-
tice,' wrote  Fielding,  '  have  owned  to  me  that  they  have
passed  by  such,  with  warrants  in  their  pockets  against
them,  without  daring  to  apprehend  them  ;  and,  in-
deed, they  could  not  be  blamed  for  not  exposing  them-
selves to  sure  destruction  ;  for  it  is  a  melancholy  truth
that  at  this  very  day  a  rogue  no  sooner  gives  the  alarm
within  certain  purlieus  than  twenty  or  thirty  armed  vil-
lains are  found  ready  to  come  to  his  assistance.'  ^  When
the  eighteenth  century  had  far  advanced,  robbers  for
whose  apprehension  large  rewards  were  offered  have  been
known  to  ride  publicly  and  unmolested,  before  dusk,  in
the  streets  of  London,  surrounded  by  their  armed  adhe-
rents, through  the  midst  of  a  half-terrified,  half-curious
crowd.^

This  state  of  things  was  very  alarming,  and  the  evil
was  apparently  growing,  though  some  real  measures  had
been  taken  to  improve  the  security  of  London.  One
very  important  step  in  this  direction  was  accomplished
under  George  I.  The  districts  of  Whitefriars  and  the
Savoy  had  for  centuries  the  privilege  of  sheltering
debtors  against  their  creditors,  and  they  had  become
the  citadels  of  the  worst  characters  in  the  community,
who  defied  the  officers  of  justice  and  were  a  perpetual
danger  to  the  surrounding  districts.  In  1697  a  law
had  been  passed  annulling  their  franchises ;  but  similar
privileges,  though  not  legally  recognised,  were  claimed
for  the  Mint  in  Southwark,  and  for  many  years  were
successfully  maintained. Multitudes of debtors, and

'  Sir  John  Fielding's  Account  Bobbers,
of  the  Origin  and  Effects  of  a  ^  See  an  extraordinary  instance

Police  set  on  foot  i7i  1753.  of  this  in  Andrews'  Eighteenth

-  Causes  of the  Increase of  Century,  p.  235.

110 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

with  them  great  numbers  of  more  serious  criminals,  fled
to  this  quarter.  The  attempts  of  the  officers  to  arrest
them  were  resisted  by  open  violence.  Every  kind  of
crime  was  concocted  with  impunity,  and  every  con-
spirator knew  where  to  look  for  daring  and  perfectly
unscrupulous  agents.  It  was  not  until  1723  that  the
Government  ventured  to  grapple  firmly  with  this  great
evil.  An  Act  making  it  felony  to  obstruct  the  execu-
tion of  a  writ,  and  enabling  the  Sherifi"  of  Surrey  to
raise  a  posse  comitatus  for  taking  by  force  debtors  from
the  Mint,  finally  removed  this  plague-spot  fi-om  the
metropolis,  and  put  an  end  for  ever  in  England  to  that
right  of  sanctuary  which  had  for  many  generations  been
one  of  the  most  serious  obstructions  to  the  empire  of  the
law.^

Another  and  still  more  important  step  was  the
measure  which  was  carried  in  1736  for  the  proper
lighting  of  the  streets.  Up  to  this  date  London  was
probably  in  this  respect  behind  every  other  great  city
in  Europe.  The  lighting  was  done  by  contract,  and
the  contractors,  by  a  singular  arrangement,  agreed  to
pay  the  City  6001.  a  year  for  their  monopoly.  In  re-
turn for  this  they  were  empowered  to  levy  a  rate  of  6s.
a  year  from  all  housekeepers  who  paid  poor  rate,  and
from  all  who  had  houses  of  over  10^.  per  annum,  unless
they  hung  out  a  lantern  or  candle  before  their  doors,  in
which  case  they  were  exempt  from  paying  for  the  public
lamps.  The  contractors  were  bound  to  place  a  light
before  every  tenth  house,  but  only  from  Michaelmas  to
Lady  Day,  and  then  only  until  midnight,  and  only  on
what  were  termed  '  dark  nights.'  The  '  light  nights '
were  ten  every  month  from  the  sixth  alter  the  new
moon  till  the  third  after  the  full  moon.  The  system
was  introduced  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,

Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  iii.  127,  128.

CH.  IT.  POLICE MEASURES.  Ill

and  was  then  a  great  imjDrovement,  but  it  left  the  streets
of  London  absolutely  unlighted  for  far  more  than  half
the  hours  of  darkness.  Under  such  conditions  the  sup-
pression of  crime  was  impossible,  and  few  measures
enacted  during  the  eighteenth  century  contributed  more
to  the  safety  of  the  metropolis  than  that  which  was
passed  in  1736  enabling  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen
to  erect  glass  lamps  in  sufficient  numbers  throughout
London,  to  keep  them  lighted  from  the  setting  to  the
rising  of  the  sun,  and  to  levy  a  considerable  and  general
rate  for  their  maintenance.  More  than  15,000  lamps
are  said  in  a  few  years  to  have  been  erected,  and  it  was
calculated  that,  while  under  the  old  system  London  was
only  lit  by  public  lamps  for  about  750  hours  in  the  year,
under  the  new  system  it  was  lighted  for  about  5,000.^

Yet,  in  spite  of  this  great  change,  street  robberies
continued  for  some  years  to  increase,  and  the  inefficiency
of  the  watchmen,  and  the  great  multiplication  of  the
criminal  classes  under  the  influence  of  gin,  were  con-
stant subjects  of  complaint.  The  great  novelist  Field-
ing, when  driven  by  narrowed  circumstances  to  accept
the  office  of  Bow  Street  magistrate,  did  much  both  to
call  attention  to  and  to  remedy  the  evil.  Under  the
direction  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  he  and  his  brother,
who  succeeded  him  in  his  post,  instituted  a  new  police,
consisting  of  picked  men  who  had  been  constables,  and
who  were  placed  under  the  direct  control  of  the  Bow
Street  magistrates.  A  very  remarkable  success  re-
warded their  labours.  The  gang  which  had  so  long
terrified  London  was  broken  up ;  nearly  all  its  members
were  executed,  and  the  change  effected  was  so  great
that  Browne,  writing  in  1757,  was  able  to  say  that  '  the
reigning  evil  of  street  robberies  has  been  almost  wholly
suppressed.'  ^ At  the  same  time  a  serious  attempt  was

'  Maitland's  Hist,  of  London,  i.  565-567.
-  Browne's  Estimate,!.  219.

112 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  iv.

made,  at  once  to  remove  the  seeds  and  sources  of  crime,
and  to  provide  a  large  reserve  for  the  navy,  by  collecting
many  hundreds  of  the  destitute  boys  who  swarmed  in
the  streets,  clothing  them  by  public  subscription,  and
drafting  them  into  ships  of  war,  where  they  were
educated  as  sailors.^  The  police  force  soon  became
again  very  inefficient,  but  the  condition  of  London  does
not  appear  to  have  been  at  any  subsequent  period  quite
as  bad  as  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,
though  the  country  highways  were  still  infested  with
robbers.  The  early  Hanoverian  period  has,  indeed,
probably  contributed  as  much  as  any  other  portion  of
English  history  to  the  romance  of  crime.  The  famous
burglar,  John  Sheppard,  after  two  marvellous  escapes
from  Newgate,  which  made  Mm  the  idol  of  the  populace,
was  at  last  hanged  in  1724.  The  famous  thief-taker,
Jonathan  Wild,  after  a  long  career  of  crime,  being  at
last  convicted  of  returning  stolen  goods  to  the  rightful
owner  without  prosecuting  the  thieves,  which  had  lately
been  made  a  capital  ofience,^  was  executed  in  the  fol-
lowing year,  and  was  soon  after  made  the  subject  of  a
romance  by  Fielding.  The  famous  highwayman,  Dick
Turpin,  was  executed  in  1739.  Another  well-known
highwayman  named  M'Lean  is  said  to  have  been  the
son  of  an  Irish  Dean  and  a  brother  of  a  Calvinist
minister  in  great  esteem  at  the  Hague.  He  had  a
lodging  in  St.  James's  Street ;  his  manners  were  those
of  a  polished  gentleman,  and  the  interest  he  excited  was
so  great  that  the  day  befoi^e  his  execution  in  1750
3,000  persons  are  said  to  have  visited  his  cell.^ The

'  Sir  John  Fielding On the  been  robbed  by  M'Lean  in  Hyde

Police  of  1753.  Park. See,  too,  his  paper  in  the

'^  The  goods  were  stolen,  and  World,  No.  103. Some  curious

as  soon  as  a  reward  was  offered  particulars  of  the  crime  of  this

restored  by  a  confederate.  period  will  be  found  in  Harris's

^  Horace  Walpole to Mann.  Life  of  Harchviche.
Aug.  1750. "Walpole  had  himself

CH.  IV.  RIOTS — I'LUNDER OF WRECKS.  113

weakness  of  the  law  was  also  shown  in  the  great  number
of  serious  riots  which  took  place  in  every  part  of  the
kingdom.  The  Porteous  riots  and  the  riots  against  the
malt  tax  in  Scotland,  the  Spitalfields  riots  directed
against  Irisli  weavers,  and  the  numerous  riots  occasioned
by  the  Gin  Act,  and  at  a  later  period  by  the  system  of
turnpikes  and  by  the  preaching  of  the  Methodists,  were
the  most  remarkable,  while  the  characteristic  English
hatred  of  foreigners  was  shown  by  a  furious  disturbance
in  1738  because  French  actors  were  employed  at  the
Haymarket,  and  some  years  afterwards  by  the  sacking
of  Drury  Lane  Theatre  because  Garrick  had  employed
in  a  spectacle  some  French  dancers.  Outrages  con-
nected with  smuggling  were  in  many  parts  of  the  king-
dom singularly  daring  and  ferocious,  and  they  were
often  countenanced  by  a  large  amount  of  popular
sympathy.'  In  Hampshire  a  gang  of  deer-stealers,
known  as  the  Waltham  Blacks,  were  in  the  reign  of
George  I.  so  numerous  and  so  audacious,  that  a  special
and  most  sanguinary  law,  known  as  the  '  Black  Act,'
was  found  necessary  for  their  suppression. ^

Another  crime,  strikingly  indicative  of  the  imperfect
civilisation  of  the  country,  was  the  plunder  of  ship-
wrecked sailors,  who  were  often  lured  by  false  signals
upon  the  rocks.  In  some  of  the  northern  countries  of
Europe,  till  a  comparatively  recent  period,  the  law
expressly  permitted  the  inhabitants  to  seize,  as  a  prize,
any  property  that  was  wrecked  upon  their  coast. ^  In
England,  without  any  such  permission,  it  became  a
prevalent  custom.  At  the  close  of  the  seventeenth
century  Defoe  mentions  that  many  Englishmen  had
been  sacrificed  abroad  in  resentment  for  these  bar-
barities, and  he  tells  us  how,  when  a  ship  of  which  he

'  See  Pike's  Hist,  of  Crime,  ii.  White's  Selborne,  pp.  29,  30.

399,  652.  3  Blackstone, bk. i.  ch. viii.

-'  9 George I. c. 22. See  §  2.

VOL. II  I

114 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  iv.

was  himself  a  shareholder  was  sinking  on  the  coast  of
Biscay,  a  Spanish  ship  refused  to  give  any  assistance,
the  captain  declaring,  '  that,  having  been  shipwrecked
somewhere  on  the  coast  of  England,  the  people,  instead
of  saving  him  and  his  ship,  came  off  and  robbed  him,
tore  the  ship  almost  to  pieces,  and  left  him  and  his  men
to  swim  ashore  for  their  lives  while  they  plundered  the
cargo;  upon  which  he  and  his  whole  crew  had  sworn
never  to  help  an  Englishman  in  whatever  distress  he
should  find  them,  whether  at  sea  or  on  shore.'  ^  About
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  crime  increased
to  an  enormous  degree  on  many  parts  of  the  British
coast.2  In  order  to  check  it  a  law  had  been  passed  in
the  reign  of  Anne  and  made  perpetual  under  George  I.,
making  it  felony,  without  the  benefit  of  clergy,  to  do
any  act  by  which  a  ship  was  destroyed,  fining  anyone
who  secreted  shipwrecked  goods  treble  their  value,  and
enabling  the  authorities  in  every  seaport  town  to  take
special  measures  for  the  relief  of  ships  in  distress,  and  in
case  of  success  to  exact  a  certain  sum  from  the  owners  as
salvage.^  It  was  ordered  that  this  Act  should  be  read
four  times  yearly  in  all  the  parish  churches  and  chapels  of
all  seaport  towns  in  the  kingdom.^  It  proved,  however,
utterly  insufficient,  and  in  the  administration  of  Pelham
the  plunder  of  a  shipwi'ecked  or  distressed  vessel  was
made  a  capital  offence.'^  Notwithstanding  this  enact-
ment, however,  the  crime  was  by  no  means  suppressed.
It  was  the  especial  scandal  of  Cornwall.  In  visiting  that
county  in  1776,  Wesley  learnt  that  it  was  still  as  com-
mon there  as  ever  ;  he  severely  censured  the  connivance
or  indifference  of  the  gentry,  who  might  have  totally

'  Wilson's  Life  of  Defoe,  i.  209.  4  George  I.  c.  12.

-  Coxe's Life  of  Pelham, ii.  ^  Macpheison's Annals of

272.  Commerce,  iii.  39-41.

•'  12 Anne stat. 2, c. 18  ;  ^  26  George  II.  c.  19.

en.  TV.  FLEET MARRIAGES.  115

suppressed  it,' and  he also found the  custom very-
general  on  the  western  coast  of  Ireland. ^

The  long  list  of  social  reforms  passed  under  the
Pelham  Ministry  may  be  fitly  closed  by  the  Marriage
Act  of  Lord  Hardwicke,  which  put  a  stop  to  those
Fleet  marriages  which  had  become  one  of  the  strangest
scandals  of  English  life.  Before  this  Act,  the  canon
law  was  in  force  in  England,  and  according  to  its
provisions  the  mere  consent  of  the  parties,  followed  by-
cohabitation,  constituted,  for  many  purposes,  a  valid
marriage ;  and  a  marriage  valid  for  all  purposes  could
be  celebrated  by  a  priest  in  orders  at  any  time  or  place,
without  registration  and  without  the  consent  of  parents
or  guardians.  Stamped  licences  were  indeed  required
by  law,  but  not  for  the  validity  of  the  contract,  and
their  omission  was  only  punished  as  a  fraud  upon  the
revenue.  In  such  a  state  of  the  law  atrocious  abuses
had  grown  up.  A  multitude  of  clergymen,  usually  pri-
soners for  debt  and  almost  always  men  of  notoriously
infamous  lives,  made  it  their  business  to  celebrate
clandestine  marriages  in  or  near  the  Fleet.  They
performed  the  ceremony  without  licence  or  question,
sometimes  without  even  knowing  the  names  of  the
persons  they  united,  in  public-houses,  brothels,  or
garrets.  They  acknowledged  no  ecclesiastical  superior.
Almost  every  tavern  or  brandy  shop  in  the  neighbour-
hood had  a  Fleet  parson  in  its  pay.  Notices  were
placed  in  the  windows,  and  agents  went  out  in  every
direction  to  solicit  the  passers-by.  A  more  pretentious,
and  perhaps  more  popular,  establishment  was  the  Chapel

'  Wesley's  Journal,  Aug.  1776.  them ; and for so doing de-

^  '  A  Swedish  ship  being  leaky  manded a fourth part of  the

put  into one of our  harbours.  cargo. And  this,  they  said,  the

The  Irish,  according  to  custom,  law  allows.' — Wesley's  Journal,

ran  to  plunder her. A  neigh-  June  17G0.

bouring gentleman hindered

116 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

ill  Curzon  Street,  where  the  Eev.  Alexander  Keith  of-
ficiated. He  was  said  to  have  made  a  '  very  bishoj^ric
of  revenue  '  by  clandestine  marriages,  and  the  expres-
sion can  hardly  be  exaggerated  if  it  be  true,  as  was  as-
serted in  Parliament,  that  he  had  married  on  an  average
6,000  couples  every  year.  He  himself  stated  that  he
had  married  many  thousands,  the  great  majority  of
whom  had  not  known  each  other  more  than  a  week,
and  many  only  a  day  or  half  a  day.  Young  and  inex-
perienced heirs  fresh  from  college,  or  even  from  school,
were  thus  continually  enti'apped.  A  passing  frolic,  the
excitement  of  drink,  an  almost  momentary  passion,  the
deception  or  intimidation  of  a  few  unprincipled  con-
federates, were  often  sufficient  to  drive  or  inveigle  them
into  sudden  marriages,  which  blasted  all  the  prospects
of  their  lives.  In  some  cases,  when  men  slept  off  a
drunken  fit,  they  heard  to  their  astonishment  that,
during  its  continuance,  they  had  gone  through  the
ceremony.  When  a  fleet  came  in  and  the  sailors
flocked  on  shore  to  spend  their  pay  in  drink  and  among
prostitutes,  they  were  speedily  beleaguered,  and  200
or  300  marriages  constantly  took  place  within  a  week.
Among  the  more  noted  instances  of  clandestine  mar-
riages we  find  that  of  the  Duke  of  Hamilton  with  Miss
Gunning,  that  of  the  Duke  of  Kingston  with  Miss
Chudleigh,  that  of  Henry  Fox  with  the  daughter  of  the
Duke  of  Richmond,  that  of  the  poet  Churchill,  who  at
the  age  of  seventeen  entered  into  a  marriage  which
contributed  largely  to  the  unhappiness  of  his  life.  The
state  of  the  law  seemed,  indeed,  ingeniously  calculated
to  promote  both  the  misery  and  the  immorality  of  the
people,  for  while  there  was  every  facility  for  contracting
the  most  inconsiderate  marriages,  divorce,  except  by  a
special  Act  of  Parliament,  was  absolutely  unattainable.
It  is  not  surprising  that  contracts  so  lightly  entered  into
should  have  been  as  lightly  violated. Desertion,  con-

CH.  TV.  FLEET  MARRIAGES.  117

jugal  infidelity,  bigamy,  fictitious  marriages  celebrated
by  sham  priests,  were  the  natural  and  frequent  con-
sequences of  the  system.  In  many  cases  in  the  Fleet
registers  names  were  suppressed  or  falsified,  and  mar-
riages fraudulentlyantedated,  and  many  households,  after
years  of  peace,  were  convulsed  by  some  alleged  pre-
contract or  clandestine  tie.  It  was  proved-  before
Parliament  that  on  one  occasion  there  had  been  2,954
Fleet  marriages  in  four  months,  and  it  appeared  from
the  memorandum-books  of  Fleet  parsons  that  one  of
them  made  b7l.  in  marriage  fees  in  a  single  month,
that  another  had  married  173  couples  in  a  single  day.

The  evil  was  of  considerable  standing,  and  some
attempts  had  been  made  to  remedy  it.  By  a  law  of
William  III.  any  clergyman  celebrating  a  marriage
without  licence  was  subject  to  a  fine  of  1001.,^  but
this  penalty  was  not  renewed  at  each  violation  of  the
Act,  and  the  ofi*ender  was  able  by  a  writ  of  error  to
obtain  a  delay  of  about  a  year  and  a  half,  during  which
time  he  carried  on  his  profession  without  molestation,
made  at  least  400L  or  500Z.,  and  then  frequently  ab-
sconded. No  penalty  whatever  attached  to  the  public-
house  keeper,  who  hired  the  clergyman,  and  in  whose
house  the  ceremony  was  performed.  Another  Act,  passed
in  1712,  after  reciting  the  loss  the  revenue  experienced
from  these  practices,  raised  the  penalty  incurred  by  the
priest  to  imprisonment,  but  this  also  it  was  found  pos-
sible to  evade.  To  meet  the  evil  it  was  necessary  to
remodel  the  whole  marriage  law.  The  first  step  in  this
direction  was  taken  by  Lord  Bath,  who,  when  attending
a  Scotch  trial,  was  struck  by  the  hardship  of  a  case  in
which  a  man,  after  a  marriage  of  thirty  years,  was
claimed  by  another  woman  on  the  ground  of  a  pre-
contract ;  but  the  preparation  of  a  measure  on  the  sub-

>  6  &  7  William  III.  c.  6 ;  7  &  8  William  III.  c.  35,

118 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  iv.

ject  soon  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Chancellor,  Lord
Hardwicke,  who  succeeded,  in  1753,  in  carrying  it  suc-
cessfully through  Parliament.  His  Act  provided  that,
with  the  exception  of  Jewish  and  Quaker  marriages,  no
marriage  should  be  valid  in  England  which  was  not
celebrated  by  a  priest  in  orders,  and  according  to  the
Anglican  liturgy,  that  the  ceremony  could  not  be  per-
formed unless  the  banns  had  been  published  for  three
successive  Sundays  in  the  parish  church,  or  unless  a
licence  had  been  procured,  and  that  these  licences  in
the  cases  of  minors  should  be  conditional  upon  the  con-
sent of  the  parents  or  guardians.  The  special  licence
by  which  alone  the  marriage  could  be  celebrated  in  any
other  place  than  the  parish  church,  could  only  be  issued
by  the  Archbishop,  and  cost  a  considerable  sum.  All
marriages  which  did  not  conform  to  these  provisions
were  null,  and  all  who  celebrated  them  were  liable  to
transportation .  ^

This  measure  is  extremely  important,  as  introducing
into  English  legislation  a  principle  which  has  even  now
by  no  means  attained  its  full  recognition,  but  which  is
evidently  destined  to  become  one  day  supreme.  Ac-
cording to  the  theological  theory  which  was  adopted  by
the  law  of  England,  and  was  long  absolute  in  Christen-
dom, the  Church  alone  has  a  right  to  determine  what
constitutes  the  validity  of  a  marriage,  and  when  that
marriage  is  once  consummated  it  is  absolutely  indis-
soluble, and  possesses  a  mystical  sanctity  altogether
irrespective  of  its  influence  upon  society.  In  opposition
to  this  view  there  has  grown  up  in  the  last  century  a
conviction  that  it  is  not  the  busineL.3  of  the  State  to
enforce  morals,  and  especially  any  particular  theological
conceptions  of  duty,  that  its  sole  end  should  be  to  in-
crease the  temporal  happiness  of  the  people,  and  that

'  2C  George  II.  c.  33.

CH.  IV.  THE MARRIAGE ACT.  119

the  restrictions  it  imposes  on  individual  liberty  can  only
be  justified,  and  should  be  strictly  limited,  by  this  end.
According  to  this  view  the  ecclesiastical  and  the  legal
conceptions  of  marriage  are  entirely  distinct.  Marriage
should  be  regarded  by  the  legislator  merely  as  a  civil
contract  of  extreme  importance  to  the  maintenance  of
the  young,  the  disposition  of  property,  and  the  stability
of  society ;  and  it  is  the  right  and  the  duty  of  the  State,
with  a  sole  view  to  the  interests  of  society,  to  determine
on  what  conditions  it  may  be  celebrated,  annulled,  or
repeated.

In  some  respects  these  two  views  coincide,  while  in
others  they  conflict.  Every  statesman  will  admit  that
the  purity  and  stability  of  the  marriage  state  are  social
ends  of  great  importance,  and  that  a  religious  sanction
contributes  to  secure  them.  At  the  same  time  the
legislator  will,  in  some  respects,  be  more  severe,  and  in
others  more  indulgent,  than  the  divine.  Considering
marriage  as  a  contract  involving  momentous  civil  con-
sequences, he  may  insist  that  it  should  be  entered  into
publicly,  formally,  and  deliberately,  may  lay  down  in
the  interests  of  society  certain  restrictive  conditions,
and  may  absolutely  refuse,  when  those  conditions  are
not  complied  with,  to  recognise  its  existence,  or  to
punish  those  who  violate  or  repeat  it  On  the  other
hand,  in  all  questions  relating  to  marriages  of  consan-
guinity or  to  divorce.  State  interference  with  the  liberty
of  individuals  can  only  be  justified  on  utilitarian  grounds.
If,  for  example,  the  question  be  that  of  marriage  with  a
deceased  wife's  sister,  a  legislator  imbued  with  this  spirit
will  consider  it  wholly  irrelevant  to  discuss  whether  such
marriages  were  or  were  not  forbidden  in  the  Levitical
code,  whether  the  Levitical  code  is  binding  upon  a
Christian,  whether  ecclesiastical  tradition  favours  or
condemns  them.  The  sole  question  for  him  to  decide
is  whether  they  produce  such  a  clear  preponderance  of

120 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

social  evils  as  would  justify  liim  in  restricting  in  this
respect  the  natural  liberty  of  the  subject.  If  they  do
not,  they  should  be  permitted,  and  those  who  regard
them  as  theologically  wrong  should  refrain  from  con-
tracting them.  A  similar  principle  applies  to  the  diffi-
cult question  of  divorce.  At  first  sight  nothing  can
appear  more  monstrous  than  that  when  two  persons
have  voluntarily  entered  into  a  contract  with  the  single
purpose  of  promoting  their  mutual  happiness,  when
they  find  by  experience  that  the  effect  of  that  contract
is  not  happiness  but  misery,  and  when  they  are  both  of
them  anxious  to  dissolve  it,  the  law — whose  sole  legiti-
mate object  is  the  happiness  of  the  people — should
interpose  to  prevent  them  from  doing  so.  The  pre-
sumption against  such  an  interference  with  individual
liberty  must  always  be  very  weighty,  and  there  are
many  considerations  which  tend  to  strengthen  it.  Of
all  forms  of  wretchedness,  that  resulting  from  an  un-
happy marriage  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  to  antici-
pate, for  it  may  result  from  a  turn  of  disposition  or  an
infirmity  of  temper  which  is  only  revealed  by  the  most
intimate  knowledge.  In  all  ages  and  countries  a  vast
proportion  of  these  lifelong  contracts  have  either  been
negotiated  by  the  relations  of  the  contracting  parties,
with  only  their  nominal  consent,  or  have  been  entered
into  at  an  age  when  there  can  be  little  knowledge  of
life  or  character,  when  the  judgment  is  still  unformed,
or  under  the  influence  of  a  passion  which  is  proverbially
fitted  to  distort  it.  It  is  also  a  well-recognised  fact
that,  as  Swift  says,  the  art  of  '  making  nets '  is  very
different  from  the  art  of  '  making  cages/  that  many  of
the  qualities  peculiarly  fitted  to  attract  men  into  mar-
riage are  also  peculiarly  unfitted  to  secure  the  happiness
of  a  home.  It  may  be  added  that  while  the  chances  of
unhappiness  in  this  contract  are  so  many,  that  unhappi-
ness  may  easily  rise  to  an  amount  of  moral  misery  no

CH.  IV.  DIVORCE.  121

other  condition  can  pi'oduce,  for  it  extends  to  and  em-
bitters the  minutest  details  of  daily  life,  pervades  e very-
sphere,  and  depresses  every  aim.  In  many  cases  mar-
riage involves  to  the  weaker  party  a  tyranny  so  brutal,
galling,  incessant,  and  at  the  same  time  absolutely  hope-
less, that  it  forms  the  nearest  earthly  type  of  eternal
damnation.  In  such  cases  it  would  be  much  more
reasonable  to  speak  of  the  sacrament  of  divorce  than  of
the  sacrament  of  marriage,  and  it  were  hard  to  say  what
benefit  issues  from  the  contract,  unless  it  be  that  of
relieving  death  of  half  its  terror  by  depriving  life  of  all
its  charm.  Thousands  of  couples  who,  if  freed  from  the
efiects  of  one  great  mistake,  possess  all  the  elements  of
usefulness  and  enjoyment,  are  thus  condemned  by  law
to  the  total  sacrifice  of  the  happiness  of  their  lives.  Nor
are  the  moral  effects  less  disastrous.  No  condition  can
be  more  fitted  to  break  down  and  degrade  the  moral
character  than  that  I  have  described.  No  condition  can
present  stronger  temptations.  A  moralist  may  very
reasonably  doubt  whether  even  open  profligacy  is  more
debasing  than  a  legitimate  union,  in  which  hatred
has  taken  the  place  of  love,  and  the  unspoken  day-
dream of  each  partner  is  to  witness  the  burial  of  the
other.

It  is  added  that  even  if  the  law  imposed  no  restric-
tions on  divorce,  perpetual  monogamous  attachments
would  always  be  the  most  common,  for  the  simple  reason
that  they  are  those  which  are  most  conducive  to  the
happiness  of  men.  They  have  in  their  support  one  of
the  strongest  of  all  human  sentiments — the  cohesion  of
custom.  In  no  other  case  is  this  cohesion  so  powei'ful,
for  in  no  other  is  the  relation  so  close  or  so  constant.
Putting  aside  the  idle  cant  of  satirical  writers,  every
candid  observer  will  admit  that  the  death  of  a  husband
or  a  wife  is,  usually,  without  exception  the  greatest  ca-
lamity that  can  befall  the  survivor. With  such  a  volun^.

122 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

tary  cohesion  severance  would  be  very  rare  unless  there
were  some  strong  reason  to  overcome  it,  and  when  so
strong  a  reason  exists  it  would  probably  be  advisable.
The  birth  of  children,  which  makes  the  stability  of  the
family  peculiarly  necessary,  contributes  in  itself  to  secure
it,  for  every  child  joins  its  parents  by  a  new  bond.
Nature  has  abundantly  provided  for  the  stability  of
the  marriage  state  when  it  promotes  happiness.  Why
should  the  law  prevent  its  dissolution  when  it  produces
pain?

The  answer  is  that  these  arguments  underrate  the
violence  of  a  passion  which  is,  perhaps,  the  most  dan-
gerous and  unruly  in  human  nature,  and  at  the  same
time  neglect  to  make  sufficient  allowance  for  the  in-
equality of  the  sexes.  In  the  marriage  contract  the
woman  is  the  weaker;  she  is  usually  the  poorer;  her
happiness  is  far  more  absolutely  bound  up  with  her
domestic  life  than  the  happiness  of  a  man.  Her  vigour
passes  before  that  of  her  husband.  If  cast  out  at  a
mature  age  from  the  domestic  circle,  her  whole  life  is
broken,  and  the  very  probability  of  such  a  fate  is  suffi-
cient to  embitter  it.  If  divorce  could  always  be  effected
without  delay,  difficulty,  exjDonse,  or  blame  ;  if  the  law
provided  no  protection  for  the  weaker  partner  against
those  violent  passions  which  may  be  conceived  by  one
sex  in  mature  age,  and  which  are  rarely  inspired  by
the  other  except  in  youth,  it  is  easy  to  predict  what
would  be  the  result.  The  tie  of  custom  would  in  in-
numerable cases  be  snapped  by  the  impulse  of  passion.
Very  many  would  never  pass  that  painful  novitiate,
when  tastes  and  habits  have  not  yet  assimilated,  which
is  now  so  often  the  preface  to  many  years  of  uninter-
rupted happiness.  In  many  cases  the  mere  decline  of
physical  charms  would  lead  to  a  severance  of  the  bond.
The  appetite  for  change  would  grow  with  the  means  of
gratifying  it,  and  thus  affections  would  be  weakened,

CH.  IV.  DIVORCE.  123

habits  would  be  unsettled,  and  insecurity  and  misery
would  be  widely  spread.  Nor  would  the  evil  stop  here.
The  stability  of  domestic  life  is  of  vital  importance  to
the  position,  the  education,  and  the  moral  culture  of  the
young,  and  to  the  maintenance  among  all  classes  of
those  steady  and  settled  habits  that  are  most  valuable
to  the  community.

It  is  not  necessary  in  this  place  to  pursue  this  sub-
ject into  detail,  or  to  discuss  the  exact  amount  of  re-
striction which  in  these  cases  can  be  judiciously  im-
posed. It  is  plain  that  the  marriage  tie  is  not  one  of
those  which  the  legislator  can  deal  with  on  the  prin-
ciple of  unlimited  freedom  of  contract.  It  is  also,  i
think,  plain  that  the  complete  ascendency  in  law  of  the
secular  view  of  marriage  must  sooner  or  later  lead  to
a  greater  extension  of  the  liberty  of  divorce  than  in
England,  at  least,  is  admitted.  The  condemnation  of
either  partner  for  any  of  the  graver  or  more  degrading-
forms  of  criminal  offence,  and  even  habits  of  inveterate
and  systematic  drunkenness,  might  very  reasonably  be
made  legal  causes.  The  question  whether  the  desire  of
the  two  contracting  parties,  who  have  discovered  that
the  contract  into  which  they  had  entered  is  prejudicial
to  their  happiness,  should  be  regarded  as  a  sufficient
ground,  is  a  much  more  difficult  one.  It  is  clear,  how-
ever, that  a  legislator  who  accorded  such  latitude  would
be  perfectly  justified  in  imposing  upon  both  parties  such
a  period  of  probation  or  delay  as  would  meet  the  cases
of  fickleness  or  sudden  passion,  and  on  the  stronger  party
such  special  burdens  as  would  to  some  extent  equalise
the  balance  of  interest.  But  his  judgment  on  this
matter  should  be  formed  solely  by  an  estimate  of  con-
sequences. He  must  strike  the  balance  between  op-
posing evils,  and  his  point  of  view  is  thus  wholly  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  theologian  who  starts  with  the
belief  that  divorce  is  in  itself  necessarily  sacrilegious.

124 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  iv.

This  is  a  matter  for  the  conscience  and  judgment  of
individuals,  but  not  for  the  cognisance  of  law.  In  the
Marriage  Act  of  Lord  Hardwicke  the  question  of  divorce
was  not  directly  raised,  but  the  modern  legal  doctrine
of  marriage  was  fully  established  by  the  clause  which
treated  matrimonial  contracts  as  absolute  nullities,
though  they  were  celebrated  with  a  regular  religious
ceremony,  if  certain  legal  requirements  were  wanting.
The  dissolution  of  religious  marriages  for  temporal
reasons  was,  indeed,  not  altogether  new  in  British  law.
In  the  Regency  Bill,  which  was  passed  on  the  death  of
the  Prince  of  Wales  in  1751,  there  was  a  clause  annul-
ling any  marriage  contracted  by  the  young  heir  to  the
throne  before  the  expiration  of  his  minority  without  the
consent  of  the  Regent,  or  of  the  major  part  of  the
Council  J  and  a  similar  principle  was  involved  in  the
Irish  law  annulling  marriages  between  Protestants  and
Catholics,  celebrated  by  priests  or  degraded  clergymen.
The  Marriage  Act  of  1753,  however,  gave  this  principle
a  much  greater  extension.  It  was  justly  noticed  as  a
striking  illustration  of  the  decline  of  dogmatic  theology
in  England  that  a  Bill,  involving  so  important  a  prin-
ciple, should  have  passed  without  serious  difficulty
through  the  House  of  Lords,  and  should  have  been
assented  to  by  the  whole  bench  of  bishops. ^

In  the  House  of  Commons,  however,  the  Marriage
Bill  was  fiercely  assailed.  Henry  Fox,  who  had  him-
self a  very  natural  predilection  for  the  old  system,
though  a  member  of  the  Government,  met  it  with  the
most  determined  and  acrimonious  opposition,  and  he
found  a  considerable  body  of  supporters.  Their  argu-
ments will  now  appear  to  most  men  very  inconclusive.
Much  was  said  on  such  topics  as  the  natural  right  of
all  men  to  be  married  as  they  pleased,  the  immorality

'  WaXpole's  Memoirs  of  George  TL  i.  146,  342.

CH.  IV.  THE MARRIAGE ACT.  125

that  would  ensue  from  any  measure  which  rendered
marriages  difficult,  the  tendency  of  the  new  Bill  to  in-
crease the  despotic  power  of  parents,  and  the  advantages
of  the  old  system  in  assisting  younger  sons  in  marrying
lieiresses,  and  thus  dispersing  fortunes  which  under  the
law  of  primogenitui-e  had  been  unduly  accumulated.^
Such  arguments  could  have  no  real  weight  in  the  face
of  the  glaring  and  scandalous  evils  of  Fleet  marriages,
and  the  law  as  remodelled  by  Lord  Hardwicke  continued
in  force  until  the  present  century.  It  is  evident,  how-
ever, that  the  monopoly  wliich  the  Anglican  clergy
possessed  of  celebrating  legal  marriages  could  not  be
accepted  by  other  sects  as  a  final  settlement  of  the  ques-
tion, and  as  the  principle  of  religious  equality  became
more  fully  recognised  in  English  politics,  a  serious  and
at  last  successful  agitation  arose  against  the  Act.  There
were  also  some  legal  flaws  in  it,  which  somewhat  quali-
fied the  admiration  with  which  it  was  regarded  by
lawyers.^  Such  as  it  was,  however,  it  was  effectual  in
suppressing  a  great  scandal  and  a  great  evil  which  had
taken  deep  root  in  the  habits  of  the  nation.  With
large  classes  of  the  community  the  easy  process  of  Fleet
marriages  was  very  popular.  On  the  day  before  the  new
law  came  into  force  300  were  celebrated,  and  a  bold
attempt  was  made  by  a  clergyman  named  Wilkinson  to
perpetuate  the  system  at  the  Savoy.  He  claimed,  by
virtue  of  some  old  privileges  attaching  to  that  quarter,

'  It  is  curious  to  observe  what  the  nobility  from  the  plebeians,'

nonsense  Horace  Walpole  talked  that  '  from  beginning  to  end  of

about this  Bill,  not  in  a party  the  Bill  one  only  view  had  pre-

speech,  but  in  a grave  history.  dominated,  that  of  pride  and  of

He  says  that  it '  seemed  to  annex  aristocracy.' — Memoirs  of  George

as  sacred  privileges  to  birth as  II.  i.  336-348,  358.

could  be  devised  in  the  proudest,  ^  See  Lord  Campbell's  severe

poorest  littleltalianprincipahty,'  judgment of it. Lives  of the

that  it  was  '  the  bane  of  society,  Chancellors,  vi.  262.
the  golden  grate  that  separates

126  ENGLAJVD IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  iv.

to  be  extra-parochial,  and  to  have  the  right  of  issuing
licences  himself,  and  he  is  said  to  have  actually  celebrated
as  many  as  1,400  clandestine  marriages  after  the  Mai-
riage  Act  had  passed.  By  the  instrumentality  of  Garrick,
a  member  of  whose  company  had  been  married  in  this
manner  in  1756,  a  Savoy  licence  passed  into  the  hands
of  the  Government,  and  the  trial  and  transportation  of
Wilkinson  and  his  curate  put  an  end  to  clandestine  mar-
riages in  England.  Those  who  desired  them,  however,
found  a  refuge  in  Scotland,  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  Guernsey ;
and  in  1760  there  were  always  vessels  ready  at  South-
ampton to  carry  fugitive  lovers  to  the  latter  island.^

The  measures  I  have  enumerated,  though  very  im-
portant, were  for  the  most  part  remedies  applied  to  some
great  and  crying  evils  which  had  at  last  become  intoler-
able to  the  community.  Of  the  active  reforming  and
philanthropic  spirit  which  became  so  conspicuous  in  the
reign  of  George  III.  we  find  at  this  time  scarcely  any
traces.  The  creation  of  the  great  religious  societies,
and  part  of  the  legislation  of  William,  showed  something
of  this  spirit,  and  something  of  it  appeared,  though  in
a  more  exclusively  ecclesiastical  form,  during  the  clerical
reaction  under  Anne,  but  during  the  ascendency  of
Walpole  and  the  Pelhams  it  almost  wholly  died  away.
The  Methodist  movement  was  as  yet  in  its  purely  re-
ligious stage  ;  the  Court  and  Government  initiated
nothing,  and  the  number  of  private  reformers  was  very
small.  The  scheme  of  Berkeley  for  founding  a  Christian
university  in  Bermuda  for  the  civilisation  and  conver-
sion of  America  was  one  of  the  few  examples.  This  ex-
traordinary man,  who  united  the  rarest  and  most  various

'  See J. Southerden Burns'  IIist.ofLonclo7i;Tenna,ni'sLon-

very  curious  Hist,  of  Fleet  Mar-  don  ; Smollett's Hist.  ; Pari.

riages  ;  the  copious  extracts  from  Hist. ; and  Walpole's Memoirs

the  Fleet  registers  in Knight's  of  George  II.

CH.  IV. BERKELEY  AND  OGLETHORPE.  127

intellectual  gifts  with  a  grace  and  purity  of  character,
and  an  enthusiasm  of  benevolence,  that  fascinated  all
about  him,  succeeded  for  a  time  in  communicating
something  of  his  own  spirit  to  some  of  the  most  selfish
of  politicians.  The  story  is  well  known  how  his  irre-
sistible eloquence  turned  the  ridicule  of  the  Scriblerus
Club  into  a  brief  but  genuine  outburst  of  enthusiasm  ;
how  he  raised  by  subscription  a  considerable  sum  for
carrying  out  his  scheme,  Walpole  himself  contributing
2001.;  how  his  success  in  canvassing  the  Members  of
Pai'liament  was  so  great  that  the  Bill  for  endowing  the
university  passed  in  1726  with  only  two  dissentient
voices.  Walpole  was  astonished  at  the  success,  having,
as  he  said,  '  taken  it  for  granted  the  very  preamble  of
the  Bill  would  have  secured  its  rejection,'  but  although
he  promised  20,000L  he  never  paid  it,  and  in  1731
Berkeley,  receiving  a  private  intimation  that  it  was
hopeless  expecting  it,  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  enter-
prise, and  returned  from  Rhode  Island  to  Ireland.

A  more  successful  reformer  was  James  Oglethorpe,
a  very  remarkable  man,  whose  long  life  of  96  years  was
crowded  with  picturesque  incidents  and  with  the  most
various  and  active  benevolence.  Having  served  as  a
young  man  under  Prince  Eugene,  he  entered  Parlia-
ment in  1722,  and  sat  there  for  thirty-three  years.
Though  a  man  of  indomitable  energy,  and  of  some  prac-
tical and  organising  talent,  he  had  no  forensic  ability,
and  he  was  both  too  hot-tempered,  too  impulsive,  and
too  magnanimous  to  take  a  liigh  rank  among  the  adroit
and  intriguing  politicians  of  his  time.  He  would  pro-
bably have  remained  an  undistinguished  Member  of  Par-
liament if  it  had  not  happened  that  among  his  acquaint-
ances was  a  gentleman  named  Castell,  who,  having
fallen  from  a  considerable  position  into  hopeless  debt,
had  been  imprisoned  in  the  Fleet,  and  being  unable  to
pay  the  accustomed  fees  to  the  warder,  had  been  con-

128 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  iV.

fined  in  a  house  where  the  small-pox  was  raging,  and
had  perished  by  the  disease.  This  incident  directed
the  attention  of  Oglethorpe  to  the  management  of  the
prisons.  For  many  years  it  had  been  known  that  debtors
in  England  were  subject  to  frightful  privations,  and  a
book  had  been  published  as  early  as  1691  enumerating
their  wrongs,^  but  no  steps  had  been  taken  to  redress
them.  Oglethorpe,  however,  succeeded  in  1729  in  ob-
taining a  parliamentary  inquiry  into  the  condition  of  the
Fleet  and  the  Marshalsea,  which  was  afterwards  ex-
tended to  that  of  the  other  gaols,  and  the  results  were
so  horrible  that  they  produced  a  universal  cry  of  indig-
nation.

It  appeared  that  the  wardenship  of  the  Fleet  was
regularly  put  up  for  sale,  that  it  had  been  bought  from
the  great  Lord  Clarendon  by  John  Huggins  for  5,000?.,
that  it  had  been  sold  by  Huggins  to  Bambridge  for
the  same  sum  in  1728,  and  that  these  men  were  ac-
customed, in  addition  to  the  large  regular  emoluments
of  the  office,  to  exact  heavy  fees  from  the  prisoners,  and
to  avenge  themselves  upon  those  who  were  unable  or
unwilling  to  pay  them,  by  the  utmost  excesses  of  bru-
tality. In  the  Fleet,  when  Bambridge  was  governor,
such  prisoners  were  continually  left  manacled  for  long
periods  in  a  dungeon,  almost  unendurable  from  its
stench  and  its  want  of  ventilation,  situated  above  a
common  sewer,  and  in  which  the  bodies  of  those  who
died  in  the  prison  were  deposited  to  await  the  coroner's
inquest.  One  brave  soldier  had  been  falsely  accused  of
theft,  acquitted  by  the  jury,  and  then  seized  and  im-
prisoned as  a  debtor  by  the  gaoler  on  account  of  the  gaol

'  See  on  this  subject  Muralt's  special  form  of  prayer  '  for  im-

Letters on the English (Eng.  prisoned  debtors  '  to  be  inserted

trans.  1726), p. 69. In 1711  in  the  Irish  Prayer  Book.  Mant's

the  Irish  Convocation  ordered  a  Hist,  of  the  Irish  Church,  ii.  233.

CH.  IV.  STATE OF  THE PEISONS.  129

fees  that  were  incurred  during  his  detention.  Cases
were  proved  of  debtors  who,  being  unable  to  pay  their
fees,  were  locked  up,  like  Castell,  with  prisoners  suffer-
ing from  small-pox,  and  thus  rapidly  destroyed ;  of
others  who  were  reduced  almost  to  skeletons  by  in-
sufficient food  ;  of  sick  women  who  were  left  without
beds,  without  attendance,  and  without  proper  nourish-
ment, till  they  died  of  neglect ;  of  men  who  were  tor-
tured by  the  thumbscrew,  or  who  lingered  in  slow  agony
under  irons  of  intolerable  weight.  One  poor  Portuguese
had  been  left  for  two  months  in  this  condition.  An-
other prisoner  had  lost  all  memory  and  all  use  of  his
limbs  from  the  sufierings  he  underwent.  Great  numbers
perished  through  want  of  the  most  ordinary  care.  It
appears,  indeed,  to  have  been  the  deliberate  intention  of
the  governor  to  put  an  end  to  some  of  his  prisoners,
either  because  they  were  unable  to  pay  fees,  or  because
they  had  for  some  reason  incurred  his  resentment,  or  in
order  that  he  might  obtain  the  small  remnants  of  their  pro-
perty. In  Newgate,  and  in  some  of  the  provincial  prisons
in  England,  almost  equal  atrocities  were  discovered.  In
Dublin — where  inquiries  were  instituted  with  commend-
able promptitude  by  the  Irish  Parliament — it  was  found
that  a  tax  was  systematically  laid  upon  each  prisoner
to  provide  strong  drink  for  the  gaol,  that  the  worst  crimi-
nals were  mingled  with  the  debtors,  and  that  a  tyranny
not  less  brutal  than  that  of  the  Fleet  was  exercised  by
the  gaoler.  One  wretched  man,  crippled  by  a  broken  leg,
was  left  for  two  months  in  a  bed  to  which  the  water  fre-
quently rose,  and  which  rotted  away  beneath  him.^

'  Howell's  State  Trials,  xvii.  i.  591,  592)  has  enumerated  many

ParZ.ffis^.viii.  708-753.  Nichols'  of  the  atrocities  in  the Dublin

Life  of  Hogarth,  p.  19. Histori-  prison. He  has  not  mentioned

cal  Register,  1729. AVright's  ikfe-  that  the  inquiry  which  revealed

muirs  of  Oglethorpe. Andrews'  them  was  a  consequence  of  the

Eighteenth  Ceiiturij,  pp.  294-298.  discovery  of  similar  atrocities  in

Mr.  Froude  {English  in  Ireland,  the  principal  prisons  of  England.
VOL. II.  K

130 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

In  most  large  prisons  the  gaol  fever,  produced  by
squalor,  overcrowding,  bad  drainage,  insufficient  nourish-
ment, and  insufficient  exercise,  made  fearful  ravages,  and
sometimes,  by  a  righteous  retribution,  it  spread  from
these  centres  through  the  rest  of  the  community.  This
evil  was  already  noticed  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth
centuries.  The  '  Black  Assize'  at  Oxford,  in  1577,  was
long  remembered,  when  the  Chief  Baron,  the  Sheriff,
and  about  300  men  died  within  forty  hours.  Bacon
described  the  gaol  fever  as  '  the  most  pernicious  infection
next  to  the  plague,  .  .  .  whereof  we  have  had  in  our
time  experience  twice  or  thrice,  when  both  the  judges
that  sat  upon  the  jail,  and  numbers  of  those  who  attended
the  business,  or  were  present,  sickened  and  died.'  In
1730  Chief  Baron  Pengelly,  Serjeant  Shippen,  and  many
others,  were  killed  by  gaol  fever  when  attending  the
Dorsetshire  Assizes,  and  the  High  Sheriff  of  Somerset-
shire perished  through  the  same  cause.  In  the  Scotch
rebellion  no  less  than  200  men  in  a  single  regiment
were  infected  by  some  deserters.  The  army  and  navy,
indeed,  through  the  operation  of  the  press-gang,  which
seized  numbers  just  released  from  prison,  were  peculiarly
exposed  to  the  contagion,  and  it  was  said  by  a  good
judge,  that  the  mortality  in  them  produced  by  the  gaol
fever  was  greater  than  that  produced  by  all  other  causes
combined.  In  1750  the  disease  raged  to  such  an  extent
in  Newgate  that  at  the  Old  Bailey  Assizes  two  judges,
the  Lord  Mayor,  an  alderman,  and  many  of  inferior  rank
were  its  victims.  From  that  time  sweet-smelling  herbs
were  always  placed  in  the  prisoners'  dock  to  counteract
the  contagion.^

Something  was  done  by  new  prison  regulations,  and
by  the  removal  and  prosecution  of  some  of  the  worst

'  Howard  On  Prisons,  Introduction. Lawrence's  Life  of  Field-
ing, pp.  296,  297.

CH.  IV.  GEORGIA.  131

offenders,  to  remedy  the  evil ;  but  still  the  condition  of
the  prisons  continued  till  a  much  later  period  a  disgrace
to  English  civilisation.  The  miseries  of  the  imprisoned
debtor  were  commemorated  in  the  poetry  of  Thomson,
and  by  the  pencil  of  Hogarth,  and  they  furnished  the
subject  of  some  of  the  most  pathetic  pages  of  Fielding
and  Smollett.  As  late  as  1 741  it  was  announced  that
two  prisoners  had  died  of  extreme  want  in  the  Marshal-
sea  in  Dublin,  and  that  several  others  were  reduced  to
the  verge  of  starvation.^  In  1759  Dr.  Johnson  com-
jnited  the  number  of  imprisoned  debtors  at  not  less  than
20,000,2  and  asserted  that  one  of  four  died  every  year
from  the  treatment  they  underwent.

The  exposure  of  the  abuses  in  the  English  prisons
by  no  means  exhausted  the  philanthropic  energies  of
Oglethorpe.  Like  Berkeley,  his  imagination  was  di-
rected towards  the  West,  and  he  conceived  the  idea  of
founding  a  colony  in  which  poor  debtors  on  attaining
their  freedom  might  find  a  refuge.  A  charter  was  ob-
tained in  1732.  Private  subscriptions  flowed  largely
in,  and  with  the  consent  of  Berkeley  the  proceeds  of  the
sale  of  some  lands,  which  Parliament  had  voted  for  the
Bermuda  scheme,  were  appropriated  to  the  new  enter-
prise. Early  in  1733  the  colony  of  Georgia  was  founded,
and  Oglethorpe  for  many  years  was  its  governor.  Besides
giving  a  refuge  to  needy  classes  from  England,  the  colony
was  intended  to  exercise  a  civilising  and  missionary  in-
fluence upon  the  surrounding  Indians  ;  and  in  its  char-
ter Oglethorpe  inserted  a  most  memorable  clause,  abso-
lutely prohibiting  the  introduction  of  slaves.  Georgia
became  a  centre  of  the  Moravian  sect,  the  scene  of  the
early  labours  of  the  Wesleys,  and  afterwards  of  White-

'  Dublin  Gazette,  March  17- admitted  that  he  had  found  rea-
•_'l,  1740-41.  sons  to  question  the  accuracy  of

'  Idler,  No.  38.  Johnson  after- this  calculation.
wards,  in reprinting the Idler,

K  2

132 es:gla>t>  in*  the  EIGHTEZNTH  CEMLET. ch.  it.

field,  and  the  asjhnn  of  many  of  the  poor  Protestants
wiio  had  been  driTen,  on  a^^coimt  of  their  religion,  firom
the  bishopric  of  Salzburg.  The  administration  of  Ogle-
thorpe was  manned  by  some  fenlts  of  temper  and  of  taot,
but  it  was  on  the  whole  able,  energetic,  and  fortunate.
When  hostilities  broke  ont  with  Spain  he  conducted  the
war  with  brilliant  courage  and  success,  and  he  succeeded
in  materially  diminishing  the  atrocities  which  had  hither-
to accompanied  Tiidian  warfare.  He  became  a  general
and  served  in  the  -Jacobite  rebellion  of  1745,  but  was
repulsed  with  some  loss  at  the  village  of  Clifton :  and
though  acquitted  by  a  court  of  inquiry,  his  conduct
fjnringr  this  campaign  threw  a  certain  shadow  over  his
military  reputation.  He  succeeded,  in  1749,  in  carry-
ing through  Parliament  a  Bill  exempting  the  Moravians
in  England  from  the  necessity  of  violating  their  reli-
gious sentiments  by  taking  oaths  or  bearing  arms.  He
was  one  of  the  first  men  who  recognised  the  rising  genius
of  -Johnson ;  and  in  his  old  age  he  was  the  intimate
fiiend  of  Johnson,  Goldsmith,  and  Burke.  BLis  singu-
larly varied  and  useful  life  terminated  in  1785.^

With  these  exceptions,  probably  the  only  consider-
able trace  of  warm  and  disinterested  philanthropy  in
the  sphere  of  politics  during  the  period  I  am  describing
was  the  vote  of  100,000?.  in  1755  for  the  relief  of  the
distressed  Portuguese,  after  the  great  earthquake  at
Lisbon.  In  no  respect  does  the  legislation  of  this  period
present  a  more  striking  contrast  to  that  of  the  nine-
teenth century  than  in  the  almost  complete  absence  of
attempts  to  alleviate  the  social  condition  of  the  poorer

'  Wright's  lAfe  of  Oglefhorpe.  One  ddTen  by  srrcng  bcnevoleDee  of

Se«.  too.  the  manT  aUnsioiLs  to  -l,^^j, t,t_  rw  i_v  _ - i

,  . ■ . -D ^^■ '  T  ~ TT  =iia!l  At  Hte  OslerhoTDe  rrom  pole  to

hmi  m  Jiosweli  5  -Jonnson. H.  xxle.—lm.itatiD7i  cfHorais,  Ep.  iL

Walpole  alwaj3  depreciates  O^  See,  too,  Wesley's  Journal  and

thorpe.  Pope  has  devot-ed  a  well-  Tjennan's  Lifeoj  Wesky.

CH.  IV. ABUSES  IN  THE  NAVY  AND  ARMY. 133

classes,  or  to  soften  the  more  repulsive  features  of  Eng-
lish life.  The  public  Press  had  not  yet  undertaken  that
minute  and  searching  investigation  into  abuses,  which
is  the  most  useful  of  all  its  functions ;  and  the  general
level  of  humanity  in  the  community  was  little,  if  at  all,
higher  than  in  the  preceding  generation.  The  graphic
and  terrible  picture  which  is  given  in  '  Roderick  Ran-
dom '  of  the  hardships  endured  by  the  common  sailors
on  board  a  man-of-war,  was  derived  from  the  actual
experience  of  the  author,  when  serving  in  1741  as
surgeon's  mate  in  the  expedition  against  Carthagena ;  ^
and  those  who  read  it  will  hardly  wonder  that  it  was
found  impossible  in  time  of  war  to  man  the  royal  navy
without  having  constant  recourse  to  the  press-gang.^
The  condition  of  the  army  was  little  better.  It  appears
from  a  memorial  drawn  up  in  1707  that  the  garrison  of
Portsmouth  was  reduced  by  death  or  desertion  to  half
its  former  number  in  less  than  a  year  and  a  half,  through
sickness,  want  of  firing,  and  bad  barracks,  and  the  few
new  barracks  that  were  erected  were  built  with  the  most
scandalous  parsimony,  and  crowded  to  the  most  frightful
excess.^  The  African  slave  trade  was  still  an  important
branch  of  British  enterprise. A  few  isolated  voices,  as

'  That  it  is  not  exaggerated  taining  a  reserve  of  3,000  sea-
is  abundantly  showTi  by  Lind's  men,  who  were  to  receive  a  pen-
Essay  07i  the  Health  of  Seamen,  sion  in  time  of  peace,  and  to  be
whichwas  first  published  in  1757.  called  into  active  service  in  time
This  author  says  (ch.  i.)  :  '  I  have  of  war  ;  but  the  Bill  was  violently
known  1,000  men  confined  to-  opposed  and  eventually  dropped
gather  in  a  guardship,  some  hun-  (Coxe's  Lifeof^  PeUmm,  ii.  66-70).
dreds  of  whom  had  neither  a  bed  A  somewhat  similar  measure,  but
nor  so  much  as  a  change  of  linen.  on  a  larger  scale,  had  actually
I  have  seen  many  of  them  brought  passed  under  William,  but  it  was
into  hospital  in  the  same  clothes  repealed  in  the  ninth  year  of
and  shirts  they  had  on  when  Anne  (Macpherson's  Annals  of
pressed  several  months  before.  Commerce,  ii.  683).

2  Pelham,  in  1749, endeavoured  ^  Clode's Military  Forces  of

to  abolish  impressment  by  main-  the  Crown,  i.  222.

134 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  GENTUKY. ch.  iv.

we  shall  hereafter  see,  had  been  raised  against  it,  but
they  had  as  yet  made  no  sensible  impression  on  the
public  mind,  and  no  less  a  statesman  than  the  elder  Pitt
made  its  development  a  main  object  of  his  policy.  The
penal  code  was  not  only  atrociously  sanguinary  and  con-
tinually aggravated  by  the  addition  of  new  offences  ;  it
was  also  executed  in  a  manner  peculiarly  fitted  to  brutal-
ise  the  people.  In  some  respects,  it  is  true,  it  may  be
compared  favourably  with  the  criminal  procedures  of  the
Continent.  English  law  knew  nothing  of  torture  or  of
arbitrary  imprisonment,  or  of  the  barbarous  punishment
of  the  wheel,  and  no  English  executions  were  quite  so
horrible  as  those  which  took  place  in  the  Oevennes  in
the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  or  as  the  pro-
longed and  hideous  agonies  which  Damiens  endured  for
several  hours,  in  1757.  But  this  is  about  all  that  can
be  said.  Executions  in  England  till  very  lately  have
been  a  favourite  public  spectacle — it  may  almost  be  said
a  public  amusement — and  in  the  last  century  everything
seemed  done  to  make  the  people  familiar  with  their  most
frightful  aspects.  A  ghastly  row  of  heads  of  the  rebels
of  1745  mouldered  along  the  top  of  Temple  Bar,  Gal-
lows were  erected  in  every  important  quarter  of  the  city,
and  on  many  of  them  corpses  were  left  rotting  in  chains.
When  Blackstone  wrote,  there  were  no  less  than  160
offences  in  England  punishable  with  death,  and  it  was
a  very  ordinary  occurrence  for  ten  or  twelve  culprits  to
be  hanged  on  a  single  occasion,  for  forty  or  fifty  to  be
condemned  at  a  single  assize.  In  1782  seventy  per-
sons received  sentence  of  death  at  the  Old  Bailey,^
and  in  the  same  year  we  find  eighteen  persons  hanged
in  one  day  in  the  not  very  considerable  town  of  Cork.^
Often the criminals staggered intoxicated to the

'  Andrews' Eighteenth Cen-  -  Dublin Weekly Journal,

tury,  p.  271.  April  22,  1732. See,  too,  Mad-

cu.  IV.  PUBLIC EXECUTIONS.  135

gallows,  and  some  of  the  most  noted  were  exhibited
for  money  by  the  turnkeys  before  their  execution.
No  less  than  200?,  is  said  to  have  been  made  in  this
manner  in  a  few  days  when  Sheppard  was  prisoner  in
Newgate.^  Dr.  Dodd,  the  unhappy  clergyman  who
was  executed  for  forgery,  was  exhibited  for  two  hours
in  the  press-room  at  a  shilling  a  head  before  he  was  led
to  the  gallows.^

'  The  executions  of  criminals,'  wrote  a  Swiss  traveller
in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  'return
every  six  weeks  regularly  with  the  sessions.  The  crimi-
nals pass  through  the  streets  in  carts,  dressed  in  their
best  clothes,  with  white  gloves  and  nosegays,  if  it  be  the
season.  Those  that  die  merrily  or  that  don't  at  least
show  any  great  fear  of  death,  are  said  to  die  like  gentle-
men ;  and  to  merit  this  encomium  most  of  them  die  like
beasts,  without  any  concern,  or  like  fools,  having  no
other  view  than  to  divert  the  crowd.  .  .  .  Though  there
is  something  very  melancholy  in  this,  yet  a  man  cannot
well  forbear  laughing  to  see  these  rogues  set  themselves
off  as  heroes  by  an  affectation  of  despising  death.  .  .  .
The  frequent  executions,  the  great  numbers  that  suffer
together,  and  the  applauses  of  the  crowd,  may  contribute
something  to  it,  and  the  brandy  which  they  swallow  be-
fore their  setting  out  helps  to  stun  them.'^  Women
who  were  found  guilty  of  murdering  their  husbands,  or
of  the  other  offences  comprised  under  the  terms  high  or
petit  treason,  were  publicly  burnt,  by  a  law  which  was
not  abolished  till  1790.'* A  stake  ten  or  eleven  feet  hioh

Aen's  Hist,  of  Periodical  Litcra-  "^Public Ledger, quoted bv

ture  in  Ireland,  i.  258  ; and  for  Andrews,  p.  281.

an almost equally  striking in-  ^  Muralt's  Letters  on  the  Eng-

stance in 1787 at Worcester,  Z^s7tiVa^^o?^,  (English  trans.  172G),

Eoberts' Social Hist, of the  pp.  42-44.

Southern^  Counties,  p.  152.  *  '  In  treasons  of  every  kind

'  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  the  punishment  of  women  is  the

i-  158.  same,  and  different  from  that  of

136 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  iv.

was  planted  in  the  ground.  An  iron  ring  was  fastened
near  the  top,  and  from  it  the  culprit  was  hung  while  the
faggots  were  kindled  under  her  feet.  The  law  enjoined
that  she  should  be  burnt  alive,  but  in  practice  the  sen-
tence was  usually  mitigated,  and  she  was  strangled  be-
fore the  fire  touched  her  body.  A  horrible  case,  how-
ever, occurred  in  1726  at  the  execution  of  a  murderess
named  Katherine  Hayes.  The  fire  scorching  the  hands
of  the  executioner,  he  slackened  the  rope  before  he
strangled  her,  and  though  fresh  faggots  were  hastily
piled  up,  a  considerable  time  elapsed  before  her  agonies
were  terminated.^  The  law  which  condemned  a  man
gailty  of  high  treason  to  be  cut  down  when  half  hanged,
to  be  disembowelled,  and  to  have  his  bowels  burnt  be-
fore his  face,  was  still  executed  in  ghastly  detail.^  The
law  which  condemned  a  prisoner  who  refused  to  plead
on  a  capital  charge  to  be  laid  naked  on  his  back  in  a
dark  room,  while  weights  of  stone  or  iron  were  placed
on  his  breast  till  he  was  slowly  pressed  to  death,  was
enforced  in  England  in  1721  and  in  1735,  and  in  Ire-
land as  late  as  1740.  A  criminal  was  sentenced  in
England  to  the  same  fate  in  1741,  but  he  at  last  con-

men.  For  as  the  natural  modesty  Common.  The  State  Trials
of  the  sex  forbids  the  exposing  (xviii.  351)  give  the  following
and  publicly  mangling  their  description  of  the  execution  of
bodies,  their  sentence  (which  is  Mr.  Townley,  who  was  one  of
to  the  full  as  terrible  to  the  sense  them  :  '  After  he  had  hung  six
as  the  other)  is,  to  be  drawn  to  minutes,  he  was  cut  down,  and,
the  gallows  and  there  to  be  burnt  having  life  in  him  as  he  lay  up-
alive.' — Blackstone,  iv.  ch.  vi.  on  the  block  to  be  quartered,  the

'  Andrews,  p.  279. See,  too  executioner gave him several

her  life,  in  The  Lives  of  Emi-  blows  on  his  breast,  which  not

nent  Criminals  executed  hetiveen  having  the  effect  required,  he  im-

1720  and  1735.  mediately  cut  his  throat ;  after

-See  Andrews'  Eighteenth  which  he  took  his  head  off ;  then
Century,  p.  281.  Eight  persons  ripped  him  open  and  took  out
guilty  of  holding  commissions  in  his  bowels  and  heart  and  threw
the  army  of  the  Pretender,  were  them  into  the  fire,  which  con-
executed  in  1746  on  Kennington  sumed them  ; then  he  slashed

BRUTAL PUNISHMENTS.

137

sented  to  plead  ;  and  the  law  was  not  repealed  till  1772.^
The  punishment  of  the  pillory,  which  was  very  common,
seemed  specially  adapted  to  encourage  the  brutality  of
the  populace,  and  there  are  several  instances  of  culprits
who  perished  from  the  usage  they  underwent.  Men,
and  even  women,  were  still  whipped  publicly  at  the  tail
of  a  cart  through  the  streets,  and  the  flogging  of  women
in  England  was  only  abolished  in  1820.^

On  the  whole,  however,  the  institutions  and  manners
of  the  country  were  steadily  assuming  their  modern
aspect.  From  the  ministry  of  Walpole  the  House  of
Commons  had  become  indisputably  the  most  powerful
body  in  the  State.  Then  it  was  that  the  post  of  First
Lord  of  the  Treasury  came  to  be  universally  recognised
as  the  head  of  the  Government.  Then  it  was  that  the
forms  of  parliamentary  procedure  were  in  many  respects

his  four  quarters  and  put  them
with  the  head  into  a  coffin.'

'  Andrews,  pp.  285,  286.  The
last  case  is  from  the  Universal
Spectator,  Sept.  1741.  '  On  Tues-
day, was  sentenced  to  death  at
the  Old  Bailey,  Henry  Cook,
shoemaker,  of  Stratford,  for  rob-
bing Mr.  Zachary  on  the  high-
way. On  Cook's  refusing  to
plead,  there  was  a  new  press
made  and  fixed  in  the  proper
place  in  the  press-yard,  there
having  been  no  person  pressed
since  the  famous  Spiggott,  the
highwa.yman,  about  twenty  years
ago.  I5urnworth,  alias  Frazier,
was  pressed  at  Kingston,  in
Surrey,  about  sixteen  years  ago.'
The  Irish  case  was  at  Kilkenny.
Madden,  Periodical  Literature,
i.  274.  See,  too,  the  Annual
Register,  1770,  pp.  163-165.

-  See  the  very  large  collection
of  passages  from  old  newspapers

and  magazines,  illustrating  the
penal  system  in  England,  in  An-
drews' Eighteenth  Century,  and
in  that  great  repository  of  curious
information.  Notes  and  Queries.
See,  too,  Knight's  London,  Cow-
per's  Hist,  of  the  Rod,  and  Mad-
den's  Hist,  of  Periodical  Litera-
ture in  Ireland.  For  cases  of
criminals  being  killed  by  the
ill-usage  they  underwent  in  the
pillory,  see  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,
i.  367  ;  Nichols'  Memoirs  of  Ho-
garth, pp.  190,  191.  Johnson
wrote  a  very  humane  and  sensi-
ble protest  against  the  multipli-
cation of  capital  offences.  Ram-
bler, No.  114,  and  Fielding  in  his
Causes  of  the  Licrcase  of  Rob-
bers advocated  private  execu-
tions. The  public  whipping  of
women  in  England  was  abolished
in  1817,  the  private  whipping
only  in  1820.

138  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  iv.

definitely  fixed.  In  1730  the  absurd  practice  of  draw-
ing up  the  written  pleadings  in  the  law  courts  in  Latin
was  abolished,  in  spite  of  the  strenuous  opposition  of
the  Chief  Justice  Lord  Eaymond.^  The  last  attempt  to
impeach  a  Prime  Minister  was  when  Walpole  was  over-
thrown ;  the  last  battle  fought  on  British  soil  was  in
the  rebellion  of  1745.  The  last  traces  of  the  old  ex-
emptions from  the  dominion  of  the  law  were  removed
by  the  abolition  of  hereditary  jurisdictions  in  Scotland,
and  of  the  right  of  sanctuary  in  London  ;  and  the  most
conspicuous  sign  of  the  insular  spirit  of  the  nation  dis-
appeared when  England  consented  to  adopt  the  same
calendar  as  the  most  civilised  nations  on  the  Continent.
It  was  at  this  time,  also,  that  the  modern  military
system  was  firmly  established.  An  aversion  to  a  stand-
ing army  in  time  of  peace  had  long  been  one  of  the
strongest  of  English  sentiments,  and  it  was  one  in  which
both  the  great  parties  of  the  State  cordially  concurred.
The  Tories  were  never  weary  of  dilating  upon  the  mili-
tary despotism  of  Cromwell,  which  had  left  an  indelible
impression  on  the  mind  of  the  nation,  while  the  army  of
30,000  men  which  James  had  maintained  without  the
consent  of  Parliament,  furnished  one  of  the  gravest
Whig  charges  against  that  sovereign.  Of  all  the  mea-
sures that  accompanied  the  Restoration,  none  had  been
more  popular  than  the  disbandment  of  the  army  of
Cromwell ;  but  soon  after,  a  conflict  began  between  the
Crown  and  the  Legislature,  which  continually  recurred
with  aggravated  severity  up  to  the  time  of  the  Revolu-
tion. The  last  two  Stuart  sovereigns  aimed  at  the
maintenance,  in  time  of  peace,  of  a  considerable  military
force  altogether  subject  to  their  control.  They  governed
it  by  articles  of  war.  They  assumed  or  claimed  as  part
of  their  prerogative,  a  power  unknown  to  the  law,  of

'  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vi.  119,  120.

CH.  IV.  GKOWTH OF STANDING ARMIES.  139

administeiing-  justice  and  inflicting  punishments  on
their  soldiers  by  courts-martial ;  and  James,  in  defiance
of  the  Test  Act,  had  bestowed  numerous  military  com-
mands upon  Catholics.  The  steady  policy  of  Parlia-
ment, on  the,  other  hand,  was  to  develop  the  militia,
which  it  was  assumed  could  never  become  inimical  to
the  liberties  of  England ;  to  insist  upon  the  disband-
ment,  in  time  of  peace,  of  the  whole  army,  except,
perhaps,  a  body-guard  for  the  King  and  garrisons  for
the  forts ;  and  to  maintain  the  exclusion  of  Catholics
from  commands,  and  the  principle  that  punishments  in
time  of  peace  could  only  be  inflicted  by  order  of  the
civil  magistrate.  The  great  part  which  this  conflict
had  in  preparing  the  Revolution  is  well  known ;  and  an
article  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  expressly  provided  that,
without  the  consent  of  Parliament,  the  raising  or  keep-
ing of  a  standing  army  within  the  kingdom  was  illegal.
It  soon,  however,  became  evident  to  all  sagacious  ob-
servers that  a  considerable  army  was  indispensable  if
England  were  ever  to  engage  in  a  land  war  with
continental  nations.  The  French  army,  which  under
Henry  IV.  consisted  of  14,000  men,  amounted,  after
the  Peace  of  Nimeguen,  to  no  less  than  140,000  ;  ^
and  before  the  close  of  his  reign  Lewis  XIY.  is  said  to
have  had  as  many  as  360,000  men  at  one  time  under
arms.  The  Emperor  Charles  VI.  employed  170,000
soldiers  in  the  war  of  1733.  The  Prussian  army,  on
the  accession  of  Frederick  the  Great,  consisted  of  76,000
men  ;  and  every  petty  German  ruler  was  augmenting
his  forces.  The  genius  of  Parma,  Turenne,  Conde,  and
Vauban  transformed  the  art  of  war,  and  every  improve-
ment made  a  hastily  levied  militia  more  helpless  before
a  disciplined  army.  Vauban  and  Cohorn  may  almost  be
said  to  have  created  the  art  of  attacking  and  defending

*  Heeren.

140 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

fortresses.  Mining  acquired  a  prominence  in  warfare,
and  was  conducted  with  a  skill  formerly  utterly  un-
known. Transportable  copper  pontoons  for  crossing
rivers  were  invented  by  the  French  in  1672.  The  in-
vention of  the  fixed  bayonet  has  been  attributed  both  to
Mackay  and  to  Vauban ;  and  the  Prussian  infantry
attained  a  perfection  in  manoeuvring  and  a  rapidity  in
firing  which  made  every  battalion  a  walking  battery,
and  was  speedily  copied  in  the  rest  of  Europe.*

All  these  changes,  by  giving  a  new  perfection  to  the
art  of  war,  made  it  evident  that  the  time  had  arrived
when  a  considerable  permanent  body  of  highly  trained
soldiers  was  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  State  ;  and
that  necessity  in  England  was  still  more  felt  on  account
of  the  perpetual  fear  of  a  Jacobite  insurrection.  But  a
permanent  army  could  not  exist  unless  adequate  means
were  provided  for  preserving  its  discipline,  especially  at
a  time  when  the  dispositions  of  the  troops  were  doubtful
or  divided.  The  declaration  of  800  soldiers  at  Ipswich
in  favour  of  James  in  1689  produced  the  first  Mutiny
Act,  which  was  enacted  for  six  months,  and  which
enabled  courts-martial  to  punish  mutiny  and  desertion
by  death.2  The  press-gang  soon  came  into  use,  and  it
was  much  employed  in  time  of  war  as  a  kind  of  irregu-
lar police  ;  suspected  criminals,  or  notorious  bad  charac-
ters, against  whom  no  definite  charge  could  be  proved,
being  in  this  manner  draughted  in  great  numbers  into
the  army.  An  Act  of  Anne  gave  justices  of  the  peace
express  power  to  levy  as  soldiers  such  able-bodied  men  in
their  districts  as  had  '  no  lawful  calling  or  employment,
or  visible  means  for  their  maintenance  or  livelihood.'  ^

There  are  few  more  curious  pages  in  English  history

'  Frederick II., Mimoires de  Hervey's  Memoirs,  i.  86.
mon  Temps. See,  too,  for  other  -  Macaulay's  nist.

military  statistics,  Eanke's  Hist.  •''  3  &  4  Anne,  c.  11.

of Prussia,  i. 420, 421. Lord

en.  IV.  THE MUTOY ACT.  141

than  the  slow  and  gradual  change  of  public  opinion  on
the  subject  of  standing  armies.  For  more  than  half  a
century  the  battle  continued  with  almost  unabated  vio-
lence, and  a  century  had  elapsed  before  it  altogether
subsided.  The  Mutiny  Act  was  regarded  as  a  purely
temporary  contrivance,  but  it  was  soon  felt  by  most  ex-
perienced men  that  it  was  impossible  to  govern  the
army  if  military  insubordination  or  desertion  were
treated  as  mere  breaches  of  contract,  and  were  punish-
able only  by  the  civil  courts.  The  Mutiny  Act  was
accordingly  re-enacted,  sometimes  for  six  months,  more
frequently  for  a  year,  but  it  was  long  before  it  was
recognised  as  permanently  necessary.  In  the  reigns  of
William  and  Anne  there  were  several  periods — one  of
them  lasting  for  more  than  two  years — in  which  it  was
not  in  force,  and  its  invariable  enactment  dates  only
from  George  I.  Its  opponents  dwelt  upon  the  danger
of  severing  by  a  special  code  of  laws  the  members  of
the  army  from  their  fellow-citizens,  and  of  tampering
with  the  great  constitutional  principle  that  the  civil
magistrate  in  time  of  peace  should  have  sole  jurisdic-
tion for  the  suppression  of  crime ;  and  they  urged  that
to  permit  the  Sovereign,  of  his  own  authority,  to  esta-
blish articles  of  war,  and  erect  courts-martial  for  en-
forcing them,  was  to  vest  a  sole  legislative  power  in  the
Crown.  On  these  grounds  Windham  and  Shippen,  at
the  head  of  the  Tory  party,  strenuously  opposed  the
Mutiny  Act.  Walpole  took  the  same  course,  when  he
was  in  opposition  to  Stanhope,  and  his  saying  that  '  he
who  gives  the  power  of  blood  gives  blood'  was  con-
tinually quoted  by  its  opponents.  In  1717  the  power
of  inflicting  capital  punishment  by  sentence  of  court-
martial  on  deserters  and  mutineers  was  only  carried  by
247  to  229,^  and  most  of  the  extensions  which  the  Act

'  See  the  remarkable  account  of  tlie  debate  in  Tindal.

142 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  iv.

underwent  were  fiercely  contested.  The  Act  of  1689
provided  only  for  the  punishment  of  mutiny  and  deser-
tion, without  exempting  any  officer  or  soldier  from  the
ordinary  processes  of  law,  and  its  operation  was  re-
stricted to  the  regular  army  and  to  England.  The
scope  of  the  Act  was  gradually  extended  to  Jersey  and
Guernsey,  to  Ireland,  and  at  length  to  the  whole
dominion  of  the  Crown.  The  Mutiny  Act  of  1713,
which  was  the  first  passed  in  time  of  peace,  gave  courts-
martial  no  power  to  award  a  capital  sentence,  and  this
incapacity  continued  till  the  rebellion  of  1715.  Under
George  I.  the  Crown  for  the  first  time  obtained  an
express  and  formal  authority  to  constitute,  under  roj^al
sign  manual,  articles  of  war  for  the  government  of  l3he
army,  and  to  enforce  their  penalties  by  courts-martial.
The  articles  of  war  of  1717  made  provision  for  the  trial
of  ordinary  civil  offences  by  courts-martial,  and  the
Mutiny  Act  declared  that  acquittal  or  conviction  should
be  a  bar  to  all  further  indictment  for  the  same  offence.
In  1728,  however,  a  question  arose  whether  the  articles
of  war  which  emanated  from  the  Sovereign  alone,  could
create  capital  offences  unknown  to  the  law,  and  the
Attorney-General  advised  the  Government  that  while
the  power  of  inflicting  other  penalties  by  those  articles
was  unrestricted,  no  sentence  extending  to  life  or  limb
could  be  imposed  by  court-martial  except  for  offences
enumerated  in,  and  made  so  punishable  by,  the  Mutiny
Act ;  and  a  clause  to  this  effect  has  been  inserted  in
every  Mutiny  Act  since  1748.  In  1748,  too,  an  oath  of
secrecy  was  first  imposed  upon  the  members  of  courts-
martial  forbidding  them  to  divulge  the  sentence  till
approved,  or  the  votes  of  any  member,  unless  required
by  Parliament.  The  position  of  half-pay  ofiicers  was
long  and  vehemently  discussed.  It  was  contended  by
the  Government  that  they  were  subject  to  the  Mutiny
Act,  but  the  opinions  of  the  judges  were  divided  on  the

CH.  IV.  THE MUTINY ACT.  143

question.  A  special  clause  making  them  hV.ble  was
inserted  in  the  Act  of  1747,  but  it  was  withdrawn  in
1749,  and  in  1785  their  exemption  was  decided.  In
1754  the  operation  of  the  Mutiny  Act  was  extended
to  the  troops  of  the  East  India  Company  serving  in
India,  and  to  the  King's  troops  serving  in  North  Ame-
rica, as  well  as  to  local  troops  serving  with  them.  In
1756  the  militia,  when  called  out  for  active  service,
were  brought  under  its  provisions;  and  in  1788,  in
spite  of  the  strong  opposition  of  Fox  and  Sheridan,
the  corps  of  sappers  and  miners  was  included  in  the
same  category.^

The  extreme  distrust  with  which  this  department  of
legislation  was  regarded  is  shown  by  the  strong  opposi-
tion that  was  aroused  over  almost  all  the  questions  I
have  enumerated.  The  first  volume  of  the  Commen-
taries of  Blackstone  was  published  as  late  as  1765,  and
it  is  remarkable  that  even  at  this  date  that  great  law\^er
spoke  with  the  strongest  apprehension  of  the  dangers
to  liberty  arising  from  the  Mutiny  Act.  He  main-
tained that  the  condition  of  the  army  was  that  of
absolute  servitude ;  and  he  argued  that  every  free  and
prudent  nation  should  endeavour  to  prevent  the  intro-
duction of  slavery  into  the  midst  of  it ;  that  if  it  has
unhappily  been  introduced,  arms  should  at  least  never
be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  slaves,  and  that  no  policy
could  be  more  suicidal  than  to  deprive  of  the  liberties
of  the  constitution  the  very  men  who  are  at  the  last
resort  entrusted  with  their  defence.^  But  whatever
plausibility  there  may  be  in  such  reasoning,  it  will  now
hardly  be  disputed  that  a  body  of  many  thousands  of
armed  men,  whose  prompt  and  unreasoning  obedience

•  See, for the origin of the sequent  history,  Clode's  Military
Mutiny  Act,  Macaulay's  Hist,  of Forces  of  the  Crown,  vol.  i.
England,  ch.  xi.,  and  tor  its  suh-  -  Blackstone,  beck  i.  ch.  xiii.

144 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  iv.

is  of  the  utmost  moment  to  tlie  State,  cannot  be  per-
manently governed  by  the  mikl  and  tardy  processes
of  law  which  are  applicable  to  civilians.  Military
insubordination  is  so  grave  and,  at  the  same  time,  so
contagious  a  disease,  that  it  requires  the  promptest
and  most  decisive  remedies  to  prevent  it  from  leading
to  anarchy.  By  retaining  a  strict  control  over  the  pay
and  over  the  numbers  of  the  soldiers,  by  limiting  each
Mutiny  Act  to  a  single  year,  and  by  entrusting  its
carriage  through  the  House  to  a  civil  minister,  who
is  responsible  for  its  provisions.  Parliament  has  very
effectually  guarded  against  abuses ;  and  the  army,  since
the  days  of  the  Commonwealth,  has  never  been  inimical
to  the  liberties  of  England.

The  jealousy  that  was  felt  about  the  Mutiny  Act
extended  to  other  parts  of  military  administration.
After  the  Peace  of  Ryswick,  Parliament  insisted  on
reducing  the  forces  to  10,000  men,  or  about  a  third  part
of  what  William  considered  necessary  for  the  security
of  the  State ;  and  during  the  greater  part  of  the  first
two  Hanoverian  reigns  there  was  an  annual  conflict
about  the  number  of  the  forces.  In  1717  Walpole
himself,  being  at  this  time  in  Opposition,  was  promi-
nent in  urging  their  reduction  from  16,000  to  12,000
men.  During  his  own  administration  the  army  in
time  of  peace  was  usually  about  17,000  men.  The
terror  which  was  produced  by  the  Scotch  invasion  of
1745,  the  frequent  alarms  of  a  French  invasion,  the
popularity  of  the  wars  of  the  elder  Pitt,  and  the  great
extension  of  the  Empire  resulting  from  his  conquests,
gradually  led  to  increased  armaments ;  nor  was  the
growth  of  the  regular  army  seriously  checked  by  the
organisation,  between  1757  and  1763,  of  a  national
militia.  In  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century
the  number  of  soldiers  in  Parliament  was  much  com-
plained of,  and  some  unsuccessful  efforts  were  made  to

MILITARY ADMINISTRATION.

145

diminish  it.^  Walpole  desired  to  avail  himself  of  the
military  as  of  other  forms  of  patronage  for  the  purpose
of  gratifying  his  supporters  and  thus  securing  his  parlia-
mentary majority  5  but  George  II.,  to  his  great  credit,
steadily  refused  to  allow  the  army  to  be  dragged  into
the  vortex  of  corruption, ^  though  he  consented  to  de-
prive the  Duke  of  Bolton  and  Lord  Cobham  of  their
regiments  on  account  of  their  votes  against  the  excise
scheme.  A  Bill  was  at  this  time  introduced  to  prevent
any  officer  above  the  rank  of  colonel  from  being  thus
deprived,  except  by  a  court-martial  or  an  address  from

'  In  1741  some  members  of
the  House  of  Lords  drew  up  a
very  remarkable  protest  on  this
subject.  After  complaining  of
the  increase  of  the  army,  and  of
the  formation  of  new  corps,  they
say :  '  We  apprehend  that  this
method  of  augmentation  by  new
corps  may  be  attended  with  con-
sequences fatal  in  time  to  our
Constitution,  by  increasing  the
number  of  commissions  which
may  be  disposed  of  with  regard
to  parliamentary  influence  only.
.  .  .  Our  distrust  of  the  motives
of  this  augmentation  which
creates  at  once  370  officers  .  .  .
ought  to  be  the  greater  so  near
the  election  of  a  new  parliament
.  .  .  and  we  cannot  forget  that
an  augmentation  of  8,010  men
was  likewise  made  the  very  year
of  the  election  of  the  present
Parliament.  .  .  .  The  number  of
officers  in  ParUament  has  gradu-
ally increased,  and  though  we
think  the  gentlemen  of  the  army
as  little  liable  to  undue  influence
as  any  other  body  of  men,  yet  we
think  it  would  be  very  imprudent
to  trust  the  very  fundamentals
of  our  Constitution,  the  indepen-
VOL. II.

deucy  of  Parliaments,  to  the
uncertain  effects  of  ministerial
favour  or  resentment.' — Eogers'
Protests  of  the  Lords,  ii.  1-6.

^  Walpole  himself  complained
to  Lord  Hervey :  '  How  many
people  there  are  I  could  bind  to
me  by  getting  things  done  in  the
army  you  may  imagine,  and  that
I  never  can  get  any  one  thing
done  in  it  you  perhaps  will  not
believe  ;  but  it  is  as  true  as  that
there  is  an  army,  that  I  never
ask  for  the  smallest  commission
by  which  a  Member  of  Parlia-
ment may  be  immediately  or  col-
laterally obliged,  that  the  King's
answer  is  not — "  I  won't  do  that ;
you  want  always  to  have  me  dis-
oblige all  my  old  soldiers,  you
understand  nothing  of  troops.  I
will  order  my  army  as  I  think
fit ;  for  your  scoundrels  in  the
House  of  Commons  you  may  do
as  you  please  ;  you  know  I  never
interfere  nor  pretend  to  know
anything  of  them,  but  this  pro-
vince I  will  keep  to  myself."  ' —
Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs,  ii.  381,
:-582.  This  is  not  the  least  of  the
many  unrecognised  services  of
George  II.  to  the  country.
L

146 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  iv.

one  House  of  Parliament.  Considering  the  great  power
of  the  ministry  in  both  Houses,  it  is  not  surprising  that
this  measure  should  have  been  defeated  by  large  majori-
ties, but  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  it  should  have
been  extremely  unpopular.  The  manner  in  which  Wal-
pole  exercised  his  power  was  very'  scandalous.  The
desire  to  restrict  the  corrupt  influence  of  the  Govern-
ment was  very  strong,  and  the  excise  scheme  was
generally  detested ;  but  so  deep  and  so  lively  after  the
lapse  of  more  than  seventy  years  was  the  hatred  of
military  government  which  the  despotism  of  Cromwell
had  planted  in  the  nation  that  it  was  sufficient  to  over-
power all  other  considerations.  It  was  contended  that
the  measure  of  the  Opposition,  by  relaxing  the  authority
of  the  civil  power  over  the  military  system  and  by
aggrandising  that  of  the  courts-martial,  would  increase
the  independence  and  the  strength  of  standing  armies,
and  in  consequence  the  dangers  of  a  stratocracy ;  and
it  is  a  curious  and  well-attested  fact  that  it  very
seriously  impaired  the  popularity  of  the  party  who
proposed  it.^

The  last  sign  that  may  be  noticed  of  the  unpopularity
of  a  standing  army  was  the  extreme  reluctance  of  Parlia-
ment to  provide  barracks  adequate  for  its  accommoda-
tion. In  Ireland,  it  is  true,  which  was  governed  like  a
conquered  country,  a  different  policy  was  pursued,  and
a  large  grant  for  their  erection  was  made  as  early  as
William  III.,2  while  in  Scotland  they  chiefly  date  from

'  Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs,  i.  to  have  contemplated  a  consider-

282-284. Coxe's  Walimle,  i.  409.  able multiplication  of  barracks.

Pcui. Hist. ix. 291. William  As his biographer somewhat

had  positively  refused  to  remove  strangely  says:  '  If  his  Lordship

Sir  G.  Rooke  from  the  Admiralty  had  returned  to  Ireland  he  would

on account  of  his  votes  in  the  have  ordered  new  barracks  to  be

House of Commons. Wilson's  built  in  those  parts  of  the  king-

Life  of  Defoe,  i.  469.  dom which are not amenable

-  Clode. Chesterfield  appears  to  the  laws  of  the  country. By

cu.  IV.  BARKACKS.  147

the  rebellion  of  1715,  but  in  England  the  barrack  ac-
commodation till  a  much  later  period  was  miserably
insufficient.'  Even  at  the  time  when  the  army  had
acquired  very  considerable  dimensions  the  majority  of
the  troops  were  still  billeted  out  in  public-houses,  kept
under  canvas  during  the  most  inclement  portions  of  the
year,  or  stowed  away  in  barns  that  were  purchased  for
the  purpose.  Pulteney  contended  that  the  very  fact
that  a  standing  army  in  quarters  is  more  burdensome
than  a  standing  army  in  barracks  is  a  reason  for  op-
posing the  erection  of  the  latter,  lest  the  people  should
grow  accustomed  to  the  yoke.^  '  The  people  of  this
kingdom,'  said  General  Wade  in  1740,  'have  been
taught  to  associate  the  ideas  of  barracks  and  slavery,
like  darkness  and  the  devil.' ^  Blackstone,  in  1765,
strongly  maintained  that  the  soldiers  should  live  '  inter-
mixed with  the  people,'  and  that  '  no  separate  camp,  no
barracks,  no  inland  fortress,  should  be  allowed.'*  It
was  about  this  time,  however,  that  the  popular  jealousy
of  the  army  began  first  perceptibly  to  decline.  In  1760
Lord  Bath  published  a  pamphlet  which  is  in  more  than
one  respect  remarkable,  but  which  is  especially  in-
teresting for  the  evidence  it  furnishes  of  this  change.

this  provision  he  wished  to  make  spacious  court  of  freestone.  .  .  .
the  inhabitants  know  that  thc7-e  is  These are the first barracks
a  God,  a  king,  and  a  government.'  erected  in  Great  Britain,  and  it
— Maty's Life of Chcsfcrficld,  would  be  a  vast  ease  to  the  in-
p.  271.  habitants  in  most  great  towns  if
'  Clode's Military  Forces,  i.  they  had  them  everywhere ;  but
221-226. A  writer  who visited  Enghsh  liberty  will  never  con-
Scotland  about  1722,  speaking  of  sent  to  what  will  seem  a  nest
Berwick-on-Tweed,  says  :  '  King  for  a  standing  army.' — Macky's
George,  since  his  accession  to  the  Journey  throtigh  Scotland  (1723),
throne,  to  ease  the  inhabitants  pp.  24,  25.
of  this  town  from  quartering  of  ^  Pari.  Hist.  xi.  1448.
soldiers,  hath  built  a  fine bar-  ^  Ibid.  1442.
rack  here  consisting  of  a  square  *  Book  i.  ch.  xiii.

148 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  it.

He  complained  bitterly  that  the  country  had  become
strangely  tolerant  of  a  far  larger  peace  establishment
than  had  once  been  regarded  as  compatible  with  the
security  of  the  Constitution ;  that  the  members  of  the
great  families  were  beginning  to  enlist  in  large  numbers
in  the  army,  not  only  in  time  of  war,  but  also  as  a
permanent  profession  in  time  of  peace ;  and  that  the
erection  of  barracks,  which  twenty  years  before  would
have  ruined  any  minister  who  proposed  it,  was  now
accepted  without  serious  protest,  or  even  with  popular
applause.^  Still  the  old  feeling  of  distrust  was  not
wholly  extinct.  The  scheme  of  fortification  proposed
by  the  younger  Pitt,  in  1786,  was  rejected  on  the
ground  that  it  would  render  necessary  and  would  pro-
vide accommodation  for  a  larger  standing  army ;  ^  and
in  1792,  when  a  barrack  department  was  instituted  for
the  purpose  of  erecting  barracks  throughout  the  country,
a  considerable  opposition  was  shown  to  the  scheme.
Fox  and  Grey,  as  the  representatives  of  the  Whigs,
vehemently  denounced  it  in  the  beginning  of  1793,
maintaining, like  Pelham, Pulteney,  and  Blackstone,

'  '  What I  lament  is to see  favourite  measure  with  onr  pa-

the  sentiments  of  tlae  nation  so  triots and with the  public in

amazingly  reconciled  to  the  pro-  general.  .  .  .  What  I  lament,  as

spect  of  having  a  far  more  name-  the  greatest  misfortune  that  can

rous  body  of  regular  troops  kept  threaten  the  public  liberty,  is  to

up  after  the  peace  than  any  true  see  the  eagerness  with  which  our

lover  of  his  country  in former  nobility,  born  to  be  the  guardians

times  thought  could  be  allowed  of  the  Constitution  against  pre-

without  endangering  the  Consti-  rogative,  solicit  the  badge  of  mili-

tution. Nay,  so unaccountably  tary subjection, not  merely to

fond  are  we  become  of  the  mill-  serve  their  country  in  times  of

tary  plan, that  the erection  of  danger, which would be com-

barracks,  which  twenty  years  ago  mendable,  but  in  expectation  of

would  have  ruined  any  minister  being  continued soldiers when

who  should  have  ventured  to  pro-  tranquiUity  shall  be  restored.' —

pose  it,  may  be  proposed  safely  Letter  to  Tiuo  Great  Men  (New-

by  our  own  ministers  nowadays,  castle  and  Pitt),  p.  35.

and  upon  trial  be  found  to  be  a  ^  Clode.

BARRACKS.  149

that  the  erection  of  barracks  was  menacing  and  uncon-
stitutional, and  that  the  dangers  of  a  standing  army
could  only  be  averted  if  the  soldiers  were  closely  mixed
with  the  populace.*

Pari.  Hist.  xxx.  474-496.

150  ENGLAXD LS' THE  EIGHTEENTH CE>'TUBY. CH.  T.

CHAPTER  V.

I  PROPOSE  to  devote  tTiis  chapter  to  a  brief  sketcli  of  the
leadino'  intellectaal  and  social  changes  of  the  period
we  have  been  examining  which  have  not  fallen  within
the  scope  of  the  preceding  narrative.  In  the  higher
forms  of  intellect,  if  we  omit  the  best  works  of  Pope
and  Swift,  who  belong  chiefly  to  the  reign  of  Anne,  the
reigns  of  George  I.  and  George  IE.  were,  on  the  whole,
not  prolific,  but  the  influence  of  the  Press  was  great  and
growing,  though  periodical  writing  was  far  less  brilliant
than  m  the  preceding  period.  Among  other  writers,
Fielding,  Lyttelton,  and  Chesterfield  occasionally  con-
tributed to  it.  The  '  Craftsman '  especially,  though  now
utterly  neglected,  is  said  to  have  once  attained  a  cir-
culation of  10,000,  was  believed  to  have  eclipsed  the
'  Spectator,'  and  undoubtedly  contributed  largely  to  the
downfall  of  Walpole.  Though  set  up  by  Bolingbroke
and  Pulteney,  it  was  edited  by  an  obscure  and  disrepu-
table writer  named  Amhurst,  who  devoted  nearly  twenty
years  to  the  service  of  the  faction,  but  who  was  utterly
neglected  by  them  in  the  compromise  of  1742.  He
died  of  a  broken  heart,  and  owed  his  grave  to  the  charity
of  a  bookseller.  We  have  already  seen  the  large  sum
which  Walpole,  though  in  general  wholly  indifferent  to
literary  merit,  bestowed  upon  the  Government  Press,
and  ite  writers  were  also  occasionally  rewarded  by
Government  patronage.  Thus  Trenchard,  the  author  of
'  Cato's  Letters,'  obtained  the  post  of  '  commissioner  of
wine-Hcences '  from  Walpole ;  and  Concannon,  another

CH.  V.  THE PRESS.  151

ministerial  writer,  was  made  Attorney-General  of  Jamaica
by  Newcastle.  In  1724  there  were  three  daily  and  five
weekly  papers  jDi'inted  in  London,  as  well  as  ten  which
appeared  three  times  a  week.^

The  number  steadily  increased,  and  a  provincial
Press  gradually  grew  up.  The  first  trace  of  newspapers
outside  London  is  in  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth,
when  the  contending  armies  carried  with  them  printing
presses  for  the  purpose  of  issuing  reports  of  their  pro-
ceedings ;  but  the  first  regular  provincial  papers  appear
to  have  been  created  in  the  last  decade  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  and  by  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century  almost  every  important  provincial  town  had  its
local  organ.  Political  caricatures,  which  were  probably
Italian  in  their  origin,^  came  into  fashion  in  England
during  the  South  Sea  panic.  Caricatures  on  cards,
which  were  for  a  time  exceedingly  popular,  were  in-
vented by  George  Townshend,  in  1756.^  As  the  cen-
tury advanced,  the  political  importance  of  the  Press
became  very  apparent.  '  Newspapers,'  said  a  writer  in
the  'Gentleman's  Magazine'  of  1731,  'are  of  late  so
multiplied  as  to  render  it  impossible,  unless  a  man
makes  it  his  business,  to  consult  them  all.  .  .  .  Upon
calculating  the  number  of  newspapers  it  is  found  that
(besides  divers  written  accounts)  no  less  than  200  half-
sheets  per  month  are  thrown  from  the  press,  only  in

'  Andrews' Hist,  of Britisli  vention  there  called  caricature

Journalism,  i.  129.  drawing.  Can  you  find  me  some-

^  In  the  autobiography  of  Lord  body  that  will  make  me  a  cari-
Shelburne  there  is  a  curious  anec-  cature  of  Lady  Masham,  de-
dote  on  the  subject  of  caricatures.  scribing  her  covered  with  run-
'  He  [Lord  Melcombe]  toldme  that  ning  sores  and  ulcers,  that  I  may
coming  home  through  Brussels,  send  it  to  the  Queen  to  give  her  a
he  was  presented  to  Sarah,  right  idea  of  her  new  favom-ite?  "
Duchess of  Marlborough, after  (p.  122).

her  disgrace. She  said  to  him,  ^  \Ya\];)ole^s  Memoirs  of  George

"  Young  man, you come from  II.  ii.  228.
Italy ;  they  tell  me  of  a  new  in-

152 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

London,  and  about  as  many  printed  elsewhere  in  the
three  kingdoms ;  ...  so  that  they  are  become  the
chief  channels  of  amusement  and  intelligence.'  ^  '  The
people  of  Great  Britain,'  said  Mr.  Dan  vers  in  1738,
'  are  governed  by  a  power  that  never  was  heard  of  as  a
supreme  authority  in  any  age  or  country  before.  .  .  .
It  is  the  government  of  the  Press.  The  stuff  which  our
weekly  newspapers  are  filled  with  is  received  with  greater
reverence  than  Acts  of  Parliament,  and  the  sentiments
of  one  of  these  scribblers  have  more  weight  with  the
multitude  than  the  opinion  of  the  best  politician  in  the
kingdom.'  ^  '  No  species  of  literary  men,'  wrote  Dr.
Johnson  in  1758,  'has  lately  been  so  much  multiplied
as  the  writers  of  news.  Not  many  years  ago  the  nation
was  content  with  one  Gazette,  but  now  we  have  not
only  in  the  metropolis,  papers  of  every  morning  and
every  evening,  but  almost  every  large  town  has  its
weekly  historian.'  ^  One  of  the  consequences  of  the
complete  subjection  of  literary  men  to  the  booksellers
was  the  creation  of  magazines,  which  afforded  a  more
certain  and  rapid  remuneration  than  books,  and  gave
many  writers  a  scanty  and  precarious  subsistence.  The
'Gentleman's  Magazine'  appeared  in  1731.  It  was
speedily  followed  by  its  rival,  the  '  London  Magazine  ; '
and  in  1750  thei^e  were  eight  periodicals  of  this  kind.
In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  also,  literary
reviews  began  in  England.  In  1752  there  were  three —
the  '  Literary,'  the  '  Critical,'  and  the  '  Monthly.'  The
stamp  duty  and  the  advertisement  duty  established
under  Anne  still  remained,  and  under  George  II.  an
additional  tax  of  ^d.  had  been  imposed  on  newspapers,
and  an  additional  duty  of  a  shilling  on  advertisements  ;
but  the  demand  for  this  form  of  literature  was  so  great

'  Advertisement to the first  ^  Pari.  Hist.  x.  448.

nnmheroiih.e  Gentleman' sMaga-  ^  The  Idler,  "No.  BO.

zine.

CH.  V.  COAR.sENESS OF MANNERS.  153

that  these  impositions  do  not  appear  to  have  seriously
checked  it.^  The  essay  writers  had  made  it  their  great
object  as  much  as  possible  to  popularise  and  difl'use
knowledge,  and  to  bring  down  every  question  to  a  level
with  the  capacities  of  the  idlest  reader ;  and  without
any  great  change  in  education,  any  display  of  extra-
ordinary genius,  or  any  real  enthusiasm  for  knowledge,
the  circle  of  intelligence  was  slowly  enlarged.  The
progress  was  probably  even  greater  among  women  than
among  men.  Swift,  in  one  of  his  latest  letters,  noticed
the  great  improvement  which  had  taken  place  during
his  lifetime  in  the  education  and  in  the  writing  of
ladies  ;  ^  and  it  is  to  this  period  that  some  of  the  best
female  correspondence  in  our  literature  belongs.

The  prevailing  coarseness,  however,  of  fashionable
life  and  sentiment  was  but  little  mitigated.  The  writ-
ings of  Swift,  Defoe,  Fielding,  Coventry,  and  Smollett
are  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  great  difierence  which  in
this  respect  separated  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  from  our  own  day,  and  unlike  Anne,  the  first
two  Hanoverian  sovereigns  did  nothing  to  improve  the
prevailing  tone.  Each  king  lived  publicly  with  mis-
tresses, and  the  immorality  of  their  Courts  was  accom-
panied by  nothing  of  that  refinement  or  grace  which  has
often  cast  a  softening  veil  over  much  deeper  and  more
general  corruption.  On  this  subject  the  vivid  and  un-
doubtedly authentic  picture  of  the  Court  of  George  II.
which  is  furnished  by  Lord  Hervey  enables  us  to  speak
with  much  confidence.  Few  figures  in  the  history  of
the  time  are  more  worthy  of  study  than  that  shrewd  and

'  See,  on  the  History  of  News-  nalism. Madden's  Uisi.  of  Irish

papers,  Chalmers'  Life  of  Buddi-  Periodical  Literature. Wright's

man. Nichols' Literary  Anec-  England  under the House of

dotes  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  Hanover.

vol.  iv. Hunt's  Fourth  Estate.  -  Mrs. Delany's Corresi^on-

Andrews'  Hist,  of  British  Jour-  dence,  i.  551.

154 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch,  v.

coarse-minded  Queen,  who  by  such  infinite  adroitness,
and  by  such  amazing  condescensions,  succeeded  in  ob-
taining insensibly  a  complete  command  over  the  mind  of
her  husband,  and  a  powerful  influence  over  the  politics
of  England.  Living  herself  a  life  of  unsullied  virtue,
discharging  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  difficulty
the  duties  of  a  wife  with  the  most  exemplary  patience
and  diligence,  exercising  her  great  influence  in  Church
and  State  with  singular  wisdom,  patriotism,  and  bene-
volence, she  passed  through  life  jesting  on  the  vices  of
her  husband  and  of  his  ministers  with  the  coarseness  of
a  trooper,  receiving  from  her  husband  the  earliest  and
fullest  accounts  of  every  new  love  afiair  in  which  he
was  engaged,  and  prepared  to  welcome  each  new  mis-
tress, provided  only  she  could  herself  keep  the  first  place
in  his  judgment  and  in  his  confidence.  The  character
of  their  relation  remained  unbroken  to  the  end.  No
stranger  death  scene  was  ever  painted  than  that  of
Caroline,^  nor  can  we  easily  find  a  more  striking  illus-
tration of  the  inconsistencies  of  human  nature  than  that
a  woman  so  coarse  and  cynical  in  her  judgments  of
others  should  have  herself  died  a  victim  of  an  excessive
and misplaced  delicacy.^ The works of  Richardson,

'  The  Queenhad  always  wished  mon  Dieu  1  cela  n'empeche  pas."

the  King  to  marry  again. '  She  I  know  this  episode  will  hardly

had  often  said  so  when  he  was  becredited,  but  it  is  literally  true.'

present  and  when  he  was  not  pre-  — Lord Hervey's Meinoirs, ii.

sent,  and  when  she  was  in  health,  513,  514.

and  gave  it  now,  as  her  advice  to  "  She  had  for  fourteen  years

him  when  she  was  dying  ;  upon  suffered from a rupture  which

which  his  sobs  began  to  rise,  and  she  could not bring  herself  to

his  tears  to  fall  with  double  ve-  reveal except to her  husband,

hemence. Whilst in  the  midst  When  on  her  death-bed,  and  suf-

of  this  passion,  wiping  his  eyes  fering extreme agony,  she still

and  sobbing  between  every  word,  concealed  it  from  her  doctors,  and

with  much  ado  he  got out  this  it was contrary to her ardent

answer:  "Non,  j'aurai  des  mai-  wish  that the  King,  too  late  to

tresses." To  which  the Queen  save  her,  told  them  of  her  com-

made  no  other  reply  than  :  "  Ah,  plaint. Lord  Hervey,  ii.  505,  506.

CH.  V.  COARSENESS — GAMBLING.  155

which  appeared  between  1740  and  1753,  and  which
at  once  attained  an  extraordinary  popularity,  probably
contributed  something  to  refine  the  tone  of  society,  but
the  improvement  was  not  very  perceptible  till  the  reign
of  George  III.  Sir  Walter  Scott,  in  a  well-known
anecdote,  has  illustrated  very  happily  the  change  that
had  taken  place.  He  tells  us  that  a  grand-aunt  of  his
own  assured  him  that  the  novels  of  Aphra  Behn  were
as  current  upon  the  toilet  table  in  her  youth  as  the
novels  of  Miss  Edgeworth  in  her  old  age,  and  he  has
described  very  vividly  the  astonishment  of  his  old  re-
lative when,  curiosity  leading  her,  after  a  long  interval
of  years,  to  turn  over  the  forgotten  pages  she  had  de-
lighted in  when  young,  she  found  that,  sitting  alone  at
the  age  of  eighty,  she  was  unable  to  read  without  shame
a  book,  which  sixty  years  before  she  had  heard  read  out
for  amusement  in  large  circles  consisting  of  the  best
society  in  London.^

In  one  respect  during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  there  was  a  marked  deterioration.  The  passion
for  gambling,  which  had  been  very  prevalent  since  the  Re-
storation, appears  to  have  attained  its  climax  under  the
first  two  Georges.  It  had  been  very  considerably  stimu-
lated by  the  madness  of  speculation  which  infected  all
classes  during  the  South  Sea  mania.  That  desire  to
make  rapid  fortunes,  that  contempt  for  the  slow  and
steady  gains  of  industry,  which  has  in  our  own  day  so
often  produced  the  wildest  combinations  of  recklessness
and  credulity,  was  never  more  apparent.  Scheme  after
scheme  of  the  most  fantastic  description  rose,  and  glit-
tered, and  burst.  Companies  for  '  Fishing  up  Wrecks
on  the  Irish  Coast,'  for  '  Insurance  against  Losses  by
Servants,'  for  'Making  Salt  Water  Fresh,'  for  'Ex-
tracting Silver  from Lead,' for  '  Tran^imuting  Quick-

>  Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott,  v.  136,  137.

156 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  v.

silver  into  Malleable  and  Fine  Metal,'  for  '  Importing
Jackasses  from  Spain,'  for  '  Trading  in  Human  Hair,'
for  '  A  Wheel  for  Perpetual  Motion,'  as  well  as  many
others,  attracted  crowds  of  eager  subscribers.  One  pro-
jector announced  a  Company  '  for  an  undertaking  which
shall  in  due  time  be  revealed,'  each  subscriber  to  pay  at
once  two  guineas,  and  afterwards  to  receive  a  share  of  a
hundred,  with  a  disclosure  of  the  object.  In  a  single
morning  he  received  2,000  guineas,  with  which  he  im-
mediately decamped.^

It  was  natural  that  this  passion  for  speculation
should  have  stimulated  the  taste  for  gambling  in  private
life.  It  had  long  been  inveterate  among  the  upper
classes,  and  it  soon  rose  to  an  unprecedented  height.
The  chief,  or  at  least  the  most  prominent,  centre  was
White's  chocolate-house.  Swift  tells  us  that  Lord  Ox-
ford never  passed  it  without  bestowing  on  it  a  curse  as
'  the  bane  of  the  English  nobility ; '  and  it  continued
during  the  greater  part  of  the  century  to  be  the  scene
of  the  wildest  and  most  extravagant  gambling.  It  was,
however,  only  the  most  prominent  among  many  similar
establishments  which  sprang  up  around  Charing  Cross,
Leicester  Fields,  and  Golden  Square.  The  Duke  of
Devonshire  lost  an  estate  at  a  game  of  basset.  The  fine
intellect  of  Chesterfield  was  thoroughly  enslaved  by  the
vice.  At  Bath,  which  was  then  the  centre  of  English
fashion,  it  reigned  supreme;  and  the  physicians  even
recommended  it  to  their  patients  as  a  form  of  distraction.
In  the  green-rooms  of  the  theatres,  as  Mrs.  Bellamy
assures  us,  thousands  were  often  lost  and  won  in  a
single  night.  Among  fashionable  ladies  the  passion
was  quite  as  strong  as  among  men,  and  the  professor
of  whist  and  quadrille  became  a  regular  attendant  at
their  levees. Miss  Pelham,  the  daughter  of  the  prime

Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  iii.

CH.  V.  LOTTERIES.  157

minister,  was  one  of  the  most  notorious  gamblers  of  her
time,  and  Lady  Cowper  speaks  in  her '  Diary '  of  sittings
at  Oom-t  at  which  the  lowest  stake  was  200  guineas.
The  public  lotteries  contributed  very  powerfully  to  dif-
fuse the  taste  for  gambling  among  all  classes.  They
had  begun  in  England  in  the  seventeenth  century ;  and
though  more  than  once  forbidden,  they  enabled  the
Government  to  raise  money  with  so  little  unpopularity
that  they  were  again  resorted  to.  '  I  cannot  forbear
telling  you,'  wrote  Addison  to  an  Irish  friend  in  1711,
'  that  last  week  I  drew  a  prize  of  1,000^.  in  the  lottery.'  ^
Fielding  wrote  a  satire  on  the  passion  for  lotteries  pre-
valent in  his  time.  The  discovery  of  some  gross  frauds
in  their  management  contributed  to  throw  them  into
discredit,  and  Pelham  is  said  to  have  expressed  some
disapproval  of  them,  but  they  were  not  finally  suppressed
in  England  till  1823.  Westminster  Bridge,  which  was
begun  in  1736,  was  built  chiefly  from  the  produce  of
lotteries.  Another  instance  of  their  employment  is
deserving  of  special  remembrance,  for  it  is  connected
with  the  origin  of  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  London
institutions.  In  1753  lotteries  were  established  to  pur-
chase the  Sloane  collection  and  the  Harleian  manuscripts,
which  were  combined  with  the  Cottonian  collection,  and
deposited  in  Montague  House  under  the  name  of  the
British  Museum.^

Concerning  the  amusements  and  social  life  of  the
upper  classes,  I  shall  content  myself  with  making  a  few
somewhat  miscellaneous  observations.  The  subject  is  a
very  lai'ge  one,  and  it  would  require  volumes  to  exhaust
it ;  but  it  is,  I  think,  possible  to  select  from  the  mass  of

'  Addison  to  Jos.  Dawson.  mann's  Hist,  of  Inventions,  ii.
(Dec.  18,  1711)  Departmental  423-429.  The  passion  for  gam-
Correspondence.  Irish  State  Paper  bling  in  England  appears  in  all
Office.  the correspondence and other

•^  Macpherson,  iii.  300. Beck-  light  literature  of  the  time.

158 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

details  a  few  facts  which  are  not  without  a  real  historic
importance,  as  indicating  the  tendencies  of  taste,  and  thus
throwing  some  light  on  the  moral  history  of  the  nation.
It  was  said  that  the  Revolution  brought  four  tastes
into  England,  two  of  which  were  chiefly  due  to  Mary,
and  two  to  her  husband.  To  Mary  was  due  a  pas-
sion for  coloured  East  Indian  calicoes,  which  speedily
spread  through  all  classes  of  the  community,  and  also  a
passion  for  rare  and  eccentric  porcelain,  which  con-
tinued for  some  generations  to  be  a  favourite  topic  with
the  satirists.  William,  on  his  side,  set  the  fashion  of
picture-collecting,  and  gave  a  great  impulse  to  garden-
ing. ^  This  latter  taste,  which  forms  one  of  the  healthi-
est elements  in  English  country  Kfe,  attained  its  height
in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  it  took  a
form  which  was  entirely  new.  In  the  reign  of  Charles  II.
the  parks  of  Greenwich  and  St.  James  had  been  laid
out  by  the  great  French  gardener  Le  Notre,  and  the
taste  which  he  made  general  in  Europe  reigned  in  its
most  exaggerated  form  in  England.  It  appeared  to  be
a  main  object  to  compel  nature  to  recede  as  far  as  possi-
ble, to  repress  every  irregularity,  to  make  the  human
hand  apparent  in  every  shrub,  and  to  convert  garden-
ing into  an  anomalous  form  of  sculpture.  The  trees
were  habitually  carved  into  cones,  or  pyramids,  or  globes,
into  smooth,  even  walls,  or  into  fantastic  groups  of  men
and  animals.  The  flower-beds  were  laid  out  symme-
trically in  architectural  figures.  Long,  straight,  and
formal  alleys,  a  perfect  uniformity  of  design,  and  a  con-
stant recurrence  of  similar  forms,  were  essential  to  a
well-arranged  garden.  The  passion  for  gardening,  how-
ever, at  this  time  took  some  root  in  England,  and  the
writings  of  Evelyn  did  much  to  extend  it.  William
introduced  the  fashion  of  masses  of  clipped  yews  form-

'  Defoe's  Tour  through  Great  Britain,  i.  121-124.

CH.  V.  GARDENING.  159

ing  the  avenue  or  shading  the  approaches  of  the  house,
and  of  imposing  iron  gates.  Sir  William  Temple,  in
his  essay  '  On  the  Garden  of  Epicurus,'  accurately  re-
flected the  prevailing  taste.  But  early  in  the  eighteenth
century  two  great  gardeners — Bridgeman,  who  died  in
1737,  and  Kent,  who  died  in  1748 — originated  a  new
form  of  landscape  gardening,  which  speedily  acquired
an  almost  universal  popularity.  They  utterly  discarded
all  vegetable  sculpture  and  all  symmetry  of  design,  gave
free  scope  to  the  wild,  luxuriant,  and  irregular  beauties
of  nature,  and  made  it  their  aim  to  reproduce,  as  far  as
possible,  in  a  small  compass  its  variety  and  its  freedom.
The  essay  in  which  Bacon  had  urged  that  one  part  of
a  garden  should  be  made  an  imitation  of  unrestricted
nature,  the  description  of  Paradise  in  Milton,  and  the
description  of  the  garden  of  Armida  in  Tasso,  were  cited
as  foreshadowing  the  change,  and  at  a  later  period  the
poetry  of  Thomson  undoubtedly  contributed  to  sustain
it.  Addison  and  Pope  laid  out  their  gardens  on  the
new  plan,  and  defended  it  with  their  pens,*  and  the
latter  is  said  to  have  greatly  assisted  Kent  by  his  advice.
Spence  and  Horace  Walpole  were  enthusiastic  disciples.^
The  new  system  was  made  the  subject  of  a  graceful
poem  by  Mason,  and  of  an  ingenious  essay  by  Shenstone,
and  in  1770  appeared  Whately's  '  Observations  on
Modem  Gardening,'  which  was  the  first  considerable
standard  work  in  England  upon  the  subject.  The  gar-
dens of  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  Carlton  House  were  imi-
tated from  that  of  Pope  at  Twickenham.^ Kensington

'  See Addison's papers in  See,  too,  his  Life  of  Kent. See

Spectator,  Nos. 414, 477, and  also,  on  the  spread  of  the  taste,

Pope's very  curious paper in  Angeloni's  Letters  an  the  English

Guardian,  No. 173. See,  too,  Nation,  ii.  266-274.

Pope's  Moral  Essays,  Ep.  4.  ^  Walpole  on  Modern  Garden-

-  Spence's Anecdotes, xxxi.  ing.
Walpole  on  Modern  Gardening.

160 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  V.

Gardens  were  laid  out  by  Kent  on  the  new  plan,  as  well
as  the  gardens  of  Olaremont  and  Esher,  those  of  Lord
Burlington  at  Chiswick,  and  those  of  Lord  Cobham  at
Stowe.

The  example  was  speedily  followed,  and  often  exag-
gerated,^ in  every  part  of  England,  and  the  revolution
of  taste  was  accompanied  by  a  great  increase  in  the
love  of  gardening.  In  the  beginning  of  the  century
there  were  probably  not  more  than  1,000  species  of
exotics  in  England,  but  before  its  close  more  than
5,000  new  kinds  were  introduced.  When  Miller
published  the  first  edition  of  his  '  Dictionary  of  Gar-
dening' in  1724,  only  twelve  species  of  evergreens  were
grown  in  the  island,  and  the  number  of  the  plants
cultivated  in  England  is  said  to  have  more  than  doubled
between  1731  and  1768.^  Very  many  were  introduced
from  Madeira,  and  the  West  Indies,  which  had  been
explored  by  Sir  Hans  Sloane,  and  from  the  American
colonies,  which  had  been  explored  by  several  indepen-
dent investigators ;  and  the  taste  for  botany  was  still
more  diffused  by  the  long  controversies  that  followed
the  publication  in  1735  of  the  great  discovery  of
Linnffius  about  the  sexual  nature  of  plants.^  Land-
scape gardening  is  said  to  have  been  introduced  into
Ireland  by  Dr.  Delany,  the  friend  of  Swift,  and  into
Scotland  by  Lord  Karnes,^  but  both  countries  remained
in  this  respect  far  behind  England.  At  Edinburgh
a  botanical  garden  appears  to  have  existed  as  early
as  1680.5 In  Ireland  a  florists'  club  was  established

'  See,  on  these  exaggerations,  ^  Miller's Retrospect of the

The World, Nos. 6, 15. The  Eighteenth Century, i. 163-

taste  was  carried  so  far  that  dead  188.

trees were sometimes planted,  ■*  Loudon's  Encyclojpcedia,  pp.

and every straight walk con-  2G9,  273.

demned.  '-•  Pnlteney's  Progress  of  Botany

-  Loudon's Encyclopcedia of  in  England,  ii.  4.
Gardening,  pp.  276,  277.

CH,  V.  ARCHITECTURE AND PAINTING.  161

by  some  Huguenot  refugees  in  the  reign  of  George  I.,
but  it  met  with  no  encouragement  and  speedily  ex-
pired. ^  An  Englishman  named  Threlkeld,  who  was
settled  in  Dublin,  published,  in  1727,  '  A  Synopsis  of
Irish  Plants  ; '  and  another  work,  entitled  '  Botanologia
Universalis  Hibernica,  or  a  general  Irish  Herbal,'  was
published  in  1735  by  a  writer  named  Keogh.^  In  Eng-
land the  love  for  gardens  and  for  botany  continually
extended,  and  it  forms  one  of  the  most  remarkable
features  in  the  history  of  national  tastes  during  the
first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.

The  poet  Gray,  in  a  letter  written  in  1763,  observes
that  '  our  skill  in  gardening  or  laying  out  grounds  is  the
only  taste  we  can  call  our  own,  the  only  proof  of  original
talent  in  matters  of  pleasure.'  In  architecture,  it  is
true,  England  had  produced  one  or  two  respectable
and  one  really  great  name  ;  and  the  Fire  of  London
had  given  Wren  a  noble  field  for  the  display  of  his
genius,  but  in  other  departments  of  art  there  was  an
almost  absolute  blank.  Few  questions  in  history  are
more  perplexing,  and  perhaps  insoluble,  than  the  causes
which  govern  the  great  manifestations  of  aesthetic  genius.
Germany,  which  up  to  the  time  of  the  Reformation  was
in  this  respect  peculiarly  prolific — Germany,  which  is
now  pre-eminently  the  land  of  artistic  criticism,  and
which  ranks  high  in  artistic  production — can  scarcely
be  said  to  have  produced  a  single  painter  of  real  genius
during  the  long  period  that  elapsed  between  the  death  of
Holbein  and  the  dawn  of  the  nineteenth  century.  France,
the  richest,  the  most  cultivated,  the  most  luxurious
nation  on  the  Continent,  in  spite  of  a  munificent
royal  patronage  of  art,  was  during  the  same  period  but
little  more  successful. Many  very  considerable  artists,

'Loudon's Encyclo;pcedia,  p.  ^  Pulteney'sProp'resso/Boianj/

282.  in  England,  ii.  197-201.

VOL. II.  M

]  62  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

no  doubt,  arose;  but  yet  the  nation  which  appears
beyond  all  others  to  possess  the  gift  of  grace  and  deli-
cacy of  touch,  which  has  created  the  Gobehns  tapestry
and  the  Sevres  china,  and  has  governed  through  a
long  succession  of  generations  the  taste  of  Europe,
could  boast  of  no  painter  except  Claude  Lorraine,
who  had  taken  absolutely  a  foremost  place;  and  its
art  was  far  inferior  to  that  which  grew  up  in  more  than
one  small  Italian  province,  among  the  canals  of  Hol-
land, or  in  the  old  cities  of  Flanders.  But  of  all  the
great  civilised  nations,  England  in  this  respect  ranked
the  last.  Dobson,  indeed,  who  had  been  brought  for-
ward by  the  patronage  of  Vandyck,  and  who  died  at
the  early  age  of  thirty-six,  showed  some  real  talent  for
portrait-painting,  and  Oliver,  Hilliard,  and  Cooper  some
skill  in  miniature ;  but  still,  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  not  a  single  English  painter  or
sculptor  had  taken  a  permanent  place  in  European  art,
and  the  number  of  painters,  even  of  third  or  fourth  rate
excellence,  was  very  small.  The  principal,  and,  indeed,
the  most  congenial,  employment  of  the  British  artist
appears  to  have  been  the  production  of  the  gaudy  sign-
boards which  nearly  every  shopkeeper  was  then  accus-
tomed to  hang  out  before  his  door.'

This  complete  barrenness  of  British  art  is  in  many
ways  remarkable.  No  real  deficiency  of  imagination
can  be  attributed  to  a  nation  which  has  produced  the
noblest  poetic  literature  in  Christendom;  and  some-
thing had  been  done  to  stimulate  artistic  taste.  Henry
VIII.,  Elizabeth,  and  above  all,  Charles  I,,  had  warmly
patronised  art,  and  the  latter  was  one  of  the  two
greatest  collectors  of  his  time.  He  purchased  the
cartoons  of  Raphael  and  the  whole  collection  of  the
Duke  of  Mantua, which  was  then  the  most valuable

'  Spectator,  No.  28.

CH.  V.  PAINTING.  163

in  Europe.  He  drew  over  to  England  both  Rubens
and  Vandyck,  and  his  competition  with  Philip  IV.  of
Spain  was  so  keen  that  it  is  said  to  have  tripled  the
ordinary  price  of  the  works  of  the  great  artists.^  In  the
early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  English  were
already  famous  for  their  assiduity  in  haunting  the
galleries  in  Italy,^  and  for  their  zeal  in  collecting
pictures  ;  and  their  aristocracy  possessed  ampie  wealth
to  enable  them  to  gratify  their  desires.  Catholicism  is,
no  doubt,  more  favourable  to  art  than  Protestantism  ;
but  if  the  change  of  religion  had  in  some  degree  im-
paired the  appreciation  of  Italian  or  Spanish  art,  the
English  were  at  least  in  intimate  connection  with  Hol-
land, where  a  noble  school  existed  which  was  essentially
the  creation  of  Protestantism.  A  few  Italian  and  a
long  succession  of  Dutch  and  Flemish  artists  visited
England.  It  possessed,  indeed,  an  admirable  school
of  painting,  but  it  was  a  school  which  was  represented
almost  exclusively  by  foreigners,  by  Holbein,  Rubens,
Vandyck,  Lely,  and  Kneller.  Foreign  writers  were
accustomed  to  attribute  the  utter  absence  of  native
talent  in  art  to  the  aspect  of  physical  nature,  and
especially  to  the  turbid  and  depressing  gloom  of  a
northern  sky ;  but  the  explanation  will  hardly  appear
sufficient  to  those  who  remember  that  Rembrandt,  Van
der  Heist,  Potter,  Gerard  Dow,  Cuyp,  and  many  other
artists  of  consummate  power,  grew  up  beneath  a  sky
that  is  scarcely  brighter  than  that  of  England,  and  in
a  country  much  less  eminently  endowed  with  natural
"beauty.

I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  fully  this  deficiency,  but
several  partial solutions may be given. Puritanism

'  Du  Bos,  Reflexions  critiques dotes  of  Painting,  ch.  ix.
sur  la  poisie  et  sur  la  peinUire,  •  Ibid,

ii.  152  (1733). Walpole's  Anec-

M  2

164 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  V.

was  exceedingly  inimical  to  art,  and  the  Parliament  in
1645  ordered  that  the  pictures  in  the  royal  collection
containing  representations  of  the  Second  Person  of  the
Trinity,  or  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  should  be  burnt,  and
that  all  the  other  pictures  collected  by  Charles  should
be  sold.  Fortunately  this  very  characteristic  edict  was
not  fully  complied  with.  Cromwell  succeeded  in  saving
the  cartoons  of  Raphael  and  other  less  important
pictures  for  England  and  the  world ;  but  a  great
portion  of  the  art  treasures  of  the  King  were  dispersed.
Many  of  his  finest  pictures  found  their  way  to  the
Escurial,  and  a  ply  which  was  exceedingly  hostile  to
art  was  given  to  a  large  part  of  the  English  people.  In
order  that  the  artistic  capacities  of  a  nation  should  be
largely  developed,  it  is  necessary  that  the  great  body
of  the  people  should  come  in  frequent  contact  with
artistic  works,  and  that  there  should  be  institutions
securing  the  means  of  artistic  education.  Both  of  these
conditions  were  wanting  in  England.  In  ancient  Greece
and  in  modern  Florence  all  classes  of  the  community
had  the  opportunity  of  becoming  familiar  with  the
noblest  works  of  the  chisel  or  of  the  pencil ;  their  taste
was  thus  gradually  educated,  and  any  artistic  genius
that  was  latent  among  them  was  awakened.  But  in
England  by  far  the  greater  number  of  works  of  art
were  in  private  hands,  while  Sabbatarian  prejudices  and
the  division  of  classes  produced  by  an  aristocratic  tone
of  manners,  effectually  excluded  the  great  mass  of  the
people  from  the  small  number  of  paintings  that  were  in
public  institutions.  Annual  exhibitions  were  as  yet
unknown.^ The  country  habits  of  the  English  nobility

'  According  to  Pye,  the  first  and  other  artists followed  his

public exhibition of British  example. In  1759  a  meeting  of

Works of  Art  was about  1740,  artists  resolved  to  establish  an

when  Hogarth  presented  a  por-  annual exhibition, and in the

trait  to  the  Foundling  Hospital,  following  year  they,  for  the  first

CH.  V.  PAINTING.  165

turned  their  tastes  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  field-sports
and  other  outdoor  pursuits,  and  art  never  occupied  the
same  prominence  in  their  lives  as  it  did  in  those  of  the
Cardinals  of  Rome,  or  of  the  rich  merchants  of  Florence,
Venice,  and  Amsterdam.  The  same  passion  for  a  coun-
try life  induced  most  of  those  who  were  real  collectors
to  accumulate  their  treasures  in  their  country  houses,
where  they  were  seen  only  by  a  few  private  friends,  and
were  utterly  without  influence  on  the  nation  at  large.
In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  England  was
already  very  rich  in  private  collections,^  but  the  pro-
portion of  Englishmen  who  had  ever  looked  at  a  good
picture  or  a  good  statue  was  very  small.  Nor  were
there  any  means  of  artistic  education.

At  Paris  the  Royal  Academy  of  Painting  and  Sculp-
ture was  established  as  early  as  1648,  and  in  1665  Col-
bert founded  that  admirable  institution,  the  French
Academy  at  Rome,  for  the  purpose  of  providing  young
artists  with  the  best  possible  instruction.  In  England
nothing  of  the  kind  existed,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century  a  poor  student  of  art  could  find  no
assistance  except  by  private  patronage.  The  first  two
Georges  were  absolutely  indifferent  to  art,  and  although
a  fashion  of  collecting  pictures  had  spread  very  widely
among  the  English  aristocracy,  their  patronage  was
neither  generous  nor  intelligent.  It  was  observed  that
portrait-painting,  which  touched  another  sentiment  be-
sides love  of  pure  art,  was  the  only  form  that  was  really
encouraged.  Painter  after  painter,  distinguished  in
other  branches,  came  over  to  England,  but  they  invari-

time, carried their intention  the  chief  pictures  contained  in

into  effect. — Pye's  Patronage  of  them will be  found  in  a  book

British  Art,  p.  286.  called  The  English  Connoisseur :

'  A  list  of  the  chief  collections  an  account  of  whatever  is  curiotcs

in  England  in  1766  is  given  in  in  painting  and  sculpture  in  the

Pye's  Patronage  of  British  Art,  palaces  and  seats  of  the  nohility

pp.  145,  146,  and  catalogues  of  and  gentry  of  England  (1766).

166 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  V.

ably  found  that  they  could  succeed  only  by  devoting
themselves  to  the  one  department  which  appealed  di-
rectly to  the  vanity  of  their  patrons. ^  'Painters  of
history,'  said  Kneller,  '  make  the  dead  live,  but  do  not
begin  to  live  themselves  till  they  are  dead.  I  paint  the
living,  and  they  make  me  live.'  Hogarth  described
portrait-painting  as  '  the  only  flourishing  branch  of  the
high  tree  of  British  art.'  Barry  complained  that  '  the
difficulty  of  subsisting  by  any  other  species  of  art  .  .  .
and  the  love  of  ease  and  affluence  had  so  operated  upon
our  youth  that  the  country  had  been  filled  with  this
species  of  artist.'  The  Dutch  portrait-painter  Vanloo,
who  came  to  London  in  1737,  was  so  popular  that,  as  a
nearly  contemporary  writer  tells  us,  '  for  several  weeks
after  his  arrival,  the  train  of  carriages  at  his  door  was
like  that  at  the  door  of  a  theatre.  He  had  some  hun-
dreds of  portraits  begun,  and  was  obliged  to  give  as
many  as  five  sittings  in  a  day.  Large  bribes  were  given
by  many  to  the  man  who  kept  the  register  of  his  engage-
ments, in  order  to  accelerate  their  sittings,  and  when
that  was  not  done,  it  was  often  necessary  to  wait  six

'  '  No  painter,  however  excel-  painters  for  drapery  and  other
lent,  can  succeed  among  the  Eng-  parts.'  — Angeloni's  Letters  on
lish,  that  is  not  engaged  in  paint-  the  English  (2nd  ed.  1756),  i.
ing  portraits.  Canaletti,  whose  97.  So,  too,  Amiconi,  a  Vene-
works  they  admired  whilst  he  tian  historical  painter,  came  to
resided  at  Venice,  at  his  coming  England  in  1729,  and  tried  for  a
to  London  had  not  in  a  whole  time  to  maintain  a  position  by
year  the  employment  of  three  his  own  form  of  art,  '  but,'  says
months.  Watteau,  whose  pic-  Horace  Walpole,  '  as  portraiture
tures  are  sold  at  such  great  prices  is  the  one  thing  necessary  to  a
at  present,  painted  never  a  pic-  painter  in  this  country,  he  was
ture  but  two  which  he  gave  to  obhged  to  betake  himself  to  that
Dr.  Mead,  during  the  time  he  re-  employment  much  against  his  in-
sided  here.  At  the  same  time,  clinaXion:  —  Anecdotes  of  Paint-
Vanloo,  who  came  hither  with  ing.  See,  too,  Dallaway's  Pro-
the  reputation  of  painting  por-  gress  of  the  Arts  in  England,
traits  very  well,  was  obliged  to  pp.  455-461.
keep three or four subaltern

CH.  V.  HOGARTH.  167

weeks.' Vanloo  remained  in  England  only  four  years,
but  is  said  to  have  accumulated  in  that  time  consider-
able wealth.^ On  the  other  hand,  it  is  very  remarkable
that,  in the  next generation,  Wilson,  the  first great
English  landscape-painter,  and  Barry,  the  first  historical
painter  of  real  talent,  were  both  of  them  unable  to  earn
even  a  small  competence,  and  both  of  them  died  in  ex-
treme poverty. Vertue,  who  died  in  1756,  carried  the
art  of  engraving to  considerable perfection,  and  was
followed  by  Strange,  Boydell,  and  a  few  other  native
engravers. Kneller, and afterwards Thornhill,  made
some  attempts in  the  first  quarter  of  the  century  to
maintain  a  private  academy  in  England  for  artistic  in-
struction, but  they  appear  to  have  met  with  little  en-
couragement, and  the  reign  of  George  I.  is  on  the  whole
one  of  the  darkest  periods  in  the  history  of  English  art.
Early  in  the  next  reign,  however,  a  painter  of  great
and  original  genius  emerged  from  obscurity,  who,  in  a
low  form  of  art,  attained  a  high,  and  almost  a  supreme,
perfection. William  Hogarth  was  born  in  London,  of
obscure  parents,  in  1698. His  early  years  were  chiefly
passed  in engraving  arms,  shop  bills,  and  plates for
books. He  then painted portraits, some  of  them  of
singular  beauty,  and  occasionally  furnished  designs  for
tapestry. In  1730  he  secretly  married  the  daughter  of
Sir  James  Thornhill,  the  fasliionable  artist  of  the  day,
and  in  1731  he  completed  his  '  Harlot's  Progress,' which
proved  to  all  good  judges  that,  for  the  first  time,  a  really
great  native  painter  had  arisen  in  England. Had  his
genius  been  of  a  higher  order,  he  would  probably  have
been  less  successful. He  had  little  charm  of  colouring
or  sense  of  beauty,  and  no  power  of  idealising  nature ;
but  his  rare  gifts  of  invention  and  of  humour,  the  intense
realism,  homeliness  and  truth  of  his  pictures  of  English

Bouquet,  UEtat  des  Arts  en  Angleterre,  pp.  59,  60.

168 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

life,  and  the  excellent  morals  they  invariably  conveyed,
appealed  to  all  classes,  while  their  deep  and  various
meaning,  and  the  sombre  imagination  he  sometimes
threw  over  his  conceptions,^  raised  them  far  above  the
level  of  the  mere  grotesque.  The  popularity  of  his
designs  was  such  that  they  were  immensely  imitated,
and  it  was  found  necessary  to  pass  an  Act  of  Parlia-
ment, in  1735,  vesting  an  exclusive  right  in  designers
and  engravers,  and  restraining  the  multiplying  of  copies
of  works  without  the  consent  of  the  aitist.^  In  the
same  reign  sculpture  in  England  was  largely  pursued
by  Rysbrack,  a  native  of  Antwerp,  and  by  Roubiliac,
a  native  of  Lyons.

The  taste  for  music  was  more  widely  diffused  than
that  for  painting ;  but  although  it  made  rapid  progress
in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  this  was
in  no  degree  due  to  native  talent.  A  distinguished
French  critic^  has  noticed,  as  one  of  the  most
striking  of  the  many  differences  between  the  two
great  branches  of  the  Teutonic  race,  that,  among  all
modern  civilised  nations,  the  Germans  are  probably  the
most  eminent,  and  the  English  the  most  deficient,  in
musical  talent.  Up  to  the  close  of  the  seventeenth
century,  however,  this  distinction  did  not  exist,  and
England  might  fairly  claim  a  very  resjDectable  rank
among  musical  nations.  No  feature  in  the  poetry  of
Shakespeare  or  Milton  is  more  remarkable  than  the
exquisite  and  delicate  appreciation  of  music  they  con-
tinually evince,  and  the  musical  dramas  known  under
the  name  of  masques,  which  were  so  popular  from  the
time  of  Ben  Jonson  to  the  time  of  the  Rebellion,  kept
up  a  general  taste  for  the  art. Henry Lawes,  who

>  See  e.g.  that  noble  sketch—  ^  8 Geo. II. c. 13. Nichols'

the  last he ever drew — called Memoirs  of  Hogarth,  p.  37.
'Finis.'  '  Eenan.

CH.T.  MUSIC.  169

composed  the  music  for  '  Comus,'  as  well  as  edited  the
poem,  and  to  whom  Milton  has  paid  a  beautiful  com-
pliment,^ was  conspicuous  as  a  composer.  Blow,  in  the
last  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  contributed  much
to  Church  music ;  but  the  really  great  name  in  English
music  was  Henry  Purcell,  who  was  born  in  1658,  and
died  in  1697,  and  who,  in  the  opinion  of  many  com-
petent judges,  deserves  to  rank  among  the  very  greatest
composers  who  had  up  to  that  date  arisen  in  Europe.
In  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  however,
music  was  purely  an  exotic.  The  capital  fact  of  this
period  was  the  introduction  and  great  popularity  of
the  Italian  opera.  Operas  on  the  Italian  model  first
appeared  in  England  in  1705.  They  were  at  first  sung
in  English,  and  by  English  performers  ;  but  soon  after,
some  Italian  castrati  having  come  over,  the  principal
characters  in  the  dialogue  sang  in  Italian,  while  the
subordinate  characters  answered  in  English.  After
two  or  three  years,  this  absurdity  passed  away,  and  the
operas  became  wholly  Italian.  In  1710  the  illustrious
Handel  first  came  to  England,  and  '  Rinaldo,'  his
earliest  opera,  appeared  in  1711.  Bononcini,  who  at
one  time  rivalled  his  popularity  as  a  composer,  followed
a  few  years  later.  An  Academy  for  Music  was  founded
in  1720,  and  several  Italian  singers  of  the  highest
merit  were  brought  over,  at  salaries  which  were  then
unparalleled  in  Europe.  The  two  great  female  singers,
Ouzzoni  and  La  Faustina,  obtained  each  2,000  guineas

'  '  But  first  I  must  put  off
These  my  sky-robes,  spun  out  of  Iris'  woof,
And  take  the  weeds  and  likeness  of  a  swain
That  to  the  service  of  this  house  belongs,
Who  with  his  soft  pipe  and  smooth-dittied  song
Well  knows  to  still  the  wild  winds  when  they  roar,
And  hush  the  waving  woods.'  Coimts.

Lawes  taught  music  in  the  house  of  Lord  Bridgewater,  where  Comus

was  first  represented.

170 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

a  year,  Farinelli  1,500  guineas  and  a  benefit,  Senesino
1,400  guineas.  The  rivalry  between  Cuzzoni  and
La  Faustina,  and  the  rivalry  between  Handel  and
Bononcini,  divided  society  into  factions  almost  like
those  of  the  Byzantine  Empire  ;  and  the  conflicting
claims  of  the  two  composers  were  celebrated  in  a  well-
known  epigram,  which  has  been  commonly  attributed  to
Swift,  but  Avhich  was  in  reality  written  by  Byrom.^  The
author  little  imagined  that  one  of  the  composers,  whom
he  treated  with  such  contempt,  was,  in  his  own,  and
that  no  ignoble,  sphere,  among  the  master  intellects
of  mankind. 2

The  difficulties  against  which  the  new  entertainment
had  to  struggle  were  very  great.  Addison  opposed  it
bitterly  in  the  '  Spectator.'  The  partisans  of  the  regular
drama  denounced  it  as  an  absurd  and  mischievous
novelty.  It  had  to  encounter  the  strong  popular  pre-
judice against  foreigners  and  Papists.  It  was  weakened
by  perpetual  quarrels  of  composers  and  singers,  and  it
was  supported  chiefly  by  the  small  and  capricious  circle
of  fashionable  society.  In  1717  the  Italian  theatre  was
closed  for  want  of  support,  but  it  revived  in  1720  under
the  auspices  of  Handel.  The  extraordinary  success  of
'The  Beggars'  Opera,'  which  appeared  in  1728,  for  a
time  threw  it  completely  in  the  shade.  The  music  of
Handel  was  deserted,  and  the  Italian  theatre  again
closed.  It  reopened  in  the  following  year  under  the
joint  direction  of  Handel  and  of  Heidegger,  a  Swiss,
famous  for  his  ugliness,  his  impudence,  and  his  skill  in

'  '  Some  say  that  Signer  Bononcini
Compared  to  Handel  is  a  ninny ;
Others  aver  that  to  him  Handel
Is  scarcely  fit  to  hold  a  candle.
Strange  that  such  difference  should  be
'Twixt  tweedledum  and  tweedledee.'

*  Burney's  Hist,  of  Mtisic. Scholcher's  Life  of  Handel.  Byrom's
Remains,  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  150.

CH.  V.  HANDEL.  171

organising  public  amusements  ;  and  it  continued  to
flourish  until  a  quarrel  broke  out  between  Handel  and
the  singer  Senesino.  The  great  nobles,  who  were  the
chief  supporters  of  the  opera,  took  the  side  of  the  singer,
set  up,  in  1733,  a  rival  theatre  in  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,
attracted  to  it  Farinelli  and  most  of  the  best  singers,
made  it  their  special  object  to  ruin  Handel,  and  suc-
ceeded in  so  governing  the  course  of  fashion  that  his
theatre  was  almost  deserted.  The  King,  it  is  true,
steadily  supported  him,  and  Queen  Caroline,  with  the
tact  she  usually  showed  in  discovering  the  highest  talent
in  the  country,  threw  her  whole  enthusiasm  into  his
cause ;  but  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  was  in  violent
opposition  to  his  father,  took  the  opposite  side,  and  the
Court  could  not  save  the  great  musician  from  ruin.
'  The  King  and  Queen,'  says  Lord  Hervey,  '  sat  freezing
constantly  at  his  empty  Haymarket  opera,  whilst  the
Prince,  with  the  chief  of  the  nobility,  went  as  constantly
to  that  of  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.'  ^  Handel  struggled  for
some  time  vainly  against  the  stream ;  all  the  savings  he
had  amassed  were  lost,  and  his  career  was  for  a  time
ended  by  bankruptcy  in  1737.

The  effect,  however,  was  only  to  make  him  turn
more  exclusively  to  that  nobler  and  loftier  form  of  music
in  which  he  had  no  rival.  Like  the  great  blind  poet
of  Puritanism,  whom  in  more  than  one  respect  he  re-
sembled, he  was  indeed  one  of  those  whose  lips  the
Seraphim  had  touched  and  purified  with  the  hallowed
fire  from  the  altar ;  and  it  was  only  when  interpreting
the  highest  religious  emotions that his transcendent

'  Lord  Hervey' s  Memoirs,  i.  ployment  for  people  of  quality,
314.  The  Princess  Royal  was  or  the  ruin  of  one  poor  fellow
equally  enthusiastic.  The  King  [Handel]  so  generous  or  so  good-
said,  with  good  nature  and  good  natured  a  scheme  as  to  do
sense,  '  He  did  not  think  setting  much  honour  to  the  undertakers,
oneself  at  the  head  of  a  faction  whether  they  succeeded  or  not.'
of  fiddlers  a  very  honourable  em-

172 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  v.

genius  was  fully  felt.  If  it  be  true  that  music  is  in
modern  art  what  painting  was  in  the  Renaissance  and
what  sculpture  was  in  antiquity,  the  name  of  Handel
can  be  placed  little  below  those  of  Raphael  and  of
Phidias,  and  it  is  to  his  sacred  music  that  his  pre-
eminence is  mainly  due.  To  recall  sacred  music  from
the  neglect  into  which  it  had  fallen  in  England  had
long  been  his  desire.  In  1713  he  had  composed  a  grand
'  Te  Deum '  and  '  Jubilate '  in  celebration  of  the  Peace
of  Utrecht.  From  1718  to  1721  he  had  been  organist
to  the  chapel  of  the  Duke  of  Ohandos.  He  introduced
for  the  first  time  organ  concerts  into  England  ;  and,  in
addition  to  many  beautiful  anthems,  he  composed  his
oratorio  of  '  Esther '  for  the  Duke  of  Chandos's  chapel.
Oratorios  had  been  invented  in  the  middle  of  the  six-
teenth century  by  St.  Philip  Neri  in  order  to  counteract
the  attractions  of  the  theatre,  but  they  had  hitherto  been
absolutely  unknown  in  England.  '  Esther '  was  brought
upon  the  public  stage  for  the  first  time  in  1732.  It  was
followed  in  1733  by  'Deborah'  and  by  'Athalie,'  in
1738  by  'Israel  in  Egypt,'  in  1740  by  'Saul.'  The
earliest  of  these  great  compositions  were  received  with
considerable  applause,  but  the  last  two  were  almost
utterly  neglected.  The  musical  education  of  the  public
was  not  sufficient  to  appreciate  them;  the  leaders  of
fashion  who  professed  to  regulate  taste  in  matters  of
art  steadily  and  vindictively  derided  them  ;  and  the
King  and  Queen  incurred  no  small  ridicule  for  their
persistent  admiration  of  Handel.  A  story  is  told  of
Chesterfield  leaving  the  empty  theatre  in  which  an
oratorio  was  being  sung  before  the  King,  and  giving
as  his  reason  that  he  did  not  desire  to  intrude  on  the
privacy  of  his  sovereign.  Horace  Walpole,  who  assumed
the  language  of  a  great  critic  in  matters  of  art,  but
whose  cold  heart  and  feebly  fastidious  taste  were  usually
incapable  of  appreciating  any  high  form  of  excellence,

Cfi.  V.

HANDEL.  173

sneered  at  Handel,  as  he  afterwards  sneered  at  Garrick ;
and  it  came  to  be  looked  upon  in  fashionable  circles  as
one  of  the  signs  of  good  taste  to  ridicule  his  music. ^
Some  ladies  of  position  actually  engaged  a  famous  mimic
and  comic  singer  to  set  up  a  puppet-show  in  the  hoj)e
of  drawing  away  the  people  from  Handel,^  and  with  the
same  view  they  specially  selected  the  days  on  which
an  oratorio  was  performed,  for  their  card  parties  or
concerts.^

There  was,  of  course,  a  certain  party  in  his  favour.
Arbuthnot,  who  was  himself  an  excellent  musician,
steadily  supported  him.  Pope,  though  perfectly  insen-
sible to  the  charm  of  music,  resting  on  the  opinion  of
Arbuthnot,  took  the  same  side.  A  statue  of  Handel  by
Roubiliac  was  erected  in  Vauxhall  in  1738,  but  of  the
general  depreciation  and  condemnation  of  his  music
there  can  be  no  doubt.  The  death  of  Queen  Caroline,
in  1737,  deprived  him  of  his  warmest  patron,  and  he
composed  an  anthem  for  her  funeral,  which  Dr.  Burney

'  Fielding  has  noticed  this  in  Again  shall  Handel  raise  his  laurelled

a  characteristic  passage. '  It  was  j^^l^,Yih^^  harmony  with  rapture  glow !

Mr.  Western's  custom  every  alter-  The  speUs  dissolve,  the  combination
noon,  as  soon  as  he  was  drunk,  breaks,

to  hear  his  daughter  play  on  the  ^"J^e^tf  ^'  '"'  ^°''^^''  ^""^^''^  '^^*^'

harpsichord  ;  for  he  was  a  gi'eat  lo,  Russei  faUs  a  sacrifice  to  whim,

lover  of  music,  and,  perhaps,  had  And  starts  amazed  in  Newgate  from  his
he  lived in town, might have  dream.

,  -J! 1  Lme  183.

passed  as  a  connoisseur,  tor  he

always  excepted  against  the  finest  Eussel  was  a  famous  mimic  and
compositions  of  Mr.  Handel ;  he  singer  set  up  by  certain  ladies  of
never  relished  any  music  but  quahty  to  oppose  Handel.  When
what  was  light  and  airy ;  and,  the  current  of  fashion  changed
indeed,  his  most  favourite  tunes  he  sank  into  debt,  and  was  con-
were  "  Old  Sir  Simon,  the  King,"  fined  in  Newgate,  where  he  lost
"  St.  George  he  was  for  Eng-  his  reason.  A  small  subscription
land,"  "Bobbing  Joan,"  and  was  with  difiiculty  raised  among
some  others.'  -Tom  Jones.  his patronesses to procure  his

^  See  Smollett's poem  called  admission  into  Bedlam.
'  Advice,'  and  the  accompanying  '  Scholcher.

note.

174 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

regarded  as  the  most  perfect  of  all  his  works.  After
the  bankruptcy  of  his  theatre,  and  the  almost  total
failure  of  his  last  two  oratorios,  he  felt  it  necessary  to
bend  before  the  storm,  and  he  resolved  for  a  time  to  fly
where  his  works  '  would  be  out  of  the  reach  of  enmity
and  prejudice.'  He  had  already  composed  the  music
for  the  greatest  of  all  his  works,  but  he  would  not  risk
its  production  in  London,  and  he  adopted  the  resolution
of  bringing  it  out  for  the  first  time  in  Dublin.^

The  visit  of  Handel  to  Ireland  in  the  December  of
1741  has  been  investigated  in  all  its  details,^  and
it  forms  a  pleasing  episode  in  the  Irish  history  of  the
eighteenth  century.  It  appears  that  music  had  for  some
time  been  passionately  cultivated  in  the  Irish  capital,
that  a  flourishing  society  had  been  formed  for  practising
it,  and  that  the  music  of  Handel  was  already  in  great
favour.  It  was  customary  to  give  frequent  concerts  for
the  benefit  of  Dublin  charities,  and  one  of  these  chari-
ties was  at  this  time  attracting  great  attention.  The
revelation  of  the  frightful  abuses  in  the  debtors'  prisons
in  Ireland  had  made  a  deep  impression,  and  a  society
was  formed  for  ameliorating  the  condition  of  the  in-

' '  But  soon,  all  soon,  rebellion  will  commence
If  music  meanly  borrow  aid  from  sense  ;
Strong  in  new  arms,  lo  !  giant  Handel  stands
Like  bold  Briareus,  with  a  hundred  hands ;
To  stir,  to  rouse,  to  shake  the  soul,  he  comes  ;
And  Jove's  own  thunders  follow  Mars's  drums.
Arrest  him.  Empress,  or  you  sleep  no  more.
She  heard,  and  drove  him  to  the  Hibernian  shore.'

Dtmciad,  bk.  iv.

-  See  a  very  curious and  in-  stay  of  Handel  in  Ireland,  by  the

teresting  little book,  called  An  publication  of  the  letters  of  Mrs.

Account  of  the  Visit  of  Handel  Delany,  who  was  then  living  near

to  Dublin,  by  Horatio  Townsend  Dii  jlin,  and  who  was  a  friend  and

(Dublin,  1852). Since  this  book  ardent  admirer  of  Handel. See,

was  published,  a  little  additional  too,  Burney's  Hist,  of  Music,  iv.

Ught  has been  thrown  on  the  G61,  662.

CH.  V.  HANDEL.  175

mates,  compounding  with  their  creditors,  and  releasing
as  many  as  possible  from  prison.  In  the  year  1739  no
less  than  188  had  been  freed  from  a  condition  of  ex-
treme misery,  and  the  charity  still  continued.  It  was
for  the  benefit  of  this  and  of  two  older  charities  ^  that
the  '  Messiah  '  of  Handel  was  first  produced,  in  Dublin,
in  April  1742.  In  the  interval  that  had  elapsed  since
his  arrival  in  Ireland  its  composer  had  abundant  evi-
dence that  the  animosity  which  had  pursued  him  so
bitterly  in  England  had  not  crossed  the  Channel.  In
a  remarkable  letter  dated  December  29,  written  to  his
friend  Charles  Jennens,^  who  had  selected  the  passages
of  Scripture  for  the  '  Messiah,'  Handel  describes  the
success  of  a  series  of  concerts  which  he  had  begun  :
'  The  nobility  did  me  the  honour  to  make  amongst
themselves  a  subscription  for  six  nights,  which  did  fill
a  room  of  600  persons,  so  that  I  needed  not  sell  one
single  ticket  at  the  door;  and,  without  vanity,  the  per-
formance was  received  with  a  general  approbation.  .  .  .
I  cannot  sufficiently  express  the  kind  treatment  I  re-
ceive here,  but  the  politeness  of  this  generous  nation
cannot  be  unknown  to  you,  so  I  let  you  judge  of  the
satisfaction  I  enjoy,  passing  my  time  with  honour,
profit,  and  pleasure.'  A  new  series  of  concerts  was  per-
formed with  equal  success,  and  on  April  8,  1742,  the
'Messiah'  was  rehearsed,  and  on  the  13th  it  was  for
the  first  time  publicly  performed.  The  choirs  of  St.
Patrick's  Cathedral  and  of  Christ's  Church  were  enlisted
for  the  occasion.  Mrs.  Cibber  and  Mrs.  Avolio  sang
the  chief  parts.  The  Viceroy,  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin,
the  leading  Fellows  of  Trinity  College,  and  most  of  the
other  dignitaries  in  Church  and  State,  were  present,  and
the success  was overwhelming  and  immediate. The

'  Mercer's Hospital  and the country  gentleman — a  Nonjuror.
Charitable  Infirmary.  Townsend,  p.  81.

^  He was a Leicestershire

176  ENGLAND EST  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. ch.  V.

Music  Hall  was  so  thronged  that  an  advertisement  was
issued,  begging  the  ladies  for  the  occasion  to  discard
their  hoops,  and  no  discordant  voice  appears  to  have
broken  the  unanimity  of  applause.  Handel,  whose
sensitive  nature  had  been  embittered  by  long  neglect
and  hostility,  has  recorded  in  touching  terms  the  com-
pleteness of  his  triumph.  He  remained  in  Ireland  till
the  following  August,  a  welcome  guest  in  every  circle ;
and  he  is  said  to  have  expressed  his  surprise  and  admi-
ration at  the  beauty  of  those  national  melodies  which
were  then  unknown  out  of  Ireland,  but  which  the  poetry
of  Moore  has,  in  our  own  century,  carried  over  the
world.

On  his  return  to  London,  however,  he  found  the
hostility  against  him  but  little  diminished.  The  '  Mes-
siah,' when  first  produced  in  London,  if  it  did  not
absolutely  fail,  was  but  coldly  received,  and  it  is
shameful  and  melancholy  to  relate  that  in  1745  Handel
was  for  a  second  time  reduced  to  bankruptcy.  The
first  really  unequivocal  success  he  obtained  in  England
for  many  years  was  his  '  Judas  Maccabasus,'  which  was
composed  in  1746,  and  brought  out  in  the  following
year.  It  was  dedicated  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,
and  was  intended  to  commemorate  his  victory  at  Cul-
loden,  and  this  fact,  as  well  as  the  enthusiastic  support
of  the  London  Jews,  who  welcomed  it  as  a  glorification
of  a  great  Jewish  hero,  contributed  largely  to  its  suc-
cess. From  this  time  the  current  of  fashion  suddenly
changed.  When  the  '  Messiah '  was  again  produced  at
Covent  Garden  in  1750  it  was  received  with  general
enthusiasm,  and  the  '  Te  Deum  '  on  the  occasion  of  the
victory  of  Dettingen,  and  the  long  series  of  oratorios
which  Handel  brought  out  in  the  closing  years  of  his
life,  were  scarcely  less  successful.  In  1751  he  became
completely  blind,  but  he  still  continued  to  compose
music  and  to  play  publicly  upon  the  organ. Among

CH.  V.  THE  ENGLISH  THEATRE.  177

other  pieces  he  performed  liis  own  '  Samson,'  and  while
the  choir  sang  to  the  pathetic  strains  of  Handel  those
noble  lines  in  which  Milton  represented  the  Jewish  hero
lamenting  the  darkness  that  encompassed  him,  a  thrill
of  sympathetic  emotion  passed  through  the  crowded
audience  as  they  looked  upon  the  old  blind  musician,
who  sat  before  them  at  the  organ. ^  The  popularity  of
his  later  days  restored  his  fortunes,  and  he  acquired
considerable  wealth.^  He  died  on  Good  Friday  in  1759,
after  a  residence  in  England  of  forty-nine  years,  and  he
obtained  the  well-won  honour  of  a  tomb  in  Westminster
Abbey.3

The  great  impulse  given  by  Handel  to  sacred  music,
and  the  naturalisation  of  the  opera  in  England,  are  the
two  capital  events  in  English  musical  history  during
the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Apart  from
these  musical  performances  the  love  for  dramatic  enter-
tainments appears  to  have  greatly  increased,  though  the
theatre  never  altogether  recovered  the  blow  it  had
received  during  the  Puritan  ascendency.  So  much  has
been  said  of  the  necessary  effect  of  theatrical  amuse-
ments in  demoralising  nations  that  it  is  worthy  of
special  notice  that  there  were  ten  or  eleven  theatres
open  in  London  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and  a  still
greater  number  in  the  reign  of  her  successor,*  whereas  in
the  incomparably  more  profligate  reign  of  Charles  II.
there  were  only  two.  Even  these  proved  too  many,
and  in  spite  of  the  attraction  of  actresses,  who  were
then  for  the  first  time  permitted  upon  the  stage,  and  of
the  great  histrionic  powers  of  Hart  and  of  Betterton,  it
was  found  necessary  to  unite  the  companies  in  1684.''

'  Mrs. Delany's Corresimn-  by  Bumey  and  by  Hawkins.

dence,  iii.  177.  *  Compare  Collier's  Annals  of

■'  Ibid.  iii.  549,  550. He  left  the  Stage,  i.  343. Chalmers'  Ac-

20,000Z.  count  of  the  Early  English  Stage.

■'  Scholclier'sXi/e  of  Handel.  ^  Gibber's  Apology,  ch.  iv.
See,  too,  the  Histories  of  Music

VOL. II.  M

178 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch,  v.

The  profligacy  of  the  theatre  during  the  generation  that
followed  the  Restoration  can  hardly  be  exaggerated,
and  it  continued  with  little  abatement  during'  two  reig^ns.
The  character  of  the  plays  was  such  that  few  ladies  of
respectability  and  position  ventured  to  appear  at  the
first  representation  of  a  new  comedy,  and  those  whose
curiosity  triumphed  over  their  delicacy  usually  came
masked — a  custom  which  at  this  time  became  very
common,  and  which  naturally  led  to  grave  abuses.^  By
the  time  of  the  Revolution,  however,  the  movement  of
dissipation  had  somewhat  spent  its  force,  and  the  ap-
pearance in  1698  of  Collier's  well-known  '  Short  View
of  the  Stage '  had  a  sensible  and  an  immediate  efiect.
Though  the  author  was  a  vehement  Nonjuror,  William
expressed  warm  approbation  of  his  work,  and  a  royal
order  was  issued  to  restrain  the  abuses  of  the  stage.
The  Master  of  the  Revels,  who  then  licensed  plays,
began  to  exercise  his  function  with  some  severity,  and
a  favourable  change  passed  over  public  opinion.  In
the  reign  of  Anne  the  reformation  was  much  aided  by
the  prohibition  of  masks  in  the  theatre.^  But  although
a  certain  improvement  was  effected,  much  still  remained
to  be  done.  Great  scandal  was  caused  by  a  prologue,
written  by  Garth,  and  spoken  at  the  opening  of  the
Haymarket  Theatre  in  1705,  which  congratulated  the
world  that  the  stage  was  beginning  to  take  the  place  of

'  '  While our authors took  appearances, and rarely came

these  extraordinary  Hberties  with  upon  the  first  days  of  acting  but

their  wit,  I  remember  the  ladies  in  masks  (then  daily  worn,  and

were  then  observed  to  be  decently  admitted  in  the  pit,  side  boxes,

afraid  of  venturing  barefaced  to  and  gallery).'— Gibber's  Apology,

a  new  comedy  till  they  had  been  ch.  viii. So  Pope  :

assured  they  might  do  it  without  The  fair  sat  panting  at  a  courtier's  play,

the risque of insult to their  And  not  a  mask  went  unimproved  away,
modesty; or if their  curiosity  Essay  on  Criticism,  pt.  ii.

were  too  strong  for  their  patience,  ^  See  Davies'  Life  of  Oarrick,

they  took  care  at  least  to  save  ii.  355  (ed.  1780).

CH.  V.  IMMORALITY OF THE STAGE.  179

the  Church.^  The  two  Houses  of  Convocation,  in  a
representation  to  the  Queen  in  1711,  dwelt  strongly  on
the  immorality  of  the  drama.^  Swift  placed  its  degraded
condition  among  the  foremost  causes  of  the  corruption
of  the  age  ,3  and  it  is  remarkable  that  although  English
play-writers  borrowed  very  largely  from  the  French,  the
English  stage  was  far  inferior  to  that  of  France  in  de-
corum, modesty,  and  morality.  In  this  respect  at  least
there  was  no  disposition  to  imitate  French  manners,
and  we  may,  indeed,  trace  among  English  writers  no
small  jealousy  of  the  dramatic  supremacy  of  France.
Dryden  continually  expressed  it,  and  Shadwell  dis-
played it  in  a  strain  of  grotesque  insolence.  Among
his  plays  was  one  called  'The  Miser,'  based  upon
one  of  the  most  perfect  of  the  matchless  comedies  of
IMoliere.  Not  content  with  degrading  this  noble  play
by  the  addition  of  coarse,  obscene,  and  insipid  jests  which
French  taste  would  never  have  tolerated,  Shadwell  pre-
fixed to  it  a  preface  in  which  he  gives  us  with  amusing

>  '  In  the  good  days  of  ghostly  ignorance,
How  did  cathedrals  rise  and  zeal  advance !
The  merry  monks  said  orisons  at  ease,
Large  were  their  meals,  and  light  their  penances.
Pardons  for  sins  were  pm-chased  with  estates,
And  none  but  rogues  in  rags  died  reprobates.
But  now  that  pious  pageantry's  no  more,
And  stages  thrive  as  churches  did  before.'

See  the  Harleian  Miscellany,  ii.  21.

2  Harleian  Miscellany,  ii.  21.  poets  in  all  other  ages  and  coun-
^  See  some  admirable  remarks  tries.  ...  I  do  not  remember
on  the  subject  in  his  Project  for  that  our  English  poets  ever
the  Advancement  of  Beligio7i,  suffered  a  criminal  amour  to
written  in  1709.  He  says  :  '  It  is  succeed  upon  the  stage  until  the
worth  observing  the  distributive  reign  of  Charles  II.  Ever  since
justice  of  the  authors,  which  is  that  time  the  alderman  is  made
constantly  apphed  to  the  punish-  a  cuckold,  the  deluded  virgin  is
ment  of  virtue  and  the  reward  debauched,  and  adultery  and  for-
of  vice ;  directly  opposite  to  the  nication  are  supposed  to  be  corn-
rules  of  their  best  criticks,  as  well  mitted  behind  the  scenes  as  part
as  to  the  practice  of  dramatick  of  the  action.'

N  2

180 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  v.

candour  his  own  estimate  of  the  comparative  merits  of
Moliere  and  of  himself.  '  The  foundation  of  this  play,'
he  said,  '  I  took  from  one  of  Moliere's,  called  "  L'Avare,"
but  having  too  few  persons  and  too  little  action  for  an
English  theatre,  I  added  to  both  so  much  that  I  may
call  more  than  half  this  play  my  own  ;  and  I  think  I
may  say  without  vanity  that  Moliere's  part  of  it  has  not
suffered  in  my  hands ;  nor  did  I  ever  know  a  French
comedy  made  use  of  by  the  worst  of  our  poets  that  was  not
bettered  by  them.  'Tis  not  barrenness  of  wit  or  invention
that  makes  us  borrow  from  the  French,  but  laziness,  and
this  was  the  occasion  of  my  making  use  of"  L'Avare." ' '
Shadwell  was  a  poor  poet,  but  he  was  for  a  long
time  a  popular  dramatist,  and  he  was  sufficiently  con-
spicuous to  be  appointed  poet  laureate  by  William  in
the  place  of  Dryden.  The  preface  I  have  cited,  coming
from  such  a  pen,  throws  a  curious  light  upon  the  national
taste.  Addison  and  Steele,  who  contributed  in  so  many
ways  to  turn  the  stream  of  fashion  in  the  direction  of
morality,  did  something  at  least  to  introduce  French
decorum  into  the  English  drama.  Both  of  them  wrote
plays,  which,  though  of  no  great  merit,  had  their  hour
of  noisy  popularity,  and  were  at  least  scrupulously
moral.  '  I  never  heard  of  any  plays,'  said  Parson
Adams,  in  one  of  the  novels  of  Fielding,  '  fit  for  a
Christian  to  read  but  "Cato"  and  the  "Conscious
Lovers,"  and  I  must  own  in  the  latter  there  are  some
things  almost  solemn  enough  for  a  sermon.' ^  The
example,  however,  was  not  very  generally  followed,  and

'  So,  too,  in  the  Prologue  of  "-  Joseph  Andrews,  bk.  iii.  ch.

the  play —  si. Hallam  says  :  '  Steele's  Gon-

, , . , .  , ^  .^,  scioiLS  Lovers  is  the  first  comedy

French  plavs  m  which  true  wits  as „ „, .i -r> x x- t i,-  i,
rarely  found  [after  the  Eestoration]  which  can

Asminesof  silver  are  in  English  gi-ound. be  called  moral.' Hist,  of  Lite-

_ * ,*'  ^ * ^Z*  ^^.* .^^^  rature, iv. 284. Hazhtt  com-

For  our  good-natured  nation  thinks  it  fit  , . n  .1 . ti j.- i „„„

To  count  French  toys  good  wares,  French  plams  of  the  too  didactic  charac-

nonsense  wit.  ter  of  the  plays  of  Steele,  and  says :

CH.  V.  POLITICAL PLAYS.  181

some  of  the  comedies  of  Fielding  in  point  of  coarseness
are  little  if  at  all  superior  to  those  of  Wycherley.  Dr.
Herring,  who  was  afterwards  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
when  Court  Chaplain  and  preacher  at  Lincoln's  Inn,
denounced  the  '  Beggar's  Opera '  of  Gay  with  great
asperity  from  the  pulpit ;  ^  and  Sir  John  Barnard,  in
1735,  brought  the  condition  of  the  theatre  before  the
House  of  Commons,  complaining  bitterly  that  there
were  now  six  theatres  in  London,  and  that  they  were
sources  of  great  corruption.  In  the  course  of  the  debate
one  of  his  chief  supporters  observed  '  that  it  was  no  less
surprising  than  shameful  to  see  so  great  a  change  for
the  worse  in  the  temper  and  inclinations  of  the  British
nation,  who  were  now  so  extravagantly  addicted  to
lewd  and  idle  diversions  that  the  number  of  playhouses
in  London  was  double  that  of  Paris  .  .  .  that  it  was
astonishing  to  all  Europe  that  Italian  eunuchs  and
signoras  should  have  set  salaries  equal  to  those  of  the
Lords  of  the  Treasury  and  Jvidges  of  England.'  ^  On
this  occasion  nothing  effectual  was  done,  but  soon  after
the  theatre  took  a  new  form  which  was  well  calculated
to  alarm  politicians.  Fielding,  following  an  example
which  had  been  set  by  Gay,  made  it  the  vehicle  of
political  satire,  and  in  his  '  Pasquin '  and  his  '  His-
torical Eegister '  he  ridiculed  Walpole  and  the  corrup-
tion at  elections.  Another  play,  called  '  The  Golden
Rump,'  submitted  to  the  director  of  Lincoln's  Inn
Theatre  and  handed  over  by  him  to  the  minister,  was
said  to  have  contained  a  bitter  satire  against  the  King
and  the  reigning  family.  Walpole,  relying  on  these,
cari-ied through Parliament  in  1737  a  licensing  Act

'  The  comedies  of  Steele  were  the  Comic  Writers,  p.  341.

first  that  were  written  expressly  '  Swift's Correspondence, ii.

with  a  view  not  to  imitate  the  243. Intelligencer,  No.  iii.

manners  but  to  reform  the  morals  -  Pari.  Hist.  ix.  948.

of  the age.' — Lectures on  the

182 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

greatly  restricting  the  number  of  playhouses,  and  at  the
same  time  authorising  the  Lord  Chamberlain  to  prohibit
any  dramatic  representation,  and  providing  that  no  new
play  or  addition  to  an  old  play  could  be  acted  if  he  had
not  first  inspected  it.  The  power  of  the  Lord  Chamber-
lain over  the  theatre  was  not  a  new  thing,  and  it  had
very  recently  been  exercised  for  the  suppression  of  the
sequel  to  the  '  Beggar's  Opera '  by  Gay ;  but  it  had
hitherto  been  undefined  or  very  rarely  employed,  and  the
institution  of  an  authorised  and  systematic  censorship
was  opposed  by  Pulteney,  and  denounced  with  especial
vehemence  by  Chesterfield,  as  the  beginning  of  a  cru-
sade against  the  liberty  of  the  Press.  Among  the  plays
that  were  proscribed  under  the  new  system  were  the '  Gus-
tavus  Vasa  '  of  Brooke,  and  the  '  Eleanora  '  of  Thomson  ;
the  rising  fashion  of  political  comedies  was  crushed,  but
in  general  the  licensing  power  was  employed  with  much
moderation  and  simply  in  the  interests  of  morality.^

By  far  the  greatest  dramatic  success  during  the  first
half  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  the  '  Beggar's  Opera '
of  Gay.  It  for  a  time,  as  we  have  seen,  ruined  the
Italian  opera ;  and  in  one  of  the  notes  of  the  '  Dunciad  '
we  have  a  curious  picture  of  the  enthusiasm  it  excited.
It  was  acted  in  London  without  interruption  for  sixty-
three  days,  and  was  received  with  equal  applause  in
the  following  season.  It  was  played  fifty  times  in
both  Bristol  and  Bath.  It  spread  rapidly  through  all
the  great  towns  of  the  kingdom,  penetrated  to  Scotland
and  Wales,  and  was  brilliantly  successful  in  Ireland.
Its  favourite  songs  appeared  on  ladies'  fans  and  on
drawing-room  screens,  and  a  hitherto  obscure  actress,

'  A  very  full  history  of  Wal-  wlio  acted without licence as

pole's  measure  is  given  in  Coxe's  vagrants  or  vagabonds. See,  too,

Life,  ch.  xlvii. It  was  ostensibly  Maty's Life of Chesterfield.

an  Act  to  amend  a  law  passed  Lawrence's Life of Fielding.

under  Anne  which  treated  players  Pari.  Debates.

CH.  V.  THEATRICAL TASTE.  183

by  playing  its  principal  part,  became  one  of  tlie  most
conspicuous  and  popular  personages  in  the  country.  In
general  the  prevailing  taste  in  dramatic  literature  during
the  greater  part  of  this  period  was  very  low.  The  change
which  had  passed  over  the  social  position  of  authors
was  peculiarly  prejudicial  to  the  drama,  which  consists
in  a  great  degree  of  sketches  of  the  manners  of  society,^
and  there  was  little  or  no  demand  for  plays  of  a  high
order.  Slight  and  coarse  comedies,  or  gaudy  spectacles
with  rope  dancers  and  ballets,  appear  to  have  been  in
the  greatest  favour,  and  in  more  serious  pieces  the  love
of  butchering,  so  characteristic  of  the  English  stage,
was  long  a  standing  reproach  among  foreign  critics.^
Masquerades  were  at  this  time  extremely  popular,  and
they  had  a  considerable  influence  over  theatrical  taste.
Heidegger  organised  them  on  a  magnificent  scale,  and
they  were  warmly  patronised  by  the  King,  who  was
extremely  angry  with  Bishop  Gibson  for  denouncing
them.  In  one  celebrated  masquerade  the  King  was
present  in  disguise,  while  the  well-known  maid  of
honour,  Miss  Chudleigh,  scandalised  all  decent  per-
sons by  appearing  almost  naked  as  Iphigenia.^  In
1755,  after  the  earthquake  of  Lisbon,  they  were  for  a
short  time  suppressed,  lest  they  should  call  down  a
similar  judgment  upon  London.^  The  English  form
of  pantomime,  which  is  nearly  related  to  this  type  of
amusement, and which, after more  than  150  years,

'  As Horace Walpole said:  —To  the Countess of Ossory,

'  Why  are  there  so  few  genteel  June  14,  1787.

comedies  but  because  comedies  -  Tatlcr,  No.  134. Spectator,

are written by men not of  No.  44.

that sphere? Etheridge, Con-  ^  Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,

greve, Vanbrugh, and Gibber  May  1749.

wTote genteel comedy  because  *  Walpole's  Mem.  of  George  II.

they  lived  in  the  best  company  ;  iii. 98. Bedford ascribed the

and  Mrs.  Oldfield  played  it so  great  storm  of  1703  to  the  ini-

weU  because  she  not only  fol-  quities of the stage. — Bedford

lowed  but  often  set  the  fashion.'  On  the  Stage,  p.  26.

184  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

retains  its  popularity,  was  invented  by  Rich  in  1717.^
For  a  few  years  after  the  Restoration  the  acting  of  Hart
and  Betterton  in  some  degree  supported  Shakespeare
upon  the  stage,  but  a  change  had  taken  place  in  the
taste  and  in  the  manners  of  the  nation,  which  made  his
plays  appear  barbarous  or  insipid.  Even  Dryden,  who
defended  him,  only  ventured  with  some  timidity  to  pro-
nounce him  to  be  equal,  if  not  superior,  to  Ben  Jonson.^
Evelyn,  having  been  present  at  a  representation  of
'  Hamlet '  in  1661,  noticed  that  '  the  old  plays  began  to
disgust  this  refined  age  since  his  Majesty  had  been  so
long  abroad  ; '  ^  and  the  depreciating  or  contemptuous
language  which  Pepys  employed  about  nearly  every
Shakespearian  play^  that  he  witnessed  probably  reflected
very  fairly  the  sentiments  of  the  average  playgoer.
Many  of  the  greatest  plays  were  soon  completely
banished  from  the  stage,  and  the  few  which  retained
any  popularity  were  re-written,  printed  under  other
names,  or  at  least  largely  altered,  reduced  to  a  French
standard  of  correctness,  or  enlivened  with  music  and
dancing.  Thus  '  Romeo  and  Juliet'  was  superseded  by
the  '  Caius  Marius  '  of  Otway,  '  Measure  for  Measure '
by  the  '  Law  against  Lovers  '  of  Davenant,  the  '  Merry
Wives  of  Windsor '  by  Dennis's  '  Comical  Gallant,'
'  Richard  II.'  by  Tate's  '  Sicilian  Usurper,'  '  Cymbeline  '
by  Durfey's  '  Injured  Princess,'  '  The  Merchant  of
Venice '  by  Lord  Lansdowne's '  Jew  of  Venice.'  '  Mac-
beth ' was re-cast by Davenant, '  Richard III.' by

'  Davies'  Life  of  Oarrick,  i.  play  ;' OWzcZ^o  (which he  appears

92,93. Cihhei's  Apology,  ch.xY.  at  first  to  have  liked),  '  a  mean

-  Biyden's  Essay  on  Dramatic  thing;'  Henry  VIII.  'a  simple

Poetry.  thing  made  up  of  many  patches,'

■'  Evelyn's  Diary,  Nov.  1661.  with  nothing  good  in  it  '  besides

*  He  calls  Midsummer  Night's  the  shows  and  processions.'  Mac-
Dream  '  the  most  insipid,  ridi-  beth he acknowledged was '  a
culous  play' he  ever  saw;  the  pretty  good  play.'
Taming  of  the Shrew '  a  silly

CH.  V.  REVIVAL OF SHAKESPEAEE.  185

Gibber,  'The  Tempest'  by  both  Davenant  and  Shad-
well,  '  Coriolanus '  by  Dennis,  and  '  King  Lear '  by
Tate.i

The  revolution  of  taste  which  gradually  reinstated
in  his  ascendency  the  greatest  writer  of  England,  and
perhaps  of  the  world,  and  made  his  ideas  and  language
familiar  to  the  upper  and  middle  classes  of  the  nation,
is  certainly  not  less  worthy  of  commemoration  than  any
of  the  military  or  political  incidents  of  the  time.  Its
effect  in  educating  the  English  mind  can  hardly  be
overrated,  and  its  moral  influence  was  very  great.  It
was  partly  literary  and  partly  dramatic.  The  first
critical  edition  of  Shakespeare  was  that  of  Rowe,  which
was  published  in  1709  ;  and,  before  half  the  century
had  passed,  it  was  followed  by  those  of  Pope,  Theobald,
Sir  Thomas  Hanmer,  and  Warburton.  Dr.  Johnson
has  noticed  as  a  proof  of  the  paucity  of  readers  in  the
seventeenth  century  '  that  the  nation  had  been  satisfied
from  1623  to  1664,  that  is,  forty-one  years,  with  only
two  editions  of  Shakespeare,  which  probably  did  not
together  make  1,000  copies.' ^  By  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century,  however,  there  had  been  thirteen
editions,  and  of  these,  nine  had  appeared  within  the
last  forty  years.^  It  is  obvious  from  this  fact  that  the
interest  in  Shakespeare  was  steadily  increasing,  and
that  the  critical  study  of  his  plays  was  becoming  an
important  department  of  English  literature  ;  and  he
slowly  reappeared  in  his  unaltered  form  upon  the  stage.
The  merit  of  this  revival  has  often  been  ascribed  almost
exclusively  to  Garrick,  but  in  truth  it  had  begun  before,
and  was  a  natural  reflection  of  the  movement  in  litera-
ture. Six  or  seven  years before  the  appearance  of

'  Malone's  Historical  Account  speare,  p.  141. See,  too,  Miller's

of  the  English  Stage.  Retrospect  of  the  Eighteenth  Cen-

2  Life  of  Milton.  tury,  iii.  48, 49  ;  296,  297.
^  Knight's Studies  of Shah-

186 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  V.

Garrick,  some  ladies  of  rank  formed  a  '  Shakespearian
Club  '  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  by  their  presence
or  encouragement  the  best  phiys  of  Shakespeare.^  Soon
after,  revivals  became  both  frequent  and  successful.  In
1737  '  King  John'  was  revived  at  Oovent  Garden  for
the  first  time  since  the  downfall  of  the  stage.  In  1738
the  Second  Part  of  '  Henry  IV.,'  '  Henry  V.,'  and  the
First  Part  of  '  Henry  VI.,'  no  one  of  which  had  been
acted  for  forty  or  fifty  years,  were  brought  upon  the
stage.  In  1740  'As  You  Like  It'  was  reproduced  after
an  eclipse  of  forty  years,  and  had  a  considerable  run.
In  February  1741  the  '  Merchant  of  Venice  '  was  pro-
duced in  its  original  form  for  the  first  time  after  one
hundred  years,  and  Macklin  excited  the  most  enthusias-
tic applause  by  his  representation  of  Shylock,  who  in
Lord  Lansdowne's  version  of  the  play  had  been  reduced
to  insignificant  proportions.^  In  the  same  year  the
'  Winter's  Tale  '  was  revived  after  one  hundred  years,
and  'All's  Well  that  Ends  Well '  for  the  first  time  since
the  death  of  Shakespeare  ;  and  a  monument  of  the  great
poet  was  erected  in  Westminster  Abbey,  paid  for  by  the
proceeds  of  special  representations  at  the  two  great
theatres.^  In  the  October  of  this  year  Garrick  appeared
for  the  first  time  on  the  London  stage  in  the  character
of  Richard  III."

The  effects  of  the  talent  of  a  great  actor  ai-e  neces-
sarily so  extremely  evanescent,  that  it  is  impossible  to

'  Davies'  Life  of  Garrick,  ii.  *  Malone's  Historical  Account

224.  of  the  English  Stage,  292-294.

^  See  an  interesting  account  of  The interval that  had elapsed

this  great  triumph  in  Kirkman's  since  the  former  acting  of  each

Life  of  Macklin,  ii.  253-265.  of  these  plays  is  given  by  Ma-

^  Mrs.  Dela7iy'$  Life,  ii.  139.  lone on the authority  of the

Pope  wrote —  advertisements,  which  may  not

After  one  hundred  and  thirty  years'  always  have  been  absolutely  cor-

'^^P  rect.
Enter  Shakespeare  with  a  loud  clap.

I

ca.  V.  GAREICK.  187

compare  with  much  confidence  the  merits  of  those  who
have  long  passed  away.  When,  however,  we  consider
the  extraordinary  versatility  of  the  acting  of  Garrick,
and  the  extraordinary  impression  which  during  a  long
series  of  years  it  made  upon  the  most  cultivated,  as  well
as  upon  the  most  illiterate,  it  will  appear  probable  that
he  has  never  been  surpassed  in  his  art — it  is  certain
that  he  had  never  been  equalled  in  England  since  the
death  of  Betterton.'  The  grandson  of  one  of  those
refugees  who  had  been  expelled  from  France  upon  the
Revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  he  is  another  of  the
many  instances  of  the  benefits  which  England  has  in-
directly derived  from  the  intolerance  of  her  neighbours ;
and  in  two  respects  his  appearance  on  the  stage  has  a
real  importance  in  the  history  of  the  English  mind.  He
was  before  all  things  a  Shakespearian  actor,  and  he  did
more  than  any  other  single  man  to  extend  the  popu-
larity and  increase  the  reputation  of  the  great  drama-
tist. He  usually  gave  seventeen  or  eighteen  plays  of
Shakespeare  in  a  year.^  He  brought  out  their  beauties
with  all  the  skill  of  a  consummate  artist,  and  he  at  the
same  time  produced  a  revolution  in  the  art  of  acting
very  similar  to  that  which  Kent  had  effected  in  the  art
of  gardening.  A  habit  of  slow,  monotonous  declamation,
of  unnatural  pomp,  and  of  a  total  disregard  for  historic
truth  in  theatrical  costume,  had  become  general  on  the
English  stage,  and  the  various  and  rapid  intonations  of

*  The  impression  Betterton  among  poets.  A  few  other  par-
made  in  his  day  seems  to  have  ticulars  relating  to  him  mil  be
been  not  at  all  less  than  that  found  in  Gait's  Lives  of  the
made  by  Garrick.  He  was  Players.  Pope  thought  Better-
buried  in  Westminster  Abbey,  ton  the  greatest  actor,  but  said
and  Steele  took  occasion  of  his  that  some  old  people  spoke  of
funeral  to  devote  an  admirable  Hart  as  his  superior.  Betterton
paper  in  the  jPaiZer  to  his  acting.  died  in  1710.  Spence's  AncC'
See,  too.  Gibber's  Apology. Gib-  dotes.

ber  pronounced  him  as  supreme  "  Davies'  Life  of  Garrick,  ii.

among actors as Shakespeare  114.

188 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  v,

Garrick,  the  careful  and  constant  study  of  nature  and
of  history  which  he  displayed  both  in  his  acting  and  his
accessories,  had  all  the  effect  of  novelty.^  It  is  worthy
of  notice  that  a  similar  change  both  in  gardening  and
in  acting  took  place  in  France  a  generation  later,  and
was  in  a  great  degree  due  to  the  love  of  nature  and  the
revolt  against  conventional  forms,  resulting  from  the
writings  of  Rousseau.  Garrick,  like  all  innovators,  had
to  encounter  at  first  much  opposition.  Pope  and  Field-
ing were  warmly  in  his  favour,  but  the  poet  Gray  de-
clared himself  '  stiff  in  opposition.'  Horace  Walpole
professed  himself  unable  to  see  the  merit  of  the  new
performer.  Gibber,  who  had  been  brought  up  in  the
school  of  Betterton,  was  equally  contemptuous,  and  the
leading  actors  took  the  same  side.  Macklin  always  spoke
of  him  with  the  greatest  bitterness.  Quin,  who  had  for
some  time  held  the  foremost  rank  in  tragedy,  and  whose
ready  wit  made  him  a  specially  formidable  opponent,
said,  '  If  the  young  fellow  is  right,  I  and  the  rest  of  the
players  have  been  all  wrong ; '  and  he  added,  '  Garrick
is  a  new  religion — Whitefield  was  followed  for  a  time —
but  they  will  all  come  to  church  again.'  Gariick  an-
swered in  a  happy  epigram  to  the  effect  '  that  it  was  not

'  See  the  preliminary  disser-  tween  him  and  his  mother,  when
tation  to  Foote's  Works,  i.  hi,  you  told  me  he  acted  so  fine,
liii.  Macklin,  who  had  quarrelled  why,  Lord  help  me !  any  man —
with  Garrick,  and  who  cordially  that  is,  any  good  man — that  has
detested  him,  described  his  act-  such  a  mother,  would  have  done
ing  as  '  all  bustle.'  Mackhn's  exactly  the  same.  I  know  you
Memoirs,  i.  248.  Fielding's  witty  are  only  joking  with  me,  but  in-
description  is  well  known.  '  He  deed.  Madam,  though  I  was  never
the  best  player  ! '  cries  Partridge,  at  a  play  in  London,  yet  I  have
with  a  contemptuous  sneer, '  why,  seen  acting  before  in  the  country ;
I  could  act  as  well  as  he  myself.  and,  the  King  for  my  money !  he
I  am  sure  if  I  had  seen  a  ghost  I  speaks  all  his  words  distinctly,
should  have  looked  in  the  very  half  as  loud  again  as  the  other,
same  manner  and  done  just  as  Anybody  may  see  he  is  an  ac-
he did.  And  then,  to  be  sure,  in  tor.' — Tom  Jones.  See,  too.  The
that  scene,  as  you  called  it,  be-  World,  No.  6.

CH.  V.  GARRICK.  189

heresy,  but  reformation.'  In  two  or  three  characters
Quin  is  said  to  have  equalled  him.  The  Othello  of  Gar-
rick  was  a  comparative  failure,  which  was  attributed  to
the  dark  colouring  that  concealed  the  wonderful  play  of
his  features/  and  Barry,  owing  to  his  rare  personal  ad-
vantages, was,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  superior  as
Komeo,^  but  on  the  whole  the  supremacy  of  Garrick
was  in  a  few  months  indisputable,  and  it  continued  un-
shaken during  his  whole  career.  At  the  same  time  his
excellent  character,  his  brilliant  qualities,  both  as  a
writer  and  a  talker,  and  the  very  considerable  fortune
that  he  speedily  amassed,  gave  him  a  social  position
which  had,  probably,  been  attained  by  no  previous  actor.
The  calling  of  an  actor  had  been  degraded  by  eccle-
siastical tradition,  as  well  as  by  the  gross  immorality  of
the  theatre  of  the  Eestoration.  For  some  time,  how-
ever, it  had  been  steadily  rising,^  and  Garrick,  while
elevating  incalculably  the  standard  of  theatrical  taste,
contributed  also  not  a  little  to  free  his  profession  from
the  discredit  under  which  it  laboured.  From  the  time
of  his  first  appearance  upon  the  stage  till  the  close  of
the  careers  of  Kemble,  of  the  elder  Kean,  and  of  Miss
O'Neil,  the  English  stage  was  never  without  some  actors
who  might  rank  with  the  greatest  on  the  Continent.

The  old  Puritanical  and  ecclesiastical  hatred  of  the
theatre  had  abated,  but  it  was  still  occasionally  shown.
In  Scotland  it  completely  triumphed,  and  the  attempts
of  Allan  Ramsay  and  a  few  others  to  promote  dramatic
taste were  almost  completely  abortive."* In  England,

'  Nichols' Life  of Hogarth,  *  Burton's  Hist,  of  Scotland

pp.  191,  192.  from the Revolution, ii. 5G1.

-  Mrs.  Montagu's  Letters,  iii.  James  I.,  before  he  ascended  the

107.  English  throne,  had  come  into

3  Some  particulars  of  the  in-  violent  collision  with  the  Puritan

crease  of  actors'  salaries  will  be  ministers, because he tried to

found in Kirkman's Life of  procure  actors  toleration  in  Seot-

MacJclin,  i.  4.35. Davies'  Life  of  land.— Collier's Annals of  the

Garrick,  ii.  239-242.  Stage,  i.  344-6.

190 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  ▼.

Collier  not  only  censured  the  gross  indecency  and  im-
morality of  the  stage  with  just  severity,  but  he  also  con-
tended that  it  was  profane  to  employ  any  form  of  words
which  was  ultimately  derived  from  the  Bible,  even
though  it  had  long  since  passed  into  general  usage,  to
use  the  word  '  martyr '  in  any  but  its  religious  sense,  to
reflect,  however  slightly,  on  any  priest,  not  only  of  a
Christian  but  even  of  a  Pagan  creed.  In  1719  Arthur
Bedford,  a  chaplain  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  published
a  most  curious  work  '  Against  the  horrid  Blasphemies
and  Impieties  which  are  still  used  in  English  Playhouses
.  .  .  showing  their  plain  tendency  to  overthrow  all
piety,  and  advance  the  interest  and  honour  of  the  devil  in
the  world ;  from  almost  7,000  instances  taken  out  of  the
plays  of  the  present  century.'  He  analysed  with  extra-
ordinary minuteness  the  whole  dramatic  literature  of  the
time,  and  declares  that  it  offended  against  no  less  than
1,400  texts  of  the  Bible.  He  accuses  the  playwriters,
among  other  things,  of  restoring  the  Pagan  worsliip  by
invoking  or  giving  divine  titles  to  Cupid,  Jupiter,
Venus,  Pluto,  and  Diana  ;  of  indirectly  encouraging
witchcraft  or  magic,  '  for  by  bewitching,  magick,  and
enchanting,  they  only  signify  something  which  is  most
pleasant  and  desirable  ; '  of  encouraging  it  directly  and
in  the  most  blasphemous  manner  by  such  plays  as
'  Macbeth  '  or  the  '  Tempest.' ' Like  Collier,  he  finds  it

'  See  the  long  and  curious  cri-  days  after  entertain  again  their

ticism  on  Macbeth. Two pas-  audience with the ridiculous

sages  may  be  cited  as  specimens  plays  of  the Tempest  and  Mac-

of this  singular  book. '  When  beth,  and  that  at  the  mention  of

God  was  pleased  to  vindicate  His  the  chimneys  being  blown  down

own  honour,  and  show  that  He  the  audience  were  pleased  to  clap

would  not  be  thus  affronted,  by  at  an  unusual  length  ...  as  if

sending  a  most  dreadful  storm  they  would  outbrave  the  judg-

.  .  .  yet,  so  great  was  the  obsti-  ment,  throw  Providence  out  of

nacy of the  stage under such  the  chair,  place  the  devil  in  His

signal judgments,  that  we are  stead, and provoke  God once

told  the  actors did in a few  more  to  plead  His  own  cause  by

CH.  V.  PREJUDICE AGAINST THE THEATRE.  191

very  criminal  to  place  an  immoral  sentiment  in  the
mouth  of  an  immoral  character,  or  a  Pagan  sentiment
in  the  mouth  of  a  Pagan  speaker ;  and  he  was  able  to
discover  blasphemy  even  in  the  '  Cato '  of  Addison.^
About  thirty  years  later,  William  Law  published  his
well-known  treatise  '  On  the  Absolute  Unlawfulness  of
the  Stage,'  in  which  he  maintained  that  '  the  business
of  players  is  the  most  wicked  and  detestable  profession
in  the  world  ; '  '  that  the  playhouse,  not  only  when  some
very  profane  play  is  on  the  stage,  but  in  its  daily,  com-
mon entertainments,  is  as  certainly  the  house  of  the
devil  as  the  church  is  the  house  of  God ; '  and  that  in
going  to  the  theatre  '  you  are  as  certainly  going  to  the
devil's  triumph  as  if  yovi  were  going  to  those  old  sports
where  people  committed  murder  and  offered  Christians
to  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts.'  In  1769,  during  the
Shakespeare  Jubilee,  when  Garrick  was  acting  at  Strat-
ford-on-Avon,  the  populace  of  that  town  are  said  to  have
regarded  him  as  a  magician,  and  to  have  attributed  to
the  vengeance  of  Heaven  the  heavy  rains  that  fell  during
the  festival.^  But,  on  the  whole,  the  religious  prejudice
against  the  theatre  in  the  first  sixty  years  of  the  eigh-

sending  a  greater  calamity '  (p.  good  Lord,  deliver  us  from  such

26). '  In  another  play  .  .  .  the  impieties  as  these  1 )  '  (p.  16).

high-priest  sings —  '  '  Our  blessed  Saviour  . . .  hath

By  the  spirit  in  this  wand,  these  words:  "This  is life  eternal,

Wliich  the  silver  moon  commands,  that  they  may  know  Thee,  the

By  the  powerful  aod  of  Night,  i .  n ■,  -, Tp„„^  Ohrist

By  the  love  of  Amphitrite.  ° ,  ^J  ''^^f  ^'°"'  ^"" ,  ,}lr  ^^^\^'''

,T, ,1  ,  J.  rri, 1 1 •  whom  Thou  hast  sent. Upon  the

(By  the  mystery  of  Thy  holy  m-  ^^  ^^^^^ ^^^  ^.^

carnation which  was  to  destroy  ^i^>,,„„„  jovpo  him qafth—

the  works  of  the  devil) ;  by  Thy

holy  nativity  and  circumcision ;  This,  this  is  life  indeed !  Life  worth  pre-

i. rm- 1. x- J' i- 1  serving!

by Thy baptism, fasting, and  Such  life  as  Juba  never  felt  tiU  now  !

temptation;  by  Thine  agony  and

bloody  sweat ;  by  Thy  cross  and  ^^^  ^  little  after

passion  ;  by  Thv  precious  death  My  joy  ! My  best  beloved  I My  only

and  burial ;  by  Thy  glorious  re-  '"'^  ''  ^^'-  2'*'*'>

surrection  and  ascension  ;  and  by  ^  Davies' Life  of  Garrick,  ii.

the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  226,  227.

192 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. Ch.  v.

teenth  century  was  probably  much  less  strong  than  it
afterwards  became,  through  the  influence  of  the  Metho-
dists and  the  Evangelicals.  The  strength  which  it  at
last  acquired  among  large  classes  is  much  to  be  re-
gretted. It  has  prevented  an  amusement  which  has
added  largely  to  the  sum  of  human  happiness,  and  which
exercises  a  very  considerable  educational  influence,  from
spreading  anywhere  except  in  the  greatest  centres  of
population.  It  has  multiplied  proportionately  amuse-
ments of  a  far  more  frivolous  and  purely  unintellectual
character,  and  it  has  withdrawn  from  the  audiences  in
the  theatre  the  very  classes  whose  presence  would  be  the
best  guarantee  of  the  habitual  morality  of  the  entertain-
ment.

The  decline  of  one  other  class  of  amusements  must
be  briefly  noticed,  for  it  forms  a  curious  page  in  the
history  of  national  manners.  Up  to  the  time  of  the
Eebellion  the  baiting  of  animals,  and  especially  of  bulls
and  bears,  was  a  favourite  pastime  with  every  class.
Henry  VIII.,  Mary,  Elizabeth,  and  James  I.  had  all
encouraged  it ;  but  under  Elizabeth  the  growing  taste
for  theatrical  representations  had  begun  gradually  to
displace  it,  and  to  give  a  new  ply  and  tone  to  the  man-
ners of  the  rich.  All  forms  of  amusement  naturally  fell
into  desuetude  during  the  Civil  War.  All  of  them  were
suppressed  during  the  Commonwealth,  and  it  was  pro-
bably some  Puritan  divines  who  first  maintained  in  Eng-
land the  doctrine  that  it  was  criminal  to  make  the  com-
bative or  ferocious  instincts  of  animals  subservient  to
our  pleasures.^  Motives  of  humanity  had,  however,  in
general  little  or  nothing  to  say  to  the  Puritanical  pro-
scription of  these  amusements,  which,  as  Macaulay  truly

'  See  a  very  curious  collection  beast  showeth  to  another  is  the

of  Puritan  denunciations  of  cock-  fruit of our rebellion against

fighting,  on  the  ground  that  '  the  God,' in  the Harleian  Miscel-

antipathy  and  cruelty  that  one  lany,  vi.  125-127.

CH.  V.  THE BEAE-GARDEN.  193

said,  were  condemned  not  because  they  gave  pain  to  the
animal,  but  because  they  gave  pleasure  to  the  spectators.^
When,  however,  they  revived  at  the  Restoration,  the
change  of  tastes  that  had  taken  place  became  apparent.
The  bear-garden  was  as  popular  as  ever  with  the  poor,
but  the  upper  classes  had  begun  to  desert  it.  In  1675
we  find  a  Court  exhibition  before  the  Spanish  Ambas-
sador, and  in  1681  the  Ambassador  of  Morocco  and  the
Duke  of  Albemarle  witnessed  a  similar  spectacle,  but
such  entertainments  were  now  becoming  rare.  Pepys
and  Evelyn  speak  of  them  as  '  rude  and  nasty  pleasures,'
'  butcherly  sports,  or  rather  barbarous  cruelties  ; '  ^  and,
although  even  in  the  last  years  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury we  find  a  writer  on  this  subject  asserting  that  bull-
baiting  '  is  a  sport  the  English  much  delight  in,  and  not
only  the  baser  sort  but  the  greatest  lords  and  ladies,'  ^
it  is  clear  that  the  stream  of  fashion  had  decidedly  turned.
In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  essay-
writers,  who  exercised  so  great  an  influence  on  the  minor
morals  of  society,  steadily  discountenanced  these  amuse-
ments ;  and  we  may  at  this  period  find  several  slight,
but  clear  traces  of  a  warmer  regard  for  the  sufferings  of
the  lower  animals.  Steele  speaks  of  the  bear-garden  as
a  place  '  where  reason  and  good  manners  had  no  right
to  enter,'  and  both  he  and  Pope  wrote  in  the  strongest
terms  against  cruelty  to  animals,  and  especially  against
the  English  passion  for  brutal  amusements.^

'  See  Macaulay'saccount,  Hist.  wood,  in  his  History  of  the  Stage,
ch.  ii.,  and  the  famous  bear-  says  : 'Bull-baiting,  boxing,  bear-
baiting  scene  in  Hudibras.  gardens,  and  prize-fighting  will

■^  Pepys'  Diary,  Aug.  14,  1666.  draw  to  them  all  ranks  of  people

Evelyn's  Diary,  June  16,  1670.  from  the  peer  to  the  pedlar '  (p.

^  John Houghton's '  CoUec-  60). They  had,  however,  at  this
tions for the Improvement  of  time quite passed out of the
Agriculture ' (1694), quoted  in  category  of  recognised  fashion-
Malcolm's  Anecdotes  of  London,  able  amusements,
iii.  57. As  late  as  1749,  Chet-  ^  Sipectator,  No.  141. Tatler,

VOL.  n.  o

194

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  v.

The  practice  of  vivisection,  wMch  is  at  all  times
liable  to  grave  abuse,  and  which,  before  the  introduction
of  ansesthetics,  was  often  inexpressibly  horrible,  appears
to  have  been  very  common.*  Bacon  had  recommended
inquirers  to  turn  their  attention  in  this  direction ;  and  the
great  discovery,  partly  through  its  means,  of  the  cir-
culation of  the  blood,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  had  brought  it  into  fashion  ;  but  Pope
spoke  of  it  with  extreme  detestation,^  and  Johnson,
several  years  later,  dwelt  with  just  indignation  upon
the  useless  barbarities  of  which  some  medical  students
were  guilty.^  The  poems  of  Gay  are  animated  by  a
remarkable  feeling  of  compassion  for  animals,''  and  the
Duke  of  Montague  is  said  to  have  established  a  home
for  them,  and  to  have  exerted  his  influence  as  a  great
landlord  warmly  in  their  favour.^

No.  134.  Guardian,  No.  61  (by
Pope).  See,too,theTFbrZ<i,No.l90.
'  See,  on  the  vivisection  of  dogs,
Coventry's  Pompey  the  Little,
part  iii.  ch.  xi.  The  author
adds  :  '  A  dog  might  have  been
the  emblematic  animal  of  jEscu-
lapius  or  Apollo  with  as  much
propriety  as  he  was  of  Mer-
cury ;  for  no  creatures,  I  beheve,
have  been  of  more  eminent  ser-
vice to  the  healing  tribe  than
dogs.  Incredible  is  the  number
of  these  animals  which  have
been  sacrificed  at  the  shrines  of
physic  and  surgery.  Lectures  of
anatomy  subsist  by  their  destruc-
tion. Ward  (says  Pope)  tried  his
drops  on  puppies  and  the  poor  ;
and  in  general,  all  new  medicines
and  experiments  of  a  doubtful
nature  are  sure  to  be  made  in
the  fh-st  place  on  the  bodies
of  those  unfortunate  animals.'
Swift,  in  one  of  his  Drapier's
Letters,  compares  the  threats  and

complaints  of  Wood  '  to  the  last
howls  of  a  dog  dissected  ahve,  as
I  hope  he  hath  sufficiently  been.'
Letter  4.

"  Spence's  Anecdotes,  sec.  viii.

^  '  Among  the  inferior  pro-
fessors of  medical  knowledge  is  a
race  of  wretches,  whose  lives  are
only  varied  by  varieties  of  cruelty;
whose  favourite  amusement  is  to
nail  dogs  to  tables  and  open  them
ahve  ;  to  try  how  long  hfe  may
be  continued  in  various  degrees  of
mutilation  or  with  the  excision
or  laceration  of  the  vital  parts ;  to
examine  whether  burning  irons
are  felt  more  acutely  by  the  bone
or  tendon,  and  whether  the  more
lasting  agonies  are  produced  by
poison  forced  into  the  mouth  or
injected  into  the  veins.' — The
Idler  (No.  17),  1758.

*  See  especially  his  poem  on
field  sports.

*  Spence's  Anecdotes,  Supple-
ment.

CH.  V.  BULL-BAITING.  195

At  the  same  time  the  change  was  only  in  a  small
section  of  the  community.  Bear-baiting,  when  it  ceased
to  be  an  amusement  of  the  rich,  speedily  declined  be-
cause of  the  scarcity  of  the  animals,  but  bull-baiting
through  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  a  po-
pular English  amusement.  In  Queen  Anne's  time  it
was  performed  in  London  at  Hockley  Hole,  regularly
twice  a  week,^  and  there  was  no  provincial  town  to
which  it  did  not  extend.  It  was  regarded  on  the  Con-
tinent as  peculiarly  English.  The  tenacity  of  the  Eng-
lish bull-dog,  which  would  sometimes  suffer  itself  to  be
cut  to  pieces  rather  than  relax  its  hold,  was  a  favourite
subject  of  national  boasting,  while  French  writers  pointed
to  the  marked  difference  in  this  respect  between  the
French  and  English  taste  as  a  conclusive  proof  of  the
higher  civilisation  of  their  own  nation. ^  Among  those
who  at  a  late  period  patronised  or  defended  bull-baiting
were  Windham  and  Parr ;  and  even  Canning  and  Peel
opposed  the  measure  for  its  abolition  by  law.  At  Stam-
ford and  at  Tutbury  a  maddened  bull  was,  from  a  very
early  period,  annually  hunted  through  the  streets.
Among  the  entertainments  advertised  in  London  in
1729  and  1730,  we  find  '  a  mad  bull  to  be  dressed  up
with  fireworks  and  turned  loose  in  the  game  place,  a

'  'Experienced  men  inured  to  city  ways,
Need  not  the  calendar  to  count  their  days.
When  through  the  town,  witli  slow  and  solemn  air,
Led  by  the  nostril,  walks  the  muzzled  bear,
Behind  him  moves,  majestically  dull,
The  pride  of  Hockley  Hole,  the  surly  bull.
Learn  hence  the  periods  of  the  week  to  name :
Monday  and  Thursday  are  the  days  of  game.'

Gay's  Trivia.
2  Tatler,  No.  134.  Guardian,  nsdions.'^Essays  on  Morality
No.  61.  '  The  bear-garden,'  says  (1st  ed.),  p.  7.  Hogarth  intro-
Lord  Kames,  '  which  is  one  of  duced  into  his  picture  of  a  cock-
the  chief  entertainments  of  the  fight,  a  Frenchman  turning  away
Enghsh,  is  held  in  abhorrence  with  an  expression  of  unqualified
by  the  French,  and  other  polite disgust.

o  2

196  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  v.

dog  to  be  dressed  up  with  fireworks  over  him,  a  bear  to
be  let  loose  at  the  same  time,  and  a  cat  to  be  tied  to  the
bull's  tail,  a  mad  bull  dressed  up  with  fireworks  to  be
baited.'  ^  Such  amusements  were  mingled  with  prize-
fighting, boxing  matches  between  women,  or  combats
with  quarter-stafls  or  broadswords.  Ducking-ponds,  in
which  ducks  were  hunted  by  dogs,  were  favourite  po-
pular resorts  around  London,  especially  those  in  St.
George's  Fields,  the  present  site  of  Bethlehem  Hospital.
Sometimes  the  amusement  was  varied,  and  an  owl  was
tied  to  the  back  of  the  duck,  which  dived  in  terror  till
one  or  both  birds  were  killed.  The  very  barbarous
amusement  of  cock-throwing,  which  was  at  least  as  old
as  Chaucer,  and  in  which  Sir  T.  More  when  a  young
man  had  been  especially  expert,  is  said  to  have  been
peculiarly  English.^  It  consisted  of  tying  a  cock  to  a
stake  as  a  mark  for  sticks,  which  were  thrown  at  it  from
a  distance  till  it  was  killed ;  and  it  was  ascribed  to  the
English  antipathy  to  the  French,  who  were  symbolised
by  that  bird.^

The  old  Greek  game  of  cock-fighting  was  also  ex-
tremely popular  in  England.  It  was  a  favourite  game
of  schoolboys,  who,  from  the  time  of  Henry  II.  till
the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  were  accus-
tomed almost  universally  to  practise  it  on  Shrove  Tues-
day; and  in  many  schools  in  Scotland  the  runaway
cocks  were  claimed  by  the  masters  as  their  perquisites.

'  Andrews' Eighteenth Cen-  Ush  People. Collier's Hist,  of

tury,  p.  60. Strutt's  Sports  and  the Drama. Andrews' Eigh-

Pastimes,  p.  259.  teenth  Century.  Chambers'  Book

"-  There  is,  however,  a  picture  of  Days.  Hone's  Everyday  Book.

representing  a  Dutch  fair,  in  the  Milson's Travels m England.

gallery  at  the  Hague,  where a  Muralt's Letters on England.

goose  is  represented  undergoing  One  famous  bear,  called  Sacher-

a  similar  fate.  son,  is  immortalised  by  Shake-

'  See,  on  these  sports,  Strutt's  speare.  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor,

Sports  and  Pastimes  of  the  Eng-  act.  i.  scene  i.

CH,  V,  COCK-FIGHTING.  197

A  curious  account  is  preserved  of  the  parish  of  Apple-
cross  in  Ross-shire,  written  about  1790,  in  which  among
the  different  sources  of  the  schoolmaster's  income  we
find  '  cock-fight  dues,  which  are  equal  to  one  quarter's
payment  for  each  scholar.'  ^  Henry  VIII.  built  a  cock-
pit at  Whitehall  ;  and  James  I.  was  accustomed  to
divert  liimself  with  cock-fighting  twice  a  week.  In  the
eighteenth  century  it  appears  to  have  rather  increased
than  diminished,  and  being  the  occasion  of  great  gam-
bling it  retained  its  place  among  very  fashionable  amuse-
ments ;  nor  does  it  appear  to  have  been  generally  re-
garded as  more  inhuman  than  hunting,  coursing,  or
shooting.  It  was  introduced  into  Scotland  at  the  close
of  the  seventeenth  or  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century  by  a  fencing  master  named  Machrie,  who  seems
to  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  benefactor  to  Scotland
for  having  started  a  new,  cheap,  and  innocent  amuse-
ment. He  wrote,  in  1705,  'An  Essay  on  the  Innocent
and  Royal  Recreation  and  Art  of  Cocking,'  in  which  he
expressed  his  hope  that  '  in  cock-war  village  may  be  en-
gaged against  village,  city  against  city,  kingdom  against
kingdom,  nay,  the  father  against  the  son,  until  all  the
wars  of  Europe,  wherein  so  much  innocent  Christian
blood  is  spilt,  be  turned  into  the  innocent  pastime  of
cocking.'  ^  The  fiercest  and  most  powerful  cocks  were
frequently  brought  over  from  Germany ;  and  the  Welsh
main,  which  was  the  most  sanguinary  form  of  the  amuse-
ment, appears  to  have  been  exclusively  English,  and  of
modern  origin.  In  this  game  as  many  as  sixteen  cocks
were  sometimes  matched  against  each  other  at  each  side,
and  they  fought  till  all  on  one  side  were  killed.  The
victors  were  then  divided  and  fought,  and  the  process
was  repeated  till  but  a  single  cock  remained.  County
engaged county  in  cocking  matches,  and  the  church

'  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals  of  Scotland,  iii.  269,
«  Ibid.  pp.  267,  268,

198 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

bells  are  said  to  have  been  sometimes  rung  in  honour
of  the  victor  in  the  Welsh  main.^

The  passion  for  inland  watering-places  was  at  its
height.  Bath,  under  the  long  rule  of  Beau  Nash,  fully-
maintained  its  old  ascendency,  and  is  said  to  have  been
annually  visited  by  more  than  8,000  families.  Anstey,
in  one  of  the  most  brilliant  satirical  poems  of  the  eigh-
teenth century,  painted,  with  inimitable  skill,  its  follies
and  its  tastes ;  and  the  arbitrary  but  not  unskilful  sway
and  self-important  manners,  of  its  great  master  of  the
ceremonies,  were  widely  celebrated  in  verse  and  prose.
Among  the  commands  which  he  issued  there  is  one
which  is  well  worthy  of  a  passing  notice.  Between
1720  and  1730  it  was  observed  that  young  men  of
fashion  in  London  had  begun  in  their  morning  walks  to
lay  aside  their  swords,  which  were  hitherto  looked  upon
as  the  indispensable  signs  of  a  gentleman,  and  to  carry
walking-sticks  instead.  Beau  Nash  made  a  great  step
in  the  same  direction  by  absolutely  prohibiting  swords
within  his  dominions,  and  this  was,  perhaps,  the  begin-
ning of  a  change  of  fashion  which  appears  to  have  been
general  about  1780,  and  which  has  a  real  historical  im-
portaiice  as  reflecting  and  sustaining  the  pacific  habits
that  were  growing  in  society.^  In  addition  to  Bath,
Tunbridge  Wells,  Epsom,  Buxton,  and  the  more  modest

'  Roberts'  Social  Hist,  of  the  story  of  a  gentleman  whom  he

Southern  Counties,  p.  421. The  reproved  for  swearing,  and  who

history  of  cock-fighting  and  cock-  was  at  last  so  molhfied  that  he

throA\dng  has been fully exa  said 'he  would  come  to  hear  him,

mined in a dissertation by  only he was afraid he should

Pegge,  in  the  ArchcBologia,  vol.  say  something against fighting

iii. ;  in  Beckmann's  Sist.  of  In-  of cocks.' — Wesley's Journal,

ventions,  vol.  ii. ;  and  in  Strutt's  March  1743.
Sports  and  Pastimes. See,  too,  "  See  a  curious  passage  from

Macky's  Totir  through  England,  '  The Universal Spectator,' of

i. 137 ;  Heath's  account  of  the  1730, quoted in  the Pictorial

Scilly  Islands,  Pinkerton's  Voy-  Hist,  of  England,  iv.  805. Beau

ages, ii. 756. Wesley  tells a  Nash's  Life,  by  Doran. Doran's

CH.  V.  WATERING-PLACES — SEA-BATHING.  199

Islington  retained  their  popularity,  and  a  new  rival  was
rising  into  note.  The  mineral  springs  of  Cheltenham
were  discovered  about  1730,  and  in  1738  a  i^egular  Spa
was  built.  Sea-batliing  in  the  first  half  of  the  eigh-
teenth century  is  very  rarely  noticed.  Chesterfield,
indeed,  having  visited  Scarborough  in  1733,  observed
that  it  was  there  commonly  practised  by  both  sexes,*
but  its  general  popularity  dates  only  from  the  appear-
ance of  the  treatise  by  Dr.  Richard  Russell  '  On  glan-
dular consumption,  and  the  use  of  sea- water  in  diseases
of  the  glands,'  which  was  published  in  Latin  in  1750,
and  translated  in  1753.  The  new  remedy  acquired  an
extraordinary  favour,  and  it  produced  a  great,  perma-
nent, and  on  the  whole  very  beneficial  change  in  the
national  tastes.  In  a  few  years  obscure  fishing-villages
along  the  coast  began  to  assume  the  dimensions  of
stately  watering-places,  and  before  the  century  had
closed  Cowper  described,  in  indignant  lines,  the  com-
mon enthusiasm  with  which  all  ages  and  classes  rushed
for  health  or  pleasure  to  the  sea.^

There  was  not,  I  think,  any  other  change  in  the
history  of  manners  during  the  first  sixty  years  of  the

article  on  Beau  Nash,  in  the  of  the  century  in  a  treatise  on  the
Oentleman's  Magazine.  Town-  subject  by  a  writer  named  Povey.
send's Hist,  of the House of  '  Suffolk Correspondence, ii.

Commons,  ii.  412-416.  The  61.  See,  too,  a  passage  from
evils  resulting  from  the  prevail-  '  The  Universal  Spectator,'  for
ing  fashion  of  wearing  swords,  1732,  quoted  in  Stone's  C/irowicZes
had  been  noticed  in  the  beginning of  Fasliion,  ii.  274.

2  '  Your  prudent  grandmammas,  ye  modern  belles,

Content  with  Bristol,  Bath,  and  Tunbridge  Wells,

When  health  required  it,  would  consent  to  roam.

Else  more  attached  to  pleasures  found  at  home ;

But  now  alike,  gay  widow,  virgin,  wife,

Ingenious  to  diversify  dull  life.

In  coaches,  chaises,  caravans,  and  hoys,

Fly  to  the  coast  for  daily,  nightly  joys,

And  all,  impatient  of  dry  land,  agree

With  one  consent  to  rush  into  the  sea.' Retirement.

200 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. CH.  v.

eighteenth  century,  so  considerable  as  to  call  for  extended
notice  in  a  work  like  the  present.  The  refinements  of
civilisation  advanced  by  slow  and  almost  insensible  de-
grees into  country  life  as  the  improvements  of  roads
increased  the  facilities  of  locomotion,  and  as  the  growth
of  provincial  towns  and  of  a  provincial  press  multiplied
the  centres  of  intellectual  and  political  activity.  In
these  respects,  however,  the  latter  half  of  the  century
was  a  far  more  memorable  period  than  the  former  half;
and  the  history  of  roads,  which  I  have  not  yet  noticed,
will  be  more  conveniently  considered  in  a  future  chapter.
The  manners  and  tastes  of  the  country  gentry  were  often
to  the  last  degree  coarse  and  illiterate,  but  the  large
amount  of  public  business  that  in  England  has  always
been  thrown  upon  the  class,  maintained  among  them  no
contemptible  level  of  practical  intelligence ;  and  some
circulation  of  intellectual  life  was  secured  by  the  cathe-
dral towns,  the  inland  watering-places,  and  the  periodical
migrations  of  the  richer  members  to  London  or  Bath.
The  yeomanry  class,  also,  as  long  as  they  existed  in
considerable  numbers,  maintained  a  spirit  of  indepen-
dence in  country  life  which  extended  even  to  the  meanest
ploughman,  and  had  some  influence  both  in  stimulating
the  faculties,  and  restraining  the  despotism  of  the
country  magistrates.^  Whatever  may  have  been  the
defects  of  the  English  country  gentry,  agriculture  under
their  direction  had  certainly  attained  a  much  higher
perfection  than  in  France,^  and  though  narrow-minded
and  intensely  prejudiced,  they  formed  an  upright,
energetic,  and  patriotic  element  in  English  public  life.

'  Defoe  has  noticed  this  inde- Will  boldly  tell  them  what  they  ought
pendence  in  hnes  more  remark- .  *?  *^°' ,.  .  , , .

able  for  their  meaning  than  for ^djometimes  punish  their  omissions

their  form.  Trm-bom  Englishman.

The  meanest  English  plowman  studies

Anr'keeps  thereby  the  magistrates  in ^  '  ^ee  the  coinparison  in  Arthur
awe  ;  Young  s  Tour  %n  France.

CH.  V.  THE  COUNTRY  GENTRY.  201

The  well-known  pictures  of  Sir  Roger  de  Coverley  and
of  Squire  Western  exhibit  in  strong  lights  their  merits
and  their  faults,  and  the  contrast  between  rural  and
metropolitan  manners  was  long  one  of  the  favourite  sub-
jects of  the  essayists.

That  contrast,  however,  was  rapidly  diminishing.
In  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  habit
of  making  annual  visits  to  London  or  to  a  watering-
place  very  greatly  increased,  and  it  contributed  at
once  to  soften  the  manners  of  the  richer  and  to  ac-
celerate the  disappearance  of  the  poorer  members  oi
the  class.  A  scale  and  rivalry  of  luxviry  passed  into
country  life  which  made  the  position  of  the  small  land-
lord completely  untenable.  At  the  beginning  of  the
century  there  still  existed  in  England  numerous  land-
owners with  estates  of  2001.  or  300^.  a  year.  The
descendants  in  many  cases  of  the  ancient  yeomen,  they
ranked  socially  with  the  gentry.  They  possessed
to  the  full  extent  the  pride  and  prejudices,  and  dis-
charged very  efficiently  many  of  the  duties  of  the
class ;  but  they  lived  exclusively  in  the  country,  their
whole  lives  were  occupied  with  country  business  or
country  sports,  their  travels  rarely  or  never  extended
beyond  the  nearest  county  town,  and  in  tastes,  in  know-
ledge, and  in  language  they  scarcely  differed  from  the
tenant-farmer.  From  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth
century  this  class  began  rapidly  to  diminish,  and  even
before  the  war  of  the  American  Revolution  they  had
become  very  rare.^ Though  still  vehement  Tories,  full

'  This  change  is  well  noticed  reckon  themselves  so  much  on  a

in  a  very  able  book  published  in  par,  that  a  small  estate  is  but

1772. The author says : '  An  another word for starving ; of

income  of  200Z.  or  SOOl.  a  year  in  course,  few  are  to  be  found,  but

the  last  age  was  reckoned  a  decent  they  are  bought up by  greater

hereditary  patrimony,  or  a  good  neighbours or become mere

establishment  for  life  ;  but  now  farmers.' — Letters on  England,

...  all  country  gentlemen  give  in  p.  229.
to  so  many  local  expenses,  and

202 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  V.

of  zeal  for  the  Church  and  of  hatred  of  Dissenters  and
foreigners,  the  Jacobitism  of  the  country  gentry  had
subsided  during  the  reign  of  George  II.,  and  they  gave
the  Pretender  no  assistance  in  1745.  Their  chief  vice
was  hard-drinking.^  Their  favourite  occupations  were
field  sports.  These  amusements,  though  they  somewhat
changed  their  character,  do  not  appear  to  have  at  all
diminished  during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, and  it  was  in  this  period  that  Gay,  and  especially
Somerville,  published  the  most  considerable  sporting
poems  in  the  language.  Hawking,  which  had  been
extremely  popular  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth
century,  and  which  was  a  favouiute  sport  of  Charles  II.,
almost  disappeared  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century.  Stag-hunting  declined  with  the  spread  of
agriculture,  but  hare-hunting  held  its  ground,  and  fox-
hunting greatly  increased.  Cricket,  which  would  occupy
a  distinguished  place  in  any  modern  picture  of  English
manners,  had  apparently  but  just  arisen.  The  earliest
notice  of  it,  discovered  by  an  antiquary  who  has  devoted
much  research  to  the  history  of  amusements,  is  in  one  of
D'Urfey's  songs,  written  in  the  beginning  of  the  century.^
It  was  mentioned  as  one  of  the  amusements  of  Londoners
by  Strype  in  his  edition  of  Stow's '  Survey '  published  in
1720,  and  towards  the  close  of  the  century  it  gi-eatly
increased.

'  Mrs.  Montagu,  in  one  of  her  am  very  happy  that  drinking  is

letters  from  Yorkshire  to  a  friend  not  within  our  walls. We  have

in  London,  writes  :  '  We  have  not  not  had one person disordered

been  troubled with  any  visitors  with  liquor  since  we  came  down,

since  Mr.  Montagu  went  away ;  though  most  of  the  poor  ladies

and  could  you  see  how  awkward,  in  the  neighbourhood  have  had

how  absurd,  how  uncouth  are  the  more  hogs  in  their  dra-wang-room

generality  of  people  in  this  coun-  than  ever  they  had  in  their  hog

try,  you  would  look  upon  this  as  sty.' — Doran's  Life  of  Mrs.  Mon-

no  small  piece  of  good  fortune.  tagu,  p.  36.

For the most part they are  ^  Strutt's  Sports  and  Pastimes,

drunken  and  vicious,  and  worse  p.  106.
than  hypocrites — profligates. I

CH.  V.  CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.  203

There  had  been  loud  complaints  ever  since  the  Re-
volution, both  in  the  country  and  in  the  towns,  of  the
rapid  rise  of  the  poor-rates,  but  it  seems  to  have  been
due,  much  less  to  any  growth  of  real  poverty  than  to
improvident  administration  and  to  the  dissipated  habits
that  were  generated  by  the  poor-laws. Although  the
controversy  on  the  subject  of  these  laws  did  not  come  to
a  climax  till  long  after  the  j^eriod  we  are  now  consider-
ing, the  great  moral  and  economical  evils  resulting  from
them  were clearly seen  by  the  most  acute thinkers.
Among  others,  Locke,  in  a  report  which  he  drew  up  in
1697,  anticipating  something  of  the  later  reasoning  of
Malthus,  pointed  out  forcibly  the  danger  to  the  country
from  the  great  increase  of  able-bodied  pauperism,  and
attributed  it  mainly,  if  not  exclusively,  to  '  the  relaxation
of  discipline  and  the  corruption  of  manners.' The  annual
rates  in  the  last  thirty  years  of  the  seventeenth  century
were  variously  estimated  at  from  600,000^  to  840,000?.
They  rose  before  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Anne  to  at  least
a  million. They  again  sank  for  a  time  after  an  Act,
which  was  carried  in  1723,  for  founding  workhouses  and
imposing  a  more  severe  discipline  on  paupers,  but  they
soon  regained  their  ascending  movement  and  continued
steadily  to  increase  during  the  remainder  of  the  century.
Popular  education  and  the  rapid  growth  of  manufacturing
wages  had  not  yet  produced  that  high  type  of  capacity
and  knowledge  which  is  now  found  among  the  skilled
artisans  of  the  great  towns,  but  the  broad  lines  of  the
English  industrial  character  were clearly discernible.
Probably  no  workman  in  Europe  could  equal  the  Eng-
lishman in  physical  strength, in  sustained  power  and
energy  of  work,  and  few,  if  any,  could  surpass  him  in
thoroughness  and  fidelity  in  the  performance  of  his  task
and  in  general  rectitude  and  honesty  of  character. On
the  other  hand,  he  was  far  inferior  to  most  continental
workmen  in  those  branches  of  labour  which  depended

204 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

on  taste  and  on  delicacy  of  toucli,  and  most  industries  of
this  kind  passed  into  the  hands  of  refugees.  His  require-
ments were  much  greater  than  those  of  the  continental
workman.  In  habits  of  providence  and  of  economy
he  ranked  extremely  low  in  the  industrial  scale ;  his
relaxations  usually  took  the  form  of  drunkenness  or
brutal  sports,  and  he  was  rather  peculiarly  addicted  to
riot  and  violence.  An  attempt  to  estimate  with  any
precision  the  position  of  the  different  classes  engaged  in
agriculture  or  manufacturing  industry  is  very  difficult,
not  only  on  account  of  the  paucity  of  evidence  we
possess,  but  also  on  account  of  the  many  different  and
fluctuating  elements  that  have  to  be  considered.  The
prosperity  of  a  class  is  a  relative  term,  and  we  must
judge  it  not  only  by  comparing  the  condition  of  the
same  class  in  different  countries  and  in  different  times,
but  also  by  comparing  it  with  that  of  the  other  sections
of  society.  The  value  of  money  has  greatly  changed,^
but  the  change  has  not  been  uniform  ;  it  has  been
counteracted  by  other  influences  ;  it  appKes  much  more
to  some  articles  of  consumption  than  to  others,  and
therefore  affects  very  unequally  the  different  classes  in
the  community.  Thus  the  price  of  wheat  in  the  seventy
years  that  followed  the  Revolution  was  not  very  materially
different  from  what  it  now  is,  and  during  the  first  half

>  It  is  wortliy  of  notice  that  700,000Z.  per  annum,  but
the  complaints  of  the  increasing  neither  had  any  family  to  pro-
price  of  living  in  the  first  half  vide  for,  and  both  lived  in  times
of  the  eighteenth  century  were,  when  that  income  would  have
among  the  upper  classes,  little  supported  a  greater  expense  than
less  loud  than  those  we  hear  in  a  million  would  do  now  ;  for  the
the  present  day.  Thus  the  author  truth  of  which  I  appeal  to  the  ex-
of  Faction  Detected  by  the  Evi-  perience  of  every  private  family,
dence  of  Facts,  which  was  pub-  and  to  the  known  advance  of
lished  in  1743,  speaking  of  the  price  in  all  commodities  and
royal  income  at  different  periods  articles  of  expense  whatsoever  '
of  Enghsh  history,  says  :  '  King  (p.  137).
William and  Queen  Anne  had

CH.  V.  CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.  205

of  the  eighteenth  century  it,  on  the  whole,  slightly
declined.  At  the  time  of  the  Revolution  it  was  a  little
under  41s.  a  quarter.  During  the  ten  years  ending  in
1705  it  was  about  43s.,  in  the  ten  ending  in  1715  it  was
about  44s. ;  in  the  twenty  ending  in  1735  about  35s.  ;
in  the  ten  ending  in  1745  about  32s. ;  and  in  the  ten
ending  in  1755  about  33s.  The  price  of  meat,  on  the
other  hand,  was  far  less  than  at  present.  The  average
price  of  mutton  throughout  England  from  1706  to  1730
is  stated  to  have  been  2^d.  a  pound.  From  1730  to
1760  it  had  risen  to  3d.  a  poimd.  The  price  of  beef,
from  1740  to  1760,  is  said  to  have  been  2^d.  a  pound.
Pork,  veal,  and  lamb,  as  well  as  beer,  were  proportion-
ately cheap. ^  We  must  remember,  too,  in  estimating
the  condition  of  British  labourers,  that  besides  their
wages  they  had  the  advantage  of  an  immense  extent  of
common  land.  Nearly  every  village  had  still  around  it
a  large  space  of  uninclosed  ground  on  which  the  cows,
sheep,  and  geese  of  the  poor  found  an  ample  pasture.

The  different  parts  of  England  differed  widely  in
prosperity,  the  counties  surrounding  London,  and  gene-
rally the  southern  half  of  the  island,  being  by  far  the
most  flourishing,  while  the  northern  parts,  and  especially
the  counties  bordering  on  Scotland,  were  the  most  poor.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  at  least  in  the  more  pro-
sperous parts  of  England,  the  condition  of  the  labourer
was  much  above  the  general  level  of  the  same  class  on
the  Continent.  Gregory  King,  in  his  very  valuable
estimate  of  '  the  state  and  condition  of  England '  in
1696,  has  calculated  that,  out  of  a  population  of  about
5,500,000,  about  2,700,000  ate  meat  daily,  and  that,  of
the  remaining  2,800,000,  1,540,000  ate  meat  at  least

'  These  and  many  other  sta.-  Hist,  of  the Working Classes,

tistics on the  subject  are  col-  iii.  append,  i. Thornton's  Over-

lected  in  Knight's  Pictorial  Hist.  Populatioii,  p.  202.
of  England, iv. 700. Eden's

206

ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

twice  a  week,  while  240,000  were  either  sick  persons  or
infants  under  thirteen  months  old.  There  remained
1,020,000  persons  '  who  receive  alms,  and  consequently
eat  not  flesh  above  once  a  week.'  It  would  appear  from
this  estimate  that  the  whole  population  ate  meat  at  least
once  a  week,  and  all  healthy  adults,  who  were  not
paupers,  more  than  once ;  ^  while  the  gigantic  con-
sumption of  beer,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,
makes  it  almost  certain  that  this  was  the  common
beverage  of  all  classes.  The  same  writer  makes  a
curious  attempt  to  estimate  the  average  incomes  of
families in the  different classes of  society  in  1688.

'  The  immense  proportion  the
paupers  bore  to  the  rest  of  the
population  will  strike  the  reader ;
but  Macaulay,  in  his  famous
third  chapter,  greatly  exaggerated
its  significance  as  indicating  the
amount  of  real  misery  in  the
community.  The  relief  was  out-
door rehef ;  there  appears  to  have
been  no  general  feeling  of  shame
about  accepting  it,  and  it  was  dis-
tributed with  a  most  mischievous
profusion.  Eichard  Dunning,  in
a  tract  published  in  1698,  asserts
that  the  parish  pay  was  in  fact
three  times  as  much  as  a  common
labourer,  having  to  maintain  a
wife  and  three  children,  can
afford  to  expend  upon  himself,
and  that  '  persons  once  receiving
parish  pay  presently  become
idle,  alleging  that  the  parish  is
bound  to  maintain  them,  and
that  in  case  they  should  work,  it
would  only  favour  a  parish  from
whom,  they  say,  they  shall  have
no  thanks.'  He  assures  us  that
'  such  as  are  maintained  by  the
parish  pay,  seldom  drink  any
other  than  the  strongest  ale-
house beer,  which,  at  the  rate

they  buy  it,  costs  50s.  or  31.  a
hogshead  ;  that  they  seldom  eat
any  bread  save  what  is  made  of
the  finest  wheat  flour.'  At  this
time  there  is  reason  to  believe
that  wheat  bread  was  almost
unused  among  the  labouring
poor.  The  formation  of  work-
houses in  1723  was  of  some  ad-
vantage, but  the  diet  of  their
inmates  was  most  imprudently
and  indeed  absurdly  liberal.  See
Thornton's  Over-Population,  pp.
205-207.  Knight's  PictorialHis-
tory,  iv.  844.  Macaulay's  pic-
ture of  the  condition  of  the  poor
should  be  compared  with  the
admirable  chapter  on  the  same
subject  in  Mr.  Thornton's  Over-
Population.  See,too, his  Labour,
pp.  11, 12.  The  annual  expendi-
ture in  poor  rates  is  said  to  have
trebled  between  the  close  of  the
reign  of  Anne  and  the  year  1750
(Macpherson,  Hist,  of  Commerce,
iii.  560) ;  yet  nearly  all  the  evi-
dence we  possess  seems  to  show
that  the  prosperity  of  the  country
had  during  that  period  been
steadily  increasing.

CH.  V.  CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.  207

That  of  the  temporal  lords  he  places  at  2,800Z. ;  that  of
baronets  at  880^. ;  that  of  esquires  and  of  other  gentle-
men respectively  at  450Z.  and  2801. ;  that  of  shopkeepers
and  tradesmen  at  4<bl. ;  that  of  artisans  and  handicrafts
at  4>0l. ;  that  of  labouring  people  and  out-servants  at
15^,  •  that  of  common  soldiers  at  14Z. ;  that  of  cottagers
and  paupers  at  61.  10s.  The  average  annual  incomes
of  all  classes  he  reckoned  at  321.  a  family,  or  71.  IBs.
a  head.  In  France  he  calculated  that  the  average
annual  income  was  61.  a  head,  and  in  Holland  8/.  Is.  4<d.
From  a  careful  comparison  of  the  food  of  the  different
nations  he  calculated  that  the  English  annually  spent
on  food,  on  an  average,  3^.  16s.  6d.  a  head ;  the  French,
21.  16s.  2d.  ;  the  Dutch,  21.  16s.  5^^

Such  estimates  can,  of  course,  only  be  accepted  with
much  reservation  ;  but  they  are  the  judgments  of  a  very
acute  contemporary  observer,  and  they  are,  no  doubt,
sufficiently  accurate  to  enable  us  to  form  a  fair  general
conception  of  the  relative  proportions.  In  1704  an
abortive  attempt  which  was  made  to  extend  the  system
of  poor-law  relief  produced  the  '  Giving  Alms  no  Charity,'
one  of  the  most  admirable  of  the  many  excellent  tracts
of  Defoe.  No  man  then  living  was  a  shrewder  or  more
practical  observer,  and  he  has  collected  many  facts
which  throw  a  vivid  light  on  the  condition  of  the  labour-
ing poor.  He  states  that  although  in  Yorkshire,  and
generally  in  the  bishopric  of  Durham,  a  labourer's  weekly
wages  might  be  only  4s.,  yet  in  Kent  and  in  several  of
the  southern  and  western  counties  agricultural  weekly
wages  were  7s.,  9s.,  and  even  10s.  He  mentions  the
case  of  a  tilemaker,  to  whom  he  had  for  several  years

'  This  curious  work  is  printed  the  wretchedness  of  the  poor
in  full  at  the  end  of  the  later  when  he  states,  on  the  authority-
editions  of  Chalmers'  Estimate.  of  King,  that  '  hundreds  of  thou-
Macaulay,  as  will  be  seen,  has  sands  of  families  scarcely  knew
much  overcharged  his  picture  of  the  taste  of  meat.'

208 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

paid  from  16s.  to  20s.  a  week,  and  states  that  journey-
men weavers  could  earn  from  15s.  to  20s.  a  week.  The
pauperism  of  the  country  he  ascribes  not  to  any  want
of  employment,  but  almost  wholly  to  habits  of  vagrancy,
drunkenness,  and  extravagance.  '  I  affirm,'  he  says,
'  of  my  own  knowledge,  that  when  I  wanted  a  man  for
labouring  work,  and  offered  9s.  per  week  to  strolling
fellows  at  my  door,  they  have  frequently  told  me  to  my
face  that  they  could  get  more  a-begging.'  '  Good  hus-
bandry,' he  adds,  '  is  no  English  virtue  ...  it  neither
loves,  nor  is  beloved  by,  an  Englishman.  The  English
get  estates  and  the  Dutch  save  them  ;  and  this  observa-
tion I  have  made  between  foreigners  and  Englishmen —
that  where  an  Englishman  earns  his  20s.  a  week,  and
but  just  lives,  as  we  call  it,  a  Dutchman  grows  rich,  and
leaves  his  children  in  very  good  condition.  Where  an
English  labouring  man,  with  his  9s.  a  week,  lives
wretchedly  and  poor,  a  Dutchman,  with  that  wages,
will  live  tolerably  well.  .  .  .  We  are  the  most  lazy,
diligent  nation  in  the  world.  There  is  nothing  more
frequent  than  for  an  Englishman  to  work  till  he  has  got
liis  pockets  full  of  money,  and  then  go  and  be  idle,  or
perhaps  drunk,  till  it  is  all  gone,  and  perhaps  himself
in  debt ;  and  ask  him,  in  his  cups,  what  he  intends,  he'll
tell  you  honestly  he  will  drink  as  long  as  it  lasts,  and
then  go  to  work  for  more.  I  make  no  difficulty  to
promise,  on  a  short  summons,  to  produce  above  a
thousand  families  in  England,  within  my  particular
knowledge,  who  go  in  rags,  and  their  children  wanting
bread,  whose  fathers  can  earn  their  15s.  to  25s.  a  week,
but  will  not  work.  .  .  .  The  reason  why  so  many  pre-
tend to  want  work  is  that,  as  they  can  live  so  well  on
the  pretence  of  wanting  work,  they  would  be  mad  to
have  it  and  work  in  earnest.'  He  maintains  that  wages
in  England  were  higher  than  in  any  other  country  in
Europe,  that  hands  and  not  employment  were  wanting,

CH.  V.  AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS.  209

and  that  the  condition  of  the  labour  market  was  clearly
shown  by  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  a  sufficient
number  of  recruits  for  the  army,  without  resorting  to
the  press-gang.  When,  a  few  years  later,  the  com-
mercial treaty  between  France  and  England  was  dis-
cussed, one  of  the  strongest  arguments  of  its  opponents
was  the  danger  of  French  competition,  on  account  of
the  much  greater  cheapness  of  French  labour.  '  The
French,'  said  one  of  the  writers  in  the  '  British  Mer-
chant,' '  did  always  outdo  us  in  the  price  of  labour ;
their  common  people  live  upon  roots,  cabbage,  and  other
herbage ;  four  of  their  large  provinces  subsist  entirely
upon  chestnuts,  and  the  best  of  them  eat  bread  made  of
barley,  millet,  Turkey  and  black  corn  .  .  .  they  gene-
rally drink  nothing  but  water,  and  at  best  a  sort  of  liquor
they  call  heuverage  (which  is  water  passed  through  the
husks  of  grapes  after  the  wine  is  drawn  off)  ;  they  save
a  great  deal  upon  that  account,  for  it  is  well  known  that
our  people  spend  half  of  their  money  in  drink.'  ^

As  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge  from  the  few  scattered
facts  that  are  preserved,  the  position  of  the  poor  seems
on  the  whole  to  have  steadily  improved  in  the  long
pacific  period  during  the  reigns  of  George  I.  and  George
II.  It  was  at  this  time  that  wheat  bread  began  to
supersede,  among  the  labouring  classes,  bread  made  of
rye,  barley,  or  oats,  and  the  rate  of  wages  slightly
advanced  without  any  corresponding,  or  at  least  equi-

'  British  Merchant,  i. 6, 7.  changed,  the  whole  town  comes

'  I think nothing so terrible,'  out  to  beg,  with  such  miserable

wrote  Lady  M.  Montagu,  when  starved  faces  and  thin  tattered

travelling through France in  clothes,  they  need  no  other  elo-

1718,  '  as  objects  of  misery,  ex-  quence  to  persuade  one of  the

cept  one  had  the  Godlike  attri-  wretchedness  of  their  condition.'

bute  of  being  capable  to  redress  — Lady  M.  W.  Montagu's  Works

them ;  and  all  the  country  vil-  (Lord  WharncUffe's  edition),  ii.

lages of France show nothing  89.
else. When  the  post-horses  are

VOL. II.  P

210 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  v.

valent,  rise  in  the  price  of  the  articles  of  first  necessity.
When  Arthur  Young  investigated  the  agricultural  con-
dition of  the  southern  counties  in  1768,  he  found  that
the  average  weekly  rate  of  agricultural  wages  for  the
whole  year  round,  was  10s.  9d.  within  20  miles  of  Lon-
don ;  7s.  8d.  at  a  distance  of  from  20  to  60  miles  from
London;  6s.  4id.  at  from  60  to  110  miles  from  London;
6s.  Sd.  at  from  110  to  170  miles.  The  highest  wages
were  in  the  eastern  counties,  the  lowest  in  the  western
counties,  and  especially  in  Gloucestershire  and  Wilt-
shire. In  some  parts  of  these  he  found  that  the  agri-
cultural wages  were  not  higher  than  4s.  6d.  in  winter
and  6s.  in  summer.  In  the  north  of  England,  which  he
described  in  1770,  he  found  that  agricultural  wages,  for
the  whole  year,  ranged  from  4s.  lid.  to  9s.  9d.,  the
average  being  7s.  Id.  Within  300  miles  to  the  north
of  London,  the  average  rate  in  different  districts  varied
only  from  6s.  9d.  to  7s.  2d. ;  but  beyond  that  distance
it  fell  to  5s.  8d.  Twenty  years  later,  the  same  admir-
able observer,  after  a  detailed  examination  of  the  com-
parative condition  of  the  labouring  classes  in  England
and  France,  pronounced  agricultural  wages  in  the  latter
country  to  be  76  per  cent,  lower  than  in  England,  and
he  has  left  a  most  emphatic  testimony  to  the  enormous
superiority  in  well-being  of  the  English  labourer.^

One  change,  however,  was  taking  place  which  was,
on  the  whole,  to  his  disadvantage.  It  was  inevitable
that  with  the  progress  of  agriculture  the  vast  tracts  of
common  land  scattered  over  England  should  be  re-
claimed and  enclosed,  and  it  was  almost  equally  in-
evitable that  the  permanent  advantage  derived  from
them  should  be  reaped  by  the  surrounding  landlords.

'  Arthur  Young's  Southern  of  the  Poor,  Thornton's  Over-
Tour,  pp.  321-324.  Northern  Populatwn  and  Labour,  Knight's
Tour,  iv.  293-297.  Tour  in  Pictorial  Hist,  of  England,  vol.
France. See,  too,  Eden's  Hist.  iv.,  Taine's  Anx^ien  Bdgime.

CH.  V,  ENCLOSURES — LONDON.  211

Clauses  were,  it  is  true,  inserted  in  most  Enclosure
Bills  providing  compensation  for  those  who  had  com-
mon rights ;  and  the  mere  increase  of  the  net  produce
of  the  soil  had  some  effect  in  raising  the  price  of  labour ;
but  the  main  and  enduring  benefits  of  the  enclosures
necessarily  remained  with  those  in  whose  properties
the  common  land  was  incorpoi'ated,  and  by  whose  capital
it  was  fructified.  After  a  few  generations  the  right  of
free  pasture,  which  the  English  peasant  had  formerly
enjoyed,  had  passed  away,  while  the  compensation
he  had  received  was  long  since  dissipated.  The  great
movement  for  enclosing  common  land  belongs  chiefly  to
the  reign  of  George  III.,  but  it  had  begun  on  a  large
scale  under  his  predecessor.  Only  two  Enclosure  Acts
had  been  passed  under  Anne,  and  only  sixteen  under
George  I.  Under  George  II.  there  were  no  less  than
226,  and  more  than  318,000  acres  were  enclosed.^

Though  the  population  of  London  was  only  about
a  sixth  part  of  what  it  now  is,  the  magnitude  of  the
city  relatively  to  the  other  towns  of  the  kingdom
was  not  less  than  at  present.  Under  the  Tudors  and
the  Stuarts  many  attempts  had  been  made  to  check
its  growth  by  proclamations  forbidding  the  erection  of
new  houses,  or  the  entertaining  of  additional  inmates,
and  peremptorily  enjoining  the  country  gentry  to  return
to  their  homes  in  order  '  to  perform  the  duties  of  their
several  charges  .  .  .  to  be  a  comfort  unto  their  neigh-
bours ...  to  renew  and  revive  hospitality  in  their
respective  counties.'  Many  proclamations  of  this  kind
had  been  issued  during  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth
century,  but  the  last  occasion  on  which  the  royal  prero-
gative was  exercised  to  prevent  the  extension  of  London
beyond  its  ancient  limits  appears  to  have  been  in  1674.^

'  M'Cullocli's Statistical  Ac-  ^  Eden's  Hist,  of  the  Poor,  i.

count  of  the  British  Empire,  136,  137.  Craik's  Hist,  of  Com-
i.  550.  meree,  ii.  114. See,  too,  on  the

p  2

212 ENGLAND  IX  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

From  that  time  its  progress  was  miimpeded,  and
Davenant  in  1685  combated  the  prevalent  notion  that
it  was  an  evil.^  The  cities  of  London  and  Westminster,
which  had  originally  been  far  apart,  were  fully  joined
in  the  early  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  partly,
it  is  said,  through  the  great  number  of  Scotch  who
came  to  London  on  the  accession  of  James  I.,  and
settled  chiefly  along  the  Strand. ^  The  quarter  now
occupied  by  St.  James's  Square,  Pall  Mall,  St.  James's
Street,  and  Arlington  Street,  was  pasture  land  till  about
1680.  Evelyn,  writing  in  1684,  stated  that  London
had  nearly  doubled  in  his  own  recollection ;  ^  but  in
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  Hackney,
Newington,  Marylebone,  Islington,  Chelsea,  and  Ken-
sington were  still  rural  villages,  far  removed  from
the  metropolis.  Marylebone,  which  was  probably  the
nearest,  was  separated  from  it  by  a  full  mile  of  fields.
The  growth  of  London  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  appears  to  have  been  chiefly  in  the  direction  of
Deptford,  Hackney,  and  Bloomsbury.  It  spread  also  on
the  southern  bank  of  the  Thames  after  the  building  of
Westminster  Bridge  in  1736,  and  especially  in  the
quarter  of  the  rich,  which  was  extending  steadily
towards  the  west.  Horace  Walpole  mentions  that
when,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  Lord  Burlington  built
his  great  house  in  Piccadilly,  he  was  asked  why  he
placed  it  so  far  out  of  town,  and  he  answered,  because
he  was  determined  to  have  no  building  beyond  him.  In
little  more  than  half  a  century  Burlington  House  was  so
enclosed  with  new  streets  that  it  was  in  the  heart  of  the
west  end  of  London.^ In  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  the

alarm  felt  at  the  increase  of  Lon-  -  Howell's Londinopolis  (1657),

don,  Pari.  Hist.  iv.  660,  676,  679,  p.  346.

742,  743.  3  Evelyn's Diary, June 12,

'  Essay upon Ways and  1684.

Means.  *  Anecdotes  of  Painting.

CH.  V.  LONDON.  213

most  fasMonable  quarters  were  Bloomsbury  Square,
Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  Solio  Square,  and  Queen  Square,
Westminster.  In  the  reign  of  George  II.  they  included
Leicester  Fields,  Golden  Square,  and  Charing  Cross.
Pall  Mall,  till  the  middle  of  the  century,  was  a  fashion-
able promenade.  Among  other  amusements,  smock-
racing  by  women  was  kept  up  there  till  1733.^

The  great  nobles  whose  houses  once  fringed  the
Strand  generally  moved  westward.  Cavendish,  Han-
over, and  Grosvenor  Squares,  as  well  as  New  Bond
Street,  the  upper  part  of  Piccadilly,  the  greater  part
of  Oxford  Street,  and  many  contiguous  streets  were
built  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century ;  but
Portman  Square  was  not  erected  till  about  1764.  On
the  present  site  of  Curzon  Street  and  of  the  adjoining
streets.  May  fair,  with  one  short  interruption,  was
annually  celebrated  till  1756.  It  lasted  for  six  weeks,
and  did  much  to  demoralise  the  neighbourhood,  which
was  also  greatly  injured  by  the  crowds  of  ruffians  who
passed  through  that  quarter  to  witness  the  frequent
executions  at  Tyburn.  In  1748  we  find  Chesterfield,
whose  house  stood  near  the  border  of  May  fair,  com-
plaining bitterly  that  the  neighbouring  district  was  full
of  thieves  and  murderers.^  It  appears  from  a  map  of
London,  published  in  1733,^  that  there  were  no  houses
to  the  noi-th  of  Oxford  Street,  except  the  new  quarter
of  Cavendish  Square  which  formed  a  small  promontory
bounded  by  Marylebone  Street  on  the  north  and  by  Ox-
ford Street  on  the  south,  and  extending  from  Vere  Street
on  the  west  to  near  the  site  which  is  now  occupied  hj
Portland  Eoad.  Moving  on  eastward  the  northern  fron-
tier line  of  London  touched  Montague  House,  now  the
British  Museum. It  then  gradually  ascended,  passed  a

'  Andrews' Eighteenth Cen- Mrs.  Montagu,  pp.  274,  275.
tury,  p.  62.  ^  Seymour's  Survey of  Lon-

2  Doran's  Life  and  Letters  of don.

214 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  v.

few  lanes  to  the  north  of  Olerkenwell  Green,  and  finally
reached  Hoxton,  which  was  connected  by  some  scat-
tered houses  with  the  metropolis.  To  the  east,  London
stretched  far  into  Whitechapel  Street,  Ratcliffe  High-
way, and  Wapping,  which,  however,  were  divided  from
one  another  by  large  open  spaces.  To  the  west  the  new
quarter  of  Grosvenor  Square  extended  close  to  Hyde
Park,  and  there  were  also  a  few  houses  clustered  about
Hyde  Park  Corner,  but  most  of  the  space  between
Grosvenor  Square  and  what  is  now  called  Piccadilly  ^
was  open  ground.  Along  the  Westminster  bank  of
the  river  the  town  reached  as  far  as  the  Horseferry
opposite  Lambeth.  London  Bridge  was  still  the  only
bridge  across  the  Thames,  and  the  only  considerable
quarter  on  the  southern  side  of  the  river  was  in  its
neighbourhood.  Except  a  few  scattered  villages,  open
fields  extended  over  all  the  ground  wliich  is  now  oc-
cupied by  the  crowded  thoroughfares  of  Belgravia,
Chelsea,  and  Kensington,  and  by  the  many  square  miles
of  houses  which  stretch  along  the  north  of  London  from
St.  John's  Wood  to  Hackney.

No  less  than  eight  parishes  were  added  between  the
Revolution  and  the  death  of  George  II., ^  and  many
signs  indicate  the  rapid  extension  of  the  town.  The
number  of  hackney  coaches  authorised  in  London,  which
was  only  200  in  1652,  was  800  in  1715,^  and  the  num-
ber of  sedan  chairs  was  raised  from  200  in  1694  to  400
in  1726.4  A  traveller  noticed,  about  1724,  that  while
in  Paris,  Brussels,  Rome,  and  Vienna,  coaches  could
only  be  hired  by  the  day,  or  at  least  by  the  hour,  in
London  they  stood  at  the  corner  of  every  street.^ The

'  The  street  was  then  only  called  ii.  215.

Piccadilly  to  Devonshire  House.  '  Macpherson,  ii.  449  ; iii.  14.

The continuation was called  *  Ibid.  ii.  655 ;  iii.  134.

Portugal  Street,  and  near  Hyde  ^  Macky's Journey through

Park,  the  Exeter  Eoad.  England,  i.im. Muralt's  ie^

-  Craik's  Hist,  of  Commerce,  ters  on  the  English,  p.  84,

CH.  V.  LONDON.  215

old  water  supply  being  found  inadequate  for  the  wants
of  the  new  western  quarter,  a  company  was  founded  in
1722,  and  a  reservoir  formed  in  Hyde  Park.'  Above
all,  in  1711  a  most  important  step  was  taken  in  the  in-
terests of  civilisation  by  the  full  organisation  of  a  Lon-
don penny  post.^  Great  progress  was  made,  as  we  have
already  seen,  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century
in  lighting  the  streets  and  protecting  the  passengers,
but  very  little  was  done  to  embellish  the  city.  The
pavement  was  scandalously  inferior  to  that  of  the  great
towns  of  the  Continent,  while  the  projecting  gutters
from  the  roofs  of  the  houses  made  the  streets  almost
impassable  in  the  rain,  and  it  was  not  until  the  first
years  of  George  III.  that  these  evils  were  remedied  by
law.^  Architectural  taste  during  the  ascendency  of
Vanbrugh  was  extremely  low,  and  it  is  worthy  of  note
that  the  badness  of  the  bricks  employed  in  building,
which  has  been  represented  as  a  peculiar  characteristic
of  the  workmanship  of  the  present  generation,  was  al-
ready a  matter  of  frequent  complaint.^

*  Macpherson,  iii.  121.  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen-

2  Compare Macpherson, ii.  tury  (p.  76),  declares  that  Lon-

608  ; iii.  13. The penny  post  don  houses seldom last more

was first instituted  in  1682  as  than forty  or fifty years, and

a  private  enterprise  by  an  up-  sometimes  drop before  the  end

holsterer named Murray, who  of  that  term. The  author  of  the

assigned  it  to  one  Lockwra,  and  Letters  concerning the  Present

Government  ultimately  adopted  State  of  England  (1772) says  :

it. Its first mention in the  '  The material of all common

statute  book  is  in  1711.  edifices,  viz.  bricks,  are  most  in-

^  Pugh's Life of Hanway,  sufferably  bad,  to  a  degree  that

pp.  127-139. See,  too,  the  de-  destroys  the  beauty  of  half  the

scription of the state  of the  buildings about town, making

streets  in  Gay's  Trivia. Mac-  them seem of dirt and mud

pherson's  Hist,  of  Commerce,  iii.  rather than brick.  ...  A  law

360,  477.  might  surely  be  enacted  against

■•  Macaulay has noticed (c.  using  or  making  such  detestable

iii.),  on the authority  of  Duke  materials,  by  having  all  bricks

Cosmo,  the  badness  of  the  bricks  undergo  a  survey  or  examination

of  the  city  which  was  destroyed  before sale, that are made  in

by  the  Fire. Muralt,  in  the  very  London  '  (p.  241).

216 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

The  London  season  extended  from  October  to  May,
leaving  four  months  during  which  the  theatres  were
closed  and  all  forms  of  dissipation  suspended.^  In  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  London  was  still  un-
able to  boast  of  any  public  gallery  of  ancient  pictures  or
of  any  exhibition  of  the  works  of  modern  artists.  The
British  Museum  was  not  yet  formed.  Zoological  Gar-
dens were  still  unknown,  and  there  was  nothing  of  that
variety  o±  collections  which  is  so  conspicuous  a  feature
of  the  present  century.  At  the  Tower,  it  is  true,  there
had  for  centuries  been  a  collection  of  wild  animals,
which  many  generations  of  country  visitors  regarded  as
so  pre-eminent  among  the  sights  of  London  that  it  has
even  left  its  trace  upon  the  language.  The  lions  of  the
Tower  are  the  origin  of  that  application  of  the  term
'  lion '  to  any  conspicuous  spectacle  or  personage,  which
has  long  since  become  universal.  A  much  larger  pro-
portion of  amusements  than  at  present  were  carried  on
in  the  open  air.  Besides  the  popular  gatherings  of  May
fair,  Bartholomew  fair,  and  Southwark  fair,  there  were
the  public  gardens  of  Vauxhall  and  of  Eanelagh,  which
occupy  so  prominent  a  place  in  the  pictures  of  fashion-
able life  by  Fielding,  Walpole,  Goldsmith,  Lady  W.
Montagu,  and  Miss  Burney,  and  also  the  less  famous
entertainments  of  Marylebone  Gardens,  and  of  Cuper's
Gardens  on  the  Lambeth  side  of  the  Thames.  Vaux-
hall dated  from  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,
but  Eanelagh  Gardens,  which  occupied  part  of  the
present  site  of  the  gardens  of  Chelsea  Hospital,  were
only  opened  in  1742.  In  the  reign  of  George  II.  Queen
Caroline  took  great  interest  in  the  improvement  of  the
London  parks,  and  it  is  to  her  that  London  is  chiefly
indebted  for  the  formation  of  the  Serpentine.  Kensing-
ton Gardens,  however,  were  still  reserved  for  the  royal

'  Rambler,  No.  124.

CH.  V.  COFFEE-HOUSES — FASHIONABLE HOURS.  217

family,  though  they  were  sometimes  thrown  open  to  the
upper  classes  as  a  special  favour  or  during  the  absence
of  the  Court.  Queen  Caroline  is  said  to  have  once
thought  of  making  St.  James's  Park  a  royal  garden,  as
it  had  been  before  the  Restoration,  but  to  have  been
dissuaded  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  in  answer  to  her
question  what  such  a  change  would  cost,  replied,  '  Only
three  crowns.'  One  of  the  consequences  of  the  early
dinner  hours  was  that  after-dinner  promenades  in  the
park  became  a  very  fashionable  pleasure.^

Coffee-houses,  though  apparently  less  conspicuous
centres  of  news,  politics,  and  fashion  than  they  had  been
under  Anne,  were  still  very  numerous.  At  the  present
day  every  traveller  is  struck  with  the  almost  complete
absence  in  London  of  this  element  of  continental  life,
but  in  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  coffee-
houses were  probably  more  prominent  in  London  than
in  any  other  city  in  Europe.  A  writer  who  described
the  metropolis  in  1708,  not  much  more  than  fifty  years
after  the  first  coffee-house  had  been  established  in  Eng-
land, estimated  the  number  of  these  institutions  at  nearly
3,000.2

The  fashionable  hours  were  becoming  steadily  later.
Colley  Cibber,  in  describing  the  popularity  of  Kynaston,
a  favourite  actor  of  female  parts  under  Charles  II.,  men-
tions that  ladies  of  quality  were  accustomed  to  take  him
with  them  in  their  coaches  to  Hyde  Park  in  his  theatrical
habit  after  the  play,  which  they  could  then  do,  as  the
play  began  at  four  o'clock.^  '  The  landmarks  of  our
fathers,'  wrote  Steele  in  1710,  '  are  removed,  and  planted
further  up  in  the  day  ...  in  my  own  memory  the  dinner

'  See  Larwood's  Story  of  the  lating  to  these  coffee-houses  will

London  Parks,  i.  121,  124,  129,  be  found  in  Timbs'  Cltih  Life  in

130  ;  ii.  57.  London.

-  Hatton's  New  View  of  Lon-  '  Gibber's  Apology,  ch.  v.
don,  i.  30. Many  particulars  re-

218  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  v.

hour  has  crept  by  degrees  from  twelve  o'clock  to  three.
Where  it  will  fix  nobody  knows.'  ^  In  the  reign  of
George  II.  the  most  fashionable  dinner  hour  appears  to
have  been  four.  The  habits  of  all  classes  were  becom-
ing less  simple.  Defoe  noticed  that  within  the  memory
of  men  still  living  the  apprentices  of  shopkeepers  and
warehousemen  habitually  served  the  families  of  their
masters  at  table,  and  discharged  other  menial  functions
which  in  the  reign  of  George  I.  they  would  have  indig-
nantly spurned. 2  The  merchants  who  had  hitherto  lived
in  the  city  near  their  counting-houses,  began,  early  in
the  eighteenth  century,  to  migrate  to  other  quarters,
though  they  at  first  seldom  went  further  than  Hatton
Garden. 3  Domestic  service  was  extremely  disorganised.
Almost  all  the  complaints  on  this  subject,  which  in  our
own  day  we  hear  upon  every  side,  and  which  are  often
cited  as  conclusive  proofs  of  the  degeneracy  of  the
English  people,  were  quite  as  loud  and  as  emphatic  a
hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  as  at  present.  It  was  said
that  while  no  servants  in  Europe  were  so  highly  paid  or
so  well  fed  as  the  English,  none  were  so  insolent,  ex-
acting, or  nomadic,  that  the  tie  of  affection  between
master  and  servant  was  completely  broken,  that  on  the
smallest  provocation  or  at  the  hope  of  the  smallest  in-
crease of  wages,  or  still  more  of  vails,  the  servant  threw

' Tatler, No. 263. Fielding  Old-fashioned haUs, dull aunts, and

writes—  croaking  rooks. ^ ^ ^

The  family  that  dines  the  latest  To  pass  her  time twixt  reading  and

Is  in  our  street  esteemed  the  greatest,  bohea,

But  latest  hours  must  surely  fall  To  muse,  and  spiU  her  solitary  tea,

'Fore  him  who  ueyer  dines  at  all.  Or  o'er  cold  coffee  trifle  wdth  the  spoon.

Epistle  to  Sir  R.  Walpole.  Count  the  slow  clock,  and  dine  exact  at

In  the country  the old  hours  ^°°^-

seem  to  have  gone  on Pope,  in  .  Behaviour  of  the  Servants  of

his  Epistle  to  Mrs Blount,  on  England, -p.  12. ^

her  leaving  town  for  the  country,  -/^^^ Lawrence's Life of

ll^^~,,  -  Fielding,  ^.m.

bne  went  to  plain  work  and  to  purling
brooks.

CH.  V.  DOMESTIC SERVICE.  219

up  his  place,  and  that  no  other  single  cause  contributed
so  largely  to  the  discomfort  of  families.  Servants  had
their  clubs,  and  their  societies  for  maintaining  each  other
when  out  of  place,  and  they  copied  only  too  faithfully
the  follies  and  the  vices  of  their  masters.  There  were
bitter  complaints  of  how  they  wore  their  masters'  clothes
and  assumed  their  masters'  names,  how  there  were  in
liveries  'beaux,  fops,  and  coxcombs,  in  as  high  perfec-
tion as  among  people  that  kept  equipages,'  how  near
the  entrance  of  the  law  courts  and  the  Parliament  a
host  of  servants  kept  up  '  such  riotous  clamour  and
licentious  confusion '  that  '  one  would  think  there  were
no  such  thing  as  rule  or  distinction  among  us.'  ^  In
the  theatres  especially  they  were  a  constant  source  of
disturbance.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  upper  classes  to
send  their  footmen  before  them  to  keep  their  places
during  the  first  acts  of  the  play,  and  they  afterwards
usually  retired  to  the  upper  gallery,  to  which  they
claimed  the  right  of  free  admission.  Their  constant
disorder  led  to  their  expulsion  from  Drury  Lane  Theatre
in  1737,  which  they  resented  by  a  furious  riot.  The
presence  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales  was  un-
able to  allay  the  storm,  and  order  was  not  restored  till

*  Spectator,  No.  88.  World,  or  rather  confederacies,  contri-
No.  157.  Angeloni's  Letters  on  buting  to  the  maintenance  of
the  English,  ii.  38-42.  Defoe's  each  other  when  out  of  place,
Behaviour  of  the  Servants  of  and  if  any  of  them  cannot  ma-
Engla7icl.  Fielding's  Old  Men  nage  the  family  where  they  are
Taught  Wisdom.  Gentleman'' s  entertained  as  they  please,  im-
Magazine,  1731,  pp.  249,  250.  mediately  they  give  notice  they
Gonzales,  a  Portuguese  traveller  will  be  gone.  There  is  no  speak-
who  visited  England  in  1730,  ing  to  them  ;  they  are  above  cor-
writes :  'As  to  the  common  and  rection.  ...  It  is  become  a  com-
menial  servants  [of  London]  they  mon  saying,  '  If  my  servant  ben't
have  great  wages,  are  well  kept  a  thief,  if  he  be  but  honest,  I  can
and  clothed,  but  are  notwith-  bear  with  other  things,'  and,  in-
standing  the  plague  of  almost  deed,  it  is  very  rare  to  meet  in
every  house  in  town.  They  London  with  an  honest  servant.'
form  themselves into  societies,  — Pinkerton's  Travels,  ii.  95

220 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

twenty-five  or  twenty-six  persons  had  been  seriously
injured.^

This  state  of  things  was  the  natural  consequence  of
luxurious  and  ostentatious  habits,  acting  upon  a  national
character  by  no  means  peculiarly  adapted  to  domestic
service.  There  were,  however,  also  several  special  causes
at  work,  which  made  the  condition  of  domestic  service  a
great  national  evil.  The  most  conspicuous  were  the
custom  of  placing  servants  on  board  wages,  which  was
very  prevalent  in  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and
which  encouraged  them  to  frequent  clubs  and  taverns ;
the  constant  attendance  of  servants  upon  their  mistresses
in  the  great  scenes  of  fashionable  dissipation ;  the  law
which  communicated  to  the  servants  of  peers  and  Mem-
bers of  Parliament  the  immunity  from  arrest  for  debt
enjoyed  by  their  masters  ;  and,  above  all,  the  system  of
vails,  which  made  servants  in  a  great  degree  indepen-
dent of  their  masters.  This  system  had  been  carried  in
England  to  an  extent  unparalleled  in  Europe  ;  and  the
great  prominence  given  to  it  in  the  literature  of  the  early
half  of  the  eighteenth  century  shows  how  widespread  and
demoralising  it  had  become.  When  dining  with  his
nearest  relation  a  gentleman  was  expected  to  pay  the
servants  who  attended  him,  and  no  one  of  small  fortune
could  accept  many  invitations  from  a  great  nobleman,
on  account  of  the  large  sums  which  had  to  be  distributed
among  the  numerous  domestics.  No  feature  of  Enghsh
life  seemed  more  revolting  or  astonishing  to  foreigners
than  an  English  entertainment  where  the  guests,  often
under  the  eyes  of  the  host,  passed  from  the  drawing-
room  through  a  double  row  of  footmen,  each  one  of  them
expecting  and  receiving  his  fee.  It  was  said  that  a
foreign  minister,  dining  on  a  great  occasion  with  a  noble-

'  Lawrence's  Life  of  Fielding,  pp.  63,  64. Mrs.  Delany's  Life  and
Correspondence,  i.  398,  399.

CH.  V.  DOMESTIC SERVICE.  221

man  of  the  highest  rank,  usually  expended  in  this  way
as  much  as  ten  guineas,  that  a  sum  of  two  or  three
guineas  was  a  common  expenditure  in  great  houses,  and
that  a  poor  clergyman,  invited  to  dine  with  his  bishop,
not  unfrequently  spent  in  vails  to  the  servants,  at  a
single  dinner,  more  than  would  have  fed  his  family  for
a  week.  Dr.  King  tells  a  story  of  a  poor  nobleman  who
in  Queen  Anne's  time  was  an  intimate  friend  of  the
Duke  of  Ormond,  and  who  regularly  received  a  guinea
with  every  invitation,  for  distribution  among  the  ser-
vants of  his  host.  The  effect  of  this  system  in  weaken-
ing the  authority  of  masters,  and  in  demoraHsing  ser-
vants, was  universally  recognised,  and  soon  after  the
middle  of  the  century  a  great  movement  arose  to  abolish
it,  the  servants  being  compensated  by  a  higher  rate  of
wages.  The  movement  began  among  the  gentry  of
Scotland.  The  grand  jury  of  Northumberland  and  the
grand  jury  of  Wiltshire  followed  the  example,  pledging
themselves  to  discourage  the  system  of  vails,  but  many
years  still  elapsed  before  it  was  finally  eradicated.^

Of  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  city  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  speak  with  confidence.  There  is  reason  to
believe  that  cleanliness  and  good  ventilation  had  greatly
increased,^  and  in  at  least  one  respect  a  marked  improve-

'  Eight  Letters  to  his  Grace  to  carry  off  the  water;  besides

the  Duke  of on  the  Custom  wells  in  most  public  yards,  and

of Vailsgiving  in  England  [by  pipes for conveying plenty of

Hanway,  the  Persian  traveller]  fresh  water  to  keep  them  clean

(London, 1760). King's Ancc-  and  sweet ; many  late stately

dotes  of  his  Own  Time,  pp.  51,  edifices,  large  clean  courts,  lofty

52. Eeresby's  Memoirs,  p.  377.  rooms,  large  sashlights,  &c.,  and

Angeloni's  Letters  on  the  Eng-  many  excellent  conveniences  both

lish,  ii.  38-42. World,  No.  60.  by  land  and  water,  for  supplying

Connoisseur, No. 70. Eoberts'  the  city  with  fresh  provisions  at

Social Hist, of the Southern  moderate  prices  .  .  .  must  con-

Counties,  pp.  32-34.  tribute  not  a  Uttle  to  make  the

^  '  Many of  its streets  have  city more healthy.'  —  Short's

been widened, made straight.  Comparative Hist, of  the  In-

raised,  paved  with  easy  descents  crease  and  Decrease  of  Mankind

222 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  V,

ment  of  the  national  health  had  recently  taken  place.
The  Plague  of  London  was  not  a  single  or  isolated  out-
burst. It  had  been  chronic  in  London  during  the  whole
of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  though  greatly  dimi-
nished had  not  been  extirpated  by  the  Fire.  By  the
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  it  completely  dis-
appeared, and  it  was  noticed  that  from  thiis  time  the
deaths  from  colic  and  dysentery  decreased  with  an  ex-
traordinary rapidity.  In  each  successive  decennial  period
in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  annual
average  of  deaths  from  this  source  was  much  less  than  in
the  preceding  one,  and  the  average  in  the  last  decen-
nial period  is  said  to  have  been  little  more  than  a  tenth
of  what  it  had  been  in  the  first  one.^  The  statistics,
however,  both  of  disease  and  of  population,  were  so  fluc-
tuating and  so  uncertain  that  it  is  rash  to  base  much  upon
them.  It  appears,  however,  evident  that  the  mortality
of  the  towns  as  compared  with  the  country,  and  the
mortality  of  infants  as  compared  with  adults,  were  con-
siderably greater  than  at  present,^  and  also  that  the
population  of  London  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  cen-
tury, if  it  did  not,  as  was  often  said,  absolutely  decrease,
at  least  advanced  much  less  rapidly  than  in  the  first
quarter. The  great  spread  of  gin-drinking  was  followed

in  England  and  Abroad  (1767),  onlyinLondonbutin  all  the  great

p.  20. See, too, Macpherson's  towns,  and  in  the  manner  of  liv-

Annals  of  Commerce,  iii.  321.  ing throughout the kingdom ;

'  Heberden's  Observations  on  particularly  in  respect  to  cleanli-

the Increase and Decrease of  ness  and  ventilation  '  (p.  35).
different  Diseases  (1801). This  ^  See  the article on Vital

eminent  authority,  having  given  Statistics  in  M'CuUoch's  Statis-

many  statistics  on the  subject,  tical  Account  of  the  British  Em-

concludes : '  The cause of so  pire, and Short's Comparative

great  an  alteration  in  the  health  History. According to Short,

of  the  people  of  England  (for  it  '  the  cities  and  great  towns  in  the

is  not  confined  to  the  metropolis)  kingdom  may  be  deemed  as  so

I  have  no  hesitation  in  attribut-  many slaughterhouses of the
ing  to  the  improvements  which  . people  of  the  nation  '  (p.  22).
have  gradually  taken  place,  not

CH.  V.  TREATMENT OF DISEASE.  223

both  by  a  serious  diminution  in  the  number  of  births,
and  by  a  great  increase  in  the  number  of  deaths,  and
was,  no  doubt,  regarded,  with  justice,  as  the  chief  enemy
of  the  public  health.^  Medical  science  had  been  some-
what improved,  but  the  practice  of  lowering  the  consti-
tution by  excessive  bleedings  was  so  general  that  it  may
be  questioned  whether  on  the  whole  it  did  not  kill  more
than  it  cured.  The  great  progress  of  botany  had,  as  was
natural,  some  effect  upon  it.  A  garden  of  medical  plants
was  created  at  Chelsea  by  the  Company  of  Apothecaries
as  early  as  1673,  and  it  was  greatly  improved  in  the
early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  chiefly  by  the  in-
strumentality of  Sir  Hans  Sloane.  This  very  remark-
able man  was  almost  equally  distinguished  as  a  physician
and  as  a  botanist,  and  among  other  services  to  medi-
cine he  greatly  extended  the  use  of  Peruvian  bark.^
A  still  more  important  fact  in  the  history  of  English
medicine  was  the  increased  study  of  anatomy.  The
popular  prejudice  against  dissection  which  had  for
centuries  paralysed  and  almost  prevented  this  study  still
ran  so  high  in  England  that  in  spite  of  the  number  of
capital  punishments,  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  the
civil  power  could  accommodate  surgeons  with  proper
subjects,  and  all  publicity  was  studiously  avoided. No

'  Dr.  Short  says  the  passion  we  have  two  shocking  effects  of

for  spirituous  liquors  '  began  to  this bewitching Hquor. First,

diffuse  its  pernicious effects  in  here  is  a  greater  barrenness,  a

1724,  at  the  very  time  when  the  decrease  or  want of 40,000  of

city  began to be  more fruitful  ordinary births  which  the  last

and  healthy  than it  had been  vicennary  produced,  instead  of  an

since the Eestoration. How  increase,  as  we  had  in  other  vi-

powerfuUy  this  poison  wrought  cennaries.  Secondly,  an  increase

let  us now  see. From  1704  to  of  12,000  buryings,  though  there

1724  were  born  336,514,  buried  was  so  great  a  defect  of  births.'

474,125. Let  us  allow  fourteen  — Short's  Comparative  History,

years  for  this  dire  bane  to  spread,  p.  21.

operate,  and become  epidemic;  ^  'Pvlien&j,  Progress  of  Botany

then  from  1738  to  1758  were  born  in  England,  ii.  85,  99-103.
296,831, buried 486,171. Here

224 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

English  artist,  unless  he  desired  to  hold  up  to  abhorrence
the  persons  whose  portraits  he  drew,  would  have  painted
such  a  subject  as  the  famous  study  of  anatomy  by  Rem-
brandt. With  such  a  state  of  feeling  it  is  not  surprising
that  the  English  medical  school,  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  should  have  been  far  inferior  to  that
which  gathered  round  the  chair  of  Boerhaave  at  Leyden.
In  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  however,  a  French  refugee
surgeon,  named  Bussiere,  began  for  the  first  time  to
give  public  lectures  on  anatomy  in  England,  and  the
example  was  speedily  followed  by  two  anatomists  of
great  ability.^  Cheselden  commenced,  in  1711,  a  series
of  lectures  on  anatomy,  which  continued  for  twenty  years.
The  first  Monro  opened  a  similar  course  at  Edinburgh  in
1719,  and  a  school  of  medicine  arose  in  that  city  which
in  the  latter  part  of  the  century  had  no  superior  in
Europe.  The  passion  for  anatomy  was  shown  in  the
illegal  efibrts  made  to  obtain  bodies  for  dissection ;  and
Shenstone,  in  one  of  his  elegies,  complains  bitterly  of
the  frequent  violation  of  the  tomb.^

In  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  also  the
first  serious  attempt  was  made  to  restrain  the  small-pox,
which  had  long  been  one  of  the  greatest  scourges  of
Europe.  Inoculation,  as  is  well  known,  was  introduced
into  England  from  Turkey  by  Lady  Mary  Montagu,  and
by  Dr.  Maitland,  the  physician  of  the  Embassy,  and  the
son  of  the  former,  afterwards  the  famous  traveller,  was
the  first  English  subject  who  was  inoculated.  On
her  return  to  England  in  1722,  Lady  Mary  Montagu
laboured  earnestly  to  propagate  the  system,  and  the
Princess  of  Wales,  afterwards  Queen  Caroline,  whose
mind  was  always  open  to  new  ideas,  and  who  exhibited

'  Nichols'  Literary  Anecdotes  Society  the  privilege  of  taking

of  the  Eighteenth Century, iv.  bodies  of  malefactors  for ana-

618. Miller's  Retrospect  of  the  tomical  purposes.  Hatton's  New

Eighteenth Century, ii. 10.  Vieio  of  London,  ii.  665.

Charles  II.  had  given  the  Eoyal  '^  Elegy  xxii.

CH.  V.  INOCULATION.  225

no  small  courage  in  carrying  them  out,  at  once  perceived
the  importance  of  the  discovery.  She  obtained  permis-
sion to  have  the  experiment  tried  on  five  criminals  who
had  been  condemned  to  death,  and  who  were  pardoned
on  the  condition  of  undergoing  it.  In  four  cases  it  was
perfectly  successful,  and  the  remaining  criminal  con-
fessed that  she  had  had  the  disease  when  a  child.

The  physicians,  however,  at  first  generally  dis-
couraged the  practice.  Popular  feeling  was  vehemently
roused  against  it,  and  some  theologians  denounced  it  as
tempting  Providence  by  artificially  superinducing  dis-
ease, endeavouring  to  counteract  a  Divine  visitation,
and  imitating  the  action  of  the  devil,  who  caused  boils
to  break  out  upon  the  body  of  Job.  Sir  Hans  Sloane,
however,  fully  recognised  the  value  of  inoculation,  and
the  Princess  of  Wales  had  two  of  her  children  inoculated
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  movement.  This  act  ex-
posed her  to  no  little  obloquy,  but  it  had  some  effect  in
encouraging  the  practice,  and  the  adhesion  of  Madox,
the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  was  useful  in  counteracting
the  theological  prejudice  it  had  aroused.  Still,  for  some
years  it  advanced  very  slowly.  Only  845  persons  were
inoculated  in  England  in  the  eight  years  that  followed
its  introduction,  and  it  seemed  likely  altogether  to  die
out,  when  news  arrived  that  some  of  the  planters  in  the
West  Indies  had  made  use  of  it  for  their  slaves  with
complete  success.  From  this  time  the  tide  turned.  In
1 746  a  small-pox  hospital  was  founded  in  London  for
the  purpose  of  inoculation,  and  in  1754  the  College  of
Physicians  pronounced  in  its  favour.  It  had,  however,
long  to  struggle  against  violent  prejudice.  As  late  as
1765  only  6,000  persons  had  been  inoculated  in  Scot-
land. In  1768  a  hospital  for  inoculation  at  Peter-
borough was  burnt  by  the  mob,  and  in  the  following
year  the  practice  was  forbidden  by  law  in  the  colony  of
Virginia.

VOL. II.  Q

226 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  v.

This  prejudice  was  less  unreasonable  than  has  been
supposed.  Though  some  patients  died  from  inoculation,
its  efficacy  in  securing  those  who  underwent  the  opera-
tion from  one  of  the  most  deadly  of  diseases  was  ^  un-
questionable. It  was,  however,  only  very  partially
practised,  and  as  its  object  was  to  produce  in  the  patient
the  disease  in  a  mitigated  form,  it  had  the  effect  of
greatly  multiplying  centres  of  infection,  and  thus  pro-
pagating the  very  evil  it  was  intended  to  arrest.  To
those  who  were  wise  enough  to  avail  themselves  of  it,
it  was  a  great  blessing ;  but  to  the  poor  and  the  ignorant,
who  repudiated  it,  it  was  a  scourge,  and  for  some  years
after  it  was  widely  introduced,  the  deaths  from  small-
pox were  found  rapidly  to  increase.  If  inoculation  can
be  regarded  as  a  national  benefit,  it  was  chiefly  because
it  led  the  way  to  the  great  discovery  of  Jenner.^  ^

It  was  in  this  respect  somewhat  characteristic  of
the  period  in  which  it  arose.  One  of  the  most  remark-
able features  of  the  first  sixty  years  of  the  eighteenth
century  is  the  great  number  of  new  powers  or  influences
that  were  then  called  into  action  of  which  the  full  sig-
nificance was  only  perceived  long  afterwards.  It  was
in  this  period  that  Russia  began  to  intervene  actively
in  Western  politics,  and  Prussia  to  emerge  from  the
crowd  of  obscure  German  States  into  a  position  of  com-
manding eminence.  It  was  in  this  period  that  the  first
steps  were  taken  in  many  works  which  were  destined  in
succeeding  generations  to  exercise  the  widest  and  most
abiding  influence  on  human  affairs. It  was  then  that

»  Lady M. W. Montagu's  teenth  Century,  iv.  625.  Nichols'

Works  (Lord  Whamcliffe's  ed.),  i.  Literary  Illustrations,  i.  277-280.

xxii, 55-60, 391-393. Baron's  Voltaire's  Lettres  sur  Us  Anglais,

Life of Jenner, i. 230-233.  let.  xi. Ueherden's  Observations

Gentleman's Magazine, xxvii.  on  the  Licrease  and  Decrease  of

409.  Haygarth  on  Castial  Small-  Disease,  p.  36.  Walpole's  Memoirs

pox (1793), i. 31. Nichols'  of  George  IIL  iii.  198. Stan-

Literary  Anecdotes  of  the  Eigh-  hope's  Hist,  of  England,  v.  8.

CH,  V.  DECLINE OF RELIGIOUS FANATICISM.  227

the  English  Deists  promulgated  doctrines  which  led  the
way  to  the  great  movement  of  European  scepticism ;
that  Diderot  founded  the  French  Encyclopedia  ;  that
Voltaire  began  his  crusade  against  the  dominant  religion
of  Christendom ;  that  a  few  obscure  Quakers  began  the
long  struggle  for  the  abolition  of  slavery ;  that  Wesley
sowed  the  first  seeds  of  religious  revival  in  England.
Without  any  great  or  salient  revolutions  the  aspect  of
Europe  was  slowly  changing,  and  before  the  middle  of
the  century  had  arrived  both  the  balance  of  power  and
the  lines  of  division  and  antagonism  were  profoundly
modified.  Industrial  interests  and  the  commercial  spirit
had  acquired  a  new  preponderance  in  politics,  and  theo-
logical influence  had  at  least  proportionately  declined.
The  fear  of  Mohammedan  aggression,  which  was  one
great  source  of  theological  passions  in  Christendom,  had
now  passed  away.  The  power  of  the  Turks  was  broken
by  the  war  which  ended  in  the  Peace  of  Carlo witz,  and
eighteen  years  later  by  the  victories  of  Eugene,  and
although  they  waged  a  successful  war  with  Austria  in
1739,  their  triumph  was  much  more  due  to  the  dis-
organisation of  their  opponents  than  to  their  own
strength.  Among  Christian  sects  the  frontier  lines  were
now  clearly  traced.  In  Germany,  as  we  have  seen,  the
political  position  of  Protestantism  at  the  time  of  the
Eevolution  appeared  very  precarious,  and  a  new  danger
arose  when  the  Sovereign  of  Saxony  bartered  his  faith
for  the  crown  of  Poland.  But  this  danger  had  wholly
passed.  The  elevation  of  Hanover  into  an  Electorate
and  of  Prussia  into  a  kingdom,  the  additional  strength
acquired  by  Hanover  through  its  connection  with  Eng-
land, and  the  rapid  development  of  the  greatness  of
Prussia,  would  have  secured  German  Protestantism  from
danger  even  if  the  zeal  of  the  Catholic  States  had  not
greatly  abated.  The  only  religious  war  of  the  period
broke  out  in  Switzerland  in  1712  ;  it  ended  in  the  com-

Q  2

228  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  v.

plete  triumph  of  the  Protestant  cantons,  and  the  spirit
of  fanaticism  and  of  persecution  had  everywhere  declined.
Two  Protestant  States,  however,  which  had  played  a
great  and  noble  part  in  the  history  of  the  seventeenth
century,  had  sunk  gradually  into  comparative  insig-
nificance. Sweden  never  recovered  the  effects  of  its
disastrous  war  with  Russia.  Holland,  through  causes
that  were  partly  political  and  partly  economical,  had
ceased  to  exercise  any  great  influence  beyond  its  borders.
France  exhibited  some  decline  of  energy  and  ambition,
and  a  marked  decline  of  administrative  and  military
ability ;  and  some  of  the  elements  of  decomposition
might  be  already  detected  which  led  to  the  convulsions
of  the  Revolution.  In  England  the  Protestant  suc-
cession and  parliamentary  institutions  were  firmly  es-
tablished, and  the  position  of  the  country  in  Europe
was  on  the  whole  sustained.

EMIGRATION.  229

CHAPTER  VI.

THE  COLONIES  AND  SCOTLAND.

Among  the  British  dependencies  in  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  first  place  must  be  given  to  the
colonies  in  North  America. It  was  a  signal  proof  of  the
wisdom of  the  English  legislators  of  the  seventeenth
century,  that  they  conceded  to  these  colonies  charters
which  secured  them  an  almost  absolute  self-government ;
while  the  number  of  the  American  provinces,  and  the
diversity  of  the  religions  of  the  colonists,  led  to  a  much
larger  measvn^e  of  religious  liberty  than  existed  in  Europe.
To  these  two  inestimable  advantages  must  be  added  a
country of  almost  unlimited resources, and  a  people
who,  in  energy,  moral  excellence,  and  practical  wisdom,
were probably unsurpassed  upon  the earth. In the
present  century the  immigration of  a large foreign
population  is  seldom  favourable  to  the  moral  condition
of  a  nation. Emigration  has  become  so  easy  and  so
familiar,  that  it  is  the  resource  of  multitudes  but  little
removed from simple pauperism. Men of ordinary
characters  usually  deteriorate  when  severed  from  the
ties  of  home  traditions,  associations,  and  opinions ;  and
they  seldom  feel  any  strong  attachment  for  a  country
which  was  not  that  of  their  childhood. But  in  the  seven-
teenth century  the  conditions  of  emigration  were  es-
sentially  different. The  difficulties of  the enterprise
were  such  that  those  who  encountered  them  were  almost
always  men  of  much  more  than  common  strength  of
character,  and  they  were  to  a  very  large  extent  men

230 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ca.  vl.

whose  motive  in  abandoning  their  country  was  the
intensity  of  their  religious  or  political  convictions.  It
is  the  peculiarity  of  the  British  colonies  in  America  that
they  were  mainly  founded  and  governed  by  such  men.
Puritans  in  New  England,  Episcopalians  in  Virginia,
Quakers  in  Pennsylvania,  Catholics  in  Maryland — each
province  contained  numbers  who,  during  the  persecu-
tions of  the  Stuarts  or  of  the  Commonwealth,  had  sought
in  the  Western  world  the  opportunity  of  freely  professing
their  faith.  From  the  time  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  to
the  time  when  the  Salzburg  Protestants  flocked  to  the
new  colony  of  Georgia  in  1732,  America  was  pre-
eminently the  home  of  the  refugees ;  and  this  fact  is,
perhaps,  the  most  important  in  its  history.  After  all
that  can  be  said  of  material  and  intellectual  advantages,
it  remains  true  that  moral  causes  lie  at  the  root  of  the
greatness  of  nations  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  no  nation
ever  started  on  its  career  with  a  larger  proportion  of
strong  characters,  or  a  higher  level  of  moral  conviction,
than  the  English  colonies  in  America.

Many  other  circumstances  combined  to  mark  them
out  as  the  predestined  seat  of  a  great  free  nation.
Founded  in  nearly  every  case  without  any  pecuniary
assistance  from  the  mother  country,  and  separated  from
it  by  3,000  miles  of  water,  they  were,  during  the
earlier  stages  of  their  existence,  practically  almost  be-
yond the  knowledge  and  control  of  the  Government  at
home ;  and  most  of  the  colonists  belonged  to  those  non-
episcopal  Churches  which,  by  throwing  on  the  people
the  duties  of  ecclesiastical  government,  have  been  the
best  schools  of  political  freedom.  Without  bishops,
without  peers,  without  a  resident  sovereign,  without
superfluous  offices  or  endowments,  with  a  population
consisting  almost  wholly  of  freeholders  scattered  thinly
over  an  immense  territory  and  mainly  occupied  in  agri-
cultural pursuits,  their  politics were  naturally  of  the

CH.  VI.  SHADOWS OF COLONIAL LIFE.  231

simplest  and  freest  kind;  and  they  almost  entirely-
escaped  the  corruption  that  so  deeply  tainted  the
Government  at  home.  Their  progress,  though  less
rapid  than  it  afterwards  became,  was  eminently  healthy
and  steady.  In  less  than  eighty  years  after  the  first
permanent  English  settlement  there  were  twelve  distinct
colonial  governments  ;  and  the  population,  which  at  the
time  of  the  Revolution  was  estimated  at  about  200,000,
had  risen  to  1,000,000  some  years  before  the  middle  of
the  century.^

There  were,  no  doubt,  many  shadows  on  the  picture.
From  the  nature  of  their  population  the  American
colonies  contained  a  very  large  amount  of  the  fiercest
religious  fanaticism ;  and  although  in  some  provinces
noble  efforts  were  made  to  establish  freedom  of  worship,
these  efforts  were  altogether  exceptional.  What  re-
ligious liberty  existed  was  much  more  the  consequence
of  the  extent  of  territory,  and  of  the  multiplication  of
provinces,  which  enabled  each  sect  to  find  a  home,  than
of  the  dispositions  of  the  people  themselves.^  The  his-
tory of  Salem  witchcraft,  of  the  persecution  of  the
Quakers  in  Massachusetts,  and  of  the  suppression  of
religious  liberty  in  Maryland,  as  well  as  a  crowd  of
savage  or  absurd  laws  regulating,  in  the  interests  of
religion,  not  only  the  opinions  but  also  the  minutest
actions  of  the  people,  remain  to  show  how  far  the
colonists  were  from  attaining  any  high  general  standard
of  religious  freedom.  Nor  were  their  faults  exclusively
those  of  saints.  Their  warfare  and  intercourse  with
Indians  were  often  marked  by  gross  cruelty  or  injustice.
The  practice  of  kidnapping  men  at  the  English,  Scotch,
or  Irish  ports,  to  sell  them  to  American  planters,  con-

'  Bildreth's  Hist,  of  the  United  colonies  in  Burke's  Account  of

States  (ed.  1849),  ii.  127,  373.  the European Settlements in

-  See  two  remarkable  chapters  America.
on  religious intolerance  in  the

232 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi.

tinned  far  into  the  eighteenth  century;  a  numerous
race  of  daring  pirates  found  secure  homes  along  the
deserted  seaboards  of  America ;  and  the  colonial  popula-
tion, if  it  contained  much  of  the  highest  excellence,  con-
tained also  not  a  little  of  the  refuse,  of  Europe.  As
numbers  increased  and  as  the  condition  of  society  became
more  complex,  violent  disputes  arose  in  many  provinces
between  the  colonists  and  the  proprietary,  and  they
generally  ended  in  an  increase  of  the  power  of  the
Crown.  The  proprietary  governments  sometimes  de-
generated into  narrow  oligarchies  ;  the  theocratical
laws  of  New  England  excited  wide  and  general  irrita-
tion, and  in  the  last  days  of  the  Stuarts  there  were
many  conflicts  between  the  Home  Government  and  the
colonies.  Under  Charles  II.  the  charter  of  Massachu-
setts was  annulled  on  the  pretext  of  violation  of  the
Navigation  Act ;  under  James  II.  the  illegal  Declara-
tion of  Indulgence  was  published  in  the  colonies,  and
the  constitutions  of  Rhode  Island,  of  Connecticut,  and
of  Plymouth  were  invaded.

They  were  re-established  at  the  Revolution,  but  that
great  event  was  on  the  whole  not  favourable  to  America.
While  it  greatly  lowered  the  royal  authority  at  home,  it
rather  increased  it  beyond  the  Atlantic  ;  for  the  com-
mercial classes  who  rose  to  power  viewed  with  extreme
jealousy  the  growing  independence  of  the  colonies,  and
were  especially  anxious  to  secure  for  themselves  the
most  rigid  monopoly  of  trade.  William  more  than
once  exercised  his  power  of  veto  against  declaratory
Acts  of  the  Colonial  Assemblies  tending  towards  inde-
pendence, and  there  was  a  great  desire  on  the  part  of
the  Government  to  bring  all  the  colonies  under  the
direct  management  of  the  Crown.  The  disputes  in
some  colonies  between  the  colonists  and  the  proprie-
taries, the  embarrassment  resulting  in  time  of  war
from  distinct  forms  of  government, the  Jacobitism  of

CH.  VI. CONSTITUTIONS OF  THE AMERICAN  COLONIES. 233

Penn,  who  had  founded  one  great  colony,  and  the
Catholicism  of  Lord  Baltimore,  who  had  established
another,  assisted  in  the  transformation.  The  charter
of  Massachusetts  was  not  restored,  but  a  new  charter
was  granted  much  more  favourable  to  the  Crown.  Bills
were  brought  in,  in  1701  and  in  1721,  for  the  resump-
tion of  all  the  colonial  charters ;  and  although  these
bills  were  not  carried,  several  charters  were  surrendered
in  the  thirty  years  that  followed  the  Revolution,  and  a
new  system  was  established  more  favourable  to  the
supremacy  of  the  Crown.'  It  is  not  necessary  here  to
follow  in  detail  these  changes,  which  have  now  lost  most
of  their  interest,  and  it  is  sufficient  to  indicate  their
general  scope.  In  the  old  proprietary  and  charter
colonies  the  forms  of  government  were  very  various,
but  the  great  principle  was  the  division  of  power,  in
widely  different  proportions,  between  the  proprietary
and  the  freeholders ;  and  the  colonial  legislatures,
though  restricted  in  their  sphere,  were  in  that  sphere
almost  supreme.  In  the  proprietary  colonies,  which
consisted,  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution,  of  Maryland,
Pennsylvania,  Carolina,  and  Delaware,  certain  indivi-
duals called  proprietaries  appointed  the  governors  and
authorised  them  to  summon  legislative  assemblies.  In
the  other  charter  colonies,  which  then  consisted  of  Mas-
sachusetts, Rhode  Island,  and  Connecticut,  nearly  all
power  resided  with  the  freemen.  In  the  Crown  colonies,
on  the  other  hand,  the  government  was  a  faint  copy  of
the  English  Constitution.  Every  Bill,  in  order  to  be-
come law,  had  to  be  read  three  times  by  the  Council
and  Assembly,  and  assented  to  by  the  Governor.  The
Governor  and  the  Council,  as  well  as  the  judges,  were
appointed  by  the  Crown,  but  the  Assembly  was  a  repre-
sentative body  elected  by  the  colonists. The  members

See  Bancroft,  iii.  68-70,  107,  108. Hildreth,  ii.  123,  124.

^34 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vt.

of  the  Council  were  nominated  from  among  the  chief
persons  in  the  colony.  They  discharged  the  functions
not  only  of  a  House  of  Lords,  but  also  of  a  Privy  Council
to  the  Governor,  and  in  some  cases  of  a  Court  of
Chancery,  but  they  only  held  office  during  pleasure.
The  Crown  did  not  consider  itself  bound  by  the  colonial
Acts,  and  reserved  to  itself  a  power  of  subsequent  veto
in  the  case  of  measures  which  had  received  the  assent
of  the  Governor ;  and  civil  cases  of  the  more  important
kind  might  be  carried  on  appeal  to  England.  In  1696
a  law  was  passed  modifying  the  condition  of  the  charter
colonies,  enjoining  that  no  proprietors  should  dispose  of
their  land,  without  licence  from  the  Sovereign,  to  any
but  British  subjects,  conferring  on  the  Crown  a  nega-
tive upon  the  Governors,  who  were  nominated  by  the
proprietors,  and  asserting  the  nullity  of  any  colonial
Act  or  usage  that  was  repugnant  to  English  Acts
relating  to  the  colonies.'  To  maintain  the  complete
ascendency  of  the  British  Parliament  over  all  colonial
authorities  became  a  fundamental  maxim,  and  each
change  in  government  was  intended  to  strengthen  the
influence  of  the  Crown.  During  the  peaceful  adminis-
tration of  Walpole,  however,  the  moderation  of  the
Government  extended  to  the  colonies,  and  the  happy
neglect  of  Newcastle,  to  whose  department  they  be-
longed, was  probably  on  the  whole  very  conducive  to
their  prosperity.^

'  Bancroft,  iii.  105. Macpher-  a  sinecure,  and  during  all  that

son's Annals  of  Commerce,  ii.  period the Duke of  Newcastle

683,  684.  had  been  Secretary  of  State. It

-  Walpole  gives  a  curious  de-  would  not  be  credited  what  reams

scription  of  '  the  extreme  igno-  of  paper,  representations,  memo-

rance  in  which  the  English  Court  rials,  petitions  from  that  quarter

had  kept  themselves  of  the  affairs  of  the  world  lay  mouldering  and

of America.' '  The Board of  unopened  in  his  office.  ...  He

Trade  during Sir  E. Walpole's  knew  as  Httle  of  the  geography

administration  had  very  faultily  of his  province  as  of  the  state

been  suffered  to  lapse  almost  into  of  it. When General  Ligonier

CH.  VI.  PROGRESS OF THE COLONIES.  235

They  had  long  eclipsed  all  rivals  in  North  America.
The  great  extent  of  Spanish  territory  which  spread  to
the  south  of  the  British  colonies  was  afflicted  with  that
political  atrophy  which  had  passed  over  the  other  parts
of  the  once  mighty  empire  to  which  it  belonged ;  and
the  Dutch,  who  in  so  many  quarters  rivalled  or  surpassed
the  colonial  enterprise  of  England,  had  been  long  driven
from  North  America.  New  Netherlands,  captured  by
the  English  in  1664,  was  confirmed  as  a  British  pos-
session by  the  Peace  of  1667,  the  Dutch  retaining,  as
a  compensation,  the  colony  of  Surinam,  in  Guiana,
which  they  had  taken  from  the  English.  New  Amster-
dam, the  capital  of  the  Dutch  settlement  in  North  Ame-
rica, consisted  chiefly  of  small  thatched  houses,  and  was
so  poor  and  so  mean  that  the  English  general  com-
plained that  he  was  unable  to  find  in  the  town  bedding
for  his  soldiers.  In  compliment  to  the  brother  of  the
King,  it  was  called  by  its  conquerors  New  York — a
name  destined  to  occupy  a  great  space  in  the  eyes  of
the  world.  The  French  settlements  were  more  im-
portant, but  they  were  dwarfed  and  stunted  by  a  re-
strictive and  centraHsed,  though  not  unskilful,  system
of  government ;  ^  and  when  the  Revolution  involved  the
two  nations  in  war,  the  superior  force  of  the  English
colonies  was  so  manifest  that  William  refused  the  offer
of  colonial  neutrality  which  had  been  made  by  Lewis.
The  French  settlers  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution  were
officially  reckoned  at not  more  than 11,249  persons,

hinted  some  defence  to  him  for  European  Settlements  in  America

Annapolis,  he  replied,  with  his  (published  anonymously  in  1757),

evasive  lisping hurry : "  Anna-  which  was written at least in

polls,  Annapohs  ? Oh,  yes ! An-  part by Burke, a much more

napohs  must  be  defended,  to  be  favourable  judgment  is  passed  on

sure Annapohs should be de-  the  French  colonial  governments

fended — Where  is  Annapolis  ?"  '  than  is  usual  in  modern  Ameri-

Memoirs  of  George  II.  i.  396.  can  and  Enghsh  histories.
'  In  that  able  work  on  The

236 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vi.

about  a  twentieth  part  of  the  population  of  the  English
colonies.^  They  were  scattered  over  Canada,  Acadia,
Newfoundland,  and  the  borders  of  Hudson's  Bay  ;  they
laid  claim  to  large  tracts  of  almost  uninhabited  territory,
which  were  under  British  rule  ;  and  though  each  nation
possessed,  beyond  dispute,  tracts  immeasurably  greater
than  it  could  occupy,  a  keen  competition  existed  be-
tween them.  A  long  series  of  wars,  rendered  very
horrible  by  the  employment  on  both  sides  of  Indian
auxiliaries,  ensued.  The  Peace  of  Ryswick  did  not
alter  the  relative  positions  of  the  two  nations,  as  it  pro-
vided that  each  should  possess  the  territories  it  occupied
before  the  war,  and  that  commissioners  should  be  ap-
pointed to  settle  the  disputed  frontier.  The  Peace  of
Utrecht  advanced  greatly  the  English  power,  for  New-
foundland, Acadia,  now  called  Nova  Scotia,  and  the
borders  of  Hudson's  Bay,  passed  into  their  possession,
but  the  frontier  line  continued  ill-defined,  and  a  subject
of  perpetual  dispute.  The  French  endeavoured  with
great  energy  to  repair  their  disasters.  They  occupied
Cape  Breton,  which  commanded  the  St.  Lawrence,  and
erected  there  the  powerful  fortifications  of  Louisburg.
They  strengthened  their  new  colony  of  Louisiana,
founded  New  Orleans  in  1718,  and  encroached  steadily
on  what  was  claimed  as  English  territory  along  the  Ohio
and  the  Alleghany.  The  establishment  of  Georgia
brought  the  English  colonists  into  closer  connection
with  the  Spaniards ;  and  during  the  war  of  the  Austrian
succession  Oglethorpe  carried  on  hostilities  with  skill
and  daring  along  the  disputed  frontiers  of  Georgia  and
Florida.  In  the  north  the  English  colonists  obtained  a
brilliant  triumph  by  the  capture  of  Loviisburg  and  con-
sequent subjugation  of  Cape  Breton  ;  and,  by  a  singular
stroke  of  good  fortune,  a  great  French  expedition  against

'  Bancroft,  iii.  177.

CH.  VI.  COMMERCIAL RESTRICTIONS.  237

Nova  Scotia  in  1746  was  dispersed  and  shattered  by
two  furious  storms.  The  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  left
the  American  frontiers  almost  unchanged,  for  Cape
Breton  was  restored  to  the  French  in  compensation  for
Madras,  but  the  foundation  of  Halifax  contributed  much
to  strengthen  the  great  ascendency  of  England ;  and
the  whole  white  population  of  French  America,  about
the  middle  of  this  century,  was  said  not  to  have  been
more  than  52,000,  while  that  of  British  America  was
reckoned  at  1,051,000.

The  real  evil  of  the  colonial  government  lay  in  the
commercial  policy  of  the  mother  country — in  the
system  of  restrictions  intended  to  secure  for  Eng-
land a  monopoly  of  the  colonial  trade,  and  to  crush
every  manufacture  that  could  compete  with  English
industry.  It  was  a  policy  which  sprang,  in  a  great
degree,  from  that  mercantile  theory  which  denied  the
possibility  of  a  commerce  mutually  beneficial  to  the
parties  engaged  in  it.  It  was  strengthened  by  the
Revolution,  which  gave  commercial  interests  and  the
commercial  classes  a  new  pre-eminence  in  English
legislation,  and  it  had  political  consequences  of  the
gravest  character.  In  a  very  few  instances,  it  is  true,
it  was  considered  an  English  interest  to  encourage
colonial  produce.  Thus  Virginia,  though  afterwards
forbidden  to  export  her  tobacco  to  any  foreign  country,
had  obtained  under  the  first  two  Stuarts,  in  conjunction
with  Bermuda,  a  monopoly  of  the  English  market,  and
the  cultivation  of  tobacco  at  home  was  absolutely  for-
bidden.* For  a  long  time  the  tar  and  pitch  of  the
British  navy  had  come  chiefly  from  Sweden ;  but  that
Power  having  conferred  the  monopoly  of  the  trade  upon
a  mercantile  company,  the  price  was  inordinately  raised.
Under  these  circumstances  the  Ministers  resolved  to

Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  ii.  329,  332,  486.

238 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vt.

secure  the  materials  for  the  navy  from  the  British
colonies,  and  Acts  were  accordingly  passed,  in  1703  and
1711,  encouraging  by  bounties  the  import  from  the
American  colonies  of  tar,  pitch,  hemp,  masts,  and  yards,
and  at  the  same  time  reserving  all  pine-trees  of  certain
specified  dimensions,  that  were  not  private  property,
for  his  Majesty's  navy.*

But  with  these  exceptions,  the  laws  were  almost
wholly  restrictive.  The  famous  Navigation  Acts,  in-
tended to  exclude  foreigners  from  the  trade,  provided
that  all  vessels  trading  to  or  fi'om  the  plantations  should
be  built  in  England  or  the  plantations,  and  limited  both
the  export  and  import  trade,  as  far  as  the  most  impor-
tant articles  were  concerned,  to  the  British  dominions.^
Another  measure  declared  in  its  preamble  that  the
woollen  manufacture,  which  had  begun  to  rise  among
the  colonists,  '  would  inevitably  sink  the  value  of  lands  '
in  England  ;  and  it  proceeded  utterly  to  destroy  the
intercolonial  trade  by  enacting  that,  '  after  the  1st  of
December,  1699,  no  wool  or  manufacture  made  or  mixed
with  wool,  being  the  produce  of  any  of  the  English
plantations  in  America,  shall  be  loaden  in  any  ship  or
vessel,  upon  any  pretence  whatever,  nor  loaden  upon  any
horse,  cart,  or  other  carriage,  to  be  carried  out  of  the
English  plantations  to  any  other  of  the  said  planta-
tions, or  to  any  other  place  whatever.' ^  In  1719
the  House  of  Commons  resolved  '  that  the  erecting
of  manufactories  in  the  colonies  tended  to  lessen  their
dependence  upon  Great  Britain.'  In  1721  George  I,,
when  opening  Parliament,  recommended  the  policy  of  de-
riving the  naval  stores  from  the  North  American  colonies.

'  3  &  4  Anne,  ex.;  9  Anne,  II.  c.  vii. ;  7  &  8  William  III.  c.

c.  xvii.  xxii.

2  12  Charles  II.  c.  xviii. ;  15  »  lo  &  11  William  III. c.  x.

Charles II. c. vii.; 22 & 23  (abridged).
Charles  II.  c.  xxvl. ;  25  Charles

en.  VI.  COMMERCIAL RESTRICTIONS.  239

on  the  express  ground  that  '  the  cultivation  of  this  useful
and  advantageous  branch  of  commerce  would  divert
the  colonies  from  setting  up  manufactures  which  directly
interfered  with  those  of  Great  Britain.'  Iron  existed
largely  in  the  colonies  ;  and  in  a  new  country  covered
with  unfelled  timber,  and  depending  mainly  on  ship-
building, the  trade  of  the  smith  was  of  pre-eminent  im-
portance. But  the  English  House  of  Commons,  in  the
interests  of  the  English  manufacturer,  passed  a  measure
in  1719  that  none  of  the  American  colonies  should
manufacture  iron  of  any  kind ;  that  no  smith  might
make  so  much  as  a  bolt,  a  spike,  or  a  nail ;  and  tlie
House  of  Lords  added  a  clause  to  the  effect  that  no
forge  should  be  erected  in  any  of  the  colonies  for
making  '  sows,  pigs,  or  cast  iron  into  bar  or  rod  iron.'  ^
Such  a  measure  would  have  hopelessly  ruined  the
colonies,  and  it  raised  so  vehement  an  opposition  that
it  was  dropped ;  but  the  export  of  American  iron  to
the  mother  country  was  restrained  by  heavy  duties  till
1750.  The  introduction  of  pig  and  bar  iron  was  then
freely  admitted ;  but  in  order  that  the  American  manu-
facture should  never  rise  above  the  most  rudimentary
stage,  it  was  provided  that  no  mill  or  other  engine  for  roll-
ing iron,  or  furnace  formaking  steel,  should  be  permitted
in  the  colonies. ^  No  part  of  the  world  possessed  furs
in  greater  abundance,  or  of  finer  quality,  than  North
America;  and  it  was  therefore  obviously  absurd  that
all  hats  should  be  imported  from  the  mother  coimtry  ;
but  no  sooner  had  the  colonists  begun  to  make  their
own  hats  than  the  English  hatters  took  the  alarm,  and
Parliament  in  1732  made  a  law  forbidding  the  ex-
portation of  American  hats,  not  only  to  foreign  coun-
tries and  to  the  mother  country,  but  even  from  one
colony  to  another,  and  at  the  same  time  providing  that
no  colonist  should  pursue  the  trade  unless  he  had  served
'  Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  iii.  72,  73. ^  Ibid.  iii.  280.

240  ENGLAJVD IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi

a  seven  years'  apprenticeship,  should  have  more  than
two  apprentices  at  a  time,  or  should  teach  the  industry
to  negroes.^  The  measure  was  successful,  and  an  in-
dustry in  which  the  colonies  were  naturally  peculiarly
fitted  to  excel  speedily  languished.  The  colonists  were
accustomed  to  send  large  quantities  of  provisions  and
lumber  to  the  French  West  Indian  colonies,  and  to
bring  back  in  return  rum,  sugar,  and  molasses.  The
English  sugar  colonies  complained,  and  a  law  was
passed  in  1733  imposing  heavy  penalties  on  all  rum,
sugar,  and  molasses  imported  into  America  except  from
the  British  colonies.^  It  was,  indeed,  found  impossible
to  enforce  this  law,  but  it  long  remained  unrepealed
upon  the  statute  book.

In  this  manner  England  made  it  a  fixed  maxim  of
her  commercial  policy  to  crush  every  rising  industry  in
her  colonies  that  could  possibly  compete  with  the  home
market.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  admitted  that
she  had  hitherto  abstained  from  deriving  from  them  a
direct  revenue,  and  it  must  be  added  that  some  system
of  commercial  restraint  was  universally  pursued,  and
that  the  English  system  was  not  sufficiently  severe  to
counteract  the  great  material  and  political  advantages
of  her  colonies.  Farming  and  shipbuilding,  the  trade
in  furs,  provisions,  tar,  and  pitch,  the  magnificent  cod
fisheries  of  Newfoundland,  and  the  whale  fishery,  which
had  received  a  new  impulse  through  the  invention  of  a
gun  by  which  the  harpoon  could  be  plunged  from  a  great
distance  into  the  body  of  the  fish,  were  the  chief  sources
of  colonial  wealth ;  and  there  was  also  a  considerable
linen  manufacture  created  by  Irish  emigrants,  and  a
large  smuggling  trade  which  it  was  happily  impossible
to  suppress.  The  country  was  growing  rapidly  richer,
though  its  progress  was  seriously  retarded,  and  though

5  George  II.  c.  xxii.  ^  6  George  II.  c.  xiii.

CH.  VI.  THEIR POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES.  241

many  of  its  natural  capacities  were  paralysed  by  law.
But  the  political  alienation  whicli  was  the  inevitable
and  most  righteous  consequence  of  these  laws  had
already  begun,  and  it  is  to  the  antagonism  of  interests
they  created,  much  more  than  to  the  Stamp  Act  or  to
any  isolated  instances  of  misgovernment,  that  the  sub-
sequent disruption  must  be  ascribed.'  To  a  sagacious
observer  of  colonial  politics  two  facts  were  becoming
evident.  The  one  was  that  the  deliberate  selfishness
of  English  commercial  legislation  was  digging  a  chasm
between  the  mother  country  and  the  colonies  which
must  inevitably,  when  the  latter  had  become  sufficiently
strong,  lead  to  separation.  The  other  was  that  the
presence  of  the  French  in  Canada  was  an  essential  con-
dition of  the  maintenance  of  the  British  Empire  in
America.  It  was  a  perpetual  danger  to  the  colonists,
and  as  long  as  the  French  Canadians  were  assisted  by
France  it  was  impossible  for  the  British  colonists  to
dispense  with  the  assistance  of  England.  By  ordinary
statesmen  these  things  appear  to  have  been  altogether
unperceived,  but  even  at  the  time  we  are  considering
there  were  those  who  foretold  them.  In  1748  the
Swedish  traveller  Kalm,  having  described  in  vivid
colours  the  commercial  oppression  under  which  the
colonists  were  suffering,  and  the  growing  coldness  of
their  feelings  towards  the  mother  country,  added  these
remarkable  words :  '  I  have  been  told,  not  only  by
native  Americans,  but  by  English  emigrants  publicly,
that  within  thirty  or  fifty  years  the  English  colonies

'  As  Arthur  Young  very  justly  Lord Eockingham nor Lord

said,  '  Nothing  can  be  more  idle  North,  but  it was that baleful

than  to  say  that  this  set  of  men,  spirit  of  commerce  that  wished

or  the  other administration,  or  to  govern  great  nations  on  the

that  great minister occasioned  maxims  of  the  counter.' — Preface

the  American  war. It  was  not  to  the Tour  in  Ireland. See,

the  Stamp  Act  nor  the  repeal  of  too,  Huskisson's Speech  on  the

the  Stamp Act,  it  was  neither  Navigatioii  Laios.

VOL.  II.  K

242  ENGLAND EST THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

in  North  America  may  constitute  a  separate  State
entirely  independent  of  England.  But  as  this  whole
country  towards  the  sea  is  unguarded,  and  on  the  frontier
is  kept  uneasy  by  the  French,  these  dangerous  neigh-
bours are  the  reason  why  the  love  of  these  colonies  for
their  metropolis  does  not  utterly  decline.  The  Eng-
lish Government  has,  therefore,  reason  to  regard  the
French  in  North  America  as  the  chief  power  which
urges  their  colonies  to  submission.'  ^

The  commercial  disabilities  were  not  the  only
grievances  under  which  the  colonies  laboured.  Another
— which,  however,  never  attained  any  very  serious  pro-
portions— was  the  influx  of  English  criminals.  The
system  of  selling  English  criminals  to  the  colonists  for
a  limited  period  of  servitude  may,  indeed,  be  traced
back  to  a  much  earlier  period,  but  it  was  revived  or
increased  by  a  statute  of  George  I.,^  and  it  introduced
a  very  pernicious  element  into  colonial  life.^  Another,
and  a  much  more  terrible  evil,  was  the  rapid  multiplica-
tion of  negro  slaves.  Of  all  the  many  forms  of  suffering
which  man  has  inflicted  upon  man,  with  the  exception
of  war,  and,  perhaps,  of  religious  persecution,  the  slave
trade  has  probably  added  most  largely  to  the  sum  of
human  misery,  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  it  occupied  the  very  foremost  place  in  English
commerce.  The  first  Englishman  who  took  part  in  it
appears  to  have  been  John  Hawkins,  who  sailed  in  1562
with  three  ships  to  Sierra  Leone,  where  he  secured,
'partly  by  the  sworde  and  partly  by  other  meanes,'
some  800  negroes,  whom  he  transported  to  Hispaniola.
The  enterprise  proving  successful,  he  made  a  much
more  considerable  expedition  in  1564  to  the  coast  of

'  Quoted  by  Bancroft,  iii.  464,  of  the  Metropolis  (7th  ed.  1806),

465.  pp.  436,  437. Harris's  Life  of

2  4  George  I.  c.  xi.  Lord  Hardwicke,  i.  156.

3  See  Colquhoun  on  the  Police

CH.  VI.  THE SLAVE TRADE.  243

Guinea,  the  English  '  going  every  day  on  shore  to  take
the  inhabitants  with  burning  and  spoiling  their  towns,'
and  the  achievement  was  so  highly  considered  at  home
that  he  was  knighted  by  Elizabeth,  and  selected  for  his
crest  a  manacled  negro.  It  is  a  slight  fact,  but  full  of
a  ghastly  significance  as  illustrating  the  state  of  feeling
prevailing  at  the  time,  that  the  ship  in  which  Hawkins
sailed  on  his  second  expedition  to  open  the  English  slave
trade  was  called  '  The  Jesus.'  ^  The  traffic  in  human
flesh  speedily  became  popular.  A  monopoly  of  it  was
granted  to  the  African  Company,  but  it  was  invaded  by
numerous  interlopers,  and  in  1698  the  trade  was  thrown
open  to  all  British  subjects.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that
while  by  the  law  of  1698  a  certain  percentage  was  ex-
acted from  other  African  cargoes  for  the  maintenance
of  the  forts  along  that  coast,  cargoes  of  negroes  were
especially  exempted,  for  the  Parliament  of  the  Revolu-
tion desired  especially  to  encourage  the  trade. ^  Nine
years  before,  a  convention  had  been  made  between  Eng-
land and  Spain  for  supplying  the  Spanish  West  Indies
with  slaves  from  the  island  of  Jamaica,^  and  it  has  been
computed  that  between  1680  and  1700  the  English  tore
from  Africa  about  300,000  negroes,  or  about  15,000
every  year.^

The  great  period  of  the  English  slave  trade  had,
however,  not  yet  arrived.  It  was  only  in  1713  that  it
began  to  attain  its  full  dimensions.  One  of  the  most
important  and  most  popular  parts  of  the  Treaty  of
Utrecht  was  the  contract  known  as  the  Assiento,  by
which  the  British  Government  secured  for  its  subjects
during  thirty  years  an  absolute  monopoly  of  the  supply
of  slaves  to  the  Spanish  colonies.  The  traffic  was  regu-
lated by  a  long  and  elaborate  treaty,  guarding  among

'  Hakluyt's  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  ^  Macpherson,  ii.  638.

-  Macpherson's  4?inaZso/ Com-  ■•  Bsbncvoit'sHist.  of  the  United

merce,  ii.  702.  States,  iii.  411.

B  2

244 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  vi.

other  things  against  any  possible  scandal  to  the  Roman
Catholic  religion  from  the  presence  of  heretical  slave-
traders,  and  it  provided  that  in  the  thirty  years  from
1713  to  1743  the  English  should  bring  into  the  Spanish
West  Indies  no  less  than 144,000  negroes,  or 4,800
every  year,  that  during  the  first twenty-five  years  of
the  contract  they  might  import  a  still  greater  number
on  paying  certain  moderate  duties,  and  that  they  might
carry  the  slave  trade  into  numerous  Spanish  ports  from
which  it  had  hitherto  been excluded. The  monopoly
of  the  trade  was  granted  to  the  South  Sea  Company,
and  from  this  time  its  maintenance,  and  its  extension
both  to  the  Spanish  dominions  and  to  her  own  colonies,
became  a  central  object  of  English  policy. A  few  facts
will  show  the  scale  on  which  it was  pursued. From
Christmas  1752  to  Christmas  1762  no  less  than  71,115
negroes  were  imported  into  Jamaica.^ In  a  despatch
written  at  the  end  of  1762,  Admiral  Rodney  reports
that  in  little  more  than  three  years  40,000  negroes  had
been  introduced  into  Guadeloupe.^ In  a  discussion  upon
the  methods  of  making  the  trade  more  effectual,  which
took  place  in  the  English  Parliament  in  1750,  it  was
shown  that  46,000  negroes  were  at  this  time  annually
sold  to  the  English  colonies  alone.^ A  letter  of  General
O'Hara,  the  Governor  of  Senegambia,  written  in  1766,
estimates  at  the  almost  incredible  figure  of  70,000  the
number  of  negroes  who  during  the  preceding  fifty  years
had  been annually shipped from Africa.^ A distin-
guished modern  historian,  after  a  careful  comparison  of
the  materials  we  possess,  declares  that  in  the  century
preceding the prohibition of  the  slave trade by  the
American  Congress,  in 1776,  the  number  of  negroes
imported  by  the  English  alone  into  the  Spanish,  French,

»  Macpherson,  iii.  403.  ="  Walpole's  Letters,  Feb.  25,

2  Grenville  Corres;pondence,  ii. 1750.
12.  ■•  Macpherson,  iii.  438.

CH.  VI.  THE SLAVE TRADE.  245

and  English  colonies  can,  on  the  lowest  computation,
have  been  little  less  than  three  millions,  and  that  we
must  add  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  million  who  perished
on  the  voyage,  and  whose  bodies  were  thrown  into  the
Atlantic.^

These  figures  are  in  themselves  sufficiently  eloquent.
No  human  imagination,  indeed,  can  conceive,  no  pen
can  adequately  portray,  the  misery  they  represent.
Torn  from  the  most  distant  parts  of  Africa,  speaking
no  common  language,  connected  by  no  tie  except  that
of  common  misfortune,  severed  from  every  old  associa-
tion and  from  all  they  loved,  and  exchanging,  in  many
cases,  a  life  of  unbounded  freedom  for  a  hopeless,  abject,
and  crushing  servitude,  the  wretched  captives  were
carried  across  the  waste  of  waters  in  ships  so  crowded
and  so  unhealthy  that,  even  under  favourable  circum-
stances, about  twelve  in  every  hundred  usually  died
from  the  horrors  of  the  passage.  They  had  no  know-
ledge, no  rights,  no  protection  against  the  caprices  of
irresponsible  power.  The  immense  disproportion  of  the
sexes  consigned  them  to  the  most  brutal  vice.  Diifer-
ence  of  colour  and  difference  of  religion  led  their  masters
to  look  upon  them  simply  as  beasts  of  burden,  and  the
supply  of  slaves  was  too  abundant  to  allow  the  motive
of  self-interest  to  be  any  considerable  security  for  their
good  treatment.  Often,  indeed,  it  seemed  the  interest
of  the  master  rather  to  work  them  rapidly  to  death  and
then  to  replenish  his  stock.  All  Africa  was  convulsed
by  civil  wars  and  infested  with  bands  of  native  slave-
dealers  hunting  down  victims  for  the  English  trader,
whose  blasting  influence,  like  some  malignant  provi-
dence, extended  over  mighty  regions  where  the  face  of
a  white  man  was  never  seen.

It  has  been  frequently  stated  that  England  is  re-

Bancroft 'si?tsi.o/^7ie  United  States,  iii.  411,  412.

246 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  VI.

sponsible  for  the  introduction  of  negro  slavery  into
British  America ;  but  this  assertion  will  not  stand  the
test  of  examination.  The  first  cargo  of  negro  slaves  in-
troduced into  North  America  is  said  to  have  been  con-
veyed by  a  Dutch  vessel  to  Virginia  in  1620.^  Slavery
existed  in  New  York  and  New  Jersey  when  they  were
still  Dutch;  in  Carolina,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania
when  they  were  still  subject  to  proprietary  governments.
Its  encouragement  only  became  an  object  of  the  colonial
policy  of  England  at  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,
but  before  that  date  it  had  been  planted  in  every  British
colony  in  North  America,  had  become  eminently  popu-
lar among  the  colonists,  and  had  been  sanctioned  by
many  enactments  issuing  from  colonial  legislatures.  It
is,  however,  true  that  from  a  very  early  period  a  certain
movement  against  it  may  be  detected  in  some  American
States,  that  there  was,  especially  in  the  Northern  Pro-
vinces, a  great  and  general  dislike  to  the  excessive  im-
portation of  negroes,  and  that  every  attempt  to  prohibit
or  restrict  that  importation  was  rebuked  and  defeated
by  England. 2  As  early  as  1701  we  find  a  petition  in
favour  of  the  emancipation  of  negroes  presented  to  the
representatives  of  Boston.  In  1703  a  duty  of  41.  was
imposed  on  every  slave  introduced  into  Massachusetts.
After  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  many  States,  and  among
others  South  Carolina  itself,  remonstrated  and  struggled
against  the  vast  imjDortation  of  slaves.  They  had,  how-
ever, no  power  to  prohibit  it  by  law.  Several  English
Acts  of  Parliament  were  passed  to  encourage  the  slave
trade,^  the  State  Governors  were  forbidden  to  give  the

'  Hildreth,  Hist,  of  the  United  much  ability  and  impartiality  in

States,  i.  119,  120.  Hildreth's  Hist,  of the  United

-  See, on this subject, Gra-  States. Mr.  Bancroft  writes  in

hame's  Review  of  the  American  a  vehement  anti-English  spirit.
Apology  for-  American  Accession  ^  The following, e.g., is the

to  Negro  Slavery. The  question  preamble of one of the  laws

of  negro  slavery  is  treated  with  passed  in  the  ministry  of the

CH.  VI.  THE SLAVE TRADE.  247

necessary  assent  to  any  measures  restricting  it,  and  the
English  pursued  tliis  policy  steadily  to  the  very  eve  of
the  Revolution.  As  late  as  1775  we  find  Lord  Dart-
mouth, the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies  and  one
of  the  most  conspicuous  leaders  of  the  English  religious
world,  answering  the  remonstrance  of  a  colonial  agent
in  these  memorable  words :  '  We  cannot  allow  the  colo-
nies to  check  or  discourage  in  any  degi'ee  a  traffic  so
beneficial  to  the  nation.' '

It  has  been  computed  that  up  to  the  year  1740  the
number  of  negroes  who  had  been  introduced  into  the
North  American  colonies  was  nearly  130,000,  and  that
by  1776  it  was  rather  more  than  300,000.^  The  causes
that,  at  a  later  period,  gave  a  much  greater  extension
to  American  slavery,  and  the  philanthropic  movement
in  opposition  to  the  slave  trade,  will  find  their  place  in
a  later  portion  of  this  book.  In  the  first  half  of  the
eighteenth  century  the  colonial  opposition  to  the  impor-
tation of  slaves  arose  almost  exclusively  from  economical
and  political  reasons — from  the  effect  of  the  excessive
supply  upon  prices,  and  from  the  grave  dangers  result-
ing from  the  presence  of  a  vast  population  of  captives.
In  1711  there  was  a  violent  panic  in  New  York,  and
nineteen  victims  perished,  on  account  of  an  alleged  "
negrt)  plot  to  burn  the  city.^  In  1738  a  serious  insur-
rection of  negroes  was  excited  by  the  Spaniards  in
South  Carolina,  and  the  colonists  of  Jamaica  were  com-
pelled to  make  a  treaty  with  fugitive  slaves  whom  they
were  unable  to  subdue.'* A  few  isolated  protests  against

elder  Pitt :  '  Whereas  the  trade  iii.  413,  414.

to  and  from  Africa  is  very  ad-  '  Bancroft's  Hist,  of  tJie  United

vantageous  to  Great  Britain,  and  States,  iii.  407-416.

necessary  for  the  supplying  the  ^  Ibid,  iii.  407.

plantations and  colonies  there-  ^  Hildreth,  Hist,  of  the  United

unto  belonging  with  a  sufficient  States,  ii.  267.

number  of  negroes  at  reasonable  *  Holmes'  Annals  of  America,

prices.' See, on  this subject,  ii.  10,  11.

Eose's  Diaries,  i.  38. Bancroft,

248 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  en.  vi.

slavery  based  on  religious  principles  were  heard,  but
they  had  no  echo  from  the  leading  theologians.  Jona-
than Edwards,  who  occupied  the  first  place  among  those
born  in  America,  left,  among  other  property,  a  negro
boy.  Berkeley  had  slaves  when  in  Rhode  Island,  and
appears  to  have  felt  no  scruples  on  the  subject,  though
he  protested,  with  his  usual  humanity,  against  '  the
irrational  contempt  of  the  blacks.' '  The  article  in  the
charter  of  Georgia  forbidding  slavery,  being  extremely
unpopular  among  the  colonists,  was  repealed  in  1 749 ;
and  it  is  melancholy  to  record  that  one  of  the  most  pro-
minent and  influential  advocates  of  the  introduction  of
slavery  into  the  colony  was  George  Whitefield.  In
Georgia  there  was  an  express  stipulation  for  the  reli-
gious instruction  of  the  slaves ;  it  is  said  that  those  in
or  about  Savannah  have  always  been  noted  in  America
for  their  piety, ^  and  the  advantage  of  bringing  negroes
within  the  range  of  the  Gospel  teaching  was  a  common
argument  in  favour  of  the  slave  trade.  The  Protestants
from  Salzburg  for  a  time  had  scruples,  but  they  were
reassured  by  a  message  from  Germany :  '  If  you  take
slaves  in  faith,'  it  was  said,  '  and  with  intent  of  conduct-
ing them  to  Christ,  the  action  will  not  be  a  sin,  but  may
prove  a  benediction.'  ^  In  truth,  however,  but  little  zeal
was  shown  in  the  work  of  conversion.  Many  who  cor-
dially approved  of  the  slavery  of  pagans  questioned
whether  it  was  right  to  hold  Christians  in  bondage;
there  was  a  popular  belief  that  baptism  would  invalidate
the  legal  title  of  the  master  to  his  slave,*  and  there  was

'  Fraser's Life  of Berkeley,  expressly  asserting  that  baptism

pp.  187,  188.  made no change in the legal

^  Hildreth,  ii.  417-419.  position  of  the  negro;  an  opinion

^  Ibid.  of  Yorke  and  Talbot,  the  English

*  See  Hildreth's  Hist,  of  the  law  officers,  to  the  same  effect

United  States,  ii.  426. Bancroft,  was  circulated  in  the  colonies ;

iii. 409. South Carolina,  Vir-  and  Gibson,  the  Bishop  of  Lon-

ginia,  and  Maryland  passed  laws  don,  declared  that  '  Christianity

CH.  VI.  SLAVERY.  249

a  strong  and  general  fear  lest  any  form  of  education
should  so  brace  the  energies  of  the  negro  as  to  make
him  revolt  against  his  lot.  Of  the  extent  to  which  this
latter  feeling  was  carried,  one  extraordinary  instance  of
a  later  period  may  be  given.  The  Society  for  the  Pro-
pagation of  the  Gospel  sent  missionaries  to  convert  the
free  negroes  in  Guinea,  on  the  Gold  Coast,  and  in
Sierra  Leone ;  but  it  was  itself  a  large  slave-owner,
possessing  numerous  slaves  on  an  estate  in  Barbadoes.
In  1783  Bishop.  Porteus  strongly  urged  upon  the
managers  of  the  Society  the  duty  of  at  least  giving
Christian  instruction  to  these  slaves ;  but,  after  a  full
discussion,  the  recommendation  was  absolutely  declined.^

In  the  American  States  slavery  speedily  gravitated
to  the  South.  The  climate  of  the  Southern  provinces
was  eminently  favourable  to  the  negroes  ;  and  the  crops,
and  especially  the  rice  crop — which  had  been  introduced
into  South  Carolina  from  Madagascar  in  1698 — could
hardly  be  cultivated  by  whites.  In  the  Northern  pro-
vinces the  conditions  were  exactly  reversed.  We  can
scarcely  have  a  better  illustration  of  the  controlling
action  of  the  physical  on  the  moral  world  than  is
furnished  by  this  fact.  The  conditions  of  climate
which  made  the  Northern  provinces  free  States  and  the
Southern  provinces  slave  States  established  between
them  an  intense  social  and  moral  repulsion,  kindled
mutual  feelings  of  the  bitterest  hatred  and  contempt,
and  in  our  own  day  produced  a  war  which  threatened
the  whole  future  of  American  civilisation.

But  in  spite  of  these  grave  evils,  the  American  pro-
vinces in  the  period  I  am  describing  were  rapidly  ad-
vancing. The  old  Puritanical  fervour  and  simplicity,
strengthened  as  it  was  by  the  influx  of  many  persecuted

and  the  embracing  of  the  Gospel  ^  Hodgson's  Life  of  Pc/rteus,

does  not  make  the  least  altera- pp.  86-88.
tion  in  civil  property.'

250 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vr.

Protestants,  may  still  be  sometimes  detected.  At  the
close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  '  travel,  play,  and
work  on  the  Lord's  Day,'  were  prohibited  in  Massachu-
setts by  law;  and  injunctions  were  given  to  constables
'  to  restrain  all  persons  from  swimming  in  the  waters,
unnecessary  and  unreasonable  walking  in  the  streets  or
fields  of  the  town  of  Boston  or  other  places,  keeping
open  their  shops  or  following  their  secular  occasions  or
recreations  in  the  evening  preceding  the  Lord's  Day,  or
any  part  of  the  said  day  or  evening  following.'  Adul-
tery was  punished  by  public  whipping  and  by  compelling
the  culprit  to  wear  a  large  A  sewn  on  his  coat.^  In  the
following  century  we  find  in  the  same  State  one  law  for
the  suppression  of  lotteries,  another  for  '  the  prevention
of  idleness  and  immorality,'  a  third  for  discouraging  ex-
traordinary expenses  at  funerals  and  forbidding  funeral
scarves,  a  fourth  prohibiting  all  dramatic  representa-
tions.^ The  last  Act  was  due  to  the  indignation
produced  by  some  young  Englishmen  who  got  up,
in  a  Boston  coffee-house,  a  representation  of  Otway's
'  Orphan ; '  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  professional
acting  was  not  introduced  into  the  English  colonies
of  America  till  1752.  A  London  theatrical  company
then  visited  the  colonies,  but  the  law  prohibited  them
from  appearing  in  Massachusetts  or  Connecticut.^

In  general,  however,  the  increase  of  wealth  was  bring-
ing with  it  a  more  luxurious  type  of  civilisation  which
often  surprised  the  traveller  from  England,^  and  the
standard  of  intelligence  was  very  high.  In  1721,  in  the
very  year  when  inoculation  first  appeared  in  England,  it
was  introduced  into  Boston  by  Cotton  Mather.^  Having

1  Hildreth,  ii.  169.  *  See  Grahame's  Hist,  of  the

*  Holme's  Annals  of  America,  United  States,  iii.  153.

i.  524,  534  ;  ii.  42. Hildreth,  ii.  *  Holmes'  Annals  of  America,

407.  i.  527.
3  Hildreth,  ii,  407.

CH.  VI.  INTELLECTUAL  PEOGRESS.  251

seen  in  the  '  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society '  some
letters  from  Turkey  describing  its  advantages,  he  suc-
ceeded in  inducing  a  physician  named  Boylston  to  join
with  him  in  his  crusade ;  he  obtained  the  support  of  the
leading  Puritan  ministers  at  Boston,  and  in  spite  of  a
furious  opposition — during  which  his  life  was  more
than  once  seriously  threatened — he  at  last  brought  the
practice  into  common  use.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that
Cotton  Mather,  who  on  this  occasion  showed  himself  so
much  in  advance  of  his  time,  was  the  same  man  who,
thirty  years  before,  was  the  chief  agent  in  the  most
ferocious  persecution  of  witches  ever  known  in  America.^
The  first  printing  press  in  North  America  is  said  to  have
been  set  up  at  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  in  1688.  Har-
vard College  was  founded  in  the  same  year,  and  it  was
followed  in  1693  by  William  and  Mary  College,  in
Virginia,  and  in  1701  by  Yale  College,  in  Connecticut.^
Free  schools  had  early  been  established  in  New  Eng-
land, and  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  an
American  press  gradually  grew  up.  The  first  American
newspaper  appeared  at  Boston  in  1704,  and  by  1740
there  were  eleven  in  the  colonies.^  A  considerable
public  library  was  founded  at  Philadelphia  in  1742,
and  another  at  Newport  in  Rhode  Island  in  1747.''
Franklin,  the  greatest  natural  philosopher  and  one  of
the  greatest  writers  America  has  produced,  about  this
time  rose  to  notice;  and  his  discovery  in  1752  of  the

'  Hildreth,  ii.  300,  301. The  -  The history of American

Courant —  a  newspaper  edited  by  education  has  been  very fully

a  brother  of  Frankhn— strongly  treated  in  the  third  volume  of

opposed  inoculation. Benjamin  Miller's  Retrospect  of  the  Eigh-

Franklin  was  then  working  as  an  teenth  Century,  a  valuable  Ameri-

apprentice  with  his  brother,  and  can  book  which  does  not  deserve

there  is  an  old  Boston  tradition  the neglect into which  it has

that  he  wrote  something  on  the  fallen,

same side.— Miller's Eetrospect  ^  Bancroft,  ill.  374,  375.

of  the  Eighteenth  Century  (Eng-  *  Holmes,  ii.  21-35.
lish  edition,  1805),  i.  356.

252  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

lightning-conductor  was  probably  the  most  important
that  any  British  subject  had  made  for  more  than  a
generation.  Jonathan  Edwards,  the  most  acute  of
American  metaphysicians,  was  now  in  the  zenith  of
his  fame ;  and  when,  a  few  years  later,  the  hour
arrived  for  the  final  rupture  with  England,  it  was  found
that  the  British  colonies  had  formed  a  generation  of
men  who  were  fully  competent  to  guide  the  destinies
of  a  nation.

The  American  provinces  were  by  far  the  most
important  of  the  English  colonies,  and  England,  as  a
colonial  Power,  had  in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  no  pretensions  to  that  complete  pre-eminence
which  she  afterwards  obtained.  Spain  and  Portugal,
indeed,  the  gi-eat  colonial  Powers  of  the  past,  though
still  possessing  mighty  territories,  were  already  in
their  decadence  ;  but  France,  from  the  time  of  Colbert,
had  entered  vigorously  into  the  field,  and  Holland  in
a  great  part  of  the  world  considerably  overbalanced
the  influence  of  England.  In  that  great  Indian  Em-
pire which  now  counts  more  than  200  millions  of
subjects,  England  in  the  middle  of  the  century  pos-
sessed little  more  than  Bombay,  Madras,  Fort  William
in  Bengal,  and  a  few  scattered  factories.  The  whole
coast,  ports,  and  forts  of  the  rich  island  of  Ceylon
were  in  the  hands  of  the  Dutch,  whose  factories
rivalled  those  of  England  on  the  mainland,  and  who
had  acquired  dominion,  influence,  or  commercial  pre-
ponderance in  the  Spice  Islands,  in  Java,  Sumatra,
Borneo,  Celebes,  and  many  neighbouring  islands,  in
the  peninsula  of  Malacca,  and  in  the  kingdoms  of
Siam  and  of  Aracan.  The  Dutch  at  this  time  almost
monopolised  the  important  trade  in  cinnamon,  nut-
megs, cloves,  and  spice ;  they  were  the  only  Europeans
who  had  commercial  relations  with  Japan,  and  in  Africa
they  were  the  sovereigns  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.

CH.  VI.  THE INDIES.  253

The  French  colonies  at  Pondicherry,  the  Isle  of  France,
and  the  Isle  of  Bourbon,  fostered  as  they  were  by
the  skill  of  Dupleix  and  La  Bourdonnais,  seriously
threatened  the  English  dominions  in  Hindostan,  and,
as  we  have  seen,  Madras  was  at  one  time  in  their
power.  The  two  English  East  India  Companies  whose
rivalry  played  so  great  a  part  in  the  politics  of  the
years  that  followed  the  Kevolution,  had  been  amalga-
mated in  1702.  Among  the  articles  imported  from
India  were  printed  and  dyed  calicoes,  which  began
to  come  into  fashion  in  England  under  William  and
Mary,  and  the  demand  for  them  was  soon  so  great  as
for  a  few  years  to  add  very  largely  to  Indian  prosperity.
But  the  jealousy  of  the  manufacturers  at  home  was
soon  aroused,  and  as  usual  they  speedily  succeeded  in
crushing  the  rival  trade.  A  law  passed  in  1699,  and
renewed  in  1721,  absolutely  prohibited  under  severe
penalties  the  use  of  all  Indian  silks,  stuffs,  and  printed  or
dyed  calicoes  in  apparel,  household  stuffs,  or  furniture  in
England.^  The  island  of  St.  Helena,  which  had  been
abandoned  by  the  Dutch  in  1651,  proved  of  great
importance  as  a  station  for  provisioning  English  ships
to  India,  and  there  were  a  few  English  factories  along
the  Persian  Gulf,  and  in  the  islands  of  Borneo  and
Sumatra.

In  the  West  Indies  it  was  estimated  towards  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  the  English  pos-
sessions contained  about  90,000  whites  and  at  least
230,000  negroes.^  Jamaica,  which  was  the  most  im-
portant of  the  British  islands,  had  long  been  a  favourite
resort  of  the  buccaneers  or  pirates  who  infested  the
Spanish  waters.  It  derived  great  wealth  from  its  clan-
destine trade  with  Spanish  America,  and  it  was  one  of

'  11  &  12  William  III.  c.  10; pean  Settlements  in  America  {Qth.
7  George  I.  c.  7.  ed.),  ii.  117.

-  Burke's  Accoimt  of  the  Euro-

254 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi.

the  cMef  depots  of  the  slave  trade.  Its  government
was  the  most  valuable  in  the  gift  of  the  Crown,  next  to
that  of  Ireland,  the  total  emoluments  of  the  post  being
little  less  than  10,000L  a  year.  The  prosperity  of  the
island,  however,  had  been  clouded  by  some  great  cala-
mities, and  its  old  capital,  Port  Royal,  had  three  times
in  thirty  years  been  reduced  to  ruins.  It  had  been
destroyed  by  a  gi'eat  earthquake  in  1692,  by  a  great
fire  about  ten  years  later,  and  by  a  terrific  hurricane
in  1722.  From  this  time  the  seat  of  government  was
transferred  to  Kingston.  Barbadoes,  which  ranked  next
to  Jamaica  in  importance  and  before  it  in  the  date  of
its  settlement,  was  much  more  thickly  populated  in
proportion  to  its  size,  but  it  seems  to  have  somewhat
declined  since  the  period  of  the  Restoration.  Shortly
after  that  event  Charles  II.  had  marked  his  sense  of  its
importance  by  creating  no  less  than  thirteen  baronets
out  of  its  leading  men.  The  growth  of  the  French  sugar
islands,  the  settlement  of  Antigua,  St.  Christopher,
Nevis,  and  Montserrat,  the  progress  of  Jamaica,  and  a
great  pestilence  which  swept  over  the  island  in  1692,
diminished  the  relative  importance  of  Barbadoes,  but  it
still  carried  on  a  large  trade  in  sugar,  rum,  molasses,
cotton,  ginger,  and  aloes,  and  it  supported  a  militia  of
near  5,000  men.  The  Anglican  religion  was  established
in  each  of  the  English  West  India  Isles.  The  system
of  government  was  like  that  in  the  Crown  colonies  of
America.  Each  island  possessed  a  representative  as-
sembly, and  although  they  were  much  hampered  by  the
commercial  policy  of  the  mother  country,  they  enjoyed
in  their  internal  afiairs  a  large  measure  of  self-govern-
ment. ^  It  was  computed  in  1 734  that  the  English  sugar
islands  produced  annually  about 85,000  hogsheads  of

'  See  an  excellent  description count  of  the  European Settle-
of  these  islands  in  Burke's  Ac- ments  in  America.

CH.  vt.  THE HIGHLANDS.  255

sugar,  that  300  sail  of  ships  visited  them  every  year
from  Great  Britain  besides  those  from  the  English  colo-
nies, and  that  they  annually  received  British  manu-
factures to  the  value  of  240,000^.^  There  were,  however,
bitter  complaints  that  the  French  sugar  plantations  of
St.  Domingo,  Guadeloupe,  Martinico,  and  other  less  con-
siderable islands,  had  so  rapidly  increased  that  they
rivalled  or  surpassed  those  of  England.^

Much  more  important  to  England  than  any  changes
that  were  effected  in  these  distant  colonies  were  those
which  were  produced  nearer  home.  No  period  in  the
history  of  Scotland  is  more  momentous  than  that  be-
tween the  Revolution  and  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  for  in  no  other  period  did  Scotland  take  so
many  steps  on  the  path  that  leads  fi-om  anarchy  to  civi-
lisation. In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century
the  Highlands  were  almost  wholly  inaccessible  to  the
traveller.  They  were  for  the  most  part  traversed  only
by  rude  horse-tracks,  without  any  attempt  to  diminish
the  natural  difficulties  of  the  country.  They  were  in-
habited by  a  population  speaking  a  language  different
from  that  of  England,  scarcely  ever  inteimarrying  with
Lowlanders,  living  habitually  with  arms  in  their  hands,
sunk  in  the  lowest  depths  of  barbarism,  and  divided  into
a  number  of  kingdoms,  that  were  practically  as  distinct
and  independent  as  those  of  the  Heptarchy.  By  law
the  chief  had  an  hereditary  jurisdiction  over  his  vassals
extending  '  to  the  pit  and  to  the  gallows,'  to  the  execu-
tion of  capital  punishment  by  drowning  and  hanging ;
but  the  law  was  a  very  feeble  and  inadequate  expres-
sion of  his  real  power.  It  is,  indeed,  no  exaggeration
to  say  that  the  decisions  of  Parliament  and  of  the  tri-
bunals were  long  absolutely  inoperative  in  the  High-

'  Macpherson's  Amials  of  Commerce,  iii.  200.
«  Ibid.  iii.  262,  263.

256 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vi.

lands.  The  chief  could  determine  what  king,  what
government,  what  religion  his  vassals  should  obey ;  his
word  was  the  only  law  they  respected  ;  a  complete  de-
votion to  his  interests,  an  absolute  obedience  to  his
commands,  was  the  first  and  almost  the  single  article  of
their  moral  code.  Combining  in  his  own  person  the
characters  of  king,  general,  landlord,  and  judge,  he  lived
with  his  vassals  on  terms  of  the  utmost  familiarity,  but
he  ruled  them  with  all  the  authority  of  an  Oriental
despot,  and  he  rarely  appeared  abroad  without  a  retinue
of  ten  or  twelve  armed  men.^  The  law  could  never
touch  him.  Captain  Burt,  who  visited  the  Highlands
about  1730,  found  an  English  footman,  who  had  been
lured  to  the  Highlands,  enslaved  by  one  of  these  chiefs,
and  his  return  to  freedom  was  hopeless.  Sometimes  the
chief  had  a  regular  executioner  in  his  service,^  and  for
the  slightest  cause  he  could  have  those  who  offended
him  either  deliberately  assassinated  or  executed  after
a  mock  trial,  conducted  by  his  own  followers.  Some-
times he  would  grant  the  temporary  use  of  his  power  to
his  guest,  and  promise  him  the  pleasure  of  seeing  any-
one who  had  offended  him  hanging  next  morning  before
his  window,  unless  he  preferred  his  head  as  a  memorial

'  'The ordinary  Highlanders  pended to Burt, ii. 270,

esteem  it  the  most  sublime  de-  and  the vivid  picture by  Dr.

gree  of  virtue  to  love  their  chief  Johnson,  Tour  to  the  Hebrides

and pay him  blind obedience,  (ed.  1817),  pp.  130-137.
although  it  be  in  opposition  to  "  '  There  is still  to be seen

the  Government,  the  laws  of  the  among  the  papers  of  the  family

kingdom,  or  even  the  law  of  God.  of  Perth  an  application  from  the

He  is  their  idol,  and  as  they  pro-  town  of  Perth  toLordDrummond,

fess  to  know  no  king  but  him  (I  dated in 1707, requesting an

was  going  further),  so  will  they  occasional  use  of  his  Lordship's

say  they  ought to  do  whatever  executioner,  who  was  considered

he  commands  without  inquiry.'  an  expert  operator. The  request

— Burt's  Letters  from  the  North  was granted,  his Lordship re-

of Scotland (5th  ed.),  ii.  2, 3.  serving  to  himself  the  power  of

See,  too.  Marshal  Wade's  '  Ee-  recalling  him  whenever  he  had

ports on the  Highlands,' ap-  occasion for his services.' —

C3H.  VI.  THE HIGHLANDS.  257

of  Highland  courtesy.^  '  Almost  every  chief,'  said  a
traveller,  '  had  in  some  remote  valley,  in  the  depths  of
woods  and  rocks,  whole  tribes  of  thieves  in  readiness  to
let  loose  against  his  neighbours  when,  for  some  public
or  private  reason,  he  did  not  judge  it  expedient  to  resent
openly  some  real  or  imaginary  affront.'  ^

Not  unfrequently  the  chiefs  increased  their  scanty
incomes  by  kidnapping  boys  or  men,  whom  they  sold
as  slaves  to  the  American  planters.^  Generations  of  an
idle  and  predatory  life  had  produced  throughout  the
Highlands  the  worst  vices  of  barbarians.  The  slightest
provocation  was  avenged  with  blood.  Fierce  contests
between  chiefs  and  clans  were  perpetuated  from  age  to
age,  and  the  pile  of  stones,  which  marked  the  spot
where  a  Highlander  had  fallen,  preserved  through  many
generations  the  memory  of  the  feud.^  In  war  the
Highlanders  usually  gave  no  quarter.  Their  savage,
merciless  ferocity  long  made  them  the  terror  of  their
neighbours.^  Few  episodes  in  British  history  are  more
terrible  than  that  which  occurred  in  1678,  when
Lauderdale  let  loose  8,000  Highlanders  to  punish  the

Stewart's  Sketches  of  the  Cha-  ago.' — Macky's  Journey  through

racter  of  the  Highlanders (3rd  Scotland,  p.  128.

ed.),  i.  62.  *  See  a  horrible  catalogue  of

'  See  Burt's  Letters,  and  the  Highland  cruelties  in  Macaulay,

description  of  Highland  manners  c.  xviii. 'That  the  Highlanders,'

in  Burton's  Hist,  of Scotland  says  Captain  Burt,  '  for  the  most

since  the  Revolution.  part  are  cruel  is  beyond  dispute,

-  Pennant's Second  Tour in  though  all clans are  not  alike

Scotland. Pinkerton's  Voyages,  merciless. In  general  they  have

iii.  349.  not generosity enough to give

'  Burton's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  quarter  to  an  enemy  that  falls  in

ii.  407-411.  their  power. Nor  do  they  seem

*  Burt, ii. 10, 11. Another  to  have  any  remorse  at  shedding

English  traveller  writes  :  '  Many  blood  without  necessity  '  (ii.  77).

gentlemen in the Highlands  The  same  writer  gives  numerous

shun one another's company,  horrible  instances  of  their  cruelty

lest  they  should  revive  a  quarrel  both  to  English  soldiers  and  to

that happened between their  each  other. See,  too,  Johnson's

forefathers,  perhaps 300  years  Tour,  p.  140.

VOL. II.  S

258 E?fGLA>D IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vi.

obstinate  Presbyteriauism  of  the  western  counties  by-
living  in  free  quarters  among  tbem.  For  three  months
they  committed  every  variety  of  atrocity  that  human
malignity  could  conceive ;  torturing  some  with  thumb-
screws, scorching  others  before  vast  fires,  tearing  chil-
dren from  their  mothers,  foully  abusing  women,  plun-
dering and  devastating  everything  within  their  range.*
Far  into  the  eighteenth  century  no  stranger  could  settle
among  the  clans.  If  he  did,  his  house  was  burnt,  his
cattle  were  killed  or  maimed,  and  he  himself  was  happy
if  he  escaped  with  life.^  Manual  labour  was  looked
upon  with  contempt.  Most  forms  of  field  labour  were
habitually  done  by  the  women,  while  the  husband  and
the  son  looked  on  in  idleness,  or  devoted  themselves  to
robbing  or  begging.^  Plunder  was  the  passion,  the
trade,  the  romance  of  the  Highlander.  In  war  his
admirable  courage  and  endurance  were  almost  neutral-
ised by  the  predatory  instinct  that  led  him  in  the  midst
of  the  battle  to  turn  aside  to  plunder  the  wounded  or

'  Vfoirow's,  Hist.of  the  Chitrch  the  Affairs  of  Scotland.  Pennant,

of  Scotland,  ii.  when  lie  visited  Scotland  in  1769

-  Burt's  Letters,  ii.  72-75,  225.  and  1772,  noticed  the  same  traits,

^  See  a  striking  statement  in  though  in  diminished  intensity,

Burt, ii.  44, 45. Fletcher of  and  especially  observed  how  at

Saltoun writes  : '  Nor, indeed,  Caithness '  the tender  sex  are

can  there  be  a  thorough  reforma-  the  only  animals  of  burden.' —

tion  in  this  affair  so  long  as  the  Pinkerton's Voyages,  iii.  89-94.

one  half  of  our  country,  in  extent  Another  writer,  who  visited  the

of  ground,  is  possessed  by  a  people  Highlands  in  1774,  says: 'An

who  are  all  gentlemen  only  be-  Highlander  will  to  this  day  wrap

causethey  will  not  work,  and  who  himself  up  in his  plaid,  throw

in  everything  are  more  contempt-  himself at his length on the

ible  than  the  vilest  slaves,  except  ground  and  lie  there  totally  un-

that  they  always  carry  arms,  be-  concerned,  while his ^afe and

cause  for  the  most  part  they  live  children are  busily  engaged  in

upon  robbery. This  part  of  the  getting  in the scanty  harvest

country,  being  an  inexhaustible  which  the  barren  nature  of  his

source of beggars, has always  land allows him.' — Topham's

broken  all  our  measures  relating  Letters  from  Edinburgh,  pp.  43,

to  them.' — Second  Discourse  on  44.

CH.  VI.  THE HIGHLANDS.  269

the  dead,  or  to  fly  in  the  most  critical  moments  to  his
mountain  fastnesses  in  order  to  secure  his  booty.

Lord  Kames  has  very  happily  observed  that  the  High-
landers, till  after  the  rebellion  of  1745,  were  precisely  in
the  moral  condition  of  the  Germans  as  described  by  Ceesar,
among  whom  robbery  carried  with  it  no  reproach,  if  it
were  committed  beyond  the  borders  of  their  canton  or
their  tribe.^  The  whole  line  of  the  Lowlands  contigu-
ous to  the  Highlands  was  infested  with  predatory  bands,
driving  off,  or  as  it  was  termed  '  lifting '  cattle,  espe-
cially at  Michaelmas,  when  they  were  in  a  fit  condition
for  the  market.  These  expeditions  carried  with  them
no  sense  of  immorality  and  dishonour,  and  when  under-
taking them  the  Highlanders,  it  was  said,  '  prayed  as
earnestly  to  Heaven  for  success  as  if  they  were  engaged
in  the  most  laudable  design.'^  At  one  time  every
young  chief,  on  coming  of  age,  was  expected  in  this
manner  to  prove  his  manhood.^  From  this  source  the
chiefs  obtained  the  rewards  for  their  numerous  followers,
and  sometimes  dowries  for  their  daughters.  A  regular
tribute,  called  '  black  mail,'  was  paid  in  defiance  of  the
law,  to  some  neighbouring  chief,  by  most  of  the  Low-
landers  whose  land  adjoined  the  Highlands,  to  secure
them  against  depredations.  If  it  were  neglected,  the
cattle  of  the  farmer  were  soon  driven  away,  and  the
only  hope  of  recovering  them  was  by  the  payment  of
'  tascall,'  or  compensation  money,  to  some  powerful
Highlander,  Even  if  the  thieves  were  captured,  they
were  seldom  prosecuted,  for  few  farmers  dared  to  incur
the  vengeance  of  the  clan,  who  would  descend  by  night

'  History  of  Man,  bk.  ii.  c.  i.  Sketches  of  the  Clmracter  of  the

*  Pennant (Pinkerton's Voy-  Highlanders,  i.  36-48.

ages,  iii.  348). There  is  an  in-  ^  Martin's  Description  of  the

teiesting examination of the  Western Islands (Pinkerton's

moral  notions  of  the  Highlanders  Voyages,  iii.  607).
on this subject in Stewart's

s 2

260 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

to  burn  the  houses  and  to  hough  the  cattle  of  those  who
offended  them.  It  was  computed  in  1747  that  cattle  to
the  value  of  6,0001.  were  annually  stolen  in  this  manner
from  the  Lowland  border ;  that  the  expense  of  fruitless
efforts  to  recover  them  amounted  to  at  least  2,000Z. ;
that  the  additional  expense  of  herds  and  watchmen  to
guard  against  the  Highlanders  was  about  10,000Z. ;  that
5,000Z.  was  annually  paid  in  black  mail ;  and  that  the
lands  were  understocked  by  reason  of  thefts  to  such  an
extent  as  amounted  to  a  loss  of  at  least  15,000Z.^  Of
the  extraordinary  impotence  of  the  law  in  the  early
years  of  the  eighteenth  century,  even  in  the  southern
extremity  of  the  Highlands,  we  have  a  striking  instance
in  the  career  of  Robert  Macgregor,  the  well-known  Rob
Roy.  For  more  than  twenty  years  he  carried  on  a
private  war  with  the  Duke  of  Montrose,  driving  away
his  cattle,  intercepting  his  rents,  levying  contributions
on  his  tenants,  and  sometimes,  in  broad  daylight,  carry-
ing away  his  servants.  He  did  this — often  under  the
protection  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle — in  a  country  that
was  within  thirty  miles  of  the  garrison  towns  of  Stirling
and  Dumbarton,  and  of  the  important  city  of  Glasgow,
and  although  a  small  garrison  had  been  planted  at
Inversnaid  for  the  express  purpose  of  checking  his
depredations.  He  at  last  died  peacefully  on  his  bed  in
1736  at  the  patriarchal  age  of  eighty.

If  such  things  could  be  on  the  borders  of  Loch
Lomond,  we  can  easily  imagine  the  barbarous  condition
of  the  North.  The  very  rudiments  of  civilisation  had
scarcely  penetrated  to  the  mountains.  From  Dunkeld
to  Inverness,  which  was  about  one  hundred  miles,  and

>  See '  An  Inquiry  into the  Wade's  proceedings  in  the  High-

Rise  and  Progress  of  Eebellions  lands, Burt, ii. 126-130  ; and

in  the  Highlands,'  appended  to  Lord  Lovat's  report  to  George  I.

Burt's  Letters  (5th  ed.),  ii.  359.  in  1724  on  the  State  of  the  High-

Also the review of Marshal  lands.

cii.  VT.  THE HIGHLANDS.  261

from  tlience  to  the  Western  Sea,  including  the  western
islands,  there  was  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury not  a  single  town  or  village  that  could  contain  the
rudest  court  of  justice,  nor  was  there  any  inn  or  other
accommodation  for  travellers  till  a  few  were  built  by
General  Wade  shortly  after  the  rebellion  of  1715.  Of
this  large  tract  of  country,  no  part  was  cultivated  ex-
cept a  few  spots  in  straths  or  glens,  by  the  sides  of  rivers,
brooks,  or  lakes,  and  on  the  sea  coast  and  in  the  western
islands.^  The  population  lived  by  the  produce  of  their
cattle,  or  by  the  chase.  Iron  was  hardly  known,  except
in  the  form  of  weapons.  The  plough  was  a  piece  of
wood  that  scratched  the  earth ;  the  spades  were  made
of  wood  ;  table-knives  were  rarely  or  never  laid  upon
the  table.  The  only  mills  for  gi-inding  corn  were  hand-
querns  turned  by  a  woman's  hand.^  In  some  of  the
Western  Highlands  the  harrow  was  attached  to  the  tail
of  the  horse,  and  drawn  without  any  harness  whatever.^
The  rents  were  usually  paid  in  kind.*  Potatoes,  except
as  a  rare  garden  vegetable,  were  unkno^vn  in  Scotland
till  after  the  rebellion  of  1745,  when  the  Irish  fashion
of  cultivating  them  in  the  open  field  was  introduced,

'  Ctilloden  Papers,  p.  298.  patroness of Gay) was accus-

^  Burton's  Hist,  of Scotland,  tomed,  when at Edinburgh,  to

ii. 395, 396. '  Table knives,'  express very emphatically her

wrote Dr. Johnson, 'were not  disgust at the Scotch fashion,

regularly  laid  on  the  table  before  still  prevailing  in  the  capital,  of

the  prohibition  of  arms  and  the  eating  off  the  end  of  a  knife. —

change of  dress. Thirty  years  Chambers' Traditions  of  Edin-

ago the Highlander  wore his  burgh.

knife  as  a  companion  to  his  dirk  ^  Burt's  Letters,  ii.  48.  Pen-
or  dagger,  and  when  the  com-  nant  found  this  barbarous  cus-
pany  sat  down  to  meat,  the  men  tom  prevailing  in  Skye  as  late
who  had  knives  cut  the  flesh  into  as  1772  (Second  Tour  in  Scot-
small  pieces  for  the  women,  who  land). — Pinkerton's  Voyages,  ill.
with  their  fingers  conveyed  it  to  318.

their  mouths.' — Johnson's  Totir  *  Defoe's  Hist,  of  the Union,

to  the  Hebrides,  p.  84. I  may  Johnson's  Tour,  p.  174. Burt's

add  that  the  eccentric  Duchess  Letters,  ii.  52.
of  Queensberry  (the  friend  and

262 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

and  they  gradually  became  the  chief  article  of  food
among  the  labouring  poor;^  field  turnips  were  ex-
tremely rare  ;  ^  wheat  was  confined  to  the  Lowlands ;  ^
and,  except  some  scanty  crops  of  oats,  cattle  were
almost  the  only  form  of  Highland  produce.  In  the
complete  absence  of  all  industrial  pursuits,  there  were
few  purchasers  and  few  changes,  but  a  dead  level  of  the
most  abject  poverty.  In  bad  seasons  a  little  milk  and
a  small  quantity  of  oatmeal  were  mixed  with  blood
drawn  from  a  living  cow,  and  boiled  together  into
cakes. ^  When  Captain  Burt  visited  the  Highlands  he
found  in  some  places  the  cattle  so  weak  from  want  of
food  and  from  immoderate  bleeding,  that  in  the  morn-
ing they  could  not  rise  from  the  ground,  and  the  in-
habitants joined  together  to  help  up  each  other's  cows.^
In  the  islands  and  on  the  coast  shell-fish  were  largely
eaten,  and  in  the  interior  of  the  Highlands  the  peasants
lived  chiefly  on  oatmeal  and  milk.  The  filth  of  their
persons,  their  cabins,  and  their  cookery  was  described
as  revolting  ;  and  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  one  of  the
consequences  of  the  invasion  of  England  in  1745  that
was  most  dreaded,  was  the  spread  of  the  cutaneous
diseases  that  accompanied  the  Highlanders  wherever
they  went.^  Their  cabins  had  no  chimneys,  but  only  holes
for  the  escape  of  the  smoke.  During  the  long  winters
they  had  no  diversions,  but  sat  brooding  in  the  smoke
over  the  fire  till  their  legs  and  thighs  were  completely
scorched, and  till they grew  as  black as chimney-

'  Compare Scotland and  speaks  of  the  complete  absence

Scotchmen of the Eighteenth  of wheat in his time in the

Century  from  the  MSS.  of  John  Highlands,  Boethius had men-

Eamsay of Ochertyre, ii.  246.  tioned  the  country  round  Inver-

Stewart  On  the  Highlanders  of  ness  as  specially  fertile  in  this

Scotland  (3rd  ed.),  i.  146.  cxo^.—CuUoden  Papers,  p.  xx.

2  Stewart,  i.  146.  *  Burt's  Letters,  ii.  28

'  Burton,  ii.  395. Johnson's  ^  Ibid.  pp.  30,  31.

Tour, p. 120. Burt's Letters.  »  Burton,  ii.  480.
It is curious  that  while Burt

CH.  VI.  THE HIGHLANDS.  263

sweepers.  Sore  eyes  and  frequent  blindness  were  the
natural  consequence,  and  they  had  no  candles,  though
resinous  sticks  were  sometimes  employed  in  their  place. ^
The  islands  were,  if  possible,  even  more  barbarous  than
the  mainland.  In  some  of  them  it  was  said  beef  was
boiled  in  the  hide,  and  fowls  roasted  with  their  feathers.^
The  sheep  were  not  shorn,  but  the  wool  was  torn  from
the  living  animals.^  The  Shetland  Islands  during  the
whole  winter  were  cut  off  from  all  communication  with
the  mainland.  The  landing  of  William  in  Torbay  in
November  1688  is  said  only  to  have  been  known  in
Zetland  in  the  following  May.^

In  some  of  these  islands  and  in  several  of  the  re-
moter valleys  of  the  Highlands  the  Catholic  worship
lingered  on  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth
century,  and  although  the  Scotch  Kirk  gradually  ex-
tended its  empire,  it  found  it  much  more  easy  to  extir-
pate the  worship  and  the  dogmas  than  the  popular
superstitions  of  the  old  faith.  A  strange  mixture  of
Pagan  and  Popish  notions  long  continued  to  blend  with
the  new  creed.  A  Presbyterian  minister  who  visited  the
northern  islands  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury relates  with  much  horror  that  in  one  parish  of
Orkney  the  people  attached  such  a  reverence  to  the
remains  of  a  ruined  and  roofless  chapel  called  Our  Lady's
Kirk,  containing  a  stone  which  was  said  to  bear  the
footprints  of  St.  Magnus,  that  it  was  found  necessary
even  in  the  wildest  weather  to  conduct  the  Presbyterian
service  there,  as  the  congregation  refused  to  attend  it  in
any  other  place.^ In  another  island  the  minister  was

•  Burt's  Letters,  ii.  34,  35.  410.

*  Burt's  Letters,  p.  173.  ^  Brand's  description  of  Ork-
"  Brand's  description  of  Ork-  ney, &c. (1701), Pinkerton,  iii.

ney,  Zetland,  &c.,  in  Pinkerton,  773.

iii. 770. Sinclair's Statistical  ^  Ibid. (Pinkerton, iii. 762,

Account  of  Scotlayid,  1.  392,  v.  763).

264 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

given  his  choice  from  all  the  young  seals  that  were  taken,
and  that  which  he  selected  was  called  '  cullen  Moiy,'  or
'  the  Virgin  Mary's  seal.'  ^  The  lark  was  known  as  Our
Lady's  hen.'-^  The  belief  in  charms,  in  holy  wells,  in
second  sight,  in  sacred  spots,  in  holy  or  unholy  seasons,
was  almost  as  general  as  in  a  Catholic  country.  Luna-
tics were  dipped  in  the  well  of  St.  Fillan  or  of  Lich
Maree.^  The  faces  of  the  sick  were  fanned  with  the
leaves  of  a  Bible.*  On  a  particular  day  in  harvest  time
it  was  believed  that  if  anyone  worked,  the  ridges  would
bleed.^  An  impostor  in  the  island  of  St.  Kilda  carried
away  a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants,  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  eighteenth  century,  by  a  pretended  revela-
tion from  St.  John  the  Baptist,  enjoining  among  other
things  a  careful  observance  of  saint-days  and  a  weekly
fast,  and  reviving  the  doctrine  of  the  intercession  of  the
saints;  and  it  was  noticed  that  if  any  change  should
give  a  renewed  ascendency  to  Popery  the  people  were
thoroughly  prepared  to  embrace  it.^  Other  superstitions
partook  largely  of  paganism.  The  clans  were  summoned
to  war  by  the  fiery  cross  dipped  in  blood  with  those
mystic  rites  which  the  great  Scotch  poet  has  made  so
familiar.  As  late  as  1 745  it  was  sent  round  Loch  Tay
by  Lord  Breadalbane  to  summon  his  clansmen  to  sup-
port the  Government.^  Traces  of  the  old  forms  of
sacrifice  may  be  found  in  the  custom,  which  has  lingered
even  to  our  own  century,  of  burying  a  cock  alive  where  an
epileptic  first  fell,  of  burying  one  cow  alive  in  order  to

'  Martin's  Description  of  the  *  Martin's  description  (Pinker-
Western  Islands  (Pinkerton,  iii.  ton,  iii.  653).
594).  5  Brand's  description  (Pinker-

2  Brand  (Pinkerton,  iii.  763).  ton,  iii.  763).

'  See  Arthur  Michell's  very  in-  «  Martin  and  Brand  (Pinker-

teresting  paper  on '  Superstitions  ton,  iii.  725-728,  763).

of  the  North-west  Highlands  of  '  Stewart's Sketches of the

Scotland,'  in  the  fourth  volume  Highlanders  of  Scotlaiid,  i.  ap-

of the Antiquarian Society of  pend.  xi.
Scotland.

CH.  VI.  SUPERSTITIONS — HIGHLAND FIDELITY.  265

save  a  herd  stricken  by  the  murrain.'  On  May-day  a
strange  ceremony  was  performed,  in  which  a  libation
was  poured  out  on  the  ground,  and  offerings  were  made
for  the  preservation  of  the  horses  and  sheep,  and  to  pro-
pitiate the  fox,  the  hooded  crow,  and  the  eagle. ^  The
beHef  in  witches  and  in  fairies  was  universal.  Tarans,
or  souls  of  unbaptised  infants,  were  believed  to  wander
disconsolate  over  the  hills,  and  spirit  voices,  singing  Irish
songs,  to  be  heard  during  the  night  in  the  lonely  val-
leys.^ Spirits  in  the  shape  of  tall  men  with  long  brown
hair,  known  as  Brownies,  played  a  very  large  part  in  the
Highland  mythology,  were  propitiated  by  libations  of
milk,  and  were  sometimes  consulted  in  difficulty  by  a
man  sewn  up  in  a  cow's  hide  and  placed  during  the  night
in  the  hollow  under  a  cataract  to  await  the  answer  to
his  inquiry.^

The  great  virtue  of  the  Highlander  was  his  fidelity
to  his  chief  and  to  his  clan.  It  took  the  place  of  patriot-
ism and  of  loyalty  to  the  Sovereign.  It  was  unbroken
by  the  worst  excesses  of  tyranny,  and  it  was  all  the  more
admirable  on  account  of  the  extreme  poverty  which,  after
the  Union,  made  the  Scotch  nobles  a  laughing-stock  in
England.  In  the  reign  of  James  V.,  an  insurrection  of
Clan  Chattan  having  been  suppressed  by  Murray,  200
of  the  insurgents  were  condemned  to  death.  Each  one
as  he  was  led  to  the  gallows  was  offered  a  pardon  if  he
would  reveal  the  hiding-place  of  his  chief,  but  they  all
answered  that,  were  they  acquainted  with  it,  no  sort  of
punishment  could  induce  them  to  be  guilty  of  treachery

'  Michell  on  Superstitions  of  iii.  49).
the  North-west  Highlands.  Dal-  *  Martin  (Pinkerton,  iii.  681).
zell's  Darker  Superstitions  of  *  Ibid.  (Pinkerton,  iii.  610,
Scotland.  Michell  states  that  611).  Many  other  curious  in-
these  sacrifices  are  even  now  not  stances  of  Highland  superstitions
unknown  in  some  parts  of  Scot-  will  be  found  in  Ramsay's  Scot-
land, land  and  Scotchmen  of  the  Eigh-

^  Pennant's  Tour  (Pinkerton,  teenth  Century.

266 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

to  their  leader.  In  the  rebellion  of  1715  an  extraordi-
nary example  of  the  power  of  the  chief  was  furnished  by
the  career  of  the  well-known  Simon  Eraser,  afterwards
Lord  Lovat.  He  was  personally  very  indiflerent  to  the
rival  claimants  of  the  throne.  Having  committed  a  rape
on  the  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Athol,  and  afterwards  been
mixed  up  in  a  Jacobite  plot,  he  had  lived  for  many  years
in  exile  in  France,  but  had  fallen  into  suspicion  with  the
Court  of  St.  Germain,  and  at  last  resolved,  for  this  and
for  a  still  more  personal  reason,  to  go  over  to  the  Hano-
verian side.  By  the  law  of  Highland  allegiance  he  was
the  head  of  the  Eraser  clan,  but  the  English  law  had  given
his  estates  to  the  daughter  of  the  last  Lord  Lovat,  who
had  married  Mackenzie  of  Eraserdale.  Mackenzie,  by
virtue  of  his  marriage,  claimed  the  territorial  influence
of  the  head  of  the  Erasers.  He  took  the  Jacobite  side
in  the  rebellion,  and  had  actually  led  a  great  portion  of
the  clan  to  join  the  camp  of  Lord  Mar,  when  Simon
Eraser  appeared  upon  the  scene.  The  effect  was  instan-
taneous. Although  he  had  long  been  absent  from  the
country,  although  he  had  himself  hitherto  been  a  Jaco-
bite, the  Erasers  at  once  obeyed  his  summons,  abandoned
the  army  of  the  Pretender,  and  took  a  conspicuous  part
on  the  Hanoverian  side.  Not  less  remarkable  on  the
other  side  was  the  case  of  the  Macleans.  Their  land  had
for  more  than  forty  years  been  vested  for  debt  in  the
Duke  of  Argyle.  Their  chief  had  not  retained  an  acre
of  ground.  He  had  spent  most  of  his  life  in  Erance,  and
had  latterly  been  maintained  in  London  by  the  charity
of  Queen  Anne.  Yet  Sir  John  Maclean  was  able  as
head  of  the  clan  to  summon  400  men  to  fight  for  the
Pretender,  although  the  Hanoverian  army  was  com-
manded by  their  own  landlord,  the  Duke  of  Argyle.  Eor
many  years  after  the  estates  of  Lord  Seaforth  had  been
forfeited  for  his  participation  in  the  rebellion  of  1 71 5,  his
rents  were  regularly  collected  by  his  tenants  and  trans-

CH.  VI.  HIGHLAND FIDELITY.  2G7

mitted  to  the  Continent  to  their  exiled  lord.  In  1745
the  house  of  Macpherson  of  Cluny  was  burnt  to  the
ground  by  the  King's  troops.  A  reward  of  1,000Z.  was
offered  for  his  apprehension.  A  large  body  of  soldiers
was  stationed  in  the  district,  and  a  step  of  promotion  was
promised  to  any  officer  who  should  secure  him.  Yet  for
nine  years  the  chief  was  able  to  live  concealed  on  his  own
property  in  a  cave  wliich  his  clansmen  dug  for  him  during
the  night,  and,  though  upwards  of  one  hundred  persons
knew  of  his  place  of  retreat,  no  bribe  or  menace  could
extort  the  secret ;  till  at  last,  wearied  of  the  long  and
dreary  solitude  and  despairing  of  pardon,  he  took  refuge
in  France.^

It  needs  no  argument  to  show  how  dangerous,  how
incompatible  with  all  national  unity  and  with  all
security,  was  this  absolute  devotion  of  the  clansmen
to  their  chief.  It  is,  however,  equally  manifest  that
it  implied  a  moral  quality  of  a  high  order.  It  grew
out  of  a  state  of  society  in  wliich  the  dignity  of  the
noble  depended,  not  on  any  display  of  pageantry  or
wealth,  but  solely  on  the  number  and  affection  of  his
people — in  which  the  humblest  clansman  claimed  con-
sanguinity with  his  chief,  bore  his  name  and  identified
himself  with  his  glory.  Chivalrous,  self-sacrificing
fidelity  was  the  great  virtue  of  the  Highlands,  and
the  education  of  the  clan  life  made  it  at  last  a  dis-
tinguishing feature  of  the  Scotch  character.  For  a
long  time,  however,  the  influence  of  the  Highlands
and  the  Lowlands  on  each  other  was  chiefly  an  in-
fluence of  repulsion,  and  it  is  curious  to  contrast
the conduct of  the Scotch  Parliament, which, with

'  See  Lord  Lovat's  Memorial  art  On  the  Highlanders  of  Scot-

of  the  State of  the  Hirjhla7ids.  Za^tcZ,  i.  62,  63,  and  append,  xlviii.

Pennant's Tour  (Pinkerton,  iii.  Eamsay's  Scotland  and  Scotch-

384). Chambers'  Domestic  An-  men  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,

nals  of  Scotland,  iii.  459. Stew-  ii.  506.

268 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  VI.

the  assent  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Presby-
terian Church,  surrendered  Charles  I.  for  money  to
the  Eepublicans,  with  that  of  those  poverty-stricken
Highlanders,  among  whom  the  Pretender  wandered
helplessly  for  five  months  at  a  time  when  a  reward
of  30,000Z.  was  offered  for  his  apprehension.

Of  the  high  military  qualities  of  the  Highlanders  it
is  scarcely  necessary  to  speak,  and  they  were  probably
shared  to  the  full  extent  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Low-
lands. Great  courage,  gi^eat  power  of  enduring  both
privation  and  pain,^  great  fire  and  impetuosity  in
attack  were  abundantly  shown;  but  the  discipline  of
a  regular  army  was  required  to  add  to  these  that  more
than  English  tenacity  which  has  placed  the  Scotchman
in  the  first  rank  of  European  soldiers.  The  prowess  of
the  nation  had  been  displayed  in  many  glorious  fields
both  at  home  and  abroad.  Crowds  of  Scotch  adventurers,
impelled  by  poverty,  ambition,  or  internal  feuds,  had
from  a  very  early  date  been  scattered  over  Europe.^
Many  had  taken  part  in  the  Crusades.  Great  numbers,
from  the  days  of  St.  Lewis  till  near  the  close  of  the
seventeenth  century,  were  enlisted  in  the  service  of
France.  They  may  be  traced  in  the  armies  of  Ger-
many, Italy,  and  Russia,  and  Scotchmen  were  con-
spicuous among  the  bravest  soldiers  of  Gustavus
Adolphus.^ More  than  3,000  Scotchmen  under  Lord

'  I  have  heard  one  of  the  most  proverb —
eminent  of  EngUsh  surgeons  state  Q'l'^  d'Escossois,  de  rats,  de  poux
,, li. I!  1  • ■  Ceux  qui  voyagent  lusquau  bout
as the  result of  his  experience,  du  monde,  en  rencontrent  partout.
that  he  found  a  wide  difference  Michel,  Les  Ecossais  en  France,  1.  p.  4.
in  the  power  of  enduring  pain  s  ^^  immense  amount  of  in-
shown  by  patients  from  different  formation about Scotchmen a-
parts  of  the  British  Empure,  and  broad  wiU  be  found  in  Michel's
that  he  has usually  found  his  Ecossais  en  France. See,  too,
Scotch  patients  in  this respect  Stewart's  Sketches  of  the  High-
greatly  superior  both  to  his  Eng-  landers, ii. 409-418  ; Defoe's
lish  and  to  his  Irish  ones.  Memoirs  of  an  English  Cavalier ;

*  There was an old French  Macky's  Journey  in  Scotland.

CH.  VI.  HIGHLAND MORALS.  269

Reay,  the  Laird  of  Fowlis,  and  other  Highland  gentlemen,
followed  his  banner,  and  they  fought  so  desperately  that
scarcely  one  in  ten  outlived  the  field  of  Liitzen,  Their
military  qualities,  however,  were  more  recognised  abroad
than  at  home,  and  no  statesman  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century  appears  yet  to  have  foreseen  that  the
Highland  valleys,  which  were  still  looked  upon  as  mere
nests  of  thieves,  would  become  one  day  among  the  most
valuable  recruiting-grounds  of  the  British  army.

A  few  other  traits  may  be  added  which  lighten  the
darkness  of  the  picture.  The  Highlanders  were  dis-
tinguished for  their  hospitality  to  those  who  came
properly  recommended  to  them,^  and  several  examples
are  recorded  of  the  signal  generosity  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  Western  Islands  to  shipwrecked  sailors  at  the
very  time  when  the  practice  of  plundering  wrecks  was
most  scandalously  prevalent  on  both  the  English  and
the  Irish  coasts.^  Their  natural  grace  of  manner  was
beyond  question,  and  popular  poetry  and  much  tradi-
tional lore  produced  among  them  some  of  the  effects
of  education.  They  were  comparatively  free,  too,  from
that  spirit  of  bitter  theological  intolerance  which  was
the  bane  of  the  Lowlands,^  and  even  their  predatory
habits  were  not  unqualified  or  unrestricted.  The  '  lift-
ing '  of  cattle  was  looked  upon  as  a  form  of  guerrilla
warfare,  and  Captain  Burt  observed  as  a  curious
anomaly  that  '  the  Highlander  thinks  it  less  shameful

'  One  great  source  of  the  pro-  the  Highlanders,  i.  append,  xiii.-

verbial  hospitality  of  the  Scotch  xvii. Eamsay  notices  that  the

chiefs  and  lairds  was  the  preva-  Highlanders  were  in  this  resj^ect

lent custom of  paying rent in  most  honourably distinguished

kind. — See  the  '  Eemarks  on  the  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  more

Changesof  Manners  in  my  Time,'  civihsed  parts of  the  kingdom,

by  Mrs.  Mure,  Caldivcll  Papers,  Scotland  And  Scotchmen  of  the

i.  262.  Eighteenth  Century,  ii.  398.

"  See  some  striking  instances  ^  Pennant (Pinkerton, iii.

of  this  in  Stewart's  Sketches  of  426) ;  Stewart,  i.  105-108.

270  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vi.

to  steal  100  cows  than  one  single  sheep,'  that  '  personal
robberies  are  seldom  heard  of  among  them,'  and  that  he
had  himself  frequently  made  long  journeys  in  the  High-
lands accompanied  by  only  a  single  servant,  and  with
four  hundred  or  five  hundred  guineas  in  his  pormanteau,
without  any  apprehension  of  robbers  by  the  way,  or
any  danger  in  his  lodgings  by  night. ^

Among  the  greater  chiefs  there  were,  no  doubt,  a
few  who,  from  their  intercourse  vnth  the  Lowlands  and
with  the  Continent,  had  attained  to  a  fair  degree  of
culture ;  but  for  the  most  part  the  difficulties  of  travel-
ling and  the  habits  of  clan  life  were  sufficient  to  exclude
even  considerable  men  from  all  further  contact  with
civilisation  than  could  be  obtained  by  rare  visits  to
Inverness  or  perhaps  to  Aberdeen.  The  first  of  these
towns  was  the  real  capital  of  the  Highlands.  It  had
been  for  some  time  occupied  by  Cromwell ;  and  he  was
so  sensible  of  its  importance  as  a  military  post  for
keeping  the  tribes  in  subjection  that  he  strengthened
it  by  a  fortress,  which  took  five  years  in  its  erection,
and  is  said  to  have  cost  not  less  than  80,000L,  but
which,  at  the  petition  of  the  Highland  chiefs,  was  at
once  levelled  at  the  Restoration.  More  enduring  con-
sequences, ascribed  to  the  invasion,  were  the  excellent
English  long  afterwards  spoken  in  the  town,  and  the
prevalence of  English manners among its people.^

'  Burt's  Letters,  ii.  131-133.  English.'  —  Macky's Journey

See, too, Stewart's Sketches  through  Scotland,  p.  123. See,

of  the Highlanders, i. 37-39.  too,  Burt's  Letters,  i.  37. Cham-

Eamsay's  Scotland  and  Scotch-  bers,  however,  attributes  the  good

men  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  English  spoken  in  Inverness  '  to

ii.  494-496.  the  simple  circumstance  that  the

-  '  The  people  speak  as  good  people  here  do  not  learn  Enghsh

English  here  [at  Inverness]  as  at  in their infancy through the

London,  and with an  English  medium of broad Scotch, but

accent ; and ever since Oliver  make a direct  transition from

Cromwell  was  here  they  are in  Gaelic into pure EngHsh.' —

their  manners  and  dress  entirely  Gazetteer  of  Scotland.

CH.  VI.  INVERNESS.  271

Inverness  was  one  of  the  few  towns  which  appear,  at
the  time  of  the  Revolution,  to,  have  been  sincerely
attached  to  Episcopacy.  For  ten  years  the  population
refused  to  allow  any  Presbyterian  minister  to  effect
a  peaceful  settlement  among  them,  and  the  final  esta-
blishment of  the  Kirk  was  not  accomplished  without  the
intervention  of  the  troops.^  In  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century  the  town  consisted  of  400  or  500
thatched  houses,  with  two  churches,  twelve  maltkilns,
and  a  wretched  prison — so  loathsome  and  so  neglected
that  an  unhappy  prisoner  is  said,  in  1715,  to  have  been
actually  devoured  by  rats.^  It  carried  on  a  consider-
able trade  in  malt,  supplying  the  counties  of  Inverness,
Ross,  Sutherland,  and  Caithness,  as  well  as  the  Orkney
and  Shetland  Isles,  and  receiving  in  return  large
quantities  of  skins.  Its  prosperity,  which  was  never
very  great,  received  a  serious  blow  from  the  duties
imposed  on  corn  and  afterwards  from  the  malt  tax;
ruins  of  granaries  and  maltkilns  were  seen  on  every
side,  and  to  this  fact  we  may  in  part  attribute  the
strong  Jacobitism  of  its  inhabitants.  The  house  which,
during  the  troubles  of  1745,  was  successively  occupied
by  the  Pretender  and  by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  is
stated  to  have  been  then  the  only  one  in  the  town
which  contained  a  sitting-room  or  parlour  without  a
bed  in  it.  Inverness  was  so  isolated  from  the  Lowlands
that  there  was  no  regular  post  between  it  and  Edin-
burgh till  the  Union  in  1707,  and  it  was  not  till  1755

'  Lawson's  Hist,  of  the  Epi-  Moray, illustrated by  family

scopal  CMirch  of  Scotland, -p.  139.  papers  (1865),  there  is  a  fright-

-  Fraser  -  Mackintosh's A7iti-  ful  contemporary  picture  of  the

quarian Notes respecting the  state  of  Inverness  prison  in  1786.

Highlands, -p.  IQ. No  great  im-  About thirty  persons— soine of

provement  appears  to  have  been  them  criminals  and  some  of  them

effected  till  late  in  the  century.  debtors — were  frequently  confined

In  Dunbar's  Social  Life  informer  in  cells  none  of  which  were  above

Days,  chiefly  in  the  Province  of  12  feet  square  (pp.  90-92).

272 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  Vi.

that  the  post  ceased  to  be  carried  on  foot.  It  may  be
added  that  the  coach  of  Lord  Seaforth,  which  appeared
in  the  town  in  1715,  was  the  first  ever  seen  in  its
streets;  that  in  1740  its  magistrates  advertised  for  a
saddler  to  settle  in  the  borough,  as  there  was  then  no
such  person  among  its  inhabitants ;  and  that  the  most
ordinary  form  of  cart  was  not  introduced  till  1778.'

Aberdeen  was  a  much  more  important  town,  but  it
lay  outside  the  range  of  the  wilder  districts  of  the  High-
lands, and  in  spite  of  its  northern  situation  it  had  all
the  characteristics  of  a  Lowland  city.  Its  constant  com-
munication by  sea  with  the  south  and  with  the  Conti-
nent, and  also  its  admirable  educational  institutions,  had
raised  it  to  a  high  level  of  civilisation.  Its  Grammar
School  was  founded  early  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and
Eang's  College  was  the  last  of  the  three  universities
established  in  Scotland  before  the  Reformation.  It  owed
its  origin  to  a  letter  of  James  IV.,  who  represented  to
the  Pope  '  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Highlands  were
ignorant  of  letters  and  almost  uncivilised ;  that  there
were  no  persons  to  be  found  fit  to  preach  the  Word  of
God  to  the  people,  or  to  administer  the  sacraments  of
the  Church  ;  and  besides  that,  the  country  was  so  inter-
sected with  mountains  and  arms  of  the  sea,  and  so  distant
from  the  universities  already  erected,  and  the  roads  so
dangerous,  that  the  youth  had  not  access  to  the  benefits
of  education  in  their  seminaries.'  At  the  same  time  the
King  suggested  Old  Aberdeen  as  a  fitting  site  for  the
university,  as  being  '  situated  at  a  moderate  distance
from  the  Highland  country  and  Northern  islands.'  The
request  was  readily  granted. A  bull  of  Alexander  VI.

'  See  on  Inverness,  the  descrip-  other  sources  in  Fraser-Mackin-
tion  in  Burt's  Letters,  Sinclair's  tosh's Antiquarian Notes re-
Survey,  and  Chambers'  Gazetteer  specting  the  Highlands (Inver-
of Scotland ; and also some  ness,  1865).
curious facts collected from

CH.  vr.  ABERDEEN.  273

was  obtained,  in  which  the  Pope,  having  noticed  that
there  were  ah^eady  two  universities  in  Scotland,  added,
with  much  force,  that  '  while  the  distribution  of  other
things  lessened  their  power,  science  had  this  distinguish-
ing quality,  that  the  diflusion  of  it  tended  not  to  diminish
but  to  increase  and  spread  the  general  stock  of  know-
ledge.' The  university  was  formed  after  the  model  of
that  of  Paris ;  its  leading  promoter  was  the  Chancellor,
Bishop  Elphinstone,  who  had  himself  been  professor  at
Paris  and  Orleans  ;  and  the  first  principal  was  Hector
Boece,  the  friend  of  Erasmus  and  the  historian  of  Scot-
land. After  the  Reformation,  however,  the  distance  of
King's  College  from  the  new  town,  and  also  the  Catholic
tendencies  of  its  professors,  produced  a  desire  for  a  new
university ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century
Marischal  College  was  founded.  Even  before  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century  many  eminent  Scotchmen  were
connected  with  Aberdeen  either  by  birth  or  by  education.
Jamesone,  who  is  said  to  have  been  fellow-pupil  with
Vandyck  in  the  school  of  Rubens,  and  who  certainly  was
tlie  first  and  for  a  long  time  the  only  considerable  painter
of  Scotland,  was  a  native  of  the  city.  Burnet  and  Ar-
buthnot  were  both  educated  in  Marischal  College,  and
the  former,  though  but  little  connected  with  Scotland
during  his  lifetime,  showed  his  gratitude  by  founding
eight  bursarships  in  his  will.  Colin  Maclaurin,  one  of
the  greatest  mathematicians  in  Europe,  was  professor  in
the  same  college  before  his  removal  to  Edinburgh  in
1727.  Reid  was  educated  in  Marischal  College,  and  be-
came professor  in  King's  College  in  1752.  The  popu-
lation of  Aberdeen  in  1755  was  estimated  at  15,730. •
The  first  newspaper  in  the  north  of  Scotland  was  esta-
blished by  its  citizens  in  1748.  They  had  an  important
manufacture  of  woollen  stockings,  they  exported  to  the

'  Thorn's  Hist,  of  Aberdeen,  ii.  28.
VOL. II.

274 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

Continent  large  quantities  of  salmon  and  pork,  and  they
were  less  honourably  noted  for  a  scandalous  system  of
decoying  young  boys  from  the  country  and  selling  them
as  slaves  to  the  planters  in  Virginia.  It  was  a  trade
which,  in  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  was
carried  on  to  a  considerable  extent  through  the  High-
lands;' and  a  case  which  took  place  about  1742  at-
tracted much  notice  a  few  years  later,  when  one  of  the
victims,  having  escaped  from  servitude,  returned  to
Aberdeen,  and  published  a  narrative  of  his  sufferings,
seriously  implicating  some  of  the  magistracy  of  the  town.
He  was  prosecuted  and  condemned  for  libel  by  the  local
authorities,  but  the  case  was  afterwards  carried  to  Edin-
burgh. The  iniquitous  system  of  kidnapping  was  fully
exposed,  and  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  unani-
mously reversed  the  verdict  of  the  Aberdeen  authorities
and  imposed  a  heavy  fine  upon  the  provost,  the  four
bailies,  and  the  dean  of  the  Guild. ^

If  we  now  turn  to  the  Lowlands,  we  find  their  con-
dition at  least  so  far  difierent  from  that  of  the  Highlands
that  a  real  civilisation  was  generally  diffused.  The  in-
tellect, the  industrial  energy,  the  progressive  instincts  of
Scotland  were  essentially  Lowland ;  and  in  quiet  times
these  guided  the  policy  of  the  nation.  Edinburgh,
though  still  but  a  small  town,  excited  the  admiration  of
travellers  who  were  acquainted  with  the  greatest  cities

'  An  atrocious  case  of  this  kind,  prisoners,  after undergoing  the

which  shows  clearly  the  state  of  most frightful sufferings, suc-

the  Highlands,  occurred  in  1739.  ceeded  in escaping. The case

Nearly 100 men,  women, and  was  fully  investigated  by  Messrs.

children  were  seized  in  the  dead  Ward and Baillie, two local

of  the night  on  the  islands  of  magistrates,  and  their  report  is

Skye  and  Herries,  pinioned,  hor-  among  the  State  Papers  for  Ire-

ribly  beaten,  and  stowed  away  in  land in the English Eecord

a ship bound  for America,  in  OfSce.

order  to  be  sold  to  the  planters.  ^  See Kennedy's Annals of

Fortunately  the  ship  touched  at  Aberdeen,  i.  294-296.
Donaghadee  in  Ireland,  and  the

CH.  VT.

EDINBURGH.

275

of  England  and  the  Continent ;  nor  was  their  admiration
entirely  due  to  the  singular  beauty  of  its  situation.  The
quaint  architecture  of  the  older  houses — which  some-
times rose  to  the  height  of  nine,  ten,  or  eleven  stories —
indeed,  carried  back  the  mind  to  very  barbarous  times ;
for  it  was  ascribed  to  the  desire  of  the  population  to  live
as  near  as  possible  to  the  protection  of  the  castle.^  The
filth  of  the  streets  in  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth
century  was  indescribable.^  Southern  writers  were  fond
of  expatiating  on  the  dangers  to  the  passers-by  from  the
fetid  torrents  that  were  continually  discharged  from  the
windows ;  and,  long  after  the  middle  of  the  century  had
passed,  they  complained  that  the  best  inn  in  the  capital
of  Scotland  hardly  ranked  above  an  English  alehouse.^
The  new  quarter,  which  now  strikes  every  stranger  by
its  spacious  symmetry,  was  not  begun  till  the  latter
half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  but  as  early  as  1723  an
English  traveller  described  the High Street  as  '  the

•  Pennant  (Pinkerton,  iii.  28,
29).

^  See  Chambers'  Domestic  An-
nals of  Scotland,  iii.  591-593.

^  An  English  traveller  who
lived  at  Edinburgh  in  1774  and
1775,  and  who  was  in  general
greatly  pleased  with  the  town  and
with  its  inhabitants,  says  those
who  have  been  accustomed  '  to
the  hotels  of  Paris  and  Lyons  can
scarcely  form  in  imagination  the
distress  of  a  miserable  stranger
on  his  first  entrance  into  this
city ;  as  there  is  no  inn  that  is
better  than  an  alehouse,  nor  any
accommodation  that  is  decent,
cleanly  or  fit  to  receive  a  gentle-
man. On  our  first  arrival,  my
companion  and  myself,  after  a
long  day's  journey,  were  landed
at  one  of  these  stable-keepers'

(for  they  have  modesty  enough
to  give  them  no  higher  denomi-
nation). .  .  .  On  entering  the
house  we  were  conducted  by  a
poor  devil  of  a  girl  without  shoes
or  stockings,  and  with  only  a
single  linsey-woolsey  petticoat
which  just  reached  halfway  to
her  ankles,  into  a  room  where
about  twenty  Scotch  drovers  had
been  regaling  themselves  with
whiskey  and  potatoes.  You  may
guess  our  amazement  when  we
were  informed  that  this  was  the
best  inn  in  the  metropolis — that
we  could  have  no  beds  unless  we
had  an  inclination  to  sleep  to-
gether and  in  the  same  room
with  the  company  which  a  stage
coach  had  that  moment  dis-
charged.' —  Topham's  Letters
from  Edinburgh,  p.  19.

T  2

276 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. CH.  vi.

stateliest  street  in  the  world,' '  and  even  after  the  extinc-
tion of  the  Parliament,  the  law  courts  and  the  new  uni-
versity attracted  to  the  capital  most  of  the  intellect  and
the  refinement  of  the  country.  Under  the  influence  of
the  Kirk  the  public  manners  of  the  town  were  marked
by  much  decorum  and  even  austerity,  but  the  populace
were  unusually  susceptible  of  fierce  political  enthusiasm,
and  when  excited  they  were  extremely  formidable.  The
riots  against  the  Union,  the  riot  against  the  imposition
of  the  malt  tax  in  1725,  the  well-known  riot  in  which
Captain  Porteous  was  hanged  by  the  mob,  the  riot  in
1749  arising  from  some  officers  having,  on  the  anniver-
sary of  Oulloden,  called  for  the  tune  of  '  Culloden  '  in
the  theatre,  were  among  the  most  serious  in  the  king-
dom during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.
Political  feeling,  indeed,  among  all  classes,  appears  to
have  run  very  high ;  and  it  was  noticed  that  even  the
ladies  took  sides,  and  expressed  their  politics  by  the
manner  in  which  they  wore  their  plaids.^  Edinburgh,  how-
ever, in  the  eighteenth  century,  could  boast  of  a  much
more  efiicient  police  than  London  or  any  other  English
town.  A  city  guard  composed  chiefly  of  fierce  High-
landers armed  and  disciplined  like  regular  soldiers,  and
placed  under  the  control  of  the  magistrates,  was  per-
manently established  in  1696;  and  it  was  not  finally
abolished  till  the  present  century.^

Edinburgh,  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, was  more  than  twice  as  large  as  any  other  Scotch
town.  Its  population  at  the  time  of  the  Union  slightly
exceeded  30,000,  while  that  of  Glasgow  was  not  quite
15,000,  that  of  Dundee  not  quite  10,000,  and  that  of
Perth  about  7,000.^  A  hard  climate,  a  sterile  soil,  and
a  long  continuance  of  singularly  adverse  circumstances,

'  Macky's  Journey  to  Scotland  Edinburgh. Topham  bears  high

(1723),  p.  65.  testimony  to  the  efficiency  of  this

■■^  Burt,  i.  85.  body  as  a  police  force.

•  Chambers' Traditions of  *  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  i.  881

CH.  VT.  MISERY OF SCOTLAND.  277

had  formed  among  the  people  a  character  of  indomitable
energy  which  pi-omised  well  for  the  future  ;  but  as  yet
the  condition  of  the  Lowlands  was  extremely  wretched.
They  lay  between  the  anarchy  of  the  Highlands  and
the  anarchy  of  the  border.  To  the  north,  the  greater
part  of  Scotland  was  occupied  by  predatory  tribes,  who
continually  descended  to  ravage  their  fields,  who  infested
their  streets  as  beggars,  and  who  inoculated  all  classes
with  their  habits  of  idleness,  filth,  and  turbulence.  To
the  south  lay  a  much  more  wealthy  and  powerful  nation,
whose  dealings  towards  them  were  usually  inspired  by
implacable  hatred  or  by  the  narrowest  selfishness.  Ee-
peated  English  invasions  had  desolated  the  weaker  land,
and  a  chronic  war  subsisted  for  centuries  along  the
border.  The  accession  of  a  Scotch  king  to  the  English
throne  diminished  these  dangers,  but  it  brought  with
it  new  evils  scarcely  less  grave.  In  the  interests  of  the
English  Church  a  long  attempt  was  made  to  force  Epi-
scopacy, by  savage  persecution,  upon  a  Presbyterian
people.  After  the  Eestoration  all  religious  worship  by
non-Episcopal  ministers  was  for  a  time  forbidden.  A
few  ministers  were  afterwards  restored  by  the  Indul-
gence on  terms  which  the  more  rigid  members  deemed
it  criminal  to  accept,  but  it  was  made  a  capital  offence
to  preach  in  any  conventicle,  or  even  to  attend  a  con-
venticle in  the  open  air.  The  goods  as  well  as  the  lives
of  all  who  were  guilty  of  these  offences  were  forfeited
to  the  law,  and  no  one  could  sit  in  Parliament  or  could
vote  for  a  Member  of  Parliament,  who  had  not  sworn
an  oath  abjuring  the  principles  of  the  Covenanters.
Great  numbers  were  killed,  despoiled  of  their  property,
driven  to  the  mountains,  tortured  with  horrid  ingenuity,
or  transported  to  the  plantations  ;  and  although  the
persecution  failed  as  it  deserved,  it  inflicted  great  and
enduring  calamities  upon  the  nation,  and  among  other
consequences  infused  into  it  a  spirit  of  fierce  and  gloomy

278 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

fanaticism.  Besides  this,  the  natural  poverty  and  the
unhappy  position  of  Scotland  could  not  save  it  from  the
commercial  jealousy  of  its  neighbour.  Though  part  of
the  same  empire,  it  was  excluded  from  all  trade  with
the  English  colonies ;  no  goods  could  be  landed  in  Scot-
land from  the  plantations  unless  they  had  been  first
landed  in  England,  and  paid  duty  there,  and  even  then
they  might  not  be  brought  in  a  Scotch  vessel.  The
trade  with  England  itself  was  at  the  same  time  severely
hampered.  At  the  time  of  the  Union,  and  even  after
the  Scotch  land  tax  had  been  increased  in  accordance
with  its  provisions,  the  whole  revenue  of  Scotland  was
only  160,000L,  while  that  of  England  was  5,691,000L>
The  poverty,  the  abject  misery  of  the  country,  was
such  that  every  bad  season  produced  a  literal  famine.
In  1698  and  the  three  preceding  years  the  harvests  were
very  bad,  and  Fletcher  of  Saltoun — one  of  the  greatest
intellects  and  one  of  the  most  ardent  patriots  of  Scot-
land— wrote  a  discourse  on  the  state  of  the  nation  which
throws  a  vivid  light  on  the  material  wretchedness  and
the  moral  anarchy  that  prevailed.  '  Many  thousands  of
our  people,'  he  said,  '  are  at  this  day  dying  for  want  of
bread  .  .  .  and  though,  perhaps,  upon  the  great  want
of  bread  occasioned  by  the  continued  bad  seasons  of
this  and  the  three  preceding  years,  the  evil  be  greater
and  more  pressing  than  at  any  time  in  our  days,  yet
there  have  always  been  in  Scotland  such  numbers  of
poor  as  by  no  regulations  could  ever  be  orderly  pro-
vided for ;  and  this  country  has  always  swarmed  with
such  numbers  of  idle  vagabonds  as  no  laws  could  ever
restrain.'  '  There  are  at  this  day,'  he  adds,  '  in  Scot-
land (besides  a  great  many  poor  families,  very  meanly
provided  for  by  the  Church  boxes,  with  others  who  by
living  upon  bad  food  fall  into  various  diseases)  200,000

Stanhope's  Anne,  i.  281.

CH.  VI.  LOW STATE OF CIVILISATION.  279

people  begging  from  door  to  door.  These  are  not  only-
no  way  advantageous,  but  a  very  grievous  burden  to  so
poor  a  country;  and  though  the  number  of  them  be
perhaps  double  to  what  it  was  formerly  by  reason  of
this  present  great  distress,  yet  in  all  times  there  have
been  about  100,000  of  those  vagabonds  who  have  lived
without  any  regard  or  subjection  either  to  the  laws  of
the  land  or  even  those  of  God  and  nature — fathers
incestuously  accompanying  with  their  own  daughters,
the  son  with  the  mother,  and  the  brother  with  the  sister.
No  magistrate  could  ever  discover  or  be  informed  which
way  one  in  a  hundred  of  these  wretches  died,  or  that
ever  they  were  baptised.  Many  murders  have  been
discovered  among  them,  and  they  are  not  only  a  most
unspeakable  oppression  to  poor  tenants  (who,  if  they
give  not  bread  or  some  kind  of  provision  to  perhaps
forty  such  villains  in  one  day,  are  sure  to  be  insulted
by  them),  but  they  rob  many  poor  people  who  live  in
houses  distant  from  any  neighbourhood.  In  years  of
plenty  many  thousands  of  them  meet  together  in  the
mountains,  where  they  feast  and  riot  for  many  days ;
and  at  country  weddings,  markets,  burials,  and  other
the  like  public  occasions,  they  are  to  be  seen — both
men  and  women — perpetually  drunk,  cursing,  blas-
pheming, and  fighting  together.' '

It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realise  that  these  words  were
written  less  than  200  years  ago  by  a  great  Scotch
patriot,  of  a  country  which  now  ranks  in  social,  indus-
trial, and  political  virtues  at  the  very  head  of  the  British
Empire ;  nor  would  it  be  easy  to  find  a  more  impressive
illustration  of  the  immense  advance  in  human  welfare
which  has  during  that  period  been  achieved.  The  re-
medies which  Fletcher  of  Saltoun  deemed  alone  ade-
quate to  the  evil  are  such  as  would  even  now  in  some

The  Second  Discourse  on  the  Affairs  of  Scotland.

280 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi.

quarters  find  mvicli  favour.  He  desired  to  reduce  these
wandering  beggars  and  their  children  to  a  condition  of
slavery,  to  oblige  every  man  of  a  certain  estate  to  take
a  proportionate  number,  to  hand  over  as  an  example
'  three  or  four  hundred  of  the  most  notorious  of  those
villains  which  we  call  jockeys  to  the  State  of  Venice  to
serve  in  the  galleys '  against  the  Turks,  and,  lastly,  to
transplant  the  whole  population  of  the  Highlands,  whom
he  regarded  as  incorrigible,  into  the  Low  country,  and
to  people  the  Highlands  from  thence.  These  measures,
he  said,  should  be  prepared  secretly,  and  taken  rapidly,
as  otherwise  those  whom  it  was  intended  to  enslave
'  would  rather  die  with  hunger  in  caves  and  dens  and
murder  their  young  children  than  appear  abroad  to
have  them  and  themselves  taken  into  such  a  kind  of
service.'  He  might  have  added  that  such  a  policy  would
have  inevitably  produced  a  reaction  of  violence  that
would  have  intensified  every  evil  it  was  intended  to
correct,  and  would  have  left  behind  it  a  hatred  which
would  have  rankled  for  centuries  in  the  Scotch  mind,
and  which  generations  of  freedom  and  good  government
would  have  been  unable  to  efface.

Very  different  was  the  course  which  was  actually
pursued.  The  series  of  measures  which  in  a  few
generations  raised  Scotland  from  one  of  the  most
wretched  and  barbarous  into  one  of  the  most  civilised
and  happy  nations  in  Europe  may  be  soon  told,  and
it  forms  one  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  continued
good  legislation  upon  record.  The  Revolution  brought
into  the  ascendency  in  England  the  party  who  were  in
alliance  with  the  Dissenters,  and  the  first  great  work
was  to  put  an  end  to  the  religious  oppression  of  the
people.  The  Act  which  made  the  religion  of  the  im-
mense majority  of  devout  Scotchmen  the  established
religion  of  their  country  closed  for  ever  the  darkest
page  in  Scotch  history,  and  terminated  the  opposition

CH.  VI.  REMEDIAL MEASURES.  281

between  the  authority  of  religion  and  the  authority  of
law.  It  was  soon  followed  by  an  Act  establishing
schools  in  every  parish,  which  in  a  few  years  diffused
the  benefits  of  knowledge  throughout  the  kingdom,
and  made  the  average  level  of  Scotch  intelligence
superior  to  that  of  any  other  part  of  the  Empire.  The
Tory  ministry  of  Anne  completed  the  work  by  a
measure  passed  in  a  somewhat  different  spirit  and  in
favour  of  another  class,  securing  the  Episcopal  minority
the  undisturbed  exercise  of  their  religion.

The  effect  of  these  three  measures  can  hardly  be
overrated.  Of  all  the  nations  of  Europe  there  was
probably  not  a  single  one  which,  up  to  the  time  of  the
Revolution,  was  so  violent,  so  turbulent,  so  difficult  to
govern  as  the  Scotch. ^  It  is  not  true,  indeed,  that  the
sentiment  of  loyalty  was  wanting  among  them,  but  it
was  a  sentiment  which  found  its  object  in  the  chief  of
the  clan  and  not  at  all  in  the  government  of  the  nation.'^
Nor  was  the  contemptuous  repudiation  of  the  English
doctrine  of  passive  obedience  confined  to  the  High-
landers. The  Lowlanders  in  this  respect  scarcely  dif-
fered from  their  northern  fellow-countrymen,  except
in  the  more  orderly  and  methodised  character  of  their
opposition. During  the  minority  of  James  I.  the  well-

'  '  There  have  been  more  re-  mured  in  a  castle  and  afterwards
bellions  in  Scotland  than  in  any  deposed.  Her  successor,  James
other  country,  and  the  rebelUons  VI.,  they  imprisoned;  they  led
have  been  very  sanguinary  as  him  captive  about  the  country,
well  as  very  numerous.  The  and  on  one  occasion  attempted
Scotch  have  made  war  upon  his  hfe.  Towards  Charles  I.
most  of  their  kings,  and  put  to  they  showed  the  greatest  animo-
death  many.  To  mention  their  sity,  and  they  were  the  first  to  re-
treatment  of  a  single  dynasty,  strain  his  mad  career.' — Buckle's
they  murdered  James  I.  and  James  Hist,  of  Civilisation,  ii.  159.
III.  They  rebelled  against  James  -  See  the  very  just  remarks  of
II.  and  James  VII.  They  laid  Macaulay  on  the  difference  be-
hold of  James  V.  and  placed  him  tween  English  and  Scotch  Jaco-
jn  confinement. Mary  they  im-  bitism. — Hist.  c.  xiii.

282 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vi.

known  saying  of  Trajan  when  he  delivered  the  sword  to
the  governor  of  a  province,  '  Pro  me  ;  si  merear,  in  me,'
was  actually  inscribed  on  the  coin  of  the  realm,  and,
although  the  King  afterwards  changed  the  motto,  the
coin  was  not  called  in,  and  continued  to  circulate  till
the  Union.^  Of  all  the  considerable  forms  into  which
the  Christian  religion  crystallised  after  the  Reformation,
the  Scotch  Kirk  was  the  most  violently,  the  most  habi-
tually, insubordinate  to  the  civil  power.  It  caught  its
colour  from  the  spirit  of  the  nation  in  which  it  rose.
It  was  by  its  constitution  essentially  republican,  de-
riving its  theology  chiefly  from  the  Old  Testament.  It
was  in  this  respect  the  very  antipodes  to  the  Anglican
Church  and  to  the  Galilean  branch  of  the  Catholic
Church,  both  of  which  did  all  that  lay  in  their  power
to  consecrate  despotism  and  to  strengthen  authority.
Had  the  Scotch  Kirk  continued  much  longer  to  be  op-
pressed and  proscribed,  had  all  the  force  and  weight
of  religious  sentiment  been  employed  for  several
generations  to  enfeeble  and  to  subvert  the  authority
of  the  law,  the  effect  upon  the  character  of  the  nation
would  have  been  in  the  last  degree  pernicious.  The
habits  produced  by  generations  of  misgovernment  do
not  at  once  subside  when  the  cause  is  removed ;  and
more  than  half  a  century  of  time  and  many  other
healing  measures  were  required  before  Scotland  be-
came a  really  loyal  country,  but  from  the  time  when
the  Scotch  Kii-k  became  its  established  religion  its  con-
dition was  comparatively  normal  and  healthy,  and  in
spite  of  the  rebellions  of  1715  and  1745,  the  elements
of  turbulence  began  steadily  to  subside.

Scarcely  less  striking  and  beneficial  in  its  effects
was  the  second  measure  to  which  I  have  referred.  The
importance  of  a  sound  system  of  national  education  was

■  Burnet's  Speech  on  the  Sacheverell  Case  (1710).

CH.  VI.  SCOTCH EDUCATION.  283

at  that  time  hardly  recognised  out  of  Scotland,  and  it
was  peculiarly  necessary  for  a  peo^sle  who  in  the  com-
petition of  life  were  depressed  by  the  weight  of  great
natural  disadvantages.  It  must  be  acknowledged,
however,  that  a  very  large  part  of  the  credit  of  the
movement  in  favour  of  education  belongs  to  the  Church
which  preceded  the  Reformation,  nor  is  any  fact  in
Scotch  history  more  remarkable  than  the  noble  en-
thusiasm for  knowledge  which  animated  that  Church
during  the  fifteenth  century.  The  establishment  of
the  University  of  St.  Andrews  in  1410,  of  that  of
Glasgow  in  1450,  of  that  of  Aberdeen  in  1495,  the
formation  of  grammar  schools  in  the  burgh  corpora-
tions, and,  above  all,  that  remarkable  law  enacted  in
1496,  by  the  Scotch  Parliament,  requiring  all  barons
and  freeholders  of  substance,  under  pain  of  a  heavy
fine,  to  send  their  eldest  sons  to  grammar  schools
till  they  had  obtained  a  competent  knowledge  of  Latin,
and  then  for  three  years  to  '  the  schules  of  art  and  jure,'
till  they  had  acquired  a  suflficient  knowledge  of  law  to
distribute  justice  among  their  people,  abundantly  attest
the  importance  of  the  movement.  Even  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  though  not  formally  established  till  1582,
was  chiefly  endowed  by  a  sum  bequeathed  many  years
before  for  that  purpose  by  Reid,  the  Catholic  bishop  of
Orkney.^  It  was  on  these  foundations  that  the  states-
men of  the  Reformation  and  of  the  Revolution  built,  but  it
must  be  added  that  the  Scotch  Kirk  uniformly  exhibited
a  most  praiseworthy  zeal  in  extending  the  benefits  of
education.  Knox  himself,  as  early  as  1560,  had  pro-
posed an  elaborate  system  of  national  education.  Soon
after  the  rebellion  of  1640  the  establishment  through-
out Scotland  of  parochial  schools,  imitated  fi'om  those
at  Geneva,  and  placed  under  the  direct  supervision  of

'  Bower's  Hist,  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  i.  69.

284 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vi.

the  Kirk,  was  decreed,  and  the  clergy  largely  extended
the  system  of  bursarships  wliich  has  played  so  conspi-
cuous a  part  in  Scotch  life,  and  has  brought  the  advan-
tage of  university  education  within  the  range  of  classes
wholly  excluded  from  it  in  England.'  The  singularly
disputatious  character  of  Scotch  preaching,  and  the  re-
publican form  of  Scotch  Church  government,  contributed
to  give  a  considerable  though  one-sided  stimulus  to  the
national  mind.  Burnet,  describing  his  own  experience
when  preaching  with  some  brother  divines  in  Scotland
in  1670,  said,  '  We  were  indeed  amazed  to  see  a  poor
commonalty  so  capable  to  argue  on  points  of  govern-
ment and  on  the  bounds  to  be  set  to  the  power  of
princes  in  matters  of  religion.  Upon  all  these  topics
they  had  texts  of  Scripture  at  hand,  and  were  ready
with  their  answers  to  anything  that  was  said  to  them.
This  measure  of  knowledge  was  spread  even  among  the
meanest  of  them,  their  cottagers,  and  their  servants.'  ^

The  turbulence  of  the  time,  however,  and  the  rapid
fluctuations  of  politics  prevented  some  of  these  mea-
sures from  being  fully  carried  out,  and  the  system  of
parochial  schools  was  not  finally,  generally,  and  efii-
caciously  established  till  the  Act  of  1696.  Its  effects
in  a  few  years  became  visible.  Though  the  material
well-being  of  the  people,  even  of  the  most  prosperous
parts  of  Scotland,  was  during  the  greater  part  of  the
eighteenth  century  considerably  below  the  average
standard  in  England,  though  the  Scotch  poor  in  the
Lowlands  remained  rather  conspicuously  deficient  in  the
graces  and  the  courtesies  of  life,  the  level  of  intelligence
among  them  was  soon  distinctly  higher,  the  proportion  of
national  faculties  called  into  active  exercise  was  dis-
tinctly greater,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  Empire.
The  impulse  which  was  created  in  primary  education

'  See  Bower's  Hist,  of  the  Uni-  *  Hist,  of  his  Own  Times,  i.

versity  of  Edinburgh,  i.  198-204. 293.

1

CH.  VI.  SCOTCH EDUCATION.  285

was  soon  followed  by  a  corresponding  improvement  in
higher  culture.  The  zeal  of  the  Scotch  student  became
notorious,  and  in  the  Lowlands  at  least  the  standard  of
general  knowledge  among  the  gentry  was  perceptibly
higher  than  in  England.^  In  no  other  country  did
the  philosophy  of  Newton  at  so  early  a  period  find
a  general  acceptance.  In  1692  it  was  noticed  that
Newton  had  already  received  numerous  congratula-
tory letters  on  the  '  Principia,'  but  '  especially  from
Scotland.'  The  new  philosophy  was  taught  by  James
Gregory  at  St.  Andrews,  and  by  David  Gregory  at
Edinburgh,  prior  to  1691  ;  and  the  latter  professor,
having  in  that  year  been  removed  to  the  astronomical
chair  at  Oxford,  appears  to  have  been  the  first  person
who  made  it  popular  in  the  great  English  University.^
In  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  name
of  Hume  is  only  second  to  that  of  Kant,  and  Glasgow
University  was  the  centre  (?f  a  great  reaction  against
the  teaching  of  Locke,  conducted  successively  by
Hutcheson,  Adam  Smith,  and  Reid,  at  a  time  when  the
English  Universities,  with  their  enormous  revenues,
were  sunk  in  lethargy  and  prejudice.^

'  Burnet,  after  deploring  the  nist.  of  his  Own  Times,  ii.  648.

low  level of  instruction  among  Lockhart  (who  is  a  more  partial

the  English  gentry,  adds:  'The  witness)  says  :  'It  is  obvious  that

Scotch,  though  less  able  to  bear  at  this  very  time (which  must

the  expense  of  a  learned  educa-  chiefly  proceed  from  this  humour

tion, are  much  more  knowing;  of  travelling)  the  Scotch  gentry

the  reason  of  which  is  this :  the  do  far  exceed  those  of  England,

Scotch,  even of  indifferent  for-  so  that  in  the  one  you  shall  find

tunes,  send  private  tutors  with  all  the  accomphshments  of  well-

their children both to schools  bred gentlemen, and in your

and colleges ; these  look after  country  English  esquires  all  the

the young  gentlemen  mornings  barbarity imaginable.'  — Lock-

and  evenings  and  read  over  with  liart  Papers,  i.  252.

them what they  have learned,  -  Baden Powell's Hist, of

and  so  make  them  perfecter  in  NaMcral Philosophy, pp. 347,

it ;  they  generally go  abroad a  348.

year  or  two  and  see  the  world.'—  -'As early as 1703 Leibnitz

286

ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vi.

The  Act  of  Toleration  of  1712,  granting  the  Epi-
scopal clergy  liberty  and  protection  in  their  worship  and
permission  to  administer  baptism  and  perform  marriages,
though  less  important  than  the  measures  I  have  men-
tioned, was  also  of  some  real  advantage  to  the  country.
The  establishment  of  the  Scotch  Kirk  had  undoubtedly
fulfilled  the  wishes  of  a  majority  of  the  people,  but  there
were  many  districts,  especially  in  the  north  of  Scotland,
where  Episcopalianism  had  struck  deep  root,  where  the
new  Church  was  only  accepted  with  much  difiiculty,  and
where  a  majority,  or  at  least  a  large  minority,  long  con-
tinued sincerely  attached  to  the  proscribed  faith.  ^  After
undergoing  great  hardship  and  persecution  in  the  years
immediately  following  the  Revolution,  the  Episcopal
clergy  obtained  a  small  measure  of  legal  toleration  by
the  Comprehension  Act  of  1695,  which,  however,  only
apphed  formally  to  parish  churches,  leaving  Episcopal

wrote  to  Lord  Eoxburgh :  '  The
Scotch  prove  clearly  enough  that
then'  genuis  can  quite  keep
pace  with  that  of  the  Enghsh.
Messrs.  David  Gregory  and  Creigh
are  taking  successful  pains  with
mathematics,  but  the  late  Mr.
James  Gregory  especially  was  an
excellent  genius.  I  say  nothing
of  the  illustrious  Lord  Napier,
the  author  of  the  Logarithms.  I
hope  also  that  Mr.  Cunningham
.  .  .  will  do  honour  to  his  country
whenever  he  shall  choose  to
communicate  to  the  pubUc  the
great  knowledge  he  possesses.' —
Kemble's  State  Papers,  pp.  319,
320.

'  I  think  anyone  who  will  read
the  evidence  collected  in  the
eighth  chapter  of  Lawson's  jHisi.
of  the  EpiscoiMlian  Church  in
Scotland  will  conclude  that  the

Episcopalian  minority  was  more
important,  and  the  resistance  to
the  establishment  of  Presby-
terianism  more  serious,  than
would  be  inferred  from  the  nar-
rative of  Macaulay.  In  one
parish  —  that  of  Glenorchy  —
some  of  the  parishioners  actually
marched  the  Presbyterian  minis-
ter over  the  bounds  of  the  parish
(the  piper  meanwhile  playing  the
march  of  death)  and  compelled
him  to  swear  that  he  would
never  return.  —  See  Stewart's
Sketches  of  the  Highlanders,  i.
105,  106,  138.  See,  too,  on  the
number  of  Scotch  Episcopalians,
Lathbury's  Hist,  of  the  Non-
jurors, pp.  420-422.  The  lower
and  middle  classes  were  usually
Presbyterian,  the  nobility  and
gentry  Episcopalian.

OH.  vr.  SCOTCH EPISCOrALIANS.  287

worship  in  private  houses  and  meeting-houses  as  illegal
as  before.  All  Episcopal  clergymen  who  had  not  before
been  deprived,  were  permitted  by  this  Act  to  retain  their
benefices  on  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  subscribing
the  '  assurance '  which  was  the  Scotch  equivalent  to  the
abjuration  oath.  The  great  majority  of  the  Episcopal
clergy  refused  to  comply  with  this  latter  condition,  which,
by  asserting  that  the  Pretender  had  no  right  to  the
throne,  was  tantamount  to  abandoning  the  doctrine  of
the  Divine  right  of  kings.  A  small  number,  however,
known  as  the  '  Protected  Ministers,'  submitted  and  were
suffered  to  retain  their  benefices,  but  not  to  take  any
share  in  the  government  of  the  Church,  and,  though  it
was  not  expressly  stated  in  the  Act  of  Parliament,  they
were  assumed  by  the  law  courts  to  be  beyond  the  control
of  the  Church  Judicatures.  This  assumption  was,  it  is
true,  violently  contested  by  the  Presbyterian  authorities,
and  they  made  more  than  one  effort  to  bring  the  Episco-
palian clergy  within  the  range  of  their  discipline.^  It  is
worthy  of  notice  that  the  difference  between  the  Churches
for  several  years  after  the  Revolution  lay  exclusively  in
the  system  of  Church  government,  for  the  Episcopalians
in  Scotland  employed  no  liturgy  and  conducted  their
worship  in  almost  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  Presby-
terians,

The  bitterness,  however,  that  raged  between  them
was  very  great.  The  memory  of  atrocious  persecutions
inflicted  on  the  Presbyterians  during  the  period  of  Epi-
scopalian ascendency,  and  the  fierce  and  acrid  fanaticism
of  the  Kirk,  excited  the  people  to  the  utmost,  though  in
the  great  towns  the  Episcopal  meeting-houses  were
usually  connived  at.  Queen  Anne,  shortly  after  her  ac-
cession, wrote  a  letter  to  the  Privy  Council,  expressing
her  wish  that  the  Episcopal  clergy  should  be  permitted

See  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  the  Nonjurors,  pp.  438,  439.

288  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vi.

the  free  exercise  of  public  worship.  As  the  Tory  party
acquired  an  ascendency,  the  spirit  of  the  Government
became  hostile  to  the  Presbyterian  establishment,  and
there  were  serious  fears  that  an  attempt  would  be  made
to  subvert  it.  The  Episcopalians,  on  the  other  hand,
identified  themselves  more  closely  with  the  English
Church,  and  after  the  Union  some  of  them  began  to
employ  the  Anglican  liturgy  in  their  services — an  inno-
vation which  excited  paroxysms  of  alarm  and  indignation
in  Scotland,  partly  on  religious  grounds,  partly  as  a
symptom  of  a  very  dangerous  alliance  of  Churches.  The
matter  was  brought  to  an  issue  by  a  Scotch  clergyman
named  Greenshields,  who  had  for  some  time  held  a  curacy
in  Ireland,  but  returned  to  Scotland  in  1709,  and,  having
taken  the  required  oaths,  opened  an  Episcopal  meeting-
house at  Edinburgh,  and  made  use  of  the  English  liturgy.
A  petition  against  it  was  at  once  presented  to  the
General  Assembly  from  many  of  the  inhabitants  of
Edinburgh.  The  Assembly  passed  an  Act  proclaiming
that  the  Union  was  infringed  by  '  the  use  of  set  forms,
rites,  and  ceremonies.'  The  magistrates  interfered,  and
threw  Greenshields  into  prison.  The  ostensible  reason
was  that  he  officiated  in  an  unauthorised  meeting-house.
The  real  reason  was  that  he  employed  the  English  liturgy
in  his  worship.  On  an  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Session
the  sentence  of  the  magistrates  was  confirmed  ;  but
Greenshields  at  once  took  a  step  which  filled  his  oppo-
nents with  dismay.  He  appealed  to  the  British  House
of  Lords,  and  the  Presbyterians  were  made  for  the  first
time  to  feel  that  a  question  relating  to  their  own  disci-
pline and  jurisdiction  could  be  decided  by  a  tribunal
consisting  in  pai't  of  English  bishops.  Harley  and  St.
John  wished  the  appeal  to  be  withdrawn,  as  being  cer-
tain to  give  bitter  ofience  either  in  England  or  in  Scot-
land, but  Lockhart  of  Carnwath  ^  and  other  Tory  Scotch

'  See  Lockhart's  Memoirs,  i.  378.

CH.  VI.  TOLERATION ACT OF 1712.  289

members  insisted  on  its  being  heard,  and  in  March  1711
the  House  of  Lords  reversed  the  judgment  of  the  Court
of  Session,  and  condemned  the  Edinburgh  magistrates
to  costs.

Tliis  episode,  occurring  at  a  time  when  Presbyterian
meeting-houses  were  perfectly  legal  in  England,  natu-
rally caused  much  indignation  south  of  the  Tweed,  and  it
was  the  immediate  forerunner  of  the  Toleration  Act  of
1712.  It  was,  no  doubt,  true  that  this  Act  was  sup-
ported by  many  who  were  enemies  to  the  Scotch  Esta-
blishment, and  who  hoped  that  a  toleration  would  lead  to
its  overthrow  ;  but  this  fact  will  not  justify,  and  will  but
slightly  palliate,  the  passionate,  vehement,  and  persistent
hatred  with  which  the  bare  toleration  of  Episcopalians
was  denounced  by  the  Presbyterians  of  Scotland.  It
was  described  as  inconsistent  with  the  existence  and  with
the  discipline  of  the  Established  Church,  as  a  breach  of
the  Union,  as  opening  the  door  to  great  corruption  both
in  doctrine  and  worship,  as  a  grievous  sin  against  the
Almighty.  A  petition  was  addressed  to  the  Queen
adjuring  her  to  interpose  in  order  to  prevent  '  such  a
manifest  and  ruinous  encroachment.'  The  pulpits  rang
with  denunciations  of  toleration.  The  Assembly  assumed
an  attitude  of  uncompromising  hostility.  Carstairs,^  the
ablest  of  the  Scotch  divines,  was  sent  to  London  to  op-
pose it,  and  Defoe,  the  most  brilliant  writer  among  the
English  Nonconformists,  employed  his  pen  in  the  same
cause.  The  English  Parliament,  however,  was  at  this
time  borne  along  on  the  full  wave  of  Tory  enthusiasm
that  followed  the  Sacheverell  impeachment,  and  public

'  The  proceedings  of  Carstairs  to  Defoe's  Hist,  of  the  Union,
on  this  matter  have  been  lately  Burton's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  Lath-
investigated  with  much  learning  bury's  Hist,  of  the  Nonjurors,
and  ability  from  the  Scotch  Kirk  and  the  tracts  on  the  subject
point  of  view,  in  Story's  Life  of  published  at  the  time.
Carstairs. See,  too,  the  preface

VOL. n.  U

290 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vi.

opinion  was  not  a  Kttle  stirred  when  it  was  known  that
even  English  regiments  in  Scotland  were  not  suffered  to
have  the  English  service  publicly  celebrated  for  their
use.^  The  measure  was  carried,  but  a  provision  was
added  which  at  once  diminished  its  benefit  and  added
to  its  unpopularity.  The  Whigs,  who  could  hardly,
consistently  with  their  principles,  oppose  a  Toleration
Act,  desired  at  least  that  it  should  not  shelter  a  Jacobite
party,  and  carried  a  clause  making  the  oath  of  abjura-
tion indispensable  for  those  who  desired  the  benefits  of
the  Act.  The  Tories  accepted  the  clause,  but  extended
the  oath  to  the  Established  Church.  It  might  appear
at  first  sight  that  the  Presbyterians  at  least,  who  entirely
discarded  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings,  and
who  had  in  general  very  little  sympathy  with  the  Stuarts,
would  have  found  no  difficulty  in  taking  an  oath  abjuring
the  Pretender,  and  promising  allegiance  to  the  sovereign
who  reigned  according  to  the  Act  of  Settlement.  It
was  discovered,  however,  by  the  keen  eye  of  theological
jealousy,  that,  as  the  Act  of  Settlement  provided  that
the  reigning  sovereign  must  be  a  member  of  the  Angli-
can Church,  the  oath  imposed  on  the  Presbyterians  of
Scotland  was  an  act  of  homage  and  an  additional  guaran-
tee to  Prelacy.  Some  positively  refused  to  take  it,  and
seceded  from  the  Establishment ;  others  took  it,  making
at  the  same  time  a  formal  declaration  that  they  did  so
under  the  belief  that  it  implied  no  deviation  from  their
strict  allegiance  to  the  Presbyterian  type  of  worship  and
Church  government ;  and  for  many  years  the  new  test,
as  it  was  termed,  added  very  materially  to  the  discontent
which  the  Toleration  Act  produced  among  the  Presby-
terians of  Scotland.  Among  the  Episcopalians  its  efiects
were  still  more  serious.  The  clergy  of  this  Church  were
almost  universally  Jacobite,  and  the  conditions  of  the

'  See  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  the  Nonjv/rors,  p.  451.

CH.  VI.  THE ABJURATION OATH,  291

Toleration  Act  were  that  they  should  pray  for  the  reign-
ing sovereign,  and  take  the  oath  not  only  of  allegiance,
but  also  of  abjuration.  These  conditions  they  could  not
or  would  not  accept.  The  oath,  as  I  have  already  ex-
plained, involved  a  distinct  repudiation  of  the  religious
doctrine  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings — a  retrospective
judgment  which  many,  wholly  free  from  the  taint  of  dis-
loyalty, were  unable  to  make.^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it
was  usually  not  taken,  and  the  required  prayer  was  not
offered.  On  the  rare  occasions  when,  in  Episcopalian
meeting-houses,  the  King  was  prayed  for,  the  congrega-
tion would  rise  up ;  men  and  women  would  begin  to
take  snuff,  or  to  occupy  themselves  in  some  other  trivial
way,  and  not  a  single  response  would  be  heard.^  The
Toleration  Act,  however,  saved  the  Episcopalians  from
State  prosecutions.  The  Government  left  them  in  tran-
quillity as  long  as  they  remained  peaceful,  and  the  par-
tial recognition  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  though  it
proved  but  temporary,  had  the  effect  of  considerably
extending  the  sphere  of  religious  liberty,  of  checking  in
some  degree  the  extreme  despotism  of  the  Kirk  Sessions,
and  perhaps  of  preventing  many  Scotchmen  from  aban-
doning their  country.

The  next  great  object  to  be  attained  was  the  de-
velopment of  industrial  life.  We  have  seen  how  pro-
foundly— it  might  easily  have  been  imagined  how  in-
curably— the  habits  of  the  Scotch  were  opposed  to  those
of  an  industrial  community,  and  how  one  of  the  greatest
Scotchmen  of  his  time  imagined  that  the  only  way  of
correcting  them  was  by  instituting  a  gigantic  system  of
slavery.  In  truth,  however,  the  slow  but  simple  remedy
for  the  evil  was  found  in  the  legislative  emancipation  of
Scotch  industry.  The  first  great  impulse  towards  in-
dustrial life  in  Scotland  was  given  by  the  project  of  the

'  See  the  powerful  statement Lawson,  p.  266.
of  Bishop  Eussell  to  this  effect  in  2  Burt's  Letters,  i.  212.

u  2

292  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

Darien  colony,  which  stirred  the  nation  to  the  very-
depths,  and  created  hopes  that  were  only  too  soon
dashed  to  the  ground.  A  terrible  reaction  followed.
On  the  ruin  of  the  scheme  in  which  so  much  of  the
capital  of  Scotland  was  embarked,  poverty  and  dis-
couragement became  more  general  than  ever,  and  the
jealous  hostility  which  the  English  Government  and
people  had  shown  to  the  enterprise  supplied  a  new  ali-
ment to  the  old  national  animosity.  The  real  develop-
ment of  Scotch  industry  dates  from  the  Union  of  1707.
This  measure  was  not,  it  is  true,  a  popular  one.  The
political  absorption  of  a  small  into  a  larger  nationality
can  very  rarely  be  effected  without  irritating  the  most
sensitive  chords  of  national  feeling.  The  sentiment  of
nationality  is  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  respectable
by  which  human  beings  are  actuated.  No  other  has
produced  a  greater  amount  of  heroism  and  self-sacri-
fice, and  no  other,  when  it  has  been  seriously  out-
raged, leaves  behind  it  such  enduring  and  such
dangerous  discontent.  The  deep  hostility  between  the
English  and  the  Scotch,  their  difference  in  religion,
their  great  difference  in  wealth,  and  the  large  national
debt  of  England,  all  contributed  to  aggravate  the
difficulty.  The  Treaty  of  Union,  however,  as  it  was
finally  carried,  was  drawn  up  with  great  skill,  and  with
much  consideration  for  the  interests  of  the  weaker
nation.  It  provided  that  the  land  tax  should  be  so
arranged  that  when  England  contributed  2,000,000Z.,
Scotland  should  only  contribute  48,000?.,  or  rather  less
than  a  fortieth  part ;  that  in  consideration  of  the  heavy
English  debt,  by  which  the  taxation  of  the  whole  island
would  be  increased,  an  equivalent  of  about  400,000Z.
should  be  granted  to  Scotland  and  applied  to  the  pay-
ment of  her  small  debt  of  160,000?.,  to  making  good
the  losses  incurred  in  assimilating  her  coinage  to  that
of  England,  to  the  restitution  of  the  money  lost  by  the

CH.  VI.  THE UNION.  293

Darien  Company,  and,  if  any  surplus  remained,  to  the
encouragement  of  her  manufactures,  and  also  that  she
should  enjoy  an  exemption  of  a  few  years  from  some
temporary  taxes.  With  these  exceptions  the  taxation
of  the  two  countries  was  equalised,  and  the  same  duties
of  custom  and  excise,  the  same  system  of  weights  and
measures,  the  same  coinage,  the  same  laws  concerning
public  right,  policy  and  civil  government  were  extended
through  the  whole  island.  It  was  provided  also  that
the  succession  of  the  United  Kingdom  should  remain
to  the  Princess  Sophia  and  the  heirs  of  her  body,  being
Protestants  ;  that  sixteen  peers  elected  every  Parlia-
ment by  the  whole  body  of  Scotch  peers,  and  forty-five
commoners  elected,  two-thirds  of  them  by  the  counties,
and  the  remainder  by  the  boroughs,  should  represent
Scotland  in  the  United  Parliament ;  ^  and  that  the  Epi-
scopal Church  should  be  for  ever  established  in  England
and  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Scotland.  The  Sove-
reign was  also  restrained  from  creating  any  additional
Scotch  peers,  and  the  hereditary  jurisdictions  and  all
the  other  privileges  of  the  existing  peers,  except  that  of
voting  in  Parliament,  were  guaranteed.  But,  above  all,
perfect  free  trade  was  established  between  England  and
Scotland,  and  all  the  markets  of  the  English  plantations
were  thrown  open  to  Scotland  as  freely  as  to  her  neigh-
bour.

The  commercial  clauses  of  the  Union  laid  the  foun-
dation of  the  material  prosperity  of  Scotland,  and  they
alone  reconciled  the  most  intelligent  Scotchmen  to  the
partial  sacrifice  of  their  nationality.  The  country  was,
indeed,  reduced  to  a  condition  of  chronic  famine,  and
the  emancipation  of  Scotch  trade  had  become  a  cardinal

'  The  mode  of  election  for  both  the  Scotch  Parhament,  whose  act
peers  and  commoners  was  to  be  on  this  point  the  Union  treaty
determined  in  the  last  session  of ratified  by  anticipation.

294  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vt.

object  of  every  patriot.  The  Union  in  itself  was  ex-
tremely unpopular,  but  the  English  clearly  intimated
that  on  no  other  condition  would  they  grant  Scotland
a  share  in  the  commercial  privileges  of  the  Empire,
One  of  the  last  public  acts  of  William  had  been  to  urge
the  expediency  of  an  Union  ;  and  in  1702  formal  nego-
tiations were  entered  into  and  commissioners  were  ap-
pointed to  negotiate  a  treaty  between  the  nations,  but
English  manufacturing  jealousy  defeated  the  attempt.
In  1703,  however,  a  new  Scotch  Parliament  assembled,
which  soon  brought  matters  to  an  issue.  The  great
majority  of  the  members  were  vehement  Presbyterians,
fall  of  suspicions  of  the  High  Church  tendencies  of  the
Queen  and  of  bitter  resentment  at  the  policy  of  England.
They  adjourned,  till  other  business  had  been  despatched,
the  Bills  of  supply  ;  they  began  by  passing  a  declaratory
Act  securing  the  Presbyterian  government  in  Scotland,
and  they  even  made  it  high  treason  to  impugn,  either
by  writing,  speaking,  or  acting,  any  article  of  the  Claim
of  Rights,  which  asserted  the  evil  of  Episcopacy  and
the  necessity  for  a  Presbyterian  Establishment.  A  Bill
for  tolerating  the  Episcopalians  was  brought  forward,
but  its  promoters  did  not  venture  to  press  it.  Turning
then  from  religious  to  civil  matters,  the  Parliament
proceeded  with  a  high  hand  to  exhibit  its  independence
of  England.  Though  members  of  the  British  Empire,
though  they  bore  their  part  in  the  burdens  and  the
dangers  of  British  wars,  the  Scotch  were  excluded  by
their  neighbours  from  all  trade  with  the  colonies  ;  and
they  now  resolved  to  consult  exclusively  their  own  in-
terests and  dignity.  An  Act  was  passed  declaring
that  after  the  death  of  the  reigning  Queen  the  Sovereign
of  Scotland  should  have  no  right  of  declaring  war  with-
out the  consent  of  the  Parliament.  Another  and  still
more  startling  measure,  called  the  Bill  of  Security,
provided  that  on  the  death  of  the  Queen  without  issue,

CH.  VI.  PAELIAMENT OF 1703.  295

the  Estates  should  meet  to  name  a  Protestant  successor ;
but  that  this  should  not  be  the  same  person  who  would
succeed  to  the  crown  of  England  unless  a  treaty  had
been  first  made  securing  '  the  honour  and  sovereignty
of  the  Scotch  crown  and  kingdom,  the  freedom,  fre-
quency, and  power  of  parliaments,  the  religion,  freedom,
and  trade  of  the  nation  from  English  or  any  foreign
influence.'  It  was  at  the  same  time  made  high  treason
to  administer  the  coronation  oath  without  parliamentary
authority,  and  orders  were  given  immediately  to  arm
the  nation.

These  were  bold  measures,  and  they  showed  plainly
that  the  spirit  of  the  nation  could  no  longer  be  trifled
with.  Scotland  could  not  directly  compel  England  to
grant  her  free  trade,  but  she  conld  proclaim  herself  a
separate  kingdom,  and  by  the  assistance  of  France  she
might  have  maintained  her  position.  The  last  days  of
the  Parliament  of  1703  were  indeed  extremely  alarm-
ing, A  Bill  brought  in  by  the  Earl  of  Marchmont  to
secure  the  succession  to  the  House  of  Hanover  was
met  by  an  outburst  of  furious  derision ;  and  the  House
refused  even  to  allow  any  record  of  it  to  remain  in
their  books.  An  attempt  to  bring  in  a  Bill  of  Supply
was  treated  with  scarcely  less  scorn,  and  for  nearly  two
hours  the  debate  was  rendered  inaudible  by  fierce
cries  of  '  Liberty  !  '  and  '  No  subsidy  !  '  The  necessi-
ties of  the  Government  were  such  that  the  ministers
appear  to  have  supported  a  strange  measure,  which  was
carried,  to  remove  the  restrictions  upon  the  importation
of  French  wine,  at  a  time  when  war  was  raging  between
England  and  France.  The  duty  raised  from  it  was
found  absolutely  necessary  for  the  public  service ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  the  Jacobites  supported  the  Bill  as
opening  easy  communications  with  France.  Menaces  of
coercion  were  freely  used  on  both  sides.  The  foot-
guards  were  ordered  to  be  in  readiness ;  the  Duke  of

296 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

Queensberr}^,  who  was  the  Queen's  High  Commissioner,
would  have  been  in  imminent  danger  of  his  life  but  for
the  protection  of  the  soldiers.  '  The  whole  nation,'
said  an  observer,  '  was  strangely  inflamed ; '  and  '  a
national  humour  of  being  independent  of  England  fer-
mented strongly  among  all  sorts  of  people  without
doors.'  While  the  royal  assent  was  reluctantly  granted
to  the  other  Bills,  it  was  refused  to  the  Bill  of  Security  ;
and  as  the  Scotch  Parliament  was  proceeding  to  discuss
still  more  stringent  measui^es,  limiting  the  prerogative
of  future  sovereigns,  it  was  suddenly  prorogued  without
having  voted  supplies,  and  the  pay  of  the  army  and
the  charge  of  the  Government  were  sufiered  to  run  to
credit.'

It  was  hoped  that  in  the  recess  the  angry  feeling
would  subside ;  and,  as  a  means  of  softening  some  of
the  leaders,  Athol,  who,  though  he  was  Lord  Privy
Seal,  had  been  prominent  in  opposition,  was  made  a
Duke  ;  Tarbet,  who  had  been  conspicuous  on  the  same
side,  was  raised  to  the  Earldom  of  Cromarty ;  and
several  other  dignities  were  conferred.  The  Order  of
the  Thistle  was  at  tliis  time  revived  and  bestowed  on
some  powerful  noblemen.  Some  changes  were  made
in  the  administration ;  the  Duke  of  Queensberry,  who
had  been  accused  of  getting  up  a  false  charge  of
Jacobitism  against  some  conspicuous  nobles,  was  re-
moved from  the  position  of  High  Commissioner,  and
replaced  by  the  Marquis  of  Tweeddale ;  and  the  royal
speech,  in  opening  the  Session  of  1704,  urged  in  the
strongest  terms  the  absolute  necessity  of  at  once
settling  the  question  of  the  succession.  But  it  soon
appeared  that  the  Parliament  was  neither  conciliated
nor  dismayed. The  Duke  of  Hamilton  began  the  oppo-

'  See  on  these  and  the  sub-  England;  Burnet's  Ow«  Times;
sequent  transactions,  Lockhart  Boyer's  Queen  Anne;  Defoe's
Papers,  vol.  i.  ;  Tindal,  Hist,  of Hist,  of  tlie  Union,

CH.  VI.  BILL OF SECURITY PASSED.  297

sition  by  moving  that  '  this  Parliament  could  not  pro-
ceed to  name  a  successor  to  the  crown  until  the  Scots
had  a  previous  treaty  with  England  in  relation  to  com-
merce and  other  concerns.'  The  Bill  of  Security  was
again  passed,  with  little  modification,  and  this  time  it
was  tacked  to  a  Bill  for  the  payment  of  the  army.  The
leading  politicians  openly  declared  their  determination
to  refuse  to  vote  funds  for  the  payment  of  the  troops
till  the  Bill  was  passed.  War  was  at  this  time  raging ;
an  invasion  might  at  any  time  be  expected  ;  there  was
a  strong  Jacobite  party  in  the  Scotch  Parliament ;
another  party,  guided  by  Fletcher  of  Saltoun,  was
almost  or  altogether  republican,  and  desired  to  reduce
the  prerogative  of  the  Grown  to  little  more  than  a
shadow,  and  make  Scotland  virtually  independent  of
England.  The  resentment  of  the  people  at  English
commercial  jealousy  blazed  fierce  and  high,  and  mani-
fested itself  by  alarming  demonstrations.  If  the  royal
assent  was  refused,  an  invading  army  from  France
might  be  altogether  unresisted,  and  might  even  find  the
Parliament  and  people  on  its  side.  Under  these  very
critical  circumstances  the  English  Government  thought
it  prudent  to  yield,  and  by  the  advice  of  Godolphin  the
royal  assent  was  given  to  the  Bill  of  Security.

This  step  was  vehemently  unpopular  in  England.
It  was,  in  fact,  nothing  less  than  an  agreement  by  the
English  ministry  that  unless  certain  privileges,  to  which
the  English  Parliament  and  the  English  nation  tena-
ciously clung,  were  accorded  to  the  Scotch,  the  union
of  crowns  effected  under  James  I.  should  be  annulled,
and  the  ijations,  on  the  death  of  the  reigning  sovereign,
should  be  definitely  separated.  Wharton  is  reported
to  have  said,  when  the  assent  was  given,  that  the  head
of  the  Lord  Treasui"er  was  now  safe  in  the  bag  ;  and
had  not  the  battle  of  Blenheim  just  given  a  new
strength  to  the  ministry,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the

298 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi.

judgment  might  have  proved  true.  When  the  English
Parliament  met,  a  vote  of  censure  was  at  once  moved
against  the  Government.  In  order,  probably,  to  mode-
rate the  language  of  the  Opposition  speakers,  the  Queen
herself  was  present  at  the  debate.  The  influence  of
Marlborough  was  exerted  in  favour  of  Godolpliin,  and
his  friends  succeeded  in  defeating  the  motion.  But
whatever  fate  might  await  the  ministry,  it  was  plain
that  if  the  disruption  of  the  kingdom  was  to  be  averted
free  trade  must  be  conceded ;  and  the  English  were  re-
solved that  it  should  be  conceded  only  as  the  price  of
an  Union.  Seldom,  however,  was  there  less  real  union
of  feeling  between  the  nations  than  at  this  time.  Reso-
lutions were  passed  by  the  House  of  Lords  praying  the
Queen  to  fortify  Newcastle,  Tynemouth,  Carlisle,  and
Hull ;  to  call  out  the  militia  in  the  four  northern
counties ;  and  to  send  a  sufficient  number  of  troops  to
the  border.  She  was  at  the  same  time  empowered  to
appoint  commissioners  on  the  part  of  England  to  nego-
tiate an  Union  on  condition  that  a  similar  step  was
taken  by  the  Scotch  Parliament ;  but  if  no  such  Union
took  place,  and  if  the  same  succession  to  the  crown
with  that  of  England  were  not  enacted  by  a  specified
day,  it  was  provided  that  all  Scotchmen,  except  those
who  were  settled  residents  in  England  or  who  were
serving  in  her  Majesty's  forces,  should  be  held  as  aliens  ;
that  the  introduction  of  Scotch  cattle,  coal,  and  linen
into  England  and  of  English  horses  or  arms  into  Scot-
land should  be  absolutely  forbidden ;  and  that  all  Scotch
vessels  found  trading  with  France  should  be  captured.

The  efiects  of  the  prohibitory  clauses  of  this  Bill  on
the  feeble  resources  of  Scotland  wouldhave  been  fatal,  and
from  this  time  the  Union  was  inevitable.  The  Scotch
Parliament,  however,  met  in  June  1705  in  a  very  angry
mood.  The  ministry,  being  thought  unable  to  meet
the  difficulties  of  the  Bill,  was  changed. The  Duke  of

CH.  VI.  UNION NEGOTIATIONS.  299

Argyle  was  appointed  commissioner.  The  Duke  of
Queensberry  again  came  to  the  front,  in  the  office  of
Privy  Seal,  and  some  of  the  adherents  of  the  ejected
ministry,  forming  a  separate  party,  added  considerably
to  the  complexity  of  the  situation.  Purely  personal
and  factious  motives  played  a  great  part  in  the  events
that  ensued,  and  it  is  not  here  necessary  to  pursue  them
in  detail.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  Duke  of
Hamilton  was  partially  gained  over  by  the  administra-
tion, and  that  his  defection  in  a  great  degree  determined
the  course  of  events.  Bills  were  passed  providing  that
on  the  Queen's  death  the  officers  of  State  and  Judges
of  the  Supreme  Court  should  be  elected  by  Parliament,
that  a  Scotch  ambassador  should  be  present  at  every
treaty  made  by  the  Sovereign  of  the  two  kingdoms  with
a  foreign  Power,  and  that  the  Scotch  Parliament  should
become  triennial.  None  of  these  Bills  received  the
royal  assent,  and  the  Scotch  Parliament  soon  entered
into  the  treaty  for  Union.  A  resolution  of  capital  im-
portance, moved,  to  the  astonishment  of  most  men,  by
the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  and  carried  by  the  absence  of
some  of  the  usual  opponents  of  the  Government,  placed
the  appointment  of  the  Scotch  commissioners  for  nego-
tiating the  Union  in  the  hands  of  the  Crown.  As  a
preliminary  step  to  the  treaty  it  was  insisted,  as  a
matter  affecting  the  national  honour,  that  the  English
Act  declaring  the  Scotch  to  be  aliens  should  be  repealed.
This  measure  had  answered  its  purpose  of  compelling
the  Scotch  to  negotiate,  and  the  English  Parliament
wisely  and  gracefully  consented  to  repeal  it,  as  well  as
the  clauses  in  the  same  Act  relating  to  trade,  and  thus
removed  a  formidable  obstacle  to  the  treaty.  The
Scotch  would,  if  possible,  have  desired  free  trade  with-
out any  other  change  in  the  constitution ;  and  when
it  was  plain  that  England  would  not  submit  to  this,
they  would  gladly  have  negotiated  a  federal  union,  but

300 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

the  English  statesmen  steadily  refused  to  grant  the
boon  unless  it  were  accompanied  by  a  complete  consoli-
dation of  the  kingdom.

Somers,  who  possessed  the  qualities  of  a  great  states-
man in  a  much  higher  degree  than  any  other  English-
man of  the  period  of  the  Revolution,  took  a  leading  part
in  the  negotiation,  and  he  conducted  it  with  consum-
mate skill.  Neither  of  the  contracting  parties  entered
into  it  with  any  enthusiasm,  but  each  of  them  gained  by
the  treaty  an  end  of  the  utmost  importance.  England,
at  the  expense  of  commercial  concessions,  at  which  her
manufacturers  were  deeply  indignant,  obtained  a  strength
in  every  contest  with  her  enemies  such  as  she  had  never
before  enjoyed.  Scotland,  at  the  price  of  the  partial
sacrifice  of  a  nationality  to  which  she  was  most  passion-
ately and  most  legitimately  attached,  acquired  the  pos-
sibility of  industrial  life,  and  raised  her  people  from  a
condition  of  the  most  abject  wretchedness.  In  the  ten
years  preceding  the  Union  the  commercial  intercourse
between  the  two  countries  had  been  so  slight  that  the
goods  imported  from  Scotland  to  England  only  twice
exceeded  the  small  amount  of  100,000L,  and  the  im-
ports from  England  into  Scotland  never  in  a  single  year
exceeded  87, 536L,  while  the  whole  shipping  trade  of  the
smaller  country  was  annihilated  by  the  Navigation  Act.
But  immediately  after  the  Union  the  movement  of  in-
dustry and  commerce  was  felt  in  every  pai^t  of  the  Low-
lands.^ Glasgow,  having  no  port  or  vessels  of  its  own,
chartered  ships  from  Whitehaven  and  began  a  large
trade  with  the  American  colonies.^  In  1716  or  1718
the  first  vScotch  vessel  that  ever  crossed  the  Atlantic  was
laimched  upon  the  Clyde  ;^  in  1735  Glasgow  possessed

'  Craik's  Hist,  of  Commerce,  ^  Compare  Buckle's  Hist,  of

ii.  183, 184.  Civilisation, ii. 315  ; Burton's

^  Chambers'  Domestic  Anyials,  Hist,  of  Scotland,  ii.  393
iu.  481.

CH.  VI.  PROSPERITY FOLLOWING THE UNION.  301

sixty-seven  vessels  with  a  tonnage  of  5,600/  and  in  a
few  years  she  had  become,  in  the  American  trade,  a
serious  rival  to  the  great  seaports  of  England.  It  was
in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  Greenock
laid  the  foundation  of  its  future  greatness  by  the  con-
struction of  a  commodious  harbour,  and  Paisley  rose
from  a  small  village  into  a  considerable  manufacturing
town.^  It  was  computed  that  the  aggregate  tonnage  of
Scotch  vessels  rose  between  1735  and  1760  from  12,342
tons  to  more  than  52,000,^  and  it  was  noticed  as  a  sig-
nificant evidence  of  the  growth  of  the  industrial  spirit  in
Scotland,  that  from  the  time  of  the  Union  it  was  com-
mon for  the  younger  sons  of  the  gentry  to  become  mer-
chants, and  to  make  voyages  in  that  capacity  to  the
Continent.^  In  the  seventeenth  century  almost  the  only
Scotch  manufacture  had  been  that  of  linen.  In  imita-
tion of  the  curious  law  which  encouraged  the  English
woollen  trade  by  providing  that  every  corpse  should  be
buried  in  wool,  a  Scotch  law  of  1686  had  enacted  that
every  shroud  should  be  of  linen,^  but  it  was  not  until
the  Union  gave  the  linen  manufacture  a  wider  vent,
that  the  trade  began  really  to  flourish.  It  was  intro-
duced into  Glasgow  in  1725,  it  speedily  spread  through
many  other  Scotch  towns,^  and  we  find  it  appearing

'  Burton's  Hist.  ii.  393.  higher  than  2s.  the  yeard, and

2  Buckle's  Hist,  of  Civilisa-  with  this  cloth  was  everybody
Hon,  ii.  313-316.  cloathed. The  young  gentlemen,

3  Burton's  Hist.  ii.  393.  Mac-  who  at  this  time  [1727]  were
pherson's  Annals  of  Covimerce,  growing  more  delicat,  got  their
iii.  340.  cloth from Holland for shirts,

*  Mrs. Mure's '  Eemarks on  but  the old  was satisfied  with

the  Change  of  Manners  in  my  necks and sleeves of the fine,

Time.' — Caldwell  Papers,  i.  266.  which  was  put  on  loose,  above

"  Chambers'  Annals,  iii.  85.  the  country  cloth.' — Caldivell
Mrs.  Mure,  in  her  very  curious  Papers,  i.  260.  In  the  High-
sketch  of  the  manners  of  her  lands  it  was  the  first  task  of  a
time,  tells  us  that  '  every  woman  newly  married  woman  to  prepare
made  her  web  of  wove  linen  and  her  winding-sheet,
bleched  it  herself. It  never  rose  ^  See  many  curious facts on

302 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vt.

even  in  the  Orkney  Islands  about  1747.'  It  was
noticed  by  the  historian  of  commerce  that  on  October
23,  1738,  no  less  than  151,219  yards  of  Scotch  linen,
as  well  as  3,000  spindles  of  linen  yarn,  were  imported
into  London,  and  that  of  late  years  the  entries  had  been
annually  increasing.^  The  value  of  the  Scotch  linen
stamped  for  sale  in  five  years  from  1728  to  1732  was
662,938L  In  the  four  years  from  1748  to  1751  it  had
risen  to  1,344,814L^  The  Aberdeen  trade  in  woollen
stockings  largely  increased,  and  a  considerable  manu-
facture of  coarse  woollen  serge  grew  up.  Some  time
before  the  century  had  closed,  cheap  Scotch  carpets  had
penetrated  to  most  English  houses.^  The  preparation
of  kelp,  which  was  introduced  into  Scotland  in  1720,
gave  some  industry  to  the  poorest  coasts ;  ^  and  the  first
Scotch  county  banks  were  established  in  1749  at  Aber-
deen and  Glasgow.^  The  extreme  poverty  of  Scotland
was  in  this  manner  relieved,  and  with  the  extension  of
commerce  the  sober  habits  of  industrial  life  began  to
pervade  and  I'eform  the  vagabond  portion  of  the  popu-
lation.

It  is  hardly  possible  to  advert  to  the  Scotch  Union
without  pausing  for  a  moment  to  examine  why  its  in-
fluence on  the  loyalty  of  the  people  should  have  ulti-
mately been  so  much  happier  than  that  of  the  legislative
union  which,  nearly  a  century  later,  was  enacted  between
England  and  Ireland.  A  very  slight  attention  to  the
circumstances  of  the  case  will  explain  the  mystery,  and
will  at  the  same  time  show  the  shallowness  of  those
theorists  who  can  only  account  for  it  by  reference  to

this  subject  in  Buckle's  Hist,  of  ^  Ibid.  iii.  289.

Civilisation,  ii.  315-320.  ■*  Topham's Letters from

'  Barry's  Hist,  of  the  Orkney  Edinburgh,  pp.  175,  176.

Islands,  p.  368.  *  Barry's  Hist,  of  the  Orkney

^  Macpherson's Annals of  Islands,  p.  376.

Commerce,  iii.  217.  ^  Buckle,  ii.  320.

CH.  VI.  THE SCOTCH AKD IRISH UNIONS.  303

original  peculiarities  of  national  character.  The  sacri-
fice of  a  nationality  is  a  measure  which  naturally  pro-
duces such  intense  and  such  enduring  discontent  that  it
never  should  be  exacted  unless  it  can  be  accompanied
by  some  political  or  material  advantages  to  the  lesser
country  that  are  so  great  and  at  the  same  time  so
evident  as  to  prove  a  corrective.  Such  a  corrective  in
the  case  of  Scotland  was  furnished  by  the  commercial
clauses.  The  Scotch  Parliament  was  very  arbitrary  and
corrupt,  and  by  no  means  a  faithful  representation  of
the  people.  The  majority  of  the  nation  were  certainly
opposed  to  the  Union,  and,  directly  or  indirectly,  it  is
probable  that  much  corruption  was  employed  to  effect
it ;  but  still  the  fact  remains  that  by  it  one  of  the  most
ardent  wishes  of  all  Scottish  patriots  was  attained,  that
there  had  been  for  many  years  a  powerful  and  intelli-
gent minority  who  were  prepared  to  purchase  commer-
cial freedom  even  at  the  expense  of  the  fusion  of  legis-
latures, and  that  in  consequence  of  the  establishment  of
free  trade  the  next  generation  of  Scotchmen  witnessed
an  increase  of  material  well-being  that  was  utterly  un-
precedented in  the  history  of  their  country.  Nothing
equivalent  took  place  in  Ireland.  The  gradual  abolition
of  duties  between  England  and  Ireland  was,  no  doubt,
an  advantage  to  the  lesser  country,  but  the  whole  trade
to  America  and  the  other  English  colonies  had  been
thrown  open  to  Irishmen  between  1775  and  1779,
Irish  commerce  had  taken  this  direction ;  the  years
between  1779  and  the  rebellion  of  1798  were  probably
the  most  prosperous  in  Irish  history,  and  the  generation
that  followed  the  Union  was  one  of  the  most  miserable.
The  sacrifice  of  nationality  was  extorted  by  gross  cor-
ruption. It  was  demanded  by  no  considerable  section
of  the  Irish  people.  It  was  accompanied  by  no  signal
political  or  material  benefit  that  could  mitigate  or  coun-
teract its  unpopularity,  and  it  was  efiected  without  a

304 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vi.

dissolution,  in  opposition  to  tlie  votes  of  the  majority  of
the  representatives  of  the  counties  and  considerable
towns,  and  to  numerous  addresses  from  every  part  of
the  country.  Can  any  impartial  man  be  surprised  that
such  a  measure,  carried  in  such  a  manner,  should  have
proved  unsuccessful  ?  There  was,  it  is  true,  one  course
that  might  have  made  it  palatable.  The  Irish  never
dreamed  of  demanding  the  establishment  of  the  Church
of  the  majority,  which  in  the  case  of  Scotland  was
solemnly  guaranteed  by  the  Union.  They  never
dreamed  of  demanding  even  that  religious  equality
which,  sixty-eight  years  after  the  Union,  was  at  last
conceded.  The  Union  Treaty,  indeed,  had  a  special
clause  guaranteeing  the  perpetuity  of  the  established
Church  of  the  minority,  and  it  was  one  of  the  favourite
arguments  of  Castlereagh  that  it  would  stereotype  the
inequality.  But  there  were  other  and  less  ambitious
ends  which  the  majority  of  the  Irish  people  desired.
Had  the  Catholic  population  been  able  to  look  back  to
the  Union  as  the  era  of  their  complete  political  emanci-
pation, of  the  settlement  of  the  tithe  question,  and  of  the
payment  of  the  priests,  the  whole  current  of  Irish  feel-
ing might  have  been  changed.  The  propriety  of  uniting
these  measures  with  the  Union  was  self-evident,  and  Pitt
naturally  perceived  it;  but  the  actual  proceedings  of
his  Government  on  the  subject  were  such  that  it  would
have  been  better  had  the  question  of  emancipation  never
been  raised.  The  shameful  story  will  be  hereafter  told.
It  is  sufficient  here  to  say  that  the  Government  inti-
mated to  the  leading  Catholics  that  they  would  be  in
favour  of  emancipation  and  of  the  other  two  measures  I
have  mentioned  if  the  Union  were  carried,  and  that
they  succeeded  in  this  manner  in  obtaining  some  valu-
able ecclesiastical  support,  and  in  inducing  the  great
body  of  the  Catholics  to  remain  passive  during  the
struggle. But  no  sooner  had  the  Union  been  accom-

CH.  VI.  THE SCOTCH AND IRISH UNIONS.  305

plished  than  it  appeared  that  the  ministers  were  not
even  agreed  in  desiring  emancipation,  that  they  had  not
taken  a  single  step  to  overcome  the  known  opposition
of  the  King,  and  that  they  were  prepared  to  make  no
considerable  sacrifice  in  favour  of  the  Catholics.  Pitt
resigned  office,  indeed,  when  the  King  refused  to  con-
sent to  the  measure,  but  a  month  had  not  passed  before
he  himself  agreed  to  abandon  it,  and  when  he  resumed
power  it  was  on  the  express  understanding  that  he
would  oppose  any  attempt  to  carry  emancipation.  Nor
was  any  attempt  made  to  carry  the  commutation  of
tithes  and  the  payment  of  the  priests.  The  Catholics  for
some  years  acted  with  perfect  moderation,  till  it  became
evident  to  all  men  that  their  cause  had  not  only  not
been  assisted,  but  had  even  been  greatly  impeded  by
the  Union.  Then  at  last  O'Connell  induced  them  to
change  their  policy.  He  succeeded  in  carrying  them
into  a  violent  agitation,  which  brought  the  country  to
the  verge  of  civil  war,  and  he  obtained  emancipation
from  a  Tory  ministry  by  the  menace  of  rebellion.  Such
events  were  not  likely  to  pacify  the  country,  or  to  re-
concile it  to  the  sacrifice  of  its  nationality;  and  it  is
not  surprising  that  the  organised  agitation  that  was
created  should  have  been  turned  in  the  direction  of
repeal,  or  that  the  animosity  produced  by  the  Union
should  even  now  be  far  from  extinguished.

In  all  this  there  is  nothing  mysterious.  It  is
obvious  that  the  Union  never  ought  to  have  been
carried  until  some  considerable  section  of  the  people
desired  it,  and  until  it  could  be  accompanied  by  serious
measures  for  improving  the  position  of  the  Catholics
and  for  attaching  their  priesthood  to  the  Government.
A  nation,  however,  which  has  never  been  called  upon  to
surrender  its  nationality  is  apt  to  underrate  the  difficulty
of  the  sacrifice  in  others ;  and  public  writers,  in  whom
this  sentiment  has  usually  been  enfeebled  by  education

VOL. II.  X

306 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

or  other  causes,  hardly  recognise  sufficiently  its  great
power  over  large  masses  of  men.  But  certainly  the
history  of  the  Scotch  Union,  if  rightly  understood,
should  not  lead  men  into  this  error,  for  it  is  most  in-
structive to  observe  how  tenacious  and  how  violent  was
the  hostility  to  the  measure  for  many  years  after  its
material  benefits  had  become  apparent.^  Many  in-
fluences concurred  in  aggravating  the  discontent.  To
anyone  who  will  attentively  study  the  subject,  it  will
appear  evident  that  the  religious  difficulty  in  Scotland
in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  even
more  serious  than  the  religious  difficulty  in  Ireland  at
its  close.  One  section  of  the  Scotch  clergy  had  long
denounced  as  sinful  all  allegiance  to  a  sovereign  who
was  connected  with  Episcopacy,  and  when  the  project
of  Union  was  announced  it  was  met  by  a  storm  of  reli-
gious invective.  To  enter  into  an  adulterous  union
with  a  nation  which  had  adopted  the  anti-Christian
system  of  prelacy,  to  acknowledge  the  legislative  and
judicial  authority  of  an  assembly  in  which  bishops  sat,
to  recognise  in  innumerable  public  documents  their
titles  as  lords  over  God's  heritage,  to  throw  in  the  lot  of
Scotland  with  that  of  a  nation  which  had  so  long  perse-
cuted the  saints,  was  denounced  as  a  complete  apostasy
from  the  true  religion  of  the  Covenant.  Such  a  mea-
sure, it  was  said,  was  essentially  and  grossly  sinful,  and
could  not  fail  to  entail  upon  the  purer  nation  the
divine  wrath  accumulated  by  the  crimes  of  the  oppres-
sor. More  moderate  divines  questioned  whether  any
mere  treaty  provision  could  secure  the  establishment  of
Presbyterianism  if  the  supreme  legislative  power  were
lodged  with  a  Parliament  consisting  mainly  of  Episco-
palians, and  their  apprehensions  derived  much  weight

'  This  is  noticed  by  all  Scotch with  especial  fullness  by  Mr.  Bur-
historians, but the course of ton  in  his  valuable  History,
opinion  has  lately  been  traced

CH.  VI. UNrOPULARITY  OF  THE  UNION. 307

from  the  fact  that,  soon  after  the  Union,  a  Tory  ministry,
supported  by  a  furious  outburst  of  Church  feeling,  was
in  power.  The  Act  securing  the  toleration  of  Episco-
pacy, the  imposition  of  the  abjuration  oath  on  Presby-
terians, the  partial  restoration  by  the  Imperial  Parlia-
ment of  that  lay  patronage  which  had  been  abolished
by  the  Revolution,  and  the  legal  recognition  of  Christ-
mas, were  all  esteemed  great  grievances  by  the  Kirk.

There  were  also  many  others  of  a  different  kind.
Edinburgh  suffered  from  the  withdrawal  of  the  Parlia-
ment. Taxation  was  increased  ;  the  trade  with  France
was  stopped ;  the  retail  trade  of  Scotland  was  disturbed
by  the  sudden  influx  of  English  goods ;  the  commis-
sioners of  customs  and  excise  appointed  for  carrying
out  the  Union  were  chiefly  Englishmen.  The  Scotch
Privy  Council  was  abolished  in  1708  in  defiance  of  the
wishes  of  the  great  majority  of  the  Scotch  representatives.
When  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  was  suspended  in  the
same  year  on  account  of  the  Jacobite  expedition,  the
Government  availed  themselves  of  their  power  to  arrest
many  of  their  leading  opponents,  including  Lord  Bel-
haven  and  Fletcher  of  Saltoun,  who  were  certainly  not
Jacobites,  and  who  were  actually  carried,  under  cus-
tody, to  London.  It  was  very  difficult  to  obtain  con-
victions for  treason  in  Scotland,  and  accordingly  a  Bill
was  framed  in  1709  making  the  law  in  cases  of  treason
the  same  throughout  the  whole  kingdom ;  it  was  carried,
in  spite  of  the  strenuous  and  almost  unanimous  oppo-
sition of  the  Scotch,  in  both  Houses,  and  under  its
provisions  eighty-nine  Scotch  rebels  were  carried  in
1716  from  Edinburgh  to  Carlisle  to  be  tried  by  English
juries.  The  House  of  Lords,  too,  exhibited  an  extreme
and  illiberal  jealousy  of  the  Scotch  peers,  and  in  1711,
when  the  English  dukedom  of  Brandon  was  conferred
on  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  the  Whig  majority,  including
Somers  and  Cowper,  in  order  to  limit  strictly  the  num-

X  2

308 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH,  vi.

ber  of  Scotchmen  in  the  House,  passed  a  resolution
declaring  that,  although  the  Sovereign  had  an  undoubted
right  to  confer  English  peerages  on  Scotch  peers,  these
peerages  did  not  carry  with  them  the  right  of  sitting  or
voting  in  the  House  of  Lords,  or  of  taking  part  in  the
trial  of  peers.  Tliis  decision  was  dictated  mainly  by
party  and  national  feeling.  It  was  all  the  more  scan-
dalous, because  at  this  very  time  the  Duke  of  Queens-
berry  was  sitting  in  the  House  by  virtue  of  an  English
peerage  bestowed  on  him  since  the  Union,  and  it  was
not  rescinded  until  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  judges
was  given  against  its  legality,  in  1782.  In  1713  a
new  and  terrible  grievance  arose  when  the  malt  tax,
which  was  one  of  the  heaviest  of  English  burdens,  was
extended  to  Scotland,  where  the  poverty  of  the  nation,
and  the  poor  quality  of  the  native  barley,  made  it  al-
most insupportable.^

All  these  things,  together  with  the  constant  in-
sults to  which  the  Scotch  were  exposed  in  London
on  account  of  their  poverty,  their  pronunciation,  or
their  birth,  envenomed  the  minds  of  a  proud  people,
who  had  but  just  consented  to  a  most  painful  sacri-
fice of  their  nationality.  The  unpopularity  of  the
Union,  at  the  time  it  was  carried,  was  abundantly
shown  by  the  addresses  which  poured  in  from  every  side
against  it,  and  by  the  fierce  demonstrations  in  every
leading  city  in  Scotland.^  In  1708  the  violent  discon-
tent produced  by  it  was  one  of  the  chief  reasons  that
induced  Lewis  XIV.  to  attempt  a  Jacobite  invasion.^

'  It  was  contended,  with  some  signed  with  Spain,

reason,  that  this  imposition  was  -  Much striking evidence of

a  violation  of  the  Union. The  this,  as  well  as  of  the  long  con-

14th  article  provided  that  Scot-  tinuance  of  the  discontent,  will

land  should  not  be  subject  to  any  be  found  in  the  Lockhart  Papers.

malt  tax  during  the  war ;  and  at  ^  Lockhart  Papers,  1.  224-227.

the  time  when  it  was  imposed,  'Bojex's  Hist,  of  Queen  Anne,^^^^.

though peace had been  signed  334,  835.
with  France,  it  had  not  yet  been

CH.  VI.  UNPOPULARITY OF THE UNION.  309

In  1713,  when  the  malt  tax  was  first  extended  to  Scot-
land, the  Scotch  peers,  and  among  them  the  Duke  of
Argyle,  who  had  taken  a  leading  part  in  carrying  the
Union,  brought  forward  in  the  House  of  Lords  a  motion
for  its  repeal,  and  they  were  only  defeated  by  a  majority
of  four.  In  1715  the  deep  dissatisfaction  produced  by
the  Union  was  a  leading  element  of  the  Jacobite  re-
bellion. In  1725  an  attempt  to  levy  the  malt  tax  in
Scotland  produced  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  riots
almost  amounting  to  insurrection,  and,  but  for  the
presence  of  a  strong  military  force,  the  whole  country
would  have  been  in  a  flame. ^  In  1745,  when  the  Pre-
tender endeavoured  to  rally  the  nation  around  his  stan-
dard, the  most  seductive  ofler  he  could  make  was  a
promise  that  he  would  restore  the  old  Parliament  of
Scotland.  How  much  longer  the  discontent  smouldered
on,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  There  was  then  no  such
thing  as  popular  suffrage  or  vote  by  ballot,  and  we  can

'  At  this  time  Lockhart  wrote  of EgKnton, in 1729, for the

to  the  Pretender  :  '  As  the  aver-  guidance  of  his  infant  son  when

sion  to  the  Union  daylie  increases,  he  grew  older,  contains  the  fol-

that  is  the  handle  by  which  Scots-  lowing  passage:  'You come  to

men  will  be  incited  to  make  a  live  in  a  time,  my  chiefest  care,

generall  and  zealous  appearance :  when  the right of these king-

this  your  enimies  know  so  well  doms comes to  be a question

that on former occasions all  betwixt  the  House  of Hanover,

manner  of  pains  were  taken  to  who  are  in  possession,  and  the

buz in  the people's ears that  descendants  of  King  James.  You

they'd  be  disappointed  in  what  are  in  my poor  opinion  not  to

they  expected  from  you,  for  that  intermeddle  with  either  but  live

to  gratify  your  subjects  of  Eng-  abstractedly  at  home ... for

land you was to uphold the  since  we are  under  the  misery

Union.' Lockhart accordingly  and  slavery  of being  united  to

recommends,  as  the  most  effica-  England, a Scotsman without

cious  way  of  raising  Scotland,  a  prostituting  his  honour  can  ob-

proclamation  promising  repeal. —  tain  nothing  by  following  a  court,

Lockhart  Papers, ii. 224-236.  but  bring  his  estates  under  debt.

See,  too, the passages I have  and  consequently  himself  to  ne-

quoted,  i. 164. A very touch-  cessity.'  — Eraser's  Memorials  of

ing  letter of  advice,  written  on  the  Earls  of  Eglinton,  i.  116.
his  deathbed  by  the  ninth  Earl

310  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. CH.  VI.

only  glean  from  incidental  notices  the  real  sentiments
of  the  people.  It  is  impossible,  however,  not  to  be
struck  by  the  bitterness  with  which  the  Union  was
regarded,  long  after  the  rebellion  of  1745,  by  such  a
Scotchman  as  Smollett,  and  at  a  still  later  period  by
such  a  Scotchman  as  Sir  Walter  Scott.

The  industrial  life,  however,  which  it  rendered  pos-
sible was  one  of  the  most  important  elements  in  the
regeneration  of  Scotland.  The  work  was  completed  by
another  group  of  measures  reducing  the  Highlands  to
a  condition  of  comparative  civilisation.  One  serious
obstacle  to  be  encountered  was  the  language,  for  there
were  great  tracts  in  which  the  English  tongue  was
unknown.  Tiie  parochial  schools  were  intended,  among
other  objects,  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  English,  and
'  to  root  out  the  Irish  language,'  ^  and  the  same  ends
were  very  powerfully  forwai^ded  by  a  Scotch  '  Society
for  the  Propagation  of  Christian  Knowledge,'  which
obtained  letters  patent  from  Anne  in  1709,  and  was
chiefly  designed  to  dispel  the  ignorance  of  the  High-
lands. It  established  numerous  schools  in  the  moun-
tain districts  ;  and  a  very  competent  historian,  writing
in  1775,  stated  that,  as  a  consequence  of  its  efforts,
public  worship  had  in  many  places  ceased  to  be  cele-
brated in  Gaelic,  that  Popery  had  considerably  dimi-
nished, and  that  the  English  language  was  '  so  diffused,
that  in  the  remotest  glens  it  is  spoken  by  the  J^oung
people.'  ^  The  zeal  in  spreading  the  English  language
was,  indeed,  carried  to  such  an  extent  that  there  were
even  those  who  objected  to  the  diffusion  of  the  Bible  in
the  Highland  tongue.^

'  See  the  appendix  to  Burt's  the  ignorant  and  barbarous  part

Letters,  ii.  363.  of  that  nation,'  and  the  example

^  Lachlan Shaw's Hist, of  contributed  largely  to  the  insti-

Moray,  p.  381. In  1730,  Primate  tution of the Irish Charter

Boulter  notices  '  the  good  success  Schools. Boulter's Letters, ii.

of  the  corporation  estabhshed  in  10-13.

Scotland  for  the  instruction  of  ^  '  Their  language  is  attacked

CH.  VI.  HIGHLAND ROADS.  311

Another  great  difficulty  was  the  want  of  communi-
cations. As  long  as  there  were  no  roads  through  the
Highlands  it  was  impossible  to  restrain  the  influence  of
the  chiefs,  or  to  assert  the  authority  of  the  law ;  and
regular  soldiers  were  almost  powerless  when  matched
against  lightly  clad  and  hardened  mountaineers,  who
knew  every  glen  and  mountain  pass.  After  the  re-
bellion of  1715  an  Act  was  passed  for  disarming  the
Highlanders,  and  many  barracks  were  built ;  but  these
measures  proved  utterly  useless.  The  loyal  clans  alone
brought  in  their  arms.  The  soldiers  were  easily  baffled
and  bewildered  in  the  trackless  mountains.  They  were
ignorant  of  the  language ;  they  could  obtain  no  infor-
mation from  the  inhabitants,  and  their  presence  tended
rather  to  weaken  than  to  strengthen  the  law,  for  it  was
a  standing  proof  of  the  impotence  of  the  Government.'
About  1726  Marshal  Wade  undertook  to  make  the  Dis-
arming Act  a  reality,  and  at  the  same  time  to  strike  a
death-blow  to  the  power  of  the  chiefs  by  opening  up
the  Highlands.  Surveyors  and  engineers  were  brought
from  England,  one  of  them  being  that  Captain  Burt
whom  I  have  so  often  quoted.  Troops  were  employed
on  extra  pay  to  make  the  roads,  and  after  about  eleven
years  of  patient  labour,  the  greater  part  of  the  High-
lands was  made  thoroughly  accessible.  The  place  which
this  enterprise  occupies  in  history  is  not  a  great  one,
but  very  few  measures  have  contributed  so  largely  to  the
moral,  material,  and  political  civilisation  of  Scotland.^

on  every  side.  Schools  are  *  See  '  Lord  Lovat's  Memoir
erected  in  wiiieh  English  alone  to  George  I.  on  the  State  of  the
is  taught,  and  there  were  lately  Highlands'  (1724),  in  the  appen-
some  who  thought  it  reasonable  dix  to  Burt's  Letters.
to  refuse  them  a  version  of  the  -  See  the  Memoir  on  Scotch
Holy  Scriptures,  that  they  might  Eoads,  appended  to  Burt's  Let-
have  no  monument  of  their  na-  ters,  and  numerous  notices  of
tive  tongue.' — Johnson's  Toior  in  their  history  in  Chambers'  Do-
the  Hebrides,  p.  85.  See,  too,  vies  ic  Annals  of  Scotland.  It
p.  159.  was  on  the  road  between  Inver-

812  ENGLAJNTD IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vi.

The  extension  of  education,  the  formation  of  a
powerful  middle  class  in  consequence  of  the  industrial
development  of  the  Lowlands,  the  Disarming  Act,  and,
above  all,  the  new  roads  that  intersected  the  Highlands,
gradually  destroyed  the  absolute  power  which  the  chiefs
exercised  over  their  clans,  brought  them  within  the
range  of  the  law,  and  weakened  that  moral  sentiment
which  lay  at  the  root  of  their  power.  The  Union  con-
tributed very  powerfully  to  the  same  end  ;  the  political
weight  of  the  great  majority  of  the  Scotch  nobles  was
destroyed ;  the  sixteen  representative  peers  legislated
in  England ;  London  became  the  centre  of  their  hopes,
their  ambitions,  and  their  intrigues,  and  the  bond  of
sympathy  that  had  so  closely  united  them  to  their
people  was  slowly  dissolved.  The  rebellions  of  1715
and  1 745  ruined  many  of  the  great  Scotch  families  ;
some  noblemen  were  executed,  the  property  of  others
was  confiscated,  several  were  compelled  to  take  refuge
on  the  Continent  and  lived  for  a  whole  generation  away
from  their  clans.  In  this  manner  the  moral  condition
of  the  Highlands  was  profoundly  modified,  and  the  way
was  prepared  for  the  abolition  of  hereditary  jurisdictions
by  the  Pelham  Ministry  in  1746.  This  great  measure
was  the  natural  consequence  of  the  suppression  of  the
rebellion ;  and  although  these  jurisdictions  had  been
guaranteed  by  the  Union,  their  abolition  was  of  such
manifest  advantage  to  the  nation,  and  was  so  clearly
inevitable  through  the  causes  I  have  enumerated,  that
it  was  carried  with  little  difficulty.  A  compensation  of
about  150,000?.  reconciled  the  gentry  to  the  destruction
of  the  last  vestige  of  feudal  power,  and  the  hopeless
ruin  of  the  Jacobite  cause  put  an  end  to  all  expectation
of  its  revival.

ness  and  Inverary  that  the  obe-  Had  you  seen  these  roads  before  they
lisk  stood  with  the  weU-known  YoTwoX'^fiit  up  your  hands  and  bless
inscription —  General  Wade.

CH.  VI,  THE EPISCOPALIANS.  313

Other  measures,  of  much  more  doubtful  benefit,
were  carried  about  the  same  time.  Not  content  with
again  disarming  the  Highlanders,  the  Legislature  passed
an  Act  rendering  it  penal  for  them  to  wear  their  national
dress  ;  and  by  doing  so  it  produced  a  deep  and  general
irritation.  A  somewhat  inquisitorial  measure  compelled
all  private  teachers  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance ;  and
the  Scotch  Episcopal  Church,  which  was  still  vehemently
Jacobite,  was  crushed  by  laws  of  terrible  severity.  We
have  already  seen  how,  by  the  Toleration  Act  of  1712,
the  oaths,  both  of  allegiance  and  abjuration,  and  the
obligation  of  praying  by  name  for  the  Sovereign,  were
imposed  on  all  officiating  clergymen  ;  how  this  obliga-
tion was  generally  neglected ;  and  how  the  Government
usually  connived  at  the  neglect.  In  1718,  however,
during  an  alarm  about  the  Pretender,  a  severe  law  was
enacted  rendering  all  Episcopal  clergymen  who  per-
formed divine  worship  without  having  taken  the  pre-
scribed oaths  liable  to  six  months'  imprisonment ;  and
every  religious  assembly  of  nine  or  more  persons,  ex-
clusive of  the  household,  was  declared  to  be  a  meeting-
house within  the  meaning  of  the  Act.^  The  law  was
but  little  enforced.  For  many  years  after  the  accession
of  the  Hanoverian  dynasty,  the  Pretender  seems  to  have
habitually  designated  the  clergyman  who  was  to  fill  a
vacancy  in  the  Scotch  episcopacy.^  The  whole  of  that
episcopacy,  as  well  as  the  great  majority  of  the  minor
clergy,  remained  Nonjurors  ;  and  in  each  rebellion  the

'  5  George  I.  c.  29.  appears  from  Lockhart  to  have

^  See  the Lockhart Papers,  been  one  of  the  most  active  of

vol. ii.  passim, but especially  the  Jacobites  under George  I.,

pp.  76-93,  104-108,  116,  117. A  and  his  son  was  one  of  the  Jaco-

serious  schism, however, broke  bite  prisoners  taken  in  the  Ee-

out  among  the bishops of  the  belhon  of  1715. — Bishop  Nichol-

Scotch  Church in 1726,  which  son's Letters (British Museum

caused  much  trouble  to  the  Jaco-  Add.  MSS.  6116,  p.  70).
bites. A  Bishop  of  Edinburgh

314 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  VI.

Church  was  strongly  on  the  side  of  the  Pretender.  The
result  was  the  crushing  Act  of  1746.  It  was  enacted
that  every  person  who  exercised  the  functions  of  pastor
or  minister  in  any  Episcopal  meeting-house  in  Scotland
without  registering  his  letters  of  orders,  taking  the
prescribed  oaths,  and  praying  by  name  for  the  Sove-
reign, should,  on  conviction,  be  imprisoned  for  six
months  for  the  first  offence,  transported  for  life  to  some
of  his  Majesty's  colonies  for  the  second,  and  imprisoned
for  life  if  he  returned ;  and  any  place  where  more  than
four  persons  besides  the  household  assembled  for  public
worship,  was  constituted  a  meeting-house  under  the
provisions  of  the  Act.  The  penalties  were  no  longer
confined  to  clergymen  ;  every  layman  present  at  one  of
these  illegal  meetings  who  did  not  give  information  to
the  magistrate  within  five  days,  was  liable  to  a  fine  of
5L  on  the  first  conviction  and  to  two  years'  imprison-
ment on  the  second.  No  one  convicted  of  having  been
twice  in  one  year  at  an  illegal  Episcopal  meeting-house
could  sit  in  either  House  of  Parliament,  could  vote  for
a  representative  peer  or  for  a  Member  of  the  House  of
Commons,  could  act  as  magistrate  or  councillor,  or
could  hold,  for  one  year  after  conviction,  any  civil  or
military  ofiice  in  Scotland ;  and  all  judges  aiid  magis-
trates convicted  of  negligence  in  putting  the  Act  into
force  were  liable  to  a  fine  of  601}  Nor  was  this  all.
A  supplementary  Act  provided  that  no  clergyman,  even
if  he  had  complied  with  all  the  provisions  of  the  law,
could  ofiiciate  in  Scotland  unless  he  could  produce
letters  of  orders  from  a  bishop  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land or  of  Ireland.^  As  the  Scotch  bishops  were,  with-
out exception.  Nonjurors,  their  letters  of  orders  were
insufiicient,  and  as  it  was  impossible  for  Orders  to  be
repeated,  the  effect  of  this  law  was  to  unfrock  all  the

19  George  II.  c.  38.  «  21  George  II.  c.  34.

CH.  VI. GROWTH OF LOYALTY AND INDUSTKY.  315

existing  Episcopal  clergy  in  Scotland,  except  the  few
who  had  been  ordained  out  of  the  country.  The  clause
was  vehemently  opposed  by  the  English  bishops,  who
dilated  upon  the  disrespect  shown  to  Episcopal  orders,
and,  with  more  justice,  upon  the  extreme  hardship  of
depriving  a  large  body  of  men — many  of  them  guilty  of
no  offence  whatever — of  their  means  of  livelihood,  and
shutting  against  them  every  door  of  repentance.  For  a
time  the  opposition  was  successful,  and  the  clause  was
thrown  out  in  committee ;  but  by  the  strenuous  efforts
of  Lord  Hardwicke  it  was  speedily  restored.

These  measures  were  certainly  not  unprovoked,  but
they  were  examples,  I  think,  of  a  very  excessive  and
injudicious  severity  ;  and  they  reduced  one  section  of
the  Scotch  people  to  a  state  of  great  suffering  and  de-
pression, from  which  they  were  not  relieved  till  the
following  reign.  They  did  not,  however,  affect  a  suffi-
ciently large  proportion  of  the  people  to  counteract  the
long  train  of  favourable  influences  that  were  operating
in  Scotland,  and  the  pacification  of  the  Highlands
rapidly  advanced.  The  elder  Pitt,  by  forming  the
Highlanders  into  Scotch  regiments  in  the  great  war
against  France,  gave  a  full  vent  and  a  new  direction  to
their  military  qualities,  created  among  them  a  new  en-
thusiasm, and  enabled  them  speedily  to  efface,  by  new
and  glorious  deeds,  the  bitter  recollections  of  the  past.

The  industrial  habits  that  had  taken  such  deep  root
in  Scotland  speedily  penetrated  to  the  relations  between
landlord  and  tenant,  and  the  effects  were  by  no  means
entirely  good.  A  very  painful  transition  took  place
from  a  state  of  society  that  rested  upon  feudal  custom
to  a  state  of  society  that  was  governed  by  mercantile
principles.  Rack  rents  had,  it  is  true,  been  known  at
a  much  earlier  period,^  but  they  do  not  appear  to  have

'  Fletcher  of  Saltoun  wrote  in cipal  and  original  source  of  our
1698 :  '  Were  I  to  assign  the  prin- poverty,  I  should  place  it  in  the

316 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. CH.  vr.

been  general  during  the  first  forty  years  of  the  eigh-
teenth century  ;  or,  at  least,  they  were  not  usually  paid
to  the  landlord.  The  system  of  middle-men,  or,  as  they
were  termed,  tacksmen,  or  feuars,  became  almost  uni-
versal ;  ^  and  it  produced  all  those  evils  which  were  so
well  known  in  Ireland  before  the  famine.  The  head
tenant  held  his  farm  at  a  very  low  rent  from  the  land-
lord ;  he  sublet  it  at  a  heavier  rent,  and  subdivided  it
to  such  an  extent  that  farms  which  one  family  and  four
horses  would  suffice  to  cultivate  had  from  four  to  sixteen
families  living  upon  them.^  In  consequence  of  the  clan
system  tenants  were  never  displaced  and  rarely  migrated,
and  they  multiplied  indefinitely  on  the  same  spot.
Rents  were  settled  by  custom ;  feudal  duties  were  largely
considered,  and  the  landlord  cared  more  for  maintaining
around  him  skilful  robbers  and  bold  soldiers  than  for
increasing  his  revenue  or  improving  his  estate.

Such  a  system  was  very  rude  and  barbarous,  but
it  was  impossible  to  overtkrow  it  without  inflicting
much  distress.  Very  soon  after  the  rebellion  of  1745
it  was  completely  desti'oyed.  Some  estates  were  con-
fiscated, many  old  proprietors  were ruined  or  driven

letting  of  our  lands  at  so  exces-  knew  the  full  value  of  the  land,

sive  a  rate  as  makes  the  tenant  and  had  not  the  smallest  scruple

poorer even than his servant,  at  racking  their  dependants. It

whose  wages  he  cannot  pay  .  .  .  has often been observed that

and  makes the  master  have  a  there  is  no  oppressor  so  unfeel-

troublesome and  ill-paid  rent ;  ing  as  a  bonnet  laird,  or  a  tenant

his land  not improved by en-  who  has  power  to  sublet. But

closure  or  otherwise,  but  for  want  for  many  years  back  there  has

of  horses  and  oxen  fit  for  labour  been a clause  in  most of our

everywhere  run  out  and  abused.'  tacks  prohibiting subletting.' —

— Second  Discourse  on  the  Af-  Scotland  and  Scotchmen  of  the

fairs  of  Scotland.  Eighteenth  Century,  ii.  190.

'  Eamsay,  writing  in  the  last  -  See the '  Inquu'y into the

quarter of  the eighteenth cen-  Causes  of  Eebellions  in  the  High-

tury,  says:  'The hardest  mas-  lands,' append,  to  Burt's  iJei^ers,

ters  were  the  lesser  feuars,  who  ii.  340,  341.
being themselves countrymen

CH.  VI.  AGRICULTURAL CHANGES.  317

into  exile  ;  new  men  with  new  methods  of  management
were  in  the  ascendant,  and  the  great  social  and  political
changes  that  followed  the  abolition  of  the  hereditary-
jurisdictions  were  intensified  by  a  great  and  sudden
rise  in  the  price  of  cattle,  which  profoundly  altered  the
conditions  of  Scotch  agriculture.  Pennant,  who  visited
Scotland  in  1769,  and  Dr.  Johnson,  who  visited  it  in
1773,  have  both  left  us  vivid  descriptions  of  the  social
and  economic  change  that  was  at  that  time  taking
place.  Rents  of  competition  were  everywhere  replacing
rents  of  custom.  The  landlord,  being  no  longer  a
feudal  chief,  sought  to  increase  his  revenue  by  raising
rents ;  the  tenants  resisted,  and  were  ejected  without
scruple,  and  new  tenants  came  in  who,  regarding  the
whole  transaction  in  a  commercial  spirit,  were  entirely
without  feudal  attachment  to  their  landlord.  The  old
hospitality  exercised  by  the  chief  had  ceased ;  his  army
of  retainers  disappeared;  the  clans  were  rapidly  dis-
persing, some  seeking  to  improve  their  lot  in  the  great
industrial  cities  of  the  Lowlands,  and  very  many  emi-
grating to  America.  In  remote  districts,  where  the
spirit  of  enterprise  had  not  penetrated,  the  change  pro-
duced extreme  distress ;  the  tenants  clinging  desperately
to  their  old  farms,  though  their  complete  want  of  agri-
cultural skill  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  pay  with
tolerable  comfort  the  increased  rents.  The  whole  cha-
racter of  the  people  was  rapidly  changing,  and  the  chief,
who  had  once  been  looked  upon  as  the  father  of  his
people,  was  too  often  regarded  only  as  a  rapacious  land-
lord.i

There  was  much  in  this  change  that  it  is  impossible
to  contemplate  without  regret, but  the  general  result

'  See  the  very  interesting  de-  Pennant's  Tour (Pinkerton,  iii.

scription — unfortunately  too  long  95,  328,  329). Kamsay's Scot-

for  quotation — of  this  change  in  land  and  Scotchmen  of  the  Eigh-

Johnson's Tour,  pp. 144-152.  teenth  Centxiry,  ii.  505-517.

318 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. ch.  vi.

was  on  the  whole  beneficial.  The  deplorable  agriculture
which  had  so  long  contributed  to  impoverish  Scotland
began  to  give  way  before  the  stimulus  of  competition,
and  the  economical  condition  of  the  Highlands  was
rapidly  ameliorated.  Some  efforts  to  improve  the  agri-
culture or  the  breeds  of  cattle  in  Scotland  had  been
made,  about  the  time  of  the  Union,  by  the  Earl  of
Haddington,  by  Sir  Archibald  Grant,  by  Lockhart  of
Carnwath,  and  by  Elizabeth  Mordaunt^ — the  daughter  of
Lord  Peterborough  and  the  wife  of  the  eldest  son  of  the
Duke  of  Gordon.'  Large  tracts  were  about  the  same
time  planted,  the  seats  of  the  nobility  were  embellished,^
and  a  society  '  for  improving  the  knowledge  of  agri-
culture' was  founded  at  Edinburgh  in  1723;^  but  it
was  not  until  after  the  abolition  of  hereditary  juris-
dictions that  Scotch  agriculture  began  to  show  any  real
promise  of  the  admirable  perfection  it  has  since  attained.'*
If  feudal  virtues  and  some  of  the  more  romantic  aspects
of  Highland  life  had  diminished,  the  loss  was  more  than
compensated  by  the  immense  increase  of  order,  sobriety,
honesty,  and  security.  The  manners  of  all  classes  were
softening.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  use  of  tea,  which
only  became  common  among  the  upper  classes  in  Eng-
land late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  had  some  time
before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  become
general  among  the  very  poorest  classes  in  the  Lowlands,
and  was  to  a  great  extent  superseding  among  them  the
use  of  intoxicating  drinks.^ The  progi'ess  of  the  High-

'  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals  Duncan  Forbes  laments  bitterly

of  Scotland,  iii.  417-419.  the  decline  of  the  duty  on  beer

-  Macky's Tour  in Scotland  and  ale  arising  from  this  cause.

(1723),  p.  276.  '  The  cause  of  the  mischief  we

^  Chambers'  Annals,  iii.  484.  complain  of,'  he  says, '  is evi-

*  Burton's  Hist.  ii.  393,  394.  dently  the  excessive  use  of  tea,

^  In  a  very  valuable  paper  on  which  is  now  become  so  common

•The State  of  the  Eevenue  of  that  the  meanest  families,  even

Scotland,'  drawn  up  about  1742,  of  labouring  people,  particularly

Cii.  VI. IMPROVEMENT  OF  AGRICULTURE  AND  MANNERS. 319

lands  was  even  more  startling  than  that  of  the  Lowlands.
Travellers  said  with  truth  that  there  was  no  recorded
instance  in  Europe  of  so  rapid  and  so  extraordinary  an
improvement  as  took  place  in  them  in  the  thirty  or  forty
years  that  followed  the  rebellion.  In  that  time  districts
which  had  been  for  centuries  nests  of  robbers  became
as  secure  as  the  counties  about  the  metropolis,  and
some  of  the  most  inveterate  vices  were  eradicated.'  A
single  instance  will  suffice  to  illustrate  the  magnitude  of
the  change.  I  have  already  quoted  the  picture  from
Fletcher  of  Saltoun  of  the  extraordinary  extent  to
which  the  habits  of  vagabond  and  shameless  mendi-
cancy were,  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,
spread  through  the  whole  Scotch  nation.  It  is  a  singu-
larly curious  fact  that  when  Pennant  visited  Scotland,
in  1769,  one  of  the  features  with  which  that  acute
English  traveller  was  especially  struck  was  the  remark-
able absence  of  beggars  in  a  population  that  was  still
extremely  poor.  '  Very  few  beggars,'  he  said,  '  are  seen
in  North  Britain ;  either  the  people  are  full  masters  of
the  lesson  of  being  content  with  very  little,  or,  what  is
more  probable,  they  are  possessed  of  a  spirit  that  will

in  boroughs,  make  their  morn-  parties  of  Mary  of  Modena  at
ing  meal  of  it,  and  thereby  HoljTOod,  at  the  time  when,  on
wholly  disuse  the  ale  which  account  of  the  excitement  about
heretofore  was  their  accustomed  the  Exclusion  Bill,  it  was  thought
drink  ;  and  the  same  drug  sup-  prudent  to  send  the  Duke  of  York,
plies  all  the  labouring  women  as  Governor,  to  Scotland. — Tra-
with  their  afternoon's  entertain-  ditions  of  Edinburgh,  p.  320.
ments  to  the  exclusion  of  the  '  Thus  Lord  Kames  said  :
twopenny.  ...  As  the  lowest  '  The  mildness  with  which  the
rank  of  housekeepers  make  use  Highlanders  have  been  treated
of  tea,  so  the  servants,  particu-  of  late,  and  the  pains  that  have
larly  the  females  in  better  fami-  been  taken  to  introduce  industry
lies,  make  it  their  morning  among  them,  have  totally  extir-
and  afternoon's  diet.' — Citllodeyi  pated  depredations  and  reprisals,
Papers,  pp.  190,  193.  Accord-  and  have  rendered  them  the
ing  to  Chambers,  tea  was  first  most  peaceable  people  in  Scot-
introduced  into  Scotland  in  the  land.'--ifis^.o/lfaw,bk. ii.  sec.  9.

320 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vi.

struggle  hard  with  necessity  before  it  will  bend  to  the
asking  of  alms.'  ^

If  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  in  the  foregoing
pages  to  exhibit  clearly  the  nature  and  the  coherence
of  the  measures  I  have  enumerated  and  the  magnitude
of  the  economical  and  moral  revolution  that  was  effected,
the  history  can,  I  think,  hardly  fail  to  have  some  real
interest  for  my  readers.  There  are  very  few  instances
on  record  in  which  a  nation  passed  in  so  short  a  time
from  a  state  of  barbarism  to  a  state  of  civilisation,  in
which  the  tendencies  and  leading  features  of  the  national
character  were  so  profoundly  modified,  and  in  which  the
separate  causes  of  the  change  are  so  clearly  discernible.
Invectives  against  nations  and  classes  are  usually  very
shallow.  The  original  basis  of  national  character  differs
much  less  than  is  supposed.  The  character  of  large
bodies  of  men  depends  in  the  main  upon  the  circum-
stances in  which  they  have  been  placed,  the  laws  by
which  they  have  been  governed,  the  principles  they  have
been  taught.  When  these  are  changed  the  character
will  alter  too,  and  the  alteration,  though  it  is  very  slow,
may  in  the  end  be  very  deep.  To  trace  the  causes,
whether  for  good  or  ill,  that  have  made  nations  what
they  are,  is  the  true  philosophy  of  history.  It  is  mainly
in  proportion  as  this  is  done  that  history  becomes  a
study  of  real  value,  and  assuredly  no  historical  school
is  more  mischievous  or  misleading  than  that  which
evades  the  problem  by  treating  all  differences  of  na-
tional character  as  innate  and  inexplicable,  and  national
crimes  and  virtues  as  the  materials  for  mere  party
eulogy  or  party  invective.

There  is  another  and  a  much  more  serious  school  of

'  Pinkerton's  Voyages,  iii.  45.  strolling  beggars are given by

See, too, Sinclair's Survey  of  Sinclair under the head of

Scotland, vi. 220 ; viii. 574.  '  Beggars.'
Some instances, however, of

CH.  VI. EFFECTS OF LEGISLATION ON CHARACTER. 321

writers  who  regard  legislation  simply  as  the  product
and  expression  of  a  state  of  thought  and  feeling  other-
wise created,  and  will  scarcely  admit  that  it  has  any
independent  influence  in  moulding  the  characters  or
determining  the  progress  of  nations.  In  this  theory
there  is,  doubtless,  a  considerable  element  of  truth.
No  law  can  be  permanently  efficacious  if  it  is  opposed
to  those  prevailing  moral  and  intellectual  tendencies
which  we  call  the  spirit  of  the  age.  The  best  are  those
which,  being  suggested  by  some  previous  want,  respect
very  closely  the  customs  and  dispositions  of  the  people,
and  fall  in  with  the  tendencies  of  the  time.  English-
men, at  least,  are  in  general  free  from  the  delusion  so
prevalent  on  the  Continent,  that  a  nation  which  has
been  for  generations  ignorant,  superstitious,  intolerant,
and  enslaved,  which  has  for  ages  been  without  the
opportunities  or  the  habits  of  political  life,  can  be
suddenly  regenerated  by  removing  every  restraint  and
conferring  upon  it  a  democratic  constitution.  They
know  that  the  result  invariably  is  either  that  the  old
despotism  continues  under  a  new  name,  or  that  a  period
of  anarchy  is  followed  by  a  period  of  reaction  in  which
the  small  amount  of  liberty  the  nation  might  otherwise
have  enjoyed  becomes  impossible.  They  know  that
legislation  greatly  in  advance  of  the  nation  for  which
it  is  intended  will  always  prove  pernicious  or  inopera-
tive ;  that  constitutions,  in  order  to  flourish,  must  grow
out  of  the  past  condition  of  the  country ;  that  the  sys-
tem of  government  which  is  good  for  one  nation  is  not
necessarily  good  for  another,  and  that  the  laws  which
were  well  suited  for  the  infancy  of  a  people  are  not
equally  suited  for  its  maturity.

But  although  the  effects  of  legislative  and  political
influences  on  the  formation  of  national  character  have
been  greatly  exaggerated,  although  these  effects  proba-
bly diminish  with  the  increasing  complexity  of  society,

VOL. II.  Y

322 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi,

and  with  the  increasing  force  of  its  spontaneous  ener-
gies, they  both  have  been,  and  are,  very  real.  The
results  of  great  movements  of  moral  or  intellectual
advance  would  often  have  been  transient  had  they  not
been  consolidated  by  laws  which  arrested  in  some  de-
gree the  reflux  of  the  wave,  kept  the  higher  standard
continually  before  the  people,  and  prevented  the  tide  of
opinion  from  sinking  altogether  to  its  former  level.
Laws  regulating  the  succession  of  property  govern  in  a
few  generations  the  distribution  of  wealth,  which  more
than  any  other  single  circumstance  determines  the  social
type,  and  thus  afiects  the  whole  circle  of  opinions  and
of  tastes.  A  skilfully  framed  system  of  national  edu-
cation has  often  contributed  largely  to  settle  the  un-
fixed opinions  of  a  nation,  and  has  always  done  very
much  to  establish  the  character  and  the  grade  of
national  civilisation.  By  offering  endowments  for  the
cultivation  of  some  one  class  of  talents  or  the  propa-
gation of  some  one  class  of  opinions,  the  legislator,  if
he  abstains  carefully  from  shocking  any  strong  national
prejudice,  may  gradually  invest  those  particular  talents
with  a  consideration  they  would  never  otherwise  have
possessed,  and  attract  to  those  opinions  a  very  dispro-
portionate amount  of  the  national  ability.  On  the  other
hand,  a  great  legislative  injustice  festers  in  the  social
body  like  a  wound  and  spreads  its  influence  far  beyond
the  part  immediately  affected.  The  habits  of  arrogance,
of  servility,  and  of  lawlessness  it  produces  will  propa-
gate themselves  from  class  to  class  till  the  whole  type
of  the  nation  becomes  more  or  less  perverted.

Of  the  good  efiects  of  legislation  upon  national
character  we  can  hardly  have  a  better  example  than  is
furnished  by  the  succession  of  laws  I  have  enumerated,
beginning  with  the  establishment  of  the  Scotch  Kirk  in
1690,  and  ending  with  the  abolition  of  hereditary  juris-
dictions in  1746. But  although  from  this  time  the

CH.  VI,  TORTURE— SERFDOM— CORRUPTION.  323

history  of  Scotland  was  one  of  uninterrupted  progress
there  were  still  dark  shadows  on  the  picture,  and  it  was
many  years  before  the  English  level  of  civilisation  was
altogether  attained.  Even  torture,  which  had  always
been  illegal  in  England,  was  legal,  and  was  practised
in  Scotland  after  the  Eevolution,  and  was  only  abolished
by  the  Treason  Act  of  1709.  The  last  traces  of  serfdom
disappeared  in  England  about  the  time  of  James  I.,  but
in  Scotland  colliers  and  labourers  in  the  salt  works  were
in  a  condition  of  serfdom  during  the  greater  part  of  the
eighteenth  century.  They  were  legally  attached  for  life
to  the  works  on  which  they  laboured.  Their  children
were  bound  to  the  same  emplojrment  in  the  same  place,
and  on  the  sale  of  the  works  their  services  were  trans-
ferred to  the  new  owner.  It  was  only  in  1775  that  an
Act  was  passed  for  their  emancipation.^  Judicial  cor-
ruption in  England,  in  spite  of  one  or  two  exceptional
cases,  may  be  said  to  have  ceased  at  the  Eevolution,
but  in  Scotland  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  was
largely  practised  far  into  the  eighteenth  century.^
The  political  system  was  even  more  corrupt  and  more
illusory  than  that  of  England ;  for  while  the  borough
members  were  elected  by  the  magistrates  and  town
councils,  the  qualification  for  the  county  members  was
so  high  that  the  whole  representation  was  often  in  the
hands  of  a  few  families.  The  character  of  the  Scotch
members  was  lowered  by  the  fact  that  for  many  years
after  the  Union  they  alone  received  regular  wages  for
their  attendance  in  Parliament,^  their  greater  poverty
exposed  them  specially  to  temptation,  and  one  of  the
worst  effects  of  the  Union  on  imperial  politics  was  the
great  accession  it  gave,  in  both  Houses,  to  the  corrupt

'  Eden's  Hist,  of  the  Poor,  i.  =>  See  some  particulars  of  these

417,  418.  payments  in  Dunbar's  (SocmZii/e

^  See  Chambers'  Traditions  of  in  Former  Days,  pp.  214,  215.
Edinburgh,  117-120.

T  2

324  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vt.

influence  of  the  Crown.  It  was,  indeed,  the  custom  in
England  to  regard  the  Scotch  as  the  most  slavish  and
venal  of  politicians,  and  the  reproach  was  not  wiped
away  till  the  Refox^m  Bill  of  1832  gave  Scotland  a  real
representation,  and  created  constituencies  surpassing
those  of  any  other  part  of  the  kingdom  in  the  average
of  their  intelligence,  purity,  and  liberalism.

It  must  be  added,  however,  that  the  systematic  sup-
port which  Scotch  members  and  Scotch  peers  were  ac-
customed to  give  to  successive  ministries  did  not  extend
to  purely  Scotch  questions.  The  very  unpopularity  of
Scotchmen  drew  them  together,  and  in  this  class  of
questions  they  showed  themselves  singularly  shrewd,
tenacious,  and  implacable  in  their  resentments.  The
admirable  habit  of  conferring  together  on  purely  local
matters  and  adopting  a  common  line  of  policy  before
the  discussions  in  Parliament,  which  has  given  the  Scotch
contingent  nearly  all  the  weight  of  a  national  legisla-
ture, was  early  adopted.  It  appears  to  have  begun  at
the  time  of  the  organised  opposition  to  the  malt  tax  in
1713,'  and  it  has  contributed  largely  to  promote  the
interests  of  their  country.  The  murder  of  Captain  Por-
teous  in  1736,  the  complete  impunity  of  the  murderers,
the  weakness  shown  by  the  Provost,  and  the  manifest
connivance  of  a  large  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Edin-
burgh,^ were  followed  by  a  severe  Bill disabling  the

'  Lockhart  Papers,  i.  417, 429.  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  (Sept.

^  It would be useless and  9,  1736) :  '  I  can't  but  mention

foolish to attempt to describe  to your Grace  that  this  is  the

again an episode which Sir  third prisoner within the me-

Walter  Scott  has  made  the  sub-  mory of man that has been

ject  of  perhaps  the  most  mas-  taken out  of a  tolbooth here,

terly historical  picture in the  and barbarously murdered by

language,  but  I  may  quote  two  the  mob. They  charge  me  with

curious  passages  illustrating  the  procuring Porteous's reprieve,

state  of  Scotch  feeling  about  it.  and  threaten to  murder  me  in

General  Moyle, who was com-  my  bed  or  set  fire  to  my  house ;

manding at Edinburgh, wrote  but  I  despise  them  all. I  don't

en.  VI.  THE PORTEOUS RIOTS.  325

Provost  from  holding  any  public  office,  and  at  the  same
time  depriving  the  city  of  its  charter  and  of  its  guards,
and  taking  away  the  gates  of  the  Netherbow.  The  oppo-
sition of  the  Scotch  was  so  fierce  and  general  that  the
measure  was  at  last  reduced  to  one  disabling  the  Provost
from  holding  any  future  oflice,  and  imposing  on  the  city
the  very  moderate  fine  of  2,000L  for  the  benefit  of  the
widow  of  Porteous.  But  the  design  against  the  city
was  never  forgiven,  and  the  animosity  of  the  Scotch
legislators  against  Walpole  did  much  to  hasten  his  fall.^
One  Scotch  member,  named  Anstruther,  had  voted  for
the  original  Bill,  and  he  received  a  regiment  as  the
price  of  his  vote ;  but  when  he  afterwards  visited  his
estate  in  Scotland,  he  found  it  necessary  to  assume  a
disguise  in  order  to  escape  the  vengeance  of  the  people.
When  his  election  was  contested,  the  Scotch  members
voted  to  a  man  against  him,  and  when,  as  late  as  1751,
he  was  accused  on  account  of  some  alleged  misgovern-

hear  that  any  of the  criminals  to  punish  murderers  are  called

are  yet  apprehended,  though  well  grievous persecutions. I  have

kno^vn  by  many  of  the  inhabi-  conversed with several of the

tants  of the  town.' The  Earl  parsons,  and  I  observe  that  none

of Islay, writing a little later  of those  that are  of the  high

(Oct. 16) to Sir E. Walpole,  party will call any  crime the

says : '  The  most  shocking  cir-  mob  can  commit  by  its proper

cumstance is, that it plainly  name. Their  manner  of  talking,

appears the liigh-flyers of our  were it universal,  would extir-

Scotch  Church  have  made  this  pate rehgion out  of the  world

infamous murder a point of  for  the  good  of  human  society

conscience. One  of  the actors  and,  indeed,  I  could  hardly  have

went  straight  away  to a coun-  given  credit  to  the  public  reports

try  church  where  the  Sacrament  of  the  temper  of  these  saints  if

was  given  to a  vast crowd of  I  had  not  myself been  witness

people,  as  the  fashion is  here,  of it and been  admonished  by

and  there  boasted  of  what  he  had  one  of  them  to  have  regard  to

done. All  the  lower  rank  of  the  the divine attribute of mercy,

people  who have distinguished  (in  Enghsh)  to  protect  the  rebels

themselves by pretences to a  and murderers.'  —  Coxe's Wal-

superior  sanctity,  speak  of this  pole,  ii.  361,  367.
murder  as  the  hand  of  God  do-  '  Coxe's  Walpole.

ing  justice  ;  and  my  endeavours

326 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  vi.

ment  at  Minorca,  the  animosity  of  his  countrymen  was
still  conspicuously  apparent.^

The  manners  of  the  people  continued  for  some  time
to  reflect  very  clearly  their  former  degradation.  The
modes  of  life  produced  by  a  long  period  of  abject
wretchedness  are  never  at  once  removed  by  the  intro-
duction of  comparative  prosperity.  What  began  by  the
force  of  necessity  continues  by  the  force  of  habit,  and
more  than  one  generation  must  pass  before  it  is  changed.
Industrial  habits  were  rapidly  growing,  but  it  was  a
long  time  before  they  reached  the  English  level. ^  In
spite  of  their  admirable  education,  in  spite  of  their  Pro-
testantism, in  spite  of  their  growing  industry,  the  as-
pect of  the  Scotch  population  in  the  latter  years  of  the
eighteenth  century  was  still  extremely  repulsive  to  an
English  eye.  All  the  squalor  of  dress,  person,  and
dwelling  that  now  shocks  the  traveller  in  some  parts  of
Ireland  was  exhibited  in  the  Lowlands,  and  it  was  ac-
companied by  a  striking  absence  of  the  natural  grace,
the  vivacity,  the  warm  and  hospitable  spirit  of  an  Irish
population.  These  latter  qualities  existed,  indeed,  in
Scotland,  but  only  in  the  Highlands,  and  the  tone  of
manners  in  the  north  and  south  of  the  country  is  said  to
have  presented  a  stronger  contrast  than  could  be  fur-
nished by  any  other  nation  in  Europe.^ The  many  solid

'  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  twenty-four processes of that

II.  i.  56-61.  kind, which shows how lan-

^  Topham,  in  his  Letters  from  guidly trade was carried on,

Edinburgh  in 1774 and 1775,  while  the people remained ig-

was  much  struck  with  the  aver-  norant  of their  advantages  by

sion  to  trade  still  prevailing in  the  Union. From  thai  time  to

Scotland. Lord  Kames  gives  a  the  year 1771  there  have  been

curious  illustration  of  the  growth  thrice  that  number every  year,

of  commercial  habits. '  In  Scot-  taking  one  year  with  another —

land,'  he  says,  '  an  innocent  bank-  an  evident  proof  of  the  late  rapid

rupt  imprisoned  for  debt  obtains  progress of commerce  in  Scot-

hberty  by  a  process  termed  ccssio  land.' — Hist,  of  Man,  bk.  i.  sec.  4.

bonorum. From  the  year  1694  'An  intelligent  traveller,  who

to  the  year  1744  there  were  but  visited  Scotland in  1787,  gives

CH.  Ti.  THE SCOTCH KIEK.  327

and  noble  elements  of  the  Scotch  character  might,  in-
deed, be  clearly  discerned,  but  many  years  had  still  to
pass  before  the  nation  reached  its  present  high  standard
in  the  externals  of  civilisation.

One  evil  of  a  different  kind  proved  very  inveterate.
However  great  may  have  been  the  services  wliich,  in  some
respects,  the  Scotch  Kirk  has  rendered  to  its  country,  it
is  incontestable  that  the  religious  bigotry  it  produced
far  exceeded  that  of  any  other  considerable  body  in  the
kingdom,  and  its  influence  for  evil  as  well  as  for  good  may
even  now  be  deeply  traced  in  the  character  of  the  people.

The  history  of  the  Scotch  Kirk,  and  the  nature  of
the  influence  it  exercised,  have  been  treated,  not  many
years  ago,  with  great  power,  but  with  some  prejudice,
by  one  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  eloquent  of  the  his-
torians of  England.  Buckle  has,  indeed,  fully  recog-
nised its  undoubted  services  to  political  liberty,  but  he
has  not,  I  think,  done  justice  to  the  good  effects  of  a
stern  moral  discipline  acting,  during  many  generations,

the  following  description  of  the  civil  in  their  address,  and  hos-

aspect  of  the  people  :  '  The  com-  pitable  to  the  utmost  extent  of

mon  people  of  Scotland  are  more  their  Uttle  power. Their  houses,

than  a  century  behind  the  Eng-  it  is  true,  are  mean  and  incon-

lish  in  improvement ; and the  siderable  ;  but within they are

manners  of  the  Lowlanders in  often as  clean  as  their  poverty

particular  cannot  fail  to  disgust  will  allow ;  and  their doors  are

a  stranger. AU  the  stories  that  never  closed  against  the  necessi-

are  propagated  of  the  filth  and  ties  or curiosity  of a  stranger,

habitual  dirtiness  of  this  people  This  marked  distinction  between

are  surpassed  by  the  reality :  and  two races  of  inhabitants  of  the

the squalid, unwholesome ap-  same  country  is  curious,  and,  I

pearance  of  their  garb  and  coun-  beheve,  quite  unparalleled  in  any

tenances is exceeded by the  other nation  ; neither does it

wretchedness  that  prevails  with-  seem  to  wear  off  in  the  degree

in their houses . . . Whole  that  might be  expected  in the

groups  of  villagers  fly  from  the  common progress of improve-

approach  of  a  traveller  like  the  ment.' — Skrine's  Travels  in  the

most  untamed  of  savages.' On  North  of  England  and  part  of

the  other  hand,  the  Highlanders  Scotland,  pp.  71,  72.
'  are  courteous  in  their  manners,

328  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

on  a  people  singularly  wild,  wayward,  and  anarchical ;
to  the  strength  of  character  infused  into  the  nation  by
the  fervent,  though  narrow,  religious  zeal  with  which
all  classes  were  saturated  ;  or  to  the  educational  value  of
a  system  in  which  every  sermon  was  an  argument,  and
all  the  problems  of  religion  were  perpetually  submitted
to  popular  discussion.  The  Scotch  Kirk  is,  indeed,  a
body  which  it  is  not  very  easy  for  those  who  are  not  in
sympathy  with  its  theology  to  judge  with  equity.  Few
forms  of  religion  have  been  more  destitute  of  all  grace
or  charm,  more  vehemently  intolerant,  and  at  the  same
time  more  ignorant  and  narrow.  Those  who  take  any
wide  or  philosophical  view  of  religious  phenomena  will
find  it  peculiarly  difiicult  to  sympathise  with  men  who,
assuming  the  genuineness,  authority,  and  absolute  infal-
libility of  the  whole  body  of  canonical  writings  without
question  and  without  discrimination,  excluded  on  prin-
ciple all  the  lights  which  history,  tradition,  patristic  wri-
tings, or  Oriental  research  could  throw  upon  their  mean-
ing ;  banished  rigidly  fi-om  their  worship  every  artistic
element  that  could  appeal  to  the  imagination  and  soften
the  character ;  condemned  in  one  sweeping  censure
almost  all  Churches,  ages,  and  religious  literatures,  ex-
cept their  own,  as  hopelessly  benighted  and  supersti-
tious, and  at  the  same  time  pronounced,  with  the  most
unfaltering  assurance,  upon  the  most  obscure  mysteries
of  God  and  of  religion,  and  cursed,  with  a  strange  exu-
berance of  anathema,^  all  who  diverged  from  the  smallest
article  of  their  creed.

The  Scotch  ministers  succeeded,  indeed,  in  im-
pressing their  doctrines,  with  a  pecular  definiteness,  on
the  minds  of  their  people,  and  in  forming  a  high
standard  of  principle,  and  a  rare  energy  of  conviction  ;
but their  system  was not one to produce  any  real

'  See  an  amusing  instance  of  this  in  Burton,  ii.  70.

CH.  VI.  THE SCOTCH KIRK.  329

modesty  of  judgment,  any  gentleness  or  generosity  of
character,  any  breadth  or  variety  of  sympathy.  Super-
stitious and  intolerant  as  was  the  Catholic  Church,  it
was  at  least  in  these  respects  superior.  In  a  religion
that  rests  ultimately  on  authority,  there  is  always
something  to  mitigate  the  extreme  arrogance  of  ignorant
dogmatism.  In  a  great  and  ancient  religion,  comprising
within  itself  the  accumulated  traditions,  literatures,  and
superstitions  of  many  nations  and  of  many  centuries,
influences  from  distant  and  various  quarters  are  at  least
brought  to  bear  upon  the  mind,  and  insular  habits  of
thought  are  in  some  degree  corrected.  Popes  and  Coun-
cils may  define  their  dogmas,  every  instrument  of  coer-
cion or  persuasion  may  be  employed  to  reduce  the
mighty  mass  to  uniformity,  but  still  the  religion  will
practically  assume  many  forms.  There  will  be  degrees
of  realised  belief,  and  types  of  devotion  adapted  to  dif-
ferent characters,  national  peculiarities,  and  grades  of
intellect  and  knowledge  ;  while  a  worship  and  a  mytho-
logy appealing  largely  to  the  imagination,  and  a  devo-
tional literature  appealing  largely  to  the  feelings,  will
supply  an  atmosphere  in  which  religious  minds  can  ex-
patiate without  concentrating  themselves  unduly  on  the
dogmatic  side  of  their  faith.  In  the  Scotch  Kirk  a  bare,
hard,  and  narrow  dogmatism  was  the  very  essence  of
religion,  and  was  enforced  with  an  intolerance  that
has  never  been  surpassed.

Of  all  the  reformers,  none  breathed  a  spirit  of
such  savage  fanaticism  as  John  Knox;  and  there
was  certainly  no  branch  of  the  Protestant  clergy  who
so  long  and  so  steadily  denounced  every  form  of  re-
ligious toleration  as  his  successors.^  It  is  wholly  un-
true that  they  were  intolerant  only  in  self-defence,
and  towards  those  whose  principle  was  intolerance  of

'  The  reader  may  find,  with- lustrations  of  this  fact  in  Buckle,
out  going  further,  numerous  il- Macaulay,  and  Burton.

330 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vi.

others.  The  last  and  one  of  the  very  worst  instances
in  British  history  of  the  infliction  of  death  for  the  ex-
pression of  religious  opinions  was  the  execution,  in
1697,  of  Thomas  Aikenhead,  a  young  man  of  only
eighteen,  for  the  enunciation  of  some  sceptical  opinions
which  he  was  afterwards  most  anxious  to  recant,  and
this  judicial  murder  was  mainly  due  to  the  Scotch
clergy.^  The  Scotch  Nonjurors  made  it  one  of  their
charges  against  William  that  he  had  sinfully  sufiered
James  II.  to  escape,  instead  of  bringing  his  head  to  the
block. ^  For  nearly  a  generation  the  Scotch  ministers
habitually  denounced  the  toleration  of  Episcopalianism
and  of  other  Protestant  sects  with  a  vehemence  quite  as
unqualified  as  that  with  which  they  had  previously  de-
nounced the  persecution  directed  against  themselves ;
and  when  the  Associate  Presbytery  seceded  from  the
Establishment  they  announced  in  their  '  testimony  '  that
the  institution  of  religious  toleration  was  among  the
foremost  '  causes  of  God's  wrath  against  sinfal  and  back-
sliding Scotland.'  ^  In  no  part  of  the  British  Empire —
I  imagine  in  no  part  of  Protestant  Europe — were  pro-
secutions for  witchcraft  so  frequent,  so  persistent,  and  so
ferocious  as  in  Scotland,  and  it  was  to  the  ministers  that
the  persecution  was  mainly  due.  They  employed  all
their  influence  in  hunting  down  the  victims,  and  they
sustained  the  superstition  by  their  teaching  long  after  it
had  almost  vanished  in  England.''  Hundreds  of  wretched
women  have  on  this  ground  been  burnt  in  Scotland  since
the  Eeformation,  and  the  final  sentence  was  preceded  by
tortures  so  horrible,  various,  and  prolonged,  that  several

'  See  Macaulay's  Hist.  c.  xxii.  stitions  of  the  Highlanders  ;  Pit-

2  Macaulay,  c.  xvi.  cairn's  Criminal  Trials  of  Scot-

^  Burton's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  land ; Burt's Letters, and Sir

ii.  321,  332,  333.  Walter Scott's Letters  on  De-

*  Much  evidence  on  the  sub-  monology  and  Witchcraft.  I  have

ject  of  Scotch  witchcraft  will  be  myself  elsewhere  referred  to  the

found  InDalzell's  Darker  Super-  subject.

CH.  VI.  SCOTCH WITCHCRAFT.  331

prisoners  died  through  the  torment.^  As  late  as  1678
ten  women  were  condemned  to  the  flames  on  a  single
day  on  the  charge  of  having  had  carnal  intercourse  with
the  devil. ^

Even  when  the  superstition  had  to  a  great  degree
died  away  among  educated  laymen,  the  influence  of  the
clergy  over  the  populace  was  such  that  acquittal  itself
was  sometimes  insufiicient  to  save  the  life  of  the  victim.
A  curious  and  very  detailed  contemporary  account  is
preserved  of  a  case  of  this  kind  which  occurred  in  1 704-
1705  in  the  little  town  of  Pittenweem  in  Fifeshire.  A
blacksmith  in  that  town,  having  long  been  ill,  at  last
declared  himself  to  be  sufiering  from  witchcraft,  and
accused  seven  women  as  the  culprits.  They  were  at
once  arrested;  a  petition  was  presented  from  Mr.  Cow-
per,  the  minister  of  the  town,  and  from  the  Town  Coun-
cillors for  a  commission  to  try  them ;  but  the  Earl  of
Rothes,  who  was  the  sheriff,  having  instituted  an  in-
quiry, detected  the  imposture  and  released  them.  Among
them  was  a  poor,  ignorant  woman  named  Jane  Corphar.
When  first  '  committed  prisoner  to  the  tolbooth  upon
suspicion  of  being  a  witch,  she  was  well  guarded  with
a  number  of  men,  who,  by  pinching  her  and  pricking
her  with  pins,  kept  her  from  slif^ep  many  days  and  nights,
threatening  her  with  present  death  unless  she  would
confess  herself  guilty  of  witchcraft ; '  and  she  herself
alleged  that  Mr.  Cowper  had  beaten  her  with  his  stick
on  her  denying  her  guilt.  The  intended  efiect  was  pro-
duced; and  wearied  out  with  pain,  sleeplessness,  and
terror,  she  confessed  whatever  they  desired.  On  being
visited,  however,  by  the  magistrates,  she  at  once  asserted

'  Thus  we  find  that  of  twenty-  Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,

six  persons  who  were  condemned  i.  169-172.

to  the  flames  at  Aberdeen  in  1595  ^  Arnot's  Hist,  of  Edinburgh,

and  1596,  three  died  under  tor-  pp.  193,  194.
ture. The rest were burnt. —

332 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

her  innocence,  declared  that  her  previous  confessions
were  all  lies  and  were  made  '  to  please  the  minister  and
the  bailies,'  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  her  release.  But
the  minister  again  appeared  on  the  scene.  It  was  stated
that  when  the  poor  woman  was  charged  with  having
renounced  her  baptism  she  gave  the  unmeaning,  and
probably  purely  ignorant,  answer  that  '  she  had  never
renounced  it  but  to  the  minister.'  For  this  offence  Mr,
Cowper  summoned  her  to  the  church,  threatened  her,
and  of  his  own  authority  ordered  her  to  be  confined  in
a  prison  that  was  in  the  building.  She  succeeded  in
escaping,  but  next  day  was  arrested  by  the  minister  of
a  parish  eight  miles  off,  who,  without  giving  any  notice
to  the  magistrates,  sent  her  in  custody  to  the  minister
of  Pittenweem.  '  When  she  came  to  Mr.  Cowper  she
asked  him  if  he  had  anything  to  say  to  her  ;  he  answered,
"  No." '  It  was  now  evening,  but  it  was  with  great
difficulty  she  could  find  anyone  in  the  town  to  shelter
her.  The  storm  was  rapidly  gathering  around  her.
Next  morning  a  fierce  crowd  had  collected,  who  '  went,'
writes  our  informant,  '  to  Mr.  Cowper  and  asked  him
what  they  should  do  with  her.  He  told  them  he
was  not  concerned,  they  might  do  what  they  pleased
with  her.  They  took  encouragement  from  this  to  fall
upon  the  poor  woman,  three  of  the  minister's  family
going  along  with  them,  I  hear.'  They  seized  her,  beat
her  unmercifully,  tied  her  so  hard  with  a  rope  that  she
was  almost  strangled,  dragged  her  by  the  heels  through
the  streets  and  along  the  shore,  bound  her  fast  to  a  rope
which  they  stretched  at  a  great  height  between  a  ship
and  the  land,  swung  her  to  and  fro  till  they  were  weary
— throwing  stones  at  her  meanwhile — and  at  last  dashed
her  violently  to  the  ground,  all  being  ready  to  receive
her  with  stones  and  staves.  Her  two  daughters  rushed
in  and  fell  upon  their  knees  before  the  mob,  imploring
at  least  to  be  permitted  to  speak  one  word  to  their

en.  VI.  SCOTCH WITCHCRAFT.  333

mother  before  she  expired ;  but  they  were  driven  away
with  fierce  threats.  At  last,  after  '  three  hours'  sport,
as  they  called  it,'  the  woman  was  killed ;  the  populace
compelled  a  man  with  a  sledge  and  horse  to  drive  several
times  over  her  head,  and  they  placed  her  mangled  corpse
under  a  heap  of  stones  at  the  door  of  the  woman  who  had
given  her  shelter  on  the  previous  night,  whom  they
threatened  with  a  similar  fate.  It  was  noticed  that  in
his  sermon  on  the  following  Sunday  the  minister  did  not
introduce  a  single  sentence  expressing  reprobation  of
the  murder  to  which  he  had  so  largely  contributed.^

This  episode  is  probably  typical  of  many  others.
Under  the  teaching  of  the  Scotch  clergy,  the  dread  and
hatred  of  witches  rose  to  a  positive  frenzy;  and  the  last
execution  for  witchcraft,  as  well  as  the  last  execution  for
heresy,  in  the  British  Empire,  took  place  in  Presbyterian
Scotland.  As  late  as  1727  a  mother  and  daughter  were
convicted  of  witchcraft ;  the  daughter  succeeded  in  es-
caping, but  the  old  woman  was  burnt  in  a  pitch-barrel.^
The  associated  Presbytery,  in  1736,  solemnly  denounced
the  repeal  of  the  laws  against  witchcraft  as  an  infrac-
tion of  the  express  word  of  God.^

Other  extravagances,  if  less  pernicious,  were  even
more  grotesque.  Thus,  some  of  the  clergy  denounced
the  use  of '  fanners '  to  winnow  corn  as  impious,  because
by  them  men  raised  an  artificial  breeze  in  defiance  of
Him  who  maketh  the  wind  to  blow  '  where  it  listeth ; '  *
they  denounced  inoculation,  till  late  in  the  eighteenth,
century,  as  flying  in  the  face  of  Providence  and  en-
deavouring to  baffle  a  divine  judgment ;  ^  they  denounced

'  See  the  very  interesting  let-  *  Buckle's  Hist.  ii.  380, 381.

ter describing the  tragedy, in  There  are,  however, several  in-

Dunbar's  Social  Life  in  Former  stances  of  the  clergy  having  used

Days,  pp.  268-273.  their influence to promote the

*  Burt's  Letters,  i.  230,  231.  practice. See under '  Inocula-
'  Burton,  ii.  334.  tion,' in Sinclair's Survey of

*  See  a  Note  to  Burt's  Letters, Scotland.
i.  176.

334 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi,

in  repeated  resolutions  the  legal  vacation  in  December
as  a  national  sin,  because  it  implied  some  recognition  of
the  superstitious  festival  of  Christmas ;  ^  and  they  some-
times even  thought  it  necessary  to  interfere  on  the  same
gi'ound  to  put  down  the  custom  of  eating  a  Christmas
goose. ^  A  picture  of  Chi'ist,  attributed  to  Raphael,
formed  part  of  a  small  collection  which  was  exhibited
in  1734  at  Edinburgh  and  Perth.  In  the  latter  city  it
was  at  once  denounced  from  the  pulpit ;  a  furious  mob,
shouting  '  Idolatry  ! '  '  Popery  ! '  and  '  Molten  images  ! '
surrounded  the  house  where  it  was.  It  was  saved  with
difficulty,  and  soon  after  the  Seceders  solemnly  enrolled
among  the  national  sins  of  Scotland  the  fact  that  '  an
idolatrous  picture  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ
was  well  received  in  some  remarkable  places  of  the  land.'  ^
Theatres,  assemblies,  dancing,  light  literature,  gaieties
at  weddings,  all  those  forms  of  popular  festivity  which
brighten  the  hard  lot  of  the  labouring  poor,  were  in-
exorably condemned.  An  assembly  for  dancing  which
was  established  at  Edinburgh  in  1710  was  denounced
from  the  pulpit,  attacked  by  a  furious  mob,  and  the
doors  were  on  one  occasion  perforated  with  red-hot  spits."*
The  first  circulating  library  in  Scotland,  which  was  set
up  by  Allan  Ramsay  in  1728,  was  denounced ;  and  the
magistrates  were  induced  to  take  measures  against  it
because  it  was  made  the  means  of  disseminating  plays
and  other  light  literature.^  The  Scotch  Sabbath  became
a  proverb  throughout  Europe.  Even  after  the  Revolu-
tion, the  magistrates  in  Edinburgh  employed  men  called
'  seizers,'  whose  function  was  to  patrol  the  streets  and
arrest  all  who  were  found  walking  on  Sunday  during

'  Macaulay's  Hist.  c.  xiii.  of  Scotland,  iii.  564,  565.
^  Dunbar's Social Life in  *  Chambers' Traditions of

Former  Days,  p.  128.  Edinburgh,  p.  57.
^  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals  *  Ibid.  p.  25.

CH.  VI.  TYRANNY OF THE KIRK.  335

sermon  time.^  On  that  dreaiy  day  it  was  esteemed  sin-
ful to  walk  in  the  fields,  to  stand  in  the  streets,  to  look
out  of  the  window,  to  suffer  little  children  to  play,  to  travel
even  on  the  most  urgent  occasions,  to  pursue  the  most
innocent  secular  recreation  or  employment,  to  whistle,
to  hum  a  tune,  to  bathe,  or,  in  the  opinion  of  some
ministers,  even  to  shave.  Very  few  things  affect  so
largely  the  happiness  and  the  true  civilisation  of  a  people
as  the  manner  in  which  they  are  accustomed  to  spend
the  only  day  of  the  week  on  which,  for  the  great  majority
of  men,  the  burden  of  almost  ceaseless  labour  is  inter-
mitted. In  Scotland,  as  far  as  the  Church  influence
could  extend,  every  element  of  brightness  and  gaiety  on
that  day  was  banished,  every  form  of  intellectual  and
Eesthetic  culture  was  rigidly  proscribed.  In  every  parish
a  Kirk  Session  was  established,  consisting  of  the  minister
and  his  elders,  who  often  employed  spies  to  discover
offences,  and  pried  incessantly,  not  only  into  the  opi-
nions, but  also  into  the  domestic  relations  and  private
pursuits  and  manners  of  the  parishioners ;  and  the
minister  summoned  offenders  before  the  congregation,
imposed  upon  them  public  and  shameful  penances,  and
if  they  resisted  subjected  them  to  excommunication,
which,  in  the  existing  state  of  society,  cut  them  off  from
all  intimate  intercourse  with  their  neighbours,  and
blasted  their  temporal  and,  as  they  believed,  also  their
eternal  prospects.^  There  was,  in  truth,  more  real  re-
ligious liberty  in  the  seventeenth  century  at  Naples  and
in  Castille  than  in  the  Western  Lowlands  of  Scotland.

This  system  cannot  be  exactly  termed  priestcraft,
for  the  minister  was  strictly  controlled  by  the  congre-
gation ;  and  the  elders,  who  were  all  laymen,  took  part

'  Arnot's  Hist,  of  Edinburgh,  Burton  has  analysed  their dis-

P-  192.  cipline -ndth much care. See,

-  See  many  curious  particulars  too, Buckle's  masterly chapter

about  the  Kirk  Sessions  in  Burt.  on  the  Scotch  Kirk.

336 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vi.

in  his  judicial  acts.  As  far,  however,  as  freedom  of
action  and  liberty  of  dissent  were  concerned,  it  had  the
effects  of  a  crushing  sacerdotal  tyranny  ;  and  it  was
supported  by  language  about  the  claims  and  prerogatives
of  the  Kirk,  hardly  less  arrogant  and  imperious  than
that  which  issues  from  the  Vatican.

The  palmy  days  of  this  Church  despotism  were  in
the  seventeenth  century  and  in  the  early  years  of  the
eighteenth.  From  this  time,  many  influences  contri-
buted gradually  to  weaken  it.  The  cessation  of  perse-
cution, the  secure  position  of  an  established  Church,  the
growth  of  industrial  life,  a  more  intimate  connection
with  England,  and  also  those  intellectual  agencies  which
during  the  eighteenth  century  were  steadily  lowering
the  theological  temperature  throughout  Europe,  had  all
their  influence  in  Scotland.  In  the  great  centres  espe-
cially an  opposition  arose,  and  Allan  Ramsay,  Pitcairn,
and  a  few  others,  bitterly  assailed  the  pretensions  of  the
clergy.  A  lady  who  was  a  very  keen  observer  of  the
habits  of  her  time,  and  who  died  at  a  great  age,  near  the
close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  had  the  happy  thought
of  writing  down  the  changes  of  manners  that  occurred
in  Scotch  society  during  her  own  life,  as  well  as  those
which  she  had  gathered  from  the  lips  of  her  older  rela-
tions, and  she  has  furnished  us  with  several  curious
particulars  illustrating  the  movement.  The  infusion  of
English  ideas  after  the  Union  was  very  rapid.  Some  of
the  most  considerable  persons  in  Scotland  were  obliged  to
pass  half  the  year  in  London,  and  naturally  came  back
^ith  a  certain  change  in  their  ideas.  The  under-ofiicers
of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  and  the  Boards  of  Customs
and  Excise  established  in  Scotland,  were  chiefly  Eng-
lish, and  being  men  of  fashion  they  were  hospitably  re-
ceived in  the  best  Scotch  society,  and  gradually  modified
its  tone.  About  the  same  time  the  custom  was  largely
extended  of  sending  young  men  of  fortune  to  Holland

CH.  VI.  CHANGE OF IDEAS.  337

for  their  education,  and  permitting  them  afterwards  to
make  a  tour  through  France ;  and  French  manners,  and
to  a  certain  degree  French  morals,  began  to  penetrate
into  Scotch  society.  Luxury  increased,  and  the  severity
of  domestic  discipline  wliicli  had  once  prevailed  rapidly
disappeared.  In  the  early  years  of  the  century  we  are
told,  '  Every  master  was  revered  by  his  family,  honoured
by  his  tenants,  and  awful  to  his  domestics.  His  hours
of  eating,  sleeping,  and  amusement  were  carefully  at-
tended to  by  all  his  family,  and  by  all  his  guests.  Even
his  hours  of  devotion  were  marked  that  nothing  might
interrupt  him.  He  kept  his  own  seat  by  the  fire  or  at
the  table  with  his  hat  on  his  head,  and  often  particular
dishes  were  served  up  for  himself  that  nobody  else
shared  of.  His  children  approached  him  with  awe,  and
never  spoke  with  any  degree  of  freedom  before  him.
The  consequence  of  this  was  that  except  at  meals  they
were  never  together,'  There  was  a  reverence  for  parents
and  elderly  friends  and  generally  an  attention  to  the  old
which  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century  was  unknown.
The  position  of  servants  was  still  very  humble.  They
had  '  a  set  form  for  the  week  of  three  days  broth  and
salt  meat,  the  rest  meagre,  with  plenty  of  bread  and
small  beer.'  Until  vails  were  abolished,  the  yearly
wages  of  men-servants  were  only  from  31.  to  4<l.,  those  of
maid-servants  from  30s.  to  40s.  The  tables  were  covered
with  many  dishes,  and  fine  table-linen  was  greatly
prized,  but  the  gentry  still  ate  off  pewter,  and  few  per-
sons except  the  richest  noblemen  kept  a  carriage.  Girls,
even  in  good  families,  were  taught  very  little  beyond
reading,  writing,  and  plain  work.  They  spent  their
time  chiefly  in  working  tapestry  or  curtains  for  the
house,  and  in  reading  long  romances  or  books  of  de-
votion ;  they  rarely  appeared  in  public  except  at  church,
and  at  the  great  gatherings  for  baptisms,  marriages,  or
funerals  ;  and  their  chief  task  was  to  repeat  psalms  and
VOL.  IT.  Z

338 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vi.

long  catechisms,  in  which  they  were  employed  an  hour
or  more  every  day,  and  almost  the  whole  day  on  Sunday.
'  They  never  eat  a  full  meal  at  table.  This  was  thought
very  indelicate,  but  they  took  care  to  have  something
before  dinner,  that  they  might  behave  with  propriety  in
company.'  The  intercourse  of  men  with  women,  how-
ever, though  not  less  pure,  was  much  less  reserved  than
in  the  latter  part  of  the  century.  '  They  would  walk
together  for  hours  or  travel  on  horseback  or  in  a  chaise
without  any  imputation  of  imprudence.'  The  character
of  '  a  learned  lady '  was  greatly  dreaded,  and  it  was
acquired  by  a  very  slight  knowledge  of  the  current
literature  of  the  time.  Our  informant  has  preserved
from  the  recollections  of  her  uncle  a  curious  record  of
the  ordinary  way  of  spending  Sunday  in  a  gentleman's
house  in  the  first  years  of  the  century.  At  nine  the
chaplain  read  prayers  to  the  family.  At  ten  the  whole
household  went  regularly  to  church,  which  lasted  till
half-past  twelve.  At  one  the  chaplain  again  read
prayers,  after  which  they  had  cold  meat  or  an  egg,  and
returned  to  church  at  two.  The  second  service  ter-
minated at  four,  when  they  betook  themselves  to  their
private  devotions,  except  the  children  and  servants,  who
were  convened  by  the  chaplain  and  examined.  This
continued  till  five,  when  dinner  was  served.  A  few
male  friends  usually  partook  of  this  meal,  and  sat
till  eight.  It  was  followed  by  singing,  reading,  and
prayers  conducted  by  the  master  himself,  after  which  all
retired  to  rest.  '  The  fear  of  hell  and  deceitful  power  of
the  devil  were  at  the  bottom  of  all  their  religious  senti-
ments.' Almost  every  old  house  had  its  haunted  chamber,
where  few  dared  to  sleep  ;  and  dreams  and  omens  were
in  high  repute  even  among  the  most  educated.^

'  See the '  Eemarks on the in  the Caldwell  Papers (Mait-
Change of  Manners  in  my  own land  Club),  i.  259-272.
Time,'  by  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Mure,

\

CH.  vr.  CHANGE OF IDEAS.  339

All  this,  in  the  upper  classes  at  least,  gradually
changed,  and  it  was  noticed  that  the  decline  of  religious
terrorism  advanced  step  by  step  with  the  softening  of
the  relations  between  parent  and  child,  and  between
master  and  servant.  In  1719  the  Presbytery  of  Edin-
burgh passed  some  very  characteristic  resolutions  la-
menting the  decadence  of  piety. ^  They  complained
among  other  things  that  the  people  were  now  accus-
tomed to  walk  or  stand  in  the  streets  before  or  after
service  time  on  Sunday,  that  they  even  wandered  on
that  day  to  fields  and  gardens,  or  to  the  Castle  Hill,  or
stood  idly  gazing  from  their  windows,  and  that  '  some
have  arrived  at  that  height  of  impiety  as  not  to  be
ashamed  of  washing  in  waters  and  swimming  in  rivers
upon  the  holy  Sabbath.'  Amateur  concerts  took  root
in  Edinburgh  about  1717.^  Two  or  three  years  later
the  fashion  of  large  gatherings  at  the  tea-table  came  in,
and  exercised  a  wide  social  influence,  and  about  the
same  time  clubs  began  rapidly  to  multiply.^  A  love  of
dancing  spread  in  certain  circles,  and  was  bitterly  cen-
sured and  deplored,  and  it  was  noticed  by  the  more
rigid  Presbyterians,  as  a  circumstance  of  peculiar  poig-
nancy, that  the  Cameronian  March,  called  by  the  name
of  the  saintly  Cameron,  was  a  favourite  tune.^  A  weekly
assembly  for  dancing,  and  private  balls  carried  on  by
subscription,  began  in  Edinburgh  to  take  the  place,  as
centres  of  social  intercourse,  once  occupied  by  the
gatherings  at  baptisms,  marriages,  and  burials  ;  ^  and
about  1726  we  even  find  a  theatre  established,  though
its existence  was long very  precarious.^ There was

'  Arnot's  Hist,  of  Edinburgh,  lished  about  1723,  in  Chambers'

p.  204.  Domestic  Annals,  iii.  483.

-  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals,  ^  Caldwell  Pa^yers,  i.  267.

iii.  432,  433.  ^  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals,

a  Caldwell  Papers,  i.  269,  271.  iii.  520. In Glasgow the  first

"• See  the  curious  extracts  from  theatrical  performance appears

a  book  of  Patrick  Walker,  pub-  to  have  been  in  1728. Wodrow

z  2

340  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUEY. CH.  vi.

as yet  little  or no  scepticism,  and  attendance  at the
Kirk  was  universal,  but  some  preachers  had  arisen  who
entirely  discarded  the  old  style  of  dogmatic  preaching,
who  banished  from  their  sermons  every  description  of
religious  terrorism,  and  were  accustomed  to  represent
the Christian religion chiefly  as the purest rule of
morals,  the  belief  in  a  particular  providence  and  a  future
state  as  the  support  in  every  trial,  the  distresses  of  in-
dividuals as  necessary  for  exercising  the  affections  of
others,  and  the  state  of  suffering  as  the  post  of  honour.
This  kind  of  preaching  became  especially  popular  after
the  rebellion  of  1745,  when  ideas  of  liberty  were  widely
diffused. The  phrase  '  slavery  of  the  mind  '  came  then
into  common  use. Nurses  were  dismissed  for  talking
to  the  young  of  witches  or  ghosts,  and  the  old  ministers
were  ridiculed  who  preached  of  hell  and  damnation. ^
It  must  be  added  that,  by  one  of  those  curious  contrasts
not unfrequent when  Churches aim  at an excessive
austerity,  there  existed  in  the  midst  of  a  rigid  and  ex-
ternally decorous  society  a  large  amount  of  the  most
extravagant  dissipation. We  read  of  a  Hell-fire  Club
in  Edinburgh,  and  of  a  Sweating  Club,  whose  members
perpetrated  infamous  street  outrages  like  those  of  the
Mohocks  in  London,  and  it is  certain  that  during a
great  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  hard  drinking  and
other  convivial  excesses  were  carried  among  the  upper
classes  in  Scotland  to  an extent  considerably  greater
than  in  England,  and  not  less  than  in  Ireland.^

says  that  in  that  year '  two  things  as very  prevalent in  Scotland,

happened  pretty  singular,  which  though an  external  conformity

twenty  or  thirty  years  ago  would  to  the  Kirk  was  strictly  enforced,

have  been  very  odd  in  Glasgow—  — Letters  from Edinburgh,  p.

the  setting  up  of  an  EpiscoiDalian  238.

meeting-house,  and  public  allow-  ^  Ample  evidence  of  this  will

ing of comedies.'  —  Wodrow's  be  found  in  Chambers' TrafZifio^s

Analecta,  iii.  436.  of  Edinburgh,  and  in  Dean  Bam-

'  Caldwell  Papers,  \.2&%,  210.  ssbj's  Reminiscences. Mrs.  Mure

In  1774  Topham  describes  Deism  mentions  how  an  entire  hogshead

CH.  VI.  CHURCH INFLUENCE,  341

This  evil,  however,  appears  to  have  been  more  in  the
second  than  in  the  first  half  of  the  century.  In  the
second  half  of  the  century  also,  the  kind  of  preaching  I
have  described  became  more  common  in  the  fashionable
quarters  of  the  great  towns.  A  small  but  very  eminent
party  arose  in  the  Established  Church  of  Scotland,  who
fully  reflected  the  more  enlightened  tendencies  of  their
time ;  and  among  their  ministers  we  find  the  great
names  of  Blair,  Ferguson,  Home,  Reid,  and  Robertson.
This  school,  however — distinguished  and  admirable  as
it  was — was  almost  confined  to  the  great  cities,  and  it
had  no  real  root  among  the  people.  It  has  been  ob-
served with  truth  that  every  popular  schism  in  Scotland
was  inspired,  not  by  a  desire  to  innovate,  but  by  a
desire  to  restore  the  sterner  discipline  of  the  past.
The  empire  of  the  Kirk  over  the  greater  part  of  Scot-
land, and  over  the  poorer  and  middle  classes,  was  but
little  shaken  during  the  eighteenth  century;  and  al-
though it  is  scarcely  possible  for  a  Christian  Church
to  exercise  a  supreme  influence  over  a  people  without
producing  some  excellent  moral  effects,  it  also  con-
tributed largely  to  narrow,  darken,  and  harden  the
national  character.  The  general  standard  of  external
decorum  was,  indeed,  so  far  higher  than  in  England,
that  it  was  said  that  a  blind  man  travelling  south-
wards would  know  when  he  passed  the  frontier  by  the
increasing  number  of  blasphemies  he  heard.  If  there
was  a  somewhat  unusual  amount  of  hypocrisy  and
censoriousness,  no  one  who  reads  the  letters  of  the
time  will  question  that  there  was  also  a  very  large
amount  of  simple  and  unostentatious  piety ;  while
order,  industry,  and  truthfulness  were  admirably  dis-

of  wine  was  di-unk  at  the  mar-  grace to  be  seen  drunk,  yet  it

riage  of  one  of  her  friends. '  The  was  none  to  be  a  httle  intoxicate

women,'  she  says,  'had  a  good  in good company.'  —  Caldwell

share ;  for  though  it  was  a  dis-  Papers,  i.  263-265.

342  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vi.

played.  The  industrial  virtues,  however,  for  which
Scotchmen  are  so  eminently  distinguished,  can  only
be  very  partially  attributed  to  the  influence  of  the
Kirk ;  for  they  spring  naturally  and  almost  spon-
taneously from  good  secular  education  and  from  an
advanced  industrial  civilisation,  while  in  some  other
branches  of  morals  no  great  improvement  has  been  ef-
fected. It  is  well  known  that  the  statistics  of  drunken-
ness and  the  statistics  of  illegitimacy  show  that  in
point  of  sobriety  the  Scotch  nation  ranks  among  the
lowest  in  Europe,  and  in  point  of  chastity  below  either
of  the  other  parts  of  the  kingdom.  I  cannot  find  that
the  discipline  of  the  Scotch  Kirk  has  ever  had  an  in-
fluence in  repressing  drunkenness  at  all  comparable  to
that  wliich  was  exercised  by  Father  Mathew  in  Ireland,
and  which  was  felt  for  an  entire  generation.  Ofiences
against  chastity  occupied  a  very  prominent  place  in  the
proceedings  of  the  Kirk  Sessions  and  of  the  Scotch
legislators,  and  penalties  of  an  absurdly  exaggerated
description  were  employed  to  repress  them.  In  1695
thirty-two  women  of  ill-fame  were  transported  from
Edinburgh  to  the  American  plantations.^  Oflenders
of  a  less  serious  kind  were  compelled  to  do  public
penance  before  the  congregations  in  the  churches,  and,
among  other  punishments,  to  stand  in  the  pillory.  The
efiects  were  what  might  have  been  expected.  The
extreme  publicity  given  to  these  matters  had  no  ten-
dency to  diminish  the  offence ;  the  spectacle  of  the
public  penances  attracted  to  the  Kirk  those  who  would
certainly  have  found  no  other  charm  within  its  walls ;
and  the  excessive  severity  of  the  penalties  imposed  on
the  fallen  led  to  a  very  serious  increase  of  child-murder.
On  one  day  in  the  last  century,  four  women  were
executed  in  Edinburgh  for  this  offence  ;  and  they  all

>  Chambers'  Domestic  Annals,  iii.  115.

CH.  VI.  HIGHLAND INFLUENCE.  343

declared  that  the  dread  of  the  pillory  had  prompted
them  to  the  crime.'  In  the  Northern  districts  the
influence  of  the  Kirk  in  this,  as  in  other  respects,
appears  to  have  been  less  felt ;  and  it  is  somewhat
remarkable  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  eSbrts  of  the  clergy,
a  great  Scotch  writer  was  able  to  state,  long  after  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  that  '  in  the  High-
lands of  Scotland  it  is  scarce  a  disgrace  for  a  young
woman  to  have  a  bastard.'  ^

Some  of  the  higher  and  more  attractive  features
also  of  the  Scotch  character  are  to  be  attributed,  not  to
the  action  of  the  Kirk,  but  to  a  widely  different  source.
We  have  seen  in  the  foregoing  pages  how  marked  had
been  the  opposition  between  the  Highlands  and  the
Lowlands,  and  in  how  great  a  degree  the  pacification
and  civilisation  of  Scotland  depended  upon  the  in-
creasing predominance  of  the  latter.  It  would,  how-
ever, be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Highlands
contributed  nothing  beneficial  to  the  Scotch  character.
The  distinctive  beauty  and  the  great  philosophic  interest
of  that  character  spring  from  the  very  singular  com-
bination it  displays  of  a  romantic  and  chivalrous  with
a  practical  and  industrial  spirit.  In  no  other  nation
do  we  find  the  enthusiasm  of  loyalty  blending  so
happily  with  the  enthusiasm  for  liberty,  and  so  strong
a  vein  of  poetic  sensibility  and  romantic  feehng  qualify-
ing a  type  that  is  essentially  industrial.  It  is  not  diffi-
cult to  trace  the  Highland  source  of  this  spirit.  The
habits  of  the  clan  life,  the  romantic  loyalty  of  the
clansman  to  his  chief,  the  almost  legendary  charm  that
has  grown  up  around  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  and  around
the  Pretender,  have  all  had  their  deep  and  lasting  in-
fluence on  the  character  of  the  people.  Slowly,  through
the  course  of  many  years,  a  mass  of  traditional  feeling

'  Arnot's  Hist,  of  Edinburgh,  -  Lord  Karnes'  Hist,  of  Man,

p.  193.  bk.  i.  sec.  6.

344 ENGLAJMD  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vi.

was  formed,  clustering  around,  but  usually  transfiguring,
real  facts.  The  devotion  which  sprang  up  among  the
countrymen  of  Knox,  and  in  defiance  of  the  hard  Puri-
tanism of  the  Kirk,  to  the  mournful  memory  of  the
Catholic  Queen,  is  one  of  the  most  touching  facts  in
history.  It  was  noticed  by  Dempster,  only  thirteen
years  after  the  tomb  of  Mary  had  been  removed  from
Peterborough  to  Westminster  Abbey,  that  devout  Scots
were  accustomed  to  make  pilgrimages  to  it  as  to  the
tomb  of  a  martyr.  It  was  supposed  to  have  wrought
numerous  miracles,  and  is  probably  the  last  tomb  in
the  kingdom  to  which  this  power  has  been  ascribed.'
The  clan  legends,  and  a  very  idealised  conception  of
clan  virtues,  survived  the  destruction  of  feudal  power ;
and  the  pathos  and  the  fire  of  the  Jacobite  ballads  were
felt  by  multitudes  long  after  the  star  of  the  Stuarts  had
sunk  for  ever  at  Culloden.  Traditions  and  sentiments
that  were  once  the  badges  of  a  party  became  at  last  the
romance  of  a  nation ;  and  a  great  writer  arose  who
clothed  them  with  the  hues  of  a  transcendent  genius,
and  made  them  the  eternal  heritage  of  his  country  and
of  the  world.

*  Stanley's  Westminster  Abbey.

ENGLISH POLITICS IN 1754,  345

CHAPTER  VII.

On  March  6,  1754,  Henry  Pelham  died,  and  the  peace
which  had  so  long  prevailed  in  English  politics  at  once
terminated.  For  rather  more  than  three  years  from
this  time  the  political  stage  presented  an  aspect  of
almost  unexampled  turbulence  and  confusion.  In  the
vicissitudes  of  this  period,  however,  there  is  but  little
of  permanent  interest,  for  they  sprang  neither  from
party  divisions,  conflicting  principles,  nor  disputed
measures,  but  solely  from  the  rivalry  of  a  few  great
houses,  and  from  the  incessant  jealousies  of  a  small  circle
of  statesmen.  The  actors  in  the  preceding  struggle
had  for  the  most  part  passed  away.  Orford  and  Boling-
broke  were  dead ;  Bath  had  lost  all  power,  and  Granville
all  ambition  ;  and  Chesterfield,  though  he  exercised
some  influence  as  a  mediator  in  1757,  was  content  with
a  subordinate  position,  and  contributed  little  to  the
history  of  the  time.  The  most  prominent,  or  at  least
the  most  influential,  statesman  of  the  old  generation
was  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  upon  the  death  of  his
brother  became  Prime  Minister  of  England.

Newcastle  is  certainly  the  most  remarkable  instance
on  record  of  the  manner  in  which,  under  the  old  system,
great  possessions  and  family  or  parliamentary  influence
could  place  and  maintain  an  incapable  man  in  the  first
position  in  the  State.  In  private  life  or  in  a  subordinate
office  the  glaring  weaknesses  of  his  character  would
have  been  comparatively  unnoticed,  and  he  would  have
been  justly  respected  as  a  man  of  pure  morals,  warm
affections,  and  sincere  and  unaffected  piety. Unfor-

346 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vii.

tunately,  however,  he  inherited  a  greater  parliamentary
influence  than  any  other  English  noble,  and  he  was
devoured  by  the  most  feverish  and  insatiable  ambition.
Without  any  of  the  aims  or  capacities  of  a  legislator,
or  any  sordid  desire  for  the  emoluments  of  office,  he
delighted  beyond  all  earthly  things  in  its  occupations,
interests,  and  dignity,  in  the  secret  and  corrupt  manage-
ment of  Parliament,  in  the  dispensation  of  bribes,  places,
and  pensions.  George  II.  complained  that  he  was  unfit
to  be  Chamberlain  to  the  smallest  court  in  Germany,
and  he  was  the  object  of  more  incessant  ridicule  than
any  other  politician  of  his  time ;  but  yet  for  forty-six
years  he  held  high  posts  at  the  Court  or  in  the  Govern-
ment. For  nearly  thirty  years  he  was  Secretary  of
State ;  for  ten  years  he  was  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury.
His  co-operation  proved  essential  to  the  success  both  of
Walpole  and  of  Pitt,  and  no  statesman  or  combination
of  statesmen  could  long  dispense  with  his  assistance.
Intellectually  he  was  probably  below  the  average  of
men,  and  he  rarely  obtained  full  credit  even  for  the
small  talents  he  possessed.  He  was  the  most  peevish,
restless,  and  jealous  of  men,  destitute  not  only  of  the
higher  gifts  of  statesmanship,  but  even  of  the  most
ordinary  tact  and  method  in  the  transaction  of  business,
and  at  the  same  time  so  hurried  and  undignified  in  man-
ner, so  timid  in  danger,  and  so  shuffling  in  difficulty,
that  he  became  the  laughing-stock  of  all  about  him.
Lord  Wilmington  said  of  him  that  he  always  appeared
to  have  lost  half  an  hour  in  the  morning,  and  to  be
running  after  it  all  the  rest  of  the  day.  Associated
with  such  men  as  Walpole  and  Pitt,  he  was  often  treated
with  gross  contempt,  and  he  was  incessantly  imagining
slights  where  none  were  intended,  indulging  on  the
smallest  provocation  in  violent  explosions  of  grotesque
irritability,  and  employing  all  the  petty  arts  of  a  weak
man  to  maintain  his  position  among  more  powerful  com-

CH.  VII.  THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.  347

petitors.  His  confused,  tangled,  unconnected  talk,  his
fulsome  flattery,  his  promises  made  at  the  spur  of  the
moment  and  almost  instantly  forgotten,  his  childish
exhibitions  of  timidity,  ignorance,  fretfulness,  and  per-
plexity, the  miserable  humiliations  to  which  he  stooped
rather  than  abandon  office,  his  personal  oddities,  and
his  utter  want  of  all  dignity  and  self-control  made  him
at  once  one  of  the  most  singular  and  most  contemptible
figures  of  his  time.

Yet  there  were  many  worse  men,  and  many  more
dangerous  politicians.  Chesterfield,  who  knew  him  well,
and  who  seldom  erred  on  the  side  of  indulgence,  de-
scribed him  as  '  a  compound  of  most  human  weaknesses,
but  untainted  with  any  vice  or  crime  ; '  and  most  of  his
faults  sprang  much  more  from  extreme  feebleness,  in-
constancy, and  nervousness,  than  from  any  deeper  cause.
He  was  good-natured,  placable,  and  on  the  whole  well-
meaning,  indefatigable  in  the  discharge  of  business,  a
respectable  writer  of  official  despatches,  a  ready  though
ungraceful  debater.  He  originated  nothing,  and  dis-
couraged every  measure  that  might  arouse  opposition  ;
but  the  very  timidity  of  his  nature  kept  him  for  the
most  part  in  harmony  with  the  wishes  of  the  people,
and  he  was  guilty,  during  a  career  of  unexampled  length,
of  very  little  harshness,  violence,  or  injustice.  He
was  a  steady  upholder  of  the  Hanoverian  dynasty ;  he
assisted  during  many  years  one  of  the  best  Home
Ministers  and  the  greatest  Foreign  Minister  the  country
has  ever  possessed.  He  had  the  merit  of  bringing
Hardwicke  into  office,  and  he  secured  his  lifelong  con-
fidence and  attachment.  In  foreign  politics  he  was
a  consistent  supporter  of  the  Austrian  interest;  and
although  he  sometimes  yielded  too  much  to  the  German
tendencies  of  the  King,  he  appears  to  have  had  a  real
feeling  for  the  honour  of  England.  Though  he  cannot
be  acquitted  of  an  inveterate  passion  for  intrigue,  the

348 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vii.

charge  of  deliberate  and  aggravated  treachery  to  Sir  R.
Walpole,  which  Horace  Walpole  has  brought  against
him,  is,  I  conceive,  both  false  and  malignant.  Newcastle
differed  from  Walpole  in  desiring  England  to  take  a
more  energetic  part  in  continental  affairs,  just  as  he
afterwards  differed  for  a  similar  reason  from  his  own
brother.  He  remained  in  office  after  the  retirement  of
Walpole  at  Walpole's  express  desire,  and  he  exerted  all
his  influence,  and  no  small  amount  of  dexterity,  to  shield
him  from  impeachment.*  The  darkest  stain  upon  his
memory  is  the  alacrity  with  which  he  sacrificed  Byng
to  the  popular  clamour.  The  great  evil  of  his  ascend-
ency was  the  gross,  systematic,  and  shameless  corruption
which  he  practised.  In  his  time  it  was  impossible  even
for  an  able  man  to  govern  Parliament  without  corrup-
tion, but  Newcastle  vastly  increased  the  evil,  discredited
and  degraded  his  party,  and  left  the  standard  of  political
morality  lower  than  he  found  it.  At  the  same  time,
though  a  great  corrupter  of  others,  he  was  not  himself
corrupt.  During  his  official  career  he  reduced  his
fortune  from  25,000?.  to  6,0001.  a  year,  and  he  refused
a  pension  when  he  retired.

Such  was  the  statesman  who,  on  the  death  of  Pel-
ham,  became  the  head  of  the  Government.  The  position,
however,  of  leader  and  manager  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons remained  vacant,  and  it  was  fiercely  contested.
Of  the  ablest  men  in  Parliament,  there  was  indeed  one
who  had  no  political  ambitions.  The  silver-tongued
Murray — the  most  graceful,  luminous,  and  subtle  of  all
legal  speakers — was  at  this  time  Attorney-General,  and
although  there  was  no  height  of  political  greatness  to
which  he  might  not  have  aspired,  he  resolutely  turned
aside  from  the  rugged  path  of  statesmanship. His  eyes

>  Walpole  to  Devonshire,  Feb.  2, 1741-2. Coxe's  Wal]pole,  iii.  592.
Coxe's  Pelham,  i.  29,  30.

CH.  VII.  THE LEADERSHIP OF THE COMMONS.  349

were  fixed  upon  the  calm  dignity  of  the  Bench,  and  he
soon  after,  as  Lord  Mansfield,  took  his  place  among  the
greatest  of  English  judges.  Two  men,  however,  whose
influence  was  almost  equal,  and  whose  names  were  des-
tined during  two  generations  to  be  in  the  foremost
rank  of  politics,  were  looking  eagerly  to  the  vacant
place.  These  were  Henry  Fox  and  William  Pitt,  who
were  afterwards  known  as  Lord  Holland  and  Lord
Chatham,  and  who  at  this  time  filled  respectively  the
ofiices  of  Secretary  at  War  and  Paymaster  of  the  Forces.
The  first — a  bold,  bad  man,  educated  in  the  school  of
Walpole,  but  almost  destitute  of  principle,  patriotism,
and  consistency — possessed  rare  talents  for  business
and  for  intrigue,  and  social  qualities  which  gave  him
great  influence,  and  won  for  him  much  affection.  With-
out any  of  the  higher  imaginative  qualities  or  any  of
the  lighter  graces  of  oratory,  his  clear,  strong  sense,  his
indomitable  courage,  and  his  admirable  tact,  readiness,
and  memory,  made  him  one  of  the  most  formidable  of
debaters.  He  had  obtained,  by  the  force  of  his  personal
attractions,  and  without  the  advantage  of  either  rank  or
wealth,  a  considerable  parliamentary  following,  and  his
position  was  strengthened  by  the  somewhat  hesitating
favour  of  the  King,  by  the  friendship  of  the  Duke  of
Cumberland,  and  by  a  close  political  alliance  with  the
Duke  of  Bedford.  He  was  known  to  be  ambitious  and
unscrupulous,  and  it  did  not  yet  appear  that  he  cared
more  for  money  than  for  power.  Pitt  was  an  incom-
parably greater  man,  both  in  intellect  and  character,
and  having  just  married  the  sister  of  Lord  Temple,  he
had  obtained  the  support  of  the  Grenville  connection ;
but  his  lofty  and  unaccommodating  character,  and  his
arrogant  temper,  had  impaired  his  popularity  in  the
House ;  his  denunciations  of  Hanover  and  of  the  Hano-
verian policy  of  the  Court,  had  made  him,  beyond  all
other  politicians,  obnoxious  to  the  King;  he  was  dis-

350  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vii.

liked  and  feared  by  Newcastle,  and  at  the  time  of  the
death  of  Pelham,  as  in  many  other  critical  moments  of
his  career,  he  was  disabled  by  the  gout.

I  do  not  propose  to  follow  in  detail  the  long  series
of  vicissitudes,  intrigues,  dissensions,  and  combinations
that  followed.  They  were  not  determined  by  political,
but  by  personal  motives.  They  have  been  minutely
described  by  many  historians,  and  they  belong  to  a  class
of  facts  which  in  the  present  work  I  desire,  as  far  as  is
consistent  with  the  clearness  of  my  narrative,  to  avoid.
It  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  Newcastle  first  offered
the  leadership  of  the  House  to  Fox,  but  insisted  upon
retaining  in  his  own  hands  the  distribution  of  the  secret-
service  money  and  the  nomination  to  the  Treasury
boroughs,  or,  in  other  words,  the  administration  of  cor-
ruption ;  that  Fox  refused  the  leadership  when  clogged
by  this  restriction;  that  Newcastle,  relying  on  the
almost  complete  absence  of  formal  opposition,  then
entrusted  the  vacant  post  to  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  a
politician  of  no  ability  or  standing ;  that  Fox  and  Pitt
at  once  composed  their  differences,  and  resolved  to  make
this  arrangement  impossible ;  that  instead  of  adopting
the  plain  and  honourable  course  of  resigning  their  posi-
tions, they  remained  in  office,  and  at  the  same  time
devoted  all  their  talents  to  ridiculing  and  discrediting
their  new  leader,  and  that  the  covert  sarcasms  of  Fox
and  the  scarcely  disguised  denunciations  which  Pitt
directed  not  only  against  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  but
also  against  Murray  and  Newcastle,  soon  made  the  posi-
tion of  the  Government  intolerable.  It  is  evident  that
this  course  was  an  outrageous  violation  of  the  most
ordinary  rules  of  political  loyalty  and  honour,  and  it  is
equally  evident  that  any  prime  minister  of  common
firmness  would  have  instantly  and  at  all  hazards  dis-
missed a  subordinate  who  was  guilty  of  it.  Instead  of
taking  this  step,  Newcastle,  with  characteristic  timidity.

CH.  VII.  WAR IN AMERICA.  351

preferred  to  make  new  overtures  to  Fox,  who  after  some
negotiation  accepted  them,  desisted  from  his  covert  op-
position to  his  cliiefs,  disclaimed  in  private  all  connec-
tion with  Pitt,  and,  although  he  was  unable  as  yet  to
obtain  the  position  of  Secretary  of  State  as  he  desired,
he  was  called  to  the  Cabinet  Council  in  January  1755,
and  obtained  some  promotions  for  his  adherents  in  the
ministry.

In  peaceful  times  these  personal  intrigues  might
have  long  continued  to  run  their  course  without  any
other  effect  than  that  of  lowering  the  level  of  poli'ical
morality.  The  clouds  of  war  were,  however,  now  gather-
ing heavily  over  the  distant  horizon.  The  Peace  of
Aix-la-Chapelle  had  left  the  respective  frontiers  of  the
English  and  French  colonies  in  America  almost  unde-
fined. The  limits  of  immense  provinces,  in  a  great
degree  uninhabited  and  even  unexplored,  were  neces-
sarily very  vague,  and  the  French  and  English  colonists
were  both  animated  by  fierce  national  antipathy.  Each
side  aspired  to  complete  ascendency  in  North  America,
and  each  side  had  tribes  of  Indians  ready  to  fight  in  its
cause.  On  the  cession  of  Acadia  or  Nova  Scotia  to
England,  commissioners  had  been  appointed  to  deter-
mine the  frontiers  of  the  province,  but  they  had  been
wholly  unable  to  agree ;  the  English  maintaining,  and
the  French  strenuously  denying,  that  the  tract  around
the  Bay  of  Fundy  was  included  in  the  ceded  territory.
A  Btill  more  serious  question  arose  about  the  line  of  the
great  lakes,  of  the  Ohio  and  of  the  Mississippi.  The
English,  immediately  after  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Ohapelle,
had  given  an  English  mercantile  company  the  exclusive
right  of  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  founding  colonies
on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  and  some  scattered  settle-
ments were  already  established.  The  French,  on  the
other  hand,  determined  to  connect  by  a  long  chain  of
forts  their  Canadian  colonies  with  Louisiana,  and  thus

352 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vii.

to  cut  oflf  New  England  from  all  communication  with
the  central  part  of  America.  They  maintained  that  the
whole  basin  of  the  great  rivers  behind  the  Alleghanies
formed  part  of  Canada.  They  supported  their  claim  by
launching  war-ships  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  by  rapidly
throwing  out  outposts  and  founding  forts  along  the
Ohio ;  and  the  Marquis  Duquesne,  who  was  governor  of
Canada,  sent  a  formal  message  to  the  governors  of  New
York  and  Pennsylvania,  announcing  that  France  would
permit  no  English  settlements  on  that  river.

Under  these  circumstances  hostilities  speedily  broke
out.  The  Board  of  Trade  reported  to  the  King  that
'  as  the  French  had  not  the  least  pretence  of  right  to
the  territory  on  the  Ohio  ...  it  was  a  matter  of  wonder
what  such  a  strange  expedition  in  time  of  peace  could
mean,  unless  to  complete  the  object  so  long  in  view  of
conjoining  the  St.  Lawrence  with  the  Mississippi,'  and
Lord  Holdernesse,  the  Secretary  of  State,  sent  orders
to  the  governors  of  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia  to  repel
force  by  force,  '  whenever  the  French  were  found  within
the  undoubted  limits  of  their  provinces.'  In  the  course
of  1754  a  few  slight  conflicts  took  place.  A  project  of
erecting  an  English  fort  near  the  point  where  the  Mon-
ongahela  flows  into  the  Ohio  was  defeated  by  a  French
occupation,  and  a  French  fort,  named  aiter  Duquesne,
was  established  on  the  spot.  The  name  of  George
Washington,  then  a  young  man  of  twenty-two,  the  son
of  a  planter  of  Westmoreland  county,  on  the  Potomac,
now  appears  for  the  first  time  in  history.  In  1753  he
had  been  sent  on  a  vain  mission  to  negotiate  with  the
French  about  the  limits  of  their  frontier,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  he  was  despatched  to  the  Ohio  at  the  head
of  about  400  soldiers.  In  May  1754  a  skirmish  took
place,  in  which  the  French  commander  was  killed,  but
soon  after  Washington  was  attacked  by  a  very  superior
force  and  compelled  to  capitulate. Remonstrances  were

CH.  VII.  PERPLEXITIES OF NEWCASTLE.  353

made  by  the  English  ambassador  at  Paris.  The  colo-
nial legislatures  exhibited  great  disunion  and  incapacity,
but  still  additional  forces  were  raised,  and,  as  the  ap-
proach of  a  great  war  was  felt  to  be  imminent,  the  army
estimates  at  home  were  increased.  Troops  were  with-
drawn from  Ireland,  and  in  October  Major-General
Braddock,  a  favourite  officer  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,
was  despatched  to  America  with  about  2,000  troops.^

All  these  circumstances  greatly  added  to  the  diffi-
culties of  Newcastle,  and  the  popular  feeling  against
him  rose  higher  and  higher.  His  conduct  was  a  miser-
able exhibition  of  weakness  and  vacillation.  He  was
now  past  sixty.  He  had  spent  a  long  life  in  official
pursuits,  and  he  was  entirely  incapable  of  breaking  the
habits  he  had  formed.  His  love  of  office  had  become
an  absolute  disease,  and  the  idea  of  sacrificing  it  was
intolerable  to  his  mind.  He  was  the  undisputed  leader
of  a  party  which  possessed  an  immense  majority  in  both
Houses.  Yet  no  minister  was  ever  less  able  to  con-
trol insubordinate  colleagues,  or  to  conduct  a  great
war.  He  was  incapable  of  taking  any  resolution,  his
mind  veered  with  every  breath  of  opposition,  and  with
the  exception  of  his  Chancellor,  Lord  Hardwicke,  he
had  hardly  a  sincere  friend  in  the  Cabinet.  Pitt,  sullen,
irritated,  and  bitterly  aggrieved  with  both  Fox  and
Newcastle,  confined  himself  to  his  own  department,  and
took  no  pains  to  conceal  his  disgust  and  his  contempt.
'  Your  Grace  knows  I  have  no  capacity  for  these  tilings,'
he  shortly  answered  when  consulted  about  the  difficulties
in  America,  'and  therefore  I  do  not  desire  to  be  in-
formed about  them.'  The  debates  on  the  Marriage
Act  had  made  Pox  and  Hardwicke  deadly  enemies.
Leicester  House,  for  the  first  time  since  the  death  of
the  last  Prince  of  Wales,  had  begun  to  take  an  active

'  Hildreth's Hist,  of  the  United  States. Bancroft. Walpole's
George  II. Sparks'  Life  of  Washington.

VOL. II.  A  A

354  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

part  in  politics,  and  the  influence  of  the  Princess
Dowager  was  exerted  against  the  Government,  and
especially,  on  different  grounds,  against  Newcastle  and
against  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  The  universal  feel-
ing of  the  country  was  one  of  despondency,  for  men  felt
that  great  dangers  were  approaching,  and  that  the  hand
which  held  the  rudder  was  miserably  weak.  As  a  very
acute  observer '  writes,  '  There  was  no  violence,  no  op-
pression, no  particular  complaint,  and  yet  the  nation
was  sinking  by  degrees,  and  there  was  a  general  indis-
position proceeding  from  the  weakness  and  worthlessness
of  the  minister  who  would  embrace  everything,  and  was
fit  for  nothing.'  The  French  made  propositions  for
peace,  but  they  appeared  utterly  unacceptable.  They
proposed  to  leave  the  valley  of  the  Ohio  in  the  condition
in  which  it  had  been  at  the  opening  of  the  last  war,  and
afterwards  that  both  countries  should  retire  from  the
country  between  the  Ohio  and  the  Alleghanies,  leaving
the  country  to  the  north  and  west  of  the  Ohio  in  French
possession.  They  claimed  this  territory  on  the  double
ground  of  discovery  and  of  possession.  French  mis-
sionaries and  French  explorers  had  penetrated  much
farther  to  the  west  than  the  English;  and  since  the
Peace  of  Utrecht,  while  the  English  were  chiefly  em-
ployed in  developing  the  country  they  had  occupied,
the  French  threw  out  many  scattered  forts  in  a  country
wholly  uninhabited  by  their  rivals.  The  English,  on
the  other  hand,  held  that  when  they  had  established  a
settlement  on  the  eastern  coasts  of  America,  their  claims,
as  against  any  other  European  Power,  extended  in  the
same  latitude  from  sea  to  sea ;  they  considered  it  a
matter  of  the  most  vital  importance  to  prevent  their
colonies  from  being  inclosed  between  the  ocean  and  a
hostile  Power,  and  they  met  the  French  proposals  by

'  Codington's  Diary,  May  1755.

CH.  VII.  THE WAR  IN 1755.  355

demanding  the  cession  of  the  coast  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,
and  the  destruction  of  all  forts  built  by  the  French  in
the  disputed  territory.  The  maritime  preparations  of
the  French  were  in  the  meantime  rapidly  pressed  on.
A  squadron  destined  for  America,  and  carrying  4,000
soldiers,  sailed  from  Brest  for  America,  and  a  British
fleet  was  sent  out,  under  Boscawen,  to  follow,  and  if  it
entered  the  St.  Lawrence  to  intercept  it.  The  French,
suspecting  the  design,  succeeded,  under  shelter  of  a
fog,  in  evading  the  English,  but  two  ships  which  had
been  detached  from  the  French  fleet  were  attacked  by
the  English  and  captured.

After  the  news  of  this  aggression,  which  had  taken
place  without  any  declaration  of  war,  and  in  spite  of
the  pacific  assurances  of  Newcastle,  the  French  am-
bassador was  immediately  recalled.  The  next  advices
from  America  brought  an  account  of  the  surprise  and
capture,  by  3,000  English  troops,  of  the  French  forts
recently  established  at  Beau  Sejour,  on  the  Bay  of
Fundy,  and  soon  after  the  news  arrived  of  a  very  serious
disaster  on  the  Ohio.  In  July  1755  General  Braddock,
at  the  head  of  about  2,000  men,  having  marched  against
Fort  Duquesne,  had  been  encountered  by  a  smaller
body  of  French  and  Indians,  who  concealed  themselves
in  the  long  grass,  and  who,  by  an  unexpected  and  well-
directed  fire,  produced  a  panic  and  a  rout.  Braddock
himself  fell,  about  sixty  oflicers  were  killed  or  wounded,
and  the  whole  force  was  put  to  flight.  The  perplexity
of  the  situation  was  much  increased  by  the  absence  of
the  King,  who,  contrary  to  the  strong  wish  both  of  the
ministers  and  of  the  people,  had  insisted  on  going  with
Lord  Holdernesse  to  Hanover,  leaving  the  government
in  the  hands  of  a  regency,  of  which  the  Duke  of  Cum-
berland was  virtually  the  head.  Many  French  merchant
vessels  from  Martinico  were  now  returning,  and  it  was
a  great  object,  if  possible,  to  intercept  them. A  new

A  A 2

356  ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

fleet,  under  Sir  Edward  Hawke,  was  ready,  and  it  was
resolved  to  send  it  out ;  but  the  great  question  in  the
Cabinet  was  what  instructions  should  be  given  to  it.
The  Duke  of  Cumberland  strongly  urged  that,  as  war
was  inevitable,  the  most  vigorous  measures  should  be
taken.  Pox,  the  Princess  Dowager,  and,  with  more
hesitation.  Lord  Anson,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the
Admiralty,  shared  his  view.  Lord  Granville  appears
to  have  vacillated,  and  he  desired  that  hostilities  should
only  be  exercised  against  ships  of  war,  and  was  abso-
lutely against  interfering  with  trade,  which  he  called
'  vexing  your  neighbours  for  a  little  muck.'  The  Chan-
cellor desired  to  postpone  matters  and  take  no  decisive
and  inevitable  step.  Newcastle  himself  was  in  a  state
of  pitiable  alarm.  At  one  time  he  suggested  that
'  Hawke  should  take  a  turn  in  the  Channel  to  exercise
the  fleet,  without  having  any  instructions  whatever  ; '
he  then  urged  in  turn  that  Hawke  should  be  ordered
not  to  attack  the  enemy  unless  he  thought  it  worth
while,  that  he  should  not  do  so  unless  their  ships  were
more  together  than  ten,  that  he  meant  this  only  of
merchant  ships — for,  to  be  sure,  he  must  attack  any
squadron  of  ships  of  war — that  he  should  take  and  de-
stroy all  French  ships  of  war,  but  no  merchantmen,  that
he  should  be  restrained  from  taking  any  ships  except
ships  of  the  line.^  Ultimately  it  was  decided  as  a  com-
promise that  war  should  not  be  declared,  but  that
Hawke  should  be  ordered  to  take  all  Prench  ships  of
war  and  merchantmen.  Letters  of  marque  were  issued
to  cruisers,  and  by  the  end  of  1755  300  French  mei'-
chant  ships  and  7,000  or  8,000  Prench  sailors  were
brought  into  English  ports.  The  Prench,  who  were
resolved  to  put  England  clearly  in  the  wrong,  and  who
had  also  not quite completed  their preparations,  ab-

'  Dodington's Diary, July moirs, pp. 45-49. Walpole.
1755. Lord Waldegrave's Me- Smollett.

CH.  VII,  HANOVERIAN INTERESTS.  357

stained  from  declaring  war,  released  an  English  ship  of
war  which  some  French  ships  had  captured,  and  very
naturally  stigmatised  the  proceedings  of  the  English  as
simple  piracy.  In  the  meantime  the  press  for  seamen
in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  was  stringently  carried
out,  the  great  towns  subscribed  large  premiums  over
and  above  the  bounty  given  by  the  Government  for  all
who  voluntarily  enlisted  as  soldiers  or  sailors,  and  the
Government  having  resolved  to  raise  a  million  by  way
of  lottery,  for  military  purposes,  no  less  than  3,880,000l
was  at  once  subscribed.^

While  these  events  were  taking  place,  the  King  was,
as  usual,  mainly  occupied  with  Hanover.  It  could
scarcely  fail,  in  case  of  war,  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
the  French,  and  there  were  some  fears  that  France
might  obtain  the  support  of  Prussia,  by  offering  its
annexation  as  a  bribe.  The  subsidiary  treaties  with
Saxony  and  Bavaria  had  just  expired,  and  the  King
made  a  new  treaty  with  Hesse,  and  opened  negotiations
for  a  treaty  with  Russia.  Such  treaties,  binding  Eng-
land to  pay  large  sums  to  foreign  soldiers  for  the  de-
fence of  the  King's  foreign  dominions,  though,  as  the
event  showed,  they  were  very  reasonable,  and  indeed
necessary  to  the  security  of  England,  were  in  the
highest  degree  unpopular,  and  no  one  who  knew  Pitt
could  question  that  under  the  circumstances  in  which
he  then  stood  he  would  make  use  of  this  unpopularity
to  the  utmost.  Newcastle  had  an  interview  with  him,
and  tried  to  conciliate  him  by  the  offer  of  a  seat  in  the
Cabinet,  by  hopes  of  further  promotion,  by  entreaties
that  would  under  any  circumstances  have  been  humi-
liating, but  which  were  doubly  so  when  coming  from
an  old  to  a  young  man,  and  from  a  Prime  Minister
to  a  refractory subordinate. Pitt treated him with

Smollett. Walpole.

358 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

contemptuous  arrogance,  induced  Legge,  the  Cliancellor
of  the  Exchequer,  to  refuse  to  sign  the  warrants  for  the
subsidy ;  and  on  the  opening  of  Parliament  in  November
1755  he  was  the  foremost  orator  in  denouncing  the
treaties,  and  compelled  Newcastle  to  dismiss  him.
Legge  underwent  the  same  fate,  and  two  members  of
the  Grenville  family  accompanied  them  into  retirement.
The  treaties  were  carried,  but  the  Government  was
shaken  to  the  basis.  Fox  had  just  before  received  the
seals  as  Secretary  of  State.  Lord  Barrington,  one  of
the  most  servile  politicians  of  the  time,  became  Secre-
tary at  War  in  his  place ;  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  who
was  the  especial  favourite  both  of  Newcastle  and  the
King,  but  who  was  entirely  incapable  of  taking  a  fore-
most position  in  Parliament,  returned  to  his  old  place
at  the  Wardrobe  with  a  pension  of  2,000Z.  a  year  on
the  Irish  establishment ;  and  a  few  minor  changes  were
made.  The  majority  of  the  Government  in  Parliament
was  still  considerable  and  unbroken,  and  with  the
assistance  of  Fox  and  Murray  its  debating  power  was
very  formidable  ;  but  opinion  outside  the  House  was
now  strongly  against  it,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a
single  measure,  its  policy  exhibited  extreme  inefficiency.
The  exception  was  the  treaty,  which  was  signed  in
January  1756,  with  the  King  of  Prussia,  by  which  both
parties  agreed  not  to  suffer  foreign  troops  of  any  nation
to  enter  or  pass  through  Germany.  Frederick  had  for
a  long  time  made  the  English  King  one  of  his  favourite
subjects  of  ridicule  and  abuse,  had  intrigued  largely
with  the  Jacobites,  and  appears  to  have  entertained
some  hopes  that,  in  the  event  of  a  revolution  in  Eng-
land, he  might  annex  Hanover  to  his  dominions.'  But
the  excellent  intelligence  which  he  obtained  from  all
the  chief  capitals  in  Europe  convinced  him  that  the  day

See  Lord  Stanhope's  Hist,  of  England,  iv.  72.

CH.  VII.  CONFEDERACY AGAINST PRUSSIA.  359

for  ambition  was  past,  and  that  a  cloud  was  slowly
gathering  over  his  head  which  threatened  him  with
utter,  speedy,  and  almost  inevitable  ruin.

The  lapse  of  years  and  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune
had  done  nothing  to  allay  the  passionate  hatred  with
which  Maria  Theresa  regarded  him,  and  she  was  pre-
pared to  make  any  sacrifice,  to  endure  any  humiliation,
to  engage  in  any  war,  if  she  could  only  recover  Silesia,
and  avenge  the  wrongs  which  she  had  suffered.  Count
Brtihl,  who  exercised  an  absolute  control  over  the
government  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  was  scarcely  less
implacable  in  his  hatred,  and  very  soon  after  the  Peace
of  Dresden  these  two  were  negotiating  in  secret  on  the
possibility  of  an  alliance  against  Prussia.  Saxony  as
yet  feared  to  enter  into  any  formal  alliance,  but  at  the
suggestion  of  Briihl  overtures  were  made  to  the  Czarina
Elizabeth,  who  then  governed  Russia,  and  they  were
speedily  successful.  The  Czarina  had  been  the  object
of  some  of  the  scurrilous  jests  of  Frederick,  and  a  bitter
resentment  had  been  kindled  in  her  mind.  Reports  of
Pi'ussian  intrigues  against  Russia  were  industriously
circulated  by  agents  of  Briihl.  The  dangers  of  a  new
great  military  Power  were  set  forth,  and  a  secret  com-
pact was  made  between  the  Empress  and  the  Czarina  to
which  Saxony  soon  after  acceded,  the  object  being  on
the  first  opportunity  to  reduce  Prussia  once  more  to  the
condition  of  a  fourth-rate  Power.  But  in  order  that
the  plan  should  have  a  prospect  of  success  it  was  neces-
sary that  the  neutrality,  if  not  the  assistance,  of  France
should  be  secured,  and  this  became  the  great  object  of
Maria  Theresa.  All  the  traditions  of  French  policy  were
in  the  opposite  direction.  France  had  long  looked  upon
Austria  as  her  chief  enemy  upon  the  Continent.  For
generations  it  had  been  her  main  object  to  reduce
Austrian  influence,  and  especially  to  support  every
German  Power  that  opposed  her. But  she  had  already

360 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  vii.

very  recently  shown  how  little  she  was  wedded  to  tradi-
tional policy  when  in  alliance  with  England  she  turned
her  arms  against  the  French  prince  whom  Lewis  XIV.
had  placed  on  the  throne  of  Spain,  and  she  now  made
a  change  which  was  scarcely  less  startling.  Madame
de  Pompadour,  who  then  exercised  an  almost  absolute
rule  over  the  counsels  of  Lewis  XV.,  had  made  over-
tures to  Frederick  which  had  been  repelled  with  bitter
scorn.  It  was  certainly  no  high  sense  of  female  virtue
that  animated  him,  but  he  had  a  contempt  for  women,
he  delighted  in  wounding  them  by  coarse  jests,  which
spared  neither  the  virtuous  nor  the  vicious,  and  he  ex-
asperated Madame  de  Pompadour  into  a  deadly  enmity.
Kaunitz,  the  ambassador  of  Maria  Theresa  at  the  Court
of  France,  completed  the  work  by  presents  and  by
flatteries  delivered  in  the  name  of  the  Empress,  which
soon  secured  the  unbounded  attachment  of  Madame  de
Pompadour  to  the  Austrian  cause. ^

Nor  were  arguments  of  a  purely  political  nature
wanting.  By  espousing  the  side  of  Austria  in  her
quarrel  with  Prussia,  France  could  purchase,  if  not  the
alliance,  at  least  the  neutrality  of  Austria,  in  the  war
with  England  which  was  impending.  To  a  far-seeing
French  statesman  it  could  not  appear  desirable  that  a
great  military  Power  should  grow  up  on  the  frontiers
of  France ;  and  the  very  reasons  that  induced  her  to
support  the  smaller  German  States  against  Austria  now
induced  her  to  prevent  the  rise  of  a  new  State  which
might  one  day  be  scarcely  less  formidable.  The  history
of  the  last  war  also  was  eloquent  in  favour  of  the
alliance.  Austria  and  France  had  both  expended  tor-
rents of  blood  and  millions  of  money,  they  had  both
ended  the  war  exhausted  and  impoverished,  yet  neither

'  It  is  commonly  said  that  hand,  but  Arneth  in  his  Hist,  of
Maria  Theresa  wrote  to  the  Maria  Theresa  has  thrown  great
French  mistress with her own doubt  upon  the  story.

CH.  VII.  CHANGE IN FRENCH POLICY.  361

had  gained  anything  by  the  struggle.  Each  side  had
experienced  the  most  crushing  disasters,  and  in  each
case  these  disasters  were  mainly  due  to  the  sudden  ag-
gression or  to  the  sudden  desertion  of  Frederick.  And
the  Sovereign  who  had  proved  so  false  to  both  parties,
who  had  brought  such  calamities  on  both  parties,  who
had  played  so  skilfully  for  his  own  selfish  purposes
upon  their  resentments  and  their  ambitions,  had  re-
mained the  only  gainer  by  the  contest.  Was  it  de-
sirable that  this  drama  should  be  repeated — that  a
Power  should  be  consolidated  strong  enough  to  turn
the  balance  in  every  contest  between  the  two  great
rivals  on  the  Continent,  a  Power  certain  to  seek  its
own  aggrandisement  by  inflaming  their  mutual  ani-
miosities,  and  by  depressing  each  in  turn  ?  Nor  was
this  all.  The  territory  most  coveted  by  France  was  the
Austrian  Netherlands.  Both  for  purposes  of  aggression
and  for  purposes  of  defence,  influence  over  those  strong
places  would  prove  invaluable  to  her  policy ;  but  all
her  attempts  to  seize,  or  at  least  to  hold,  them  had
failed  through  the  alliance  of  Austria  and  the  maritime
Powers.  But  to  Austria  this  distant  province,  in  wliich
she  held  only  a  divided  rule,  was  much  less  important
than  Silesia,  and  she  was  prepared  in  the  event  of  re-
covering her  ancient  province  that  Mons  should  be
ceded  to  France,  and  that  Don  Philip,  of  Parma,
should  exchange  his  Italian  dominions  for  the  Austrian
Netherlands.

These  propositions  were  the  basis  of  a  negotiation
which  was  only  very  slowly  matured.  It  was  not  until
May  1756,  nearly  four  months  after  the  treaty  between
England  and  Prussia,  that  a  compact  of  neutrality  and
defensive  alliance  was  signed  between  Austria  and
France,  by  which  the  former  Power  engaged  to  observe
complete  neutrality  in  the  war  between  England  and
France,  and  the  latter  to abstain from every attack

362 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

upon  the  Austrian  dominions,  while  in  all  contingencies
that  did  not  aiise  out  of  that  war  each  Power  guaran-
teed the  territory  of  the  other.  It  was  not  until  the
following  year  that  France,  in  conjunction  with  Sweden,
which  she  subsidised,  drew  the  sword  against  Prussia
and  signed  a  treaty  for  her  partition.  But  as  early  as  the
middle  of  1755  negotiations  with  this  object  had  begun,
and  Frederick  learnt  enough  from  a  clerk  in  the  Dres-
den archives  to  realise  the  danger  that  was  impending,
and  the  importance  of  seeking  an  English  alliance,
which  alone  was  open  to  him.  On  the  other  hand,
England,  finding  Austria  unwilling  to  support  her,
gladly  accepted  an  arrangement  which  saved  Hanover
from  the  possible  contingency  of  a  Prussian  invasion,
and  in  the  more  probable  event  of  a  French  invasion
enlisted  in  its  help  the  best  army  in  Germany.

For  the  rest,  nothing  could  be  more  deplorable  than
the  condition  of  England,  and  the  years  1756  and
1757  were  among  the  most  humiliating  in  her  history.
French  preparations  made  at  Dunkirk  and  Brest,  appa-
rently intended  for  a  descent  upon  England,  produced
the  wildest  alarm.  It  was  stated  that  there  were  only
three  regiments  in  the  country  fit  for  service,  and  '  the
nation,'  in  the  words  of  Burke,  '  trembled  under  a
shameful  panic  too  public  to  be  concealed,  too  fatal  in
its  consequences  to  be  ever  forgotten.'  Urgent  appeals
were  made  to  the  Dutch  to  send  over  once  more  the
6,000  soldiers  which  they  had  engaged  by  the  Barrier
Treaty  of  1709  to  furnish  whenever  the  Protestant  dy-
nasty was  in  danger.  The  Dutch,  however,  were  re-
solved not  to  thrust  themselves  into  a  European  war  on
account  of  England,  and  they  persisted  in  their  neu-
trality, contending  that  the  treaty  did  not  bind  them  to
take  part  in  a  conflict  which  was  in  reality  not  one
between  the  House  of  Brunswick  and  the  House  of
Stuart,  but  between  the  French  and  English  settlers  in

CH.  VII. GERMAN  TROOPS — MINORCA ATTACKED.  363

America,  and  also  that  England,  by  seizing  French
ships  without  a  declaration  of  war,  was  clearly  the  ag-
gressor. In  the  preceding  year  it  had  been  popular  to
denounce  the  policy  of  subsidising  German  troops  as  a
scandalous  sacrifice  of  English  to  Hanoverian  interests,
but  now  it  was  to  German  troops  that  the  Government
turned  for  the  defence  of  England.  To  the  great  in-
dignation of  Pitt,  who  declared  that  the  resources  of
the  country  were  sufficient  for  its  defence,  a  large  body
of  Hessian  and  Hanoverian  soldiers  were  brought  over
at  the  desire  of  the  Parliament,  and  distributed  through
the  country.  It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  a  measure
more  irritating  to  the  national  pride,  but  the  defences
had  been  so  deplorably  neglected  that  in  case  of  invasion
it  might  have  proved  very  necessary.  As  Lord  Waldegrave
wrote,  '  we  first  engaged  in  a  war,  and  then  began  to  pre-
pare ourselves.'  As  Pitt  himself  said,  the  country  was  so
unnerved  'that  20,000  men  from  France  could  shake  it.'
It  soon  appeared,  however,  that  the  alarms  of  a
French  invasion  were  groundless,  and  that  the  real
object  of  the  movement  of  troops  in  Picardy,  Nor-
mandy, and  Brittany  was  to  divert  the  attention  of  the
English  Government  from  an  expedition  that  was  fitting
out  at  Toulon  for  an  attack  upon  Minorca.  The  design
was  perfectly  successful.  The  English  Government
continued  to  disbelieve  in  the  Toulon  expedition  till
it  was  too  late  to  intercept  it,  and  on  April  10,  1756,
a  fleet  of  twelve  ships  of  the  line,  with  an  army  of  about
14,000  men  ^  under  the  command  of  that  old  volup-
tuary the  Duke  of  Richelieu,  sailed  unmolested  from
Toulon  for  Minorca,  where  a  landing  was  effected
without  opposition  on  April  17. The  British  troops,

'  From  13,000  to  14,000, ac-  i. 468. According  to another

cording  to  Byng. See  his  letter  version the French numbered

to  the  Admiralty,  in  Beatson's  16,000.
Naval  and Military Memoirs,

364 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

under  General  Blakeney,  numbered  less  than  3,000
men,  and  they  at  once  abandoned  the  open  towns  as
indefensible,  and  concentrated  themselves  in  the  Castle
of  St.  Philip,  which  the  French  proceeded  to  besiege.
It  was  impossible  that  it  could  long  hold  out  without
succour ;  but  three  days  before  the  French  expedition
had  started  from  Toulon,  the  Government,  being  at
last  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  danger,  had  sent
out  Admiral  Byng,  with  ten  ships  of  the  line,  to
defend  Minorca.  Every  stage  of  the  expedition  ex-
hibited mismanagement  or  timidity.  The  ships  of
Byng  were  miserably  ill-manned,  and  they  had  to  be
partially  refitted  at  Gibraltar.  Scarcely  any  marines
were  taken  on  board,  and  only  a  single  regiment  for
the  relief  of  Minorca.  Byng  was  directed  to  demand
a  battalion  at  Gibraltar  to  reinforce  the  little  army
of  Blakeney;  but  the  commander  having  called  a
council  of  war,  it  pronounced  the  garrison  to  be  so  weak
that  no  soldiers  could  be  spared  without  imminent
danger.  On  May  15  war  had  been  at  last  declared
by  England  against  France,  and  on  the  19th  the
fleet  of  Byng  appeared  off  Minorca,  where  it  was
next  day  encountered  by  the  French.  After  a  partial
and  indecisive  engagement,  night  drew  on,  and  the
Admiral,  having  summoned  a  council  of  war,  repre-
sented to  it  that  in  his  opinion  the  relief  of  St.  Phibp's
with  his  present  resources  was  impracticable.  He
urged  that  the  French  fleet  was  superior  to  his  own
in  men  and  metal,  that  it  was  extremely  doubtful
whether  a  complete  naval  victory  could  save  Minorca,
that  there  were  scarcely  any  troops  to  be  landed,  that  in
the  absence  of  marines  those  few  were  necessary  for  the
safety  of  the  fleet,  and  that  even  if  they  were  thrown
into  the  castle  they  would  be  quite  insufficient  to  save
it.  He  added  that  Gibraltar  might  very  probably  at
once  be  attacked,  and  that  owing  to  the  weakness  of

CH.  VII.  MINORCA TAKEN — WAR IN AMERICA.  305

its  garrison  it  would  be  in  great  danger  if  the  only
British  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean  were  destroyed.
Under  these  circumstances,  he  determined,  with  the
unanimous  consent  of  the  council,  to  draw  off  his  fleet,
to  cover  Gibraltar,  and  to  await  reinforcements.

St.  Philip's,  left  to  itself,  was  taken,  after  a  brave
resistance,  on  June  28 ;  and  thus  Minorca,  which  con-
tained one  of  the  finest  harbours  in  the  Mediterranean,
and  which  was  one  of  the  most  valuable  fruits  of  the
Peace  of  Utrecht,  passed  into  French  hands. ^

In  America  the  war  was  less  eventful,  but  hardly
more  successful.  After  the  disaster  of  General  Brad-
dock,  a  slight  success  had,  it  is  true,  illumined  the
English  fortunes.  In  the  September  of  1755,  General
Johnson,  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  rather  more  than
3,000  colonists  and  Indians,  had  defeated  an  almost
equal  French  force  under  General  Dieskau,  near  Lake
George,  and  the  French  commander,  mortally  wounded,
fell  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  But  no  results  fol-
lowed, and  in  the  August  of  the  following  year  the
important  fort  of  Oswego  was  captured  by  Montcalm,
and  1,600  men  and  about  120  cannon  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  French.  Numerically  the  French  colonists
were  but  a  handful  as  compared  with  the  English,  but
by  superior  energy  and  skill  they  had  hitherto  on  the
whole  maintained  an  ascendency  in  the  war.

Nor  was  it  only  in  Europe  and  in  America  that  the
year  1756  w^as  disastrous.  Almost  ever  since  the  Peace
of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  the  French  and  English  colonists  in
India  had  been  contending  against  each  other  by
intrigues  and  sometimes  by  arms.  On  the  French
side,  since  the  recall  and  disgrace  of  La  Bourdonnais,
Dupleix was  without a rival,  and,  though  miserably

'  All  the  more  important  docu- son.  See,  too,Walpole'silfewotrs
ments  and  facts  relating  to  this of  George  II.  vol.  ii.
expedition  are  collected  in  Beat-

366 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vit.

neglected  by  the  Home  Government,  he  had  done  very
much  to  extend  the  dominions  of  France.  Vain,  osten-
tatious, and  perfectly  unprincipled,  he  was  yet  admir-
ably adapted  to  build  up  a  great  Oriental  empire.
His  ambition  was  boundless.  He  was  eminently  skilful
both  in  intrigue  and  in  organisation,  and  he  discovered
with  the  eye  of  a  true  statesman  the  real  conditions,
weaknesses,  and  tendencies  of  Indian  politics.  He  was
the  first  European  statesman  who  understood  the  pos-
sibility of  giving  to  native  soldiers  the  discipline  and
the  efficiency  of  a  European  army,  who  clearly  realised
the  immense  superiority  in  war  of  a  small  disciplined
force  over  the  great  native  armies  of  India,  and  who
engaged  on  a  large  scale  and  with  real  knowledge  in
native  contests.  On  the  death  of  Aurungzebe,  in  1707,
the  great  Mogul  Empire  had  fallen  into  a  condition  of
complete  atrophy,  if  not  dissolution  ;  the  real  power
passed  into  the  hands  of  a  multitude  of  nabobs  or
viceroys,  who,  while  owning  a  nominal  allegiance  to
the  Court  of  Delhi,  had  become  in  fact  independent
and  hereditary  sovereigns  in  their  several  provinces,
while  in  the  absence  of  any  strong  central  authority
the  country  was  torn  by  repeated  rebellions,  invasions,
and  disputed  successions.

Under  circumstances  so  favourable  for  a  policy
of  aggrandisement,  Dupleix  adopted  with  great  skill
the  course  of  selecting  his  own  candidate  in  cases
of  disputed  succession,  deciding  the  conflict  by  French
arms  and  obtaining  as  his  reward  immense  conces-
sions of  territory  or  power.  He  thus,  after  a  few
years  of  able  and  audacious  policy,  succeeded  in
establishing  an  almost  complete  ascendency  over  the
Carnatic,  and  indeed  over  the  whole  of  the  Deccan,
and  became  by  far  the  greatest  potentate  in  India.
The  English  watched  his  progress  with  great  jea-
lousy and  alarm, but  for  a  considerable  period they

CH.  VII.  THE WAR IN HINDOSTAN.  367

were  unable  to  arrest  it,  and  they  feared  with  much
reason  that  the  consolidation  of  French  power  in  the
Carnatic  would  be  followed  in  the  next  war  by  the
subjugation  of  Madras.  They  accordingly  threw  their
whole  energies  into  the  contest,  and  by  the  military
skill  of  Lawrence,  and  especially  of  Clive,  who  was
then  a  young  captain  in  the  service  of  the  Company,
the  whole  aspect  of  aiFairs  was  gradually  changed.  In
1752  and  1753,  while  there  was  still  peace  between
England  and  France,  war  was  raging  in  the  Carnatic,
and  after  several  brilliant  English  victories  the  French
power  in  that  province  was  almost  shattered.  The
victory  was  completed  by  the  French  Government
itself,  who  recalled  and  disgraced  Dupleix  in  1754,
leaving  the  English  candidate  undisputed  nabob  of  the
Carnatic,  and  giving  India  a  short  interval  of  peace.
But  in  1756  a  new  danger  had  arisen  from  another
quarter.  Surajah  Dowlah,  the  Viceroy  of  Bengal,  one
of  the  most  powerful  and  most  ferocious  of  the  princes
of  India,  having  quarrelled  with  the  English  on  some
trivial  pretest,  marched  upon  Calcutta,  captured  both
the  town  and  fort  after  a  very  short  resistance,  and  in
the  fierce  heat  of  an  Indian  June  his  soldiers  thrust  146
English  prisoners  for  a  whole  night  into  the  Black  Hole,
a  prison  cell  only  eighteen  feet  by  fourteen,  from  which
in  the  morning  but  twenty-three  came  forth  alive.

Long  before  the  news  of  this  ghastly  tragedy  had
reached  Europe,  the  cloud  of  war  which  had  been  slowly
gathering  over  Germany  had  burst.  Frederick  had  cer-
tain knowledge  that  a  league  comprising  France,  Russia,
Austria,  and  Saxony,  was  formed  against  his  little
State  of  five  million  inhabitants.  No  other  European
country  in  proportion  to  its  population  was  so  purely
military  as  Prussia,  and  its  army,  under  the  skilful
direction  of  the  King,  had  been  raised  to  the  highest
efficiency ; but  the  disproportion  of  numbers  was  so

368  ENGLAND EN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vii.

overwhelming  that  ruin  appeared  inevitable.  The  only
possibility  of  success  lay  in  a  sudden  attack  which
might  crush  some  members  of  the  league  before  they
were  prepared,  and  disconcert  the  plans  of  the  others.
France  was  not  yet  ready  to  enter  into  the  field.
Russia  was  very  distant,  and  rapid  successes  in  Saxony
and  Austria  might  even  now  change  the  course  of
events.  At  the  end  of  July  1756,  Frederick  de-
spatched a  peremptory  message  to  Maria  Theresa  de-
manding an  explanation  of  the  military  preparations
of  Austria,  and  on  receiving,  as  he  expected,  an  evasive
answer,  he  at  once  marched  at  the  head  of  60,000  men
upon  Dresden.  The  Saxon  army,  which  consisted  of
about  18,000  men,  retired  to  Pirna,  where  it  was  at  once
blockaded.  Dresden  was  captured.  In  the  presence
of  the  Queen,  who  had  vainly  tried  to  prevent  it,  the
door  of  the  archive-room  was  forced,  the  original  docu-
ments disclosing  the  circumstances  of  the  league  against
Frederick  were  abstracted,  and  their  publication  amply
justified  in  the  eyes  both  of  contemporaries  and  of
posterity  the  invasion  of  Saxony.  An  Austrian  army,
slightly  inferior  to  that  of  Frederick,  and  commanded
by  Marshal  Browne — whom  Khevenhiiller,  when  djdng,
had  pronounced  to  be  the  ablest  general  in  the  Aus-
trian service — marched  to  the  relief  of  the  blockaded
Saxons  ;  and  Frederick,  leaving  a  portion  of  his  army
before  Pirna,  hastened  with  the  remainder  to  meet  the
Austrians.  The  battle  took  place  on  Oct.  1,  at  Lobo-
sitz,  a  village  within  the  Bohemian  frontier.  It  was  long,
bloody,  and  admirably  contested,  but  Frederick  ultimately
compelled  the  Austrians  to  retreat,  though  his  own  losses
in  killed  and  wounded  were  greater  than  those  of  the
enemy.  Browne  made  another  gallant  but  unsuccessful
attempt  to  relieve  the  Saxons,  and  on  the  16th  the  whole
Saxon  army  capitulated.  Their  sovereign  was  allowed
to  retire  to his  Polish  dominions. The  officers  were

CH.  VII.  FALL OF  NEWCASTLE,  369

dismissed  on  parole.  The  soldiers  were  compelled  to
enlist  in  the  Prussian  army,  and  Frederick  retired  to
winter  quarters  in  Dresden,  where  he  levied  crushing
contributions  on  the  Saxons  for  the  support  of  the
war.^

While  these  events  were  taking  place  abroad,  the
distrust  of  the  mismanagement  of  Newcastle  was  becom-
ing stronger  and  stronger  in  England,  and  the  Govern-
ment, in  spite  of  its  parliamentary  majority,  was  mani-
festly sinking.  In  October  1756  Fox  sealed  its  fate  by
deserting  his  colleagues.  He  complained  that  New-
castle monopolised  power,  withheld  his  confidence,  and
mismanaged  affairs,  and  he  was  too  clear-sighted  not  to
perceive  that  the  Government  was  doomed,  and  that  his
safest  course  was  to  abandon  it.  Nearly  at  the  same
time  the  Chief  Justiceship  of  the  Eang's  Bench  became
vacant,  and  Murray  insisted  upon  obtaining  it.  New-
castle still  made  desperate  efforts  to  avert  resignation.
He  tried  in  vain  by  high  political  offers  to  induce  Murray
to  abandon  or  defer  his  intention.  He  endeavoured  in
turn  to  persuade  Pitt  once  more  to  join  his  administra-
tion. Lord  Egmont  to  accept  the  lead  of  the  House  of
Commons,  Lord  Granville  to  take  the  first  place  in  the
Government,  leaving  his  present  post  of  President  of
the  Council  to  Newcastle.  Every  attempt,  however,
was  in  vain,  and  in  November  1756  he  resigned.  Lord
Hardwicke  accompanied  him  into  opposition,  and  Lord
Anson,  whose  reputation  was  much  sullied  by  the  loss
of  Minorca,  was  at  the  same  time  dismissed  from  the
Admiralty.

The  King  entrusted  the  formation  of  the  new  minis-
try to  Fox,  who  made  overtures  to  Pitt,  but  the  latter
peremptorily  refused  to  serve  with  his  rival. This  com-

'  Frederick,  Hist,  des  Se;pt  Ans. Carlyle,  History  of  Frederick  the
Great.

VOL. II.  B  B

370  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

bination  having  failed,  a  Government  was,  after  much  and
difficult  negotiation,  formed  in  December  by  the  Duke
of  Devonshire  and  Pitt,  and  supported  by  the  Grenville
connection.  In  this  administration  Devonshire  suc-
ceeded Newcastle  as  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  Legge
became  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  Pitt  succeeded
Pox  as  Secretary  of  State.  Lord  Temple  was  placed  at
the  head  of  the  Admiralty  ;  George  Grenville  succeeded
Dodington  as  Treasurer  of  the  Navy ;  and  the  Great  Seal
was  put  in  commission.  Great  efforts  were  made  to  in-
crease the  army,  and  one  of  the  earliest  steps  of  Pitt  was
his  famous  measure  of  forming  two  regiments  out  of
the  Highland  clans.  It  was  important  as  providing  a
body  of  troops  who  have  never  been  surpassed,  and  still
more  so  as  drawing  into  legitimate  channels  that  exu-
berant martial  spirit  which  was  the  secret  of  the  insur-
rections and  the  anarchy  of  the  Highlands.  The  merit
of  Pitt,  however,  in  carrying  it  has  been  exaggerated,  A
Scotch  regiment  called  the  Black  Watch  had  already
served  with  distinction  at  Fontenoy,  and,  as  we  have
seen,^  the  enlisting  of  Highlanders  had  been  warmly  ap-
proved of  by  Walpole,  and  its  expediency  was  again
pressed  upon  the  Government  in  the  early  part  of  1756.^^
Pitt,  however,  carried  it  into  effect,  he  provided  with
much  energy  for  reinforcing  the  British  strength  in
America,  and  the  mere  pre-eminence  in  the  Govern-

'  See  vol.  i.  p.  386.  No  men  in  this  island  are  better

^  See  a  remarkable  paper  of  qualified for  the  American  war

recommendations presented to  than the  Scots  Highlanders.' —

the  Duke  of  Cumberland  in  May  Almon's  Anecdotes  of  Chatham,

1756,  and  by  his  order  delivered  i.  166,  167. The suggestion  is

to  Pitt, in Dec.  1756. One  of  said  to  have been  due to the

the  recommendations  is  as  fol-  Duke  of  Argyle.  Beatson's  Naval

lows  :  '  Two  regiments,  1,000  men  aiid  Military  Memoirs,  ii.  2.  See,

in  a  corps,  may  be  raised  in  the  too,  the  present  Duke's  Scotland

north  of  Scotland  for  the  said  as  it  was  and  is,  ii.  80-87,
service  [that  of  America]. . .  .

CH.  VII,  MINISTRY OF DEVONSHIK'E AND PITT.  371

merit  of  a  statesman  in  whom  the  nation  had  confidence
did  something  to  brace  the  flagging  energies  of  his
countrymen.

But  it  soon  appeared  evident  that  the  Government
could  not  last.  Though  the  opinion  of  the  country  was
incontestably  and  strongly  in  favour  of  Pitt,  though  the
circumstances  of  the  country  were  such  that  the  pre-
sence of  a  man  of  genius  and  energy  at  the  head  of
aifairs  was  of  transcendent  importance,  it  is  doubtful
whether  Pitt  would  have  climbed  to  power  had  he  not
received  the  warm  support  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  and
condescended  to  gain  the  favour  of  Lady  Yarmouth,  the
mistress  of  the  King ;  ^  and  it  is  certain  that  the  first
administration  in  which  he  exercised  a  preponderating
power  was  one  of  the  weakest  in  the  reign.  The
majority  in  both  Houses  still  looked  on  Newcastle  as
their  chief;  and  the  opposition  of  the  great  Pelham
interest,  and  the  ambiguous  attitude  of  Fox,  were  fatal
to  the  Government.  Pitt  during  most  of  the  winter
was  incapacitated  by  the  gout ;  and  the  King,  though
well  satisfied  with  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  was  bitterly
hostile  both  to  Pitt  and  to  Temple.  In  February,  in  a
conversation  with  Lord  Waldegrave,  he  summed  up
with  amusing  frankness  his  opinion  of  their  merits.  He
complained  that  Pitt  '  made  him  long  speeches  which
possibly  might  be  very  fine  but  were  greatly  beyond  his
comprehension,  and  that  his  letters  were  affected,  formal,
and  pedantic  ;  that  as  to  Temple,  he  was  so  disagreeable
a  fellow  there  was  no  bearing  him ;  that  when  he  at-
tempted to  argue  he  was  pert  and  sometimes  insolent ;
that  when  he  meant  to  be  civil  he  was  exceeding
troublesome  ;  and  that  in  the  business  of  his  ofiice  he
was  totally  ignorant.' The  King  was  certainly  no  ad-

'  Walpole's  George  II.  ii.  259,  260. Shelburne's  Autobiography .
Waldegrave's  Memoirs.

B B 2

372 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  vii.

mirer  of  Newcastle,  but  he  now  turned  to  him  in  de-
spair, and  anxiously  asked  Lord  Waldegrave  whether
the  old  statesman  would  again  undertake  the  manage-
ment of  affairs.  Lord  Waldegrave  described  the  Duke
as  in  his  usual  condition,  '  equally  balanced  between
fear  on  one  side  and  love  of  power  on  the  other,'  '  eager
and  imjDatient  to  come  into  power,  but  dreading  the
danger  with  which  it  must  be  accompanied.'  '  I  know,'
answered  the  King,  '  he  is  apt  to  be  afraid,  therefore
go  and  encourage  him ;  tell  him  I  do  not  look  upon
myself  as  King  whilst  I  am  in  the  hands  of  these  scoun-
drels ;  that  I  am  determined  to  get  rid  of  them  at  any
rate ;  that  I  expect  his  assistance,  and  that  he  may  de-
pend upon  my  favour  and  protection.'  The  Duke  of
Cumberland  at  the  same  time  strongly  pressed  the  King
that  Pitt  and  Temple  should  be  turned  out  without  fur-
ther deliberation,  and  he  desired  that  a  new  administra-
tion should  be  formed  before  he  set  out  for  Hanover,
where  he  was  about  to  take  the  command  of  the  electoral
troops.^

It  happened,  too,  that  on  one  important  question
both  Temple  and  Pitt  had  incurred  some  transitory  un-
popularity in  a  manner  that  was  greatly  to  their  honour.
When,  during  the  administration  of  Newcastle,  the  news
arrived  of  the  surrender  of  Minorca,  the  indignation
against  Byng  ran  fierce  and  high.  He  was  burnt  in
effigy  in  all  the  great  towns.  His  seat  in  Hertfordshire
was  assaulted  by  the  mob.  The  streets  and  shops
swarmed  with  ballads  and  libels  directed  against  him.
Addresses  to  the  King  soon  poured  in  from  Dorsetshire,
Huntingdon,  Buckingham,  Bedford,  Suffolk,  Shropshire,
Surrey,  Somerset,  Lancashire,  from  most  of  the  great
towns,  and  especially  from  the  City  of  London,  calling
for  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  causes  of  the  fall  of  Minorca,

'  Waldegrave's  Memoirs,  pp.  95-98.

CH.  VII.  CONDEMNATION OF BYNG.  373

and  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  people  would  be
satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  blood.  Newcastle,  terri-
fied to  the  utmost,  was  only  too  ready  to  ofier  up  any
scapegoat.  '  Oh,  indeed,  he  shall  be  tried  immediately,
he  shall  be  hanged  directly,'  he  is  said  to  have  blurted
out  to  a  deputation  from  the  City  who  came  to  him
with  representations  against  the  admiral.  Fowke,  the
Governor  of  Gibraltar,  was  broken  by  the  King  ;  and
Byng  on  his  arrival  was  at  once  put  in  close  confine-
ment, and  soon  after  brought  before  a  court-martial.
The  trial  lasted  from  December  21,  1756,  till  the  20th
of  the  following  January.  The  court  fully  acquitted
Byng  of  all  cowardice  and  of  all  disaffection,  but  while
admitting  that  he  had  acted  according  to  his  conscien-
tious judgment,  they,  after  much  hesitation  and  delay,
pronounced  that  he  had  not  done  all  in  his  power  to  de-
stroy the  French  ships  or  to  relieve  Minorca,  and  that
he  was  accordingly  guilty  of  neglect  of  duty.  Origin-
ally the  Articles  of  War  left  it  at  the  discretion  of  the
courts-martial  to  inflict,  according  to  the  circumstances
of  the  case,  death  or  whatever  other  penalty  they  pleased
in  cases  of  neglect  of  duty,  but  about  three  years  before
the  trial  of  Byng  the  articles  had  been  remodelled,  and
the  capital  penalty  was  left  without  an  alternative.  The
court,  however,  unanimously  accompanied  their  sentence
by  a  recommendation  to  mercy,  and  also  by  a  very
earnest  representation  to  '  the  Lords  Commissioners  for
executing  the  office  of  Lord  High  Admiral.'  '  We  can-
not help  laying  the  distresses  of  our  minds  before  your
Lordships  on  this  occasion,'  they  wrote,  '  in  finding  our-
selves under  a  necessity  of  condemning  a  man  to  death
from  the  great  severity  of  the  12th  Article  of  War,  part
of  which  he  falls  under,  and  which  admits  of  no  mitiga-
tion even  if  the  crime  should  be  committed  by  an  error
of  judgment  only ;  and  therefore  for  our  own  consciences'
sakes,  as  well  as  in  justice  to  the  prisoner,  we  pray  your

374 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

Lordships  in  the  most  earnest  manner  to  recommend
him  to  his  Majesty's  clemency.' '

It  appeared  almost  incredible  that  under  such  cir-
cumstances the  sentence  should  have  been  carried  out,
and  the  opinion  of  the  navy  as  well  as  the  opinion  of
the  court-martial  was  strongly  and  unequivocally  in
favour  of  remission.  Pitt  bravely  urged  its  propriety,
both  publicly  in  Parliament,  and  in  the  closet  of  the
Ejing,  but  without  effect.  '  You  have  taught  me,'  said
the  King,  when  Pitt  spoke  of  the  dominant  sentiment
of  the  House  of  Commons,  '  to  look  for  the  sense  of  my
subjects  in  another  place  than  the  House  of  Commons.'
Temple  was  equally  courageous,  but  with  his  usual
absence  of  tact  he  mortally  offended  the  King  by  some
expressions  which  he  let  fall,  which  were  supposed  to
have  compared  the  conduct  of  the  admiral  with  that  of
the  King  at  the  battle  of  Oudenarde.^  The  most  promi-
nent members  of  the  court-martial  again  individually
urged  in  the  strongest  terms  the  gross  injustice  of  exe-
cuting the  admiral  for  what  was  a  mere  error  of  judg-
ment ;  and  Voltaire,  with  characteristic  humanity,  sent
to  England  a  letter  he  had  received  from  Richelieu,  in
which  that  commander  spoke  with  high  eulogy  of  Byng.
But  all  these  efforts  were  in  vain.  Newcastle  and  his
partisans,  though  out  of  office,  had  lost  little  of  their
power.  They  imagined  that  by  the  execution  of  Byng
they  could  win  popularity,  secure  themselves  from  the
indignation  of  the  nation,  and  assist  Lord  Anson,  who
had  been  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  when  the  disaster
took  place,  and  to  whose  neglect  it  was  mainly  to  be
attributed. Fox,  who  showed  on this  occasion  what

'  Walpole's George II. pp.  Walpole, which appeared in-

226-231, 284-293. Beatson's  credible  to  Macaulay,  is  partly

Naval  and Military Memoirs,  corroborated  by  Lord  Waldegrave.

i.  501-513.  Memoirs,  pp.  93,  94.

-  This statement of Horace

CH.  VII.  DISMISSAL OF TEMPLE AND PITT.  375

he  showed  more  conspicuously  in  the  next  reign — the
callous  selfishness  which  lay  below  his  superficial  good
nature — made  great  use  of  the  unpopularity  of  Byng
as  a  party  weapon  against  Pitt,  and  Lord  Hardwicke
steadily  laboured  for  his  destruction.  The  unfortunate
admiral  exhibited  in  the  last  days  of  life  an  admir-
able <30urage ;  and  his  execution,  which  took  place  on
March  14,  reflected  much  more  real  discredit  upon  the
nation  that  demanded  it  than  the  military  disaster
which  caused  it.^

The  execution  of  Byng,  however,  did  nothing  to  re-
store the  popularity  of  Newcastle,  and  his  opposition  to
it  did  no  lasting  injury  to  that  of  Pitt.  On  April5,  1757,
three  weeks  after  the  tragedy  had  been  consummated,
the  King  struck  the  blow  he  had  for  some  time  meditated.
Temple  was  dismissed ;  a  few  daj^s  later  Pitt  underwent
the  same  fate,  and  after  a  term  of  ofiice  of  less  than  five
months  the  whole  ministry  was  dissolved.  It  was  fol-
lowed by  a  very  significant  outburst  of  popular  feeling.
The  stocks  fell.  The  Common  Council  voted  the  free-
dom of  the  City  to  both  Pitt  and  Legge.  '  For  some
weeks,'  in  the  words  of  Horace  Walpole,  '  it  rained
gold  boxes,'  and  the  nation  showed  beyond  dispute  that
the  statesman  who  was,  beyond  all  others,  the  most
disliked  by  the  King  and  by  the  most  considerable  of
the  great  nobles,  was  also  the  statesman  in  whom  alone
the  English  people  had  real  confidence.  For  eleven
weeks  after  his  fall  England  was  without  a  Government  \
and  during  all  this  time  a  great  war  was  raging,  difii-
culties  and  dangers  were  accumulating,  the  reputation
of  the  country  had  sunk  to  the  lowest  ebb,  and  without
a  single  real  political  principle  being  at  issue  the  states-
men were  Hivided  by  the most implacable  hostility.

'  Walpole's Gecn-ge II. and Letters. Waldegrave's Memoirs.
Beatson's  Naval  a7id  Military  Memoirs.

376 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

At  last,  after  numerous  abortive  attempts  and  unsuccess-
ful combinations  in  whicli  Newcastle  bore  the  chief  part,
it  became  evident  to  most  men  that  the  union  of  the
parliamentary  influence  of  Newcastle  and  of  the  genius
and  popularity  of  Pitt  was  absolutely  necessary,  and
in  June  1757  a  coalition  ministry  was  formed  which
was  the  most  successful  in  English  history,  and  which
speedily  restored  the  fortunes  of  the  nation.  Newcastle
returned  to  the  Treasury.  Legge  became  again  Chan-
cellor of  the  Exchequer.  Pitt  and  Lord  Holdernesse
were  Secretaries  of  State.  Temple  became  Privy  Seal,
and  Anson,  to  the  surprise  and  indignation  of  many,
resumed  his  post  at  the  Admiralty.

All  the  leading  parties  had  to  sacrifice  much.  The
King  was  bitterly  hostile  to  Pitt,  whom  he  had  just
dismissed,  and  was  absolutely  coerced  by  the  Duke  of
Newcastle,  who  now,  to  his  great  indignation,  distinctly
told  him  that  he  would  take  no  part  in  a  Government
of  which  Pitt  was  not  a  member,  and  who  induced  the
most  powerful  Whig  families  to  support  him.  New-
castle, on  the  other  hand,  had,  a  few  weeks  before,  pro-
mised the  King  that  he  would  never  coalesce  with  Pitt.
He  had  received  from  Pitt  insults  and  injuries  that
must  have  rankled  in  the  least  sensitive  nature,  and  he
was  compelled,  after  a  severe  struggle,  to  relinquish  to
Pitt  all  control  over  the  conduct  of  the  war,  and  to
confine  himself  to  the  management  of  the  Treasury.
Pitt,  too,  had  much  to  forget.  He  had  learnt  by  ex-
perience that  he  had  overrated  his  strength  and  his
importance.  He  was  compelled  to  unite  with  a  states-
man whom  he  had  covered  with  ridicule  and  insult,
whose  alliance  he  had  rejected  with  the  most  arrogant
scorn,  whose  expulsion  from  public  affairs  he  had  made
a  main  end  of  his  policy.  But  a  few  months  had  passed
since  he  had  dilated  with  withering  irony  upon  the
conduct  of  Fox  in  uniting  with  Newcastle,  comparing

CH.  vn.  THE COALITION MINISTRY.  377

it,  in  a  well-known  passage,  to  the  junction  of  the  two
rivers  at  Lyons,  and  his  language  was  now  equally
applicable  to  himself.  He  had,  however,  gained  much.
Animated  by  a  real  patriotism,  and  conscious  of  extra-
ordinary powers  as  a  War  Minister,  he  now  obtained
the  absolute  direction  of  the  war,  an  assured  majo-
rity, and  the  leadership  of  the  House  of  Commons,
while  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  take  any  per-
sonal part  in  the  corruption  of  its  members.  In  his
own  words,  he  '  borrowed  '  the  majority  of  the  Duke
of  Newcastle  to  carry  on  the  government  of  the
country.

The  part  taken  by  Fox  at  this  juncture  was  the  most
remarkable.  Hitherto  he  had  been  in  political  weight
at  least  equal  to  Pitt,  and  the  great  interest  in  par-
liamentary contests  had  lain  in  their  rivalry.  In  the
country,  however,  he  was  even  more  unpopular  than
Newcastle,  and  his  political  prospects  had  recently
declined.  It  was  certain  that  he  could  not  form  a
ministry  alone,  and  that  Pitt  would  not  combine  with
him  on  equal  terms.  It  was  more  than  doubtful
whether  a  ministry  of  Newcastle  and  Fox,  from  which
Pitt  was  excluded,  could  ever  stand.  Neither  statesman
appears  to  have  believed  it,  and  to  both  the  combination
would  have  been  eminently  distasteful.  On  the  other
hand,  Fox's  fortune  was  dissipated;  he  loved  money,
and  he  saw  a  chance  of  obtaining  in  a  short  time  great
wealth.  The  office  of  Paymaster  of  the  Forces  was  a
subordinate  one,  and  did  not  even  carry  with  it  a  seat
in  the  Cabinet,  but  in  time  of  war  it  was  extremely
lucrative.  Fox  therefore  consented  to  accept  it,  became
the  subordinate  of  his  ancient  rival,  and  speedily  amassed
an  enormous  fortune.

The  events  which  I  have  now  very  briefly  sketched
are  important  as  showing  the  disorganisation  into  which
the  Whig  party  had  fallen  in  the  last  days  of  George  II.,

378 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  CH,  vii.

at  a  time  when  it  possessed  a  complete  monopoly  of
political  power.  At  hardly  any  other  period  of  English
history  did  parliamentary  government  wear  a  less  at-
tractive aspect,  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  discover  the
causes  of  the  disease.  Party  government,  in  the  true
sense  of  the  word,  had  for  many  years  been  extinct;
Toryism  had  sunk  into  Jacobitism;  Jacobitism  had
faded  into  insignificance  ;  and  the  great  divisions  of
politicians  had  almost  wholly  ceased  to  represent  a
division  of  principles  or  even  of  tendencies.  Two  or
three  times  in  English  history  something  analogous  to
this  has  occurred,  and  it  always  brings  with  it  grave
political  dangers.  Such  a  state  of  affairs  is  peculiarly
unfavourable  to  real  earnestness  in  public  life.  Faction
replaces  party,  personal  pretensions  acquire  an  inor-
dinate weight,  and  there  is  much  reason  to  fear  lest  the
tone  of  political  honour  should  be  lowered  and  lest  the
public  spirit  of  the  nation  should  decline.  But  in
periods  when  the  parliamentary  machine  is  completely
controlled  by  the  popular  will,  this  state  of  party
anarchy  or  amalgamation  is  not  without  its  compensa-
tions. It  continually  happens  that  administrations
become  unpopular,  not  because  the  general  principles
of  their  policy  are  in  contlict  with  the  opinions  of  the
country,  but  from  isolated  mistakes,  from  the  feebleness
or  perversity  of  a  particular  minister.  It  is  a  great
misfortune  when  Parliament  is  unable  to  transfer  autho-
rity to  more  efficient  hands  without  altering  the  whole
system  of  national  policy :  yet,  when  the  lines  of  party
demarcation  are  strongly  drawn,  it  is  often  impossible
to  do  so.  In  times  when  party  divisions  cease  to  coincide
with  any  clear  division  of  principles,  power  will  natu-
rally pass  to  the  ablest  statesman ;  in  other  times,  to
the  representative  of  the  dominant  principle.  Besides
this,  it  is  at  a  time  when  the  conflict  of  parties  is  in  a
great  degree  intermitted,  that  social  reforms  and  ad-

CH.  vii. DECADENCE  OF  PARTY  GOVERNMENT. 379

ministrative  improvements  have  most  prospect  of  being
attended  to.

At  the  period  I  am  describing,  however,  the  absence
of  party  divisions  concurred  with  a  great  weakness  of
popular  control,  and  with  an  almost  complete  absence
of  a  reforming  spirit  among  politicians,  while  the
immense  corrupt  influences  that  had  been  gradually
matured  and  concentrated,  had  made  the  chief  political
power  in  the  nation  almost  hereditary  in  a  few  families.
The  voice  of  the  people  was,  it  is  true,  still  sufficiently
powerful — with  the  assistance  of  some  minor  influences
— to  force  Pitt  into  the  ministry ;  and  the  character  of
Parliament  was  still  so  popular  that  Newcastle,  in  spite
of  his  large  majority,  was  unable  to  carry  on  the  govern-
ment in  opposition  to  the  most  powerful  speakers.  But
yet  a  small  number  of  great  noblemen  had  acquired  a
complete  control  over  so  large  a  proportion  of  seats,  that
their  combination  made  any  opposing  administration
impossible ;  no  government  could  be  carried  on  without
them,  and  the  fluctuations  of  power  were  chiefly  go-
verned by  their  competition.  And  while  the  personal
ambitions  of  the  great  families  broke  up  the  Parliament
into  numerous  small  factions,  the  conduct  of  the  King
aggravated  the  difficulty.  His  point  of  view,  however
mistaken,  was  at  least  veiy  intelligible.  He  boasted,
with  much  reason,  that  in  the  course  of  a  long  reign  it
would  be  impossible  to  cite  a  single  case  in  which  he
had  violated  the  constitution ;  but  he  had  not  yet  fully
acquiesced  in  the  fact  that  the  most  important  preroga-
tive theoretically  conceded  to  him  had,  by  the  force  of
facts,  become  little  more  than  a  fiction.  He  was  told
that  it  was  his  undoubted  right  to  choose  his  ministers ;
and  he  contended  that,  if  so,  he  had  at  least  the  right
of  excluding  from  office  statesmen  who  were  personally
ofiensive  to  him.  Such  a  right  cannot,  in  practice,
coexist  with parliamentary  government  j but  we can

380 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

tardly  blame  the  King  for  having  been  slow  to  recog-
nise the  fact.  That  he  greatly  underrated  the  genius
of  Pitt  is  very  true.  He  complained  that  he  was  totally
ignorant  of  foreign  affairs,  prolix,  pompous  and  affected
in  the  closet  and  in  his  letters ;  and  he  probably  shared
the  feeling  that  appears  to  have  been  common,  that  he
was  a  mere  visionary  rhetorician.  '  Pitt  used  to  call
me  madman,'  said  old  Lord  Granville  after  one  of  the
cabinet  councils,  '  but  I  never  was  half  so  mad  as  he.'
But  the  chief  causes  of  irritation  were  the  violent  and
grossly  offensive  attacks  which  Pitt  had  made  on  Han-
over and  on  the  Hanoverian  partialities  of  the  King,
the  persistence  with  which  he  had  sought  popularity  by
pandering  to  the  popular  jealousy  on  the  subject,  and
the  utterly  unreasonable  opposition  he  had  made  to  the
measures  for  the  protection  of  Hanover  at  a  time  when
that  country  was  exposed  to  imminent  danger  solely  on
account  of  an  English  quarrel  in  America.  It  is  not
surprising  that  the  King  should  have  bitterly  resented
these  attacks,  nor  yet  that  he  should  have  pronounced
the  English  notions  of  liberty  '  somewhat  singular,  when
the  chief  of  the  nobility,'  as  he  complained,  '  chose  rather
to  be  the  dependents  and  followers  of  a  Duke  of  New-
castle, than  to  be  the  friends  and  counsellors  of  their
sovereign.'  ^

He  yielded,  however,  at  last,  and  from  this  time
Pitt  had  no  reason  to  complain.  Lord  Nugent,  many
years  after,  described  in  the  House  of  Commons  one  of
the  early  interviews  between  the  King  and  his  new
minister.  '  Sire,  give  me  your  confidence,'  said  Pitt,
'  and  I  will  deserve  it,'  '  Deserve  my  confidence,'  was
the  answer,  '  and  you  shall  have  it.' The  promise  was

'  See  Lord  Waldegrave's  very  Memoirs,  pp.  132,  133.  Also
interesting  report  of  the  King's  Walpole's  account  of  this  period,
conversation on this matter. Memoirs  of  George  II.

CH.  VII.  WILLIAM PITT.  381

fully  kept,  and  during  the  remainder  of  the  reign  Pitt
was  scarcely  less  absolute  over  military  affairs  in  Eng-
land than  Frederick  the  Great  in  Prussia.  Perceiving
clearly  the  extreme  danger  of  divided  counsels  in  war,
he  even  assumed  a  complete  control  of  the  navy,  insist-
ing that  the  correspondence  of  the  naval  officers,  which
had  always  been  vested  in  the  Board  of  Admiralty,  should
be  given  over  to  him,  and  even  that  the  Board  should
sign  despatches  which  he  wrote,  without  being  privy  to
their  contents.^  From  the  middle  of  1757  to  the  death
of  George  11.  there  was  no  serious  opposition  to  his
will,  and  the  history  of  England  was  little  more  than
the  history  of  his  policy.

We  may  here,  then,  conveniently  pause  to  examine
in  some  detail  the  character  and  policy  of  this  most
remarkable  man,  who,  in  spite  of  many  and  glaring
defects,  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  noblest,  as  he  was
one  of  the  greatest,  who  have  ever  appeared  in  English
politics.  There  have,  perhaps,  been  English  statesmen
who  have  produced  on  the  whole  greater  and  more  en-
during benefits  to  their  country  than  the  elder  Pitt,  and
there  have  certainly  been  some  whose  careers  have  ex-
hibited fewer  errors  and  fewer  defects ;  but  there  has
been  no  other  statesman  whose  fame»has  been  so  dazzling
and  so  universal,  or  concerning  whose  genius  and  cha-
racter there  has  been  so  little  dispute.  As  an  orator,  if
the  best  test  of  eloquence  be  the  influence  it  exercises
on  weighty  matters  upon  a  highly  cultivated  assembly,
he  must  rank  with  the  very  greatest  who  have  ever
lived.  His  speeches  appear,  indeed,  to  have  exhibited
no  pathos,  and  not  much  wit ;  he  was  not  like  his  son,
skilful  in  elaborate  statements  ;  nor  like  Fox,  an  exhaus-
tive debater;  nor  like  Burke,  a  profound  philosopher;
nor  like  Canning,  a  great  master  of  sparkling  fancy  and

'  Thackeray's  Life  of  Chatham,  i.  293.

382 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vii.

of  playful  sarcasm ;  but  lie  far  surpassed  them  all  in  the
blasting  fury  of  his  invective,  in  the  force,  fire,  and
majesty  of  a  declamation  which  thrilled  and  awed  the
most  fastidious  audience,  in  the  burning  and  piercing
power  with  which  he  could  imprint  his  views  upon  the
minds  of  his  hearers.  Like  most  men  of  real  and  origi-
nal genius,  but  unlike  the  great  majority  even  of  very
eminent  speakers,  his  eloquence  did  not  consist  solely  or
mainly  in  the  skilful  structure  and  the  rhetorical  collo-
cation of  his  sentences.  It  abounded  in  noble  thoughts
nobly  expressed,  in  almost  I'hythmical  phrases  of  imagi-
native beauty  which  clung  like  poetry  to  the  memory,
in  picturesque  images  and  vivid  epithets  which  illumined
with  a  sudden  gleam  the  subjects  he  treated.  He  lived
at  a  time  when  there  were  no  regular  parliamentary
reporters,  he  never  appears  to  have  himself  corrected  a
speech,  the  remains  we  possess  are  but  disjointed  frag-
ments or  palpably  inaccurate  recollections,  and  nearly  a
hundred  years  have  elapsed  since  his  death ;  but  yet,  in
spite  of  all  these  disadvantages,  there  are  few  English
orators  who  have  left  so  many  passages  or  sentences  or
turns  of  phraseology  which  are  still  remembered.  His
comparison  of  the  coalition  of  Fox  and  Newcastle  to  the
junction  of  the  Rhone  and  of  the  Saone,  his  denuncia-
tion of  the  employment  of  Indians  in  warfare,  his  defence
of  the  Dissenters  against  the  charge  of  secret  ambition,
his  appeal  to  the  historical  memories  recorded  on  the
tapestry  of  the  House  of  Lords,  his  contrast  between  the
iron  barons  of  the  past  and  the  silken  barons  of  the  pre-
sent, his  eulogy  of  Magna  Charta,  his  expansion  of  the
trite  maxim  that  every  Englishman's  house  is  his  castle,
his  descriptions  of  the  Church  of  England  as  '  a  Oalvin-
istic  creed,  a  Popish  liturgy,  and  an  Arminian  clergy,'
and  of  the  Press  as  '  like  the  air,  a  chartered  libertine,'
are  all  familiar,  while  hardly  a  sentence  is  remembered
from  the  oratory  of  his  son,  of  Fox,  of  Plunket,  or  of

CH,  VII.  CHARACTER OF HIS ELOQUENCE.  383

Brougham.  He  possessed  every  personal  advantage
that  an  orator  could  desire — a  singularly  graceful  and
imposing  form,  a  voice  of  wonderful  compass  and  me-
lody, which  he  modulated  with  consummate  skill;  an
eye  of  such  piercing  brightness  and  such  commanding
power  that  it  gave  an  air  of  inspiration  to  his  speaking,
and  added  a  peculiar  terror  to  his  invective.  The  weight
and  dignity  of  a  great  character  and  a  great  intellect
appeared  in  all  he  said,  and  a  certain  sustained  loftiness
of  diction  and  of  manner  kept  him  continually  on  a
higher  level  than  his  audience,  and  imposed  respect
upon  the  most  petulant  opposition.

In  the  histrionic  part  of  oratory,  in  the  power  of
conveying  deep  impressions  by  gesture,  look,  or  tone,
he  appears  indeed  to  have  been  unequalled  among  ora-
tors. Probably  the  greatest  actor  who  ever  lived  was
his  contemporary,  and  the  most  critical  and  at  the  same
time  hostile  observers  declared  that  in  grace  and  dignity
of  gesture  Chatham  was  not  inferior  to  Garrick.  But
notwithstanding  the  exquisitely  finished  acting  displayed
in  their  delivery,  his  speeches  exhibited  in  the  highest
perfection  that  quality  of  spontaneity  which  so  broadly
distinguishes  the  best  modern  speaking  from  the  pre-
pared harangues  of  antiquity.  They  were  scarcely  ever
of  the  nature  of  formal  orations,  and  they  were  little
governed  by  rule,  symmetry,  or  method.  They  usually
took  the  tone  of  a  singularly  elevated,  rapid,  and  easy
conversation,  following  the  course  of  the  debate,  passing
with  unforced  transitions,  and  with  the  utmost  variety
of  voice  and  manner,  through  all  the  modes  of  statement,
argument,  sarcasm,  and  invective;  abounding  in  inge-
nious illustrations  and  in  unlooked-for  flashes,  digressing
readily  to  answer  objections  or  to  resent  interruption,
and  rising  in  a  moment  under  the  influence  of  a  strong
passion  or  of  a  great  theme  into  the  grandest  and  most
majestic  declamation. In  his  best  days  he  used  to  speak

384 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  vii.

for  hours  with  a  power  that  never  flagged,  but  in  his
latter  years  his  voice  often  sank,  whole  passages  were
scarcely  audible  to  the  listeners,  and  his  eloquence  shone
with  a  fitful  and  occasional,  though  still  a  dazzling
splendour.  '  He  was  not,'  it  was  said,^  '  like  Towns-
hend,  for  ever  on  the  rack  of  exertion,  but  rather  light-
ened upon  his  subject  and  reached  the  point  by  the
flashings  of  his  mind,  which,  like  those  of  his  eye,  were
felt  but  could  not  be  followed.'  He  rarely  involved
himself  in  intricate  or  abstract  speculation,  or  in  long
trains  of  reasoning ;  but  no  one  was  a  greater  master  of
those  brief,  keen  arguments  which  are  most  efiective  in
debate.  No  one  could  expose  a  fallacy  with  a  more
trenchant  and  epigrammatic  clearness,  or  could  illumi-
nate his  case  with  a  more  intense  vividness.  He  is  said
to  have  cared  less  for  the  right  of  reply  than  most  great
speakers,  but  two  of  his  most  powerful  speeches — his
detailed  refutation  of  Grenville's  argument  in  favour  of
American  taxation  in  1766,  and  his  answer  in  1777  to
Lord  Suffolk's  apology  for  the  employment  of  Indians
in  war — were  replies.

It  was  said  by  an  acute  critic  ^  that  both  his  son  and
Charles  Fox  often  delivered  abler  speeches,  but  that
neither  of  them  ever  attained  those  moments  of  tran-
scendent greatness  which  were  frequent  with  the  elder
Pitt,  and  that  he  alone  of  the  three  had  the  power
not  only  of  delighting  and  astonishing,  but  also
of  overawing  the  House.  He  had  a  grandeur  and  a
manner  peculiarly  his  own,  and  it  was  the  pre-eminent
characteristic  of  his  eloquence  that  it  impressed  every
hearer  with  the  conviction  that  there  was  something  in
the  speaker  immeasurably  greater  even  than  his  words.
He  delighted  in  touching  the  moral  chords,  in  appealing
to  strong  passions,  in  arguing  questions  on  high  grounds

Grattau.  *  Charles  Butler.

CH.  VII. CHARACTER  OF  HIS  ELOQUENCE. 385

of  principle  rather  than  on  grounds  of  detail.  As  Grat-
tan  said,  '  Great  subjects,  great  empires,  great  charac-
ters, eflFulgent  ideas,  and  classical  illustrations,  formed
the  material  of  his  speeches.'  His  imagination  was  so
vivid  that  he  was  accustomed  to  say  that  most  things
returned  to  him  with  greater  force  the  second  time  than
the  first.  His  diction,  though  often  rising  to  an  admir-
able poetic  beauty,  was  in  general  remarkably  simple,
and  his  speeches  were  so  little  prepared  and  so  little
restrained  that  he  feared  to  speak  when  he  had  any  im-
portant secret  relating  to  the  subject  of  debate  on  his
mind.  As  he  himself  said,  '  When  my  mind  is  full  of  a
subject,  if  once  I  get  on  my  legs  it  is  sure  to  run  over.'
In  the  words  of  Walpole,  '  though  no  man  knew  so  well
how  to  say  what  he  pleased,  no  man  ever  knew  so  little
what  he  was  going  to  say.'  But  yet,  as  is  often  the  case,
this  facility  of  spontaneous  and  sudden  eloquence  was
only  acquired  by  long  labour,  and  it  was  probably  com-
patible with  a  careful  preparation  of  particular  passages
in  his  speeches.  Wilkes  described  him  as  having  given
all  his  mind  '  to  the  studying  of  words  and  rounding
of  sentences.'  He  had  perused  Barrow's  sermons  as  a
model  of  style,  with  such  assiduity  that  he  could  repeat
some  of  them  by  heart.  He  told  a  friend  that  he  had
read  over  Bailey's  English  Dictionary  twice  from  begin-
ning to  end.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  detect  the  great
merit  of  the  style  of  Junius  as  a  model  for  oratory,  and
he  recommended  some  early  letters,  which  that  writer
had  published  under  the  signature  of  Domitian,  to  the
careful  study  of  his  son.  One  who  knew  him  well  ^  de-
scribed him  as  so  fastidious  that  he  disliked  even  to  look
upon  a  bad  print,  lest  it  should  impair  the  delicacy  of
his  taste.

Yet  in  truth  that  taste  was  far  from  pure,  and  there

'  Lord  Shelburne.
VOL. n.  CO

386  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

was  much  in  his  speeches  that  was  florid  and  meretri-
cious, and  not  a  little  that  would  have  appeared  absurd
bombast  but  for  the  amazing  power  of  his  delivery,  and
the  almost  magnetic  fascination  of  his  presence.  The
anecdotes  preserved  of  the  ascendency  he  acquired,  and
of  the  terror  he  inspired  in  the  great  councils  of  the
realm,  are  so  wonderful,  and  indeed  so  unparalleled,  that
they  would  be  incredible  were  they  not  most  abundantly
attested.  '  The  terrible,'  said  Charles  Butler,  '  was  his
peculiar  power  ;  then  the  whole  House  sank  before  him.'
'  His  words,'  said  Lord  Lyttelton, '  have  sometimes  frozen
my  young  blood  into  stagnation,  and  sometimes  made
it  pace  in  such  a  hurry  through  my  veins  that  I  could
scarce  support  it.'  '  No  malefactor  under  the  stripes  of
an  executioner,'  said  Glover,  '  was  ever  more  forlorn  and
helpless  than  Fox  appeared  under  the  lash  of  Pitt's  elo-
quence, shrewd  and  able  in  Parliament  as  Fox  confess-
edly is.'  Fox  himself,  in  one  of  his  letters,  describes  a
debate  on  a  contested  election,  in  which  the  member,
who  was  accused  of  bribery,  carried  with  him  all  the
sympathies  of  the  House,  and  kept  it  in  a  continual  roar
of  laughter  by  a  speech  full  of  wit,  humour,  and  buffoon-
ery. '  Mr.  Pitt  came  down  from  the  gallery  and  took
it  up  in  his  highest  tone  of  dignity.  "  He  was  astonished
when  he  heard  what  had  been  the  occasion  of  their  mirth.
Was  the  dignity  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  such  sure
foundations  that  they  might  venture  themselves  to  shake
it?  Had  it  not  on  the  contrary  been  diminishing  for
years,  till  now  we  are  brought  to  the  very  brink  of  a
precipice,  when,  if  ever,  a  stand  must  be  made  ?  "  Then
followed  high  compliments  to  the  Speaker,  eloquent  ex-
hortations to  Whigs  of  all  conditions  to  defend  their  at-
tacked and  expiring  liberty,  "  unless  you  will  degenerate
into  a  little  assembly,  serving  no  other  purpose  than  to
register  the  arbitrary  edicts  of  one  too  powerful  a  sub-
ject." .  .  .  Displeased  as  well  as  pleased  allow  it  to  be

CH.  VII.  CHARACTER OF HIS ELOQUENCE.  387

the  finest  speech  that  was  ever  made ;  and  it  was  observed
that  by  his  first  two  periods  he  brought  the  House  to  a  si-
lence and  attention  that  you  might  have  heard  a  pin  drop.'
On two occasions a member who  attempted to
answer  him  was  so  disconcerted  by  his  glance,  or  by
a  few  fierce  words  wliich  he  uttered,  that  he  sat  down
confused  and  paralysed  with  fear. Charles  Butler  asked
a  member  who  was  present  on  one  of  these  occasions  '  if
the  House  did  not  laugh  at  the  ridiculous  figure  of  the
poor  member  ?  ' '  No,  sir,'  he  replied,  '  we  were  all  too
much  awed  to  laugh.' No  speaker  ever  took  greater
liberties  with  his  audience. Thus,  when  George  Gren-
ville  in  one  of  his  speeches  was  urging  in  defence  of  a
tax  the  difficulty  of  discovering  a  substitute  :  '  Tell  me
where  it  should  be  placed ;  I  say,  tell  me  where  ?  '  he
was  interrupted  by  Pitt  humming  aloud  the  refrain  of  a
popular  song,  '  Tell  me,  gentle  shepherd,  where  ?  ' 'If,
gentlemen, . . .'  began  Grenville,  when  Pitt  rose,  bowed,
and  walked  contemptuously  out  of  the  House. '  Sugar,
Mr. Speaker,' he once began,  when a  laugh arose.
'  Sugar,'  he  repeated  three  times,  turning  fiercely  round,
'  who  will  now  dare  to  laugh  at  sugar  ? '  and  the  mem-
bers, like  timid  schoolboys,  sank  into  silence. '  On  one
occasion,'  wrote  Grattan — who,  when  a  young  man,  care-
fully followed  his  speeches — '  on  addressing  Lord  Mans-
field, he  said,  "  Who  are  the  evil  advisers  of  his  Majesty  ?
is  it  you  ? is  it  you  ? is  it  you  ? "  (pointing  to  the
ministers  until  he  came  near  Lord  Mansfield). There
were  several  lords  round  him,  and  Lord  Chatham  said,
"  My  Lords,  please  to  take  your  seats." When  tbey
sat  down  he  pointed  to  Lord  Mansfield,  and  said,  "Is  it
you  ? Methinks  Felix  trembles." ' Grattan  adds,  with
much  truth,  '  It  required  a  great  actor  to  do  this. Done
by  anyone  else  it  would  have  been  miserable. ...  It
was  said  he  was  too  much  of  a  mountebank,  but  if  so  it
was  a  great  mountebank. Perhaps  he  was  not  so  good

c  c  2

388  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

a  debater  as  his  son,  but  he  was  a  much  better  orator,  a
greater  scholar,  and  a  far  greater  man.'  ^

It  is  manifest  that  while  his  eloquence  would  have
placed  him  first,  or  among  the  first  of  orators  in  any  age
or  in  any  country,  his  usual  style  of  speaking  was  only
adapted  to  a  period  when  regular  reporters  were  un-
known. Parliamentary  reporting  has  immeasurably
extended  the  influence  of  parliamentary  speaking,  it
has  done  much  to  moderate  its  tone  and  to  purify  it  from
extravagance  and  bombast,  but  it  is  extremely  injurious
to  its  oratorical  character.  The  histrionic  part  of  elo-
quence has  almost  lost  its  power.  A  great  speaker
knows  that  it  is  necessary  to  emasculate  his  statements
by  cautions,  limitations,  and  qualifications  wholly  un-
necessary for  the  audience  he  addresses,  but  very  essen-
tial if  his  words  are  to  be  perpetuated,  and  to  be
canvassed  by  the  great  public  beyond  the  walls.  He
knows  that  language  which  would  exercise  a  thrilling
efiect  upon  a  heated  assembly  in  the  fierce  excitement
of  a  midnight  debate  would  appear  insufferably  turgid
and  exaggerated  if  submitted  the  next  day  to  the  cold
criticism  of  unimpassioned  readers,  and  the  mere  fact
that  wliile  addressing  one  audience  he  is  thinking  of
another,  gives  an  air  of  unreality  to  his  speaking.  In
the  time  of  Pitt,  however,  reporting  was  irregular,  fitful,
and  inaccurate.  The  real  aim  of  the  great  orator  was  to
move  the  audience  before  him  ;  but  a  vague  report  of
the  immense  power  of  his  speeches  was  communicated
to the country; and detached passages or phrases,

'  See  an  admirable  letter  on  Lord Waldegrave's Memoirs.

Pitt's speaking, in Grattan's  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.,

Life. Grattan's Character of  and  the  autobiography  in  the  first

Pitt,  Miscellaneous  Wm-hs,  pp.  9,  volume  of  Lord  E.  Fitzmaurice's

10. Butler's  Reminiscences, i.  Life of  Shelburne. This last

139-156. Thackeray's Life of  book  has  thrown  a  good  deal  of

Chatham. Almon's  Anecdotes  of  additional  light  upon  the  elder

Chatham. Glover's Memoirs.  Pitt.

CH.  vn.  HIS DISINTERESTEDNESS.  389

eminently  fitted  to  stir  the  passions  of  the  people,  were
circulated  abroad.

If  we  pass  from  the  oratory  of  Pitt  to  his  character,
we  must  speak  with  much  more  qualification.  His  faults
were,  indeed,  many  and  very  grave,  but  they  were  re-
deemed by  some  splendid  qualities  which  dazzled  his
contemporaries,  and  have  perhaps  exercised  a  somewhat
disproportionate  influence  upon  the  judgments  of  pos-
terity. He  was  entirely  free  from  all  taint  or  suspicion
of  corruption.  Entering  public  life  at  a  time  when  the
standard  of  political  honour  was  extremely  low,  having,
it  is  said,  at  first  a  private  fortune  of  not  more  than
lOOZ.  a  year,  and  being  at  the  same  time  almost  destitute
of  parliamentary  connection,  conscious  of  the  possession
of  great  administrative  powers,  and  intensely  desirous
of  ofiice,  he  exhibited  in  all  matters  connected  with
money  the  most  transparent  and  fastidious  purity.  He
once  spoke  of  '  that  sense  of  honour  which  makes  am-
bition virtue,'  and  he  illustrated  it  admirably  himself
He  was  entirely  inaccessible  to  corrupt  offers,  and,  un-
like the  great  majority  of  his  contemporaries,  not  content
with  declaiming  when  in  opposition,  he  attested  in  the
most  emphatic  manner  his  sincerity  when  in  power.  On
his  appointment  as  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  in  1746,  he
at  once  and  for  ever  established  his  character  by  two
striking  instances  of  magnanimity.  His  predecessors
had  long  been  accustomed  to  invest  in  Government
securities  the  large  floating  balance  which  was  left  in
their  hands  for  the  payment  of  the  troops  and  to  appro-
priate the  interest,  and  also  to  receive  as  a  perquisite  of
office  one-half  per  cent,  of  all  subsidies  voted  by  Parlia-
ment to  foreign  princes.  These  two  sources  of  emolu-
ment being  united  to  the  regular  salary  of  the  office
made  it  in  time  of  war  extremely  lucrative ;  and  though
they  had  never  been  legalised  they  were  universally  re-
cognised, and  had  been  received  without  question  and

390 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vil.

without  opposition  by  a  long  line  of  distinguished  states-
men, Pitt,  who  was  probably  the  poorest  man  who  had
ever  filled  the  ofiice,  refused  them  as  illegal,  and  when
the  King  of  Sardinia  pressed  upon  him  as  a  free  gift  a
sum  equivalent  to  the  usual  deduction  from  his  subsidy,
he  at  once  declined  to  accept  it.

Such  a  course  speedily  made  him  the  idol  of  the
nation,  which  had  long  chafed  bitterly  under  the  cor-
ruption of  its  representatives.  Pitt  had,  indeed,  every
quality  that  was  required  for  a  great  popular  leader.
His  splendid  eloquence,  his  disinterestedness,  his  posi-
tion outside  the  charmed  circle  of  aristocratic  con-
nections, the  popular  cast  and  tendency  of  his  politics,
filled  the  people  with  admiration,  and  their  enthusiasm
was  by  no  means  diminished  by  the  pride  with  which,
relying  on  their  favour,  he  encountered  every  aristocratic
cabal,  or  by  the  insatiable  ambition  which  was  the  most
conspicuous  element  of  his  character.  His  pride  was
indeed  of  that  kind  which  is  the  guardian  of  many
virtues,  and  his  ambition  was  indissolubly  linked  with
the  greatness  of  his  country.  Beyond  all  other  states-
men of  the  eighteenth  century  he  understood  and  sym-
pathised with  the  feelings  of  the  English  people,  and
recognised  the  gi'eat  unrepresented  forces  of  the  nation,
and  amid  all  the  variations  of  his  career  his  love  of  free-
dom never  faltered,  and  a  burning,  passionate  patriotism
remained  the  guiding  principle  of  his  life.

The  qualities  of  a  great  popular  leader  are,  however,
by  no  means  his  only  title  to  our  admiration.  It  is  his
peculiar  merit  that,  while  no  statesman  of  his  time
rested  more  entirely  upon  popular  favour,  or  enjoyed  it
more  largely,  or  valued  it  more  highly,  very  few  risked
it  so  boldly  in  a  righteous  cause.  Perhaps  the  very
noblest  incident  of  his  life  was  his  strenuous  though
unavailing  opposition  to  the  execution  of  Byng,  at  a
time  when  popular  excitement  was  running  most  fiercely

en.  vti.  HIS INDEPENDENCE.  391

against  the  unhappy  admiral,  and  when  the  Bang  fully
shai'ed  the  feelings  of  his  people.  The  moment  was  one
of  the  most  critical  in  the  career  of  Pitt.  The  Devon-
shire Ministry  had  but  just  come  into  power.  It  was
miserably  weak  in  parliamentary  influence.  The  King
disliked  it,  and  the  favour  of  the  people  was  its  only
support.  No  man  had  by  nature  less  sympathy  than
Pitt  with  excessive  caution  or  timidity.  Yet  he  clearly
saw  that  the  execution  of  Byng  was  cruel,  impolitic,
and  even  unjust,  and  he  risked  the  ruin  of  his  popu-
larity rather  than  support  it.

He  exhibited  a  similar  courage  more  than  once
at  a  later  period.  When  at  the  beginning  of  the
next  reign  the  opponents  of  Bute  had  lashed  to  fury
the  popular  prejudice  against  the  Scotch,  Pitt,  though
himself  the  most  formidable  adversary  of  the  Scotch
favourite,  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  rebuking  this
prejudice  with  the  sternest  and  most  eloquent  in-
dignation. When  Wilkes  had  become  the  idol  of  the
multitude,  Pitt,  at  the  very  time  when  he  was  exerting
all  his  powers  to  defend  the  constitutional  right  of  the
popular  hero  to  sit  in  Parliament,  scornfully  disclaimed
all  sympathy  with  him,  describing  him  as  '  a  blasphemer
of  his  God,  and  a  libeller  of  his  King.'  When  the
Americans,  defending  the  principles  of  liberty,  had
broken  into  open  rebellion,  Pitt  defied  the  whole  national
feeling  of  England  by  exclaiming  in  Parliament,  '  I
rejoice  that  America  has  resisted — three  millions  of
people  so  dead  to  all  the  feelings  of  liberty  as  voluntarily
to  submit  to  be  slaves  would  have  been  fit  instruments
to  make  slaves  of  the  rest.'

Great  disinterestedness,  great  courage,  and  great
patriotism,  united  with  an  intense  love  of  liberty,  with
splendid  talents,  and  with  splendid  success,  were  suffi-
cient to  overbalance  and  sometimes  to  conceal  faults
that  would  have  ruined  an  inferior  man. No  impartial

392 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

judge,  indeed,  who  considers  the  career  of  Pitt,  can  fail
to  admit  that  it  was  disfigured  by  the  grossest  incon-
sistencies, and  was  in  some  of  its  parts  distinctly  dis-
honourable. He  was  a  younger  son  of  a  family  which
had  acquired  considerable  wealth  in  India — chiefly  by
the  sale  of  the  largest  diamond  then  known  ;  and  which,
though  not  noble,  was  connected  by  marriage  with  the
Stanhopes,  and  counted  among  its  property  the  borough
of  Old  Sarum.  At  Eton  and  Oxford  he  formed  inti-
macies with  many  men  who  afterwards  had  high  positions
in  politics.  He  travelled  for  a  time  in  Prance  and  Italy,
obtained  on  his  return  a  cornetcy  in  a  regiment  of
dragoons,  and  entered  Parliament  for  Old  Sarum  in
1735,  being  then  about  twenty-seven.  He  at  once  at-
tached himself  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  was  in
violent  opposition  to  his  father  and  to  the  Government,
and  became  one  of  the  most  impetuous  assailants  of
Walpole.  He  was  one  of  the  fiercest  of  that  mischievous
band  who,  by  their  furious  declamations,  drove  the
country  into  the  Spanish  war,  frustrated  all  the  pacific
efforts  of  Walpole,  and  clamoured  for  a  complete  aban-
donment of  the  right  of  search  as  an  indispensable  con-
dition of  peace.  He  swelled  the  cry  against  standing
armies  in  time  of  peace.  He  denounced  the  Hanoverian
tendencies  of  Walpole  ;  he  made  that  great  minister  the
object  of  his  constant  invectives.  Walpole  is  said  to
have  exclaimed,  on  hearing  him,  '  We  must  muzzle  this
terrible  cornet,'  and  he  deprived  him  of  his  commission  ;
but  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  once  appointed  him  groom
of  his  bedchamber.  Upon  the  resignation  of  Walpole,
Pitt  distinguished  himself  Ijeyond  most  other  politicians
by  his  implacable  hostility  to  the  fallen  statesman,  by
the  pertinacity  with  which  he  urged  on  his  impeach-
ment, and  by  the  energy  with  which  he  supported  the
Bill  for  granting  an  indemnity  to  all  who  would  give
evidence  against  him.

CH.  VII,  HIS DENUNCIATIONS OF HANOVER.  393

The  speedy  result  of  the  fall  of  Walpole  was  the
ascendency  of  Carteret.  Pitt  appeared  as  far  as  ever
from  power,  and  the  King  already  looked  upon  him  with
especial  dislike.  The  Hanoverian  measures  of  Carteret,
and  especially  the  subsidising  of  Hanoverian  troops,
were  extremely  unpopular ;  and  Pitt  immediately  con-
stituted himself  the  organ  of  the  popular  feeling,  and
delivered,  in  1743  and  1744,  some  of  his  most  powerful
speeches  in  opposition  to  the  new  favourite.  He  nick-
named him  '  the  Hanover-troop  minister,'  and  his
Government  '  the  prerogative  administration.'  He  de-
scribed him  as  '  a  sole,  an  execrable  minister,  who  seems
to  have  drunk  of  the  potion  which  poets  have  described
as  causing  men  to  forget  their  country.'  Comparing
him  to  Walpole,  he  adduced  the  parallel  of  Rehoboam
the  son  of  Solomon,  whose  little  finger  was  heavier  than
his  predecessor's  loins.  He  insulted  the  King  in  lan-
guage which  must  appear  shameful  to  all  who  do  not
consider  a  sovereign  excluded  from  the  ordinary  courtesy
of  a  gentleman,  doubly  shameful  when  viewed  in  the
light  of  Pitt's  own  policy  at  a  later  period.  '  It  is  now,'
he  exclaimed,  '  but  too  apparent  that  this  great,  this
powerful,  this  formidable  kingdom,  is  considered  only
as  a  province  to  a  despicable  electorate.'  He  opposed
the  address  to  the  King  after  the  battle  of  Dettingen ;
he  more  than  insinuated  that  the  reports  of  the  King's
courage  during  the  battle  were  untrue ;  he  spoke  of  his
'  absurd,  ungrateful,  and  perfidious  partiality  for  Han-
over ; '  he  declared  that  the  public  welfare  demanded
the  separation  of  Hanover  from  England;  he  dilated
upon  the  '  cowardice '  of  the  Hanoverian  troops,  and
upon  the  imaginary  indignities  offered  to  the  British
soldiers;  and  exaggerated  with  malignant  eloquence
every  petty  misconduct  of  the  foreign  allies.  He
objected  to  the  whole  scheme  of  the  war,  laying  it
down  as  a  maxim '  that  we  should  never assist  our

3^4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

allies  upon  the  Continent  with  any  great  number  of
troops.' '

His  language  at  this  time  was  certainly  sufficiently
violent  and  exaggerated.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted
that  there  were  real  and  serious  grounds  for  complaining
that  Carteret  had  subordinated  the  interests  of  England
to  those  of  Hanover.  Much  must  be  allowed  for  the
excited  condition  of  the  nation,  and  something  for  that
vehement  oratorical  temper  which  naturally  leads  a
great  speaker  to  magnify  the  evil  of  what  his  judgment
pronounces  to  be  censurable,  and  to  express  his  oppo-
sition in  the  most  powerful  language.  With  the  coun-
try these  speeches  made  Pitt  eminently  popular,  and  in
Parliament  he  was  greatly  feared ;  but  by  the  leading
statesmen  he  was  not  much  liked  or  trusted.  He  was
described  as  '  extremely  supercilious  and  apt  to  mingle
passions  with  business ;  '  as  'a  young  man  of  fine
parts,'  but  '  narrow,  not  knowing  much  of  the  world,
and  a  little  too  dogmatical.'  ^  The  old  Duke  of  New-
castle, however,  in  a  private  letter  to  the  Duke  of
Cumberland,  not  long  after  declared  that  Pitt  had  *  the
dignity  of  Sir  W.  Windham,  the  wit  of  Mr.  Pulteney,
and  the  knowledge  and  judgment  of  Sir  E,.  Walpole.'

He  soon,  however,  appeared  in  a  very  new  light.
He  was  extremely  desirous  of  office,  and  it  may  be  fairly
admitted  that  this  desire  was  due  to  no  sordid  motive,
but  to  a  consciousness  of  his  extraordinary  powers,  and
to  a  wish  to  devote  them,  in  a  period  of  great  military
decadence,  to  the  service  of  the  country.  The  Pelhams
fully  recognised  his  genius,  and  he  speedily  formed  a  close
political  alliance  with  them.  This  course  was  probably
the  only  one  which  then  opened  to  him  a  prospect  of

'  A  curious collection  of  ex-  Life  of  Chatham.

tracts  from  speeches  of  Pitt  to  ^  Marchmont  Papers,  i.  72,  74,

this  effect  mil  be  found  in  the  80.
Quarterly Review, vol. Ixvi.

HIS INCONSISTENCIES.  395

political  power,  and  it  proved  eventually  of  great  benefit
to  the  country ;  but  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  there
was  something,  at  least  singular,  in  the  alliance  of  the
orator  who  had  denounced  the  whole  policy  of  Walpole
with  the  most  unqualified  violence,  and  who  had  con-
tinually thundered  against  the  corruption  of  his  adminis-
tration, with  Henry  Pelham,  who  was  universally  re-
garded as  the  natural  heir  to  the  policy  of  Walpole,  and
with  Newcastle,  who  had  been  the  chief  agent  in  the
corruption  of  which  Walpole  had  been  accused.  Be
this,  however,  as  it  may ;  the  alliance  was  a  very  firm
one,  and  was  long  faithfully  observed.  When  the  Pel-
hams  constructed  the  '  Broad-bottomed  Ministry '  in
December  1744,  they  admitted  several  of  Pitt's  friends
to  office,  and  would  have  made  Pitt  himself  Secretary
at  War,  but  for  the  positive  refusal  of  the  King.^  They
undertook,  however,  ultimately  to  break  down  the  royal
opposition ;  and  on  this  understanding  Pitt  gave  them
his  warm  and  unqualified  support.  He  resigned  his
position  in  the  household  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  He
had  hitherto  been  the  most  vehement  opponent  of  the
system  of  carrying  on  the  war  by  land,  and  had,  as  late
as  January  1743-4,  made  the  policy  of  maintaining  a
British  army  in  Flanders  the  special  object  of  his
attack ;  ^  but  he  now  rose  from  his  sick  bed,  and  came
down  to  the  House  to  deliver  an  eloquent  speech  in
support  of  the  Pelham  project  of  strengthening  and
continuing  that  army.  He  had  almost  exhausted  the
vocabulary  of  abuse  in  denouncing  Carteret  for  taking
Hanoverian  troops  into  British  pay,  but  he  now  spoke
in  favour  of  the  Pelham  scheme  of  continuing  that  pay
in  an  indirect  form  by  increasing  the  subsidy  of  the
Queen  of  Hungary  on  the  understanding  that  she  should

'  Coxe's  Life  of  Pelham, i.  ^  See  this  speech  inThackeray's

197.  Life  of  Chatham,  i.  129.

396 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vii.

take  the  Hanoverians  into  her  service.^  Nor  was  this
all.  In  1746,  without  the  smallest  remonstrance  from
Pitt,  the  Hanoverians  were  again  taken  directly  into
British  pay,  and  the  measure  for  which  one  minister
was  driven  with  the  intensest  obloquy  from  office  was
quietly  adopted  by  his  successors.

The  Pelhams  were  not  ungratefal  for  this  support.
I  have  already  described  the  events  which  placed  Bath
and  Granville  in  power  for  forty-eight  hours,  and  then
led  to  the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  King.  The
proximate  cause  of  this  change  was  the  pertinacity  with
wliich  Newcastle  urged  upon  the  King  the  claims  of
Pitt.  The  chief  condition  Newcastle  exacted  on  re-
turning to  office  was  the  appointment  of  Pitt — not,  in-
deed, to  the  office  of  Secretary  at  War,  but  to  that  of
Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland,  from  which  he  was  speedily
promoted  to  that  of  Paymaster  of  the  Forces.  The
admirable  pecuniary  disinterestedness  he  manifested  in
this  office  should  not  blind  us  to  the  glaring  and  almost
grotesque  inconsistency  of  his  conduct.  He  who  had
done  all  in  his  power,  not  only  to  drive  Walpole  from
office,  but  also  to  persecute  him  to  death,  was  now  a
member  of  a  Government  consisting  chiefly  of  Walpole's
colleagues  and  following  closely  in  Walpole's  steps.  He
who  had  made  Parliament  ring  with  denunciations  of
the  payment  of  Hanoverian  troops  now  voted  for  a  con-
siderable increase  of  the  Hanoverian  subsidies.  He  who
had  contributed  so  largely  to  plunge  the  nation  into  war
with  Spain  on  account  of  the  right  of  search,  and  had
maintained  that  a  British  Government  must  at  all
hazards  exact  from  the  Spaniards  a  complete  surrender
of  that  right,  now  supported  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-
Chapelle,  which  concluded  the  war  without  even  men-
tioning the  right  of  search. He  who  had  made  himself

*  Coxe's  Life  ofPelham,  i.  216.

CH.  vii.  HIS INCONSISTENCIES,  397

the  special  organ  of  the  popular  antipathy  to  an  army
in  time  of  peace  now  strenuously  argued  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  army  when  the  war  was  terminated.

It  is  an  extraordinary  proof  of  the  intellectual  power
of  Pitt  that  he  should  have  maintained  his  position  un-
shaken when  his  career  was  in  so  many  respects  open  to
attack.  It  is,  perhaps,  a  still  more  remarkable  proof  of
the  impression  of  honesty  and  sincerity  which  he  left
upon  the  minds  of  those  who  came  in  contact  with  him,
that,  in  spite  of  all  these  fluctuations,  he  should  have  still
preserved  his  moral  ascendency.  No  man,  indeed,  was
more  governed  in  his  judgment  by  the  vehement  feelings
of  the  moment,  or  cared  less  to  reconcile  the  different
parts  of  his  career.  When  a  member  urged  upon  him  the
necessity  of  continuing  the  war  till  the  right  of  search  was
surrendered,  he  simply  said  that  'he  had  once  been  an
advocate  for  that  claim.  It  was  when  he  was  a  young
man;  but  now  he  was  ten  years  older,  had  considered  pub-
lic affairs  more  coolly,  and  was  convinced  that  the  claim
of  no  search  respecting  British  vessels  near  the  coast  of
Spanish  America  could  never  be  obtained  unless  Spain
was  so  reduced  as  to  consent  to  any  terms  her  conquerors
might  think  proper  to  impose.'  His  conversion  to  the
expediency  of  armies  in  time  of  peace  was  attributed
to  the  lesson  furnished  by  the  rebellion  of  1745.  His
abandonment  of  all  his  old  maxims  about  subsidising
foreign  troops  or  carrying  on  continental  war  he  justi-
fied on  the  ground  that  circumstances  had  changed  by
the  expulsion  from  office  of  the  minister  who  was  in
German  interests  ;  and  at  a  later  period  he  urged  that
Hanover  was  endangered  on  account  of  England,  or
that  Frederick  was  the  most  formidable  adversary  of
France.  After  the  death  of  Walpole  he  took  occasion
in  one  of  his  speeches  to  speak  of  that  minister  in  terms
of  warm  eulogy,  and  to  express  his  regret  for  his  own
opposition  to  the  Excise  Scheme. In  general  he  re-

398  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vii.

fused  to  enter  into  explanations,  and  took  a  very  lofty
tone  with  all  who  ventured  to  hint  at  inconsistencies.
'  The  honourable  member  had  quoted  his  words  exactly,
but  mistook  the  meaning  ;  which  was  not  to  give
offence  to  a  head  so  honourable  and  honest  as  his.  He
deprecated  any  invidious  retrospect  as  to  what  had
passed  in  former  debates,  and  heartily  wished  all  the
differences  they  had  occasioned  might  be  buried  in  ob-
livion, and  not  revived  again  to  the  reproach  of  any
gentleman  whatever.'

He  supported  the  Pelhams  very  steadily  and  very
efficiently,  and  they  cordially  recognised  his  merits.
'  I  think  him,'  said  Pelham  in  one  of  his  letters,  '  the
most  able  and  useful  man  we  have  amongst  us ;  truly
honourable  and  strictly  honest.  He  is  as  firm  a  friend
to  us  as  we  can  wish  for,  and  a  more  useful  one  there
does  not  exist.'  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  acknow-
ledged that  he  owed  a  debt  of  the  deepest  gratitude  to
these  statesmen,  and  especially  to  Newcastle.  When
he  was  still  young,  poor,  and  isolated,  they  had  taken
him  under  their  protection,  had  supported  him  with  the
whole  weight  of  their  unrivalled  parliamentary  influ-
ence, and  had  made  it  for  years  their  steady  object  to
overcome  the  antipathy  of  the  King.  Newcastle  was
not  a  brave  man,  but  he  had  not  hesitated  for  the  sake
of  Pitt  to  incur  the  bitterest  royal  displeasure,  and  even
to  break  up  the  ministry  in  the  midst  of  the  rebellion,
in  order  to  compel  the  King  to  admit  Pitt  to  office.
The  King  never  forgave  it ;  and  whatever  may  have
been  the  faults  of  Newcastle,  he  had  a  right  to  expect
much  gratitude  from  Pitt.  Nor  was  Pitt  so  insensible
to  the  value  of  royal  favour  as  to  be  inclined  to  under-
rate the  service  that  was  done  to  him.  His  language,
indeed,  when  suffering  under  the  displeasure  of  the
King,  was  strangely  abject  and  unmanly.  '  Bearing
long a load  of obloquy for supporting the King's

err.  VII.  HIS CONDUCT TOWARDS NEWCASTLE.  399

measures,'  he  once  wrote  to  Lord  Hardwicke,  '  and
never  obtaining  in  recompense  the  smallest  remission
of  that  displeasure  I  vainly  laboured  to  soften,  all
ardour  for  public  business  is  really  extinguished  in  my
mind.  .  .  .  The  weight  of  irremovable  royal  displeasure
is  a  load  too  great  to  move  under ;  it  must  crush  any
man;  it  has  sunk  and  broken  me.  I  succumb,  and
wish  for  nothing  but  a  decent  and  innocent  retreat.'  ^
On  another  occasion,  when  Newcastle  had  been  en-
deavouring, as  he  often  did,  to  soften  the  feelings  of
the  King  towards  the  young  statesman,  Pitt  wrote  :
'  I  cannot  conclude  without  assuring  your  Grace  of  my
warmest  gratitude  for  the  kind  use  you  were  so  good  as
to  make  of  some  expressions  in  my  letter ;  nothing  can
touch  me  so  sensibly  as  any  good  office  in  that  place
where  I  deservedly  stand  in  need  of  it  so  much,  and
where  I  have  so  much  at  heart  to  efface  the  past  by
every  action  of  my  life.'  ^

Such  was  the  language  of  Pitt,  such  were  his  obliga-
tions to  Newcastle,  at  a  time  when  he  was  still  strug-
gling into  power.  How  he  requited  those  obligations
after  the  death  of  Pelham,  when  Sir  Thomas  Robinson
obtained  the  leadership  of  the  House,  has  been  already
described.  His  conduct  at  this  period  of  his  career  is
often  passed  over  much  too  lightly.  It  is  no  doubt  true
that  the  fierce  confhct  between  Hardwicke  and  Fox  at  a
time  when  they  were  both  prominent  ministers  in  the
same  Government  suflSciently  shows  the  imperfection  of
the  discipline  then  prevailing  in  the  administration;
but,  still,  the  conduct  of  a  subordinate  minister  who,
while  retaining  office,  makes  it  his  main  object  to  dis-
credit his  official  superiors,  cannot  be  justified.  And
Pitt  adopted  this  course  through  the  mere  spite  of  a
disappointed  place-hunter,  and  his  hostility  was  directed

Chatham  Correspondence,  i.  105.  -  Ibid.  i.  49.

400 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vii.

against  the  statesman  to  whom,  more  than  to  any  other
single  politician,  he  owed  the  success  he  had  hitherto
achieved.  At  the  very  time  when  he  thus  revolted
against  Newcastle,  he  was  actually  sitting  in  Parlia-
ment for  one  of  the  Pelham  boroughs.^  The  excuses
which  have  been  made  for  him  on  the  ground  of  the
crude  judgments  and  vehement  passions  of  a  young
man,  of  the  low  standard  of  political  morality,  of  the
jealousies  and  fretfulness  of  Newcastle,  or  of  the  mis-
management of  public  affairs,  can  amount  only  to  a  pal-
liation, not  a  justification,  of  his  proceedings.  Pitt  was
not  a  very  young  man  when  he  came  into  Parliament ;
he  was  forty-six  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  Pelham ;
and  his  conduct  exhibited  far  graver  defects  than  mere
violence,  impatience,  or  inconsistency.

There  were  also  faults  of  another  description  which
greatly  impaired  his  career.  That  nervous  irritability
which  frequently  accompanies  great  mental  powers,  and
which  the  conflicts  of  Parliament  are  peculiarly  fitted  to
aggravate,  was  in  his  case  intensified  by  disease ;  and  it
reached  a  point  which  seemed  sometimes  hardly  com-
patible with  sanity.  Canning,  at  a  later  period,  exhi-
bited a  somewhat  similar  irritability ;  but  the  sensitive-
ness which  in  Canning  was  shown  by  acute  suffering
under  attack,  with  Chatham  assumed  the  form  of  an
almost  superhuman  arrogance.  His  natural  tempera-
ment, his  consciousness  of  the  possession  of  unrivalled
powers,  his  contempt  for  the  corrupt  politicians  about
him,  and  his  determination  to  make  the  voice  of  the
people  heard  amid  the  intrigues  of  party,  contributed  to
foster  it.  In  debate  his  transcendent  eloquence,  and
especially  his  powers  of  invective,  enabled  him  in  a
great  measure  to  crush  opposition  even  when  he  could
not  win  votes ;  but  it  was  in  the  management  of  party

'  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  ii.  271.

CH.  vii.  HIS HISTRIONIC TURN.  401

that  his  fierce  and  ungovernable  temper  was  most  fatal
to  his  career.  '  His  language,'  as  General  Conway  once
said,  '  was  of  a  kind  seldom  heard  west  of  Constanti-
nople.' His  imperious  and  dictatorial  manners  made
him  in  his  latter  days  of  all  politicians  the  most  difficult
to  co-operate  with,  and  contributed  perhaps  as  much  as
the  selfishness  of  the  great  families  to  the  disunion  of
the  Whigs.

He  was  at  the  same  time  singularly  theatrical  and
affected.  His  speeches  owed  much  of  their  charm  to
the  most  consummate  acting,  and  he  carried  his  his-
trionic turn  into  every  sphere  in  which  he  moved.  As
Goldsmith  said  of  Garrick,  he  never  seemed  natural
except  when  acting.  In  his  intercourse  with  his  most
intimate  friends,  in  the  most  confidential  transaction  of
business,  he  was  always  strained  and  formal,  assuming
postures,  studying  efl'ects  and  expressions.  His  dress,
his  sling,  his  crutch,  were  all  carefully  arranged  for  the
most  private  interview.  His  under-secretaries  were
never  suffered  to  sit  in  his  presence.  His  letters —
whether  he  was  addressing  a  minister  on  affairs  of  state,
or  exhorting  his  young  nephew  to  guard  against  the
ungracefalness  of  laughter  ^ — were  tumid,  formal,  and
affected.  He  told  Lord  Shelburne  that,  even  indepen-
dently of  considerations  of  health,  he  would  always,
for  reasons  of  policy,  live  a  few  miles  out  of  town.  He
performed  many  acts  that  were  very  noble,  but  he
seldom  lost  sight  of  the  efiect  they  might  produce.
He  performed  them  with  an  elaborate  ostentation;
and  simplicity,  modesty,  and  unobtrusive  excellence
were  wholly  alien  to  his  character.  It  is  said  of
him  that  in  his  family  circle  he  delighted  in  read-
ing out  the  tragedies  of  Shakespeare,  which  he  did
with  great  pathos  and  power ;  but  whenever  he  came

'  Chatham Correspondence, i. 79. Chesterfield  impressed  the
same  precept  upon  his  son.

VOL. II.  D  D

402 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTUKY. ch.  vii.

to  any  light  or  comic  parts,  lie  immediately  stopped
and  gave  the  book  to  some  member  of  his  family
to  read.  This  anecdote  is  characteristic  of  his  whole
life.  He  never  unbent.  He  was  always  acting  a  part,
always  self-conscious,  always  aiming  at  a  false  and  un-
real dignity.

These  faults  increased  with  age.  Success  and  ad-
miration turned  his  head,  and  the  seeds  of  a  nervous
disease  that  had  a  close  affinity  to  insanity  continually
affected  him.  With  all  his  brilliant  qualities  he  was
not  one  of  those  great  men  who  retain  the  simplicity  of
their  character  in  the  most  splendid  positions,  moving
like  the  lights  of  heaven,  undisturbed  by  the  admira-
tion of  which  they  are  the  object.  As  his  mind  grew
more  and  more  disordered,  he  learnt  to  delight  in
an  almost  regal  state,  in  pomp  and  ceremony  and  os-
tentation, in  inflated  language  and  florid  imagery.  Of
all  very  great  Englishmen,  he  is  perhaps  the  one  in
whom  there  was  the  largest  admixture  of  the  qualities
of  a  charlatan.

It  was  consistent  with  this  disposition  that  he  should
have  been  singularly  affected  by  royalty.  He  could,  as
we  have  seen,  speak  of  the  Sovereign  in  terms  that  may
be  justly  designated  as  insolent,  and  during  the  greater
part  of  life  he  was  in  opposition  to  the  Court ;  but  he
could  also  adopt  a  tone  of  almost  Oriental  servility.
Koyalty  is  surrounded  by  associations  that  appeal  so
powerfully  to  the  imagination  that  it  exercises  some
dazzling  influence  on  most  of  those  who  are  brought  for
the  first  time  in  contact  with  it ;  but  the  power  it  seems
to  have  had  over  such  a  man  as  Chatham,  aiter  years  of
gi-eatness  and  of  office,  is  both  humiliating  and  strange.
I  have  already  quoted  some  sentences  from  his  letters
on  the  subject,  and  others  scarcely  less  abject  might  be
cited.  'The  least  peep  into  that  closet,'  Burke  com-
plained, '  intoxicates  him,  and  will  to  the  end  of  his  life.'

CH.  VII.  HIS SELF-DENIAL OVER-ESTIMATED.  403

'  At  the  levee,'  said  another  observer,  '  he  used  to  bow
so  low  yon  could  see  the  tip  of  his  hooked  nose  between
his  legs.'  When  he  retired  from  office  in  1761,  in  the
very  zenith  of  his  fame,  a  few  kind  and  unexpected
words  from  George  III.  so  overcame  him  that  he  burst
into  tears.

He  was,  no  doubt,  an  eminently  patriotic  man,  es-
sentially disinterested,  and  free  from  all  tendency  to
avarice,  but  even  in  this  respect  he  was  accustomed  to
take  a  tone  of  superiority  which  was  not  altogether  justi-
fied by  his  life.  He  began  his  public  career  a  very  poor
man,  and  he  never  stooped,  like  most  of  his  contempo-
raries, to  corruption ;  but  no  one  who  follows  his  course
under  George  II.  will  regard  him  as  having  been  indif-
ferent to  office ;  he  was  in  fact  nearly  always  in  place
either  under  the  Crown  or  in  the  household  of  the  Prince
of  Wales,  and  by  a  singular  felicity  he  was  no  loser  by
his  short  periods  of  opposition.  The  Duchess  of  Marl-
borough was  so  pleased  with  his  attacks  upon  Walpole
and  Carteret  that  she  bequeathed  him  10,000^.  in  1744.
His  brother-in-law.  Lord  TemjDle,  extricated  him  from
difficulty  when  he  was  dismissed  from  office  in  1755,  by
a  gift  of  1,000/.  He  obtained  a  legacy  of  1,000/.  from
Mr.  Allen,  one  of  his  admirers,  in  1764;  and  in  the
following  year  Sir  William  Pynsent,  who  was  wholly
unknown  to  him,  left  him  an  estate  of  the  annual  value
of  3,000/.  Under  George  II.  he  stood  proudly  and
somewhat  ostentatiously  aloof  from  the  whole  depart-
ment of  patronage,  but  he  at  least  acquiesced  very
placidly  in  the  corruption  of  liis  colleagues.  In  the  fol-
lowing reign  he  accepted  a  fair  share  of  the  dignities
and  emoluments  of  the  Crown — a  peerage  for  his  wife,
a  pension  of  3,000/.  a  year,  and  at  a  later  period  an
earldom  for  himself.  None  of  these  rewards  were  dis-
honourably acquired  ;  all  of  them  were  amply  deserved ;
but  it  is  absurd  to  speak  of  such  a  career  as  a  miracle

D D  2

404  ENGLAND TN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  vii.

of  self-denial.  Both  the  elder  and  the  younger  Pitt
delighted  in  a  kind  of  ostentatious  virtue  which  raised
them,  in  the  eyes  of  careless  observers,  to  a  far  higher
level  than  politicians  like  Burke  or  like  Fox,  who,  with
abilities  perhaps  not  inferior,  sacrificed  incomparably
more  to  their  principles.^

But  yet  with  all  his  faults  he  was  a  very  great  man
— far  surpassing  both  in  mental  and  moral  altitude  the
other  politicians  of  his  generation.  As  a  war  minister
his  greatness  was  beyond  question,  and  almost  beyond
comparison.  At  very  few  periods  of  English  history
was  the  aspect  of  affairs  more  gloomy  than  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  second  ministry  of  Pitt.  The  country
seemed  hopelessly  overmatched ;  the  public  services
had  fallen  into  anarchy  or  decrepitude,  and  a  general
languor  and  timidity  had  overspread  all  departments.
The  wild  panic  that  had  lately  passed  through  England
upon  the  rumour  of  an  invasion  showed  how  little  con-
fidence she  felt  in  her  security,  while  the  loss  of  Minorca
had  discredited  her  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  an-
nihilated both  her  commerce  with  the  Levant  and  her
supremacy  in  the  Mediterranean.  In  America,  General
Loudon,  with  a  large  force,  made  an  expedition  in  July
1757  against  Louisburg;  but  it  was  conducted  with
great  timidity  and  hesitation,  and  on  the  arrival  of  a
French  fleet  was  somewhat  ignominiously  abandoned,
while  the  French  carried  on  the  war  with  energy  and
success  upon  the  borders  of  Lake  George.  In  spite  of
English  cruisers  they  succeeded  in  the  beginning  of
1757  in  pouring  reinforcements  into  Canada,  while
French  squadrons  swept  the  sea  around  the  West  Indies
and  the  coasts  of  Africa.  Nearer  home  an  expedition
against  Rochefort,  which  was  one  of  the  first  enterprises

'  See  the  very  remarkable  statements  of  Lord  Shelburne  in  his
Autobiography,  pp.  75,  76.

CH.  VII.  WAR IN GERMANY, 17o7.  405

of  Pitt,  failed  through  the  irresolution  of  Sir  John  Mor-
daunt.  On  the  Continent  the  league  against  Frederick
and  against  Hanover  seemed  overwhelming,  and  it
appeared  as  if  the  struggle  could  not  be  greatly  pro-
longed. Before  the  end  of  March  1757,  two  French
armies,  amounting  together  to  100,000  men,  were  in
the  field.  They  soon  occupied  the  Duchy  of  Cleves,
and  marched  rapidly  on  Hanover,  Frederick  withdrew
his  garrisons  from  the  invaded  country,  and  left  the
defence  of  Germany  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  who
hastened  over  in  April  to  defend  Hanover  with  a  mixed
army  of  about  60,000  men,  consisting  almost  entirely
of  different  bodies  of  German  mercenaries,  while
Frederick  himself  marched  against  Bohemia.  He
calculated  that  in  a  few  months  a  great  Russian  army
would  be  in  the  field  against  him  ;  that  his  only  chance
of  safety  was  to  strike  down  the  Austrians  while  they
were  still  isolated,  and  that  in  the  meantime  the  Duke
of  Cumberland  might  hold  the  French  at  bay.  On
May  5  he  crossed  the  Moldau,  and  on  the  6th  he  fought
the  great  battle  of  Prague,  one  of  the  most  bloody  in
the  eighteenth  century.  It  lasted  for  twelve  hours,  and
although  the  victory  remained  with  Frederick,  he  ac-
knowledged that  he  had  left  18,000  men  on  the  field.
Marshal  Browne,  who  commanded  the  Austrians,  was
killed,  and  the  losses  of  the  Austrian  army  were  com-
puted at  24,000.  Prague  was  speedily  besieged,  but
on  June  18  another  great  battle  was  fought  at  Kolin,
which  decided  the  campaign.  The  Austrians  under
Marshal  Daun  greatly  surpassed  the  Prussians  in
numbers.  They  occupied  a  position  of  extraordinary
strength,  and  after  desperate  efforts  to  dislodge  them,
the  Prussians  were  driven  back  with  the  loss  of  about
14,000  men,  and  of  many  cannon.  They  were  com-
pelled to  abandon  the  siege  of  Prague,  and  the  shat-
tered remains  of  a  once  mighty  army  hastily  evacuated

406 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

Bohemia  and  returned  to  Saxony.  The  Russians  speedily-
advanced  upon  East  Prussia,  took  Memel,  and  desolated
the  surrounding  country.  General  Lehwald,  with  an
army  of  less  than  a  third  of  their  number,  attacked
them  on  August  30,  but  after  a  fierce  combat  he  was
driven  back  ;  but  the  Russians  suffered  so  much  in  the
action  that  they  retired  for  a  time  from  the  Prussian
dominion,  while  General  Lehwald  succeeded  in  expelling
the  Swedes,  who  were  desolating  Pomerania.

On  the  side  of  Hanover  the  war  was  altogether  un-
fortunate. The  Duke  of  Cumberland,  on  July  26,  was
completely  defeated  by  the  French  in  the  battle  of
Hastenbeck,  on  the  Weser.  Hanover  was  speedily
overrun,  occupied,  and  pillaged  ;  and  on  September  8,
by  the  mediation  of  the  King  of  Denmark,  the  Conven-
tion of  Closterseven  was  concluded,  by  which  Cumber-
land agreed  to  send  home  to  their  respective  countries
the  subsidised  troops  from  Hesse,  Brunswick,  and  Saxe-
Gotha,  while  part  of  the  Hanoverian  army  took  shelter
in  the  town  of  Stade,  and  the  remainder  retired  beyond
the  Elbe,  leaving  Hanover  in  the  full  possession  of  the
French,  who  were  now  free  to  turn  their  arms  to  any
part  of  the  Prussian  dominions.  Only  a  few  weeks
before,  the  news  arrived  that  Ostend  and  Nieuport,  so
long  regarded  as  among  the  most  important  barriers
against  the  enci'oachraents  of  France,  had,  by  the  in-
vitation of  her  Imperial  Majesty,  received  French
garrisons.^

It  is  not  clear  that  Cumberland  could  have  taken
any  better  step.  His  army  was  outnumbered,  ill-dis-
ciplined, heterogeneous,  and  defeated;  and  if  the  French
had  at  this  time  exhibited  anything  of  the  energy  and
military  talent  which  they  displayed  so  abundantly  in
the  days  of  Lewis  XIV.,  and  which  they  again  showed

Clmtham  Cwrespondeyice,  i.  248.

en.  VII.  DISGRACE OF CUMBERLAND.  407

in  the  days  of  Napoleon,  they  might  easily  have  com-
pelled it  to  surrender  at  discretion.  In  Prussia,  how-
ever, the  Convention  was  denounced  as  the  most  in-
famous of  desertions,  and  in  England  the  indignation  it
excited  was  scarcely  less.  The  unfortunate  commander,
on  his  return,  was  overwhelmed  with  obloquy.  The
King  received  him  with  a  cutting  silence.  '  Here  is
my  son,'  he  afterwards  said  to  the  courtiers  who  sur-
rounded him,  '  who  has  ruined  me  and  disgraced  him-
self.' Cumberland  at  once  threw  up  all  his  military
employments,  and  thus  closed  a  career  which  had  been
singularly  unfortunate.  Of  all  the  members  of  the
royal  family,  with  the  exception  of  Queen  Caroline,  he
was  the  only  one  who  possessed  any  remarkable  ability,
and  Horace  Walpole  even  placed  him  in  this  respect,
somewhat  absurdly,  in  the  same  category  with  Sir  R.
Walpole,  Granville,  Mansfield,  and  Pitt.^  He  was
noted,  too,  for  a  rugged  truthfulness,  for  a  conscientious
energy  of  administration,  for  an  uncomplaining  loyalty,
for  a  fidelity  to  his  friends  and  engagements  not  common
among  the  great  personages  of  his  time.  For  a  few
weeks  after  the  battle  of  Culloden  he  had  been  the  idol
of  the  nation,  and  in  allusion  to  his  name,  '  the  sweet
William  '  became  the  favourite  flower  of  loyal  English-
men, but  the  accounts  of  the  atrocities  that  followed
his  triumph  soon  turned  the  stream  ;  and  his  harsh,
morose,  and  arbitrary  temper,  the  exaggerated  sternness
of  his  military  discipline,  and  the  steady  hatred  of  the
Scotch,  made  him,  somewhat  undeservedly,  one  of  the
most  unpopular  men  in  England.  In  the  Regency  Bill,
which  followed  the  death  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  he  was
deprived  of  the  first  place  which  would  naturally  have
devolved  on  him.  His  one  victory  brought  with  it  re-
collections more  bitter  than  many  defeats,  and  he  was

'  Walpole's  George  II.  iii.  85.

408 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vii.

associated  in  the  popular  mind  with  the  disasters  of
Fontenoy,  Lauffeld,  Hastenbeck,  and  Closterseven.
Pitt,  whom  he  had  constantly  opposed,  and  in  whose
dismissal  he  had  borne  a  great  part,  acted  on  this  oc-
casion very  nobly,  and  when  the  angry  King  urged
that  he  had  given  his  son  no  order  for  such  a  treaty,
rejoined,  '  But  full  powers,  sir ;  very  full  powers.'  The
cloud  that  hung  over  the  unliappy  prince  was  never
wholly  removed,  and  he  died  in  the  prime  of  life  in
1765.

It  is  not  surprising  that,  under  the  circumstances
I  have  described,  the  position  of  affairs  should  have
appeared  almost  hopeless.  No  English  statesman  had
studied  foreign  politics  more  carefully  than  Chesterfield,
and  his  judgment  was  forcibly  expressed  in  a  private
letter  written  about  this  time.  '  Whoever  is  in,'  he
wrote,  '  or  whoever  is  out,  I  am  sure  we  are  undone
both  at  home  and  abroad.  At  home,  by  our  increasing
debt  and  expenses ;  abroad,  by  our  ill  luck  and  inca-
pacity. The  King  of  Prussia,  the  only  ally  we  had  in
the  world,  is  now,  I  fear,  hors  de  combat.  Hanover  I
look  upon  to  be  by  this  time  in  the  same  situation  with
Saxony,  the  fatal  consequence  of  which  is  but  too  ob-
vious. The  French  are  masters  to  do  what  they  please
in  America.  We  are  no  longer  a  nation.  I  never  yet
saw  so  dreadful  a  prospect.'  ^  The  language  of  Pitt
was  scarcely  less  desponding.  '  The  day  is  come,'  he
wrote  in  one  of  his  most  confidential  despatches,  '  when
the  very  inadequate  benefits  of  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,
the  indelible  reproach  of  the  last  generation,  are  become
the  necessary  but  almost  unattainable  wish  of  the  pre-
sent, when  the  Empire  is  no  more,  the  ports  of  the
Netherlands  betrayed,  the  Dutch  Barrier  Treaty  an
empty  sound,  Minorca,  and  with  it  the  Mediterranean,

July  1757. Chesterfield's  MisccUancoiis  Works,  iv.  198.

PITTS GREATNESS AS WAR MINISTER.

409

lost,  and  America  itself  precarious.'  ^  So  serious  did
the  situation  appear,  that  he  even  endeavoured,  though
without  success,  to  induce  Spain  to  draw  the  sword
against  France,  by  the  promise  that  if  Spanish  assist-
ance enabled  England  to  recover  Minorca,  England
would  cede  Gibraltar  to  the  Spanish  king,^

Pitt  had,  however,  just  confidence  in  himself.  '  I
am  sure,'  he  said  on  one  occasion  to  the  Duke  of  Devon-
shire, '  that  I  can  save  the  country,  and  that  no  one  else
can.'  ^  If  he  did  not  possess  to  a  high  degree  the  skill
of  a  great  strategist  in  detecting  the  vulnerable  parts  of
his  opponents  and  in  mapping  out  brilliant  campaigns,
he  had  at  least  an  eagle  eye  for  discovering  talent  and
resolution  among  his  subordinates,  a  rare  power  of  re-
storing the  vigour  of  every  branch  of  administration,
and,  above  all,  a  capacity  unrivalled  among  statesmen
of  reviving  the  confidence  and  the  patriotism  of  the
nation,  and  of  infusing  an  heroic  daring  into  all  who
served  him.  '  No  man,'  said  Colonel  Barre,  '  ever
entered  his  closet  who  did  not  come  out  of  it  a  braver
man.'  He  came  into  power  at  the  end  of  June  1757,
and  disasters,  largely  due  to  the  incapacity  of  his  pre-
decessors, and  especially  to  the  long  period  of  admini-
strative anarchy  that  had  just  taken  place,  threw  a  deep
shade  over  the  first  months  of  his  power.  The  news  of
the  defeat  of  Frederick,  of  the  introduction  of  French
troops  into  the  Austrian  Netherlands,  of  the  battle  of
Hastenbeck,  of  the  Convention  of  Closterseven,  and  of
the  failure  before  Louisburg,  followed  in  swifb  succes-
sion. The  expedition  against  Eochefort  was  skilfully
planned.  The  energy  with  which  a  large  fleet  and  a
considerable  army  were  equipped  was  of  good  omen,

'  To  Sir  Benjamin  Keene,  Aug.
1757.  Chatham  Correspondence,
i.  251.

'^  Chathain  Correspondence,  i.

247-256.

^  Thackeray's
ham,  i.  318.

Life  of  Chat-

410 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

and  the  mere  fact  that  England  once  more  took  the
offensive  had  some  moral  effect ;  but  the  expedition,  as
I  have  said,  failed  through  the  timidity  of  its  com-
mander, or  at  least  it  succeeded  only  in  destroying  the
fortifications  of  the  little  island  of  Aix.  An  Act  organ-
ising a  national  militia,  which  had  long  been  a  popular
demand  and  a  favourite  project  of  Pitt,  had  been  carried
chiefly  by  the  exertions  of  George  Townshend,  just
before  the  accession  of  Pitt  to  power,  but  it  was  an
extremely  ominous  sign  that  it  produced  the  most
violent  discontent.  Notwithstanding  the  critical  con-
dition of  affairs,  great  numbers  of  the  country  gentry
and  farmers  resented  the  duties  thrown  on  them.  The
people  believed  that  by  serving  in  the  militia  they
became  liable  to  foreign  service,  and  the  first  months
of  the  administration  of  Pitt  were  disturbed  by  vio-
lent riots  in  Surrey,  Kent,  Leicester,  Hertford,  Bed-
ford, Nottingham,  and  Yorkshire.  The  towns  speedily
caught  the  martial  enthusiasm  which  Pitt  sought  to
inspire,  but  the  country  districts  were  at  first  torpid
or  hostile,  and  regular  troops  had  to  be  employed  in
the  midst  of  the  war  to  compel  the  people  to  serve  in  that
very  constitutional  force  for  which  they  had  long  been
clamouring  as  the  best  defence  against  standing  armies.^
It  was  from  Prussia  that  the  first  gleam  of  good
fortune  shone  upon  the  cause.  That  unbappy  country
was  now  placed  under  the  ban  of  the  German  Empire,
and  invaded  simultaneously  in  different  quarters  by  the
French,  the  Eussians,  the  Austrians,  and  the  Swedes.
Silesia  was  again  in  the  power  of  the  Austrians  as  far
as  Breslau,  which  surrendered,  in  November,  without  a
blow.  They  had  made  themselves  masters  of  Zittau  in
Lusatia,  and  in  October  an  Austrian  detachment  had
even  laid  Berlin  under  contribution,  while  the  occupa-

'  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  iii.  40-42. Chatham  Corre-
spondence, i.  257-262.

CH.  vii.  ROSSBACH AND LP:UTHEN.  411

tion  of  Hanover,  and  the  surrender  of  Cumberland,  had
opened  a  long  frontier  line  to  the  invasions  of  the
French,  and  for  a  time  deprived  Prussia  of  all  assistance
on  the  Continent.  But  the  little  State  which  was  thus
struggling  in  the  grasp  of  so  many  and  such  mighty-
antagonists,  found  in  the  agony  of  her  fate  resources
in  herself  of  which  her  enemies  had  scarcely  dreamed.
Her  assailants  were  fighting  only  for  ambition,  but
Prussia  was  fighting  a  desperate  fight  for  her  very
existence.  She  had  long  been  administered  like  a
gi-eat  camp.  Her  army,  in  proportion  to  her  popu-
lation, was  enormous,  and  it  had  been  brought  by
the  Draconic  discipline  of  two  reigns  to  the  highest
point  of  efficiency.  Her  King  was  now  incomparably
the  greatest  general  in  Europe,  and  he  had  the  immense
advantage  of  not  only  commanding  the  armies,  but  also
disposing  absolutely  of  the  resources  of  the  State,  while
among  his  opponents  discipline  was  relaxed,  the  whole
army  administration  had  gone  to  decay,  and  except  in
the  Austrian  army  there  was  an  almost  entire  absence
of  military  ability.  After  several  skirmishes  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  Prussian  territory,  the  King,  at  the
head  of  an  army  of  not  more  than  25,000  men,  utterly
routed  nearly  40,000  French  and  nearly  20,000  German
troops,  at  Eossbach,  on  November  5,  1757.  3,000  of
the  enemy  were  left  on  the  field;  nearly  7,000  men,
more  than  sixty  cannon,  and  many  flags  were  taken;
while  the  whole  Prussian  loss  was  about  500  men.  A
month  later  Frederick  was  found  in  Silesia  at  the  head
of  an  army  of  30,000  or  40,000  men,  and  at  Leuthen  he
fought  a  decisive  battle  with  a  great  Austrian  army  com-
manded by  Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine.  The  dispropor-
tion of  numbers  was  almost  if  not  altogether  as  great  as  at
Rossbach,  and  the  Austrian  army  was  better  disciplined
and  better  commanded  than  the  French,  but  the  victory
of  the  Prussians  was  complete  and  overwhelming :  at

412 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

least  22,000  Austrians  were  left  on  the  field  or  taken
prisoners,  and  the  remainder,  with  the  loss  of  a  multi-
tude of  cannon  and  flags,  were  driven  in  disorder  out  of
the  Prussian  dominions.  Before  the  Prussians  retired
into  winter  quarters,  Breslau,  with  17,000  Austrian
soldiers,  was  compelled  to  surrender,  and  all  Silesia
was  for  a  time  under  Prussian  rule.

At  these  successes  the  spirit  of  the  nation  rose  very-
high,  and,  as  is  ever  the  case,  the  consciousness  of  the
presence  of  a  great  general  gave  a  new  courage  and
confidence  to  his  troops,  and  infused  a  proportionate
despondency  into  his  enemies.  But  the  struggle  would
have  been  a  hopeless  one  but  for  the  assistance  of  Pitt.
The  Convention  of  Closterseven  had  been  ratified  on
neither  side.  It  had  not  been  rigidly  observed  by  the
French,  there  were  no  stipulations  for  the  duration  of
the  neutrality  of  the  Hanoverians,  and  it  might  on  the
whole  be  reasonably  regarded  as  a  mere  temporary
armistice.  Pitt  recommended  to  repudiate  it.^  The
Hanoverian  army  was  armed  anew.  The  command  was
given  to  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick,  one  of  the
best  generals  in  the  Prussian  service.  It  was  soon
after  reinforced  by  12,000  English  under  the  Duke  of
Marlborough,  and  it  bore  a  chief  part  in  defending  the
side  of  Germany  conterminous  to  France.  Pitt,  at  the
same  time,  disregarding  all  his  former  denunciations  of
German  subsidies,  obtained  an  annual  subsidy  of  nearly
700.000L  for  Frederick,  which  during  the  next  few  years
was  punctually  paid.  Had  it  not  been  for  this  succour,
and  for  the  immense  supplies  which  Frederick  contrived
with  a  vindictive  pleasure  to  wring  from  the  unhappy
Saxons,  the  material  resources  of  Prussia  would  pro-
bably have  been  wholly  inadequate  to  the  strain  of  the
war.

'  The  text  of  the  Convention  and  also  the  arguments  of  the  Eng-
lish when  repudiating  it  are  given  in  full  by  Smollett.

CH.  VII.  THP: war in 1758.  413

At  the  same  time,  undeterred  by  the  failure  of  the
Rochefort  expedition,  Pitt  pressed  on  eagerly  his  attacks
on  the  French  coast.  It  is  this  part  of  his  military
policy  that  has  been  most  blamed,  and  it  must  be
owned  that  no  material  results  were  obtained  com-
mensurate with  the  cost  of  life  and  money  incurred,
but  they  kept  large  bodies  of  French  troops  in  their
own  country.  The  moral  effect  of  these  numerous
attacks  on  a  nation  peculiarly  susceptible  of  sudden
panic  was  very  considerable.  In  the  course  of  1758
an  attempt  of  the  French  to  send  reinforcements  to
America  from  Aix  was  defeated  by  Hawke.  A  power-
ful expedition  of  ships  and  soldiers  was  sent  against
St.  Malo,  but  it  resulted  only  in  the  destruction  of  some
French  shipping.  Cherbourg  was  attacked  and  occupied,
its  docks  were  destroyed,  its  shipping  was  burnt ;  but
this  success  was  speedily  counterbalanced  by  a  disaster
which  befell  some  British  troops  who  had  landed  at  St.
Cas,  and  who  were  surprised  and  driven  off  with  great
loss.  In  the  following  year,  when  some  preparations
were  made  for  an  invasion  of  England,  Havre  was  bom-
barded and  very  seriously  injured  by  Rodney.

The  German  campaign  of  1758  was  marked  by  great
vicissitudes  of  fortune.  The  part  which  was  taken  by
Frederick  began  with  an  invasion  of  Moravia,  and  an
attempt  to  take  Olmutz,  which  was  defeated  by  the
skilful  strategy  of  Marshal  Daun,  who  succeeded  in
cutting  off  the  supplies  of  the  Prussian  army.  After
some  inconsiderable  movements,  Frederick  then  turned
his  arms  against  the  Russians,  who,  having  invaded
Pomerania  and  the  marches  of  Brandenburg  in  great
force,  had  penetrated  nearly  as  far  as  Frankfort  on  the
Oder,  committing  the  most  frightful  atrocities  on  their
way.  The  great  battle  of  Zorndorf,  which  began  on  the
25th  of  August,  and  continued  more  or  less  during  the
two  following  days,  determined  the  campaign. More

414 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vit,

than  21,000  Russians,  more  than  11,000  Prussians,
were  left  on  the  field,  and  the  Russian  army  was  com-
pelled to  retreat.  The  victor  then,  leaving  a  small
body  of  troops  to  watch  the  frontier,  turned  his  rapid
steps  to  Saxony,  which  Marshal  Daun,  after  the  raising
of  the  siege  of  Olmutz,  had  hastened  to  relieve.  The
plan  of  the  Austrians  was  to  avail  themselves  of  the
absence  of  Frederick  in  Pomerania  to  invade  simul-
taneously Silesia  and  Saxony,  and  it  appeared  almost
certain  that  one  or  both  would  be  withdrawn  from  the
Prussian  grasp.  The  chief  efforts  of  the  Austrians  were
made  in  Saxony.  The  small  Prussian  army  there  was
completely  outnumbered.  General  Maguire,  one  of  the
many  Irish  officers  in  the  Austrian  service,  succeeded
on  September  5  in  capturing  after  a  short  resistance
the  important  fortress  of  Sonnenstein,  overlooking  Pirna,
and  there  was  much  reason  to  believe  that  Dresden
would  soon  be  rescued.  But  Frederick,  who,  like
Napoleon,  was  accustomed  to  disconcert  his  enemies
not  more  by  his  strategy  in  the  field  than  by  the  extra-
ordinary and  in  his  own  day  unparalleled  rapidity  of
his  marches,  speedily  arrived  at  the  Saxon  frontier,  and
reduced  the  enemy  to  the  defensive.  Here,  however,
for  a  time  his  good  fortune  deserted  him.  The  skilful
Austrian  general,  who  had  already  bafiled  him  at  Kolin
and  at  Olmutz,  but  whose  extreme  caution  and  exces-
sive slowness  had  hitherto  prevented  him  from  reaping
the  fruits  of  his  success,  succeeded  in  surprising  the
Prussian  camp  at  Hochkirchen,  on  October  14,  and  in
completely  defeating  the  Prussian  army.  All  the  mili-
tary skill  of  Frederick  was  required  to  prevent  the
defeat  becoming  an  absolute  rout,  and  it  was  one  of  the
greatest  faults  of  -Daun  that  he  gave  Frederick  time  to
repair  it.  The  discipline,  and  in  some  degree  the  con-
fidence, of  the  Prussian  army  were  speedily  restored,
and  Frederick  acted  with  characteristic  vigour. Evading

CH.  vii.  THE WAR IN 17-58.  415

the  army  of  Daun,  and  leaving  Saxony  for  the  present
to  its  fate,  he  marched  upon  Neiss,  a  frontier  town  of
Silesia,  which  an  Austrian  army  was  besieging,  raised
the  siege,  and  obliged  the  Aiistrians  to  evacuate  Silesia
and  to  retire  into  Bohemia.  In  the  meantime,  Daun
had  besieged  Dresden,  which  was  courageously  defended
by  a  Prussian  garrison,  who  held  out  till  Frederick,
with  an  army  now  completely  refitted  and  reorganised,
again  appearing  in  Saxony,  obliged  Daun  both  to  raise
the  siege  and  to  cross  the  frontier.

The  army  of  Prince  Ferdinand  had  in  the  meantime
driven  the  French  from  Hanover  and  across  the  Rhine,
and  although  the  English  contingent  had  not  yet  ar-
rived, it  had  defeated  the  French  with  much  loss  on
June  23,  in  the  battle  of  Orefeld.  The  French,  how-
ever, having  reached  their  own  frontier,  received  power-
ful reinforcements,  and  after  some  weeks  Prince  Ferdi-
nand recrossed  the  Rhine,  baffling  with  great  skill  the
efforts  of  the  French  to  prevent  him.  In  October  the
French  gained  a  considerable  success  in  Hesse,  and  the
army  of  Prince  Ferdinand  was  much  wasted  by  illness.
Among  those  who  died  was  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,
who  commanded  the  English.

In  America  events  were  taking  place  of  far  greater
importance  to  England.  In  spite  of  the  immense  pre-
ponderance of  numbers  on  the  side  of  the  English,  the
balance  of  success  in  the  first  years  of  the  war  had
been  clearly  with  the  French.  In  Europe  the  admini-
stration and  the  enterprise  of  France  had  seldom  sunk
so  low  as  during  the  Seven  Years'  War,  but  Montcalm
and  the  little  body  of  French  colonists  and  soldiers
whom  he  commanded  in  Canada,,  exhibited  in  rare  per-
fection the  high  quality  of  French  daring.  The  popu-
lation of  the  French  colony  was  so  small  that  there  were
said  to  have  been  in  all  not  more  than  20,000  men
capable  of  bearing  arms,  and  as  these  were  drawn  for

416 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vil.

the  most  part  from  agriculture,  the  utmost  distress  was
prevailing.  By  skilful  strategy,  by  availing  themselves
of  powerful  fortresses,  by  concentrating  their  slender
resources  on  some  single  point,  by  the  employment  of
Indian  allies,  and,  it  must  be  added,  by  the  singular
mismanagement  and  feebleness  of  their  opponents,  the
French  had  hitherto  more  than  held  their  own.  But
Pitt,  on  attaining  to  power,  at  once  made  it  one  of  his
main  objects  to  drive  them  from  America.  He  urgently
appealed  to  the  colonists  to  raise  20,000  men  for  the
cause.  The  Crown  was  to  provide  arms,  ammunition,
tents,  and  provisions.  The  colonies  were  to  raise,
clothe,  and  pay  the  levies,  but  for  this  expense  he
promised  a  parliamentary  reimbursement,  and  this
promise  induced  the  colonists  to  make  all  the  efforts
that  were  required.  General  Loudon,  the  English  com-
mander-in-chief, was  recalled,  and  replaced  by  General
Abercrombie.  Disregarding  all  claims  of  mere  seniority,
and  looking  only  for  skill,  courage,  and  enterprise,  the
minister  placed  Wolfe  and  Howe,  who  were  still  quite
young  men,  and  Amherst,  who  was  but  just  forty,  in
important  commands.  A  powerful  fleet  was  sent  out
under  the  command  of  Boscawen  for  an  attack  upon
Louisburg ;  the  English  had  soon  nearly  50,000  men
under  arms,  and  of  these  about  22,000  were  regular
troops,  while  the  regular  troops  on  the  side  of  France
were  less  than  5,000.  Supplies  were  cut  off  by  the
fleet,  and  the  French  Government  at  home  made  scarcely
a  serious  effort  to  support  their  colonists.  Under  such
circumstances  the  war  could  have  but  one  end.  In
1758  Louisburg,  with  the  whole  of  Cape  Breton,  was
taken ;  and  in  another  quarter  Fort  Duquesne,  which
had  borne  so  great  a  part  in  the  first  events  of  the  war,
was  compelled  to  surrender,  but  the  French  repulsed
with  great  loss  an  English  attack  upon  Ticonderoga,
and  Lord  Howe  lost  his life  in  the  battle. In  1759

CH.  vir.  CONQUEST OF CANADA.  417

Ticonderoga,  Crown  Point,  and  Niagara  were  captured
in  swift  succession,  and  soon  after,  a  desperate  struggle
in  wMcli  both  sides  displayed  splendid  courage,  and  in
which  both  Wolfe  and  Montcalm  found  a  glorious  end,
planted  the  flag  of  England  on  the  heights  of  Quebec.
In  1760  the  French  gained  one  last  victory  at  Sillery
and  even  laid  siege  to  Quebec,  but  they  were  soon
obliged  to  retire ;  the  conquest  was  completed  by  the
surrender  of  Montreal,  with  the  last  French  army ;
and  the  whole  of  Canada  passed  under  the  English
rule.

No  conquest  during  the  war  excited  a  wilder  enthu-
siasm. In  the  eyes  even  of  keen  observers  it  had  long
appeared  extremely  doubtful  whether  England  or  France
was  destined  to  exercise  political  supremacy  in  the  New
World.  The  progress  of  the  French  power  had  been  so
rapid,  and  its  organisation  so  skilful,  that  it  had  been
steadily  encroaching  upon  its  rival.  Yet,  looking  at
the  question  in  the  calmer  light  of  history,  it  can  hardly,
I  think,  be  disputed  that  the  danger  was  exaggerated.
The  immense  difference  in  population  between  the
French  and  English  colonies  made  the  ultimate  ascen-
dency of  the  latter  inevitable,  and  the  same  military
character,  which  was  the  secret  of  the  rapid  successes
of  the  French,  prevented  them  from  striking  deep  root
in  the  soil,  and  from  founding  those  great  industrial
communities  which  alone  endure.  But  other  conse-
quences, unforeseen,  but  not  less  important,  were  pend-
ing ;  and  already,  amid  the  blaze  of  the  victories  of
Pitt,  that  strange  Nemesis  which  so  often  dogs  the
steps  of  great  human  prosperity  may  be  clearly  de-
scried. The  destruction  of  the  French  power  in  America
removed  the  one  ever-pressing  danger  which  secured
the  dependence  of  the  English  colonies  on  the  mother
country.  The  great  colonial  forces  raised  and  success-
fully employed  during  the  war  gave  the  colonies  for  the

VOL.  II.  E  B

418 ENGLAND  IX  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. ch.  vii.

first  time  a  consciousness  of  their  strength,  and  fur-
nished them  with  leaders  for  the  War  of  Independence ;
while  the  burden  of  the  debt  due  to  the  lavish  expendi-
ture of  Pitt  revived  that  scheme  for  the  taxation  of
America  which  led  in  a  few  years  to  the  dismember-
ment of  the  Empire.

The  ascendency  of  the  English  on  the  sea  was  soon
complete,  and  it  involved  the  most  absolute  destruction
of  the  colonial  empire  of  France.  60,000  seamen  were
voted  for  1758,  and  a  measure  which  was  at  this  time
carried  for  the  more  punctual  payment  of  seamen's
wages,^  as  well  as  the  great  number  of  prizes  that  were
speedily  taken,  added  immensely  to  the  popularity  of
the  service.  Pitt  pressed  on  every  expedition  with  a
calculated  and  sagacious  audacity,  and  his  imperious
will  broke  down  every  obstacle.  In  the  very  first  enter-
prise of  his  administration,  Anson,  startled  at  the
rapidity  required,  declared  that  it  was  impossible  to
have  the  ships  ready  at  the  time  that  was  specified.
Pitt  at  once  rejoined  that  in  that  case  he  would  lay  the
matter  before  the  King,  and  impeach  the  First  Lord  of
the  Admiralty  in  the  House  of  Commons,  The  threat
was  suflicient,  and  the  ships  were  ready  at  the  appointed
time.  The  Dutch,  presuming  on  the  weakness  of  pre-
vious governments  in  England,  had  largely  assisted  the
French  with  naval  stores,  but  Pitt  promptly  arrested
this  by  an  order  that  every  Dutch  vessel  laden  with
naval  or  military  stores  should  be  at  once  captured,  and
after  much  angry  remonstrance  the  Dutch  were  obliged
to  submit.  Goree  and  Senegal,  so  valuable  for  the
African  trade,  Guadeloupe,  and  the  little  island  of
Mariagalante  were  soon  compelled  to  surrender.  Hawke,
Boscawen,  and  Pococke,  in  a  succession  of  naval  vic-
tories, captured  or  destroyed  about  nine-tenths  of  the

'  See  Beatson's  Naval  and  Military  Memoirs,  ii.  93,  94,

en.  VII.  VICTORIES OF CLTVE.  419

ships  of  war  of  France,  while  her  commerce  was  swept
by  innumerable  privateers  from  every  sea.

At  the  same  time  the  foundations  were  laid  of  a  new
empire,  destined  at  length,  by  much  genius  and  much
heroism,  by  many  generations  of  skilful  administration,
and  by  not  a  few  acts  of  atrocious  perfidy  and  violence,
to  attain  a  magnitude  and  a  splendour  unequalled  in
the  history  of  mankind.  After  the  tragedy  of  the  Black
Hole,  the  complete  expulsion  of  the  English  from  Ben-
gal, and  the  confiscation  of  all  their  factories,  Surajah
Dowlah  retired  triumphantly  to  Moorshedabad,  leaving
a  deputy  with  a  small  force  to  protect  Calcutta.  But
the  English  at  Madras  speedily  took  measures  to  restore
their  affairs.  In  December  1756  an  English  fleet  under
Admiral  Watson,  with  an  army  of  900  Europeans  and
1,500  sepoys  under  Clive,  entered  the  Hooghly.  On
the  27th  the  English  captured  the  fort  between  Fulta
and  Calcutta.  On  January  2,  1757,  they  reached,  and
after  a  short  conflict  occupied  Calcutta.  On  the  10th
they  took  and  plundered  the  town  of  Hooghly,  about
twenty-three  miles  higher  up  the  river ;  and  on  Febru-
ary 4  they  attacked  in  its  encampments  an  army  of
40,000  men,  with  which  Surajah  Dowlah  had  marched
against  them.  A  tliick  mist  interrupted  the  battle,  but
the  Nabob  was  so  impressed  by  the  daring  of  the  Eng-
lish that  he  made  overtures  for  peace,  which  Clive,  who
knew  that  the  French  war  had  begun,  and  that  he  was
needed  at  Madras,  hastened  to  accept.  The  privileges
of  the  Company  were  restored,  and  the  English  obtained
some  pecuniary  compensation,  as  well  as  the  right  of
fortifying  Calcutta,  and  of  founding  a  mint.  Clive  soon
after  turned  his  arms  against  the  French  settlement  of
Chandernagor,  about  twenty  mUes  from  Calcutta,  which,
in  spite  of  the  brave  resistance  of  the  French,  and  the
threatening  remonstrances  of  Surajah  Dowlah.  was  com-
pelled to  surrender.

420 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

The  war  with  the  Nabob  speedily  broke  out  anew.
Immediately  after  the  treaty  he  had  signed,  he  had  sum-
moned the  French  to  assist  him  in  expelling  the  English
from  Bengal.  He  had  played  false  to  all  parties,  vacil-
lated and  shuffled  in  all  his  engagements,  and  governed
his  people  so  atrociously  that  they  were  ripe  for  revolt ;
and  Meer  Jaffier,  his  chief  general,  resolved,  with  the
assistance  of  the  English,  to  dethrone  him.  A  secret
treaty  was  signed,  and  after  a  long  series  of  intrigues
and  falsehoods,  which  it  is  not  here  necessary  to  de-
scribe, but  which  left  deep  stains  on  the  principal  people
concerned,^  the  English  unaided  took  the  field,  and  on
the  23rd  of  June,  1757,  the  fate  of  Bengal  and  ulti-
mately of  India  was  decided,  with  scarcely  any  loss  on  the
English  side,  by  the  great  battle  of  Plassy.  Olive  com-
manded only  900  Europeans  2  and  2,100  sepoys.  The
force  of  Surajah  Dowlah  was  estimated  at  about  60,000
men.  Meer  Jaffier  had  just  before  renewed,  with  forms
of  peculiar  solemnity,  his  allegiance  to  Surajah  Dowlah,
and  had  also  promised  Olive  that  he  would  desert  to  him
in  the  battle,  but  he  kept  neither  engagement,  and  re-
mained passive,  awaiting  the  event.  But  in  spite  of  the
immense  disproportion  of  numbers,  European  discipline
and  European  skill  gained  the  day,  and  the  army  of
Surajah  Dowlah  was  scattered  to  the  winds.  Olive,
wisely  shutting  his  eyes  to  the  timidity  or  treachery  of
Meer  Jaffier,  raised  him  to  the  position  of  Nabob  of
Bengal.  Surajah  Dowlah,  soon  after  falling  into  the
hands  of  the  new  sovereign,  in  the  absence  of  the  Eng-
lish, was  put  to  death. Immense  sums  passed  into  the

'  Except  Admiral  Watson,  who  repetition,

refused  to  sign  the  fictitious  treaty  '^  Theyconsistedchiefiy  of  the

devised  for  the  purpose  of  deceiv-  39th  Eegiment. Tliere  were  also

ing  Omichund. The  story  is  too  about  one  hundred  English  artil-

well  known  from  Macaulay's  ad-  lerymen  and  fiftyEnglish  sailors,
mirable  essay  on  Clive to need

CH.  VII.  VICTORIES OF CLIVE.  421

possession  of  the  English  Company, which  from  this
time  exercised  a  complete  protectorate  in  Bengal.

The  events  of  the  next  few  years  only  served  to  con-
firm it.  Clive,  after  the  battle  of  Plassy,  was  made
governor- general  of  the  English  possessions  of  Bengal,
and  the  weakness  of  Meer  JaSier  was  so  great  that  the
English  virtually  exercised  an  absolute  rule  over  a  terri-
tory which  already  contained  thirty  millions  of  inhabit-
ants. Repeated  disturbances  and  partial  insurrections
against  the  new  Nabob  were  composed  or  suppressed  by
the  authority  of  Olive,  and  in  1759  he  succeeded  with-
out a  blow  in  defeating  an  aggression  of  a  more  formid-
able kind.  The  authority  of  the  court  of  Delhi  over
the  subordinate  princes  had  long  fallen  into  desuetude,
and  the  reigning  emperor  was  now  held  in  complete
servitude  by  his  vizier ;  but  his  eldest  son,  Shah  Alum,
with  a  vigour  not  common  in  his  race,  fled  to  a  Rohilla
chief,  who  was  in  opposition  to  the  vizier  of  his  father,
gathered  around  him  an  army  of  adventurers,  and  with
the  assistance  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  and  of  some  other
princes,  endeavoured  to  re-establish  the  ascendency  of
his  family  in  Bengal  by  overthrowing  the  Nabob  who
had  been  raised  to  power  by  the  English.  A  large
army  soon  invested  Patna.  Meer  Jafiier  could  scarcely
be  prevented  by  the  influence  of  Clive  from  making  the
most  abject  submission,  but  the  terror  of  the  English
name  was  already  so  great  that  the  mere  approach  of  an
English  army  was  sufiicient  to  disperse  the  invaders.
Meer  Jaffier,  in  a  transport  of  gratitude,  gave  a  new
dominion  to  Clive  of  the  annual  value  of  little  less  than
30,000L  Nearly  at  the  same  time  Clive  despatched  a
small  army  under  Colonel  Forde  to  drive  the  French
from  a  region  to  the  north  of  the  Carnatic,  which  they
had  invaded,  and  which  was  defended  by  the  Marquis
de  Conflans ;  and  after  some  hard  fighting  the  enter-
prise was  fully  achieved. At  the  close  of  1759  another

422 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vii.

danger  arose,  and  was  surmounted  with  equal  success.
The  Dutch,  who  possessed  some  factories  in  Bengal,  and
who  had  so  long  rivalled  the  colonial  power  of  England,
watched  with  bitter  jealousy  the  growing  ascendency  of
the  English,  and  they  resolved  to  counterbalance  it  by
sending  a  considerable  force  from  Java.  Meer  JafBer,
who  had  now  come  to  look  upon  Clive  with  mingled
terror  and  dislike,  warmly,  though  secretly,  encouraged
them ;  and  seven  ships  and  1 ,400  soldiers  were  sent
from  Java  into  the  Hooghly.  The  troops  were  landed.
The  expedition  was  hastening  to  the  Dutch  settlement
of  Chinsurah,  and  there  was  reason  to  believe  that  Meer
Jaffier  was  about  to  join  it  with  forces  that  might  gravely
endanger  the  safety  of  the  English.  But  the  prompt
daring  of  Clive  baffled  all  calculations.  Though  Eng-
land and  Holland  were  at  perfect  peace,  he  ordered  the
Dutch  to  be  attacked  by  sea  and  land.  Their  seven
ships  were  taken.  Their  troops  were  cut  to  pieces.
Their  settlement  in  Bengal  was  attacked,  and  they  were
compelled  to  accept  humiliating  terms,  rigidly  restrict-
ing their  future  progress.  Having  thus  secured  his
power  against  all  competition,  Clive  sailed  for  Europe
in  February  1760.

While  these  events  were  taking  place  in  Bengal,  the
struggle  between  the  French  and  English  for  supremacy
was  decided  in  Madras.  In  the  course  of  1757  there
had  been  several  inconsiderable  operations  around  Tri-
chinopoly  and  Madura,  but  the  great  crisis  of  the  war
did  not  take  place  till  after  the  arrival  of  Lally  as  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  French,  in  April  1758.  A  mem-
ber of  an  old  Irish  Jacobite  family,  the  new  commander
had  served  from  early  youth  in  one  of  the  Irish  regiments
in  the  French  army,  had  borne  an  honourable  part  in
several  arduous  campaigns,  and  had  contributed  largely
to  the  French  victory  at  Fontenoy.  He  was  an  emi-
nently skilful  officer,  noted  among  brave  men  for  his

CH.  vii.  LALLY.  423

heroic  courage,  frank,  generous,  ardent,  and  devoted,
but  easily  led  astray  by  a  hot  temper  and  an  excessive
self-confidence,  rash  and  violent  in  his  language,  utterly
ignorant  of  Oriental  life  and  prejudices,  and  utterly
destitute  of  the  qualities  of  a  good  administrator.
Argenson  described  him  in  a  few  graphic  sentences  as
one  who  was  like  fire  in  his  activity,  who  expressed,  in
terms  that  were  not  forgotten,  everything  that  he  felt,
who  could  make  no  allowance  for  want  of  discipline,
want  of  straightforwardness,  or  want  of  promptitude,
and  who  rose  into  a  storm  of  fury  at  the  slightest
appearance  of  negligence,  insubordination,  or  fraud.
The  directors  on  appointing  him  urged  upon  him  in  the
first  place  to  eradicate  the  spirit  of  extreme  corruption
and  cupidity  that  had  become  inveterate  at  Pondicherry,
impoverishing  the  public,  while  it  multiplied  private
fortunes  ;  Lally  arrived  in  the  colony  with  a  strong  con-
viction that  the  chief  persons  in  authority  were  dis-
honest, and  he  made  little  secret  of  his  opinion.  He
had,  indeed,  every  reason  to  be  dissatisfied,  and  the
negligence  and  abuses  he  discovered  might  have  tried  a
more  patient  temper.  Though  he  had  been  expected
for  eight  months,  he  found  that  notliing  whatever  had
been  done  to  provide  for  his  expedition.  No  money
was  raised  to  pay  the  soldiers.  Twenty-four  hours'  pro-
vision for  the  men  could  not  be  obtained  without  djifi-
culty  in  Pondichei'ry.  The  governor  and  council  could
give  no  accurate  information  about  the  number  of  the
English  troops,  or  even  about  the  nature  of  the  English
fortifications.  Time  was  very  pressing,  for  Lally  had
started  from  France  with  more  than  1,000  European
soldiers,  chiefly  of  his  own  Irish  regiment,  and  though
more  than  a  fourth  of  them  had  perished  by  fever  during
the  voyage,  his  army,  if  properly  equipped,  when  united
to  the  troops  already  in  the  colony,  would  have  been
much  superior  to  any  in  the  province.

424 ENGLAND IX  THE EIGHTEEXTH CEXTURY. CH.  vit.

He  insisted  at  once  on  marching  against  Fort  St.
David,  It  was  one  of  the  most  important,  and  perhaps
the  strongest  fort  possessed  by  the  English  in  all
BUndostan,  and  it  was  defended  by  a  powerful  garrison,
and  by  180  cannon.  The  difficulties  of  Lally  were
almost  insuperable.  His  troops  were  weary  and
weakened  by  sickness  and  by  a  long  journey.  He
found  it  difficult  to  feed,  and  impossible  to  pay  them.
The  supply  of  mortars  and  bombs  and  di'aught  cattle
was  miserably  insufficient,  and  on  May  24  the  Governor
of  Pondicherry  wrote  that  his  resources  were  exhausted,
and  that  the  colony,  wasted  by  fifteen  years  of  nearly
incessant  war,  was  quite  unable  to  support  the  army.
Pressing  letters  were  sent  to  France  for  supplies  of
money,  but  many  months  must  elapse  before  an  answer
could  be  received.  The  French  fleet  which  was  destined
to  co-operate  with  Lally  was  attacked  by  the  English,
and  though  the  battle  was  indecisive,  it  was  too  much
injured  to  render  much  assistance.  The  necessity  of
hastening  the  works  was  imperative  ;  and  Lally,  who
was  probably  perfectly  ignorant  that  he  was  outraging
the  most  cherished  religious  convictions  of  the  natives,
ordered  them  without  distinction  of  c3ste  to  be  pressed
and  employed  in  carrying  burdens  and  discharging  other
necessary  works,  and  he  thus  turned  all  the  sympathies
of  the  natives  against  him.  But  the  resolution  of  the
general  overcame  all  obstacles,  and,  on  June  1,  Fort  St,
David  was  compelled  to  suiTender,  and,  in  obedience  to
instructions  received  from  France,  was  razed  to  the
ground,

Lally  desii'ed  to  mai'ch  at  once  upon  Madras,  but
the  commander  of  the  French  fleet  refused  to  co-operate
with  him,  and  the  want  of  money  rendered  another  long
enterprise  utterly  impossible.  He  accordingly  turned
his  arms  against  the  King  of  Tanjore,  a  rich  native
prince,  against  whom  the  French  company  held  an  old

CH.  VII.  LALLY.  425

claim  for  a  considerable  sum,  and  he  hoped  by  subduing
him  to  obtain  money  sufficient  to  cany  on  his  opera-
tions. He  sacked  some  villages,  levied  contributions,
plundered  a  pagoda  which  was  widely  venerated,  blew
from  his  cannons  six  Brahmins,  whom  he  believed  to  be
spies,  and  at  last  reached  and  bombarded  the  capital ;
but  he  met  with  a  more  obstiriate  resistance  than  he
expected,  and  his  ammunition  was  so  scanty  that  he
was  driven  to  fire  back  upon  the  enemy  their  own
cannon-balls.  He  persevered  until  there  were  not  more
than  twenty  cartouches  for  every  soldier  in  his  army,
and  he  then  reluctantly  gave  the  order  to  retreat.  In
the  meantime  the  English  jBeet  attacked  and  defeated
that  of  the  French  ;  and  the  French  admiral,  in  spite  of
the  urgent  remonstrances  of  Lally,  refused  to  risk  an-
other encounter,  and  resolved  to  abandon  the  sea  to  the
English  and  take  refuge  at  Mauritius.

The  position  of  Lally  was  now  in  the  last  degree
deplorable.  He  had  quarrelled  with  all  the  leading
people  about  him.  His  army  was  without  money  or
ammunition,  and  almost  without  provisions,  and  he  was
utterly  ignorant  of  the  country  and  of  the  very  peculiar
character  of  the  people  with  whom  he  had  to  deal.  He
collected,  however,  with  extreme  difficulty  some  small
munitions,  took  some  inconsiderable  forts,  and  at  last
even  succeeded  in  carrying  out  his  favourite  project  of
attacking  Madras.  From  his  private  fortime  he  contri-
buted 60,000  rupees  for  the  enterprise,  and  he  induced
some  members  of  the  council  and  a  few  other  inhabi-
tants of  Pondicherry  to  follow  his  example.  His  army
consisted  of  2,700  Europeans  and  4,000  natives,  and  he
was  ready  to  march  in  the  beginning  of  November
1758,  but  fiuious  storms  of  rain  delayed  him  for  a  fall
month.  The  grarrison  of  the  town  in  the  meantime  was
reinforced,  and  it  now  consisted  of  more  than  1,700
European  soldiers  and  about  2,400  natives. The  Black

426 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  vii.

Town  was  easily  taken,  and  some  slight  successes  were
gained  against  the  garrison,  but  an  insubordinate  spirit
was  rapidly  spreading  among  the  French  troops.  Their
pay  was  several  months  in  arrear.  The  great  quantities
of  spirits  found  in  the  Black  Town  contributed  to  de-
moralise them.  Almost  all  provisions  except  rice  and
butter  had  come  to  an  end.  Desertions  became  very
numerous,  and  many  of  the  officers  were  in  open  or
secret  opposition  to  their  general.  A  breach  was  made
in  the  fort,  and  Lally  was  anxious  for  the  assault,  but
his  officers  held  back  and  pronounced  it  to  be  imprac-
ticable, and  on  February  16,  1759,  Admiral  Pococke,
with  powerful  reinforcements  from  the  English,  ap-
peared at  Madras.  Nothing  then  remained  but  retreat,
and  Lally  fell  back  upon  Pondicherry,  where  he  found
utter  confusion  and  extreme  destitution  reigning,  while
his  many  enemies  received  him  with  insults,  and  every
conference  ended  in  angry  recriminations.  In  Sep-
tember the  French  fleet  from  Mauritius  again  appeared
off"  Pondicherry,  having  on  its  passage  fought  an  inde-
cisive but,  on  the  whole,  unsuccessful  engagement  with
the  English,  and  500  European  soldiers,  400  Oaffirs,
and  a  small  quantity  of  money  were  landed ;  but  the
admiral  refused  to  remain  upon  the  coast,  and  again  left
the  unhappy  colony  to  its  fate.

The  interest  of  the  war  now  gathered  chiefly  around
the  fort  of  Wandewash,  one  of  the  most  important
barriers  of  the  French  colony.  In  May  an  English
force  had  attacked  it,  but  on  the  approach  of  the  French
army  it  decamped.  At  the  end  of  September  Major
Brereton  made  another  attempt,  but  an  officer  named
Geoghegan,  who  commanded  a  very  inferior  French
force,  repelled  him  with  much  loss.  But  on  October
27,  Colonel  Coote,  who  was  one  of  the  ablest  of  the
many  able  soldiers  produced  in  the  East  Indian  service,
landed  at  Madras  with  considerable  reinforcements,  and

CH.  VII. DESTRUCTION OK FRENCH POWER IN INDIA. 427

on  November  29  he  took  Wandewash.  Lally  marched
to  oppose  him,  and  a  decisive  battle  was  fought  on
December  22,  1759,  in  which  the  French  were  com-
pletely defeated.

By  the  battle  of  Wandewash  Coote  decided  the  fate
of  Madras,  as  Olive,  by  the  battle  of  Plassy,  had  de-
cided that  of  Bengal.  The  two  battles  were,  indeed,  in
some  respects,  very  different.  At  Plassy  the  skill  and
prowess  of  a  small  body  of  Europeans  were  opposed  to
an  enormous  numerical  preponderance  of  Asiatics.  At
Wandewash  the  forces  were  probably  nearly  equal.
Europeans  bore  the  brunt  of  the  fray,  and  each  side  was
admirably  commanded.  Lally  appears  to  have  done
what  little  could  be  done  to  retrieve  affairs,  but  his  army
was  demoralised  and  almost  destitute,  and  he  was  de-
tested by  all  the  civil  authorities  with  whom  he  had  to
combine.  Fortress  after  fortress  in  the  Carnatic  was
slowly  reduced,  and  at  last,  on  December  9,  1760,
Ooote  laid  siege  to  Pondicherry.  It  was  gallantly  de-
fended, but  provisions  soon  ran  short,  and  on  January
16,  1761,  it  was  compelled  to  surrender  at  discretion,
and  the  power  of  France  in  India  was  extinguished.
The  town  which  had  so  long  rivalled  the  imjDortance  of
Madras  was  levelled  to  the  ground,  and  though  the
colony  was  restored  and  the  town  rebuilt  at  the  peace,
France  never  again  became  a  serious  rival  of  England
in  Hindostan.  The  scandalous  inefficiency  of  the  Go-
vernment of  Lewis  XV.  was  in  no  respect  more  con-
spicuous than  in  the  almost  complete  abandonment  of
these  noble  settlements,  and  in  the  gross  ingratitude
shown  to  those  who  had  founded  or  defended  them.  La
Bourdonnais  had  languished  for  years  in  the  Bastille.
Dupleix  died  a  ruined  and  broken-hearted  man.  Lally,
who  had  been  guilty  of  much  imprudence,  but  who  had
at  least  defended  the  interests  of  France  with  great
courage,  with  perfect  devotion,  and  with  no  mean  mili-

428 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vii.

tary  skill,  was  reserved  for  a  yet  more  terrible  fate.
While  he  was  detained  a  prisoner  of  war  in  England,
the  indignation  aroused  in  France  by  the  ruin  of  Pondi-
cherry  blazed  fierce  and  high,  and  his  many  enemies
were  only  too  glad  to  make  him  their  scapegoat.  With
characteristic  intrepidity  and  characteristic  rashness  he
obtained  his  parole,  and,  relying  on  his  innocence,  ap-
peared in  Paris  to  meet  his  accusers.  He  was  at  once
flung  into  the  Bastille,  removed  from  thence  to  a
common  prison,  and  confined  for  fifteen  months  before
trial.  He  was  then  brought  before  the  Parliament  of
Paris,  one  of  the  most  partial  of  tribunals,  denied  the
assistance  of  counsel,  and  condemned  to  death  on  the
vague  charge  of  having  betrayed  the  interests  of  the
King.  When  the  sentence  was  read  to  him,  he  ex-
claimed, in  the  bitterness  of  his  indignation,  '  Is  this
then  the  reward  of  forty-five  years  of  service  ? '  He
tried  to  stab  himself  to  the  heart  with  a  pair  of  com-
passes that  was  lying  near,  but  the  instrument  was
wrested  from  his  hand,  and  that  very  day  he  was
dragged  to  the  scafibld  on  a  common  dung-cart,  and
with  a  gag  to  his  mouth.  It  was  not  until  1778  that
the  unrighteous  sentence  was  reversed,  and  the  memory
of  one  of  the  bravest  though  most  unfortunate  of
soldiers  judicially  vindicated.^

The  administration  of  Pitt  had  little  or  nothing  to
say  to  the  victories  of  Olive,  but  it  contributed  much  by
its  prompt  reinforcements,  and  by  the  expeditions  which
detained  the  French  troops  in  their  own  country,  to  the
triumph  of  Coote  in  Madras.  On  the  other  hand,  the
rumours  of  great  victories  in  a  distant  and  almost  un-

'  See Mdm.  de  Lally. Sis-  verselle,  art.  'LaUy.' Coote  said

mondi,  Hist,  des  Frangais. Vol-  that  no  other  man  in  all  India

taire, Melanges Historiques,  could  have  maintained  the  strug-

Lally,  and  the  Hists.  of Orme  gle  so  long  or  so  gallantly.
and of Mill. Biographic Uni-

CH.  VII.  GREAT EFFORTS OF ENGLAND.  429

known  land  inflamed  the  imaginations  and  strengthened
the  enthusiasm  of  the  nation.  At  the  close  of  1758
there  were  no  less  than  24,000  French  prisoners  cap-
tive in  England,  an  army  of  nearly  95,000  British  and
7,000  foreign  troops  had  been  voted,  and  above  twelve
millions  had  been  raised  for  the  ensuing  year.^  Yet
there  were  no  signs  of  flagging  or  discontent.  The  in-
toxication of  glory  had  made  the  nation  indifferent  to
sacrifice,  and  the  spell  which  the  great  minister  had
thrown  over  his  fellow-countiymen  was  unbroken.  It
was  noticed  that,  unlike  all  previous  statesmen,  he
seemed  to  take  a  strange  pleasure  in  rather  exagger-
ating than  attenuating  the  pecuniary  sacrifices  he  de-
manded, and  his  eloquence  and  his  personal  ascendency
almost  silenced  opposition.  Even  the  Prussian  subsidy
was  acquiesced  in  with  scarcely  a  murmur.  Pitt  de-
fended it  in  a  speech  of  consummate  power  ;  and  as  the
sound  of  approbation  arose  from  every  part  of  the
House,  he  shouted,  in  his  loudest  and  most  defiant  tone,
'  Is  there  an  Austrian  among  you  ?  Let  him  stand
forth  and  reveal  himself ! '  and  tliis,  which  from  any
other  speaker  would  have  seemed  the  most  arrogant  of
rants,  had  a  thrilling  effect  upon  his  hearers.  Very
judiciously,  however,  he  left  to  others  the  burden  and
the  odium  of  financial  measures  and  of  parliamentary
management,  and  identified  himself  only  with  those
military  enterprises  which  he  understood  so  well.
'  Ignorant  of  the  whole  circle  of  finance,'  wrote  an
acute  observer,  '  he  kept  aloof  from  all  details,  drew
magnificent  plans,  and  left  others  to  find  the  magnifi-
cent means.  Disdaining  to  descend  into  the  operations
of  an  office  which  he  did  not  fill,  he  affected  to  throw
on  the  Treasury  the  execution  of  measures  which  he
dictated.  .  .  .  Secluded  from  all  eyes,  his  orders  were

'  Walpole's  George  II.  iii.  151.

430 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, ch.  vii.

received  as  oracles.  Their  success  was  imputed  to  his
inspiration — misfortunes  and  miscarriages  fell  to  the
account  of  the  more  human  agents.' '

The  German  war  was  naturally  the  least  popular
part  of  the  policy  of  the  Government.  It  cost  much
both  in  men  and  money.  It  involved  the  greatest
dangers  and  it  promised  least  advantage  to  England.
Pitt,  in  opposition,  had  done  everything  in  his  power
to  fan  the  popular  feeling  against  continental  subsidies,
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  proofs  of  the  as-
cendency he  exercised  that  he  was  able  to  extend  that
system  further  than  even  Carteret  had  desired.  He
urged,  in  a  sentence  which  was  often  repeated,  that
he  conquered  America  in  Germany,  and  the  career  of
Frederick  exercised  a  very  natural  fascination  over  the
popular  mind.  One  of  the  most  marked  features  of  the
national  character  is  the  strong  sympathy  which  is
always  shown  in  England  for  a  small  Power  struggling
against  great  odds  ;  a  sympathy  honourable  and  noble
in  itself,  but  which  is  often  carried  to  such  a  point  that
it  makes  the  British  public  wholly  indifferent  to  the
original  cause  of  the  conflict.  Never  in  the  history  of
Europe  was  the  spectacle  of  such  a  struggle  more
strikingly  exhibited  than  by  Frederick  at  this  time.
In  the  campaign  of  1759  it  seemed  as  if  everything  was
lost.  The  veteran  troops  with  which  Frederick  had
begun  the  war  were  now  for  the  most  part  swept  away
and  replaced  by  raw  levies.  The  Austrians,  under
Daun,  were  again  slowly  but  steadily  creeping  on  upon
Saxony,  while  a  great  Russian  army  menaced  Silesia.
Marshal  Dohna,  who  was  sent  at  the  head  of  a  Prussian
army  to  repel  it,  found  himself  out-manoeuvred  and
compelled  to  retire.  Frederick  superseded  him,  and
replaced  him by  General Wedell,  to whom he  gave

'  Walpole's  George  11.  iii.  173,  174.

CH.  vri.  GERMAN CAMPAIGN, 17o9.  431

positive  orders  to  attack  the  Russians.  The  Prussians
were  less  than  30,000.  The  Russians  were  about
70,000.  A  battle  was  fought  at  Ziillichau  on  July  23,
and  the  Prussians  were  completely  defeated,  and  Praiik-
fort-on-Oder  fell  into  the  Russian  hands.  Frederick
then  hastened  in  person,  with  every  soldier  he  could
spare,  to  oppose  the  Russians.  Daun,  as  usual,  had
entrenched  himself  impregnably,  and  knowing  that  the
Russian  army  was  deficient  in  cavalry,  he  sent  12,000
horsemen  with  8,000  foot,  under  the  command  of
General  Laudohn,  to  reinforce  it.  On  August  12  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Frankfort  the  great  battle  of
Kunersdorf  was  fought.  Frederick  commanded  50,000
men ;  the  Russian  army  was  estimated  at  between
80,000  and  90,000.  At  first  fortune  appeared  to  smile
on  the  King,  but  at  the  end  he  experienced  the  most
crushing  of  all  his  defeats.  19,000  Prussians  were
killed,  wounded,  or  made  prisoners.  All  their  cannon
were  taken ;  most  of  their  generals  were  killed  or
wounded.  Frederick  escaped  only  with  great  difficulty,
and  at  the  evening  of  the  day  not  more  than  3,000
Prussian  troops  were  together.  Had  it  not  been  for
the  amazing  dilatoriness  of  the  enemy,  who  were  con-
tent with  the  blood  they  had  shed,  and  who  left
Frederick  time  to  collect  the  scattered  remnants  of  his
army,  to  bring  cannon  from  diflferent  fortresses,  and
to  refill  his  ranks  by  new  levies,  it  would  have  been
impossible  to  continue  the  war.  As  it  was,  Saxony
was  for  a  time  almost  denuded  of  Prussian  troops.  In
the  beginning  of  September,  Dresden  was  taken  by  the
Austrians,  and  in  November,  before  the  armies  retired
into  winter  quarters,  Marshal  Daun  compelled  several
thousand  men,  under  the  Prussian  General  Finck,  to
surrender  themselves  as  prisoners  at  Maxen,  while  a
few  days  later  another  Austrian  general  captured
General  Dierecke,  with  1,500  Prussians,  at  Meissen.

432 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vii.

But  even  in  this  year,  so  disastrous  to  Frederick,
the  star  of  England  shone  proudly  on  the  Continent.
Prince  Ferdinand  had,  it  is  true,  in  the  middle  of  April,
been  defeated  by  the  French  at  Bergen.  But  a  far
more  important  battle  was  fought  at  Minden,  on
August  1,  when  a  French  army  of  more  than  50,000
men  was  utterly  defeated,  with  a  loss  of  at  least  7,000
men  and  of  30  cannon,  by  a  British  and  German  army
of  about  36,000  men.  One  shadow,  indeed,  rested  on
the  fortunes  of  the  day.  Lord  George  Sackville,  who
commanded  the  English  cavalry,  through  a  nervousness
of  which  there  are  very  few  examples  in  English  mili-
tary history,  disobeyed  at  a  critical  moment  of  the
battle  the  order  to  charge,  and  thus  saved  the  French
from  absolute  destruction.  He  was  pronounced  by  a
court-martial  guilty  of  disobedience,  and  unfit  to  serve
the  Crown  in  any  military  capacity  whatever  ;  and
although  great  family  influence  and  very  considerable
abilities  raised  him  in  the  following  reign  to  a  high
position,  his  reputation  was  irrevocably  blasted.  But
the  timidity  of  one  man  was  amply  redeemed  by  the
splendid  courage  shown  by  many  thousands,  and  the
victory  of  Minden  contributed  largely  to  reconcile  the
people  to  the  continental  war.  The  French  still  medi-
tated an  invasion  of  England,  but  all  alarm  from  this
quarter  was  dispelled  in  November,  when  Hawke  de-
feated and  nearly  annihilated  the  French  fleet  in
Quiberon  Bay.

Still,  this  war,  had  it  not  been  accompanied  by
splendid  victories  on  sea,  in  Asia,  and  in  America,  and
had  it  not  been  conducted  by  a  statesman  to  whom  the
nation  could  refuse  nothing,  would  have  met  with  great
and  general  opposition  at  home.  In  1760 — the  last
year  of  the  reign  of  George  II. — the  campaign  opened
very  fatally  for  Frederick.  He  had,  indeed,  made  the
most  extraordinary  efibrts  to  restore  his  affairs. The

CH.  vii.  DESPERATE SITUATION OF FREDERICK.  433

fields  were  almost  deserted,  civil  business  was  almost
in  suspense  through  the  unsparing  levies  which  he  had
raised  for  his  army.  Prisoners  of  war  were  compelled,
at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  to  take  the  oath  of  alle-
giance and  enlist  against  their  countrymen,  and  every
device  was  employed  to  attract  or  inveigle  soldiers  from
the  surrounding  States.  The  English  subsidy  con-
tributed in  part  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and
by  pitiless  exactions  immense  sums  were  drawn  from
the  inhabitants  of  those  unhappy  provinces  which  had
the  misfortune  to  be  occupied  by  Prussian  troops.
Saxon  woods  were  cut  down  and  sold  to  speculators.
The  civil  ofiicials  were  left  unpaid,  while  a  vast  quan-
tity of  base  money  was  coined,  and  issued  from  the
Prussian  Mint.  In  this  manner,  by  imposing  sacrifices
such  as  no  nation  could  undergo,  except  for  self-pre-
servation, Frederick  endeavoured  to  meet  the  enormous
preponderance  of  power  that  was  against  him,  while
the  spirits  of  an  ignorant  and  superstitious  soldiery
were  raised  by  the  circulation  of  false  news  and  of
forged  prophecies.

But  for  a  time  all  seemed  in  vain.  The  campaign
of  1759  had  extended  far  into  the  winter,  and  Frederick
conceived  the  bold  idea  of  renewing  it  while  the  vigil-
ance of  his  enemies  was  relaxed  in  winter  quarters,  and
of  making  another  efibrt  to  drive  the  Austrians  from
Saxony.  His  head-quarters  were  at  Freyberg.  Having
received  reinforcements  from  Prince  Ferdinand,  and
been  joined  by  12,000  men  under  the  hereditary  prince,
he  left  the  latter  to  keep  guard  behind  the  Miilde,  and
in  January  1760,  at  a  time  when  the  snow  lay  deep
upon  the  ground,  he  made  a  fierce  spring  upon  the
Austrians,  who  were  posted  at  Dippoldiswalde ;  but
General  Maguire,  who  commanded  there,  baffled  him
by  the  vigilance  and  skill  with  which  he  guarded  every
pass,  and  compelled  him  to  retrace  his  steps  to  Frey-

VOL. II.  F F

434 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY.  ch.  vil.

berg.  When  the  winter  had  passed  and  the  regular
campaign  had  opened,  Laiidohn,  one  of  the  most  active
of  the  Austrian  generals — the  same  who  had  borne  a
great  part  in  the  victories  of  Hochkirchen  and  Kuners-
dorf — entered  Silesia,  surprised  with  a  greatly  superior
force  the  Prussian  General  Fouque,  compelled  him,  with
some  thousands  of  soldiers,  to  surrender,  and  a  few  days
later  reduced  the  important  fortress  of  Glatz.  Frederick,
at  the  first  news  of  the  danger  of  Fouque,  marched
rapidly  towards  Silesia,  Daun  slowly  following,  while
an  Austrian  corps,  under  General  Lacy,  impeded  his
march  by  incessant  skirmishes.  On  learning  the  sur-
render of  Fouque,  Frederick  at  once  turned  and  hastened
towards  Dresden.  It  was  July,  and  the  heat  was  so
intense  that  on  a  single  day  more  than  a  hundred  of  his
soldiers  dropped  dead  upon  the  march.  He  hoped  to
gain  some  days  upon  Daun,  who  was  still  pursuing,  and
to  become  master  of  Dresden  before  succours  arrived.
As  he  expected,  he  soon  outstripped  the  Austrian
general,  and  the  materials  for  the  siege  were  collected
with  astonishing  rapidity;  but  General  Maguire,  who
commanded  at  Dresden,  defended  it  with  complete
success  till  the  approach  of  the  Austrian  army  obliged
Frederick  to  retire.  Baffled  in  his  design,  he  took  a
characteristic  vengeance  by  bombarding  that  beautiful
city  with  red-hot  balls,  slaughtering  multitudes  of  its
peaceful  inhabitants,  and  reducing  whole  quarters  to
ashes  ;  and  he  then  darted  again  upon  Silesia,  still
followed  by  the  Austrian  general.  Laudohn  had  just
met  with  his  first  reverse,  having  failed  in  the  siege  of
Breslau;  on  August  15,  when  Daun  was  still  far  ofi",
Frederick  fell  upon  him  and  beat  him  in  the  battle  of
Liegnitz.  Soon  after,  however,  this  success  was  counter-
balanced by  Lacy  and  Totleben,  who,  at  the  head  of
some  Austrians  and  Eussians,  had  marched  upon  Berlin,
which,  after  a  brave  resistance,  was  once  more  captured

CH.  vit.  GERMAN CAMPAIGN, 1760.  435

and  ruthlessly  plundered  ;  but  on  the  approach  of
Frederick  the  enemy  speedily  retreated.  Frederick
then  turned  again  towards  Saxony,  which  was  again
occupied  by  Daun,  and  on  November  3  he  attacked  his
old  enemy  in  his  strong  entrenchments  at  Torgau.
Daun,  in  addition  to  the  advantage  of  position,  had  the
advantage  of  great  numerical  superiority,  for  his  army
was  reckoned  at  65,000,  while  that  of  Frederick  was
not  more  than  44,000 .  But  the  generalship  of  Frederick
gained  the  victory.  General  Ziethen  succeeded  in  at-
tacking the  Austrians  in  the  rear,  gaining  the  height,
and  throwing  them  into  confusion.  Daun  was  wounded
and  disabled,  and  General  O'Donnell,  who  was  next  in
command,  was  unable  to  restore  the  Austrian  line.
The  day  was  conspicuous  for  its  carnage  even  among
the  bloody  battles  of  the  Seven  Years'  War  :  20,000
Austrians  were  killed,  wounded,  or  prisoners,  while
14,000  Prussians  were  left  on  the  field.  The  battle
closed  the  campaign  for  the  year,  leaving  all  Saxony  in
the  possession  of  the  Prussians,  with  the  exception  of
Dresden,  which  was  still  held  by  Maguire.

The  English  and  German  army,  under  Prince  Ferdi-
nand, succeeded  in  the  meantime  in  keeping  at  bay
a  very  superior  French  army,  under  Marshal  Broglio  ;
and  several  slight  skirmishes  took  place,  with  various
results.  The  battle  of  Warburg,  which  was  the  most
important,  was  won  chiefly  by  the  British  cavalry,  but
Prince  Ferdinand  failed  in  his  attempts  to  take  Wesel
and  Gottingen  ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  year  the  French
took  up  their  quarters  at  Oassel.^

Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  the  events  of  the  war  to
the  close  of  1760.  The  principal  criticisms  that  have
been  brought  against  the  war  ministry  of  Pitt  were  the

'  I  have  compiled  this  sketch rick and from the inimitable
chiefly  from  the  works  of  Frede- narrative  of  Mr.  Carlyle.

F F 2

436 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ch.  vn.

expense  that  was  incurred,  and  the  uselessness  of  some
of  his  expeditions.  The  latter  criticism  has  been  already
discussed  ;  the  foi'mer,  it  must  be  admitted,  had  some
plausibility.  Notwithstanding  the  long  peace,  and  the
strict  economy  of  Walpole,  the  National  Debt,  which  was
fifty-two  millions  at  the  accession  of  George  II.  in  1727,
had  risen  to  nearly  one  hundred  and  thirty-nine  millions
at  the  peace  of  1763.  Fox  accused  Pitt  of  breaking
windows  with  guineas ;  and  Lord  Bath,  in  a  powerful
pamphlet,  complained  that  the  war  expenses  during  all
King  William's  reign  '  were  at  a  medium  not  above
three  and  a  half  millions  a  year,  and  Queen  Anne's,
though  the  last  years  were  exorbitant,  were  little  more
than  five  millions  ;  whereas  now  twelve  or  fourteen
millions  are  demanded  without  reserve,  and,  what  is
still  more,  voted  without  opposition.'^  In  1760,  no
less  than  sixteen  millions  were  voted. ^  It  may,  how-
ever, be  truly  answered  that  the  expenditure  of  Pitt
was  insignificant  when  compared  with  that  of  North  in
the  American  war,  and  of  his  own  son  in  the  French
war ;  that  the  area  of  hostilities  had  been  immensely
increased  by  the  development  of  the  rival  colonies  in
America  and  India  ;  that  the  scale  of  the  German  war
was  such  that  no  smaller  subsidy  would  have  enabled
Frederick  to  hold  his  own,  while  no  subsidy  was  ever
more  adequately  employed ;  and,  lastly,  that  the  expedi-
tions of  Pitt  were  almost  always  crowned  with  success.
He  maintained  with  much  reason  that  prompt  expendi-
ture is  good  economy  in  war,  and  the  expeditions  he
sent  forth  were  so  admirably  equipped  that  their  blows
were  usually  decisive,  and  had  rarely  to  be  repeated.
Besides  this,  one  of  the  main  objects  of  the  war  was
the  creation  of  a  great  colonial  empire,  which,  at  a  time

'  Letter  to  Two  Great  Men,  p.  33.
2  Walpole's  George  II.  iii.  282.

CH.  viT.  FINANCIAL CO?;DrnON OF ENGLAND.  437

when  free  trade  was  yet  unknown,  was  the  essential  con-
dition of  great  commercial  development.  The  immense
outlets  furnished  for  English  industry,  and  the  complete
empire  which  England  soon  acquired  upon  the  sea,
rapidly  increased  the  national  wealth.  France,  in  1759,
proclaimed  herself  bankrupt,  and  stopped  the  payment
for  her  debts  ;  the  Prussian  people  were  reduced  to  the
lowest  depths  of  misery,  and  their  Government  subsisted
only  by  debasing  the  coin ;  but  in  England  the  chief
springs  of  national  wealth  were  unimpaired,  and  in  no
previous  war  had  commercial  activity  been  so  fully
sustained.  It  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  healthy
financial  condition  of  England  that,  in  nearly  every
war,  her  exports,  though  they  for  a  time  declined  in
value,  soon  ascended  again,  till  they  reached  and  passed,
in  time  of  war,  the  level  of  the  preceding  peace.  In  the
war  which  began  in  1702,  this  was  effected  in  ten  years  ;
in  the  war  which  began  in  1739,  it  was  effected  in  nine
years  ;  in  the  war  wliich  began  in  1755,  the  period  was
much  shorter,  and  already,  in  1758,  the  exports  passed
the  figure  of  the  preceding  peace.*

A  more  just,  and  at  the  same  time  a  more  serious
criticism,  is  that  the  war,  in  its  later  stages,  had  become
unnecessary.  If  Pitt  seriously  desired  peace  with
France,  it  seems  almost  certain  that  he  could  have
obtained  it ;  and  even  if  Europe  could  not  have  been
pacified,  the  withdrawal  from  either  side  of  France  and
England,  without  seriously  disturbing  the  balance  of
power,  would  have  greatly  limited  the  contest.  But
although  some  slight  negotiations  were  made  in  1759,
it  appears  evident  that  Pitt  had  no  real  desire  for  peace,
or  at  least  for  any  peace  that  did  not  involve  the  com-
plete humiliation  of  his  adversary.  Not  content  with
having  almost  annihilated  the  fleets  of  France,  he  desired

Burke's  Third  Letter  on  a  Regicide  Peace.

438 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

to  deprive  her  of  all  her  colonial  empire,  and  also  of  all
participation  in  that  Newfoundland  fishery  which  he
described  as  the  great  nursery  of  her  sailors.  '  Some
time  ago,'  he  said  in  the  midst  of  his  triumphs,  '  I  would
have  been  content  to  bring  France  to  her  knees,  now  I
will  not  rest  till  I  have  laid  her  on  her  back.'  He  once
confessed,  with  a  startling  frankness,  that  he  loved
'  honourable  war.'  He  never  appears  to  have  had  any
adequate  sense  of  the  misery  it  produces,  or  to  have
looked  upon  France  in  any  other  light  than  that  of  an
inevitable  and  natural  enemy.  It  must  be  remembered,
however,  that  while  the  contest  between  the  Prussians
on  the  one  side  and  the  Austrians  and  Russians  on  the
other,  was  one  of  the  most  stubborn  and  most  sanguinary
on  record,  England  had  in  this  war  the  good  fortune  of
gaining  immense  advantages  by  victories  that  were
almost  bloodless.  Never,  perhaps,  since  the  struggle
at  Thermopylge  were  the  military  enterprises  so  dispro-
portioned  to  the  political  results  they  produced.  Pitt
declared  in  Parliament  that  not  1,500  Englishmen  had
fallen  in  the  conquest  of  Canada.^  In  the  battle  of
Plassy,  which  decided  the  ascendency  of  England  in
Bengal,  Clive  lost  only  20  Europeans  and  52  sepoys.^
In  the  battle  of  Wandewash,  which  overthrew  the  French
power  in  India  and  made  England  supreme  in  Madras,
the  losses  of  Coote  in  killed  and  wounded  were  190
Europeans  and  69  black  soldiers.^

It  must  be  added,  too,  that  the  memory  of  two
inglorious  peaces  rankled  bitterly  in  the  mind  of  the
people,  and  that  in  desiring  to  push  the  war  to  the
uttermost,  Pitt  was  in  perfect  accordance  with  their
wishes. For  the  first  time  since  the  great  days  of  Queen

'  Horace  Walpole's  George  II. tions  of  the  British  in Hindostan,
iii.  235.  ii.  178.

*  Orme's Military Transac-  ^  Ibid.  ii.  589.

en.  VII.  PITT AND MARLBuROUGH.  439

Anne,  the  nation  was  drinking  the  intoxicating  cup  of
military  glory,  and  Marlborough  himself  was  never
supported  by  an  enthusiasm  as  powerful  and  as  un-
divided as  that  which  was  elicited  by  the  triumphs  of
Pitt.  Marlborough  was  personally  never  very  popular.
A  large  party  in  England  regarded  every  victory  he
won  as  injurious  to  their  policy  and  their  interests.
He  was  fighting  chiefly  for  continental  objects,  and
though  the  splendour  of  his  genius  threw  a  flood  of
glory  upon  the  nation  to  which  he  belonged,  English
soldiers  bore  but  a  small  part  in  the  battles  which  he
won.  Of  the  52,000  men  who  conquered  at  Blenheim
18,000  were  imperial  troops  under  Eugene.  Of  the
remainder  who  were  commanded  by  Marlborough  about
a  fourth  part  were  English.^  At  Ramillies  the  chief
brunt  of  the  battle  was  borne  by  the  Dutch  and  the
Danes,  who  encountered  and  with  little  assistance  cut
to  pieces  the  household  troops  who  were  the  very  flower
of  the  army  of  France.^  At  Oudenarde  the  Confederates
lost  in  killed  and  wounded  2,972  men.  Less  than  180
of  these  were  English.^  Of  the  129  battalions  who
formed  the  victorious  army  at  Malplaquet  only  1 9  were
English,  and  the  English  suflered  little  more  than  a  tenth
part  of  the  whole  losses  of  the  allies.*  But  no  other
European  nation  took  part  in  the  conquests  of  Canada
and  India  or  in  the  naval  victories  of  Hawke,  and  the
fruits  of  these  triumphs  belonged  to  England  alone.

'  Marlborough's  wing  consisted  are  hardly  mentioned  in most

of  48  battalions  and  86  squad-  English  accounts  of  these  battles,

rons. Of  these  14  battalions  and  lost 8,463 men at Malplaquet,

13 squadrons were English. —  more  than  1,500  men  at  Oude-

Lediard's  Life  of  Marlborough,  narde,  and  most  of  those who

i.  368.  fell  at  Ramillies. I  may  mention

^  Ibid.  ii.  26,  27.  that  Lediard's  military  statistics

^  Ibid.  ii.  284.  are  much  fuller  than  those  of

*  1,866 men out of 18,353.  Coxe,
Ibid.  ii.  501. The  Dutch,  who

440 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ch.  vii.

Party  spirit  had  wholly  gone  down.  The  King  was
now  reconciled  to  his  great  minister.  Parliament  was
almost  unanimous,  and  for  the  first  time  for  many  years
it  was  in  real  sympathy  with  the  people.

Pitt  made  large  demands  upon  the  self-sacrifice
and  resolution  of  the  nation,  but  in  this  respect  he  was
never  disappointed.  England  under  his  guidance  was
almost  wholly  unlike  the  England  of  Walpole  and
Pelham.  Its  relaxed  energies  were  braced  anew.  The
thick  crust  of  selfishness,  corruption,  and  effeminacy  was
broken,  and  an  emulation  of  heroism  and  enterprise  was
displayed.  Foreign  nations  cordially  recognised  the
greatness  of  the  change.  '  England,'  said  Frederick,
'  had  long  been  in  labour,  but  had  at  last  produced
a  man ; '  and  long  years  after  Pitt  had  been  removed
from  office,  it  was  observed  that  the  mere  mention
of  the  probability  of  his  returning  to  power  was  suf-
ficient to  quell  the  boasts  of  the  French.  At  the  same
time  he  never  appears  to  have  been  regarded  in  France
with  the  intensity  of  hatred  which  was  bestowed  upon
his  son.  The  magnanimous  and  generous  features  of
his  character,  and  the  somewhat  theatrical  nature  of
his  greatness  in  some  degree  dazzled  even  his  enemies  ;
and  it  is  remarkable  that  one  of  the  most  eloquent
eulogies  of  Chatham  is  from  a  Frenchman,  the  Abbe
Kaynal.

The  intellectual  and  moral  qualities  that  constitute  a
great  war  minister  and  a  great  home  minister  are  so
very  difierent  that  they  have  hardly  ever  been  united
in  the  same  man.  In  judging  the  influence  of  Pitt
on  home  politics  we  must  remember  how  short  a  time
he  was  in  power  and  in  health.  During  the  last  years
of  George  II.,  when  his  authority  was  so  great,  the
energies  of  the  nation  were  absorbed  in  the  war ;  nor
did  he  ever  attain  in  home  politics  the  authority  which
was  willingly  conceded  him  in  military  administration.

cii.  VII.  Pitt's  home  policy.  441

In  the  succeeding  reign  he  was  either  in  opposition,  or,
being  in  office,  was  prostrated  by  illness.  His  pro-
posals were  seldom  or  never  carried  into  effect,  or
even  fully  elaborated.  They  were  like  the  unfinished
sketches  of  a  great  artist,  or  like  beacon-lights  kindled
in  the  darkness  to  mark  out  a  path  for  his  successors.
That  he  possessed  the  qualities  of  a  great  home  or  peace
minister  can  hardly  be  alleged.  In  matters  of  finance
and  on  questions  of  commercial  policy  he  was  extremely
ignorant.  We  look  in  vain  in  his  career  for  any  great
signs  of  administrative  or  constructive  talent,  and  he
was  eminently  deficient  in  the  tact,  the  moderation,  and
the  temper  that  are  requisite  for  party  management.
Yet  even  in  this  sphere  he  exercised  a  profound  and,  on
the  whole,  a  salutary  influence.  The  most  remarkable
characteristic  of  his  home  policy  was  the  great  pro-
minence he  gave  to  the  moral  side  of  legislation,  or,
in  other  words,  the  skill  with  which  he  acted  upon
the  higher  enthusiasms  of  the  people.  In  his  con-
ception of  politics,  the  supreme  end  of  legislation  is
to  inspire  the  nation  with  a  lofty  spirit  of  patriotism,
courage,  and  enterprise ;  to  enlist  its  nobler  qualities
habitually  in  the  national  service,  and  to  make  the
Legislature  a  faithful  reflex  of  its  sentiments.  No
preceding  statesman  showed  so  full  a  confidence  in  the
people.  It  was  thus  that,  adopting  a  suggestion  of
Argyle,^  he  armed  the  Jacobite  clans,  and  attracted  to
national  channels  the  martial  enthusiasm  of  Scotland,
which  had  been  so  long  in  the  service  of  the
Stuarts.  It  was  thus  that  he  proposed,  and  at  last
carried  out,  the  scheme  of  a  national  militia,  and  but
for  the  opposition  of  his  colleagues,  he  would  have
extended  it  to  Scotland.  It  was  thus  that  he  sup-
ported, though without success, the measure which

'  See  Ramsay's  Scotland  and  Scotchmen  of  the  Eighteenth  Cen-
tury, ii.  504,  505,  513,  514,

442 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUEY. CH.  vii.

was  brought  forward  by  Pratt  in  1758  to  extend  the
operation  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  which  applied
only  to  those  who  were  detained  on  some  criminal
charge,  to  all  who  were  confined  under  any  pretence
whatever.  In  the  following  reign  he  was  the  first
conspicuous  statesman  who  raised  the  banner  of  parlia-
mentary reform,  and  it  was  characteristic  of  him  that
he  based  his  proposal,  not  on  the  common  ground  of
the  irregularities  or  anomalies  of  the  Legislature,  but
on  the  ground  that  the  strong  patriotic  spirit  that
animated  the  country  was  not  adequately  represented
in  it ;  that  corrupt  or  personal  motives  had  lowered  its
tone,  and  that  an  infusion  of  the  popular  element  was
necessary  to  reinvigorate  it.

It  was  in  the  same  spirit  that  he  attempted  in
his  latter  days  to  break  down  the  system  of  party
government,  under  the  belief  that  it  diverted  the
energies  of  politicians  from  national  objects  ;  and  to
withdraw  the  government  of  India  from  the  East
India  Company,  under  the  belief  that  so  great  a
territory  should  not  remain  in  the  hands  of  a  mercan-
tile company,  or  be  governed  on  merely  commercial
principles,  but  should  be  thoroughly  incorporated  in
the  British  Empire.  No  one  who  follows  his  career
can  doubt  that,  had  he  been  in  power  at  the  time  of
the  American  troubles,  he  could  have  conciliated  the
colonies ;  and  it  was  during  the  later  ministry  of
Pitt  that  the  first  steps  were  taken  towards  the  in-
troduction of  a  better  government  into  Ireland.  He
never  could  have  conducted  party  government  with
the  tact  of  Walpole ;  he  never  could  have  framed,
like  Burke,  a  great  measure  of  economical  reform,  or
have  presided,  like  Peel,  over  a  great  revolution  of
the  commercial  system  ;  but  no  minister  had  a  greater
power  of  making  a  sluggish  people  brave,  or  a  slavish
people  free,  or  a  discontented  people  loyal.

CH.  VII.  DEMOCRATIC INFLUENCE.  443

Although  he  cannot  be  said  to  have  carried  a  single
definite  measure  increasing  the  power  of  the  people,
or  diminishing  the  corrupt  influence  of  the  Crown  or
of  the  aristocracy,  it  may  be  asserted,  without  a  para-
dox, that  he  did  more  for  the  popular  cause  than  any
statesman  since  the  generation  that  effected  the  Re-
volution. With  very  little  parliamentary  connection,
and  with  no  favour  from  royalty,  he  became,  by  the
force  of  his  abilities,  and  by  the  unbounded  popularity
which  he  enjoyed,  the  foremost  man  of  the  nation.  In
him  the  people  for  the  first  time  felt  their  power.  He
was  essentially  their  representative,  and  he  gloried  in
avowing  it.  He  declared,  even  before  the  Privy
Council,  that  he  had  been  called  to  ofiice  by  the  voice
of  the  people,  and  that  he  considered  himself  account-
able to  them  alone.  The  great  towns,  and  especially
London,  constantly  and  warmly  supported  him  ;  and
though  his  popularity  was  sometimes  for  a  short  time
eclipsed,  it  was  incomparably  greater  than  that  of  any
previous  statesman.  In  our  days,  such  popularity,
united  with  such  abilities,  would  have  enabled  a
statesman  to  defy  all  opposition.  In  the  days  of
Pitt  it  was  not  so,  and  he  soon  found  himself  incap-
able of  conducting  government  without  the  assistance
of  the  borough  patronage  of  the  aristocracy,  or  of  re-
sisting the  hostility  of  the  Crown.  But  although  he
was  not  omnipotent  in  politics,  the  voice  of  the  people
at  least  made  him  so  powerful  that  no  Government  was
stable  when  he  opposed  it,  and  that  all  parties  sought
to  win  him  to  their  side.  This  was  a  new  fact  in
parliamentary  history,  and  it  marks  a  great  step  in
the  progress  of  democracy.

His  influence  was  also  very  great  in  raising  the
moral  tone  of  public  life.  His  transparent  and  some-
what ostentatious  purity  formed  a  striking  contrast
to the prevailing  spirit  of  English  politics, and  the

444 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vii.

power  and  persistence  with  which  he  appealed  on  every
occasion  to  the  higher  and  unselfish  motives  infused
a  new  moral  energy  into  the  nation.  The  political
materialism  of  the  school  of  Walpole  perished  under
his  influence,  and  his  career  was  an  important  element
in  a  great  change  which  was  passing  over  England.
Under  the  influence  of  many  adverse  causes  the  stan-
dard of  morals  had  been  greatly  depressed  since  the
Restoration ;  and  in  the  early  Hanoverian  period  the
nation  had  sunk  into  a  condition  of  moral  apathy
rarely  paralleled  in  its  history.  But  from  about  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  reforming  spirit
was  once  more  abroad,  and  a  steady  movement  of
moral  ascent  may  be  detected.  The  influence  of  Pitt
in  politics,  and  the  influence  of  Wesley  and  his  fol-
lowers in  religion,  were  the  earliest  and  most  im-
portant agencies  in  efiecting  it.  It  was  assisted  in
another  department  by  the  example  of  George  III.,
who  introduced  an  improved  tone  into  fashionable  life,
and  it  was  reflected  in  the  smaller  sphere  of  public
amusements  in  the  Shakespearian  revival  of  Garrick.
In  most  respects  Pitt  and  Wesley  were,  it  is  true,
extremely  unlike.  The  animating  principles  of  the
latter  are  to  be  found  in  doctrines  that  are  most
distinctively  Christian,  and  especially  in  that  aspect  of
Christian  teaching  which  is  most  fitted  to  humble  men.
Pitt  was  a  man  of  pure  morals,  unchallenged  orthodoxy,
and  of  a  certain  lofty  piety, ^  but  yet  his  character  was
essentially  of  the  Roman  type,  in  which  patriotism  and
magnanimity  and  well-directed  pride  are  the  first  of
virtues  ;  and  the  sentences  of  the  Latin  poets  and  the
examples  of  the  age  of  the  Scipios,  which,  in  a  letter  to  a
bishop,  he  once  called  '  the  apostolic  age  of  patriotism,'

'  See  especially  a  striking  letter  about  religion  to  his  nephew.-
Chatham  Correspondence,  i.  1^-15.

CH.  VII.  PITT, WESLEY AND WALPOLE.  445

appear  to  have  left  the  deepest  impression  on  his  mind.
But  with  all  these  differences  there  was  a  real  analogy
and  an  intimate  relation  between  the  work  of  these  two
men.  The  religious  and  political  notions  prevailing  in
the  early  Hanoverian  period  were  closely  connected.
The  theological  conception  which  looked  upon  religion
as  a  kind  of  adjunct  to  the  police  force,  which  dwelt
almost  exclusively  on  the  prudence  of  embracing  it  and
on  the  advantages  it  could  confer,  and  which  regarded
all  spirituality  and  all  strong  emotions  as  fanaticism,
corresponded  very  faithfully  to  that  political  system
under  which  corruption  was  regarded  as  the  natural
instrument,  and  the  maintenance  of  material  interests
as  the  supreme  end  of  government ;  while  the  higher
motives  of  political  action  were  systematically  ridiculed
and  discouraged.  By  Wesley  in  the  sphere  of  religion,
by  Pitt  in  the  sphere  of  politics,  the  tone  of  thought  and
feeling  was  changed,  and  this  is  perhaps  the  aspect  of
the  career  of  Pitt  which  possesses  the  most  abiding
interest  and  importance.  The  standard  of  political
honour  was  perceptibly  raised.  It  was  felt  that  en-
thusiasm, disinterestedness,  and  self-sacrifice  had  their
place  in  politics;  and  although  there  was  afterwards,
for  short  periods,  extreme  corruption,  public  opinion
never  acquiesced  in  it  again.

It  was  a  singular  fortune  that  produced,  in  so  brief
a  period  from  the  ranks  of  the  Whig  party,  one  of  the
greatest  peace  ministers  and  the  greatest  war  minister  of
England,  and  it  would  be  difiicult  to  find  two  nearly
contemporary  statesmen,  of  the  same  party  and  of  equal
eminence,  who  in  character  and  policy  were  more
directly  opposed  than  Walpole  and  Pitt.  Each  was  in
many  respects  immeasurably  superior  to  the  other,  and
in  some  respects  they  will  hardly  admit  of  comparison.
We  can  scarcely,  for  example,  compare  a  speaker  who
was  simply  a  clear,  shrewd,  and  forcible  debater,  with-

446 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. ch.  vil.

out  polish  of  manner  or  elevation  of  language,  with  an
orator  who  surpassed  Chesterfield  in  grace,  while  he
equalled  Demosthenes  in  power.  In  his  private  life,
Walpole,  though  a  man  of  great  kindness  of  nature,  was
notoriously  lax  and  immoral,  while  Pitt  was  without  re-
proach ;  but  we  must  remember  that  the  first  was  full  of
constitutional  vigour,  while  the  second  was  a  confirmed
invalid.  In  public  integrity  there  was,  I  think,  less  real
difference  between  them  than  is  usually  imagined.  There
is  no  proof  that  Walpole  ever  dishonestly  appropriated
public  money.  Both  statesmen  received  large  rewards
for  their  services,  and  these  rewards  in  kind  and  in
amount  were  nearly  the  same.  The  factious  conduct
of  Walpole  during  the  administration  of  Stanhope  may
be  fairly  balanced  by  the  conduct  of  Pitt  towards  Wal-
pole, and  afterwards  towards  Newcastle.  Pitt,  however,
was  entirely  free  from  nepotism,  while  Walpole  bestowed
vast  public  revenues  upon  his  sons.  Walpole  hated
everything  theatrical  and  declamatory.  He  had  too
little  dignity  for  the  position  he  occupied,  and  in  his
best  days  he  was  more  liked  than  respected.  Pitt  was
always  in  some  degree  an  actor.  His  want  of  social
freedom  greatly  impaired  his  success  as  a  party  leader,
and  he  inspired  more  awe  than  any  other  English  poli-
tician. The  ability  of  the  one  was  shown  chiefly  in
averting,  that  of  the  other  in  meeting,  danger.  A
cautious  wisdom  predominated  in  the  first,  an  enter-
prising greatness  in  the  second.  The  first  dealt  almost
exclusively  with  material  interests,  and  sought  only  to
allay  strong  passions.  The  second  delighted  in  evok-
ing, appealing  to,  and  directing  the  most  fiery  enthu-
siasms. The  first  was  incomparably  superior  in  his
knowledge  of  finance;  the  second  in  his  management
of  war.  The  first  loved  peace,  and  made  England  very
prosperous ;  the  second  loved  war,  and  surrounded  his
country  with  glory.

CH.  VII.  DEATH OF GEORGE II.  447

The  influence  of  the  two  men  on  political  morals  was,
as  we  have  seen,  directly  opposite.  With  much  quiet
patriotism  Walpole  had  none  of  the  loftiness  of  character
of  Pitt,  and  was  entirely  incapable  of  the  traits  of  splen-
did magnanimity  and  disinterestedness  which  were  so
conspicuous  in  the  latter.  Though  he  did  not  originate,
he  accepted,  systematised,  and  extended  parliamentary
corruption  ;  his  personal  integrity,  though  probably
very  real,  was  never  above  suspicion,  and  his  ridicule  of
all  who  professed  high  political  principles  contributed
very  much  to  lower  the  prevailing  tone.  It  was  re-
served for  Pitt  to  break  the  spell  of  corruption,  and  he
did  more  than  any  other  English  statesman  to  ennoble
public  life  and  to  raise  the  character  of  public  men.

The  death  of  George  II.,  on  October  25,  1760,  cut
short  the  ministerial  ascendency  of  Pitt  as  well  as  the
undisputed  supremacy  of  the  Whig  party.  Without
being  in  any  sense  of  the  word  a  great,  or  in  any  high
sense  of  the  word  a  good  man,  this  sovereign  deserves,
I  think,  at  least  in  his  public  capacity,  more  respect
than  he  has  received,  and  England  owes  much  to  his
government.  He  was,  it  is  true,  narrow,  ignorant,  ill-
tempered,  avaricious,  and  somewhat  vain,  exceedingly
faulty  in  his  domestic  relations,  and  entirely  destitute
of  all  taste  for  literature,  science,  or  art ;  but  he  was
also  an  eminently  honest,  truthful,  and  honourable  man  ;
and  during  a  period  of  thirty-three  years,  and  often
under  circumstances  of  strong  temptation,  he  discharged
with  remarkable  fidelity  the  duties  of  a  constitutional
monarch.  He  was  unfaithful  to  his  marriage-bed,  but
he  had  a  sincere  respect  and  admiration  for  his  wife ;
and,  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  country,  he  allowed
himself  to  be  governed  mainly  by  her  superior  intellect.
He  was  extremely  fond  of  war,  and  showed  distinguished
personal  courage  at  Oudenarde  and  at  Dettingen  ;  but
he  cordially  recognised  the  ability  of  the  most  pacific

448 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. ch.  vil.

minister  of  the  age,  and  he  supported  Walpole  with
honourable  constancy  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of
his  career.  He  loved  money  greatly,  but  he  lived
strictly  within  the  revenues  that  were  assigned  to  him,
and  was  the  most  economical  English  sovereign  since
Elizabeth.  He  was  a  despotic  sovereign  in  Germany,  as
well  as  a  constitutional  sovereign  in  England ;  but  the
habits  he  had  formed  in  the  first  capacity  never  induced
him  to  trench  in  the  smallest  degree  upon  the  liber-
ties of  England,  and  on  several  occasions  he  sacrificed
frankly  his  strongest  preferences  and  antipathies.  It
was  thus  that  he  allowed  Walpole  to  restrain  him  from
the  war  which  he  desired ;  that  he  received  Newcastle
as  minister  ;  that  he  discarded  Carteret,  who,  of  all  poli-
ticians, was  most  pleasing  to  him ;  that  he  consented,
though  only  after  a  long  struggle,  to  give  his  confidence
to  Pitt,  who  had  grossly  insulted  him.  He  yielded,  un-
gracefully and  ungraciously  indeed,  and  usually  with  an
explosion  of  violent  language,  but  yet  honestly  and
frankly ;  and  no  minister  to  whom  he  had  ever  given
his  confidence  had  cause  to  complain  of  him.  '  The  late
good  old  King,'  said  Chatham  in  the  succeeding  reign,
'  had  something  of  humanity,  and  amongst  many  other
royal  virtues  he  possessed  justice,  truth,  and  sincerity
in  an  eminent  degree,  so  that  he  had  something  about
him  by  which  it  was  possible  to  know  whether  he  liked
you  or  disliked  you.'  He  was  a  respectable  military
administrator  and  an  industrious  man  of  business,  and
some  of  the  sayings  recorded  of  him  exhibit  considerable
shrewdness  and  point.  Courtly  divines  and  poets  were
accustomed  to  eulogise  him  in  language  which  would  be
exaggerated  if  applied  to  the  genius  of  Napoleon  or  to
the  virtues  of  Marcus  Aurelius.  An  impartial  historian
will  acknowledge  that  the  reign  of  George  II.  was  in
its  early  part  one  of  the  most  prosperous  and  tranquil,
and  in  its  latter  part  one  of  the  most  glorious  periods  of

en.  vu.  DKATH OF (JEOKGK H.  41.9

English  history ;  and  that  the  moderation  with  which
tlie  sovereign  exercised  his  prerogative,  and  the  fidelity
with  which  he  saci'ificed  his  own  wishes  in  the  support
of  his  ministers,  contributed  in  no  small  measure  to  the
result.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME,

TRINTCD BY

3P0TI LSWOODK AXD CO., NEW-SIUKKT SQUARB

I.OXDOM

VOL n.  G  Q

STANDARD HISTORICAL WORKS.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND,  from  the
ACCESSION  of  JAMES  the  SECOND.
Popular  Edition, 2  vols,  crown  8vo.  5s. I People's  Edition,  4  vols,  crown  8vo  IC*.
Student's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  12,?. | Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  8vo.  iSs.
Library  Edition,  5  vols.  8vo.  £4.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS.

student's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  6»-. I Trevelyan  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  i).i.
People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  Svo.  Ss. \ Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols.  Svo.  244'.
Library  Edition,  3  vols.  8vo.  36s.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  ESSAYS,  with  LAYS  of  ANCIENT
EOME. In  1  volume.

Popular  Edition,  crown  Svo.  2*.  6d.

Authorised  Edition,  crown  8vo.  2s.  6d  ;  or  Zs.  6d.  gilt  edges.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS.

People's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  is.  Gd.  | Library  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  '21s.

MACAULAY'S (Lord) MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS

and  SPEECHES.
Popular  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  2s.6d.  | Student's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  Svo.  6.«.
Cabinet  Edition,  including  Indian  Penal  Code,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,  and  Miscel-
laneous Poems,  4  vols,  post  Svo.  24.s-.

MACAULAY'S  (Lord)  COMPLETE  WORKS.

Cabinet  Edition,  16  vols,  post  8vo.  £4.  16s.  \  Library  Edition,  8  vols,  demy  Svo.  £5.  5*.

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  from  the  FALL  of  WOLSEY
to  the  DEFEAT  of  the  SPANISH  AKMADA.  By  James  A.  Froudk.
12  vols,  crown  Svo.  £2.  2s.

The  ENGLISH  in  IRELAND  in  the  EIGHTEENTH
CENTUEY. By  Jaaies  A.  Fhoude. 3  vols,  crown  Svo.  18s.

SHORT  STUDIES  on  GREAT  SUBJECTS.  By  James
A.  Fboude.  Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols,  crown  Svo.  24s.  Popular
Edition,  4  vols,  crown  Svo.  3s.  6d.  each.

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  from  the  ACCESSION  of
JAMES  I.  to  the  OUTBREAK  of  the  GREAT  CIVIL  WAR.  By
S.  R.  Gabdinee. 10  vols,  crown  Svo.  6s.  each.

HISTORY  of  the  GREAT  CIVIL  WAR,  1642-1649.  By
S.\MtrEL  R.  Gabdinee,  LL.D.  &c.  (3  vols.)  A''oI.  I.  1642-1644.
With  24  Maps  (out  of  print).  Vol.  II.  1644-1647.  With  21  Maps,
Svo.  24s. Vol.  III.  1647-1649. With  8  Maps,  Svo.  28s.

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  in  the  EIGHTEENTH  CEN-
TURY.  By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky.  Svo.  Vols.  I.andll.  1700-1760.  36s.
Vols.  III.  and  IV.  1760-1784,  36s.  Vols.  V.  and  VI.  1784-1793,  36s.
Vols.  VII.  and  VIII.  1793-1 800,  36s.  Cabinet  Edition.  England,
7  vols,  cro-wn  Svo.  6s.  each. Ireland,  5  vols,  crown  Svo.  6s.  each.

London:  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

STANDARD HISTORICAL WORKS.

The  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  since
the  ACCESSION  of  GEOKGE  III.  1760-1870.  By  Sir  T.  Erskinr
May  (Lord  Fabxbo rough). 3  vols,  crown  8vo.  IS.--

HISTORY  of  ENGLAND  from  the  CONCLUSION  of  the

GKEAT  WAR  in  ISlo  to  the  YEAR  1858. By  Spencer  Walpolr.
Library  Edition. 5  vols. 8vo.  £4.  lOs.
Cabixet  Edition'. 6  vols,  crown  8vo.  6s.  each.

A  JOURNAL  of  the REIGNS  of  KING  GEORGE  IV,

KING WILLIAM  IV.  and QUEEN VICTORIA. By  the  latp
Charles  C.  F.  Greville,  Esq. 8  vols,  crown  8vo.  6s.  each.

A  HISTORY  of  TAXATION  and  TAXES  in  ENGLAND.
from  the  EARLIEST  TIMES  to  the  PRESENT  DAY.  By  Stephen
Dowell,  Assistant  Solicitor  of  Inland  Revenue. 4  vols.  8vo.  48.s.

The  ENGLISH  CHURCH  in  the  EIGHTEENTH  CEN-
TURY. By  Charles  J.  Abbey  and  John  H.OvEKTON.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.6(/.

HISTORY  of  the  PAPACY  daring  the  REFORMATION.

By  Mandell  Creighton,  D.D.  LL.D.  Bishop  of  Peterborough. 8vo.
Vols.  I.  and  IL  1378-1464,  32s. Vols.  III.  and  IV.  1464-1518,  24.v.

The HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY of EUROPE. By

Edward  A.  Freeman. With  65  Maps. 2  vols.  8vo.  31s.  6d.
HISTORY of  the ROMANS under  the  EMPIRE. By

Dean Merivale. Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols, post  8vo.  48s. Cheap

Edition,  8  vols,  crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.
A  HISTORY of  the FRENCH REVOLUTION. By  H.

Morse Stephens, Balliol College, Oxford. 3  vols.  8vo. Vols.

I.  and  II.  18,'!,  each.

HISTORY  of  CIVILISATION  in  ENGLAND  and
FRANCE,  SPAIN  and  SCOTLAND.  By  H.  T.  Buckle.  3  vols,
crown  8vo.  24.9.

The  HISTORY  of  EUROPEAN  MORALS  from  AUGUS-
TUS to  CHARLEMAGNE.  By  W.  E.  H.  Leckt.  2  vols.cr.8vo.  ir..<.
HISTORY  of  the  RISE  and  INFLUENCE  of  the  SPIRIT

of  RATIONALISM  in  EUROPE. By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky. 2  vols,
crown  8ro.  16.<.

DEMOCRACY in AMERICA. By  A. de Tocqueville.

Translated  by  H.  Reeve. 2  vols,  crown  8vo.  16s.

The  HISTORY  of  PHILOSOPHY,  from  Thales  to  Comte.

By  G.  H.  Lewes. 2  vols.  8vo.  32s.
The  HISTORY  of  ISRAEL. By  Professor  Heinrich  Ewald.

8vo. Vols.  I.  and  II.  24s. Vols.  III.  and  IV.  21s. Vol.  V.  18s.

Vol.  VI.  16s. Vol.  VII.  21s. Vol.  VIII.  18s.

London:  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

no

THE  LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Santa  Barbara

THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW.

Series  9482

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

See  Spine  for
Barcode  Number
