HISTOKY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

XYIIITH  CENTUEY

VOL.  17.

WORKS BY
WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY.

HISTORY OF ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY.

Li  BRAKY  EDITION. 8  vols. 8vo.  £7.  4*.

Vols.  I.  and  II.,  1700-1760,  36*.  Vols.  III.  and  IV.,  1760-1784,  36$.
Vole.  V.  aid  VI.,  1784-17^3,  36*.  Vols.  VII.  and  VIII.,
1793-1810,  36*.

CABINET  EDITION. ENGLAND. 7  vols. Crown  8vo.  5*.  net  each.
IRELAND. 5  vols. Crown  8 vo.  5*.  net  each.

LEADERS  OF  PUBLIC  OPINION  IN  IRELAND. 2  vols.
8vo.  25*.  net.

HISTORY  OF  EUROPEAN  MORALS  FROM  AUGUSTUS
TO  CHARLEMAGNE. 2  vols. Crown  8vo.  10*.  uet.

HISTORY  OF  THE RISE AND INFLUENCE OF  THE
SPIRIT OP  RATIONALISM IN EUROPE.
CABINET  EDITION. 2  vols. Crown  8vo.  10*.  net.
AUTHORISED  CHEAP  EDITION. 1  vol. Crown  8vo.  2*.  Qd.  net.

DEMOCRACY  AND  LIBERTY.

LIBRARY  EDITION. 2  vols. 8vo.  36*.

CABINET  EDITION. 2  vols. Crown  8vo.  10*.  net.

THE  MAP  OF  LIFE  :  Conduct  and  Character. Crown  8vo.
5$.  net.

HISTORICAL  AND  POLITICAL  ESSAYS.  8vo.  10*.  6d.  net.
POEMS. Fcap.  8vo.  5s.

A  MEMOIR  OF  THE  RIGHT  HON.  WILLIAM  EDWARD
HARTPOLE  LEOKY.  By  His  WIFE.  With  Portraits.  8vo.
12*.  64.  net.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.,  39  Paternoster  Row,  London,
New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

A

HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY

BY

WILLIAM  EDWARD  HABTPOLE  LECKY

NEW IMPRESSION

VOLUME  IV.

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39  PATEENOSTER  ROW,  LONDON
NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY,  AND  CALCUTTA

1910

All rights reserved

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Cabinet  Edition,  first  printed  March  1892;
Reprinted  March  1896 ;  April  1899 ;  September
1901:  June  1902;  March  1906;  and  September  1910.

CONTENTS

THE FOURTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER XI.

AMERICA,  1763-1776.

PAGB

Effects  of  the  Peace  of  Paris  on  the  American  colonies .  1

Predictions  of  their  separation  from  England . . .  2

Question  of  the  cession  of  Canada 3

Impossibility  of  retaining  the  colonies  by  force . . .  6

Strong  loyalty  of  the  colonies 8

Their  independence  of  each  other 10

New  England 13

The  Middle  States 18

Virginia 24

The  other  Southern  colonies 29

Intellectual  and  material  condition  of  the  colonies . .  30

Their  moral  and  political  condition 34

Their  relations  to  the  mother  country . .  .38

And  to  the  Crown 41

Commercial  restrictions .......  42

American  smuggling ........  4(5

'  Writs  of  assistance ' .......  48

Elements  of  dissension  .... ...  49

Policy  of  Grenville.

Eevision  of  the  trade  laws .52

Establishment  of  an  army  in  the  colonies . . . ,  56

Determination  to  tax  the  colonies . • • .  59

CONTENTS  OP

PAM

Earlier  proposals  to  tax  America 61

Arguments  in  favour  of  it  . . . . . . ,62

Franklin  on  a  colonial  army . . . . . . . 67

The  Stamp  Act 68

Speech  of  Barre 74

Taxation  and  representation
Commercial  concessions. Quartering  Act
General  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act .
Impossibility  of  enforcing  it  . :

Charles  Townshcnd  proposes  to  tax  America . .

Suspends  ths  New  York  Assembly

Establishes  a  new  Board  of  Customs  ....
Imposes  new  duties  for  purposes  of  revenue  . . .

Eeview  of  Townshend's  policy

Beception  of  Townshend's  measures  in  America . .
Death  of  Townshend  (September  1767) ....
Changes  in  the  Ministry. Ascendency  of  North . .
Hillsborough  censures  the  Massachusetts  Circular .

Growing  spirit  of  insurrection

Samuel  Adams

Attitude  of  Massachusetts

Attitude  of  the  English  Parliament,  1768  and  1769 .
Eevival  of  a  law  for  trying  traitors  in  England
Determination  to  repeal  all  the  duties  except  that  on  tea
Recall  of  Bernard. Submission  of  New  York .

The  Boston  massacre

Acquittal  of  the  soldiers. American  humanity  . .

The  tea  duty

Abandonment  of  the  non-importation  agreements .

75

79
80
84

The  Rockingham  Hinisiry.

General  indifference  to  American  affairs  ....  84

Distress  in  the  trading  towns 86

Meeting  of  Parliament  (December  1765).  The  Opposition  86

Pitt  justifies  the  Americans 89

Government  repeals  the  Stamp  Act,  but  asserts  the  right

totax 93

Necessity  of  the  Declaratory  Act 94

New  revision  of  the  commercial  laws  .  .  .  .  .  97

Opinion  in  America 99

Governor  Bernard 101

New  York  refuses  to  obey  the  Mutiny  Act.  '  The  Farmer's

Letters ' 104

The  Chatham  Ministry.

Irritation  in  England  against  America  ....  105

107
110
110
110
111
113
115
117
117
118
119
123
123
124
125
120
127
1HO
133
135

THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.  vil

PAGE

The  destruction  of  the  '  Gaspee ' 136

Measure  to  protect  the  King's  ships. Committees  of  cor-
respondence 138

Benjamin  Franklin 138

Sends  Hutchinson's  letters  to  America . . . .  145

Wedderburn's  invective 150

The  Boston  tea  ships 153

Impeachment  of  Oliver 154

English  opinion  on  the  American  Question.

Tucker  advocates  the  cession  of  America . . . .  154

Adam  Smith 156

Chatham «...  159

Burke 160

Parliament  in  favour  of  coercion 165

Closing  of  Boston  harbour .  165

Suspension  of  the  Charter  of  Massachusetts  . . . .  166

Soldiers  to  be  tried  in  England 167

General  Gage  made  Governor  of  Massachusetts. Quarter-

. ing  Act 167

The  Quebec  Act 168

The  other  colonies  support  Boston .....  173

Numerous  riots .  175

Proclamation  of  Gage 179

The  Congress  at  Philadelphia  (September  1774) . .  180
General  arming.  How  far  Americans  wished  for  indepen-
dence 185

Illusions  in  America  and  in  England ....  188

Divided  opinion  in  America 191

The  loyalists 192

Enrolment  of  an  American  army.  Capture  of  Fort  William  194

English  Parliament  meets,  November  1774 . . . .  195

New  efforts  of  conciliation  by  Chatham ....  196

By  Burke,  Hartley,  &c . .  197

Parliament  cuts  off  the  trade  of  America. Increases  the

army  at  Boston 198

Conciliatory  measure  of  North . .....  199

Battle  of  Lexington,  April  19, 1775 201

Battle  of  Bunker's  Hill,  June  17, 1775 203

Congress  of  Philadelphia,  1775 205

Washington  appointed  commander.  His  life  and  character  206

Capture  of  Ticonderoga. Invasion  of  Canada . . .  214
Death  of  Montgomery. American  retreat . . . .216

Lord  Dunmore  in  Virginia 216

Proceedings  in  the  Middle  and  Southern  colonies . .  217

The  negroes  and  Indians . . . . .. • .  219

CONTEXTS OF

PAOK

The  English  party  in  America ••»•••  222

Misgivings  in  America ...•••••  223

The  army  of  Washington .......  226

Dilatoriness  of  Gage .  230

Beplaced  by  Howe. Situation  of  the  Americans,  Decem-
ber 1775 232

Boston  evacuated,  March  17,  1776 234

Paine's  '  Common  Sense ' 234

Motives  leading  to  separation 235

The  French  alliance 237

Difficulty  of  England  in  raising  soldiers . . . .  240
Enlistment  of  German  mercenaries . . . . .243

Produces  the  Declaration  of  Independence . . . .  244

CHAPTER  XII.

Domestic  troubles  of  the  King 248

The  Royal  Marriage  Act 249

Charles  Fox .252

His  brief  separation  from  North  (1772) . . . .  261

Affairs  of  the  East  India  Company.

Despotism  exercised  by  its  servants 262

The  private  trade 263

Displacement  of  native  princes 264

Growing  power  of  the  Company  in  Bengal . . . .  260

Administration  of  Clive  (1765) 267

Parliament  claims  authority  over  the  territorial  revenue  271

Eegulates  the  dividends  .

War  with  Hyder  Ali

Bankruptcy  of  the  Company  (1772)
Views  of  Adam  Smith  about  India
Select  Committee  of  1773.  Speeches  of  Burke

Indian  Acts  of  1773

Charges  against  Clive

272
274
275
276
278
281
283

His  acquittal  and  death 285

Religious  legislation.

Great  diminution  of  intolerance ......  286

Abuses  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts 287

Nonconformists  elected  Sheriffs  in  London .  . .  291

Proposed  abolition  of  subscription  to  the  Articles . „  292

Dissenters  freed  from  the  subscription  .  ...  298

The  Quebec  Act 299

THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.  Ix

PAQB

Propriety of legislating  for  Catholics. Diminution of

Catholic  fanaticism • •  300

Obsolete  laws • •  301

How  far  the  anti-Catholic  laws  were  enforced » • .  303

Position  of  Catholics  in  England .....  304

Eelief  Bill  of  1778 306

Eiots  in  Scotland 308

The  Gordon  riots,  1780 309

Trials  of  rioters 324

Effects  of  the  riots  on  opinion 325

General  popularity  of  the  North  Ministry  ....  327

Parliamentary  approval  of  its  American  policy . . .  327

Secession  of  Fox 329

English  opinion  on  the  American  question,  1775  and  1776  332

Scotch  opinion 338

Irish  opinion 339

Difficulties  of  enlistment. Impressment . . • .  340

Criminals  enrolled  in  the  army  ......  346

Party  aspects  of  the  American  question . . . .  348

Grave  divisions  in  the  country  ......  353

CHAPTER  XIII.

America,  1776.

American  forces  at  New  York . . . . • .  354

Advance  of  Howe ........  355

New  York  taken  Sept.  15 356

Americans  propose  to  burn  it 356

Fire  at  New  York 358

Demoralisation  of  the  American  army ....  359

Loyalist  movements 361

Causes  of  their  impotence 364

Washington  retreats  to  New  Jersey 367

English  take  Crown  Point  and  recover  Lake  Champlain .  368
Their  unsuccessful  attack  on  Charleston. They  occupy

Ehode  Island 368

Employment  of  Indians 369

Creation  of  an  American  navy ......  372

Deplorable  condition  of  Washington's  army  . . . .  374

Capture  of  Lee .  377

Washington  passes  the  Delaware 378

Brilliant  prospects  of  the  English 380

Congress  fly  to  Baltimore. Letter  of  Robert  Morris . .  382

Incapacity  of  Howe 384

X  CONTENTS OP

PAGH

Washington  surprises  Trenton . . • • , .  386

llevulsion  of  feeling  against  the  English . . . .  386

Misconduct  of  English  soldiers . . . . . .  387

The  English  retire 388

Enlistment  of  the  new  American  army . . . .  389

Impotence  of  Congress 391

Paper  money 393

Regulation  of  prices 396

Paper  made  legal  tender .......  397

Moral  effects  of  these  measures 397

General  prospects  of  the  war 400

Foreign  intervention  necessary  to  American  success  . .  402

Policy  of  France.

Memorial  of  Vergennes  ....... i  402

Memorial  of  Turgot ........  405

French  subsidise  the  Americans 407

American  commissioners  at  Paris 408

Continental  opinion  generally  in  favour  of  the  Americans  410

French  public  opinion 411

Enthusiasm  for  Franklin . ......  413

Marie  Antoinette  and  the  Americans . . . . .  415

Foreign  enlistments  for  America . . . . .416

America,  1777.

Difficulties  of  Washington  in  New  Jersey. State  of  his

army 419

Predatory  expeditions. Howe  marches  on  Philadelphia  422

Battle  of  Brandywine. Occupation  of  Philadelphia  .  423

Fresh  English  successes. Pennsylvanian  loyalty  . .  424

Winter  at  Valley  Forge 425

Burgoyne  made  Commander  of  the  Northern  army .  427

His  speech  to  the  Indians. Advance  on  Ticonderoga  428

Capture  of  Ticonderoga. Flight  of  the  Americans .  42y

Growing  difficulties  of  Burgoyne ....  430

Battle  of  Stillwater 431

Capitulation  of  Saratoga 433

Leads  at  once  to  the  French  alliance „ • • • .  433

England,  1776-1778.

Popularity  of  the  war  at  the  close  of  1776  . » . .  435

Attempt  to  burn  dockyards .......  435

Despondency  of  the  Whigs ......  437

Their  open  advocacy  of  the  American  cause  . • . .  438

Uncompromising  attitude  of  the  King . . » .  442

THE  FOURTH VOLUME.  XI

PAUI

Conduct  of  North , 444

Speech  of  Chatham 447

Overtures  to  Franklin. North's  conciliatory  measures 448

Three  English  commissioners  sent  to  America

England  and  France  at  war

General  desire  for  Chatham

Determination  of  the  King  not  to  accept  him
Compared  with  his  attitude  towards  Fox  in  1804
Death  of  Chatham,  May  1788 ....
How  regarded  by  contemporary  statesmen
Growth  of  the  military  spirit ....
Changes  in  the  ministry. Thurlow  and  Wedderburn

452
453
454
456
458
460
461
463
465

1778-1779.

The  Mischianza 467

Evacuation  of  Philadelphia 467

Failure  of  the  Franco-American  expedition  against  Rhode

Island 468

Other  expeditions  in  1778 469

Quarrel  of  Keppel  and  Palliser 471

Disputes  in  the  American  army  ......  472

Half-pay 472

Violation  of  the  Convention  of  Saratoga ....  474

English  ponduct  the  war  more  fiercely 476

Despair  of  the  loyalists .  478

American  humanity 479

Jealousy  between  the  Americans  and  the  French. Pro-
jected invasion  of  Canada 480

Distress  in  America. Eise  of  prices 484

Vergennes  fears  that  the  Revolution  will  fail . . >  485

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

CHAPTER XI.

AMERICA, 1763-1776.

AT  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  the  thirteen
American  colonies  which  were  afterwards  detached  from
the  English  Crown  contained,  according  to  the  best
computation,  about  a  million  and  a  half  freemen,  and
their  number  probably  slightly  exceeded  two  millions
at  the  time  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  No
part  of  the  British  Empire  had  gained  so  largely  by  the
late  war  and  by  the  ministry  of  Pitt.  The  expulsion  of
the  French  from  Canada  and  of  the  Spaniards  from
Florida,  by  removing  for  ever  the  danger  of  foreign
interference,  had  left  the  colonists  almost  absolute
masters  of  their  destinies,  and  had  dispelled  the  one
dark  cloud  which  hung  over  their  future.  No  serious
danger  any  longer  menaced  them.  No  limits  could  be
assigned  to  their  expansion.  Their  exultation  was  un-
bounded, and  it  showed  itself  in  an  outburst  of  genuine
loyalty.  The  name  of  Pittsburg  given  to  the  fortress
erected  where  Fort  Duquesne  had  once  stood  attested
the  gratitude  of  America  to  the  minister  to  whom  she

VOL. IV.  B

2  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  n.

owed  so  much.  Massachusetts,  the  foremost  of  the  New
England  States,  voted  a  costly  monument  in  West-
minster Abbey  to  Lord  Howe,  who  had  fallen  in  the
conquest  of  Canada.  The  assembly  of  the  same  State
in  a  congratulatory  address  to  the  Governor  declared  that
without  the  assistance  of  the  parent  State  they  must
have  fallen  a  prey  to  the  power  of  France,  that  without
the  compensation  granted  to  them  by  Parliament  the
burdens  of  the  war  would  have  been  insupportable,  that
without  the  provisions  of  the  treaty  of  peace  all  their
successes  would  have  been  delusive.  In  an  address  to
the  King  they  repeated  the  same  acknowledgment,
and  pledged  themselves,  in  terms  to  which  later  events
gave  a  strange  significance,  to  demonstrate  their
gratitude  by  every  possible  testimony  of  duty  and
loyalty.1

Several  acute  observers  had  already  predicted  that
the  triumph  of  England  would  be  soon  followed  by  the
revolt  of  her  colonies.  I  have  quoted  in  a  former
chapter  the  remarkable  passage  in  which  the  Swedish
traveller,  Kalm,  contended  in  1748  that  the  presence
of  the  French  in  Canada,  by  making  the  English
colonists  depend  for  their  security  on  the  support  of  the
mother  country,  was  the  main  cause  of  the  submission
of  the  colonies.  In  his  '  Notes  upon  England,'  which
were  probably  written  about  1730,  Montesquieu  had
dilated  upon  the  restrictive  character  of  the  English
commercial  code,  and  had  expressed  his  belief  that
England  would  be  the  first  nation  abandoned  by  her
colonies.  A  few  years  later,  Argenson,  who  has  left
some  of  the  most  striking  political  predictions  upon
record,  foretold  in  his  Memoirs  that  the  English  colonies
in  America  would  one  day  rise  against  the  mother

1  Grahame's Hist, of the chinson's  Hist,  of  Massachusetts
United  States,  iv.  (.)4,95. H.H- Bay  from  1749  to  1774,  p.  101.

CH.  xi.  PREDICTIONS OF AMERICAN REVOLT.

country,  that  they  would  form  themselves  into  a  re-
public, and  that  they  would  astonish  the  world  by  their
prosperity.  In  a  discourse  delivered  before  the  Sorbonne
Sn  1750  Turgot  compared  colonies  to  fruits  which  only
remain  on  the  stem  till  they  have  reached  the  period  of
maturity,  and  he  prophesied  that  America  would  some
day  detach  herself  from  the  parent  tree.  The  French
ministers  consoled  themselves  for  the  Peace  of  Paris  by
the  reflection  that  the  loss  of  Canada  was  a  sure  prelude
to  the  independence  of  the  colonies;  and  Vergennes,
the  sagacious  French  ambassador  at  Constantinople,
predicted  to  an  English  traveller,  with  striking  accuracy,
the  events  that  would  occur.  '  England,'  he  said,  '  will
soon  repent  of  having  removed  the  only  check  that  could
keep  her  colonies  in  awe.  They  stand  no  longer  in
need  of  her  protection.  She  will  call  on  them  to  con-
tribute towards  supporting  the  burdens  they  have  helped
to  bring  on  her,  and  they  will  answer  by  striking  off  all
dependence.' !

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Englishmen  were
wholly  blind  to  this  danger.  One  of  the  ablest  advo-
cates of  the  retention  of  Canada  was  the  old  Lord  Bath,
who  published  a  pamphlet  on  the  subject  which  had  a
very  wide  influence  and  circulation ; 2  but  there  were  a
few  politicians  who  maintained  that  it  would  be  wiser
to  restore  Canada  and  to  retain  Guaclaloupe,  with
perhaps  Martinico  and  St.  Lucia.  This  view  was  sup-
ported with  distinguished  talent  in  an  anonymous  reply
to  Lord  Bath,  which  is  said  to  have  been  written  by
William  Burke,  the  friend  and  kinsman  of  the  great
orator.  Canada,  this  writer  argued,  was  not  one  of  the
original  objects  of  the  war,  and  we  had  no  original  right
to  it.  The  acquisition  of  a  vast,  barren,  and  almost  un-

1  Bancroft's  Jlisi.  of  the  United 2  Letter  to  Two  Great  Men  on
States,  i,  625.  the  Prospect  of  Peace.

B  2

4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

inhabited  country,  lying  in  an  inhospitable  climate,  and
with  no  commerce  except  that  of  furs  and  skins,  was
economically  far  less  valuable  to  England  than  the
acquisition  of  Guadaloupe,  which  was  one  of  the  most
important  of  the  sugar  islands.  Before  the  war  France
had  a  real  superiority  in  the  West  Indies,  and  the
English  Caribbean  islands  were  far  more  endangered  by
the  French  possession  of  Guadaloupe,  than  the  English
American  colonies  by  the  French  possession  of  Canada.
The  latter  danger  was,  indeed,  never  great,  and  by  a
slight  modification  of  territory  and  the  erection  of  a  few
forts  it  might  be  reduced  to  insignificance.  England
in  America  was  both  a  far  greater  continental  and  a  far
greater  naval  Power  than  France,  and  she  had  an  im-
mense superiority  both  in  population  and  position.
But  in  addition  to  these  considerations,  it  was  urged,
an  island  colony  is  more  advantageous  than  a  continental
one,  for  it  is  necessarily  more  dependent  upon  the
mother  country.  In  the  New  England  provinces  there
are  already  colleges  and  academies  where  the  American
youth  can  receive  their  education.  America  produces,
or  can  easily  produce,  almost  everything  she  wants.
Her  population  and  her  wealth  are  rapidly  increasing ;
and  as  the  colonies  recede  more  and  more  from  the  sea,
the  necessity  for  their  connection  with  England  will
steadily  diminish.  '  They  will  have  nothing  to  expect,
they  must  live  wholly  by  their  own  labour,  and  in  pro-
cess of  time  will  know  little,  inquire  little,  and  care
little  about  the  mother  country.  If  the  people  of  our
colonies  find  no  check  from  Canada  they  will  extend
themselves  almost  without  bounds  into  the  inland  parts.
.  .  .  What  the  consequence  will  be  to  have  a  nume-
rous, hardy,  independent  people  possessed  of  a  strong
country,  communicating  little  or  not  at  all  with  England,
I  leave  to  your  own  reflections.  .  .  .  By  eagerly  grasping
at  extensive  territory  we  may  run  the  risk,  and  that

CH.  XI.

SHOULD CANADA BE  RETAINED?

perhaps  in  no  very  distant  period,  of  losing  what  we
now  possess.  The  possession  of  Canada,  far  from  being
necessary  to  our  safety,  may  in  its  consequences  be  even
dangerous.  A  neighbour  that  keeps  us  in  some  awe  is
not  always  the  worst  of  neighbours.  So  far  from
sacrificing  Guadaloupe  to  Canada,  perhaps  if  we  might
have  Canada  without  any  sacrifice,  we  ought  not  to
desire  it.  ...  There  is  a  balance  of  power  in  America
as  well  as  in  Europe.' 1

These  views  are  said  to  have  been  countenanced  by
Lord  Hardwicke,2  but  the  tide  of  opinion  ran  strongly
in  the  opposite  direction.  Mauduit  as  well  as  Bath
wrote  in  favour  of  the  retention  of  Canada,  and  their
arguments  were  supported  by  Franklin,  who  in  a  re-
markable pamphlet  sketched  the  .great  undeveloped
capabilities  of  the  colonies,  and  ridiculed  the  'visionary
fear'  that  they  could  ever  be  combined  against  England.3
Pitt  was  strongly  on  the  same  side.  The  nation  had
learned  to  look  with  pride  and  sympathy  upon  that
greater  England  which  was  growing  up  beyond  the

1  RemarJts  on  the  Letter  Ad-
dressed to  Tico  Great  Men,  pp.
30,  31.

2  Hutchinsoa's History of
Massachusetts Bay  from  1749
to 1774, p. 100. Hardwicke,
however,  is  said  to  have been
governed  exclusively  by  commer-
cial considerations.

3  '  Their  jealousy  of  each  other
is  so  great,  that  however  neces-
sary a  union  of  the  colonies  has
long  been  for  their  common  de-
fence and  security  against  their
enemies,  and  how  sensible  soever
each  colony  has been of  that
necessity,  yet  they  have  never
been  able  to  effect  such  a  union
among  themselves,  nor  even  to
agree  in  requesting  the  mother

country  to  establish  it  for  them.
Nothing  but  the  immediate  com-
mand of  the  Crown  has  been  able
to  produce  even  the  imperfect
union  but  lately  seen  there  of
the  forces  of  some  colonies.  If
they  could  not  agree  to  unite  for
their  defence  against  the  French
and  Indians  .  .  .  can  it  reason-
ably be  supposed  there  is  any
danger  of  their  uniting  against
their  own  nation,  which  protects
and  encourages  them,  with  which
they  have  so  many  connections
and  ties  of  blood,  interest,  and
affection,  and  which,  it  is  well
known,  they  all  love  much  more
than  they  love  one  another  ?  ' —
Canada  Pamphlet,  Franklin's
Works,  iv.  41,  42.

6  ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xu

Atlantic,  and  there  was  a  desire  which  was  not  un-
generous or  ignoble  to  remove  at  any  risk  the  one
obstacle  to  its  future  happiness.  It  was  felt  that  the
colonists  who  had  contributed  so  largely  to  the  conquest
of  Cape  Breton  had  been  shamefully  sacrificed  at  the
Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  when  that  province  was  re-
stored to  France ;  and  that  the  expulsion  of  the  French
from  Canada  was  essential,  not  only  to  the  political  and
commercial  prosperity  of  the  Northern  colonists,  but
also  to  the  security  of  their  homes.  The  Indian  tribes
clustered  thickly  around  the  disputed  frontier,  and  the
French  being  numerically  very  inferior  to  the  English,
had  taken  great  pains  to  conciliate  them,  and  fit  the
same  time  to  incite  them  against  the  English.  Six
times  within  eighty-five  years  the  horrors  of  Indian
war  had  devastated  the  northern  and  eastern  frontier.1
The  Peace  of  Paris,  by  depriving  the  Indians  of  French
support,  was  one  of  the  most  important  steps  to  their
subjection.

To  any  statesman  who  looked  upon  the  question
without  passion  and  without  illusion,  it  must  have
appeared  evident  that  if  the  English  colonies  resolved
to  sever  themselves  from  the  British  Empire,  it  would
be  impossible  to  prevent  them.  Their  population  is  said
to  have  doubled  in  twenty-five  years.  They  were  sepa-
rated from  the  mother  country  by  three  thousand  miles
of  water.  Their  seaboard  extended  for  more  than  one
thousand  miles.  Their  territory  was  almost  boundless
in  its  extent  and  in  its  resources,  and  the  greater  part
of  it  was  still  untraversed  and  unexplored.  To  conquer
such  a  country  would  be  a  task  of  great  difficulty,  and
of  ruinous  expense.  To  hold  it  in  opposition  to  the
general  wish  of  the  people  would  be  impossible.  Eng-
land by  her  command  of  the  sea  might  easily  destroy  ita

1  Hildreth's  History  of  the  United  States,  ii.  496.

CH.  xi. MILITARY  CAPABILITIES  OP  AMERICA.  7

commerce,  disturb  its  fisheries,  bombard  its  seaboard
towns,  and  deprive  it  of  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life,  but
she  could  strike  no  vital  blow.  The  colonists  were  chiefly
small  and  independent  freeholders,  hardy  backwoods-
men and  hunters,  universally  acquainted  with  the  use  of
arms,  and  with  all  the  resources  and  energies  which  life
in  a  new  country  seldom  fails  to  develop.  They  had
representative  assemblies  to  levy  taxes  and  organise  re-
sistance. They  had  militias  which  in  some  colonies  in-
cluded all  adult  freemen  between  the  ages  of  sixteen  or
eighteen  and  fifty  or  sixty  j  l  and  in  addition  to  the
Indian  raids,  they  had  the  military  experience  of  two
great  wars.  The  capture  of  Louisburg  in  1 749  had  been
mainly  their  work,  and  although  at  the  beginning  of  the
following  war  they  exhibited  but  little  alacrity,  Pitt,  by
promising  that  the  expenses  should  be  reimbursed  by
the  British  Parliament,  had  speedily  called  them  to  arms.
In  the  latter  stages  of  the  war  more  than  20, 000  colonial
troops,  10,000  of  them  from  New  England  alone,  had
been  continually  in  the  field,  and  more  than  400  priva-
teers had  been  fitted  out  in  the  colonial  harbours.2  The
colonial  troops  were,  it  is  true,  only  enlisted  for  a  single
campaign,  and  they  therefore  never  attained  the  steadi-
ness and  discipline  of  English  veterans  ;  but  they  had
co-operated  honourably  in  the  conquest  of  Canada,  and

1  Burnaby's  Travels  in  North  ticularly,  there  is  an  express  law
America.  Pinkerton's  Voyages,  by  which  every  man  is  obliged
xiii.  725,  728,  749.  Gerard  to  have  a  musket,  a  pound  of
Hamilton,  in  a  letter  written  in  powder,  and  a  pound  of  bullets
1767,  said  : 'There  are  in  the  dif-  always  by  him,  so  there  is  no-
ferent  provinces  above  a  million  thing  wanting  but  knapsacks  (or
of  people  of  which  we  may  sup-  old  stockings,  which  will  do  as
pose  at  least  200,000  men  able  to  well)  to  equip  an  army  for  march-
bear  arms  ;  and  not  only  able  to  ing.' — Chatliam  Correspondence,
bear  arms,  but  having  arms  in  iii.  203.

their  possession  unrestrained  by  2  Eamsay's  Hist,  of  the  Ameri-

any  iniquitous  game  Act.  In  the  can  Revolution,  i.  40. Hildreth,

Massachusetts  Government  par-  ii.  486. Grahame,  iv.  94.

8 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CB.  xl.

even  in  the  expeditions  against  Havaiinah  and  Mar-
tinique, and  they  contained  many  skilful  officers  quite
capable  of  conducting  a  war.

Under  such  circumstances,  with  the  most  moderate
heroism,  and  even  without  foreign  assistance,  a  united
rebellion  of  the  English  colonies  must  have  been  suc-
cessful, and  their  connection  with  the  mother  country
depended  mainly  upon  their  disposition  towards  her  and
towards  each  other.  For  some  years  before  the  English
Revolution,  and  for  several  years  after  the  accession  of
William,  the  relations  of  the  colonies  to  England  had
been  extremely  tense ;  but  in  the  long  period  of  un-
broken Whig  rule  which  followed,  most  of  the  elements
of  discontent  had  subsided.  The  wise  neglect  of  Wai-
pole  and  Newcastle  was  eminently  conducive  to  colonial
interests.  The  substitution  in  several  colonies  of  royal
for  proprietary  governments  was  very  popular.  It  was
found  that  the  direct  rule  of  the  Sovereign  was  much
more  equitable  and  liberal  than  that  of  private  companies
or  individuals.  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Delaware
alone  retained  the  proprietary  form,  and  in  the  first  two
at  least,  a  large  party  desired  that  the  proprietors  should
be  compensated,  and  that  the  colonies  should  be  placed
directly  under  the  Crown.1  There  were  slight  differ-
ences in  the  colonial  forms  of  government,  but  every-
where the  colonists  paid  their  governors  and  their  other
officials.  The  lower  chamber  in  each  province  was
elected  freely  by  the  people,  and  in  nearly  every  respect
they  governed  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  the  British
dominion  with  a  liberty  which  was  hardly  equalled  in
any  other  portion  of  the  civilised  globe.  Political  power
was  incomparably  more  diffused,  and  the  representative

1  See  a  very  remarkab'e  para-  lition  of  the  proprietary  govern-

phlet  of  Franklin, called  Cool  ment  in  Pennsylvania. Frank -

TJuntghts  on  tJie  present  Situa-  lin's  Works,  iv.  78-93.
tion  (1764),  advocating  the  abo-

CH.  XI.  ATTACHMENT  TO ENGLAND.  9

system  was  incomparably  less  corrupt  than  at  home,  and
real  constitutional  liberty  was  flourishing  in  the  English
colonies  when  nearly  all  European  countries  and  all  other
colonies  were  despotically  governed.  Material  prosperity
was  at  the  same  time  advancing  with  giant  strides,  and
religious  liberty  was  steadily  maintained.  Whatever
might  be  her  policy  nearer  home,  in  the  colonies  the  Eng-
lish Government  in  the  eighteenth  century  uniformly
opposed  the  efforts  of  any  one  sect  to  oppress  the  others.1
The  circumstances  and  traditions  of  the  colonists  had
made  them  extremely  impatient  of  every  kind  of  autho-
rity, but  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  they  were
animated  by  a  real  attachment  to  England.  Their  com-
mercial intercourse,  under  the  restrictions  of  the  Navi-
gation Law,  was  mainly  with  her.  Their  institutions,
their  culture,  their  religion,  their  ideas  were  derived
from  English  sources.  They  had  a  direct  interest  in  the
English  war  against  France  and  Spain.  They  were  proud
of  their  English  lineage,  of  English  greatness,  and  of
English  liberty,  and,  in  the  words  of  Franklin,  they  had
'  not  only  a  respect  but  an  affection  for  Great  Britain ;
...  to  be  an  Old  England  man  was  of  itself  a  character
of  some  respect,  and  gave  a  kind  of  rank  among  them.' 8
Hutchinson,  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  who  was  one
of  the  strongest  supporters  of  the  royal  authority,  ac-
knowledges that  when  George  III.  mounted  the  throne,
if  speculative  men  sometimes  figured  in  their  minds  an

1  In  Carolina  a  law  had  been  palians,  and  in  others  the  Dis-

passed  depriving  the  Dissenters  senters,  have  been  predominant,

of  their  political  privileges,  but  they  have  made  partial  laws  in

it  was  repealed  by  the  King  in  favour  of  their  respective  sects,

Council. Franklin's  Works,  iv.  and  laid  some  difficulties  on  the

84.  Franklin  adds  :  '  Nor  is  there  others,  but  those  laws  have  been

existing  in  any  of  the  American  generally,  on  complaint,  repealed

colonies  any test imposed by  at  home.' — P.  88.

Great  Britain  to  exclude  Dissen-  *  See  his  evidence  before  Par-

ters  from  ofiice. In  some  colo-  liament in 1766. Franklin's

nies,  indeed,  where  the  Episco-  Works,  iv.  IfiO.

10 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  ».

American  Empire,  it  was  only  '  in  such  distant  ages  that
nobody  then  living  could  expect  to  see  it ; '  and  he  adds
that  the  rapid  growth  of  colonial  power  had  as  yet  pro-
duced no  '  plan  or  even  desire  of  independency,'  and
that  '  the  greatest  hope  from  the  reduction  of  Canada,
as  far  as  could  be  judged  from  the  public  prayers  of  the
clergy  as  well  as  from  the  conversation  of  people  in
general,  was  "  to  sit  quiet  under  their  own  vines  and  fig-
trees,  and  to  have  none  to  make  them  afraid." ' l  The
great  career  of  Pitt,  which  had  intensified  patriotic  feel-
ings throughout  the  Empire,  was  nowhere  more  appre-
ciated than  in  America,  and  the  Peace  of  Paris,  however
distasteful  to  Englishmen,  might  at  least  have  been  ex-
pected to  strengthen  the  loyalty  of  the  colonies.  It  had
been  made  by  men  who  were  wholly  beyond  the  range
of  their  influence,  yet  they  had  gained  incomparably
more  by  it  than  any  other  portion  of  the  Empire.

The  patriotism  of  the  colonies  indeed  attracted  them
far  more  to  England  than  to  each  other.  Small  groups
of  colonies  were  no  doubt  drawn  together  by  a  natural
affinity,  but  there  was  no  common  colonial  government,
and  they  were  in  general  at  least  as  jealous  of  each
other  as  of  England.  One  of  the  chief  excuses  for  im-
posing by  parliamentary  authority  imperial  taxation  on
the  colonies  was  the  extreme  difficulty  of  inducing  them
to  co-operate  cordially  for  military  purposes.2  Soon
after  the  Eevolution,  William  had  proposed  a  plan  for

1  Hutchinson's  Hist,  of  Mas-  things  go  on  very  slowly  and  ir-

sachusctts  Bay,  pp.  84,  85.  regularly  here  ;  for  not  only  the

'*  The  Swedish  traveller  Kalm,  sense  of  one  province  is  sonie-

who  visited  North  America  in  times  directly  opposite  to  that  of

1749  and  1750,  was  much  struck  another,  but  frequently  the  views

with  this  dislike  to  co-operation.  of  the  Governor  and  those  of  the

He  says  :  '  Each  English  colony  Assembly  of  the  same  province

in  North  America  is  independent  are  quite  different.  ...  It  has

of  the  other.  .  .  .  From  hence  it  commonly  happened  that  while

happens  that  in  time  of  war  some  provinces  have  been  suffer-

CH.  xi.  DISUNION  OF  THE COLONIES.  11

general  defence  against  the  French  forces  in  Canada  by
which  each  colony  was  to  contribute  a  contingent  pro-
portionate to  its  numbers,  but  all  the  colonial  assem-
blies rejected  it,  and  the  States  which  were  most  remote
from  the  danger  absolutely  refused  to  participate  in  the
expense.1  In  1754,  when  another  great  war  was  im-
pending, a  Congress  of  Commissioners  from  the  different
colonies  assembled  at  Albany,  at  the  summons  of  the
Lords  of  Trade,  for  the  purpose  of  concerting  together
and  with  the  friendly  Indians  upon  measures  of  defence.
Benjamin  Franklin  was  one  of  the  Commissioners  for
Pennsylvania,  and  he  brought  forward  a  plan  for  uniting
the  colonies  for  defence  and  for  some  other  purposes  of
general  utility  into  a  single  Federal  State,  administered
by  a  President-C4eneral  appointed  by  the  Crown,  and  by
a  general  council  elected  by  the  colonial  assemblies ;
but  the  plan  was  equally  repudiated  by  the  colonial
legislatures  as  likely  to  abridge  their  authority,  and  by
the  Board  of  Trade  as  likely  to  foster  colonial  indepen-
dence.2 In  the  war  that  ensued  it  was  therefore  left  to
the  colonial  legislatures  to  act  independently  in  raising
troops  and  money,  and  while  the  Northern  colonies  which
lay  nearest  Canada  more  than  fulfilled  their  part,  some
of  the  Southern  ones  refused  to  take  any  considerable
share  of  the  burden.  The  management  of  Indian  affairs
gradually  passed  with  general  approval  from  the  different
colonial  legislatures  to  the  Crown,  as  it  was  found  im-

ing  from  their  enemies,  the  neigh-  There  are  instances  of  provinces

bouring  ones  were  quiet  and  in-  who  were  not  only  neuter  in  these

active  and  as  if  it  did  not  in  the  circumstances, but who even

least  concern  them. They  have  carried  on  a  great  trade  with  the

frequently  taken  up  two  or  three  Power  which  at  that  very  time

years in considering whether  was  attacking  and  laying  waste

they  should  give assistance  to  some  other  provinces.' — Pinker-

an  oppressed  sister  colony,  and  ton's  Voyages,  xiii.  460,  461.

sometimes  they  have  expressly  '  Grahame,  iii.  13.

declared  themselves  against  it.  2  Franklin's  Works,  i.  177.

12 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

possible  to  induce  the  former  to  act  together  on  any
settled  plan.1

The  history  of  the  colonies  during  the  twenty  or
thii'ty  years  preceding  the  Declaration  of  Independence
is  full  of  intestine  or  intercolonial  disputes.  There  were
angry  discussions  about  boundaries  between  Massachu-
setts on  the  one  hand,  and  Rhode  Island,  New  Hamp-
shire, and  Connecticut  on  the  other.  Albany  was  long
accused  of  trafficking  largely  with  the  Indians  for  the
spoils  they  had  obtained  in  their  raids  upon  New  Eng-
land. New  York  quarrelled  fiercely  with  Virginia  about
the  responsibility  for  the  failure  of  a  military  expedi-
tion, and  with  New  Hampshire  about  the  government
of  the  territory  which  was  subsequ?ntly  known  as  Ver-
mont. In  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  the  Assemblies
were  in  continual  hostility  with  their  proprietaries,  and
the  mother  country  was  compelled  to  decide  a  vio-
lent dispute  about  salaries  between  the  Virginian  laity
and  clergy.  Great  bodies  of  Dutch,  Germans,  French,
Swedes,  Scotch,  and  Irish,  scattered  among  the  descen-
dants of  the  English,  contributed  to  the  heterogeneous
character  of  the  colonies,  and  they  comprised  so  many
varieties  of  government,  religious  belief,  commercial  in-
terest, and  social  type,  that  their  union  appeared  to
many  incredible  on  the  very  eve  of  the  Revolution.2  The

1  Grahame,  iv.  145-147.  inexhaustible  source  of  animosity

*  The  following  is  the  judg-  in  their  jealousy  for  the  trade  of

ment  of  that  usually  very  acute  the  Jerseys. Massachusetts  Bay

observer,  Burnaby,  who  travelled  and  Rhode  Island  are  not  lesa

through  the  colonies  in  1759  and  interested  in  that  of  Connecticut.

1760. '  Fire  and  water  are  not  The  West  Indies  are  a  common

more heterogeneous than the  subject  of  emulation  to  them  all.

different  colonies  in  North  Ame-  Even  the  limits  and  boundaries

rica. Nothing  can  exceed  the  of  each  colony  are a  constant

jealousy and emulation  which  source  of  litigation. In short,

they  possess  in  regard  to  each  such  is  the  difference  of  charac-

other. The  inhabitants  of  Penn-  ter,  of  manners,  of  religion,  of

sylvania  and  New  York  have  an  interest  of  the  different  colonies.

en.  jti.  NEW  ENGLAND.  13

movement  which  at  last  arrayed  them  in  a  united  front
against  England  was  not  a  blind  instinctive  patriotism
or  community  of  sentiment,  like  that  which  animates  old
countries.  It  was  the  deliberate  calculation  of  intelli-
gent men,  who  perceived  that  by  such  union  alone  could
they  attain  the  objects  of  their  desire.

New  England,  which  was  the  centre  of  the  resist-
ance, was  then  divided  into  the  four  States  of  Massa-
chusetts Bay,  Connecticut,  New  Hampshire,  and  Rhode
Island,  and  it  was,  in  proportion  to  its  size,  by  far  the
most  populous  portion  of  British  America.  It  com-
prised about  a  third  part  of  its  whole  population,1  and
Massachusetts  alone  had,  during  a  great  part  of  the  last
war,  maintained  7,000  men  under  arms.  The  descend-
ants of  the  old  Puritans,  the  New  Englanders  were  still
chiefly  Congregationalists  or  Presbyterians,  and  there
might  be  found  among  them  an  austerity  of  manners
and  of  belief  which  was  hardly  exceeded  in  Scotland.
It  was,  however,  gradually  declining  under  many  influ-
ences. Time,  increasing  wealth,  the  intellectual  atmo-
sphere of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  disorders  and
changes  produced  by  a  state  of  war,  contact  with  large
bodies  of  European  soldiers,  and  also  the  demoralising

that  I  .think,  if  I  am  not  wholly  mother  country.  Whenever  such

ignorant  of  the  human mind,  a  day  shall  come,  it  will  be  the  be-

were they left to  themselves,  ginning  of  a  terrible  scene.  Were

there  would  soon  be  a  civil  war  these  colonies  left  to  themselves

from  one  end  of  the  continent  to  to-morrow,  America  would  be  a

the other ; while  the Indians  mere  shambles  of  blood  and  con-

and  negroes  would  with  better  fusion  before  little  petty  states

reason impatiently watch  the  could  be  settled." — Answer  to  the

opportunity of exterminating  Halifax  Libel,  p.  16.
them altogether.'  —  Pinkerton,  '  According  to Grahame  (iv.

xiii.  752. Otis,  one  of  the  ear li-  125),  in  1763  it  contained  upwards

est  and  most  considerable  of  the  of  500,000  persons. The  North

American  patriots,  wrote  hi  1765:  American Gazetteer (2nd edit.

'  God  forbid  these  colonies  should  1778) estimates its population

ever  prove  undutiful to their  at  upwards  of  600,000.

14  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xi.

influence  of  a  great  smuggling  trade  with  the  French
West  Indies,  had  all  in  their  different  ways  impaired
the  old  types  of  character.  The  Governments  of  three
of  the  colonies  were  exceedingly  democratic.  In  Massa-
chusetts the  Council  or  Upper  Chamber,  instead  of
being,  as  in  most  provinces,  appointed  by  the  Sove-
reign, was  elected  annually  by  the  Lower  Chamber;
every  town  officer  was  annually  chosen ;  all  town  affairs
were  decided  in  public  meetings  ;  the  clergy  were
selected  by  their  congregations,  and,  with  the  exception
of  a  few  Custom-house  officers,  the  Crown  officers  were
paid  by  the  State.  The  Governor  was  appointed  by  the
Crown,  and  he  possessed  a  right  of  veto  upon  laws,  and
also  upon  the  appointment  of  Councillors  ;  but  as  his
own  salary  and  that  of  the  whole  Executive  depended
on  the  popular  vote,  and  as  the  Council  emanated  directly
from  the  representative  body,  his  actual  power  was  ex-
tremely small.  The  civil  list  allowed  by  the  Assembly
was  precarious  and  was  cut  down  to  the  narrowest  limits.
The  Governor  usually  received  1  ,OOOZ.  English  currency
a  year,  but  obtained  some  additional  occasional  grants.
The  Lieutenant-Governor  received  no  salary  as  such,
except  during  the  absence  of  the  Governor,  and  the
office  was  therefore  usually  combined  with  some  other.
The  judges  had  each  only  about  1201.  sterling  a  year,
with  the  addition  of  some  fees,  which  were  said  not  to
have  been  sufficient  to  cover  their  travelling  expenses.1
The  Attorney-General  received  no  salary  from  the  As-
sembly, as  the  Governor  refused  to  recognise  its  claim
to  have  a  voice  in  his  appointment.  Rhode  Island  and
Connecticut  were  even  more  democratic  than  Massa-
chusetts. By  the  charters  conceded  to  these  colonies,

1  Reports of the Board of  See,  too,  a  letter  of  Hutchinson

Trade on the Establishments  in  the  American  Remembrancer

in  America  (1766). American  1776,  part  i.  p.  159.
Papers, MSS., Kecord Office.

CH. XI.

GROWING INFLUENCE OF LAWYERS.

15

the  freemen  elected  all  their  officers  from  the  highest  to
the  lowest,  and  they  were  not  obliged  to  communicate
the  acts  of  their  local  legislatures  to  the  King.  Such  a
system  had  naturally  led  to  grave  abuses,  and  in  Rhode
Island  especially  there  were  loud  complaints  of  the
scandalous  partiality  of  the  judges  and  of  the  low  pre-
vailing tone  of  honesty  and  statesmanship.1

One  of  the  most  remarkable  recent  changes  in  New
England  manners  was  the  extraordinary  increase  of  liti-
gation and  the  rapid  growth  in  numbers  and  importance
of  the  legal  class.  For  a  century  and  a  half  of  colonial
days  there  were  but  two  lay  presidents  of  Harvard  Col-
lege ;  nearly  half  the  students  were  intended  for  some
church  ministry,  and  the  profession  of  a  lawyer  was
looked  .upon  as  in  some  degree  dishonest  and  disreput-
able. It  was  rapidly  rising,  however,  in  New  England
as  elsewhere,  and  it  contributed  more  than  any  other
profession  to  the  Revolution.2  Jefferson,  Adams,  Otis,
Dickenson,  and  many  other  minor  agents  in  the  struggle

1  See the  very unfavourable
picture given by Burnaby ;
Pinkerton,  xui.  742, 743.  Winter-
botham's  Present Situation  of
the  United  States  (1795),  ii.  236.
Burke's European Settlements
in  America,  ii.  300.

2  See  a  curious  passage  in  the
Life  of  Adams  prefixed to  his
Familiar  Letters to  his Wife,
pp. x, xiv. Tucker says of
America  : '  In  no  country,  per-
haps,  in  the world are there
so many  lawsuits.' — Letter to
Burke,  p.  26. So,  too,  Burke :
'  In  no  country,  perhaps,  in  the
world is the  law  so general  a
study. The  profession  itself  is
numerous  and  powerful,  and  in
most  provinces  it  takes  the  lead.
The  greater  number  of  the  depu-

ties sent  to  Congress  were  law-
yers. ...  I  have  been  told  by
an  eminent  bookseller  that  in
no  branch  of  his  business,  after
tracts  of  popular  devotion,  were
so  many  books  as  those  on  the
law  exported  to  the  plantations.'
— Speech  on  Conciliation  with
America,  See,  too,  Burke's  Eu-
ropean Settlements  in  America,
ii.  304.  The  passion  for  the  law
steadily  increased,  and  in  1787
Noah  Webster  wrote  :  '  Never
was  such  a  rage  for  the  study
of  law.  From  one  end  of  the
continent  to  the  other  the  stu-
dents of  this  science  are  multi-
plying without  number.  An  in-
fallible proof  that  the  business
is  lucrative.' — Webster's  Essays,
p.  116.

1C ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

were  lawyers.  Another  influence  which  did  much  to  lower
the  New  England  character  was  the  abundance  of  depre-
ciated paper  money.  In  1750  the  British  Parliament
granted  a  sum  of  money  to  reimburse  Massachusetts
for  what  it  had  expended  more  than  its  proportion
towards  the  general  expense  of  the  war,  and  the  Legis-
lature of  the  province  determined  to  redeem  their  paper,
but  to  do  so  at  a  depreciated  value,  and  only  an  ounce
of  silver  was  given  for  50s.  of  paper,  though  the  bills
themselves  promised  an  ounce  for  6s.  8d.  In  1751  the
mother  country  was  obliged  to  interpose  to  prevent  the
New  Englanders  from  cheating  their  English  creditors
by  making  paper  legal  tender.1

Still  with  every  drawback  the  bulk  of  the  New
Englanders  were  a  people  of  strong  fibre  and  high
morals.  Strictly  Sabbatarian,  rigidly  orthodox,  averse
to  extravagance,  to  gambling,  and  to  effeminate  amuse-
ments, capable  of  great  efforts  of  self-sacrifice,  hard,
stubborn,  and  indomitably  intractable,  they  had  most
of  the  qualities  of  a  ruling  race.  The  revival  of
Jonathan  Edwards,  the  later  preaching  of  Whitefield,
and  the  numerous  days  of  fasting  or  thanksgiving,  had
done  something  to  sustain  their  fanaticism.  A  severe
climate  and  long  struggles  with  the  French  and  the
Indians  had  indurated  their  characters,  and  the  common
schools  which  had  been  established  in  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century  in  every  village  had  made  a  certain
level  of  education  universal.  Their  essentially  repub-
lican religion,  the  traditions  of  their  republican  origin,
and  the  republican  tone  of  their  manners,  had  all  con-
spired to  maintain  among  them  a  spirit  of  fierce  and
jealous  independence.  They  had  few  manufactures.

1  24  Geo.  II.  c.  53. Another  subject  Tucker's  Letter  to  Burke,

law  to  facilitate  recovery  of  debts  pp. 29-31. Bolles' Financial

from  America  was  made  in  1732  History  of the United States,

(5  Geo.  II.  c.  7). See  on  this  pp.  29,  30.

CH.  XT.  NEW  ENGLAND.  17

Slavery,  being  unsuited  to  their  soil  and  climate,  had
taken  but  little  root,  and  there  was  said  to  be  no  other
portion  of  the  globe  in  which  there  was  so  little  either
of  wealth  or  of  poverty.1  The  bulk  of  the  population
were  small  freeholders  cultivating  their  own  land.  By
a  somewhat  singular  anomaly,  the  democratic  colony  of
Rhode  Island,  during  nearly  the  whole  of  its  colonial
history,  adopted  the  English  law  of  real  property  with
its  system  of  entail  and  primogeniture  ;  but  in  the  other
New  England  colonies  the  law  favoured  equal  division,
reserving,  however,  in  the  case  of  intestacy,  a  double
portion  for  the  elder  son  2  Extreme  poverty  was  un-
known ;  yet  Burke,  who  was  admirably  acquainted  with
American  life,  questioned  whether  there  were  two  per-
sons either  in  Massachusetts  or  Connecticut  who  could
afford  to  spend  1,OOOZ.  a  year  at  a  distance  from  their
estates.3  Boston,  at  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Paris,
contained  18,000  or  20,000  inhabitants.4  It  was  the
great  intellectual  centre  of  the  colonies,  and  five  print-
ing presses  were  in  constant  employment  within  its
walls.  It  contained  the  chief  distilleries  in  America  ;
it  was  noted  for  its  commerce,  its  shipbuilding,  and
its  cod-fishery ;  and  in  1763  no  less  than  eighty  New
England  vessels  were  employed  in  the  whale  fishery  at
the  mouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence.8  Boston,  however,  un-
like most  American  towns,  appears  for  a  long  time  to
have  been  almost  stationary.  The  rise  of  New  York,

1  Winterbotham's  View  of  the  Works,  ii.  213,  estimates  it  at
United  States,  ii.  3,  4.  16,000. Winterbotham, some

2  Story's Constitution  of  the  years  after  the  Bevolution,  reck-
Uniled  States,  i.  90,  166.  ons  it  at  18,033. In  the  North

3  Observations  on  the  State  of  American  Gazetteer,  it  is  placed
the  Nation.  as  high  as  30,000,  but  this  is

4  Burnaby  in  1759  reckons  the  certainly  an  exaggeration,
population  of  Boston at from s  Grahame's  Hist.  iv.  129, 130.
18,000 to 20,000. Pinkerton,  Burke's  European Settlements,
xiii.  744. Adams  in  his  Diary,  U.  183.

VOL.  IV.  C

18  ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

Philadelphia,  and  other  towns  had  diminished  its  pros-
perity, and  the  New  England  States  were  burdened  by
considerable  natural  disadvantages,  and  by  the  great
weight  of  debt  bequeathed  from  the  war.

Among  the  Middle  States  the  two  provinces  of  New
York  and  New  Jersey  still  contained  many  families  de-
scended from  the  old  Dutch  settlers;  but  these  were
being  rapidly  lost  in  a  very  miscellaneous  population.
Twenty-one  years  before  New  York,  or,  as  it  was  then
called,  New  Amsterdam,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Eng-
lish, it  was  computed  that  no  less  than  eighteen  different
languages  were  spoken  in  or  near  the  town,1  and  it  con-
tinued under  English  rule  to  be  one  of  the  chief  centres
of  foreign  immigration.  It  was  noticed  during  the  War
of  Independence,  that  the  political  indifference  of  these
colonies  formed  a  curious  contrast  to  the  vehemence  of
New  England,2  and  New  York  fluctuated  more  violently
in  its  political  attitude  than  any  other  colony  in
America.  The  town  at  the  Peace  of  Paris  was  little
more  than  half  the  size  of  Boston,  but  it  was  rapidly
advancing  in  commercial  prosperity,  and  large  fortunes
were  being  accumulated.  In  the  country  districts
much  of  the  simplicity  and  frugality  of  the  old  Dutch
settlers  survived ;  but  the  tone  of  manners  in  the  town
was  less  severe  and  more  luxurious  than  in  New  Eng-
land. There  were  but  few  signs  of  the  theological
intolerance  so  conspicuous  in  some  of  the  older  States,
and  veiy  many  religions,  representing  very  many
nationalities,  subsisted  side  by  side  in  apparent  har-
mony. There  was  little  intellectual  life ;  education  was
very  backward,  and  the  pursuit  of  wealth  appears  to
have  been  the  absorbing  passion.

The  letters  written  by  the  Governor  and  Lieutenant-

1  Tyler's  Hist,  of  American Travels in North  America  in
Literature,  ii.  206.  1780-1782,  ii.  180,

3  Chastellux (Eng. trans.),

en.  ix.

NEW  YORK.  19

Governor  to  the  home  authorities  in  1765  and  the  two
following  years  give  a  curious,  though  perhaps  somewhat
overcharged  picture,  of  the  less  favourable  aspects  of  New
York  life.  The  most  opulent  men  in  the  State  had  risen
within  a  single  generation  from  the  lowest  class.  Few
persons  except  lawyers  had  any  tincture  of  literature,
and  lawyers  under  these  circumstances  had  attained  a
greater  power  in  this  province  than  in  any  other  part  of
the  King's  dominions.  They  had  formed  an  association
for  the  purpose  of  directing  political  affairs.  In  an
Assembly  where  the  majority  of  the  members  were  igno-
rant and  simple-minded  farmers,  they  had  acquired  a
controlling  power ;  they  knew  the  secrets  of  every  family.
They  were  the  chief  writers  in  a  singularly  violent
press.  They  organised  and  directed  every  opposition  to
the  Governor,  and  they  had  attained  an  influence  not
less  than  that  of  the  priesthood  in  a  bigoted  Catholic
country.  There  was  a  long  and  bitter  quarrel  about
the  position  of  the  judges,  one  party  wishing  that  they
should  hold  their  office  during  good  behaviour,  and
should  thus  be  beyond  the  control  of  the  Executive  or
Home  Government  ;  the  other  party  wishing  that  they
should  receive  fixed  and  adequate  salaries,  instead  of
being  dependent  on  the  annual  vote  of  the  Assembly.
The  utmost  annual  sum  the  Assembly  would  vote  for
its  Chief  Justice  was  3001.  of  New  York  currency,  which
was  much  less  valuable  than  the  currency  of  England.
Legal  decisions  are  said  to  have  been  given  with  great
and  manifest  partiality.  '  In  the  present  state  of  our
courts  of  justice,'  wrote  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  '  all
private  property  for  some  years  past,  as  well  as  the
rights  and  authority  of  the  King,  are  more  precarious
than  can  be  easily  imagined.'  On  one  occasion  the
Chief  Justice  gave  a  judgment  against  a  member  of  the
Assembly ;  by  the  influence  of  that  member  his  salary
was  reduced  by  50Z.  In  cases  affecting  the  Revenue

c  2

20 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XL

Acts  or  the  property  rights  of  the  Crown,  the  law  was
almost  impotent,  and  the  Governor  vainly  tried  to  ob-
tain the  right  of  appeal  to  an  English  court.  Cases
under  51.  in  value  were  decided  by  the  local  magis-
trates ;  and  as  it  was  the  custom  for  each  member  of  the
Assembly  to  have  the  nomination  to  all  civil  and  military
offices  in  his  own  county,  the  Commission  of  the  Peace
was  the  usual  reward  of  electioneering  services.  No-
thing was  more  common  than  to  find  petty  cases  decided
in  public-houses,  by  magistrates  who  were  selected  from
the  meanest  and  least  respectable  tradesmen,  and  who
were  sometimes  so  ignorant  that  they  were  obliged  to
put  a  mark  instead  of  a  signature  to  their  warrants.1

By  far  the  most  important  of  the  Middle  States  was
the  great  industrial  colony  of  Pennsylvania.  A  fertile
soil,  a  great  abundance  of  mineral  wealth,  a  situation
singularly  favourable  to  commercial  intercourse,  and  a
population  admirably  energetic  and  industrious,  had
contributed  to  develop  it,  and  it  far  surpassed  all  the
other  colonies  in  the  perfection  of  its  agriculture,  and
in  the  variety,  magnitude,  and  prosperity  of  its  manu-
factures. Its  population  at  the  time  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence  appears  to  have  been  about  350,000.

1  Documents  relating  to  the  real  gentleman,  one  well-bred
Colonial  History  of  New  York  man,  since  I  came  to  town.  At
procured  in  Holland,  England,  their  entertainments  there  is  no
and  France,  vii.  500,  705,  760,  conversation  that  is  agreeable ;
774,  796,  797,  906,  979.  New  there  is  no  modesty ;  no  atten-
York  is  described  by  most  of  the  tion  to  one  another.  They  talk
writers  on  America  I  have  al-  very  loud,  very  fast,  and  all  to-
ready  quoted.  J.  Adams  gives  a  gether.  If  they  ask  you  a  ques-
very  unfavourable  picture  of  the  tion,  before  you  can  utter  three
manners  of  its  inhabitants.  He  words  of  your  answer  they  will
writes :  '  With  all  the  opulence  break  out  upon  you  again  and
and  splendour  of  this  city  [New  talk  away.' — Adams' Diary,  1774.
York]  there  is  very  little  good  Works,  ii.  353.  On  the  condition
breeding  to  be  found.  We  have  of  education  in  New  York,  see
been  treated  with  an  assiduous  Tyler's  Hist,  of  American  Lite-
respect,  but  I  have  not  seen  one  rature,  ii.  206,  207.

CH.  xi.  PENNSYLVANIA.  21

The  Quakers,  who  were  its  first  colonists,  now  formed
about  a  fifth  part  of  the  population,  and  still  exercised
the  greatest  power  in  the  Assembly.  Pennsylvania,
however,  rivalled  or  surpassed  New  York  in  its  attrac-
tion to  foreign  immigrants,  and  few  countries  have
contained  so  great  a  mixture  of  nationalities.  The
Germans  were  so  numerous  that  they  for  some  time
returned  15  out  of  the  69  members  of  the  Assembly.1
Nearly  12,000  had  landed  in  the  single  summer  of
1749,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  century  a  German
weekly  paper  was  published  at  Philadelphia.2  There
was  also  a  large  colony  of  Irish  Presbyterians,  who
lived  chiefly  along  the  western  frontier,  and  who  had
established  a  prosperous  linen  manufacture ;  and
Swedes,  Scotch,  Welsh,  and  a  few  Dutch  might  be
found  among  the  inhabitants.  The  law  of  real  property
was  nearly  the  same  as  in  Massachusetts.  There  was
perfect  liberty,  and  the  prevailing  spirit  was  gentle,
humane,  pacific,  and  keenly  money-making.  The
Quakers,  though  their  distinctive  character  was  very
clearly  imprinted  on  the  colony,  had  found  that  some
departure  from  their  original  principles  was  indispens-
able. A  section  of  them,  in  flagrant  opposition  to  the
original  tenet  of  their  sect,  contended  that  war  was  not
criminal  when  it  was  strictly  defensive.  A  long  line  of
cannon  defended  the  old  Quaker  capital  against  the
French  and  Spanish  privateers  ;  and  the  Pennsylvanian
Assembly,  in  which  the  Quakers  predominated,  re-
peatedly voted  military  aids  to  the  Crown  during  the
French  wars,  disguising  their  act  by  voting  the  money
only  '  for  the  King's  use,'  and  on  one  occasion  '  for  the
purchase  of  bread,  flour,  wheat,  or  other  grain,'  the
latter  being  understood  to  be  gunpowder.*

1  Wintcrbotham,  ii.  439.  396.

2  Kalm's Travels in  North *  Franklin's Life, pp.  148-
America. Pinkerton, xiii.  395, 155,  Kalm's  Travels.  Pinkerton,

22 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  n.

Philadelphia  was  probably  at  this  time  the  most
beautiful  and  attractive  city  in  the  American  colonies ;
famous  for  its  ship-building,  for  the  great  variety  of  its
commerce,  and  for  its  very  numerous  institutions  of
benevolence  and  instruction.  Burnaby,  who  visited  it
in  1759,  was  filled  '  with  wonder  and  admiration'  at
the  noble  city  which  had  grown  up  where,  eighty  years
before,  the  deer  and  the  buffalo  had  ranged.  He  dilates
upon  the  admirable  lighting  and  paving  of  the  streets,
upon  its  stately  town  hall,  upon  its  two  public  libraries,
upon  its  numerous  churches,  almshouses,  and  schools ;
upon  its  market,  which  was  '  almost  equal  to  that  of
Leadenhall ; '  upon  the  crowd  of  ships  that  thronged  its
harbour.  He  estimated  its  population  at  18,000  or
20,000,  and  he  tells  us  that  about  twenty-five  ships
were  annually  built  in  its  docks,  and  that  many  of  its
houses  were  let  for  what  was  then  the  very  large  sum  of
1QOL  a  year.  It  contained  an  opulent  and  brilliant,  if
somewhat  exclusive  society,  with  all  the  luxury  of  a
European  city.  The  gay  profusion  of  flowers  that  were
stuttered  through  the  houses  ;  the  rich  orchards  extend-
ing to  the  very  verge  of  the  town,  and  encircling  eveiy
important  dwelling ;  the  aspect  of  well-being  which  was
displayed  in  every  class ;  the  use  of  tea,  which  as  early
as  1750  was  universal  in  every  farmer's  house;1  the
multiplication  of  country  seats ;  the  taste  for  lighter  and
more  cheerful  manners,  which  had  sprung  from  contact
with  the  English  officers  during  the  war  ;  the  periodical
assemblies  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  of  the  best  society
to  pass  the  summer  days  in  fishing  upon  the  Schuylkill,
diversified  with  music  and  with  dancing — all  bring

xiii.  391. As  early  as  1741,  the  Travels, and  Christian  Expo-

Quaker,  Thomas  Chalkley,  had  riences  (ed.  1850),  pp.  362,  363.

lamented  the falling away  of  '  Kalm's  Travels. Pinkerton,

Pennsylvanian  Quakers  in this  xiii.  494.
respect. See  his  curious  Life,

Ctt.  It.

PHILADELPHIA.  28

before  us  the  picture  of  a  State  which  was  far  removed
from  the  simplicity,  the  poverty,  and  the  austerity  of  its
Quaker  founders.1

To  a  European,  however,  or  at  least  to  a  French
taste,  the  tone  of  manners  appeared  formal  and  cum-
brous. A  brilliant  Frenchman  who  visited  Philadel-
phia during  the  War  of  Independence,  complained  with
some  humour  that  dancing,  which  in  other  countries
was  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  gaiety  and  love,  was
treated  in  America  as  an  emblem  of  legislation  and
marriage ;  that  every  detail  of  a  ball  was  regulated
beforehand  with  the  most  minute  precision,  and  carried
out  with  a  stern  severity ;  that  each  dancer  was  re-
stricted to  the  same  partner  for  the  whole  evening ; a
and  that  the  almost  endless  succession  of  toasts  that
were  rigidly  enforced,  made  an  American  entertainment
nearly  intolerable  to  a  stranger.  He  noticed,  too,  the
significant  manner  in  which,  in  the  absence  of  titles,
precedence  had  come  to  be  determined  by  wealth.3  A
curious  relic  of  a  standard  of  commercial  integrity
which  had  long  since  passed  away,  survived  in  the
middle  of  the  century  in  the  custom  o-f  '  marriage  in
the  shift.'  When  a  man  died  leaving  debts  which  his
widow  was  unable  to  pay,  she  was  obliged,  if  she  con-

1  Burnaby's  Travels. See,  too,  to  it. '  I  appeal  to  Miss  Wilkcs,
Kalm's  Travels,  ten  years  earlier,  whose  judgment  I  hear  highly
and  the  North  American  Gazet-  commended, would she think
teer,  arts. 'Pennsylvania' and  herself much  indebted to  her
'  Philadelphia.' There  is  a  very  favourite  admirer  if  he  forced  a
graphic  description  of  Philadel-  most  disagreeable  partner  upon
phia,  evidently  by  an  eye-witness,  her,  for  a  long  winter's  night,
in  that  curious  book,  the  Life  of  because  he  would  not  dance  with
Bampfylde  Moore  Carew,  pub-  her  himself?' See  on  this  cus-
lished  in  1749,  1750.  torn  the  remarks  of Twisleton,

2  The  same  custom,  however,  Twisleton  and  Chabot's  Hand-
appears  to  have  prevailed  in  Eng-  writing  of  Junius,  p.  235.
land. Junius, in one of his  •  Chastellux's  Travels,  i.  278.
private  letters  to  Wilkes,  alludea

24 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  *i.

tracted  a  second  marriage,  to  leave  her  clothes  -in  the
hands  of  the  creditors,  and  to  go  through  the  ceremony
in  her  shift.  Gradually,  however,  the  ceremony  was
mitigated  by  the  bridegroom  lending  her  clothes  for  the
occasion.1  The  conflicts  with  the  proprietary  govern-
ment turned  chiefly  upon  the  question  of  how  far  the
proprietary  estates  might  be  submitted  to  taxation,  and
the  decision  of  the  mother  country  was  given  in  favour
of  the  colonists.  The  conflict  was  especially  violent  on
account  of  the  peculiarity  of  the  Pennsylvanian  Govern-
ment, which  consisted  only  of  two  parts,  a  governor
and  a  representative  chamber,  while  in  the  other
colonies  the  council  or  upper  chamber  acted  the  part  of
a  mediator  or  umpire.  A  Council  existed,  it  is  true,  in
Pennsylvania,  but  it  had  no  legislative  power,  and  wag
restricted  to  the  function  of  advising  the  Executive.
The  proprietary  government  was  both  weak  and  un-
popular ;  and  Pennsylvania,  like  most  other  colonies,
was  disturbed  by  many  outbreaks  of  lawless  violence.

The  only  other  colony  which  it  is  necessary  particu-
larly to  notice  on  account  of  the  part  which  it  played  in
the  Revolution,  is  Virginia,  the  oldest  of  the  charter
colonies — the  colony  of  Washington,  Jefferson,  Patrick
Henry,  the  Randolphs,  and  the  Lees.  At  the  Peace  of
Paris,  in  1763,  it  appears  to  have  contained  about
200,000  inhabitants,  the  large  majority  being  slaves,2
and  its  character  was  wholly  different  from  the  Puritan
type  of  New  England  and  from  the  industrial  type  of
Pennsylvania.  The  Church  of  England  was  here  the
dominant  religion,  and  it  was  established  by  law.  There
was  a  fixed  revenue  for  the  support  of  the  civil  estab-
lishments, derived  partly  from  Crown  quit  rents,  and
partly  from  a  duty  on  tobacco,  which  had  been  granted

1  Kalm. Pinkerton,  xiii.  512. xiii.  p.  711;  Grahame,  iv.  122;
*  Compare,  on  the  population Winterbothain.
of  Virginia,  Burnaby ;  Pinkerton,

CH. XI.

VIRGINIA.  25

for  ever.  A  system  of  entails  subsisted  which  was
even  stricter  than  that  in  England,  and  it  concurred
with  the  conditions  of  slave  labour  and  with  the  nature
of  the  soil  to  produce  a  much  more  unequal  distribution
of  property  than  in  the  Northern  colonies.  The  Ulster
Presbyterians,  who  had  penetrated  largely  into  Massa-
chusetts, Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  North  Carolina,
had  formed  a  considerable  settlement  on  the  northern
and  western  frontiers  of  Virginia,  and  a  few  French
refugees  were  also  established  in  the  colony,  but  over
the  greater  part  of  it  the  English  element  was  in  the
free  population  almost  unmixed.  Education  in  general
was  very  backward.  There  were  scarcely  any  manufac-
tures, and  there  was  but  little  town  life.  "Wheat  was
produced  in  abundance,  and  the  tobacco  of  Virginia  and
of  the  adjoining  colony  of  Maryland  was  long  esteemed
the  finest  in  the  world.  Four  great  navigable  rivers
enabled  the  planters  to  load  their  ships  before  their  own
doors  at  distances  of  more  than  eighty  miles  from  the
sea;  and  in  1758,  70,000  hogsheads  of  tobacco  were
exported  from  Virginia.1  After  this  time  the  tobacco
culture  seems  to  have  somewhat  dwindled,  under  the
rising  competition  of  Georgia  and  of  the  western
country  along  the  Mississippi.

The  management  of  the  colony  was  chiefly  in  the
hands  of  great  planters,  some  of  them  descended  from
Cavaliers  who  had  emigrated  during  the  troubles  of  the
Commonwealth.  They  were  a  high-spirited  and  haughty
class,  extremely  tenacious  of  social  rank,  hospitable,
convivial,  full  of  energy  and  courage,  and  as  essentially
aristocratic  in  their  feelings,  if  not  in  their  manners,
as  the  proudest  nobility  of  Europe.  They  resented
bitterly  the  entry  during  the  Revolution  war  of  new
families  into  power,  and  it  was  noticed  that  the  popu-

Winterbotham,  iii.  112.

26  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  ti.

lar  or  democratic  party  in  this  province  showed  more
zeal  in  breaking  down  precedence  than  in  combating
the  English.1  A  great  portion  of  the  colony  was  abso-
lutely uncultivated  and  uncleared,2  but  large  landed
properties  gave  so  much  social  consequence  that  they
were  rarely  broken  up,  though  they  were  usually  very
heavily  encumbered  by  debts.  In  Virginia,  as  in  the
other  colonies,  there  were  some  yeomen,  but  this  class
can  never  flourish  where  slavery  exists,  and  there  was
an  idle,  dissipated,  indebted,  and  impoverished  popula-
tion, descended  in  a  great  degree  from  younger  sons  of
planters,  who  looked  with  contempt  on  manual  labour,
and  who  were  quite  ready  to  throw  themselves  into  any
military  enterprise.  A  traveller  from  Europe,  after
passing  through  the  greater  part  of  the  colonies,  noticed
that  in  Virginia,  for  the  first  time,  he  saw  evidence  of
real  poverty  among  the  whites.3  The  upper  classes
were  keen  huntsmen  ;  among  all  classes  there  was  much
gambling  and  an  intense  passion  for  horse-racing,  and
even  in  districts  where  there  were  no  public  convey-
ances and  no  tolerable  inns,  great  crowds  from  distances
of  thirty  or  forty  miles  were  easily  collected  by  a  cock-
fight.4 Among  the  lower  class  of  whites  there  was  a
great  brutality  of  manners,  and  they  were  especially
noted  for  their  habit  of  'gouging'  out  each  other's
eyes  in  boxing  matches  and  quarrels.5  '  Indians  and
negroes,'  a  traveller  observed,  '  they  scarcely  consider
as  of  the  human  species.'  Acts  of  violence,  and  even
murder,  of  which  they  were  the  victims,  were  never

1  Chastellux,  ii.  189.  whole  is  cultivated,  and  in  Con-

2  Noah  Webster,  who  was  one  necticut  scarcely  a  tenth  remains
of the best of  the  early  eco-  in a wild state.' — Webster's
nomists  of America, wrote in  Essays,  p.  365.

1790  :  'In  Virginia  and  Maryland  *  Chastellux,  ii.  190.

I  should  question  whether  a  tenth  *  Ibid.  pp.  28,  29.

of  the  land  is  yet  cultivated. In  •  Ibid.  pp.  l'J2, 193.
New  England  more  than  half  the

CII, XI.

VIRGINIA.  27

or  scarcely  ever  punished,  and  no  negro  was  suffered
to  give  evidence  in  a  court  of  law  except  at  the  trial  of
a  slave  for  a  capital  offence.1  Virginia,  however,  was  a
great  breeding  country  for  negroes,  and  chiefly,  perhaps,
for  this  reason  they  are  said  to  have  been  treated  there
with  somewhat  less  habitual  cruelty  than  in  the  West
Indies.2

Burke  has  very  truly  said  that  slave-owners  are
often  of  all  men  the  most  jealous  of  their  freedom,  for
they  regard  it  not  only  as  an  enjoyment  but  as  a  kind
of  rank ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  slavery,  when  it
does  not  coexist  with  a  thoroughly  enervating  climate,
is  exceedingly  favourable  to  the  military  qualities,  for
by  the  stigma  which  it  attaches  to  labour,  it  diverts
men  from  most  peaceful  and  industrial  pursuits.  Both
of  these  truths  were  exemplified  in  Virginia,  which  pro-
duced a  very  large  proportion  of  the  most  prominent
advocates  of  independence,  while  it  was  early  noted  for
the  efficiency  of  its  militia.3  Virginia  always  claimed
to  be  the  leading  as  well  as  the  oldest  colony  in  America,
and  though  its  people  were  much  more  dissipated  and
extravagant  than  those  of  the  Northern  colonies,  the
natural  advantages  of  the  province  were  so  great,  and
the  tobacco  crop  raised  by  the  negroes  was  so  valuable,
that  in  the  ten  years  preceding  1770  the  average  value
of  the  exports  from  Virginia  and  Maryland  exceeded  by
considerably  more  than  a  third  the  united  exports  of
the  New  England  colonies,  New  York  and  Pennsyl-
vania.4 A  large  number  of  the  planters  appear  to  have

1  Burnaby. Pinkerton's  Voy-  Essays, pp. 361-364. Story's
ages,  xiii.  714,  715.  Constitution  of  the  United  States,

2  Chastellux.ii.  193-195.  There  i.  29-33.

is  an  excellent  description  of  Vir-  *  Sparks'  Life  of  Washington.

ginian  society  in  Wirt's  Life  of  Washington's  Works,  i.  133.

Patrick  Henry, See,  too,  Gra-  *  Hildreth,  ii.  559.
hame, iv.  122-124. Webster's

28 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xi.

been  warmly  attached  to  England,  but  much  discontent
was  produced  by  the  interference  of  the  mother  country
in  the  quarrel,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  between
the  laity  and  the  clergy  of  this  State.  The  sixty  or
seventy  clergymen  of  the  Established  Church  received,
in  addition  to  a  house  and  to  some  glebe  lands,  an
annual  stipend  in  the  form  of  tobacco,  which  was
delivered  to  them  packed  in  hogsheads  for  exportation
at  the  nearest  warehouse.  In  a  year  when  the  tobacco
crop  failed,  the  Assembly  passed  a  law  obliging  the
clergy  to  receive  their  stipends  in  money  instead  of
tobacco,  and  enforced  it  without  waiting  for  the  royal
assent.  The  clergy  complained  that  no  allowance
having  been  made  for  the  low  price  of  tobacco  in  good
years,  it  was  unfair  that  they  should  be  deprived  of  the
benefit  of  its  high  price  in  a  bad  year,  and  they  sent
over  an  agent  to  England  and  induced  the  English
Government  to  disallow  the  law.  Actions  were  brought
by  the  clergy  to  recover  the  sums  out  of  which  they  had
been  defrauded,  but  although  the  law  was  indisputably
on  their  side  they  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  verdicts
from  Virginian  juries.  It  was  in  pleading  against  them
that  Patrick  Henry,  the  greatest  of  American  orators,
first  exhibited  his  eloquence  and  his  antipathy  to
England.  He  had  been  successively  a  storekeeper,  a
farmer,  and  a  shopkeeper,  but  had  failed  in  all  these
pursuits,  had  become  bankrupt,  and  at  last,  with  a  very
tarnished  reputation,  had  entered  the  law  courts,  where
he  soon  displayed  a  power  of  popular  eloquence  which
had  never  yet  been  equalled,  or  perhaps  approached,  in
America.  He  openly  told  the  juries  that  the  act  of  the
English  Government  in  disallowing  the  proceedings  of
the  Virginian  Assembly  was  an  instance  of  tyranny  and
misgovernment  that  dissolved  the  political  compact,  and
speaking  in  a  popular  cause  he  created  so  fierce  a  spirit
in  the  colony  that  the  clergy  gave  up  all  attempts  to

en.  xi.

THE SOUTHERN COLONIES.

obtain  what  was  due  to  them.1  In  addition  to  this
passing  quarrel,  there  was  a  more  chronic  source  of
anti-English  feeling  in  Virginia  in  the  commercial  re-
strictions which  prevented  the  planters  from  sending
their  tobacco  to  foreign  countries.

It  is  not  necessary  to  pursue  further  a  description  of
the  Southern  colonies.  Maryland  in  soil,  produce,  and
social  condition  greatly  resembled  Virginia,  but  pro-
perties were  smaller ;  a  few  rich  Roman  Catholics
might  still  be  found  among  the  landowners,2  and  the
colony  was  full  of  convicts,  who  were  brought  there  in
great  numbers  from  England,  and  sold  as  slaves  to  the
planters.  In  Maryland  the  same  law  of  real  property
prevailed  as  in  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania,  but  in
all  the  other  Southern  colonies  the  English  law,  with
its  tendency  to  favour  great  agglomerations  of  land,  was
maintained.3  In  the  vast  provinces  of  Carolina  the

1  Burnaby. Pinkerton, xiii.
712-714. Wirt's  Life  of  Henry.

2  Adams  mentions  in  1774  a
Catholic  gentlemannamed  Carroll
(one  of  the  signers  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence)  who  lived  at
Annapolis,  in  Maryland,  as  a  man
of  the  first  fortune  in  America.
'  His  income  is  10,0002.  a  year
now,  will  be  14,0002.  in  two  or
three  years  they  say ;  besides,  his
father  has  a  vast  estate  which
will  be  his.' — Adams'  Works,  ii.
880.

3  Story's  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  i.  165,  166. In
1777  Adams  writes  that  in  Mary-
land 'they  have but  few  mer-
chants. They  are  chiefly  planters
and  farmers ;  the  planters are
those  who  raise  tobacco,  and  the
farmers  such  as  raise  wheat,  &c.
The  lands  are  cultivated  and  all
sorts  of  trades  are  exercised  by

negroes  or  by  transported  con-
victs,  which  has  occasioned  the
planters  and  farmers  to  assume
the  title  of  gentlemen,  and  they
hold  their  negroes  and  convicts
-that  is,  all  labouring  people
and  tradesmen — in  such  con-
tempt, thatthey  think  themselves
a  distinct  order  of  beings.  Hence
they  never  will  suffer  their  sons
to  labour  or  learn  any  trade,  but
they  bring  them  up  in  idleness
or,  what  is  worse,  in  horse-racing,
cock-fighting,  and  card-playing.
.  .  .  The  object  of  the  men  of
property  here,  the  planters,  Ac.,
is  universally  wealth.  Every
way  in  the  world  is  sought  to
get  and  save  money;  land
jobbers,  speculators  in  land ;
little  generosity  to  the  public,
little  public  spirit.' — Adams'
Works,  ii.  436.

30  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

climate  was  more  enervating  and  the  proportion  of
negroes  was  much  larger  than  in  Virginia,  and  there
were  greater  contrasts  of  wealth  and  poverty  than  in
any  other  parts  of  British  America.  Georgia  and
Florida  were  too  undeveloped  to  have  much  political
or  intellectual  influence.  Through  the  whole  of  the
Southern  colonies  there  was  much  less  severity  of
religious  orthodoxy,  less  energy  and  moral  fibre,  less  in-
dustrial, political,  and  intellectual  activity  than  in  the
North,  and  a  much  greater  tendency  both  to  idleness
and  to  amusement.  Charleston  is  said,  of  all  the
American  towns,  to  have  approached  most  nearly  to  the
social  refinement  of  a  great  European  capital.

In  general,  however,  the  American  colonies  had  at-
tained to  great  prosperity  and  to  a  high  level  of  civili-
sation. Burnaby  noticed  that  in  a  journey  of  1,200
miles  through  the  Northern  and  Central  colonies  he  had
not  met  with  a  single  beggar.1  Domestic  wages  were
much  higher,2  and  farmers  and  farm -labourers  incom-
parably more  prosperous  than  in  England  or  in  any
other  part  of  Europe.  '  The  Northern  yeomanry,'
wrote  an  American  economist  at  a  time  when  America
can  have  done  little  more  than  recover  from  the  losses
of  the  War  of  Independence,  '  not  only  require  more
clothing  than  the  Southern,  but  they  live  on  expensive
food  and  drinks.  Every  man,  even  the  poorest,  makes
use  of  tea,  sugar,  spirits,  and  a  multitude  of  articles
which  are  not  consumed  by  the  labourers  of  any  other
country.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  labouring  people  in  New
England  eat  meat  twice  a  day,  and  as  much  as  their

1  Pinkerton's Voyages, xiii.  the  poor  emigrants  from  Europe

750.  sold  themselves  to  the  planters

*  Ibid.  xiii.  500. It  must  be  for  a  term  of  years,  and  some-
remembered,  however,  that  the  times  in  this  way  paid  their  pas-
slaves  in  America  were  not  only  sage,
negroes  and  convicts. Many  of

CH.  xi.  AMERICAN  EDUCATION.  31

appetites  demand.'  Owing  to  the  admirable  parish
libraries,  there  were  New  England  parishes  'where
almost  every  householder  has  read  the  works  of  Addi-
son,  Sherlock,  Atterbury,  Watts,  Young,  and  other
similar  writings,  and  will  converse  handsomely  on  the
subjects  of  which  they  treat ; ' l  and  Boston,  New  York,
Philadelphia,  and  Charleston,  would  in  almost  all  the
elements  of  civilisation  have  ranked  high  among  the
provincial  towns  of  Europe.  When  Kalm  visited  Canada
in  1 750,  he  found  that  there  was  not  a  single  printing
press  in  the  whole  territory  possessed  by  the  French,2
but  before  that  time  most  of  the  more  important  British
colonies  possessed  a  newspaper,  and  by  the  close  of
1765  at  least  forty-three  newspapers  are  said  to  have
been  established  in  America.3  There  were  seven  im-
portant colleges,4  and  there  were  at  least  four  literary
magazines.8

In  New  England,  education  was  always  conducted
at  home,  but  in  the  Southern  and  some  of  the  Middle
colonies  the  rich  planters  were  accustomed  to  send  their
sons  for  education  to  England.6  In  these  States  educa-
tion was  almost  a  monopoly  of  the  rich  ;  schoolmasters
were  despised,  and  schools  were  extremely  rare.  Mar-
tin, the  last  royal  governor  in  North  Carolina,  stated
that  in  his  time  there  were  only  two  schools  in  the
whole  colony.7  In  the  first  thirty  years  of  the  eigh-
teenth century  there  was  but  one  grammar  school,  in
the  next  forty  years  there  were  but  three  in  the  great
province  of  South  Carolina.8  Noah  Webster  mentions

1  Webster's  Essays,  pp.  339,  4  Harvard,  William  and  Mary,

366.  This  was  published  in  1790.  Yale,  New  Jersey,  King's,  Phila-

*  Pinkerton,  xiii.  C60.  delphia,  and  Khode  Island.

«  Tyler's  Hist,  of  American *  Tyler,  ii.  305,  306.
Literature,  ii.  304. Miller,  how- '  Miller,  iii.  191, 192,  194.
ever,  gives  a  much  lower  esti- 7  See Sabine's American

mate (Retrospect  of the  Eigh-  Loyalists,  p.  35.
teenth  Century,  iii.  90-92).  •  Miller's  Retrospect,  iii.  230.

32 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

that  he  once  saw  a  copy  of  instructions  given  to  a  re-
presentative of  Maryland  by  his  constituents,  and  he
found  that  out  of  more  than  a  hundred  names  that  were
subscribed,  '  three-fifths  were  marked  by  a  cross  be-
cause the  men  could  not  write.'  He  ascertained  in
1785  that  the  circulation  of  newspapers  in  the  single
New  England  State  of  Connecticut  was  equal  to  that
in  the  whole  American  territory  south  of  Pennsylvania,1
and  he  has  recorded  the  extraordinary  fact  that  in  some
parts  of  the  colonies  the  education  of  the  young  was
frequently  confided  to  the  care  of  purchased  convicts.2
All  the  great  seminaries  of  learning  lay  in  the  Northern
and  Middle  colonies  and  in  Virginia,  and  the  English
education  of  the  rich  planters  of  the  South  had  greatly
coloured  their  political  opinions.  At  the  same  time
they  formed  the  more  important  part  of  the  very  small
leisure  class  which  existed  in  America ;  and  it  is  a  re-
markable fact  that  the  Southern  colonies,  though  in
general  far  behind  the  Northern  ones,  produced  no  less
than  five  out  of  the  first  seven  presidents  of  the  United
States.

In  the  Northern  colonies,  on  the  contrary,  education
was  both  very  widely  diffused  and  very  equal.  The
average  was  exceedingly  high,  but  there  were  no  emi-
nences. The  men  were  early  devoted  to  money-making,
but  it  was  noticed  that  there  was  a  general  ambition  to
educate  women  above  their  fortunes,  and  that  in  some
towns  there  were  three  times  as  many  '  genteelly  bred '
women  as  men.3  The  absence  of  any  considerable  leisure

1  Webster's  Essays,  338,  360.  the  war  it  was  a  frequent  prac-

2  '  The  most  important  busi-  tice  for  gentlemen to  purchase
iiess  in  civil  society  is  in  many  convicts  who had been trans-
parts  of  America  committed  to  ported  for  their  crimes  and  ein-
the  most  worthless characters.  ploy  them  as  private  tutors  in
.  .  .  Education  is  sunk  to  a  level  their  families  ?  ' — Ibid.  pp.  I1?  -
with  the  most  menial  services.  19. See,  too,  pp.  55,  338.

.  .  .  Will  it  be  denied  that  before *  Ibid.  p.  30.

en.  xi.  AMERICAN  EDUCATION.  83

class,  tlie  difficulty  of  procuring  books,1  and  especially
the  intensely  commercial  and  money-making  character
of  the  colonists,  were  fatal  to  original  literature ;  and,
except  for  a  few  theological  works,  American  literary
history  before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century
would  be  almost  a  blank.  Berkeley  wrote  his  '  Alci-
phron '  and  his  '  Minute  Philosopher '  in  Rhode  Island  ;
but  the  first  native  writer  of  real  eminence  was  Jona-
than Edwards,  who  was  born  in  1703.  He  was  soon
followed  by  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  in  literature,  as
in  science,  took  a  place  among  the  greatest  of  his
contemporaries.  Rittenhouse,  who  was  born  near  Phila-
delphia in  1732,  attained  some  distinction  in  astro-
nomy ;  and  among  the  Americans  who  sought  a  home  in
England  were  the  painters  Copley  and  West,  and  the
grammarian  Lindley  Murray.  Several  of  those  noble
public  libraries  which  are  IIQ.W  one  of  the  great  glories
of  America  had  already  arisen;  the  first  circulating
library  was  established  at  Philadelphia  in  173 1,2  and
between  1763  and  1770  a  medical  school  was  founded
in  the  same  city,  and  courses  of  lectures  were  for  the
first  time  given  on  anatomy,  on  the  institutes  of  medi-
cine, on  the  Linnasan  system  of  botany,  and  on  the  dis-
coveries of  Lavoisier  in  chemistry.3

1  In  that  curious book, the  is  but  one  little  bookseller's  shop,

Life  of  Bampfylde  Moore  Carew,  and  none  at  all  in  Virginia,  Mary-

which  was  published  in  1749,  land, Carolina,  Barbadoes, or

and  which  shows  great  personal  any  of  the  sugar  islands,'  p.  199.

knowledge  of  America,  it  is  said :  As  late  as  1760  it  is  said  that

'  There  are  five  printing  houses  '  there  were  no  Greek  types  in

[in  Boston],  at  one  of  which  the  the country, or  if  there  were

Boston  Gazette  is  printed,  and  that  no  printer  knew  how  to  set

comes  out  twice  a  week. The  them.' — Tudor's  Life of Otis,

presses  here  are  generally  full  of  p.  16.

work,  which  is  in  a  great  measure  2  Franklin's  Life,  p.  99.

owing  to  the  colleges  and  schools  3  Miller's Retrospect of the

for  useful  learning  in  New  Eng-  Eighteenth Century, iii. 236,

land,  whereas  at  New  York  there  237,282. This  book  contains

VOL.  IV,  P

34 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

The  moral  and  political  aspect  of  the  country  pre-
sented a  much  more  blended  and  doubtful  picture,  and
must  have  greatly  perplexed  those  who  tried  to  cast  the
horoscope  of  America.  Nations  are  essentially  what
their  circumstances  make  them,  and  the  circumstances
of  the  American  colonists  were  exceedingly  peculiar.
A  country  where  so  large  a  proportion  of  the  inhabi-
tants were  recent  immigrants,  drawn  from  different
nations,  and  professing  various  creeds;  where,  owing
to  the  vast  extent  of  territory  and  the  imperfection  of
the  means  of  communication,  they  were  thrown  very
slightly  in  contact  with  one  another,  and  where  the
money-making  spirit  was  peculiarly  intense,  was  not
likely  to  produce  much  patriotism  or  community  of
feeling.  On  the  other  hand,  the  same  circumstances
had  developed  to  an  almost  unprecedented  degree
energy,  variety  of  resource,  independence  of  character,
capacity  for  self-government.  In  a  simple  and  labo-
rious society  many  of  the  seed-plots  of  European  vice
were  unknown.  Small  freeholders  cultivating  thei»*
own  lands  were  placed  under  conditions  very  favour-
able to  moral  development,  and  the  wild  life  of  the
explorer,  the  pioneer,  and  the  huntsman  gave  an  un-
bounded scope  to  those  superfluous  energies  which
become  so  dangerous  when  they  are  repressed  or  mis-
directed. Beliefs  that  had  long  been  waning  in  Europe
retained  much  vigour  in  the  colonies,  and  there  were
little  sects  or  societies  which  represented  the  fervour
and  purity  of  the  early  Christians  perhaps  as  perfectly
as  anything  upon  earth.  Travellers  noticed  that,  ex-
cept where  slavery  had  exercised  its  demoralising  influ-
ence, the  intercourse  between  the  sexes  was  singularly
free  and  at  the  same  time  singularly  pure.1  There  was

an admirable account of the Hist,  of  the  United  States,  ii.  513.
early  intellectual  history  of  the  '  Chastellux,  i.  153,  154. Mi-

colonies. See,  too,  Hildreth'« moires  de  Lafayette,  i.  25. See,

CH.  xi,  AMERICAN MORALS.  35

a  great  simplicity  and  freshness  of  character,  a  spirit
of  warm  hospitality,  a  strong  domestic  feeling.  Politi-
cal corruption,  which  was  the  great  cancer  of  English
life,  was  almost  unknown,  though  there  were  serious
scandals  connected  with  the  law  courts,  and  though  the
level  of  commercial  integrity  was  probably  lower  than
in  England.  A  large  proportion  of  the  men  who  played
a  conspicuous  part  in  the  events  to  be  recorded,  were
men  of  high  private  morals,  simple,  domestic,  honour-
able, and  religious.  When  the  conflict  with  England
became  inevitable,  one  of  the  first  proceedings  of  the
different  States  was  to  appoint  days  of  humiliation  and
prayer,  and  Washington  notes  in  his  private  diary  how
on  this  occasion  he  '  went  to  church  and  fasted  all  day.'
The  most  stringent  rules  were  made  in  the  American
camp  to  suppress  all  games  of  chance  and  to  punish
all  profane  language.  John  Adams,  recounting  week
after  week  in  his  diary  the  texts  of  the  sermons  he  had
heard,  and  his  estimate  of  the  comparative  merits
of  the  preachers,  when  he  was  leading  the  popular
party  in  the  very  agony  of  the  struggle  for  the  in-
dependence of  America,  is  a  typical  example  of  a
class  of  politicians  strangely  unlike  the  revolutionists
of  Europe.

The  most  serious  evil  of  the  colonies  was  the  number
and  force  of  the  influences  which  were  impelling  large
classes  to  violence  and  anarchy,  brutalising  them  by
accustoming  them  to  an  unrestrained  exercise  of  power,
and  breaking  down  among  them  that  salutary  respect
for  authority  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  true  national
greatness.  The  influence  of  negro  slavery  in  this  respect
can  hardly  be  overrated,  and  in  the  slave  States  a
master  could  commit  any  act  of  violence  and  outrage  on
a  negro  with  practical  impunity.

too,  the  very  engaging  picture  manners  in  the  M&moirea  <fy
of  Pennsylvanian  morals  and  Comte  de  S&gur.

D  2

86 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xi.

The  relations  of  the  colonists  to  the  Indian  tribes
were  scarcely  less  demoralising.  White  men  planted
among  savages  and  removed  from  the  control  of  Euro-
pean opinion  seldom  fail  to  contract  the  worst  vices  of
tyrants.

The  voluminous  and  very  copious  despatches  of  Sir
W.  Johnson  and  of  Mr.  Stuart,  who  during  many  years
had  the  management  of  Indian  affairs,  are,  on  the
whole,  extremely  creditable  to  the  writers.  They  show
that  the  Government  laboured  with  great  humanity,
equity,  and  vigilance  to  protect  the  rights  of  the  Indians,
but  they  also  show  that  they  had  to  encounter  insupe-
rable difficulties  in  their  task.  The  Executive  was
miserably  weak.  There  were  usually  no  troops  within
reach.  Juries  in  Indian  cases  could  never  be  trusted,
and  public  opinion  on  the  frontier  looked  upon  Indians
as  little  better  than  wild  beasts.  The  French  had  in
this  respect  succeeded  much  better.  The  strong  Execu-
tive of  Canada  guarded  the  Indians  effectually  from
depredations,  restricted  commercial  dealings  with  them
to  the  better  class  of  traders,  and  attached  them  by  a
warm  feeling  of  gratitude.  But  the  despatches  of
Johnson  and  Stuart  are  full  of  accounts  of  how  the
English  settlers  continually  encroached  on  the  terri-
tory which  was  allotted  by  treaty  to  the  Indians;
how  the  rules  that  had  been  established  for  the  regu-
lation of  the  Indian  trade  were  systematically  vio-
lated ;  how  traders  of  the  lowest  kind  went  among  the
savages,  keeping  them  in  a  state  of  continual  drunken-
ness till  they  had  induced  them  to  surrender  their
land ;  how  the  goods  that  were  sold  to  Indians  were  of
the  most  fraudulent  description ;  how  many  traders  de-
liberately excited  outrages  against  their  rivals;  how
great  numbers  of  Indians  who  were  perfectly  peace-
ful, and  loyal  to  the  English,  were  murdered  without
a  shadow  of  provocation ;  and  how  these  crimes  were

CH.  xi.  fREATMENf OF  INDIANS.  87

perpetrated  without punishment and  almost without
blame.1

A  few  voices  were  no  doubt  raised  in  the  colonies
on  their  behalf.  Franklin  wrote  with  honest  indignation
denouncing  some  horrible  murders  that  had  been  per-
petrated in  Pennsylvania.  The  Quakers  were  usually
noted  for  their  righteous  dealing  with  the  Indians.  John
Eliot  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  Brainerd  in  the
eighteenth  century,  had  laboured  with  admirable  zeal
for  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  the  Society  for  the
Propagation  of  the  Gospel  had  planted  several  missionary
stations  among  them.  In  general,  however,  the  French
missionaries  were  far  more  successful.  This  was  partly,
no  doubt,  owing  to  their  creed,  for  Catholicism,  being  a
highly  pictorial,  authoritative,  and  material  religion,
is  much  more  suited  than  Protestantism  to  influence
savages  and  idolaters ;  but  much  also  depended  on  the
great  superiority  of  the  Catholic  missionaries  in  organ'
isation,  education,  and  even  character.  The  strange
spectacle  was  often  shown  of  Presbyterians,  Baptists,
and  Anglicans  contending  in  rivalry  for  converts.  New
England  Puritans  tried  to  persuade  their  converts  that
their  dances,  their  rejoicings  at  marriages,  and  their
most  innocent  amusements  were  wrong.  Many  mis-
sionaries were  absolutely  unacquainted  with  the  lan-
guage of  those  to  whom  they  preached,  and  they  had
no  interpreters  except  ignorant  backwoodsmen.2  It  is

1  Letters  on  Indian  affairs  946-948,  953-977.
form  a  very  large  proportion  of  2  Ibid.  vii.  969,  970.  Sir  W.
the  papers  (Plantations,  General)  Johnson  mentions  that  he  was
on  America  in  the  Kecord  Office.  himself  present  when  one  of  the
The  most  valuable  have  been  missionaries,  preaching  to  the
printed  in  the  admirable  collec-  Indians,  '  delivered  as  his  text,
tion  of  Documents  relative  to  the  "  For  God  is  no  respecter  of  per-
Colonial  History  of  New  York,  sons,"  and  desired  it  to  be  ex-
published  by  order  of  the  Legisla-  plained  to  them  ;  the  interpreter
ture  of  that  State.  See  e.g.  vol.  (though  the  best  in  that  country)
vii.  pp.  602,  G37-641,  837,  838,  told  the  Indians  that  "God  had

S8  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt.

a  significant  fact  that  in  the  French  war  the  Indians
were  usually  on  the  side  of  the  French,  and  in  the  War
of  Independence  on  the  side  of  the  Government,  and
the  explanation  is  probably  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the
constant  and  atrocious  outrages  which  they  endured  from
the  American  traders.

To  these  elements  of  anarchy  must  be  added  the
enormous  extent  of  smuggling  along  the  American
coast,  and  also  the  extreme  weakness  of  the  Govern-
ment, which  made  it  impossible  to  enforce  any  un-
popular law  or  repress  any  riot.  There  was  no  standing
army,  and  the  position  of  the  governors  was  in  several
States  one  of  the  most  humiliating  dependence.  In
the  four  New  England  States,  in  New  Jersey,  and  in
New  York,  all  the  executive  and  judicial  authorities
depended  mainly  or  entirely  for  their  salaries  upon  an
annual  vote  of  the  Assembly,  which  was  at  all  times
liable  to  be  withdrawn  or  diminished.  It  was  not  pos-
sible under  such  circumstances  that  any  strong  feeling
of  respect  for  authority  could  subsist,  and  the  absence
of  any  great  superiority  either  in  rank  or  in  genius
contributed  to  foster  a  spirit  of  unbounded  self-con-
fidence among  the  people.

The  relation  of  this  great,  rising,  and  civilised  com-
munity to  the  parent  State  was  a  question  of  transcendent
importance  to  the  future  of  the  Empire.  The  general
principle  which  was  adopted  was,  that  each  colony
should  regulate  with  perfect  freedom  its  local  affairs,
but  that  matters  of  imperial  concern,  and  especially
the  commercial  system,  should  remain  under  the  control
of  the  Imperial  Parliament.  The  common  law  and  the

no  love  for  such  people  as  them,"  not  been  present  the  error  must

on  which  I  immediately  stopped  have passed, and many  more

him  and  explained  the  text,  as  I  might  have  been  committed  in

did  the  rest  of  his  discourse,  to  the  course  of  the  serino;:.'
prevent  farther  mistakes  ;  h&d  I

CH.  ix.  RELATIONS  OF  THE  COLONIES  TO  PARLIAMENT.  89

statute  law,  as  far  as  they  existed  before  the  colonisa-
tion, were  extended  to  the  colonies,  but  the  relation
of  the  colonial  legislatures  to  the  Government  at  home
was  not  very  accurately  defined.  The  original  charters,
while  authorising  them  to  levy  taxes  and  make  laws
for  the  colonies,  had  declared  that  the  colonists  should
be  deemed  natural-born  English  subjects,  and  should
enjoy  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  thereof;  that
the  laws  of  England,  in  so  far  as  they  were  applicable
to  their  circumstances,  should  be  in  force  in  the  colonies,
and  that  no  law  should  be  made  in  the  colonies  which
was  repugnant  or  did  not,  '  as  near  as  may  be  con-
veniently,' conform  to  the  laws  of  England.  A  statute
of  William  provided  that  all  colonial  laws  which  were
repugnant  to  laws  made  in  England,  '  so  far  as  such
law  shall  relate  to  and  mention  the  said  plantations,
are  illegal,  null,  and  void.' l

These  restrictions  are  of  a  very  vague  description,
and,  as  is  often  the  case  in  English  law,  the  meaning
was  determined  more  by  a  course  of  precedents  than  by
express  definition.  Great  remedial  measures,  guarantee-
ing the  rights  of  subjects,  such  as  the  Great  Charter  or
the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  were  in  full  force  in  the
colonies ;  but  the  colonial  legislatures,  with  the  entire-
assent  of  the  Home  Government,  assumed  the  right  of
modifying  almost  every  portion  both  of  the  common
and  of  the  statute  law,  with  a  view  to  their  special
circumstances.  The  laws  relating  to  real  property,  the
penal  code,  and  the  laws  relating  to  religious  belief,
were  freely  dealt  with,  and  it  became  a  recognised
principle  that  the  colonies  might  legislate  for  them-
selves as  they  pleased,  provided  they  left  untouched
allegiance  to  the  Crown  and  Acts  of  the  English  Par-
liament in  which  they  were  expressly  mentioned.

1  7  and  8  William  III.  cap.  22.  Story's  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  i.  139,  147-149.

40  ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xi.

The  scope  of  the  Act  of  William  establishing  this
latter  restriction  was  also  determined  by  precedent.
The  theory  of  the  English  Government  was,  that  Par-
liament had  by  right  an  absolute  and  unrestricted
power  of  legislation  over  the  dependencies  of  England.
The  colonies  were  of  the  nature  of  corporations  which
lay  within  its  supreme  dominion,  but  which  were  en-
trusted with  certain  corporate  powers  of  self-govern-
ment. In  an  early  period  of  colonial  history  this  theory
had  been  contested  in  the  colonies,  and  especially  in
Massachusetts  ;  and  it  had  been  contended  that  the
colonies,  having  been  founded  in  most  instances  with-
out any  assistance  from  the  Home  Government,  and
having  received  their  charters  from  the  Sovereign,  and
not  from  the  Parliament,  were  in  the  position  of  Scot-
land before  the  Union,  bound  in  allegiance  to  the  King,
but  altogether  independent  of  the  English  Parliament.
This  theory,  however,  was  inconsistent  with  the  whole
course  of  English  legislation  about  the  colonies,  with
the  terms  of  the  charters,  and  with  the  claims  of  the
colonists  to  rights  that  were  derived  exclusively  from
English  law.  It  was  not  within  the  prerogative  of  the
Sovereign  either  to  emancipate  English  subjects  by
charter  from  the  dominion  of  Parliament,  or  to  confer
upon  aliens  the  character  of  Englishmen.  The  claim
to  be  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  Parliament  was  accord-
ingly soon  dropped  by  the  colonists ;  and,  although  it
revived  at  the  era  of  the  Revolution,  we  find  Massachu<-
setts  in  1757,  1761,  and  1768,  acknowledging,  in  the
most  explicit  and  emphatic  terms,  the  right  of  the
English  Parliament  to  bind  the  colonies  by  its  Acts.1

The  only  modern  Acts  of  Parliament,  however,  which
were  esteemed  binding  were  those  in  which  the  colonies
were  expressly  mentioned ;  and  theso  Acts  dealt  with

Story's  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  i.  174,

Cif.  xi.  RELATIONS  TO  PARLIAMENT  AND  THE  CROWN.  4 1

them,  not  as  separate  units,  but  as  integral  parts  of  one
connected  Empire.  It  was  the  recognised  right  of  Par-
liament to  establish  a  uniform  commercial  system,  ex-
tending over  the  whole  Empire,  and  binding  every
portion  of  it.  There  were  also  some  matters  which
were  mainly,  if  not  exclusively,  of  colonial  interest,  on
which  Parliament  undertook  to  legislate,  and  its  autho-
rity was  submitted  to,  though  not  without  some  protest
and  remonstrance.  It  was  sometimes  necessary  to
establish  a  general  regulation  binding  on  all  the  colo-
nies ;  and  as  there  existed  no  general  or  central  colonial
government,  it  devolved  upon  the  Imperial  Parliament
to  enforce  it.  On  this  principle  Parliament  introduced
the  English  Post-office  system  into  the  colonies,  deter-
mined the  rates  of  postage,  regulated  the  currency,
created  new  facilities  for  the  collection  of  debts,  es-
tablished a  uniform  law  of  naturalisation,  and  even
legislated  about  joint-stock  companies.1

The  relation  of  the  colonial  governments  to  the
Crown  varied  in  some  degree  in  the  different  colonies.
As  a  general  rule  the  Governor  and  the  Council  repre-
sented the  royal  authority,  and,  except  in  the  case  of
the  three  colonies  of  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island,  and
Maryland,  the  Crown  had  a  right  of  disallowing  laws
which  had  passed  through  all  their  stages  in  America.3
The  royal  veto  had  fallen  into  complete  disuse  in  Eng-
land, but  in  the  case  of  colonial  legislation  it  was  still
not  unfrequently  employed.  With  the  exception,  how-
ever, of  measures  relating  to  commerce,  colonial  Acts
were  rarely  or  never  annulled,  except  when  they  tended
to  injure  or  oppress  some  class  of  colonists.  As  the
Governor  was  usually  paid  by  an  annual  vote  of  the
Assembly,  and  as  he  had  very  little  patronage  to  dis-
pose of,  the  Executive  in  the  colonies  was  extremely

1  Hildreth,  ii.  517.  «  Story,  i.  158.

42 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xi.

weak,  and  the  colonists,  in  spite  of  the  occasional  exer-
cise of  the  royal  veto,  had  probably  a  much  more  real
control  over  legislation  than  the  people  of  England.
Trial  by  jury,  both  in  civil  and  criminal  cases,  was  as
universal  as  in  England ;  but  an  appeal  lay  from  all
the  highest  courts  of  judicature  in  the  colonies  to  the
King  in  Council.

There  were  assuredly  no  other  colonies  in  the  world
so  favourably  situated.  They  had,  however,  before  the
passing  of  the  Stamp  Act,  one  real  and  genuine  griev-
ance, which  was  already  preparing  the  way  to  the  dis-
ruption of  the  Empire.  I  have  already  in  a  former
volume  enumerated  the  chief  restrictions  of  the  com-
mercial code  ;  but  it  is  so  important  that  the  true
extent  of  colonial  grievances  should  be  clearly  under-
stood, that  I  trust  the  reader  will  excuse  some  repeti-
tion in  my  narrative.  The  colonies  were  not,  like
Ireland,  excluded  from  the  Navigation  Act,  and  they
had  no  special  reason  to  complain  that  their  trade  was
restricted  to  vessels  built  either  in  England  or  in  the
plantations,  and  manned  to  the  extent  of  two-thirds  of
their  crew  by  British  subjects.  In  this  respect  they
were  on  an  exact  level  with  the  mother  country,  and
the  arrangement  was  supposed  to  be  very  beneficial  to
both.  It  was,  however,  undoubtedly  a  great  evil  that
the  colonists  were  confined  to  the  British  dominions  for
a  market  for  their  tobacco,  cotton,  silk,  coffee,  indigo,
naval  stores,  skins,  sugar,  and  rice,1  as  well  as  many
less  important  articles ;  that  they  were  prohibited  from
carrying  any  goods  from  Europe  to  America  which  had
not  first  been  landed  in  England,  and  that  every  form
of  colonial  manufacture  which  could  possibly  compete
with  the  manufactures  of  England  was  deliberately

1  The  law  about  the  last  three sometimes  among  the  unenume
articles  varied. They  were  some- rated  articles,
times among the enumerated,

<5h.  *t.  THE  COMMERCIAL  SYSTEM.  43

crushed.  In  the  interest  of  the  English  wool  manufac-
ture they  were  forbidden  to  export  their  own  woollen
goods  to  any  country  whatever,  or  even  to  send  them
from  colony  to  colony.  In  the  interests  of  English  iron
merchants  they  were  forbidden  to  set  up  any  steel  fur-
naces or  slitting  mills  in  the  colonies.  In  the  interest
of  English  hatters  they  were  forbidden  to  export  their
hats,  or  even  to  send  them  from  one  colony  to  another,
and  serious  obstacles  were  thrown  in  the  way  of  those
who  sought  to  establish  a  manufacture  for  purely  home
consumption.  In  the  interest  of  the  English  sugar
colonies,  the  importation  of  sugar,  molasses,  and  rum
from  the  French  West  India  islands,  which  was  of
extreme  importance  to  the  New  England  colonies,  was
virtually  forbidden.  Every  act  of  the  colonial  legisla-
tures which  sought  to  encourage  a  native  or  discourage
an  English  branch  of  trade,  was  watched  with  jealous
scrutiny.  Thus  in  1761  the  Assembly  of  South  Caro-
lina, being  sensible  of  the  great  social  and  political
danger  arising  from  the  enormous  multiplication  of
negroes  in  the  colony,  passed  a  law  imposing  a  heavy
duty  upon  the  importation  of  slaves ;  but  as  the  slave
trade  was  one  of  the  most  lucrative  branches  of  English
commerce,  the  law  was  rescinded  by  the  Crown.  In
the  same  year  instructions  were  sent  to  the  Governor  of
New  Hampshire  to  refuse  his  assent  to  any  law  impos-
ing duties  on  negroes  imported  into  the  colonies.1

There  is,  no  doubt,  much  to  be  said  in  palliation  of
the  conduct  of  England.  If  Virginia  was  prohibited
from  sending  her  tobacco  to  any  European  country
except  England,  Englishmen  were  also  prohibited  from
purchasing  any  tobacco  except  that  which  came  from
America  or  Bermuda.  If  many  of  the  trades  and  manu-
factures in  which  the  colonies  were  naturally  most

1  Grahame,  iv.  79.

44  ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTU&Y. cH.  Ju.

fitted  to  excel  were  restricted  or  crushed  by  law,
English  bounties  encouraged  the  cultivation  of  indigo
and  the  importation  into  England  of  pitch,  tar,  hemp,
flax,  and  ship  timber  from  America,  and  several  arti-
cles of  American  produce  obtained  a  virtual  monopoly
of  the  English  market  by  their  exemption  from  the
duties  which  were  imposed  on  similar  articles  imported
from  foreign  countries.  If  the  commercial  system
diminished  very  seriously  the  area  of  profitable  com-
merce that  was  open  to  the  colonies,  it  at  least  left
them  the  elements  of  a  great  national  prosperity.  The
trade  with  England  and  the  trade  with  the  English
West  Indies  were  large  and  lucrative,  and  the  export
trade  to  foreign  countries  was  only  prohibited  in  the
case  of  those  articles  which  were  enumerated  in  the
Navigation  Act.  Among  the  non-enumerated  articles
were  some  of  the  chief  productions  of  the  colonies —
grain  of  all  kinds,  salted  provisions,  timber,  fish,  and
rum ;  and  in  all  these  articles  the  colonists  were  suffered
to  trade  with  foreign  nations  without  any  other  re-
striction than  that  of  sending  them  in  ships  built  and
chiefly  manned  by  British  subjects.  They  were,  how-
ever, forbidden,  in  the  ordinary  state  of  the  law,  to  send
salted  provisions  or  any  kind  of  grain  except  rice  to
England.  The  prohibition  of  the  extremely  important
trade  with  the  French  West  Indies  was  allowed,  with
the  tacit  connivance  of  the  Government,  to  become  for
a  long  time  little  more  than  a  dead  letter.  The  pro-
vision which  prevented  the  colonists  from  receiving  any
European  goods  except  direct  from  England  was  much
mitigated  before  1763,  and  to  some  extent  after  that
date,  by  the  system  of  drawbacks  freeing  these  goods
from  the  greater  part  of  the  duties  that  would  have  been
paid  in  England,  so  that  many  continental  goods  were
actually  sold  more  cheaply  in  America  than  in  England.
It  was  a  great  grievance  and  absurdity  that,  for  the

CH.  xi.  THE  COMMERCIAL  SYSTEM.  45

Bake  of  a  few  Portugal  merchants  in  London  who
charged  a  commission  on  the  goods  that  passed  through
their  hands,  the  colonists  were  forbidden  to  import
directly  wine,  oil,  and  fruit  from  Portugal,  and  were
obliged  to  send  them  the  long  journey  to  England,  to
be  landed  there,  and  then  reshipped  for  America.  But
in  practice  this  rule  was  somewhat  mitigated,  and
American  ships  carrying  fish  to  Portugal  were  tacitly
allowed  to  bring  back  small  quantities  of  wine  and  fruit
as  ship  stores.1

It  is  a  gross  and  flagrant  misrepresentation  to  de-
scribe the  commercial  policy  of  England  as  exceptionally
tyrannical.  As  Adam  Smith  truly  said,  '  Every  Euro-
pean nation  had  endeavoured  more  or  less  to  monopolise
to  itself  the  commerce  of  its  colonies,  and  upon  that
account  had  prohibited  the  ships  of  foreign  nations  from
trading  to  them,  and  had  prohibited  them  from  importing
European  goods  from  any  foreign  nation  ; '  and  '  though
the  policy  of  Great  Britain  with  regard  to  the  trade  of
her  colonies  has  been  dictated  by  the  same  mercantile
spirit  as  that  of  other  nations,  it  has,  upon  the  whole,
been  less  illiberal  and  oppressive  than  that  of  any  of
them/ 2  Even  France,  which  was  the  most  liberal  of

1  Letters  of  Governor  Bernard  part  of  the  world,  to  confine  (as
on  the  Trade  and  Government  of  far  as  laws  can  confine)  the  trade
America,  p.  4.  See,  too,  Franklin's  of  the  colonies  to  the mother
Causes  of  American  Discontents  country.  .  .  .  Thus  the  trade  of
before 1768. Works,  iv. 250,  the  Spanish  colonies  is  confined
251. Wealth  of  Nations,  book  by  law  to  Old  Spain,  the  trade
iv.  ch.  iv.,  vii.  of  the  Brazils  to  Portugal,  the

2  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iv.  trade  of  Martinico  and  the  other
ch.  vii. See,  too,  Gentz  On  the  French  colonies  to  Old  France,
State  of  Europe  before  and  after  and  the  trade  of Curacoa and
the  French  "Revolution  (English  Surinam  to  Holland. But  in  one
trans.), pp. 295-308. « Ever  instance the Hollanders  make
since  the  discovery  of  America,'  an exception (perhaps a  wise
says  Dean  Tucker,  'it  has  been  one),  viz.  in  the  case of  Eusta-
the  system  of  every  European  tia,  which  is  open  to  all  the  world.'
Power  which  had  colonies  in  that  •  -Tucker's  Four  Tracts,  p.  133.

46  ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

continental  nations  in  her  dealings  with  her  colonies,
imposed  commercial  restrictions  more  severe  than  those
of  England.  Not  only  was  the  trade  of  French  Canada,
like  that  of  British  America,  a  monopoly  of  the  mother
country ;  it  was  not  even  open  without  restriction  to
Frenchmen  and  to  Canadians,  for  the  important  trade  in
beavers  belonged  exclusively  to  a  company  in  France,
and  could  only  be  exercised  under  its  authorisation.1

Still,  when  every  allowance  has  been  made,  it  is  un-
doubtedly true  that  the  commercial  policy  of  England
had  established  a  real  opposition  of  interest  between
the  mother  country  and  her  colonies  ;  and  if  the  policy
which  was  the  proximate  cause  of  the  American  Revo-
lution was  chiefly  due  to  the  King  and  to  the  landed
gentry,  the  ultimate  cause  may  be  mainly  traced  to  the
great  influence  which  the  commercial  classes  possessed
in  British  legislation.  The  expulsion  of  the  French
from  Canada  made  it  possible  for  the  Americans  to
dispense  with  English  protection.  The  commercial  re-
strictions alone  made  it  their  interest  to  do  so.  If  the
'Wealth  of  Nations'  had  been  published  a  century
earlier,  and  if  its  principles  had  passed  into  legislation,
it  is  quite  possible  that  the  separation  of  England  and
her  colonies  might  have  been  indefinitely  adjourned.  A
false  theory  of  commerce,  then  universally  accepted,
had  involved  both  the  mother  country  and  her  colonies
in  a  web  of  restrictions  which  greatly  retarded  their
development,  and  had  provided  a  perpetual  subject  of
irritation  and  dissension.  The  Custom-house  and
revenue  officers,  unlike  other  officials  in  America,  were
not  paid  by  the  local  legislatures.  They  were  appointed
directly  by  the  Crown  or  by  the  governors,  and  in
America  as  in  England  cases  of  revenue  fraud  might  by
means  of  the  Admiralty  Court  be  tried  without  the

Kalm. Pinkerton'a  Voyages,  xiii.  700.

CH.  xi.  SMUGGLING.  47

intervention  of  a  jury.  Smuggling  was  very  lucrative,
and  therefore  very  popular,  and  any  attempt  to  interfere
with  it  was  greatly  resented.

The  attention  of  the  British  Government  was  ur-
gently called  to  it  during  the  war.  At  a  time  when
Great  Britain  was  straining  every  nerve  to  conquer
Canada  from  the  French,  when  the  security  of  British
America  was  one  of  the  first  objects  of  English  policy,
and  when  large  sums  were  remitted  from  England  to  pay
the  colonies  for  fighting  in  their  own  cause,  it  was  found
that  the  French  fleets,  the  French  garrisons,  and  the
French  West  India  islands,  were  systematically  supplied
with  large  quantities  of  provisions  by  the  New  England
colonies.  The  trade  was  carried  on  partly  by  ordinary
smuggling  and  partly  under  the  cover  of  flags  of  truce,
granted  ostensibly  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  and
large  numbers  of  persons,  some  of  them,  it  is  said,  high  in
official  life,  connived  and  participated  in  it.  Pitt,  who
still  directed  affairs,  wrote  with  great  indignation  that
this  trade  must  at  all  hazards  be  suppressed  ;  but  the
whole  mercantile  community  of  the  New  England  sea-
ports appears  to  have  favoured  or  partaken  in  it,  and
great  difficulties  were  found  in  putting  the  law  into
execution.  The  smuggling  was  even  defended  with  a
wonderful  cynicism  on  the  ground  that  it  was  good
policy  to  make  as  much  money  as  possible  out  of  the
enemy.  Some  papers  seized  in  the  possession  of  French-
men at  New  York  showed  clearly  how  extensive  and
well-organised  was  the  plan  of  the  French  for  obtaining
their  supplies  from  New  England.  Amherst  wrote  to
Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  and  Connecticut  to  lay  an
embargo  on  all  but  transports  engaged  in  Government
employ,  and  this  measure  was  actually  taken,  but  it
was  removed  in  little  more  than  a  month.1  In  order  to

1  Hildreth.  ii.  498. Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  iii 330
Arnold's  Hist,  of  Rhode  Island,  ii.  227,  235,  236.

48 ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  XI,

detect  if  possible  the  smuggled  goods,  the  Custom-
house officers  in  1761  applied  to  the  Superior  Court  in
Massachusetts  to  grant  them  '  writs  of  assistance.'
These  writs,  which  were  frequently  employed  in  Eng-
land, and  occasionally  in  the  colonies,  bore  a  great
resemblance  to  the  general  warrants  which  soon  after
became  so  obnoxious  in  England.  They  were  general
writs  authorising  Custom-house  officers  to  search  any
house  they  pleased  for  smuggled  goods,  and  they  were
said  to  have  been  sometimes  used  for  purposes  of
private  annoyance.  They  appear,  however,  to  have  been
perfectly  legal,  and  if  their  employment  was  ever  justifi-
able, it  was  in  an  attempt  to  put  down  a  smuggling
trade  with  the  enemy  in  time  of  war.  The  issue  of  the
warrants  was  resisted,  though  unsuccessfully,  by  the
Boston  merchants,  and  a  young  lawyer  of  some  talent
named  James  Otis,  whose  father  had  just  been  dis-
appointed in  his  hopes  of  obtaining  a  seat  upon  the
bench,  signalised  himself  by  an  impassioned  attack  on
the  whole  commercial  code  and  on  the  alleged  oppres-
sion of  Parliament.  His  speech  excited  great  enthu-
siasm in  the  colonies,  and  was  afterwards  regarded  by
John  Adams  and  some  others  as  the  first  step  towards
the  Revolution.1

There  were  indeed  already  on  all  sides  symptoms
by  which  a  careful  observer  might  have  foreseen  that
dangers  were  approaching.  The  country  was  full  of  rest-
less military  adventurers  called  into  prominence  by  the
war.  The  rapid  rise  of  an  ambitious  legal  profession
and  the  great  development  of  the  Press  made  it  certain

1  Otis  tells  a  story  of  a  man  Otis,  p.  67. A  very  full  abstract

who  possessed  one  of  these  writs,  of  the  great  speech  of  Otis  against

being  summoned  by  a  judge  for  the writs of  assistance  will  be

Sabbath-breaking  and  swearing,  found  in  this  work — a  remarkable

and  avenging  himself  by  search-  book  from  which  I  have  derived

ing  the  house  of  the  judge  from  much  assistance.  See,  too,  Adams'

top  to  bottom.— Tudor's  Life  of  Works,  i.  57,  58,  ii.  524,  525.

OH.  xi.  GROWING DISSENSIONS.  49

that  there  would  be  abundant  mouthpieces  of  discontent,
and  there  was  so  much  in  the  legal  relations  of  England
to  her  colonies  that  was  anomalous,  unsettled,  or  unde-
fined, that  causes  of  quarrel  were  sure  to  arise.  The
revenue  laws  were  habitually  violated.  There  was,  in
the  Northern  colonies  at  least,  an  extreme  impatience
of  every  form  of  control,  and  the  Executive  was  almost
powerless.  The  Government  would  gladly  have  secured
for  the  judges  in  Massachusetts  a  permanent  provision,
which  would  place  them  in  some  degree  beyond  the
control  of  the  Assembly,  but  it  found  it  impossible  to
carry  it.  The  Assemblies  of  North  Carolina  and  New
York  would  gladly  have  secured  for  their  judges  a
tenure  of  office  during  good  behaviour,  as  in  England,
instead  of  at  the  King's  pleasure,  but  the  Home  Govern-
ment, fearing  that  this  would  still  further  weaken  the
Executive,  gave  orders  that  no  such  measure  should
receive  the  assent  of  the  governors,  and  in  New  York
the  Assembly  having  refused  on  any  other  condition  to
vote  the  salaries  of  the  judges,  they  were  paid  out  of
the  royal  quit  rents.1

There  were  frequent  quarrels  between  the  governors
and  the  Assemblies,  and  much  violent  language  was
employed.  In  1762,  011  the  arrival  of  some  French  ships
off'  Newfoundland,  the  inhabitants  of  Massachusetts,
who  were  largely  employed  in  the  fishery,  petitioned  the
governor  that  a  ship  and  sloop  belonging  to  the  province
should  be  fitted  out  to  protect  their  fishing  boats.  The
governor  and  council  complied  with  their  request,  and
in  order  that  the  sloop  should  obtain  rapidly  its  full
complement  of  men  he  offered  a  bounty  for  enlistment.
The  whole  expense  of  the  bounty  did  not  exceed  400/.
The  proceeding  might  be  justified  by  many  precedents,
and  it  certainly  wore  no  appearance  of  tyranny ;  but

1  Bancroft,  i.  502,  503. Grahame,  iv.  87,  88.
YOU IV,

50 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xi.

Otis,  who  had  been  made  one  of  the  representatives  of
Boston  as  a  reward  for  his  incendiary  speech  about  the
writs  of  assistance,  saw  an  opportunity  of  gaining  fresh
laurels.  He  induced  the  House  to  vote  a  remonstrance
to  the  governor,  declaring  that  he  had  invaded  '  their
most  darling  privilege,  the  right  of  originating  taxes,'
and  that  '  it  would  be  of  little  consequence  to  the  people
whether  they  were  subject  to  George  the  King  of  Great
Britain  or  Lewis  the  French  king  if  both  were  arbitrary,
as  both  would  be  if  both  could  levy  taxes  without
Parliament.'  It  was  with  some  difficulty  that  the
governor  prevailed  on  the  House  to  expunge  the  passage
in  which  the  King's  name  was  so  disloyally  intro-
duced.1

The  immense  advantages  which  the  colonists  ob-
tained by  the  Peace  of  Paris  had  no  doubt  produced  even
in  the  New  England  colonies  an  outburst  of  loyal  grati-
tude, but  the  prospect  was  again  speedily  overclouded.
The  direction  of  colonial  affairs  passed  into  the  hands  of
George  Grenville,  and  that  unhappy  course  of  policy  was
begun  which  in  a  few  years  deprived  England  of  the
noblest  fruits  of  the  administration  of  Pitt.

Up  to  this  time  the  North  American  colonies  had  in
time  of  peace  been  in  general  almost  outside  the  cogni-
sance of  the  Government.  As  their  affairs  had  no  in-
fluence on  party  politics  Parliament  took  no  interest  in
them,  and  Newcastle,  during  his  long  administration,
had  left  them  in  almost  every  respect  absolutely  to  them-
selves. It  was  afterwards  said  by  a  Treasury  official,
who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  management  of
affairs,  that  '  Grenville  lost  America  because  he  read  the
American  despatches,  which  none  of  his  predecessors
had  done.'  The  ignorance  and  neglect  of  all  colonial
matters  can  indeed  hardly  be  exaggerated,  and  it  is

Hutchinson,  pp.  97,  98. Tudor's  Life  of  Otis,  pp.  118-122.

CH.  XI.  A NEW  SYSTEM REQUIRED.  51

stated  by  a  very  considerable  American  authority,  that
letters  had  repeatedly  arrived  from  the  Secretary  of  State
who  was  officially  entrusted  with  the  administration  of
the  colonies  addressed  '  to  the  Governor  of  the  Island  of
New  England.' !  America  owed  much  to  this  ignorance
and  to  this  neglect ;  and  England  was  so  rich,  and  the
colonies  were  long  looked  upon  as  so  poor,  that  there
was  no  disposition  to  seek  anything  more  from  America
than  was  derived  from  a  partial  monopoly  of  her  trade.
But  the  position  of  England,  as  well  as  of  America,  was
now  wholly  changed.  Her  empire  had  been  raised  by
Pitt  to  an  unprecedented  height  of  greatness,  but  she
was  reeling  under  a  national  debt  of  nearly  140  millions.
Taxation  was  greatly  increased.  Poverty  and  distress
were  very  general,  and  it  had  become  necessary  to  intro  -
duce  a  spirit  of  economy  into  all  parts  of  the  adminis-
tration, to  foster  every  form  of  revenue,  and  if  possible,
to  diffuse  over  the  gigantic  empire  a  military  burden
which  was  too  great  for  one  small  island.  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  in  the  ministry  of  Bute,  Charles
Townshend  and  his  colleagues  had  already  contemplated
a  change  in  the  colonial  system,  that  they  desired  to  re-
duce the  colonial  governments  to  a  more  uniform  system,
to  plant  an  army  in  America,  and  to  support  it  by
colonial  taxes  levied  by  the  British  Parliament,  and  that
it  was  only  the  briefness  of  their  tenure  of  office  that
prevented  their  scheme  from  coming  to  maturity.2  When
Grenville  succeeded  to  power  on  the  fall  of  Bute,  he
took  up  the  design,  and  his  thorough  knowledge  of  all
the  details  of  office,  his  impatience  of  any  kind  of  neglect,

1  Otis,  Rights  of  the  British  Bedford  Correspondence,  iii.  210.
Colonies  asserted  (3rd  ed.  1766),  Walpole's  George  III.  iii.  32.  Mr.
p.  37.  Bancroft  has  collected  with  great

2  See Knox's Extra-official  industry  all  the  extant  evidence
Papers,  ii. 29. Almon's Bio-  of  this  plaa.

graphical Anecdotes, ii.  81-83.

52  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

abuse,  and  illegality,  as  well  as  his  complete  want  of
that  political  tact  which  teaches  statesmen  how  far  they
may  safely  press  their  views,  foreshadowed  a  great  change
in  colonial  affairs.  He  resolved  to  enforce  strictly  the
trade  laws,  to  establish  permanently  in  America  a  por-
tion of  the  British  army,  and  to  raise  by  parliamentary
taxation  of  America  at  least  a  part  of  the  money  which
was  necessary  for  its  support.

These  three  measures  produced  the  American  Revo-
lution, and  they  are  well  worthy  of  a  careful  and  dispas-
sionate examination.  The  enormous  extent  of  American
smuggling  had  been  brought  into  clear  relief  during  the
war,  when  it  had  assumed  a  very  considerable  military
importance,  and  as  early  as  1762  there  were  loud  com-
plaints in  Parliament  of  the  administration  of  the  Cus-
tom-house patronage.  Grenville  found  on  examination
that  the  whole  revenue  derived  by  England  from  the
custom-houses  in  America  amounted  to  between  1,OOOZ.
and  2,OOOZ.  a  year;  that  for  the  purpose  of  collecting
this  revenue  the  English  Exchequer  paid  annually  be-
tween 7,OOOZ.and8,OOOZ.,  and  that  the  chief  Custom-house
officers  appointed  by  the  Crown  had  treated  their  offices
as  sinecures,  and  by  leave  of  the  Treasury  resided  ha-
bitually in  England.1  Great  portions  of  the  trade  laws
had  been  systematically  violated.  Thus,  for  example,  the
colonists  were  allowed  by  law  to  import  no  tea  except
from  the  mother  country,  and  it  was  computed  that  of
a  million  and  a  half  pounds  of  tea  which  they  annually
consumed,  not  more  than  a  tenth  part  came  from  Eng-
land.2 This  neglect  Grenville  resolved  to  terminate.
The  Commissioners  of  Customs  were  ordered  at  once  to

1  Grenville  Papers,  ii.  114.  fruit,  sugar  and  molasses,  con-

2  Bancroft,  ii.  178. See,  too,  sumed in the colonies, were
Massachiisettensis,  Letter  iii.  Ac-  smuggled.' — Sabine'a American
cording  to  Sabine, '  Nine-tenths  Loyalists,  i.  12.

probably  of  all  the  tea,  wine  and

CH.  XI.  THE WEST INDIA  TBADE,  58

their  posts.  Several  new  revenue  officers  were  appointed
with  more  rigid  rules  for  the  discharge  of  their  duties.
The  Board  of  Trade  issued  a  circular  to  the  colonies  re-
presenting that  the  revenue  had  not  kept  pace  with  the
increasing  commerce,  and  did  not  yield  more  than  one-
quarter  of  the  cost  of  collection,  and  requiring  that  illicit
commerce  should  be  suppressed,  and  that  proper  support
should  be  given  to  the  Custom-house  officials.  English
ships  of  war  were  at  the  same  time  stationed  off  the
American  coast  for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  smug-
glers.1

In  1764  new  measure^  of  great  severity  were  taken.
The  trade  with  the  French  West  India  islands  and  with
the  Spanish  settlements,  for  molasses  and  sugar,  had
been  one  of  the  most  lucrative  branches  of  New  England
commerce.  New  England  found  in  the  French  islands
a  market  for  her  timber,  and  she  obtained  in  return  an
abundant  supply  of  the  molasses  required  for  her  distil-
leries. The  French  West  India  islands  were  nearer  than
those  of  England.  They  were  in  extreme  need  of  the
timber  of  which  New  England  furnished  an  inexhaustible
supply,  and  they  were  in  no  less  need  of  a  market  for
their  molasses,  which  had  been  excluded  from  France  as
interfering  with  French  brandies,  and  of  which  enormous
quantities  were  bought  by  the  New  England  colonies.
In  1763,  14,500  hogsheads  of  molasses  were  imported
into  New  England  from  the  French  and  Spanish  settle-
ments ;  it  was  largely  paid  for  by  timber  which  would
otherwise  have  rotted  uselessly  on  the  ground,  and  the
possibility  of  selling  this  timber  at  a  profit  gave  a  great
impulse  to  the  necessary  work  of  clearing  land  in  New
England.  No  trade  could  have  been  more  clearly  bene-
ficial to  both  parties,  and  the  New  Englanders  main-
tained that  it  was  the  foundation  of  their  whole  system

1  Arnold's  Hist,  of  Rhode  Island,  ii.  24G.

54  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  XI.

of  commerce.  The  distilleries  of  Boston,  and  of  other
parts  of  New  England,  had  acquired  a  great  magnitude.
Rum  was  sent  in  large  quantities  to  the  Newfoundland
fisheries  and  to  the  Indians,  and  it  is  a  circumstance  of
peculiar  and  melancholy  interest  that  it  was  the  main
article  which  the  Americans  sent  to  Africa  in  exchange
for  negro  slaves.  In  the  trade  with  the  Spanish  settle-
ments the  colonists  obtained  the  greater  part  of  the  gold
and  silver  with  which  they  purchased  English  commo-
dities, and  this  fact  was  the  more  important  because  an
English  Act  of  Parliament  had  recently  restrained  the
colonists  from  issuing  paper  money.1

In  the  interest  of  the  English  sugar  colonies,  which
desired  to  obtain  a  monopoly  for  their  molasses  and  their
sugar,  and  which  at  the  same  time  were  quite  incapable
of  furnishing  a  sufficient  market  for  the  superfluous
articles  of  American  commerce,  a  law  had  been  passed
in  1733  which  imposed  upon  molasses  a  prohibitory  duty
of  sixpence  a  gallon  and  on  sugar  a  duty  of  five  shillings
per  cwt.  if  they  were  imported  into  any  of  the  British
plantations  from  any  foreign  colonies.  No  portion  of
the  commercial  code  was  so  deeply  resented  in  America,
and  its  effects  would  have  been  ruinous,  had  not  the  law
been  systematically  eluded  with  the  connivance  of  the
revenue  officers,  and  had  not  smuggling  almost  assumed
the  dimensions  and  the  character  of  a  branch  of  regular
commerce.  After  several  renewals  the  Act  expired  in
1763,  and  the  colonies  urgently  petitioned  that  it  should
not  be  renewed.

Bernard,  the  Governor,  and  Hutchinson,  the  Lieu-
tenant-Governor  of  Massachusetts,  strongly  condemned
the  policy  of  the  Act,  and  dwelt  upon  the  impossibility
of  enforcing  it.  Grenville,  however,  refused  to  relin-

1  Macpherson's Annals of Bancroft. Grahame. Letters  of
Commerce, iii. 171-177, 192. Governor  Bernard.

C».  XI.  GRENVTI  LE'S COMMERCIAL POLICY.  55

quish  what  might  be  made  a  source  of  revenue,  and  the
old  law  was  renewed  with  several  important  modifica-
tions. The  duty  on  molasses  was  reduced  by  one-half,
but  new  duties  were  imposed  on  coffee,  pimento,  French
and  East  India  goods,  white  sugar  and  indigo  from
foreign  colonies,  Spanish  and  Portuguese  wine,  and
wine  from  Madeira  and  the  Azores,  and  the  most  strin-
gent measures  were  taken  to  enforce  the  law.  Bonds
were  exacted  from  every  merchant  who  exported  lumber
or  iron;  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Courts  of  Admiralty,
which  tried  smuggling  cases  without  a  jury,  was
strengthened  and  enlarged,  and  all  the  officers  of  ships
of  war  stationed  on  the  coasts  of  America  were  made
to  take  the  Custom-house  oaths  and  act  as  revenue
officers.  In  addition,  therefore,  to  the  old  race  of  ex-
perienced but  conniving  revenue  officers,  the  repression
of  smuggling  became  the  business  of  a  multitude  of
rough  and  zealous  sailors,  who  entered  into  the  work
with  real  keenness,  with  no  respect  of  persons,  and
sometimes  with  not  a  little  unnecessary  or  excessive
violence.  The  measure  was  one  of  the  most  serious
blows  that  could  be  administered  to  the  somewhat  wan-
ing prosperity  of  Boston,  and  it  was  the  more  obnoxious
on  account  of  its  preamble,  which  announced  as  a  reason
for  imposing  additional  duties  that  '  it  is  just  and
necessary  that  a  revenue  be  raised  in  your  Majesty's
dominions  in  America  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  de-
fending, protecting,  and  securing  the  same.'  In  order
to  diminish  the  severity  of  these  restrictions,  bounties
were  in  the  same  year  given  to  the  cultivation  of
hemp  and  flax  in  the  colonies.  South  Carolina  and
Georgia  were  allowed  to  export  the  rice  which  was  their
chief  product  to  the  French  West  India  islands ;  and
the  whale  fishery,  which  was  one  of  the  most  profit-
able industries  of  New  England,  was  relieved  of  a
duty  which  had  hitherto  alone  prevented  it  from  com-

66  ENGLAfcb Ifr TftE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  JO.

pletely  superseding  or  eclipsing  the  whale  fishery  of
England.1

Judging  by  the  mere  letter  of  the  law,  the  com-
mercial policy  of  Grenville  can  hardly  be  said  to  have
aggravated  the  severity  of  the  commercial  code,  for  the
hew  restrictions  that  were  imposed  were  balanced  by
the  new  indulgences  that  were  conferred.  In  truth,
however,  the  severe  enforcement  of  rules  which  had  been
allowed  to  become  nearly  obsolete  was  a  most  serious
injury  to  the  prosperity  of  New  England.  A  trade
which  was  in  the  highest  degree  natural  and  beneficial,
and  which  had  long  been  pursued  with  scarcely  any
hindrance,  was  impeded,  and  the  avowed  object  of
raising  by  imperial  authority  a  revenue  to  defray  the
expense  of  defending  the  colonies,  created  a  constitu-
tional question  of  the  gravest  kind.

It  was  closely  connected  with  the  intention  to  place
rather  more  than  10,000  soldiers  permanently  in
America.  This  scheme  was  also  much  objected  to.
The  colonists  retained  in  its  full  force  the  dread  of  a
standing  army,  which  had  been  so  powerful  in  England
at  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  In  time  of  war,  they
said,  they  had  always  shown  themselves  willing  to  raise
troops  at  the  requisition  of  the  governor.  Parliament,
in  the  last  war,  had  repeatedly  acknowledged  the  alacrity
they  had  displayed,  and  they  asked  why  the  country
might  not,  as  heretofore,  be  protected  in  time  of  peace
by  its  own  militias,  which  were  organised  and  paid
without  any  assistance  from  the  mother  country.  It
was  urged  that  the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  Canada
had  greatly  diminished  its  foreign  dangers,  and  it  was
asked  whether  the  army  was  really  intended  to  guard
against  foreigners.

1  4  Geo.  III.  15,  26,  27,  29. iii.  395-401. Grahame,  iv.  169-
Macpherson's  Hi&t.  of  Commerce, 17o.  Tudor's  Life  of  Otis,  p.  165.

a*.  Xt.  INDIAN WAR, 1763.  57

It  is  possible,  and  indeed  very  probable,  that  a  de-
sire to  strengthen  the  feeble  Executive,  and  to  prevent
the  systematic  violation  of  the  revenue  laws,  was  a
motive  with  those  who  recommended  the  establishment
of  an  army  in  America ;  but  the  primary  object  was,
no  doubt,  the  defence  of  the  colonies  and  the  mainte-
nance of  imperial  interests.  In  the  earlier  stages  of
colonial  history,  little  had  been  done  in  the  way  of
protection,  because  these  poor  and  scattered  communi-
ties appeared  of  little  value  either  to  England  or  to  her
enemies.  British  America,  however,  was  now  a  great
and  prosperous  country.  When  we  remember  its  vast
extent,  its  great  wealth,  and  its  distance  from  the
mother  country ;  when  we  remember  also  that  a  great
part  of  it  had  been  but  just  annexed  to  the  Crown,  and
that  its  most  prosperous  provinces  were  fringed  by
tribes  of  wild  Indians,  the  permanent  maintenance  in  it
of  a  small  army  appears  evidently  expedient.  The
dangers  from  Indians  in  the  north  had  been  no  doubt
diminished  by  the  conquest  of  Canada,  but  a  terrible
lesson  had  very  recently  shown  how  formidable  Indian
warfare  might  still  become.  In  June  1763,  a  confedera-
tion including  several  Indian  tribes  had  suddenly  and
unexpectedly  swept  over  the  whole  western  frontier  of
Pennsylvania  and  Virginia,  had  murdered  almost  all
the  English  settlers  who  were  scattered  beyond  the
mountains,  had  surprised  and  captured  every  British
fort  between  the  Ohio  and  Lake  Erie,  and  had  closely
blockaded  Fort  Detroit  and  Pittsburg.  In  no  previous
war  had  the  Indians  shown  such  skill,  tenacity,  and
concert ;  and  had  there  not  been  British  troops  in  the
country,  the  whole  of  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  Mary-
land would  probably  have  been  overrun.  In  spite  of
every  effort,  a  long  line  of  country  twenty  miles  in
breadth  was  completely  desolated,  and  presented  one
hideous  scene  of  plunder,  massacre,  and  torture.  It

58 ENGLAND  m  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. c».  si.

was  only  after  much  desperate  fighting,  after  some  losses,
and  several  reverses,  that  the  troops  of  Amherst  suc-
ceeded in  repelling  the  invaders  and  securing  the  three
great  fortresses  of  Niagara,  Detroit,  and  Pittsburg.

The  war  lasted  for  fourteen  months  ;  but  during  the
first  six  months,  when  the  danger  was  at  its  height,  the
hard  fighting  appears  to  have  been  mainly  done  by
English  troops,  though  a  considerable  body  of  the  militia
of  the  Southern  colonies  were  in  the  field.  At  last
Amherst  called  upon  the  New  England  colonies  to  assist
their  brethren,  but  his  request  was  almost  disregarded.
Massachusetts,  being  beyond  the  zone  of  immediate
danger,  and  fatigued  with  the  burden  of  the  late  war,
would  give  no  help ;  and  Connecticut  with  great  reluc-
tance sent  250  men.  After  a  war  of  extreme  horror,
poace  was  signed  in  September  1764.  In  a  large
degree  by  the  efforts  of  English  soldiers,  the  Indian
territory  was  again  rolled  back,  and  one  more  great
service  was  rendered  by  England  to  her  colonies.1

This  event  was  surely  a  sufficient  justification  of  the
policy  of  establishing  a  small  army  in  the  colonies.
But  it  was  not  alone  against  the  Indians  that  it  was
required.  It  was  a  general  belief  in  America  that  if
another  war  broke  out,  France  would  endeavour  to
regain  Canada,  and  that  she  might  be  aided  by  an
insurrection  of  her  former  subjects.2  It  was  almost
certain  that  the  next  French  war  would  extend  to  the
West  Indies,  and  in  that  case  America  would  be  a  post
of  vital  importance  both  for  defence  and  for  attack.  It
was  plainly  unwise  that  such  a  position  should  be  left
wholly  denuded  of  troops,  and  dependent  for  its  protec-
tion upon  the  precarious  favour  of  the  winds.

These  considerations  appear  to  me  to  justify  fully

1  Trumbull's Hist, of the 2  Otis,  Rights  of  tlie  Colonies
United  States,  pp.  455-467. Hil- p.  97.
jreth,  Grahame,  Hutuhinson.

CH.  «.  PROPOSED  COLONIAL  ARMY.  69

the  policy  of  the  ministers  in  desiring  to  place  a  Bmall
army  permanently  in  the  colonies.  We  must  next
inquire  whether  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the  colo-
nists to  support  it.  The  position  of  England  after  the
Peace  of  Paris  was  wholly  different  from  her  position
in  the  preceding  century.  She  was  no  longer  a  small,
compact,  and  essentially  European  country,  with  a  few
outlying  possessions  of  comparatively  little  value.  By
the  conquests  of  Clive  in  Hindostan,  by  the  great  de-
velopment of  the  colonies  of  British  America,  by  the
acquisition  of  Florida  and  Canada  and  of  the  important
islands  which  had  recently  been  annexed,  she  had
become  the  centre  of  an  empire  unrivalled  since  that  of
Charles  V.  and  pregnant  with  the  possibilities  of  almost
unbounded  progress.  It  devolved  upon  the  English
statesmen  who  obtained  power  after  the  Peace  of  Paris
to  legislate  for  these  new  conditions  of  national  great-
ness, and  to  secure,  as  far  as  human  sagacity  could  do
so,  the  permanence  of  that  great  Empire  which  had
been  built  up  by  so  much  genius  and  with  so  much
blood,  and  which  might  be  made  the  instrument  of
such  incalculable  benefits  to  mankind.  The  burden  of
the  naval  protection  they  proposed  to  leave  exclusively
with  the  mother  country,  but  the  burden  of  the  military
protection  they  proposed  to  divide.  They  maintained
that  it  was  wholly  impossible  that  8,000,000  English-
men, weighed  down  with  debt  and  with  taxation,  and
with  a  strong  traditional  hostility  to  standing  armies,
could  alone  undertake  the  militaiy  protection  of  an
empire  so  vast,  so  various,  and  in  many  of  its  parts  so
distant.  Two  subsidiary  armies  had  already  been
created.  The  East  India  Company  had  its  own  forces
for  the  defence  of  India,  and  Ireland  supported  a  large
force  both  for  its  own  defence  and  for  the  general
service  of  the  Empire.  Townshend  and  Grenville  re-
solved to  plant  a  third  army  in  the  colonies.

60 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

The  case  of  Ireland  is  here  worthy  of  special  notice.
If  North  America  was  the  part  of  the  British  Empire
where  well-being  was  most  widely  diffused,  Ireland  was
probably  the  part  where  there  was  most  poverty.  Her
population  may,  perhaps,  have  exceeded  the  free  popu-
lation of  British  America  by  about  a  million ;  but  her
natural  resources  were  infinitely  less.  By  her  exclusion
from  the  Navigation  Act  she  had  been  shut  out  from  all
direct  trade  with  the  British  dependencies,  while  her
most  important  manufactures  had  been  suppressed  by
law.  The  great  majority  of  her  population  had  been
reduced  to  extreme  degradation  by  the  penal  code.  She
was  burdened  by  a  tithe  system  supporting  an  alien
Church.  Her  social  system  was  disorganised  by  re-
peated confiscations  and  by  the  emigration  of  her  most
energetic  classes,  and  she  was  drained  of  her  little  wealth
by  absenteeism,  by  a  heavy  pension  list,  and  by  an
exaggerated  establishment  in  Church  and  State,  in
which  the  chief  offices  were  reserved  for  Englishmen.
Yet  Ireland  from  Irish  revenues  supported  an  army  of
12,000  men,  which  was  raised  in  1769  to  15,000.

I  have  no  wish  to  deny  that  the  Stamp  Act  was  a
grievance  to  the  Americans,  but  it  is  due  to  the  truth
of  history  that  the  gross  exaggerations  which  have  been
repeated  on  the  subject  should  be  dispelled,  and  that
the  nature  of  the  alleged  tyranny  of  England  should  be
clearly  defined.  It  cannot  be  too  distinctly  stated  that
there  is  not  a  fragment  of  evidence  that  any  English
statesman,  or  any  class  of  the  English  people,  desired
to  raise  anything  by  direct  taxation  from  the  colonies
for  purposes  that  were  purely  English.  They  did  not
ask  them  to  contribute  anything  to  the  support  of  the
navy  which  protected  their  coast,  or  anything  to  the
interest  of  the  English  debt.  At  the  close  of  a  war
which  had  left  England  overwhelmed  with  additional
burdens,  in  which  the  whole  resources  of  the  British

CH.  xi. PROPOSED  COLONIAL  ARMY.  63

Empire  had  been  strained  for  the  extension  and  security
of  the  British  territory  in  America,  by  which  the  Ameri-
can colonists  had  gained  incomparably  more  than  any
other  of  the  subjects  of  the  Crown,  the  colonies  were
asked  to  bear  their  share  in  the  burden  of  the  Empire
by  contributing  a  third  part — they  would  no  doubt
ultimately  have  been  asked  to  contribute  the  whole —
of  what  was  required  for  the  maintenance  of  an  army
of  10,000  men,  intended  primarily  for  their  own  defence.
lOOjOOOZ.  was  the  highest 'estimate  of  what  the  Stamp
Act  would  annually  produce,  and  it  was  rather  less
than  a  third  part  of  the  expense  of  the  new  army.  This
was  what  England  asked  from  the  most  prosperous
portion  of  her  Empire.  Every  farthing  which  it  was
intended  to  raise  in  America,  it  was  intended  also  to
spend  there.

The  great  grievance  was  of  course  that  the  sum  was
to  be  raised  by  imperial  taxation,  and  that  it  was  there-
fore a  departure  from  the  old  system  of  government  in
the  colonies.  Hitherto  the  distinction  between  external
and  internal  taxation  had  been  the  leading  principle  of
colonial  administration.  Parliament  exercised  a  recog-
nised right  when  it  determined  the  commercial  system
of  the  colonies  by  the  imposition  of  duties  which  pro-
duced indeed  some  small  revenue,  but  which  were  not
intended  for  that  purpose,  but  solely  for  the  purpose  of
commercial  regulation.  But  taxes  intended  for  the
purpose  of  revenue  had  only  been  imposed  by  the
colonial  assemblies.  Twice  already  in  the  eighteenth
century  the  imposition  of  imperial  taxation  for  military
purposes  had  been  contemplated.  In  1739  a  body  of
American  merchants  under  the  leadership  of  Sir  W.
Keith,  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  had  proposed  the
establishment  of  a  body  of  troops  along  the  western
frontier  of  the  British  settlements,  and  had  suggested
a  parliamentary  duty  on  stamped  paper  and  parch-

62 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

ments  as  a  means  of  defraying  the  expense  ;  but  Wai-
pole  had  wisely  declined  to  accede  to  the  proposition.
In  1754,  when  it  was  necessary  to  make  preparations
for  the  great  war  with  France,  and  when  the  scheme
for  uniting  the  colonies  for  military  purposes  had  failed,
the  Government  proposed  that  the  governors  of  the
several  provinces  should  meet  together,  and  with  some
members  of  the  general  councils  should  concert  mea-
sures for  the  defence  of  the  colonies.  It  was  proposed
that  the  English  Treasury  should  advance  such  sums  as
they  deemed  necessary  for  this  purpose,  and  that  it
should  be  reimbursed  by  a  tax  imposed  on  all  the  colonies
by  the  Imperial  Parliament.  The  extreme  difficulty  of
obtaining  any  simultaneous  military  action  of  the
colonies,  and  the  impossibility  of  inducing  the  colonies
which  were  remote  from  the  immediate  danger  to  con-
tribute their  quota  to  the  common  cause,  were  the
reasons  alleged ;  and  in  order  that  the  grievance  should
be  as  small  as  possible,  it  was  intended  that  Parliament
should  only  determine  the  proportion  to  be  paid  by  each
colony,  leaving  it  to  each  colonial  assembly  to  raise  that
sum  as  it  pleased.  Franklin,  who  was  consulted  about
the  scheme,  wrote  some  able  letters  to  Shirley,  the
Governor  of  Massachusetts,  protesting  against  it,  and
Pitt  refused  to  adopt  it.1

The  constitutional  competence  of  Parliament  to  tax
the  colonies  is  a  question  of  great  difficulty,  upon  which
the  highest  legal  authorities  have  been  divided,  though
the  decided  preponderance  of  legal  opinion  has  been  in
favour  of  the  right.  Parliament  repeatedly  claimed  and
exercised  a  general  right  of  legislating  for  the  colonies,

1  See on this negotiation  ii. 56, 57. The Controversy

Franklin's letters to Shirley,  between  Great  Britain  and  her

with the prefatory note. —  Colonies Reviewed (1769),  pp.

Franklin's Works, iii. 56-58.  194-198. Bancroft,  i.  195-198.
Thackeray's  Life  of  Chatham,

CH.  xi. MIGHT  PARLIAMENT  TAX  THE  COLONIES? 63

and  it  is  not  possible  to  show  by  the  distinct  letter  of
the  law  that  this  did  not  include  the  right  to  make
laws  imposing  taxes.  It  was  admitted  by  the  Ameri-
cans that  it  might  impose  trade  duties  which  produced
revenue,  though  they  were  not  primarily  intended  for
that  purpose ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  Charter  of
Pennsylvania,  though  of  that  colony  alone,  expressly
reserved  to  Parliament  the  right  of  taxation.1  To  an
accurate  thinker,  indeed,  it  must  appear  evident  that
every  law  which  in  the  interest  of  English  manufac-
turers prohibited  the  Americans  from  pursuing  a  form
of  manufacture,  or  buying  a  particular  class  of  goods
from  foreigners,  was  in  reality  a  tax.  The  effect  of  the
monopoly  was  that  the  Americans  paid  more  for  these
goods  than  if  they  had  produced  them  or  bought  them
from  foreigners,  and  this  excess  was  a  sum  levied  from
the  Americans  for  the  benefit  of  England.  If  the  Vir-
ginian planters  were  obliged  by  restrictive  laws  to  send
their  tobacco  to  England  alone,  and  if  a  tax  was  im-
posed on  all  tobacco  in  England  for  the  purpose  of
revenue,  it  is  clear  that  at  least  a  portion  of  that  tax
was  really  paid  by  the  producer  in  Virginia.  It  is  also
not  evident  in  the  nature  of  things  why  the  general  de-
fence of  the  Empire  should  be  esteemed  less  an  imperial
concern  than  the  regulation  of  commerce ;  and  why,  if
Parliament  might  bind  the  colonies  and  raise  money
for  the  regulation  of  their  commercial  system,  she  might
not  also  both  determine  and  enforce  their  military  ob-
ligations. The  general  opinion  of  English  lawyers  ap-
pears to  have  been  that  the  distinction  between  internal
and  external  taxation  had  no  basis  in  law  or  in  fact,  and
that  the  right  of  the  English  Legislature  was  supreme

1  By  the  Charter  the  Sovereign  prietors  or  chief  governor  or  As-
engaged  never  to  levy  any  tax  in  sembly,  or  by  Act of  Parlia-
Pennsylvania,  '  unless  the  same  merit  in  England.*
be  with  the  consent  of  the  pro-

64 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

over  the  colonies,  however  impolitic  it  might  be  to  exer-
cise it.  In  1724  the  law  officers  of  the  Crown,  one  of
whom  was  Sir  Philip  Yorke,  had  given  their  opinion
that  '  a  colony  of  English  subjects  cannot  be  taxed  but
by  some  representative  body  of  their  own  or  by  the
Parliament  of  England ; '  and  a  similar  opinion  was
given  in  1744  by  Murray,  afterwards  Lord  Mansfield.
Mansfield  was  subsequently  one  of  the  strongest  ad-
vocates of  the  Stamp  Act,  and  the  most  vehement  op-
ponent of  its  repeal.  In  a  few  years  the  colonial
lawyers  appear  to  have  agreed  substantially  with  those
of  England,  for  they  maintained  that,  in  order  to  es-
tablish by  argument  the  sole  right  of  the  Assemblies  to
tax  the  colonies,  it  was  necessary  to  deny  that  the
Imperial  Parliament  had  any  power  of  legislating  for
them.

It  was  admitted  that  it  was  a  new  thing  to  impose
internal  taxation  on  the  colonies.  The  Post  Office
revenue,  which  was  often  alleged  as  an  example,  might
be  regarded  merely  as  a  payment  exacted  for  the  per-
formance of  a  service  of  general  utility,  and  the  pro-
priety of  imposing  this  new  burden  on  the  colonies  was
defended  on  the  ground  that  the  circumstances  both  of
the  colonies  and  of  England  had  radically  changed.1  The
idea,  however,  of  supporting  an  American  army  by  im-
perial taxation  of  America  was,  as  we  have  seen,  not
new,  and  some  of  the  best  judges  of  American  affairs
appeai'ed  to  regard  it  as  feasible.  When  the  question
of  establishing  a  general  fund  during  the  war  was  under
discussion  in  1754  and  1755,  Governor  Shirley  gave  his
opinion '  that  the  several  Assemblies  within  the  colonies
will  not  agree  among  themselves  upon  such  a  fund;
that  consequently  it  must  be  done  in  England,  and  that

1  As Dr. Johnson wittily into  the  plough :  we  wait  till  it
though somewhat offensively is  an  ox.'
wrote : '  We do  not  put  a  calf

CH.  xi.  DIFFICULTIES OF RAISING AN ARMY,  65

the  only  effectual  way  of  doing  it  there  will  be  by  an
Act  of  Parliament,  in  which  I  have  great  reason  to
think  the  people  will  readily  acquiesce,  and  that  the
success  of  any  other  method  will  be  doubtful.' 1

This  passage  implies  what  was  probably  the  strong-
est argument  weighing  upon  the  ministers.  It  was  the
absolute  impossibility  of  inducing  America  to  support
her  own  army  unless  the  English  Parliament  inter-
vened. There  was  no  central  colonial  government.
There  was  no  body,  like  the  Irish  Parliament,  compe-
tent to  tax  the  several  provinces.  In  order  to  raise  the
money  for  the  support  of  an  American  army  with  the
assent  of  the  colonies,  it  was  necessary  to  have  the
assent  of  no  less  than  seventeen  colonial  assemblies.
The  hopelessness  of  attempting  to  fulfil  this  condition
was  very  manifest.  If  in  the  agonies  of  a  great  war  it
had  been  found  impossible  to  induce  the  colonies  to  act
together;  if  the  Southern  colonies  long  refused  to  assist
the  Northern  ones  in  their  struggle  against  France  be-
cause they  were  far  from  the  danger;  if  South  Carolina,
when  reluctantly  raising  troops  for  the  war,  stipulated
that  they  should  act  only  within  their  own  province ;
if  New  England  would  give  little  or  no  assistance  while
the  Indians  were  carrying  desolation  over  Virginia  and
Pennaylvania ;  what  chance  was  there  that  all  these
colonies  would  agree  in  time  of  peace  to  impose  uniform
and  proportionate  taxation  upon  themselves  for  the  sup-
port of  an  English  army  ? a  It  seemed  evident,  as  a

1  The  Controversy  betiveen  in  a  speech  to  the  Assembly  of

Great  Britain  and  her  Colonies,  New  Jersey  in  1775,  said  :  '  The

pp.  196,  197.  necessity  of  some  supreme  judge

*  See  a  very  able  statement  of  [to  determine  the  quota  of  each

the  dissension  among  the  colo-  province  to  the  general  expense]

nies  in  The  Controversy  between  is  evident  from  the  very  nature

Great  Britain  and  Jier  Colonies,  of  the  case,  as  otherwise  some  of

pp.  93-97.  Governor  Franklin  the  colonies  might  not  contribute

(the  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin),  their  due  proportion.  During  the

VOL.  IV.  F

65 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

matter  of  practical  statesmanship,  that  it  would  be  im-
possible, without  the  assistance  of  Parliament,  to  sup-
port an  American  army  by  American  taxation,  unless
the  provinces  could  be  induced  to  confide  the  power  of
taxation  to  a  single  colonial  assembly,  and  unless  Eng-
land could  induce  that  assembly,  by  the  promise  of
commercial  relaxations,  to  vote  a  subsidy.  To  both
parts  of  this  scheme  the  difficulties  were  enormous,  and
probably  insuperable.  Extreme  jealousy  of  England,
of  the  Executive,  and  of  each  other,  animated  the  colo-
nies, while  a  spirit  of  intense  commercial  monopoly  was
dominant  in  England.  Under  these  conditions  the
problem  might  well  have  appeared  a  hopeless  one.

It  would  have  been  far  wiser,  under  such  circum-
stances, to  have  abandoned  the  project  of  making  the
Americans  pay  for  their  army,  and  to  have  thrown  the
burden  on  the  mother  country.  Heavily  as  the  English
were  at  this  time  taxed,  grievous  as  was  the  discontent
that  was  manifested  among  the  people,  the  support
of  a  small  American  army  would  not  have  been  over-
whelming, while  a  conflict  with  the  colonists  on  the
question  could  lead  to  no  issue  that  was  not  disastrous.
There  was  indeed  one  method  which  might  possibly
have  been  successful.  Fresh  duties  imposed  on  Ame-
rican goods  might  have  raised  the  required  sum  in  a

last  war  I  well  remember  it  was  ern  colonies  so  far  as  to  include

ardently  wished  by  some  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  should  come

colonies  that  others,  who  were  into  his  Majesty's  requisition  on

thought  to  be  delinquent,  might  the  occasion. But  as  none of

be compelled  by  Act  of  Parlia-  the  Assemblies  of  the  New  Eng-

ment  to  bear  an  equal  share  of  land  Governments  thought  them-

the  public  burdens.  .  .  .  When  selves  nearly  concerned,  nothing

the  Assembly  in  1764  was  called  was  granted  by  them,  and  the

upon  to  make  provision  for  rais-  whole  burden  of  the  expedition

ing  some  troops  on  account  of  then carried  on  fell  on Great

the Indian  war, they  declined  Britain  and  three  or  four  of  the

doing  it  for  some  time  but  on  middle  colonies.' — See  Tinker's

condition  a  majority  of  the  east-  Letter  to  Burke,  pp.  49,  50.

en.  xi.  DIFFICULTIES OF  RAISING AN ARMY.  67

manner  mischievous  and  wasteful  indeed  both  to  Eng-
land and  the  colonies,  but  not  wholly  inconsistent  with
the  usual  tenor  of  their  government,  and  in  the  opinion
of  Franklin  such  a  measure  might  have  been  acquiesced
in.  In  the  beginning  of  1764  that  very  shrewd  ob-
server wrote  a  letter  urging  the  necessity  of  converting
the  Government  of  Pennsylvania  from  a  proprietary
into  a  royal  one,  in  which  there  occurs  a  passage  which
is  singularly  curious  when  read  in  the  light  of  the
author's  subsequent  career.  '  That  we  shall  have  a
standing  army  to  maintain,'  he  says,  '  is  another  bug-
bear raised  to  terrify  us  from  endeavouring  to  obtain  a
king's  government.  It  is  very  possible  that  the  Crown
may  think  it  necessary  to  keep  troops  in  America  hence-
forward, to  maintain  its  conquests  and  defend  the  colo-
nies, and  that  the  Parliament  may  establish  some  revenue
arising  out  of  the  American  trade  to  be  applied  towards
supporting  these  troops.  It  is  possible  too  that  we  may,
after  a  few  years'  experience,  be  generally  very  well
satisfied  with  that  measure,  from  the  steady  protection
it  will  afford  us  against  foreign  enemies  and  the  security
of  internal  peace  among  ourselves  without  the  expense
and  trouble  of  a  militia.' l

Grenville  adopted  another  course,  but  he  acted  with
evident  reluctance  and  hesitation.  In  March  1764,  at
the  same  time  as  the  commercial  measure  I  have  al-
ready described,  he  brought  forward  and  carried  a  reso-
lution asserting  that  '  for  further  defraying  the  expense
of  protecting  the  colonies  it  may  be  proper  to  charge
certain  stamp  duties  in  the  said  colonies.'  Further
measures  were  postponed  for  a  year,  in  order  to  ascer-
tain fully  the  sentiments  of  the  colonies,  and  also  to
give  them  an  opportunity,  if  they  chose  to  avail  them-
selves of  it,  either  of  suggesting  some  other  tax  or  of

1  Franklin'g  Works,  iv.  89,  90.

68 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt.

preventing  the  action  of  Parliament  by  themselves  rais-
ing the  sum  which  was  required.1

At  the  close  of  this  session  the  agents  of  the  dif-
ferent colonies  went  in  a  body  to  Grenville  to  ask  him
if  it  was  still  his  intention  to  bring  in  the  threatened
Bill.  Grenville  replied  positively  in  the  affirmative,
and  he  defended  his  determination  by  arguments  which
he  had  already  used  both  in  private  and  in  the  House
of  Commons.  The  interview  was  described  by  Mauduit,
the  agent  of  Massachusetts,  in  a  letter  to  his  colony,
and  his  accuracy  was  fully  attested  by  Montagu,  the
agent  for  Virginia.  Grenville,  according  to  these  re-
porters, urged  '  that  the  late  war  had  found  us  70  mil-
lions, and  had  left  us  more  than  140  millions  in  debt.
He  knew  that  all  men  wished  not  to  be  taxed,  but  in
these  unhappy  circumstances  it  was  his  duty  as  a
steward  for  the  public  to  make  use  of  every  just  means
of  improving  the  public  revenue.  He  never  meant,
however,  to  charge  the  colonies  with  any  part  of  the
interest  of  the  national  debt.  But,  besides  that  public
debt,  the  nation  had  incurred  a  great  annual  expense
in  the  maintaining  of  the  several  new  conquests  which
we  had  made  during  the  war,  and  by  which  the  colonies
were  so  much  benefited.  The  American  civil  and  mili-
tary establishment,  after  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,
was  only  70,OOOZ.  per  annum.  It  was  now  350,OOOL
This  was  a  great  additional  expense  incurred  upon  Ame-
rican account,  and  he  thought  therefore  that  America
ought  to  contribute  towards  it.  He  did  not  expect  that
the  colonies  should  raise  the  whole ;  but  some  part  of  it
he  thought  they  ought  to  raise,  and  a  stamp  duty  was
intended  for  that  purpose.'  He  then  proceeded  to
defend  the  particular  tax  which  he  had  selected.  It  was
the  easiest.  It  was  the  most  equitable.  It  would  fall

!  Almon's  Biographical  Anecdotes,  ii.  88-92.

en.  xi.

GRENVILLE'S  SCHEME.

69

exclusively  on  property.  It  could  be  collected  by  very
few  officers.  It  would  be  equally  spread  over  America
and  the  West  Indies.  'I  am  not,  however,'  he  con-
tinued, '  set  upon  this  tax.  If  the  Americans  dislike  it,
and  prefer  any  other  method  of  raising  the  money  them-
selves, I  shall  be  content.  Write  therefore  to  your
several  colonies,  and  if  they  choose  any  other  mode  I
shall  be  satisfied,  provided  the  money  be  but  raised.' '

1  Almon's  Biographical  Anec-
dotes, ii.  82-92.  In  the  reply  of
the  Massachusetts  Assembly  to
Mauduit,  the  following  passage
occurs :  '  The  actual  laying  the
stamp  duty,  you  say,  is  deferred
till  next  year,  Mr.  Grenville
being  willing  to  give  the  pro-
vinces their  option  to  raise
that  or  some  equivalent  tax,
"  desirous,"  as  he  was  pleased  to
express  himself,  "  to  consult  the
ease,  and  quiet,  and  the  goodwill
of  the  colonies."  '  '  This  suspen-
sion,' the  letter  adds,  '  amounts
to  no  more  than  this,  that  if  the
colonies  will  not  tax  themselves
as  they  may  be  directed,  the
Parliament  will  tax  them.' —
Mauduit's  View  of  the  New  Eng-
land Colonies,  pp.  95-100.  In
The  Controversy  between  Great
Britain  and  her  Colonies,  which
was  perhaps  the  ablest  statement
of  the  case  against  the  colonies,
and  which  was  written  by  Knox,
the  Under- Secretary  of  State,  and
one  of  Grenville's  confidential
writers,  it  is  said  :  '  Mr.  Grenville,
indeed,  went  so  far  as  to  desire
the  agents  to  acquaint  the  colo-
nies that  if  they  could  not  agree
among  themselves  upon  raising
a  revenue  by  their  own  Assem-
blies, yet  if  they  all,  or  any  of
them,  disliked  stamp  duties,  and

would  propose  any  other  sort  of
tax  which  would  carry  the  ap-
pearance of  equal  efficacy,  he
would  adopt  it.  But  he  warmly
recommended  to  them  the  mak-
ing grants  by  their  own  Assem-
blies as  the  most  expedient
rnethod  for  themselves.' — P.  199.
Burke,  however,  states  that  Gren-
ville in  the  many  debates  on  the
Stamp  Act  never  made  this  apo-
logy for  himself,  that  he  always
expressed  his  dislike  to  the
system  of  raising  money  by  re-
quisitions to  the  colonial  Assem-
blies, and  his  preference  for  par-
liamentary taxation,'  and  that  it
is  therefore  impossible  he  can
have  recommended  the  colonies
to  tax  themselves,  though  he
may  have  urged  them  to  agree
upon  the  tax  which  they  would
wish  Parliament  to  propose
(Speech  on  American  Taxation).
It  appears,  however,  evident  from
the  Massachusetts  letter  that  al-
though Grenville  was  inexorable
about  the  right  of  Parliament  to
tax  the  colonies,  the  colonists
understood  him  to  have  inten-
tionally left  it  open  to  them  to
prevent  the  exercise  of  that  right
by  raising  the  money  themselves.
All  that  politicians  in  England
really  wanted  was  an  American
contribution  to  the  defence  of

70 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  XT.

He  hinted  that  by  agreeing  to  the  tax  the  Americans
could  make  a  precedent  for  their  being  always  con-
sulted by  the  ministry  before  they  were  taxed  by  Par-
liament.1

Grenville  has  been  much  blamed  for  not  having
made  a  formal  requisition  to  each  colonial  Assembly,
as  was  usual  in  time  of  war,  requesting  them  to  raise  a
sum  for  the  support  of  the  army  ;  but  it  is  almost  cer-
tain that  such  a  requisition  would  in  most,  if  not  all,
cases  have  been  refused,  and  the  demand  would  have
been  made  use  of  as  a  proof  that  Parliament  had  no
right  to  impose  the  required  tax.  It  is  evident,  how-
ever, that  if  the  colonies  were  anxious  to  avoid  what
they  regarded  as  the  oppression  of  parliamentary  taxa-
tion, by  themselves  making  the  provision  for  the  re-
quired army,  they  had  ample  time  and  opportunity  to
do  so.  They  were,  however,  quite  resolved  not  to  con-
tribute to  the  army  in  any  form.  They  had  not  asked
for  it.  They  disliked  and  dreaded  it  as  strengthening
the  English  Government.  Their  own  taxes  were  much
increased  Jby  burdens  inherited  from  the  war ;  a  great
part  of  the  country  was  still  suffering  from  recent  de-
vastations by  the  Indians,  and  the  irritation  caused  by
the  measures  against  smuggling  was  very  strong.  The
proposed  tax  was  discussed  in  every  provincial  Assem-
bly, and  the  result  was  a  long  series  of  resolutions  and
addresses  to  Parliament  denying  in  the  most  emphatic
terms  the  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  America,  and  as-
serting that  if  the  scheme  of  the  minister  were  carried
into  effect,  '  it  would  establish  the  melancholy  truth
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  colonies  are  the  slaves  of  the
Britons  from  whom  they  are  descended.' 2  The  Penn-

the  Empire. See,  too,  the  state-  291,  292;  iv.  194.

ment of Garth, the  Agent  of  l  Annual  Register,  1765,  p.  83.

South  Carolina;  Bancroft,  ii.  211;  *  See  the  Virginian Address,

and  that  of  Franklin,  Works,  i.  Grahame,  iv.  180.

CH.  xi.  RECEPTION OF  THE SCHEME.  71

sylvaiiians  alone  made  some  advance  in  the  direction
of  compromise  by  resolving  that,  '  as  they  always  had
thought,  so  they  always  shall  think  it  their  duty  to  grant
aid  to  the  Crown,  according  to  their  abilities,  whenever
required  of  them  in  the  usual  constitutional  manner,'
but  they  took  no  measure  to  carry  their  resolution  into
effect.  In  New  England  the  doctrine  that  Parliament
had  no  right  whatever  to  legislate  for  America  was  now
loudly  proclaimed,  and  Otis  was  as  usual  active  in  fan*
ning  resistance  to  the  Government.

It  was  obvious  that  a  very  dangerous  spirit  was
arising  in  the  colonies.  A  few  voices  were  raised  in
favour  of  the  admission  of  American  representatives
into  Parliament ;  but  this  plan,  which  was  advocated  by
Otis  and  supported  by  the  great  names  of  Franklin  and
of  Adam  Smith,  would  have  encountered  enormous
practical  difficulties,  and  it  found  few  friends  in  either
country.  Grenville  himself,  however,  appears  to  have
for  a  time  seriously  contemplated  it.  As  he  was  accus-
tomed to  say  to  his  friends,  he  had  never  entertained
the  smallest  design  against  American  liberty,  and  the
sole  object  of  his  colonial  policy  was  to  induce  or  oblige
America  to  contribute  to  the  expense  of  her  own  de-
fence in  the  same  manner  as  Ireland.  He  had  consulted
the  colonial  agents  in  order  that  tbe  colonies  might
themselves  suggest  the  form  of  the  contribution,  and
establish  the  precedent  of  being  always  in  such  cases
consulted.  He  had  deferred  the  Stamp  Act  for  a  whole
year  in  order  that  the  colonies  might,  if  they  chose,
make  imperial  taxation  unnecessary ;  and  if  the  Ame-
ricans thought  that  their  liberties  would  become  more
secure  by  the  introduction  of  American  representatives
into  the  British  Parliament,  he  was  quite  ready  to  sup-
port such  a  scheme.1  He  would  probably,  however,

1  See  Knox's  Extra-official  Papers,  ii.  24,  25,  31-33. Hutchin-

72 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CE.  JO.

have  found  it  not  easy  to  carry  in  England,  and  it  was
soon  after  utterly  repudiated  in  America.  At  the  same
time,  after  the  open  denial  of  the  competence  of  Parlia-
ment to  tax  the  colonies,  it  was  especially  difficult  to
recede,  and  Grenville  had  some  reason  to  think  that  the
colonial  addresses  exaggerated  the  sentiments  of  the
people.  When  the  project  was  first  laid  before  the
agents  of  the  colonies,  the  Agent  for  Rhode  Island  was
the  only  one  who  unequivocally  repudiated  it.1  The
form  of  the  tax  was  not  one  which  would  naturally  at-
tract much  attention,  and  it  might  be  hoped  that  public
opinion  would  soon  look  upon  it  as  of  the  same  nature
as  the  postal  revenue  which  the  Imperial  Parliament
had  long  levied  in  the  colonies.

In  February  1765  the  agents  of  several  of  the
colonies  had  an  interview  with  Grenville,  and  made  one
last  effort  to  dissuade  him  from  introducing  the  measure.
Grenville,  in  his  reply,  expressed  his  sincere  regret  if
he  was  exciting  resentments  in  America,  but,  he  said,
'  it  is  the  duty  of  my  office  to  manage  the  revenue.  I
have  really  been  made  to  believe  that,  considering  the
whole  circumstances  of  the  mother  country  and  the
colonies,  the  latter  can  and  ought  to  pay  something  to
the  public  cause.  I  know  of  no  better  way  than  that
now  pursuing  to  lay  such  a  tax.  If  you  can  tell  of  a
better  I  will  adopt  it.'  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  had
shortly  before  come  over  as  Agent  for  Philadelphia,

son's  Hist,  of  Massachusetts,  p.  as  well  as  the  Lower  House  would

112. In  his  Notes  on  the  United  have  set  at  rest  the  whole  ques-

States,  Sir  Augustus  Foster,  who  tion.' Lord  Liverpool  was  accus-

was  English  Secretary  of  Lega-  tomed  to  say  that  no  serious  re-

tion  at  Washington,  1804-1806,  sistance  to  the  Stamp  Act  would

mentions that both Jefferson  have  been  made,  if  Grenville  had

and  his  successor  in  the  Presi-  carried  it  at  once  without  leaving

dency,  Madison,  expressed  their  a  year  for  discussion. See  Quar-

belief that '  the  timely  conces-  terly  Review,  No.  cxxxv.  p.  37.

sion  of  a  few  seats  in  the  Upper  '  See  Grahame,  iv.  188.

CH.  nc.  THE STAMP ACT.  73

presented  the  resolution  of  the  Assembly  of  his  pro-
vince, and  urged  that  the  demand  for  money  should
be  made  in  the  old  constitutional  way  to  the  Assembly
of  each  province  in  the  form  of  a  requisition  by  the
governor.  '  Can  you  agree,'  rejoined  Grenville,  '  on  the
proportions  each  colony  should  raise  ? '  The  question
touched  the  heart  of  the  difficulty  ;  the  agents  were
obliged  to  answer  in  the  negative,  and  the  interview
speedily  closed.  A  few  days  later  the  fatal  Bill  was
introduced  into  a  nearly  empty  House,  and  it  passed
through  all  its  stages  almost  unopposed.  It  made  it
necessary  for  all  bills,  bonds,  leases,  policies  of  insu-
rance, newspapers,  broadsides,  and  legal  documents  of
all  kinds  to  be  written  on  stamped  paper,  to  be  sold
by  public  officers  at  varying  prices  prescribed  by  the
law.  The  proceeds  were  to  be  paid  into  his  Majesty's
treasury,  and  they  were  to  be  applied,  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  Parliament,  exclusively  to  the  protection  and
defence  of  the  colonies.1  Offences  against  the  Stamp
Act  were  to  be  cognisable  in  America  as  in  England  by
the  Courts  of  Admiralty,  and  without  the  intervention
of  juries.  In  order  to  soften  the  opposition,  and  to  con-
sult, to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  the  wishes  of  the  colo-
nists, Grenville  informed  the  colonial  agents  that  the
distribution  of  the  stamps  should  be  confided  not  to
Englishmen  but  to  Americans,  and  he  requested  them
to  name  such  persons  in  their  respective  provinces  a?
they  thought  best  qualified  for  the  purpose  and  most
acceptable  to  the  inhabitants.  They  all  complied  with
the  request,  and  Franklin  named  one  of  his  intimate
friends  as  stamp  distributor  for  Pennsylvania.

The  Stamp  Act,  when  its  ultimate  consequences  are
considered,  must  be  deemed  one  of  the  most  momentous
legislative  Acts  in  the  history  of  mankind  j  but  in  Eng-

1  5  Geo.  III.  c.  12.

74 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

land  it  passed  almost  completely  unnoticed.  The  Wilkea
excitement  absorbed  public  attention,  and  no  English
politician  appears  to  have  realised  the  importance  of  the
measure.  It  is  scarcely  mentioned  in  the  contemporary
correspondence  of  Horace  Wai  pole,  of  Grenville,  or  of
Pitt.  Burke,  who  was  not  yet  a  member  of  the  House
of  Commons,  afterwards  declared  that  he  had  followed
the  debate  from  the  gallery,  and  that  he  had  never
heard  a  more  languid  one  in  the  House  ;  that  not  more
than  two  or  three  gentlemen  spoke  against  the  Bill ;
that  there  was  but  one  division  in  the  whole  course  of
the  discussion,  and  that  the  minority  in  that  division
was  not  more  than  thirty-nine  or  forty.  In  the  House
of  Lords  he  could  not  remember  that  there  had  been
either  a  debate  or  division,  and  he  was  certain  that
there  was  no  protest.1  Pitt  was  at  this  time  confined
to  his  bed  by  illness,  and  Conway,  Beckford,  and  Barre
appear  to  have  been  almost  the  only  opponents  of  the
measure.  The  latter,  whose  American  experience  during
the  Canadian  war  had  given  him  considerable  weight,
described  the  colonists,  in  a  fine  piece  of  declamation,
as  '  sons  of  liberty '  planted  in  America  by  the  oppres-
sion and  strengthened  by  the  neglect  of  England,  and
he  predicted  that  the  same  love  of  freedom  which  had
led  them  into  an  uncultivated  and  inhospitable  country,
and  had  supported  them  through  so  many  hardships
and  so  many  dangers,  would  accompany  them  still,  and
would  inspire  them  with  an  indomitable  resolution  to

1  Burke's  speech  on  American  who  is  the  present  Pitt  and  the

taxation,  April  1774.  The  follow-  dread  of  all  the  vociferous  Norths

ing  is  Horace  Walpole's  sole  no-  and  Rigbys,  on  whose  lungs  de-

tice  of  the  measure  :  '  There  has  pended so much  of Mr.  Gren-

been  nothing  of  note  in  Parlia-  ville's  power.' Walpole  to  Hert-

ment  but  one  slight  day  on  the  ford,  Feb.  12,  1765. Beckford,

American  taxes,  which  Charles  some  years  later,  mentioned  that

Townshend  supporting,  received  he  had  opposed  the  Stamp  Act. —

a  pretty  heavy  thump  from  Barr6,  Cavendish  Debates,  i.  41.

CH.  XI. TAXATION  AND  REPRESENTATION. 75

vindicate  their  violated  liberty.  His  words  appear  to
have  excited  no  attention  in  England,  and  were  not
even  reported  in  the  contemporary  parliamentary  his-
tory ;  but  they  were  at  once  transmitted  to  America  by
the  Agent  for  Connecticut,  who  had  been  present  in  the
gallery,  and  they  contributed  not  a  little  to  stimulate
the  flame.  The  '  sons  of  liberty '  became  from  this  time
the  favourite  designation  of  the  American  associations
against  the  Stamp  Act.

In  truth,  the  measure,  although  it  was  by  no  means
as  unjust  or  as  unreasonable  as  has  been  alleged,  and
although  it  might  perhaps  in  some  periods  of  colonial
history  have  passed  almost  unperceived,  did  unquestion-
ably infringe  upon  a  principle  which  the  English  race
both  at  home  and  abroad  have  always  regarded  with  a
peculiar  jealousy.  The  doctrine  that  taxation  and  re-
presentation are  in  free  nations  inseparably  connected,
that  constitutional  government  is  closely  connected  with
the  rights  of  property,  and  that  no  people  can  be  legi-
timately taxed  except  by  themselves  or  their  represen-
tatives, lay  at  the  very  root  of  the  English  conception
of  political  liberty.  The  same  principle  that  had  led
the  English  people  to  provide  so  carefully  in  the  Great
Charter,  in  a  well-known  statute  of  Edward  I.,  and  in
the  Bill  of  Rights,  that  no  taxation  should  be  drawn
from  them  except  by  the  English  Parliament ;  the  same
principle  which  had  gradually  invested  the  representa-
tive branch  of  the  Legislature  with  the  special  and
peculiar  function  of  granting  supplies,  led  the  colonists
to  maintain  that  their  liberty  would  be  destroyed  if
they  were  taxed  by  a  Legislature  in  which  they  had  no
representatives,  and  which  sat  3,000  miles  from  their
shore.  It  was  a  principle  which  had  been  respected  by
Henry  VIII.  and  Elizabeth  in  the  most  arbitrary  mo-
ments of  their  reigns,  and  its  violation  by  Charles  I.
was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  Rebellion.  The  prin-

76 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

ciple  which  led  Hampden  to  refuse  to  pay  20s.  of  ship
money  was  substantially  the  same  as  that  which  inspired
the  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act.  It  might  be  impos-
sible to  show  by  the  letter  of  the  law  that  there  was
any  generical  distinction  between  taxing  and  other
legislative  Acts ;  but  in  the  constitutional  traditions  of
the  English  people  a  broad  line  did  undoubtedly  exist.
As  Burke  truly  said,  '  the  great  contests  for  freedom  in
this  country  were  from  the  earliest  times  chiefly  on  the
question  of  taxing.'  The  English  people  have  always
held  that  as  long  as  their  representatives  retain  the
power  of  the  purse  they  will  be  able  at  last  to  check
every  extravagance  of  tyranny,  but  that  whenever  this
is  given  up  the  whole  fabric  of  their  liberty  is  under-
mined. The  English  Parliament  had  always  abstained
from  imposing  taxes  on  Wales  until  Welsh  members
sat  among  them.  When  the  right  of  self-taxation  was
withdrawn  from  Convocation,  the  clergy  at  once  assumed
and  exercised  the  privilege  of  voting  for  Members  of
Parliament  in  virtue  of  their  ecclesiastical  freeholds.
The  English  Parliament  repeatedly  asserted  its  autho-
rity over  the  Parliament  of  Ireland,  and  it  often  exerted
it  in  a  manner  which  was  grossly  tyrannical;  but  it
never  imposed  any  direct  tax  upon  the  Irish  people.
The  weighty  language  of  Henry  Cromwell,  who  governed
Ireland  in  one  of  the  darkest  periods  of  her  history,  was
remembered :  '  I  am  glad,'  he  wrote,  '  to  hear  that  as
well  non-legal  as  contra-legal  ways  of  raising  money
are  not  hearkened  to.  ...  Errors  in  raising  money
are  the  compendious  ways  to  cause  a  general  discon-
tent; for  whereas  other  things  are  but  the  concern-
ments of  some,  this  is  of  all.  Wherefore,  I  hope  God
will  in  His  mercy  not  lead  us  into  temptation.' l

1  H.  Cromwell  to Thurloe,  February  24, 1C57. Thurloe  State
Papers,  vi.  820.

en.  XT. TAXATION  AND  REPRESENTATION. 77

It  is  quite  true  that  this  theory,  like  that  of  the
social  contract  which  has  also  borne  a  great  part  in  the
history  of  political  liberty,  will  not  bear  a  severe  and
philosophical  examination.  The  opponents  of  the
American  claims  were  able  to  reply,  with  undoubted
truth,  that  at  least  nine-tenths  of  the  English  people
had  no  votes;  that  the  great  manufacturing  towns,
which  contributed  so  largely  to  the  public  burdens,
were  for  the  most  part  wholly  unrepresented ;  that  the
minority  in  Parliament  voted  only  in  order  to  be  syste-
matically overruled ;  and  that,  in  a  country  where  the
constituencies  were  as  unequal  as  in  England,  that
minority  often  represented  the  large  majority  of  the
voters.  It  was  easy  to  show  that  the  financial  system
of  the  country  consisted  chiefly  of  a  number  of  parti-
cular taxes  imposed  on  particular  classes  and  industries,
and  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  these  taxes  were
levied  not  only  without  the  consent  but  in  spite  of  the
strenuous  opposition  of  the  representatives  of  those  who
paid  them.  The  doctrine  that  '  whatever  a  man  has
honestly  acquired  is  absolutely  his  own,  and  cannot
without  robbery  be  taken  from  him,  except  by  his  own
consent,'  if  it  were  applied  rigidly  to  taxation,  would
reduce  every  society  to  anarchy;  for  there  is  no  tax
which  on  such  principles  a  large  proportion  of  the  tax-
payers would  not  be  authorised  in  resisting.  It  was  a
first  principle  of  the  Constitution  that  a  Member  of
Parliament  was  the  representative  not  merely  of  his  own
constituency,  but  also  of  the  whole  Empire.  Men  con-
nected with,  or  at  least  specially  interested  in  the  colo-
nies, always  found  their  way  into  Parliament ;  and  the
very  fact  that  the  colonial  arguments  were  maintained
with  transcendent  power  within  its  walls  was  sufficient
to  show  that  the  colonies  were  virtually  represented.

Such  arguments  gave  an  easy  dialectic  victory  to
the  supporters  of  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  in  the  eyes  of  a

78 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  n.

true  statesman  they  are  very  insufficient.  Severe  accu-
racy of  definition,  refinement  and  precision  of  reasoning,
are  for  the  most  part  wholly  out  of  place  in  practical
politics.  It  might  be  true  that  there  was  a  line  where
internal  and  external  taxation,  taxation  for  purposes  of
commerce  and  taxation  for  purposes  of  revenue,  faded
imperceptibly  into  one  another;  but  still  there  was  a
broad,  rough  distinction  between  the  two  provinces
which  was  sufficiently  palpable  to  form  the  basis  of  a
colonial  policy.  The  theory  connecting  representation
with  taxation  was  susceptible  of  a  similar  justification.
A  Parliament  elected  by  a  considerable  part  of  the
English  people,  drawn  from  the  English  people,  sitting
in  the  midst  of  them,  and  exposed  to  their  social  and
intellectual  influence,  was  assumed  to  represent  the
whole  nation,  and  the  decision  of  its  majority  was
assumed  to  be  the  decision  of  the  whole.  If  it  be  asked
how  these  assumptions  could  be  defended,  it  can  only
be  answered  that  they  had  rendered  possible  a  form  of
government  which  had  arrested  the  incursions  of  the
royal  prerogative,  had  given  England  a  longer  period
and  a  larger  measure  of  self-government  than  was
enjoyed  by  any  other  great  European  nation,  and  had
created  a  public  spirit  sufficiently  powerful  to  defend
the  liberties  that  had  been  won.  Such  arguments,
however  worthless  they  might  appear  to  a  lawyer  or  a
theorist,  ought  to  be  very  sufficient  to  a  statesman.
Manchester  and  Sheffield  had  no  more  direct  represen-
tation in  Parliament  than  Boston  or  Philadelphia ;  but
the  relations  of  unrepresented  Englishmen  and  of  colo-
nists to  the  English  Parliament  were  very  different.
Parliament  could  never  long  neglect  the  fierce  beatings
of  the  waves  of  popular  discontent  around  its  walls.  It
might  long  continue  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  wishes
of  a  population  3,000  miles  from  the  English  shore.
When  Parliament  taxed  the  English  people,  the  taxing

CH.  xi. TAXATION  AND  REPRESENTATION. 79

body  itself  felt  the  weight  of  the  burden  it  imposed ;
but  Parliament  felt  no  part  of  the  weight  of  colonial
taxation,  and  had  therefore  a  direct  interest  in  increas-
ing it.  The  English  people  might  justly  complain  that
they  were  taxed  by  a  body  in  which  they  were  very
imperfectly  represented ;  but  this  was  a  widely  different
thing  from  being  taxed  by  the  Legislature  of  another
country.  To  adopt  the  powerful  language  of  an  Irish
writer,  no  free  people  will  ever  admit  '  that  persons  dis-
tant from  them  1,000  leagues  are  to  tax  them  to  what
amount  they  please,  without  their  consent,  without
knowing  them  or  their  concerns,  without  any  sympathy
of  affection  or  interest,  without  even  sharing  themselves
in  the  taxes  they  impose — on  the  contrary,  diminishing
their  own  burdens  exactly  in  the  degree  they  increase
theirs.' l

The  Stamp  Act  received  the  royal  assent  on  March
22,  1765,  and  it  was  to  come  into  operation  on  the  1st
of  November  following.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  mea-
sure granting  the  colonies  bounties  for  the  import  of
their  timber  into  England,  permitting  them  to  export
it  freely  to  Ireland,  Madeira,  the  Azores,  and  any  part
of  Europe  south  of  Cape  Finisterre ;  and  in  some  other
ways  slightly  relaxing  the  trade  restrictions.2  A  mea-
sure .was  also  passed  which  obliged  the  colonists  to
provide  the  British  troops  stationed  among  them  with
quarters,  and  also  with  fire,  candles,  beds,  vinegar,  and
salt.  Neither  of  these  measures,  however,  at  the  time
excited  much  attention,  and  public  interest  in  the  colo-
nies was  wholly  concentrated  upon  the  Stamp  Act.
The  long  delay,  which  had  been  granted  in  the  hope
that  it  might  lead  to  some  proposal  of  compromise  from
America,  had  been  sedulously  employed  by  skilful

1  Considerations  on  the  Depen- 1769,  p.  75.
dcncies  of  Great  Britain  (by  Sir *  5  Geo.  III.  c.  46.
Hercules Langrishe), Dublin,

80 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

agitators  in  stimulating  the  excitement ;  and  when  the
news  arrived  that  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  carried,  the
train  was  fully  laid,  and  the  indignation  of  the  colonies
rose  at  once  into  a  flame.  Virginia  set  the  example  by
a  series  of  resolutions  which  were  termed  '  the  alarum
bell  to  the  disaffected,'  and  which  were  speedily  copied
in  the  other  provinces.  They  declared  that  the  colo-
nists were  entitled  by  charter  to  all  the  liberties  and
privileges  of  natural-born  subjects ;  '  that  the  taxation
of  the  people  by  themselves,  or  by  persons  chosen  by
themselves  to  represent  them,  ...  is  the  distinguish-
ing characteristic  of  British  freedom,  without  which  the
ancient  constitution  cannot  exist,'  and  that  this  inesti-
mable right  had  always  been  recognised  by  the  King
and  people  of  Great  Britain  as  undoubtedly  belonging
to  the  colonies.  A  congress  of  representatives  of  nine
States  was  held  at  New  York,  and  in  an  extremely  able
State  paper  they  drew  up  the  case  of  the  colonies.
They  acknowledged  that  they  owed  allegiance  to  the
Crown,  and  '  all  due  subordination  to  that  august  body,
the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  ; '  but  they  maintained
that  they  were  entitled  to  all  the  inherent  rights  and
liberties  of  natural-born  subjects ;  '  that  it-  is  insepar-
ably essential  to  the  freedom  of  a  people,  and  the  un-
doubted right  of  Englishmen,  that  no  taxes  be  imposed
on  them  but  with  their  own  consent,  given  personally
or  by  their  representatives;'  that  the  colonists  'are
not,  and  from  their  local  circumstances  cannot  be,  re-
presented in  the  House  of  Commons  of  Great  Britain ; '
that  the  only  representatives  of  the  colonies,  and  there-
fore the  only  persons  constitutionally  competent  to  tax
them,  were  the  members  chosen  in  the  colonies  by
themselves ;  and  '  that  all  supplies  of  the  Crown  being
free  gifts  from  the  people,  it  is  unreasonable  and  incon-
sistent with  the  principles  and  spirit  of  the  British
Constitution  for  the  people  of  Great  Britain  to  grant  to

CH.  xi.  RIOTS  IN AMERICA.  81

his  Majesty  the  property  of  the  colonies.'  A  petition
to  the  King  and  memorials  to  both  Houses  of  Parlia-
ment were  drawn  up  embodying  these  views.1

It  was  not,  however,  only  by  such  legal  measures
that  the  opposition  was  shown.  A  furious  outburst  of
popular  violence  speedily  showed  that  it  would  be  im-
possible to  enforce  the  Act.  In  Boston,  Oliver,  the
secretary  of  the  province,  who  had  accepted  the  office  of
stamp  distributor,  was  hung  in  effigy  on  a  tree  in  the
main  street  of  the  town.  The  building  which  had  been
erected  as  a  Stamp  Office  was  levelled  with  the  dust ;
the  house  of  Oliver  was  attacked,  plundered,  and  wrecked,
and  he  was  compelled  by  the  mob  to  resign  his  office
and  to  swear  beneath  the  tree  on  which  his  effigy  had
been  so  ignominiously  hung,  that  he  never  would
resume  it.  A  few  nights  later  the  riots  recommenced
with  redoubled  fury.  The  houses  of  two  of  the  leading
officials  connected  with  the  Admiralty  Court  and  with
the  Custom-house  were  attacked  and  rifled,  and  the
files  and  records  of  the  Admiralty  Court  were  burnt.
The  mob,  intoxicated  with  the  liquors  which  they  had
found  in  one  of  the  cellars  they  had  plundered,  next
turned  to  the  house  of  Hutchinson,  the  Lieutenant-
Governor  and  Chief  Justice  of  the  province.  Hutchin-
son was  not  only  the  second  person  in  rank  in  the
colony,  he  was  also  a  man  who  had  personal  claims  of
the  highest  kind  upon  his  countrymen.  He  was  an
American,  a  Calvinist,  a  member  of  one  of  the  oldest
colonial  families,  and  in  a  country  where  literary  enter-
prise was  very  uncommon  he  had  devoted  a  great  part
of  his  life  to  investigating  the  history  of  his  native  pro-
vince. His  rare  ability,  his  stainless  private  character,
and  his  great  charm  of  manner  were  universally  recog-
nised ; a  he  had  at  one  time  been  one  of  the  most

1  See  Story's Constitution  of *  See  Tudor's  Life  of  Otis,  pp.
the  United  States,  i.  175,  176.  424-433.

VOL. IV.  Gr

82 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

popular  men  in  the  colony,  and  he  had  been  selected
by  the  great  majority  of  the  Assembly  as  their  agent
to  oppose  in  England  the  restrictive  commercial  laws
of  Grenville.  Bernard,  however,  considering  this  posi-
tion incompatible  with  the  office  of  Lieutenant-Governor,
which  Hutchinson  had  held  since  1758,  induced  him  to
decline  it;  and  although  Hutchinson  was  opposed  to
the  policy  of  the  Stamp  Act,  the  determination  with
which  he  acted  as  Chief  Justice  in  supporting  the  law
soon  made  him  obnoxious  to  the  mob.  He  had  barely
time  to  escape  with  his  family,  when  his  house,  which
was  the  finest  in  Boston,  was  attacked  and  destroyed.
His  plate,  his  furniture,  his  pictures,  the  public  docu-
ments in  his  possession,  and  a  noble  library  which  he
had  spent  thirty  years  in  collecting,  were  plundered
and  burnt.  Resolutions  were  afterwards  carried  in  the
town  for  suppressing  riots,  but  nothing  was  done,  and
it  was  evident  that  the  prevailing  feeling  was  with  the
rioters.  Mayhew,  one  of  the  most  popular  preachers  of
Boston,  had  just  before  denounced  the  Stamp  Act  from
the  pulpit,  preaching  from  the  text,  '  I  would  that  they
were  even  cut  off  which  trouble  you.'  A  leading  trades-
man who  had  been  notoriously  a  ringleader  was  appre-
hended by  the  sheriffs,  but  he  was  released  without
inquiry  in  consequence  of  a  large  portion  of  the  civic
guard  having  threatened  to  disband  themselves  if  he
were  committed  to  prison.  Eight  or  ten  persons  of
inferior  note  were  actually  imprisoned,  but  the  mob
compelled  the  gaoler  to  surrender  the  keys  and  release
them,  and  not  a  single  person  was  really  punished.1

The  flame  rapidly  spread.  In  the  newly  annexed
provinces,  indeed,  and  in  most  of  the  West  India
islands,  the  Act  was  received  without  difficulty,  but  in

1  Holmes'  Annals  of  America, nual Register, 1765. Adams'
1765. Grahame's  Hist.  iv. An- Diary,  Works,  ii.  156.

CH.  xr.  RIOTS  IN  AMERICA.

nearly  every  American  colony  those  who  had  consented
to  be  stamp  distributors  were  hung  and  burnt  in  effigy,
and  compelled  by  mob  violence  to  resign  their  posts.
The  houses  of  many  who  were  known  to  be  supporters
of  the  Act  or  sympathisers  with  the  Government  were
attacked  and  plundered.  Some  were  compelled  to  fly
from  the  colonies,  and  the  authority  of  the  Home
Government  was  exposed  to  every  kind  of  insult.  .In
New  York  the  effigy  of  the  Governor  was  paraded  with
that  of  the  devil  round  the  town  and  then  publicly
burnt,  and  threatening  letters  were  circulated  menacing
the  lives  of  those  who  distributed  stamps.1  The  mer-
chants of  the  chief  towns  entered  into  agreements  to
order  no  more  goods  from  England,  to  cancel  all  orders
already  given,  in  some  cases  even  to  send  no  remittances
to  England  in  payment  of  their  debts,  till  the  Stamp
Act  was  repealed.  The  lawyers  combined  to  make  no
use  of  the  stamped  papers.  In  order  that  the  colonies
might  be  able  to  dispense  with  assistance  from  England,
great  efforts  were  made  to  promote  manufactures.  The
richest  citizens  set  the  example  of  dressing  in  old  or
homespun  clothes  rather  than  wear  new  clothes  im-
ported from  England ;  and  in  order  to  supply  the
deficiency  of  wool,  a  general  agreement  was  made  to
abstain  from  eating  lamb.

When  the  1st  of  November  arrived,  the  bells  were
tolled  as  for  the  funeral  of  a  nation.  The  flags  were
hung  half-mast  high.  The  shops  were  shut,  and  the
Stamp  Act  was  hawked  about  with  the  inscription,
'  The  folly  of  England  and  the  ruin  of  America.'  The
newspapers  were  obliged  by  the  new  law  to  bear  the
Etnmp,  which  probably  contributed  much  to  the  extreme
virulence  of  their  opposition,  and  many  of  them  now

1  Documents  relating  to the  Colonial  Hist,  of  New  York,  vil.
770-775.

o  2

8-1  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

appeared  with  a  death's  head  in  the  place  where  the
stamp  should  have  been.  It  was  found  not  only  im-
possible to  distribute  stamps,  but  even  impossible
to  keep  them  in  the  colonies,  for  the  mob  seized  on
every  box  which  was  brought  from  England  and  com-
mitted it  to  the  flames.  Stamps  were  required  for  the
validity  of  every  legal  document,  yet  in  most  of  the
colonies  not  a  single  sheet  of  stamped  paper  could
be  found.  The  law  courts  were  for  a  time  closed,
and  almost  all  business  was  suspended.  At  last  the
governors,  considering  the  impossibilty  of  carrying  on
public  business  or  protecting  property  under  these  con-
ditions, took  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and  issued
letters  authorising  non-compliance  with  the  Act  on  the
ground  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  procure  the
requisite  stamps  in  the  colony.

The  determination  of  the  opponents  of  the  Act  was
all  the  greater  because  in  the  interval  between  its  en-
actment and  the  period  in  which  it  was  to  come  into
operation  a  change  had  taken  place  in  the  Administra-
tion at  home.  The  Grenville  Ministry  had  fallen  in
J  uly,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  that  of  Rockingham ;
and  Conway,  who  had  been  one  of  the  few  opponents
of  the  Stamp  Act,  was  now  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Colonies.

Up  to-  this  time  colonial  affairs  had  scarcely  excited
any  attention  in  the  English  political  world.  The  Duke
of  Cumberland,  in  a  long  and  detailed  memorial,1  has
recounted  the  negotiations  he  was  instructed  to  carry
on  with  Pitt  in  April  and  May  1765,  with  a  view  to
inducing  that  statesman  to  combine  with  the  Rocking-
ham party  in  a  new  ministry,  and  it  is  very  remarkable
that  in  this  memorial  there  is  not  a  word  relating  to
the  colonies.  The  general  political  condition  of  the

1  Albemarle's  Life  of  RockingJiam,  i.  185-203.

CH.  xi. ENGLISH  INDIFFERENCE  TO  THE  STAMP  ACT. 85

country  was  carefully  reviewed.  Much  was  said  about
the  Regency  Bill,  the  Cyder  Bill,  the  dismissal  of
officers  on  account  of  their  votes,  the  illegality  of
general  warrants,  the  abuses  of  military  patronage,  the
growing  power  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  the  propriety
of  attempting  a  new  alliance  with  Prussia  ;  but  there  is
not  the  smallest  evidence  that  either  Pitt  or  Cumberland,
or  any  of  the  other  statesmen  who  were  concerned  in
the  negotiation,  were  conscious  that  any  serious  ques-
tion was  impending  in  America.  The  Stamp  Act  had
contributed  nothing  to  the  downfall  of  Grenville ;  it
attracted  so  little  attention  that  it  was  only  in  the  last
days  of  1765  or  the  first  days  of  1766  that  the  new
ministers  learnt  the  views  of  Pitt  upon  the  subject;1
it  was  probably  a  complete  surprise  to  them  to  learn
that  it  had  brought  the  colonies  to  the  verge  of  rebel-
lion, and  in  the  first  months  of  their  power  they  appear
to  have  been  quite  uncertain  what  policy  they  would
pursue.  One  of  the  first  persons  in  England  who  fully
realised  the  magnitude  of  the  question  was  the  King.
On  December  5,  1765,  he  wrote  to  Conway:  'I  am
more  and  more  grieved  at  the  accounts  of  America.
A V here  this  spiiit  will  end  is  not  to  be  said.  It  is  un-
doubtedly the  most  serious  matter  that  ever  came  before
Parliament ;  it  requires  more  deliberation,  candour,  and
temper  than  I  fear  it  will  meet  with.' 2

The  ministers  would  gladly  have  left  the  question  of
American  taxation  undecided,  but  this  was  no  longer
possible.  Parliament  had  almost  unanimously  asserted
its  right,  and  the  colonial  Assemblies  had  defiantly  de-
nied it.  The  servants  of  the  Crown  had  in  nearly  every
colony  been  insulted  or  plundered,  and  the  honour  of
England  and  of  the  Parliament  was  deeply  touched.  The
Ministry  was  very  weak ;  Pitt  had  refused  to  join  it ;

1  Albemarle's  Life  of  RocMngliam,  i.  269. »  Ibid.  i.  25G.

86 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt.

the  King  disliked  and  distrusted  it,  and  he  was  strongly
in  favour  of  the  coercion  of  America.  On  the  other  hand,
it  was  clear  that  the  Act  could  not  be  enforced  without
war,  and  the  merchants  all  over  England  were  suffering
seriously  from  the  suspension  of  the  American  trade.
Petitions  were  presented  from  the  traders  of  London,
Bristol,  Liverpool,  and  other  towns,  stating  that  the
colonists  were  indebted  to  the  merchants  of  this  country
to  the  amount  of  several  millions  sterling  for  English
goods  which  had  been  exported  to  America ;  that  the
colonists  had  hitherto  faithfully  made  good  their  en-
gagements, but  that  they  now  declared  their  inability  to
do  so ;  that  they  would  neither  give  orders  for  new  goods
nor  pay  for  those  which  they  had  actually  received  ;  and
that  unless  Parliament  speedily  retraced  its  steps,  mul-
titudes of  English  manufacturers  would  be  reduced  to
bankruptcy.  In  Manchester,  Nottingham,  Leeds,  and
many  other  towns,  thousands  of  artisans  had  been  thrown
out  of  employment.  Glasgow  complained  that  the  Stamp
Act  was  threatening  it  with  absolute  ruin,  for  its  trade
was  principally  with  America,  and  not  less  than  half  a
million  of  money  was  due  by  the  colonists  of  Maryland
and  Virginia  alone  to  Glasgow  merchants.1

Parliament  met  on  December  17,  17G5,  and  the  at-
titude of  the  different  parties  was  speedily  disclosed.  A
powerful  Opposition,  led  by  Grenville  and  Bedford,
strenuously  urged  that  no  relaxation  or  indulgence
should  be  granted  to  the  colonists.  In  two  successive
sessions  the  policy  of  taxing  America  had  been  delibe-
rately affirmed,  and  if  Parliament  now  suffered  itself  to
be  defied  or  intimidated  its  authority  would  be  for  ever
at  an  end.  The  method  of  reasoning  by  which  the
Americans  maintained  that  they  could  not  be  taxed  by

1  Parl.  Hist.  xvi.  133-137 ;  Walpole's  Memoirs,  ii.  296  ;  BurJce's
Correspondence,  i.  100.

CH.  XT.  ARGUMENTS  OF  GREXVILLE.  87

a  Parliament  in  which  they  were  not  represented,  might
be  applied  with  equal  plausibility  to  the  Navigation  Act
and  to  every  other  branch  of  imperial  legislation  for  the
colonies,  and  it  led  directly  to  the  disintegration  of  the
Empire.  The  supreme  authority  of  Parliament  chiefly
held  the  different  parts  of  that  Empire  together.  The
right  of  taxation  was  an  essential  part  of  the  sovereign
power.  The  colonial  constitutions  were  created  by  royal
charter,  and  it  could  not  be  admitted  that  the  King,
while  retaining  his  own  sovereignty  over  certain  por-
tions of  his  dominions,  could  by  a  mere  exercise  of  his
prerogative  withdraw  them  wholly  or  in  part  from  the
authority  of  the  British  Parliament.  It  was  the  right
and  the  duty  of  the  Imperial  Legislature  to  determine
in  what  proportions  the  different  parts  of  the  Empire
should  contribute  to  the  defence  of  the  whole,  and  to  see
that  no  one  part  evaded  its  obligations  and  unjustly
transferred  its  share  to  the  others.  The  conduct  of  the
colonies,  in  the  eyes  of  these  politicians,  admitted  of  no
excuse  or  palliation.  The  disputed  right  of  taxation  was
established  by  a  long  series  of  legal  authorities,  and  there
was  no  real  distinction  between  internal  and  external
taxation.  It  now  suited  the  Americans  to  describe
themselves  as  apostles  of  liberty,  and  to  denounce  Eng-
land as  an  oppressor.  It  was  a  simple  truth  that  Eng-
land governed  her  colonies  more  liberally  than  any  other
country  in  the  world.  They  were  the  only  existing
colonies  which  enjoyed  real  political  liberty.  Their  com-
mercial system  was  more  liberal  than  that  of  any  other
colonies.  They  had  attained,  under  British  rule,  to  a
degree  of  prosperity  which  was  surpassed  in  no  quarter
of  the  globe.  England  had  loaded  herself  with  debt  in
order  to  remove  the  one  great  danger  to  their  future  ;
she  cheerfully  bore  the  whole  burden  of  their  protection
by  sea.  At  the  Peace  of  Paris  she  had  made  their  in-
terests the  very  first  object  of  her  policy,  and  she  only

88 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

asked  them  in  return  to  bear  a  portion  of  the  cost  of
their  own  defence.  Somewhat  more  than  eight  millions
of  Englishmen  were  burdened  with  a  national  debt  of
H-0,000,000/.  The  united  debt  of  about  two  millions  of
Americans  was  now  less  than  800, OOO/.  The  annual
sum  the  colonists  were  asked  to  contribute  in  the  form
of  stamp  duties  was  less  than  100, OOO/.,  with  an  express
provision  that  no  part  of  that  sum  should  be  devoted  to
any  other  purpose  than  the  defence  and  protection  of
the  colonies.  And  the  country  which  refused  to  bear
this  small  tax  was  so  rich  that  in  the  space  of  three  years
it  had  paid  off  1,755,000£.  of  its  debt.  No  demand  could
be  more  moderate  and  equitable  than  that  of  England ;
and  amid  all  the  high-sounding  declamations  that  were
waited  across  the  Atlantic,  it  was  not  difficult  to  perceive
that  the  true  motive  of  the  resistance  was  of  the  vulgar-
est  kind.  It  was  a  desire  to  pay  as  little  as  possible  ;
to  throw  as  much  as  possible  upon  the  mother  country.
Nor  was  the  mode  of  resistance  more  respectable —
the  plunder  of  private  houses  and  custom  houses  ;  mob
violence  connived  at  by  all  classes  and  perfectly  un-
punished ;  agreements  of  merchants  to  refuse  to  pay
their  private  debts  in  order  to  attain  political  ends.  If
this  was  the  attitude  of  America  within  two  years  of  the
Peace  of  Paris,  if  these  were  the  first  fruits  of  the  new
sense  of  security  which  British  triumphs  in  Canada  had
given,  could  it  be  doubted  that  concessions  would  only
be  the  prelude  to  new  demands?  Already  the  Custom-
house officers  were  attacked  by  the  mobs  almost  as
fiercely  as  the  stamp  distributors.  Already  Otis,  the
most  popular  advocate  of  the  American  cause,  was  ridi-
culing the  distinction  between  internal  and  external
taxation,  and  denying  that  the  British  Legislature  pos-
eessed  any  rightful  authority  iii  America.  Already  a
highly  seditious  press  had  grown  up  in  the  colonies,  and
to  talk  scarcely  disguised  treason  had  become  the  best

CH.  xi. ARGUMENTS OF  GRENVILLE AND PITT.  89

passport  to  popular  favour.  It  would  be  impossible  for
Parliament,  if  it  now  receded,  to  retain  permanently  any
legislative  authority  over  the  colonies  ;  and  if  this,  too,
were  given  up,  the  unity  of  the  Empire  would  be  but  a
name,  and  America  would  in  reality  contribute  nothing
to  its  strength.  If  ministers  now  repealed  the  Stamp
Act  they  would  be  guilty  of  treachery  to  England.  They
would  abdicate  a  vital  portion  of  the  sovereignty  which
England  rightfully  possessed.  They  would  humiliate
the  British  Parliament  before  the  Empire  and  before  the
world.  They  would  establish  the  fatal  principle  that  it
must  never  again  ask  any  of  the  distant  portions  of  the
Empire  to  contribute  to  the  burden  of  their  own  per-
manent defence.  They  would  establish  the  still  more
fatal  precedent  that  the  best  way  of  inducing  Parliament
to  repeal  an  obnoxious  tax  was  to  refuse  to  pay  it,  and
to  hound  on  mobs  against  those  who  were  entrusted  with
its  collection.

These  were  the  chief  arguments  on  the  side  of  the
late  ministers.  Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  rose  from  his
sick-bed,  and  in  speeches  of  extraordinary  eloquence,
which  produced  an  amazing  effect  on  both  sides  of
the  Atlantic,  he  justified  the  resistance  of  the  colonists.
He  stood  apart  from  all  parties,  and,  while  he  declared
that  '  every  capital  measure  '  of  the  late  ministry  was
wrong,  he  ostentatiously  refused  to  give  his  confidence
to  their  successors.  He  maintained  in  the  strongest
terms  the  doctrine  that  self-taxation  is  the  essential  and
discriminating  circumstance  of  political  freedom.  His
opinion  on  the  great  question  at  issue  cannot  be  better
expressed  than  in  his  own  terse  and  luminous  sentences.
'  It  is  my  opinion,'  he  said,  '  that  this  kingdom  has  no
right  to  lay  a  tax  upon  the  colonies.  At  the  same  time
I  assert  the  authority  of  this  kingdom  over  the  colonies
to  be  sovereign  and  supreme  in  every  circumstance  of
government  and  legislation  whatsoever.  .  .  .  Taxation,

90 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XL

is  no  part  of  the  governing  or  legislative  power.  The
taxes  are  a  voluntary  gift  and  grant  of  the  Commons
alone.  In  legislation  the  three  estates  of  the  realm  are
alike  concerned  ;  but  the  concurrence  of  the  peers  and
the  Crown  to  a  tax  is  only  necessary  to  close  with  the
form  of  a  law.  The  gift  and  grant  is  of  the  Commons
alone.  .  .  .  The  distinction  between  legislation  and
taxation  is  essentially  necessary  to  liberty.  .  .  .  The  Com-
mons of  America,  represented  in  their  several  Assem-
blies, have  ever  been  in  possession  of  the  exercise  of  this,
their  constitutional  right  of  giving  and  granting  their
own  money.  They  would  have  been  slaves  if  they  had
not  enjoyed  it.  At  the  same  time  this  kingdom,  as  the
supreme  governing  and  legislative  power,  has  always
I  ound  the  colonies  ...  in  everything,  except  that  of
taking  their  money  out  of  their  pockets  without  their
consent.'  In  his  reply  to  Grenville  he  reiterated  these
principles  with  still  stronger  emphasis.  '  I  rejoice,'  he
said,  '  that  America  has  resisted.  Three  millions  of
people,  so  dead  to  all  the  feelings  of  liberty  as  volun-
tarily to  submit  to  be  slaves,  would  have  been  n't  instru-
ments to  make  slaves  of  the  rest.  ...  In  such  a  cause
your  success  would  be  hazardous.  America,  if  she  fell,
would  fall  like  the  strong  man  with  his  arms  around  the
pillars  of  the  Constitution.  .  .  .  When  two  countries  are
connected  together  like  England  and  her  colonies  with-
out being  incorporated,  the  one  must  necessarily  govern ;
the  greater  must  rule  the  less,  but  so  rule  it  as  not  to
contradict  the  fundamental  principles  that  are  common
to  both.  If  the  gentleman  does  not  understand  the  dif-
ference between  external  and  internal  taxes,  I  cannot  help
it ;  but  there  is  a  plain  distinction  between  taxes  levied
for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  revenue,  and  duties  imposed
for  the  regulation  of  trade  for  the  accommodation  of  the
subject;  although  ia  the  consequences  some  revenue
might  incidentally  arise  from  the  latter.  .  .  .  I  will  be  bold

<m.  xi.  ARGUMENTS  OF  PITT.  91

to  affirm  that  the  profit  to  Great  Britain  from  the  trade
of  the  colonies  through  all  its  branches  is  two  millions  a
year.  This  is  the  fund  that  carried  you  triumphantly
through  the  last  war.  .  .  .  This  is  the  price  America
pays  for  her  protection.  ...  I  dare  not  say  how  much
higher  these  profits  may  be  augmented.  .  .  .  The
Americans  have  not  acted  in  all  things  with  prudence
and  temper.  They  have  been  driven  to  madness  by
injustice.  Will  you  punish  them  for  the  madness  you
have  occasioned?  Rather  let  prudence  and  temper
come  first  from  this  side.  I  will  undertake  for  America
that  she  will  follow  the  example.  .  .  .  Upon  the  whole
I  will  beg  leave  to  tell  the  House  what  is  really  my
opinion.  It  is  that  the  Stamp  Act  should  be  repealed
absolutely,  totally,  and  immediately ;  that  the  reason  for
the  repeal  should  be  assigned,  because  it  was  founded
on  an  erroneous  principle.  At  the  same  time  let  the
sovereign  authority  of  this  country  over  the  colonies  be
asserted  in  as  strong  terms  as  can  be  devised,  and  be
made  to  extend  to  every  point  of  legislation  whatsoever  ;
that  we  may  bind  their  trade,  confine  their  manufactures,
and  exercise  every  power  whatsoever — except  that  of
taking  their  money  out  of  their  pockets  without  their
consent.' !

These  views  were  defended  in  the  strongest  terms  by
Lord  Camden,  who  pledged  his  great  legal  reputation
to  the  doctrine  that  taxation  is  not  included  under  the
general  right  of  legislation,  and  that  taxation  and  repre-
sentation are  morally  inseparable.  '  This  position,'  he
very  rashly  affirmed,  '  is  founded  on  the  laws  of  nature ;
nay,  more,  it  is  itself  an  eternal  law  of  nature.  For

1  Chatham  Correspondence,  ii.  power  and  influence  which  Mr.

863-372. Rockingham  next  day  Pitt  has  whenever  he  takes  part

wrote  to  the  King :  '  The  events  of  in  c'ebate.' — Albemarle's  Life  of

yesterday  in  the  House  of  Com-  Roikinjham,  i.  270.
Dions  have  shown  the  amazing

92 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt.

whatever  is  a  man's  own  is  absolutely  his  own.  No
man  has  a  right  to  take  it  from  him  without  his  con-
sent, either  expressed  by  himself  or  representative.
Whoever  attempts  to  do  it  attempts  an  injury.  Who-
ever does  it  commits  a  robbery.' l

The  task  of  the  ministers  in  dealing  with  this  ques-
tion was  extremely  difficult.  The  great  majority  of
them  desired  ardently  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act ;
but  the  wishes  of  the  King,  the  abstention  of  Pitt,  and
the  divided  condition  of  parties  had  compelled  Rocking-
ham  to  include  in  his  Government  Charles  Townshend,
Barrington,  and  Northington,  who  were  all  strong  ad-
vocates of  the  taxation  of  America,  and  Northingtoii
took  an  early  opportunity  of  delivering  an  invective
against  the  colonies  which  seemed  specially  intended
to  prolong  the  exasperation.  '  If  they  withdraw  alle-
giance,' he  concluded,  '  you  must  withdraw  protection,
and  then  the  little  State  of  Genoa  or  the  kingdom  of
Sweden  may  soon  overrun  them.'  The  King  himself,
though  he  was  prepared  to  see  the  Stamp  Act  altered
in  some  of  its  provisions,  was  decidedly  hostile  to  the
repeal.  When  the  measure  was  first  contemplated,
two  partisans  of  Bute  came  to  the  King  offering  to
resign  their  places,  as  they  meant  to  oppose  the  repeal,
but  they  were  at  once  told  that  they  might  keep  their
places  and  vote  as  they  pleased.  The  hint  was  taken,
and  the  King's  friends  were  among  the  most  active,
though  not  the  most  conspicuous,  opponents  of  the
ministers.2  And  in  addition  to  all  these  difficulties  the
ministers  had  to  deal  with  the  exasperation  which  was
produced  in  Parliament  by  the  continual  outrages  and
insults  to  which  all  who  represented  the  English  Govern-
ment in  America  were  exposed.

'  Parl.  Hist.  ivi.  178.  ^  862,  365. Albemarle'a  Life  of

2  Grenville  Papers, iii. 353, Eockingham.

CH.  xi.  REPEAL  OF  THE STAMP ACT.  93

Their  policy  consisted  of  two  parts.  They  asserted
in  the  strongest  and  most  unrestricted  form  the  sove-
reignty of  the  British  Legislature,  first  of  all  by  resolu-
tions and  then  by  a  Declaratory  Act  affirming  the  right
of  Parliament  to  make  laws  binding  the  British  colonies
'  in  all  cases  whatsoever,'  and  condemning  as  unlawful
the  votes  of  the  colonial  Assemblies  which  had  denied
to  Parliament  the  right  of  taxing  them.  Side  by  side
with  this  measure  they  brought  in  a  Bill  repealing  the
Stamp  Act.1  It  was  advocated  both  in  its  preamble
and  in  the  speeches  of  its  supporters  on  the  ground  of
simple  expediency.  The  Stamp  Act  had  already  pro-
duced evils  far  outweighing  any  benefits  that  could  flow
from  it.  To  enforce  it  over  a  vast  and  thinly  populated
country,  and  in  the  face  of  the  universal  and  vehement
opposition  of  the  people,  had  proved  hitherto  impossible,
and  would  always  be  difficult,  dangerous,  and  disastrous.
It  might  produce  rebellion.  It  would  certainly  produce
permanent  and  general  disaffection,  great  derangement
of  commercial  relations,  a  smothered  resistance  which
could  only  be  overcome  by  a  costly  and  extensive  system
of  coercion.  It  could  not  be  wise  to  convert  the
Americans  into  a  nation  of  rebels  who  were  only  wait-
ing for  a  European  war  to  throw  off  their  allegiance.
Yet  this  would  be  the  natural  and  almost  inevitable
consequence  of  persisting  in  the  policy  of  Grenville.
The  chief  interests  of  England  in  her  colonies  were
commercial,  and  these  had  been  profoundly  injured  by
the  Stamp  Act.  As  long  as  it  continued,  the  Ameri-
cans were  resolved  to  make  it  their  main  effort  to
abstain  as  much  as  possible  from  English  goods,  and
the  English  commercial  classes  were  unanimous  in
favour  of  the  repeal.  The  right  of  the  country  was
affirmed  and  the  honour  of  Parliament  vindicated  by

6  Geo.  III.  c.  11, 12.

91  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. en.  xi,

the  Declaratory  Act.  It  now  remained  only — if  pos-
sible without  idle  recrimination — to  pursue  the  course
which  was  most  conducive  to  the  interests  of  England.
And  that  course  was  plainly  to  retire  from  a  position
which  had  become  utterly  untenable.

The  debates  on  this  theme  were  among  the  fiercest
and  longest  ever  known  in  Parliament.  The  former
ministers  opposed  the  repeal  at  every  stage,  and  most
of  those  who  were  under  the  direct  influence  of  the
King  plotted  busily  against  it.  Nearly  a  dozen  mem-
bers of  the  King's  household,  nearly  all  the  bishops,
nearly  all  the  Scotch,  nearly  all  the  Tories  voted  against
the  ministry,  and  in  the  very  agony  of  the  contest  Lord
Strange  spread  abroad  the  report  that  he  had  heard
from  the  King's  own  lips  that  the  King  was  opposed  to
the  repeal.  Buckingham  acted  with  great  decision.
He  insisted  on  accompanying  Lord  Strange  into  the
King's  presence,  and  in  obtaining  from  the  King  a
written  paper  stating  that  he  was  in  favour  of  the
repeal  rather  than  the  enforcement  of  the  Act,  though
he  would  have  preferred  its  modification  to  either  course.
The  great  and  manifest  desire  of  the  commercial  classes
throughout  England  had  much  weight ;  the  repeal  was
carried  through  the  House  of  Commons,  brought  up  by
no  less  than  200  members  to  the  Lords,  and  finally
carried  amid  the  strongest  expressions  of  public  joy.
Burke  described  it  as  '  an  event  that  caused  more
universal  joy  throughout  the  British  dominions  than
perhaps  any  other  that  can  be  remembered.' l

Of  these  two  measures  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act
was  that  which  was  most  violently  denounced  at  the
time ;  but  the  Declaratory  Act,  which  passed  almost
unopposed,  is  the  one  which  now  requires  defence.  It

1  Albemarle'a  Life  of  Rock- 314,321.  Annual  Register,  17G6.
ingham,  i.  250,  292,  299-302, Orenville  Papers,  iii.  353-370.

en.  xi.  THE DECLARATORY  ACT.  95

has  been  represented  as  the  source  of  all  the  calamities
that  ensued,  for  as  long  as  the  right  of  Parliament  to
tax  America  was  asserted,  the  liberty  of  the  colonies
was  precarious.  I  have  already  stated  my  opinion  that
no  just  blame  attaches  to  the  ministry  on  this  matter.
It  would  no  doubt  have  been  better  if  the  question  of
the  right  of  taxation  had  never  been  raised,  and  no  one
asserted  this  more  constantly  than  Burke,  who  largely
inspired  the  policy  of  the  Government.  But  the  minis-
ters had  no  alternative.  Parliament  had  already  twice
asserted  its  right  to  tax.  With  the  exception  of  Lord
Camden,  the  first  legal  authorities  in  the  country  unani-
mously maintained  it.  The  Americans  had  openly
denied  it,  and  they  had  aggravated  their  denial  by
treating  an  Act  of  Parliament  and  those  who  were
appointed  to  administer  it  with  the  grossest  outrage.
It  was  quite  impossible  that  Parliament  with  any  regard
to  its  own  dignity  could  acquiesce  tamely  in  these  pro-
ceedings. It  was  quite  impossible  that  a  weak  ministry,
divided  on  this  very  question  and  undermined  by  the
Court,  could  have  carried  the  repeal,  if  it  had  been  un-
accompanied by  an  assertion  of  parliamentary  authority
on  the  matter  that  was  in  dispute.  All  accounts  con-
cur in  showing  that  the  proceedings  of  the  Americans
had  produced  a  violent  and  very  natural  irritation,1  and
e^ery  mail  brought  news  which  was  only  too  well  fitted
to  aggravate  it.  The  judgment  on  this  subject  of  Sir
George  Savile,  who  was  one  of  the  most  sagacious
members  of  the  Buckingham  party,  is  of  great  weight.
In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Americans  he  wrote :  '  You

1  Thus  Shelburne  reported  to  "Walpole  says  :  '  As  the  accounts

Pitt,  December  21,  1765. '  The  from  America grew  every  day

prejudice  against  the  Americans  worse,  the  ministers,  who  at  first

on  the  whole  seemed  very  great,  were  inclined  to  repeal  the  Act,

and  no  very  decided  opinion  in  were  borne  down  by  the  flagrancy

favour  of  the  ministry.' — Cliat-  of  the  provocation.' — Memoirs  of

ham Correspondence, ii. 355.  George  III.  ii.  221.

96  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY". CH.  xi.

should  know  that  the  great  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the
ministers  has  been  unhappily  thrown  in  by  yourselves
— I  mean  the  intemperate  proceedings  of  various  ranks
of  people  on  your  side  the  water — and  that  the  diffi-
culties of  the  repeal  would  have  been  nothing  if  you
had  not  by  your  violence  in  word  and  action  awakened
the  honour  of  Parliament,  and  thereby  involved  every
friend  of  the  repeal  in  the  imputation  of  betraying  the
dignity  of  Parliament.  This  is  so  true  that  the  Act
would  certainly  not  have  been  repealed  if  men's  minds
had  not  been  in  some  measure  satisfied  with  the  Decla-
ration of  Right.' l

Franklin,  in  the  very  remarkable  evidence  which  he
at  this  time  gave  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of
Commons  about  the  political  condition  and  prospects  of
America,  having  been  asked  whether  he  thought  the
Americans  would  be  contented  with  a  repeal  of  the
Stamp  Act  even  if  it  were  accompanied  by  an  assertion
of  the  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  them,  answered,  '  I
think  the  resolutions  of  right  will  give  them  very  little
concern,  if  they  are  never  attempted  to  be  carried  into
practice.' 2  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  judg-
ment was  a  just  one.  All  testimony  concurs  in  showing
that  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  produced,  for  a  time

1  Albemarle'g Life  of  Rock-  1778,  'that  with  respect  to  the

ingham,  i.  305. Charles  Fox,  in  Declaratory  Act,  any  reason  that

a  speech  which  he  made  on  De-  ever  weighed  with  him  in  favour

cember  10,  1777,  fully  corrobo-  of  that  Act  was  to  obtain  the

rated  this  assertion,  and  declared  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act. Many

that  '  it  was  not  the  inclination  people  of  high  principles  would

of  Lord  Eockingham, but the  never,  in  his  opinion,  have  been

necessity  of  his  situation,  which  brought  to  repeal  the  Stamp  Act

was  the  cause  of  the  Declaratory  without  it ;  the  number  of  those

Act.' — Parl.  Hist.  xix.  563. The  who  opposed  that  repeal,  even  as

Duke  of  Richmond,  who  on  all  it  was,  were  very  numerous.' —

American  questions  was  one  of  Chatham Correspondence, iv.

the  most  prominent  members  of  501,  502.
the  Rockingham  party,  said  in  "  Franklin's  Works,  iv.  176.

Cfl.  xi,  COMMERCIAL RELAXATIONS.  97

at  least,  a  complete  pacification  of  America.  As  Adams,
who  was  watching  the  current  of  American  feeling  with
great  keenness,  wrote,  '  The  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act
has  hushed  into  silence  almost  every  popular  clamour,
and  composed  every  wave  of  popular  disorder  into  a
smooth  and  peaceful  calm.'  l

In  addition  to  these  measures,  the  colonial  Go-
vernors were  instructed  to  ask  the  Assemblies  to  com-
pensate those  whose  property  had  been  destroyed  in
the  late  riots.  An  Act  was  carried  indemnifying  those
who  had  violated  the  Stamp  Act,  and  some  considerable
changes  were  made  in  that  commercial  system  which
was  by  far  the  most  real  of  the  grievances  of  America.
It  was  impossible  for  a  Government  which  had  just  won
a  great  victory  for  the  Americans,  by  the  assistance  of
the  commercial  and  manufacturing  classes,  to  touch
either  the  laws  prohibiting  some  of  the  chief  forms  of
manufacture  in  the  colonies  or  the  general  principle  of
colonial  monopoly ;  and  the  favourite  argument  of  the
opponents  of  the  Stamp  Act  was  that  the  trade  advan-
tages arising  from  that  monopoly  were  the  real  contri-
bution of  America  to  the  defence  and  prosperity  of  the
Empire.  Within  these  limits,  however,  much  remained

1  Adams' Diary. Works,  ii.  in  1774  on  the  American  ques-

203. Adams'  biographer says  tion,  speaking  of  the  repeal of

the  colonists  '  received  the  repeal  the  Stamp  Act,  said :  '  I  am  bold

of  the  Stamp  Act  with  transports  to  say, so sudden a  calm,  re-

of  joy,  and  disregarded  the  mere  covered  after  so  violent  a  storm,

empty declaration of a  right  is  without  parallel  in history.'

which  they  flattered  themselves  The  testimony  of  Hutchinson  is

was  never  to  be  exercised. The  equally  decisive.  '  The  Act  which

spirit  of  resistance  immediately  accompanied  it  [the  repeal  of  the

subsided, and a general  tran-  Stamp  Act]  with  the  title  of  "  Se-

quillity  prevailed  until  the  pro-  curing  the  Dependency of the

ject of levying internal  taxes  Colonies,"  caused  no  allay  of  the

upon  the  people  of  the  colonies  joy,  and  was  considered  as  mere

by  Act of  Parliament  was  re-  naked form.' Hist,  of  Massa-

sumed  in  England.' Ibid.  i.  81,  chusetts  Bay,  p.  147.
82. Burke  in  his  great  speech

VOL. IV.  H

98 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  Jil.

to  be  done.  The  restrictions  imposed  upon  the  trade
with  the  French  West  India  islands,  and  especially  upon
the  importation  of  molasses,  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,
the  main  practical  grievance  of  the  commercial  system.
The  prohibition  of  manufactures,  however  unreasonable
and  unjust,  was  of  no  serious  consequence  to  a  country
where  agriculture,  fisheries,  and  commerce  were  natu-
rally the  most  lucrative  forms  of  enterprise;  but  an
abundant  supply  of  molasses  was  essential  to  the  great
distilleries  at  Boston.  The  duty  when  it  was  Is.  a
gallon  had  been  a  mere  dead  letter.  When  Grenville
reduced  it  to  6d.  a  gallon,  the  most  violent  measures
had  still  been  unable  to  suppress  a  great  smuggling
trade,  and  the  duty  only  yielded  2,0001.  a  year.  The
Buckingham  Government  lowered  it  to  Id.,  and  this
small  duty,  being  no  longer  a  grievance,  produced  no
less  than  17,000/.  The  duties  imposed  on  coffee  and
pimento  from  the  British  plantations,  and  on  foreign
cambrics  and  lawns,  imported  into  America,  were  at
the  same  time  lowered ;  and  the  British  West  India
islands,  in  whose  favour  the  colonial  trade  with  the
French  islands  had  been  restricted,  were  compensated  by
the  opening  in  them  of  some  free  ports  and  by  some
other  commercial  favours.1

'  The  Americans,'  said  Chatham  a  few  years  later,
when  describing  this  period,  '  had  almost  forgot,  in  their
excess  of  gratitude  for  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  any
interest  but  that  of  the  mother  country  ;  there  seemed
an  emulation  among  the  different  provinces  who  should
be  most  dutiful  and  forward  in  their  expressions  of
loyalty.' 2  The  Rockingham  Ministry  had  undoubtedly,
under  circumstances  of  very  great  difficulty,  restored
confidence  to  America,  and  concluded  for  the  present  a

1  Macpherson's Annals of *  Thackeray's  Life  of  Clutt-
Commerce,  iii.  446,  447.  ham,  ii.  263.

CH.  KI.  THE FEELING  IN  AMERICA.  99

contest  which  would  probably  have  ended  in  a  war.  In
most  of  the  provincial  Assemblies  and  in  many  public
meetings  of  citizens,  addresses  of  thanks  were  carried
to  the  King,  to  the  Ministry,  to  Pitt,  Carnden,  and
Barre ;  and  in  more  than  one  province  statues  were
raised  to  the  King  and  to  Pitt.  The  shrewd  Phila-
delphian  Quakers  passed  a  characteristic  resolution,
'  that  to  demonstrate  our  zeal  to  Great  Britain,  and  our
gratitude  for  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  each  of  us
will  on  the  4th  of  June  next,  being  the  birthday  of  our
gracious  Sovereign,  dress  ourselves  in  a  new  suit  of  the
manufactures  of  England,  and  give  what  homespun
clothes  we  have  to  the  poor.' l  A  feeling  of  real  and
genuine  loyalty  to  the  mother-country  appears  to  have
at  this  time  existed  in  the  colonies,  though  it  required
much  skill  to  maintain  it.

The  Americans  had  in  truth  won  a  great  victory,
which  inspired  them  with  unbounded  confidence  in  their
strength.  They  had  gone  through  all  the  excitement
of  a  violent  and  brilliantly  successful  political  campaign ;
they  had  realised  for  a  time  the  union  which  appeared
formerly  so  chimerical ;  they  had  found  their  natural
leaders  in  the  struggle,  and  had  discovered  the  weakness
of  the  mother  country.  Many  writers  and  speakers  had
arisen  who  had  learnt  the  lesson  that  a  defiance  of  Eng-
lish authority  was  one  of  the  easiest  and  safest  paths  to
popular  favour,  and  the  speeches  of  Pitt  had  kindled  a
fierce  enthusiasm  of  liberty  through  the  colonies.  There
was  no  want  of  men  who  regretted  that  the  agitation
had  ceased,  who  would  gladly  have  pressed  on  the
struggle  to  new  issues,  and  who  were  ready  to  take  ad-
vantage of  the  first  occasion  for  quarrel.  It  was  not
easy  for  an  ambitious  man  in  these  distant  colonies  to
make  his  name  known  to  the  world  ;  but  if  events  ever

1  Annual  Register,  1766,  p.  114.

B  2

100 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  XL

led  to  a  collision,  a  great  field  of  ambition  would
be  suddenly  opened.  Besides  this,  principles  of  a
far-reaching  and  revolutionary  character  had  become
familiar  to  the  people.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  when
nations  begin  to  scrutinise  too  closely  the  foundations
of  political  authority,  the  possible  results  to  which  poli-
tical principles  may  logically  lead,  the  exact  limits  by
which  the  different  powers  of  a  heterogeneous  and  pre-
scriptive government  must  be  confined.  The  theory  of
English  lawyers  that  a  Parliament  in  which  the  Ameri-
cans were  unrepresented  might  fetter  their  commerce
in  all  its  parts,  and  exact  in  taxation  the  last  shilling
of  their  fortunes,  and  that  their  whole  representative
system  existed  only  by  the  indulgence  of  England,
would,  if  fully  acted  on,  have  reduced  the  colonies  to
absolute  slavery.  On  the  other  hand,  Otis  and  other
agitators  were  vehemently  urging  that  the  principles  of
Chatham  and  Camden  would  authorise  the  Americans
to  repudiate  all  parliamentary  restrictions  on  American
trade.  No  objection  seems  indeed  to  have  been  felt  to
the  bounties  which  England  conferred  upon  it,  or  to  the
protection  of  their  coasts  by  English  vessels  ;  but  in  all
other  respects  parliamentary  interference  was  profoundly
disliked.  Lawyers  had  assumed  during  the  late  troubles
a  great  prominence  in  colonial  politics,  and  a  litigious,
captious,  and  defining  spirit  was  abroad.

It  was  noticed  that  in  the  addresses  to  the  King
and  to  the  Government  thanking  them  for  the  repeal  of
the  Stamp  Act,  as  little  as  possible  was  said  about  the
supremacy  of  Parliament,  and  in  the  most  exuberant
moments  of  colonial  gratitude  there  were  no  signs  of
any  disposition,  in  any  province,  to  undertake,  under
proper  guarantees  and  limitation,  the  task  of  supporting
English  troops  stationed  in  America.  Had  the  colonies
after  the  Peace  of  Paris  been  willing  to  contribute  this
small  service  to  the  support  of  the  Empire,  the  constitu-

CH XT.  GOVERNOR BERNARD.  101

tional  question  might  never  have  been  raised  ;  had  they
now  offered  to  do  so,  it  would  probably  never  have  been
revived.  The  requisitions  to  the  colonial  Assemblies  to
compensate  the  sufferers  in  the  late  riots  were  very  un-
popular. In  one  or  two  provinces  the  money  was,  it  is
true,  frankly  and  promptly  voted ;  but  in  most  cases
there  was  much  delay.  Massachusetts,  where  the  most
scandalous  riots  took  place,  rebelled  violently  against
the  too  peremptory  terms  of  the  requisition ;  refused  at
first  to  pass  any  vote  of  compensation  ;  yielded  at  last,
after  a  long  delay,  and  by  a  small  majority,  but  accom-
panied its  grant  by  a  clause  indemnifying  the  rioters,
which  was  afterwards  annulled  by  the  King.

Bernard,  who  since  the  beginning  of  1760  had  been
Governor  of  Massachusetts,  had  of  late  become  extremely
unpopular,  and  his  name  has  been  pursued  with  untiring
virulence  to  the  present  day.  His  letters  are  those  of  an
honest  and  rather  able,  but  injudicious  and  disputatious
man,  who  was  trying,  under  circumstances  of  extreme
difficulty,  to  do  his  duty  both  to  the  Government  and
the  people,  but  who  was  profoundly  discontented  with
the  constitution  of  the  province.  In  1763  and  1764  he
exerted  all  his  influence  to  procure  the  lowering  or  the
abolition  of  the  duties  in  the  Sugar  Act,  and  in  general
a  larger  amount  of  free  trade  for  the  colonies.  In
1765  he  opposed  the  Stamp  Act  as  inexpedient,
though  he  maintained  that  Parliament  had  the  right  of
taxing  the  colonies,  provided  those  taxes  were  exclu-
sively applied  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  paid  them.
Up  to  this  time  he  appears  to  have  been  generally  liked
and  esteemed  ;  *  but  he  was  now  called  upon  to  take
the  most  prominent  part  in  maintaining  the  policy  of
the  English  Government,  and  his  letters  give  a  vivid
picture  of  the  difficulties  he  encountered.  He  describes

1  See  Hutchineon,  p.  254.

102 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

himself  as  placed  '  in  the  midst  of  those  who  first  stirred
up  these  disturbances,  without  a  force  to  protect  my
person,  without  a  council  to  advise  me,  watched  by  every
eye,  and  misrepresented  or  condemned  for  everything  I
do  on  the  King's  behalf.'  He  laments  that  the  govern-
ments of  the  colonies  '  were  weak  and  impotent  to  an
amazing  degree,'  that  '  the  governors  and  officers  of  the
Crown  were  in  several  of  the  chief  provinces  entirely
dependent  upon  the  people  for  subsistence,'  that  '  the
persons  of  the  governors  and  Crown  officers  are  quite
defenceless  and  exposed  to  the  violence  of  the  people,
without  any  possible  resort  for  protection,'  and  he  con-
tinually urged  that  as  long  as  the  Council,  which  was
the  natural  support  of  the  Executive,  was  elected
annually  by  the  Assembly,  and  as  long  as  almost  all
the  civil  officers  were  mainly  dependent  for  their  salaries
on  an  annual  vote  of  the  Assembly,  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  enforce  in  Massachusetts  any  unpopular  law  or
to  punish  any  outrage  which  was  supported  by  popular
favour.  It  was  his  leading  doctrine  that  if  British  rule
was  to  be  perpetuated  in  America,  and  if  a  period  of
complete  anarchy  was  to  be  averted,  it  was  necessary  to
put  an  end  to  the  obscurity  which  rested  upon  the  rela-
tions of  the  colonies  to  the  Home  Government ;  to
establish  finally  and  decisively  the  legislative  ascendency
of  the  British  Parliament,  and  to  remodel  the  constitu-
tions of  the  colonies  on  a  uniform  type.  He  proposed
that  the  Assemblies  should,  as  at  present,  remain  com-
pletely representative  ;  but  that  the  democratic  element
in  the  Constitution  should  be  always  balanced  by  a
council  consisting  of  a  kind  of  life  peers,  appointed
directly  by  the  King,  and  that  there  should  be  a  fixed
civil  list  from  which  the  King's  officers  should  derive  a
certain  provision.  As  such  changes  were  wholly  in-
compatible with  the  charters  of  the  more  democratic
colonies,  he  proposed  that  American  representatives

CH.  xi.  GOVERNOR BERNARD.  103

should  be  temporarily  summoned  to  the  British  Parlia-
ment, and  that  Parliament  should  then  authoritatively
settle  the  colonial  system.1

These  views  were  of  course  at  first  only  communi-
cated confidentially  to  the  Government,  but  in  the  open
acts  of  Bernard  there  was  much  that  was  offensive  to
the  people.  His  addresses  were  often  very  injudicious;
h'3  had  a  bad  habit  of  entering  into  elaborate  arguments
with  the  Assembly,  and  he  was  accused  of  straining  the
small  amount  of  prerogative  which  he  possessed.  The
Assembly,  shortly  after  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,
showed  its  gratitude  by  electing  Otis,  the  most  violent
assailant  of  the  whole  legislative  authority  of  England,
as  its  Speaker,  and  Bernard  negatived  the  choice.  The
Assembly,  contrary  to  immemorial  usage,  refused  to
elect  Hutchinson,  the  Lieutenant-Go vernor,  Oliver,  the
Secretary  of  the  Province,  and  the  other  chief  officers  of
the  Crown,  members  of  the  Council.  Bernard  remon-
strated strongly  against  the  exclusion  ;  he  himself
negatived  six  '  friends  of  the  people '  who  had  been
elected,  and  he  countenanced  a  claim  of  Hutchinson  to
take  his  seat  in  his  capacity  of  Lieutenant-Governor
among  the  councillors.  The  relations  between  the
Executive  and  the  Assembly  were  thus  extremely  tense,
while  the  inhabitants  of  Boston  were  very  naturally  and
very  pardonably  intoxicated  with  the  triumph  they  had
obtained.  The  little  town,  which  was  probably  hardly
known  even  by  name  in  Europe  outside  commercial
circles,  had  bearded  the  Government  of  England,  and
it  was  deeply  sensible  of  the  heroism  it  had  displayed.
The  rioters  were  never  punished,  but  were,  on  the  con-
trary, the  objects  of  general  sympathy,  and  the  '  sons  of
liberty'  resolved  to  meet  annually  to  commemorate

1  He  proposed  that  thirty  re- fifteen  from  the  islands.— Letters
preservatives  should  be  sent  from of  George  Bernard,  p.  34.
the continental colonies, and

104 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CK.  XT.

their  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act,  and  to  express  their
admiration  for  one  another.  Attempts  to  enforce  the
revenue  Acts  were  continually  resisted.  It  was  ob-
served that  the  phrase,  '  No  representation,  no  taxa-
tion ! '  which  had  been  the  popular  watch-cry,  was  be-
ginning to  be  replaced  by  the  phrase,  '  No  representa-
tion, no  legislation ! '  and  many  '  patriots '  whose  names
are  emblazoned  in  American  history,  with  unbounded
applause  and  with  the  most  perfect  security  were  hurl-
ing highly  rhetorical  defiances  at  the  British  Govern-
ment.

The  clause  in  the  Mutiny  Act  requiring  the  colonists
to  supply  English  troops  with  some  of  the  first  necessa-
ries of  life,  was  another  grievance.  Boston,  as  usual,
disputed  it  at  every  point  with  the  Governor ;  and  New
York  positively  refused  to  obey.  In  a  very  able  book
called  '  The  Farmer's  Letters,'  written  by  a  lawyer
named  Dickinson,  which  appeared  about  this  time,  it
was  maintained  that  if  the  British  Legislature  has  the
right  of  ordering  the  colonies  to  provide  a  single  article
for  British  troops,  it  has  a  right  to  tax :  '  An  Act  of
Parliament  commanding  to  do  a  certain  thing,  if  it  has
any  validity,  is  a  tax  upon  us  for  the  expense  that
accrues  in  complying  with  it.'

It  is  evident  that  great  wisdom,  moderation,  and
tact  were  needed  if  healthy  relations  were  to  be  estab-
lished between  England  and  her  colonies,  and  unfortu-
nately these  qualities  were  conspicuously  absent  from
English  councils.  The  downfall  of  the  Rockingham
Ministry,  and  the  formation  of  a  ministry  of  which
Grafton  was  the  nominal  and  Pitt  the  real  head,  seemed
on  the  whole  a  favourable  event.  The  influence  and
popularity  of  Pitt  were  even  greater  in  America  than
in  England.  His  acceptance  of  the  title  of  Earl  of
Chatham,  which  injured  him  so  deeply  in  English
opinion,  was  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  colonists ;

CH.  ii.  GROWING DIFFICULTIES  IN ENGLAND.  105

and  he  possessed  far  beyond  all  other  English  states-
men the  power  of  attracting  or  conciliating  great  bodies
of  men,  and  firing  them  with  the  enthusiasm  of  loyalty
or  patriotism.  Camden,  who  next  to  Chatham  was
the  chief  English  advocate  of  the  colonial  cause,  was
Chancellor.  Conway,  who  moved  the  repeal  of  the
Stamp  Act,  was  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State  ;  and
Shelburne,  who  at  the  age  of  twenty-nine  was  placed
over  American  affairs,  had  on  the  question  of  taxing
America  been  on  the  side  of  Chatham  and  Camden.
Illness,  however,  speedily  withdrew  Chatham  from
public  affairs,  and  in  the  scene  of  anarchy  which  ensued
it  was  left  for  the  strongest  man  to  seize  the  helm.
Unfortunately,  in  the  absence  of  Chatham,  that  man
was  unquestionably  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,
Charles  Townshend.

From  this  time  the  English  government  of  America
is  little  more  than  a  series  of  deplorable  blunders.  A
feeling  of  great  irritation  against  the  colonies  had  begun
to  prevail  in  English  political  circles.  The  Court  party
continually  repeated  that  England  had  been  humiliated
by  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.1  Grenville  maintained
that  if  that  Act  had  been  enforced  with  common  firm-
ness, the  stamp  duties  in  America  would  soon  have
been  collected  with  as  little  difficulty  as  the  land  tax  in
England ;  and  he  pointed  to  the  recent  news  as  a  con-
clusive proof  that  the  policy  of  conciliation  had  failed  ;
and  that  through  the  vacillation  or  encouragement  of
English  statesmen,  the  spirit  of  rebellion  and  of  anarchy
was  steadily  growing  beyond  the  Atlantic.  There  was
a  general  feeling  that  it  was  perfectly  equitable  that
America  should  support  an  army  for  her  own  defence,

1  '  The  whole  body  of  courtiers  humiliated  state  until  something

drove  him  [Charles  Townshend]  of  the  kind  should  be  done.'—

onwards. They  always  talked  as  Burke's Speech on American

if the  King  stood  in  a sort  of  Taxation  (1774).

10() ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  or.  xx.

and  for  that  of  the  neighbouring  islands ;  and  also,  that
this  had  become  a  matter  of  vital  and  pressing  import-
ance to  the  British  Empire.  The  political  correspond-
ence of  the  time  teems  with  intimations  of  the  in-
cessant activity  with  which  France  and  Spain  were
intriguing  to  regain  the  position  they  had  lost  in  the
late  war.  The  dispute  about  the  Manilla  ransom  and
the  annexation  of  Corsica  were  the  most  conspicuous,
but  they  were  not  the  most  significant,  signs  of  the
attitude  of  those  Powers.  Plans  for  the  invasion  of
England  had  been  carefully  elaborated.  French  spies
had  surveyed  the  English  coast.  In  1764  and  1765  an
agent  of  Choiseul  had  minutely  studied  the  American
colonies,  and  had  reported  to  his  master  that  the
English  troops  were  so  few  and  scattered  that  they
could  be  of  no  real  service,  and  that  democratic  and
provincial  jealousy  had  prevented  the  erection  of  a
single  citadel  in  all  New  England.1  The  King  fully
agreed  with  his  wisest  ministers  that  the  army  was
wholly  insufficient  to  protect  the  Empire,  and  the
scheme  of  Chatham  for  averting  the  rapidly  growing
dangers  from  France  by  a  new  alliance  with  Prussia
had  signally  failed.  England  was  beginning  to  learn
the  lesson  that  in  the  crisis  of  her  fate  she  could  rely
on  herself  alone,  and  that  in  political  life  gratitude  is
of  all  ties  the  frailest  and  the  most  precarious.  At  the
same  time,  the  country  gentlemen  who  remembered  the
days  of  Walpole,  when  England  was  more  prosperous
though  less  great,  murmured  at  the  heavy  land  tax  in
time  of  peace,  and  had  begun  to  complain  bitterly  that
the  whole  expense  of  the  defence  of  wealthy  colonies
«?as  thrown  on  them.  The  factious  vote,  in  which  the
partisans  of  Grenville  and  most  of  the  partisans  of
Rockingham,  with  the  notable  exception  of  Burke,  con-

'•  Bancroft,  iii.  28. Fitzmaurice's  Life  of  Shelburne,  ii.  3-5.

en.  XT.  TOWNSHEND'S  DECLARATION.  107

curred,  which  reduced  the  land  tax  proposed  by  the
Government  from  4s.  to  3s.  in  the  pound,  made  ifc
necessary  to  seek  some  other  source  of  revenue.1  Shel-
burne  himself  fully  adopted  the  view  that  America
should  support  her  own  army,  and  he  imagined  that  if
it  were  reduced  to  the  smallest  proportions  the  required
sum  might  be  gradually  raised  by  enforcing  strictly  the
quit  rents  of  the  Crown,  which  appear  to  have  fallen
into  very  general  neglect,  and  by  turning  the  grants  of
land  to  real  benefit.2  Townshend,  however,  had  other
schemes,  and  he  lost  little  time  in  forcing  them  upon
Parliament.

On  January  26,  1767,  in  a  debate  on  the  army,
George  Grenville  moved  that  America,  like  Ireland,
should  support  an  establishment  of  her  own ;  and  in
the  course  of  the  discussion  which  followed,  Townshend
took  occasion  to  declare  himself  a  firm  advocate  of  the
principle  of  the  Stamp  Act.  He  described  the  distinc-
tion between  external  and  internal  taxes  as  ridiculous,
in  the  opinion  of  every  one  except  the  Americans ;  and
he  pledged  himself  to  find  a  revenue  in  America  nearly
sufficient  for  the  purposes  that  were  required.3  His
colleagues  listened  in  blank  astonishment  to  a  pledge
which  was  perfectly  unauthorised  by  the  Cabinet,  and
indeed  contrary  to  the  known  decision  of  all  its  mem-

1  See  vol.  iii.  p.  301.  burne,  ii.  35.

2  '  The  forming  of  an  American  3  There  are t\vo  accounts ot
fund  to  support the  exigencies  this  speech  :  the  first  in  a  letter
of  government  in  the  same  man-  from  Lord  Charlemont  to  Flood
ner  as  is  done  in  Ireland,  is  what  (Jan.  29),  Chatham  Correspond-
is  so  highly  reasonable that  it  ence,  iii.  178,  179  ;  the  other  in
must  take  place  sooner  or  later.  a  letter  from  Shelburne  to  Chat-
The  most  obvious  manner  of  lay-  ham  (Feb.  1),  Ibid.  iii.  182-188.
ing  a  foundation  for  such  a  fund  See,  too,  Grenville  Papers,  iv.
seems  to  be  by  taking  proper  care  211,  222,  and  the  extracts  from
of  the  quit  lands,  and  by  turning  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  Memoirs
the  grants  of  land  to  real  benefit.'  in  Lord  Stanhope's  History,  v.
— Fitzmaurice's  Life of Shel-  App.  xvii.  xviii.

108 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XT.

bers ;  but,  as  the  Duke  of  Grafton  afterwards  wrote,  no
one  in  the  ministry  had  sufficient  authority  in  the
absence  of  Chatham  to  advise  the  dismissal  of  Towns-
hend,  and  this  measure  alone  could  have  arrested  his
policy.  Shelburne,  who  was  the  official  chief  of  the
colonies,  wrote  to  Chatham,  who  was  then  an  almost
helpless  invalid,  relating  the  circumstances  and  express-
ing his  complete  ignorance  of  the  intentions  of  his  col-
league. The  news  had  just  arrived  that  New  York  had
openly  repudiated  an  Act  of  Parliament  by  refusing  to
furnish  troops  with  the  firt>t  necessaries  of  life ;  and  it
produced  an  indignation  in  Parliament  which  Chatham
himself  appears  fully  to  have  shared.  'America,'  he
wrote  confidentially  to  Shelburne,  '  affords  a  gloomy
prospect.  A  spirit  of  infatuation  has  taken  possession
of  New  York.  Their  disobedience  to  the  Mutiny  Act
will  justly  create  a  great  ferment  here,  open  a  fair  field
to  the  arraigners  of  America,  and  leave  no  room  to  any
to  say  a  word  in  their  defence.  I  foresee  confusion  will
ensue.  The  petition  of  the  merchants  of  New  York  is
highly  improper  ;  .  .  .  .  they  are  doing  the  work  of
their  worst  enemies  themselves.  The  torrent  of  in-
dignation in  Parliament  will,  I  apprehend,  become
irresistible.' l  In  a  letter  written  a  few  days  later  he
says,  '  The  advices  from  America  afford  unpleasing
views.  New  York  has  drunk  the  deepest  of  the  baneful
cup  of  infatuation,  but  none  seem  to  be  quite  sober  and
in  full  possession  of  reason.  It  is  a  literal  truth  to  say
that  the  Stamp  Act  of  most  unhappy  memory  has
frightened  those  irritable  and  umbrageous  people  quite
out  of  their  senses.' 2  Letters  from  colonial  governors
painted  the  state  of  feeling  in  the  darkest  colours.  At
every  election,  in  the  bestowal  of  every  kind  of  popular
favour,  to  have  opposed  parliamentary  authority  in

1  ChatJuim  Correspondence,  iii.  188,  189. *  Ibid.  p.  193.

CH.  xi.  REPORTS FROM AMERICA.  109

America  was  now  the  first  title  to  success;  to  have
supported  it,  the  most  fatal  of  disqualifications.  The
pulpit,  the  press,  the  lawyers,  the  '  sons  of  liberty ' —
all  those  classes  who  subsist  or  flourish  by  popularity —
were  busy  in  inflaming  the  jealousy  against  England,
and  in  extending  the  field  of  conflict.  There  was  a
general  concurrence  of  opinion  among  American  officials
that,  even  apart  from  the  necessity  of  providing  for  the
defence  of  the  colonies,  it  was  indispensable,  if  any  Act
of  Parliament  was  henceforth  to  be  obeyed,  that  a  small
army  should  be  permanently  established  in  America,
and  that  the  Executive  should  be  strengthened  by
making  at  least  the  governor,  who  represented  the
English  Crown,  and  the  judges,  who  represented  English
law,  independent  of  the  favour  of  the  Assemblies.  It
is  remarkable  that  among  the  officials  who  advocated
these  views  was  the  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  had
been  appointed  Crown  Governor  of  New  Jersey.  It  was
urged,  too,  that  the  more  democratic  constitutions
among  the  colonies  must  be  remodelled  ;  that,  while  the
Assembly  should  always  be  the  legitimate  and  un-
fettered representative  of  the  people,  the  Council  must
always  be  chosen  by  the  Governor.

Very  strong  arguments  might  be  urged  in  favour  of
these  changes  ;  but  there  was  one  still  stronger  against
them — that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  effect  them.
On  May  13,  1767,  however,  when  Chatham  was  com-
pletely incapacitated,  and  when  all  other  statesmen  had
sunk  before  the  ascendency  of  Townshend,  the  Chancellor
of  the  Exchequer  brought  in  his  measure.  With  that
brilliancy  of  eloquence  which  never  failed  to  charm  the
House,  he  dilated  upon  the  spirit  of  insubordination
that  was  growing  up  in  all  the  colonies,  upon  the  open
defiance  of  an  Act  of  Parliament  by  New  York,  and
upon  the  absolute  necessity  of  asserting  with  dignity
and  decision  the  legal  ascendency  of  Parliament.  The

110 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  si.

measures  which  he  ultimately  brought  forward  and
carried  were  of  three  kinds :  By  one  Act  of  Parliament
the  legislative  functions  of  the  New  York  Assembly
were  suspended,  and  the  Governor  was  forbidden  to  give
his  sanction  to  any  local  law  in  that  province  till  the
terms  of  the  Mutiny  Act  had  been  complied  with.1  By
another  Act  a  Board  of  Commissioners  of  the  Customs
with  large  powers  was  established  in  America  for  the
purpose  of  superintending  the  execution  of  the  laws
relating  to  trade.2  By  a  third  Act  the  proposal  of
taxing  America  was  resumed.  Townshend  explained
that  the  distinction  between  internal  and  external
taxation  was  in  his  eyes  entirely  worthless ;  but  in  the
discussions  on  the  Stamp  Act  the  Americans  had  taken
their  stand  upon  it.  They  had  represented  it  as  tran-
scendently  important,  and  had  professed  to  be  quite
willing  that  Parliament  should  regulate  their  trade  by
duties,  provided  it  raised  no  internal  revenue.  This
distinction  Townshend  said  he  would  observe.  He  would
raise  a  revenue,  but  he  would  do  so  only  by  a  port  duty
imposed  upon  glass,  red  and  white  lead,  painters'
colours,  paper,  and  tea,  imported  into  the  colonies.  The
charge  on  the  last-named  article  was  to  be  3d.  in  the
pound.  The  whole  annual  revenue  expected  from  these
duties  amounted  to  less  than40,OOOL,3  and  it  was  to  be
employed  in  giving  a  civil  list  to  the  Crown.  Out  of
that  civil  list,  salaries  were  to  be  paid  to  the  governors
and  judges  in  America ;  and  in  the  very  improbable
event  of  there  being  any  surplus,  it  was  to  go  towards
defraying  the  expense  of  protecting  the  colonies.  In
order  to  assist  in  the  enforcement  of  the  law,  writs  of
assistance  were  formally  legalised.  Coffee  and  cocoa
exported  from  England  to  the  colonies  were  at  the  same

1  7  Geo.  III.  c.  59.  *  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George

*  Ibid.  o.  41.  III.  iii.  28.

CH.  xi.  REVIEW OF  THE  CONTROVERSY.  Ill

time  freed  from  the  duty  which  they  had  previously  paid
on-  importation  into  England.  Tea  exported  to  the
colonies  obtained  a  similar  indulgence  for  five  years,
but  the  drawback  on  the  export  of  china  earthenware  to
America  was  withdrawn.1

It  is  a  strange  instance  of  the  fallibility  of  political
foresight  if  Townshend  imagined  that  America  would
acquiesce  in  these  measures,  that  England  possessed
any  adequate  means  of  enforcing  them,  or  that  she  could
a  second  time  recede  from  her  demands  and  yet  maintain
her  authority  over  the  colonies.  It  is  mournful  to
notice  how  the  field  of  controversy  had  widened  and
deepened,  and  how  a  quarrel  which  might  at  one  time
have  been  appeased  by  slight  mutual  concessions  was
leading  inevitably  to  the  disruption  of  the  Empire.
England  was  originally  quite  right  in  her  contention
that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  colonies  to  contribute  some-
tiling  to  the  support  of  the  army  which  defended  the
unity  of  the  Empire.  She  was  quite  right  in  her  belief
that  in  some  of  the  colonial  constitutions  the  Executive
was  far  too  feeble,  that  the  line  which  divides  liberty
from  anarchy  was  often  passed,  and  that  the  result  was
profoundly  and  permanently  injurious  to  the  American
character.  She  was  also,  I  think,  quite  right  in  ascrib-
ing a  great  part  of  the  resistance  of  America  to  the
disposition,  so  common  and  so  natural  in  dependencies,
to  shrink  as  much  as  possible  from  any  expense  that
could  possibly  be  thrown  on  the  mother  country,  and  in
forming  a  very  low  estimate  of  the  character  and  motives
of  a  large  proportion  of  those  ambitious  lawyers,  news-
paper writers,  preachers,  and  pamphleteers  who,  in  New
England  at  least,  were  labouring  with  untiring  assiduity
to  win  popular  applause  by  sowing  dissension  between
England  and  her  colonies.  But  the  Americans  were

1  7  Geo.  III.  c.  4C,  56.

112

ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XT.

only  too  well  justified  in  asserting  that  the  suppression
of  several  of  their  industries  and  the  monopoly  by
England  of  some  of  the  chief  branches  of  their  trade,  if
they  did  not  benefit  the  mother  country,  at  least  im-
posed sacrifices  on  her  colonies  fully  equivalent  to  a
considerable  tax.1  They  were  also  quite  justified  in
contending  that  the  power  of  taxation  was  essential  to
the  importance  of  their  Assemblies,  and  that  an  extreme
jealousy  of  any  encroachment  on  this  prerogative  was
in  perfect  accordance  with  the  traditions  of  English
liberty.  They  had  before  their  eyes  the  hereditary
revenue,  the  scandalous  pension  list,  the  monstrous
abuses  of  patronage,  in  Ireland,  and  they  were  quite
resolved  not  to  suffer  similar  abuses  in  America.2  The
judges  only  held  their  seats  during  the  royal  pleasure.
Ministerial  patronage  in  the  colonies,  as  elsewhere,  was
often  grossly  corrupt,3  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  colonists

1  See  the  '  Cause  of  American
Discontents  before  1768.'  —
Franklin's  Works,  iv.  250,  251.

*  See  a  powerful  statement  of
the  abuses  in Ireland in the
Farmer's  Letters,  No.  10.

*  In  a  private  letter  written  by
General Huske, a prominent
American  who was  residing  in
England  in 1758, there  is an
extraordinary,  though  probably
somewhat  overcharged,  account
of English appointments in
America. '  For  many  years  past
....  most  of  the  places  in  the
gift  of  the  Crown  have  been  filled
with  broken  Members  of  Parlia-
ment, of  bad  if  any  principles,
pimps,  valets  de  chambre,  elec-
tioneering scoundrels,  and  even
livery servants. In one  word,
America  has  been  for  many  years
made the hospital of Great
Britain  for  her  decayed  courtiers,

and  abandoned,  worn-out  de-
pendents. I  can  point  you  out  a
chief  justice  of  a  province  ap-
pointed from  home  for  no  other
reason  than  publicly  prostituting
his  honour  and  conscience  at  an
election ;  a  livery  servant  that
is  secretary  of  a  province,  ap-
pointed from  hence ;  a  pimp,
collector  of  a  whole  province,  who
got  this  place  of  the  man  in
power  for  prostituting  his  hand-
some wife  to  his  embraces  and
procuring  him  other  means  of
gratifying  his  lust.  Innumerable
are  instances  of  this  sort  in
places  of  great  trust.' — Philli-
more's  Life  of  Lyttelton,  ii.  604.
In  Parliament  Captain  Phipps,
speaking  of  America,  said,  '  In-
dividuals have  been  taken  from
the  gaols  to  preside  in  the  seat
of  justice;  offices  have  been
given  to  men  who  had  never  seen

CH.  xi. RECEPTION  OF  TOWNSHEND*S  LAW  IN  AMERICA. 113

the  annual  grant  was  the  one  efficient  control  upon
maladministration.

A  period  of  wild  and  feverish  confusion  followed.
Counsels  of  the  most  violent  kind  were  freely  circu-
lated, and  for  a  time  it  seemed  as  if  the  appointment
of  the  new  Board  of  Commissioners  would  be  resisted
by  force  ;  but  Otis  and  some  of  the  other  popular
leaders  held  back  from  the  conflict,  and  in  several  colo-
nies a  clear  sense  of  the  serious  nature  of  the  struggle
that  was  impending  exercised  a  sobering  influence.
Georgia,  which  had  been  inclined  to  follow  the  exam-
ple of  New  York,  was  brought  to  reason  by  the  pros-
pect of  being  left  without  the  protection  of  English
troops  in  the  midst  of  the  negroes  and  the  Indians.1
The  central  and  southern  colonies  hesitated  for  some
time  to  follow  the  lead  of  New  England.  Hutchinson
wrote  to  the  Government  at  home  that  Boston  would
probably  find  no  other  town  to  follow  her  in  her  career
of  violence ;  and  De  Kalb,  the  secret  agent  of  Choiseul,
who  was  busily  employed  in  fomenting  rebellion  in  the
colonies,  appears  for  a  time  to  have  thought  it  would
all  end  in  words,  and  that  England,  by  keeping  her
taxes  within  very  moderate  limits,  would  maintain  her
authority.2  Massachusetts,  however,  had  thrown  herself
with  fierce  energy  into  the  conflict,  and  she  soon  carried
the  other  provinces  in  her  wake.  Non-importation
agreements  binding  all  the  inhabitants  to  abstain  from
English  manufactures,  and  especially  from  every  article
on  which  duties  were  levied  in  England,  spread  from
colony  to  colony,  and  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts
issued  a  circular  addressed  to  all  the  other  colonial
Assemblies  denouncing  the  new  laws  as  unconstitu-
tional, and  inviting  the  different  Assemblies  to  take

America.' —  Cavendish  Debates, '  Hildreth,  ii.  540.
i.  91.  2  Bancroft,  iii.  116,  140.

VOL. IV.  I

1U

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

united  measures  for  their  repeal.  The  Assembly  at  the
same  time  drew  up  a  petition  to  the  King  and  ad-
dresses to  the  leading  English  supporters  of  the  Ame-
rican cause.1  These  addresses,  which  were  intended  to
act  upon  English  opinion,  were  composed  with  great
ability  and  moderation  ;  and  while  expressing  the  firm
resolution  of  the  Americans  to  resist  every  attempt  at  par-
liamentary taxation,  they  acknowledged  fully  the  general
legislative  authority  of  Parliament,  and  disclaimed  in
the  strongest  language  any  wish  for  independence.

In  America  the  language  commonly  used  was  less
decorous.  One  of  the  Boston  newspapers  dilated  furi-
ously upon  the  '  obstinate  malice,  diabolical  thirst  for
mischief,  effrontery,  guileful  treachery,  and  wickedness '
of  the  Governor  2  in  such  terms  that  the  paper  was
brought  before  the  Assembly,  but  that  body  would  take
no  notice  of  it,  and  the  grand  jury  refused  to  find  a
true  bill  against  its  publisher.  The  Commissioners  of
the  revenue  found  that  it  was  idle  to  attempt  to  en-
force the  Revenue  Acts  without  the  presence  of  British
troops.  Riots  were  absolutely  unpunished,  for  no  jury

1  In  their  petition  to  the  King
they  say,  'With  great  sincerity
permit  us  to  assure  your  Majesty
that  your  subjects  of  this  pro-
vince ever  have,  and  still  con-
tinue to  acknowledge  your  Ma-
jesty's High  Court  of  Parliament,
the  supreme  legislative  power  of
the  whole  Empire,  the  superin-
tending authority  of  which  is
clearly  admitted  in  all  cases  that
can  consist  with  the  fundamental
rights  of  nature  and  the  Consti-
tution.' 'Your  Lordship,'  they
wrote  to  Shelburne,  '  is  too  can-
did and  just  in  your  sentiments
to  suppose  that  the  House  have
tin!  most  distant  thought  of  in-

dependency of  Great  Britain.'
'  So  sensible  are  the  members  of
this  House,'  they  wrote  to  Bock-
ingham,  '  of  their  happiness  and
safety  in  their  union  with  and
dependence  upon  the  mother-
country,  that  they  would  by  no
means  be  inclined  to  accept  of  an
independency  if  offered  to  them.'
The  true  Sentiments  of  Ame-
rica, as  contained  in  a  Collection
of  Letters  sent  from  the  Rouse
of  Representatives  of  Massa-
chusetts Bay  to  several  Persona
of  High  Rank  in  this  Kingdom.
London, 1768.

2  Bancroft. Hutchinson.

CH «.  DEATH OF  TOWXSDEND.  115

would  convict  the  rioters.  Bernard  wrote  that  his
position  was  one  of  utter  and  humiliating  impotence,
and  that  the  first  condition  of  the  maintenance  of  Eng-
lish authority  iii  Massachusetts  was  to  quarter  a  power-
ful military  force  at  Boston.

While  these  things  were  happening  in  America,  the
composition  of  the  Ministry  at  home  was  rapidly  chang-
ing. On  September  4, 17G7,  after  a  short  fever,  Charles
Townshend  died,  leaving  to  his  successors  the  legacy  of
his  disastrous  policy  in  America,  but  having  achieved
absolutely  nothing  to  justify  the  extraordinary  reputa-
tion he  possessed  among  his  contemporaries.  Nothing
of  the  smallest  value  remains  of  an  eloquence  which
some  of  the  best  judges  placed  above  that  of  Burke  and
only  second  to  that  of  Chatham,1  and  the  two  or  three
pamphlets  which  are  ascribed  to  his  pen  hardly  surpass
the  average  of  the  political  literature  of  the  time.  Exu-
berant animal  spirits,  a  brilliant  and  ever  ready  wit,
boundless  facility  of  repartee,  a  clear,  rapid,  and  spon-
taneous eloquence,  a  gift  of  mimicry  which  is  said  to
have  been  not  inferior  to  that  of  Garrick  and  of  Foote,
great  charm  of  manner,  and  an  unrivalled  skill  in  adapt-
ing himself  to  the  moods  and  tempers  of  those  who  were
about  him,  had  made  him  the  delight  of  every  circle  in

1  Flood,  in  a  letter  to  Charle-  brilliancy and spontaneity of

mont,  describing a debate in  wit,  to  Chatham  in  solid  sense,

which almost all the chief  and  to  every  other  speaker in

speakers  in  Parliament  had  ex-  histrionic power. — Memoirs of

erted themselves, says that  George  III. See  especially, ii.

'  Burke  acquitted  himself  very  275  ; iii.  23-27. Sir George

honourably,'  but  there  was  '  no  Colebrooke said  that '  Nobody

one person near Townshend.  excepting Mr.  Pitt  possessed  a

He  is  an  orator. The  rest  are  style of oratory so perfectly

speakers.' — Original Letters  to  suited  to  the  House  '  (Walpole'a

Flood,  p.  27. Walpole,  in  his  George  III.  iii.  102). And  Thur-

numerous allusions to his  low  described  him  as  '  the  most

speeches, describes him as  delightful  speaker  he  ever  knew.'

greatly superior to Burke in  — Nicholls'  George  III.  p.  2(i.

I  2

116 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xr.

which  he  moved,  the  spoilt  child  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons. He  died  when  only  forty-two,  but  he  had  al-
ready much  experience  of  official  life.  He  had  been
made  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  1754,  Treasurer  of
the  Chamber  and  member  of  the  Privy  Council  in  1756,
Secretary  of  War  in  1761,  President  of  the  Board  of
Trade  in  1763,  Paymaster-General  in  1765,  Chancellor
of  the  Exchequer  in  1766.  The  extraordinary  quick-
ness of  apprehension  which  was  his  most  remarkable
intellectual  gift,  soon  made  him  a  perfect  master  of
official  business,  and  no  man  knew  so  well  how  to  apply
his  knowledge  to  the  exigencies  of  debate,  and  how  to
pursue  every  topic  to  the  exact  line  which  pleased  and
convinced  without  tiring  the  House.  Had  he  possessed
any  earnestness  of  character,  any  settled  convictions,
any  power  of  acting  with  fidelity  to  his  colleagues,  or
any  self-control,  he  might  have  won  a  great  name  in
English  politics.  He  sought,  however,  only  to  sparkle
and  to  please,  and  was  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  any  prin-
ciple or  any  connection  for  the  excitement  and  the
vanity  of  a  momentary  triumph.  In  the  absence  of
Chatham,  whom  he  disliked  and  feared,  he  had  been
rapidly  rising  to  the  foremost  place.  He  had  obtained
a  peerage  for  his  wife,  and  the  post  of  Lord  Lieutenant
of  Ireland  for  his  brother ;  he  had  won  the  favour  of
the  King,  and  was  the  idol  of  the  House  of  Commons,
and  he  had  forced  the  Government  into  a  line  of  policy
which  was  wholly  opposed  to  that  of  Camden,  Grafton,
and  Shelburne.  In  a  few  months,  or  perhaps  weeks,  he
would  probably  have  been  the  head  of  a  new  ministry.
Death  called  him  away  in  the  full  flush  of  his  triumph
and  his  powers,  and  he  obeyed  the  summons  with  the
same  good-humoured  levity  which  he  had  shown  in  so
many  periods  of  his  brief  and  agitated  career.1

1  Townshend  is now  chiefly beautiful  character  of him in
remembered by  the singularly Burke's speech on American

en.  xi.

CEANGES IN  THE MINISTRY.

117

Ho  was  replaced  by  Lord  North,  the  favourite  minis-
ter of  the  King,  and  one  of  the  strongest  advocates  of
American  taxation,  and  in  the  course  of  the  next  few
months  nearly  all  those  who  were  favourable  to  America
disappeared  from  the  Government.  Con  way,  Shelburne,
and  Chatham  successively  resigned,  and  though  Camden
remained  for  a  time  in  office  he  restricted  himself  ex-
clusively to  his  judicial  duties,  and  took  no  part  iu
politics.  Lord  Hillsborough  was  entrusted  as  Secretary
of  State  with  the  special  care  of  the  colonies,  and  the
Bedford  party,  who  now  joined  and  in  a  great  measure
controlled  the  Government,  were  strenuous  supporters
of  the  policy  of  coercing  America.

The  circular  of  the  Massachusetts  Assembly  calling
the  other  provincial  Assemblies  to  assist  in  obtaining
the  repeal  of  the  recent  Act  was  first  adverted  to.
Hillsborough,  in  an  angry  circular  addressed  to  the
governors  of  the  different  provinces,  urged  them  to
exert  their  influence  to  prevent  the  Assemblies  of  their
respective  provinces  from  taking  any  notice  of  it,  and
he  characterised  it  in  severe  terms  as  '  a  flagitious  at-
tempt to  disturb  the  public  peace '  by  '  promoting  an
unwarrantable  combination  and  exhibiting  an  open  op-
position to  and  denial  of  the  authority  of  Parliament.'  He
at  the  same  time  called  on  the  Massachusetts  Assembly

taxation.  Horace  Walpole  says
of  him,  'He  had  almost  every
great  talent  and  every  little
quality.  .  .  .  With  such  a  capa-
city he  must  have  been  the
greatest  man  of  this  age,  and
perhaps  inferior  to  no  man  in
any  age,  had  his  faults  been  only
in  a  moderate  proportion.' —
Memoirs  of  George  III.  iii.  100.
See,  too,  Sir  G.  Colebrooke's  cha-
racter of  him.  Ibid.  pp.  100-
102.  In  an  able  paper  in  the

North  Briton  (No.  20)  it  is  said
of  him,  '  He  joins  to  an  infinite
fire  of  imagination  and  brilliancy
of  wit,  a  cool  and  solid  judg-
ment, a  wonderful  capacity  for
business  of  every  kind,  the  most
intense  application  to  it,  and  a
consummate  knowledge  of  the
great  commercial  interests  of
this  country,  which  I  never
heard  were  before  united  in  the
same  person.'

1 1  8 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  «

to  rescind  its  proceedings  on  the  subject.  After  an
animated  debate  the  Assembly,  in  the  summer  of  1768,
refused  by  92  votes  to  17.  It  was  at  once  dissolved,
and  no  new  Chamber  was  summoned  till  the  following
year.  The  Assembly  of  Virginia  was  dissolved  on  ac-
count of  resolutions  condemning  the  whole  recent  policy
of  England,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  months  a  similar
step  was  taken  in  Maryland,  Georgia,  North  Carolina,
and  New  York.  It  was  a  useless  measure,  for  the  new
Assemblies  which  were  summoned  in  obedience  to  the
charter  were  very  similar  to  their  predecessors.  In  the
meantime,  two  regiments  escorted  by  seven  ships  of
war  were  sent  to  Boston  to  strengthen  the  Government.
More  energetic  attempts  were  made  to  enforce  the
revenue  laws,  and  several  collisions  took  place.  Thus
the  sloop  '  Liberty,'  belonging  to  Hancock,  a  leading
merchant  of  the  patriot  party,  arrived  at  Boston  in  June
1768,  laden  with  wines  from  Madeira,  and  a  Custom-
house officer  went  on  board  to  inspect  the  cargo.  He
was  seized  by  the  crew  and  detained  for  several  hours
while  the  cargo  was  landed,  and  a  few  pipes  of  wine
were  entered  on  oath  at  the  Custom-house  as  if  they
had  been  the  whole.  On  the  liberation  of  the  officer
the  vessel  was  seized  for  a  false  entry,  and  in  order  to
prevent  the  possibility  of  a  rescue  it  was  removed  from
the  wharf  under  the  guns  of  a  man-of-war.  A  great
riot  followed,  and  the  Custom-house  officers  were  obliged
to  fly  to  a  ship  of  war,  and  afterwards  to  the  barracks,
for  protection.1  On  another  occasion  a  cargo  of  smug-
gled Madeira  was  ostentatiously  carried  through  the
streets  of  Boston  with  an  escort  of  thirty  or  forty  strong
men  armed  with  bludgeons,  and  the  Custom-house  offi-
cers were  so  intimidated  that  they  did  not  dare  to
interfere.2  At  Newport  an  inhabitant  of  the  town  was

1  Holmes'  American  Annals, Massachusetts  Bay,  pp.  189, 190.
1763. Hutchinson'a Hist, of *  Ibid.  p.  188.

CH.  xr.  THE BOSTON REGIMENTS.  119

killed  in  an  affray  with  some  midshipmen  of  a  ship  of
war,1  and  a  few  months  later  a  revenue  cutter  which
was  lying  at  the  wharf  was  attacked  and  burnt.2  At
Providence,  an  active  Custom-house  officer  was  tarred
and  feathered.3  Effigies  of  the  new  Commissioners
were  hung  on  the  liberty  tree  at  Boston.  The  Governor
and  other  officials  were  insulted  by  the  mob,  and  new
non-importation  engagements  were  largely  subscribed.

The  first  troops  from  England  arrived  in  Massachu-
setts between  the  dissolution  of  the  old  and  the  election
of  the  new  Assembly,  but  shortly  before  their  arrival
the  inhabitants  of  Boston  gathered  together  in  an  im-
mense meeting  and  voted  that  a  standing  army  could
not  be  kept  in  the  province  without  its  consent.  Much
was  said  about  Brutus,  Cassius,  Oliver  Cromwell,  and
Paoli;  the  arms  belonging  to  the  town  were  brought
out,  and  Otis  declared  that  if  an  attempt  was  made
against  the  liberties  of  the  people  they  would  be  distri-
buted. A  day  of  prayer  and  fasting  was  appointed ;  a
very  significant  resolution  was  carried  by  an  immense
majority,  calling  upon  all  the  inhabitants  to  provide
themselves  with  arms  and  ammunition,  and  no  one  was
deceived  by  the  transparent  pretext  that  they  might  be
wanted  against  the  French.  Open  treason  was  freely
talked,  and  many  of  the  addresses  to  the  Governor  were
models  of  grave  and  studied  insolence.

These  documents  were  chiefly  composed  by  Samuel
Adams,  a  very  remarkable  man  who  had  now  begun  to
exercise  a  dominant  influence  in  Boston  politics,  and
who  was  one  of  the  chief  authors  of  the  American  Revo-
lution, He  had  an  hereditary  antipathy  to  the  British
Government,  for  his  father  seems  to  have  been  ruined
by  the  restrictions  the  English  Parliament  imposed  on
the  circulation  of  paper  money,  and  a  bank  in  which  his

1  Arnold's  Hist,  of  Rliode  Is- •  Ibid.  p.  297.
land,  ii.  288.  »  Ibid.  p.  294.

120 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

father  was  largely  concerned  had  been  dissolved  by  Act
of  Parliament,  leaving  debts  which  seventeen  years  later
were  still  unpaid.  It  appears  that  Hutchinson  was  a
leading  person  in  dissolving  the  bank.  Samuel  Adams
had  taken  part  in  various  occupations.  He  was  at  one
time  a  small  brewer  and  at  another  a  tax-gatherer,  but
in  the  last  capacity  he  entirely  failed,  for  a  large  sum
of  money  which  ought  to  have  passed  into  the  Exche-
quer was  not  forthcoming.  It  seems,  however,  that
no  more  serious  charge  could  be  substantiated  against
him  than  that  of  unbusiness-like  habits  and  an  insuffi-
cient stringency  in  levying  the  public  dues ;  the  best
judges  appear  to  have  been  fully  convinced  of  his
integrity  in  money  matters,  and  it  is  strongly  con-
firmed by  the  austere  and  simple  tenor  of  his  whole
later  life.1

He  early  became  one  of  the  most  active  writers  in
the  American  Press,  and  was  the  soul  of  every  agitation
against  the  Government.  It  was  noticed  that  he  had  a
special  skill  in  discovering  young  men  of  promise  and
brilliancy,  and  that,  without  himself  possessing  any
dazzling  qualities,  he  seldom  failed  by  the  force  of  his
character  and  the  intense  energy  of  his  convictions  in
obtaining  an  ascendency  over  their  minds.  It  was
only  in  1765,  when  Adams  was  already  forty-three,
that  he  obtained  a  seat  in  the  Assembly,  where,  with
Otis  and  two  or  three  others,  he  took  a  chief  part
in  organising  opposition  to  the  Government.  In  the  lax
moral  atmosphere  of  the  eighteenth  century  he  exhi-
bited in  perfection  the  fierce  and  sombre  type  of  the
seventeenth-century  Covenanter.  Poor,  simple,  osten-

1  The life  of S.  Adams  has  racter. Several  facts  relating  to

been  written  with  great  elabora-  him  will  be  found  in  Hutchin-

tion and  unqualified  eulogy  by  son's  Hist,  of  Massachusetts  Bay,

W.  V.  Wells,  and  Bancroft  adopts  pp.  294,  295.
B.  very  similar  view  of  his  cha-

CH.  xi.  SAMUEL  ADAMS.  121

tatiously  austere  and  indomitably  courageous,  the
blended  influence  of  Calvinistic  theology  and  of  repub-
lican principles  had  permeated  and  indurated  his  whole
character,  and  he  carried  into  politics  all  the  fervour  of
an  apostle  and  all  the  narrowness  of  a  sectarian.  Hating
with  a  fierce  hatred,  monarchy  and  the  English  Church,
and  all  privileged  classes  and  all  who  were  invested  with
dignity  and  rank  ;  utterly  incapable  of  seeing  any  good
thing  in  an  opponent,  or  of  accepting  any  form  of  poli-
tical compromise,  he  advocated  on  all  occasions  the
strongest  measures,  and  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the
first  both  to  foresee  and  to  desire  an  armed  struggle.
He  had  some  literary  talent,  and  his  firm  will  and  clearly
defined  principles  gave  him  for  a  time  a  greater  influence
than  abler  men.  He  now  maintained  openly  that  any
British  troops  which  landed  should  be  treated  as  enemies,
attacked,  and,  if  possible,  destroyed.  More  moderate
counsels  prevailed ;  yet  measures  verging  on  revolution
were  adopted.  As  the  Governor  alone  could  summon
or  prorogue  the  Assembly,  a  convention  was  held  at
Boston  when  it  was  not  sitting,  to  which  almost  every
town  and  every  district  of  the  province  sent  its  dele-
gate, and  it  assumed  all  the  semblance  of  a  legislative
body.

The  Assembly  itself,  when  it  met,  pronounced  the
establishment  of  a  standing  army  in  the  colony  in  time
of  peace  to  be  an  invasion  of  natural  rights  and  a  viola-
tion of  the  Constitution,  and  it  positively  refused  to
provide  quarters  for  the  troops,  on  the  ground  that  the
barracks  in  an  island  three  miles  from  the  town,  though
within  the  municipal  circle  of  Boston,  were  not  yet  full.
The  plea  was  ingenious  and  strictly  legal,  and  the  troops
were  accordingly  quartered  as  well  as  paid  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  Crown.  The  simple  presence  among  the
colonists  of  English  soldiers  was,  however,  now  treated
as  an  intolerable  grievance ;  the  regiments  were  ab-

122 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xi.

Burdly  called  '  an  unlawful  assembly,'  and  they  were  in-
variably spoken  of  as  if  they  were  foreign  invaders.  The
old  distinction  between  internal  and  external  taxation,  the
old  acquiescence  in  commercial  restrictions,  and  the  old
acknowledgment  of  the  general  legislative  authority  of
Parliament,  had  Completely  disappeared  from  Boston
politics.  The  treatise  which,  half  a  century  earlier,
Molyneux  had  written  on  the  rights  of  the  Irish  Parlia-
ment now  became  a  text-book  in  the  colonies,  and  it
was  the  received  doctrine  that  they  owed  allegiance  in-
deed to  the  King,  but  were  wholly  independent  of  the
British  Parliament.  They  scornfully  repudiated  at  the
same  time  the  notion  of  maintaining  like  Ireland  a  mili-
tary establishment  for  the  general  defence  of  the  Empire.
It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  project  of  a  legislative
union  with  Great  Britain,  which  was  at  this  time  advo-
cated by  Pownall  in  England,  was  absolutely  repudiated
in  America.  Pownall  wished  the  colonial  Assemblies
to  continue,  but  to  send  representatives  to  the  English
Parliament,  which  would  thus  possess  the  right  of  taxing
the  colonists.  But  this  scheme  found  no  favour  in
America.  It  was  pronounced  impracticable  and  danger-
ous. It  was  said  that  the  colonial  representatives  would
speedily  be  corrupted,  that  the  colonists  could  never
hope  to  obtain  a  representation  adequate  to  their  im-
portance, and  that  inadequate  representation  was  even
a  greater  grievance  than  taxation  without  representa-
tion. Bernard  now  strongly  advocated  the  permanent
admission  of  American  representatives  into  the  British
Parliament  as  the  only  possible  solution,  but  he  acknow-
ledged that  the  idea  was  unpopular,  and  he  alleged  that
the  true  reason  was  that  if  the  colonies  were  represented
in  Parliament  they  could  have  no  pretext  for  disobeying
it.1  It  -vas  evident  that  every  path  of  compromise  was

1  Letters  of  Governor  Bernard,  pp.  55-60.

CH.  XT.  GROWING DISAFFECTION.  123

closing,  and  that  disaffection  was  steadily  rising  to  the
height  of  revolution.  Foreign  observers  saw  that  the
catastrophe  was  fast  approaching,  and  Choiseul  noticed
that  the  English  had  no  cavalry  and  scarcely  10,000
infantry  in  America,  while  the  colonial  militia  numbered
400,000  men,  including  several  cavalry  regiments.  It
was  not  difficult,  he  concluded,  to  predict  that  if  America
could  only  find  a  Cromwell  she  would  speedily  cease  to
form  a  part  of  the  British  Empire.1

For  the  present,  except  a  few  revenue  riots,  resist-
ance was  purely  passive.  The  Massachusetts  Assembly
petitioned  for  the  removal  of  the  troops  and  for  the
removal  of  the  Governor.  Acute  lawyers  contested
every  legal  point  that  could  possibly  be  raised  against
the  Government.  The  grand  juries  being  elected  by
the  townships  were  wholly  on  the  side  of  the  people,
and  they  systematically  refused  to  present  persons  guilty
of  libel,  riot,  or  sedition.  Non-importation  agreements
spread  rapidly  from  town  to  town,  and  had  a  serious
effect  upon  English  commerce.  The  troops  had  little
to  do  as  there  was  no  open  resistance,  but  they  found
themselves  treated  as  pariahs  and  excluded  from  every
kind  of  society,  and  they  had  even  much  difficulty  in
procuring  the  necessaries  of  life.

The  English  Parliament  in  December  1768  and
January  1769  greatly  aggravated  the  contest.  Both
Houses  passed  resolutions  condemning  the  disloyal
spirit  of  Massachusetts,  the  non-importation  agreements,
and  the  Boston  convention  ;  and  addresses  were  carried
thanking  the  Sovereign  for  the  measures  he  had  taken
to  maintain  the  authority  of  England  ;  promising  a  full
support  to  future  measures  taken  with  that  end,  and
suggesting  that  the  names  of  the  most  active  agitators
should  be  transmitted  to  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,

1  Bancroft.

124 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  M.

and  that  a  long  disused  law  of  Henry  VIII.  which  em-
powered the  Governor  to  bring  to  England  for  trial,
persons  accused  of  treason  outside  England,  should  be
put  in  force.1  This  last  measure  was  due  to  the  Duke
of  Bedford,  and  although  it  was  certainly  not  unpro-
voked, it  excited  a  fierce  and  legitimate  indignation  in
America,  and  added  a  new  and  very  serious  item  to  the
long  list  of  colonial  grievances.  Already,  the  colonial
advocates  were  accustomed  to  say,  a  Parliament  in
which  the  colonies  were  wholly  unrepresented,  claimed
an  absolute  power  of  restricting  their  commerce,  of
taxing  them,  and  even,  as  in  the  case  of  New  York,  01
suspending  their  legislative  assemblies.  British  troops
were  planted  among  them  to  coerce  them.  Their
governors  and  judges  were  to  be  made  independent  of
their  Assemblies,  and  now  the  protection  of  a  native
jury,  which  alone  remained,  was  to  be  destroyed.  By
virtue  of  an  obsolete  law,  passed  in  one  of  the  darkest
periods  of  English  history  and  at  a  time  when  England
possessed  not  a  single  colony,  any  colonist  who  was
designated  by  the  Governor  as  a  traitor  might  be  carried
three  thousand  miles  from  his  home,  from  his  witnesses,
from  the  scene  of  his  alleged  crime,  from  all  those  who
were  acquainted  with  the  general  tenor  of  his  life,  to
be  tried  by  strangers  of  the  very  nation  which  he
was  supposed  to  have  offended.  Combine  all  these
measures,  it  was  said,  and  what  trace  of  political  free-
dom would  be  left  in  the  colonies  ?

This  measure  was  apparently  intended  only  to  in-
timidate the  more  violent  agitators,  and  it  was  never
put  in  action.  The  Cabinet  were  much  divided  about
their  American  policy,  and  signs  of  weakness  speedily
appeared.  Townshend's  Act  had  brought  America  to
the  verge  of  revolution,  and  had  entailed  great  expense

1  Parl  Hist.  xvi.  477-487. Cavendish  Debates,  i.  192-194.

CH.  XT.  THE  TEA DUTY  MAINTAINED.  125

on  the  country,  but  it  had  hitherto  produced  no  appre-
ciable revenue,  and  there  was  little  or  no  prospect  of
improvement.  It  was  stated  that  the  total  produce  of
the  new  taxes  for  the  first  year  was  less  than  16,000/.,
that  the  net  proceeds  of  the  Crown  revenue  in  America
were  only  about  295Z.,  and  that  extraordinary  military
expenses  amounting  to  1 70,00(K  had  in  the  same  period
been  incurred.1  Pownall,  who  had  preceded  Bernard
as  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  strongly  urged  in  Par-
liament the  repeal  of  the  new  duties,  and  a  considerable
section  of  the  Cabinet  supported  his  view.  After  much
discussion  it  was  resolved  to  adopt  a  policy  of  com-
promise2— to  repeal  the  duties  on  glass,  paper,  and
painters'  colours,  and  to  retain  that  on  tea  for  the  pur-
pose of  keeping  up  the  right.  Less  than  300Z.  had
hitherto  been  obtained  by  this  charge ;  but  the  King,
the  Bedford  section  of  the  Cabinet,  and  Lord  North
determined,  in  opposition  to  Grafbon  and  Camden,  to
retain  it,  and  they  carried  their  point  in  the  Cabinet
by  a  majority  of  one  vote.  A  circular  intimating  the
intention  of  the  Government  was  despatched  in  the
course  of  1769  to  the  governors  of  the  different  colonies,
and  in  this  circular  Lord  Hillsborough  officially  in-
formed them  that  the  Cabinet  '  entertained  no  design
to  propose  to  Parliament  to  lay  any  further  taxes  on
America  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  revenue.' 3  Gover-
nor Bernard,  whose  relations  with  the  Assembly  and
Council  of  Massachusetts  had  long  been  as  hostile  as

1  Hildreth,  ii.  553.  [for  the  taxation  or  coercion  of

2  The Massachusetts Agent,  America]  with  Lord  North  the
De  Berdt,  wrote  to  the  Assembly  Chancellor,  but the  opposition
in  July  1768,  describing  an  inter-  you  had  made  rendered  it  abso-
view  with  Hillsborough. 'He  lutely  necessary  to  support  the
assured me, before the  warm  authority  of  Parliament.' — .Mas-
measures  taken  on  your  side  had  sachusetts  State  Papers,  p.  161.
cjome  to  their  knowledge  he  had  3  Grahame,  iv.  297.

settled  the  repeal  of  those  Acts

126 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  n.

possible,  was  rewarded  for  his  services  to  the  Crown  by
a  baronetcy,  but  in  the  August  of  1769  he  was  recalled
to  England  amid  a  storm  of  insult  and  rejoicing  from
the  people  he  had  governed;  and  after  about  a  year,
Hutchinson,  who,  though  equally  devoted  to  the  Govern-
ment, was  somewhat  less  unpopular  with  the  colonists,
was  promoted  to  the  ungrateful  post.  Some  slight
signs  of  improvement  were  visible.  New  York  sub-
mitted to  the  Mutiny  Act,  and  its  Assembly  accordingly
regained  its  normal  powers.  The  non-importation
agreements  had  for  some  time  been  very  imperfectly
observed,  and  it  was  soon  noticed  that  a  good  deal  of
tea  was  imported  in  small  quantities,  and  that  the  port
Juty  was  paid  without  difficulty.1

Hitherto,  though  the  townspeople  of  Boston  had
done  everything  in  their  power  to  provoke  and  irritate
the  soldiers  who  were  quartered  among  them,  there  had
been  no  serious  collision.  The  condition  of  the  town,
however,  was  such  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  that
any  severity  of  discipline  could  long  avert  it.  There
was  a  perfect  reign  of  terror  directed  against  all  who
supported  the  revenue  Acts  and  who  sympathised  with
authority.  Soldiers  could  scarcely  appear  in  the  streets
without  being  the  objects  of  the  grossest  insult.  A
Press  eminently  scurrilous  and  vindictive  was  ceaselessly
employed  in  abusing  them :  they  had  become,  as
Samuel  Adams  boasted,  '  the  objects  of  the  contempt
even  of  women  and  children.'  Every  offence  they  com-
mitted was  maliciously  exaggerated  and  vindictively
prosecuted,  while  in  the  absence  of  martial  law  they
were  obliged  to  look  passively  on  the  most  flagrant  in-
sults to  authority.  At  one  time  the  '  sons  of  liberty '
in  a  procession  a  mile  and  a  half  long  marched  round
the  State  House  to  commemorate  their  riots  against  the

1  See  Hutchinson's Hist,  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  pp.  350,  351,
422,  423.

CH.  xi.  CONDITION OF  BOSTON.  127

Stamp  Act,  and  met  in  the  open  fields  to  chant  their
liberty  song  and  drink  'strong  halters,  firm  blocks,
and  sharp  axes  to  such  as  deserve  them.'  At  another
an  informer  who  was  found  guilty  of  giving  information
to  revenue  officers  was  seized  by  a  great  multitude,
tarred  and  feathered,  and  led  through  the  streets  of
Boston,  which  were  illuminated  in  honour  of  the  achieve-
ment. A  printer  who  had  dared  to  caricature  tho
champions  of  freedom  was  obliged  to  fly  from  his
house,  to  take  refuge  among  the  soldiers,  and  ultimately
to  escape  from  Boston  in  disguise.  Merchants  who
had  ventured  to  import  goods  from  England  were  com-
pelled by  mob  violence  to  give  them  up  to  be  destroyed
or  to  be  re-embarked.  A  shopkeeper  who  sold  some
English  goods  found  a  post  planted  in  the  ground  with
a  hand  pointing  to  his  door,  and  when  a  friend  tried  to
remove  it  he  was  stoned  by  a  fierce  mob  through  the
streets.  A  popular  minister  delighted  his  congrega-
tion by  publicly  praying  that  the  Almighty  would
remove  from  Boston  the  English- soldiers.  It  was  said
that  they  corrupted  the  morals  of  the  town,  that  their
drums  and  fifes  were  heard  upon  the  Sabbath-day,  that
their  language  was  often  violent,  threatening,  or  profane,
that  on  several  occasions  they  had  struck  citizens  who
insulted  them.1  On  March  2,  1770,  there  was  a  scuffle
at  a  rope  walk  between  some  soldiers  and  the  rope-
makers,  and  on  the  night  of  the  5th  there  occurred  the
tragedy  which,  in  the  somewhat  grandiloquent  phrase
of  John  Adams,  '  laid  the  foundation  of  American  inde-

1  Holmes. Bancroft. One  of  presume  we  may  safely  say  that

the  later  accusations  against  the  our  language  has  suffered  more

English  soldiers  was,  that  they  injurious changes in  America

impaired  the  purity  of  the  Ameri-  since  the  British  army  landed  on

can pronunciation  of  English.  our  shores  than  it  had  suffered

Noah  Webster, in  his  curious  before,  in the period  of three

essay  on  the  '  Manners  of  the  centuries.'  —  Webster's Essays,

United  States '  (1787),  says :  '  I  p.  96.

123 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xr.

pendence.'  A  false  alarm  of  fire  had  called  a  crowd  into
the  streets,  and  a  mob  of  boys  and  men  amused  them-
selves by  surrounding  and  insulting  a  solitary  sentinel
who  was  on  guard  before  one  of  the  public  buildings.
He  called  for  rescue,  and  a  party  consisting  of  a  cor-
poral and  six  common  soldiers,  under  the  command  of
Captain  Preston,  appeared  with  loaded  muskets  upon
the  scene.  The  mob,  however,  refused  to  give  way.
Some  forty  or  fifty  men — many  of  them  armed  with
sticks — surrounded  the  little  band  of  soldiers,  shouting,
'  Rascals,  lobsters,  bloody  backs  ! ' l  and  defying  them
to  use  their  arms.  They  soon  proceeded  to  violence.
Snowballs  and,  according  to  some  testimony,  stones
were  thrown.  The  crowd  pressed  violently  on  the
soldiers,  and  it  was  afterwards  alleged  that  one  of  the
soldiers  was  struck  by  a  club.  Whether  it  was  panic
or  resentment,  or  the  mere  necessity  of  self-defence,
was  never  clearly  established,  but  a  soldier  fired,  and
in  another  moment  seven  muskets,  each  loaded  with
two  balls,  were  discharged  with  deadly  effect  into  the
crowd.  Five  men  fell  dead  or  dying,  and  six  others
were  wounded.

There  are  many  dreadful  massacres  recorded  in  the
page  of  history — the  massacre  of  the  Danes  by  the
Saxons,  the  massacre  of  the  Sicilian  Vespers,  the
massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew — but  it  may  be  questioned
whether  any  of  them  had  produced  such  torrents  of
indignant  eloquence  as  the  affray  which  I  have  de-
scribed. The  '  Boston  massacre,'  or,  as  the  Americans,
desiring  to  distinguish  it  from  the  minor  tragedies  of
history,  loved  to  call  it,  '  The  bloody  massacre,'  at  once
kindled  the  colonies  into  a  flame.  The  terrible  tale  of
how  the  bloody  and  brutal  myrmidons  of  England  had
shot  down  the  inoffensive  citizens  in  the  streets  of  Boston

In  allusion  to  the  British  custom  of  flogging  soldiers.

CH.  M. WITHDRAWAL OF  THE BOSTON  TROOPS.  129

raised  an  indignation  which  was  never  suffered  to  flag.
In  Boston,  as  soon  as  the  tidings  of  the  tragedy  were
spread  abroad,  the  church  bells  rang,  the  drums  beat
to  call  the  people  to  arms,  and  next  day  an  immense
meeting  of  the  citizens  resolved  that  the  soldiers  must
no  longer  remain  in  the  town.  Samuel  Adams  and  the
other  leading  agitators,  as  the  representatives  of  the
people,  rushed  into  the  presence  of  Hutchinson,  and
rather  commanded  than  asked  for  their  removal.  Hut-
chinson hesitated  much.  He  was  not  yet  governor.
Bernard  was  in  England.  Hutchinson  had  himself
asked  for  the  troops  to  be  sent  to  Boston.  He  knew
that  their  removal  would,  under  the  circumstances,  be  a
great  humiliation  to  the  Government  and  a  great  en-
couragement to  the  mob,  and  that  if  once  removed  it
would  be  extremely  difficult  to  recall  them.  On  the
other  hand,  if  they  remained  it  was  only  too  probable
that  in  a  few  hours  the  streets  of  Boston  would  run  with
blood.  He  consulted  the  council,  and  found  it  as  usual
an  echo  of  the  public  voice.  He  yielded  at  last,  and
the  troops  were  removed  to  Fort  William,  on  an  island
three  miles  from  Boston,  and  the  wish  of  the  townsmen
was  thus  at  last  accomplished.  An  immense  crowd
accompanied  the  bodies  of  the  '  martyred '  citizens  to
their  last  resting-place.  An  annual  celebration  was  at
once  resolved  upon,  and  for  several  years  the  citizens
were  accustomed  on  every  anniversary  to  meet  in  the
chief  towns  of  America  in  chapels  hung  with  crape,
while  the  most  popular  orators  described  the  horrors  of
the  Boston  massacre,  the  tyranny  of  England,  and  the
ferocious  character  of  standing  armies.1

Few things contributed more to the American
Revolution  than  this  unfortunate  affray. Skilful  agi-

1  The commemoration was of  July. Tudor's  Life  of  Otis,
kept  up  till  1783,  after  which  it p.  462.
was  replaced  by  that  of  the  4th

VOL. IV.  K

130 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, cu.  xi.

tators  perceived  the  advantage  it  gave  them,  and  the
most  fantastic  exaggerations  were  dexterously  diffused.
The  incident  had,  however,  a  sequel  which  is  extremely
creditable  to  the  American  people.  It  was  determined
to  try  the  soldiers  for  their  lives,  and  public  feeling  ran
so  fiercely  against  them  that  it  seemed  as  if  their  fate
was  sealed.  The  trial,  however,  was  delayed  for  seven
months,  till  the  excitement  had  in  some  degree  subsided.
Captain  Preston  very  judiciously  appealed  to  John
Adams,  who  was  rapidly  rising  to  the  first  place  both
among  the  lawyers  and  the  popular  patriots  of  Boston,
to  undertake  his  defence.  Adams  knew  well  how  much
he  was  risking  by  espousing  so  unpopular  a  cause,  but
he  knew  also  his  professional  duty,  and,  though  violently
opposed  to  the  British  Government,  he  was  an  eminently
honest,  brave,  and  humane  man.  In  conjunction  with
Josiah  Quincy,  a  young  lawyer  who  was  also  of  the
patriotic  party,  he  undertook  the  invidious  task,  and  he
discharged  it  with  consummate  ability.  It  was  clearly
shown  that  the  popular  account  which  had  been  printed
in  Boston  and  circulated  assiduously  through  the
colonies,  representing  the  affair  as  a  deliberate  and  pre-
meditated massacre  of  unoffending  citizens,  was  grossly
untrue.  As  was  natural  in  the  case  of  a  confused
scuffle  in  the  dark,  there  was  much  conflict  of  testimony
about  the  exact  circumstances  of  the  affair,  but  there
was  no  sufficient  evidence  that  Captain  Preston  had
given  an  order  to  fire;  and  although  no  soldier  was
seriously  injured,  there  was  abundant  evidence  that  the
soldiers  had  endured  gross  provocation  and  some
violence.  If  the  trial  had  been  the  prosecution  of  a
smuggler  or  a  seditious  writer,  the  jury  would  probably
have  decided  against  evidence,  but  they  had  no  dis-
position to  shed  innocent  blood.  Judges,  counsel,  and
jurymen  acted  bravely  and  honourably.  All  the  soldiers
were  acquitted,  except  two,  who  were  found  guilty  of

CH.  xi.  AMERICAN  HUMANITY.  131

manslaughter,  and  who  escaped  with  very  slight  punish-
ment.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  after  Adams  had  accepted
the  task  of  defending  the  incriminated  soldiers,  he  was
elected  by  the  people  of  Boston  as  their  representative
in  the  Assembly,  and  the  public  opinion  of  the  province
appears  to  have  fully  acquiesced  in  the  verdict.1  In
truth,  although  no  people  have  indulged  more  largely
than  the  Americans  in  violent,  reckless,  and  unscru-
pulous language,  no  people  have  at  every  period  of  their
history  been  more  signally  free  from  the  thirst  for  blood,
which  in  moments  of  great  political  excitement  has  been
often  shown  both  in  England  and  France.  It  is  a
characteristic  fact  that  one  of  the  first  protests  against
the  excessive  multiplication  of  capital  offences  in  the
English  legislation  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  made
by  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts,  which  in  1762
objected  to  death  as  a  punishment  for  forgery  on  the
ground  that  '  the  House  are  very  averse  to  capital
punishment  in  any  case  where  the  interest  of  the
Government  does  not  absolutely  require  it,'  and  where
some  other  punishment  will  be  sufficiently  deterrent.2

1  See  on  this  episode,  Adams'  where  except  in  Boston  has  been

Works,  i. 97-114,  ii. 229-233  ;  favourable  beyond  my  hopes. I

Hutchinson's Hist, of  Massa-  expected  that  the  court  and  jury

chuxetts  Bay ;  Hutchinson's  let-  would  be  censured,  but  they  are

ters  to  Bernard,  and  the  Histories  generally  applauded.' — American

of  Hildreth  and  Bancroft. Mr.  Remembrancer,  1776,  part  i.  p.

Bancroft  in  his  account  of  this  159.

transaction appears to  me  to  *  Tudor's  Life  of  Otis,  p.  113.

exhibit  even  more  strongly  than  According  to  Dr.  Price  (On  Civil

usual that  violent  partisanship  Liberty,  p.  101),  not  more  than

which  so  greatly impairs the  one  execution  had  taken  place

value  of  his  very  learned  History.  in  Massachusetts  Bay  in  eighteen

Outside  Boston  the  verdict  seems  years. The  annual average of

to  have  given  much  satisfaction.  executions  in  London  alone  for

Hutchinson  wrote  (Dec.  1770) :  twenty-three  years before 1772

'  The  reception  which  has  been  was  from  twenty-nine  to  thirty,

given  to  the  late  verdicts  every-  — Howard  On  Prisons,  p.  9.

K  2

132 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XL

In  the  long  period  of  anarchy,  riot,  and  excitement
which  preceded  the  American  Revolution  there  was
scarcely  any  bloodshed  and  no  political  assassination,
and  the  essential  humanity  of  American  public  opinion
which  was  shown  so  conspicuously  during  the  trial  of
the  soldiers  at  Boston,  was  afterwards  displayed  on  a  far
wider  field  and  in  still  more  trying  circumstances  during
the  fierce  passions  of  the  revolutionary  war,  and  still
more  remarkably  in  the  triumph  of  the  North  in  the
War  of  Secession.

While  these  things  were  taking  place  in  America,
Lord  North  carried  through  Parliament  his  measure  re-
pealing all  the  duties  imposed  by  Townshend's  Act,  with
the  exception  of  that  on  tea,1  which  he  maintained  in
spite  of  a  very  able  opposition  led  by  Pownall.  His
defence  of  the  distinction  was  by  no  means  destitute  of
plausibility  or  even  of  real  foi-ce.  The  other  duties,  he
said,  were  imposed  on  articles  of  English  manufacture
imported  into  America,  and  such  duties  were  both  un-
precedented and  economically  inexpedient,  as  calculated
to  injure  English  industry.  The  duty  on  tea,  however,
was  of  another  kind,  and  it  was  in  perfect  accordance
with  commercial  precedents.  The  Americans  had  them-
selves drawn  a  broad  distinction  between  external  and
internal  taxation.  No  less  than  thirty-two  Acts  binding
their  trade  had  been  imposed  and  submitted  to,  and  the
power  of  Parliament  to  impose  port  duties  had,  till  the
last  two  years,  been  unquestioned.2  Whatever  might
be  said  of  the  Stamp  Act,  the  tea  duty  was  certainly
not  a  grievance  to  America,  for  Parliament  had  relieved
the  colonies  of  a  duty  of  nearly  I2d.  in  the  pound,  which
had  hitherto  been  levied  in  England,  and  the  colonists
were  only  asked  in  compensation  to  pay  a  duty  of  3d.
in  the  pound  on  the  arrival  of  the  tea  in  America.  The

1  10  Geo.  III.  17.  *  See  Cavendish  Debates,  i.  108,  222.

CH.  xr.  THE TEA DUTY.  133

measure  was,  therefore,  not  an  act  of  oppression  but  of
relief,  making  the  price  of  tea  in  the  colonies  positively
cheaper  than  it  had  been  before.1  It  was  coupled  with
the  circular  of  Lord  Hillsborough  pledging  the  English
Government  to  raise  no  further  revenue  from  America.
At  the  same  time  the  quartering  Act,  which  had  been
so  much  objected  to,  was  allowed  silently  to  expire.2

It  will  probably  strike  the  reader  that  every  argu-
ment which  showed  that  the  tea  duty  was  not  a  grievance
to  the  colonies,  was  equally  powerful  to  show  that  it
was  perfectly  useless  as  a  means  of  obtaining  a  revenue
from  them.  It  would  be  difficult,  indeed,  to  find  a
more  curious  instance  of  legislative  incapacity  than  the
whole  transaction  displayed.  The  repeal  of  the  greater
part  of  Townshend's  Act  had  given  the  agitators  in
America  a  signal  triumph ;  the  maintenance  of  the  tea
duty  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  obtaining  a  colonial
revenue  left  them  their  old  pretext  for  agitation,  and  at
the  same  time  that  duty  could  not  possibly  attain  the
end  for  which  it  was  ostensibly  intended,  and  the  Go-
vernment by  the  circular  of  Lord  Hillsborough  had  pre-
cluded themselves  from  increasing  it.  Hutchinson,
whose  judgment  of  American  opinion  is  entitled  to  the
highest  respect,  has  expressed  his  firm  conviction  that
the  Government  might  have  raised  the  whole  revenue
they  expected  from  Townshend's  Act  without  the
smallest  difficulty,  if  they  had  simply  adopted  the  ex-
pedient of  levying  the  duty  on  goods  exported  to
America  in  England  instead  of  in  the  colonies.3

1  Stedman,  i.  74. Hutchinson  same  tea  in  quality  at  3s.  the  Ib.

says:  ' By  taking  off  12d., which  which  the  people in England

used  to  be  paid  in  England,  and  drank at  6s.' — Hist, of Mas-

substituting  3d.  only,  payable  in  sachusetts  Say,  p.  351.
the  colonies,  tea was  cheaper 2  Parl. Hist. xvi. 852-874 ;

than  it  had  ever  been  aold  by  Cavendish  Debates,  i.  4P4-500.
the  illicit  traders,  and  the  poor *  '  If  these duties [those in

people in America  drank  the  Townshend's  Act]  had  been  paid

134 ENGLAND IK THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  XT.

The  object  of  maintaining  the  tea  duty  was,  of
course,  to  assert  the  right  of  Parliament  to  impose  port
duties,  and  this  assertion  was  thought  necessary  on
account  of  the  recent  conduct  and  language  of  the
Americans.1  At  the  same  time  North,  like  Grenville,
continually  maintained  that  the  plan  of  obliging
America  to  pay  for  her  own  army  might  have  been
easily  and  peaceably  carried  out  had  the  condition  of
English  parties  rendered  possible  any  steady,  systematic,
and  united  policy.  It  was  the  changes,  vacillation,
divisions,  and  weaknesses  of  English  ministries,  the
utter  disintegration  of  English  parties,  the  rapid  alter-
nations of  severity  and  indulgence,  the  existence  in  Par-
liament of  a  powerful  section  who  had  at  every  step  of
the  struggle  actively  supported  the  Americans  and  en-
couraged them  to  resist,  the  existence  outside  Parlia-
ment of  a  still  more  democratic  party  mainly  occupied
with  political  agitation — it  was  these  things  which  had
chiefly  lured  the  colonies  to  their  present  state  of  an-
archy, had  rendered  all  resistance  to  authority  a  popular
thing,  and  had  introduced  the  habit  of  questioning  the
validity  of  Acts  of  Parliament.  The  evil,  however,  was
accomplished.  The  plan  of  making  America  pay  for
her  defence  was  virtually  abandoned,  and  the  ministers
were  only  trying  feebly  and  ineffectively  to  uphold  the
doctrine  of  the  Declaratory  Act,  that  Parliament  had

upon  exportation  from  England  have  already  quoted  the  opinion

and  applied  to  the  purpose  pro-  of  Franklin  to  much  the  same

posed,  there  would  not  have  been  ellect.

any  opposition  made  to  the  Act.  '  See Lord North's strong

It  would  have  been  a  favour  to  statement  of  the  reluctance  with

the  colonies. The  saving  upon  which  he  maintained  any  part

tea  would  have  been  more  than  of  the  duties. Parl.  Hist.  xvi.

the whole paid on the other  854 ;  Cavendish  Debates,  i.  485,

articles. The  consumer  in  Ame-  486. The speech of George

rica  would  have  paid  the  duty  Grenville  in  this  debate,  as  re-

just  as  much  as  if  it  had  been  ported  by  Cavendish,  is  particu-

paid  upon  importation.'  —  Hist.  lurly  worthy  of  attention.
of  Massachusetts  Bay,  p.  179. I

CH.  xi.  AMERICA, 1769-1771.  135

a  right  to  draw  a  revenue  from  America,  by  maintain-
ing a  duty  which  was  in  full  accordance  with  American
precedents  and  which  was  a  positi ve  boon  to  the  Ameri-
can people.

The  policy  was  not  quite  unsuccessful.  The  non-
importation agreements  had  lately  been  so  formidable
that  the  English  exports  to  America,  which  amounted
to  2,378,OOOZ.  in  1768,  amounted  only  to  1,634,OOOZ.  in
1769;1  but  the  merchants  in  the  colonies,  after  some
hesitation,  now  resolved  to  abandon  these  agreements,
and  commerce  with  England  resumed  its  old  activity.
An  exception,  however,  was  still  made  in  the  case  of
tea,  and  associations  were  formed  binding  all  classes  to
abstain  from  that  beverage,  or  at  least  to  drink  only
what  was  smuggled.  The  next  two  or  three  years  of
colonial  history  were  somewhat  less  eventful,  though  it
was  evident  that  the  spirit  of  insubordination  and  an-
archy was  extending.  In  North  Carolina,  in  1771,  some
1,500  men,  complaining  of  extortions  and  oppressions
of  their  local  courts,  rose  to  arms,  and  refused  to  pay
taxes,  and  the  colony  was  rapidly  dividing  into  a  civil
war.  The  Governor,  however,  at  the  head  of  rather
more  than  1,000  militia,  completely  defeated  the  in-
surgents in  a  pitched  battle.  Some  hundreds  were
killed  or  wounded,  and  six  were  afterwards  hanged  for
high  treason.  In  Massachusetts  the  troops  were  not
again  brought  into  Boston,  but  Castle  William,  which
commanded  the  harbour,  and  to  which  the  Boston  pa-
triots had  once  been  so  anxious  to  relegate  them,  was
placed  under  martial  law,  and  the  provincial  garrison
was  withdrawn.  There  were  long  and  acrimonious  dis-
putes between  Hutchinson  and  the  Massachusetts  As-
sembly about  the  right  of  the  former  to  convene  the
Assembly  at  Cambridge  instead  of  Boston  ;  about  the

1  Purl.  Hist.  xvi.  855.

136 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  «.

extent  to  which  the  salaries  of  Crown  officers  should  be
exempted  from  taxation ;  about  the  refusal  of  the  Go-
vernor to  ratify  the  grant  of  certain  sums  of  money  to
the  colonial  agents  in  England.  In  1772,  Hutchinson,
to  the  great  indignation  of  the  colony,  informed  the
Assembly  that,  as  his  salary  would  henceforth  be  paid
by  the  Crown,  no  appropriation  would  be  required  for
that  purpose.  Otis,  who  had  long  been  the  most  fiery
of  the  Boston  demagogues,  had  now  nearly  lost  his  in-
tellect as  well  as  his  influence ;  and  John  Adams,  who
was  a  far  abler  man,  had  for  a  time  retired  from  agita-
tion, and  devoted  himself  to  his  profession.  Samuel
Adams,  however,  still  retained  his  influence  in  the  As-
sembly, and  he  was  unwearied  in  his  efforts  to  excite
ill  feeling  against  England,  and  to  push  the  colony  into
rebellion.

In  Rhode  Island  a  revenue  outrage  of  more  than
common  daring  took  place.  A  ship  of  war,  called  the
'  Gaspee,'  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Duddingston,  and
carrying  eight  guns,  was  employed  under  the  royal
commission  in  enforcing  the  revenue  Acts  along  the
coast,  and  the  commander  is  said  to  have  discharged
his  duty  with  a  zeal  that  often  outran  both  discretion
and  law.  He  stopped  and  searched  every  ship  that
entered  Narraganset  Bay  ;  compelled  all  ships  to  salute
his  flag;  sent  a  captured  cargo  of  smuggled  rum,  con-
trary to  law,  out  of  the  colony  to  Boston  on  the  ground
that  it  could  not  be  safely  detained  in  Newport ;  seized
more  than  one  vessel  upon  insufficient  evidence ;
searched  for  smuggled  goods  with  what  was  considered
unnecessary  violence,  and  made  himself  extremely  ob-
noxious to  the  colony,  in  which  smuggling  was  one  of
the  most  flourishing  and  most  popular  of  trades.  The
Chief  Justice  gave  an  opinion  that  the  commander  of
one  of  his  Majesty's  ships  could  exercise  no  authority
in  the  colony  without  having  previously  applied  to  the

CH.  xr.  THE  'GASPEB.'  137

Governor,  and  shown  him  his  warrant.  .  Duddingston
appealed  to  the  Admiral  at  Boston,  who  fully  justified
his  conduct,  and  an  angry  altercation  ensued  between
the  civil  and  naval  authorities.  On  June  9,  1772,  the
*  Gaspee,'  when  chasing  a  suspected  vessel,  ran  aground
on  a  shoal  in  the  river  some  miles  from  Providence,  and
the  ship  which  had  escaped  brought  the  news  to  that
town.  Soon  after  a  drum  was  beat  through  the  streets,
and  all  persons  who  were  disposed  to  assist  in  the  de-
struction of  the  King's  ship  were  summoned  to  meet  at
the  house  of  a  prominent  citizen.  There  appears  to
have  been  no  concealment  or  disguise,  and  shortly  after
ten  at  night  eight  boats,  full  of  armed  men,  started  with
muffled  oars  on  the  expedition.  They  reached  the
stranded  vessel  in  the  deep  darkness  of  the  early  morn-
ing. Twice  the  sentinel  on  board  vainly  hailed  them,
when  Duddingston  himself  appeared  in  his  shirt  upon
the  gunwale  and  asked  who  it  was  that  approached.
The  leader  of  the  party  answered  with  a  profusion  of
oaths  that  he  was  the  sheriff  of  the  county  come  to
arrest  him,  and  while  he  was  speaking  one  of  his  men
deliberately  shot  the  lieutenant,  who  fell  badly  wounded
on  the  deck.  In  another  minute  the  '  Gaspee '  was
boarded.  The  crew  were  soon  overpowered,  bound,  and
placed  upon  the  shore.  Duddingston,  his  wounds
having  been  dressed,  was  landed  at  a  neighbouring
house ;  the  party  then  set  fire  to  the  '  Gaspee,'  and
while  its  flames  announced  to  the  whole  country  the
success  of  their  expedition,  they  returned  in  the  broad
daylight  to  Providence.  Large  rewards  were  offered
by  the  British  Government  for  their  detection;  but,
though  they  were  universally  known,  no  evidence  could
be  obtained,  and  the  outrage  was  entirely  unpunished.1

1  A  full  account  of  this  trans-  of  Rhode  Island,  ii.  309-320.
action  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Mr.  Arnold  has  given  a  curious
Arnold's  very  interesting  History  letter  describing  it,  by  Ephraim

1.58 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xt.

An  American  historian  complains  that  this  event,  though
clue  to  a  mere  '  sudden  impulse,'  inspired  at  least  one
English  statesman  with  a  deep  hostility  to  the  charter
of  the  colony,  according  to  which  Governor,  Assembly,
and  Council  were  all  elected  directly  by  the  people.1

It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that,  just  before  this  out-
rage took  place,  the  British  Parliament  had  passed  an
Act  for  the  protection  of  his  Majesty's  ships,  dockyards,
and  naval  stores,  by  which  their  destruction  was  made
a  felony,  and  the  ministry  were  empowered,  if  they
pi  eased,  to  try  those  who  were  accused  of  such  acts  in
England.2  This  law,  though  it  applied  to  the  colonies,
was  not  made  with  any  special  reference  to  them,  but
it  became  one  of  their  great  grievances.  Perhaps  the
state  of  feeling  disclosed  in  the  town  of  Providence  at
the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  '  Gaspee,'  may  be  re-
garded as  the  strongest  argument  in  its  defence.

A  considerable  step  towards  uniting  the  colonies
was  taken  in  this  year  and  in  1773  by  the  appointment
in  Massachusetts,  Virginia,  and  some  other  colonies  of
committees  specially  charged  with  the  task  of  collecting
and  publishing  colonial  grievances,  maintaining  a  cor-
respondence between  the  different  provinces,  and  pro-
curing authentic  intelligence  of  all  the  acts  of  the
British  Parliament  or  Ministry  relating  to  them.  In
England  they  were  already  represented  by  agents  of
great  ability,  the  most  prominent  being  Benjamin
Franklin,  who  at  this  time  possessed  a  greater  reputa-
tion than  any  other  living  American.

He  was  born  in  1706,  and  was  therefore  now  in  the
decline  of  life.  A  younger  son  in  a  large  and  poor
family,  ill  treated  by  his  elder  brother,  and  little  favoured
by  casual  good  fortune,  he  had  risen  by  his  own  energies

Bowen,  one  of  the  party who '  Bancroft,  in.  461.
captured  the  '  Gaspee.'  *  12  Geo.  III.  c.  24.

en.  xi.  BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN".  189

from  a  bumble  journeyman  printer  at  Boston  and  Phila-
delphia  to  a  foremost  place  among  his countrymen  ;
and  he  enjoyed  a  reputation  which  the  lapse  of  a  cen-
tury has  scarcely  dimmed. Franklin  is,  indeed,  one  of
the  very  small  class  of  men  who  can  be  said  to  have
added  something of  real  value to  the  art of living.
Very  few  writers  have  left  so  many  profound  and  origi-
nal observations  on  the  causes  of  success  in  life,  and  on
the  best  means  of  cultivating  the  intellect  and  the  cha-
racter. To  extract  from  surrounding  circumstances  the
largest  possible  amount  of  comfort  and  rational  enjoy-
ment, was  the  ideal  he  placed  before  himself  and  others,
and  he  brought  to  its  attainment  one  of  the  shrewdest
and most inventive  of  human  intellects,  one of  the
calmest  and  best  balanced  of  human  characters. '  It  is
hard,'  he  once  wrote,  '  for  an  empty  sack  to  stand  up-
right ; '  and  it  was  his  leading  principle  that  a  certain
amount  of  material  prosperity  is  the  almost  indispen-
sable condition  as  well  as  the  chief  reward  of  integrity
of  character. He  had  no  religious  fervour,  and  no  sym-
pathy with  those  who  appeal  to  strong  passions  or  heroic
self-abnegation  ;  but  his  busy  and  somewhat  pedestrian
intellect  was ceaselessly  employed  in devising  useful
schemes  for  the  benefit  of  mankind. He  founded  so-
cieties for mutual  improvement,  established  the first
circulating  library  in  America,  introduced  new  methods
for extinguishing fires,  warming rooms,  paving and
lighting  the  streets,  gave  a  great  impulse  to  education
in  Pennsylvania,  took  part  in  many  schemes  for  strength-
ening the  defences  and  improving  the  police  of  the  colony,
and  was  the  soul  of  more  than  one  enterprise  of  public
charity. '  Poor  Richard's  Almanac,'  which he began
in  1732,  and  which  he  continued  for  twenty-five  years,
attained  an  annual  circulation  of  near  10,000,  and  he
made  it  a  vehicle  for  diffusing  through  the  colonies  a
vast  amount  of  practical  knowledge  and  homely  wisdom.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  «.

His  brother  printed  the  fourth  newspaper  which
ever  appeared  in  America,  and  Franklin  wrote  in  it
when  still  a  boy.  He  had  afterwards  a  newspaper  of
his  own,  and  there  were  few  questions  of  local  politics
in  which  he  did  not  take  an  active  part.  He  was  very
ambitious  of  literary  success,  and  within  certain  limits
he  has  rarely  been  surpassed.  How  completely  blind
he  was  to  the  sublime  and  the  poetical  in  literature,  he
indeed  conclusively  showed  when  he  tried  to  improve
the  majestic  language  of  the  Book  of  Job  or  the  Lord's
Prayer  by  translating  them  into  ordinary  eighteenth-
century  phraseology ;  but  on  his  own  subjects  no  one
wrote  better.  His  style  was  always  terse,  luminous,
simple,  pregnant  with  meaning,  eminently  persuasive.
There  is  scarcely  an  obscure  or  involved  or  superfluous
sentence,  scarcely  an  ambiguous  term  in  his  works,  and
not  a  trace  of  that  false  and  inflated  rhetoric  which  has
spoilt  much  American  writing,  and  from  which  the
addresses  of  Washington  himself  are  not  quite  free.
He  was  a  most  skilful  and  plausible  reasoner,  abound-
ing in  ingenious  illustration,  and  with  a  happy  gift  of
carrying  into  difficult  and  intricate  subjects  that  trans-
parent simplicity  of  style  which  is,  perhaps,  the  highest
reach  of  art.  At  the  same  time  his  researches  and
writings  on  electricity  gave  him  a  wide  reputation  in
the  scientific  world,  and  in  1 752  his  great  discovery  of
the  lightning  conductor  made  his  name  universally
known  through  Europe.  It  was  indeed  pre-eminently
fitted  to  strike  the  imagination ;  and  it  was  a  strange
freak  of  fortune  that  one  of  the  most  sublime  and  poetic
of  scientific  discoveries  should  have  fallen  to  the  lot  of
one  of  the  most  prosaic  of  great  men.

In  every  phase  of  the  struggle  with  England  he
took  a  prominent  part ;  and  it  may  be  safely  asserted
that  if  he  had  been  able  to  guide  American  opinion,  it
would  never  have  ended  in  revolution.  During  a  great

CH.  H.  BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN.  141

portion  of  the  struggle  he  always  professed  &  warm
attachment  for  England  and  the  English  Constitution.
In  conversation  with  Burke  he  expressed  the  greatest
concein  at  the  impending  separation  of  the  two  coun-
tries ;  predicted  that  '  America  would  never  again  see
such  happy  days  as  she  had  passed  under  the  protection
of  England,  and  observed  that  ours  was  the  only  in-
stance of  a  great  empire  in  which  the  most  distant  parts
and  members  had  been  as  well  governed  as  the  metro-
polis and  its  vicinage.' 1  A  man  so  eminently  wise  and
temperate  must  have  clearly  seen  that  colonies  situated
3,000  miles  from  the  mother  country,  doubling  their
population  every  twenty-five  years,  possessing  repre-
sentative institutions  of  the  freest  and  most  democratic
type,  and  inhabited  by  a  people  who,  from  their  circum-
stances and  their  religion,  carried  the  sentiment  of
independence  to  the  highest  point,  were  never  in  any
real  danger  of  political  servitude,  and  that  there  was  no
difference  between  America  and  England  which  reason-
able men  might  not  easily  have  compromised.  Per-
sonally, no  one  had  less  sympathy  than  Franklin  with
anarchy,  violence,  and  declamation,  and  in  some  respects
his  natural  leaning  was  towards  the  Tories.  It  is
remarkable  that  when  he  was  in  England  at  the  time
of  the  Middlesex  election,  his  sympathies  ran  strongly
against  Wilkes,  he  spoke  with  indignation  of  the  punish-
ment that  must  await  a  people  '  who  are  ungratefully
abusing  the  best  Constitution  and  the  best  King  any  na-
tion was  ever  blessed  with ; ' 2  and  he  fully  adopted  the
Tory  maxim  that  the  whole  political  power  of  a  nation
belongs  of  right  to  the  freeholders.3  He  held  under

1  Burke's '  Appeal from  the  404.

New  to  the  Old  Whigs.' Works, *  '  All  the  land  in  England  is

vi. 122. See,  too,  Franklin's  in  fact  represented.  ...  As  to

Works,  i.  413,  414.  those  who  have  no  landed  pro-

1  Franklin's  Works,  vii.  399-  perty  in  a  county,  the  allowing

142 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  w.

the  Government  the  position  of  Postmaster-General  for
America.  He  was  once  thought  of  as  Under-Secretary
of  State  for  the  colonies  under  Lord  Hillsborough,  and
Lis  son  was  royal  Governor  of  New  Jersey.

His  writings  are  full  of  suggestions  which,  if  they
had  been  acted  on,  might  have  averted  the  disruption.
As  we  have  already  seen,  he  had  advocated  an  union  of
the  colonies  for  defensive  purposes  as  early  as  1754,
and  in  1764  had  regarded  with  great  equanimity,  and
even  approval,  the  possible  establishment  of  an  English
army  in  America,  paid  for  by  duties  imposed  on  the
colonies.  He  opposed  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  it  is  quite
evident,  from  his  conduct,  that  he  neither  expected  nor
desired  that  it  should  be  resisted.  In  one  of  his
writings,  he  very  wisely  suggested  that  England  should
give  up  her  trade  monopoly,  and  that  America  should
in  return  agree  to  pay  a  fixed  annual  sum  for  the
military  purposes  of  the  Empire.  In  another,  he
advocated  a  legislative  union,  which  would  have  en-
abled the  English  Parliament,  without  injustice,  to  tax
America.  He  strongly  maintained  the  reality  of  the
distinction  between  internal  and  external  taxation,  and
asserted  with  great  truth  that  '  the  real  grievance  is  not
that  Britain  puts  duties  upon  her  own  manufactures
exported  to  us,  but  that  she  forbids  us  to  buy  like
manufactures  from  any  other  country.'

He  was  Agent  for  Pennsylvania  at  the  time  of  the
Stamp  Act,  and,  in  his  examination  soon  after,  before  the
House  of  Commons,  he  defended  the  colonial  cause  with
an  ability,  a  presence  of  mind,  and  a  moderation  that
produced  a  great  impression  upon  Parliament.  His  many
tracts  in  defence  of  their  cause,  though  they  are  very
far  from  a  fair  or  candid  statement  even  of  the  facts  of
the  case,  were  undoubtedly  the  ablest  and  most  plausible

them  to  vote  for  legislators  is  an vations,'  Franklin's  Works,  iv.
impropriety.' — '  Political Obser- 221.

CM.  xi.  BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.  143

arguments  advanced  on  the  American  side.  In  17G7  be
mentioned  the  assiduity  with  which  the  French  ambas-
sador was  courting  him,  and  he  added :  '  I  fancy  that
intriguing  nation  would  like  very  well  to  meddle  on
occasion  and  blow  up  the  coals  between  Britain  and  her
colonies  ;  but  I  hope  we  shall  give  them  no  opportunity.' l
In  his  confidential  correspondence  with  American  politi-
cians, he  constantly  advocated  moderation  and  patience.
'Our  great  security,'  he  wrote  in  1773,  'lies  in  our
growing  strength  both  in  numbers  and  wealth,  that
creates  an  increasing  ability  of  assisting  this  nation  in
its  wars,  which  will  make  us  more  respectable,  our
friendship  more  valued,  and  our  enmity  feared.  .  .  .
In  confidence  of  this  coming  change  in  our  favour,  I
think  our  prudence  is,  meanwhile,  to  be  quiet,  only
holding  up  our  rights  and  claims  on  all  occasions  .  .  .
but  bearing  patiently  the  little  present  notice  that  is
taken  of  them.  They  will  all  have  their  weight  in  time,
and  that  time  is  at  no  great  distance.' 2  '  There  seems
to  be  among  us  some  violent  spirits  who  are  for  an
immediate  rupture ;  but  I  trust  the  general  prudence
of  our  country  will  see  that  by  our  growing  strength
we  advance  fast  to  a  situation  in  which  our  claims  must
be  allowed ;  that  by  a  premature  struggle  we  may  be
crippled  and  kept  down  another  age  .  .  .  that  between
governed  and  governing  every  mistake  in  government,
every  encroachment  on  right,  is  not  worth  a  rebellion
.  .  .  remembering  withal  that  this  Protestant  country
(our  mother,  though  lately  an  unkind  one)  is  worth
preserving,  and  that  her  weight  in  the  scale  of  Europe,
and  her  safety  in  a  great  degree,  may  depend  on  our
union  with  her.'3

:  Franklin's  Works,  vii.  357.  then  returning  to  America. 'Go

2  Ibid. viii. 30, 31. After  home  and  tell  your  countrymen

the Stamp Act, Franklin ex-  to  get  children  as  fast  as  they

pressed  his  opinion  in  a  pithy  can."

sentence  to  Ingersoll,  who  svas  *  Ibid.  pp.  78,  79.

144 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xr.

In  addition  to  his  position  of  Agent  for  Pennsylvania,
he  became  Agent  for  New  Jersey,  for  Georgia,  and  in
1770  for  Massachusetts.  His  relations,  however,  with
the  latter  colony  were  not  always  absolutely  cordial.
His  religious  scepticism,  his  known  hatred  of  war,  his
personal  relations  to  the  British  Government,  his  dislike
to  violent  counsels,  and  to  that  exaggerated  and  de-
clamatory rhetoric  which  was  peculiarly  popular  at
Boston,  all  placed  him  somewhat  out  of  harmony  with
his  constituents;  and  although  they  were  justly  proud
of  his  European  reputation,  even  this  was  sometimes  a
cause  of  suspicion.  They  felt  that  he,  and  he  alone,  of
living  Americans,  by  his  own  unassisted  merit,  had  won
a  great  position  in  England,  and  they  doubted  whether
he  could  be  as  devoted  to  their  cause  as  men  whose
reputation  was  purely  provincial.  In  1771,  Arthur
Lee,  of  Virginia,  who  was  fully  identified  with  the
extreme  party,  was  appointed  his  colleague,  and  there
were  several  other  symptoms  that  Franklin  was  looked
on  with  some  distrust.  The  suspicions  of  his  sincerity
were,  however,  wholly  groundless.  His  heart  was
warmly  in  the  American  cause,  and  although  he  would
have  gladly  moderated  the  policy  of  his  countrymen,
he  was  by  no  means  disposed  to  suffer  himself  to  be
stranded  and  distanced.  His  views  became  more  ex-
tensive, and  his  language  more  emphatic ;  he  now  main-
tained with  great  ability  the  position  that  the  colonies,
like  Hanover,  or  like  Scotland  before  the  Union,  though
they  were  subject  to  the  English  king,  were  wholly  in-
dependent of  the  British  Legislature;  and  in  1773  he
was  concerned  in  a  transaction  which  placed  him  at  open
war  with  English  opinion.

It  had  been  for  a  long  time  the  habit  of  Hutchinson,
the  Governor-General  of  Massachusetts ;  of  Oliver,  who
was  now  Lieutenant-Governor ;  and  of  some  other  poli-
ticians of  the  province  who  were  attached  to  the  Crown,

CH.  w.  HUTCniXSON's  LETTERS.  145

to  carry  on  a  strictly  private  and  confidential  correspond-
ence about  the  state  of  the  colonies  with  Whately,  who
had  formerly  been  private  secretary  to  George  Grenville.
In  June  1772  Whately  died,  and  in  December,  by  some
person  and  some  means  that  have  never  been  certainly
disclosed,  the  letters  of  his  American  correspondents
were  stolen  and  carried  to  Franklin.  The  letters  of
Hutchinson  had,  with  one  exception,  been  written  be-
fore his  appointment  as  Governor,  but  at  a  time  when
he  held  high  office  in  the  colony,  and  they  were  written
with  the  perfect  freedom  of  confidential  intercourse.
Whately,  though  peculiarly  conversant  with  colonial
matters,  held  at  this  time  no  office  under  the  Crown,
and  was  a  simple  member  of  the  Opposition.  Hutchin-
son, in  writing  to  him,  dilated  upon  the  turbulent  and
rebellious  disposition  of  Boston,  the  factious  character
of  the  local  agitators,  the  weakness  of  the  Executive,
the  necessity  of  a  military  force  to  support  the  Govern-
ment, and  the  excessive  predominance  of  the  democratic
element  in  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts.  '  I  never
think,'  he  wrote  in  the  letter  which  was  afterwards
most  violently  attacked,  '  of  the  measures  necessary  for
the  peace  and  good  order  of  the  colonies  without  pain.
There  must  be  an  abridgment  of  what  are  called  English
liberties.  ...  I  doubt  whether  it  is  possible  to  project
a  system  of  government  in  which  a  colony  3,000  miles
distant  from  the  parent  State  shall  enjoy  all  the  liberty
of  the  parent  State.  ...  I  wish  the  good  of  the  colony
when  I  wish  to  see  some  further  restraint  of  liberty
rather  than  the  connection  with  the  parent  State  should
be  broken,  for  I  am  sure  such  a  breach  must  prove  the
ruin  of  the  colony.'  Oliver  argued  with  more  detail
that  the  Council  or  Upper  Chamber  should  consist  ex-
clusively of  landed  proprietors,  that  the  Crown  officers
should  have  salaries  independent  of  popular  favour,  that
the  popular  election  of  grand  juries  should  be  abolished,
VOL.  IV.  L

146 ENGLAND  IN  TUB  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

and  that  there  should  be  a  colonial  representation  in
the  English  Parliament.  All  this  appears  to  have
been  most  honestly  written,  but  it  was  written  without
the  reserve  and  the  caution  which  would  have  been
maintained  in  letters  intended  to  be  published.  Both
Hutchinson  and  Oliver  impressed  on  their  correspon-
dent their  desire  that  these  letters  should  be  deemed
strictly  confidential.1  They  were  brought  to  Franklin
as  political  information  for  his  perusal.  He  at  once
perceived  the  advantage  they  would  give  to  the  popular
party,  and  he  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  send
them  to  Massachusetts  on  condition  that  they  should
not  be  printed  or  copied ;  that  they  should  be  shown
only  to  a  few  of  the  leading  people,  that  they  should  be
eventually  returned,  and  that  the  source  from  which
they  were  obtained  should  be  concealed.

The  letters  were  accordingly  sent  to  Thomas  Gush-
ing, the  Speaker  of  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts,  and,
as  might  have  been  expected,  they  soon  created  a  general
ferment.  As  Franklin  acutely  wrote,  '  there  was  no
restraint  proposed  to  talking  of  them,  but  only  to  copy-
ing.' They  were  shown  to  many  of  the  leading  agita-
tors. John  Adams  was  suffered  to  take  them  with  him
on  his  judicial  circuit,  and  they  were  finally  brought
before  the  Assembly  in  a  secret  sitting.  The  Assembly
at  once  carried  resolutions  censuring  them  as  designed
to  sow  discord  and  encourage  the  oppressive  acts  of  the
British  Government,  to  introduce  arbitrary  power  into
the  province  and  subvert  its  constitution,  and  with  the
concurrence  of  the  Council  it  petitioned  the  King  to
remove  Hutchinson  and  Oliver  from  the  Government.
The  letters  were  soon  generally  known.  The  sole  ob-
stacle to  their  diffusion  was  the  promise  that  they  should
not  be  copied  or  printed,  and  it  was  not  likely  that  thi3

1  See  the  letters  of  Oct.  26,  1769,  and  May  7, 1767.

en.  xi.  Pi: LOCATION OF  THE LETTERS.  1-17

would  be  observed.  According  to  one  account,1  copies
were  produced  which  were  falsely  said  to  have  come  by
the  last  mail  from  England,  and  which  were  therefore
not  included  under  the  original  promise.  According  to
another  account,2  Hancock,  one  of  the  leading  patriots,
took  '  advantage  of  the  implied  permission  of  Hutchin-
son '  to  have  copies  made.  Hutchinson  had  indeed  been
challenged  with  the  letters,  and  been  asked  for  copies  of
them  and  of  such  others  as  he  should  think  proper  to
communicate.  After  some  delay,  he  answered  eva-
sively, '  If  you  desire  copies  with  a  view  to  make  them
public,  the  originals  are  more  proper  for  the  purpose
than  the  copies,'  and  this  sentence  appears  to  have  been
considered  a  sufficient  authorisation.  The  letters  were
accordingly  printed  and  scattered  broadcast  over  the
colonies.

When  the  printed  copies  arrived  in  England,  they
excited  great  astonishment,  and  William  Whately,  the
brother  and  executor  of  the  late  Secretary,  was  filled
with  a  very  natural  consternation  at  a  theft  which  was
likely  to  have  such  important  consequences,  and  for
which  public  opinion  was  inclined  to  make  him  respon-
sible. He,  in  his  turn,  suspected  a  certain  Mr.  Temple,
who  had  been  allowed  to  look  through  the  papers  of  his
deceased  brother,  for  the  purpose  of  perusing  one  re-
lating to  the  colonies,  and  a  duel  ensued,  in  which
Whately  was  wounded.  Franklin  then,  for  the  first
time,  in  a  letter  to  a  newspaper,  disclosed  the  part  he
had  taken.  He  stated  that  he,  and  he  alone,  had  ob-
tained and  transmitted  to  Boston  the  letters  in  question,
that  they  had  never  passed  into  the  hands  of  William
Whately,  and  that  it  was  therefore  impossible  either  that
Whately  could  have  communicated  them  or  that  Temple
could  have  taken  them  from  his  papers.  There  is  some

Sparks'  Cantimiatian  of  Franklin's  Life.  *  Bancroft.

L 2

148  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. or.  n.

reason  to  believe  that  the  original  owner  had  left  them
carelessly  in  a  public  office,  from  whence  they  had  been
abstracted,  but  the  mystery  was  never  decisively  solved,
franklin  always  maintained  that  in  this  matter
he  had  simply  done  his  duty,  and  that  his  conduct  was
perfectly  honourable.  The  letters,  he  said, '  were  written
by  public  officers  to  persons  in  public  stations,  on  public
affairs,  and  intended  to  procure  public  measures.'  They
were  brought  to  him  as  the  Agent  for  Massachusetts,
and  it  was  his  duty  as  such  to  communicate  to  his  con-
stituents intelligence  that  was  of  such  vital  importance
to  their  affairs.  He  even  urged,  more  ingeniously  than
plausibly,  that  he  was  animated  by  a  virtuous  desire  to
lessen  the  breach  between  England  and  the  colonies.
Like  most  Americans,  he  said,  he  had  viewed  with  in-
dignation the  coercive  measures  which  emanated,  as  he
supposed,  from  the  British  Government,  but  his  feelings
were  much  changed  when  it  was  proved  that  their  real
origin  might  be  traced  to  Americans  holding  high  offices
in  their  native  country.  It  was  to  convince  him  of  this
truth  that  the  letters  had  been  originally  brought  to  him.
It  was  to  spread  a  similar  conviction  among  his  country-
men that  he  had  sent  them  across  the  Atlantic.  With
more  force  his  apologists  have  urged  that  the  sanctity  of
private  correspondence  was  not  then  regarded  as  it  is
regarded  now,  and  that  the  Government  itself  continu-
ally tampered  with  it  for  political  purposes.1  In  1766
the  Duke  of  Bedford  discovered,  to  his  great  indigna-
tion, that  a  letter  which  he  had  written  to  the  Duke  of
Grafton  had  been  opened;  and  among  the  items  of
secret-service  money  during  the  administration  of  Gren-
ville  was  a  sum  to  a  Post  Office  official  '  for  engraving
the  many  seals  we  are  obliged  to  make  use  of. ' 2  If

1  See  vol.  iii.  p.  249. Burke's 2  Grenville  Papers,  iii.  99,  311,
Works,  U.  148.  312.

CH.  xi.  FRANKLIN'S  CONDUCT.  140

Government  was  not  ashamed  to  resort  to  such  methods,
was  it  reasonable  to  expect  that  an  agent  who  was  en-
deavouring in  a  hostile  country  and  against  overwhelm-
ing obstacles  to  maintain  the  interests  of  his  colony
would  be  more  scrupulous?  Letters  of  Franklin  him-
self, written  to  the  colony,  had  been  opened,  and  their
contents  had  been  employed  for  political  purposes.
Hutchinson  had  been  concerned  in  this  proceeding,  and
could  therefore  hardly  complain  that  his  own  weapons
were  turned  against  himself.1

These  considerations,  no  doubt,  palliate  the  conduct
of  Franklin.  Whether  they  do  more  than  palliate  it,
must  be  left  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader.  In  England
that  conduct  was  judged  with  the  utmost  severity.  For
the  purpose  of  ruining  honourable  officials,  it  was  said,
their  most  confidential  letters,  written  several  years
before  to  a  private  Member  of  Parliament  who  had  at
that  time  no  connection  with  the  Government,  had  been
deliberately  stolen  ;  and  although  the  original  thief  was
undiscovered,  the  full  weight  of  the  guilt  and  of  the  dis-
honour rested  upon  Franklin.  He  was  perfectly  aware
that  the  letters  had  been  written  in  the  strictest  confi-
dence, that  they  had  been  dishonestly  obtained  without
the  knowledge  either  of  the  person  who  received  them
or  of  the  persons  who  wrote  them,  and  that  their  ex-
posure would  be  a  deadly  injury  to  the  writers.  Under
these  circumstances  he  procured  them.  Under  these
circumstances  he  sent  them  to  a  small  group  of  politi-
cians whom  he  knew  to  be  the  bitterest  enemies  of  the
Governor,  and  one  of  the  consequences  of  his  conduct
was  a  duel  in  which  the  brother  of  the  man  whose  private
papers  had  been  stolen  was  nearly  killed.  Any  man  of
high  and  sensitive  honour,  it  was  said,  would  sooner

1  See  Franklin's  own  vindica- accompanying  notes. Works,  iv.
lion  of  his  proceedings,  with  the 404-455.

1 50 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XT.

have  put  his  hand  in  the  fire  than  have  been  concerned
in  such  a  transaction.  When  the  petition  for  the  re-
moval of  Hutchinson  and  Oliver  arrived,  the  Govern-
ment referred  it  to  the  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council,
that  the  allegations  might  be  publicly  examined  with
counsel  on  either  side,  and  the  case  excited  an  interest
which  had  been  rarely  paralleled.  No  less  than  thirty-
five  Privy  Councillors  attended.  Among  the  distin-
guished strangers  who  crowded  the  Bar  were  Burke,
Priestley,  and  Jeremy  Bentham.  Dunning  and  Lee,
who  spoke  for  the  petitioners,  appear  to  have  made  no
impression ;  while  on  the  other  side,  Wedderburn,  the
Solicitor-General,  made  one  of  his  most  brilliant  but
most  virulent  speeches.  After  a  brief  but  eloquent
eulogy  of  the  character  and  services  of  Hutchinson,  he
passed  to  the  manner  in  which  the  letters  were  procured,
and  turning  to  Franklin,  who  stood  before  him,  he  de-
livered an  invective  which  appears  to  have  electrified
his  audience.  '  How  the  letters  came  into  the  possession
of  anyone  but  the  right  owners,'  he  said,  '  is  still  a  mys-
tery for  Dr.  Franklin  to  explain.  He  was  not  the
rightful  owner,  and  they  could  not  have  come  into  his
hands  by  fair  means.  Nothing  will  acquit  Dr.  Franklin
of  the  charge  of  obtaining  them  by  fraudulent  or  corrupt
means  for  the  most  malignant  of  purposes,  unless  he
stole  them  from  the  person  who  stole  them.  I  hope,  my
Lords,  you  will  brand  this  man  for  the  honour  of  this
country,  of  Europe,  and  of  mankind.  .  .  .  Into  what
country  will  the  fabricator  of  this  iniquity  hereafter  go
with  unembarrassed  face  ?  Men  will  watch  him  with  a
jealous  eye.  They  will  hide  their  papers  from  him,  and
lock  up  their  escritoires.  Having  hitherto  aspired  after
fame  by  his  writings,  he  will  henceforth  esteem  it  a  libel
to  be  called  a  man  of  letters — homo  trium  literarum.1  But

1  Fur- a  thief.

CH.  xr.  WEDDERBURN*S  INVECTIVE.  151

lie  not  only  took  away  those  papers  from  one  brother —
he  kept  himself  concealed  till  he  nearly  occasioned  the
murder  of  another.  It  is  impossible  to  read  his  account,
expressive  of  the  coolest  and  most  deliberate  malice,
without  horror.  Amid  these  tragical  events,  of  one  per-
son nearly  murdered,  of  another  answerable  for  the  issue,
of  a  worthy  Governor  hurt  in  his  dearest  interests,  the
fate  of  America  in  suspense — here  is  a  man  who,  with
the  utmost  insensibility  of  remorse,  stands  up  and  avows
himself  the  author  of  all.  I  can  compare  him  only  to
Zanga  in  Dr.  Young's  "  Revenge  " :

Know  then,  'twas  I —

I  forged  the  letter. I  disposed  the  picture,
I  hated,  I  despised,  and  I  destroy.

I  ask,  my  Lords,  whether  the  revengeful  temper  at-
tributed by  poetic  fiction  only  to  the  bloody  African,  is
not  surpassed  by  the  coolness  and  apathy  of  the  wily
American  ? '

The  scene  was  a  very  strange  one,  and  it  is  well
suited  to  the  brush  of  an  historical  painter.  Franklin
was  now  an  old  man  of  sixty-seven,  the  greatest  writer,
the  greatest  philosopher  America  had  produced,  a
member  of  some  of  the  chief  scientific  societies  iu
Europe,  the  accredited  representative  of  the  most  im-
portant of  the  colonies  of  America,  and  for  nearly  an
hour  and  in  the  midst  of  the  most  distinguished  of
living  Englishmen  he  was  compelled  to  hear  himself
denounced  as  a  thief  or  the  accomplice  of  thieves.  He
stood  there  conspicuous  and  erect,  and  without  moving
a  muscle,  amid  the  torrent  of  invective,  but  his  apparent
composure  was  shared  by  few  who  were  about  him.
With  the  single  exception  of  Lord  North,  the  Privy
Councillors  who  were  present  lost  all  dignity  and  all
self-respect.  They  laughed  aloud  at  each  sarcastic  sally
of  Wedderburn.  '  The  indecency  ot  their  behaviour,'  in

152 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XT.

the  words  of  Shelburne,  '  exceeded,  as  is  agreed  on  all
hands,  that  of  any  committee  of  elections; '  and  Fox,  in
a  speech  which  he  made  as  late  as  1803,  reminded  the
House  how  on  that  memorable  occasion  '  all  men  tossed
up  their  hats  and clapped their hands  in  boundless
delight  at  Mr.  Wedderburn's  speech.' The  Committee
at  once  voted that  the  petition  of  the  Massachusetts
Assembly  was  '  false,  groundless,  and  scandalous,  and
calculated  only  for  the  seditious  purpose  of  keeping  up
a  spirit  of  clamour  and  discontent  in the province.'
The  King  in  Council  confirmed  the  report,  and  Franklin
was  ignominiously  dismissed from  his  office  of  Post-
master. It  was  an  office  which  had  yielded  no  revenue
before he  had received it,  but which his  admirable
organisation  had  made  lucrative  and  important. The
colonists  accepted  the  insults  directed  against  their  great
representative  as  directed  against  themselves,1  and  from
this  time  the  most  sagacious  of  American  leaders  had  a
deep  personal  grudge  against  the  British  Government.2
In  the  meantime  a  serious attempt  was  made  to
make  the  tea  duty  a  reality. About  seventeen  million
pounds  of  tea  lay  unsold  in  the  warehouses  of  the  East
India  Company. The  Company  was  at  this  time  in  ex-
treme  financial  embarrassment,  almost amounting to
bankruptcy,  and  in  order  to  assist  it  the  whole  duty
which  had  formerly  been  imposed  on  the  exportation  to
America was  remitted.3 Hitherto  the Company  had
been  obliged  to  send  their  tea  to  England,  where  it  was
sold  by  public  sale  to  merchants  and  dealers,  and  by

1  On  the  extraordinary  popu-  19. Chatham Correspondence,
larity  of  Franklin  at  this  time,  iv.  322,  323.

see  the  letter  of  Dr.  Bush,  quoted  3  By the previous law (12

in Sparks'  Continuation  of  the  Geo.  III.  c.  60)  a  drawback of

Life  of  Franklin.  three-fifths  of  the  duty  had  been

2  Life  of  Franklin.  Campbell's  allowed.
Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  viii.  14-

cn.  xi.  TEE  TEA SENT  TO BOSTON.  153

them  exported  to  the  colonies.  The  Company  were
now  permitted  to  export  tea  direct  from  their  ware-
houses on  their  own  account  on  obtaining  a  licence  from
the  Treasury,1  and  they  accordingly  selected  their  own
agents  in  the  different  colonies.  As  the  East  India
Company  had  of  late  been  brought  to  a  great  extent
under  the  direction  of  the  Government,  the  consignees
were  such  as  favoured  the  Administration,  and  in  Boston
they  included  the  two  sons  of  Hutchinson.  Several
ships  freighted  with  tea  were  sent  to  the  colonies,  and
the  Government  hoped,  and  the  '  sons  of  liberty  '  feared,
that  if  it  were  once  landed  it  would  probably  find
purchasers,  for  owing  to  the  drawback  of  the  duty  on
exportation  it  could  be  sold  much  cheaper  than  in
England  itself,  and  cheaper  than  tea  imported  from  any
other  country.  The  colonies  at  once  entered  into  a
conspiracy  to  prevent  the  tea  being  landed,  and  a  long
series  of  violent  measures  were  taken  for  the  purpose  of
intimidating  those  who  were  concerned  in  receiving  it.
At  last,  in  December  1773,  three  ships  laden  with  tea
arrived  at  Boston,  and  on  the  16th  of  that  month  forty
or  fifty  men  disguised  as  Mohawk  Indians,  and  under  the
direct  superintendence  of  Samuel  Adams,  Hancock.2
and  other  leading  patriots,  boarded  them,  and  posting
sentinels  to  keep  all  agents  of  authority  at  a  distance,
they  flung  the  whole  cargo,  consisting  of  342  chests,
into  the  sea.  In  the  course  of  the  violent  proceedings
at  Boston  in  this  year,  the  Council,  the  militia,  the  corps
of  cadets  had  been  vainly  asked  to  assist  in  maintaining
the  law.  The  sheriff*  of  the  town  was  grossly  insulted.
The  magistrates  would  do  nothing,  and,  as  usual,  the
crowning  outrage  of  the  destruction  of  the  tea  was

1  13  George  III.  c.  44.  tea  from  St.  Eustatia. Hist,  of

1  Hutchinson notices that  Massachusetts  Bay,  p.  297.  See,

Hancock's  uncle  had  made his  too,  Sabine's  American  Loyal-

large  fortune  chiefly  by  smuggling  isls,  i.  9.

154 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cn.  xi.

accomplished  with  perfect  impunity,  and  not  a  single
person  engaged  in  it  was  in  any  way  molested.  Afc
Charleston  a  ship  arrived  with  tea,  but  the  consignees
were  intimidated  into  resignation,  and  the  tea  was  stored
in  cellars,  where  it  ultimately  perished.  At  New  York
and  Philadelphia  the  inhabitants  obliged  the  captains  of
the  tea  ships  at  once  to  sail  back  with  their  cargoes  to
the  Thames.

While  the  law  was  thus  openly  defied,  the  popular
party  were  inflexibly  opposed  to  the  project  of  granting
the  judges  fixed  salaries  from  the  Crown,  and  thus
making  them  in  some  degree  independent  of  the  As-
semblies. In  Massachusetts  the  Assembly  declared  all
judges  who  received  salaries  from  the  Crown  instead
of  the  people  unworthy  of  public  confidence,  and  it
threatened  to  impeach  them  before  the  Council  and  the
Governor.  In  February  1774,  proceedings  of  this  kind
were  actually  instituted  against  Oliver,  the  Chief  Justice
of  the  province,  because  he  had  accepted  an  annual
stipend  from  the  Crown.  Out  of  100  members  who
voted,  no  less  than  92  supported  the  impeachment.
Hutchinson  of  course  refused  to  concur  in  the  measure,
and  on  March  30  he  prorogued  the  House,  and  at  the
same  time  accused  it  of  having  been  guilty  of  proceed-
ings which  '  strike  directly  at  the  honour  and  authorky
of  the  King  and  Parliament.'

The  news  of  these  events  convinced  most  intelligent
Englishmen  that  war  was  imminent,  and  that  the  taxa-
tion of  America  could  only  be  enforced  by  the  sword.
Several  distinct  lines  of  policy  were  during  the  next
two  or  three  years  advocated  in  England.  Tucker,  the
Dean  of  Gloucester,  a  bitter  Tory,  but  one  of  the  best
living  writers  on  all  questions  of  trade,  maintained  a
theory  which  was  then  esteemed  visionary  and  almost
childish,  but  which  will  now  be  very  differently  regarded.
He  had  no  respect  for  the  Americans  j  he  dissected  with

CH.  xi. .  DEAN TUCKER.  155

unsparing  severity  the  many  weaknesses  in  their  argu-
ments, and  the  declamatory  and  rhetorical  character  of
much  of  their  patriotism  ;  but  he  contended  that  matters
had  now  come  to  such  a  point  that  the  only  real  remedy
was  separation.  Colonies  which  would  do  nothing  for
their  own  defence,  which  were  in  a  condition  of  smothered
rebellion,  and  which  were  continually  waiting  for  the
difficulties  of  the  mother  country  in  order  to  assert  their
power,  were  a  source  of  political  weakness  and  not  of
political  strength,  and  the  trade  advantages  which  were
supposed  to  spring  from  the  connection  were  of  the
most  delusive  kind.  Trade,  as  he  showed,  will  always
ultimately  flow  in  the  most  lucrative  channels.  The
most  stringent  laws  had  been  unable  to  prevent  the
Americans  from  trading  with  foreign  countries  if  they
could  do  so  with  advantage,  and  in  case  of  separation
the  Americans  would  still  resort  to  England  for  most
of  their  goods,  for  the  simple  reason  that  England  could
supply  them  more  cheaply  than  any  other  nation.  The
supremacy  of  English  industry  did  not  rest  upon
political  causes.  '  The  trade  of  the  world  is  carried  on
in  a  great  measure  by  British  capital.  British  capital
is  greater  than  that  of  any  other  country  in  the  world,
and  as  long  as  this  superiority  lasts  it  is  morally  impos-
sible that  the  trade  of  the  British  nation  can  suffer  any
very  great  or  alarming  diminution.'  No  single  fact
is  more  clearly  established  by  history  than  that  the
bitterest  political  animosity  is  insufficient  to  prevent
nations  from  ultimately  resorting  to  the  markets  that
are  most  advantageous  to  them,  and  as  long  as  England
maintained  the  conditions  of  her  industrial  supremacy
unimpaired  she  was  in  this  respect  perfectly  secure.
But  nothing  impairs  these  conditions  so  much  as  war,
which  wastes  capital  unproductively  and  burdens  in-
dustry with  a  great  additional  weight  of  debt,  military
establishments,  and  taxation.  The  war  which  began

156 ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xi.

about  the  Spanish  right  of  search  had  cost  sixty  millions,
and  had  scarcely  produced  any  benefit  to  England.
The  last  war  cost  ninety  millions,  and  its  most  im-
portant result  had  been,  by  securing  the  Americans
from  French  aggression,  to  render  possible  their  present
rebellion.  Let  England,  then,  be  wise  in  time,  and
before  she  draws  the  sword  let  her  calculate  what
possible  advantage  she  could  derive  commensurate  with
the  permanent  evils  which  would  inevitably  follow.
The  Americans  have  refused  to  submit  to  the  authority
and  legislation  of  the  Supreme  Legislature,  or  to  bear
their  part  in  supporting  the  burden  of  the  Empire.
Let  them,  then,  cease  to  be  fellow-members  of  that
Empire.  Let  them  go  their  way  to  form  their  own
destinies.  Let  England  free  herself  from  the  cost,  the
responsibility,  and  the  danger  of  defending  them,  re-
taining, like  other  nations,  the  right  of  connecting
herself  with  them  by  treaties  of  commerce  or  of  alliance.1
The  views  of  Adam  Smith,  though  less  strongly  ex-
pressed, are  not  very  different  from  those  of  Tucker.
The  '  Wealth  of  Nations  '  was  published  in  1776,  and
although  it  had  little  political  influence  for  at  least  a
generation  after  its  appearance,  its  publication  has
ultimately  proved  one  of  the  most  important  events  in
the  economical,  and  indeed  in  the  intellectual,  history
of  modern  Europe.  No  part  of  it  is  more  remarkable
than  the  chapters  devoted  to  the  colonies.  Adam  Smith
showed  by  an  exhaustive  examination  that  the  liberty
of  commerce  which  England  allowed  to  her  colonies,
though  greatly  and  variously  restricted,  was  at  least
more  extensive  than  that  which  any  other  nation
conceded  to  its  dependencies,  and  that  it  was  sufficient
to  give  them  a  large  and  increasing  measure  of  pro-
sperity. The  laws,  however,  preventing  them  from

1  Tucker's  Political  Tracts.

CH.  xr.  ADAM SMITH.  157

employing  their  industry  in  manufactures  for  them-
selves, he  described  as  '  a  manifest  violation  of  the  most
sacred  rights  of  mankind,'  and  likely  '  in  a  more  ad-
vanced state '  to  prove  '  really  oppressive  and  insupport-
able.' Hitherto,  however,  these  laws,  though  they  were
'  badges  of  slavery  imposed  without  any  sufficient
reason,'  had  been  of  little  practical  importance;  for,
owing  to  the  great  cheapness  of  land  and  the  great
clearness  of  labour  in  the  colonies,  it  was  obviously  the
most  economical  course  for  the  Americans  to  devote
themselves  to  agriculture  and  fisheries,  and  to  import
manufactured  goods.  His  chief  contention,  however,
was  that  the  system  of  trade  monopoly  which,  with
many  exceptions  and  qualifications,  was  maintained  in
the  colonies  for  the  benefit  of  England,  was  essentially
vicious ;  that  the  colonies  were  profoundly  injured  by
the  restrictions  which  confined  them  to  the  English
market,  and  that  these  restrictions  were  not  beneficial,
but  were  indeed  positively  injurious  to  England  herself.
These  positions  were  maintained  in  a  long,  complicated,
but  singularly  luminous  argument,  and  it  followed
that  the  very  keystone  of  English  colonial  policy  was
a  delusion.  '  The  maintenance  of  this  monopoly  has
hitherto  been  the  principal,  or,  more  properly,  perhaps,
the  sole  end  and  purpose  of  the  dominion  which  Great
Britain  assumes  over  the  colonies.'  The  burden  of  a
great  peace  establishment  by  land  and  sea,  maintained
almost  exclusively  from  English  revenue,  two  great  wars
which  had  arisen  chiefly  from  colonial  questions,  and
the  risk  and  probability  of  many  others,  were  all
supposed  to  be  counterbalanced  by  the  great  advantage
which  the  mother  country  derived  from  the  monopoly  of
the  colonial  trade.  The  truth,  however,  is  that  '  the
monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  depresses  the  industry  of
all  other  countries,  but  chiefly  that  of  the  colonies,
without  in  the  least  increasing,  but,  on  the  contrary,

158 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

diminishing,  that  of  the  country  in  whose  favour  it  is
established.'  '  Under  the  present  system  of  manage-
ment, therefore,  Great  Britain  derives  nothing  but  loss
from  the  dominion  which  she  assumes  over  the  colonies.'
Like  Tucker,  Adam  Smith  would  gladly  have  seen
a  peaceful  separation.  '  Great  Britain,'  he  wrote, '  would
not  only  be  immediately  freed  from  the  whole  annual
expense  of  the  peace  establishment  of  the  colonies,  but
might  settle  with  them  such  a  treaty  of  commerce  as
would  effectually  secure  to  her  a  free  trade  more  advan-
tageous to  the  great  body  of  the  people,  though  less  so
to  the  merchants,  than  the  monopoly  which  she  at  pre-
sent enjoys.'  She  would  at  the  same  time  probably
revive  that  good  feeling  between  the  two  great  branches
of  the  English  race  which  was  now  rapidly  turning  to
hatred.  Such  a  solution,  however,  though  the  best,
must  be  put  aside  as  manifestly  impracticable.  No
serious  politician  would  propose  the  voluntary  and  peace-
ful cession  of  the  great  dominion  of  England  in  America
with  any  real  hope  of  being  listened  to.  '  Such  a  measure
never  was  and  never  will  be  adopted  by  any  nation  in
the  world.'

Dismissing  this  solution,  then,  Adam  Smith  agreed
with  Grenville  that  every  part  of  the  British  Empire
should  be  obliged  to  support  its  own  civil  and  military
establishments,  and  to  pay  its  proper  proportion  of  the
expense  of  the  general  government  or  defence  of  the
British  Empire.  He  also  agreed  with  Grenville  that  it
naturally  devolved  upon  the  British  Parliament  to  de-
termine the  amount  of  the  colonial  contributions,  though
the  colonial  Legislatures  might  decide  in  what  way  those
contributions  should  be  raised.  It  was  practically  im-
possible to  induce  the  colonial  Legislatures  of  themselves
to  levy  such  taxation,  or  to  agree  upon  its  propor-
tionate distribution.  Moreover,  a  colonial  Assembly,
though,  like  the  vestry  of  a  parish,  it  is  an  admirable

CK.  xr. ADAM  SMITH,  CHATHAM  AND  BURKE. 15D

judge  of  the  affairs  of  its  own  district,  can  have  no  proper
means  of  determining  what  is  necessary  for  the  defence
and  support  of  the  whole  Empire.  This  '  can  be  judged
of  only  by  that  Assembly  which  inspects  and  superin-
tends the  affairs  of  the  whole  nation.'  '  The  Parliament
of  England,'  he  added,  '  has  not  upon  any  occasion  shown
the  smallest  disposition  to  overburden  those  parts  of
the  Empire  which  are  not  represented  in  Parliament.
The  islands  of  Jersey  and  Guernsey  .  .  .  are  more
lightly  taxed  than  any  parts  of  Great  Britain.  Par-
liament .  .  .  has  never  hitherto  demanded  of  the  colo-
nies anything  which  even  approached  to  a  just  propor-
tion of  what  was  paid  by  their  fellow-subjects  at  home,'
and  the  fear  of  an  excessive  taxation  might  be  easily
met  by  making  the  colonial  contribution  bear  a  fixed
proportion  to  the  English  land  tax.  The  colonists,  how-
ever, almost  unanimously  refused  to  submit  to  taxation
by  a  Parliament  in  which  they  were  not  represented.
The  only  solution,  then,  was  to  give  them  a  representa-
tion in  it,  and  at  the  same  time  to  open  to  them  all  the
prizes  of  English  politics.  The  colonists  should  ulti-
mately be  subjected  to  the  same  taxes  as  Englishmen,
and  should  be  admitted,  in  compensation,  to  the  same
freedom  of  trade  and  manufacture.

If  we  pass  from  the  political  philosophers  to  active
politicians,  we  find  that  Chatham  and  Burke  were  sub-
stantially agreed  upon  the  line  they  recommended.
Burke,  who  had  long  shown  a  knowledge  and  a  zeal  on
American  questions  which  no  other  politician  could  rival,
had  in  the  preceding  year  accepted,  with  very  doubtful
propriety,  the  position  of  paid  agent  of  New  York ;  and
in  1774  he  made  his  great  speech  on  American  taxation.
In  the  same  year  Chatham  reappeared  in  the  House  of
Lords,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  American  de-
bates. Burke  and  Chatham  continued  to  differ  on  the
question  of  the  abstract  right  of  Parliament  to  tax

1GO ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CK.  xi.

America,  but  they  agreed  in  maintaining  that  the  union
to  the  British  Crown  of  a  vast,  civilised  and  rapidly  pro-
gressive country,  evidently  destined  fx)  take  a  foremost
place  in  the  history  of  the  world,  was  a  matter  of  vital
importance  to  the  future  of  the  Empire.  In  the  speeches
and  letters  of  Chatham  especially,  this  doctrine  is  main-
tained in  the  most  emphatic  language.  '  I  fear  the  bond
between  us  and  America,'  he  wrote  in  1774,  'will  be
cut  off  for  ever.  Devoted  England  will  then  have  seen
her  best  days,  which  nothing  can  restore  again.' l  '  Al-
though I  love  the  Americans  as  men  prizing  and  setting
a  just  value  upon  that  inestimable  blessing,  liberty,  yet
if  I  could  once  persuade  myself  that  they  entertain  the
most  distant  intention  of  throwing  off  the  legislative
supremacy  and  great  constitutional  superintending
power  and  control  of  the  British  Legislature,  I  should  my-
self be  the  very  first  person  ...  to  enforce  that  power
by  every  exertion  this  country  is  capable  of  making.' 2

In  the  speeches  of  Burke,  no  passages  of  equal  em-
phasis will  be  found;  but  Burke,  like  Chatham,  entirely
refused  at  this  time  to  contemplate  the  separation  of  the
colonies  from  the  Empire  ;  and  he  maintained  that  the
only  good  policy  was  a  policy  of  conciliation,  reverting
to  the  condition  of  affairs  which  existed  before  the  Stamp
Act,  and  repealing  all  the  coercive  and  aggressive  laws
which  had  since  then  been  promulgated.  This  was  what
the  Americans  themselves  asked.  In  presenting  a  peti-
tion from  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  in  August
1773,  Franklin,  their  Agent,  had  written  '  that  a  sincere
disposition  prevails  in  the  people  there  to  be  on  good
terms  with  the  mother  country  ;  that  the  Assembly  have
declared  their  desire  only  to  be  put  into  the  situation
they  were  in  before  the  Stamp  Act.  They  aim  at  no

1  Thackeray's  Life  of  Chatham,  ii.  274.

2  Ibid.  ii.  279.

CH.  xi.  POLICY OF  BURKE.  161

revolution.' l  In  this  spirit  Burke  urged  their  claims.
'  Revert  to  your  old  principles  .  .  .  leave  America,  if
she  has  taxable  matter  in  her,  to  tax  herself.  I  am  not
here  going  into  a  distinction  of  rights,  nor  attempting
to  mark  their  boundaries.  I  do  not  enter  into  these
metaphysical  distinctions.  I  hate  the  very  sound  of
them.  Leave  the  Americans  as  they  anciently  stood,
and  these  distinctions,  born  of  our  unhappy  contest,  will
die  along  with  it.  ...  Let  the  memory  of  all  actions  in
contradiction  to  that  good  old  mode,  on  both  sides  be
extinguished  for  ever.  Be  content  to  bind  America  by
laws  of  trade ;  you  have  always  done  it.  Let  this  be  your
reason  for  binding  their  trade.  Do  not  burthen  them
with  taxes  ;  you  were  not  used  to  do  so  from  the  begin-
ning. Let  this  be  your  reason  for  not  taxing.  These  are
the  arguments  of  states  and  kingdoms.  Leave  the  rest
to  the  schools ;  for  there  only  they  may  be  discussed
with  safety.  If  intern perately,  unwisely,  fatally,  you
sophisticate  and  poison  the  very  source  of  government
by  urging  subtle  deductions  and  consequences  odious  to
those  you  govern,  from  the  unlimited  and  illimitable
nature  of  supreme  sovereignty,  you  will  teach  them  by
these  means  to  call  that  sovereignty  itself  in  question.'
The  duty  on  tea  should  especially  be  at  once  re-
pealed. It  was  said  that  it  was  an  external  tax  such
as  the  Americans  had  always  professed  themselves  ready
to  pay ;  that  port  duties  had  been  imposed  by  Grenville
as  late  as  1764  without  exciting  any  protest,  and  that
it  was  therefore  evident  that  the  claims  of  the  Ameri-
cans were  extending.  But  the  American  distinction  had
always  been  that  they  would  acknowledge  external
taxes,  which  were  intended  only  to  regulate  trade  ;  but
not  internal  taxes,  which  were  intended  to  raise  revenue.
Townshend,  with  unhappy  ingenuity,  proved  that  an

1  Franklin's  Works,  iv.  432.
VOL. IV.

162 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en,  tt.

external  tax  could  be  made  to  raise  revenue  like  an  in-
ternal tax,  and  this  purpose  was  expressly  stated  in
the  preamble  of  the  Act.  '  It  was  just  and  necessary,'
the  preamble  said,  '  that  a  revenue  should  be  raised
there  ; '  and  again,  the  Commons  '  being  desirous  to
make  some  provision  in  the  present  Session  of  Parlia-
ment towards  raising  the  said  revenue.

It  would  also  be  difficult  to  conceive  a  more  absurd
position  than  that  of  the  ministry  which  retained  the  tea
duty.  It  was  an  intelligible  policy  to  force  the  Americans
to  support  an  army  for  the  defence  of  the  Empire  ;  but
it  was  calculated  that  the  duty  would  at  the  utmost  pro-
duce 16,0001.  a  year,  and  the  ministry  had  precluded
themselves  from  the  possibility  of  increasing  the  revenue.
Townshend  no  doubt  had  meant  to  do  so ;  but  Lord  North
had  authorised  Lord  Hillsborough  to  assure  the  colonial
Governors,  in  his  letter  of  May  1769, '  that  his  Majesty's
present  Administration  have  at  no  time  entertained  a
design  to  propose  to  Parliament  to  lay  any  further  taxes
upon  America  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  revenue.'
16,OOOL  a  year  was  therefore  the  utmost  the  Ministers
expected  from  a  policy  which  had  led  England  to  the
brink  of  an  almost  inevitable  war.  But  even  this  was
not  all.  In  order  to  impose  this  unhappy  port  duty  of
3d.  in  the  pound  on  the  Americans,  Parliament  had  ac-
tually withdrawn  a  duty  of  Is.  in  the  pound  which  had
hitherto  been  paid  without  question  and  without  diffi-
culty upon  exportation  from  England,  and  which  neces-
sarily fell  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  upon  those  who  pur-
chased the  tea.  '  Incredible  as  it  may  seem,  you  have
deliberately  thrown  away  a  large  duty  which  you  held
secure  and  quiet  in  your  hands,  for  the  vain  hope  of
getting  three-fourths  less,  through  every  hazard,  through
certain  litigation,  and  possibly  through  war.' '  It  was

1  The  East India Company the  transaction,  and  offered  that
had  clearly  seen  the  absurdity  of the  Government  should  retain  a

CH.  si.  POLICY  OF  BURKE.  163

said  that  the  duty  was  merely  an  assertion  of  right,  like
the  Declaratory  Act  of  1766.  The  answer  is  to  be  found
in  the  very  preamble  of  the  new  Act,  which  asserted  not
merely  the  justice,  but  also  the  expediency,  of  taxing
the  colonies.  A  simple  repeal  was  the  one  possible  form
of  conciliation,  for  a  legislative  union  between  countries
3,000  miles  apart  was  wholly  impracticable,  and  the  idea
was  absolutely  repudiated  by  the  colonies.  On  the  sub-
ject of  the  restrictive  trade  laws,  Burke  wisely  said  as
little  as  possible.  He  knew  that  the  question  could  not
be  raised  without  dividing  the  friends  of  America,  and
probably  without  alienating  the  commercial  classes,
who  were  the  chief  English  opponents  of  American
taxation.

Whether  the  policy  of  Burke  and  Chatham  would
have  succeeded  is  very  doubtful.  After  so  much  agita-
tion and  violence,  after  the  promulgation  of  so  many
subversive  doctrines  in  America,  and  the  exhibition  of
so  much  weakness  and  vacillation  in  England,  it  could
scarcely  be  expected  that  the  tempest  would  have  been
calmed,  and  that  the  race  of  active  agitators  would  have
retired  peaceably  into  obscurity.  Philosophers  in  their
studies  might  draw  out  reasonable  plans  of  conciliation,
but  pure  reason  plays  but  a  small  part  in  politics,  and
the  difficulty  of  carrying  these  plans  into  execution  was
enormous.  Party  animosities,  divisions,  and  subdivi-
sions ;  the  personal  interests  of  statesmen  who  wanted
to  climb  into  office,  and  of  agitators  who  wanted  to
retain  or  increase  their  power;  the  obstinacy  of  the
Court,  which  was  opposed  to  all  concession  to  the
colonies,  and  no  less  opposed  to  a  consolidation  of
parties  at  home;  the  spirit  of  commercial  monopoly,

duty  of  sixpence  in  the  pound  threepence  in  the  pound  paid  in
on  exportation,  provided  it  con-  America.  Purl.  Hist,  xviii.  178.
sented  to  repeal  the  duty  of

M  2

1C4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

which  made  one  class  averse  to  all  trade  concessions ;
the  heavy  weight  of  the  land  tax,  which  made  another
class  peculiarly  indignant  at  the  refusal  of  the  colonists
to  bear  the  burden  of  their  own  defence ;  the  natural
pride  of  Parliament,  which  had  been  repeatedly  insulted
and  defied ;  the  anger,  the  jealousy,  and  the  suspicion
which  recent  events  had  created  on  both  sides  of  the
Atlantic ;  the  doubts  which  existed  in  England  about
the  extent  to  which  the  disloyal  spirit  of  New  England
had  permeated  the  other  colonies;  the  doubts  which
existed  in  America  about  which  of  the  many  sections  of
English  public  opinion  would  ultimately  obtain  an  as-
cendency ;  and,  finally,  the  weak  characters,  the  divided
opinions,  the  imperfect  information,  and  the  extremely
ordinary  capacities  of  the  English  ministers,  must  all  be
taken  into  account.  Had  Chatham  been  at  the  head  of
affairs  and  in  the  full  force  of  his  powers,  conciliation
might  have  been  possible  ;  but  such  a  policy  required  a
firm  hand,  an  eagle  eye,  a  great  personal  ascendency.

Popular  opinion  in  England,  which  had  supported
the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  and  had  acquiesced  in
the  repeal  of  the  greater  part  of  Townshend's  Act,  was
now  opposed  to  further  concession.  England,  it  was
said,  had  sufficiently  humiliated  herself.  The  claims
and  the  language  of  the  colonial  agitators  excited  pro-
found and  not  unnatural  indignation,  and  every  mail
from  America  brought  news  that  New  England  at
least  was  in  a  condition  of  virtual  rebellion ;  that
Acts  of  Parliament  were  defied  and  disobeyed  with
the  most  perfect  impunity  ;  that  the  representatives  of
the  British  Government  were  habitually  exposed  to  the
grossest  insult,  and  reduced  to  the  most  humiliating
impotence.  The  utility  of  colonies  to  the  mother
country  was  becoming  a  doubtful  question  to  some.
Ministers,  it  was  said,  admitted  in  Parliament  that '  it
might  be  a  great  question  whether  the  colonies  should

en.  xi.  THE  CASE  FOR  COERCION.  1G5

not  be  given  up.'  *  England,  indeed,  was  plainly  stag-
gering under  the  weight  of  her  empire.  In  1774,  on
the  very  eve  of  its  gigantic  struggle,  Parliament  re-
sounded with  complaints  of  the  magnitude  of  the  peace
establishment,  and  there  were  loud  cries  for  reduction.
It  was  noticed  that  the  land  tax  was  Is.  higher  than  in
any  previous  peace  establishment ;  that  the  Three  per
Cents,  which  some  years  ago  were  above  90,  had  now
fallen  to  about  86 ;  that  the  land  and  malt  taxes  were
almost  entirely  absorbed  by  the  increased  expenditure
required  for  the  navy.2  All  this  rendered  the  attitude
of  the  colonies  peculiarly  irritating.  The  publication
of  the  letters  of  Hutchinson  produced  great  indignation
among  English  politicians ;  and  the  burning  of  the
1  Gaspee,'  the  destruction  of  tea  in  Boston  harbour,  and
the  manifest  connivance  of  the  whole  population  in  the
outrage,  raised  that  indignation  to  the  highest  point.
The  time  for  temporising,  it  was  said,  was  over.  It
was  necessary  to  show  that  England  possessed  some
real  power  of  executing  her  laws  and  protecting  her
officers,  and  the  ministers  were  probably  supported  by
a  large  majority  of  the  English  people  when  they  re-
solved to  throw  away  the  scabbard,  and  to  exert  all
the  powers  of  Parliament  to  reduce  Massachusetts  to
obedience.

The  measures  that  were  taken  were  very  stringent.
By  one  Act  the  harbour  of  Boston  was  legally  closed.

1  Annual  Register,  1774,  p.  62.  doubts  whether  there  should  ever
The  King  himself  wrote  (Nov.  be  a  strict  union  between  the
1774):  •  We  must  either  master  colonies  and  the  mother  country ;
them  [the  colonies]  or  totally  I  have  doubts  whether  they  are
leave  them  to  themselves,  and  a  real  service  or  a  burthen  to  us ;
treat  them  as  aliens.'  —  Corre~  but  I  never  had  a  doubt  as  to
tpondence  of  George  III.  i.  216.  our  right  to  lay  an  internal  tax
As  early  as  Jan.  1769  Hussey,  the  upon  them.' — Cavendish  De-
Attorney- General  to  the  Queen,  bates,  \.  197.
said  in  Parliament,  '  I  have  my  *  Annual  Register,  1774,  p.  53.

166 ENGLAND  IN  TOE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

The  Custom-house  officers  were  removed  to  Salem.  All
landing,  lading,  and  shipping  of  merchandise  in  Boston
harbour  was  forbidden,  and  English  men-of-war  were
appointed  to  maintain  the  blockade.  The  town,  which
owed  its  whole  prosperity  to  its  commercial  activity,
was  debarred  from  all  commerce  by  sea,  and  was  to
continue  under  this  ban  till  it  had  made  compensation
to  the  East  India  Company  for  the  tea  which  had  been
destroyed,  and  had  satisfied  the  Crown  that  trade  would
for  the  future  be  safely  carried  on  in  Boston,  property
protected,  laws  obeyed,  and  duties  regularly  paid.1

By  another  Act,  Parliament  exercised  the  power
which,  as  the  supreme  legislative  body  of  the  Empire,
Mansfield  and  other  lawyers  ascribed  to  it,  of  remodel-
ling by  its  own  authority  the  Charter  of  Massachusetts.
The  General  Assembly,  which  was  esteemed  the  legiti-
mate representative  of  the  democratic  element  in  the
Constitution,  was  left  entirely  untouched ;  but  the
Council,  or  Upper  Chamber,  which  had  been  hitherto
elected  by  the  Assembly,  was  now  to  be  appointed,  as
in  most  of  the  other  colonies  of  America,  by  the  Crown,
and  the  whole  executive  power  was  to  cease  to  emanate
from  the  people.  The  judges  and  magistrates  of  all
kinds,  including  the  sheriffs,  were  to  be  appointed  by
the  royal  governor,  and  were  to  be  revocable  at  pleasure.
Jurymen,  instead  of  being  chosen  by  popular  election,
were  to  be  summoned  by  the  sheriffs.  The  right  of
public  meeting,  which  had  lately  been  much  employed
in  inciting  the  populace  against  the  Government,  was
seriously  abridged.  No  meeting  except  election  meet-
ings might  henceforth  be  held,  and  no  subject  discussed,
without  the  permission  of  the  governor.2

It  was  more  than  probable  that  such  grave  changes
would  be  resisted  by  force,  that  blood  would  be  shed,

1  14  George  III.  c.  19.  8  Ibid.  o.  45.

CH.  xi.  COERCIVE  ACTS OF  PARLIAMENT.  167

and  that  English  soldiers  would  again  be  tried  for  their
lives  before  a  civil  tribunal.  The  conduct  of  the  Boston
judges  and  of  the  Boston  jury  at  the  trial  of  Captain
Preston  and  his  soldiers  had  redounded  to  their  im-
mortal honour ;  but  Government  was  resolved  that  no
such  risk  should  be  again  incurred,  and  that  soldiers
who  were  brought  to  trial  for  enforcing  the  law  against
the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  should  never  again  be  tried
by  a  Boston  jury.  To  remove  the  trial  of  prisoners
from  a  district  where  popular  feeling  was  so  violent
that  a  fair  trial  was  not  likely  to  be  obtained,  was  a
practice  not  wholly  unknown  to  English  law.  Scotch
juries  were  not  suffered  to  try  rebels,  or  Sussex  juries
smugglers ;  and  an  Act  was  now  passed  '  for  the  im-
partial administration  of  justice,'  which  provided  that
if  any  person  in  the  province  of  Massachusetts  were
indicted  for  murder  or  any  other  capital  offence,  and  if
it  should  appear  to  the  governor  that  the  incriminated
act  was  committed  in  aiding  the  magistrates  to  suppress
tumult  and  riot,  and  also  that  a  fair  trial  cannot  be  had
in  the  province,  the  prisoner  should  be  sent  for  trial  to
any  other  colony,  or  to  Great  Britain.1

These  were  the  three  great  coercive  measures  of
1774.  It  is  not  necessary  to  dilate  upon  them,  for
their  character  is  transparently  evident,  and  the  pro-
vocation that  produced  them  has  been  sufficiently  ex-
plained. The  colonial  estimate  of  them  was  tersely
stated  in.  the  remonstrance  of  the  province.  '  By  the
first,'  they  say,  '  the  property  of  unoffending  thousands
is  arbitrarily  taken  away  for  the  act  of  a  few  individuals  ;
by  the  second  our  chartered  liberties  are  annihilated,
and  by  the  third  our  lives  may  be  destroyed  with  im-
punity.' General  Gage,  who  had  for  some  years  been
Commander-in-chief  of  the  whole  English  army  in

1  14  George  III.  c.  39.

168 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUBY. CH.  XI.

America,  was  appointed  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  and
entrusted  with  the  task  of  carrying  out  the  coercive
policy  of  Parliament;  and  in  order  to  assist  him,  an
Act  was  carried,  quartering  soldiers  on  the  inhabitants.1
One  other  measure  relating  to  the  colonies  was
carried  during  this  session,  which  met  with  great
opposition,  and  which,  though  important  in  American
history,  is  still  more  important  in  the  history  of  religious
liberty.  It  was  the  famous  Quebec  Act,  for  the  purpose
of  ascertaining  the  limits  and  regulating  the  condition
of  the  new  province  of  Canada.2  The  great  majority  of
the  inhabitants  of  that  province  were  French,  who  had
been  accustomed  to  live  under  an  arbitrary  government,
and  whose  religious  and  social  conditions  differed  widely
from  those  of  the  English  colonists.  The  Government
resolved,  as  the  event  showed  very  wisely,  that  they
would  not  subvert  the  ancient  laws  of  the  province,  or
introduce  into  them  the  democratic  system  which  existed
in  New  England.  The  English  law  with  trial  by  jury
was  introduced  in  all  criminal  cases  ;  but  as  all  contracts
and  settlements  had  hitherto  been  made  under  French
law,  and  as  that  law  was  most  congenial  to  their  tastes
and  habits  and  traditions,  it  was  maintained.3  In  all
civil  cases,  therefore,  French  taw  without  trial  by  jury
continued  in  force.  A  legislative  Council,  varying  from
seventeen  to  twenty- three  members,  open  to  men  of  both
religions,  and  appointed  by  the  Crown,  managed  all
legislative  business  except  taxation,  which  was  expressly
reserved.  The  territory  of  the  province,  determined  by
the  proclamation  of  1763,  was  enlarged  so  as  to  include

1  14  George  III.  c.  54.  ferred  having  their  trials  deter-

*  Ibid.  c.  83.  mined  by  judges  to  having  them

1  According  to  General  Carle-  determined  by  juries,  and  had

ton,  the  Governor,  Canada  con-  not the least desire for any

taiued 150,000 Catholics, and  popular  assemblies.— Parl.  Hist.

less  than  400  Protestants  ;  and  xvii.  1307,  1308.

the  French  Catholics  greatly  pre-

CH.  xi.  THE  QUEBEC  ACT.  169

some  outlying  districts,  which  were  chiefly  inhabited  by
French ;  and  by  a  bold  measure,  which  excited  great
indignation  both  among  the  Puritans  of  New  England
and  among  the  Whigs  at  home,  the  Catholic  religion,
which  was  that  of  the  great  majority  of  the  inhabitants,
was  virtually  established.  The  Catholic  clergy  obtained
a  full  parliamentary  title  to  their  old  ecclesiastical  estates,
and  to  tithes  paid  by  members  of  their  own  religion ;
but  no  Protestant  was  obliged  to  pay  tithes.

The  Quebec  Act  was  little  less  distasteful  to  the
colonists  than  the  coercive  measures  that  have  been
related.  The  existence  upon  their  frontiers  of  an
English  state  governed  on  a  despotic  principle  was
deemed  a  new  danger  to  their  liberties,  while  the
establishment  of  Catholicism  offended  their  deepest
religious  sentiment.  Its  toleration  had  indeed  been
provided  for  by  the  Peace  of  Paris,  and  on  the  death  of
the  last  French  bishop  the  Government  had  agreed  to
recognise  a  resident  Catholic  bishop  on  the  condition
that  he  and  his  successors  should  be  designated  by  itself,
but  the  political  position  of  the  Catholics  had  been  for
some  time  undetermined.  The  Protestant  grand  jurors
at  Quebec  had  insisted  that  no  Catholic  should  be
admitted  to  grand  or  petty  juries,  and  the  party  they
represented  would  have  gladly  concentrated  all  civil  and
political  power  in  the  hands  of  an  infinitesimal  body  of
Protestant  immigrants,  degraded  the  Catholics  into  a
servile  caste,  and  reproduced  in  America  in  a  greatly
aggravated  form  the  detestable  social  condition  which
existed  in  Ireland.  At  home  the  strength  of  the  anti-
Catholic  feeling  was  a  few  years  later  abundantly  shown,
but,  with  the  exception  of  some  parts  of  Scotland,  no
portion  of  the  British  Islands  was  animated  with  the
religious  fervour  of  New  England,  and  no  sketch  of  the
American  Revolution  is  adequate  which  does  not  take
this  influence  into  account.  In  this  as  in  many  other

170 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  M.

respects  these  colonies  presented  a  vivid  image  of  an
England  which  had  long  since  passed  away.  Their  de-
mocratic church  government,  according  to  which  each
congregation  elected  its  own  minister,  their  historical
connection  with  those  austere  republicans  who  had
abandoned  their  native  country  to  worship  God  after
their  own  fashion  in  a  desert  land,  and  the  intensely
Protestant  type  of  their  belief,  had  all  conspired  to
strengthen  the  Puritan  spirit,  and  in  the  absence  of
most  forms  of  intellectual  life  the  pulpit  had  acquired
an  almost  unparalleled  ascendency.  The  chief  and
almost  the  only  popular  celebration  in  Massachusetts
before  the  struggle  of  the  Revolution  was  that  of  the  5th
of  November.1  In  Boston,  which  was  the  chief  centre
of  the  political  movement,  the  theological  spirit  was
especially  strong,  for  the  population  was  unusually
homogeneous  both  in  race  and  in  religion.  The  Con-
gregationalists  were  three  or  four  times  as  numerous  as
the  Episcopalians,  and  other  sects  were  as  yet  scarcely
represented.2

The  spirit  of  American  puritanism  was  indeed  so
fierce  and  jealous  that  the  American  Episcopalians  who
were  connected  with  the  English  Church  were  never
suffered  in  the  colonial  period  to  have  a  bisbop  among
them,  but  remained  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Bishop
of  London.  Berkeley,  Butler,  and  Seeker  had  vainly
represented  how  injurious  this  system  was  to  the
spiritual  welfare  of  the  Ameiican  Episcopalians.  Sher-
lock complained  bitterly  that  he  was  made  responsible
for  the  religious  welfare  of  a  vast  country  which  he  had

1  See  a  curious  account  of  thig  in  1775,  Washington  forbade  the

celebration in  Tudor'a Life  of  commemoration,  lest  it should

Otis,  pp.  26-29. It  degenerated  irritate  the  Canadian  Catholics,

into  a  violent  contention  between  Sparks'  Washington,  iii.  144.

different  parts  of  Boston. When  *  Tudor's Life of Otis,  ppt

the  Americans  invaded  Canada  446,  447.

CH.  xi.  AMERICAN DISLIKE TO BISHOPS.  171

never  seen,  which  he  never  would  see,  and  over  which
he  could  exercise  no  real  influence.  Gibson  tried  to
exercise  some  control  over  the  colonial  clergy,  but  found
that  he  had  no  means  of  enforcing  his  will.  Archbishop
Tenison  had  even  left  a  legacy  for  the  endowment  of
two  bishoprics  in  America.  The  Episcopalians  them-
selves petitioned  earnestly  for  a  resident  bishop,  and
stated  in  the  clearest  terms  that  they  wished  him  to  be
only  a  spiritual  functionary  destitute  of  all  temporal
authority.  'The  powers  exercised  in  the  consistory
courts  in  England,'  it  was  said,  '  are  not  desired  for
bishops  residing  in  America.'  They  were  not  to  be
supported  by  any  tax  ;  they  were  not  to  be  placed  either
in  New  England  or  Pennsylvania,  where  non-episcopal
forms  of  religion  prevailed,  or  to  be  suffered  in  any
colony  to  exercise  any  authority,  except  over  the
members  of  their  own  persuasion.1  It  was  urged  that
those  who  were  in  communion  with  the  Established
Church  of  England  were  the  only  Christians  in  America
who  were  deprived  of  what  they  believed  to  be  the
necessary  means  of  religious  discipline ;  that  the  rite
of  confirmation,  which  is  so  important  in  the  Anglican
system,  was  unknown  among  them  ;  that  it  was  an  in-
tolerable grievance  and  a  fatal  discouragement  to  their

1  See  the report of Bishop  of  them appear  to  have been

Sherlock  to  the  King  in  Council,  educated  in Dublin  University.

on  the  Church  in  the  Colonies.  The Massachusetts Assembly,

—  Documents relating to the  writing  in  1768  to  their  Agent  in

Colonial  History  of  New  York,  England,  against  the  taxation  of

vii. 360-369. Much informa-  America  by  England,  say :  •  The

tion about the condition of  revenue  raised  in America,  for

the Episcopalians in America  aught  we  can tell, may  be  aa

will  be  found  in  the  correspond-  constitutionally  applied  towards

ence  between  Archbishop  Seeker  the supj  ort of prelacy, as  of

and  some  American  clergymen  soldiers and  pensioners ;  ' and

in  the  same  volume. According  they  add  :  '  We  hope  in  God  such

to Sherlock,  the Episcopalian  an  estal  lishment  will  never  take

ministers  in  America  were  chiefly  place  in  America.' — Wells'  Life

Scotch  and  Irish.  A  great  number  of  S.  Acains,  i.  200.

1 72 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

creed,  that  every  candidate  for  ordination  was  obliged
to  travel  6,000  miles  before  he  could  become  qualified
to  conduct  public  worship  in  his  own  village.  By  a
very  low  computation,  it  was  said,  this  necessity  alone
imposed  on  each  candidate  an  expenditure  of  100/.,  and
out  of  fifty-two  candidates  who,  in  1767,  crossed  the  sea
from  the  Northern  colonies,  no  less  than  ten  had  died  on
the  voyage  or  from  its  results.1  More  than  once  the
propriety  of  sending  out  one  or  two  bishops  to  the
colonies  had  been  discussed,  but  the  notion  always  pro-
duced such  a  storm  of  indignation  in  New  England  that
it  was  speedily  abandoned.  It  was  not  indeed  a  question
on  which  the  Ministers  at  all  cared  to  provoke  American
opinion ;  and  it  is  a  curiously  significant  illustration  of
the  theological  indifference  of  the  English  Government
that  the  first  Anglican  colonial  bishop  was  the  Bishop
of  Nova  Scotia,  who  was  only  appointed  in  1787  ;  and
that  the  first  Anglican  Indian  bishop  was  the  Bishop  of
Calcutta,  who  was  appointed  by  the  influence  of  Wilber-
force  in  1814.

It  is  easy  to  conceive  how  fiercely  a  Protestantism
as  jealous  and  sensitive  as  that  of  New  England  must
have  resented  the  establishment  of  Catholicism  in
Canada ;  and  in  the  New  England  colonies  the  poli-
tical influence  exercised  by  the  clergy  was  very  great.
Public  meetings  were  held  in  the  churches.  Procla-
mations were  read  from  the  pulpit.  The  Episcopalian-
ism  of  a  large  proportion  of  the  Government  officers
contributed  perceptibly  to  their  unpopularity ;  political
preaching  was  almost  universal,  and  the  sermons  of
Mayhew,  Chauncey,  and  Samuel  Cooper  had  much  in-
fluence in  stimulating  resistance.  The  few  clergymen
who  abstained  from  introducing  politics  into  the  pulpit

1  Petition  to  Lord  Hillsborough York  and  New  Jersey,  Oct.  12,
from  the  Anglican  clergy  of  New 1771. MSB.  Record  Office.

CH.  «. THE  COLONIES  SUPPORT  BOSTON. 173

were  looked  upon  with  great  suspicion  or  dislike.1  The
fast  days  which  were  held  in  every  important  crisis
diffused,  intensified,  and  consecrated  the  spirit  of  resist-
ance, and  gave  a  semi-religioas  tone  to  the  whole  move-
ment. There  were  a  few  prominent  leaders,  indeed,
who  were  of  a  different  character.  Otis  lamented
bitterly  that  the  profession  of  a  saintly  piety  was  in  New
England  the  best  means  of  obtaining  political  power.
Franklin  was  intensely  secular  in  the  character  of  his
mind,  and  his  theology  was  confined  to  an  admiration
tor  the  pure  moral  teaching  of  the  Evangelists,  while
Jefferson  sympathised  with  the  freethinkers  of  France ;
but  such  ways  of  thinking  were  not  common  in  America,
and  the  fervid  Puritanism  of  New  England  had  a  very
important  bearing  upon  the  character  of  the  struggle.

It  was  soon  evident  that  the  Americans  were  not  in-
timidated by  the  Coercion  Acts,  and  that  the  hope  of  the
ministry  that  resistance  would  be  confined  to  Massa-
chusetts, and  perhaps  to  Boston,  was  wholly  deceptive.
The  closing  of  the  port  of  Boston  took  place  on  the  1st
of  June,  1774,  but  before  that  time  the  sympathies  of
the  other  colonies  had  been  clearly  shown.  The  As-
sembly of  Virginia,  which  was  in  session  when  the  news
of  the  intended  measure  arrived,  of  its  own  authority
appointed  the  1st  of  June  to  be  set  apart  as  a  day  of

1  This  was  one  of  the  charges  mentions  how,  '  ayant  tax6  un
brought  against  Dr.  Byles,  a  ministre  anglican  de  ne  parler
well-known  Tory  clergyman  in  que  du  ciel,'  he  was  much  grati-
Boston.  He  answered  his  ac-  fied  on  the  following  Sunday  by
cusers  :  '  I  do  not  understand  hearing  from  the  pulpit  a  de-
politics,  and  you  all  do.  .  .  .  You  nunciation  of  the  'execrable
have  politics  all  the  week  :  pray  house  of  Hanover.' — M6m.  de
let  one  day  in  seven  be  devoted  Lafayette,  i.  38.  See,  too,  on  the
to  religion.  .  .  .  Give  me  any  use  made  of  days  of  '  fasting  and
subject  to  preach  on  of  more  prayer  '  for  the  purpose  of  excit-
consequence  than  the  truths  I  ing  the  revolutionary  feeling,
bring  to  you,  and  I  will  preach  Tucker's  Life  of  Jejfe.rsont  i.
on  it  next  Sabbath.'  Lafayette  64,  55.

1 74 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

fasting,  prayer,  and  humiliation,  '  to  implore  the  divine
interposition  to  avert  the  heavy  calamity  which  threat-
ened destruction  to  their  civil  rights,  with  the  evils  of
civil  war,  and  to  give  one  heart  and  one  mind  to  the
people  firmly  to  oppose  every  injury  to  the  American
rights.'  The  Governor  at  once  dissolved  the  House,  but
its  members  reassembled,  drew  up  a  declaration  express-
ing warm  sympathy  with  Boston,  and  called  upon  all
the  colonies  to  support  it.

The  example  was  speedily  followed.  Subscriptions
poured  in  for  the  relief  of  the  Boston  poor  who  were
thrown  out  of  employment  by  the  closing  of  the  port.
Virginia,  South  Carolina,  and  Maryland  sent  great
quantities  of  corn  and  rice.  Salem  and  Marblehead,
which  were  expected  to  grow  rich  by  the  ruin  of  Bos-
ton, offered  the  Boston  merchants  the  free  use  of  their
harbours,  wharfs,  and  warehouses.  Provincial,  town,
and  county  meetings  were  held  in  every  colony  en-
couraging Boston  to  resist,  and  the  1st  of  June  was
generally  observed  throughout  America  as  a  day  of
fasting  and  prayer.  The  Assembly  of  Massachusetts
was  convoked  by  the  new  Governor,  and  soon  after
removed  from  Boston  to  Salem,  and  it  showed  its  feel-
ings by  calling  on  him  to  appoint  a  day  of  general
fasting  and  prayer,  by  recommending  the  assembly  of
a  congress  of  representatives  of  all  the  colonies  to  take
measures  for  the  security  of  colonial  liberty,  by  accus-
ing the  British  Government  of  an  evident  design  to  de-
stroy the  free  constitutions  of  America,  and  to  erect  in
their  place  systems  of  tyranny  and  arbitrary  sway,  and
by  appealing  to  their  constituents  to  give  up  every
kind  of  intercourse  with  England  till  their  wrongs
were  redressed.  As  was  expected  in  Boston,  the  As-
sembly was  at  once  dissolved,  but  the  movement  of  re-
sistance was  unchecked.  An  attempt  made  by  some
loyalists  to  procure  a  resolution  from  a  public  meeting

ra.  XI.  PREPARATIONS  FOR  WAR.  175

hi  favour  of  paying  the  East  India  Company  for  the  tea
which  had  been  destroyed  was  defeated  by  a  great  ma-
jority. The  system  of  committees  charged  in  every
district  with  organising  resistance  and  keeping  up  cor-
respondence between  the  colonies,  which  had  been  found
so  efficient  in  1765  and  1767,  was  revived;  the  press
and  the  pulpit  all  over  America  called  on  the  people  to
unite  ;  and  a  '  solemn  league  and  covenant'  was  formed,
binding  the  subscribers  to  abstain  from  all  commercial
intercourse  with  Great  Britain  till  the  obnoxious  Acts
were  repealed.  It  was  agreed  that  all  delinquents
should  be  held  up  in  the  newspapers  to  popular  venge-
ance, and  on  the  5th  of  September,  1774,  the  delegates
of  the  twelve  States  assembled  in  Congress  at  Phila-
delphia.

'  The  die  is  now  cast,'  wrote  the  King  at  this  time ;
'  the  colonies  must  either  submit  or  triumph.'  The
war  did  not  indeed  yet  break  out,  but  both  sides  were
rapidly  preparing.  Fresh  ships  of  war  and  fresh  troops
were  sent  to  Boston.  General  Gage  fortified  the  neck
of  land  which  connected  it  with  the  continent ;  he  took
possession,  amid  fierce  demonstrations  of  popular  indig-
nation, of  the  gunpowder  in  some  of  the  arsenals  of  New
England ;  he  issued  a  proclamation  describing  the  new
'  league  and  covenant '  as  '  an  illegal  and  traitorous
combination,'  but  he  was  unable  to  obtain  any  prosecu-
tion. He  tried  to  erect  new  barracks  in  Boston,  but
found  it  almost  impossible  to  obtain  builders.  Most
of  the  new  councillors  appointed  by  the  Crown  were
obliged  by  mob  violence  to  resign  their  posts,  and  the
few  who  accepted  the  appointment  were  held  up  to
execration  as  enemies  of  their  country.  Kiots  and  out-
rages were  of  almost  daily  occurrence.  Conspicuous
Tories  were  tarred  and  feathered,  or  placed  astride  of
rails,  and  carried  in  triumph  through  the  streets  of  the
chief  towns.  One  man  was  fastened  in  the  body  of  a

176 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  XI.

dead  ox  which  he  had  bought  from  an  obnoxious  loyalist,
and  thus  carted  for  several  miles  between  Plymouth
and  Kingston.  Another  was  nearly  suffocated  by  being
confined  in  a  room  with  a  fire,  while  the  chimney  and
all  other  apertures  were  carefully  closed.  Juries  sum-
moned under  the  new  regulations  refused  to  be  sworn.
Judges  who  accepted  salaries  from  the  Crown  were  pre-
vented by  armed  mobs  from  going  to  their  courts.
Most  of  the  courts  of  justice  in  Massachusetts  were
forcibly  closed,  and  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  in-
formed General  Gage  that  it  was  totally  impossible  for
them  to  administer  justice  in  the  province,  that  no  jurors
could  be  obtained,  and  that  the  troops  were  altogether
insufficient  for  their  protection.

Conspicuous  politicians,  even  members  of  the  Con-
gress, are  said  to  have  led  the  mobs.  In  Berkshire  the
mob  actually  forced  the  judges  from  the  bench  and  shut
up  the  court-house.  At  Worcester,  about  5,000  per-
sons, a  large  proportion  of  them  being  armed,  having
formed  themselves  in  two  files,  compelled  the  judges,
sheriffs,  and  gentlemen  of  the  bar  to  pass  between  them
with  bare  heads,  and  at  least  thirty  times  to  read  a  paper
promising  to  hold  no  courts  under  the  new  Acts  of  Par-
liament. At  Springfield  the  judges  and  sheriffs  were
treated  with  the  same  ignominy.  At  Westminster,  in
the  province  of  New  York,  the  court-house  and  gaol  were
captured  by  the  mob,  and  the  judges,  sheriffs,  and  many
loyalist  inhabitants  were  locked  up  in  prison.  A  judge
in  the  same  province  had  the  courage  to  commit  to
prison  a  man  who  was  employed  in  disarming  the  loyal-
ists. The  prisoner  was  at  once  rescued,  and  the  judge
carried,  tarred  and  feathered,  five  or  six  miles  through
the  country.1  Great  numbers  of  loyalists  were  driven

1  Moore's  Diary  of  the  Ameri- This  very  interesting  book  is  a
can  Revolution,  i.  37-52, 138. collection  of  extracts  from  the

CH.  xi.  MOB  VIOLENCE  IN  AMERICA.  177

from  their  estates  or  tljeir  business ;  and  except  under
the  very  guns  of  British  soldiers,  they  could  find  no
safety  in  New  England.  As  the  Crown  possessed
scarcely  any  patronage  in  the  colonies  to  reward  its
friends,  all  but  the  most  courageous  and  devoted  were
reduced  to  silence,  or  hastened  to  identify  themselves
with  the  popular  cause.  '  Are  not  the  bands  of  society,'
wrote  a  very  able  loyalist  at  this  time,  '  cast  asunder,
and  the  sanctions  that  hold  man  to  man  trampled  upon  ?
Can  any  of  us  recover  debts,  or  obtain  compensation  for
an  injury,  by  law  ?  Are  not  many  persons  whom  we
once  respected  and  revered  driven  from  their  homes  and
families,  and  forced  to  fly  to  the  army  for  protection,  for
110  other  reason  but  their  having  accepted  commissions
under  our  King  ?  Is  not  civil  government  dissolved  ?
.  .  .  What  kind  of  offence  is  it  for  a  number  of  men  to
assemble  armed,  and  forcibly  to  obstruct  the  course  of
justice,  even  to  prevent  the  King's  courts  from  being
held  at  their  stated  terms  ;  to  seize  upon  the  King's  pro-
vincial revenue,  I  mean  the  moneys  collected  by  virtue
of  grants  made  to  his  Majesty  for  the  support  of  his
government  within  this  province  ;  to  assemble  without
being  called  by  authority,  and  to  pass  Governmental
Acts  ;  to  take  the  militia  out  of  the  hands  of  the  King's
representative,  or  to  form  a  new  militia ;  to  raise  men
and  appoint  officers  for  a  public  purpose  without  the
order  or  permission  of  the  King  or  his  representative,  or
to  take  arms  •  and  march  with  a  professed  design  of  op-
posing the  King's  troops  ?  '  '  Committees  not  known
in  law  .  .  .  frequently  elect  themselves  into  a  tribunal,
where  the  same  persons  are  at  once  legislators,  accusers,
witnesses,  judges,  and  jurors,  and  the  mob  the  execu-

contemporary newspapers on too,  Force's  American  Archives
both  sides  of  the  question,  and (4th  series),  i.  747,  748,  7G7-7G9,
fives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  social 795,  1260-1263.
condition  of  the  colonies. See,

VOL. IV.  N

178 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

tioners. The accused  has  no  day  in  court,  and  the
execution  of  the  sentence  is  the  first  notice  he  receives.
This  is  the  channel  through  which  liberty  matters  have
been  chiefly  conducted  the  summer  and  fall  past.  .  .  .
It  is  chiefly  owing  to  these  committees  that  so  many  re-
spectable persons  have  been  abused  and  forced  to  sign
recantations  and  resignations ;  that  so  many  persons,  to
avoid  such  reiterated  insults  as  are  more  to  be  depre-
cated by  a  man  of  sentiment  than  death  itself,  have  been
obliged  to  quit  their  houses,  families,  and  business,  and
fly  to  the  army  for  protection ;  that  husband  has  been
separated from  wife, father from son, brother from
brother,  the  sweet  intercourse  of  conjugal  and  natural
affection  interrupted,  and  the  unfortunate  refugee  forced
to  abandon  all  the  comforts  of  domestic  life.' 1 Even  in
cases  which  had  little  or  no  connection  with  politics,
mob  violence  was  almost  uncontrolled. Thus  a  custom-
house officer  named  Malcolm,  who  in  a  street  riot  had
struck  or  threatened  to  strike  with  a  cutlass  a  person
who  insulted  him,  was  dragged  out  of  his  house  by  the
mob, stripped, tarred  and  feathered,  then  carted  for
several hours during an intense frost, and finally
scourged,  with  a  halter  round his  neck,  through  the
streets  of  Boston,  and  all  this  was  done  in  the  presence
of  thousands  of  spectators,  and  with  the  most  absolute
impunity. At  Marblehead  the  mob,  believing  that  an
hospital erected for  the  purpose  of  inoculation  was
spreading  contagion,  burnt  it  to  the  ground,  and  for
several  days  the  whole  town  was  in  their  undisputed
possession.1

1  Massachusettensis,  or  Letters  self  driven  from  his  house  in

on  the  present  Troubles  of  Massa-  Taunton,  and  bullets  were  fired

chusetts  Bay,  Letters  I.,  IV.  into  it. — Moore's  Diary,  i.  38.

-  Ibid.  Letter  III.  These  very  Among  the  numerous  persons

remarkable  letters  were  written  who  were  at  this  time  driven  into

by  Leonard,  one  of  his  Majesty's  exile  was  Dr.  Cooper,  President

Council.  The  author  was  him-  of  King's  College  in  New  York,

CH.  xi.  GAGE'S  PROCLAMATION. — NEW  ENGLAND  ARMS.  179

Among  many  graver  matters,  an  amusing  indigna-
tion was  about  this  time  excited  by  a  proclamation
which  General  Gage,  according  to  a  usual  custom,  issued
'  for  the  encouragement  of  piety  and  virtue,  and  the
prevention  of  vice,  profaneness,  and  immorality.'  The
General  knew  that  the  Boston  preachers  made  it  a
favourite  theme  that  the  presence  of  British  soldiers
was  fatal  to  the  purity  of  New  England  morals,  and  he
now  for  the  first  time  inserted  '  hypocrisy '  in  the  list
of  the  vices  against  which  the  people  were  warned.
The  vehemence  with  which  this  was  resented  as  a
studied  insult  to  the  clergy,  convinced  many  impartial
persons  that  the  insinuation  was  not  wholly  undeserved.

The  people  were  in  the  meantime  rapidly  arming.
Guns  were  collected  from  all  sides,  the  militia  was  assidu-
ously drilled,  and  its  organisation  was  improved  ;  bodies
of  volunteers  called  '  minute  men '  were  formed,  who
were  bound  to  rise  to  arms  at  the  shortest  notice,  and
New  England  had  all  the  aspect  of  a  country  at  war.
A  false  alarm  was  spread  abroad — possibly  in  order  to
ascertain  the  number  who  would  rise  in  case  of  insur-
rection— that  the  British  troops  and  vessels  were  firing
upon  Boston,  and  in  a  few  hours  no  less  than  30,000
men  from  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  are  said  to
have  been  in  arms.  The  collision  was  happily  averted,
but  this  incident  gave  the  popular  party  new  confidence
in  their  strength,  and  over  the  greater  part  of  New
England  their  ascendency  was  undisputed.  The  new
seat  of  government  at  Salem  was  abandoned  ;  the  new
councillors,  and  all  or  nearly  all  the  officers  connected

and  the  most  distinguished  Epi-  half -dressed over the college

Bcopalian  in  America. He  had  fence,  to  take  refuge  in  an  Eng-

written  something  on  the  loyalist  lish  ship  of  war,  and  ultimately

gide,  and  accordingly  received  a  in  England  — Documents  relat-

letter  threatening  his  life,  and  ing to the  Colonial  History  of

was  soon  after  compelled  to  fly  New  York,  viii.  297.

N  2

180 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XT.

with  the  revenue,  fled  for  safety  to  Boston,  and  although
the  troops  were  not  openly  resisted  they  experienced
on  every  side  the  animosity  of  the  people.  Farmers
refused  to  sell  them  provisions.  Straw  which  they  had
purchased  was  burnt.  Carts  with  wood  were  over-
turned, boats  with  bricks  were  sunk,  when  it  was  dis-
covered that  they  were  for  the  King's  service,  and  at
the  same  time  colonial  agents  were  industriously  tempt-
ing individual  soldiers  to  desert.

The  Congress  which  met  in  Philadelphia,  though  it
had  no  legal  authority,  was  obeyed  as  the  supreme
power  in  America.  It  consisted  of  delegates  selected
by  the  Provincial  Assemblies  which  then  were  sitting,
and,  in  cases  where  the  Governors  had  refused  to  con-
voke these  Assemblies,  by  Provincial  Congresses  called
together  for  that  purpose.  Except  Georgia,  all  the
colonies  which  existed  before  the  peace  of  1763  were
represented.  The  number  of  delegates  varied  according
to  the  magnitude  of  the  States,  but  after  much  discus-
sion it  was  determined  that  no  colony  should  count  for
more  than  one  in  voting.  The  Congress  in  the  first  place
expressed  its  full  and  unqualified  approbation  of  the
conduct  of  the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  exhorted  them  to
continue  unflinching  in  their  opposition  to  the  invasion
of  their  Constitution,  and  invited  the  other  colonies  to
contribute  liberally  to  their  assistance.  It  next  drew
up  a  series  of  extremely  able  State  papers  defining  and
enforcing  the  position  of  the  Americans.  After  long
debate  and  violent  difference  of  opinion,  it  was  resolved
not  to  treat  the  commercial  restrictions  as  a  grievance,
or  to  deny  the  general  legislative  authority  of  Parlia-
ment over  America.  Franklin,  as  we  have  seen,  had
recently  contended  that  the  colonies,  though  subject  to
the  King,  were  by  right  wholly  independent  of  the
Parliament,  and,  this  doctrine  had  been  formally  main-
tained by  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  in  its  addresses

en.  xi.

CONGRESS OF  PHILADELPHIA, 1774.

181

of  1773,  but  it  was  not  the  contention  of  the  original
opponents  of  the  Stamp  Act,1  and  it  was  not  generally
accepted  in  the  other  colonies.2  The  Congress,  there-
fore, while  asserting  in  the  strongest  terms  the  exclusive
right  of  the  provincial  legislatures  in  all  cases  of  taxa-
tion and  internal  policy,  at  last  consented  to  add  these
remarkable  words  in  their  declaration  of  rights :  '  From
the  necessity  of  the  case  and  in  regard  to  the  mutual
interests  of  both  countries,  we  cheerfully  consent  to  the
operation  of  such  Acts  of  the  British  Parliament  as  are
bond  fide  restrained  to  the  regulation  of  our  external
commerce  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  commercial
advantages  of  the  whole  Empire  to  the  mother  country
and  the  commercial  benefits  of  its  respective  members.'
They  enumerated,  however,  a  long  series  of  Acts  carried

1  Even  Otis,  who  had  been  the
first  to  denounce  the  commercial
restrictions  as  unconstitutional,
and  who  repudiated  writs  of
assistance  as  the  creation  of  the
English  Parliament,  maintained
— not  very  consistently  —  that
Parliament  had  a  real  legislative
authority  in  America,  and  he  de-
precated in  the  strongest  lan-
guage any  measure  tending  to
separation.  '  The  supreme  Legis-
lative,' he  wrote  in  1765,  'repre-
sents the  whole  society  or  com-
munity, as  well  the  dominions
as  the  realm ;  and  this  is  the
true  reason  why  the  dominions
are  justly  bound  by  such  Acts
of  Parliament  as  name  them.
This  is  implied  in  the  idea  of  a
supreme  sovereign  power;  and
if  the  Parliament  had  not  such
authority  the  colonies  would  be
independent,  which  none  but
rebels,  fools,  or  madmen  will
contend  for.' — Answer  to  tlw
Halifax  Libel,  p.  1C.  The  suuie

doctrine  is  laid  down  with  equal
emphasis  in  the  Farmer's  Let-
ters :  '  The  Parliament  unques-
tionably possesses  a  legal  autho-
rity to  regulate  the  trade  of  Great
Britain  and  all  its  colonies.  Such
an  authority  is  essential  to  the
relation  between  a  mother
country  and  its  colonies.  .  .  .
We  are  but  parts  of  a  whole,  and
therefore  there  must  exist  a
power  somewhere  to  preside  and
preserve  the  connection  in  due
order.  This  power  is  lodged  in
the  Parliament.' — Letter  II.

1  Story's  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  i.  178, 179.  Jeffer-
son says  that  about  the  middle
of  1774  he  maintained  that  the
relations  of  England  to  the
colonies  were  similar  to  those  of
England  with  Scotland  before
the  Union,  or  of  England  with
Hanover  at  present,  but  he  only
found  one  person  to  agree  with
him. — A  u  tobiog~aphy.

182 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. OH.  XT.

during  the  present  reign  which  were  violations  of  their
liberty,  and  which  must  be  repealed  if  the  two  countries
were  to  continue  in  amity.  Among  them  were  the
Acts  closing  the  harbour  of  Boston,  changing  the  con-
stitution of  Massachusetts,  establishing  despotic  govern-
ment and  the  Popish  religion  in  Canada,  interfering
with  the  right  of  public  meeting,  quartering  British
troops  upon  the  colonists,  and  above  all  imposing  taxa-
tion by  Imperial  authoi'ity.

They  pronounced  it  unnecessary  to  maintain  a  stand-
ing army  in  the  colonies  in  time  of  peace,  and  illegal
to  do  so  without  the  consent  of  the  local  legislatures.
They  complained  also  that  their  assemblies  had  been
arbitrarily  dissolved,  that  their  governors  had  conspired
against  their  liberty,  and  that  in  several  cases  they  had
been  deprived  of  their  constitutional  right  of  trial  by
jury  or  at  least  by  a  'jury  of  the  vicinage.'  The  Court
of  Admiralty  tried  revenue  cases  without  a  jury,  and
the  Governor  had  power  to  send  for  trial  out  of  the
colony  those  who  were  accused  of  treason,  of  destroying
the  King's  ships  or  naval  stores,  or  of  homicide  com-
mitted in  suppressing  riot  or  rebellion.  All  this  mass
of  legislation  Parliament  must  speedily  and  absolutely
repeal.  For  the  present,  however,  the  Congress  resolved
to  resort  only  to  peaceful  means,  and  their  weapon  was
a  rigid  non- importation,  non-consumption,  and  non-
exportation  agreement,  which  was  to  be  imposed  by
their  authority  upon  all  the  colonies  they  represented
and  was  to  continue  until  their  grievances  had  been
fully  redressed.

From  December  1  following,  the  members  of  the
Congress  bound  themselves  and  their  constituents  to
import  no  goods  from  Great  Britain,  to  purchase  no
slave  imported  after  that  date  and  no  tea  imported  on
account  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  to  extend  the
same  prohibition  to  the  chief  products  of  the  British

CH.  yj.  CONGRESS  OF 1774.  183

plantations,  to  the  wines  of  Madeira  and  the  "VYest  India
islands  which  were  unloaded  to  pay  duty  in  England,
and  to  foreign  indigo.  On  September  10,  1775,  if  the
grievances  were  not  yet  redressed  a  new  series  of
measures  were  to  come  into  force,  and  no  commodity
whatever  was  to  be  exported  from  America  to  Great
Britain,  Ireland,  or  the  West  Indies,  except  rice  to
Europe;  committees  were  to  be  appointed  in  every
town  and  county  to  observe  the  conduct  of  all  persons
touching  this  association,  and  to  publish  in  the  '  Gazette '
the  name  of  anyone  who  had  violated  it ;  and  all  deal-
ings with  such  persons  and  with  any  portion  of  the
colonies  which  refused  to  join  the  association  were  for-
bidden. At  the  same  time  the  Congress  agreed  for
themselves  and  their  constituents  to  do  the  utmost  in
their  power  to  encourage  frugality  and  promote  manu-
factures, to  suppress  or  suspend  every  form  of  gambling
and  expensive  amusement,  to  abandon  the  custom  of
wearing  any  other  mourning  than  a  black  ribbon  or
necklace  for  the  dead,  and  to  diminish  the  expenditure
at  funerals.

In  addition  to  these  measures,  they  issued  very
powerful  addresses  to  the  King  and  to  the  people  of
England  professing  their  full  loyalty  to  the  Crown,  but
enumerating  their  grievances  in  emphatic  terms.  In
the  address  to  the  people  of  England  they  skilfully
appealed  to  the  strong  anti-Catholic  feeling  of  the  nation,
denying  the  competence  of  the  Legislature  '  to  establish
a  religion  fraught  with  sanguinary  and  impious  tenets,'
'  a  religion  that  has  deluged  your  island  in  blood,  and
dispersed  impiety,  bigotry,  persecution,  murder,  and
rebellion  through  every  part  of  the  world ; '  and  they
predicted  that  if  the  ministers  succeeded  in  their  de-
signs, '  the  taxes  from  America,  the  wealth  and,  we
may  add,  the  men,  and  particularly  the  Roman  Catholics
of  this  vast  continent,  will  be  in  their  power '  to  enslave

184 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  XT.

the  people  of  Great  Britain.  Their  own  attachment  to
Great  Britain  they  emphatically  affirmed.  '  You  have
been  told,'  they  said,  '  that  we  are  seditious,  impatient
of  government,  and  desirous  of  independency.  Be
assured  that  these  are  not  facts  but  calumnies.  .  .  .
Place  us  in  the  same  situation  that  we  were  at  the
close  of  the  last  war,  and  our  former  harmony  will  be
restored.'  At  the  same  time,  in  an  ingenious  address
to  the  Canadians  they  endeavoured  to  alienate  them
from  England,  to  persuade  them  that  they  were  both
oppressed,  deceived,  and  insulted  by  the  present  minis-
ters, and  to  induce  them  to  join  with  the  other  colonies
in  vindicating  their  common  freedom.  Difference  of
religion,  they  maintained,  could  be  no  bar  to  co-opera-
tion. '  We  are  too  well  acquainted,'  they  said,  '  with
the  liberality  of  sentiment  distinguishing  your  nation
to  imagine  that  difference  of  religion  will  prejudice  you
against  a  hearty  amity  with  us,'  and  they  referred  to
the  example  of  the  Swiss  cantons,  where  Protestant  and
Catholic  combined  with  the  utmost  concord  to  vindicate
and  guard  their  political  liberty.  Having  issued  these
addresses,  the  Congress  dissolved  itself  in  less  than
eight  weeks ;  but  it  determined  that  unless  grievances
were  first  redressed,  another  Congress  should  meet  at
Philadelphia  on  May  10  following,  and  it  recommended
all  the  colonies  to  choose  deputies  as  soon  as  possible.1

Such  were  the  proceedings  of  this  memorable  body,
which  laid  the  foundation  of  American  independence.
Perhaps  the  most  perplexing  question  raised  by  its  pro-
ceedings is  the  degree  of  sincerity  that  can  be  ascribed
to  the  disclaimer  of  all  wish  for  separation.  That  a
considerable  party  in  New  England  anticipated  and

1  Journal  of  the  Proceedings account  of  the  debates  in  Adams'
of  the  Congress  held  at  Philadel- Diary,
yhia,  Sept.  1774. See,  too,  the

en.  XL  INDEPENDENCE  NOT WISHED FOB.  185

desired  an  open  breach  with  England  appears  to  me
undoubted,  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  many  of  the
leading  agents  in  the  Revolution  expressed  up  to  the
last  moment  a  strong  desire  to  remain  united  to  England.
It  was  in  August  1774,  when  the  Americans  were  busily
arming  themselves  for  the  struggle,  that  Franklin  as-
sured Chatham  that  there  was  no  desire  for  indepen-
dence in  the  colonies.1  John  Adams,  who  had  not,  like
Franklin,  the  excuse  of  absence  from  his  native  country,
wrote  in  March  1775,  even  of  the  people  ofMassachusetts,
'  that  there  are  any  that  pant  after  independence  is  the
greatest  slander  on  the  province.'  Jefferson  declared
that  before  the  Declaration  of  Independence  he  had
never  heard  a  whisper  of  disposition  to  separate  from
Great  Britain  ;  and  Washington  himself,  in  the  October
of  1774,  denied  in  the  strongest  terms  that  there  was
any  wish  for  independence  in  any  province  in  America.2
The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  more  distinguished
Americans  were  quite  resolved  to  appeal  to  the  sword
rather  than  submit  to  parliamentary  taxation  and  to  the
other  oppressive  laws  that  were  complained  of,  but  if
they  could  restore  the  relations  to  the  mother  country
which  subsisted  before  the  Stamp  Act,  they  had  no
desire  whatever  to  sever  the  connection.  In  1774  and
during  the  greater  part  of  1775  very  few  Americans
wished  for  independence,  and  long  after  this  period
many  of  those  who  took  an  active  part  in  the  Revolution
would  gladly  have  restored  the  connection  if  they  could
have  done  so  on  terms  which  they  considered  compatible

1  He said  to  Chatham that,  person,  drunk  or  sober,  the  least

•having  more  than  once  travelled  expression  of  a  wish  for  a  separa-

almost  from  one  end  of  the  con-  tion,  or  hint  that such  a  thing

tinent  to  the  other,  and  kept  a  would be advantageous to

great  variety  of  company — eating,  America.' — Negotiations  in  Lon-

drinking, and  conversing  with  don. Franklin's  Works,  v.  7.

them  freely,  I  have  never  heard  2  See  on this  subject Wash-

iu any  conversation,  from any  ington's  Works,  ii.  401,  496-502.

186 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CM.  XK

with  their  freedom.  The  instructions  of  the  chief
colonies  to  their  delegates  in  Congress  are  on  this
subject  very  unequivocal.  Thus  New  Hampshire  in-
structed its  delegates  to  endeavour  '  to  restore  that
peace,  harmony,  and  mutual  confidence  which  once
happily  subsisted  between  the  parent  country  and  her
colonies.'  Massachusetts  spoke  of  'the  restoration  of
union  and  harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  the
colonies  most  ardently  desired  by  all  good  men.'
Pennsylvania  enjoined  its  representatives  to  aim  not
only  at  the  redress  of  American  grievances  and  the
definition  of  American  rights,  but  also  at  the  esta-
blishment of  '  that  union  and  harmony  between  Great
Britain  and  her  colonies  which  is  indispensably  necessary
to  the  welfare  and  the  happiness  of  both.'  Virginia
aspired  after  '  the  return  of  that  harmony  and  union  so
beneficial  to  the  whole  Empire  and  so  ardently  desired
by  all  British  America,'  and  North  and  South  Carolina
adopted  a  similar  language.1  In  1775  the  Convention
of  South  Carolina  assured  their  new  governor  that  they
adhered  to  the  British  Crown,  though  they  had  taken
arms  against  British  tyranny.  The  Virginian  Convention
in  the  same  year  declared  '  before  God  and  the  world  '
that  they  bore  their  faith  to  the  King,  and  would
disband  their  forces  whenever  the  liberties  of  America
were  restored ;  the  Assembly  of  New  Jersey,  while  their
State  was  in  open  rebellion,  rebuked  their  governor  for
supposing  the  Americans  to  be  aiming  at  national  inde-
pendence ; 2  and,  lastly,  the  Provincial  Congress  of  New
York,  when  congratulating  Washington  on  his  appoint-
ment as  commander-in-chief  of  the  insurgent  force,  took
care  to  add  their  assurance  '  that  whenever  this  im-
portant contest  shall  be  decided  by  that  fondest  wish  of

1  Journal  of  the  Proceedings 2  See  other  instances  in  Gra-
of  the  Congress  held  at  Phila- hame,  iv.  392,  305.
dclphia,  Sept.  5,  1774.

en.  xt.  INDEPENDENCE NOT WISHED FOR.  187

each  American  soul,  an  accommodation  with  our  mother
country,  you  will  cheerfully  resign  the  deposit  com-
mitted into  your  hands.' *

Many  other  public  documents  might  be  cited  showing
that  the  Americans  took  up  arms  to  redress  grievances
and  not  to  establish  independence,  and  that  it  was  only
very  slowly  and  reluctantly  that  they  became  familiar-
ised with  the  idea  of  a  complete  separation  from  England.
Nor  is  there,  1  think,  any  reason  to  believe  that  this
language  was  substantially  untrue.  In  March  177G
General  Reed,  in  confidential  letters  to  Washington,
lamented  that  the  public  mind  in  Virginia  was  violently
opposed  to  the  idea  of  independence.2  Galloway,  one
of  the  ablest  of  the  Pennsylvanian  loyalists,  afterwards
expressed  his  belief  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of
Commons  that  at  the  time  when  the  Americans  took  up
arms  less  than  a  fifth  part  of  them  '  had  independence
in  view  ; '  3  and  John  Adams  when  an  old  man  related
how,  when  he  first  went  to  the  Congress  at  Philadelphia,
the  leading  conspirators  in  that  town  said  to  him,  '  You
must  not  utter  the  word  independence  or  give  the  least
hint  or  insinuation  of  the  idea  either  in  congress  or  any
private  conversation ;  if  you  do  you  are  undone,  for  the
idea  of  independence  is  as  unpopular  in  Pennsylvania
and  iii  all  the  Middle  and  Southern  States  as  the  Stamp
Act  itself.'4  Adams  tells  how,  when  a  letter  which
lie  had  written  in  1775  advocating  independence  was
intercepted  and  published,  he  was  '  avoided  like  a  man
infected  with  the  leprosy,'  and  '  walked  the  streets  of
Philadelphia  in  solitude,  borne  down  by  the  weight  of
care  and  unpopularity.' 6  Few  men  contributed  more

1  Ramsay,  i.  2'20.  4  Adams'  Works,  ii.  512.

2  March  3  and  15,  1776. See  »  Ibid.  p.  513. In  a  confiden-
Washington's Works,  iii. 347,  tial  letter  from  New  York,  dated
848.  Aug. 7, 1775,  Governor  Tryon

3  Examination  of  Joseph  Gal-  said:  'I  should  do  great  injustice
loway,  p.  4.  to  America  were  I  to  hold  up  an

188 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  «.

to  hasten  the  separation  between  the  two  countries,  yet
he  afterwards  wrote  these  remarkable  words :  '  For  my
own  part  there  was  not  a  moment  during  the  Revolution
when  I  would  not  have  given  everything  I  possessed
for  a  restoration  to  the  state  of  things  before  the  contest
began,  provided  we  could  have  a  sufficient  security  for
its  continuance. ' l

In  1774  also,  it  is  evident  that  a  large  proportion  of
the  most  ardent  patriots  imagined  that  redress  could  be
obtained  without  actual  fighting,  and  that  the  Legisla-
ture of  the  greatest  country  in  the  world  would  repeal  no
less  than  eleven  recent  Acts  of  Parliament  in  obedience
to  a  mere  threat  of  resistance.  They  knew  that  numerous
urgent  petitions  in  favour  of  conciliation  had  been  pre-
sented by  English  merchants,  and  that  many  of  the  most
conspicuous  English  politicians,  including  Chatham,
Camden,  Shelburne,  Conway,  Barre",  and  Burke,  were
on  their  side,  and  they  overrated  greatly  the  strength  of
their  friends,  and  especially  the  effect  of  the  non-impor-
tation agreements  upon  English  prosperity.  '  England,'
it  was  argued  in  the  Congress, '  is  already  taxed  as  much
as  she  can  bear.  She  is  compelled  to  raise  ten  millions
in  time  of  peace.  Her  whole  foreign  trade  is  but  four
and  half  millions,  while  the  value  of  the  importations  to
the  colonies  is  probably  little,  if  at  all,  less  than  three
millions.'  '  A  total  non-importation  and  non-exportation
to  Great  Britain  and  the  West  Indies  must  produce  a
national  bankruptcy  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.' 2
Richard  Henry  Lee,  one  of  the  most  prominent  Virginian
politicians,  was  so  confident  in  the  effect  of  non-impor-

idea  that  the  bulk  of  its  inhabit-  relating  to  the  Colonial  History

ants  wishes  an  independency. I  of  New  York,  viii.  603.

am  satisfied  (not  to  answer  for  *  See  Washington's  Works,  ii.

our  Eastern  neighbours)  a  very  501.

);vrge  majority, particularly  in  *  Speech  of  Chase. Adama*

this  province,  are  utter  enemies  Wwfe,  ii.  383.

to  such  a  principle.'— Documents

CH.  xi. ILLUSIONS  IN  AMERICA  AND  ENGLAND.  189

tation  that  he  declared  himself  '  absolutely  certain  that
the  same  ship  which  carries  home  the  resolution  will
bring  back  the  redress/  1  Washington  was  more  doubt-
ful, but  he  expressed  his  opinion  privately  that  by  a  non-
importation and  a  non-exportation  agreement  combined,
America  would  win  the  day,  though  one  alone  would  be
insufficient.  John  Adams,  Hawley,  and  Patrick  Henry,
however,  were  of  opinion  that  the  proceedings  of  the
Congress  were  very  useful  in  uniting  the  colonies,  but
that  they  were  quite  insufficient  to  coerce  Great  Britain,
and  that  the  question  must  ultimately  be  decided  by  the
sword.*

In  England,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  to  the  very
last  a  great  disbelief  in  the  reality  of  a  colonial  union.
Nearly  all  the  rumours  of  violence  and  insubordination
had  come  from  two  or  three  of  the  New  England  States
and  from  Virginia,  and  it  was  supposed  that  in  the
moment  of  crisis  the  other  States  would  hold  aloof,  and
that  even  in  the  insurgent  colonies  a  large  party  of  ac-
tive loyalists  could  be  fully  counted  on.  Provincial
governors  being  surrounded  by  such  men  were  naturally
inclined  to  underrate  the  capacity  or  the  sincerity  of
their  opponents,  and  they  thought  that  the  wild  talk  of
hiwyers  and  demagogues  and  the  demonstrations  of  mob
violence  would  speedily  collapse  before  firm  action.
Hutchinson,  who  lived  in  the  centre  of  the  disaffection,
and  who  ought  to  have  known  the  New  England  character
as  well  as  any  man,  predicted  that  the  people  of  America
would  not  attempt  to  resist  a  British  army,  and  that  ii
they  did  a  few  troops  would  be  sufficient  to  quell  them.3
His  opinion  appears  to  have  had  considerable  weight
with  George  III.,  and  it  greatly  strengthened  him  in
his  determination  to  coerce.4  General  Gage  for  some

1  Adams'  Works,  ii.  362.  »  Ibid.  p.  428.

7  Tudor's  Li/e  o/ Ote,  pp.  256, *  Correspondence of Geortje
257.  HI.  with  Lord  North,  i.  194, 195.

100 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

time  took  the  same  view.  He  assured  the  King  in  the
beginning  of  1774  that  the  Americans  'will  be  lions
while  we  are  lambs,  but  if  we  take  the  resolute  part
they  will  undoubtedly  prove  very  meek,'  and  he  thought
that  *  four  regiments,  intended  to  relieve  as  many  regi-
ments in  America,  if  sent  to  Boston '  would  be  '  suf-
ficient to  prevent  any  disturbance.' !  It  is  true  that
Carleton,  the  Governor  of  Canada,  and  Tryon,  the
Governor  of  New  York,  though  they  had  no  doubt  of
the  ability  of  England  to  crush  insurrection,  warned  the
Government  that  the  task  would  be  a  very  serious  one,
and  would  require  much  time  and  large  armies,2  but  the
prevailing  English  opinion  was  that  any  armed  move-
ment could  be  easily  repressed.  Soldiers  spoke  of  the
Americans  with  professional  arrogance,  as  if  volunteers
and  militias  organised  by  skilful  and  experienced  officers,
consisting  of  men  who  were  accustomed  from  childhood
to  the  use  of  arms,  and  fighting  with  every  advantage
of  numbers  and  situation,  were  likely  to  be  as  helpless
before  regular  troops  as  a  Middlesex  mob.  Unfortu-
nately, this  ignorant  boasting  was  not  confined  to  the
mess-room,  and  Lord  Sandwich,  in  March  1775,  ex-
pressed the  prevailing  infatuation  with  reckless  insolence
in  the  House  of  Lords.  He  described  the  Americans  as
'  raw,  undisciplined,  cowardly  men.'  He  said  that  the
more  they  produced  in  the  field,  the  easier  would  be
their  conquest.  He  accused  them  of  having  shown
egregious  cowardice  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg,  and  he
predicted  that  they  would  take  to  flight  at  the  very  sound
of  a  cannon.3  Whether,  under  the  most  favourable  cir-
cumstances, the  subjugation  would  produce  any  advan-
tages commensurate  with  the  cost  ;  whether,  assuming

1  Correspondence  of  George  III.  •  Parl.  Hist,  xviii.  446,  447.
with  Lord  North,  i.  164.  See,  too,  the  very  similar  speech

2  See  their  opinions  in  Tudor's  ofEigby. Walpole's  Last  Jour-
Life  of  Otis,  p.  428.  nals,  i.  481.

CH.  xi.  HESITATION  IN  AMERICA.  191

that  England  had  conquered  her  colonies,  she  could
permanently  hold  them  contrary  to  their  will ;  and
whether  other  nations  were  likely  to  remain  passive
during  the  struggle,  were  questions  which  appear  to
have  scarcely  occurred  to  the  ordinary  English  mind.

It  was,  however,  quite  true  that  in  America  there
was  much  difference  of  opinion,  and  that  large  bodies
were  only  dragged  with  extreme  reluctance  into  war.
In  New  York  a  powerful  and  wealthy  party  sympathised
strongly  with  the  Government,  and  they  succeeded  in
June  1775  in  inducing  their  Assembly  to  refuse  its
approbation  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Congress.1  Even
in  New  England  a  few  meetings  were  held  repudiating
the  proceedings  at  Philadelphia.2  Three  out  of  the  four
delegates  of  South  Carolina  in  the  Congress  declined  to
sign  the  non-importation  agreements  until  a  provision
had  been  made  to  permit  the  exportation  of  rice  to
Europe.3  The  Pennsylvanian  Quakers  recoiled  with
horror  from  the  prospect  of  war,  and  the  Convention  of
the  province  gave  instructions  to  their  delegates  in  the
Congress,  which  were  eminently  marked  by  wisdom
and  moderation.  They  desired  that  England  should
repeal  absolutely  the  obnoxious  Acts ;  but,  in  order
that  such  a  measure  should  not  be  inconsistent  with
her  dignity,  they  recommended  an  indemnity  to  the
East  India  Company,  promised  obedience  to  the  Act  of
Navigation,  disowned  with  abhorrence  all  idea  of  inde-
pendence, and  declared  their  willingness  of  their  own
accord  to  settle  an  annual  revenue  on  the  King,  subject
to  the  approbation  of  Parliament.  Virginia  had  been

1  Ramsay,  i.  143. See,  on  the  Documents  relating  to  the  Colo-

remarkable  loyalty  shown  by  the  nial  History  of  New  York,  viii.

New  York  Assembly  at  this  time,  531,  532.

a  striking  letter  of  Lieutenant-  *  Adolphus,  ii.  211.

Governor  Golden  to  Lord  Dart-  3  Adams,  ii.  385.
mouth (Feb. 1, 1775) in the

192 ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xi.

very  prominent  in  hurrying  the  colonies  into  war,  and
its  great  orator,  Patrick  Henry,  exerted  all  his  powers
in  stimulating  resistance ;  but  even  Virginia  insisted,
in  opposition  to  John  Adams  and  to  other  New  Eng-
landers,  on  limiting  the  list  of  grievances  to  Acts  passed
since  17G3,  in  order  that  there  might  be  some  possi-
bility of  reconciliation.1

Among  the  Episcopalians,  and  among  the  more
wealthy  and  especially  the  older  planters,  the  English
party  always  predominated,  and  a  large  section  of  the
mercantile  class  detested  the  measures  which  suspended
their  trade,  and  believed  that  America  could  not  subsist
without  the  molasses,  sugar,  and  other  products  of  the
British  dominions.  There  was  a  wide-spread  dislike  to  the
levelling  principles  of  New  England,  to  the  arrogant,
restless,  and  ambitious  policy  of  its  demagogues,  to  their
manifest  desire  to  invent  or  discover  grievances,  foment
quarrels,  and  keep  the  wound  open  and  festering.2  There
were  brave  and  honest  men  in  America  who  were  proud
of  the  great  and  free  Empire  to  which  they  belonged,  who
had  no  desire  to  shrink  from  the  burden  of  maintaining
it,  who  remembered  with  gratitude  all  the  English  blood
that  had  been  shed  around  Quebec  and  Montreal,  and
who,  with  nothing  to  hope  for  from  the  Crown,  were
prepared  to  face  the  most  brutal  mob  violence  and  the
invectives  of  a  scurrilous  Press,  to  risk  their  fortunes,
their  reputations,  and  sometimes  even  their  lives,  in
order  to  avert  civil  war  and  ultimate  separation.  Most
of  them  ended  their  days  in  poverty  and  exile,  and  as
the  supporters  of  a  beaten  cause  history  has  paid  but  a
scanty  tribute  to  their  memory,  but  they  comprised
some  of  the  best  and  ablest  men  America  has  ever  pro-
duced, and  they  were  contending  for  an  ideal  which

1  Adams'  Works,  ii.  384.  differences  in  Congress  in  Adams'

*  See  a  graphic  account  of  the Works,  ii.  350,  410.

CH.  xi.  AMERICAN LOYALISTS.  193

was  at  least  as  worthy  as  that  for  which  Washington
fought.  It  was  the  maintenance  of  one  free,  industrial,
and  pacific  empire,  comprising  the  whole  English  race,
holding  the  richest  plains  of  Asia  in  subjection,  blend-
ing all  that  was  most  venerable  in  an  ancient  civilisa-
tion with  the  redundant  energies  of  a  youthful  society,
and  likely  in  a  few  generations  to  outstrip  every  com-
petitor and  acquire  an  indisputable  ascendency  on  the
globe.  Such  an  ideal  may  have  been  a  dream,  but  it
was  at  least  a  noble  one,  and  there  were  Americans
who  were  prepared  to  make  any  personal  sacrifices
rather  than  assist  in  destroying  it.

Conspicuous  among  these  politicians  was  Galloway,
one  of  the  ablest  delegates  from  Pennsylvania,  who  saw
clearly  that  a  change  in  the  American  Constitution
was  necessary  if  England  was  to  remain  united  to  her
colonies.  He  proposed  that  a  President-General  ap-
pointed by  the  Crown  should  be  placed  over  the  whole
group  of  American  colonies;  that  a  Grand  Council,
competent  to  tax  the  colonies  and  to  legislate  on  all
matters  relating  to  more  colonies  than  one,  should  be
elected  by  the  Provincial  Assemblies ;  that  Parliament
should  have  the  right  of  revising  the  Acts  of  this  Grand
Council,  and  that  the  Council  should  have  the  right  of
negative  upon  any  parliamentary  measure  relating  to
the  colonies.1  The  proposal  at  first  met  with  consider-
able support  in  the  Congress,  and  it  was  finally  defeated
by  a  majority  of  only  one  vote.  Dickinson,  whose
'  Farmer's  Letters '  had  been  one  of  the  ablest  state-
ments of  the  American  case,  shrank  with  horror  from
the  idea  of  rebellion.  He  bitterly  accused  John  Adams
and  the  other  New  Englanders  of  opposing  all  measures
of  reconciliation,  and  declared  that  he  and  his  friends
would  no  longer  co-operate  with  them,  but  would  carry

1  Adams'  Works,  ii.  387-389. Galloway's  Examination,  pp.  47-49.
VOL. IV  O

194 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. OH.  xi.

on  the  opposition  in  their  own  way.1  7Jhe  remarkable
eloquence  and  the  touching  and  manifest  earnestness
of  the  letters  which  appeared  at  Boston  under  the  signa-
ture of  '  Massachusettensis,'  urging  the  people  to  shrink
from  the  great  calamity  of  civil  war,  had  for  a  time
some  influence  upon  opinion.  As  usual,  however,  in
such  a  crisis,  the  more  energetic  and  determined  men
directed  the  movement,  and  the  fierce  spirit  of  New
England  substantially  triumphed  over  all  opposition.
The  Congress  agreed,  it  is  true,  to  profess  its  loyalty,
to  petition  the  King,  and  to  limit  its  grievances  to
measures  carried  since  1763,  but  it  offered  no  basis
of  compromise ;  it  demanded  only  an  unqualified  sub-
mission, and  it  enumerated  so  long  a  list  of  laws  that
must  be  repealed  that  it  was  quite  impossible  that  Par-
liament could  comply.  General  Gage  deemed  the  aspect
of  affairs  so  threatening  that  he  suspended  by  proclama-
tion the  writs  which  he  had  issued  summoning  the
Assembly  of  Massachusetts  to  meet  at  Salem  in  October
1774.  But  a  provincial  congress  was  at  once  convened.
It  was  obeyed  as  if  it  had  been  a  regular  branch  of  the
Legislature,  and  it  proceeded  to  organise  the  revolution.
Pleasures  were  taken  for  enlisting  soldiers  for  the  de-
fence of  the  province;  general  officers  were  selected.
It  was  resolved  to  enroll  as  speedily  as  possible  an
army  of  12,000  men  within  the  province,  and  Rhode
Island,  New  Hampshire,  and  Connecticut  were  asked
to  join  to  raise  the  number  of  men  to  20,000.  A  com-
mittee was  at  the  same  time  formed  for  correspond-
ing with  the  people  of  Canada,  and  a  circular  was  sent
round  to  all  the  New  England  clergy  asking  them  to
use  their  influence  in  the  cause.2

Before  the  end  of  the  year  intelligence  arrived  that
a.  proclamation  had  been  issued  in  England  forbidding

Adams'  Works,  ii.  410,  419.  *  Ramsay,  i.  130.

en.  xr.  THE  WINTER 1774-1775.  195

the  exportation  of  military  stores,  and  it  was  at  once
responded  to  by  open  violence.  In  Rhode  Island,  by
order  of  the  Provincial  Assembly,  forty  cannon  with  a
large  amount  of  ammunition  were  removed  from  Fort
George,  which  defended  the  harbour,  and  placed  under
a  colonial  guard  at  Providence.  The  captain  of  a
King's  ship  which  was  stationed  off  the  province  de-
manded an  explanation.  The  Governor  replied  that
the  cannon  had  been  removed  lest  the  King's  officers
should  seize  them,  and  that  they  would  be  used  against
any  enemy  of  the  colony.  In  New  Hampshire  a  small
fort  called  William  and  Mary,  garrisoned  by  one  officer
and  five  private  soldiers,  was  surprised  and  captured
by  a  large  body  of  armed  colonists,  and  the  military
stores  which  it  contained  were  carried  away.  Mills  for
manufacturing  gunpowder  and  arms  were  set  up  in
several  provinces,  and  immediate  orders  were  given  for
casting  sixty  heavy  cannon.

Though  no  blood  had  yet  been  shed,  it  is  no  exagge-
ration to  say  that  the  war  had  already  begun,  and  in
England  the  indignation  rose  fierce  and  high.  Parlia-
ment had  been  unexpectedly  dissolved,  and  the  new
Parliament  met  on  November  30,  1774,  but  no  serious
measure  relating  to  America  was  taken  till  January
1775,  when  the  House  reassembled  after  the  Christmas
vacation.  The  ministers  had  a  large  majority,  and
even  apart  from  party  interest  the  genuine  feeling  of
both  Houses  ran  strongly  against  the  Americans.  Yet
at  no  previous  period  were  they  more  powerfully  de-
fended. I  have  already  noticed  that  Chatham,  having
returned  to  active  politics  after  his  long  illness  in  1774,
had  completely  identified  himself  with  the  American
cause,  and  had  advocated  with  all  his  eloquence  mea-
sures of  conciliation.  He  reiterated  on  every  occasion
his  old  opinion  that  self-taxation  is  the  essential  con-
dition of  political  freedom,  described  the  conduct  of

o  2

196 ENGLAND ESf THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  TO.

the  British  Legislature  in  establishing  Catholicism  in
Canada  as  not  less  outrageous  than  if  it  had  repealed
the  Great  Charter  or  the  Bill  of  Rights,1  and  moved  an
address  to  the  King  praying  that  he  would  as  soon  as
possible,  'in  order  to  open  the  way  towards  a  happy
settlement  of  the  dangerous  troubles  in  America/  with-
draw the  British  troops  stationed  in  Boston.  In  the
course  of  his  speech  he  represented  the  question  of
American  taxation  as  the  root-cause  of  the  whole
division,  and  maintained  that  the  only  real  basis  of
conciliation  was  to  be  found  in  a  distinct  recognition  of
the  principle  that  '  taxation  is  theirs,  and  commercial
regulation  ours  ; '  that  England  has  a  supreme  right  of
regulating  the  commerce  and  navigation  of  America,
and  that  the  Americans  have  an  inalienable  right  to
their  own  property.  He  fully  justified  their  resistance,
predicted  that  all  attempts  to  coerce  them  would  fail,
and  eulogised  the  Congress  at  Philadelphia  as  worthy
of  the  greatest  periods  of  antiquity.  Only  eighteen
peers  voted  for  the  address,  while  sixty-eight  opposed  it.
On  February  1  he  reappeared  with  an  elaborate  Bill
for  settling  the  troubles  in  America.  It  asserted  in
strong  terms  the  right  of  Parliament  to  bind  the  colonies
in  all  matters  of  imperial  concern,  and  especially  in  all
matters  of  commerce  and  navigation.  It  pronounced
the  new  colonial  doctrine  that  the  Crown  had  no  right
to  send  British  soldiers  to  the  colonies  without  the  assent
of  the  Provincial  Assemblies,  dangerous  and  unconstitu-
tional in  the  highest  degree,  but  at  the  same  time  it  re-
cognised the  sole  right  of  the  colonists  to  tax  themselves,
guaranteed  the  inviolability  of  their  charters,  and  made
the  tenure  of  their  judges  the  same  as  in  England.  It
proposed  to  make  the  Congress  which  had  met  at  Phila-
delphia an  official  and  permanent  body,  and  asked  it  to

Chatliam  Correspondence,  iv.  332.

CH.  xi.  CONCILIATORY PROPOSALS  REJECTED.  197

make  a  free  grant  for  imperial  purposes.  England,
in  return,  was  to  reduce  the  Admiralty  Courts  to  their
ancient  limits,  and  to  suspend  for  the  present  the  differ-
ent Acts  complained  of  by  the  colonists.  The  Bill  was
not  even  admitted  to  a  second  reading.

Several  other  propositions  tending  towards  concilia-
tion were  made  in  this  session.  On  March  22,  1775,
Burke,  in  one  of  his  greatest  speeches,  moved  a  series  of
resolutions  recommending  a  repeal  of  the  recent  Acts
complained  of  in  America,  reforming  the  Admiralty
Court  and  the  position  of  the  judges,  and  leaving
American  taxation  to  the  American  Assemblies,  without
touching  upon  any  question  of  abstract  right.  A  few
days  later,  Hartley  moved  a  resolution  calling  upon  the
Government  to  make  requisitions  to  the  colonial  As-
semblies to  provide  of  their  own  authority  for  their  own
defence  ;  and  Lord  Camden  in  the  House  of  Lords  and
Sir  G.  Savile  in  the  House  of  Commons  endeavoured  to
obtain  a  repeal  of  the  Quebec  Act.  All  these  attempts,
however,  were  defeated  by  enormous  majorities.  The
petition  of  Congress  to  the  King  was  referred  to  Parlia-
ment, which  refused  to  receive  it,  and  Franklin,  after
vain  efforts  to  effect  a  reconciliation,  returned  from  Eng-
land to  America.  The  Legislature  of  New  York,  sepa-
rating from  the  other  colonies,  made  a  supreme  effort  to
heal  the  wound  by  a  remonstrance  which  was  presented
by  Burke  on  May  15.  Though  strongly  asserting  the
solo  right  of  the  colonies  to  tax  themselves,  and  com-
plaining of  the  many  recent  Acts  inconsistent  with  their
freedom,  it  was  drawn  up  in  terms  that  were  studiously
moderate  and  respectful.  It  disclaimed  '  the  most  dis-
tant desire  of  independence  of  the  parent  kingdom.'  It
acknowledged  fully  the  general  superintending  power
of  the  English  Parliament,  and  its  right  '  to  regulate
the  trade  of  the  colonies,  so  as  to  make  it  subservient  to
the  interest  of  the  mother  country,'  and  it  expressed  the

198 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, CH.  XT.

readiness  of  New  York  to  bear  its  '  full  proportion  of
aids  to  the  Crown  for  the  public  service/  though  it  made
no  allusion  to  the  project  of  supporting  an  American
army.  The  Government,  however,  induced  the  House
of  Commons  to  refuse  to  receive  it,  on  the  ground  that
it  denied  the  complete  legislative  authority  of  Parlia-
ment in  the  colonies  as  it  had  been  defined  by  the
Declaratory  Act.

Parliament  at  the  same  time  took  stringent  mea-
sures to  enforce  obedience.  It  pronounced  Massachu-
setts in  a  state  of  rebellion,  and  promised  to  lend  the
ministers  every  aid  in  subjugating  it.  It  voted  about
6,000  additional  men  for  the  land  and  sea  service ;
it  answered  the  non-importation  and  non-exportation
agreements  of  the  colonies  by  an  Act  restraining  the
New  England  States  from  all  trade  with  Great  Britain,
Ireland,  and  the  West  Indies,  and  from  all  participation
in  the  Newfoundland  fisheries,  and  it  soon  after,  on  the
arrival  of  fresh  intelligence  from  America,  extended  the
same  disabilities  to  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Mary-
land, Virginia,  and  South  Carolina.  It  was  also  resolved
that  the  British  force  in  Boston  should  be  at  once  raised
to  10,000  men,  which  it  was  vainly  thought  would  be
sufficient  to  enforce  obedience.

At  the  same  time  North  was  careful  to  announce
that  these  coercive  measures  would  at  once  cease  upon
the  submission  of  the  colonies,  and  on  February  20,
1775,  he  had,  to  the  great  surprise  of  Parliament,  him-
self introduced  a  conciliatory  resolution  which  was  very
unpalatable  to  many  of  his  followers  and  very  inconsis-
tent with  some  of  his  own  earlier  speeches,  but  by  which
he  hoped,  if  not  to  appease,  at  least  to  divide,  the  Ameri-
cans. His  proposition  was,  that  if  and  as  long  as  any
colony  thought  fit  of  its  own  accord  to  make  such  a
contribution  to  the  common  defence  of  the  Empire,
and  such  a  fixed  provision  for  the  support  of  the  civil

CH.  xr. CONCILIATORY  MEASURE  OF  NORTH. 199

government  and  administration  of  justice,  as  met  the
approbation  of  Parliament,  it  should  be  exempted  from
all  imperial  taxation  for  the  purpose  of  revenue.

The  reception  of  this  conciliatory  measure  was  very
remarkable.  Hitherto  Lord  North  had  guided  the
House  with  an  almost  absolute  sway,  and  on  American
questions  the  Opposition  seldom  could  count  upon  90
votes,  while  the  ministers  had  usually  about  260.  The
disclosure,  however,  of  the  conciliatory  resolution  pro-
duced an  immediate  revolt  in  the  ministerial  ranks.
Six  times  Lord  North  rose  in  vain  efforts  to  appease
the  storm.  The  King's  friends  denounced  him  as  be-
traying the  cause.  The  Bedford  faction  was  expected
every  moment  to  fly  into  open  rebellion,  and  Chatham
states  that  for  about  two  hours  it  was  the  prevailing  be-
lief in  the  House  of  Commons  that  the  minister  would
be  left  in  a  small  minority.  The  storm,  however,  had  a
sudden  and  most  significant  ending.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,
who  was  known  to  be  in  the  intimate  confidence  of  the
King,  declared  for  the  Bill,  and  the  old  majority  speedily
rallied  around  the  minister.1

At  an  earlier  stage  of  the  dispute  this  resolution
might  have  been  accepted  as  a  reasonable  compromise,
but  in  the  midst  of  the  coercive  measures  that  had  been
adopted  it  pleased  no  one.  Burke  and  the  Whig  party
denounced  it  as  not  stating  what  sum  the  colonists  were
expected  to  pay,  leaving  them  to  bid  against  one  another,
and  to  bargain  with  the  mother  country,  and  in  the
meantime  holding  them  in  duress  with  fleets  and  armies,
like  prisoners  who  had  not  yet  paid  their  ransom.
Barre"  assailed  it  with  great  bitterness,  as  intended  for
no  other  object  than  to  excite  divisions  in  Ameiica.
The  colonists  themselves  repudiated  it  as  interfering

1  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv. ter,  1775,  pp.  95-98. Walpole'3
403,  404. See. too,  Gibbon  to Last  Journals,  i.  4C3,  464.
liolroyd.  Feb.  25,  Annual  Regis-

200 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CR.  xi.

with  their  absolute  right  of  disposing  of  their  own  pro-
perty as  they  pleased,  and  most  later  historians  have
treated  it  as  wholly  delusive.1

With  this  view  I  am  unable  to  concur.  The  proposi-
tion appears  to  me  to  have  been  a  real  and  considerable
step  towards  conciliation.  It  was  accepted  as  such  by
Governor  Pownall.  who  was  one  of  the  ablest  and  most
moderate  of  the  defenders  of  the  colonies  in  Parliament,8
and  it  was  recommended  to  the  Americans  by  Lord  Dart-
mouth in  language  of  much  force  and  of  evident  sincerity.
He  argued  that  the  colonies  owed  much  of  their  great-
ness to  English  protection,  that  it  was  but  justice  that
they  should  in  their  turn  contribute  according  to  their
respective  abilities  to  the  common  defence,  and  that
their  own  welfare  and  interests  demanded  that  their  civil
establishments  should  be  supported  with  a  becoming
dignity.  Parliament,  he  says,  leaves  each  colony  '  to
judge  of  the  ways  and  means  of  making  due  provision
for  these  purposes,  reserving  to  itself  a  discretionary
power  of  approving  or  disapproving  what  shall  be  offered.'
It  determines  nothing  about  the  specific  sum  to  be
raised.  The  King  trusts  that  adequate  provision  will
be  made  by  the  colonies,  and  that  it  will  be  '  proposed
in  such  a  way  as  to  increase  or  diminish  according  as
the  public  burthens  of  this  kingdom  are  from  time  to
time  augmented  or  reduced,  in  so  far  as  those  burthens
consist  of  taxes  and  duties  which  are  not  a  security  for
the  National  Debt.  By  such  a  mode  of  contribution,'
he  adds, '  the  colonies  will  have  full  security  that  they
can  never  be  required  to  tax  themselves  without  Parlia-
ment taxing  the  subjects  of  this  kingdom  in  a  far  greater
proportion.'  He  assured  them  that  any  proposal  of  this
nature  from  any  colony  would  be  received  with  every

1  See  o.g.  Lord  Russell's  Life *  See  his very  able  speech,
of  Fox,  L  85,  8tt.  Parl.  Hist,  xviii.  322-329.

OH.  XT.  BATTLE  OF  LEXINGTON.  201

possible  indulgence,  provided  it  was  unaccompanied  by
declarations  inconsistent  with  parliamentary  authority.1

The  letter  of  Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  governors  of
the  colonies  was  written  in  March.  Little  more  than  a
month  later  the  first  blood  was  shed  at  Lexington.  On
the  night  of  April  18,  1775,  General  Gage  sent  about
800  soldiers  to  capture  a  magazine  of  stores  which  had
been  collected  for  the  use  of  the  provincial  army  in  the
town  of  Concord,  about  eighteen  miles  from  Boston.
The  road  lay  through  the  little  village  of  Lexington,
where,  about  five  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,
the  advance  guard  of  the  British  found  a  party  of  sixty
or  seventy  armed  volunteers  drawn  up  to  oppose  them,
on  a  green  beside  the  road.  They  refused  when  sum-
moned to  disperse,  and  the  English  at  once  fired  a
volley,  which  killed  or  wounded  sixteen  of  their  number.
The  detachment  then  proceeded  to  Concord,  where  it
succeeded  in  spiking  two  cannon,  casting  into  the  river
five  hundred  pounds  ol  ball  and  sixty  barrels  of  powder,
and  destroying  a  large  quantity  of  flour,  and  it  then
prepared  to  return.  The  alarm  had,  however,  now  been
given ;  the  whole  country  was  roused.  Great  bodies  of
yeomen  and  militia  flocked  in  to  the  assistance  of  the
provincials.  From  farmhouses  and  hedges  and  from
the  shelter  of  stone  walls  bullets  poured  upon  the  tired
retreating  troops,  and  a  complete  disaster  would  pro-
bably have  occurred  had  they  not  been  reinforced  at
Lexington  by  900  men  and  two  cannon  under  Lord
Percy.  As  it  was  the  British  lost  65  killed,  180
wounded,  and  28  made  prisoners,  while  the  American
loss  was  less  than  90  men.

The  whole  province  was  now  in  arms.  The  Massa-
chusetts Congress  at  once  resolved  that  the  New  England

1  This  letter  is  printed  in  the 645-547. Force's  American  Ar-
Docnments  relating  to  the  Colo- chives  (4th  series),  ii.  27,  28.
nial  History  of  New  York,  viii.

202 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

army  should  be  raised  to  30,000  men,  and  thousands  of
brave  and  ardent  yeomen  were  being  rapidly  drilled  into
good  soldiers.  The  American  camp  at  Cambridge  con-
tained many  experienced  soldiers  who  had  learnt  their
profession  in  the  great  French  war,  and  very  many
others  who  in  the  ranks  of  the  militia  had  already  acquired
the  rudiments  of  military  knowledge,  and  evsn  when
they  had  no  previous  training,  the  recruits  were  widely
different  from  the  rude  peasants  who  filled  the  armies  of
England.  As  an  American  military  writer  truly  said,
the  middle  and  lower  classes  in  England,  owing  to  the
operation  of  the  game  laws  and  to  the  circumstances  of
their  lives,  were  in  general  almost  as  ignorant  of  the  use
of  a  musket  as  of  the  use  of  a  catapult.  The  New  England
yeomen  were  accustomed  to  firearms  from  their  child-
hood ;  they  were  invariably  skilful  in  the  use  of  spade,
liatchet,  and  pickaxe,  so  important  in  military  opera-
tions ;  and  their  great  natural  quickness  and  the  high
level  of  intelligence  which  their  excellent  schools  had
produced,  made  it  certain  that  they  would  not  be  long
in  mastering  their  military  duties.  The  whole  country
was  practically  at  their  disposal.  All  who  were  suspected
of  Toryism  were  ordered  to  surrender  their  weapons.
General  Gage  was  blockaded  in  Boston,  and  he  remained
strictly  on  the  defensive,  waiting  for  reinforcements
from  England,  which  only  arrived  at  the  end  of  May.
Even  then,  he  for  some  time  took  no  active  measures,
but  contented  himself  with  offering  pardon  to  all  in-
surgents who  laid  down  their  arms,  except  Samuel
Adams  and  John  Hancock,  and  with  proclaiming
martial  law  in  Massachusetts.  He  at  length,  however,
determined  to  extend  his  lines,  so  as  to  include  and
fortify  a  very  important  post,  which  by  a  strange  negli-
gence had  been  left  hitherto  unoccupied.

On  a  narrow  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Boston,  but
separated  from  it  by  rather  less  than  half  a  mile  of

CH.  xi. BATTLE  OF  BUNKER'S  HILL. 203

water,  lay  the  little  town  of  Charleston,  behind  which
rose  two  small  connected  hills,  which  commanded  a  great
part  both  of  the  town  and  harbour  of  Boston.  Breed's
Hill,  which  was  nearest  to  Charleston,  was  about
seventy-five  feet,  Bunker's  Hill  was  about  one  hundred
and  ten  feet,  in  height.  The  peninsula,  which  was
little  more  than  a  mile  long,  was  connected  with  the
mainland  by  a  narrow  causeway.  Cambridge,  the  head-
quarters of  the  American  forces,  was  by  road  about  four
miles  from  Bunker's  Hill,  but  much  of  the  intervening
space  was  occupied  by  American  outposts.  The  posses-
sion, under  these  circumstances,  of  Bunker's  Hill,  was  a
matter  of  great  military  importance,  and  Gage  deter-
mined to  fortify  it.  The  Americans  learnt  his  intention,
and  determined  to  defeat  it.

On  the  night  of  June  16,  an  American  force  under
the  command  of  Colonel  Prescott,  and  accompanied  by
some  skilful  engineers  and  by  a  few  field-guns,  silently
occupied  Breed's  Hill  and  threw  up  a  strong  redoubt
before  daylight  revealed  their  presence  to  the  British.
Next  day,  after  much  unnecessary  delay,  a  detachment
under  General  Howe  was  sent  from  Boston  to  dislodge
them.  The  Americans  had  in  the  meantime  received
some  reinforcements  from  their  camp,  but  the  whole
force  upon  the  hill  is  said  not  to  have  exceeded  1 ,500
men.  Most  of  them  were  inexperienced  volunteers.
Many  of  them  were  weary  with  a  long  night's  toil,  and
they  had  been  exposed  for  hours  to  a  harassing  though
ineffectual  fire  from  the  ships  in  the  harbour ;  but  they
were  now  strongly  entrenched  behind  a  redoubt  and  a
breastwork.  The  British  engaged  on  this  memorable
day  consisted  in  all  of  between  2,000  and  3,000  regular
troops,  fresh  from  the  barracks,  and  supported  by  ar-
tillery. The  town  of  Charleston,  having  been  occupied
by  some  American  riflemen,  who  poured  their  fire  upon
the  English  from  the  shelter  of  the  houses,  was  burnt

204 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

by  order  of  General  Howe,  and  its  flames  cast  a  ghastly
splendour  upon  the  scene.  The  English  were  foolishly
encumbered  by  heavy  knapsacks  with  three  days'
provisions.  Instead  of  endeavouring  to  cut  off  the
Americans  by  occupying  the  neck  of  land  to  the  rear  of
Breed's  Hill,  they  climbed  the  steep  and  difficult  ascent
in  front  of  the  battery,  struggling  through  the  long
tangled  grass  beneath  a  burning  sun,  and  exposed  at
every  step  to  the  fire  of  a  sheltered  enemy.  The
Americans  waited  till  their  assailants  were  within  a
few  rods  of  the  entrenchment,  when  they  greeted  them
with  a  fire  so  deadly  and  so  sustained  that  the  British
line  twice  recoiled,  broken,  intimidated,  and  disordered.
The  third  attack  was  more  successful.  The  position  was
carried  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.  The  Americans
were  put  to  flight,  and  five  out  of  their  six  cannon  were
taken.  But  the  victory  was  dearly  purchased.  On  the
British  side  1,054  men,  including  89  commissioned
officers,  fell.  The  Americans  only  admitted  a  Joss  of
449  men ;  and  they  contended  that,  if  they  had  been
properly  reinforced,  and  if  their  ammunition  had  not
begun  to  fail,  they  would  have  held  the  position.1

The  battle  of  Breed's,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  called,
of  Bunker's  Hill,  though  extremely  bloody  in  proportion
to  the  number  of  men  engaged,  can  hardly  be  said  to
present  any  very  remarkable  military  character,  and
in  a  great  European  war  it  would  have  been  almost
unnoticed.  Few  battles,  however,  have  had  more
important  consequences.  It  roused  at  once  the  fierce
instinct  of  combat  in  America,  weakened  seriously  the
only  British  army  in  New  England,  and  dispelled  for
ever  the  almost  superstitious  belief  in  the  impossibility
of  encountering  regular  troops  with  hastily  levied  volun-

1  See  General  Gage's  despatch. part  ii.,  pp.  132,133. Ramsay,
American  Remembrancer,  1776, Stedman,  and  Bancroft.

en.  M.  CONGRESS  OF 1775.  205

teers.  The  ignoble  taunts  which  had  been  directed
against  the  Americans  were  for  ever  silenced.  No  one
questioned  the  conspicuous  gallantry  with  which  the
provincial  troops  had  supported  a  long  fire  from  the
ships  and  awaited  the  charge  of  the  enemy,  and  British
soldiers  had  been  twice  driven  back  in  disorder  before
their  fire.  From  this  time  the  best  judges  predicted
the  ultimate  success  of  America.

On  May  10  the  new  Continental  Congress  had  met
at  Philadelphia,  and  it  at  once  occupied  itself,  with  an
energy  arid  an  industry  that  few  legislative  bodies  have
ever  equalled,  in  organising  the  war.1  Like  the  former
Congress,  its  debates  were  secret,  and  its  decisions  were
ultimately  unanimous.  New  York,  which  for  a  time
had  flinched,  was  now  fully  rallied  to  the  cause,  and
before  the  close  of  the  Congress,  Georgia  for  the  first
time  openly  joined  the  twelve  other  colonies.  The
conciliatory  offer  of  Lord  North  was  emphatically  re-
jected. The  colonies,  it  was  said,  had  the  exclusive
right,  not  only  of  granting  their  own  money,  but  also
of  deliberating  whether  they  will  make  any  gift,  for
what  purpose  and  to  what  amount ;  and  '  it  is  not  just
that  they  should  be  required  to  oblige  themselves  to
other  contributions,  while  Great  Britain  possesses  a
monopoly  of  their  trade.'  Still  professing  to  have  no
desire  to  separate  from  Great  Britain,  the  Congress
drew  up  another  petition,  expressing  deep  loyalty  to  the
King,  and  addresses  to  the  people  of  Great  Britain,
Ireland,  and  Canada,  and  to  the  Assembly  of  Jamaica,

1  John  Adams,  describing  his  and  from  six  to  ten  in  committees

life  at  Philadelphia  to  his  wife,  again. I  don't  mention  this  to

in December 1775,  says:  'The  make  you  think me a  man  of

whole  Congress  is  taken  up  al-  importance,  because  not  I  alone,

most, in different committees,  but  the  whole  Congress,  is  thus

from  seven  to  ten  in  the  morn-  employed.1 — Adams' Familiar

ing. From  ten  to  four,  or  some-  Letters,  p.  127.
times five,  we  are  in  Congress,

206 ENGLAND  IX  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  w.

asserting  that  the  British  had  been  the  aggressors  at
Lexington,  and  had  destroyed  every  vestige  of  consti-
tutional liberty  in  Massachusetts,  and  that  America,  in
taking  up  arms,  acted  strictly  in  self-defence.  It  for-
bade the  colonists  to  have  any  commercial  intercourse
with  those  ports  of  America  which  had  not  observed  the
non-impoi'tation  agreement  of  the  preceding  year.  It
forbade  them  to  furnish  any  provisions  or  other  ne-
cessaries to  British  fishermen  on  their  coast,  or  to  any-
one connected  with  the  British  army  or  navy.  It  at
the  same  time  ordered  that  ten  companies  of  riflemen
from  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,  should  be
raised  to  reinforce  the  New  England  army  at  Cambridge ;
made  rules  for  the  regulation  of  the  revolutionary  army ;
determined  upon  an  expedition  to  Canada ;  issued  bills
of  credit  to  the  amount  of  3,000,000  Spanish  dollars ;
established  an  American  post-office  with  Franklin  at  its
head ;  appointed  a  number  of  general  officers,  and,
above  all,  selected  George  Washington  as  Commander-
in-chief  of  the  American  army.

The  unanimity  with  which  these  measures  were  de-
creed was  due  to  the  great  forbearance  of  many  mem-
bers of  the  Congress,  for  the  secret  debates  of  that  body
were  distracted  by  the  bitterest  divisions.  As  John
Adams  wrote,  '  Every  important  step  was  opposed  and
carried  by  bare  majorities,'  and  a  large  amount  of  jea-
lousy and  suspicion  was  displayed.1  Adams,  at  the  head
of  the  New  England  party,  maintained  that  America
should  at  once  declare  her  independence,  form  herself
into  a  confederation,  seize  all  the  Crown  officers  as  host-
ages, and  enter  into  negotiations  with  France  and  Spain ;
and  letters  which  he  had  written  expressing  these  views

1  Autobiography. Adams'  private  friendships  and  enmities,

Works,  ii.  503. '  It  is  almost  im-  and provincial  views and pre-

possible,'  wrote  Adams,  '  to  move  judices,  intermingle  in  the  con-

anything  but  YOU  instantly  see  saltation.' — Ibid.  ii.  418.

CB.W.  CONGRESS OF 1775.  207

feli  into  the  hands  of  the  British  Government.  Dickin-
son, however,  supported  by  Pennsylvania  and  by  some
of  the  other  Middle  States,  insisted  upon  drawing  up
another  petition  to  the  King,  and  making  a  last  effort
towards  reconciliation  ;  and  after  a  very  angry  resist-
ance, Adams  was  obliged  to  yield.  Zubly,  a  Swiss
clergyman,  who  was  prominent  among  the  delegates  of
Georgia,  appears  to  have  gone  still  further.  '  There  are
persons  in  America,'  he  complained,  '  who  wish  to  break
off  with  Great  Britain ;  a  proposal  has  been  made  to
apply  to  France  and  Spain  ;  before  I  agree  to  it  I  will
inform  my  constituents.  I  apprehend  the  man  who
should  propose  it  would  be  torn  to  pieces,  like  De  Witt.'1
He  objected  strongly  to  the  proposed  invasion  of  Canada
as  an  unjustifiable  aggression,  and  to  the  non-importa,-
tion  and  non-exportation  agreements  as  certain  to  ruin
America.  He  openly  expressed  his  hope  that  the  pre-
sent winter  would  witness  a  reconciliation  with  the
mother  country  ;  and  he  declared  his  opinion  that  '  a
republican  government  is  little  better  than  government
of  devils.'  2  The  trade  agreements  were  debated  vehe-
mently through  several  days,  and  a  large  proportion  of
the  members  appear  to  have  held  that  the  non-expor-
tation agreement  would  render  it  impossible  for  the
colonies  to  obtain  the  money  which  was  necessary  for
carrying  on  the  war.  Negotiations  with  France  and  Spain
were  spoken  of,  but  as  yet  there  was  great  doubt  about
the  disposition  of  these  Powers.  It  is  curious,  amid  the
storm  of  invective  which  at  this  time  was  directed  against
English  tyranny,  to  read  the  opinion  of  Gadsden,  one  of
the  representatives  of  South  Carolina,  who  was  most
active  in  promoting  the  Revolution:  '  France  and  Spain,'
he  said,  '  would  be  glad  to  see  Great  Britain  despotic  in
America.  Our  being  in  a  better  state  than  their  colo-

1  Adams'  TForJra,  ii.  459. ' *  Ibid.  ii.  4BG,  4C9.  472.

208 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  K.

nies,  occasions  complaints  among  them,  insurrections
and  rebellions.  But  these  Powers  would  be  glad  we
were  an  independent  State.'  *

Perhaps  the  most  difficult  question,  however,  was
the  appointment  of  a  commander-in-chief ;  and  on  no
other  subject  did  the  Congress  exhibit  more  conspicuous
wisdom.  When  only  twenty-three,  Washington  had  been
appointed  commander  of  the  Virginian  forces  against
the  French ;  and  in  the  late  war,  though  he  had  met
with  one  serious  disaster,  and  had  no  opportunity  of
obtaining  any  very  brilliant  military  reputation,  he  had
always  shown  himself  an  eminently  brave  and  skilful
soldier.  His  great  modesty  and  taciturnity  kept  him  in
the  background,  both  in  the  Provincial  Legislature  and
in  the  Continental  Congress  ;  but  though  his  voice  was
scarcely  ever  heard  in  debate,  his  superiority  was  soon
felt  in  the  practical  work  of  the  committees.  '  If  you
speak  of  solid  information  or  sound  judgment,'  said
Patrick  Henry  about  this  time,  '  Colonel  Washington  is
unquestionably  the  greatest  man  in  the  Congress.'  He
appeared  in  the  Assembly  in  uniform,  and  in  military
matters  his  voice  had  an  almost  decisive  weight.  Several
circumstances  distinguished  him  from  other  officers,  who
in  military  service  might  have  been  his  rivals.  He  was
of  an  old  American  family.  He  was  a  planter  of  wealth
and  social  position,  and  being  a  Virginian,  his  appoint-
ment was  a  great  step  towards  enlisting  that  important
colony  cordially  in  the  cause.  The  capital  question  now
pending  in  America  was,  how  far  the  other  colonies
would  support  New  England  in  the  struggle.  In  the
preceding  March,  Patrick  Henry  had  carried  a  resolu-
tion for  embodying  and  reorganising  the  Virginia  militia,
and  had  openly  proclaimed  that  an  appeal  to  arms  was
inevitable ;  but  as  yet  New  England  had  borne  almost

1  Adams'  Works,  ii.  474.

Of.  xi  GEORGE  WASHINGTON.  209

the  whole  burden.  The  army  at  Cambridge  was  a  New
England  army,  and  General  Ward,  who  commanded  it,
had  been  appointed  by  Massachusetts.  Even  if  Ward
were  superseded,  there  were  many  New  England  com-
petitors for  the  post  of  commander ;  the  army  naturally
desired  a  chief  of  their  own  province,  and  there  were
divisions  and  hostilities  among  the  New  England  depu-
ties.1 The  great  personal  merit  of  Washington  and  the
great  political  importance  of  securing  Virginia,  deter-
mined the  issue  ;  and  the  New  England  deputies  ulti-
mately took  a  leading  part  in  the  appointment.  The
second  place  was  given  to  General  Ward,  and  the  third
to  Charles  Lee,  an  English  soldier  of  fortune  who  had
lately  purchased  land  in  Virginia  and  embraced  the
American  cause  with  great  passion.  Lee  had  probably
a  wider  military  experience  than  any  other  officer  in
America,  but  he  was  a  man  of  no  settled  principles,  and
his  great  talents  were  marred  by  a  very  irritable  and
capricious  temper.

To  the  appointment  of  Washington,  far  more  than
to  any  other  single  circumstance,  is  due  the  ultimate
success  of  the  American  Revolution,  though  in  purely
intellectual  powers,  Washington  was  certainly  inferior
to  Franklin,  and  perhaps  to  two  or  three  other  of  his
colleagues.  There  is  a  theory  which  once  received  the
countenance  of  some  considerable  physiologists,  though
it  is  now,  I  believe,  completely  discarded,  that  one  of
the  great  lines  of  division  among  men  may  be  traced  to
the  comparative  development  of  the  cerebrum  and  the
cerebellum.  To  the  first  organ  it  was  supposed  belong
those  special  gifts  or  powers  which  make  men  poets,
orators,  thinkers,  artists,  conquerors,  or  wits.  To  the
second  belong  the  superintending,  restraining,  discern-
ing, and  directing  faculties  which  enable  men  to  employ

1  See  Adams'  Diary. Works,  ii.  416.
VOL.  IV.  f

210 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH:  CEN1URY. CH.  «.

their  several  talents  with  sanity  and  wisdom,  which
maintain  the  balance  and  the  proportion  of  intellect  and
character,  and  make  sound  judgments  and  well-regulated
lives.  The  theory,  however  untrue  in  its  physiological
aspect,  corresponds  to  a  real  distinction  in  human  minds
and  characters,  and  it  was  especially  in  the  second  order
of  faculties  that  Washington  excelled.  His  mind  was
not  quick  or  remarkably  original.  His  conversation
had  no  brilliancy  or  wit.  He  was  entirely  without  the
gift  of  eloquence,  and  he  had  very  few  accomplishments.
He  knew  no  language  but  his  own,  and  except  for  a
rather  strong  turn  for  mathematics,  he  had  no  taste
which  can  be  called  purely  intellectual.  There  was
nothing  in  him  of  the  meteor  or  the  cataract,  nothing
that  either  dazzled  or  overpowered.  A  courteous  and
hospitable  country  gentleman,  a  skilful  farmer,  a  very
keen  sportsman,  he  probably  differed  little  in  tastes  and
habits  from  the  better  members  of  the  class  to  which  he
belonged  ;  and  it  was  in  a  great  degree  in  the  administra-
tion of  a  large  estate  and  in  assiduous  attention  to  county
and  provincial  business  that  he  acquired  his  rare  skill  in
reading  and  managing  men.

As  a  soldier  the  circumstances  of  his  career  brought
him  into  the  blaze,  not  only  of  domestic,  but  of  foreign
criticism,  and  it  was  only  very  gradually  that  his  supe-
riority was  fully  recognised.  Lee,  who  of  all  American
soldiers  had  seen  most  service  in  the  English  army,  and
Conway,  who  had  risen  to  great  repute  in  the  French
army,  were  both  accustomed  to  speak  of  his  military
talents  with  extreme  disparagement ;  but  personal  jea-
lousy and  animosity  undoubtedly  coloured  their  judg-
ments. Kalb,  who  had  been  trained  in  the  best  military
Bchools  of  the  Continent,  at  first  pronounced  him  to  be
very  deficient  in  the  strength,  decision,  and  promptitude
of  a  general ;  and,  although  he  soon  learnt  to  form  the
highest  estimate  of  his  military  capacity,  he  continued

en.  xi.  GEORGE  WASHINGTON.  211

to  lament  that  an  excessive  modesty  led  him  too  fre-
quently to  act  upon  the  opinion  of  inferior  men,  rather
than  upon  his  own  most  excellent  judgment.1  In  the
army  and  the  Congress  more  than  one  rival  was  opposed
to  him.  He  had  his  full  share  of  disaster ;  the  operations
which  he  conducted,  if  compared  with  great  European
wars,  were  on  a  very  small  scale ;  and  he  had  the  im-
mense advantage  of  encountering  in  most  cases  generals
of  singular  incapacity.  It  may,  however,  be  truly  said
of  him  that  his  military  reputation  steadily  rose  through
many  successive  campaigns,  and  before  the  end  of  tl.e
struggle  he  had  outlived  all  rivalry,  and  almost  all  envy.
He  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  technical  part  of
his  profession,  a  good  eye  for  military  combinations,  an
extraordinary  gift  of  military  administration.  Punctual,
methodical,  and  exact  in  the  highest  degree,  he  excelled
in  managing  those  minute  details  which  are  so  essential
to  the  efficiency  of  an  army,  and  he  possessed  to  an
eminent  degree  not  only  the  common  courage  of  a  soldier,
but  also  that  much  rarer  form  of  courage  which  can
endure  long-continued  suspense,  bear  the  weight  of
great  responsibility,  and  encounter  the  risks  of  misre-
presentation and  unpopularity.  For  several  years,  and
usually  in  the  neighbourhood  of  superior  forces,  he  com-
manded a  perpetually  fluctuating  army,  almost  wholly
destitute  of  discipline  and  respect  for  authority,  torn
by  the  most  violent  personal  and  provincial  jealousies,
wretchedly  armed,  wretchedly  clothed,  and  sometimes
in  imminent  danger  of  starvation.  Unsupported  for  the
most  part  by  the  population  among  whom  he  was  quar-
tered, and  incessantly  thwarted  by  the  jealousy  of  Con-
gress, he  kept  his  army  together  by  a  combination  of
skill,  firmness,  patience,  and  judgment  which  has  rarely

1  See Greene's German  Element  in  tfte  American War, pp.
142-144.

p  2

212 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

been surpassed, and he led it at last  to a signal
triumph.

In  civil  as  in  military  life,  he  was  pre-eminent
among  his  contemporaries  for  the  clearness  and  sound-
ness of  his  judgment,  for  his  perfect  moderation  and
self-control,  for  the  quiet  dignity  and  the  indomitable
firmness  with  which  he  pursued  every  path  which  he  had
deliberately  chosen.  Of  all  the  great  men  in  history  he
was  the  most  invariably  judicious,  and  there  is  scarcely
a  rash  word  or  action  or  judgment  recorded  of  him.
Those  who  knew  him  well,  noticed  that  he  had  keen
sensibilities  and  strong  passions  ;  but  his  power  of  self-
command  never  failed  him,  and  no  act  of  his  public  life
can  be  traced  to  personal  caprice,  ambition,  or  resent-
ment. In  the  despondency  of  long-continued  failure,
in  the  elation  of  sudden  success,  at  times  when  his
soldiers  were  deserting  by  hundreds  and  when  malig-
nant plots  were  formed  against  his  reputation,  amid  the
constant  quarrels,  rivalries,  and  jealousies  of  his  sub-
ordinates, in  the  dark  hour  of  national  ingratitude,  and
in  the  midst  of  the  most  universal  and  intoxicating
flattery,  he  was  always  the  same  calm,  wise,  just,  and
single-minded  man,  pursuing  the  course  which  he  be-
lieved to  be  right,  without  fear  or  favour  or  fanaticism ;
equally  free  from  the  passions  that  spring  from  interest,
and  from  the  passions  that  spring  from  imagination.
He  never  acted  on  the  impulse  of  an  absorbing  or  un-
calculating  enthusiasm,  and  he  valued  very  highly  for-
tune, position,  and  reputation  ;  but  at  the  command  of
duty  he  was  ready  to  risk  and  sacrifice  them  all.  He
was  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  words  a  gentleman  and
a  man  of  honour,  and  he  carried  into  public  life  the
severest  standard  of  private  morals.  It  was  at  first  the
constant  dread  of  large  sections  of  the  American  people,
that  if  the  old  Government  were  overthrown,  they  would
fall  into  the  hands  of  military  adventurers,  and  undergo

CH.  xi.  GEORGE  WASHINGTON.  213

the  yoke  of  military  despotism.  It  was  mainly  the
transparent  integrity  of  the  character  of  Washington
that  dispelled  the  fear.  It  was  always  known  by  his
friends,  and  it  was  soon  acknowledged  by  the  whole
nation  and  by  the  English  themselves,  that  in  Washing-
ton America  had  found  a  leader  who  could  be  induced
by  no  earthly  motive  to  tell  a  falsehood,  or  to  break  an
engagement,  or  to  commit  any  dishonourable  act.  Mew
of  this  moral  type  are  happily  not  rare,  and  we  have  all
met  them  in  our  experience;  but  there  is  scarcely
another  instance  in  history  of  such  a  man  having  reached
and  maintained  the  highest  position  in  the  convulsions
of  civil  war  and  of  a  great  popular  agitation.

It  is  one  of  the  great  advantages  of  the  long  practice
of  free  institutions,  that  it  diffuses  through  the  com-
munity a  knowledge  of  character  and  a  soundness  of
judgment  which  save  it  from  the  enormous  mistakes
that  are  almost  always  made  by  enslaved  nations  when
suddenly  called  upon  to  choose  their  rulers.  No  fact
shows  so  eminently  the  high  intelligence  of  the  men  who
managed  the  American  Revolution  as  their  selection  of
a  leader  whose  qualities  were  so  much  more  solid  than
brilliant,  and  who  was  so  entirely  free  from  all  the  cha-
racteristics of  a  demagogue.  It  was  only  slowly  and
very  deliberately  that  Washington  identified  himself
with  the  revolutionary  cause.  No  man  had  a  deeper
admiration  for  the  British  Constitution,  or  a  more  sin-
cere wish  to  preserve  the  connection  and  to  put  an  end
to  the  disputes  between  the  two  countries.  In  Virginia
the  revolutionary  movement  was  preceded  and  prepared
by  a  democratic  movement  of  the  yeomanry  of  the  pro-
vince, led  by  Patrick  Henry,  against  the  planter  aristo-
cracy,1 and  Washington  was  a  conspicuous  member  of
the  latter.  In  tastes,  manners,  instincts,  and  sym-

See  Wirt's  Life  of  Patrick  Ilenry.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. en.  xi.

pathies  he  might  have  been  taken  as  an  admirable
specimen  of  the  better  type  of  English  country  gentle-
man, and  he  had  a  great  deal  of  the  strong  conservative
feeling  which  is  natural  to  the  class.  From  the  first
promulgation  of  the  Stamp  Act,  however,  he  adopted
the  conviction  that  a  recognition  of  the  sole  right  of  the
colonies  to  tax  themselves  was  essential  to  their  free-
dom, and  as  soon  as  it  became  evident  that  Parliament
was  resolved  ab  all  hazards  to  assert  and  exercise  its
authority  of  taxing  America,  he  no  longer  hesitated.
An  interesting  letter  to  his  wife,  however,  shows  clearly
that  he  accepted  the  proffered  command  of  the  Ameri-
can forces  with  extreme  diffidence  and  reluctance,  and
solely  because  he  believed  that  it  was  impossible  for
him  honourably  to  refuse  it.  He  declined  to  accept
from  Congress  any  emoluments  for  his  service  beyond
the  simple  payment  of  his  expenses,  of  which  he  was
accustomed  to  draw  up  most  exact  and  methodical
accounts.

The  other  military  events  of  the  year  must  be  veiy
briefly  related.  About  three  weeks  after  the  skirmish
at  Lexington  a  party  of  colonists  under  Colonels  Allen
and  Benedict  Arnold  had  succeeded,  without  the  loss  of
a  man,  in  seizing  the  two  very  important  forts  of  Ticon-
deroga  and  Crown  Point,  which  commanded  Lakes
George  and  Cham  plain,  and  were  indeed  the  key  of
Canada,  but  which  had  been  left  by  the  English  in  the
charge  of  only  sixty  or  seventy  soldiers.  In  September,
in  obedience  to  the  direction  of  the  Congress,  a  colonial
army  invaded  Canada.  Washington  was  at  this  time
organising  the  army  in  Massachusetts,  but  the  Canadian
expedition  was  entrusted  to  the  joint  command  of
Schuyler — who,  however,  was  soon  obliged  through
ill-health  to  return  to  Ticonderoga — and  of  Mont-
gomery, a  brave  and  skilful  Irish  soldier  from  Donegal,
who  had  been  for  many  years  settled  in  the  colonies,

cu.  XT.  INVASION 01'  CANADA, 1775.  215

and  had  served  with  great  distinction  in  the  late  French
war.  For  some  time  the  invasion  was  successful.
Several  parties  of  Indians  joined  the  Provincials.1
General  Carleton,  who  commanded  the  English  in
Canada,  with  800  soldiers  was  driven  back  when  at-
tempting to  cross  the  St.  Lawrence.  The  small  fort
of  Chamblee  and  the  much  more  important  fort  of
St.  John  were  taken.  Montreal  was  occupied  in  No-
vember, and  in  the  beginning  of  December  Montgomery
laid  siege  to  Quebec.  He  had  been  joined  just  before
by  Benedict  Arnold,  who  had  been  sent  by  Washington
at  the  head  of  an  expedition  to  assist  him,  but  their
joint  efforts  were  unsuccessful.  The  Canadians  re-
mained loyal  to  England.  Their  laws  and  their  re-
ligion had  been  guaranteed.  They  had  enjoyed  under
English  rule  much  prosperity  and  happiness.  The
Catholic  priests  were  strongly  on  the  side  of  the  Eng-
lish Government.2  The  contagion  of  New  England
republicanism  had  not  penetrated  to  Canada,  and  the
Canadians  had  no  sympathy  with«the  New  England
character  or  the  New  England  creed.  They  were  es-
pecially indignant,  too,  at  the  invasion,  because  on
June  1, 1775,  about  four  weeks  before  Congress  secretly
decided  upon  this  step,  that  body  had  passed  a  resolu-
tion disclaiming  any  such  intention,  and  had  caused  it
to  be  widely  disseminated  through  Canada.3  Unsup-
ported by  the  inhabitants,  in  the  midst  of  a  Canadian
winter,  without  large  cannon  or  sufficient  ammunition,
Montgomery  soon  found  his  position  a  hopeless  one.
His  troops  deserted  in  such  numbers  that  only  800
remained.4  They  were  turbulent,  insubordinate,  and
half-trained  ;  and  they  had  enlisted  for  so  short  a  period

1  Stedman,  i.  133.  Jlist.  vi.  76,  and  Bancroft,  Hist.

*  See  Adolphus,  ii.  239. Earn-  of  the  United  States,  viii.  170,
Bay,  i.  238.  J77-

*  Compare Lord Stanhope's 4  Bancroft.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  Tt.

and  were  so  unwilling  to  renew  their  contract  that  it
was  necessary  to  press  on  operations  as  quickly  as  pos-
sible.1 He  fell  on  the  last  day  of  1775  in  a  desperate
but  unsuccessful  attempt  to  storm  Quebec,  and  in  the
course  of  the  following  year  the  Americans  evacuated
Canada.

In  most  parts  of  the  colonies  the  British  govern-
ment simply  perished  through  the  absence  of  British
soldiers,  but  in  Virginia  Lord  Dunmore,  the  Governor
of  the  province,  made  desperate  efforts  to  retain  it.

1  '  TheNewEnglanders,'  wrote
Montgomery,  '  are  the  worst  stuff
imaginable  for  soldiers.  They
are  homesick.  Their  regiments
are  melted  away,  and  yet  not  a
man  dead  of  any  distemper.
There  is  such  an  equality
among  them  that  the  officers
have  no  authority,  and  there
are  very  few  among  them  in
whose  spirit  I  have  confidence.
The  privates  are  all  generals,
but  not  soldiers,  and  so  jealous
that  it  is  impossible,  though  a
man  risk  his  person,  to  escape
the  imputation  of  treachery.' —
Bancroft,  Hist,  of  tJie  United
Slates,  viii.  185.  The  Jay  after
the  capitulation  of  Montreal,
Montgomery  wrote  to  General
Schuyler :  '  I  am  exceedingly
sorry  that  Congress  has  not
favoured  me  with  a  committee  ;
it  would  have  had  great  effect
with  the  troops,  who  are  exceed-
ingly turbulent,  and  even  mutin-
ous. ...  I  wish  some  method
could  be  fallen  upon  of  engaging
gentlemen  to  serve.  A  point  of
honour  and  more  knowledge  of
the  world  to  be  found  in  that
class  of  men  would  greatly  re-
form discipline,  and  render  the

troops  much  more  tractable.' —
Washington's  Works,  iii.  180,
181.  Washington  writes  (Jan.
31,  177G):  'The  account  given
of  the  behaviour  of  the  men
under  General  Montgomery  is
exactly  consonant  to  the  opinion
I  have  formed  of  these  people,
and  such  as  they  will  exhibit
abundant  proofs  of  in  similar
cases  whenever  called  upon.
Place  them  behind  a  parapet,
a  breastwork,  stone  wall,  or  any-
thing  that  will  afford  them
shelter,  and  from  their  know-
ledge of  a  firelock  they  will  give
a  good  account  of  the  enemy ;
but  I  am  as  well  convinced  as  if
I  had  seen  it,  that  they  will  not
march  boldly  up  to  a  work,  nor
stand  exposed  in  a  plain.'— Ibid,
p.  277.  See,  too,  p.  285.  The
failure  and  death  of  Montgomery,
Washington  ascribed  to  the  sys-
tem of  short  enlistments,  'for
had  he  not  been  apprehensive
of  the  troops  leaving  him  at  so
important  a  crisis,  but  continued
the  blockade  of  Quebec,  a  capi-
tulation, from  the  best  accounts
I  have  been  able  to  collect,  must
inevitably  have  followed.' — Ibid,
p.  2?a.

CH.  xi.  FIGHTING  IN  VIRGINIA.

Having  removed  a  store  of  gunpowder  from  Williams-
burg,  in  order  to  secure  it  from  the  Provincials,  he  wad
obliged  to  fly  from  the  palace  to  a  British  man-of-war.
There  were  no  English  soldiers  in  the  province,  but
with  the  assistance  of  some  British  frigates,  of  some
hundreds  of  loyalists  who  followed  his  fortunes,  and  of  a
few  runaway  negroes,  he  equipped  a  marine  force  which
spread  terror  along  the  Virginian  coast,  and  kept  up  a
harassing,  though  almost  useless,  predatory  war.  Two
incidents  in  the  struggle  excited  deep  resentment
throughout  America.  The  first  was  a  proclamation  by
which  freedom  was  promised  to  all  slaves  who  took
arms  against  the  rebels.  The  second  was  the  burning
of  the  important  town  of  Norfolk,  which  had  been
occupied  by  the  Provincials,  had  fired  on  the  King's
ships,  and  had  refused  to  supply  them  with  provisions.
Ifc  was  impossible,  however,  by  such  means  to  subdue
the  province.  An  attempt  to  raise  a  loyalist  force  in
the  back  settlements  of  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas  was
defeated  by  the  arrest  of  its  chief  instigators  in  the
summer  of  1776,  and  soon  after,  Dunmore,  being  no
longer  able  to  obtain  provisions  for  his  ships,  aban-
doned the  colony.  The  unhappy  negroes  who  had
taken  part  with  the  loyalists  are  said  to  have  almost
universally  perished.1

In  the  Southern  provinces,  and  especially  in  the
two  Carolinas  and  in  Georgia,  there  was  a  considerable
loyalist  party,  but  it  was  unsupported  by  any  regular
troops,  and  after  a  few  spasmodic  struggles  it  was
easily  crushed.  Most  of  the  governors  took  refuge  in
English  men-of-war;  a  few  were  arrested  and  im-
prisoned. Provincial  Congresses  assumed  the  direction
of  affairs;  except  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
British  soldiers  the  power  of  England  had  ceased,  and

Stedman. Bancroft. Ramsay,  i.  252.

218 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cu.  «.

there  was  no  force  in  America  competent  to  restore  it.
In  the  chief  towns  the  stir  of  military  preparation  was
incessant.  When  Franklin  attended  the  Congress  at
Philadelphia  in  the  September  of  1775,  he  found  com-
panies of  provincial  soldiers  drilled  twice  a  day  in  the
square  of  the  Quaker  capital,  and  the  fortifications
along  the  Delaware  were  rapidly  advancing.  Six
powder  mills  were  already  designed,  and  two  were  just
about  to  open.  A  manufactory  of  muskets  had  been
established  which  was  expected  to  complete  twenty-five
muskets  a  day.  Suspected  persons  were  constantly
arrested,  and  the  letter-bags  systematically  examined.
Tories  were  either  tarred  and  feathered  or  compelled  to
mount  a  cart  and  ask  pardon  of  the  crowd,  and  the
ladies  of  the  town  were  busily  employed  in  scraping
lint  or  making  bandages  for  the  wounded.1

Over  the  inland  districts  the  revolutionary  pai'ty
was  as  yet  supreme,  but  the  whole  coast  was  exposed,
almost  without  defence,  to  the  attacks  of  English  ships
of  war,  and  all  the  chief  towns  in  America  were  sea-
port. The  Americans  possessed  a  large  population  of
seafaring  men  who  were  eminently  fitted  for  maritime
warfare,  but  they  had  as  yet  not  a  single  ship  of  war.
The  Government  made  large  offers  to  gunsmiths  to  in-
duce them  to  abandon  America  for  England.2  The
manufacture  of  gunpowder  was  only  slowly  organised,
and  for  many  months  the  colonial  forces  were  often  in
extreme  danger  in  consequence  of  the  scantiness  of
their  supply.  It  was  wisely  determined  to  pay  the
provincial  troops  and  to  pay  them  well ;  but  as  all
foreign  commerce  was  arrested,  and  as  most  forms  of
industry  were  dislocated,  there  was  very  little  money

1  Parton's  Life  of  Franklin, Tryon, Documents relating to
II  100.  the Colonial History of

*  See a letter of Governor York,  viii.  C17.

CH.  xi.  XEGROES  AND  INDIANS.  219

in  the  country,  and  paper  was  speedily  depreciated.
Some  of  the  necessaries  of  life  had  hitherto  been  im-
ported from  England,  and  the  great  want  of  native
woollen  goods  was  especially  felt  in  the  rigour  of  the
first  winter  of  the  war.

Though  the  negroes,  who  were  so  numerous  in  the
Southern  States,  were  a  cause  of  great  anxiety  to  the
colonists,1  they  remained  at  this  time,  with  few  excep-
tions, perfectly  passive  ;  but  one  of  the  first  conse-
quences of  the  appeal  to  arms  was  to  bring  Indian
tribes  into  the  field.  In  the  great  French  war  they
had  been  constantly  employed  by  the  French  and  fre-
quently by  the  English,  and  it  was  not  likely  that  so
formidable  a  weapon  would  be  long  unused.  Neither
side,  it  is  true,  desired  a  general  Indian  rising.  Neither
side  can  be  justly  accused  of  the  great  crime  of  inciting
the  Indians  to  indiscriminate  massacre  or  plunder,  but
both  sides  were  ready  to  employ  them  as  auxiliaries.
Before  the  battle  of  Lexington  the  Provincial  Congress
of  Massachusetts  formed  a  company  out  of  Stockbridge
Indians  residing  in  the  colony.2  In  the  beginning  of
April  1775  they  issued  an  address  to  the  Mohawk
Indians  exhorting  them  '  to  whet  the  hatchet '  for  war
against  the  English,3  and  Indians  were,  as  we  have
seen,  employed  by  the  Provincials  in  their  invasion  of

1  Thus  J.  Adams  in  1775  gives  join  it  from  the  two  provinces
an  account  of  an  interview  with  in  a  fortnight.  .  .  .  Their  only
some  gentlemen  from  Georgia.  security  is  that  all  the  King's
•These  gentlemen  give  a  melan-  friends  and  tools  of  Government
choly  account  of  the  State  of  have  large  plantations  and  pro-
Georgia  and  South  Carolina.  perty  in  negroes,  so  that  the
They  say  that  if  1,000  regular  slaves  of  the  Tories  would  be
troops  should  land  in  Georgia,  lost  as  well  as  those  of  the
and  their  commander  be  pro-  Whigs.' — Adams'  Works,  ii.  428.
vided  with  arms  and  clothes  *  Washington's  Works,  iii.  175.
enough,  and  proclaim  freedom  *  Force's  American  Archives
to  all  the  negroes  who  would  join  (4th  series),  i.  1349,  1350.
his  camp,  20,000  negroes  would

220 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

Canada.  In  March  1775  Mr.  Stuart,  who  managed
Indian  affairs  for  the  English  Government  in  the
Southern  colonies,  reported  that  General  Gage  had  in-
formed him  '  that  ill-affected  people  in  those  parts  had
been  endeavouring  to  poison  the  minds  of  the  Indians
of  the  six  nations  and  other  tribes  with  jealousies,  in
order  to  alienate  their  affection  from  his  Majesty,' l  and
New  England  missionaries  appear  to  have  been  in  this
respect  especially  active.2  Up  to  the  middle  of  this
year  the  English  professed  great  reluctance  to  make
use  of  savages.  In  July,  Stuart  wrote  very  emphatic-
ally to  the  Revolutionary  Committee  of  Intelligence  at
Charleston,  which  had  expressed  suspicions  on  this  sub-
ject :  '  I  never  have  received  any  orders  from  my  supe-
riors which  by  the  most  tortured  construction  could  be
interpreted  to  spirit  up  or  employ  the  Indians  to  fall
upon  the  frontier  inhabitants,  or  to  take  any  part  in
the  disputes  between  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies,'  3
and  both  English  and  colonists  exhorted  the  Indians  as
a  body  to  remain  neutral.4  It  is,  however,  certain  that

1  March2S,1775.  MSS.Record
Office  (Plantations,  General).

2  Documents  relating  to the
Colonial  History  of  New  York,
viii.  656,  657. See,  too,  a  letter
of  the  Provincial  Congress,  dated
April  4,  1775,  to  a  New  England
missionary,  urging  him to  use
his  influence  to  make  the  Indians
take  up  arms  against  the  Eng-
lish. Washington's Works,  iii.
495.

1  July  18, 1775.  MSS.  Eecord
Office.

4  In  a  speech  to  the  Indians,
August  30,  1775,  Stuart  said:
1  There  is  a  difference  between
the  white  people  of  England  and
the  white  people  of  America  ;
this  is  a  matter  which  does  not

concern  you,  they  will  decide  it
among  themselves." — MSS.  Ee-
cord Office  (Plantations,  General).
In  August  1775  the  commis-
sioners sent  by  the  twelve  colo-
nies had  a  long  interview  with
the  chiefs  of  the  six  nations,  and
gave  them  an  elaborate  account
of  the  motives  which  had  united
them  against  England.  They
added,  however:  '  This  is  a  family
quarrel  between  us  and  Old  Eng-
land. You  Indians  are  not  con-
cerned in  it.  We  do  not  wish
you  to  take  up  the  hatchet  against
the  King's  troops.  We  desire
you  to  remain  at  home  and  not
join  either  side,  but  keep  the
hatchet  buried  deep.' — Docu-
ments relating  to  tJie  Colonial

CfT. XI.

INDIANS  CALLED TO  ARM3.

221

in  the  beginning  of  June  1775  Colonel  Guy  Johnson,
who  had  succeeded  Sir  William  Johnson  in  the  direc-
tion of  one  great  department  of  Indian  affairs,  had,  in
obedience  to  secret  instructions  from  General  Gage,  in-
duced a  large  body  of  Indians  to  undertake  '  to  assist
his  Majesty's  troops  in  their  operations  in  Canada,' l
and  in  July  this  policy  was  openly  avowed  by  Lord
Dartmouth.  It  was  defended  on  the  ground  that  the
Americans  had  themselves  adopted  it.2

Few  things  were  more  terrible  to  the  Americans

History  of  New  York,  viii.  619.
See,  too,  the  Secret  Journals  of
Congress,  July  17,  1775.

1  Documents relating  to  the
Colonial  History  of  New  York,
viii.  636. See  Secret  Journals  of
Congress,  June  27,  1775.

2  July  24, 1775, Lord  Dart-
mouth wrote  to  Colonel  Johnson  :
'  The unnatural  rebellion now
raging  in  America  calls  for  every
effort  to  suppress  it,  and  the  in-
telligence  his Majesty  has re-
ceived of  the  rebels  having  ex-
cited the  Indians  to  take  a  part,
and  of  their  having  actually  en-
gaged a  body  of  them  in  arms  to
support  their  rebellion,  justifies
the  resolution  his Majesty  has
taken  of  requiring  the  assistance
of  his  faithful  adherents  the  six
nations. It is, therefore,  his
Majesty's  pleasure  that  you  lose
no  time  in  taking  such  steps  as
may  induce  them  to  take  up  the
hatchet  against  his  Majesty's  re-
bellious  subjects.'  —  Documents
on  tlie  Colonial  History  of  New
York,  viii.  596. General  Gage
wrote  to  Stuart  (September  12,
1775)  telling  him  to  hold  a  cor-
respondence with  the Indians,
'to  make  them  take  arms  against

his  Majesty's  enemies,  and  to
distress  them  all  in  their  power,
for  no  terms  are  now  to  be
kept  with  them.'  '  The  rebels,'
he  continues,  '  have  themselves
opened  the  door.  They  have
brought  down  all  the  savages
they  could  against  us  here,  who
with  their  riflemen  are  continu-
ally firing  on  our  advanced  sen-
tries.'—MSS.  Record  Office.  On
October  24,  1775,  Stuart  sent
ammunition  to  the  savages  ac-
cording to  instructions,  adding :
•  You  will  understand  that  an
indiscriminate  attack  upftn  the
province  is  not  meant,  but  to
act  in  the  execution  of  any  con-
certed plan,  and  to  assist  his
Majesty's  troops  or  friends  in
distressing  the  rebels.' — Ibid.
On  November  20,  1775,  Lord
North  said  in  Parliament :  '  As
to  the  means  of  conducting  the
war,  he  declared  there  was  never
any  idea  of  employing  the  negroes
or  the  Indians  until  the  Ameri-
cans themselves  had  first  applied
to  them ;  that  General  Carleton
did  then  apply  to  them,  and  that
even  then  it  was  only  for  the  de-
fence of  his  own  province.'—
larl.  Hist,  xviii.  994.

222 ENGLAND  O  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. cu.  n.

than  the  scourge  of  Indian  war.  As  it  had  generally
been  the  function  of  the  Government  to  protect  the
savages  against  the  rapacity  and  violence  of  the  colonists,
England  could  count  largely  upon  their  gratitude,  and
the  horrors  which  never  failed  to  multiply  in  their  track
gave  a  darker  hue  of  animosity  to  the  struggle.

But  the  greatest  danger  to  the  colonial  cause  was
the  half-heartedness  of  its  supporters.  It  is  difficult  or
impossible  to  form  any  safe  conjecture  of  the  number  of
real  loyalists  in  America,  but  it  is  certain  that  it  was
very  considerable.  John  Adams,  who  would  naturally
be  inclined  to  overrate  the  preponderance  in  favour  of
independence,  declared  at  the  end  of  the  war  his  belief
that  a  third  part  of  the  whole  population,  more  than  a
third  part  of  the  principal  persons  in  America,  were
throughout  opposed  to  the  Revolution.1  Massachusetts
was  of  all  the  provinces  the  most  revolutionary,  but  when
General  Gage  evacuated  Boston  in  1776  he  was  accom-
panied by  more  than  1,000  loyalists  of  that  town  and  of
the  neighbouring  country.  Two-thirds  of  the  property
of  New  York  was  supposed  to  belong  to  Tories,  and
except  in  the  city  there  appears  to  have  been  no  serious
disaffection.2  In  some  of  the  Southern  colonies  loyalists
probably  formed  half  the  population,  and  there  was  no
colony  in  which  they  were  not  largely  represented.

There  were  also  great  multitudes  who,  though  they
would  never  take  up  arms  for  the  King,  though  they
perhaps  agreed  with  the  constitutional  doctrines  of
the  Revolutionists,  dissented  on  grounds  of  principle,
policy,  or  interest  from  the  course  which  they  were
adopting.  There  were  those  who  wished  to  wait  till

1  Adams'  Works,  x.  87.  Many  *  Parl.  Hist, xviii.  123-129.

particulars  .about  the  strength  of  Sparks' Life of Washington.

the  loyalist  party  will  be  found  Force's  American  Archives  (4th

in  Mr.  Sabine's  very  interesting  series),  i.  773,  957.
book,  Tlie  Loyalists  of  America.

en.  xi.  FOREBODINGS IX AMERICA.  223

the  natural  increase  of  the  colonies  made  coercion  mani-
festly impossible;  who  feared  to  stake  acknowledged
liberties  on  the  doubtful  issue  of  an  armed  struggle  ;
who  shrank  from  measures  that  would  destroy  their
private  fortunes ;  who  determined  to  stand  aloof  till
the  event  showed  which  side  was  likely  to  win ;  who
still  dreamed  of  the  possibility  of  resisting  the  Par-
liament without  casting  off  allegiance  to  the  Crown.
If  America  succeeded  in  throwing  off  the  yoke  of
England,  it  could  hardly  be  without  the  assistance
of  France,  and  many  feared  that  France  would  thus
acquire  a  power  on  the  Continent  far  more  dangerous
than  that  of  England  to  the  liberties  of  the  colonies.
Was  it  not  likely,  too,  that  an  independent  America
would  degenerate,  as  so  many  of  Ihe  best  judges  had
predicted,  into  a  multitude  of  petty,  heterogeneous,
feeble,  and  perhaps  hostile  States?  Was  it  not  certain
that  the  cost  of  the  struggle  and  the  burden  of  inde-
pendence would  drain  its  purse  of  far  more  money  than
England  was  ever  likely  to  ask  for  the  defence  of  her
Empire  ?  Was  it  not  possible  that  the  lawless  and
anarchical  spirit  which  had  of  late  years  been  steadily
growing,  and  which  the  patriotic  party  had  actively
encouraged,  would  gain  the  upper  hand,  and  that  the
whole  fabric  of  society  would  be  dissolved  ?  John
Adams  in  his  Diary  relates  the  '  profound  melancholy '
which  fell  upon  him  in  one  of  the  most  critical  moments
of  the  struggle,  when  a  man  whom  he  knew  to  be  a
horse-jockey  and  a  cheat,  and  whom,  as  an  advocate,  he
had  often  defended  in  the  law  courts,  came  to  him  and
expressed  the  unbounded  gratitude  which  he  felt  for  the
great  things  which  Adams  and  his  colleagues  had  done.
'  We  can  never,'  he  said,  '  be  grateful  enough  to  you.
There  are  now  no  courts  of  justice  in  this  province,  and
I  hope  there  will  never  be  another.'  *  Is  this  the  object,'
Adams  continued,  '  for  which  I  have  been  contending  ? '

224 ENGLAND  EST  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XL

said  I  to  myself.  .  .  .  Are  these  the  sentiments  of  such
people,  and  how  many  of  them  are  there  in  the  country  ?
Half  the  nation,  for  what  I  know  ;  for  half  the  nation
are  debtors,  if  not  more,  and  these  have  been  in  all
countries  the  sentiments  of  debtors.  If  the  power  of
the  country  should  get  into  such  hands — and  there  is
great  danger  that  it  will — to  what  purpose  have  we
sacrificed  our  time,  health,  and  everything  else?  ' l

Misgivings  of  this  kind  must  have  passed  through
many  minds,  and  the  older  colonists  were  not  of  the  stuff
of  which  ardent  soldiers  are  made.  Among  the  poor,
vagrant,  adventurous  immigrants  who  had  lately  poured
in  by  thousands  from  Ireland  and  Scotland,  there  was
indeed  a  keen  military  spirit,  and  it  was  these  men  who
ultimately  bore  the  chief  part  in  the  war  of  indepen-
dence ;  but  the  older  and  more  settled  colonists  were
men  of  a  very  different  type.  Shrewd,  prosperous,  and
well-educated  farmers,  industrious,  money-loving,  and
eminently  domestic,  they  were  men  who,  if  they  were
compelled  to  fight,  would  do  so  with  courage  and  intel-
ligence, but  who  cared  little  or  nothing  for  military
glory,  and  grudged  every  hour  that  separated  them  from
their  families  and  their  farms.  Such  men  were  dragged
very  reluctantly  into  the  struggle.  The  American
Revolution,  like  most  others,  was  the  work  of  an  ener-
getic minority,  who  succeeded  in  committing  an  unde-
cided and  fluctuating  majority  to  courses  for  which  they
had  little  love,  and  leading  them  step  by  step  to  a  posi-
tion from  which  it  was  impossible  to  recede.2  To  the

1  Adams'  Works,  ii.  420.  June  16,  1779. As  a  loyalist,  his

*  One  of  the  most  remarkable  mind  was  no  doubt  biassed,  but

documents  relating  to  the  state  he  was  a  very  able  and  honest

of  opinion  in  America  is  the  ex-  man,  and  he  had  much  more  than

amination of Galloway (late  common  means  of  forming  a  cor-

Speaker  of  the  House  of  Assem-  rect  judgment. He  says  :  '  I  do

bly  in  Pennsylvania)  by  a  Com-  not  believe,  from  the  best  know-

mittee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ledge  I  have  of  that  time  [the

CH.  XI.

GENERAL APATHY.

225

last,  however,  we  find  vacillation,  uncertainty,  half-
measures,  and  in  large  classes  a  great  apparent  apathy.
In  June  1775,  the  Provincial  Congress  of  New  York
received  two  startling  pieces  of  intelligence,  that  Wash-
ington was  about  to  pass  through  their  city  on  his  way
to  Cambridge,  and  that  Tryon,  the  royal  governor,  had
just  arrived  in  the  harbour.  The  Congress,  though  it
was  an  essentially  Whig  body,  and  had  assumed  an
attitude  which  was  virtually  rebellion,  still  dreaded  the
necessity  of  declaring  itself  irrevocably  on  either  side,
and  it  ultimately  ordered  the  colonel  of  militia  to  dis-

begirming  of  the  rebellion],  that
one-fifth  of  the  people  had  inde-
pendence in  view.  .  .  .  Many  of
those  who  have  appeared  in  sup-
port of  the  present  rebellion  have
by  a  variety  of  means  been  com-
pelled. ...  I  think  I  may  ven-
ture to  say  that  many  more  than
four-fifths  of  the  people  would
prefer  an  union  with  Great
Britain  upon  constitutional  prin-
ciples to  that  of  independence.'
Galloway  was  asked  the  following
question  :  '  That  part  of  the  rebel
army  that  enlisted  in  the  service
of  the  Congress  —  were  they
chiefly  composed  of  natives  of
America,  or  were  the  greatest
part  of  them  English,  Scotch,
and  Irish  ?  '  Galloway  answered  :
•  The  names  and  places  of  their
nativity  being  taken  down,  I  can
answer  the  question  with  pre-
cision. There  were  scarcely  one-
fourth  natives  of  America — about
one-half  Irish — the  other  fourth
were  English  and  Scotch.'  This
last  answer,  however,  must  be
qualified  by  a  subsequent  answer,
that  he  judged  of  the  country  of
the  troops  by  the  deserters  who
VOL.  IV.

came  over,  to  the  number  of  be-
tween 2,000  and  3,000,  at  the
time  when  Galloway  was  with
Sir  W.  Howe  at  Philadelphia.  I
have  no  doubt  that  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  war  the  proportion  of
pure  Americans  in  the  army  was
much  larger,  as  it  was  chiefly  re-
cruited in  New  England,  where
the  population  was  most  un-
mixed. It  is  stated  that  more
than  a  fourth  part  of  the  conti-
nental soldiers  employed  during
the  war  were  from  Massachusetts.
See  Greene's  Historical  View  of
the  American  Revolution,  p.  235.
Galloway's  very  remarkable  evi-
dence was  reprinted  at  Philadel-
phia in  1855.  In  his  Letters  to
a  Nobleman  on  the  Conduct  of
the  War,  Galloway  reiterates  hia
assertion  that  'three-fourths  of
the  rebel  army  have  been  gener-
ally composed  of  English,  Scotch,
and  Irish,  while  scarcely  the
small  proportion  of  one-fourth
are  American,  notwithstanding
the  severe  and  arbitrary  laws  to
force  them  into  the  service.' —
P.  25.

226 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY". en.  xi.

pose  of  his  troops  so  as  to  receive  '  either  the  General
or  Governor  Tryon,  whichever  should  first  arrive,  and
wait  on  both  as  well  as  circumstances  would  admit.'  *
The  dominant  Quaker  party  of  Pennsylvania  was  at  least
as  hostile  to  rebellion  as  to  imperial  taxation,  and  Chas-
tellux  justified  the  very  democratic  institutions  which
Franklin  established  in  that  province  when  the  Revolu-
tion had  begun,  on  the  ground  that  '  it  was  necessary  to
employ  a  sort  of  seduction  in  order  to  conduct  a  timid
and  avaricious  people  to  independence,  who  were  besides
so  divided  in  their  opinions  that  the  Republican  party
was  scarcely  stronger  than  the  other.' 2  In  every
Southern  colony  a  similar  division  and  a  similar  hesita-
tion may  be  detected.

The  result  of  all  this  was,  that  there  was  much  less
genuine  military  enthusiasm  than  might  have  been  ex-
pected. When  Washington  arrived  at  Cambridge  to
command  the  army,  he  found  that  it  nominally  con-
sisted of  about  17,000  men,  but  that  not  more  than
14,500  were  actually  available  for  service,  and  they  had
to  guard  a  line  extending  for  nearly  twelve  miles,  in
face  of  a  force  of  at  least  9,000  regular  troops,  besides
seamen  and  loyalists.  Urgent  demands  were  made  to
the  different  colonies  to  send  recruits,  but  they  were
very  imperfectly  responded  to.  Colonel  Lee,  in  a  re-
markable letter  on  the  military  prospects  of  the  Ame-
ricans, estimated  that  in  three  or  four  months  the
colonists  could  easily  have  an  efficient  army  of  100,000
infantry.3-  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  month's  recruiting
during  this  most  critical  period  produced  only  5,000
men.  There  was  abundant  courage  and  energy  among
the  soldiers,  but  there  was  very  little  subordination,

1  See  a  curious  note  in  Wash- America,  Eng.  trans.  I.  332.
ington's  Works,  iii.  8.  *  American Remembrancer,

*  Chastellux,  Travels  in  North 1776,  part  i.  p.  25,

CH.  xi. DEFECTS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  ARMY. 227

discipline,  or  self-sacrifice.  Each  body  of  troops  had
been  raised  by  the  laws  of  its  own  colony,  and  it  was
reluctant  to  obey  any  other  authority.  Washington
complained  bitterly  of  '  the  egregious  want  of  public
spirit '  in  his  army.  The  Congress  had  made  rules  for
its  regulation.  The  troops  positively  refused  to  accept
them,  as  they  had  not  enlisted  on  those  terms,  and
Washington  was  obliged  to  yield,  except  in  the  case  of
new  recruits.  The  Congress  had  appointed  a  number  of
officers,  but  the  troops  rebelled  violently  against  their
choice,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  they  would
only  remain  at  their  post  as  long  as  they  served  under
such  officers  as  they  pleased.1  The  absence  of  any
social  difference  between  officers  and  soldiers  greatly
aggravated  the  difficulty  of  enforcing  discipline.2  The
local  feeling  was  so  strong  that  General  Schuyler  gave
it  as  his  deliberate  opinion  that  '  troops  from  the  colony
of  Connecticut  will  not  bear  with  a  general  from
another  colony.'3  The  short  period  for  which  the
troops  had  consented  to  enlist  made  it  impossible  to
give  them  steadiness  or  discipline,  to  count  upon  the
future,  or  to  engage  in  enterprises  of  magnitude  or
continuity.  What  little  subordination  had  been  attained
in  the  beginning  of  the  period  was  destroyed  at  the
close,  for  the  officers  were  obliged  to  connive  at  every
kind  of  relaxation  of  discipline  in  order  to  persuade
their  soldiers  to  re-enlist.4  Personal  recriminations
and  jealousies,  quarrels  about  rank  and  pay  and  ser-
vice, were  incessant.  Great  numbers  held  aloof  from
enlisting,  imagining  that  the  distress  of  their  cause
would  oblige  the  Congress  to  offer  large  bounties ; 5  no
possible  inducement  could  persuade  a  large  proportion
of  the  soldiers  to  re-enlist  when  their  short  time  of  ser-

1  Washington's Works, iii. •  Ibid.  p.  243 ;  see,  too,  p.  151.
176.  4  Ibid.  p.  280.

*  Ibid.  p.  279.  •  Ibid.  pp.  200,  201,  281.

Q 2

228 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xu

vice  had  expired,  and  there  were  instances  of  gross
selfishness  and  misconduct  among  the  disbanding
soldiers.1  The  term  for  which  the  Connecticut  troops
had  enlisted  expired  in  December,  and  the  whole  body,
amounting  to  some  5,000  men,  positively  refused  to
re-enlist.  It  was  vainly  represented  to  them  that  their
desertion  threatened  to  bring  absolute  ruin  on  the
American  cause.  The  utmost  that  the  most  strenuous
exertions  could  effect  was,  that  they  would  delay  their
departure  for  ten  days.  There  were  bitter  complaints
that  Congress  granted  no  bounties,  leaving  this  to  the
option  of  the  several  colonies,  and  also  that  the  scale  of
pay,  though  very  liberal,  was  lower  than  what  they
might  have  obtained  in  other  employments.  Great
numbers  pretended  sickness,  in  order  to  escape  from
the  service  ; 2  great  numbers  would  only  continue  in
the  army  on  the  condition  of  obtaining  long  furloughs
at  a  time  when  every  man  was  needed  for  the  security
of  the  lines.3  There  was  a  constant  fear  of  concentrat-
ing too  much  power  in  military  hands,  and  of  building

1  Washington's Works, iii. .  .  .  Such  a  mercenary  spirit
240,  280.  pervades  the  whole  that  I  should

2  Ibid.  p.  191.  not  be  at  all  surprised  at  any
8  Washington's  letters  are  full disaster  that  may  happen.  .  .  .

of  complaints  on  the  subject.  I  Could  I  have  foreseen  what  Ihave
will  quote  a  few  lines  from  a  experienced,  and  am  likely  to  ex-
letter  of  Nov.  28,  1775.  '  Such  perience,  no  consideration  upon
a  dearth  of  public  spirit,  and  earth  should  have  induced  me  to
such  want  of  virtue,  such  stock-  accept  this  command.'  (Wash-
jobbing  and  fertility  in  all  the  ington's  Works,  iii.  178,  179.)
low  arts  to  obtain  advantages  '  No  troops,'  he  writes  in  another
of  one  kind  or  another  in  this  letter, '  were  ever  better  provided
great  change  of  military  arrange-  or  higher  paid,  yet  their  back-
ment,  I  never  saw  before,  and  wardness  to  enlist  for  another
pray  God's  mercy  that  I  may  year  is  amazing.  It  grieves  me
never  be  witness  to  again.  ...  to  see  so  little  of  that  patriotic
I  have  been  obliged  to  allow  fur-  spirit  which  I  was  taught  to  be-
loughs  as  far  as  fifty  men  to  a  lieve  was  characteristic  of  thie
regiment,  and  the  officers,  I  am  people.'  (Ibid.  p.  181.)  '  The
persuaded,  indulge  as  many  more,  present  soldiery  are  in  expecta-

CH.  xi.  WANT OF  EARNESTNESS.  229

up  a  system  of  despotism,  and  there  was  a  general
belief  among  the  soldiers  that  unquestioning  obedience
to  their  officers  was  derogatory  to  their  dignity  and
inconsistent  with  their  freedom.

The  truth  is,  that  although  the  circumstances  of  the
New  Englanders  had  developed  to  a  high  degree  many
of  the  qualities  that  are  essential  to  a  soldier,  they
had  been  very  unfavourable  to  others.  To  obey,  to  act
together,  to  sacrifice  private  judgment  to  any  authority,
to  acknowledge  any  superior,  was  wholly  alien  to  their
temperament,1  and  they  had  nothing  of  that  passionate
and  all-absorbing  enthusiasm  which  transforms  the
character,  and  raises  men  to  an  heroic  height  of  patriotic
self-devotion.  Such  a  spirit  is  never  evoked  by  mere
money  disputes.  The  question  whether  the  Supreme
Legislature  of  the  Empire  had  or  had  not  the  right  of
obliging  the  colonies  to  contribute  something  to  the
support  of  the  imperial  army,  was  well  fitted  to  produce
constitutional  agitation,  eloquence,  riots,  and  even  or-
ganised armed  resistance ;  but  it  was  not  one  of  those
questions  which  touch  the  deeper  springs  of  human
feeling  or  action.  Any  nation  might  be  proud  of  the

tion  of  drawing  from  the  landed  same  time  to  prevent  the  opera-
interest  and  farmers  a  bounty  tion  of  licentious  and  levelling
equal  to  that  given  at  the  com-  principles,  which  many  very
mencement  of  this  army,  and  easily  imbibe.  The  pulse  of  a
therefore  they  keep  aloof.'  Ibid.  New  England  man  beats  high  for
p.  188.  liberty ;  his  engagement  in  the
1  General  Trumbull  wrote  to  service  he  thinks  purely  volun-
Washington,  Dec.  1775 :  '  The  tary,  therefore  when  the  time  of
late  extraordinary  and  reprehen-  enlistment  is  out  he  thinks  him-
sible  conduct  of  some  of  the  self  not  holden  without  further
troops  of  this  colony  impresses  engagement.  This  was  the  case
me  and  the  minds  of  many  of  in  the  last  war.  I  greatly  fear  ita
our  people  with  grief,  surprise,  operation  amongst  the  soldiers
and  indignation.  .  .  .  There  is  of  the  other  colonies,  as  I  am
great  difficulty  to  support  liberty,  sensible  that  it  is  the  genius  and
to  exercise  government,  to  main-  spirit  of  our  people."  Ibid.  p.
tain  subordination,  and  at  the  183.

230 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  St.

shrewd,  brave,  prosperous,  and  highly  intelligent  yeomen
who  flocked  to  the  American  camp  ;  but  they  were  very
different  men  from  those  who  defended  the  walls  of
Ley  den,  or  immortalised  the  field  of  Bannockburn.  Few
of  the  great  pages  of  history  are  less  marked  by  the
stamp  of  heroism  than  the  American  Revolution ;
and  perhaps  the  most  formidable  of  the  difficulties
which  Washington  had  to  encounter  were  in  his  own
camp.

Had  there  been  a  general  of  any  enterprise  or  genius
at  the  head  of  the  British  army,  the  Americans  could
scarcely  have  escaped  a  great  disaster;  but  at  this
period,  and  indeed  during  all  the  earlier  period  of  the
Revolutionary  War,  the  English  exhibited  an  utter
absence  of  all  military  capacity.  That  spirit  of  enter-
prise and  daring  which  had  characterised  every  branch
of  the  service  during  the  administration  of  Chatham,
had  absolutely  disappeared.  Every  week  was  of  vital
importance  at  a  time  when  undisciplined  yeomen  were
being  drilled  into  regular  troops,  and  the  different  pro-
vincial contingents  were  being  slowly  and  painfully
organised  into  a  compact  army.  But  week  after  week,
month  after  month,  passed  away,  while  the  British
lay  inactively  behind  their  trenches.  After  the  first
reinforcements  had  arrived  at  the  end  of  May  1775,
General  Gage  had  upwards  of  11,000  men  at  his
disposal,  including  seamen  and  loyalists;  yet  even  then
weeks  of  inactivity  followed.  At  Bunker's  Hill  more
than  1 ,000  men  were  lost  in  capturing  a  position  which
during  several  months  might  have  been  occupied  any
day  without  resistance.  Gage  knew  that  the  town
which  he  held  was  bitterly  hostile ;  that  the  Americans
greatly  outnumbered  him ;  that  they  occupied  strong
and  fortified  positions ;  that  he  was  himself  secure
through  his  command  of  the  sea ;  that  his  army  was
the  sole  support  of  the  British  Empire  in  New  England.

CH.  xi.  INACTIVITY OF  GAGE.  281

A  very  large  proportion  of  his  soldiers  were  incapaci-
tated by  illness.1  He  considered  those  who  remained
too  few  to  be  divided  with  safety ;  and  he  main-
tained that,  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  means  of  trans-
port, it  would  be  both  rash  and  useless  to  attempt
to  penetrate  into  the  country,  and  that  success  would
only  drive  the  Americans  out  of  one  stronghold  into
another.

He  probably  feared,  also,  by  energetic  measures,  to
commit  the  country  irrevocably  to  a  war  which  might
still  be  possibly  avoided,  and  to  produce  in  an  undecided
and  divided  people  an  outburst  of  military  enthusiasm.
There  was  a  widespread  expectation  that  the  resistance
would  fall  to  pieces  through  the  divisions  of  the
Americans,  through  the  stress  of  the  blockade,  or  in
consequence  of  the  conciliatory  propositions  of  North.
Gage  would  risk  nothing.  His  information  was  miser-
ably imperfect,  and  he  was  probably  very  indifferently
informed  of  the  extreme  weakness  of  the  Americans.
The  Provincials  had  as  yet  no  cavalry.  They  had
scarcely  any  bayonets.  Their  ammunition  was  so  de^
plorably  scanty  that  in  the  beginning  of  August  it  was
discovered  that  there  were  only  nine  rounds  of  ammu-
nition for  each  man,  and  a  fortnight  passed  before  they
received  additional  supplies,  and  in  this  condition  they
succeeded  in  blockading,  almost  without  resistance,  a
powerful  English  army.  Nor  was  Gage  more  success-
ful in  conciliating  than  in  fighting.  He  had  made  an
agreement  with  the  inhabitants  of  Boston  that,  on

1  According  to  Bancroft,  Gage  duty. (Bancroft,  Hist, of the

had  never  more  than  6,500  ef-  United States, viii. 42-44.)

fective troops, though  hisnominal  Still the British troops were

force,  including  sailors  and  loyal-  regular soldiers,  well  provided

lets,  was estimated at 11,500  with  all  munitions  of  war,  while

men. Washington  at  this  time  the  Americans  were  almost  un-

had  nominally  17,000  men,  but  disciplined  and  singularly  des-

never  more  than  14,500  fit for  titute  of  all  that  was  required.

232 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUR*. CH.  xt

delivering  up  their  arms,  they  might  depart  with  their
effects;  but  he  soon  after  repented,  and  though  the
people  had  complied,  he  refused  to  fulfil  his  promise.
Many,  indeed,  were  allowed  to  depart,  but  they  were
obliged  to  leave  their  effects  behind  as  a  security  for
their  loyalty.

At  length,  in  October,  he  was  recalled,  and  General
Howe  assumed  the  command;  but  the  spirit  of  indecision
and  incapacity  still  presided  over  the  British  forces.
In  November  and  December,  the  time  for  which  the
American  troops  enlisted  having  ended,  most  of  them
insisted  on  disbanding,  and  a  new  army  had  to  be
formed  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  On  the  last  day
of  December  1775,  when  the  old  army  had  been  dis-
banded, only  9,650  men  had  been  enlisted  to  supply
their  place,  and  more  than  1,000  of  these  were  on
furlough,  which  it  had  been  necessary  to  grant  in  order
to  persuade  them  to  enlist.1  Yet  not  a  single  attempt
appears  to  have  been  made  to  break  the  American  lines.
'  It  is  not  in  the  page  of  history,  perhaps,'  wrote  Wash-
ington, '  to  furnish  a  case  like  ours  :  to  maintain  a  post
within  musket-shot  of  the  enemy  for  six  months  together
without  powder,  and  at  the  same  time  to  disband  our
army  and  recruit  another  within  that  distance  of  twenty
odd  British  regiments.'  2  '  My  situation/  he  wrote  in
February  1776,  '  has  been  such  that  I  have  been  obliged
to  use  art  to  conceal  it  from  my  own  officers,'  and  he
expressed  his  emphatic  astonishment  that  Howe  had  not
obliged  him,  under  very  disadvantageous  circumstances,
to  defend  the  lines  he  had  occupied.3

The  negligence  and  delay  of  the  British  probably
saved  the  American  cause,  and  great  efforts  were  made
to  recruit  the  provincial  army.  Before  many  weeks  the

1  Washington's  Works,  i.  164.  »  Ibid.  iii.  221,  222.

1  Ibid.  iii.  285.

CH.  xi. AMERICAN  ARMY  AND  NAVY. 233

army  around  Boston  had  considerably  increased,  and
before  the  middle  of  the  year  it  was  pretended,  though
probably  with  great  exaggeration,  that  the  Americans
had  altogether  80,000  men  in  arms.1  In  April  the
Congress  voted  about  1,300,OOOZ.  for  the  support  of  the
army,  and  in  June  it  offered  a  bounty  of  ten  dollars  for
every  man  who  would  enlist  for  three  years.  Large
numbers  of  cannon  were  cast  in  New  York,  and  great
exertions  were  made  to  fit  out  a  fleet.  A  hardy  sea-
faring population,  scattered  over  a  long  seaboard,  accus-
tomed from  childhood  both  to  smuggling  and  to  distant
commercial  enterprises,  formed  an  admirable  material  for
the  new  navy.  The  old  privateersmen  of  the  last  war
resumed  their  occupation,  and  the  number  of  British
merchant  vessels  that  were  captured  brought  a  rich
return  to  the  American  sailors.  The  want  of  ammu-
nition was  the  most  serious  deficiency,  but  it  was
gradually  supplied.  Manufactories  of  arms  and  gun-
powder were  set  up  in  different  provinces.  The
Americans  succeeded  in  purchasing  powder  in  Africa,
in  the  Bahama  Islands,  and  in  Ireland.  A  few  daring
men  sailed  from  Charleston  to  East  Florida,  which  had
never  joined  in  opposition  to  the  Government,  and  sur-
prised and  captured  near  St.  Augustine  a  ship  containing
15,000  Ibs.  of  powder.  A  cargo,  which  was  but  little
less  considerable,  was  seized  by  the  people  of  Georgia
immediately  on  its  arrival  from  England  ;  and  several
ships,  carrying  military  stores  to  Boston,  were  inter-
cepted before  the  British  appear  to  have  been  aware
that  American  privateers  were  upon  the  sea.  The  news
from  Canada  was  extremely  discouraging,  but  it  was
counterbalanced  by  a  great  triumph  in  Massachusetts.

1  American  Remembrancer,  that  the  estimates  in  the
1776,  part  ii.  p.  281.  It  is  evi-  American  Remembrancer  %re&l\y
dent  from  Washington's  letters  exceeded  the  truth.

23-4 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  Xt.

The  blockade  of  Boston  became  more  severe  ;  sickness
disabled  many  of  the  British  soldiers ;  swarms  of  pri-
vateers made  it  very  difficult  to  obtain  provisions ;
and  at  last,  on  the  night  of  March  4, 1776,  the  Americans
obtained  possession  of  Dorchester  heights,  which  com-
manded the  harbour.  The  town  was  now  no  longer
tenable.  On  March  17,  Howe,  with  the  remainder  of
his  army,  consisting  of  about  7,600  men,  sailed  for
Halifax,  and  Washington  marched  in  triumph  into  the
capital  of  Massachusetts.

At  the  same  time  public  opinion  in  the  colonies
began  to  run  strongly  in  the  direction  of  independence.
Great  stress  has  been  placed  on  the  effect  of  an  anony-
mous pamphlet  called  '  Common  Sense,'  advocating
complete  separation  from  England,  which  appeared  at
Philadelphia  in  January  1776.1  It  was  the  first  con-
siderable work  of  the  notorious  Thomas  Paine,  who
had  only  a  few  months  before  come  over  from  England,
and  had  at  once  thrown  himself,  with  the  true  instinct
of  a  revolutionist,  into  hostility  to  his  country.  Like
all  his  works,  this  pamphlet  was  written  in  clear,  racy,
vivid  English,  and  with  much  power  of  popular  reason-
ing ;  and,  like  most  of  his  works,  it  was  shallow,  violent,
and  scurrilous.  Much  of  it  consists  of  attacks  upon
monarchy  in  general,  and  hereditary  monarchy  in  par-
ticular ;  of  very  crude  schemes  for  the  establishment  of
democratic  forms  of  government  in  America,  and  of
violent  denunciations  of  the  English  king  and  people.
England  is  described  by  this  newly  arrived  English-
man as  '  that  barbarous  and  hellish  power  which  hath
stirred  up  the  Indians  and  negroes  to  destroy  us.'  The
lingering  attachment  to  her  is  ridiculed  as  mere  local
prejudice.  Not  one  third  part  of  the  inhabitants  even
of  Pennsylvania,  it  is  said,  are  of  English  descent ;  and

Bee  the  American  Remembrancer,  1776,  part  i.  pp.  238-241.

OH.  xi.  'COMMON  SENSE.'  235

the  Americans  are  recommended  to  put  to  death  as
traitors  all  their  countrymen  who  were  taken  in  arms
for  the  King.  At  the  same  time  the  arguments  show-
ing that  America  was  capable  of  subsisting  as  an  in-
dependent Power,  and  that,  as  a  part  of  the  British  Em-
pire, she  could  only  be  a  secondary  object  in  the  system
of  British  politics,  were  stated  with  great  force.  The
present  moment,  it  was  urged,  was  eminently  oppor-
tune for  complete  separation.  Reunion  could  only  be
purchased  by  concessions  that  would  be  fatal  to  Ameri-
can liberty.  Cordial  reconciliation  was  no  longer  possi-
ble, and  America  had  now  the  inestimable  advantage  of
the  military  experience  of  the  last  war,  which  had  filled
the  country  with  veteran  soldiers.  If  the  struggle  were
adjourned  for  forty  or  fifty  years,  the  Americans  would
no  doubt  be  more  numerous,  but  they  would  probably
be  less  united,  and  it  was  quite  possible  that  there
would  not  be  a  general  or  skilful  military  officer  among
them.

It  is  said  that  not  less  than  100,000  copies  of  this
pamphlet  were  sold ;  and  Washington  himself,  not  long
after  its  appearance,  described  it  as  '  working  a  powerful
change  in  the  minds  of  many  men.' l  As  is  usually,  how-
ever, the  case  with  very  popular  political  writings,  its
success  was  mainly  due  to  extraneous  circumstances.
It  fell  in  with  the  prevailing  tendency  of  the  time,  and
gave  an  expression  to  sentiments  which  were  rising  in
countless  minds.  The  position  of  men  who  were  profess-
ing unbounded  devotion  to  their  Sovereign,  and  were  at
the  same  time  imprisoning  his  governors,  waging  war
against  his  armies,  and  invading  a  peaceful  province
which  was  subject  to  his  rule,  was  manifestly  untenable.
When  blood  was  once  shed,  amid  the  deepening  excite-
ment of  the  contest  the  figments  of  lawyers  disappeared,

Washington's  Works,  iii.  270,  347.

236 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt

and  the  struggle  assumed  a  new  character  of  earnest-
ness and  animosity.  Several  acts  of  war  had  already  been
committed,  of  which  Americans  might  justly  complain,
and  others  were  grossly  exaggerated  or  misrepresented.
The  conduct  of  the  British  troops  in  the  beginning  of
the  war  in  firing  upon  the  Provincials  at  Lexington,
was  absurdly  described  as  a  wanton  massacre.  The
conduct  of  Gage  to  the  inhabitants  of  Boston,  and  the
burning  of  Charleston  during  the  battle  of  Bunker's
Hill  to  prevent  it  from  being  a  shelter  for  American
soldiers,  were  more  justly  objected  to  ;  while  the  pro-
ceedings of  Lord  Dunmore  in  Virginia  raised  the  in-
dignation of  the  colonists  to  the  highest  point.  When
the  news  of  the  burning  of  Norfolk  arrived,  Washing-
ton expressed  his  hope  that  it  would  '  unite  the  whole
country  in  one  indissoluble  band  against  a  nation  which
seems  to  be  lost  to  every  sense  of  virtue,  and  those  feel-
ings which  distinguish  a  civilised  people  from  the  most
barbarous  savages.'  *

If  such  language  could  be  employed  by  such  a  man,
it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  fierce  a  spirit  must  have  been
abroad.  In  the  dissolution  of  all  government,  mob  in-
timidation had  a  great  power  over  politicians,  and  mobs
are  always  in  favour  of  the  strongest  measures ;  and
the  adoption  of  the  policy  of  armed  resistance  had
naturally  given  an  increased  power  to  those  who  had
been  the  first  to  advocate  it.  Every  step  which  was
taken  in  England  added  to  the  exasperation.  Already
the  Americans  had  been  proclaimed  rebels  ;  and  all
commercial  intercourse  with  them  had  been  forbidden.
The  petition  of  Congress  to  the  King,  which  was  the
last  serious  effort  of  America  for  pacification,  was  duly
taken  over  to  England  ;  but,  after  a  short  delay,  Lord
Dartmouth  informed  the  delegates  that  '  no  answer

1  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Joseph  Reed,  i.  148.

OH.  xi. REASONS  FOR  SEPARATION. 237

would  be  given  to  it.'  An  Act  of  Parliament  was
passed  authorising  the  confiscation  of  all  American
ships  and  cargoes,  and  of  all  vessels  of  other  nations
trading  with  the  American  ports ;  and  by  a  clause  of
especial  atrocity,  the  commanders  of  the  British  ships
of  war  were  empowered  to  seize  the  crews  of  all  Ameri-
can vessels,  and  compel  them,  under  pain  of  being
treated  as  mutineers,  to  serve  against  their  countrymen.1
All  these  things  contributed  to  sever  the  colonies
from  amicable  connection  with  England,  and  to  make
the  prospect  of  reconciliation  appear  strange  and  re-
mote. Separation,  it  was  plausibly  said,  was  the  act
of  the  British  Parliament  itself,  which  had  thrown  the
thirteen  colonies  out  of  the  protection  of  the  Crown.
But  another  and  more  practical  consideration  concurred
with  the  foregoing  in  producing  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence. One  of  the  gravest  of  the  questions  which
were  agitating  the  revolutionary  party  was  the  expe-
diency of  asking  for  foreign,  and  especially  for  French,
assistance.  France  had  hitherto  been  regarded  in
America,  even  more  than  in  England,  as  a  natural
enemy.  She  was  a  despotic  Power,  and  could  not
therefore  have  much  real  sympathy  with  a  struggle  for
constitutional  liberty.  Her  expulsion  from  America
had  been  for  generations  one  of  the  first  objects  of
American  patriots ;  and  if  she  again  mixed  in  American
affairs,  it  was  natural  that  she  should  seek  to  regain
the  province  she  had  so  lately  lost.  If  America  was
destined  to  be  an  independent  Republic,  nothing  could
be  more  dangerous  than  to  have  a  military  and  aggres-
sive colony  belonging  to  the  most  powerful  despot-
ism in  Europe  planted  on  her  frontiers.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  it  appeared  more  than  probable  that  the

1  16  Oeo.  III.  o.  5.

238 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xt

intervention  or  non-intervention  of  France  would  deter-
mine the  result  of  the  present  struggle.  If  America
were  cordially  united  in  her  resistance  to  England,  it
would  be  impossible  to  subdue  her ;  but  it  was  quite
evident  to  serious  men  that  America  was  not  united ;
that  outside  New  England  there  was  scarcely  an
approach  to  unanimity ;  that  powerful  minorities  in
almost  every  province  were  ardently  attached  to  Eng-
land ;  and  that,  of  the  remainder  of  the  population,  a
very  large  proportion  were  vacillating,  selfish,  or  indif-
ferent, ready,  if  the  occasion  could  be  found,  to  be
reconciled  with  England,  and  altogether  unprepared  to
make  any  long  or  strenuous  sacrifices  in  the  cause.
Under  these  circumstances  the  revolutionary  leaders
had  much  to  fear.

There  was  a  party  in  the  Congress,  among  whom
Patrick  Henry  was  conspicuous,  who  desired  to  pur-
chase French  assistance  by  large  territorial  cessions
in  America ;  !  but  this  view  found  little  favour.  Apart
from  all  considerations  of  territorial  aggrandisement,
it  was  the  evident  interest  of  France  to  promote
the  independence  of  America.  She  could  thus  obtain
for  herself  a  share  in  that  vast  field  of  commerce  from
which  she  had  hitherto  been  excluded  by  the  Navigation
Act.  The  humiliation  of  the  loss  of  Canada  would  be
amply  avenged  if  the  thirteen  old  colonies  were  separated
from  England.  A  formidable  if  not  fatal  blow  would
be  given  to  that  maritime  supremacy  against  which
France  had  so  long  and  so  vainly  struggled ;  and  the
French  West  India  islands,  which  were  now  in  time  of
war  completely  at  the  mercy  of  England,  would  become
comparatively  secure  if  the  harbours  of  the  neighbour-
ing continent  were  held  by  a  neutral  or  a  friendly  Power.
Ever  since  the  Peace  of  Paris,  a  feeling  of  deep  humilia-

1  Adams'  Life,  Works,  I  201.

CH.  xi.  THE  FRENCH  ALLIANCE.  239

tion  and  discontent  had  brooded  over  French  society ;
and  even  in  Europe  the  influence  of  France  appeared
to  have  diminished.  The  recent  appearance  of  Russia
as  an  active  and  formidable  agent  in  the  European
system,  and  the  recent  growth  of  Prussia  into  the
dimensions  of  a  first-class  Power,  had  profoundly  altered
the  European  equilibrium.  Both  of  these  Powers  lay
in  a  great  degree  beyond  the  influence  of  France ;  and
although  one  school  of  French  politicians  maintained
that  the  rise  of  Prussia  was  beneficial,  as  establishing
a  balance  of  power  in  Germany,  and  checking  the  pre-
ponderance of  Austria,  another  school  looked  upon  it
as  seriously  affecting  both  French  ascendency  and
French  security.  Great  indignation  was  felt  in  Paris
at  the  passive  attitude  of  the  Government  at  the  time
of  the  first  partition  of  Poland  in  1772,  and  during  the
war  that  ended  in  the  treaty  of  Kainardji  in  1774,  when
Russia  succeeded  in  extending  her  territory  southwards,
in  separating  the  Crimea  from  the  Turkish  Empire,  and
in  acquiring  a  right  of  protectorate  over  Christians  in
Constantinople.  As  long  as  the  old  King  lived,  there
seemed  little  chance  of  a  more  active  policy ;  but  in
May  1774  Lewis  XV.  died,  and  a  new  and  more  ad-
venturous spirit  was  ruling  at  the  Tuileries.

Under  such  circumstances  it  appeared  to  John
Adams,  and  to  the  more  sagacious  of  his  supporters,
that  it  would  be  possible  to  obtain  from  France  such  a
measure  of  assistance  as  would  insure  the  independence
of  America  without  involving  her  future  in  European
complications.  But  the  first  condition  of  this  policy
was  a  declaration  by  the  colonies  that  they  were  finally
and  for  ever  detached  from  Great  Britain.  France  had
no  possible  interest  in  their  constitutional  liberties.
She  had  a  vital  interest  in  their  independence.  It  was
idle  to  suppose  that  she  would  risk  a  war  with  England
for  rebels  who  might  at  any  time  be  converted  by  con-

240 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xi.

stitutional  concessions  into  loyal  subjects,  and  enemies
of  the  enemies  of  England.

The  questions  of  a  French  alliance  and  of  a  declara-
tion of  independence  were  thus  indissolubly  connected.
In  the  autumn  of  1775  a  motion  was  made  in  Congress,
and  strongly  supported  by  John  Adams,  to  send  ambas-
sadors to  France.  But  Congress  still  shrank  from  so
formidable  a  step,  though  it  agreed,  after  long  debates
and  hesitation,  to  form  a  secret  committee  'to  corre-
spond with  friends  in  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  other
parts  of  the  world.' l  But  the  conduct  of  England  her-
self soon  dispelled  the  hesitation  of  America.  England
found  herself  at  this  time  confronted  with  a  military
problem  which  she  was  utterly  unable  by  her  own  un-
assisted efforts  to  solve.  The  same  pressure  of  financial
distress,  the  same  reluctance  to  increase  the  army
estimates,  which  had  made  the  English  ministers  so
anxious  to  throw  upon  America  the  burden  of  support-
ing her  own  army,  had  prevented  the  maintenance  of
any  considerable  army  at  home.  Public  opinion  had
never  yet  fully  accepted  the  fact  that  the  forces  which
were  very  adequate  under  Walpole  were  wholly  insuffi-
cient after  the  Peace  of  Paris.  The  King,  indeed,  had
for  many  years  steadily  maintained  that  military  eco-
nomy in  England  had  been  carried  to  a  fatal  point,
and  that  the  army  was  much  below  what  the  security
of  the  Empire  required ;  but  his  warnings  had  been  dis-
regarded.* The  feeling  of  the  country,  the  feeling  of

1  Adams'  Life,  Works,  i.  200-  military  force  in  that  island ;
203.  but  the  economical,  and  I  may

2  As  early  as  Aug.  11, 1765,  the  say  injudicious,  ideas of this
King  had  written to Conway :  country  in  time  of  peace,  make
'  The  only  method  that  at  pre-  it  not  very  practicable,  for  a  corpa
sent  occurs  to  me  by  which  the  ought  on  purpose  to  be  raised  for
French  can  be  prevented  settling  that service,  we  having more
on  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  places  to  garrison  than  we  have
would  be  the  having  a  greater  troops  to  supply.' He  adds  that

CH.  xi. INADEQUACY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARMY. 241

the  House  of  Commons,  against  large  standing  armies
was  so  strong  that  it  was  impossible  to  resist  it.  As
late  as  December  1774,  the  seamen  had  been  reduced
from  20,000  to  16,000,  and  the  land  forces  had  been
fixed  at  17,547  effective  men.1  In  the  following  year,
when  the  war  became  inevitable,  Parliament  voted
28,000  seamen  and  55,000  land  forces,  but  even  this
was  utterly  inadequate  for  the  conquest  of  America,
and  as  yet  it  only  existed  upon  paper.  Most  of  the
troops  that  could  be  safely  spared  had  been  already
sent,  and  the  result  had  been  the  formation  of  two
armies,  one  of  which  was  not  more  than  sufficient  for
the  protection  of  Canada,  while  the  other  had  been  for
months  confined  within  the  town  of  Boston.

It  was  evident  that  much  larger  forces  were  required
if  America  was  to  be  subdued,  and  Howe  strongly  urged
that  he  could  make  no  aggressive  movement  with  any
prospect  of  success  unless  he  had  at  least  20,000  men.
To  raise  the  required  troops  at  short  notice  was  very
difficult.  In  January  1776,  Lord  Barrington  warned
the  King  that  Scotland  had  never  yet  been  so  bare  of
troops,  and  that  those  in  England  were  too  few  for  the
security  of  the  country.2  The  land  tax  for  1776  was
raised  to  four  shillings  in  the  pound.  New  duties  were
imposed ;  new  bounties  were  offered.  Eecruiting  agents
traversed  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  the  most
remote  districts  of  Ireland,  and  the  poor  Catholics  of

we  are  '  very  unable  to  draw  the  ing  orders  to  Ireland ;  this  was

sword.' — British  Museum. Eg.  objected  to  in  the  Cabinet ;  if  it

MSS.  982.  had  then  been  adopted,  the  army

On  August  26, 1775,  he  wrote  would  have  been  at  least  2,000

to  Lord  North :  '  The  misfortune  or  3,000  men stronger  at thig

is,  that  at  the  beginning  of  this  hour.' — Correspondence  of  George

American  businessthere  has  been  III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  265,  266.

an  unwillingness  to  augment  the  *  Adolphus,  ii.  159.

army  and  navy. I  proposed  early  *  Tlte  Political  Life  of  Lord

In  the  summer  the  sending  beat-  ftarrington,  pp.  162-164.

VOL,  IV,  8

242 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XI.

Minister  and  Connaught,  who  had  been  so  long  ex-
cluded from  the  English  army,  were  gladly  welcomed.
Recruits,  however,  came  in  very  slowly.  There  was  no
enthusiasm  for  a  war  with  English  settlers.  The  press-
gangs  met  with  an  unusual  resistance.  No  measure
short  of  a  conscription  could  raise  at  once  the  necessary
army  in  England,  and  to  propose  a  conscription  would
be  fatal  to  any  Government.

The  difficulties  of  subduing  America  by  land  opera-
tions, even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,
were  enormous.  Except  on  the  sea-coast  there  were  no
fixed  points,  no  fortified  places  of  such  importance  that
their  possession  could  give  a  permanent  command  of
any  large  tract  of  territory ;  the  vast  distances  and  the
difficulties  of  transport  made  it  easy  for  insurgents  to
avoid  decisive  combats  ;  and  in  a  hostile  and  very  thinly
populated  country,  the  army  must  derive  its  supplies
almost  exclusively  from  England.1  The  magnitude,  the
ruinous  expense  of  such  an  enterprise,  and  the  almost
absolute  impossibility  of  carrying  the  war  into  distant
inland  quarters,  ought  to  have  been  manifest  to  all,  and
no  less  a  person  than  Lord  Barrington,  the  Secretary
for  War,  held  from  the  beginning  that  it  would  be  im-
possible for  England  to  subdue  America  by  an  army,
though  he  thought  it  might  be  subdued  by  a  fleet  which

1  General  Lloyd,  who  was  one  that,  in  the  existing  condition  of

of  the  best  English  writers  on  the  opinion  in  America,  if  NewEng-

art  of  war,  maintained  that  Eng-  land  were  subdued,  the  rest  of

land,  in  consequence  of  her  pos-  the colonies would  all  submit,

session  of  Canada,  might  have  The impossibility,  however,  of

completely  crushed  the  four  pro-  subduing  them  by  land  measures,

vinces  of  New  England  by  ope-  if  they  did  not,  he  clearly  showed,

rating  vigorously  on  the  line  of  See  a  remarkable  chapter  on  the

country (about 150 miles) ex-  American  war  in  his  '  lleflectiona

tending  from  Boston  to  Albany,  on  the  Principles  of  War,' ap-

OT  to  some  other  point  on  the  ponded to  his History  of 1,14

Hudson  River ;  and  he  thought  Seven  Years'

CH.  xi. BARRINGTON — HANOVERIAN  TROOPS. 248

blockaded  its  seaport  towns  and  destroyed  its  commerce.
But  Barrington  was  one  of  the  most  devoted  of  the
King's  friends,  and  he  was  a  conspicuous  instance  of  the
demoralising  influence  of  the  system  of  politics  which
had  lately  prevailed  in  England.  Already,  at  i  he  close
of  1774,  he  informed  his  colleagues  in  the  clearest  and
most  decisive  manner  of  his  disapproval  of  the  policy
they  were  pursuing,  and  he  repeatedly  begged  the  King
to  accept  his  resignation.  '  I  am  summoned  to  meetings '
of  the  ministers,  he  complained,  '  when  I  sometimes
think  it  my  duty  to  declare  my  opinions  openly  before
perhaps  twenty  or  thirty  persons,  and  the  next  day  I
am  forced  either  to  vote  contrary  to  them  or  to  vote
with  an  Opposition  which  I  abhor.'  He  wished  to  retire
both  from  the  ministry  and  from  Parliament,  but  he  had
declared  that  he  would  remain  in  both  as  long  as  his
Majesty  thought  fit,  and  he  accordingly  continued  year
after  year  one  of  the  responsible  ministers  of  the  Crown
though  he  believed  that  the  policy  of  the  Government
was  mistaken  and  disastrous.  It  was  only  in  December
1778  that  his  resignation  was  accepted.1

The  King  was  the  real  director  of  the  Administra-
tion, and  he  was  determined  to  relinquish  no  part  of  his
dominions.  He  was  accordingly  reduced  to  the  humilia-
ting necessity  of  asking  for  foreign  assistance  to  subdue
his  own  subjects.  It  was  sought  from  many  quarters.  He
himself,  as  Elector  of  Hanover,  agreed  to  lend  2,355  men
of  his  Electoral  army  to  garrison  Minorca  and  Gibraltar,
and  thus  to  release  some  British  soldiers  for  the  Ameri-
can war.  The  Dutch  had  for  a  long  time  maintained
a  Scotch  brigade  in  their  service,  and  the  Government
wished  to  take  it  into  English  pay,  but  the  States-
General  refused  to  consent.  Russia  had  just  concluded
her  war  with  the  Turks,  and  it  was  hoped  that  she  might

1  Political  Life  of  Lord  Banington,  pp.  14G-186.

R  2

244 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  u.

sell  some  20,000  of  her  spare  troops  to  the  English
service,  but  Catherine  sternly  refused.  The  little
sovereigns  of  Germany  were  less  chary,  and  were  quite
ready  to  sell  their  subjects  to  England  to  iight  in  a
quarrel  with  which  they  had  no  possible  concern.  The
Duke  of  Brunswick,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel,  the
Hereditary  Prince  of  Hesse  Cassel,  and  the  Prince  of
Waldeck  were  the  chief  persons  engaged  in  this  white
slave  trade,  and  they  agreed  for  a  liberal  payment  to
supply  17,742  men  to  serve  under  English  officers  in
America.1

The  German  princelets  acted  after  their  kind,  and
the  contempt  and  indignation  which  they  inspired  were
probably  unmixed  with  any  feeling  of  surprise.  The
conduct,  however,  of  England  in  hiring  German  mer-
cenaries to  subdue  the  essentially  English  population
beyond  the  Atlantic,  made  reconciliation  hopeless  and
the  Declaration  of  Independence  inevitable.  It  was  idle
for  the  Americans  to  have  any  further  scruples  about
calling  in  foreigners  to  assist  them  when  England  had
herself  set  the  example.  It  was  necessary  that  they
should  do  so  if  they  were  successfully  to  resist  the
powerful  reinforcement  which  was  thus  brought  against
them.

It  belongs  rather  to  the  historian  of  America  than  to
the  historian  of  England  to  recount  in  detail  the  various
steps  that  led  immediately  to  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence. It  will  here  be  sufficient  to  indicate  very
briefly  the  main  forces  that  were  at  work.  Even  after
the  enlistment  of  foreign  mercenaries  by  Great  Britain,
the  difficulty  of  carrying  the  Declaration  was  very  great.

1  See  on  the terms of  this  his  opinion  of  the  transaction  by

bargain,  Correspondence  o/ 'George  claiming  to  levy  on  the  hired

III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  258-260,  troops  which  passed  through  his

266,  267,  294, 295. Frederick  dominions  the  same  duty  as  on

the  Great  is  said  to  have  marked  so  many  head  of  cattle.

OH.  it.  DECLARATION  OJ  INDEPENDENCE.  245

As  late  as  March  1776,  John  Adams,  who  was  the  chief
advocate  of  the  measure,  described  the  terror  and  dis-
gust with  which  it  was  regarded  by  a  large  section  of
the  Congress,  and  he  clearly  shows  the  nature  of  the
opposition.  '  All  our  misfortunes,'  he  added,  '  arise  from
the  reluctance  of  the  Southern  colonies  to  republican
government,'  and  he  complains  bitterly  that  '  popular
principles  and  axioms  '  are  '  abhorrent  to  the  inclina-
tions of  the  barons  of  the  South  and  the  proprietary
interests  in  the  Middle  States,  as  well  as  to  that  avarice
of  land  which  has  made  on  this  continent  so  many  vo-
taries to  Mammon.'  It  was  necessary,  in  the  first  place,
to  mould  the  governments  of  the  Southern  and  Middle
States  into  a  purely  popular  form,  destroying  altogether
the  proprietary  system  and  those  institutions  which  gave
the  more  wealthy  planters,  if  not  a  preponderance,  at
least  a  special  weight  in  the  management  of  affairs.
The  Congress  recommended  the  colonists  '  where  no
government  sufficient  to  the  exigencies  of  their  affairs
hath  hitherto  been  established '  to  adopt  a  new  form  of
government,  and  it  pronounced  it  necessary  that  the
whole  proprietary  system  should  be  dissolved.1  The
Revolution  was  speedily  accomplished,  and  the  tide  of
democratic  feeling  ran  strongly  towards  independence.
Virginia,  now  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  revolutionaT-y
party,  concurred  fully  with  Massachusetts,  and  the  in-
fluence of  these  two  leading  colonie's  overpowered  the
rest.  In  Pennsylvania,  in  New  Jersey,  in  Maryland,  in
Delaware,  in  New  York,  in  South  Carolina,  there  was
powerful  opposition,  but  the  strongest  pressure  was  ap-
plied to  overcome  it.  New  Jersey  and  Maryland  first
dropped  off  and  accepted  the  Resolution  of  Indepen-
dence, but  South  Carolina  and  Pennsylvania  opposed  it

1  Adams'  Works,  i.  207,  208, the  United  States,  bk.  ii.  ch.  i. ;
'-217,  218;  Story's  Constitution  of Jay's  Life,  by  his  son,  i.  43.

246 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  Xu

almost  to  the  last,  while  Delaware  was  divided  aiid  New
York  abstained.  John  Adams  was  now  the  most  power-
ful advocate,  while  John  Dickinson  was  the  chief  oppo-
nent of  independence.  At  last,  however,  it  was  resolved
not  to  show  any  appearance  of  dissension  to  the  world.
The  arrival  of  a  new  delegate  from  Delaware,  and  the
abstention  of  two  delegates  of  Pennsylvania,  gave  the
paity  of  independence  the  control  of  the  votes  of  these
provinces.  South  Carolina,  for  the  sake  of  preserving
unity,  changed  sides.  New  York  still  abstained,  and  on
July  2,  1776,  the  twelve  colonies  resolved  that  'these
united  colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and
independent  States  ;  that  they  are  absolved  from  all  alle-
giance to  the  British  Crown,  and  that  all  political  con-
nection between  them  and  the  State  of  Great  Britain  is,
and  ought  to  be,  totally  dissolved.'  Thomas  Jeiferson,  of
Virginia,  whose  literary  power  had  been  shown  in  many
able  State  papers,  had  already  drawn  up  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  which  having  been  revised  by  Franklin
and  by  John  Adams,  was  now  submitted  to  the  exa-
mination of  Congress,  and  was  voted  after  some  slight
changes  on  the  evening  of  the  4th.  It  proclaimed  that
a  new  nation  had  arisen  in  the  world,  and  that  the
political  unity  of  the  English  race  was  for  ever  at  an
end.

CB.  jui. GROWING STliENGTH OF  THE  MINISTRY. 24?

CHAPTER

THE  importance  of  the  American  question  during  the
few  years  that  preceded  the  Declaration  of  Indepen-
dence was  so  transcendently  great  that  I  have  thought
it  advisable  to  devote  the  preceding  chapter  exclusively
to  its  development,  and  have  endeavoured  to  preserve
the  unity  and  clearness  of  my  narrative  by  omitting
several  matters  of  domestic  policy  which  I  shall  now
,  proceed  to  relate.

From  the  time  of  the  accession  of  Lord  North  to  the
foremost  place  the  Government  had  continued  steadily
to  increase  in  parliamentary  authority,  and  the  long
period  of  anarchy  and  rapid  political  fluctuation  which
marked  the  beginning  of  the  reign  had  completely
ceased.  The  Court  was  now  closely  united  with  the
ministers.  The  King  disposed  personally  of  nearly  all
the  ecclesiastical,  and  of  most  of  the  other  departments
of  patronage.  He  prescribed  in  a  great  measure  the
policy  of  his  Government.  His  friends  in  Parliament
steadily  supported  it ;  the  most  important  of  the  old
followers  of  Grenville  had  joined  it ;  it  was  strengthened
by  the  personal  popularity  of  North,  by  the  eclipse  of
Chatham,  and  by  the  dissension  between  his  followers
and  those  of  Rockingham,  and  it  commanded  over-
whelming majorities  in  both  Houses.  The  democratic
movement  which  followed  the  Middlesex  election  had
gradually  subsided.  The  City  opposition  was  broken
into  small  and  hostile  fragments,  and  a  great  political
apathy  prevailed  in  the  nation.

248 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  CH.  MI.

But  while  the  course  of  events  appeared  thus  emi-
nently favourable  to  the  designs  of  the  Court,  a  long
series  of  disgraces  and  calamities  had  cast  a  dark
shadow  around  the  throne.  In  1770  the  Duke  of
Cumberland,  one  of  the  brothers  of  the  King,  had  been
compelled  to  appear  as  defendant  in  an  action  for
criminal  conversation  qn  account  of  his  adultery  with
Lady  Grosvenor,  and  to  pay  10,0001.  in  damages.  He
then  formed  a  new  and  notorious  connection  with
another  married  woman,  and  soon  after  the  King  learnt
with  bitter  indignation  that  in  October  1771  he  had
secretly  married  Mrs.  Horton,  the  widow  of  an  un-
distinguished Derbyshire  gentleman.  The  new  Duchess
was  daughter  of  Lord  Imham,  and,  as  Junius  and  the
other  satirists  of  the  Court  noticed  with  ferocious
pleasure,  she  was  sister  to  that  Colonel  Luttrell  who
had  been  so  lately  put  forward  in  opposition  to  Wilkes
as  the  champion  of  the  Court.  Immediately  after  this
marriage  had  been  announced,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,
the  favourite  brother  of  the  King,  confessed  that  he  had
several  years  before  contracted  a  secret  marriage  with
the  Dowager  Countess  of  Waldegrave,  an  illegitimate
daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  and  granddaughter
of  the  great  statesman  of  the  last  reign.  Very  soon
after,  news  arrived  from  Copenhagen  of  the  disgrace  of
the  King's  sister,  the  Queen  of  Denmark,  who  had  been
arrested  by  the  command  of  her  husband  on  a  charge  of
adultery  with  Count  Struensee,  the  Prime  Minister  of
Denmark,  and  had  been  thrown  into  prison.  Struensee
was  executed  with  circumstances  of  peculiar  horror,  but
the  Queen  after  four  months  of  confinement  was  suffered
to  retire  to  Hanover,  where  a  few  years  later  she  died.
The  Princess  Dowager,  the  mother  of  the  King,  was  in
the  mean  time  slowly  dying  of  cancer,  and  ten  days  after
the  news  of  her  daughter's  disgrace  arrived  in  England,
she  ended  her  stormy  and  unhappy  life.  There  is  no

CH.  xit. DEATH  Of  THE  rfilNCESS  DOWAGER.  249

evidence  whatever  that  for  several  years  before  her
death  she  had  exercised  any  political  power ;  but  the
belief  in  her  influence  had  never  ceased,-  and  neither  her
sex  nor  her  sorrows  nor  her  munificent  charities  could
screen  her  from  the  most  brutal  insults,  which  pursued
her  to  the  very  end  of  her  life.  Wilkes,  Home,  Junius,
and  a  crowd  of  nameless  libellers  and  caricaturists,  and
especially  the  infamous  papers  called  the  '  Whisperer  '
and  the  '  Parliamentary  Spy,'  vied  with  each  other  in
insulting  her ;  and  in  March  1771,  when  the  Princess
was  stricken  down  with  her  mortal  illness,  Alderman
Townshend  made  a  furious  attack  upon  her  in  the  House
of  Commons,  declaring  that  for  ten  years  England  had
been  governed  by  a  woman,  that  he  considered  the
Princess  Dowager  of  Wales  to  be  the  cause  of  all  the
calamities  of  the  country,  and  that  an  inquiry  should  be
made  into  her  conduct.1  The  Princess  died  on  February
8,  1772,  and  her  body  was  a  few  days  later  carried  to
the  tomb  amid  the  shouts  and  rejoicings  of  the  mob.2

In  the  same  month,  and  in  consequence  of  the
scandals  connected  with  the  Dukes  of  Cumberland  and
Gloucester,  a  King's  message  was  brought  to  Parliament
urging  both  Houses  to  take  into  consideration  measures
for  making  more  effectual  the  right  which  had  always,
it  was  stated,  belonged  to  the  kings  of  this  nation  of
approving  of  all  marriages  in  the  royal  family,  and  it
was  followed  by  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  which  more
than  any  other  measure  in  1772  divided  opinion  both  in
Parliament  and  in  the  country.  The  object  of  this  Bill
was  to  prevent  the  great  dangers  which  might  arise
from  clandestine  or  improper  marriages  in  the  royal
family.  It  was  possible  that  in  consequence  of  such

1  Chatliam  Correspondence,  iv. *  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.
134, 135. Cavendish  Debates, 17.
ii.  447. Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  122.

250 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xtl.

marriages  the  title  of  the  successor  to  the  throne  might
become  a  matter  of  doubt  and  of  dispute,  and  it  was
very  probable  that  connections  might  be  formed,  and
disgraceful  elements  introduced  into  the  royal  family,
which  would  greatly  lower  the  authority  of  the  monarchy
in  the  country.  To  guard  against  these  dangers,  the
Marriage  Bill  prohibited  any  descendant  of  the  late
King,  except  those  who  were  the  issue  of  princesses
married  into  foreign  houses,  from  contracting  marriage
before  the  age  of  twenty-five  without  the  assent  of  the
King  signified  under  the  Great  Seal.  After  that  age
they  might  marry  without  the  royal  consent,  but  only  if
they  had  given  notice  of  their  intention  to  the  Privy
Council  twelve  months  before  the  ceremony  was  per-
formed, and  if  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  did  not
signify  their  disapprobation.  All  marriages  contracted
in  defiance  of  this  Act  were  to  be  null,  and  all  who
celebrated  them  or  assisted  at  them  were  to  be  subject
to  the  penalties  of  praemunire.1

This  Bill  was  fiercely  and  persistently  opposed.  Its
adversaries  emphatically  denied  that  the  King  possessed
either  by  law  or  by  prerogative  any  control  over  the
marriages  of  his  family  other  than  that  which  every
parent  or  guardian  possesses  over  his  children  or  his
wards  when  they  are  minors.  They  dilated  upon  the
great  number  of  persons  far  removed  from  the  throne
who  would  ultimately  be  brought  under  the  provisions
of  the  law,  and  deprived  during  their  whole  lives  of  their
natural  and  inherent  right  of  marrying  according  to
their  inclination;  and  they  urged  that  while  no  im-
morality was  so  pernicious  to  the  community  as  the
immorality  of  those  who  occupied  an  eminent  position
in  the  eyes  of  men,  the  moral  effects  of  a  Bill  imposing
Such  formidable  restraints  upon  marriage  must  be  in

1  12  Gco.  III.  c.  xi.

CH.  XH.  TIIE KOYAL MARRIAGE BILL.  25 1

the  highest  degree  injurious.  To  treat  the  whole  royal
family  as  a  separate  caste,  and  to  make  intermarriage
between  its  members  and  subjects  almost  impossible,
was  no  doubt  very  congenial  to  the  sentiments  of  a
German  court,  but  it  was  a  slur  upon  the  English
nobility,  it  was  utterly  inconsistent  with  English  tradi-
tions, and  it  claimed  for  a  German  family  reigning  by  a
parliamentary  title  a  position  which  had  not  been  claimed
either  by  the  Plantagenets,  the  Tudors,  or  the  Stuarts.
The  principle  that  a  marriage  which  was  valid  in  the
eyes  of  God  and  of  the  Church  could  be  pronounced  by
the  civil  law  to  be  not  only  criminal  and  irregular,  but
null  and  void,  had  indeed  been  introduced  into  English
legislation  in  the  last  reign,  but  it  was  a  principle
which  was  contrary  to  religion,  and  would  never  be
fully  recognised  by  opinion.  Nor  was  the  Bill  likely  to
fulfil  its  objects.  It  was  intended  to  prevent  improper
persons  from  sitting  on  the  throne,  but  it  imposed  no
restraint  on  the  imprudent  or  profligate  marriage  of  the
reigning  prince.  It  was  intended  to  prevent  the  possi-
bility of  disputed  successions ;  but  it  would  almost
certainly  multiply  clandestine  marriages,  and  call  into
being  two  classes  of  heirs  ;  those  who  were  legitimate
in  the  eyes  of  God,  of  the  Church,  and  perhaps  of  public
opinion,  and  those  whose  legitimacy  depended  on  an
Act  of  Parliament.

Arguments  of  this  kind  made  the  Bill  exceedingly
unpopular  outside  Parliament,  and  in  the  House  of
Commons  itself  the  feeling  against  it  was  so  strong  that
an  amendment  limiting  it  to  the  reign  of  George  III.
and  three  years  longer  was  only  rejected  by  a  majority
of  18.1  The  measure  was  generally  understood  to
emanate  especially  from  the  King,  and  his  influence

1  Correspotidence  of  George  III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  99, 100.  Parl.
Si&t.  xvii.  423.

252 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CJMfttaY. CH.  xir.

was  employed  to  the  utmost  to  carry  it.  '  I  do  expect,'
he  wrote  to  Lord  North,  '  every  nerve  to  be  strained  to
carry  the  Bill  through  both  Houses  with  a  becoming
firmness,  for  it  is  not  a  question  that  immediately
relates  to  administration,  but  personally  to  myself,  and
therefore  I  have  a  right  to  expect  a  hearty  support  from
everyone  in  my  service,  and  shall  remember  defaulters.' !

The  Bill  was  carried  by  large  majorities ;  it  still
remains  on  the  statute  book,  and,  although  it  may  be^
justly  regarded  as  oppressive  by  the  collateral  branches;
of  the  House  of  Brunswick,  who  are  too  far  from  the1
throne  to  have  any  reasonable  prospect  of  succeeding;
to  it,  it  cannot  be  said  to  have  hitherto  produced  any
of  the  public  dangers  that  were  foretold.  The  discus-
sions on  the  measure  are  especially  interesting  as  mark-
ing the  first  appearance  in  opposition  to  the  Government
of  Charles  James  Fox,  a  man  whose  name  during  the
next  thirty  years  occupies  a  foremost  place  in  English
history,  and  whose  character  and  early  life  it  will  now
be  necessary  to  sketch.

He  was  the  third  son  of  the  first  Lord  Holland,  the
old  rival  of  Pitt.  He  had  entered  Parliament  irregu-
larly and  illegally  in  November  17G8,  when  he  had  not
yet  completed  his  twentieth  year,  and  in  February  1770
he  had  been  made  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  the
Government  of  Lord  North.  The  last  political  connec-
tion of  Lord  Holland  had  been  with  Bute,  and  his  son
appears  to  have  accepted  the  heritage  of  his  Tory  prin-
ciples without  inquiry  or  reluctance.  His  early  life
was  in  the  highest  degree  discreditable,  and  gave  very
little  promise  of  greatness.  His  vehement  and  pas-
sionate temperament  threw  him  speedily  into  the  wildest
dissipation,  and  the  almost  insane  indulgence  of  hia
father  gratified  his  every  whim.  When  he  was  only

1  Correspondence  of  Oeorge  III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  91.

CH.  MI.  CHARLES  FOX.  253

fourteen  Lord  Holland  had  brought  him  to  the  gambling
table  at  Spa,1  and,  at  a  time  when  he  had  hardly
reached  manhood,  he  was  one  of  the  most  desperate
gamblers  of  his  day.  Lord  Holland  died  in  1774,  but
before  his  death  he  is  said  to  have  paid  no  less  than
140,OOOL  in  extricating  his  son  from  gambling  debts.
The  death  of  his  mother  and  the  death  of  his  elder
brother  in  the  same  year  brought  him  a  considerable
fortune,  including  an  estate  in  the  Isle  of  Thanet  and
the  sinecure  office  of  Clerk  of  the  Pells  in  Ireland,
which  was  worth  2,300Z.  a  year ;  but  in  a  short  time
he  was  obliged  to  sell  or  mortgage  everything  he  pos-
sessed. He  himself  nicknamed  his  antechamber  the
Jerusalem  Chamber  from  the  multitude  of  Jews  who
haunted  it.  Lord  Carlisle  was  at  one  time  security  for
him  to  the  extent  of  15,OOOZ.  or  16,OOOL  During  one
of  the  most  critical  debates  in  1781  his  house  was  in
the  occupation  of  the  sheriffs.  He  was  even  debtor  for
small  sums  to  chairmen  and  to  waiters  at  Brooks's  ;  and
although  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  was  partly  re-
lieved by  a  large  subscription  raised  by  his  friends,  he
never  appears  to  have  wholly  emerged  from  the  money
difficulties  in  which  his  gambling  tastes  had  involved  him.
Nor  was  this  his  only  vice.  With  some  men  the
passion  for  gambling  is  an  irresistible  moral  mono-
mania, the  single  morbid  taint  in  a  nature  otherwise
faultless  and  pure.  With  Fox  it  was  but  one  of  many
forms  of  an  insatiable  appetite  for  vicious  excite-
ment, which  continued  with  little  abatement  during
many  years  of  his  public  career.  In  1777,  during  a
long  visit  to  Paris,  he  lived  much  in  the  society  of
Madame  du  Deffand,  and  that  very  acute  judge  of
character  formed  an  opinion  of  him  which  was,  on  the
whole,  very  unfavourable.  He  has  much  talent,  she

»  Russell's  Life  of  Fox,  i.  4,

254 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  wi.

said,  much  goodness  of  heart  and  natural  truthfulness,
but  he  is  absolutely  without  principle,  he  has  a  con-
tempt for  everyone  who  has  principle,  he  lives  in  a
perpetual  intoxication  of  excitement,  he  never  gives  a
thought  to  the  morrow,  he  is  a  man  eminently  fitted  to
corrupt  youth.1  In  1779,  when  he  was  already  one  of
the  foremost  politicians  in  England,  he  was  one  night
drinking  at  Almack's  with  Lord  Derby,  Major  Stanley,
and  a  few  other  young  men  of  rank,  when  they  deter-
mined at  three  in  the  morning  to  make  a  tour  through
the  streets,  and  amused  themselves  by  instigating  a
mob  to  break  the  windows  of  the  chief  members  of  the
Government.2  His  profligacy  with  women  during  a
great  part  of  his  life  was  notorious,  though  he  appears
at  last  to  have  confined  himself  to  his  connection  with
Mrs.  Armitstead,  whom  he  secretly  married  in  Septem-
ber 1795.3  He  was  the  soul  of  a  group  of  brilliant
and  profligate  spendthrifts,  who  did  much  to  dazzle  and
corrupt  the  fashionable  youth  of  the  time;  and  in
judging  the  intense  animosity  with  which  George  III.
always  regarded  him,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  his
example  and  his  friendship  had  probably  a  considerable
influence  in  encouraging  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  those
vicious  habits  and  in  that  undutiful  course  of  conduct
which  produced  so  much  misery  in  the  palace  and  so
much  evil  in  the  nation.4  One  of  the  friends  of  Charles

1  Mdme.  du  Deffand  to  H.  Wai-  Sheridan  excessively,  and  Grey
pole. See  Correspondence  of  Fox,  more  than  any  of  them. . .  .  Pitt,
i.  149.  I  am  told,  drinks  as  much  as

2  Ibid.  i.  224,  225. Fox  ap-  anybody, generally  more than
pears,  however,  to  have drunk  any  of  his  company,  and  that  he
less,  or  to  have  borne  drink  better,  is  a  pleasant,  convivial  man  at
than  several  of  his  leading  con-  table.'— Lady  Minto's  Life  of  Sir
temporaries. Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  G.  Elliot,  i.  189.

in  a  letter  to  his  wife,  says :  '  Fox  *  Russell's  Life  of  Fox,  iii.  78.

drinks  what  I  should  call  a  great  4  See  Walpole's  Last  Journals,

deal,  though  he  is  not  reckoned  ii.  480,  502,  503,  598,  599.
to do  so by  his companions  ;

CH.  xii.  CUARLES  FOX.  255

Fox  summed  up  his  whole  career  in  a  few  significant
sentences.  '  He  had  three  passions — women,  play,  and
politics.  Yet  he  never  formed  a  creditable  connection
with  a  woman.  He  squandered  all  his  means  at  the
gaming  table,  and,  except  for  eleven  months,  he  was
invariably  in  opposition.'

That  a  man  of  whom  all  this  can  be  truly  said
should  have  taken  a  high  and  honourable  place  in
English  history,  and  should  have  won  for  himself  the
perennial  love  and  loyalty  of  some  of  the  best  English-
men of  his  time,  is  not  a  little  surprising,  for  a  life
such  as  I  have  described  would  with  most  men  have
destroyed  every  fibre  of  intellectual  energy  and  of  moral
worth.  But  in  truth  there  are  some  characters  which
nature  has  so  happily  compounded  that  even  vice  is
unable  wholly  to  degrade  them,  and  there  is  a  charm
of  manner  and  of  temper  which  sometimes  accompanies
the  excesses  of  a  strong  animal  nature  that  wins  more
popularity  in  the  world  than  the  purest  and  the  most
self-denying  virtue.  Of  this  truth  Fox  was  an  eminent
example.  With  a  herculean  frame,  with  iron  nerves,
with  that  happy  vividness  and  buoyancy  of  temperament
that  can  ever  throw  itself  passionately  into  the  pursuits
and  the  impressions  of  the  hour,  and  can  then  cast
them  aside  without  an  effort,  he  combined  one  of  the
sweetest  of  human  tempers,  one  of  the  warmest  of
human  hearts.  Nothing  in  his  career  is  more  remark-
able than  the  spell  which  he  cast  over  men  who  in  charac-
ter and  principles  were  as  unlike  as  possible  to  himself.
'  He  is  a  man,'  said  Burke,  '  made  to  be  loved,  of  the
most  artless,  candid,  open,  and  benevolent  disposition ;
disinterested  in  the  extreme,  of  a  temper  mild  and
placable  to  a  fault,  without  one  drop  of  gall  in  his
whole  constitution.'  'The  power  of  a  superior  man,'
said  Gibbon,  'was  blended  in  his  attractive  character
with  the  soitness  and  simplicity  of  a  child.  Perhaps

256 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  XIL

no  human  being  was  ever  more  perfectly  exempt  from
the  taint  of  malevolence,  vanity,  or  falsehood.'  '  He
possessed,'  said  Erskine,  '  above  all  men  I  ever  knew,
the  most  gentle,  and  yet  the  most  ardent  spirit.'  He
retained  amid  all  his  vices  a  capacity  for  warm  and
steady  friendship  ;  a  capacity  for  struggling  passionately
and  persistently  in  opposition,  for  an  unpopular  cause ;
11  purity  of  taste  and  a  love  of  literature  which  made
him,  with  the  exception  of  Burke,  the  foremost  scholar
among  the  leading  members  of  the  House  of  Commons ;
an  earnestness,  disinterestedness,  and  simplicity  of
character  which  was  admitted  and  admired  ev"en  by  his
political  opponents.

He  resembled  Bolingbroke  in  his  power  of  passing
at  once  from  scenes  of  dissipation  into  the  House  of
Commons,  and  in  retaining  in  public  affairs  during  the
most  disorderly  periods  of  his  private  life  all  his  sound-
ness of  judgment  and  all  his  force  of  eloquence  and  of
decision.  Gibbon  described  how  Fox '  prepared  himself
for  one  important  debate  by  spending  twenty-two  pre-
vious hours  at  the  hazard  table  and  losing  11,OOOZ.
Walpole  extols  the  extraordinary  brilliancy  of  the  speech
which  he  made  on  another  occasion,  when  he  had  but
just  arrived  from  Newmarket  and  had  been  sitting  up
drinking  the  whole  of  the  preceding  night,  and  he
states  that  Fox,  in  the  early  period  of  his  brilliant  oppo-
sition to  the  American  policy  of  North,  was  rarely  in
bed  before  five  in  the  morning,  or  out  of  it  before  two
in  the  afternoon.1  Yet,  like  Bolingbroke,  he  never  lost
the  taste  and  passion  for  study  even  at  the  time  when
he  was  most  immersed  in  a  life  of  pleasure.  At  Eton
and  Oxford  he  had  been  a  very  earnest  student,  and
few  of  his  contemporaries  can  have  had  a  wider  know-
ledge of  the  imaginative  literatures  of  Greece,  Italy,  or

's  Last  Journals,  ii.  4,

CH.  MI.  CHARLES  FOX.  257

France.  He  was  passionately  fond  of  poetry,  and  a
singularly  delicate  and  discriminating  critic;  but  he
always  looked  upon  literature  chiefly  from  its  orna-
mental and  imaginative  side.  Incomparably  the  most
important  book  relating  to  the  art  of  government  which
appeared  during  his  lifetime  was  the  'Wealth  of
Nations/  but  Fox  once  owned  that  he  had  never  read
it,  and  the  history  which  was  his  one  serious  composi-
tion added  nothing  to  his  reputation.  In  books,  how-
ever, he  found  an  unfailing  solace  in  trouble  and  dis-
appointment. One  morning,  when  one  of  his  friends,
having  heard  that  Fox  on  the  previous  night  had  been
completely  ruined  at  the  gaming  table,  went  to  visit
and  console  him,  he  found  him  tranquilly  reading  Hero-
dotus in  the  original.  '  What,'  he  said,  '  would  you
have  a  man  do  who  has  lost  his  last  shilling  ? '

His  merits  as  a  politician  can  only  be  allowed  with
great  deductions  and  qualifications.  But  little  stress
should  indeed  be  laid  on  the  sudden  and  violent  change
in  his  political  principles,  which  was  faintly  fore-
shadowed in  1772  and  fully  accomplished  in  1774,
though  that  change  did  undoubtedly  synchronise  with
his  personal  quarrel  with  Lord  North.  Changes  of
principle  and  policy,  which  at  forty  or  fifty  would  indi-
cate great  instability  of  character,  are  very  venial  at
twenty-four  or  twenty-five,  and  from  the  time  when
Fox  joined  the  Whig  party  his  career  through  long
years  of  adversity  and  of  trial  was  singularly  consistent.
I  cannot,  however,  regard  a  politician  either  as  a  great
statesman  or  a  great  party  leader  who  left  so  very  little
of  permanent  value  behind  him,  who  offended  so  fre-
quently and  so  bitterly  the  national  feelings  of  his
countrymen,  who  on  two  memorable  occasions  reduced
bis  party  to  the  lowest  stage  of  depression,  and  who
failed  so  signally  during  a  long  public  life  in  winning
the  confidence  of  the  nation.  His  failure  is  the  more
VOL.  iv.  S

258 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  mi.

remarkable  as  one  of  the  features  most  conspicuous
both  in  his  speeches  and  his  letters  is  the  general  sound-
ness of  his  judgment,  and  his  opinions  during  the
greater  part  of  his  life  were  singularly  free  from  every
kind  of  violence,  exaggeration,  and  eccentricity.  Much
of  it  was  due  to  his  private  life,  much  to  his  divergence
from  popular  opinion  on  the  American  question  and  on
the  question  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  much  also
to  an  extraordinary  deficiency  in  the  art  of  party
management,  and  to  the  frequent  employment  of  lan-
guage which,  though  eminently  adapted  to  the  imme-
diate purposes  of  debate,  was  certain  from  its  injudicious
energy  to  be  afterwards  quoted  against  him.  Like
more  than  one  great  master  of  words,  he  was  trammelled
and  injured  at  every  stage  of  his  career  by  his  own
speeches.  The  extreme  shock  which  the  disastrous
coalition  of  1784  gave  to  the  public  opinion  of  England
was  largely,  if  not  mainly,  due  to  the  outrageous  vio-
lence of  the  language  with  which  Fox  had  in  the  pre-
ceding years  denounced  Lord  North,  and  a  similar
violence  made  his  breach  with  the  Court  irrevocable,
and  greatly  aggravated  his  difference  with  the  nation
on  the  question  of  the  French  Revolution.

But  if  his  rank  as  a  statesman  and  as  a  party  leader
is  by  no  means  of  the  highest  order,  he  stood,  by  the
concurrent  testimony  of  all  his  contemporaries,  in  the
very  first  line,  if  not  in  the  very  first  place,  among
English  parliamentary  debaters.  He  threw  the  whole
energy  of  his  character  into  this  field,  and  by  continual
practice  he  at  last  attained  a  dexterity  in  debate  which
to  his  contemporaries  appeared  little  less  than  miracu-
lous. '  During  five  whole  sessions,'  he  once  said,  '  I
spoke  every  night  but  one,  and  I  regret  only  that  I  did
not  speak  on  that  night.'  With  a  delivery  that  in  the
beginning  of  his  speeches  was  somewhat  slow  and
hesitating,  with  little  method,  with  great  repetition,

OK.  xii.  CHARLES  FOX.  259

with  no  grace  of  gesture,  with  an  utter  indifference  to
the  mere  oratory  of  display,  thinking  of  nothing  but
how  to  convince  and  persuade  the  audience  who  were
immediately  before  him,  never  for  a  moment  forgetting
the  vital  issue,  never  employing  an  argument  which
was  not  completely  level  with  the  apprehensions  of  his
audience,  he  possessed  to  a  supreme  degree  the  debating
qualities  which  an  educated  political  assembly  of  Eng-
lishmen most  highly  value.  The  masculine  vigour  and
strong  common  sense  of  his  arguments,  his  unfailing
lucidity,  his  power  of  grasping  in  a  moment  the  essen-
tial issue  of  a  debate,  his  skill  in  hitting  blots  and
throwing  the  arguments  on  his  own  side  into  the  most
vivid  and  various  lights,  his  marvellous  memory  in
catching  up  the  scattered  threads  of  a  debate,  the  rare
combination  in  his  speeches  of  the  most  glowing  vehe-
mence of  style  with  the  closest  and  most  transparent
reasoning,  and  the  air  of  intense  conviction  which  he
threw  into  every  discussion,  had  never  been  surpassed.
He  was  one  of  the  fairest  of  debaters,  and  it  was  said  that
the  arguments  of  his  opponents  were  very  rarely  stated
with  such  masterly  power  as  by  Fox  himself  before  he
proceeded  to  grapple  with,  and  to  overthrow  them.1
He  possessed  to  the  highest  degree  what  Walpole
called  the  power  of  '  declaiming  argument,'  and  that
combination  of  rapidity  and  soundness  of  judgment  which
is  the  first  quality  of  a  debater.  '  Others,'  said  Sir
George  Savile,  '  may  have  had  more  stock,  but  Fox  had
more  ready  money  about  him  than  any  of  his  party.'
'  I  believe,'  said  Lord  Carlisle,  '  there  never  was  a  person
yet  created  who  had  the  faculty  of  reasoning  like  him.'
•  Nature,'  said  Horace  Walpole,  '  had  made  him  the
most  powerful  reasoner  of  the  age.'  '  He  possessed  be-
yond all  modorns,'  wrote  Mackintosh,  'that  union  of

Butler's  Reminiscences,  i.  159.

82

260 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. OH.  xn.

reason,  simplicity,  and  vehemence  which  formed  the
prince  of  orators.'  '  Had  he  been  bred  to  the  bar,'
wrote  Philip  Francis,  '  he  would  in  my  judgment  have
made  himself  in  a  shorter  time,  and  with  much  less
application  than  any  other  man,  the  most  powerful
litigant  that  ever  appeared  there.'  '  He  rose  by  slow
degrees,'  said  Burke, '  to  be  the  most  brilliant  and  accom-
plished debater  the  world  ever  saw.'  His  finest  speeches
were  wholly  unpremeditated,  and  the  complete  sub-
ordination in  them  of  all  rhetorical  and  philosophical
ambition  to  the  immediate  purpose  of  the  debate  has
greatly  impaired  their  permanent  value;  but  even  in
the  imperfect  fragments  that  remain,  the  essential
qualities  of  his  eloquence  may  be  plainly  seen.

At  the  period,  however,  we  are  now  examining,  hi3
talent  was  yet  far  from  its  maturity,  and  the  statesman
who  became  one  of  the  steadiest  and  most  consistent  of
Whigs  was  still  one  of  the  most  ardent  of  Tories.
Almost  the  first  speech  he  ever  made  was  in  favour  of
the  expulsion  of  Wilkes,  and  he  was  one  of  the  ablest
advocates  of  the  election  of  Luttrell,  one  of  the  fiercest
vituperators  of  the  City  democrats.  Very  few  politicians
were  so  unpopular  in  the  City,  and  in  the  great  riot  of
1771  his  chariot  was  shattered  by  the  mob,  he  was
dragged  through  the  mud,  and  his  life  was  in  some
danger.1  He  supported  the  shameful  attack  on  the
property  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  which  gave  rise  to
the  Nullum  Tern  pus  Act,  and  resisted  the  attempt  of  Sir
W.  Meredith  in  1771  to  defeat  it.  He  opposed  the  law
which  punished  by  disfranchisement  the  gross  corrup-
tion of  the  electors  of  Shoreham.  He  opposed  the  law
making  the  Grenville  Election  Act  perpetual.  He  op-
posed the  motion  for  relieving  clergymen  of  their  sub-

1  See  the  admirable  description  of  this  riot  in  Sir  George  Tre-
velyan's  noble  volume  on  the  early  life  of  Fox.

CH.  xn.  fox's  RUPTURE  WITH  NORTH.

scriptiou  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  though  he  expressed
a  strong  wish  that  the  obligation  should  be  no  longer
extended  to  students  at  the  Universities.1  It  is  curious
to  find  Lord  Holland  congratulating  himself  on  the
close  connection  of  his  son  with  Lord  North,  arid  antici-
pating that  the  young  statesman  would  infuse  a  new
energy  into  his  chief  in  the  struggle  with  the  Wnigs
that  followed  the  resignation  of  Grafton,2  and  it  is  not
less  curious  to  read  the  judgment  of  the  future  historian
of  James  II.  upon  the  history  of  Clarendon.  '  I  think
the  style  bad,  and  that  he  has  a  great  deal  of  the  old
woman  in  his  way  of  thinking,  but  hate  the  opposite
party  so  much  that  it  gives  me  a  kind  of  partiality  for
him.'3

The  resignation  of  Fox  in  February  1772  was  not
due  to  any  general  opposition  to  the  policy  of  North,  but
to  his  opposition  to  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  and  to  his
unsuccessful  effort  to  amend  that  Marriage  Act  of  Lord
Hardwicke  which  his  father  had  so  ably  and  so  bitterly
opposed.  It  appears,  however,  from  a  letter  addressed
by  Lord  Holland  to  Lord  Ossory  that  Fox  considered
that  he  '  had  reason  to  be  dissatisfied,'  and  to  think  that
'  Lord  North  did  not  treat  him  with  the  confidence  and
attention  he  used  to  do,'  and  also  that  his  father  con-
sidered that  he  '  had  been  too  hasty  in  a  step  of  this
consequence.'  Fox  himself  probably  soon  adopted  a
similar  view,  for  he  spoke  of  North  in  a  tone  of  marked
moderation  and  compliment,  expressed  in  strong  terms
his  general  concurrence  with  his  political  principles,
and  clearly  intimated  his  desire  not  to  go  into  general
opposition.4  North  met  his  overtures  in  the  same  spirit,
and  towards  the  close  of  1772  the  first  quarrel  of  Fox

1  Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  293.  *  Correspondence of Fox,  i.

2  Correspondence  of  Fox,\.  63, 70  87,  Russell's  Life  of  Fox,  i.
64.  33-38.

•  Jesse's  Life  of  Selwyn,  Hi.  11.

262 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURA, ctt.  xu.

with  the  Tory  party  was  ended.  A  new  disposition  of
places  was  made  expressly  to  open  a  place  for  him,  and
he  became  one  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Treasury.

The  most  engrossing  subject  of  parliamentary  dis-
cussion in  1772  and  the  following  year  was  the  affairs  of
the  East  India  Company,  and  in  order  to  understand
them  it  will  be  necessary  to  resume  in  a  few  pages  the
narrative  which  was  broken  off  in  a  former  volume.
The  period  of  Indian  history  during  the  five  years  that
followed  the  return  of  Clive  to  England  in  February
1760,  though  it  is  not  the  most  tragical,  is  perhaps  the
most  shameful  in  its  whole  annals.  The  victories  of
Clive  had  filled  the  natives  with  an  abject  terror  of  the
English  name,  and  had  given  Englishmen  an  almost
absolute  ascendency  in  Bengal.  But  this  power  was
not  in  the  hands  of  the  responsible  government  of
England.  It  was  not  even  in  the  hands  of  the  great
commercial  Company  which  nominally  ruled  the  British
possessions  in  Hindostan.  It  was  practically  mono-
polised by  a  great  multitude  of  isolated  officials,  scattered
over  vast  and  remote  districts,  dominating  in  the  native
Courts,  far  removed  from  all  control,  and  commanding
great  bodies  of  disciplined  Sepoys.  Most  of  them  had
left  England  when  little  more  than  schoolboys,  and  at
a  time  when  their  characters  were  wholly  unformed.
Some  of  them  were  desperate  adventurers  of  broken
fortunes  and  tarnished  honour,  and  they  had  gone  to  the
East  at  a  time  when  very  few  even  of  the  best  Europeans
would  have  considered  themselves  bound  to  apply  the
whole  moral  law  to  men  of  a  pagan  creed  and  of  a
colour  differing  from  their  own.  The  government  of  the
Company  was  too  weak,  too  divided,  and  too  distant  to
exercise  any  real  control  upon  their  conduct ;  and  they
found  themselves  wholly  beyond  the  range  and  influence
of  European  opinion,  and  in  a  country  where  all  the
traditions,  habits,  and  examples  of  government  were

CH.  xii.  STATE  OF  INDIA.  263

violent  and  despotic.  Salaries  had  been  regulated  ac-
cording to  a  European  scale,  and  they  were  utterly
insufficient  in  the  East.  By  the  strictest  economy  the
servants  of  the  Company  could  barely  live  upon  their
pay,  while  they  had  unlimited  opportunities  of  ac-
quiring by  illicit  means  enormous  wealth.  Nowhere  in
Europe,  nowhere  else,  perhaps,  in  the  world,  were  large
fortunes  so  easily  amassed.  Olive  himself  had  gone  out
a  penniless  clerk;  when  he  returned  to  England,  at
thirty-four,  he  had  acquired  a  fortune  of  more  than
40,OOOZ.  a  year,  besides  giving  50,000£.  to  his  relatives ; l
and  he  aiterwards  declared  that  when  he  remembered
what  he  might  have  obtained  he  was  astonished  at  his
moderation.  It  was  a  common  thing  for  young  men
who  had  gone  out  without  a  penny,  to  return,  in  ten  or
twelve  years,  with  fortunes  that  enabled  them  to  rival
or  eclipse  the  oldest  families  in  their  counties.

It  needs  but  little  knowledge  of  human  nature  to
perceive  that  such  a  combination  of  circumstances  must
have  led  to  the  grossest  abuses.  The  English  officials
began  everywhere  to  trade  on  their  own  account,  and
to  exercise  their  enormous  power  in  order  to  drive  all
competitors  from  the  field.  A  chief  part  of  the  native
revenues  consisted  of  duties  imposed  on  the  transit  of
goods;  but  the  servants  of  the  Company  insisted  on
exempting  themselves  from  paying  them.  Sometimes
they  sold  for  large  sums  a  similar  exemption  to  native
traders.  They  defied,  displaced,  or  intimidated  all
native  functionaries  who  attempted  to  resist  them.
They  refused  to  permit  any  other  traders  to  sell  the
goods  in  which  they  dealt.  They  even  descended  upon
the  villages,  and  forced  the  inhabitants,  by  flogging  and
confinement,  to  purchase  their  goods  at  exorbitant  prices,
or  to  sell  what  they  desired  to  purchase,  at  prices

1  Malcolm's  Life  of  Clive,  ii.  187.

264 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

far  below  the  market  value.  They  exacted  heavy  sums,
as  fines,  from  those  who  refused  to  yield ;  disorganised
the  whole  system  of  taxation  in  the  native  states  by  the
exemptions  they  claimed  ;  seized,  bound,  and  beat  the
agents  of  the  native  governments ;  openly  defied  the
commands  of  the  Nabob,  and  speedily  undermined  all
authority  in  Bengal  except  their  own.  Monopolising
the  trade  in  some  of  the  first  necessaries  of  life,  to  the
utter  ruin  of  thousands  of  native  traders,  and  selling
those  necessaries  at  famine  prices  to  a  half-starving
population,  they  reduced  those  who  came  under  their
influence  to  a  wretchedness  they  had  never  known
before.  The  native  rulers  had  often  swept  like  some
fierce  monsoon  over  great  districts,  spreading  devasta-
tion and  ruin  in  their  path ;  but  the  oppression  of  the
English  was  of  a  new  and  wholly  different  kind.  Never
before  had  the  natives  experienced  a  tyranny  which  was
at  once  so  skilful,  so  searching,  and  so  strong.  Every
Sepoy  in  the  service  of  the  Company  felt  himself  in-
vested with  the  power  of  his  masters.  Whole  districts
which  had  once  been  populous  and  flourishing  were  at
last  utterly  depopulated,  and  it  was  noticed  that  on
the  appearance  of  a  party  of  English  merchants  the
villages  were  at  once  deserted,  and  the  shops  shut,  and
the  roads  thronged  with  panic-stricken  fugitives.

There  were  other  means  by  which  the  vast  fortunes
of  the  upper  servants  of  the  Company  were  accumulated.
The  Company  had  not  adopted  the  plan  of  governing  the
country  directly.  It  ruled  mainly  by  its  influence  over
the  native  authorities,  and  its  chief  servants  exercised
an  almost  unlimited  power  of  promoting  or  degrading.
They  became  the  centre  of  a  vast  web  of  intrigue,  count-
less native  officials  competing  for  their  support,  and
purchasing  it  by  gifts  wrung  from  an  impoverished
people.  More  than  one  native  ruler  struggled  against
the  tyranny,  and  there  was  much  mutiny  and  disorder

CH.  xii.  STATE  OF  INDIA.  265

among  the  British  ;  but  in  critical  moments  they  alwaya
displayed  a  skill,  a  courage,  and  a  discipline  that  en-
abled them  to  crush  all  opposition.  The  Emperor  had
been  murdered  in  1760,  and  his  successor,  having  made
the  Nabob  of  Oude  his  Viceroy,  attempted  to  restore  the
Imperial  ascendency  in  Bengal ;  but,  after  two  severe  de-
feats, he  was  compelled  to  retreat.  Meer  Jaffier,  whom
the  English  had  made  Nabob  of  Bengal  after  the  battle
of  Plassy,  was  deposed  by  them,  and  his  son-in-law,
Meer  Cossim,  was  raised  to  the  vacant  seat.  He  proved,
however,  to  be  a  man  of  energy  and  capacity.  He  re-
sented bitterly  the  trade  privileges  of  the  English,  and
he  attempted  to  place  the  English  traders  on  a  level
with  his  own  subjects.  The  English,  finding  him  recal-
citrant, soon  resolved  to  depose  him.  The  struggle  was
long  and  desperate ;  150  English  were  deliberately
massacred  by  the  Nabob  at  Patna.  The  Nabob  of  Oude
joined  his  forces  with  those  of  Meer  Cossim  ;  but  the
prowess  of  the  English  proved  again  victorious.  Meer
Jaffier  was  once  more  made  Nabob  of  Bengal,  and  the
total  defeat  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude  in  the  battle  of  Buxar,
on  September  15,  1764,  destroyed  the  power  of  the  only
great  Mogul  chief  remaining,  and  placed  the  Emperor
himself  under  the  protection  of  the  English.  In  Madras
the  English  influence  was  extended  by  the  subjugation
of  some  independent  chiefs.  Mohammed  Ali,  the  Nabob
of  that  province,  was  wholly  subservient  to  the  English ;
and  the  Company  obtained  the  grant  of  a  great  part  of
the  revenues  of  the  Carnatic.

In  January  1765,  Meer  Jaffier  died,  and  the  succes-
sion to  his  throne  lay  between  his  surviving  son,  who
was  a  youth  of  twenty,  and  an  infant,  who  was  the  son
of  his  eldest  deceased  son.  The  choice  legally  rested
with  the  Emperor ;  but  he  was  not  even  consulted.  The
Company  made  Nujum-ad-dowla,  the  son  of  Meer  Jaffier,
Nabob ;  but  he  purchased  the  dignity  both  by  large

266 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xn.

money  gifts  and  by  conditions  which  marked  another
step  in  the  subjugation  of  Bengal  to  the  English.  The
new  Nabob  was  compelled  to  leave  the  whole  military
defence  of  the  province  to  the  English,  keeping  only  as
many  troops  as  were  necessary  for  purposes  of  parade
and  for  the  administration  of  justice  and  the  collection
of  the  revenue.  The  civil  administration  was  hardly
less  effectually  transferred  by  a  provision  placing  it  in
the  hands  of  a  vicegerent,  who  was  to  be  chosen  by  the
Nabob  by  the  advice  of  the  Governor  and  Council,  and
who  might  not  be  removed  without  their  consent.  The
large  revenues  the  Company  already  received  from
Bengal  were  confirmed  and  increased ;  the  Company's
servants  obtained  a  formal  concession  of  the  privilege  of
trading  within  the  country  without  paying  the  duties
exacted  from  native  traders,  provided  they  paid  two
and  a  half  per  cent,  on  the  single  article  of  salt,  and
the  accountants  of  the  revenue  were  not  to  be  appointed
except  with  their  approbation.

At  every  turn  of  the  wheel,  at  every  change  in  the
system  or  the  personality  of  the  Government,  vast  sums
were  drawn  from  the  native  treasury,  and  most  steps  of
promotion  were  purchased  by  gifts  to  the  English.  A
great  part  of  these  gifts,  going  to  minor  servants  for
procuring  minor  promotions,  have  never  been  traced ;
but  the  Select  Committee  of  1773  published  a  detailed
account  of  such  sums  as  had  been  proved  and  acknow-
ledged to  have  been  distributed  by  the  princes  and  other
natives  of  Bengal  from  the  year  1757  to  1766,  both  in-
cluded. Omitting  the  great  grant  which  had  been  made
to  Clive  after  the  battle  of  Plassy,  these  sums  amounted
to  no  less  than  5,940,4982.

Humours  of  these  abuses  had  begun  to  come  to  Eng-
land. The  Indian  adventurer,  or,  as  he  was  popularly
called,  the  Nabob,  was  now  a  conspicuous  and  a  very
unpopular  figure  in  Parliament,  and  the  feeling  of  dis-

CH.  xil.  SECOND ADMINISTRATION  OF  CLIVE.  267

content  was  greatly  strengthened  by  the  impoverished
and  embarrassed  condition  of  the  Company.  While
numbers  of  its  servants  were  returning  to  England  laden
with  enormous  wealth,  the  great  corporation  itself
seemed  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy.  The  pay  of  its
troops  was  in  arrears,  and  the  treasury  at  Calcutta  was
empty ;  heavy  bills  had  been  drawn  in  Bengal,  and  it
was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  they  could  be  met.1  Van-
sittart,  who  had  succeeded  Clive  in  the  government  of
Bengal,  though  a  man  of  good  intentions  and  of  some
ability,  was  utterly  unable  to  control  his  servants,  and
he  was  often  paralysed  by  resistance  in  his  own  Council.
Orders  were  sent  out  from  England,  in  1764,  forbidding
the  servants  of  the  Company  from  engaging  on  their
own  account  in  the  inland  trade,  and  enjoining  that  all
presents  exceeding  4,000  rupees  received  by  them  should
be  paid  to  their  masters ;  but  these  orders  were  com-
pletely disregarded.  It  was  felt  by  the  Directors  that
if  the  Company  was  to  be  saved,  a  stronger  hand  was
needed  in  India.  After  several  stormy  debates  and
much  division  of  opinion,  Clive  was  again  made  Gover-
nor and  Commander-in-Chief  of  Bengal,  and  was  in-
vested with  extraordinary  powers;  and  in  May  1765
he  arrived  at  Calcutta.

His  administration  lasted  only  for  eighteen  months,
but  it  was  one  of  the  most  memorable  in  Indian  history.
He  found,  in  his  own  emphatic  words,  '  that  every  spring
of  the  Government  was  smeared  with  corruption  ;  that
principles  of  rapacity  and  oppression  universally  pre-
vailed, and  that  every  spark  of  sentiment  and  public
spirit  was  lost  and  extinguished  in  the  unbounded  lust
of  unmerited  wealth.'  The  condition  of  affairs,  he  in-
formed the  Directors,  was  '  nearly  desperate,'  and,  he
added,  '  in  a  country  where  money  is  plenty,  where  fear

'  \Fill.  hook  iv.  oh.  v.

268 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn

is  the  principle  of  government,  and  where  your  arms  are
ever  victorious,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  lust  of  riches
should  readily  embrace  the  proffered  means  of  its  grati-
fication, and  that  the  instruments  of  your  power  should
avail  themselves  of  your  authority  and  proceed  even  to
extortion  in  those  cases  where  simple  corruption  could
not  keep  pace  with  their  rapacity.  Examples  of  this
sort  set  by  superiors  could  not  fail  of  being  followed  in
a  proportionate  degree  by  inferiors.  The  evil  was  con-
tagious, and  spread  among  the  civil  and  military  down
to  the  writer,  the  ensign,  and  the  free  merchant.' l

The  scheme  of  policy  which  he  adopted  shows  clear
traces  of  a  powerful  and  organising  mind.  Though
himself  the  greatest  conqueror  in  the  Indian  service,  he
strongly  censured  the  spirit  of  aggrandisement  and  ad-
venture that  had  passed  into  the  Company,  and  he  de-
clared that  they  never  could  expect  good  finances  till
they  recognised  their  own  position  as  a  purely  commer-
cial body,  put  a  check  to  the  incessant  military  expe-
ditions in  which  they  had  engaged,  and  resolved  to
restrict  their  influence  and  their  possessions  to  Bengal,
Orissa,  and  Behar.2  But  the  relations  of  the  English
with  the  Emperor  and  with  the  Nabob  of  Bengal  were
both  changed.  The  Emperor  and  his  Vizier,  the  Nabob
of  Oude,  were  still  in  a  state  of  hostility  to  the  Com-
pany, but  they  were  thoroughly  broken  and  humiliated,
and  the  war  had  for  some  time  languished.  Clive  now
concluded  a  definite  peace  with  them.  The  Nabob  ot
Oude  received  back  all  his  territory  on  paying  a  large
sum  in  compensation,  with  the  exception  of  Allahabad
and  Corah,  which  were  reserved  for  the  Emperor.  The
financial  relations  between  the  Emperor  and  Bengal
were  much  modified,  and  one  change  was  made  which
was  of  capital  importance  in  the  future  government  of

1  Malcolm's  Life  of  Clive,  ii.  335-338.  *  Mill,  iv.  7.

CH.  Ml.  SECOND ADMINISTRATION OF  CLIVE.  269

India.  The  '  Dewannee,'  or  right  of  collecting,  receiv-
ing, and  administering  the  revenue  of  Bengal,  Orissa,
and  Behar,  was  granted  to  the  English.  They  thus  be-
came practically  the  sovereigns  of  the  country.  The
Nabob  of  Bengal  received  a  large  pension  from  the
Government,  but  he  was  deprived  of  all  real  power,
though,  by  the  advice  of  Clive,  he  was  still  retained  as
a  nominal  ruler,  in  order  that  in  case  of  any  complica-
tion with  European  Powers  the  English  might  be  able,
under  the  fiction  of  a  native  prince,  to  preserve  a  some-
what greater  liberty  of  action  in  declaring  or  in  declin-
ing hostilities.

He  at  the  same  time  made  great  efforts  to  cure  the
abuses  of  the  administration.  The  difficulties  he  had
here  to  encounter  were  enormous,  for  he  had  not  only
to  struggle  with  the  opposition  of  the  civil  servants  in
India,  but  also  with  very  serious  obstacles  raised  by  the
Directors  at  home.  In  spite  of  the  orders  of  the  Direc-
tors enormous  presents  had  passed  to  their  chief  servants
in  India  on  the  accession  of  Nujum-ad-dowla,  and  on
the  appointment  of  his  vicegerent  the  inland  trade  had
been  expressly  recognised  and  encouraged  by  the  treaty
with  the  new  Nabob.  At  the  same  time  the  Directors
positively  refused  to  raise  the  salaries  of  their  servants,
and  until  such  a  step  was  taken,  it  was  impossible  that
the  inland  trade  could  be  suppressed.  Some  compromise
was  evidently  necessary,  and  that  which  was  adopted  by
Clive,  though  it  was  in  direct  disobedience  to  the  in-
structions of  his  superiors  at  home,  and  though  he  was
accused  of  having  in  the  course  of  the  transaction
speculated  largely  for  his  own  interest,1  was  probably  one
of  the  best  that  could  have  been  devised.  A  peremptory
order  was  issued  forbidding  the  infamous  practice  of
forcing  the  natives  to  buy  and  sell  at  such  prices  as  the

1  Mill,  book  iv.,  chap.  vii. ;  see,  too,  chap.  v.

270 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

servants  of  the  Company  chose  to  prescribe,  and  the
inland  trade  and  presents  from  natives  were  in  general
terms  prohibited.  Olive  resolved,  however,  to  maintain
for  the  Company  a  strict  monopoly  of  the  salt  trade,
which  was  probably  the  most  lucrative  in  Bengal,  and
to  assign  the  profits  of  that  trade  in  specified  proportions
to  the  Governor,  the  Councillors,  and  the  senior  civil
and  military  officers.  The  shares  of  the  trade  were
granted  to  the  civil  servants  as  low  down  as  factors,  and
to  the  military  servants  as  low  down  as  majors,  and  the
chaplains  and  surgeons  were  included  in  the  arrange-
ment ;  35  per  cent,  was  allowed  as  a  tax  to  the  Company.
According  to  the  estimate  of  Clive,  the  profits  from  this
source  of  a  councillor  or  colonel  would  be  at  least  7,OOOL
a  year  ;  those  of  a  major  or  factor,  2,000£.1

These  measures  and  several  others  of  detailed  reform
were  carried  amid  storms  of  unpopularity.  When  some
of  the  Bengal  functionaries  refused  to  act  under  him,
he  sent  to  Madras  for  substitutes.  On  one  day  200
officers  resigned,  and  but  for  the  fidelity  of  the  Sepoys
the  whole  military  organisation  of  the  Company  might
have  fallen  to  the  ground.  But  the  iron  will  of  Clive
was  never  diverted  from  its  object.  He  encountered
the  animosities  of  those  whose  illicit  gains  he  disturbed
with  the  same  calm  courage  which  he  had  displayed  at
Fort  William,  at  Plassy,  and  at  Chinsurah ;  and  when
at  last,  in  January  1767,  his  broken  health  obliged  him
to  return  to  England,  he  had  undoubtedly  left  the  state
of  India  much  better  than  he  had  found  it.  Had  the
lines  of  his  policy  been  steadily  maintained,  the  affairs
of  the  Company  might  never  have  passed  under  the  hostile
notice  of  Parliament.

The  Directors,  however,  refused  to  confirm  the  pro-
visions he  had  made  about  the  salt  trade,  and  on  the

Malcolm's  Clive,  Hi.  101-103.

CH.  xii.  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA.  271

removal  of  Olive  the  old  trade  abuses  grew  up  again,
though  in  a  somewhat  mitigated  form.  The  belief  in
the  enormous  wealth  of  India  had  greatly  increased,  and
the  proprietors  of  the  Company  began  to  clamour  loudly
for  an  augmented  dividend.  In  spite  of  the  great  debts
of  the  Company,  in  spite  of  the  strong  opposition  of  the
Directors,  the  proprietors  insisted  on  raising  the  dividend
in  1766  from  6  to  10  per  cent.,  and  in  1767  to  12|  per
cent.

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  great  question  of  the
justice  and  propriety  of  a  parliamentary  interference
with  the  government  of  India  first  came  into  practical
importance.  We  have  seen  in  a  former  chapter  that
Chatham  strongly  maintained  that  it  was  both  the  right
and  the  duty  of  the  Crown  to  take  the  government  of
India  under  its  direct  control ;  that  no  subjects  could
acquire  the  sovereignty  of  any  territory  for  themselves,
but  only  for  the  nation  to  which  they  belonged ;  that
while  the  trading  privileges  of  the  Company  should
be  preserved  as  long  as  its  charter  was  in  force,  its
territorial  revenue  belonged  of  right  to  the  nation ;
and  that  the  gross  corruption  and  oppression  existing
in  India  loudly  called  for  parliamentary  interference.
These  views  were  maintained  with  equal  emphasis  by
Shelburne ;  but  in  the  Cabinet  of  Chatham  himself
Charles  Townshend  strongly  urged  that  the  question
should  not  be  brought  before  the  House  of  Commons,
and  the  whole  Rockingham  section  of  the  Whigs  main-
tained the  sole  right  of  the  Company  under  the  terms  of
its  charters  to  the  government  and  revenues  of  India.
As  no  reservation  of  territorial  revenue  to  the  Crown
had  been  made  when  these  charters  were  purchased  by
the  Company,  granted  by  the  Crown,  and  confirmed  by
Parliament,  they  contended  that  the  claims  now  put
forward  on  the  part  of  the  Government  were  utterly  in-
consistent with  good  faith  or  respect  for  property.  In

272 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

November  1766,  however,  Parliament  appointed  a  com-
mittee to  inquire  into  and  to  publish  the  state  of  the
Company's  revenue  and  other  affairs,  its  relations  to  the
Indian  princes,  the  expenses  the  Government  had  in-
curred on  its  account,  and  even  the  correspondence  of
the  Company  with  its  servants  in  India.  It  was  with
difficulty  that  the  Company  procured  an  exemption  of
the  confidential  portion  of  that  correspondence  from  the
general  publicity.  In  1767  a  law  was  passed  which
introduced  several  new  regulations  into  the  manner  of
voting  and  declaring  dividends  in  public  companies ;  !  it
was  immediately  followed  by  an  Act  which,  in  defiance
of  the  late  resolution  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors  raising
the  dividend  of  the  East  India  Company  to  12£  per
cent.,  limited  it  till  the  next  Session  of  Parliament  to
10  per  cent. ;  a  and  the  Company,  terrified  by  the  action
of  the  Government,  then  entered  into  an  agreement,
by  which  it  purchased  the  extension  of  its  territorial
revenue,  and  also  a  temporary  exemption  from  a  duty
which  had  been  imposed  upon  some  kinds  of  tea,  by
binding  itself  to  pay  400,OOOZ.  a  year  into  the  public
exchequer  for  two  years  from  February  1, 1767. 3

The  question  of  right  which  was  thus  raised  was  a
very  grave  one.  The  enactment  of  a  law  restraining  a
trading  company  from  granting  such  dividends  as  were
voted  and  declared  by  those  who  were  legally  entrusted
with  the  power  of  doing  so  was  opposed  by  all  sections
of  the  Opposition  as  a  gross  violation  of  the  rights  of
property,  and  as  inconsistent  with  the  security  of  every
commercial  corporation  in  the  country.  Counsel  were
heard  against  the  Bill.  On  the  third  reading  in  the
House  of  Lords  a  minority  of  forty-four  divided  against

1  7  Geo.  III.  c.  48.  son's  Annak  of  Commerce,  iii.

1  Ibid.  c.  49  463-4G6.

•  Ibid.  o.  66,  57.  See  Macpher-

CH.  xn. TRIBUTE EXACTED FROM THE COMPANY. 273

a  majority  of  fifty-nine,  and  nineteen  peers  signed  a
protest  against  the  measure.1  The  principle,  however,
was  maintained  and  extended.  In  1768  the  restraint
on  the  dividend  was  continued  for  another  year,  and  in
1769  anew  agreement  was  made  by  Parliament  with
the  East  India  Company  for  five  years,  during  which
time  the  Company  was  guaranteed  its  territorial  re-
venues, but  was  bound  to  pay  an  annuity  of  400,OOOZ.,
and  to  export  a  specified  quantity  of  British  goods.  It
was  at  liberty  to  increase  its  dividend  during  that  time
to  12£  per  cent,  providing  the  increase  in  any  one  year
did  not  exceed  1  per  cent.  If,  however,  the  dividend
should  fall  below  10  per  cent,  the  sum  to  be  paid  to  the
Government  was  to  be  proportionately  reduced.  If  it
sank  to  6  per  cent,  the  payment  to  the  Government  was
to  cease.  In  case  the  finances  of  the  Company  enabled
it  to  pay  off  some  specified  debts,  it  was  to  lend  some
money  to  the  public  at  2  per  cent.2

It  is  obvious  that  this  law  rested  upon  the  supposi-
tion that  the  Company  possessed  an  enormous  surplus
revenue,  and  a  large  section  of  politicians  regarded  the
exaction  of  the  annuity  as  a  simple  extortion,  which
was  wholly  unwarranted  by  the  terms  of  the  charter.
It  soon  became  evident  that  the  Company  was  totally
unable  to  pay  it.  Its  debts  were  already  estimated
at  more  than  six  millions  sterling.3  It  supported  an
army  of  about  30,000  men.  It  paid  about  one  million
sterling  a  year  in  the  form  of  tributes,  pensions,  or
compensations  to  the  Emperor,  the  Nabob  of  Bengal,  and
other  great  native  personages.4  Its  incessant  wars,
though  they  had  hitherto  been  always  successful,  were
always  expensive,  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  wealth

Adolphus,  i.  301,  302.  -  9  Geo.  III.  o.  24.

Wealth  of  Nations,  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  part  iiL
Annual  Register,  1773,  p.  65.
|V,  T;

274 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xii.

which  should  have  passed  into  the  general  exchequer
was  still  diverted  to  the  private  accounts  of  its  servants.
At  this  critical  period,  too,  the  Company  was  engaged
in  a  desperate  and  calamitous  struggle  with  Hyder  Ali,
the  ruler  of  Mysore,  who  was  by  far  the  ablest  and  most
daring  native  enemy  the  English  had  yet  encountered
in  Hindostan.  The  war  had  begun  in  1767,  when
Hyder  Ali  succeeded  in  inducing  the  Nizam  of  Deccan
to  join  him  against  the  English ;  but  although  it  had
become  evident  from  the  beginning  that  an  enemy  had
arisen  who  was  widely  different  in  skill  and  courage
from  those  whom  the  Company  had  as  yet  encountered,
it  seemed  as  if  English  discipline  was  likely  to  be  as
usual  completely  victorious.  After  several  vicissitudes
of  fortune  Hyder  Ali  was  defeated  in  a  great  battle  near
Amboor.  The  Nizam  fell  away  from  him  and  made
peace  with  the  English.  Mangalore,  one  of  Hyder
Ali's  principal  seaports,  was  captured  by  a  squadron
from  Bombay.  Colonel  Smith  pursued  the  defeated
chieftain  into  his  own  country,  and  although  he  was
unable  to  force  him  to  give  battle,  he  penetrated  far
into  Mysore  and  captured  several  fortresses.  But  tjp-
wards  the  close  of  1768  a  great  turn  took  place  in  the
fortunes  of  the  war.  Hyder  Ali  reconquered  everything
that  had  been  taken.  With  14,000  horsemen  and  a
large  force  of  Sepoys,  he  swept  almost  without  resistance
over  the  southern  division  of  the  Carnatic,  reducing  a
once  fertile  land  to  utter  ruin  ;  and  soon  after,  having
by  a  series  of  artful  manoeuvres  succeeded  in  drawing
the  English  army  far  from  Madras,  he,  at  the  head  of
6,000  cavalry,  traversed  120  miles  in  three  days,  and
appeared  unexpectedly  in  the  immediate  neighbour-
hood of  the  English  capital.  He  at  once  proposed  a
peace;  and,  as  the  open  town  and  the  rich  country
round  Madras  were  at  his  mercy,  the  English  agreed
Lo  negotiate.  In  April  1769  a  treaty  was  signed,

CH.  xii. BANKRUPTCY  OF  THE  COMPANY. 275

providing  for  a  mutual  restitution  of  conquests  and  an
alliance.

It  was  the  first  instance  in  which  a  victorious  native
Power  had  almost  dictated  terms  to  the  English,  and  its
effects  on  the  fortunes  of  the  Company  were  immediate.
The  price  of  East  India  Stock  fell  60  per  cent.,  the
credit  of  the  Company  sank,  and  as  the  revenues  from
India  began  to  fail,  and  the  shadow  of  unpopularity  fell
more  darkly  upon  the  corporation,  the  old  complaints
of  the  abuses  that  were  'practised  grew  louder.  Three
supervisors  were  sent  out  to  India  by  the  Directors  in
1769,  with  authority  to  investigate  every  department  of
the  service;  but  the  ship  in  which  they  sailed  never
reached  its  destination.  In  1770  Bengal  was  desolated
by  perhaps  the  most  terrible  of  the  many  terrible
famines  that  have  darkened  its  history,  and  it  was
estimated  that  more  than  a  third  part  of  its  inhabi-
tants perished.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  these  calamities,
in  spite  of  the  rapidly  accumulating  evidence  of  the
inadequacy  of  the  Indian  revenues,  the  rapacity  of
the  proprietors  at  home  prevailed,  and  dividends  of
12  and  12£  per  cent.,  as  permitted  by  the  last  Act,
were  declared.  The  result  of  all  this  could  hardly  be
doubtful.  In  July  1772,  the  Directors  were  obliged
to  confess  that  the  sum  required  for  the  necessary
payments  of  the  next  three  months  was  deficient  to
the  extent  of  no  less  than  1,293,OOOZ.,  and  in  August
the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  waited  on  the
minister  to  inform  him  that  nothing  short  of  a  loan  of
at  least  one  million  from  the  public  could  save  the
Company  from  ruin.

The  whole  system  of  Indian  government  had  thus  for
a  time  broken  down.  The  division  between  the  Directors
and  a  large  part  of  the  proprietors,  and  between  the
authorities  of  the  Company  in  England  and  those  in
India,  the  private  and  selfish  interests  of  its  servants  in

T 2

276 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn

India,  and  of  its  proprietors  at  home,  the  continual
oscillation  between  a  policy  of  conquest  and  a  policy  of
trade,  and  the  great  want  in  the  whole  organisation  of
any  adequate  power  of  command  and  of  restraint,  had
fatally  weakened  the  great  corporation.  In  England
the  conviction  was  rapidly  growing  that  the  whole
system  of  governing  a  great  country  by  a  commercial
company  was  radically  and  incurably  false.  The  argu-
ments on  the  subject  cannot  be  better  stated  than  they
were  a  few  years  later  by  Adam  Smith.  The  first
interest,  he  said,  of  the  Sovereign  of  a  people  is  that  its
wealth  should  increase  as  much  as  possible ;  and  this  is
especially  the  case  in  a  country  like  Bengal,  where  the
revenue  is  chiefly  derived  from  land  rent.  But  a  company
of  merchants  exercising  sovereign  power  will  always
treat  their  character  of  sovereigns  as  a  mere  appendix
to  their  character  of  merchants,  will  make  all  govern-
ment subservient  to  the  maintenance  of  trade  monopoly,
and  will  employ  it  to  stunt  or  distort  the  economical
development  of  the  people  over  whom  they  rule.  In
the  Spice  Islands  the  Dutch  were  said  to  burn  all
spiceries  which  a  fertile  season  produces  beyond  what
they  expected  to  be  able  to  dispose  of  in  Europe  with
such  profit  as  they  deemed  sufficient.  In  British  India
Government  officials  had  been  known  to  compel  a
peasant  to  plough  up  a  rich  field  of  poppies,  for  no  other
reason  than  that  they  might  be  able  to  sell  their  own
opium  at  a  higher  price.  As  sovereigns  it  was  the  plain
interest  of  the  Company  that  their  subjects  should  buy
European  goods  as  cheaply,  and  should  sell  their  own
goods  as  profitably,  as  possible.  As  merchants  possess-
ing the  sole  right  of  trading  between  India  and  Europe,
it  was  their  interest  to  compel  the  Indians  to  buy  what
the  Company  supplied  at  the  dearest  rate,  and  sell  what
the  Company  purchased  for  the  European  market  at  the
cheapest  rate.  The  first  object  of  sovereign  merchant

Ml.  xu.  HELPLESSNESS  OF  THE  COMPANY.  277

companies  is  always  to  exclude  competitors  from  the
markets  of  the  country  they  rule,  and  consequently  to
reduce  some  part  at  least  of  the  surplus  produce  of  that
countiy  to  what  they  themselves  require  or  can  dispose
of  at  the  profit  they  consider  reasonable.  Insensibly
but  invariably,  on  all  ordinary  occasions,  they  will  pre-
fer the  little  and  transitory  profit  of  the  monopolist  to
the  great  and  permanent  revenues  of  a  sovereign.

And  the  public  trade  monopoly  of  the  Company  is
but  a  small  part  of  the  evil.  This,  at  least,  extends
only  to  the  trade  with  Europe.  But  the  private  trade  of
the  servants  of  the  Company  extended  to  a  far  greater
number  of  articles,  to  every  article  in  which  they  chose
to  deal,  to  articles  of  the  first  necessity  intended  for
home  consumption.  It  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  clerks
of  a  great  counting-house,  10,000  miles  distant  from
their  masters,  will  abstain  from  a  trade  which  is  at  once
so  lucrative  and  so  easy,  and  it  is  no  less  idle  to  doubt
that  this  trade  will  become  a  ruinous  form  of  oppression.
The  Company  has  at  least  a  connection  with  India,  and
has,  therefore,  a  strong  interest  in  not  ruining  it.  Its
servants  have  gone  out  for  a  few  years  to  make  their
fortunes,  and  when  they  have  left  the  country  they  are
absolutely  indifferent  to  its  fate.  If  their  wishes  are
attended  to,  they  will  establish  the  same  legal  monopoly
for  their  private  trade  as  the  Company  possesses  for  its
public  trade.  If  they  are  not  suffered  to  do  so,  they
will  attain  the  same  end  by  other  means,  by  perverting
the  authority  of  Government  and  the  administration  of
justice,  in  order  to  harass  and  to  ruin  all  rival  traders.1

The  subject  was  discussed  in  Parliament,  in  1772,  at
great  length,  and  with  much  acrimony.  Several  pro-
positions were  put  forward  by  the  Directors,  but  re-
jected by  the  Parliament ;  and  Parliament,  under  the

1  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk.  iv.  ch.  vii.

278 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY.  CH.  Xll.

influence  of  Lord  North,  and  in  spite  of  the  strenuous
and  passionate  opposition  of  Burke,  asserted  in  un-
equivocal terms  its  right  to  the  territorial  revenues
of  the  Company.  A  Select  Committee,  consisting  of
thirty-one  members,  was  appointed  to  make  a  full  in-
quiry into  the  affairs  of  the  Company ;  but  it  was  not
till  1773  that  decisive  measures  were  taken.  The
Company  was  at  this  time  absolutely  helpless.  Lord
North  commanded  an  overwhelming  majority  in  both
Houses,  and  on  Indian  questions  he  was  supported  by
a  portion  of  the  Opposition.  The  Company  was  on  the
brink  of  ruin,  unable  to  pay  its  tribute  to  the  Govern-
ment, unable  to  meet  the  bills  which  were  becoming
due  in  Bengal.  The  publication,  in  1773,  of  the  report
of  the  Select  Committee,  revealed  a  scene  of  malad-
ministration, oppression,  and  fraud  which  aroused  a
wide-spread  indignation  through  England;  and  the
Government  was  able  without  difficulty,  in  spite  of  the
provisions  of  the  charter,  to  exercise  a  complete  con-
trolling and  regulating  power  over  the  affairs  of  the
Company.  A  new  Committee— this  time  sitting  in
secret — was  appointed  by  the  Government  to  investigate
its  affairs,  and  Parliament  took  the  decisive  step  of
preventing  by  law  the  Company  from  sending  out  to
India  a  Commission  of  Supervision  which  it  had  ap-
pointed, on  the  ground  that  it  would  throw  a  heavy
additional  expenditure  on  its  tottering  finances.1

A  very  earnest  opposition  was  made  to  this  measure
by  a  few  members,  among  whom  Burke  was  pre-eminent.
The  part  which  Burke  took  in  the  contest  is  a  curious
illustration  of  the  strong  natural  conservatism  of  his
intellect,  and  a  curious  contrast  to  his  later  speeches  on
Indian  affairs  ;  and  few  persons  who  follow  his  speeches
as  they  appear  in  the  parliamentary  reports  will  fail  to

1  13  Geo.  III.  c.  9. Annual  Register,  1773,  pp.  73-76.

flft.  Kit. BURKE  S DEFENCE OF  T&E COMPANY.  279

be  struck  with  the  ungovernable  violence  of  language,
and  the  glaring  faults  of  taste,  temper,  and  tact  which
they  display.1  His  arguments,  however,  when  reduced
to  their  simplest  expression,  were  very  forcible.  He
contended  that  to  violate  a  royal  charter,  repeatedly
confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament,  was  to  strike  at  the
security  of  every  trading  corporation,  and,  indeed,  of
all  private  property,  in  the  kingdom,  and  that  it  was  a
clear  violation  of  the  charter  of  a  self-governed  Company
to  prevent  it,  by  Act  of  Parliament,  from  managing  its
own  affairs  and  exercising  a  supervision  and  control  over
its  own  servants.  Every  additional  proof  of  the  abuses  in
India  was  an  additional  argument  for  permitting  the
Company  to  send  out  a  Committee  of  Supervision,  and
the  simple  postponement  of  such  a  step  would  ne-
cessarily aggravate  the  evils  that  were  complained  of.
It  was  true  that  the  financial  condition  of  the  Company
was  deplorable ;  but  its  embarrassments  were  partly
due  to  transient  and  exceptional  causes,  and  mainly  to
the  conduct  of  the  Government  itself.  Without  a
shadow  of  authority  in  the  terms  of  the  charter  or  in  the
letter  of  the  law,  the  ministers  had  raised  a  distinction
between  the  territorial  revenue  and  the  trade  revenue
of  the  Company.  By  threatening  the  former  they  had
extorted,  in  addition  to  the  legitimate  duties  which  had
been  paid  into  the  Imperial  exchequer,  no  less  than
400,OOOZ.  a  year,  at  a  time  when  the  finances  of  the
Company  were  altogether  unable  to  bear  the  exaction.
This  tribute,  which  was  the  true  origin  of  the  bank-
ruptcy of  the  Company,2  was  purely  extortionate.  In
one  form  or  another  it  was  computed  that  little  less  than

1  See  Parl.  Hist.  xvii. It  ia  proposal  in  the  Annual  Eegisier
curious  to  contrast  the  wild  ian-  and  in  the  protests  of  the  dis-
guage  of  these  speeches  with  the  sentient  peers,  which  were  pro-
admirable  summary  of  the  argu-  bably  all  written  by  Burke,
ments  against  the Government *  Parl.  Nisi.  xvii.  567.

280 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xii.

two  millions  sterling  had  of  late  passed  annually  from
the  Company  to  the  Government.1  The  interference  of
Parliament  with  the  affairs  of  the  Company  had  been
going  on  since  1767,  and  had  produced  nothing  but
unmixed  disaster.  Not  a  single  abuse  had  been  in
reality  removed.  Government  had  shaken  the  credit
of  the  Company ;  had  introduced  a  fatal  element  of  un-
certainty into  all  its  calculations ;  had  imposed  upon  it
a  tribute  which  reduced  it  to  bankruptcy;  had  paralysed
its  efforts  to  control  the  abuses  of  its  own  servants.
Nor  was  there  the  smallegt  reason  to  believe  that  the
withdrawal  of  the  chief  patronage  of  India  from  the
Company,  and  the  transfer  of  an  almost  boundless  fund
of  corruption  to  the  servants  of  the  Crown,  would  prove
beneficial  either  to  England  or  to  India.  In  the  eyes
of  the  law  Parliament  may,  no  doubt,  be  regarded
as  omnipotent ;  but  its  power  does  not  equitably  extend
to  the  violation  of  compacts  and  the  subversion  of  pri-
vileges which  had  been  duly  purchased.  Yet  this  was
the  course  which  Parliament  was  now  taking  when  it
virtually  cancelled  the  charter  it  had  granted.

These  arguments,  however,  proved  of  no  avail.  A
large  number  of  proprietors  of  the  Company  supported
the  Government.  Clive  himself,  who  was  in  violent  op-
position to  the  predominating  party  among  the  Direc-
tors, was  usually  on  their  side.2  The  public  mind  was
at  last  keenly  sensible  of  the  enormity  of  the  abuses  in
India,  and  it  was  felt  that  an  empire  already  exceeding
in  magnitude  every  European  country  except  France
and  Russia,  with  a  gross  revenue  of  four  millions,  and
a  trade  in  proportion,3  should  not  any  longer  be  left  un-
controlled by  Parliament.  The  Company  was  obliged
to  come  to  Parliament  for  assistance,  and  the  ministers
resolved  to  avail  themselves  of  the  situation  to  reorganise

1  Ann.  Reg.  1773,  p.  76.

•  Malcolm's  Life  of  Clive,  Hi.  313  -316.  *  Ibid.  289.

CB.  xit.  INDIAN ACTS, 1773.  281

its  whole  constitution.  By  enormous  majorities  two
measures  were  passed  through  Parliament  in  1773,
which  mark  the  commencement  of  a  new  epoch  in  the
history  of  the  East  India  Company.  By  one  Act,  the
ministers  met  its  financial  embarrassments  by  a  loan  of
1,400,000?.  at  an  interest  of  4  per  cent.,  and  agreed  to
forego  the  claim  of  400,000?.  till  this  loan  had  been  dis-
charged. The  Company  was  restricted  from  declaring
any  dividend  above  6  per  cent,  till  the  new  loan  had
been  discharged,  and  above  7  per  cent,  till  its  bond-debt
was  reduced  to  1,500,000?.  It  was  obliged  to  submit
its  accounts  every  half-year  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury ;
it  was  restricted  from  accepting  bills  drawn  by  its  ser-
vants in  India  for  above  300,000?.  a  year,  and  it  was
obliged  to  export  to  the  British  settlements  within  its
limits  British  goods  of  a  specified  value.

By  another  Act,  the  whole  constitution  of  the  Com-
pany was  changed,  and  the  great  centre  of  authority
and  power  was  transferred  to  the  Crown.  The  qualifi-
cation to  vote  in  the  Court  of  Proprietors  was  raised
from  500?.  to  1,000?.,  and  restricted  to  those  who  had
held  their  stock  for  twelve  months ;  and  by  this  measure
1,246  voters  were  at  once  disfranchised.  The  Directors,
instead  of  being,  as  heretofore,  annually  elected,  were
to  sit  for  four  years,  a  quarter  of  the  number  being  an-
nually renewed.  The  Mayor's  Court  at  Calcutta  was  to
be  restricted  to  small  mercantile  cases,  and  all  the  more
important  matters  of  jurisdiction  in  India  were  to  be
submitted  to  a  new  court,  consisting  of  a  Chief  Justice
and  three  puisne  judges  appointed  by  the  Crown.  A
Governor-General  of  Bengal,  Behar,  and  Orissa,  was  to
be  appointed  at  a  salary  of  25,000?.  a  year,  with  four
Councillors,  at  salaries  of  8,000?.  a  year,  and  the  other
presidencies  were  made  subordinate  to  Bengal.  The
first  Governor-General  and  Councillors  were  to  be
nominated,  not  by  the  East  India  Company,  but  by

282 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CB.  Xii.

Parliament ;  they  were  to  be  named  in  the  Act,  and  to
hold  their  offices  for  five  years ;  after  that  period  the
appointments  reverted  to  the  Directors,  but  were  sub-
ject to  the  approbation  of  the  Crown.  Everything  in
the  Company's  correspondence  with  India  relating  to
civil  and  military  affairs  was  to  be  laid  before  the  Go-
vernment. No  person  in  the  service  of  the  King  or  of
the  Company  might  receive  presents,  and  the  Governor-
General,  the  Councillors,  and  the  judges  were  excluded
from  all  commercial  profits  and  pursuits.1

By  this  memorable  Act  the  charter  of  the  East  India
Company  was  completely  subverted,  and  the  govern-
ment of  India  passed  mainly  into  the  hands  of  the  min-
isters of  the  Crown.  The  chief  management  of  affairs
was  vested  in  persons  in  whose  appointment  or  removal
the  Company  had  no  voice  or  share,  who  might  govern
without  its  approbation  or  sanction,  but  who  neverthe-
less drew,  by  authority  of  an  Act  of  Parliament,  large
salaries  from  its  exchequer.  Such  a  measure  could  be
justified  only  by  extreme  necessity  and  by  brilliant  suc-
cess, and  it  was  obviously  open  to  the  gravest  objections
from  many  sides.  The  direct  appointment  by  the  legis-
lative body  of  great  executive  officers  was  especially  de-
nounced as  at  once  unprecedented  and  unconstitutional ;
for  it  freed  ministers  from  the  responsibility,  while  it
left  them  the  advantages,  of  the  patronage,  and  thus,  in
the  words  of  the  protest  of  the  Buckingham  peers,  '  de-
feated the  wise  design  of  the  Constitution,  which  placed
the  nomination  of  all  officers  either  immediately  or  deri-
vatively in  the  Crown,  while  it  committed  the  check
upon  improper  nominations  to  Parliament.'  Some  of
the  names  then  selected  were  afterwards  very  prominent
in  English  and  Indian  history.  Warren  Hastings  had

1  13  Geo.  III.  c.  C3,  64;  Parl. History  oj  British  India,  bk.  iv.
Hist. xvii. 928, 929 ; Annual oh.  ix.
Begi»ter,  1773,  pp.  95-105 ;  Mill's

OH.  xfi.  CHARGES  AGAINST  CLIVE.  283

been  appointed  by  the  East  India  Company  Governor
and  President  of  Bengal  in  1772.  He  now  became  by
Act  of  Parliament  the  first  Governor-General :  Barwell,
Clavering,  Monson,  and  Philip  Francis  were  the  four
Councillors.  In  the  Governor-General's  Council  all  dif-
ferences were  to  be  decided  by  a  majority,  and  it  was
therefore  always  possible  for  the  Governor-General  to  be
thwarted  by  three  of  the  Councillors.

In  a  future  chapter  of  this  history  it  will  be  my  task
to  describe  the  results  of  this  great  change  and  experi-
ment in  government  which  makes  the  year  1773  so
memorable  in  the  history  of  British  administration  in
India.  The  overwhelming  majorities  by  which  the
measure  was  carried,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the
Company,  of  the  City  of  London,  and  of  the  Rockingham
Whigs,  show  that  it  obtained  something  more  than  a
mere  party  support ;  and  Lord  North,  having  attained
his  end,  was  anxious  as  much  as  possible  to  alleviate  the
stroke.  Seventeen  millions  of  pounds  of  tea  were  lying
in  the  warehouses  of  the  Company,  and  by  permitting
the  direct  export  of  this  tea  to  the  colonies,  North  hoped
to  grant  a  great  boon  to  India,  and  did  not  foresee  that
he  was  taking  a  great  step  toward  the  loss  of  America.

Another  subject  which  now  attracted  general  atten-
tion was  the  charges  that  were  brought  against  Clive.
He  complained  bitterly  that  he  had  been  examined  before
the  Select  Committee  as  if  he  had  been  a  sheep-stealer.
The  report  of  the  committee  unveiled  the  many  acts  of
violence  and  rapacity  he  had  committed  during  his
earlier  administration ;  the  great  reforms  which  he  had
undertaken  during  his  later  administration  had  mortally
offended  many  corrupt  interests ;  he  had  bitter  enemies
among  the  Directors ;  he  was  the  most  prominent  and
most  wealthy  representative  of  a  class  of  men  who  were
very  unpopular  in  the  country ;  and  as  he  had  attached
himself  to  the  Grenville  connection  in  politics,  and  had

284 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

not  after  the  death  of  Grenville  fully  identified  himself
with  North,  his  position  in  Parliament  was  somewhat
isolated.  General  Burgoyne,  when  presenting  one  of
the  reports  of  the  Select  Committee,  declared  that  it  con-
tained an  account  of  crimes  shocking  to  human  nature  ;
and  a  few  days  later  he  brought  on  a  vote  of  censure
directed  personally  against  Olive.  Having  enumerated
the  disgraceful  circumstances  attending  the  deposition
of  Surajah  Dowlah  in  1757,  the  fictitious  treaty  drawn
up  by  Clive  in  order  to  elude  the  payment  that  had
been  promised  to  Omichund,  the  forgery  by  Clive  of  the
name  of  Admiral  Watson,  and  the  enormous  gifts  which
Clive  had  received  as  a  reward  for  the  elevation  of  Meer
Jaffier,  he  moved  that  Clive  did  at  that  time,  '  through
the  influence  of  powers  with  which  he  was  entrusted,'
obtain,  under  various  authorities,  sums  amounting  to
234,000^.,  and  in  so  doing  abused  those  powers.

The  debates  that  followed  were  very  remarkable  foe
the  confusion  of  parties  and  persons  they  displayed.
Clive  defended  himself  with  great  ability  and  power,
and  his  chief  advocate  was  Wedderburn,  the  Solicitor-
General,  while  one  of  his  chief  assailants  was  Thurlow,
the  Attorney -General.  Lord  North  voted  with  the  ene-
mies of  Clive.  The  Court  party  were  divided;1  and  the
bulk  of  the  Opposition  supported  Clive.  Fox  and  Barr6
agreed  in  attacking  him,  while  Lord  G.  Germaine  power-
fully defended  him.  Burke  was  also  among  his  defend-
ers. He  always  drew  a  broad  distinction  between  the
career  of  Clive  and  the  career  of  Hastings,  and  main-
tained that  though  the  former  had  committed  great

1  The  King  himself  was  very  country,  and  come  to  a  resolution

hostile  to Clive. He  wrote  to  that  seems  to  approve  of  Lord

North,  May  22,  1773  :  '  I  own  I  Olive's  rapine.' Correspondence

am  amazed  that  private  interest  of  George  III.  with  Lord  North.

could  make  so  many  individuals  See,  too,  Fox's  Correspondence,  i.

forget what they owe  to  their  92.

OH.  MI. ACQUITTAL AND SUICIDE OF  CLIVE.  285

crimes,  his  serious  attempts  in  his  last  administration  to
purify  the  government  of  India,  and  especially  his  pro-
hibition of  presents  from  the  natives,  had  done  much  to
atone  for  them.1  The  facts  that  were  alleged  against
him  could  not,  indeed,  be  disputed  ;  but  the  danger  of
the  crisis,  and  the  universal  habits  of  Indian  life,  were
strong  circumstances  of  palliation.  It  was  remembered
that  fifteen  years  had  passed  since  the  incriminated  acts
were  committed ;  that  Olive  had  performed  services  of
transcendent  value  to  the  Empire ;  that  in  his  last  ad-
ministration, with  every  opportunity  of  enormously  in-
creasing his  fortune,  he  had  refrained  from  doing  so ;
and  that  the  animosity  against  him  was  quite  as  much
due  to  his  merits  as  to  his  crimes.  The  resolution  of
Burgoyne  was  divided  into  two  parts.  The  first  part,
asserting  that  Olive  had  accepted  234,OOOL,  was  carried
without  a  division  ;  but  the  latter  part,  censuring  his
conduct,  was  rejected  after  a  long  debate,  and,  on  the
motion  of  Wedderburn,  the  House  unanimously  re-
solved '  that  Robert  Olive  did  at  the  same  time  render
great  and  meritorious  services  to  this  country.' 2

He  did  not  long  survive  the  triumph.  The  excite-
ment of  the  conflict  and  the  storm  of  invective  that
was  directed  against  him  contributed  to  unhinge  his
mind,  which  had  always  been  subject  to  a  dark,  consti-
tutional melancholy  ;  and  a  painful  disease,  and  a
dangerous  narcotic  taken  to  alleviate  it,  aggravated  the
evil.  In  November  1774  he  died  by  his  own  hand,
when  but  just  forty-nine;  and  in  this  manner,  about
two  years  before  the  outbreak  of  the  American  war,

1  See  Burke's  Works,  xiii.  141-  represents  the  motion  of  censure

14C.  as  having  been  carried,  but  this

*  See  Annual  Register,  1773,  appears  to  be  an  error.  Walpole

p.  107.  Malcolm's  Memoirs  of  (Last  Journals,  i.  243-245)  men-

Clive,  iii.  359,  360.  The  account  tions  several  speeches  which  are

in  the  Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  881.  882,  not  given  in  the  Parl,  Hist.

286 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xu.

England  lost  the  greatest  general  she  had  produced
since  the  death  of  Maryborough.1

Another  group  of  measures  of  considerable  import-
ance, which  occupied  at  this  time  the  attention  of  the
public  and  of  Parliament  related  to  religious  liberty.  The
spirit  of  intolerance,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  last  volume,
had  been  for  a  long  time  steadily  declining  in  England,
and  there  was  no  disposition  in  the  higher  ranks  of  the
Government  and  among  the  leaders  of  either  of  the
great  parties  in  the  State  to  make  legislation  subser-
vient to  religious  fanaticism.  Prosecutions  for  reli-
gious heterodoxy  had  almost  wholly  ceased.  The  only
case,  I  believe,  of  the  punishment  of  a  freethinker  for
his  writings  in  the  early  years  of  George  III.  was
that  of  Peter  Anet,  who  was  sentenced  in  1762  to
stand  twice  in  the  pillory,  and  to  be  imprisoned  for  a
year  in  Bridewell  with  hard  labour,  for  a  very  violent
and  scurrilous  attack  upon  Christianity.2  The  Metho-
dist movement,  however,  contributed  to  strengthen  a
spirit  of  fanaticism  among  the  classes  who  were  influ-
enced by  it,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  already
seen,  it  was  encountered  by  explosions  of  mob  violence
which  often  amounted  to  a  high  degree  of  persecution,
and  which  were  sometimes  in  a  very  shameful  manner
connived  at,  countenanced,  or  even  instigated  by  local
magistrates  and  by  clergymen.  Isolated  incidents  oc-
casionally occurred  which  seemed  to  show  that  the  spirit
of  persecution  was  rather  dormant  than  dead  ;  3  and  the

1  See  Malcolm's  Memoirs  of  3  Thus  in  1769  Abel  Proffer

Olive.  Mill's  Hist,  of  British  was  convicted  at  the  Monmouth

India,  Parl.  Debates,  vol.  xvii.,  Assizes  for  barbarous  treatment

and  the  admirable  account  of  of  a  Jew.  He  had  placed  him

Indian  affairs  in  the  Annual  before  a  large  fire  with  his  hands

Register.  tied  behind  him,  to  roast,  and

-  Annual  Register,  1762,  p.  then  stuffed  hot  bacon  down  his

113.  throat. — Annual  Register,  1769,

CH.  xii.  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  COURTS.  287

law,  though  mildly  administered,  contained  many  things
that  were  repugnant  to  true  religious  liberty.

The  Ecclesiastical  Courts  still  retained  a  jurisdic-
tion which  was  in  many  respects  oppressive  and  anom-
alous, and  there  were  frequent  complaints  of  their
expensive,  vexatious,  and  dilatory  proceedings.  Their
conflict  with  the  temporal  courts  dates  from  a  period
long  anterior  to  the  Reformation,  and  the  temporal
courts  had  early  assumed,  and  exercised  with  much
severity,  a  superintending  influence  over  the  spiritual
ones,  defining  their  sphere  of  action,  and  arresting  by
'  writs  of  prohibition '  their  attempts  to  extend  their
authority.  The  Ecclesiastical  Courts  retained,  how-
ever, a  power  of  taking  cognisance  of  acts  of  private
immorality,  heresy,  and  neglect  of  religious  observ-
ances, and  some  large  departments  of  wrong  lay  within
their  jurisdiction.  The  withholding  of  tithes  and  other
ecclesiastical  dues  and  fees  from  the  parson  or  vicar,
injuries  done  by  one  clergyman  to  another,  questions
of  spoliation  and  dilapidation  of  churches  or  parsonages,
matrimonial  cases,  and  also,  by  a  peculiarity  of  Eng-
lish law,  testamentary  cases  and  cases  of  intestacy,
passed  under  their  control.

The  tendency  of  English  law,  however,  was  gradu-
ally to  abridge  their  sphere.  The  strange  power  they
originally  possessed  of  compelling  an  accused  person  to
criminate  himself,  by  tendering  to  him  what  was  termed
an  ex-officio  oath  relating  to  the  matter  in  dispute,  would
probably  have  been  abolished  under  Elizabeth  but  for
the  direct  intervention  of  the  Queen.1  It  was  finally
taken  away  under  Charles  II.2  and  the  jurisdiction  of

p.  93. In  the  same  year  we  read  the  streets  by  order  of  the  mayor.'

that '  On Saturday  morning  a  — Ibid.  p.  108.

Methodist preacher, who had  '  Hallam's  Hist,  of  England,

disturbed  the  peace  of  the  city  cJ"u  iv.

of  Gloucester  with  his  enthusi-  *  13  Car.  II.  st.  i.  c.  12.

astic  rant,  was flogged  through

288  ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY CH.  Til.

the  Ecclesiastical  Courts  in  cases  of  tithes  and  other
pecuniary  dues  was  greatly  limited.  When  a  question
of  disputed  right  was  raised,  the  trial  passed  at  once
from  the  Ecclesiastical  to  the  Civil  Court,  and  this  rule
applied  to  all  tithe  cases  in  which  the  defendant  pleaded
any  custom,  modus,  or  composition.  The  Ecclesiastical
Court  had,  therefore,  only  to  enforce  an  undisputed
right,  and  in  cases  of  dues  or  tithes  under  the  value  of
40s.  a  law  of  William  III.  provided  a  summary  process
by  which  they  might  be  recovered  before  a  justice  of
the  peace.1  The  discipline  the  Spiritual  Courts  exer-
cised in  cases  of  immorality,  and  especially  in  cases  of
non-attendance  at  church,  gradually  faded  away,  from
the  impossibility  of  enforcing  it.  The  only  place  where
in  the  eighteenth  century  the  discipline  of  the  Anglican
Church  appears  to  have  been  habitually  and  severely
enforced  was  in  the  Isle  of  Man  under  the  episcopate
of  Bishop  Wilson.

Already  in  the  seventeenth  century  it  had  become
customary  to  commute  these  penances  for  a  money  pay-
ment,2 and  such  payments  in  cases  which  were  mainly
pro  salute  animi  gradually  ceased.  Archbishop  Seeker
in  1753  complained  bitterly  of  the  difficulty  of  enforcing
any  kind  of  ecclesiastical  discipline.  Yet  in  remote
country  parishes,  even  in  the  closing  years  of  the  eigh-
teenth century,  the  spectacle  might  be  occasionally  seen
of  some  poor  woman  arrayed  in  a  white  sheet  doing
public  penance  for  her  fault.3

1  Blackstone,  bk.  iii.  eh.  vii.  in  the  Court  of  Arches  and  con-

8  Ibid. bk.  iv. ch. xv., xix.  demned  to  do  penance,  and  then

In  the debate  about  Ecclesias-  came  a  dispensation  from per-

tical  Courts  in  1813,  one  of  the  formance,  for  which  he  had  to

speakers  mentions  a  case  of  def  a-  pay  95  J.' — Annual  Register,  1813,

mation  in  which  '  the  defendant  p.  56.

had  been acquitted before the  *  Several curious  particulars

Commissary Court of Surrey,  about  Church  discipline  in  Eng-

but  was  afterwards  found  guilty  land  in  the  eighteenth  century

01.  xii.  EXCOMMUNICATION.  289

In  cases,  however,  of  the  wrongs  which  I  have  enu-
merated, and  also  in  cases  of  defamation,  the  Ecclesi-
astical Courts  retained  all  their  vigour,  and  there  were
bitter  complaints  of  their  abuses  and  of  the  excessive
expense  of  their  procedure.  They  possessed  also  a  pecu-
liar weapon  of  terrible  force.  The  sentence  of  excom-
munication might  be  imposed  by  them  for  many  offences ;
but  it  was  most  commonly  employed  as  a  punishment
for  contempt  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  in  not  appear-
ing before  it,  or  not  obeying  its  decrees,  or  not  paying
its  fees  or  costs.  An  excommunicated  person  in  Eng-
land was  placed  almost  wholly  beyond  the  protection
of  the  law.  He  could  not  be  a  witness  or  a  juryman.
He  could  not  bring  an  action  to  secure  or  recover
his  property.  If  he  died  without  the  removal  of  his
sentence  he  had  no  right  to  Christian  burial.1  Nor
was  this  all.  After  forty  days'  contumacy  he  might
be  arrested  by  the  writ  '  De  excommunicate  capiendo,'
issued  by  the  Court  of  Chancery,  and  imprisoned  till  he
was  reconciled  to  the  Church.

It  is  a  singular  fact  that  such  a  tremendous  power,
which  in  theory  at  least  might  extend  even  to  perpetual
imprisonment,  should  during  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth
century  have  been  lodged  with  an  Ecclesiastical  Court,
and  that  it  might  be  applied  to  men  who  had  committed
such  trivial  offences  as  the  non-payment  of  fees  or  costs.
Nor  was  it  by  any  means  a  dead  letter.  Howard,  in
the  course  of  hia  visits  to  the  English  gaols,  mentions
that  in  Rothwell  gaol,  in  Yorkshire,  he  found  a  weaver
named  William  Carr,  who,  '  having  given  a  bad  name
to  a  woman  who  was  said  not  to  deserve  a  very  good

will  be  found  in  Abbey  and  Over-  '  See  Jacob's  Law  Dictionary,

ton's very  interesting  work on  art.  'Excommunication.' Tom-

Tlie  English  Church  in  the  Eigh-  lin's  Law  Diet.  art.  '  Excommu-

ieenth  Century,  ii.  52-54,  506-  nication.'
609.

VOL.  IV.  U

290 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

one,'  was  cited  before  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  and  im-
prisoned '  until  he  shall  have  made  satisfaction  to  the
Holy  Church,  as  well  for  the  contempt  as  for  the  injury
by  him  done  anto  it.'  He  lay  in  prison  from  May
1774  to  July  1776,  when  he  was  released  by  an  In-
solvent Act  which  forgave  that  class  of  debtors  their
fees.1  In  1787  two  women  were  committed  to  North-
ampton gaol  by  virtue  of  the  writ '  De  excommunicate
capiendo,'  '  because  they  had  wickedly  contemned  the
power  of  the  keys.'2  In  this  year,  however,  an  Act
was  carried  limiting  the  time  of  commencing  suits  in
these  Courts  for  different  offences  to  six  or  eight
months.3  But  the  most  serious  abuses  connected  with
them  continued  to  the  present  century.  In  1812  Lord
Folkestone  brought  forward  the  subject  when  present-
ing a  petition  from  a  young  woman  who  had  lain  for
two  years  in  Bristol  gaol  as  an  excommunicated  person.
She  had  neglected  to  perform  a  penance  imposed  on
her  by  the  Ecclesiastical  Court ;  had  been  excommuni-
cated and  imprisoned  in  consequence ;  and,  as  she  was
too  poor  to  pay  the  fees  that  had  been  incurred,  she  was
unable  to  obtain  her  release.  Lord  Folkestone  related
six  or  seven  other  cases  of  a  similar  kind,  and  in  about
half  of  them  the  excommunicated  person  had  been  at
least  three  years  in  prison.4  In  1813  an  important  Act
was  passed  regulating  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts.  The
power  of  excommunication  for  contempt  and  non-pay-
ment of  fees  was  taken  away.  The  penalty  was  reserved
only  for  certain  expressly  defined  offences,  and  no  civil
penalty  or  disability,  except  imprisonment  not  exceeding
six  months, could  any  longer  attach  to  excommunication.*
A  very  scandalous  form  of  persecution,  in  which,

1  Howard  on  Prisons  (Srded.),  *  27  Geo.  III.  c.  44.

p.  -116.  4  Parl.  Debates,  xii.  99,  100,

1  Disney's  Life  of  Sykes,  1?£,  295-303.

200, 373,  374.  *  53  Geo.  III.  c.  127.

CH.  zn. NONCONFORMISTS  ELECTED  AS  SHERIFFS. 291

however,  religious  motives  had  no  part,  was  practised
in  the  last  years  of  George  II.  and  the  early  years  of
George  III.  by  no  less  a  body  than  the  Corporation  of
the  City  of  London.  In  1748  that  Corporation  made
a  bye-law  imposing  a  fine  of  400Z.  and  20  marks  on
any  person  who,  being  nominated  by  the  Lord  Mayor
for  the  office  of  Sheriff,  refused  to  stand  the  election
of  the  Common  Hall,  and  600/.  on  anyone  who,  being
elected,  refused  to  serve.  The  proceeds  of  these  tines
were  to  be  employed  in  building  the  New  Mansion
House,  which  had  just  been  begun.  But  the  office  of
Sheriff  was  one  of  those  in  which  no  one  could  serve
who  had  not  previously  taken  the  Sacrament  according
to  the  Anglican  rite,  and  it  was,  therefore,  one  of  those
from  which  Dissenters  were  excluded.  It  would  appear
almost  incredible,  if  the  facts  were  not  amply  attested,
that  under  these  circumstances  the  City  of  London
systematically  elected  wealthy  Dissenters  to  the  office
in  order  that  they  should  be  objected  to  and  fined,  and
that  in  this  manner  it  extorted  no  less  than  15,OOOL

The  electors  appointed  these  Dissenters  with  a  clear
knowledge  that  they  would  not  serve,  and  with  the  sole
purpose  of  extorting  money.  One  of  those  whom  they
selected  was  blind;  another  was  bedridden.  Some-
times the  victims  appealed  against  the  sentence,  but
the  case  was  brought  in  the  first  instance  before  a  City
court,  which  always  gave  verdicts  for  the  Corporation,
and  the  cost  of  appeals  against  the  whole  weight  of  the
City  influence  was  so  great  that  few  men  were  rich
enough  or  determined  enough  to  encounter  it.  At  last
a  gentleman  named  Evans,  who  had  been  elected
Sheriff,  determined  to  fight  the  battle  to  the  end.  For
no  less  than  ten  years  the  case  was  before  the  Courts,
It  was  contended  on  the  part  of  the  Corporation  that
the  Toleration  Act  did  nothing  more  than  suspend  the
penalties  for  attending  the  Nonconformist,  and  neglect*

v  3

292 ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xn.

ing  the  Anglican,  service;  that  it  left  the  Dissenters
liable  to  every  other  penalty  and  inconvenience  to
which  they  had  been  previously  subject,  and  that  they
might,  therefore,  be  legally  fined  for  refusing  to  serve
in  an  office  which  they  could  not  legally  fill  without
going  through  a  ceremony  repugnant  to  their  con-
science. This  doctrine  was  finally  overthrown  in  1767
by  a  judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords.  After  con-
sultation with  the  judges,  and  after  one  of  the  most
admirable  of  the  many  admirable  speeches  of  Lord
Mansfield,  the  House  decided  that  the  Toleration  Act
took  away  the  crime  as  well  as  the  penalty  of  Non-
conformity, and  that  no  fine  could  be  legally  imposed
on  Nonconformists  who  refused  to  serve  in  offices  to
which  conscientious  Dissenters  were  ineligible  by  law.1
The  next  important  question  relating  to  religious
liberty  was  one  to  which  I  have  already  adverted  in
another  connection.  The  movement  for  abolishing  the
subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  was  defended
mainly  on  the  principles  of  Locke  and  of  Hoadly.
Though  not  absolutely  coextensive,  it  was  at  least
closely  connected  with  the  growth  of  the  Arian  school
of  which  Clarke,  Sykes,  Clayton,  and  Lindsey  were
prominent  representatives,  and  it  received  a  great  im-
pulse in  1766  from  the  publication  and  the  popularity
of  the  '  Confessional '  of  Archdeacon  Blackbume.  In
1771  a  society  called  the  Feathers  Tavern  Association
was  formed  for  the  purpose  of  applying  to  the  Legis-
lature for  relief.  Blackburne  and  Lindsey  were  its
most  active  members,  and  in  February  1772  a  petition,
drawn  up  by  Blackburne  and  signed  by  250  persons,
was  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons  by  Sir  W.
Meredith.  Of  those  who  signed  it  about  200  were

1  See  the  noble  speech  of  Lord ii.  511-514. Stephens  on  the
Mansfield,  ParZ.  Hist.  xvi.  313- Constitution,  pp.  337,  338.
827. Campbell's  Chief  Justices,

CH.  HI.  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  THE  ARTICLES.  293

clergymen,  and  the  remainder  were  lawyers  and  doctors,
who  protested  especially  against  the  custom  which  pre-
vailed at  the  universities  of  obliging  students  who  came
up  for  matriculation,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  or  even
earlier,1  and  who  were  not  intended  for  the  Church,  to
subscribe  their  consent  to  the  Articles.  It  was  re-
marked that  Oxford  was  strongly  opposed  to  the  move-
ment, while  a  powerful  party  at  Cambridge  supported
it.  Watson,  who  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Llandaff,
and  who  was  at  this  time  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cam-
bridge, published,  under  the  signature  of  '  A  Christian
Whig,'  two  letters  in  favour  of  it,  which  were  presented
to  every  Member  of  Parliament  the  day  before  the
petition  was  taken  into  consideration.2  Paley,  who
was  then  rising  to  prominence  as  a  lecturer  at  Cam-
bridge, refused  to  sign  the  petition  on  the  characteristic
ground  that  he  was  '  too  poor  to  keep  a  conscience,'  but
he  fully  concurred  in  it,  and  he  wrote  anonymously  in
its  support.3  It  was  signed  by  Jebb  and  John  Law,
who  were  prominent  tutors  at  Cambridge,  and  it  was
countenanced  by  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  who  was  father
of  John  Law,  and  also,  it  is  said,  in  some  degree  by
Bishop  Lowth.4

Lord  North  was  anxious  that  the  petition  should  be
received  and  silently  laid  aside ;  but  Sir  Roger  Newdi-
gate,  who  was  violently  opposed  to  it,  insisted  upon
moving  its  rejection,  and  a  very  interesting  debate

1  Parl.  Hist,  xvii.  250.  opinions of their compilers.

*  Watson's  Autobiography,  L  The  Articles,  he  maintained,  were
65,  66.  intended  by  the  Legislature  to

*  Meadley's  Life  of  Palcy,  pp.  exclude  abettors  of  Popery,  Ana-
47-50,  Append. 3-46. In his  baptists,  and  members  of  sects
Moral  Philosophy,  book  iii.  ch.  hostile  to  episcopacy, and  the
xxii.,  Paley  justified  subscription,  intention of  the  Legislature  is
but  strongly  denied  that  it  bound  the  measure  of  the  obligation  of
the  subscriber to believe  every  the  subscriber.

proposition contained in the *  Walpole's  Last  Journal*,  L
Articles,  or  all  the  theological 7-13.

204 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CK.  xrt.

ensued.  On  the  side  of  the  petitioners  the  chief  topics
were  the  obscurities,  the  absurdities,  and  inconsistencies
of  the  Articles,  the  manifest  severity  with  which  they
pressed  upon  many  clerical  consciences,  the  folly  of
asking  schoolboys  of  sixteen  to  declare  their  assent  to
a  long  series  of  complicated  dogmatic  assertions,  the
individual  right  and  duty  of  every  Protestant  to  inter-
pret Scripture  freely  for  himself,  the  essentially  Popish
character  of  all  attempts  to  prescribe  religious  opinions
by  human  formularies,  the  danger  and  the  immorality
of  holding  out  temptations  to  dissimulation  and  pre-
varication by  annexing  rewards  or  punishments  to
particular  opinions,  the  duty  of  opening  the  Church  as
wide  as  possible  to  all  conscientious  men.  The  peti-
tioners were  quite  ready  to  assent  to  Scripture  as  the
inspired  Word  of  God,  and  to  abjure  all  Popish  ten-
dencies, but  they  refused  to  be  bound  by  any  merely
human  formularies.

Among  the  arguments  on  the  other  side  may  bo
mentioned  the  appearance,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,
of  two  political  doctrines  which  were  afterwards  des-
tined, in  connection  with  Irish  politics,  and  with  the
Roman  Catholic  question,  to  attain  a  great  import-
ance. It  was  contended  that  the  Coronation  Oath  made
it  unlawful  for  the  Sovereign  to  give  his  assent  to
any  law  which  changed  the  form  or  character  of  the
Established  Church,  and  that  a  similar  incapacity
was  imposed  upon  Parliament  by  the  articles  of  the
Scotch  Union,  which  enacted  the  permanent  main-
tenance of  the  then  existing  Church  establishments  in
the  two  countries.1  It  is  remarkable  that  Burke,  while
strongly  opposing  the  petition,  took  great  pains  to  dis-
claim all  sympathy  with  these  arguments,  and  asserted
that  the  Coronation  Oath  only  bound  the  Sovereign  to

1  See  both  of  these  arguments  in  the  speech  of  Sir  Roger  Newdigate,
Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  255,  256.

CH.  xii.  DEBATE ON  THE  SUBSCRIPTION.  205

respect  the  religion  which  his  Parliament  had  sanctioned,
and  that  the  Act  of  Union  was  no  bar  to  the  right  of
the  united  Parliament  to  revise  and  modify  the  eccle-
siastical conditions  of  the  country.1

The  King  was  very  strongly  opposed  to  the  prayer
of  the  petitioners,2  and  Lord  North,  in  a  temperate
speech,  opposed  it  as  disturbing  what  was  now  quiet,
and  as  likely  to  introduce  anarchy,  confusion,  and  dis-
sension into  the  Church.  The  petition  was  supported
among  others  by  Lord  George  Germaine,  Sir  George
Savile,  and  Thomas  Pitt,  the  nephew  of  Chatham,  who
belonged  to  different  political  connections,  and  its  advo-
cates appear  to  have  been  chiefly  Whigs.  Dowdeswell,
however,  and  Burke  on  this  question  severed  themselves
from  their  friends,3  and  the  speech  of  Burke  was  by  far
the  ablest  in  the  debate.  He  urged  the  great  danger
of  religious  alterations,  which  usually  pave  the  way  to
religious  tumults  and  shake  one  of  the  capital  pillars  of
the  State.  He  dwelt  upon  the  complete  indifference  of
the  great  majority  of  the  people  to  the  subject,  and  he
laid  down  very  emphatically  the  principle  which  always
governed  his  own  attitude  and  that  of  the  section  of  the
Whig  party  which  he  inspired,  towards  proposed  re-
forms. '  The  ground  for  a  legislative  alteration  of  a
legal  establishment  is  this  and  this  only  :  that  you  find
the  inclinations  of  the  majority  of  the  people,  concurring
with  your  own  sense  of  the  intolerable  nature  of  the
abuse,  are  in  favour  of  a  change.'  No  such  desire
existed  in  the  present  case.  While  strongly  asserting
the  right  of  every  man  to  follow  his  own  convictions  in

1  Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  276-279.  sentiments  in  regard  to  the  pe-

2  Correspondence of George  tition  of  the  clergy  praying  to
III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  89 ;  ii.  be  relieved  from  subscription  to
378.  the  39  Articles,  are  in  opposition

1  Burke,  in  a  letter  to  Lady  to  the  opinions  of  nearly  all  my
Huntingdon,  promising  to  op-  own  party.' — Life  of  the  CounUas
pose  the  petition,  says  :  •  My  of  Huntingdon,  ii.  287.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

religion,  he  as  strongly  maintained  the  undoubted  right
of  the  Legislature  '  to  annex  its  own  conditions  to  bene-
fits artificially  created,'  and  '  to  take  a  security  that  a
tax  raised  on  the  people  shall  be  applied  only  to  those
who  profess  such  doctrines  and  follow  such  a  mode  of
worship  as  the  Legislature  representing  the  people  has
thought  most  agreeable  to  their  general  sense,  binding
as  usual  the  minority  not  to  an  assent  to  the  doctrines,
but  to  a  payment  of  the  tax.'  The  present  question,  he
said,  is  not  a  question  of  the  rights  of  private  conscience,
but  of  the  title  to  public  emoluments.  He  drew  a  vivid
picture  of  the  utter  unsuitability  of  the  Bible  to  be
treated  as  a  bond  of  union  or  a  summary  of  faith,1  and
he  dilated  upon  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  a  re-
ligious organisation  without  any  fixed  code  of  belief,
and  the  confusion  and  anarchy  which  an  abolition  of
subscription  would  probably  produce.  By  a  majority  of
217  to  71  the  House  refused  to  receive  the  petition.8

The  question  was  again  introduced  in  1773  and
1774,  but  it  made  no  progress  either  in  the  House  or
in  the  country,  though  the  subscription  of  students  at

1  'What  is  that  Scripture  to
which  they  are  content  to  sub-
scribe ?  They  do  not  think  that
a  book  becomes  of  dixine  au-
thority because  <t  is  bound  in
blue  morocco,  and  is  printed  by
John  Basket  and  his  assigns?
The  Bible  is  a  vast  collection  of
different  treatises.  A  man  who
holds  the  divine  authority  of
one  may  consider  the  other  as
merely  human.  .  .  .  There  are
some  who  reject  the  Canticles —
others  six  of  the  Epistles.  The
Apocalypse  has  been  suspected
even  as  heretical,  and  was
doubted  of  for  many  ages.  .  .  .
The  Scripture  is  no  one  sum-

mary of  doctrines  regularly  di-
gested, in  which  a  man  could
not  mistake  his  way.  It  is  a
most  venerable  but  most  multi-
farious collection  of  the  records  of
the  divine  economy,  a  collection
of  an  infinite  variety  of  cosmo-
gony, theology,  history,  prophecy,
psalmody,  morality,  apologue,
allegory,  legislation,  ethics,  car-
ried through  different  books,  by
different  authors,  at  different
ages,  for  different  ends  and  pur-
poses.'— Burke's  Works,  x.  20^
21.

*  ParL  Hist. xvii. 24G-  29C
Burke's  Works,  x.  3-21.

CH.  xii.  DISSENTERS'  SUBSCRIPTION.  297

Cambridge  was  soon  after  modified.  Several  of  the
leaders  of  the  movement  seceded  from  the  Church  of
England  to  Unitarianism  ;  the  school  of  Hoadly  was
in  its  decadence,  and  a  new  spirit  was  arising  in  the
Church.  It  was  a  significant  fact  that  the  Methodists,
and  the  section  of  the  Anglican  clergy  who  were  most
imbued  with  their  principles,  were  the  most  ardeiit
opponents  of  the  relaxation  of  subscription,1  and  the
strongly  dogmatic  character  of  the  Evangelical  school,
and  the  Calvinistic  theology  which  soon  became  domi-
nant within  it,  tended  to  attach  its  members  to  the  Arti-
cles. The  opposition  to  them  soon  died  away,  and  when
it  was  next  revived  it  was  by  the  school  which  was  be-
yond all  others  the  most  opposed  to  that  of  Hoadly,  by
members  of  the  school  of  Newman,  who  justly  looked
upon  the  Articles  as  the  stronghold  of  that  Protestant
faith  which  they  desired  to  extirpate  from  the  Church.
In  the  course  of  the  debates  on  the  subscription,
Lord  North  said  that  if  the  application  for  relief  had
come  from  Dissenting  ministers,  who  received  no  emolu-
ments from  the  Establishment,  he  could  see  no  objec-
tion to  it,  and  this  remark  encouraged  the  Dissenters
to  apply  for  a  relief  from  their  subscription.  As  we
have  seen,  their  ministers,  schoolmasters,  and  tutors
were  compelled  by  the  Toleration  Act  to  assent  to
thirty-five  and  a  half  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  the
Church  of  England.  No  such  subscription  had  been
exacted  in  the  Irish  Toleration  Act  of  1719,  which
legalised  the  position  of  the  Irish  Protestant  Dissenters,
and  it  was  on  various  grounds  unpopular  among  the
Dissenters  in  England.  Many  had  drifted  far  from  the
orthodoxy  of  their  fathers ;  many  had  adopted  the  views
of  Hoadly,  that  all  subscriptions  to  human  formularies

1  Life  of  the  Cotmtess  of  Huntingdon,  ii.  285-288. Walpole'*
Last  Journals,  i.  376.

298 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xu.

\vere  wrong,  and  many  others  who  cordially  believed
the  doctrinal  articles  regarded  the  subscription  to  them
as  a  humiliating  act  of  homage  to  a  rival  Church.  The
law,  indeed,  appears  to  have  been  very  rarely  enforced,
and  there  was  a  party  among  the  more  orthodox  Dis-
senters who  desired  its  maintenance,  and  even  peti-
tioned against  the  abolition  of  the  subscription  to  the
Anglican  Articles  as  tending  to  encourage  the  growth
of  Ariaiiism.1  The  prevailing  Dissenting  opinion,  how-
ever, was  on  the  other  side,  and  the  relief  Bill  was  ex-
tremely well  received  in  the  House  of  Commons.  The
ministers,  though  they  did  not  take  it  under  their  own
charge,  appear  to  have  favoured  it,  or  at  least  to  have
been  divided  on  the  subject.  On  the  side  of  the  Oppo-
sition, Burke  spoke  strongly  in  its  favour,  and  the  great
body  of  the  Whigs  supported  it.  It  was  carried  through
the  House  of  Commons  by  large  majorities  in  1772  and
1773,  but  the  bishops — strongly  countenanced  by  the
King,  and,  apparently  at  his  orders,  by  the  ministry 2 —
opposed  it  in  the  Lords,  and  in  spite  of  the  warm  sup-
port of  Chatham  it  was  defeated  in  that  House.  In
1779,  however,  it  was  brought  in  with  more  success,
and  by  the  concurrence  of  both  parties  Dissenting
ministers  and  tutors  were  admitted  to  the  benefits  of
the  Toleration  Act  without  a  subscription  to  the  Arti-
cles, provided  they  declared  themselves  Christians  and
Protestants,  and  believers  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ments.3 In  the  same  year  the  Irish  Parliament  re-
lieved the  Irish  Nonconformists  from  the  Test  Act.

On  these  questions  the  tendency  of  the  Whigs  was
somewhat  more  decidedly  towards  religious  liberty  than
that  of  the  Tories.  This  was,  however,  in  some  degree

1  Parl.  Hist.  rvii.  441,  443, *  19 Geo.  III. c.  44. Sea

770-772,  786-790.  Belsham'g  Life  of  Lindsey,  pp.

Correspondence of George  66, 67.
III.  with  Lord  North,  i.  101.

CH.  xil. CATHOLICISM  ESTABLISHED IN  CANADA. 299

due  to  the  greater  freedom  of  an  Opposition,  and  in
some  degree  to  the  old  alliance  of  the  Dissenters  with
the  Whigs  ;  each  party  was  much  divided,  and  Lord
North's  own  disposition  was  far  removed  from  in-
tolerance. In  one  most  important  measure,  which
marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  religious  liberty,  the
Government,  as  we  have  already  seen,  represented  the
liberal,  and  the  Opposition  the  intolerant  side.  The
Quebec  Act  of  1774,  establishing  Catholicism  in  Canada,
would  a  generation  earlier  have  been  impossible,  and  it
was  justly  considered  a  remarkable  sign  of  the  altered
condition  of  opinion  that  such  a  law  should  be  enacted
by  a  British  Parliament,  and  should  have  created  no
serious  disturbances  in  the  country.  The  Church  party
was  at  this  time  closely  allied  with  the  Court  against
the  Americans.  The  bishops  were  on  nearly  all  ques-
tions steady  supporters  of  Lord  North,  and  only  one  of
them  actively  opposed  the  Quebec  Bill.

The  Whig  party  and  the  City  politicians  were  fiercely
hostile  to  the  measure.  Chatham  denounced  it  as  'a
breach  of  the  Reformation,  of  the  Revolution,  and  of  the
King's  Coronation  Oath,'  '  a  gross  violation  of  the  Pro-
testant religion.'  The  City  of  London  presented  an  ad-
dress to  the  King  petitioning  him  not  to  give  his  assent
to  a  Bill  which  was  inconsistent  with  his  Coronation  Oath
and  with  his  position  as  protector  of  the  Protestant  re-
ligion. When  the  King  went  down  to  the  House  of
Lords  to  give  his  assent  to  the  Bill,  he  was  met  by  cries
of  '  No  Popery ! '  from  an  angry  mob,1  and  the  Sove-
reign who  in  his  later  years  was  justly  regarded  as  the
bitterest  enemy  of  his  Catholic  subjects  in  Ireland  was
now  described  as  leaning  more  strongly  to  Popery  than
any  English  monarch  since  the  Stuarts.  It  was  cus-
tomary to  compare  George  III.  in  this  respect  to

Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  374-379.

300 ENGLAND  IN  TEE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTUKY. en.  xii.

Charles  I.1  When  Burke,  in  1775,  moved  his  famous
scheme  for  conciliating  America,  Horace  Walpole  com-
mented upon  it  in  these  terms  :  '  It  is  remarkable  that
in  his  proposed  repeal  he  did  not  mention  the  Quebec
Bill — another  symptom  of  his  old  Popery.'  2

The  success  of  the  Quebec  Act  led  Parliament,  a
few  years  later,  to  undertake  the  relief  of  the  Catholics
at  home  from  some  part  of  the  atrocious  penal  laws  to
which  they  were  still  subject.  The  absurdity  of  main-
taining such  laws  suspended  over  the  heads  of  a  small
and  peaceful  fraction  of  the  nation,  in  an  age  of  general
enlightenment  and  toleration,  was  now  keenly  felt,  and
it  was  the  more  conspicuous  on  account  of  the  marked
change  which  had  passed  over  the  spirit  of  the  chief
Catholic  Governments  of  Europe.  Religion  had  every-
where ceased  to  be  a  guiding  motive  in  politics.  Nearly
all  the  Catholic  governments  of  Europe  were  animated
by  a  purely  secular  spirit,  and  were  completely  eman-
cipated from  clerical  influence.  Pombal  in  Portugal ;
Choiseul,  Malesherbes,  and  Turgot  in  France ;  Aranda
and  Grimaldi  in  Spain,  however  much  they  may  have
differed  on  other  points,  were  in  this  perfectly  agreed.
If  Austria,  under  Maria  Theresa,  formed  a  partial  ex-
ception, the  accession  to  the  empire  of  Joseph  II.  in
1764  had  already  given  a  new  bias  to  its  policy.  The

1  '  James  II.  lost  his  crown  Charles had not.' — Walpole'a

for  such  enormities. The  prince  Last  Journals,  i.  378. The  poet

that  wears  it  to  the  prejudice  of  Cowper  wrote (Feb. 13, 1780)

that  family  is  authorised by  a  about  the resemblance  of the

free Parliament to do what  reigns of George III. and of

James  was expelled  for  doing  I  Charles  I., '  especially  the  sus-

A  prince  cried  up  like  Charles  I.  picion  that  obtains of  a  fixed

for  his  piety  is  as  favourable  to  design  of  Government  to  favour

Papists  as  Charles  was,  and  has  the growth of Popery.'  —  Sea

a  bench  of  bishops  as  unjust  to  Albemarle's  Lifeof  liockingham,

the  Presbyterians,  as  propitious  ii.  393.

to  Papists,  as  Charles  had. And  *  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  L

George  III.  has  an  army,  which  641.

CH xri.  THE  CATHOLIC  QUESTION.  801

Jesuits,  who  represented  especially  the  intolerance  and
aggressiveness  of  Catholicism,  had,  for  many  years,  lost
all  credit  and  almost  all  power.  They  had  been  ex-
pelled from  Portugal  in  1759,  from  France  in  1764,
from  Bohemia  and  Denmark  in  1766,  from  Spain,  the
Spanish  colonies  in  America,  Venice,  and  Genoa  in
1767,  from  Malta,  Naples,  and  Parma  in  1768,  and,  at
last,  in  1773,  Clement  XIV.  had  been  induced  to  issue
his  famous  bull  suppressing  the  order.  In  nearly  all
Catholic  countries,  the  tendency  was  to  enlarge  the
bounds  of  religious  liberty,  to  secularise  the  Government,
and  to  restrict  the  power  of  the  Church.  Charles  III.
had  almost  completely  fettered  the  Inquisition  of  Spain.
In  the  course  of  a  few  years,  stringent  laws  were  made
reducing  the  power  of  the  clergy  in  Venice,  Austrian
Lombardy,  Piedmont,  Parma,  and  the  two  Sicilies.  An
imperial  edict  in  1776  had  abolished  some  of  the  worst
forms  of  persecution  in  Austria  and  Hungary,  and
in  the  same  year  Necker,  though  an  austere  Calvinist,
obtained  a  foremost  place  among  the  ministers  of
France.

All  these  things  made  the  legal  position  of  the
English  Catholics  appear  especially  shameful,  and  the
laws  against  them  manifestly  reflected  the  passions  and
the  intolerance  of  another  age.  In  considering,  how-
ever, the  real  working  of  these  laws,  we  must  remember
the  curious  conservatism  of  English  legislators,  who
have  continually  preferred  to  allow  a  bad  or  an  un-
popular law  to  become  dormant  rather  than  repeal  it.
The  statute  book  is  by  no  means  a  true  reflex  of  con-
temporary opinion  and  practice,  for  it  is  full  of  strange
survivals  of  other  ages.  Thus  a  law  of  Henry  V.  which
provided  that  all  members  of  counties  and  boroughs
must  be  residents  in  the  constituencies  they  represented,
and  that  no  non-resident  could  be  a  voter,  was  suffered
to  be  completely  obsolete  for  centuries,  and  was  at  last

302 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

removed  from  the  statute  book  in  1774.1  I  have
already  referred  to  the  law  for  slowly  pressing  to  death
prisoners  who  refused  to  plead,  which  was  only  repealed
in  1772,2  and  to  the  law  for  punishing  Irish  witches
with  death,  which  was  only  repealed  in  182 1,3  and
several  other  almost  equally  striking  instances  may
be  adduced.  Shortly  before  the  Restoration,  thirteen
gipsies  were  executed  at  one  Suffolk  assize,  under  a  law
of  Elizabeth,  which  made  all  gipsies  found  in  England
liable  to  death,4  and  this  law,  though  censured  by  a
committee  of  the  Ilouse  of  Commons  in  1772,5  was  not
repealed  till  1783.8  The  mediaeval  '  appeal  of  murder,'
which  enabled  the  heir  of  the  deceased  person  to  chal-
lenge the  alleged  murderer  to  battle,  after  his  acquittal
by  a  jury,  and  which  took  away  from  the  Crown  all
power  of  pardoning  the  accused  if  he  were  defeated,
was  recognised  by  English  law  during  the  whole  of  the
eighteenth  century.  It  was  eulogised  in  Parliament  by
"Dunning  in  1774,7and  it  was  only  abolished  in  1819  on
account  of  an  appellee  having,  in  the  previous  year,
thrown  down  his  glove  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench
and  demanded  his  legal  right  of  trial  by  battle.8  The
1  wager  of  law,'  according  to  which  a  man  who  was
charged  with  a  debt  was  released  from  it  if  he  denied
the  obligation,  and  obtained  eleven  neighbours  to  swear,
from  a  general  knowledge  of  his  character,  that  they
believed  him,  existed  in  English  law  till  1833.9

From  time  to  time  an  ingenious  man  exhumed  some
obsolete  and  forgotten  law  for  the  purpose  of  extorting

1  It  was  repealed  by  14  Geo.  III.  Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  448-450.

c.  58. See,  for  much  information  23  Geo.  III.  c.  51.

on  this  subject,  Cieasy's  Hist,  of  Parl.  Hist.  xvii.  1291-1297.

the  Constitution,  2G7-2GO.  See,  too,  Campbell's  Lives  of  the

*  12  Geo.  III.  c.  20.  Clanccllors,  viii.  22-21.

1  1  &  2  Geo.  IV.  c,  18.  59  Geo.  HI.  o.  46.

«  Black  stone,  book  iv.  o.  18.  3  &  4  William  IV.  o.  42.

CH.  xu.  OBSOLETE  LAWS.  303

money  or  gratifying  revenge.  Thus,  in  1761,  we  find  a
lady  tried  at  Westminster  to  recover  a  penalty  of  20^.,
under  a  law  of  Elizabeth,  because  she  had  not  attended
any  authorised  place  of  worship  for  a  month  previously,
and  acquitted  by  the  jury  on  the  ground  of  her  ill
health.1  In  1772,  a  vicar  was  fined  10Z.  and  his
curate  5Z.  for  not  having  read  in  church  an  old  Act
against  cursing  and  swearing.  The  vicar,  it  appears,
had  dismissed  his  curate,  and  the  sons  of  the  latter,
having  discovered  the  existence  of  this  long-forgotten
law,  brought  the  action  in  revenge,  not  knowing  that
their  father  would  be  involved  in  the  condemnation.2
In  1774,  a  gentleman  was  indicted  at  the  Chester
Assizes  for  having  broken  the  law  of  Elizabeth,  which,
in  order  to  prevent  the  increase  of  the  poor,  made  it
penal  to  erect  any  detached  cottage  without  accompany-
ing it  with  four  acres  of  freehold  land.3  The  judges
expressed  great  indignation  at  the  proceeding,  and
at  their  representation  the  statute  was  repealed  in  the
following  session.4  Two  statutes  of  Charles  II.  requiring
that  the  dead  should  be  buried  in  woollen,  and  imposing
a  penalty  of  5Z.  on  clergymen  who  neglected  to  certify
to  the  churchwarden  any  instances  in  which  the  Act
was  not  complied  with,  were  only  repealed  in  1814,  on
account  of  a  number  of  actions  being  brought  by  a
common  informer  to  recover  the  penalties.8

In  all,  or  nearly  all,  of  these  cases,  the  prosecutions
were  due  to  private  motives  of  revenge  or  avarice,  and
similar  motives,  no  doubt,  inspired  most  of  those
directed  against  Catholics.  The  Act  still  subsisted

1  British  Chronicle,  Feb.  23,  for  tlie  Maintenance  of  the  Poor,

1761.  in  a  Letter  to  Thomas  Gilbert

*  Gentleman' sMagazine,m2t  (Chester  1776), pp.  21,  22.  The

p.  389.  law  was  repealed  by  15  Geo.  III.

3  31Eliz.c.7.  See  Blackstone,  c.  32.

book  iv.  c.  13.  5  Phillimore's Hist,  of  Geo.

4  Observations  on  a Scheme III.  p.  68. 54  Geo.  III.  c.  108.

304 ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xn.

which  gave  a  reward  of  1 OOZ.  to  any  informer  who  pro-
cured the  conviction  of  a  Catholic  priest  performing  his
functions  in  England,  and  there  were  occasional  prose-
cutions, though  the  judges  strained  the  law  to  the
utmost  in  order  to  defeat  them,  and  insisted  upon  a
rigour  and  fulness  of  proof  that  would  not  have  been
exacted  in  any  other  case.  In  1767,  a  priest  named
John  Baptist  Malony  was  tried  at  Croydon  on  the  charge
of  having  administered  the  sacrament  to  a  sick  person,
was  found  guilty  and  was  condemned  to  perpetual  im-
prisonment. He  lay  for  some  years l  in  confinement,
and  was  then  banished  from  England.  In  the  same
year,  a  mass-house  in  Southwark  was  suppressed,  but
the  priest  succeeded  in  escaping  by  a  back-door.  Two
priests,  named  Webb  and  Talbot — the  latter  a  brother
of  Lord  Shrewsbury — were  prosecuted  in  1768  and
1769,  but  were  acquitted  through  a  defect  in  the
evidence  establishing  their  orders.  Malony  was,  I
believe,  the  only  priest  actually  convicted  during  the
reign  of  George  III.,  but  prosecutions  were  sufficiently
frequent  to  make  the  position  of  all  priests  exceedingly

1  According  to  Burke  (speech  Court  were  reluctantly  obliged  to

at  Bristol  in  1780),  two  or  three  condemn  him  (shocking  as  the

years. Burke's  Works,  iii.  389.  idea  was)  to  perpetual  imprison-

Oliver  says his imprisonment  ment. His  Lordship was  then

lasted four  years. (Collections  in  office,  and  though  every  method

illustrating the Hist, of the  was  taken  by  the  Privy  Council

Catholic  Religion  in  Cornwall,  to  give  a  legal  discharge  to  the

Devon,  Dorset,  £c.  pp.  14,  15.)  prisoner,  neither  the  laws  then

Lord  Shelburne  alluded  to  this  in  force  would  allow  of  it,  nor

case  in  a  speech  in  1778. 4  Mr.  dared  the  King  himself  to  grant

Malony,  a  priest  of  the  Roman  him  a  pardon.  He,  however,  with

Catholic  persuasion,  had been  his  colleagues  in  office,  was  so

apprehended and brought to  perfectly persuaded  of  the  im-

trial  by  the  lowest  and  most  de-  policy  and  inhumanity  of the

ppicable  of  mankind,  a  common  law,  that  they  ventured  to  givo

informing  constable  of  the  City  him  his  liberty  at  every  hazard.'

of  London. He  was  convicted  — Parl.  Hist.  xix.  1145.
of  being  a  popish  priest,  and  the

CH.  xii.  POSITION  OF  ENGLISH  CATHOLICS.  305

precarious.  Mrs.  Lingard,  the  mother  of  the  historian,
who  died  in  1824  at  the  age  of  ninety-two,  is  said  to
have  remembered  the  time  when  her  family  had  to  go
in  a  cart  at  night  to  hear  mass,  the  priest  wearing  a
round  frock  to  resemble  a  poor  man.1

Mansfield  and  Camden,  who  differed  on  most  ques-
tions, agreed  cordially  in  discountenancing  legal  mea-
sures against  Catholics.  One  priest  appears  to  have
escaped  conviction  mainly  through  the  extraordinary
ingenuity  with  which  Mansfield  from  the  bench  sug-
gested doubts  and  difficulties  in  the  evidence  of  a  very
clear  case,  and  thus  gave  the  jury  a  pretext  for  acquit-
ting the  prisoner.2  Sir  William  Stanley,  of  Hooton,
was  indicted  in  1770  for  refusing  to  part  with  his  four
coach-horses  when  a  20L  note  was  tendered  to  him,  but
he  was  acquitted  upon  the  ground  that  a  bank-note  was
not  legal  tender.3  In  another  case,  the  owner  of  an
estate  in  the  north  of  England  endeavoured  to  reduce
a  lady,  who  was  a  near  relative  of  his  own,  to  utter
poverty  by  depriving  her  of  her  jointure,  which  was  in
the  form  of  a  rent-charge  on  his  estate,  on  the  plea  that

1  Oliver's Collections illus-  of  all  the  Catholic  cases  must

trating  the  History  of  the  Catholic  have  fallen  to  this  firm.
Religion, p. 33. Gentleman's 2  See  his  very  curious  charge  in

Magazine,  1767,  pp. 141,  142.  Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  ii.  514-

Butler's  Memorials  of the  English  516. In  1776  Dunning  moved  in

Catholics. Butler  states  (ii.  64)  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  for  in-

that  in  1780  he  ascertained  that  formations  against  two  Middlesex

a single  house of  attorneys  in  justices  of  the  peace,  who  had

Gray's  Inn  had  defended  more  refused to  compel  two persons

than  twenty  priests  under  prose-  charged  with  being  Koman  Catho-

cution  for  their  religion,  and  had  lies,  to  take  the  oaths.  Mansfield

defended  them in most cases  refused  the  injunction,  and  at  the

gratuitously. Butler  does not  same  time  expressed  his  disap-

say  over  how  long  a  period  these  proval  of  the  attempt  to  revive

prosecutions were diffused. I  the  severities  of  the  penal  code. —

suspect  the  time  must  have  in-  Annual  Register,  1776,  p.  191.
eluded  at  least  the  whole  reign  of 3  Oliver,  p.  15.
George  III.,  and  that  the  defence

VOL.  IV.  X

306 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

being  a  Catholic  she  could  take  no  estate  or  interest
in  land.  Lord  Camden  took  up  her  case  with  great
zeal,  and  finding  that  there  was  no  remedy  in  the  exist-
ing law,  hfe  took  the  extreme  step  of  bringing  in  and
carrying  a  special  Act  of  Parliament  for  her  relief.1
The  position  of  Catholics,  however,  and  especially  of
Catholic  landowners,  was  always  one  of  extreme  pre-
cariousness.  They  were  still  subject  to  a  double  land-
tax.  They  were  at  the  mercy  of  their  Protestant  rela-
tives, who  might  easily  deprive  them  of  their  land ;  at
the  mercy  of  common  informers  ;  at  the  mercy  of  any
two  justices  who  might  at  any  time  tender  to  them  the
oath  of  supremacy.  They  were  virtually  outlaws  in
their  own  country,  doomed  to  a  life  of  secrecy  and  re-
tirement, and  sometimes  obliged  to  purchase  by  regular
contributions  an  exemption  from  prosecution.

Several  of  their  largest  landowners  had  recently
taken  the  oath,  and  the  English  Catholics  were  a  small
body  with  no  power  in  the  State.  A.  Catholic  writer,  in
1781,  estimated  that  in  that  year  they  counted  7  peers,
22  baronets,  and  about  150  other  gentlemen  of  landed
property.  Several  of  the  peers  and  three  or  four  of  the
baronets  were  men  of  great  estates,  but  the  landed  pro-
perties of  the  remaining  commoners  did  not  average
more  than  1,000/.  a  year,  and  not  more  than  two  or
three  Catholics  held  prominent  positions  in  the  mercan-
tile world.2

The  worst  part  of  the  persecution  of  Catholics  was
based  upon  a  law  of  William  III.,  and  in  1778  Sir
George  Savile  introduced  a  Bill  to  repeal  those  por-
tions of  this  Act  which  related  to  the  apprehending  of
Popish  bishops,  priests,  and  Jesuits,  which  subjected

1  Burke's  Works,  iii.  389.  But-  lish  Catholics  from  theRefonna-
ler's  Memorials  of  t)ie  English  tion  to  the  Year  1781,  pp.  121,
Catholics,  ii.  72,  73.  122.

2  State  and  Behaviour  of  Eng-

en.  xii.  CATHOLIC  RELIEF  ACT, 1778.  307

these  and  also  Papists  keeping  a  school  to  perpetual
imprisonment,  and  which  disabled  all  Papists  from  in-
heriting or  purchasing  land.  In  order  to  obtain  the
benefits  of  the  law,  it  was  necessary  that  the  Catholics
should  take  a  special  oath  abjuring  the  Pretender,  the
temporal  jurisdiction  and  deposing  power  of  the  Pope,
and  the  doctrine  that  faith  should  not  be  kept  with
heretics,  and  that  heretics,  as  such,  may  be  lawfully  put
to  death.1

It  is  an  honourable  fact  that  this  Relief  Bill  was
carried  without  a  division  in  either  House,  without  any
serious  opposition  from  the  bench  of  bishops,  and  with
the  concurrence  of  both  parties  in  the  State.  The
law  applied  to  England  only,  but  the  Lord  Advocate
promised,  in  the  ensuing  session,  to  introduce  a  similar
measure  for  Scotland.

It  was  hoped  that  a  measure  which  was  so  mani-
festly moderate  and  equitable,  and  which  was  carried
with  such  unanimity  through  Parliament,  would  have
passed  almost  unnoticed  in  the  country;  but  fiercer
elements  of  fanaticism  than  politicians  perceived  were
still  smouldering  in  the  nation.  The  first  signs  of  the
coming  storm  were  seen  among  the  Presbyterians  of
Scotland.  The  General  Assembly  of  the  Scotch  Esta-
blished Church  was  sitting  when  the  English  Relief
Bill  was  pending,  and  it  rejected  by  a  large  majority  a
motion  for  a  remonstrance  to  Parliament  against  it.
But  in  a  few  months  an  agitation  of  the  most  dangerous
description  spread  swiftly  through  the  Lowlands.  It
was  stimulated  by  many  incendiary  resolutions  of  pro-
vincial synods,  by  pamphlets,  handbills,  newspapers,
and  sermons,  and  a  '  Committee  for  the  Protestant
Interests '  was  formed  at  Edinburgh  to  direct  it.  The
Scotch  Catholics  were  exceedingly  alarmed,  and  they

1  18  Geo.  III.  c.  CO.

x  2

308 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xif.

endeavoured  to  avert  the  danger  which  they  feared  by
signing  and  publishing,  in  the  beginning  of  1779,  a
letter  to  Lord  North,  entreating  him  to  forego  his  in-
tention of  putting  them  in  the  same  position  as  their
brethren  in  England,  as  any  such  attempt  would  arouse
a  spirit  of  fanaticism  in  Scotland  that  would  endanger
then  lives  and  property.  But  it  was  now  too  late.
Furious  riots  broke  out  in  January  1779,  both  in  Edin-
burgh and  Glasgow.  Several  houses  in  which  Catholics
lived,  or  the  Catholic  worship  was  celebrated,  were
burnt  to  the  ground.  The  shops  of  Catholic  tradesmen
were  wrecked,  and  their  goods  scattered,  plundered,
or  destroyed.  Catholic  ladies  were  compelled  to  take
refuge  in  Edinburgh  Castle.  The  houses  of  many  Pro-
testants who  were  believed  to  sympathise  with  the  Relief
Bill  were  attacked,  and  among  the  number  was  that  of
Robertson  the  historian.  The  troops  were  called  out  to
suppress  the  riot,  but  they  were  resisted  and  pelted,  and
not  suffered  to  fire  in  their  defence ;  and  the  fears  or
sympathies  of  the  Edinburgh  magistrates  were  clearly
shown  in  the  almost  grotesque  servility  of  the  procla-
mation which  they  issued  to  the  rioters.  '  To  remove
the  fears  and  apprehensions,'  they  wrote,  '  which  had
distressed  the  minds  of  many  well-meaning  people  in
the  metropolis,  with  regard  to  the  repeal  of  the  penal
statutes  against  Papists,  the  public  are  informed  that
the  Act  of  Parliament  passed  for  that  purpose  was  totally
laid  aside,  and  therefore  it  was  expected  that  all  peace-
able subjects  would  carefully  avoid  connecting  them-
selves with  any  tumultuous  assembly  for  the  future.' l

The  flame  soon  spread  southwards.  For  some  years
letters  on  the  increase  of  Popery  had  been  frequently
appearing  in  the  London  newspapers.'  Many  murmurs

1  Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  ii. subject  will  be  found  in  the  St.

616.  James's  Chronicle  for  17C5. The

*  Several  mrious  letters  on  this alarm  at  the  alleged  increase  of

CB.  xii. LORD  GEORGE  GORDON.  800

had  been  heard  at  the  enactment  of  the  Quebec  Act,
and  many  striking  instances  in  the  last  ten  years  had
shown  how  easily  the  spirit  of  riot  could  be  aroused,
and  how  impotent  the  ordinary  watchmen  were  to  cope
with  it.  Great  discontent  had  undoubtedly  been  pro-
duced in  large  sections  of  the  population  by  the  Relief
Act  of  1778  ;  the  success  of  the  Scotch  riots  in  pre-
venting the  introduction  of  a  similar  measure  for  Scot-
land encouraged  the  hopes  of  procuring  its  repeal ;  and
the  fanatical  party  had  unfortunately  acquired  an  un-
scrupulous leader  in  the  person  of  Lord  George  Gordon,
whose  name  now  attained  a  melancholy  celebrity.  He
was  a  young  man  of  thirty,  of  very  ordinary  talents,
and  with  nothing  to  recommend  him  but  his  connection
with  the  ducal  house  of  Gordon,  and  his  position  as  a
member  of  Parliament,  and  he  had  for  some  time  dis-
tinguished himself  by  coarse,  violent,  and  eminently
absurd  speeches  on  the  enormities  of  Popery,  which
only  excited  ridicule  in  the  House  of  Commons,  but
which  found  admirers  beyond  its  walls.  He  was  a
Scotchman,  and  appears  to  have  been  honestly  fanatical,
but  his  fanaticism  was  mixed  with  something  of  the
vanity  and  ambition  of  a  demagogue,  and  with  a  vein
of  recklessness  and  eccentricity  closely  akin  to  insanity.
A  '  Protestant  Association,'  consisting  of  the  worst  agi-
tators and  fanatics,  was  formed,  and  at  a  great  meeting
held  on  May  29,  1780,  and  presided  over  by  Lord
George  Gordon,  it  was  determined  that  20,000  men
should  march  to  the  Parliament  House  to  present  a
petition  for  the  repeal  of  the  Relief  Act.

It  was about half-past  two on the  afternoon  of
Fiiday,  June  2,  that  three  great  bodies,  consisting  of

Popery  led  the  House  of  Lords  in  their  clergy  an  account  of the

the  next  year  to  pass  a  motion  Catholics in each  parish. See

requesting  the  bishops  in  their  Gent.  Mag.  17G7,  p.  429.
several  dioceses  to  obtain  from

310 ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xit

many  thousands  of  men,  wearing  blue  cockades,  and
carrying  a  petition  which  was  said  to  have  been  signed
by  near  120,000  persons,  arrived  by  different  roads  at
the  Parliament  House. Their  first  design  appears  to
have  been  only  to  intimidate,  but  they  very  soon  pro-
ceeded to  actual  violence. The  two  Houses  were  just
meeting,  and  a  scene  ensued  which  has  scarcely  been
paralleled  in  England,  though  it  resembled  on  a  large
scale  and  in  an  aggravated  form  the  great  riot  around
the  Parliament  House  in  Dublin,  which  took  place  during
the  administration  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford. The  mem-
bers were  seized,  insulted,  compelled  to  put  blue  cock-
ades in  their  hats,  to  shout  '  No  Popery ! '  and  to  swear
that  they  would  vote  for  the  repeal ;  and  many  of  them,
but  especially  the  members  of  the  House  of  Lords,  were
exposed to  the  grossest  indignities. Lord  Mansfield,
who  was  now  in  his  seventy-sixth  year,  was  particularly
obnoxious  to  the  mob  on  account  of  the  recent  acquittal
of  a  Popish  priest  by  his  influence. The  windows  of  his
carriage  were  broken,  the  panels  were  forced  in,  and  he
was  in  great  danger  of  being  torn  to  pieces,  when  the
Archbishop  of  York  succeeded  with  much  courage  in
extricating  him  from  the  grasp  of  his  assailants. The
Chancellor,  Lord  Thurlow,  who  was  equally  unpopular,
was  not  present,  but  the  mob  speedily  recognised  his
brother,  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln. In  a  few  moments  a
wheel  of  his  carriage  was  wrenched  off,  and  the  bishop
was  for  a  time  in  extreme  danger,  when  a  law  student
succeeded  in  dragging  him,  half  fainting,  into  a  neigh-
bouring  house,  where he  disguised  himself  and  then
escaped  over  the  roofs. The  carriage  of  Lord  Stormont
was  shattered  to  pieces,  and  he  was  for  half  an  hour  in
the  hands  of  the  mob. Bathurst,  Boston,  Townshend,
Hillsborough, and  many other  peers underwent  the
grossest  ill-usage.

The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  that  day  bringing  in  a

OH.  xn.  THE GORDON RIOTS.  311

motion — to  which  the  insensate  proceedings  of  the  mob
furnished  a  ghastly  commentary — in  favour  of  putting
all  power  in  the  hands  of  the  populace  by  granting  them
universal  suffrage  and  annual  parliaments.  But  no
serious  discussion  was  possible.  Pale,  bruised,  and  agi-
tated, with  their  wigs  torn  off,  their  hair  dishevelled,
their  clothes  torn  and  bespattered  with  mud,  the  peers
of  England  sat  listening  to  the  frantic  yells  of  the  mul-
titude who  already  thronged  the  lobbies.

In  the  Commons  Lord  George  Gordon  presented  the
petition,  and  demanded  its  instant  consideration.  The
House  behaved  with  much  courage,  and  after  a  hurried
debate  it  was  decided  by  192  to  7  to  adjourn  its  conside-
ration till  the  Gth.  Lord  George  Gordon  several  times
appeared  on  the  stairs  of  the  gallery,  and  addressed  the
crowd,  denouncing  by  name  those  who  opposed  him,  and
especially  Burke  and  North ;  but  Conway  rebuked  him
in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  the  mob,  and  Colonel  Gor-
don, one  of  his  own  relatives,  declared  that  the  moment
the  first  man  of  the  mob  entered  the  House  he  would
plunge  his  sword  into  the  body  of  Lord  George.  The
doors  were  locked.  The  strangers'  gallery  was  empty,
but  only  a  few  doorkeepers  and  a  few  other  ordinary
officials  protected  the  House,  while  the  mob  is  said  at
first  to  have  numbered  not  less  than  60,000  men.  Lord
North  succeeded  in  sending  a  messenger  for  the  Guards,
but  many  anxious  hours  passed  before  they  arrived.
Twice  attempts  were  made  to  force  the  doors.  At  one
time  the  danger  seemed  so  imminent  that  Colonel  Lut-
trell  proposed  that  they  should  be  thrown  open,  and  that
the  members  should,  with  their  drawn  swords,  endeavour
to  cut  their  way  through  the  mob.  Happily,  however,
the  crowd,  though  it  contained  some  desperate  fanatics,
and  some  desperate  criminals,  consisted  chiefly  of  idle,
purposeless  ruffians  of  the  lowest  class,  bent  only  on
mischief  and  amusement,  but  animated  by  no  very  bitter

312 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

animosity,  and  they  were  content  with  having  kept  the
two  Houses  of  Parliament  for  several  hours  blockaded
and  imprisoned.  The  stifling  heat  of  the  day  caused
many  to  drop  away.  Lord  Mahon  harangued  the  crowd
with  some  effect  from  the  window  of  a  neighbouring
coffee-house ;  Alderman  Sawbridge  and  the  Assistant
Chaplain  expostulated  with  them,  but  without  much  suc-
cess, and  at  last  about  nine  o'clock  the  troops  appeared,
and  the  crowd,  without  resisting,  agreed  to  disperse.

A  great  part  of  them,  however,  were  bent  on  further
outrages.  They  attacked  the  Sardinian  Minister's  chapel
in  Duke  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  They  broke  it
open,  carried  away  the  silver  lamps  and  other  furniture,
burnt  the  benches  in  the  street,  and  flung  the  burning
brands  into  the  chapel.  The  Bavarian  Minister's  chapel
in  Warwick  Street,  Golden  Square,  was  next  attacked,
plundered,  and  burnt  before  the  soldiers  could  intervene.
They  at  last  appeared  upon  the  scene,  and  some  slight
scuffling  ensued,  and  thirteen  of  the  rioters  were  cap-
tured.

It  was  hoped  that  the  riot  had  expended  its  force,
for  Saturday  and  the  greater  part  of  Sunday  passed  with
little  disturbance,  but  on  Sunday  afternoon  new  outrages
began  in  Moorfields,  where  a  considerable  Catholic  popu-
lation resided.  Several  houses  were  attacked  and  plun-
dered, and  the  chapels  utterly  ruined.  The  mob  tore  up
altars,  pulpita,  pews  and  benches,  and  made  large  fires
of  them.  Nothing  but  the  bare  walls  remained,  and
even  these  sometimes  fell  before  the  heat.  The  soldiers
were  called  in,  but  only  when  it  was  too  late,  and  they
were  not  suffered  to  fire.  Authority  seemed  completely
paralysed.  The  impunity  that  had  hitherto  attended  the
outrages,  the  hope  of  gigantic  plunder,  the  madness
which  every  hour  became  stronger  and  more  contagious,
the  desperation  of  men  who  had  already  compromised
themselves  beyond  return,  all  added  to  the  flame.  The

CH.  xii.  THE GORDON  RIOTS.  313

mob  were  fast  finding  their  leaders  ;  and  as  their  con-
fidence in  themselves  increased,  they  loudly  boasted  that
they  would  root  out  Popery  from  the  land,  release  the
prisoners  who  had  been  confined  in  Newgate  for  the
outrages  on  Friday,  and  take  signal  vengeance  on  the
magistrates  who  had  committed  them,  and  on  all  who
had  given  evidence  against  them.

Monday,  June  5,  was  the  anniversary  of  the  King's
birthday,  and  the  signs  of  official  rejoicing  contrasted
strangely  with  the  panic  that  was  abroad.  The  military
preparations  were  still  miserably  inadequate.  A  procla-
mation was  issued  promising  a  reward  of  500Z.  for  the
detection  of  those  who  were  concerned  in  plundering  the
Sardinian  and  Bavarian  chapels,  but  the  rioters  were  as
far  as  possible  from  being  intimidated.  One  party,
carrying  spoils  of  the  chapels  they  had  plundered,
marched  in  triumph  to  Lord  George  Gordon's  house  in
Welbeck  Street,  and  then  burnt  them  in  the  adjoining
fields.  Another  party  went  to  Virginia  Lane,  Wapping,
and  a  third  to  Nightingale  Lane,  and  in  each  of  these
places  a  Catholic  chapel  was  soon  in  a  blaze.  A  Catholic
school  at  Hoxton  was  next  destroyed.  They  then  at-
tacked the  houses  and  shops  of  those  who  had  given
evidence  against  the  rioters,  burnt  them,  and  plundered
their  contents.  Sir  George  Savile's  house  in  Leicester
Square  underwent  the  same  fate.  As  the  proposer  of
the  Relief  Bill,  he  was  especially  obnoxious  to  the  fanati-
cal portion  of  the  rioters,  and  he  had  prudently  taken
the  precaution  of  secretly  removing  his  plate  and  some
other  valuables.  The  house,  however,  war-  completely
wrecked,  and  when  the  evening  closed  in,  it  was  little
more  than  a  ruin.  The  iron  rails  that  surrounded  it
were  torn  up,  and  became  formidable  weapons  in  the
hands  of  the  mob.

All  this  was  done  with  complete  impunity,  and  as  a
natural  consequence  the  spirits  of  the  rioters  rose  higher

314 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xu.

and  higher.  On  Tuesday,  June  6,  more  daring  enter-
prises were  attempted.  All  the  troops  in  London  were
concentrated  on  a  few  points,  such  as  the  Tower,  the
Houses  of  Parliament,  St.  James's  Palace,  and  St.
George's-in-the-Fields,-  and  great  districts  were  almost
wholly  unprotected.  No  Catholic  house  was  any  longer
secure.  No  one  knew  how  many  were  implicated  in  or
sympathised  with  the  rioters,  for  the  most  peaceful  sub-
jects now  wore  blue  cockades  as  a  protection  from  the
mob.  The  two  Houses  met  under  strong  military  pro-
tection, but,  in  spite  of  that  protection,  Lord  Sandwich,
on  his  way  to  Parliament,  was  torn  out  of  "his  carriage,
which  was  broken  in  pieces,  his  face  was  cut,  and  he  was
rescued  with  difficulty  by  the  Horse-guards.  An  attack
was  made  on  the  house  of  Lord  North,  but  it  was  suc-
cessfully defended  by  a  party  of  light  horse,  who  with
drawn  swords  charged  the  mob  and  trampled  several
men  under  their  horses'  hoofs.  At  six  in  the  evening  a
party  went  to  the  house  of  Justice  Hyde,  near  Leicester
Fields,  which  in  less  than  half  an  hour  was  utterly
wrecked  ;  while  another  party,  consisting  of  many  thou-
sands of  desperate  men,  passed  rapidly  through  Long
Acre,  and  down  Holborn,  till  they  arrived  at  Newgate.
They  summoned  Mr.  Akerman,  the  keeper,  to  release
their  comrades,  and  on  his  refusal  they  at  once  besieged
the  gaol.

It  had  been  lately  built  at  an  expense  of  40,OOOZ.,
and  was  esteemed  the  strongest  in  England.  The
mob,  however,  were  under  the  direction  of  men  who
well  knew  what  they  had  undertaken,  and  they  had  pro-
vided themselves  with  sledge-hammers  and  pickaxes  to
batter  down  the  door,  and  long  ladders  to  scale  the  walls.
For  a  time  the  great  iron  gate  resisted  their  efforts,  and
no  gunpowder  appears  to  have  been  employed.  But
another  and  not  less  formidable  means  of  assault  was
speedily  discovered.  The  house  of  the  chief  keeper,

CH.  xn.  THE GORDON RIOTS.  315

which  adjoined  the  gaol,  was  easily  broken  open,  and
great  masses  of  furniture  were  flung  down  through  the
windows,  piled  against  the  prison  door,  and  then  ignited.
New  combustibles  were  brought  in  from  all  sides,  and  a
furious  blaze  was  kindled,  till  the  door  was  red-hot  and
tottering  upon  its  hinges.  In  the  meantime  the  keeper's
house  was  set  on  fire,  and  the  prison  chapel  caught  the
flames,  while  men,  climbing  on  high  ladders,  flung  burn-
ing brands  through  the  grated  orifices,  and  soon  ignited
the  woodwork  of  the  prison.  The  fire  spread  far  and
fast,  casting  its  red  and  fluctuating  glare  upon  the  dense
and  savage  crowd  half-mad  with  drink  and  with  excite-
ment. One  hundred  constables  endeavoured  to  disperse
them,  but  the  rioters  closed  around  them  and  over-
powered them,  and  flung  their  staves  into  the  flames,  and
sentinels  kept  watch  at  every  street  to  guard  the  depre-
dators against  surprise.  About  300  prisoners,  four  of
whom  were  under  sentence  of  death,  were  confined  in
Newgate.  They  were  divided  between  the  hope  of  escape
and  the  still  more  pressing  fear  of  being  burnt  alive  or
smothered  by  the  dense  volumes  of  smoke  that  already
rolled  through  the  prison,  and  their  piercing  cries  were
clearly  heard  above  the  tumult.  At  length  the  iron  door
gave  way  beneath  the  heat  and  the  repeated  blows.  The
crowd  rushed  in  ;  some  climbed  to  the  roof,  and  made  a
hole  through  the  rafters ;  others  penetrated  through  a
gap  made  by  the  burning  chapel.  The  cells  were  broken
open,  and  the  prisoners  dragged  out.  All  seem  to  have
been  saved  except  some  intoxicated  rioters,  who  sank
down  stupefied  with  drink,  and  perished  in  the  fall  of
the  burning  rafters.  In  a  short  time  little  but  blackened
walls  remained  of  the  greatest  prison  in  London,  and  a
new  contingent  of  desperate  malefactors  was  added  to
the  rioters.

The  mob  had  triumphed,  but  they  did  not  pause  in
their  career  of  crime. Parties  were  at  once  told  off  for

316 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xrr.

different  enterprises.  One  party  attacked  the  Catholics
in  Devonshire  Street,  Red  Lion  Square;  another  de-
stroyed the  house  of  Justice  Cox,  in  Great  Queen
Street ;  a  third  broke  open  the  new  prison  in  Clerken-
well,  and  released  all  the  prisoners ;  a  fouith  attacked
and  wrecked  the  house  of  Sir  John  Fielding,  who,  as
the  most  active  magistrate  in  London,  was  especially
obnoxious  to  them  ;  a  fifth,  shortly  after  midnight,  at-
tacked the  great  house  of  Lord  Mansfield  in  Blooms-
bury  Square.  Lord  and  Lady  Mansfield  had  but  just
time  to  escape  through  the  back  when  it  was  broken
open,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  furniture  was  thrown
out  of  the  windows,  and  kindled  into  a  blaze  before  the
door.  A  collection  of  precious  pictures,  a  noble  law
library,  many  priceless  manuscripts  from  the  pen  of
Mansfield  himself,  many  important  legal  papers  which
were  in  his  care,  were  thrown  in  to  feed  the  flames.  The
wine  cellars  were  broken  open,  and  the  crowd  was  soon
mad  with  drink.  A  party  of  guards  arrived  when  the
ruin  was  almost  accomplished,  and,  the  Riot  Act  having
been  read,  the  magistrates  ordered  them  to  fire,  and  six
men  and  a  woman  were  killed,  and  several  wounded ;
but  the  passions  of  the  mob  had  risen  too  high  for  fear.
It  was  remembered  that  Lord  Mansfield  possessed  a
country  house  between  Highgate  and  Hampstead,  and
a  party  was  sent  to  burn  it ;  but  they  were  anticipated
and  repelled  by  a  party  of  horse.  Eleven  or  twelve
private  houses  were,  however,  that  night  in  a  blaze,  and
the  conflagration  mingled  with  the  splendour  of  a  general
illumination ;  for  the  mob  compelled  every  householder
to  illuminate  in  honour  of  their  triumph.

Wednesday,  June  7,  long  known  in  London  by  the
name  of  '  Black  Wednesday,'  witnessed  a  spectacle  such
as  London  had  never  before  seen.  The  long  tension,
the  succession  of  sleepless  nights,  the  complete  triumph
of  the  mob  during  four  days,  the  proved  incapacity  of

OH.  xn.  THE  GORDON RIOTS.  317

the  City  authorities  to  keep  the  peace,  the  knowledge
that  the  worst  criminals  from  the  gaols  were  at  large,
the  threatening  warnings  sent  out  by  the  mob  that  they
would  destroy  the  Bank,  the  prisons,  and  the  palaces,
had  utterly  cowed  the  people.  A  camp  was  formed  and
cannon  were  drawn  out  in  Hyde  Park.  The  Berkshire
Militia,  and  soon  after  the  Northumberland  Militia,
arrived  to  reinforce  the  regular  troops.  Strong  guards
were  stationed  at  the  chief  public  buildings,  at  the
houses  of  the  ministers,  at  Devonshire  House  and  Rock-
ingham  House,  and  every  important  dwelling  was  barri-*
caded  as  in  a  siege,  and  guarded  by  armed  men.  But
a  great  section  of  London  was  completely  in  the  hands
of  the  mob.  The  Lord  Mayor  and  the  City  magistrates
seemed  paralysed  with  fear.  Many  magistrates  had
fled  from  London;  the  houses  of  the  few  who  were
really  active  had  been  plundered  or  burnt,  and  all  spirit
of  self-reliance  and  resistance  appeared  for  the  moment
to  have  been  extinguished.  Fanaticism  had  but  little
part  in  the  proceedings  of  this  day ;  it  was  outrage  and
plunder  in  their  most  naked  forms.  Richard  Burke,  in
a  letter  dated  from  '  What  was  London,'  gives  us  a
vivid  picture  of  the  abject  terror  that  was  prevailing.
'  This  is  the  fourth  day,'  he  writes,  '  that  the  metropolis
of  England  (once  of  the  world)  is  possessed  by  an  en-
raged, furious,  and  numerous  enemy.  Their  outrages
are  beyond  description,  and  meet  with  no  resistance.
.  .  .  What  this  night  will  produce  is  known  only  to
the  Great  Disposer  of  things.  ...  If  one  could  in
decency  laugh,  must  one  not  laugh  to  see  what  I  saw  :
a  single  boy,  of  fifteen  years  at  most,  in  Queen  Street,
mounted  on  a  pent-house  demolishing  a  house  with
great  zeal,  but  much  at  his  ease,  and  throwing  tho
pieces  to  two  boys  still  younger,  who  burnt  them  for
their  amusement,  no  one  daring  to  obstruct  them?
Children  are  plundering  at  noonday  the  City  of  Lon-

318 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xn.

don.'1  Three  boys,  armed  with  iron  bars  torn  up  from
Lord  Mansfield's  house,  went  down  Holborn  in  the
middle  of  the  day  shouting  '  No  Popery ! '  and  extort-
ing money  from  every  shop,  and  they  met  with  no
opposition.  Small  parties  of  the  same  kind  levied  con-
tributions in  almost  every  district,  no  one  daring  to
resist  them,  lest  the  mob  should  be  called  down  upon
their  houses.  One  man  on  horseback  was  especially
noticed  who  refused  to  take  anything  but  gold.  Dr.
Johnson  walked  on  that  day  to  visit  the  ruins  of  New-
gate, and  he  passed  a  party  plundering  the  sessions
house  of  Old  Bailey.  They  consisted,  as  he  observed,
of  less  than  100  men,  and  'they  did  their  work  at
leisure,  in  full  security,  without  sentinels,  without  trepi-
dation, as  men  lawfully  employed  in  full  day.'2

In  the  afternoon  the  shops  were  shut.  '  No  Popery ! '
was  chalked  upon  the  shutters,  and  bits  of  blue  silk
were  hung  out  from  almost  every  house.  Rumours  of
the  most  terrible  kind  were  circulated  through  the  town.
It  was  reported  that  the  mob  had  threatened  to  let
loose  the  lunatics  from  Bedlam  and  the  lions  from  the
Tower ;  that  the  French  had  organised  the  whole  move-
ment in  order  that  the  destruction  of  London,  and
especially  of  the  Bank,  might  produce  a  national  bank-
ruptcy ;  that  the  soldiers  had  been  tampered  with,  and
would  refuse  to  fire  on  the  people.  The  Duke  of  Grafton
gives  a  curious  illustration  of  the  universality  of  the
alarm,  in  the  fact  that  even  the  servants  of  the  Secre-
tary of  State  wore  blue  cockades  to  conciliate  the  mob.

In  the  evening,  scenes  more  terrible  than  any  that
had  yet  been  witnessed  took  place.  The  King's  Bench
Prison,  the  Fleet  Prison,  the  new  Bridewell,  the  watch-
houses  in  Kent  Street  near  St.  George's  Church,  the
toll-gates  on  Blackfriars  Bridge,  and  a  great  number  of

Burke's  Correspondence,  ii.  350,  351. -  Croker's  Boswell,  p.  f>48.

CH.  xii.  TEE GCRDOJN RIOTS.  819

piivate  houses,  were  simultaneously  in  flames.  From
a  single  point  thirty-six  distinct  conflagrations  were
counted.  The  tall  pinnacles  of  fire  rising  like  volcanoes
in  the  air,  the  shouts  of  the  populace,  the  blaze  reflected
in  the  waters  of  the  Thames,  the  shrieks  of  women,
mingling  with  the  crackling  of  the  flames,  with  the
crash  of  falling  buildings,  and,  from  time  to  time,  with
the  sound  of  musketry  as  the  troops  fired  in  platoons
into  the  crowd,  all  combined  to  form,  in  the  words  of
an  eye-witness,  a  perfect  '  picture  of  a  city  sacked  and
abandoned  to  a  ferocious  enemy.'  The  rioters  had
seized  large  supplies  of  arms  in  the  artillery  grounds,
and  the  great  number  of  felons  who  were  now  in  their
ranks  gave  an  additional  desperation  to  the  conflict.
It  was  noticed  that  a  brewer's  boy,  riding  on  a  horse
strangely  decorated  with  chains  from  Newgate,  led  the
most  daring  party.  Under  his  guidance  they  attempted
to  capture  and  burn  the  Bank  of  England ;  but  a  strong
body  of  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Hol-
royd,  repelled  them  with  the  loss  of  many  lives,  and
they  were  in  like  manner  defeated  in  an  attempt  upon
the  Pay  Office.

The  riots  were  fortunately  localised.  The  worst
conflagrations  were  in  Queen  Street,  Little  Russell
Street,  Bloomsbury,  and  Holborn.  Chains  drawn  across
the  Strand  and  Holborn,  and  protected  by  lines  of
soldiers,  prevented  the  mob  from  passing  westwards  ;
but  Charing  Cross,  the  Haymarket,  and  Piccadilly  were
illuminated  through  fear.  Strange  to  say,  in  the  un-
molested parts  of  the  town  the  ordinary  amusements
still  went  on,  and  Horace  Walpole  notices  that  on  this
dreadful  night  Lady  Ailesbury  was  at  the  play  in  the
Haymarket,  and  that  his  four  nieces  were  with  the
Duke  of  Gloucester  at  Ranelagh.1  The  night  was  for-

1  Letters  to  the  Countess  of  Ossory,  June  7,  1780.

320 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xir.

tunately  very  calm,  and  the  sky  was  clear,  and  glowing
with  the  reflected  flames,  save  where  dark  volumes  of
ascending  smoke  from  time  to  time  overspread  it.  The
streets  in  the  quarters  where  the  riot  was  at  its  height
were  thronged  with  idle  spectators — many  of  them
women  with  infants  in  their  arms — gazing  on  the  scene,
and  mixing  with  terror-stricken  fugitives  who  were
endeavouring  to  save  some  portion  of  their  property.
Spectators  were,  in  most  places,  in  little  danger ;  for
the  rioters  were  busily  engaged,  and  they  might  be  dis-
tinctly seen  by  the  glare  of  the  flames  pursuing  their
work  of  plunder  and  demolition,  for  the  most  part
entirely  undisturbed,  in  the  midst  of  the  burning  houses.
Wraxall  went  through  a  great  part  of  the  disturbed
district  on  foot,  without  the  smallest  hindrance,  and  he
noticed  that  as  he  stood  with  his  companions  by  the
wall  of  St.  Andrew's  churchyard,  near  the  spot  where
the  fiercest  conflagration  was  raging,  a  watchman  with
a  lantern  in  his  hand  passed  by,  calling  the  hour  as  in
a  time  of  profound  tranquillity.

The  resistance  was  confined  to  a  few  points.  Some
attempts  were  made  to  extinguish  the  flames,  but  they
were  baffled  by  the  mob.  A  large  engine  was  brought
to  play  upon  the  Fleet  Prison ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  pre-
sence of  soldiers,  the  rioters  cut  off  its  pipes  and  flung
it  into  the  flames.  At  Blackfriars  Bridge,  when  the
toll-gates  were  plundered,  the  soldiers  fired  with  con-
siderable effect.  Many  rioters  were  killed ;  one  man
was  noticed  to  run  thirty  or  forty  yards,  when  pierced
by  a  bullet,  before  he  dropped  dead ;  and  several,  when
dead  or  dying,  are  said  to  have  been  thrown  by  their
comrades  into  the  Thames.  Others  were  killed  in  the
attack  on  the  King's  Bench  Prison ;  but  the  greater
number  fell  in  the  unsuccessful  attacks  on  the  Bank
and  on  the  Pay  Office.  The  most  terrible  scene,  how-
ever, took  place  near  the  decline  of  Holborn  Hill,  in

en.  xii.  THE  GORDON  RIOTS.  321

front  of  St.  Andrew's  Church,  where  the  buildings  of  a
great  Catholic  distiller,  named  Langdale,  were  attacked
and  burnt.  Immense  casks  of  unrectified  spirits,  still
wholly  unfit  for  human  consumption,  were  staved  in,
and  the  spirits  flowed  in  great  streams  along  the  road,
while  men,  women,  and  children  gathered  it  up  in  pails
or  lapped  it  with  their  hands.  Such  a  scene  of  drunken
madness  had  perhaps  never  before  been  exhibited  in
England.  Numbers,  both  of  men  and  women,  killed
themselves  by  drinking  the  poisonous  draught.  Women
with  infants  in  their  arms  were  seen  lying  insensible
along  the  road.  Soon  the  fire  reached  the  spirits,  and
it  leapt  forth,  with  a  tenfold  fury,  in  the  midst  of  the
reeling  and  dizzy  crowd  who  were  plundering  the  house.
Numbers  fell  into  the  burning  ruins,  or  into  the  midst
of  the  liquid  fire.  Eight  or  nine  wretched  creatures
were  dragged  out  when  half-burnt,  but  most  of  those
who  fell  perished  by  one  of  the  most  horrible  of  deaths.
The  night  of  June  7  was  the  end  of  all  that  was
serious  in  the  Gordon  riots.  The  defeat  of  the  attacks
upon  the  Bank  and  the  Pay  Office,  and  the  terrible
scene  on  Holborn  Hill,  had  broken  the  spirits  and  power
of  the  rioters,  while  the  introduction  into  London  of
large  bodies  of  regular  troops  and  of  militia  had  made
further  resistance  impossible.  In  addition  to  the  per-
manent debility  and  indeed  impotence  of  the  London
police  force,  and  to  the  incompetence  of  the  Lord  Mayor
and  of  several  of  the  City  magistrates,  other  causes  com-
bined to  paralyse  the  civil  power.  The  military  forces
at  the  disposal  of  the  Crown  were  diminished  by  the
exigencies  of  the  great  war  which  was  raging  in  America.
The  ministry  of  Lord  North  was  already  tottering  to  its
fall,  and  its  weakness  enfeebled  every  branch  of  the
Executive,  while  the  recollection  of  the  furious  outbursts
of  popular  indignation  which  had  been  aroused  against
those  who  employed  soldiers  in  suppressing  the  Wilkea

VOL. IV.  Y

322 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  mi.

riots  in  1769  made  both  magistrates  and  ministers
extremely  timid.1  As  Lord  Mansfield  once  said  with
profound  truth,  '  It  is  the  highest  humanity  to  check
the  infancy  of  tumults/  and  a  well-directed  volley  on
the  first  day  of  the  riots,  though  it  would  have  exposed
the  Government  to  much  foolish  declamation,  would
probably  have  prevented  all  the  horrible  scenes  that
ensued.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  Wilkes,  who  had  been
the  instigator  or  the  pretext  of  the  last  great  riots  in
London,  took,  as  alderman,  a  distinguished  and  courage-
ous part  in  suppressing  the  Gordon  riots,  in  defending  the
Bank,  and  in  protecting  the  Catholics,  and  he  received
the  special  thanks  of  the  Privy  Council  for  his  services.
No  one,  however,  in  this  trying  period  appeared
in  a  more  honourable  light  than  the  King.  The  calm
courage  which  he  never  failed  to  show,  and  his  ex-
treme tenacity  of  purpose,  which  in  civil  affairs  often
proved  very  mischievous,  were  in  the  moments  of
crisis  peculiarly  valuable.  Many  lives  and  a  vast
amount  of  property  had  been  sacrificed  because  no
officer  dared  to  allow  his  soldiers  to  fire  except  by  the
direction  of  a  magistrate,  and  after  the  Riot  Act  had
been  read,  and  a  whole  hour  had  elapsed.  Such  an
interpretation  of  the  law  made  the  display  of  soldiers  in
the  midst  of  burning  houses  and  in  the  agonies  of  a
great  struggle  little  more  than  a  mockery,  and  the
King  strongly  contested  it.  On  the  7th  he  called  of
his  own  accord  a  meeting  of  the  Privy  Council,  and
obtained  from  Wedderburn,  the  Attorney-General,  an
opinion  that,  if  a  mob  were  committing  a  felony,  such

1  In  1776 — four  years  before  of  being  hanged.  The  Guards
the  Gordon  riots  — Dr.  Johnson  will  not  come  for  fear  of  being
had  said :  '  The  characteristic  of  given  up  to  the  blind  rage  of
our  own  Government  at  present  popular  juries.' — Croker's  Bos-
is  imbecility.  The  magistrates  well,  p.  509.
dare  not  call  the  Guards  for  fear

CH.  xii.  EFFECTS OF  THE RIOTS.  323

as  burning  down  a  house,  and  could  not  be  prevented
by  any  other  means,  the  military  might  and  ought  to
fire  on  them  at  once,  and  that  the  reading  of  the  Riot
Act  under  such  circumstances  was  wholly  unnecessary.
Much  hesitation  appears  to  have  been  shown  in  the
Council,  but  the  King,  declaring  that  at  least  one
magistrate  would  do  his  duty,  announced  his  intention
of  acting  on  his  own  responsibility,  on  the  opinion  of
Wedderburn,  and  his  readiness,  if  any  difficulty  were
shown,  to  lead  his  guards  in  person.  The  Council  at
length  agreed  with  the  opinion,  and  a  discretionary
power  was  given  to  the  soldiers,  which,  though  it  was
much  complained  of  by  some  constitutional  pedants,
was  manifestly  necessary,  and  was  the  chief  means  of
suppressing  the  riots.1

In  the  course  of  the  four  days  during  which  the  riots
were  at  their  height  no  less  than  seventy-two  private
houses  and  four  gaols  were  destroyed.2  Of  the  number
of  the  rioters  who  were  killed  it  is  impossible  to  speak
with  accuracy.  No  account  was  made  of  those  who
died  of  drink,  who  perished  in  the  ruins  or  in  the  burn-
ing spirits,  who  were  thrown  into  the  Thames,  or  who
were  carried  away  when  wounded  and  concealed  in  their
own  homes.  Excluding  these,  it  appears  from  a  report
issued  by  Amherst  shortly  after  the  suppression  of  the
riots,  that  285  had  been  killed  or  had  died  of  their
wounds,  and  that  173  wounded  prisoners  were  still  in
his  hands.  In  the  opinion  of  the  most  competent  judges
the  whole  city  had  been  in  imminent  danger  of  destruc-
tion, and  owed  its  escape  mainly  to  the  fact  that  the
mob  at  the  time  when  it  would  have  been  impossible  to
have  resisted  them,  wasted  their  strength  upon  chapels
and  private  buildings,  instead  of  at  once  attacking  the

1  See  Campbell's  Clumcellors,  *  See  Lord  Loughborough's
viii.  41-43.  Jesse's  Memoirs  of  Charge,  Ann.  Beg.  1780,  p.  281.
Qeo.  III.  ii.  276-279.

Y  2

324 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

Bank  and  the  public  offices,  and  also  to  the  happy
accident  that  on  the  night  of  the  7th  there  was  scarcely
a  breath  of  wind  to  spread  the  flames.  135  prisoners
were  soon  after  brought  to  trial,  and  59  were  capitally
convicted,  of  whom  21  were  executed.  Lord  George
Gordon  was  thrown  into  the  Tower,  and  was  tried
before  Lord  Mansfield  on  the  charge  of  high  treason  for
levying  war  upon  the  Crown.  The  charge  was  what  is
termed  by  lawyers  '  constructive  treason.'  It  rested
upon  the  assertion  that  the  agitation  which  he  had
created  and  led  was  the  originating  cause  of  the  out-
rages that  had  taken  place.  As  there  was  no  evidence
that  Lord  George  Gordon  had  anticipated  these  out-
rages, as  he  had  taken  no  part  in  them,  and  had  even
ottered  his  services  to  the  Government  to  assist  in  their
suppression,  the  accusation  was  one  which,  if  it  had
been  maintained,  would  have  had  consequences  very
dangerous  to  public  liberty.  After  one  of  the  greatest
speeches  of  Erskine,  Lord  George  Gordon  was  acquitted,
and  he  still  retained  such  a  hold  over  large  classes
that  thanksgivings  were  publicly  offered  up  in  several
churches  and  chapels.  He  was  many  years  after  thrown
into  prison  for  a  libel  upon  Marie  Antoinette,  and  he
died  in  Newgate  in  1793.  Before  the  close  of  his  life
he  startled  his  theological  admirers  by  his  conversion  to
Judaism.1

1  The  three  most  detailed  con-  tJie  Proceedings  of  Lord  George
temporary  accounts  of  these  riots  Gordon  and  the  Persons  assem-
ble :  the  Narrative  of  the  late  bled  under  the  Denomination  of
Disturbances  in  London  and  the  Protestant  Association  (Lon-
Westminster,  by  William  Vincent,  don,  1780).  The  poet  Crabbe
of  Gray's  Inn  (the  real  writer  of  witnessed  some  of  the  scenes,  and
this,  which  is  the  fullest  account  especially  the  capture  of  New-
of  the  riots,  was  Thomas  Hoi-  gate,  and  he  describes  them  in  a
croft) ;  the  Annual  Register  of  letter  in  his  biography,  which  ia
1780,  which  also  contains  reports  unfortunately  imperfect.  Horace
of  the  trials  of  the  chief  rioters ;  Walpole  and  Wraxall  were  both
and  an  anonymous  Narrative  of  witnesses  of  the  scenes  on  Black

en.  xii.  EFFECTS OF  THE  RIOTS.  325

In  the  House  of  Commons  a  series  of  resolutions
were  introduced  by  Burke  with  the  concurrence  of  the
Government,  vindicating  the  recent  Relief  Bill,  and
condemning  the  misrepresentations  which  had  led  to
the  tumults.  An  attempt  was  made  to  allay  the  fears
of  the  more  fanatical  Protestants  by  a  Bill  introduced
by  Sir  George  Savile  forbidding  Catholics  from  taking
any  part  in  the  education  of  Protestants ;  but  though
it  passed  the  Commons,  it  miscarried  in  the  Lords.

The  riots  of  1780  do  not  properly  belong  to  the
period  of  time  with  which  the  present  chapter  is  occu-
pied ;  but  it  is  the  plan  of  this  book  to  prefer  the  order
of  subjects  to  the  order  of  chronology,  and  these  dis-
turbances were  the  immediate  consequence  of  the  re-
ligious legislation  under  Lord  North.  Making  every
allowance  for  the  amount  of  ordinary  crime  which  en-
tered into  them,  and  considering  how  slight  was  the
provocation  that  produced  them,  they  display  a  depth
and  intensity  of  fanaticism  we  should  scarcely  have  ex-
pected in  the  eighteenth  century ;  and  similar  disturb-
ances, though  on  a  much  smaller  scale,  took  place  at
Hull,  Bristol,  and  Bath.  The  disgrace  was  keenly  felt
both  at  home  and  abroad.1  Secret  negotiations  for
peace,  were  at  this  time  going  on  with  Spain,  and  it
was  noticed  that  the  reports  of  the  riots  in  London
greatly  interfered  with  them,  for  the  no-Popery  fanati-
cism in  London  irritated  the  public  opinion  of  Spain,
while  the  success  of  the  rioters  was  thought  clearly  to

Wednesday. The  first  has  de-  ham's  Life  of  Hutton,  pp.  530-

scribed  them  very  fully  in  his  536. I  need  scarcely  refer  to  the

letters  to  Lord  Strafford  and  to  admirable  narrative  of  Dickens,

the  Countess  of  Ossory ;  and  the  in  Barnaby  Budge,  based  upon

second  in  his  Memoirs. See  also  Holcroft,  Walpole,  and  the  An-

&  letter  from  Dr.  Warner  in  Jesse's  nual  Register.
Life  of  Selwyn,  iv.  327-335,  and '  See  e.g.  the  two  well-known

the interesting journal  of the  poems  of  Cowper  on  the  burning

Moravian,  James  Hutton. — Ben-  of  Lord  Mansfield's  library.

326 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xil.

prove  the  weakness  of  the  Government.1  '  Our  danger,'
wrote  Gibbon  shortly  after  the  suppression,  '  is  at  an
end,  but  our  disgrace  will  be  lasting,  and  the  month  of
June  1780  will  ever  be  marked  by  a  dark  and  diabolical
fanaticism  which  I  had  supposed  to  be  extinct.' 2  To  a
writer  of  the  nineteenth  century,  however,  the  lesson
to  be  derived  from  the  narrative  is  not  altogether  a
gloomy  one.  Whatever  judgment  may  be  formed  in
other  respects  in  the  old  controversy  between  those  who
regard  the  history  of  modern  England  as  a  history  of
unqualified  progress,  and  those  who  regard  it  in  its
most  essential  features  as  a  history  of  decay,  there  is  at
least  one  fact  which  no  serious  student  of  the  eighteenth
century  will  dispute.  It  is,  that  the  immense  changes
which  have  taken  place  in  the  past  century  in  the  en-
largement of  personal  and  political  liberty,  and  in  the
mitigation  of  the  penal  code,  have  been  accompanied  by
an  at  least  equal  progress  in  the  maintenance  of  public
order  and  in  the  security  of  private  property  in  England.
The  Government  of  Lord  North  during  the  period
preceding  the  great  outbreak  of  the  American  war  waa
almost  wholly  occupied  with  domestic,  Indian,  and  colo-

1  Sec  Cumberland's  Memoirs,  lisees qui  vient  de se passer.
ii.  35, 36,  48.  Voila  cette  liberte  tant  pronee  —

2  Miscellaneous  Works,  ii.  241.  cette legislation unique. Sans
'  Rien,'  wrote  Madame  du  Del-  religion,  sans  moeurs,  rien  ne  se
f and,  '  n'est  plus  affreux  que  tout  soutient." — Arneth, Correspon~
ce  qui  arrive  chez  vous. Votre  dance  secrete  de  Marie-Therese
liberte  ne  me  seduit  point.  Cette  et Marie- Antoinette, iii. 444.
liberte  tant  vantee  me  parait  bien  Hillsborough,  in  a  private  letter
plus  onereuse  que notre escla-  to  Buckinghamshire,  the  Lord
vage.' — Walpole's  Letters,  vi.  88.  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  speaks  of
In  one  of  the  letters  of  Maria  '  the  dreadful  and  unaccountable
Theresa to Marie Antoinette  insurrection  which  for  four  days
(June  30,  1780)  she  speaks  with  together  has  made  such  derasta-
great  dislike  of  a  contemplated  tion  in  this  town,  and  threatened
visit  of  the  Emperor  to  England :  not  less  than  a  total  destruction
'  Surtoutapres  la  terrible  emeute,  of  it.1 — June 10, 1780. MSS.
inoui'e  entre  les  puissances  civi-  Record  Office.

or.  xii. FOREIGN  AFFAIRS — DISSOLUTION ,  1774.  327

nial  questions,  and  neither  exercised  nor  aspired  to
exercise  any  considerable  influence  on  the  affairs  of
other  nations.  The  Revolution,  which  in  1772  changed
the  Constitution  of  Sweden,  breaking  the  power  of  the
aristocracy  and  aggrandising  that  of  the  Crown,  was
effected,  in  a  great  measure,  under  French  instigation,
and  England  had  no  voice  in  the  infamous  treaty  which
in  the  same  year  sanctioned  the  first  partition  of  Poland,
or  in  the  treaty  of  Kainardji  in  1774,  by  which  Russia
made  the  Crimea  a  separate  khanate,  and  greatly  ex-
tended both  her  own  frontier  and  her  influence  in
Turkey.

In  1772  the  Government  had  to  contend  with
a  keen  commercial  crisis  and  a  period  of  acute  and
general  distress.  In  many  parts  of  England  there  were
desperate  food  riots.  Several  banks  broke,  and  a  wide-
spread panic  prevailed.1  But  in  Parliament  the  Go-
vernment continued  for  some  years  invincibly  strong,
and  its  Indian  policy  and  the  earlier  parts  of  its  Ame-
rican policy  appear  to  have  been  generally  regarded
either  with  approval  or  with  indifference.  In  1774
Parliament  was  dissolved  shortly  before  the  natural
period  of  its  existence  had  expired  ;  and  the  American
measures  of  the  Government,  if  they  had  been  seriously
unpopular  in  the  constituencies,  would  certainly  have
affected  the  elections.  The  election,  however,  fully
confirmed  the  ministerial  majority.2  In  the  first  im-

•  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  cans  would  take  steps  '  to  influ-
88,  122,  128. Ann.  Beg.  1772,  ence the general election by
90,  91,  109,  110.  creating jealousies, fears, and

*  Lord  Russell  thinks  that  'the  prejudices  among  the  mercantile
abrupt  dissolution  prevented  any  and  trading  part  of  the'  nation.'
influencebeingexercisedby  Ame-  — Russell's  Life  of  Fox,  i.  70,
rican  affairs  on  the  temper  of  the  71. According  to  Wai  pole,  one
elections,'  and  he  quotes  a  speech  reason  of  the  premature  disso-
of  Lord  Suffolk,  who  said  he  ad-  lution was,  that '  the advicea
vised  the  dissolution,  foreseeing  from  America,  though  industri-
tliat  if  it  were  delayed  the  Ameri-  ously  concealed, were so bad

828 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  KIT.

portant  party  division  on  an  American  question  that
followed  the  dissolution  the  ministers  counted  264  votes
to  73. 1  The  Reform  spirit  appeared  to  have  almost  died
away.  Grenville's  Act  for  the  trial  of  disputed  elec-
tions was,  it  is  true,  renewed  and  made  perpetual  in
1774,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  Lord  North;  but
different  motions  for  shortening  the  duration  of  Parlia-
ment, and  for  making  its  constitution  more  popular,
were  rejected  without  difficulty,  and  appear  to  have
excited  no  interest.  The  city  of  Westminster  sup-
ported the  ministers,  and  the  democratic  fervour  of  the
City  of  London  had  greatly  subsided.  Wilkes  found
rivals  and  bitter  enemies  in  Home  and  Townshend ;
but  at  last,  after  two  disappointments,  he  became  Lord
Mayor  of  London  in  1774,  and  in  the  election  of  the
same  year  he  without  opposition  regained  his  seat  as
member  for  Middlesex.  He  made  some  good  speeches
against  the  policy  of  the  Government  in  America,  but
his  position  in  Parliament  was  never  a  distinguished
one,  and  he  soon  abandoned  the  character  and  the  prac-
tices of  an  agitator.

All  the  measures  of  American  coercion  that  pre-
ceded the  Declaration  of  Independence  were  carried
by  enormous  majorities  in  Parliament.  The  Act  for
closing  Boston  harbour  passed  its  chief  stages  with-
out even  a  division.  The  Act  for  subverting  the
charter  of  Massachusetts  was  finally  carried  in  the
House  of  Commons  by  239  to  64,  in  the  House  of
Lords  by  92  to  20.  The  Act  for  enabling  the  Governor
of  Massachusetts  to  send  colonists  accused  on  capital

that  great  clamour  was  feared  the  late  Parliament, and  they

from  the American merchants  must necessarily have had  a

and  trading  towns.' — Last  Jour-  considerable  part  in  determining

nals,  i.  391). At  the  same  time  the  votes  of  the  electors.

the  American  Coercion  Acts  were  '  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.

among the most conspicuous  436.

measures  of  the  Government  in

en.  xw.  GOVERNMENT MAJORITIES, 1774-1775.  329

charges  to  be  tried  in  England,  was  ultimately  carried
in  the  Commons  by  127  to  24,  in  the  Lords  by  43  to
12.  The  motion  for  repealing  the  tea  duty,  which  was
supported  by  one  of  the  greatest  speeches  of  Burke,
was  rejected  by  182  to  49.  In  February  1775  the  ad-
dress moved  by  Lord  North,  pledging  Parliament  to
support  the  Government  in  crushing  the  resistance  in
America,  was  carried  by  296  to  106,  and  an  amend-
ment of  Fox,  censuring  the  American  policy  of  the
ministers,  was  rejected  by  304  to  105.  In  March  the
conciliatory  propositions  of  Burke  were  defeated  by  the
previous  question,  which  was  carried  by  270  to  78.  In
May  the  very  respectful  remonstrance  of  the  General
Assembly  of  New  York,  which  was  one  of  the  last
efforts  of  conciliation  by  the  moderate  party  in  Ame-
rica, was  censured  by  the  House  of  Commons  as  '  incon-
sistent with  the  legislative  authority  of  Parliament,'  by
186  to  67.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  had  urged  in  the
Cabinet  the  repeal  of  the  tea  duty,  but  had  been  out-
voted. He  still  remained  for  some  time  in  the  minis-
try, trying  in  vain  to  modify  its  policy  in  the  direction
of  conciliation.  In  August  1775  he  wrote  a  strong
remonstrance  to  Lord  North  on  the  subject.  Seven
weeks  later  he  resigned  the  Privy  Seal  and  went  into
opposition,  declaring  in  Parliament  that  he  had  hitherto
'  concurred  when  he  could  not  approve,  from  a  hope
that  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  Government
would  be  the  probability  of  amicable  adjustment,'  and
recommending  the  repeal  of  all  Acts  relating  to  Ame-
rica which  had  been  carried  since  1763.  But  although
Grafton  had  very  lately  been  Prime  Minister  of  Eng-
land, he  did  not,  according  to  Walpole,  carry  six  votes
with  him  in  his  secession.1  The  resignation  of  Con  way,

1  Walpole's  Last  Journals,ui. George  III.  i.  281,  282.  Thacke-
B. Donne's Correspondence  of ray's  Chatham,  ii.  307,  308.

330 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xii.

which  immediately  followed,  proved  even  less  important.
Dartmouth,  who  had  hitherto  directed  American  affairs,
obtained  the  Privy  Seal,  and  he  was  replaced  by  Lord
George  Germaine,  better  known  under  the  name  of
Lord  George  Sackville,  who  had  never  overcome  the
stigma  which  his  conduct  at  Minden  had  left  upon  his
reputation,  but  who  was  an  able  administrator,  and  a
still  more  able  debater.  He  speedily  infused  a  new
energy  into  the  direction  of  American  affairs,  and  the
enlistment  of  the  German  troops  appears  to  have  been
principally  due  to  him.  The  Opposition  in  the  begin-
ning of  1776  was  almost  contemptible  in  numbers,  and
at  the  same  time  divided  and  discredited.  The  Duke
of  Richmond  in  one  House,  and  Burke  in  the  other,
were  the  steadiest  and  most  powerful  opponents  of  the
American  policy  of  the  Government,  and  they  had  been
recently  joined  by  Charles  Fox,  who  had  been  dis-
missed from  the  ministry  in  February  1774,  and  had
at  once  thrown  himself  with  a  passionate  vehemence
into  opposition.

His  secession,  like  most  acts  of  his  early  life,  was
very  discreditable  in  its  circumstances.  A  libel  on  the
Speaker,  written  by  Home,  had  been  brought  under
the  notice  of  the  House  of  Commons.  Lord  North,  with
his  usual  moderation,  would  gladly  have  suffered  the
matter  to  drop ;  but  one  of  the  members  insisted  on
Woodfall,  the  printer,  appearing  before  the  House,  and
it  was  moved,  upon  his  apology,  that  he  should  be  com-
mitted to  the  Sergeant-at-Arms.  North,  after  some
hesitation,  agreed  to  this  course  ;  but  Charles  Fox,  who
was  at  this  time  a  Commissioner  of  the  Treasury,  in
opposition  to  the  known  wishes  of  his  chief  moved  that
Woodfall  should  be  committed  to  Newgate,  declared
that  he  selected  this  gaol  in  defiance  of  the  City  and
Sheriffs,  in  whose  jurisdiction  it  lay,  and  insisted  on
carrying  his  motion  to  a  division.  Lord  North,  per-

CH.  xii.  FOX SECEDES  FROM THE TORIES.  331

plexed,  irresolute,  and  embarrassed  by  a  previous  speech
in  which  he  had  leaned  towards  severity,  voted  with
his  turbulent  subordinate ;  but  most  of  the  ministerial
party  were  on  the  other  side,  and  the  motion  of  Fox  was
rejected  by  152  to  68.  Such  an  act  of  glaring  insub-
ordination could  not  be  passed  over.  The  King  wrote
next  day,  with  much  indignation,  '  I  am  greatly  in-
censed at  the  presumption  of  Charles  Fox  in  obliging
you  to  vote  with  him  last  night,  but  approve  much  of
your  making  your  friends  vote  in  the  majority  ;  indeed,
that  young  man  has  so  thoroughly  cast  off  every  prin-
ciple of  common  honour  and  honesty  that  he  must
become  as  contemptible  as  he  is  odious,  and  I  hope  you
will  let  him  know  that  you  are  not  insensible  of  his
conduct  towards  you.' l  About  ten  days  later  Lord
North  curtly  dismissed  Fox,  who  thus,  at  the  age  of
twenty-five,  was  finally  severed  from  the  Tories.

He  did  not  for  some  years  formally  attach  himself
to  any  section  of  the  Whigs ; 2  but  he  passed  at  once
from  an  extreme  Tory  into  virulent  and  unqualified
opposition  to  his  former  chief,  and  he  was  conspicuous
beyond  all  other  speakers  for  his  attacks  upon  the
American  policy  of  the  Government.  It  must  be  ac-
knowledged, however,  that  he  never  appears  when  in
office  to  have  taken  any  active  part  in  defending  the
American  policy  of  the  Government,  that  this  policy
only  attained  its  full  distinctness  and  prominence  after
his  dismissal,  and  that  his  father  had  from  the  first
disapproved  of  the  taxation  of  America.3  From  an
early  period  of  his  life,  Fox  seems  to  have  had  some
intimacy  with  Burke,4  and  the  conversation  of  that  ex-
traordinary man  profoundly  influenced  his  opinions.
The  sincerity  of  his  opposition  to  the  American  war

1  Correspondence  of  George  III.  and  Lord  North,  i.  170.

*  See  Correspondence  of  Fox,  i.  223.

1  Ibid.  i.  122,  123.  «  Ibid.  p.  26.

832 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xil.

never  appears  to  have  been  seriously  questioned,  and  it
is  confirmed  by  the  great  sacrifices  of  popularity  he
made  in  the  cause,  and  by  the  strong  internal  evidence
of  his  speeches  and  letters.  The  circumstances  of  his
secession,  his  extreme  youth,  and  the  extravagant  dis-
sipation in  which  he  at  this  time  indulged,1  deprived
him  of  all  the  weight  that  attaches  to  character ;  but
his  extraordinary  debating  skill  developed  rapidly  in
opposition,  and  Grattan,  who  had  heard  him  speak  in
many  periods  of  his  career,  considered  his  speeches
during  the  American  war  the  most  brilliant  he  ever
delivered.8

The  division  of  opinion  in  the  country  upon  the
American  question  was  probably  much  more  equal  than
in  Parliament,  and  it  is  also  much  more  difficult  to  esti-
mate with  accuracy ;  but  it  appears  to  me  evident  that
in  1775  and  in  1776  the  preponderating  opinion,  or  at
least  the  opinion  of  the  most  powerful  and  most  intelli-
gent classes  in  the  community,  on  American  questions
was  with  the  King  and  with  his  ministers.  In  February
1775,  Lord  Camden  wrote,  'I  am  grieved  to  observe
that  the  landed  interest  is  almost  altogether  anti-
American,  though  the  common  people  hold  the  war  in
abhorrence,  and  the  merchants  and  tradesmen,  for  ob-
vious reasons,  are  likewise  against  it.' 3  The  Established
Church  was  strenuously  anti- American,  and  the  Bishops
voted  steadily  for  the  measures  of  coercion.4  The  two
Universities  presented  addresses  on  the  same  side,  and
the  addresses  from  the  great  towns  in  favour  of  the

1  Walpole's Last Journals, possession or expectation of
ii.  4.  places,  when  they  vote  together

2  Correspondence  of  Fox,  i.  298. unanimously,  as  they  generally
1  Chatham's Correspondence, do  for  ministerial  measures,  make

iv.  401.  a  dead  majority  that  renders  all

*  As  Franklin  wrote  :  '  Sixteen  debating  ridiculous.' — Franklin's

Scotch peers and twenty-four  Works,  v.  46.
bishops,  with all  the  Lords  in

CH.  xiz. ENGLISH OPINION ON THE AMERICAN WAR.

Government  were  both  more  numerous  and  more  largely
signed  than  those  which  opposed  it.  Manchester,  which
was  still,  as  in  1745,  a  great  centre  of  English  Toryism,
led  the  way ; l  while  on  the  other  hand,  '  the  majority
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  great  trading  cities  of  London
and  Bristol  still  wished  and  struggled  to  have  matters
restored  to  their  ancient  state.' 2  It  was  said,  however,
with  some  truth,  that  the  opposition  of  the  merchants
was  mainly  an  opposition  of  interest,  and  the  opposition
of  the  City  an  opposition  of  faction,  and  it  was  acknow-
ledged by  the  warmest  advocates  of  the  Americans  that
the  trading  classes  on  this  question  were  greatly  divided,
and  the  bulk  of  them  exceedingly  languid  in  their  oppo-
sition. The  cessation  of  the  Turkish  war  and  of  the
troubles  in  Poland  had  revived  trade,  and  the  loss  of
American  commerce  was  not  yet  sensibly  felt,  while  the
supply  of  the  army  in  America  and  the  equipment  of
new  ships  of  war  had  given  a  sudden  stimulus  to  the
transport  trade  and  to  many  branches  of  English  in-
dustry.3 The  stress  of  legal  opinion  in  every  stage  of
the  controversy  appears  to  have  been  hostile  to  the
Americans,  and,  in  1776,  Horace  Walpole  emphatically
declared  that  '  the  Court  have  now  at  their  devotion  the
three  great  bodies  of  the  clergy,  army,  and  law.' 4  The
general  English  opinion,  which  at  the  time  of  the  repeal
of  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  very  favourable  to  the  colo-
nists, appears  to  have  turned.  There  was  a  strong
feeling  of  indignation  at  the  recent  proceedings  in

1  See  a  valuable  note  by  Mr.  *  Ibid.  p.  38. See,  too,  on  the
Donne  in  the  Correspondence  of  apathy  of  the  trading  classes  at
George  III.  and  Lord  North,  i.  this  time,  Walpole's  Last  Jour-
267-271.  nals,  ii.  6; Burke's  Correspon-

2  See  the  very  remarkable  and  dence,  ii.  50 ;  Correspondence  of
impartial analysis of English  George  III.  and  Lord  North,  L
opinion  (very  probably  written  by  235,  236,  272,  273.

Burke)  in  the  Anmtal  Register,  *  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  ii.

1776,  pp.  38,  39.  90,  91.

334 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xii.

America;  a  general  belief  that,  as  a  matter  of  patriotism,
Government  ought  now  to  be  supported,  even  though
some  of  its  past  acts  had  been  culpable  ;  a  widespread
anticipation  that  by  a  little  decision  all  resistance  might
be  overcome,  that  the  civil  war  might  still  be  averted,
or  that  at  least  it  might  be  terminated  in  a  single  cam-
paign.

The  great  strength  of  the  Opposition  lay  in  the
Nonconformist  bodies,  who  were  in  general  earnestly
and  steadily  in  favour  of  the  Americans.  The  '  Essay
on  Liberty,'  by  Dr.  Price,  which  was  published  in  1775,
was  a  powerful  defence  of  their  cause,  and  it  identified
it  very  skilfully  with  the  cause  of  constitutional  liberty
and  of  parliamentary  reform  at  home.  In  two  years  it
passed  through  eight  editions,  and  in  the  judgment  of
Walpole  it  was  '  the  first  publication  on  that  side  that
made  any  impression.' l  But  though  the  majority  of  the
old  Dissenters  were  staunch  supporters  of  the  Ameri-
cans, even  in  their  ranks  there  was  some  languor  and
division,2  while  a  large  section  of  the  Methodists,  as  we
have  already  seen,  took  the  other  side.  The  tract  of
John  Wesley  against  the  American  pretensions  had  an
enormous  circulation.  Lord  Dartmouth  was  one  of  the
most  conspicuous  laymen  in  the  Evangelical  religious
world ;  and  Cowper,  the  great  poet  of  the  movement,
believed  that  the  King  would  be  committing  a  sin  if  he
acknowledged  the  independence  of  America.  Literary
opinion  was,  on  the  whole,  anti-American.  The  views
of  Junius,  of  Adam  Smith,  and  of  Dean  Tucker  have
been  already  given.  Dr.  Johnson  was  a  leading  pamph-

1  Last  Journals,  ii.  22,  23.  active  on the  American side  '

*  Walpole in  one  place  even  (ibid.  84, 85) ; and  in another

asserts that the Presbyterians  place  he says, the Dissenters,

and  other  Dissenters  in  England  though  on  the  whole  American,

1  were entirely passive," being  '  were  yet  kept  quiet  by  pensions

bribed  or  sold  by  their  leaders,  to  their  chiefs.'— Ibid.  pp.  323,

though  those  in Ireland  were  324.

en.  XH.  BURKE ON ENGLISH OPINION.  385

leteer  in  support  of  the  Government.  Gibbon  in  Par-
liament steadily  supported  Lord  North,  and  Robertson,
though  somewhat  timidly,  leaned  to  the  same  side.
Hume,  however,  though  in  most  of  his  sympathies  a
decided  Tory,  was  one  of  the  very  few  men  who  as  early
as  1775  agreed  cordially  with  Burke  that  the  attempt
to  coerce  America  could  lead  to  nothing  but  disaster
and  ruin.1

The  confidential  letters  of  Burke  throw  much  valu-
able light  on  the  condition  of  English  opinion  on  the
American  question,  and  they  are  full  of  bitter  complaints
of  the  languor  or  alienation  even  of  the  natural  sup-
porters of  the  Whig  party.  In  January  1775,  describ-
ing the  failure  of  his  friends  to  arrest  the  American
measures  of  the  ministry,  he  says :  '  The  mercantile
interest,  which  ought  to  have  supported  with  efficacy
and  power  the  opposition  to  the  fatal  cause  of  all  this
mischief,  was  pleaded  against  us,  and  we  were  obliged
to  stoop  under  the  accumulated  weight  of  all  the
interests  in  this  kingdom.  I  never  remember  the  oppo-
sition so  totally  abandoned  as  on  that  occasion.' 2  In
the  August  of  the  same  year,  he  writes  with  great
bitterness  to  Buckingham  :  '  As  to  the  good  people  of
England,  they  seem  to  partake  every  day  more  and
more  of  the  character  of  that  Administration  which  they
have  been  induced  to  tolerate.  I  am  satisfied  that
within  a  few  years  there  has  been  a  great  change  in  the
national  character.  We  seem  no  longer  that  eager,
inquisitive,  jealous,  fiery  people  which  we  have  been
formerly.  .  .  .  No  man  commends  the  measures  which
have  been  pursued,  or  expects  any  good  from  those
which  are  in  preparation,  but  it  is  a  cold,  languid

1  Seo  Donne's  notes  to  the  Correspondence  of  George  III.  and
Lord  North,  i.  279,  280,  ii.  401.
*  Burke's  Correspondence,  ii.  2.

336 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, cn.  xn.

opinion,  like  what  men  discover  in  affairs  that  do  not
concern  them.  .  .  .  The  merchants  are  gone  from  us
and  from  themselves.  .  .  .  The  leading  men  among
them  are  kept  full  fed  with  contracts  and  remittances
and  jobs  of  all  descriptions,  and  are  indefatigable  in
their  endeavours  to  keep  the  others  quiet.  .  .  .  They
all,  or  the  greatest  number  of  them,  begin  to  snuff  the
cadaverous  haul  gout  of  lucrative  war.  War  is  indeed
become  a  sort  of  substitute  for  commerce.  The  freight-
ing business  never  was  so  lively,  on  account  of  the  pro-
digious taking  up  for  transport  service.  Great  orders
for  provisions  and  stores  of  all  kinds  .  .  .  keep  up  the
spirits  of  the  mercantile  world,  and  induce  them  to  con-
sider the  American  war  not  so  much  their  calamity  as
their  resource  in  an  inevitable  distress.'  *  '  The  real
fact,'  he  wrote  a  month  later,  '  is  that  the  generality  of
the  people  of  England  are  now  led  away  by  the  misre-
presentations and  arts  of  the  Ministry,  the  Court  and
their  abettors,  so  that  the  violent  measures  towards
America  are  fairly  adopted  and  countenanced  by  a
majority  of  individuals  of  all  ranks,  professions,  or  occu-
pations in  this  country,'  and  he  complains  that  the
Opposition  were  compelled  '  to  face  a  torrent  not  merely
of  ministerial  and  Court  power,  but  also  of  almost
general  opinion.' 2

The  party  in  England,  however,  that  favoured  the
Americans,  though  it  could  not  shatter  the  Government,
was  quite  sufficiently  strong  to  encourage  the  colonists,
and  many  of  its  members  threw  themselves  into  their
cause  with  the  most  passionate  ardour.  It  is  easy  to
imagine  the  effect  that  must  have  been  produced  on  the
excited  minds  beyond  the  Atlantic  by  the  language  of
Chatham  in  his  great  speech  in  January  1775.  'The
spirit  which  resists  your  taxation  in  America,'  he  said,

1  Burke's  Correspondence,  ii.  48-50 .  *  Ibid.  pp.  68, 69.

CH.  in.  ENGLISH  ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  THE  AMERICANS. 337

'  is  the  same  that  formerly  opposed  loans,  benevolences,
and  ship-money  in  England.  .  .  .  This  glorious  spirit
of  Whiggism  animates  three  millions  in  America  who
prefer  poverty  with  liberty  to  gilded  chains  and  sordid
affluence,  and  who  will  die  in  defence  of  their  rights  as
freemen.  .  .  .  For  myself,  I  must  declare  that  in  all
my  reading  and  observation — and  history  has  been  my
favourite  study  :  I  have  read  Thucydides,  and  have
studied  and  admired  the  master  states  of  the  world —
that  for  solidity  of  reasoning,  force  of  sagacity,  and
wisdom  of  conclusion  under  such  a  complication  of
difficult  circumstances,  no  nation  or  body  of  men  can
stand  in  preference  to  the  General  Congress  at  Phil-
adelphia. .  .  .  All  attempts  to  impose  servitude  upon
such  men,  to  establish  despotism  over  such  a  mighty
continental  nation,  must  be  vain,  must  be  fatal.  We
shall  be  forced  ultimately  to  retract.  Let  us  retract
while  we  can,  not  when  we  must.'

In  accordance  with  these  sentiments  Chatham  with-
drew his  eldest  son  from  the  army  rather  than  suffer
him  to  be  engaged  in  the  war.1  Lord  Effingham  for
the  same  reason  threw  up  his  commission,  and  Am-
herst  is  said  to  have  refused  the  command  against
the  Americans.2  In  1776  the  question  was  openly
debated  in  Parliament  whether  British  officers  ought
to  serve  their  sovereign  against  the  Americans,  and
no  less  a  person  than  General  Conway  leaned  de-
cidedly to  the  negative,  and  compared  the  case  to  that
of  French  officers  who  were  employed  in  the  Massacre
of  St.  Bartholomew.3  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  after

1  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv.  parliamentary  reformer,  refused
420.  a  naval  appointment  at  this  time

2  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i.  because  it  would  imply  service
459.  against  the  Americans.  Life  and

3  Parl.Hist.  xviii.  998. Cart-  Correspondence  of  Major Cart-
wright,  who  in  the  next  genera-  wriglit,  i.  75,  81.

tion  became  so  prominent  as  a

VOL. IV.  Z

838 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

the  battle  of  Bunker's  Hill,  declared  in  Parliament  that
*  he  did  not  think  that  the  Americans  were  in  rebellion,
but  that  they  were  resisting  acts  of  the  most  unexampled
cruelty  and  oppression.' '  The  Corporation  of  London
in  1775  drew  up  an  address  strongly  approving  of  their
resistance,2  and  the  addresses  of  several  other  towns
expressed  similar  views.  A  great  meeting  in  London,
and  also  the  guild  of  merchants  in  Dublin,  returned
thanks  to  Lord  EfRngham  for  his  recent  conduct,  and  in
1776  the  freedom  of  the  City  was  conferred  on  Dr.
Price,  on  account  of  his  defence  of  the  Americans.3
An  English  subscription — though  a  very  small  one —
was  raised  for  the  relief  of  the  Americans  who  were
wounded  at  Lexington,  and  for  the  relatives  of  those
who  had  been  killed,4  and  in  1777  Home  was  sentenced
to  a  year's  imprisonment  and  to  a  fine  of  200Z.  for  pub-
lishing an  advertisement  of  the  Constitutional  Society,
accusing  the  English  troops  in  that  battle  of  murder.8
When  Montgomery  fell  at  the  head  of  the  American
troops  in  the  invasion  of  Canada,  he  was  eulogised  in
the  British  Parliament  as  if  he  had  been  the  most  de-
voted servant  of  the  Crown.6

With  scarcely  an  exception  the  whole  political  repre-
sentation of  Scotland  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament
supported  Lord  North,  and  was  bitterly  hostile  to  the
Americans.  Scotland,  however,  is  one  of  the  very  few
instances  in  history,  of  a  nation  whose  political  repre-
sentation was  so  grossly  defective  as  not  merely  to  dis-
tort but  absolutely  to  conceal  its  opinions.  It  was
habitually  looked  upon  as  the  most  servile  and  corrupt
portion  of  the  British  Empire ;  and  the  eminent  libe-

1  Parl.  Hist,  xviii.  1076.  4  Franklin's  Life,  p.  401.

2  Adolphus,  ii.  253. Annual  s  Annual Register, 1777,  p.
Reg.  177G,  p.  41.  211.

3  Annual  Register,  1776,  pp.  •  Ibid. 1776, p. 15. Fox's
41-43, 126. Walpole's Last  Correspondence,  i.  142.  Adolphus,
Journals,  i.  502,  503,  ii.  23.  ii.  241.

CH.  xii.  SCOTCH AND IRISH OPINION.  339

ralisin  and  the  very  superior  political  qualities  of  its
people  seem  to  have  been  scarcely  suspected  to  the  very
eve  of  the  Reform  Bill  of  1 832.  That  something  of  that
liberalism  existed  at  the  outbreak  of  the  American  war,
may,  I  think,  be  inferred  from  the  very  significant  fact
that  the  Government  were  unable  to  obtain  addresses  in
their  favour  either  from  Edinburgh  or  Glasgow.1  The
country,  however,  was  judged  mainly  by  its  representa-
tives, and  it  was  regarded  as  far  more  hostile  to  the
American  cause  than  either  England  or  Ireland.  A
very  able  observer,  when  complaining  of  the  apathy  and
lassitude  with  which  the  American  policy  of  the  Govern-
ment was  generally  regarded,  adds,  '  We  must  except
from  all  these  observations  the  people  of  North  Britain,
who  almost  to  a  man,  so  far  as  they  could  be  described
or  distinguished  under  any  particular  denomination,  not
only  applauded,  but  proffered  life  and  fortune  in  support
of  the  present  measures.' 2

'  In  Ireland,'  says  the  same  writer,  '  though  those  in
office  and  the  principal  nobility  and  gentry  declared
against  America,  by  far  the  majority  of  the  Protestant
inhabitants  there,  who  are  strenuous  and  declared
Whigs,  strongly  leaned  to  the  cause  of  the  colonies.' 3
'  There  are  three  million  Whigs  in  America,'  said  Chat-

1  Correspondence  of  Geo.  III.  Ramsay's  History  of  the  Ameri-
i.  269.  can  Revolution,  ii.  311.  llamsay

2  Annual Register, 1776, p.  adds,  however,  that  the '  army
39. The  same  character  seems  and  the  Congress  ranked  among
to  have  extended  to  the  Scotch  their  best  officers  and  most  valu-
in America. '  The Irish in  able  members  some  individuals
America,'  it  was said,  « with  a  of  that  nation.' — Ibid. Adams
few  exceptions  were  attached  to  notices  the  strong  opposition  of
independence.  .  .  .  The  Scotch,  the  Scotch,  who  were  settled  in
on  the  other  hand,  though  they  Virginia,  to  the  measures  taken
had  formerly  sacrificed  much  to  by  the  Congress  in  1775. — Adams'
liberty  in  their  own  country,  were  Diary,  Works,  ii.  431.
generally disposed to support  3  Annual Register, 1776,  p.
the  claims  of  Great  Britain.' —  39.

•./  9

L  &

310 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, ca.  xit

ham,  in  1775,  'and  all  Ireland  is  Whig,  and  many  in
England.' l  Protestant  Ireland  was  indeed  far  more
earnestly  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Americans  than  any
other  portion  of  the  Empire.  Emigrants  from  Ulster
formed  a  great  part  of  the  American  army,  and  the
constitutional  question  of  the  independence  of  the  Irish
Parliament  was  closely  connected  with  the  American
question.  The  movement  of  opinion,  however,  was  con-
fined to  the  Protestants.  The  Catholic  gentry,  on  this
as  on  all  other  occasions  of  national  danger,  presented
addresses  to  the  King  attesting  in  strong  terms  their
loyalty,  but  the  mass  of  the  Catholic  population  were
politically  dead,  and  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  con-
tributed anything  to  the  public  opinion  of  the  country.
One  remarkable  fact,  however,  was  noticed  both  in
England  and  Ireland.  There  was  a  complete  absence
of  alacrity  and  enthusiasm  in  enlisting  for  the  army
and  navy.2  This  was  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why
Germans  were  so  largely  enlisted,  and  it  is  the  more
remarkable  because  Irish  Catholics  were  now  freely
admitted  into  the  service.  For  a  long  time  the  system
of  enrolling  soldiers,  and  still  more  the  system  of  en-
rolling sailors,  had  excited  much  discontent,  and  the
legality  of  press-gangs  had  very  lately  been  brought
into  question.  The  impressing  for  the  navy  rested
rather  on  immemorial  custom  than  on  positive  law,  and
it  was  pronounced  by  lawyers  to  be  a  part  of  the  com-
mon law.3  The  impressing  for  the  army  was  more
rarely  resorted  to,  but  a  statute  of  Anne  authorised
magistrates  within  their  specified  limits  to  impress  for
the  army  such  able-bodied  men  as  did  not  follow  any
lawful  calling  and  had  not  some  other  support,  and
several  subsequent  Acts  continued  the  system  for  limited

1  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  i. *  See  Annual  Register,  1776,
416. Thackeray's  CliatlMm,  ii. p.  39.
236.  *  Blackstone,  book  i.  c.  xiiL

CH.  xil.  IMPRESSMENT.  541

periods.  A  special  clause  exempted  such  as  had  votes
for  members  of  Parliament  from  liability  to  impress-
ment.1 In  1757,  a  gentleman  of  property  having  been
pressed  and  confined  in  the  Savoy,  his  friends  applied
for  an  immediate  writ  of  Habeas  Corpus,  under  the
well-known  Act  of  Charles  II.  The  question  was  not
determined,  as  the  gentleman  was  released  by  order  of
the  Secretary  of  War ;  but  the  judges  who  were  con-
sulted all  pronounced  that  this  Act  only  applied  to
those  who  had  committed  or  were  accused  of  commit-
ting a  criminal  offence,  and  that  a  man  accused  of  no
crime  could  not  claim  its  protection.  A  Bill  was  in-
troduced in  the  beginning  of  1758  to  remedy  this
strange  anomaly,  but  it  was  thrown  out  by  the  instru-
mentality of  Lord  Hardwicke,2  and  this  extension  of
the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  was  only  granted  in  1816.3

The  enormous  cruelty  and  injustice  of  the  impress-
ment for  the  navy,  as  it  was  actually  carried  on,  can
hardly  be  exaggerated,  and  it  seemed  doubly  extra-
ordinary in  a  country  which  was  so  proud  of  its  freedom.
'  Impressment,'  as  has  been  truly  said,  '  is  the  arbitrary
and  capricious  seizure  of  individuals  from  the  general
body  of  citizens.  It  differs  from  conscription  as  a  par-
ticular confiscation  differs  from  a  general  tax.'  4  Vol-
taire was  much  struck  with  this  feature  of  English  life,
and  he  drew  a  vivid  picture  of  a  boatman  on  the  Thames
boasting  to  him  one  day  of  the  glories  of  English  free-
dom and  declaring  that  he  would  sooner  be  a  sailor  in
England  than  an  archbishop  in  France,  the  next  day
with  irons  on  his  feet,  begging  money  through  the

1  2  &  3  Anne,  c.  19. Parl. *  56  Geo.  III.  c.  100.

Hist.  xv.  875 ;  Clode's  Military 4  May's Const. History of

Forces  of  tlie  Crown,  ii.  15-19.  Englatid. Hume,  in  his  Essay

The  last  Act  for  impressment  '  On  some  remarkable  Customs,'

for  the  army  appears to  have  called  attention  to  the  great  ano-

expired  in  1780.  nialy  of  impressment  in  a  free

z  Parl.  Hist.  xv.  875-923.  country.

342 ENGLAND IN T1IE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xn.

gratings  of  the  prison  into  which  he  had  been  thrown
without  the  imputation  of  any  crime,  and  where  he
must  remain  till  the  ship  was  ready  which  was  to
carry  him  to  the  Baltic.  In  a  system  so  violent  and  so
arbitrary,  all  kinds  of  abuses  were  practised.  As  we
have  already  seen,  the  press-gang  was  often  employed
to  drag  Methodist  preachers  from  a  work  which  the
magistrates  disliked.  It  was  sometimes  employed  to
avenge  private  grudges.  It  was  thus  that  Fielding
represents  Lord  Fellamar  endeavouring  to  get  rid  of
his  rival  by  employing  a  lieutenant  to  press  him.  On
one  occasion  in  1770  a  marriage  ceremony  in  St.
Olave's,  Southwark,  was  interrupted  by  a  press-gang,
who  burst  into  the  church,  struck  the  clergyman,  and
tried  to  carry  away  the  bridegroom.1  As  merchant
ships  came  in  from  America,  and  the  sailors  looked  for-
ward, after  their  long  voyage,  to  see  once  more  their
wives  and  children,  a  danger  more  terrible  than  that
of  the  sea  awaited  them,  for  it  was  a  common  thing  for
ships  of  war  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  returning  vessels,  in
order  to  board  them  and  to  press  their  sailors  before
they  landed.2  Often  the  press-gang  went  down  to  some
great  sea-port  and  boarded  all  the  merchant  ships  lying
at  anchor,  in  order  to  collect  sailors  for  the  royal  navy.3
They  were  sometimes  fiercely  resisted.  On  one
occasion  in  1770,  110  impressed  seamen  who  were
being  carried  down  the  Thames  in  a  tender,  broke  open
the  hatches,  overpowered  the  officers  and  crew,  ran  the
tender  aground  on  the  coast  of  Essex,  and  thus  suc-
ceeded in  escaping.4  On  another,  when  the  sailors  of
a  merchant  vessel,  which  was  lying  off  Gravesend,  saw
the  boat  of  a  ship-of-war  approaching,  they  seized  all

1  Annual Register,  1770,  p.  *  Annual Register, 1770,  p.

161.  147.

-  See  the  Life  of  Bampfylde  *  Ibid.
Moore  Carew  (1749),  pp.  128-130.

CH.  xtt.  IMPRESSMENT.  343

the  arms  on  board  and  drove  off  their  assailants  with
a  loss  of  one  man  killed  and  of  several  dangerously
wounded.1  In  1779  a  man  was  hanged  at  Stafford  for
killing  one  of  those  who  were  endeavouring  to  press
him,  and  a  party  of  sailors  were  tried  at  Ipswich  for
the  murder  of  a  publican  in  whose  house  they  were
impressing  sailors,  but  were  acquitted  on  account  of
the  impossibility  of  ascertaining  who  struck  the  blow.2

Of  the  vast  sum  of  private  misery  produced  by  the
system  it  is  difficult  to  form  an  adequate  estimate.  One
case — which  was  probably  but  one  of  many — happened
to  attract  considerable  attention  on  account  of  its  being
mentioned  in  Parliament  by  Sir  William  Meredith,  in
1777.  A  sailor  had  been  taken  in  the  press  that  fol-
lowed the  alarm  about  the  Falkland  Islands,  and  carried
away,  leaving  a  wife  who  was  then  not  nineteen,  with
two  infant  children.  The  breadwinner  being  gone,  his
goods  were  seized  for  an  old  debt,  and  his  wife  was
driven  into  the  streets  to  beg.  At  last,  in  despair  she
stole  a  piece  of  coarse  linen  from  a  linendraper's  shop.
Her  defence,  which  was  fully  corroborated,  was  that
'  she  had  lived  in  credit  and  wanted  for  nothing  till  a
press-gang  came  and  stole  her  husband  from  her,  but
since  then  she  had  no  bed  to  lie  on,  nothing  to  give  her
children  to  eat,  and  they  were  almost  naked.  She
might  have  done  something  wrong,  for  she  hardly  knew
what  she  did.'  The  lawyers  declared  that  shop-lifting
being  a  common  offence,  she  must  be  executed,  and  she
was  driven  to  Tyburn  with  a  child  still  suckling  at  her
breast.3

Even  worse  than  the  authorised  system  was  the
illicit  pressing  for  the  East  India  Company.  Great
numbers  of  young  men  were  inveigled  or  kidnapped  by

1  Annual  Register,  1770,  p.  149. -  Ibid.  1779,  pp.  204, 215,  216.
8  Parl.  Hist.  xix.  238.

344 ENGLAND  IN  f  HE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xn.

crimps  in  its  service,  confined  often  for  long  periods,
and  with  circumstances  of  the  most  aggravated  cruelty,
in  secret  depots  which  existed  in  the  heart  of  London,
and  at  last,  in  the  dead  of  night,  shipped  for  Hindostan.
Several  cases  of  this  kind  were  detected  in  the  latter
part  of  the  eighteenth  century  by  the  escape  of  prisoners,
and  it  was  evident  that  the  system  was  practised  on  a
large  scale.1

The  regular  press-gang  was  not  confined  to  Eng-
land, and  it  formed  one  of  the  gravest  and  most  justifi-
able grievances  of  the  American  colonists.  As  early  as
1747,  one  of  the  most  terrible  riots  ever  known  in  New
England  was  produced  by  the  seizure  of  some  Boston
sailors  by  the  press-gang  of  Admiral  Knowles.  An  Eng-
lish vessel  was  burnt.  English  officers  were  seized  and
imprisoned  by  the  crowd.  The  Governor  was  obliged
to  take  refuge  in  the  Castle.  The  sub-sheriff  was  im-
pounded in  the  stocks,  the  militia  refused  to  act  against
the  people,  and  the  Admiral  was  ultimately  obliged  to
release  his  captives.2  A  similar  resistance  was  shown
to  many  subsequent  attempts  to  impress  in  New  Eng-
land,3 and  one  of  the  first  and  ablest  writers  against
the  system  was  Benjamin  Franklin.  In  England  a
great  opposition  was  raised  in  the  City  of  London  in
1770  and  1771,  at  the  time  of  the  great  press  for  sea-
men which  was  made  when  a  war  with  Spain  about
the  Falkland  Islands  appeared  imminent.  Press
warrants  in  the  City  were  only  legal  when  backed  by
an  alderman,  and  Crosby  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  most  of

1  See  several  instances  of  the  land,  ii.  255,  256.  See,  too,  on

kind  in  Andrews'  XVIII.  Cent.  the  pressing  in  New  England,

p.  209-212.  Phillimore's  Hist.  the  very  curious  Journal  of

of  Geo.  III.  pp.  GO,  61.  Annual  Thomas  Chalkley  from  1697  to

Register,  1767,  p.  82.  1741  (ed.  1850),  pp.  313,  314,  and

•  Grahame's  History  of  the  Hutchinson's  Hist,  of  Massachu-

United  States,  iii.  295-300.  setts  Bay,  p.  231.

1  Arnold's  Hist,  of  New  Eng-

CH.  wi.  IMPRESSMENT.  345

the  aldermen  refused  to  back  them.  Wilkes  and  Saw-
bridge,  in  their  capacity  of  aldermen,  dismissed  some
men  who  had  been  pressed  in  the  City.  A  press-gang,
which  was  beating  a  drum  through  the  City,  was
brought  before  the  Lord  Mayor  and  reprimanded ;  and
at  a  great  meeting  in  Westminster  Hall,  at  which  both
Wilkes  and  Sawbridge  spoke,  impressment  was  de-
nounced as  a  violation  of  the  Constitution.1  The  agita-
tion, however,  did  not  spread.  The  attempts  which
had  been  made  more  than  once  since  the  Revolution  to
make  impressing  unnecessary,  by  a  system  of  additional
bounties  and  pensions,  and  by  the  formation  of  a  re-
serve,2 had  not  succeeded,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the
legality  and  absolute  necessity  of  impressment  were  at
this  time  strongly  asserted  by  three  such  different
authorities  as  Chatham,  Mansfield,  and  Junius.3

In  the  great  difficulty  of  obtaining  voluntary  recruits
for  the  American  war,  the  press  for  sailors  was  very
largely  resorted  to,  and  in  1776  it  was  especially  fierce.
In  less  than  a  month  800  men  were  seized  in  London
alone,  and  several  lives  were  lost  in  the  scuffles  that  took
place.4

While  these  means  were  employed  for  recruiting
the  navy,  others  of  an  equally  questionable  kind  were

1  Annual  Register,  1770,  pp.  Letters  (signature  Philo-Junius).

157,  161,  162,  1G9, 174;  1771,  Campbell's Chief Justices, ii.

pp.  16,  67,  68,  70.  419. Chatham  said  :  '  I  believe

*  See  vol.  ii.  p.  133.  In  1770,  every  man  who  knows  anything
in  order  to  escape  the  necessity  of  the  British  navy  will  acknow-
of  pressing,  several  of  the  chief  ledge  that,  without  impressing,
towns  subscribed  additional  it  is  impossible  to  equip  a  re-
bounties  for  sailors  who  enlisted  spectable  fleet  within  the  time
voluntarily.  Annual  Register,  in  which  such  armaments  are
1770,  pp.  150,  163.  usually  wanted.' —Thackeray's

8  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  Geo,  CJiatham,  ii.  217.

III.  iv. 181. Chatham  Corre-  *  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  ii.

spondence,  iii.  480,  481 ; iv.  22,  75,  77,  81.
43. Adolphus,  i. 459. Junius'

346 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xit.

found  necessary  for  filling  the  vacancies  in  the  army.  I
have  noticed  in  a  former  chapter  that  it  had  been  a
common  thing  for  press-gangs  for  the  navy  to  hang
about  the  prison-gates  and  seize  criminals  whose  sen-
tences had  just  expired,  and  this  was  not  the  only  way
in  which  the  gaols  were  made  to  furnish  their  contingent
for  the  defence  of  the  country.  Two  or  three  Acts  in
favour  of  insolvent  debtors  had  been  passed,  granting
them  their  liberty  on  condition  of  enlisting  in  the  army
or  navy,  and  in  1702  a  system  had  begun  which  con-
tinued up  to  the  time  of  the  Peninsular  war,  of  permit-
ting criminals,  who  were  undergoing  their  sentence,  to
pass  into  the  army.1  In  the  beginning  of  the  American
war,  this  system  appears  to  have  been  much  extended.
The  usual  manner  of  disposing  of  criminals  under  sen-
tence of  transportation  had  hitherto  been  to  send  them
to  America,  where  they  were  sold  as  slaves  to  the  plan-
ters ;  but  the  war  that  had  just  broken  out  rendered  this
course  impossible.  For  a  time  the  Government  was  in
great  perplexity.  The  gaols  were  crowded  with  prisoners
whose  sentence  it  was  impossible  to  execute.  The  go-
vernors of  the  African  colonies  protested  against  the
introduction  of  a  criminal  element  among  them.  An
Act  was,  it  is  true,  passed,  authorising  the  punishment
of  hard  labour  in  England  as  a  substitute  for  transpor-
tation to  '  any  of  his  Majesty's  colonies  and  plantations,'
and  galleys  were  set  up  in  the  Thames  where  criminals,
under  sentence  of  transportation,  were  employed  in  hard
labour.2  But  it  soon  occurred  to  the  Government  that
able-bodied  criminals  might  be  more  usefully  employed
in  the  coercion  of  the  revolted  colonists,3  and  there  is

1  Clode's  Military  Forces  of  is  derived  from  the '  Government
the  Crown,  ii.  12-15.  Correspondence ' in the Irish

2  16  Geo.  III.  c.  43. Walpole's  State  Paper  Office. On  March
Last  Journals,  ii.  38. Annual  30, 1770, Lord Harcourt, the
Register,  1776,  p.  163.  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  wrote

'  My  knowledge  of  this  subject to  the  Secretary  of  State,  Lord

CRIMINALS IN THE ARMY.

347

reason  to  believe  that  large  numbers  of  criminals,  of  all
but  the  worst  category,  passed  at  this  time  into  the
English  army  and  navy.  In  estimating  the  light  in
which  British  soldiers  were  regarded  in  America,  and
in  estimating  the  violence  and  misconduct  of  which
British  soldiers  were  sometimes  guilty,  this  fact  must
not  be  forgotten.  It  is  indeed  a  curious  thing  to  notice
how  large  a  part  of  the  reputation  of  England  in  the
world  rests  upon  the  achievements  of  a  force  which  was
formed  mainly  out  of  the  very  dregs  of  her  population,
and  to  some  considerable  extent  even  out  of  her  criminal
classes.1

The  difficulty  of  procuring  voluntary  recruits  for  the
army  and  navy  seems  to  show  that,  if  the  bulk  of  the
poorer  population  of  the  country  did  not  actively  sym-

Weymouth,  complaini  ng  that  the
gaols  in  Ireland  were  full  of  con-
victs under  sentence  of  transpor-
tation, '  as  no  merchant  will  con-
tract to  convoy  them  to  America
•whilst  the  present  rebellion  sub-
sists.' He  proposed,  therefore,
to  pardon  such  of  them  as  were
fit  and  serviceable  men,  '  on  con-
dition of  their  entering  into  his
Majesty's  land  and  sea  service,
as  I  shall  direct.'  Weymouth
answered  (April  23,  1776) :  '  The
measure  proposed  by  your  Excel-
lency for  granting  pardons  to
prisoners  who  may  be  found,  on
proper  examination,  to  be  fit  for
the  sea  or  the  land  service,  has
been  of  late  in  many  instances
pursued  here,  and  his  Majesty
approves  of  your  granting  par-
dons to  prisoners  in  the  several
gaols  of  Ireland  under  these  cir-
cumstances. But  it  will  occur  to
your  Excellency  how  necessary
it  is,  that  the  enlisting  officers

should,  in  the  strongest  manner,
be  enjoined  to  examine  and  re-
port, before  the  pardon  shall  be
granted,  whether  the  prisoners
are  really  fit  for  service,  as  a  dis-
charge cannot  so  properly  be
granted.  It  should  also  be  ob-
served that  when  they  are  en-
gaged, particular  care  should  be
taken  to  secure  this  kind  of  re-
cruits, and  that  they  be  con-
sidered rather  in  a  different  light
from  those  who  enter  volun-
tarily.'

1  It  does  not  appear  to  have
been  only  the  British  troops  who
were  recruited  from  the  prisons.
Speaking  of  the  Germans  in  the
British  service,  Goltz  wrote  to
Frederick  (March  13, 1777),  'Les
recrues  hessoises  sont  en  grande
partie  des  malfaiteurs  detaches
de  la  chaine.' — Circourt,  Action
Commune  de  la  France  et  de
V  Am^rigue,  iii.  81.

348 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xn.

pathise  with  the  Americans,  a  war  with  a  people  of  their
own  race  and  language  had  at  least  no  popularity  among
them.  In  concluding  this  review  of  the  condition  of
English  opinion  in  1776,  a  few  words  must  be  added
about  the  relations  of  the  American  contest  to  English
party  principles.  Chatham,  as  we  have  seen,  invariably
maintained  that  the  American  cause  was  essentially  the
cause  of  the  Whigs.  In  his  great  speech  in  the  begin-
ning of  1775  he  asserted  that  'the  great  fundamental
maxim  '  of  the  British  Constitution  is,  '  that  no  subject
of  England  shall  be  taxed  but  by  his  own  consent,'  and
that  '  to  maintain  this  principle  is  the  common  cause  of
the  Whigs  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  and  on  this.'
In  December  1777,  when  the  war  had  been  long  de-
clared, he  extolled  the  Americans  as  '  Whigs  in  principle
and  heroes  in  conduct,'  and  he  openly  expressed  his
wish  for  their  success.  Like  the  Whigs,  the  Americans
made  the  full  development  of  civil  liberty,  and  especially
the  defence  of  the  great  Whig  principle  that  taxation
and  representation  are  inseparably  connected,  the  main
object  of  their  policy,  and  the  highly  democratic  character
of  their  political  constitutions  lay  at  the  root  of  their
resistance.  Public  meetings,  instructions  to  members,
all  the  forms  of  political  agitation  that  had  of  late  years
grown  up  in  England,  were  employed  by  the  popular
party  in  America.  On  the  other  hand,  all  who  esteemed
licentiousness  rather  than  despotism  the  great  danger  of
England,  all  who  disliked  the  development  of  the  popular
element  in  the  Constitution,  all  whose  natural  leaning
was  towards  authority,  repression,  and  prerogative,  gra-
vitated to  the  anti-American  side.  In  America  the  sup-
porters of  the  English  Government  were  invariably  called
Tories.  In  England  the  King,  the  followers  of  Bute,
and  the  whole  body  of  Tories,  were  ultimately  enlisted
against  the  Americans,  while  the  support  of  their  cause
became  more  and  more  the  bond  of  union  between  the

CH.  xii. PARTY  ASPECTS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 349

Whigs  who  followed  Chatham  and  the  Whigs  who  fol-
lowed Rockingham.  By  a  true  political  instinct  the
clergy  of  the  Established  Church  and  the  country  gentry,
who  were  the  natural  supporters  of  Toryism,  were  gener-
ally ranged  on  one  side,  and  the  Dissenters  and  the
commercial  class  on  the  other.

So  far  the  party  lines  of  the  American  question  ap-
pear very  clear  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  Grenville,  who
began  the  policy  of  taxing  America,  always  called  him-
self a  Whig,  he  defended  his  measure  by  Whig  argu-
ments, and  he  strenuously  maintained  that  the  bulk  of
the  party,  in  supporting  the  Americans,  had  deserted
the  orthodox  traditions  of  their  policy.  The  Whigs  were
the  hereditary  champions  of  the  rights  of  Parliament,
and  it  was  the  power  of  Parliament  that  was  in  question.
The  Whigs  had  made  it  one  of  their  first  objects  to  make
the  Sovereign  dependent  on  Parliament  for  his  supplies,
and  they  were  therefore  bound  to  look  with  peculiar  jea-
lousy on  a  theory  according  to  which  supplies  might  be
raised  by  requisition  from  the  Crown,  and  for  other  than
local  purposes,  by  Assemblies  over  which  Parliament  had
no  control.  The  Whigs  were  the  natural  opponents  of
all  extensions  of  the  royal  prerogative,  and  they  could
not  with  any  consistency  admit  that  the  King  could
withdraw  by  charter  a  portion  of  his  dominions  from  the
full  authority  of  Parliament.

Much  of  the  language  and  some  of  the  arguments
of  the  Americans  were  undoubtedly  drawn  from  the
Tory  arsenal.  As  Lord  North  truly  said,  it  was  the
colonists  who  appealed  to  the  King's  prerogative.  It
was  the  ministers  who  upheld  the  authority  of  Par-
liament. The  Americans  delighted  in  contrasting  their
devotion  to  the  Sovereign  with  their  repudiation  of
parliamentary  control,  and  they  dilated,  in  language
which  seemed  an  echo  of  that  of  the  early  Tories,  upon
the  unconstitutional  enlargement  of  the  dominion  of

350 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  XIL

Parliament.  With  the  deep-seated  conservatism  of  the
English  character,  the  Whigs  had  always  pretended
that  the  Revolution  had  made  no  real  change  in  the
relative  position  of  the  great  powers  of  the  State  ;  that
it  had  only  arrested  encroachments  by  the  Sovereign,
and  defined,  asserted,  and  protected  the  ancient  liberties
of  the  people.  The  Americans,  on  the  other  hand,  main-
tained with  great  reason  that  Parliament,  since  the
Revolution,  or  at  least  since  the  Rebellion,  had  acquired
a  wholly  new  place  in  the  British  Empire,  and  that  the
arguments  of  English  lawyers  about  the  necessary  sub-
ordination of  all  parts  of  the  British  Empire  to  the
Supreme  Legislature,  and  about  the  impossibility  of  the
Sovereign  withdrawing  British  subjects  by  charter  from
parliamentary  control,  were  based  upon  a  state  of  things
which  at  the  time  when  the  colonies  were  founded  existed
neither  in  law  nor  in  fact.  'At  present,'  Franklin
wrote,  '  the  colonies  consent  and  submit  to  the  supre-
macy of  the  Legislature  for  the  regulations  of  general
commerce,  but  a  submission  to  Acts  of  Parliament  was
no  part  of  their  original  Constitution.  Our  former  kings
governed  their  colonies  as  they  had  governed  their  do-
minions in  France,  without  the  participation  of  British
Parliaments.  The  Parliament  of  England  never  pre-
sumed to  interfere  in  that  prerogative  till  the  time  of
the  great  Rebellion,  when  they  usurped  the  government
of  all  the  King's  other  dominions,  Ireland,  Scotland,  &c.' '
But  although  the  arguments  by  which  the  followers

1  Letter  of  B.  Franklin,  Nov.  while  the  aim  of  Toryism  was
29,  1769.  American  Remem-  to  increase  the  prerogative.  In
brancer,  1775,  p.  52.  In  a  speech  the  present  case,  Administration
in  1775  Lord  North  said  :  '  If  he  contended  for  the  right  of  Par-
understood  the  meaning  of  the  liament,  while  the  Americana
words  Whig  and  Tory,  he  con-  talked  of  their  belonging  to  the
ccived  that  it  was  the  charac-  Crown.  Their  language,  there-
teristic  of  Whiggism  to  gain  as  fore,  was  that  of  Toryism,'  —
much  for  the  people  as  possible,  Parl.  Hist.,  xviii.  771.

en.  XH. PARTY  ASPECTS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 351

of  Grenville  and  Bedford  maintained  that  their  policy
was  a  legitimate  outcome  of  the  principles  of  the  Whig
party  were  by  no  means  without  plausibility,  or  even
without  real  force,  the  main  current  of  Whig  sentiment
flowed  irresistibly  in  the  opposite  direction.  As  the
conflict  deepened,  the  line  of  division  corresponded
closely  with  the  division  of  parties.  The  whole  body  of
the  Tories,  headed  by  the  King,  steadily  supported  a
policy  of  coercion,  while  the  Whigs  made  the  cause  of
the  colonists  their  own,  though  they  defended  it,  as
we  have  seen,  by  different  arguments  and  in  different
degrees.  Chatham  could  never  tolerate  the  idea  of  an
independent  America,  though  he  foresaw  the  danger  at
a  very  early  stage  of  the  conflict.  He  treated  the  whole
question  as  one  of  the  right  of  every  free  people  to  be
taxed  only  by  their  own  representatives.  He  strongly
asserted  the  right  and  policy  of  the  parliamentary  re-
strictions of  American  commerce,  and  with  Shelburne
he  emphatically  protested  against  the  new  American
doctrine  that  the  Sovereign  could  not  place  his  troops
in  any  part  of  his  dominions  that  he  chose.1  The  Rock-
ingham  Whigs,  on  the  other  hand,  while  they  regarded
the  surrender  of  the  parliamentary  power  of  taxation  as
a  matter  not  of  right  but  of  policy,  were  prepared  to
make  wide  concessions  in  other  directions;  and  some
members  of  the  party,  almost  from  the  beginning  of  the
struggle,  were  willing  to  consent  to  a  final  surrender  of
English  dominion  over  the  colonies.  Of  this  section
the  Duke  of  Richmond  was  the  most  conspicuous.  As
early  as  1776  he  argued  that  America  never  could  be
subdued  except  at  a  ruinous  expense ;  that  by  continu-
ing the  war,  she  would  be  forced  into  alliance  with  our
natural  enemy  France ;  that  if  subdued,  she  would  take
the  first  opportunity  of  revolting,  and  that  this  oppor-

Adolphus.  ii.  309.

852

ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, oil.  xii.

tunity  would  probably  be  when  England  was  engaged
in  a  deadly  struggle,  and  when  an  American  revolt
might  prove  her  ruin.  If,  then,  he  contended,  America
can  no  longer  be  kept  amicably  dependent,  it  is  better
to  acknowledge  her  independence  at  once,  to  save  further
expenditure,  to  enter  while  it  is  still  possible  into  close
alliance  with  her,  and  thus  to  avert  the  great  danger  of
her  alliance  with  France.1

One  other  consideration  weighed  greatly  with  the
Whig  statesmen.  It  was  the  firm  conviction  of  many,
if  not  of  all  of  them,  that  the  triumph  of  the  English  in
America  would  give  such  an  ascendency  to  the  Tory
party  and  to  the  power  of  the  Crown,  that  it  would  be
fatal  to  English  liberty.  Such  an  opinion  was  more
than  once  implied  in  the  speeches  of  Chatham.  It  was
the  opinion  of  Fox  2  and  of  Horace  Walpole,3  and  many
years  after  the  struggle  had  terminated  it  was  deliber-
ately reaffirmed  by  Burke.4  We  have  a  curious  picture

1  These  views  were  privately
expressed  by  the  Duke  of  Eich-
mond  to  his  brother-in-law,  Mr.
Connolly,  in  a  remarkable  letter
dated  Nov.  1776,  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  late  Sir  Charles  Bun-
bury,  who  kindly  allowed  me  to
make  use  of  it.  In  Jan.  1778,
Richmond  declared  in  Parliament
his  readiness  to  acknowledge
American  independence.  (Wai-
pole's  Last  Journals,  ii.  182.)

*  Fox's  Correspondence,  i.  142-
147.

1  In  March  1778,  he  writes  : '  I
had  as  little  doubt  but  if  the
conquest  of  America  should  be
achieved,  the  moment  of  the
victorious  army's  return  would
be  that  of  the  destruction  of  our
liberty.' — Wai  pole's  Last  Jour-
nals, ii.  241.

4  In  defending  his  conduct  on
the  American  question,  he  says :
'  He  certainly  never  could,  and
never  did,  wish  the  colonists  to
be  subdued  by  arms.  He  was
fully  persuaded  that  if  such
should  be  the  event,  they  must
be  held  in  that  subdued  state  by
a  great  body  of  standing  forces,
and  perhaps  of  foreign  forces.
He  was  strongly  of  opinion  that
such  armies,  first  victorious  over
Englishmen,  in  a  conflict  for
English  constitutional  rights  and
privileges,  and  afterwards  habi-
tuated (though  in  America)  to
keep  an  English  people  in  a  state
of  abject  subjection,  would  prove
fatal  in  the  end  to  the  liberties
of  England  itself.' — 'Appeal  from
the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs,'
Burke' s  Works,  vi.  124.

CR,  xii.  DIVIDED STATE OF ENGLAND.  353

of  the  tone  of  thought  prevailing  among  some  of  the
Whig  leaders  in  the  beginning  of  the  American  contest,
in  a  letter  which  was  written  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond
to  Burke  from  Paris  in  the  August  of  1776.  Richmond
had  gone  to  France  to  prosecute  his  claim  to  an  old
French  peerage,  and  he  declares  that  the  political  con-
dition of  England  was  one  reason  why  he  was  anxious
to  obtain  it.  England,  he  believed,  was  on  the  verge
of  despotism,  and  it  would  be  a  despotism  more  oppres-
sive than  that  of  France,  for  it  would  be  less  tempered
by  habit  and  manners.  He  himself  was  likely  to  be
among  the  proscribed,  and  in  that  case,  '  if  America  be
not  open  to  receive  us,  France  is  some  retreat,  and  a
peerage  here  is  something.' l

Under  all  these  circumstances,  England  entered  into
the  ill-omened  conflict  in  which  she  was  engaged,  pro-
foundly divided.  A  party,  small  indeed  in  numbers,
but  powerful  from  its  traditions,  its  connections,  and  its
abilities,  had  identified  itself  completely  with  the  cause
of  the  insurgents,  opposed  and  embarrassed  the  Govern-
ment in  every  effort  to  augment  its  forces  and  to  sub-
sidise allies,  openly  rejoiced  in  the  victories  of  the
Americans,  and  exerted  all  its  eloquence  to  justify  and
to  encourage  them.  We  must  now  pass  to  the  other
side  of  the  Atlantic,  and  examine  the  movements  of
public  opinion  in  America  and  the  measures  of  the
American  Congress  to  organise  the  war.

1  Burke's  Correspondence,  ii.  112-120.

VOL. IV.  A  A

354 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

CHAPTER  XIH.

WHEN  General  Howe  sailed  from  Boston  for  Halifax  on
March  17,  1776,  he  was  accompanied  by  rather  more
than  7,000  soldiers,  besides  2,000  sailors  and  marines
and  about  1,500  loyalist  refugees,  while  the  army  of
Washington  amounted  to  21,800  men,  of  whom  2,700
were  sick.  The  evacuation,  though  immediately  due  to
the  capture  of  Dorchester  Heights,  was  not  altogether
involuntary,  for  the  English  ministers  had  some  time
before  authorised  and  counselled  him  to  leave  Boston
and  repair  to  a  Southern  port,  though  they  left  the
period  to  his  discretion.  In  April,  Washington  left
Boston,  and  on  the  13th  of  the  month  he  arrived  at
New  York,  which  now  became  the  great  centre  of  the
forces  of  the  Revolution.

Several  months  passed  with  but  little  stirring
action  on  either  side.  The  Americans  were  busily  em-
ployed in  calling  out  and  organising  their  forces,  in
arresting  and  imprisoning  the  loyalists,  who  were  very
numerous  about  New  York,  and  in  constructing  power-
ful lines  of  entrenchment  on  Long  Island  for  the  de-
fence of  the  city.  Recruits  came  in  slowly.  Desertions,
jealousies,  and  quarrels  continued  with  little  abate-
ment, and  the  disastrous  news  of  the  result  of  the
expedition  against  Canada  and  the  appearance  of
small-pox  among  the  troops  had  thrown  a  great  damp
upon  American  patriotism.1  In  the  beginning  of  July,
Colonel  Reed,  the  adjutant-general  of  the  forces,  wrote

1  Washington's  Works,  iii.  466

CH.  xrn.  HOWE MOVES TOWARDS NEW YORK.  355

to  a  member  of  Congress  that  the  American  army
was  now  less  than  8,000  men,  all  of  whom,  from  the
general  to  the  private,  were  exceedingly  discouraged.1
Soon,  however,  several  thousand  volunteers  or  militia-
men arrived  from  the  country  about  New  York,  from
Connecticut,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,  and  Maryland.
On  August  3,  Washington's  army  was  officially  reckoned
at  20,537  men,  of  whom,  however,  nearly  3,800  were
sick  or  on  furlough.  By  August  26  about  3,150  more
men  had  come  in.2  They  were,  however,  badly  clothed,
imperfectly  armed,  and  for  the  most  part  almost  with-
out discipline  or  military  experience.

General  Howe  in  the  meantime  was  drawing  nearer
to  New  York.  He  passed  from  Halifax  to  Sandy
Hook,  and  from  Sandy  Hook  to  Staten  Island,  where
he  was  joined  by  the  fleet  from  England  under  his
brother,  Lord  Howe.  Troops  withdrawn  from  Virginia
and  South  Carolina,  regiments  from  England  and  the
West  Indies,  and  a  large  body  of  newly  enrolled  Ger-
mans, soon  filled  his  attenuated  ranks,  and  he  found
himself  at  the  head  of  little  less  than  30,000  well-
appointed  soldiers.  On  August  22  and  23  between
15,000  and  16,000  men  were  landed  without  opposition
on  Long  Island,3  and  011  the  27th  they  totally  defeated
the  portion  of  the  American  army  which  was  defending
the  entrenchments.  If  Howe  had  known  how  to  im-
prove his  victory  the  whole  force,  consisting  probably
of  about  10,000  men,  must  have  been  at  his  mercy.
By  the  strange  negligence  of  the  English  commander,
by  the  great  skill  of  Washington,  and  by  the  assistance  of

1  Stedman's History of the  authorities  are hopelessly dis-
American  War,  i.  207.  agreed  about  the  exact  numbers

2  Washington's  Works,  i.  187  ;  engaged  in Long Island, and
iv.  66.  among  the  Americans  themselves

3  Howe's  Narrative,  p.  45. I  there  are  very  great  differences,
must,  however,  warn  the  reader  Compare  Bamsay,Bancroft,Sted-
that  the  English  and  American  man,  and  Stanhope.

A  A  2

356 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  XHI.

a  dense  fog,  the  Americans,  who  had  been  hemmed  in  on
a  corner  of  the  island  and  who  were  separated  from  the
mainland  by  an  arm  of  the  sea  a  mile  wide,  succeeded
in  effecting  their  retreat  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morn-
ing, unimpeded  and  unobserved.  They  escaped,  how-
ever, only  by  abandoning  the  lines  they  had  constructed
with  much  labour,  and  on  September  15  Howe  com-
pleted his  campaign  by  the  capture  of  New  York.

The  blow  was  a  very  formidable  one  to  the  American
cause,  and  it  had  for  some  time  been  foreseen.  On
September  2  Washington  wrote  from  New  York  a
letter  to  the  President  of  the  Congress,  in  which  he
suggested  no  less  a  measure  than  the  deliberate  de-
struction of  this  great  and  wealthy  commercial  town.
'  Till  of  late/  he  said,  '  I  had  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind
of  defending  this  place ;  nor  should  I  have  yet,  if  the
men  would  do  their  duty,  but  this  I  despair  of.  ...
If  we  should  be  obliged  to  abandon  the  town,  ought  it
to  stand  as  winter  quarters  for  the  enemy  ?  They
would  derive  great  conveniences  from  it  on  the  one
hand ;  and  much  property  would  be  destroyed  on  the
other.  ...  At  present  I  dare  say  the  enemy  mean  to
preserve  it  if  they  can.  If  Congress,  therefore,  should
resolve  upon  the  destruction  of  it,  the  resolution  should
be  a  profound  secret,  as  the  knowledge  of  it  will  make
a  capital  change  in  their  plans.'1

Such  a  suggestion,  emanating  from  such  a  man,
furnishes  a  remarkable  comment  upon  the  indignation
so  abundantly  expressed  by  the  revolutionary  party  at
the  burning  of  Falmouth  and  Norfolk  at  the  time  when
these  little  towns  were  actually  occupied  by  troops  who
were  firing  upon  the  English.  If  preparations  for  burn-
ing New  York  were  not,  as  has  been  alleged,  actually
made  before  the  Americans  evacuated  the  city,  it  is  at

1  Washington's  Works,  iv.  74.

CB.  xin. PROPOSED  BURNING  OP  NEW  YORK 357

least  certain  that  such  a  step  was  at  this  time  openly
and  frequently  discussed.1  Jay,  who  was  one  of  the
most  conspicuous  of  the  New  York  patriots,  was  of
opinion  that  not  only  the  city,  but  the  whole  surround-
ing country,  should  be  reduced  to  ruin,2  and  the  former
measure  was  strongly  advocated  by  Greene,  one  of  the
most  popular  of  the  American  generals.  'The  City
and  Island  of  New  York,'  he  wrote,  ten  days  before  the
surrender,  '  are  no  objects  to  us.  We  are  not  to  put
them  in  competition  with  the  general  interest  of  America.
Two-thirds  of  the  property  of  the  city  and  the  suburbs
belong  to  Tories.  ...  I  would  burn  the  city  and
suburbs,  and  that  for  the  following  reasons.'  He  then
proceeds  to  enumerate  the  military  advantages  that
would  ensue,  and  adds,  '  all  these  advantages  would  re-
sult from  the  destruction  of  the  city,  and  not  one  benefit
can  arise  to  us  from  its  preservation,  that  I  can  con-
ceive.'3 Joseph  Reed,  who  was  Adjutant-General  of
the  American  army,  was  also  strongly  in  favour  of
burning  New  York — '  a  city,'  he  said,  '  the  greater  part
of  whose  inhabitants  are  plotting  our  destruction.' 4

Happily  for  its  own  reputation,  happily  perhaps  for
its  influence  in  America,  Congress  rejected  the  counsel,

1  In  a  letter  dated  Aug.  17,  Washington  wrote  to  the  Con-
1776,  a  loyalist  who  had  escaped  vention  of  New  York  that  'a  re-
from  New  York  wrote  :  '  Every  port  now  circulating  that  if  the
means  of  defence  has  been  con-  American  army  should  be  obliged
certed  to secure  the city  and  to  retreat  from  this  city,  any  in-
whole  island  of  New  York  from  dividual  may  set  it  on  fire,'  was
an attack of the  royal army.  wholly  unauthorised  by  him. —
Should  General  Howe succeed  Washington's  Works,  iv.  58.
in  that  enterprise,  his  antagonist,  2  Life  and  Correspondence  oj
Mr.  Washington,  has  provided  a  Joseph  Reed,  i.  235.
magazine  of  pitch,  tar,  and  com-  '  Washington's  Works,  iv.  85,
bustibles,  to  burn  the  city  before  86. This  letter  was  written  on
he  shall  retreat  from  his  present  Sept.  5,  1776.
station.' — Moore's  Diary  of  the  *  Life  of  J.  Reed,  i.  213.
Revolution,  i.  288. On  Aug.  23,

868 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xtlt

and  New  York  fell  intact  into  the  hands  of  the  English.1
But  the  knowledge  of  the  design  had  spread  abroad,
and  there  were  men  who  were  quite  ready  to  carry  it
into  effect.  Shortly  after  midnight,  on  the  morning  of
September  21,  fires  burst  out  simultaneously  in  several
parts  of  New  York.  The  church  bells  had  all  been
carried  away  by  Washington  to  be  turned  into  cannon,
so  there  was  great  difficulty  in  spreading  the  alarm.
The  fire-engines  were  in  bad  repair,  and  before  the  fire
could  be  extinguished  about  a  fourth  part  of  the  town
was  reduced  to  ashes.  Several  women  and  children
perished  in  the  flames,  and  many  hundreds  of  families
were  reduced  in  an  hour  from  comfort  to  beggary.  But
for  the  admirable  efforts  of  English  soldiers  under
General  Robertson,  and  of  sailors  who  landed  from  the
fleet,  assisted  by  a  sudden  change  of  wind,  it  is  pro-
bable that  nothing  would  have  remained  of  the  future
capital  of  America.  Men  with  combustibles  in  their
hands  were  seized  and  killed  either  by  the  soldiers  or
the  populace.  Tryon,  the  English  Governor  of  New
York,  expressed  his  firm  belief  that  the  conflagration
had  been  deliberately  prepared  with  the  full  knowledge
of  Washington  before  the  Americans  had  left  the  town,
and  had  been  executed  by  officers  of  his  army,  some  of
whom  '  were  found  concealed  in  the  city.'  In  this  con-
jecture he  was  undoubtedly  mistaken.  The  letters  of
Washington  show  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the
conflagration,  but  few  impartial  judges  will  question
the  distinct  assertion  of  General  Howe  that  the  fire  was,
beyond  all  question,  an  incendiary  one,  and  it  is  almost
equally  certain  that  it  owed  its  origin  to  the  revolution-
ary party.2

1  '  The  Congress having  re-  *  See,  on  this  fire,  the  descrip-

solved  that  it  [New  York]  should  tion  sent  by  Governor  Tryon  to

not  be destroyed.' — Washing-  Lord  George  Germaine,  in  the

ton's  Works,  iv.  86.  Documents  relating  to  the  His-

ra.  xm.  THE  AMERICAN  ARMY.  359

The  superiority  of  the  English  over  the  Americans
at  Long  Island,  both  in  numbers,  in  arms,  and  in  mili-
tary experience,  was  so  great  that  the  defeat  reflected
no  shadow  of  discredit  upon,  the  beaten  army,  who
appear  to  have  fought  with  great  courage  and  resolu-
tion ;  but  the  extreme  anarchy  and  insubordination
that  still  reigned  within  the  ranks,  and  the  great  want
of  real  patriotism  and  self-sacrifice  that  was  displayed,
boded  ill  to  the  revolutionary  cause.  In  the  letter  to
which  I  have  already  referred,  written  by  Colonel  Reed
before  the  battle,  we  have  a  vivid  picture  of  the  condi-
tion of  the  American  army.  '  Almost  every  villainy
and  rascality,'  he  wrote,  '  is  daily  practised  with  im-
punity. Unless  some  speedy  and  effectual  means  of
reform  are  adopted  by  Congress  our  cause  will  be  losi.
As  the  war  must  be  carried  on  systematically,  you
must  establish  your  army  upon  a  permanent  footing,
and  give  your  officers  good  pay,  that  they  may  be,  and
support  the  character  of,  gentlemen,  and  not  be  driven
by  a  scanty  allowance  to  the  low  and  dirty  arts  which
many  of  them  practise  to  filch  the  public  of  more
money  than  all  the  amount  of  the  difference  of  pay.  It

tory  of  New  York,  viii.  686,  687,  interesting  book  the  History  of
and  some  interesting  contempo-  New  York  by  the  loyalist  Judge
rary  accounts  in  Moore's  Diary,  Jones,  who  was  present  when
i.  311-315.  See,  too,  Washing-  the  event  took  place,  there  is  an
ton's  Works,  iv.  100,  101.  Sted-  account  of  the  conflagration  in
man  speaks  of  the  conflagration  which  it  is  attributed  without
as  the  accomplishment  of  a  any  question  to  the  revolution-
settled  plan  of  the  Americans  ists  (Jones's  History  of  New
formed  before  the  evacuation,  York,  i.  120, 121) ;  and  the  editor
and  he  states  that  several  cart-  has  collected  a  great  number  of
loads  of  bundles  of  pine-sticks  contemporary  documents  sup-
dipped  in  brimstone  were  found  porting  the  same  conclusion  (pp.
next  day  in  cellars  to  which  the  611-619).  General  Greene  had
incendiaries  had  not  time  to  set  predicted  that,  if  Washington
fire.  He  adds  that  about  1,100  was  obliged  to  retire,  '  two  to
houses  were  burnt. —  Stedman's  one,  New  York  is  laid  in  ashes.'
Hist.  i.  208,  209.  In  that  very  —  Life  of  J.  Reed,  i.  213.

360 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

is  not  strange  that  there  should  be  a  number  of  bad
officers  in  the  continental  service  when  you  consider
that  many  of  them  were  chosen  by  their  own  men,  who
elected  them,  not  for  a  regard  to  merit,  but  from  the
knowledge  they  had  of  their  being  ready  to  associate
with  them  on  the  footing  of  equality.  It  was  some-
times the  case  that  when  a  company  was  forming,  the
men  would  choose  those  for  officers  who  consented  to
throw  their  pay  into  a  joint  stock  with  the  privates,
from  which  captains,  lieutenants,  ensigns,  sergeants,
corporals,  drummers,  and  privates  drew  equal  shares.
Can  it  be  wondered  at  that  a  captain  should  be  tried
and  broken  for  stealing  his  soldiers'  blankets  ?  or  that
another  officer  should  be  found  shaving  his  men  in  the
face  of  characters  of  distinction.  .  .  .  Had  I  known
the  true  posture  of  affairs,  no  consideration  would  have
tempted  me  to  have  taken  an  active  part  in  this  scene.
And  this  sentiment  is  universal.' !

The  letters  of  Washington  at  this  time  are  full  of  com-
plaints of  the  quarrels  between  the  soldiers  of  the  diffe-
rent provinces,  of  the  numerous  desertions  in  the  most
critical  periods  of  the  campaign,  of  the  constant  acts  of  in-
subordination, of  the  complete  inefficiency  of  the  militia.2
The  defeat  at  Long  Island  had  totally  demoralised  them.
'  The  militia,  instead  of  calling  forth  their  utmost  efforts
to  a  brave  and  manly  opposition  in  order  to  repair  our
losses,  are  dismayed,  intractable,  and  impatient  to  re-
turn. Great  numbers  of  them  have  gone  off,  in  some
instances  almost  by  whole  regiments,  by  half  ones,  and
by  companies  at  a  time.'  '  Their  want  of  discipline  and
refusal  of  almost  every  kind  of  restraint,'  '  their  humours
and  intolerable  caprice,'  their  '  entire  disregard  of  that
order  and  subordination  necessary  to  the  well-being  of
an  army,'  their  '  impatience  to  get  home,'  and  their

1  Stedman,  i.  206,  207. See, *  See  Washington's  WorJa,  iv.
too,  the  Life  of  Reed,  I.  243.  3,  7,  37,  89,  90,  105.

CH.  xin.  CONGRESS  AND THE STATES.  361

'  abominable  desertions '  were  rapidly  infecting  the
regular  continental  troops.1  On  one  occasion  a  body
of  New  York  militia  under  Colonel  Hay  simply  refused
to  obey  his  commands  or  to  do  duty,  saying  that
'  General  Howe  had  promised  them  peace,  liberty,  and
safety,  and  that  is  all  they  want.' 2  There  was  so  little
unity  of  action  between  the  Congress  and  the  local
legislatures  that,  while  the  former  offered  a  bounty  of
ten  dollars  to  those  who  would  enlist  for  a  year  in  the
continental  service,  the  particular  States  sometimes
offered  a  bounty  of  twenty  dollars  to  the  militia  who
were  called  out  for  a  few  months,  and  it  was  in  conse-
quence scarcely  possible  to  obtain  recruits  for  the  more
serious  military  service.3  This  competition,  indeed,  be-
tween the  Congress  and  the  separate  States  continued
during  a  great  part  of  the  war ;  and  as  late  as  1779,
when  Franklin  was  endeavouring  to  borrow  money  from
Holland,  he  complained  bitterly  of  the  difficulties  he  en-
countered through  the  rivalry  of  particular  States  which
were  applying  at  the  same  time  for  loans  for  their  own
purposes,  and  not  unfrequently  offering  higher  interest.4
To  all  these  difficulties  which  beset  the  path  of
Washington  must  be  added  the  widespread  disaffection
to  the  American  cause  which  was  manifest  in  the  State
of  New  York.  The  legal  legislature  of  the  province
had  indeed  been  superseded  in  1775  by  a  Provincial
Convention  elected  and  governed  by  the  revolutionists,
and  it  passed  a  resolution  that  all  persons  residing  in
the  State  of  New  York  who  adhered  to  the  King  and
Great  Britain  '  should  be  deemed  guilty  of  treason  and
should  suffer  death.' 6  '  A  fierce  mob  was  active  in

1  Washington's  Works,  iv.  72,  of  Foreign  Affairs,  May  26,  1779.
73,  89,  94,  95,  157.  — American  Diplomatic Carre-

2  Ibid.  p.  162.  spondencc,  Ui.  88-91.
1  Ibid.  i.  207  ;  iv.  73.  *  Ramsay,  i.  295.

4  Franklin  to  the.  Committee

362 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xin.

hunting  down  suspected  Tories,  and  they  had  intro-
duced the  brutal  New  England  punishment  of  carrying
their  victims  astride  upon  rails ;  l  but  the  bulk  of  the
property  of  New  York  belonged  to  loyalists,  and  they
were  very  numerous,  both  among  the  middle  classes  of
the  town  and  in  the  country  population.  Before  the
arrival  of  the  English,  New  York  gaol  was  crowded
with  suspected  loyalists,  and  among  them  were  many
of  the  first  characters  in  the  town.  English  recruiting
agents  penetrated  even  into  the  camp  of  Washington,
and  a  plot  was  discovered  for  seizing  his  person.2  When
Howe  landed  at  Staten  Island  he  was  warmly  welcomed
by  the  inhabitants,  who  at  once  furnished  him  with  all
that  he  required,  and  came  forward  in  numbers  to  take
the  oath  of  allegiance.3  When  Washington  was  driven
from  Long  Island,  almost  the  whole  population  came
forward  gladly  to  testify  their  loyalty  to  the  Crown,4
and  a  corps  of  several  hundred  loyalists  recruited  in
the  province  was  serving  in  the  English  army.5  The
Queen's  County,  which  comprehended  the  north  side  of
Long  Island,  was  especially  noted  for  its  loyalty.  It
refused  to  send  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  Congress
or  the  Provincial  Convention,  and  at  the  end  of  the  war
nearly  a  third  part  of  its  inhabitants  are  said  to  have
emigrated  to  Nova  Scotia.6

The  conduct of  the  American  troops,  who  were

1  Moore's  Diary,  i.  288.  cessions  as  have  been  required  ;

*  Washington's  Works,  i.  181.  some  through  compulsion,  I  sup-

1  Governor Tryon to Lord  pose, but more from inclina-

George  Germaine,  July  8,  1776.  tion.' — Washington  to  Trumbull,

— Documents  relating  to  the  His-  Washington's Works, iv. 88.

tory  of  New  York,  viii.  681.  Moore's  Journal,  i.  304.

4  '  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  from  *  Documents  relating  to the

the  best  information we have  Hist,  of  New York,  viii.  681,

been  able  to  obtain,  the  people  687.

of  Long  Island  have  since  our  s  Jones's  Hist,  of  New  York,

evacuation  gone  generally  over  i.  107, 108.
to  the  enemy  and  made  such  con-

cte.  xiii.  MISCONDUCT  OF  AMERICAN  TROOPS.  363

almost  wholly  unaccustomed  to  discipline,  was,  as
might  have  been  expected,  far  from  faultless.  '  The
abandoned  and  profligate  part  of  our  army,'  wrote
Washington,  '  lost  to  every  sense  of  honour  and  virtue,
as  well  as  their  country's  good,  are  by  rapine  and
plunder  spreading  ruin  and  terror  wherever  they  go,
thereby  making  themselves  infinitely  more  to  be  dreaded
than  the  common  enemy  they  are  come  to  oppose.'
In  a  confidential  letter  to  the  President  of  the  Con-
gress he  complained  that  except  for  one  or  two  of-
fences the  utmost  penalty  he  was  empowered  to  inflict
was  thirty-nine  lashes ;  that  these,  through  the  collusion
of  the  officers  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  them  applied,
were  sometimes  rather  '  a  matter  of  sport  than  punish-
ment,' and  that  in  consequence  of  the  inadequacy  of  the
penalty  '  a  practice  prevails  of  the  most  alarming  nature,
which  will,  if  it  cannot  be  checked,  prove  fatal  both  to
the  country  and  to  the  army.'  '  Under  the  idea  of  Tory
property,  or  property  that  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  the
enemy,  no  man  is  secure  in  his  effects  and  scarcely  in
his  person.' l  American  soldiers  were  constantly  driving
innocent  persons  out  of  their  homes  by  an  alarm  of  fire,
or  by  actually  setting  their  houses  on  fire,  in  order  more
easily  to  plunder  the  contents,  and  all  attempts  to  check
this  atrocious  practice  had  proved  abortive.  The  burn-
ing of  New  York  was  generally  attributed  to  New  Eng-
land incendiaries.  The  efforts  of  the  British  soldiers  to
save  the  city  were  remembered  with  gratitude,  and,
although  some  parts  of  the  province  of  New  York  still
obeyed  the  Provincial  Congress,  there  is  little  doubt
that  in  the  city  and  in  the  country  around  it  the  British
were  looked  upon  not  as  conquerors  but  as  deliverers.8

1  Washington's  Works,  iv.  118,  Gerrnaine  from  New  York :  'The

119.  success  that  accompanied  my

*  On  Feb.  11,  1777,  Governor  endeavour  to  unite  the  inhabit-

Tryon  wrote  to  Lord  George  ants  of  this  city  by  an  oath  of

864 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

eft.  xm.

Washington,  in  October  1776,  expressed  his  grave
fear  that  in  case  of  any  unfavourable  turn  in  American
affairs  the  enemy  might  recruit  soldiers  at  least  as  fast
as  the  revolutionists.1  It  was  one  of  the  great  miscal-
culations of  the  English  Government  that  they  enter-
tained a  similar  expectation,  and  hoped  to  suppress  the
rebellion  mainly  by  American  troops.  Attempts  were
made  to  produce  a  rising  among  the  Scotch  emigrants
in  Virginia.  Officers  were  authorised  to  raise  provincial
corps  for  the  service  of  the  King,  and  on  a  single
occasion  equipments  were  sent  out  from  England  for  no
less  than  8,000  provincial  troops.  In  the  course  of  the
struggle  it  is,  no  doubt,  true  that  many  thousands  took

allegiance  and  fidelity  to  his
Majesty  and  his  Government  has
met  my  warmest  wishes  ;  2,970
of  the  inhabitants  having  quali-
fied thereto  in  my  presence,  ....
I  have  the  satisfaction  to  assure
your  lordship,  as  the  invitation
to  the  people  to  give  this  volun-
tary testimony  of  their  loyalty
to  his  Majesty  and  his  Govern-
ment was  made  even  without  a
shadow  of  compulsion,  it  gave
me  peculiar  satisfaction  to  see
the  cheerfulness  with  which  they
attended  the  summons.  I  be-
lieve there  are  not  100  citizens
who  have  not  availed  themselves
of  the  opportunity  of  thus  testi-
fying their  attachment  to  Go-
vernment. The  mayor,  since  I
went  through  several  wards,  has
attested  fifty  more  men  (and  is
daily  adding  to  the  number),
which  makes  the  whole  sworn
in  the  city  3,020,  or  3,030,  which,
added  to  those  attested  on  Staten
Island,  in  the  three  counties  on
Long  Island,  and  in  Westchester
county  .  .  .  makes  the  whole
amount  to  5,600  men.  ...  I

have  assured  the  General  that
should  he  remove  all  his  troops
from  the  city,  there  would  not
be  the  least  risk  of  a  revolt  from
the  inhabitants,  but  on  the  con-
trary was  confident  large  num-
bers would  take  a  share  in  the
defence  of  the  town  against  the
rebels.' — Documents  relating  to
the  Colonial  History  of  New
York,  viii.  697.

1  Washington's  WorJcs,iv.  132.
'  One  unhappy  stroke  will  throw
a  powerful  weight  into  the  scale
against  us,  enabling  General
Howe  to  recruit  his  army  as  fast
as  we  shall  ours ;  numbers  being
so  disposed  and  many  actually
doing  so  already '  (p.  134).  In
another  letter  he  reports  that  he
has  learned  from  Long  Island
that '  the  enemy  are  recruiting  a
great  number  of  men  with  much
success,1  and  expresses  his  fear
that '  in  a  little  time  they  will
levy  no  inconsiderable  army  of
our  own  people  '  (p.  127).  See,
too,  on  the  American  loyalists,
pp.  519-523,  and  Galloway's
Examination.

CH.  xin.  PERSECUTION OF  LOYALISTS. .  865

arms  for  the  King  either  in  isolated  risings  or  in  the
regular  army,1  but  the  enlistments  were  much  fewer
than  was  expected,  and  the  hope  that  America  would
supply  the  main  materials  for  the  suppression  of  the  re-
volt proved  wholly  chimerical.  One  of  the  first  acts  of
the  Whig  party  in  every  colony  was  to  disarm  Tories,
and  the  promptitude  and  energy  with  which  this
measure  was  accomplished,  combined  with  the  un-
fortunate issue  of  several  small  risings  in  the  Southern
colonies,  paralysed  the  loyalists.

Nor  was  it  surprising  that  they  showed  great  re-
luctance and  hesitation.  That  strong  dislike  to  mili-
tary life  which  pervaded  the  colonial  population  was
nowhere  more  conspicuous  than  in  the  class  of  society
in  which  loyal  sentiments  chiefly  prevailed,  and  the
American  loyalists  risked  much  more  than  the  Ameri-
can insurgents.  In  addition  to  the  Acts  punishing
with  death,  banishment,  forfeiture  of  goods,  or  im-
prisonment, those  who  assisted  the  English,  every  State
passed  Acts  of  Attainder,  by  which  the  properties
of  long  lists  of  citizens  who  were  mentioned  by  name
were  confiscated.  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware,  following
the  example  of  the  Irish  Jacobite  Parliament  of  1689,
gave  the  attainted  person  the  option  of  appearing  to
take  his  trial  for  treason  by  a  specified  date,  but  usually
the  confiscations  were  absolute  and  unconditional.  In
Connecticut  the  simple  offence  of  seeking  royal  pro-
tection or  absenting  himself  from  his  home  and  country
made  the  loyalist  liable  to  the  confiscation  of  all  his
property.  In  New  York,  in  addition  to  an  Act  confis-
cating all  the  goods  of  fifty-nine  persons,  three  of  whom
were  women,  and  making  them  liable  to  the  penalty  of
death  if  they  were  found  in  the  State,  a  heavy  tax  was

1  Some  attempts  to  estimate in  Sabine'g  American  Loyalists,
the number of loyalists who 58-61.
actually  took  arms  will  b«  found

366 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

imposed  on  every  parent  who  had  a  loyalist  son.1  One
of  the  first  acts  of  the  revolutionary  party  when  they
occupied  Boston  was  to  confiscate  and  sell  all  property
belonging  to  loyalists,  and  in  a  country  of  farmers  and
yeomen  most  property  was  immovable.  The  loyalist
exposed  himself  to  the  undying  animosity  of  a  large
proportion  of  his  neighbours  ;  he  exposed  his  family  to
those  savage  mobs  who  by  plunder  and  torture  were
everywhere  supporting  the  Revolution,  and  he  was
certain  to  incur  absolute  ruin  not  only  in  case  of  the
defeat  of  the  English  cause,  but  even  in  case  of  the
temporary  evacuation  of  the  district  in  which  his  pro-
perty was  situated.  If  the  rebellion  collapsed,  it  would
probably  do  so  speedily  through  the  want  of  men  and
money  and  through  the  burden  of  the  sufferings  it  pro-
duced, and  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  intervene
and  to  excite  against  himself  the  hatred  of  those  who
would  continue  to  be  his  neighbours.  If  the  rebellion
was  prolonged,  an  American  resident  could  estimate
more  truly  than  Englishmen  how  difficult  it  was  to
subdue  an  enormous,  half-opened  country,  how  abso-
lutely impossible  it  was  that  the  English  power  could
be,  for  purposes  of  protection,  a  living  reality  over  more
than  a  very  small  section  of  it.  Nor  were  the  moral  in-
ducements to  enter  into  the  struggle  very  strong.  Thou-
sands who  detested  the  policy  of  the  New  Englanders,
and  who  longed  to  see  the  colonies  reconciled  to  England,
reprobated  the  Stamp  Act  and  many  other  parts  of  the
English  policy,  and  felt  in  no  way  bound  to  draw  the
sword  against  their  countrymen,  or  to  add  new  fuel  to  a
civil  war  which  they  had  done  their  utmost  to  avert.

The  remaining  military  operations  of  1776  may  be
told in  a  few  words. "Washington,  after  his defeat,

1  See  a  long  list  of  these  Acts Jones's  History  of  New  York,  ii.
of  Attainder  in  S&b'me'e  American 269,  270.
Loyalists,  pp.  78-81. See  too.

CH.  xin. NEW  JERSEY  AND  TICONDEROGA. 367

avoided  any  general  action,  though  several  slight  skir-
mishes took  place.  The  whole  of  New  York  Island
was  evacuated  with  the  exception  of  Fort  Washington,
which,  by  the  advice  of  General  Greene,  and  contrary
to  the  opinion  of  Washington,  it  was  determined  to  de-
fend. The  British,  however,  took  it  by  storm  in  a
single  day,  and  they  captured  in  it  2,700  American
soldiers  and  a  large  quantity  of  artillery  and  military
stores,  which  the  Americans  could  ill  spare.  Im-
mediately after  this  brilliant  success,  a  powerful  de-
tachment under  Lord  Cornwallis  crossed  the  Hudson,
entered  New  Jersey,  to  which  Washington  had  fled,  and
prepared  to  besiege  Fort  Lee  ;  but  the  garrison  hastily
evacuated  it,  leaving  their  artillery  and  stores  in  the
hands  of  the  British,  and  the  whole  province  open  to
invasion.  The  Provincial  Convention  still  held  its
meetings  in  distant  towns  of  the  Province  of  New  York,
and  a  few  American  soldiers  under  Lee  continued  in  the
province ;  but  the  main  operations  were  now  trans-
ferred to  the  Jerseys.

But  before  following  the  fortunes  of  the  war  in  that
province,  it  is  necessary  to  enumerate  the  chief  opera-
tions in  other  parts  of  the  colonies.  Schuyler,  who
commanded  the  Northern  army,  which  had  just  eva-
cuated Canada,  though  he  appears  to  have  been  a  cap-
able officer,  was  disliked  by  the  New  England  troops,
and  in  the  summer  of  1776  the  Congress,  without  as  yet
absolutely  superseding  him,  gave  a  joint  command  to
Gates,  who  was  more  popular  in  New  England.  The
defeated  army  had  fallen  back  on  the  strong  fort  of
Ticonderoga ;  but  the  Americans  also  held  the  fort  of
Crown  Point,  which  was  fifteen  miles  distant,  and  they
had  constructed  with  great  energy  a  small  fleet,  which
for  a  time  gave  them  the  command  of  Lake  Champlain.
Gates  appointed  Benedict  Arnold  to  command  it ;  and
this  general,  who  had  already  shown  himself  a  soldier  of

368 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

great  daring  and  capacity,  exhibited  the  same  qualities
in  the  novel  functions  of  naval  commander.  The  English
at  length  constructed  a  fleet  far  more  powerful  than
that  of  the  Americans,  and  in  October  they  compelled
the  Americans  to  evacuate  Crown  Point,  and  they
totally  defeated  the  American  fleet.  Only  one  or  two
vessels  were,  however,  captured,  for  Arnold  succeeded
in  running  the  others  on  shore,  in  burning  them  before
they  could  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  English,  and  in  con-
ducting the  soldiers  who  manned  them  safely  to  Ticon-
deroga.  The  winter  was  now  drawing  in,  and  General
Carleton,  who  commanded  the  English,  made  no  at-
tempt to  besiege  Ticonderoga,  but  fell  back  into  winter
quai*ters  on  the  Canadian  frontier.

In  June  1776  General  Clinton,  at  the  head  of  some
troops  which  had  lately  arrived  from  Ireland,  and  sup-
ported by  a  fleet  under  Sir  Peter  Parker,  attempted  to
capture  Charleston,  which  was  the  wealthiest  and  most
important  town  in  the  southern  colonies.  Had  he  suc-
ceeded, he  would  have  stopped  one  of  the  chief  sources
of  military  preparation  in  the  South,  and  would  have
probably  called  into  activity  the  strong  loyalist  party
which  had  already  shown  itself  in  South  Carolina.
Charleston  had,  however,  recently  been  protected  by  a
very  strong  fortification  on  Sullivan's  Island,  and  it  was
skilfully  defended  by  General  Lee,  the  most  experienced
of  all  the  soldiers  in  the  service  of  the  revolution.  In  at-
tacking the  fort,  three  frigates  ran  aground,  and  although
two  were  saved,  it  was  found  necessary  to  burn  the  third  ;
and  after  several  attempts  the  difficulties  of  the  enter-
prise were  found  to  be  so  great  that  it  was  abandoned.
In  July,  Parker  and  Clinton  sailed  for  New  York.

The  successful  defence  of  Charleston  was  a  great  en-
couragement to  the  revolution  in  the  Southern  colonies,
and  for  two  and  a  half  years  no  new  attempt  was  made
to  re-establish  in  those  quarters  the  dominion  of  England.

CH.  XHI.  RHODE  ISLAND — INDIAN  WAB.  369

In  December,  however,  the  same  commanders  who  had
made  the  abortive  attempt  upon  Charleston  descended
upon  Rhode  Island,  and  occupied  it  without  resistance.
One  of  the  provinces  most  hostile  to  British  rule
was  thus  effectually  curbed,  considerable  impediments
were  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  naval  preparations  of  the
enemy,  and  a  good  harbour  was  secured  for  the  British ;
but  military  critics  have  doubted,  or  more  than  doubted,
whether  these  advantages  justified  the  British  com-
mander in  detaining  at  least  6,000  soldiers  for  nearly
three  years  inactive  in  the  island.

The  employment  of  Indians  in  the  war  was  now
on  both  sides  undisguised.  I  have  related  in  a  former
chapter  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the  true  history  of  its
first  stages,  and  in  the  Canadian  campaign  the  Indians
gave  great  assistance  to  the  English.  Actuated,  accord-
ing to  the  English  view,  by  a  strong  personal  attach-
ment to  Sir  William  Johnson  and  Colonel  Guy  Johnson,
and  by  an  earnest  loyalty  to  the  Crown,  which  had  so
often  protected  them  against  the  encroachments  of  the
colonists — according  to  the  American  view  by  a  mere
selfish  desire  to  support  the  side  on  which  there  waa
most  to  gain  and  least  to  lose,1  the  Indians  along  the
Canadian  frontier  remained  steadily  loyal ;  and  it  is  but
justice  to  add  that  their  fidelity  was  never  more  con-

1  Compare  the  letters  of  Col.  which  put  it  out  of  the  power  of
Guy  Johnson  in  the  Documents  the  Americans  to  supply  the
relating  to  the  Colonial  History  Indians  with  the  articles  of  coni-
of  New  York,  vol.viii.  (especially  merce  they  chiefly  valued.  There
pp.  656,  657),  and  a  note  in  is  a  striking  statement  of  the
Washington's  Works,  iii.  407.  unwavering  fidelity  of  the  Mo-
Ramsay  (History  of  the  American  hawks  to  England  during  the  war,
Revolution,  ii.  138)  attributes  the  of  the  great  sufferings  they  en-
fidelity  of  the  Canadian  Indians  dured  for  her,  and  of  the  un-
chiefly  to  the  impression  the  ex-  grateful  way  in  which  they  were
pulsion  of  the  French  had  made  abandoned  at  the  peace.in  Jones's
upon  their  minds,  and  to  the  non-  History  of  New  York,  i.  75,  76-
importation  agreement  of  1774,

VOL. IV.  B  B

370  ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  XIII.

spicuous  than  in  the  first  period  of  the  campaign,  when
it  appeared  as  if  the  forces  of  Montgomery  and  Arnold
would  have  carried  everything  before  them.  In  May
1776  the  Congress  resolved  that  'it  is  highly  expedient
to  engage  the  Indians  in  the  service  of  the  United
Colonies ; '  in  the  following  month  they  authorised
General  Schuyler  to  raise  2,000  Indians  for  his  service
in  Canada,  and  Washington  to  employ  Indians  to  any
extent  he  thought  useful ;  and  they  at  the  same  time
promised  a  reward  to  all  Indians  who  took  English
officers  or  soldiers  prisoners.1  Schuyler  found  it  impos-
sible to  shake  the  allegiance  of  the  Canadian  Indians ;
but  in  July  1776  Washington  wrote  an  urgent  letter  to
the  General  Court  of  Massachusetts  begging  them  to
enlist  500  or  600  Indians  for  his  own  army.2  It  is  a
remarkable  fact,  however,  that  in  nearly  every  period  of
the  struggle,  and  in  every  part  of  the  States,  the  great
majority  of  the  Indians,  if  they  took  part  in  the  war,
ranged  themselves  on  the  side  of  the  Crown,  and  Eng-
land obtained  in  consequence  much  the  larger  share  both
of  the  benefit  and  of  the  discredit  of  their  assistance.3
The  English  Government  had  certainly  no  desire
to  instigate  or  encourage  acts  of  atrocity,  and  they
strongly  exhorted  the  Indians  to  abstain  from  such
acts ;  but  at  the  same  time  they  knew  that  it  was
often  wholly  impossible  to  restrain  them  ;  they  de-
liberately calculated  upon  the  terrors  of  Indian  war-
fare as  a  method  of  coercion ;  they  were  not  content
with  employing  Indians  in  their  own  armies,  and  under
the  supervision  of  their  own  officers,  but  urged  them  to
independent  attacks  against  the  colonists,  and  there
were  men  in  the  English  service  who  would  have  readily

1  Secret  Journals  of  Congress, 430,  431,  460. See,  too,  v.  273,
May  25,  June  17,  July  8,  1776. 274.
•'Washington's Works, ill. »  Ramsay,  ii.  139.

CH.  XIII.

INDIAN WAR.

371

given  them  uncontrolled  licence  against  the  enemy.1
Shoi*tly  before  the  attack  upon  Charleston,  a  very  for-
midable conspiracy  of  loyalists  and  Indians  to  invade
Virginia  and  the  Carolinas  was  discovered.  Mr.  Stuart,
who  had  for  a  long  time  directed  the  Indian  affairs  of
the  Southern  colonies,  was  the  leading  agent  in  organ-
ising it ;  and  it  was  intended  to  bring  the  Creeks  and

1  A  disgraceful  affair  occurred
in  Canada  in  the  summer  of  1776,
when  several  American  prisoners
were  killed  and  others  plundered
by  Indians  after  capitulation,  and
the  English  officer  declared  his
inability  to  control  the  savages.
(Washington's  Works,  iv.  1,  2.)
Feb.  15,  1777,  Col.  Guy  Johnson
wrote  to  Lord  George  Ger-
maine :  '  The  terror  of  their
name  without  any  acts  of  savage
cruelty  will  tend  much  to  the
speedy  termination  of  the  rebel-
lion.'— Documents  relating  to  the
Colonial  History  of  Neio  York,
viii.  699.  On  April  21,  1777,
Governor  Tryon  wrote  to  Secre-
tary Knox :  '  I  am  exactly  of
opinion  with  Colonel  La  [Corne]
St.  Luc,  who  says :  "  II  faut
lacher  les  sauvages  centre  les
miserables  rebels,  pour  imposer
de  terreur  sur  les  frontiers.  II
dit  de  plus  (mais  un  peu  trop
pour  moi),  qu'il  faut  brutalizer
les  affaires ;  assurement  il  est
bien  enragee  de  la  mauvais  traite-
ment  qu'il  a  recu  de  les  aveugles
peuples  "  '  (sic).  Ibid.  p.  707.
On  March  12,  1778,  Col.  Johnson
wrote  to  Lord  George  Germaine  :
1  It  is  well  known,  my  lord,  that
the  colonies  solicited  the  Indians
early  in  1775 ;  that  they  pro-
posed to  make  me  prisoner,  that
they  carried  some  Indians  then

to  their  camp  near  Boston,  as
they  did  others  since,  who  were
taken  in  the  battle  on  Long
Island ;  that  the  tomahawk  which
is  so  much  talked  of  is  seldom
used  but  to  smoak  through  or  to
cut  wood  with,  and  that  they  are
very  rarely  guilty  of  any  cruelty
more  than  scalping  the  dead,  in
which  article  even  they  may  be
restrained.  It  is  also  certain  that
no  objection  was  made  to  them
formerly ;  that  the  King's  instruc-
tions of  1754  to  General  Brad-
dock,  and  many  since,  direct  their
being  employed,  while  some  of  the
American  colonies  went  further
by  fixing  a  price  for  scalps.
Surely  foreign  enemies  have  an
equal  claim  to  humanity  with
others.  ...  I  am  persuaded  ....
that  I  can  restrain  the  Indians
from  acts  of  savage  cruelty.'  Ibid,
pp.  740,  741.  See,  too,  on  this
subject,  the  note  in  Washington's
Works,  v.  274-276.  Governor
Pownall,  who  was  intimately  ac-
quainted with  Indian  affairs,  said
'  the  idea  of  an  Indian  neutrality
is  nonsense — delusive,  dangerous
nonsense.  If  both  we  and  the
Americans  were  agreed  to  observe
a  strict  neutrality  in  not  employ-
ing them,  they  would  then  plun-
der  and  scalp  both  parties  indis-
criminately."

372 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xin.

Cherokees,  who  inhabited  lands  to  the  west  of  the
Carolinas  and  of  Georgia,  into  the  field,  and  to  assist
them  by  an  expedition  of  English  soldiers  and  by  a
great  loyalist  rising.  The  project  was  paralysed  by  its
premature  disclosure,  and  the  great  body  of  Indians  in
these  parts  remained  passive ;  but  the  Cherokees  took
up  arms,  and  waged  a  very  savage  war  in  the  back
settlements  of  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas.  The  Southern
colonists,  however,  soon  collected  an  army  for  their
defence,  and  not  only  cleared  their  own  territory,  but
crossed  the  Alleghanies,  traversed  the  Indian  settle-
ments, burnt  the  villages,  destroyed  the  crops,  and  soon
compelled  the  savages  to  sue  for  peace,  and  to  cede  a
great  part  of  their  land  to  South  Carolina.  It  was
noticed  that  the  barbarities  practised  by  the  Indians  in
this  campaign  had  a  great  effect  in  repressing  the
loyalist  sentiment  in  the  Southern  colonies.1

Another  subject  which  greatly  occupied  the  atten-
tion of  the  Americans  was  the  indispensable  necessity
of  creating  a  navy  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  their
commerce  and  injuring  that  of  the  enemy.  The  Ameri-
cans have  at  all  times  shown  a  remarkable  aptitude  for
the  seafaring  life,  and  they  did  not  wait  for  the  De-
claration of  Independence  to  take  measures  for  the  con-
struction of  an  independent  navy.  In  the  last  three
months  of  1775  Congress  ordered  seventeen  cruisers,
varying  from  ten  to  thirty-six  guns,  to  be  built.  In
February  1776  the  first  American  squadron,  consisting
of  eight  small  ships — the  largest  carrying  twenty-four
guns — sailed  under  Commander  Hopkins  from  Dela-
ware Bay,  and  in  October  1776  twenty-six  American
vessels  were  either  built  or  building.2  A  few  larger
vessels  were  afterwards  constructed  in  France,  but  the

1  Annual  Register, nil, p.\2Z. of  the  United  States,  i 76,  77,
*  Cooper's  History  of  the  Navy 89,  90.  101,  102.

ce.  XHI.  PRIVATEERING.  373

American  navy  appears  to  have  been  almost  wholly
manned  by  natives,  and  in  this  respect  it  furnished  a
great  contrast  to  the  army,  in  which  the  foreign  element
was  very  prominent.  The  popularity,  however,  of  the
regular  naval  force  could  never  compete  with  that  of
privateering,  which  was  soon  practised  from  the  New
England  and  Pennsylvanian  coasts  on  a  scale  and  with
a  daring  and  success  very  rarely  equalled.  The  zest
with  which  the  Americans  threw  themselves  into  this
lucrative  form  of  enterprise  is  a  curious  contrast  to
their  extreme  reluctance  to  take  up  arms  in  the  field.
'  Thousands  of  schemes  of  privateering,'  wrote  John
Adams  in  August  1776,  'are  afloat  in  American  imagi-
nations.' l  In  the  beginning  of  the  war  this  kind  of
enterprise  was  especially  successful,  for  a  swarm  of
privateers  were  afloat  before  the  English  appear  to  have
had  the  smallest  suspicion  of  their  danger.  The  names
are  preserved  of  no  less  than  sixteen  privateers  belong-
ing to  Rhode  Island  alone,  which  were  on  the  sea  in
1776  ;3  and  it  is  probable  that  these  form  but  a  small
fraction  of  the  total  number.  At  the  end  of  1776
250  West  Indiamen  had  been  captured,3  the  injury
already  done  to  the  West  India  trade  was  estimated
in  England  at  1,800,000^,  and  the  rate  of  insurance
had  risen  to  28  per  cent.,  which  was  higher  than  at
any  period  in  the  last  war  with  France  and  Spain.4

The  leading  merchants  speculated  largely  in  priva-
teers, and  it  was  noticed  that  'the  great  profit  of
privateering  was  an  irresistible  temptation  to  sea-
men,'6 and  a  formidable  obstacle  to  enlistment  in  the

1  Adams's  Familiar  Letters,  p.  4  Ibid.  p.  262. See,  too,  Ame-
208. See,  too,  pp.  220,  226,  230.  rican  Remembrancer,  1776,  part

2  Arnold's History  of  Rhode  ii.  p.  267.

Island,  ii.  386.  s  American  Diplomatic  Carre*

*  American  Diplomatic  Corre-  spondence,  ii.  93.
spondence,  i.  248.

374 ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xlil.

army.  At  the  end  of  1776,  Kobert  Morris,  in  describing
the  gloomy  prospects  of  the  revolution,  complained  that
'  in  the  Eastern  States  they  are  so  intent  upon  priva-
teering that  they  mind  little  else ; l  but  when  Chastellux
visited  Philadelphia  a  few  years  later,  he  found  this
distinguished  patriot  and  merchant  himself  so  occupied
with  the  trade  that  he  regarded  a  week  as  a  calamitous
one  in  which  no  prize  was  brought  in  by  his  cruisers,
and  his  fortune  had  risen  in  the  most  disastrous  period
of  the  American  war  to  between  300,OOOJ.  and  400,OOOZ.a
It  was  found  impossible  to  man  the  navy  without  lay-
ing an  embargo  on  the  privateers,  and  in  1776  the
Assembly  of  Rhode  Island  proposed  to  the  other  States
a  general  embargo  until  the  quotas  of  enlistments  re-
quired by  the  Congress  for  the  army  had  in  each  State
been  filled.3  It  may  be  questioned,  however,  whether
American  enterprise  could  have  been  on  the  whole  more
profitably  employed,  for  successful  privateering  brought
great  wealth  into  the  country,  impoverished  the  enemy,
and  added  very  largely  to  the  popularity  of  the  war.

It  needed,  indeed,  all  the  popularity  that  could  be
derived  from  this  source,  for  the  latter  months  of  1776
form  one  of  the  darkest  periods  in  the  whole  struggle.
The  army  of  Washington  had  dwindled  to  3,000  and
even  to  2,700  effective  men.  Except  two  companies
of  artillery  belonging  to  the  State  of  New  York  that
were  engaged  for  the  war,  the  whole  of  the  continental

1  American  Diplomatic  Carre-  the  manner  in  which (without
spondeiice,  i.  243.  actual  dishonesty)  he  employed

2  Chastellux,  Travels  in  North  his  position  of  Financier-General
America,  i.  199-201. According  to  the  colonies,  to  subserve  hia
to  a  note,  however,  appended  to  private  interests. See,  too,  Ban-
the  English  translation  of  this  croft's  Hist,  of  the  United  States,
book,  a  large  part  of  the  great  x.  566,  567.

fortune  of Morris  was due to 3  Arnold's  Hist,  of  Rhode  Is-

other  causes,  and  especially  to  land,  ii.  388,  389.

cu.  xiii.  STATE OF THE AKMY — LEE.  375

troops  had  only  been  enlisted  for  a  year,  and  when
their  time  of  service  expired  in  November  and  Decem-
ber, it  appeared  as  if  none  of  them  would  consent  to
re-enlist  or  to  postpone  their  departure.  In  the  face
of  an  enemy  of  overwhelming  numbers,  in  the  very
agonies  of  a  struggle  upon  which  the  whole  future  of
the  contest  depended,  company  after  company  came  for-
ward claiming  instant  dismissal.  Fourteen  days  after
the  capture  of  Fort  Washington  had  deprived  the  Ameri-
cans of  nearly  3,000  soldiers,  a  large  division  of  the
army  took  this  course.  Every  hope  of  success  seemed
fading  away.  An  urgent  despatch  was  sent  to  Gates,
who  commanded  the  remains  of  the  army  which  had
invaded  Canada,  to  send  assistance  from  Ticonderoga.
Unfortunately  two  of  the  regiments  which  he  sent  were
from  New  Jersey,  their  time  of  service  had  expired,  and
as  soon  as  they  found  themselves  in  their  native  State
they  disbanded  to  a  man.1

General  Lee  had  been  left  with  some  troops  at  the
east  side  of  Hudson  River,  and  Washington  now  urg-
ently summoned  him  to  his  assistance.  Lee  had  served
with  much  distinction  in  the  English  army  in  America
during  the  last  war,  and  his  fierce  energy  had  gained  for
him  among  the  Indians  the  title  of '  the  spirit  that  never
sleeps.3  He  returned  to  England  after  the  capture  of
Canada,  served  in  1762  in  Portugal  with  the  auxiliary
forces  against  the  Spaniards,  and  performed  at  least  one
brilliant  exploit  in  the  capture  of  a  Spanish  camp  near
Villa  Velha,  on  the  Tagus.  Having,  however,  quarrelled
with  his  superiors,  and  being  disappointed  in  his  ho.pes
of  promotion,  he  passed  into  the  Polish  service,  where
he  became  a  major-general.  He  afterwards  spent  some
years  in  travelling,  fought  several  desperate  duels,  and
was  everywhere  noted  for  his  violent  and  turbulent

1  Ramsay,  i.  312. Hildreth,  iii.  159.

ENGLAND IN THE  ElGfiTEENTfi CENTUftY. CH.  Still.

character ;  but  lie  was  also  an  accomplished  linguist  and
a  man  of  some  literary  talent,  and  he  was  one  of  the
many  persons  to  whom  the  letters  of  Junius  were  as-
cribed. He  travelled  in  America  in  an  early  stage  of
the  colonial  dispute,  and  appears  to  have  conceived  a
genuine  enthusiasm  for  the  American  cause ;  but  he  was
even  more  of  an  adventurer  than  an  enthusiast,  and  was
much  disappointed  at  being  placed  in  the  American  army
not  only  below  Washington,  but  also  below  Ward, — '  a
fat  old  gentleman,'  as  he  complained,  '  who  had  been  a
popular  churchwarden,  but  had  no  acquaintance  what-
ever with  military  affairs.'  General  Ward  retired  shortly
after  the  recovery  of  Boston,  and  the  star  of  Lee  seemed
for  a  time  rising  very  high.  His  military  experience  was
eminently  useful  in  organising  the  American  army.  His
defence  of  Charleston  against  the  fleet  of  Sir  Peter  Parker
in  the  summer  of  1776  had  been  skilful  and  successful;
and  having  afterwards  been  summoned  to  the  north,  his
advice  is  said  to  have  decided  the  evacuation  of  New
York  Island,  which  probably  saved  the  American  army
from  capture.

His  self-willed,  impracticable,  and  insubordinate
temper,  however,  soon  became  apparent;  he  was  ex-
tremely jealous  of  Washington,  whose  ability  he  appears
to  have  greatly  underrated,  and  after  the  capture  of
Fort  Washington  he  thought  the  situation  nearly
hopeless.  '  Between  ourselves,'  he  wrote  to  his  friend
Gates, '  a  certain  great  man  is  most  damnably  deficient.
He  has  thrown  me  into  a  situation-  where  I  have  my
choice  of  difficulties.  If  I  stay  in  this  province  I  risk
myself  and  army,  and  if  I  do  not  stay,  the  province  is
lost  for  ever.  I  have  neither  guides,  cavalry,  medicines,
money,  shoes,  nor  stockings.  I  must  act  with  the
greatest  circumspection.  Tories  are  in  my  front,  rear,
and  on  my  flanks.  The  mass  of  the  people  is  strangely
contaminated.  In  short,  unless  something  which  I  do

<3fl.  xili.  MILITARY EVENTS, DECEMBER 1776.  377

not  expect  turns  up,  we  are  lost.  Our  councils  have
been  weak  to  the  last  degree.'  For  some  time  he  posi-
tively disobeyed  the  summons  of  his  chief,  hoping  to
strike  some  independent  blow  near  New  York.  At  length ,
slowly  and  reluctantly,  he  entered  New  Jersey ;  but
having  on  December  13  gone  some  way  from  his  army  to
reconnoitre,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  British  party  and
was  captured.  To  the  officers  who  took  him  he  expressed
his  disgust  at  '  the  rascality  of  his  troops,'  his  disappoint-
ment at  the  deep  division  of  opinion  in  America,  and  his
conviction  that  '  the  game  was  nearly  at  an  end.' l

The  incident  struck  terror  into  the  American  army
at  a  time  when  no  additional  discouragement  was  needed.
Washington,  closely  pursued  by  a  greatly  superior  force
under  Lord  Cornwallis,  retreated  successively  to  Newark,
to  Brunswick,  to  Princeton,  to  Trenton,  and  to  the  Penn-
sylvanian  side  of  the  Delaware.  Seldom  has  a  com-
mander found  himself  in  a  more  deplorable  position,  for
in  New  Jersey  and  in  Pennsylvania,  as  well  as  in  New
York,  the  bulk  of  the  people  were  either  utterly  indif-
ferent or  positively  hostile  to  his  cause.  '  The  want  of
exertion,'  he  wrote  ou  December  5,  '  in  the  principal
gentlemen  of  the  country,  or  a  fatal  supineness  and  in-
sensibility of  danger  .  .  .  have  been  the  causes  of  our
late  disgraces.'  The  militia  he  described  as  '  a  destruc-
tive, expensive,  and  disorderly  mob.' 2  On  the  12th  he
wrote  that,  a  great  part  of  the  continental  troops  having
insisted  on  abandoning  him,  he  had  '  hoped  to  receive  a
reinforcement  from  the  militia  of  the  State  of  New  Jersey
sufficient  to  check  the  further  progress  of  the  enemy,'
but  had  been  '  cruelly  disappointed.'  '  The  inhabitants

>  '  For the fullest particulars  1860). The  life  and  writings  of

about  this  remarkable  man  see  Lee  were  published  in  one  volume

an  interesting  monograph  called  in  1794.

The  Treason  of  Charles  Lee,  by *  Washington's  Works,  iv.  202,

George  H. Moore (New York  203.

378 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xm.

of  this  State,  either  from  fear  or  disaffection,  almost  to
a  man  refused  to  turn  out.' l  In  Pennsylvania,  things
were  a  little,  but  only  a  little,  better.  About  1,500  men
of  the  militia  of  Philadelphia  marched  to  Trenton,  '  but
the  remainder  of  the  province  continues  in  a  state  of
supineness,  nor  do  I  see  any  likelihood  of  their  stirring
to  save  their  own  capital,  which  is  undoubtedly  General
Howe's  great  object.' 2

'  With  a  handful  of  men,'  he  wrote  a  few  days  later,
'  compared  to  the  enemy's  force,  we  have  been  pushed
through  the  Jerseys  without  being  able  to  make  the
smallest  opposition  and  compelled  to  pass  the  Dela-
ware.' 3  '  Instead  of  giving  any  assistance  in  repelling
the  enemy,  the  militia  have  not  only  refused  to  obey
your  general  summons  and  that  of  their  commanding
officers,  but,  I  am  told,  exult  at  the  approach  of  the
enemy  and  on  our  late  misfortunes.'4  'I  found  ...  no
disposition  in  the  inhabitants  to  afford  the  least  aid.'
'  We  are  in  a  very  disaffected  part  of  the  province,  and
between  you  and  me  I  think  our  affairs  are  in  a  very  bad
condition ;  not  so  much  from  the  apprehension  of  General
Howe's  army  as  from  the  defection  of  New  York,  the
Jerseys,  and  Pennsylvania.  In  short,  the  conduct  of
the  Jerseys  has  been  most  infamous.  Instead  of  turning
out  to  defend  their  country  and  affording  aid  to  our
army,  they  are  making  their  submission  as  fast  as  they
can.  If  the  Jerseys  had  given  us  any  support  we  might
have  made  a  stand  at  Hackinsac,  and,  after  that,  at
Brunswick ;  but  the  few  militia  that  were  in  arms  dis-
banded themselves  and  left  the  poor  remains  of  our  army
to  make  the  best  we  could  of  it.'  '  If  every  nerve  is  not
strained  to-recruit  the  new  army  with  all  possible  expe-
dition I  think  the  game  is  pretty  nearly  up.'  '  The  enemy

Washington's  Works,  iv.  212  »  Ibid.  p.  215.

Ibid.  p.  213.  «  Ibid.  p.  223.

Cir.  xin.  DECEMBER 1776.  879

are  daily  gathering  strength  from  the  disaffected.'  '  I
have  no  doubt  but  General  Howe  will  still  make  an
attempt  upon  Philadelphia  this  winter.  I  see  nothing
to  oppose  him  a  fortnight  hence.' l

Clothes,  shoes,  cannon,  entrenching  tools  were
imperatively  needed.  A  great  part  of  the  military
stores  of  the  Revolution  had  been  captured  at  Fort
Washington.  Even  small  arms  were  beginning  to
fail.  'The  consumption  and  waste  of  these,'  wrote
Washington,  '  this  year  have  been  great.  Militia  and
flying-camp  men  coming  in  without  them  were  obliged
to  be  furnished  or  become  useless.  Many  of  these
threw  their  arms  away ;  some  lost  them  ;  whilst  others
deserted  and  took  them  away.'2  And  in  the  midst
of  all  this  distress  there  was  incessant  jealousy  and
recrimination,  dishonesty  and  corruption  ;  '  the  different
States,  without  regard  to  the  qualifications  of  an  officer,
quarrelling  about  the  appointments  and  nominating  such
as  are  not  fit  to  be  shoeblacks,  from  the  local  attach-
ments of  this  or  that  member  of  the  Assembly  ; ' 3  '  the
regimental  surgeons,  many  of  whom  are  very  great
rascals,  countenancing  the  men  in  sham  complaints  to
exempt  them  from  duty,  often  receiving  bribes  to  certify
indispositions  with  a  view  to  procure  discharges  or  fur-
loughs,' quarrelling  incessantly  around  the  beds  of  the
sick,  and  '  in  numberless  instances  '  drawing  '  for  medi-
cines and  stores  in  the  most  profuse  and  extravagant
manner  for  private  purposes  ; ' 4  the  troops,  in  fine,  so
full  '  of  local  attachments  and  distinctions  of  country,'
that  after  vainly  trying  to  unite  them  by  '  denominating

1  Washington's Works, iv.  of  his  regiment  at  the  American
230,  231,  234.  camp  at  Harlem  for  selling  the

2  Ibid.  p.  238.  soldiers certificates that they

3  Ibid.  p.  184.  were  unfit  for  duty,  at  the  rate

4  Ibid.  pp.  116,  117. One  regi-  of  8d.  a  man. — Moore's  Journal,
mental  doctor  was  drummed  out  i.  315.

380 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm,

the  whole  by  the  greater  name  of  American,'  Washington
acknowledged  that  the  task  was  an  impossible  one,  and
that  the  best  way  of  governing  his  army  was  by  stirring
the  emulation  of  the  contingents  of  the  different  States.1
It  seemed  at  this  time  not  only  probable  but  al-
most certain  that  the  American  Revolution  would  have
collapsed ;  and  if  it  had  done  so,  it  is  strange  to  think
how  completely  the  commonplaces  of  history  would
have  been  changed,  and  how  widely  different  would
now  have  been  the  popular  estimate  of  the  rival  actors
both  in  England  and  in  America.  In  the  course  of  a
few  months  the  English  had  driven  the  Americans  from
Canada  and  from  New  York.  They  had  taken  posses-
sion of  Rhode  Island  without  opposition.  They  had
overrun  the  whole  of  the  Jerseys,  and  nothing  but  the
Delaware  saved  Philadelphia  from  capture.  It  is  almost
certain  that  with  the  most  ordinary  vigilance  and  enter-
prise Howe  could  have  compelled  the  chief  American
army  to  surrender  in  Long  Island,  and  that  if  he  had
at  once  pursued  Washington  across  the  Delaware,
Philadelphia  would  have  immediately  fallen  into  his
hands.  In  either  of  these  cases  the  American  Revolu-
tion would  probably  have  ended  in  1776.  In  all  the
provinces  which  had  been  conquered,  except  Rhode
Island,  the  feelings  of  the  people  had  been  at  least  as
favourable  to  the  British  as  to  the  revolutionists,  and
the  more  closely  the  correspondence  of  the  time  is
examined  the  more  evident  it  will  appear  that,  in  the
middle  colonies  at  least,  those  who  really  desired  to
throw  off  the  English  rule  were  a  small  and  not  very
respectable  minority.  The  great  mass  were  indifferent,
half-hearted,  engrossed  with  their  private  interests  or
occupations,  prepared  to  risk  nothing  till  they  could
clearly  foresee  the  issue  of  the  contest.

Washington's  Works,  iv.  236.

CH.  xiii.  AMERICAN APATHY.  881

In  almost  every  part  of  the  States — even  in  New  Eng-
land itself — there  were  large  bodies  of  devoted  loyalists.1
The  different  States  still  regarded  themelves  as  different
countries,  and  one  of  the  sentiments  that  most  strongly
pervaded  the  majority  of  them  was  dislike  of  the  New
Englanders.2  Washington,  in  New  Jersey,  issued  a
stringent  proclamation  ordering  the  inhabitants  along
the  march  of  the  English  to  destroy  all  hay  and  corn
which  they  could  not  remove,  but  the  order  was  nearly
universally  disobeyed,  and  Howe  never  at  this  time
found  the  smallest  difficulty  in  obtaining  all  necessary
supplies.3  Had  the  Americans  as  a  whole  ever  looked
upon  the  English  as  the  Dutch  looked  upon  the  Spaniards,
and  as  the  Poles  look  upon  the  Russians,  had  they  mani-
fested in  the  struggle  of  the  revolution  but  a  tenth  part
of  the  earnestness,  the  self-sacrifice,  the  enthusiasm
which  they  displayed  on  both  sides  in  the  war  of  Seces-
sion, Howe  would  at  least  have  been  enormously  out-
numbered. But  during  the  whole  of  the  campaign  in
New  Jersey  the  army  of  Washington  was  far  inferior  in
numbers  to  that  which  was  opposed  to  him,  and  it  was
so  ragged,  inexperienced,  and  badly  armed  that  it  had
rather  the  appearance  of  a  mob  than  of  an  army.  Howe
issued  a  proclamation  offering  full  pardon  to  all  rebels
who  appeared  before  the  proper  authorities  within  sixty
days  and  subscribed  a  declaration  of  allegiance,  and
great  multitudes,  including  most  of  the  chief  persons  in

1  Thus  Governor  Tryon  writes  can  give  the  more  credit  to  from

to  Lord  G.  Germaine,  Dec.  31,  the  number  of  Connecticut  mers

1776,  giving  the  report  of  two  of  that  enlist  in  the  provincial  corps

his  Majesty's  Council  who  had  now  raising.' — Documents  rclat-

just  returned  from  Connecticut :  ing  to  the Colonial  History  of

'  They  tell  me,  from  the  intelli-  New  York,  viii.  694.

gence  they  had  opportunities  to  2  Adams's  Works,  iii.  87. Hil-

collect,  they  are  positive  a  ma-  dreth,  iii.  147.

jority  of  the  inhabitants  west  of  *  Gal

Connecticut  river  are  firm  friends  17,  18.
to  Government. This  report  I

882 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xin.

the  State,  gladly  availed  themselves  of  it.  At  Phila-
delphia itself  there  was  so  much  disaffection  that  Wash-
ington was  obliged  to  detach  a  portion  of  his  shrunken
army  for  the  purpose  of  intimidating  those  who  were
opposing  all  defensive  works  against  the  British,  and
he  was  in  almost  daily  expectation  that  the  British
would  make  an  attempt  to  pass  the  Delaware,  and  only
too  certain  that  if  they  succeeded  in  doing  so,  Phila-
delphia would  be  at  their  mercy.

The  Congress  regarded  the  capture  of  the  town  as  so
imminent  that  it  fled  precipitately  to  Baltimore.  Pro-
bably the  last  member  who  remained  in  Philadelphia
was  Robert  Morris,  afterwards  well  known  for  the  great
ability  he  displayed  in  organising  the  finances  of  the
Union,  and  he  wrote  on  December  21,  1776,  a  report
of  the  condition  of  affairs  to  the  American  Commissioners
at  Paris,  which  gives  a  most  vivid  and  instructive  pic-
ture of  the  light  in  which  the  struggle  now  appeared  to
the  ablest  of  its  partisans.  He  describes  the  ruinous
consequences  of  the  capture  of  Fort  Washington,  the
interception  of  the  despatches  of  Washington,  the  sick-
ness that  was  raging  in  the  army,  the  want  of  warm
clothing  in  the  coldest  period  of  the  winter,  the  head-
long flight  through  New  Jersey  before  an  overwhelming
force  of  the  enemy,  the  disappointment  of  all  hopes  of
assistance  from  the  people.  '  Alas,  our  internal  enemies
had  by  various  arts  and  means  frightened  many,  dis-
affected others,  and  caused  a  general  languor  to  prevail
over  the  minds  of  almost  all  men  not  before  actually
engaged  in  the  war.  Many  are  also  exceedingly  dis-
affected with  the  constitutions  formed  for  their  respective
States,  so  that,  from  one  cause  or  other,  no  Jersey  militia
turned  out  to  oppose  the  march  of  an  enemy  through
the  heart  of  their  country ;  and  it  was  with  the  utmost
difficulty  that  the  Associators  of  this  city  could  be  pre-
vailed on  to  march  against  them.'  The  capture  of  Lee

CH.  xni.  REPORT  OF  MORRIS.  383

had  been  a  new  and  terrible  blow,  but  the  party  he
commanded,  and  also  500  men  returning  from  the  Lakes
under  General  Gates,  had  just  joined  Washington ;  and
as  the  army  of  Howe  had  been  scattered,  the  one  hope
of  the  Americans  was  that  they  might  be  able  to  cut  off
the  detached  parties  of  the  British,  and  thus  compel  them
to  abandon  New  Jersey.  '  Unless  that  task  is  performed,
Philadelphia — nay,  I  may  say  Pennsylvania — must  fall.'
But  the  difficulties  were  almost  insuperable.  The
dispositions  of  the  people  were  such  that  the  English
had  excellent  intelligence,  while  the  revolutionists
could  scarcely  obtain  any.  The  proclamation  of  Howe
'  had  a  wonderful  effect,  and  all  Jersey,  or  far  the
greater  part  of  it,  is  supposed  to  have  made  their  sub-
mission. .  .  .  Those  who  do  so  of  course  become  our
most  inveterate  enemies ;  they  have  the  means  of  con-
veying intelligence,  and  they  avail  themselves  of  it.'
Philadelphia  was  in  a  state  of  complete  panic,  and
numbers  of  its  citizens  were  taking  flight.  '  We  are
told  the  British  troops  are  kept  from  plunder,1  but  the
Hessians  and  other  foreigners,  looking  upon  that  as  the
right  of  war,  plunder  wherever  they  go,  from  both
Whigs  and  Tories  without  distinction,  and  horrid  de-
vastations they  have  made.'  The  rapid  depreciation  of

1  The  good  conduct  ascribed  truth,  also  ascribes  the  outrages

to  the British soldiers is  not  indifferently to both nations,

borne  out  by  other  authorities.  (Examination  before  the  House

Washington  speaks  of  the  deras-  of  Commons,  pp.  39,  40.) Judge

tations and robberies in  New  Jones,  in  his  loyalist  Hist,  of  New

Jersey  as  equally  the  work  of  the  York  (i.  114),  speaking  of  the

British  and  the  Hessians,  and  he  plunderings  by  the  British  army

notices  that  at  Princeton,  where  near  that  city,  says  :  '  The  Hes-

some  very  scandalous  acts  were  sians  bore  the  blame  at  first,  but

perpetrated,  there  were  no  Ger-  the  British  were  equally  alert.'

man soldiers. (Washington's  Jones  notices,  however,  that  the

Works,  iv.  255,  268,  309,  310.)  army under General Carleton

Galloway,  who  had  particularly  was  honourably  distinguished  for

good  means  of  ascertaining  the  its  good  conduct  (ibid.  90,  91).

384 ENGLAND Iff THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xm.

the  continental  currency  in  itself  threatened  'instant
and  total  ruin  to  the  American  cause.'  '  The  enormous
pay  of  our  army,  the  immense  expenses  at  which  they
are  supplied,  .  .  .  and,  in  short,  the  extravagance  that
has  prevailed  in  most  departments  of  the  public  service,
have  called  forth  prodigious  emissions  of  paper  money.'
Unless  some  brilliant  success  immediately  changed  the
prospects  of  the  war,  nothing,  in  the  opinion  of  this
most  competent  observer,  but  the  speedy  assistance  of
France  could  possibly  save  the  American  cause.  '  Our
people,'  he  continues,  '  knew  not  the  hardships  and  cal-
amities of  war  when  they  so  boldly  dared  Britain  to
arms ;  every  man  was  then  a  bold  patriot,  felt  himself
equal  to  the  contest,  and  seemed  to  wish  for  an  oppor-
tunity of  evincing  his  prowess ;  but  now,  when  we  are
fairly  engaged,  when  death  and  ruin  stare  us  in  the
face,  and  when  nothing  but  the  most  intrepid  courage
can  rescue  us  from  contempt  and  disgrace,  sorry  I  am
to  say  it,  many  of  those  who  were  foremost  in  noise
shrink  coward-like  from  the  danger,  and  are  begging
.pardon  without  striking  a  blow.' l

Nothing,  indeed,  could  now  have  saved  the  American
cause  but  the  extraordinary  skill  and  determination  of
its  great  leader,  combined  with  the  amazing  incapacity
of  his  opponents.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Sir
William  Howe  possessed  in  a  fair  measure  the  know-
ledge of  the  military  profession  which  books  could
furnish,  but  not  one  gleam  of  energy  or  originality  at
this  time  broke  the  monotony  of  his  career,  and  to  the
blunders  of  the  Jersey  campaign  the  loyalists  mainly
ascribed  the  ultimate  success  of  the  revolution.  The
same  want  of  vigilance  and  enterprise  that  had  suffered
the  Americans  to  seize  Dorchester  heights,  and  thus  to
compel  the  evacuation  of  Boston,  the  same  want  of

American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  i.  233-24(J.

CH.  xin.  INCAPACITY  OF  HOWE.  83S

vigilance  and  enterprise  that  had  allowed  them  when
totally  defeated  to  escape  from  Long  Island,  still  Con-
tinued. When  Washington  was  flying  rapidly  from
an  overwhelming  force  under  Lord  Comwallis,  Howe
ordered  the  troops  to  stop  at  Brunswick,  where  they
remained  inactive  for  nearly  a  week.  In  the  opinion
of  the  best  military  authorities,  but  for  that  delay  the
destruction  of  the  army  of  Washington  was  inevitable.
The  Americans  were  enabled  to  cross  the  Delaware
safely  because,  owing  to  a  long  delay  of  the  British
general,  the  van  of  the  British  army  only  arrived  at  its
bank  just  as  the  very  last  American  boat  was  launched.1
Even  then,  had  the  British  accelerated  their  passage,
Philadelphia,  the  seat  and  centre  of  the  Revolutionary
Government,  would  have  certainly  fallen.  The  army  of
Washington  was  utterly  inadequate  to  defend  it.  A
great  portion  of  its  citizens  were  thoroughly  loyal.  The
Congress  itself,  when  flying  from  Philadelphia,  declared
the  impossibility  of  protecting  it,  and  although  Washing-
ton had  burnt  or  removed  all  the  boats  for  many  miles
along  the  Delaware,  there  were  fords  higher  up  which
might  easily  have  been  forced,  and  in  Trenton  itself,
which  was  occupied  by  the  English,  there  were  ample  sup-
plies of  timber  to  have  constructed  rafts  for  the  army.2
But  Howe  preferred  to  wait  till  the  river  was
frozen,  and  in  the  meantime,  though  his  army  was  in-
comparably superior  to  that  of  Washington  in  numbers,
arms,  discipline,  and  experience,  he  allowed  himself  to
undergo  a  humiliating  defeat.  His  army  was  scattered
.?ver  several  widely  separated  posts,  and  Trenton,  which
wag  one  of  the  most  important  on  the  Delaware,  was
left  in  the  care  of  a  large  force  of  Hessians,  whose  dis-
cipline had  been  greatly  relaxed.  Washington  per-
ceived that  unless  he  struck  some  brilliant  blow  before

1  See  Stedman,  i.  220-223.
*  Jones's  History  of  New  York,  i.  124-128.
VOL. IV.  C  O

386 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xui.

the  close  of  the  year,  his  cause  was  hopeless.  The
whole  province  was  going  over  to  the  English.  As
soon  as  the  river  was  frozen  he  expected  them  to  cross
in  overwhelming  numbers,  and  in  a  few  days  he  was
likely  to  be  almost  without  an  army.  At  the  end  of
the  year  the  engagement  of  the  greater  part  of  his  troops
would  expire,  and  on  December  24  he  wrote  to  the
President  of  the  Congress,  '  I  have  not  the  most  distant
prospect  of  retaining  them  a  moment  longer  than  the
last  of  this  month,  notwithstanding  the  most  pressing
solicitations  and  the  obvious  necessity  for  it.' l  Under
these  desperate  circumstances  he  planned  the  surprise
of  Trenton.  '  Necessity,'  he  wrote,  '  dire  necessity,  will,
nay,  must  justify  an  attack.'  It  was  designed  with  admir-
able skill  and  executed  with  admirable  courage.  On  the
night  of  Christmas  1776,  Washington  crossed  the  Dela-
ware, surprised  the  German  troops  in  the  midst  of  their
Christmas  revelries,  and  with  a  loss  of  only  two  officers
and  two  privates  wounded,  he  succeeded  in  capturing
1,000  prisoners  and  in  recrossing  the  river  in  safety.2

The  effect  of  this  brilliant  enterprise  upon  the  spirits
of  the  American  army  and  upon  the  desponding,  waver-
ing, and  hostile  sentiments  of  the  population  was  im-
mediate. Philadelphia  for  the  present  was  saved,  and
the  Congress  speedily  returned  to  it.  Immediately
after  the  victory  a  large  force  of  militia  from  Pennsyl-
vania joined  the  camp  of  Washington,3  and  at  the  end
of  December  the  disbandment  of  the  continental  troops,
which  a  week  before  he  had  thought  inevitable,  had
been  in  a  great  measure  averted.  '  After  much  per-
suasion,' he  wrote,  '  and  the  exertions  of  their  officers,
half,  or  a  greater  proportion  of  those  [the  troops]  from
the  eastward  have  consented  to  stay  six  weeks  on  a

1  Washington's  TT  orA-s,  iv.  244.  *  Ibid.  pp.  247-252.

3  Hid.  219,  251.

CH.  xm.  THE  AMERICAN  CAUSE  REVIVES.  887

bounty  of  ten  dollars.  I  feel  the  inconvenience  of  this
advance,  and  I  know  the  consequences  which  will  result
from  it,  but  what  could  be  done?  Pennsylvania  had
allowed  the  same  to  her  militia ;  the  troops  felt  their
importance  and  would  have  their  price.  Indeed,  as
their  aid  is  so  essential  and  not  to  be  dispensed  with,  it
is  to  be  wondered  at,  that  they  had  not  estimated  it  at
a  higher  rate.' l  '  This  I  know  is  a  most  extravagant
pi'ice  when  compared  with  the  time  of  service,  but  .  .  .
I  thought  it  no  time  to  stand  upon  trifles  when  a  body
of  firm  troops  inured  to  danger  was  absolutely  necessary
to  lead  on  the  more  raw  and  undisciplined.' 2

No  money  was  ever  better  employed.  Recrossing
the  Delaware,  Washington  again  occupied  Trenton,  and
then,  evading  an  overwhelming  British  force  which  was
sent  against  him,  he  fell  unexpectedly  on  Princeton  and
totally  defeated  three  regiments  that  were  posted  there
to  defend  it.  The  English  fell  back  upon  Brunswick,  and
the  greater  part  of  New  Jersey  was  thus  recovered  by
the  Americans.  A  sudden  revulsion  of  sentiments  took
place  in  New  Jersey.  The  militia  of  the  province  were
at  last  encouraged  to  take  arms  for  Washington.  Re-
cruits began  to  come  in.  The  manifest  superiority  of
the  American  generalship  and  the  disgraceful  spectacle
of  a  powerful  army  of  European  veterans  abandoning  a
large  tract  of  country  before  a  ragged  band  of  raw  recruits
much  less  numerous  than  itself,  changed  the  calcula-
tions of  the  doubters,  while  a  deep  and  legitimate  indig-
nation was  created  by  the  shameful  outrages  that  were
perpetrated  by  the  British  and  German  troops.

Unfortunately  these  outrages  were  no  new  thing.  An
ardent  American  loyalist  of  New  York  complains  that
one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  soldiers  of  General  Howe  when
they  entered  that  city  was  to  break  open  and  plunder  the

1  Washington's  Works,  iv.  254,  255.  *  Ibid.  256.

c  c  2

388 ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, en.  xm.

College  library,  the  Subscription  library,  and  the  Cor-
poration library,  and  to  sell  or  destroy  the  books  and
philosophical  apparatus ;  and  he  adds,  with  much  bitter-
ness, that  during  all  the  months  that  the  rebels  were  in
possession  of  New  York  no  such  outrage  was  perpe-
trated, that  during  a  great  part  of  that  time  the  regular
law  courts  had  been  open,  and  that  they  had  frequently
convicted  American  soldiers  of  petty  larcenies,  and
punished  them  with  the  full  approbation  of  their  officers.1
1  ii  New  Jersey  the  conduct  of  the  English  was  at  least
«-ts  bad  as  at  New  York.  A  public  library  was  burnt  at
Trenton.  A  college  and  a  library  were  destroyed  at
Princeton,  together  with  an  orrery  made  by  the  illus-
trious Rittenhouse,  and  believed  to  be  the  finest  in
the  world.2  Whigs  and  Tories  were  indiscriminately
plundered.  Written  protections  attesting  the  loyalty
of  the  bearer  were  utterly  disregarded,  and  men  who  had
exposed  themselves  for  the  sake  of  England  to  complete
ruin  at  the  hands  of  their  own  countrymen,  found  them-
selves plundered  by  the  troops  of  the  very  Power  for
which  they  had  risked  and  sacrificed  so  much.  Nor  was
this  all.  A  British  army  had  fallen  back  before  an
army  which  was  manifestly  incomparably  inferior  to  it,
and  had  left  the  loyalists  over  a  vast  district  at  the
mercy  of  their  most  implacable  enemies.  Numbers  who
had  actively  assisted  the  British  were  obliged  to  fly  to
New  York,  leaving  their  families  and  property  behind
them.  Already  loyalist  risings  had  been  suppressed  in
Maryland,  in  Delaware,  and  in  Carolina,  and  had  been
left  unsupported  by  the  British  army.  The  abandon-
ment of  New  Jersey  completed  the  lesson.  A  fatal

1  Jones's  History  of  New  writer,  '  every  load  of  forage  that

York,  i.  136,  137.  did  not  come  from  New  York  was

"  Anmial  Register,  1777,  p.  13.  sought  or  purchased  at  the  price

•After  this  time,'  says  the  same  of  blood.'— Ibid.  p.  21.

CH.  xin.  FORMATION OF A NEW ARMY.  389

clamp  was thrown  upon  the  cause  of  the  loyalists  in
America  from  which  it  never  wholly  recovered.1

In  the  meantime  the  Congress  was  busily  engaged
in  raising  a  new  continental  army  to  replace  the  troops
that  were  disbanded.  The  language  of  Washington  on
this  subject  was  very  decided.  He  again  and  again
urged  in  the  strongest  terms  the  absolute  impossibility
of  carrying  on  the  war  successfully  mainly  by  militia,
and  he  declared  his  firm  conviction  that,  on  the  whole,
this  branch  of  the  service  had  done  more  harm  than
good  to  the  cause.  He  was  equally  positive  that  no
system  of  short  enlistments  would  be  sufficient,  and
that  the  continental  troops  should  be  raised  for  the
whole  duration  of  the  war.  To  do  this  it  was  necessary
to  offer  high  pay  and  a  large  bounty,  but  it  was  a
measure  of  capital  importance,  and  no  sacrifice  must  be
grudged.  The  class  of  officers  appointed  must  be
wholly  changed.  The  pay  of  the  officers  must  be  greatly
raised  both  absolutely  and  in  its  proportion  to  the  pay  of
the  privates.  The  system  of  allowing  soldiers  to  appoint
their  own  officers  must  be  abandoned,  and  no  persons
who  were  not  gentlemen  should  be  chosen.  It  is
curious,  in  tracing  the  foundation  of  the  great  demo-
cracy of  the  West,  to  notice  the  emphasis  with  which
Washington  dwelt  on  the  danger  to  discipline  of  '  the
soldiers  and  officers  being  too  nearly  on  a  level,'  and  on
the  facility  with  which  degrees  of  rank  were  transferred
from  civil  to  military  life.  '  In  your  choice  of  officers,'
he  wrote  to  one  of  his  colonels,  '  take  none  but  gentle-
men. Let  no  local  attachments  influence  you.' a

'  See  Galloway's  Examina-  the  common  soldiers  is  the  best

tion,  pp.  23,  65.  contrivance  hitherto  discovered

2  Washington's  Works,  iv.  for  intercepting  the  spread  of  a

111,  139  140,  2G9.  Mr.  King-  panic  or  any  other  bewildering

lake  observes  that  '  social  dif-  impulse  '  through  an  army.  —

fereuce  between  the  officers  and  Hist,  of  the  Crimean  War,  i.307.

390 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xm.

It  was  only  with  great  hesitation  and  reluctance
that  the  Congress  could  be  induced  to  adopt  these  views.
They  hated  the  notion  of  a  standing  army.  They
dreaded  the  expense  of  additional  bounties,  and  the
unpopularity  of  a  great  difference  between  officers  and
privates,  and  a  strong  jealousy  of  Washington  pre-
vailed with  many  members.  John  Adams  expressed
his  firm  conviction  that  if  the  system  of  enlistments  for
the  war  were  adopted,  few  men,  except  mercenaries  of
the  lowest  type,  would  serve  in  the  American  army.1
At  length,  however,  in  September  1776  the  Congress
agreed  to  vote  that  eighty-eight  battalions,  each  con-
sisting of  750  men,  should  be  enlisted  for  the  war.  It
entrusted  the  enlistment  of  these  battalions  to  the
different  States,  but  assigned  to  each  its  quota  and  gave
to  the  States  the  right  of  appointing  colonels  and  all
inferior  officers,  and  it  at  the  same  time  revised  the
articles  of  war  and  made  them  somewhat  more  strin-
gent. A  bounty  of  twenty  dollars  was  offered  to  each
recruit,  and  future  advantages  were  very  lavishly  pro-
mised. Every  private  was  to  be  entitled  at  the  end  of
Ids  service  to  100  acres  of  land,  while  larger  quantities,
proportioned  to  their  rank,  were  promised  to  the  officers.
Congress  also  offered  eight  dollars  to  every  person  who
should  obtain  a  recruit ;  and  in  spite  of  the  strong  pro-
test of  Washington,  several  of  the  States  offered  addi-

1  He  says:  'I  never  opposed  could  get  at  home  better  living,

the  raising  of  men  during  the  more  comfortable  lodgings,  more

war but  I  contended  that  than  double  wages  in  safety,  not

I knew  the  number  to be  ob-  exposed  to  the  sicknesses  of  the

tained  in  this  manner  would  be  camp, would bind themselves

very  small  in  New  England,  from  during the war  ?  ...  In the

whence  almost  the  whole  army  middle States,  where  they  im-

was  derived. A  regiment  might  ported from Ireland and Ger-

possibly  be  obtained  of  the  mean-  many  so  many  transported  con-

est,  idlest,  most  intemperate,  and  victs  and  redemptioners,  it  was

worthless, but no more possible  they  might  obtain  some."

Was  it  credible  that  men  who  — Adams's  Works,  iii.  48.

CH.  xm.  FORMATION  OF  A NEW  ARMY.  391

tional  and  separate  bounties  for  enlistment.  It  was
found,  however,  impossible,  even  on  these  terms,  to
obtain  any  considerable  number  of  recruits  for  the
whole  duration  of  the  war ;  so  it  was  determined  to
admit  recruits  for  three  years,  who  were  to  have  no
land,  but  were  entitled  to  all  the  other  advantages.
Congress  also,  after  some  hesitation,  gave  Washington
an  extraordinary  power  of  raising  and  organising  six-
teen additional  battalions  of  infantry,  three  regiments
of  cavalry,  three  regiments  of  artillery,  and  a  corps  of
engineers;  and  as  the  State  appointment  of  officers
proved  very  prejudicial,  they  gave  Washington  a  dicta-
torial power  over  officers  under  the  rank  of  Brigadier-
General.1  But  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to  encourage
enlistment,  a  large  proportion  of  the  continental  soldiers
were  raised  by  compulsion.  The  States  passed  laws
drafting  the  militia,  and  compelling  every  person  drafted
to  enter  the  military  service  or  to  find  a  substitute
under  pain  of  imprisonment.  In  Virginia  a  law  ex-
empted every  two  persons  who  could  find  a  recruit  from
all  military  service,  and  servants  were  manumitted  who
consented  to  enter  the  army.2

The  difficulty  of  obtaining  soldiers  was  by  no  means
the  only  one  that  weighed  upon  the  Congress.  The
powers  of  this  body  were  so  little  defined  and  so  im-
perfectly acknowledged  that  it  had  scarcely  any  coer-
cive authority  over  the  separate  States.  Prior  to  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  Congress  was  merely
regarded  as  an  organisation  for  enabling  them  to  co-
operate in  resisting  the  encroachments  or  coercive  mea-
sures of  Great  Britain,  and  the  delegates  had  been
severely  limited  by  the  instructions  of  their  constituents.
Since  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  Congress  had

1  Hildreth,  iii.  164, 166.  Wash- 2  Galloway's  Examination,  pp.
ington's  Works,  i.  205-207,  225. 18t  19.

392 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xiti.

become  the  Government  of  the  country,  but  its  autho-
rity rested  only  upon  manifest  necessity  and  general
acquiescence,  and  had  no  real  legal  basis.  It  was  not
even  a  representation  of  the  different  State  Assemblies.
The  great  majority  of  its  members  were  elected  by
Provincial  Conventions,  summoned  with  every  sort  of
irregularity,  and  often  representing  very  small  sections
of  the  people.1  It  was  obvious  that  such  a  body  could
not  strain  allegiance  or  impose  sacrifices.  It  was  only
in  November  1777  that  the  Articles  of  Confederation
were  voted  by  Congress,  which  settled  its  constitution
and  powers,  and  defined  the  respective  limits  of  the
central  and  State  governments.  But  these  Articles  of
Confederation  were  not  ratified  by  any  of  the  States  till
July  1778,  and  they  were  not  ratified  so  as  to  become
obligatory  on  all  the  States  till  March  1781.3  In  the
meantime  Congress  exercised  the  authority  of  a  sovereign
power,  but  it  was  obliged  to  be  more  than  commonly
careful  not  to  arouse  the  jealousy  of  the  States.  Several
questions  of  great  difficulty  had  indeed  already  arisen.
It  was  necessary  to  determine  the  proportion  of  men
and  money  to  be  contributed  by  each  State,  and  there
were  dangerous  controversies  about  the  exact  boundaries
of  the  different  States,  and  upon  the  question  whether
the  Crown  lands  should  be  regarded  as  common  pro-
perty at  the  disposition  of  Congress  for  the  public  good,
or  as  State  property  subject  only  to  the  local  legisla-
tures.3 It  was  only  by  great  skill,  management,  and
forbearance  that  these  questions  were  solved  or  evaded,
and  a  unity  and  consistency  of  action  imparted  to  the
whole  machine.

1  Galloway's  Examination,  p.  chosen  by  one-twentieth  part  of

11. The  editor  of  this  Examina-  the  people.'

tion  says:  'In  no  colony  where  *  Story  On  the  Constitution,

these delegates were not ap-  book  ii.  ch.  i.

pointed  by  the  Assemblies,  which  *  Ibid,  book  ii.  ch.  ii.
were  in  four  only, were they

CH.  xiu.  FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES.  893

The  first  necessity  of  the  war  was  to  raise  money  to
carry  it  on.  A  great  portion  of  the  military  stores  had
to  be  manufactured  or  imported,  and  it  was  very  evident
that  in  no  part  of  the  world  was  it  less  possible  than  in
America  to  count  upon  gratuitous  service.  But  the
first  step  in  the  quarrel  with  Great  Britain  had  been
due  to  the  attempt  of  the  British  Parliament  to  tax
America,  and  a  great  impatience  of  taxation  had  been
one  of  the  chief  supports  of  the  revolutionary  party.
Under  these  circumstances,  Congress  did  not  venture
to  claim  the  power  of  directly  imposing  any  tax,  and
at  the  beginning  of  the  contest  the  separate  States,
which  had  an  indisputable  right  of  self- taxation,  did
not  venture  to  exercise  it  for  military  purposes,  know-
ing how  large  a  part  of  the  population  were  lukewarm
or  hostile  to  the  revolution.  During  the  first  two  years
of  the  war  no  additional  taxes  of  any  importance  ap-
pear to  have  been  imposed,  in  spite  of  the  earnest
entreaties  of  Congress.1  But  money  was  imperatively
needed,  and  the  plunder  of  loyal  subjects  went  but  a
small  way  in  providing  it.  A  foreign  loan  was  ob-
viously impossible  until  the  revolutionary  government
had  acquired  some  aspect  of  permanence  and  security.
The  only  course  that  remained  was  the  issue  of  paper
money,  and  this  Congress  authorised  with  the  general
implied  assent  of  the  States.  Five  issues,  amounting
in  the  whole  to  fifteen  million  dollars,  had  been  made
by  the  end  of  July  1776.  Congress  apportioned  the
debt  thus  incurred  to  the  several  States  upon  "the  basis
of  population,  and  each  State  was  primarily  bound  to
raise  taxes  for  the  gradual  redemption  of  its  portion  of
the  debt,  and  if  it  failed,  the  other  States  were  liable
to  the  creditor.  At  first  this  expedient  was  very  popu-
lar, and  the  struggle  was  undertaken  under  the  belief

Bolles's  Financial  Hist,  of  the  United  States,  pp.  195-197.

891 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xia.

that  it  would  be  only  a  short  one.  But  already,  in
July  1776,  there  were  alarming  symptoms  of  that  de-
preciation of  the  continental  paper  which  was  perhaps
the  most  serious  danger  to  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,
and  it  was  aggravated  by  the  failure  of  an  attempt
which  was  made  to  raise  a  loan  of  5  millions  of  dollars
at  4  per  cent.

The  financial  question,  indeed,  was,  perhaps,  the
most  formidable  which  the  party  of  the  Revolution  had
to  encounter.  America  started  with  the  great  advan-
tage of  a  prosperous  and  economical  people,  and  of  a
government  entirely  free  from  the  profuse  extravagance
and  corruption  of  the  English  political  system.  In  a
remarkable  memorial  drawn  up  by  Franklin,  the  con-
tinental nations  were  reminded  that  the  colonies  of
America,  having  borrowed  10,000,000  dollars  in  the
last  French  war,  had  paid  off  the  whole  of  this  debt  in
1772,  and  that  the  entire  amount  expended  by  the  civil
governments  of  three  millions  of  people  was  only
70,000^  But  the  very  payment  of  the  debt,  though
it  greatly  raised  the  credit  of  the  country,  had  left  it
with  but  little  money,  and  it  was  estimated  that  the
whole  amount  of  specie  in  the  colonies  amounted  to
less,  probably  to  much  less,  than  twelve  millions  of
dollars.2  The  Congress  judiciously  threw  open  the
ports,  as  far  as  the  British  cruisers  would  allow  it,  to
commerce,  and  the  American  privateers  brought  in
much  wealth  to  the  nation,  but  the  revenues  derived
from  these  sources  could  not  balance  the  expense  of
the  war.  At  the  end  of  1777,  Congress  advised  the
different  States  to  confiscate  and  sell  for  public  pur-
poses the  property  of  all  who  had  abandoned  their  alle-
giance to  the  State  and  passed  over  to  the  enemy,  and

1  American  Diplomatic Cor- *  Bolles'g  Financial  Hist,  of
respondent,  iii.  16,  18.  tlie  United  States,  pp.  34,  45,  46.

On.  xui. THE  DEPRECIATED  CURRENCY. 895

tliis  measure  was  energetically  pursued.  In  some  States,
the  estates  and  rights  of  married  women,  of  widows  and
minors,  and  of  persons  who  had  died  within  the  terri-
tory possessed  by  the  British,  were  forfeited,  and  great
masses  of  property  were  thus  brought  into  the  public
treasury.1  But  in  spite  of  all  such  palliatives,  the
financial  stress  was  rapidly  increasing,  and  measures  of
the  most  violent  character  were  taken  to  arrest  it.  Al-
ready, at  the  end  of  1776,  Robert  Morris  described  the
proportionate  rate  of  paper  money  to  specie  as  from
2  or  2£  to  1,  and  the  depreciation  naturally  advanced
with  accelerated  speed. a  It  was  not  uniform  in  all  the
States,  but  in  1778  the  rate  was  5  or  6  to  1.  In  1779
it  was  27  or  28  to  1,  and  in  the  beginning  of  1780,
when  new  measures  were  taken  on  the  subject,  it  was
50  or  60  to  I.3  Its  necessary  consequence  was  a  cor-
responding elevation  of  all  nominal  prices,  and  an  utter
confusion  of  all  pecuniary  arrangements  which  had  been
made  before  the  war.  Multitudes  of  quiet  and  indus-
trious men,  who  had  been  perfectly  indifferent  to  the
Stamp  Act  and  the  tea  duty,  found  themselves  brought
face  to  face  with  ruin,  and  a  cry  of  indignation  and
distress  rose  up  over  the  land.  '  The  country  people,'
wrote  a  French  officer  from  Philadelphia,  '  are  so  ex-
asperated at  the  high  price  everything  bears,  that  unless
some  change  soon  takes  place  they  threaten  not  only  to
withhold  provisions  from  the  town,  but  to  come  down
in  a  body  and  punish  the  leaders.'4

In  the  beginning  of  1777,  Congress,  with  the  warm

1  Bolles's  Financial  History  of  p  159. Many  details  about  the
the  United  States,  pp.  56,  57.  prices of the chief articles  of

2  American Diplomatic Cor-  consumption will be found in
respondents,  i.  239.  that very  charming book,  Fa-

*  Ramsay's History of Hit  miliar  Letters  of  John  Adams

American  Revolution,  ii.  129.  and  his  Wife  during  il\&  Revolu~

4  Quoted  in  Bolles's  Financial  tion.
History  of  the United States,

396 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

approval  of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  determined  to
enter  upon  a  course  which  the  more  sagacious  men  in
America  knew  to  be  little  better  than  insane.  It  im-
agined that  it  could  regulate  all  prices  by  law,  and
maintain  them  at  a  level  greatly  below  that  which  the
normal  operation  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  had
determined.  Laws  with  this  object  were  speedily  made
in  all  the  States.  The  prices  of  labour,  of  food,  of  every
kind  of  manufacture,  of  all  domestic  articles,  were  strictly
regulated,  and  committees  employed  to  see  that  these
prices  were  not  exceeded.  The  measure,  of  course,
aggravated  the  very  evil  it  was  intended  to  diminish.
Goods  that  were  already  very  rare  and  greatly  needed
were  carefully  concealed  and  withdrawn  from  sale  lest
they  should  be  purchased  at  prices  below  their  real  value.
In  most  cases  the  law  was  disregarded,  and  sellers  con-
tinued to  sell,  sometimes  secretly,  sometimes  openly,  at
prices  higher  than  the  law  permitted,  charging  an  addi-
tional sum  to  compensate  them  for  the  risk  they  incurred.
Mob  violence  directed  against  the  '  engrossers,  mono-
polisers, and  forestallers,'  combinations  of  the  more
patriotic  merchants  binding  themselves  to  sell  only  at
the  authorised  prices,  newspaper  denunciations  and
occasional  legal  punishments,  were  all  insufficient  and
impotent;  and  in  September  1777,  John  Adams  wrote
that  in  his  sincere  opinion  the  Act  for  limiting  prices,
if  not  repealed,  would  '  ruin  the  State,  and  introduce
a  civil  war.'  At  last,  in  October  1778,  Congress  voted
that  '  all  limitations  of  prices  of  gold  and  silver  be
taken  off; '  but  the  States  continued  for  some  time
longer  to  endeavour  to  regulate  prices  by  legislation.1

Still  more  terrible  in  their  consequences  than  the

1  See  a  full history  of  this History  of  the  United  States,  pp.
Subject in Bolles's Financial 158-173.

CH.  xiii.  PAPER  MADE LEGAL TENDER.  897

attempted  limitation  of  prices  were  the  laws  which
were  passed  by  the  different  States  at  the  invitation
of  Congress,  making  paper  money  legal  tender,  com-
pelling all  persons  to  receive  it  in  full  payment  of  debts
or  obligations  contracted  before  the  Revolution,  and
pronouncing  those  who  refused  to  do  so  enemies  of  the
liberty  of  America.  Few  laws  have  spread  a  larger
amount  of  distress,  dishonesty,  and  injustice  through
a  great  community.  All  those  who  subsisted  on  life-
incomes  or  fixed  rents  or  interest  of  money  found  their
incomes  rapidly  reduced  to  a  small  fraction  of  their
previous  value  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  vast  wealth
was  suddenly  created,  as  the  whole  debtor  class  were
enabled  to  free  themselves  from  their  obligations.
Debts  incurred  in  gold  were  paid  off  in  depreciated
paper  which  was  only  worth  a  twentieth,  a  thirtieth,  a
fortieth,  a  fiftieth  part  of  its  real  value.  They  were
legally  extinguished  by  a  payment  which  was  in  reality
not  Is.  or  Qd.  or  even  3d.  in  the  £.

In  a  country  where  debtors  were  extremely  nume-
rous, and  where  the  whole  social  and  economical  system
rested  on  the  relation  of  debtor  and  creditor,  this
law  opened  the  door  to  the  most  enormous  and  far-
reaching  fraud,  but  it  acted  differently  on  different
classes,  and  this  difference  had  an  important  influence
upon  the  fortunes  of  the  Revolution.  To  the  labourer
who  lived  upon  his  daily  wages,  the  depreciation  was
of  little  moment,  especially  if  he  had  been  too  im-
provident to  lay  by  any  store  for  the  future.  Earning
and  spending  in  the  same  currency,  the  change  was
no  disadvantage  to  him,  and  he  was  even  benefited
by  the  unnatural  stimulus  which  the  immense  quan-
tities of  paper  money  thrown  suddenly  upon  the  mar-
ket had  given  to  all  kinds  of  labour.  On  the  other
hand,  the  wealthy  and  the  saving  and  the  helpless
classes  were  in  general  utterly  ruined.  Debts  of  mer-

898 ENGLAND IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

chants  which  had  been  contracted  when  goods  were
cheapest  and  had  often  been  for  years  on  the  books,
were  now  discharged  in  paper  not  a  twentieth  part  of
the  real  value.  Widows  and  orphans  in  great  numbers,
who  had  been  left  fortunes  in  money,  were  paid  off  by
guardians,  trustees,  or  executors  in  depreciated  paper.
Old  men  who  had  lent  out  the  savings  of  industrious
lives,  and  had  been  living  comfortably  upon  the  inter-
est, were  fortunate  if  they  did  not  receive  back  their
principal  shrunk  to  perhaps  a  fiftieth  part  of  its  origi-
nal value.  Everyone  who  had  been  sufficiently  saving
to  lend  was  impoverished.  Everyone  who  had  been
reckless  and  improvident  in  borrowing  was  enriched,
and  '  truth,  honour,  and  justice,'  in  the  emphatic  words
of  a  contemporary  American  historian,  '  were  swept
away  by  the  overflowing  deluge  of  legal  iniquity.'  *
Among  the  enterprising  men  who  had  thrown  them-
selves into  the  first  movement  of  the  revolution  were
many  of  broken  fortunes  and  doubtful  antecedents,
many  ardent  speculators,  many  clever  and  unscrupu-
lous adventurers.  Such  men  found  in  the  violent
depreciation,  the  local  variations,  and  the  sudden
fluctuations  of  the  currency  a  ready  path  to  fortune,
and  they  soon  acquired  a  new  and  sinister  interest  in
the  continuance  of  the  struggle.  Among  others,  the
gentleman  who  called  himself  Earl  of  Stirling,  and  who
had  attained  the  position  of  brigadier-general  in  the
American  service,  had  entered  it  overwhelmed  with
debt,  but  by  availing  himself  of  the  condition  of  the
currency,  he  is  stated  to  have  paid  off  debts  amount-
ing to  nearly  80,OOOZ.  with  1,OOOZ.  of  gold  and  silver.2
Very  seldom  in  the  history  of  the  world  had  the  race
for  wealth  been  so  keen,  or  the  passion  for  speculation
so  universal,  or  the  standard  of  public  honesty  so  low.

Ramsay.  *  Jones's  History  of  New  York,  ii.  324.

CH.  xiii.  GAMBLING AND DISHONESTY.  399

'  The  first  visible  effect,'  wrote  a  contemporary  Ameri-
can economist,  '  of  an  augmentation  of  the  medium  and
the  consequent  fluctuation  of  value  was  a  host  of  jockeys,
who  followed  a  species  of  itinerant  commerce,  and  sub-
sisted upon  the  ignorance  and  honesty  of  the  country
people ;  or,  in  other  words,  upon  the  difference  in  the
value  of  the  currency  in  different  places.  Perhaps  we
may  safely  estimate  that  not  less  than  20,000  men  in
America  left  honest  callings  and  applied  themselves  to
this  knavish  traffic.'  *  '  The  manners  of  the  continent,'
wrote  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  March  1778,
'  are  too  much  affected  by  the  depreciation  of  our  cur-
rency. Scarce  an  officer  but  feels  something  of  a  desire
to  be  concerned  in  mercantile  speculation,  from  finding
that  his  salary  is  inadequate  to  the  harpy  demands
•which  are  made  upon  him  for  the  necessaries  of  life,
and  from  observing  that  but  little  skill  is  necessary  to
constitute  one  of  the  merchants  of  these  days.  We  are
almost  a  continental  tribe  of  Jews.'2  'Speculation,'
wrote  Washington,  '  peculation,  engrossing,  forestalling,
with  all  their  concomitants,  afford  too  many  melan-
choly proofs  of  the  decay  of  public  virtue.' 4  The  vast
gains  rapidly  acquired  by  privateering,  the  enormous
rate  of  insurance,  the  enormous  prices  given  for  such
European  goods  as  arrived  safely  in  America,  had  al-
ready produced  a  spirit  of  fierce  and  general  gambling
which  the  depreciation  and  fluctuation  of  the  currency
immeasurably  increased.  Immense  fortunes  were  sud-
denly accumulated  ;  and,  in  the  gloomiest  period  of
the  struggle,  Philadelphia  was  a  scene  of  the  wildest
and  maddest  luxury.  Many  years  after  the  peace  with
England  had  been  signed,  the  older  Americans  could

1  Noah  Webster's  Essays,  p.  the speculations by officers,

105.  Holies,  p.  118.

American  Diplomatic  Corre-  3  Washington's  Works, vi.  210.
e,  i.  375. See,  too,  on

400 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xni.

clearly  trace  in  the  prevailing  spirit  of  reckless  and
dishonest  speculation  the  demoralising  effects  on  the
national  character  of  the  years  of  the  depreciated  cur-
rency.1

It  was  gradually  becoming  evident  to  intelligent
observers  that  the  war  was  not  likely  to  be  determined
by  mere  hard  fighting.  In  its  first  stages  a  decisive
English  victory  might  more  than  once  have  concluded
it ;  but  it  was  plain  that,  if  the  American  people,  or
any  very  large  proportion  of  them,  persevered,  no  mili-
tary expeditions  could  subdue  them.  In  no  country  in
the  world  was  it  more  easy  to  avoid  a  decisive  action,
and  the  whole  texture  and  organisation  of  colonial  life
hung  so  loosely  together,  that  the  capture  of  no  single
point  was  likely  to  be  of  vital  importance.  In  the
course  of  the  war  every  important  town — Boston,  New
York,  Philadelphia,  Newport,  Savannah,  Charleston —
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  British,  but  the  struggle  still
continued.  A  Rebel  Convention  governed  a  part  of  the
State  of  New  York  at  the  very  time  when  the  capital

1  Oct.  4, 1779,  Franklin  -wrote:
'  The  extravagant  luxury  of  our
country  in  the  midst  of  all  its
distresses  is  to  me  amazing.' —
American  Diplomatic  Corre-
spondence, iii.  116.  Chastellux,
in  his  Travels  in  North  America,
gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  luxury
at  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Bolles  (to
whose  excellent  work  I  am  in-
debted for  most  of  these  quota-
tions), cites  the  striking  descrip-
tion given  by  a  modern  American
writer :  '  Speculation  ran  riot.
Every  form  of  wastefulness  and
extravagance  prevailed  in  town
and  country,  nowhere  more  than
at  Philadelphia,  under  the  very
eyes  of  Congress ;  luxury  of  dress,

luxury  of  equipage,  luxury  of  the
table.  We  are  told  of  one  enter-
tainment at  which  800Z.  was
spent  in  pastry.  As  I  read  the
private  letters  of  those  days  I
sometimes  feel  as  a  man  might
feel  if  permitted  to  look  down
upon  a  foundering  ship  whose
crew  were  preparing  for  death
by  breaking  open  the  steward's
room,  and  drinking  themselves
into  madness.  .  .  .  The  moral
sense  of  the  people  had  contracted
a  deadly  taint.  The  spirit  of
gambling  .  .  .  was  undermining
the  foundations  of  society.' —
Greene's  Historical  View  of  tfa)
American  Revohition.

•CH.  xm.  PROSPECTS OF THE WAR.  401

and  the  surrounding  country  were  in  the  undisputed
possession  of  the  King's  army ;  and  whole  districts  sub-
mitted without  a  struggle  whenever  the  troops  appeared,
and  cast  off  their  allegiance  the  moment  they  had  gone.
To  occupy  and  maintain  in  permanent  subjection  a
country  so  vast,  so  difficult,  and  so  sparsely  populated  ;
to  support  a  great  army  in  the  midst  of  such  a  country,
and  3,000  miles  from  England,  if  the  people  were  really
hostile,  was  absolutely  and  evidently  impossible,  and
the  attempt  could  not  long  be  made  without  a  ruinous
expense.

The  real  hope  of  success  lay  in  the  languor,  divisions,
and  exhaustion  of  the  Americans  themselves.  A  large
minority  detested  the  revolution.  A  large  majority  were
perfectly  indifferent  to  it,  or  were  at  least  unwilling
to  make  any  sacrifice  for  it.  Jealousies  and  quarrels,
insubordination  and  corruption,  inordinate  pretensions
and  ungovernable  rapacity  divided  and  weakened  its
supporters.  The  extreme  difficulty  of  inducing  a  suffi-
cient number  of  soldiers  to  enrol  themselves  in  the  army
of  Washington,  the  difficulty  of  procuring  cannon  and
gunpowder  and  every  kind  of  military  stores,  the  want
of  woollen  clothes,  and  of  other  important  articles  of
European  commerce,  the  ruin,  the  impoverishment,  and
the  confusion  that  resulted  from  the  enormous  deprecia-
tion of  the  currency,  and  finally  the  impossibility  of
paying  for  the  essential  services  of  the  war,  made  it
probable  that  a  peace  party  would  soon  gain  the  ascend-
ent, and  that  the  colonies  would  soon  be  reunited  to
the  mother  country.

If  America  had  been  left  unaided  by  Europe  this
would  probably  have  happened.  A  large  proportion  of
the  States  would  almost  certainly  have  dropped  off,  and
although  the  war  might  have  been  continued  for  some
time  in  New  England  and  Virginia,  it  was  tolerably
evident  that  even  there  no  lai'ge  amount  of  gratuitous

VOL. IV.  D D

402 ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xin.

service  or  real  self-sacrifice  could  be  expected.  Wash-
ington himself  at  one  time  gravely  contemplated  the
possibility  of  being  reduced  to  carry  on  a  guerilla  war-
fare in  the  back  settlements.  But  at  this  most  critical
period  foreign  assistance  came  in  to  help,  and  it  is  not
too  much  to  say  that  it  was  the  intervention  of  France
that  saved  the  cause.

I  have  already  noticed  the  circumstances  under
which  Congress  in  1775  determined  to  seek  this  assist-
ance, and  the  strong  motives  of  resentment,  rivalry,  and
interest  that  disposed  France  to  accede  to  the  request.
It  was  in  November  1775  that  a  committee  was  ap-
pointed to  correspond  with  '  friends  of  America  in  other
countries  ; '  and  early  next  year  Silas  Deane  was  sent  to
Paris  as  secret  agent,  with  instructions  to  ascertain  the
dispositions  of  the  French  Court,  and  to  endeavour  to
obtain  arms  and  supplies.  He  arrived  in  Paris  in  July
1776,  but  before  that  date  the  French  ministers  had
resolved  upon  their  policy.  Choiseul,  who  had  watched
with  especial  eagerness  the  rise  of  the  troubles  in  the
colonies,  and  who  had  steadily  laboured  to  reconstruct
the  shattered  ravy  of  France,  to  maintain  a  close  alliance
between  the  different  branches  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,
and  to  oppose  on  all  occasions  the  interests  of  England,
had  fallen  from  power  in  1770,  but  he  was  still  said  to
have  some  influence,  and  to  have  exerted  it  in  favour
of  the  colonies.  The  existing  ministry  was  presided
over  by  Count  Maurepas,  and  its  most  powerful  mem-
bers were  Vergennes,  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,
and  the  illustrious  Turgot,  the  Comptroller-General.

In  the  beginning  of  1776  Vergennes  drew  up  a
memorial  on  American  affairs,  which  was  laid  before  the
King.  It  was  written  in  a  tone  of  extreme  hostility  to
England,  and  although  it  affected  to  deprecate  a  war,
its  whole  tendency  was  to  urge  the  Government  to  a
more  directly  aggressive  policy.  The  civil  war  that

CH.  xni.  MEMORIAL OF VERGENNES.  403

Lad  arisen  was,  in  the  opinion  of  Vergennes,  infinitely
advantageous  both  to  France  and  to  Spain,  in  so  far  as
it  was  likely  to  exhaust  both  the  victors  and  the  van-
quished, but  there  were  some  grave  dangers  to  be  feared.
It  was  possible  that  the  English  would  acknowledge  the
impracticability  of  coercing  America,  and  would  enter
into  a  policy  of  conciliation ;  and  it  was  only  too  pro-
bable that  in  that  case  they  would  employ  the  great
army  they  had  collected  in  America  to  seize  the  posses-
sions of  France  and  Spain  in  the  West  Indies.  Such
an  enterprise  would  be  extremely  popular.  It  would
speedily  efface  the  recollection  of  the  domestic  quarrel ;
it  would  be  almost  certainly  successful,  for  the  French
and  Spanish  West  Indies  were  practically  indefensible ;
and  it  was  especially  likely  if  Chatham  again  became
minister,  as  it  would  enable  him  to  overthrow  the
arrangements  of  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  against  which  he
had  so  bitterly  protested.  It  was  possible  again,  that
the  King  of  England,  having  conquered  the  liberties  of
America,  would  endeavour  to  subvert  those  of  England,
but  he  could  only  do  so  by  flattering  the  national  hatred
and  jealousy,  and  by  surrounding  himself  with  the
popularity  that  springs  from  a  successful  foreign  war.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  American  States  became  in-
dependent, it  might  be  feared  that  England  would  seek
to  indemnify  herself  for  her  loss  and  humiliation  by  seiz-
ing the  French  and  Spanish  West  Indies ;  and  it  was  not
impossible  that  America  herself,  being  shut  out  from  the
English  markets,  might  be  compelled  by  necessity  to  seek
in  new  conquests  an  outlet  for  her  productions.

The  Kings  of  France  and  Spain  were  animated  by
a  strong  love  of  peace,  and  peace  must  in  consequence,
if  possible,  be  preserved.  If,  however,  they  had  thought
lit  '  to  follow  the  impulse  of  their  interests,  and  per-
haps of  the  justice  of  their  cause  ...  if  their  military
and  financial  means  were  in  a  state  of  development

D D 2

404 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xin.

proportionate  to  their  substantial  power,  it  would,  no
doubt,  be  necessary  to  say  to  them  that  Providence
had  marked  out  this  moment  for  the  humiliation  of
England  .  .  .  that  it  is  time  to  avenge  upon  her  the
evils  which,  since  the  commencement  of  the  century,
she  has  inflicted  upon  her  neighbours  and  rivals ;
that  for  this  purpose  all  means  should  be  employed
to  render  the  next  campaign  as  animated  as  possible,
and  to  procure  advantages  to  the  Americans.  The
degree  of  passion  and  exhaustion  should  determine
the  moment  to  strike  the  decisive  blows  which  would
reduce  England  to  a  secondary  Power  .  .  .  and  deliver
the  universe  from  a  greedy  tyrant  that  was  absorbing
all  power  and  all  wealth.'  This  bold  policy,  however,
of  undisguised  assistance  the  two  Kings  did  not  wish  to
adopt,  and  so  another  policy  was  submitted  to  the  King
and  to  his  council.

'  The  continuance  of  the  war  for  at  least  one  year  is
desirable  to  the  two  Crowns.  To  that  end  the  British
ministry  must  be  maintained  in  the  persuasion  that
France  and  Spain  are  pacific,  so  that  it  may  not  fear  to
embark  in  an  active  and  costly  campaign ;  while  on  the
other  hand  the  courage  of  the  Americans  should  be
kept  up  by  secret  favours  and  vague  hopes  which  will
prevent  accommodation.  .  .  .  The  evils  the  British  will
make  them  suffer  will  embitter  their  minds ;  their
passions  will  be  more  and  more  inflamed  by  the  war ;
and  should  the  mother  country  be  victorious,  she  will
for  a  long  time  need  all  her  strength  to  keep  down
their  spirit.'  To  carry  out  this  policy  the  ministers
must  '  dexterously  tranquillise  the  English  ministry  as
to  the  intentions  of  France  and  Spain,'  while  secretly
assisting  the  insurgents  with  military  stores  and  money,
and  they  must  at  the  same  time  strengthen  their  own
forces  with  a  view  to  a  war.1

1  See  Bancroft's  History  of  the  American  Revolution.

CH.  xnr.  MEMORIAL OF  TURGOT.  405

In  order  to  judge  the  real  character  of  the  advice  eo
frankly  given,  we  must  remember  that  England  was  at
this  time  at  perfect  peace  with  France ;  that  she  had
given  no  provocation  or  reasonable  pretext  for  hostility ;
that  as  the  American  colonies  had  not  yet  declared  their
independence,  their  quarrel  with  the  mother  country
was  as  yet  a  purely  domestic  one,  and  also  that  no  con-
sideration of  their  welfare  or  of  the  principles  they  were
advocating  entered  in  the  smallest  degree  into  the
motives  of  action  of  Vergennes.

By  the  command  of  the  King  the  memorial  of  Ver-
gennes was  submitted  to  Turgot,  who,  in  April  1776,
presented  a  paper  containing  his  own  views  of  the
question.  Sooner  or  later,  in  the  opinion  of  Turgot,  the
independence  of  America  was  a  certainty,  and  it  would
totally  change,  not  only  the  relations  of  Europe  with
America,  but  also  all  the  prevailing  maxims  of  com-
merce and  politics.  America  must  necessarily  be  a
nation  of  free-traders.  She  need  not  seek  new  con-
quests in  order  to  find  a  market  for  her  produce.
By  throwing  open  her  own  ports  she  would  soon
oblige  other  nations  to  do  the  same ;  and  they  would
not  be  long  in  discovering  that  the  whole  system  of
monopoly,  restriction,  and  dependence  on  which  the
cobnial  system  of  all  European  nations  during  the
last  two  centuries  was  founded  was  an  absolute  delu-
sion.

It  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  manner  in
which  economical  ideas  were  growing  in  Europe,  that
this  opinion,  which  a  few  years  before  would  have  been
regarded  as  the  most  extravagant  of  paradoxes,  was  in
1776  independently  promulgated  by  the  greatest  French
statesman  of  his  age,  and  by  the  founder  of  political
economy  in  England.  Turning,  however,  to  the  imme-
diate interests  of  France,  Turgot  considered  her  most
pressing  and  immediate  necessity  to  be  peace.  Her

406 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  XIIL

finances  were  so  deranged  that  nothing  but  extreme
and  long-continued  frugality  could  avert  a  catastrophe,
and  the  foreign  dangers  that  threatened  her  were  much
exaggerated.  There  was  no  sufficient  reason  to  believe
that  the  English  ministers  contemplated  attacking  her,
and  it  was  extremely  unlikely  that  in  the  very  probable
event  of  England  losing  her  colonies  she  would  launch
into  a  new  and  costly  war,  especially  as  in  that  case
she  would  have  lost  the  basis  of  her  operations  against
the  French  West  Indies.  The  severance  of  the  colonies
from  England  would  not  injure  England,  and  it  would
be  a  great  benefit  to  the  world,  on  account  of  its  in-
evitable influence  on  colonial  and  commercial  policy.
'  Wise  and  happy  will  be  that  nation  which  shall  first
know  how  to  bend  to  the  new  circumstances,  and  con-
sent to  see  in  its  colonies  allies  and  not  subjects.  .  .  .
When  the  total  separation  of  America  shall  have  ex-
tinguished among  the  European  nations  the  jealousy  of
commerce,  there  will  exist  among  men  one  great  cause  of
war  the  less,  and  it  is  very  difficult  not  to  desire  an  event
which  is  to  accomplish  this  good  for  the  human  race.'

The  immediate  interests,  however,  of  France  and
Spain  must  be  judged  upon  narrower  grounds.  Eng-
land was  their  great  rival,  and  the  policy  of  the  English
ministers  was  so  infatuated  that  their  success  in  America
would  be  the  result  most  favourable  to  French  and
Spanish  interests.  If  England  subdued  her  colonies  by
ruining  them,  she  would  lose  all  the  benefits  she  had
hitherto  derived  from  them.  If  she  conquered  them
without  materially  diminishing  their  strength,  she  would
find  them  a  source  of  perpetual  weakness,  for  they  would
always  be  awaiting  their  opportunity  to  rebel.  The  true
interest  of  France  was  to  remain  perfectly  passive.  She
must  avoid  any  course  that  would  lead  to  war.  She
must  give  no  money  and  no  special  assistance  to  the
revolted  colonists,  but  the  ministers  might  shut  their

CH.  xin.  FRANCE ASSISTS AMERICA.  407

eyes  if  either  of  the  contending  parties  made  purchases
in  French  harbours.1

Maurepas  and  Malesherbes  supported  the  pacific
views  of  Turgot,  but  Vergennes  found  the  other  minis-
ters on  his  side,  and  his  policy  speedily  prevailed.  Males-
herbes, discouraged  at  the  resistance  to  his  internal
reforms,  retired  from  the  ministry  in  the  beginning  of
1776,  and  Turgot,  who  was  detested  by  the  aristocracy
and  disliked  by  the  Queen,  was  dismissed  a  few  months
later.  The  French  Government,  while  duping  the  Eng-
lish ministry  by  repeated  and  categorical  assertions  of
their  strict  neutrality,  subsidised  the  revolt ;  and  in  May
1776,  nearly  two  months  before  the  arrival  of  Silas
Deane  in  Europe,  Vergennes  wrote  a  letter  to  the  King,
of  which  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  is  more  like
the  letter  of  a  conspirator  than  of  the  minister  of  a  great
nation.  He  was  about  to  authorise  Beaumarchais  to
furnish  the  Americans  with  a  million  of  livres  for  the
service  of  the  English  colonies.  He  was  so  anxious  to
preserve  the  secrecy  of  the  transaction  that  he  had  taken
care  that  his  letter  to  Beaumarchais  should  not  be  in  his
own  handwriting  or  in  the  handwriting  of  any  of  his
secretaries  or  clerks,  and  he  had  accordingly  employed
his  son/  a  boy  of  fifteen,  on  whose  discretion  he  could
rely.  He  would  now  write  to  Grimaldi,  the  minister
of  Spain,  proposing  to  him  to  contribute  a  similar
amount.2

The  reputation  which  literary  achievement  gives,  so
far  eclipses  after  a  few  years  minor  political  services
that  it  is  probable  that  only  a  small  fraction  of  those  who
delight  in  the  '  Marriage  of  Figaro '  or  in  the  '  Barber
of  Seville  '  are  aware  that  Beaumarchais  was  for  a  time
one  of  the  most  active  of  the  confidential  agents  of  Ver-
gennes, and  that  he  bore  a  very  considerable  part  in  the

1  See  this  memoir  in  Target's 2  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplo-
Works,  viii.  (ed.  1809).  matie  Frangaise,  >i.  143, 144.

408 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  xm.

transactions  that  led  to  the  independence  of  America.
Under  an  assumed  name,  he  brought  a  first  loan  of  a
million  livres  from  Vergennes  to  the  Americans.  A
similar  sum  was  sent  by  Spain,  and  the  money  was
employed  in  purchasing  from  the  royal  arsenals  of
France  such  munitions  of  war  as  were  necessary  for  the
army.  In  the  course  of  1776,  Deane  was  able  in  this
way  to  procure  for  his  countrymen  30,000  stand  of
arms,  30,000  suits  of  clothes,  more  than  250  pieces  of
cannon,  and  great  quantities  of  other  military  stores.1

The  assistance  at  this  critical  moment  was  of  vital  im-
portance, and  from  this  time  France  continued  steadily,
by  successive  loans  and  supplies  of  military  munitions,
to  maintain  the  army  of  Washington.  In  September
1776,  Franklin  and  Arthur  Lee,  together  with  Deane,
were  appointed  commissioners  at  Paris  for  the  purpose
of  negotiating  treaties  with  foreign  Powers,  and  espe-
cially with  France,  and  rather  more  than  a  year  later  a
furious  quarrel  broke  out  between  Lee  and  Deane,  which
ended  in  the  recall  of  the  latter,  with  serious  imputations
upon  his  integrity.  He  was  replaced  by  John  Adams,
but  before  that  time  the  alliance  with  America  had  been
signed.  The  assistance  of  France,  however,  was  never
more  valuable  than  in  the  first  period  of  the  war,  while
she  was  still  at  peace  with  England.  American  vessels
were  admitted,  by  the  connivance  of  the  ministers,  into
French  ports  with  articles  of  commerce  of  which  by  law
French  merchants  had  a  strict  monopoly,  and  the  Ameri-
can agents  were  soon  able  to  inform  the  Congress  that
France  gave  the  commerce  of  the  insurgent  colonies
greater  indulgences  in  her  ports  than  the  commerce  of
any  other  nation  whatever.2  Privateers  were  sheltered
and  equipped  ;  prizes  were  secretly  sold  in  the  French

1  American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  i.  13L
•  Ibid.  pp.  37,  69,  92,  93.

en.  xnt.  PERFIDY OF  VERGENNES.  409

harbours.  Experienced  officers,  trained  in  the  French
army,  were  sent  to  America  with  the  permission,  or
even  at  the  instigation,  of  the  French  ministers,  to
organise  or  command  the  American  forces.  In  the  be-
ginning of  1777  one  of  the  ablest  sea  officers  in  France
was  engaged,  by  the  permission  of  the  minister,  in
superintending  the  construction  in  French  harbours  of
ships  of  war  for  America,1  and  finally  a  new  grant  of
two  millions  of  livres  from  the  Crown  was  made,  the
King  exacting  no  conditions  or  promise  of  repayment,
and  only  requiring  absolute  secrecy.2

It  was  not  possible  that  these  things  could  be  wholly
concealed  from  the  English  Ambassador,  but  the  comedy
was  boldly  if  not  skilfully  played.  Vergennes  professed
his  absolute  ignorance  of  the  despatch  of  military  stores
to  America,  at  the  very  time  when  by  his  authorisation
they  were  freely  exported  from  the  King's  own  arsenal.
lie  gave  orders  that  vessels  which  were  pointed  out  as
laden  with  such  stores  should  be  stopped,  and  then
allowed  them  secretly  to  escape.  He  formally  recalled
the  leave  of  absence  of  officers  who  were  said  to  be
going  to  America,  but  did  not  oblige  them  to  return  to
their  regiments.  He  gave  orders  that  no  prizes  should
be  sold  in  the  French  ports,  and  then  instructed  persons
about  the  Court  to  inform  the  American  agents  that  this
measure  was  necessary,  as  France  was  not  yet  fully  pre-
pared for  war,  but  that  they  must  not  for  a  moment
doubt  the  good-will  of  the  Court.  He  even  imprisoned
for  a  time  some  who  were  too  openly  breaking  the  law,
and  restored  some  prizes  which  were  brought  too  osten-
tatiously into  French  harbours,  but  he  secretly  granted
400,000  livres  as  a  compensation  to  their  captors,  and
the  prisoners  found  no  difficulty  in  escaping  from  the
prison  at  Dunkirk.  He  again  and  again,  in  every  term

1  American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  i.  273,  341.
3  Ibid.  p.  273.

410 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

that  could  be  binding  upon  men  of  honour,  assured  the
English  Ambassador  of  the  perfect  neutrality  and  pacific
intentions  of  France,  and  of  the  determination  of  the
French  King  to  observe  religiously  the  treaties  he  had
signed ;  and  he  at  the  same  time  steadily  pi-essed  on  his
naval  preparations  for  the  war.1  If  the  French  were
somewhat  slower  in  throwing  away  the  mask  and  the
scabbard  than  the  Americans  could  have  wished,  they
at  least  gave  the  colonies  the  assistance  most  needed,
and,  as  the  commissioners  acutely  said,  the  very  delay
was  not  without  its  compensation.  '  Enjoying  the
whole  harvest  of  plunder  upon  the  British  commerce,
which  otherwise  France  and  Spain  would  divide  with
us,  our  infant  naval  power  finds  such  plentiful  nourish-
ment as  has  increased  and  must  increase  its  growth  and
strength  most  marvellously.' 2

'  All  Europe,'  they  wrote,  about  this  time,  '  is  for
us.'  '  Every  nation  in  Europe  wishes  to  see  Britain
humbled,  having  all  in  their  turn  been  offended  by  her
insolence,  which  in  prosperity  she  is  apt  to  discover  on
all  occasions.' 3  England  under  the  great  ministry  of
Pitt  had  acquired  an  empire  and  a  preponderance  on
the  sea  not  less  overwhelming  and  not  less  menacing
than  that  which  Charles  V.  and  Lewis  XIV.  had  ac-
quired on  land,  and  it  had  become  a  main  object  of  the
governing  classes  on  the  Continent  to  reduce  it,  while
the  merchants  in  every  nation  were  looking  forward
with  eagerness  to  the  opening  of  the  great  field  of

1  See  the  full  details  of  these  French, both in Paris and

proceedings  in  the  very  curious  through their ambassador in

letters  of  Franklin  and  Deane,  London,  of  their  pacific  inten-

American  Diplomatic  Correspon-  tions, see Adolphus's  Hist,  of

dence,  i.  272,  273,  311,  313,  319,  England,  ii.  309,  429,  439.

320,  322,  341,  371. Correspon-  "  American  Diplomatic  Corre-

dence  of  George  III.  with  Lord  spondence,  i.  321.

North,  ii. 68,  69. On  the re-  »  Ibid.  pp.  278,  281.
peated  assurances  given  by  the

CH.  xiii.  EUROPEAN ASSISTANCE TO AMERICA.  411

American  commerce,  which  had  hitherto  been  a  mono-
poly of  England.  Spain,  which  was  greatly  under  the
influence  of  France,  and  very  hostile  to  England,  sup-
plied the  colonies  with  money  and  with  gunpowder,  and
gave  their  vessels  greater  trade  privileges  than  those  of
any  other  country,1  though  without  any  real  wish  for
American  independence.  The  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany
secretly  removed  all  duties  from  American  commerce,
and  expressed  himself  so  favourable  to  the  American
cause  that  Deane  assured  his  employers  that  they  might
safely  purchase  or  construct  frigates  at  Leghorn.3
Frederick  of  Prussia,  who  had  never  forgiven  his  de-
sertion by  England,  without  committing  himself  openly
to  the  Americans,  or  even  consenting  to  receive  their
envoy,  watched  with  undisguised  delight  the  growing
embarrassments  of  his  old  ally,  threw  every  obstacle  in
his  power  in  the  way  of  German  enlistments,  and  took
great  pains  to  assure  France  that  he  would  remain
perfectly  passive  if  she  entered  into  war  with  England.
The  Emperor,  hostile  on  all  other  points  to  Frederick,
agreed  with  him  in  discouraging  the  German  enlist-
ments for  England.  Holland  was  delighted  to  find  in
America  a  new  market  for  her  goods,  and  the  little
Dutch  island  of  St.  Eustatius  became  a  great  mart  for
supplying  the  wants  of  the  insurgents.

In  France  public  opinion  began  to  flow  with  irre-
sistible force  in  favour  of  war.  The  old  enmity  towards
England,  the  martial  spirit  which  had  been  repressed
and  profoundly  humiliated,  the  recollection  of  the  long
series  of  defeats  and  disasters  which  had  terminated  in
the  shameful  peace  of  1763,  and  also  the  prevailing  fear
that,  unless  the  power  of  England  were  diminished,  all

1  American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  i.  92,  93,  275.
*  Ibid.  pp.  65  92,  93.

412 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xni.

the  French  dominions  in  the  West  Indies  and  South
Africa  must  speedily  be  captured,  had  deeply  stirred
the  French  people  ;  while  all  that  was  best  in  French
thought  and  most  generous  in  French  character  wel-
comed the  rise  of  the  great  republic  of  the  West.  The
small  but  growing  school  of  economists  saw  in  it  the
future  champion  of  free  trade.  The  followers  of  Voltaire,
who  aspired  beyond  all  things  to  religious  liberty,
pointed  with  enthusiasm  to  the  complete  separation  of
Church  and  State  and  the  total  absence  of  religious  re-
strictions in  the  American  constitutions,  and  they  began
to  extol  America  even  more  than  they  had  hitherto  ex-
tolled China,  as  the  ideal  land  of  philosophers  and  free-
thinkers. The  followers  of  Rousseau,  who  valued  beyond
all  things  political  equality  and  liberty,  and  who  were
at  this  time  in  the  zenith  of  their  influence,  saw  in  the
New  World  the  realisation  of  their  principles  and  of
their  dreams,  the  final  refuge  of  liberties  that  were
almost  driven  from  Europe.  The  influence  of  French
speculation  on  the  American  contest  had  in  truth  been
extremely  slight.  The  struggle  in  New  England  was  of
an  essentially  English  kind,  directed  to  very  practical
ends,  and  turning  mainly  on  the  right  of  taxation  and
on  disputed  principles  or  interpretations  of  the  British
Constitution ;  but  there  were  a  few  men  in  America
who  had  been  in  some  degree  touched  by  French  thought,
and  among  them  was  Jefferson,  the  chief  author  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  The  passage  in  that
document — curiously  unlike  the  cautious  spirit  of  New
England  lawyers  and  of  Pennsylvanian  Quakers,  and
curiously  audacious  in  a  document  that  emanated  from
an  assembly  consisting  largely  of  slave-owners — in
which  the  American  legislators  asserted  as  a  self-
evident  truth  that  all  men  were  created  equal,  and  were
endowed  by  the  Creator  with  an  inalienable  right  to
liberty,  might  have  been  written  by  Rousseau  himself;

CH.  xui. FRENCH ENTHUSIASM— FRANKLIN  IN  PARIS. 413

and  the  much  nobler  passage  in  which  they  main-
tained that  all  governments  exist  only  for  the  benefit,
and  derive  their  just  powers  from  the  consent,  of
the  governed ;  and  that  whenever  any  form  of  go-
vernment becomes  destructive  to  the  ends  for  which
government  was  instituted,  it  is  the  right  of  the
people  to  alter  or  abolish  it,  awoke  a  mighty  echo  on
the  Continent.

It  was  a  strange  thing  to  see  the  public  opinion  of
a  purely  despotic  country  thrilling  with  indignation  be-
cause England  had  violated  the  constitutional  liberties
of  her  colonies ;  especially  strange  when  it  is  remembered
that  one  of  the  great  American  grievances  was  that
England  had  perpetuated  in  Canada  something  of  the
French  system  of  colonial  government.  Of  the  sincerity
of  the  enthusiasm,  however,  there  can  be  little  question.
The  very  judicious  selection  of  Franklin  as  the  chief
representative  of  the  colonies  greatly  added  to  it.  His
works  were  well  known  in  France  through  several
translations ;  his  great  discovery  of  the  lightning  con-
ductor had  been  made  when  the  Parisian  enthusiasm  for
physical  science  was  at  its  height,  and  it  was  soon  found
that  the  man  was  at  least  as  remarkable  as  his  works.
Dressed  with  an  almost  Quaker  simplicity,  his  thin  grey
hair  not  powdered  according  to  the  general  fashion,  but
covered  with  a  fur  cap,  he  formed  a  singular  and  strik-
ing figure  in  the  brilliant  and  artificial  society  of  the
French  capital.  His  eminently  venerable  appearance,
the  quaint  quiet  dignity  of  his  manner,  the  mingled  wit
and  wisdom  of  his  conversation,  the  unfailing  tact,
shrewdness,  and  self-possession  which  he  showed,  whether
he  was  negotiating  with  French  statesmen  or  moving
in  a  social  sphere  so  unlike  that  from  which  he  had
arisen,  impressed  all  who  came  in  contact  with  him.
Vergennes  declared  him  to  be  the  only  American  in
whom  he  put  full  confidence.  Turgot,  in  an  immortal

414 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xin.

line,  described  him  as  having  torn  the  lightning  from
heaven  and  the  sceptre  from  the  tyrant's  hand.1  Voltaire
complimented  him  in  his  most  graceful  phrases,  and  ex-
pressed his  pride  that  he  was  himself  able  to  address
him  '  in  the  language  of  Franklin.'  Poets,  philosophers,
men  and  women  of  fashion,  were  alike  at  his  feet,  and
all  the  enthusiasms  and  Utopias  of  France  seemed  to
gather  round  that  calm  American,  who,  under  the  ap-
pearance of  extreme  simplicity,  concealed  the  astuteness
of  the  most  accomplished  diplomatist,  and  who  never  for
a  moment  lost  sight  of  the  object  at  which  he  aimed.
His  correspondence  and  his  journal  show  clearly  the
half-amused,  half-contemptuous  satisfaction  with  which
he  received  the  homage  that  was  bestowed  on  him.  It
became  the  fashion  to  represent  him  as  the  ideal  philo-
sopher of  Rousseau.  He  was  compared  by  his  admirers
to  Phocion,  to  Socrates,  to  William  Tell,  and  even  to
Jesus  Christ.  His  head,  accompanied  by  the  line  or
Turgot,  appeared  everywhere  on  snuffboxes  and  medal-
lions and  rings.  He  was  the  idol  alike  of  the  populace
and  of  society,  and  he  used  all  his  influence  to  hurry
France  into  war.2

A  few  warning  voices  were  heard,  but  they  were
little  heeded.  Necker,  who  now  managed  the  finances,
saw  as  clearly  as  Turgot  had  seen  before  him  that  con-
tinued peace  was  a  vital  interest  to  France  and  to  her
dynasty,  for  it  alone  could  avert  the  impending  bank-

1  The  famous line, 'Eripuit  According  to Condorcet  (Vie

ccelofulmen,  sceptrumque  tyran-  de  Turgot),  Turgot  wrote  :  'Eri-

nis,'  was  perhaps  suggested  by  a  puit  ccelo  fulmen, mox  sceptra

passage  in  Manilius  :  tyrannis.'

'  Solvitque animis miracula  *  Some curious particulars

rerum,  about  Franklin's  French  life  will

Eripuitque  Jovi fulmen,  vir-  be  found  in  a  very  able  article  on

esque  tonandi,  Franklin  in  M.  Philarete  Chasles*

Et sonitum  ventis concessit  Le  Dix-huitieme  Si&cleen  Angle-

nubibus  ignem.'  i.  103-106.  tc/  re.

CH.  xm. WARNING VOICES — MARIE ANTOINETTE. 415

ruptcy.  Even  Vergennes  hesitated  to  strike  tlie  fatal
blow  till  it  had  been  somewhat  more  clearly  demon-
strated that  a  reconciliation  of  England  with  her  colo-
nies was  no  longer  to  be  feared.  When  at  the  request
of  Franklin  the  Declaration  of  Independence  was
translated,  and  scattered,  with  the  permission  of  the
ministers,  broadcast  over  France,  Mirabeau,  who  was
then  a  prisoner  at  Vincennes,  asked  whether  those  who
were  so  anxious  to  ally  themselves  with  the  revolted
colonies  had  really  read  or  understood  this  Declaration,
and  had  considered  whether  on  its  principles  any  Euro-
pean governments,  except  those  of  England,  Holland,
and  Switzerland,  could  be  deemed  legitimate.  When
a  few  months  later  the  French  ministers  informed
England  that  the  Americans  had  become  independent
by  virtue  of  their  Declaration,  Lafayette  remarked  with
a  smile  that  they  had  announced  a  principle  of  national
sovereignty  which  they  would  soon  hear  of  at  home.1
The  King  hesitated  much,  but  Marie  Antoinette,  who
caught  up  every  fashion  and  enthusiasm  with  the  care-
less levity  of  youth,  assisted  the  American  cause  with
all  her  influence,  little  dreaming  that  she  was  giving
the  last  great  impulse  to  that  revolutionary  spirit  which
was  so  soon  to  lead  her  to  misery  and  to  death.  '  Give
me  good  news,'  she  said  to  Lafayette,  when  he  visited
her  in  1779,  'of  our  good  Americans,  of  our  dear  re-
publicans.' 2  Paine's  '  Common  Sense,'  with  all  its
denunciations  of  monarchy,  was  translated  into  French,

1  Rocquain,  L' Esprit  Revolu-  commune de la  France  et  de

tionnaire  avant la  Revolution,  l'Am6rique,i.ni. Paine,  many

pp.  370,  371 ;  Memoires  de  La-  years  later,  wrote : '  It  is  both

fayette,  i.  50.  justice  and  gratitude  to  say  that

*  '  Dites-moi de  bonnes  nou-  it  was  the  Queen  of  France  who

velles  de  nos  bons  Am6ricains,  gave the cause of America ,o

de  nos  chers  republicans.' This  fashion  at  the  French  CourL'— -

was  told  by  Lafayette  to  Angus-  Itiglits  of  Man.
tin  Thierry. See  Circourt,  Action

416 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

and  was,  if  possible,  even  more  popular  in  France  than
in  America.1  Few  things  in  history  are  more  tragical
than  the  mingled  gaiety  and  enthusiasm  with  which
the  brilliant  society  of  Versailles  plunged  into  the
stream  that  was  to  sweep  them  so  speedily  to  the  abyss.
As  yet,  however,  there  were  few  misgivings,  and  Ameri-
can observers  believed  and  hoped  that  if  a  revolution
broke  out  it  would  not  be  in  Paris  but  in  London.
'  The  King  and  Queen,'  wrote  John  Adams  from  Paris
in  1778,  '  are  greatly  beloved  here.  Every  day  shows
fresh  proof  of  it.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Channel
there  is  a  king  who  is  in  a  fair  way  to  be  the  object  of
opposite  sentiments  to  a  nation  if  he  is  not  at  present.'2
One  of  the  chief  signs  of  the  prevailing  enthusiasm
was  the  multitude  of  soldiers  who  went  to  America  to
enlist  in  the  army  of  the  insurgents.  '  I  am  well-nigh
harassed  to  death,'  wrote  Deane  in  1776,  '  with  appli-
cations of  officers  to  go  out  to  America.'  '  Had  I  ten
ships  here  I  could  fill  them  all  with  passengers  for
America.'  f  The  desire  that  military  officers  here  of  all
ranks  have,'  wrote  the  commissioners  a  few  months
later,  '  of  going  into  the  service  of  the  United  States  is
so  general  and  so  strong  as  to  be  quite  amazing.  We
are  hourly  fatigued  with  their  applications  and  offers
which  we  are  obliged  to  refuse.'3  Most  of  them,  no
doubt,  were  mere  soldiers  of  fortune,  animated  only  by
love  of  adventure,  hatred  of  England,  or  hope  of  higher
rank  or  pay  than  they  could  gain  at  home ;  but  a  few
were  of  the  purest  type  of  enthusiasts  for  liberty.
Among  these  the  most  conspicuous  was  Lafayette,  who
abandoned  a  great  fortune  and  position  and  a  young
wife  to  serve  gratuitously  in  the  army  of  Washington,

1  American Diplomatic Cor- and  his  Wife,  p.  350.
respondence,  i.  29,  30.  3  American  Diplomatic Cor~

•  Familiar  Letters  of  J.Adams respondence,  i.  71,  93,  276.

Oil.  XIH.  THE FOREIGN OFFICERS.  417

and  who  was  appointed  a  major-general  at  the  age  of
nineteen.

The  great  majority  of  these  foreigners  were  French,
but  there  were  a  few  of  other  nationalities.  Among
the  latter  were  Pulaski,  who  had  distinguished  himself
beyond  all  other  men  in  resisting  the  first  partition  of
Poland,  and  Kosciusko,  the  hero  of  her  later  struggle.
Steuben,  a  veteran  German  soldier,  who  had  served
under  Frederick  through  the  Seven  Years'  War,  did
more  than  perhaps  any  other  single  person  to  discipline
and  organise  the  army  of  Washington.  Baron  Kalb,
who,  like  many  other  Germans,  had  fought  with  much
distinction  under  the  banner  of  Marshal  Saxe,  had
visited  America  in  1768  as  the  secret  agent  of  Choiseul,
and  when  the  war  broke  out  he  hastened  to  place  his
sword  at  the  disposal  of  the  Americans.  Another  officer
of  whom  great  hopes  were  entertained  was  Conway,  an
Irishman  in  the  French  service,  who  was  esteemed  '  one
of  the  most  skilful  disciplinarians  in  France,'  but  whose
intriguing  and  ambitious  character  produced  one  of  the
most  serious  of  the  many  divisions  in  the  American
army.1

This  incursion  of  foreign  soldiers  into  America  was
by  no  means  without  embarrassments.  It  was  not  at
all  in  the  character  of  the  American  troops  to  place
themselves  under  the  command  of  strangers,  or  to  give
up  to  strangers  the  most  lucrative  posts  in  their  army,
and  the  swarms  of  French  soldiers  who  came  over  with
promises  of  high  rank  given  them  by  Deane  excited
endless  jealousy  and  difficulty.  Great  numbers  of
American  officers  at  once  resigned.  General  Du  Cou-

1  American Diplomatic Cor-  lish  by  Greene  (G.  W.),  in  hia

respondcnce,  i.  71-73,  76,  97,  98,  interesting  little book on The

295,  296. The  lives  of  Steuben  German  Element  in  iliA  War  oil

and  of  Kalb  have  been  written  Independence.
in  German  by  Kapp,  and  in  Eng-

VOL. IV.  E  E

418 ENGLAND  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, en.  xill

dray,  who  came  out  with  a  large  party  of  French  officers,
was  drowned  in  the  Schuylkill,  and  his  followers,  after
much  angry  contention  about  the  rate  of  pay,  declared
that  the  terms  of  their  engagement  were  broken,  and
returned  to  France.  An  attempt  was  made  to  enlist  a
brigade  of  French  Canadians,  and  to  employ  the  French
officers  in  organising  it,  but  it  utterly  failed,  and  no
class  of  Canadians  showed  the  smallest  disposition  to
throw  off  the  English  rule.1  In  the  eighteenth  century
the  type  of  mercenary  soldier  who  sought  pay  and
adventure  in  foreign  armies  was  a  very  common  one,
and  men  of  this  stamp  were  often  more  than  commonly
capacious  and  unprincipled.  Numbers  of  officers,
through  their  ignorance  of  English,  were  wholly  unable
to  communicate  with  the  troops  they  aspired  to  com-
mand, while  the  leading  authorities  in  America  who
were  obliged  to  organise  the  public  service  were  often,
if  not  usually,  absolutely  ignorant  of  French.  Wash-
ington himself  was  completely  so,  though  he  found  time,
in  the  midst  of  the  occupations  of  the  campaign,  to
learn  enough  to  understand,  though  not  to  speak  it,2
and  in  the  busiest  and  most  anxious  period  of  the
struggle  John  Adams  wrote  to  his  wife  lamenting
bitterly  that  he  had  not  her  knowledge  of  that  lan-
guage, and  imploring  her  to  send  him  the  name  of  the
author  of  her  '  thin  French  grammar  which  gives  the
pronunciation  of  the  French  words  in  English  letters.'3
It  needed  all  the  tact  and  skill  of  management
which  Washington  eminently  possessed  to  surmount
these  difficulties,  but  in  spite  of  every  drawback  the

1  See,  on  these  difficulties,  Count  Fersen,  however,  who  had

American  Diplomatic  Correspon-  interviews  with  Washington  in

deuce,  i.  336,  337,  346-349.  Oct.  1780,  says  he  neither  spoke

Washington's  Works,  iv.  327-  nor  understood  French.— Lettres

829,  419-425, 450-452 ;  v.  32-35.  du  Comte  Fersen,  i.  40,  41.

*  Sparks's  Life  of  Washington.  *  Familiar  Letters,  p.  136.

en.  xiri.  THE  WINTER OF 1776-?.  419

presence  of  this  large  foreign  element  was  of  great  as-
sistance to  the  Americans.  In  addition  to  several  excel-
lent officers  who  had  fought  in  the  British  army  during
the  conquest  of  Canada,  they  had  now  among  them
many  veteran  soldiers  trained  in  the  very  best  armies
of  the  Continent,  and  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  out  of
29  major-generals  in  the  American  army,  no  less  than
11  were  Europeans.1

The  remainder  of  the  winter  of  1776-7,  after  the
combat  of  Trenton,  passed  without  any  memorable  in-
cident in  America.  The  English  remained  for  several
months  absolutely  inactive  in  their  entrenchments,  and,
to  the  unfeigned  astonishment  of  Washington,2  they
made  no  attempt  to  regain  the  territory  they  had  lost,
or  to  force  the  passage  of  the  Delaware  and  capture
Philadelphia.  Washington,  on  the  other  hand,  was
endeavouring  to  form  an  army,  and  his  letters  are  full
of  bitter  complaints  of  the  want  of  patriotism  he  on  all
sides  discovered.  In  New  Jersey,  it  is  true,  the  tide  of
feeling  had  been  turned  by  the  outrages  of  the  British
and  Hessian  troops.  The  New  Jersey  militia  were  in
arms  against  the  British,  who  now  found  the  difficulties
of  obtaining  provisions,  forage,  and  intelligence  greatly
enhanced ;  but  the  laws  of  Congress  directing  the  States
to  provide  specified  contingents  for  the  American  army
were  almost  inoperative.  The  reluctance  to  enlist  was
extreme,  and  the  delays  of  the  State  authorities
threatened  the  utter  ruin  of  the  cause.  The  attempt  to
enlist  troops  for  the  whole  duration  of  the  war  almost
entirely  failed.  For  some  time  Washington  had  not
more  than  1,500  men  in  his  camp,  while  the  English
army  was  nearly  ten  times  as  numerous.3  The  theft  of

1  Greene's  Historical  View  of 3  Kamsay,  ii.  1,  2. See,  too,
tlie  American  Revolution,  p.  283. the  Cornwallis  Correspondence,  i.

*  Washington's  Works,  iv.  301 , 29.
340,  352.

•Jti

420 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xin.

arms  by  the  soldiers  who  deserted  or  disbanded  them-
selves had  been  carried  to  such  an  extent  that  it  had
become  difficult  even  to  provide  the  soldiers  with  com-
mon guns,  when  fortunately  in  March  the  first  great
supplies  of  guns  and  military  stores  arrived  from
France,  and  in  this  respect  restored  the  condition  of
the  army.1  In  the  beginning  of  this  month  Washing-
ton reckoned  the  army  of  Howe  in  the  Jerseys  at  not
less  than  10,000  men,  while  his  own  army  was  4,000,
nearly  all  '  raw  militia,  badly  officered,  and  under  no
government.' 2  In  the  beginning  of  April  he  com-
plained that  the  extravagant  bounties  given  by  different
States  for  raising  bodies  of  men  upon  colonial  esta-
blishments had  made  it  almost  impossible  to  procure
them  for  the  continental  service,  as  '  the  men  are  taught
to  set  a  price  upon  themselves,  and  refuse  to  turn  out
except  that  price  be  paid.'  '  How  I  am  to  oppose  them '
[the  British],  he  adds,  '  God  knows ;  for  excepting  a
few  hundreds  from  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia,
I  have  not  yet  received  a  man  of  the  new  continental
levies.' 3  Ten  days  later,  in  a  confidential  letter  to  his
brother,  he  once  more  expressed  his  utter  astonishment
at  the  continued  inactivity  of  General  Howe,  and  de-
clared that  if  the  English  general  abstained  much
longer  from  taking  advantage  of  the  extreme  weakness
of  his  opponents  it  would  show  that  he  was  totally  unfit
for  the  trust  that  was  reposed  in  him.4  In  the  begin-
ning of  June  he  again  acknowledged  that  it  was  still

1  Washington's  Works,  iv.  337-  2  Ibid.  pp.  339,  340. About  a

339. The  stealing  of  guns  con-  fortnight  later,  he wrote that

tinued  to  be  a  great  evil  in  the  the  numbers  '  fit  for  duty  '  were

American  army. In  July  1777  under  3,000,  of whom all but

Washington  again  complains  of  981  were  militia,  whose  term  of

their  rarity,  though  the  importa-  service  would  expire  in  about  a

tion  of arms  far  exceeded  the  fortnight. Ibid.  p.  364.

number  of  troops  raised  to  make  3  Ibid.  pp.  375,  376.

use  of  them. Ibid.  p.  477.  4  Ibid.  p.  387.

CH.  xni  AMERICAN ARMY, 1777.  421

'  impossible,  at  least  very  unlikely,  that  any  effectual
opposition  can  be  given  to  the  British  army  with  the
troops  we  have,  whose  numbers  diminish  more  by  de-
sertion than  they  increase  by  enlistments.' l  If,  indeed,
as  most  historians  are  accustomed  to  assume,  the  bulk
of  the  American  people  were  really  on  the  side  of
Washington,  their  apathy  at  this  time  is  almost  inex-
plicable, and  it  could  only  be  surpassed  by  the  stupen-
dous imbecility  of  the  English,  who  appear  to  have  been
almost  wholly  ignorant  of  the  state  of  the  American
army,  who  remained  waiting  for  reinforcements  from
England  long  after  the  season  for  active  operations  had
begun  and  at  a  time  when  there  was  scarcely  any
enemy  to  oppose  them,  and  who,  by  burning  and  plun-
dering houses,  destroying  crops,  insulting  and  outraging
peaceful  inhabitants,  were  rapidly  turning  their  friends
into  foes.

One  great  cause  of  the  slow  organisation  of  the
Americans  was  the  difficulty  of  appointing  the  principal
officers.  In  addition  to  the  numerous  foreigners  who
were  to  be  provided  for,  great  perplexity  arose  from  the
claim  of  every  State  to  have  a  proportion  of  general
officers  corresponding  to  the  number  of  troops  it  fur-
nished.2 In  the  absence  of  any  universally  recognised
superior,  conflicting  claims  and  pretensions  had  free
course ;  and  several  admirable  letters  remain  in  which
Washington  endeavoured  to  soothe  the  resentment  or
the  vanity  of  neglected  officers.  John  Adams,  who
visited  the  army  in  the  summer  of  1777,  was  much
shocked  at  the  disunion  he  found  prevailing,  and  in  a
letter  to  his  wife  he  expressed  himself  on  the  subject
with  great  bitterness.  'I  am  wearied  to  death,'  he
wrote,  '  with  the  wrangles  between  military  officers
high  and  low.  They  quarrel  like  cats  and  dogs.  They

Washington's  Works,  iv.  447.  *  Ibid.  pp.  378.

422 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, en.  XIIL

worry  one  another  like  mastiffs,  scrambling  for  rank
and  pay  like  apes  for  nuts.' l

In  the  spring  and  early  summer  a  few  inconsiderable
expeditions  took  place  in  different  quarters.  The  Eng-
lish destroyed  large  quantities  of  American  stores  at  a
place  called  Peeks-Kill,  about  fifty  miles  from  New
York,  and  at  Danbury  in  Connecticut.  The  Americans
destroyed  a  quantity  of  English  stores  in  Long  Island,
and  a  small  party  of  volunteers  passing  into  Rhode
Island  succeeded  in  surprising  and  taking  prisoner
General  Prescott,  who  was  ultimately  exchanged  for
General  Lee.  In  June,  Howe,  having  received  some
reinforcements  from  England,  abandoned  his  quarters
at  Brunswick,  but  he  made  no  effort  to  march  upon
the  Delaware.  After  much  complex  mano3uvring  and
several  skirmishes  which  it  is  not  here  necessary  to
recount,  he  returned  to  his  old  quarters  at  Staten  Island,
despatched  a  portion  of  his  troops  to  New  York,  and
then  sailed  by  a  circuitous  route  to  Chesapeake  Bay,
where  he  landed  with  about  16,000  men  at  a  point
some  sixty  miles  from  Philadelphia.

If  the  States  had  done  what  was  expected  from  them,
he  would  have  been  at  least  greatly  outnumbered,  but  it
was  estimated  by  Galloway,  and  probably  not  untruly,
that,  of  the  66,000  men  voted  by  Congress  for  the  con-
tinental service  of  1777,  they  did  not  bring  into  the  field
16,000,  and  that  not  half  of  these  had  enlisted  volun-
tarily.2 Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  and  New  Hamp-
shire— the  States  where  the  anti-English  spirit  might
have  been  expected  to  be  strongest— were  obliged  to
pass  laws  drafting  militiamen  to  serve  by  compulsion  as
substitutes  in  the  continental  army  for  twelve  months.3
There  were  also  great  numbers  of  '  redemptioners,'  or
men  who  had  bound  themselves  to  serve  their  masters

1  Familiar  Letters,  p.  276.

*  (ySi\\ov:&f& Examination,  pp.  18, 19. *  Hildreth,  iii.  189.

CH.  xiii. PHILADELPHIA. WASHINGTON'S DEFEATS. 423

for  a  specified  number  of  years,  and  who  were  freed  from
their  obligations  if  they  would  enlist  in  (he  American
army.1  Even  Boston  had  lost  much  of  her  old  enthu-
siasm,2 and  every  State  fell  far  short  of  its  quota.
Washington  endeavoured  to  arrest  the  march  of  Howe,
but  on  September  11,  1777,  he  was  totally  defeated  in
the  battle  of  Brandywine.  His  army  fled  in  utter  con-
fusion to  Chester,  and  Du  Portail,  a  French  oflicer  who
was  then  in  the  American  service,  in  reporting  the  cir-
cumstances to  the  French  War  Office,  expressed  his  firm
conviction  that  '  if  the  English  had  followed  their  ad-
vantage that  day,  Washington's  army  would  have  been
spoken  of  no  more.'  8

As  usual,  however,  Howe  did  nothing  to  com-
plete his  victory,  and  the  American  army  was  able
to  re-form  itself.  The  revolutionists  took  great  pains
to  intimidate  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  Pennsylvania,
and  they  sent  several  of  the  principal  inhabitants
of  Philadelphia  prisoners  to  Virginia.4  On  September
26,  Howe  entered  Philadelphia,  and  appears  to  have
been  warmly  received  both  in  the  town  and  in  its
neighbouring  country.  He  left  four  regiments  to  occupy
the  city,  but  posted  the  bulk  of  his  army  at  German-
town,  about  ten  miles  distant.  On  October  4,  Washing-
ton, having  received  large  reinforcements  of  militia  from
Maryland  and  New  Jersey,  surprised  this  post,  but  after
an  obstinate  battle  he  was  again  utterly  defeated.  The
British,  with  the  assistance  of  some  men-of-war,  then

1  Hildreth,  iii.  190.  swered  :  '  If  it  is  not  Toryism,  it

2  Adams writes (March 31,  is  a  spirit  of  avarice  and  con-
1777): 'We  have  reports  here  tempt  of  authority,  an  inordinate
not  very  favourable  to  the  town  love  of  gain,  that  prevails  not
of  Boston. It  is  said  that  dissi-  only in  town  but  everywhere  1
pation  prevails.and  thatToryism  look  or  hear  from.' — Ibid.  p.  261.
abounds  and  is  openly  avowed  at  *  Jones's  History  of  New  Yorkt
the coffee-houses.'  —  Familiar  i.  197.

Letters,  p.  252. His  wife  an-  *  liamsay,  ii.  8,  9.

424 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

proceeded  to  open  the  navigation  of  the  Delaware,  at-
tacking the  powerful  forts  which  the  Americans  had
constructed  to  command  it,  and  though  they  were  once
very  gallantly  repulsed,  they  were  in  the  end  completely
successful.  Washington  still  continued,  at  the  head  of
a  regular  army,  to  maintain  himself  in  Pennsylvania,
but  the  capital  was  in  the  undisputed  possession  of  the
English,  the  Congress  was  obliged  to  fly  to  Lancaster
and  Yorktown,  the  army  of  the  Americans  was  de-
moralised by  two  great  defeats,  and  the  communica-
tions between  the  English  fleet  and  army  were  fully
established.

The  position  of  Washington  at  this  time  was  in  all
respects  deplorable.  As  early  as  March  he  had  written
to  General  Schuyler :  '  The  disaffection  of  Pennsylvania,
I  fear,  is  beyond  anything  you  have  conceived,' l  and  the
experience  of  the  campaign  fully  justified  his  apprehen-
sions. General  Howe,  during  the  many  months  his  army
was  stationed  at  Philadelphia,  never  found  the  smallest
difficulty  in  obtaining  from  the  people  abundance  of  fresh
provisions.  Profiting  by  his  experience  in  New  Jersey,
he  had  given  stringent  orders,  which  appear  to  have  been
on  the  whole  complied  with,  that  no  peaceful  inhabitants
should  be  molested;  he  even  despatched  a  severe  remon-
strance to  Washington,  who  had  destroyed  some  mills
in  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  he  succeeded  without  diffi-
culty in  establishing  perfectly  amicable  relations  with
the  inhabitants.  It  would,  perhaps,  be  an  exaggeration
to  say  that  the  active  loyalists  were  the  true  representa-
tives of  Pennsylvania!!  feeling  ;  but  it  is,  in  my  opinion,
not  doubtful  that  the  sympathies  of  this  great  and
wealthy  province  were  much  more  on  the  side  of  the
Crown  than  on  the  side  of  the  Revolution.  Had  the
Pennsylvanians  really  regarded  the  English  as  invaders

Washington's  Works,  iv.  3CO.

en.  xni. PENNSYLVANIAN  SYMPATHY FOR  ENGLAND. 425

or  oppressors,  the  presence  of  an  English  army  in  their
capital  would  most  certainly  have  roused  them  to  pas-
sionate resistance.  But,  in  truth,  it  was  never  found
possible  to  bring  into  the  field  more  than  a  tenth  part  of
the  nominal  number  of  the  Pennsylvanian  militia,  and
the  Pennsylvanian  quota  in  the  continental  regiments
was  never  above  one-third  full,  and  soon  sank  to  a  much
lower  point.1  Washington  complained  bitterly  that  he
could  obtain  no  military  intelligence,  the  population  of
whole  districts  being  '  to  a  man  disaffected ' — disaffected
'  past  all  belief.' 2  Millers  refused  to  grind  corn  for  his
army.  Provisions  of  every  kind  were  systematically
withheld,  and  often  only  obtained  by  forced  requisitions
or  from  other  provinces.  Carriages  could  rarely  be
obtained  except  by  force,  and  Washington  candidly
described  himself  as  in  an  enemy's  country.3  No  Ameri-
can of  any  military  or  political  eminence  could  separate
himself  from  the  army  in  Pennsylvania  without  great
danger  of  being  seized  by  the  inhabitants  and  delivered
up  to  the  English.4 .  As  Lafayette  bitterly  complained,
there  were  whole  regiments  of  Americans  in  the  British
army,  and  in  every  colony  there  was  a  far  greater  num-
ber who,  without  actually  taking  up  arms,  made  it  their
main  object  '  to  injure  the  friends  of  liberty  and  to  give
useful  intelligence  to  those  of  despotism.' 5

The  American  army  had  sunk  into  a  condition  of
appalling  destitution.  In  September,  Washington  wrote
that  'at  least  1,000  men  were  barefooted  and  have  per-
formed the  marches  in  that  condition  ; ' G  and  in  the
depth  of  winter  the  misconduct  or  inefficiency  of  the
commissaries  appointed  by  the  Congress,  and  the  general

1  Washington's  Works,  v.  96,  loway's  Examination, pp. 25-.

146. Hildreth,  iii.  217.  27.

7  Washington's  Works,  v.  69,  4  Life  of  Joseph' Reed,  i.  359.

198.  *  M&m.  de  Lafayette,!.  16.

1  Ibid.  pp.  187,  197-199.  Gal-  •  Washington's  Works,  v.  71.

426 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

disaffection  of  the  people,  had  reduced  the  revolutionary
forces  to  a  degree  of  misery  that  almost  led  to  their  de-
struction. On  one  occasion  they  were  three  successive
days  without  bread.  On  another,  they  were  two  days
entirely  without  meat.  On  a  third,  it  was  announced
that  there  was  not  in  the  camp  '  a  single  hoof  of  any
kind  to  slaughter,  and  not  more  than  twenty-five  barrels
of  flour.'  There  was  no  soap  or  vinegar.  '  Few  men '
had  '  more  than  one  shirt,  many  only  the  moiety  of  one,
and  some  none  at  all ; '  and,  besides  a  number  of  men
confined  in  hospitals  or  farmers'  houses  for  want  of  shoes,
there  were  on  a  single  day  2,898  men  in  the  camp  unfit
for  duty  because  they  were  'barefoot  and  otherwise
naked.'  In  the  piercing  days  of  December,  numbers  of
the  troops  were  compelled  to  sit  up  all  night  around  the
fire,  having  no  blankets  to  cover  them,  and  it  became
evident  that  unless  a  change  quickly  took  place  the  army
must  either  '  starve,  dissolve,  or  disperse,  in  order  to  ob-
tain subsistence  in  the  best  manner  they  can.'  In  three
weeks  of  this  month  the  army,  without  any  fighting,  had
lost  by  hardship  and  exposure  near  2,000  men.1  So
large  a  proportion  of  the  troops  were  barefoot  that  '  their
marches  might  be  traced  by  the  blood  from  their  feet.'  *
Yet  week  after  week  rolled  on,  and  still,  amid  unabated
sufferings,  a  large  proportion  of  those  brave  men  held
together  and  took  up  their  winter  quarters,  diminished
indeed  in  numbers,  and  more  than  once  defeated  in
the  field,  but  still  unbroken  and  undismayed,  within
a  day's  march  of  a  greatly  superior  army  of  British
soldiers.

The  time  was,  indeed,  well  fitted  to  winnow  the  chaff
from  the  grain  ;  and  few  braver  and  truer  men  were  ever
collected  around  a  great  commander  than  those  who  re-

1  Washington's  Works,  v.  193, *  Ibid.  p.  329. See,  too,  the
197,  199.  M6m.  de  Lafayette,  i.  22.

en.  xm. VALLEY  FORGE. THE  NORTHERN  ARMY.

mained  with  Washington  during  that  dreary  winter  in
Valley  Forge,  some  twenty  miles  from  Philadelphia.
'  For  some  days  past,'  wrote  their  commander  on  Feb-
ruary 16,  1778,  '  there  has  been  little  less  than  a  famine
in  the  camp ;  a  part  of  the  army  has  been  a  week  with-
out any  kind  of  flesh,  and  the  rest  three  or  four  days.
Naked  and  starving  as  they  are,  we  cannot  enough
admire  the  incomparable  patience  and  fidelity  of  the
soldiery,  that  they  have  not  been  ere  this  excited  by
their  sufferings  to  a  general  mutiny  and  dispersion.
Strong  symptoms,  however,  of  discontent  have  appeared
in  particular  instances,  and  nothing  but  the  most  active
efforts  everywhere,  can  long  avert  so  shocking  a  cata-
strophe.' l  Many,  indeed,  fell  away.  '  No  day,  nor
scarce  an  hour  passes,'  wrote  Washington  in  December,
'  without  the  offer  of  a  resigned  commission.' 2  Many
fled  to  the  country  and  to  their  friends,  and  not  less
than  3,000  deserters  came  from  the  American  camp  to
the  British  army  at  Philadelphia.3

But  while  the  American  army  in  Pennsylvania
seemed  thus  on  the  eve  of  dissolution,  and  owed  its  safety
chiefly  to  the  amazing  apathy  of  the  English,  an  event
had  happened  in  the  North  which  changed  the  whole
fortune  of  the  war,  and  made  the  triumph  of  the  Revo-
lution a  certainty.  We  left  the  greater  part  of  the
northern  American  army  posted  in  the  strong  fort  of
Ticonderoga  and  in  a  series  of  neighbouring  entrench-
ments, which,  it  was  believed,  might  be  long  maintained
against  the  enemy.  General  Carleton  had  been  lately
superseded  by  General  Burgoyne  in  the  command  of  the
English  army  in  those  quarters.  Burgoyne  was  already
well  known  to  fame.  He  had  served  with  distinction  in

Washington's  Works,  v.  239. 8  Galloway 'sExamination, pp.
Ibid.  p.  201.  19,  20.

428 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  mi.

the  war  in  Portugal.  He  had  been  a  member  of  Parlia-
ment and  a  frequent  speaker,  and  he  had  attained  much
reputation  in  another  and  very  different  field,  as  the
author  of  an  exceedingly  popular  comedy,  called  the
'  Heiress.'  He  was  esteemed  a  good  soldier  and  a  man
of  much  general  ability  and  ambition,  though  not  equally
distinguished  for  the  rectitude  of  his  judgment.  In
June  1777  he  marched  from  St.  John's  at  the  head  of  a
well-appointed  army  of  nearly  8,000  men,  about  half  of
them  foreigners ;  and  he  soon  after  summoned  the
Indians  who  had  taken  arms,  to  a  war  feast,  and  in  an
emphatic  speech  impressed  upon  them  the  duty  of  hu-
manity in  war,  offered  a  reward  for  every  prisoner  brought
in  alive  by  the  savages,  and  threatened  severe  punish-
ments against  all  who  were  guilty  of  outrages  against
old  men,  women,  children,  or  prisoners.  He  afterwards
issued  a  proclamation  to  the  insurgents,  winch  was
greatly  and  justly  blamed.  He  enumerated  in  highly
coloured  terms  the  crimes  which  had  been  committed
against  the  loyalists,  promised  impunity  and  protection
to  all  who  would  lay  down  their  arms,  but  threatened
those  who  resisted  with  the  most  terrible  war,  and  re-
minded them  that  a  word  from  him  would  abandon  them
to  the  ferocity  of  the  Indians.

The  advance  upon  Ticonderoga  was  made  by  land
and  water,  and  the  army  and  fleet  arrived  before  it  on
July  1.  Works  were  speedily  thrown  up.  Batteries
were  planted  ;  a  hill  which  commanded  the  chief  forti-
fications of  the  Americans,  and  which  had  been  left
unguarded,  was  seized ;  and  General  St.  Glair,  who
commanded  the  American  forces,  having  hastily  sum-
moned a  council,  it  was  agreed  that  the  whole  army
could  only  be  saved  from  capture  by  an  instant  eva-
cuation of  the  fortress  and  of  all  the  adjoining  works.
Congress  had  been  already  informed  that  between
13,000  and  14,000  men  were  required  for  their  de-

m.  xiri.  EVACUATION OF TICONDEROGA.  429

fence,  and  less  than  3,500  were  left  to  guard  them
against  an  English  force  which  was  much  larger  than
the  Americans  had  anticipated.  On  the  night  of  July  5
the  Americans  precipitately  abandoned  the  fortification.
Their  flight  was  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  Ninety-
three  cannon  were  left  in  Ticonderoga.  The  chief  part
of  the  provisions  and  stores  were  embarked  on  200
boats  and  despatched  up  the  South  River  to  Skenes-
borough,  but  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  the  English
fleet  hastened  in  their  pursuit,  burst  through  a  ponder-
ous boom  which  had  been  constructed  to  impede  its
progress,  overtook  the  American  flotilla,  burnt  three
galleys,  captured  two  others,  and  took  or  destroyed  the
greater  portion  of  the  stores  and  provisions.  The  Ameri-
can army  which  retreated  by  land  was  rapidly  pursued,
and  the  rearguard,  consisting  of  1,200  men  under
Colonel  Warren,  was  overtaken  and  almost  anni-
hilated. It  is  said  that  not  more  than  ninety  men  re-
joined the  ranks.  St.  Clair  succeeded,  however,  after
a  rapid  march  of  seven  days,  in  gaining  Fort  Edward,
where  Schuyler  was  stationed  with  the  remainder  of
the  Northern  army.  The  combined  forces  of  the  Ameri-
cans now  numbered  4,400  men,  including  militia,  and
they  hastily  fled  before  the  approaching  army  of  Bur-
goyne  in  the  direction  of  Albany.1

The  evacuation  of  Ticonderoga,  and  the  crushing
disasters  that  immediately  followed  it,  struck  a  panic
through  New  England  which  had  hardly  been  equalled
when  New  York  or  Philadelphia  was  taken.  The
strongest  post  in  the  American  possession  had  fallen
almost  without  a  blow,  and  it  appeared  for  a  time  as  if
the  design  which  the  English  generals  were  seeking  to
accomplish  would  be  speedily  attained.  It  was  the
object  of  Burgoyne,  in  co-operation  with  Clinton,  who

1  Ramsay,  Stedman,  Hildreth.

430 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xni.

was  stationed  at  New  York,  and  with  Howe,  who  was
stationed  at  Philadelphia,  by  occupying  the  whole  line
of  the  Hudson,  to  sever  New  England  from  the  Central
and  Southern  States,  and,  by  thus  isolating  the  part  of
America  which  was  seriously  disaffected,  to  reduce  the
whole  contest  to  narrow  limits.  Washington  wrote  in
great  alarm  describing  the  evacuation  as  unjustifiable
and  almost  inexplicable,  and  John  Adams  declared  that
the  Americans  would  never  learn  to  defend  a  post  till
they  had  shot  one  of  their  generals.  Charges  not  only  of
incapacity  but  of  treachery  were  freely  made.  Schuyler
was  deprived  of  his  command  and  replaced  by  Gates,
who,  as  a  New  Englander,  was  more  acceptable  to  the
soldiers.  Such  small  reinforcements  as  could  be  raised
were  hastily  despatched,  and  with  them  was  Lincoln,
who  was  very  popular  with  the  Massachusetts  militia,
and  Benedict  Arnold,  whose  high  military  qualities  were
now  generally  recognised.  The  country  into  which  the
English  had  plunged  was  an  extremely  difficult  one,
full  of  swamps,  morasses,  and  forests,  but  at  length  on
July  30  the  Hudson  was  reached.

But  by  this  time  the  first  panic  had  subsided,  and  a
spirit  of  resistance  had  arisen  wholly  unlike  anything
the  British  had  yet  encountered  during  the  war.  The
militia  of  New  England  and  of  the  disaffected  portions
of  New  York  were  called  to  arms,  and  they  responded
with  alacrity  to  the  summons.  It  was  partly  a  genuine
enthusiasm  for  the  cause,  for  the  New  Englanders  had
thrown  themselves  into  the  Revolution  with  an  earnest-
ness which  was  almost  wholly  wanting  in  New  Jersey
and  Pennsylvania,  and  their  keen  intelligence  fully
realised  the  importance  of  the  crisis.  It  was  partly
also  the  dread  of  Indian  incursions,  and  the  many  in-
stances of  Indian  atrocities  perpetrated  under  the  shelter
of  the  English  fiag,  which  roused,  as  they  always  roused,
the  dormant  energies  of  the  people.  The  American  army

en.  XIIT.  BURGOYNE'S  ARMY.  431

soon  rose  to  more  than  13,000  men.1  Burgoyne  found
himself  enormously  outnumbered  in  the  heart  of  a  coun-
try where  the  natural  difficulties  of  obtaining  provisions,
preserving  communications,  procuring  intelligence,  and
moving  troops  were  immense.  Two  isolated  detach-
ments of  German  troops,  under  Colonel  Baum  and
Colonel  Breyman,  accompanied  by  some  Indians  and
by  some  loyalists,  were  totally  defeated  near  Benning-
ton,  with  a  loss  of  600  or  800  men,  and  of  four  cannon.
An  attempt  made  by  another  separate  expedition  to
capture  a  small  fort  called  Fort  Stanwix  failed,  after
some  severe  fighting,  in  the  course  of  which  many
wounded  and  prisoners  were  brutally  murdered  by  In-
dians in  the  English  service.  False  intelligence  of  a
defeat  of  Burgoyne,  and  exaggerated  accounts  of  the
force  that  was  sent  to  relieve  the  fort,  induced  St.  Leger,
who  commanded  the  expedition,  hastily  to  abandon  the
siege,  and  his  artillery  and  stores  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  garrison.  But  still  Burgoyne  pressed  on,  and,  hav-
ing with  great  difficulty  collected  provisions  for  thirty
days,  he  crossed  the  Hudson,  marched  for  four  days
along  its  banks,  and  on  September  19  he  encountered
the  American  forces  at  Stillwater.  The  American  wing
which  was  first  attacked  was  commanded  by  General
Arnold,  who  appears  to  have  fought,  as  he  always  did,
with  eminent  courage  and  skill.2  The  battle  was  fierce
and  obstinate,  and  was  only  terminated,  after  about  four

1  Ramsay,  pp.  11,  38.  all  other  occasions,  Benedict
1  An  attempt  has  been  made  Arnold  showed  himself  an  ex-
in  America,  supported  by  the  cellent  soldier.  See  the  Life  of
authority  of  Mr.  Bancroft,  to  Benedict  Arnold  and  a  consider-
prove  that  Arnold  was  not  ac-  able  amount  of  additional  evi-
tively  engaged  on  this  day.  Mr.  dence  in  a  pamphlet  called  Bene-
Isaac  Arnold,  however,  the  re-  diet  Arnold  at  Saratoga  (re-
cent biographer  of  Benedict  Ar-  printed  from  the  United  Service,
nold,  appears  to  have  established  Sept.  1880),  by  Isaac  N.  Arnold,
beyond  dispute  that  this  is  a  See,  too,  Stedman's  very  full
mistake,  and  that  on  this,  as  on  account  of  the  campaign.

432 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xm,

hours'  fighting,  by  the  approach  of  night.  The  English
retained  the  field  of  battle,  but  all  the  real  advantages
were  on  the  side  of  the  Americans.  The  dwindling  army
of  the  English  was  reduced  by  between  500  and  600
men,  while  the  loss  of  the  Americans  was  probably
somewhat  smaller.

The  hunting  season  of  the  Indians  had  now  begun,
and  as  they  had  obtained  little  plunder  and  were  much
dispirited  by  the  combats  of  Bennington  and  Still  water,
they  began  rapidly  to  desert.  A  large  proportion  of
the  Canadian  volunteers  followed  their  example.  Pro-
visions were  beginning  to  run  short.  By  crossing  the
Hudson  the  English  had  greatly  added  to  the  difficulty
of  maintaining  their  communications  with  the  store-
houses on  Lake  George.  An  expedition  was  planned
by  Gates  and  Arnold  to  recover  Ticonderoga,  and  al-
though it  failed  in  its  main  object,  it  succeeded  in  in-
tercepting large  supplies  intended  for  the  English.  The
army  of  Burgoyne  was  now  reduced  to  little  more  than
5,000  men,  many  of  them  incapacitated  by  wounds  or
sickness,  and  they  were  limited  to  half  the  usual  allow-
ance of  provisions.  The  forage  was  soon  exhausted,
and  the  horses  perished  in  numbers  through  hunger.
The  only  hope  remaining  was  that  relief  might  arrive
from  New  York,  and  Burgoyne  had  already  succeeded
in  sending  a  message  to  Clinton  describing  his  situation,
and  he  had  arranged  all  his  later  movements  with  a  view
to  such  relief.  An  attempt  was  made  from  New  York
to  effect  it,  but  the  relieving  army  never  reached  the
unhappy  commander.  The  almost  certain  prospect  of
capturing  a  British  army  elated  the  Americans  to  the
highest  degree,  and  new  volunteers  rapidly  poured  in.
On  October  7  another  desperate  fight  took  place ;  Arnold
had  all  but  succeeded  in  capturing  the  British  lines,
when  he  was  laid  low  by  a  severe  wound  ;  and  the
British  lost,  besides  many  killed  and  wounded,  200

cir.  xiii.  CAPITULATION OF SARATOGA.  433

prisoners  and  nine  pieces  of  cannon.  Next  clay,  Bur-
goyne  retired  to  Saratoga,  where  he  was  speedily  sur-
rounded by  an  army  nearly  four  times  as  large  as  his
own,  and  so  advantageously  posted  that  it  was  scarcely
possible  to  attack  it.  Burgoyne  estimated  the  number
of  his  own  men  who  were  still  capable  of  fighting  as  not
more  than  3,500.1  All  communications  were  cut  off;
the  hope  of  relief  from  New  York  was  almost  gone,  and
the  small  amount  of  provisions  in  the  camp  was  nearly
exhausted.  Burgoyne  refused,  even  in  this  extremity,
to  yield  without  conditions,  but  on  October  17,  1777,
the  memorable  convention  was  signed,  by  which  the
whole  British  army,  with  all  its  arms  and  artillery,  were
surrendered  to  the  enemy.

The  number  of  men  who  surrendered,  including
Canadians,  irregular  and  militia  troops,  camp  followers
and  labourers,  was  about  5,800,  and  it  was  stipulated,
among  other  things,  that  they  should  march  out  with
the  honours  of  war,  and  that  they  should  be  permitted
at  once  to  return  to  England  on  condition  of  not  serving
again  in  North  America  during  the  war.  The  over-
whelming nature  of  the  disaster  was  at  once  felt  on  both
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Clinton,  who  had  captured  some
forts  and  advanced  some  distance  along  the  Hudson  to
the  relief  of  Burgoyne,  retired  to  New  York.  The
small  garrison  which  had  been  left  at  Ticonderoga,
knowing  that  it  was  impossible  to  defend  that  post
against  the  army  which  was  now  free  to  act  against  it,
hastily  abandoned  it  and  retreated  to  Canada.

In  Europe,  one  of  the  first  effects  of  the  calamity  was
to  fix  the  determination  of  the  French  ministers.  Their
desire  of  injuring  and  humiliating  Great  Britain  had
hitherto  been  restrained  by  their  dread  of  war,  by  the

1  See  the  Minutes  of  the  Conn- State  of the  Expedition  from
oil  of  War,  Oct.  13,  in  Burgoyne's Canada.

VOL.  IV.  F F

434 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xnt

miseiable  condition  of  their  finances,  by  their  fear  that
the  long  succession  of  Ameiican  disasters  would  lead,
either  to  a  speedy  compromise  or  to  a  total  subjugation
of  the  insurgents.  It  is  a  common  error  of  politicians
to  overrate  the  wisdom  of  their  opponents  and  to  under-
rate the  influence  of  resentment,  ambition,  and  tempo-
rary excitement  upon  their  judgments  or  their  acts ;
and  many  of  the  best  English  observers  appear  to  have
believed  in  1777  that  France  would  not  enter  openly
into  the  war,  but  would  content  herself  with  the  line
of  sagacious  policy  which  had  been  indicated  by  Turgot.
This  appears  to  have  been,  on  the  whole,  the  opinion  of
Burke.1  It  was  the  decided  opinion  of  Gibbon,  who
visited  Paris  in  August ; 2  and  the  King,  though  quite
aware  of  the  secret  assistance  which  the  French  were
giving  to  the  Americans,  expressed  his  belief,  in  Sep-
tember, that  the  chances  of  war  with  France  had  greatly
diminished.3

It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  the  French  ministers
themselves  were  undecided  until  the  tidings  arrived,
in  the  first  week  of  December,  of  the  surrender  of
Saratoga.  In  those  tidings  they  heard  the  knell  of
English  dominion  in  America,  of  English  greatness  in
the  world.  Their  decision  was  speedily  taken.  On  the
17th  of  that  same  month  they  informed  the  American
commissioners  that  they  were  resolved  to  enter  into  a
treaty  of  commerce  with  America,  to  acknowledge  and
support  her  independence,  and  to  seek  no  advantage  for
themselves  except  a  participation  in  American  commerce
and  the  great  political  end  of  severing  the  colonies  from
the  British  Empire.  The  sole  condition  exacted  was
that  the  Americans  should  make  no  peace  with  England

1  Bnrke'B Correspondence, ii.  III.  and  Lord  North,  ii.  83,  84.

115,  14G.  See,  too,  pp.  98,  106,  and  Wai-

*  Miscellaneous  Works,  ii.  210.  pole's  Last  Journals,  ii.  178.
1  Correspondence of George

en.  XIIT.  ENGLISH OPINION, 1776-7-  435

which  did  not  involve  a  recognition  of  their  independ-
ence.1 On  February  6,  1778,  treaties  to  this  effect  were
formally  signed  in  Paris.

It  will  now  be  necessary  to  revert  to  the  course  of
opinion  in  England.  The  undoubted  popularity  of  the
war  in  its  first  stage  had  for  some  time  continued
to  increase,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  1776  and  the
first  half  of  1777  it  had  probably  attained  its  maximum.
At  the  close  of  1776  the  greater  part  of  the  Rocking-
ham  connection,  finding  themselves  beaten  by  over-
whelming majorities,  abstained  from  attending  Parlia-
ment except  in  the  mornings,  when  private  business
was  being  transacted.  A  gi-eat  part  of  the  majorities
against  them  consisted,  no  doubt,  of  courtiers  and  place-
men, of  representatives  of  Cornish  boroughs,  or  other
nominees  of  the  Government ;  but  the  Whigs  at  this
time  very  fully  admitted  that  the  genuine  opinion  of
the  country  was  with  the  Government  and  with  the
King.  The  victory  of  Long  Island,  the  capture  of  New
York,  Fort  Washington,  and  Fort  Lee,  the  successful
invasion  of  the  Jerseys,  and  at  a  later  period  the  battle
of  Brandywine  and  the  occupation  of  Philadelphia  and
of  Ticonderoga,  convinced  a  great  section  of  the  Eng-
lish people  that  the  insurrection  was  likely  to  be  speedily
suppressed,  and  that  the  area  of  real  disaffection  had
been  extremely  exaggerated.  The  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence, and  the  known  overtures  of  the  Americans
to  France,  were  deemed  the  climax  of  insolence  and
ingratitude.  The  damage  done  to  English  commerce,
not  only  in  the  West  Indies,  but  even  around  the  Eng-
lish and  Irish  coast,  excited  a  widespread  bitterness,
and  it  was  greatly  intensified  by  a  series  of  attempts
which  were  made  at  the  close  of  1776  and  in  the  begin-
ning of  1777  to  burn  the  arsenals  at  Portsmouth  and

1  American  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  i,  355-357.

F F  2

436 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm,

Plymouth,  and  the  shipping  at  Bristol.  Several  houses
at  Bristol  were  actually  destroyed,  but  at  last  the  cul-
prit was  detected  and  convicted,  and  he  prc-ved  to  be
an  artisan  who  had  recently  returned  from  America,
and  who  by  his  own  confession  had  acted  at  the  direct
instigation  of  Silas  Deane,  the  American  commissioner
at  Paris.1  Besides  all  this,  war  in  itself  is  seldom  un-
popular in  England.  English  privateers  were  soon
afloat,  rivalling  in  their  gains  those  of  the  colonies,  and
the  spirits  of  patriotism,  combat,  domination,  and  ad-
venture were  all  aroused.

Sir  George  Savile,  writing  confidentially  to  Rock-
ingham  in  January  1777,  described  the  condition  of
opinion  in  the  most  emphatic  terms :  '  We  are  not  only
patriots  out  of  place,  but  patriots  out  of  the  opinion  of
the  public.  The  reputed  successes,  hollow  as  I  think
them,  and  the  more  ruinous  if  they  are  real,  have  fixed
or  converted  ninety-nine  in  one  hundred.  The  cause
itself  wears  away  by  degrees  from  a  question  of  right
and  wrong  between  subjects,  to  a  war  between  us  and  a
foreign  nation,  in  which  justice  is  never  heard,  because
love  of  one's  country,  which  is  a  more  favourite  virtue,
is  on  the  other  side.  I  see  marks  of  this  everywhere
and  in  all  ranks.'2  In  his  admirable  letter  on  the
American  question  addressed  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol,
which  was  published  in  the  beginning  of  1777,  Burke
made  no  secret  of  his  belief  that  English  opinion  had
deserted  the  Americans.  A  few  months  later  he  wrote
to  Fox  that  '  the  popular  humour '  was  far  worse  than
he  had  ever  known  it;  that  his  own  constituency,
Bristol,  had  just  voted  the  freedom  of  the  city  to  Lord
Sandwich  and  Lord  Suffolk ;  that  '  in  Liverpool  they
are  literally  almost  ruined  by  this  American  war,  but

1  See  his  confession  in  Howell's 2  Albemarle's  Life  of  Rocking.
State  Trials,  xx.  1305.  ham.  ii.  b05.

CH.  xin.  ENGLISH OPINION, 1777.  437

they  love  it  as  they  suffer  from  it.'  '  The  Tories,'  he
added,  '  do  universally  think  their  power  and  conse-
quence involved  in  the  success  of  this  American  business.
The  clergy  are  astonishingly  warm  in  it ;  and  what  the
Tories  are  when  embodied  and  united  with  their  natural
head,  the  Crown,  and  animated  by  their  clergy,  no  man
knows  better  than  yourself.  The  Whigs  .  .  .  are
what  they  always  were  (except  by  the  able  use  of  op-
portunities), by  far  the  weakest  party  in  this  country.
.  .  .  The  Dissenters,  their  main  effective  part,  are  .  .  .
not  all  in  force.  They  will  do  very  little.' l

Measures  were  carried  without  difficulty  suspending
the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  in  the  case  of  persons  suspected
of  high  treason  committed  in  North  America  or  on  the
high  seas,  or  of  piracy,  and  granting  letters  of  marque
and  reprisal  against  American  vessels.  Supplies  amount-
ing to  a  little  less  than  13  millions  were  voted  for  the
expenses  of  the  year,  and  an  address,  which  was  moved
by  Lord  Chatham  in  May,  for  repealing  the  many  op-
pressive Acts  relating  to  America  since  1763,  was
easily  rejected.  The  language  of  the  Opposition  in  their
private  correspondence,  and  sometimes  in  public,  was
that  of  extreme  despondency.  Burke  was  never  weary
of  impressing  upon  the  people  that  the  American
question  should  not  be  decided  by  philosophical  or
historical  disquisitions  upon  the  rights  of  Parliament
or  of  provincial  assemblies,  but  by  considerations  of  prac-
tical policy,  and  that  no  possible  good  could  result  from
the  course  which  was  being  pursued.  The  English,  he
argued,  never  could  get  a  revenue  from  America.  They

1  Burke's  Works,  ix.  152,  153.  disgrace  and  total  surrender  of

So  the  Duke  of  Grafton  writes :  General Burgoyne's army at

'  The  majority,  both  in and  out  Saratoga was not sufficient  to

of Parliament, continued  in  a  awaken  them  from  their  follies.'

blind  support  of  the  measures  of  — MS.  Autobiography.
Administration. Even  the  great

438 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xiil.

were  masters  only  of  the  ground  on  which  they  en-
camped. They  were  rapidly,  by  the  employment  of
savage  allies  and  of  German  mercenaries,  depriving
themselves  of  every  friend  in  America.  They  were
adding  enormously  to  their  own  national  debt,  and  were
exposing  themselves  to  the  danger  of  a  foreign  war
under  most  disadvantageous  circumstances.  Nor  were
these  the  only  evils  resulting  from  the  contest.  The
party  most  hostile  to  British  liberty  was  raised  to
power.  The  principles  of  liberty  were  discredited.
Precedents  were  admitted  and  a  bias  was  created  ex-
tremely hostile  to  the  British  Constitution,  and  some  of
its  most  essential  maxims,  being  violated  in  America
and  asserted  by  insurrection,  would  soon  cease  to  be  re-
spected at  home.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  even  ex-
pressed his  firm  belief  that  Parliament  in  its  present
mood  would  be  perfectly  ready  to  establish  despotism  in
England.1

The  Whig  secession  was  a  very  short  one,  and  it
was  imperfectly  observed.  Fox,  who  was  now  rapidly
rising  to  a  foremost  place  among  the  opponents  of  the
Ministry,  never  joined  it.  His  speeches  at  this  time,
by  the  confession  of  the  best  judges,  were  among  the
mdst  powerful  ever  heard  in  Parliament ;  and  a  signifi-
cant letter  is  preserved  in  which  the  King  recommended
North  to  push  on  as  much  business  as  possible  during  a
few  days  when  the  young  orator  was  at  Paris.2  Whether,
however,  these  speeches  were  as  advantageous  to  the
Whig  party  as  they  were  to  the  reputation  of  the
speaker,  may,  I  think,  be  much  doubted.  It  was  one
of  the  peculiarities  of  Fox,  which  he  showed  both
during  the  American  War  and  during  the  war  of  the
French  Revolution,  that  whenever  he  differed  from  the

Burke's  Correspondence,  ii.  118.

Correspondence  of  George  III.  with  Lord  North,  ii.  40.

en.  xiii.  CONDUCT OF  THE OPPOSITION.  430

policy  of  the  Government,  he  never  appeared  to  have
the  smallest  leaning  or  bias  in  favour  of  his  country.
Believing  at  this  time  that  his  friends  were  as  com-
pletely proscribed  as  the  Jacobites  in  the  two  preceding
reigns,  and  that  he  had  nothing  to  look  forward  to  ex-
cept the  reputation  of  a  great  orator,1  he  placed  no
check  upon  his  natural  impulses.  More  than  any  other
man  he  gave  the  Whig  party  that  cosmopolitan  andun-
national  character  which  was  one  of  the  chief  sources  of
its  weakness,  and  which  it  only  lost  at  the  Reform  Bill
of  1832.  Chatham,  in  his  most  vehement  denunciations
of  the  policy  of  the  Government,  never  forgot  that  ho
was  beyond  all  things  an  English  statesman,  and  the
greatness  of  England  was  at  all  times  the  first  object  of
his  ambition.  Burke,  although  he  was  guilty  of  innu-
merable faults  of  temper  and  taste,  and  although  he  was
quite  prepared  to  recognise  the  Independence  of  Ame-
rica, if  it  became  necessary,  seldom  failed  to  put  forward
reconciliation  as  the  ultimate  end  of  his  policy ;  and  in
his  letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol  in  1777  he  offended
some  of  the  more  violent  members  of  his  party  by  ex-
pressing his  earnest  wish  that  the  whole  body  of
authority  of  the  English  Crown  and  Parliament  over
America  which  existed  before  the  Stamp  Act,  might  be
preserved  perfect  and  entire.2  But  the  language  of
Fox  was  that  of  a  passionate  partisan  of  the  insurgents.
I  have  already  mentioned  his  eulogy  of  Montgomery,
who  fell  at  the  head  of  the  American  army.  In  one  of
his  letters  he  described  the  first  considerable  success  of
the  English  in  America  as  '  the  terrible  news  from  Long
Island,'  and  spoke  of  what  would  happen  '  if  America
should  be  at  our  feet — which  God  forbid.' 3  In  Parlia-

Fox's  Correspondence,  i.  169-171.
See  Burke's  Works,  iii.  176,  178.
Fox's  Correspondence,  ii.  145,  147.

440 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xiiL

ment  he  exerted  all  his  eloquence  to  show  that  it  was
the  true  interest  of  France  and  Spain  to  draw  the  sword
in  favour  of  American  Independence.1  When  the  news
of  the  crushing  disaster  of  Saratoga  arrived,  the  Oppo-
sition did  not  suspend  for  a  single  day  their  party  war-
fare ;  they  expressed  no  real  desire  to  support  the  Gov-
ernment in  its  difficulties,  and  Fox  at  once  signalised
himself  by  a  furious  invective  against  Lord  George
Germaine,  accusing  him  of  disgracing  his  country  in
every  capacity,  and  expressing  his  hope  that  he  would
be  brought  to  a  second  trial.2

In  every  stage  of  the  contest  the  influence  of  the
Opposition  was  employed  to  trammel  the  Government.
In  1776  they  denounced  the  garrisoning  of  Minorca  and
Gibraltar  with  Hanoverian  soldiers  as  a  breach  of  the
Act  of  Settlement.3  After  the  surrender  of  Saratoga,
Liverpool,  Manchester,  Edinburgh,  and  Glasgow  each
raised  a  regiment.  Several  independent  companies
were  raised  in  Wales,  and  the  patriotic  enthusiasm  was
so  strong  that  no  less  than  15,000  soldiers  were  pre-
sented by  private  bounty  to  the  State.4  But  the  Oppo-
sition did  everything  in  their  power  to  discourage  the
movement.  They  denounced  the  raising  of  troops  by
private  subscription  as  unconstitutional  and  dangerous
to  liberty,  while  they  dilated  upon  the  indefensible  con-
dition of  the  country  in  a  strain  that  must  have  greatly
encouraged  the  French,5  and  Fox  at  the  same  time
moved  that  no  more  troops  should  be  sent  out  of  Eng-
land.6 The  statement  of  Wraxall  that  the  Whig  colours

1  Parl.  Hist,  xviii.  1430.  •  See Parl.  Hist. xix. 620,

*  Walpole's Last  Journals,  622. He  said 'that  Scotland  and
ii.  170,  171. Correspondence  of  Manchester  were  so  accustomed
George  111.  ivith  Lord  North,  ii.  to  disgrace  that  it  was  no  wonder
95.  if  they  pocketed  instances  of  dis-

1  Adoiphus,  ii.  265-267.  honour  and  sat  down  contented

4  Ibid.  pp.  504,  505.  with  infamy.'

•  Ibid.  pp.  509-515.

cb.  xiii. CONDUCT  OF  THE  OPPOSITION.  441

of  buff  and  blue  were  first  adopted  by  Fox  in  imitation
of  the  uniform  of  Washington's  troops,1  is,  I  believe,
corroborated  by  no  other  writer ;  but  there  is  no  reason
to  question  his  assertion  that  the  members  of  the  Whig
party  in  society  and  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament
during  the  whole  course  of  the  war  wished  success  to
the  American  cause  and  rejoiced  in  the  American
triumphs.2  Benedict  Arnold  was  attacked,  Franklin
and  Laurens  were  eulogised  in  the  British  House  of
Commons  in  a  strain  which  would  have  been  perfectly
becoming  in  the  American  Congress,  and  the  American
cause  was  spoken  of  as  the  cause  of  liberty.3  Dr.  Price,
who  was  one  of  the  great  lights  of  the  democratic  party,
and  whose  knowledge  of  finance  was  widely  celebrated,
was  invited  by  the  Congress  at  the  end  of  1778  to  go
over  to  America  and  to  manage  the  American  finances.
He  declined  the  invitation  on  the  ground  of  his  feeble
health  and  spirits,  but  with  a  profusion  of  compliments
to  the  Assembly,  which  he  '  considered  the  most  respect-
able and  important  in  the  world,'  with  the  warmest
wishes  for  the  success  of  the  Americans,  and  without
the  smallest  intimation  that  the  fact  that  they  were  at
war  with  his  country  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  place
his  talents  at  their  disposal.4  In  1781  a  young  poet  of
the  party,  who  afterwards  became  the  great  Sir  William
Jones,  told  how  Truth,  Justice,  Reason,  and  Valour  had

1  Wraxall's  Memoirs,  ii.  2.  '  dressed  in  buff  and  blue,  after-
There  is  a  long  discussion  on  the  wards  joined  Montgomery  in
origin  of  the  Whig  colours  in  the  Canada,  was  wounded  and  taken
Stanhope  Miscellanies,  pp.  116-  prisoner  at  Quebec.' — Hist,  of
122,  but  it  leaves  the  question  New  York,  ii.  343.
in  great  uncertainty.  Sparks  2  Wraxall's  Memoirs,  i.  470,
thought  that  the  Americans  471.

adopted  the  uniform  from  the  *  Parl.  Hist.  xxii.  1176.  Burke

Whigs, but  it  appears  to  have  was the warmest eulogist of

been  worn  in  America  from  the  Franklin  and  Laurens.

very  beginning  of  the contest.  4  American Diplomatic Cor

Jones  speaks  of  a  soldier  who,  respondence,  ii.  222,  224.

442 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xtn.

all  fled  beyond  the  Atlantic  to  seek  a  purer  soil  and  a
more  congenial  sky.1  'The  parricide  joy  of  some,'  wrote
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  about  this  time, '  in  the  losses  of  their
country  makes  me  mad.  They  don't  disguise  it.  A
patriotic  Duke  told  me  some  weeks  ago  that  some  ships
had  been  lost  off  the  coast  of  North  America  in  a  storm.
He  said  1,000  British  sailors  were  drowned — not  one
escaped — with  joy  sparkling  in  his  eyes.  ...  In  the
House  of  Commons  it  is  not  unusual  to  speak  of  the
Provincials  as  our  army.'  The  same  acute  observer  ex-
pressed his  conviction  that  the  North  Ministry  had  re-
peatedly made  mistakes  which  would  have  destroyed  it
had  it  not  been  for  the  course  which  was  adopted  by  the
Opposition.  '  It  was  the  wish  of  Great  Britain  to  re-
cover America.  Government  aimed  at  least  at  this
object,  which  the  Opposition  rejected.  .  .  .  The  prin-
ciples [of  Government]  respecting  America  were  agree-
able to  the  people,  and  those  of  Opposition  offensive  to
them.'2

And  while  the  Opposition  by  their  grossly  unpatriotic
language  and  conduct  exasperated  the  national  feeling,
the  King,  on  his  side,  did  the  utmost  in  his  power  to
embitter  the  contest.  It  is  only  by  examining  his  cor-
respondence with  Lord  North  that  we  fully  realise  how
completely  at  this  time  he  assumed  the  position  not
only  of  a  prime  minister  but  of  a  Cabinet,  superintend-
ing, directing,  and  prescribing,  in  all  its  parts,  the
policy  of  the  Government.  It  was  not  merely  that  he
claimed  a  commanding  voice  in  every  kind  of  appoint-
ment. The  details  of  military  management,  the  whole

1  See  a  poem  called  The  Muse  Bow.  tyrants,  bow  beneath  th'  avenging

Recalled ;  Jones  continued :-  oSLe  with  fleets  shall  mock  the

There  on  a  lofty  throne  shall  Virtue  waves,

stand,  And  arts  that  flourish  not  with  slaves.
To  her the  youth  of  Delaware  shall

An,?  wh'en  her  smiles  rain  plenty  o'er _  JLEAJg"}*,  ^V7 ^
the  land,  Oilbcrt  Elliot,  i.  74,  76,  7 1 .

en.  xni.  CONDUCT OF  THE KINO.  443

course  and  character  of  the  war,  and  sometimes  even
the  manner  in  which  Government  questions  were  to  be
argued  in  Parliament,  were  prescribed  by  him;  arid
ministers,  according  to  the  theory  which  had  now  be-
come dominant  in  Court  circles,  were  prepared  to  act
simply  as  his  agents,  even  in  direct  opposition  to  their
own  judgments.  We  have  already  seen  that  Lord  Bar-
rington,  who,  as  minister  of  war,  was  most  directly  re-
sponsible for  the  manner  in  which  the  war  was  con-
ducted, had  distinctly  informed  his  brother  ministers  as
early  as  1774  that  he  disapproved  of  the  whole  policy  of
coercing  the  colonies,  that  be  believed  the  military
enterprises  which  he  organised  could  lead  to  nothing
but  disaster,  and  that  he  was  convinced  that,  though
the  Americans  might  be  reduced  by  the  fleet,  they  could
never  be  reduced  by  the  army.  We  have  seen  also
that,  although  Barrington  never  failed  to  express  his
opinions  frankly  and  fully  to  the  Cabinet,  he  consented,
at  the  request  of  the  King,  to  remain  the  responsible
minister  till  the  end  of  1778.  Lord  Howe  and  Lord
Amherst  agreed  with  Barrington  in  thinking  that  an
exclusively  naval  war  was  the  sole  chance  of  success,
and  it  is  extremely  probable  that  this  opinion  was  a
just  one.  In  the  divided  condition  of  American  opinion,
the  stress  of  a  severe  blockade  might  easily  have  ren-
dered the  Revolutionary  party  so  unpopular  that  it
would  have  succumbed  before  the  Loyalists,  had  it  not
been  strengthened  by  the  great  military  triumph  of
Saratoga,  and  by  the  indignation  which  the  outrages  of
British  and  German  troops  and  the  far  more  horrible
outrages  of  Indian  savages  had  very  naturally  produced.
But  the  King  had  a  different  plan  for  the  war,  and  Bar-
rington obediently  carried  it  out.  '  Every  means  of
distressing  America,'  wrote  the  King,  '  must  meet  with
my  concurrence.'  He  strongly  supported  the  employ-
ment of  Indians,  and  in  October  1777  he  expressed  his

444 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xni.

•

hope  that  Howe  would  '  turn  his  thoughts  to  the  mode
of  war  best  calculated  to  end  this  contest,  as  most  dis-
tressing to  the  Americans,'  which,  the  King  reproach-
fully added,  'he  seems  as  yet  carefully  to  have  avoided.' l
It  was  the  King's  friends  who  were  most  active  in  pro-
moting all  measures  of  violence.  Clergymen  who  in
the  fast-day  sermons  distinguished  themselves  by  violent
attacks  on  the  Americans  or  by  maintaining  despotic
theories  of  government,  were  conspicuously  selected  for
promotion.  The  war  was  commonly  called  the  '  King's
war,'  and  its  opponents  were  looked  upon  as  opponents
of  the  King.2

The  person,  however,  who  in  the  eye  of  history  ap-
pears most  culpable  in  this  matter,  was  Lord  North.
He  disclaimed  indeed  the  title  of  Prime  Minister,  as  a
term  unknown  to  the  Constitution ;  but  as  First  Lord
of  the  Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  he
was  more  than  any  other  person  responsible  to  the
country  for  the  policy  that  was  pursued,  and  but  for  his
continuance  in  office  that  policy  could  hardly  have  been
maintained.  Nearly  all  the  great  politicians  of  Europe
— Frederick  in  Prussia,  Turgot  in  France,  Chatham  and
Burke  in  England — pronounced  the  course  which  the
English  Government  were  adopting  to  be  ruinous ;  and
the  bitterness  with  which  the  Opposition  attacked  Lord
North  was  always  considerably  aggravated  by  the  very
prevalent  belief  that  he  was  not  seriously  convinced  of
the  wisdom  of  the  war  he  was  conducting,  and  that  the
tenacity  with  which  he  pursued  it  long  after  success
appeared  impossible,  was  due  to  his  resolution,  at  all

1  Correspondent-?  of  George  IIL  from the handwriting of the

with  Lord  North,  L  374,  ii.  84.  King, in Albemarle's Life of

See,  too,  Bancroft's  History  of  Rockingham,  ii.  330-332.
the  United  States,  ix.  321,  and 2  See  Nichols's Recollections

also  a  paper, '  On  the  Conduct  of  p/  George  IIL  i.  35.
the  War  from  Canada,'  copied

en.  xm. -  CONDUCT OF  NORTH.  445

hazards  to  his  country,  to  retain  his  office.  The  publi-
cation of  the  correspondence  of  George  III.  has  thrown
a  light  upon  this  question  which  was  not  possessed  by
contemporaries,  and,  while  it  completely  exculpates
North  from  the  charge  of  excessive  attachment  to  office,
it  supplies  one  of  the  most  striking  and  melancholy
examples  of  the  relation  of  the  King  to  his  Tory  mini-
sters. It  appears  from  this  correspondence  that  for  the
space  of  about  five  years  North,  at  the  entreaty  of  the
King,  carried  on  a  bloody,  costly,  and  disastrous  war  in
direct  opposition  to  his  own  judgment  and  to  his  own
wishes.  In  the  November  of  1779  Lord  Gower,  who
had  hitherto  been  one  of  the  staunchest  supporters  of
the  Government,  resigned  his  post  on  the  ground  that
the  system  which  was  being  pursued  '  must  end  in  ruin
to  his  Majesty  and  the  country ; '  and  North,  in  a  pri-
vate letter  to  the  King,  after  describing  the  efforts  he
had  made  to  dissuade  his  colleague  from  resigning,
added  these  memorable  words :  '  In  the  argument  Lord
North  had  certainly  one  disadvantage,  which  is  that  he
holds  in  his  heart,  and  has  held  for  three  years  past,  the
same  opinion  with  Lord  Gower.' ]  And  yet  in  spite  of
this  declaration  he  continued  in  office  for  two  years
longer.  Again  and  again  he  entreated  that  his  resig-
nation might  be  accepted,  but  again  and  again  he
yielded  to  the  request  of  the  King,  who  threatened,  if
his  minister  resigned,  to  abdicate  the  throne,  who  im-
plored him,  by  his  honour  as  a  gentleman,  and  his
loyalty  as  a  subject,  to  continue  at  his  post,  who  reiter-
ated his  supplications  in  letter  after  letter  of  passionate
entreaty,  and  who,  though  perfectly  aware  that  Lord
North  regarded  the  war  as  hopeless  and  inevitably  dis-
astrous, uniformly  urged  that  resignation  would  be  an
act  of  culpable,  cowardly,  and  dishonourable  desertion.

1  See  Fox's  Correspondence,  \.  212.

446 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xm.

Unhappily  for  his  country,  most  unhappily  for  his  own
reputation,  North  suffered  himself  to  be  swayed  and
became  the  instrument  of  a  policy  of  which  he  utterly
disapproved.  He  was  an  amiable  but  weak  man,  keenly
susceptible  to  personal  influence,  and  easily  moved  by
the  unhappiness  of  those  with  whom  he  came  in  con-
tact, but  without  sufficient  force  of  principle  to  restrain
his  feelings,  or  sufficient  power  of  imagination  to  realise
adequately  the  sufferings  of  great  bodies  of  men  in  a
distant  land.  His  loyalty  and  personal  attachment  to
the  King  were  stronger  than  his  patriotism.  He  was
cut  to  the  heart  by  the  distress  of  his  Sovereign,  and  he
was  too  good-natured  to  arrest  the  war.

The  King  was  determined,  under  no  circumstances,
to  treat  with  the  Americans  on  the  basis  of  the  recog-
nition of  their  independence ;  but  he  acknowledged,
after  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,  and  as  soon  as  the
French  war  had  become  inevitable,  that  unconditional
submission  could  no  longer  be  hoped  for,  and  that  it
might  be  advisable  to  concentrate  the  British  forces  in
Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  Floridas,  and  to  employ
them  exclusively  against  the  French  and  Spanish  pos-
sessions in  the  West  Indies.1  He  consented,  too,  though
apparently  with  extreme  reluctance,  and  in  consequence
of  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  Cabinet,  that  new  propo-
sitions should  be  made  to  the  Americans.  The  stocks
had  greatly  fallen.  No  recruits  could  any  longer  be
obtained  from  Germany ;  the  ministerial  majorities,
though  still  large,  had  perceptibly  diminished,  and  out-
side the  Parliament,  Gibbon  noticed,  even  before  the
news  of  Saratoga  arrived,  that  the  tide  of  opinion  was
beginning  to  flow  in  the  direction  of  peace.2  On  De-

1  Correspondence  of  George  III.  Gibbon  (Dec.  2,  1777).  A  month

with  Lord  North,  ii.  118,  125,  previously  the  Duke  of  Kichmond

126.  had  written :  '  I  will  say,  too,

*  See a  remarkable  letter  of  that  the  people  begin  to  feel  the

en.  xiii.  SPEECH OF CHATHAM.  447

cernber  10,  1777,  a  few  days  after  the  surrender  of
Burgoyne  had  been  announced,  when  the  attitude  of  the
French  was  yet  unknown,  and  when  Parliament  was
about  to  adjourn  for  Christmas,  Lord  North  announced
that  at  the  close  of  the  holidays  he  would  bring  in  a
project  of  conciliation.

The  next  day  Chatham  made  one  of  his  greatest
speeches  on  the  subject.  Though  now  a  complete  in-
valid, he  had  several  times  during  the  last  few  months
spoken  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  American  ques-
tion, with  little  less  than  his  old  eloquence,  and
with  a  wisdom  and  moderation  which  in  his  greater
days  he  had  not  always  exhibited.  America,  he  em-
phatically and  repeatedly  maintained,  never  could  be
subdued  by  force ;  the  continued  attempt  could  only
lead  to  utter  ruin,  and  France  would  sooner  or  later
inevitably  throw  herself  into  the  contest.  He  repro-
bated, in  language  that  has  become  immortal  in  Eng-
lish eloquence,  the  policy  which  let  loose  the  tomahawks
of  the  Indians  upon  the  old  subjects  of  England.  In  a
passage  which  is  less  quoted,  but  which  was  eminently
indicative  of  his  military  prescience,  he  had  in  Novem-
ber spoken  of  the  total  loss  of  the  army  of  Burgoyne  as
a  probable  contingency,1  and  he  dilated  on  the  in-
sufficiency of  the  naval  establishments  in  a  language
which  was  emphatically  repudiated  by  the  ministers,  but
which  subsequent  events  fully  justified.  He  strongly
maintained,  however,  that  England  and  America  must
remain  united  for  the  benefit  of  both,  and  that  though
every  week  which  passed  made  it  more  difficult,  and

continuance  of  the  war, the  losses,  Savile,  however,  thought  that  in

the  taxes,  the  load  of  debt,  the  November  the  people  were  still

want  of  money,  and  the  impossi-  on  the  side  of  the  war. Ibid.  p.

bility  of  such  success  as  to  re-  322.

establish  a  permanent  tranquil-  '  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv.

iity.' — Albeinarle's  Life  of  Rock-  452.

ingham, ii, 318. Sir George

•148 ENGLAND  IN  THE EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, en.  Tin.

though  the  language  of  the  ministers,  and  especially  the
employment  of  Indians,  had  enormously  aggravated  the
situation,  it  was  still  possible,  by  a  frank  and  speedy
surrender  of  all  the  constitutional  questions  in  dispute,
and  by  an  immediate  withdrawal  of  the  invading  army,
to  conciliate  the  colonies.  '  America  is  in  ill-humour
with  France  on  some  points  that  have  not  entirely  an-
swered her  expectations ;  let  us  wisely  take  advantage
of  every  possible  moment  of  reconciliation.  Her  natu-
ral disposition  still  leans  towards  England,  and  to  the
old  habits  of  connection  and  mutual  interest  that  united
both  countries.  This  was  the  established  sentiment  of
all  the  continent.  .  .  .  All  the  middle  and  southern
provinces  are  still  sound  .  .  .  still  sensible  of  their
real  interests.'  '  The  security  and  permanent  prosperity
of  both  countries '  can  only  be  attained  by  union,  and
by  this  alone  the  power  of  France  can  be  repressed.
'  America  and  France  cannot  be  congenial ;  there  is
something  decisive  and  confirmed  in  the  honest  Ameri-
can that  will  not  assimilate  to  the  futility  and  levity  of
Frenchmen.'  Prompt,  conciliatory  action  was,  however,
necessary,  and  he  accordingly  strenuously  opposed  the
adjournment,  which  left  the  country  without  a  Parlia-
ment in  the  six  critical  weeks  that  followed  the  arrival
of  the  news  of  the  capitulation  of  Saratoga.1

His  counsel  was  rejected,  but  in  the  course  of  the
recess  some  private  overtures  were  vainly  made  to  Frank-
lin by  persons  who  are  said  to  have  been  in  the  confidence
of  the  English  Government.  The  feeling  of  uneasiness  in
the  country  was  now  very  acute,  and  it  was  noticed  that
in  January  1778  the  Three  per  Cents,  stood  at  71£,
whereas  in  January  1 760,  which  was  the  fifth  year  of  a
war  with  the  united  House  of  Bourbon,  they  were  79.a

1  Chatham  Correspondence,  iv.  454,  455,  457,
«  Parl.  Hist.  xix.  G17.

CH.  xiii. NOKTH'S  MEASURE  OF  CONCILIATION. 449

On  February  17,  North  rose  to  move  Bills  of  concilia-
tion which  virtually  conceded  all  that  America  had  long
been  asking.  The  Act  remodelling  the  constitution  of
Massachusetts  and  the  tea  duty,  which  were  the  main
grievances  of  the  colonies,  were  both  absolutely  and
unconditionally  repealed.  Parliament  formally  promised
to  impose  no  taxes  upon  the  colonies  for  the  sake  of
revenue,  and  although  it  retained  its  ancient  right  of
imposing  such  duties  as  were  necessary  for  the  regu-
lation of  commerce,  it  bound  itself  that  those  duties
should  always  be  applied  to  public  purposes  in  the
colony  in  which  they  were  levied,  in  such  manner  as  the
colonial  assemblies  should  determine.  It  was  enacted
also  that  commissioners  should  be  sent  out  to  America
to  negotiate  a  peace,  with  full  powers  to  treat  with
Congress,  to  proclaim  a  cessation  of  hostilities  by  land
and  sea,  to  grant  pardons  to  all  descriptions  of  persons,
and  to  suspend  the  operation  of  all  Acts  of  Parliament
relating  to  the  American  colonies  which  had  passed
since  February  1763.1

The  propositions  were  listened  to  with  blank  amaze-
ment by  the  most  devoted  followers  of  the  ministers.
They  were  in  effect  much  the  same  as  those  which
Burke  had  vainly  advocated  nearly  three  years  before.
They  completely  surrendered  all  for  which  England  had
been  contending  at  such  a  ruinous  cost,  and  the  speech
with  which  Lord  North  introduced  them  was  one  of  the
most  extraordinary  ever  made  by  an  English  minister.
He  contended  that  his  present  measures  were  not  only
perfectly  consistent  with  his  present  opinions,  but  con-
sistent also  with  the  opinions  he  had  always  held  and
with  the  policy  he  had  always  pursued.  He  never,  he
said,  had  any  real  belief  in  the  possibility  of  obtaining
a  considerable  revenue  from  America.  The  policy  of

1  18  Geo.  III.  c.  xi.  xii.  xiii.
VOL. IV.  G  G

450 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

taxing  America  was  not  his,  but  that  of  his  predecessors.
He  found  the  tea  duty  established  and  was  not  able  to
abandon  it.  The  measure  enabling  the  East  India
Company  to  send  its  tea  to  America,  paying  a  small
duty  there,  but  with  a  drawback  of  the  much  larger
duty  previously  paid  in  England,  was  in  reality  an  act
not  of  oppression  but  of  relief,  and  it  had  only  been
turned  into  a  new  grievance  by  the  combined  artifices
of  demagogues  who  wished  to  produce  a  separation,  and
of  smugglers  who  feared  that  the  contraband  trade  in
tea  would  be  extinguished.  The  coercion  Acts  had
been  introduced  on  account  of  great  acts  of  violence
which  had  occurred  in  the  colonies.  They  had  not  pro-
duced the  results  that  were  hoped  for,  and  he  was  quite
prepared  to  abandon  them.  They  had,  however,  been
so  far  from  representing  what,  in  the  opinion  of  North,
ought  to  be  the  permanent  relations  of  England  to  the
colonies,  that  he  had  accompanied  them  by  a  concilia-
tory measure  which  he  still  thought  would  have  formed
the  happiest,  most  equitable,  most  lasting  bond  of  union
between  the  mother  country  and  her  colonies.  He  had
proposed  that  any  colony  might  secure  itself  against  all
taxation  by  Parliament  if  it  would,  of  its  own  accord,
raise  such  a  sum  towards  the  payment  of  its  civil
government  and  towards  the  common  defence  of  the
Empire  as  Parliament  thought  sufficient.  The  proposal
was  most  honestly  meant,  but  the  Americans  had  been
persuaded,  partly  by  their  own  leaders,  and  partly  by
the  English  Opposition,  that  it  was  a  deceptive  one.  He
had  afterwards  authorised  Lord  Howe  and  his  brother
to  negotiate  with  members  of  the  Congress  in  1776,  but
it  was  then  objected  that  the  commissioners  had  in-
sufficient powers.  This  objection  was  obviated  by  the
present  Bill.  The  new  commissioners  would  be  in-
structed to  endeavour  to  induce  the  colonies  to  make
some  reasonable,  moderate,  and  voluntary  contribution

OH,  xin. NORTH'S  MEASURE  OF  CONCILIATION. 451

towards  the  cost  of  the  common  empire  when  reunited,
but  no  such  contribution  was  to  be  demanded  as  essen-
tial; the  right  of  Parliament  to  tax  the  colonies  was
formally  and  finally  renounced,  and  the  States  were
not  to  be  asked  to  resign  their  independence  till  the
treaty  with  the  mother  country  had  been  agreed  on
and  ratified  in  Parliament.  It  was  added  in  the  course
of  the  debate  on  the  part  of  the  Government,  that  a
security  of  the  debts  of  Congress,  and  a  re-establish-
ment of  the  credit  of  the  paper  money  which  had  now
been  so  enormously  depreciated,  would  be  one  of  the
objects  of  the  Commission  and,  it  was  hoped,  one  of  the
chief  inducements  to  the  Americans  to  receive  it  with
favour.

The  speech,  wrote  a  keen  observer,1  was  listened  to
'  with  profound  attention,  but  without  a  single  mark  of
approbation  to  any  part,  from  any  description  of  men
or  any  particular  man  in  the  House.  Astonishment,
dejection,  and  fear  overclouded  the  whole  assembly.'
Everything,  as  devoted  followers  of  the  Ministry  ex-
plained, except  independence,  was  conceded,  and  offers
were  made  which  a  little  before  would  certainly  have
been  welcomed  with  alacrity.  Now,  however,  they
clashed  against  two  fatal  obstacles — the  treaties  with
France,  which,  though  not  yet  formally  declared  or
ratified,  were  already  signed,  and  the  antecedents  of
the  ministry,  which  made  it  impossible  that  any  pro-
posals that  emanated  from  it  could  be  received  without
hostility  and  distrust.  That  Lord  North  in  his  speech
truly  represented  his  own  later  opinions  on  American
questions  is  very  probable,  but  they  were  at  least
opinions  which  were  utterly  opposed  to  those  which  the
world  ascribed  to  him  and  to  the  general  policy  of  his
party.  He  was  the  special  leader  of  men  who  in  every

1  Annual  Register  1778.

a  a  2

452 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xm.

stage  of  the  long  controversy  had  uniformly  shown
themselves  the  most  implacable  enemies  of  the  preten-
sions of  the  colonies,  and  who  had  spared  no  insult  and
no  injury  that  could  exasperate  and  envenom  the  con-
flict. Sandwich  and  Kigby,  Weymouth  and  Hills-
borough,  Wedderburn  and  Germaine,  the  King's
friends  and  the  Bedford  faction,  were  very  naturally
regarded  by  the  Americans  as  their  most  rancorous
enemies.  The  language  of  the  ministerial  newspapers,
the  disposal  of  ministerial  patronage,  the  gradual  dis-
placement of  eveiy  politician  who  leaned  towards  a
milder  policy,  had  all  abundantly  indicated  their  spirit.
In  such  hands  it  was  scarcely  possible  that  concilia-
tion could  succeed.  The  commissioners  appointed  were
Lord  Carlisle,  William  Eden,  and  George  Johnstone,  a
former  governor  of  Florida.  The  first  two  were  as  yet
very  little  known  in  politics,  but  after  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  Lord  Carlisle  had  moved  the  address
in  answer  to  the  royal  Speech  which  denounced  the
Americans  as  rebels  and  traitors,  while  Eden  had  been
Under-Secretary  to  Lord  Suffolk,  the  most  vehement
advocate  of  the  employment  of  Indians  in  the  war.
Johnstone  had,  it  is  true,  opposed  the  ministerial  mea-
sures relating  to  the  colonies,  and  he  was  well  known
in  America ;  but  he  greatly  injured  the  cause  by  private
overtures  to  members  of  Congress,  endeavouring  by
personal  offers  to  obtain  their  assistance,  and  after  much
angry  altercation  he  withdrew  from  the  Commission.
Congress  unanimously  declined  any  reconciliation  which
was  not  based  on  a  recognition  of  American  indepen-
dence. The  commissioners  appear  to  have  done  every-
thing in  their  power  to  execute  their  mission.  They
even  went  beyond  their  legal  powers,  for  besides  pro-
mising the  Americans  complete  liberty  of  internal
legislation,  they  offered  an  engagement  that  no  Euro-
pean troops  should  be  again  sent  to  America  without

CH.  xui.  THE FRENCH WA&.

the  consent  of  the  local  assemblies,  and  they  also  offered
an  American  representation  in  the  English  Parliament.
Gates  was  in  favour  of  negotiation,  and  Lee,  who  had
now  lost  almost  all  sympathy  with  the  American  cause,
was  on  the  same  side ;  but,  though  a  great  section  of
the  American  people  would  have  gladly  closed  the
quarrel  by  a  reconciliation,  the  Congress  was  in  the
hands  of  the  insurgent  party.  In  October  the  com-
missioners published  a  manifesto  appealing  from  the
Congress  to  the  people,  offering  the  terms  which  had
been  rejected  to  each  separate  State,  and  threatening
a  desolating  war  if  those  terms  were  not  accepted.
Offers,  however,  emanating  from  the  North  ministry
were  almost  universally  distrusted,  and  the  new  alliance
with  France  was  welcomed  with  enthusiasm.  On  May
4,  1778,  the  treaties  of  alliance  and  commerce  were
unanimously  ratified  by  Congress.  On  the  13th  of  the
preceding  March  the  latter  treaty  had  been  formally
communicated  by  the  French  ambassador  at  London,
and  immediately  after,  the  ambassadors  on  each  side
were  recalled,  and  England  and  France  were  at  war.

The  moment  was  one  of  the  most  terrible  in  English
history.  England  had  not  an  ally  in  the  world.  One
army  was  a  prisoner  in  America;  and  the  Congress,  on
very  futile  pretexts,  had  resolved  not  to  execute  the
Convention  of  Saratoga,  which  obliged  them  to  send  it
back  to  England.  The  great  bulk  of  the  English
troops  were  confined  in  Philadelphia  and  New  York.
The  growing  hostility  of  the  German  Powers  had  made
it  impossible  to  raise  or  subsidise  additional  German
soldiers  ;  and  in  these  circumstances,  England,  already
exhausted  by  a  war  which  its  distance  made  peculiarly
terrible,  had  to  confront  the  whole  force  of  France,  and
was  certain  in  a  few  months  to  have  to  encounter  the
whole  force  of  Spain.  Her  navy  was  but  half  prepared ;
her  troops  were  barely  sufficient  to  protect  her  shores

45-i ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

from  invasion;  her  ministers  and  her  generals  were
utterly  discredited ;  her  Prime  Minister  had  just  ad-
mitted that  the  taxation  of  America,  which  was  the
original  object  of  the  war,  was  an  impossibility.  At
the  same  time,  the  country  believed,  as  most  men  be-
lieved both  on  the  Continent  and  in  America,  that  the
severance  of  the  colonies  would  be  the  beginning  of  the
complete  decadence  of  England ;  and  the  Imperial
feeling,  which  was  resolved  to  make  any  sacrifice  rather
than  submit  to  the  dismemberment  of  the  Empire,  was
fully  aroused.  It  is  a  feeling  which  is  rarely  absent
from  any  large  section  of  the  English  race,  and  how-
ever much  the  Americans,  during  the  War  of  Indepen-
dence, may  have  reprobated  it,  it  was  never  displayed
more  conspicuously  or  more  passionately  than  by  their
own  descendants  when  the  great  question  of  secession
arose  within  their  border.

There  was  one  man  to  whom,  in  this  hour  of  panic
and  consternation,  the  eyes  of  all  patriotic  Englishmen
were  turned.  In  Chatham  England  possessed  a  states-
man whose  genius  in  conducting  a  war  was  hardly
inferior  to  that  of  Marlborough  in  conducting  an  army.
In  France  his  name  produced  an  almost  superstitious
terror.  In  America  it  was  pronounced  with  the  deepest
affection  and  reverence.  He  had,  in  the  great  French
war,  secured  the  Anglo-Saxon  preponderance  in  the
colonies ;  he  had  defended  the  colonies  in  every  stage
of  their  controversy  about  the  Stamp  Act,  and  had
fascinated  them  by  the  splendour  of  his  genius.  If  any
statesman  could,  at  the  last  moment,  conciliate  them,
dissolve  the  new  alliance,  and  kindle  into  a  flame  the
loyalist  feeling  which  undoubtedly  existed  largely  in
America,  it  was  Chatham.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  con-
ciliation proved  impossible,  no  statesman  could  for  a
moment  be  compared  to  him  in  the  management  of  a
war.  Lord  North  implored  the  King  to  accept  his

CH.  xni. DESIRE FOR A CHATHAM MINISTRY.  455

resignation,  and  to  send  for  Chatham.  Bute,  the  old
Tory  favourite,  breaking  his  long  silence,  spoke  of
Chatham  as  now  indispensable.  Lord  Mansfield,  the
bitterest  and  ablest  rival  of  Chatham,  said,  with  tears
in  his  eyes,  that  unless  the  King  sent  for  Chatham,  the
ship  would  assuredly  go  down.  George  Grenville,  the
son  of  the  author  of  the  Stamp  Act,  and  Lord  Rochford,
one  of  the  ablest  of  the  late  Secretaries  of  State,  em-
ployed the  same  language,  and  public  opinion  loudly
and  unanimously  declared  itself  in  the  same  sense.
Lord  Barrington  represented  to  the  King  '  the  general
dismay  which  prevails  among  all  ranks  and  conditions,
arising  from  an  opinion  that  the  administration  was
not  equal  to  the  times,  an  opinion  so  universal  that  it
prevailed  among  those  who  were  most  dependent  and
attached  to  his  ministers,  and  even  among  the  ministers
themselves.'  '  Every  rank,'  wrote  one  of  the  foremost
bankers  in  London,  '  looks  up  to  Chatham  with  the
only  gleam  of  hope  that  remains ;  nor  do  I  meet  with
anyone  who  does  not  lament  and  wonder  that  his
Majesty  has  not  yet  publicly  desired  the  only  help  that
can  have  a  chance  to  extricate  the  country  from  the
difficulties  which  every  day  grow  greater,  and  must
otherwise,  I  fear,  become  insurmountable.'  The  Rock-
ingham  party  believed,  what  Chatham  still  refused  to
admit,  that  the  only  possible  course  was  to  acknowledge
at  once  the  independence  of  America ;  and  the  old
jealousies  that  divided  them  from  Chatham  were  far
from  extinct.  But  the  Rockingham  party  also  agreed
in  thinking  that  it  was  now  in  the  easy  power  of
France  and  Spain  to  give  '  a  deadly  blow '  to  this
country,  and  as  Chatham  had  clearly  said  that  America
could  never  be  overcome  by  force,  the  difference  be-
tween them  was  in  reality  chiefly  in  the  more  or  less
sanguine  hope  they  entertained  of  the  possibility  of
conciliation.  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  of  all  pro-

456 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xiu.

minent  politicians  was  the  most  vehement  supporter  of
the  necessity  of  admitting  the  independence  of  America,
sent  to  say  that  '  there  never  was  a  time  when  so  great
a  man  as  Lord  Chatham  was  more  wanted  than  at
present,'  and  that  if  Chatham  thought  it  right  to  make
another  attempt  to  prevent  the  separation  of  the
colonies  he  would  '  be  the  first  to  give  him  every  sup-
port in  his  power.'  Lord  Cam  den,  who  now  usually
acted  with  the  Rockingham  party,  and  was  somewhat
alienated  from  Chatham,  wrote  of  him  to  Rockingham  :
'  I  see  plainly  the  public  does  principally  look  up  to
him,  and  such  is  the  opinion  of  the  world  as  to  his
ability  to  advise  as  well  as  execute  in  this  perilous
crisis,  that  they  will  never  be  satisfied  with  any  change
or  arrangement  where  he  is  not  among  the  first.' l

Everything  seemed  thus  to  point  to  a  Ministry
under  the  guidance  of  Chatham  as  the  last  hope  of
English  greatness.  Alone  amid  the  accumulating  dis-
asters of  his  country  and  the  concurrence  of  the  most
hostile  parties  the  King  was  unmoved.  He  consented
indeed — and  he  actually  authorised  Lord  North  to  make
the  astounding  proposition — to  receive  Chatham  as  a
subordinate  minister  to  North,  in  order  to  strengthen
the  existing  administration ;  but  this  was  the  utmost
extent  to  which  he  would  go.  His  own  words,  which
are  too  clear  for  cavil  or  for  dispute,  should  determine
for  ever  Ms  claims  to  be  regarded  as  a  patriot  king.
'  I  declare  in  the  strongest  and  most  solemn  manner,'
he  wrote  to  North,  '  that  though  I  do  not  object  to  your
addressing  yourself  to  Lord  Chatham,  yet  that  you
must  acquaint  him  that  I  shall  never  address  myself  to
him  but  through  you,  and  on  a  clear  explanation  that
he  is  to  step  forth  to  support  an  administration  wherein

1  Compare Chatham Corrc- Albemarle's Life of Rocking-
spondence,  iv.  493-50G,  511, 512  ; /tarn,  i.  348-351.

CH.  xili.  OBSTINACY Of THE KING.  457

you  are  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  ...  I  will  only
add,  to  put  before  your  eye  my  most  inward  thoughts,
that  no  advantage  to  this  country,  no  present  danger
to  myself,  can  ever  make  me  address  myself  to  Lord
Chatham  or  any  other  branch  of  the  Opposition.  .  .  .
Should  Lord  Chatham  wish  to  see  me  before  he  gives
his  answer,  I  shall  most  certainly  refuse  it.  ...  You
have  now  fiill  powers  to  act ;  but  I  do  not  expect  Lord
Chatham  and  his  crew  will  come  to  your  assistance.'
'I  solemnly  declare,'  he  wrote  on  the  following  day,
'  that  nothing  shall  bring  me  to  treat  personally  with
Lord  Chatham  ; '  and  again,  a  little  later,  '  No  considera-
tion in  life  shall  make  me  stoop  to  opposition.' l

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  determination  of  the
King  at  any  cost  to  his  country,  and  in  defiance  of  the
most  earnest  representations  of  his  own  minister  and  of
the  most  eminent  politicians  of  every  party,  to  refuse  to
send  for  the  greatest  of  living  statesmen  at  the  moment
when  the  Empire  appeared  to  be  in  the  very  agonies  of
dissolution,  was  not  solely  or  mainly  due  to  his  own
opinions  on  the  American  question.  Chatham  had  de-
clared, as  strongly  as  the  King  himself,  his  determination
not  to  concede  American  independence ;  and  the  King,
by  permitting  Lord  North  to  introduce  his  conciliatory
Bills,  had  sanctioned  the  surrender  of  every  other  con-
stitutional question  in  dispute.  The  main  motives  that
influenced  the  King  were  personal.  The  many  provoca-
tions he  had  undoubtedly  received  from  Chatham  had
produced  in  his  eminently  sullen  and  rancorous  nature  an
intensity  of  hatred  which  no  consideration  of  patriotism
could  overcome,  and  he  also  clearly  saw  that  the  triumph
of  the  Opposition  would  lead  to  the  destruction  of  that
system  of  personal  government  which  he  had  so  labori-

1  Fox's  Correspondence,  i.  188,  189 ;  Correspondence  of  George
III.  with  Lord  North,  ii.  149,  153.

4<58 ENGLAND IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. CH.  xm.

ously  built  up.  Either  Chatham  or  Rockingham  would
have  insisted  that  the  policy  of  the  country  should  be
directed  by  its  responsible  ministers,  and  not  dictated
by  an  irresponsible  sovereign.  It  is  not  difficult  to
detect  in  the  passionate  expressions  of  the  King  that
the  great  question  in  whose  hands  the  real  and  efficient
determination  of  the  policy  of  government  was  to  rest,
was  that  which  most  deeply  affected  his  mind.  The
Opposition,  he  said,  '  would  make  me  a  slave  for  the
remainder  of  my  days.'  '  Whilst  any  ten  men  in  the
kingdom  will  stand  by  me  I  will  not  give  myself  up
into  bondage.'  'I  will  never  put  my  hand  to  what
would  make  me  miserable  to  the  last  hour  of  my  life.'
'  Rather  than  be  shackled  by  those  desperate  men  (if
the  nation  will  not  stand  by  me,  which  I  can  never
suppose),  I  will  rather  see  any  form  of  government
introduced  into  this  island,  and  lose  my  crown  than
wear  it  as  a  disgrace.'  No  change,  he  emphatically
said,  should  be  made  in  the  Government  which  did  not
leave  North  at  its  head,  and  Thurlow,  Suffolk,  Sandwich,
Gower,  Weymouth,  and  Wedderburn  in  high  office.
On  such  conditions  he  well  knew  that  he  could  always
either  govern  or  overthrow  the  administration.1

This  episode  appears  to  me  the  most  criminal  in  the
whole  reign  of  George  III.,  and  in  my  own  judgment  it
is  as  criminal  as  any  of  those  acts  which  led  Charles  I,
to  the  scaffold.  It  is  remarkable  how  nearly,  many
years  later,  it  was  reproduced.  Terrible  as  was  the
condition  of  England  in  1778,  the  dangers  that  menaced
it  in  1804  were  probably  still  greater.  The  short  peace
of  Amiens  had  ended ;  Napoleon,  in  the  zenith  of  his
power  and  glory,  was  preparing  the  invasion  of  England,
and  the  very  existence  of  the  country  as  a  free  and  in-

1  Correspondence  of  George  III.  with  Lard  North,  ii.  151,  154,
156.

CH.  xiii.  OBSTINACY OF  TflE  KING.  459

dependent  State  was  menaced  by  the  most  extraordinary
military  genius  of  modern  times,  disposing  of  the
resources  of  the  greatest  and  most  warlike  of  conti-
nental nations.  Under  these  circumstances,  Pitt  strenu-
ously urged  upon  the  King  the  necessity  of  a  coalition
of  parties,  and  especially  of  the  introduction  of  Fox
into  the  ministry.  Fox  had  not,  like  Chatham,  shown
the  genius  of  a  great  war  minister ; .  but  he  was  at  the
head  of  a  powerful  party  in  the  State,  and,  as  he  had
been  one  of  the  strongest  opponents  of  the  war  when  it
first  broke  out,  his  acceptance  of  office  would  not  only
have  given  Government  the  strength  it  greatly  needed,
but  would  also  have  been  the  most  emphatic  demonstra-
tion of  the  union  of  all  parties  against  the  invaders.
But  the  obstinacy  of  the  King  proved  indomitable.  He
'  expressed  his  astonishment  that  Mr.  Pitt  should  one
moment  harbour  the  thought  of  bringing  such  a  man
[as  Fox]  before  his  royal  notice.'  He  announced  that
the  great  Whig  statesman  was  excluded  by  his  '  express
command ; '  and  when,  in  the  succeeding  year,  Pitt
resumed  his  efforts,  the  King  said  '  that  he  had  taken
a  positive  determination  not  to  admit  Mr.  Fox  into  his
councils,  even  at  the  hazard  of  a  civil  war.' l

It  is  an  idle,  though  a  curious  question,  whether  it
would  have  been  possible  for  Chatham  at  the  last  moment
to  have  induced  the  Americans  to  acquiesce  in  anything
short  of  complete  independence.  If  the  foregoing
narrative  be  truly  written,  it  will  appear  manifest  to
the  reader  that  a  great  part  of  the  American  people  had
never  really  favoured  the  Revolution,  and  that  there
were  many  of  the  remainder  who  would  have  been
gladly  reunited  with  England  on  terms  which  Chatham
was  both  ready  and  eager  to  concede.  The  French
alliance  had,  however,  made  it  a  matter  of  honour  and

1  Russell's  Life  of  Fox,  iii.  330-332,  349.

ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xiix.

of  treaty  obligation  for  the  Americans  to  continue  the
struggle,  and  passions  had  risen  to  a  point  that  made
reconciliation  almost  hopeless.  The  Rockingham  party,
in  strongly  asserting  that  an  immediate  recognition  of
American  independence  was  the  true  policy  of  England,
probably  to.ik  a  more  just  view  of  the  situation  than
Chatham,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  their  declaration
would  have  greatly  aggravated  the  difficulty  of  carrying
out  his  policy.  Nor  was  it  possible  that  the  task  of
reconciliation,  even  if  it  were  practicable,  could  have
been  reserved  for  Chatham.  The  sands  of  that  noble
life  were  now  almost  run.  On  April  7,  1778,  he
appeared  for  the  last  time  in  the  House  of  Lords.
Wrapped  in  flannel,  supported  on  crutches,  led  in  by
his  son-in-law  Lord  Mahon,  and  by  that  younger  son
who  was  destined  in  a  few  years  to  rival  his  fame,  he
had  come  to  protest  against  an  address  moved  by  the
Duke  of  Richmond  calling  upon  the  King  to  withdraw
his  forces  by  land  and  sea  from  the  revolted  colonies.
His  sunk  and  hueless  face,  rendered  the  more  ghastly
by  the  still  penetrating  brilliancy  of  his  eyes,  bore
plainly  on  it  the  impress  of  approaching  death,  and  his
voice  was  barely  audible  in  the  almost  breathless  silence
of  the  House;  but  something  of  his  old  fire  may  be
traced  in  the  noble  sentences  of  indomitable  and  defiant
patriotism  with  which  he  protested  'against  the  dis-
memberment of  this  ancient  and  most  noble  monarchy,'
and  laughed  to  scorn  the  fears  of  invasion.  After  the
reply  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  he  tried  to  rise  again,
but  fell  back  senseless  in  an  apoplectic  fit.  He  lingered
till  May  11.  It  was  afterwards  remembered  that,  as
he  lay  on  his  death-bed  looking  forward  to  his  own
immediate  end,  he  caused  his  son  to  read  to  him  the
passage  in  Homer  describing  the  stately  obsequies  of
Hector  and  the  sorrow  and  despair  of  Troy.

The  death  of  Chatham  would  under  any  circumstances

OH.  XTII.  DEATH OF  CHATHAM.  461

have  made  a  profound  and  general  impression,  and  the
closing  scene  in  the  House  of  Lords  was  eminently
fitted  to  enhance  it.  It  was  an  exit,  indeed,  combining
every  element  of  sublimity  and  pathos.  So  awful  a
close  of  so  glorious  a  career,  the  eclipse  of  a  light  that  had
filled  the  world  with  its  splendour,  the  remembrance  of
the  imperishable  glory  with  which  the  dying  statesman
had  irradiated,  not  only  his  country,  but  the  dynasty
that  ruled  it,  the  prescience  with  which  he  had  pro-
tested at  every 'stage  against  the  measures  that  had
ruined  it,  the  lofty  patriotism  which,  amid  many  failings
and  some  follies,  had  never  ceased  to  animate  his  career
— appealed  in  the  strongest  manner  to  every  sensitive
and  noble  nature.  Lord  North  showed  on  the  occasion
the  good-feeling  and  generosity  which  never  failed  to
distinguish  him  when  he  was  able  to  act  upon  his  own
impulses ;  and  Burke,  though  he  had  long  and  deeply
disliked  Chatham,  combined  with  Fox  in  paying  an  elo-
quent tribute  to  his  memory.  The  vote  of  a  public
funeral  and  monument,  and  a  Bill  paying  the  debts  of
the  deceased  statesman  and  annexing,  for  all  future
time,  an  annuity  of  4,OOOL  a  year  to  the  title  of  Chatham,
were  carried  almost  unanimously  through  Parliament.
Beneath  this  decorous  appearance,  however,  we  may
trace  some  very  different  feelings,  and  there  were  those
who  looked  with  indifference,  if  not  with  pleasure,  on
the  death  of  Chatham.  When  he  was  struck  down  by
the  fatal  fit  the  King  wrote  curtly  and  coldly  to  North,
'  May  not  the  political  exit  of  Lord  Chatham  incline
you  to  continue  at  the  head  of  affairs  ? '  When  Parlia-
ment a  little  later  voted  a  public  funeral  for  the  most
illustrious  of  English  statesmen,  the  King  wrote,  '  T  was
rather  surprised  the  House  of  Commons  have  unani-
mously voted  an  address  for  a  public  funeral  and  a
monument  in  Westminster  Abbey  for  Lord  Chatham,
but  I  trust  it  is  voted  as  a  testimony  of  gratitude  for

462 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xin.

his  rousing  the  nation  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  war
...  or  this  compliment,  if  paid  to  his  general  conduct,
is  rather  an  offensive  measure  to  me  personally.'  When
the  funeral  took  place  it  was  observed  that  all  persons
connected  with  the  Court  were  conspicuously  absent.1

Among  the  politicians  of  the  Opposition  also  there
were  some  who  looked  upon  the  removal  of  Chatham  in
a  very  similar  spirit.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  who  at  a
later  period  became  the  head  of  the  Whig  connection,
wrote  to  Rockingham  declining,  on  the  plea  of  private
business,  and  in  terms  that  are  singularly  disgraceful
both  to  his  head  and  heart,  to  be  present  at  the  funeral
of  Chatham.  '  I  feel  no  inducement,'  he  wrote,  '  to
attend  the  ceremony  this  morning,  but  the  pleasure  of
meeting  you.'  He  approved  of  the  conduct  of  Lord
llockingham  in  attending  the  funeral,  but  added  a  sen-
tence, which  is  peculiarly  painful  as  showing  the
opinion  of  the  man  to  whom,  beyond  all  others,  Chatham
was  attached  by  the  warmest  personal  and  political
friendship.  '  Lord  Camden  might  possibly  not  be  much
mistaken  in  considering  Lord  Chatham's  death  as  a
fortunate  event.' 2  Chatham,  indeed,  though  in  his  own
family  he  was  one  of  the  most  amiable  of  men,  and
though  in  the  country  at  large  he  was  the  object  of  an
almost  adoring  affection,  never  had  the  power  of  attach-
ing to  himself  real  private  friends.  Camden  and  Shel-
burne  were  the  two  statesmen  to  whom  he  appears  to  have
given  his  fullest  confidence,  but  Camden  considered  his
death  a  fortunate  event,  and  Shelburne,  in  his  posthu-
mous memoir,  did  the  utmost  in  his  power  to  blacken
his  memory.

1  Correspondence of George  of  Chatham,  which  Lord Stan-
III.  with  Lord  North,  ii.  171,  hope  prints from the Grafton
184-186.  papers, Camden speaks some-

2  Albemarle's Life of  Rock-  what  more  feelingly  on  the  sub-
ingham,  ii.  356,  357. In  a  letter  ject. See, too, the Chatham
written  immediately  after  the  fit  Correspondence,  iv.  519-628.

CH.  xiii.  ENGLISH OPINION  ON  THE WAR.  463

His  death,  though  it  gave  substantial  unity  to  the
Opposition,  no  doubt  on  the  whole  strengthened  the
Government.  By  far  the  greatest  name  opposed  to  it
was  removed,  and  nearly  the  whole  Opposition  now  ad-
vocated the  concession  of  complete  American  independ-
ence, for  which  the  country  was  most  certainly  as  yet
not  prepared.  The  declaration  of  France  aroused  the
indignation  of  the  nation  and  changed  the  sentiments
of  many.  Perhaps  the  class  among  whom  the  Americans
had  hitherto  found  the  warmest  and  most  uncompromis-
ing friends  were  the  Presbyterians  of  Ulster,  and  a
letter  from  Buckingham,  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  written
immediately  after  the  new  war  had  become  inevitable,
asserts  that  '  by  accounts  received  from  very  good
authority,  the  idea  of  a  French  war  has  not  only  altered
the  language  but  the  disposition  of  the  Presbyterians.'1
In  England,  too,  many  who  had  refused  to  regard  the
Americans  as  enemies,  determined,  as  a  matter  of
patriotism,  to  rally  round  the  Government,  now  that  a
foreign  enemy  was  in  the  field.2  The  militia  were
called  out ;  some  great  noblemen  undertook  to  raise
regiments.  The  old  spirit  of  international  rivalry,  the
old  self-confidence,  and  the  old  pugnacity  were  fully
stirred,  and  the  nation  prepared  with  a  thrill  of  not  un-
joyful  enthusiasm  to  encounter  its  old  enemy.3

In  the  negotiations  that  had  taken  place  just  before
the  death  of  Chatham  it  had  at  one  time  appeared  not  im-
probable that  a  considerable  fusion  of  parties  might  be
effected.  Fox,  though  usually  acting  with  the  Rocking-
ham  Whigs,  had  not  yet  finally  attached  himself  to  them,
and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that,  although  he  at  this  very
time  surpassed  all  other  politicians  in  the  extraordinary

1  Buckingham  to  Weymouth  ii.  232,  233.

(Private), March 29, 1778.—  3  See  Lady Minto's Life  of

MSS.,  Eecord  Office.  Hugh  Elliot,  pp.  142-145.

*  SeeWalpole's  Last  Journals,

464 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xtn.

violence  and  power  of  his  attacks  upon  the  ministers,
he  had  no  disinclination  to  take  office  with  them  in  a
coalition  ministry.  He  appears  to  have  insisted  only
that  places  should  be  found  for  some  other  members  of
the  Whig  party,  that  the  measures  he  had  protested
against  relating  to  America  should  be  repealed,  and  that
Lord  George  Germaine  should  be  excluded.1  Negotia-
tions arising  from  the  desire  of  Lord  North  to  resign
went  on  in  an  intermittent  manner  for  several  months,
and  in  January  1779  Fox  wrote  to  Lord  Rockingham,
expressing  a  decided  inclination  for  a  coalition  ministry,
provided  that  North,  Germaine,  and  Sandwich  were  no
longer  members.  He  contended  that  it  was  only  by  a
gradual  introduction  of  a  Whig  element  into  the  Cabinet
that  the  national  policy  could  be  modified.  Rocking-
ham, on  the  other  hand,  acting  on  the  opinion  which
Burke  had  steadily  advocated,  considered  that  the  party
connection  or  organisation  must  be  inflexibly  main-
tained, and  that  the  Whigs  should  only  accept  adminis-
tration in  a  body  and  on  such  terms  as  would  enable
them  fully  to  control  its  policy.  Richmond  wrote  a  long
and  very  able  letter  advocating  the  same  view,  and  it  is
evident  that  he  considered  a  junction  of  Fox  with  the
greater  part  of  the  North  ministry  extremely  probable.2
The  opinion  of  Rockingham  and  Richmond  prevailed,
and  all  overtures  to  the  Whigs  were  at  this  time  rejected,
but  in  the  course  of  1778  a  few  minor  changes  were
made.  In  February  Sir  W.  Howe,  at  his  own  request,
was  recalled  from  America  and  succeeded  in  the  com-
mand of  the  English  army  by  Sir  Henry  Clinton.  In
March,  in  consequence  of  a  personal  quarrel,  the  re-
signation of  Lord  G.  Germaine  was  tendered  and  ac-

1  See  a  curious  paper  by  Eden  in  March  1778, — Fox's Corre-

describing  a  secret negotiation  spondcnce,  i.  180-183.
he  carried  on  with  the  Opposi- *  Ibid.  i.  206-223.
tion  as  agent  of  the  Government

CH.  xin. THURLOW  AND  WEDDERBURN. 465

cepted,  but  it  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  apparently  on
account  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  successor,  and
shortly  after  some  changes  were  made  in  the  legal  ap-
pointments. In  the  negotiations  that  preceded  the
death  of  Chatham,  Shelburne  had  noticed  and  deplored
the  growing  importance  of  lawyers  in  politics,  and  it
was  from  this  class  that  by  far  the  ablest  of  the  King's
friends  were  drawn.  The  ministry  of  Lord  North  was
on  the  whole  very  deficient  in  ability,  but  its  Attorney-
General  and  its  Solicitor-General  were  both  men  of
extraordinary  talent.

Thurlow  and  Wedderburn — the  Moloch  and  the
Belial  of  their  profession — had  both  made  it  their  line
of  policy  to  attach  themselves  specially  to  the  King.
Thurlow  was  not  a  great  lawyer,  but  he  was  a  most
powerful  and  ready  debater,  a  man  of  much  rugged
sense  and  indomitable  courage,  coarse,  violent,  arro-
gant, shameless  and  profane.  A  leonine  countenance,
a  loud  commanding  voice,  fierce,  shaggy  brows,  a  de-
meanour like  that  of  an  insolent  counsel  brow-beat-
ing a  timid  witness  and  manifestly  delighting  in  his
distress,  a  quickness  of  repartee  that  seldom  or  never
failed  him,  and  a  complete  ireedom  from  every  vestige
of  deference,  modesty,  or  hesitation,  all  added  to  the
impression  of  overbearing  and  exuberant  strength  which
he  made  on  those  with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  On
a  single  question — the  excellence  of  the  African  slave
trade — he  appears  to  have  had  a  genuine  conviction
almost  rising  to  enthusiasm,  but  in  general,  though  he
had  a  strong  natural  bias  towards  harsh  and  despotic
measures,  he  seems  to  have  taken  his  politics  much  as
he  took  his  briefs,  and  he  had  that  air  of  cynical,  brutal,
and  almost  reckless  candour  which  is  sometimes  the
best  veil  of  a  time-serving  and  highly  calculating  nature.
Wedderburn,  who  had  already  astonished  the  world  by
the  flagrancy  of  one  great  act  of  apostasy,  had  not  in-

VOL.  IV.  H H

466 ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  xin.

deed  the  daring  or  the  power,  the  genuine  simplicity
and  directness  of  intellect  that  enabled  Thurlow  to  play
so  great  a  part  in  politics,  but  he  excelled  him  and  al-
most all  his  other  contemporaries  in  the  art  of  elaborate
and  subtle  reasoning,  and  he  was  in  the  highest  degree
plausible,  insinuating,  persevering,  dexterous,  and  in-
triguing. Both  of  these  men  played  a  great  part  in  the
political  system  of  George  III.  as  representing  especially
the  King  in  Cabinets  which  did  not  possess  his  full  con-
fidence, and  in  June  1778,  Lord  Bathurst,  being  induced
to  resign  the  Chancellorship,  was  replaced  by  Thurlow,
who  thus  passed  into  the  Cabinet.  The  promotion  was
one  for  which  the  King  was  extremely  anxious  with  a
view  to  the  apparently  imminent  resignation  of  North.

In  America  the  intervention  of  France  speedily
changed  the  conditions  of  the  war.  Philadelphia,
though  it  had  so  lately  been  the  seat  of  the  Revolu-
tionary Congress,  never  appears  to  have  shown  any
restlessness  under  the  English  occupation.  There  were,
no  doubt,  many  Whigs  among  the  young  men,  and  a
portion  of  the  population  had  emigrated,  but  there
appears  to  have  been  no  popular  movement  against  the
English,  no  difficulty  in  supplying  them  with  all  that
they  required,  no  necessity  for  any  military  measures
of  exceptional  stringency,  no  signs  of  that  genuine
dislike  which  had  been  so  abundantly  displayed  at
Boston.  The  English  officers  were  received  in  the  best
society  with  much  more  than  toleration,  and  they  soon
became  extremely  popular.  The  winter  during  which
the  forces  of  Washington  remained  half-starved  at
Valley  Forge,  and  in  which  their  commander  com-
plained so  bitterly  of  the  sullen  or  hostile  attitude  of
the  population,  was  long  remembered  in  Philadelphia
for  its  gaiety  and  its  charm.  In  May,  1778,  a  more
than  commonly  splendid  festival  was  given  by  the

en.  XIH. THE  MISCHIANZA — PHILADELPHIA  EVACUATED.  467

English  officers  in  honour  of  Sir  William  Howe,  who
was  just  leaving  America,  and  of  his  brother.  It  was
called  the  Mischianza,  and  comprised  a  magnificent
tournament,  a  regatta,  a  ball,  and  a  great  display  of
fireworks,  with  innumerable  emblems  and  exhibitions
of  loyalty  to  England.  It  brought  together  one  of  the
most  brilliant  assemblages  ever  known  of  the  youth,
beauty,  and  fashion  of  Philadelphia,  and  it  was  after-
wards remembered  that  the  unfortunate  Major  Andre
was  one  of  the  most  prominent  in  organising  the  enter-
tainment, and  that  the  most  admired  of  the  Philadel-
phian  beauties  who  adorned  it  was  Miss  Shippen,  soon
after  to  become  the  wife  of  Benedict  Arnold.1

Very  soon,  however,  the  aspect  of  affairs  was
changed,  and  in  June,  1778,  Clinton,  in  consequence  of
express  orders  from  England,  evacuated  Philadelphia,
and  prepared  to  fall  back  on  New  York.  The  blow  was
a  terrible  one,  and  no  less  than  3,000  of  the  inhabitants
went  into  banishment  with  the  British  army.2  The
Delaware  was  crowded  with  ships  bearing  broken-
hearted fugitives  who  had  left  nearly  all  they  possessed,
and  of  those  who  remained  many  were  banished  or

1  Many curious particulars  sioner  and  by  his  wife,  will  be

about  the Mischianza  will  be  found  in  Lady  Minto's  Life  of

found  in  Arnold's  Life  of  Bene-  Hugh  Elliot,  pp.  173-178. Mrs.

diet  Arnold,  pp. 224-227,  and  Eden  writes :  '  I  found  the  ac-

Jones's  Hist,  of  New fork,  i.  count  we  had  heard  of  so  much

241-251,  716-720. A  pen-and-  apparent  distress  in  the town

ink  sketch  of  Miss  Shippen  in  perfectly  false ;  indeed  it  is  quite

the  Mischianza,  drawn  by  Andre,  impossible to believe by the

is  still  preserved. The  editor  of  people's  faces  and  the  extreme

Jones's  History  has  preserved  a  quietness  of  the  town,  that  you

remarkably  pretty poem by a  are  not  in  a  city  perfectly  at

Philadelphian lady describing  peace  and  at  ease. As  to  se-

the  charm  of  the  English  occu-  curity,  I  feel  quite  as  safe  here

pation  of  that  town. Some  in-  as  if  I  was  in  my  own  dressing-

teresting  letters  describing  Phila-  room  in  Downing  Street,'  p.  176.

delphia  in  the  summer  of  1778,  2  Ibid.  p.  177.
written  by  Eden  the Commis-

B H 2

468 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xin.

imprisoned  by  the  Americans.  The  retreat  was  effected
without  much  difficulty,  though  the  Americans  tried  to
impede  it,  and  fought  a  battle  with  that  object  at  Mon-
mouth.  In  July,  Count  D'Estaing  arrived  off  the  coast
with  a  French  fleet  of  twelve  ships  of  the  line,  four
frigates,  and  about  4,000  French  soldiers.  He  had
hoped  to  find  Lord  Howe's  fleet  still  in  the  Delaware,
where  it  had  gone  to  co-operate  with  the  army  in  Phila-
delphia, and  as  that  fleet  was  less  than  half  the  size  of
his  own,  it  would  in  this  case  scarcely  have  escaped.
The  English,  however,  were  already  at  New  York,  and
D'Estaing  followed  them  there;  but  though  he  for  a
time  blockaded,  he  did  not  attempt  to  force  the  harbour.
The  French  had  for  a  few  weeks  a  complete  command
of  the  sea,  and  by  the  advice  of  Washington  an  attempt
was  made  to  capture,  or  annihilate,  the  British  force
which  had  occupied  Rhode  Island  since  December  1776,
and  which  now  amounted  to  about  6,000  men.  An
American  force  of  10,000  men,  consisting  partly  of  a
section  of  the  army  of  Washington  and  partly  of  militia
and  volunteers  raised  in  New  England,  was  placed  under
the  command  of  General  Sullivan,  and  it  succeeded  on
August  9  in  landing  on  the  island.  The  French  fleet
had  a  few  days  before  forced  its  way  into  Newport
harbour  and  obliged  the  English  to  burn  several  trans-
ports and  warships  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  falling
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.

The  operations  of  the  French  and  Americans  appear,
however,  to  have  been  badly  combined,  and  they  ended
in  complete  and  somewhat  ignominious  failure.  Four
ships  of  the  line — the  first  ships  of  a  fleet  sent  from
England  under  Admiral  Byron — had  just  joined  Lord
Howe,  who  hastened,  though  still  inferior  to  the  French,
to  encounter  them,  when  a  great  storm  separated  and
dispersed  the  rival  fleets,  and  greatly  injured  some  of
the  French  ships.  To  the  extreme  indignation  of  the

CH.  xiii.  CAPTURE OF  SAVANNAH.  469

Americans,  and  in  spite  of  an  angry  written  protest  by
Sullivan,  the  French  admiral  refused  to  pursue  the  en-
terprise, and  withdrew  his  ships  under  the  shelter  of
the  batteries  of  Boston.  Between  two  and  three  thou-
sand of  the  troops  of  Sullivan  at  once  deserted,  and  it
was  with  much  difficulty,  and  after  some  hard  fighting,
that  the  remainder  succeeded  in  effecting  their  retreat.1
Clinton,  with  4,000  men,  had  hastened  to  the  relief  of
Rhode  Island,  but  owing  to  adverse  winds  he  arrived
just  too  late,  and  returned  to  New  York.

Several  small  expeditions,  however,  were  made,  and
the  war  on  the  part  of  the  English  was  in  1778  carried
on  with  energy  and  success,  but  sometimes  with  great
harshness  and  barbarity.  They  destroyed  two  or  three
little  naval  towns  which  had  been  conspicuous  resorts
of  American  privateers,  burnt  numerous  houses  and
great  quantities  of  shipping,  and  carried  away  much
cattle  and  large  stores  of  arms.  They  surprised  by  a
night  attack  a  regiment  of  light  cavalry  in  New  Jersey,
and  also  a  small  brigade  under  Count  Pulaski,  and  they
almost  cut  them  to  pieces,  little  or  no  quarter  being
given.  A  more  considerable  expedition  was  sent  to
Georgia,  where  the  loyalist  feeling  had  always  been  very
strong,  and  it  speedily  captured  Savannah,  the  capital
of  the  province,  and  drove  the  American  troops  into
South  Carolina.  The  inhabitants  of  Georgia  for  the

1  The  deep  disappointment  of  certainty  of  success  rendered  it

Washington  appears  clearly  in  a  matter  of  rejoicing,  to  get  our

his  letter  to  his  brother. 'An  own  troops  safe  off  the  island,

unfortunate storm (so it ap-  If  the  garrison  of  that  place,

peared, and yet ultimately it  consisting  of  nearly  6,000  men,

may have happened for the  had  been  captured,  as  there  was

best),  and  some  measures  taken  in  appearance  at  least  a  hundred

in consequence of it by the  to  one  in  favour  of  it,  it  would

French admiral, perhaps un-  have  given  the  finishing  blow  to

avoidably  blasted  in  one  mom  ont  British  pretensions  of  sovereignty

the  fairest  hopes  that  ever  were  over  this  country.'  —  Washing-

oonceived, and from a  moral  ton's  Works,  vi.  68,  69.

470 ENGLAND  IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. CH.  MIL

most  part  gladly  took  the  oath  of  allegiance ;  many  of
them  bore  arms  in  the  service  of  the  Crown,  and  a  State
legislature  acknowledging  the  royal  authority  was  once
more  established  in  the  province.  Some  predatory
guerilla  war  was  carried  on  with  various  success  along
the  borders  of  Florida,  and  a  very  horrible  Indian  war
raged  near  the  Susquehanna.  The  desolation  of  the
new  and  flourishing  settlement  of  "Wyoming  by  900
Indians,  accompanied  by  about  200  loyalists  under
Colonel  John  Butler,  has  furnished  the  subject  of  a  well-
known  poem  by  Campbell.  It  was  accompanied  by  all
those  circumstances  of  murder,  torture,  and  outrage  that
usually  followed  Indian  warfare,  and  about  three  months
later  it  was  terribly  avenged  by  some  Pennsylvanian
troops  under  another  Colonel  Butler.  In  November
D'Estaing  sailed  from  Boston,  quickly  followed  by  an
English  fleet,  to  carry  the  war  into  the  West  Indies.

The  magnitude  of  the  empire  and  interests  of  Eng-
land was  indeed  vividly  illustrated  by  the  enterprises
of  the  year,  and  there  was  no  want  of  that  vigour  and
daring  which  in  the  earlier  American  operations  had
been  so  conspicuously  absent.  In  Hindostan  the  Eng-
lish at  once  took  up  arms  against  the  French  settlers,
and  before  1778  had  ended  all  the  French  possessions
in  India  had  fallen  into  their  hands,  except  the  little
fort  of  Mahe"  on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  which  was  taken
in  the  following  year.  In  another  and  far  distant
quarter  the  French  settlements  on  the  islands  of
Miqueloii  and  St.  Pierre,  which  had  been  assigned  at
the  peace  of  Paris  as  the  centres  of  the  French  New-
foundland fisheries,  were  destroyed.  In  the  West
Indies,  Bouille,  the  French  governor  of  Martinique,
succeeded  in  capturing  the  neighbouring  island  of
Dominica ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  St.  Lucia  was  taken
from  the  French.  In  the  following  year,  however,  the
balance  was  turned  in  their  favour  by  the  capture  of

CH.  xnt.  KEPPEL AND PALLISER.  471

the  English  islands  of  St.  Vincent  and  Grenada.  At
home  the  English  discovered  with  alarm  that  the  naval
preparations  of  France  were  much  more  considerable
than  they  had  anticipated.  The  command  of  the
Channel  fleet  was  given  to  Admiral  Keppel — an  ap-
pointment very  creditable  to  the  Government,  for  Kep-
pel was  a  member  of  Parliament  on  the  side  of  the
Opposition,  and  was  appointed  only  on  account  of
his  great  professional  eminence.  He  sailed  in  June
towards  the  French  coasts,  and  captured  or  destroyed
two  French  frigates  before  war  had  been  formally  de-
clared, but  retired  precipitately  on  discovering  that  the
French  fleet  was  much  greater  than  his  own.  Having
received  reinforcements,  he  again  sailed  in  July,  and
fought  a  somewhat  larger  French  fleet  off  Ushant.  The
battle  was  indecisive.  It  was  terminated  by  a  sudden
squall  and  the  approach  of  night,  and  next  day  neither
commander  was  disposed  to  renew  it.

The  result  created  much  disappointment  in  England,
and  bitter  recriminations  broke  out  between  Keppel  and
Sir  Hugh  Palliser,  the  second  in  command.  The  conflict
was  greatly  increased  by  party  spirit,  for  both  admirals
were  members  of  Parliament,  and  they  were  attached
to  opposite  parties.  Each  of  them  demanded  a  court-
martial.  Keppel  was  in  all  respects  fully  acquitted,
and  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  House,  but  he  was
so  angry  at  what  he  conceived  to  be  the  bias  of  the
Government  that  he  threw  up  his  command ;  while
Palliser  was  also  acquitted  on  every  serious  point  that
was  alleged  against  him,  though  he  was  censured  for
not  having  apprised  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  dis-
abled state  of  his  ship  during  the  battle.  Public  opinion
in  London,  and  also  in  the  navy,  ran  violently  in  favour
of  Keppel.  London  was  illuminated  for  two  nights  on
the  occasion  of  his  acquittal,  and  some  serious  riots  were
directed  against  Palliser  and  against  the  Admiralty.

472 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xui.

The  rapid  growth  of  the  navy  of  France  was  the
most  alarming  feature  of  the  year,  but  on  the  whole
the  English  appeared  still  to  hold  their  accustomed
pre-eminence  in  seamanship.  It  was  feared  that  the
sudden  outbreak  of  the  war  with  France  would  lead  to
the  destruction  of  a  great  part  of  the  British  commerce
which  was  now  afloat,  but  these  fears  were  not  realised.
By  sound  seamanship,  by  good  fortune,  and  by  the
neglect  of  the  enemy,  an  important  fleet  of  merchant-
men from  the  East  Indies,  another  from  Lisbon,  and  a
third  from  Jamaica,  all  arrived  in  safety,1  while  English
privateers  swept  every  sea  with  their  usual  enterprise
and  success.  It  was  computed  that  by  the  end  of  1778
the  Americans  alone  had  lost  not  less  than  900  vessels.8

The  internal  dissensions,  and  the  great  want  of  any
efficient  organisation  which  had  hitherto  impaired  the
American  enterprises,  continued  unabated.  At  the  end
of  1777  there  was  a  long  and  bitter  cabal  against
Washington  by  Generals  Gates,  Miflin,  and  Conway,
supported  by  some  members  of  Congress,  and  forged
letters  attributed  to  "Washington  were  printed  and
widely  disseminated.  Lee,  who  had  now  been  ex-
changed and  again  put  at  the  head  of  an  American
army,  was  removed  from  his  command  by  court-martial
on  account  of  his  disobedience  to  Washington  at  the
battle  of  Monmouth,  followed  by  disrespectful  language
to  his  chief.  An  extreme  jealousy  of  the  army  was  one
of  the  strongest  feelings  of  Congress,  and  a  long  and
painful  dispute  took  place  with  the  commander-in-chief
about  the  wisdom  of  providing  half-pay  for  the  Ameri-
can officers  when  the  war  was  over.  In  some  very  re-
markable and  well-reasoned  letters,  Washington  urged
its  absolute  necessity.  '  Men  may  speculate,'  he  wrote,
4  as  they  will ;  they  may  talk  of  patriotism ;  they  may

1  Walpole's  Last  Journals,  ii.  289-292. *  Hildreth,  iii.24l.

CH.  xin.  AMERICAN HALF-PAY.  473

draw  a  few  examples  from  ancient  stories  of  great
achievements  performed  by  its  influence ;  but  whoever
builds  upon  them  as  a  sufficient  basis  for  conducting  a
long  and  bloody  war,  will  find  himself  deceived  in  the
end.  ...  I  know  patriotism  exists,  and  I  know  it  has
done  much  in  the  present  contest ;  but  I  will  venture
to  assert  that  a  great  and  lasting  war  can  never  be
supported  on  this  principle  alone.  It  must  be  aided
by  a  prospect  of  interest  or  some  reward.'  In  the  Eng-
lish army  commissions  were  so  valuable  that  companies
had  lately  been  sold  for  from  1,500Z.  to  2,200Z.,  and
4,000  guineas  had  been  given  for  a  troop  of  dragoons.
In  America  all  prices  had  risen  to  such  a  point  through
the  depreciated  currency,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  for
an  American  officer  to  live  upon  his  pay,  and  he  had
nothing  to  look  forward  to  when  his  service  had  ex-
pired. The  result  of  this  state  of  things  was  abund-
antly seen  in  c  the  frequent  defection  of  officers  seduced
by  views  of  private  interest  and  emolument  to  abandon
the  cause  of  their  country,'  '  Scarce  a  day  passes  with-
out the  offer  of  two  or  three  commissions,'  and  '  num-
bers who  had  gone  home  on  furlough  mean  not  to
return,  but  are  establishing  themselves  in  more  lucra-
tive employments.'  '  The  salvation  of  the  cause,'
Washington  solemnly  avowed,  depends  on  the  estab-
lishment of  some  system  of  half-pay,  and  without  it  the
'  officers  will  moulder  to  nothing,  or  be  composed  of
low  and  illiterate  men  void  of  capacity  for  this  or  any
other  business.'  '  The  large  fortunes  acquired  by  num-
bers out  of  the  army  afford  a  contrast  that  gives  poign-
ancy to  every  inconvenience  from  remaining  in  it.'
But  for  the  sudden  prospect  of  a  speedy  termination
of  the  war  given  by  the  French  alliance,  Washington
doubted  whether  in  the  beginning  of  1779  America
would  have  '  more  than  the  shadow  of  an  army,'  and
in  spite  of  that  alliance  he  believed  that  few  officers

474 ENGLAND IN THE  EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, en.  MIL

could  or  would  remain  on  the  present  establishment.1
A  compromise  was  at  last  effected  in  1778  by  which
the  officers  who  served  to  the  end  of  the  war  were  to
receive  half-pay  for  seven  years,  and  the  common
soldiers  who  served  to  the  end  of  the  war  a  gratuity  of
80  dollars.2

The  enlistments,  as  usual,  continued  very  slow.
Scarcely  a  third  part  of  the  men  voted  by  the  different
states  actually  came  in,  and  it  was  found  necessary  to
take  extraordinary  measures  to  obtain  recruits.  In  the
beginning  of  the  war  a  few  free  negroes  had  been  ad-
mitted into  the  army  of  Washington,  and  in  1778  a
regiment  of  slaves  was  raised  in  Rhode  Island.  They
were  promised  their  freedom  at  the  close  of  the  war,
and  the  owners  were  compensated  for  their  loss.  The
negroes  proved  excellent  soldiers  ;  in  a  hard-fought
battle  that  secured  the  retreat  of  Sullivan  they  three
times  drove  back  a  large  body  of  Hessians,  and  during
the  latter  years  of  the  war  large  numbers  of  slaves  were
enlisted  in  several  states.3

Some  recruits  were  also  drawn  from  another  and
a  much  more  shameful  source.  The  convention  of
Saratoga  had  explicitly  provided  that  the  captive  army
of  Burgoyne  should  without  delay  be  sent  to  Boston,
and  should  there  be  met  by  English  transports  and
embarked  for  England,  on  the  condition  that,  it  should
not  serve  in  North  America  during  the  existing  war.
This  article  was  naturally  disliked  by  the  Congress,
as  it  allowed  the  English  troops  to  be  employed
either  in  home  garrisons  or  in  foreign  service,  except
in  America,  and  it  was  deliberately  and  most  dis-
honourably violated.  The  keen  legal  gentlemen  who

1  Washington's  Works,  v.  305,  *  See  Historical  Notes  on  th«

312,  313,  322,  323,  328,  351 ;  vi.  Employment  of  Negroes  in  the

163.  American  Army,  by  George  H.

»  Hildreth,  iii.  245.  Moore.

CB.  xni.  THE VIOLATED CONVENTION.  476

directed  the  proceedings  of  Congress  had  no  difficulty
in  discovering  pretexts,  though  they  were  so  flimsy  that
it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  any  upright  man  could
for  a  moment  have  admitted  them.  Something  was
said  about  a  deficiency  in  the  number  of  cartouche
boxes  surrendered,  but  the  ground  ultimately  taken
was  an  expression  in  a  letter  of  General  Burgoyne.
Shortly  after  the  surrender  six  or  seven  English  officers
had  been  crowded  together  in  one  room  without  any
distinction  of  rank,  contrary  to  the  7th  article  of  the
convention,  and  Burgoyne,  in  remonstrating  against
the  proceeding,  had  incautiously  used  the  expression,
'  the  public  faith  is  broken.'  This,  the  Congress  main-
tained, was  equivalent  to  a  repudiation  of  the  conven-
tion by  one  of  its  signers.  Burgoyne  at  once  wrote
disclaiming  any  such  intention,  and  he  formally  pledged
himself  that  his  officers  would  join  with  him  in  signing
any  instrument  that  was  thought  necessary  for  confirm-
ing the  convention,  and  removing  all  possible  doubt  of
its  being  binding  upon  the  English  Government.  The
Congress,  however,  pretended  to  be  unsatisfied,  and  re-
solved to  detain  the  English  troops  '  till  a  distinct  and
explicit  ratification  of  the  convention  of  Saratoga  be  pro-
perly notified  by  the  Court  of  Great  Britain  to  Congress.'
No  such  ratification  could  be  obtained  for  several
months,  and  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  English
would  consent  to  it,  as  it  involved  a  recognition  of
the  Congress,  and  was  at  the  same  time  absolutely
without  necessity,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  con-
vention. The  commissioners,  however,  who  came  to
America  in  1778  with  the  fullest  powers  to  negotiate
on  the  part  of  the  King  and  Parliament,  offered  to  re-
new the  convention ;  and  Sir  H.  Clinton  subsequently
sent  to  the  Congress  instructions  from  the  English
Secretary  of  State  authorising  him  expressly  to  demand
a  fulfilment  of  its  terms,  and,  if  required,  to  ratify  in

476 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

the  King's  name  all  the  conditions  stipulated  in  it ;  but
the  Congress  still  refused  to  release  the  prisoners,  who
were  thus  by  an  act  of  barefaced  treachery  detained  in
America  for  several  years.1  After  a  time,  many  of
them  were  persuaded  to  enlist  in  the  American  army,
and  Massachusetts  appears  to  have  especially  employed
them  as  substitutes  for  her  own  citizens,  who  refused
to  serve.  Washington  strongly  censured  this  practice,
which  was  as  impolitic  as  it  was  dishonourable,  for
many  of  the  captive  soldiers  only  joined  the  American
army  in  order  to  escape,  and  soon  found  themselves  again
under  their  own  flag,  where,  under  the  very  peculiar
circumstances  of  the  case,  they  were  gladly  welcomed.2
On  the  part  of  the  English  there  were  manifest  signs
of  a  fiercer  spirit  and  a  harsher  policy  than  had  hitherto
been  pursued,  and  a  very  bad  impression  was  made  by
some  sentences  in  the  address  issued  by  the  English
Commissioners  before  they  left  the  continent  after  their
unsuccessful  mission.  While  making  wide  offers  of
pardon  and  reconciliation  to  the  separate  states  and  to
all  individuals  who  renewed  their  allegiance  to  the
Crown,  they  added  that  hitherto  the  English  had  as
much  as  possible  '  checked  the  extremes  of  war,  when
they  tended  to  distress  a  people  still  considered  as  our
fellow-subjects  and  to  desolate  a  country  shortly  to
become  again  a  source  of  mutual  advantage.'  By  throw-
ing themselves  into  the  arms  of  the  natural  enemy  of
England,  the  Americans  had  changed  the  nature  of  the
contest,  '  and  the  question  is,  how  far  Great  Britain
may  by  every  means  in  her  power  destroy  or  render

1  Eamsay,  ii.  56,  57  ;  Stedman,  United  States,  iii.  237,  255,256),

ii.  56,  57. That excellent  and  which  is  much  more  honourable

most impartial American his-  to his countrymen than the

torian,  Mr.  Hildreth,  has  related  laboured  apologies  of  Mr.  Ban-

the  circumstances  of  this  trans-  croft.

action  with  a  severe  and  simple  2  Washington's  Works,  v.  287,

truthfulness (History qf t)te  346,  347.

en.  xin.  CHARGES AGAINST  THE ENGLISH.  477

useless  a  connection  contrived  for  her  ruin  and  for  the
aggrandisement  of  France.  Under  such  circumstances
the  laws  of  self-preservation  must  direct  the  conduct  of
Great  Britain ;  and  if  the  British  colonies  are  to  become
an  accession  to  France,  will  direct  her  to  render  that
accession  of  as  little  avail  as  possible  to  her  enemy.' 1

It  is  extremely  difficult  amidst  the  enormous  exagge-
rations propagated  by  the  American  press  to  ascertain
how  far  the  English  in  this  contest  really  exceeded  the
ordinary  rights  of  war.  It  was  the  manifest  interest  of
the  revolutionary  party  to  aggravate  their  misdeeds  to
the  utmost,  both  for  the  purpose  of  inflaming  the  very
languid  passions  of  their  own  people  and  of  arousing
the  indignation  of  Europe,  and  much  was  said  in  the
excitement  of  the  contest  which  seems  singularly  absurd
when  judged  in  the  dispassionate  light  of  history.
George  III.  was  habitually  represented  as  a  second
Nero.  The  Howes — who,  whatever  may  have  been
their  other  faults,  were  certainly  free  from  the  smallest
tendency  towards  inhumanity — were  ranked  'in  the
annals  of  infamy'  with  Pizarro,  Alva,  and  Borgia.
There  were  proposals  for  striking  medals  representing
on  one  side  the  atrocities  committed  by  the  English,
and  on  the  other  the  admirable  actions  of  the  Americans
— for  depicting  British  barbarities  upon  the  common
coins,  for  introducing  them  as  illustrations  into  school-
books  in  order  to  educate  the  American  youth  into  un-
dying hatred  of  England.2  If  we  put  aside  the  Indian
wars,  it  does  not  appear  to  me  that  anything  was  done
in  America  that  was  not  very  common  in  European
wars,  but  there  were  undoubtedly  many  acts  committed
for  which  the  English  had  deep  reason  to  be  ashamed.

1  Stedman,  ii.  60,  61.  i. 500-507 ; Hi. 107,  127,  128.

2  See Moore's Diary of  the Adam's Familiar Letters, pp.
American  War, passim. Ameri- 258,259,266.

can  Diplomatic  Correspondence,

478 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xm.

Owing  apparently  to  a  want  of  management  or  proper
organisation,  the  American  prisoners  who  had  been  con-
fined in  New  York  and  Fort  Washington  after  the
battle  at  Long  Island  were  so  emaciated  and  broken
down  by  scandalous  neglect  or  ill-usage  that  Washing-
ton refused  to  receive  them  in  exchange  for  an  equal
number  of  healthy  British  and  Hessian  troops.1  There
were  numerous  instances  of  plunder  and  burning  of
private  houses  brought  home  to  the  British  soldiers  or
to  their  German  allies ;  and  several  small  towns  were
deliberately  burnt  because  they  had  fired  on  the  British
soldiers,  because  they  had  become  active  centres  of
privateering,  or  because  they  contained  stores  and  maga-
zines that  might  be  useful  to  the  American  army.

In  the  horrible  tragedy  at  Wyoming  the  English  do
not  appear  to  have  been  directly  concerned,  but  some
American  loyalists  took  part  in,  or  prompted  its  worst
atrocities,  and  the  hatred  between  the  loyalists  and  the
Whigs  became  continually  stronger.  The  former  were
being  rapidly  driven  to  despair.  The  wholesale  con-
fiscation of  their  properties;  their  shameful  abandon-
ment on  many  occasions  by  the  British  troops ;  the
innumerable  insults  and  injuries  inflicted  on  them  by
their  own  countrymen ;  and  the  almost  certain  prospect
that  England  must  sooner  or  later  relinquish  America,
had  rendered  their  position  intolerable.  The  Congress,
by  a  resolution  passed  in  December  1777,  ordered  that
all  loyalists  taken  in  arms  in  the  British  service  should
be  sent  to  the  States  to  which  they  belonged  to  suffer
the  penalties  inflicted  by  the  laws  of  such  States  against
traitors.2  When  Philadelphia  was  reoccupied  by  the
Americans,  Washington  vainly  desired  that  pardon
should  be  granted  to  such  loyalists  as  consented  to  remain

1  See  Washington's  Works,  i.  240,  241;  iv.  380-386,  557-559.
*  Ibid.  v.  308,  309.

CH.  xiii.  AMERICAN ACTS OF  HUMANITY.  479

in  the  town,  but  no  such  proposition  was  listened  to.
Two  Quaker  gentlemen  of  considerable  position  in  Phila-
delphia, who  were  convicted  of  having  actively  assisted
the  English  during  the  period  of  the  occupation,  were
hanged ;  and  twenty-three  others  were  brought  to  trial
but  acquitted.

It  is,  however,  but  justice  to  the  Americans  to  add
that,  except  in  their  dealings  with  their  loyal  fellow-
countrymen,  their  conduct  during  the  war  appears  to
have  been  almost  uniformly  humane.  No  charges  of
neglect  of  prisoners,  like  those  which  were  brought,
apparently  with  too  good  reason,  against  the  English
were  substantiated  against  them.  The  conduct  of
Washington  was  marked  by  a  steady  and  careful
humanity,  and  Franklin  also  appears  to  have  done  much
to  mitigate  the  war.  It  was  noticed  by  Burke,  that
when  a  great  storm  desolated  the  West  Indian  Islands  in
1780,  Franklin  issued  orders  that  provision-ships  should
pass  unmolested  to  the  British  as  well  as  to  the  other
isles,  while  the  English  thought  this  a  proper  time  to
send  an  expedition  against  St.  Vincent's,  to  recover  it
from  the  French.1  In  the  instructions  which  Franklin
gave  to  Paul  Jones  in  1779,  he  ordered  him  not  to
follow  the  English  example  of  burning  defenceless
towns,  except  in  cases  where  '  a  reasonable  ransom  is
refused,'  and  even  then  to  give  such  timely  notice  as
would  enable  the  inhabitants  to  remove  .the  women  and
children,  the  sick  and  the  aged.2  In  the  same  year  he
issued  directions  to  all  American  captains  who  might
encounter  the  great  nagivator,  Captain  Cook,  not  only
not  to  molest  him,  but  to  give  him  every  assistance  in
their  power  as  a  benefactor  to  the  whole  human  race.3

1  Parl.Hist.  xxii.  220.  s  Ibid.  pp.  67, 68. It  must  be

*  American  Diplomatic  Corre- admitted,  however,  that  as  early

spondence,  iii.  78.  as  1777  both  Franklin  and  Deane

480 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  en.  xra.

The  relations  of  the  Americans  with  their  new  allies
were  by  no  means  untroubled.  In  the  army  the  jealousy
between  the  American  and  the  foreign  officers  was
extreme.  Even  Washington  was  once  tempted  to
express  a  wish  that  there  was  not  a  single  foreigner  in
the  army  except  Lafayette,1  and  some  of  the  strongest
feelings  of  the  American  population  were  shocked  by
the  alliance  with  the  French.  The  New  Englanders
had  always  been  taught  to  regard  France  as  a  natural
enemy,  and  they  were  Protestants  of  Protestants.  Con-
gress, having  very  lately  expressed  its  unbounded
horror  at  the  encouragement  by  England  of  Popery  in
Canada,  had  now  allied  itself  with  the  leading  Catholic
power  against  the  leading  Protestant  power  of  Europe.
Very  bitter  indignation  was  felt  and  expressed  at  the
conduct  of  Count  D'Estaing  in  retiring  from  Rhode
Island,  and  it  needed  all  the  tact  and  unvarying  mode-
ration of  Washington  to  prevent  at  this  time  an  open
outbreak.  At  Boston  and  at  Charleston  there  were
violent  riots  between  the  French  sailors  and  the  popu-
lace, and  several  lives  were  lost.

had  given  their  full  approbation
to  projects  that  were  entertained
of  burning  and  plundering  Liver-
pool and  Glasgow  (ibid.  i.  92, 298).
I  have  already  noticed  the  Ameri-
can proposals  for  burning  New
York  and  desolating  the  surround-
ing country  (supra,  pp.  356, 357),
and  Lee  strongly  recommended
the  burning  of  Philadelphia  in
1776.  (Moore's  Treason  of  Charles
Lee,  p.  69.)  Washington  contem-
plated burning  Newport,  the
capital  of  Rhode  Island  (Wash-
ington's WorJcs,  vi.  373),  but  this
was  in  order  to  dislodge  an
English  army,  and  he  was  never
guilty  of  such  depredations  as
those  perpetrated  by  the  English

in  Connecticut  and  Virginia.  In
1779  Congress  ordered  the  marine
committee  to  take  measures  for
burning  and  destroying  towns  be-
longing to  the  enemy  in  Great
Britain  and  the  West  Indies  as  a
measure  of  retaliation,  but  this
order  was  never  carried  into  effect
(Adolphus,  iii.  59).  Lord  Corn-
wallis  asserts  that  the  Ameri-
cans treated  their  prisoners  in
S.  Carolina  with  an  '  inhumanity
scarcely  credible,'  and  that  seve-
ral were  barbarously  murdered
(Cornwallis,  Correspondence,  i.
67,  71),  but  these  appear  to  have
been  loyalists.

1  Washington's  Works,  vi.  15,
47.

CH.  xin.  THE  FRENCH ALLIANCE.  481

The  subsequent  departure  of  the  French  squadron
for  the  West  Indies  was  deemed  a  proof  that  France
was  only  regarding  her  own  interests  in  the  contest.
A  plan  of  again  invading  Canada  with  a  combined
force  of  French  and  Americans  was  propounded  by
Lafayette  in  1778,  and  was  warmly  espoused  by  many
members  of  Congress,  but  Washington,  in  a  most  re-
markable secret  letter,  warned  them  of  its  extreme
political  danger.  The  French,  he  said,  had  no  doubt
bound  themselves  by  the  treaty  of  alliance  not  to  re-
gain any  of  the  territory  in  America  which  they  had
abandoned  at  the  Peace  of  Paris,  but  if  a  large  body
of  French  troops  found  themselves  in  possession  of  the
capital  of  the  province  which  had  so  lately  belonged
to  France,  and  which  was  bound  to  France  by  the  ties
of  religion  and  race  and  old  associations,  was  it  likely
that  they  would  relinquish  it?  By  keeping  Canada
France  would  gain  a  vast  commerce,  absolute  command
of  the  Newfoundland  fishery,  the  finest  nursery  of  sea-
men in  the  world,  complete  security  for  her  own  islands,
and  what,  perhaps,  she  would  value  not  less,  a  perma-
nent control  over  the  United  States.  If,  as  seemed
probable,  France  and  Spain  would  soon  combine  to
destroy  the  naval  power  of  England,  they  would  be
without  a  rival  on  the  sea,  and  France  could  always
pour  troops  into  Canada,  which  would  make  all  resist-
ance by  the  Americans  hopeless.  In  such  case,  America
might  again  seek  to  be  united  with  England,  but  she
would  find  that  England,  if  she  had  the  disposition,
would  not  have  the  power  to  help  her.  Nor  was  it
difficult  for  the  French  to  find  a  pretext  for  holding
Canada,  for  they  might  treat  it  as  a  pledge  or  surety
for  the  large  sums  for  which  America  was  already  in-
debted to  France.1

1  Washington's  Works,  pp.  106-110.
VOL.  IV.  J  I

482 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  MIL

These  arguments  had  probably  a  considerable  weight
with  Congress,  and  the  projected  invasion  was  aban-
doned. The  secret  instructions,  however,  furnished  by
the  French  Government  to  Gerard,  their  minister  in
America,  have  of  late  years  been  laid  before  the  public,
and  they  show  that  France  not  only  had  no  intention
of  taking  possession  of  Canada,  but  also  that  she  was
determined  as  far  as  possible  to  discourage  all  attempts
of  the  Americans  to  invade  it.  The  possession  of  Canada
and  Nova  Scotia  by  the  English,  and,  if  it  could  be
attained,  the  possession  of  the  whole  or  part  of  Florida
by  the  Spaniards,  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  French
ministers,  be  eminently  favourable  to  French  interests,
for  it  would  keep  the  American  Stat  es  in  a  condition  of
permanent  debility  and  anxiety,  and  would,  therefore,
make  them  value  more  highly  the  friendship  and  al-
liance of  France.  So  important  did  this  consideration
appear  to  Vergennes,  that  he  assured  the  French  am-
bassador at  Madrid  of  his  perfect  readiness  to  guarantee
to  England  her  dominion  over  Canada  and  Nova  Scotia.1

The  folly  of  continuing  the  war  after  the  French
alliance  had  been  declared,  was  keenly  felt  not  only  by
the  English  Opposition  and  by  continental  Europe,  but
even  by  Lord  North  himself;  but  the  determination  of
the  King,  and  the  pride  that  would  relinquish  no  part  of
the  British  Empire,  still  prevailed,  and  sanguine  hopes

1  '  Les d6put6s du Congrea  cipe  utile  d'inqui6tude  et  de  vigi-

avaient  propos6  au  roi  de  prendre  lance  pour les  Am£ricains,  qui

1'engagement  de  favoriser  la  con-  leur  fera  sentir  davantage  tout  le

qu3te  que  les  Americains  entre-  besoin  qu'ils  ont  de  1'alliance  et

prendraient du Canada,  de  la  de  1'amitie  du  roi ;  il  n'est  pas

Nouvelle-Ecosse  et  des  Florides,  de  son inter^t  de  le  detruire.'

et  il  y  a  lieu  de croire  que  le  See  the  instructions to  Gerard

projet  tient  fort  a  coeur  au  Con-  in  Circourt's  translation  of  Ban-

gres. Mais  le roi a  consider^  croft,  De  Vaction  commune  de  la

que  la  possession  de  ces  trois  France  et  de  I'Amtrique,  iii.  259.

contr6es,  ouau  moins  du  Canada,  See,  too,  pp.  307,  311,  312.
par  1'Angleterre,  serait  un  prin-

OH.  xiii. DERANGEMENT OF  THE  CURRENCY.  483

were  entertained  that  American  resistance  might  even
now  speedily  collapse.1  Nor  were  those  hopes  without
some  real  foundation.  In  May  1778  Washington  him-
self expressed  his  fear  that  '  a  blow  at  our  main  army
if  successful,  would  have  a  wonderful  effect  upon  the
minds  of  a  number  of  people  still  wishing  to  embrace
the  present  terms,  or  indeed  any  terms,  offered  by  Great
Britain.'  2  Recruits,  which  were  always  obtained  with
great  difficulty  and  in  insufficient  numbers,  became  still
more  rare  as  soon  as  there  was  a  prospect  of  foreign
assistance,  and  the  depreciation  of  the  continental  cur-
rency continued  with  an  accelerated  speed.  Nothing  in
the  American  Revolution  is  more  curious  than  the  obsti-
nacy with  which  the  several  States,  to  the  end  of  1778,
refused  the  urgent  and  repeated  entreaties  of  Congress
to  impose  some  serious  taxation  in  order  to  meet  the
enormous  expenses  of  the  war.3  Whether  it  was  timidity,
or  indifference,  or  parsimony  may  be  difficult  to  say,  but
Congress  everywhere  met  with  a  refusal,  and  the  conse-
quent derangement  of  the  currency  steadily  grew,  and
in  reality  imposed  far  more  serious  loss  than  the  heaviest

1  A  certain  Captain  Blankett,  of  it  for  the  support  of  America

from  the  Victory  (May  31,  1778),  in  one  coffee-house  in  Paris  than

forwarded  to  Shelburne  an  ab-  is  to  be  found  in  the  whole  con-

stract  of  an  intercepted  letter  of  tinent.  TheAmericans  are  averse

a  French  engineer  giving  his  im-  to  war  from  a  habit  of  indolence

pressions  of  the  state  of  things  at  and  equality. Their  antipathy

this  time  prevailing  in  America.  to  the  French  is  very  great.' —

He  thought  that  the  Americans  Lansdowne  Papers,  British  Mu-

owed  their  success  much  more  to  seum,  Add.  MSS.  24131,  p.  29.

English  blunders  than  to  them-  There  is  an  admirably  impartial

selves,  and  that  if  Howe  had  fol-  and  powerful  summary  of  the

lowed  up  his  victory  at  Brandy-  arguments  of  the  ministers  to

wine,  the  whole  American  army  show  that  America  must  soon

would  have  been  dispersed.  'Each  collapse,  in  the  Annual  Register,

State,'he  writes, 'is  jealous  of  the  1779,  p.  106.

other. The  spirit  of  enthusiasm  •  Washington's  Works,  v.  359.

in  defence  of  liberty  does  not  ex-  8  See  Bolles's  Financial  His-

ist  among  them;  there  is  more  tori/,  pp.  103-198.

484 ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  CH.  xm.

taxation.  But  for  the  large  sums  of  money  which  France
annually  sent,  the  struggle  could  hardly  have  continued,
and  already  to  those  brave  men  who  still  continued  to
serve  their  country  in  the  field  without  entering  into
questionable  speculations,  life  was  fast  becoming  almost
impossible.  Washington  wrote  in  October  1778  that
the  most  puny  horses  for  military  purposes  cost  at  least
200L,  a  saddle  30Z.  or  401. ;  boots  20/. ;  flour  sold  at
different  places  from  5Z.  to  15Z.  per  hundredweight;
hay  from  10L  to  30L  per  ton,  and  other  essentials  in
the  same  proportion.1  Six  months  later  Mrs.  Adams
wrote  to  her  husband  that  all  butchers'  meat  was  from
a  dollar  to  eight  shillings  per  Ib. ;  corn  25  dollars  a
bushel;  butter  and  sugar  both  12s.  a  Ib. ;  a  common
cow  from  601.  to  701. ;  labour  six  or  eight  dollars  a  day.2
'  Unless  extortion,  forestalling,  and  other  practices  which
have  crept  in  and  become  exceedingly  prevalent  and
injurious  to  the  common  cause,  can  meet  with  proper
checks,'  wrote  Washington,  '  we  must  inevitably  sink
under  such  a  load  of  accumulated  oppression.'3  The
evil  was  a  growing  one,  and  in  the  last  month  of  1778,
when  the  French  alliance  and  the  immediate  prospect
of  a  Spanish  alliance  appeared  to  make  the  triumph
of  America  a  certainty,  Washington  was  writing  in  a
tone  of  extreme  despondency  :  '  Our  affairs  are  in  a
more  distressed,  ruinous,  and  deplorable  condition  than
they  have  been  since  the  commencement  of  the  war  ; '
'  the  common  interests  of  America  are  mouldering  and
sinking  into  irretrievable  ruin  if  a  remedy  is  not  soon
applied.'4

1  Washington's  Works,  vi.  80. Americans  here  is  the  most  ex-

3  Adams's Familiar  Letters, travagant. All  the  infernal  arts
p.  3G1.  of stockjobbing, all the vora-

*  Washington's  Works,  vi.  91.  cious  avarice  of  merchants  have

4  Ibid.  p.  151. The  evil  was  mingled  themselves  with  Ameri-
not  confined  to  the  Americans  can politics here.'  —  Familiar
nt  home. Adams  writing from  Letters,  p.  356.

1'assy  says :  '  The  delirium  among

CH.  xiu.  ESTIMATE OF THE REVOLUTION.  485

A  feeling  very  much  of  the  same  kind  was  begin-
ning to  press  upon  the  mind  of  the  French  Minister,  who
was  now  the  main  support  of  the  American  cause.  Two
confidential  letters  written  by  Vergennes  to  the  French
ambassador  at  Madrid,  in  November  1778,  are  very
curious,  as  showing  that  the  closer  view  which  the  al-
liance had  given  him  of  the  character,  dispositions,  and
circumstances  of  the  American  people  had  profoundly
disappointed  him.  With  a  little  more  energy  England,
he  was  convinced,  might  have  totally  suppressed  the
revolt,  and  even  now,  and  in  spite  of  the  active  inter-
vention of  France,  he  had  great  fears  lest  the  whole
edifice  of  American  Independence  should  crumble  into
dust.1

In  truth  the  American  people,  though  in  general  un-
bounded believers  in  progress,  are  accustomed,  through
a  kind  of  curious  modesty,  to  do  themselves  a  great  in-
justice by  the  extravagant  manner  in  which  they  idealise
their  past.  It  has  almost  become  a  commonplace  that
the  great  nation  which  in  our  own  day  has  shown  such
an  admirable  combination  of  courage,  devotion,  and
humanity  in  its  gigantic  civil  war,  and  which  since  that
time  has  so  signally  falsified  the  predictions  of  its  ene-
mies, and  put  to  shame  all  the  nations  of  Europe  by  its

1  'C'estgratuitementqu'onvoit  r^publique,  s'ils  n'en corrigent

dans  le  peuple  nouveau  une  race  pas  les  vices,  ce  qui  me  parait

de  conquerants.  .  .  .  Malgr6 le  tres  difficile  .  .  .  ne  sera  jamais

grand  attachement  que  le  peuple  qu'un  corps  faible  et  susceptible

et meme  les chefs  temoignent  de  bien  peu d'activite. Si  lea

pour  leur  independance,  je  sou-  Anglais  en  avaient  mis davan-

haite  que  leur  Constance  ne  les  tage,  ce  colosse  apparent  serait

abandonne  pas avant  qu'ils  en  actuellement  plus  soumis  qu'il

aient  obtenu  la  reconnaissance.  ne  1'avait  jamais  ete. Dieu  fasse

Je  commence  a  n'avoir  plus  une  que  cela  n'arrive  pas  encore. Je

si  grande  opinion  de  leur  fermete,  vous  avoue  que  je  n'ai  qu'une

parce que celle  que  j'avais  de  faible  confiance dans 1'euergie

leurs  talents,  de  leurs  vues  et  de  des Etats-Unia.' — Circourt,  iii.

leur  amour  patriotique  s'affaiblit  312-814.
a  mesure  que  je  m'eclaire.'  '  Leur

486 ENGLAND  m  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY,  ca.  xm.

unparalleled  efforts  in  paying  off  its  national  debt,  is  of
a  far  lower  moral  type  than  its  ancestors  at  the  time  of
the  War  of  Independence.  This  belief  appears  to  me
essentially  false.  The  nobility  and  beauty  of  the  cha-
racter of  Washington  can  indeed  hardly  be  surpassed  ;
several  of  the  other  leaders  of  the  Revolution  were  men
of  ability  and  public  spirit,  and  few  armies  have  ever
shown  a  nobler  self-devotion  than  that  which  remained
with  Washington  through  the  dreary  winter  at  Valley
Forge.  But  the  army  that  bore  those  sufferings  was  a
very  small  one,  and  the  general  aspect  of  the  American
people  during  the  contest  was  far  from  heroic  or  sub-
lime.1 The  future  destinies  and  greatness  of  the  Eng-
lish race  must  necessarily  rest  mainly  with  the  mighty
nation  which  has  arisen  beyond  the  Atlantic,  and  that
nation  may  well  afford  to  admit  that  its  altitude  during
the  brief  period  of  its  enmity  to  England  has  been  very

1  The  following  very  emphatic  is  the  want  of  everything,  are
passage  is  from  a  letter  of  Wash-  but  secondary  considerations  and
ington  from  Philadelphia,  Dec.  postponed  from  day  to  day,  from
80,  1778 :  '  If  I  were  called  upon  week  to  week,  as  if  our  affairs
to  draw  a  picture  of  the  times  wore  the  most  promising  aspect,
and  of  men  from  what  I  have  .  .  .  Our  money  is  now  sinking
Been,  heard,  and  in  part  know,  I  50  per  cent,  a  day  in  this  city,
should  in  one  word  say  that  idle-  and  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  in
ness,  dissipation,  and  extrava-  the  course  of  a  few  months  a
gance  seem  to  have  laid  fast  hold  total  stop  is  put  to  the  currency
of  most  of  them ;  that  specula-  of  it ;  and  yet  an  assembly,  a
tion,  peculation,  and  an  insatiable  concert,  a  dinner,  or  supper,  will
thirst  for  riches  seem  to  have  got  not  only  take  men  off  from  acting
the  better  of  every  other  con-  in  this  business,  but  even  from
sideration  and  almost  of  every  thinking  of  it ;  while  a  great  part
order  of  men ;  that  party  dis-  of  the  officers  of  our  army  from
putes  and  personal  quarrels  are  absolute  necessity  are  quitting
the  great  business  of  the  day;  the  service,  and  the  more  vir-
whilst  the  momentous  concerns  tuous  few,  rather  than  do  this,
of  an  empire,  a  great  and  accu-  are  sinking  by  sure  degrees  into
mulating  debt,  ruined  finances,  beggary  and  want.' — Washing-
depreciated  money  and  want  cf  ton's  Works,  vi.  151,  152.
credit,  which  in  iis  consequences

CH.  XIH.  ESTIMATE OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  487

nnduly  extolled.  At  the  same  time,  the  historian  of
that  period  would  do  the  Americans  a  great  injustice
if  he  judged  them  only  by  the  revolutionary  party,  and
failed  to  recognise  how  large  a  proportion  of  their  best
men  had  no  sympathy  with  the  movement.

END  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

TRIXTKD  BY

SPOTTISIVOODK  AND  CO. LTD..  I.ONDOK
COLCHKSTKR  AND  ETON

Lecky

Lecky

A  history  of  England  . . .

DA

480

.L46>

v.4
