Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity, Vol. 2: From 330 A.D. to 330 A.D. (Francis Legge, 1915)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (forerunnersrival02legguoft).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

#cfo gorfe: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

Bomfrajj, Calcutta anH flSatiras: MACMTLLAN AND CO., Ltd.

Toronto: J. M. DENT AND SONS, Ltd.

Cofego: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHTEI-KAISHA


All rights reserved


FORERUNNERS AND RIVALS
OF CHRISTIANITY

BEING
STUDIES IN RELIGIOUS HISTORY

FROM 33O B.C. TO 33O A.D.


BY

F. LEGGE, F.S.A.

(Honorary) Foreign Secretary Society of Biblical Archaeology,

Member of Council Royal Asiatic Society,

Member of Committee Egypt Exploration Fund, &c.


" The ghosts of words and dusty dreams "
" Old memories, faiths infirm and dead "

Swinburne, Fe'lise.


IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. II


Cambridge :
at the University Press
1915


Cantbn&fff:

PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
AT THE ONIVER8ITY PRESS


CONTENTS
CHAPTER VII

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS

Expectation of Parusia causes Gnosticism to be ignored by Apostolic
writers — Change in Christian teaching at end of 1st century — Destruction
of Temple of Jerusalem forces Christians to separate from Jews — Some
compromise with heathenism necessary — Coveted position of Christian
bishops — Founders of Gnostic sects — Only evidence of their teaching
till lately, Irenaeus and Epiphanius, both unsatisfactory — Discovery of
Philosophumena of Hippolytus, and Salmon and Stahelin's attacks on
its credibility — The Pistis Sophia and Bruce Papyrus — General features
of Post-Christian Gnostics — Their belief in Divinity and Historicity of
Jesus — Difficulties arising from this and their various solutions — Secrecy
of doctrine common among Gnostics and consequent calumnies — Many
Gnostic doctrines still doubtful — Parallel between the Gnostic and
Protestant sects — Gnosticism bridge between heathenism and Christianity
— Effect of this on Catholic practice and doctrine . . Pages 1-24

CHAPTER VIII

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS :— THE OPHITES

Different accounts of origin of Ophites — Alteration from time to time
of their doctrines — Phrygia first home of Ophites and its history — Its
religion and bi-sexual deity lead to theocrasia — Jewish settlements in
Phrygia and their apostasy — Addiction of Phrygian Jews to magic —
Their connection with Cabala uncertain — Ineffable First Cause of the
Ophites — The Great Light or Supreme Being at once Father-and-Son —
Female Deity necessary in Phrygia, — Formation of Supreme Triad of
Father, Mother, and Son — Messenger of Triad called Christos — Creation
of Universe by Powers intermediate between God and man, and
Legend of Sophia — Sophia's son Ialdabaoth the Demiurge, the seven
heavens, and their rulers — The Ophiomorphus or serpent-shaped god,
whence derived — Passions of ipankind derived from Ophiomorphus, but
latter not bad — Creation of Man by planetary powers — The seven earthly
demons, Talmud, and Cabala — Man's soul brought from above by Christos


vi Contents

— The soul of the world and the Mysteries — Ophites followers of Jesus,
but believe in salvation through Mysteries — Scheme of redemption and
abstinence from generation — Composite nature of Jesus, His earthly life,
passion, and resurrection — Rites attributed to Ophites — Naassene Hymn
and its explanation — Changes of man's soul and Gospel according to the
Egyptians — Necessity of guide through next world like Boole of the Dead
— Celsus' Diagram described and explained — "Defences" or Apologiae of
soul added by Origen — Explanation of and commentary on Diagram and
Defences — Spread and decay of Ophite sect — Gradual modification of their
doctrines and connection with the Pistis Sophia — Apocryphal Gospels
used by Ophites : extracts quoted — Ophites apply fantastic interpretation
to all literature 25-82


CHAPTER IX

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS: VALENTINUS

Early Ophites probably uneducated — General softening of manners
under Julian Emperors and development of morality — Change in ethical
ideals of Gnosticism probably starts in Alexandria — Doctrines of Saturninus
and Basilides — Basilides' system never intended for public use and probably
merges in that of Valentinus — Links with Simon Magus and Ophites —
Success of Valentinus' teaching and abuse of him by Fathers — Valentinus'
theology : Bythos either bi-sexual or makes syzygy with Sige — Emanation
of Ogdoad — Valentinus' statements as to this possibly metaphors —
Emanation of Decad and Dodecad — Names of Aeons and their explanation
— Sophia and her Fall in Valentinus' system — Her Ectroma and emanation
of Christos, the Holy Spirit, and the Cross- — Sophia Without and Jesus the
Joint Fruit of the Pleroma — Formation of worlds from passions of Sophia
Without and their rulers — The different natures of men and demons —
The Heavenly Banquet — Valentinus' predestinarian views contrasted
with Ophites'— Salvation of Psychics by Jesus — Valentinus' account of
Crucifixion doubtful — Life of Valentinus — His successors — Italic School:
Ptolemy, Secundus, and Heracleon — Anatolic School: Axionicus, Bar-
desanes, Theodotus, and Alexander — Life of Bardesanes and his Hymns —
Valentinus' innovations on Christianity and attitude of early Fathers
towards them — His use of metaphor and "God is Love" — Exegesis of
Valentinus and his followers and his pastoral attitude — Did Valentinus
ever attempt to break with Church or to found secret sect? — Valentinus'
compliance with heathenism attracts rich and learned — Dangers of this
for Church — Proceedings of Marcus — Spread of sect after Valentinus'
death — Ptolemy's letter to Flora/ — Egypt natural home of sect — Its Decay
— Half-way house between earlier Gnosticism and Catholicism 83-133


Contents vii

CHAPTER X

THE SYSTEM OF THE PISTIS SOPHIA AND ITS
RELATED TEXTS

Description of the Pistis Sophia MS. — Story of two first parts — Pre-
terrestrial acts of Jesus — Incarnation and Second Ascension with address
of the Powers — Arrangement of Heavenly Worlds and their occupants:
the Powers above and below the Veil : those of the Right, Middle, and Left
— The starry world — Adventures of Jesus' passage to the upper worlds —
He changes the course of the stars — Meeting of Jesus with Pistis Sophia
and her history — Is the Pistis Sophia the Interrogations of Mary ? — Ophite
features in Pistis Sophia — Valentinian ones more marked — Joys of elect
in next world and places according to mysteries — Mysteries are sacraments
— Eucharistic grace revealed in book — Complete union of worshippers with
deity confined to few — Egyptian fe'atures in book — Existing MS., Coptic
version of Greek text — Original work probably by Valentinus — The Texts
of the Saviour : a thaumaturgic work — Its continuation — Texts of the
Saviour later than Pistis Sophia and quotations from them — Are the Texts
by Marcus the Magician? — The Bodleian Papyrus Bruce and its divisions
— One fragment must be later than Pistis Sophia — Another connected
with the Texts of the Saviour — Dr Karl Schmidt's views as to date, etc.
discussed — Increase of post-mortem terrors in later books, a peculiarly
Egyptian feature — Degeneration of Gnosticism in Egypt and its magical
tendencies — 111 effects of this upon Egyptian Christianity — Services
rendered to Church by Gnosticism generally . . . 134-202

CHAPTER XI

MARCION

Increase of anti-Jewish feeling in Rome under Antoninus Pius — History
of Marcion — Terror of Church at Marcion's doctrine — Uncompromising
character of Marcionism — Marcion's expurgation of Scripture — His
Antitheses — His Two Gods — His Docetic views — His anti-Jewish teaching
—His treatment of the Pauline Epistles — His abhorrence of allegory —
The original nature of his system and its resemblance to Protestantism —
p uritanism of Marcionites — History of Marcionism — Rise of sects within
; t — Marcion's follower Apelles leans towards Catholicism — Tatian's,
Encratites', and other variations of Marcionism — After Constantine, many
Marcionites rejoin Church — Others coalesce with Manichaeans — Failure of
Marcion's attempted reform— Interest of Marcion's heresy for later ages

203-223


viii Contents


CHAPTER XII

THE WORSHIP OF MITHRAS

Reaction of East towards Persia in Roman times — Struggle between
Rome and Persia only closes with Mahommedan Invasion — Rome leans
to Persian fashions and proclaims Mithras protector of Empire — How
Mithraism reached Rome — Its propagation by the soldiery — Mithras may
have been originally god of Western Asia — His place in Persian religion
— Magism, its tenets and connection with magic — And with astrology —
Uncertainty as to Mithraic tenets and Oumont's theory — Roman ideas as
to Ormuzd and Ahriman — Connection of Mithras with the Sun — The
Legend of Mithras — Explanation of Tauroctony — The Mithraic Eucharist
or Banquet — Mithras probably the only god for his worshippers- — His
position midway between heaven and earth — Ahriman in Mithraism —
Identified with Greek Hades — Lord of Destiny — The seven spheres in
Mithraism — Eclecticism of Mithraics as to worship of other gods — Possibly
as to Christianity also — The Mysteries of Mithras — The seven degrees of
initiation — Privileges of higher initiates doubtful — The so-called Mithraic
Liturgy — The priests and ceremonies of Mithraism — Likeness of Mithraism
to Freemasonry and its political uses — Decline of Mithraism on loss of
Dacia — Its extinction under Gratian — Exclusion of women from mysteries
drawback to Mithraism — Xot attractive save to soldiers — Survivals of
Mithraism in royal titles — And in magic and astrology . 224-276


CHAPTER XIII

MANES AND THE MANICHAEANS

Contrast between Mithraism and Manichaeism — Life and Death of
Manes — Ardeshir, son of Sassan, finds religion necessary to State — Restores
Zoroastrianism — Manichaeism a Zoroastrian heresy — Christian account of
origin of Manichaeism too late — Manes' cardinal doctrines Persian —
Conflict between Light and Darkness — Satan and the First Man — Defeat
of latter and creation of Universe — The Redemption of the Light — Birth
and ancestry of Adam — Jesus sent as Saviour to Adam — Infidelity of Eve
and its results — Likeness of these to Mandaite stories — Roles of Buddha,
Zoroaster, and Jesus in Manichaeism — The salvation and transmigration
of souls — The death of the perfect righteous — Of the Hearer — Distinction
between Perfect and Hearer peculiar to Manichaeism — Obligations of
Hearers — Hatred of Manes for Jews — Manes aims at syncretic religion —


Contents ix

MSS. found at Turfan prove chameleon-like character of Manichaeism —
Manichaeans are Christians among Christians, Buddhists among Buddhists
— Manichaean Cosmogony and Anthropogony in Bar Kh6ni and the Tur-
kestan MSS. — Organization of Manichaean Church — Ritual of Manichaeans
confined to prayers and hymns — Manichaean prayers from Mahommedan
sources — Khuastuanift or Manichaean Litany from Turkestan given with
commentary — Perfect redeem Light by eating food — Hearers' fasts help
scheme of redemption — Sacrament among Manichaeans doubtful — Sym-
bolical pictures in Manichaean Churches — Festivals of the Bema, Christmas,
and Sunday — Manichaean Scriptures — Manichaean treatise found at Tun-
huang — The two great archangels and the division of the sexes — History
of Manichaeism 277-357

CONCLUSION

End of Paganism — Supremacy of Christianity in West — Its borrowings
from its defeated rivals — Triumph of Christianity survival of fittest

358-361

Index 362-425


.


CHAPTER VII

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS

It will be seen, from what has been said in the first
volume, that, even at the beginning of the Christian era,
there was no lack of aipeac; or choice of creeds offered to
those peoples of the Levant who had outgrown their national
religions ; and it may be a surprise to many that more notice
was not taken by the Christians of the Apostolic age of
these early essays at a universal faith. Some writers, indeed,
among whom Bishop Lightfoot is perhaps the most notable,
have thought that they could detect allusions to them in the
Canonical writings, and that by the " worshipping of angels,
intruding into those things which man hath not seen, vainly
puffed up by the understanding of his flesh 1 " which St Paul
condemns in the Epistle to the Colossians, must be understood
the teachings of Gnostic sects already in existence 2 . Others
have gone further, and think that the Fourth Gospel was itself
written under Gnostic influence 3 , and that the Apocalypse
attributed to the same author vituperates under the name of
the Nicolaitans a Christian sect professing Gnostic tenets 4 .
Even if this be so, however, the comparatively late date assigned
to all these documents 5 must prevent their being received as

1 CoL ii. 18.

2 Lightfoot, St Paul's Epistle to the Colossians, pp. 90 sqq.

3 So A. JuHcher in Encyc. Bibl. s.v. Gnosis.

* Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk i. c. 23, p. 214, Harvey. Salmon in Diet, of
Christian Biog. s.v. Nicolaitans, thinks this an idea peculiar to Irenaeus
alone and not to be found in the older source from which he drew his
account of the other Gnostics.

5 The Canonical Apocalypse was probably written after the siege
of Jerusalem by Titus in 70 A.D., while the first unmistakable mention
we have of St John's Gospel is by Theophilus of Antioch a hundred
years later. Earlier quotations from it are anonymous, i.e. they give the
words of the Gospel as in the A. V. but without referring them to any specified
author. See Duchesne, Early Christian Church, Eng. ed. pp. 102, 192.
l. n. 1


2 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

evidence of what happened in the earliest stage of the Christian
Church ; and we find no proof that Gnosticism ever seriously
competed for popular favour with orthodox Christianity until
well into the und century 1 . That the first Christians would take
little heed either of organized religions like that of the Alex-
andrian divinities, or of the speculations of the Orphic poets
and of such sects as the Simonians is plain, when we consider
the way in which their expectation of the Parusia or Second
Coming dominated every moment of their fives 2 . They believed
with the unquestioning faith of children that their dead Master
would presently return to the earth, and that it would then be
destroyed to make way for a new state of things in which, while
the majority of mankind would be condemned to everlasting
fire, His followers should taste all the joys of Paradise. With
this before their eyes, they turned, as has been said, their
possessions into a common fund 3 , they bound themselves
together in a strict association for mutual help and comfort,
and they set to work to sweep their fellows into the Christian
fold with an earnestness and an energy that was the fiercer
because the time for its exercise was thought to be so short.
" The Lord is at hand and His reward," a saying which seems
to have been a password among them 4 , was an idea never
absent from their minds, and the result was an outburst of
proselytism such as the world till then had never seen.

" They saw," says a writer who was under no temptation to exag-
gerate the charity and zeal of the primitive Church, " their fathers
and mothers, their sisters and their dearest friends, hurrying onward to
that fearful pit, laughing and singing, lured on by the fiends whom
they called the gods. They felt as we should feel were we to see a
blind man walking towards a river bank .... Who that could hope
to save a soul by tears and supplications would remain quiescent

1 Hegesippus, quoted by Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk iv. c. 22, says that the
Church was untroubled by heresy until tbe reign of Trajan.

2 Hegesippus (see last note) in his account of the martyrdom of " James
the Brother of the Lord," op. cil. Bk tr. c. 23.

3 See Schmiedel, Encyc. Bibl. s.v. Community of Goods. Cf. Lucian,
de Mori. Peregrini, c. xm, and Mozley's comments in Diet. Christian Biog.
s.v. Lucianus.

4 Maran atha. See Epistle of Barnabas, c. xxi.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 3

as men do now ? .... In that age every Christian was a mis-
sionary. The soldier sought to win recruits for the heavenly host ;
the prisoner of war discoursed to his Persian jailer ; the slave girl
whispered the gospel in the ears of her mistress as she built up the
mass of towered hair ; there stood men in cloak and beard at street
corners who, when the people, according to the manners of the day,
invited them to speak, preached, not the doctrines of the Painted
Porch, but the words of a new and strange philosophy ; the young
wife threw her arms round her husband's neck and made him agree
to be baptised, that their souls might not be parted after death 1 . ..."

How could people thus preoccupied be expected to concern
themselves with theories of the origin of a world about to perish,
or with the philosophic belief that all the gods of the nations
were but varying forms of one supreme and kindly power ?
Before the end of the ist century, however, this belief in
the immediate nearness of the Second Coming had died away 2 .
The promise that the second Gospel puts into the mouth of
Jesus that some of His hearers should not taste of death until
they saw the Son of Man come with power 3 , had become in-
capable of fulfilment by the death of the last of those who had
listened to Him. Nor were all the converts to the faith which
His immediate disciples had left behind them possessed with the
same simple faith and mental equipment as themselves 4 . To
the poor fishermen and peasants of Judaea had succeeded the
slaves and freedmen of great houses — including even Caesar's
own, — some of them professionally versed in the philosophy of
the time, and all with a greater or less acquaintance with the
religious beliefs of the non-Jewish citizens of the great Roman
Empire 5 . The preachings and journeys of St Paul and other
missionaries had also brought into the Christian Church many
believers of other than Jewish blood, together with the foreign

1 Winwood Reade, op. cat. pp. 237 sqq.

2 Eugene de Faye, " Formation d'un Doctrine de Dieu au lime Siecle,"
R.H.R. t. Lxrn. (1911), p. 9. He quotes Harnack in his support.

3 Mark xi. 1.

4 On the ignorance of the first Christian writers, see de Faye, op. cit.
p. 4.

5 Origen, cont. Celsum, Bk m. c. 12. Cf. Kriiger, La Grande Encyclo-
pedic, Paris, s.v. Gnosticisme.

1—2


1


4 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

merchants and members of the Jewish communities scattered
throughout the Roman world, who were better able than the
Jews of Palestine to appreciate the stability and the organized
strength of the Roman Empire and to desire an alliance with
it. To ask such men, deeply engaged as many of them were
in the pursuit of wealth, to join in the temporary communism
and other-worldliness practised by the first Christian Church
would have been as futile as to expect the great Jewish banking-
houses of the present day to sell all that they have and give
it to the poor.

Another cause that profoundly altered the views of the early
Christian communities must have been the catastrophe and final
dispersion of the Jewish nation. Up to the time of the des-
truction of the Temple of Jerusalem under Titus, the Christians
not only regarded themselves as Jews 1 , but were looked upon
by such of the other subjects of Rome as had happened to have
heard of them, as merely one sect the more of a race always
factious and given to internal dissensions. Yet even in St
Paul's time, the Christians were exposed to a bitter persecution
at the hands of those orthodox Jews who seemed to the Gentile
world to be their co-religionists 2 , and it is probable that in
the outbreak of fanaticism attending the first Jewish war,
they suffered severely at the hands of both combatants 3 . The
burning of the Temple must also have been a crushing blow
to all who looked for a literal and immediate fulfilment of the

1 " Those which say they are Jews, but are not " ; Rev. ii. 9 ; ibid.
iii. 9. The Clementine Homilies, though of much later date, never speak
of the Christians otherwise than as Jews. Cf. Duchesne, Early Christian
Church, p. 12.

2 Acts viii. 1.

3 Renan {U Antichrist, p. 511, and note 1) gives a passage, which he
thinks is from Tacitus, showing that Titus aimed at the suppression of the
Christians as well as the Jews. Doubtless many Christians perished in the
punitive measures taken in the 1st century against the Jews in Antioch
and elsewhere. Cf. Josephus, Wars of the Jews, Bk vn. c. 3 ; Eusebius,
H. E. Bk m. cc. 12, 17, 19, 20. It was the persecution by the fanatical
Jews that compelled the flight of the Christians to Pella shortly before the
siege. See Eusebius, Bk m. c. 5 ; Epiph. Haer. xxrx. c. 7, p. 239, Oehler.
The episode of the "Woman clothed with the Sun" of the Canonical
Apocalypse is supposed by some to refer to this.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 5

Messianic hope, and its result was to further accentuate the
difference between the Christians and the Jews 1 . Moreover, the
hatred and scorn felt by these last for all other members of
the human race had now been recognized by the Gentiles 2 , and
the repeated insurrections attempted by the Jews between the
time of Titus and the final war of extermination under Hadrian
showed that these feelings were shared by the Jewish communi-
ties outside Palestine 3 . It was therefore not at all the time
which worldly-wise and prudent men, as many of the later
Christian converts were, would choose for identifying themselves
with a race which not only repudiated the relationship in the
most practical way, but had lately exposed themselves on other
grounds to the deserved execration of the civilized world.

It is, then, by no means surprising that some of the new
converts should have begun to look about them for some
compromise between their recently acquired convictions and
the religious beliefs of the Graeco-Roman world in which they
had been brought up, and they found this ready to their hand
in the pre-Christian sects which we have ventured above to
class together under the generic name of Gnostic. In the
Orphic poems, they found the doctrine of successive ages of
the world, each with its different characteristics, which coincided
well enough with the repeated declaration of the Christians
that the old world was passing away, — as was indeed the fact

1 So that the members of the little Church of Pella who retained the
name of Jews gradually ceased to be regarded as orthodox by the other
Christian communities and were called Ebionites. See Renan, UAnte-
christ, p. 548. Cf. Fuller in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Ebionites for authori-
ties. The connection that Fuller would find between the Essenes and the
Ebionites seems to rest on little proof.

2 Thus Mgr Duchesne, op. cit. p. 14, says that " St Paul was a Jew by
birth, imbued with the exclusiveness and disdainful spirit which inspired
his race and influenced all their dealings with other nations."

3 Many of the Sicarii and other fanatics managed to escape before the
catastrophe of the First Jewish War to Egypt and the Cyrenaica, where
they continued to commit outrages and make rebellion until they brought
on themselves and their co-religionists the wrath of the Romans. See
Josephus, Wars, Bk vn. cc. 10, 11. Cf. Renan, V Antechrist, p. 539 ;
id., Les fivangiles, p. 369.


fj Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

since the conquests of Alexander 1 . They found, too, both in
the Orphic poems and in the mixed religions like that of the
Alexandrian divinities which had sprung from the doctrines
taught by these poems, the legend of a god dying and rising
again for the salvation of mankind told in a way which had
many analogies with the Gospel narratives of the Passion and
Resurrection of Jesus 2 . Among the Essenes, too, who may have
owed, as has been said above, some of their doctrines to Orphic
inspiration, they found all the modest virtues of sobriety,
chastity, and mutual help which had already distinguished the
Christian Church above all the other religious associations of
the time. And among both the Orphics and the Essenes was
to be noticed the strained and fanciful system of interpretation
by allegory and figure which enabled them to put their own
construction upon the words not only of the books of the Jewish
Canon, but of those writings which had begun to circulate
among the scattered Christian communities as containing the
authentic teaching of Jesus and His immediate disciples 3 . Add
to this that the Simonians, and no doubt other pre-Christian
Gnostic sects of which we have lost all trace, had already shown
the mixed populations of the Levant how to reconcile the
innovations of a teacher of impressive and commanding
personality with their own ancestral traditions 4 , and that the
many mysteries then diffused throughout the ancient world

1 Abel's Orphica, Frgs. 243-248, especially the quotation from Nigidius.

2 See Chapter II, supra.

3 So Renan, V Antichrist, p. 300, says that the Synoptic Gospels
probably first took shape in the Church at Pella. Thus he explains the
so-called " little Apocalypse " of Matthew xxiv., Mark xiii., and Luke xxi.
Cf. ibid., p. 296 and note. For the symbolic construction placed upon
them by the Gnostics, see Hatch, H. L., p. 75.

* Hegesippus, who probably wrote about 150 a.d., speaks of Thebuthis,
Dositheus, and others as leaders of early sects. Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk iv.
c. 22, and Origen (cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 11) make this last a contemporary
of Simon Magus. The Clementine Homilies (Bk n. c. 24), from whom both
authors may have derived their information, have a long story about
Dositheus being with Simon a follower of John the Baptist, and disputing
with Simon the headship of the sect. From presumably other sources,
Hegesippus speaks of the Essenes, the Masbothoeans and the Hemero-
baptists, for which last see Chapter XIII, infra, as pre-Christian sects.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 7

offered a ready means of propagating new doctrines under
cover of secrecy ; and it will be seen that most of the sources
from which the founders of the great post-Christian sects
afterwards drew their systems were then lying open and ready
to hand.

The prize which awaited success was, moreover, no mean one.
It is sometimes said that the only distinction that awaited a
leader of the Church at this time was the distinction of being
burned alive 1 . Yet the fear of impeachment to be followed by
a still more horrible death never prevented English statesmen
in the xvnth century from struggling with each other for place
and power ; while the State had not as yet made any serious
attempt to suppress the propagation of Christianity by force.
On the other hand, a Christian bishop, even at this early date,
occupied a position which was really superior to that of most
functionaries of the secular State. Gifted with almost complete
power over his flock in temporal as well as in spiritual matters,
he was at once their judge and their adviser ; and, so long as
there were Pagan emperors on the throne, the faithful were
forbidden to come to any tribunal but his 2 . His judgments,
too, had a greater sanction than those of any temporal judge ;
for while he could not indeed lawfully condemn any of his
hearers to death, he had in the sentence of excommunication
which he alone could pronounce, the power of cutting them off
from eternal life. The adoration with which he was regarded
by them also surpassed the respect paid to proconsul or legate 3 ;
and the literature of the time is full of allusions to the way in
which, when brought before the temporal rulers, he was attended

1 Winwood Reade, op. cit. p. 244. Probably this is wbat is meant by
Gibbon when he says (Decline and Fall, Bury's ed. m. p. 153, n. 54) that
no future bishop of Avila is likely to imitate Priscillian by turning heretic,
because the income of the see is 20,000 ducats a year.

2 Apostolical Constitutions. Bk n. cc. 45, 46, 47. Harnack, Expansion
of Christianity, Eng. ed. n. p. 98 n. 1, gives the date of this work as
" middle of the 2nd century." Duchesne, op. cit. p. 109, thinks it is
derived from the Didache which he puts not later than Trajan.

3 Apost. Const. Bk n. c. 26 : " He (i.e. the bishop) is your ruler and
governor ; he is your king and potentate ; he is next after God, your
earthly divinity, who has a right to be honoured by you."


8 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

by weeping multitudes who crowded round him even in prison,
imploring his blessing and kissing his fetters 1 . Hence it is not
to be wondered at that such a position was eagerly sought after,
that envy of the episcopate was the principal sin against which
the Christian writers of the sub-Apostolic age warned their
readers 2 , and that it is to the disappointment at failing to
attain the highest places in the orthodox Church that they
ascribe the foundation of all the principal post- Christian sects 3 .
Without taking this accusation as literally correct, it is plain
that the chance of irresponsible power over those whom
they could convince must have proved a most alluring bait to
religious- minded persons who were also ambitious and intel-
lectual men of the world 4 .

Thus it came about that during the und and nird centuries,
there arose more than one teacher who set himself to construct
a system which should enable its votaries to retain the Hellenistic
culture which Alexander's conquests had spread throughout the
whole civilized world with the religious and moral ideas which
the enthusiasm and energy of the first Christians had begun
to diffuse among the lower classes of citizens 5 . Alexandria,
the natural meeting-place between the East and West, was no

1 Lucian, Proteus Peregrinus, passim ; Acts of Paul and Thekla ; Acts of
Peter of Alexandria.

8 Clement of Rome, First Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 44.

3 So Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. e. 26, pp. 219, 220, Harvey, says it was the
desire to become a bihavKakos or teacher that drove Tatian, once a
hearer of Justin Martyr's, into heresy. Hegesippus, ubi cit. supra, says
that Thebuthis first corrupted the Church, on account of his not being
made a bishop. For the same accusation in the cases of Valentinus and
Marcion, see Chapters IX and XI, infra.

* Celsus apud Origen (op. cit. Bk m. cc. 10, 11) says : M Christians at
first were few in number, and all held like opinions, but when they increased
to a great multitude, they were divided and separated, each wishing to
have his own individual party ; for this was their object from the begin-
ning " — a contention which Origen rebuts.

6 Thus in Egypt it was almost exclusively the lower classes which
embraced Christianity at the outset. See Amelineau, " Les Actes Coptes
du martyre de St Polycarpe" in P.S.B.A. vol. x. (1888), p. 392. Julian
(Cyr. vi. p. 206) says that under Tiberius and Claudius there were no
converts of rank.


vn] Post-Christian Ghiostics 9

doubt the scene of the first of these attempts, and the writings
of Philo, fortunately still extant, had already shown the way
in which the allegorical system of interpretation could be used
to this end. That many of the founders of post-Christian
Gnostic sects were Alexandrian Jews is the constant tradition
of the Christian Church, and is antecedently probable enough 1 .
But other Gnostic leaders were certainly not Alexandrians and
came from centres sufficiently distant from Egypt to show that
the phenomenon was very widely spread, and that the same
causes produced the same results in the most distant places and
entirely outside the Jewish community. Marcion, the founder
of the Marcionite Church, was a native of Pontus. Saturnilus
or Saturninus — the name is spelt differently by Irenaeus and
Hippolytus — came from Antioch, Theodotus from Byzantium,
others, such as Cerdo, and probably Prepon the Syrian, began
teaching in Rome, while we hear of a certain Monoimus, who
is said to have been an Arab 2 . Most of these are to us merely
names, only very brief summaries of the different systems
founded or professed by them having been preserved in the
heresiologies compiled by the Fathers of the Church both before
and immediately after the alliance of the Christian Church with
the Roman State under Constantine.

1 Thus Cerinthus, who is made by tradition the opponent of St John,
is paid to have been a Jew and to have been trained in the doctrines of
Philo at Alexandria (Theodoret, Haer. Fab. Bk II. § 3). Cf. Neander,
Ch. Hist. (Eng. ed.) vol. n. pp. 42-47. Neander says the same thing about
Basilides (op. cit. p. 47 and note) and Valentinus (p. 71), although it is
difficult to discover any authority for the statement other than the Jewish
features in their doctrines. There is more evidence for the statement
regarding Marcus, the heresiarch and magician whom Irenaeus {op. cit.
Bk i. c. 7) accuses of the seduction of Christian women, apparently in his
own time, since the words of Marcus' ritual, which the Bishop of Lyons
quotes, are in much corrupted Hebrew, and the Jewish Cabala was used by
him. Renan's view {Marc Aurele, pp. 139 sqq.) that Christianity in Egypt
never passed through the Judaeo-Christian stage may in part account for
the desire of Jewish converts there to set up schools of their own.

2 For Marcion, see Chapter XI, infra. Summary accounts of the
doctrines of other Gnostics mentioned are given by Irenaeus and Hippolytus
in the works quoted. See also the Diet, of Christian Biog., under their
respective names.


10 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch

Of these treatises, the two, which, up to about sixty years
ago, formed our main sources of information with regard to
the Gnostics of the sub- Apostolic age 1 , are the writings of
St Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons about the year 177 a.d., and of
Epiphanius, Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, who tells us he wrote
in the seventh year of Gratian or 374 a.d. The first of these is
considerably later in date than the heresiarchs in refutation of
whose doctrines he wrote his five books "against Heresies" ;
and although he is most probably honest in his account of their
tenets, it is evident that Irenaeus was incapable of distinguishing
between the opinions of the founders of the sects which he
V controverts and those of their followers and successors. Epi-
phanius, on the other hand, wrote when the Catholic Church
was already triumphant, and his principal object seems to have
been to blacken the memory of those competitors whom she
had already outdistanced in the race for popularity and power.
Hence he spares no pains to rake together every story which
theological hatred and unclean imagination had ever invented
against her opponents and rivals ; while his contempt for con-
sistency and the rules of evidence show the intellectual depths to
f*~ which the war which orthodox Christianity had from the first
waged against Hellenistic culture had reduced the learning of the
age. The language in which he and the other Catholic writers
on heresy describe the Gnostics is, indeed, the first and most
salient instance of that intolerance for any other opinions than
their own, which a recent writer of great authority declares
the Apostles and their successors derived from their Jewish
nationality 2 . " The first-born of Satan," " seducers of women,"
" savage beasts," " scorpions," " ravening wolves," " demo-
niacs," " sorcerers," and " atheists " were the mildest terms in

1 The lesser heresiologists, such as Philaster of Brescia, St Augustine,
the writer who is known as Praedestinatus, the author of the tract Adrersus
omnes Haereses wrongly ascribed to Tertullian, and the other writers in-
cluded in the first volume of Oehler's Corpus Haercseologici, Berlin, 1856,
as well as writers like Eusebius, all copy from one or other of these sources.
The Excerpta Theodoti appended to the works of Clement of Alexandria
are on a different footing, but their effect at the time spoken of in the text
was not appreciated. Cf. Salmon in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Valentinus.

2 Bouchd-LecleTcq, L' I ntoleranceReligieuseet Politique, Paris, 1912, p. 140.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 11

which Epiphanius and his fellow heresiologists can bring
themselves to speak of the. sectaries. They afford ample jus-
tification for the remark of the philosophic Emperor Julian
that " no wild beasts are so hostile to men as Christian sects in
general are to one another 1 ."

From this lack of trustworthy evidence, the discovery in
1842 at a convent on Mt Athos of eight out of the ten books
of the Philosophumena now generally attributed to Hippolytus,
Bishop of " Portus Eomana " in 230 a.d. 2 , seemed likely to
deliver us. The work thus recovered bore the title of the
Refutation of all Heresies, and did succeed in giving us a fairly
clear and coherent account of some twenty Gnostic sects, the
very existence of many of which was previously unknown to
us. Moreover, it went a good way beyond its predecessors in
pointing out that the real origin of all the heretical sects then
existing was to be found, not so much in the diabolic inspiration
which other writers thought sufficient to account for it, as in
the Pythagorean, Platonic, and other philosophies then in vogue,
together with the practice of astrology and magic rites which
had come to form an important part of all the Pagan religions
then popular. It also showed a very extensive and apparently
first-hand acquaintance with the works of the Gnostic leaders,
and the lengthy quotations which it gives from their writings
enable us to form a better idea than we had before been able
to do both of what the Gnostic tenets really were and of the
arguments by which they were propagated. Unfortunately the
text of the Philosophumena has not been able to withstand
the assaults of those textual critics who have already reduced
the Book of Genesis to a patchwork of several authors writing at
widely separate times and places, and writers like Dr Salmon
and Prof. Stahelin have laboured to show that the author of
the Philosophumena was taken in by a forger who had himself
concocted all the documents which Hippolytus quotes as being

1 Ammianus Marcellinus, Bk xxn. c. 5, § 4.

2 An excellent and concise account of the discovery and the subsequent
controversy as to the authorship of the book is given by Salmon in the
Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Hippolytus Romanus. For Mgr Duchesne's theory
that Hippolytus was a schismatic Pope, see his Hist. Christian Church,
pp. 227-233.


12 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

the work of different heresiarchs 1 . Their conclusions, although
they do not seem to put the matter entirely beyond doubt,
have been accepted by many theological writers, especially in
Germany, and in the course of the discussion the fact has
emerged that the documents quoted can hardly go back to an
earlier date than the year 200 a.d. 2 It is therefore unlikely that
Hippolytus had before him the actual words of the heresiarchs
whom he is endeavouring to refute ; and if the Philosophumena
were all we had to depend upon, we might despair of knowing
what " the great Gnostics of Hadrian's time " really taught.

The reason for this paucity of documents is also plain
enough. " The antidote to the scorpion's bite," to use a patristic
figure of speech 3 , was felt by the early Church to be the actual
cautery, and its leaders spared no pains to rout out and burn
the writings of the heretics pending the time when they could
apply the same treatment to their authors. Even before their
alliance with Constantine had put the resources of the State
at their disposal, they had contrived to use the secular arm
for this purpose. In several persecutions, notably that of
Diocletian, which was probably the most severe of them all,
the Christian scriptures were particularly sought for by the
Inquisitors of the State, and many of the orthodox boasted that
they had arranged that the police should find the writings of
the heretics in their stead 4 . Later, when it came to the turn
of the Christians to dictate imperial edicts, the possession of
heretical writings was made punishable with severe penalties 5 .

1 Salmon's position is set out by him in Hermathzna, Dublin, 1885,
pp. 389 sqq. For Stahelin's, see his tractate Die Gnostische Quellen Hip-
polyts, Leipzig, 1890, in Harnack's Texte und Untersuchungen. Both are
skilfully summarized by de Faye in his Introduction a Vfitude du Gnosticisme,
Paris, 1903, pp. 25 sqq.

2 De Faye does not accept Stahelin's contention as to the forgery, but
his conclusion as to the date is as stated in the text. See Introduction, etc.
pp. 68, 71.

3 Tertullian, Scorpiace, c. 1.

* Neander, Ch. Hist. (Eng. ed.), I. p. 208, quotes a case from St Augustine
which I have not been able to verify.

6 Gibbon, Decline and Fall, n. p. 110 and note 144 (Bury's ed.). For
the search which the Christian emperors directed to be made for the
heretics' books, see Eusebius, Vita Constantini, Bk in. cc. 64, 65.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 13

Between orthodox Christian and Pagan it is a wonder that
any have survived to us.

A lucky chance, however, has prevented us from being
entirely ignorant of what the Gnostics had to say for themselves.
In 1851, a MS. which had been known to be in the British
Museum since 1778, was published with a translation into a
curious mixture of Latin and Greek by the learned Petermann,
and turned out to include a sort of Gospel coming from some
early Gnostic sect 1 . From a note made on it by a writer who
seems to have been nearly contemporary with its scribes, it is
known as Pistis Sophia or " Faith-Wisdom " ; and the same MS.
also contains fragments of other works coming from a cognate
source. In 1891, a papyrus in the Bodleian Library at Oxford,
which had been brought into this country in 1769 by the
traveller Bruce, was also published with a French translation
by M. Amelineau, an ex- Abbe who has long made the later
Egyptian language his peculiar study, and proved to contain
two documents connected with the system disclosed in the
Pistis Sophia 2 . Both MSS. are in Coptic of the dialect of the
Sahid or Upper Egypt, to which fact they probably owe their
escape from the notice of the Byzantine Inquisitors ; and they
purport to contain revelations as to the next world and the
means of attaining salvation therein made by Jesus on His
return to earth after the Resurrection. Although these several
documents were evidently not all written at one time and place,
and cannot be assigned to a single author, the notes and

1 The actual transcription and translation were made by Maurice
Schwartze, a young German who was sent over here to study the documents
in the British Museum at the expense of the King of Prussia. He died after
the completion of his task, and before the book could be printed.

2 Amelineau's transcription and translation appeared in the Notices
et Extraits, etc. of the Academie des Inscriptions, t. xxrx. pt 2 (Paris, 1891).
He has also published a translation into French without text of the Pistis
Sophia (Paris, 1895). Dr Carl Schmidt, of the University of Berlin, has
published translations into German of both works under the title Koptisch-
Gnostische Schriften, Bd I., Leipzig, 1905. None of these versions are
entirely satisfactory, and it is much to be wished that an authoritative
edition of the two works could be put forward by English scholars. The
present writer gave a short history and analysis of them in the Scottish
Review for 1893 under the title " Some Heretic Gospels."


14 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

emendations appearing on the MSS. show that most of them
must have been in the possession of members of the same school
as their composers ; and that therefore we have here for the
first time direct and authentic evidence of the Gnostic tenets,
as put forward by their adherents instead of by their opponents.
The collation of these documents with the excerpts from
other Gnostic writings appearing in early writers like Clement
of Alexandria who were not professed heresiologists 1 , shows that
the post-Christian Gnostic sects had more opinions in common
than would be gathered from the statements of St Irenaeus,
Hippolytus, and Epiphanius, and that they probably fulfilled
a real want of the age 2 . All of them seem to have held that
there was one Supreme Being, the source of all good, and that
matter was inherently malignant and opposed to him. All
of them, too, seem to have taught the perfectibility of man's
nature, the salvation of at any rate the majority of mankind,
and the possibility of their rising in the scale of being ; and all
of them held that this was to be effected mainly by means
of certain mysteries or sacramental rites which were assumed
to have a magical efficacy. All these fundamental character-
istics find their origin in the beliefs of the pre-Christian religions
and religious associations described above, and doubtless owed
much to their influence. But with these, there was now
combined for the first time the recognition of the divinity of
One who, while appearing upon earth as a man among men,

1 Clement was so far from being a heresiologist that he has not escaped
the reproach of being himself a heretic. He repeatedly speaks in praise of
the " true Gnostic," meaning thereby the perfect Christian, and although
this is probably a mere matter of words, it seems to have induced Photius
in the ixth century to examine his writings with a jealous eye. The result
was that, as M. Courdaveaux points out {R.H.R. 1892, p. 293 and note),
he found him guilty of teaching that matter was eternal, the Son a simple
creature of the Father, the Incarnation only an appearance, that man's soul
entered several bodies in succession, and that several worlds were created
before that of Adam. All these are Gnostic opinions, and it may be that if
we had all Clement's books in our hands, as had Photius, we might confirm
M. Courdaveaux's judgment, as does apparently Mgr Duchesne. Cf. his
Hist, of Christian Ch. pp. 244, 245.

2 Cf. A. C. McGiffert, Prolegomena to the Church History of Eusebius
(Schaff and Wace's Nicene Library), Oxford, 1890, vol. i. p. 179 and note.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 15

was yet thought by all to be endowed with a greater share of
the Divine nature than they. Orpheus, Moses, Homer, and the
Jewish prophets had in turn been claimed as religious teachers
who were divinely inspired ; but Jesus was asserted by every
later Gnostic school of whose teachings we have any evidence
to have been Himself of higher essence and substance than the
rest of mankind 1 . How far this assertion was dictated by the
necessity for finding a superhuman authority for the revelation
which each Gnostic leader professed to make to his disciples may
be open to question ; but in view of some contemporary contro-
versies it is well to draw attention to the fact that the Divinity
in some shape or other of Jesus, as well as what is now called His
"historicity," was never for a moment called in question during
the first three centuries by Gnostic or Catholic. Movoyevr)?
or Monogenes 2 — a word which Catholic writers later confused
with Movoyev vt)t6<; or " only-begotten," but which is best repre-
sented by the corresponding Latin expression unicus or " unique"
(i.e. one of a kind) — is the word in which the Gnostics summed
up their conceptions of the nature of Jesus 3 .

This belief, however, led to consequences which do not at
first sight seem to follow from it. The gods of classical antiquity
were indeed supposed to be of like passions with ourselves, and
the Greek of Homer's time never thought it shame to attribute
to them jealousy or lust or fear or vanity or any other of the
weaknesses which afflict us 4 . But the one feature besides their
beauty that distinguished the Greek gods from humanity was

1 Of the heresies mentioned in the Philosophumena only two, viz.
that of Simon Magus and that of those whom Hippolytus calls the Sethiani,
do not admit, either expressly or by implication, the divinity of Jesus.
This may be accounted for by what has been said above as to both being
pre-Christian in origin.

2 E.g. Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. c. 1, I. p. 9, Harvey. Here he is called
0/j.oios re Kai 'laos rw irpofiakovTi, " like and equal to him who had sent him
forth." There is certainly here no allusion to " begetting " in the ordinary
sense of the word.

3 As in the epithet of Persephone in the Orphic Hymn quoted above.
See Chapter IV, supra. The unanimity with which all post- Christian
Gnostics accepted the superhuman nature of Jesus seems to have struck
Harnack. See his What is Christianity ? Eng. ed. 1904, pp. 209, 210.

• Iliad I. 11. 560 sqq. ; iv. 11. 57, 330 ; xrv. 11. 320 sqq.


16 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

their immortality or freedom from death ; and if demigods like
Heracles were said to have gone through the common experience
of mortals, this was held as proof that their apotheosis or
deification did not take place until they had left the earth 1 .
So much was this the case that the Greeks are said to have
been much amused when they first beheld the Egyptians wailing
for the death of Osiris, declaring that if he were a god he could
not be dead, while if he were not, his death was not to be
lamented 2 ; and Plutarch, when repeating the story to his
countrymen, thought it necessary to explain that in his view
the protagonists in the Osiris and Set legend were neither gods
nor men, but " great powers " or daemons not yet deified and
in the meantime occupying a place between the two 3 . The
same difficulty was, perhaps, less felt by the other Mediterranean
peoples, among whom, as we have seen, the idea of a god who
died and rose again was familiar enough 4 ; but the Gnostic
leaders must always have had before their eyes the necessity
of making Christianity acceptable to persons in possession of
that Hellenistic culture which then dominated the world, and
which still forms the root of all modern civilization. How,
then, were they to account for the fact that their God Jesus,
whether they considered Him as the Logos or Word of Philo,
or the Monogenes or Unique Power of the Supreme Being, had
suffered a shameful death by sentence of the Roman procurator
in Judaea ?

The many different answers that they gave to this question
showed more eloquently than anything else the difficulties with
which it was surrounded. Simon, according to Hippolytus,
said that Jesus only appeared on earth as a man, but was
not really one, and seemed to have suffered in Judaea, although
he had not really done so 5 . Basilides the Egyptian, the leader

1 Odyssey xi. 11. 600 sqq. ; Plutarch, Life of Pelopidas, c. xvi. '

2 Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. lxxl

3 Ibid. cc. xxv., xxvn., xxx.

4 Probably this was one of the reasons why the Mysteries which
showed the death of a god had in Greece to be celebrated in secret. See
Diodorus' remark (Bk v. c. 77, § 3) that the things which the Greeks only
handed down in secret were by the Cretans concealed from no one.

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 19, p. 265, Cruice.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 17

of another sect, held, according to Irenaeus, that the body of
Jesus was a phantasm and had no real existence, Simon of
Cyrene having been crucified in his stead 1 ; while Hippolytus,
who seems to have drawn his account of Basilides' teaching
from a different source from that used by his predecessor,
makes him say that only the body of Jesus suffered and relapsed
into " formlessness 2 ," but that His soul returned into the
different worlds whence it was drawn. Saturninus, another
heresiarch, held, according to both authors, to the phantasmal
theory of Jesus' body, which attained such popularity among
other Gnostic sects that " Docetism," as the opinion was called,
came to be looked upon by later writers as one of the marks
of heresy 3 , and Hippolytus imagines that there were in existence
sects who attached such importance to this point that they
called themselves simply Docetics 4 . Valentinus, from whose
teaching, as we shall see, the principal system of the Pistis
Sophia was probably derived, also adhered to this Docetic
theory, and said that the body of Jesus was not made of human
flesh, but was constructed " with unspeakable art " so as to
resemble it, the dove-like form which had descended into it
at His baptism leaving it before the Crucifixion 5 . According
to Irenaeus, too, Valentinus held that the Passion of Jesus was
not intended as an atonement or sacrifice for sin, as the Catholics
taught, but merely as a symbol or reflection of something that
was taking place in the bosom of the Godhead 6 .

Another point in which the chief post-Christian Gnostic sects
seem to have resembled one another is the secrecy with which
their teachings were surrounded. Following strictly the practice
of the various mysteries — the Eleusinian, the Isiac, Cabiric, and
others — in which the Mediterranean god, whether called Diony-
sos, Osiris, Attis, Adonis, or by any other name, was worshipped,
none were admitted to a knowledge of their doctrines without

1 Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk i. c. 19, n. p. 200, Harvey.

2 anopsia. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 27, p. 366, Cruice.

3 Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. c. 18, p. 197, Harvey. Hippolytus, op. cit.
Bk vn. c. 28, p. 368, Cruice.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vrxr. c. 8.

5 Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. c. 1, § 13, pp. cxli and 61, Harvey.

6 Ibid. Bk I. c. 1, § 31, pp. cxli and 62, Harvey.

L. n. 2


18 Post-Christian (Gnostics [ch.

undergoing a long, arduous, and expensive course of initiation.
More than one Gnostic teacher is said to have told his hearers
to conceal from men what they were, or in other words not to
let it be known that they were affiliated to the sect 1 , and all
the Fathers bear witness to the way in which in time of persecu-
tion the Gnostics escaped by professing any faith that would
satisfy the Roman authorities. By doing so, they laid them-
selves open to the accusation hurled at them with great virulence
by the Church, that their secret rites and doctrines were so
filthy as to shock human nature if made public — an accusation
which at the first appearance of Christianity had been brought
against the Catholics, and which the Church has ever since
made use of against any sect which has differed from her,
repeating it even at the present day against the Jews and the
Freemasons 2 . There is, however, no reason why the accusation
should be better founded in one case than in the others ; and
it is plain in any event that the practice of secrecy when
expedient followed directly from the magical ideas which have
been shown above to be the foundation of the dogmas of
all the pre-Christian Gnostics, besides permeating religions
like that of the Alexandrian divinities. The willingness of the
post-Christian Gnostics to subscribe to any public profession of
faith that might be convenient was no doubt due to the same
cause 3 . As has been well said, to the true Gnostic, Paganism,
Christianity, and Mahomniedanism are merely veils 4 . The
secret words and formulas delivered, and the secret rites which
the initiate alone knows, are all that is necessary to assure him
a distinguished place in the next world ; and, armed with these,

1 Irenaeus, op. tit. Bk I. c. 19, § 3, p. 202, Harvey ; Hippolytus,
op. tit. Bk rv. c. 24, p. 225, Cruice ; Tertullian, Scorpiace, c. L

2 For the accusation against the Christians, see Athenagoras, Apologia,
cc. m.,xxxL Justin Martyr, First Apol. e. xxvi. For that against the Jews,
Strack, Le Sang et lafausse Accusation du Meurtre Rituel, Paris, 1893. For
that against the Freemasons, " Devil Worship and Freemasonry," Con-
temporary Review for 1896.

3 See n. 1, supra. So Eusebius speaks of theSimonians receiving baptism
and slipping into the Church without revealing their secret tenets, Hist.
Eccl. Bk n. c. 1.

« Revillout, Vie et Sentences de Secundus, Paris, 1873, p. 3, n. 1.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 19

he can contemplate with perfect indifference all outward forms
of worship.

These and other points which the post-Christian Gnostic
sects seem to have had in common 1 can therefore be accounted
for by their common origin, without accepting the theory of
the textual critics that the Fathers had been deceived by an
impostor who had made one document do duty several times
over. Yet until we have the writings of the heresiarchs actually
in our hands, we must always be in doubt as to how far their
opinions have been correctly recorded for us. The post-
Christian Gnostic sects have been compared with great aptness
to the Protestant bodies which have sprung up outside the
Catholic Church since the German Reformation 2 , and the
analogy in most respects seems to be perfect. Yet it would
probably be extremely difficult for a bishop of the Church of
Rome or of that of England to give within the compass of an
heresiology like those quoted above an account of the tenets
of the different sects in England and America, without making
grave and serious mistakes in points of detail. The difficulty
would arise from want of first-hand knowledge, in spite of the
invention of printing having made the dissemination of informa-
tion on such subjects a thousand times more general than in
sub-Apostolic times, and of the fact that the modern sects,
unlike their predecessors, do not seek to keep their doctrines
secret. But the analogy shows us another cause of error. The
" Free Churches," as they are called in modern parlance, have
from the outset shown themselves above all things fissiparous,
and it is enough to mention the names of Luther, Zwingli,
Calvin, Socinus, Wesley, and Chalmers to show how hopelessly
at variance the teachings of the founders of sects at first sight
are. But in spite of this, there seems to have been always
a sort of fluidity of doctrine among them, and hardly any of

1 Amelineau, Le Onosticisme figyptien, p. 75, thus enumerates them:
doctrine of emanation, an unknown [i.e. an inaccessible and incom-
prehensible] God, the resemblance of the three worlds, the aeonology of
Simon, and a common cosmology. To this may be added the inherent
malignity of matter and the belief in salvation by knowledge. See Kriiger,
La Grande Encyclopedie, s.v. Gnosticisme.

2 Renan, Marc AurUe, p. 114.

2—2


20 Post- Christian Gnostics [ch.

the Nonconformist sects now profess the dogmas with which
they first came into existence. The changes in this respect,
however, never involve the borrowing of new tenets from
sources external to them all, but seem to be brought about by
a sort of interfiltration between one sect and another. Thus,
for example, for many centuries after the Reformation the
majority of the dissident sects which rejected all connection
with the Catholic Church were among the stoutest defenders
of the Divinity of Jesus, and the Socinians who held the contrary
opinion were in an entirely negligible minority. At the present
day, however, the tendency seems to run the other way, and
many Nonconformist bodies are leaning towards Unitarian
doctrines, although few of them probably have ever heard the
name of Socinus. A similar tendency to interpenetration of
doctrines early showed itself among the Gnostics ; and there
can be little doubt that it sometimes led to a fusion or amalga-
mation between sects of widely differing origin. Hence it is
not extraordinary that certain tenets are sometimes recorded
by the Fathers as peculiar to one Gnostic leader and sometimes
to another, and to trace accurately their descent, it would be
necessary to know the exact point in the history of each sect
at which such tenets appeared. But the Fathers seldom thought
of distinguishing between the opinions of an heresiarch and
those of his successors, and the literary habits of the time were
not in favour of accurate quotation of documents or even of
names 1 . This forms the chief difficulty in dealing with the
history of the Gnostic teaching, and although the discovery
of fresh documents contemporary with those we now possess
would undoubtedly throw additional light upon the subject,
it is probable that it will never be entirely overcome.

1 Witness the confusion between Ennoia and Epinoia in Chapter VT,
vol. I. p. 180, n. 4, supra, and between Saturnilus and Saturninus in this
chapter, p. 9. So Irenaeus and others record the opinions of an associate
of Marcus whom they call " Colurbasus," a name which modern criticism
has shown to be a mistake for yniX ^1p Kol-arba, " The Voice of the
Four " or the Supreme Tetrad. See Renan, Marc Aurele, p. 129 ; Hort
in Diet. Christian Biog. s.h.v. So Clement of Alexandria, Protrepi. c. n.
mistakes Evoe, the mystic cry of the Bacchantes, for the Eve of
Genesis.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 21

Generally speaking, however, Gnosticism played a most
important part in the history of Christianity. Renan's view
that it was a disease which, like croup, went near to strangling
the infant Church is often quoted 1 ; but in the long run it is
probable that Gnosticism was on the whole favourable to her
development. In religion, sentiment often plays a larger part
than reason ; and any faith which would enable men of weight
and influence to continue the religious practices in which they
had been brought up, with at the outset but slight modification,
was sure of wide acceptance. There seems no doubt that the
earlier Gnostics continued to attend the mysteries of the
Chthonian deities in Greece and of their Oriental analogues,
Osiris, Attis, Adonis, and the like elsewhere, while professing
to place upon what they there saw a Christian interpretation 2 .
Here they acted like the little leaven that leaveneth the whole
lump, and this did much to spread the knowledge of the new
faith among those spiritually-minded Gentiles, who would never
have felt any interest in Christianity so long as it remained
merely a branch of Judaism 3 . Most of them, moreover, sooner
or later abandoned their Gnosticism, and became practising
members of the Catholic Church, who sometimes went a long
way to meet them. As Renan has said, none of them ever
relapsed into Paganism 4 , and in this way the so-called heresies
became at once the feeders of orthodox Christianity and its
richest recruiting-ground 5 . They offered in fact an easy road
by which the wealthy, the learned, and the highly-placed could
pass from Paganism to Christianity without suffering the
inconvenience imposed upon the first followers of the Apostles.

1 Renan, L'figlise Chretienne, p. 140.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 177, Cruice.

3 As in the case of Clement of Alexandria, who seems to have been
initiated into most of the heathen mysteries then current. It is to be
noted, too, that Origen, although he speaks of the Ophites as an insignifi-
cant sect (see Chapter VTII, infra), yet professes to know all about then-
secret opinions.

* Renan, Marc Aurele, p. 139.

5 Thus Ambrose of Milan had been before his conversion a Valentinian,
Epiphanius a Nicolaitan. See Eusebius, H.E. Bk vt. c. 18 ; Epiph. Haer.
xxvi. c. 17, p. 198, Oehler.


22 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch.

On the other hand, it may be argued that the Church in
receiving such recruits lost much of that simplicity of doctrine
and practice to which it had hitherto owed her rapid and un-
varying success. The Gnostics brought with them into their
new faith the use of pictures and statues, of incense, and of all
the paraphernalia of the worship of the heathen gods. Baptism
which, among the Jewish community in which Christianity
was born, was an extremely simple rite, to be performed by
anybody and entirely symbolical in its character 1 , became an
elaborate ceremony which borrowed the name as well as many
of the adjuncts of initiation into the Mysteries. So, too. the
Agape (love-feast) or common meal, which in pre-Christian
times was, as we have seen, common to all Greek religious
associations unconnected with the State, was transformed by
the Gnostics into a rite surrounded by the same provisions for
secrecy and symbolizing the same kind of sacrifice as those which
formed the central point of the mystic drama at Eleusis and
elsewhere. Both these sacraments, as they now came to be
called, were thought to be invested with a magical efficacy,
and to demand for their proper celebration a priesthood as
exclusive as, and a great deal more ambitious than, that of
Eleusis or Alexandria. The daring speculations of the Gnostics
as to the nature of the godhead and the origin of the world
also forced upon the Catholics the necessity of formulating her
views on these points and making adhesion to them a test of
membership 2 . To do so was possibly to choose the smaller
of two evils, yet it can hardly be denied that the result of the
differences of opinion thus aroused was to deluge the world

1 It could be even self-administered, as in the Acts of Paul and Thekla,
where Thekla baptizes herself in the arena. See Teschendorf's text. The
Clementine. Homilies (Bk xrv. c. 1) show that it could be immediately
followed by the Eucharist without any intermediate rite or preparation.
Contrast with this the elaborate ceremonies described by Cyril of Jeru-
salem, where the white-robed band of converts after a long catechumenate,
including fasting and the communication of secret doctrines and passwords,
approach on Easter Eve the doors of the church where the lights turned
darkness into day. See Hatch, H. L. pp. 297, 299.

2 Duchesne, Hist. Christian Ch. p. 32 ; Harnack, What is Christianity?
Eng. ed. p. 210.


vn] Post-Christian Gnostics 23

with blood and to stay the progress of human knowledge for
more than a thousand years 1 . It is said that if Gnosticism
had not been forcibly suppressed, as it was directly the Christian
priesthood obtained a share in the government of the State,
Christianity would have been nothing but a battle-ground for
warring sects, and must have perished from its own internal
dissensions. It may be so ; but it is at least as possible that,
if left unmolested, many of the wilder sects would soon have
withered away from their own absurdity, and that none of the
others would have been able to endure for long. In this respect
also, the history of the post-Reformation sects offers an in-
teresting parallel.

Be that as it may, it is plain that the Catholic Church, in
devoting her energies to the suppression of the Gnostic heresies,
lost much of the missionary power which till then had seemed
all-conquering. During the two centuries which elapsed between
the siege of Jerusalem under Vespasian and the accession of
Aurelian, the Church had raised herself from the position of a
tiny Jewish sect to that of the foremost among the many
religions of the Roman Empire. A brief but bloody persecution
under Diocletian convinced the still Pagan Emperors of the
impossibility of suppressing Christianity by force, and the
alliance which they were thus driven to conclude with it enabled
the Church to use successfully against the Gnostics the arm
which had proved powerless against the Catholics 2 . Yet the

1 As Hatch, H. L. pp. 274-279, has pointed out, the term opooiaws,
which led to so much shedding of Christian blood, first occurs among the
post-Christian Gnostics, and led in turn to most of the wranglings about
" substance," " person," and the other metaphysical distinctions and their
result in " strife and murder, the devastation of fair fields, the flame of
fire and sword " (ibid. p. 279). For the possibilities of Greek science, had
it not been opposed by the Church, see ibid. p. 26.

2 See the edict of Constantine, which Eusebius (Vit. Constantini, cc.
lxiv., lxv.) quotes with unholy glee, prohibiting the Gnostics from pre-

ing to assemble together either publicly or privately, and commanding
that their "houses of prayer" should be confiscated and handed over to the
Catholic Church. Eusebius (ibid. c. lxvi.) says that the result of this was
that the " savage beasts crept secretly into the Church," and continued to
disseminate their doctrines by stealth. Perhaps such a result was to be
expected.


24 Post-Christian Gnostics [ch. vii

triumph was a costly one, and was in its turn followed by a
schism which rent the Church in twain more effectually than
the Gnostic speculations could ever have done. In the West,
indeed, the Latin Church was able to convert the barbarians
who extinguished the Western half of the Roman Empire ; but
in the East, Christianity had to give way to a younger and more
ardent faith. How far this was due to the means taken by the
Church to suppress Gnosticism must still be a matter of specula-
tion, but it is certain that after her first triumph over heresy
she gained no more great victories.


CHAPTER VIII

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS I THE OPHITES

Although the Ophites were one of the most widely-spread
and in some respects the most interesting of the heretical sects
which came to light after the foundation of the Christian
Church, we know nothing at first hand about their origin.
Philastrius, or Philaster of Brescia, writing about 380 a.d.,
includes them among those " who taught heresies before the
Coming of Christ 1 " ; but the phrase does not perhaps bear
its apparent meaning, and the late date at which he wrote
makes it unlikely that he possessed any exclusive evidence on
the point. A more plausible tradition, which is common to
St Augustine 2 , to the tractate Against All Heresies which passes
under the name of Tertullian 3 , and to the similar one attributed
to St Jerome 4 , is that the Ophites derived their doctrines from
Nicolaus or Nicolas of Antioch, the deacon mentioned in the
Acts 5 , and that they are therefore alluded to under the name
of Nicolaitans 6 in the address to the Church of Ephesus in the
Canonical Apocalypse. Origen, on the other hand, in his
Discourse against Celsus says that they boasted of one Euphrates

1 " Eorum qui ante adventum Christi Haereseos arguuntur." Philas-
trius, Ep. Brixiensis, de Haeresibus Liber, c. I. vol. I. p. 5, Oehler.

2 Augustinus, de Haeresibus (cf. ad Quod vult deum) Liber, c. xvn. L p.
200, Oehler.

3 Pseudo-Tertullianus, Adversus omnes Haereses, cc. v., vr. p. 273,
Oehler. The writer was probably Victorinus of Pettau.

* Pseudo-Hieronymus, Indiculus de Haeresibus, c. m., vol. I. p. 285,
Oehler.

5 Acts vi. 5. It will be noted that Epiphanius, who himself belonged
to the sect in his youth, interposes only the Basilidians between them and
the followers of Saturninus, the " heresy " of which last he derives directly
from that of Simon Magus.

6 Rev. ii. 6, 15.


26 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

as their founder 1 ; while Hippolytus declares that their tenets
were said by themselves to be due to " the very numerous
discourses which were handed down by James the brother of
the Lord to Mariamne 2 ." From which contradictory state-
ments we may gather that the " heresy " of the Ophites was,
even as early as 230 a.d., a very old one, which may have
appeared even before Christianity began to show its power,
and that it was probably born in Asia Minor and owed much
to the Pagan religions there practised and little or nothing
to any dominant personality as did the systems of Simon Magus
and the heresies treated of in the succeeding chapters.

It is also probable that between the time when the Canonical
Apocalypse was written and that of Origen and Hippolytus 3 ,
the Ophites altered their doctrines more than once. We may
not be able to go so far as their historian, Father Giraud, who
thinks that he can distinguish between their earlier opinions,
which he would attribute to the Naassenes or Ophites 4 described
by Hippolytus, and those of a later school to which he would
assign the name of Ophites specially 5 . Yet many of the

1 Origen, cord. Ceteum, Bk vi. c. 28. Possibly the Euphrates called
" the Peratic " or Mede by Hippolytus (op. cit. Bk iv. c. 2, p. 54, Cruice).

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 141, Cruice. This Mariamne is
doubtless the sister of Philip mentioned in the Apocryphal Acta Philippi
(c. xxxn., Tischendorf), which have, as is said later, a strong Gnostic or
Manichaean tinge. Celsus knew a sect which took its name from her. See
Origen, cord. Cels. Bk v. c. 62.

3 The Canonical Apocalypse is not earlier than 70 a.d., and was prob-
ably written soon after the fall of the Temple of Jerusalem. Hippolytus
and Origen wrote 130 years later.

4 Naassene is evidently derived from the Hebrew or Aramaean £'I"I3
" Serpent," cf. Hipp. op. cit. Bk v. c. 6, p. 139, Cruice, and exactly corre-
sponds to the Greek 6(()itt}s and the Latin serpentintis (Low Latin serpen-
tarius). " Worshipper of the Serpent " seems to be the patristic gloss on
the meaning of the word.

5 Giraud, Ophitae, c. 4, § 65, p. 89. The question really depends upon
Hippolytus' sources, as to which see last chapter, pp. 11, 12. Cf. De Faye,
Introduction, etc., p. 41. Hippolytus' Naassene author cannot be much
earlier than 170 a.d. since he quotes from St John's Gospel, and probably
later than the work of Irenaeus written in 180-185. Yet the Ophite system
described by Irenaeus is evidently not a primitive one and has been added
to by his Latin translator. See n. 3, p. 47, infra.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 27

Fathers confuse their doctrines with those of the Sethians,
the Cainites, and other sects which seem to have had some
distinguishing features 1 ; while Hippolytus, who shows a more
critical spirit than the other heresiologists, says expressly that
the other heresies just named were little different in appearance
from this one,being united by the same spirit of error 2 . The con-
fusion is further increased by his statement that the Naassenes
called themselves Gnostics, although Carpocrates' followers, who
must have been later in time, are elsewhere said to be the first
to adopt this name 3 . For there was at least one other sect
of heretics who did the same thing, and to whom Epiphanius
in his Panarion attributes, together with a theological and
cosmological system not unlike that hereafter described,
mysteries of unnameable obscenity with which the Ophites
were never charged 4 . In this respect it may be as well to
remember the words of Tertullian that the heretics

" know no respect even for their own leaders. Hence it is that
schisms seldom happen among heretics because, even when they
exist, they do not appear ; for their very unity is schism. I am
greatly in error," he continues, " if they do not amongst themselves
even diverge from their own rules, since every man, as it suits his
own temper, modifies the traditions he has received after the same
fashion as did he who handed them down to him, when he moulded
them according to his own free will .... What was allowed to
Valentinus is allowable to the Valentinians, and that is lawful for
the Marcionites which Marcion did, i.e. to innovate on the faith

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 27, § 1, p. 226, Harvey, says that the Ophites are the
same as the Sethians ; Hippolytus, op. tit. Bk v. c. 11, p. 184, Cruice, that
they are connected with the Peratae, the Sethians, and the system of
Justinus. Epiphanius, Haer. xxxvn. c. 1, p. 494, Oehler, while deriving
them from Nicolaus the Deacon, gives them a common origin with those
whom he calls Gnostics simply, and identifies these last with the Borboriani,
Coddiani, Stratiotici, Phibionitae, Zacchaei, and Barbelitae (see Haer. xxvi.
c. 3).

2 Hippolytus, op. tit. Bk v. c. 11, p. 184, Cruice.

3 favrovs yvooo-TiKovs ovo/xd^ovrfs. Hippolytus, loc. tit. Eusebius, H. E.
Bk iv. c. 7, says that Carpocrates was the father of the heresy of the
Gnostics and contemporary with Basilides.

4 Epiphanius, Haer. xxvi. c. 7, pp. 174, 176, Oehler.


28 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

according to his own judgment. In short, all heresies when in-
vestigated are found to be in many particulars disagreeing with
their own authors 1 ."

If Tertullian was right, it is idle to expect that after the
lapse of nineteen centuries we can hope to distinguish between
the opinions of an heresiarch and those of his followers who
differed from or improved upon his teaching.

Of the country in which the Ophites first appeared, and
where to the last they had their strongest following, there can,
however, be little doubt. Phrygia, by which is meant the
entire central part of Asia Minor or, to use its modern name,
Anatolia, must from its situation have formed a great meeting-
place for different creeds, among which that of the Jews occupied
in the first centuries of our era a prominent place. Seleucus
Nicator had followed the example of Alexander in Egypt in
granting the Jews full rights of citizenship in all his cities,
and Antiochus the Great took even more practical steps towards
inducing them to settle there when he transported thither two
thousand Jewish families from Mesopotamia and Babylon 2 .
These Jews of the Eastern Diaspora or Dispersion had, however,
by no means kept whole the faith of their forefathers, and there
seems in consequence to have been less racial hatred between
them and the earlier inhabitants of the country here than else-
where 3 . In religious matters, these last, too, seem to have been
little affected by the Euhemerism that had destroyed the faith
of the more sophisticated Greeks, and the orgiastic worship of
Cybele, Attis, and Sabazius found in Phrygia its principal seat.
The tendency of the inhabitants towards religious hysteria was
not likely to be lessened by the settlement in the centre of
Asia Minor of the Celtic tribes known as the Galatae, who had
gradually passed under the Roman yoke in the time of Augustus,
but seem long to have retained their Celtic taste for innovations

1 Tertullian, de Praescript. Haer. c. xlii.

2 Josephus, Antiq. Bk xn. c. 3.

3 Ramsay, Cities and Bislioprics of Phrygia, ir. pp. 667 sqq. ; St Paul,
pp. 142 sqq. ; Commentary on Calatians, pp. 189 sqq. The fact that Timothy,
the son of the Jewess Eunice by a Greek father, was not circumcised (see
Acts xvi. 1) is quoted in support.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 29

in religious matters, and to have supplied from the outset an
endless number of heresies to the Church 1 . Moreover, in the
Wars of Succession which followed the death of Alexander,
Phrygia had been bandied about like a shuttlecock between
Antigonus and Lysimachus ; in the decadence of the Seleucid
house, it had been repeatedly harried by the pretenders to the
Syrian crown ; and it had, during the temporary supremacy
of Mithridates and his son-in-law Tigranes, been subject to the
tyranny of the Armenians 2 . Thanks to the policy of these
barbarian kings, it had in great measure been denuded of its
Greek-speaking inhabitants 3 , the growth of its towns had been
checked, and the country seems to have been practically
divided among a crowd of dynasts or priest-kings, generally
the high-priests of temples possessing vast landed estates
and preserving their importance by the celebration of yearly
festivals. Dr Mahaffy compares these potentates with the
prince-bishops and lordly abbots produced by nearly the same
conditions in mediaeval Europe 4 , and Sir William Ramsay's
and Mr Hogarth's researches of late years in Anatolia have
shown how much truth there is in the comparison.

The religion practised by these priest-kings throughout the
whole of Asia Minor differed slightly in form, but was one in
substance 5 . It was in effect the worship of the bisexual and
mortal gods whom we have already seen worshipped under
varying names in the Eastern basin of the Mediterranean.
These deities, whose alternate appearance as male and female,
infant and adult, could only be explained to Western ears as
the result of incestuous unions, could all on final analysis be
reduced to one great divinity in whom all Nature was contained.
The essence of the Anatolian religion, says Sir William Ramsay,
when describing the state of things that existed in Phrygia
immediately before the preaching of St Paul, was

1 E.g. the Montanist, the most formidable of the heresies which attacked
the primitive Church, apart from Gnosticism. Cf. also Galatians i. 6.

2 Mahaffy, Greek World under Roman Sway, p. 168. For the tyranny
of the Armenians, see Plutarch, Luctdlus, cc. xiv., xxi.

3 Mahaffy, Gk. World, p. 100.
* Mahaffy, ibid. p. 225.

6 Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. p. 9.


30 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

" the adoration of the life of Nature— that life apparently subject
to death, yet never dying, but reproducing itself in new forms,
different and yet the same. This perpetual self-identity under
varying forms, this annihilation of death through the power of
self -reproduction, was the object of an enthusiastic worship, cha-
racterized by remarkable self-abandonment and immersion in the
divine, by a mixture of obscene symbolism and sublime truths, by
negation of the moral distinctions and family ties that exist in a
more developed society, but do not exist in the free life of Nature.
The mystery of self-reproduction, of eternal unity amid temporary
diversity, is the key to explain all the repulsive legends and cere-
monies that cluster round that worship, and all the manifold
manifestations or diverse embodiments of the ultimate single divine
life that are carved on the rocks of Asia Minor 1 ."

Whether the Phrygians of Apostolic times actually saw all
these sublime ideas underlying the religion of their country
may be doubted ; but it is fairly certain that at the time in
question there was worshipped throughout Anatolia a divine
family comprising a goddess known as the Mother of the Gods,
together with a male deity, who was at once her son, her spouse,
her brother, and sometimes her father 2 . The worship of this
pair, who were in the last resort considered as one bisexual
being, was celebrated in the form of festivals and mystery-
plays like those of the Middle Ages, in which the birth, nuptials,
death, and resurrection of the divinities were acted in dramatic
form. At these festivals, the worshippers gave themselves up
to religious excitement alternating between continence some-
times carried to the extent of self- mutilation on the part of
the men, and hysterical or religious prostitution on the part
of the women 3 . The gathering of foreign merchants and slaves
in the Anatolian cities, and the constant shifting of their

1 Ramsay, Cities, etc., i. p. 87.

2 Ramsay, ibid. I. p. 92.

3 Ramsay, ibid. I. pp. 93, 94. The Galli or priests of Cybele, who
mutilated themselves in religious ecstasy, seem to have been the feature
of Anatolian religion which most struck the Romans, when the statue of
the Mother of the Gods first appeared among them. Cf. next page. For
the other side of the religion, see Lucian, de Dea Syria, cc. vr., xnrn., and
Apuleius, Metamorph. Bk vm. c. 29.


vni] Post -Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 31

inhabitants by their successive masters, had forced on the
votaries of these Phrygian deities a theocrasia of the most
complete kind, and the Phrygian god and goddess were in turn
identified with the deities of Eleusis, of whom indeed they may
have been the prototypes, with the Syrian Aphrodite and Adonis,
with the Egypto- Greek Serapis and Isis, and probably with
many Oriental deities as well 1 . At the same time, their fame
and their worship had spread far beyond Phrygia. The
primitive statue of the goddess of Pessinus, a black stone or
baetyl dignified by the name of the Mother of the Gods, was
transported to Rome in the stress of the Second Punic War
and there became the centre of a ritual served by eunuch priests
supported by the State 2 ; while, later, her analogue, the Syrian
goddess, whose temple at Hierapolis, according to Lucian,
required a personnel of over three hundred ministrants, became
the object of the special devotion of the Emperor Nero 3 . As
with the Alexandrian divinities, the respect paid to these
stranger deities by the legions carried their worship into every
part of the Roman world 4 .

The element which the Jews of Asia contributed to Anatolian
religion at this period was probably more important than has
been generally supposed. M. Cumont's theory that the epithet
of the "Highest" ("'T^o-to?) often applied to the God of Anatolia
and Syria really covers the personality of Yahweh of Israel
rests upon little proof at present 5 . It may be conceded that
the tendency to monotheism — or to speak strictly their hatred

1 As in the hymn to Attis said to have been sung in the Great Mysteries,
given in the Philosophumena (see p. 54, infra). Cf. Ramsay, Cities, etc.,
I. pp. 132, 263, 264, for other identifications. The Anatolian name of the
Dea Syria to whose cult Nero was addicted, was Atargatis, which Prof.
Garstang would derive from the Babylonian Ishtar (Strong, Syrian Goddess,
1913, p. vii) ; see Cumont, Les Religions Orientates dans le Paganisme
Romain, Paris, 1906, p. 126. The whole of Cumont's chapters on Syria
and Asia Minor (op. cit. pp. 57-89) can be consulted with advantage,
The American edition, 1911, contains some additional notes. See, too,
Decharme's article on Cybele in Daremberg and Saglio's Diet, des Antiq.

2 Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, pp. 548 sqq.

3 See n. 1, supra ; Suetonius, Nero, c. lvi.

4 Dill, loc. cit., and authorities there quoted.

8 Cumont, Rel. Or. p. 77, and see index to American edition, 1911.


32 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [oh.

for the worshippers of many gods — rooted in the Jews from the
Captivity onwards may at first have done much to hasten the
progress of the theocrasia which was welding all the gods of
the Mysteries into one great God of Nature. But the Baby-
lonian or Oriental Jews, called in the Talmud and elsewhere
the Ten Tribes, probably had some inborn sympathy with the
more or less exalted divinities of the West. Even in the temple
of Jerusalem, Ezekiel sees in his vision " women weeping for
Tammuz 1 ," while Jeremiah complains of the Jews making cakes
to the Queen of Heaven, which seems to be another name for
the Mother of the Gods 2 . The feminine side of the Anatolian
worship can therefore have come to them as no new thing.
Perhaps it was due to this that they so soon fell away from their
ancestral faith, and that, in the words of the Talmud, " the
baths and wines of Phrygia separated the Ten Tribes from
their brethren 3 ." That their collection of money for the Temple
in Roman times was due not so much to any religious motive,
as to some of the financial operations in which the Jews were
always engaging, Cicero hints with fair plainness in his Oration
in defence of Flaccus 4 . They seem, too, to have intermarried
freely with the Greek citizens, while the sons of these mixed
marriages did not undergo the circumcision which the Jews of
the Western Dispersion demanded not only from native Jews
but also from proselytes of alien blood 5 .

The Jews also brought with them into Phrygia superstitions
or side-beliefs to which they were probably much more firmly
attached than to their national religion. The practice of magic
had always been popular among the Chosen People as far back
as the time of Saul, and the bowls inscribed with spells against
enchantments and evil spirits form almost the only relics which

1 Ezekiel viii. 14.

2 Jeremiah vii. 18 ; lxiv. 17-19.

3 Ramsay, Cities, etc., n. p. 674, quoting Neubauer, Ge'ographie du
Talmvd.

4 Cicero, pro Flacc. c. xxvm. The Jews of the Dispersion in Egypt had
temples of their own, in one at least of which Yahweh had for assessors a
goddess Anat and a subordinate god Bethel. See Rene Dussaud, " Les
Papyrus judeo-arameens d'Elephantine," R.H.R. t. lxiv. (1911) p. 350.

s Acts xvi. 2, 3. See n. 3, p. 28, supra.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 33

they have left in the mounds which mark their settlement at
Hilleh on the site of the ancient Babylon 1 . From this and
other evidence, it would seem that the Babylonian Jews had
borrowed from their Chaldaean captors many of their views as
to the importance of the Name in magic, especially when used
for the purposes of exorcism or of spells ; that they thought
the name of their national god Yahweh particularly efficacious ;
and that the different names of God used in the Old Testament
were supposed, according to a well-known rule in magic, to be
of greater efficiency as the memory of their meaning and actual
significance died out among them 2 . The Babylonian Jews,
moreover, as is evident from the Book of Daniel, no sooner
found themselves among the well-to-do citizens of a great city
than they turned to the professional practice of divination and
of those curious arts whereby they could make a living from the
credulity of their Gentile neighbours without the manual labour
always dreaded by them 3 . Hence Phrygia, like the rest of
Asia Minor during the Apostolic Age, was full of strolling
Jewish sorcerers who undertook for money to cast out devils,
to effect and destroy enchantments, to send and interpret
dreams, and to manufacture love philtres 4 . That in doing so
they made great use of the name of their national deity seems
plain from Origen's remark that " not only do those belonging
to the Jewish nation employ in their prayers to God and in the
exorcising of demons the words : God of Abraham and God of

1 Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, 1853, pp. 509 sqq. Was this why Daniel
was called " Master of the Magicians " ? Dan. iv. 9 ; v. 11.

2 Thus, in a Coptic spell, the Words from the Cross : " Eli, eli, lama
sabachthani," are described as " the revered names of God." See Rossi,
" Trattato gnostico " in Mem. della Real. Accad. di Torino, Ser. B, xlii.
fol. 9. So in mediaeval magic the word " Eieazareie " or " Escherie "
is frequently used, apparently without any suspicion that it covers the
n\-UX -\WH rPHK 'Ehyeh 'asher 'ehyeh — " I am that I am " of Exodus.

3 Hausrath, Hist, of New Testament Times, Eng. ed. 1878, i. pp. 126, 127,
and authorities there quoted.

4 See last note. In the Acts, Bar-jesus or Elymas the sorcerer, the
seven sons of Sceva, and some of those who burned their magical books
at Ephesus, are said to be Jews. Harnack, Expansion of Christianity,
Eng. ed. i. pp. 156, 157, says the Jews were known as exorcisers of
demons throughout the Roman Empire.

t,. tt. - 3


34 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

Isaac and God of Jacob, but so also do most of those who occupy
themselves with magical rites. For there is found in treatises
on magic in many countries such an invocation of God and
assumption of the divine name, as implies a familiar use of it
by these, men in their dealings with demons 1 ." This is abun-
dantly borne out by the spells preserved for us by the Magic
Papyri before mentioned, where the expressions " God of
Abraham," " God of Isaac," " God of Jacob " constantly
occur. One spell given above contains, as we have seen,
along with many unfamiliar expressions drawn from Greek,
Persian, Egyptian, and even Sumerian sources, the words
" Blessed be the Lord God of Abraham 2 ," and in nearly every
one do we find the Tetragrammaton or four-lettered name of
God transliterated in the A.V. Jehovah, either with or without
some of the other Divine names used in the Old Testament.
The names of the angels Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael given
in the Old Testament and the Apocrypha are also common
in all this literature 3 .

Did the Babylonian Jews bring with them into Phrygia any
theory of the universe other than the direct and unfettered
rule of Jehovah and the creation of the world from nothing,
which they gathered from their sacred books ? There is little
evidence on the point, save some expressions of doubtful import
in the Magic Papyri 4 and the statement of Origen that " the
name Sabaoth, and Adonai and the other names treated with
so much reverence among the Hebrews .... belong to a secret

1 Origen, cord. Cels. Bk iv. c. 33. Cf. ibid. c. 34, and Bk I. c. 22. Also
Justin Martyr's Dial. c. Tryph. c. lxxxv.

2 See Chapter III, vol. I. n. 6, p. 106, supra.

3 Karl Wessely, in Expositor, Series III, vol. IV. (1886), pp. 194 sqq.,
gives many specimens of these spells. The papyri from which they are
taken are printed in full in his Griechische Zauber papyrus von Paris und
London, Wien, 1888, and his Neue Griechische Zauberpapyri, Wien, 1893.
See also Parthey, Zwei griechische Zauberpapyri des Berliner Museums,
Berlin, 1866 ; Leemans, Papyri Graeci Mus. Ant. Publ. Lugduni Batavi,
t. n., Leyden, 1885, and Kenyon, Gk. Papyri in B.M. before quoted.

* They sometimes speak of certain expressions being used by the
apxitpt'is " high priests," Leemans, op. cit. t. n. p. 29. Does this mean the
adepts in magic or the heads of a sect ?


vni] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 35

theology which refers to the Framer of all things 1 ." It might
be possible to deduce from this that the elaborate system known
as the Cabala or secret tradition of the Jews was already in
existence 2 . This system, on its theoretical or speculative side,
attempts to explain the existence of the physical universe by
postulating a whole series of intermediate powers emanating
from the Supreme Being of whom they are the attributes or
names; while, on the other or "practical," it professes to perform
wonders and to reveal mysteries by a childish juggling with
letters in the shape of anagrams and acrostics or with their
numerical values 3 . As has been said above, follies of this last-
named kind were unknown neither to the later Orphics nor to
the primitive Church, and might well be thought to have been
acquired by the Jews during their stay in Babylon, where the
Semitic inhabitants seem from a very early date and for magical
reasons to have used numbers instead of letters in writing the
names of their gods 4 . It would not have been difficult for them
to have acquired at the same time from the Persian masters
of Babylon the doctrine of emanation instead of creation which
is to be found in the Zend Avesta as well as in all the post-Chris-
tian Gnostic systems. But there are other channels besides the
Anatolian religion through which these ideas might have come
into the West 5 , and it will be better not to lay any stress upon
this. That the Cabala in the complete form in which it appears
in the books known as the Sepher Jetzirah and the Sepher
Zohar does not go further back than the vith or vuth century
of our era, seems to be the opinion of all those best qualified
to judge in the matter. M. Isidore Loeb, who has given the
most coherent and compact summary of Cabalistic teaching
that has appeared of late years, finds its germs in Babylonian
Judaism at about the same period which saw the blossoming of

1 Origen, cont. Gels. Bk. I. c. 24.

2 So Kuenen, Religion of Israel (Eng. ed.), rn. p. 314, says that the
-tence of the Cabala is indicated in the Talmud.

3 See Chapter V, vol. i. pp. 169, 170, supra.

4 The Sumerian moon-god, Nannar, was denoted by the number 30,
Marduk called 50 and so on. See King, Seven Tablets of Creation, 1902, 1,
p. 66.

5 See Chapter VII, supra.

3—2


36 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

the Christian Gnostic sects, without going so far as to derive
either of the later doctrines from the other 1 .

However this may be, there is a fair consensus of opinion
among the Fathers of the Church as to the doctrines current
among those whom, for reasons to be presently seen, they called
the Ophites or worshippers of the Serpent. *The aim of the
sect seems to have been to produce an eclectic system which
should reconcile the religious traditions current from time
immemorial in Western Asia with the worship of the Hellenized
gods of Asia Minor, and the teachings of the already powerful
Christian Church. With this view they went back to what is
probably the earliest philosophical theory of the origin of the
universe, and declared that before anything was, there existed
God, but God conceived as an infinite ocean of divinity, too
great and too remote to be apprehended by man's intelligence,
of whom and of whose attributes nothing could be known or
said, and who could only be likened to a boundless sea. Some-
thing like this was the view of the earliest inhabitants of Baby-
lonia, who declared that before heaven or earth or the gods
came into being there was nothing but a vast waste of waters 2 .
At some time or another, the same idea passed into Egypt,
when the Egyptians attributed the beginning of things to Nu
or the primaeval deep 3 ; and it was probably the spread of
this tradition into Ionia which induced Thales of Miletus, the
earliest of the Ionian philosophers, to assert that water was
the first of all things 4 . ^ This unknowable and inaccessible

1 Isidore Loeb, La Cabbale Juive, p. 587. F. Herman Kruger, La Grande
Encyclopedic, s.v. Gnosticisme, and Franck, La Kabbah, Paris, 1843, p. 203,
both notice the likeness between Gnosticism and the Cabala and say that
they are derived from the same source.

2 See the Sumerian Hymn of Creation translated by Sayce, Religions
of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia (Gifford Lectures), Edinburgh, 1902, p. 380;
Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, Boston, U.S.A. 1898, p. 490 ;
King, Seven Tablets, p. 3 ; Rogers, Rel. of Bab., p. 108.

3 " Au commencement etait le Nun, 1' ocean primordial, dans les pro-
fondeurs infinies duquel flottaient les germes des choses. De toute eternite
Dieu s'engendra et s'enfanta lui-meme au sein de cette masse liquide sans
forme encore et sans usage." Maspero, Hist. Ancienne des Peuples de.
VOrient, p. 326.

4 Diogenes Laertius, Vit. Philosoph. Bk i. c. 6.


vin] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 37

power, the Ophites declared to be ineffable or impossible to
name, and he was only referred to by them as Bythos or the
Deep. The same idea and the same name were adopted by
most of the later gnostics 1 .

1 Including in that name some who attained to high office in the Catholic
Church. Thus Hatch, H . L. p. 255, says with apparent truth that Clement
of Alexandria " anticipated Plotinus in conceiving of God as being ' beyond
the One and higher than the Monad itself,' which was the highest abstrac-
tion of current philosophy." The passage he here relies on is in Clement's
Paedagogus, Bk I. c. 8. Hatch goes on to say, " There is no name that can
properly be named of Him : ' Neither the One nor the Good, nor Mind,
nor Absolute Being, nor Father, nor Creator, nor Lord ' " — expressions to
be found in Clement's Stromata, Bk v. c. 12. Clement's orthodoxy may
be called in question ; but no fault has been found in that respect with
Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais and the friend of Hypatia. Yet in his Hymns
he uses expressions which would have come naturally to the lips of any
Ophite. Thus :

2i> 8' apprjv, (xv 8e dtjXvs, "Male thou and female,

2v 8? (pavd, av 8e <riyd, Voice thou and silence,

<Pvo-e<0s (pvo-ts yovoava, Nature engendered of Nature,

2v 8' avag, alcovos alav, Thou, the King, the Aeon of Aeons,

To fiiv, fj 6ifus fioaaai ; What is it lawful to call thee ?

and again

Uarepav navroiv Father of all Fathers,

Yldrep, avTondrap, Father of thyself,

npondrap, dirdrcop, Propator [Forefather] who hast no

father,
Yie (Tfavroi O Son of thyself


Mvaras Se voos But the initiated mind

Ta re kcu to. Ae'y«, Says this and that,

Bvdov apprjrov Celebrating with dances

'Apfaxopevcov. The Ineffable Bythos."

(Hymn III)

The ineff ability of divine names was an old idea in Egypt, especially
in the Osirian religion, where it forms the base of the story of Ra and
Isis. So the name of Osiris himself was said to be ineffable. See Eug.
Lefebure in Sphinx, Stockholm, vol. I. pp. 99-102. The name of Marduk
uf Babylon is in the same way declared ineffable in an inscription of Neri.
glissar, Trans. Roy. Soc. Litt. 2nd series, vol. vm. p. 276. The name of
Yahweh became ineffable directly after Alexander. See Halevy, Revue des
Etudes juives, t. ix. (1884), p. 172. In every case, the magical idea that the
god might be compelled by utterance of his secret name seems to be at the
root of the practice. Cf. Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt, Eng. ed. p. 354-


38 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

From this unknowable principle or Father (Uarr/p dyvcoaTos)
there shone forth, according to the Ophites, a Primordial Light,
infinite and incorruptible, which is the Father of all things
subsequent to him 1 . Here they may have been inspired, not
by the Babylonian, but by its derivative, the Jewish tradition
given in the Book of Genesis 2 . But this Light was in effect,
though not in name, the chief god of their system, and in Asia
Minor the gods had never perhaps been imagined as existing
in any but human form. Accordingly they described this Light
as the First Man, meaning thereby no terrestrial creature, but
a heavenly or archetypal man in whose likeness mankind was
afterwards made 3 . From him came forth a second Light
sometimes called his Ennoia or Thought, which expression
seems to cover the idea that this Second Man or Son of Man,
by both which names he was known to the Ophites, was not
begotten in the ordinary way of mortals, but was produced
from the First Man as a thought or concept is formed in the
brain 4 . Or we may, to take another metaphor, regard this
Ennoia as the rays of light which emanate or flow forth from
a lamp or other source of light, but which have no independent
existence and still remain connected with their parent. Such
was the Ophite idea with regard to the two great Lights or the

1 The whole account of Ophite doctrine as to the origin of things is
here taken from Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, pp. 226 sqq., Harvey.

2 Genesis i. 8.

3 Philo explains that there is a vast difference between man as now
made and the first man who was made according to the image of God,
De opificio mundi, c. 46. This idea of an archetypal man was widely spread
over Eastern Europe and Asia, and Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis,
Gottingen, 1907, Kap. iv, " Der Urmensch," has collected all or nearly
all the references to it in the literature of the period that could be produced
up to that date. As to its origin, the issue is still very doubtful. While
we should naturally expect to find it in the Babylonian legends, the Tablets
of Creation contain no certain allusion to it, while it is certainly to be traced
in the Zend Avesta and its related books. Until we are able to compare
the dates of these two sources it seems idle to speculate as to which is
the original one and which the derived. But see Introduction (pp. xxi-xxiii
and note on last page quoted) supra.

4 This is a less primitive and therefore probably later way of accounting
for the birth of one spiritual or superhuman being from another, than that
of Simon Magus who made his Supreme Being androgyne.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 39

First and Second Man whom they refused to consider as separate,
giving them both the name of Adamas, or the Unconquered,
a classical epithet of the Hades already identified at Eleusis
with Dionysos 1 . They also called them, as will be seen later,
the Father-and-Son. In this, perhaps, they did not go outside
the conception of the Anatolian religion, which always repre-
sented the Divine Son as the spouse of the goddess who gave him
birth, and in this way eternally begetting himself. Thus, the
Phrygian goddess Cybele under the name of Agdistis was said to
be violently enamoured of Atys who was in effect her own son 2 .
The same idea was familiar to the Egyptians, among whom
more than one god is described as the "bull (i.e. male or husband)
of his mother," and it may thus have passed into the Alexandrian
religion, where Horus was, as we have seen, often given instead
of Osiris as the lover of Isis 3 . At Eleusis it was more modestly
concealed under the myth which made Dionysos or Hades at
once the ravisher of Persephone and her son by Zeus in serpent
form — a myth which is summed up in the mystic phrase pre-
served by Clement of Alexandria that " The bull is the father
of the serpent, and the serpent the father of the bull 4 ."

Thus the Ophites accounted for the divinity who was in
effect their Supreme God, the still higher Bythos, as we have
seen, being put in the background as too awful for human
consideration 5 . But it was still necessary to make manifest

1 Theocritus, Idyll, n. 1. 34. For the identity of Hades and Dionysos
see Chapter II. vol. i. supra.

2 Pausanias, Descpt. Oraec. Bk vm. cc. 17, 20 ; Arnobius, adv. Oentes,
Bk v. cc. 5, 7. Cf. Decharme in Daremberg and Saglio's Diet, des Antiq.
s.v. Cybele.

3 See Chapter II. vol. i. supra.

4 Clem. Alex. Protrept. c. n. ; Arnobius, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 21, calls it
" the well-known senarian verse of a poet of Tarentum," and connects it
with the Sabazian rites, whence it probably found its way to Eleusis.

5 This relegation of the really Supreme God to an unregarded place in
me pantheon is common enough in the history of religions. Thus the
Shilluks of the Upper Nile take little notice of their great god Jok, to whom
they only sacrifice once a year, reserving all the rest of their worship for
a being intermediate between God and man called Nyakang. See Gleichen,
The Anglo-Egyptian Soudan, vol. I. pp. 162, 197, and R.H.R. 1911, Juillet-
Aout.


40 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

the feminine aspect of the deity which was always very pro-
minent in Asia Minor. The Mother of the Gods, known as
Ma in Lydia, Cybele in Phrygia proper, Artemis at Ephesus,
the unnamed Syrian goddess at Hierapolis, and Aphrodite in
Cyprus and elsewhere 1 , was in the early Christian centuries
the most prominent person in the Anatolian pantheon, a fact
which Sir William Ramsay would attribute to the matriarchate,
Mutterrecht, or custom of descent in the female line, which he
thinks indigenous to Asia Minor. In the earliest Phrygian
religion there seems little doubt that the supreme goddess was
originally considered to be bisexual, and capable of production
without male assistance, as is expressly stated in the legend of
Agdistis or Cybele preserved by Pausanias 2 , and perhaps hinted
at in the stories of Amazons spread throughout the whole of
Asia Minor. But it is probable that, as Sir William Ramsay
himself says, this idea had become less prominent with the
immigration from Europe of tribes of male warriors without
female companions 3 , while Semitic influence was always against
it. Hence the Ophites found themselves compelled to make
their female deity inferior or posterior to their male. " Below
these,. again (i.e. below the First and Second Man or Father-and-
Son)," says Irenaeus in reporting their doctrines, " is the Holy
Spirit. . . .whom they call the First Woman 4 ." Neither he nor
Hippolytus gives us any direct evidence of the source whence
this feminine Power was thought by them to have issued. But
Hippolytus says without circumlocution that " this Man,"
i.e. Adamas or the Father-and-Son, " is both male and female 5 ,"
and he quotes the words of an Ophite hymn 6 addressed to him
that : " From thee is Father and through thee is Mother, two
names immortal, parents of Aeons, thou citizen of heaven,

1 Seen. 1, p. 31, supra. The Dea Syria was otherwise called Atargatis,
of which Derketo was, teste. Prof. Garstang, a homonym. See Strong, The
Syrian Goddess, p. 52 and n. 25.

2 See n. 1, p. 31, supra.

3 Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. p. 9.

4 Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. c. 28, p. 227, Harvey.

5 npa-fvodrfKv^, Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 1, p. 139, Cruice.
• See next note.


vni] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 41

Man of mighty name 1 ! " Later, he puts in the mouth of the
Naassene or Ophite wriffer from whom he repeatedly quotes,
the phrase :

" The Spirit is where the Father and the Son are named, from whom,
and from the Father it is there born ; and this (that is, the Spirit)!
is the many-named, myriad-eyed Incomprehensible One for whom)
every nature in different ways yearns,"

or in other words the soul or animating principle of Nature 2 .
It therefore seems that the first Ophites made their Supreme
God a triad like the Eleusinian, the Alexandrian, and the
Anatolian, consisting of three persons two of whom were males
and the third a female, or a Father, Mother, and Son, of whom
the Son was but another and renewed form of the Father,
while the union of all three was necessary to express every
aspect of the Deity, who was nevertheless one in essence 3 .

1 'Afro aov irarrjp ko.1 8id ere p-qTrjp, ra 8vo dBdvara ovopara, Alcavav
yoveis, iroKlra ovpavoxi, peya\a>vvpe dvdpcone, Hippolytus, op. dt. Bk V.
c. 1, p. 140, Cruice. Salmon points out that almost the same words occur
in Hippolytus' account of the heresy of Monoimus the Arab, where he
describes the monad as being among other things : kvrq prjTvp, avrrj
narrjp, to. bvo dddvara ovopara, op. cit. Bk vm. C. 12, p. 410, Cruice.
He is inclined to attribute this to the real or supposed fact that both the
Xaassenes and Monoimus borrowed from the Apophysis of Simon. See
Salmon in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Monoimus.

2 To 8e 7rv(vpa (Kfl [eWiv] ottov (cat 6 Uarrjp 6vopd£eTai koi 6 Ylos,
(K tovtov [/ecu e<c] rov Uarpos €K(l ytvvapevov, k.t.X., Hippolytus, Op. Clt.

Bk v. c. 9, pp. 174, 185, Cruice. The words in brackets are Cruice' s
emendation. Duncker and Schneidewin omit them and read yewapevos
for yewapevov. Giraud, op. cit. pp. 92, 93, agrees with Cruice's reading,
and points out that both the Spirit and the Son are here put forward as
the masculine and feminine forms respectively of the great Adamas, It is
evident, however, that among the earlier Ophites represented by Irenaeus'
Greek text, the Spirit or First Woman was thought to come into being
after the First Man and the Son of Man. See Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, p. 227,
Harvey.

3 Thus after saying that " he who says all things are composed (<rvv(-
arrdvai) from one (substance) errs, but that he who says they are framed
from three speaks the truth," he goes on to say Mia yap iari (prjcriv, rj
paKapia (pvcris rov paicaplov dvdparrov rov ava, rov ' Addpavros • pia 8e rj Ovr/rr]
Karat- pia 8e r) d/3acriXeuToy yevea 17 dvco yevopivq, k.t.X., For one IS the

blessed nature of the blessed Man above, viz. : Adamas, and one is the


42 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

This threefold division of things, said the Ophites, ran through
all nature ' ' there being three worlds or universes : the angelic
(that sent directly from God), the psychic, and the earthly or
material ; and three Churches : the Chosen, the Called, and the
Captive 1 ." The meaning of these names we shall see later
when we consider the Ophite idea of the Apocatastasis 2 or
return of the worlds to the Deity.

First, however, another Power had to be produced which
should serve as an intermediary or ambassador from the Supreme
Triad to the worlds below it. This necessity may have arisen
from Plato's view, adopted by Philo of Alexandria, that God
was too high and pure to be contaminated by any contact
with matter 3 . But it may also owe something to the idea
common to all Orientals that a king or great man can only
communicate with his inferiors through a wakil or agent ; and
that this idea was then current in Phrygia seems plain from
the story in the Acts of the Apostles that in the Lycaonian
province Barnabas, who was of majestic presence, was adored
and nearly sacrificed to as Zeus, while Paul, who was the
principal speaker, was only revered as Hermes 4 . The later
Ophite account of the production of this intermediary power
or messenger which we find in Irenaeus is that the Father-
and-Son " delighting in the beauty of the Spirit " — that is of
the First Woman—" shed their light upon her " and thus
brought into existence " an incorruptible light, the third
man, whom they call Christ os 5 ." With this last addition the

nature below which is subject to death, and one is the kingless race which
is begotten above," etc. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, p. 157, Cruice.

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 1, p. 140, Cruice.

2 aTTOKorcuTTcuTis (see p. 57 infra). As Salmon has shown with
great clearness, this, rather than the redemption of individual souls, is the
aim of all post-Christian Gnostic systems, 9 Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Gnos-
ticism.

3 Philo, de Sacrificantibus, c. 13 ; II. p. 261, Mangey.
« Acts xiv. 11-18.

5 Postea, dicunt, exultante primo homine cum filio suo super formosi-
tate Spiritus, hoc est foeminae, et illuminante earn, generavit ex ea lumen
incorruptibile, tertium masculum, quern Christum vocant. So the Latin
version of Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, p. 227, Harvey. The Greek text, which
should contain Irenaeus' own words, only says : 'Epaadfjiai 3e (f)acn rov


vin] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 43

Divine Family was considered complete, and the same author
tells us that Christos and his mother were " immediately drawn
up into the incorruptible aeon which they call the veritable
Church 1 ." This seems to be the first appearance in Gnosticism
of the use of the word Church as signifying what was later
called the Pleroma or Fulness of the Godhead ; but it may be
compared to the " Great Council " apparently used in the same
sense by some unidentified prophet quoted by Origen, of which
Great Council Christ was said by the prophet to be the " Angel "
or messenger 2 .

From this perfect Godhead, the Ophites had to show the
evolution of a less perfect universe, a problem which they
approached in a way differing but slightly from that of Simon
Magus. This last, as we have seen, interposed between God
and our own world three pairs of " Roots " or Powers together
with an intermediate world of aeons whose angels and authori-
ties had brought our universe into existence. These angels
purposely fashioned it from existing matter, the substance most
removed from and hostile to God, in order that they might

7rpa)TOv*Avdpa>Trov, Ka\ tov Sevrepov, rrjs <Spas roii Uvevfj.a.Tos...Kai iraiboiroiT)-
aai (pcbs...6 ko\ov<ti Xpiarov. Something, however, has evidently been
expunged from the earlier version of the story, and it is possible that the
later interpolation is due to the desire of the translator to make the
teaching of the heretics as repulsive as possible. Theodoret merely copies
the Latin text of Irenaeus.

1 els tov cicpdaprov dvarrTraadfjvai Ala>va,fjv koi aXr/divfjv i<KKr}<Tiav koXovcti.
Irenaeus, loc. cit. p. 228, Harvey.

2 This Divine Family or Council must have been an old idea in post-
exilic Judaism. Justin Martyr, Dial. c. Trrjph. c. 126, says that Christ
is called the " Angel of the Great Council " by Ezekiel, but the expression
is not to be found in the A. V. Origen, cont. Cds. Bk v. c. 53, also speaks
of a prophecy in which Jesus was described as the " Angel of the Great
Council, because he announced to men the great counsel of God " — a pun
which curiously enough is the same in Greek as in English. The Jews of
Elephantine worshipped in their temple a god and a goddess who were looked
upon as the assessors, if the inferiors, of Yahweh (see n. 4, p. 32, supra).
In the Talmud, it is said that God has an upper or celestial familia or
tribunal without consulting which he does nothing, and which is indicated
by the " holy ones " of Dan. iv. 17. See Taylor, Pirke-Aboth, Cambridge,
1877, n. p. 43, n. 7. The expression " Angel of the Great Council " recurs
in the Gnostic epitaph from the Via Latina given later (Chapter IX).


44 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

rule over it and thus possess a dominion of their own. But the
Ophites went behind this conception, and made the first con-
fusion of the Divine light with matter the result of an accident.
The light, in Irenaeus' account of their doctrines, shed by the
Father-and-Son upon the Holy Spirit was so abundant that she
could not contain it all within herself, and some of it therefore,
as it were, boiled over and fell down 1 , when it was received by
that matter which they, like Simon, looked upon as existing
independently 2 . They described this last as separated into four
elements, water, darkness, the abyss, and chaos, which we may
suppose to be different strata of the same substance, the upper-
most layer being apparently the waste of waters mentioned in
Genesis. Falling upon these waters, the superfluity of light of
the Holy Spirit stirred them, although before immovable, to
their lowest depths, and took from them a body formed appar-
ently from the envelope of waters surrounding it. Then, rising
again by a supreme effort from this contact, it made out of
this envelope the visible heaven which has ever since been
stretched over the earth like u canopy 3 . This superfluity of

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, pp. 227, 228, Harvey.

2 Giraud, op. cit. p. 95, thinks that in the Naassene teaching matter
does not really exist, all things being contained in Adamas. The absolute
antagonism of God and matter is, however, too strongly marked a feature
of nearly all the sources from which the Ophites can have drawn their
doctrine for his theory to be entertained. Berger, fitudes des Documents
nouveaux fournis sur les Ophites par les Philosophumena, Nancy, 1873,
p. 25, puts forward the same idea as a mere figure of speech and in order
apparently to reconcile the Ophite doctrine with St John's statement that
without the Word " nothing " was made. Later he (ibid. pp. 61, 104, 105)
points out that the tendency of the Ophite like all other Gnostic doctrine
is to widen rather than to narrow the abyss between Spirit and Matter.

3 This is a variant, and an important one, of the Babylonian myth
which makes Bel, after defeating Tiamat the Dragon of Chaos, cut her in
two halves and make out of them the visible heaven and earth. See Rogers,
op. cit. p. 126. The heaven which there is fashioned from the powers of
evil, is here at any rate half divine. In later systems, such as one of those
in the Pistis Sophia and especially that of the Manichaeans, the older
Babylonian idea is returned to. It would therefore seem that for the
modification here introduced, the Ophites were indebted to Jewish influence
and forced it to agree with the story of Genesis. See Irenaeus, op. cit.
Bk i. c. 28, p. 229, Harvey.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 45

light which thus mingled with matter, the earlier Ophites
called, like the authors of the Wisdom-literature, Sophia, and
also Prunicos (meaning apparently the " substitute ") and de-
scribed as bisexual 1 . Another and perhaps a later modification

1 Irenaeus, loc. cit. p. 228, Harvey. This is the first unmistakable
allusion to the figure of the Sophia which is so prominent in most of the
Gnostic systems and reappears in Manichaeism. There can, I think, be
no doubt that she is in effect the Great Goddess worshipped throughout
Western Asia, who appears under different names in Lydia, Phrygia,
Syria, Ionia, Crete, and Greece, and who is to be identified on etymological
grounds, if Prof. Garstang (n. 1, p. 31, supra) is correct, with the Babylonian
Ishtar. That the Alexandrians saw her in their goddess Isis has already
been shown in Chap. II. Her most prominent characteristics show her to
be a personification of the Earth, the mother of all living, ever bringing
forth and ever a virgin, as is shown in the " Goddesses Twain," Demeter
and Cora. The dove was throughout Asia her symbol and perhaps
her totem animal (Strong, The Syrian Goddess, pp. 22-24 for authority),
as the serpent was that of her spouse or male counterpart (Justin
Martyr, First Apol. c. xxvii. ; Clem. Alex. Protrept. c. n.). In the
Orphic cosmogonies she appears under her name of Gaia or Ge as the " first
bride" (Abel's Orphica, fr. 91) spouse of Uranos, as well as under all her
subsequent personifications. She seems, too, to bear much analogy with
the Persian Amshaspand, Spenta Armaiti, who is also identified with the
earth, and is called Sophia or Wisdom (Tiele, Religion of the Iranian Peoples,
Eng. ed. Bombay, 1912, pp. 130, 131). Whether the Persians also drew
this conception from the Babylonian Ishtar is a question which some years
ago might have been answered in the affirmative. Now, however, it has
been complicated by the identification of this Spenta Armaiti with the
Aramati of the Vedas — for which see M. Carnoy's article Aramati-Armatay
in Le Museon, Louvain, vol. xm. (1912), pp. 127-146 — and the discovery of
Winckler that the Vedic gods were worshipped in Asia Minor before 1272 B.C.
Her appearance in the cosmology of the Gnostics under the name of
Sophia is, however, probably due to the necessity of effecting by hook or
by crook a harmony between Gentile and Jewish ideas, and is doubtless
due in the first instance to the passage in the Book of Proverbs vm.,
ix., where Wisdom ™??F or '\^ a jj.<i>d (in both languages feminine) is de-
scribed as existing from the beginning and the daily delight of Yahweh,
ejoicing always before him and his instrument in making the universe
(Clem. Horn. xvi. c. 12). It is said that Simon Magus called his mistress
Helena by the name of Sophia, but the story only occurs in Victorinus of
Pettau and is probably due to a confusion with the Sophia of later sects like
that of Valentinus. In all these, with the single exception of that of
Marcion, she plays a predominant part in the destiny of mankind.


46 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

of their doctrine fabled that it sprang from the left side of the
First Woman while Christos emerged from her right. They
therefore called it Sinistra and declared it to be feminine only 1 .
Both traditions agreed that this Sophia or Prunicos put forth
a son without male assistance, that this son in like manner
gave birth to another power and so on, until at last seven powers
at seven removes sprang from Sophia. Each of them fashioned
from matter a habitation, and these are represented as heavens
or hemispheres stretched out one under the other, every one
becoming less perfect as it gets further from the Primordial
Light 2 . Irenaeus and Hippolytus are agreed that the first or
immediate son of Sophia was called Ialdabaoth, a name which
Origen says, in speaking of the Ophites, is taken from the art
of magic, and which surely enough appears in nearly all the
earlier Magic Papyri 3 . Hippolytus says that this Ialdabaoth

1 This appears in the Latin version of Irenaeus only.

2 'Y<p' €Ka(TTOv &e rovrcov tva olpavbv 8r)fiiovpyT)dijvai, koi (Kacrrov oikcIv
tuv ohdov. Irenaeus, op. cit. Bk I. c. 28, p. 230, Harvey.

3 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 32. This Ialdabaoth or Jaldabaoth appears
in the systems or heresies of the Nicolaitans and of those whom Epiphanius
calls " Gnostics " par excellence. See Epiphanius, op. cit. Bk i. t. ii., Haer.
25, p. 160, and Haer. 26, p. 184. Theodoret, Haer. Fab. Bk v. c. 9, makes
him belong also to the system of the Sethians. In all these he is the son of
Sophia and presides over one or more of the super-terrestrial heavens,
although the particular place assigned to him differs in the different sects.
In the Pistis Sophia he is described (in the story of Pistis Sophia proper)
as a power " half flame and half darkness " (cf. Ezekiel viii. 2) projected by
one of the " triple-powered " gods of our universe and sent down into Chaos
for the destruction of the heroine ; in one of the later documents of the book
we see him as lord of a particular portion of Chaos, where he presides over
the punishment of a certain class of sinning souls. His name offers many
difficulties. Gieseler reads it nin2 Nt 1 ?*, " son of Chaos," and this
Salmon, Diet. Christian Biog. s.h.v., considers the most probable derivation,
although Harvey's reading of mmNT^NTT "Lord (or Jah) God
of the Fathers," is certainly more appropriate. In the great Magic Papyrus
of Paris, the name appears as aAGaBoot, which can hardly be anything
else that Aldabot or Adabot, since we have aXGoonai for Adonai in the
next line (Griffith, The Old Coptic magical texts of Paris, p. 3 ; extract
from the Zeitschrift fur Agyptische Sprache, Bd. xxxvm.). In Papyrus
xlvi of the British Museum (Kenyon, Ok. Pap. p. 69), we find paXfivaPaud,
probably a clerical error for Jaldabaoth, which is again followed as before


vra] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 47

was the Demiurge and father of the visible universe or pheno-
menal world 1 . Irenaeus also gives the names of the later
" heavens, virtues, powers, angels, and builders " as being
respectively Iao, Sabaoth, Adonai, Eloaeus, Oreus, and Asta-
phaeus or Astanpheus, which agrees with the Ophite document
or Diagram to be presently mentioned 2 . The first four of these
names are too evidently the names given in the Old Testament
to Yahweh for us to doubt the assertion of the Fathers that
by Ialdabaoth the Ophites meant the God of the Jews 3 . The
last two names, Oreus and Astaphaeus, Origen also asserts to

by the name \&a>vai. In the Leyden Papyrus which calls itself
the " 8th Book of Moses," we have a god invoked as Aldabeim, which is
there said to be an Egyptian name, and to be the (frvo-iKov ovofia
" natural name " of the sun and the boat in which he rises when he dawns
upon the world (Leemans, op. cit. pp. 87, 119, 127). It is not at all certain,
however, which of these is the right spelling, for the German editors of
Hippolytus read in one place Esaldaios for Ialdabaoth, and the Magic
Papyrus last quoted has a name Aldazao which is said to be quoted from
a book of Moses called Archangelicus (Leemans, op. cit. p. 157). The name
Ialdazao (" El Shaddai " ?) is used as that of the " God of Gods " in the
great Magic Papyrus of Paris, with whose name that of the aeon Sophia
is mentioned (Wessely, Griech. Zauberpap. p. 50). The most probable
conclusion is that Jaldabaoth represents some name or epithet of God cur-
rent among the Semitic Babylonians which had fallen into disuse and had
been much corrupted by being turned into and out of demotic. So Revil-
lout (Revue figyptologique) gives an instance where the invocation eVj'o-^es
tni fie " Come unto me ! " by a like process became transmogrified into
" episkhesepimme " without being recognized by the scribe as Greek.

1 clbiKos Kocrfios, Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 153, Cruice.
By the expression Demiurge he means that he fashioned it from pre-existent
matter, as a workman builds a house.

2 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, p. 230, Harvey.

3 Thus Irenaeus, Bki. c. 18, p. 198, Harvey, in summarizing the teaching
of Saturninus says that the god of the Jews was one of the (world-creating)
angels. That Saturninus' opinion was derived from or coincided with
that of the Ophites, see Salmon, Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Saturninus.
Hippolytus Naassene also calls Jaldabaoth " a fiery god " and " a fourth
number," op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p: 153, Cruice, in allusion to the text about God
being a consuming fire and to his Tetragrammaton or four-lettered name.
Epiphanius, Haer. xxxvu. c. 4, p. 500, Oehler, says Kal ovtos eart, (fraviv,
6 6(6s tcov 'lovdaiav 6 'laXSa/3ao>0, " And this Ialdabaoth is, they [the
Ophites] say, the God of the Jews."


48 Post-Christian Gnostics: the 0})hites [ch.

be taken from the art of magic, and may be supposed to have
some connection with fire and water respectively 1 . It is prob-
able that the later Ophites identified all these seven heavens
with the seven astrological " planets," i.e. Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon in probably that
order 2 .

How now did the earth on which we live come into being ?
The primitive Babylonians, whose ideas and culture were at
a very early date spread over the whole of Asia Minor, conceived
the earth not as a globe but as a circular boat like the ancient
coracle, over which the heavens stretched like a canopy or
hemisphere 3 . Hence we must regard these heavens of the
planetary powers, Ialdabaoth and his progeny, as a series of
covers fitting one within the other like, in the words of the
Fathers, " juggling cups," or to take another simile, the succes-
sive skins of an onion. The earth stretched below these, but
was at the stage of creation at which we have arrived really
without form and void, being the formless waste of waters which
covered the denser darkness and chaos. The ordered shape
which it afterwards assumed and which we now see, was, in
the Ophite story, the result of the fall of no deity, angel, or
heavenly power, but of Man. Irenaeus' account of this Second
Fall is that the six powers descended from Ialdabaoth began
to quarrel with their progenitor for supremacy — an idea which
perhaps is to be referred either to the Jewish tradition of the
revolt of the angels or with more likelihood to the astrological
ideas about the benefic and malefic planets 4 . This so enraged

1 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 32.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk iv. c. 11.

3 See the picture by Faucher Gudin of the universe according to the
Babylonians in Maspero, Hist. Ancienne des Peuples de VOrient Classique,
Paris, 1895, 1. 1, p. 543.

4 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, pp. 231, 232, Harvey. A sort of echo or perhaps
a more detailed repetition of the story is found in one of the latest documents
of the Pistis Sophia, where Jesus tells Hi3 disciples that the dpxovres or
rulers of Adamas once rebelled and persisted in begetting " archons and
archangels and angels and serving spirits and decans " ; that the 12 aeons,
who are evidently the Signs of the Zodiac, divided into two companies
of six, half of them under the rule of one Jabraoth repenting and being
translated into a higher sphere, while the others were " bound " in our


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 49

him that he glared in his wrath upon the underlying dregs of
matter, and his thought {ewoia) implanted there took birth and
shape 1 . This fresh son of his was possessed of a quality of the
possession of which he himself had never given any evidence,
and was called Nous or Intelligence like the male of Simon's
first syzygy or pair of roots. But he was said to be of serpent
form (o</>tb/iop(/>o?) because, as says theNaassene or Ophite author
quoted by Hippolytus, " the serpent is the personification of
the watery element," and therefore, perhaps, the symbol of
that external ocean which the ancients thought surrounded
the inhabited world 2 . It seems more probable, however, that
the Ophites were compelled to introduce this form because the
serpent was worshipped everywhere in Asia Minor as the type
of the paternal aspect of the earth-goddess' consort 3 . This is
best shown, perhaps, in the Eleusinian legend of Zeus and
Persephone ; but Alexander himself was said to have been
begotten by Zeus in the form of a serpent, and no Phrygian
goddess seems ever to have been portrayed without one 4 . So

firmament under the rule of the five planets. Perhaps the origin of the
whole story is the battle of the Gods and the serpent-footed giants, which
appears on the Mithraic bas-reliefs, for which see P.S.B.A. 1912, p. 134,
and PI. XVI, 7. It is certainly of Asiatic or Anatolian origin, and seems to
be connected with volcanic phenomena. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 13,
p. 192, Cruice, says this rebellion is a " Chaldaean " doctrine.

1 tuv 8e ddvprjcravTa, els ttjv Tpvya rfjs vXrjs epelcrdai ttjp evvoiav, koI
ytwT)<rai vlov 6(pi6fj.op(pov «£ avTr/s, " and [they say that] he being enraged,
beheld his thought in the dregs of matter, and a serpent-formed
son was born from it," Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, p. 232, Harvey. Perhaps
this explains how the Ennoia or Thought of God was supposed to take
definite shape. Other editors wish to read epeibtadat " fixed " for
fptladai.

2 Hippolytus, Bk v. c. 9, p. 178, Cruice.

3 See n. 1, p. 45, supra. So Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 178, Cruice,
when speaking of the Ophites frequenting the mysteries of the Magna
Mater, says that there is no temple anywhere [he means in Phrygia] with-
Ottt a serpent. See Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. pp. 51, 87. As King, Gnostics
and their Remains, p. 225, noted, all the principal cities of Asia Minor,
Ephesus, Apamea and Pergamum depicted serpents on their coins. For
the story of Alexander's birth, see Budge, Alexander the Great (Pseudo-
Callisthenes), p. 8.

4 See Ramsay in last note.

l. n. 4


lOif


50 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

much was this the case that in the Apocryphal Acta Philippi
it is said that sacred serpents were kept in all the heathen
temples in Asia. Hierapolis is, in the same document, called
Ophioryma or the serpent's stronghold, whence idolatry seems
to be spoken of as the Echidna or Viper 1 . The connection of
the serpent with the Sabazian rites has already been mentioned.
This Ophiomorphus, or god in serpent form, was in the
later Ophite teaching the cause not only of man's soul but of
his passions. The Latin text of Irenaeus says that from him
came " the spirit and the soul and all earthly things, whence
all forgetfulness, and malice, and jealousy, and envy, and
death came into being 2 ." This was evidently written under
the influence of the Christian idea that the serpent of Genesis
was Satan or the Devil. But Hippolytus tells us, no doubt
truly, that the Ophiomorphus of the earlier Ophites was in
the opinion of his votaries a benevolent and beneficent power.
After saying that they worship

" nothing else than Naas, whence they are called Naassenes, and
that they say that to this Naas (or serpent) alone is dedicated every
temple, and that he is to be found in every mystery and initiatory
rite," he continues, " They say that nothing of the things that are,
whether deathless or mortal, with or without soul, could exist apart
from him. And all things are set under him, and he is good and
contains all things within himself, as in the horn of the unicorn,
whence beauty and bloom are freely given to all things that exist
according to their nature and relationship 3 ."

It can hardly be doubted that the writer from whom Hippolytus
here quotes is referring to the soul or animating principle of
the world, whom he here and elsewhere identifies with the great
God of the Greek mysteries 4 . Hence it was the casting-down
to this earth of Ophiomorphus which gave it life and shape,

1 Acta Philippi (ed. Teschendorf), passim.

2 dehinc et Spiritum, et animam et omnia mundialia ; inde generatum
omnem oblivionem, et malitiam, et zelum, et invidiam, et mortem. Iren-
aeus, Bk I. c. 28, p. 232, Harvey. So Dionysos, whose emblem (Clem.
Alex. Protrept. c. n.) was the serpent, is identified with the soul of the world.
Cf. Berger, fit-udes sur la Philosophumena, Xancy, 1873, pp. 39 sqq.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 178, Cruice.
* Ibid. Bk v. c. 7, pp. 144, 145, Cruiee.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 51

and thus stamped upon it the impress of the First Man 1 . As
Ophiomorphus was also the child of Ialdabaoth son of Sophia,
the Soul of the World might therefore properly be said to be
drawn from all the three visible worlds 2 .

We come to the creation of man which the Ophites attributed
to the act of Ialdabaoth and the other planetary powers, and
represented as taking place not on the earth, but in some one
or other of the heavens under their sway 3 . According to
Irenaeus — here our only authority — Ialdabaoth boasted that
he was God and Father, and that there was none above him 4 .
His mother Sophia or Prunicos, disgusted at this, cried out
that he lied, inasmuch as there was above him " the Father of
all, the First Man and the Son of Man 5 " ; and that Ialdabaoth
was thereby led on the counsel of the serpent or Ophiomorphus
to say, " Let us make man in our own image 6 ! " Here the
Greek or older text of Irenaeus ends, and our only remaining
guide is the later Latin one, which bears many signs of having
been added to from time to time by some person more zealous
for orthodoxy than accuracy. Such as it is, however, it narrates
at a length which compares very unfavourably with the brevity
and concision of the statements of the Greek text, that Ialda-
baoth's six planetary powers on his command and at the
instigation of Sophia formed an immense man who could only
writhe along the ground until they carried him to Ialdabaoth
who breathed into him the breath of life, thereby parting with'
some of the light that was in himself ; that man " having
thereby become possessed of intelligence (Nous) and desire
(Enthymesis) abandoned his makers and gave thanks to the
First Man " ; that Ialdabaoth on this in order to deprive man
of the light he had given him created Eve out of his own
desire ; that the other planetary powers fell in love with her

1 Is this the origin of the ideas on the Macrocosm and the Microcosm ?
See Chapter XIII, infra.

2 See n. 3, p. 41, supra.

3 Cf . Charles, Book of the Secrets of Enoch, pp. 7, 57.

* Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, p. 232, Harvey.

5 It is curious that she did not also mention herself or the First Woman.

• This is the story of the earliest or Greek text ; the Latin says that he
said it to divert the minds of his rebellious sons.

4—2


52 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

beauty and begot from her sons who are called angels ; and
finally, that the serpent induced Adam and Eve to transgress
Ialdabaoth's command not to eat of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge 1 . On their doing so, he cast them out of Paradise,
and threw them down to this world together with the serpent
or Ophiomorphus. All this was done by the secret contrivance
of Sophia, whose object throughout was to win back the light
and return it to the highest world whence it had originally
come. Her manner of doing so seems to have been some-
what roundabout, for it involved the further mingling of light
with matter, and even included the taking away by her of
light from Adam and Eve when turned out of Paradise and
the restoring it to them when they appeared on this earth —
a proceeding which gave them to understand that they had
become clothed with material bodies in which their stay would
be only temporary 2 . Cain's murder of Abel was brought about
by the same agency, as was the begettal of Seth, ancestor of
the existing human race. We further learn that the serpent
who was cast down got under him the angels begotten upon
Eve by the planetary powers, and brought into existence six
sons who, with himself, form " the seven earthly demons."
These are the adversaries of mankind, because it was on account
of man that their father was cast down ; and " this serpent
is called Michael and Sammael 3 ." Later Ialdabaoth sent the

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, pp. 232-234, Harvey. This Adam is of course
not to be confused with Adamas. Neither did he resemble the Adam of
Genesis, for he is described as being immen-sum latitudine et longitudine.
Harvey, ubi cit., gives many parallels to this from the Talmud and Cabala,
which must be either taken directly from the Ophite author or borrowed from
a common source. For Eve's creation, see n. 2, p. 58, supra.

1 Cf. the vestures of light belonging to Jesus in the Pistis Sophia,.
Chapter X, infra. So Philo, Quaest. el Sol. in Gen. c. 53, explains that the
coats of skin made by God for Adam and Eve are a " figure of speech "
for a material body. Origen, in like manner (cont. Cels. Bk iv. c. 40), says
that the clothing of the protoplasts in tunics of skin covers " a certain
secret and mystic doctrine far exceeding Plato's of the soul losing its wing3
and being borne to earth."

8 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, pp. 234-236, Harvey. The idea of the seven
evil demons is a very old one in the East. See the Babylonian story of
the assault of the seven evil spirits on the Moon. Sayce, Gijford Lectures*


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 53

Flood, sought out Abraham, and gave the Law to the Jews.
In this, as in everything, he was opposed by his mother Sophia,
who saved Noah, made the Prophets prophesy of Christ, and
even arranged that John the Baptist and Jesus should be born,
the one from Elizabeth and the other from the Virgin Mary 1 .
In all this, it is difficult not to see a later interpolation introduced
for the purpose of incorporating with the teaching of the earlier
Ophites the Biblical narrative, of which they were perhaps only
fully informed through Apostolic teaching 2 . It is quite possible
that this interpolation may be taken from the doctrine of the
Sethians, which Irenaeus expressly couples in this chapter with
that of the Ophites, and which, as given by Hippolytus, contains
many Jewish but no Christian features 3 . Many of the stories
in this interpolation seem to have found their way into the
Talmud and the later Cabala, as well as into some of the Mani-
chaean books.

So far, then, the Ophites succeeded in accounting to their
satisfaction for the origin of all things, the nature of the Deity,
the origin of the universe, and for that of man's body. But
they still had to account in detail for the existence of the soul
or incorporeal part of man. Irenaeus, as we have seen, attributes
it to Ophiomorphus, but although this may have been the belief
of the Ophites of his time, the Naassenes assigned it a more
complicated origin. They divided it, as Hippolytus tells us,
into three parts which were nevertheless one, no doubt corre-
sponding to the threefold division that we have before seen
running through all nature into angelic, psychic, and earthly 4 .

1902, p. 430, in which those who like to rationalize ancient myths can see
a lunar eclipse. We meet again with Sammael and Michael as names of
one of them in the diagram to be described later.

1 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, p. 237, Harvey.

2 The LXX or Greek version of the Old Testament belongs to tne
Western Diaspora rather than to the Eastern. Perhaps this was why Paul
and Barnabas in addressing the Phrygians were careful to give them a
summary of Old Testament history. See Acts xiii. 16 sqq.

3 The Sethians had a book called the Paraphrase of Seth now lost,
which from its name may easily have been a heretical version of the Book
of Genesis. See Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 21, p. 223, Cruice.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 145, Cruice, says that this was first
taught by the " Assyrians," by which he evidently means the Syrians.


54 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

The angelic part is brought by Christos, who is, as we have
seen, the angel or messenger of the triune Deity, into " the
form of clay 1 , " the psychic we may suppose to be fashioned
with the body by the planetary powers, and the earthly is
possibly thought to be the work of the earthly demons hostile
to man 2 . Of these last two parts, however, we hear nothing
directly, and their existence can only be gathered from the
difference here strongly insisted upon between things " celestial
earthly and infernal." But the conveyance of the angelic soul
to the body Hippolytus' Ophite writer illustrates by a bold
figure from what Homer in the Odyssey says concerning
Hermes in his character of psychopomp or leader of souls 3 .
As to the soul or animating principle of the world, Hippolytus
tells us that the Ophites did not seek information concerning
it and its nature from the Scriptures, where indeed they would
have some difficulty in finding any, but from the mystic rites
alike of the Greeks and the Barbarians 4 ; and he takes us in
turns through the mysteries of the Syrian worshippers of Adonis,
of the Phrygians, the Egyptian (or rather Alexandrian) wor-
shippers of Osiris, of the Cabiri of Samothrace, and finally
those celebrated at Eleusis, pointing out many things which
he considers as indicating the Ophites' own peculiar doctrine
on this point 5 . That he considers the god worshipped in all
these different mysteries to be one and the same divinity seems
plain from a hymn which he quotes as a song of " the great
Mysteries," and which the late Prof. Conington turned into
English verse 6 . So far as any sense can be read into an

1 TrXacrfxa to tttjXivov, Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 153, Cruice.

2 This is certainly the opinion of the sect responsible for one of the later
documents of the Pistis Sophia. See Pistis Sophia, pp. 346, 347, Copt.
So Rossi's Trattato gnostico, before quoted, speaks throughout of Satan or
the chief of the powers of evil as the apxTjirXaa^a *' originator of the form " ?

3 Hippolytus, see n. 1, supra.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 144, Cruice.

* Ibid. Bk v. c. 8, pp. 157-173, Cruice.
6 Son of Saturn, son of Jove

Or born of mighty Rhea's love.

Holy name, that sounds so dear

To that ancient Rhea's ear. [Thee


vni] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 55

explanation made doubly hard for us by our ignorance of what
really took place in the rites the Ophite writer describes, or
of any clear account of his own tenets, he seems to say that
the many apparently obscene and sensual scenes that he alludes
to, cover the doctrine that man's soul is part of the universal
soul diffused through Nature and eventually to be freed from
all material contact and united to the Deity ; whence it is
only those who abstain from the practice of carnal generation
who can hope to be admitted to the highest heaven 1 . All this
is illustrated by many quotations not only from the heathen
poets and philosophers, but also from the Pentateuch, the
Psalms, the Jewish Prophets, and from the Canonical Gospels
and St Paul's Epistles.

Thee the old Assyrians [read Syrians] all

The thrice-wept Adonis call.

To thee for name has Egypt given

The holy horned moon of heaven [Osiris].

Thou the serpent-god of Greece

The all reverenced Adam thou of Samothrace.

Thee the Lydians, Phrygians thee,

Invoke, the Corybantic deity.

Thee Pappas now and now the dead,

Now lifting up reborn the god-like head.

Unfruitful now or barren desert brown,

Now the rich golden harvest mowing down.

Or whom the blossoming almond-tree

Brought forth on the free hills the piper wild to be.

Attis, old Rhea's son I sing

Not with the wild bell's clashing ring

Nor Ida's fife, in whose shrill noise

The old Curetae still rejoice ;

But with the mingling descant sweet

Of Phoebus' harp, so soft, so sweet,

Evan ! Evan ! Pan, I call !

Evan the wild Bacchanal :

Or that bright Shepherd that on high

Folds the white stars up in the silent sky.

Quarterly Review, June, 1851.

1 irdvv yap irucpas kcu n((j>v\aypeva>s irapayytXkov<Tiv dWxf<r#at as

diroKfKoppivoi ttjs Trpos yvva7<a opiXias. " For they very strictly enjoin

that their followers should abstain, as if they were castrated, from

companying with women," Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 177, Cruice.


56 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

The connection of such a system with orthodox Christianity
seems at first sight remote enough, but it must be remembered
that Hippolytus was not endeavouring to explain or record
the Ophite beliefs as a historian would have done, but to hold
them up to ridicule and, as he describes it, to " refute " them.
Yet there can be no doubt that the Ophites were Christians or
followers of Christ who accepted without question the Divine
Mission of Jesus, and held that only through Him could they
attain salvation. The difference between them and the orthodox
in respect to this was that salvation was not, according to
them, offered freely to all, but was on the contrary a magical
result following automatically upon complete initiation and
participation in the Mysteries 1 . Texts like " Strait is the way
and narrow is the gate that leadeth into eternal life " and " Not
every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven " were laid hold of by them as showing
that complete salvation was confined to a few highly instructed
persons, who had had the sense to acquire the knowledge of
the nature of the Deity and of the topography of the heavenly
places which underlay the ceremonies of the Mysteries. Such
an one, they said after his death would be born again not with
a fleshly but with a spiritual body and passing through the
gate of heaven would become a god 2 . It does not follow,
however, that those who did not obtain this perfect gnosis
would be left, as in some later creeds, to reprobation. The
cry of " all things in heaven, on earth, and below the earth 3 "
that the discord of this world 4 might be made to cease, which

Tovricm, (pjjo~iv, ov8t\s tovtoiv tcov pvarrjpiav dxpoaTT/s yiyovtv el pr]
fiovoi ol yvcoo-TiKo\ TfXetoi. " This he (the Xaassene writer) says signifies
that none was a hearer of these mysteries save only the perfect Gnostics,"
Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, p. 144, Cruice. The " this " refers to the
text : " He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."

(K to>v aapdreov ro>v xo'ikcov dvayfvirqdevres irvevpariKoX oil aapKiKoi
" being born again from the earthly body, not as fleshly but as spiritual

men Oi 8e avroi, (prjai, <&pvy(s rov avrov ttoXiv «'(c p.eTa,3o\?is Xeyovai

6f6v. " For the Phrygians themselves declare, he says, that he who is
ihus reborn is by reason of the change a god," Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v.
c. 8, pp. 165, 166, Cruice. Cf. Berger, Etudes, etc. p. 27.

rav e'irovpavicov koi cntyfiaiv kcii Kara^dovicoi' .

TijV do~vp(f)aiv[av tov <6o~pov.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 57

the Naassene author quoted by Hippolytus daringly connects
with the name of Pappas given by the Phrygians to Sabazius
or Dionysos, would one day be heard, and the Apocatastasis /
or return of the world to the Deity would then take place 1 .
If we may judge from the later envelopments of the Ophite
teaching this was to be when the last spiritual man (iru€v/j.aTiKo<i)
or perfect Gnostic had been withdrawn from it. In the mean-
time those less gifted would after death pass through the
planetary worlds of Ialdabaoth until they arrived at his heaven
or sphere, and would then be sent down to the earth to be
reincarnated in other bodies. Whether those who had attained
some knowledge of the Divine nature without arriving at
perfect Gnosis would or would not be rewarded with some
sort of modified beatitude or opportunity of better instruction
is not distinctly stated, but it is probable that the Ophites
thought that they would 2 . For just as those who have been
admitted into the Lesser Mysteries at Eleusis ought to pause
and then be admitted into the " great and heavenly ones,"
the progress of the Ophite towards the Deity must be pro-
gressive. They who participate in these heavenly mysteries,
says the Naassene author, receive greater destinies than the
others 3 .

It might seem, therefore, that the Mysteries or secret rites
of the heathens contained in themselves all that was necessary
for redemption, and this was probably the Ophite view so
far as the return of the universe to the bosom of the Deity
and the consequent wiping out of the consequences of the
unfortunate fall of Sophia or Prunicos were concerned. A
tradition preserved by Irenaeus says that Sophia herself " when
she had received a desire for the light above her, laid down
the body she had received from matter — which was, as we have

1 Hippolytus, op. et loc. cit. p. 165, Cruice.

2 The Naassene writer says that the peace preached " to those that are
afar off " of Ephesians ii. 17, refers to rols vXikoIs nal xo'inols " to the
material and earthly," and that " to those that are near " to rols TrvevpaTi-
koIs Kai votpols reXeiois dvdpairots " to the spiritual and understanding
perfect men." Hippolytus, op. et loc. cit.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, pp. 172, 173, Cruice.


58 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

seen, the visible heaven — and was freed from it 1 ." But this
seems to be an addition which is not found in the Greek version,
and is probably taken from some later developments of the
Ophite creed. It is plain, however, that the whole scheme
of nature as set forth in the opinions summarized above is
represented as contrived for the winning-back of the light —
for which we may, if we like, read life — from matter, and this
is represented as the work of Sophia herself. The futile attempt
of the arrogant and jealous Ialdabaoth to prolong his rule by
the successive creation of world after world, of the archetypal
or rather protoplasmic Adam, and finally of Eve, whereby the
light is dispersed through matter more thoroughly but in ever-
diminishing portions 2 , is turned against him by his mother
Sophia, the beneficent ruler of the planetary worlds, who even
converts acquaintance with the " carnal generation " which
he has invented into a necessary preparation for the higher
mysteries 3 . Thus Hippolytus tells us that the Naassenes

" frequent the so-called mysteries of the Great Mother, thinking
that through what is performed there, they see clearly the whole
mystery. For they have no complete advantage from the things
there performed except that they are not castrated. [Yet] they
fully accomplish the work of the castrated [i.e. the Galli]. For
they most strictly and carefully preach that one should abstain

1 Cum accepisset concupiscentiam superioris luminis, et virtutem sump-
sisset per omnia, deposuisse corpus et liberatam ah eo. Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28,
p. 229, Harvey. As he goes on to say : Corpus autem hoc exuisse dicunt
earn, foeminam a foemina nominant, it is plain that he is here referring to
the Third or Lower Sophia who was one of the personages in the Valentinian
drama and unknown, so far as we can tell, to the Ophites. The Latin
translator is no doubt responsible for this confusion.

2 That this was the object of Ialdabaoth in creating Eve is plain from
Irenaeus' Latin text (Bk I. c. 28, p. 233, Harvey) : Zelantem autem Ialda-
baoth voluisse ezcogitare evacuare hominem per foeminam, et de sua Enthy-
mesi eduxisse foeminam, quam ilia Prunicos suscipiens invisibiliter evacuavit
a virtute. He then goes on to relate the seduction of the archons which
plays so large a part in the Enochian literature, and which is made Sophia's
contrivance for nullifying the command to " Increase and multiply " in
Genesis.

3 ra fitKpa. fivarijpia ra rrjs (rapjctK^s ytvio-faas : Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk V.
c. 8, p. 172, Cruice.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 59

from all companying with woman, as do the castrated. And the
rest of the work, as we have said at length, they perform like the
castrated 1 ."

So far, then, as the general scheme of the redemption of
light from matter is concerned, there seems to have been no
fundamental necessity in the Ophite view for the Mission of
Jesus. But they assigned to Him a great and predominant
part in hastening the execution of the scheme, and thus bringing
about the near approach of the kingdom of heaven. We
have seen that Sophia provided in spite of Ialdabaoth for the
birth of the man Jesus from the Virgin Mary, and the Naassene
author said that

I into this body of Jesus there withdrew and descended things
intellectual, and psychic, and earthly : and these three Men (i.e.
the First Man, the Son of Man, and Christos) speak together through
Him each from his proper substance unto those who belong to
each 2 ."

The Latin text of Irenaeus amplifies the statement considerably
and says that Prunicus, as it calls Sophia, finding no rest in
heaven or earth, invoked the aid of her mother the First Woman.
This power, having pity on her repentance, implored the First
Man to send Christos to her assistance. This prayer was
granted, and Christos descended from the Pleroma to his sister
Sophia, announced his coming through John the Baptist,
prepared the baptism of repentance, and beforehand fashioned
Jesus, so that when Christos came down he might find a pure
vessel, and that by Ialdabaoth her own son, the " woman "
might be announced by Christ. The author quoted by Irenaeus
goes on to say that Christ descended through each of the seven
heavens or planetary worlds in the likeness of its inhabitants,
and thus took away much of their power. For the sprinkling
of light scattered among them rushed to him, and when he
came down into this world he clothed his sister Sophia with
it, and they exulted over each other, which they (the Ophites)
" describe as the [meeting of] the bridegroom and the bride."

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 177, Cruice.

2 Ibid. Bk v. c. 6, p. 140, Cruice.


60 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

But " Jesus being begotten from the Virgin by the operation
of God was wiser, purer, and juster than all men. Christos
united to Sophia descended into Him [on His baptism] and so
Jesus Christ was made 1 ."

Jesus then began to heal the sick, to announce the unknown
Father, and to reveal Himself as the Son of the first man.
This angered the princes of the planetary worlds and their
progenitor, Ialdabaoth, who contrived that He should be killed.
As He was being led away for this purpose, Christos with
Sophia left Him for the incorruptible aeon 2 or highest heaven.
Jesus was crucified ; but Christos did not forget Him and sent
a certain power to Him, who raised Him in both a spiritual
and psychic body, sending the worldly parts back into the world.
After His Resurrection, Jesus remained upon earth eighteen
months, and perception descending into Him taught what
was clear. These things He imparted to a few of his disciples
whom He knew to be capable of receiving such great mysteries,
and He was then received into heaven. Christos sate down
at the right hand of Ialdabaoth that he might, unknown to
this last, take to himself the souls of those who have known
these mysteries, after they have put off their worldly flesh.
Thus Ialdabaoth cannot in future hold holy souls that he may
send them down again into the age [i.e. this aeon] ; but only
those which are from his own substance, that is, which he has

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, § 6, p. 238, Harvey. The section is given almost
word for word as in Irenaeus ; but it is manifestly taken from some other
source than that of the Greek text, and is inconsistent with the rest of the
story. If the Lower Sophia or Prunicos (the Substitute) were born from the
mere boiling over of the light shed upon her mother, of what had she to
" repent " ? In the Pistis Sophia, indeed, the heroine wins her way back
to her former estate by repentance, but her fall has been occasioned by dis-
obedience and ambition. So, too, the story about Jesus changing His form
on His descent through the seven heavens is common to the story of Pistis
Sophia and the legend of Simon Magus, which two it therefore connect
(see Chapter VI, vol. I. p. 191, n. 4). It also appears in the Ascension of
Isaiah which Mr Charles thinks may be dated about 150 a.d. (see Charles,
Ascension of Isaiah, 1900, pp. xi and 62), but which is probably of much
later date. There are other features to be noted in their place common
to the Pistis Sophia and the last named work.

2 That is to say, that which does not perish and return to the Deity.


vra] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 61

himself breathed into bodies. When all the sprinkling of light
is thus collected, it will be taken up into the incorruptible
aeon. The return to Deity will then be complete, and matter
will probably be destroyed. In any case, it will have lost the
light which alone gives it life 1 .

What rites or form of worship were practised by these
Ophites we do not know, although Epiphanius preserves a
story that they were in the habit of keeping a tame serpent
in a chest which at the moment of the consecration of their
Eucharist was released and twined itself round the con-
secrated bread 2 . Probably the very credulous Bishop of
Constantia was misled by some picture or amulet depicting
a serpent with his tail in its mouth surrounding an orb or
globe which represents the mundane egg of the Orphics. In
this case the serpent most likely represented the external
ocean which the ancients thought surrounded the habitable
world like a girdle. But the story, though probably untrue,
is some evidence that the later Ophites used, like all post-
Christian Gnostics, to practise a ceremony resembling the
Eucharist, and certainly administered also the rite of baptism
which is alluded to above in the tale of the descent of Christos.
Hippolytus also tells us that they used to sing many hymns
to the First Man ; and he gives us a " psalm " composed by

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, § 7, pp. 238-241, Harvey. This again is given
almost verbatim. The stay of Jesus on earth after His Resurrection, and
His teaching His disciples " quod liquidum est," that is, without parable,
is also told in the Pistis Sophia, but His post-Resurrection life is there
put at 12 years. Irenaeus' Latin translator has, as has been said, evidently
here got hold of some later developments of Ophitism not known to his
author at the time that the Greek text was written. Yet some tradition
of a long interval between the Resurrection and the Ascension was evidently
current in the sub-Apostolic age. Irenaeus himself says on the authority
of " those who met with John the Disciple of the Lord in Asia " that Jesus'
ministry only lasted for one year from His Baptism, He being then 30
years old, and that He suffered on completing his 30th year ; yet that He
taught until He was 40 or 50 years old. See Irenaeus, Bk n. c. 33, § 3,
p. 331, Harvey. Some part of this statement appears in the Greek text.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. xxxvn. c. 5, p. 502, Oehler. Epiphanius, although
generally untrustworthy, had been, as M. de Faye reminds us, a Nicolaitan
in his youth. See de Faye, Introd. p. 116.


62 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

them which, as he thinks, " comprehends all the mysteries
of their error 1 ." Unfortunately in the one text of the Philo-
sophmnena which we have, it is given in so corrupt a form
that the first German editor declared it to be incapable of
restoration. It may perhaps be translated thus :

The generic law of the Whole was the first Intelligence of all
The second [creation?] was the poured-forth Chaos of the First-born
And the third and labouring soul obtains the law as her portion

Wherefore clothed in watery form [Behold]

The loved one subject to toil [and] death

Now, having lordship, she beholds the Light

Then cast forth to piteous state, she weeps.

Now she weeps and now rejoices

Now she weeps and now is judged

Now she is judged and now is dying

Now no outlet is found, the unhappy one

Into the labyrinth of woes has wandered.

But Jesus said : Father, behold !

A strife of woes upon earth

From thy spirit has fallen

But he [i.e. man ?] seeks to fly the malignant chaos

And knows not how to break it up.

For his sake, send me, Father ;

Having the seals, I will go down

Through entire aeons I will pass,

All mysteries I will open

And the forms of the gods I will display,

The secrets of the holy Way

Called knowledge [Gnosis], I will hand down.

It is probable that this psalm really did once contain a
summary of the essential parts of the Ophite teaching. In
whatever way we may construe the first three lines, which
were probably misunderstood by the scribe of the text before us,
there can hardly be a doubt that they disclose a triad of three
powers engaged in the work of salvation 2 . The fall of Sophia

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 10, pp. 182-184, Cruice.

2 Cruice, op. el he. cit. p. 152, n. 3, remarks that the Supreme Triad
here shown is to voepuv, rb xolkov, to -^v^i-^ov " the intellectual, the
earthly, and the psychic or animal" This may be ; but there is no


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 63

seems also to be alluded to in unmistakable terms, while the
Mission of Jesus concludes the poem. Jesus, not here dis-
tinguished from the Christos or Heavenly Messenger of the
Trinity, is described as sent to the earth for the purpose of
bringing hither certain " mysteries " which will put man on
the sacred path of Gnosis and thus bring about the redemption
of his heavenly part from the bonds of matter. These " mys-
teries " were, as appears in Hippolytus and elsewhere, sacra-
ments comprising baptism, unction, and a ceremony at least
outwardly resembling the Christian Eucharist or Lord's Supper 1 .
These had the magical effect, already attributed by the Orphics
to their own homophagous feast, of changing the recipient's
place in the scale of being and transforming him ipso facto
into something higher than man. That the celebration of
these mysteries was attended with the deepest secrecy accounts
at once for their being nowhere described in detail by Hippo-
lytus' Ophite author, and also for the stories which were current
among all the heresiological writers of filthy and obscene rites*.
Fortified by these mysteries, and by the abstinences and the
continence which they entailed — at all events theoretically,
and as a counsel of perfection — the Ophite could attend, as
we have seen, all the ceremonies of the still pagan Anatolians
or of the Christian Church indifferently, conscious that he alone
understood the inner meaning of either.

Another practice of the Ophites has accidentally come
down to us which deserves some mention. The division of
the universe into three parts, i.e. angelic, psychic, and earthly,
which we have already seen in germ in the system of Simon

proof that the Ophites ever gave Chaos or unformed Matter a place
in it, or made it the next principle to their Supreme Being. Probably
for the supposed " Chaos " in the second line of the Psalm should be
substituted some words like " the projected Thought " of the Father.
Miller has some curious remarks quoted in the same note on the metre of
the Psalm, which he points out is the same as in a poem of Lucian's, and in
the hymns of Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, already mentioned.

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 148 ; ibid. c. 9, p. 181, Cruice. They
probably resembled the ceremonies described at length in the Pistis Sophia
and the Bruce Papyrus. See Chapter X, infra.

2 See p. 18 supra.


64 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [oh.

Magus, was by the Ophites carried so much further than by him
that it extended through the whole of nature, and seriously
affected their scheme of redemption. Father Giraud, as we have
seen, goes so far as to say that in the opinion of Naassenes,
matter hardly existed, and that they thought that not only did
Adamas, or the first man, enter into all things, but that in their
opinion all things were contained within him 1 . This pantheistic
doctrine may have been current in Phrygia and traces of it
may perhaps be found in the Anatolian worship of nature ;
but the words of the Naassene psalm quoted above show that
the Naassenes, like all the post- Christian Gnostics of whom we
know anything, thought that matter not only had an inde-
pendent existence, but was essentially malignant and opposed
to God. They divided, as we have seen, the universe which
came forth from Him into three parts of which the angelic,
noetic, or pneumatic included, apparently, nothing but the
Pleroma or Fulness of the Godhead consisting of the Trinity
of Father, Son and Mother with their messenger Christos.
Then followed the second, psychic, or planetary world, containing
the heaven of Sophia with beneath it the holy hebdomad or
seven worlds of Ialdabaoth and his descendants 2 . Below this
came, indeed, the choic, earthly, or terrestrial world, containing
some sparks of the light bestowed upon it consciously by Sophia
and unconsciously by Ialdabaoth, and inhabited by mortal
men. But this world was the worst example of the " discord "
(davfi(f>a)via), or as it was called later, the "confusion"
(icepacrfios), caused by the mingling of light with matter, and
as such was doomed to extinction and to eternal separation from
the Divine 3 . In like manner, the soul of man consisted of three

1 Giraud, op. cit. p. 95.

2 Sanctam autem hebdomadam septem stellas, quas dicunt planetas,
esse volunt. Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 28, § 5, p. 236, Harvey.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, p. 159, Cruice, says that the " nothing "
said in John i. 3, 4 to have been made without the Word is in fact this
world. To Se "ouSeV," 6 X W P IS avrov yeyovcv, 6 Kocrpos 18ik6s ecrriv yiyovtv
yap x<»pts avrov viro rplrov <al Ttrdprov. "But the 'nothing ' which came into
being without Him is the world of form ; for it came into being without
Him by the Third and Fourth " — these last being evidently Sophia and
Jaldabaoth respectively.


viii] Port-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 65

parts corresponding to the three worlds, that is to say, the
pneumatic, psychic, and earthly ; and of these three, the last
was doomed to extinction. Only by laying aside his earthly
part as Jesus had done and becoming entirely pneumatic, could
man attain to the light and become united with the Godhead.
But to do so, his soul must first pass from choic to psychic and
thence to pneumatic, or, as the Naassene author quoted bv
Hippolytus puts it, must be born again and must enter in at
the gate of heaven 1 .

This rebirth or passage of the soul from the choic to the
psychic, and thence to the pneumatic, was, as has been said,
the work of the mysteries, especially of those new ones which
the Ophite Jesus or Christos had brought to earth with Him
from above. The process by which these " changes of the
soul " were brought about was, according to the Naassenes,
I set forth in the Gospel according to the Egyptians 2 ." The
only quotation pertinent to the matter which we have from
this lost work is one preserved for us by Clement of Alexandria
which refers to the coming of a heavenly age " when the two
shall be made one, and the male with the female neither male
nor female 3 " — a saying which seems to refer to the time when
all the light now scattered among the lower worlds shall return
to the androgyne Adamas from whom it once issued. But it
is probable that this gospel only described the upward passage
of the soul in figures and parables probably conveyed in texts
of the Canonical Gospel divorced from their context and their
natural meaning, as in the Naassene author quoted by Hippo-
lytus. Such a gospel might be a sufficient means of instruction

1 Ov 8vuarai oiiv, (pr/ai, (ra>6r]vai 6 Te'Xfiof avOpwros, eav p>) dvaytwrjOr/
dta ravTT)s tlo-fXdwv rijs irv\r]s. " The perfect [or initiated] man, he says,
therefore cannot be saved unless he be born again, entering in through
this gate." Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, p. 165, Cruice.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 144, Cruice.

3 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk m. c. 13, and n. 2, p. 196, Chapter VI, vol. I.
The out( apptv ovre $rj\v of this passage and of Clement's Second Epistle to
the Romans (Hilgenfeld, N.T. extra canon, pt i, p. 79) is compared by
the Naassene author (Hipp. op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 146, Cruice) with the
emasculation of Attis, which is made a type of the soul " passing from the
material parts of the lower creation to the eternal substance above."

l. n. 5


66 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [en.

for the living, who could puzzle out its meaning with the help
of their mystagogues or priests 1 ; but it must always have
been difficult for the best-instructed to remember the great
complications of worlds, planets, and celestial powers that lay
at the root of it. How difficult then must it have been thought
for the disembodied soul to find its way through the celestial
places, and to confront the " guardians of the gate " of each
with proof of his exalted rank in the scale of being ? What
was wanted was some guide or clue that the dead could take
with him like the Booh of the Dead of the ancient Egyptians,
some memory or survival of which had evidently come down
to the Alexandrian worship 2 , or like the gold plates which we
have seen fulfilling the same office among the worshippers of
the Orphic gods 3 .

That the Ophites possessed such documents we have proof
from the remarks of the Epicurean Celsus, who may have
flourished in the reign of Hadrian (a.d. 117 — 138) 4 . In his
attack on Christianity called The True Discourse, he charges
the Christians generally with possessing a " diagram " in which
the passage of the soul after death through the seven heavens
is portrayed. Origen, in refuting this Epicurean's arguments
more than a century later, denies that the Church knew anything
of such a diagram, and transfers the responsibility for it to
what he calls " a very insignificant sect called Ophites 5 ." He

1 The Naassenes had priests. Ol ovv it pels kclI irpoaraTai. tov Boyparos
yeyevqvrai npcoroi ol eirLKk-qGevres Saaaarfvoi. " The priests and chiefs of the
doctrine have been the first who were called Naassenes." Hippolytus,
op. cit. Bk v. c. 6, p. 139, Cruice. Cf. also p. 77, infra.

2 As we have seen, Aelius Aristides says the devotees of the Alexandrian
gods used to bury holy books in their tombs. See Chapter II, vol. i.
p. 60, supra.

3 See Chapter IV, supra.

4 I have taken the earliest date for which there is any probability,
because it was in Hadrian's time that most of the great Gnostics taught,
and their speculations would therefore have been most likely to come to
heathen ears. Keim, Celsus Wahres Wort, Zurich, 1873, however, makes
the date of the book 177-178 a.d., and this seems supported by the latest
critics. See Patrick, Apology of Origen, 1892, p. 9, where the question is
thoroughly examined.

5 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 24.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 67

further says that he has himself seen this diagram and he
gives a detailed description of it sufficient to enable certain
modern writers to hazard a guess as to what it must have looked
like 1 . It seems to have been chiefly composed of circles, those
in the uppermost part — which Celsus says were those " above
the heavens " — being two sets of pairs. Each pair consisted
of two concentric circles, one pair being inscribed, according
to Origen, Father-and-Son, and according to Celsus, " a greater
and a less" which Origen declares means the same thing 2 . By
the side of this was the other pair, the outer circle here being
coloured yellow and the inner blue ; while between the two
pairs was a barrier drawn in the form of a double-bladed axe 3 .

1 See Matter, Histoire du Gnosticisme, Paris, 1843, PI. Ill, and Giraud,
op. cit. PL facing p. 238.

2 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vr. c. 38. The fact is significant as showing
that the Ophites considered the Son as contained within the Father.

3 e it iy fypa^ijxivov didcppayfia TreXtKouidel axfipari, Origen, op. et loc. cit.
The TTtXeKvs or double-bladed axe was the symbol of Zeus Labrandos
of Caria, and is often met with on the coins of Asia Minor, while it seems to
have played a prominent part in the worship of Minoan Crete and in
Mycenae. See Arthur Evans, Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult, 1901,
pp. 8-12. Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. c. 91, thinks that Savazos or Sabazios
was called in Phrygia Lairbenos, which may be connected with the word
Lahrys said to be the name of the double axe. He found a god with this
weapon worshipped together with Demeter or Cybele in the Milyan country,
op. cit. pp. 263, 264, and he thinks the pair appear under the different
names of Leto, Artemis, Cybele, and Demeter on the one hand, and Apollo,
Lairbenos, Sabazios, Men, and Attis on the other throughout Asia Minor.
He points out, however, that they were only the male and female aspects of a
single divinity {op. cit. 93, 94). Is it possible that this is the explanation
of the double axe as a divine symbol ? The axe with one blade was the
ordinary Egyptian word-sign for a god (see P.S.B.A. 1899, pp. 310, 311)
and the double axe might easily mean a god with a double nature. If
this idea were at all prevalent in Anatolia at the beginning of our era, it
would explain Simon Magus' mysterious allusion to the flaming sword of
Genesis iii. 24, " which turns both ways to guard the Tree of Life," and is
somehow connected with the division of mankind into sexes. See Hip-
polytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 17, p. 260, Cruice. A very obscure Coptic text
which its discoverer, M. de Mely, calls " Le Livre des Cyranides " {C. R. de
VAcad. des Inscriptions, Mai--Juin, 1904, p. 340) gives a hymn to the
vine said to be sung in the Mysteries of Bacchus in which the " mystery of
the axe " is mentioned.

5—2


68 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

"Above this last" Origen says "was a smaller circle inscribed
'Love,' and below it another touching it with the word ' Life.' And
on the second circle, which was intertwined with and included two
other circles, another figure like a rhomboid ' The Forethought of
Sophia.' And within their (?) point of common section was 'the
Nature of Sophia.' And above their point of common section was
a circle, on which was inscribed ' Knowledge,' and lower down
another on which was the inscription ' Comprehension V "

There is also reference made by Origen to " The Gates of
Paradise," and a flaming sword depicted as the diameter of
a flaming circle and guarding the tree of knowledge and of life ;
but nothing is said of their respective places in the diagram.

Jacques Matter, whose Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme
appeared in 1843, without its author having the benefit of
becoming acquainted with Hippolytus' Philosophumena, which
tells us so much as to the doctrines of the Naassenes or early
Ophites, and Father Giraud, who has on the contrary drawn
largely from it, and whose dissertation on the Ophites was
published in 1884, have both given pictorial representations
of the Ophite diagram. Although they differ somewhat in
the arrangement of the circles, both are agreed that the blue
and yellow circles signify the Holy Spirit and Christos. The
Pleroma or Fulness of the Godhead consisting of Father, Son
and Holy Spirit, with the Christos their messenger, therefore
seems figured in these two pairs of circles. Both Matter and
Father Giraud also arrange four other circles labelled respec-
tively Knowledge, Nature, Wisdom, and Comprehension (ITWo-;?,
<&vcri<;, 1o<f)ia, and Ivpeais) within one large one with a border
of intertwined lines which they call the Forethought of Sophia
(Upovoui lochias). This may be the correct rendering, but
it is hardly warranted by Origen's words given above, nor do
we know of any powers, aeons, or other entities in the Ophite
system called Gnosis or Physis 2 . In any event, however, it

1 Origen, op. et loc. tit. The names of the circles, etc., in the original
are from above downwards : \\yairtj, Z<or h npovota 2o<frias, rVaxm, 2o<£('a,
4>t'crij, and "2vvt<ris.

2 Gnosis does appear in the Xaassene Psalm given in this Chapter, but
only as the name of the " Holy Way."


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 69

is fairly clear that this part of the diagram represents the
Sophia who fell from the Holy Spirit into matter, and that
her natural or first place should be the heaven stretched out
above the seven planetary worlds. Yet Irenaeus tells us that
the Ophites he describes thought that Sophia succeeded finally
in struggling free from the body of matter and that the super-
planetary firmament represented merely the lifeless shell she
had abandoned 1 . This is, perhaps, the view taken by the
framers of the diagram.

However that may be, Origen's discourse agrees with Celsus
in describing a " thick black line marked Gehenna or Tartarus "
which cuts, as he says, the diagram in two. This is specially
described by Celsus ; and if it surprises anyone to find it thus
placed above the planetary heavens, it can only be said that
later Gnostics, including those who are responsible for the
principal documents of the Pistis Sophia to be presently men-
tioned, put one of the places where souls were tortured in
" the Middle Way " which seems above, and not, like the
classical Tartarus, below the earth 2 . Below this again, come
the seven spheres of the planets dignified by the names of
Horaios, Ailoaios, Astaphaios, Sabaoth, Iao, Ialdabaoth and
Adonai respectively. These names are, indeed, those given
in Irenaeus as the names of the descendants of Sophia, although
the order there given is different. As to the meaning of them,
Origen declares that Ialdabaoth, Horaios, and Astaphaios are
taken from magic and that the others are (the Hebrew) names
of God 3 . But it should be noticed that Origen is in this place
silent as to their situation in the diagram, and that those assigned

1 See n. 1, p. 58 supra.

2 In this it is following strictly the tradition of the Enochian literature.
" And we ascended to the firmament, I and he, and there I saw Sammael
and his hosts, and there was great fighting therein and the angels of Satan
were envying one another." Charles, Ascension of Isaiah, c. vn. v. 9, p. 48,
and Editor's notes for other references.

3 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vr. c. 32. Horaios is probably connected with
the root tsk " light " ; Astaphaios appears in the earliest texts as Astan-
pheus. which may be an anagram for ar4(f>avos " crown." Or it may be
mt3S?n "inundation" which would agree with Origen's statement as
to this being the principle of water, for which see p. 73 infra.


70 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

to them in Matter's and Father Giraud's reconstructions are
taken from the prayers or " defences " which will be given
independently of it.

The division which Matter calls " Atmosphere terrestre " and
Father Giraud "The Fence of Wickedness " (<t>payfMo<; Ka/a'a?)
is also not to be found in Origen's description of the diagram,
but is taken from another passage where he defines it as the
gates leading to the aeon of the archons 1 . The remaining
sphere, containing within itself ten circles in Matter's recon-
struction and seven in Father Giraud's, is however fully de-
scribed. The number ten is, as Matter himself admitted to be
probable, a mistake of the copyist for seven 2 , and there can
be no doubt that the larger sphere is supposed to represent
our world. The word " Leviathan " which in accordance with
Origen's description is written both at the circumference and
at the centre of the circle 3 is evidently Ophiomorphus or the
serpent-formed son of Ialdabaoth whom we have seen cast
down to earth by his father together with the protoplasts
Adam and Eve 4 . He should according to the later Gnostics
be represented in the shape of a " dragon " or serpent coiled
round the world and having his tail in his mouth, while the
seven circles within the ring thus formed are the seven Archons
or ruling spirits created by him in imitation of Ialdabaoth.
These are represented in beast-like form and are, as we have
seen, hostile to man. The first four have the Hebrew angelic
names of Michael, Suriel, Raphael, and Gabriel, perhaps because

1 Op. cit. Bk vi. c. 31.

2 Unless we take the ten circles as including the three gates of Horaios,
Ailoaios, and Astaphaios. In this case, Jaldabaoth and his first three sons
would alone form the higher part of the planetary world. This is unlikely,
but if it were so, there would be an additional reason for calling Jaldabaoth,
as does Irenaeus, a " fourth number." Theodore Bar Khoni, who wrote in
the vmth century (see Chapter XIII, infra), in his notice of the Ophites
gives the number of these heavens as ten. See Pognon, Coupes de
Khouabir, Paris, 1898, p. 213.

iir] tov kvk\ov koi tov nivrpov civtov Kariypuyj/f, Origen, Op. cit. Bk VI.
c. 25.

* Origen says, toe. cit., that Leviathan is Hebrew for " Dragon." Cf.
Ps. civ. 26.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 71

the four planetary worlds to which they correspond bear also
Hebrew names of God 1 . The remaining three Thauthabaoth,
Erataoth. and Thartharaoth are probably taken from the pecu-
liar corruption of Hebrew and Egyptian words to be found in
the Magic Papyri. Some of them, at any rate, we meet again
later. The word Behemoth which appears at the foot of the
diagram may be translated " animals 2 ." It may either be a
further description of the seven Archons — as seems most likely —
or be taken in its etymological sense as the animal kingdom
which in the scale of being succeeds terrestrial man.

To this diagram, Origen adds the prayers or defences above
alluded to, which he draws from some source not mentioned.
He calls them the " instruction " which they {i.e. the Ophites)
receive after passing through the " fence of wickedness, — gates
which are subjected to the world of the Archons 3 " ; but we
know from other sources that they are the speeches, " defences "
or passwords required to be uttered by the soul of the initiated
when, released from this world by death, she flies upwards
through the planetary spheres 4 . As they contain many in-
structive allusions, they can best be given in Origen's own
words, at the same time remarking that the reading is not in
all cases very well settled. The first power through whose
realm the soul had to pass is not here mentioned by name,

3 That is to say : Jaldabaoth ; Iao, which is probably one of the many
attempts to represent in Greek the Tetragrammaton nii"P called in English
Jehovah ; Ailoaios or Eloaios, the singular of the well-known plural
name of God in Genesis WnbtS " Elohim " ; and Adonai, ^ix, " the
Lord," which in many parts of the O.T. replaces the Tetragrammaton.
Harvey, however, op. oil. p. 33, n. 3, thinks Iao may simply represent the
initial of the name of Yahweh coupled with Alpha and Omega to show His
eternal nature. He connects this with " I am the first and the last "of
Isaiah xliv. 6, and Rev. i. 11. Yet the later Greeks called Dionysos Iao.
See the (probably spurious) oracle of Apollo Clavius quoted by Macrobius,
Saturnalia, Bk I. c. 18, rr. 19 sqq.

2 Giraud, op. cit. p. 230.

3 TrvXas dpxovrcov alwvi SeSepevas: Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 31.
Perhaps we should read 8i8ofifvas, " Gates which belong to the age of the
Archons," i.e. while their rule lasts.

4 See the quotation from the Gospel of Philip later in this chapter,
p. 79, infra.


72 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

but by the process of exhaustion is plainly the one whom
Irenaeus calls Adonaeus or Adonai.
To him the soul of the dead is to say :

" I salute the one-formed king, the bond of blindness, boundless
oblivion, the first power preserved by the spirit of Pronoia and by
Sophia ; whence I am sent forth pure, being already part of the light
of the Son and of the Father. Let grace be with me, Father,
yea let it be with me 1 ! "

In passing through the next mentioned, which is the realm of
Ialdabaoth :

" Thou First and Seventh, born to command with boldness,
Ialdabaoth the Ruler (Archon) who hast the word of pure Mind
(rovs), a perfect work to the Son and the Father, I bring the symbol
of life in the impress of a type, and open the door to the world which
in thy aeon thou didst close, and pass again free through thy realm.
Let grace be with me, Father, yea let it be with me 2 ! "

Arrived at Iao, he ought to say :

" Thou, Second Iao and first lord of death, who dost rule over
the hidden mysteries of the Son and the Father, who dost shine
by night, part of the guiltless one. I bear my own beard as a symbol
and am ready to pass through thy rule, having been strengthened
by that which was born from thee by the living word. Let grace
be with me, Father, yea let it be with me 3 ! "

1 This appears to be the sphere of the Sun to which the epithet pov6-
Tponov " one-formed " is not inappropriate. Why he should be called
8f(Tfiov d^Xe^ias " bond of blindness," and Xt)8tjv dTrepio-KenTov " thought-
less oblivion," does not appear. irpa>-n)v bvvapiv irvevpari vpovolas <a\
ao<piq TijpovpevTiv " the first power preserved," etc. coincides curiously
with what is said in the Pistis Sophia as to the Ship of the Sun and the
" Virgin of Light."

2 This seems to be the sphere of Saturn, the furthest or 7th reckoning
from the earth and therefore according to the astronomy of the time the
nearest to the upper heavens. Was the symbol of life the Egyptian $
or ankh ? It was of course the jealous Jaldabaoth's or Ialdabaoth's wish
that no human souls should penetrate beyond his realm.

3 So the Pistis Sophia speaks repeatedly of the "Little Iao the Good."
This should be the sphere of the Moon. In the hymn to Attis given in
this chapter, see n. 6, p. 54 supra, Attis-Dionysos-Osiris is identified with
" the holy horned moon of heaven." and the name Iao may be connected


viii] Post-Christian Ghwstics: the Ophites 73

To Sabaoth :

r Ruler of the Fifth realm, King Sabaoth, advocate of the law of
thy creation. I am freed by grace of a mightier Pentad. Admit
me, when thou beholdest the blameless symbol of thy art preserved
by the likeness of a type, a body set free by a pentad. Let grace
be with me, Father, yea let it be with me 1 ! "

To Astaphaios :

"0 Astaphaios, Ruler of the third gate, overseer of the first
principle of water, behold me an initiate, admit me who have been
purified by the spirit of a virgin, thou who seest the substance of
the Cosmos. Let grace be with me, Father, yea let it be with me 2 !"

To Ailoaios :

I Ailoaios, ruler of the second gate, admit me who brings to thee
the symbol of thy mother, a grace hidden from the powers of the

with the Coptic lop ioh or " moon." He may be called the trpwros
5eo-7roT7?y davarov " first lord of death," because Osiris, like Dionysos, was
the first to return to life after being torn in pieces. The cptpav fj8t) rf]v
I8iav avfiftoXov " bearing my own beard as a symbol " seems to refer to
the attitude of the Egyptian dead, who is represented as holding his beard
in his light hand when introduced into the presence of Osiris. See Budge,
Book of the Dead, 1898 (translation volume), frontispiece, or Papyrus of
Ani, ibi cit.

1 This may be the sphere of Jupiter, who in one of the later documents
of the Pistis Sophia is made ruler of the five planets. Sabaoth is prob-
ably the Divine Name niiOS " [Lord of] Hosts " which the Greeks
took for a proper name. It, like Iao, appears often in the later documents.
The Trevras bwaroaripa " mightier Pentad " may refer to the Three
Men (Adamas, his son, and Christos), and the Two Women (the First
Woman and Sophia) placed at the head of the universe by the Ophites.

2 This should be the sphere of Mercury, the messenger of the gods
and leader of souls, who, unlike the higher powers, sees the earth from
anigh and without veils. The irapdivov Trvevfxa " spirit of a Virgin " may
bo the Virgin of Light of the Pistis Sophia, who plays such an important
part in the redemption of souls. Hippolytus' Naassene writer (Hipp.
op. cit. Bk v. c. 9, p. 181, Cruice) speaks of Jesus as the true gate and talks
in this connection of "Life-giving water" and of "we Christians celebrating
the mystery in the third gate " — an allusion which is unintelligible at
present, unless it refers to the waters of baptism.


74 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

authorities. Let grace be with me, Father, yea let it be with
me 1 ! "

and to Horaios :

" Horaios, who didst fearlessly overleap the fence of fire receiving
the rulership of the first gate, admit me when thou beholdest the
symbol of thy power, engraved on the type of the Tree of Life,
and formed by resemblance in the likeness of the Guiltless One.
Let grace be with me, Father, yea let it be with me 2 ! "

These defences have evidently got out of their proper order,
and have probably been a good deal corrupted as well 3 . But
their form and general purport are mostly intelligible and show
undoubted signs of Egyptian origin. They were therefore
probably not the work of the earlier Ophites or Naassenes,
but were most likely introduced when the Ophite doctrines
began to leave their primitive seat in Phrygia and to spread
westward into North Africa and the south-east of Europe.
The diagram itself seems to be fairly expressive of the more
ancient teaching and in particular the division of all things

1 The sphere of Venus ? The planet is said in one of the later docu-
ments of the Pistis Sophia to be ruled by a power from " Pistis Sophia,
the daughter of Barbelo," another name for the material antitype of the
heavenly Sophia or Mother of Life, whom we shall meet with later.

2 The sphere of Mars ? No allusion is made elsewhere to the (ppajfiov
wpos " fence of fire " ; but we do of course often hear of an empyrean
or heaven of fire stretching over the earth. The £<or]s £uAoi< is,
according to both Origen and Celsus, the Cross ; Origen, op. cil. Bk vi.
cc. 34, 37.

3 The proper order would appear to be :

(1) Horaios $ the guardian of the First Gate, i.e. that of Fire.

(2) Ailoaios $ the guardian of the Second Gate, i.e. that of Air.

(3) Astaphaios ty the guardian of the Third Gate, i.e. that of Water.
Above these we have (4) Adonai the ® the first power as distinguished

from mere porters or guardians of gates, (5) Iao the J) called in the password
the second, and (6) and (7) Sabaoth % and Jaldabaoth ^ above all. This
would about correspond with the astronomy of the time, which tried to
put the sun in the centre of our system. But the relative places of Sabaoth,
Jaldabaoth, and Ailoaios are very uncertain, and Epiphanius in describing
the Ophite sect whom he calls " Gnostics " says that some wished to make
Ialdabaoth occupy the 6th heaven, and others Ailoaios, called by him
Elilaios, while giving the 7th to Sabaoth. Epiph. Haer. xxvi. c. 10, p. 174,
Oehler.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 75

below the Godhead into three parts. Thus we find in it the
" middle space " or heaven of Sophia, itself perhaps the Paradise
whence the protoplasts and Ophiomorphus were hurled, then
the world of seven planets, and finally this earth under the
government of Ophiomorphus' seven angels. To judge from
Origen's remark that " they say there is a sympathy (crvfnrdOeta)
between the Star Phaenon (i.e. Saturn) and the lion-like power
(Michael) 1 ," it is probable that the Ophites, like the Babylonian
astrologers, looked upon the system of " correspondences," as
it was afterwards called, as running through all nature in such
a way that every world and every power inhabiting it was a
reflection of the one above it 2 . That each world according
to the Naassenes contained a " Church " or assembly of souls 3
is stated in the text quoted above, the " Captive " Church
there mentioned being evidently composed of the souls still
held in the grip of matter, the " Called " of those who had
passed into the planetary worlds, and the " Chosen " of those
who were purified enough to be admitted into the middle space
or Paradise of Sophia 4 . That these last were thought to be
eventually united with the Deity appears in some later deve-
lopments of the Ophite faith, but the doctrine seems also to
have been known to the Naassenes, since the author quoted
by Hippolytus speaks of " the perfect gnostics " becoming

1 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk n. c. 31. If *l corresponds to Michael and also
to Jaldabaoth, 11 ought to do the like to Suriel and Iao, $ to Sabaoth
(which would be appropriate enough) and to Raphael, the sun to Adonai
and Gabriel, and so on. No system of correspondences, however, can be
devised that does not break down on scrutiny. Sammael, which is here
Michael's other name, is used in the Aseensio Isaiae (see Charles, Ascension
of Isaiah, p. 6) as a name of Satan. But it may well be that good and bad
spirits occupying corresponding places in the universe were sometimes called
by the same names. So one of the documents of the Pistis Sophia speaks
of an angel cryptically named Zarazaz " who is called by the demons after
a strong demon of their own place, Maskelli" : Pistis Sophia, p. 370, Copt.

2 Though Babylonian in origin it must early have found its way into
Egypt. See Maspero, fit. tgyptol. n. p. 385 and Chapter VI, supra, vol. I.
p. 183 and n. 3.

3 Soul, perhaps, does not here mean anything more than animating
principle, spark, or breath of life.

4 See p. 42, supra.


76 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

" kingless " (that is, subject to no other being) and as appointed
to " share in the Pleroma 1 ."

Of the amount of success which the speculations of the
Ophites enjoyed we know very little. Origen, as we have seen,
speaks of them as being in his day " an insignificant sect " ;
and we have no proof that their numbers were ever very large 2 .
Father Giraud asserts on the faith of some of the smaller
heresiologists and Conciliar Acts that they spread over the
whole of Asia Minor, through Syria and Palestine into Egypt
on the one hand, and, on the other, to Mesopotamia, Armenia,
and even to India, and this is probably more or less correct 3 .
But those who had actually read their writings, as Irenaeus
and Hippolytus evidently had done, seem to have looked upon
them more as the source of many later heresies than as for-
midable by their own numbers. Whether the Sethians with
whom Irenaeus would identify them were really a subdivision
of the Ophite sect may be doubted, because in Hippolytus'
account of the Sethian doctrines, the existence of Jesus is never
mentioned or referred to, and there is some reason for thinking
them a non-Christian sect 4 . But the heresies of the Peratae

1 . . .rovs reXeiovs dftacriXfVTOvs yevicrdai nai ^xfracr^fii' tov ir\r)f>a>nciTOS,
Hippolytus, op. cil. Bk v. c. 8, p. 168, Cruice. See also the same expression
in n. 3, p. 41, supra.

2 Origen's testimony on this point can be the better relied on, because
his good faith, unlike that of writers like Epiphanius, is above suspicion.
He and Clement of Alexandria are the only two writers on Gnosticism
among the Fathers to whom M. de Faye (Introd. p. 1) will allow "intelli-
gence " and "' impartialite."

3 He gives, op. cit. p. 79, a map showing their chief seats from the head
of the Persian Gulf on the one hand to Crete and the Adriatic on the other.

4 In the Bruce Papyrus mentioned in Chapter X, there is much said about
agodcalledSitheus,so that it is by no means certain that theSeth after whom
they were named was the patriarch of Genesis. He might be the Egyptian
Set, whose name is transliterated in the Magic Papyri as 'S.rfiB. His
appearance in Egypt first as the brother and then as the enemy of Osiris
has never been fully accounted for. See "The Legend of Osiris," P.S. B.A.
for 1911, pp. 145 sqq. Epiphanius' attempt in the Panarion (Haer. xxxix.
c. 3, p. 524, Oehler)to connect the genealogy of Jesus with the Seth of Genesis
is not even said to depend on the doctrines of the sect, and the whole chapter
reads like an interpolation. Cf. Friedlander, Vorchristliche jiidische Gnos-
ticismus, Gottingen, 1898, p. 25.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 77

and of Justinus, which Hippolytus describes as not differing
much from the Ophites, certainly resemble that which has been
summarized above too closely for the resemblance to be acci-
dental ; while the same remark applies to those of the Bar-
beliotae and Cainites described by Irenaeus, and to the Gnostics,
Archontics, and others of whom we read in Epiphanius' Panarion.
Most of these sects seem to have flourished on the Eastern or
Asiatic outskirts of the Roman Empire, although some of them
probably had settlements also in Egypt, Greece, Crete, and
Cyrene. As the first Ophites had contrived to make an amalgam
of the fervent and hysterical worship of nature in Anatolia with
the Jewish and Christian tenets, so no doubt these daughter
sects contrived to fit in with them the legends of the local cults
among which they found themselves. But such compromises
were not likely to last long when the Catholic Church began
to define and enforce the orthodox faith, and the Ophites seem
to have been one of the first to succumb. In the vth century
a.d., there were still Ophite "colleges" to be found in the
province of Bithynia ; for Theocritus and Evander, the bishops
of Chalcedon and Nicomedia, " refuted " their leaders publicly
with such effect, says Praedestinatus, that they afterwards
broke into their " secret places " at the head of a furious mob,
drove away their priests, killed the sacred serpents, and " de-
livered the people from that danger 1 ." This is the last that
we hear of them as an organized sect, and although Justinian
in a.d. 530 thought right to include them by name in his law
against heretics, it is probable that by then their opinions had
long since passed into other forms 2 .

Probably one of the first changes to take place in the
Ophite faith was the withdrawal into the background of the
serpent worship which respect for the ancient cults of
Asia Minor had imposed upon the earlier members of the sect.
In the diagram, Ophiomorphus does not seem to have been
depicted in his proper shape, although he may perhaps be
identified with the Leviathan there ^shown as surrounding
the terrestrial world. Those Ophites who wished to obtain

1 Praedestinatus, de Haeresibus, Bk I. c. 17, p. 237, Oehler.

2 Matter, Hist, du Gnost. t. n. p. 176.


78 Post-Christ kui Gnostics: the Ophites [ch.

proselytes among Christian catechumens no doubt felt the
advisability of not insisting upon this conception, inasmuch as
" the serpent " was the figure under which the Oriental Chris-
tians loved to allude to the Pagan worships which still opposed
them in Asia Minor 1 . Hence there arose much confusion among
the Ophites themselves as to the character of the serpent, and
while some, according to Irenaeus, asserted that Sophia the
mother of Ialdabaoth herself became the serpent 2 , Theodoret,
a very late witness, thinks that the Ophites of his time held
that Ophiomorphus, although originally the minister of Sophia,
had gone over to the other side, and had become the enemy
of mankind 3 . In this we may also, perhaps, see, if we will,
the effect of Egyptian influence upon the earlier Ophite teaching ;
for in Egypt, the serpent Apep was always looked upon as
the enemy of Ra, the Sun-god, who was rightly considered
the great benefactor of humanity. It is no doubt due to the
same influence that in one of the documents of the Pistis
Sophia — one part of which, as will be seen later, was probably
written for the furtherance of a late form of the Ophite heresy
— the serpent, while keeping his place in the Cosmos as the
great ocean which surrounds the earth, is transformed into
the outer darkness of the Canonical Gospels, and described as
a huge torture-chamber for the punishment of souls 4 . The
same document shows us how the Ophites, while adopting all
the ideas of their predecessors the Orphics as to the respective
states of the initiated and uninitiated after death, — including
therein their reincarnation, the draught from the lake of
memory and the like— contrived to mix with them the current
astrological ideas of the time which made all these events
happen in an order determined by the motions of the stars 5 .
This tendency, already visible in Hippolytus' time in the Ophite

1 See Acta Philippi before quoted passim.

2 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 28, § 8, p. 241, Harvey. King, Gnostics, etc. p. 101,
quotes from Tertullian, de Praescript., " Serpentem magnificant in tantum
ut etiam Christo praeferant," which sounds like an Ophite doctrine ; but
I have failed to verify the quotation.

3 Theodoret, Haer. Fab. i. 24.

« Pistis Sophia, pp. 319, 320, Copt.
* Ibid. p. 384, Copt.


viii] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 79

sect which he calls the Peratae 1 , will, however, be better con-
sidered when we come to deal with the documents of the Pistis
Sophia themselves.

There remains to be said that the Gospel according to the
Egyptians mentioned above is the only apocryphal document
that Hippolytus directly attributes to the earlier Ophites or
Naassenes. The sects derived from them seem to have made
use of a great number of others, among which we find a Book
of Baruch otherwise unknown to us, The Paraphrase of Seth,
the Gospels of Nicodemus, Philip, and Thomas, together with
a Gospel according to the Hebrews, which may or may not have
been identical with the one which Hippolytus calls that according
to the Egyptians 2 . Of these, the first two are entirely lost, and
the documents which we possess bearing the name of the
Gospel of Nicodemus relate the events of the Crucifixion in
much the same way as the Canonical Gospels, but add thereto
the visit of Jesus to Hades. A Gospel of Thomas, which is
also extant, contains only the account of miracles performed
by Jesus in His infancy, and therefore goes to controvert the
Ophite theory that Christos and Sophia only descended upon
Him at His baptism, and that up to that period He was as
other men. It is probable, however, that our copies of these
Apocryphal Gospels have been severely edited so as to expunge
everything which savoured of Gnostic teaching and may really
have been partly or wholly the work of Ophites 3 . Of the
Gospel of Philip, Epiphanius has preserved a short passage as
follows :

" The Lord has revealed to me what the soul ought to say when
she goes to heaven, and how she ought to answer each of the Powers
on high. ' I have known myself,' she says, ' and I have collected
myself from everywhere, and I have not begotten children for the
Axchon, but I have rooted out his roots, and I have collected the
scattered members, and I know thee what thou art. For I, she

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 13, pp. 188 sqq., Cruice.

2 See Giraud, op. cit. pp. 250 sqq. for references and editions. English
translations of some of them have appeared in the "Apocryphal Acts" etc.
of Clark's Ante-Nicene Library, and in Cambridge Texts and Studies.

3 This is the opinion of Lipsius. See Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Gospels,
Apocryphal.


80 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [en.

says, am from above 1 .' And thus he [i.e. Philip] says, she is set
free. But if, he says, she is found to have begotten a son, she is
retained below, until she can receive again her own children, and
draw them up to herself 2 ."

Similar expressions are to be found in two of the documents
of the Pistis Sophia, and the abstinence from sexual intercourse
which they enjoin is direct and first-hand evidence rebutting
the accusation of promiscuous immorality which Epiphanius
brings against the Ophites or their related sects. Epiphanius
attributes to the same sect of " Gnostici " the use of a Gospel
of Perfection which " others " — the context shows that he
means certain Ophites — " are not ashamed to call the Gospel
of Eve." Of this he also preserves a single passage as follows :

" I stood upon a high mountain, and I saw a huge man and another
who was mutilated [or perhaps only smaller, KoXofibv] and I heard
a voice of thunder, and I drew near to hearken and he spoke to
me and said, ' I am thou and thou art I ; and where thou art, there
am I, and I am scattered through all things. And whencesoever
thou dost wish, collect me, and in collecting me, thou dost collect
thyself 3 .' "

Is the greater and lesser man here the Adamas or Father-
and-Son of the Ophites, in which case the latter part of the
passage doubtless refers to the scattering of the light through
the world of matter and the necessity of its collection and
return to the Godhead. The " I am thou and thou art I "
phrase is repeated in the Pistis Sophia by the risen Jesus to
His disciples 4 , and seems to refer to the final union of the
perfected human soul with the Deity.

1 Cf. the similar expressions in the speech of the soul on the Orphic
Gold Plates, Chapter IV, vol. I. pp. 131 sqq.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. xxvr. c. 13, p. 190, Oehler.

3 Ibid. p. 172, Oehler. Cf. the "Logia Jesu" published by the Egypt
Exploration Fund in Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 1898, p. 3. " Wherever there
are two, they are not without God, and wherever there is one alone, I say
I am with him. Raise the stone, and there thou shalt find me, cleave the
wood and there am I."

* Pistis Sophia, pp. 206, 230, Copt.


vm] Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites 81

In addition to these books, the Ophites whom Irenaeus
and Hippolytus describe quoted freely from the Canonical
books of the Old Testament, from one of the apocryphal books
of Ezra and from the Book of Tobit, as also from such books
of the Canonical New Testament as the Gospels, including
that of St John, and most of the Pauline Epistles, including
that to the Hebrews 1 . But it would be going too far to say
that they " accepted " these or attributed to them a Divine
origin, or thought them inspired in the sense in which the
word was used by the Catholic Church. On the contrary,
Epiphanius complains that they thought many of the contents
of the Old Testament Books at any rate were inspired only by
Ialdabaoth and the creators of the world of matter for the
purpose of misleading mankind 2 ; and throughout they seem
to have considered all the Canonical Scriptures that they quote
as on an equality with the writings of Homer, Hesiod, the
legendary Orpheus, and other heathen writers such as Herodotus.
Without attempting to deny or question the historical truth
of the facts or legends recorded by all these authors, they
regarded them merely as figures having an allegorical or typical
meaning, which they could interpret in any manner they
pleased, so as to make them accord with their own preconceived
theories. Thus the Naassenes when they found St Luke quoting
from the Proverbs of Solomon that " the just will fall seven
times and rise again," declared that this referred to the down-
ward passage of man's soul through the planetary heavens 3 ;
and Justinus, one of the Ophite teachers, finding a story in
Herodotus about Heracles and the serpent-tailed girl whom he
met in Scythia, said that it was a type of the generation of the

1 Griiber, Die Ophiten, Wiirzburg, 1864, pp. 173 sqq., points out that the
Ophites, like the Valentinians, seem to have used the Peshitto or Syriac
version of the Canonical Books for their quotations. He says the fact
had been already noticed by Harvey. It is, of course, another indication
of the Anatolian or Syrian origin of the sect.

2 Irenaeus, I. 28, c. 5, p. 237, Harvey, gives a list of the books which
they assigned to each planetary power, Jaldabaoth taking the lion's share
with the Hexateuch, Amos and Habbakuk.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 7, p. 150, Cruice. Proverbs xxiv. 16
seems the text referred to.

t,. rr. 6


82 Post-Christian Gnostics: the Ophites [en. vin

universe by the combination of the invisible and unforeseeing
Demiurge and the female principle or Sophia 1 . The same
dialectic had already been made use of by the Orphics, by
Philo of Alexandria, and by Simon Magus ; but the Ophites
seem to have been the first to apply it to all literature. The
full effect of this method of interpretation we shall see later.
^ Generally speaking, it may be said that the Ophites seem
to have been the first to bring about any kind of amalgamation
between the popular religions of the Near East and the rising
faith of Christianity. By interpreting the " mysteries " or
secret rites of Asia Minor and elsewhere in their own sense,
they supplied Christianity with a mythology which it would
otherwise have lacked and the absence of which must always
have proved a bar to its propagation among other than Semitic
peoples. At the same time they greatly exalted the figure of
Christ, who in their system became much less the personal
teacher and master of the Jewish-Christian communities 2 than
the angel or messenger of the Supreme Being sent from above
in pursuance of a vast scheme for the redemption of the human
race. In this capacity it went some way towards identifying
the historical Jesus with the great god of the Mysteries and
towards giving the sacraments of the newly-founded Church
the secular authority of the rites practised in them. 1 ' The
influence of the Ophite system or systems upon the sects which
succeeded them is at present hard to define, but there can be
little doubt that some of the documents, which have come
down to us in the Coptic MSS. before mentioned and will
be more fully described in Chapter X, can only be explained
by reference to them/

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 25, pp. 226, 227, Cruice. Sophia is evi-
dently the serpent in this combination.

2 The Ebionites, or whatever other J udaeo- Christian sect is responsible
for the Clementines, make St Peter affirm that Jesus " did not proclaim
Himself to be God," and that " that which is begotten cannot be compared
with that which is unbegotten or self- begotten." See Clem. Horn. xvi.
cc. 15, 16.


CHAPTER IX

POST-CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS : VALENTINUS

It seems fairly plain that the originators of the Ophite
teaching were uneducated men 1 . A few quotations from
Homer and Pindar, probably familiar to anyone who listened
to the Rhapsodists, are indeed to be found in the anonymous
author whom Hippolytus quotes under the name of " the
Naassene." But the reading of the learned of that day con-
sisted not of poetry but of philosophy ; and there is no trace
in his speculations of direct acquaintance with the works of
any philosopher whatever. This is the more striking because
Heraclitus of Ephesus, Zeno of Cyprus, and Cleanthes of Assos
might have been brought into court in support of his cosmo-
gonical ideas ; and the Stoic philosophy was especially an
Asiatic one, having one of its principal homes in Tarsus, and
therefore not very far from Phrygia proper. Its cosmology as
taught in Rome at the period now under discussion 2 , differed
very little from that of the earlier Ophites, and its theory of
" seminal reasons " (\6yoc o-rrepfiariKol) or particles of fiery
matter ctescending from heaven to earth and there becoming
formative principles, together with its belief in metensomatosis
or transmigration has many resemblances with the Ophite

1 The same may be said of practically all Christians of the Apostolic
age. See Hatch, H.L. p. 124. It was the reproach which Celsus cast at
the whole Christian community in the reign of Marcus Aurelius. See
Origen, cont. Cels. Bk m. c. 44. Origen, op. cit. Bk m. c. 9, retorts that
f now " (i.e. circa 230 a.d.) not only rich but highly-placed men and well-
born ladies are to be found among the Christians. The change probably
took place during the reign of Commodus ; Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk v.
c. 21. Origen and Eusebius agree that this entry of educated men into the
Church brought heresy along with it. See Origen, op. cit. Bk m. c. 12.

2 Brehier, " La Cosmologie Stoicienne," R.H.B. t. lxtv. (1911), pp. 1-9.

6—2


84 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

scheme of redemption 1 . Yet the Naassene author in an age
when philosophy was most in fashion never appeals to the
authority of the founders of the Stoic school or of those followers
of theirs who must have been his contemporaries and country-
men ; and Hippolytus, whose own acquaintance with Greek
philosophy was superficial and hardly first-hand, in his summary
of the Naassene doctrine draws no parallel between the two.
On the other hand, the Naassene author perpetually refers to
the Old Testament which he seems to have known in the Peshitto
or Syrian version, although, as will have been seen, he by no
means regards it from the Jewish standpoint as a divinely
inspired rule of life, and pushes down Yahweh, its God, into
a very inferior position in the scale of being. As the date of
the Peshitto has not yet been put further back than the second
century a.d. 2 , this would lead one to suppose that it had only
recently come to the notice of the Naassene writer, who probably
welcomed it as a valuable source from which to draw materials
for spells and exorcisms. This excessive reverence for the
letter as apart from the spirit of a document is characteristic
of the magician of the early Christian centuries, and is further
exemplified in a magic papyrus of the nird century a.d., now
in the British Museum, where " a number of single lines taken
without any regard to sense or on any discernible principle from
the Iliad and Odyssey " are arranged in a certain order for use
as a fortune-telling book, and appear in company with magical
recipes for obtaining dreams, compounding love philtres, and
all the usual paraphernalia of a wizard of the period 3 . Such a
use of writings venerable for their antiquity would never enter
into the head of anyone endowed with any literary sense, but
seems natural enough to persons of limited reading, to whom
they form their sole material for study. In reading into the
lives of the Jewish patriarchs hidden allusions to the theories

1 A. W. Benn, The Philosophy of Greece, 1898, pp. 246, 255.

* Kenyon, Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the N. T., 1901, p. 138,
says, " Mr Gwilliam, whose opinion, as editor of the Peshitto, is entitled to
all respect, believes it to be the original translation of the Scriptures into
Syriac," but thinks the question not yet decided.

3 Kenyon, Greek Papyri, p. 83.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 85

of the origin of the universe and the destiny of man then current
over the whole Hellenistic world, the Naassenes did not behave
differently from our own Puritans of Cromwell's time, who dis-
covered in texts like " Take the prophets of Baal, Let not one
of them escape 1 ! " a justification for " knocking on the head
out of hand," the clergy of the opposing party 2 . We may, if we
please, pi(jbure to ourselves the earlier Ophites as a handful of
merchants, artizans, freedmen, and slaves inclined by inherited
custom to magical practices and to ecstatic or hysterical forms
of religion, and, as it were, intoxicated by the new field of
speculation which the translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into
their own tongue had opened to them. At the same time, their
anti-Semitic feeling, dating perhaps from the time of the Mac-
cabaean resistance which had materially contributed to the
downfall of the Syrian Empire, and considerably exacerbated
by the atrocities committed by the Jewish rebels at the close
of the ist century a.d., must have forced them into an attitude
in every way opposed to Jewish national pretensions ; while
it is easy to understand that such persons must have caught
eagerly at any via media which enabled them to reconcile the
Jewish traditions, long familiar to them through spells and
charms, with the legends of the Greek Mysteries, and at the
same time protected them against the social and moral obloquy
attaching to open adherence to the Jewish rites. Such con-
siderations, perhaps, explain alike the immediate success of
St Paul's preaching in Asia Minor, and the outburst of activity
among the Gnostics which followed close upon it 3 .

1 1 Kings xviii. 40.

2 See the case of Dr Michael Hudson quoted by Sir Walter Scott from
Peck's Desiderata Curiosa in his notes to Woodstock; and Cromwell's
letter to the Houses on the siege of Drogheda.

3 M. Cumont's theory, that the Jewish colonies in Phrygia had intro-
duced the worship among the Pagans of Yahweh under the name of
" Hypsistos " is not convincing; but it is probable that in religious matters
these colonists gave more than they borrowed. The story of the king
of Adiabene who wished to turn Jew (see Chapter XII, infra) is signi-
ficant. Cf . the princes of the same kingdom who fell while fighting valiantly
in the Jewish ranks in the Sunday battle of Gabao in which Cestius Gallus
was defeated. See Josephus, Bell. Bk it. c. 19, § 2.


86 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

The Gnostic speculations were, however, destined to pass
out of the hands of unlearned men. Although it was hardly-
likely to have been noticed at the time, the day was past for
national or particularist religions having for their object the
well-being of one nation or city ; and men's relations to the
Divine world were coming to be looked upon as a matter
concerning the individual rather than the State. Alexander's
work in breaking down the barriers between people and people
was beginning to bear fruit in the intellectual as it had already
done in the political world, and the thoughtful were everywhere
asking themselves, as Tertullian tells us, not only whence man
and the world had come, but what was the meaning of the evil
within the world 1 . Along with this, too, had come a general
softening of manners which was extremely favourable to specu-
lation on such subjects, and to which the vagaries of the Caesars
of the Julian house have made us somewhat blind. A reign
of terror might often exist among the great families in the capital
under a jealous or suspicious Emperor, and the majority of the
proletariat might there as in other large towns be entirely given
up to the brutal or obscene amusements of the arena or the
theatre. But in the provinces these things had little effect on
the working of the system set up under the Empire ; and the
civilized world was for the first time, perhaps, in its history,
beginning to feel the full benefits of good government and free-
dom from foreign invasion. It is quite true that the population
were then, as at the present day, leaving the country and flocking
into the towns, thereby acquiring new vices in addition to their
old ones ; but this also led, as town life must always do, to
increased respect for the rights of their neighbours, and to the
extension of the idea of law and order rather than of the right
of the strongest as the governing principle of the universe.
The Roman law, upon which the jurisprudence of every civilized
country is still based, first took coherent shape in the reign
of Hadrian ; and Ulpian's fundamental maxim that before the
law all men are free and equal was founded on a conception of
the rights of the individual very different from the Oriental notion
that all subjects high and low were the chattels of the king.

1 Tertullian, de Praescript. c. vm.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentmus 87

In these circumstances, new ethical ideals had arisen which
affected all classes in the State. As Sir Samuel Dill has said in
his charming sketch of Roman manners under the Julian, Flavian
and Antonine emperors, " It has perhaps been too little recog-
nized that in the first and second centuries there was a great
propaganda of pagan morality running parallel to the evangelism
of the Church 1 ." But this ethical propaganda was an entirely
lay affair, and the work not of the priests but of the philosophers 2 .
It had, indeed, always been so in the Hellenic world, and while
we find it exciting no surprise that a priest of the most sacred
mysteries should be worse instead of better than other men 3 ,
it was the philosophers to whom was committed what was later
called the care of souls. Thus Alexander had recourse, when
prostrated by self-reproach after the killing of Clitus, to the
ministrations of Anaxarchus, who endeavoured to console him
with the sophism that kings are not to be judged like other men 4 .
So, too, we hear of the Stoic philosopher, Musonius Rufus, when
the army of Vespasian was besieging Rome, accompanying
the Senate's embassy to the troops of Antonius, and preaching
to them at the risk of his life upon the blessings of peace and the
horrors of war 5 . Seneca, also, when about to die, endeavours
to stay his friends' lamentations by reminding them of the
" rules of conduct" by which alone they may expect consolation,
and bequeaths to them the example of his life 6 ; while the
" Stoic saint," Thrasea, when the sentence of death reaches him,
is occupied in listening to a discourse of Demetrius the Cynic
on the nature of the soul and its separation from the body 7 .
This shows an attitude of mind very different from the merely
magical or, as we should say, superstitious belief in the efficacy
of spells and ceremonies ; and the example of Epictetus bears
witness that it was that of slaves as well as of senators.

Gnosticism, therefore, was bound to become ethical as well
as gnostical, or, in other words, to insist on the efficacy of
conduct as well as of knowledge, so soon as it came into contact

1 Dill, Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p. 346.

2 Ibid. pp. 293, 294.

3 Like Callias. See Chapter II, vol. I. p. 76, supra.

4 Arrian, Anabasis, Bk rv. c. 9. 5 Tacitus, Hist. Bk in. c. 81.
6 Tacitus, Annal. Bk xv. c. 62. 7 Ibid. Bk xvi. c. 34.


88 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

with thinkers trained in philosophy. Where it did so, in the
first instance, cannot be told with any degree of certainty ;
but all probability points to Alexandria as one of the places
where the post-Christian Gnosticism first made alliance with
philosophic learning. Not only was Alexandria the natural
meeting-place of Greeks and Orientals, but it was at the early
part of the und century a great deal more the centre of the
intellectual world than either Athens or Rome. Although
Ptolemy IX Physcon is said to have expelled from it the philo-
sophers and scholars of the Museum, they seem to have returned
shortly afterwards, and in the meantime their dispersion in
the neighbouring cities and islands, where most of them must
have supported themselves by teaching, probably did a good
deal towards diffusing the taste for philosophy over a wider
area than before. In Philo's time, in particular, the Platonic
philosophy had gained such a hold in the city that he, though a
leader of the Jews, had had to assimilate it as best he might 1 ,
and, as we have seen, to bring it more or less into harmony with
the traditional beliefs of his own people. A century later we
see the same thing occurring with the now rising sect of Chris-
tians ; and a school of Christian philosophy was founded in
Alexandria under the leadership of Pantaenus, the predecessor
in office of the famous Clement of Alexandria 2 . If we may
judge from the writings of this last, the expressed object of
this school was to instil a knowledge of Greek literature and
philosophy into Christian teachers, to bring about which it
attempted to show that, while both philosophy and Christian
theology alike aimed at the discovery of truth, the valuable
parts of the philosophic doctrines were borrowed or derived
from the writings held sacred by Jews and Christians 3 . Nor were
the Alexandrians in the least likely to refuse a hearing to any
new faith however wild. The leading place which Alexandria
had gained among the markets of the world brought within its
gates the adherents of every religion then known, and Jewish
merchants and Christian artizans there mixed with Buddhist

1 Matter, Hist, du Gnost. t. I. p. 398.

2 Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. Bk iv. c. 6.

3 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk i. c. 15.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 89

monks and fetish-worshippers from Central Asia, while the
terms on which they met compelled a wide tolerance for one
another's opinions, and predisposed its citizens to a practical
amalgam of several apparently conflicting creeds 1 .

It was into this atmosphere that Gnosticism entered at
least as early as the reign of Hadrian. Who was answerable
for its first introduction there we have no means of knowing,
nor do we even know with any certainty what form Egyptian
Gnosticism first took 2 . One would imagine that the Hellenizing
tendency of the Samaritans might have brought to Alexandria
the doctrines of Simon Magus, but there is no direct evidence
to that effect. The case is different with Antioch, where one
Saturninus or Satornilus — the name is spelt differently by
Irenaeus and Hippolytus — seems to have put forth, at the period
referred to, a quasi- Christian system having some likeness to
that of the Ophites, its chief distinguishing feature being its
hatred of Judaism and its God, for whose overthrow it declared
Christ to have been sent 3 . Like the Ophites, Saturninus rigidly
opposed the commerce of the sexes, declaring marriage and
generation to be alike the work of Satan, the declared enemy
of the world-creating angels, and of their leader the God of the
Jews 4 . But the followers of this Saturninus seem to have been
few in number, and although all the later heresiologists pre-
served the memory of his teaching, it is probable that the sect
itself did not long survive its founder 5 . Basilides, whose
name is associated with that of Saturninus by Irenaeus, 'Hip-
polytus, and Epiphanius, who all make him a fellow disciple
with Saturninus of Menander, the continuator or successor of

1 Cf. Hadrian's letter to Servian, Chapter II, vol. I. p. 86, supra.

2 Amelineau, Le Gnosticisme figyptien, p. 30. Its early shape was
probably more magical and less ethical than its later developments, because,
as the same author (P.S.B.A. 1888, p. 392) says, for several centuries it

as only the lowest classes in Egypt that became Christians.

Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 18, p. 197, Harvey. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vu.
. 28, p. 369, Cruice.
* So Hippolytus, loc. cit., who copies Irenaeus' statement word for
word. But something has evidently slipped out of the text. If Christ and
Satan were both the enemies of Yahweh, we should have the a-vn^avrja-is or
fellowship declared impossible by St Paul in 2 Cor. vi. 15.
s Matter, Hist, du Onost. t. I. p. 349.


I


90 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Simon Magus 1 , certainly flourished under the same reign at
Alexandria, where he taught an extremely complicated doctrine,
declaring that between the unknown Father of All and this
world there was interposed a series of 365 heavens corresponding
in number to the days of the year, the chief of them being called
Abraxas, the letters of which word have that numerical value 2 .
This is the account of Irenaeus, not materially varied by any
of the other early writers on heresy, with the exception of
Hippolytus, who gives us a long account of the doctrine of
Basilides and his son Isidore, which according to their own
account they derived from Matthias, the Apostle who replaced
Judas and who received it secretly from Jesus Himself 3 . From
Hippolytus, we learn that Basilides' complete or final teaching
declared that there was a time when nothing existed —

" neither matter, nor substance, nor the Unsubstantial, nor simple,
nor compound, nor the Intelligible, nor the Unintelligible, nor that
which can be comprehended by the senses, nor that which cannot
be so comprehended, nor man, nor angel, nor god, nor anything
which can be named "—

and that this God-Who-Was-Not willed to make a world 4 . This
act of volition, exercised in Hippolytus' words " without will or
mind or consciousness 5 ," produced the Seed of the World which
contained within itself all the future universe, as the grain of
mustard-seed contains the roots, stem, branches, leaves, and


1 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 18, p. 197, Harvey ; Hippolytus, Bk vii. c. 28,
p. 367, Cruice ; Epiphanius, Haer. xxm. c. 1, p. 135, Oehler.

2 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 19, § 1, p. 199, Harvey. For the name Abraxas
see ibid. p. 203, and Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vu. c. 26, p. 361, Cruice. As
Harvey points out in his note, the passage containing it has evidently
slipped out of Irenaeus' text and has been added at the foot of the roll.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 20, p. 344, Cruice. The revelations
in question must therefore have been made after the Resurrection. Clement
of Alexandria says that Basilides was a disciple of Glaucias, the interpreter
of Peter : Strom. Bk vn. c. 17.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 21, pp. 345, 346, Cruice.

s dd(\j]T<os Kai avoT/Ttos koi avai<Tdi)Ta>s. Hippolytus, loc. cit. This
(TTiyfia dfjispuTTov or " indivisible point " from which all things come
is mentioned in Simon Magus' Apophasis (see Chapter VI, vol. I. p. 194,
supra) as well as in the Bruce Papyrus of Chapter X, infra.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 91

innumerable other seeds of the future plant 1 . In this Seed was
" a Sonhood, threefold in all things, of the same substance with
the God- Who- Was-Not and generated from non-existing things 2 ."
Of this threefold Sonhood, one part was subtle or finely divided
like aether or air, one coarser, and one which needed purifica-
tion ; and he goes on to describe how the finer part immediately
upon the projection of the Seed, burst forth and flew upwards
until it reached the Non-Existent- One, towards whom, Hip-
poly tus says, " every nature strains," on account of " its beauty
and majesty 3 ." The coarser part of the Sonhood attempted
to imitate the first, but failed to do so until helped by the Holy
Spirit who served it as the wing does the bird ; but although
the second Sonhood thereby attained beatitude, the Holy
Spirit could not enter into the Godhead along with him " because
it (or she) was of a different substance from him and had nothing
of his nature 4 ." She was therefore left near it, purified and
sanctified by her contact with the Sonhood as a jar which has
once contained perfume still preserves its savour 5 . As for the
third Sonhood, it remained in the Seed of the World, which
thereafter gave birth to the Great Archon or Ruler, who is the
Demiurge or Architect of the Universe and fashions all cosmic
things. This Archon makes out of the things below him a Son
who by the arrangement of the God- Who- Was-Not is greater
and wiser than himself, whence the Archon causes him to sit
at his right hand 6 . This Son is in effect Christ, who reveals
to the Archon the existence of the worlds above him, and sends
the Gospel (here personified) into the world so that by it the
third Sonhood might be purified and thus raised to union with
the God- Who- Was-Not.

1 Or like the Orphic egg from which Phanes came forth. See Chapter IV,
vol. I. p. 123, supra.

2 Hi/, (prjaiv, iv avra> ra> o-nippari Ylorrjs, rpipeprjs Kara irdvra, T<a ovk
oi'Ti 6euj opoovo-ios, yfvrjrf] ii- ovk ovrav, HippolytllS, Op. dt. Bk VII. C. 22,
p. 349, Cruice. If these are Basilides actual words, he would seem to
have been the first author to make use of the expression Homoousios.

3 Hippolytus, op. et loc. cit. p. 350, Cruice.

* "~E)(fiv /xiv avro /xer' avTrjs ovk rjhvvaro' tfv yap ov% opoovaiov ovbe
(pvo-iv efye ptTa rijs YIottjtos. Hippolytus, op. et loc. cit. p. 351, Cruice.

6 Had Basilides or Hippolytus read Horace ?

• Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 23, p. 353, Cruice.


92 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

There is no need to follow further the system of Basilides, nor
to describe the extremely complicated tangle of worlds, princi-
palities, powers, and rulers, including the 365 heavens and their
Archon or ruler Abraxas, which Basilides interposes between this
earth and the Godhead. M. Amelineau has endeavoured to show
that, in this, Basilides was borrowing from the ancient Egyptian
religion which he imagines to have been still flourishing in the
Egypt of the second Christian century 1 . It may be so ; and,
although M. Amelineau's proofs seem hardly strong enough to
bear the weight of the conclusions he would draw from them,
it may be conceded that in the Ogdoad and the Hebdomad of
which we hear so much in Hippolytus' account of Basilides'
teaching, we have a distinct echo of the extraordinary arithmetic
of the Pharaonic or old Egyptian theology, wherein we are
constantly meeting with an Ennead or " company " of nine
gods which, as M. Maspero has shown, sometimes consists of
eight, sometimes of ten, and sometimes of a still more discrepant
number of individuals 2 . But Basilides' system was never in-
tended for popular use ; for he himself said, according to
Irenaeus, that only one out of a thousand or two out of ten
thousand could understand it, and that his disciples should
keep their adherence to it strictly secret, seeking to know all
things, but themselves remaining unknown 3 . Its interest for
us here lies in the fact that Valentinus who transformed post-

1 Amelineau, Le Gnosticisme figyptien, pp. 139-152. So Mallet,
Quite, de Neith a Sais, Paris, 1888, pp. 213, 214, says that both Basilides
and Valentinus drew their doctrines from the late form of Egyptian religion
which he describes.

2 Paul neteru. Maspero, Etudes figyptol., n. pp. 244, 245. Cf. the
whole of the luminous essay Sur VEnndade in the same volume and especially
pp. 385, 386. Cf. Naville, Old Egyptian Faith, p. 117; Erman, Hist.
Egyptian Religion, p. 78.

3 Tu enim, aiunt, omnes cognosce, te autem nemo cognoscat Xon

autem multos scire posse haec, sed unum a mille, et duo a myriadibus. Ire-
naeus, Bk I. c. 19, § 3, p. 202, Harvey. Epiphanius, Haer. xxrv. c. 5,
p. 152, Oehler, while copying Irenaeus' account puts it rather differently,
'YfX€ts irdvra yivaxrKtrt, vpas 8t fir)8f\s ytvaxncfTO), which probably represents
Irenaeus' own expression. One of the authors of the Pistis Sophia had
evidently heard of Basilides' remark about 1 in 1000. Cf. Pistis Sophia,
p. 354, Copt.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 93

Christian Gnosticism, as will presently be seen, from an esoteric
or mystical explanation of Pagan beliefs 1 into a form of Christi-
anity able to compete seriously with the Catholic Church, was
himself a native of Egypt, that he studied the Platonic philosophy
in Alexandria 2 , and that he must have resided there at the same
time as Basilides, who was slightly older than he, and died
before Valentinus' doctrine was promulgated 3 . It is therefore
hardly possible that Valentinus should not have known of
Basilides' teaching and have borrowed from it, even without
the internal evidence of borrowing afforded by a comparison
of the two systems*. The almost total silence of the Fathers as
to Basilides' school after that of Valentinus became famous is
to be accounted for, as Matter points out, by supposing that
the hearers of Basilides, probably few in number, came over
to him in a body 5 .

Basilides, therefore, forms a very important link between
Simon Magus and the pre-Christian Gnostics — with whom
Basilides was connected, as we have seen, through his master
and Simon Magus' successor Menander — on the one hand, and
Valentinus on the other. But his teaching also explains to us
why so many of the features of the Ophite doctrines also re-
appear in the Valentinian heresy. For the three Sonhoods of
Basilides, although described in a fantastic and almost unin-
telligible way by Hippolytus, seem to correspond in idea with

1 So Irenaeus, loc. cit., p. 203, Harvey, makes the Basilidians say that
they were neither Jews nor Christians : Et Judaeos quidem jam non esse
dieunt,Ckristianos autem nondum — or, as Epiphanius, loc. cit., more strongly
puts it: 'lovScu'ovr fxev tavrovs jxr]KtTi eivcu <f)d<rKOV(Ti, Xpicrriavovs 8e firjiceTi
ytytvfjadai.

2 Epiphanius, Pan. Haer. xxxi. c. 2, p. 306, Oehler. Amelineau,
Onost. Eg. p. 168, defends Epiphanius' statement.

3 Matter, Hist, du Onost. t. n. p. 37, says that Basilides died about
135 a.d. and that Valentinus' teaching began to make itself heard about
the year following ; but he gives no authorities for the statement. Epi-
phanius, loc. cit., does say, however, that Valentinus was later in time than
Basilides and " Satornilus " (Saturninus). There seems no authority for
Matter's statement that he was of Jewish origin.

4 Amelineau, Gnost. tg. p. 176, and Clement of Alexandria as there
quoted. Cf. King, Gnostics, p. 263.

8 Matter, Hist, du Gnost. t. n. p. 36.


94 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

the First and Second Man and the Christos of the Naassene
writer ; while the Holy Spirit, who is of inferior essence and
therefore remains below the Supreme Godhead, can hardly be
distinguished from the Sophia or Prunicos who in the Ophite
scheme plays so large a part in the work of the redemption of
the light. The power of the Great Archon or Ruler of this
World is also said in Hippolytus' account of the Basilidean
teaching, to rise no higher than the firmament, which was
placed between the hypercosmic spaces where soared the
Boundary Spirit, and the ordered universe 1 ,— a statement
which strictly corresponds to the limit placed on the power
and authority of the Ophite Ialdabaoth. The Archon of
Basilides who must, I think, be intended for Yahweh the God
of the Jews is, like Ialdabaoth, ignorant that there is anything
above him 2 ; and although he differs from his prototype in
being better taught by his Son, this is easily explained by
the higher position occupied by both Jews and Christians in
Alexandria than in Phrygia. It is significant also that the
mystic and probably cryptogrammatic name Caulacau which
the Naassene writer uses for the Saviour of his system is applied
to the corresponding person in the system of Basilides 3 .

1 'EnVi ovv yiyovt irpunTj <ai btvTtpa dvadpofir/ rrjs YIottjtos, kcu ptpivrfKtv
avrov to Ilv tv pa to "Ayiov tov flprjpivov Tponov, o~Ttpt<npAT<av vnepKoirpiav
Kai tov Koo-fiov p.era^v TtTayfiivov. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vii. c. 23, p. 353,
Cruice.

2 Hippolytus, loc. cit. p. 354, Cruice.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk v. c. 8, pp. 158, 159, Cruice, says simply in
speaking of the Naassene writer : ovtoi do-\v ol rpt\s viripoynoi \6yoi
" Kav\a<ai, 2av\ao~av, Zeijtrap." " KavXa(ca€ " tov ava>, tov Ahapavros,
" SavXaaav" tov Kara Ovtjtov, " Zttja-dp " tov eVi ra av<o pfvo~avros 'lopbdvov.
" These are the three weighty words : Caulacau [the name] of him who
is above, [i.e.] Adamas; Saulasau of the mortal one who is beneath;
Zeesar of the Jordan which flows on high." Epiphanius, Haer. xxv. c. 4,
pp. 162, 164, Oehler, says that they are taken from the words of Isaiah
xxviii. 10, DC TJJT lp 1 ? 1p 1^> TV translated in the A.V. "precept upon pre-
cept, line upon line, here a little " ; but the resemblance is not very close,
and it is more probable that the barbarous words of the text cover some sort
of cryptogram. Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 19, § 3, p. 201, Harvey, says of the Basili-
dians : Quemadmodum et mundus nomen esse, in quo dicunt descendisse et
ascendisse SalixUorem, esse Caulacau, which Harvey says is unintelligible.
See Salmon, s.h.v. in Diet, of Christian Biog., where he tries hard to explain


;


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 95

The popularity and success that attended Valentinus' own
teaching may be judged from the pains that the Fathers took
to oppose it. The five books Against Heresies so often quoted
above were written by Irenaeus with the avowed intention
of refuting Valentinus' disciples. Hippolytus, who aimed at a
more encyclopaedic account of the heresies of his time, devotes
more space to the Valentinian sect than to any other. Tertullian
not only repeatedly gibes at them after his manner when treat-
ing of other matters, but composed a special book against them
still extant, from which we learn of the existence of other
treatises against them written by Justin Martyr, Miltiades a
Christian sophist, and one Proculus, all which are now lost 1 .
Those near to Valentinus in date seem hardly to have con-
sidered him an enemy of Christianity. Clement of Alexandria
quotes several passages from the writings of him and his
followers, and although it is always with the view of con-
tradicting the statements of his fellow-countryman, he yet
does so without any of the heat displayed by other contro-
versialists 2 . On the other hand, the orthodox who wrote long
after Valentinus was in his grave are most bitter against him.
Epiphanius, who seldom had a good word for any one, calls him,
with some justice, the chief of heretics 3 ; Philaster of Brescia
says he was more a follower of Pythagoras than of Christ, and
that he led captive the souls of many 4 ; Praedestinatus, that he
and his followers throughout the East severely wounded the

the name and its use. Cheyne, Prophecies of Isaiah, 2nd ed. vol. I. p. 162,
would make this Caulacau, however, equivalent to the " word of Jehovah "
or Logos. Cf. Ren&n, Hist, du Peuple d' Israel, Eng. ed. 1897, n. pp. 436, 437.

1 Tertullian, adv. Valentinianos, c. 5.

2 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk n. c. 20 ; Bk iv. cc. 9, 13 ; Bk vi. c. 6. So
Origen, to whose frequent quotations from the Valentinian Heracleon we
owe all that we know of that shrewd Biblical critic. See A. E. Brooke,
Fragments of Heracleon, Cambridge Texts and Studies, voL I. p. 4. De
Faye's opinion that Clement and Origen were the only Fathers who treated
•Gnosticism with intelligence and sometimes judicially has been quoted above.

3 Epiphanius, Pan. Haer.-x.xxi. c. 1, p. 306, Oehler.

4 Valentinus Pythagoricus magis quam Christianus, vanam quandam

ac perniciosam doctrinam eructans, et velut arithmeticam, id est numerosi-
tatis, novam fallaciam praedicans, multorumque animas ignorantium capti-
vavit, Philastrius, de Haeresibus liber, c. 38, p. 43, Oehler, vol. I.


96 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [oh.

Church of God 1 ; while Eusebius in his Life of Constantine
produces an Imperial edict against the Valentinians and other
heretics, issued, according to him, some time before the baptism
of its promulgator, and ordering that they shall no longer be
allowed to assemble together and that their " houses of prayer "
shall be confiscated to the use of the Catholic Church 2 . It was
probably in pursuance of some such law, which also enjoined,
as Eusebius tells us, the search for and destruction of their
writings, that a conventicle of the Valentinians at Callinicum on
the Eastern frontier of the Empire was burned by the Christian
mob headed by their bishop and monks in a.d. 388 3 . The
same scenes were no doubt enacted in other parts of the Empire ;
and we may, perhaps, see in the fury of the persecutors the
measure of their fear.

Yet there is little in the Valentinian doctrine as described
by the Fathers to account for the popularity that it evidently
attained. Valentinus, like all the Gnostics, believed in one
Supreme Source of all things ; but he from the first threw over
the extremely philosophical idea of Basilides, which some
writers would derive from Buddhism 4 , of a non-existent God
as the pinnacle of his system. To fill the gap thus left, he
returned to the older conception of the Ophites, and postulated
a Bythos or Deep as the origin of all. But this " Unknowable
Father " was by no means the mere abstraction without direct
action upon the world or man that he was in the systems of the
Ophites and of Basilides. As to the mode of his action, however,
a schism — or rather, a difference of opinion — early manifested
itself among his followers. Some of them gave to Bythos a
female consort called, as Irenaeus, and, following him, Tertullian,
tell us, Silence (~iyi)) and Grace (Xa'^t?), from whom all the
subsequent aeons or manifestations of the Godhead descended 5 .

1 [Vcdentiniani et Valentinus] Hi per orientem dispersi graviler dei
ecclesiam vulnerarunl, Praedestinatus, Bk 1. c. 11, p. 235, Oehler, vol. 1.

2 Eusebius, Vita Constantini, Bk in. cc. 64, 65.

3 Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol. m. c. 27, p. 174, Bury.
* King, Gnostics, p. 13.

6 Irenaeus, Bk 1. c. 1, § 1, pp. 8, 9, Harvey; Tertullian, adv. Vol. c. vn.
Is this the "Grace" for whose presence the soul prays in the apologiae of ,
the Ophites ? See last chapter.


ix J Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 97

Irenaeus partly explains away this by the statement that Bythos
or the Perfect Aeon dwelt for boundless ages in rest and solitude
(rjavxia), but that there existed with him Ennoia or Thought.
Whether this last part of the statement was or was not thrown in
so as to force a parallel between the system of Valentinus and
that of Simon Magus from whom the orthodox insisted all later
heresiarchs derived their teaching, cannot now be said. But
Hippolytus, who, while not disputing this derivation, is just as
anxious to show that Valentinus was also much indebted to
the Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy learned by him at
Alexandria, tells us that there were other Valentinians who
insisted that the Father (or Bythos) was without spouse (a&vyos)
not feminine (adrjXvs) and lacking nothing (d-7rpoo-8er)s) ; and
that Valentinus himself said that Bythos was " unbegotten
(dyevvTjTos) not subject to conditions of space or time, having
no counsellor, nor any substance that could be comprehended
by any figure of speech 1 ." Herein either Hippolytus or Valen-
tinus seems to have been attracted by the ideas of the Neo-
Pythagorean school of Alexandria, who indulged in many
arithmetical theories about the Monad or Final Unity which
went on producing male and female (i.e. odd and even) numbers
alternately until it arrived at the perfect harmony of ten 2 .
Yet those who study ancient religions by the comparative
method will be more inclined to see in this diversity of opinion
among the Valentinians a hesitation between the old idea
current, as we have seen, in the Eastern Mediterranean, that
a god may be bisexual and therefore capable of producing
descendants without female assistance and the ancient Semitic
view (due perhaps to the fact that Semitic languages know only
two genders) which divided the Godhead like everything else
into male and female 3 .

1 "OXcos, (f>r)<ri, yevvrjrov ovdev, Ilar^p 8e tjv fxovos dyevvrjTos, oi tottov
fX 03V j °^ XP® vov i °v o~vfijiov\ov, ovk aX\r)v Tiva nar ov8eva rmv rponav
voT)Bf)nai 8wafiivr]u ovaiav : Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 29, p. 280, Cruice.

2 Diogenes Laertius, Vit. Philosoph. Bk vm. c. 19.

3 Philippe Berger, "Les Steles Puniques de la Bibliotheque Xationale,"
Gazette Archeologique, lime ann. Paris, 1876, p. 123, says that the Aryan
genius sees atmospheric phenomena where the Semite imagines persons
who unite and give birth (personnes qui s'unissent et s'engendrent les unes

l. n. 7


98 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

However this may be, all the Valentinian schools seem to
have agreed upon the emanation which immediately proceeded
from the Deep or the Father of All. From Bythos, either alone
or with the help of Sige 1 , there proceeded Mind or Nous (N0O9),
called also Monogenes 2 and the Father, the beginning of all
subsequent things. This Nous is said to be " equal and like "
to him from whom he had emanated, and by himself capable
of comprehending the greatness of Bythos 3 . With Nous there
also came forth a female Power named Aletheia or Truth
( 'AXr/deia), and this pair gave birth to a second syzygy, viz.
Logos or the Word (A070?) and Zoe or Life (Zcor/), who in their
turn produced a third pair, namely : Anthropos, Man ("A vdpwrros)
and Ecclesia, the Church ('E««X»/o-ta) 4 . The later Valentinians,
from whom Irenaeus quotes, added to these six aeons, Bythos
and his spouse Sige, thus making up the originating Ogdoad
or eightfold Godhead again called the root and substance of
all [subsequent] things 5 . Valentinus himself, however, prob-
ably did not give Bythos a spouse and held that he remained
apart from and uplifted above his six principal emanations 6 .

Ies autres). Renan, Hist, du Peuple d" Israel, Paris, 1887, t. 1. p. 49, shows
that all Semites are naturally euhemerists and therefore anthropomorphists.

1 Amelineau, Gnost. £g. pp. 198 sqq., shows that Sige appears not only
in the " Italic School " of Valentinus' followers, but also in the Oriental
School which is more likely to represent the teaching of Valentinus himself.
This may in fact be deduced from the words which Hippolytus puts into
his mouth {op. cit. Bk vi. c. 29, p. 281, Cruice) : \\ydnr), (prjatv, rjv 5\os, 17
8e ayanr} ovk tartv ayairrj, iav prj rj to dya7ra>p,€vov. " He, he says, is all
Love, and Love is not Love, unless there is something to love." Thus the
Orphics called their Phanes or firstborn god Eros.

2 As has been many times said, not " Only-begotten," but " unique."
See Badham in Academy, 5 Sept. 1896.

3 Tavrqv [Sige] be iiirodf^apivrjv to anepfia tovto koi tyKvpova yevoptvrjv,
a.7TOKvfjo-ai Novv, opoiov re icai. io~ov t<b it pofiakovTi, koi povov ^(opoivra to
fxtyfdos tov Harpos: Irenaeus, Bk 1. c. 1, § 1, p. 9, Harvey: "and she
having received this seed and becoming pregnant, brought forth Nous, like
and equal to him who had projected him, and alone containing the greatness
of the Father."

* Id. Bk 1. c. 1, § 1, pp. 9, 10, Harvey.

* Ibid. p. 10, Harvey.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 29, p. 280, Cruice.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 99

This subdivision of the Divine, resembling as it does the
system of Simon Magus before described, may seem at first
sight incredibly foolish and complicated, especially when it is
considered that these " aeons," as Valentinus calls them, might
be considered not only as powers but as worlds. So it did to
the Fathers, who are never tired of pouring contempt upon it.
Tertullian makes merry over the Valentinian conception of a
universe with an endless series of heavens piled one over the
other, as he says, like the " Lodgings to let " of a Roman insula
or tenement house, or, had he ever seen one, of a New York
skyscraper 1 . Irenaeus jokes cumbrously, comparing the Valen-
tinian aeons to vegetables as if, he says, a gourd should bring
forth a cucumber and this in its turn a melon 2 . Hippolytus,
indeed, cannot indulge in such jeers because to do so would have
stamped him in the opinion of all the learned of his time as an
uneducated barbarian, his pet theory of Gnosticism being that
all its doctrine was a plagiarism from the Greek philosophers
and notably from Plato. Yet he never loses an opportunity
of calling Valentinus' opinions " worthless " ; and goes out of
his way to tack on to them the system of the Jewish magician
Marcus, who, if we can believe the statements of the Fathers,
exploited the rising sense of religion of the age for his own
immoral or interested purpose 3 .

Yet a statement that Tertullian lets drop, as if accidentally,
may teach us to beware of taking Valentinus' supposed opinions
on the nature of these hypostases or Persons of the Godhead
more literally than he did himself. In his treatise against the
Valentinians the " furious African barrister " is led away by
the exigencies of his own rhetoric to tell us that there were some
among them who looked upon all this elaborate description of
the emanations of the Ogdoad as a figure of speech. All the
aeons of the Ogdoad were according to them merely attributes
or names of God. When, they said, God thought of producing
offspring, He thereby acquired the name of Father ; and because
his offspring was true, that of Truth ; and because He wished
to appear in human form, he was called Man ; and because He

1 Tertullian, adv. Valentinianos, c. 7.

2 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 5, § 2, p. 106, Harvey. * See p. 128 infra.

7—2


100 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

assembled His attributes in His mind and selected from them
those most proper for His purpose, they were called the Church ;
and as His only (or unique) Son was, as it were, uttered or sent
forth to mankind, He was called the Word) and from His powers
of salvation, Life ; and so on 1 . As we have seen, Valentinus did
not invent de novo his conception of the Godhead, which bears
besides evident marks of having been adopted with slight modi-
fication from that of Simon Magus and the Ophites. This state-
ment of Tertullian gives us ground therefore for supposing that
he may really have held the same views respecting the Divine
Nature as the Catholic Church, merely giving an allegorical
explanation of the earlier opinions to convince his hearers that
the teaching of the Apostles was not so subversive of or incon-
sistent with the way of thinking of the ancient theologians and
philosophers as some of them thought. Clement of Alexandria
shows similar comprehensiveness when he said that in the
Christian faith there are some mysteries more excellent than
others — or, in other words, degrees in knowledge and gTace 2
— , that the Hellenic philosophy fits him who studies it for the
reception of the truth 3 , and that the Christian should rejoice
in the name of Gnostic, so long as he understands that the true
Gnostic is he who imitates God as far as possible 4 . He even
goes further, and himself uses the Gnostic method of personifica-
tion of abstract qualities, as when he says that Eeverence is the
daughter of Law 5 , and Simplicity, Innocence, Decorum, and Love,
the daughters of Faith 6 . If Valentinus used similar metaphors,
it by no means follows that he was thereby advocating the
worship of many gods, which was the accusation most frequently
brought against him by the Catholic Church. The same accusa-
tion might with equal propriety be made against John Bunvan
on account of his Interpreter and his Mr Greatheart.

But whatever Valentinus' own views with regard to the
Supreme Being may have been, he could no more escape than
did Philo or any other Platonist from the difficulty of explaining

1 Tertullian, adv. V alentinianos, c. 36.

2 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk I. c. 1.

3 Ibid. Bk i. cc. 7, 16. * Ibid. Bk n. c. 19.
• Ibid. Bk n. c. 20. 6 Ibid. Bk n. c. 12.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 101

the connection of this Perfect God with imperfect matter 1 , and
this had to be the work in his system of an intermediate Power.
This Power was that Nous or Monogenes whom we have seen
was the first and unique being produced from the Unknowable
Father, to whom he seems to have stood in much the same
relation as the Dionysos of the Orphics did to the supreme Zeus 2 .
Yet although it was through this lieutenant of the Unknown
Father that all things were made, he also was too great to act
directly upon matter. Seeing, says Hippolytus in this con-
nection, that their own offspring, Logos and Zoe, had brought
forth descendants capable of transmission, Nous and his partner
Aletheia returned thanks to the Father of All and offered to
him a perfect number in the shape of ten aeons 3 . These ten
aeons were projected like the direct emanations of the Godhead
in syzygies or pairs, their names being respectively Bythios
or Deep (BvOios*) and Mixis or' Mixture (M/ft<?), Ageratos or
Who Grows not Old ('AyjjpaTos) and Henosis or Oneness
C'Ei'wo-t?), Autophyes or Self -Produced (Avro(f>vrj<i 5 ) and
Hedone or Pleasure (HSovrj), Akinetos or Who Cannot Be
Moved ('Akivtjtos) and Syncrasis or Blending (Si^y/coacrt?),
Monogenes or the Unique (Movoyevrjs) 6 and Macaria or Bliss
(Ma/capCa). In like manner, Logos and Zoe wishing to give
thanks to their progenitors Nous and Aletheia, put forth
another set, this time an imperfect number, or twelve aeons,
also arranged in syzygies and called Paraclete (n.apd/cXrjTO'i)
and Faith (n«r™<?), Fatherly (llar/m/co?) and Hope ('E\7ri<?)>
Motherly (MyTpi/cos) and Love (Ayd-irq), Ever-Thinking
('Aei'vov? 7 ) and Comprehension (2ui>e<m), Of the Church
(E/ac\T}<Tia(TTiKd<;) and Blessedness (MaieapioTT)*;), Longed-for
(®e\r}To<i) and Wisdom (locpia). It was through this last, as
through her namesake in the system of the Ophites, that the
Divine came to mingle with Matter.

1 See Chapter VI, voL i. p. 174, supra.

2 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk vn. c. 1.

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vl c. 29, p. 281, Cruice. 4 i.e. Profound.

5 Not " self-existent," but maker of his own (j>v<ris or nafaire.

6 See n. 2, p. 98 supra.

I 7 Harvey reads here aluvtos " everlasting," which makes at least as
good sense as the other.


102 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Before coming to this, however, it will be well to say some-
thing here about the ideas that seem to lie behind the names
of this series of aeons numbering, with the first six, twenty-eight
in all, which thus made up what was known as the Pleroma or
Fulness of the Godhead. If we arrange them in three families
or groups according to their parentage, thus :

Children of Bythos (either alone or with Sige).
Nous — Aletheia .

Children of Nous and Aletheia.

Logos — Zoe.
Bythios — Mixis.
Ageratos — Henosis.
Autophyes — Syncrasis.
Monogenes — Macaria.

Children of Logos and Zoe.

Anthropos — Ecclesia.
Paracletos — Pistis.
Patricos — Elpis.
Metricos — Agape.
Ecclesiasticis — Macariotes.
Theletas — Sophia,

it will be seen that among the elder members of each group,
that is, the three first syzygies, Nous- Aletheia, Logos-Zoe, and
Anthropos-Ecclesia, the name of the male member of each
syzygy is always that of an actual and concrete concept — the
Mind, the Word, and Man, — showing perhaps how thought and
speech all marked different stages in the evolution of the being
called the Perfect Man 1 ; while the appellatives of the females
of each syzygy — Truth, Life, and the Church — all connote

1 Some memory of this seems to have enlivened the disputes between
the Nominalists and Realists of the xrnth century. Cf. the wrangling of
the Doctors at the School of Salerno in Longfellow's Golden Legend

I, with the Doctor Seraphic, maintain

That the word that's not spoken, but conceived in the brain,

Is the type of Eternal Generation,

The spoken word is the Incarnation.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 103

abstract ideas 1 . With the Decad put forth by Nous and
Aletheia, i.e. Bythios-Mixis, Ageratos-Henosis, Autophyes-
Hedone, Acinetos-Syncrasis, and Monogenes-Macaria, every
male aeon, as M. Amelineau has pointed out, has for name an
adjective, while the females are all described by substantives 2 .
But the names of the male aeons are all epithets or attributes
peculiar to their father Nous, who is thus said to be the abysmal,
never-ageing, creator of his own nature, immovable, and
unique, and those of the female aeons are descriptive of different
states or conditions arising from his action 3 . M. Amelineau
thinks that the names of these last describe a successive degrada-
tion of the Divine Nature ; but this does not seem to have been
Valentinus' intention, and it is hard to see for instance why
Syncrasis or blending should be more unworthy than Mixis or
simple mixture. Moreover, this group of aeons, unlike the six
preceding them, are not reproductive and no direct descendants
follow from their conjugation. Perhaps then we may best
understand Valentinus' nomenclature as a statement that the
coming together of Mind and Truth produced Profound Ad-
mixture, Never-ageing Union, Self-created Pleasure, Unshake-
able Combination, and Unique Bliss. In like manner, the names
of the members of the Dodecad or group of twelve aeons pro-
ceeding from Logos and Zoe may be read as describing the
Comforting Faith, the Fatherly Hope, the Motherly Love 4 ,
the Everlasting Comprehension, the Elect Blessedness, and the
Longed-for Wisdom arising from the conjugation of the Word
and Life or, in one word, from the Incarnation 5 .

1 They are also probably places or receptacles. In the Pistis Sophia
we read repeatedly of the three x a> PW aTa ano ^ °f * ne T °' ros aXrjdfias.

2 Amelineau, Gnost. figypt. pp. 200 sqq.

3 So Hope Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, 1913, p. 114, points out that
half of the Persian Amshaspands or archangels bear names expressing "what
Mazda is" and the other half "what Mazdagives." There is much likeness, as
has been said, between the Amshaspands and the "'Roots" of Simon Magus.

* It is worth noticing that these are the three " theological " virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity.

8 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 23, pp. 269-271, Cruice, wishes to make
out that all this is derived from what he calls the " Pythagorean " system
of numbers. Anyone wishing to pursue these " silly cabalisms" further is
recommended to read Harvey's Introduction to Valentinus' system, op,
cit. pp. cxv-cxvii.


104 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

To return now to the fall of Sophia which, in the system of
Valentinus, as in that of the Ophites, brought about the creation
of the universe. All the accounts of Valentinus' teaching that
have reached us seem to agree that Sophia's lapse was caused,
according to him, not by accident as with the Ophites, but by
her own ignorance and emulation. Leaving the Dodecad, " this
twelfth and youngest of the aeons," as Hippolytus describes
her 1 , soared on high to the Height of the Father, and perceived
that he, the Unknowable Father, was alone able to bring forth
without a partner 2 . Wishing to imitate him, she gave birth
by herself and apart from her spouse, " being ignorant that only
the Ungenerated Supreme Principle and Root and Height and
Depth of the Universes can bring forth alone." " For," says
he {i.e. Valentinus), " in the ungenerated (or unbegotten) all
things exist together. But among generated (or begotten)
things, it is the female who projects the substance, while the
male gives form to the substance which the female has pro-
jected 3 ." Hence the substance which Sophia put forth was
without form and unshapen — an expression which Valentinus
seems to have copied, after his manner, from the " without form
and void " (aiiopfyos Kai dicaTao-ictvao-Tos) of Genesis 4 .

1 Atto Se t5>v 8(Ka8vo 6 8<o$eKaros <a\ vetoraroj ttc'ivtcov to>v (Iko(tl'!ktu>
Ald>va>v, 8ij\vs o)v Kai KaXovpevos Sotyia, Kurevorjcre to ttXtjOos icai ttjv 8vvap.iv
T&v yfytwr/KOTaiv Ala>va>v, Kai. dvt8pap.€V els to j3d6os to tov Uarpas. "But
the twelfth of the twelve, and the youngest of all the eight and twenty
aeons, who is a female and called Sophia, considered the number and power
of those aeons who were begotten (?) and went on high to the height of the
Father " : Hippolytus, op. cit, Bk vi. c. 30, p. 283, Cruice. The " eight
and twenty aeons " shows that Valentinus, according to Hippolytus, did
not reckon Bythos and Sige in the first Ogdoad.

2 A further proof that the primitive doctrine of Valentinus did not
give a spouse to Bytho3.

3 'Ev p.ev yap rm ay(vvf]TCd, (prjo-lv, eari iravra 6p.ov- (6p.oii seems
here to mean " without distinction of time or place." Cf. the " None
is afore or after other " of the Athanasian Creed) eV 8e toIs yewrjTols, to
fxev afj\v to~Tiv ova-Las npo^XrjTiKov, to Se uppev p,op(f)0L>TiK6v Trjs vtto tov
0T]\(a>s n pofiaWofif vrjs ovaias. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 30, p. 284,
Cruice.

Kai tovto to~Ti, (prjariv, o Xe'yet Mayvarji' "fj 8( yrj tfv aopaTos nai a<aTa-
o-Ktvao-Tos." " And this, he says, is the saying of Moses. ' And the earth
was invisible and unshapen ' " — a curious variant of the A.V., Hippolytus,


-


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 105

This Ectroma or abortion of Sophia, however, caused great
alarm to the other members of the Pleroma, who feared that
they might themselves be led into similar lapses, and thus bring
about the destruction of the whole system. They accordingly
importuned Bythos, who ordered that two new aeons, viz.
Christos or Christ and the Holy Spirit, should be put forth by
Nous and Aletheia to give form and direction to the Ectroma
and to alleviate the distress of Sophia 1 . This was accordingly
done, and this new pair of aeons separated Sophia from her
Ectroma and drew her with them within the Pleroma, which
was thereupon closed by the projection by Bythos of yet
another aeon named the Cross (-ravpos) 2 , whose sole function
was apparently to preserve the Pleroma or Divine World from
all contamination from the imperfection which was outside 3 .
This last aeon being, says Hippolytus, born great, as brought
into existence by a great and perfect father, was put forth as
a guard and circumvallation for the aeons, and became the
boundary of the Pleroma, containing within him all the thirty

loc. cit. He goes on to say that this is "the good and heavenly Jerusalem,"
the land in which the children of Israel are promised milk and honey. It
should be noticed, however, that even this unshapen being, like all the
Sophias, was identified with the Earth.

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 31, pp. 284, 285. Irenaeus, Bk I. cc. 1, 4,
p. 21, Harvey, says that Monogenes [Nous] put forth (Trpo.SaXe) the
pair Kara Trpofxrjdfiav rov Uarpos, apparently without the aid of his
partner Aletheia. Hippolytus' account is the simpler, as making all the
Pleroma thus descend from a single pair, and is therefore, probably, the
earlier.

2 Hippolytus, loc. cit., says that this new aeon was called "Opos "Horus,"
or " The Limit," because he separates the Pleroma or Fulness from the
Hysterema or Deficiency (i.e. that which lacks God), which is one of those
puns which will be familiar to all Egyptologists (see Erman, Life in Ancient
Egypt, Eng. ed. p. 396, for other examples). He is also said to have been
called Metocheus or the Partaker, because he shares in the Deficiency,
doubtless as being partly outside the Pleroma. His name of Horus was
probably suggested by that of the old Egyptian god whose figure must have
been familiar to every Alexandrian. In the nnd century A.D., this last
generally appears with hawk's head and human body dressed in the cuirass
and boots of a Roman gendarme or stationarius, which would be appro-
priate enough for a sentinel or guard.

2 Hippolytus, loc. cit. pp. 284, 285, Cruice.


106 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [en.

aeons together. Outside this boundary remained Sophia's
Ectroma, whom Christ and the Holy Spirit had fashioned into
an aeon as perfect as any within the Pleroma ; and she, like her
mother, is now called Sophia, being generally distinguished from
" the last and youngest of the aeons " as the Sophia Without 1 .
This Sophia Without the Pleroma was by no means at
peace within herself. She is represented as having been
afflicted with great terror at the departure of Christos and the
Holy Spirit from her, when they left her to take their places
within the Pleroma, and as grieving over her solitude and " in
great perplexity " as to the nature of the Holy Spirit. Hence
she turned herself to prayers and supplications to Christos, the
being who had given her form, and these prayers were -heard.
Meanwhile, the thirty aeons within the Pleroma had resolved,
on finding themselves safe within the guard of Stauros, to
glorify the Father or Bythos by offering to him one aeon who
should partake of the nature of each, and was therefore called
the " Joint Fruit of the Pleroma 2 ." This was Jesus " the
Great High Priest," who, on coming into existence was sent
outside the Pleroma at the instance of Christos in order that
he might be a spouse to the Sophia Without and deliver her
from her afflictions 3 . This he did, but the four passions of

1 Hippolytus, loc. tit. pp. 286, 287, Cruice. Christ and the Holy Spirit,
having discharged the duty laid upon them, have retired with Sophia
" the youngest of the aeons " within the Pleroma and cannot again issue
forth.

2 Hippolytus, op. tit. C. 32 : t8o£ev avrols p.') povov Kara <rv£vylav SeSo-
£a<€vcu tov vlov, 8o£dcrai[ft(] iral 8ia npocrCpopas Kapnayv irpeirovrav ra Uarpi.
"It seemed good to them [the aeons of the Pleroma] not only to magnify the
Son by conjunction, but also by an offering of pleasing fruits to the Father."
So in the mysteries of Isis, Osiris is called the fruit of the vine Dionysos.
See Athenagoras, Legatid. c. xxn. Plainly Bythos and Nous or Monogenes
are here represented as Father and Son as in the Ophite myth. The new
projection is necessary to accord with the text about the whole Pleroma
dwelling together bodily in Jesus. Cf. Colossians i. 19.

3 The expression 6 apxieptiis 6 fiiyas is repeated by Clement of
Alexandria, Protrept. c. xn, possibly with reference to this passage. It
may be noticed, however, that Jesus is here also made the Messenger or
Ambassador of the Light as with the Ophites. It will be seen later that he
occupies the same place with the Manichaeans. Cf. Chapter XIII, infra.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 107

Sophia, namely, fear, grief, perplexity, and supplication, having
once been created could not be destroyed, but became separate
and independent beings. Thus it was that matter came into
being, and was itself the creation of the Deity, instead of being,
as in the earlier systems, of independent origin. For Jesus
" changed her fear into the substance which is psychic or
animal (ovaua ^rvx^v)> her grief into that which is hylic or
material, and her perplexity into the substance of demons 1 .'*
Of her supplication, however, Jesus made a path of repentance
(68bv eVi fM€rdvoiav) and gave it power over the psychic sub-
stance. This psychic substance is, says Valentinus, a " con-
suming fire " like the God of Moses, and the Demiurge or
Architect of the Cosmos, and is called the "Place" (tottos)
and the Hebdomad or Sevenfold Power, and the Ancient of
Days, and is, if Hippolytus has really grasped Valentinus'
opinions on the point, the author of death 2 . He and his realm
come immediately below that of Sophia Without, here some-
what unexpectedly called the Ogdoad, where Sophia dwells with
her spouse Jesus 3 . His sevenfold realm is, it would seem, the
seven astronomical heavens, of which perhaps the Paradise of
Adam is the fourth 4 . Below this again comes this world, the

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 32, p. 289, Cruice.

2 Ibid. p. 290, Cruice. Kara tovto toLvvv to pipoi, Bvryrr} ris fOTiv
7) ^v^r/, fi€o-6rr]s tls ovaa' ecrri yap 'E/38o/ias ica! Karairavo-is. " According
to this, therefore," [he has just said that fire has a twofold power,
for there is a fire which devours everything and which cannot be
extinguished] " part (of the Demiurge) is a certain soul which is subject
to death, and a certain substance which occupies a middle place. For it
is a Hebdomad and a laying to rest." The passage is not easy, but seems
to mean that some of the souls made by the Demiurge are mortal, while
others are susceptible of salvation. Cf. n. 1, p. 109, infra. The name
Hebdomad evidently refers to the seven astronomical heavens under the
rule of the Demiurge, and the title " Ancient of Days " identifies him, like
the Jaldabaoth of the Ophites, with the God of the Jews.

3 Called Ogdoadas or eighth, because it is next above the seven heavens ;
but Sophia, the 28th, was the last of the aeons. We see, therefore, that
Valentinus, like the Ophites of the diagram, is reckoning forwards and
backwards in the most confusing way.

4 So Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 9, pp. 44, 45, Harvey, says that they [the
Valentinians] say that the seven heavens are endowed with intelligence
(votjtovs) and that they suppose them to be angels, and that the Demiurge


108 Post-Christian Gnostics: Yalentinus [ch.

Cosmos, ruled by a hylic or material Power called the Devil
(AidfioXos) or Cosmocrator, not further described by Yalentinus
but apparently resembling the Satan of the New Testament 1 .
Lowest of all is unformed and unarranged matter, inhabited by
the demons, of whom Beelzebub, as in the Gospels, is said to
be the chief 2 . We have then four " places " outside the Pleroma
or Godhead, arranged in a succession which reckoning from above
downwards may be thus summed up :

1. The Heaven of Sophia called the Ogdoad, wherein dwell
Sophia Without and her spouse Jesus 3 .

is himself an angel like God. Also that Paradise is a heaven above the
third, and that a fourth angel rules (?) there, and that from him Adam
took somewhat while talking to him. Whatever this story may mean, it is
curious to see how readily the Gnostics identified in name a heavenly place
with its ruler, as in the titles of kings and peers.

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 10, pp. 47, 48, Harvey, says that the Devil or
Cosmocrator and all the spiritual things of evil (rd TrvevpariKa rrjs irovrjplas)
were made out of the pain (Xvtttj) of Sophia, and that he is the creation
of the Demiurge, but knows what is above him, because he is a spirit, while
his creator is ignorant that there is anything higher than himself, because
he is only ruler of animal things (\/a>x (K <i virdpxovTa). In this, which is
probably the teaching of Ptolemy, Valentinus' successor is seen to be
reverting to the Ophite ideas. Hippolytus, who here probably gives us
Valentinus' own doctrine, says on the other hand (op. cit. Bk vi. c. 33,
pp. 290, 291, Cruice) : "Qantp ovv ttjs y^v\iK^s ovcrias 17 Trpatrr) kcll peyiaTT}
Svvapis ytyovev tiKtov [the text is here restored by Cruice : rov povoyei'ovs
vlov, ovroo ttjs rAiicJ)? ovaias Svvafus'] 8id(3o\os, 6 ap^cov tov Koapov tovtov
ttjs 8t Tu>v daipovcov ovtrias, rjris iorXv in. rffs diropias, 6 Bfe\£tfiov8.
" As therefore the first and greatest power of the animal substance (the
Demiurge) came into being as the image of the unique son (Nous), so the
power of the material substance is the Devil, the Ruler of this world ;
and Beelzebud [the power] of the substance of demons which came into
being from the perplexity " (of Sophia). It has been shown elsewhere
(P.S.B.A. 1901, pp. 48, 49) that this Beelzebud or Beelzebuth is written
in the Magic Papyri Jabezebuth or Yahweh Sabaoth, probably in pursuance
of the parallelism which gives every god or superior power his correspondent
personality in the inferior or evil world. In all magic, mediaeval or other-
wise, Beelzebuth is carefully distinguished from Satan.

2 Matthew x. 25, xii. 24, 27 ; Mark iii. 22 ; Luke xi. 15, have
j3«X£f/9ovX, while the Peshitto writes the more familiar Beelzebub.
See P.S.B.A. quoted in last note.

3 Called also the Heavenly Jerusalem. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi.
c. 32, p. 290, Cruice.


re]


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 109

2. The Sevenfold World called the Hebdomad created and
ruled by the Demiurge or Ancient of Days.

3. Our own ordered world or Cosmos created by the Demi-
urge but ruled by the Devil.

4. Chaos or unarranged Matter ruled by Beelzebub, Prince
of the Demons.

Much of this may be due to the desire apparently inborn in
natives of Egypt to define with excessive minuteness the topo-
graphy of the invisible world ; but the disposition of these
different Rulers was by no means a matter of indifference to
mankind. The Demiurge, as in the Ophite system, was not,
indeed, bad, but foolish and blind, not knowing what he did, nor
why he created man. Yet it is he who sends forth the souls of
men which reach them at their birth and leave them at their
death. Hence, says Hippolytus, he is called Psyche or Soul as
Sophia is called Pneuma or Spirit. But this soul of man is little
else than what we call the life, and here as in all else the Demiurge
is controlled without knowing it by his mother Sophia, who
from her place in the Heavenly Jerusalem directs his operations.
The bodies of men the Demiurge makes from that hylic and
diabolic substance which is matter 1 , and the soul which comes

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 10, p. 49, Harvey : A^/not/py^o-aira Si) tov
Koo-pov, ireiroitjicevai koi tov avdpcoirov tov xo'ikov • ovk airo ravTrjs 8e tt\s
f»/pas yrjs, aXX' airo rfjs dopdrov ovcrias, airo tov Ke^v/ittVou ical pevarov
ttjs v\r]s Aa/3dira • nal els tovtov ep(pvcrTJo~ai tov \(av)(ik6v 8iopl£ovrai.
"Having indeed fashioned the world, he (the Demiurge) made material
man ; not taking him out of this dry earth, but from the unseen substance,
from the poured forth and liquid matter, and into him, they declare, he
breathed that which is of the soul." Although this might be taken for a
Ptolemaic elaboration or embroidery of Valentinus' own doctrine, it is
epeated in almost identical words in the Excerpta Theodoti of Clement of
exandria, which represent the teaching of the Oriental School, and it
is therefore possibly the statement of Valentinus himself. Hippolytus, op.
cit. Bk vi. c. 34, p. 293, Cruice, is quite in accord with this. Irenaeus says
later (Bk 1. c. 1, § 11) with reference to the body of Jesus : ko.\ v\ik6v 8e
ov8' otiovv fl\r)(pevai \eyovo~tv avTov prj yap elvai tt]v vkrjv 8e<TiKr]v acorqpias.
I And they say that He took on Himself nothing whatever of matter ;
for matter is not susceptible of salvation." From which it is to be inferred
that Valentinus rejected the resurrection of the body.


110 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

from him dwells within it as in an inn, into which all may enter.
Sometimes, says Valentinus — and in this instance at least we
know it is he, not one of his followers, who is speaking — the
soul dwells alone and sometimes with demons, but sometimes
with Logoi or " words," who are heavenly angels sent by Sophia
Without and her spouse the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma into
this world, and who dwell with the soul in the earthly body,
when it has no demons living with it 1 . After leaving the body
of matter, the soul will even be united with its especial angel in
a still more perfect manner, as is a bridegroom with his bride 2 , a

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 4, p. 23, Harvey, says that when Jesus, the
Joint Fruit of the Pleroma, was projected, Angels of the same kind as
himself (opoyevels) were projected with him as a guard of honour. That
these are the spiritual spouses of the souls of men is confirmed by Hippo-
lytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 34, p. 292, according to Cruice's emendation :
'YirodiflprjTai 8e zeal tcl iv tjj Oybodbi, Ka\ irpoftej3r]Kao~iv rj 2o(f>la, rjris iorl
prjTrjp ndvTcov tuv £iovTa>v kot avrovs, Jcai 6 koivo? tov U\r]pd>paTOS Kapiros 6
Aoyos, [/cai] olrives elalv dyyeXoi irrovpdvioi, iroXiTevopevoi iv 'lepovo~aX!}p rfj
ava, t?j iv ovpavols. " The things which are in the Ogdoad also are sub-
divided, and there proceed (from it) Sophia who is, according to them, the
Mother of All Living, and the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma, the Logos, and
there are certain heavenly angels who are citizens of the Jerusalem which
is above, that which is in the heavens." So later (ibid. p. 293, Cruice). . .
oiTivis fieri Xoyoi avcoffev nareairappevoi drro tov koivov tov HXrjpciopaTOs
Kapiroii kcu rrjs 2o(pias els tovtov tov icoo-pov, KaroiKovvres iv [(ro>/xa]ri
^oiVcai peTii yjfvxris, orav 8aipov€s p.t) (ruvoi/caxri tj] tyvxjl- " There are
certain Logoi sown from above in the world by the Joint Fruit of the
Pleroma and Sophia, which dwell in the material body with the soul, when
there are no demons dwelling with it." Clement of Alexandria, in Strom.
Bk v. c. 14, points out that the notion of demons dwelling with the soul
is to be found in Plato, and quotes the passage from the Vision of Er (Rep.
Bk x. c. 15) about the souls of men between births each receiving from the
hand of Lachesis a demon as their guides through life. It is more likely,
however, to have been derived from the Zoroastrian belief in the Fra vastus
or Ferouers, celestial spirits who five with Ahura Mazda and the powers
of light, until they are sent on earth to be joined with the souls of men,
and to combat the powers of Ahriman (see L. C. Casartelli, La Philosophic
Religieuse du Mazdeisme, Paris, 1884, pp. 76-80, for references). Cf
Hope Moulton, op. cit. c. vm. passim.

2 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 12, p. 59, Harvey : Tovs be Trvevparucovs dno-
ovaapevovs ras ^rv)(ds nai irvevpara voepa yevopivovs, dKparfjTeos nal dopants
ivTos irXrjpapaTos elaeXdovras vvp<pas diroboBrjo-eadai. rols nep\ tov 2a>Trjpa


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 111

state which is sometimes spoken of as "the Banquet," and seems
connected with what has been said above about the meeting of
Jesus the Joint Fruit with the Sophia Without 1 . Yet this is
not a question of conduct or free will, but of predestination,
and seems to mark the chief practical difference between
Valentinus on the one hand and the Ophites and the pre-Christian
Gnostics on the other. The Ophites, as we have seen, believed
in the threefold nature of the soul, or its composition from the
pneumatic or spiritual, the psychical or animal, and the choic
or earthly, all which elements were thought to be present in
everyone. But they held, following their predecessors the
Orphici, that these divisions corresponded to what may be
called degrees of grace, and that it was possible for man to
pass from one category to the other, and become wholly pneu-
matic or psychic or earthly. Valentinus, however, introduces
a different idea and makes the distinction between the three

dyyeXots. " And the Spirituals, or Pneumatis, doffing their souls and
becoming intelligent spirits, shall enter unperceived and unseen within the
Pleroma, and shall be given as brides to the angels about the Saviour."
This suggestion, which completely shocked the modesty of Tertullian, may
be connected with the Zoroastrian idea of the virgin who appears to the
believer as his conductor at the bridge Chinvat. See Chapter XII, infra.

1 This appears in the Excerpta Theodoti, fr. 63, Migne's Patrol. Graeci,
t. IX. col. 689 : 'H ptv ovv trvtvpariKav dvdiravais iv KvpiaKjj iv 'Oybodbi fj
KvpiaKT) 6vofi.d£(Tai- irapd rrj firjrpl e\ovra ras y\rvxds rd tv8vp.ara cfypt
avvTeXdas' al 8e dWat irio-ral ^v^ai irapd ra Aqpiovpya' irep\ 8f ttjv
<rvvT(\eiav dva^dtpovcri (cat avrol els 'Oy8od8as. Etra to 8eiirvov rbv ydp,ov
koivov Trdvrcov twp o~a>£<i)6fVTa>v, d)(pis av dmo-adr) irdvra <a\ aWrjka yvayplajj.
"Therefore the repose of the Spirituals in [the dwelling] of the Lord,
that is, in the Ogdoad, is called the Lord's rest " (cf. Irenaeus, Bk I.
cc. 1, 9, p. 46, Harvey) : "the garments [i.e. natures] containing the
souls [will remain] with the Mother until the Consummation. And the
other faithful souls (will remain) with the Demiurge ; and at the Con-
summation they will withdraw, and they also will go into the Ogdoad.
Then will be the Wedding Feast of all those who are saved until all things
shall be made equal and all things mutually made known." This heavenly

quet, of which we may be quite sure Valentinus made the Marriage in
Cana a type, will be met with again in the worship of Mithras (Chapter XII,
infra). But it was also well known to the Orphics (see Abel's Orphica,
Frag. 227, etc.), and the question repeats itself : Did the Orphics borrow
the idea from the Persians, or the Mithraists from the Orphics ?


112 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentin us [ch.

different categories of human souls one not of degree, but of
essence 1 . Men have not a threefold soul, but belong to one
of three classes, according to the source of their souls. Either
they are pneumatic, i.e. spiritual, belonging wholly to Sophia,
or psychic, that is animated by the Demiurge alone and therefore
like him foolish and ignorant although capable of improvement,
or hylic, that is formed wholly of matter and therefore subject
to the power of the demons 2 . Nothing is said explicitly by
Hippolytus as to how this division into classes is made ; but
we know by other quotations from Valentinus himself that this
is the work of Sophia who sends the Logoi or Words into such
souls as she chooses, or rather into those which she has created
specially and without the knowledge of the Demiurge 3 .

The consequences of this division upon the future of man-
kind generally also differed materially from that of the Ophitic
scheme. Only the pneumatics or spiritual men are by nature

1 Valentinus may have found this doctrine in Egypt, where as Maspero
points out (tit. figyptol. I. p. 398) only the rich and noble were thought
to enjoy the life beyond the grave.

2 Valentinus' remark about the Cosmocrator being superior in knowledge
to the Demiurge because he is a spirit (see n. 1, p. 108 supra) much
complicates the problem, and brings us pretty near to the Dualism of the
Avesta. That all matter was in Valentinus' opinion transitory appears
from Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 13, where it is said that when all the seed scat-
tered by Sophia in the world, i.e. the souls of the Pneumatici, is gathered
in, the fire which is within the Cosmos shall blaze forth and after destroying
all matter shall be extinguished with it.

3 Clem. Alex., Strom. Bk n. c. 8, quotes an epistle of Valentinus in which
he speaks of the terror of the angels at the sight of man because of the
things which he spoke : bid rbv dopdrcos iv alrco anippa bebaiKora rt;s
av&Otv ovaias, kcu -rappyaia^opevov " because of that within him which
yielded a germ of the substance on high, and spoke freely." So Irenaeus,
Bk I. C. 1, § 10, p. 51, Harvey : "EXadev ovv, tos (pacri, tov Arjpiovpyov 6
auynaraa-irape'is tco ep.cpvo-yp.aTi airroii inro rrjs Socpias -rvevpariKos dv0p(o-ru>v
[avdpcoTTos] dppTjrco [adj. 8vvdp.fi KaY] irpovoiq. " It escaped the Demiurge,
therefore, as they say, that the man whom he had formed by his breath
was at the same time made spiritual by Sophia with unspeakable power
and foresight." So that, as Irenaeus says a few lines later, man has his
soul from the Demiurge, his body from Chaos, his fleshly part (to o~apKiK.lv)
from matter, and his spiritual man from the Mother, Achamoth [i.e. n~2n
" Wisdom "].


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 113

immortal or deathless, and when they leave the material body
go on high to the Ogdoad or Heaven of Sophia, where she sits
with Jesus the " Joint Fruit " of the Pleroma 1 . The hylics or
men who are wholly material perish utterly at death, because
their souls like their bodies are corruptible 2 . There remain the
psychic— the " natural men " of the New Testament 3 — who are
not so to speak " saved " ; but are yet capable of salvation.
How was this salvation to be brought about ?

Valentinus seems to have answered this by saying, as any
Catholic Christian would have done at the time, that it was
through the Divine Mission of Jesus. Yet this Jesus, according
to Valentinus or the Valentinian author from whom Hippolytus
draws his account, was neither Jesus the Joint Fruit of the
Pleroma, who according to them remained with his spouse

1 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk iv. c. 13, quoting " a certain homily " (ns
SpiXia) of Valentinus : 'Air' dpxrjs ddavaroi e&re, ical TtKva faijs eoTt ala>vias
ical tov ddvarov rjOeXere /zepuracrtfcu (Is iavrovs, Iva daTravfjarjTe avrov not
avaKuxrrjTe <a\ airoddvrj 6 Odvaros iv vpiv /ecu cV vpmv. "Orav yap tov atv

. Kocrpov \vT]Tt,vpeis 8i KaraXvrjo'df, Kvpievere ttjs KTtcrewr <a\ ttjs (pdopds andtrrjs.
"You were deathless from the beginning and the children of life everlasting,
and you wish to share out death among you, in order that you may dissipate
and destroy it and that death may die in and by you ; for when you put
an end to the world and are yourselves put an end to, you have rule over
creation and all corruption." So one of the documents of the Pistis
Sophia speaks of this world being finally consumed by the fire " which
the perfect wield." It was doubtless such predictions which gave colour
to the charge of incendiarism made by the Roman authorities against
the Christians generally. For the translation of the pneumatics to the
Ogdoad see next note.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 31, p. 290, Cruice : 'Eav egopotoodrj rotr
ava> (v 'OySoaSt, dddvaros eyevero ko.1 i]\flfv els rrjv 'OySocida ijris tart, (prjo-lv,
If povaaXrjp firovpdvios • (civ 8e e£op.oia>()r) tij vXtj, tovt(<tti rois rrddecri rots
vXiKois, <p8aprr) i<m <a\ an-coXfTo. " If [the soul] be of the likeness of those
on high in the Ogdoad, it is born deathless and goes to the Ogdoad which
is, he says, the heavenly Jerusalem ; but if it be of the likeness of matter,
that is, if it belongs to the material passions, it is corruptible and is utterly
MBtroyed."

3 \{fvxiK.6s uv6p<oiros translated in the A.V. by " natural man "
evidently means in the Valentinian sense those who are animated or have
had breathed into them the breath of life merely. It has nothing to do with
soul as we understand the term.

l. u. 8


114 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Sophia in the Heavenly Jerusalem, nor Christos who with his
consort the Holy Spirit was safe within the Pleroma. He was
in effect a third saviour brought into being especially for the
salvation of all that is worth saving in this devil-ruled and
material world, in the same way that Christos and his consort
had saved the first Sophia after she had given birth to the
monstrous Ectroma, and as Jesus the Joint Fruit had saved
this Ectroma itself. It is very probable, as M. Amelineau has
shown with great attention to detail, that every system, perhaps
every universe, had according to Valentinus its own saviour,
the whole arrangement being part of one vast scheme for the
ordering and purifying of all things 1 . Hence Valentinus ex-
plains, as the Ophites had failed to do, that salvation spreads
from above downwards and that the redemption of this world
was not undertaken until that of the universe of the Demiurge
had been effected 2 . The Demiurge — and the statement has
peculiar significance if we consider him the God of the Jews —
had been taught by Sophia Without that he was not the sole
God, as he had imagined, and had been instructed and " initiated
into the great mystery of the Father and the Aeons 3 ." Although

1 Amelineau, Gnost. Sg. p. 225.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 36, pp. 297, 298, Cruice : *E8u ovv

8wp6<ofi€v(ov tS>v av<o Kara rqp ai/Ttjv dicoXovdiav teat ra ivddbe rv\civ 8ia>pda>-
o-ecor. " Wherefore when things on high had been put straight, it had to be
according to the law of sequences that those here below should be put
straight also."

3 Hippolytus, op. cit. p. 297, Cruice : eSiSaxOn yap virb tt)s Zocpias 6
Arjpiovpyos, on owe ecrnv avrbs Qebs p.6vos a>? ('v6pu£(, kol ttXtjv avroii ertpos
(ovk) tcrnv aXX eyvm 8i8a^6€ts virb r^s 2o0t'ay rbv Kpelrrova' KaTTj^rj^T] yap
vn avTTJs, Kal ipvrj6r) ko\ e8i8d)(0r) to p-tya, tov Harpos ko\ tu>v Alaivcov
pvo-rrjpiov, Ka\ ii-elirtv ai/ro ovSevl, k.t.X. " For the Demiurge had been
taught by Sophia that he was not the only God and that beside him there
was none other, as he had thought ; but through Sophia's teaching he
knew better. For he had been instructed and initiated by Sophia, and
had been taught the great mystery of the Father and of the Aeons, and
had declared it to none " — in support of which the statement in Exodus
(vL 2, 3) about being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but " by my
name Jehovah was I not known unto them " is quoted. The identifica-
tion by Valentinus of the Demiurge with the God of the Jews is therefore
complete.


ix] Post-Christian Ghiostics: Valentinus 115

it is nowhere distinctly stated, it seems a natural inference that
the same lot will fall to the psychic men who are, like the
Demiurge, " soul " rather than " spirit," and that they will
receive further instruction in the Heaven of Sophia. Thus, he
continues, the lapses 1 of the Demiurge had been set straight and
it was necessary that those here below should go through the
same process. Jesus was accordingly born of the Virgin Mary ;
He was entirely pneumatic, that is His body was endowed with
a spiritual soul, for Sophia Without herself descended into Mary
and the germ thus sown by her was formed into a visible shape
by the operation of the Demiurge 2 , ^As for His Mission, it
seems to have consisted in revealing to man the constitution of
the worlds above him, the course to be pursued by him to attain
immortality, and to sum up the whole matter in one word, the
Gnosis or knowledge that was necessary to salvation 3 . *""

Here the account of the teaching of Valentinus, which has
been taken almost entirely from the Philosophumena or from
quotations from his own words in trustworthy writers like

1 cr^aXfiara " stumblings," Hippolytus, loc. cit.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vr. c. 35, p. 295, Cruice. I have taken what
seems on comparison to be the original form of Valentinus' teaching.
In the same chapter, Hippolytus tells us that his followers were divided
on the question of the composition of the body of Jesus — the Italic School
led by Heracleon and Ptolemy averring that it was psychic and that at
His baptism only the wvevpa came upon Him as a dove, while the
Oriental School of Axionicus and Bardesanes maintained that it was
pneumatic from the first. Cf. n. 2, p. 116 infra.

3 Am61ineau, Gnost. tig. p. 226. The Excerpta Theodoti, on which he
relies, says (fr. 78) : Me^pi tov fiairTio~p.a.Tos ovv jj elp.app.cvr], (fiaaiv, dXr/d-qs-
fiera 8e tovto ovk en dXrjSevovaiv oi dorpoXoyoi. Eort 8e ov to Xovrpov povov to
£X(vdepoiv, dXXa Kai fj yvtoais Tivts Tjpev, ti yeyovapcv, ttov Tjptv, rj irov
ivf^X^drfptVj ttov o-irev8opev, iroffev XvTpovp,(da, ti yevvrjais ti dvayevvrjais.
" Until baptism then, they say the destiny [he is talking of that which is
foretold by the stars] holds good ; but thereafter the astrologers' pre-
dictions are no longer unerring. For the [baptismal] font not only sets
us free, but is also the Gnosis which teaches us what we are, why we have
come into being, where we are, or whither we have been cast up, whither
we are hastening, from what we have been redeemed, why there is birth,
and why re-birth." For baptism was to the Valentinian initiation, and a
mystagogue of Eleusis would have expressed himself no differently.

8—2


I


116 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Clement of Alexandria, abruptly ends, and we are left to con-
jecture. We cannot therefore say directly what Valentinus him-
self taught about the Crucifixion. Jesus, the historical Jesus
born of the Virgin Mary, though purely pneumatic or spiritual
at the outset, received according to one account some tincture
of the nature of all the worlds through which He had descended,
and must therefore, probably, have had to abandon successive
parts of His nature, as He reascended 1 . Probably, therefore,
Valentinus thought that the Spiritual or Divine part of Him
left Him before the Passion, and that it was only His material
body that suffered 2 . As we shall see later, this idea was much
elaborated by the later Gnostics, who thought that all those
redeemed from this world would in that respect have to imitate
their Great Exemplar. If this be so, it is plain that it was
only that part of the soul of Jesus which He had received from
Sophia which returned to her, and was doubtless re-absorbed
in her being. Yet there is nothing to make us believe that
Valentinus did not accept the narrative of the Canonical

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 13, pp. 60-62, Harvey ; Am61ineau, Gnost.
£g. p. 226, and Excerpta Theodoti there quoted.

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vl c. 35, pp. 295, 296, Cruice : 'O 8e 'hio-ots,

6 KdlVOS "ivdpfOTTOS, OTTO UvfVfUlTOS ' Ay 10V [k(71 TOV 'Y^ltTTOu], TOVTiCTl TT)S

'2o<f)ias Km roii Ar/piovpyov, Iva ttjv piv Tr\ao~tv <a\ KaracrKevf]v tov adypaTOS
avrov 6 Ar/piovpyos KaTaprio~T], ttjv 8e ovaiav avrov to Hvevpa irapaaxTl TO
"Aytov, kcu ytvrfTai Aoyos iirovpavios drro rrjs 'Oy8oa8os yevvT}6ets 8ui M
" But Jesus, the new man, [has come into being] by the Holy Spirit and
by the Highest, that is by Sophia and the Demiurge, so that the Demiurge
might put together the mould and constitution of His body and that the
Holy Spirit might provide its substance ; and that He might become the

Heavenly Logos when born of Mary." According to this, the body of

Jesus was a " psychic " or animal one ; yet Hippolytus says immediately
afterwards (p. 296, Cruice), that it was on this that there was a division
between the Italic and the Oriental Schools of Valentinians, the former with
Heracleon and Ptolemy saying that the body of Jesus was an animal one,
the Holy Spirit coming on Him as a dove at His baptism, while the Orientals
with Axionicus and Bardesanes maintained that the body of the Saviour
was pneumatic or spiritual, " the Holy Spirit or Sophia and the power of
the Highest or Demiurgic art having come upon Mary, in order that what
was given to Mary might be put into form." Apparently Valentinus was
willing to call the God of the Jews'Y^ten-of or "Highest," which M. Cumont
thinks was his name in Asia Minor.


P i


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 117

Gospels in full 1 , or to doubt that he taught that Jesus really
suffered on the Cross, although he doubtless interpreted this
in his usual fashion, by making it a symbol of the self-sacrifice
of Jesus the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma, when He left that
celestial abode to give form and salvation to the miserable
Ectroma of Sophia 2 . Here again we can but gather Valentinus'
opinions from those of his followers, who may have altered
them materially to fit them to the exigencies of a situation of
which we can form no very precise idea.

Of these followers we know rather more than in the case of
any other of the early heresiarchs. According to TertuUian,
Valentinus was brought up as a Christian, and expected to
become a bishop of the Catholic Church, " because he was an
able man both in genius and eloquence 3 ." Finding, Tertullian
goes on to say, that a confessor 4 was preferred to him, he broke
with the Church and " finding the track of a certain old opinion "
(doubtless, the Ophite) " marked out a path for himself." The
same accusation of disappointed ambition was levelled against
nearly every other heresiarch at the time, and may serve to
show how greatly the place of bishop was coveted ; but we have

1 With the exception of that of St John, since the part of the Pistis
Sophia which it is suggested is by Valentinus does not quote it. His fol-
lowers, however, knew of it, as in the Ezcerpta Theodoti the opening verse
to iv dpxjj r)v 6 Aoyos ko.1 6 Aoyos fjv napa tov Q(6v, kcu Qeos rjv 6 Xoyos IS
quoted with the comments of ol diro tov Ovakevrlvov on it. Cf. Amelineau,
Onost. tig. p. 209, where the passage is given in n. 4.

2 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 1, § 13, pp. 60-62, Harvey: EiVt hi ol Xiyovres^.
"Eirade 8i Xonrov nar avrovs 6 ^u^ticds Xpiaros, koX 6 e< rijs oiKOvopias
KaTfo-Kfva.o-u.ivos p.vo-TT)pia>8a>s, Iv' eViSet^/; [S''] ovtov r] pi)Tf)p tov ava>
XpiaTov, fKelvov tov iffiKTaOevTos tb Sraupco, ko.1 p,op(pd>aavros ttjv A^a/xcoa
p.op<pa>o-iv ttjv kot ovcriav • tvavra yap ravra tvitovs fKfivcov eivai Afyovtrt.
" And there are some " (probably the Anatolic or Oriental School is meant)

" who say And further the animal Christ, He who had been mysteriously

formed by dispensation, suffered so that the Mother might show forth
through Him the type of the Christ on high, of him who is extended by
Stauros, and gave shape to Achamoth as regards substance : for they say
that all things here are the types of others there."

3 Tertullian, adv. Valentinianos, c. iv.

* That is, not a martyr, but one who had suffered for the faith without
losing his life.


118 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

no means of judging its truth in this particular instance, and it
is repeated neither by Irenaeus, Hippolytus, nor Clement of
Alexandria who was in an exceptionally good position for know-
ing the truth of the case. Irenaeus, however, says that Valen-
tinus came to Rome during the papacy of Hyginus, flourished
(//*/iaae) under that of Pius, and dwelt there until that of
Anicetus ; and this is confirmed by Eusebius, who connects
Valentinus' stay in Rome with the reign of Hadrian's successor,
Antoninus Pius 1 . Tertullian further declares that Valentinus did
not separate from the Church until the papacy of Eleutherus 2 ,
which did not commence until a.d. 174, and M. Amelineau
seems therefore well-founded in his inference that Valentinus
elaborated his system in Egypt while yet in the Church, and
that he went to Rome in order to impose it upon the rest of the
faithful 3 . If this be so, it would abundantly account for its
far closer approximation to the orthodox faith than that of
the Ophites, from which it appears to have been derived.
Epiphanius tells us further that after quitting Rome, Valentinus
died in Cyprus, where he made " a last shipwreck of his faith 4 ."
Could we place implicit faith in Epiphanius' highly- coloured
statements, we might gather from this that Valentinus gave a
fresh turn to his doctrines after finding himself away from the
great cities in which he had hitherto spent his life.

However that may be, the time which, on the shortest
computation, Valentinus passed in Rome was quite sufficient
for him to set up a school there, and we are not surprised to hear
that thereafter there was a body of Valentinians in the West,
which was called the " Italic school." Innovating, as Tertullian
said all heretics did, upon the system of their founder, they
taught, as before mentioned, that Sige or Silence was a real
spouse to the Ineffable Bythos or the Supreme Being and existed
side by side with Him from eternity 6 . They further said that

1 Irenaeus, Bk m. c. 4, § 1, vol. n. p. 17, Harvey ; Eusebius, Hist.
Eccl. Bk rv. c. 11. Cf. Amelineau, Onosi. 1tq. p. 170.

1 Tertullian, de. Praescpt. c. xxx. Amelineau, Onost. tg. p. 175, objects
to this.

8 Amelineau, Onost. £g. p. 172, n. 1 ; ibid. p. 175.

* Epiphanius, Pan., Haer. xxxi. e. 2.

* Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 35, p. 296, Cruice.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 119

the Dodecad or group of twelve aeons, of whom Sophia was the
last, emanated not from Logos and Zoe, but from the third
syzygy of Anthropos and Ecclesia 1 ; and that the body of the
historical Jesus was not material but psychic or from the world
of the Demiurge 2 , which seems to include the view held by other
Gnostics that it was a phantasm which only appeared to suffer
on the Cross, but did not do so in reality. We know the names of
several of the leaders of this Italic school, among whom were
Ptolemy, Secundus, and Heracleon. It was the doctrine of the
first of these apparently flourishing in Gaul in his time, which
spurred on Irenaeus to write against them 3 ; while Heracleon
was called by Clement of Alexandria the most distinguished of
the school of Valentinus and taught in the last-named city 4 .
Ptolemy's doctrine as described by Irenaeus seems to have
materially differed from that of his master only in the particulars
just given ; while Secundus is said by the same heresiologist to
have divided the First Ogdoad into two tetrads, a right hand
and a left, one of which he called light and the other darkness 5 .
Over against this, we hear from Hippolytus of an Eastern
school (At,8aaKa\ia dvaroXcKr}), which M. Amelineau shows
satisfactorily to have most closely represented the teaching of
Valentinus himself 6 , and which was carried on after his death
by Axionicus and Bardesanes 7 . Of these, Axionicus is said to
have taught in his native city of Antioch ; while Bardesanes was
evidently the same as the person called by the Syrians Bar
Daisan of Edessa, whose name was still great in the time of
Albiruni 8 . Theodotus, whose writings are quoted at some
length by Clement of Alexandria, and Alexander, whose argu-
ments as to the body of Jesus are rebutted by Tertullian,
probably continued their teaching 9 .

1 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 1, § 2, p. 13, Harvey.

2 See n. 2, p. 116 supra. 3 Irenaeus, Prooem. p. 4, Harvey.

4 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk iv. c. 9.

5 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 38, p. 302, Cruice. So Irenaeus, Bk i.
5, § 2, p. 101, Harvey. This appears to be hyperbole rather than dualism.

« Amelineau, Gnost. fig. p. 189.

7 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 35, p. 296, Cruice.

8 Albiruni, Chronology of Ancient Nations, ed. Sachau, 1879, pp. 27, 189.
* De Faye, Intro, etc. p. 105, n. 1 ; Tertullian, de Came Christi, c. xvr.


120 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

The life of Bar Daisan, of which some particulars have been
preserved for us by Bar Hebraeus and other Eastern historians
of the Church, throws considerable light upon the attitude
towards Christianity of Valentinus and that Anatolic School
which best represented his teachings. Bar Daisan was born some
fifty years after Valentinus of rich and noble parents in the town
of Edessa in Mesopotamia, where he seems to have been edu-
cated in the company of the future king of the country, Abgar
Bar Manu 1 . He was probably a Christian from his infancy, early
became a Christian teacher, and withstood Apollonius, a Pagan
Sophist who visited Edessa in the train of the Emperor Cara-
calla, making avowal of his readiness to suffer martyrdom for
the faith. According to Eusebius, he had the greatest abhor-
rence of the dualistic doctrine of Marcion and wrote books against
him in his native Syriac which were afterwards translated into
Greek 2 . He, or perhaps his son Harmonius 3 , also composed
a great number of hymns which were sung in the Catholic
Churches of Mesopotamia and Syria ; and it was not until a
century and a half after his death that Ephrem Syrus, a doctor
of the now triumphant and persecuting Church, found that
these abounded in the errors of Valentinus, and deemed it
necessary to substitute for them hymns of his own composition 4 .
Valentinus seems in like manner to have lived in Rome as a
Christian teacher, as we have seen, for at least sixteen years,
and to have composed many psalms, some of which are quoted
by Clement of Alexandria. If Tertullian is to be believed, he
was qualified for the episcopate, which he must have had some
chance of obtaining ; and his want of orthodoxy cannot,
therefore, have been manifest at the time or considered an
objection to his candidature 5 . Moreover, Irenaeus says that
Valentinus was the first who converted the so-called Gnostic

1 See Hort, Bardaisan, in Diet. Christian Biog.

2 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk iv. c. 30, says that Bar Daisan was first a
Valentinian and afterwards recanted, " but did not entirely wipe away
the filth of his old heresy."

* Rather a suspect name for a hymn writer.

* Ephrem Syrus' own date is given as 370 a.d., in Diet. Christian Biog,
8.h.n.

1 See n. 3, p. 117 supra.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 121

heresy into the peculiar characteristics of his own school 1 ;
which agrees with Tertnllian's statement that Valentinus was
" at first a believer in the teaching of the Catholic Church in
the Church of Rome under the episcopate of the Blessed
Eleutherus 2 ." It is evident, therefore, that long after his
peculiar teaching was developed, he remained a member of the
Church, and that it was not by his own wish that he left it, if
indeed he ever did so.

One is therefore led to examine with some closeness the
alleged differences between his teaching and that of the orthodox
Christianity of his time ; and these, although they may have
been vitally important, seem to have been very few. With
regard to his views as to the nature of the Godhead, as given
above, they do indeed seem to differ toto coelo from those
shadowed forth in the Canonical Gospels and Epistles, and
afterwards defined and emphasized by the many (Ecumenical
and other Councils called 'to regulate the Church's teaching on
the matter. The long series of aeons constituting his Pleroma or
Fulness of the Godhead seems at first sight to present the most
marked contrast with the Trinity of Three Persons and One
God in the Creeds which have come down to us from the early
Church. But is there any reason to suppose that Valentinus
regarded the members of these Tetrads, Decads, and Dodecads
as possessing a separate and individual existence or as having
any practical importance for the Christian ? We can hardly
suppose so, when we consider the attitude of his immediate
followers with regard to them. Some, as we have seen, were
said to have put as the origin of all things, not a single principle
but two principles of different sexes or, as Irenaeus says, a

tdyad," thereby splitting the Supreme Being into two 3 . We can
1 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 5, § 1, p. 98, Harvey.
2 See n. 2, p. 118 supra.
3 This may have been due either to their Egyptian extraction, or to
e necessity of putting the matter in a way that would be intelligible to
eir Egyptian disciples. Cf. Naj^ille, Old Egyptian Faith, 1909, where
he says that the Egyptian way of expressing abstract ideas is by metaphors.
Their ancestors, the Egyptians of the early Dynasties, when they wanted
to describe how gods oi both sexes came forth from one single male deity,
did so by means of a very coarse image. See Budge, Papyrus of Nesi-


\2'2 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

imagine the outcry that this would have caused two centuries
later when the different parties within the Christian Church
were at each other's throats on the question whether the Son
was of the same or only of like substance with the Father.
Yet neither Valentinus, nor Ptolemy, nor Heracleon, nor any
one of the Valentinian leaders seems to have borne the others
any hostility on that account, to have dreamed of separating
from them on such a pretext, or to have ceased to regard them-
selves both as Christians and followers of Valentinus. The
only inference to be drawn from this is either that the account
of their teaching has been grossly corrupted or that they con-
sidered such questions as matters of opinion merely, on which
all might freely debate, but which were not to be taken as
touchstones of the faith.

This view derives great support from the way in which
Clement of Alexandria, Valentinus' countryman and the one
among the Fathers who seems best fitted to understand him,
regarded similar questions. M. Courdaveaux has shown with
great clearness that Clement sometimes confounded the Third
Person of the Trinity with the Second, and sometimes made
Him His inferior. He also considered the Son as a simple
creature of the Father, and, therefore, necessarily, of lower
rank 1 . It was for such " heresies," as they were afterwards
called, that Photius, who had Clement's now lost book of the
Hypotyjposes under his eyes, condemned him as a heretic,
although his judgment in the matter has never been adopted
by the Church. M. Courdaveaux also shows that Tertullian,
even before he left the Church, looked upon both the Son and
the Holy Spirit as only " members " of the Father, whom he
considered to contain within Himself the complete divine sub-

Amsu, Archaeologia, voL Ln. (1890), pp. 440, 441. Cf. same author, Hieratic
Papyri in B.M.

1 Courdaveaux, R.H.R. Jan.-Fev. 1892, p. 293 and n. 7. Mgr Duchesne,
op. cit. pp. 244, 245, agrees that Clement looked upon the Son as a creature
only. Nor does there seem much difference between Valentinus' view of the
relation between the Demiurge and the Unknown Father, and Clement's
remarks about the Son whom he calls timeless and unbegotten and says
that it is from Him that we must learn the "remote cause the Father of
the Universe" : Strom. Bk vn. c. 1. Cf. Justin Martyr, c. Trypho. c. 56.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 123

stance ; and this was certainly none of the heresies for which
his memory was arraigned 1 . It by no means follows that
Valentinus' teaching was the same as that of the Church in all
its details ; but it seems possible from these examples that he
did not think it necessary to be more definite than the Church
herself upon such points, and that he did not look upon them in
any other light than as matters of opinion.

It should also be considered whether the language that Valen-
tinus used regarding the nature and divisions of the Godhead
is to be construed in the same sense and as implying the meaning
that it would have done a few centuries later, when these
points had been long discussed and the reasons for and against
them marshalled and weighed. So far as can now be seen,
he, like all Egyptians, never lost sight of allegory in dealing
with matters transcending sense. Thus, when he speaks of
the pretended union of Bythos and Sige, he is careful to say that
there is nothing actually begotten, and that the whole story
must be considered in a figurative sense :

" The Father [i.e. Bythos] alone," he says, " was unbegotten,
not subject to conditions of place, nor time, taking no counsel, nor
having any other being that can be comprehended by any recognized
trope : but he was alone, and, as it is said, solitary, and resting in
solitary repose within himself. And when he became fruitful, it
seemed to him good at a certain time to engender and bring forth
the most beautiful and perfect thing which he had within him :
for he did not love solitude. For he was all love, but love is not
love unless there is something to be loved 2 ."

Between this and such Canonical texts as " God is love, and he
that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God and God in him 3 ," there

I iay be a difference of application indeed, but none of language.
It seems, therefore, that in his theology Valentinus treated
1 R.H.R. Jan.-Fev. 1891, p. 27. Tertullian's own heresy was of course
ontanism. Harnack, Hist, of Dogma, Eng. ed., n. pp. 257, 258, says
indeed that Hippolytus' own views of the Trinity coincide with those of
Valentinus and are a relic of polytheism.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vr. c. 29, pp. 280, 281, Cruice.

3 2 John iv. 16. - So 'Aydn-t] " Love " is made the summit of the
universe in the Ophite Diagram. See Chap. VIII supra.


124 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

the Ophitic ideas on which he worked very much as the Ophites
had themselves treated the legends of Osiris and Attis. Dealing
with their stories of aeons and powers as myths — that is to say
as legends which whether true or not were only to be considered
as symbols designed to show the way in which the world and man
came forth from God — he thereby established his cosmology on
a foundation which could be considered satisfactory by those
half- heathen schools which had already contrived to reconcile
the Pagan rites with the Jewish Scriptures and the Christian
belief in the Mission of Jesus. But he went far beyond them
in applying the same method of interpretation to all the acts
of Jesus recorded in the Gospels. If Jesus were crucified upon
the Cross, it was because its type the aeon Stauros had been set
as a limit between that which is God and that which is not
God but only godlike 1 . If He is said to go up to Jerusalem,
it means that He went up from the world of matter to the
Heaven of Sophia which is called Jerusalem 2 . If He were sent
down to earth, it was because the higher worlds had already
been put in the way of redemption by the gathering-in of
Sophia into the Pleroma, the marriage of Sophia Without to
Jesus the Joint Fruit, and the revelation to the Demiurge or
God of the Jews that he was not the Supreme Being but only
his reflection at several removes 3 . Every world is a copy of
the one above it, every event must take place in every world
in its turn, and all creation is like a chain which hung from
the heavens is gradually drawn up to them, this creation of ours
(/criais Kad 1 ///xa<?) being its last link 4 .

In all this, Valentinus wrote like a philosopher of the period,
and, in fact, pretty much as Philo had done. But beyond this,
he seems to have paid great attention to what is called the
" pastoral " duty of a religious teacher or the care of souls, and
to have busied himself to show how religion could be used to
console and sustain the heart. All the fragments that we have
left of the writings of himself and his followers are directed

1 Neander, Ch. Hist. vol. n. p. 90.

* Heracleon, quoted by Origen in Commentaries on St John, Bk x. c. 19.
8 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vi. c. 36, pp. 297, 298, Cruice.

* Ibid. loc. cit. p. 298, Cruice.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 125

towards this end ; and would, from this point of view, do credit
to any doctor of the Church. This is especially the case with
the passage formerly quoted likening the human heart to an
inn, of which Clement of Alexandria gives the actual words as
follows :

"There is one good by whose coming is the manifestation, which
is by the Son, and by Him alone can the heart become pure, by
the expulsion of every evil spirit from the heart. For the multitude
of spirits dwelling in it do not suffer it to be pure ; but each of
them performs his own deeds, insulting it often with unseemly
lusts. And the heart seems to be treated somewhat like the court-
yard of an inn. For the latter has holes and ruts in it, and is often
filled with dung ; men living filthily in it, and taking no care for
the place because it belongs to others. So fares it with the heart
as long as no thought is taken for it, and it is unclean and many
demons dwell therein. But when the one good Father visits it,
it is sanctified and gleams with light. And he who possesses such
a heart is so blessed, that he shall see God 1 ." *"

It is no wonder that M. Amelineau speaks in terms of admira-
tion of the eloquence with which Valentinus applies himself to
the problem of the existence of evil, and that Neander should
say that he in great measure realized the idea of Christianity 2 .
It seems indeed plain that Valentinus never intended to
break with the Catholic Church and that it is not likely that
he would have attempted during his life to found any organiza-
tion that would have been in any way hostile to her 3 . Hence
it is in vain to search for any special rites belonging to the sect ;
and it is most probable that he and his immediate followers
continued to worship with the orthodox, and to resort to the
jriests of the Church at large for the administration of the
Church's sacraments. Did they however demand any formal

1 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk n. c. 20.

2 Amelineau, Onost. .% p. 230; Neander, Ch. Hist. vol. n. p. 94.
s Neander, op. et loc. cit. p. 150 and note, says Clement of Alexandria

leclares that while Marcion wished to found a Church, the other Gnostics
endeavoured to found schools (Siarpifiai) only. Clem. Alex. Strom.
Bk vn. c. 15, seems to be the passage referred to ; but in the present state
of the text it may be doubted whether it will bear the construction Neander
puts upon it.


i


126 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

initiation into their own doctrines or, in other words, attempt
to keep them in any sense secret ? One can only say that there
is no proof that they did so. Clement of Alexandria and Origen
both quote freely from the books written by Valentinus and his
follower Heracleon in which their doctrines are openly set forth,
and do not hint at any special difficulty they may have had in
obtaining them. Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Hippolytus do the
same thing with regard to the writings of Valentinus and Ptolemy,
and Irenaeus tells us that he has obtained his knowledge of their
doctrines not only by reading their commentaries (on Scripture)
but by personal conversation with their disciples 1 . It does not,
therefore, look as if before the legal procedure of the State or
the more summary methods of the Christian mob could be used
by the Catholics for the suppression of opinion and discussion,
the Valentinians ever tried to do what Basilides had recom-
mended to his followers, and to found what was really a secret
society either within or without the bosom of the Church 2 .

It does not follow from this, however, that the Valentinians
differed only in trifling points from the orthodox, or that the
Fathers were wrong when they accused them of working grave
inj ury to the nascent Church. The compliances with heathenism
which they allowed those who thought with them, such as
attendance at the circus and the theatres, partaking of heathen
sacrifices, and flight or even the denial of their faith in time of
persecution 3 , although justified by them with texts, such as :
" That which is of the flesh is flesh ; and that which is of the
Spirit is Spirit," must have aroused the most bitter hostility
from those wise governors of the Church who saw clearly
whither the struggle between the Church and the Roman Empire
was tending. The reward most constantly before the eyes of
those about to obtain what was called "the crown" of martyrdom
was that by thus giving their lives for the faith they would
immediately after death become united with the Deity, instead

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. Prooem. p. 4, Harvey.

1 Of. Renan, VEglise Chr&ienne, p. 165. The manner in which the
Valentinians tried to make converts to their doctrines within the Church
is described by Irenaeus, Bk in. c. 15, § 2, pp. 78, 80, Harvey, and Tertullian,
adv. Valentinianoa, c. 1.

* Renan, Ufiglise Chr&ienne, pp. 152, 153, for references.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 127

of waiting like other Christians for the Last Judgment 1 . Hence,
intending martyrs were regarded even while yet alive with
extraordinary reverence by the rest of the faithful, who, as we
know from heathen as well as Christian writers, were in the habit
of flocking into the prisons after them, weeping over them and
kissing their fetters, and deeming it a privilege to minister in
every way to the necessities of those who might by a sort of
anticipation be regarded as already Divine 2 . It was on this
veritable army of martyrs and on the enthusiasm which their
triumphs excited that the Church mainly relied for victory in
her warfare with the State. But how was this army to be
recruited if the ideas of Valentinus once gained the upper hand
in the Christian community, and it came to be thought that the
same reward could be gained by acquaintance with the relative
positions of the heavens and their rulers, and an accurate
knowledge of the constitution of the universe ? It was in time
of persecution that the Valentinians oftenest found adherents —
" then the Gnostics break out, then the Valentinians creep
forth, then all the opponents of martyrdom bubble up," as
Tertullian describes it 3 ; and it is easy to understand that those
who had most to lose in position or ease of life would grasp
eagerly at any intermediate course which would enable them
to keep their faith in the religion recently revealed to them
without going through the terrible trials to which their orthodox
teachers sought to subject them. Hence, the Valentinians
probably in some sort justified Gibbon's remark that " the
Gnostics were distinguished as the most polite, the most learned,
and the most wealthy of the Christian name 4 " ; and this alone
would probably account for the undying hostility which the
Church always exhibited towards them.

It was also the case that the spread of the tenets of Valen-
tinus and his followers was attended with some peculiar social
dangers of its own. Their division of mankind into the three

1 Tertullian, de Pudicitia, and Pseudo Cyprian, de Olor. Martyr, passim.

2 See Chap. VII, n. 1, p. 8 supra.

3 Tertullian, Scor place, c. 1.

4 Gibbon, Decline and Fall, Bury's ed. vol n. p. 13. Cf. what Irenaeus,
Bk I. c. 1, § 8, p. 36, Harvey, says as to the high price charged' by the
Valentinians for their teaching.


128 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentin us [ch.

natural classes of spiritual, psychical, and hylic, if carried to
its logical conclusion, brought with it some strange results. As
the spiritual or pneumatics were saved in any event, and were,
already even in this life, as was expressly said, a kind of " gods,"
it was manifestly not for them to trouble themselves about
obedience to the moral law. The same conclusion applied to the
hylics who were doomed to annihilation in any case, and whose
struggles towards righteousness were bound to be inefficacious.
There remained the psychics or animal men, for whom indeed
a certain course of life was prescribed before they could attain
salvation. But with the excessive freedom of interpretation and
the licence of variation that Valentinus apparently allowed his
followers, the exact limits of this course must always have been
a matter of doubt ; and it was here that many corruptions and
debasements of his teaching began to show themselves. For it
was an age when religious impostors of all kinds found an easy
market in the credulity of their fellows, and charlatans every-
where abounded who were ready to support their claims to ex-
clusive knowledge of holy things by false miracles and juggling
tricks. Hippolytus gives us a long list of such devices in-
cluding the means of answering questions in sealed letters,
producing an apparition, and the like, which he declares the
heresiarchs learnt from the magicians and used as proof of their
own doctrines 1 . One knows at any rate from Lucian's evidence
that religious pretenders like Alexander of Abonoteichos were
not negligent of such practices, and charlatans of his kind were
perhaps especially likely to be attracted to the timid and wealthy
followers of Valentinus. A Valentinian impostor of this sort,
if the Fathers are to be believed, was the Jewish magician
Marcus, who taught a system corresponding in most points
with that given above, but made use of it in his own interest
as a means of moneymaking and for the corruption of women.
Irenaeus speaks of the doctrine of this Marcus as being an
especial snare to the Christians of Gaul, into which country
Marcus or some follower of his perhaps travelled while Irenaeus
was Bishop of Lyons 2 . By a mode of interpretation which was

1 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk iv. c. 4, §§ 1-15.

* Irenaeus, Bk I. cc. 7-8 passim, pp. 114-156, Harvey.


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 129

indeed a caricature of Valentinus' own, Marcus found proof of the
existence and order of his aeons in the values of the letters com-
posing Divine names and in words like Jesus and Christos 1 . He
seems, too, to have himself administered baptism accompanied
by exorcisms in the Hebrew language, and to have profaned the
Eucharist with juggling tricks which made the cup to overflow
and turned the water it contained into wine having the semblance
of blood 2 . Thus, says Irenaeus, he contrived to draw away a
great number from the Church and to seduce many of the
faithful women. Valentinus, perhaps, is somewhat unfairly
held responsible by the Fathers for such a perversion of his own
teaching which he would, perhaps, have condemned as loudly
as they. Scandals of the kind here hinted at were not unknown
in the Catholic Church itself, and Christian ministers have been
found in all ages, sects, and countries who have been willing to
abuse for their own purposes the power which religion gives
them over the opposite sex. It is true, too, that people, as
has been well said, are seldom either as good or as bad as their
creed, and the doctrine that "God sees no sin in His elect"
has been preached in our own time without being followed by
the " wretchlessness of most unclean living " which the 17th
article of the Church of England declares to be one of the
probable consequences of predestinarian teaching. The later
Valentinians certainly did not forbid marriage, as is shown by
the pathetic epitaph from a grave in the Via Nazionale quoted
by Renan 3 , and thus avoided some of the moral dangers with
which the practice of celibacy is sometimes reproached.

Of the fortunes of the Valentinian sect after the death of

1 Thus he says that the Dove signifies Alpha and Omega, the first and the
3t, because A and Q.iike irtpiartpd "dove," have the numerical value of 801.

2 A similar miracle is performed by the risen Jesus in the Bruce Papyrus.
Chap. X infra.

3 - a.
4>o)y TrarpiKov iroOeovcra, avvaipe, <rvvevve, crcxpr} pov,
Xovrpois xP €l<Ta l i * vr l X(pftoTo)i) pvpov acpdirov, dyvov,
Aldovoou eairevcras ddp[rj](rai 6eia irpocranra,
ftovXr/s ttjs pcydXrjs piyav ayyikov, vlov oXtjOt),
[fir v]vp(pa>va poXovaa nal fls [n6\7r]ovs dv6pov<ra[l]
[Auovcov 7T(i\rpiiiovs k[o.\

L. II. 9


130 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Valentinus, we have very little precise information. Tertullian
speaks of it as being in his time the most numerous society of
heretics (frequentissimum plane collegium haereticorum), and in
the West it extended from Rome, as we have seen, into Gaul
and even into Spain, where it existed at the end of the 4th
century 1 . Probably, however, it here propagated itself sporadi-
cally, its opinions appearing now and then among isolated
writers and teachers, who probably drew their disciples carefully
from among the Christian community, and only disclosed their
system to those who showed some aptitude for it. Of such was
doubtless " my fair sister Flora " {ahe\$rj i*ov icaX?] <3>\&>oa),

b.

Ovk (a-\ev Kowbv /3iorou [rJeXor t]8( Bavovcra-
Kar6av€ koi £a>e i <a\ opa <f>aos 5<f>8iTov ovtoos '
£o>et fiiv £(ooi(ri ffavev 8e Oavoxxriv aKijOas.
yaia, ri davfj-d^eis vdnvos yevos; t) Tre(f)6fJT)Tai ;

(Boeckh's) C. I. O. 9595a, 1. 1, and p. 594.
" Longing for the light of the Father, partner of my blood, partner of my
bed, my wise one !
Anointed at the font with the incorruptible and pure myrrh of Christ,
Thou hast hastened to behold the divine faces of the Aeons, [and]
The Great Angel of the Great Council, the true Son.
Thou hast gone to the nuptial couch and hast hurried to the fatherly
bosoms of the Aeons

And

Though dying, she has not suffered the common end of life,
She is dead, and yet lives and actually beholds the light incorruptible,
To the living she is alive, and dead only to those really dead.
O Earth, why dost thou wonder at this new kind of shade ? or dost
thou fear it ? "
This was engraved on a cippus of white marble found about three miles
from Rome in the Via Latina and is now in the Kircher Museum. Renan's
translation is given in Marc Aurele, p. 147. That the lady's name was
Flavia seems evident from the acrostic contained in the first verse. She must
also have been a pneumatic or spiritual from her husband's confident ex-
pectation that she would be raised to the Heavenly Jerusalem and by his
assertion of her deathlessness. Hence it may be inferred that Valentinus'
disciples even when of the highest spiritual rank were allowed to marry. Cf .
Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk in. c. 17. The name " Angel of the Great Council "
is applied to Christ by Justin Martyr (c. Tryph. c. 126) who says that He
is so called by EzekieL The passage does not appear in the Canons.
1 Matter, Hist, du Onosticisme, t. u. p. 126, quoting St Jerome.


ix ] Post-Christian Gnostics : Valentinus 131

to whom Valentinus' successor Ptolemy wrote a letter setting
out his tenets which Epiphanius has preserved for us 1 . As the
quotations in it presuppose an acquaintance on her part with
Old Testament history as well as with the Canonical Gospels
and the Pauline Epistles, there can be little doubt that she was
already a Christian convert. This mode of propaganda was
the more obnoxious to the episcopate that it was likely to
escape for some time the observation of the overseers of the
Church, and is quite sufficient to explain the pains which bishops
like Irenaeus and Hippolytus took to expose and refute the
doctrines of the Valentinians, as well as what they say with
doubtful accuracy about the secrecy which was observed con-
cerning them 2 . In the East, things were probably different,
and Heracleon's Commentaries on the Gospels, from which
Origen quotes freely, would on the face of it have been useless
unless addressed to the Christian community at large, and
make no attempt to conceal their heretical teaching. In Egypt,
however, the Gnostic teachers found a soil ready prepared for
them. Egyptian Christianity, whether founded, according to
tradition, by St Mark or not, never seems to have gone through
the intermediate stage of observing the prescriptions of the
Jewish Law while preaching its abrogation, and, in Alexandria
especially, so far appealed to those learned in the Hellenistic
and other philosophies as to necessitate the founding of a
Christian school there for their study. The native Egyptians,
too, had for millennia been given to mystic speculation about
the nature of God and the destiny of the soul after death ;
and Valentinus, who must be presumed to have understood his
own people, doubtless knew how to suit his teaching to their
comprehension, even if he did not incorporate therein, as
M. Amelineau has endeavoured to show, some of the more
abstruse doctrines on these points of the old Egyptian religion 3 .
Moreover, from the time of Hadrian onwards, the Egyptians
were animated by a bitter and restless hatred against their

1 Epiphanius, Haer. xxxm. c. 3, pp. 401-413, Oehler. Cf. " the Elect
Lady " to whom 2 John is addressed.

2 It should be remembered that Valentinus had been dead some 50
years when Irenaeus and Hippolytus wrote.

3 Amelineau, Gnost. fig. Chap, v, pp. 281-320 passim.

9—2


132 Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus [ch.

Roman masters, and this feeling, which was by no means with-
out justification, disposed them to embrace eagerly any ideas
condemned by the bishops and clergy of Rome and of Constanti-
nople. Hence the Valentinians had in Egypt their greatest
chance of success, and the existence of documents like those
described in the next chapter shows that Egyptian Christianity
must have been largely permeated by their ideas perhaps up
to Mohammedan times. Further East, the same causes pro-
duced similar effects, though in this case they were probably
modified by the necessity of combating the remains of heathen
religions which there lingered. The growing political power
of the Catholic Church even before the conversion of Constantine
probably drove the Valentinians to form separate communities
wherever they were in sufficient numbers to do so, and thus is
explained the possession by them of the " houses of prayer "
of which the Constantinian Decree above quoted professes to
deprive them. On the confines of the Empire and in provinces
so far distant from the capital as Mesopotamia, these heretical
communities probably lingered longer than in other places, and
may have enjoyed, as in the case of Bardesanes, the protection
and countenance of the native kinglets. Even here, however,
the employment of the secular arm which its alliance with the
State gave to the Church seems to have eventually forced them
into an attitude of hostility towards it, as is shown by the
" rabbling " of one of their conventicles in the way before
mentioned. The accession of Julian brought them a temporary
respite 1 ; but on his death in the Persian campaign, the retreat
of the Roman eagles probably gave them their quietus. Only
in Egypt, it would seem, did their doctrines succeed in gaining
anything like a permanent resting-place. Elsewhere, the rise
of new heresies and especially of Manichaeism drove them out
of their last strongholds.

y Valentinianism, therefore, approved itself a stop-gap or
temporary faith, which for two hundred years 2 acted as a half-

1 Julian, Ep. 43, tells Hecebolius that the Arians of Edessa, "puffed up
by their riches," have maltreated the Valentinians, and that he has there-
fore ordered the confiscation of the estates and treasure of the Church of
Edessa. It is doubtful whether the edict can have been enforced before
the emperor's death abrogated it.

* We get at a sort of minimum date for its persistence from the career


ix] Post-Christian Gnostics: Valentinus 133

way house between heathenism and Christianity. In this
capacity, it was singularly efficient, and was one of the forces
which enabled, as Renan said, the ancient world to change
from Paganism to Christianity without knowing it. In parti-
cular, it seems to have attracted to itself the attention of the
learned and leisured class who were endeavouring, earnestly if
somewhat timidly, to work out a rule of faith and conduct from
the welter of creeds and philosophies with which the Empire
was swamped during the first Christian centuries. Such a class
is not that out of which martyrs are made, and is sure sooner
or later to acquiesce in the opinions of the majority ; but we
may be certain that the learned and polite Valentinians would
have listened with natural disgust to the simple and enthusi-
astic declamations of Jewish fishermen and artizans which had
for their chief theme the coming destruction and overthrow of
the social system in which they had grown up. The brilliant,
if baseless, speculations of Valentinus, which even now have
a certain attraction for the lovers of mysticism 1 , gave them
exactly the kind of spiritual pabulum they craved for, and
enabled them to wait in hope and patience until Christianity,
forcing its way upward, as religions generally do, from the lowest
class of society, had become the faith of the governing ranks.
In this way, Valentinianism was probably one of the best
recruiting grounds for the Catholic Church, and Renan is
doubtless right when he says that no one who passed from
Paganism through the Gnosticism of Valentinus and his fellows
ever reverted to his former faith. Yet Valentinianism itself was
doomed to but a short life, and in its original form probably did
not survive its founder by much more than a century and a half.
One of its later developments we shall see in the next chapter. *"

of St Ambrose, who had been a Valentinian in his youth (see Eusebius,
Hist. Eccl. Bk vi. c. 18), and was made bishop of Milan in 374 a.d., he being
then 34 years old. The sect therefore had adherents in Italy about 360 a.d.
1 It may be news to some that an attempt has lately been made to
revive in Paris the heresy of Valentinus. See the Contemporary Review
for May, 1897, or Jules Bois' Les Petits Religions de Paris, where a full
account of the services and hymns of " L'F>glise Gnostique " is given. Its
founder, Jules Doinel, was reconverted to Catholicism some time before
his death. Its present head is M. Fabre des Essarts.


CHAPTER X

THE SYSTEM OF THE PISTIS SOPHIA AND
ITS RELATED TEXTS 1

In 1765, the British Museum purchased from the celebrated
antiquarian, Dr Askew, a parchment MS. written in Coptic 2 .
On palaeographic grounds it is said to be not earlier than the
vith century a.d., which agrees fairly with its state of pre-
servation and the fact that it is written on both sides of the
skins so as to present the appearance of a modern book 3 .
Woide, then librarian of the Museum and pastor of the King's
German Chapel at St James', published some extracts from
it in his Appendix to the Codex Alexandrinus in 1799, and
Dulaurier gave others in the Journal Asiatique in 1847 4 . It
remained, however, untranslated until 1850, when Maurice
Schwartze, a young German scholar who was sent over here to
study our MSS. at the expense of the king of Prussia, turned it
into Latin ; and he having died soon after, his translation was
published the following year by the learned Petermann. The
British Museum text is written throughout in the Sahidic

1 The chapter on Marcion and his doctrines should perhaps in strict
chronological order follow on here, as Marcion's teaching was either con-
temporary with, or at most, but a few years later than, that of Valentinus.
Cf. Salmon in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Marcion, Valentinus. But the earliest
documents in the Pistis Sophia are, as will be seen, possibly by Valentinus
himself, and, as all of them are closely connected with his doctrine, it seemed
a pity to postpone their consideration. '

2 W. E. Crum, Catalogue of the Coptic MS. in the Brit. Mus., 1905,
p. 173, n. 2, says that it was bought at the sale of Askew's effects for
£10. 10«. 0d., and that Askew himself bought it from a bookseller.

a H. Hyvernat, Album de Palebgraphie Copte, Paris, 1888.
4 Matter, Hist, du Gnost. t. n. pp. 39-43, 347-348, and t. m. pp. 368-
371.


oh. x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 135

dialect, and is the work of more than one scribe ; but it seems
to be agreed by those who have studied it with knowledge
that the documents it contains are neither continuous nor
necessarily related ; and that it is in fact a series of extracts
from earlier MSS. 1 Of these documents, the second commences
with a heading, in a handwriting other than that of the scribe
of this part, reading " the Second Book of Pistis Sophia " ;
but as such a heading implies that the foregoing document
was the First Book of Pistis Sophia, the whole MS. is generally
known by that name 2 .

The story presented in these two documents, although
uncompleted, is, so far as it goes, perfectly consistent, and
presupposes belief in a Gnostic system resembling at once
those of the Ophites and of Valentinus. An introduction in
narrative form informs us that Jesus, after rising from the
dead, spent eleven years in teaching His disciples the arrange-
ment of the heavenly places " only so far as the places " of
a power whom He calls " the First Mystery," and declares to
be " before all mysteries," and to be " within the veil," being
" the father of the likeness of a dove 3 ." The result of this

1 See the present writer's article " Some Heretic Gospels " in the
Scottish Review for July, 1893, where the MSS. treated of in this chapter
and their divisions are described in detail. Schmidt, Koptisch-gnostische
Schriften, Bd I. p. 14, speaks of this "Codex Askewianus" as "eine
Miszellenhandschrif t. ' '

2 Except where otherwise specified, subsequent references here to
Pistis Sophia (in Italics) are to the first 253 pages of the Coptic MS. only.

3 Cf. the eaarepov rov KaTa7rtrdcrfiaros " within the veil " of Heb.
vi. 19. For other instances of its use in this sense see Crura, Cat. of
the Coptic MSS. in the Brit. Mus. p. 255, n. 1 ; and Clem. Alex. Strom.
Bk v. c. 6. For the dove, Mr F. C. Conybeare, in a paper on the subject
read before the Society of Historical Theology in Dec. 1892 (see Academy
of 3rd Dec. 1892), said that the dove was " the recognised symbol of the
Holy Spirit or Logos in the allegorizing theology of the Alexandrine Jews
at the beginning of the 1st century A.D.," and quoted several passages
from Philo in support. Cf. Origen, cont. Cels. Bk I. c. 31. But it was also
the emblem, perhaps the totem-animal, of the great Asiatic goddess who,
under the name of Astarte or Aphrodite, was worshipped as the Mater
viventium or " Mother of all Living," with whose worship the serpent was
also connected. It was doubtless to this that the text "Be ye wise as
serpents, harmless as doves " refers. Both serpents and doves figure largely


136 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

limitation was, we are told, that the disciples were ignorant
not only that any power existed higher than the First Mystery,
but also of the origin of the " places " or worlds of those
material and quasi- material powers who, here as in the earlier
systems, are responsible for the governance of the world and
the fate of mankind. While the disciples are sitting with
Jesus on the Mount of Olives, however, He is carried away
from them into Heaven by a great " power " or shape of light
which descends upon Him. On His return, He tells them that
this shape was " a vesture of light " or His heavenly nature
which He had laid aside before being born into this world 1 . He
also informs them that, when He first came into this world
before His Incarnation, He brought with Him twelve powers
which He took from " the Twelve Saviours of the Treasure
house of Light 2 ," and planted them in the mothers of the


in the Mycenaean and Cretan worship of the goddess. See Ronald Burrows,
Discoveries in Crete, 1907, pp. 137, 138, and Index for references. In later
Greek symbolism the dove was sacred to the infernal Aphrodite or Perse-
phone whose name of ^tppfcpurra or <btpcre<paTTu has been rendered
" she who bears the dove." See de Chanot, "Statues Iconiques de Chypre"
in Gazette Archeoloqique, 1878, p. 109.

1 Pistis Sophia, p. 152, Copt. This metaphor is first met with in Philo,
Quaest. in Oenesim, Bk I. c. 53, who declares that the " coats of skin " of
Gen. iii. 21 are the natural bodies with which the souls of the protoplasts
were clothed. It was a favourite figure of speech with the Alexandrian
Jewish writers. So in the Ascensio Isaiae, c. iv. 16, 17 : " But the saints
will come with the Lord with their garments which are now stored up on
high in the seventh heaven : with the Lord will they come, whose spirits

are clothed And afterwards they will turn themselves upward in

their garments, and their body will be left in this world." Cf. Charles,
Ascension of Isaiah, pp. 34, 35, and Eschatology (Jowett Lectures), pp.
399 sqq., where he says that this was also the teaching of St Paul.

* The word Scorr/p, which here as elsewhere in the book appears without
any Coptic equivalent, evidently had a peculiar signification to the Valen-
tmian Gnostics. Irenaeus.Bk I. c. 1, § 1, p. 12, Harvey, says that it was the
name they gave to Jesus oide yap Kvptov avop.a&iv avrbv tfeXoucn " for they
do not choose to call Him Lord." In the later part of the book, the do-
cument called Mtpos Ttv X a>i> 2a>T^por (p. 253, Copt.) says that "he is
saviour and ax^prjros (i.e. not to be confined in space), who finds the words
of the mysteries and the words of the Third Receptacle which is within


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 137

twelve Apostles, so that when these last were born into the
world they were given these powers instead of receiving, like
other men, souls " from the archons (or rulers) of the aeons 1 ."
He also describes how He appeared among the archons of
the Sphere in the likeness of the angel Gabriel, and found
among them the soul of " Elijah the Prophet 2 ." This He
caused to be taken to " the Virgin of Light," that it might
be planted in Elizabeth, the mother of John the Baptist 3 ,
(i.e. the inmost of the three) and excelleth them all." From which it would
appear that the chief qualification of a saviour in the eyes of the later
Valentinians was that he was not restricted to his special place in the uni-
verse, but could visit at will the worlds below him. We seem therefore to
be already getting near the Manichaean idea of Burlchans (messengers or
Buddhas) who are sent into the world for its salvation. Cf. Chapter XIII
infra.

1 So that Judas Iscariot received a super- excellent soul as well as the
other eleven, unless we are to suppose that his successor and substitute
Matthias was one of those chosen from the beginning. It is curious that
neither in this nor in any other Valentinian document is there any allusion
to the treason of Judas. The phrase " Archons of the aeons " means, as
will be seen later, the rulers of the twelve signs of the Zodiac.

2 The " Sphere," here as elsewhere in the book, means the sphere of the
visible firmament, which is below that of Heimarmene or Destiny.

3 This irapBevos tov <pcor6s or Virgin of Light appears here, I think,
for the first time in any Gnostic document, although she may have
been known to the Valentinians. See Irenaeus, Bk II. c. 47, § 2, p. 368,
Harvey. She is, perhaps, a lower analogue of Sophia Without, and is
represented as seated in or near the material sun which is said to give its
light in its " true form " only in her tottos or place, which is 10,000 times
more luminous than that of the Great Propator or Forefather mentioned
later (Pistis Sophia, p. 194, Copt. ). Her function seems to be the " judging "
of the souls of the dead, which does not apparently involve any weighing
of evidence, but merely the examination of them to see what " mysteries "
they have received in previous incarnations, which will determine the
bodies in which they are reincarnated or their translation to higher spheres
(ibid. pp. 239, 292). She also places in the soul a power which returns to
her, according to the Me'poy revx&v Soj-r^por, on the death of its possessor
(ibid. p. 284, Copt.), thereby discharging the functions assigned in the

st book of Plato's Republic to Lachesis. She is also on the same authority
the M. r. 2.) one of the rulers of the disk of the sun and of that of the
moon (ibid. pp. 340-341, Copt.), and her place is one of the " places of the
Middle " and is opposite to the kingdom of Adamas, which is called the
*' head of the aeons "(ibid. p. 236, Copt.). She reappears in Manichaeism


138 The Fist is Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

and He adds that He bound to it a power which He took from
" the Little Iao the Good, who is in the middle." The object
of this was, we are told, that John the Baptist might prepare
the way of Jesus and baptize with water for the remission
of sins.

Jesus then proceeds to describe His own Incarnation.
When speaking, still in the shape of the angel Gabriel, with
Mary His " mother after the body of matter," He planted in
her the first power he had received from " Barbelo," which
was the body He had worn " in the height 1 " ; and, in the

and it is said in the ActaArchdai that at the destruction of theworld shewill
pass into " the ship " of the moon along with Jesus and other powers where
she will remain until the whole earth is burnt up (c. xm. p. 21 of Hegemonius,
Ada Archdai, Beeson's ed., Leipzig, 1906, p. 21). In the Turfan texts
(F. W. K. Muller, Handschriften-Reste in Estrangelo Schrift aus Turjan,
m. Teil, Berlin, 1904, p. 77) appears a fragment of a prayer in which is
invoked yisd kanigrOsana which Dr Muller translates 'irjaovs irapdivos
tov <pa>Tos, " Jesus, Virgin of Light " ; but it is possible that there is
some mistake in the reading.

1 Barbelo is a name very frequently met with in the earlier heresio-
logists. Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 26, §§ 1, 2, pp. 221-226, Harvey, declares that there
was a sect of Simonians called Barbeliotae " or Naassenes " who suppose
" a certain indestructible (the Latin version says " never-ageing ") Aeon
in a living virgin spirit whom they call Barbelo (masc.)," and gives an
account of a string of other aeons issuing not from, but at the prayer of,
this Barbelo, which is far from clear in the present state of the text. The
sect appears, from what can be made out of his description, to have resem-
bled the Ophites, of which it may have been a branch. Hippolytus, however,
says nothing of them, and the account of Epiphanius (Haer. xxv. and xxvi.,
Vol. n, pt 1, pp. 160, 184, Oehler, is untrustworthy, inasmuch as he assigns
the worship of Barbelo to two sects, one of which he calls Nicolaitans and
the other Gnostics simply. To both of them he attributes after his manner
unimaginably filthy rites, and it is plain from his making Barbelo the mother
of Jaldabaoth and giving her a seat in the eighth heaven that he confuses
her wilfully or otherwise with the Sophia of the Ophites. Her place in the
system of the Pistis Sophia will be described in the text. The name is said
by Harvey to be derived from the Syriac Barba eZo,the Deity in Four or God
in Tetrad, and the derivation Is approved by Hort (Diet, of Christian Biog.
s.h.n.). It appears more likely, however, that it is to be referred to the
Hebrew root ^22 " Babel" or confusion, a derivation which Hort also men-
tions. In Irenaeus' Greek text the name is spelt &ap&r)\a>, in the Latin
" Barbelo " with an accusative " Barbelon," and in Epiphanius PapfyXoi
and fiapfypu. U we might alter this last into Pap&apia>d, we might see


x] The Pistis Sophia and Its Related Texts 139

place of the soul, a power which He received from " the Great
Sabaoth the Good, who is in the place of the right." After
this digression, He resumes His account of what happened
after His receiving the vesture of light on the Mount of Olives,
and declares that He found written in this vesture five mysterious
words "belonging [viz. in the language of] to the height 1 ,"
which He interprets to His disciples thus :

" The mystery who is without the world, through whom all things
exist, he is the giving forth and the lifting up of all and he has put
forth all the emanations and the things which are in them all. And
it is through him that all the mysteries exist and all their places.
Come unto us, for we are thy fellows and thy members 2 ! We
are one with thee, for thou and we are one. This is the First
Mystery which existed since the beginning in the Ineffable One

it in a great number of magic spells of the period. Cf . Wessely, Ephe.sia
Grammata, Wien, 1886, pp. 26, 28, 33, 34.

1 Pistis Sophia, p. 16, Copt. The five words are zama, zama, 6zza,
rachama, 6zai. Whatever they may mean, we may be quite sure that they
can never contain with their few letters the three pages or so of text which
are given as their interpretation. It is possible that the letters are used
acrostically like the A G L A, i.e. ^"JN rh>tyh 7M (? Ahih ? rPHX) nnx Ate
Gibor Lailam Adonai, " The mighty Adonai for ever" (or "thou art the
mighty and eternal Lord ") commonly met with in mediaeval magic. Cf.
Peter de Abano, Heptameron, sen Elementa Magica, Paris, 1567, p. 563 ; or,
for other examples, F. Barrett, The Magus, 1801, Bk II. pp. 39, 40. The
notable feature in these mysterious words is the quantity of Zetas or £'s that
they contain which points to the use of some sort of table like that called
by Cabalists ziruph, or a cryptogram of the aaaaa, aaaab, kind. It should
be noticed that Coptic scribes were often afflicted with what has been
called Betacism or the avoidance of the letter Beta or /3 by every means,
which frequently led to the substitution for it of £ as in the case of Jalda-
baoth = la\8a(a<0 given above (Chap. VIII, n. 3, p. 46 supra).

2 This idea of certain powers being the members or " limbs " of him
from whom they issue recurs all through the Pistis Sophia. Cf. especially
p. 224, Copt., where it is said that the x oi PVt JLaTa or "receptacles" of the
Ineffable go forth from his last limb. It is probably to be referred to the
conception of the Supreme Being as the Man <ar *£oxfiv, which we have
seen current among theOphites. See Chap. VIII, n. 2, p. 38 supra. That the
ancient Egyptians used the same expression concerning their own gods and
especially Ra, see Moret, " Le Verbe createur et revelateur," R.H.R., Mai-
Juin, 1909, p. 257. Cf. Amelineau, Onosticisme figyptien, p. 288. So
Naville, Old Egyptian Faith, p. 227.


140 The Pistis Sofihia and its Belated Texts [ch.

before he [i.e. the First Mystery] went forth, and we all are his
name 1 .

" Now therefore we all await thee at the last boundary which
is the last mystery from within 2 . This also is part of us. Now
therefore we have sent to thee thy vesture which is thine from the
beginning, which thou didst place in the last boundary, which is
the last boundary from within, until the time should be fulfilled
according to the commandment of the First Mystery. And now
that the time is fulfilled, clothe thyself in it ! Come unto us, for
we all stand near to thee that we may clothe thee with all the glory
of the First Mystery by His command. Which glory is as two
vestures, besides that which we have sent unto thee. For thou
art worthy of them since thou art preferred before us and wast
made before us. Wherefore the First Mystery has sent thee by us
the mystery of all his glory, which is as two vestures. In the first
is the glory of all the names of all the mysteries and of all the emana-
tions which are in the ranks of the receptacles of the Ineffable One.
And in the second vesture is the glory of the names of all the
mysteries and of all the emanations which are in the ranks of the

1 That is to say, their names make up his name as letters do a word.
So in the system of Marcus referred to in Chap. IX supra, Irenaeus (Bk I.
c. 8, § 11, p. 146, Harvey) explains that the name of Jesus ('irja-ovs)
which might be uttered is composed of six letters, but His unutterable
name of twenty-four, because the names of the first Tetrad of '\pprjros
(Bythos), 2tyi7, Uar^p (Monogenes or Nous) and \Wr]0eia contain that
number of letters. See also § 5 of same chapter. Those who wish to
understand the system are recommended to read the whole of the chapter
quoted. As Irenaeus has the sense to see, there is no reason why the
construction from one root of names founded on the principle given should
not go on for ever.

2 This is probably either the Horos or Stauros that we have seen brought
into being in the teaching of Valentinus as a guard to the Pleroma, or, as
is more probable, an antitype of the same power in the world immediately
above ours. That there was more than one Horos according to the later
Valentinians appears plain from the words of Irenaeus above quoted
(see Chap. IX, n. 1, p. 105 supra). Probably each world had its Horos,
or Limit, who acted as guard to it on its completion. That in this world,
the Cross, personified and made pre-existent, fulfils this office seems evident
from the Gospel of Peter, where it is described as coming forth from the
Sepulchre with Jesus (Mem. Miss. Archeol. du Caire, 1892, t. ix. fasc. 1,
v. 10). Cf. too, Clem. Alex. Paedagogus, Bk in. c. 12, and Strom. Bk n.
c. 20.


x] The Plstis Sophia and its Related Texts 141

two receptacles of the First Mystery. And in this vesture which
we have sent thee now, is the glory of the name of the Recorder
who is the First Precept 1 , and the mystery of the Five Marks 2 , and
the mystery of the great Legate of the Ineffable One who is the
same as that Great Light 3 , and the mystery of the Five Prohegumeni
who are the same as the Five Parastatae*. And there is also in
that vesture the glory of the name of the mystery* of all the ranks
of the emanations of the Treasure-house of Light, and of their
Saviours, and the ranks of those ranks which are the Seven Amen
and which are the Seven Sounds, and also the Five Trees 5 and also

1 'O ptjvevros. The word is not known in classical Greek (but cf.
Iitii'vttjs " a revealer"), and appears to have its root in firjv " the moon,"
as the measure of the month. From the Coptic word here translated
" Precept," we may guess it to be a personification of the Jewish Law or
Torah which, according to the Rabbis, before the creation of the world
existed in the heavens. Later in the book it is said that it is by command
of this power that Jeu places the aeons (p. 26, Copt.) ; that the souls of those
who receive the mysteries of the light (i.e. the psychics) will have pre-
cedence in beatitude over those who belong to the places of the First Precept
(p. 196, Copt.) ; that all the orders of beings of the Third x^PVH- a axe
below him (p. 203, Copt.) ; and that he is " cut into seven mysteries,"
which may mean that his name is spelled with seven letters (p. 219, Copt.).

2 Xd.payfj.ai. Are these the letters mentioned in last note ?

3 Upta^evTTjs, properly, " ambassador " or " agent." Doubtless a
prototype of our sun. Elsewhere in the book, Jesus tells His disciples
that He brought forth from Himself " at the beginning" power (not a
power), which He cast into the First Precept, " and the First Precept cast
part of it into the Great Light, and the Great Light cast part of that which
he received into the Five Parastatae, the last of whom breathed part of that
which he received into the Kerasmos or Confusion " (p. 14, Copt.). The
Great Light is also called the Xapaypa of the Light, and is said to have
remained without emanation (p. 219, Copt.).

* napaardrai, " Comrades " or " witnesses " or " helpers." They
can here hardly be anything else but the Five Planets. It is said later
that it was the last Parastates who set Jeu and his five companions in
thp " Place of the Right Hand " (p. 193, Copt.). When the world is des-
troyed, Jesus is to take the perfect souls into this last Parastates where
they are to reign with him (p. 230, Copt.) for 1000 years of light which are
365,000 of our years (p. 243, Copt.), n.po^yoip.tvos " Forerunner " does
not seem to occur in classical Greek.

5 We hear nothing more definite of these Five Trees, but they appear
again in Manichaeism, and are mentioned in the Chinese treatise from
Tun-huang, for which see Chap. XIII infra.


142 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

the Three Amen, and also the Saviour of the Twins who is the boy
of a boy 1 , and the mystery of the Nine Guards of the Three Gates
of the Treasure-house of Light. And there is also within it the
glory of the name which is on the right, and of all those who are
in the middle. And there also is the glory of the name of the Great
Unseen One, who is the Great Forefather 2 , and the mysteries of the

1 This is a most puzzling expression and seems to have baffled the scribe,
as he speaks of them, when he comes to repeat the phrase (p. 216, Copt.),
as the " Twin Saviours," which is a classical epithet of the Dioscuri. In
Pharaonic Egypt, Shu and Tefnut the pair of gods who were first brought
into being by the Creator were sometimes called " The Twins." See
Naville, Old Egyptian Faith, p. 120. Cf. p. 171 infra.

2 It is evident from the context that we here begin the enumeration
of the Powers of the Left, who are hylic or material and therefore the least
worthy of the inhabitants of the heavens. According to Irenaeus, the
Valentinians held that all of them were doomed to destruction. Tpivv w

ovtoov, to p.ev vXikov, b teal dpiarepbv koXoiktl, Kara dvdyKTjv diro\-
Xvcrdai Xiyovcriv, are pt]8(piav eni8e£ao-dai ttvojjv d(pdap(rias bvvdptvov
(Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 11, p. 51, Harvey). " There being three forms of
existences, they say that the hylic, which they call the left hand, must be
destroyed, inasmuch as it cannot receive any breath of incorruption."
So in the Bruce Papyrus to be presently mentioned, the " part of the left "
is called the land of Death. At their head stands " the Great Unseen
Propator," who throughout the Pistis Sophia proper is called by this title
only, and occupies the same place with regard to the left that Iao does in
respect of the middle, and Jeu of the right. In the Mepos rtvx&v Scor^poj
(p. 359, Copt.) he is called by the name dypappaxapap^x which
frequently appears in the Magic Papyri. It is there spelt indifferently
aKpap.viKap.api, aKpap,p,a)(api, aKpap.paxap.apti, aKpapp.axax a X a P l > aQ d in a
Latin inscription on a gold plate, acramihamari (see Wessely, Ephesia
Grammata, p. 22, for references), which last may be taken to be the
more usual pronunciation. One is rather tempted to see in the name a
corruption of dypappartov in the sense of " which cannot be written,"
but I can find no authority for such a use of the word. As the ruler of the
material Cosmos he might be taken for the Cosmocrator who, as we have
seen, is called by Valentinus Diabolos or the Devil (but see n. 1, p. 152
infra). Yet he cannot be wholly evil like Beelzebuth for it is said in the
text (p. 41, Copt.) that he and his consort Barbelo sing praises to the Powers
of the Light. So in the Mtpos t^w 2coTrjpos (p. 378, Copt.)
he is represented as begging for purification and holiness when the Great
Name of God is uttered. It is plain also from the statements in the text
(pp. 43, 44, Copt.) that in the Pistis Sophia he, Barbelo, and the Avdd8t)s
or Arrogant Power make up a triad called the great rpidwapus or


,


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 143

Three Triple Powers, and the mystery of all their places, and the
mystery of all their unseen ones, and of all the dwellers in the
Thirteenth Aeon, and the name of the Twelve Aeons with all their
Archons, all their Archangels, all their Angels and all the dwellers
in the Twelve Aeons, and all the mystery of the name of all the
dwellers in Heimarmene 1 , and all the heavens, and the whole
mystery of the name of all the dwellers in the Sphere and their
firmaments with all they contain and their places. Lo, then, we
have sent unto thee this vesture, which none knoweth from the
First Precept downward, because that the glory of its light was
hidden within it, and the Spheres and all the places from the First
Precept downward knew it not. Hasten, then, do on the vesture,
and come unto us, for we have remained near thee to clothe thee
with these two vestures by the command of the First Mystery
until the time fixed by the Ineffable One should be fulfilled. Now,
then, the time is fulfilled. Come unto us quickly, that we may
clothe thee with them until thou hast accomplished the entire
ministry of the completion of the First Mystery, the ministry
which has been laid upon thee by the Ineffable One. Come then
unto us quickly in order that we may clothe thee with them ac-
cording to the command of the First Mystery. For yet a little
while, a very little while, and thou wilt cease to be in the world.
Come then quickly, that thou mayest receive all the glory which
is the glory of the First Mystery."

This long address, in which the whole arrangement of the
universe as the author supposes it to exist is set forth, is
clearly the utterance of the heavenly powers belonging to the
higher worlds whom Jesus has left on His descent to earth.
Unintelligible as it seems at first sight, it can be explained
to some extent by the tenets of the Ophites described in
Chapter VIII, which formed, as we have seen, the basis on
which Valentinus also constructed his system. The Ineffable

" Triple Powers " from whom are projected the powers called the " Twenty-
four Invisibles." In another document of the same MS. (p. 361, Copt.) a
power from him is said to be bound in the planet Saturn.

1 This ~ElfiapfjLevT] or " Destiny " is the sphere immediately above

our firmament. It is evidently so called, because on passing through it

; the soul on its way to incarnation receives the Moira or impress of its own

destiny, of which it cannot afterwards rid itself except by the grace of the

mysteries or Valentinian sacraments. Cf. Chap. IX, n. 3, p. 115 supra.


144 The Pistis Sojjhia arid its Belated Texts [ch.

One may be assumed to be the Bythos whom both the Ophites
and Valentinus called by that epithet 1 and held to be the
first and final source of all being. Although something
is said here and elsewhere in the book of his " receptacles "
and " places 2 ," no particulars of them are given, they being
apparently reserved for a future revelation 3 . The First
Mystery, however, is spoken of later as a " Twin Mystery,
looking inward and outward 4 ," which seems to correspond
to the Father-and-Son of the Ophite diagram. Later in
the book, Jesus reveals to His disciples that He Himself is
the First Mystery "looking outward 5 ," and this seems to
show that the author's conception of the relations between
Him and the First Person of the Trinity did not differ much
from that of the Catholic Church 6 . The world of this First
Mystery extends downwards as far as what is here, as in the
Epistle to the Hebrews 7 , called " the veil," which is perhaps
the veil of sense separating all things contaminated by mixture
with matter from the Divine. This First Mystery is said to
consist of twenty-four " mysteries " ; but these do not seem
to be, as in the older systems, places or worlds, but rather
attributes or aspects of the Deity which together go to make
up His whole being, as a number of letters are required to
make up a word or name 8 . But from some words of Jesus

1 "ApprjTos. Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 5, § 1, p. 99, Harvey. Innominabilis,
Tertullian, adv. Valentinianos, c. 37. So Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk v. c. 10,
says that God is ineffable, being incapable of being expressed even in His
own power.

2 XooprjficiTa : rorroi.

3 That [i.e. the First] mystery knoweth why there emanated all the
places which are in the receptacle of the Ineffable One and also all which
is in them, and why they went forth from the last limb of the Ineffable

One These things I will tell you in the emanation of the universe.

Pist. Soph. p. 225, Copt.

4 Ibid. p. 222, Copt. s Ibid% p- 12 7, Copt.
8 See Chap. IX, pp. 121, 122 supra.

7 Heb. vi. 19.

8 p. 203, Copt. Why there should be 24, when the dodecad or group of
Aeons in the world above was only 12, it is difficult to say. But Hippolytus
supplies a sort of explanation when he says (op. cil. Bk vx. c. 33, p. 292,
Cruice) : Tavra (<rrtv a \iyovaiv • tri [8i] irpos tovtois, dpidprjriKTjV Troiovp,fvoi


x] The Pistis Sophia and Its Related Texts 145

given later in the book, it would appear that its author did
not at all discard the view of the earlier Ophites that the
Supreme Being was to be figured as of human form, for we
find him remarking that the First Mystery himself proceeded
from the " last limb " or member of the Ineffable One 1 . For
the rest, it need only be pointed out here that the powers who
address Jesus in the quotation just given also speak of
themselves as His " members " ; but that notwithstanding
this, they must be looked upon as purely spiritual entities
having no direct connection with any material forms except
as paradigms or patterns 2 . Whatever the worlds which they

ti^v nacrav avrav 8i8ao~Kak'iav, as irpoelirov [tovs] evros nX^pw/iaro? Alwvas
rpidicovra nakiv (TwrpotiefiiXrjitevai avrois koto, avakoyiav Alwvas aXXovs, lv
J/ to JJXrjpapa ev api8po> TfXet'a) o-vvrjdpoio-pevov. 'Qs yap oi Hvdayopinol
SiflXof els 8a>8e <a <a\ rpidnovTa Kal e^jcovra, nal Xfirrd XeTrroiv da\v eneivois,
8(8r]\a)Taf ovra>s ov roi to. tvrbs HXrjpoipaTos viro8taipovo~iv. "This is
what they say. But besides this, they make their whole teaching
arithmetical, since they say that the thirty Aeons within the Pleroma again
projected by analogy other Aeons, so that thereby the Pleroma may be
gathered together in a perfect number. For the manner in which the
Pythagoreans divide [the cosmos] into 12, 30, and 60 parts, and each of
these into yet more minute ones, has been made plain " [see op. cit. Bk vi.
c. 28, p. 279, where Hippolytus tells us how Pythagoras divided each Sign
of the Zodiac into 30 parts " which are days of the month, these last into
60 XtTTTci, and so on "]. " In this way do they [the Valentinians] divide
the things within the Pleroma." Cf. Me'poy rtvx^v Swrrjpos p. 364,
Copt. In another book of the Philosophumena (Bk rv. c. 7 Hepl rfjs
dpiOptTiKTJs Tfx v V s ) ne explains how the Pythagoreans derived infinity from
a single principle by a succession of odd and even or male and female num-
bers, in connection with which he quotes Simon Magus (op. cit. p. 132,
Cruice). The way this was applied to names he shows in the chapter
Ilfpl padrjpaTiKwv (op. cit. Bk iv. c. 11, pp. 77 sqq., Cruice) which is in fact
a description of what in the Middle Ages was called Arithmomancy, or
divination by numbers.

1 p. 224, Copt. See also p. 241, Copt. — a very curious passage where
the Ineffable One is called " the God of Truth without foot " (cf. Osiris as
a mummy) and is said to live apart from his " members."

2 In the beginning of the Mepos reu^wi/ 2a>T^pos (p. 252, Copt.) it is
said of the Ineffable that " there are many members, but one body." But
this statement is immediately followed by another that this is only said
" as a pattern (Trapd8(typa) and a likeness and a resemblance, but not
in truth of shape " (p. 253, Copt.).

L. II. 10


146 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

inhabit may be thought to be like — and Jesus more than once
tells His disciples that there is nothing on earth to which they
can be compared — we can only say that they are two in number,
and that it is the two " vestures of light " sent to Jesus on the
Mount of Olives, or, in other words, His two natures, which
give Him the means of ascending to the heavens of the Ineffable
One and of the First Mystery respectively. If the author ever
intended to discuss them further, he has certainly not done
so in the Pistis Sophia properly so called 1 .

On the other hand, the worlds and powers existing " below
the veil," or within the comprehension of the senses, and sym-
bolized by the third and inferior " vesture " sent to Jesus,
are indicated even in the address given above with fair
particularity. Their names and relative positions are not easy
to identify ; but, thanks to some hints given in other parts
of the book, the universe below " the veil " may be recon-
structed thus 2 : — its upper part contains the Treasure-house
of light where, as its name implies, the light as it is redeemed
from matter is stored up. There are below it five other worlds
called the Parastatae or Helpers, in one of which Jesus is to
reign during the millennium, and the ruler of the last of which
arranges the pure spirits who dwell below it 3 . The highest

1 What he does say is that the Ineffable One has two x a> php- aTa or
receptacles and that the second of these is the x^PW - °f the First Mystery.
It is, I think, probable that an attempt to describe both these x a PW aTa &
made in one of the documents of the Bruce Papyrus. See pp. 191 , 192 infra.

2 In addition to the enumeration contained in the so-called interpre-
tation of the mysterious " Five Words," there appears in the 2nd part of
the Pistis Sophia (pp. 206 sqg. Copt.) a long rhapsody in which it is declared
that a certain mystery knows why all the powers, stars, and heavenly
" places " were made. These are here again set out seriatim, and as the
order in the main corresponds with that in the Five " Words," translated
in the text, it serves as a check upon this last. The order of the powers in
the text was given in the article in the Scottish Review before referred to,
and, although this was written 20 years ago, I see no occasion to alter it.

3 It is the " last Parastates " who places Jeu and his companion in
*' the place of those who belong to the right hand according to the arrange-
ment (i.e. oiKovofiia) of the Assembly of the Light which is in the Height
of the Rulers of the Aeons and in the universes (noo-pol) and every race
which is therein " (p. 193, Copt. ). A later revelation is promised as to these,


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 147

spirit in the Treasure-house is called the First Precept or the
Recorder, and with him is associated the Great Light, who is
said to be the "legate" of the Ineffable One 1 . In the Treasure-
house there are also the orders of spirits set out in the address
just quoted, the only two to which it is necessary to refer
here being the Five Trees 2 and the Twelve Saviours. From
the Five Trees emanated the great " Powers of the Right
Hand " to be next mentioned ; while, as is before described,
the Twelve Saviours furnished the spotless souls required for
the Twelve Apostles 3 . The lower part of the same universe
is called the Kerasmos or Confusion, because here the light,
which in the upper part is pure, is mingled with matter. It
is divided in the first instance into three parts, the Right-hand,
the Middle, and the Left-hand 4 . Of these, the Right-hand
contains the spirits who emanated from the Five Trees of the
Treasure-house. At their head is Jeu, who has supreme
authority over all the Confusion 5 . He is called the Overseer

but in the meantime it is said that Jeu emanated from the chosen or pure
{fikiKptvrjs) light of the first of the Five Trees (loc. cit.).

1 See nn. 1 and 3, p. 141 supra. As has been said, it is difficult not to see
in this "1st Precept " a personification of the Torah or Jewish Law.

2 See n. 3, p. 146 supra.
8 See n. 2, p. 136 supra.

* So Secundus, Valentinus' follower, taught according to Hippolytua
{v. Chap. IX supra) " that there is a right and a left tetrad, i.e. light and
darkness." This may be taken to mean that the constitution of the light-
world was repeated point for point in the world of darkness. The middle
world is of course that where light and darkness mingle.

5 Jeu is generally called the firio-Koiros or overseer of the Light He
it is who has placed the Rulers of the Aeons so that they always " behold
the left " (p. 26, Copt.). He is also said to have bound " in the beginning "
the rulers of the Aeons and of Destiny and of the Sphere in their respective
places (p. 34, Copt.), and that each and every of them will remain in the
ragis or order and walk in the 8p6pos or course in which he placed
em. We also hear in the Pistis Sophia proper of two " books of Jeu"
hich Enoch wrote when the First Mystery spoke with him out of the
of Life and the Tree of Knowledge in the Paradise of Adam " (p. 246,
pt.). In the first part of the Mtpos revx^v 2a>-nipos, however Jeu is
ribed as " the First Man, the inicrKonos of the Light, and the
pttrfievTTis or Ambassador of the First Precept" (p. 322, Copt.); and
it is further said in the same book that " the Book of Jeu (not books)

10—2


148 The Pistis Sophia and its Belated Texts [ch.

of the Light, and in his name we may possibly recognize a
corruption of the Hebrew Yahweh. With him and of similar
origin is Melchisedek 1 , the Inheritor, Receiver or Purifier of the
Light, whose office it is to take the portions of light as they are
redeemed into the Treasure-house 2 . Another emanation from
the Five Trees is an otherwise unnamed Guard of the Veil of
the Treasure-house 3 which seems to be the veil dividing the

which Enoch wrote in Paradise when I (Jesus) spoke with him out of the
Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge " was placed by His means in " the
rock Ararad." Jesus goes on to say that He placed " Kalapatauroth the
ruler who is over Skemmut in which is the foot of Jeu, and he surrounds
all rulers and destinies — I placed that ruler to guard the books of Jeu from
the Flood and lest any of the rulers should destroy them out of envy "
(p. 354, Copt.).

1 Melchizidek is very seldom mentioned in the Pistis Sophia, but when
he is, it is always as the great wapaKrjpTTTOip or " inheritor " of the Light
(p. 34, Copt.). Jesus describes how he comes among the Rulers of the Aeons
at certain times and takes away their light, which he purifies (p. 35, Copt.).
He is said to have emanated from the light of the 5th Tree of the Treasure
House, as Jeu did from that of the 1st (p. 193, Copt.). In the Mepos
revx&v 2a>rripos, he is called the great irapakrjpTTT^s or "receiver" of the Light
(p. 292, Copt.). In the 2nd part of the last named document he is called
Zorocothora Melchizidek, an epithet which C. W. King in The Gnostics and
their Remains translates " light-gatherer." It is also said in the same 2nd
part that "he and Jeu are the two great lights," and that he is the irpeo-ftevTTjs
or " Legate " of all the fights which are purified in the Rulers of the Aeons
(p. 365, Copt.). We may perhaps see in him and Jeu the antitypes of
which the Great Light and the First Precept are the paradigms. Hippoly-
tus, op. cit. Bk vu. c. 36, p. 391, Cruice, says that there was a sect, the fol-
lowers of one Theodotus, a Tpaire('iTvs or money-changer, who said that
there was " a greatest power named Melchizidek who was greater than
Christ.'' Pseudo-Tertullian repeats the same story and adds that Mel-
chizidek is " a celestial virtue of great grace," who does for heavenly angels
and virtues what Christ does for men, having made himself " their
intercessor and advocate." See auct. cit. (probably Victorinus of Pettau)
Against all Heresies, c. xxiv. p. 279, OehL He doubtless founded hi3
opinion on the passage in the Hebrews. The name seems to mean
" Holy King " Cf. the " King of Glory " of the Manichaeans, see Chap.
XIII infra.

* p. 35, Copt.

3 He is said to have emanated from the 2nd Tree (p. 193, Copt.) and is
nowhere distinctly named. But one may perhaps guess from the order in
which he occurs in the 2nd part of the Mepos revx&v 2a>Trjpos that


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 149

Treasure-house from the Place of the Right-hand, and there
are two others of equal rank who are called simply the two
Prohegumeni or Forerunners 1 . Below these again is the
Great Sabaoth the Good, who supplied, as we have seen, the
soul which was in Jesus at His birth, and who is himself the
emanation, not of any of the Five Trees, but of Jeu 2 . He
seems to have a substitute or messenger called the little Sabaoth
the Good, who communicates directly with the powers of
matter. In the Middle come the powers who are set over
the reincarnation of souls and the consequent redemption of
mankind. Of these, the only two named are " the Great Iao
the Good 3 ," spoken of in one passage as the Great Hegumen
(or Leader) of the Middle 4 . He, too, has a minister called
"the Little Iao" who supplies the "power" which, with the
soul of Elijah, animated the body of John the Baptist 5 . He
also has twelve deacons or ministers under him 6 . The other

his name was Zarazaz, evidently a cryptogram like those mentioned in
n. 1, p. 139 supra. It is also said that the Rulers call him " Maskelli after
the name of a strong (i.e. male) ruler of their own place (p. 370, Copt.)."
This name of Maskelli, sometimes written Maskelli-maskello, is frequently
met with in the Magic Papyri. Cf . Wessely, Ephesia Orammata, p. 28.

1 They are said to have emanated from the 3rd and 4th Tree respectively
(p. 193, Copt.).

2 p. 193, Copt. He is evidently called the Good because there is a
wicked Sabaoth sometimes called Sabaoth Adamas, and the Great because
there is a Little Sabaoth the Good who seems to act as his messenger. It
is this last who takes the power from the Great Sabaoth the Good which
afterwards becomes the body of Jesus and " casts it into matter and
Barbelo " (p 127, Copt.). He seems to be set over or in some way identified
with what is called the Gate of Life (p. 215, Copt.) both in the Pistis Sophia
and the Mtpos Tevx&v ^(orrjpos (p. 292, Copt.).

3 p. 12, Copt., where he is oddly enough called the Little Iao the Good,
I think by a clerical error. Later he is said to be " the great leader of the
middle whom the Rulers call the Great Iao after the name of a great ruler
in their own place " (p. 194, Copt.). He is described in the same way in
the second part of the Mepos rev^MK 2a>Trjpos (p. 371, Copt.).

4 See last note.

5 p. 12, Copt. This " power" is evidently the better part of man's soul
like the Logoi who dwell therein in the passage quoted above from Valen-
tinus, see Chap. IX, p. 112 supra.

8 p. 194, Copt.


150 The Pistis Sophia aiul its Belated Texts [ch.

great Leader of the Middle is the Virgin of Light 1 . She it is
who chooses the bodies into which the souls of men shall be
put at conception, in discharge of which duty she sends the
soul of Elijah into the body of John the Baptist, her colleague
Iao's share in the work being apparently limited to providing
the " power " accompanying it. She has among her assistants
seven other virgins of light 2 , after whose likeness Mary the
Mother of Jesus and Mary Magdalene are said to have been
made, and we also read of " receivers " who are under her
orders 3 . The light of the Sun "in its true shape " is said to
be in her place 4 , and there is some reason for thinking that
she is to be considered as the power which directs the material
Sun, while her colleague Iao has the same office as regards
the Moon 5 .

We now come to the places of the left, the highest of which
seems to be that which is called the Thirteenth Aeon. This
is a part of the universe the existence of which Jesus conceals
from His disciples until He receives his " vestures," and there
is much mystery as to its origin. It seems to have been
governed in the first instance by a triad consisting of an un-
named power referred to as the Great Forefather or the Great
Unseen One, a female power called Barbelo 6 , and a second

1 See n. 3, p. 137 supra.

* So the Mtpof rtvxcov 2a>Tr)pos (p. 327, Copt.).

8 The likeness of Mary the Mother and Mary Magdalene to the seven
Virgins appears in the translation of Amelineau (Pistis Sophia, Paris, 1895,
p. 60). Schwartze (p. 75, Lat.) puts it rather differently. See also Schmidt,
K.-G.S. bd. 1, p. 75. The " receivers " of the Virgin of Light are mentioned
on p. 292, Copt. * p. 184, Copt,

6 pp. 340, 341, Copt. As iO£ (ioh) is Coptic for the Moon, it is
just possible that there may be a kind of pun here on this word and the
name Iao. Osiris, whose name was often equated by the Alexandrian
Jews with their own divine name Jaho or Jah, as in the Manethonian story of
Osarsiph = Joseph, was also considered a Moon-god. Cf. the " Hymn of
the Mysteries " given in Chap. VIII, where he is called " the holy horned
moon of heaven."

• See note 1, p. 138 supra. The Bruce Papyrus (Amelineau, Notice sur
U Papyrus Onostique Bruce, Paris, 1882, p. 220) speaks of the " Thirteenth
Aeon, where are the Great Unseen God and the Great Virgin of the Spirit
(cf. the napfftviKT) nvtvfjM of Irenaeus) and the twenty-four emanations
of the unseen God."


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 151

male called the Authades or Proud God 1 who plays a principal
part in the episode of Pistis Sophia which forms the ostensible
theme of the book. Of the Great Forefather, we are told
nothing of importance, but what is said of the female power
Barbelo bears out fully the remark which Hippolytus attri-
butes to Valentinus that among the lesser powers or aeons
the female merely projects the substance, while it is the male
which gives form to it 2 . It is doubtless for this reason that
it is from her that the body of Jesus is said to have come —
i.e. that she provided the matter out of which it was formed
in the first instance, and which had, as He says later in the
present book, to be purged and cleansed by Himself 3 . She
is also spoken of throughout as the origin of all the matter
within the world of sense 4 . This triad, constantly referred
to throughout the book as the Three Tridynami or Triple
Powers, have put forth, before the story opens, twenty-four other
powers arranged in twelve syzygies or pairs who are spoken of as
the Twenty-four Unseen Ones, and who inhabit with them the
Thirteenth Aeon. Only one of these is named and this is the
inferior or female member of the last syzygy. She is named
Pistis Sophia, and gives, as we have seen, her name to the book 5 .
We now pass from the unseen world, which can neverthe-
less be comprehended as being in part at least material, to
the starry world above us which is plainly within the reach

1 See n. 2, p. 142 supra.

2 See Chapter IX, p. 104 supra.

3 p. 116, Copt.

4 I suppose it is in view of this maternal aspect of her nature that she
is alluded to in the latter part of the Mepos Tevx&v Scorrjpos as
QapPrjXa /3SeAAj? " Barbelo who gives suck " ? Her place, according to
the Bruce Papyrus (Amelineau, p. 218), is said to be in the Twelfth Aeon.

5 There have been many attempts to make this name mean something
•ke than merely " Faith- Wisdom." Dulaurier and Renan both tried to
read it " 77-10-7-17 2o<pla " " the faithful Wisdom " or " La fidele Sagesse."
If we had more documents of the style of Simon's Apophasis, we should
probably find that this apposition of two or more nouns in a name was
not infrequent, and the case of Ptah-Sokar-Osiris will occur to every
Egyptologist. The fact that the name includes the first and last female
member of the Dodecad of Valentinus (see p. 101 supra) is really its most
plausible explanation.


152 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

of our organs of sense. The controlling part in this is taken
by the powers called the Twelve Aeons, who are ruled before
the advent of Jesus by a power called, like the Supreme Being
in the Ophite system, Adamas 1 . As they are called in one
passage the 12 hours of the day, it may be concluded that
they are the 12 zodiacal signs or, in other words, the Zodiac
or 12 constellations of fixed stars through which the sun appears
to pass in his yearly course 2 . Although nowhere expressly
stated, it may be concluded that they emanated from the last
member of the triad of the Left, i.e. the Authades, who is here
said to have been disobedient in refusing " to give up the purity

1 This Adamas seems to be an essentially evil power, who wages useless
war against the Light on the entry of Jesus into his realm (p. 25, Copt.).
His seat is plainly the Twelve Aeons or Zodiac (p. 157, Copt.), and it is said
in the Mepos revx^v SooTijpos that his " kingdom " is in the tottoi KecpaXrjs
alcovwv or Places of the head of the Aeons and is opposite the place of the
Virgin of Light (p. 336, Copt.). In the second part of the same document
(i.e. the p. t. a.) it is said that the rulers of Adamas rebelled, persisting in the
act of copulation (<Tvvov<rla) and begetting " Rulers and Archangels and
Angels and Ministers (Xei rovpyoi) and Decans" (Atnavoi), and that thereupon
Jeu went forth from the Place of the Right and "bound them in Heimarmene
and the Sphere." We further learn that half the Aeons headed by Jabraoth,
who is also once mentioned in the Pistis Sophia proper (p. 128, Copt., and
again in the Bruce Papyrus, Amelineau, p. 239), were consequently trans-
ferred to another place, while Adamas, now for the first time called Sabaoth
Adamas, with the unrepentant rulers are confined in the Sphere to the
number of 1800, over whom 360 other rulers bear sway, over whom again are
set the five planets Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter (pp. 360, 361,
Copt.). All this seems to me to be later than the Pistis Sophia proper, to
have been written at a time when belief in astrology was more rife than in
Hadrian's reign, and to owe something to Manichaean influence. The original
Adamas, the persecutor of Pistis Sophia herself, seems identifiable with the
Diabolos or Cosmocrator of Valentinus, in which case we may perhaps see
in the "Great Propator" a merely stupid and ignorant power like the
Jaldabaoth of the Ophites and their successors. See p. 163 infra.

2 p. 145, Copt. So Irenaeus in his account of the Valentinian doctrines,
Bk i. c. 1, p. 12 sqq. I suppose there is an allusion to this in the remark of
Jesus to Mary that a year is as a day (p. 243, Copt. ). But all the astrology of
the time seems to have divided the astronomical day not into 24, but into
12 hours. It was the same with the Manichaeans. See Chavannes and
Pelliot, "Un Traite manicheen retrouve en Chine," Journal Asiatique,
serie x, t. xvm. (Nov.-Dec. 1911), p. 540, n. 4.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 153

of his light," no doubt when the earth was made, and is accused
of ambition in wishing to rule the Thirteenth Aeon. Through
his creature, Adamas their king, he induces the rulers of the
Twelve Aeons to delay the redemption of the light from matter.
It is from their matter that are made the souls, not only of
men, but of beasts, birds, and reptiles 1 , and if they were allowed
to do as they pleased, the process would go on for ever, as it
is the habit of these Archons " to turn about and devour
their own ejecta, the breath of their mouths, the tears of their
eyes, and the sweat of their bodies," so that the same matter
is used over and over again 2 . Below the starry world comes
the Sphere of Heimarmene or Destiny, so called apparently
because both the earthly and heavenly lot of each soul is
determined on its downward passage through it, and below
that again the Sphere simply so called, which is the visible
firmament apparently stretched above us. The Archons of
the Aeons, of whom Adamas is the chief, rule their own and
both these lower spheres, and the only hindrance to their
dilatory manoeuvres prior to the advent of Jesus was caused
by Melchizidek the Receiver of the Light 3 , who came among
them at stated times, took away their light, and, after having
purified it, stored it up in the Treasure-house. This was

1 But curiously enough, not the " souls " of fish. So in the Middle
Ages, the Manichaeans of Languedoc did not allow their " Perfects " to
partake of animal food nor even of eggs, but allowed them fish, because
they said these creatures were not begotten by copulation See Schmidt,
Hist, des Cathares, Paris, 1843. Is this one of the reasons why Jesus is
called 'Ix#vs ?

2 This idea of man being made from the tears of the eyes of the heavenly
powers is an old one in Egypt. So Maspero explains the well-known sign
of the utchat or Eye of Horus as that " qui exprime la matiere, le corps du
soleil, d'ou tous les etres decoulent sous forme de pleurs," " Les Hypogees
Royaux de Thebes," fit. tqyptol. n. p. 130. Moret, " Le verbe createur et
revelateur en figypte," R. H. R. Mai-Juin, 1909, p. 386, gives many instances
from hymns and other ritual documents. It was known to Proclus who
transfers it after his maimer to Orpheus and makes it into hexameters :

Thy tears are the much-enduring race of men,
By thy laugh thou hast raised up the sacred race of gods.
See Abel's Orphica, fr. 236.

3 See n. 1, p. 148 supra.


154 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

apparently done through the medium of the sun and moon,
who seem to have acted in the matter as the " receivers " of
Melchizidek 1 .

We can now resume the narrative of the book which has-
been interrupted in order that a description of the universe
through which Jesus passes on His ascension might be given.
He tells His disciples that clothing Himself in His third or
least glorious " vesture," He flew up to the firmament, the
gates of which opened spontaneously to give Him passage 2 .
Entering in, the Archons there were all struck with terror at
the light of His vesture, and wondered how the " Lord of the
Universe 3 " passed through them unnoticed on his descent to
earth 4 . The same scenes are repeated when He enters the
Sphere of Destiny, and again when He reaches the Twelve
Aeons or Zodiac of fixed stars. Before leaving the Twelve
Aeons, Jesus takes away from its rulers a third part of their
power, and alters their course, so that its direction is changed
every six months. This He does, as He tells His disciples,
for a double reason. He thereby prevents the Aeons from
devouring their own matter, and so delaying the redemption
of the light, and He further hinders their movements from
being used by mankind in the divination and magic which
the sinning angels taught when " they came down " — a clear
reference to the story in Genesis of the fall of the angels as-
amplified in the Book of Enoch. This alteration, He declares,

1 This is, perhaps, to be gathered from the Pislis Sophia, p. 36, Copt.
Cf. Mf'pos rtv^mv 2a>TTjpos, pp. 337-338. In another part of the last-named
document, the Moon- ship is described as steered by a male and female dragon
(the caduceus of Hermes ?) who snatch away the light of the Rulers (p. 360,
Copt.).

2 This seems to be the passage referred to later by Origen. See n. 2,
p. 159 infra.

3 The usual epithet or appellation of Osiris Neb-er-tcher^Lord of
Totality or the Universe. Cf. Budge, Book of the Dead, passim.

* So in the Ascensio Isaiae, of which Mr Charles says that " we cannot
be sure that it existed earlier than the latter half of the 2nd century of our
Era," it is said (Chap. IX, v. 15) " And thus His descent, as you will see,
will be hidden even from the heavens, so that it will not be known who
He is." Charles, The Ascension of Isaiah, p. 62. Cf. ibid pp. 67, 70,
73 and 79-


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 155

was foreshadowed by the text " I have shortened the times
for my elect's sake 1 ."

Passing upward to the Thirteenth Aeon, Jesus tells His
disciples that he found Pistis Sophia dwelling alone in a place
immediately below it, and He here makes a long digression to
recount her history. She is, as has been said above, one of the
twenty- four invisible but material emanations projected by the
Great Unseen Forefather and his consort Barbelo, and formerly
dwelt with her own partner, whose name is not mentioned, in
the Thirteenth Aeon 2 . But one day happening to look forth
from her place and beholding the light of the Treasure-house,
she longed to ascend towards it and began to sing praises to it.
This angered exceedingly the Authades or Proud God, the Third
Triple Power or chief of the Thirteenth Aeon, who had already,
as has been said, shown his disobedience in refusing to give
up his light. Out of envy and jealousy of Pistis Sophia, he
sends forth from himself a great power with a lion's face who
is " half flame and half darkness " and bears the name of
Jaldabaoth, which we have met with before among the Ophites 3 .
This Jaldabaoth is sent below into the regions of Chaos, the
unformed and shapeless darkness which is either below or
surrounds the earth 4 , and when Pistis Sophia sees him shining

1 pp. 39, 40, Copt. The reference is apparently to the Book of Enoch,
c. lxxx. (see Charles, Book of Enoch, pp. 212, 213, and the Epistle of Barna-
bas, N.T. extra can., c. rv. p. 9, Hilgenfeld). In the Latin version of the
last- quoted book, it is assigned to Daniel, which shows perhaps the con-
nection of Enoch with all this quasi-prophetic or apocalyptic iterature.

2 According to the Valentinian system, his name was QeXrjTos or
" the Beloved." See Chap. IX, p. 101 supra.

3 See Chap. VIII supra. Here he occupies a far inferior position to
that assigned him by the Ophites. In the Me'pos Tevx<bv Sojrqpos he
sinks lower still and becomes merely one of the torturers in hell (p. 382,
Copt., k.t.A.). Thus, as is usual in matters of religion, the gods of one age
become the fiends of the next. In the Bruce Papyrus (Amelineau, p. 212)
he appears as one of the chiefs of the Third Aeon. It is curious, however,
to observe how familiar the name must have been to what Origen calls
" a certain secret theology," so that it was necessary to give him some place
in every system of Gnosticism. His bipartite appearance may be taken
from Ezekiel viii. 2.

4 Probably the latter. See what is said about the Outer Darkness in
the Mepos revx&v ScoTJjpos, p. 319, Copt, where it is described as " a great


156 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

there, she mistakes his light for the light of the Treasure-
house, and, leaving her consort, plunges downwards towards
it. She is instantly seized by Jaldabaoth and other wicked
powers sent forth by the Proud God, and grievously tormented
with the object of taking from her her light, so that she may
never again be able to return to her own place. In this plight,
she sings several Metanoiae or hymns of penitence to the light,
and after seven of these, Jesus, as He says, " from pity and
without commandment," raises her to the uppermost parts of
Chaos where she is slightly more at ease 1 . She continues here
to sing hymns of penitence, but is tormented afresh until,
after her ninth repentance, Jesus receives command from the
First Mystery to succour her. This he does in a battle with
fresh emanations from the Authades, including one in the
shape of " a flying arrow 2 ." Adamas, the king of the wicked
Eons, also sends a power to the assistance of Jaldabaoth, and
the other emanations of the Proud God turn into serpents,
a basilisk with seven heads, and a dragon 3 . The powers of
light sent by Jesus, however, defeat all her enemies, and the
archangels Gabriel and Michael bear her aloft and establish her
in the place below the Thirteenth Aeon, where Jesus finds her
on His ascension as here recorded. But this is not the end.
Jesus tells her that when " three times " are fulfilled 4 , she

dragon whose tail is in his mouth who is without the whole Koa-fios and
surrounds it."

1 p. 83, Copt. So in the Manichaean legend, the First Man, on being
taken captive by Satan, prays seven times to the Light and is delivered
from the Darkness in which he is imprisoned. See Chap. XIII infra.

2 This demon in the shape of a flying arrow seems to be well known in
Rabbinic lore. Mr Whinfield in J.R.A.S., April, 1910, pp. 485, 486, describes
him as having a head like a calf, with one horn rising out of his forehead like
a cruse or pitcher, while to look upon him is certain death to man or beast.
His authority seems to be Rapaport's Tales from the Midrash.

3 The basilisk with seven heads seems to be Death. See Gaster, "The
Apocalypse of Abraham," T.S.B.A. voL ix. pt 1, p. 222, where this is said
to be the " true shape " of death. Cf. Kohler, " Pre-Talmudic Haggadah,"
J.Q.R., 1895, p. 590. Death, as we have seen in Chap. IX, p. 107, was in
the ideas of Valentinus the creature of the Demiurge. For the dragon, see
Whinfield, vbi cit.

* These " three times " are not years. As the Pistis Sophia opens with
the announcement that Jesus spent 12 years on earth after the Resurrection,


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 157

will be tormented again. This happens as predicted im-
mediately before the descent of the " vesture " on Him on
the Mount of Olives. Thereupon, He delivers her for the
last time and restores her to her place in the 13th Aeon, where
she sings to him a final hymn of thanksgiving.

This completes the episode of Pistis Sophia, and the rest
of the book is filled with the questionings upon it of Mary
Magdalene and the other disciples, among whom are prominent
Mary the Mother of Jesus, Salome, Martha, St John the Divine,
St Philip, St Thomas, and St Matthew, to which last-named
three is said to be entrusted the recording of the words of
Jesus, together with St Peter, St James and St Andrew. This
has led some commentators to think that the work may possibly
be the Interrogations of Mary ('Epun-^o-eK? Map/as), concerning
which Epiphanius says that two versions, a greater and a lesser,
were used by several Gnostic sects 1 . These questionings and
the answers of Jesus are extremely tedious, and include the
comparison of the hymns of Pistis Sophia, fourteen in all, with
certain named Psalms and Odes of David and Solomon of
which they are said to be the " interpretation 2 ." In the
course of this, however, the purpose of the book is disclosed,

we may suppose that He was then — if the author accepted the traditional
view that He suffered at 33 — exactly 45 years old, and the " time " would
then be a period of 15 years, as was probably the indiction. The descent"
of the " two vestures " upon Jesus is said (p. 4, Copt.) to have taken place
" on the 15th day of the month Tybi " which is the day Clement of Alex-
andria (Strom. Bk I. c. 21 ) gives for the birth of Jesus. He says the followers
of Basilides gave the same day as that of His baptism.

1 Epiphanius, Haer. xxvi. t. n. pt 1, p. 181, Oehler.

2 This doctrine of epurjvda occurs all through the book. The author
is trying to make out that well-known passages of both the Old and New
Testaments were in fact prophetic utterances showing forth in advance the
marvels he narrates. While the Psalms of David quoted by him are Canoni-
cal, the Odes of Solomon aro the Apocrypha known under that name and
quoted by Lactantius (Div. Inst. Bk iv. c. 12). For some time the Pistis
Sophia was the only authority for then- contents, but in 1909 Dr Rendel
Harris found nearly the whole collection in a Syriac MS. of the 16th century.
A translation has since been published in Cambridge Texts and Studies,
vol. vm. No. 3, Cambridge, 1912, by the Bishop of Ossory, who shows, as
it seems conclusively, that they were the hymns sung by the newly-baptized

n the Primitive Church.


158 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [en.

and appears as the revelation of the glories awaiting the be-
liever in the world to come, the coming of the Millennium, and
the announcement that Jesus has brought the " mysteries "
to the earth for the salvation of men. But before describing
these, it may be as well to draw attention to the manifest
likeness between the theology and cosmology of the Pistis
Sophia proper and what has been said above of the tenets of
the Ophites and of Valentinus.

At first sight, the Pistis Sophia in this respect seems to be
almost entirely an Ophite book. The Ineffable One, as has
been said, is not to be distinguished from the Ophite Bythos,
while " the First Mystery looking inward and outward " is
a fairly close parallel to the First Man and the Son of Man
of the Ophite system. The names Sabaoth, Iao, and Jalda-
baoth also appear both here and with the Ophites, although
the last-named power now occupies a greatly inferior position
to that assigned to him by them, and from a merely ignorant
power has now become an actively malignant one. The work
assigned to Sophia Without in the older system is here taken
in the Place of the Middle by the Virgin of Light, who is
throughout the working agent in the salvation of mankind ;
but it should be noted that she here operates directly and
not through a grosser power as with the Ophites. The idea
of a female divinity ordering the affairs of men for their good
as a mother with her children had already gained possession
of the heathen world in the character of (the Greek) Isis, and
in the hint here given as to the resemblance between her
delegates and the Virgin Mary, we may see, perhaps, the road
by which the Christian world travelled towards that con-
ception of the Theotokos or Mother of God which played such
an important part in its later creed. Among the powers
inferior to her the names and places are changed, but the
general arrangement remains nearly the same as with the
Ophites, especially the Ophites of the diagram. The starry
world in particular here comes much into evidence, and is given
more important functions than in any other Gnostic system
except the Ophite 1 . The " Gates " of the firmaments are met

1 Astrological doctrine first becomes prominent in Gnostic teaching


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 159

with both here and in the Ophite prayers or " defences "
recorded by Origen 1 , and an allusion put by this last into the
mouth of Celsus and not otherwise explained, to " gates that
open of their own accord," looks as if Origen's heathen adversary
may himself have come across the story of the Pistis Sophia 2 .
The general hostility of this starry world and its rulers towards
mankind is a leading feature in both systems.

On the other hand, the parallels between the theology of
the Pistis Sophia and that of Valentinus are even closer, and
are too important to be merely accidental. The complete
identification of Jesus with the First Mystery strongly recalls
the statement of Valentinus, rather slurred over by the Fathers,
that Jesus was Himself the Joint Fruit or summary of the
perfections of the whole Pleroma or Godhead, and is a much
more Christian conception than that of the earlier Ophites
as to His nature 3 . So, too, the curious theory that each of

in the Excerpta Theodoti which we owe to Clement of Alexandria. We may
therefore put their date about the year 200. This would be after the time
of Valentinus himself, but agrees well with what M. Cumont (Astrology and
Religion, pp. 96 sqq. ) says as to the great vogue which astrology attained
in Rome under the Seven'. Its intrusion into the Valentinian doctrines
is much more marked in the Mepos revx^v Swnjpos than in the Pistis Sophia,
and more in the Bruce Papyrus than in either.

1 See Chap. VIII, pp. 73, 74 supra.

2 Origen, cont. Cels. Bk vi. c. 34.

3 Hippolytus (Chap. IX, p. 92), speaks of the Jesus of Valentinus as
the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma simply. Irenaeus (Bk I. c. 1, p. 23,
Harvey) goes into more detail: Kai virep rfjs eviroitas TavTijs fiovXjj pia Kai
yvwpy to irav HXrjpapa rav Auoveov, o~vvev8oK0vvTos tov XpiaTov Kai tov rivev-
fiaros, tov 8e Uarpos avr&v arvveir io~<ppayi£opivov, eva tKaorov rmv Ald>va>v,
Strep eix fv * v fdvTco koXXiotov Kai avdripararov avveveyKapJvovs Kai epavto~a-
fitvovs, Kai ravra dppodicos 7rAe£avra?, Kai eppcXas evaxravraj, irpoj3a\eo~0ai
irpofiXrjpaTa (Is Tipfjv Kai 86£av rov Bvdov, reXeiorarov KaWos re Kai aarpov tov
TlX-qpaypaTOs, TfXfiov Kapirbv tov 'irjo-ovv bv Kai Scor^pa Trpoo-ayopevOfjvai, Kai
XpioTOV, Kai Aoyov iraTpavoptKan (cat Kara [>cai to] Uavra, 8ia to anb navrmv

tlvau " And because of this benefit, with one will and opinion, the whole
Pleroma of the Aeons, with the consent of Christos and the Spirit, and their
Father having set his seal upon the motion, brought together and combined
what each of them had in him which was most beautiful and brightest, and
wreathing these fittingly together and properly uniting them, they projected
a projection to the honour and glory of Bythos, the most perfect beauty
and star of the Pleroma, the perfect Fruit Jesus, who is also called Saviour


160 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

the lower worlds has its own " saviour " finds expression in
both systems, as does the idea that Jesus received something
from all the worlds through which He passed on His way to
earth. One may even find a vivid reminiscence of the Valen-
tinian nomenclature in the name of Pistis Sophia herself,
which combines the names of the feminine members of the
first and last syzygies of the Valentinian Dodecad 1 , Pistis
there being the spouse of Paracletus or the Legate, and Sophia
that of Theletus or the Beloved, while the cause of her fall
in the present book is the same as that assigned in the system
of Valentinus. Hence it may appear that the author of the
Pistis Sophia, whoever he may have been, was well acquainted
with the Ophite and Valentinian theology, and that he con-
tinued it with modifications of his own after the innovating
habit current among the Gnostics and noticed by Tertullian.

In the cosmology of the Pistis Sophia, again, the preference
given to Valentinian rather than to the older Ophitic views
is clearly marked The cause of the descent of the light into

and Christ, and after his Father Logos, and Pan, because He is from
all." Compare with these the words of Colossians ii. 9 : on ev avr<a
KdToinel nav to n\rjp<opa rrjs GfurrjTos aoipanKas. "For in him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily."

1 That the Valentinians considered the Dodecad (and a fortiori the Decad)
as having a collective entity, and as it were a corporate existence, seems
plain from what Hippolytus says in narrating the opinions of Marcus :
ravra yap 8d>8(Ka £a>8ia (pavepwrara Tr/v roxi 'Av6pa>Trov <a'i rr/v TLKKXrjcrias
Qvyaripa 8a>8ticd8a dnoo~K.ui(eiv \eyovcri. " For they say that these 12 signs
of the Zodiac most clearly shadow forth the Dodecad who is the daughter
of Anthropos and Ecclesia " (Hipp. op. cit. Bk vi. c. 54, p. 329, Cruice).
And again (loc. cit. p. 331, Cruice) : in pfjv koi ttjv yi\v tls 8ca8(Ka KXlp-ara
8iT)pTJo~0ai (pdcrKovTfs, koi nad* ev (KaoTpv n\ip.a, dva piav 8vvapu.v tn rov
ovpavSav Kara. Kaderov vnoSe^opivrjv, koi opoovo-ia TtKTOvo'av T(Kva rrj Kara-
TrtprrovcTT) Kara rr]v diroppoiav 8vvdp.€i, rinov aval rrjs avco 8a>8eicd8os. " These
are also they who assert that the earth is divided into twelve climates, and
receives in each climate one special power from the heavens and produces
children resembling the power thus sent down by emanation, being thus a
type of the Dodecad above." The doctrine of correspondences or, as it
was called in the Middle Ages, of " signatures " is here most clearly stated.
In all this the Valentinian teaching was doubtless under the influence of the
ancient Egyptian ideas as to the paut neteru or " company of the gods,"
as to which see Maspero's essay Sur VEnniade quoted above.


x] The Pistis Sojrfiia and its Related Texts 161

matter in the first instance is no accident as with the Ophites,
but is part of the large scheme for the evolution or, as the
author calls it, the " emanation " of the universe which was
devised and watched over in its smallest details by the First
Mystery 1 . Whether the author accepted the wild story
attributed to Valentinus by Irenaeus concerning the Fall of
Sophia and her Ectroma, it is impossible to say, because, as
we have seen, he omits all detailed description of the way in
which the two higher worlds which we have called the heavens
of the Ineffable One and the world of the First Mystery came
into being 2 . But it is plain that both must have been made
by or rather through Jesus, because it is stated in the mysterious
five words written on the vesture of Jesus that it is through
the First Mystery that all things exist, and that it was from
him that all the emanations flowed forth 3 . As the Pistis
Sophia also says that Jesus is Himself the First Mystery,
this corresponds to the opening words of St John's Gospel,
that " by Him all things were made 4 ." Hence the author of

1 It is said (p. 9, Copt.) that it is by him that the universe was created
and that it is he who causes the sun to rise.

2 As has before been said, this is attempted in one of the documents of
the Bruce Papyrus. See pp. 191, 192 infra. In the present state of the text
this attempt is only difficultly intelligible, and is doubtless both later in date
than and the work of an author inferior to that of the Pistis Sophia.

3 p. 16, Copt. Yet the First Mystery is not the creator of Matter
which is evil, because Matter does not really exist. See Bruce Papyrus
(Amelineau, p. 126) and n. 2, p. 190 infra.

4 As mentioned in the Scottish Review article referred to in n. 1, p. 135
supra, there is no passage but one in the Pistis Sophia which affords any
colour for supposing that the author was acquainted with St John's Gospel.
All the quotations set forth by Harnack in his treatise Vbcr das gnostische
Buch Pistis -Sophia, Leipzig, 1891, p. 27, on which he relies to prove the
converse of this proposition, turn out on analysis to appear also in one or
other of the Synoptics, from which the author may well have taken them.
Tne single exception is this {Pistis Sophia, p. 11, Copt.), "Wherefore I
said unto you from the beginning, Ye are not from the Cosmos ; I likewise
am not from it " ; John xvii. 14 : " (0 Father) I have given them thy word ;
and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as
I am not of the world." The parallel does not seem so close as to make
it certain that one document is copying from the other. Both may very
possibly be taken from some collection of Logia now lost, but at one

L. ii. 11


162 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

the Pistis Sophia, if confronted with the story of the Ectroma,
would doubtless have replied that this was merely a myth
designed to teach the danger for the uninstructed of acting
on one's own initiative instead of waiting for the commands
of God, and that in his book he had told the same story in
a slightly different way. This seems to be the only con-
struction to be placed on the trials of Pistis Sophia herself,
since her desire for light seems not to have been looked upon
as in itself sinful, and the real cause of her downfall was the
mistaking the light of Jaldabaoth for that of the Treasure-house.
But her descent into Chaos, unlike the Fall of her prototype,
apparently had nothing to do with the creation of the universe
and its inhabitants, which in the Pistis Sophia seems to
have taken place before the story opens. If they were sup-
posed by the author to have originated in the passions of Sophia
Without, as Hippolytus tells us Valentinus taught 1 , they
were none the less the direct work of Jesus, and the statement
in Hippolytus, that in the Valentinian teaching Jesus made
out of the supplication of Sophia Without a path of repentance,
finds a sort of echo in the Pistis Sophia, where it is the
" Metanoiae " or hymns of penitence many times repeated
of Pistis Sophia, her antitype or copy, which bring Jesus to
her succour. A further parallel may be found in Hippolytus'
other statement from Valentinus that Jesus gave this " suppli-
cation " power over the psychic substance which is called the
Demiurge 2 . In the Pistis Sophia, the heroine defeats the
Authades with the assistance of Jesus ; and there does not
seem much doubt that Pistis Sophia is eventually to receive
her adversary the Authades' place, an event which is fore-
shadowed by the quotation of the text " His bishopric let
another take " in one of her penitential psalms 3 . It would

time current in Alexandrian circles ; or from the Gospel of the Egyptians,
from which the Pistis Sophia afterwards quotes.

1 See Chap. IX, p. 107 supra.

2 See last note. The Authades or Proud God of the Pistis Sophia seems
to have all the characteristics with which Valentinus endows his Demiurge.

3 So Pistis Sophia sings in her second hymn of praise after her deliv eranoe
from Chaos (p. 160, Copt.) "lam become pure light," which she certainly
was not before that event. Jesus also promises her later (p. 168, Copt.)


x] The Pistis Soj)hia and its Belated Texts 163

also appear that Adamas, the wicked king of the Twelve Aeons,
may be the Adversary or Diabolos described by the Valen-
tinians 1 as the cosmocrator or ruler of this world, his rule
being exercised in the Pistis Sophia through his servants, the
Archons of " Heimarmene and the Sphere." The epithet of
Adamas or dSa/uLao-Tos given in classical literature to Hades
as the Lord of Hell would seem appropriate enough in his
case. This would only leave Beelzebub, prince of the
demons, unaccounted for ; but the author does not here give
any detailed description of Chaos which may be supposed to
be his seat. Although the omission was, as we shall see,
amply repaired in other documents put forth by the sect, it
may be here explained by the conviction of the nearness of
the Parusia or Second Advent which marks the Pistis Sophia 2 .
On the fulfilment of this hope, the Cosmos was, as we are
informed, to be " caught up," and all matter to be destroyed 3 .
What need then to elaborate the description of its most
malignant ministers ?

The joys of the elect in the world to come, on the contrary,
receive the fullest treatment. In the " completion of the Aeon,
when the number of the assembly of perfect souls is made

that when the three times are fulfilled and the Avihades is again wroth with
her and tries to stir up Jaldabaoth and Adamas against her " I will take
away their powers from them and give them to thee." That this promise
was supposed to be fulfilled seems evident from the low positions which
Jaldabaoth and Adamas occupy in the Mepos revx&v 2aTfjpos, while Pistis
Sophia is said to furnish the " power " for the planet Venus.

1 See Chap. IX, p. 108 and n. 1 supra.

2 All the revelations in the Pistis Sophia are in fact made in anticipa-
tion of the time " when the universe shall be caught up," and the disciples
be set to reign with Jesus in the Last Parastates. Cf. especially pp. 193-
206 Copt.

3 The idea may not have been peculiar to Valentinus and his followers.
So in the Ascensio Isaiae (x. 8-13) the " Most High the Father of my
Lord " says to " my Lord Christ who will be called Jesus " : '' And none
of the angels of that world shall know that thou art Lord with Me of the
seven heavens and of their angels. And they shall not know that Thou art
with Me till with a loud voice I have called to the heavens, and their angels,
and their lights, even unto the sixth heaven, in order that you may judge
and destroy the princes and angels and gods of that world, and the world
that is dominated by them." Charles, Ascension of Isaiah, pp. 70-71.

11—2


164 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

up 1 ," or in other words when all pneumatic or spiritual men
have laid aside their material bodies, they will ascend through
all the firmaments and places of the lesser powers until they
come to the last Parastates, where they are to reign with
Jesus over all the worlds below it 2 . This is the place from
which the power, which the Great Light, the legate of the
Ineffable One, took from the First Precept and passed into
the Kerasmos or Confusion, originated ; and it was this world,
or rather its ruler, who arranged Jeu. and the other Powers
of the Right Hand in their Places and thus set going the whole
machinery of salvation. Its " light " or glory is said to be
so tremendous that it can be compared to nothing in this
world, and here Jesus will reign with the disciples for 1000
"years of light " which are equal to 365,000 of our years 3 .
Here the thrones of the twelve " disciples " (/xaOrjrai) will
depend on His 4 , " but Mary Magdalene and John the Virgin
shall be higher than all the disciples 5 ." In the midst of these
beatitudes they will apparently receive further instruction or
further mysteries, the effect of which will be that they will
at the conclusion of the Millennium be united with Jesus in
so close a union that, as it is expressly said, they will become
one with Him, and finally they will become members of the
Godhead and, as it were. " the last limb of the Ineffable One 6 ."
In the meantime they will be at liberty to visit any of the
worlds below them. All those who have received lesser
mysteries, — that is to say, who have received a lesser degree
of instruction and have not become wholly pneumatic or

1 p. 194, Copt.

2 p. 230, Copt.

3 On the belief in the Millennium in the primitive Church, see Dollinger,
First Age of Christianity and the Church, Eng. ed. 1906, pp. 119, 123 and
268 and Ffoulkes, s.v. Chiliasts, in Diet. Christian Biog.

4 p. 230, Copt. Cf. Luke xxii. 29, 30.

5 p. 231, Copt. " disciples " not apostles. So the Manichaeans made
Manes to be attended by twelve disciples. See Chap. XIII infra.

8 So Jesus says (p. 230, Copt.) of "the man who receives and accom-
plishes the Mystery of the Ineffable One " ; " he is a man in the Cosmos,
but he will reign with me in my kingdom ; he is a man in the Cosmos, but
he is a king in the light ; he is a man in the Cosmos, but he is not of the
Cosmos, and verily I say unto you, that man is I, and I am that man."


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 165

spiritual — will after death in this world go to the heaven of
which they have received the mystery, or, in cases where
their instruction has only just begun, be brought before the
Virgin of Light, who will cause their souls to be sent back to
earth in "righteous" bodies, which will of themselves seek after
the mysteries, and, having obtained them, will, if time be
allowed, achieve a more or less perfect salvation. Here,
again, we meet with a close resemblance to the system of
those later Ophites who possessed the diagram described by
Origen ; for Jesus tells His disciples that those who have only
taken these lower mysteries will have to exhibit a seal or token
(o-v/jl{3o\ov) and to make an " announcement " (airofyao-Ls)
and a defence (aTroXoyla) in the different regions through
which they pass after death 1 . No such requirements, He
says, will be made from those who have received the higher
mysteries, whose souls on leaving the body will become great
streams of light, which will pass through all the lower places
I during the time that a man can shoot an arrow," the powers
therein falling back terror-stricken from its light until the
soul arrives at its appointed place. As, therefore, these seals and
announcements and defences will be of no use to the disciples,
the Jesus of the Pistis Sophia declares that He will not describe
them in detail, they having been already set out in " the two
great Books of Jeu 2 ."

What now are these " mysteries " which have so tremendous
an effect on their recipient as actually to unite him with the
Deity after death ? The Greek word fiva-Trjpiov, which is that
used in the Coptic MS., does not seem to mean etymologically
more than a secret, in which sense it was applied to the cere-
monies or secret dramas exhibited, as has been said, at Eleusis
and elsewhere, and later, to the Christian Eucharist 3 . In the
early part of the Pistis Sophia it is the word used to denote
i the First Mystery or first and greatest emanation of God,
who is withdrawn from human contemplation and, as it were,
concealed behind a veil impenetrable by the senses of man.

1 p. 246, Copt.

2 See last note and n. 5, p. 147 supra.

3 Hatch, op. cit. p. 302 and note.


J


166 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

But in the part of the book with which we are now dealing
it seems to refer not to hidden persons, but to secret things.
These things seem to fall into two categories, one of which
is spoken of as the Mystery of the Ineffable One, and the other
as the Mysteries of the First Mystery. The Mystery of the
Ineffable One is said to be one, but, with the provoking
arithmetic peculiar to the book, it is immediately added that
it " makes " three mysteries and also another five, while it
is still one 1 . The Mysteries of the First Mystery on the other
hand are said to be twelve in number, and these figures may
possibly cover some allusion to the Ogdoad and the Dodecad
of Valentinus 2 . It is also fairly clear that each of these Twelve
Mysteries of the First Mystery must be some kind of ceremony,
and a ceremony which can be performed without much pre-

1 pp. 236, 237, Copt.

2 Loc. cit. Or they may cover a kind of allegory, as we might say
that Agape or Love makes Faith, Hope, and Charity. But I believe it
to be more likely that the " 12 mysteries " are letters in a word. So in
the Mepos Ttvx&v 2a>Trjpos it is said of the " Dragon of the Outer Darkness,"
which is in fact the worst of all the hells described in that book : " And
the Dragon of the Outer Darkness hath twelve true (avSevri]) names
which are in his gates, a name according to each gate of the torture-
chambers. And these names differ one from the other, but they belong to
each of the twelve, so that he who saith one name, saith all the names.
And these I will tell you in the Emanation of the Universe " — (p. 323,
Copt.). If this be thought too trivial an explanation, Irenaeus tells us that
the 18 Eons remaining after deducting the Decad or Dodecad (as the case
may be) from the rest of the Pleroma were, according to the Valentinians,
signified by the two first letters of the name of Jesus : aX\a ku\ 8ia rcbv
irporjyovfifvatv roi> ov6p,aros avrov 8vo ypappdrmv, tov re Icora nai tov rp-a, rovs
SacaoKTo) Alcbvas evo-ijpcos prjvvea-dai, Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 5, p. 26, Harvey.
Equally absurd according to modern ideas are the words of the Epistle
of Barnabas (c. x., pp. 23, 24, Hilgenfeld), where after quoting a verse in
Genesis about Abraham circumcising 318 of his slaves (cf. Gen. xiv. 14),
the author says " What then is the knowledge (yvao-is) given therein ?
Learn that the 18 were first, and then after a pause, he says 300. (In)
the 18, 1 = 10, H = 8, thou hast Jesus ("Itjo-ovv). And because the Cross
was meant to have grace in the T, he says also 300. He expresses there-
fore Jesus by two letters and the Cross by one. He knows who has placed
in us the ungrafted gift of teaching. None has learned from me a more
genuine word. But I know that ye are worthy."


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 167

paration or many participants. This we may deduce from
the following description of the merits of one of them :

" For the second mystery of the First Mystery, if it is duly accom-
plished in all its forms, and the man who accomplishes it shall speak
the mystery over the head of a man on the point of going forth from
the body, so that he throws it into his two ears : — even when the
man who is going forth from the body shall have received it aforetime,
and is a partaker of the word of Truth 1 , — verily, I say unto you
that when that man shall go forth from the body of matter, his
soul will make a great flash of light, and will pass through every
Place until it come into the kingdom of that mystery.

" But and if that man has not [aforetime] received that mystery,
and is not a partaker of the word of Truth, — verily I say unto you
that man when he shall go forth from the body shall not be judged
in any Place whatever, nor shall he be tormented in any Place
whatever, and no fire shall touch him on account of that great
mystery of the Ineffable One which is in him ; and all shall make
haste to pass him from one hand to the other, and to guide him
into every Place and every order, until they shall lead him before
the Virgin of Light, all the Places being filled with fear before the
sign of the mystery of the kingdom of that Ineffable One which
shall be with him.

" And the Virgin of Light shall wonder and she shall try him,
but he will not be led towards the light until he shall have accom-
plished all the service of the light of that mystery, that is to say,
the purifications of the renunciation of the world and all the matter
that is therein 2 . But the Virgin of Light shall seal that soul with

1 " The True Word " or the Word of the Place of Truth. The latter
expression is constantly used in other parts of the book, and seems to refer
to the xd>pr)fia or "receptacle," that is the heaven, of the Aeon 'AAi^eia,
that is the Decad. Cf. especially the Mepos reu^wv Soorrjpos (pp. 377,
378, Copt.), where it is said that certain baptisms and a " spiritual chrism "
will lead the souls of the disciples " into the Places of Truth and Goodness,
to the Place of the Holy of all Holies, to the Place in which there is neither
female, nor male, nor shape in that Place, but there is Light, everlasting,
ineffable."

2 These dirordypara are set out in detail in the Mtpos Tet^wv Sarrjpos
(pp. 255 sqq. Copt.), where the disciples are ordered to " preach to the whole

world renounce (diroTacro-eTt) the whole world and all the matter

which is therein, and all its cares and all its sins, and in a word all its con-
versation (opiXtai) which is therein, that ye may be worthy of the


168 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

the excellent seal which is this**** 1 , and she shall have it cast in
the same month in which it went forth from the body of matter
into a righteous body which will find the God of Truth and the
excellent mysteries in order that it may receive them by inheritance
and also the light for eternity. Which is the gift of the second
mystery of the First Mystery of that Ineffable One 2 ."

The only ceremony to which such grace as is here set forth
was likely to be attributed by any Christian in the early age
of the Church was that of Baptism. It was called by writers
like Gregory of Nazianza and Chrysostom a fxvcnrjpiov* ;
while we hear as early as St Paul's time of " those who are
baptized over [or on behalf of] the dead " (^aTTTi^o/xevot virep
T&v veicpwvy, the theory being, according to Dollinger, that
those who had wished during their lives to receive baptism
but had not done so, could thus obtain the benefit of the
prayers of the Church, which could not be offered for an un-
baptized person 5 . So much was this the case with some sects,
that it was an offence charged by writers like Tertullian against
the Valentinians that they were in the habit of delaying baptism
as long as possible and even of putting it off till they were
about to die 6 , as in the case in the text. Baptism, too, was

mysteries of the Light, that ye may be preserved from all the punish-
ments which are in the judgments " and so on. It should be noted that
these are only required of the psychics or animal men.

1 No doubt in the Greek original the actual seal was here figured.
For examples, see the Bruce Papyrus, passim. The idea is typically
Egyptian. As M. Maspero says in his essay on "La Table d'Offrandes,"
R.H.R. t. xxxv. No. 3 (1897), p. 325 : no spell was in the view of the ancient
Egyptians efficacious unless accompanied by a talisman or amulet which
acted as a material support to it, as the body to the souL

• p. 238, Copt.

8 Hatch, op. cit. p. 296, n. 1, for references.

* 1 Cor. xv. 29. The practice of " baptizing for the dead," as the A.V.
has it, evidently continued into Tertullian's time. See Tertull. de Resur-
rectione. Carnis, c. XLvrn. p. 530, Oehler.

6 Dollinger, First Age, p. 327.

8 Hatch, op. cit. p. 307. The Emperor Constantine, who was baptized
on his deathbed, was a case in point. The same story was told later about
the Cathars or Manichaeans of Languedoc. The motive seems in all these
cases to have been the same : as baptism washed away all sin, it was as
well to delay it until the recipient could sin no more.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 169

spoken of in sub-Apostolic times as the " seal " (a-cppayk) 1 , or
impress, which may be that which the soul has to exhibit,
both in the Ophite system and in that of the Pistis Sophia,
to the rulers of the next world. In any event, the rite was
looked upon by Catholic and heretic alike as an initiation or
commencement of the process by which man was united with
Christ. The other eleven " mysteries of the First Mystery "
are not specifically described in the Pistis Sophia ; but it is
said that the receiving of any one of them will free its re-
cipient's soul from all necessity to show seals or defences to
the lesser powers and will exalt him after his death to the
rank of a king in the kingdom of light, although it will not
make him equal to those who have received the mystery of
the Ineffable One 2 . It therefore seems probable that these
" twelve mysteries of the First Mystery " all refer to the rite
of baptism, and are called twelve instead of one only to accord
with some trifling juggling with words and letters such as was
common with the followers of Valentinus 3 . That baptism was
held in the sub- Apostolic age to be, in the words of Dollinger,
" not a mere sign, pledge, or symbol of grace, but an actual
communication of it wrought by the risen and glorified Christ
on the men He would convert and sanctify, and a bond to
unite the body of the Church with its Head 4 ," will perhaps
be admitted. According to the same author, St Paul teaches
that " by Baptism man is incorporated with Christ, and puts
on Christ, so that the sacramental washing does away with
all natural distinctions or race ; — Greek and Jew, slave and
free, men and women, are one in Christ, members of His body,
children of God and of the seed of Abraham 5 ." He tells us
also that the same Apostle " not only divides man into body
and spirit, but distinguishes in the bodily nature, the gross,
visible, bodily frame, and a hidden, inner, " spiritual " body
not subject to limits of space or cognizable by the senses ;

1 Hatch, op. oil. p. 295 and note, for references.

2 p. 236, Copt.

3 See n. 2, p. 166 supra.

* Dollinger, First Age, pp. 234, 235.

5 Ibid. p. 235. Rom. vi. 4 ; GaL iii. 27, 29, are quoted in support.


170 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

this last, which shall hereafter be raised, is alone fit for and
capable of organic union with the glorified body of Christ,
of substantial incorporation with it 1 ." If Dollinger in the
xixth century could thus interpret St Paul's words, is it ex-
traordinary that the author of the Pistis Sophia should put the
same construction on similar statements some sixteen centuries
earlier ? So the late Dr Hatch, writing of baptism in this
connection, says : " The expressions which the more literary
ages have tended to construe metaphorically were taken
literally. It was a real washing away of sins ; it was a real
birth into a new life ; it was a real adoption into a divine
sonship 2 ."

If this be so, it seems to follow that the Mystery of the
Ineffable One must be the other and the greatest of the
Christian sacraments. Jesus tells His disciples that it is the
" One and unique word," and that the soul of one who has
received it " after going forth from the body of matter of the
Archons " will become " a great flood of light " and will fly
into the height, no power being able to restrain it, nor even
to know whither it goes. He continues :

" It shall pass through all the Places of the Archons and all the
Places of the emanations of light, nor shall it make any announce-
ment nor defence nor give in any symbol ; for no Power of the
Archons nor of the emanations of light can draw nigh to that soul.
But all the Places of the Archons and of the emanations of light
shall sing praises, being filled with fear at the flood of light which
clothes that soul, until it shall have passed through them all, and
have come into the Place of the inheritance of the mystery which
it has received, which is the mystery of the sole Ineffable One, and
shall have become united with his members 3 ."

He goes on to explain that the recipient of this mystery shall
be higher than angels, archangels, and than even all the Powers
of the Treasure-house of Light and those which are below it :

1 Ibid. p. 235. Rom. vii. 22 ; 1 Cor. vi. 14 ; Eph. iii. 16 and v. 30
are quoted in support.

2 Hatch, op. cit. p. 342.

3 p. 228, Copt.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 171

"He is a man in the Cosmos; but he is a king in the light. He
is a man in the Cosmos, but he is not of the Cosmos, and verily
I say unto you, that man is myself and I am that man.

" And, in the dissolution of the Cosmos, when the universe shall f.L '$
be caught up, and when the number of perfect souls shall be caught
up, and when I am become king in the middle of the last Parastates,
and when I am king over all the emanations of light, and over the
Seven Amen, and the Five Trees, and the Three Amen, and the
Nine Guards, and over the Boy of a Boy, that is to say the Twin
Saviours, and when I am king over the Twelve Saviours and all
the numbers of perfect souls who have received the mystery of light,
then all the men who have received the mystery of that Ineffable
One shall be kings with me, and shall sit on my right hand and
on my left in my kingdom. Verily I say unto you, Those men are
I and I am those men. Wherefore I said unto you aforetime :
You shall sit upon thrones on my right hand and on my left in my
kingdom and shall reign with me. Wherefore I have not spared
myself, nor have I been ashamed to call you my brethren and my '
companions, seeing that you will be fellow-kings with me in my
kingdom. These things, therefore, I said unto you, knowing that
I should give unto you the mystery of that Ineffable One, and that L. . \
mystery is I and I am that mystery 1 ."

That this is the supreme revelation up to which the author
of the Pislis Sophia has been leading all through the book,
there can hardly be any doubt. Its position shortly before
the close of the book 2 , the rhapsodic and almost rhythmical
phrases with which the approach to it is obscured rather than
guarded, and the way in which directly the revelation is made,
the author falls off into merely pastoral matters relating to
the lesser mysteries, all show that the author has here reached
his climax. But does this revelation mean anything else than
that Jesus is Himself the victim which is to be received in the
Sacrament or fivarvpioi' of the Altar ? That the Christians of
the first centuries really thought that in the Eucharist they
united themselves to Christ by receiving His Body and Blood
there can be no question, and the dogma can have come as
no novelty to those who, like the Ophites, had combined with

1 pp. 230, 231, Copt.

2 The Pistis Sophia proper comes to an end twenty pages later.


J !»■


172 The Pistis Sophia aiid its Related Texts [ch.

Christianity the ideas which we have seen current among the
Orphics as to the sacramental efficacy of the homophagous
feast and the eating of the quivering flesh of the sacrifice
which represented Dionysos. Dollinger gives the views of
the primitive Church concisely when he says it is " because
we all eat of one Eucharistic bread, and so receive the Lord's
body, that we all become one body, or as St Paul says, we
become members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones."
" We are nourished by communion," he continues, " with
the substance of His flesh and blood, and so bound to the
unity of His body, the Church ; and thus what was begun in
Baptism is continued and perfected in the Eucharist 1 ." Thus,
Justin Martyr, who lived in the reign of Antoninus Pius, says
" the food which is blessed by the prayer of His word, and
from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished,
is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh 2 ."
That the same idea was realized by the heretics may be gathered
from what has been said above as to the wonder-working
celebration of the Eucharist by Marcus, when the wine was
made to change visibly into blood before the eyes of the
recipient 3 .

It is plain also that the Pistis Sophia does not look upon
this perfect union as within the reach of all. Basilides, the first
of the Egyptian Gnostics, had said that not one in a thousand
or two in ten thousand were fit to be admitted to the higher
mysteries, and the same phrase is repeated by Jesus Himself in
one of the later documents of the MS. of which the Pistis Sophia
forms part 4 . Those who were worthy of admission to the

1 Dollinger, First Age, p. 239. 1 Cor. x. 16 sqq. ; Eph. v. 30, quoted in
support.

2 Justin Martyr was probably bom 114, and martyred 165 a.d. For
the passage quoted in text, see his First Apology, c. lxvi., where he mentions
among other things that the devils set on the worshippers of Mithras to
imitate the Christian Eucharist by celebrating a ceremony with bread and
a cup of water.

3 Hatch, op. cit. p. 308. This visible change of the contents of the cup
of water to the semblance of blood is described in the Mepos Ttvx&v 2o>Tfjpos
(p. 377, Copt.), and with more detail in the Bruce Papyrus. Cf. p. 183 infra.

Mtpoi Tfvx&v 2toTTJpos, p. 354, Copt.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 173

mysteries of the Ineffable One and of the First Mystery were
the pneumatics or spiritual men predestined to them from
before their birth. For the others, the psychic or animal
men, there were the mysteries " of the light," which are, so
to speak, the first step on the ladder of salvation 1 . These
are nowhere described in the Pistis Sophia or first document
of the book, the hearer being therein always referred for their
details to the two great Books of Jeu mentioned above, " which
Enoch wrote when I {i.e. Jesus) spoke with him from the tree
of knowledge and from the tree of life, which were in the Para-
dise of Adam 2 ." It is here expressly said that Jesus' own
disciples have no need of them ; but their effect is described
as purifying the body of matter, and transforming their
recipient into " light " of exceeding purity. On the death
of one who has taken them all, his soul traverses the different
heavens repeating the passwords, giving in the defences, and
exhibiting the symbols peculiar to each mystery until it reaches
the abode assigned to its particular degree of spiritual illumina-
tion. These mysteries of the light are open to the whole world
and there is some reason for thinking they are the sacraments
of the Catholic Church, the members of which body, Irenaeus
says, the " heretics " (Qy the Valentinians ?) held not to be saved
but to be only capable of salvation 3 . If the recipient of these

1 Whether the author of the Pistis Sophia really intended to describe
them may be doubted ; but it is to be noted that the sacraments which
Jesus is represented as celebrating in the Mepos revx&v 2corrjpos can
hardly be they, although Jesus calls them in one place (p. 374, Copt.),
" the mysteries of the light which remit sins, which themselves are appel-
lations and names of light." These are administered to the twelve disciples
without distinction, and it is evident that the author of these books is quite
unacquainted with any division into pneumatic and psychic, and knows
nothing of the higher mysteries called in the Pistis Sophia proper " the
lysteries of the Ineffable One " and " the mysteries of the First Mystery."
We should get over many difficulties if we supposed the two later books to
be Marcosian in origin, but in any event they are later than the Pistis
Sophia.

p. 246, Copt. So in the Manichaean text described in Chapter XIII,
Jesus is Himself called " the Tree of Knowledge."

3 So Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, § 11, pp. 53, 54, Harvey : 'En-aiSeti^a-ai' yap
ra -<\rv^Ka ol -v^w^i/cot avdpconoi, oi Bi' epyatv teal iri(TTea>s tJsiXtjs fieftaiovpevoi,


174 The Pistis Sojyhia and its Related Texts [ch.

lesser mysteries die before complete initiation, he has to undergo
a long and painful series of reincarnations, his soul being sent
back into the Sphere of Destiny and eventually into this world
by the Virgin of Light, who will, however, take care that it
is placed in a " righteous " body which shall strive after the
mysteries until it finds them. But the way to these lower
mysteries is the complete renunciation of this world. Man
naturally and normally is entirely hylic or material, being,
as Jesus tells His disciples in the Pistis Sophia, " the very dregs
of the Treasure-house, of the Places of those on the Right
Hand, in the Middle, and on the Left Hand, and the dregs of
the Unseen Ones and of the Archons, and, in a word, the dregs
of them all 1 ." Hence it is only by the cleansing grace of the
mysteries that he can hope to escape the fate which is coming
upon the Kerasmos, and to obtain these, he must avoid further
pollution.

" Wherefore preach you to the whole race of men, saying : Slacken
not day and night until ye find the cleansing mysteries. Say unto
them : Renounce the world and all the matter that is therein ;
for whoso buys and sells in the world and eats and drinks in its
matter, and lives in all its cares and all its conversations, takes
unto himself other matter as well as his own matter Where-
fore I said unto you aforetime : Renounce the whole world and all
the matter that is therein lest ye add other matter to your own
matter. Wherefore preach ye to the whole race of men .... cease
not to seek day and night and stay not your hand until ye find
the cleansing mysteries which will cleanse you so as to make you

Kai pr) ttjv TfXtiav yvaxriv exovres- tivcu Se tovtovs airo rfjs 'EkkXtjo-ios r)p.ds
Xtyovo-f oio Kai rjpiv piv dvaynalov tlvai 7-771/ dyaOrjv npdtjiv diro(paivovrai'
aXXas yap dbvvarov o-aBrjvai. Avtovs 8e fit) 81a rrpd£ea>s, dXXa bid to <pvo~ei
irvfvpariKovs tlvai, iravTy re Kai irdvroos acodrjo-fo-dai 8oypari£ovo-iv. " For
the psychic (animal) men are taught psychic things, they being made
safe by works and by mere faith, and not having perfect knowledge.
And they say that we of the Church arc these people. Wherefore they
declare that good deeds are necessary for us : for otherwise we could not
be saved. But they decree that they themselves are entirely and in every
thing saved, not by works, but because they are pneumatic (spiritual)
by nature."

1 p. 249, Copt.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 175

pure light, that ye may go into the heights and inherit the light
of my kingdom 1 ."

We see, then, that the author of the Pistis Sophia really
contemplated the formation of a Church within a Church, where
a group of persons claiming for themselves special illumination
should rule over the great body of the faithful, these last being
voluntarily set apart from all communion with their fellows 2 .
This was so close a parallel to what actually occurred in Egypt
in the ivth century, when the whole male population was
said with some exaggeration to have embraced the monastic
life 3 , and submitted themselves to the rule of an ambitious
and grasping episcopate, as to give us a valuable indication
as to the authorship and date of the book. It may be said
at the outset that the conception of the universe which appears
throughout is so thoroughly Egyptian that it must have been
written for Egyptian readers, who alone could have been
expected to understand it without instruction. The idea
of the Supreme Being as an unfathomable abyss was, as has
been said in Chapter II, a very old one in Egypt, where one of
the oldest cosmogonies current made Nu or the sea of waters
the origin of both gods and men 4 . So was the peculiar theory
that the lesser gods were the limbs or members of the Supreme 5 .
An Ogdoad 6 or assembly of eight gods arranged in syzygies or

1 p. 250, Copt. It is to be observed that these '* cleansing mysteries "
will only admit their recipients to the light of the Kingdom of Jesus — not to
that of the First Mystery or of the Ineffable One.

2 As did perhaps the Manichaeans afterwards. See J.R.A.S. for
January, 1913, and Chap. XIII infra.

3 So Charles Kingsley in Hypatia. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, voL iv.
c. 60, n. 15, quotes a statement of Rufinus that there were nearly as many

lonks Irving in the deserts as citizens in the towns.

4 Mallet, Le Cuke de Neit a Sais, p. 200, points out that the God
fti described in the 18th Chapter of the Book of the Dead is " the infinite
abyss, the Bu0dy, the irarrjp ayvaxrros of the Gnostics." So Maspero

Rev. Critique, 30 Sept. 1909, p. 13, who declares that the author of the
■'istis Sophia was influenced directly or indirectly by Osirian beliefs.
6 Moret, Le verbe crdateur et rdvekUeur, p. 286, for references.
6 Maspero, E~t. tgyptol. t. H. p. 187 : " L'ogdoade est une conception
lermopolitaine qui s'est repandue plus tard sur toute 1'lSgypte a cote de
'enneade d'Heliopolis. Les theologiens d'Hermopolis avaient adopte


176 The Pistis Sojrfiia and its Related Texts [ch.

couples was also well known in the time of the early dynasties,
as was the Dodecad of twelve gods which Herodotus knew, and
which M. Maspero refers on good evidence to the time of the
Pyramid-Builders 1 . So was the view that men and other
material things were made from the tears of the celestial
powers 2 , a notion well known to Proclus the Neo-Platonist,
who attributed it to the legendary Orpheus 3 . Not less Egyptian
— perhaps in its origin exclusively Egyptian — is the view that the
knowledge of the places of the world after death and their rulers
was indispensable to the happiness of the dead. " Whosoever,"
says M. Maspero in commenting upon some funerary texts of
the Ramesside period, " knows the names of these (gods) while
still on earth and is acquainted with their places in Amenti,
will arrive at his own place in the other world and will be in
all the places reserved for those who are justified 4 ." The
resemblance between the system of the Pistis Sophia and the
doctrines of the Egyptian religion in the days of the Pharaohs
has been pointed out in detail by the veteran Egyptologist
the late Prof. Lieblein and has been approved by M. Maspero 5 .
It extends to particular details as well as to general ideas,
as we see from the ritual inscribed on the tombs at Thebes,
where each " circle " or division of the next world is said to

le concept de la neuvaine, seulement ils avaient amoindri les huit dieux
qui formaient le corps du dieu principal Ils les avaient reduits a n'etre
plus que des etres presque abstraits nommes d'apres la fonction qu'on
leur assignait, en agissant en masse sur l'ordre et d'apres 1' impulsion du
dieu chef. Leur enneade se composait done d'un dieu tout-puissant et
d'une ogdoade."

1 " Son origine (l'ogdoade hermopolitaine subordonne a un corps
monade) est fort ancienne : on trouve quelques-unes des divinites qui la
composent mentionnees deja dans les textes des Pyr amides." Maspero,
op. cit. t. n. p. 383. As he says later the actual number of gods in the
Ennead or Ogdoad was a matter of indifference to the ancient Egyptian :
" les dieux comptaient tou jours pour neuf, quand meme ils etaient treize
ou quinze," ibid. p. 387. Cf. Amelineau, Gnost. ~&g, pp. 294, 295.

2 Seen. 5, p. 175 supra, and Maspero, " Hypogees Royaux," fit. figyptol.
n. p. 130, n. 2.

3 See n. 2, p. 153 supra.

4 Maspero, " Hypogees Royaux," t. n. p. 121.
6 Maspero, Rev. Crit. 30 Sept. 1909, p. 13.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 177

have its own song and its own " mystery," an idea often met
with in the Pistis Sophia 1 . Even the doctrine in the Pistis
Sophia that the dead had to exhibit a " seal " as well as a
" defence " to the guardians of the heavenly places is explained
by the Egyptian theory that no spell was effective without
an amulet, which acted as a kind of material support to it 2 .
The greater part of the allusions in the- Pistis Sophia are in
fact unintelligible, save to those with some acquaintance
with the religious beliefs of the Pharaonic Egyptians.

At the same time it is evident that the MS. of the Pistis
Sophia that has come down to us is not the original form of the
book. All the scholars who have studied it are agreed that the
Coptic version has been made from a Greek original by a scribe
who had no very profound acquaintance with the first-named
tongue 3 . This appears not only from the frequent appearance
in it of Greek words following Coptic ones of as nearly as possible
the same meaning ; but from the fact that the scribe here and
there gives us others declined according to the rules not of
Coptic but of Greek accidence. We must therefore look for
an author who, though an Egyptian and acquainted with the
native Egyptian religion, would naturally have written in
Greek ; and on the whole there is no one who fulfils these
requirements so well as Valentinus himself. The fact that
the author never quotes from the Gospel according to St John
indicates that it had not come to his knowledge ; for the opening
chapter of St John's Gospel contains many expressions that
could easily on the Gnostic system of interpretation be made
to accord with the Valentinian theology, and is in fact so used
by later writers of the same school as the author of the Pistis
Sophia*. Now the first direct and acknowledged quotation

1 Maspero, " Hypogees Royaux," t. n. p. 118. Cf. Pistis Sophia, p. 84,
apt. and elsewhere.

2 Maspero, " La Table d'Qffrandes," R.H.R. t. xxxv. (1897) p. 325. As
been said, in the Ascensio Isaiae, anyone passing from one heaven to

lother has to give a password, but not to exhibit a seal.

3 Amelineau, Gnost. t,g. p. 196 ; Schmidt, Koptisch-Gnostische Schriften,
I. p. xiii.

4 It is so used in the Excerpta Theodoti, and in the Papyrus Bruce. See
190, infra.

l. n. 12


178 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

from St John's Gospel that we have is that made by Theophilus,
who was made bishop of Antioch in a.d. 170, and the generally-
received opinion is that this Gospel, whenever written, was
not widely known long before this date 1 . The only founders
of Gnostic sects of Egyptian birth prior to this were Basilides
and Valentinus, and of these two, Valentinus is the more likely
author, because he, unlike his predecessor, evidently taught
for general edification, and possessed, as the Fathers agree,
a numerically large following. We have, moreover, some
reason for thinking that Valentinus actually did write a book
with some such title as the Sophia. Tertullian, in his declama-
tion against the Valentinians, quotes a sentence from " the
Wisdom (Lat. Sophia) not of Valentinus but of Solomon 2 ." It
has been suggested that he is here referring to some saying of
the Valentinian aeon Sophia ; but no writings would in the
nature of things be attributed to her, and, as M. Amelineau
points out, it is more natural to think that he was here com-
paring a book with a book 3 . This figure of rhetoric was a
favourite one with Tertullian, for in his treatise De Came
Christi we find him quoting in like manner the Psalms —
" not the Psalms of Valentinus, the apostate, heretic, and
Platonist, but the Psalms of David 4 ." The fact that the
story in the British Museum MS. is called Pistis Sophia instead
of Sophia only need not hinder us from identifying this
with the work presumably referred to by Tertullian, because
this title is, as has been said, the work of another scribe
than those who transcribed the original ; and Pistis Sophia

1 Jean Reville, Le Quatrieme Bvangile, Paris, 1901, p. 321. Mgr Duchesne,
Early Christian Church, pp. 102, 192, says in effect that St John's Gospel
appeared after the Apostle's death and was not accepted without opposi-
tion. He thinks Tatian and Irenaeus the first writers who quoted from it
with acknowledgement of its authorship. If we put the date of Tatian's
birth at 120 (see Diet. Christian Biog. s.h.n.) and allow a sufficient period for
the initiation into heathen mysteries which he mentions, for his conversion
and for his becoming a teacher, we do not get a much earlier date than 170
for his acceptance of the Fourth Gospel. Irenaeus was, of course, later in
date than Tatian.

2 Tertullian, Adv. Valentinianos, c. 2.

3 Amelineau, Gnost. £g. p. 180.

* Tertullian, de Carne Christi, c. 20.


x] The Pistis Sojrfiia and its Related Texts 179

is sometimes spoken of in the MS. itself as Sophia only 1 . More-
over, there is some reason for thinking that certain of the
Fathers and even their Pagan adversaries had seen and read
the story of Pistis Sophia. The allusion quoted above from
Origen to gates opening of their own accord seems to refer to
one of its episodes, and Tertullian, in the treatise in which
he says he is exposing the original tenets of the sect 2 , uses
many expressions that he can hardly have borrowed from any
other source. Thus, he speaks of Sophia " breaking away
from her spouse 3 " which is the expression used by Pistis
Sophia in her first Metanoia and is in no way applicable to the
Valentinian Sophia of Irenaeus or Hippolytus. He again speaks
of the same Sophia as being all but swallowed up and dissolved
in " the substance " evidently of Chaos, which is the fate which
Pistis Sophia anticipates for herself in the MS. Tertullian,
like the Pistis Sophia, also assigns to the psychic substance
the place of honour or right hand in the quasi-material world,
while the hylic is relegated in both to the left hand 4 . The
Paradise of Adam is said by him to be fixed by Valentinus
"above the third heaven 5 " as it is in the Pistis Sophia, if,
as we may suppose, the soul of the protoplast dwelt in the
same place as that of Elijah. The name of Ecclesia or the
Church is given not only to a particular aeon in the Pleroma,
but also to the divine power breathed into man from a higher
world in both Tertullian and the Pistis Sophia*, and, in the
treatise De Carne Christi, Tertullian alludes contemptuously
to an heretical doctrine that Christ possessed " any new kind
of flesh miraculously obtained from the stars 7 ," which seems
to refer to the taking by Jesus in the opening of the Pistis
iphia of a body from " Barbelo " the goddess or Triple Power

1 E.g. p. 47, Copt. Cf. also ibid. pp. 147, 170, 176.

2 Tertullian, adv. Val. c. v.
Op. cit. c. 9. 4 Op. cit. c. 18.

5 Op. cit. c. 20. 6 Op. cit. c. 25.

7 Tertullian, de Carne Christi, c. 9. Irenaeus, Bk n. c. 7, § 1, p. 270,
rey, seems to have known both of Barbelo and of the Virgin of Light,
ice he speaks of corpora sursum. . . .spiritalia et lucida, " spiritual and
inslucent bodies on high " casting a shadow below in quam Matrem suam
descendisse dicunt " into which they allege their Mother descended."

12—2


180 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

set over matter and inspiring the benefic planet Venus. For
all which reasons it seems probable that in the Pistis Sophia
we have the translation of an authentic work by Valentinus.
The Pistis Sophia, however, is not the only work in the
British Museum MS. The first and second books of it, as
they are called by the annotator, come to an end, rather abrupt
but evidently intentional, on the 252nd page of the MS. There
then appears the heading in the hand of the annotator " Part
of the Texts of the Saviour 1 ," and on this follow two pages
dealing with the " members " of the Ineffable One, as to which
it is expressly said that only a partial revelation is made 2 .
These seem to have slipped out of their proper place, and are
followed by two discontinuous extracts from another treatise,
the second of which is also headed by the annotator " Part
of the Texts of the Saviour." This second part, which we
shall venture to take before the other, is evidently the intro-
duction to or the commencement of a new treatise, for it
begins with the statement that " After they had crucified Our
Lord Jesus He rose from the dead on the third day," and
that His disciples gathered round Him, reminding Him that
they had left all to follow Him 3 . Jesus " standing on the
shore of the sea Ocean," then makes invocation to the "Father
of every Fatherhood, boundless light," in a prayer composed
of Egyptian and Hebrew words jumbled together after the
fashion of the spells in the Magic Papyri 4 . He then shows

1 oy /wepoc nt€ n Teyxoc m ncoothp, or (in Greek) Mepos rev^v
2cor»7pos.

2 " This I say to you in paradigm, and likeness and similitude, but not
in truth of shape, nor have I revealed the word in truth," p. 253, Copt-
So in the next page (p. 254, Copt.), Jesus says of the perfect initiate that
" He also has found the words of the Mysteries, those which I have written
to you according to similitude — the same are the members of the Ineffable
One." From His mention of " writing," one would imagine that the
reference here is to documents such as the Bruce Papyrus which gives the
pictures of "seals" together with cryptographically written words.

8 p. 357, Copt. This opening sentence could not have been written by
one of the Valentinians of Hadrian's time, who, as has been said above,
" did not choose to call Jesus, Lord," Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 1, 1, p. 12, Harvey.

* In the address of Jesus beginning " O my Father, Father of every
Fatherhood, boundless light " with which this part of the M. r. <r. opens, we


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 181

the disciples the " disk of the sun " as a great dragon with
his tail in his mouth drawn by four white horses and the disk
of the moon like a ship drawn by two white steers 1 . The two

can, with a little good will, identify nearly every word of the " galimatias "
which at first sight seems mere gibberish. Thus, the whole invocation reads:
aerjiova), 'iaco, aco'i, o'ia\\nvG>Qtp, 6ep\i\voty, va>\jn8tp, £ayovpT], Trayovprj^vedpopacod,
vey\nanaa>6, p,apaxaxda, 8<o(3appaj3av, dapva^axav, £opOKodopa Ifov Safiacod.
The seven vowels to which many mystical interpretations have been
assigned, and which have even been taken for a primitive system of musical
notation (C. E. Ruelle, " Le Chant des Sept Voyelles Grecques," Rev. des
Hit. Grecqiies, Paris, 1889, t. n. p. 43, and pp. 393-395), probably express the
sound to Greek ears of the Jewish pronunciation of Yahweh or Jehovah.
The word Iao we have before met with many times both as a name of
Dionysos and otherwise, and is here written anagrammatically from the
difficulty which the Greeks found in dealing with Semitic languages written
the reverse way to their own. The word yjnvudep which follows and is also
written as an anagram is evidently an attempt to transcribe in Greek letters
the Egyptian words P, Shai, neter (P= Def. article, Shai = the Egyptian God
of Fate whose name Revillout, Rev. figyptol. Paris, 1892, pp. 29-38, thinks
means "The Highest," and neter or nuter the determinative for " god "),
the whole reading " Most High God." The words (ayovpr) nayovprj (better,
■n-arovprj) are from the Hebrew roots "itDS "I3D and seem to be the " he that
openeth and no man shutteth ; and shutteth and no man openeth " of
Rev. iii. 7. Nedp.op.aood, which is often found in the Magic Papyri, is remi-
niscent of the Egyptian neb maat " Lord of Truth," the following vei\nopaa>6
being probably a variant by a scribe who was uncertain of the orthography.
Mapaxaxda I can make nothing of, although as the phrase vefydopaatQ
papaxaxda appears in the Magic Papyrus of Leyden generally called
W (Leemans, Papyri Graeci, etc. t. n. p. 154) in a spell there said to be written
by " Thphe the Hierogrammateus " for " Ochus the king," it is evidently
intended for Egyptian. In the same spell appear the words 6apvp.axax
CopoKodopa and doafiappaPav which are evidently the same as those
in the M. r. o-., and of which I will only say that, while Mr King supposes
£opoKo6opa to mean " fight-gatherer," ScoftappaPav is in the leaden tabula
devotionis of Carthage (Molinier, " Imprecation gravee sur plomb," Mem.
de la Soc. Nat. des Antiquaires de France, serie VI. t. vrn. Paris, 1897,
pp. 212-216) described as tov 6eov tov ttjs irakivyeveo-ias " the god of
rebirth." The concluding words are of course merely " Yahweh .of Hosts."
1 The description of the moon-chariot drawn by two white oxen is
found in Claudian's Proserpine. According to Cumont (Textes et Monu-
ments relatifs aux Mysteres de Miihra, t. I. p. 126 and note) it was not until
Hadrian's time that this conception, which seems to have been Persian in
origin, became fixed in the West.


182 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

steering oars of this last are depicted as a male and a female
dragon who take away the light from the rulers of the stars among
whom they move. Jesus and His disciples are then translated
to the place called the " Middle Way 1 ." He there describes
how the Archons of Adamas rebelled and persisted in engen-
dering and bringing forth "rulers and archangels and angels and
ministers and decans." We further hear, for the first time,
that the Twelve Aeons, instead of being, as in the Pistis Sophia,
all under the rule of Adamas, are divided into two classes,
one Jabraoth ruling over six of them and Sabaoth Adamas
over the other six ; that Jabraoth and his subjects repented
and practised " the mysteries of the light," including, as we
have seen, abstinence from generation 2 , whereupon they were
taken up by Jeu to the light of the sun between the " places
of the middle and those of the left." " Sabaoth Adamas,"
on the other hand, with his subjects to the number of 1800,
were bound to the sphere, 360 powers being set over them,
the 360 being controlled by the five planets Saturn, Mars,
Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter. Jesus then describes in great
detail the different tortures in the Middle Way and two other
hells called Chaos and Amenti, wherein the souls of un-
initiated men who commit sins are tormented between their
incarnations 3 , the final punishment being in the worst cases

1 This " Middle Way " has nothing to do with the tottos or " place "
of the middle, where are set in the Pistis Sophia proper the powers who
preside over incarnation. It is below the visible sphere (p. 364, Copt.)
and is met with in Rabbinic lore. See Kohler, op. cit. p. 587.

8 This division of the Twelve Aeons into two halves seems at first sight
inconsistent with the description in the Pistis Sophia proper which always
speaks of them as Twelve. Yet it is plain that the author of the Pistis
Sophia knew the legend here given, as he makes John the Divine speak
(p. 12, Copt.) of " the rulers who belong to the Aeon of Jabraoth " and had
made peace with the mysteries of the light. These " rulers who repented "
are again mentioned on p. 195, Copt. In the other part of the M;>f
Tfvx&v larfjpos (p. 356, Copt.), it is also said that the souls of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are to be placed in "the Place of Jabraoth and of all the
rulers who repented " until Jesus can take them with Him to the light.
So the Papyrus Bruce (Amelineau, p. 239).

* There are seven pages missing between the descriptions of the tortures
of the Middle Way and those of Amenti and Chaos, the gap occurring at


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 183

annihilation. He then affords His disciples a vision of "fire
and water and wine and blood " which He declares He brought
with Him on His Incarnation, and celebrates a sacrament
which He calls " the baptism of the First Oblation," but which
seems to be a peculiar form of the Eucharist with invocations
in the jargon alluded to above, and a thaumaturgic conversion
of the wine used in it into water and vice versa 1 . There are
several lacunae in this part of the MS., and the tortures for
certain specified sins are differently given in different places, so
that it is probable that with the Part of the Texts of the Saviour
has here been mixed extracts from another document whose
title has been lost 2 .

The remaining document of the British Museum MS.,
being the third in order of place, was probably taken from
the same book as that last described, and was placed out of
its natural order to satisfy the pedantry of the scribes, the
rule in such cases being that the longer document should always
come first. Like its successor, it deals largely with the " punish-
ments " of the souls who have not received the mysteries of
the light, and introduces a new and still more terrible hell
in the shape of the " Dragon of Outer Darkness " which it
declares to be a vast dragon surrounding the world, having
his tail in his mouth, and containing twelve chambers, wherein
the souls of the uninitiated dead are tortured after their trans-
migrations are ended until they reach the annihilation reserved
for them at the last judgment 3 . There is also given here a

p. 379, Copt. It is possible that what follows after this is not from the
Mepos Tevx<*v 2a>TTJpos but an extract from yet another document.

1 In the text of the M. t. <t. (p. 377, Copt.), Jesus simply asks His father
for a sign, and " the sign is made which Jesus had said." In the Papyrus

Jruce where the same ceremony is described in almost identical words, it
is said that the wine of the offering was turned into water which leaped
forth of the vase which contained it so as to serve for baptism. Cf. Ame-
lineau, Gnost. fig. p. 253. That Marcus the magician by juggling produced
similar prodigies, see Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 7, n. pp. 116, 117, Harvey.

2 The name of Jaldabaoth, which in the whole of the rest of the MS. is
spelt TaAAaBacoG, appears on p. 380 immediately after the lacuna of seven
pages asT&AT&BAco0, Ialtabaoth, which supports the theory of another author.

3 This is also briefly mentioned in the part of the Mepos revx^v Swrfjpos
just described. See pp. 386, sqq., Copt.


184 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

very curious account of man's invisible part, which is said
to be made up of the " Power " infused into it by the Virgin
of Light which returns to its giver after death 1 , and the Moira
or Fate which it derives from the Sphere of Destiny and has as
its sole function to lead the man it inhabits to the death he is
predestined to die 2 . Then there is the Counterfeit of the Spirit,
which is in effect a duplicate of the soul proper and is made
out of the matter of the wicked Archons. This not only incites
the soul to sin, but follows it about after death, denouncing to
the powers set over the punishments the sins it has induced
the soul to commit 3 . All these punishments, to describe which
is evidently the purpose of all the extracts from the Texts
of the Saviour here given, are escaped by those who have received
the mysteries.

The Texts of the Saviour therefore clearly belong to a later
form of Gnosticism than the Pistis Sophia properly so called.
The author's intention is evidently to frighten his readers
with the fate reserved for those who do not accept the teaching
of the sect. For this purpose the division of mankind into
pneumatic, psychic, and hylic is ignored 4 , and this is especially

1 This appears to contradict the Pistis Sophia proper, where it is said
that the Virgin of Light gives the soul, and the Great Iao the Good the
power.

2 Cf. the speech of the crocodile in the tale of the Predestined Prince :
" Ah, moi, je suis ton destin qui te poursuit ; quoi que tu f asses, tu seras
ramene sur mon chemin." Maspero, Contes Populaires de V£gypte Ancienne,
3rd ed. Paris, n. d. p. 175.

3 Evidently the Egyptian ka or double. Cf. the " Heart Amulet "
described by Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion, pp. 142, 143, where
the dead says to his heart : " Oh heart that I have from my mother !
Oh heart that belongs to my spirit, do not appear against me as witness,
provide no opposition against me before the judges, do not contradict me
before him who governs the balance, thou art my spirit that is in my

body " This seems to be a transcription of the 30th Chapter of the

Book of the Dead, of which there are several variants, none of which however
directly suggest that the heart is the accuser to be dreaded. See Budge,
Book of the Dead, 1909, vol n. pp. 146-152.

4 Thus the M. r. a-, says (p. 355, Copt.) "For this I despoiled myself
{i.e. laid aside my heavenly nature) to bring the mysteries into the Cosmos,
for all are under [the yoke of] sin, and all lack the gifts of the mysteries ....
Verily, verily I say unto you : until I came into the Cosmos, no soul entered


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 185

plain in certain passages where the torments after death of
those who follow " the doctrines of error " are set forth. Magic,
which has been spoken of with horror in the Pistis Sophia, is
here made use of in the celebration of the rites described,
and the miraculous power of healing the sick and raising the
dead, though said to be of archontic, i.e. diabolic, origin is here
recommended as a means to be employed under certain safe-
guards for the purpose of converting " the whole world 1 ."
Even the duration of the punishments and the different bodies
into which the souls of the men are to be cast are made to depend
upon the relative positions of the stars and planets which seem
to be interpreted according to the rules of the astrology of
the time, — a so-called science, which is spoken of scornfully
in the Pistis Sophia itself 2 . Yet it is evident that the author
or authors of the Texts of the Saviour are acquainted with the

into the light." Contrast this with the words of the Pistis Sophia proper
(p. 250, Copt.) : " Those who are of the light have no need of the mysteries,
because they are pure light," which are made the " interpretation " of the
text : " They that are whole have no need of a physician, but they that
are sick." See also the Pistis Sophia, p. 246, Copt., where it is said of the
mysteries promised by Jesus that " they lead every race of men inwards
into the highest places according to the x^P r ll JL < 1 °f the inheritance, so that
ye have no need of the rest of the lower mysteries, but you will find them
in the two books of Jeu which Enoch wrote etc."

1 p. 280, Copt.

2 M. r. a-, p. 388, Copt., where it is said that the soul of the righteous but
uninitiated man is after death taken into Amenti and afterwards into the
Middle Way, being shown the tortures in each place, " but the breath of
the flame of the punishments shall only afflict him a little." Afterwards
he is taken to the Virgin of Light, who sets him before the Little Sabaoth the
Good until the Sphere be turned round so that Zeus (if ) and Aphro-
dite ( $ ) come into aspect with the Virgin of Light and Kronos ( +?) and
Ares ( £ ) come after them. She then puts the soul into a righteous body,
which she plainly could not do unless under the favourable influence of
the '* benefics " Zf and O. . This seems also to be the dominant idea of the
Excerpta Theodoti, q.v. Compare this, however, with the words of the
Pistis Sophia proper (pp. 27, 28, Copt.) where Mary Magdalene explains
that the alteration made by Jesus in the course of the stars was effected in
order to baffle those skilled in the mysteries taught by the angels " who
came down" (as in the Book of Enoch), from predicting the future by
astrology and magic arts learned from the sinning angels.


186 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [en.

book which precedes it ; for in a description of the powers
which Jeu, who appears in both as the angelic arranger of
the Ker^smos, " binds " in the five planets set to rule over
it, we learn that he draws a power from " Pistis Sophia, the
daughter of Barbelo " and binds it in the planet Venus or
Aphrodite 1 . As this is the only reference to her, and receives
no further explanation, it is plain that the writer assumed
his readers to be well acquainted with Pistis Sophia's history,
and Jeu, Melchisidek, Adamas, and Jaldabaoth, now one
of the torturers in Chaos, appear, as we have seen, in both
works. The author of the Texts of the Saviour also shows
himself the avowed opponent of the Pagan deities still worshipped
in the early Christian centuries, as is evidenced by his making
not only the Egyptian Typhon, but Adonis, Persephone, and
Hecate, fiends in hell. Oddly enough, however, he gives an
explanation of the myth of the two springs of memory and
oblivion that we have seen in the Orphic gold plates in the
following passage, which may serve as an example of the
style of the book :

" Jesus said : When the time set by the Sphere of Destiny 2 for a
man that is a persistent slanderer to go forth from the body is
fulfilled, there come unto him Abiuth and Charmon, the receivers
of Ariel 3 , and lead forth his soul from the body, that they may
take it about with them for three days, showing it the creatures of
the world. Thereafter they drag it into Amenti unto Ariel that
he may torment it in his torments for eleven months and twenty-
one days. Thereafter they lead it into Chaos unto Jaldabaoth and
his forty-nine demons, that each of his demons may set upon it
for eleven months and twenty-one days with whips of smoke.

1 p. 361, Copt.

2 That is the Sphere of Destiny acting through its emissary the Moira
or Fate described above, p. 184 supra.

3 It is a curious example of the fossilizing, so to speak, of ancient
names in magic that Shakespeare should preserve for us in the Tempest
and Macbeth the names of Ariel and Hecate which we find in the M. r. a.
No doubt both were taken by him from mediaeval grimoires which them-
selves copied directly from the Graeco-Egyptian Magic Papyri mentioned
in Chap. Ill supra. Cf. the use of Greek " names of God" like ischiros
(sic !) athanato8, etc. in Reginald Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft, passim.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 187

Thereafter they lead it into rivers of smoke and seas of fire that
they may torment it therein eleven months and twenty-one days.
Thereafter they lead it on high into the Middle Way that each of
the Archons of the Middle Way may torment it with his own torments
another eleven months and twenty-one days. And thereafter they
lead it unto the Virgin of Light who judges the righteous and the
sinners, and she shall judge it. And when the Sphere is turned
round, she delivers it to her receivers that they may cast it forth
among the Aeons of the Sphere. And the servants of the Sphere
lead it into the water which is below the Sphere, that the boiling
steam may eat into it, until it cleanse it thoroughly. Then Jaluha
the receiver of Sabaoth Adamas, bearing the cup of oblivion de-
livers it to the soul, that it may drink therein and forget all the
places and the things therein through which it has passed 1 . And
it is placed in an afflicted body wherein it shall spend its appointed
time 2 ."

The object of the cup of oblivion is obviously that the wicked
man may learn nothing from the torments he has endured. In
the case of the righteous but uninitiated dead, the baleful effect
of this cup will be annulled by " the Little Sabaoth the
Good" who will administer to him another cup "of perception
and understanding and wisdom " which will make the soul
seek after the mysteries of light, on finding which it will inherit
light eternal.

It would be easy to see in these features of the Texts of the
Saviour the work of Marcus the magician who, as was said in
a former chapter, taught, according to the Fathers, a corrupted
form of the doctrine of Valentinus for his own interested pur-
poses 3 . The distinguishing feature about his celebration of
the Eucharist is the same as that given in the Texts of the

1 So that it could not profit by the knowledge of the awful punishments
prepared for sinners. I do not know that this idea occurs elsewhere.

2 p. 380, Copt.

3 The Marcosian authorship of the whole MS. is asserted by Bunsen,
, Hippolytus and his Age, vol. I. p. 47. Kostlin, Uber das gnostische System des
Buch Pistis Sophia in the Theologische Jahrbiicher of Baur and Zeller,
Tubingen, 1854, will have none of it, and declares the Pistis Sophia to be
an Ophite work. In this, the first commentator on the book is followed by
Griiber, Der Ophiten, Wurzburg, 1864, p. 5, §§ 3, 4.


188 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

Saviour, and as Clement of Alexandria was acquainted with
a sect in his day which substituted water for wine therein 1 ,
it is probable that Marcosians were to be found during the
latter part of the nnd century in Egypt. It is also to be
noted that the annotator has written upon the blank leaf
which separates the first and second books of the Pistis Sophia
a cryptogram concealing, apparently, the names of the Ineffable
One and the other higher powers worshipped by Valentinus,
and this seems to be constructed in much the same way as the
isopsephisms and other word-puzzles attributed by Irenaeus
to Marcus 2 . The mixture of Hebrew names and words with
Egyptian ones in the prayer of Jesus given in the Texts of

1 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk I. c. 19.

2 Thus, according to Marcus (Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 8, § 11, pp. 145, 146,
Harvey), " that name of the Saviour which may be pronounced, i.e. Jesus,
is composed of six letters, but His ineffable name of 24." The cryptogram
in the Pistis Sophia is in these words (p. 125, Copt.) : " These are the names
which I will give thee from the Boundless One downwards. Write them
with a sign that the sons of God may show them forth of this place Thi3
is the name of the Deathless One aaa aJcow, and this is the name of
the word by which the Perfect Man is moved : in. These are the
interpretations of the names of the mysteries. The first is aaa, the
interpretation of which is (fxfrq). The second which is fipp or which
is axoa>, its interpretation is aaa. The third is •fytyty., its interpreta-
tion is ono. The fourth is (fxfxb, its interpretation is vw. The
fifth is 888, its interpretation is aaa, which above the throne is aaa.
This is the interpretation of the second aaaa, aaaa, aaaa, which is the
interpretation of the whole name." The line drawn above the three
Alphas and Omegas is used in the body of the text to denote words in a
foreign (i.e. non-Egyptian) language such as Hebrew ; but in the Papyrus
Bruce about to be described, the same letters without any line above are
given as the name of " the Father of the Pleroma." See Amelineau's text,
p. 113. The " moving " of the image (rrXda-fxa) of the Perfect Man is
referred to in Hippolytus (op. cit. p. 144, Cruice). That the Tetra-
grammaton was sometimes written by Jewish magicians with three Jods
or ».».». see Gaster, The -.Oldest Version of Midrash Megillah, in Kohut'a
Semitic Studies, Berlin, 1897, p. 172. So on a magic cup in the Berlin
Museum, conjuration is made " in the name of Jahve the God of Israel
who is enthroned upon the cherubim ... and in the name AAAA"
(Stiibe, Judisch-Babylonische Zaubertexte, Halle, 1895, pp. 23-27). For the
meaning of the words " above the throne," see Franck, La Kabbale, p. 45,
n. 2.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 189

the Saviour would agree well with what the last-named Father
says about Marcus being a Jew, and a prayer which he represents
Marcus as making over the head of a convert baptized into his
sect is couched in a jargon of the same character 1 . On the
other hand, the opening sentence of the book calls Jesus " our
Lord," which Irenaeus tells us the Valentinians carefully
abstained from doing 2 , and the long and detailed description of
the different hells and their tortures is much more Egyptian
than Jewish 3 . The remark attributed to Basilides as to one in
a thousand and two in ten thousand being worthy to take the
higher mysteries is here put into the mouth of Jesus, and
perhaps it would be safer to attribute for the present the Texts
of the Saviour not to Marcus himself, but to some later G-nostic
who fused together his teaching with that of the earlier and
more disinterested professors of Egyptian Gnosticism.

The same remarks apply with but little modification to some
other fragments of Gnostic writings which have come down
to us. In the Bodleian Library at Oxford is to be seen a MS.
written on papyrus, which was brought to this country by
the Abyssinian traveller, Bruce. This also is in the Sahidic
dialect of Coptic, and although it has been badly damaged
and the ink is rapidly disappearing in the damp climate of
Oxford, yet a copy taken nearly a century ago by Woide makes
its decipherment possible in most places. The Bruce Papyrus,
like the British Museum parchment MS., contains more than
one document. Unfortunately the arrangement of the leaves
is by no means certain, and the two scholars who have studied
it most thoroughly differ almost as widely as possible as to
the order of its contents. M. Amelineau, a celebrated Egypto-
logist and Coptic scholar, who published in 1882 a copy of

1 The opening words of the invocation fiaaepa xa/xocro-ij ftaiavopa
(iKrrahia povaba Kovara $a$o(pj>p icaXaxdel which Irenaeus (Bk L C. 14, § 2,
pp. 183, 184, Harvey) quotes in this connection from Marcus certainly
read, as Renan (ISfiglise Chretienne, p. 154, n. 3) points out, " In the
name of Achamoth " (i.e. Sophia).

2 See n. 3, p. 180, supra. In the Pistis Sophia proper Jesus is never
spoken of save as " the Saviour " or as " the First Mystery."

3 Cf. Maspero, Hypogees Royaux, passim, esp. pp. 157 and 163.


190 The Pistis Sojihia and its Belated Texts [ch.

the text with a French translation in the Notices et Extraits of the
Academie des Inscriptions, considers that the treatises contained
in it are only two in number, the first being called by the author
in what seems to be its heading The Book of the Knowledge
of the Invisible God and the second The Book of the Great Word
in Every Mystery. Dr Carl Schmidt, of the University of
Berlin, on the other hand, who, like M. Amelineau, has studied
the Papyrus at Oxford, thinks that he can distinguish in the
Bruce Papyrus no less than six documents, of which the first
two are according to him the two books of Jeu referred to
in the Pistis Sophia, two others, fragments of Gnostic prayers,
the fifth a fragment on the passage of the soul through the
Archons of the Middle Way, and the sixth, an extract from an
otherwise unknown Gnostic work which he does not venture
to identify further 1 . To enter into the controversy raised
by this diversity of opinion would take one outside the limits
of the present work ; but it may be said that at least one, and
that the most important, of the documents in question must
be later than the Pistis Sophia. Not only does this— which
M. Amelineau calls the Book of the Knowledge of the Invisi-
ble God and Dr Schmidt " Unbekanntes Altgnostisches
Werk " — quote the opening words of St John's Gospel : " In
the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God without whom nothing was made 2 ,"

1 Schmidt's study of the Bruce Papyrus with a full text and translation
was published in the Texte und Untersuchungen of von Gebhardt and
Harnack under the title Gnostische Schriften in Koptischer Sprache aus
dem Codex Brucianus, Leipzig, 1892. He republished the translation of
this together with one of the Pistis Sophia in the series of early Greek
Christian literature undertaken by the Patristic Committee of the Royal
Prussian Academy of Sciences under the title Koptisch-Gnostische Schriften,
Bd I. Leipzig, 1905. His arrangement of the papyrus leaves makes much
better sense than that of Amelineau, but it is only arrived at by eliminating
all passages which seem to be inconsequent and attributing them to separate
works. The fragments which he distinguishes as A and B and describes
as " gnostischen Gebetes," certainly appear to form part of those which
he describes as the two " books of Jeu."

2 Amelineau, " Notice sur le Papyrus gnostique Bruce," Notices et Extraits
des MSS. de la Bill. Nat. etc. Paris, 1891, p. 106. This would seem to
make matter the creation of God, but the author gets out of the dilemma


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 191

which, as has been said, the author of thePistis Sophiaw&s unable
to do ; but it mentions in briefer form than this last the heavenly
origin of the souls of the Twelve Apostles 1 . There is also in
the same document a description of what appears to be the
" emanation of the universe," in which the following passage
occurs :

" And He [i.e. the Ineffable One] heard them [a prayer by the
lesser powers is referred to]. He sent them powers capable of
discernment, and knowing the arrangement of the hidden Eons.
He sent them according to the arrangement of those who are
hidden 2 . He established their Orders according to the orders of
the Height, and according to the hidden arrangement they began
from below upward in order that the building might unite
them. He created the aery earth as a place of habitation for
those who had gone forth, in order that they might dwell thereon
until those which were below them should be made strong. Then
he created the true habitation within it 3 , the Place of Repentance
(Metanoia) within it, the Place of Repentance within it, the antitype
of Aerodios 4 . Then [he created] the Place of Repentance within

by affirming (op. cit. p. 126) that " that which was not was the evil which
is manifested in matter " and that while that which exists is called alavios,
" everlasting," that which does not exist is called vXr], " matter."

1 Amelineau, op. cit. p. 231.

2 This word arrangement (olicovofiia) occurs constantly in the Pistis
Sophia, as when we read (p. 193, Copt.) that the last napao-raTTjs by the
command of the First Mystery placed Jeu, Melchisedek, and four other
powers in the tottos of those who belong to the right hand npos olKovopias
of the Assembly of the Light. There, as here, it doubtless means that
they were arranged in the same order as the powers above them in
pursuance of the principle that " that which is above is like that which
is below," or, in other words, of the doctrine of correspondences.
From the Gnostics the word found its way into Catholic theology, as when
Tertulhan (adv. Praxean, c. 3) says that the majority of simple-minded
Christians " not understanding that though God be one, he must yet be
believed to exist with his oWovopia, were frightened." Cf. Hatch, H.L.
p. 324.

3 Perhaps the House or Place of 'AX^cta or Truth many times
alluded to in the M. r. a.

4 Aerodios is shortly after spoken of as a person or power, so that here,
slsewhere, in this literature, the place is called by the name of its ruler.


192 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

it, the antitype of Autogenes (Self-begotten or, perhaps, "of his
own kind "). In this Place is purification in the name of Autogenes
who is god over them and powers were set there over the source
of the waters which they make to go forth (?). Here are the names
of the powers who are set over the Water of Life : Michar and
Micheu, and they are purified in the name of Barpharanges 1 .
Within these are the Aeons of Sophia. Within these is the true
Truth. And in this Place is found Pistis Sophia, as also the pre-
existent Jesus the Living, Aerodios, and his Twelve Aeons 2 ."

What is intended to be conveyed by this it is difficult to say
in the absence of the context ; but the Pistis Sophia mentioned
is evidently the heroine of the book of that name, and the
abrupt mention of her name without explanation shows, as
in the Texts of the Saviour, that the author supposed his readers
to be acquainted with her story. While this part of the Papyrus
may possibly be an attempt by some later writer to fulfil the
promise to tell His disciples at some future time the "emanation
of the universe " frequently made by Jesus in the Pistis Sophia,
it cannot be earlier in date than this last-named document.

Another large fragment in the Bruce Papyrus is also con-
nected with that which has been called above the Texts of the
Saviour, and helps to link up this with the system of the Pistis
Sophia proper. In the first part of the Texts of the Saviour
(i.e. the fourth document in the British Museum book), Jesus, as
has been mentioned, celebrates with prodigies a sacrament which
He calls the" Baptism of the first Oblation" ; and He tells them
at the same time that there is also a baptism of perfumes,
another baptism of the Holy Spirit of Light, and a Spiritual
Chrism, besides which He promises them " the great mystery

1 This word constantly occurs in the Magic Papyri, generally with another
word prefixed, as aeatvyf v @ap<f>apayyr)s (Papyrus Mimaut, 1. 12, Wessely's
Griechische Zavberpapyri, p. 116), which C. W. King (Gnostics and their
Remains, 2nd ed. p. 289) would translate " they who stand before the mount
of Paradise " or in other words the Angels of the Presence. Amelineau
(Notices, etc. p. 144, n. 2) will have Barpharanges to be " a hybrid word,
part Chaldean and part Greek " meaning " Son of the Abyss " — which is
as unlikely as the other interpretation.

1 p. 143, Amelineau (Notices, etc.) ; p. 361, Schmidt, K.-G.S.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 193

of the Treasure-house of Light and the way to call upon it
so as to arrive thither," a " baptism of those who belong to
the Right Hand," and of " those who belong to the Middle "
and other matters. These promises are in some sort fulfilled
in that part of the Bruce Papyrus which Dr Schmidt will have
it is " the Second Book of Jeu 1 ," where Jesus celebrates with
accompanying prodigies three sacraments which He calls the
Baptism of Fire of the Virgin of the Treasure-house of Light, the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit, and a " mystery " which is said to
take away from His disciples "the wickedness of the archons 2 ."
The details of these vary but very slightly from the i: Baptism
of the First Oblation " celebrated by Jesus in the Texts of the
Saviour, and seem to have been written in continuation and
as an amplification of it. But the Texts of the Saviour, as
we have seen, also mention Pistis Sophia in such a way as
to presuppose an acquaintance with her history ; and the
presumption that the author of the Bruce Papyrus had read
the book bearing her name is confirmed by the repetition in it of
the names of Jeu, here called " the Great Man, King of the great
aeon of light," the Great Sabaoth the Good, the Great Iao the
Good, Barbelo 3 , the Great Light, and all the " Amens," Twin
Saviours," " Guardians of Veil3 " and the rest who are classed
together in the Pistis Sophia as the great emanations of light,
and mentioned in a connection which shows them to have
the same functions in all these documents 4 . When we add
to these the repetition of the tradition, formally stated for
the first time in the Pistis Sophia, that Jesus spent twelve
years with His disciples between His Resurrection and His

1 According to Amelineau, op. cit., " The Book of the Great Word in
Every Mystery."

2 pp. 188-199, Amelineau, op. cit. ; Schmidt, K.-G.S. pp. 308-314.

3 pp. 219, 220, Amelineau, op. cit. ; Schmidt, K.-G.S. p. 226. She
seems to be here called " the Great Virgin of the Spirit." Cf. the 'Yirt-
6(vto yap Alwva riva dvakedpov iv irapdepiKa biayovri nvevp.ari, 6 fiapf$rp\a>8
dvopdgovo-i, " For [some of them] suppose a certain indestructible Aeon
continuing in a Virgin spirit whom they call Barbelo " of Irenaeus,
Bk I. c. 27, § 1, p. 222, Harvey.

4 The powers named are thus called in both the Pistis Sophia and
the Bruce Papyrus. See Pistis Sophia, pp. 248, 252 Copt.; Amelineau,
op. cit. p. 177.

l. n. 13


194 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

Ascension 1 , there can be little doubt that this part of the Papyrus
Bruce also is subsequent to the Pistis Sophia. Similar argu-
ments, which are only omitted here for the sake of greater
clearness, apply to all the rest of Dr Schmidt's documents,
and it follows that none of the contents of the Papyrus can
be considered as any part of the " Books of Jeu " mentioned
in the Pistis Sophia 2 , which, therefore, remains the parent
document on which all the others are based. As to their
absolute date, it seems impossible to arrive at any useful
conclusion. Both M. Amelineau and Dr Schmidt are agreed
that the Coptic Papyrus is a translation from Greek originals ;
and M. Amelineau does not put this too far forward when he
suggests that it was made in the nnd and inrd century of
our era 3 . Dr Schmidt is probably nearer the mark when
he puts the actual transcription of the Papyrus as dating in
the earliest instance from the vth century. His earliest date
for any of the Greek originals is the first half of the inrd century 4 .
If now we put these later documents — the Texts of the
Saviour and those contained in the Bruce Papyrus — side by
side, we notice a marked, if gradual, change of tendency from
the comparatively orthodox Christianity of the Pistis Sophia
proper. Id the Texts of the Saviour notably, the fear of hell
and its punishments is, as we have seen, present throughout,
and seems to be the sanction on which the author relies to
compel his readers to accept his teaching. In the documents
of the Bruce Papyrus this is also to be found in more sporadic
fashion, nearly the whole of the book being occupied by the
means by which men are to escape the punishment of their

1 According to the Pistis Sophia (p. 1, Copt.), 11 years elapsed between
the Crucifixion and the descent of the " Vestures " upon Jesus on the
Mount of Olives. We may imagine another year to have been consumed by
the revelations made in the book.

2 If the " Books of Jeu " were ever written we should expect them to
bear the name of Enoch, who is said to have taken them down in Paradise
at the dictation of Jesus. See p. 147, n. 5, supra. Very possibly the
expression really does refer to some of the mass of literature once passing
under the name of Enoch and now lost to us.

* Amelineau, op. cit. p. 72.
4 Schmidt, K.-G.S. p. 26.


i


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 195

sins. These methods of salvation are all of them what we
have earlier called gnostical or magical, and consist simply
in the utterance of " names " given us in some sort of crypto-
grammatic form, and the exhibition of " seals " or rather
impressions (^aca/er^oe?) here portrayed with great attention to
detail, which, however, remain utterly meaningless for us. Thus
to quote again from what Dr Schmidt calls the Second Book
of Jeu, Jesus imparts to His disciples the " mystery " of
the Twelve Aeons in these words :

" When you have gone forth from the body and come into the
First Aeon, the Archons of that Aeon will come before you. Then
stamp upon yourselves this seal **, the name of which is zozese.
Utter this once only. Take in your two hands this number, 1119.
When you have stamped upon yourselves this seal and have
uttered its name once only, speak these defences ; ' Back ! Protei
Persomphon Chous, Archons of the First Aeon, for I invoke
Eazazeozazzozeoz.' And when the Archons of the First Aeon shall
hear that name, they will be filled with great fear, they will flee
away to the West, to the Left Hand, and you will enter in 1 " :

and the same process with different names and seals is to be
repeated with the other eleven aeons. This is, of course, not
religion, such as we have seen in the writings of Valentinus,
nor even the transcendental mysticism of the Pistis Sophia,
but magic, and magic of a peculiarly Egyptian form.
The ancient Egyptian had always an intense fear of the
world after death, and from the first conceived a most gloomy
view of it. The worshippers of Seker or Socharis, a god so
ancient that we know him only as a component part of the
triune or syncretic divinity of late dynastic times called Ptah-
Seker-Osiris, depicted it as a subterranean place deprived
of the light of the sun, hot and thirsty, and more dreary than
even the Greek Hades or the Hebrew Sheol.

" The West is a land of sleep and darkness heavy, a place where
those who settle in it, slumbering in their forms, never wake to see
their brethren ; they never look any more on their father and
their mother, their heart leaves hold of their wives and children.

1 Amelineau, op. cit. p. 211; Schmidt, K.-G.S. p. 322. The West or
Amenti is the Egyptian name for Hades.

13—2


196 The Fist is Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

The living water which earth has for every one there, is foul here
where I am ; though it runs for every one who is on earth, foul
is for me the water which is with me. I do not know any spot
where I would like to be, since I reached this valley ! Give me
water which runs towards me, saying to me, ' Let thy jug never
be without water ' ; bring to me the north wind, on the brink
of water, that it may fan me, that my heart may cool from its pain.
The god whose name is Let Complete Death Come, when he has
summoned anybody to him, they come to him, their hearts disturbed
by the fear of him ; for there is nobody dares look up to him from
amongst gods and men, the great are to him as the small and he
spares not [those] who love him, but he tears the nursling from the
mother as he does the old man, and everyone who meets him is
filled with affright 1 ."

The priests took care that such a picture did not fade from
want of reproduction and, true to the genius of their nation,
elaborated it until its main features are almost lost to us under
the mass of details 2 . Especially was this the case with the
religion of the Sun-God Ra, who after his fusion with Amon
of Thebes at the establishment of the New Empire came to
overshadow all the Egyptian cults save that of Osiris. The
tombs of the kings at Thebes are full of pictures of the land
of this Amenti or the West, in which horror is piled upon
horror, and book after book was written that there should be
no mistake about the fate lying in wait for the souls of men 3 .
In these we see the dead wandering from one chamber to
another, breathing a heavy and smoke-laden air 4 , and con-
fronted at every step by frightful fiends compounded from
the human and bestial forms, whose office is to mutilate, to
burn, and to torture the soul. The means of escape open to
the dead was, under the xxth dynasty, neither the conscious-
ness of a well-spent life nor the fatherly love of the gods, but
the knowledge of passwords and mysterious names 5 . Every
chamber had a guardian who demanded of the dead his own

1 Maspero, " Egyptian Souls and their Worlds," tt. figyptol. i. p. 395.

2 Maspero, " Hypog6es Royaux," tt. figyptol. t. n. pp. 148, 165.

3 Ibid. pp. 178, 179.

4 Ibid. p. 31.

6 Ibid. pp. 14-15.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 197

name, without repeating which the soul was not allowed
to enter 1 . Every fiend had to be repelled by a special
exorcism and talisman 2 , and every " circle " through which
the dead passed had its own song and " mystery," which it
behoved the dead to know 3 . Only thus could he hope to j
win through to the Land of Osiris, where he might enjoy a
relative beatitude and be free to go about and visit the
other heavenly places 4 . For this purpose, the map, so to
speak, of the route was engraved on the walls of the tombs of
those who could afford it, and the necessary words to be said
written down. Those who were not so rich or so lucky were
thought to be parcelled out, like the fellahin of that day, or
the villeins of feudal times, in colonies among the different
districts of the lower world, where they flourished or perished
according to the number of talismans or " protections " that
they possessed 5 . " If ever," says M. Maspero, "there were in
Pharaonic Egypt mysteries and initiates, as there were in
Greece and in Egypt under the Greeks, these books later than
the Book of the Other World and the Book of the Gates are books
of mystery and of initiates 6 ." Thereafter, he goes on to
say, the ancient popular religion disappeared more and more
from Egypt, to give place to the overmastering sense of the
terrors of death 7 and the magical means by which it was sought
to lighten them.

It is to the survival of these ideas that books like the Texts of
the Saviour and those in the Papyrus Bruce must be attributed.
The Gnostic Christianity of Valentinus, direct descendant
as it was of the amalgam of Christianity with pre-Christian
faiths which the Ophites had compounded, no sooner reached
the great mass of the Egyptian people than it found itself
under their influence. In this later Gnostic literature we hear
no more of the Supreme Father of Valentinus, "who alone"

1 Ibid. p. 166. To make things more difficult, the guardian sometimes
had a different name for every hour. Cf. ibid. p. 168.

2 Ibid. pp. 124, n. 2, 163. For the talismans or amulets, see Maspero,
" La Table d'Offrandes," R.H.R. t. xxxv. (1897), p. 325.

3 Maspero, " Hyp. Roy." pp. 113, 118.

4 Ibid. pp. 162, 163. 5 Ibid. pp. 41, 163.
• Ibid. p. 178. 7 Ibid. p. 179.


198 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

in his words, " is good " ; no more weight is laid upon the
Faith, Hope, and Love who were the first three members
of his Heavenly Man ; and the Jesus in whom were summed
up all the perfections of the Godhead becomes transformed
into a mere mystagogue or revealer of secret words and things.
All expectation of the immediate arrival of the Parusia or
Second Coming, when the world is to be caught up and all
wickedness to be destroyed, has passed into the background, as
has also the millennium in which the faithful were, in accord-
ance with a very early belief in Egypt, to share the felicity
of those who had been kings on earth 1 . Instead we have only
appeals to the lowest motives of fear and the selfish desire to
obtain higher privileges than ordinary men. Even the avoid-
ance of crime has no other sanction, and complete withdrawal
from the world is advocated on merely prudential grounds ;
while rejection of the mysteries is the unpardonable sin :

" When I have gone unto the light " (says the Jesus of the Texts
of the Saviour to His disciples) " preach unto the whole world,
saying : Eenounce the whole world and the matter that is therein,
all its cares, its sins, and in a word all its conversation, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the light, that ye may be saved
from all the torments which are in the judgments. Renounce
murmuring, that ye may. be worthy of the mysteries of the light,
that ye may escape the judgment of that dog-faced one....
Renounce wrath, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
light, that ye may be saved from the fire of the seas of the dragon-
faced one .... Renounce adultery, that ye may be worthy of
the mysteries of the kingdom of light, that ye may be saved from

the seas of sulphur and pitch of the lion-faced one Say unto

them that abandon the doctrines of truth of the First Mystery
' Woe unto you, for your torment shall be worse than that of all

1 The kings, according to a belief which was evidently very old in the
time of the Pyramid- Builders, were supposed to possess immortality as
being gods even in their lifetime. Later, the gift was extended to rulers
of nomes and other rich men, and finally to all those who could purchase the
spells that would assure it. In Maspero's words " La vie d'au dela n'etait
pas un droit pour l'lSgyptien : il pouvait la gagner par la vertu des formules
et des pratiques, mais il pouvait aussi bien la perdre, et s'il etait pauvre
ou isole, les chances etaient qu'il la perdit a bref delai " {op. cit. p. 174).


x] The Pisfis Sophia and its Related Texts 199

men, for ye shall dwell in the great ice and frost and hail in the i
midst of the Dragon of the Outer Darkness, and ye shall escape no
more from the world from that hour unto evermore, but ye shall
be as stones therein, and in the dissolution of the universe ye shall
be annihilated, so that ye exist no more for ever 1 '."

The priests who engraved the horrors of the next world on
the walls of the royal tombs at Thebes would probably have
written no differently.

Gnosticism then, in Egypt soon relapsed into the magic
from which it was originally derived ; and we can no longer
wonder that the Fathers of the Church strove as fiercely against
it as they did. In the age when books like the Texts of the
Saviour and the fragments in the Papyrus Bruce could be
written, the methods of Clement of Alexandria, who treated
Valentinus and his school as Christians bent on the truth
though led into error by a misunderstanding of the purport
of heathen philosophy, were clearly out of place. " Kavening
wolves," " wild beasts," " serpents," and " lying rogues "
are some of the terms the Fathers now bestow upon them 2 ,
and as soon as the conversion of Constantine put the sword
of the civil power into their hands, they used it to such effect
that Gnosticism perished entirely in some places and in others
dragged on a lingering existence under other forms. The
compromise that had served for some time to reconcile the
great mass of the unthinking people to the religion of Christ
thus broke down 3 ; and Egypt again showed her power of

1 p. 254, Copt.

2 de Faye {Intro, etc. p. 110) shows clearly, not only that the aims and
methods of the school of Valentinus changed materially after its founder's
death, but that it was only then that the Catholic Church perceived the
danger of them, and set to work to combat them systematically.

3 To thinkers like Dean Inge {Christian Mysticism, 1899, p. 82) this was
the natural and appointed end of Gnosticism, which according to him was
" rotten before it was ripe." " It presents," he says, " all the features
which we shall find to be characteristic of degenerate mysticism. Not to
speak of its oscillations between fanatical austerities and scandalous licence,
and its belief in magic and other absurdities, we seem, when we read
Irenaeus' description of a Valentinian heretic, to hear the voice of Luther
venting his contempt upon some Geisterer of the sixteenth century." It


200 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch.

resisting and transforming all ideas other than those which
thousands of years had made sacred to her people.

Meanwhile, the bridge between Paganism and Christianity
which Gnosticism afforded had been crossed by many. As the
Ophites showed the inhabitants of Asia Minor how to combine
the practice of their ancestral worships with the Christian
revelation, so Valentinus and his successors allowed the rich
man to enter the kingdom of heaven without the difficulties
attendant on the passage of the camel through the needle's
eye. The authors of the Pistis Sophia and the Bruce Papyrus
went further and made it possible for the Egyptian fellah — then
as now hating change, and most tenacious of his own beliefs — to
accept the hope of salvation offered by the new faith while
giving up none of his traditional lore upon the nature of the
next world. In this way, doubtless, many thousands were
converted to Christianity who would otherwise have kept
aloof from it, and thus hastened its triumph over the State.
But the law which seems to compel every religion to borrow
the weapons of its adversaries leads sometimes to strange
results, and this was never more plainly marked than in the
case of Egypt. The history of Egyptian Christianity has
yet to be written ; but it seems from the first to have been
distinguished in many important particulars from that which
conquered the West, and it is impossible to attribute these
differences to any other source than Gnosticism. The Pharaonic
Egyptian had always been fanatical, submissive like all Africans
to priestly influence, and easily absorbed in concern for his
own spiritual welfare. Given the passion for defining the
undefinable and the love of useless detail which marked
everything in the old faith, and in systems like those of the
Coptic texts which form the subject of this chapter he had
the religion to his mind. Nor were other and less abstract
considerations wanting. The life of a scribe or temple servant,
as the race began to lose the vigour which at one time had
made them the conquerors of Asia, had come to be looked upon

may be so ; yet, after all, Gnosticism in its later developments lasted for a
longer time than the doctrines of Luther have done, particularly in the
land of their birth.


x] The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts 201

by the mass of the people as that which was most desirable on
earth 1 ; and here was a faith which called upon the Egyptian to
withdraw from the world and devote himself to the care of his
own soul. Hence the appeal of Gnosticism to those who would
escape hell to renounce all earthly cares fell upon good ground,
and Egypt was soon full of ignorant ascetics withdrawn from
the life of labour and spending their days in ecstasy or con-
templation until roused to seditious or turbulent action at
the bidding of their crafty and ambitious leaders. For these
monks and hermits the Hellenistic civilization might as
well not have existed ; but they preserved their native super-
stitions without much modification, and the practices of magic,
alchemy, and divination were rife among them 2 . So, too,
was the constant desire to enquire into the nature and activities
of the Deity which they had brought with them from their
old faith, and which nearly rent Christianity in twain when
it found expression in the Arian, the Monophysite, and the
Monothelite controversies. In the meantime, the Catholic
Church had profoundly modified her own methods in the
directions which the experience of the Gnostics had shown
to be profitable. The fear of hell came to occupy a larger and
larger part in her exhortations, and apocalypse after apocalypse
was put forth in which its terrors were set out with abundant
detail. Ritual necessarily became of immense importance under
the pressure of converts who believed in the magical efficacy
of prayers and sacraments, in which every word and every
gesture was of mysterious import, and the rites of the Church
were regarded more and more as secrets on which only those
fully instructed might look. The use in them of pictures,
flowers, incense, music, and all the externals of the public
worship of heathen times, which according to Gibbon would
have shocked a Tertullian or a Lactantius could they have
returned to earth 3 , must be attributed in the first instance

1 Cf. Maspero, Life in Ancient Egypt and Assyria, Eng. ed. 1892, pp.
90-92, for the distaste of the Egyptians of Ramesside times for the life of
a soldier and their delight in that of a scribe.

2 All these, especially alchemy, are illustrated in the Magic Papyrus
of Leyden known as W. See Leemans, Pap. Or. t. II. pp. 83 sqq.

3 Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol. in. p. 214, Bury's ed.


202 The Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts [ch. x

to the influence of Gnostic converts. Renan is doubtless
right when he says that it was over the bridge between Paganism
and Christianity formed by Gnosticism that many Pagan
practices poured into the Church 1 .

Apart from these external matters, on the other hand, the
outbreak of Gnosticism possibly rendered a real service to
Christianity. To the simple chiliastic faith of Apostolic times,
the Gnostics added the elements which transformed it into a
world-religion, fitted to triumph over all the older creeds and
worships ; and their stealthy and in part secret opposition forced
the Church to adopt the organization which has enabled her to
survive in unimpaired strength to the present day. Jewish
Christianity, the religion of the few pious and humble souls who
thought they had nothing to do but to wait in prayer and hope
for their Risen Lord, had proved itself unable to conquer the
world, and its adherents under the name of Ebionites were
already looked upon by the Gentile converts as heretics.
Gnosticism, so long as it was unchecked, was a real danger to the
Church, but without it Christendom would probably have broken
up into hundreds of small independent communities, and would
thus have dissipated the strength which she eventually found
in unity. Threatened on the one hand by this danger, and
on the other with the loss of popular favour which the at-
tractions of Gnosticism made probable, the Church was forced
to organize herself, to define her doctrines, to establish a regular
and watchful hierarchy 2 , and to strictly regulate the tendency
to mystic speculation and arbitrary exegesis which she could
not wholly suppress. Yet these measures could not come
into operation without producing a reaction, the end of which
we have yet to see. F

1 Renan, Ufiglise Chretienne, pp. 154, 155, and authorities there
quoted. Of. Hatch, H. L. pp. 129, 130, 293, 307-309.

2 Harnack, What is Christianity ? p. 210 ; Duchesne, Early Christian
Church, p. 32.


CHAPTER XI

MARCION

We have seen that Valentinus left Alexandria to settle in
Rome before promulgating his new doctrine 1 , and the Eternal
City seems at that time to have drawn to itself as with a magnet
all those Oriental teachers of Christianity who wished to make
innovation in religion. Rome in the und century had become
a veritable sink into which poured men of all nations and creeds
whether old or new. Besides the great flood of Isiacists,
Mithraists, and worshippers of the Great Goddess and of the
Syrian Baals, that now began to appear there, Alexander of
Abonoteichos came thither under Marcus Aurelius to celebrate
his newly-invented mysteries 2 , and succeeded in gaining a foot-
hold at the Imperial Court. Moreover in a.d. 140, the terrible
war of extermination which Hadrian had been compelled much
against his will to wage against the Jewish nation was at length
over, and the effect of this was to transfer a great number of
Asiatic and African Christians to the world's metropolis, while
making it more than ever expedient for them to disclaim
connection with the Jews. The slightly contemptuous tolera-
tion, too, which the statesmanlike Hadrian seems to have
extended to the Christians 3 , was not likely to be withdrawn
without reason by his philosophic successor, Antoninus Pius ;
and it was doubtless the consciousness of this which led to the
appearance of the various " apologies " for, or defences of,
Christianity which Quadratus, Aristides, Justin Martyr, and
other persons with some philosophic training now began to put
forth. In such of these as have come down to us, the desire

1 Chap. rx. p. 118 supra.

2 Renan, Marc Aurele, p. 49. Cf. Dill, Nero to Marcus, pp. 473-477.

3 Renan, Vitalise Chretienne, pp. 31-33, and Hadrian's letter there
quoted.


204 Marcion [ch.

of their authors to dissociate themselves from the Jews, then
at the nadir of their unpopularity, is plainly manifest, and no
doubt gave the note to the innovators 1 . It is certainly very
marked in the heresy of Marcion, which, unlike those of
Valentinus and the other Gnostics, was to culminate in the
setting-up of a schismatic Church in opposition to that founded
on the Apostles.

Marcion was, according to the better account, a wealthy
shipowner of Pontus and probably a convert to Christianity 2 .
He seems to have been born at Sinope, at one time the most
important of the Greek towns on the Southern shore of the
Euxine or Black Sea. Mithridates the Great, who was also
born there, had made Sinope his capital, and though it had
no doubt declined in rank since his time, it must still have been,
in the year 100 a.d. (the probable date of Marcion's birth), a
flourishing and prosperous place 3 . As in all the cities of Asia
Minor, the Stoic philosophy had there obtained a firm hold,
and there is some reason for thinking that Marcion received
lessons in this before his conversion 4 . Of the circumstances
which led to this event we have no knowledge, and it was even
said in later times that he was born a Christian, and that his
father had been a bishop of the Church. A better founded
story is that, on his conversion, he brought into the common
fund of the Church a considerable sum of money, which is said
to have been paid out to him on his expulsion 5 . When at the

1 Of the defences mentioned in the text the Apology of Quadratus is the
only one still lost to us. Justin Martyr's two Apologies are among the
best known of patristic works. That of Aristides was found by Dr Rendel
Harris in a Syriac MS. in 1889. For the identification of this by Dean
Armitage Robinson with the story of Barlaam and Josaphat, see Cambridge
Texts and Studies, vol. 1. No. 1.

2 The account of Marcion's life given by Salmon (s.v. Marcion) in the
Diet. Christian Biog. is here mostly followed. Abundant references to the
Fathers and other sources are there given.

3 Tertullian's talk (adv. Marcion. Bk I. c. 1) about its barbarism and
the natives living in waggons is mere rhetoric. He probably knew nothing
about the place.

4 Stoicae studiosus. Tertullian, de Praescript. c. xxx.

* Id. adv. Marc. Bk rv. c. 4; and de Praescript. c. xxx., where the money
is said to have been 200 sestertia or nearly £1800.


xi] Marcion 205

mature age of forty he went to Rome, it seems reasonable to
suppose that he accepted the orthodox teaching, as it is said
that there was some talk of his being made bishop of what was
even then the richest and highest in rank of all the Christian
Churches. At Rome, however, he fell in with one Cerdo, a
Syrian, who seems to have been already domiciled there and to
have taught in secret a pronouncedly dualistic system in which
God and Matter were set in sharp opposition to one another,
and in which it was held that a good God could not have been
the author of this wicked world 1 . This opinion Marcion
adopted and elaborated, with the result that he was expelled
from the Catholic Church, and thereupon set to work to found
another, having bishops, priests, deacons, and other officers in
close imitation of the community he had left 2 . It is said that
before his death he wished to be reconciled to the Church, but
was told that he could only be readmitted when he had restored
to the fold the flock that he had led away from it. This, on
the authority of Tertullian, he would have been willing to do ;
but his rival Church had by that time so enormously increased
in numbers, that he died, probably in 165 a.d., before he was
able to make the restitution required 3 . This story also can
only be accepted with a great deal of reserve 4 .

It is abundantly plain, however, that Marcion was regarded
not only by the professed heresiologists of the succeeding age,
but also by teachers like Justin Martyr and the learned Clement
of Alexandria, as one of the most formidable enemies of the
Church, whose evil influence persisted even after his death 5 .
By the reign of Gratian, his rival Church had spread over Italy,
Egypt, Palestine, Arabia, Syria, and Persia 6 ; and, although
the main authority for the increase is the always doubtful one

1 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk I. c. 2. Cf. Pseudo Tertullianus, adv. omn.
Haer. c. xvi.

* Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 150 ; cf. Tertullian, de Praescript. c. xlt.
3 Ibid. op. cit. e. xxx. Salmon (Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Marcion) wishes

I transfer this story to Cerdo.
4 Neander, Church Hist. n. p. 139, disbelieves it.
5 Justin Martyr, First Apol. cc. xxvi., lviii. He writes as Marcion's
ntemporary. Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk m. c. 3.
6 Epiphanius, Haer. xtn. p. 553, Oehler.


206 Marcion [ch.

of Epiphanius, this last was not likely to have unduly magnified
the success of the Church's rival, and his story has the confirma-
tion of Tertullian that in his time the Marcionites made churches
" as wasps make nests 1 ." Every Father of note seems to have
written against the heresiarch who had thus dared, as was said,
to turn away souls from Christ, and Polycarp, the saint and
martyr, when Marcion claimed acquaintance with him in Rome
on the strength of a former meeting in Smyrna, replied with
much heat, " Yes, I know thee ! the first-born of Satan 2 ."
So late as the Council in Trullo in the viith century, special
arrangements had to be made for the reception of Marcionites
who wished to be reconciled to the Church, and forms of abjura-
tion of the sect are said to have lingered until the xth 3 .

That this longevity was purchased by no willingness to
make the best of both worlds or to enjoy peace by compromising
with heathenism in the way we have seen prevalent among the
Alexandrian Gnostics, is at once evident. Alone among the
heretics of the sub-Apostolic Age, the Fathers declare, the
i Marcionites held fast their faith in time of persecution, while
they refused to frequent the circus and the theatre and practised
an austerity of life putting to shame even the ascetics among
the orthodox 4 . Marcion himself underwent none of the slanders
on his personal morals which theologians generally heap upon
their opponents 5 , and none of his tenets are said by either
Tertullian or Epiphanius, who took his refutation most seriously
in hand, to have been borrowed from those Pagan rites or
mysteries which they looked upon as forming the most shameful

1 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk rv. c. 5.

2 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk iv. c. 14.

3 The council was held 692 a.d. See Salmon in Diet. Christian Biog.
s.v. Marcion.

4 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk I. c. 27.

5 The story that he seduced a virgin L? now generally held to mean
merely that he corrupted the unsullied faith of the Church. Cf. Hegesippus
in Eusebius, HiM. Eccl. Bk v. c. 22. So Salmon, art. cit. supra. As Xeander
points out (Ch. Hist. n. p. 136 note), Tertullian, had he known the story,
would certainly have published it. Yet he contrasts Marcion's chastity
with the real or supposed incontinence of his follower, Apelles (de Praescript.
c. xxx.).


xi] Mansion 207

source from which to contaminate the pure doctrine of the
Church. Irenaeus, who was his junior by some twenty or thirty
years, and may have known him personally, says indeed that
he was a disciple of Simon Magus 1 , but in this he may have
alluded merely to his position as the founder of a rival
Church. Hippolytus is silent about this ; but, true to his system
of attacking philosophy on account of its supposed connection
with heresy, says that Marcion is a disciple, not of Christ, but
of Empedocles 2 . There is much to be said for the view that
Marcion's heresy was so well and firmly established before the
end of the und century, that those who then denounced it
really knew little of its beginnings 3 . They are, however,
unanimous as to the more than Puritanical attitude adopted by
its founders. The Marcionites were allowed neither to drink
wine nor to eat flesh, and those believers in their tenets who
Were married had either to separate from their wives or to remain
among the catechumens until about to die, it being unlawful .
for them to receive baptism save on their deathbeds 4 .

Marcion's, indeed, seems to have been one of those ruggedly
logical and uncompromising natures, not to be led away by
reverence for authority or tradition, which appear once or
twice in the history of most religions ; and it is doubtless this
quality which has led Prof. Harnack, as did Neander in the last
century, to claim him as the first reformer of the Catholic
Church 5 . Like another Luther, Marcion declared that the
Church had become corrupted by the additions made by men
to the pure teaching she had received from her Founder, and
that only in return to her primitive faith was safety to be found.
For this primitive faith, he appealed, like the makers of the
German Reformation, to the words of Scripture, but he differed
from them most widely in the limitations that he placed upon
them. It was, he declared, impossible to find any attributes

1 Irenaeus, Bk i. c. 25, p-219, Harvey.

2 Hippolytus, op. tit. Bk vrr. c. 3, p. 370, Cruice.

3 So Salmon, art. tit., Renan, and others. This view, however, cannot
apply to Justin Martyr who was, as we have seen, his contemporary. See
n. 5. p. 205 supra.

4 See Salmon {Did. Christian Biog. s.v. Marcion) for authorities.

5 See Harnack' s article on Marcion in Encyc. Brit. (11th ed.).


208 Marcion [ch.

in common between the God of the Old Testament and the
Supreme (and benevolent) Being of whom Jesus announced
Himself the Son, and he therefore rejected the Old Testament
entirely. In the same way, he said that the Canonical Gospels
then received among Christians had become overlaid with
Jewish elements introduced by the Asiatic converts among whom
they were first circulated ; and that the narrative in the Gospel
according to Luke was alone trustworthy 1 . From this also,
he removed the whole series of traditions concerning the Birth
and Infancy of Jesus ; and made it begin in effect with the
words of the fourth chapter in which is described the coming-
down of Jesus to " Capernaum, a city of Galilee." These he
combined with the opening words of Luke iii., so that the event
was described as taking place in the " fifteenth year of the reign
of Tiberius Caesar 2 ." He also excised from the Gospel every-
thing which could indicate any respect shown by the Founder
of Christianity to the Torah or Law of the Jews, the allusions
to the Jewish traditions concerning Jonah and the Queen of
Sheba, the supposed fulfilment of the Jewish prophecies in the
person and acts of Jesus, and the statement that He took part
in the Paschal Feast. He further removed from it every passage
which represents Jesus as drinking wine or taking part in any
festivity, and in the Lord's Prayer he struck out the petition
for delivery from evil, while modifying the " Hallowed be thy
name ! " It has been suggested that in this last case he may
have given us an older version than that of the Canon 3 .

With the remainder of the New Testament, Marcion took
similar liberties. He rejected entirely the Acts of the Apostles,
The Apocalypse of St John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
Epistles generally called " Pastoral," as well as all those passing
under the names of St John, St James, St Peter and St Jude.

1 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk rv. c. 2. Marcion apparently knew nothing
of St John's Gospel, which may not have become public till after his death.
Had he done so, as Renan says {Utlgl. Chretienn*, p. 71), he would probably
have preferred it to any other, because of its markedly anti- Jewish tendency.

2 According to him, Jesus was not born of woman. Cf. Hippolytus,
op. cit. Bk vn. c. 31, pp. 383-384, Cruice.

3 The whole controversy is well summed up in Matter, Hist, du Gnost.
t. n. pp. 238-242.


xi] Marcion 209

For the Apostle Paul, however, Marcion had a profound
admiration, pronouncing him to be the only true follower of
Jesus, and he accepted with some alterations the ten epistles
which he thought could with confidence be attributed to him.
These were the Epistles to the Galatians, the two to the Corin-
thians, the one to the Romans, both those to the Thessalonians,
that to the Ephesians or, as he preferred to call it, to the
Laodiceans, and those to the Colossians, to Philemon, and to
the Philippians. From these ten epistles, he removed every-
thing which described the fulfilment of the prophecies of the
Jewish prophets, all allusions to the Parusia or Second Coming,
and some expressions which seemed to him to militate against
the asceticism that he himself favoured 1 . All these alterations
seem to have been set down by Marcion in a book to which he
gave the name of the Antitheses, and which contained his
statement of the incongruities apparent between the Old and
New Testaments. This book is now lost, and the details of
Marcion's emendations have in consequence to be picked out
from the treatise of Tertullian against him, the statements of
Epiphanius, and the anonymous discourse de Recta Fide which
is sometimes included in the works of Origen 2 .

If these alterations of the Scriptures generally received
depended on any independent tradition, or even upon a rational
criticism, they would be of the greatest use to modern textual
critics, who have in consequence hoped eagerly that some lucky
chance might yet give us a copy of Marcion's Gospel 3 . But
the Fathers make no allusion to any claim of the kind ; and in
the absence of Marcion's own words, it seems likely that his
alterations were merely dictated by the preoccupation regarding
the Divine nature which seems with him to have amounted to
a passion. Never, he said, could the jealous and irascible God

1 See Matter, op. cit. t. n. pp. 246-260, where Marcion's emendations
are given chapter by chapter und their sources cited.

2 Hahn, in his Antitheses Marcionis gnostici, Konigsberg, 1823, claimed
to have restored this book, while Hilgenfeld has examined the extant
remains of Marcion's Gospel in Das Evangelium Marcions. He attempted
to restore Marcion's Apostolicon in the Zeitschr. fur hist. Theol. 1855.

3 The Antitheses seem to have been seen by Photius in the xth century,
so that we need not despair.

l. n. 14


210 Marcion [ch.

of the Jews be identified with the loving and benevolent Spirit
whom Jesus called His Father. Hence there was not one God ;
but two Gods. One of these was the Supreme Being, perfect
in power as in goodness, whose name, as perhaps the Orphics
and the Ophites taught, was Love 1 . Too great to concern
Himself with sublunary things, and too pure, as Plato and
Philo had both said, to have any dealings with an impure and
sinful world, He remained seated apart in the third or highest
heaven, inaccessible to and unapproachable by man, like the
unknown Father of Valentinus and the other Gnostic sects 2 .
Below Him was the Creator, or rather the Demiurge or Fashioner
of the World, in constant conflict with matter, which he is
always trying unsuccessfully to conquer and subdue in accor-
dance with his own limited and imperfect ideas. Just, according
to Marcion, was the Demiurge, whom he identified with the
God of the Jews ; and it was this attribute of justice which
prevented him from being considered wholly evil in his nature,
as was Satan, the active agent of the matter with which the
Demiurge was always striving. Yet the Demiurge was the
creator of evil on his own showing 3 , and as such is entitled to
no adoration from man, whom he has brought into a world full
of evil. Man's rescue from this is due to the Supreme God,
who sent His Son Jesus Christ on earth that He might reveal
to mankind His Heavenly Father, and thus put an end to the
sway of the Demiurge.

That Jesus on His coming was seized and slain by the Jews,
with at least the connivance of the Demiurge. Marcion admitted.
But as this might seem like a defeat of the Supreme Being by
His inferior, he was forced to accept the theory called Docetism
which was in "favour with many other Gnostics. According to
this, the body of Jesus was not real flesh and blood, and had

1 Like the Eros-Phanes of the Orphics and the Ophite Agape. So
Pausanias, Bk rx. c. 27, says the Lycomidae sang in the Mysteries hymns to
Eros, which he had read, thanks to a 8a8oix°s or torch-bearer at Eleusis.

2 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk I. c. 2, says that Marcion is obliged to admit
the existence of a Creator, because his work is manifest ; but that he will
never be able to prove that of a higher God than he — a mode of reasoning
which might take him further than he intends.

3 Isaiah, xlv. 7.


xi] Mar don 211

indeed no actual existence, but was a phantasm which only
appeared to mankind in the likeness of a man 1 . Hence it
mattered nothing that this body, which did not really exist,
appeared to suffer, to be slain, and even to rise again. The
Supreme God was not mocked, and the resurrection of the body
was to Marcion a thing unthinkable.

In lesser matters, Marcion's dislike of the God of the Jews
is, perhaps, more marked. Man's body, according to him, was
made by the Demiurge out of matter 2 , but without any spark
from a higher world infused into it, as the Ophites and Valentinus
had taught. Hence man was naturally inclined to evil, and
the Law which the Demiurge delivered to him was more or less
of a snare. Man was sure to give way to the evil desires inherent
in matter, and on doing so became with all his race subject to
the power of matter and the evil spirits inhabiting it. It is
true that the Demiurge had devised a plan of salvation in the
shape of the Law of the Jews delivered to them on Sinai. But
this concerned one small people only, and it was but a fraction
of that community which could hope to observe it in all its
forms and ceremonies. Did they do so, the Demiurge would
provide for them a modified felicity in that region of Hades
called the Bosom of Abraham 3 . For those Gentiles, and even
for those Jews who from weakness or obstinacy did not obey the
Law, he had prepared punishment and, apparently, eternal
tortures. It is true that he promised the Jews a Messiah who
should lead them to the conquest of the earth, but this leader
certainly was not Jesus 4 ; and it is probable that Marcion
thought that His Mission had put it out of the power of the
Demiurge to fulfil any of these promises.

Possibly it was the same dislike of the Jews that led Marcion
to consider St Paul as the only real apostle of Jesus. The others,
he said, had overlaid the faith that they had received with
Jewish traditions ; but Paul, chosen by Jesus after His
Ascension 5 , had resisted their attempt to reintroduce the Law
of the Jews, and was, in his own words, an apostle sent not

1 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk nr. c. 8. 2 Neander, Ch. Hist. n. pp. 1 42 sqq.

3 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk m. c. 24.

4 Op. cit. Bk m. c. 4. Cf. Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 144.
6 Tertullian, op. cit. Bk v. c. 1.

14—2


212 Mar don [ch.

from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father
who raised Him from the dead 1 . Marcion also seems to have
laid stress upon St Paul's wonder that the Galatians were " so
soon removed from Him who hath called you to His grace to
another Gospel 2 ," with the suggestion that this second gospel
was the contrivance of the Demiurge ; and generally to have
accentuated the controversy between St Peter and St Paul
mentioned in the Epistle bearing their name 3 . From the same
Epistle to the Galatians, Marcion appears to have erased the
name of Abraham where his blessing is said to have " come on
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ 4 " ; and in like manner, to
have read into the passage in the First Epistle to the Corinth-
ians 5 , where it is said that " the world by wisdom knew not
God," expressions implying that it was the " Lord of this
World," i.e. the Demiurge, who was ignorant of the Supreme
Being 6 . As this ignorance of the Demiurge was a favourite
theme of the Ophites and other Gnostics, it is possible that
Marcion was more indebted to these predecessors of his than
modern commentators on his teaching are inclined to allow ;
but he perhaps justified his reading by tacking it on to the
passage in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians which says
that " the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them
which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ,
who is the image of God, should shine upon them 7 ." From the
Epistle to the Romans, in which he seems to have made very
large erasures 8 , Marcion draws further arguments in favour of
his contention that the Jews were kept in ignorance of the
Supreme God, relying upon texts like :

" For they [i.e. Israel] being ignorant of God's righteousness and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God 9 ."

So, too, in the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
Marcion rejects the passage which declares that Jesus shall

1 Gal. i. 1. Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk v., contains most of Marcion's
dealings with the Pauline Epistles.

2 Gal. L 6, 7. 3 Gal. ii. 11 sqq. * Gal. iii. 14.

6 1 Cor. i. 21. e Tertullian, adv. Mare. Bk v. c. 5.

7 2 Cor. iv. 4. Cf. Tertullian, op. cit. Bk v. c. 11.

8 Tertullian, op. cit. Bk v. c. 14. » Rom. x. 2, 3.


xi] Marcion 213

come "in flaming fire taking vengeance 1 ," which he considered
inconsistent with the benevolence of Himself and His Father.
We do not know whom he considered to be the Antichrist there
predicted, as Epiphanius leaves us in doubt whether Marcion
accepted the verses which go by the name of the Little
Apocalypse, but Tertullian seems to imply that Marcion may
have assigned this part to the Messiah of the Demiurge 2 . In
like manner, he is said to have altered the passage in the Epistle
to the Ephesians which speaks of " the mystery which from
the beginning of the world hath been hid in God 3 ," so as to
make it appear that the mystery was hid not in God, but from
the god who created all things, meaning thereby the Demiurge 4 .
Until some lucky discovery gives us the text of Marcion's
Antitheses it is difficult to say whether he has been correctly
reported by his adversaries, or whether, which is probable
enough, they have suppressed evidence brought forward by
him in support of these erasures and interpolations. That in
putting them forward, he did so in such a way as to leave many
an opening to a skilled controversialist is easy to believe, and
there are many passages in Tertullian's refutation which show
that his forensically-trained adversary took advantage of these
with more eagerness than generosity. But the noteworthy thing
about the long drawn out dialectic of Tertullian's treatise
Against Marcion, is the way in which Marcion throughout
resolutely abstains from any of the allegorical or figurative
interpolations of Scripture which we have seen so prevalent
among all the Gnostic writers from Simon Magus down to the
authors of the Pistis Sophia and its connected texts. Every-
where, it would seem, he took the Biblical texts that he quotes
at their literal meaning and never seems to have attempted to
translate any of them by trope or figure. In like manner, we
find him, so far as his adversaries' account goes, entirely free
from that preoccupation concerning the divisions and order of
the spiritual world which plays so large a part in the speculations
of the systems hitherto described. Nor does he show any
tendency to the deification of abstract ideas which is really at

1 2 Thess. i. 8. Cf. Tertullian, op. cit. Bk v. c. 16.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. xm. p. 676, Oehler ; Tertullian, loc. cit.

3 Ephes. iii. 8, 9. * Tertullian, op. cit. Bk v. c. 18.


214 Marc ion [ch.

the root of all Gnostic systems whether before or after Christ.
Nowhere does Marcion let fall an expression which could make
us think of the Sophia or Wisdom of God as a separate entity
or personified being, nor is the Logos of Plato and his Alexan-
drian admirers ever alluded to by him. Hence, he in no way
contributes to the growth, so luxuriant in his time, of mythology
and allegory 1 . In everything he exhibits the hard and unimagi-
native quality of the practical man.

These considerations have great bearing on the question of
the source of his heresy. Had he busied himself, like the
Gnostics, with elaborate descriptions of the invisible universe,
one would have thought that he owed something to the ancient
Egyptian theology, in which such speculations occupied nearly
the whole care of its professors. Had he, on the other hand,
studied to personify the attributes and qualities of the Supreme
Being, one would have been able to connect his teaching with
that of the Persian religion, in which, as will be seen in the next
chapter, the idea of such personification took the principal place.
This connection would have been natural enough, because the
province of Pontus, whence Marcion came, had long been
subject to the Persian power, and did not become Roman in
name until the reign of Nero. Yet no trace of such a connection
is even hinted at by adversaries perfectly well informed of the
main tenets of the Persian religion 2 . The inference is therefore
unavoidable that Marcion's views were original, and that they
were formed, as was said by a critic of the last century, by a
sort of centrifugal process, and after rejecting in turn all heathen
and Jewish elements, as well as most of the traditions which
had already grown up in the Catholic Church 3 . That Marcion

1 But see n. 2, p. 217, infra.

2 As is plain from the words of Plutarch quoting, as is generally thought,
Theopompus of Chios. See Is. et Os. co. xlvi., xlvh. Al-Biruni, Chronology,
p. 189, says indeed that both Bardesanes and Marcion borrowed from
Zoroaster. But this was eight centuries after Marcion's death, and we
have no evidence as to Al-Biruni's means of knowledge of his tenets.

3 Harvey's Irenaeus, i. p. cli. There is a curious resemblance to
Marcion's Demiurge in the Clementine Homilies, xx. c. 2, where the king
of this world who rules by law and rejoices in the destruction of sinners is
mentioned. But the Homilies are probably Ebionite and certainly, in the
form in which they have come down to us, later than Marcion.


xi] Mareion 215

was aware of this seems probable from the many efforts made
by him to be reconciled to the Church, or rather to convert the
whole Church to his way of thinking. In this, as in the em-
phasis which he laid on faith rather than knowledge as the
source of man's happiness in this world and the next, he again
anticipated in a most striking manner the views of the German
Reformers some fourteen centuries later 1 .

A like analogy is to be seen in the practices of the Marcionite
churches, so far at any rate as we may trust to the reports of
their orthodox opponents. True, as it would seem, to his
conviction of the complete failure of the scheme of the Demiurge,
Mareion set his face even more sternly than our own Puritans
of Cromwell's time against anything that should look like
enjoyment of the things of this world 2 . His followers were
enjoined to eat no meat, to abstain from wine even in the
Eucharist, which in the Marcionite churches was celebrated with
water, and to observe perpetually the strictest continence 3 .
The Sabbath was kept by them as a fast and, although this may
look like an obedience to Jewish custom, Epiphanius, who is our
sole authority for the observance, tells us that Mareion expressly
rejected this attribution 4 . Virginity was, according to him, the
only state of life for the true Christian ; and although he '
freely baptized unmarried men and eunuchs, he refused baptism
to married persons, as has been said, until they were divorced
or on the point of death 5 . To the enticements of the circus,
the gladiatorial shows, and the theatre, the Marcionites used,
according to Tertullian, to return the answer " God forbid ! " ;
and they made the same reply, he tells us, when invited to save
their lives in time of persecution by sacrificing a few grains of

1 Neander Antignortikus, Eng. ed. vol. n. p. 490, calls him the repre-
sentative of the Protestant spirit. In modern times, it is perhaps sufficient
to notice Harnack's predilection, as shown in his Dogmengeschichte, for
Mareion and his works. Foakes-Jackson, Some Christian Difficulties of the
Second and Twentieth Centuries (Hulsean Lectures), Cambridge, 1903,
pp. 19 sqq., thinks the study of the controversy between Mareion and
Tertullian should especially appeal to Modernists.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vii. c. 29, p. 378, Cruice.

3 Epiphanius, Haer. xlii. p. 556, Oehler. * Op. et loc. cit.
5 Tertullian, adt. Marc. Bk iv. c. 11 Cf. p. 207, supra.


216 Marcion [ch.

incense to the genius of the Emperor 1 . The reason of all this
austerity was apparently their contempt for the kingdom of
the Demiurge and their resolve to do nothing to prolong his rule.

Of the spread of the Marcionite heresy we have very little
more information than that given above. Prof. Harnack thinks
150-190 a.d. was the " golden age of the Marcionites 2 ," but
Tertullian evidently considered that some thirty years after
the last of these dates they were nearly as numerous as the
Valentinians, whom he speaks of as the largest sect of heretics 3 .
An inscription found in a Syrian village refers to a " synagogue "
of Marcionites occupying a site there in 318 a.d. 4 , which is, as
has been remarked, older than the earliest dated inscription of
the Catholic Church. Theodoret, too, about 440 a.d., boasts of
having converted more than a thousand of them, a statement
which afterwards swells into eight villages and supposes that
they were pretty thickly clustered together 5 . Yet they must
have led a miserable existence, being persecuted by the Imperial
authorities and their Christian brethren at once, and it is not
to be wondered at that Marcion himself addresses some followers
in a letter quoted by Tertullian as " my partners in hate and
wretchedness 6 ." It speaks volumes for their faith that they
continued to hold it in spite of everything.

This was the more to their credit that they were by no means
at one in matters of belief. In a passage quoted in a former
chapter, Tertullian says that the Marcionites thought it fair to
do what Marcion had done, that is, to innovate on the faith
according to their own pleasure. This is a rhetorical way of
putting it ; for the successors of Marcion seem to have differed

1 Tertullian, op. cit. Bk i. c. 27.

2 Harnack in Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th ed.) s.v. " Marcion."

3 He always couples Valentinus and Marcion together. Cf . dc Praescpt.
cc. xxix., xxx. Justin Martyr, Marcion's contemporary, says (First Apolog.
c. xxvi.) that "he is even now teaching men of every nation to speak
blasphemies." Renan, UE~gl. Chre'tienne, p. 363, thinks that the Marcionites
were " much the most numerous sect before Arius."

4 Foakes- Jackson, Hulsean Lectures, p. 108. Cf. Sanday, The Gospels
in the. 2nd Cent, Oxford, 1876, p. 236.

5 Theodoret, Epp. 113 and 145.

• crvpfuaovyLfvoi icai avvTaXaiirajpoi : Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk IV.
oc. 9, 30.


xi] Marcion 217

among themselves mainly upon one point, which was, in fact,
the number of " principles " which lay at the beginning of
things 1 . Thanks to his Stoical training, Marcion was forced to
assign a large part in the formation of the cosmos to Matter,
which he nevertheless thought to be essentially evil. But in
that case, how did it come into existence ? It surely could not
be the creation of the Supreme and benevolent Being whose
name was Love ; and if not, how did it come to exist independ-
ently of Him ? To these questions it is possible that the
essentially practical genius of Marcion saw no need to return
any answer, and was content to regard them, like Epicurus
before him, as insoluble problems. But his followers apparently
refused to do so ; and hence there arose considerable diversity of
opinion. According to an Armenian author of late date, Marcion
himself taught that there were three principles, that is, the
Supreme God, the Demiurge or Creator, and Matter, which he
regarded as a sort of spouse to the Demiurge 2 . This, however,

1 See Neander, Ch. Hist. vol. n. pp. 151 sqq. and Matter, Hist, du Ghnost.
t. n. pp. 298, 304.

2 Eznig of Goghp, from whose History of the Armenian Church quota-
tion has been made above. He says that Marcion taught that there were
three heavens, in the highest of which dwelt the Good God, in the next
the God of the (Jewish) Law, and in the third his angels. Below this lay
Hyle or Matter who existed independently and was female. From the
union of the God of the Law and Hyle, this earth was produced, after
which its Father retired to his own heaven, leaving the earth to the rule
of Hyle. When he desired to make man, Hyle supplied the dust of which
he was formed, into which the God of the Law breathed his own spirit.
Adam became the adorer of Hyle, upon which the God of the Law informed
him that, if he worshipped any other God but him, he should die. On
this Adam withdrew from Hyle, and this last, becoming jealous, made a
number of gods and filled the world with them. Hence all men were cast
into hell at death, until the Good God looked down from the highest
heaven, had pity on them, and sent his Son to deliver the " spirits in
prison," which He did directly He went down into hell after His own death.
After Jesus had revealed Himself to the Creator and received his confession
of ignorance, Jesus illuminated Paul and made him His apostle. It is
extremely unlikely that this story should have formed part of Marcion's
own teaching, although it may possibly have been told by some follower
of his of Semitic blood, or, as Salmon suggests, by Cerdo. It is to be found
in Neumann's translation of Eznig in the Zeitschr. fur hist. Theol. vol. iv.
and in the Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Marcion.


218 Marcion [ch.

is extremely unlikely in view of the unanimous assertion of the
Fathers nearer to him in point of time that he taught the
existence of two principles only ; and it is probable that the
theory of three principles, if seriously advanced, must have been
the work of one of his followers. Tertullian, whose sophistry in
combating Marcion's teaching in this respect is here particularly
apparent, points out, indeed, that if the Creator be held to be
self-originated and not himself the creature of the Supreme
God, there must be nine gods instead of two 1 ; but there is no
reason to suppose that Marcion ever troubled himself about such
dialectical subtleties.

The case was different with Apelles, who was certainly later
in date than Marcion and perhaps succeeded him in the head-
ship of the sect, either immediately or at one remove 2 .
According to Tertullian, Apelles left Rome for Alexandria
where he no doubt came in contact with the Gnostic opinions
there rife 3 . The slander that Tertullian sets on foot about him
to the effect that he forsook his master's continence and was
addicted to the company of women is unexpectedly refuted by
Tertullian's contemporary, Rhodo 4 . But Apelles must have
come in contact in Alexandria with the followers of Valentin us
and other Gnostic teachers, and their arguments no doubt
compelled him to modify the strict dualism of his master.
According to Rhodo, Apelles asserted that there was only one
principle of all things, which would imply that the Demiurge
was the creature of the Supreme God, and that Matter, instead
of being essentially evil and independent, must have been also
created by Him. Hippolytus, who was possibly a little later than
Rhodo, amplifies this by the statement that Apelles held the
Demiurge to be the fashioner of things coming into being

1 Tertullian, adv. Marc. Bk i. c. 16.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. tt.tt p. 688, Oehler, says Marcion was succeeded
by Lucian, whom Apelles followed. Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. cc. 37, 38,
p. 393, Cruice, is probably the source of Epiphanius' statement; but he does
not seem to have had any first-hand knowledge of the Marcionite heresy
or its chiefs, and is not here so good a witness as Tertullian, or Irenaeus,
who mentions neither Lucian nor Apelles.

3 Tertullian, de Praescript. c. xxx.

4 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk rv. c. 13.


xi] Mar don 219

(subsequent to him) 1 , and that there was a third god or angel of
a fiery nature who inspired Moses, and even a fourth who was
the cause of evil. In this the Gnostic idea of correspondence
or reflection of one world in another is manifest ; but it is evident
that it also approaches more nearly than does the uncompro-
mising dualism of Marcion himself to the teaching of the Catholic
Church. The same tendency to compromise is evident in
Apelles' willingness to use the books of both the Old and the
New Testament, quoting with regard to them, if Epiphanius is
to be believed, the apocryphal saying of Jesus "Be ye wise
money-changers ! " to be found in, among other works, the
Pistis Sophia 2 . Apelles seems also to have modified his master's
teaching with regard to the body of Jesus, which was, he said,
no phantasm, but a real body of flesh and blood assumed by
Him on His descent to the earth, and returned by Him piece by
piece on His Ascension to the different elements whence it was
drawn. His indebtedness in this to the sources from which the
author of the Pistis Sophia drew the same doctrine needs no
demonstration. Yet there is no reason to assert that Apelles
considered these " corrections " of Marcion's teaching in any
way essential or binding on his followers. He seems, too, to
have adopted one of the practices of the primitive Church in
paying attention to the ecstatical visions of " prophets " of
both sexes, his faith in the prophecies of a virgin named
Philumene being the foundation of Tertullian's slander on his
morals. There can be no doubt, however, that in spite of these
tendencies, he remained in essentials a true follower of Marcion,
and that like his master, he deprecated enquiry into insoluble
problems. " One ought not," he said, as Rhodo reports, " to
examine doctrine, but everyone should be steadfast in the faith.
Those who trust in Him that was crucified will be saved, if
only they do good works 3 ." Herein he also, like Marcion

1 ibrjfiiovpyi)(Tf ra yev6(j.(va. Hippolytus, op. tit. Bk VII. c. 37, p. 393,
Cruice.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. xlti. p. 694, Oehler. The same Logion or saying
is also found in Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk I. c. 28, in the Apostolical Constitutions,

ik II. c. 37, and in Clem. Horn. xvm. c. 20.

3 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. Bk v. c. 13.


'220 Marcion [ch.

himself, seems to have anticipated by many centuries the
teaching of the German Reformers.

Other followers of Marcion there were who, thanks to our
lack of information concerning them, are to us merely names.
Thus Tatian, who was according to tradition a disciple of Justin
Martyr but fell away from orthodoxy after his teacher's death,
seems to have held a kind of intermediate position between the
two great schools of heresy. While teaching, according to
Irenaeus, a system of aeons not unlike that of Valentinus, he
adopted in full the notions of Marcion as to abstinence from
marriage, from the eating of flesh, and from the use of wine,
and may have been the founder of a separate sect called
Encratites 1 . We hear, too, of one Prepon, " an Assyrian " or
native of Syria, a follower of Marcion, whom Hippolytus
represents as teaching that Jesus Himself was intermediate
between the good and evil deities and came down to earth to
be freed from all evil 2 . Rhodo also speaks 3 of Potitus and
Basilicus, followers of Marcion, who held fast to his doctrine of
two principles, while Syneros, as he affirms, led a school which
asserted that there were three " natures." Lucian also, who,
according to Hippolytus and Epiphanius, came in point of
time between Marcion and Apelles 4 , may have inclined to the
same doctrine, and taught, unlike Marcion, that there would be
a resurrection, not of the body nor of the soul, but of some part
of man which he also defined as being of a " third nature 5 ."

The conversion of Constantine put a violent end to any open
propagation of the doctrines of Marcion or his successors. In
the picturesque words of Eusebius " the lurking-places of the
heretics were broken up by the Emperor's commands, and the
savage beasts which they harboured were put to flight."
Hence, he goes on to tell us, many of those who had been
" deceived " crept secretly into the Church, and were ready to

1 Irenaeus, Bk I. c. 26, § 1, p. 220, Harvey. According to Hippolytus,
op. cit. Bk vm. c. 16, p. 416, Cruice, he had been a disciple of Justin Martyr.

2 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 31, p. 382, Cruice.

3 Eusebius, op. et loc. cit. supra.

4 Hippolytus, op. cit. Bk vn. c. 37, p. 393, Cruice ; Epiphatius, Haer
XLm. p. 688, Oehler.

6 Tertullian, de Resurrectione, c. n.


xi] Marcion 221

secure their own safety by every sort of dissimulation 1 . This
practice, as we have seen, had always been popular among the
Gnostics properly so called, whose religion consisted in part in
the knowledge of the formulas secretly imparted and preserved
with jealous care from all but the initiated. Although there is
no distinct proof that the same course was now adopted by the
Marcionites, there is some reason for thinking that this was the
case. The postponement of baptism noticed above must have
early divided the members of the Marcionite churches into
grades of which the largest was in an inferior position to the
others. It is unlikely that these catechumens, who might
witness but not share in the sacraments celebrated for their
higher-placed brethren, should have courted persecution on
behalf of a faith with which they were not fully entrusted.
The outbreak of the Arian controversy, which followed so
closely on the conversion of Constantine, also carried within the
Catholic Church those speculations about the Divine nature
which had hitherto formed a fruitful source of dissension among
the Marcionites themselves. With their synagogues and
meeting-places taken away from them and handed over to the
Catholics, many of them must have looked about for some
tolerated community which they could join, and of all that thus
offered themselves, the Catholic Church offered the greatest
inducements to them.

Yet another way was open to the convinced Marcionite who
could not bring himself to reject Marcion's view that the true
purport of Jesus' teaching had been obscured by the additions
of Judaizing apostles. The sect of the followers of Manes,
who began to show themselves in the Western part of the
Roman Empire shortly before Constantine's conversion, pro-
fessed a dualism more uncompromising than any that Marcion
had taught, and coupled with it an organization so skilful and
effective that it was able for some ten centuries longer to defy
the efforts of the rest of Christendom for its suppression. In
its division of all Manichaeans into the two great classes of
Perfect and Hearers it drew very close to Marcionite practice ;
and the liberty which it allowed the Hearers of outwardly

1 Eusebius, Vita Constantini, Bk ni. cc. 64-66.


222 Marcion [ch.

professing any faith they pleased must have enabled the
Marcionite who joined it to keep those articles of his former
creed most dear to him without coming into violent collision
with either Church or State. Hence the tradition seems well
founded which asserts that the majority of those Marcionites,
who did not become reconciled with the Catholic Church after
Constantine's alliance with it, joined the ranks of the Mani-
chaeans, and so ceased to exist as a separate community 1 .

The direct influence of Marcion's teaching upon that of the
Catholic Church was probably very small. In spite of the
efforts of recent writers to maintain the contrary 2 , it is difficult
to see that this first attempt, honest and sincere as it un-
doubtedly was, at the reformation of Christianity ever bore
fruit of lasting value. Its main principle which, as we have
seen, was the rejection of the Jewish scriptures and their bearing
upon the Mission of Jesus, has been ignored, since Marcion's
death as in his lifetime, by every other Church and sect pro-
fessing Christian doctrines. His common-sense view, that the
words of the Christian Bible must mean what their authors and
their contemporaries would have naturally taken them to mean,
and do not for the most part contain any deeply hidden or
allegorical significance, was in like manner repudiated by the
whole of Christendom, which, up to the latter part of the xixth
century, continued to construe the greater part of its sacred
books by trope and figure 3 . There remains then only the
asceticism and austerity that Marcion practised which the
orthodox could have borrowed from him. But, we have seen
that the religious abstinence from procreation, and from the
use of meat and wine, can be traced back to the appearance of
Orphism in Greece some five hundred years before the Birth of
Christ ; and if the Christian Church adopted, as it partly did,

1 So Salmon in Did. Christian Biog. and Harnack in Encyclopaedia
Britannica, both s.v. Marcion.

2 Hatch, H.L. p. 77, n. 1, quoting Harnack.

3 Hatch, op. cit. pp. 75, 76, shows that the allegorical method introduced
by the Gnostics in order to avoid the difficulty of reconciling the Old
Testament with the New was at first scornfully rejected, but was soon
adopted by the orthodox, and was pursued by both Catholic and Protestant
writers up to a few years ago.


xi] Marcion 223

these practices in a modified form, it was by way of inheritance
from a source which was much nearer to it than Marcion's
heresy. That many of Marcion's ideas have been revived in
our own day is likely enough, and this opinion has been put
forward with much skill and point by Dr Foakes-Jackson in
his Hulsean Lectures. But this is a case of revival rather than
of descent, and a reformer who has to wait some eighteen
centuries before his ideas meet with acceptance, may well be
held to have failed to influence after ages.

Notwithstanding this, the heresy of Marcion will always have
great interest for the student of the History of Religions. The
success — fugitive as such things go, but real enough for a
time — with which Marcion set up a Church over against that
tremendous polity which has been called without much exaggera-
tion " the very master- piece of human wisdom," would be alone
sufficient to make it precious in the eyes of those who are not
blind to the romance of history. To archaeologists it is the
more interesting that it is only in its direction that we are likely
to receive in future much additional light upon the struggles of
nascent Christianity with one category of its competitors. The
very voluminous writings of the other Gnostics were destroyed
by the triumphant Church with such minute care that the Coptic
texts described in the last chapter form the only relics of this
once enormous literature that have survived to us. The heathen
religions which for some time disputed the ground with the
Church have also left few traces partly for the same reason,
and partly because the secrecy to which they pledged their
votaries made it unlikely that many written documents of these
faiths would survive. But the Antitheses of Marcion were in
the hands of Photius in the xth century ; and, although it is
dangerous to prophesy in such matters, it is by no means
impossible that some lucky discovery within the borders of the
Turkish Empire may yet give us a MS. that will enable us to
reconstruct them. If that should ever be the case, we shall be
in a far better position than we are now to decide whether the
analogies between Marcionism and Protestantism that have been
detected of late years are essential or superficial.


CHAPTER XII


THE WORSHIP OF MITHRAS


Few of us, perhaps, are inclined to recognize that, from its
first establishment down to the Mahommedan Invasion of the
vnth century, the Roman Empire found itself constantly in the
presence of a bitter, determined, and often victorious enemy.
Alexander had conquered but had not destroyed the Persians ;
and, although the magic of the hero's personality held them
faithful to him during his too brief life, he was no sooner dead
than they hastened to prove that they had no intention of
tamely giving up their nationality. Peucestas, the Royal body-
guard who received the satrapy of Persia itself on his master's
death, and was confirmed in it at the first shuffling of the cards
at Triparadisus, found it expedient to adopt the Persian
language and dress, with the result that his subjects conceived
for him an affection only equal to that which they afterwards
showed for Seleucus 1 . Later, when the rise of the Parthian
power under Arsaces brought about the defeat of Seleucus II
Callinicus, the opposition to European forms of government
found a centre further north 2 , whence armies of lightly-equipped
horsemen were able to raid up to the Eastern shores of the
Mediterranean 3 . Thanks probably to the knowledge of this
support in reserve, when Western Asia found the military power
of the Greek kings becoming exhausted by internecine wars,
she began to throw off the alien civilization that she had in

1 Droysen, Hiet. de VHellenisme, t. n. pp. 33, 289.

2 Op. cit. in. pp. 351, 352; 439, 450. A.s Droysen points out, in this
respect there was no practical difference between Parthian and Persian.

3 As in b.c. 41, when the Parthians under Pacorus " rushed " Palestine.
See Morrison, The Jews under the Romans, p. 58, for authorities. Cf.
Chapter v. Vol. I. p. 101, n. 3, supra.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 2'2h

part acquired, and to return more and more to Persian ways 1 .
When the Romans in their turn set to work to eat up the
enfeebled Greek kingdoms, they quickly found themselves in
presence of a revived nationality as firmly held and nearly as
aggressive as their own, and henceforth Roman and Parthian
were seldom at peace. The long struggle with Mithridates, who
gave himself out as a descendant of Darius 2 , taught the Romans
how strong was the reaction towards Persian nationality even
in Asia Minor, and the overthrow of Crassus by the Parthians
convinced his countrymen for a time of the folly of pushing
their arms too far eastwards.

With the establishment of the Empire, the antagonism
between Rome and Persia became still more strongly marked,
and a struggle commenced which lasted with little intermission
until the foundation of the Mahommedan Caliphate. In this
struggle the advantage was not always, as we should like to
think, on the side of the Europeans. While Augustus reigns,
Horace boasts, there is no occasion to dread the " dreadful
Parthians 3 " ; but Corbulo is perpetually righting them, and
when Nero commits suicide, the legend immediately springs up
that the tyrant is not dead, but has only betaken himself beyond
the Euphrates to return with an army of Rome's most dreaded
enemies to lay waste his rebellious country 4 . Towards the close
of the first Christian century, Trajan, fired, according to Gibbon,
by the example of Alexander, led an army into the East and
achieved successes which enabled him to add to his titles that
of Parthicus 5 ; but the whole of his Oriental conquests were
given back by the prudent Hadrian on his succession to the
throne. During the reign of Marcus Aurelius, Avidius Cassius

1 This is shown by, among other things, the claims of the kings of
Armenia, Cappadocia, and Pontus to be descended from the seven heroes
who delivered Persia from the Magians after the death of Cambyses. See
Droysen, op. cit. n. p. 519 ; m. pp. 82, 83.

2 Droysen, op. cit. m. p. 83.

3 Horace, Odes, Bk rv. Ode 5. Cf. his Carmen Secvlare.

4 Renan, V Antichrist, pp. 317, 318, for authorities. A critical essay
on the Neronic myth and its congeners is to be found in Dr Charles' Ascension
of Isaiah, p. li sqq. .

5 Gibbon, Decline and Fall (Bury's ed.), vol. I. pp. 5, 205.

l. n. 15


226 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

obtained some solid victories on the frontier ; but Macrinus is
said to have bought off the Parthians with a bribe of nearly
two millions of money. The rise of the Sassanian house and
the retransfer of the leadership from the Parthians to their
kinsmen in Persia proper brought about the reform of the Persian
religion, and added another impulse to the increasing strength
of Persian national feeling. Alexander Severus may have
gained some successes in the field over Ardeshir or Artaxerxes,
the restorer of the Persian monarchy 1 ; but in the reign of the
last named king's son and successor Sapor, the capture of the
Emperor Valerian with his whole army, and the subsequent
ravaging of the Roman provinces in Asia by the victors, showed
the Republic how terrible was the might of the restored kingdom 2 .
Aurelian, the conqueror of Palmyra, did much to restore the
prestige of Roman arms in the East ; and although he was
assassinated when on the march against Persia, the Emperor
Carus shortly after led a successful expedition into the heart of
the Persian kingdom 3 . In the reign of Diocletian, indeed, the
Persians lost five provinces to the Romans 4 ; but under
Constantine the Great the Romans were again vanquished in
the field, and the Persians were only prevented by the heroic
resistance of the fortified town of Nisibis and an incursion into
their Eastern provinces of tribes from Central Asia from again
overrunning the Asiatic possessions of Rome 5 .

Henceforward, the history of the long contest between the
two great empires — " the eyes," as the Persian ambassador
told Galerius, " of the civilized world 6 ," is the record of almost
uninterrupted advance on the part of Persia and of continual
retreat on the side of Rome. The patriotic enthusiasm of a
Julian, and the military genius of a Belisarius, aided by the
dynastic revolutions common among Oriental nations, might for

1 Gibbon, op. cit. I. p. 209. Severus' victories are doubted by Gibbon ;
and Prof. Bury apparently supports his author.

2 Op. cit. i. pp. 269, 270. Prof. Bury in his Appendix 17 points out
that the whole history of Valerian's capture is still very obscure.

3 Op. cit. I. p. 340.

* Op. cit. I. p. 375. See Prof. Bury's note 83 on page cited.
6 Op. cit. n. pp. 228-231.
« Op. cit. L p. 373.


xii] The Worship of Mithras 227

a time arrest the progress of the conquering Persians ; but, bit
by bit, the Asiatic provinces slipped out of the grasp of the
European masters of Constantinople. In 603 a.b., it looked as
if Persia were at length in the position to deliver the final blow
in a war which had lasted for more than five centuries. By the
invasion of Chosroes and his successive captures of Antioch,
Jerusalem, and Egypt, it seemed as if the Persians had restored
the world-empire of Cambyses and Darius ; but the Persians
then discovered, as Xerxes had done a millennium earlier, how
dangerous it is for Orientals, even when flushed by conquest,
to press Europeans too far. The Roman Emperor Heraclius,
who never before or afterwards gave much proof of military or
political capacity, from his besieged capital of Constantinople
collected an army with which he dashed into Persia in a manner
worthy of Alexander himself. After six brilliant campaigns he
dictated to the Persians a triumphant peace in the very heart
of their empire 1 . A few years later, and its shattered and
disorganized remains fell an easy prey to the Mahommedan
invaders.

The effect of this long rivalry might have been expected to
produce in the Romans during its continuance a hearty dislike
of the customs and institutions of the nation opposed to them ;
but almost the exact contrary was the result. It may be argued
that Rome's proved skill in government was in no small
measure due to her ready adoption of all that seemed to her
admirable in the nations that she overcame. Or it may be that
the influence which the memory of Alexander exercised over all
those who succeeded to his empire led them to imitate him in
his assumption of Persian manners. The fact remains that, long
before the division of the Roman Empire into East and West,
the Romans displayed a taste for Oriental luxury and magnifi-
cence which seems entirely at variance with the simplicity and
austerity of the republican conquerors of Carthage. It is
hardly too much to say that while Alexander's conscious aim
was to make Asia Greek, the Romans, on possessing themselves
of his Asiatic conquests, allowed themselves to become to a

1 Gibbon, op. tit., v. pp. 78 sqq. Winwood Reade, Martyrdom of Man,
pp. 249, 250, tells the story excellently and dramatically.

15—2


228 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

great extent " Medized," and showed an unexpected admiration
for the habits and culture of Alexander's Persian subjects.

It may of course be said that this was in external matters
only, and that the " Persian furniture " which excited Horace's
wrath 1 might if it stood alone be looked upon as merely a
passing fashion ; but the Court ceremonial introduced by
Diocletian argues a steady tendency towards Persian customs
and forms of government that must have been in operation for
centuries. The household of a Julian Caesar was no differently
arranged from that of a Roman noble of the period, and his
title of Prince of the Senate showed that he was only looked
upon as the first of his equals. But Diocletian was in all respects
but language a Persian emperor or Shah, and his style of " Lord
and God," his diadem, his silken state dress, the elaborate
ritual of his court, and the long hierarchy of its officials, were
all designed to compel his subjects to recognize the fact 2 . As
usual, the official form of religion in the Roman Empire had
for some time given indications of the coming change in the
form of government. The sun had always been the principal
natural object worshipped by the Persians, and a high-priest
of the Sun-God had sat upon the Imperial throne of Rome in
the form of the miserable Heliogabalus. Only $3 years before /
Diocletian, Aurelian, son of another Sun-God's priestess and as
virile and rugged as his predecessor was soft and effeminate,
had also made the Sun-God the object of his special devotion
and of an official worship. Hence Diocletian and his colleague
Galerius were assured in advance of the approval of a large part
of their subjects when they took the final plunge in 307 a.d.,
and proclaimed Mithras, " the Unconquered Sun-God," the
Protector of their Empire 3 .

In spite of this, however, it is very difficult to say how

1 Horace, Odes, Bk I. Ode 38.

2 Gibbon, op. cit. I. p. 382. Cf. Cumont, Religions Orientates, p. 171.
Lactantius, de Mort. Persecutor, c. xxi., says that this was the conscious
aim of Galerius. Although his authority in such a matter is suspect, there
can be little doubt of the fact.

3 The actual decree of the emperors is given in Cumont, Textes et
Monuments, t. n. Inscr. 367. The date should probably be 304 a.d. See
n. on Table of Dates, Vol. i. supra.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 229

Mithras originally became known to the Romans. Plutarch
says indeed that his cult was first introduced by the Cilician
pirates who were put down by Pompey 1 . This is not likely to
be literally true ; for the summary methods adopted by these
sea-robbers towards their Roman prisoners hardly gave much
time for proselytism, while most of the pirates whom Pompey
spared at the close of his successful operations he deported to
Achaea, which was one of the few places within the Empire
where the Mithraic faith did not afterwards show itself. What
Plutarch's story probably means is that the worship of Mithras
first came to Rome from Asia Minor, and there are many facts
which go to confirm this. M. Cumont, the historian of Mithra-
ism, has shown that, long before the Romans set foot in Asia,
there were many colonies of emigrants from Persia who with
their magi or priests had settled in Asia Minor, including in that
phrase Galatia, Phrygia, Lydia, and probably Cilicia 2 . When
Rome began to absorb these provinces, slaves, prisoners, and
merchants from them would naturally find their way to Rome,
and in time would no doubt draw together for the worship of
their national deities in the way that we have seen pursued
by the worshippers of the Alexandrian Isis and the Jewish
exiles. The magi of Asia Minor were great supporters of
Mithridates, and the Mithridatic wars were no doubt responsible
for a large number of these immigrants.

Once introduced, however, the worship of Mithras spread
like wild-fire. The legions from the first took kindly to it, and
this is the less surprising when we find that many of them
were recruited under the earliest emperors in Anatolian states
like Commagene, where the cult was, if not indigenous, yet of
very early growth 3 . Moreover the wars of the Romans against
the Persians kept them constantly in the border provinces of the
two empires, where the native populations not infrequently
changed masters. The^ enemy's town that the legions besieged
one year might therefore give them a friendly reception the next ;
and there was thus abundant opportunity for the acquaintance

1 Plutarch, Vit. Pomp. c. xxiv.

2 Cumont, Eel. Or. pp. 167, 168 ; 173, 174 ; id. T. el M. I. pp. 9, 10.
Cf. P.8.B.A. 1912, pp. 127, 128. 3 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 247.


230 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

of both sides with each others' customs. When the Roman troops
marched back to Europe, as was constantly the case during the
civil wars which broke out on the downfall of the Julian house,
they took back with them the worship of the new god whom they
had adopted, and he thus became known through almost the
whole of the Roman Empire 1 . " From the shores of the
Euxine to the north of Brittany and to the fringe of the Sahara 2 ,"
as M. Cumont says, its monuments abound, and, he might have
added, they have been met with also in the Egyptian Delta, in
Babylon, and on the northern frontiers of India. In our own
barbarous country we have found them not only in London and
York, but as far west as Gloucester and Chester and as far
north as Carlisle and Newcastle 3 . The Balkan countries, like
Italy, Germany, Southern France, and Spain, are full of them ;
but there was one part of the Roman Empire into which they
did not penetrate freely. This was Greece, where the memories of
the Persian Wars long survived the independence of the country,
and where the descendants of those who fought at Salamis,
Marathon, and Thermopylae would have nothing to do with a
god coming from the invaders' fatherland. It is only very lately
that the remains of Mithras-worship have been discovered at
the Piraeus and at Patras, in circumstances which show pretty
clearly that it was there practised only by foreigners 4 .

Notwithstanding this popularity, it is not easy to say exactly
what god Mithras' European worshippers considered him to be.
If length of ancestry went for anything in such matters, he
might indeed claim a greater antiquity than any deity of the
later Roman Pantheon, with the single exception of the Alexan-
drian gods. Mithras was certainly worshipped in Vedic India,
where his name of Mitra constantly occurs in the sacred texts
as the " shining one," meaning apparently the material sun 5 .
He is there invoked in company with Varuna, generally con-

1 Dill, Roman Society from Nero to Marcus AureJius, pp. 593-597.

2 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 248.

3 For the list see Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 258, n. 7. He thinks the
worship was first introduced here by the legions from Germany.

* Avezou and Picard, ** Bas-relief Mithriaque," R.H.R. t. lxiv. (Sept.
Oct. 1911), pp. 179 sqq.

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 223, n. 2.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 231

sidered the god of the sky, and therefore according to some,
the prototype of the Greek Zeus and the Latin Jupiter 1 . His
appearance in a similar connection in the sacred books of the
Persians led the founders of the comparative study of religion
to think that he must have been one of the primitive gods of
their hypothetical Aryan race, and that his worship must go
back to the imaginary time when Persians and Hindus dwelt
side by side in the plains of Cashmere. But this theory is
giving way before proof that the original home of the Indo-
European race was Europe, and has been badly shaken by the
discovery at Boghaz Keui of tablets showing that the gods
Mithra and Varuna were gods of the Mitannians or Hittites 2 at
some date earlier than 1500 B.C., and therefore long before the
appearance of the Persians in history. If the worship of
Mithras were not indigenous in Western Asia, it may therefore
well have come there independently of the Persians 3 .

There is no doubt, however, that the roots of Mithras-
worship went very far down into the Persian religion. In the
Yashts or hymns which are the earliest evidence of primitive
Iranian beliefs, Mithra — to use the Avestic spelling of his name —
frequently appears, not indeed as the material sun, but as the
" genius of the heavenly light " which lightens the whole
universe 4 and is the most beneficent among the powers of
Nature. Mithras is not here, however, the Supreme Being,
nor even the highest among the gods benevolent to man. This
last place is occupied in the Zend Avesta by Ahura Mazda,

* Herodotus, Bk i. c. 131. Cf. F. Max Miiller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 276.
The similarity of name between Varuna and the Greek Ouranos is fairly
obvious. Prof. Hope Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, 1913, pp. 391, 392, n. 3,
argues that the Persian god of the sky was called Dyaush or Zeus.

2 Certainly of the Mitannians, who, according to Prof. Hugo Winckler,
were one of the two main branches of the Hittites, and a Syrian people.
See his report on Excavations at Boghaz Keui in the Mitteilungen of the
Deutsche Orient-GeseUschaft for 1907. The text is given in the J.R.A.S.
for 1910, pp. 723 sqq.

3 H we accept the latest theory which makes Russia the original home
of the Aryan race (see Zaborowski, Lex Peuples Aryens d'Asie et cF Europe
Paris, 1908, p. 424) it may have even had a European origin.

* Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 225.


232 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

" the omniscient lord," who appears to be the Persian form of
Varuna, the god of the sky whom we have seen associated with
Mitra in the Vedas 1 . Nor is Mithras in the Zend Avesta one
of the six Amshaspands, the deified abstractions or personified
attributes of Ahura Mazda, who, in the later developments of
the Persian religion, occupy towards him much the same position
that the " Roots " of Simon Magus and the Aeons of the
Pleroma among the Gnostics do towards the Boundless Power
or the Ineffable Bythos 2 . In the later Avestic literature, he
appears as the chief of the Izeds or Yazatas, a race of genii
created by Ahura Mazda, who are the protectors of his universe
and the helpers of mankind in their warfare against the powers
of darkness 3 . In the latest as in the earliest Persian view of
the personality of Mithras, therefore, it is plain that he occupies
an intermediate position between the Creator and man.

It is not, however, in the religion associated with the name
of Zoroaster that we must look for the origin of Mithraism.
The date of the sacred books of Mazdeism and the historical
existence of Zoroaster himself have recently been brought down
to as late as the vnth century B.C. 4 and the appearance in Asia
of the Persian tribes as conquerors, whereas Mithras was, as
we have 6een, worshipped in Asia Minor nearly a millennium
earlier. Moreover, the strict dualism which set Ahriman, the
god of darkness and evil, in eternal and perhaps equal opposition
to Ormuzd, the god of light and goodness, seems to have been
unknown before the Sassanid reform in 226 a.d., by which time
the worship of Mithras in Europe was at its apogee 5 . M.
Cumont is, therefore, doubtless right when he thinks that
Mithraism was derived not from Mazdeism, but from Magism

1 James Darmesteter, Essais Orientaux, Paris, 1883, p. 113.

8 Casartelli, La Philosophic Religieuse du Mazdeisme sous les Sassanides,
pp. 17, 18. 3 Op. cit. p. 73.

4 660-583 B.c. See A. V. Williams Jackson, Zoroaster, N.Y. 1901,
p. 15 and Appx n. and m. Cf. D. Menant, "Parsis et Parsisme,"
Conferences an Muse'e Ouimet (Bibl. de Vulgarisation), 1904, t. xvi. lere
Ptie, p. 149.

8 Darmesteter, Le Zend Avesta (Annales du Musee Guimet), Paris, 1892,
p. xxvii, for dates. West, Pahlavi Texts, pt i. (Sacred Books of the East),
pp. lxviii-lxix ; pt n. p. xxiv. Cf. Hope Moulton, op. cit. pp. 126, 127.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 233

or the religion of the Magi, the tribe of Medes whose domination
was put an end to by Darius the son of Hystaspes, and whose
name was afterwards given to a priestly caste and has passed
into our own language as the root of the word " magic."

That these Magi practised a religion different from that
taught in the Avestic literature is plain enough. The romantic
story told by Herodotus of the Magian who seized the throne
of Persia during Cambyses' absence in Egypt on the pretence
that he was the king's brother whom Cambyses had privily put
to death 1 , is fully confirmed by Darius' trilingual inscription on
the Rock of Behistun, first copied and deciphered by Sir Henry
Rawlinson and lately published in elaborate form by the British
Museum 2 . Darius here narrates how " a certain man, a Magian,
Gaumata by name... lied unto the people" (saying) 'I am
Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, the brother of Cambyses.' Then
all the people revolted from Cambyses and went over to him,
even Persia and Media and the other provinces." Darius goes
on to record that " thereupon Cambyses died by his own hand 3 ,"
that the seven Persian nobles overthrew the pretender much
in the way described by Herodotus, and that " I rebuilt the
temples of the gods, which that Gaumata, the Magian, had
destroyed. I restored that which had been taken away as it
was in the days of old 4 ." This he tells us he did " by the grace
of Ahura Mazda," and that by this grace he always acted.
The memory of these events was kept up by the festival of the
Magophonia or Massacre of the Magi which was yearly cele-
brated in Persia and during which no Magus dared show himself
in the streets 5 . Darius' words show that there was a religious
as well as a dynastic side to the Magian revolt, though whether
the false Smerdis restored the old worship of the land, which
he found in danger of being supplanted by Zoroastrianism or
the worship of Ahura Mazda, may still be doubtful. In any
event, the reformation or counter-reformation made by Darius

1 Herodotus, Bk m. c. 61 sqq.

2 The Sculptures and Inscriptions of Darius the Great at Behistun, British
Museum Publications, 1907.

3 Op. cit. pp. 8, 9. 4 Op. cit. p. 14.

5 Maspero, Hist. Ancienne des Peupies de V Orient Classique, Paris, 1899,
t. m. p. 674 ; Rawlinson, History of Herodotus, 1862, vol. rr. p. 458.


J


234 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

did not succeed in entirely uprooting the old Magian faith, for

I Herodotus speaks of the Magi as still being in his time the

' priestly caste among the Persians, and as acting as diviners and

sacrificers to the Achaemenian kings who ruled Persia up to

Alexander's Conquest 1 .

The Magian religion as it appears in Herodotus and other
Greek authors, however, seems to have shown none of the
hostility to the powers of darkness so apparent in the religious
literature collected by the Sassanian kings. " The whole
circuit of the firmament " was, according to Herodotus, their
greatest god or Zeus ; and he says that they also "sacrifice to
the sun and moon, to the earth, to fire and water, and to the
winds " ; but that " they do not, like the Greeks, believe the
gods to have the same nature as men 2 ." He also tells us that
later they borrowed from the Arabians and the Assyrians the
worship of a goddess whom he calls Mitra, and although he is
probably wrong as to the origin and sex of this deity, his evidence
shows that Semitic admixture counted for something in the
Magian worship. In other respects, the Magian seems to have
been a primitive faith given up to the worship of the powers
of nature or elements, which it did not personify in the
anthropomorphic manner of either the Semites or the Greeks,
and to have paid little attention to public ceremonies or ritual.
It follows therefore that, like the religions of many uncivilized
people of the present day, it would draw no very sharp dis-
tinction between good and evil gods, and would be as ready to
propitiate or make use of the evil, that is those hostile to man,
as the good or benevolent. Plutarch, who describes the religion
of the Magi more than three centuries after Herodotus, when
the name of Zoroaster the Persian prophet and the dualistic
belief favoured by his teaching had long been popularly known
in the West, says that the Magi of his time held Mithras to be
the " Mediator " or intermediary between " Oromazes " or Light
on the one hand, and " Areimanios " or Darkness and Ignorance
on the other, and that they used to make bloody sacrifices
to the last-named in a place where the sun never comes 3 .

1 Herodotus, Bk i. c. 140 ; vn. c. 113. 2 Op. cit. Bk I. c. 131.

3 Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. xlvl


xn] The Worship of Mithras 235

It is easy to see how such a cult, without the control of public
ceremonies and with its unabashed traffic with the powers of
evil, would be likely to degenerate into compulsion or magic.

There was, however, another popular superstition or belief
which, about the time when Mithraism made its appearance in
Europe, had spread itself over Western Asia. This was the
idea that the positions and changes of the heavenly bodies
exercise an influence over the affairs of the world and the lot
both of kingdoms and individual men. It probably began in
Babylonia, where the inhabitants had from Sumerian times
shown themselves great observers of the stars, and had been
accustomed to record the omens that they drew from their
motions for the guidance of the kings 1 . This kind of divination
—or astrology to call it by a familiar name — received a great
impulse after Alexander's Conquest, in the first place from the
break up of the Euphratean priestly colleges before referred to,
and the driving out of the lesser priests therein to get their own
living, and then from the fact that the scientific enquiry and
mathematical genius of the Greeks had made the calculation of
the positions of the heavenly bodies at any given date and hour
a fairly simple matter to be determined without direct observa-
tion 2 . It was probably no mere coincidence that the Chaldaei
and the Mathematici, as the astrologers called themselves,
should have swarmed at Rome under just those emperors in
whose reigns Mithraism began to push itself to the front 3 .

While we may be sure that these factors, the religion of the
Magi, the practice of magic, and the astrological art, all counted
in the composition of the worship of Mithras, we yet know but
very little of its tenets. No work has come down to us from
any devotee of Mithras which will give us the same light on
the way his worshippers regarded him that the romance of

1 As in the book called "The Illumination of Bel " found in Assur-
banipal's Library at Kuyunjik. See Sayce, "Astronomy and Astrology
of the ancient Babylonians and Assyrians," T.S.B.A. vol. ra. pp. 146 sqq.
Cf. Chapter III, vol. i. p. 114 supra for examples.

2 That tables were actually used for this purpose, was shown in the
Pall Mall Magazine for August, 1896 and with more detail in Star -Lore
for April, 1897.

3 Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, pp. 449, 450, for authorities.


236 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

Apuleius and the encomium of Aelius Aristides have cast on
the mental attitude of the devotees of the Alexandrian cult.
The extensive books of Eubulus and Pallas on Mithras and the
history of his worship, which Porphyry tells us were extant from
the reign of Hadrian down to his own time 1 , are entirely lost,
and our only source of information, except a very few scattered
notices in the Fathers and in profane writers like the Emperor
Julian and Porphyry himself, are the sculptures and inscriptions
which have been found in his ruined chapels. These texts and
monuments the scholarly care of M. Cumont has gathered into
two large volumes, which will always remain the chief source
from which later enquirers must draw their materials 2 . From
their study he comes to the conclusion that, in the religion of
Mithras, there figured above him the Mazdean gods of good and
evil respectively called in the Zend Avesta Ahura Mazda and
Angro Mainyus, or in more familiar language, Ormuzd and Ahri-
man. Behind and above these again, he would place a Supreme
Being called Zervan Akerene or Boundless Time, who seems to
be without attributes or qualities, and to have acted only as the
progenitor of the opposing couple. This is at first sight very
probable, because the Orphic doctrine, which, as we have seen,
made Chronos or Time the progenitor of all the gods, was widely
spread in Asia Minor before Alexander's Conquest, and the
Persian colonies formed there under his successors must there-
fore have come in frequent contact with this most accommoda-
ting of schools 3 . Traditions of a sect of Zervanists in Western
Asia, who taught that all things came from Infinite Time, are
also to be found 4 . But most of these are recorded after
Mithraism had become extinct ; and M. Cumont' s proofs of the

1 Circa 270 a.d. See Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 26.

2 See Chap. Ill, Vol. I. p. 103, n. 4, supra.

3 See Chap. IV, Vol. I. p. 123 supra.

4 Cumont, T. et M. i. pp. 19-20, relies on a passage quoted by
Damascius from a certain Eudemos who may or may not be Eudemos of
Rhodes (Alexander's contemporary) that, " of the Magi and all the warrior
[or Medic: apemv] race some call the intelligible " [i.e. that which can be
apprehended by the mind only and not by the senses] " and united
universe Topos (place), while others of them call it Chronos (Time), and
that from this universe are to be distinguished a good God and evil demon ;


xn] The Worship of Mithras 237

existence of this dogma in the European religion of Mithras can
be reduced on final analysis to a quotation from a treatise by
Theodore, the Christian bishop of Mopsuestia who died in
428 a.d., directed, as it would seem, against the " Magi " of
his time, in which he admits that their dogmas had never been
written, and that the sectaries in question, whom he calls
Magusaeans, said " sometimes one thing and deceived them-
selves, and sometimes another and deceived the ignorant 1 ."
M. Cumont's identification of the lion-headed statue often found
in Mithraic chapels with the Supreme God of the system has
been shown elsewhere to be open to serious question, and the
figure itself to be susceptible of another interpretation than
that which he would put upon it 2 . On the whole, therefore,
while M. Cumont's mastery of his subject makes it very
dangerous to differ from him, it seems that his theory of a
Boundless Time as the pinnacle of the Mithraist pantheon
cannot be considered as proved.

Whether Ormuzd and Ahriman played any important part
in the Roman worship of Mithras is also doubtful. With regard
to the first-named, both Greeks and Romans knew him well and
identified him unhesitatingly with Zeus and Jupiter 3 . Hence
we should expect to find him, if represented at all on the
Mithraic sculptures, with the well-known features, the thunder-
bolt, and the eagle, which long before this time had become the
conventional attributes of the Roman as well as of the Homeric
father of gods and men. We are not entirely disappointed, for
we find in a bas-relief formerly in a chapel of Mithras at Sissek

or as some say, prior to these, Light and Darkness." " Both the one and
the other school therefore," Damascius goes on, " after the undivided
Nature, make the double series of the higher powers distinct from one
another, of one of which they make Oromasdes the leader, and of the
other Arimanius." It seems evident from the above words, that only a
certain sect of the Magi in the time of this Eudemos put Time at the head
of their pantheon. Cf. Cory's Ancient Fragments, 1832, pp. 318, 319.

1 Cumont, T.et M. I. p. 19.

2 See "The Lion-headed God of the Mithraic Mysteries," P.S.B.A.
1912, pp. 125-142, and p. 251 infra.

3 Darmesteter, Ormuzd et Ahriman, Paris, 1877, p. 1, quoting a lost
book of Aristotle mentioned by Diogenes Laertiu?.


238 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

(the ancient Sissia in Pannonia) and now in the Museum at
Agram, the bull-slaying scene in which Mithras figures and
which will be presently described, surmounted by an arch od
which is ranged Jupiter seated on his throne, grasping the
thunderbolt, wielding the sceptre, and occupying the place of
honour in a group of gods among whom we may distinguish
Mars and Mercury 1 . In another bas-relief of the same scene,
now at the Rudolfinum in Klagenfurt, he is depicted in a similar
position in an assembly of the gods, which although much
mutilated seems to show Zeus or Jupiter in the centre with
Hera or Juno by his side 2 . But the most conclusive of these
monuments is the great bas-relief found at Osterburken in the
Odenwald, wherein the arch surmounting the usual bull-slaying
scene contains an assembly of twelve gods with Zeus in the
centre armed with thunderbolt and sceptre, while around him
are grouped Apollo, Ares, Heracles, Hera, Athena, Aphrodite,
Nike, Poseidon, Artemis, Hades, and perhaps Persephone 3 .
When by the side of these we put the many inscriptions left by
the legionaries to "the holy gods of the fatherland, to Jupiter
best and greatest, and to the Unconquered One" ; to " Jupiter
best and greatest, and to the divine Sun, the Unconquered Sun,"
and other well-known names of Mithras, there can be no doubt
that his worshippers used to adore him together with the head
of the Roman Pantheon, and that they considered Mithras in
some way the subordinate of or inferior to Jupiter 4 . Yet there

1 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 326 and Fig. 193.

2 Op. cit. n. p. 336, reproduced in the article in theP.S.B.A. quoted inn.2,
p. 237 supra. In the collection of busts of the gods on the arch surrounding
the Tauroctony at Bologna, the head of Zeus wearing the modius of Serapis
appears with six others who, reading from left to right, are the Sun, Saturn,
Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars and the Moon. Although Jupiter here
occupies the centre and place of honour, it is probable that both he and the
other gods are here merely symbols of the planets. See Cumont, op. cit.
n. p. 261 and Fig. 99.

3 Op. cit. n. p. 349, and PI. vr. So in the bas-relief of Sarrebourg,
unfortunately much mutilated (op. cit. n. p. 514), a similar assembly of
gods includes Neptune, Bacchus, and Vulcan, who are certainly not gods
of the planets.

* For these inscriptions, see Cumont, op. cit. t. n., Inscriptions 80
(p. 107), 129 (p. 115), 318 (p. 140), 386 (p. 149), 522 (p. 167), and 470 (p. 160).


xn] The Worship of Mithras 239

is nothing to show that the Mithraists as such identified in any-
way this Jupiter Optimus Maximus with the Persian Ahura
Mazda, Oromasdes, or Ormuzd, or that they ever knew him by
any of these outlandish names.

The case is different with Ormuzd's enemy Ahriman, who
evidently was known by his Persian name to the Roman
worshippers of Mithras. In the Vatican can be seen a triangular
marble altar dedicated by a clarissimus named Agrestius who
was a high-priest of Mithras, to " the god Arimanius 1 ," and
altars with similar inscriptions have been found at Buda-Pesth 2 .
At a Mithraic chapel in York also, there was found a statue, now
in the Museum of the Philosophical Society in that city, which
bears an inscription to the same god Arimanius 3 . There is
therefore fairly clear evidence that the Mithraists recognized
Ahriman under his Persian name, and that they sacrificed to
him, as Plutarch said the " magi " of his time did to the god
whom he calls Hades 4 , and this agrees with Herodotus' state-
ment that the Persians used to do the same to "the god who is
said to be beneath the earth 5 ." Although this gave occasion
to the Christian Fathers to accuse the Mithraists of worshipping
the devil, we are not thereby bound to conclude that they
looked upon Arimanius as an essentially evil being. It seems
more probable that they considered him, as the Greeks did their
Hades or Pluto, as a chthonian or subterranean power ruling over
a place of darkness and discomfort, where there were punish-
ments indeed, but not as a deity insusceptible of propitiation by
sacrifice 6 , or compulsion by other means such as magic arts 7 . It

1 Op. tit. n. p. 98. 2 Op. cit. n. p. 141.

3 Op. cit. n. pp. 160 392, 393, and article in P.S.B.A. quoted in n. 2,
p. 237 supra.

* Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. xlvi. Cf. Origen, adv. Cels. Bk I. c. 60.

5 Herodotus.. Bk vn. c. 114.

8 Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk v. c. 11, says Zeus is the same as Hades. He
quotes Euripides as authority for the statement, but I do not know the
play in which it appears. He also, op. cit. Bk v. c. 14, quotes Xenocrates
as saying that there is an " Upper and Lower " Zeus.

7 Heracles, of course, applied compulsion to Hades. For the magic
compulsion of the same power, see the Magic Papyrus of the Bibl. Nat. in
Wessely's Griech. Zauberpap. p. 38.


240 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

has been shown elsewhere that his image in a form which fairly
represents his attributes in this capacity appears with some
frequency in the Mithraic chapels, where a certain amount of
mystery attached to its exhibition 1 . It seems to follow from
these considerations that the worshippers of Mithras attributed
to their special god no inferiority to Ahriman as M. Cumont's
argument supposes, and that the only power whom they ac-
knowledged as higher than Mithras himself was the Roman
equivalent of Ormuzd, the Jupiter Optimus Maximus adored
throughout the Roman Empire of their time as the head of the
Pantheon 2 .

The connection of Mithras with the sun is also by no means
easy to unravel. The Vedic Mitra was, as we have seen,
originally the material sun itself, and the many hundreds of
votive inscriptions left by the worshippers of Mithras to " the
unconquered Sun Mithras 3 ," to the unconquered solar divinity
(numen) Mithras 4 , to the unconquered Sun-God (deus) Mithra 5 ,
and allusions in them to the priests (sacerdotes), worshippers
(cultores), and temples (templum) of the same deity leave no
doubt open that he was in Roman times a sun-god 6 . Yet this
does not necessarily mean that he was actually the day-star
visible to mankind, and the Greeks knew well enough how to
distinguish between Apollo the god of light who was once at
any rate a sun-god, and Helios the Sun itself 7 . On the Mithraic
sculptures, we frequently see the unmistakable figure of Mithras
riding in the chariot of the Sun-God driven by the divinity with
long hair and a rayed nimbus, whom we know to be this Helios
or his Roman equivalent, going through some ceremony of conse-
cration with him, receiving messages from him, and seated side
by side with him at a banquet which is evidently a ritual feast.
M. Cumont explains this by the theory that Mithras, while in

1 P.S.B.A. 1912, p. 137, for authorities.

2 Jean Reville, La Religion a Rome sows les Sever es, Paris, 1886, p. 30.

3 Cumont. T. et M . n. p. 91, no. 2 ; p. 99, nos. 30, 34 ; p. 102, no. 49;
p. 103, no. 53.

4 Op. cit. n. p. 99, no. 29.

6 Op. cit. n. p. 105, no. 62; p. 116, no. 131.

8 Op. cit. n. p. 96, nos. 17, 20 ; p. 117, no. 139 ; p. 145, no. 354.

7 Pindar, Isthm. v. 1, where the Sun is said to be the son of Theia.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 241

Persia and in the earliest Aryan traditions the genius of the
celestial light only 1 , no sooner passed into Semitic countries
and became affected by the astrological theories of the Chal-
daeans, than he was identified with their sun-god Shamash 2 ,
and this seems as reasonable a theory as can be devised. Another
way of accounting for what he calls the " at first sight contra-
dictory proposition " that Mithras at once was and was not the
sun 3 , is to suppose that while the Mithraists wished those who
did not belong to their faith to believe that they themselves
worshipped the visible luminary, they yet instructed their
votaries in private that he was a deity superior to it and in fact
the power behind it. As we shall see, the two theories are by
no means irreconcilable, although absolute proof of neither can
yet be offered.

One can speak with more certainty about the Legend or
mythical history of Mithras which M. Cumont has contrived
with rare acumen to reconstruct from the monuments found in
his chapels. It is comprised in eleven or twelve scenes or
tableaux which we will take in their order 4 . We first see the
birth of the god, not from the head of his father Zeus like Athena,
or from his thigh like Dionysos, but from a rock, which explains
his epithet of ' ' Petrogenes ' ' or rock-born . The god is represented
in this scene as struggling from the rock in which he is embedded
below the waist, and always uplifts in one hand a broad knife
of which we shall afterwards see him make use, and in the other
a lighted torch 5 . He is here represented as a boy, and wears the
Phrygian cap or so-called cap of liberty which is his distinctive
attribute, while the torch is doubtless, as M. Cumont surmises,
symbolical of the light which he is bringing into the world 6 .
The rock is sometimes encircled by the folds of a large serpent,
probably here as elsewhere a symbol of the earth, and is in the

1 Cumont, T. et M . I. p. 225, and n. 1 ; cf. Darmesteter, Ormuzd et
Ahriman, p. 65.

2 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 231. 3 Op. cit. i. p. 200.

4 Op. cit. I. pp. 304-306. The best and clearest example of these scenes
is perhaps that given in the bas-reliefs surrounding the Tauroctony in the
Mithraeum at Osterburken. See op. cit. n. p. 350 (Monument 246).

6 Op. cit. ii. Fig. 1 of Hon. 246 (p. 350).

8 Op. cit. I. pp. 159 sqq.
l n. 16


242 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

Mithraic chapel discovered at Housesteads in Northumberland
represented in the form of an egg, the upper part remaining on
the head of the nascent god like an egg-shell on that of a newly-
hatched chicken 1 . This is probably due to some confusion or
identification with the Orphic legend of the First-born or Phanes
who sprang from the cosmic egg ; but the central idea of the
rock-birth seems to be that of the spark, hidden as it were in
the stone and leaping forth when struck. In one or two
examples of the scene, the miraculous birth is watched by a
shepherd or shepherds, which leads M. Cumont to draw a
parallel between this and the Adoration of the Shepherds at
the Birth of Christ.

The next two scenes are more diffcult to interpret with
anything approaching certainty. In one of them 2 , Mithras is
represented as standing upright before a tree from which he
cuts or tears a large branch bearing leaves and fruit. He is
here naked, save for the distinctive cap ; but immediately
after, he is seen emerging from the leafage fully clothed in
Oriental dress. In the next scene — the relative order of the
scenes seems settled by the places they most often occupy on
different examples of the same sculptures 3 — Mithras in the
Phrygian cap, Persian trousers, and flowing mantle generally
worn by him, kneels on one knee drawing a bow, the arrows
from which strike a rock in the distance and draw from it a
stream of water which a kneeling man receives in his hands
and lifts to his mouth 4 . Several variants of this scene exist,
in one of which a suppliant is kneeling before the archer-god
and raising his hands towards him as if in prayer ; while in
another, the rock may well be a cloud. M. Cumont can only
suggest with regard to these scenes, that the first may be an
allusion to the Fall of Man and his subsequently clothing
himself with leaves as described in the Book of Genesis, and

1 Cumont, op. cit. n. p. 395, and Fig. 315.

2 Op. cit. II. p. 350, f (2) of Osterburken.

3 It is not invariable, as the sculptor was sometimes evidently governed
by considerations of space.

* Op. cit. n. p. 350, f (5) of Osterburken. Cf. Mon. 245, PL v (Keuenheim)
and Mon. 251, PL vn (Heddernheim).


xn] The Worship of Mithras 243

that the second scene may depict a prolonged drought upon
earth, in which man prays to Mithras and is delivered by the
god's miraculous production of rain. He admits, however, that
this is pure conjecture, and that he knows no Indian, Persian,
or Chaldaean legend or myth to which the scenes in question
can be certainly attached. It seems therefore useless to discuss
them further here.

Passing on, we come to a series of scenes, the meaning of
which is more easily intelligible. In all of these a bull plays
a principal part. It is abundantly clear that this bull is no
terrestrial creature, but is the Goshurun or Heavenly Bull of the
Zend Avesta, from whose death come forth not only man, but
beasts, trees, and all the fruits of the earth 1 . In the Mithraic
sculptures, we see the Bull first sailing over the waters in a
cup-shaped boat 2 like the coracles still used on the Euphrates,
or escaping from a burning stable to which Mithras and a
companion have set fire 3 . Then he is depicted grazing peaceably
or raising his head now and then as if alarmed by some sudden
noise 4 . Next he is chased by Mithras, who seizes him by the
horns, mounts him 5 , and after a furious gallop casts him over
his shoulders, generally holding him by the hind legs so that
the horned head dangles to the ground 6 . In this position, he
is taken into the cave which forms the chapel of Mithras.

Here, if the order in the most complete monuments be
followed, we break off to enter upon another set of scenes which

1 West, Pahlavi Texts, Pt 1, S.B.E. p. 20 (Bundahish) ; Porphyry, de
antro nympharum, c. 18. Cf. Dollinger, J. und H. I. p. 419, and Tiele,
Religion of the Iranian Peoples (Eng. ed.), Bombay, 1912, Pt 1, p. 113.

2 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 298, Fig. 154 (Sarmizegetusa) ; p. 309,
Fig. 167 (Apulum) ; p. 326, Fig. 193 (Sissek). Dollinger, J. und H. I.
p. 141, thinks this cup-shaped boat represents the Moon. But see against
this Cumont, op. cit. I. pp. 167, 168.

3 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 515 and PI. ix, Mon. 273 ter d (8) (Sarre-
bourg). Cf. ibid. n. p. 310, Fig. 168, Mon. 192 bis b (7), also i. p. 167 and
n. 5.

4 Op. cit. n. p. 346, e (1) and PI. v (Neuenheim) ; n. p. 350, f (3) (Oster-
burken) ; n. p. 339, b (6) and PI. iv (Mauls).

8 Op. cit. n. p. 309, a (1) (Apulum); n. p. 326, b (3) and Fig. 193 (Sissek).
6 Op. cit. ii. p. 346, e (4) (Neuenheim) ; n. p. 309, a (2) (Apulum) ; n.
p. 515, d (10) (Sarrebourg).

16—2


244 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

illustrate the relations between Mithras and the sun 1 . In what
again seems to be the first in order, we see Mithras upright with
a person kneeling before him who, from the rayed nimbus round
his head, is evidently the god Helios or Sol 2 . In one representa-
tion of this scene, Mithras extends his left hand towards this
nimbus as if to replace it on the head of its wearer 3 from which
it has been displaced in yet another monument 4 , while in the
other, he displays an object not unlike a Phrygian cap which may,
however, be, as M. Cumont suggests, something like a water-
skin 5 . Generally, Mithras is represented as holding this object
over the bared head of the kneeling Sun-God, as if to crown him
with it 6 . Then we find Mithras with the ray-crowned Sun-God
upright beside him, while he grasps his hand in token, as it would
seem, of alliance or friendship 7 . If we accept the hint afforded
by the theory that the rock yielding water on being split by the
arrows of Mithras is really a cloud producing the fertilizing rain,
we may imagine that we have here the uncoriquered god remov-
ing clouds which obscure the face of the great life-giving
luminary and restoring to him the crown of rays which enables
him to shed his kindly light upon the earth. The earth would
thus be made fit for the creation of man and other animals
which, as we shall see, follows ; but in any event, the meaning
of the scene which shows the alliance is, as M. Cumont has
pointed out, not doubtful 8 . In one monument, where Mithras
grasps the hand of the person we have identified with the Sun-
God before an altar, he at the same time draws his sword, as if
to perform the exchange of blood or blood-covenant usual in
the East on swearing alliance 9 . Possibly the crowning scene, as

1 Cumont, op. tit. l p. 304, puts these scenes in a slightly different
order. That followed here is that adopted in the Mithraeum at Heddern-
heim, op. tit. n. PL vn, where the sequence is fairly plain.

2 Op. tit. n. p. 365, d (7) (Heddernheim).

3 Op. tit. n. p. 338, c (5) (Klagenfurt).

* Op. tit. n. p. 350, f (8) (Osterburken).
8 Op. tit. i. p. 172.

• Op. tit. u. p. 272, c (2) (Serdica) ; n. pp. 303, 304, c (1) (Temesvar) ;
n. p. 326, b (1) (Sissek).

7 Op. tit. n. p. 337, c. (4) (Klagenfurt).

8 Op. tit. l p. 173. 9 p. tit. n. p. 201.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 245

M. Cumont also suggests 1 , is to be connected with Tertullian's
statement that in the initiation of the Mithraist to the degree
of miles or soldier, he was offered at the sword's point a crown,
which he cast away from him saying that Mithras was his crown.
If so, it would afford some proof that the initiate here, as in
the mysteries of Isis, was made to impersonate the sun, which
is on other grounds likely enough.

We return to the scenes with the Bull, which here reach
their climax. This is the sacrifice of the Bull by Mithras,
which forms the central point of the whole legend. Its repre-
sentation, generally in bas-relief, was displayed in the most
conspicuous position in the apse of the Mithraic chapel, where
it occupied the place of the modern altar-piece, and such art
as the Roman sculptors succeeded in displaying was employed
to make it as impressive and as striking as possible 2 . It shows
the god grasping with his left hand the nostrils of the beast,
and kneeling with his left knee in the middle of the Bull's back,
while with his right hand he plunges the broad-bladed dagger
with which he was armed at his birth into the Bull's shoulder 3 .
A dog leaps forward to lap the blood flowing from the wound,
while at the same time a scorpion seizes the Bull by the genitals.
A serpent also forms part of the group, but his position varies
in the different monuments, while that of the other animals
does not. Sometimes, he lifts his head towards the blood, as
if to share it with the dog, sometimes he is extended along the
ground beneath the Bull's belly in apparent indifference to the
tragedy enacted above him 4 . Before the Bull stands generally
a youth clothed like Mithras himself in Phrygian cap, tunic,
and mantle, as well as the anaxyrides or tight trousers in which
the Greeks depicted most Easterns, while another youth
similarly attired stands behind the dying victim. These two
human figures are alike in every particular save that one of them

1 Cumont, op. cit. I. p. 173, and n. 3.

2 Most of the monuments show the remains of colour.

3 Like the thrust of the Spanish bull-fighter which is supposed to split
the heart.

4 Sometimes, though very rarely, the serpent is absent, as in the
Mithraeum discovered at Krotzenburg near Hanau. Op. cit. n. p. 353.


246 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

bears a torch upright with the flame pointing upwards, while
the other holds a similar torch reversed so that the flame juts
towards the earth. We know from a Latin inscription that the
torch-bearer with uplifted torch was called Cautes, he with the
reversed one Cautopates, but of neither name has any satis-
factory derivation or etymology yet been discovered 1 .

The meaning of the group as a whole can, however, be
explained by the documents of the later Persian religion. The
Bundahish tells us that Ahura Mazda created before all things
the Bull Goshurun, who was killed by Ahriman, the god of evil,
and that from his side came forth Gayomort, first of men,
while from his tail there issued useful seed-plants and trees,
from his blood the vine, and from his seed the different kinds of
beasts 2 . Save that the bull-slayer is here not the god of evil
but the lord of light himself, the myth is evidently the same in
the Mithraic bas-reliefs, for in some of the earliest monuments
the Bull's tail is actually shown sprouting into ears of wheat,
while in others the production of animals as a consequence of
the Bull's death may be indicated, as well as the birth of the
vine 3 . That the dog plays the part of the guardian of the
Bull's soul is probable from what we know of later Persian
beliefs 4 , while the scorpion as the creature of Ahriman may be
here represented as poisoning the seed of future life at its
source 5 . That Mithras is not supposed to kill the Bull from
enmity or other personal reasons, but in obedience to orders
from some higher power, is shown by the listening pose of his
head during the sacrifice. This is M. Cumont's opinion 6 , as

1 Cumont, op. cit. I. pp. 207, 208. Following the mention by Dionysius
the Areopagite of a " threefold Mithras," M. Cumont thinks that the two
torch-bearing figures are representations of Mithras himself. The theory
is ingenious, but not very plausible. See loc. cit. pp. 208-213.

2 Op. cit. I. p. 186, for authorities. Cf. Dollinger, J. nnd H. i. p. 420.
Tiele, Rel. of Iran. P. pt I, p. 113, says that " originally" the bull was
slain not by Ahriman, but by its creator.

3 Op. cit. I. p. 197. Cf. Porphyry, de antro nymphar. c. xvui.

4 D. Menant, " Les Rites Funeraires," Conferences au Muse'e Guimet,
t. xxxv. pp. 181, 182.

6 Cf. Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. XLvn.
6 So Cumont, T. et M. I. pp. 182, 305.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 247

also that the serpent here takes no active part in the affair,
but is merely a symbolic representation of the earth 1 . The
whole drama is clearly shown as taking place in a cave or grotto,
as appears from the arch of rocks which surmounts, and, as it
were, acts as a frame to, the Tauroctony or bull-slaying scene
in most Mithraic chapels. This cave, according to Porphyry,
represents the universe.

The Legend, however, does not end with the death of the
Bull. In the chapel at Heddernheim, the great slab on which
the Tauroctony is sculptured in bas-relief is pivoted so as to
swing round and display on its other face another scene which
we find repeated in a slightly different form on many monu-
ments 2 . Mithras and the Sun-God are here shown as partaking
of a ritual feast or banquet in which grapes seem to figure. At
Heddernheim, the grapes are tendered to the two gods over
the body of the dead bull by the two torch-bearing figures
Cautes and Cautopates, while on an arch above them various
quadrupeds, dogs, a boar, a sheep, and a cow, are seen springing
into life. In other monuments, the same scene generally
appears as a banquet at which Mithras and Helios are seated
side by side at a table sometimes alone, but at others in com-
pany with different persons who can hardly be any other than
initiates or worshippers 3 . That this represents some sort of
sacrament where a drink giving immortality was administered
seems probable, and its likeness to representations of the Last
Supper is sufficient to explain the complaint of Justin Martyr
and other Fathers that the devil had set on the Mithraists to
imitate in this and other respects the Church of Christ 4 . The
final scene of all comes when we see Mithras arresting the
glorious chariot of the Sun-God drawn by four white horses, and,
mounting therein, being driven off by the ray-crowned Helios
himself to the abode of light above the firmament 5 . In this

1 Op. cit. i. p. 192. 2 Op. cit. n. PL vni.

3 Op. cit. I. p. 175, Fig. 10, where some of the guests at the banquet wear
the masks of crows and other animals corresponding to the Mithraic degrees.

4 Justin Martyr, First Apology, c. lvi.

5 Cumont, T. et M. n. PL vm, shows this most clearly. PL v
(Neuenheim), Fig 213, opposite p. 337 (Virunum), and p. 278, Fig. 121
(Orsova), leave no doubt possible.


248 The Worship of Mithras [en.

also, it is easy to see a likeness between representations of the
Ascension of Mithras and that of Elijah or even of Christ 1 .

However this may be, the Legend of Mithras, as thus
portrayed, shows with fair closeness the belief of his worshippers
as to his place in the scheme of the universe. Mithras was
certainly not the Supreme God, a rank in the system filled by
Ahura Mazda, or his Latin counterpart, Jupiter Best and
Greatest 2 . But this being, like the Platonic Zeus and the
Gnostic Bythos, was considered too great and too remote to
concern himself with the doings of the visible universe, in which
Mithras acts as his vicegerent. Whether Mithras was or was
not considered as in some sort the double or antitype of the
Supreme Being cannot be said ; but it is worth noticing that
in the Vedas, as among the Hittites, Varuna and Mitra form
an inseparable couple who are always invoked together, and
that the same seems to have been the case with Ahura Mazda
and Mithra in the oldest religious literature of the Persians 3 .
It may therefore well be that the learned doctors of the Mithraic
theology regarded their Supreme Being and Mithras as two
aspects of the same god, an idea that, as we have seen, was
current at about the same period among the Gnostics. It is,
however, impossible to speak with certainty on such a point
in the absence of any writings by persons professing the Mithraic
faith, and it is highly improbable that the rugged soldiers who
formed the majority of the god's worshippers ever troubled
themselves much about such questions. For them, no doubt,
and for all, perhaps, but a few carefully-chosen persons,
Mithras was the Demiurge or Divine Artizan of the universe 4 ,
which he governs in accordance with the laws of right and
justice, protecting and defending alike man and those animals
and plants useful to him which Mithras has himself created from
his own spontaneous goodness. Hence he was the only god
to whom they admitted allegiance, and although the existence

1 Cumont, op. cit. i. p. 178, and Fig. 11.

2 The Juppiter Optimus Maximus of the Palazzo Altieri. Op. cit. n.
p. 104.

3 Darmesteter, Ormuzd et Ahriman, p. 65.

4 Porphyry, de avtro nympharum, c. XXIV.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 249

of other heavenly beings was not denied, it is probable that
most of them were looked upon as occupying at the best a
position less important to us than that of Mithras himself.

It is probable, moreover, that all the scenes in the Mithraic
sculptures in which we have seen the god taking part were
considered as being enacted before the creation of man and in
some heaven or world midway between the abode of Infinite
Light and this earth. That the grotto into which Mithras
drags the primordial Bull is no earthly cavern is plain from
Porphyry's remark that the Mithraic cave was an image of the
universe 1 , as well as from the band of zodiacal figures or the
arch of rocks which sometimes encloses the bas-reliefs, the sky
being looked upon by the Babylonians as a rocky vault. The
sun and moon in their respective chariots also appear above
the principal scene ; and a further hint as to its whereabouts
may be found in the fact that the flowing mantle of Mithras is
sometimes depicted as spangled with stars, thereby indicating
that the scenes in which he appears are supposed to take place
in the starry firmament. Hence is explained the epithet of
/j,ecrLTr}<i or Mediator, which Plutarch gives him 2 , and which
should be interpreted not as intercessor but as he who occupies
a position midway between two places 3 . That the higher of
these in this case was the Garotman or abode of Infinite Light
of the Avestic literature, there can, it would seem, be no
question ; but what was the lower ?

Although the statement must be guarded with all the
reserves imposed upon us in all matters relating to the religion
of Mithras by the absence of written documents, it is probable
that this lower division of the universe was our earth. The
monuments give us with fair certainty the Mithraic ideas as to
how life was brought thither ; but they tell us little or nothing
as to the condition in which the earth was at the time, nor
how it was supposed tohave come into existence. Porphyry
tells us that the " elements " (o-rotxeta) were represented in the
Mithraic chapel 4 , and we find in some examples of the bull-
slaying scenes, the figures of a small Hon and a crater or
mixing-bowl beneath the belly of the bull, which M. Cumont

1 Op. cit. cc. v. vi. 2 Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. xlvi.

\ 3 Porphyry, de anlro nymph, e. xxrv. * Op. cit. cc. v. vi.


250 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

considers to be the symbols of fire and water respectively ;
while the earth may be typified, as has been said above, by
the serpent, and the fourth element or air may be indicated by
the wind which is blowing Mithras' mantle away from his body
and to the left of the group 1 . If this be so, it is probable that
the Mithraist who thought about such matters looked upon the
four elements, of which the ancients believed the world to be
composed, as already in existence before the sacrifice of the
primordial bull brought life upon the earth ; and that the work
of Mithras as Demiurge or Artizan was confined to arranging
and moulding them into the form of the cosmos or ordered
world. As to what was the ultimate origin of these elements,
and whether the Mithraists, like the Gnostics, held that Matter
had an existence independent of, and a nature opposed to,
the Supreme Being, we have no indication whatever.

Of Mithraic eschatology or the view that the worshippers
of Mithras held as to the end of the world, we know rather less
than we do of their ideas as to its beginning. The Persian
religion, after its reform under the Sassanid kings, taught that
it would be consumed by fire 2 ; and, as this doctrine of the
Ecpyrosis, as the ancients called it, was also held by the Stoics,
whose physical doctrines were then fashionable at Rome, it is
probable enough that it entered into Mithraism also. But of
this there is no proof, and M. Cumont's attempt to show that
a similar conflagration was thought by the Mithraic priests to
have taken place before the Tauroctony, and as a kind of
paradigm or forecast of what was to come, is not very con-
vincing 3 . Yet some glimpse of what was supposed to happen
between the creation of the world and its destruction seems to

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. pp. 198 sqq. Damascius (in Cory's Ancient
Fragments, 1832, p. 319) attributes to the " Sidonians " a tbeogony which
would make "Otos," said by Cory to mean the Night Raven, the NoCr votjtos
born from Aer and Aura. Has this anything to do with the symbolism of
the crow, found always as the attendant of Mithras at the Tauroctony ?

2 Soderblom, La Vie Future (Tapres le Mazdeisme, Paris, 1901, pp. 265,
266, for authorities. Cf. Casartelli, La Philosophie Religieuse du Mazdeisme,
p. 186.

3 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 168. He reli?s on a fragment of Dion
Chrysostom which does not appear to have this meaning. See ibid. n.
p. 64.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 251

be typified by a monstrous figure often found in the ruined
chapels once used for the Mithraic worship, where it seems to
have been carefully guarded from the eyes of the general body
of worshippers. This monster had the body of a man 1 with
the head of a lion, while round his body is twined a huge
serpent, whose head either appears on the top of the lion's or
rests on the human breast. On the monster's back appear
sometimes two, but generally four wings, and in his hands he
bears upright two large keys, for one of which a sceptre is
sometimes substituted ; while his feet are sometimes human,
sometimes those of a crocodile or other reptile. On his body,
between the folds of the serpent, there sometimes appear the
signs of the four quarters of the year, i.e. Aries and Libra,
Cancer and Capricorn 2 , and in other examples a thunderbolt on
the breast or on the right knee 3 . The figure is often mounted
on a globe which bears in one instance the two crossed bands
which show that it is intended for our earth, and in one curious
instance he appears to bear a flaming torch in each hand,
while his breath is kindling a flame which is seen rising from an
altar beside him*. It is possible that in this last we have a
symbolical representation of the Ecpyrosis. Lastly, in the
Mithraic chapel at Heddernheim, which is the only one where the
figure of the lion-headed monster was found in situ, it was con-
cealed within a deep niche or cell so fashioned, says M. Cumont,
that the statue could only be perceived through a little conical
aperture or peep-hole made in the slab of basalt closingthe niche 5 .
M. Cumont's theory, as given in his magnificent work on

1 M. Cumont, op. cit. i. p. 82, says that the sex is left undecided, so
as to show that Infinite Time, the Supreme God according to him of the
Mithraic pantheon, can produce by himself. This is certainly not the case
with one of the statues given among his own monuments {op. cit. n. p. 213,
Fig. 44), or that lately recovered from the Mithraeum at Sidon, for which see
Pottier, " La Collection Louis de Clercq," Conferences au Musee Ouimet,
Bibl. de Vulg. t. xix. 1906, PL opp. p. 236, or P.S.B.A. 1912, PL xix,
Fig. 18, or Cumont, Les Mysteres de Mithra, Bruxelles, 1913, p. 235.

2 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 213, Figs. 43, 44.

3 Op. cit n. p. 216, Fig. 47 ; p. 238, Fig. 68; p. 259, Fig. 96.

4 Op. cit. n. p. 196, Fig. 22. A hole in the back of the head, made
apparently for "fire- breathing" purposes, was found in the Sidon statue
also. See Cumont, Les Mysteres, fig. 27. 6 T.et M. n. p. 375.


252 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

the Mysteres de Mithra and elsewhere, is that the figure repre-
sents that Zervan Akerene or Boundless Time whom he would
put at the head of the Mithraic pantheon, and would make the
father of both Ormuzd and Ahriman 1 . M. Cumont's opinion,
on a subject of which he has made himself the master, must
always command every respect, and it may be admitted that the
notion of such a supreme Being, corresponding in many ways
to the Ineffable Bythos of the Gnostics, did appear in the
later developments of the Persian religion, and may even have
been known during the time that the worship of Mithras
flourished in the West 2 . It has been shown elsewhere, however,
that this idea only came to the front long after the cult of
Mithras had become extinct, that M. Cumont's view that the
lion-headed monster was represented as without sex or passions
has been shown to be baseless by later discoveries, and that the
figure is connected in at least one example with an inscription
to Arimanes or Ahriman 3 . M. Cumont has himself noted the
confusion which a Christian, writing before the abolition of the
Mithras worship, makes between the statues of Hecate, goddess
of hell and patroness of sorcerers, and those of the lion-headed
monster 4 , and Hecate's epithet of HepaeiT) can only be explained
by some similar association 5 . At the same time, M. Cumont
makes it plain that the Mithraists did not regard these infernal
powers Ahriman and Hecate with the horror and loathing which
the reformed Zoroastrian religion afterwards heaped upon the
antagonist of Ormuzd 6 . On the contrary the dedications of

1 Op. tit. i. p. 78.

2 The only evidence that he produces of this last fact is a quotation from
Damascius. whose authority seems to be " Eudemus the Peripatetic," given
in n. 4,p. 236supra : thatsome of the Magi call the votjtov airav km to ijvwptvov
Topos and others Chronos. A good divinity and an evil demon according
to the same author descend from this power, one of whom he says is called
Oromasdes and the other Arimanius. It is not very clear how much of this
is Eudemus and how much Damascius. No other author gives any hint
that would allow us to attribute so early an age to Zervanism.

3 P.S.B.A. 1912. pp. 139-142.

4 Firmicus Maternus, de errore, c. rv. See Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 140, n. 7.
6 They are mentioned together in the great Magical Papyrus of the

Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris, Wessely, Griechische Zauberp. p. 73.
• Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 141.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 253

several altars and statues show that they paid them worship
and offered them sacrifices, as the Greeks did to Hades and
Persephone, the lord and lady of hell, of whom the Mithraists
probably considered them the Persian equivalents. From all
these facts, the conclusion seems inevitable that the lion-headed
monster represents Ahriman, the consort of Hecate 1 .

If we now look at the religious literature of the time when
the worship of Mithras was coming into favour, we find a pretty
general consensus of opinion that the chthonian or infernal
god represented in the earlier Persian religion by this Ahriman,
was a power who might be the rival of, but was not necessarily
the mortal enemy of Zeus. Whether Neander be right or not
in asserting that the prevailing tendency of the age was towards
Dualism 2 , it is certain that most civilized nations had then come
to the conclusion that on this earth the bad is always mixed up
with the good. Plutarch puts this clearly enough when he says
that nature here below comes not from one, but from two
opposed principles and contending powers, and this opinion, he
tells us, is a most ancient one which has come down from
expounders of myths (6eo\6<yoi) and legislators to poets and
philosophers, and is expressed " not in words and phrases, but
in mysteries and sacrifices, and has been found in many places
among both Barbarians and Greeks 3 ." The same idea of an-
tagonistic powers is, of course, put in a much stronger form in
the reformed Persian religion, where the incursion of Ahriman
into the kingdom of Ormuzd brings upon the earth all evil in
the shape of winter, prolonged drought, storms, disease, and
beasts and plants hurtful to man 4 . But this does not seem to
have been the view of Ahriman's functions taken by the older
Magism, whence the worship of Mithras was probably derived 5 .

1 The absence of any corresponding statue of the goddess is perhaps
accounted for by the misogynic character of the Mithraic worship. Yet
an empty niche corresponding to the one containing the lion-headed figure
appears in some Mithraea.

2 Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 7 and note.

3 Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. XL v.

* Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 5, quoting West, Pahlavi Texts, Pt v. p. xxvi, 50.

5 F. Rosenberg, Le Livre de Zoroastre, St Petersburg, I. p. 10, and n. 3,
says that the reform of Zoroaster was specially directed to the abolition
of the worship of Ahriman.


254 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

• In Mithraism, it is not Ahriman, as in the Bundahish, but
Mithras, the vicegerent of Ormuzd, who slays the mystic Bull,
and by so doing he brings good and not evil to the earth.
Nowhere do we find in the Mithraic sculptures any allusion to
Ahriman as a god of evil pure and simple, or as one who is for
ever opposed to the heavenly powers. We do, indeed, find in
several Mithraea representations of a Titanomachia where the
Titans, represented as men with serpent legs, are depicted as
fleeing before a god like the Greek Zeus who strikes them with
his thunderbolts 1 . But this is not more necessarily suggestive
of two irreconcilable principles than the Greek story of the
Titans, those sons of Earth who were persuaded by their mother
to make war upon their father Uranos, who put their brother
Kronos upon his throne, and who were in their turn hurled from
heaven by Kronos' son Zeus. Even if we do not accept the later
myth which reconciles Zeus to his adversaries 2 , the story does
not go further than to say that the Titans attempted to gain
heaven and were thrust back to their own proper dwelling-place,
the earth.

It is in this way, as it would seem, that the lion-headed
monster of the Mithraic chapels must be explained. Ahriman,
the god girt with the serpent which represents the earth, has
rebelled against Ormuzd or Jupiter, and has been marked with
the thunderbolt which has cast him down from heaven. But
he remains none the less lord of his own domain, the earth, his
sway over which is shown by the sceptre which he wields while
standing upon it 3 . As for the keys which he bears, they are
doubtless those of the gates behind which he keeps the souls
and bodies of men, as the Orphics said, imprisoned, until he
is compelled to release them by a higher power 4 . In all this,

1 Cumont, T. et M. n. Monument 246, e (5) Osterburken, and others
as in 1. 1. p. 157 and n. 3. Cf. abo PI. xvi, Fig. 7, in P.S.B.A. 1912.

2 The Orphic invocation of the Titans referred to in Chap. IV, vol. I.
p. 116, n. 3 supra can be thus explained.

3 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 215, Fig. 46 (PL xvm, Fig. 13 of P.S.B.A.
1912) ; n. p. 238, Fig. 68 (PL xvm, Fig. 15 of P.S.B.A. 1912).

4 So in the leaden dirae from Cyprus now in the British Museum the
Lord of Hell is invoked as " the god who is set over the gate of hell and
the keys of heaven." P.S.B.A. t. m, 1891, p. 177.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 255

his functions do not go beyond those of the Greek Hades, with
whom Plutarch equates him.

It is however, possible that he was conceived by the Mith-
raists as occupying a slightly different place in the material
universe from that of his Greek prototype. The true realm of
Hades was generally placed by the Greeks below the earth, but
that of the Mithraic Ahriman may possibly be just outside it.
M. Cumont shows many reasons for supposing the lion-headed
god to be connected with the idea of destiny 1 , and in one of the
very few contemporary writings which make distinct allusion
to the Mithraic tenets, there is something which confirms this
view. This occurs in a fragment embedded, as it were, in a
Magic Payprus or sorcerer's handbook now in the Bibliotheque
Nationale at Paris 2 . The document itself is probably not, as
Prof. Albert Dieterich has too boldly asserted, a " Mithraic
Liturgy " ; but it is evidently connected in some way with the
Mithraic worship and begins with a statement that the writer
is a priest who has received inspiration from " the great Sun-
God Mithras." M. Georges Lafaye is of opinion that it narrates
in apocalyptic fashion the adventures of the soul of a perfect
Mithraist on its way to heaven, and this is probably correct,
although it is here told for no purpose of edification but as a
spell or charm 3 . The soul, if it be indeed she who is speaking,
repeatedly complains to the gods whom she meets — including
one in white tunic, crimson mantle and anaxyrides or Persian
trousers who may be Mithras himself — of " the harsh and
inexorable necessity " which has been compelling her so long
as she remained in the " lower nature 4 ." But the Sphere of
Destiny or necessity, as we have seen in the Pistis Sophia, was
thought to be the one immediately surrounding the earth, and
although the document in which we have before met with this
idea belongs to a different set of religious beliefs than those

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 294.

2 Wessely, Griechische Zauberp. pp. 32 sqq.

3 Georges Lafaye, " L' Initiation Mithriaque," Conferences au Musee
Ouimet, t. xvm. 1906, pp. 98 sqq.

4 Wessely, Or. Zauberp. p. cit. in note 2 supra, and Lafaye, op. cil.
passim.


256 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

here treated of, it is probable that both Gnostic and Mithraist
drew it from the astrological theories current at the time which
came into the Hellenistic world from Babylon. It is therefore
extremely probable that the Mithraists figured Ahriman as
ruling the earth from the sphere immediately outside it, and
this would agree well with his position upon the globe in the
monuments where he appears. It is some confirmation of this
that, in another part of the Papyrus just quoted, the " World-
ruler " (Cosmocrator) is invoked as " the Great Serpent, leader
of these gods, who holds the source of Egypt [Qy, The Nile ?]
and the end of the whole inhabited world [in his hands], who
begets in Ocean Pshoi (i.e. Fate) the god of gods 1 " ; while
the Great Dragon or Outer Darkness in the Pistis Sophia is
said to surround the earth. That both orthodox Christians
and Gnostics like the Valentinians looked upon the Devil, who,
as lord of hell, was sometimes identified with Hades, as the
Cosmocrator or World-Ruler requires no further demonstration 2 ,
and in this particular as in others the Mithraists may have
drawn from the same source as the Gnostic teachers 3 .

That they did so in a related matter can be shown by direct
evidence. Like the Ophites of the Diagram before described,
the Mithraists thought that the soul descended to the body
through seven spheres which were those of the " planets "
Saturn, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, the Moon, and the Sun
in that order, which Origen, who mentions the fact, says that
the Persian theology declared to be symbolized " by the names
of the rest of matter," and also gave for it " musical reasons 4 ."
He further describes the different qualities which the soul in
her passage receives from each sphere, and which it seems fair
to conclude she gives back to them on her reascension.
M. Cumont is no doubt right when he attributes the origin of

1 Wessely, op. cit. p. 61. 2 See Chapter IX, p. 108 supra.

3 Lafaye, Uln. Mith. pp. Ill, 112, goes further and says that both
Gnostics and Manichaeans derived their doctrine from Mithraism, which
formed a half-way house between Paganism and Christianity. But see
Chapter XIII, infra.

* Origen, adv. Cels. Bk vi. c. 22. For " musical " there should probably
be read mystical, the r being easily omitted by a copyist.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 257

this tenet to the mathematici or astrologers and says that it too
came originally from Chaldaea 1 . The seven heavens are also
found in many Oriental documents of the time, including the
Book of the Secrets of Enoch 2 and the Apocalypse of Baruch 3 .
According to Origen, they were symbolized in the Mithraic
chapels by a ladder of eight steps, the first seven being of the
metals peculiar to the different planets, i.e. lead, tin, copper,
iron, an alloy of several metals, silver, and gold, with the eighth
step representing the heaven of the fixed stars 4 . The Stoics
who held similar views, following therein perhaps the Platonic
cosmogony, had already fixed the gate of the sky through which
the souls left the heaven of the fixed stars on their descent to
the earth in Cancer, and that by which they reascended in
Capricorn 5 , which probably accounts for the two keys borne by
the lion-headed god on the Mithraic monuments, and for those
two Zodiacal signs being displayed on his body. The other two
signs, viz. Aries and Libra, may possibly refer to the places in
a horoscope or genethliacal figure which the astrologers of the
time called the Porta laboris and Janua Ditis respectively, as
denoting the gate by which man " born to labour " enters fife,
and the " gate of Hades " by which he leaves it 6 . If, as
Porphyry says, the doctrine of metempsychosis formed part
of the Mithraic teaching, the keys would thus have a meaning
analogous to the Orphic release from " the wheel 7 ."

The other gods who appear on the Mithraic monuments are
those known to us in classical mythology and are represented
under the usual human forms made familiar by Greek and
Roman art. By the side of, but in a subordinate position to
Jupiter, we find, if M. Cumont be justified in his identifications,

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 38.

2 Charles, Bk of the Secrets of Enoch, pp. xxx sqq.

3 The Greek Apocalypse of Baruch, published by James in Cambridge
Texts and Studies, vol. v. No. 1, p. 44.

4 adv. Cels. Bk vi. c. 22. He has, however, got the order wrong, as
copper is generally associated with the planet Venus, tin with Jupiter, iron
with Mars, silver with the Moon, gold with the Sun, and lead with Saturn.

6 Bouche Leclercq, L" Astrologie Orecque, p. 23, for authorities.

6 Op. cit. p. 276. Cf. Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 40.

7 Porphyry, de Abstinentia, Bk iv. c. 16.

l. n. 17


258 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

nearly all the " great gods " of the Greco-Roman pantheon.
Five of these, that is to say, Jupiter himself, Saturn, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury may be intended as symbols of the planets
which, then as now, bore these names. But there are others
such as Juno, Neptune and Amphitrite, Pluto and Proserpine,
Apollo, Vulcan, and Hercules who cannot by any possibility
be considered as planetary signs 1 . M. Cumont's theory about
these divinities is, if one understands him rightly, that these are
really Persian or Avestic gods, such as Verethragna, represented
under the classic forms of their Greek counterparts to make
them attractive to their Roman worshippers 2 . This does not
seem very probable, because the Persians did not figure their
gods in human form 3 . Nor is there any reason to think that
the Mithraists confined themselves to the theocrasia or the
practice of discovering their own gods in the divinities of the
peoples around them which we have seen so rife in Greece, Italy,
and Egypt. But in the age when the worship of Mithras became
popular in the Roman Empire, all paganism was groping its way
towards a religion which should include and conciliate all others,
and there is much evidence that the votaries of Mithras were
especially determined that this religion should be their own. Isis,
as we have seen, might proclaim herself as the one divinity
whom under many names and in many forms the whole earth
adored ; but the Mithraists apparently went further and tried
to show that their religion contained within itself all the rest.
They appear to have first gained access to Rome under an alliance
with the priests of Cybele, whose image, with its emasculated
attendants the Galli, was transported from Pergamum to the
Eternal City during the critical moments of the Second Punic
War 4 . Externally there were many analogies between the
two cults, and Cybele's consort Attis, like Mithras, was always
represented in a Phrygian cap and anaxyrides. One of the most

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 129, n. 6, for list of monuments.

2 Op. el he. cit. ; id. Rel. Or. p. 179.

3 See p. 234, supra. The figure of the divine archer in the winged disk
which figured on the coins called darics is, perhaps, the exception which
proves the rule. Or is this meant for the Fravashi or genius of the king ?
Cf. Hope Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, p. 260.

4 Somewhere about 204 B.c. See Cumont, Rel. Or. p. 58.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 259

impressive, if most disgusting practices in the religion of Cybele
— the Taurobolium or blood-bath in which a bull was slaughtered
over a pit covered with planks pierced with holes through which
the blood of the victim dripped upon the naked votary below —
was borrowed by the Mithraists, and many of them boast on
their funereal inscriptions that they have undergone this cere-
mony and thereby, as they express it, have been " born again."
The clarissimi and high officials of the Empire who have left
records of the kind are careful to note that they are worshippers
of " the Great Mother " (Cybele) and Attis, as well as of Mithras 1 ,
and a similar statement occurs so frequently on the funereal and
other inscriptions of their wives as to lead to the hypothesis that
the ceremonies of the Phrygian Goddess were the natural refuge
of Mithras' female votaries 2 . So, too, the worship of the
Alexandrian divinities, which that of Mithras in some sort
supplanted, and which, as being as popular in the Greek world
as the last-named was in the Latin, might have been expected
to be hostile to it, yet had relations with it not very easy to be
understood. In the assembly of the gods which in some of the
monuments crowns the arch set over the Tauroctony, the
central place is in one instance taken by Sarapis with the
distinctive modius on his head instead of Zeus or Jupiter 3 , the
same priest often describes himself as serving the altars of both
gods, and " Zeus, Helios, Mithras, Sarapis, unconquered one ! "
is invoked in one of those spells in the Magic Papyri which
contain fragments of ritual prayers or hymns 4 . Possibly it is
for this reason, that the initiating priest in Apuleius' story whom
the grateful Lucius says he regards as his father, is named

1 Orelli, Inscpt. Latinar. selector. Turin, 1828, vol. I. pp. 406-412.

2 See Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 95, inscr. 15, p. 98, inscr. 23 ; p. 100
inscr. 40 ; p. 101, inscr. 41. The tomb of Vincentius in the Catacomb of
Praetextatus at Rome would show an instance of the joint worship of
feabazius, the consort of the Great Mother, and of Mithras, if we could trust
Garrucci's restoration, for which see his Les Mystbres du Syncretisme
Phrygien, Paris, 1854. It has been quoted in this sense by Hatch, H.L.
p. 290 ; but Cumont, T. et M. n. pp. 173 and 413, argues against this
construction. For the pictures themselves, see Maass, Orpheus, Munchen,
1895, pp. 221, 222.

3 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 261, Fig. 99. * Kenyon, Gk Papyri, p. 65.

17—2


260) The Worship of Mithras [ch.


Mithras, as if the initiate had been led to the Mysteries of Isis
through the worship of that god 1 .

The same syncretistic tendency is particularly marked in the
leaning of the Mithraists to the worship of the gods of Eleusis.
" Consecrated to Liber [the Latin name of Dionysos] and the
Eleusinian [goddesses]," " Mystes of Ceres," " priest " or " Chief
Herdsman (archibucolus) of the god Liber," " hierophant of
Father Liber and the Hecates," " Consecrated at Eleusis to
the god Bacchus, Ceres, and Cora " are some of the distinctions
which the devotees of Mithras vaunt on their tombstones 2 ;
while we learn that when the last survivors of the two sacred
families who had for centuries furnished priests to the Eleu-
sinian Mysteries died out, the Athenians sent for a priest of
Mithras from one of the neighbouring islands, and handed over
to him the care of the sacred rites 3 . It is even possible that
the complaisance of the Mithraists for other religions went
further than has hitherto been suspected. Not only does Justin
Martyr after describing the celebration of the Christian Eucharist
say,

"Wherefore also the evil demons in mimicry have handed down
that the same thing should be done in the Mysteries of Mithras.
For that bread and a cup of water are in these mysteries set before
the initiate with certain speeches you either know or can learn 4 " ;

but we know from Porphyry that the initiate into the rites of
Mithras underwent a baptism by total immersion which was
said to expiate his sins 5 . Among t he .w orshippers of Mithras, on
the same authority, were also ^rrginsN and others vowed to
continence 6 , and we hear that tnlTTSlithraists used, like the

1 This is the more likely because his second initiator bears the name of
Asinius, which, as he himself says (Apuleius, Metamorph. Bk xi. c. 27),
was not unconnected with his own transformation into the shape of an
ass. The Emperor Commodus was initiated into both religions (Lampri-
• ius, Commodus, c. ix.).

2 See n. 1, p. 259, supra.

3 Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p. 625, n. 3, quoting Gasquet, Mithras,
p. 137. See also Gibbon, vol. ni. p. 498, Bury (Appendix 15).

4 Justin Martyr, First Apology, c. lxvi.

' Porphyry, de antro nym vh. c. 15. Tertullian, de Praescpi. c. 40.
• Porphyry, op. et loc. ct^


xn] The Worship of Mithras 261

Christians, to call each other " Brother " and address their
priests as " Father 1 ." St Augustine tells us that in his time
the priests of Mithras were in the habit of saying, " That One
in the Cap [i.e. Mithras] is a Christian too ! " and it is not
unlikely that the claim was seriously made 2 . During the reigns
of the Second Flavian Emperors and before Constantine's pact
with the Church, we hear of hymns sung by the legionaries
which could be chanted in common by Christians, Mithraists,
and the worshippers of that Sun-God the adoration of whom
was hereditary or traditional in the Flavian House 3 . The
Mithraists also observed Sunday and kept sacred the 25th of
December as the birthday of the sun 4 .

Of the other rites and ceremonies used in the worship of
Mithras we know next to nothing. As appears from the authors
last quoted, the whole of the worship was conducted in
" mysteries " or secret ceremonies like the Eleusinian and the
rites of the Alexandrian divinities, although on a more extended
scale. The Mithraic mysteries always took place in a subter-
ranean vault or " cave," lighted only by artificial light. The
ruins of many of these have been found, and are generally so
small as to be able to accommodate only a few worshippers 5 ,
whence perhaps it followed that there were often several
Mithraea in the same town or city 6 . The chief feature seems to
have been always the scene of the Tauroctony or Bull-slaying
which was displayed on the apse or further end of the chapel,
and was generally carved in bas-relief although occasionally
rendered in the round. The effect of this was sought to be

1 See Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 339, for authorities.

2 Augustine, In Johann. evang. tractatus, vn. or Cumont, T. et M. n.
p. 59. This last thinks it more probable that the passage refers to Attis,
as there is an allusion in it to redemption by blood. But this would hardly
apply to the self-mutilation of the Galli, while it would to the blood-bath
of the Taurobolium and Criobolium which so many high initiates of Mithras
boast of undergoing.

3 J. Maurice, "La Dynastie Solaire des Seconds Flaviens," Rev.
Archeol. t, xvn. (1911), p. 397 and n. 1.

4 Cumont, T. et M . L p. 339, quoting Minucius Felix.
* Op. tit. I. p. 65.

6 The remains of five Mithraea were found in Ostia alone.


262 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

heightened by brilliant colouring, perhaps made necessary by
the dim light, and there were certainly altars of the square or
triangular pedestal type, and a well or other source from which
water could be obtained. The benches for the worshippers
were of stone and ran at right angles to and on either side of
the Tauroctony, so as to resemble the choir stalls in the chancel
of a modern church 1 . We have seen that the lion-headed
figure was concealed from the eyes of the worshippers, and we
know that they used to kneel during at least part of the service,
which was not in accord with the practice of either the Greeks
or Romans, who were accustomed to stand with upturned palms
when praying to the gods 2 . Sacrifices of animals which, if we
may judge from the debris left in some of the chapels, were
generally birds 3 , seem to have been made ; but there is no
reason to believe the accusation sometimes brought against the
Mithraists that they also slaughtered human victims in honour
of their god. Lampridius tells us, on the other hand, that the
Emperor Commodus on his initiation sullied the temple by
converting a feigned into a real murder 4 , and we hear from
another and later source that in consequence of this only a
bloody sword was shown to the candidate 5 . It seems therefore
that somebody was supposed to suffer death during the cere-
mony, perhaps under the same circumstances as already
suggested in the kindred case of the Alexandrian Mysteries 6 .
We are a little better informed as to the degrees of initiation,
which numbered seven. The initiate ascended from the degree
of Crow (corax), which was the first or lowest, to that of Father
{Pater), which was the seventh or highest, by passing successively

1 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 204, Fig. 30, and p. 493, Fig. 430; or
P.S.B.A. 1912, PL xm. Figs. 1 and 2.

2 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 62.

3 The story quoted from Pseudo-Augustine (Cumont, op. cit. I. p. 322)
about the hands of the initiates being bound with chickens' -guts which were
afterwards severed by a sword might account for the number of birds'
bones.

4 Cumont, op. cit. n. p. 21, gives the passage from Lampridius mentioned
in n. 1, p. 260, supra.

6 Op. cit. i. p. 322, quoting Zacharius rhetor.
6 See Chapter II, Vol. i. p. 62, supra.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 263

through the intermediate degrees of Man of the Secret (Cryphius),
Soldier (Miles), Lion {Leo), Persian (Perses), and Courier of
the Sun (Heliodromus) 1 . It would seem that either he, or the
initiating priests, or perhaps the other assistants, had to assume
disguises consisting of masks corresponding to the animals
named in the first and fourth of these degrees, and to make
noises like the croaking of birds and the roaring of lions 2 . These
rightly recall to M. Cumont the names of animals borne by
initiates or priests in other religions in Greece and Asia Minor
and may be referred to totemistic times. We also know from
a chance allusion of Tertullian that on being admitted to the
degree of soldier, the initiate was offered a crown or garland at
the point of a sword, which he put away from him with the
speech, " Mithras is my crown ! ", and that never thereafter
might he wear a garland even at a feast 3 . Porphyry, too, tells |
us that in the degree of Lion, the initiate's hands and lips were (
purified with honey. It has also been said by the Fathers that
before or during initiation, the candidate had to undergo certain
trials or tortures, to swim rivers, plunge through fire, and to
jump from apparently vast heights 4 ; but it is evident from the
small size of the Mithraea or chapels which have come down to
us that these experiences would have demanded much more
elaborate preparation than there was space for, and, if they
were ever enacted, were probably as purely " make-believe "
as the supposed murder just mentioned and some of the
initiatory ceremonies in certain societies of the present day 5 .
Lastly, there is no doubt that women were strictly excluded
from all the ceremonies of the cult, thereby justifying in some j

1 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 18, for the passage in St Jerome in which these
degrees are enumerated. They all appear in the inscriptions given by
Cumont, except that of Miles or Soldier. An inscription by two " soldiers "
of Mithras has, however, lately been found at Patras and published by
its discoverers, M. Charles Avezou and M. Charles Picard. See R.H.R.
t. lxiv. (1911), pp. 179-183.

2 Cumont, T. et M. I. pp. 315 sqq. 3 Tertullian, de Corona, c. 15.

4 Porphyry, de antro nymph, c. 15.

5 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 322. Gregory of Nazianza (a.o. 320-390)
is the first authority for these tortures ( KoXdaei ?) in point of time. Nonnus
the Mythographer gives more details, but is three centuries later.


264 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

sort the remark of Renan that Mithraism was a " Pagan
Freemasonry 1 ."

It has also been said that the true inwardness and faith of
the religion of Mithras was in these mysteries only gradually
and with great caution revealed to the initiates, whose fitness
for them was tested at every step 2 . It may be so, but it is
plain that the Mithraist was informed at the outset of at least
a good many of the tenets of the faith. The whole Legend of
Mithras, so far as we know it, must have been known to the
initiate soon after entering the Mithraic chapel, since we have
ourselves gathered it mainly from the different scenes depicted
on the borders of the great central group of the Tauroctony.
So, too, the mystic banquet or Mithraic Sacrament which, if
the Heddernheim monuments stood alone, we might consider
was concealed from the eyes of the lower initiates until the
proper moment came, also forms one of the subsidiary scenes
of the great altar piece in the chapels at Sarmizegetusa, Bononia
and many other places 3 . In a bas-relief at Sarrebourg, more-
over, the two principal persons at the banquet, i.e. Mithras and
the Sun, are shown surrounded by other figures wearing the
masks of crows and perhaps lions 4 , which looks as if initiates of
all grades were admitted to the sacramental banquet. One
can therefore make no profitable conjecture as to what particular
doctrines were taught in the particular degrees, though there
seems much likelihood in M. Cumont's statement that the
initiates were thought to take rank in the next world according
to the degree that they had received in this 5 . The belief that
" those who have received humble mysteries shall have humble
places and those that have received exalted mysteries exalted
places " in the next world was, we may be sure, too profitable
a one for the priests of Mithras to be neglected by them. It

1 Renan, Marc-Aurele, p. 577. a Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 73.

3 Op. tit. n. p. 294, Fig. 149 ; p. 298, Fig. 154 ; p. 300, Fig. 156 ; p. 304,
Fig. 161 ; p. 488, Fig. 421.

* Op. tit. i. p. 175, Fig. 10.

6 Op. tit. l p. 39, n. 6, quoting the Arda Viraf namak. A quotation
from Arnobius, adv. gentes, which follows, merely says that the Magi boast
of their ability to smooth the believers' passage to heaven.


xii] The Worship of Mithras 265

certainly explains the extraordinary order for the planetary
spheres adopted by Origen 1 , according to which the souls which
had taken the lowest degree would go to the heaven of Saturn,
slowest and most unlucky of the planets, while those perfected
in the faith would enter the glorious house of the Sun.

Whether they were thought to go further still, we can only
guess. It should be noticed that the mystic ladder of Mithras
had eight steps, and we have seen that when the soul had
climbed through the seven planetary spheres there was still
before her the heaven of the fixed stars. The Sun seems in
Origen's account of the Mithraic faith to have formed the last
world to be traversed before this highest heaven could be
reached ; and it was through the disk of the Sun that the
ancients thought the gods descended to and reascended from
the earth. This idea appears plainly in the Papyrus quoted
above, where the Mithraist is represented as an eagle who flies
upwards " and alone " to heaven and there beholds all things 2 .
He prays that he may, in spite of his mortal and corruptible
nature, behold with immortal eyes after having been hallowed
with holy hallo wings, "the deathless aeon, lord of the fiery
crowns," and that " the corruptible nature of mortals " which
has been imposed upon him by " inexorable Necessity " may
depart from him. " Then," says the author of the fragment —
which, it will be remembered, claims to be a revelation given by
the archangel of the great Sun- God Mithras — the initiate " will
see the gods who rule each day and hour ascending to heaven
and others descending, and the path of the visible gods through
the disk of the god my father will appear." He describes the
machinery of nature by which the winds are produced, which
seems to be figured on some of the Mithraic monuments, and
which reminds one of the physics supposed to be revealed in

1 See Chap. VIII, p. 74, n. 3, supra.

2 That those who had taken the degree of Pater were called deroi or
eagles appears from Porphyry, de Abslinentia, Bk rv. c. 16. Cumont
doubts this ; see T. et M. i. p. 314, n. 8. The idea probably had its
origin in the belief common to classical antiquity that the eagle alone could
fly to the sun, from which the Mithraist thought that the souls of men
came, and to which those of perfect initiates would return. Cf. op. cit. I.
p. 291.


266 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

the Enochian literature. Then, after certain spells have been
recited, the initiate sees the disk of the Sun, which opens,
disclosing " doors of fire and the world of the gods within them."
Then follow more invocations to the gods of the seven planetary-
worlds who appear in due course, and presumably give him
admission to their realms. After another invocation, in what
may possibly be some Asianic or Anatolian language very much
corrupted, the initiate beholds " a young god, beautiful, with
fiery hair, in white tunic and purple mantle, and having on his
head a crown of fire," who seems to be Helios or Sol, the driver
of the sun's chariot on the Mithraic monuments. He is saluted
as " Mighty in strength, mighty ruler, greatest king of gods !
Sun, lord of heaven and earth, God of Gods ! " Next appear
" seven virgins in linen robes having the heads of serpents,"
who are called " the seven Fortunes of heaven " and are, as
M. Georges Lafaye surmises, the seven stars of the constellation
of the Great Bear 1 . They are followed by seven male gods also
dressed in linen robes and with golden crowns, but equipped
with the heads of black bulls, who are called " the rulers of
the Pole." These are they, we are told, who send upon the
impious thunders and lightnings and earthquakes. And so we
are led at last to the apparition of " a god of extraordinary
stature, having a glance of fire, young and golden-haired, in
white tunic and golden crown, clothed in anaxyrides, holding in
his right hand the golden shoulder of a young bull." This,
i.e. the shoulder, we are told, is called " Arctos, who moves the
sky, making it to turn forwards and backwards according to
the hour." But the god appears to be intended for Mithras,
and the shoulder of the bull is probably an allusion to the bull-
slaying scene which may serve to show that there were more
interpretations than one placed upon the Tauroctony. The
initiate hails this god as " Lord of water, consecrator of the
earth, ruler of the air, shining-rayed One, of primeval rays ! "
and the like, and continues :

" Lord, having been born again, I die ! Having increased and
again increasing, I come to an end by life-begotten birth, and
coming into existence, and having been released unto death, I

1 Lafaye, IS Initiation Mithriaque, p. 106.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 267

pursue my way, as thou hast ordered from the beginning, as thou
hast ordained. And having accomplished the mystery, I am
Pheroura miouri"

Here the fragment abruptly breaks off, and plunges into direc-
tions for the manufacture of oracles and the other stuff common
in Magic Papyri. One is not much inclined to believe with
M. Cumont that the author of the galimatias knew nothing
about Mithraism 1 , and merely introduced Mithras' name into
his opening to impress his readers with a sense of the value of
his recipes. It seems more likely that the writer of the frag-
ment had really got hold of some part of a Mithraic ritual,
which he had read without understanding it, and that he was
trying to work more or less meaningless extracts from it into
his spells on the same principle that the sorcerers of the
European Renaissance used when they took similar liberties
with the words of the Mass. If this view be adopted, it follows
that the concluding words given above confirm the view that
the Mithraists, like the Orphics before them, taught the metem-
psychosis or reincarnation of souls 2 . Did the Mithraist think
that his soul, when released from this " dread necessity," finally
escaped from even the planetary spheres and, raising itself into
the heaven of the fixed stars, became united with the Deity
Himself ? We can only ask the question without being able
to suggest an answer supported by any evidence.

With regard to the priests who acted as celebrants in these
strange mysteries, there are instances to be found in the in-
scriptions which make it plain that the priestly office was not
confined or attached to any particular degree of initiation.
Pater Patrum (Father of Fathers) is a designation which occurs
too frequently on the monuments for it to mean anything but
eldest or president of those who had taken the seventh or
highest degree in one congregation 3 . But Sacerdos or Antistes

1 Cumont, T. et M. n. p. 56.

2 Porphyry, de Abstinentia, Bk rv. c. 16 says this was so.

3 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 318, n. 1, points out that an initiate might
become Pater Patrum immediately after being made Pater or Pater
sacrorum simply. This appears from the two monuments both dated the

I same year of Vettius Agorius Praetextatus, op. cit. rr. p. 95.


268 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

indifferently is the name by which the priest of Mithras is
described by himself and others, and the holding of the office
seems not to have been inconsistent with the tenure at once
of other priesthoods and of high office in the State. Thus
the clarissimus Vettius Agorius Praetextatus, who was Urban
Praetor, Proconsul of Achaea, Prefect of the City, Prefect of
the Praetorians of Italy and Illyricum, and Consul Designate
at the time of his death, was Father of Fathers in the religion
of Mithras besides being Pontiff of the Sun and Pontiff of Vesta 1 .
This was at a very late date, when probably only a man of high
civil rank dared avow on his tombstone, as did Vettius, his
fidelity to the god ; but earlier, we find Lucius Septimius, a
freedman of Severus, Caracalla, and Geta, acting as " Father
and Priest of theUnconquered Mithras in the Augustan house" —
evidently a Court chaplain — , and a certain clarissimus Alfenius
Julianus Kamenius who is of consular rank, a quaestor and a
praetor, as a " father of the sacred things of the Highest Un-
conquered One Mithras 2 ." So, too, we find a veteran of the
IVth Flavian Legion acting as pater sacrorum, a decurion as
antistes and another as sacerdos of Mithras 3 . Evidently, the
cares of the priesthood did not occupy the priest's whole time,
and he never seems to have lived in the temple as did the clergy
of the Alexandrian divinities. There was, on the faith of
Porphyry, a summus pontifex or Supreme Pontiff of Mithras,
who like the Christian bishop in the Epistle to Timothy was
forbidden to marry more than once 4 ; but this was probably
a high officer of State appointed directly by the Emperor.
No proof is forthcoming that a fire was kept perpetually burning
on the altar in the European chapels of Mithras, as perhaps was
the case with the temples of the faith in Asia Minor, or that
daily or any other regularly repeated services were held there,

1 See Amraianus Marcellinus Bk xxn. c. 7, for his life under Julian.
His career is well described by Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of
the Western Empire, 1899, pp. 17, 18, 30, 154, 155.

2 Cumont, T. el M. n. p. 100, inscr. 35; p. 98, inscr. 24.

3 Op. cit. H. p. 130, inscr. 225 ; p. 132, inscr. 239 ; p. 134 s inscr. 257.
The two decurions may of course have been decurions of the rite only,
as to which see op. cit. i. p. 326.

4 Op. cit. i. p. 324 : TertuUian, Praescpt. c. 40.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 269

and such services moreover could seldom have been attended
by the soldiers with the colours, who seem to have made up
the majority of the god's worshippers. Prayers to the Sun-God
and other deities were no doubt offered by Mithraists, possibly
at sunrise and sunset, and perhaps special ones on the first day
of the week, which they very likely held sacred to their god.
But the small size of the Mithraea, and the scanty number of
the members of the associations supporting each 1 , make it
extremely unlikely that there was anything like regular con-
gregational worship, or that the faithful assembled there except
for initiations or meetings for conferring the different degrees.
The extremely poor execution of the bas-reliefs and other
sculptures found in the majority of these chapels all points the
same way. Most of these, together with the furniture and what
are nowadays called " articles de culte," were presented to the
chapel by private members of the association 2 . The fact that
the congregations of many chapels must have frequently
changed by the shifting of garrisons from one end of the Empire
to the other caused by the operations of war both external and
civil, also helps to account for their temporary and poverty-
stricken appearance when compared with the great and stately
temples reared to rival gods like Serapis.

Thus the truth of Kenan's comparison of the Mithraic faith
with modern Freemasonry becomes more apparent, and we
may picture to ourselves the Mithraists as a vast society spread
over the whole of the Empire, consisting mainly of soldiers,
and entirely confined to the male sex. The example of the
Emperor Julian, himself a devotee of Mithras, but actively
concerned in the propagation of the worship of other divinities,
such as Apollo, Serapis, Mars, and Cybele 3 , shows that its real
aim was not so much the conversion of individuals as the inclu-
sion of all other cults within itself. It was doubtless with this
view that Julian recalled from exile those heresiarchs who had
been banished by the Christian emperors and insisted on equal

1 Cumont, T. et M. I. p. 65. Thirty-five seems to be the greatest
number belonging to any one chapel.

2 Op. cit. i. p. 327.

3 Amm. Marcell. passim.


270 The Worship) of Mithras [ch.

toleration for all sects of Jews and Christians 1 . Themistius is
no doubt merely echoing the sentiments of the Mithraist
emperor when he writes to his Christian successor Jovian that
no lover of wisdom should bind himself to any exclusively
national worship, but should acquaint himself with all re-
ligions 2 . God, he says, requires no agreement on this subject
among men, and their rivalries in matters of faith are really
beneficial in leading their minds to the contemplation of other
than worldly things. But this highly philosophic temper was
not reached all at once ; and it is probable that the worship of
Mithras was, on its first importation into the West, but one
foreign superstition the more, as little enlightened and as
exclusively national as the Jewish, the Egyptian, or any of the
others. It was probably its rise to imperial favour under the
Antonines, when Commodus and many of the freedmen of
Caesar's House were initiated, that first suggested to its votaries
the possibility of using it as an instrument of government;
and henceforth its fortunes were bound up with those of
the still Pagan State. Its strictly monarchical doctrine, using
the adjective in its ancient rather than in its modern connota-
tion, must have always endeared it to the emperors, who were
beginning to see clearly that in a quasi-OvientaX despotism lay
the only chance of salvation for the Roman Empire. Its relations
with Mazdeism in the strict form which this last assumed after
the religious reforms of the Sassanian Shahs have never been
elucidated, and M. Cumont seems to rely too much upon the
later Avestic literature to explain everything that is obscure
in the religion of Mithras. If we imagine, as there is reason to
do, that Western Mithraism was looked upon by the Sassanian
reformers as a dangerous heresy 3 , the Roman Emperors would
have an additional reason for supporting it ; and it is significant
that it was exactly those rulers whose wars against the Persians
were most successful who seem to have most favoured the

1 Neander, Ch. Hist. rn. p. 136.

* Marinus, vita Prodi, pp. 67, 68 ; Neander, op. cit. m. p. 136.

3 Witness the reduction of Mitra, who plays such an important part
in the religion of the Vedas, to the far lower position of chief of the Izeds
or Yazatas in the Sassanian reform.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 271

worship of the Persian god. When Trajan conquered Dacia,
the great province between the Carpathians and the Danube
now represented by Hungary and Roumania, he colonized it
by a great mass of settlers from every part of the Roman Empire,
including therein many Orientals who brought with them into
their new home the worship of their Syrian and Asianic gods 1 .
It was hence an excellent field for the culture of a universal
and syncretic religion such as that of Mithras, and the great
number of Mithraea whose remains have been found in that
province, show that this religion must have received hearty
encouragement from the Imperial Court. From its geographical
position, Dacia formed an effective counterpoise to the growing
influence upon Roman policy of the Eastern provinces, and it
might have proved a valuable outpost for a religion which was
always looked upon with hostility by the Greek-speaking
subjects of Rome. Unfortunately, however, a religion which
allies itself with the State must suffer from its ally's reverses
as well as profit by its good fortunes, and so the Mithraists
found. When the Gothic invasion desolated Dacia, and es-
pecially when Valerian's disaster enabled the Goths to gain a
footing there which not even the military genius of Claudius
could loosen, Mithraism received a blow which was ultimately
to prove fatal. The abandonment of Dacia to the Goths and
Vandals by Aurelian in 255 a.d., led to its replanting by a race
whose faces were turned more to Constantinople than to Rome,
and who were before long to be converted to Christianity en
masse 2 . Diocletian and his colleagues did what they could to
restore the balance by proclaiming, as has been said above, the
" unconquered " Mithras the protector of their empire at the
great city which is now the capital of the Austrian Empire ;
but the accession of Constantine and his alliance with the
Christian Church some twenty years later, definitely turned the
scale against the last god of Paganism. Although the Mithraic
worship may have revived for a moment under the philosophic
Julian, who was, as has been said, peculiarly addicted to it,
it possessed no real power of recuperation, and was perhaps

1 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 250, for authorities.

2 Gibbon, Decline and Fall (Bury's ed.), i. p. 260 n. 106.


272 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

one of the first Pagan religions to be extinguished by the
triumphant Christians 1 . In 377 a.d., Gracchus, the Urban
Prefect of Rome, being desirous of baptism, carried into effect
a promise made, as St Jerome boasts, some time before, and
breaking into a chapel of Mithras, " overturned, broke in pieces
and cast out " the sculptures which had seen the admission of
so many initiates 2 . His example was followed in other parts
of the Empire, and it is probable that some decree was obtained
from the Emperor Gratian legalizing these acts of vandalism 3 .
It is in this reign, M. Cumont finds, that most of the Mithraea
were wrecked, and the very few which have come down to us
in more complete state owe their preservation to the caution of
their congregations, who blocked or built up the entrances to
them in the vain hope that a fresh turn of the wheel might
again bring their own cult to the top 4 . A conservative reaction
towards the older faiths did indeed come for a moment under
Eugenius ; but it was then too late. The masses had turned
from Mithraism to Christianity, and the only adherents of the
" Capped One " were to be found among the senators and high
officials who had long connived at the evasion of the edicts
prohibiting all forms of Pagan worship. The invasions of
Alaric and Attila probably completed what the Christian mob
had begun.

M. Cumont and Sir Samuel Dill are doubtless right when
they attribute the downfall of Mithraism in great measure to
its attitude towards women 5 . Mithraism was from the first
essentially a virile faith, and had little need of the softer
emotions. Hence we find in it none of the gorgeous public
ritual, the long hours spent in mystic contemplation before the
altar, or the filial devotion of the flock to the priest, that we
see in the worship of the Alexandrian Gods. In spite of the
great authority of M. Cumont, whose statements on the subject
seem to have been accepted without much enquiry by later

1 Reville, Religion sous les Sever es, p. 102.

2 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 347.

3 Dill, Last Century, etc. p. 29, n. 2.

4 Cumont, T. et M. i. p. 347.
6 Op. cit. i. pp. 329, 330 ; Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p. 624.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 273

writers, it will probably appear to the impartial student that
the priests of Mithras were more like the churchwardens or
elders of Protestant communities at the present day than the
active and highly organized hierarchy of the Alexandrian
divinities and of the Catholic Church. It is, as we have seen,
most probable that they never visited their chapels except in
company with the other devotees when an initiation into one
or other of the seven degrees of the cult was to be performed,
and, judging from the scanty numbers of the congregation, this
can only have been at fairly long intervals. Hence the daily
prayers and sacrifices of themselves and their congregations
were probably rendered elsewhere, either in the privacy of their
homes, or in the temples of other gods. In neither case would
they have much need for the assistance of women in their
propaganda, who would, moreover, have probably felt little
interest in a worship from the most solemn and distinctive
parts of which they were excluded. The Mithraists therefore
had to dispense with the support of a very large and important
fraction of the community which was easily won over to the
side of their rivals. Exceptional causes such as the perpetual
shifting of the legions from one end of the Empire to the other
at a time when communications between them were many times
more difficult than now, may have prevented such considerations
for some time from having their full weight. When once they
did so, the issue could not long be in doubt.

Nor was the very real, if somewhat vague, monotheism
which Mithraism taught, very likely to attract, at first sight,
the enthusiasm of a large and mixed population engaged in civil
pursuits. If the conjecture made above be correct, the Mithraist
in the ordinary way acknowledged no other god than Mithras,
although he would probably have admitted that he was but
the representative and antitype of the supreme Jupiter whom
he recognized as the official head of the State pantheon. As for
the other gods, he probably considered them as mere abstract
personifications of the powers of Nature, who were at the most
the creatures and subjects of Mithras " the friend," and whom
it might please him to propitiate by acts of worship which the
god would know how to appreciate. This is not very far from the

l. n. 18


274 The Worship of Mithras [ch.

theories of the Stoics, always dear to the nobler spirits in the
Roman Empire, and coupled with the high Stoic ideal of duty,
forms one of the best working philosophies for the soldier ever
devised. But the soldier, removed as he is from care for his
daily necessities, and with instant and ready obedience to
another will than his own constantly required of him, has
always held different views on such subjects to the civilian ;
and such ideas were rather above the heads of the crowd, sunk
for the most part in abject poverty, utterly absorbed in the
struggle for daily bread, and only anxious to snatch some
passing enjoyment from a life of toil. What they, and even
more urgently, their womenfolk needed was a God, not towering
above them like the Eternal Sun, the eye of Mithras and his
earthly representative, shedding his radiance impartially upon
the just and the unjust ; but a God who had walked upon the
earth in human form, who had known like themselves pain and
affliction, and to whom they could therefore look for sympathy
and help. Such a god was not to be found in the Mithraic
Cave.

For these reasons, probably, Mithraism fell after a reign of
little more than two centuries. Yet for good or ill, few religions
have lived in vain ; and some of the ideas which it made
popular in Europe have hardly yet died out. The theory that
the emperor, king, or chief of the State is of a different nature
to other men, and is in a peculiar manner the care of the gods,
was first formulated in the West during the time that Mithraism
was in power and is a great deal more the creation of the Persian
religion than of the Egyptian, in which he was said to be the
incarnation of the Sun-God. This is fairly plain from the custom
to which M. Cumont has lately drawn attention of releasing
at the funeral or apotheosis of a Roman emperor a captive
eagle, representing the soul of the dead ruler, the upward flight
of the bird being held typical of the soul's ascension into heaven 1 .
The connection of this practice with Mithraism is evident, since
" eagle " was one of the names given to the perfect Mithraist,
or he who had taken all the seven degrees of initiation, and had

1 Cumont, "L'aigle fun6raire des Syriens et l'apotheose des empereurs."
R.H.R., 1910, pt ii. pp. 159 sqq.


xn] The Worship of Mithras 275

therefore earned the right to be called pater sacrorum 1 . The
Christian emperors of Rome continued probably the practice
and certainly the nomenclature associated with it, and Con-
stantine and his successors were hailed by the Mithraic epithets
of " aeternus," " invictus," and " felix " as freely as his Pagan
predecessors. From this period the notion of the " divinity
that doth hedge a king " descended to comparatively modern
times, and " Sacred Majesty " was an epithet of our own kings
down to the reign of the last Stuart. Probably, too, it was the
custom of releasing an eagle at a royal funeral which so im-
pressed the popular imagination that the metaphor became
transferred, as such things generally are sooner or later, to the
lower ranks of the community, and the figure of the soul being
borne aloft on wings took the place that it still occupies in
popular Christian literature.

The share that Mithraism had in diffusing the practices of
magic and astrology is by no means so clear. That the Mith-
raists, like other pagans of the early centuries, were addicted to
magic is one of the most frequent accusations brought against
them by Christian writers, and the word magic itself, as has
been said above, is derived from those Magi from whom the
Mithraists were said to have derived their doctrine. In support
of this, it can certainly be said that the worshippers of Mithras
by rendering a modified cult to Ahriman, whom the Christians
identified with Satan, laid themselves open to the suspicion of
trafficking with devils, and it is quite possible that they, like
the followers of many other religions at the time, looked with
favour upon the compulsion rather than the propitiation of the
lower powers. Yet the strict monotheism of the faith which
practically looked to Mithras for the ultimate control and
regulation of all sublunary things, is certainly against this con-
clusion ; and it should be noticed that the laws against the
practices of magic and astrology, then so intertwined that it is
difficult to separate them 2 , were quite as severe under emperors
like Commodus and Diocletian who worshipped Mithras, as

1 Cf. the " solitary eagle " of the Magic Papyrus quoted on p. 265 supra.

2 Maury, La Magie el VAstrologie, passim. The Zend Avesta also
denounces magic as did the later Manichaeism. See p. 342 infra.

18—2


276 The Worship of Mithras [ch. xii

under those of their successors who professed the faith of
Christ. The rites of Hecate, however, were, as we have seen,
closely connected with those of Mithras and were generally in
the hands of Mithraists. These Hecatean rites seem to have
been almost entirely magical in their character, and it is the
name of Hecate that was handed down as that of the patroness
of sorcerers through the Middle Ages and the Renaissance 1 .
One of the priests of Mithras also goes out of his way to declare
on his epitaph that he is studiosus astrologiae, and on the whole
the Christian accusation was probably not without foundation.

1 As in Shakespeare's Macbeth.


CHAPTER XIII

MANES AND THE MANICHAEANS

It is generally said that the religion of Mithras ended and
was absorbed in Manichaeism, which may thus be supposed to
have inherited some, at least, of its doctrines 1 . This is one of
those statements which are copied by one author from another
until they acquire by mere repetition the force of an axiom;
but its truth is not obvious, nor does it appear to rest upon any
sound foundation. Except in the fact that both Mithraism and
Manichaeism came in the first instance from Persia, there is
little likeness between the two faiths, which are in all essential
respects diametrically opposed to each other. A strict dualism,
or the eternal antagonism of two equal principles, is the dis-
tinguishing feature of the religion of Manes, while the worship
of Mithras rested, as has been said in the last chapter, on an
equally uncompromising monotheism, which made the Supreme
Being, whether known as Jupiter or Ormuzd, at once the
creator and the governor of the universe. In this respect, it
drew near to Judaism, which it may have aimed at incor-
porating with itself, and was not ashamed to place on its
monuments scenes which can be referred to the Old Testament 2 .

1 So Cumont, T. et M. L pp. 45, 349, 350. He seems to rely, however,
entirely on the passage in the Acta Archelai (as to which see n. l,p. 280 infra),
wherein the supposed bishop Archelaus addresses the equally imaginary
Manes as "Savage priest and accomplice of Mithras!" — possibly a mere
term of abuse. See Hegemonius, Acta Archelai, ed. Beeson, Leipzig, 1906,
c. xl. p. 59.

2 Cumont, T. et M. I. p.' 41. He sees in the scenes which border the
Tauroctony references or parallels to the fig-leaves of Genesis, the striking
of the rock by Moses, and the ascension of Elijah. In the so-called Mithraic
Ritual of the Magic Papyrus of Paris, there are certain Hebrew words
introduced, such as mm (a well-known perversion of the Tetragrammaton),
aavxepufi and ae/ies iXafj. (The "Eternal Sun").


278 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Manichaeism, on the other hand, looked on Judaism with
horror, rejected the Old Testament entirely, and was not
improbably born in an outbreak of anti-Semitic fury 1 . But
the discrepancy of doctrine is as nothing compared to the wide
difference in those external matters which in a new religion
most strike the imagination of the crowd, and have therefore
much to do with its success or failure. The Mithraist was
accustomed, as we have seen, to an allegorical and symbolical
ritual in which the material image of his god was for ever
before him ; but the Manichaean, as we shall see later, forbade
the use of images and his worship consisted merely of prayers
and hymns. The Mithraists made frequent use in their
ceremonies of the sacrifice of animals; but the Manichaeans
looked with displeasure on the taking of the life even of plants.
The worshipper of Mithras not only gloried in the outward
profession of his religion, but by his avoidance of the wearing
of garlands forced the notice of it on those of his fellows who
were not of the faith. The follower of Manes, on the contrary,
concealed his religion as carefully as Basilides wished his
followers to conceal theirs, and even went to the length of
outwardly adopting a creed different from his own. It is not
therefore to be wondered at that the rulers of the Roman
Empire, whose acquaintance with the worship of Mithras was
a thousand times more profound than our own, should have
favoured Mithraism and have made every effort to suppress
Manichaeism. The very emperors who placed their reformed
State under the protection of Mithras imposed the penalty
of death upon those of their subjects who should venture
to teach the religion of Manes 2 .

1 See the story which Josephus, Antiq. xx. cc. 2, 3, 4, tells about
Izates, king of Adiabene, who wanted to turn Jew and thereby so offended
his people that they called in against him Vologeses or Valkash, the first
reforming Zoroastrian king and collector of the books of the Zend Avesta.
Cf. Darmesteter, The Zend Avesta (Sacred Books of the East), Oxford, 1895,
p. xl. Cf. ]£m. de Stoop La Diffusion du Manicheisme dans VEmpire
romain, Gand, 1909, p. 10.

' Circa 296, a.d. See Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 195, where the authen-
ticity of the decree is defended. For the provocation given to the Empire
by the anti-militarism of Manes see de Stoop, op. cit. pp. 36 37.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 279

Not less different were the sanctions with which Mithraism
and Manichaeism appeared in the West. The worship of
Mithras came into the Roman world unobtrusively and without
any claim to an exclusive revelation or special means of propa-
ganda. But Manichaeism had at its back the personality of
one of those wonderful men who appear at rare intervals in the
world's history, to leave behind them a memorial of their
empire over the minds of their fellows in the shape of a new
creed. Manes was indeed, as the discoveries of the last decade
have taught us, an innovator in religion entirely worthy to
rank with Zoroaster, Buddha, and Muhammad, and when the
difficulties in the way of his missionary activity are considered,
his influence upon the religious ideas of those who came after
him was at least as marked as that of any of them. Manes or
Mani — the first being the Greek form of the name — was born,
according to his own deliberate statement, about the year
216 a.d., in a village of Babylonia called Mardinu situate
on the Kutha canal to the south of Ctesiphon 1 . According to
Christian tradition, his real name was Corbicius or Kubrik and
he was a slave of unknown birth 2 ; according to the Mahom-
medan writers his father was one Patecius or Fatak, while his
mother is sometimes described as the "Lady Mary," sometimes
as a Parthian princess, and is sometimes named Karossa 3 .
Such legends grow up naturally round the birth of all founders
of religions, and we should believe them the less in this case
that they have been handed down to us by the professors of
religions bitterly opposed to that of Manes. Yet the story
about the Parthian princess seems confirmed by the free access
that he seems to have always possessed to the court of the
Persian monarchs of his time. Manes himself says, according

1 Al-Biruni, Chronology of Ancient Nations, p. 190. The date he gives
is twelve years before the accession of Ardeshir. E. Rochat, Essai sur
Mani et sa Doctrine, Geneve, 1897, p. 81, examines all the different accounts
and makes the date from 214 to 218 a.d.

2 Epiphanius, Haer. lxvi. c. 1, p. 399, Oehler; Socrates, Hist. Eccl.
Bk I. c. 22 ; Hegemonius, Acta Archelai, c. lxtv.

3 Muhammed ben Ishak, commonly called En-Nadim, in the book
known as the Fihrist, translated by Fliigel, Mani, seine Lehre und seine
Schriften, Leipzig, 1862, pp. 83, 116. 118, 119. Cf. Rochat, op. cit.
p. 75.


280 Manes and the Manichaeans [oh.

to Al-Biruni, that illumination came to him in his thirteenth
year 1 ; but this is contradicted by the Fihrist, which puts the
age at which he received revelation as twenty- four 2 . The Acta
Archelai, a Christian source obviously suspect in the state it
has come down to us, would make him a priest of Mithras 3 , a
tradition which may have originated at a date when the Catholic
Church recognized the danger to itself involved in the spread of
the Mithraic religion. Another story would make him a Magus
or one of the priestly caste entrusted by Ardeshir with the pro-
pagation of the reformed religion of Zoroaster 4 , which is dis-
credited by the fact that it was the Magi who were from the
outset his bitterest enemies 5 . A late Oriental writer says that
he was a Christian priest having a cure of souls at Ahvaz 6 , the
capital city of the province of Huzitis, which again is negatived
by the fact that he seems from his writings to have had little
more than a hearsay knowledge of Catholic Christianity,
although they show some acquaintance with the heresies of
Bardesanes and Marcion 7 . He is said to have acquired great

1 Al-Biruni, Chronology, p. 190.

2 Fliigel, op. cit. p. 84 ; Rochat, op. cit. p. 83.

3 Hegemonius, Acta Arch. c. XL., p. 59, Beeson. Rochat, op. cit. pp.
9—49, discusses the authenticity of the Acta chapter by chapter. He
thinks the pretended discussion between Archelaus and Manes unhistoricaL
and the account of it possibly modelled on that between St Augustine and
Faustus the Manichaean. The remainder of the Acta he considers fairly
trustworthy as an account of Manes' own tenets. This may well be, as
Epiphanius, Haer. lxvi. cc. 6-7, 25-31, transcribes the epistle to Mar-
cellus, its answer, and the exposition of Turbo, and could scarcely have
heard, as early as 375 a.d., about which time he wrote, of St Augustine's
discussion. The Acta owe much to the care of the American scholar,
Mr Beeson of Chicago, who has given us the careful edition of them
mentioned in n. 1, p. 277 supra. It is a pity that he did not see his way to
keep the old numeration of the chapters.

4 Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, Paris, 1734, Pt I. Bk n. cc. 1-4.
Cf. Stokes in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Manes ; Rochat, op. cit. p. 83.

5 Rochat, op. cit. p. 89.

• Abulfarag in Kessler, Forschungen uber die Manichdische Religion,
Berlin, 1889, Bd i. p. 335 ; Rochat, op. cit. p. 84 ; Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 168.

7 Fliigel, op. cit. p. 85. Cf. Al-Biruni, India (ed. Sachau), p. 55, where
Manes quotes the opinion of Bardesanes' "partizans." There are many
words put into the mouth of Manes in the work quoted which argue
acquaintance with the Pistis Sophia.


xin] Manes and the Manichaeam 281

skill in painting which he used to illustrate his teaching 1 , and
to have been a learned mathematician and astronomer. This
is likely enough; but the only events of his life which seem
well attested, are that he began at an early age to propagate
his doctrine and that he succeeded in converting to it Peroz or
Firuz the son of Ardeshir, through whose means he obtained
a formal hearing from Sapor or Shapiir, the conqueror of
Valerian and Ardeshir's successor, shortly after this king's
accession to the throne 2 . Sapor seems to have listened to
Manes with respect and, according to an Oriental writer, to have
even favoured his propaganda, until the Magi, to whom the
revival of the Zoroastrian religion had been committed, con-
vinced him of his error 3 . On this, Manes was exiled from
Persia and retired, says Al-Biruni, to India, China, and Thibet
preaching his gospel 4 . On Sapor's death, he returned to Persia
under Hormisdas or Ormuz, and again, it is said, succeeded in
converting to his tenets the reigning monarch 5 . On Varanes'
or Bahram's accession to the throne the following year, however,
he was seized and put to death as a heretic after a disputation
with the Chief of the Magi, in which he failed to support the
test of an ordeal by molten metal proposed to him 6 . The most
likely account of his death narrates that he was decapitated,
and that his skin stuffed with straw was suspended at the gate
of the town where the execution took place 7 . This was followed

1 Abulmaali in Kessler, op. cit. p. 371; Firdausi, ibid. p. 375 ; Mirkhdnd,
ibid. p. 379. Cf. Rochat, op. cit. p. 81. He is said to have painted his
pictures in a cave in Turkestan (Stokes in Diet. Christian Biog. s.v. Manes),
which would agree well enough with the late German discoveries at Turfan,
for which see A. von Le Coq in J.B.A.S. 1909, pp. 299 sqq.

2 Fliigel, op. cit. p. 85.

3 Al-Jakubi in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 328, 329; cf. Rochat, op. cit. p. 88.

4 Al-Biruni, Chronology, pp, 191, 192.

5 Rochat, op. cit. p. 89. Al-Biruni, whom he quotes, however, says
merely that the Manichaeans increased under Ormuz, and also that Ormuz
"killed a number of them." See last note.

6 Al-Jakubi in Kessler, op. cit. p. 330. But Darmesteter (see passage
quoted in n. 2, p. 284 infra) puts this event as happening after Ormuz'
death and under Shapur II.

7 Al-Biruni, Chronology, p. 191. The town is called Djundi-sabur or
Gundisabur.


282 Manes and the Manichaeam [ch.

by a great persecution of the Manichaeans throughout Persia,
and it is fairly evident that this, like his own fate, was due to
the hostility he had aroused in the Magi 1 . The date of his
death is fixed with some accuracy at 275 a.d., so that he would
then have reached the age of sixty years 2 .

The causes underlying this sudden appearance of a new
religion are doubtless to be looked for in the political and
religious history of Persia at the time. Ardeshir, as has been
said above, gave new life to the feeling of Persian nationality
which the Parthian Kings had kept alive during Greek supre-
macy in Asia, and succeeded in again founding a Persian
Empire. Like Alexander, Antiochus Epiphanes, and again,
Diocletian, he seems to have been thoroughly alive to the great
effect that a faith common to the whole empire would have in
uniting the peoples under his sway.

"Never forget," he says in the supposed testament that he is said to
have left for the guidance of his son Sapor, "that as a king you
are at once the protector of religion and of your country. Consider
the altar and the throne as inseparable and that they must always
sustain each other. A sovereign without religion is a tyrant,
and a people which have no religion may be deemed the most
monstrous of all societies. Religion may exist without a State,
but a State cannot exist without religion ; and it is by holy laws
that a political association can alone be bound 3 ."

Yet in spite of these sentiments, more pithily expressed perhaps
in the "No bishop, no king" of our own James I, the task of
founding a common religion for the whole of the new Persian
empire must have presented some uncommon difficulties.
Apart from the strong Semitic element dominant in their
Babylonian province, the Parthians had always been eclectic
in matters of faith, and Vonones, one of the last kings of
Parthia, had shown himself to be a Philhellene of a type which
must have been peculiarly offensive to a sovereign who was

1 Al-Jakubi, ubi cit. supra; Eutychius quoted by Stokes, Diet. Christian
Biog. s.v. Manes.

2 Rochat, op. cit. p. 93, examines all the evidence for this and conies to
the conclusion given in the text.

3 Malcolm, History of Persia, London, 1821, Vol i. pp. 95, 96.


I


xin] Manes and the Manichaeans 283

trying to revive the old Persian nationality 1 . The worship of
Mithras, the god most favoured by the legions with whom
Ardeshir was soon to be at death-grips, must have been equally
out of the question ; and the knowledge of this is probably to
be seen in the low place in the celestial hierarchy assigned to
the old Vedic god in the Avesta of Ardeshir's day 2 . The
Jewish religion in Central Asia had lately given signs of prosely-
tizing fervour, and it was the going-over of a Parthian kinglet
against the will of his people to the Jewish faith which first,
according to one account, gave the excuse for the intervention
of Vologeses or Valkhash and the subsequent reformation or
revival of the Zoroastrian religion 3 . At the same time, Christi-
anity had already begun to share with Mithraism the devotion
of the legions stationed on the Roman frontier, and in the
Gnostic form favoured by the teaching of Marcion and
Bardesanes was pushing into Persia from Armenia and Edessa 4 .
Nor can we doubt that Buddhism, already perhaps struck with
decay in its native country of India 5 , but flourishing exceedingly
further East, was trying to obtain a foothold in that very
Bactria which was afterwards said to have been the historic
scene of Zoroaster's activity. Other small, but, as the event
was to show, highly vitalized faiths, were current in Western
Asia, and the power of the Magi when Ardeshir overthrew the
Parthian power had declined so greatly that the statues of the
Parthian kings were placed in the temples of the gods and
adored equally with those of the divinities 6 . The Persians of
Herodotus' time, who did not believe in deities who had the
same nature as men, would have blushed at such a profanation.

1 G. Rawlinson, The 6th Oriental Monarchy, 1873, p. 222; Rochat, op.
tit. p. 53.

2 See Chap. XII supra, p. 232. 3 See n. 1, p. 278 supra.

4 Al-Biruni, Chron. p. 187, makes Manes the successor or continuator of
Bardesanes and Marcion. This was certainly not so ; but it was probably
only from their followers that he derived any acquaintance with Christi-
anity. See n. 7, p. 280 supra. So Muhammad or Mahommed, four centuries
later, drew his ideas of the same faith from the heretics of his day.

5 Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, 1903, p. 318, says that after 300 A.D.
Buddhism was everywhere in decay in India.

8 Rochat, op. cit. p, 58.


284 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

From this unpromising welter of creeds and cults, Ardeshir
delivered the State by restoring the worship of Ahura Mazda
as the State religion. One of his first cares was to collect the
fragments of the books which we now know as the Zend Avesta,
in which the revelations of the national prophet Zoroaster were
set down in a language not then understanded of the people.
It was afterwards said that the MSS. of these books had pur-
posely been destroyed or scattered by Alexander ; but the fact
seems to be that they had fallen into discredit through the
turning-away of the Persians towards Hellenic and Semitic
gods; and that a previous attempt to restore their authority
by Valkhash or Vologeses I, the Parthian king who reigned
from 50 to 75 a.d., had met with little encouragement from his
subjects 1 . Most modern scholars are now agreed that the
Avesta and the literature that grew up round it contaiD many
doctrines not to be found in the Persian religion current in
Achaemenian times, and evidently brought into it from foreign
sources under the Hellenistic and Parthian kings. Such as it is,
however, the Avesta formed the Sacred Book of Ardeshir's
reformation; while, in the order of the Magi, by him restored
to more than their former power, the reformed Zoroastrian
faith possessed an active, established, and persecuting Church,
which reigned in Persia without a serious rival until the Mahom-
medan invasion.

Yet the first struggles of the reformation must have been
sharp, and Darmesteter was doubtless justified when he saw in
Manichaeism the first and possibly the strongest expression of
the revulsion of Ardeshir's subjects against the rigid orthodoxy
which he sought to impose upon them 2 . That such a feeling
persisted for some time is plain from the fact that Manes'
" heresy " is said by Al-Biruni to have been followed by that of
Mazdak, who seems to have preached, like the Antinomian
sects of Cromwell's time, a kind of Socialism including the
community of women and of property 3 . There arose also
about the same time or a little later the sect of Zervanists

1 Darmesteter, Zend Avesta, pp. xl, xli.

2 Op. eit. pp. xlvii sqq.

3 Al-Biruni, Chron. p. 192.


xin] Manes and the Manickaeam 285

referred to in the chapter on Mithras, who taught that Bound-
less Time was the origin of all things and was superior to
Ormuzd and Ahriman, to both of whom he was said to have
given birth. They seemed to have gained great power in the
reign of Yezdegerd II; and, if we may trust the Armenian
authors, a proclamation commanding adherence to their
doctrines was put forth by Yezdegerd's general Mihr Nerses on
his invasion of Armenia in 450 a.d. 1 But the earliest and most
enduring of these heresies or rebellions against the purified
and restored religion of Ahura Mazda appears to have been
that of Manes.

Were now the doctrines that Manes preached to his own
undoing his invention, or did he draw them from some pre-
existent source? It is said, in a Christian account which has
come down to us, that they were the work of one Scythianus 2 ,
a native, as his name implies, of " Scythia" (which here probably
means Turkestan) and a contemporary of the Apostles, who
married an Egyptian slave and learned from her all the wisdom
of the Egyptians 3 . With the help of this and the tincture of
dualism which he extracted from " the works of Pythagoras," the
story goes on to say, Scythianus constructed a system which
he taught to a disciple named Terebinthus, otherwise called
Buddas or Buddha, before his own death in Judaea 4 . This

1 Elisaeus Vartabed in Langlois' Collection des Hist, de VArmenie,
Paris, 1868, t. n. p. 190. The story is repeated almost word for word by
Eznig of Goghp, ibid. p. 875. Cf. Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 171.

2 Rochat, op. cit., following Kessler, shows, it seems, conclusively, that
this is another name for Manes' father, Fatak or Patecius.

3 She was a courtezan at Hypselis in theThebaid according to Epiphanius,
Haer. lxvi. c. 11, p. 400, Oehler. As Baur, Die Manichdische Religions-
system, Tubingen, 1831, p. 468 sqq. has pointed out, this is probably an
imitation of the story told about Simon Magus and his Helena (see Chap.
VI supra). It seems to have arisen as an embroidery, quite in Epiphanius'
manner, upon the story in the Acta, that Scythianus married a captive
from the Upper Thebaid (Hegemonius, op. cit. c. lxh. p. 90, Beeson).

4 Many guesses have been made as to the allusions concealed under
these names, as to which see Rochat, op. cit. pp. 64-73. Neander {Ch.
Hist. n. p. 16) quotes from Ritter the suggestion that Terebinthus may come
from an epithet of Buddha, Tere-hintu "Lord of the Hindus." One
wonders whether it might not have been as fitly given to a Jewish slave


286 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Terebinthus gave out that he was born of a virgin and had been
nursed by an angel on a mountain; and he also wrote four
books in which the doctrines of Scythianus were set down 1 .
These books he entrusted to an aged widow with whom he
lived, and he was afterwards struck dead while performing a
magical ceremony. On his death, she bought a boy of seven
years old named Corbicius, whom she enfranchised, and to
whom she left her property and Terebinthus' books some five
vears later. Thus equipped, Corbicius took the name of
Manes, which may signify "Cup" or "Vessel 2 ," and began to
preach. This history has evidently been much corrupted and
by no means agrees with the account before quoted from
Oriental sources which bears greater marks of authenticity;
but it is thought by some to be, like the 14th chapter of Genesis,
a sort of allegory in which the names of peoples and systems
are given as those of individual men 3 . If this be so, we should
perhaps see in Scythianus the representative of those non-
Aryan tribes of Medes of whom the Magi formed part, while
in the name of Buddha we might find that of one of those
Judaean communities holding a mixture of Magian and
Buddhist tenets who according to one tradition were for long
encamped near the Dead Sea 4 . Yet there is nothing specifically
Buddhist or Egyptian about the doctrines of Manes as we
know them 5 , and if there were any likeness between the

sold at the Fair of the Terebinth with which Hadrian closed his war of
extermination.

1 These four books may have been intended for the Shapurakhan, the
Treasure, the Gospel and the Capitularies, which Al-Biruni, Chron. p. 171,
attributes to Mani. Cf. Epiphanius, Haer. lxvi. c. 2, p. 402, Oehler,
and the Scholia of Theodore bar Khoni in Pognon, Inscriptions Mandaites
des Coupes de Khouabir, pp. 182, 183.

2 Epiphanius, op. cit. c. 1, p. 398, Oehler.

3 Colditz in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 15, 16. Cf. Rochat, op. cit. pp. 65, 66.

4 Morrison, Jews under Romans, p. 325 for authorities. Philo, de Vit.
Contempt, etc. c. m. says that similar communities existed in his time near
the Mareotic lake in Egypt. But the date of the treatise and its attribution
to Philo are alike uncertain. The first mention of Buddha in Greek
literature is said to be that by Clem. Alex. Strom. Bk I. c. 15.

5 Harnack in Encyc. Britann. 9th edition, s.v. Manichaeans, p. 48,
says "There is not a single point in Manichaeism which demands for its


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeam 287

mythology and observances of the cult and those of its prede-
cessors, it was probably introduced by Manes' followers rather
than by himself 1 . As to the doctrines of the Magi, Manes
certainly had no occasion to go to Judaea to find them; for
in the Persia of Ardeshir and Sapor he must have heard quite
as much of them as he wished.

Probably, therefore, the Christian account of Manes' sources
is untrue, or rather, as M. Rochat suggests, it was composed at a
time and place in which Manichaeism had become a heresy or
alternative creed attached, so to speak, not to Zoroastrianism but
to Christianity, and had picked up from this and other faiths
many accretions 2 . The doctrine of Manes which has come
down to us from other sources is extremely simple, and seems
to accord better with the Puritanical simplicity of life and
ritual afterwards practised by his followers. Both the
Christian and the Mahommedan traditions agree that he believed
that there were two gods, uncreated and eternal, and ever-
lastingly opposed to each other 3 . One of these is the God of
Light and the other the God of Darkness; but he does not
seem to have given any specific or proper name to either 4 .
It is possible that this last-named being may have been identified

explanation an appeal to Buddhism." This may be, but the discoveries
at Turf an and Tun-huang have made a connection between the two more
probable than appeared at the time he wrote. See also Kessler as quoted
by Rochat, op. cit. pp. 192, 193.

1 This appears from the Chinese Treatise at Pekin mentioned later.
See p. 293, n. 2.

2 Rochat, op. cit. p. 194. So Socrates, Eccl. Hist. Bk i. c. 22, calls
Manichaeism "a sort of heathen ('EXkyvifav) Christianity."

3 Hegemonius, Acta, c. vii. p. 91, Beeson; Fliigel, op. cit.
p. 86.

* Certainly none is recorded in the Christian accounts, where Darkness
is called Hyle or Matter. En Nadim (Fliigel, op. cit. p. 86) makes Manes
call the good God "the King of the Paradise of Light" and (p. 90) the
Spirit of Darkness, Hummama. Schahrastani, as quoted in Flugel's note
(p. 240), makes this word mean " mirk " or " smoke " (Qualm). It would be
curious if Hummama had any connection with the Elamite Khumbaba,
the opponent of the Babylonian hero Gilgamesh, because this personage
already figures in Ctesias' story about Nannaros, which has been recognized
as a myth relating to the Moon-god.


288 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

by him with Matter 1 , although this would seem to be a remnant
of the Platonic philosophy of which there is no other trace in
his teaching. But it is certain that he regarded the God of
Darkness as entirely evil, that is to say, malevolent, and as
a power to propitiate whom man should make no attempt.
"I have considered it needful to despatch this letter to you"
says an epistle which there is much reason to consider expresses
the opinions, if not the actual words, of Manes himself 2 :

"first for the salvation of your soul and then to secure you against
dubious opinions, and especially against notions such as those teach
who lead astray the more simple {airXova-Ttpoi), alleging that both
good and evil come from the same Power, and introducing but one
principle, and neither distinguishing nor separating the darkness
from the light, and the good from the bad and the evil ((f>av\ov),
and that which is without man from that which is within him, as
we have said formerly, so that they cease not to confuse and mingle
one thing with another. But do not thou, my son, like most men,
unreasonably and foolishly join the two together nor ascribe them
both to the God of Goodness. For these teachers attribute to God
the beginning and the end, and make him the father of these ills the
end of which is near a curse 3 "

Although this epistle bears evident marks of having been
worked over and amplified by some writer of a later age than
that of the founder of Manichaeism, there cannot be much
doubt that it contains his teaching on the Two Principles of
all things. In the Christian account of Manes' doctrine which

1 to tt)s vXtjs drjfjLiovpyrjfia Hegemonius, Acta, c. vrn. p. 9, Beeson. Cf.
Alexander of Lycopolis, adv. Manichaeos, c. n.

2 Epiph. Haer. lxvi. c. 6, p. 408, Oehler; Hegemonius, Acta, e. v.
pp. 5-7, Beeson. The authenticity of the letter is defended by Kessler,
op. cit. p. 166. Cf. Rochat, op. cit. p. 94 contra.

3 twv kokwi' eVi tov 6(6v dvacptpovo-Lv, mv to TeXos aardpas (yyvs. It is
evidently intended for a quotation from Heb. vi. 8, which however puts
it rather differently as eK<pipovo-a 8e dudvdas Kal rpifioXovs d8oKi/xo? <al
ic ardpas eyyvs, r/s to reXos els navo-tv. " But that which beareth thorns and
briers is to be rejected and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be
burned." The Khuastvantft or Manichaean confession mentioned later
repeats this phrase about God not being the creator of evil as well as of
good. See p. 335 infra.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeans 289

M. Rochat thinks earlier than the epistle quoted above, Manes'
quondam follower Turbo says after recantation that his master
reverences two gods "unbegotten, self-existing (avTo<f>ueU),
eternal and set over against each other," and that "he repre-
sents one as good, the other as wicked, giving to the one the
name of Light and to the other that of Darkness 1 ." So, too,
the Mahommedan writers who give what seems to be an inde-
pendent account of Manes' opinions are agreed that he deduced
the origin of the world from "two Original Principles, one of
which is Light and the other Darkness, and which are separated
one from the other 2 ." The absolute opposition from the outset
of good and evil therefore formed the pivot of Manes' whole
system, and was opposed quite as much to the Christian and
Jewish creeds as to the Mithraic and other modifications of
Persian religious ideas then or later in vogue, which held that
evil like good was the creation of the Supreme Being, and that
Ahriman or Pluto was a god having subordinate authority to,
but of the same nature as, Ormuzd or Zeus. This uncompro-
misingly dualistic theory gives an origin to evil independent
of that of good, and can only lead logically to the assertion of
its eternity. Whether Manes gave utterance to it for the first
time, or derived it from a theology then current in Persia, there
is little evidence to show 3 . The Zend Avesta itself in its
Sassanian recension does not seem to pronounce clearly on this
point, and has been thought by some high authorities to teach

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. vn. p. 9, Beeson.

2 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 386, sqq. Kessler's translation of
En Nadim, which is given in the first Appendix to the work quoted,
differs slightly from that of Flugel and depends on a somewhat better text
than the last-named. It is therefore used when possible in the remaining
notes to this chapter. Flugel' s book, however, has the advantage of a
commentary of some 300 pages marked with great erudition, and must
still be consulted by anyone wishing to be acquainted with its subject.

3 Plutarch, de Is. et Os. c. xlv., says, however, that "evil must have a
principle of its own," so that it cannot be the work of a benevolent being.
As he is generally supposed to have taken his account of the Persian
teaching from Theopompos of Chios, who was at the Court of Ptolemy
about 305 B.C., his evidence is against those who, like M. Cumont, would
make the "Zervanist" opinion, which assumes a common principle for
good and evil, pre-Christian. Yet the point does not yet seem capable
of decision, as Plutarch may here be only giving us his own opinion.

l. n. 19


290 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

the subordinate origin and ultimate extinction of evil 1 , and by
others exactly the reverse. It does, however, seem to be clear
that unless Manes invented de novo the doctrine above quoted,
it must have been from Persia that he obtained it. No other
country with which he can have become acquainted has yet
been shown to possess it 2 .

Exclusively Oriental, too, in its origin must be the history
of the conflict between these two Principles which follows.
Each of them apparently dwelt in his own domain for countless
ages untroubled by the existence of the other. The Light is
the uppermost and is, according to the Mahommedan version
of Manes' doctrine, without bounds in height and on each side.
The Darkness lies below it, and is in like manner boundless in
depth and in lateral extent 3 . Hence there is a long frontier
at which they touch, and this spot was filled from the beginning
by the celestial air and the celestial earth. If we may read
into the tradition something which is not expressed there, but
which seems to follow logically from it, this atmosphere and
this earth were the heavier parts of the Divine substance,
which sinking down formed a kind of sediment or deposit 4 .
Each of these Two Principles has five "members" or components,

1 Casartelli, op. cit. p. 44.

2 This is really the crux of the whole question. If the idea could be
traced back to the philosophers of Ionia {e.g. Heraclitus of Ephesus) and
their theory of eternal strife and discord being the cause of all mundane
phenomena, it is difficult to say whence the Ionians themselves derived it,
save from Persia. We can, of course, suppose, if we please, that the
Persians did not invent it de novo, but took it over from some of their
subjects. Among these, the Babylonians, for instance, from the earliest
times portrayed their demons as not only attempting to invade the heaven
of the gods, but as being in perpetual warfare with one another. But
the very little we know of Babylonian philosophy would lead us to think
that it inclined towards pantheism of a materialistic kind rather than to
dualism.

3 En Nadim, in Kessler, op. cit. p. 387 ; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 86.

4 The likeness of this to the cosmogony of the Ophites and their successor
Valentinus is of course marked (cf. Chaps. VIII and IX supra). Manes
may have borrowed it directly from Valentinus' follower Bardesanes,
whose doctrines were powerful in Edessa and Mesopotamia in his time, or
he may have taken it at first-hand from Persian or Babylonian tradition.
That Manes was acquainted with Bardesanes' doctrines, see n. 7, p. 280
supra.


.


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeam 291

and this partition into five seems in the Manichaean teaching
to run through all things. Thus, the Mahommedan tradition
tells us that the "members" of the God of Light are Gentleness,
Knowledge, Intelligence, Discretion, and Discernment, those of
the Air the same five, of the (celestial) earth, the Breeze or
Ether, Wind, Light, Water, and Fire, and of the Darkness
Smoke, Flame, Hot Wind, Poison or Pestilence, and Gloom
or Fog 1 . In this, and especially in its deification of abstract
principles, we may see a reflection of Gnostic teaching which
may easily have reached Manes from Valentinus by way of
Bardesanes and the Oriental or Edessan School. On the other
hand, the borrowing may have been the other way, and Simon
Magus may have obtained these notions from the Persian Magi
and have handed them on to Valentinus and his successors.
This does not seem so likely as the other, but the point can
hardly be settled until we know more than we do at present
of the state of the Persian religion from the time of the
Achaemenian kings to the Sassanian reform.

However that may be, both the Christian and Mahommedan
traditions are agreed that the aggressor in the struggle between
the good God and the bad was the Evil One. The Mahommedan
source, here fuller than the Christian, tells us that the Darkness
remained in an unorganized condition for ages, although
consisting of the five members enumerated above. These parts,
however, seem to have sunk down and produced another
Earth called the Darker Earth, from which in course of time
came forth Satan. Satan was not, like the King of the Paradise
of Light, without beginning, but came into being from the
union of these five members of Darkness, having the head of
a lion, the body of a serpent, the wings of a bird, the tail of
a fish, and four feet like those of crawling animals 2 , in which
figure we may see a kind of reflection of the Mithraic Ahriman 8 .

1 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. p. 387 ; Flugel, op. cit. p. 86. Fliigel's
text adds to these members other "souls" which he names Love, Belief,
Faith, Generosity, and Wisdom. Kessler substitutes Courage for
Generosity and seems to make these "souls" the members' derivatives.

2 See last note.

3 See Chapter XII, p. 251 supra. Here, again, the traditional and monstrous
figure of Satan may have been copied from the sculptured representations
of the composite demons of Babylonia (e.g. Rogers, Religion of Babylonia

19—2


292 Manes and the Manichaeam [ch.

Satan, on his emergence on the Darker Earth, perceived the
rays of light from the upper world, piercing as we may suppose
through the gloomy atmosphere of his own world, and conceived
a hatred for them. Seeing, too, that these rays gained much
in strength by their combination and mutual support, he
withdrew within himself so as to unite himself more closely
with his members 1 . Then again springing upwards, he invaded
the realms of Light with the intention of there spreading
calamity and destruction. The aeon — or world as the Fihrist
calls it — of Discernment was the first to be aware of this
invasion 2 , and reported it to the aeon Knowledge, from whom
it passed to the others in turn until it at last reached the ear
of the Good God, here, as elsewhere in the Fihrist, called the
King of the Paradise of Light. With the aid of the Spirit of
his Right Hand, of his five worlds or members before mentioned,
and of his twelve elements, of which we have before heard
nothing 3 , he made the First Man, clothing him by way of
armour with the five "species" or powers of the celestial earth,

and Assyria, Frontispiece and Figs. 1 and 13). Yet if we take the
Mithraic lion, as M. Cumont would have us do, as the symbol of fire and
the serpent as that of the earth, we have in the five sorts of animals the five
aroixei-a or elements of Aristotle. Cf. Aetius, de Placitis Philosophorum,
ed. Didot, Bk I. c. iii. § 38 (Plutarch, Moralia, n.), p. 1069. Yet the nearest
source from which Manes could have borrowed the idea is certainly Barde-
sanes, who, according to Bar Khoni and another Syriac author, taught
that the world was made from five substances, i.e. fire, air, water, light
and darkness. See Pognon, op. cit. p. 178; Cumont, La Cosmogonie
Manicheenne cFapres Theodore bar Kh&ni, Bruxelles, 1908, p. 13, n. 2.

1 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. p. 388 ; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 87. As the
ancients were unacquainted with the properties of gases, it is singular that
they should have formed such a conception as that of the compressibility
and expansibility of spirits. Yet the idea is a very old one, and the Arabian
Nights story of the Genius imprisoned in a brass bottle has its parallel in
the bowls with magical inscriptions left by the Jews on the site of Babylon
(Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, 1853, pp. 509 sqq.), between pairs of which
demons were thought to be imprisoned. Cf. Pognon, op. cit. p. 3. Some-
thing of the kind seems indicated in the "Little Point," from which all
material powers spring, referred to by Hippolytus and the Bruce Papyrus.

2 So in the Pistis Sophia, it is the "last Parastates" or assistant world
who breathes fight into the Kerasmos, and thus sets on foot the scheme of
redemption. Cf. Chapter X, p. 146 supra.

3 Yet the Fundamental Epistle speaks of the twelve "members" of
God, which Beem to convey the same idea- See Aug. c. Ep. Fund. c. 13.


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeans 293

the Breeze, Wind, Light, Water and Fire as before enumerated 1 .
With these He despatched him to fight Satan, who in his turn
did on his armour in the shape of his five "species," Smoke,
Flame, Poison, Hot Wind, and Gloom 2 . The fight lasted


1 Thus En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 388, 389 ; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 87.
But here the Christian tradition gives more details than the Mahommedan.
Hegemonius, Acta, c. vn., p. 10, Beeson, and Bar Khoni (Pognon, p. 185),
are in accord that the God of Light produced from himself a new Power
called the Mrjrijp rrjs ZaTjs or Mother of Life, that this Mother of Life pro-
jected the First Man, and that the First Man produced the five elements
called also his "sons," to wit, wind, light, water, fire and air, with which
he clothed himself as with armour. See Cumont, Cosmog. Munich, p. 16,
n. 4, for the harmonizing of the texts [N.B. the omission of trip from his
quotation from the Acta is doubtless a clerical error]. The identification
of the Mother of Life with the "Spirit of the Right [Hand]" is accepted by
Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp. 177, 178, and may be accounted for by the
crude figure by which the Egyptians explained the coming-forth of the
universe from a single male power. See Budge, Hieratic Papyri in the
Brit. Miis. p. 17.

2 These were also the "sons" of Darkness or Satan. See Bar Khoni
(Pognon, p. 186). The reason that led the God of Light to send a champion
into the fists was, according to Bar Khoni (Pognon, p. 185), that the five
worlds of his creation were made for peace and tranquillity and could
therefore not help him directly in the matter. Cf . St Augustine, de Natura
Boni, c. xlh. But Manes doubtless found it necessary to work into his
system the figure of the First Man which we have already seen prominent
in the Ophite system. Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 16, says few concep-
tions were more widely spread throughout the East. It is fully examined
by Bousset, Hauptprobleme, in his rvth chapter, "Der Urmensch." The
First Man is, in the Chinese treatise lately found at Tun-huang in circum-
stances to be presently mentioned, identified with the Persian Ormuzd
and the five elements are there declared to be his sons. See Chavannes
and Pelliot, Un Traiti. ManicMen retrouvten Chine, pt 1, Journal Asiatique,
serie x., t. xvm. (1911), pp. 512, 513. The 12 elements which helped in
his formation seem to be mentioned by no other author than En Nadim.
St Augustine, however, Contra Epistulam Fundamenti, c. 13, speaks of
the "12 members of light." The Tun-huang treatise also mentions "the
12 great kings of victorious form" whom it seems to liken to the 12 hours
of the day. As the Pistis Sophia does the same with the "12 Aeons"
who are apparently the signs of the Zodiac, it is possible that we here have
a sort of super-celestial Zodiac belonging to the Paradise of Light, of which
that in our sky is a copy. It should be remembered that in the Asiatic


294 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

long, but in the end Satan triumphed, and dragged the First
Man down into the Realm of Darkness, where he took from him
his light 1 . During the fight, too, the elements had become
mingled, so that the Ether henceforth was mixed with the
Smoke, the Fire with the Flame, the Light with the Darkness,
the Wind with the Hot Wind, and the Cloud with the Water.
This it is which brings about the confusion or mixture seen in
the present world, wherein everything which is beautiful, pure,
or useful, such as gold and silver, comes from the armour of
the First Man, and everything foul, impure, and gross, from
that of his infernal opponent 2 . After the fight, the King of
the Paradise of Light descended with another Power called the
Friend of the Lights, who overthrew Satan, and the Spirit of
the Right Hand or Mother of Life recalled, either by her voice
or by another power called the Living Spirit, the First Man from
his prison in the lowest Darkness. The First Man, on his
deliverance, in this account mounts again to the Realms of
Light, but before doing so "cuts the roots" of the Five Infernal

cosmogonies the fixed stars belong to the realm of good as the representa-
tives of order, while the planets or "wanderers" are generally evil.

1 En Xadim in Kessler, op. cit. p. 389; FliigeL op. cit. pp. 87, 88.
According to the Christian tradition, the Powers of Darkness devoured
only the soul of the First Man which was left below when his body, as will
presently be seen, returned to the upper world. See Hegemonius, Acta,
c. vn., p. 10, Beeson.

2 Both the Christian and the Mahommedan traditions agree as to this
result of the fight, which is paralleled not only by the more or less success-
ful attempt of Jaldabaoth and his powers to eat the light of Pistis Sophia,
but also by a similar case in orthodox Zoroastrianism. For all these see
Cumont, Cosmog. Munich, p. 18, n. 4. Bar Khoni (Pognon, p. 186), goes
further and describes the surrender of the First Man as a tactical effort
on his part, "as a man who having an enemy puts poison in a cake and
gives it to him." Alexander of Lycopolis (adv. Manich. c. m.), on the other
hand declares that God could not avenge himself upon matter (as he calls
Darkness) as he wished, because he had no evil at hand to help him, "since
evil does not exist in the house and abode of God " ; that he therefore
sent the soul into matter which will eventually permeate it and be the death
of it; but that in the meantime the soul is changed for the worse and
participates in the evil of matter, "as in a dirty vessel the contents suffer
change." These, however, are more likely to be the ideas of the Christian
accusers than the defences of the Manichaean teachers.


xin] Manes and the Manichaeans 295

Elements so that they can no more increase 1 . Then the King
of the Paradise of Light orders an angel to draw the Confusion
or Mixture of the Elements to that part of the Realm of Dark-
ness which touches the Realm of Light, and to create out of
it the present world, so as to deliver the imprisoned elements
of Light from the Darkness with which they are contaminated.
This is done, and a Universe having six heavens and eight
earths is formed, each heaven having twelve gates, together with
terraces, corridors, and places in such profusion as to point to
some confusion in the translation into the Syriac which has come
down to us. The only thing that concerns us in this, perhaps, is
that the visible world, presumably the lowest of the eight, has
a ditch dug round it in which is thrown the Matter of Darkness
as it is separated from the Light, and outside this a wall so that
it cannot escape. This is in view of the End of the World 2 .

1 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 389, 390 ; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 87. As
Kessler points out, En Nadim gives two accounts doubtless taken from
different Manichaean sources. In one, he says simply that the King of
the Paradise of Light followed with other gods and delivered the First
Man, the actual victor over Darkness being called "the Friend" of the
Lights (like Mithras). He then goes on to say that Joy (i.e. the Mother
of Life) and the Spirit of Life went to the frontier, looked into the abyss
of hell and saw the First Man and his powers were held enlaced by Satan,
"the Presumptuous Oppressor and the Life of Darkness" ; then she called
him in a loud and clear voice, and he became a god, after which he returned
and " cut the roots of the Dark Powers. " For Bar Khoni's amplification
of this story see p. 302, n. 1, and p. 324 infra. The whole of this, together
with the cutting of the roots, is strongly reminiscent of the Pistis Sophia.

2 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 391, 392; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 98.
The Acta (Hegemonius, op. cit. c. vtn., p. 11, Beeson) say that the "Living
Spirit" before mentioned "created the Cosmos, descended clothed with
three other powers, drew forth the rulers (ol apx»vres) and crucified them
in the firmament which is their body the Sphere." "Then he created the
fights (<t>a>(rr?ipfs) which are the remnants of the soul, caused the firmament
to encompass them, and again created the earth [not the Cosmos] with
its eight aspects." The Latin version after "earth" adds "they (sic !) are
eight, " which if it refers to the aspects would agree with En Nadim. Alex-
ander of Lycopolis (adv. Manich. c. m.), who had been a follower of Manes
and was a Christian bishop some 25 years after Manes' death, says that
"God sent forth another power which we call the Demiurge or creator
of all things; that this Demiurge in creating the Cosmos separated from
matter as much power as was unstained, and from it made the Sun and


296 Maries and the Manichaeans [ch.

So far there is no great difference — at all events, no irre-
concilable difference — between the Christian and the Mahom-
medan accounts of Manes' doctrines. The machinery set up
for the process of the redemption of the light, however, differs
somewhat conspicuously in the two traditions. The Mahom-
medan writers declare that in Manes' teaching the Sun and
Moon were created for the purification of the Light, the Sun
drawing to itself those light-elements which had become
contaminated by the demons of heat and flame and the Moon
exercising a like attraction on those which had suffered from
the embrace of Satan's other powers. Both luminaries bear
these elements into the Column of Praises or Glory which is
perpetually mounting from the Sun to the World of Light,
bearing with it the praises of men, their hymns of gratitude,
and their pure words and good works 1 . This will continue until

Moon; and that the slightly stained matter became the stars and the
expanse of heaven." "The matter from which the Sun and Moon were
taken," he goes on to say, "was cast out of the Cosmos and resembles
night" [Qy the Outer Darkness ?], while the rest of the " elements " consists
of light and matter unequally mingled. Bar Khoni (Pognon, op. cit.
p. 188), as will presently be seen, says that the Living Spirit with the Mother
of Life and two other powers called the Appellant and Respondent [evi-
dently the "three other powers" of the Acta] descended to earth, caused
the Rulers or Princes to be killed and flayed, and that out of their skins
the Mother of Life made 11 heavens, while their bodies were cast on to
the earth of darkness and made 8 earths. The Living Spirit then made
the Sun, the Moon, and "thousands of Lights" (i.e. Stars) out of the light
he took from the Rulers. That this last story is an elaboration of the
earlier ones seems likely, and the flaying of the Rulers seems to be reminis-
cent of the Babylonian legend of Bel and Tiamat, an echo of which is also
to be found in the later Avestic literature. See West, Pahlavi Texts
(S.B.E.), pt iii. p. 243. Cf. Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 27, n. 2.

1 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. p. 392; Flugel, op. cit. pp. 89-90.
This would agree perfectly with the system of the Pistis Sophia, where it
is said that the "receivers of the Sun and Moon" give the particles of the
light as it is won from matter to Melchizedek, the purifier, who purifies
it before taking it into the Treasure-house (pp. 36, 37, Copt.). The idea
that the Sun's rays had a purifying effect shows shrewd observation of
nature before his bactericidal power was discovered by science. So does
the association of the Moon with water, which doubtless came from the
phenomenon of the tides. Is the Column of Glory the Milky Way?


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 297

none but a feeble fragment of the Light remains in this world,
when the angels charged with its maintenance will abandon their
task, and return to the World of Light. A fire will then break
out, which will burn for 1468 years and will set free the remainder
of the Light imprisoned in matter by consuming its envelope.
Satan or Hummama, the Spirit of Darkness, will then acknow-
ledge his defeat, and will be driven into the tomb prepared for
him, the entrance to which will be closed with a stone the size
of the world 1 . In the Christian tradition these matters are
more complicated, and Manes is said to have taught that there
exists a great wheel bearing twelve vases or buckets after the
fashion of an Egyptian sakiyeh, which raise the redeemed
portions of Light to the Sun, who gives them to the Moon,
who in her turn delivers them to the Aeons of the Light, who
place them in the Column of Glory here called the Perfect Air 2 .
The Christian account is also more detailed with regard to the
functions of the angels charged with the conduct of the world,
making out that one of them supports this earth on his shoulders
and is therefore called Omophorus, great earthquakes and
commotions taking place when from weariness he shifts his
burthen from one shoulder to the other, while another, called


1 The Ecpyrosis or final conflagration is always present in orthodox
Mazdeism, where it inspires its Apocalypses, and is in effect the necessary
conclusion to the drama which begins with the assault on the world of
light by Ahriman. For references, see Soderblom, op. cit. chap. rv.
From the Persians it probably passed to the Stoics and thus reached the
Western- world slightly in advance of Christianity. "The day when the
Great Dragon shall be judged " is continually on the lips of the authors
of the Pistis Sophia and the Me'po? revx^" S&jrJJpoy, and the conception
may therefore have reached Manes from two sources at once. The angels
mamtaining the world as mentioned in the text are of course the Splendi-
tenens and Omophorus about to be described.

2 Hegemonius, Acta, c. vm. p. 12, Beeson. St Augustine (conira Faustum,
Bk xx. c. 10) mentions the Wheel briefly and rather obscurely. It seems
to have fallen out of the account of Bar Khoni. But see the Tun-huang
treatise (Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l fere partie, pp. 515, n. 2, 516, 517, n. 3).
There can be little doubt that it is to be referred to the Zodiac. The Aeons
of the Light seem to be the five worlds who here play the part of the
Parastatae in the Pistis Sophia.


298 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Splenditenens, holds the heavens by their backs 1 . The stars
are also in the Christian tradition fashioned out of the purer
part of the Light which was not captured by the Satanic powers,
whereas the Mahommedan tradition says nothing about their
origin 2 . The Christian writers also make the Manichaeans tell
a story about the appearance of a beautiful virgin who appears
to the male and female devils who were crucified or fixed in
this world on the deliverance of the First Man. She appears
to the male fiends as a beautiful woman and to the female as
a desirable young man ; and when they covet and pursue her,
she flies from them and disappears. The anger of the Great
Archon or Satan on this causes the appearance of clouds in

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. vm. pp. 11, 12, Beeson, mentions Omophorus,
but not Splenditenens. Splenditenens is, however, well known to St
Augustine, who describes him (contra Faustum, Bk xv. c. 7) as Splenditenen-
tern magnum, sex vultus et ora ferentem, micantemque lumine, "Great
Splenditenens, bearing six faces and mouths, and glittering with light."
So later (op. cit. Bk xx. c. 9) he says, Splenditenentem, reliquias eorumdem
membrorum Dei vestri in manu habentem, et cetera omnia capta, oppressa,
inquinata plangentem, et Atlantem maximum subter humeris suis cum eo
ferentem, ne totum ille fatigatus abjiciat. "Splenditenens, who has in his
hand the remains of these members of your God [i.e. the five elements or
"sons" of the First Man] and who mourns the capture and oppression and
defilement of all the rest ; and huge Atlas, who bears everything with him on
his shoulders, lest he should be wearied and cast it away." Bar Khoni
(Pognon, pp. 188, 189) describes them both, and calls Splenditenens 'the
Ornament of Splendour," while he makes the pair two of the five sons of
the Living Spirit, as more clearly appears in the Tunhuang treatise (Cha-
vannes et Pelliot, op. cit. p. 549, and notes 2 and 5). Where Manes found
the figure of Splenditenens is not apparent, but the world- bearing angel is
an old conception in Western Asia, as M. Cumont has shown in his before-
quoted Cosmogonie ManicMenne, App. n. He appears prominently on the
Mithraic monuments and was no doubt the original of the Greek Atlas.

2 Alexander of Lycopolis, op. cit. c. m., says plainly that the Sun and
Moon were formed out of that part of the fight (here called Bvvafjus
"power"), which, although it had been captured by the powers of matter,
had not been contaminated, while that which had suffered some slight
and moderate stain became the stars and sky. The Acta (Hegemonius,
op. cit. c. vm. p. 11, Beeson), as we have seen, says that the Living Spirit
created the lights ((pua-rfipf ?, luminaria), which are the remnants of the soul
(i.e. the armour of the First Man) and caused the firmament to surround
them. The author here evidently refers to the Sun and Moon only.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeans 299

this world and thereby obscures the Sun's light, whilst his
sweat becomes rain 1 .

On the origin of terrestrial man, there is also considerable
discrepancy between the two streams of tradition. The
Mahommedan tells us that Adam was born from the conjunction
of one of "these Archons" or Princes, and a star. Nothing is
said to tell us what is meant by "these" princes, but as the
phrase is used in other passages by the same writer to denote the
Satanic hierarchy one can but suppose that it is one of the rulers
of darkness who is here indicated 2 . The same writer goes on
to say that the conjunction was "beheld" [or aided?] by a pair
of Archons, one male and the other female, and that a second
similar conjunction resulted in the birth of Eve. There is
evidently a reference here to some legend of which we have
lost the trace 8 , and the Christian tradition assigns to Adam an
entirely different origin and declares that he was made by all
the "princes" or archons on the advice of one of their number,
who persuaded the others to give up some of the light they had
received which they knew would otherwise be taken from them
and to make from it man in their own image and after the form
of the "First Man" against whom they had fought with tem-
porary success 4 . This story is clearly the same as that which
we have already seen current among the Ophites, and it now
seems most probable that it here appears not — as was once

1 The whole of this story, which is the reverse of edifying, is studied
by M. Cumont, with the fullest references to the authorities, in his Cos-
mogonie Manicheenne before quoted, to which it forms Appendix I, under
the heading "La Seduction des Archontes. ' ' To this I must refer the reader,
only remarking that, while I fully agree that the goddess in question is
probably derived from the Mother of the Gods who under the name (inter
alia) of Atargatis was worshipped throughout Asia Minor, I do not see
that she had any connection with the "Virgin of Light" of the Pistis
Sophia. This Virgin of Light did, indeed, pass into Manichaeism, but
Bhe had there a very different name and attributes from the Mother of the
Gods. See p. 323, n. 4 infra.

2 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. p. 393 ; Flugel, op. cit. pp. 90, 91.

3 Kessler, op. ei pag. cit. n. 1, says it has dropped out of the text, which
seems likely.

* Hegemonius, Acta, cm pp. 19, 20, Beeson. The story is given
verbatim later, p. 306 infra.


300 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

thought — as an interpolation foisted into the teaching of
Manes by the Christian writer, but because both Ophite and
Manichaean derived the story independently of each other from
legends current in Western Asia 1 .

The Mahommedan writer then plunges into a long and
elaborate account of how the "Five Angels," meaning thereby
apparently the "members" Gentleness, Knowledge, Intelli-
gence, Discretion and Discernment, on beholding Adam and
Eve, prayed to certain powers which seem to be those which
descended with the King of the Paradise of Light after the
defeat of the First Man properly so called. These Powers
include the First Man himself and the Mother of Life 2 , and the

1 The Mandaeans or Disciples of St John described on p. 305 seem a
likely source, as they have many traditions about the protoplasts, some of
which clearly go back to before the Christian Era. None of those mentioned
by Brandt, Die Manddische Religion, Leipzig, 1889, pp. 34-39, however,
seem to be exactly similar to the story in the text.

2 This Mother of Life is one of the most prominent, though not one of
the most active figures in the Manichaean pantheon. Her identification
with the Spirit of the Right Hand or first Power created by the Supreme
God of Light has been mentioned above (note 1, p. 293supra). She doubtless
has her immediate origin in the great mother goddess worshipped through-
out Western Asia, whose most f amiliar name is Cybele, but whom we have
seen (Chap. H supra) identified with Isis, Demeter, and all the goddesses
of the Hellenistic pantheon. See as to this, Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp.
58 sqq., although he, too, falls into the error of identifying with her the
Virgin of Light of the Pistis Sophia. That the name ''Mother of Life"
at least passed to all these goddesses is certain ; but it also found its way
into Egyptian Christianity; for in the Coptic 3pell or amulet known as
the Prayer of the Virgin in Bartos {i.e. Parthia), studied by Mr W. E. Crum
(P.S.B.A. vol xix. 1897, p. 216), the Virgin Mary is represented as saying
"I am Mariham (Mapia'/x), I am Maria, I am the Mother of the Life of the
whole World!", and the popularity of the "Prayer" is shown by its
frequent appearance in Ethiopic and Arabic versions (op. cit. p. 211).
So, too, in the evidently Christian Tratiato Gnostico of F. Rossi (Me
della Reale Accademia di Torino, ser. n. t. xliii. p. 16) the magician says
"I entreat thee, O God, by the great revered Virgin (napOevos) in whom the
Father was concealed from the beginning before He had created anything."
Bar Kh6ni, again (Pognon, pp. 209-211), speaks of the Kukeans, who
seem to have been a semi-Christian sect, and who taught that the coming
of Jesus to earth had for its object the redemption of His bride, the Mother
of Life, who was detained here below, like the Helena of Simon Magus.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 301

The Mother of Life is mentioned in all the Mahommedan and Christian
writers who have treated of Manichaeism (for the references, see Chavannes
et Pelliot, op. cit. l fere partie, p. 511, n. 1), in the Pahlavi MS. discovered by
the Germans at Turfan (F. W. K. Muller, Handschriften-Reste in Estrangelo-
Schrift, pp. 47, 55), and in the Chinese treatise from Tun-huang
(Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. p. 511 et al.). In this last, she is called
Chan-mou, which is translated "the Excellent Mother," and En Nadim
in one passage (Kessler, op. cit. p. 399; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 100) calls
her Nahnaha, which Fliigel would translate "The Aversion of the Evil
Ones." It should be noticed, however, that her part in the cosmogony
is small, and that she acts upon the world, like all these supercelestial
powers, only through her descendants or "sons." These are treated
of later (see p. 323 and n. 1, p. 302 infra). Titus of Bostra as quoted
by Fliigel, op. cit. p. 210, speaks of her as Swapis tov dyadov ai/nen

<f)a>s alcrdrjTOv aXX' as av (j)alr) irpofHoXr) tov deov. "[The] Power of the
Good One, no longer a perceptible light, but as if one should say, an emana-
tion of God." Some years ago, we could hardly have looked for her
prototype or first appearance in the history of religions in any other
direction than Babylonia, where the worship of Ishtar, her Babylonian
counterpart, goes back as far as we can trace Babylonian religion. Now,
however, it is plain that other races than the Babylonians may have been
concerned in the spread of the worship of the Great Mother throughout
Western Asia. In the Zoroastrian faith, she seems to appear as Spenta
Armaiti, the one certainly female power among the seven Amshaspands,
who in the Pahlavi texts is set over the earth, as Vohu Mano is made
protector of the beasts, Asha Vahishta of the fire, and Khshathra Vairya
is set over metals. But besides this, she is identified in the Gathas with
the Wisdom of God (for references see pp. 136-137 of M. Carnoy's article
in the Museon mentioned below), an identification which Plutarch (de Is.
et Os. c. XLvn. ) admits by translating her name as o-o(f)la, and like the Sophia
of the Gnostics is given as a spouse to her creator Ahura Mazda, to whom
she bears the First Man Gayomort (Darmesteter, Le Zend-Avesta, t. I.
pp. 128-129). Yet we now know that this figure may have come into the
Zoroastrian pantheon neither from Semitic sources nor, as Darmesteter
thought, from Plato. M. A. Carnoy in a study called Armaiti- Armatay
(Museon, n.s. vol. xm. (1912), pp. 127-146) shows the identity of the
Persian Amshaspand with the Vedic goddess Aramati. We have already
seen that the Vedic gods Varuna and Mitra were worshipped by Hittites
in Asia Minor before the xnth century B.C., and Prof. Garstang believes
that the Earth-Mother was the great goddess of the Hittites, and was the
one worshipped in Roman times at Hierapolis or Mabug as the Dea Syria
or Atargatis, a name that he equates with Derceto, the mother of Semi-
ramis in classic legend, and declares to be compounded of Ishtar or Astarte
and the Aramaic "Athar or Athe." See Strong and Garstang. The Syrian
Goddess, pp. 1-8, and notes 24, 25, and 30, on pp. 52, 53 and 30 op.


302 Manes and the Manichaeam [ch.

Living Spirit 1 , and were besought by the Five to send to earth
a Saviour who should give Adam and Eve Knowledge and

cit. Zoroaster and Manes may therefore have taken their mother goddess
from an Aryan rather than from a Semitic original.

1 This Living Spirit is the most active agent of the Light in the Mani-
chaean system, and seems to have held his place unaltered through all the
changes of Manichaean teaching. Alexander of Lycopolis {contra Munich.
c. m. ) speaks of him as the Arjfiwvpyos or Architect of the Universe. The
earliest part of the Acta (Hegemonius, c. vn. p. 10, Beeson) says that he was
put forth from the Father (or Supreme God of Light) in consequence of
the prayers of the First Man after his defeat, that he delivered this last,
crucified or bound the Archons in the firmament (as Jeu is said to have
done in the Pistis Sophia), made the Sun and Moon and appointed their
courses, and further made the eight earths. St Augustine, contra Faustum,
Bk xx. c. 1, makes the Manichaean Faustus call him the "Third Majesty
whom we acknowledge to have his seat and his lodging-place in the whole
circle of the atmosphere. From whose powers and spiritual inpouring
also, the earth conceived and brought forth the suffering Jesus who is the
life and salvation of men and is hanging on every tree." St Augustine
further speaks {op. cit. Bk xx. c. 9) of "your mighty (potentem for viventem)
Spirit, who constructs the world from the captive bodies of the race of
darkness or rather from the members of your God held in subjection and
bondage." St Augustine (see contra Faustum, Bk xv. c. 6) also knows
that the Living Spirit has, like the First Man, five sons, to whom we shall
return later. The Mahommedan writers have much less to say on the
subject. En Nadim (Kessler, op. cit. p. 390; Flugel, op. cit. p. 88) says
abruptly that "Joy [i.e. the Mother of Life] and the Spirit of Life went to
the frontier, looked into the abyss of hell and saw there the First Man and
his angels," whereupon the Spirit of Life called the First Man with a voice
of thunder and the latter "became a god." This story is so without
connection with the context that Kessler is probably right in attributing
it to another source from that from which the Fihrist has drawn up to
this point. The source in question was probably a late one; for Bar
Khoni {op. cit. pp. 186-188) supplies many more details which will be given
in the text. Bar Kh6ni also amplifies the story in the Fihrist into a
description of how the Living Spirit, on seeing the First Man in the Dark-
ness, spoke "a word which took the appearance of a pointed sword" (cf.
Revelation i. 16), and how this word caused to appear the image of the
First Man. A dialogue then ensues between apparently the sword and
the image, which appear to be here identified with the Appellant and
Respondent of later Manichaeism, and the pair are drawn up out of hell.
See Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 24, and note 5. Al Biruni, Chronology,
p. 190, also knows of the Spirit of Life and says that Manes "preached"
of him. In the Turfan texts there is occasional mention of the "Spirit"


xin] Manes and the Manichaeam 303

Goodness and deliver them from the devils. Their prayer was
heard, and Jesus was sent upon earth "accompanied by a god,"
with whose aid the Archons were again overthrown and im-
prisoned, while Adam and Eve were set free 1 . Jesus then
addressed Adam and revealed to him the whole secret of the
cosmogony, enlightening him upon the origin and functions of
the different heavenly worlds or paradises, of the gods, of hell,
of the devils, of the earth and sky, and of the sun and moon.
He then showed him, continues the Mahommedan tradition,
the seductive power of Eve, put him on his guard against it,
and breathed into him the fear of yielding to it. Adam, it is
said, listened to these commands obediently.

The result of this abstinence on Adam's part — we are still
pursuing the Mahommedan account of the Manichaean teaching
— was seen in the sequel. The Archon or Demon who was
practically the father of the present race of mankind became
enamoured of Eve, and engendering with her begot a son " ugly
and of a reddish colour," who was named Cain. Cain in turn
had relations with his mother Eve, and from this incest was
born a son of white colour who was named Abel. From the
further intercourse of Cain and Eve were born two daughters,
one called "the Wisdom of the World," and the other "the
Daughter of Pleasure." Cain took the last-named to wife and
gave the other in marriage to Abel ; but he did not know that

together with the Father and the Son (Muller, Handschriften-Reste, pp. 26,
28), and also of the "commands" of the Holy Spirit to the Hearers, which
are plainly allusions to the Living Spirit or Zwv Hvfiip-a of the Christian
Fathers. In the Tun-huang treatise (Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. pp. 510,
556) he is repeatedly mentioned, and although nothing is said of his
demiurgic or world-creating powers, the part which he and the Mother of
Life play in the rescue of the First Man after his defeat is recognized, and
he is spoken of as forming the third person of a Trinity of which the two
other members are the Father or highest God of Light and the "Son of
the Light." Finally (op. cit. p. 557), he is said to be "a white dove,"
whereby his likeness to the Holy Spirit of the Christian Trinity already
noted by Faustus is emphasized (see Augustine, ubi cit. supra and Bk XX.
c. 6).

1 This conception of Jesus as a warrior has already been seen in the

IPistis Sophia, see p. 156 supra. So we read of "Jesus the victorious" in
the Tun-huang treatise, p. 566, n. 3.


304 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

the Wisdom of the World was filled with Light and divine
wisdom, while the Daughter of Pleasure possessed nothing of
the kind. In the sequel, one of the Angels had relations with
the Wisdom of the World and begot two daughters, called
Help (Farjad) and Bringer of Help (Barfarjad). Abel accused
Cain of being the father of these girls, whereupon Cain killed
him and took the "Wisdom of the World" as his own second
wife. The Rulers of Darkness were annoyed at this, and the
" Great Devil," here called Sindid, taught Eve magical formulas
by the aid of which she again enticed Adam to intercourse.
The result was a son "beautiful and of an agreeable counten-
ance," whom Eve wished to kill as having nothing of the
Archons in him. Adam arranged to have the child fed exclu-
sively on milk and fruits, and drew three magic circles round
him bearing the names of the King of the Paradise of Light,
the First Man, and the Spirit of Life respectively, to protect
him against the devils. He then went to a high place and
entreated God for him, whereupon one of the Three Powers
last named appeared and gave him a Crown of Glory, at the
sight of which Sindid and the Archons fled away. Then a tree
appeared to Adam called the Lotus, from which he drew milk
with which to nourish his son whom he called first after the
tree, and then Seth (Schathil). Eve, on the instigation of Sindid,
again persuaded Adam to intercourse, which so disgusted Seth
that he took with him the Wisdom of the World, her two
daughters Help and Bringer of Help, and " Siddikut," which
seems to be the community of the elect or Perfect Manichaeans,
and journeyed to the East in search of the Divine Light and
Wisdom. At their death all these entered into Paradise, while
Eve, Cain, and the daughters of Desire went to hell 1 .


1 En Nadim in Kessler, op. cit. pp. 393 sqq. ; Flugel, op. cit. pp. 90 sqq.
Theodore bar Khoni (Pognon, op. cit. pp. 189 sqq.), gives a much more
elaborate account of the creation of man and the other animals, for which
and for its explanation the reader must be referred to the elaborate analysis
of M. Cumont (Cosmog. Manich. pp. 34-49, and App. n., "La Seduction
des Archontes"). It should be noted, however, that some part of this
story was known to St Augustine. See especially contra Faustum, Bk VI.
c. 8.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 305

The story about the protoplasts of the Book of Genesis has
been given in more detail than it perhaps deserves because of
its manifest connection with the doctrines of the extant sect of
Mandaites, Hemerobaptists, or Disciples of St John still to be
found in certain villages near the Shat-el-Arab and even in
considerable towns like Bussora. These sectaries declare them-
selves to have inherited the faith of John the Baptist, and have
a sacred book called the Sidra Rabba, which has been known to
Europeans since the xvnth century, and contains, among other
things, many stories like those given above. The Mandaites are
a violently anti- Christian sect, and say that the historical Jesus
was a fiend who obtained baptism from St John the Baptist
by means of a trick, and they display a similar hatred of the
religions of both the Jews and the Mahommedans. Neverthe-
less, most modern writers consider them related to, and perhaps
the modern representatives of, the Mughtasilah or " Washers 1 ."
This last sect is certainly very ancient, and its history can
in fact be traced as far back as the beginning of the reign of
Trajan 2 , while the Mahommedan author, from whom the
traditional account of Manes' doctrines has been quoted above,
says that Manes was in his youth one of the Mughtasilah. From
this Prof. Kessler, who perhaps devoted more attention to the
Manichaean religion than any living scholar, built up the
theory that the doctrines of the Mughtasilah were one of the
principal sources from which Manes formed his system. He
even says that the Fatak or Patecius whom tradition gives as
a father to Manes must be identified with that Scythianus or
Terebinthus whom the Christian tradition makes Fatak's
predecessor, was one of the Mughtasilah, and helped Manes
both in the construction of his system and in its propagation 3 .
This may be so, but very 'little evidence is available in support
of the theory; and the points which the Mandaites and the
Manichaeans undoubtedly possess in common do not seem to

1 So Rochat, op. cit. pp. 157, 158.

2 Kessler, op. cit. pp. 72, 80; Brandt, Mandaische Religion, p. 178.

3 Rochat, op. cit. pp. 156-178, has carefully examined the resemblances
between the system of Manes and that of the Mandaites and declares that
it is at present impossible to say which of them has borrowed from the
other.

l. n. 20


306 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

be more than can be explained by the contact which must neces-
sarily have taken place between two neighbouring sects both
persecuted successively by Persian Shahs, Christian Emperors,
and Mahommedan Caliphs. The Christian tradition of Manes'
teaching concerning the protoplasts says merely that " he who
said 'Let us make man in our own image'" was the same Prince
of Darkness who thereby counselled the other Archons to give
up their light in order to make man in the likeness

"of the form that we have seen, that is to say, of the First Man.
And in that manner," it continues, "he created the man. They
created Eve also after the like fashion, imparting to her of their
own lust, with a view to the deceiving of Adam. And by these
means the construction of the world proceeded from the operations
of the Prince 1 ."

The teaching of Manes with regard to Jesus is not very
clear in the Christian tradition, no doubt because the writers
who recorded it were careful to remove from it as much as
possible everything which in their view savoured of blasphemy.
Yet the Christian author before quoted makes Manes say that
the God of Light whom he calls "the Good Father" sent his
well-beloved son upon earth for the salvation of man's soul
and "because of Omophorus" or the world-sustaining angel.
This son, by whom he can hardly mean any other than the histo-
rical Jesus, " came and transformed himself into the semblance of
a man and showed himself to men as a man, although he was
not a man, and men imagined that he had been begotten 2 ."
It is also to Him that is attributed the construction of the
wonderful wheel before alluded to as equipped with twelve vases
which the sphere causes to revolve, and which thus scoops up,
as it were, the souls of the dying 3 . The Christian account also
narrates that in

"the Paradise which is called the Cosmos [Qy the "heavenly"
earth or the Sun?], there are trees such as Desire and other deceits,

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xn., pp. 19, 20, Beeson.

2 Op. cit. c. vm., p. 12, Beeson.

3 Chavannes et Pelliot (op. cit. p. 517, n. 3) make this the work of the
Living Spirit, but they are clearly wrong. The text of the Acta referred
to in the last note leaves no doubt that it is that of the "Son."


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeans 307

whereby the minds of those men [those who reach it?] are corrupted.
But the tree in Paradise, whereby they know the good, is Jesus and
the knowledge of Him which is in the Cosmos. And whoso receives
it, distinguishes between good and evil. Yet the Cosmos itself is
not of God, but it was made from portions of matter, and therefore
all things in it will disappear 1 ."

There is not really any very great difference between this and
the Mahommedan tradition quoted above which makes Jesus
the messenger sent from above to give knowledge to Adam,
especially if we consider that Manes probably, like most of the
Gnostics, placed Paradise not upon the earth but in one of the
heavens intermediate between us and the abode of the Supreme
Being 2 . That Manes supposed Jesus to have descended to this
earth also is plain from his own words quoted by Al Biruni
from the Shapurakan or book written by Manes for King Sapor :

" Wisdom and deeds have always from time to time been brought to
mankind by the messenger of God. So in one age they have been
brought by the messenger called Buddha to India, in another by
Zaradusht [i.e. Zoroaster] to Persia, in another by Jesus to the
West. Thereupon this revelation has come down, this prophecy in
this last age through me, Mani, the messenger of the God of Truth to
Babylonia 3 ."

Manes' ideas as to the salvation of man's soul again differ
little in the two streams of tradition. The Christian, here
perhaps the fuller of the two, describes him as teaching that the
soul of man, as also that of beasts, birds, other animals, and
plants, is part of the light which was won by the demons from
the First Man, while all bodies are of that matter which is the
same as darkness. Man's body, we are told, is called a cosmos
by parallelism with the great Cosmos, and all men have roots

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xi.y p. 18, Beeson.

2 This is the tradition evidently known to the author of the Mepos
Ttvx&v Zcorijijos when he makes Jesus say "When I spoke with Enoch out
of the Tree of Knowledge in the Paradise of Adam." (See Chap. X,
p. 173 supra.)

3 Al Biruni, Chronology, p. 190.

20—2


308 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

here below bound to things which are above 1 . It is the cutting
of these roots by the demons which causes death. On the death
of a man who has attained the knowledge of the truth during
this life, his soul is taken up in the wheel to the Sun, by whom
after it has been purified it is passed over to the Moon, the two
luminaries being represented as ships or ferry-boats sailing to-
and-fro in the upper air. When the Moon is full, she ferries
the souls with which she is filled towards the East, and then
delivers them to the Aeons of Light who place them in the
Pillar of Glory before described. She then returns for a fresh
supply greatly reduced in circumference, whereby her waxing
and waning is explained 2 . In the case of a man who has not
attained the knowledge of the truth, a small portion of the
soul only is purified and is then reincarnated in the body of
a dog, a camel, or some other animal, according to the sins
which it has committed. Thus, if he has killed a mouse, he will
become a mouse, if a chicken a chicken, and so on, while those
who have been employed in the reaping of corn will themselves
become corn or some other kind of plant in order that they may
be reaped and cut in turn. The soul of the homicide will, it
is said, go to inhabit the body of a leper 3 . There will, apparently,
be five of these reincarnations 4 , and between them the soul which
has not found knowledge of the truth is given over to the demons
in order that they may subdue it in the "Gehennas" of fire.
This, like its transference into other bodies, is for the sake of
teaching it better; but if it still remains without knowledge,


1 Hegemoniu8, Acta, c. ix., p. 14, Beeson. This idea of the macrocosm
and microcosm according to which the body of man is a replica of the
universe is found in nearly all later mysticism — also in the Cabala and in
the later Zoroastrian treatises. In the Tun-huang treatise it forms the
chief theme of the homiletic part of the work.

2 Op. cit. c. vm., pp. 12, 13, Beeson. The Latin version has vir "man"
for aer "air" in its description of the Column of Glory. Probably a
clerical error.

3 Op. cit. c. x., pp. 15, 16, Beeson. The word used is Ke'Xf^oy; but
the Latin texts all read "elephant."

4 'Ep& ir£>s ixtTayy[£fTcu fj ^1^17 (Is irivrt (rw^aTa, op. et cap. dt. p. 15,

Beeson.


xin] Manes and the Manichaeam 309

it is cast into the great fire until the Consummation of the
World 1 .

The Mahommedan tradition as to what occurs at death goes
into more details, and it is here that we catch the first glimpse of
that doctrine of predestination which plays so prominent a part
in the later teaching of the Manichaean Church. When a just
or perfect or "true" Manichaean is on the point of death, the
First Man sends to him a "shining god of light" in the form of
"the Wise Guide" accompanied by three other gods and with
them "the bowl of water, the garment, the fillet for the head,
the circlet and the crown of light 2 ." With them comes the
virgin who is like to the soul of the just one. There also appear
to him the devil of greed, that of pleasure, and others with
them. Directly the just one who is dying sees them, he calls
to his help the goddess 3 who has taken the form of the Wise
Guide and the three gods her companions. They draw near to
him, and at the sight of them the devils turn and flee. Then
the gods take the just one, do on him the crowns and the
garment, put in his hand the bowl of water, and mount with
him to the Column of Praises in the sphere of the Moon, to the
First Man and to Nahnaha the Mother of Life, until they reach
the place in the Paradise of Light he occupied in the beginning*.

1 The soul of the rich man is in the same chapter said to pass into the
body of a beggar and thereafter els KoXaaiv ahaviov "to everlasting punish-
ment." Is it from this source that the Calvinists took their doctrine of
eternal damnation? The reprobation of the rich as such and without
regard to the use they might make of their wealth perhaps accounts for
the levelling and republican politics of the mediaeval sectaries.

2 The Bowl of water reminds one of the cup of soberness and reflection
administered to just souls by the little Sabaoth the Good in the Mipos Ttvx<* v
2(OTij P os. See Chap. X, p. 187 supra. The garment was probably the
"heavenly nature" with which the soul had to be clothed before it could
ascend to the upper spheres of light (cf. the Pistis Sophia). That the crown
was designed as a protection against the spirits of evil, there are many
indications in the last-mentioned document.

3 Kessler would here read "gods" for "goddess."

4 That is to say, the particular world of light, whether Gentleness,
Knowledge, Intelligence, Discretion, or Discernment, from which the soul
descended. As the "armour" of the First Man, from which the souls of
men are formed, was made with the aid of these five worlds, it is reasonable


310 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

His body remains stretched (upon the earth) in order that the
Sun, the Moon, and the Gods of Light may take from it its
powers, i.e. the Water, the Fire, the gentle Breeze, which are
then borne upwards to the Sun and become a god. The rest
of the body, which is all darkness, is cast into hell 1 .

This description of the lot of the blessed after death is
certainly taken from no other source than that from which the
Zoroastrian books put forth by the Sassanian kings are drawn.

"At the end of the third night," says theHatoxt Nask 2 , one of the
earliest Zoroastrian documents that have come down to us, "at the
dawn of day, the soul of the faithful thinks that it is in a garden and
smells its perfumes. Towards it a wind seems to blow from the
region of the South perfumed, more perfumed than any other wind.
Then the soul of the faithful thinks that he breathes this wind with
his nostrils. 'Whence blows this wind, the most perfumed that I
have breathed with my nostrils ? ' While encountering this breeze,
his religion (conscience, daena, spiritual life), appears to him in the
form of a beautiful young girl, shining, with white arms, robust, of
fair growth, of fair aspect, tall, high-bosomed, of fair body, noble,
of shining race, with the figure of one who is 15 years old, as fair in
form as the fairest creatures that exist. Then the soul of the faithful
speaks to her, and asks ' What virgin art thou, thou the most beautiful
in form of the virgins that I have ever seen ? ' Then she who is his
religion answers: '0 youth of good mind, of good words, of good
deeds, of good religion, I am thine own religion incarnate 3 .' "

So, too, the Vendidad, which may be a little later in
date than the document just quoted, represents Ahura Mazda
as saying in answer to Zarathustra himself :

to suppose that one or other predominates in the soul of everyone. Hence
probably the degree in the Manichaean hierarchy to which any hearer
might attain was thought to be decided for him before his birth, and
governed his destination after death. Thus it is said in the Pistis Sophia :
"Those who have received exalted mysteries shall be in exalted places,
and those who have received humble mysteries in humble places in the
light of my kingdom." Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. P re partie, p. 533,
n. 1 and St Augustine as there quoted.

1 The words given in the text are almost verbatim from En Nadim.
See Kessler, op. cit. pp. 398-399; Fliigel, op. cit. p. 100.

2 One of the 21 Nasks of the Sassanian Avesta.

3 Soderblom, op. cit. p. 83.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 311

"After a man has disappeared, after a man dies, the impious and
malevolent demons make their attack. When the dawn of the third
night shines forth and the day begins to lighten, the well-armed
Mithra arrives at the mountains giving forth holy radiance and the
Sun rises. Then, Spitama Zarathustra. . .she comes, the beautiful,
the well-made, the strong, of fair growth, with her dogs, full of
discernment, rich in children [i.e. fruitful], the longed-for, virtuous
one. She leads the souls of the faithful above the Hara Berezaiti ;
she sustains them across the bridge Chinvat in the road of the spiritual
divinities. Vohu Mano rises from his golden throne. Vohu Mano
says, ' faithful one, how hast thou come hither from the perishable
world to the imperishable?' Rejoicing, the faithful pass before
Ahura Mazda, before the beneficent Immortals, before golden thrones,
before the house of hymns, the dwelling of Ahura Mazda, the dwelling
of the beneficent Immortals, the dwelling of the other faithful ones.
When the faithful is purified, the wicked and malevolent demons
tremble by reason of the perfume after his departure as a sheep
pursued by a wolf trembles at the [scent of the ?] wolf 1 ."

To return, however, to the Mahommedan account of Manes'
doctrine. This last by no means confined his survey of the
state of man's soul after death to the single case of the justified
dead.

"When death draws nigh to a man who has fought for religion
and justice, [he is represented as saying,] and who has protected
them by protecting the Just, the gods whom I have mentioned
appear and the devils are there also. Then he calls the gods to his
help and seeks to win them by showing to them his works of piety,
and that which he has done to protect the religion and the Just.
The gods deliver him from the devils, while leaving him in the
condition of a man in this world, who sees fearful shapes in his
dreams, and who is plunged in dirt and mud 2 . He remains in this
state until his Light and his Spirit are freed [evidently by trans-
migration] when he arrives at the meeting-place of the Just. Then,
after having wandered for long, he dons their vesture. But when
death appears to the sinful man, to him who has been ruled by greed

1 Op. cit. pp. 89 sqq.

2 See the Orphic belief about the uninitiated being plunged in mud,
Vol. I. chap. iv. p 131 supra.


312 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

and desire, the devils draw near to him, they seize him, torment
him, and put fearful shapes before his eyes. The gods are there
also with the vesture, so that the sinful one thinks they have come
to deliver him. But they have only appeared to him to reproach
him, to remind him of his actions, and to convince him of his guilt
in having neglected the support of the Just. He wanders unceasingly
throughout the world, and is tortured until the coming of the End
of the World, when he will be thrown into hell. Thus, Manes
teaches," continues the tradition, "that there are three paths for
the soul of man. One leads to Paradise, which is the path of the
Just. Another leads back to the world and its terrors, which is
the path of the protectors of the faith and the helpers of the Just.
The third leads to hell, which is the path of the sinful man 1 ."

Yet there is nothing to show that the sins which thus doom a
man to hell are within his choice to commit or to leave alone
as he chooses. Rather does it appear that his freedom from
sin depends on the admixture of light w T hich enters into his
composition at his birth. Of all this the Christian tradition
says nothing.

It is, nevertheless, in the division here set forth of the
adherents of the religion into the Just and the protectors of
the Just, that the great distinction between the Manichaean
religion and all its contemporaries appears. Both traditions
are agreed that those who listen to the teaching of Manes are
to be divided into five classes, viz. the Masters who are the
sons of Gentleness ; those who are enlightened by the Sun, who
are the sons of Knowledge or the Priests ; the Elders who are
the sons of Intelligence ; the Just who are the sons of Discretion ;
and the Hearers who are the sons of Discernment 2 . The first
three classes we may safely neglect for the present, as they
evidently correspond to the three superior or directing orders
of the Manichaean Church to which we shall have to return

1 Kessler, op. cit. pp. 399-400; Fliigel, pp. 100-101.

2 This is, I think, the only construction to be put on the words of the
Acta: Trjs 8e yfrv^fjs com ra ovofiara tcivtci, i'ovs, tvvoia. <fip6vr)(ris. iv6vjj.r]cns,
Xo-yio-yuoj. Hegemonius, Acta, c. x., p. 15, Beeson. For the Mahommedan
tradition, see En Nadim in Fliigel, op. cit. p. 95. The whole question of
the organization of the Manichaean Church is elaborately discussed by
Fliigel in n. 225 on this passage, op. cit. pp. 293-299.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 313

later ; but the last two, the Just and the Hearers, give us the
key to the organization of the sect, and explain how it was
able to maintain itself for so long against its numerous enemies.
He who would enter into the religion, says the Mahommedan
tradition, must examine himself that he may see whether he
is strong enough to conquer desire and greed, to abstain from
meats, from wine, and from marriage, to avoid all that can be
hurtful in (to?) water or fire, and to shun magic and hypocrisy 1 .
These abstinences are those that are demanded of the perfect
Manichaeans, who have been called above the Just or the
Sons of Discretion, and who with their superiors constitute the
Manichaean Church. These are they whom the Christian tradi-
tion speaks of as the Elect, and for whom, as we have seen, there
is reserved after death a glorious ascension and an immediate
return to the Paradise of Light. So Valentinus, like many other
Gnostics, divided Christians into the two classes of pneumatics
and psychics, the first-named of whom were to occupy a more
distinguished position in the world to come than the other.
There is nothing to show, however, that Valentinus or any other
Gnostic ever imposed any discipline on the pneumatics than that
prescribed for the psychics, or that he thought that those who
were going to take a higher rank in the next world should
observe a stricter mode of life in this. The Catholics, indeed,
had already adopted the view that the celibate member of the
Church possessed "a higher calling" than his married brethren;
but there is no reason to suppose that they therefore assigned
to them a higher place in the next world, or thought that those
who had not the gift of continence were to be permitted any
relaxation of the moral law imposed upon celibate and married
alike. It is therefore probable that it was from Buddhism,
with which Manes must have made himself well acquainted
during his journeys into India, that he borrowed the scheme
by which those who believed in the truth of his teaching could
delay subjecting themselves to the austerities necessary for
salvation until their next incarnation.

However this may be, there can be little doubt that this is
the meaning of the position he assigned to the Hearers.
1 Kessler, op. cit. p. 398; Fliigel, op. cit. pp. 94, 95.


314 Manes and the Manlchaeans [ch.

"If," he says according to the Mahommedan author, "he who
would enter into the religion does not feel strong enough to practise
the abstinences before enumerated, let him renounce the attempt.
If, however, he is filled with love for the faith, yet cannot conquer
desire and greed, let him seek to progress by protecting the faith
and the Just, and let him fight against evil actions on the occasions
when he can give himself to labour 1 , piety, vigilance, prayer and
humility. This will fill him with contentment both in this ephemeral
world, and in the eternal world to come, and he will put on the
body of the second degree in the state which follows after death 2 ."

Unless they are greatly belied, some of his later followers
looked upon this as a licence to the Hearers to commit such
sins as they chose 3 in this life, yet it is evident that this
formed no part of Manes' original teaching. He imposed upon
the Hearers, says the Mahommedan tradition, ten command-
ments, which were: to abstain from prayers offered to idols,
from lying, from avarice, from murder, from adultery, from
false teaching, from magic, from double dealing, from doubt
in religion and from slackness and want of energy in action.
They also had to recite certain prayers which will be mentioned
in their place, and to fast two days when the Moon is new
as when she is full, as also when the Sun enters the sign
of Sagittary. A three days' fast was also obligatory on the
first appearance of the Moon after the entry of the Sun into
the signs of Capricorn and of Libra. But they were to feast
on Sunday, a day which the Perfect, according to the
Mahommedans, kept as a fast, their own weekly feast being
held on Monday 4 .

The attitude of Manes to other religions was also without

1 This is perhaps the first instance in antiquity of the Gospel of Work.
That these virtues of the believer are made five in number, so as to accord
with the five worlds of light, needs no demonstration.

2 See passages from Kessler and Fliigel quoted in n. 1, p. 313 supra.

3 Rainerio Saccone, a Manichaean Perfect in Languedoc, who after-
wards turned Inquisitor, said that he had often heard the Elect lamenting
that they had not taken the opportunity of committing more sins before
receiving the "Baptism of the Spirit" which was thought to wash them
away. See H. C. Lea, History of the Inquisition, vol. I., p. 94.

4 Fliigel, op. cit. pp. 95-97. See, however, n. 4, p. 349 infra.


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeans 315

precedent or parallel. Of the Jews and of their religion he
seems to have had a detestation so strong and so deeply rooted
that it is difficult not to see in it some connection with political
events of which we have lost the record. The war of exter-
mination which Hadrian had been forced to wage against the
Jews of Palestine must have been over nearly a century before
Manes began to teach; but the Babylonian Jews can hardly
have been affected by this, and the story of the king of Adiabene
quoted above shows that shortly before the time of Ardeshir
they actively pursued the proselytizing policy which their
countrymen in the West had been forced to abandon. In
doing so, they doubtless contrived, after their manner, to
offend the national prejudices of their hosts, while showing
themselves greedy, as ever, of political power 1 . This probably
provoked reprisals, and it is quite possible that Manes' teaching
derived some of its strength from the revulsion felt by Ardeshir's
Aryan subjects to the borrowings from Judaism to be found
both in Mithraism and the Avestic literature. But whatever
its cause, there can be no doubt about the hatred felt by
Manes for the Jewish religion, which is prominent in every tra-
dition of his teaching. The earlier Gnostics, like Marcion, had
made the God of the Old Testament a harsh but just and well-
meaning tyrant; 'but Manes would have none of this, and
declared that he was a fiend.

"It is the Prince of Darkness," the Christian tradition makes him
say, "who spoke with Moses, the Jews, and their priests. Thus the
Christians, the Jews, and the Pagans are involved in the same error
when they worship this God. For he led them astray in the
lusts that he taught them, since he was not the God of Truth.

1 Josephus, Antiquities, Bk xx. cc. 2-4, breaks off his history at the
critical point. The Book of Esther is, perhaps, sufficient proof of the
capacity of the Oriental Jews for provoking periodical pogroms at least
as freely as their co-religionists in modern Russia. Johnson (Oriental
Religions), Persia, 1885, p. 410, quotes, apparently from Firdusi, that the
"old Persian nobles" were driven by Ardeshir's reforms into Seistan,
where they were the ancestors of the present Afghan clans. As some of
these clans call themselves the Beni Israel, it is possible that the Jews
rather than the nobles were expelled on this occasion, as happened before
under Cyrus.


316 Manes and the Manichaeans [en.

Whence those who put their hope in that God who spoke with Moses
and the Prophets will be bound with him, because they have not
put their trust in the God of Truth. For he, the God of the Jews,
spoke with them according to their lusts 1 ."

In a very different spirit, however, Manes dealt with all the
other religions that he knew. He acknowledged the Divine
origin of the teachings of Zoroaster, of Buddha, and of Jesus
alike, with the reservation that he should himself be regarded
as the Paraclete, which here seems to mean nothing more than
the Legate or Ambassador, sent by the Good God to complete
their teaching. " Mani, the messenger of the God of Truth to
Babylonia 2 " is the title which, as we have seen, he gives
himself in the most authentic record of his teaching. He
aimed, in short, at establishing a universal religion which
should include within its scope the three faiths that between
them commanded the allegiance of the whole civilized world,
and should acknowledge him as its founder and chief. Had
his plans come to fruition in his lifetime, he would have
attained an empire over the minds of men far greater and
wider than any ever claimed or dreamed of by the most
ambitious of the Roman pontiffs.

The full details of the way in which he proposed to establish
this new faith we shall probably never know; but discoveries
made during the last decade have shown us that his plans were
well fitted to their purpose. The successive expeditions of
Drs Griinwedel and von Le Coq to Turfan have shown that up
to as late as the xith century a.d., there was still a strong body
of Manichaeans probably belonging to the Ouigur nation in
Chinese Turkestan, living apparently in complete amity with
their Buddhist countrymen 3 . The writings that were there
discovered, to which we shall have to refer more in detail later,


1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xn. pp. 20-21, Beeson; Ephraem Syrus in
Kessler, op. cit. p. 302. For Mahoinniedan confirmation, see Schahrastani
in op. cit. p. 339.

2 Al Biruni, Chronology, p. 190.

3 See Le Coq's Short Account in J.R.A.S. 1909, pp. 299-322. Another
and more popularly written one by the same author appeared to the
Conferences au Musie Guimel, Paris, 1910 (Bibl. de Vulgarisation, t. xxxv.).


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeans 317

are mostly written in a script resembling the Estranghelo or
Syriac but with an alphabet peculiar to the Manichaean
religious documents, and which cannot, one would think, have
been adopted by those who used it for any other purpose than
that of concealment 1 . Judging from this and the practice of
the sect in Europe from the time of Diocletian onward, it
seems highly probable that among Buddhists, the Manichaean
hearers professed Buddhism, and among Zoroastrians, Zoro-
astrianism, hoping that thus they might be able to turn their
fellows to their way of thinking without openly dissenting from
the reigning religion. The persecution that Bahram I insti-
tuted against them immediately upon Manes' execution was
perhaps less a reason than a pretext for this.

This is certainly borne out by their proceedings when they
found themselves among Christians.

"You ask me if I believe the gospel," said the Manichaean Perfect,
Faustus, in his dispute with St Augustine (himself for nine years
before his conversion a Manichaean Hearer). "My obedience to its
commands shows that I do. I should rather ask you if you believe
it, since you give nO proof of your belief. I have left my father,
brother, wife and children and all else that the gospel requires ; and
you ask me if I believe the gospel. Perhaps you do not know what
is called the gospel. The gospel is nothing else than the teaching
and the precept of Christ. I have parted with all gold and silver.
I have left off carrying money in my purse; content with food
obtained from day to day; without anxiety for the morrow and
without care as to how I shall be fed or wherewithal I shall be
clothed ; and you ask if I believe the gospel ? You see in me the
blessings of the gospel; and yet you ask if I believe the gospel.
You see me poor, meek, a peacemaker, pure in heart, mourning,
hungering, thirsting, bearing persecutions and hatred for righteous-
ness' sake ; and do you doubt if I believe in the gospel 2 ? "

So, too, Manes in the epistle to Marcellus which, although much
altered and corrupted by its Catholic transcribers, is probably
a genuine document, is careful to begin in language which seems
imitated from the Epistles of St Paul :

1 The Marcionites, another much hated sect, also used a secret script.

2 St Augustine, contra Faustum, Bk v. c. 1.


318 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

"Manes, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and all the saints who are with
me, and the virgins, to Marcellus, my beloved son; Grace, mercy,
and peace be with you from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ; and may the right hand of light preserve you from
the present evil world and from its calamities, and from the snares
of the wicked one, Amen 1 ."

While in the Disputation which follows and which is certainly
a later interpolation, or possibly a concoction of some later
author, he is represented as saying "My brother, I am indeed
a disciple of Christ, and, moreover, an apostle of Jesus." Yet
in spite of this and a few other passages of the same kind, it
is plain that neither Manes, nor any of those who believed on
his teaching, were Christians in any sense in which the term
could not be applied to the followers of Mahommed or many
another professedly anti-Christian teacher. Manes entirely re-
jected the account of the Incarnation given in the Gospels,
alleging, as a modern critic might do, that it was not the account
of eyewitnesses, but a mass of fables which had grown up
after the memory of the events recorded had faded away 2 .
Jesus, he said, was not born of woman, but came forth from
the Father or First Man, and descended from heaven in the
form of a man about thirty years of age 3 . But the body in
which He appeared was an illusion only and was no more that
of a Teal man than the dove which descended upon Him at the
baptism in Jordan was a real dove, and it was not true to say
that He was put to death by the Romans and suffered on the
cross 4 . So far from that being the case, he declared that Jesus,
the mortal or suffering Jesus, was nothing but the universal
soul diffused throughout Nature and thus tormented by its
association with matter. Thus, he said, the Jesus patibilis may
be said to be hanging from every tree 5 .

To say that such teaching was likely to alter in the course
of a generation or two is merely to assert that it followed the

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. v., pp. 5, 6.

2 Augustine, contra Faust. Bk vrr. c. 1.

3 Op. cit. Bk xxni. c. 2 ; ibid. Bk xxxn. c. 7.

4 Op. cit. Bk xxvi. cc. 6, 8 ; ibid. Bk xxix. c. 1.
6 Op. cit. Bk xx. c. 2.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 319

course of evolution which can be traced in all religions, and it
is possible that in what has been said in the last paragraph
concerning Jesus, we have rather the opinions of the Manichaeans
of the fourth century than those of Manes himself. Yet even
in this we see exemplified the chameleon-like habit peculiar to
the Manichaeans of modifying their tenets in outward appear-
ance so as to make them coincide as nearly as possible with the
views of those whom they wished to win over to them. Thus
when the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, the Three Persons
and One God, began to take shape under the pressure of the
Arian controversy, the Manichaeans were not long in matching
it with a Trinity of their own 1 :

"We worship," said Faustus the Manichaean Perfect, "under the
triple appellation of Almighty God, the Father and His Son Christ
and the Holy Spirit. While these are one and the same, we believe
also that the Father properly dwells in the highest or chief light, which
Paul calls "light inaccessible," and the Son in the second or visible
light. And as the Son is himself two-fold according to the apostle,
who speaks of Christ as the power of God and the wisdom of God, so
we believe that His power dwells in the Sun and His wisdom in the
Moon 2 . We also believe that the Holy Spirit, the third majesty,

1 Cumont, Cosmog. Munich, p. 15, points out that the Manichaeans
had already figured to themselves their King of the Paradise of Light as
existing in the three Persons of Father, Mother, and Son in the shape of
the Light, the Mother of Life and the First Man. This Trinity corresponds
in every particular with that worshipped in Asia Minor under the names of
Zeus (or Hadad), Cybele, and Atys, at Eleusis as Dionysos, Demeter, and
Iacchos, in Greek Egypt as Osiris, Isis, and Horus, and in Persia, according
to M. Cumont, as Ormuzd, Spenta Armaiti, and Gayomort. Of. Bousset,
Hauptprobleme, pp. 333-337. That its origin can be traced, as the last-
named author seems to think, to the Babylonian Triad, Ea, Damkina, and
Marduk, is more doubtful. The Manichaeans really acknowledged, as they
were never tired of affirming, only two gods, Light and Darkness, and
considered all the lesser powers of Light, including man's soul, as formed
from God's "substance." When, therefore, they spoke of trinities,
tetrads, and so on, it was in^all probability for the purpose of producing
that show of outward conformity with other religions which was one of the
most marked features of their system.

2 This is a reversal of the position in the Pistis Sophia, where the
female power or Virgin of Light is placed in the Sun and the male Iao in
the Moon.


320 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

has His seat and His home in the whole circle of the atmosphere 1
By His influence and inpouring of the spirit, the Earth conceives and
brings forth the suffering Jesus, who, as hanging from every tree,
is the life and salvation of man 2 ."

In like manner, while not denying them in terms, the Mani-
chaeans attempted to refine away all the significance of the
Crucifixion and the Atonement, by representing them as merely
symbolical. In one Apocryphal book called the Wanderings of
the A'postles, which seems to be of Manichaean origin, Jesus
appears to St John, who is sunk in grief at the supposed
sufferings of his Master, and tells him that His Crucifixion was
a mere phantasmagoria or miracle-play performed to impress
the plebeian crowd at Jerusalem. Then He vanishes and in His
stead appears a cross of pure light, surrounded by a multitude
of other forms representing the same shape and image. From
this cross comes a Divine voice saying sweetly :

"The cross of light is, for your sakes, sometimes called the Word,
sometimes Christ; sometimes the Door, sometimes the Way;
sometimes the Bread, sometimes the Sun ; sometimes the Besurrec-
tion, sometimes Jesus ; sometimes the Father, sometimes the Spirit ;
sometimes the Life, sometimes the Truth; sometimes Faith and
sometimes Grace 3 ."

As will presently be seen, now that we have under our hands
the writings of Manichaean communities domiciled in Persian
and Chinese territory, we find in them similar compromises
with the faiths of Zoroaster and Buddha.

Yet after the Mahommedan conquest of Asia, and in regions
where they were free, as it would seem, from the pressure of
their Zoroastrian and Christian competitors, the Manichaeans
appear to have evolved a theology as formal and as detailed
as any of the Gnostic systems which we have examined. This

1 Compare the statement of Herodotus (Bk I. c. 131) that Zeus (or
Ormuzd) in the opinion of the ancient Persians was the name of "the whole
circle of air."

2 Augustine, centra Faust. Bk xx. c. 2.

3 This is to be found in Harduin's Acta Consilii. The quotation in
the text is taken from Matter, Hist, de Gnost. t. m. p. 89, and Xeander,
Ch. Hist. n. p. 187.


xmj Manes mid the Manichaeam . 321

is in the main set out by Theodore Bar Khoni, the Nestorian
Bishop of Kashgar, in his Booh of Scholia written in Syriac and
Mandaean which has been in part translated by the scholarly
care of M. Pognon, late Consul of France at Aleppo, and has lately
been commentated by M. Cumont. M. Pognon at first identified
Bar Khoni with the nephew of the Nestorian Patriarch Iwannis
(Johannes or John), whose reign began in 893 a.d., and he
quoted Assemani's Biblioiheca Orientalis in his support 1 .
Later, however, he withdrew this, and put him a century
earlier 2 . M. Cumont, on the other hand, thinks that Bar
Khoni lived at the end of the vith century or the beginning
of the vnth, and therefore before the Mahommedan invasion 3 .
In any event, the Scholia describe a body of Manichaean
doctrine considerably later in date than any of the Christian
sources hitherto referred to, and probably formed in an atmo-
sphere where the necessity for outward conformity to either the
Zoroastrian or the Christian faith was a good deal less cogent
than it was further west. Its agreement with the Mahommedan
tradition drawn from above is also well marked, and it derives
much support from the Manichaean MSS. lately recovered from
the oasis of Turfan in Turkestan, and in that of Tun-huang in
China. It is possible, although no proofs are yet forthcoming,
that it was this Neo-Manichaeism, as it has been called, that
inspired the Manichaean sectaries who were imported in the
ixth and xth centuries into Bulgaria, whence their missionaries
found their way later into Italy, France, and other countries of
Southern Europe.

The system disclosed in these documents begins, as does
nearly every Manichaean writing, with the assertion of the
existence of two gods, that is to say, the God of Light and the
God of Darkness. As the Kingdom of Darkness, whenever and
wherever described, is the exact opposite and counterpart of

1 Pognon, op. cit. p. 5 ; Assemani, Bibl. Orient, t. m. p. 198 cit.

2 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 106. It seems probable that the Kash-
gar in question is the country in Chinese Turkestan still called by that
name. M. Pelliot, however, will have none of this and insists that Bar
Khoni's Kashgar was Al Wasit near Bagdad. For the controversy, see
J.R.A.S. 1913, pp. 434 sqq., 696 sqq. and 1914, pp. 421-427.

8 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 1, n. 2, and authorities there quoted.
l. n. 21


322 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

that of the Light, we shall not return to it again, but assume
that in describing the one we are mutatis mutandis describing
the other. The God of Light has one substance of which all
the powers of light were made, but three forms or hypostases,
called in the Greek Formula of abjuration "faces" or persons,
which added to his own personality make a supreme tetrad.
These three hypostases are his wisdom, power, and goodness,
by which is probably meant that he operates in the lower
powers through these qualities, while remaining himself remote
in the "inaccessible light 1 ." He possesses also five houses or
dwellings, which are also called his worlds and even his members.
Their names according to Bar Khoni are Intelligence, Know-
ledge, Thought, Reflexion, and Feeling 2 . These seem to be

*Avadep.aTi£a> Trdvras ovs 6 MdvTjs avinkaae 6eovs, rjroi tov TtTpanpo-

craTrov Harepa tov Meytdovs K.al tov Xeyopevov Ilparrov "Avdpooirov KM tov

ovopxi£6p.evov Hapdevov tov (putTos k.t.X. "I anathematize all those whom
Manes lyingly makes gods, to wit, the Father of Greatness in four Persons, and
the so-called First Man. . . and the famous Virgin of Light," etc., Kessler, op.
cit. p. 403. His quotation of the Formula is from the works of the Apostolic
Fathers edited by Cotclerius in 1724 (Amsterdam). It seems to have been
administered to converts from Manichaeism to Catholicism down to a
very late date. See Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, t. i. pp. 66-67.

2 Pognon, op. cit. p. 184. Cumont, Cosmog. Munich, pp. 9, 10, would
substitute Reason for Knowledge and Will for Feeling. The Greek names
as given in the Acta (Hegemonius, op. cit. c. x. p. 15, Beeson) are vovs,
ewoia, (ppovrjo-is, evdvpTjais, Xoyiapos which the Latin translator makes into
mens, sensus, prudentia, intellectus, cogitatio. The first of these may pass
as correct, since Nous appears as the first emanation of the Highest
God in all the systems which preceded that of Manes and from which he
is likely to have copied. Of the rest, it can only be said that they are
the translations by scribes of Syriac or Mandaite words which were ill
calculated to express metaphysical abstractions, and that their copyists
were seldom well acquainted with the etymology of any of the three
languages. Hence they generally made use of what they thought were
the corresponding expressions in the works of great heresiologists like
Irenaeus and Hippolytus without troubling themselves much as to their
appropriateness. In the passage from the Acta above quoted, the five
qualities named are said to be the "names of the soul," which is explained
by what is said later (op. cit. c. x. p. 17, Beeson) that "the air (dijp) is
the soul of men and beasts and birds and fish and creeping things." En
Nadim (Kessler, op. cit. p. 387 ; Fliigel, p. 86), as has been said on p. 291
supra, gives the "members of the air" as Gentleness, Knowledge, Intelli-


km] Manes and the Manichaeans 323

ranged in this order below the dwelling of the inaccessible light,
so as to cut off all approach to it by a fivefold wall. On the
attack of the powers of darkness before mentioned, the God of
Light, called by Bar Khoni the Father of Greatness, that is
to say, the Very Great or Greatest 1 , creates by his word the
Mother of Life, who in her turn evokes the First Man as already
described. Thus is constituted, if M. Cumont be right, the
First Triad of Father, Mother, and Son 2 . From the Turfan
documents, we know that the Father was called, in Turkestan
at any rate, by the name of Azrua or Zervan, and the Son
Khormizta or Ormuzd 3 . As for the appellation of the Mother
we are still in ignorance 4 .

gence, Discretion and Discernment, which are the same as those which
he has just attributed to the King of the Paradise of Light. St Augustine
(c. Faust. Bk xx. c. 15) says in like manner that the Manichaeans thought
their souls "members of God," which seems to refer to the same belief.
Bar Khoni (Pognon, op. cit. p. 186), as has been said, not only assigns the
five dwellings of Intelligence, Knowledge, Thought, Reflexion and Feeling
to the Living Spirit, but makes him draw his five sons from them, and
M. Cumont (Cosmog. Manich. p. 10, n. 3) quotes the Acta Thomae as saying
that the Third Legate or Srosh is "the Legate of the five members, Nous,
Ennoia, Phronesis, Enthymesis and Logismos." From all which we may
gather that the Supreme God of Light and his "Second" and "Third"
creations were each alike thought to have the same five dwellings or
hypostases consisting of abstract qualities, although the exact significance
of the names given to them for the present escapes us.

1 This is the usual Oriental and Semitic figure of speech which leads
Arabs at the present day to nickname any European with a large beard
"the Father of Hair," and makes the Sphinx of Ghizeh the "Father of
Terrors." In the same way, the Mother of Life means doubtless the Very
Great Life or Source of Life.

2 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 15.

3 See the Khuastuanift, pp. 335, 342 infra, and the Tun-huang treatise
(Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. p. 513, and n. 1). Cf. also Miiller, Hand-
schriften-Reste, p. 102.

4 She cannot possibly be the Virgin of Light, as in the Acta she is said
to retire at the Ecpyrosis into the Moon-ship along with that personage.
See Hegemonius, op. cit. c. xm. p. 21, Beeson. The name "Virgin of
Light " also appears in the Turfan texts as an epithet of Jesus, if the words
are not wrongly translated. See Miiller, Handschriften-Reste, pp. 75, 77.
The name Nahnaha given her by En Nadim has been referred to in n. 2,
p. 300 supra.

21—2


324 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

When the First Man or Ormuzd marched against his enemy,
he also evoked five elements called sometimes his sons and
sometimes his members. These are the Ether, the Wind, the
Light, the Water, and the Fire before mentioned, which together
compose the soul of the world, and hence of man, who is in
every respect its image. When he was conquered by Satan
and dragged down to the lowest pit of hell, he prayed, says Bar
Khoni, seven times to the Very Great Father, and he in com-
passion created, again by his word, the Friend of the Lights 1 ,
who evoked the Great Ban 2 , who evoked the Living Spirit.
Here we have the second triad or "second creation," of which,
as has been said, only the last member takes any active part
in what follows. As we have already seen, the Living Spirit
speaks a word like a sharp sword, and the image of the First
Man answers 3 and is drawn up out of hell. These two, the
sword or Appellant and the image or Respondent, together
mount towards the Mother of Life and the Living Spirit, and
the Mother of Life "clothes" the Image — no doubt with a form
or " nature, " — while the Living Spirit does the same with the
compelling word 4 . Then they return to the earth of darkness
where remains the soul of the First Man in the shape of his
five sons.

1 Probably Mithras, who is in the Vedas and elsewhere called "Mithra
the Friend." Mithras is invoked under his own name in the Turfan texts
(Miiller, Handschriften-Beste, p. 77), but the fragment is too mutilated to
be able to deduce from it his place in the pantheon.

2 This name, to be found nowhere but in Bar Khoni, cannot be ex-
plained. Pognon says it may be written the Great Laban, which gets us
no nearer to its meaning.

3 The image is probably his body or substance, which is of the substance
of the Very Great Father. So Satan is in the Coptic Trattato gnostico of
Rossi quoted in n. 2, p. 300 supra described as the apxnnXao-fxa, probably
as being the very substance of darkness as the Very Great Father is of the
Light.

4 This is the conjecture of M. Cumont (Cosmog. Manich. pp. 24, 25).
As he says in note 5 on the first-mentioned page, the passage as it stands
is inconsistent. The Appellant and Respondent under the names of
Kroshtag and Padwakhtag appear in the Khuastuanift and also in the
Tun-huang treatise (pp. 521 sqq.) without the part they play in the world
being immediately apparent. The former document, however (see p. 343


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 325

In the meantime, the Living Spirit has also given birth to
five sons. He, like the Very Great Father of whom he is perhaps
the reflexion, has five worlds named like those of his paradigm
from which he draws certain other powers. From his Intelli-
gence, says Bar Khoni, he produces The Ornament of Splendour,
who is none other than the Splenditenens we have seen drawing
the heavens after him; from his Reason, the Great King of
Honour, who is described as sitting in the midst of the celestial
armies; from his Thought, Adamas of the Light armed with
shield and spear ; from his Reflexion the King of Glory whose
function is to set in motion the three wheels of the fire, the
water, and the wind, which apparently raise to the upper
spheres the portions of those elements still left below; and
finally from his Feeling the great Omophorus or Atlas who
bears the earths on his shoulders 1 . Immediately on evocation,
three of these powers were set to work to kill and flay the rulers
of darkness, and to carry their skins to the Mother of Life. She
stretches out the skins to make the sky, thereby fashioning ten
or eleven or even twelve heavens. She throws their bodies on to
the Earth of Darkness, thereby forming eight earths 2 . Thus the
soul or sons of the First Man are rescued from the Powers of
Darkness, and the machinery of the redemption of the Light is
set on foot.

There is, however, a third act to the drama. Again, the
lesser Powers of Light, this time the Mother of Life, the First
Man, and the Living Spirit, cry to the Very Great Father.

infra), speaks of them as being concerned in the purification of the Light.
MM. Chavannes and Pelliot {op. cit. p. 521, n. 1) think it possible that they
may represent the portions of the "armour" of the First Man which were
not sullied by contact with matter, and compare them to the last two
Amshaspands, Haurvetat and Ameretat. See also their Traitd Mani-
cheen, etc. 2 me ptie, in the Journal Asiatique, XI serie, t. I. (1913), p. 101.
One might liken them to the Cautes and Cautopates appearing in the
Mithraic monuments, as to which see Chapter XII, p. 246 supra.

1 All these subordinate deities were known to St Augustine. Cf. id.
c. Faust. Bk xv. c. 6.

2 Evidently Manes accepted the dictum of Valentinus quoted above
(Chap. IX, p. 104 supra), that with celestial powers it is always the female
who gives the form. .


326 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Satan, or, as the Mahommedan tradition calls him, Hummama,
is still in existence, although his "sons," the Rulers of Darkness,
the Hot Wind, the Smoke, and the others have been crucified
or fixed in the firmament, and he is still actively working with
his remaining powers against the Light. The Light-Powers
feel themselves contaminated and oppressed by the contact,
and perhaps even in some fear lest they should again have the
worst in a renewal of the conflict. Again, the Very Great Father
hears them and sends to their assistance a third creation, called
this time simply the Messenger.

Who this Messenger is, is the main puzzle of the new
documents. The author of the Acta knew something of him,
for he speaks of a "Third Legate," who, when the world is
burning in the great conflagration which will mark the
redemption of the last particles of light, will be found in the
Ship of the Moon with Jesus, the Mother of Life, the Virgin of
Light and the twelve other powers to be presently mentioned 1 .
M. Cumont, in his able analysis of Bar Khoni's system, thinks
that this "Third Legate" resembles the Neryosang of the
Persians, who in the later Mazdean literature is made the

1 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xm, p. 21, Beeson. At 8e npofioXai vao-at, 6

ItJO'OVS 6 iv T6p fJ.lK.pCO 7rXoiO), KOI TJ fJLTJTTJp TTjS fears', KOI ol 8d)8eKCl Kvf5epi'T)TCU)

jcat r) irapdivos tov (fxoros nal 6 Trpea^vTrjs 6 rpiros 6 eV rc5 peydXa rrXoiw, icat
to £a>v Trvfvpa icai to Tel%os tov p.tyd\ov irvpbs <a\ to ret^os tov avepov, KOI
tov aipos, Kai tov vBcltos, nai tov eo~a>dev irvpbs tov £(ovtos Trpbs tov piKpov
(j>a>OTTJpa oIkovo~iv, a^ptr av to irvp KaraveXcocr^ tov <6o~p.ov okov • iv noo-o'ts
7tot€ tTfcriv, cov ovk cpciBov tt]v TToo-oTr)Ta. " But all the emanations [i.e.],
Jesus who is in the small ship, and the Mother of Life and the 12 pilots,
and the Virgin of Light, and the Third Legate who is in the large ship,
and the Living Spirit and the wall [it should be " guardian," as
MM. Chavannes and Pelliot explain] of the great fire, and the guardian of
the Ether, and of the air, and of the water, and of the inner living fire,
abide near the lesser light until the fire has consumed the whole Cosmos.
But for how many years I have not learned." The Latin version runs:
Prolationes autem omnes Jesus in modica navi, et mater vitae et duodecim
gubernatores et virgo lucis et senior tertius. Unde et majori in navi vivens
spiritus adhibetur, et murus ignis illius magni, et mums venti et aeris et
aquae et interioris ignis vivi, quae omnia in luna habitabunt usquequo totum
mundum ignis absumat ; in quot autem annis numerum non didici : — which
appears to be nonsense. The number of years which Turbo, who is here
speaking, had not learned, is said by En Nadim to be 1468.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 327

herald of Ormuzd, and has also features in common with
Gayomort the First Man, and Mithras 1 . But it is plain from
the Tun-huang treatise lately discovered, as well as from the
fragments found at Turf an, that the Third Legate corresponds
most closely to the Mazdean genius or divinity Sraosha, the
angel of Obedience 2 . Sraosha is described in the Srosh Yashts
as the "Holy and Strong Srosh," "the Incarnate Word, a
mighty-speared and lordly god." He it is who is called the
"fiend-smiter," who is said to watch over the world and to
defend it from the demons, especially at night, to fight for the
souls of the good after death, and, in the older Mazdean tra-
ditions, to judge the dead with Mithra and Rashnu as his
assessors, like Rhadamanthos, Minos, and Eacus among the
Greeks 3 . In the Turfan texts he is called the mighty, and in
the Tun-huang treatise is likened to a judge, while in both sets
of documents he has his proper appellation of Srosh 4 .

This third creation was no more content than his two
predecessors to enter upon the task allotted to him without
further help. His first act upon arriving hither, according to
Bar Khoni, was to evoke or call into existence twelve virgins

1 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. pp. 58 sqq. and Appendix I.

2 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. (l 6re ptie), p. 522, and n. 1. For the
part played by him in the Chinese treatise see op. cit. p. 536, and n. 2.
He is called "Mighty Srosh" in the Turfan texts (Miiller, Handschriften-
Reste, p. 75).

3 J. Darmesteter, The Zend Avesta, part I. (S. B. E. vol. 4, pp. 87, 99)
and part n. (S. B. E. vol. 23, pp. 159-167). All the passages in which he is
referred to come from the Vendidad, but he is also mentioned in the
Bundahish. See West, Pahlavi Texts, part I. (S. B. E. vol. 5, p. 128).

4 See n. 2 supra. M. Cumont (Cosmog. Manich. p. 34) thinks that
this Messenger was added to the two triads (of Father, Mother, and Son,
and the Friend of the Lights, Great Ban, and Living Spirit, respectively) in
order to make up "the sacred number of seven." But seven is a number
singularly neglected by the Manichaeans, who paid the greatest reverence
to five, and preferred to seven the three and the twelve. Nor do I think
that there is any real parallel in Manichaeism to the Seven Amshaspands
of Zoroastrianism. The actual word amshaspand is used in the Tun-huang
treatise (Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l* re ptie, p. 544), but with an entirely
different signification from that of archangel or divinity. It seems there
to mean simply "element." Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. 2 me partie,
p. 101.


328 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

with their vestures, their crowns, and their guards. The
Turfan texts give us the names of these powers, four of whom
seem to be attributes of sovereignty, and eight of them virtues.
Their names in the order of the new texts are respectively,
Dominion, Wisdom, Victory, Persuasion, Purity, Truth, Faith,
Patience, Uprightness, Goodness, Justice and Light, and they
are probably the twelve "pilots " whom the Acta describe as being
at the Ecpyrosis in the Moon-ship with their father, with Jesus,
and with the other powers 1 . But there is much plausibility in
M. Cumont's theory that this Third Legate or Srosh is supposed
until that event to inhabit the Sun, and that his 12 " daughters"
are the signs of the Zodiac among whom he moves 2 . According
to Bar Khoni, it is the same Legate who is ordered by the Great
Ban to create a new earth and to set the whole celestial
machinery — the Sun and Moon-ships and the three wheels of
fire, air, and water — in motion 3 . Yet we hear nothing in any
other document of any addition to the number of eight earths
already created, and we can only therefore suppose that Bar
Khoni's phrase refers to the gradual purification of this world
of ours by Srosh.

Bar Khoni also makes the appearance of this last Legate
responsible for the appearance of man upon the earth, as to
which he recites a story which seems at first sight to be an
elaboration of the Gnostic and Manichaean tradition preserved
by the Christians and mentioned above. The Legate, he makes

1 I can find no parallel to these powers in any other system, save that
of the Pistis Sophia, where appear twelve Saviours of the Treasure-house of
Light, from whom the souls of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus were said to
be drawn. If, therefore, they are not the signs of the Zodiac, they may be
an invention of the Manichaeans to accord with the magistri or highest
order of their Church (see p. 330 infra).

2 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 36.

3 Pognon, op. cit. pp. 189, 190. He says it was the Messenger (or
Srosh) who ordered the Great Ban to create a new world. M. Kugener,
however (Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 37, n. 4), says that the passage can
be read as in the text, and this avoids the improbability of the younger
power or Third Legate giving orders to one of the "second creation."
The three wheels, fire, water, and earth, may possibly have been conceived
as surrounding the earth, as with the Ophites of the Diagram. Cf. Chap.
VIII, n. 3, p. 74 supra.


xin] Manes and the Manichaeam 329

Manes say, was of both sexes, and on his appearance in the
Sun-ship, both the male and female rulers of Darkness became
so filled with desire that they began to give up the light which
they had taken from the sons of the First Man. With this was
mingled their own sin, half of which fell into the sea and there
gave birth to a horrible monster like the King of Darkness.
This was conquered and slain by Adamas of the Light, but that
which fell upon the land fructified as the five kinds of trees 1 .
Moreover, the female demons, who were pregnant at the time,
miscarried and their untimely births ate of the buds of the
trees. Yet these females remembered the beauty of the Legate
whom they had seen, and Asaqlun or Saclas 2 , son of the King
of Darkness, persuaded them to give him their sons and
daughters, in order that he might make from them an image of
the Legate. This they did, when he ate the male children and
his wife Namrael consumed the female. In consequence
Namrael gave birth to a son and a daughter who were called
Adam and Eve. Jesus was sent to Adam and found him sleep-
ing a sleep of death, but awoke him, made him stand upright,
and gave him to eat of the Tree of Life, while he separated him
from his too seductive companion. This story is not confirmed
by any of the new documents ; and in the present state of our
knowledge it is impossible to say whether it contains an old
Asiatic tradition, of which the Biblical accounts of the proto-
plasts and of the Sons of God making love to the daughters of
men are the only remnants which have till now come down to
us. or whether — as is at least as likely — the whole story is a
blend by the Manichaeans of Jewish, Mandaite, and Pagan
legends. The main point in it for our consideration is its
introduction of a Jesus who is certainly not the same as the

1 I read this, perhaps wrongly, thus instead of Five Trees as does Pognon
{op. cit. p. 191). The five kinds of trees are often referred to in the Tun-huang
treatise and in the Khuastuanift.

2 This Saclas, who appears many times in Greek heresiology with his
wife Nebrod, called in the text Namrael (for references, see Cumont,
Cosmog. Manich. p. 73, and notes 3, 4, and 5), was known to Hippolytus,
who uses both names in his description of the tenets of the Peratae, a name
which may be equivalent to that of the Medes. See Hipp. Philosoph. Bk
v. c. 14, pp. 194, 195, Cruice.


330 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Jesus patibilis whom St Augustine and the other Christian
Fathers make Manes describe as born of the Living Spirit and
the Earth, and as hanging on every tree. This other Jesus,
who came to the earth in the time of Adam, is a fourth emissary
or Saviour put forth by the second and third creations according
to the Fihrist and called by Bar Khoni "Jesus the shining one."
In the Turfan texts he is, as has been said, perhaps equated
with the Virgin of Light, and in the Tun-huang treatise he is
spoken of as "Jesus the Victorious 1 ." Evidently he is con-
ceived as one of the Burkhans or Buddhas who fight against
the Powers of Darkness, and the Jesus patibilis is but another
name for the fragments of light or "armour" of the First Man
left on this earth. The borrowing of the name revered among
Christians is but one of the compromises by which the Mani-
chaeans hoped to draw those of other faiths into their net.

A like plasticity is shown in the organization of the Mani-
chaean Church. The first disciples of Manes, to whom he gave
special commandments, were, according to Christian tradition,
only seven in number, in which if anywhere in the system we
may see a reflexion of the seven Amshaspands of the Avesta 2 .
But later there seems to have been instituted a band of twelve
Apostles in manifest imitation of the Apostles of Jesus, who
perhaps corresponded to the Masters or highest degree that we
have seen called the Sons of Gentleness. These were presided
over by a Manichaean Pope who figured as the representative
and Vicegerent of Manes himself. There were also seventy-two
bishops answering to the seventy-two disciples of Christ, who are
perhaps to be identified with the Sons of Knowledge. Then
came the Presbyters or Sons of Intelligence whose functions were
chiefly those of missionaries and who were perpetually. like
Faustus, travelling for the propagation of the faith 3 . This seems

1 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. P re ptie, p. 566, and n. 3.

2 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xi. p. 18, Beeson.

3 Augustine, de Haeresibus, c. 46, p. 210, Oehler. See also Chavannes
et Pelliot, op. cit. P re ptie, p. 569, and n. 2 ; p. 572, and nn. 2, 3 ; and
p. 581, and n. 4. MM. Chavannes and Pelliot discuss the question of the
organization of the Manichaean Church in the second part of their memoir.
See op. cit. 2 me ptie, pp. 193, 196 and n. 2. They also give a dissertation on


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 331

to have been the organization generally adopted for Christian
countries, and we meet with it there up to a very late date.
Yet there is no reason to suppose that it was necessarily copied
by the Manichaeans of Central Asia or India, or that the
Manichaeans always obeyed some central authority. What
organization they did adopt outside Europe and Africa we shall
probably have to wait to discover when more of the documents
coming from Turkestan have been deciphered.

The extreme simplicity of the Manichaean ritual also made
easy to them all such adaptations to the ways of their neigh-
bours. Hating images with as much energy, perhaps, as
Zoroaster himself, they had neither statues nor lights nor
incense in their meeting-places, which must in the West have
been as bare and as unadorned as a Scottish conventicle. The
whole service seems to have consisted of hymns and prayers,
in the first of which the mythology of the sect doubtless found
expression, while the second mainly consisted of those praises
of the Powers of Light, which praises were thought, as has been
said, to have an actual and objective existence and thus to
fulfil a considerable part in the scheme of redemption. Up to
the present we have very few examples of the hymns. The
Hymn of the Soul, of which Prof. Bevan has published an English
translation, is probably Manichaean in origin 1 , and St Augustine
tells of a "love song" in which the Father, meaning thereby
probably Srosh, the third legate 2 , is represented as presiding at
a banquet crowned with flowers and bearing a sceptre, while
twelve gods, three from each quarter of the globe, are grouped
round him "clothed in flowers" singing praises and laying
flowers at his feet. These are said to represent the seasons 3 ;
and we hear also of myths doubtless expressed in song describing

the common life of the Elect. It remains to be seen whether this was
anything more than a copy of the monastic institutions of the Buddhists.
For obvious reasons, such an organization was not adopted in lands
where they had outwardly to conform to other religions.

1 So Professor Harnack and Mr Conybeare in the Encyc. Brit, (xith
ed.), vol. xvrr. p. 576, s.v. Manichaeism.

2 "Beatus pater" is the name given to the Tertius legatus by Evodius,
de recta fide, passim.

3 Augustine, c. Faust. Bk xv. c. 5.


332 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

the great angel Splenditenens, whose care is the portions of
Light still imprisoned in matter and who is always bewailing
their captivity 1 ; and of his fellow angel Omophorus who, as
has been said, bears the world on his shoulders like the classical
Atlas 2 . Doubtless, too, some of these hymns described that
last conflagration, which seems to have occupied so great
a place in the speculations of the early Manichaeans, when the
justified faithful, secure in the two great ships which sail about
on the ocean of the upper air, shall behold the world in flames
and the last portion of the imprisoned Light mounting in the
Column of Praises, while Satan and his hosts are confined for
ever in the gross and dark matter which is henceforth to be
their portion 3 . Possibly the Turfan discoveries may yet recover
for us some important fragments of this lost literature.

With regard to the prayers, we are a little better informed.
" Free us by thy skill, for we sutler here oppression and torture
and pollution, only that thou (the First Man?) mayest mourn
ud molested in thy kingdom," is one of those which St Augustine
has preserved for us 4 . So, too, the Mahommedan tradition has
handed down a series of six doxologies or hymns of praise out
of a total of twelve which seem to have been obligatory, perhaps
on all Manichaeans, but certainly on the Perfect. The suppliant
is, we are told, to stand upright, to wash in running water or
something else, in which we may perhaps see either the origin
or an imitation of the ceremonial ablutions of the Mussulman,
then to turn towards the Great Light, to prostrate himself and
to say :

"Blessed be our guide, the Paraclete, the Messenger of the

1 Op. cit. Bk xx. c. 9.

2 Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. App. 2, "L'Omophore." He shows that
this belief in an angel who supports the world on his shoulders goes back
to the Assyrian cylinder-seals, where is found a world-bearing divinity in
exactly the same pose as that reproduced in the Mithraic bas-reliefs.

3 One of the silk banners obtained by the German expedition seems to
have depicted this scene. See A. von Le Coq, Chotscho : Facsimile- Wieder-
gaben der Wichtigerer Funde der Ersten Kgl. Preuss. Expedition nach
Turfan, Berlin, 1913, Bd 1, p. 1 and PL rv. 6.

4 Augustine, c. Fatist. Bk xx. c. 17. Is the prayer addressed to the
First Man or to Splenditenens, whom St Augustine represents as mourning
over the pollution of the Light ?


xih] Manes and the Manichaeam 333

Light. Blessed be his angels, his guards, and highly praised
his shining troops."

Then he is to rise and, prostrating himself again, to say :

"Thou highly-esteemed one, thou shining Mani our guide, thou
the root of illumination, branch of uprightness, thou the great tree,
thou who art the sovereign Remedy."

A third prostration, and the praise runs :

"I prostrate myself and praise with a pure heart and a sincere
tongue, the Great God, the Father of the Lights and of their elements,
the most highly praised, the glorified, thee and all thy Majesty and
thy blessed worlds that thou hast called forth! To praise thee is
to praise equally thy troops, thy justified ones, thy word, thy
majesty, thy good pleasure. For thou art the God who is all Truth,
all Life, and all Justice."

Then comes a fourth prostration and the sentence :

"I praise all the gods, all the shining angels, all the lights, and all
the troops who are from the Great God, and I prostrate myself before
them."

The speech after the fifth prostration is :

"I prostrate myself and I praise the great troops, and the shining
gods who, with their Wisdom spread over the Darkness, pursue it
and conquer it."

While the sixth, and last given in full, is simply :

"I prostrate myself and I praise the Father of Majesty, the eminent
one, the shining one who has come forth from the two sciences 1 ."

It seems fairly plain that these praises are addressed not
so much to the "King of the Paradise of Light" or Highest
God of Goodness as to the lesser Powers of Light. The recent
expeditions of European scholars to Central Asia have succeeded
in recovering for us almost in full the Confession-Prayer repeated


i


The praises in the text are ail given by En Nadim. See Flugel, op.
cit. p. 96. Are "the two sciences" the Living Spirit and his Intelligence
or Reason? If so the "Father of Majesty" probably means the Beatus
Pater of note 2, p. 331 supra.


334 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

ritually by the Manichaean Hearers or laymen which, besides
confirming the Christian and Mahommedan accounts of Manes'
teaching summarized above, shows a greater belief in the
efficacy of repentance and the enforcement of a stricter morality
upon all classes of Manichaeans than we should have imagined
from the accounts of their adversaries 1 . We are fortunate in
possessing more than one text of this Confession-Prayer, that
found by the energy of our English emissary, Dr (now Sir Marc
Aurel) Stein, in the "Cave of the Thousand Buddhas" at Tun-
huang, proving almost identical with the one discovered in
Turfan by the Kussian Expedition and now in St Petersburg,
while both can be checked and supplemented by fragments also
found at Turfan by Profs. GriinwedePs and von Le Coq's
expeditions to the same place and taken to Berlin 2 . The title
and first few lines of this prayer have been lost, owing to the
fact that the Chinese plan of writing on a continuous sheet of
paper many yards in length, which was then rolled up with the
last lines innermost, was adopted by its transcribers. All the
specimens yet found are in Turkish, the Russian MS. being in
the dialect called after the nation using it, Ouigour or Uighur,
and like that found by Dr Stein and the Berlin fragments, in
the Manichaean modification of the Estranghelo or Syriac
script. The prayer or litany is in 15 sections or classes, the
number having doubtless a mystical reference 3 , and is followed
in the Russian and English examples by a recapitulation which
is not without value. The version which follows is a compound

1 The Mediaeval Inquisitors were in especial never tired of denouncing
the immorality of the Manichaean Hearers. See H. C. Lea, History of the
Inquisition, index.

2 The original documents are described by Prof. A. von Le Coq in
" Turkish Khuastuanift from Tun-huang," J.R.A.S. 1911, pp. 277-279.

3 There are many allusions in Manichaean literature to three worlds
of light, which seem to be (1) the light inaccessible, or heaven of God;
(2) the light intelligible, i.e. that can be comprehended by the mind only,
which is inhabited by the First Man; and (3) the perceptible light, of
which the Sun and Moon are the rulers. See especially Chavannes et
Pelliot, op. cit. V™ ptie, pp. 564 and 586, and 2 me ptie, p. 102, n. 2.
The Manichaeans' addiction to the number five needs no insistence.
Fifteen, i.e. 3x5, is therefore a number which came naturally to them.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 335

of all the three sources mentioned above, and has been here
divided into three parts, although it is not so in the original,
for convenience of commentary.

KHUASTUANIFT.

Sect. I. "[The Son of ?] the God Khormuzta even the Fivefold
God descended from the heavens with the purity of all the gods, to
war against the Demon; he (the Fivefold God) battled against the
Shimnus 1 of evil deeds, and against the five species of the Kingdom
of the Demons. God and the Devil, Light and Darkness then
intermingled. The youth of the Divine Khormuzta even the Five-
fold God, and our souls, joined battle with Sin and the Demon- world
and became ensnared and entangled with it. All the princes of the
Demons came with the insatiable and shameless Demon of Envy
and a hundred and forty myriads of demons banded together in
evil intent, ignorance, and folly. He himself, the Born and Created
{i.e. the Fivefold God or son of Khormuzta) forgot the eternal heaven
of the Gods and became separated from the Gods of Light. Hence,

my God ! if the Shimnu (Great Devil) of evil intent has led astray
our thoughts and inclined us to devilish deeds. — If, becoming thereby
foolish and without understanding, we have sinned and erred against
the foundation and root of all bright spirits, even against the pure
and bright Azrua the Lord 2 . — If thereby Light and Darkness, God
and the Devil have intermingled. . .

here follows a lacuna of several pages which Prof, von Le Coq
suggests was filled with "an explanation of the allegorical story
of the combat" and its practical application.

" . . .If we have said. . .is its foundation and root. — If we have said
if anyone animates a body it is God ; or that if anyone kills, it is
God. — If we have said Good and Evil have alike been created by
God. If we have said it is He [God] who has created the eternal

1 Shimnu seems to be the Buddhist word for "devil." Cf. Neander,
Ch. Hist. vol. n. p. 181. Prof, von Le Coq (J.B.A.S. 1911, p. 300) says it

1 is of Soghdian origin. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l iTe ptie, p. 523, n. 3,
I seek to show that it is the equivalent of Ahriman.

2 On this word see p. 323 supra ; cf . Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l iTe
ptie, p. 542, n. 2, which seems to summarize all that there is to be said
about it, and p. 342 infra.


336 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Gods. If we have said the Divine Khormuzta and the Shimnu
(Great Devil) are brethren 1 . my God, if in our sin we have spoken
such awful blasphemies, having unwittingly become false to God.
If we have thus committed this unpardonable sin. my God,
I N.N. 2 now repent. To cleanse myself from sin, I pray : Mandstdr
Mrzd ! (My sin remit !) "

Sect. II. "When because of the God of the Sun and Moon and
of the Gods enthroned in the two resplendent Palaces, the foundation
and root of the light of all the Burkhans 3 of Earth and Water go to
the heaven prepared for their assembly (foundation and root), the
first gate they reach is the God of the Sun and Moon. In order to
deliver the Fivefold God and to sever the Light from the Darkness
he rolls along the lower part of the heavens in fulness and lights up
the four corners of the earth. my God, if in our sin we have
unwittingly sinned against the God of the Sun and Moon, the Gods
enthroned in the two resplendent Palaces. If, although calling him
the True, Mighty, and Powerful God, we have not believed in him.
If we have uttered many spoken blasphemies. If we have said the
God of the Sun and Moon dies, and his rise and setting comes [?]
not by [his own?] strength, and that should he [trust to his?] own
strength, he will not rise [?]. If we have said, our own bodies were
created before the Sun and Moon. To cleanse ourselves from this
unwitting sin also, we pray : Mandstdr Mrzd (Our sin remit)."

Sect. III. "Since, in defence of the Fivefold God, even the
youth of the Divine Khormuzta, his five members, that is to say,
First, the God of the Ether; Secondly, the God of the Wind;
Thirdly, the God of the Light; Fourthly, the God of the Water;
Fifthly, the God of the Fire, having battled against Sin and the

1 This was of course the exact statement of Zervanism, which the
Khuastuanift implicitly condemns. Cf . Mihr Nerses' proclamation in 450
a.d. quoted on p. 285 supra.

2 This was the name of the owner, which was Raimast Parzind in the
Tun-huang text of Sir Marc Stein.

8 This was the name given to the incarnate, as distinguished from the
spiritual, messengers of the God of Light to man. Thus Zoroaster is
always spoken of in Manichaean literature as a Burkhan, and doubtless
the historical Buddha and Jesus were included in the same category.
Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l ire ptie, p. 572, n. 2.


!


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeans 337

Demon-world were ensnared and entangled 1 , and have intermingled
with the Darkness. Since they were unable to go to the heaven of
God and are now upon the earth. Since the ten heavens above, the
eight earths beneath, exist on account of the Fivefold God. Since
of everything that is upon the earth the Fivefold God is the Majesty,
the Radiance [?], the Likeness, the Body, the Soul, the Strength, the
Light, the Foundation and the Root. my God, if in our sin we
have unwittingly offended against or caused grief to the Fivefold
God by an evil and wicked mind. If we have allowed our fourteen
members to gain domination over us. If by taking animated beings
with our ten snake-headed fingers and our thirty-two teeth, we have
fed upon them and have thus angered and grieved the Gods [?] 2 .
If we have in any way sinned against the dry and wet earth,
against the five kinds of animals, and against the five kinds of
herbs and trees. my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray
we now : Mandstdr Mrzd I (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. IV. "If we have unwittingly sinned against the divine
Burkhans of the hosts (of the Messenger God 3 ) and against the merit-
attaining pure Elect. If although we have called them the true
and divine Burkhans and the well-doing and pure Elect, we have not
believed on them. If although we have uttered the word of God,
we have through folly acted against it and not performed it [?].
If instead of spreading the decrees and commandments, we have
impeded them. my God, we now repent and to cleanse ourselves
from sin, we pray : Mandstdr Mrzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. V. " If we have wandered into sin against the five kinds of
animated beings, that is to say, First, against two-footed man;
Secondly, against the four-footed animals; Thirdly, against the
flying animals ; Fourthly, against the animals in the water ; Fifthly,
against the animals upon earth which creep on their bellies. my
God, if in our sin against these five kinds of animated and moving

1 Obviously the authors of the Khuastuanijt knew nothing of the
doctrine put forth by the Manichaeans in Christian lands that the First
Man offered himself as a sacrifice to destroy the sons of Darkness. Cf;
n. 2, p. 294 supra.

2 Because by so doing the existence of the diabolic creation would be
prolonged.

8 The words "of the Messenger" [God] are not in Prof, von Le Coq's
version.


l. n.


22


338 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

beings from the great to the small, we have beaten and wounded,
abused, and injured, and pained, or even put them to death. If
thus we have become the tormentors of so many animated and
moving beings. my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray
we now: Mandstdr Mrzd t (Our sin remit!)"

It will be seen that in these first five sections or clauses of
the Confession, we have a confirmation in all essential points of
the version of the faith taught by Manes as it has been preserved
for us by the Mahommedan authors quoted above. It is even
possible that it was from this source that the author of the
Fihrist and Al-Biruni derived some of their information con-
cerning the Manichaeans, and although it is impossible as yet
to fix any date for the Confession except within very wide
limits, it may be said that it is probably earlier than either of
the Mahommedan writers. It is certainly earlier than 1035
a.d., the date at which the grotto at Tun-huang in which one
of the copies was bricked up 1 . But it seems plain that it must
have long before been used in the Manichaean worship from the
fact that copies differing little, if at all, from each other have
been found in two different scripts. As two of these are in the
Turkish language, it seems likely that they were translated for
proselytizing purposes into this from the earlier Syriac version
shortly after the conquest of the Tou-kiue or Turks by the
Ouigours, which some authors put as far back as the vnth
century a.d. 2 The tenets of the Manichaeans must have been
well settled for this to be possible, and we have here, therefore,
an account at first hand of Manichaean teaching at a date much
earlier than the Mahommedan authors quoted above, and first
reduced to writing between the earliest promulgation of Manes'
own teaching and the Mahommedan conquest of Persia. It is,
therefore, contemporary, or nearly so, with the period of activity

1 Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l 4re ptie, pp. 503, n. 1. On this being
mentioned in a paper in the J.R.A.S. 1913, Dr F. Denison Ross said
that he thought the date should be put 300 years later, J. cit. p. 81. He
has since withdrawn this (J.R.A.S. 1913, pp. 434-436).

2 See - the luminous historical study by M. Henri Cordier, "Les Fouilles
en Asie Centrale," Journal des Savants, Paris, 1910, pp. 219 sqq., especially
pp. 249, 250.


xiii] Manes and the Manichaeam 339

of the Zoroastrianism revived by the Sassanides, and it is
interesting to find how much nearer in appearance to the
cosmology and theology of the Avesta are those of the Khuas-
tuanift than is the Christianized form of Manichaeism intro-
duced into Europe and Africa and combated by St Augustine.
Khormuzta, the First Man, is certainly Ahura Mazda, Oromazes,
or Ormuzd, while the Fivefold God here spoken of as the
"youth" is clearly to be identified with his five sons or the
armour left below on his defeat 1 . Hence it is probable that
the Manichaeans in Upper Asia did not wish to appear as the
worshippers of any other deities than those of the Persian
nation 2 , although where Christianity was the religion of the
State, they were willing to call these deities by other names 8 .
Yet the dualism which is the real characteristic of the faith of
Manes here as elsewhere admits of no compromise, and the sin
against which the Section II is directed is plainly that
Zervanist heresy which would make Zervan akerene or Boundless
Time the author of all things, and Ormuzd and Ahriman alike
his sons. The part played by the Sun and Moon in the redemp-
tion of the Light is here the same as that assigned to them in
both the Christian and the Mahommedan accounts of Manes'
own teaching, but nothing is here said of the wheel which
appears in the former 4 . The Divine "Burkhans" mentioned
in Section III are, as we shall see later, the Divine Messengers
sent from time to time into the present world to assist in the
redemption of the Light. The sinfulness of feeding upon,
injuring, or even angering the lower animals is here much more
strongly insisted upon than in the other documents and

1 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l 4re ptie, p. 513, n. 1. Muller, Hand-
schriften-Reste, pp. 20, 22. Von Le Coq, J.R.A.S. 1911, p. 301.

2 Ormuzd, "the whole circuit of the sky," although he calls him, more
Graecorum, Zeus, "the sun and moon, the earth, fire, water and the winds, "
were "the only gods whose worship had come down to the Persians from
ancient times" in the days of Herodotus. Cf. Herodotus, Bk i. c. 131.

3 Faustus (Aug. v. Faust. Bk n. c. 4) distinctly says "Jesus Christ is
the son of the First Man. " Cf. also c. 5.

4 It is very doubtful whether it is referred to or not in the Tun-huang
treatise. Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l ire ptie, pp. 515, n. 2, and
p. 516, n. 3.

22—2


340 Manes mid the Manichaeans [ch.

demands repentance even in the case of the Hearers, and this
points directly to a closer connection with Buddhism than
hitherto has been thought possible. It is plainly opposed to
the later Zoroastrian teaching, which makes the killing of
certain animals belonging to the creation of Ahriman a religious
duty; and may therefore have only been adopted by the
Manichaeans when they found themselves in contact with a
large community of professed Buddhists.

The next five Sections of the Khuastuanift run thus :

Sect. VI. "If, my God, we have wandered into sin, and have
committed the ten kinds of sin in thoughts, words, and deeds. If
we have made up fraudulent lies ; if we have sworn false oaths ;
if we have borne false witness ; if we have treated as guilty guiltless
men ; if by fetching and carrying tales we have set men at variance,
and thereby have perverted their minds; if we have practised
magic ; if we have killed many animated and moving beings ; if we
have given way to wanton pleasures; if we have wasted the hard-
earned gains of industrious men ; if we have sinned against the God
of the Sun and Moon 1 . If in our past and present lives since we
have become Manichaeans [i.e. Hearers] we have sinned and gone
astray, thereby bringing confusion and discord upon so many
animated beings, my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray
we now, Mandstdr hirzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. VII. "Who is he who wandering in sin comes to the entry
of the two poison-laden ways, and to the road which leads astray to
the Gate of Hell ? The first is he who holds to false doctrines ; the
second is he who invokes the Demon as God and falls down before
him. my God, if wandering in sin, we have failed to recognize
and understand the true God and his pure faith, and have not believed
what the Burkhans and the pure Elect have preached 2 , and have
instead believed on those who preach falsely, saying 'I preach the
true God, and I expound the faith rightly.' If we have accepted
the words of such a one and have unwittingly kept wrongful fasts,
and have unwittingly bowed ourselves wrongfully, and wrongfully

1 The Power whom Faustus (Aug. c. Faust. Bk xx. c. 2) calls "God
the Son."

2 Evidently the incarnate or human messengers, Zoroaster, Buddha,
Jesus, and Manes. The heavenly "legates" are never depicted as "preach-
ing " to men.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeam 341

given alms; or if we have said 'We will acquire merit' and thereby
have unwittingly committed evil deeds ; or if, invoking the Demon
and the Fiend as God, we have sacrificed to them animated and
moving beings; or if, saying, 'this is the precept of the Burkhan,'
we have put ourselves under a false law and have bowed ourselves,
blessing it. If, thus sinning against God, we have prayed to the
Demon. my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray we now :
Mandstdr Mrzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. VIII. "When we came to the knowledge of the true God
and the pure Law, we knew the Two Principles and the Law of the
Three Ages 1 . The Light Principle we knew to be the Paradise of
God and the Dark Principle to be the Land of Hell. We knew what
existed before Heaven and Earth, the Earth of God, was. We
knew how God and the Demon fought with one another, and how
Light and Darkness became mingled together, and how Heaven and
Earth were created. We knew how the Earth of the Rulers and its
Heaven will disappear, and how the Light will be freed from the
Darkness, and what will then happen to all things. We believed in
and put our faith in the God Azrua, in the God of the Sun and Moon,
in the Mighty God 2 , and in the Burkhans, and thus we became
Hearers. Four bright seals have we carved upon our hearts. One is
Love which is the seal of the God Azrua 3 ; the second is Faith, which
is the seal of the God of the Sun and Moon ; the third is the Fear
of God which is the seal of the Fivefold God; and the fourth is
the wise Wisdom, which is the seal of the Burkhans. If, my God,
we have turned away our spirits and minds from these four (categories
of) Gods ; if we have spurned them from their rightful place, and
the Divine Seals have thus been broken, my God, to cleanse our-
selves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr Mrzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. IX. "In the Ten Commandments, we have been ordered
to keep three with the mouth, three with the heart, three with the
hand, and one with the whole self. If, my God, we have wittingly
or unwittingly by cleaving to the love of the body, or by listening

1 The Past, Present and Future, called the " Three Moments " in the Tun-
huang treatise. See Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. ll me ptie, pp. 114, 116.

2 Probably the strong or mighty Srosh or Tertius Legatus.

3 This may be compared to the Ophite Diagram in which Agape or
Love is made the summit of the Pantheon. See Chap. VIII p. 68 supra.
See also the same dogma in Valentinus, Chap. IX p. 123 supra.


342 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

to the words of wicked companions and friends, of associates and
fellows ; or by reason of our having much cattle and other posses-
sions ; or by our foolish attachment to the things of this world, we
have broken these ten commandments, and have been found wanting
and of no avail : my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray
we now : Mandstdr Mrzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. X. " We have been ordered to render every day, with a
whole mind and a pure heart, four praises to the God Azrua, to the
God of the Sun and Moon, to the Mighty God, and to the Burkhans.
If from lack of the fear of God or from slackness our praises have
been offered unseemly, or if in offering them we have not turned our
hearts and minds towards God, so that our praises and prayers have
not reached God in pure wise, but have remained in another place :
my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr
Mrzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

This second part of the Confession, perhaps, deals with
errors of conduct as the first does with errors of belief. The
ten sins given in the Vlth Section do not agree exactly with
the list given in the Fihrist which says that the Manichaean
Hearers were enjoined to abstain from prayers offered to idols,
from lying, from greed, from murder, adultery, theft, from
false teaching, from magic, from doubt in religion, and from
slackness in action 1 ; but perhaps all these prohibitions could
be read into the list in the Khuastuanift. The Vllth Section
seems to be directed not so much against other religions as
against schisms within the Manichaean Church 2 , and it is
evident that its authors knew of bloody sacrifices offered to
the Pow T ers of Darkness as described by Plutarch apart from
the magic or sorcery condemned in the preceding section. In
the Vlllth Section, we have also for the second time a new name
for God in the word Azrua, which Prof, von Le Coq leaves
unexplained ; but which M. Gauthiot considers to be the same
as, or rather the equivalent in Soghdian of Zervan 3 . Zervan,
however, can hardly be here the Supreme God worshipped by
Yezdegerd, especially as the Khuastuanift has just, as we have

1 Flugel, op. cit. pp. 95, 96.

2 As to these, see En Nadim in Flugel, op. cit. pp. 97-100.

3 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l tre ptie, p. 543, n. 2.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeam 343

seen, formally condemned as blasphemers those who say that
Ormuzd and Ahriman are brethren, and therefore by implication
those who give both Powers Zervan for a father. It seems
more likely that the name is either a corruption of Ahura Mazda
or perhaps of the Sanskrit Asura ; but in any event, there can
be no doubt that it denotes the King of the Paradise of Light,
as the Highest Good God is called in the Fihrist. The division
of the Ten Commandments of Manes into three of the mouth,
three of the hand, three of the heart, and one of the whole
being recalls St Augustine^ description of the threes^eals,
the signacut an oris, signaculum manus, and signaculum sinus,
observed by the Manichaeans 1 ; while the description in Section
X of the four praises (or hymns) to be rendered daily bears
out what is said above as to the praises of man being of
importance for the actual redemption of the Light.
The remaining sections of the Khuastuanift are :

Sect. XI. "We have been ordered to give reverently seven kinds
of alms for the sake of the pure Law. It has also been ordered that
when the angels of the Light of the Five Gods and the two Appellant
and Eespondent Gods bring to us the Light of the Five Gods which
is to go to the Gods to be purified, we should in all things order
ourselves [or, "dress ourselves," according to Le Coq] according to
the Law. If, through necessity or because of our foolishness, we
have not given the seven kinds of alms according to the Law, but
have bound the Light of the Five Gods, which should go to the Gods
to be purified, in our houses and dwellings, or if we should have
given it to evil men or to evil animals, and have thereby wasted it
and sent it to the Land of Evil, my God, to cleanse ourselves from
sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr hirzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. XII. "We have been ordered to keep every year 50 days
of Vusanti 2 after the manner of the pure Elect, and thereon [?] to

1 Augustine, de Moribus Manichaeorum, c. x. Cf. Baur, Die Manichd-
ische Religionssystem, pp. 248 sqq. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l ere ptie,
p. 547, n. 1, examine the question whether these are borrowed from
Buddhism as F. W. K. Miiller and Cumont assert, and incline to the view
that Manes took them from Zoroastrianism.

2 The word vusanti does not seem to be explained by Prof, von Le Coq.
Has it any connection with the Sanskrit vasanta "spring" ? In that case,


344 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

please God by observing pure fasts. If, by reason of the care of
our bouses and dweUings or of our cattle and other possessions ; or
by reason of our need and poverty [foolish attachments, apud Le
Coq] ; or because of the greedy and shameless Demon of Envy ; or
of our irreverent hearts, we have broken the fast, either wittingly or
by foolishness ; or having begun it have not fasted according to the
Rite and the Law. my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so
pray we now : Mandstdr hirzd ! (Our sin remit !) "

Sect. XIII. "We have been ordered to pray every Full Moon
[literally, every day of the Moon-GoVl], to acknowledge before God,
the Law, and the pure Elect, our sins and transgressions in prayer
for the cleansing of ourselves from sin. If now wittingly, or by
feebleness of mind, or from idleness of body, or because our minds
were set on the cares and business of this world, we have not thus
gone to prayer for the cleansing of ourselves from sin. my God,
to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr hirzd !
(Our sin remit!)"

Sect. XIV. " We have been ordered to keep each year seven
YimJci 1 [Days of Atonement?] and one month's rigid fast [?]. We
have also been ordered when meeting together in the House of Prayer
to keep the Yimki and to observe the fast, to acknowledge in prayer
with a whole mind to the Divine Burkhans the sins which we have
committed during the year and which we know through our senses.
my God, if we have not kept the Yimki seemly; if we have not
observed the month's rigid fast perfectly and seemly; if we have
failed to acknowledge in prayer the sins of the year which we know
through our senses, and have thus failed in so many of our duties.

the 50 days fast may have been continuous like the Christian Lent and
the Mahommedan Ramadan. But it seems more likely that it refers to
the weekly fast on Sunday which, the Fihrist notwithstanding, seems to
have been incumbent on all the Manichaeans, Elect and Hearers alike.
So Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. 2 me ptie, p. Ill, n. 2. See n. 4, p. 349 infra.
1 Prof, von Le Coq says (J.R.A.S. 1911, p. 307) that this word is as
yet unexplained and may belong to another language than Turkish. One
is almost tempted to see in it a corruption of the Yom Kippur or Day of
Atonement of the Jews. Judaism is the last religion from which the
Manichaeans would have consciously borrowed; but the Jews have
always taken their goods where they found them, and it may well be that
both Jews and Manichaeans were here drawing from a common source.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeans 345

my God, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr
hirzd ! (Our sins remit !) "

Sect. XV. " How many evil thoughts do we not think every day !
How many deceitful and unseemly words do we not speak! How
many unseemly deeds do we not do ! Thus do we prepare torments
for ourselves by crimes and frauds. Since we have walked body and
soul in the love of the greedy and shameless Demon of Envy, and
the Light of the Five Gods which we absorb in our food every day
thereby goes to the Land of Evil. Wherefore, my God, to cleanse
ourselves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr Mrzd ! (Our sins
remit!)"

Here follows a lacuna of four lines, after which the Confession
resumes :

"0 my God. We are full of defects and sins! We are thine
adversaries and grieve thee by thoughts, words and deeds, for the
sake of the greedy and shameless Demon of Envy. Gazing with our
eyes, hearing with our ears, seizing with our hands, and trampling
with our feet, we ever torture and impede the Light of the Five Gods,
the dry and wet earth, the five kinds of animals, and the five kinds
of plants and trees. So full are we of defects and sins ! On account
of the Ten Commandments, the seven kinds of Alms, the three seals,
we are called Hearers ; yet we cannot perform what these claim of
us. If, wandering in sin, we have sinned against the Gods of Light,
against the pure Law, against the Herald God 1 and the Preacher, the
Men of God [the Preachers, according to Le Coq], against the
pure Elect. If we have not walked according to the letter and spirit
of the spoken words of God. If we have grieved the hearts of the
Gods. If we have been unable to keep the Days of Atonement, the
rigid fast, to offer the Praises and the Blessings according to the
Law and the Rite. If we have been found lacking and unprofitable,
and have day by day and month by month committed sins and
trespasses — to the Gods of Light, to the Majesty of the Law, to the
pure Elect, to cleanse ourselves from sin, so pray we now : Mandstdr
hirzd/ (Our sin remit!)" -

These last five sections of the Khuastuanift give us a glimpse
of the religious observances of the Manichaeans which alters
somewhat the picture of them which we should have formed from

1 Is this the Tertius Legatus or another ?


i


346 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

the account of St Augustine and other Christian writers. The
seven kinds of alms referred to in Section XI, are not, as
might be thought, the gifts to necessitous or helpless persons
prescribed alike by the Christian and the Mahommedan
religions. It is apparent both from the context and from other
sources of information that they are the offerings of food made
by the lay or lowest members of the Manichaean community
to the Elect or Perfect, who are spoken of in the subsequent
sections as being already a species of Gods. This practice was
certainly known to St Augustine, and was not likely to sink
into oblivion in a community in contact with Buddhists,
among whom monks living upon food given in alms by the
faithful were a common sight. But the reason assigned by
St Augustine for the practice, which was before obscure, here
receives full explanation. The particles of light diffused
through matter, and therefore inhabiting the bodies of animals
and plants, could only, in Manichaean opinion, be set free by
passing into the bodies of the semi-divine Elect. Thus says
St Augustine in his treatise against the Manichaean Perfect,
Faustus 1 :

"This foolish notion of making your disciples bring you food, that
your teeth and stomach may be the means of relieving Christ who
is bound up in it, is a consequence of your profane fancies. You
declare that Christ is liberated in this way — not, however, entirely ;
for you hold that some tiny particles of no value still remain in the
excrement, to be mixed up and compounded again in various
material forms, and to be released and purified at any rate by the
fire in which the world will be burned up, if not before."

With the substitution of the "Light of the Fivefold God" for
Christ — the use of this last name being probably either the gloss
of St Augustine himself, or else the concession made by the
Manichaean missionaries after their manner to the religious
prepossessions of those among whom they hoped to gain
converts — we have here the doctrine more plainly stated in
the Khuastuanift. The Hearers are to labour perpetually,
idleness being one of the Manichaean deadly sins, and to present
1 Augustine, c. Faust. Bk n. c. 5. Cf. Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit.
1*™ ptie, p. 539, and n. 1.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeans 347

the fruits of their labour in the shape of food to the Perfect.
Not only will the particles of Light imprisoned in this last thus
be conveyed to the Land of the Gods ; but it will be prevented
from going to the Land of Evil, which it would do if it were
consumed by the bodies of the Hearers or, a fortiori, of those
profane persons who belonged to other faiths than the Mani-
chaean. Thus is explained the inhumanity of which many
writers accuse the Manichaean community, which led them to
refuse food to their neighbours in time of famine, alleging that
all that they produced must be reserved for those of the Faith 1 .
This explains also the merit assigned to the observance of
the many fasts enjoined in the concluding sections of the
Khuastuanift. The fifty Vusanti fasts together with the month's
rigid fast to be kept by the Hearers would all have the effect of
diminishing their consumption of food in the shape of animals
and plants, which hinders the liberation of the particles of
Light imprisoned therein. In the choice of the days set apart
for these fasts we see another instance of the Manichaean
practice as assimilating the outward observances of other
religions. The fifty Vusanti fasts would give an average of very
nearly one a week, and were probably kept on Sunday, the
distinction between the Elect and the Hearers in this respect
noted by the Mahommedan writer being probably due to some
misconception. The month's rigid fast possibly accorded with
the Arab Ramadan and must have been very useful in prevent-
ing the Hearers from appearing singular when among Mahom-
medans ; and the seven Yimki or Days of Atonement seem to
have been copied from the observances of the Jews. So
possibly was the ritual practice alluded to in the XlVth section
of meeting together at certain times to confess their sins, and as
this is here said to take place in the House of Prayer, it entirely
disposes of the theory set up by earlier writers that the Mani-
chaeans had no temples, synagogues, or churches of their own 2 .
The confession and prayer enjoined in Section XIII were
doubtless to be repeated privately and in whatever place the

1 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. P re ptie, p. 573, n. 3.
8 So Baur, op. cit. This was doubtless true in the West and in lands
where they were exposed to severe persecution.


348 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Hearer found himself at the fortnightly periods there specified,
and this Litany was very probably the Khuastuanift itself 1 .

What other ritual was performed in these Manichaean
meeting-places is still doubtful. The Christian writers declare
that the Manichaeans celebrated a sacrament resembling the
Eucharist with the horrible accompaniments before alluded to
in the case of the followers of Simon Magus 2 . The same
accusation was made, as has been many times said above, by
nearly all the sects of the period against each other, and we
have no means of determining its truth. It is however fairly
certain from the silence observed on the subject by the
Khuastuanift that no sacramental feast of any kind was either
celebrated by or in the presence of the Hearers or general body
of Manichaeans. If the Perfect or Elect partook of any such
meal among themselves, it possibly consisted of bread and water
only and was probably a survival of some custom traditional in
Western Asia of which we have already seen the traces in the
Mysteries of Mithras 3 . The pronounced Docetism which led
the Manichaeans to regard the body of the historical Jesus as a
phantom shows that they could not have attributed to this meal
any sacramental efficacy like that involved in the doctrines either
of the Real Presence or of the Atonement.

The case is different with regard to pictures. The Mani-
chaeans forbade the use of statues or probably of any represen-
tations of the higher spiritual powers, no doubt in recollection
of the idea current among the Persians even in Herodotus' time,

1 This explains its translation from its original Pahlavi into the language
of the converts and each copy bearing the name of the owner.

2 See Cumont, Cosmog. Manich. p. 56, for authorities. Cf. also de
Stoop, op. tit. p. 22. As has been many times said above, every religion
and sect at the time accused the others of these filthy practices, without
our being able to discern any proof of the justice of the accusation in one
case more than in another. In any case, St Augustine, here the chief
authority, could not have known of it at first hand, as he had never been
more than a Hearer, and he himself says (contra Fortunatum, Bk I. App.)
that while he had heard that the Elect celebrated the Eucharist, he knew
nothing of the mode of celebration. Cf. Neander, Ch. Hist. n. p. 193.

8 All contemporary authorities are agreed that they were forbidden to
drink wine.


xin] Manes and the Manichaeam 349

that the gods had not the nature of men. Yet the Jewish and
later the Mahommedan prohibition against making likenesses of
anything had evidently no weight with them, and even before
the recent discoveries there was a tradition that Manes himself
was in the habit of using symbolical pictures called Ertenki-
Mani as a means of propaganda 1 . The truth of this is now
amply confirmed by the German discoveries at Turfan, where
Prof, von Le Coq found frescoes representing possibly Manes
himself, together with paintings on silk showing the souls of
the faithful dead in the Moon-ship 2 . Sir Marc Stein seems to
have secured similar relics at Tun-huang, and when these are
more thoroughly examined it is possible that they may throw
light upon many points of Manichaean symbolism yet obscure
to us. The fact that the Manichaean meeting-houses were
decorated with symbolical pictures seems thereby already
established.

Of their fasts, the principal ones have been already indicated
in the Khuastuanift, and their feasts seem to have been few,
almost the only one of which any mention has come down to
us being that which was called the Festival of the Bema or
pulpit, when an empty chair on five steps was placed in a
conspicuous position in the meeting-house and adored by all
present. This was said to have been done in commemoration
of Manes as their founder and on the date preserved as the
anniversary of his death 3 . If it be really true that any Manich-
aeans whether Hearers or otherwise kept Sunday as a holiday,
it must have been, as Neander suggests, not because it was
the day of the Resurrection, in which their Docetic doctrines
prevented them from believing, but as the day of the Sun.
In like manner they probably observed Christmas as the
birthday not of Jesus, but of the Sun-god in accordance
with the traditions preserved by the worshippers of Mithras 4 .

1 Neander, op. cit. n. p. 170.

2 Le Coq, Chotscho, Vol. i. PI. i. and rv.

3 Aug. c. Ep. Fundamenti, c. 8.

4 Augustine, c. Faust. Bk xvm. c. 5, whom he quotes, does not say
however that they kept Sunday as a festival, but merely that they then
worshipped the Sun: Vos in die, quern dicunt solis, solem colitis.


350 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

St Augustine speaks, too, of their keeping Easter 1 . It seems
possible that this was only done in Christian countries, in
accordance with their usual custom of conforming in outward
matters, and we have no evidence of their doing anything of
the sort in Turkestan.

Of the sacred books of the Manichaeans we hear much,
although only one has survived to us in anything like com-
pleteness. Thus we hear from Al-Biruni that the Manichaeans
have a gospel of their own "the contents of which from the
first to the last are opposed to the doctrine of the Christians,"
and this he says was called "the Gospel of the Seventy 2 ." He
also tells us of a book written by Manes himself called Shaburkan
or Shapurakhan which was doubtless written for the edification
of King Shapur or Sapor, the son of Ardeshir, whose name it
bears 3 . In this Manes seems to have described his own birth
and his assumption of the office of heavenly messenger or
"Burkhan," besides the saying as to the Burkhans before him,
Zoroaster, Buddha, and Jesus, as described above 4 . We also
hear from Al-Biruni that he wrote a gospel arranged according
to the 22 letters of the alphabet, which does not seem to be
the same as the Gospel of the Seventy 5 , and we hear from other
sources of a Book of the Giants, a Book of Secrets, a Book of
Precepts, a Book of Lifegiving, and others, together with many
letters or epistles all supposed to be by Manes' own hand 6 . As
has been said, he and his followers rejected the Old Testament
entirely, not indeed denying its inspiration, but declaring this
to have come from the Evil Principle. Of the New Testament,
Faustus, the Manichaean Perfect who disputed with St Augus-
tine, puts the matter very clearly when he says :
"We receive only so much of the New Testament as says anything
to the honour of the Son of Glory, either by Himself or by His
apostles ; and by the latter only after they had become perfect and

1 Aug. c. Ep. Fundamenti, c. 8 and de Stoop, op. cit. p. 27.

2 Al-Biruni, Chronology, p. 27. 3 lb. pp. 121, 190.

* A few other undoubted extracts from the Shapurakhan are to be
found in Miiller, Handschriften-Reste, passim, and others quoted at second
hand from Mahommedan writers in Kessler, op. cit., as to which see ib.
pp. 180-191.

6 Al-Biruni, op. cit. p. 225. 6 See Kessler, op. cit. p. 191 sqq.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeam 351

believers. As for the rest, anything that was said by them either in
their simplicity and ignorance, while they were yet inexperienced in
the truth, or with malicious design was inserted by the enemy
among the statements of truth, or was incautiously asserted by other
writers and thus handed down to later generations — of all this we
desire to know nothing. I mean all such statements as these— that
He was shamefully born of a woman ; that as a Jew He was circum-
cised ; that He offered sacrifices like a heathen ; that He was meanly
baptized, led into the wilderness, and miserably tempted 1 ."

Thus it seems that the Manichaeans accepted only such facts
of the Gospel narrative as did not conflict with their own
doctrines, and although they are said to have had an especial
veneration for St Paul, there is no reason to think that this
extended to the writings of the Apostle to the Gentiles, or had
any other motive than that of external conformity with the
religion of those whom they were endeavouring to convert. As
himself the Paraclete announced in the New Testament, Manes
claimed for himself an authority superior to that of all apostles,
and if he made use of any of the writings attributed to them,
it was probably only in the shape of isolated passages divorced
from their context. On the other hand, his followers seem to
have made free use of apocryphal or pseudepigraphical books
written in the names of the apostles and containing statements
which could be explained as confirming Manes' teaching. A
great number of these had as their common authors the names
of St Thomas and St Andrew, and the Fathers declare that
they were for the most part the work of one Leucius, whom
they assert was a Manichaean 2 . It may be so; but, as all the
copies of these works which have come down to us have been
expurgated or, in the language of the time, "made orthodox,"
by the removal of heretical matter, there is little proof of the
fact.

More authentic, however, than these pseudepigrapha and
much fuller than the extracts preserved by Christian or Mahom-

1 Aug. c. Faust. Bk xxxh. c. 7.

2 See Albert Dufourcq, De Manichaeismo apud Latinos, Paris, 1900,
where all these apocrypha are carefully examined. The Quo vadis story
appears on p. 40.


352 Manes and the Manichaeam [ch.

medan writers is a treatise found in the cave of the Thousand
Buddhas at Tun-huang which has been published only last
year. It seems by an extraordinary chance to have nearly
escaped us, having been apparently missed by all the European
expeditions because it was written in Chinese characters.
Hence it was removed to Pekin by orders of the Chinese
Government under the impression that it was Buddhist in its
nature, and has since been published in a Chinese publication
founded for the purpose of preserving the Tun-huang MSS. by
Mr Lo Tchen-yu, a Chinese scholar of gTeat philosophical and
archaeological attainments 1 . It is written on a continuous roll
of paper over six metres in length, which has led unfortunately
to the disappearance of the title and the first few words of the
treatise. The remainder shows, however, that it purports to
be a sort of allocution addressed by Manes, here as in the
Khuastuanift called the "Legate of the Light," to Adda or
Addas, whom we know from the Christian documents before
quoted to have been one of the three great missionaries said to
have been dispatched by Manes into foreign countries to
propagate his doctrine 2 . Of these three, Thomas, Hermas, and
Addas, the last-named is said to have been allotted " Scythia,"
which here as elsewhere doubtless means Turkestan, and his
name therefore gives a reasonable air of authenticity to the
text. The whole document is written in the form of a Buddhist
sutra, and has been translated with an excellent commentary
by the French Sinologist, M. Edouard Chavannes, with the help
of M. Paul Pelliot, the leader of the French Expedition to
Turkestan which probably first discovered it 3 . It entirely
confirms the Mahommedan account of the teaching of Manes
given above as well as that appearing in the Khuastuanift, and
shows that St Augustine, alike in his authentic writings and in
the tract de Haeresibus generally, although perhaps wrongfully,
attributed to him, was drawing from well-informed sources.
There are many grounds for thinking that it may originally
have been written in Pahlavi, in which case it may have been

1 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. p. 508, and n. 1.

2 Hegemonius, Acta, c. xm. p. 22, Beeson.

3 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l tre ptie, pp. 399, 400.


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 353

contemporary with Manes himself; but it frequently makes use
of Buddhist phrases often derived from the Sanskrit 1 . If the
view here taken of the date of the original treatise is well
founded, these may have been introduced by Manes during the
time that the tradition mentioned above says that he spent in
Turkestan for the elaboration of his doctrine. At all events
they show that the practice of adapting his religion, as far as
might be, to accord with that previously held by those among
whom he was trying to make proselytes, goes back to the very
origin of the sect.

This treatise was evidently written for edification rather than
for instruction, and gives us a curious idea of the imagery by
which the Manichaean teachers sought to enforce their teaching.
The theory of the macrocosm and the microcosm, which teaches
that the body of man is in itself a copy of the great world or
universe, is here carried to excess 2 , and we hear much of the
"trees" which certain demons, previously sticking to the
elements, says the treatise, "like a fly to honey, a bird to bird-
lime, or a fish to the hook 3 ," plant in the soul to the corruption
and ultimate death of the better desires there implanted by
the Light. The combat waged against the diabolic vices by
the virtues is also described with great minuteness, but in
language in which it is sometimes difficult to discover whether
the author is consciously using allegory or not. Thus he says
that the Devil, to whom he attributes the formation of the
body of man, "shut up the Pure Ether" (one of the five light
elements)

"in the city of the bones. He established (there) the dark thought
in which he planted a tree of death. Then he shut up the Excellent

1 Op. cit. l* re ptie, pp. 509, n. 5, 510, n. 2, 533, nn. 2 and 4.

2 Nowhere is this curious theory, which forms the base of most Mediaeval
Cabala and magic, more clearly stated. Thus the Tun-huang treatise says
in describing the fashioning of the body of man by the devils (as in the
Mepos Tfvx&v Scor^poy), "there is not a single formation of the universe
(or cosmos) which they did not imitate in the carnal body" (Chavannea
et Pelliot, op. cit. P re ptie, p. 527) ; and in the next page "The demon. . .
shut up the five natures of Light in the carnal body of which he made a
little universe (microcosm)."

8 Chavannes et Pelliot, op. cit. l iTe ptie, p. 514.
L. ii. ' 23


354 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

Wind in the city of the nerves. He established (there) the dark
feeling in which he planted a tree of death. Then he shut up the
strength of the Light in the city of the veins. He established (there)
the dark reflection in which he planted a tree of death. Then he
shut up the Excellent Water in the city of the flesh. He established
there the dark intellect, in which he planted a tree of death. Then
he shut up the Excellent Fire in the city of the skin. He established
there the dark reasoning in which he planted a tree of death. The
Demon of Envy [the name generally used in the treatise for the
Devil] planted these five poisonous trees of death in the five kinds of
ruined places. He made them on every occasion deceive and trouble
the original luminous nature, to draw in from without the nature
which is stranger to it, and to produce poisonous fruit. Thus the
tree of the dark thought grows within the city of the bones; its
fruit is hatred: the tree of the dark feeling grows within the city
of the nerves ; its fruit is irritation : the tree of the dark reflection
grows within the city of the veins ; its fruit is luxury [wantonness] :
the tree of the dark intellect grows within the city of the flesh ; its
fruit is anger : the tree of the dark reasoning grows within the city
of the skin ; its fruit is folly. It is thus then that of the five kinds
of things which are the bones, the nerves, the veins, the flesh, and
the skin, he made a prison and shut up there the five divisions of the
First Principle of Light. . * .*•

and so on. One might sometimes think one was reading John
Bunyan and his Holy War with its defence of the town of
Mansoul.

Most of the information contained in this Pekin Treatise has
been dealt with in its place, but there are one or two matters
concerning the cosmology of Manes which are of importance as
showing the connection of his system with that of his predeces-
sors. One regards the two great angels, here called Khrostag
and Padvaktag 2 or the Appellant and Respondent, who are
mentioned in the Khuastuanift (p. 343 supra) as bringing the

1 Op. cit. pp. 528, 529.

2 Their Chinese names are discussed by MM. Chavannes and Pelliot
(op. cit. l kTe ptie, pp. 521, n. 1, 542, n. 1, 543, nn. 1, 2, and 544, n. 1),
wherein are gathered nearly all that can be said about them. The learned
commentators decide that their functions still remain mysterious. But
see next note infra.


xni] Manes and the Manichaeam 355

light to be purified 1 . As has been said above, they show a great
likeness to the two last Amshaspands of Zoroastrianism called
Haurvetat and Ameretat ; and like them are never mentioned
separately, but always together 2 . Another point, already
referred to, is that the Zoroastrian Sraosha, the strong archangel
who guards the world at night from the demons, is here men-
tioned several times by name 3 . Yet another point is that the
two sexes are here said to have been formed by the devil out of
jealousy and rage at beholding the sun and moon, and in
imitation of the two luminaries. This is an entirely different
story not only from those given above as Manichaean but from
that given in the Great Announcement attributed to Simon
Magus, and both differ from that told in the Pistis Sophia.
It seems plain therefore that in attributing these various origins
to the division of mankind into sexes, none of the three teachers
was drawing upon tradition, but was merely inventing ad hoc.
There remains to be considered the history of the sect, as
to which we have become better informed during the last few
decades than at one time seemed possible 4 . Prohibited in the
Roman Empire from the outset, they nevertheless made their
way along both shores of the Mediterranean, and all the efforts
of the Imperial authorities proved powerless to suppress them.
Constantine directed an enquiry into their tenets, it is said,
with some idea of making them into the religion of the State,

1 W. Radloff, Chuastuanift, das Bussgebet der Manichaer, St Petersburg,
1909, pt i. pp. 19, 20. Von Le Coq, J.R.A.S. 1911, p. 294: "when the
Gods Kroshtag and Padwakhtag, the Appellant and Respondent, should
have brought to us that part of the light of the Fivefold God that, going
to God, is there to be purified." One is inclined to compare this with Jeu
and Melchizidek receiving and purifying the light won from this world, or
with Gabriel and Michael in the Pistis Sophia bearing the heroine upward
out of Chaos ; but the parallel may be accidental and is easily pushed too
far.

2 Like the "Twin Saviours" of the Pistis Sophia, whose functions are
never even alluded to in that document.

3 See notes 2 and 3, p. 327 supra.

4 M. de Stoop's Essai sur la Diffusion du Manichiisme is moat in-
forming on this head. See also A. Dufourcq's Thesis quoted in n. 2, p. 351
supra. A very brief summary of the history of the sect was given by the
present writer in J.R.A.S. 1913, pp. 69-94.

23—2


356 Manes and the Manichaeans [ch.

and although he found this impracticable or unsafe, he seems
to have been at first inclined to extend to them toleration 1 .
His successors, however, quickly reverted to the earlier policy
of Diocletian, and law after law of gradually increasing severity
was passed until adherence to Manichaeism was finally punished
with death and confiscation 2 . Pagans like the Emperor Julian
and his friend and teacher Libanius were able occasionally to
intervene in their favour ; but no sect was ever more relentlessly
persecuted, and the institution of the Dominican Inquisition
can be traced back to the Quaestiones set up by Justinian and
Theodora for their routing out and suppression 3 . In the case
of what was practically a secret society, it would be difficult
to say whether the Imperial measures would have availed to
entirely destroy their propaganda, and it is possible that the
Manichaean Church always maintained a sporadic existence in
Europe 4 until events to be presently mentioned led to its revival
in the xth century. Meanwhile in the East, they remained on
the confines of what was, up to the Mahommedan conquest in
642 a.d., the Persian Empire, and no doubt after their manner
professed outward adherence to the Zoroastrian faith, while at
the same time propagating their own doctrines in secret 5 . It

1 For the enquiry by Strategius, afterwards called Musonianus, and
Prefect of the East under Constantius, see Ammianus Marcellinus, Bk xv.
c. 13. Cf. Neander, Ch. Hist. iv. 488 sqq. That the persecution instituted
against them by Diocletian slackened under Constantine and Constantius,
see de Stoop, op. cit. pp. 40, 41.

2 See the Laws of Theodosius and Valentinian II, quoted by de Stoop,
op. cit. pp. 41, 42.

3 Gibbon, Decline and Fall, m. p. 153. Justinian put to death not
only convicted Manichaeans, but those who being acquainted with members
of the sect, did not denounce them. See de Stoop, op. cit. p. 43.

* The Manichaeans seem always to have been favoured by the better
classes and high officials of the Empire who maintained for some time a
secret leaning towards Paganism. See de Stoop, op. cit. p. 84. The case
of Barsymes, the banker or money-changer whom Theodora made Prae-
torian Prefect, and who was allowed according to Procopius (Anecdota,
c. xxn. 7) to profess Manichaeism openly, was doubtless only one of many.
It is apparently this Barsymes who is invoked in the Turf an texts as "the
Lord Bar Simus," see Muller, Handschriften-Reste, pp. 45, 59.

5 That this was the professed policy of the sect seems plain from the
words they attributed to Manes himself: "I am not inhuman like Christ


xm] Manes and the Manichaeam 357

was probably the Arab conquest which drove them to make
their headquarters on the very borders of the civilized world
as known to the ancients and in what is now Turkestan. Here
a large part of the population seems to have been Buddhist,
doubtless by reason of its dealings with China, and in the
presence of that gentle faith — whose adherents boast that they
have never yet shed blood to make a convert — the Manichaeans
enjoyed complete toleration for perhaps the first time in their
history 1 . They made use of it, as always, to send out mission-
aries into the neighbouring countries, and certainly obtained
a foothold in China, where the Chinese seem to have confused
them with the Christians. Their hatred of images doubtless
caused the iconoclastic Emperors of the East to enter into
relation with them, and we hear that Leo the Isaurian induced
many of them to enter the Imperial armies. It was possibly
these last whom the Emperor John Tzimiskes settled in what
is now Bulgaria, whence, under the names of Paulicians,
Bogomiles, and other aliases, they promoted that movement
against the Catholic Church which provoked the Albigensian
Crusades and the establishment of the Dominican Inquisition
in the West 2 . To follow them there would be to travel beyond
the scope of this book ; and it need only be said in conclusion
that they formed the bitterest and the most dangerous enemies
that the Catholic Church in Europe ever had to face. It was
possibly this which has led the rulers of the Church of Rome to
brand nearly all later heresy with the name of Manichaean ; yet
it may be doubted whether some of their doctrines did not
survive in Europe until the German Reformation, when they
may have helped to inspire some of the wilder Protestant sects
of the xvith and xvnth centuries. With the suppression of the
Albigenses, however, the existence of Manichaeism as an
organized faith comes to an end.

who said: Whoso denieth me, him will I deny. I say unto you: Whoso
denieth me before man and saves himself by this falsehood, him will I
receive with joy, as if he had not denied me." Cf. de Stoop, op. cit. p. 46,
quoting Cedrenus ; Al Biruni, Chronology, p. 191.

1 Von Le Coq, Exploration Archeologique a Tourfan, Confces au Musee
Guimet (Bibl. de Vulg. t. xxxv.), 1910, p. 278.

2 de Stoop, op. cit pp. 86, 144.


CONCLUSION

Constanttne's accession proved to be, like the coming of
Alexander, a turning-point in the history of the world. His
so-called conversion put into the hands of the Catholic Church
a weapon for the suppression of all rivalry, of which she was
not slow to make use. Already in his reign many of the
heathen temples were torn down 1 , and under the rule of his
morose and gloomy successor, Constantius, the work of demoli-
tion went on apace 2 . The accession of the philosophic Julian
gave the worshippers of other gods than Christ a short respite,
and even allowed some of the temples destroyed in the former
reigns to be restored by or at the expense of the Christians 3 .
Julian's heroic death in Persia again threw the crown into the
hands of a Christian emperor, whose reign of seven months
gave him little time, as he perhaps had small inclination, for
persecution 4 ; but under his successors Valentinian and Yalens,
heathen sacrifices were forbidden under severe penalties. The
end came under Gratian, when the temple estates were con-
fiscated, the priests and vestals deprived of the stipends which
they had hitherto received from the public treasury, and the
heathen confraternities or colleges were declared incapable of
receiving legacies 5 . Only a few rich men like the Vettius
Agorius Praetextatus whom we have seen among the worshippers
of Mithras, or the Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, whose learned

1 Neander, Ch. Hist. ni. pp. 34, 35.

2 Op. cit. m. p. 46.

3 Sozomen, Hist. Eccl. Bk v. c. 5, for instances. Cf. Neander, op. cit.
ra. pp. 66, 67.

* Neander, op. cit. m. p. 96.
6 Op. cit. m. p. 100.


Conclusion 359

and patriotic life has been so well described by Sir Samuel
Dill 1 , could henceforth venture to practise, even with maimed
rites, the faiths condemned by the Court and the Church.

As for the Gnostic sects, which since Hadrian's time had
striven with such success as we have seen to combine magic
and other ancient beliefs with Christianity, they found but
short shrift at the hands of the triumphant Church. By an
edict issued by Constantine before his own reception into the
Church, all their "houses of prayer" were confiscated for the
benefit of the Catholic Church, their meeting even in private
forbidden, and their books seized and burned 2 .

" Thus," says Eusebius, " were the lurking places of the
heretics broken up by the emperor's command, and the savage
beasts they have harboured (I mean the chief authors of their
impious doctrines) driven to flight. Of those whom they had
deceived, some, intimidated by the emperor's threats, disguising
their real feelings, crept secretly into the Church. For since the
law directed that search should be made for their books, those of
them who practised evil and forbidden arts were detected, and these
were ready to secure their own safety by dissimulation of every
kind 3 ."

Throughout the length and breadth of the Koman Empire
all but a very few Roman nobles thus professed the faith of
Christ. In the words of the dying Julian, the Galilaean had
conquered.

From this time until our own, Christianity has reigned in
the West with no serious rival. In the vnth century, when
Mahommed's Arabs, flushed with the enthusiasm of a new
faith which owed something at least to the relics of Gnosticism,
poured in upon an Empire wearied out alike by perpetual war
against the barbarians and by its own civil and religious
dissensions, the Church was compelled to abandon to them her
conquests in Africa and the East. In Europe, however, she
continued in unchecked supremacy, gathering to herself and

1 S. Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire,
pp. 143-166.

2 Eusebius, Vita Constantini, Bk m. cc. 64, 65.

3 Op. cit. c. 66.


360 Conclusion

assimilating the barbarians who at one time seemed likely to
extinguish all civilization ; and she thus became a bond uniting
many nations and languages in one community of faith and
thought. She even succeeded in keeping alive the remains of
that Greek art and learning which still form our best and
proudest intellectual possession, and if during her reign many
of the precious monuments of antiquity perished, the fault was
not entirely hers. In every respect, her rule was supreme;
and such enemies as she had in Europe were those of her own
household. The Manichaeans who, as has been said, once bid
fair to deprive her of some of her fairest provinces, never
dared to make open war upon her, and their secret defection
was punished by an unsparing use of the secular arm. The
German Reformation of the xvith century has probably left
her stronger than before, and the few losses that she has suffered
in the Old World have been more than compensated by the
number of lieges she has succeeded in attaching to herself in
the New.

In the days of her infancy, and before she thus came into
her inheritance, Christianity borrowed much from the rivals
over which she was in the long run to reign supreme. Her
outward observances, her ritual, and the organization of her
hierarchy, are perhaps all due to the associations that she
finally overcame. The form of her sacraments, the periods of
her fasts and festivals, and institutions like monachism, cannot
be explained without reference to those religions from whose
rivalry she so long suffered. That, in such matters, the Church
should take what was useful to her was, as said above, part
of her consciously expressed policy, and doubtless had much
to do with her speedy triumph. To show that her dogmas
also took many things from the same source would involve
an invasion into the domain of professional theology, for which
I have neither authority nor desire. But if, at some future
time, investigation should show that in this respect also
Christianity owes something to her forerunners and rivals,
the argument against her Divine origin would not thereby be
necessarily strengthened. That, in the course of her develop-
ment, she acquired characteristics which fitted her to her


Conclusion 361

environment would be in strict conformity with the laws which
appear to govern the evolution of all institutions ; and if the
Power ruling the universe chooses to work by law rather than
by what seems to us like caprice, such a choice does not show
Him to be lacking either in wisdom or benevolence.

As was said at the outset, everyone must be left to place
his own interpretation on the facts here attempted to be set
forth. But if, per impossibile, we could approach the study of
the origins of Christianity with the same mental detachment
and freedom from prejudice with which we might examine
the worship of the Syrian Jupiter Dolichenus or the Scandi-
navian Odin, we should probably find that the Primitive Church
had no need of the miraculous powers which were once assigned
as the reason for her gradual and steady advance to all but
universal dominion. On the contrary, it may be that Christianity
would then appear as a link — although a most important and
necessary link — in a regular chain of events which began
more than three centuries before she emerged from her birth-
place in Palestine into that Eoman world which in three
centuries more was to be hers of right. No sooner had
Alexander's conquests made a world-religion possible, than
there sprang up, as we have seen, in his own city of Alexandria,
a faith with a far higher and purer idea of Divinity than any
that had until then been known in the West. Then the germs
already present in small fraternities like those of the Orphics
and the Essenes blossomed forth into the fantastic and un-
wholesome growths, as we must needs think them, of that
Gnosticism which marked the transition of the ancient world
from Paganism to Christianity. Lastly there came in from
the countries under the influence of Rome's secular enemy,
Persia, the heresy of Marcion, the religion of Mithras, and the
syncretistic policy of Manes and his continuators. Against all
these in turn, Christianity had to struggle in a contest where
the victory was not always on her side: and if in time she
overthrew them all, it can only be because she was better
fitted to the needs of the world than any of her predecessors
or contemporaries.


INDEX


Abel, Ophite story of, ii. 52; and
Manichaean, ii. 304

Aberamenthou, name used in Magic
Papyri and Pistis Sophia, i. 102.
See Jesus, Texts of Saviour

Abiuth, receiver of Ariel in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 186

Abraham, named in Mag. Pap., i. 106
n. 6; ii. 34; an astrologer apud
Artapanus, i. 173; inspired by
Ialdabaoth, ii. 53; Bosom of, in
Marcion's system, ii. 211

Abraxas, in system of Basilides, ii. 90,
92

Abydos.. gods of, i. 33 n. 1 ; excava-
tions at, i. 36

Achaea, worship of Goddesses Twain
in, i. 135 ; Cilician pirates deported
to, ii. 229

Achaemenides. Persian religion under,
i. 122 ; ii. 234

Achamoth, Sophia of Ophites, ii. 45
n. 1 ; called the Mother by Valen-
tinus, ii. 112 n. 3; the Sophia
Without of Valentinus, ii. 117 n. 2;
baptism in name of, by Marcus,
ii. 189 ft. 1. See Sophia (2)

Acheron, Isis shining in, i. 60

Achilles, his horror of Hades, i. 59,
150; his flattery of Zeus, i. 95; his
purification by Ulysses, i. 121 n. 4

Achrammachamari, name of Great
Propator in Texts of Saviour and
Mag. Pap., ii. 142 n. 2

Acropolis, sacred things of Eleusis
lodged in, i. 39; Serapeum built
opposite, i. 52

Acrostics, use of, in Jewish, Greek and
Christian literature, i. 169 n. 1 ; in
Valentinian epitaph, ii. 129 n. 3

Adam, the protoplast, Ophite story
of, ii. 52, 58, 70 ; and Manichaean,
ii. 299; and neo-Manichaean, ii
329

Adam or Adamos, god of Samothrace,
i. 139 n. 1 ; ii. 54 n. 6


Adamas, the Ophite., the First Man
or Great Light, ii. 38; gives birth
to Second Man or Son, ibid. ;
called Father-and-Son, ii. 39; an-
drogyne, ii. 40 ; forms triad with
Holy Spirit, ii. 41 nn. 2, 3; all
things except matter contained in,
ii. 44 n. 2, 64 ; all light returns to,
ii. 65, 80; called Caulacau, ii. 94
ft. 3. See First Man, Caulacau,
Hades

Adamas, king of the Twelve Aeons in
Pistis Sophia, his rebellion, ii. 48
n. 4, 152 n. 1 ; place of, ii. 137 n. 3 ;
ruler of Zodiac, ii. 152 : delays
redemption of souls, ii. 153 ; sends
demon in shape of flying arrow,
ii. 156; probably Diabolos or
Cosmocrator of Valentinus. ii. 163.
See Sabaoth Adamas

Adamas of the Light, in neo-Mani-
chaeism, ii. 325 ; slayer of monster,
ii. 329

Adonai, epithet of Zeus in Mag. Pap.,
i. 106; in Coptic, ii. 46 n. 3; son
of Ophite Sophia, ii. 47; ruler of
planetary sphere in Diagram, ii.
69 ; meaning of name of, ii. 71 ft. 1;
address of soul to, ii. 72

Adonis, wailed for in Athens, temp.
Alcibiades, i. 16; Dying God of
Mediterranean, i. 37 ; Asiatic form
of Dionysos, i. 47 ; identified with
Osiris, i. 55; identified with Dio-
nysos by Orphics, i. 137, 145;
identified with Dionysos at Eleusis,
i. 139?;. 1; androgyne, i. 185;
Ophites attend mysteries of, ii. 21,
54 ; identified with Phrygian god,
ii. 31; fiend in hell in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 186

Advent, the. See Parusia

Aegean, islands of, birthplace of gods,
i. 16, 52; early worship of Alex-
andrian gods in, i. 52 ; and of
Eleusinian ii. 135


Index


363


Aeinous or Aionios (Everlasting),
member of Valentinian Dodecad,
ii. 101

Aelius Aristides, quoted, i. 55 n. 2,
58, 60, 64 n. 3 ; ii. 66 n. 2

Aeon, Thirteenth, highest place of
Left in P.S., ii. 143, 150; Authades
would-be ruler of, ii. 151, 153;
first dwelling-place of Pistis
Sophia, ii. 155; place below it
made for Pistis Sophia, ii. 155,
156; Pistis Sophia restored to, ii.
157

Aeons, the Twelve, described, ii. 143,
152, 153; souls made from tears
of rulers of, ii. 153; Jesus takes
away part of their power, ii. 154;
divided into repentant and un-
repentant, ii. 182 ; the mystery of,
in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 195. See
Zodiac

Aerodios, power mentioned in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 191

Aeschines, son of Glaucothea, i. 22;
Demosthenes' invective against,
quoted, i. 138. See Sabazius

Aeschylus, quoted, i. 48, 55, 123

Aether, offspring of Time ap. Orphics,
i. 123

Afghanistan, included in Persian
Empire, i. 1

Africa, political power of priesthoods
in, i. 31; Mithraism in Northern,
ii. 230 ; christianized Manichaeism
of, ii. 339

Agape or Love, supreme God of
Diagram, ii. 68, 123 n. 3 ; supreme
God of Valentinus, ii. 98 n. 1;
feminine member of Valentinian
Dodecad, ii. 101 ; supreme God of
Marcion, ii. 210; seal of Azrua
in neo-Manichaeism, ii. 341. See
Eros

Agdistis, name of androgyne Cybele,
ii. 39, 40

Ageratos or Never-ageing, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Agla, cabalistic word used in mediaeval
magic, ii. 139 n. 1

Agra on the Ilissus, mysteries of, i. 41

Agrestius, a clarissimus and high priest
of Mithras, ii. 239

Ahnas-el-Medineh or Heracleopolis,
mentioned in magic spell, i. 98

Ahriman, Areimanios, or Arimanius,
in Bundahish slayer of Gaydmort,
i. 126 n. 3; not entirely evil till
Sassanid times, ii. 232, 253 ; Magi
sacrifice to, ii. 234 ; son of Zervan
Akerene (Cumont), ii. 236, 252;


altars dedicated to, ii. 239 ; Mithras
superior to, ii. 240 ; in Bundahish
slayer of bull Goshurun, ii. 246,
254; ruler of earth in Mithraism,
ii. 255, 256; modified worship of,
in Mithraism, ii. 278; likeness of
representation of, to Manichaean
Satan, ii. 291. See Goshurun

Ahura Mazda, the Omniscient Lord,
i. liii; father of Gaydmort, i. lxi;
Supreme Being of Yashts, ii. 231 ;
his relations to Amshaspands, ii.
232 ; in Behistun inscription, ii. 233 ;
not mentioned in Mithraic monu-
ments, ii. 239; in Bundahish, ii.
246 ; replaced by Jupiter O.M. in
Mithraism, ii. 246; worship of,
restored by Ardeshir, ii. 284

Ailoaios or Eloaeus, ruler of planetary
sphere in Diagram, ii. 69, 70 n. 2,
74 n. 3 ; address to, ii. 73 ; sphere
of Venus, 74 n. 1

Akae, cryptographic name in Book of
Enoch, i. 169, 170

Akinetos or Immovable, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Albigenses, successors of Manichaeans,
ii. 357

Al-Biruni, quoted, ii. 279, 280, 283,
284, 286 n. 1, 307

Alcibiades, goes to Susa, i. 7 ; Adonis
wailed for when Sicilian expedi-
tion of, sails, i. 16

Alcmaeon of Crotona, calls stars gods,
i. 186 n. 2

Aldabeim, name of sun in Mag. Pap.,
ii. 46 n. 3

Aletheia, member of 1st Valentinian
syzygy, ii. 98

Alexander of Abonoteichos, his im-
postures, i. 24; comes to Rome
under Marcus Aurelius, ii. 203

Alexander, Kong of Epirus, Asoka's
mission to, i. 20

Alexander the Great, his conquests
hellenize Mediterranean Basin, i.
lviii; the world before and after,
i. 1 sqq. ; greatest individual in
history, i. 4, 12 sq. ; his aims and
achievements, i. 5-8, 26-27; his
deification explained, i. 18; reli-
gious associations follow conquests
of, i. 22-26 sqq. ; his work in
Egypt, i. 29, 44; his probable
plans for universal religion, i. 30 ;
breaks down national barriers, i. 54,
107 ; makes world-religions possible,
i. Ill; his conduct towards Jews,
i. 150; re-settles Samaria, L 177 j
son of Zeus in serpent form, ii. 49 ;


,


364


Index


his effect on cosmology and ethics,
ii. 86 ; consoled by Anaxarchus for
death of Clitus, ii. 87. See India

Alexander.bishopof Lycopolis, quoted,
ii. 294 n. 2, 295 n. 2.

Alexander Severus, the Emperor,
gods in lararium of, i. 82 ; his suc-
cess against Persians, ii. 226

Alexander the Valentinian, leader of
Anatolic School, ii. 119

Alexandria, its foundation by Alex-
ander, i. 5; its importance not at
first recognized, i. 28; Sema of
Alexander at, i. 30 ; a Greek city,
i. 44; Serapeum of, i. 48, 51, 58 n.
1 ; oracle of Serapis at, i. 77 ;
worship of Serapis at, i. 82 n. 2, 86 ;
destruction of temples at, by
Theodosius, i. 83, 84; Hadrian's
opinion of, i. 86; early Gnostics
start from, i. Ill; ii. 8 ; Orphics
plentiful at, i. 156 ; Simon Magus'
doctrines at, i. 198; ii. 89; intel-
lectual centre of Roman world, ii.
88; Basilides teaches at, ii. 90

Alfenius Julianus Kumenius, clarissi-
mus and priest of Mithras, ii. 268

Allat, the goddess, Ereshkigal an
epithet of, i. 100

Alleius Craeonius, author on magic, L
105

Amazons, the story of, suggests bi-
sexual deity, ii. 40

Ambrose of Milan, convert from
Valentinianism, i. 112 n. 1; ii.
21 n. 5; his date, ii. 132 n. 2

Amelineau, E. , translates Pistis Sophia,
ii. 13 ; translates Bruce Papyrus,
ii. 190; his date for Bruce Papyrus,
ii. 194; quoted, ii. 178, 191, 192,
193, 195

Amen of Thebes, the god, father of
Alexander, i. 18; priesthood of,
i. 23, 31 sqq. ; Ptolemies raise
temples to, i. 52

Amenhotep IV, King of Egypt,
failure of monotheistic teaching of,
i. 11; priests of Amen crush
heresy of, i. 31

Amens, the Three, powers mentioned
in P.S., ii. 142; and in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 193

Amens, the Seven, powers mentioned
in P.8., ii. 141; and in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 193

Amenti, the god called Lord of, i. 33 ;
Osiris the bull of, i. 45, 102 ; Jesus
the conqueror of, i. 102 n. 1 ; a hell
in Texts of Saviour, ii. 182, 186;
horrors of Egyptian, ii. 196. See


Aberamenthou, Jesus, KLhent-
Amentit

Ameretat or Immortality, one of the
Amshaspands, i. 181 n. 1 ; ii.
324 n. 4, 355. See Appellant and
Respondent

Amitrochates, son of Chandragupta,
his desire for Greek learning, L
8 «. 3

Amon. See Amen of Thebes

Amos, the Prophet, inspired by Ialda-
baoth ap. Ophites, ii. 81 n. 2

Amshaspands, the Seven, and the
Seven Planets, i. 117; names of,
i. 181, n. 1 ; ii. 103 n. 3 ; likeness of,
to "roots" of Simon Magus, ii. 103
n. 3 ; and to Aeons of Valentinus,
ii. 103 7i. 3; in Avesta, ii. 232;
absent from early Manichaeism,
ii. 327 7i. 4 ; mention of, in neo-
Manichaeism, ii. 330, 355

Anat, the goddess, assessor of Yahweh,
ii. 32 n. 4

Anatolia, its religious peculiarities
temp. Christ, ii. 28 sqq., 77; its
worship of double axe, 67 n. 3

Anaxarchus the Atomist philosopher,
consoles Alexander after death of
Clitus, ii. 87

Ancient of Days, name of Valentinian
Ialdabaoth, ii. 107 n. 2

Andrew the Apostle, Saint, name of,
shows predilection of Jews for
Greek names, i. 173 n. 2; men-
tioned in Pistis Sophia, ii. 157

Anebo, letter of Porphyry to, for
threats of Egyptian magicians to
gods, i. 104 n. 3

Angels, Essenes sworn to preserve
the names of, i. 153, 157 ; no names
of, in O.T., until Daniel, i. 158;
rulers over tribes of demons, ibid. ;
sinning, cast into abyss of fire
(Baruch), i. 165; Ennoia produces
world-making, ap. Simon M., i. 187 ;
patterns after which worlds made
(Philo), i. 187 7i. 3; world to be
freed from rule of, ap. Simon, L
196; Simonians say God of Jews
one of world-making (Epiphanius),
i. 199; seven heavens are also, ap.
Valentinians (Irenaeus), ii. 107 n. 4;
are Logoi sent into soul by Jesus
and Sophia, ii. 110; souls after
death, brides of, ibid. ; terror of
angels at speech of man (Valen-
tinus), ii. 112 n. 3; Archons of
Adamas in Texts of Saviour beget,
ii. 152 7i. 1 ; Splenditenens and
Atlas of Manichaeism, ii. 297, 298.


Index


365


See Enoch, Gabriel, Great Council,
Michael, Tertullian

Annu or On, Egyptian name of
Heliopolis and chief seat of worship
of Ra, i. 31

Anthesteria, ceremonies of, show resur-
rection and marriage of Dionysos,
i. 42

Anthropos, member of 3rd Valentinian

syzygy* "• 98

Antigonus Monophthalmos, King of
Syria, his retort when hailed as a
god, i. 19; Phrygia occupied alter-
nately by him and Lysimachus, ii.
29

Antigonus Gonatas, King of Mace-
donia, mission of Asoka to, i. 20.
See Tarn

Antinous, death of, fixes date of
Hadrian's letter to Servian, i. 86
to. 5

Antioch, worship of Serapis at, i. 35;
birthplace of Carpocrates, i. Ill;
and of Saturninus, ii. 9, 89

Antiochus I Soter, King of Syria,
mission of Asoka to, i. 20

Antiochus III the Great, King of
Syria, seizes Palestine, i. 151 ;
transports Jewish families to Ana-
tolia, ii. 28

Antiochus IV Epiphanes, King of
Syria, attempts to hellenize Jews,
i. 151, 156, 162, 163; Book of
Daniel written temp., i. 158; caught
between Romans and Parthians,
i. 160 ; his mystic antagonist Taxo,
i. 170 ; Samaritans accept reforms
of, i. 177

Antitheses, the. See Marcion

Antonines, the, Isis-worship at its
apogee temp., i. 54, 81

Antoninus Pius, the Emperor, Simo-
nians in Rome temp., i. 199

Anubis, the god, son of Osiris and
Nephthys, i. 35; tribal deity of
jackal totem, i. 36; his seeking
for Osiris in Rome, i. 70 ; in pro-
cession at Cenchreae, i. 72; mask
of, used as disguise, i 78. See
Marcus Volusius

Apelles, the Marcionite, his tenets, ii.
218

Apep, the serpent, enemy of the sun-
god Ra, ii. 78

Aphrodite, the goddess, worshipped
under other names by confraterni-
;ies, i. 25; and Adonis, i. 37; ii.
!j; daughter of Zeus, i. 124 ». 3;
lentified by Orphics with Isis and
•thers, i. 137 to. 1; Orphic hymn


to, i. 142 to. 2; called Cytheraea,
i. 143; the Mother of the Gods
in Cyprus, ii. 40; called Mother
of All Living in Asia, ii. 135 n. 3 ;
on Mithraic monuments, ii. 238.
See Venus

Apis, the "life" of Osiris, i. 32, 45, 49

Apocalypse of St John, the, its date,
ii. 26 to. 3; quoted, i. 145 to. 1,
158, 169, 182 n. 4; ii. 4 n. 1, 25

Apocatastasis, return of the worlds to
God, an Ophite doctrine, ii. 42, 57

Apollo, the god, his birthplace, i. 16;
identified with Horus, i. 48, 63;
his contempt for mankind, i. 57;
his place in Orphic legend, i. 125,
147 ; on Mithraic monuments, ii.
238; distinct from Helios, i. 240;
worship of, under Julian, i. 269

Apollonius of Tyana, image of, in
Alexander Severus' lararium, i. 82

Apophasis of Simon Magus, the,
described, i. 179; quoted, i. 182,
188, 189, 193, 194; ii. 90 to. 5

Apostles, demand only faith from
converts, i. lvii; do not borrow
from earlier creeds, i. 88; their
meeting with Simon Magus, i. 176,
177 ; in Clementines, i. 178 ;
intolerance of, due to Jewish origin
(Bouch6-Leclercq), ii. 10 ; souls of,
in P.S. drawn from Treasure-house,
ii. 137, 147

Apostolical Constitutions, their date,
ii. 7 to. 2 ; quoted, i. 87 to. 1 ; ii. 7
toto. 2, 3, 219 to. 2

Appellant and Respondent gods, the,
in neo-Manichaeism, ii. 302 to. 1,
324, 343, 354, 355

Apuat, the god, "opener of the ways,"
i. 33

Apuleius of Madaura, quoted, i. 56,
59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67,
68, 71, 73-74, 75, 77, 86 to. 3, 101
to. 2

Aramati, the Vedic goddess, identi-
fied with Spenta Armaiti of the
A vesta, ii. 45 to. 1, 300 n. 2

Ararat or Ararad, Mt, Books of Jeu
hidden in, ii. 147 to. 6

Arbela, Greek troops on Persian side
at, i. 7 ; Alexander's pursuit after,
i. 13

Arcadia, Eleusinian triad worshipped
in, i. 135

Arcadius, the Emperor, Church dedi-
cated to, in place of Serapeum, i. 84

Archelai Acta. See Hegemonius

Archimedes, his calculation of places of
stars sinful (Hippolytus), i. 112 ». 2


366


Index


Architect of the Universe. See De-
miurge

Archon, the Great, of Basilides, the
Demiurge, ii. 91 ; likeness of, to
Ialdabaoth, ii. 94

Archontics, the, a sect related to the
Ophites, ii. 77

Arctinus of Miletus, first Greek
author to mention purification, L
121 n. 4

Arctos, the Great Bear, in Mithraism,
ii. 266

Arda viraf namak, the, quoted, ii.
264 n. 5

Ardeshir, the Shah, restorer of
Persian nationality, ii. 226, 282;
his son Peroz converted to Mani-
chaeism, ii. 281 ; restores worship
of Ahura Mazda, ii. 284

Ares, the god, identified with Roman
Mars, i. 17; Homeric or Orphic
hymn to, i. 141 n. 2, 142 n. 2;
on Mithraic monuments, ii. 238

Argolis, the, Eleusinian triad wor-
shipped in, i. 135

Ariel, a fiend in Texts of Saviour, ii. 186

Arimaspi, the, fables concerning, i. 2
n. 1

Aristaeus, pro-Jewish writer, i. 173

Aristides. See Aelius Aristides

Aristides, Christian apologist, ii. 203,
204 n. 1

Aristion, Athenian courtezan member
of religious confraternity, i. 22

Aristophanes, quoted, i. 17 n. 1, 40
n. 4, 124, 137; scholiast on, i. 17
n. 1

Aristotle, his monotheism, i. 10 ; says
that religion follows form of govern-
ment, i. 12, 15; that Orpheus did
not exist, i. 121 n. 1

Armageddon, covers name of Rome,
i. 170 n. 5

Armenia, Ophites in, ii. 76 ; kings of,
claim descent from Persian heroes,
ii. 225 n. 1 ; Marcionites and
Bardesanites in, ii. 283; invasion
of, by Mihr Nerses, ii. 285

Arnobius, adv. Gentes, quoted, i. 124
n. 3 ; ii. 39 nn. 2, 4, 264 n. 5

Arrian, Anabasis, quoted, i. 4 n. 1

Arsaces, founder of Parthian kingdom,
ii. 224

Arsinoe, wife of Ptolemy Philadelphus,
i. 18

Artapanus, On the Jews, quoted, i. 173

Artemis, the goddess, the Ephesian,
i. lvi, 40; birthplace of Greek,
i. 16; Indian worship of, i. 17;
Orthia.. i. 100 n. 2; priestesses of


Ephesian, called bees, i. 143 n. 4;
Phrygian, ii. 67 n. 3; on Mithraic
monuments, ii. 238. See Diana

Aryans, their dealings with lower
races, i. 3, 92

Asar-hapi, Osiris as Apis, i. 49

Asha Vashishta or Truth, the Amshas-
pand, i. 181 n. 1

Asia, before Alexander, i. 1 ; made
Greek by Alexander, i. 5; rush of
Greeks to, i. 7 ; Greek spoken
throughout, i. 8; cruelty of
Assyrian domination in, i. 12;
returns to Persian ways, ii.
225

Asia Minor, native religions of, i. lviii,
37, 126; ii. 29, 36, 49, 67 n. 3;
gods of, coalesce with Greek, i. 17 ;
home of Dionysos worship, i. 43 n.
3 ; Alexandrian gods worshipped
in, i. 53 ; Vedic gods worshipped
in, i. 122 n. 3; Eleusinian gods
worshipped in, i. 136; Orphics
in, i. 141, 156; ii. 236; priestesses
called bees in, i. 143 n. 4 ; Jewish
atrocities in, temp. Trajan, i. 173
n. 1 ; Ophite heresy probably native
to, ii. 26, 76; Jewish settlements
in, ii. 28; Jewish magicians in,
temp. Apostles, ii. 33; matri-
archate in, ii. 40; Babylonian
culture in, ii. 48; serpent worship
in, ii. 49, 77, 78 ; reverts to Persian
ways, ii. 225 ; Mithraism in, ii. 229,
232, 268

Askew, Dr, sells Pistis Sophia to
British Museum, ii. 134

Asklepios or Aesculapius, the god,
Alexander of Abonoteichos priest
of, i. 24; Serapis statue that of,
i. 48 n. 3, 78 n. 2; identified with
Serapis, i. 78, 87

Aso, the Ethiopian queen, enemy of
Osiris, i. 33, 37 n. 1

Asoka, his missions to Greek kings,
i. 20

Assur-bani-pal, King of Assyria, his
library at Kuyunjik, i. 94, 114

Assyria, penitential psalms of, i. 115;
Jews tributary to, i. 160 n. 4

Assyrians, the, tyranny of, i. 3;
suzerains of Hebrews, i. 150 ; name
used for Syrians in Christian times,
ii. 53 n. 4, 54 n. 6; worship of
Mylitta by (Herodotus), ii. 234

Astaphaios or Astaphaeus, ruler
planetary sphere in Diagram, ii. 47 j
name derived from magic (Origen)
ii. 47, 48 ; once called Astanphei
ii. 47, 69 n. 3 ; lord of third gate,


Index


367


ii. 70 n. 2, 73, 74 n. 3 ; address to,
ii. 73

Astarte, the goddess, worship of,
brought into Greece, i. 17 ; wor-
shipped by Greek confraternity,
i. 25; Phoenician form of earth
goddess, i. 126 ; dove, totem-animal
of, ii. 135 n. 3 ; Mater Viventium,
ibid.

Astrampsuchos, name of Roman
writer on magic, i. 107; name of
celestial guard in Bruce Papyrus,
i. 107 n. 1 ; power worshipped by
the Peratae, ibid.

Astrology, origin of, in Chaldaea, i.
113; fundamental idea of, i. 114;
system of correspondences results
from, i. 115, 116; impulse given to,
by Greek mathematics, i. 116, 117;
all religions in Graeco-Roman
world take note of, i. 117, 118;
gives new life to Gnosticism, i. 119 ;
Ophites mix astrological ideas with
Orphic teaching, ii. 78; first pro-
minent in Gnosticism in Excerpta
Theodoti, ii. 158 n. 1; its great
vogue in Rome under Severi, ibid. ;
reprobated in Pistis Sophia, ii. 185 ;
part of scheme of punishments and
salvation in Texts of Saviour, ii.
185 n. 2; its importance in
Mithraism, ii. 235, 276. See Baby-
lonia

Atargatis or Dea Syrian favourite
deity of Nero, ii. 31 ; her Anatolian
name and identification with other
goddesses, ii. 31 n. 1 ; homonym of
Derketo (Garstang), ii. 40 n. 1 ; her
identity with the Mother of the
Gods, ii. 299 n. 1 ; Manichaean
Mother of Life derived from, ii.
300 n. 2

Athamas the Pythagorean, his doc-
trine of "roots," i. 197

Athanasius, Saint, creed of, i. 89

Athena, the goddess, identified with
Minerva, i. 17 ; her part in Eleu-
sinian Mysteries, i. 39; the
Homeric, i. 57, 95, 124 n. 3 ; statue
of Helena of Tyre as, i. 198; on
Mithraic monuments, ii. 238. See
Minerva, Pallas

Athenagoras, quoted, i. lvii n. 1, 63
n. 5, 64 n. 3; ii. 18 n. 2

Athens, foreign worships in, i. 16, 17
n. 1, 137 ; accepts deification of
Alexander, i. 18; gathering in, for
Eleusinian Mysteries, i. 38-41 ;
Alexandrian religion in, i. 52, 76;
Orphic myths brought into, by


Epimenides, i. 121; Orphic gold
plates in Museum at, i. 132

Athos Mt, Philoaophumena discovered
at, ii. 11

Atlas. See Corybas, Omophorus

Attis or Atys, the god, his worship
brought into Greece, i. 17, 136;
his legend, i. 37 ; ii. 39 ; identified
with Sun, i. 118; and with Dio-
nysos, Adonis and Osiris, i. 137 n. 1,
145; ii. 17; and with Sabazius,
i. 138, 139; androgyne, i. 185;
Gnostics attend mysteries of, ii. 21 ;
Phrygia, home of worship of, ii. 28,
67 n. 3 ; to Ophites, type of world-
soul, ii. 65 n. 3

Augustine of Hippo, Saint, convert
from Manichaeism, i. 112 n. 1;
well informed about Manichaeans,
ii. 352 ; quoted, i. 103 n. 4 ; ii. 10 n.
1, 12 n. 4, 25, 261, 298 n. 1, 317,
319, 331, 332, 343, 346, 349 ». 4,
350

Augustus, the Emperor, Samaria's
capital named Sebaste in honour of,
i. 177 ; Galatians become Roman
temp., ii. 28; Parthians' terror of
(Horace), ii. 225

Aurelian. the Emperor, his worship of
sun-god, i. 119 n. 1; ii. 228;
position of Christianity under, ii.
23; restores Roman arms in the
East, ii. 226; gives up Dacia to
Goths, ii. 271

Authades, the Proud God of the Pistis
Sophia, last member of Triad of the
Left, ii. 151 ; his disobedience, ii.
152; his envy of Pistis Sophia, ii.
155; sends demon in shape of flying
arrow, ii. 156; his place given to
Pistis Sophia, ii. 162

Autogenes, power mentioned in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 192

Autophyes or Self- produced, member
of Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Avebury, Lord, quoted, i. 91, 99 n. 1

Avesta, the Zend, Seven Amshaspands
of, i. 117; emanation doctrine in,
ii. 35; First Man in, ii. 38 n. 3;
Supreme Being in, ii. 231 ; Ormuzd
and Ahriman in, ii. 236; bull
Goshurun in, ii. 243; denounces
magic, ii. 275 n. 2 ; doubtful about
eternity of evil, ii. 289; quoted,
ii. 310, 311

Avidius Cassius, his victories over
Parthians, ii. 225

Axe, Double. See Bacchus, Caria,
Crete, Cybele, Cyranides, Labrys,
Mycenae, Ramsay, Simon Magus


368


Index


Axionicus the Valentinian, member of

Anatolic School, ii. 119
Aznia, name of God of Light in neo-

Manichaeism, ii. 323, 341, 342.

See Zervan

Baalzephon, name in magic spell, i.
106 n. 4

Babylon, break up of priesthoods of,
i. 122 ; rich Jews remain in, after
captivity, i. 172; Jewish families
from, transported to Phrygia, ii. 28 ;
its site marked by Hilleh, ii. 33;
Jewish taste for cryptograms de-
rived from, ii. 35

Babylonia, Zoroastrian borrowings
from, i. lxi; original home of
Dying God, i. 38 n. 1 ; relics of
Sumerian beliefs in, i. 100; astral
theory originates in, i. 115n. 1, 116;
and primaeval deep theory, ii. 36;
and Western astrology, ii. 235

Babylonians, astronomy of, i. 114;
isopsephism first used by, i.l 69 n.
3; figure earth like boat, ii. 48;
think sky a rocky vault, ii. 249

Bacchanals, orgies of, from Thrace, i.
136

Bacchus, concealed object in Cory-
bantic rites of, i. 73 n. 1 ; Mithraic
dignitary Chief Herdsman of, i. 83 ;
Orphic initiate called, i. 128;
identified with Attis, Adonis, Osiris,
etc., i. 139 n. 1 ; Orphic hymns to,
i. 142 nn. 2, 5, 143; wine called,
i. 168 ; and worship of double axe,
ii. 67 n. 3. See Dionysos

Bacchylides, quoted, i. 40 n. 1

Bactria, home of Roxana, i. 5; tale
of Possessed Princess of, i. 10;
Alexander's massacres in, i. 13;
its struggles against Alexander, i.
28 ; Buddhism and Zoroastrianism
in, ii. 283

Bahram. See Varanes

Baillet, M. Auguste, quoted, i. 65

Baluchistan, included in Persian
Empire, i. 1

Ban or Laban, the Great, a power
mentioned by Bar Khoni, ii. 324

Banquet, the, Valentinian wedding of
souls, ii. Ill; scene in Mithraic
monuments, ii. 247

Baptism, used by Ophites, ii. 61;
teaching of Primitive Church as to,
ii. 168 ; subverts influence of stars
(Theodotus), ii. 115 n. 3; Marcus
adds Hebrew exorcisms to, ii. 129,
189 n. 1 ; one of the Mysteries in
Pistis Sophia, ii. 169; postponed


until death by married Marcionites.
ii. 215, 221; Mithraists use total
immersion in, ii. 260. See Oblation,
Dead
Barbeliotae, Barbelitae or Borboriani,
apparently an Ophite sect, ii. 27
7i. 1 ; described by Trenaeus, ii. 77,
138 n. 1 ; identified with Naas-
senes and called Simonians (Iren-
aeus), ii. 138 n. 1
Barbelo, mother of Pistis Sophia, ii.
74 it. 1 ; names and place of, ii.
138 n. 1, 151 n. 4; Jesus in Pistis
Sophia takes material body from,
ii. 151, 179; in P.S. consort of
Great Propator, ii. 150, 155; men-
tioned in Texts of Saviour as
mother of Pistis Sophia, ii. 186

Barcochebas, Bar Cochba or Bar
Coziba, the Jewish Messiah called
Monogenes, i. 124 n. 3

Bardesanes or Bar Daisan the Valen-
tinian, ii. 119; his life, ii. 120; pro-
tected by King of Edessa, ii. 132;
borrows from Zoroaster ( Al-Biruni),
ii. 214 n. 2 ; Manes knows doctrines
of, ii. 280, 290 n. 4; his doctrines
enter Persia, ii. 283

Barnabas, hailed as Zeus, i. 191
n. 3 ; ii. 42 ; with Paul summarizes
Hebrew history for Phrygians, ii.
53 n. 2; Epistle of, quoted, ii. 166
n. 2

Barpharanges, magic word used in
Bruce Papyrus, ii. 192

Baruch, Apocalyptic literature at-
tributed to, i. 163, 164; Book of,
used by Ophites, ii. 79; Apoca-
lypse of, quoted, ii. 257

Basilides, the heresiarch, a Jew
(Neander), ii. 9 n. 1 ; says body of
Jesus a phantasm, ii. 16, 17; con-
temporary with Carpocrates. ii.
27 n. 3; disciple of Menander, ii.
89 ; his teaching, ii. 89 sqq. ; his
doctrine, comes through Matthias,
ii. 90 ; his borrowings from Egyp-
tian religion, ii. 92; his followers
go over to Valentinus, ii. 93 ; his
relations with Buddhism, ii. 96;
words of, repeated in Texts of
Saviour, 189 ; quoted, ii. 172. See
Buddhism

Basilidians, their relative date, ii. 25
n. 5

Baubo, the goddess, a form of Perse-
phone, i. 100

Baur, F. C, of Tubingen, says Simon
Magus is St Paul, i. 179 n. 3

Beast, Number of. See Number


Index


369


Bedouins, introduce horse into Egypt,
i. 36

Beelzebub, Beelzebud, or Beelzebuth,
chief of demons in Valentinian
system, ii. 108 ; his name a parody
of Jabezebuth, ii. 108 n. 1 ; Lord
of Chaos, ii. 109 ; his possible place
in Pistis Sophia, ii. 163

Behemoth (animals), in Diagram, ii.
71

Bel, the god, his fight with Tiamat,
ii. 44 n. 3; reappears in neo-
Manichaeism, ii. 295 n. 2

BeHsarius, his victories over Persians,
ii. 226

Bellerophon, appears in procession of
Isis at Cenchreae, i. 71

Bellona, the goddess, identified with
Isis, i. 56. See Ma

Bendis, the moon-goddess of Thrace,
i. 16; identified with Persephone,
i. 137

Beqa, cryptogram for Tetragramma-
ton, i. 169, 170

Berossos or Berossus, legend about
Zervan attributed to, i. lx; our
indebtedness to, i. 9; quotes in-
stance of isopsephism from Baby-
lonians, i. 169 n. 3

Bes, the god, dance of, on Hercula-
neum fresco, i. 69 n. 1

Bethel, the god, assessor of Yahweh
at Elephantine, ii. 32 n. 4

Bhils, sorcerers to higher races, i. 92

Bissing, Freiherr von, quoted, i. 68
n. 1, 69 n. 1. See Herculaneum

Bithynia, seat of Glycon worship,
i. 24 ; inscriptions from, i. 55 n. 3 ;
Ophite colleges in, in 5th cent, a.d.,
ii. 77

Boeotia, native country of Dionysos,
i. 52; Orphic teaching in, i. 135;
worship of Bacchus comes from
Thrace to, i. 136

Boghaz-keui, Vedic gods worshipped
at, i. lxii n. 2, 122 n. 3 ; ii. 231

Bogomiles, successors of Manichaeans,
ii. 357

Bologna, Mithraic group at, ii. 238 n. 2

Book of the Dead. See Dead

Borboriani. See Barbeliotae

Bosphorus, Isis-worship at Thracian,
i. 53

Bouche-Leclercq, M. A., thinks Timo-
theos and Manetho only typical
names, i. 44 n. 1 ; and Bryaxis'
statue that of Asklepios, i. 48 n. 3 ;
says Apostolic and sub-Apostolic
intolerance for heresy due to Jewish
nationality, ii. 10 ; quoted, i. 14 n.

l. n.


3, 27 n. 1, 28 nn. 1, 2, 29 nn. 1, 3,
30 nn. 2, 3, 44 nn. 1, 2, 48 n. 3,
52 n. 1, 66 ?k 1, 78 n. 2, 80 n. 1,
87 Ti. 2; ii. 10 n. 2, 267 n. 6

Brimo, name given to Demeter in
Mysteries, i. 124 n. 3

Bruce Papyrus, thaumaturgic sacra-
ments in, i. 87 7k 1; ii. 63 7k 1,
172n. 3; 183 n. 1, 193; Astram-
psuchos, name of "guard" in, L
107 n 1 ; creation from indivisible
point, i. 194 n. 3; ii. 90 7k 6;
discovery of, by Bruce, ii. 13,
189; its god Sitheus, ii. 76 n. 4;
its addiction to astrology, ii. 158 n.
1; describes higher worlds than
Pistis Sophia, ii. 161 n. 2; makes
matter non-existent, ii. 161 n. 3;
pictures like those in, perhaps
referred to in P.S., ii. 180 n. 2;
author of, acquainted with story of
Jabraoth, ii 182 n. 2; variety of
documents in, ii 189, 190; links
of, with Texts of Saviour, ii. 193 ;
with Pistis Sophia, ii 194; pro-
bable date of, ibid. ; quoted, ii.
191, 195

Bryaxis, his statue of Serapis, i 48,
49, 78 n. 2, 84

Buda-Pesth, altars to Ahriman found
at, ii. 239

Buddha, Mani teaches divine mission
of, i. lviii; ii. 316; Greek statues
of, in India, i 8; called Terebin-
thus, ii. 285; first mentioned in
Greek by Clem. Alex., ii. 286

Buddhas, Cave of the Thousand, MS.
found in, ii. 352. See Tun-huang

Buddhism, study of, i li; its slow
growth in India, i 20; unknown
to Onomacritos, i. 135 7k 1 ; its
dates, i 156 ti. 1 ; ii. 283 ; Basilides'
supposed borrowings from, ii. 96;
in Bactria, ii. 283; Manichaean
borrowings from, ii 313, 340, 346;
its toleration of Manichaeans, ii
357

Budge, Dr E. A. T. Wallis, quoted,
i 31 ti. 1, 32 TiTi. 3, 4, 33 nn. 1, 2,
35 n. 1, 38 ti. 2, 61 n. 1, 88 n. 2,
126 n. 3, 182 n. 6 ; ii. 49 n. 3, 72 n.
3, 121 n. 3, 154 n. 3, 184 n. 3, 293
n. 1

Bulgaria, Manichaeans settled in, ii.
357

Bundahish, the, quoted, i. 126 n. 3,
134 n. 1 ; ii. 246, 254

Burkhans, divine messengers in Mani-
chaeism, ii. 336, 339, 341. 8te
Shapurakhan

24


370


Index


Bury, Prof. J. B., quoted, i. 86

Buto, the city of Isis, i. 34

Byblus in Phoenicia, body of Osiris

washed ashore at, i. 34
Bythios or Deep, member of Valen-

tinian Decad, ii. 101
Bythos, Supreme God of Ophites, ii.

37, 39; Supreme God of Valen-

tinus, ii. 96, 97 ; his consort, ibid. ;

identified with Ineffable of Pistis

Sophia, ii. 144; resembles Ahura

Mazda, ii. 232
Byzantium, birthplace of Theodotus,

ii. 9

Cabala, the Jewish, system of corre-
spondences in, i. 115; its Mystery
of Chariot and Mystery of Creation,
i. 157; processes of "Practical,"
i. 158 n. 1, 170 nn. 2, 5; its system
of Sephiroth, i. 202 ; Marcus uses
system like that of, ii 9 n. 1 ;
indicated in Talmud, ii. 35; like-
ness of, to Gnosticism, ii. 36 n. 1 ;
its Adam Cadmon or First Man,
ii. 52 n. 1 ; Ophite stories of proto-
plasts revived in, ii. 53

Cabin of Samothrace, Hermes in
worship of, i. 99; mentioned in
Hymn to Attis, ii. 54

Cabul, importance of, foreseen by
Alexander, i. 5

Caecilia Secundina, name on Orphic
gold plate, i. 133, 169 n. 1

Cain, Ophite story of, ii. 52; Mani-
chaean story of, ii. 303 ; in neo-
Manichaeism father of Wisdom
and Pleasure, ibid.

Cainites, an Ophite sect, ii. 27, 77

Calabria, Orphic gold plates found at,
i. 131

Callias, Torchbearer at Mysteries of
Eleusis, i. 76, ii. 87 n. 3

Callinicum, Valentinian conventicle
at, burned by orthodox, ii. 96

Callisthenes, life of Alexander attri-
buted to, i. 18 n. 1

Calvin, John, founder of sect, i. 54;
ii. 19

Cambyses, Shah of Persia, conquers
Egypt, i. 28; in Behistun inscrip-
tion, ii. 233

Campus Martius, Isiac temple in, i. 53 ;
death of Simon Magus in, L 178

Candahar, named after Alexander,
i. 5

Canidia or Gratidia, witch of Horace's
Epodes, i. 108

Canopus, decrees of, i. 52 n. 1 ;
sanctuary of Isis at, i. 86 n. 1


Cappadocia, Kings of, claim descent
from Persian heroes, ii. 225 n. 1

Capua, inscription to Isis found at,
i 75 n. 2

Caria, worship of double axe in, ii
67 n. 3

Carpocrates the heresiarch, magic
rites attributed to, i 111; called
first of Gnostics, ii. 27

Carthage, outside Persian Empire, i. 1 ;
Alexander's plans concerning, i
6; Roman conquest of, i. 15; ii
227

Cams, the Emperor, his victories over
Persians, ii. 226

Cassander, patron of Euhemerus, i 19

Caulacau, mystic name common to
Ophites and Basilidians, ii. 94

Cautes and Cautopates, torch-bearers
of Mithras, ii. 245, 246, 247

Celeus, legendary King of Eleusis, i
40,41

Celsus the Epicurean, quoted, i. lvii,
73, 200 ; ii. 66, 67, 69

Cenchreae, Isiac festival at, described,
i 71

Cephisus, the, bridge over, its part in
Eleusinian procession, i 39

Cerberus, resemblance of triple mon-
ster of Serapis to, i 49

Cerdo the heresiarch, teaches at Rome,
ii. 9; his doctrines, ii 205

Ceres, god of Nature as Earth ap.
Cicero, i lvi; identified with Isis
by Apuleius, i. 56. See Demeter

Cerinthus the heresiarch, opponent of
St John, ii. 9 n. 1 ; said to have
been pupil of Philo, ibid.

Chaeremon, says Egyptian magician
threatens gods, i 104 n. 3

Chaldaea, birthplace of astrology, i
113; captivity of Jews in, i 150;
Jews tributaries to, i 160 n. 4

Chaldaeans, oppressive rule of, i. 3;
suzerains of Jews, i 150; their in-
fluence on Mithraism, ii. 241

Chalmers, Thomas, founder of sect,
ii. 19

Chandragupta or Sandracottus, father
of Amitrochates, i 8 n. 3 ; grand-
father of Asoka, i. 20

Chaos, child of Orphic Chronos, i 123
known to Aristophanes, i. 124
egg formed from, i 123, 144
Ialdabaoth and, ii. 46 n. 3, 155
Valentinians make Beelzebub ruler
of, ii. 109; Pistis Sophia raised
from, ii. 156; Pistis Sophia's
descent into, ii 156, 162; Pistis
Sophia does not describe, ii. 163;


Index


371


described in Texts of Saviour, ii.
182, 186

Charcot, Dr, his hypnotic experiments
at Salpetriere, i. 110

Charles, Dr R. H., quoted, i. 159 n. 1,
160, 161, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169,
170; ii. 60 n. 1

Charmon, receiver of Ariel in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 186

Chavannes, Ed. M., translates Traiti
Manichien, ii. 352. See Pelliot,
Tun-huang MS.

China, Manichaean documents dis-
covered in, i. lix ; Manichaeans in,
ii. 357

Chinese, their god Thian, i. 73 w. 4

Chin vat, the Bridge, in Zoroastrianism,
ii. 110 n. 2, 311

Chosroes, the Shah, his defeat by
Heraclius, ii. 227

Christ, Manes tries to include religion
of, in his own, i. lviii; statue of,
in Alexander Severus' lararium, i.
82; bishops of, worship Serapis
ap. Hadrian, i. 86; name of, has
hidden meaning (Justin Martyr),
i. 170 ft. 5; "heresies before the
Coming of," ii. 25 ; angel of Great
Council, ii. 43; Ophite Sophia
makes Prophets prophesy of, ii.
53, 59 ; descent of Ophite, through
seven heavens, ii. 59; Ophite
Christ raises Jesus after Crucifixion,
ii. 60 ; Ophites turn figure of, from
teacher to messenger, ii. 82;
Saturninus says He was sent to
destroy Judaism, ii. 89; of Basi-
lides makes Him son of Great
Archon, ii. 91 ; ascension of, imi-
tated on Mithraic monuments, ii.
248. See Archon Jesus

Christianity, importance of study of
its origins, i. xlix; dislike of its
comparative study, i. Ii, liv;
inspirational view of its history,
i. liii ; Judaism not its rival, i. liv
early competitors with, i. lv-lviii;
spread of Greek language favours,
i. 9; Alexander the Great's

! services to, i. 27 ; its rise brings
about decline of Alexandrian
religion, i. 81 ; Isis-worshippers
converted to, en bloc, i. 84; its
cardinal tenets preserved at Re-

j formation, i. 88; said to be mere
episode in history of Gnosticism,
L 111; most bitter enemy of
Gnosticism, i. 112, 120; ii. 23,
359 8qq. ; system of correspond-
ences and, i. 115; its concessions


to Sun- worshippers, i. 118; Gnos-
ticism does not compete with,
until rmd cent., ii. 2; state does
not at first persecute, ii. 7 ; lower
classes in Egypt first converts to,
ii. 8 w. 5, 89 n. 1 ; never Judaeo-
Christian in Egypt, ii. 9 ». 1, 131 ;
wars against Hellenistic culture,
ii. 10; accuses sects of obscene
rites, ii. 18; converts wealthy and
learned Gnostics, ii. 21 ; persecutes
Gnostics, iL 23; Ophites earlier
than, ii. 26; its relations with
Ophites in post-Christian times,
ii. 56, 82; history of Egyptian,
obscure, ii. 200; attraction of
Rome for innovators on, ii. 203;
Marcion's attempt to reform, fruit-
less, ii. 222; Manes' imperfect
acquaintance with, ii. 280; shares
with Mithraism devotion of legions,
ii. 283 ; compromises of Manichae-
ism with, ii. 317, 319, 320, 339, 350,
351 ; Manichaeism really opposed
to, ii. 318, 357; relations of neo-
Manichaeism with, ii. 339 ; obliga-
tions of, to rivals, ii. 360 ; triumph
of, ii. 361

Christians, political, not religious,
offenders against Roman state, i.
lvi; expect catastrophes at des-
truction of Serapeum, i. 84; said
to worship Serapis (Hadrian), i. 86 ;
formulate doctrine of Trinity, i.
89 n. 2 ; accusations of immorality
by and against, i. 179; considered
Jews until reign of Vespasian, ii. 4 ;
say old world passing away, ii. 5;
proscribe heretical writings, ii. 12 ;
apostolic, uneducated men, ii. 83
ft. 1 ; obliged to recognize Greek
philosophy, ii. 88 ; good position of,
in Alexandria, ii. 94 ; belief of, early,
as to Eucharist, ii. 171; oriental,
flock into Rome under Hadrian,
ii. 203; use of "Brother" and
"Father" by, ii. 261; extinguish
Mithraism before other heathen
religions, ii. 272; condemned by
Manichaeans for adherence to Old
Testament, ii. 315; Manichaeans
not, ii. 318, 350; Manichaeans
confused with, by Chinese, ii. 357 ;
Julian repairs heathen temples at
cost of, ii. 358

Christos the Ophite, Third Man in
Ophite system, ii. 42, 59; drawn
up with his mother into incor-
ruptible aeon, ii. 43 ; springs from
right side of First Woman, ii. 46 ;

24—2


372


Index


angel or messenger of triune Deity,
ii. 54, 63, 64, 65 ; his two visits to
earth, ii. 59 ; descends with Sophia
into Jesus, ii. 60, 61, 79; brings
Mysteries to earth, ii. 65; repre-
sented by yellow circle in Diagram,
ii. 68; likeness of Third Sonhood
of Basilides to, ii. 94

Christos, the Valentinian, projected by
Nous and Aletheia, ii. 105 ; draws
Sophia within the Pleroma, ii. 105,
1 14 ; prayer of Sophia Without to,
and its result, ii. 106; Marcus'
juggling with name of, ii. 129;
consents to projection of Jesus the
Great Fruit of Pleroma, ii. 159 n. 3

Chronos, First Being of Orphics, i
123; ii. 236

Church, the Catholic, early dislike of,
for science of religion, i. liv; des-
troys traces of religions which she
supersedes, i. lix ; likeness of Alex-
andrian festivals to those of, i. 75 ;
Alexandrian clergy divided into
seculars and regulars like that of,
i. 79 ; preserves or revives features
of Isis-worship, i. 84; worship of
Virgin introduced into, at destruc-
tion of Serapeum, i. 85 ; celebration
of Eucharist in, temp. Justin, i. 87 n.
1 ; Simon Magus' aerial flight the
tradition of, i. 178; resemblance
of Gnostic sects to Protestant
bodies outside, ii. 19; Protestant
opponents of, lean to Unitarianism,
ii. 20; most Gnostics eventually
join, ii. 21 ; makes no great con-
quests after suppressing Gnostic-
ism, ii. 23, 24 ; begins to define and
enforce orthodoxy, ii. 77; Valen-
tinus first serious competitor of,
ii. 93; Valentinian houses of
prayer confiscated for use of, ii. 96 ;
accuses Valentinus of polytheism,
ii. 100; Valentinus expects to
become bishop of (Tertullian), ii.
117; Valentinus member of, in
papacy of Eleutherus, ii. 121;
Valentinus never hostile to, ii. 125;
seduction scandals not unknown in,
ii. 129; growing power of, before
Constantine, ii. 132 ; Valentinianism
good recruiting-ground for, ii. 133 ;
Christology of Pietis Sophia not
different from that of, ii. 144;
Mysteries of the Light of P. 8.
probably sacraments of, ii. 173;
modifies her eschatology and ritual,
ii. 201 ; Marcion claimed as first
reformer of, ii. 207; Marcion re-


jects most traditions of, ii. 214;
Marcionite dated inscription earlier
than any of, ii. 216 ; Apelles nearer
to doctrine of, than Marcion, ii.
219; Arian controversy brings
speculations about Divine Nature
within, ii. 221 ; priests of Mithras
not like those of, ii. 273 ; Mani-
chaeans worst European enemies
of, ii. 357 ; Constantine's accession
leads to forcible suppression of
heathenism by, ii. 358

Church, the Manichaean, its pre-
destinarian teaching, ii. 309;
consists of Perfects and Superiors
only, ii. 313 ; its magistri, ii. 328 n.
1 ; its constitution, ii. 330 ; its
schisms, ii. 342; its suppression
and revival, ii. 356, 357

Church, the Primitive, its miracles,
i. Ii; ii. 361; its rivals, i. lvii, lxii;
its germ in Greek religious con-
fraternities, i. 21 ; its borrowings
from Alexandrian religion, i. 84,
85 ; its fundamental doctrines not
borrowed, i. 88 ; its heresies, i. 119;
its belief as to martyrdom, i. 145 n.
1 ; ii. 127 ; its community of goods,
i. 162; its angelology, i. 201; its
proselytizing zeal, ii. 2, 8; its
tradition as to early Gnostics, ii.
8, 9; its destruction of Gnostic
books, ii. 12; Asiatic Celts great
source of heresy in, ii. 29 ; acrostics
and word-puzzles used by, ii. 35;
Ophites attend services of, ii. 63;
Ophites connect sacraments of,
with heathen mysteries, ii. 82;
Trinitarian views of, ii. 121;
Valentinians attend services of, ii.
125 ; baptismal theories of, ii. 168;
Eucharistic theories of, ii. 172;
Gnosticism both danger and help
to, ii. 202; Marcion's relation to,
ii. 204 sqq. ; addiction of, to
visions of prophets, ii. 219 ; Fathers
say Mithraists copv its sacraments,
ii. 247, 260 ; its alliance with Con-
stantine. ii. 261, 271

Cicero, quoted, i. lvi, lvii n. 1, 129;
ii. 32

Cilicia, settlement of Persians in, ii.
229

Circus Maximus, resort of vagabond
magicians, temp. Tiberius, i. 108

Claudius I, the Emperor, no Christian
converts of rank in reign of (Julian),
ii. 8 n. 5

Claudius II, the Emperor, cannot expel
Goths from Dacia, ii. 271


Index


373


Cleanthes of Assos, Ophite silence as
to, ii. 83

Clement of Alexandria, accused of
heresy, ii. 14 n. 1; initiated into
heathen mysteries, ii. 21 n. 3; his
fairness to Gnostics, ii. 76 n. 2,
95 n. 2, 199 ; says angels dwelling
in soul, Platonic, ii. 110 n. 1 ; first
Greek author to mention Buddha,
ii. 286 n. 4; quoted, i. 40 n. 1,
47 n. 3, 61 n. 1, 73 n. 1, 89 n. 2,
122 n. 2, 124 n. 3, 125 n. 1, 127 n. 1,
142 n. 4, 184 n. 3, 186 nn. 2, 3,
190 n. 1, 194 n. 1 ; ii. 14, 20 n. 1,
37 n. 1, 39 n. 4, 45 n. 1, 50 n. 2,
65 n. 3, 88 w. 3, 93 n. 4, 95 w. 2,
100 ww. 2-6, 101 n. 2, 106 n. 3,
110 n. 1, 112 rc. 3, 113 n. 1, 118,
119, 122 n. 1, 125 n. 3, 129 rc. 3,
135 n. 3, 140 w. 2, 144 n. 1, 177 n. 4,
188, 205 w. 5, 219 n. 2, 239 n. 6,
286 n. 4. See Theodoti, Excerpta

Clement of Rome, quoted, i. 8 n. 2;
ii. 65 n. 3

Clementines, the, a religious romance,
i. 178; Tubingen theory as to,
i. 179; quoted, i. 158 n. 4, 178,
181 n. 3, 182 nn. 3, 6, 198; ii. 4.
n. 1, 82 n. 2, 219 n. 2

Cleomenes, Satrap of Egypt under
Alexander, i. 29

Cleopatra, last of Ptolemies, i. 30

Clitus, death of, i. 13

Coddiani, an Ophite sect. ii. 27
n. 1

Colarbasus, confusion as to name of,
ii. 20 n. 1. See Marcus

Commagene, favourite recruiting-
ground of legions, ii. 229

Commodus, the Emperor, appears in
procession of Isis, i. 54; defiles
temple of Mithras with real murder,
ii. 262 ; initiated into Mysteries of
Mithras, ii. 270

Confessors. See Martyrs

Confraternities, religious, among pre-
Christian Greeks, i. 21; hymns
composed by, i. 21 n. 1 ; frequented
by courtezans, i. 22 ; superstitious
practices of, i. 23 ; contrast between
Persian and Egyptian priests and
those of Greek, i. 25 ; propaganda
of, i. 26 ; Alexandrian religion first
spread by, i. 52, 77 ; Greek Orphics
not formed into, i. 139 n. 3, 141 ;
secret, among Jews, temp. Christ,
i. 175

Conington, Prof. John, his version of
Hymn of Great Mysteries, quoted,
ii. 54


Constantine, the Emperor, his pact
with the Church, i. lvii, lxii ; ii. 9,
12,261,271; his edict as to heresy,
i. lix n. 1 ; ii. 359 ; his conversion
leaves Alexandrian religion still
powerful, i. 83 ; many Simonians in
reign of, i. 200; only baptized on
his deathbed, ii. 168 n. 6 ; his con-
version enables Christians to sup-
press Gnosticism, ii. 199 ; and puts
stop to spread of Maroionism, ii.
220; his failure against Persians,
ii. 226; his family religion Sun-
worship, ii. 261 ; his enquiry into
Manichaeism, ii. 355; persecution
of Manichaeans slackens in reign
of, ii. 356

Copernicus, i. 117

Corbicius or Kubrik, name of Manes
in Christian tradition, ii. 279, 286

Corbulo, his wars with Persians, ii. 225

Cora or Kore, inseparable from
Demeter, i. 127 n. 3 ; ii. 45 n. 1 ;
called Mise at Pergamum, i. 143 n.
1. See Persephone, Proserpine

Correspondences, doctrine of, i. 115
sqq. ; in system of Simon Magus,
i. 183 ; in that of Ophites, ii. 75 ;
in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 191 n. 2.
See Maspero

Corybantes, the, hide pudendum of
Bacchus in box, i. 73 n. 1

Corybas, identified with Attis, i. 139
n. 1

Cosmocrator, epithet of Valentinian
Devil, ii. 108, 256

Courdaveaux, M. Victor, quoted, ii.
14 n. 1, 122. See Clement of
Alexandria, TertuUian

Crassus, his defeat by Persians, i. 8;
ii. 225

Cretans, call Isis, Diana Dictynna, i.
56

Crete, birthplace of Zeus, i. 16; and
of Zagreus, i. 37; scene of Rape
of Persephone, i. 40 n. 1 ; Orphic
myths early known in, i. 121, 122;
Orphic gold plates found in, i. 131 ;
Great Goddess of Asia worshipped
in, ii. 45 n. 1 ; double axe in, ii
67 n. 3 ; Ophites in, ii. 77

Creuzer, Georg Fritz, quoted, i. 130
n. 1

Cross, the. See Stauros; Eli, Eli

Crucifixion, the, in appearance only
ap. Basilides, ii. 17; and ap.
Manichaeans, ii. 320; Gospel of
Nicodemus confirms Gospel account
of, ii. 79 ; Valentinian teaching on,
ii. 116 ; Jesus teaches for 20 years


374


Index


after (Irenaeus), ii. 61 n. 1 ; for 12
(Pistis Sophia and Bruce Papyrus),
ii. 194. See Simon of Cyrene

Cruice, the Abbe, quoted, i. 180 n. 4

Cryptogram. See Akae, Armageddon,
Bega, Pistis Sophia, Taxo

Cumont, Prof. Franz, his work on
Mithras described, ii. 236 ; quoted,
i. 22, 119; ii. 236, 237, 238, 239,
240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246,
247, 248, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254,
255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 261, 262,
263, 264, 265, 267, 268, 269, 270,
272. 274, 277, 289 n. 3, 293 nn. 1, 2,
294 n. 2, 295 n. 2, 298 n. 1, 299 n. 1,
302 n. 1, 304 n. 1. 319 n. 1. 321,
322 n. 2, 323 n. 2, 324 n. 4, 327 nn.
1, 4, 328 nn. 2, 3, 329 n. 2, 332 n. 2,
348 n. 2

Curetes, the, their connection with
Orphism, i. 128, 142 n. 2 ; and with
Attis, i. 139 n. 1

Cybele, her worship in Athenian
associations, i. 17, 25 ; her legend
in Asia Minor, i. 37; identified
with Isis, i 55, 56; and with
Demeter and Rhea, i. 124, 126;
the -Mother of the Gods, i. 136 ;
Sabazius her son, i. 137 ; feminine
form of Dionysos, i. 137 n. 1 ; in
Orphic hymns, 139 n. 1, 143;
Phrygia chief seat of worship of,
ii. 28 ; her eunuch-priests, ii. 30 n.
3; alluded to in Jeremiah, ii. 32;
called Agdistis, ii. 39 ; identified
with Ma, Artemis, Aphrodite, etc.,
ii. 39, 40 ; always an earth-goddess,
ii. 45 n. 1 ; associated with double
axe, ii. 67 n. 3 ; her connection with
Mithras, ii. 258 ; adored by Julian,
ii. 269 ; worshipped in Manichaeism
as Mother of Life, ii. 300 n. 1

Cylon, Athens purified for murder of,
i. 121

Cypriotes, the, call Isis, Venus, i. 56

Cyprus, Adonis worship in, i. 37; ii.
40 ; Alexandrian divinities in, i. 52 ;
and Orphic, i. 143

Cyranides, Le Livre des, quoted by M.
de Mely as to "Mystery of Axe,"
ii. 67 n. 3

Cyrenaica, the, Jewish atrocities in,
ii. 5 n. 3

Cyrene, Buddhist mission to King of,
i. 20; Ptolemy Soter annexes, i.
29 ; Ophites in, ii. 77.

Cyril of Alexandria, replaces Isis by
two medical saints, i. 86 n. 1

Cyril of Jerusalem, describes elaborate
rite of baptism in ivth cent. , ii. 22 n. 1


Cytheraea. See Aphrodite

Cyzicus, worship of Alexandrian gods

at, i. 53 ; and of Eleusinian Triad,

i. 136

Dacia, its settlement by Trajan, ii. 271.
See Aurelian ; Claudius II

Dactyli, the Idaean, first of men, i.
106 n. 3

Damascius, the neo-Platonist, quoted,
i. 55 n. 4, 135 ; ii. 236 n. 4, 250 n. 1,
252 n. 2

Damascus, Perdiccas attacks Egypt
from, i. 30

Daniel, Book of, first gives personal
names of angels, i. 158; assumes
nations divided among angels, i.
199 ; addiction of Babylonian Jews
to curious arts in, ii. 33. See Anti-
ochus Epiphanes

Danube Provinces, the, worship of
Alexandrian divinities in, i. 53

Darius, son of Hystaspes, ii. 225, 227 ;
his inscription at Behistun quoted,
ii. 233

Darkness, the Dragon of Outer, the
most terrible hell in Texts of Saviour,
ii. 166 n. 2; its 12 torture-
chambers, ii. 183; surrounds the
earth, ii. 256

Darmesteter, James, quoted, ii. 232
nn. 1, 5, 237 n. 3, 241 n. 1, 248 n. 3,
278 n. 1. 284, 300 n. 2, 327 n. 3

Darwin, Charles, his doctrine of
survival of the fittest, i. Ii sqq., 117

David, King of Israel, vassal of
Philistines, i. 160 n. 4; Psalms of,
in Pistis Sophia, ii. 157

Dead, Baptism for, ii. 168; Book of
the, quoted, i. 31, 32, 55, 132, 134;
ii. 66. 72 n. 3

Death, Valentinian theories about,
ii. 107, 110, 113, 129 n. 3 ; in Pistis
Sophia a serpent with 7 heads,
ii. 156 n. 3 ; of initiates in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 167 sqq. ; in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 195 ; of sinner in Texts
of Saviour, ii. 186 sq. ; of wor-
shipper of Mithras, ii. 266; of
Manichaean Perfect, ii. 309; of
Manichaean Hearer, ii. 311

Decad, of Valentinus, described, ii.
101 ; meaning of names of, ii. 102,
103

Deisidaimon, the, of Theophrastus,
quoted, i. 140

Delos, worship of Alexandrian gods,
i. 53

Delphi, its oracle used to legitimize
foreign deities, i. 16; oracle of


Index


375


Serapis at Alexandria competes
with, i. 77; no public worship at
temple of, i. 85 ; remains of Diony-
sos buried at, i. 125

Demeter, scene of her trials, i. 16,
40 n. 1 ; her wanderings shown to
initiates, i. 40 ; her part in Anthes-
teria, i. 42 ; likeness of legend of,
to that of Isis, i. 43 ; identified with
Persephone, i. 46 ; Homeric hymn
to, quoted, i. 59 ; mystic marriage
with Zeus, i. 61 re. 1, 133, 142 re. 4,
144; consecrations to, in reign of
Valentinian and Valens, i. 83;
swine sacrificed to, i. 95; mother
of Persephone ap. Orphics, i. 124 ;
and of Iacchos, i. 125; an earth
goddess with many names, i. 126;
ii. 45 re. 1 ; Orphics in mysteries
of, i. 127 re. 3 ; assessor of Dionysos
in Pindar, i. 129 re. 3; alterations
in legend of, introduced by Orphics,
i. 130; her widespread worship,
i. 135 ; in mysteries of Samothrace,
i. 136 re. 2; associated with god of
double axe, ii. 67 re. 3 ; appears as
Mother of Life in Manichaeism,
ii. 300 re. 2. See Ceres, Rayet

Demetrius of Phalerum, takes charge
of Ptolemy's Museum, i. 44 re. 2

Demetrius Poliorcetes, his deification,
i. 18 re. 4, 19 ; his attack on Egypt
fails, i. 29 re. 2

Demiurge, the, or Architect of the
Universe, in Justinus' system, ii.
82; called the Great Archon by
Basilides, ii. 91 ; identified with
God of the Jews by Valentinus,
ii. 107 re. 2, 109, 114; author of
psychic or animal souls, ii. 112; in
Marcion's system, ii. 210, 211, 212,
214 re. 3; Messiah of, ii. 211, 213;
identified with Mithras, ii. 248

Demophoon, Celeus' son and nursling
of Demeter, i. 40

Demosthenes, his oration against
Aeschines, quoted, i. 138

Dendera, union of Osiris and Isis
depicted at, i. 61 re. 1

Deo, name of Demeter in Orphic
hymn, i. 142

Derenbourg, Hart wig, quoted, i. 163
re. 3

Derketo, homonym of Atargatis or
Dea Syria (Garstang), ii. 40 re. 1,
300 re. 2

Despoena, epithet of Persephone,
i. 133

Destiny or Heimarmene, the sphere
of, in Pistis Sophia, ii. 137 ». 2,


143 n. 1, 153, 154; in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 174, 184; in Mithraism,
ii. 255 sq. See Moira

Diadochi, the, or Successors of Alex-
ander, i. 14, 52

Diagram, the Ophites', ii. 66-71;
prayers to powers depicted in,
ii. 71-74; place of Ophiomorphus
in, ii. 77

Diana Dictynna, Cretan goddess
identified with Isis, i. 66

Didache, the, source of Apostolical
Constitutions (Duchesne), ii. 7 n. 2

Dieterich, Prof. Albert, quoted, i. 141,
142; ii. 255. See Mithraism, Or-
pheus

Dill, Sir Samuel, quoted, i. lvii, lix, 24,
54 n. 3 ; ii. 87, 272, 359

Dinkard, the, quoted, i. 134 re. 1

Diocletian, the Emperor, makes
Mithraism state religion, i. 81,
119 re. 1, 228, 271 ; his persecution
of Christians, ii. 12, 23; his
victories over Persians, ii. 226 ; his
adoption of Persian ways, ii. 228

Diodorus Siculus, authority for
Oriental religions, i. 9; quoted,
i. 31 re. 1, 43 re. 3

Diogenes, the Cynic, his saying about
Patecion quoted, i. 131

Dionysia, the, peculiarly popular in
Northern Greece, i. 136

Dionysion, temple of Dionysos at
Athens, i. 42

Dionysius, the Areopagite, his orders
of angels, i. 188 re. 1

Dionysos, a Thracian or Thessalian
god, i. 17; legend of Cretan, i. 37,
46 ; diaspasm or tearing to pieces of,
i. 37, 125 ; identified with Iacchos,
i. 39, 40 ; and with Zagreus, i. 42,
125 ; legend of, told in Little Myste-
ries, i. 42 ; identified with Osiris, L
43, 48 ; his relations with Demeter
and Persephone, i. 47 ; ii. 39 ; iden-
tified with Hades, i. 47, 48, 130;
with Apollo, i. 48; god of dead
to Alexandrians, i. 49; Boeotian
worship of, i. 62; his mystic
marriage with Demeter, i. 61 re. 1 ;
called the Vine, i. 64 re. 3; his
temple at Alexandria demolished
by Theophilus, i. 83 ; the Liberator,
i. 90 re. 1 ; sacrifices to, i. 95 ; his
likeness to Tammuz, i. 122 re. 3;
his legend centre of Orphic teach-
ing, i. 123 ; identified with Orphic
Phanes, i. 124, 144; with Zeus, i.
125 re. 2; Orphics connect his
death with man's creation and re-


376


Index


birth, i. 126; soul of man part of,
i. 127, 133; omophagy chief rite
of worship of, i. 128; ii. 112; soul
of man united with, i. 129, 144;
called Eubuleus, i. 133 ; widespread
worship of, i. 135; identified with
Adonis, i. 137 ; and Sabazius, i.
138; and Attis, i. 139; Orphic
hymns to, i. 142 n. 3, 143; son of
Semele, i. 145 ; an androgyne deity,
145, 185; all Graeco- Roman gods
tend to merge in, i. 146, 147 ; will
succeed Zeus, i. 186; jealousy of,
cause of diaspasm.. i. 190 n. 2;
spouse of Persephone and her son,
ii. 39; the soul of the world, ii.
50 n. 2 ; called Pappas, ii. 57 ; and
Iao, ii. 71 n. 1. See Bacchus, Iao

Diotima, gives traditional view of
Platonic affinity, i. 195 n. 1

Discourse, The True, of Celsus, pro-
bable date of> ii. 66

Docetism, a mark of heresy, ii. 17;
Marcion's adherence to, ii. 210;
Manichaeans profess, ii. 318, 348

Dodecad, the, of Valentinus, ii. 101
sqq. : its duplication explained, ii.
145 n. 8 ; Egyptian parallel to, 176

Doinel, Jules, founder of modern
Valentinianism, ii. 133 n. 1

Dollinger, Dr, quoted, i. 140 nn. 2. 3;
ii. 164 n. 3, 168, 169, 172

Dositheus the heresiarch, founder of
sect (Eusebius), ii. 6 n. 3

Dove, in Pistis Sophia, emblem of
Holy Spirit, ii. 135 n. 3; and of
Great Goddess, ibid. ; in Mani-
chaeism, 302 n. 1

Drexler, Prof. Anton, quoted, i. 85

Drogheda, Cromwell's letter after Siege
of, ii. 85 n. 2

Dualism, distinguishing feature of
Manichaeism, ii. 289

Duchesne. Mgr Louis, quoted, i. 89 n.
1 ; ii. 1 n. 5, 4, 5 n. 2, 7 n. 2, 11 n. 2,
14 n. 1, 22 n. 2, 122 n. 1, 178 n. 1,
202 n. 2

Dyaus, the god, worshipped in Vedas
and by Persians, i. 73 n. 4, ii. 231
n. 1

Ebionites, the, their connection with
the Church at Pella, ii. 5 n. 1;
with the Clementines, ii. 82

Ecbatana, one of the four Persian
capitals, i. 3

Ecclesia or Church, the incorruptible
aeon or Pleroma of the Ophites,
ii. 43, 60; used for assembly of
souls, ii. 75; member of third


Valentinian syzygy, ii. 98. 100, 102 ;
Italic school make her mother of
Dodecad, ii. 119; power breathed
into man in Pistis Sophia, ii. 179

Ecclesiasticus, member of Valentinian
Dodecad, ii. 101

Ecpyrosi8 or Destruction of the world
by fire, doctrine common to Stoics
and Persians, ii. 250; symbolized
by lion-headed figure in Mithraism,
ii. 251 ; in Manichaeism, ii. 297 ;
in Mazdeism, Pistis Sophia, and
Texts of Saviour, ii. 297 n. 1

Ectroma or Abortion. See Sophia (2)

Edessa, King of, protects Bardesanes,
ii. 120 ; Valentinians of, persecuted
by Arians, temp. Julian, ii. 132;
Gnosticism comes into Persia from,
ii. 283

Edfu, Horus worshipped at, i. 45;
Ptolemies restore temple of, i. 52

Egypt, Greek gods derived from
(Herodotus), i. 16; assigned to
Ptolemy on Alexander's death, i.
28 sqq. ; priestly character of re-
ligion of, i. 31 sq.; totemistic
character of early religion of, i. 37 ;
its influence on its conquerors, i. 51 ;
religion of, degenerates into sorcery,
L 57; inspires Alexandrian views
on next world, i. 60 ; Osiris-worship
in, temp. Pharaohs, i. 64 n. 3;
daily services in temples, i. 66;
early cosmogonies of, i. 73 ; ii. 36,
175 ; Ptolemy endows Alexandrian
religion in, i. 76; Alexandrian
religion in, temp. Julian, i. 83 ; pre-
Christian features surviving in,
i. 85 sq. ; triune god worshipped in
Pharaonic, i. 88; magicians of,
use foreign words, i. 93; Magic
PapjTi found in, i. 97 sqq. ; Gnos-
ticism in, quickly decays, i. Ill;
earth goddess worshipped in, i. 126 ;
Orphic hymns perhaps composed
in, i. 141 ; suzerain of Solomon,
i. 160 n. 4; lower classes in, first
become Christian, ii. 8 n. 5 ; Ophites
in, ii. 76 sqq. See Christians,
Eleusis, Enoch, Jews

Egyptians, the, sacred books of, trans-
lated into Greek, i. 9; opposed to
monotheism before Alexander, i.
11 ; priests of, oppose innovations,
i. 24 ; theocrasia known to earliest,
i. 33, 46, 54; their Osiris-worshq
bond with Greeks, i. 38; their
worship of animals, i. 45; most
superstitious and fanatic of men in
Philhellenic times, i. 50; oppose


Index


377


Alexandrian religion, ii. 51 ; respect
paid to, in Alexandrian religion,
i. 56, 73, 74; use foreign words in
magic, i. 93; think earthly Nile
copy of heavenly river, i. 116 n. 1;
their idea of eating gods to get
powers, i. 125 n. 3 ; their obligation
to Hebrews ap. Artapanus, i. 173 ;
their worship of mortal gods
absurd to Greeks, ii. 16; gods of,
husbands of their mothers, ii. 39;
their addiction to mapping-out in-
visible world, ii. 109; think only
rich happy after death, ii. 112 n. 1 ;
origin of their triune god, ii. 121 n.
3; their use of allegory, ii. 123;
their anxiety about nature of god
and future of soul, ii. 131 ; embrace
monastic life in great numbers, ii.
175; Pistis Sophia unintelligible
without knowledge of religion of
Pharaonic, ii. 177 ; their horror of
Amenti, ii. 195, 196; their enthu-
siasm for life of priest, ii. 200;
degradation of Christianity and
Gnosticism by, ii. 201 ; the wisdom
of, taught to Manes' predecessor,
ii. 285. See First Man, Jews

Egyptians, Gospel according to, said to
contain Ophite doctrine of trans-
migration, ii. 65, 79; possible
source of passage in Pistis Sophia,
ii. 161 n. 4

Eieazareie, a word used in magic, ii.
33 n. 2. See Yahweh of Israel

Elephantine, mixed religion of Jews
at, ii. 32 n. 4, 43 n. 2

Eleusinia, the Festivals following
Mysteries, i. 136

Eleusinion, the Athenian, sacred
things deposited in, i. 39

Eleusis, scene of goddesses' trials, i.
16 ; Mysteries of, described, i. 38-
41 ; initiation at, preceded by
Little Mysteries, i. 41 sq. ; likeness
of Legend of, to that of Osiris, i. 43 ;
date of reformation of Mysteries
of, ibid. ; theocrasia result of, i. 46 ;
Calathos or basket-crown of Serapis
borrowed from, i. 49 ; Mysteries of,
rob death of its terrors, i. 59;
mystic marriage of god and god-
dess crowning scene at, i. 6i n. 1 ;
formula repeated by initiates at, i.
62 n. 2; Alexandrian mysteries
more popular than those of, i. 66
initiates at, carry rods, i. 68 n. 2
hereditary priesthood of, i. 76
worshippers of other gods con-
secrated to those of, i. 83 ; Baubo


a personage in Mysteries of, i. 100 ;
the God and the Goddess of, i. 126 ;
ii. 39; entry of Dionysos into, i.
130; gods of, worshipped outside
Attica, i. 135; reason for secrecy
of Mysteries of, i. 139 n. 2 ; priest-
esses of, called bees, i. 143 n. 4;
part of Dionysos at, after Orphic
reform, i. 145; sacramental grace
of Mysteries of, i. 147; baptism
among Gnostics borrows features
from, ii. 22; Phrygian deities
identified with those of, ii. 31;
Ophites borrow doctrines from, ii.
54; Ophites' opinion of Mysteries
of, i. 67

Eleutherna, Orphic gold plates found
at, i. 131, 132

Eh, Eli, lama sabachthani, called
names of God in magic, ii. 33 n. 2

Elijah, the Prophet, his soul in Pistis
Sophia placed in St John Baptist,
ii. 137, 149, 150; in Paradise of
Adam, ii. 179; ascension of, in-
spires Mithraic monuments, ii. 248

Elizabeth, mother of St John Baptist,
her conception arranged by Sophia
ap. Ophites, ii. 53; by Virgin of
Light in Pistis Sophia, ii. 137

Eloaeus, ruler of planetary sphere
in Diagram, ii. 47, 73 ; corresponds
to Hebrew Elohe, ii. 71 n. 1. 8ee
Ailoaios

Elpis or Hope, member of Valentinian
Dodecad, ii. 101

Emanation, defined, i. 181 n. 2;
doctrine common to all post-
Christian Gnostics, ii. 19 n. 1

Empedocles, derives everything from
four roots or elements, i. 197

Encratites, the, sect said to be founded
by Tatian, ii. 220

En-ki or Ea, the god, creator of
pattern man, i. lxiii n. 1

Ennead, the Egyptian, its irregular
number of gods, ii. 92

Ennoia, second of Simon Magus'
six "Roots," i. 180; Simon Magus'
called Epinoia by Hippolytus, i.
180 n. 4; ii. 20 n. 1 ; in Great
Announcement first female power,
i. 182; her Orphic and Jewish
analogues, i. 185; produces angels
who make universe, i. 187, 195;
seized by world-making angels and
condemned to transmigration, i.
190, 196 ; identified with Helen of
Tyre, ibid. ; redeemed by Simon,
i. 191; inconsistency of stories
regarding, i. 193 ; in Ophite system,


378


Index


name of Second Man, ii. 38 ; Ophio-
morphus called, ii. 49; spouse of
Bythos according to some Valen-
tinians, ii. 97

Enoch, mass of Apocrypha connected
with name of, i. 159, 160, 164;
dates of same, i. 162 n. 1, 163, 164
n. 1 ; connection of Essenes with,
i. 168: in Pistis Sophia, author of
books written in Paradise, ii. 147
n. 5, 194 n. 2

Enoch, Book of, fall of angels in,
i. 191 n. 1 ; ii. 154 ; quoted in
Pistis Sophia, ii. 155; quoted, i.
160, 161, 162 n. 2, 165, 169; ii.
155

Enoch, Book of the Secrets of, seven
heavens arranged as in Mithraism,
ii. 257

Epaminondas, suffers in Hades because
not initiated, i. 131

Ephesus, many-breasted goddess of,
i. Ivi, 17; ii. 40; worship of
Alexandrian gods at, i. 53; Nico-
laitans at, ii. 25

Ephrem Syrus, finds Valentinianism
in Bardesanes' hymns, ii. 120; his
date, ibid. ; quoted, ii. 316 n. 1

Epicurus, his statement of the problem
of evil, ii. 217

Epimenides, introduces Orphic myths
into Athens, i. 121

Epinoia. See Ennoia

Epiphanius. bishop of Constantia, a
Nicolaitan in his youth, i. 1 12 n. 1 ;
ii. 21 re. 5 ; his ignorance about the
Essenes, i. 155 ; his date and work,
ii. 10, 77; quoted, i. 190, 191, 193,
197, 198, 199; ii. 10, 11, 14, 27,
46 n. 3, 61, 79, 80, 81, 90 n. 1,
92 n. 3, 93 nn. 1, 2, 95, 205, 213,
215, 219, 279 n. 2

Epitaph, Valentinian, in Via Nazion-
ale, ii. 129

Erataoth, name of power in Diagram,
ii. 71

Eratosthenes, studies at Museum of
Alexandria, i. 45

Ergamenes, King of Ethiopia, his
massacre of priests of Amen, i.
31 n. 1

Eris-ki-gal or Ereshchigal, the goddess,
Sumerian counterpart of Perse-
phone, i. 100

Eros, Horus takes attributes of, i. 50 ;
first-born god of Orphics, i. 123;
Orphic, known to Aristophanes, i.
124; his likeness to Valentinian
Agape, ii. 98 n. 1 ; and to Marcion's
Supreme Being, ii. 210; hymns


to, sung by Lycomidae. ii. 210
n, 1

Esaldaios, variant of Ialdabaoth or El
Shaddai, ii. 46 n. 3

Esculapius. See Asklepios

Essarts, M. Fabre des, head of
L'^glise Gnostique, ii. 133 n. 1

Essenes, the, third party among Jews,
temp. Josephus, i. lv, 152 ; perhaps
borrow from Buddhism, i. 20; a
"philosophic" sect, i. 151; mean-
ing of name, i. 152; Josephus'
account of, i. 152-154; Philo's,
i. 154, 155; girdle used by them
like Parsis' kosti, i 153 nn. 1, 4;
description of, by Pliny, Hippoly-
tus, and Porphyry, i. 155; wild
theories about, i. 155, 156; their
connection with Orphics, i. 156, 168 ;
essentially Gnostics, i. 157 ; use of
Cabala by, i. 157, 158, 169; names
of angels kept secret by, i. 158;
Enochian literature due to, i. 159,
167; peculiar interpretation of
Scripture, i. 168, 171 ; probably
extinct after Hadrian, i. 170;
divisions among, possible, i. 175 n.
3 ; Simon Magus' teaching opposite
to that of, i. 202 ; connection with
Ebionites doubtful, ii. 5 n. 1 ;
points in common with Christians,
ii. 6. See Ritschl

Ethiopia, priests of Amen flee to, i. 31 ;
Thueris the hippopotamus goddess
called "Cat of," i. 37 n. 1

Ethiopians, their rule in Egypt, i. 31,
51 ; worship Isis, i. 56 ; Psam-
metichos expels them, i. 101

Etymologicum Magnum. See Gaisford

Eubouleus or Eubuleus, a name of
Dionysos, i. 133, 137 n. 1, 142, 143;
identified with Adonis by Orphics,
i. 137. See Zeus Chthonios

Eubulus, author of lost work on
Mithras, ii. 236

Eucharist, the, rite resembling it
among Serapiasts, i. 87: simple
mode of celebration in Primitive
Church, i. 87 n. 1 ; thaumaturgic
accompaniments among heretics,
ibid., and ii. 129, 187; obscene
parody of, i. 198 ; magical efficacy
of, among Gnostics, ii. 22, 63 ; in
Apostolic times follows baptism
immediately, ii. 22 n. 1 ; Ophite
additions to, doubtful, ii. 61 ;
Ophite ideas concerning, i. 63;
Marcus' profanation of, ii. 129;
called a mystery, ii. 165; views of
Primitive Church as to, ii. 171;


Index


379


Dollinger's remarks on, ii. 172;
rite described in Texts of Saviour
and Bruce Papyrus probably Mar-
cosian, ii. 187; celebrated with
water among certain sects, ii. 188,
215; ceremony resembling, in
Mithraism, ii. 247, 260; in Mani-
chaeism probably confined to Elect,
ii. 348. See Pistis Sophia, Bruce
Papyrus, Huysmans

Eudemos of Rhodes, earliest authority
for Zervanism among Magi, ii. 236
n. 4, 252 n. 2

Eudoxos of Cnidos, his use of acrostics
in astronomical work, i. 169

Euhemerus of Messene, his theory
that gods were deified men, i. 19

Eukles, name of god in Orphic gold
plate, i. 133

Eumenides. the, said by Orphics to be
children of Persephone, i. 142

Eumolpidae, exegetes attached to, i.
44 n. 1 ; hereditary priests of
Mysteries of Eleusis, i. 76

Euphrates, the heresiarch, founder of
Ophites ap. Origen, ii. 25; called
the "Peratic" or Mede, ii. 26 n. 1

Euripides, Parthians act plays of, i. 8 ;
represents Dionysos as androgyne,
i. 47 n. 4; supports identification
of Dionysos and Apollo, i. 48;
Orphic doctrines well known to, i.
123; quoted, i. 39, 128, 149 n. 1

Europe, Alexander's marriage of, with
Asia, i. lviii ; Oriental religions pass
into, i. 20 ; after Alexander, Egypt
becomes granary of, i. 28; Alex-
andrian religion passes into, i. 77 ;
Phrygia invaded by celibate war-
riors from, ii. 40

Eusebius of Caesarea, quoted, i. 199,
200 ; ii. 4 n. 3, 6 n. 4, 10 n. 1, 12 n. 5,
18 n. 3, 23 n. 2, 83 n. 1, 88 n. 2,
96 n. 2, 120 n. 2, 132 n. 2, 206 nn.
2, 5, 220 n. 3, 221 n. 1, 359

Euxitheus, the Pythagoric, authority
for Orphic doctrine of burial of
soul in body, i. 127 n. 1. See
Philolaos

Evander, bishop of Nicomedia, rabbles
Ophites, ii. 77

Eve, the protoplast, confusion of name
of, with Evoe, ii. 20 n. 1 ; Ophite
legend of, ii. 52, 58, 70 ; and Mani-
chaean, ii. 299, 306

Evoe, word used in Mysteries of
Sabazius, i. 138; in those of Attis,
i. 139 n. 1 ; ii. 54 n. 6 ; Clement of
Alexandria connects it with Eve,
ii. 20 «. 1


Ezekiel, the Prophet, shows hatred of
Jews for Gentiles, i. 167 n. 4;
quoted, i. 186 n. 2; ii. 32, 43 n. 2

Eznig of Goghp, quoted, ii. 217,
285

Ezra, the Prophet, Apocalypse attri-
buted to, quoted, i. 163, 164, 165,
167 nn. 3, 4; ii. 81

Parrah (Seistan), probably Proph-
thasia of Arrian, i. 4 n. 1

Fatak. See Patecius

Father, Mithraic priests addressed as,
ii. 261 ; name of highest Mithraic
degree, ii. 262, 267

Father-and-Son, Dionysos the double
of his father, i. 47 ; name of Ophite
Supreme God, ii. 38, 39, 67 ; First
Mystery of Pistis Sophia, ii. 144;
Mithras may be, ii. 248

Fathers of the Church, their writings
neglected till lately, i. 1; call all
early heretics Gnostics, i. lviii, 171 ;
say Simon Magus parent of Gnos-
ticism, i. 176, 200; know little of
many heresies, i. 200 ; ii. 9 ; agree
as to Ophites, ii. 36 ; their account
of Marcus the magician, ii. 128,
167 ; their hostility to Gnosticism
justified, ii. 199 ; say devil inspires
Mithraists to imitate Church, ii.
247; ascribe Apocrypha of Thomas
and Andrew toManichaeanLeucius,
ii. 351

Faventinus, Ulpius Egnatius, priest of
Isis and other deities, i. 83

Fihrist, the, of Muhammad ben Ishak
or En-Nadim, quoted, ii. 279 n. 3,
280, 287 n. 4, 289 n. 2, 290 n. 3,
291 n. 1, 292, 293 n. 1, 294 n. 1/
295 n. 1, 296 n. 1, 299 n. 2, 300 n. 2,
302 n. 1, 304 n. 1, 309, 310, 312
nn. 1, 2, 313, 314, 322 n. 2, 332,
333, 342 nn. 1, 2

Firuz. See Peroz

Foakes-Jackson, Canon, quoted, ii.
215 n. 1, 216 n. 4, 223

Forefather, the Great Unseen or
Propator, member of ruling Triad
of Left or material powers in Pistis
Sophia, ii. 142, 150, 155

Foucart, M. George, quoted, i. 91

Foucart, M. Paul, his works on
Mysteries of Eleusis, i. 38 n. 3;
quoted, i. 17 n. 1, 21 nn. 1, 2, 22 n.
2, 23 n. 2, 25 nn. 2, 3, 39 nn. 1-3, 40
nn. 3, 4, 41 nn. 1-3, 42 nn. 1, 2,
43, 44 n. 1, 47 n. 1, 48 n. 2, 52 n. 3,
59 n. 4, 61 n. 1, 65 n. 6, 130 n. 1,
133 n. 1, 137 n. 5, 143 n. 4


380


Index


France, Isiac monuments found in,

i. 53; and Mithraic, ii. 230
Fravashis, the, or Ferouers in Maz-

deism, ii. 110 ft. 1
Frazer, Sir James G., quoted, i. 43,

91, 96 w. 4, 158 ft. 2
Freemasonry, Catholic accusation of

obscene rites against, ii. 18 ft. 2;

Mithraism a Pagan (Renan), ii. 264

Gabinius, Proconsul of Syria, rebuilds
Samaria after destruction by Jews,
i. 177

Gabriel, the angel, in Book of Daniel,
i. 158; named in Magic Papyri,
ii. 34; name of sphere in Dia-
gram, ii. 70; in Pistis Sophia,
Jesus assumes shape of, at Annun-
ciation, ii. 137, 138 ; with Michael
bears Pistis Sophia out of Chaos,
ii. 156, 355 w. 1

Gaea or Ge, the Orphic earth goddess,
i. 123, 133, 185; ii. 45 ft. 1

Gaisford, Dean, his notes to Etymo-
logicum Magnum quoted, i. 137
n. 3

Galatae, the, their settlement in Asia
Minor, ii. 28

Galerius, the Emperor, speech of
Persian ambassador to, ii. 226;
affects state of Persian Shah, ii.
228 n. 2

Galli, the, eunuch priests of Cybele,
ii. 30 n. 3

Ganymede, burlesqued in procession
of Isis, i. 71

Garotman, abode of Infinite Light in
Mazdeism, ii. 249

Gaumata, the Magian pseudo-Smerdis
in Behistun inscription, ii. 233

Gayomort, the First Man in Mazdeism,
i. lxi ; slain by Ahriman, i. 126 n. 3 ;
his legend in Bundahish, ii. 246

Geb, the Egyptian earth-god, father
of Osiris, Isis, Set and Nephthys,
i. 33, 133 n. 1

Gehenna, in Enochian literature, i.
165, 167 ; in Diagram, ii. 69

Genghiz Khan, his invasion and con-
quests, i. 5 n. 1, 14

Gentiles, the, their relations with Jews
in earliest Christian centuries, i. lv,
lvi; hostility of Jews against,
partly due to Roman taxation, i.
163 n. 1 ; final fate of, ap. Jews,
i. 164, 165, 166, 167; rebellion
of Jews against, i. 172; Jewish
hatred recognized by, after Titus,
ii. 5; non -Jewish Christianity
necessary for conversion of, ii. 21


George the Syncellus, quoted, i. 124 n.
3. See Monogenes

Gerizim, Mount, temple of, rival to
that of Jerusalem, i. 177

Germany, i. 7; Isiac monuments
found in, i. 53; and Mithraic, ii.
230

Gibbon, Edward, the historian, his
Decline and Fall (Bury's ed.),
quoted, i. 1, 85, 86 n. 2 ; ii. 7 n. 1,
12 n. 5, 96 n. 3, 127 ft. 4, 226 nn.
1-6, 227 ». 1, 228 w. 2, 271 w. 2

Gilgamesh, the Babylonian hero, ii.
287 ft. 4

Giraud, Father Francois, his Ophifae
quoted, i. 100 n. 1; ii. 26 ft. 5,
41 ». 2, 44 w. 2, 64, 68, 70, 71
ft. 2, 79 ft. 2

Gladstone, Mr, his controversy with
Huxley, i. liii

Glaucias, the interpreter of St Peter
and teacher of Basilides, ii. 90 ft. 3.
See Ptolemy, son of Glaucias

Glaucothea, mother of Aeschines and
priestess of Sabazius, i. 22, 138

Glory, the Column of, in Manichaeism,
ii.' 296, 308, 309, 332

Glory, the King of, in Manichaeism,
ii. 148 ft. 3; in neo-Manichaeiflm,
ii. 325

Glycon, the god worshipped at Nico-
media, temp. Gordian, i. 24. See
Alexander of Abonoteichos

Gnosticism, ideas at root of, opposed
to religion, i. 90 ; the importance of
knowledge of the spiritual world,
i. Ill; Christianity may be only
episode in history of, ibid. ; impulse
given to, by rise of astrology, i. 119;
earliest pre-Christian form of, i.
120; Simon Magus said to be
parent of all later, i. 176 ; a hydra,
i. 200; does not compete with
orthodox Christianity till nnd cent.,
ii. 2; early converts from, ii. 21;
its services to Church, ii. 21,
202 ; alleged necessity for forcible
suppression of, ii. 23; Montanism
and, only formidable heresies in
early centuries, ii. 29 n. 1 ; likeness
of, to Cabala, ii. 36 n. 1 ; becomes
ethical after contact with philo-
sophers, ii. 87; first form of
Egyptian, unknown, ii. 89 ; Valen-
tinus transforms Christian, ii. 93;
degenerates into magic in Egypt,
ii. 199; rotten before it was ripe
(Inge), ii. 199 w. 3; bridge between
Paganism and Christianity, ii. 200 ;
its suppression by Church, ii. 359


Index


:M


Gnostics, generic name for many
different sects, i. Iviii, 171 ; worship
of Greek confraternities resembles
that of, i. 21 ; form of Christian
sacraments borrowed from, i. 87
n. 1 ; Tertullian's views on Trinity
influenced by, i. 89 n. 2; their
use of magic (Hippolytus), i. 109;
points common to Orphics and
post-Christian, i. 148; Essenes,
Gnostics in larger sense, i. 157 ;
conceal themselves during perse-
cution, i. 200; symbolic construc-
tion of Gospels by, ii. 6; our
sources of information as to, ii. 10 ;
"the great Gnostics of Hadrian's
time," ii. 12; writings of, ii. 13;
call Jesus Monogenes, ii. 15;
magical ideas of pre-Christian, ii.
18 ; exchange of doctrines among,
ii. 20; introduce statues, incense,
etc., ii. 22; term Homoousios first
used by, ii. 23 n. 1; Barbeliotae
etc. so called by Epiphanius,
ii. 27, 77 ; Carpocratians first call
themselves, ii. 27; the "perfect
Gnostics" of the Naassenes, ii. 56
n. 1 ; become active after St Paul's
preaching in Asia Minor, ii. 85;
Mithraists perhaps copy certain
doctrines of, ii. 248 ; may get ideas
of destiny from Babylon, ii. 256

Gonds, the, sorcerers of Aryan races,
i. 92

Gordian III, the Emperor, Glycon
worship in reign of, i. 24

Goshurun or Goshurvan, the Heavenly
Bull of the Avesta, ii. 243; in
Bundahish, slain by Ahriman, ii.
246

Gospel, the Fourth, its date, ii. 178;
not quoted in Pistis Sophia, ii.
177 ; nor by Marcion, ii. 208 n. 1 ;
quoted, i. 177 n. 5; ii. 117 n. 1,
123 n. 3, 161 n. 4, 177, 190

Goths, of Dacia, converted en masse,
ii. 271

Gracchus, Urban Prefect of Rome,
temp. Gratian, ii. 272

Graecia, Magna, overthrow of Pytha-
goreans in, i. 122; Orphic gold
plates found in, i. 169

Granicus, the, Greek troops x>n Per-
sian side at, i. 7

Gratian, the Emperor, Epiphanius'
Panarion written in his 7th year,
ii. 10 ; spread of Marcionism in his
reign, ii. 205; Mithraea wrecked
with his sanction, ii. 272 ; financial
measures against Paganism, ii. 358


Gratidia or Canidia of Horace, her
sister witch a Thessalian, i. 108

Great Britain, Isiac monuments found
in, i. 63; and Mithraic, ii. 230

Greece, Persians repulsed in their
attack on, i. 1; Alexander in
Seistan receives grapes from, i.
4 n. 1; theocrasia in, i. 15, 16;
gods of, coalesce with those of
Asia Minor, L 17; its religious
confraternities, i. 21 ; Dionysos-
worahip brought into, from Egypt,
i. 43 ; Orphic teaching first appears
in, i. 112; comes into, from Thrace,
i. 122 ; Dionysos youngest of gods
of, i. 123; popular theology of,
i. 124 ; propagation of Orphic ideas
in, i. 135; no regular association
called Orphic in, i. 139 n. 3, 141 ;
mysteries of Chthonian deities in,
attended by Gnostics, ii. 21 ; great
goddess worshipped in, ii. 45 n. 1 ;
Ophites have settlements in, ii. 77 ;
Mithraism keeps out of, ii. 230.
See Hellas

Greeks, the, rush of, to Asia after
Alexander's conquests, i. 7 ; adopt
foreign gods in rvth cent. b.c,
i. 15, 16 ; Alexander's deification a
shock to, i. 18 ; rise of Euhemerism
among, i. 19; ii. 28; no priestly
caste among, i. 24, 76 ; theocrasia
popular among, i. 33, 54, 56 ; Osiris
myth common to Egyptians and,
i. 38 ; Alexandrian religion careful
of susceptibilities of, i. 44; think
Demeter and Persephone one, i. 46 ;
Apollo always a sun-god among,
i. 48; mistake of, as to Harpo-
crates, i. 50; their fear of gods
temp. Homer, i. 57 ; Homeric
flattery of gods, i. 95; turn to
magic rites vth cent. B.C., i. 121 ;
asceticism of Orphics foreign to,
i. 127; their view of Mysteries
changes after Orphic reform, i. 130;
Orphism greatest religious move-
ment among pre-Christian, i. 146;
religion of, and Jews contrasted,
L 149; adoption of acrostics and
word-puzzles among, i. 168, 169
n. 1 ; Jews forge works of well-
known authors among, i. 173;
Simon Magus uses religious tradi-
tions of, i. 185, 186; laugh at wail-
ing for Dying God, ii. 16 ; Ophites
take doctrines from Mysteries of,
ii. 54; unlike Persians, think gods
have nature of men, ii. 234 ; make
astrology popular, ii. 236


382


Index


Gregory the Great, Saint, his advice

to assimilate heathen practices, i.

85
Grunwedel, Dr, his expedition to

Turfan, ii. 316
Guards, the Nine of Treasure-house in

Pistis Sophia, ii. 142, 193
Gundisabur or Djundi-sabur, place of

Mani's execution, ii. 281 n. 7

Habakkuk, the Prophet, inspired by
Jaldabaoth according to Ophites,
ii. 81 n. 2

Hades, the god, his temple at Eleusis,
i. 39; his Rape of Persephone
shown in Mysteries, i. 40 ; in Homer
shares universe with Zeus, i. 46;
identified with Zeus Chthonios and
Dionysos, i. 47, 130, 144, 147;
ii. 39 ; his name perhaps ineffable,
i. 47 n. 1 ; called Eubuleus, i. 47,
133, 142; identified with Osiris,
i. 48 ; his epithet of Adamas, ii. 39
n. 1 ; on Mithraic monuments, ii.
238; identified with Ahriman, ii.
239, 253

Hades, the place or House of, pass-
words through, taught in Mysteries,
i. 41 ; happy lot of initiates in, i.
59; Amenti, the Egyptian, i. 102
n. 1, 104; in Orphic gold plate, L
132 ; pains of uninitiated in, i. 140 ;
like Jewish Sheol, i. 150

Hadrian, the Emperor, his letter to
Servian, i. 86; the great Gnostics
of his reign, i. Ill; ii. 12; his
war of extermination against the
Jews, i. 163, 170, 172 n. 1 ; ii. 5,
203; Celsus a contemporary of,
ii. 66 ; reign of Roman Law begins
temp., ii. 86; Gnosticism enters
Alexandria temp., ii. 89 ; gives back
Trajan's Persian conquests, ii. 225 ;
books on Mithras worship written
temp., ii. 236

Haggai, the Prophet, hatred of Jews
for Gentiles shown in, i. 167 n. 4

Halicarnassus, Alexandrian worship
in, i. 52

Ham, the patriarch, identified with
Titan, i. lx

Harnack, Prof. Adolf, quoted, i. xlix
n. 1 ; ii. 161 n. 4, 207, 215 n. 1, 216,
286 n. 5

Har-pa-khrat or Harpocrates, the
Alexandrian Horus the Child, i. 50

Harris, Dr Rendel, his discovery of
the Odes of Solomon, i. 164 n. 1;
ii. 157 n. 2 ; and of the Apology of
Aristides, ii. 204 n. 1


Hartland, Mr E. S., his theory of
mana, i. 91 n. 2

Harvey, W. W., editor of Irenaeus,
quoted, i. 181 n. I ; ii. 138 n. 1

Hasis-adra. See Xisuthros

Hatch, Dr Edwin, quoted, i. lvii, lviii
n. 1, 47 n. 4, 87 n. 1, 168 n. 3,
174 n. 2; ii. 23 n. 1, 37 n. 1, 83 n. 1,
165 n. 3, 168 n. 6, 169 n. 1. 170,
172 n. 3, 191 n. 2, 202 n. 1, 222 nn.
2,3

Haurvetat, the Amshaspand, i. 181 n.
1 ; his and Ameretat's possible
analogues in neo-Manichaeism, ii.
355

Hebdomad, the, in system of Simon
Magus and Clementines, i. 181 ;
among Ophites, ii. 64 ; Valentinus'
name for the Demiurge or god
of the Jews, ii. 107, 109, 114 n. 3

Hebrews, the, i. 173, 185. See Jews

Hebrews, the Gospel according to the,
perhaps identical with that accord-
ing to the Egyptians, ii. 79

Hecataeus of Abdera, Jewish forgery
in name of, i. 173

Hecate, the goddess, identified with
Isis, i. 56 ; priest of Isis also hiero-
phant of, i. 83 ; Orphic hymns to,
i. 142 n. 2, 147 n. 1 ; patron saint
of sorcerers till Renaissance, i. 147 ;
ii. 186 n. 3, 276; her relation to
lion-headed god of Mithraism, ii.
252

Heddernheim, revolving bas-reliefs in
Mithraeum at, ii. 247 ; concealment
of lion-headed statue in same, ii.
251

Hedone or Pleasure, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Hegemonius, his Acta Archelai,
Beeson's edition of, ii. 280 n. 3;
quoted, i. 178 n. 2; ii. 277 n. 1,
279 n. 2, 280 n. 3, 287 n. 3, 288 nn.
1, 2, 3, 289 n. 1, 293 n. 1, 294 n. 1,
295 n. 2, 297 n. 2, 298 nn. 1, 2,
299 n. 4, 302 n. 1, 306 nn. 1, 2,
307 n. 1, 308 nn. 1^, 312 n. 2,
316 n. 1, 318 n. 1, 322 n. 2, 323 n. 4,
326 n. 1, 330 n. 2, 352 n. 2

Hegesander, quoted from Athenaeus,
i. 8 n. 3

Hegesippus, his date, ii. 6 n. 4 ; quoted,
ii. 2 nn. 1, 2; 6 n. 4, 8 n. 3. See
Eusebius

Heimarmene. iSee Destiny

Helen of Troy, Simon Magus' mistress
said to be reincarnation of, i. 178,
190, 196

Helena of Tyre, name of Simon's


Index


383


mistress, i. 190; redeemed by
Simon, i. 191; inconsistency of
patristic story about, i. 193;
typifies the soul in transmigration,
i. 196 ; image of, as Athena, i. 198 ;
said to have been called Sophia,
ii. 45 n. 1

Heliogabalus, the Emperor, a high-
priest of the sun-god, ii. 228

Heliopolis. See Annu or On

Helios, classical type of, represented
on Indian coins, i. 17 n. 2 ; Serapis
identified with, i. 56 ; distinguished
by Greeks from Apollo, ii. 240
on Mithraic monuments, ii. 244
with Mithras at banquet, ii. 247
invoked in Mithraic Liturgy, ii. 266

Hellas, i. 24, 44

Hellespont, the, limit of Persian
Empire, i. 1

Hemerobaptists, the, a pre-Christian
sect, ii. 6 n. 4; called Mandaites
or Disciples of St John, ii. 305;
their history and tenets, ibid.

Henosis or Oneness, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Hera, her contempt for man in Homer,
i. 57 ; her jealousy cause of
Diaspasm ap. Orphics, i. 125; on
Mithraic monuments, ii. 238. See
Juno

Heracleon, the Valentinian, quoted by
Origen, ii. 95 n. 2; most distin-
guished of Valentinus' successors,
ii. 119; his Commentaries on the
Gospels not secret, ii. 131

Heracleopolis or Ahnas el-Medineh,
mentioned in Magic Papyrus, i. 98,
109

Heracles, becomes immortal because
of divine birth, i. 18; ii. 16;
rams sacrificed to, i. 95 ; story of,
in Herodotus used by Justinus,
ii. 81 ; on Mithraic monuments,
ii. 238; his compulsion of Hades,
ii. 239 n. 7. See Hercules

Heraclitus of Ephesus, identifies Dio-
nysos with Hades, i. 47 ; probably
unknown to Hippolytus' Naassene,
ii. 83

Heraclius, the Emperor, his overthrow
of Persia, ii. 227

Herat, a foundation of Alexander, i. 5

Herculaneum, scenes of Alexandrian
worship in frescoes found at, i. 66
n. 3, 67-69, 73, 87

Hercules, classical type of, on Indian

coins, i. 17 n. 2
lermas' Pastor, Trinitarian views of,
i. 89 n. 2


Hermes, the god, worship of, perhaps
brought into Greece from Egypt,
i. 17; Greek analogue of Anubis,
i. 35 ; as psychopomp in Mysteries
of Eleusis, i. 41 ; image of, used
in magic, i. 98 ; hymn to, in Magic
Papyrus, i. 98, 99; appears in
Mysteries of Samothrace, i. 136
n. 2 ; Terms of, in Athenian streets,
i. 139 n. 2; St Paul hailed as, in
Phrygia, i. 191 n. 3 ; ii. 42 ; leader
of souls in Homer, ii. 54; on
Mithraic monuments, ii. 258

Hermopolis, ogdoad of four syzygies
of gods under early Pharaohs at,
i. 197; ii. 175, 176

Hero of Alexandria, invents first
steam-engine, i. 45

Herod the Great, rebuilds and restores
Samaria, i. 177

Herodotus, quoted, i. 16, 43. 48, 60,
81, 123, 136; ii. 176, 233 n. 1, 234,
239, 320 ». 1

Hesiod, scholiast on, quoted, i. 40
n. 1 ; popular theology given in,
i. 124; calls God and Goddess of
Eleusis Zeus Chthonios and Deme-
ter, i. 126; his successive ages of
the world, i. 186

Hierapolis, called Ophiorhyma in
Acta Philippi, ii. 50. See Atargatis

Hiero II, King of Syracuse, introduces
Alexandrian gods into Sicily, i. 53

Hild, M. J. A., quoted, i. 134 n. 2,
149 n. 1

Hilleh, magic bowls of Jews found at,
ii. 32, 33

Hinduism, i. Ii

Hippa, Orphic hymn to, i. 138 n. 2

Hipparchus, studies at Museum, i. 45 ;
makes systematic astrology pos-
sible, i. 117

Hippolytus, bishop of Porta Romana,
discovery of his Philosophumena,
i. lix; ii. 11; Salmon's theory
about, i. lxi n. 1; ii. 11, 12; tricks
of magicians described by, i. 99, 100 ;
condemns astrology and astronomy
alike, i. 112 n. 2; his "hymn of
Great Mysteries," i. 137 n. 1, 139 n.
1 ; ii. 54 n. 6 ; thinks system of
Sethiani derived from Orphics, i.
175; his account of Simon Magus'
doctrines inconsistent, i. 193; doc-
trines of heresiarchs described by,
ii. 11, 12; exaggerates diversity of
Gnostic teaching, ii. 14 ; attributes
Ophite doctrines to discourses of
St James to Mariamne, ii. 26;
contemporary of Origen circa 200


384


Index


a.d., ii. 26 n. 3; identifies Ophio-
morphus with great god of Greek
Mysteries, ii. 60; his Ophite
psalm, ii. 61, 62, 68 re. 2; his later
Ophite sacraments, ii. 63; says
Naassenes have priests, ii. 66;
attributes Gospel of Egyptians to
Naassenes, ii. 79 ; gives most space
to Valentinus' doctrine, ii. 95;
his views on Trinity polytheistic,
ii. 123 n. 1 ; accuses heresiarchs of
magical imposture, ii. 128; writes
50 years after Valentinus' death,
ii. 131 n. 2 ; quoted, i. lix, lxi n. 1,
68 n. 3, 73, 99, 100 n. 4, 107 n. 1,
109, 110, 112 ra. 2, 137 n. 1, 139 n. 1,
175, 179, 187, 191, 193, 194, 196,
198; ii. 9, 11, 12, 14, 16, 26, 27
40, 41 ra. 1, 46, 49, 50, 53, 54, 56,
57, 58, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66 ra. 1, 73
ra. 2, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 89 rare.
3, 4, 90, 91, 94 rere. 1-3, 95, 97, 98,
99, 101, 103 n. 5, 104, 105, 106 nn.
1, 2, 107, 108 n. 1, 109, 110 n. 1,
113 re. 2, 114 nn. 2, 3, 115 n. 2,
116 n. 2, 118 n. 5, 119, 123, 124
n. 3, 128, 131, 144 n. 8, 147 n. 4,
148 ra. 1, 159 re. 3, 160 n. 1, 207,
208 n. 2, 215 re. 2, 219 n. 1, 220

Hittites, the, Mithras worshipped Toy,
1272 B.C., i. lxii; mentioned in
Sargon's omen-tablets, i. 114;
Mithras linked with Varuna among,
ii. 248

Hogarth, D. G., quoted, i. 14, 18 re. 4,
27; ii. 29

Homer, reading-book of Asiatics post
Alexander, i. 8 n. 1 ; gods of, wor-
shipped by Graeco-Indian kings, L
17 ; their indifference to mortals, i.
57; shows forth Christian doctrine
of Father and Son, i. 47 n. 3 ; puri-
ficatory rites unknown to, i. 121;
the popular theology of, i. 124 ; the
father of gods and men in, i. 185;
claimed as divinely inspired, ii. 15 ;
writings of, used by Ophites, ii. 54 ;
quoted, i. 57 nn. 1, 2, 59, 95, 96
re. 1 ; ii. 15 n. 4, 16 n. 1

Homeric Hymns, publicly recited and
perhaps displaced by Orphic, i. 135 ;
quoted, i. 16 re. 5, 40 n. 2, 59, 124

71. 3

Homoou8ios, word first used by

Gnostics, ii. 23 n. 1, 91 n. 2
Honour, King of, in neo-Manichaeism,

ii. 325
Horace, perhaps known to Basilides,

ii. 91 n. 5; quoted, i. 108; ii. 225,

228


Horaios, ruler of planetary sphere in
Diagram, ii. 69, 70; address to,
ii. 74. See Oreus

Hormisdas or Ormuz, the Shah, ii.
281

Horus, the god, king of Egypt
incarnation of, i. 18, 19, 51 ; in
Alexandrian legend of Isis and
Osiris, i. 34, 35; originally totem
of royal tribe, i. 36, 37, 45; ana-
logue of Iacchos, i. 43, 189 n. 5;
identified with Apollo, i. 48 ; child
form of, in Alexandrian religion, i.
50; Ptolemies raise temples to
Egyptian form of, i. 52 ; Athenian
dandies swear by, i. 54; Egyptian
sun-god, i. 63; in Alexandrian re-
ligion, Osiris reborn, i. 70 n. 3;
ii. 39, 63; festival of birth of,
i. 71 ; a triune god, i. 88, 189 n. 5;
symbolizes perceptible world image
of ideal, i. 198

Horus, the Limit of the Pleroma, a
Valentinian Aeon, ii. 105 ra. 2; in
system of Pistis Sophia, ii. 140 n. 2.
See Stauros

Horus-Ra, the god, composite deity
who replaces Horus in Middle
Empire, i. 63 ra. 3

Housesteads (Northumberland), Mith-
raic monuments at, ii. 242

Huesemigadon, name of Pluto in
Magic Papyri, i. 99, 100

Hummama, name of Manichaean
Satan, ii. 287 n. 4t

Huxley, the late Prof., his controversy
about Genesis, i. liii

Huysmans, J. K., revives patristic
stories of profanation of Eucharist,
i. 198

Hyades, in Chaldaean astrology, i. 113

Hymn of the Soul, said to be Mani-
chaean, ii. 331

Hymns, sung by Athenians to De-
metrius Poliorcetes, i. 19; Greek
confraternities compose, i. 21 n. 1;
to Iacchos sung by procession of
initiates, i. 39 ; used in Alexandrian
worship, i. 66, 72, 75; to Hermes
and other gods in Magic Papyri, i.
99 ; to Attis and others, i. 137 n. 1 ;
ii. 54; the collection of Orphic,
i. 141 ; to Eros sung by Lvcomidae
in Mysteries, i. 141 ra. 2: ii. 210 re.
1 ; of Synesius, quoted, ii. 37 ra. 1 ;
Ophites', addressed to First Man,
ii. 61 ; Bardesanes', used in Catholic
Church, ii. 120; the penitential, of
Pistis Sophia, ii. 156; sung by
legionaries to both Christ and


Index


:k->


Mithras, ii. 261; used by Mani-

chaeans, ii. 331
Hypsistos or the Highest, name of

Yahweh in Asia Minor (Cumont),

ii. 31, 85 w. 3; applied by Valen-

tinus to Demiurge, ii. 116 n. 2
Hyrcanus, John, high-priest of Jews,

invades Samaria and destroys it,

i. 177

Iaccheion, the, at Athens, starting-
point of procession to Eleusis, i. 39

Iacchos, the god, leader of procession
to Eleusis, i. 39 ; his identity with
Dionysos, i. 39 n. 2, 40 n. 4, 130,
145; son of Zeus and Demeter,
i. 40; analogy of his birth with
that of Horus, i. 43, 125 ; Orphics
identify him with Hades, Zeus
Chthonios and Zagreus, i. 130;
and with Eubuleus, Cybele, Aphro-
dite and Tsis, i. 137 ft. 1, 143;
and with Sabazius, i. 138 n. 2;
the father, son, and spouse of
Persephone, i. 189 n. 5

Ialdabaoth or Jaldabaoth, the Ophite
Demiurge and a "fourth number,"
i. 100 n. 4; ii. 46, 47, 70 n. 2, 71
w. 1 ; his name, variants, attributes,
and places, ii. 46, 69; the god of
the Jews, ii. 47 ; ruler of planetary
spheres ap. Ophites, ii. 48, 64;
father of Ophiomorphus, ii. 49;
creator and tempter of man, ii. 51,
52; his commands disobeyed by
protoplasts, ii. 52 ; lawgiver of Jews,
ii. 53; souls of "animal" men
pass through his realms between
incarnations, ii. 57; his attempts
to prolong his rule defeated by
Sophia, ii. 58, 59; birth of Jesus
arranged without knowledge of,
ii. 59; contrives death of Jesus,
ii. 60 ; his seven heavens called the
holy hebdomad (Irenaeus), ii. 64;
fragments of light pass into the
terrestrial world without know-
ledge of, ibid. ; creator of world of
form, ii. 64 ra. 3 ; name taken from
magic ap. Origen, ii. 69 ; his seven
worlds copied by Ophiomorphus
as in Ophite Diagram, ii. 70; ad-
" ress to, ii. 72 ; uncertain place of,
74 n. 3, 75 n. 1 ; inspires Hexa-
euch, Amos and Habakkuk ap.
)phites, ii. 81 ft. 2 ; corresponds to
"le Great Archon of Basilides, ii. 94 ;
id to Valentinus' Demiurge, ii.
107 ft. 2 ; in Pistis Sophia degraded
ito evil power sent into Chaos, ii.

L. ii.


155, 158 ; in Bruce Papyrus a chief
of Third Aeon, ii. 165 n. 3; in
Texts of Saviour a torturer in hell
ibid, and 186; Adamas helps him
to torment Pistis Sophia, if. 166;
his light deceives her, ii. 162;
his place given to Pistis Sophia!
u. 162 n. 3; various spellings of
name of, in Texts of Saviour, ii
183 n. 2. -See Habakkuk, Iren-
aeus

Ialdazao, either a variant of name of
Ialdabaoth or El Shaddai, ii 46
n. 3

Iamblichus, the neo-Platonist, says
Egyptian magicians threaten their
gods, i. 104

lad, in Magic Papyri, corruption of
name Jehovah, i. 105, 106; ruler
of planetary sphere in Diagram,
it 47, 69 ; a Hebrew name of God
(Origen), ii. 69, 71 n. 1 ; name of
Dionysos in late classical writers,
ii. 71 ra. 1; address to, ii. 72;
connection with moon, ii. 72 n. 3,
74 n. 2; used as acrostic in Texts
of Saviour, ii. 180 ra. 4

Iao, the Good, in Pistis Sophia, the
Little, supplies power for soul of
St John Baptist, ii. 138, 149; the
Great, a ruler of the Middle and
colleague of Virgin of Light, ii.
150; his connection with moon,
ii. 150 ra. 5

Iapetus, brother of Saturn, identified
by Christian writer with Japhet,
i. lx

India, Alexander's exploits in, i. 5, 13;
sorcerers in modern, i. 92, 99 n. 1 ;
Ophites spread to, ii. 76 ; Mithraic
monuments in, ii. 230; Mithras
worshipped in Vedic, ibid. ; Manes
said to have preached in, ii. 281 ;
Manes says Buddha sent to, ii. 307 ;
becomes acquainted with Bud-
dhism in, ii. 313

Ineffable One, the, of the Pistis Sophia
contains the First Mystery, ii. 139 ;
his "receptacles" issue from his
last limb, ii. 139 ». 2, 144 n. 3;
lesser powers make up his name. ii.
140; Great Light his Legate, ii.
141; the Bythos of the Ophites
and Valentinus, ii. 144, 158 ; First
Mystery proceeds from last limb of,
ii 145; the footless God of Truth,
ii. 145 n. 2; his heaven, ii. 146;
perfect initiates will eventually
become members of, ii. 164, 170;
the Mystery or Sacrament of, ii.

25


386


Index


166; its saving grace, 164 n. 6,
167, 169, 170, 171; confined to
Pneumatics only, ii. 173; an
Egyptian conception, ii. 175;
fragmentary attempt to describe
members of, ii. 180. See Name

Ionia, philosophic teaching in, tends
to theocrasia, i. 15 ; probable source
of Orphic legends, i. 124 ; tradition
of, that water origin of all things,
ii. 36; dualism of, probably
derived from Persia, ii. 290 n. 2

Irenaeus, Saint, bishop of Lyons, his
Trinitarian views unorthodox, i. 89
n. 1 ; explains number of beast as
Nero Caesar, i. 169 n. 3 ; his garbled
account of Simon's teaching, i. 187-
191, 193; makes Menander im-
mediate successor of Simon, i. 199 ;
his account of Marcus the magician,
i. 202; ii. 9 ra. 1, 129, 183 n. 1;
makes Nicolaitans of Apocalypse
Gnostics, ii. 1 ; his work against
heresies, ii. 10 ; exaggerates diver-
sity of Gnostics, ii. 14; authority
for Docetism of Basilides, Saturnius
and Valentinus, ii. 17 ; his mistake
regarding "Colarbasus," ii. 20 n. 1 ;
his account of Ophite doctrines,
ii. 26 n. 5, 40, 42, 43, 46-51, 53 ;
identifies Sethians with Ophites,
ii. 27 n. 1, 76; calls highest heaven
of Ophites the true Church, ii. 43 ;
sole authority for Jaldabaoth's
boasting, ii. 51 ; his interpolations
in primitive Ophite doctrine, ii. 53,
57, 58, 60 n. 1, 61 n. 1 ; says Jesus
lived on earth for 20 years after
Resurrection, ii. 61 n. 1 ; makes
Ophites source of most later
heresies, ii. 76; authority for
division of Ophites as to character
of serpent, ii. 78; Ophites of,
ascribe Old Testament to planetary
powers, ii. 81 n. 2 ; notes connection
of heresiarchs with each other, ii.
89; writes to refute Valentinians,
ii. 95 ; his mockery of Valentinus'
system of Aeons, ii. 99 ; his account
of Valentinian doctrines, ii. 107-112,
117, 119, 126; writes after death
of Valentinus, ii. 131 ; with Tatian,
first to quote from St John's Gospel
by name, ii. 178 n. 1 ; says Valen-
tinians will not call Jesus Lord,
ii. 180 7i. 3, 189; says Marcion
disciple of Simon Magus, ii. 207;
his account of Tatian's doctrines,
ii. 220; quoted, i. 176 n. 1, 178 n.
4, 187, 190, 191, 198, 199; ii. 1 n. 4,


8 n. 3, 9 n. 1, 15 n. 2, 17, 18 n. 1,
20 re. 1, 27 w. 1, 38 n. 1, 41 7i. 2, 42
n. 5, 43 n. 1, 44, 45 n. 1, 46 nn. 1, 2;
47 nn. 2, 3; 48, 49 n. 1, 50 n. 2,
51, 52 nn. 1, 3, 53 n. 1, 58 nn. 1,
2; 59, 60, 61. 64 n. 2, 78, 81 n. 2,
89 7i. 3, 90, 92 7i. 3, 93 n. 1, 94 n. 1,
96, 98 7i7i. 3-5; 99, 107 n. 4, 108
n. 1, 109 7i. 1, 110 nn. 1, 2, 111 n. 1,
112 nn. 2, 3; 116 n. 1, 117 n, 2,
118, 119 nn. 1, 3; 120, 121, 126,
127 7i. 4, 128, 138 n. 1, 140 n. 1, 144
7i. 1, 152 n. 1, 159 n. 3, 166 n. 2,
173 n. 3, 179 re. 7, 180 n. 3, 183 n. 1,
189 n. 1, 207, 214 n. 3, 220

Isaac, God of, invoked by magicians,
ii. 34

Isaiah, the Prophet, hostility to
Gentiles in post-Exilic passages of,
i. 165, 167 n. 4

Isaiah, Ascension of, Sammael name
of Satan in, ii. 75 n. 1 ; vestures
used for heavenly nature in. ii.
136 n. 1; its date, ii. 154 n. 4;
ecpyrosis in, ii. 163 n. 3; souls
passing from one heaven to another
must give password, ii. 177 n. 2;
quoted, ii. 154 n. 4, 163 n. 3

Ishtar, the goddess, legend of her
Descent into Hell, i. 100 ; analogies
of her lover Tammuz with Orphic
Dionysos, i. 122 n. 3; name of
Atargatis derived from (Garstang),
ii. 31 n. 1, 45 n. 1; personification
of Earth, ibid. ; identified with
Ophite Sophia, ibid. ; and with
Manichaean Mother of Life, ii. 300
re. 1. See Cybele

Isidore, son of Basilides, his doctrine
derived from Matthias the Apostle
(Hippolytus), ii. 90

Isis, the goddess, worship of the Greek,
an ethical religion, i. xlix n. 1;
her wanderings in search of the
murdered Osiris, i. 34; Nephthys,
twin sister and reflection of, i. 35;
in early Pharaonic Egypt only a
magician, i. 38; in Phrygia and
Syria, mother of all living, ibid. ;
analogy of her wanderings with
those of Demeter, i. 40, 43; in
Pharaonic Egypt wears cow's head,
i. 45; the Greek, identified with
Demeter. i. 48; her breast-knot
and 8istrum, i. 49; Isis suckling
Horus, i. 50; Marcus Volusius
disguised as priest of, i. 53;
oaths by, fashionable in Athens
temp. Menander, i. 54 ; her names
and titles in address to Lucius, i.


Index


387


56; the haven of peace and altar
of pity, i. 57; ii. 158; initiation
into Mysteries of, i. 61-63; her
child the Sun, i. 63; ii. 245;
Osiris sometimes called her son,
i. 63; both mother and father of
other gods, i. 65, 143; statue of,
dressed like Catholic Madonna, i.
66; silent adoration of image of,
i. 67 ; frescoes of scenes in worship
of, i. 67-69; her connection with
moon, i. 68 ra. 3 ; her seeking for
Osiris acted publicly, i. 70; the
festival of the ship of, i. 71-74;
the great earth -goddess, i. 73, 126;
ii. 45 n. 1, 300 n. 1 ; "one, who art
all things," i. 75 ; seven temples of,
in Rome, i. 79; statue of, in
lararium of Alexander Severus, i.
82; her last Roman worshippers,
i. 83; emblems of virility used in
worship of, i. 83; conversion of
worshippers of, to Christianity, i.
84 ; entry of features of ritual of,
into Catholic Church, i. 84, 85, 87 ;
tonsure of priests, etc., derived
from, i. 84; Trinitarian doctrine
of, i. 88; Horus at once son and
spouse of, i. 189 ra. 5; ii. 39;
Simon Magus may derive some of
his doctrines from religion of, i.
198; Phrygian Mother of Gods
identified with, ii. 31; Egyptian
legend of Ra and, i. 38 ra. 2;
analogy of, with Ophite Sophia,
ii. 45 ra. 1. See Menander, Menu-
this

Isium of Pompeii built 150 B.C., i. 53

Isopsephism. See Berossos, lao,
Number (of Beast)

Israel, to enslave Gentiles, i. 165, 166,
167 n. 4; her monotheism, i. 184

Issus, the battle of, i. 7

Italv, break-up of Pythagorean school
in, i. 122

Izates, King of Adiabene, his Jewish
proclivities, ii. 278 ra. 1

Izeds, the, or Yazatas of the Avesta,
Mithras made chief of, in Sassanian
reform, ii. 232, 270 ra. 3

Jabezebuth, name of Beelzebuth in

Magic Papyri, ii. 108 ra. 1
Jabraoth, ruler of the obedient Aeons

in Pistis Sophia and Bruce Papyrus,

ii. 152 ra. 1, 182
Jackson, Prof. A. V. Williams,

authority for late date of Avesta,

i. lxii
Jacob, Apocrypha attributed to sons


of, i. 163; contrasted with Esau,
i. 164 ra. 2 ; the seed of, oppressed,
i. 166; god of, invoked by magi-
cians, ii. 34

Jaldabaoth. See Ialdabaoth

Jaluha, "receiver" of Sabaoth Adamas
in Texts of Saviour, ii. 187

James, "the brother of the Lord,"
said to transmit Ophite doctrines
to Mariamne, ii. 26

Janet, M. Pierre, quoted, i. 110

Japan, instance of Oriental nation
Europeanized, i. 8

Japhet, the Patriarch, confused with
Iapetus, i. lx

Jason of Tralle8, aots Euripides'
Bacchus to Parthian audience
temp. Crassus, i. 8 ra. 1

Jehovah, seven vowels cover name of,
i. 103 ra. 2; name used in Magio
Papyrus, i. 106; ii. 34; lao
perhaps represents, ii. 71 ra. 1. See
Tetragrammaton, Yahweh of Israel

J6quier, M. Gustave, quoted, i. lxi ra. 3

Jeremiah, the Prophet, says Jeru-
salem worships stars, i. 186 ra. 2;
says Jews sacrifice to Mother of
Gods, ii. 32; quoted, ii. 32 n. 2

Jeremias, Dr Alfred, his astral theory,
i. 115 ra. 1

Jerome, St, Indiculus de Heresibus
attributed to, ii. 25

Jerusalem, Ptolemy Soter captures, i.
151 ; in Enochian literature repels
final assault of Gentiles, i. 161 ;
prophecy that Gentiles shall re-
build, i. 165; rivalry between
temple of, and Mt Gerizim, i. 177 ;
destruction of same temp. Titus,
ii. 4; idolatry in, ii. 32; heaven
of Ophite Sophia called the Hea-
venly, ii. 108 ra. 3, 109, 114, 124;
angel spouses of human souls citi-
zens of (Valentinus), ii. 110 n. 1

Jesuits. See Loyola, Ignatius

Jesus, said to have been Essene
(Julicher), i. 156; acrostic name
of, i. 169 ra. 1 ; Alpha and Omega
name of, i. 171 ra. 1 ; Simon Magus
appears to suffer in likeness of, i.
192; ii. 16; Apocryphal sayings
of, in Gospel of Egyptians, etc.,
i. 196 n. 2; ii. 219; His unfulfilled
promise of Second Advent, ii. 3;
analogy of His Passion and that of
Osiris, ii. 6 ; tradition of revelations
by, after Resurrection, ii. 13, 90
n. 3 ; historicity of, never doubted
by Gnostics, ii. 15; Gnostics' diffi-
culties as to Passion of, ii. 16;

25—2


388


Index


Docetic view as to body of, ii. 17 ;
Unitarian views of, among modern
Nonconformists, ii. 20; called the
Angel of the Great Council, ii. 43
to. 2; tradition as to prolonged
earthly life of, ii. 61 to. 1 ; Sethians
of Hippolytus do not mention, ii.
76 ; Gospel of Nicodemus describes
visit to Hades of, ii. 90. See
Christ
Jesus, the Ophite, birth of, from
Virgin Mary arranged by Sophia, ii.
53, 59, 60 ; salvation only attainable
through, ii. 56; body of, contains
parts from all three worlds, ii. 59 ;
Christos and Sophia descend into,
ii. 60; teaches on earth for 18
months after Resurrection, ibid. ;
in Naassene psalm, brings mys-
teries to earth, ii. 62, 63, 65;
abandons earthly body at Ascen-
sion, ii. 65; the True Gate, ii.
73 to. 3 ; identified with great god
of Greek Mysteries, ii. 82
Jesus, the Valentinian, the Joint
Fruit of Pleroma and Great High
Priest, ii. 106, 159; spouse of
Sophia Without, ii. 106, 113, 114;
matter made through, ii. 107 ;
transforms passions of Sophia
Without, ibid. ; a third deity sent
for salvation of psychics, ii. 113-
115; Valentinians disagree as to
body of, ii. 115 to. 2, 116, 119;
earthly actions of, mere symbols,
ii. 124; never called Lord, ii. 136
to. 2, 180 to. 3; name of, includes
Pleroma, ii. 166 to. 2
Jesus, the, of the Pistis Sophia, finds
rulers of stars devouring their own
matter, i. 196 to. 1; ii. 154; one
with his disciples, ii. 80, 164;
teaches on earth for 11 years after
Crucifixion, ii. 135 ; his ascent into
firmament and return, ii. 136;
describes births of Himself, St John
Baptist, and Apostles, ii. 137-139;
address of powers to, ii. 139-143;
the First Mystery, ii. 144, 159, 161,
171; other powers His members,
ii. 145 ; rule of, during Millennium,
ii. 146, 164, 171; body of, comes
from Barbelo, ii. 151 ; shortens
times for elect's sake, ii. 155;
defeats Pistis Sophia's enemies and
takes her from Chaos, ii. 156;
words of, recorded by Philip,
Thomas, and Matthew, ii. 157;
brings mysteries to earth for man's
salvation, ii. 158 ; all worlds made


through, ii. 161, 162; the victim
in the Eucharist, ii. 171, 172
Jesus, the, of the Texts of the Saviour,
called Aberamentho, i. 102 n. 1 ;
repeats words of Basilides, ii. 92
to. 3, 189; his magical invocation
of his father, ii. 180; shows Middle
Way and its tortures, ii. 182;
celebrates thaumaturgic sacrament,
ii. 183; merely a mystagogue, ii.
198 ; appeals to fears and cupidity
of disciples, ibid.
Jesus, the, of the Bruce Papyrus,
celebrates thaumaturgic sacra-
ments, ii. 193; teaches on earth
for 12 years after Crucifixion,
ibid. ; merely a mystagogue, ii.
198
Jesus, the, of Marcion, son of Supreme
Being, but not of Mary, ii. 208,
210; Paul only real apostle of,
209, 211 ; slain with connivance of
Demiurge, ii. 210; Docetic view as
to body of, ii. 211; Marcionites
differ as to body of, ii. 219; and
as to His nature, ii. 220
Jesus, the, of Manichaeism, Saviour
sent to Adam, ii. 303; maker of
Great Wheel, ii. 306; sent for
man's salvation and relief of
Omophorus, ibid. ; the Tree of
Knowledge in Paradise, ii. 307;
messenger of God like Zoroaster,
Buddha, and Mani, ii. 316; Docetic
view as to body of, ii. 318; J.
Patibilis is the soul diffused through
nature, ii. 318; perhaps equated
with Virgin of Light in neo-Mani-
chaeism, ii. 323 to. 4, 330; role in
same of him and of the Burkhans
or Buddhas, ii. 330; Son of First
Man, ii. 339 to. 3
Jeu, in Pistis Sophia, the First Man
and arranger of the Cosmos i. lxi;
takes power from the last Pura-
states, ii. 146 to. 3, 164 ; the overseer
of the Light, ii. 147; Father of
Sabaoththe Good, ii. 149; in Texts
of Saviour, binds rebellious aeons
in sphere, ii. 152 n. 1 ; transfers
repentant aeons to places between
the Middle and Left, ii. 182; binds
power from Pistis Sophia in planet
Venus, ii. 186; in Bruce Papyrus
appears with Melchisidek and other
powers, ibid. 186; he and his fol-
lowers arranged in similar order to
higher powers, ii. 191 to. 2; called
the Great Man, King of the Aeon,
ii. 193


\


Index


:mi


Jeu, the Books of, written by Enoch
in Paradise/ii. 147 n. 5 ; seals and
defences for inferior initiates said
to be described in, ii. 165 ; mysteries
of the Light described in, ii. 173;
Schmidt's theory that these are
included in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 190 ;
this theory refuted, ii. 190-194
Jevons, Dr F. B., his Hartford Lec-
ture quoted, i. liv
Jews, the, their division into three
sects, i. lv, 151 ; their sacred books
translated into Greek, post Alex-
ander, i. 9; their resistance to
Antiochus Epiphanes, i. 51 ; their
pronounced monotheism, i. 89, 149 ;
the magicians of the poorer classes '
in Rome, i. 108; their Sabbath
influenced by astrological ideas, i.
117; only clergy, paupers and
fanatics among, return from Cap-
tivity, i. 149 n. 2, 172; their
critical position post Alexander, i.
150 ; conquered by Ptolemy Soter,
go over later to Antiochus the
Great, i. 151 ; Old Testament made
familiar to, by Septuagint, i. 157;
their belief in power of name, i.
158; ii. 33; Messianic hopes of,
and their result, i. 159-163;
Apocrypha inspired by same, i.
163-167 ; fanaticism of Palestinian,
i. 172 ; Jews of Dispersion inclined
to compromise with Hellenism,
i. 173; secret Hellenizing among,
i. 175; ii. 32; their hatred of
Samaritans, i. 177; astrolatry of,
before Captivity, i. 186 n. 2;
Simon Magus' doctrines appeal to,
i. 202 ; first Christians regarded as,
ii. 4; unpopularity of, leads to
Christian separation from, ii. 5;
their influence on Gnosticism
doubtful, ii. 9 ; accused by Church
of filthy rites, ii. 18; privileges of,
under Diadochi, ii. 28; their
influence on Anatolian religion, ii.
31; Oriental, given to magic, ii. 33 ;
Anatolian, bring method of exegesis
from Babylon, ii. 34, 35 ; Egyptian,
give male and female assessor to
Yahweh, ii. 43 n. 2; unpopularity
of, in Rome, temp. Hadrian, ii.
203, 204 ; Marcion's dislike of, ii.
210, 211; Hemerobaptists' dislike
of, ii. 305 ; Manes' dislike of, ii. 315.
See Cabala, Demiurge, Jaldabaoth,
Yahweh of Israel

all apocrypha of, said to be
Cssene (Kohler), ii. 153 n. 4, 163


Joel, the Prophet, shows hatred of
Jews for Gentiles, i. 167 n. 4

John Baptist, St, said to be Pruraio,
i. 156; Simon Magus follower of
{Clementines), i. 179; ii. 6 n. 4;
birth of, ap. Ophites, ii. 53; ap.
Pistis Sophia, ii. 137; body of,
contains soul of Elijah {P.8.), ii.
137, 149, 150. See Elizabeth,
Hemerobaptists

John the Divine, St, Cerinthuf
traditional opponent of, ii. 9 n. 1
pre-eminent place of, in next world,
ii. 164; speaks of repentant aeons
(P.S. ), ii. 182 n. 2. See Apocal !n ,*,- ;
Gospel, the Fourth, Millennium

J6k, Supreme Being of the Shilluks,
ii. 39 n. 5

Josephus, quoted, i. lv n. 2, 151,
152 n. 2, 153, 154, 155, 163 n. 1,
168 n. 2, 170, 177 ; ii. 4 n. 3, 5 n. 3,
28, 85 n. 3, 278 n. 1, 315 w. 1

Jovian, the Emperor, not a persecutor,
ii. 270

Judaism, never a rival of Christianity,
i. lv; not a world -religion, i. lvi;
entry of astrological ideas into,
i. 117; Samaritans retain little of,
i. 177; resemblance between it
and Zoroastrianism (Cheyne), i.
181 v. 1 ; attempts to reconcile
it with Hellenic culture, i. 200;
Gentiles ignore Christianity while
still a branch of, ii. 21 ; Saturninus'
hatred of, ii. 89; approach of
Mithraism to, ii. 277

Judas Iscariot, in Pistis 8ophia
apparently receives super-excellent
soul, ii. 137 n. 1. See Matthias

Julian, the Emperor, thinks Alex-
andrians worship Serapis in his
time, i. 82 n. 2, 83 ; notes hatred
of Christian sects for each other,
ii. 11; authority for religion of
Mithras, ii. 236; his eclecticism,
ii. 269; Mithraism revives tem-
porarily under, ii. 271; favours
Manichaeism, ii. 356

Juno, the goddess, identified with
Isis, i. 56 ; on Mithraic monument*,
ii. 238. See Hera

Jupiter, the god, image of Simon Ma-
gus worshipped as, i. 198; Varuna
his prototype, ii. 231; identified
with Ormuzd, ii. 237 ; on Mithraic
monument presides over assembly
of gods, ii. 238 ; invoked as
superior of Mithras, ibid. ; Jupiter
Optimus Maximus not called Or-
muzd, ii. 239; but probably his


390


Index


Roman equivalent, ii. 240, 248,
277

Jupiter, the planet, god of good winds
to Babylonians, i. 113 ; its place in
astrology, i. 116, 118 n. 1; one of
Ophites' seven heavens, ii. 48,
73 n. 1 ; ruler of lesser astral
powers in Texts of Saviour, ii. 182

Justin Martyr, celebration of Eucharist
simple, temp., i 87 ft. 1 ; finds
hidden meanings in Pentateuch
and name of Christ, i. 170 n. 5;
makes Simon the heresiarch Simon
Magus of Acts, i. 179 n. 5; says
Simon tells followers he will never
die, i. 192 n. 2; authority for
Menander's succession to Simon
Magus, i. 199 n. 7; Tatian a
disciple of, ii. 8 n. 3. 220; his
dictum on Real Presence, ii. 172;
his date, ibid. ; his Apologies, ii.
203, 204 n. 1 ; thinks his contem-
porary Marcion most formidable
enemy of Church, ii. 205, 216 n. 3 ;
says devils set on Mithraists to
imitate Church's sacraments, ii.
247 ; quoted, i. 170 n. 5, 192 ft. 2,
ii. 18 w. 2, 122 n. 1, 205, 216
n. 3, 247

Justinian I, the Emperor, makes laws
against Ophites, ii. 77 ; and against
Manichaeans, ii. 356

Justinus the heresiarch, teaches
system resembling Ophites', ii. 77;
his symbolical use of story from
Herodotus, ii. 81

Juvenal, satirizes Alexandrian religion,
i. 20, 54; describes finding of
Osiris, i. 70

Karossa, alleged name of Manes'
mother, ii. 279

Kashgar, limit of Persian Empire, i. 1 ;
Bar Khoni's bishopric, ii. 321

Kenyon, Sir Frederic, gives story of
Ptolemy son of Glaucias, i. 79, 80 ;
doubts identification of Serapis
and Esculapius, i. 87 w. 2 ; thinks
relative age of Peshitto version
still undecided, ii. 84 n. 2 ; quoted,
i. 56 n. 2, 80 n. 1, 87 n. 2, 93 n. 3,
98 ft. 1, 142 n. 1, 169 n. 2; ii.
34 w. 3, 84 nn. 2, 3

Kerasmos, the, or Confusion, in
Pistis Sophia name given to mix-
ture of Light and Matter, ii. 147,
164, 174, 292 n. 2. See Jeu

Kern, Prof. Otto, quoted, i. 141
w. 4

Kesbeel, the "number" of, i. 169


Kessler, Dr Konrad, thinks Mughta-
silah a source of Manes' doctrine,
ii. 305; his Mani quoted, ii. 280,
281 nn. 1, 3, 6, 282 n. 1. 285 n. 2,
286 nn. 3, 5, 288 n. 2, 289 n. 2,
290 n. 3, 291 n. 1, 292 n. 1, 294 n. 1,
295 wft. 1. 2, 296 n. 1, 299 nn. 2. 3,
302 n. 1. 304 n. 1, 305 n. 2, 310 n. 1,
312 ft. 2, 313 n. 1, 314 n. 2, 316 n. 1,
322 n. 1, 350 nn. 4, 5, 6

Khasekhmui, King of Egypt, makes
peace between factions of Horns
and Set, i. 36

Khent-Amentit, the god, absorbed in
Osiris, i. 33

Khepera, the god, mankind comes
from tears of, i. 126 n. 3

Khojend, probable site of Alexandria
eschata, i. 5 n. 3

Khonsu, the god, story of the Pos-
sessed Princess and, i. 10

Khorassan, Alexander's fame pre-
served in, in xvnth cent., i. 14 n. 2

Khormizta or Khormuzta. See Or-
muzd

Khrostag and Padvaktag, ii. 354, 355.
See Appellant and Respondent

Khshathra Vairya or Right Law, the
Amshaspand, i. 181 n. 1 ; set over
metals, ii. 301

Khuaxtuanift, the, confession-prayer
of Manichaeans, ii. 288 n. 3; its
discovery, ii. 334; quoted with
commentary, 335-346

Khumbaba, King of Elam, his name
perhaps reappears in Manichaeism,
ii. 287 n. 4. See. Hummama

King, C. W., thinks strings of vowels
in Magic Papyri cover name of
Jehovah, i 103 n. 2; his transla-
tion of names of Simon's "Roots."
i 180 «. 4

Kios in Bithynia, inscription identi-
fying Serapis and Zeus. i. 55
n. 3

Kohler, Dr, his views on Essene
literature, i. 153 n. 4; sees Cabala
in Philo, i. 157

Koran, the, plenary inspiration of,
i. liii ; connection of, with teaching
of Simon Magus, i. 201

Kronos, the god, in Homeric myths
successor of Lranos, i. 46; called
in Orphic hymns Son of Earth and
Heaven, i. 132 n. 1 ; age of, in
Orphic myths, i. 186

Krotzenburg, Mithraic monuments at,
ii. 245 ft. 4

Kubrik or Corbicius, name given to
Manes by Christians, ii. 279


Index


391


Kuner Valley, the, cattle of, said to
be sent by Alexander to Macedonia,
i. 4 n. 1


Labrys or Double Axe, sug

explanation of its symbolism, ii.
67 n. 3

Lactantius, quoted, i. 70, 143 n. 4;
ii. 157 n. 2, 228

Lafaye, M. Georges, his views on
Herculaneum frescoes, i. 68, 69;
and on Mithraic fragment in Magic
Papvrus, ii. 255, 256; quoted, i.
48 n. 2, 49 n. 2, 50 n. 1, 52 n. 4,
53 nn. 1-6, 54 n. 2, 55 n. 3, 67 n. 3,
68, 69, 70 n. 6, 71 n. 1, 73 n. 2,
79 nn. 1-3, 88 n. 1 ; ii. 255, 266

Lairbenos, name of Sabazius in
Phrygia, ii. 67 n. 3

Lampridius, says Commodus on initia-
tion into Mithraism commits real
murder, ii. 262

Langdon, Dr Stephen, new Creation
Tablet, i. lxiii n. 1

Lecoq, Prof. A. von, his expedition to
Turfan,ii. 316; quoted, ii. 316 n. 3,
332 n. 2, 334 n. 2, 335 n. 1, 339 n. 1,
342, 343 n. 2, 344 n. 1, 349 n. 2,
357 n. 1. See Grunwedel

Lenormant, Francois, his identifica-
tion of Dionysos with Iacchos, i.
130 n. 2

Leo the Zodiacal sign, in magical
ceremony, i. 98

Leo the Isaurian, the Emperor,
enlists Manichaeans in Imperial
armies, ii. 357

Leto, the goddess, identified with
Demeter in Asia Minor, ii. 67 n. 3

Leucius, author of Manichaean apo-
crypha, ii. 351

Leviathan, in Diagram perhaps equiva-
lent to Ophiomorphus, ii. 70, 77

Levy, Isidore M., his work on Serapis,
i. 48

Libanus, in Enochian literature,
northern frontier of Palestine, i. 165

Light, shed by Ophite Father-and-Son
on Holy Spirit,- ii. 42, 44; the
Primordial, of Ophites, ii. 46;
taken from Ialdabaoth to make
protoplasts, ii. 51 ; redemption of,
from matter (Naassene writer), ii.
58, 59, 61, 64, 65; in Pistis Sophia
years of, equal to days, ii. 164;
in Pistis Sophia term equivalent
to divine, ii. 143, 146, 148, 153,
154, 156, 164, 165, 167, 170, 171,
173, 175 n. 1, 191 n. 2; and in
Bruce Papyrus, .ii. 193; the


heavenly in Persian religion, ii.
231; name of Ormuid, ii. 234,
236 n. 4; in Manichaeism, name
of god of goodness, ii. 287, 289;
its realm described, ii. 290; how
mixed with Darkness, ii. 294, 296,
335 ; redemption of, 296, 297, 336,
339; Faustus' account of three
worlds of, ii. 319; in neo-Mani-
chaeism, ii. 321, 324; powers of,
described, ii. 325-328 ; praises sung
to, ii. 331 ; redeemed through food
eaten by elect, ii. 343, 346. See
Adamas

Light, the Great, in Pistis Sophia,
Legate of the Ineffable One, ii 141,
164

Linus, explains mysteries and is a
source of doctrinesof Sethians, i. 175

Lion-headed god of Mithraea, des-
cribed, ii. 251-253; represents
Ahriman, ii. 254 ; his place, ii. 255,
256

Livy, quoted, i. 6 n. 5, 41 n. 3

Lobeck, his Aglaophamus quoted, i.
121 n. 1, 127 n. 2

Loeb, Isidore, attributes Babylonian
origin to Jewish Cabala, ii. 35, 36

Logos, in Philo chief and source of all
powers of God, i. 174; not God,
but his reflection, i. 180 n. 3;
member of 2nd Valentinian syzygy,
ii. 98; parent of Dodecad, ii. 101,
102; Jesus also called the, by
Valentinus, ii. 110 n. 1

Loret, M. Victor, says earliest Egyp-
tian gods totemistic, i. 37 n. 2

Love. See Agape, Eros

Loyola, Ignatius, compelling power of
prayer of, i. 94 t

Lucian the Marcionite, Marcion 8
successor at one or two removes,
ii. 218 n. 2 ; his teaching, ii. 220

Lucian of Samosata, his story of
Alexander of Abonoteichos, i. 24,
199, 202; ii. 128; quoted, i. 24,
199; ii. 30 n. 3, 31, 40 n. 1, 45
n. 1, 300 n. 2

Lucius, hero of the Qolden Ass,
apparition of Isis to, i. 66; his
prayer to Isis, i. 57, 58 ; promise of
Isis' protection in next world to,
i. 69, 60; his first initiation into
Mysteries, i. 62, 63 ; his second and
third, i. 64 ; his adoration of statue
of Isis, L 67; his monotheistic
conception of her, i. 75; his com-
plete devotion to her service, l 83 ;
his metamorphosis by ointment,
i. 101 n. 2


392


Index


Lucius, German theological writer,

quoted, i. 156 n. 1
Lucius Septimius, freedman of Caesar

and Mithraist Court chaplain, ii.

268
Luebbert, his work on Pindaric

doctrine of transmigration, quoted,

i. 127 n. 3
Luther, Martin, as reformer and

founder of sect, i. 54 ; ii. 19, 199

n. 3
Lyall, Sir Alfred, his dictum on magic

and religion, i. 94 ; open dealing of

Indian sorcerers, i. 99 n. 1
Lycomidae, the, hereditary priests of

Eleusis, i. 76; sing hymns of

Orpheus in Mysteries, i. 141 n. 2;

Pausanias reads their hymns to

Eros, ii. 210 n. 1
Lydia, name of Mother of Gods in,

ii. 40, 45 n. 1
Lysimachus, King of Thrace, his wars

in Phrygia, ii. 29

Ma, the goddess, Lydian equivalent of
Demeter, i. 126; Lydian name of
Mother of Gods, ii. 40

Macaria or Blessedness, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Macariotes, member of Valentinian
Dodecad, ii. 101

Macaulay, Lord, his simile as to
religions borrowing from their
rivals, i. 84

Macedonia, its distance from Karachi,
i. 4; temples to Alexandrian gods
in, i. 53

Macedonians, inhabitants of Thrace
called, i. 136; term used for sub-
jects of Syrian Empire, i. 177

Macrinus, the Emperor, buys off
Persians, ii. 226

Macrobius, quoted, i. 48 n. 1, 49 n. 1,
52, 55 w. 1, 118

Macrocosm and Microcosm, possible
origin of theory, ii. 51 n. 1 ; in
Cabala, Zoroastrianism and Mani-
chaeism, ii. 308 n. 1 ; mentioned
by name in Tun-huang MS., ii.
353

Maenads, the, reproduce rites of
savage Thracians, i. 136

Magas, King of Cyrene, Asoka's
mission to, i. 20

Magi, the, Simon Magus' system said
to be derived from (Franck), i.
197; Mithraism derived from re-
ligion of (Cumont), ii. 232, 275;
tribe of Medes defeated by Darius
Hystaspes, ii. 233, 286; priestly


caste among Persians, temp. Hero-
dotus, ii. 234; religion of, de-
scribed, ibid. ; called Magusaeans
by Theodore of Mopsuestia, ii. 237
sacrifice to Ahriman, ii. 239
relations of Manes with, ii. 280
his most bitter opponents, ii. 280,
281, 282 ; power of, declines under
Parthians, ii. 283; is restored by
Ardeshir, ii. 284
Magic, its practice by Greek confra-
ternities, i. 23; words used in,
generally taken from dying re-
ligions, i. 87, 92 ; relations between
religion and, i. 91; practice of,
increases as religion decays, i. 92;
never entirely separated from
religion, i. 93; prayer in, used to
show knowledge, i. 95; leads to
manufacture of theogonies, cosmo-
gonies, etc., i. 96, 97; ceremonial
magic described, i. 97; examples
of spells used in, i. 98-107 ; spread
of, in Rome and Asia Minor under
Empire, i. 108; phenomena of,
partly hypnotic, i. 109; diffusion
of, leads to Gnosticism, i. 110;
Egyptian Gnosticism reverts to,
i. Ill; ii. 199; astrology connected
with, in practice, i. 113; effect of
astrology upon, i. 117, 118; magical
ideas in Orphism, i. 128; Orphics'
magical theory of initiation, i.
131-134, 139; magical practices
of Orpheotelestae. i. 140, 146;
Essenes probably practised, i. 158;
so Simon Magus and his successors,
i. 176, 198, 202; Gnostic secrecy
due to magical ideas, ii. 18;
Phrygian Jews much addicted to,
ii. 33, 34; salvation through
magical effect of Ophite initiation,
ii. 56 ; Marcus' magical sacraments,
ii. 129 ; practice of, condemned in
Pistis Sophia but taught in Texts
of Saviour, ii. 180, 183, 185; and
in Papyrus Bruce, ii. 192, 193,
195 ; common among Coptic monks,
ii. 201 ; word derived from Magi,
ii. 233, 275; religion of Magi apt
to degenerate into, ii. 235; Ahri-
man of Magi compellable by, ii.
239; practice of, by Mithraists
doubtful, ii. 275; expressly con-
demned by Mithraist Emperors,
ibid. ; and by Zend Avesta and
Manichaeism, ii. 275 n. 2; its
connection with worship of Hecate,
ii. 276 ; its appearance in Mandaite
story of protoplasts, ii. 304; con-


Index


893


demned by Manes and his succes-
sors, ii. 313, 314, 342

Magic Papyri, in European Museums
enumerated, i. 93 n. 3; ii. 34;
described, i. 97; examples of
spells from, i. 98-107; probably
written in good faith, i. 109;
names in Diagram like those in,
ii. 71 ; name of Seth in, ii. 76 n. 4;
acrostics in, ii. 84; name of Mas-
kelli in, ii. 148 n. 3; Egyptian
words in, ii. 180; mediaeval gri-
moires copied from, ii. 186 n. 3;
Mithraic fragment in, ii. 267

Magophonia, the Persian festival of,
ii. 233

Magusaeans, the, mentioned by Theo-
dore of Mopsuestia, probably Magi,

Mahaffy, Dr J. P., thinks Alexandria
not the natural centre of trade
between East and West, i. 28 n. 1 ;
compares Dynasts of Asia Minor
to mediaeval bishops and abbots,
ii. 29; quoted, i. 6 n. 5, 28 n. 1, 44
n. 2, 45 n. 1, 49 n. 2, 52 n. 1, 150
n. 2, 173 nn. 1, 2; ii. 29 nn. 2, 3, 4

Malays, magic of, mainly taken from
Arabs, i. 92

Mallet, D., quoted, i. 181 n. 2; ii. 92
n. 1, 175 n. 4

Man, the First, in Pistis Sophia,
Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism,
i. lxi ; legend of, possibly Sumerian
in origin, i. lxiii n. 1 ; Ophites call
their second god by this name, ii.
38 ; wide spread of legend of, ii. 38
n. 3 ; the Father of all, ii. 51 ; in-
voked by Holy Spirit to send
Christos to Sophia, ii. 59; hymns
to, sung by Ophites, ii. 61 ; name of
Jeu in Texts of Saviour, ii. 147 n. 5 ;
Pistis Sophia delivered after seven
prayers like Manichaean, ii. 156 n.
1 ; First Mystery of Pistis Sophia
compared to Ophite, ii. 158 ; name
of Jeu in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 193
in Manichaeism, ii. 292, 293 n. 1
his defeat by Satan, ii. 294

I delivered by Friend of the Lights,
ii. 294, 295 n. 1 ; his armour called
the soul, ii. 298 n. 2; Adam and
Eve made after image of, ii. 299 ;
sends Saviour to Adam and Eve,
ii. 300, 302, 303; son of Ahura
Mazda by Spenta Armaiti, ii. 300
n. 2; Bar Khoni's account of, ii.
302 n. 1 ; magic circle with name
of, ii. 304 ; his light forms souls of
man, beasts, birds, etc., ii. 307;


sends Wise Guide to Manic)
Perfect at death, ii. 309; Jean*
comes forth from, ap. Manet, li.
318; Third Person of Manichaean
Trinity, ii. 319 n. 1 ; in neo- Mani-
chaeism, ii. 323. See Gaydmort,
Ormuzd

Mandaites, the, or Disciples of 8t
John, possible source of Manichaean
stories of protoplasts, ii. 305;
their hatred of Christians, Jew*,
and Mahommedans, ibid. See
Hemerobaptists, Mughtasilah

Manes or Mani, the heresiarch, aims
of religion of, i. Iviii; uncompro-
mising dualism of, ii. 221, 277, 289 ;
life and death of, ii. 279-281;
his connection with Bardesanes, ii.
280 n. 7, 283; heresy of, followed
by that of Mazdak, ii. 284;
originality of doctrines of, dis-
cussed, ii. 285-287, 289; his two
principles, ii. 287-290; said to
have been one of the Mughtasilah,
ii. 305; his hatred of Jews and
their Law, ii. 315; his epistle to
Marcellus, ii. 317, 318; his gospel
and other writings, ii. 350. See
Manichaeans. Manichaeism, Thibet

Manetho, writes his Egyptian history
in Greek, i. 9; entrusted by
Ptolemy with foundation of Alex-
andrian religion, i. 44; said to
have taught astrology to Greeks,
i. 78

Manichaeans, the, confusion with
Ophites possible, i. lx ; Orphic pro-
hibitions observed by, i. 128 n. 1 ;
heavens made from evil powers
according to, ii. 44 n. 3; their
King of Glory compared to Mel-
chizidek of P.S., ii. 148 n. 3;
influence of, perhaps perceptible in
later documents of Pistis Sophia,
ii. 152 n. 1 ; divide day into 12
hours, not 24, ii. 152 n. 2 ; Langue-
doc perfects may eat only fish,
ii. 153 n. 1 ; hearers of Languedoc
put off baptism till deathbed, ii.
168 n. 6; oligarchy in Church the
aim of, ii. 175 n. 2; their relations
with Marcionites, ii. 221. 222; and
with Mandaites, ii. 305; I
division of everything into five
categories, ii. 312, 323 sqq. ; duties
of Hearer among, ii. 314; •
script of. ii. 317; pretend Trinita-
rian views among Christians, ii. 319;
take symbolical view of Crucifixion,
ii. 320; hymns of, ii. 333 ; Churches


394


Index


of, ii. 347, 349; Apocrypha of, ii.
351 ; Imperial laws against, ii. 356
Manichaeism, prominence of First
Man in, i. lxi ; and of Sophia, ii. 45
n. 1 ; Virgin of Light in, ii. 137 n. 3 ;
like Avesta, condemns magic, ii.
275 n. 2; contrasted with Mith-
raism, ii. 277, 278; opposed to
Judaism, ii. 278; first rebellion
against Ardeshir's religious reform,
ii. 284, 285 ; owes little to Egypt
or Buddhism, ii. 286; simplicity
of teaching of, ii. 287 ; its quinary
system, ii. 290, 291, 330; its cos-
mology like that of Pistis Sophia,
ii. 295 n. 1, 296 n. 1 ; its androgyne
virgin, ii. 298, 299 n. 1, 328, 329;
its system of transmigration, ii. 308 ;
teaches eternal punishment, ii. 309 ;
its Ten Commandments, ii. 314,341,
342; its Burkhans or Messengers,
ii. 336; its fasts and alms, ii. 314,
344-347 ; Constantine's enquiry
into, ii. 356; favoured by Julian
and the philosophers, ibid. ; ends
with Albigenses, ii. 357
Marathon, Iacchos-song heard be-
fore Battle of, i. 65 n. 6. See
Callias
Marcion, the heresiarch, groundless
accusations of immorality against,
i. 179 n. 2 ; ii. 206 ; differs from other
Gnostics as to aeons, i. 187 n. 2;
accusation of ambition against, ii.
8 n. 3 ; native of Pontus, ii. 9, 204 ;
his followers alter his doctrines
(Tertullian), ii. 27, 216, 217;
ignores Sophia, ii. 45 n. 1, 214;
contemporary of Valentinus, ii.
134 n. 1 ; his life and date, ii. 204,
205 ; his relations with Stoics,
ibid. ; wide- spread and longevity
of heresy of, ii. 205, 206, 216;
compared to Luther, ii. 207, 208;
his alterations of Scripture, ii. 208,
209; his Antitheses, ii. 209, 213,
223; his Supreme Being, ii. 210;
his Docetism, ii. 210, 211; his
Demiurge the God of the Jews,
ii. 211 ; his dislike of Judaism, 211,
212; his rejection of allegory, ii.
213; original nature of his teach-
ing, ii. 214; anticipation of
Protestant doctrines and practices,
ii. 215, 216 ; his views as to matter,
ii 217; his influence on Church
slight, ii. 222; Manes acquainted
with his tenets, ii. 280, 283
Marcionites, the, endure till xth cent.,
ii. 206; their practices, ii. 207;


golden age of, last half of nnd
cent., ii. 216; their divisions, ii.
216, 217; their relations with
Manichaeism, ii. 221, 222
Marcus, the heresiarch, his Cabalisms,
i. 171 n. 1; ii. 9 n. 1, 129; accusa-
tions of immorality against, i. 179
n. 2 ; ii. 9 n. 1, 99, 128 ; his conjuring
tricks, i. 202; ii. 129, 183 n. 1; a
Jew, ii. 9 n. 1 ; his supposed com-
panion Colarbasus, ii. 20 n. 1;
a Valentinian (Irenaeus). ii. 99,
128 ; his life and practices, ii. 128,
129; possible connection of, with
Texts of Saviour, ii. 187-189; and
with Bruce Papyrus, ii. 193
Marcus Aurelius, the Emperor, Alex-
ander of Abonoteichos at Court
of, i. 24; ii. 202; his generals'
victories over Persians, ii. 225.
226. See Avidius Cassius
Marcus Volusius, the aedile, his escape

in dress of priest of Isis, i. 53
Marduk, the god, called by number 50,
ii. 35 re. 4; name of, ineffable, ii.
37 n. 1. See Bel, Merodach
Mariamne, sister of Philip the Apostle,
source of Ophite tradition (Hippo-
lytus), ii. 26; mentioned in Acta
Philippi, ii. 26 n. 2 ; a sect named
after her, ibid.
Marks, the Five, the mystery of, in

Pistis Sophia, ii. 141
Marriage, rejected by Orphics. i. 128;
and by Essenes, i. 152; admitted
by Simon Magus, i. 196, 202 ; re-
jected by Ophites, ii. 79, 80; and
by Saturninus, ii. 89 ; admitted by
Valentinus. ii. 129; rejected by
Texts of Saviour, ii. 174; by
Marcion, ii. 207, 215; by certain
Mithraists. ii. 260 ; bv Manichaean
Elect, ii. 313
Mars, the god, why identified with
Ares, i. 17; on Mithraic monu-
ments, ii. 238 ; devotion of Julian
to. ii. 269. See Ares
Mars, the planet, presides over a
seventh part of terrestrial things,
i. 116; a malefic in astrology, i.
118 n. 1 ; one of the seven heavens
of Ophites, ii. 48, 74 n. 2 ; a ruler
of the sidereal world in Texts of
Saviour, ii. 182. See Correspond-
ences
Martha, the sister of Mary, inter-
locutor of Jesus in Pistis Sophia,
ii. 157
Martial, the poet, quoted, i. 54, 66,
67


Index


:«*.'»


Martyrs, position of, in Primitive
Church, i. 145 n. 1; ii. 126, 127;
distinguished from confessors, ii.
117 n. 4

Mary Magdalene, St, in Pistis Sophia
made after likeness of seven virgins
of light, ii. 150 ; chief interlocutor
of Jesus in P.S., ii. 157; her pre-
eminent rank in next world, ii.
164. See Millennium

Mary, the Virgin, statues of Isis
re- used for, i. 85 ; her worship like
that of Isis, i. 61, 62, 84, 85, 88;
birth of Jesus from, due to Sophia
ap. Ophites, ii. 53, 59; Sophia de-
scends into, ap. Valentines, ii. 115;
in Pistis Sophia Jesus speaks to, in
likeness of Gabriel, ii. 138; made
after likeness of seven virgins of
light, ii. 150; interlocutor of Jesus
in, ii. 157; suggested origin of
worship of, by Church, ii. 158;
Gnostics call her Mother of Life,
ii. 300 n. 2. See Theotokos

Mary, The Interrogations of, attempted
identification of Pistis Sophia with,
ii. 157

Masbotheans, early sect mentioned
by Hegesippus, ii. 6 n. 4

Maskelli, a ruler of demons in Texts
of Saviour, ii. 75 n. 1 ; and in
Magic Papyri, ii. 148 n. 3

Maspero, Sir Gaston, says Alexander's
deification common form in Egypt,
i. 18; thinks Apuat originally only
assessor of Osiris, i. 33 n. 2 ; doubts
existence of mysteries in Pharaonic
Egypt, i. 60 n. 5; Nu originally
the Celestial Ocean, i. 73 n. 4 ; ii. 36,
175; would identify Ostanes with
Thoth, i. 108 n. 1 ; Egyptian belief
in three worlds reflecting one an-
other, i. 197; Egyptian Ennead
varies in number, ii. 92, 176 n. 1 ;
no Egyptian spell without amulet,
ii. 168 n. 1 ; says Osirian beliefs
reproduced in Pistis Sophia, ii. 175
n. 4 ; life in next world confined to
privileged few in Egypt, ii. 198 n. 1 ;
quoted, i. lxi n. 3, 2 n. 3, 3 nn. 3, 4,
10 n. 3, 18 n. 3, 32 n. 2, 35 n. 1,
57 n. 3, 60 n. 5, 63 nn. 3, 5 ; 65 n. 1,
73 n. 4, 95 n. 3, 104 n. 3, 108 n. 1,
125 v, 3, 134 n. 3, 160 n. 4, 197 ;
ii. 36 n. 3, 48 n. 3, 75 n. 2, 92 n. 2,
153 n. 2, 160 n. 1, 168 n. 1, 175 nn.
4, 6; 176 n. 1, 177 n. 2, 184 n. 2,
189 n. 3, 196 nn. 1-5, 197 nn. 1-7,
198 n. 1, 201 n. 1, 233 n. 5
utter, Jacques, his reproduction of


Ophite Diagram, ii. 68, 70; says
Ba8ilides' followers came over to
Valentinus, ii. 93; dates death of
Basilides 135 a.d., ii. 93 n. 3;
quoted, ii. 77 n. 2, 88 n. 1, 89 n. 6,
93 n. 3, 130 n. 1, 134 n. 4, 208 *. 3,
209 7i. 1, 320 n. 3

Matter, Orphic views as to, i. 128, 147,
148; Philo's, i. 174; Simon Magus',
i. 196, 201 ; the Ophites', ii. 44 n.
2,49; the post Christian Gnostics',
ii. 64 ; Valentinus', ii. 107, 1 12 n. 2,
113; the Pistis Sophia's, ii. 151,
153, 161 n. 2; The Texts of the
Saviour's, ii. 167 n. 2 ; Cerdo's, ii.
205; Marcion's, ii. 210, 217; the
Mithraiste', ii. 250 ; the Manichae-
ans', ii. 294, 346

Matthew, Saint, the Apostle, one of
the three recorders of words of
Jesus in Pistis Sophia, ii. 157

Matthias, the Apostle, Basilides'
doctrines said to be handed down
from, ii. 90; in Pistis Sophia
perhaps destined from beginning to
supersede Judas, ii. 137 n. 1

Maury, L. F. Alfred, thinks Orphic
cosmogony taken from Ionian
philosophers, i. 124; quoted, i.
16 n. 1, 17 n. 1, 21 n. 1, 25 n. 1,
40 nn. 1, 4; 42 n, 1, 46 n. 1, 51 n. 1,
95 n. 4, 123 n. 2, 124 n. 2, 125 n. 3,
135 nn. 3, 4; 136 nn. 1, 2, 4; 147
n. 1, ii. 275 n. 2

Mazdak, antinomian heresy of, ii. 284

Mazdeism, its influence on Simon
Magus, i. 197; Mithraism not
derived from, ii. 232; opposed to
Mithraism, ii. 270. See Zoroas-
trianism

Medes, angels to, stir them up against
Jerusalem (Enoch), i. 161; Magi
tribe of non-Aryan, ii. 286

Mediterranean, the, religions of
eastern basin of, i. Iviii ; the Dying
God of, i. 37, 43 n. 3, 1 23 ; ii. 1 6, 29 ;
gods of, tend to merge in Serapis,
i. 55; Orphic legends current in
islands of, i. 122; religions of
eastern, before Orphics, i. 126 ». 3;
god of, always worshipped in
mysteries, ii. 17; and often bi-
sexual, ii. 29, 97

Megalopolis in Arcadia, statue of
Dionysos with attributes of Zeus
at, i. 125 n. 2

Megasthenes, his story of gold -digging
ants, i. 2 n. 1

Melchizidek, purifier or receiver of
the Light in Pistis Sophia, ii. 148,


396


Index


153 ; receiver of, in Texts of Saviour,
ii. 148, 186; sect of worshippers
of, ii. 148 n. 1 ; Sun and Moon
act as "receivers" of {P.S.), iL
154; placed by last Parastates
according to arrangement, ii. 191
n. 2

Melissae or Bees, priestesses of Great
Goddess and Demeter so called,
L 143 n. 4

Memphis, religious capital of Egypt
after Ethiopian conquest, i. 32;
Osiris worshipped as bull Apis at,
i. 45 ; Greek Serapeum at, divided
from native, i. 51 ; Asklepios wor-
shipped at, i. 78 n. 2, 87; recluse
in Serapeum at, i. 79, 80

Men, the god, in Orphic hymn, i. 139
n. 1 ; identified with Attis in Asia
Minor, ii. 67 n. 3

Menander, comic poet, notes fashion
for Isis- worship in Athens, i. 54

Menander, the heresiarch, successor of
Simon Magus, i. Ill, 199; Basi-
lides and Saturninus disciples of,
ii. 89, 93

Menant. Mdlle D., quoted, i. lxii n. 2 ;
ii. 232 n. 4

Mendes, Osiris worshipped as ram or
goat at, i. 45

Menuthis. medical saints succeed Isis
at, i. 86 n. 1

Mercury, the god, why Hermes called,
i. 17; caduceus of, in procession
of Isis, i. 72; on Mithraic monu-
ments, ii. 238, 258. See Hermes

Mercury, the planet, presides over
category of earthly things, i. 116;
one of the Ophite heavens, ii. 48;
the sphere of, in Diagram, ii. 73 n.
2 ; ruler of stars in Texts of Saviour,
ii. 182

Merodach or Marduk, absorbs all gods
in himself, i. 15 n. 1

Merv, may be Alexandria Margiana,
i. 5 n. 3

Mesopotamia, Mazdeism in, before
Homer, i. lxiii; Antiochus the
Great transports Jews from, into
Anatolia, ii. 28 ; Ophites in, ii. 76

Messenia, worship of Eleusinian triad
in, i. 135

Messiah, Jewish expectation of, i. 164,
165, 166. See Barcochebas

Metricos or Motherly, member of
Valentinian Dodecad, ii. 101

Metropator, the word, i. 190 n. 1

Michael, the Archangel, he and Gabriel
only angels named in O.T., i. 158;
in Book of Enoch, L 169 ; in Magic


Papyri, ii. 34; name of Ophio-
morphus among Ophites, ii. 52;
connected with planet Saturn, ii.
75; with Gabriel delivers Pistis
Sophia from Chaos, ii. 156. See
Sammael

Michar and Micheu, powers set over
Waters of Life in Papyrus Bruce,
ii. 192

Mihr Nerses, conqueror of Armenia for
Yezdegerd II, ii. 285. 336 n. 1

Milk, kid bathed in, Orphic password,
i. 134

Millennium, the, in Pistis Sophia, ii. 164

Mincopies, the, of Andamans, their
compulsion of spirits, i. 93

Minerva, the goddess, why Athena
called, i. 17; identified with Isis,
i. 56. See Athena

Minuciu8, Felix, naturalistic explana-
tion of Graeco-Roman pantheon,
i. lvii n. 1 ; makes Osiris son and
not spouse of Isis, i. 63 n. 5, 70 n. 1 ;
his Octavius quoted L 70

Miracles, of Primitive Church and
success of Christianity, i. Ii; ii.
361

Mise, Orphic name of androgyne
Dionysos, i. 47, 137 n. 1 ; Orphic
hymn to, i. 143 ; Persephone called
Mise Kore, i. 143 n. 1

Mitannians, the, Mithras worshipped
by, i. lxii; ii. 231; a branch of
Hittites (Winckler), ii. 231 n. 2

Mithraism, its use of the number
seven, i. 117; its origin, ii. 232;
its connection with astrology, ii.
235 ; extinct before rise of Zervan-
ism, ii. 236 ; Stoic influence upon,
ii. 250, 274; half-way house
between Paganism and Christianity
(Lafaye), ii. 256 n. 3; its seven
heavens or spheres, ii. 256, 257;
aims at universal religion, ii. 258,
269; its ceremonies, ii. 259-262,
268, 269 ; its degrees of initiation,
iL 262, 263 ; a Pagan Freemasonry
(Renan), ii. 264, 269; its mystic
banquet, ii. 264, 265; ritual frag-
ment in Magic Papyrus connected
with, ii. 265-267; its priesthood,
ii. 268 ; its relations with the State,
ii. 270, 271 ; its connection with
Mazdeism obscure, ii. 270; its de-
cline and suppression, ii. 271-274;
its survivals, ii. 274, 275 ; its use of
magic and astrology, ii. 275, 276;
its contrasts with Manichaeism, ii.
277, 278; its attitude towards
Judaism, ibid.


Index


:;<>7


Mithras, worship of, pre-Christian and
ethical, i. xlix n. 1 ; most dangerouB
Pagan rival to Christian Church,
i. lxii; worshipped by Hittites or
Mitannians, i. lxii; ii. 231; small
beginnings of worship of, in West,
i. 24; equated with Serapis, i. 56;
supplants Alexandrian religion in
Imperial favour, i. 81; devotees
of. worship other gods. i. 83; ii.
269; identified with Sun (Pliny
and Macrobius), i. 118; Orphic
and Valentinian analogies of ban-
quet of, ii. Ill n. 1; arrival of
worship of, in West, ii. 228, 229;
monuments of, where found, ii. 230 ;
who Mithras was, ii. 230, 231 ; hia
place in Zend A vesta, ii. 231, 232;
in Herodotus and Plutarch, ii. 234 ;
lost books on, ii. 235, 236; Zer-
vanist theory of (Cumont), ii.
236, 237, 252; Jupiter 0. M. his
only superior in pantheon, ii. 238-
240; his relations with the Sun,
ii. 240-241, 243, 244 ; his birth from
a rock. ii. 241, 242; as the bringer
of rain, ii. 242, 243; scenes with
Bull, ii. 243 ; his alliance with Sun,
ii. 243, 244; "Mithras my crown"
(Tertullian), ii. 245, 263; in
Tauroctony, ii. 245-247; the
Banquet, and creation of animals,
ii. 247, 248 ; the Demiurge, ii. 248,
249; the fieuLT-q% or Mediator, ii.
249; his relations with Ahriman
and Hecate, ii. 250-254; and with
Cybele, ii. 258, 259, 269; Tauro-
bolium taken into worship of, ii.
259 ; his relations with Alexandrian
religion, ii. 259, 260; and with the
Mysteries of Eleusis, ii. 260
and with Christianity, ii. 261 ;
his chapels and rites, ii. 261, 262,
268, 269 ; monotheism of religion
of, ii. 273; name of, reappears in
neo-Manichaeism, ii. 324 n. 1. See
Izeds

Mithridates, King of Pontus, his
temporary power in Asia Minor,
ii. 29; Sinope his capital, ii. 204;
reaction towards Persian nation-
ality during his wars with Rome,
ii. 225; Magi of Asia Minor his
supporters, ii. 229

Mixis or Mixture, member of Valen-
tinian Decad, ii. 101

Mohammed or Muhammad, receives
Koran from Allah, i. liii; religion
of, admittedly propagated by
human means, i. liv; commanding

I


personality of, i. 54 ; his Arabs aim
at universal dominion, i. 160

Mohammedanism, scientific study of,
and its results, i. Ii; to Gnostic,
merely veil, ii 18; takes its ideas
of Christianity from heretio. ii.
283 n. 4

Moira, individual fate or cause of
death in Texts of Saviour, ii. 184

Monceaux, M. Paul, quoted, i. 121 n. 1.
123 nn. 2, 4, 125 n. 3, 131 n. 4,
137 n. 5, 139 n. 3

Monogenes, confusion with noroyirrtt"
rot, i. 124 n. 3 ; ii. 15, 98 n. 2 ; Bar
Coziba called, i. 124 n. 1 ; expresses
Gnostic conception of nature of
Jesus, ii. 15, 16; name of Nous,
first offspring of Bythos in system
of Valentinus, ii. 98; member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101 ; Christ
and Holy Spirit put forth by
(Irenaeus), ii. 105 n. 1

Monoimus Arabs, the heresiarch, ii. 9;
uses words found in Naassene or
Ophite writer, ii. 41 n. 1

Montanist heresy, the, most formid-
able to Church save Gnosticism,
ii. 29 n. 1. See Tertullian

Moret, M. Alexandre, description of
daily rites in Egyptian templet,
i. 66 ; quoted, i. 66 n. 1 ; ii. 139 n.
2, 153 n. 2, 175 n. 5

Morocco, monuments of Alexandrian
religion found in, i. 53

Moses, the patriarch, religion of, i. liv ;
Law of, broken by magicians,
i. 107 ; pseudepigraphical books of,
i. 163; devotion of Essenes to,
i. 168 n. 2; writings of, not
intelligible without mystic insight
(Justin Martyr), i. 170 a. 5;
adherence of rich Jews of Disper-
sion to Law of, L 173; reverence
of Essenes for, i. 168; and of
Samaritans, L 177; and of Simon
Magus, i. 188; divine inspiration
claimed for, ii. 15; magical book
ascribed to, ii. 46 n. 3

Moses, The Assumption of, edited by
Dr Charles, i. 164; comes from
Essene School, i. 167 n. 6; quoted,
L 166, 168 n. 1, 170 n. 2

Moses of Chorene, mentions Zervan
as equivalent of Shem, i. lx

Mother of the Gods. See Aphrodite,
Atargatis, Cybele, Ishtar, Ibis,
Mother of Life, Ramsay, Sophia

Mother of Life, the, the Great Goddess
of Western Asia, ii. 46 n. 1, 299 n. 1,
300 n. 2; Mater vivtntium, ii. 135


398


Index


n. 3 ; in Manichaeism, ii. 293 n. 1,
302 n. ; rescues First Man, ii. 294,
295 7i. 1; forms link with many-
systems, ii. 300 n. 2 ; with other
powers sends Jesus to Adam, ii. 303 ;
auonvmous in neo-Manichaeism, ii.
323. " See Nahnaha

Moulton, Prof. Hope, his Hibbert
Lectures quoted, i. lxii «. 2: ii.
110 n. 1, 231 n. 1, 258 n. 3

Mount of Olives, the, place of Ascen-
sion in Pistis Sophia, ii. 136, 139,
146, 157

Mughtasilah, the, Mandaites, Hemero-
baptists or Disciples of St John
described, ii. 305 ; an extant sect,
ibid. ; go back to reign of Trajan,
ibid. ; their hatred of Christians,
Jesus, and Mahommedans, ibid. ;
possible source of some of Manes'
doctrines, ibid.

Murray, Prof. Gilbert, his translation
of Orphic gold plates quoted, L
132, 133

Musaeus, address to, in Orphic hymns,
i. 139 n. 1, 142; associated with
Orpheus, the expounder of
Mysteries, i. 175

Musonius, Rufus, exercises care of
souls, ii. 87

Mycenae, Double Axe in worship of,
ii. 67 n. 3

Mystery, the First, the Great Power
of the Pistis Sophia, ii. 135; the
origin of all things, ii. 139; all
other good powers his "names,"
ii. 140; his "completion" to be
fulfilled by Jesus, ii. 143 ; a Twin
Mystery, ii. 144 ; Jesus the, looking
outwards, ii. 144, 161 ; proceeds
from last limb of Ineffable One,
ii. 145; his "receptacle" or
heaven, ii. 146; commands Jesus
to help Pistis Sophia, ii. 156;
corresponds to Father-and-Son of
Ophites, ii. 158 ; sees to emanation
of universe, ii. 161; the "mys-
teries" (i.e. sacraments) of, ii. 166,
167, 169, 173, 175 n. 1

Mysteries of Eleusis. See Dionysos,
Demeter, Eleusis, Eumolpidae,
Foucart, Iacchos, Mithras Perse-
phone

Naassenes, the, name of early Ophites
(Giraud), ii. 26, 74; borrow from
Simon Magus (Salmon), ii. 41 n. 1;
explanation of name as serpent
worshippers, ii. 50; their triple
nature of soul, ii. 53; frequent


Mysteries of Great Mother, ii. 58;
believe in malignity and inde-
pendence of matter, ii. 64; set
forth changes of soul in Gospel of
Egyptians, ii. 65; their priests,
ii. 66 n. 1; Philosophumena chief
authority for doctrines of, ii. 68;
the assembly of souls in each world
of, ii. 75 ; Gospel of Egyptians only
work attributed to (Hippolytus),
ii. 79 ; their allegorical interpreta-
tion of all literature, ii. 81 ; quote
Homer, Pindar etc., ii. 83; treat
poets as Puritans do Scripture, ii.
85

Nabonidus, King of Chaldaea, his
date for inscription of Sargon of
Accad, i. 114 n. 1

Nahnaha, name of Manichaean Mother
of Life, ii. 300 n. 2, 309, 323 n. 4

Name, of Alexander still famous in
East, i. 14 ; Hawk or Horus name
of Egyptian kings, i. 36; of Dio-
nysos at Eleusis ineffable, i. 47 n. 1 ;
of Osiris in Book of Dead, i. 55;
many names of Greek Isis, i. 56;
of Pluto used in magic, i. 99 ; the
like of Persephone, i. 100; Baby-
lonians use number instead of, L
100 ; ii. 35 ; Typhon's 100 lettered,
i. 104 ; carved on scarab and used
in spell, i. 106; names of angels
kept secret by Essenes, i. 157;
knowledge of, gives power over
spirit, i. 158 ; one of Simon Magus'
Roots, i. 180, 183, 185; more
powerful in magic if meaning for-
gotten, ii. 33 ; names of Yahweh
used by Jewish sorcerers, ii. 34;
name of Ophite Bythos ineffable,
ii. 37 ; instances of ineffable names,
ii. 37 n. 1 ; meaning of names of
Valentinian aeons, ii. 99, 103;
lesser powers names of First
Mystery in Pistis Sophia, ii. 140,
144; of good powers copied from
those of evil in Texts of Saviour,
ii. 148 n. 3; of Dragon of Outer
Darkness, ii. 166 n. 2; mysteries
called names of light, ii. 173 n. 1 ;
names in Jesus' address to His
Father explained, ii. 180 n. 4;
Greek names of God used in
mediaeval magic, ii. 186 n. 3;
cryptographic names in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 195; of Mithras in
Vedas, ii. 230 ; and in Zend A vesta
ii. 231 ; of Supreme God in Mithra-
ism, ii. 236-239; of lion-headed
god, ii. 252, 253; of Manes,


Index


399


Corbiciu8 or Kubrik, ii. 279 ; names
of Good and Evil Principles in
Manichaeism, ii. 289; names of
Satan in same, ii. 297, 304; of
Cross, ii. 320; of Zervan and
Ormuzd in neo -Manichaeism, ii.
323, 339 ; of Third Legate in same,
ii. 327. See Adamas, Caulacau,
Essenes, Sabol, Tetragrammaton

Namrael or Nebrod, wife of Saclas a
Manichaean fiend, ii. 329

Nannar, the god, Babylonian moon-
god and No. 30, ii. 35 n. 4, 287 n. 4

Naples Museum, copy of Bryaxis'
statue of Serapis at, i. 49 n. 2;
frescoes of Isis- worship at, i. 67;
Orphic gold plates at, i. 133, 134

Naville, Prof. Edouard, quoted, i. 33
n. 1, 57 n. 3 ; ii. 92 n. 2, 121 n. 3,
142 n. 1

Neander, J. A. W., quoted, i. lvi n. 2,
145 ». 1; ii. 9 n. 1, 124 n. 1,
125 nn. 2, 3, 205 nn. 2, 4, 206 n. 5,
207, 211 nn. 2, 4, 215 n. 1, 217 n. 1,
253 n. 2, 270 nn. 1, 2, 278 n. 2,
285 nn. 1, 4, 320 n. 3, 335 n. 1,
348 n. 2, 349 n. 1, 356 n. 1, 358 nn.
1-4

Nearchus, Alexander's admiral, i. 6

Nectanebo, King of Egypt, last of
Pharaohs, i. 32

Nemesis, Orphic hymn to, i. 142 n. 2.
See Rhamnusia

Neo -Manichaeism, doctrine of Bar
Khoni and Turf an MSS., ii. 321;
its organization and hierarchy, ii.
330; its settlement in Turkestan,
ii. 357; origin of Bogomiles,
Albigenses, etc., ibid.

Neo-Platonists, mainly post Constan-
tine, i. lvii ; tendency of, to merge
all gods in Dionysos, i. 146 n. 1

Neo-Pythagoreans, their influence on
Valentinianism, ii. 97

Nephotes, alleged letter of, to King
Psammetichus, i. 101

Nephthys, the goddess, wife of Set,
sister of Isis, and mother of Anubis,
i. 35

Neptune, the god, name of God of
Nature as sea, i. lvii. See Poseidon

Neptune, the planet, unknown in
classic times, i. 116

Nero, the Emperor, state recognition

I of Alexandrian gods temp., L 53;
his name and Number of the
Beast, i. 105 n. 2, 169 ; magic and
astrology most rife at Rome in
reign of (Renan), i. 108; Simon
Magus' fatal flight before, i. 178,


192 n. 2 ; hie favourite deity Dta
Syria, ii. 31; legend of his return
from among the Parthians, ii. 226

Nestor, his flattery of Athena
in Odyssey, i. 95

Nicaea, Trinitarian doctrine formu-
lated at, i. 89. See Athanasius

Nicocreon, King of Cyprus, answer of
oracle of Serapis to, i. 55

Nicodemu8, The Gospel of, used by
Ophites, ii. 79

Nicolaitans, the, of Apocalypse a
Gnostic sect (Irenaeus), u. 1 ;
Ophites derive their doctrine from
(St Augustine), ii. 25 ; named after
Nicolaus the Deacon, ii. 27 n. 1 ;
Ialdabaoth appears in system of,
ii. 46 n. 3. -See Epiphamus

Nicomedia, seat of Alexander of
Abonoteichos' worship of Glycon,
i. 24

Nike, the goddess, on coins of Indo-
Greek kings, i. 17 n. 2 ; on Mithraic
monuments, ii. 238

Nile, Pelusiac mouth of, i. 29; body
of Osiris thrown into, L 33, 34;
water of, in Alexandrian religion,
i. 68; allegory of Osiris as, i. 73;
water of, used in magic, i. 103

Nineveh, omen tablets from, i. 114

Nin-harsag, the goddess, makes two
creatures as patterns of mankind,
i. lxiii n. 1. -See Man, First

Ninos, priestess of confraternity con-
victed of poisoning, i. 23 n. 2

Nippur, Sumerian tablet from, and
legend of First Man, i. lxiii n. 1

Noah, the Patriarch, interference of
the Ophite Sophia in favour of, ii. 53

Nomos, the god, Orphic hymn to,
i. 142 n. 2

Nous, first of Simon Magus' "Roots,"
i. 180; name of Ophite Ophio-
morphus, ii. 49; member of First
Valentinian syzygy, ii. 98; in
Manichaeism, ii. 322 n. 2

Nu, the god, in Egypt origin of all
(Maspero), i. 73; ii. 36, 175;
perhaps identifiable with Khepera
the creator of man, i. 126 n. 3

Number, Ialdabaoth a "fourth," i.
100 n. 4; used for name of gods
in Babylonia, i. 100; ii. 35; of
Beast in Apocalypse, i. 105 n. 3,
169; neo-Pythagorean theory of
sexes of, ii. 97, 103 n. 5

Nut, the goddess, mother of Osiris and
goddess of sky, i. 33, 133 n. 1

Nyakang, secondary god of Shilluks,
ii. 39 n. 5


400


Index


Oblation, baptism of the First, in Texts
of Saviour, ii. 183, 192; its
analogues in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 193

Odysseus, speech of the dead Achilles
to, i. 59. See Ulysses

Ogdoad, the, of Valentinus, composed
of Bythos, Sige and first three
syzygies, ii. 98; aeons of. merely
names of God, ii. 99, 100 ; heaven
of Sophia called, ii. 107, 111 n. 1,
113 n. 2; Egyptian parallel to
(Maspero), ii. 175

Olympias, mother of Alexander the
Great, i. 12; first meets Philip at
Mysteries of Cabiri, i. 23, 136 n. 2

Olympius, the philosopher, defends
Serapeum of Alexandria against
Christians, temp. Theodosius, i. 84

Olympus, gods of, not rivals of Chris-
tianity, i. lvii ; Gnosticism a heresy
of religion of, i. lviii

Omophorus, world-supporting angel
in Manichaeism, ii. 297, 325, 332 ;
Babylonian prototype and classical
Atlas, ii. 298 n. 1, 332 ; Jesus comes
to earth for relief of, ii. 306 ; in neo-
Manichaeism, ii. 325

Onomacritos, earliest author of Orphic
poems, i. 121 ; possibly inspired by
Persian legends, i. 122 n. 3, 126 n. 3 ;
Buddhism reaches West after death
of, i. 135 n. 1

Ophiomorphus, serpent-shaped power
of Ophites, and son of Ialdabaoth,
ii. 49; cause of man's soul, pas-
sions, and death (Irenaeus), ii. 50;
Soul of the World, ibid. ; counsels
creation of man, ii. 51 ; cast down
to earth by Ialdabaoth, ii. 52, 75;
with his six sons forms seven
earthly demons, ii. 52, 70; called
Leviathan in Diagram, ii. 70, 77;
this world under his government,
ii. 75 ; obliteration of, among later
Ophites, ii. 77, 78

Ophites, tenets of, confused with
others by late writers, i. lx ; First
Man legend among, i. lxi; may
have drawn their ideas from same
source as Manichaeans, i. 128 n. 1 ;
Origen calls them insignificant sect,
ii. 21 n. 3; pre-Christian (Philas-
trius), ii. 25; different founders
assigned to, by Fathers, ii. 25, 26;
teaching of changes with time, ii. 26 ;
many different sects of, ii. 26, 27,
28 ; aim at combining Anatolian re-
ligion with Hellenic and Christian,
ii. 36 ; their Ineffable Supreme God
or Bythos, ii. 37; their Second


God, Light, First Man, Father-and-
Son or Adamas, ii. 38, 39; their
Holy Spirit or First Woman, ii. 40 ;
their Supreme Triad of Father,
Mother and Son, ii. 41 ; their
threefold division of all things,
ii. 42; accidental origin of world,
ii. 44; mingling of light with
matter called Sophia, ii. 45;
Sophia's Seven Heavens, ii. 46;
their names and connection with
Judaism, ii. 46, 47; with later
Ophites the seven planetary spheres,
ii. 48; their Ophiomorphus or
serpent-shaped god, ii. 49-51 ;
Adam and Eve made at suggestion
of Sophia, ii. 51 ; Fall of Man and
expulsion from Paradise to Earth,
ii. 52 ; their teaching as to soul of
man taken from heathen Mysteries,
ii. 54; of Fathers essentially
Christians, ii. 56; teach return of
world to Deity, ii. 57 ; their view
of Mission of Jesus, ii. 59, 60, 61 ;
use sacraments of baptism and
Eucharist, ii. 61 ; Ophite psalm
and its meaning, ii. 62, 63 ; their
salvation through rebirth of soul,
ii. 64, 65; their Diagram and its
use, ii. 66-70; defences of soul in
passing from sphere to sphere, ii.
71-74; their doctrine of corre-
spondences, ii. 75; their divisions
and end, ii. 76, 77 ; their influence
on Texts of Saviour, ii. 78; their
use of Apocrypha, ii. 79; and of
Canonical Books, ii. 81 ; mode of
interpretation of all literature, ii.
82; first Ophites probably un-
educated, ii. 83; anti- Jewish, and
reverence for Jewish Scriptures
probably due to their magical use,
ft. 84, 85 ; analogies of their teaching
with Saturninus', ii. 89; and with
Valentinus', ii. 96, 100, 109;
differences between their teaching
and Valentinus' as to soul of man •
and its salvation, ii. 111-115;
that of Pistis Sophia resembles both
Ophite system and Valentinus', ii.
135; Ophite cosmology explains
"Five Words" of P.S., ii. 143;
Supreme Being of P.S. like those
of Ophites, ii. 143, 144, 145;
degradation of lower Ophite powers
in P.S. r ii. 155 n. 3, 158; cos-
mologies of P. S. and Ophites con-
trasted, ii. 160, 161 ; lower initiates
in P.S. must exhibit seal like, ii.
165; resemblance of Eucharistic


Index


401


ideas in P.S. with Ophites', ii. 171;
Ophites' ideas as to descent of soul
through planetary spheres in Mith-
raism, ii. 256 ; cosmogony of Manes
like that of Ophites, ii. 290 n. 4.
See Evander, Naassenes

Oreus, ruler of planetary sphere in
Diagram, ii. 47. See Horaios

Origen, his unorthodox views of
Trinity, i. 89 n. 2; no Simonians
in his time, i. 200; professes
knowledge of all Ophite secrets,
ii. 21 n. 3; says Euphrates "the
Peratic" founder of Ophites, ii. 25;
says all magicians use "God of
Abraham" formula, ii. 33, 34;
calls Christ Angel of Great Council,
ii. 43; says names of Ialdabaoth,
Horaios and Astaphaios taken from
magic, ii. 47, 48; authority for
Ophite use of Diagram, ii. 66 ; his
description of Diagram, ii. 67-70;
gives "defences" of soul from
unmentioned source, ii. 71-74;
sympathy between planet Saturn
and Michael, ii. 75 ; he and Clement
of Alexandria only patristic writers
fair to Gnostics, ii. 76 w. 2; had
he or Celsus read Pistis Sophia ?,
ii. 154 n. 2, 159, 179; says Persian
theology gives mystical reasons for
order of planetary spheres, ii. 256,
265 ; Mithraic ladder described by,
ii. 257; quoted, i. 73, 199; ii. 8 n.
4, 25, 26, 34, 43, 46, 48, 66, 67,
69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 159, 256,
257

Ormuz. See Hormisdas

Ormuzd or Oromazes, antagonism of,
to Ahriman not defined till Sas-
sanid reform, ii. 232 ; called Light
(Plutarch), ii. 234 ; Zervan Akerene
above both him and Ahriman
(Cumont), ii. 236, 252; doubtful
part of, in Mithraic religion, ii. 237 ;
Romans identify him with Zeus,
ii. 237, 240; no evidence that
Mithraists called Jupiter, Ormuzd,
ii. 239 ; incursion of Ahriman into
Kingdom of Ormuzd cause of all
evil to man, ap. Manichaeans, ii.
253; identified with First Man in
neo-Manichaeism, ii. 293 n. 2-, 323;
in earlier Manichaeism, Father of
First Man, ii. 335

Orpheotelestae, strolling charlatans
with Orphic books, i. 140 ; addicted
to magic and poisoning, i. 146

Orpheus, Christian doctrine attributed
to (Clem. Alex.), i. 47 n. 3; never


existed, i. 121; religious teach-
ing attributed to him probably
Phrygian, i. 122 ; said to be founder
of Eleusinian Mysteri<-
identity of Zeus and Dionysos f iH
to be his teaching, i. 125 n. 2;
transmigration doctrine of. i I. '7
n. 3; mentioned in Pindar, i. 129
n. 3; poems attributed to, i. 135,
140 ; said to have been a Thracian,
i. 136; hymns attributed to, i. 141 ;
Musaeus called son of, i. 142;
tendency of poems of, to fuse
all other gods in Dionysos, i. 146
n. 1 ; Jews forge writings in name
of, i. 173; explains Mysteries
of Eleusis and their rites (Hip-
polytus), i. 175; respect paid to
"Orpheus and other theoiogists,"
i. 184 n. 3; parallel between
Simon's Silence and Night of, i.
185; expression "metropator" at-
tributed to, i. 190 n. 1 ; quotations
from verses attributed to, i. 40 n. 1,
47 nn. 3, 4, 65 n. 5, 90 n. 1, 123 n. 4,
125 n. 1, 127 n. 3, 129, 132 n. 1,
133 n. 2, 137 nn. 1, 4, 138 n. 2,
139 n. 1, 142, 143, 144 nn. 1, 2,
146 nn. 1, 3, 147 n. 1, 157 n. 1,
168 n. 3, 169 n. 1, 185 n. 2, 186 n. 1.
190 7i. 1 ; ii. 6 n. 1, 45 n. 1, 80 n. 1.
Ill n. 1, 153 n. 2, 254 n. 2, 311 «. 2
Orphics, the, cosmogony of, taken
from Ionian philosophers, i. 124;
their exaltation of Dionysos, i. 124,
125 n. 2 ; take Dying God into their
system, i. 12ti; take transmigration
from Pythagoreans, i. 127; attri
bute sacramental grace to Eleu-
sinian mysteries, i. 131 ; enjoin
mortification of flesh, i. 133 n. 1 ;
"kid in milk" a password among,
i. 134; teach superior worth of
next life, i. 136; identify Adonis
and Sabazius with Eubuleus and
Zagreus, i. 137; no association
or brotherhood of, i. 139, 140;
invocation to all gods worshipped
by, i. 142; make Dionysos w>th
male and female, i. 145; their
services to religion few, i. 146, 147 ;
all their peculiar features repro-
duced by Gnostics, i. 148 ; Essenes'
obligations to, i. 150, 156, 157. 168;
egg of, reappears in Book of Enoch,
i. 159; Simon Magus' successive
ages of world due to, i. 186;
analogy of chain of being of Simon
Magus with that of, i. 188;
jealousy of Simon's angels and of
£6


402


I?idex


Titans of, i. 190 n. 2 ; escape from
transmigration desired both by
Simon and by, i. 194 n. 3. See
Acrostics

Orphism, earliest form of pre-Christian
Gnosticism, i. 120; Eleusinian
Mysteries secret before, i. 130 n. 1 ;
destroys idea of nationality of gods,
i. 145; Essene views as to pre-
existence of soul taken from, i. 156 ;
abstinence for religious reasons
begins with, ii. 222

Ortho, in Magic Papyri probably
Artemis Orthia, i. 100 n. 2

Osiris, the First Man (Maspero). i. lxi;
fusion of, with other Egyptian gods,
i. 32, 33 ; legend of, i. 33, 34, 35 ;
two-fold origin of Osiris legend,
i. 36, 37, 38 ; resemblance of Osiris
myth to that of Eleusis and
Egyptian origin of latter (Foucart),
i. 43, 44; his animal forms in
Egypt, i. 45 ; identified with Hades
in Alexandrian religion, i. 48; his
Alexandrian name of Serapis, i. 49 ;
typical statue of, by Bryaxis, ibid. ;
Ptolemies continue to raise temples
to Egyptian, i. 52 ; his Egyptian title
of Neb-er-tcher, i. 55; ii. 154 n. 3 ;
Alexandrian " highestof godheads,"
i. 56, 64; Eleusinian beatitude of
dead borrowed from Egyptian wor-
ship of (Foucart), i. 59; scenes in
earthly life of, not kept secret in
Egypt, i. 60, 61 ; initiate in Alex-
andrian religion enacts Passion of,
i. 62 ; Alexandrian Horus, Osiris re-
born, i. 63 ; "god of the great gods,"
etc., i. 64 ; identified with Dionysos,
i. 64 n. 1, 65, 137 n. 1, 145; in
Alexandrian religion, water the
emblem of, i. 68, 73; in same,
Passion and Resurrection of, openly
celebrated, i. 69, 70 ; pudendum of,
processionally carried in chest, i.
73 n. 1, 84; wine the blood of,
i. 87; asked to grant "cooling
water" to dead, i. 88; magician
identifies himself with, i. 92 n. 2;
distinguished from Serapis in magic
ceremony, i. 103; the god-man
first of those who rose from the
dead (Budge), L 126 n. 3; in
Orphic gold plate dead an Osiris
(Foucart), i. 133 n. 1 ; so in
religion of Pharaonic Egypt, L
134 n. 3; the Cosmos the "emana-
tion and displayed image of "
(Plutarch), i. 181 n. 2; Simon's
god, like Osiris, his own spouse,


son, etc., i. 189 n. 5; ii. 39; Greeks
say death of Osiris should not be
wailed for, ii. 16; post-Christian
Gnostics imitate secrecy of mys-
teries of, ii. 17; post-Christian
Gnostics attend mysteries of, ii. 21,
54; name of, ineffable in Egypt,
ii. 37 n. 1 ; " the holy horned moon
of heaven,' ii. 72 n. 3; epithet of,
applied to Jesus in Pistis Sophia,
ii. 154 n. 3. See Aberamenthou

Ostanes, writer on magic identified
with god Thoth (Maspero), i. 108

Osterburken, Tauroctony of, with
assembly of twelve great gods,
ii. 238; best example of scenes
from legend of Mithras found at,
ii. 241 n. 4

Ouranos, in Cretan legend first link in
succession Ouranos-Kronos-Zeus-
Dionysos, i. 46 ; compared to
Egyptian god Nu (Maspero), i. 73
n. 4. See Uranus

Ovid, quoted, i. 67, 78

Oxyrhynchus Papyri, logion of Jesus
quoted from, ii. 80 n. 3

Pachomius, inventor of monachism
a recluse of Serapis, i. 86

Pacorus, Prince of Parthia, invades
and subdues Palestine in 40 B.C.,
i. 161 n. 3; ii. 224 n. 3

Paganism, erroneous views as to
relations of, with Christianity, i. lvi ;
merely veil for true Gnostic, ii. 18;
Gnosticism road from, to Christi-
anity, ii. 21 ; suppression of, by
Gratian, ii. 358

Palestine, Pharisees small minority of
population of, i. lv; return of
undesirables to, after Captivity,
i. 149; disappearance of its
independence after Alexander, i.
151 ; seizure of, by Ptolemy Soter
and Antiochus the Great succes-
sively, ibid. ; Essenes scattered
through villages of, not towns, i.
152; rapid Hellenization of, under
Seleucides, i. 156; Pacorus' raid
upon, i. 161 n. 3; ii. 224 n. 3;
Romans' forced conquest of. i. 163 ;
Essenes of, survive war of Titus,
but not that of Hadrian, i. 170;
Jews outside, cling to Law of
Moses, i. 173; charlatanism com-
mon among lower classes of,
temp. Apostles, i. 202; hatred of
Gentiles shared by Jews outside,
ii. 5; Ophites spread through
(Giraud), ii. 76


Index


403


Pallas, the goddess, classic type of,
on Indo-Greek coins, i. 17 n. 2;
in Orphic legend saves heart of
Dionysos, i. 125. See Athena,
Minerva

Pallas, writer on Mysteries of Mithras,
quoted by Porphyry, ii. 236

Pamirs, the, included in Persian Em-
pire, i. 1

Pan, the god, identified with Attis,
i. 139 n, 1

Panarion, the, of Epiphanius, ii. 77

Pantaenus, founder of Christian school
of Alexandria, ii. 88

Pappas, the god, identified with Attis,
i. 139 n. 1 ; play upon name of,
by Naassene author, ii. 57

Paraclete, Manes called the, ii. 316,
332, 351; means probably legate
or ambassador, ii. 316

Paiacletos, member of Valentinian
Dodecad. ii. 101

Paradise, the Gates of, in Diagram,
ii. 68 ; the Middle Space or Para-
dise of Sophia, ii. 75; of Adam
perhaps 4th of Ophite planetary
worlds, ii. 107; Books of Jed in
Pisti8 Sophia dictated to Enoch in
P. of Adam, ii. 147 n. 5; P. of
Adam set by Valentinus above the
third heaven, ii. 179

Parastatae, the Five, of Pistis Sophia
probably the five planets, ii. 141,
146; reappear in Manichaeism,
ii. 292 n. 2, 297 n. 2

Parastates, the last, sets Jeu and other
powers in their places, ii. 141 n. 4,
164; scene of Millennium in Pistis
Sophia, ii. 141 n. 4, 163 n. 2, 164.
See Jeu

Paris or Alexandres, wrath of god-
desses with, cause of Trojan war,
i. 57

Parsis, the, modern representatives
of Zoroastrianism, i. lxii; their
kosti or sacred girdle perhaps used
by Essenes, i. 153 n. 1

Parthians, the, perform Greek plays,
temp. Crassus, i. 8; struggles of
Syrian Empire against, i. 160;
ii. 224 ; Book of Enoch and raid of,
upon Jerusalem, i. 161 ; rise of,
under Arsaces, ii. 224; their age-
long war against Romans, ii. 225,
226; leadership of, transferred to
Persia, ii. 226; their eclectic reli-
ion, ii. 282; decline of power of
agi under, ii. 283
sia or Second Advent, the,
mediate expectation of, among


primitive Christians, i. lviii ; ii. '2, 'A i
belief in, leads to community of
goods, i. 162; fading of belief in
nearness of, ii. 3 ; revives in Pistis
Sophia, ii. 163; declines again in
Texts of Saviour and Bruce Papyrus,
ii. 198; all allusions to, excised
from N.T. by Marcion, ii. 209

Passion, of Dying God of Mediter-
ranean basin, i. 37; of Osiris,
publicly celebrated in Imperial
Rome, i. 69, 70; of Dionysos, i.
125 ; of Jesus, Docetic account of,
ii. 17; Ophite account of, ii. 60;
occurs when Jesus 30 years old
(Irenaeus), ii. 61 n. 1 ; Valentinian
account of, ii. 17, 117 n. 1 ; referred
to in Texts of Saviour, ii. 180;
Marcion's Docetic view of, ii, 210,
211 ; similar view of Manes, ii. 302
n. 1, 318, 320

Pastophori, college of priests of Greek
Isis established in Corinth, temp.
Sulla, i. 74 n. 2

Patecion, the brigand, saved by
initiation at Eleuais, i. 131

Patecius or Fatak, alleged father of
Manes, ii. 279 ; one of the Mughta-
silah, ii. 305

Pater, Walter, his view of Socrates'
monotheism quoted, i. 10

Patras, Mithraic monument at, ii.
263 n. 1

Patricos or Fatherly, member of
Valentinian Dodecad, ii. 101

Paul, Saint, the Apostle, Simon
Magus baptized before conversion
of, i. 176; German theory of
identity of Simon Magus with, i.
179; exclusiveness and disdainful
spirit of (Duchesne), ii. 5 n. 2;
Anatolian reugion temp. (Ramsay),
ii. 29, 30; in Phrygia treated as
Barnabas' vakil, ii. 42; O.T. his-
tory probably unknown to Phry-
gians in his time, ii. 63 n. 2;
success of his preaching to Gentiles
and its result, ii. 85; Marcion's
respect for, ii. 209 ; Marcion thinks
him only real apostle, ii. 211;
Marcion exaggerates controversy
between St Peter and, ii. 212. Set
Hermes

Paulicians, successors of Manichaeans,
ii. 357

Paullina, Fabia Aeonia, initiate of
Eleusis, hierophantis of Hecate and
worshipper of Isis, i. 83

Pausanias, his account of the legend
of Cybele quoted, ii. 39 n. 2, 40

26—2


404


Index


Pella, flight of Christians to, before
siege of Jerusalem, ii. 4 n. 3;
Christians of, called Ebionites, ii.
5 n. 1 ; Synoptic Gospels first put
into shape at (Renan), ii. 6 n. 3

Pelliot, M. Paul, discovers Tun-huang
MS., ii. 352

Pelusium. See Nile, Perdiccas

Pentateuch, Samaritan reverence for,
i. 177 ; Ophite or Naassene writer
quotes from, ii. 55. See Moses,
Old Testament

Perabsen, King of Egypt, uses totems
of both Horus and Set as his
cognizance, i. 36

Peratae, the, worship Power called
Astrampsuchos (Hippolytus), i. 107
n. 1 ; an Ophite sect, ii. 76 ; mix
Orphic with astrological teaching,
ii. 79 ; use names which appear in
Manichaeism, ii. 329 n. 2; may
mean Medes, ibid.

Perdiccas, defeated by Ptolemy Soter
at Pelusium and afterwards mur-
dered, i. 30; Nicocreon of Cyprus
helps Ptolemy against, i. 55 n. 1

Perfection, The Gospel of, used by
Ophites and called Gospel of Eve,
ii. 80; quoted, ibid.

Pergamum. See Persephone

Peroz or Firiiz, son of Ardeshir and
patron of Manes, ii. 281

Persephone, scene of trials of, Eleusis
and Asia, i. 16 ; mother of Zagreus
by Zeus, i. 37, 42, 124, 125, 138,
145 ; ii. 39 ; her temple at Eleusis,
i. 39; her Rape or capture by
Hades shown in Mysteries, i. 40;
ii. 39 ; her deliverance by Hermes,
i. 41 ; her identification with
Demeter, i. 46 ; and with Dionysos,
i. 47, 144; worshipped with Isis
and Hecate by latest Pagans, i. 83 ;
Baubo confused with, in Magic
Papyri, i. 100 ; Eres-ki-gal used as
name of, ibid. ; called the "twelfth,"
ibid. ; and unique, i. 124, 142 n. 3 ;
ii 15 n. 3 ; Dionysos added to Mys-
teries of, by Orphics, i. 130 ; Orphic
gold plate addressed to, i. 133;
worship of, with other Chthonians
outside Eleusis, i. 135 ; in Mysteries
of Samothrace, i. 136 n. 2 ; Adonis
made spouse of, i. 137; Bendis
identified with, ibid. ; allusion to,
in Sabazian rites, i. 138; Orphic
hymn to, i. 142, 143 ; identified with
Aphrodite, Cybele, and Isis, i. 143 ;
daughter of Zeus and Demeter,
i. 144 ; her relations with Iacchos,


i. 145, 189 n. 5; serpent present
in all Asiatic legends of, ii. 49;
a fiend in hell in Texts of Saviour,
ii. 186; on Mithraic monument,
ii. 238; Hecate perhaps equated
with, by Mithraists, ii. 253

Persepolis, one of the four capitals of
Persian Empire, i. 3

Persia, religions of, come westward
after Alexander, i. lvii ; First Man
legend appears in religion of, i. lxi ;
obscurity of dates of religion of,
i. lxii; description of, before
Alexander, i. 1-4; rush of Greeks
to, i. 7, 8; emigrants from, settle
in Asia Minor, ii. 229; difficulty
about religion of, temp. Manes, ii.
289

Persians, the, their good government
of subject peoples, i. 3, 12 ; priests
of, officers of state, i. 24 ; Egyptian
policy under, i. 51 ; astrology comes
westward after Asiatic conquests
of, i. 113; religion of, temp.
Achaemenides, still doubtful, i. 122 ;
suzerains of Jews, i. 150; revival
of nationality of, under Roman
Empire, ii. 224, 225 ; wars between
Romans and, ii. 225-227 ; Roman
Court adopts manners and insti-
tutions of, ii. 228; worship of
Mithras may have come to Asia
before, ii. 231. *See Magi

Peshitto, the, version, used by Ophites
and Valentinians, ii. 81 n. 1, 84;
oldest Syriac translation of Scrip-
tures (Gwilliam), ii. 84 n. 2. See
Kenyon

Pessinuntica, name of Cybele used by
Apuleius, i. 56

Pessinus, Cybele worshipped by Greek
confraternities as goddess of, i. 17 ;
Black Stone of, transported to
Rome, ii. 31

Petelia, Orphic gold plates found at,
i. 131, 132

Peter, St, the Apostle, his dealing
with Simon Magus, i. 176; Simon
follows and opposes him {Clemen-
tines), i. 178 ; causes death of
Simon Magus by prayer, ibid. ; his
controversy with St Paul, i. 179;
ii. 212; denies that Jesus pro-
claimed himself God (Clementines),
ii. 82 n. 2 ; in Pistis Sophia, ii. 157

Peter, The Gospel of, its description of
Cross in Sepulchre of Jesus, quoted,
ii. 140 n. 2

Peter and Paul, Apocrvphal Acts of,
i. 178


Index


41 If.


Petermann, J. H., edits Pistis Sophia,
ii. 13, 134

Petersen, says date of Orphic hymns
ist to nird cent., i. 141

Petosiris, name of Roman writer on
magic, i. 107

Peucestas, Greek satrap of Persia,
adopts native customs, ii. 224

Phalerum, lustration of initiates in
harbour of, i. 39

Phanes, the god, born from egg and
called Eros and Protogonos, i. 123 ;
ii. 98 n. 1, 210 n. 1 ; swallowed by
Zeus, i. 123, 128 ; Father by Night
of Uranos and Ge, i. 123, 185; an
androgyne, i. 123, 185; identified
by Orphics with Dionysos, i. 124;
ruler of First Age of World, i. 186 ;
resemblance of Basilides' Seed of
the World to, ii. 91 n. 1; and of
Mithras, ii. 242

Phanodemus, puts scene of Rape of
Persephone in Attica, i. 40 n. 1

Pharisees, few in number among Jews,
i. lv ; one of the three " philosophic "
sects of Jews ( Josephus), i. 151 ;
Ecpyrosis taught by (Hippolytus),
i. 155 n. 2; aim at universal
supremacy for Jews, i. 162

Pherecydes of Syros, probable source
of Orphic doctrines and Pytha-
goras' teacher (Maury), i. 124

Phibionitae, the, sect of Gnostics
derived from Nicolas the Deacon
(Epiphanius), ii. 27 n. 1

Philae, temple of, built by Ptolemies
to Egyptian Isis, i. 52

Philastrius or Philaster of Brescia,
makes Menander successor of
Simon Magus, i. 199 ; copies from
Irenaeus and Epiphanius, ii. 10 n.
1 ; classes Ophites among pre-
Christian sects, ii. 25

Philip, St, the Apostle, instance of
Greek name borne by Jew, i. 173 n.
2; baptizes Simon Magus, i. 176;
one of the three recorders of the
words of Jesus in Pistis Sophia, ii.
157

Philip, The Gospel of, quotation from,
ii. 79

Philip, King of Macedon, first meets
Olympias at Samothrace, i. 22,
136 n. 2 ; banishes Alexander with
Ptolemy and others, i. 30
lilistines, the, think ark of Yahweh
affects place where it is, i. 10;
Hebrews subject to, i. 150; Kings
of, suzerains of David, i. 160
n. 4


Philo of Alexandria or Philo
Judaeus, acquainted with Cicero'*
mythoplasms, i. lvii n. 1 ; Ihm
account of Essenes, i. 154; sole
authority for secret docti
same, i. 157, 168; gives number
of same at 4000, i. 170 n.
own beliefs and system, i. 174;
his views on eternal punish merit,
i. 175 n. 1 ; makes lower world
reflection of higher (Hatch), i. 183
n. 3; borrows less from Greek
mythology than Simon Mapus.i. 1 86 ;
makes stars rulers of earthly things,
i. 186, 187; angels the patterns
after which worlds made, i. 187 n. 3 ;
his system contrasted with Simon
Magus', i. 202; uses all*
exegesis as propaganda of Hellen-
istic culture, ii. 9 ; Cerinthus said
to have been a pupil of, ii. 9 n. 1 ;
some Gnostic leaders make Jesus
Logos of, ii. 16; distinguishes
between First Man and protoplast,
ii. 38 7i. 3 ; takes Platonic view that
God too high to touch matter,
ii. 42 ; allegorical interpretation of,
ii. 82; forced to harmonize Plato
with Jewish traditions, ii. 88;
describes coenobite community - m
Egypt, ii. 286 n. 4; quoted, i. 154,
157, 174, 175, 187: ii. 38 n. 3,
42 n. 3, 286 n. 4

Philo of Byblus, makes Phoenician
traditions accessible to Greeks, i. 9

Philolaos, the Pythagorean, "soul
buried in body as in a charnel-
house," i. 127 n. 1

Philosophumena, the, Stahelin's theory
of imposition on author of,
doubted, i. 175 n. 5; what its
quotation of Great Announcemnti
proves, i. 179 n. 5; discovery of
MS. of, at Mt Athos, ii. 11;
documents quoted in, not earlier
than 200 a.d., ii. 12; comi
of Naassene psalm in, ii. 62;
Matter did not and Giraud did
know it, when they reconstructed
Diagram, ii. 68

Philumena, prophetess believed in by
Apelles the Marcionite, ii. 219

Phoenicia, body of Osiris washed
ashore in, i. 34 ; Adonis worshipped
in, i. 37; so the earth -goddess,
i. 126

Photius, finds heresy in Clement of
Alexandria, ii. 14 n. 1 ; Marcion'i
Antitheses seen by, ii. 209 n. 3,
223


406


Index


Phrygia, home of Ophites, i. lx ; ii. 28 ;
birthplace of most legends of
Dying God, i. 38; worship of
Orphic Sabazius comes from, i. 137 ;
ii. 28; "Mysteries of the Mother"
in, i. 143; Simonians scattered
through (Theodoret), i. 199; meet-
ing-place of different creeds, ii. 28 ;
its government by priest-kings,
ii. 29 ; worship of androgyne deity
in, ii. 30, 67 n. 3 ; defection from
Judaism of Ten Tribes in, ii. 32;
prevalence of Jewish magicians in,
temp. Apostles, ii. 33; is Jewish
tradition responsible for Phrygian
cosmogony? ii. 34, 35; mother of
gods called Cybele in, ii. 40 ; great
goddess of, perhaps derived from
Ishtar, ii. 45 to. 1 ; traces of
pantheism in, ii. 64; double axe
used by gods of (Ramsay), ii. 67 n.
3 ; Ophites spread southward from,
ii. 74 ; Stoic philosophy has a seat
in, ii. 83

Phrygians, the, "first-born of men"
(Apuleius), i. 56; why St Paul
gives them summary of O.T.
history, ii. 53 n. 2 ; Ophite interpre-
tation of their mysteries, ii. 54;
their belief in deification of man,
ii. 56 n. 2; call Dionysos or
Sabazius, Pappas, ii. 57

Phryne, belongs to Greek confra-
ternity for foreign worship, i. 22

Piankhi, King of Egypt, abandons
Egypt for Ethiopia after conquest,
i. 31

Pindar, knows identification of Dio-
nysos with Apollo, i. 48; de-
scribes blessedness of initiates into
Mysteries, i. 59; supporter of
Orphism, i. 122; his doctrine of
transmigration, i. 129; his poems
recited at games, i. 135; quoted,
i. 48, 59, 123 to. 1, 129 n. 3, 134 to. 2

Piraeus, the, confraternities for
foreign worships cluster in, i. 21 ;
early confraternity of Serapiasts
in, i. 52 ; courtezans principal
members of confraternities in, i.
137 ; Mithraic monuments at, ii. 230

Pisistratids, the, date of flight of, and
reform of Mysteries, i. 43 to. 2;
Onomacritos flees with them to
Persia, i. 121; some Orphic ele-
ments come into Greece, temp., i.
122

Pistis or Faith, member of Valentinian
Dodecad, ii. 101

Pistis Sophia, probable origin of name


of, ii. 151 to. 5, 160; found by
Jesus alone in place below 13th '
Aeon, ii. 155; her history, ii. 155-
157 ; meaning of allegory of, ii. 162 ;
receives her adversary's place,
ibid. ; sometimes called Sophia
only, ii. 179; reappears in Texts
of Saviour as "the daughter of
Barbelo," ii. 186; and in Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 192
Pistis Sophia (the book), Jevi the First
Man appears in, i. lxi; written in
Greek, translated into Coptic, i.
lxii, ii 177 ; as in other apocrypha,
Jesus changes his shape according
to heavens he traverses, i. 191
n. 4, ii. 60 w. 1, 154; texts, trans-
lations, and summaries of, ii. 13;
principal document of, Valentinian,
ii. 17, 159-163; like Babylonians,
makes heavens formed from
powers of evil, ii. 44 to. 3 ; lalda-
baoth in, projection of ruler of
material world, ii. 46 n. 3; fea-
tures in common with Ascensio
Isaiae, ii. 60 to. 1 ; puts stay of
Jesus on earth after Resurrec-
tion at 12 years, ii. 61 n. 1 ; Eucha-
ristic ceremony of, ii. 63 to. 1, 192;
powers mentioned in Diagram and
in, ii. 72 toto. 1, 3, 73 to. 2, 74 n. 1 ;
"Receptacles" and Place of Truth
in, ii. 103 to. 1 ; Valentinian docu-
ment in, does not quote Fourth
Gospel, ii. 117 to. 1, 177; MS.
of, and its provenance, ii. 134,
135 ; heavens of Ineffable One and
First Mystery not described in,
ii. 146; Melchizidek seldom men-
tioned in, ii. 148 n. 1 ; thought by
some the Interrogations of Mary,
ii. 157 ; doctrine of interpretation
in, ii. 157 n. 2; appears at first
sight entirely Ophite, ii. 158; but
more clearly Valentinian, ii. 159,
160, 161 ; Authades of, compared
to Valentinus' Demiurge, ii. 162
to. 2; Adamas of, compared to
Valentinus' Diabolos, ii. 163;
nearness of Parusia dominant in
part of, ibid. ; description of
Millennium in, ii. 164; lesser in-
itiates must give passwords and
seals, ii. 165, 169; mystery of the
First Mystery is Baptism, ii. 168-
170; mystery of the Ineffable One
is the Eucharist, ii. 170-171;
supreme revelation of book union
with Jesus, ii. 171; "Mysteries
of Light" not described in P.S.


Index


407


proper, ii. 173; open to all the
world, ii. 174 ; Egyptian character
of book (Maspero), ii. 175-177;
probably by Valentinus, ii. 178;
read by Fathers ?, ii. 179 ; astrology
condemned in, ii. 185; cryptogram
between 1st and 2nd vols of, ii.
188 n. 2; fragment in Bruce Papy-
rus links P.S. with Texts of Saviour,
ii. 192, 193; parent work on which
all the others based, ii. 194 ; Apelles'
teaching as to body of Jesus from
same source as, ii. 219; twelve
hours theory of, like that of Tun-
huang treatise, ii. 293 n. 2 ; quoted,
i. 195 n. 1; ii. 54 n. 2, 78, 92
n. 3, 144 nn. 3, 4, 5, 8, 145 n. 1,
146 nn. 2, 3, 147 n. 5, 148 nn. 1,
2, 3, 149 nn. 1-5, 151 n. 3, 152
nn. 1, 2, 154 n. 1, 155 nn. 1, 4,
156 nn. 1, 4, 161 nn. 1, 3, 4, 162 n. 3,
163 n. 2, 164 nn. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 165
n. 1, 167, 168, 169 n. 2, 170, 171,
173, 174, 175, 182 n. 2, 184 nn. 1, 4,
185 nn. 1, 2, 188, 193 n. 4, 194 n. 1,
292 n. 2, 293 n. 2. See Petermann,
Schwartze

Plato, alone of ancients sees Socrates'
monotheism, i. 11; says few real
initiates in mysteries, i. 65; chief
authority for charlatanism of
Orpheotelestae, i. 140; creator of,
not jealous, i. 149 n. 1 ; his ideas
the paradigms of perceptible things,
i. 198; God of, too high to touch
matter, ii. 42; says souls given
daemons as guides through life,
ii. 1 10 n. 1 ; Marcion never alludes
to Logos of, ii. 214; quoted, i. 65.
140, 149 n. 1; ii. 110 w. 1

Pleroma, the, word Church apparently
used by Ophite writer for, ii. 43;
Ophite Christos descends from, to
Sophia, ii. 59 ; Ophite, consists of
Father, Son, Mother, and Christos,
ii. 64 ; the same in Diagram, ii. 68 ;
perfect Ophites share in, ii. 76;
Valentinus', originally consists of
twenty-eight members, ii. 104 n. 1 ;
Christos and Holy Spirit added to,
after Fall of Sophia (Valentinus),
ii. 105 ; Stauros partly within and
partly without {id.), ii. 105 n. 2;
Ectroma called Sophia Without
{id.), ii. 106; Jesus the Joint Fruit
of {id,), ii. 106 n. 2, 110, 113, 117,

1159 n. 3; four "places" outside
(id.), ii. 108; Pneumatics to enter
into (id.), ii. 110 n. 2 ; Christos and
Holy Spirit remain within {id.), ii.


114; projects another thirty aeons
{id.), ii. 144 n. 8

Pliny, solar monotheism of, i. 118;
his account of Essenes, i. 156;
quoted, i. 155 n. 1

Plutarch, his monotheism (Dill), i.
lvii; makes Zoroaster 5000 yean
before Trojan War, i. lxii; a
chief source of our knowledge of
Eastern religions, i. 9; authority
for meeting of Philip and Olympias,
i. 22; his contempt for oracles
of foreign gods, i. 23; legend of
Osiris and his de Iside et Oriride, i.
33-35, 43, 48; does not conceal
identification of Dionysos with
Osiris, ii. 65 n. 4; says water the
emblem of Osiris, i. 68; give*
episode of Isis as swallow, i. 70 n. 1 ;
puts festival of Birth of Horus at
spring equinox, i. 71; identifies
Greek Typhon with Egyptian S< t.
i. 105; Dionysos of, once human,
but deified for merit, i. 144 n. 3 ;
Osiris and Set neither gods nor
men but great daemons, ii. 16;
acquainted with Persian religion,
ii. 214 n. 2; says worship of
Mithras first introduced into Rome
by Cilician pirates, ii. 228, 229;
describes Persians as sacrificing to
Hades, ii. 239 ; calls Mithras ntcl-
tt)s, ii. 249; equates Hades with
Ahriman, ii. 255 ; thinks evil must
have separate principle of its own,
ii. 289 n. 3 ; quoted, i. 22, 23, 48,
70 n. 2, 144 n. 3; ii. 16, 214 n. 2,
228, 229, 249, 255, 289 n. 3. See
Dionysos, Hades, Theopompos of
Chios

Pluto, name of Hades, i. 40, 47, 48;
ruler of Hades, called in magic
Huesimigaddn, i. 99, 100; one of
the gods of Samothrace, i. 136 w. 2 ;
in Orphic hymn to Persephone,
i. 142, 143. See Hades

Pneuma, name of Valentinian Sophia,
ii. 109

Point, the Little or Indivisible, source
of everything in universe ap.
Simonians, i. 194 n. 3; and ap.
Basilides, ii. 90 n. 5; referred to
in Bruce Papyrus, ii. 292 n. 1

Polycleitos, his statue of Dionysos
with attributes of Zeus, i. 125 n. 2

Pomoerium, Alexandrian gods ex-
pelled from, temp. Tiberius, i. 78

Pompeii, Isium at, when founded, i. 53

Pompey the Great, suppression of
Cilician pirates by, ii. 229


408


Index


Pontus, birthplace of Marcion, ii. 9,
204 ; and of Mithridates, ii. 204 ;
Tertullian's rhetorical exaggera-
tion as to, ii. 204 w. 3; its kings
claim descent from Persian heroes,
ii. 225 n. 1

Porphyry, the neo-Platonist, says
Egyptian magicians threaten gods,
i. 104 n. 3 ; his account of Essenes
copied from Josephus, i. 155;
describes books on Mithras worship,
ii. 236; says Mithraic cave repre-
sents universe, ii. 247, 249; says
Mithraists teach metempsychosis,
257; gives "eagles" as name of
Mithraist Fathers, ii. 265 ». 2;
says High Priest of Mithras may
only marry once, ii. 268; quoted,
i. 104 n. 3, 155; ii. 236, 249, 265 n.
2,268

Poseidon, the god, Greek type of, on
Indian coins, i. 17 ft. 2; of Homer,
shares empire with Zeus, i. 46;
cattle and horses sacrificed to, i. 95 ;
on Mithraic monuments, ii. 238.
See Neptune

Powers, the Three Triple. See Tri-
dynami

Praedestinatus, heresiology of, its
sources, ii. 10 n. 1 ; describes
"rabbling" of Ophites by Christian
bishops and mob, ii. 77

Praetextatus, Vettius Agorius, his
rank in Mithraism, ii. 268 ; one of
the last Pagan noblemen, ii. 358.
See Paullina

Praxidice, Orphic epithet or variant
of Persephone, i. 142

Precept, the First, in Pistis Sophia
perhaps personification of Jewish
Tor ah, ii. 141 ; highest spirit in
Treasure-house, ii. 147 ; power
passed into Confusion originates
in, ii. 164

Preller, says that Orpheus is a "col-
lective" person, i. 121 n. 1

Prepon, the heresiarch, a Syrian
teaching in Rome, ii. 9; follower
of Marcion who thinks Jesus
intermediate between good and
evil, ii. 220

Priests, state officials in Persia and
Egypt, i. 24; of Greek confra-
ternities, i. 25 ; greed of Egyptian,
i. 28; always powerful in Africa,
i. 31 ; their disastrous rule in
Egypt, i. 31, 32; hereditary, of
Mysteries, i. 39 ; native Egyptian,
keep aloof from Alexandrian, i. 51 ;
of Isis on Herculaneum frescoes,


i. 68, 69 ; importance of, in Alex-
andrian religion, i. 76, 77 ; secular
and regular, in same, i. 79, 80;
break up of Asiatic and Egyptian
colleges of, spreads magic, i. 107 ;
necessity of, among Gnostics, ii. 22 ;
temporal power of Anatolian, ii.
29; Cybele's eunuch, ii. 31; high
priests of Magic Papyri, ii. 34 n. 4;
mention of, among Naassenes, ii.
66; among other Ophites, ii. 77;
Valentinians probably frequent
orthodox, ii. 125; of Marcionites,
ii. 205; of Persians, the Magi, ii.
233, 234 ; of Cybele, ally themselves
with Mithraists, ii. 258 ; of Mithras
called "Father," ii. 261 ; qualifica-
tions and duties of Mithraic, ii. 267,
268 ; like modern churchwardens,
ii. 273 : Manichaean, called sons of
knowledge, ii. 312; organization
of neo-Manichaean, ii. 330

Proclus, the neo-Platonist, gives Isis'
assertion of eternity and virginity,
i. 63 ; identifies Bendis with Perse-
phone, i. 137 ; makes all gods con-
tained in Dionysos, i. 146 n. 1 ;
makes man come from tears of
gods, ii. 153 ft. 2, 176; quoted,
i. 63, 137 n. 2; ii. 153 w. 2

Prohegumeni, the Two Forerunners of
the Treasure-house in the Pistis
Sophia, ii. 149

Prophthasia, Alexander at, said to
receive grapes from Greece, i. 4
ft. 1. See Farrah

Proserpine, Isis called Stygian P. by
the Sicilians, i. 56 ; Lucius at initia-
tion treads threshold of, i. 62. See
Persephone

Prunicos. or the Substitute, name of
Sophia among early Ophites, ii. 45,
69. See Achamoth, Sophia

Psammetichos, King of Egypt, letter
of Nephotes to, on lecanomancy,
i. 101

Psyche, name of Valentinus' De-
miurge, ii. 109

Ptah, the god, one of oldest gods of
Egypt, i. 32 ; priesthood of, in
early times, i. 33; Ptolemy
Epiphanes called the beloved of,
i. 51

Ptah-Seker-Osiris, the god, triune
deity of Saitic period, i. 33 ; ii. 195

Ptolemy I Soter, called Saviour-god,
i. 18; his wisdom in choosing and
ruling Egypt, i. 28, 29; his pre-
parations for its defence, i. 29, 30 ;
decides to found syncretic religion


Index


4<><»


uniting Egyptians and Greeks, i.
30; his court and capital both
Greek, i. 44; his Museum and its
"stuffed capons," i. 45; his dream
as to Serapis- statue, i. 48, 77;
Egyptians reject his religious
schemes, i. 51 ; success of his
religion outside Egypt, i. 52, 53,
54; five centuries between him
and Apuleius, i. 76; seizes Jeru-
salem, i. 151 ; colonizes Samaria
with " Macedonians," i. 177

Ptolemy II Philadelphus, Asoka's
mission to, i. 20; attribution of
foundation of Museum to, erro-
neous (Bouche-Leclercq), i. 44 n. 2

Ptolemy IV Philopator, decline of
Egyptian power after, i. 151

Ptolemy V Epiphanes, his coronation
at Memphis (Rosetta Stone), i. 51

Ptolemy VI Philometor, petitions to,
of Ptolemy son of Glaucias, i. 79

Ptolemy IX Physcon, expels philo-
sophers from Museum, ii. 88

Ptolemy, the son of Glaucias, recluse in
Serapeum, i. 79. See Kenyon

Ptolemy, the Valentinian, his theory
of the Cosmocrator as the creation
of the Demiurge, ii. 108 n. 1 ; a
leader of the Italic School, ii. 119;
his letter to Flora, ii. 131

Punjab, part of, in Persian Empire, i. 1

Purser, Louis Charles, collects au-
thorities on Orpheus, i. 121 n. 1

Puteoli, temple to Serapis at, 100 B.c,
i. 53

Pythagoras, pupil of Pherecydes of
Syros, i. 124; says our souls part
of world-soul, i. 129 ; his theory of
transmigration, ibid.

Pythagoreans, the, all early Orphic
poems ascribed to, i. 122 ; Orphics
take transmigration from, i. 127 ;
find withdrawal from world neces-
sary to salvation, i. 129 ; Jews take
Ecpyrosis from (Hippolytus), i.
155 n. 2

Quadratus, his lost Apology for
Christianity, ii. 202, 203 n. 1

Ra, the god, corporation of priests of,
earliest in Egypt, i. 31; the sun-
god, i. 31, 63 ; Osiris invoked with
him in Book of Dead, i. 32;

I legend of, and Isis. i. 38 n. 2;
ii. 37 n. 1 ; increase of power of,
with xrrth Dynasty, i. 63 n. 1 ;
the serpent Apep his enemy, ii.


Ramsay, Sir William, F.R.K., has
revived Alexandrian alchemist's
dream of transmutation, i. 45

Ramsay, Sir William Mitchell, says
name of Christians not mentioned
by classic writers, i. 1 n. 1 ; all goda
of mysteries forms of One. i. 56
». 4; date of Hadrian's \
Egypt, i. 86 n. 5 ; thinks Anatolian
Jews coalesce with natives-,
state of Phrygia in Tst cent., ii. 29;
characteristics of Anatolian religion,
temp. Apostles, ii. 29, 30, Wl
importance of Mother of Gods doe
to matriarchate, ii. 40; many
names of divine pair worshipped in
Phrygia, ii. 67 n. 1 ; androgyne
nature of same and symbol of
double axe, ibid. ; quoted, i. 1 *. 1,
56 n. 4, 86 n. 5; ii. 28 n. 3, 29 n. 5,
30 nn. 1, 2, 3, 31 n. 1, 40 n. 3. 67 n. 3

Raphael, the archangel, name of, in
Magic Papyri and O.T. Apocrypha,
ii. 34; in Diagram name of ter-
restrial daemon, ii. 70 ; planet Mars
connected with, ii. 75 n. 1

Rawlinson, Canon George, on govern-
ment of Persian Empire, i. 2 n. 2,
3 nn. 2, 3

Rawlinson, Sir Henry, Omen Tablets
in Cuneiform Inscriptions of W.A.,
i. 114 n. 1

Rayet, M. Octave, shows identifica-
tion of Demeter and Persephone
from inscription and vases, i. 46
n. 1

Reade, Winwood, his Martyrdom of
Man quoted, i. 11 n. 3, 149 n. 2;
ii. 2, 3, 227 n. 1

Reformation, the German, sects of,
compared to Gnostics, ii. 19;
dissidents near to, strictly Christian,
ii. 20; like makers of, Marcion
appeals to Scripture, ii. 207;
Manichaeism may have survived
till, ii. 357 ; leaves Church stronger
than before, ii. 360

Reinach, M. Salomon, Orphic pass-
word discussed by, L 134 n. 1

Renaissance, the, Hecate still goddess
of sorcerers through Middle Age*
and, i. 147 ; sorcerers of, use word*
of Mass, ii. 267

Renan, Joseph Ernest, warlike charac-
teristics of great goddesses, i. 58;
describee policy of Church of
Rome as to Pagan customs, i. 85;
abundance of diviners and sor-
cerers in Rome of Nero, L 108;
says Bar Coziba called Monog«JW«


410


Index


(Georae the Syncellus), i. 124 n. 3;
account of War of Extermination
(Derenbourg), i. 163 n. 1 ; revolt
of Jews under Trajan, i. 112 n. 1;
says Gnosticism attacks infant
Church like croup, ii. 21; his
interpretation of Caulacau, ii. 94
n. 3; quoted, i. 83 n. 1, 85 n. 1,
124 n. 3, 163 n. 1 ; ii. 21 n. 1, 94
n. 3

Reville, Albert, his controversy with
Gladstone on Genesis, i. liii ; quoted,
i. 93 w. 4

Revillout, Eugene, thinks words in
Egyptian spell, adaptation of those
of the Mass, i. 87 ; to true Gnostic
all religions merely veils, ii. 18;
quoted, i. 87 n. 3; ii. 18 n. 4

Rhacotis, Egyptian name of site of
Alexandria, i. 44

Rhamnusia, a name of Nemesis
identified with Isis, i. 50

Rhapsodists, the, their theogony, i.
123; Orphic poems recited by, at
games, i. 135, 136; Ophites
probably get lines of Homer and
Pindar from, ii. 83

Rhea, the goddess, the earth-goddess
sometimes called Cybele, Demeter
etc., i. 124, 126; mother of Attis,
i. 139 re. 1 ; ii. 54

Rhodes, worship of Alexandrian gods
at, i. 52

Rhodo, refutes Tertullian's slanders
against Marcion, ii. 218; his
quotation from Apelles the Mar-
cionite, ii. 219; other Marcionite
leaders mentioned by, ii. 220

Ritschl, his theory that both St John
Baptist and Jesus were Essenes,
i. 156 n. 1

Rochat, E.. on dates of birth and
death of Manes, ii. 279 n. 1, 282
n. 2 ; on authenticity of Acta
Archelai, ii. 280 n. 3; on Manes'
father Fatak or Patecius, ii. 285 n.
2; on authenticity of letter to
Marcellus, ii. 288 n. 2, 289;
on Mandaites as descendants of
Mughtasilah, ii. 305 n. 1 ; quoted,
ii. 279 tit*. 1, 3, 280 nn. 2-6, 281
nn. 1, 3, 5, 282 n. 2, 283 nn. 1, 6,
285 TiTi. 2, 4, 286 nn. 3, 5, 287 n. 2,
289, 305 TiTi. 1, 3

Rogers, Dr Robert William, exposes
Winckler's and Jeremias' astral
theory, i. 115 n. 1

Romans, the, take over Greek pan-
theon en bloc, i. 17; frustrate
Antiochus Epiphanes' attack on


Egypt, i. 151 ; their toleration for
Jewish religion and customs fruit-
less, i. 163; punish Palestinian
towns for rebellion, temp. Vespasian,
i. 170; receive orgiastic worship
of Cybele, ii. 30 n. 3; their long
struggle with Persians, ii. 225-227 ;
their severe laws against Mani-
chaeism, ii. 278, 356

Rome, becomes monarchical as she
acquires world-power, i. 15; wel-
comes Euhemeristic theory, i. 19;
Alexandrian gods obtain a foothold
in, i. 53 ; their worship becomes
an established church in, i. 79;
gathering of charlatans in, temp.
Nero, i. 108; Orphic gold plates
found at, i. 131 ; Simonians
numerous in, i. 199; all heretics
attracted to, ii. 203

Roots, the six of Simon Magus, i. 180;
expression used by Empedocles and
Athamas the Pythagorean, i. 197

Rosetta Stone, the, marks turning of
Ptolemies to ancient Egyptian
gods, i. 51

Roxana, wife of Alexander the Great,
i. 5, 12

Rutilianus, accomplice and dupe of
Alexander of Abonoteichos, i. 24

Sabaoth, used in Hebrew spell iden-
tifying Yahweh with Zeus and
Serapis, i. 106 ; name belonging to
a secret theology (Origen), ii. 34,
35; Ophite ruler of planetary
sphere (Irenaeus), ii. 47 ; the same
in Diagram, ii. 69; address to,
ii. 73 ; name recurs in Pistis Sophia,
ii. 158

Sabaoth the Good, the Great, soul of
Jesus on Incarnation received from
(Pistis Sophia), ii. 139, 149; the
emanation of Jeu and acts through
messenger (P. S.), ii. 149; why so
called, ii. 149 n. 2; appears in
Bruce Papyrus, ii. 193

Sabaoth the Good, the Little, mes-
senger or substitute of Great
Sabaoth, ii. 149; his action at
Incarnation, ii. 149 ?;. 2; identified
with Gate of Life, ibid. ; appears
in Texts of Saviour, ii. 149 n. 2,
187; gives cup of perception to
righteous soul in same. ii. 187,
309 n. 2

Sabaoth Adamas, in Pistis Sophia a
wicked power, ii. 149 n. 2 ; in Texts
of Saviour ruler of Wicked Aeons,
ii. 182; in same bound with his


Index


411


subjects to Sphere, ii. 182; his
"receiver" Jaluha gives cup of
oblivion to soul, ii. 187

Sabazius, the god, comes into Greece
before Alexander, i. 17, 137; a
Phrygian god called "Lord of all"
and son of Cybele, i. 137 ; rites of,
described by Demosthenes, i. 138;
identified with Attis and Adonis,
i. 139 n. 1 ; for Orphics, a form of
Dionysos, i. 145; Phrygia seat of
worship of, ii. 28; called Pappas,
ii. 57; male aspect of androgyne
deity of Anatolia (Ramsay), ii. 67
n. 3

Saboi, cry of initiates in Sabazian
mysteries, i. 138

Sabos, in Orphic hymn possibly name
of Iacchos, i. 138 n. 2

Saclas or Asaqlun, son of King of
Darkness among Peratae and
Manichaeans, ii. 329

Sadducees, dominant party among
Jews, i. lv, 162; a "philosophic"
sect ( Josephus), i. 151 ; their
sympathy with Hellenism, i. 162

Salathiel, The Apocalypse of, part of
Fourth Esdras called, i. 167

Salmon, Dr George, his theory of
forgery of Gnostic documents, i.
lxi n. 1 ; ii. 11 n. 2; on authorship
of Clementines, i. 178 n. 1 ; on '
discovery of Philosophumena, ii.
11 7i. 2 ; thinks return of worlds to
Deity rather than salvation of man-
kind aim of Gnosticism, ii. 42 n. 2 ;
his interpretation of name of Ialda-
baoth, ii. 46 n. 3 ; and of Caulacau,
ii. 94 n. 3 ; Marcion's life described
by, ii. 204 ; on early establishment
of Marcion's heresy, ii. 207 ; quoted,
i. 178 n. 1; ii. il n. 2, 41 n. 1,
42 n. 2, 94 n. 3, 204 n. 2, 205 n. 3,
206 nn. 3, 5, 207 nn. 3, 4, 222
n. 1

Salome, speech of Jesus to, in Gospel
of Egyptians, i. 196 n. 2; questions
of, in Pistis Sophia, ii. 157

Samarcand, modern name of Mara-
canda, a foundation of Alexander's,
i. 5 n. 3

Samaria, Simon Magus' deeds in, i.
176, 178, 191 n. 3 ; re-colonized by
Alexander and Ptolemy Soter, i.
177 ; destroyed by John Hyrcanus,
and rebuilt by Gabinius and Herod
the Great, ibid. ; its mixed popula-
tion of Semites and Persians, i. 197

Samaritans, the, hatred between Jews
and, i. 177 ; religion of, temp. Christ,


ibid. ; reverence of, for Pen tat .
i. 184 n. 2; Simon said to appear
to, as the Father, i. 192 ; appeal of
Simon's doctrines to, i. 1

Sammael, a name of Ophite Ophio-
morphus, ii. 52; identified with
Satan in Ascension of Isaiah, ii. 69
n. 2, 75 n. 1

Samothrace, seat of Cabiric Mysteries,
i. 61, 136 n. 2; the god of, called
Adam, i. 137 n. 1, 139 n. 1 ; ii. 54
n. 6

Sandracottus. See Chandragupta

Sapor or Shapur I, the Shah, exiles
Manes from Persia, ii. 281

Sarapis or (Lat.) Sera pis, the god, his
recluses or monks, i. 20, 80, 86;
charlatans round altars of (Plu-
tarch), i. 23; purification of
religion of, i. 24; typical statue
of, i. 49 ; Modius distinctive attri-
bute of, i. 50; Ptolemy compels
Egyptians to take him into their
temples (Macrobius), i. 52; early
temple to, at Puteoli, i. 53;
"Sarapis alone is Zeus," i. 55;
all Greek and foreign gods included
in, i. 56; merciful and com-
passionate to man, i. 58 ; friend of
man in next world, i. 59, 60;
initiation into "nocturnal orgies"
of (Apuleius), i. 64 ; special hymn
and air addressed to, i. 68, 72;
identified with Osiris (Minucius
Felix), i. 70 ; April festival of, i. 7 1 ;
Oracle of, at Alexandria, i. 77;
identified with Asklepios, i. 78, 87 ;
statue of, in Alexander Severus'
lararium, i. 82 ; statue and temple
of, at Alexandria destroyed Tby
Christians, i. 84 ; ritual of, adapted
to Christian use, i. 85 ; joint wor-
ship of, and Christ (Hadrian), i. 86 ;
trinity of, Sarapis, Isis, and Horus,
i. 88; the "Great God "(Mag. Pap.),
i. 101, 104, 125 n. 3 ; representation
of, on scarab used in Jewish spell,
i. 106, 107; identified with Sun.
i. 118; books buried in tombs of
worshippers of (Ael. Aristides), L
132 n. 3 ; Simon Magus may have
borrowed from religion of, i. 198;
Phrygian deities identified with,
ii. 31 ; appears as Zeus on Mithraic
monument, ii. 238 n. 2 ; splendour
of worship of, contrasted with that
of Mithras, ii. 269

Sargon, King of Akkad, astrological
tablets going back to reign of,
L 113, 114


412


Index


Sarmizegetusa, Mithraie monument
at, ii. 264

Sarrebourg, Mithraie monument at,
ii. 264

Satan, cosmocrator or world -ruler to
Essene initiates (Kohler), i. 153 n.
4 ; Marcion called the first-born of,
ii. 10; maker of the body in Gnos-
ticism, ii. 54 n. 2 ; enemy of world-
creating angels and god of Jews
(Saturninus), ii. 89 ; cosmocrator in
system of Valentinus, ii. 108;
active agent of matter in that of
Marcion, ii. 210; composite form
of, in that of Manes, ii. 291 ;
antagonist of Manichaean First
Man, ii. 293; imprisonment of
Manichaean, after Ecpyrosis, ii.
297; called Hummama by later
Manichaean s, ibid. ; and Great
Archon, ii. 298 ; and Sindid, ii. 304.
See Sammael

Saturn, the planet, presides over
category of terrestrial things, i.
116; soul of dead reincarnated
when S. in certain position (Texts
of Saviour), i. 118 n. 1; one of
seven heavens in Ophite system, ii.
48 ; connection in Diagram between
S. and demon Michael, ii. 75; set
over 360 rulers of wicked powers
(Texts of Saviour), ii. 182; in
Mithraism soul descends through
sphere of, ii. 256; lead associated
with, ii. 257 n. 4; in same, lowest
initiate's soul will return to sphere
of, ii. 265

Saturninus or Saturnilus, the here-
siarch, a native of Antioch, ii. 9;
his Docetism, ii. 17; confusion as
to name of, ii. 20 n. 1 ; a follower
of Simon Magus and predecessor
of Basilides and the Nicolaitans
(Epiphanius), ii. 25 n. 5; makes
god of Jews one of the seven world-
creating angels (Irenaeus), ii. 47 n.
3; denounces marriage and pro-
creation as work of Satan, ii. 89;
Valentinus later than (Epiphanius),
ii. 93 n. 3

Saulasau, mystic name of secondary
world used by Ophites, ii. 94 n. 3

Saviour, The Texts of the, time of
reincarnation dependent on planet-
ary motions, i. 118 n. 1 ; ii. 185 n.
2 ; affinity of male and female soul
explained, i. 195; sexes united at
the length, i. 196 n. 2; rebellion
of half the Twelve Aeons in, ii. 48
n. 4, 152 n. 1 ; body of man made


by evil daemons, ii. 54 n. 2 ; place
of punishment of wicked souls
above the earth, ii. 69, 182 n. 1 ;
planet Jupiter ruler of the Five
Planets, ii. 73 n. 1 ; the angel
Zarazaz called by name of demon
Maskelli, ii. 75 n. 1, 148 n. 3; the
Serpent of Outer Darkness the
Outer Ocean, ii. 78, 155 n. 4, 166
n. 2; repeats Basilides "one in
1000 and 2 in 10,000," ii. 92 n. 3,
172; many members of the
Ineffable One, but one body, ii.
145 re. 2 ; Jeu the First Man over-
seer of the Light and Legate of
First Precept, ii. 147 n. 5; the
Books of Jeu written by Enoch in
Paradise, ibid. ; Melchizidek Great
Receiver of the Light, ii. 148 n. 2,
154 n. 1 ; Great Sabaoth the Good
and Gate of Life, ii. 149 n. 2;
Great Iao the Good, leader of
Middle, ii. 149 n. 3 ; Virgin of Light
has seven virgins for assistants,
ii. 150 ; Barbelo called (35e\\r) in, ii.
151 n. 4 ; the Kingdom of Adamas
opposite the place of the Virgin of
Light, ii. 152 n. 1 ; Ialdabaoth in,
one of the torturers in hell, ii. 155
n. 3 ; says Baptisms and Chrism
lead soul into Place of Light, ii. 167
n. 1 ; renunciation of the world leads
to Mysteries of the Light, ii. 167
n. 2; thaumaturgic Eucharist of,
ii. 172 n. 3, 192; sacraments called
Mysteries of Light, etc., ii. 173 n. 1
the MS. of, described, ii. 180
cannot be Valentinian, ii. 180 n. 3
gives prayer of Jesu? in unknown
tongue, ibid. ; puts souls of Patri-
archs in Place of Jabraoth, ii. 182
n. 2 ; extracts from other documents
probably mixed with, ii. 182 n. 3,
183 n. 2 ; threefold division of soul
into Power, Moira and Counterfeit
of the Spirit, ii. 184; no division
of mankind into pneumatic,
psychics and hylics in, ibid. ;
magic recommended for conver-
sion of heathen, ii. 185; Pistis
Sophia mentioned in, as daughter
of Barbelo, ii. 186; Orphics' cups
of oblivion and memory reappear
in, ibid. ; unknown words of prayer
of Jesus in, like those of Marcus'
baptismal formula, ii. 189; sacra-
ments of Bruce Papyrus resemble
those of, ii. 193; degradation of
belief in, ii. 194; returns to native
Egyptian ideas, ii. 195-198; fear


Index


4i:j


of hell sanction of belief in, ii. 198 ;
quoted, i. 118 n. 1, 195 n. 1, 196 n.
2; ii. 54 n. 2, 75 n. 1, 78 nn. 4, 5,
92 n. 3, 145 n. 2, 147 n. 5, 148 nn.
1, 3 ; 149 n. 2, 150 nn. 2, 3, 5, 152
n. 1, 154 n. 1, 155 nn. 3, 4, 166
n. 2, 167 ww. 1, 2, 172 nn. 3, 4, 173
n. 1, 180 nn. 1-4, 182 nn. 1-3, 183
nn. 1-3, 184 n. 4, 185 nn. 1, 2, 186,
187, 198, 199

Saviours, the Twelve, furnish spotless
souls for the Twelve Apostles
(Pistis Sophia), ii. 136, 147

Saviours, the Twin, "the boy of a
boy" (Pistis Sophia), ii. 142, 171;
reappear in Texts of Saviour and
Bruce Papyrus, ii. 193; functions
of, never alluded to, ii. 355 n. 2

Prof. A. H., his translation of
omen or astrological tablets from
Nineveh, i. 114

Sches-Hor, the, royal tribe of earliest
invaders of Egypt, i. 36

Schmidt, Dr Carl, his text and trans-
lation of Pistis Sophia and Bruce
Papyrus, ii. 13 n. 2, 190

Schmiedel, Dr P. W., revives Tubingen
theory that Simon Magus is St Paul,
i. 179 n. 3; his mistake about
Menander, i. 199 n. 7; on com-
munity of goods, ii. 2 n. 3

Schwartze, Maurice G., transcriber
and translator of Pistis Sophia,
ii. 13, 134

Scythia, in story of Manes probably
means Turkestan, ii. 285; Addas
disciple of Manes missionary to,
ii. 352

Scythianus. father of Manes in
Christian tradition, ii. 285 ; identi-
fied with Patecius or Fatak (Kess-
ler), ii. 285 n. 2; may represent
non-Aryan Medes, ii. 286

Sebaste, name of Samaria when
rebuilt by Herod, i. 177

Secrecy, of Mysteries of Eleusis very
strict, i. 41 ; as to burial of
Dionysos at Delphi, i. 47; as to
names of God and Goddess of
Eleusis (Foucart), i. 47 n. 1; of
initiation into Mysteries of Isis,
i. 62 ; of Alexandrian doctrine that
Osiris god of dead, i. 64 n. 3;
observed as to contents of chest
carried in procession of Isis, i. 73;
reason for, as to Mysteries of Eleu-
sis, their foreign origin (Foucart),
Ii. 130 n. 1 ; or jealousy, i. 139 n. 2 ;
of tenets of Hellenizing Jews, i.
175 n. 2; as to Dying God not


observed by Cretan-, n |i, ; f
Gnostics as to their opinion*, ii. 18;
of Ba8ilide8' follow <
of Manichaeans, ii. 356

Secunderabad, preserves name of
Alexander, i. 5

Secundus, the Valentinian, a lea.i
the Italic School, ii. 119; imagine*
"a right and left tetrad, i.e. light
and darkness" (Hippolytus), ii.
147 n. 4

Seistan, part of Persian Empire, i. 1 ;
Alexander when in, said to receive
grapes from Greece, i. 4 n. 1

Seker or Socharis, the god, a very
ancient deity in Egypt, i. 32;
dreary life in next world of his
worshippers, ii. 195

Seleucus I Nicator, grants privilege*
of citizenship to Jews in all cities
of his Empire, ii. 28; affection of
Persians for, ii. 224

Seleucus II Callinicus, defeated by
Parthians under Arsaces, ii. 224

Semele, mother of Dionysos on his
second or third incarnation, i. 40
n. 4, 42, 145; in Alexandrian
religion Dionysos called the fruit
of the vine S., i. 64 n. 3 ; Dionysos
son of S., Zagreus re-born, i. 125

Seneca, last speech of, ii. 87

Sepher Jetzirah and Sepher Zohar,
books of vith or vnth century a.d.,
ii. 35. -See Cabala

Septuagint, the, familiarizes Jews with
Old Testament, i. 157; belongs to
Western Diaspora, ii. 53 n. 2. Set
Peshitto

Serapeum, the, Egyptian, at Memphis
separated from Greek, i. 51 ;
AtheniaD, facing the Acropolis, L
52; oracle of Serapis at Alexan-
drian, i. 55; represented on Her-
culaneum fresco (von Biasing),
i. 68 n. 1 ; Bryaxis' statue in.
i. 78 n. 2; recluse in S. of
Memphis, i. 79, 80 ; destruction of
Alexandrian, i. 83-85

Serapis. See Sarapis

Serpent, Dionysos begotten by Zeut
in form of, i. 42; live, used in
Sabazian rites, i. 138; in Orphic
poems represents earth, i. 145 a. 2 ;
Ophites = worshipper8 of, ii. 26 *,
4; "Bull father of serpent,
ii. 39; external Ocean figured as,
ii. 49; in Asia Minor emblem of
goddess' husband, ii. 49 ». 3 ;
emblem of Dionysos and soul of
world, ii. 50, 55; called "Michael


414


Index


and Sammael" (Ophites), ii. 52;
taught to coil round Eucharistic
bread (Ophites), ii. 61; called
Leviathan in Diagram, ii. 70, 77 ;
Christian mob kill Ophite, ii. 77;
drops out of Ophite teaching,
ii. 78; enemy of sun-god in
Egypt, ibid. ; "serpent and dove,"
ii. 135 n. 3 ; death figured as seven -
headed, ii. 156 n. 3; Outer
Darkness s. with tail in mouth,
ii. 183; part of, in Mithraic
Tauroctony, ii. 245; represents
earth on Mithraic monuments, ii.
247, 250; "the World-ruler, the
Great S." in Magic Papyrus, ii. 256.
See Tarentum

Set, the god, murderer of Osiris, i. 33 ;
defeated by Horus, i. 34 ; his wife
Nephthys comes over to Osiris, i.
35; Perabsen returns to worship
of, i. 36 ; aided in war by Ethio-
pians, i. 37; the "Osiris whom S.
murdered" in Magic Papyrus, i.
92 n. 2; Typhon Greek equivalent
of (Plutarch), i. 105; magician
threatens to tear S. limb from limb,
i. 125 7i. 3; like Osiris, a great
power or daemon (Plutarch), ii.
16 ; sect of Sethiani possibly named
after him, ii. 74 n. 4

Seth, Ophites accept Genesis' account
of, ii. 52; of Sethiani may be
Sitheus of Bruce Papyrus, ii. 76 n.
4; Manichaean or Mandaite story
of, ii. 304

Seth, The Paraphrase of, Apocrypha
used by Sethiani, i. 175 ; ii. 53 n. 3 ;
and by Ophites, ii. 79

Sethiani, the, sect derived from
Orphics (Hippolytus), i. 175; Si-
monians and they, only Gnostic
sects not admitting Jesus' divinity,
ii. 15 n. 1 ; their connection with
Ophites, ii. 27, 76; Ialdabaoth
appears in system of (Theodoret),
ii. 46 n. 3 ; a Jewish but apparently
non-Christian sect, ii. 53, 76. See
Linus

Severus, Caius Julius, Hadrian's
general, lays waste Palestine, i. 170

Severus, the Emperor Septimius,
imitation of Alexander temp., i. 14
n. 1

Shamash, the god, sun-god of
Chaldaeans identified with Mithras,
ii. 241

Shapur. See Sapor

Shapurakan, the, of Manes quoted,
ii 307


Shem, identified by Moses of Chorene
with Zervan, i. lx

Sheol, dreariness of Jewish, i. 58, 150 ;
Gentiles to be swallowed up by
(Enoch), i. 161

Sheshonq or Shishak, King of Egypt,
suzerain of Solomon, i. 31

Shilluks, the, Nilotic tribe who wor-
ship secondary god, but not
Supreme Being, ii. 39 n. 5

Shimnu, Buddhist Devil appearing in
Khuastuanift, ii. 335 n. 1

Shishak. See Sheshonq

Sibyl, the, announces decline of
worship of Serapis and Isis, i. 86;
Jewish forgeries in name of, i. 173

Sicarii or Zealots, escape before Fall
of Temple to Africa and commit
outrages, ii. 5 n. 3

Sicilians, the, call Isis "Stygian
Proserpine," i. 56

Sicily, scene of Rape of Proserpine
(scholiast on Hesiod), i. 40; Isis-
worship brought into, by Hiero II,
i. 53 ; Orphic gold plates found in,
i. 131; Demeter and Persephone
tutelary deities of, i. 135

Sidon, Mithraic monuments at, ii.
251 nn. 1, 4

Sige or Silence, female consort of
Bythos in Valentinian system, ii.
96, 98 ; called also Charis or Grace,
ii. 96 n. 5

Simon of Cyrene, crucified instead of
Jesus (Basilides), ii. 17

Simon Magus, accused of magic by
Hippolytus, i. 110; thinks souls
attracted into bodies by sexual
desire, i. 153 n. 3; founder of pre-
Christian sect, i. 176; traditional
account of Simon's life and death,
i. 178 ; German theory that S. was
St Paul, i. 179 ; his Great Announce-
ment, i. 179, 180; his borrowings
from Zoroastrianism, i. 181 ; ii.
232, 291 ; his succession of similar
worlds, i. 183; his aeons, andro-
gyne, i. 184 ; ii. 38 n. 4 ; his system
compound of Greek and Hebrew
traditions, i. 184, 185; his aeons
places as well as persons and
periods, i. 187; his account of
creation of man, i. 188, 189;
teaches transmigration of souls, L
190; Simon's "redemption" of
Helena of Tyre, i. 191 ; discrepant
accounts of his death, i. 192; his
theory as to division of sexes,
i. 193-196 ; ii. 355 ; sources of his
doctrine, i. 197, 198; history of


Index


415


sect, i. 198, 199 ; his heresy source
of all subsequent Gnosticism, i.
200-202 ; allegorical interpretation
of Scripture by, i. 201 n. 1 ; ii. 82,
213; said to be follower of St
John Baptist, ii. 6 n. 4; does not
admit divinity of Jesus, ii. 15 ; his
Docetic teaching, ii. 16; Satur-
ninus' heresy derived from, ii. 25 n.
5; system of, owes much to his
personality, ii. 26; borrowings of
later heresies from, ii. 41 n. 1, 49 ;
analogy of Ophite cosmogony with
that of, ii. 43 ; gives independent
origin to matter, i. 44 ; calls Helena
Sophia, ii. 45 n. 1 ; connection
between story of, and Pistis Sophia,
ii. 60 n. 1 ; triple division of nature
common to system of, and that of
Ophites, ii. 63, 64; his "flaming
sword" and double axe, ii. 67 n. 3;
did his doctrines reach Alexandria ?
ii. 89 ; Basilides a link between him
and Valentinus, ii. 93 ; Valentinian
name of Ennoia possibly taken
from system of, ii. 97 ; aeonology
of Valentinus resembles that of,
ii. 99, 100; Marcion a disciple of
(Irenaeus), ii. 207 ; story of Helena
reproduced in Christian account of
Manes' predecessor, ii. 285 n. 3.
See Apophasis, Epiphanius, Euse-
bius, Hippolytus, Irenaeus

Simonians, the, enter Church in secret
after Constantine (Eusebius), i.
200 n. 3; ii. 18 n. 3; why the
first Christians neglected, ii. 2;
headship of sect of, ii. 6

Sinai, Mt, law proclaimed on, i. liii;
ii. 211 ; Messiah of Jews to appear
on (Enoch), i. 160

Sinope, Bryaxis' statue of Serapis
comes from, i. 48; birthplace of
Mithridates the Great and of
Marcion, ii. 204

Sissek, in Croatia, Mithraic monu-
ments found at, ii. 237

Sistrum, still used in Abyssinian
Church, i. 86 n. 4

Sitheus, power or aeon mentioned in
Bruce Papyrus, ii. 76 n. 4

Siut or Assiut, Apuat originally god
of (Maspero), i. 33 n. 1

Skin, coats of, metaphor for material
body (Philo), ii. 52 n. 2; (Valen-
tinus), ii. Ill n. 1; {Pistis Sophia),
ii. 136 n. 1

Smerdis, the false. See Gaumata

Smyrna, inscription identifying De-
meter and Persephone found at,


i- 46 n. 1; statue of female
Dionysos from, i. 47 n. 4; Sera-
peum at, i. 52

Socinians, alone of xvrth cent,
reformers deny divinity of Jesus,
ii. 20

Socinus, founder of sect of Socinians,
ii. 19, 20

Socrates, the philosopher, his mono-
theism (Pater), i. 10; conceals hi*
doctrines from everybody but
Plato, i. 1 1 ; convicted of bringing
new gods into Athens, i. 15;
image of, in lararium of Alexander
Severus, i. 82

Solomon, King of Israel, believes in
other gods than Yahweh, i. 1 1 n. 3 ;
vassal to Sheshonq, Kins of Egypt,
i. 31, 160 ra. 4

Solomon, The Odes of, quoted by
Lactantius and the Pistis Sophia,
ii. 157 n. 2

Solomon, The Psalms of, Greek text
and translation of, by Viteau and
Martin noticed, i. 164 n. 1

Sonhoods of Basilides, ii. 91; corre-
spondence of, with Ophite system,
ii. 93

Sophia, the Ophite called Prunioos,
ii. 45 ; mother of Ialdabaoth, ii. 46 ;
advises creation of man, ii. 51;
brings about Fall of Man, ii. 52;
arranges births of John Baptist
and Jesus, ii. 53; lays aside her
material body (Irenaeus), ii. 57;
chief agent in redemption of the
light, ii. 58; Christos sent to her
assistance, ii. 59; descends with
Christos into Jesus, ii. 60, 79;
leaves Jesus at Crucifixion, ii. 60;
her Fall referred to in Naassene
Psalm, ii. 62; her world above
hebdomad of planets, ii. 64; her
place in Diagram, ii. 68, 69, 75;
connected with Barbelo, ii. 74 n. 1 ;
her " middle space," ii. 75 ; becomes
serpent (Irenaeus), ii. 78, 82 n. 1 ;
Justinus' finds type of, in He-
rodotus, ii. 81, 82 ; the Holy Spirit
of Basilides, ii. 94; replaced in
Pistis Sophia by Virgin of Light,
ii. 158; absent from Marcion's
system, ii. 214. See Achamoth,
Mother of Life, Prunicos

Sophias, the Valentinian, (1) Sophia,
the youngest of the Aeons and
last of Dodecad, ii. 101 ; her Fall,
ii. 104; she gives birth to Ec-
troma, ibid. ; Christ and the
Holy Spirit draw her within


416


Index


Pleroma, ii. 105; (2) Sophia With-
out, the Ectroma or abortion of
foregoing, ii. 104, 114; her identi-
fication with the Earth, ii. 104 n. 4 ;
form given to her by Christos and
the Holy Spirit, ii. 106 ; Jesus sent
as spouse to, ibid. ; matter, the soul,
the spirit, and the substance of
demons made from her passions,
ii. 107 ; her heaven called the
Ogdoad, ii. 108 ; called the Mother
of All Living, ii. 110 n. 1 ; her
heaven the heavenly Jerusalem, ii.
1 10 ; sends angels into chosen souls,
ii. 110, 112; pneumatic souls be-
long to, ii. 112; Demiurge learns
from, ii. 114; psychic souls receive
instruction in heaven of, ii. 115;
descended into Virgin Mary, ibid. ;
at Crucifixion soul of Jesus re-
turns to, ii. 116; identified with
Achamoth, ii. 117 n. 2; story of,
omitted from Pistis Sophia, ii. 161 ;
mentioned in Gat has, ii. 300 n. 2;
called Mother of Life in Mani-
chaeism, ibid. See Victorinus

Sophocles, Orphic legends known to,
i. 128

Soul, the, Serapis called the Saviour
of, i. 60; pre-ordained destiny of,
comes in with astrology, i. 119;
soul buried in body as in charnel-
house, i. 127 ; transmigration and
final fusion with Dionysos of,
i. 129, 148; Essene belief in
pre-existence of, derived from Or-
phics, i. 156; an angel or daemon
imprisoned in body (Philo), i. 174;
division of, into male and female
which seek each other (Simon
Magus), i. 195, 196; of Jesus
returns to the different worlds
whence drawn (Basilides), ii. 17;
of the world, the god of the
Greek mysteries, ii. 50, 51 ; three-
fold division of man's (Ophites),
ii. 53 ; man's soul, part of soul of
world, ii. 55; Christos unknown
to Ialdabaoth receives souls of
initiates, ii. 60; the righteous soul
must change from choic to psychic
and from psychic to pneumatic,
ii. 65; defences of, in passage
through planetary spheres, ii. 71-
74; Demiurge sends souls of men
into bodies (Valentinus), ii. 109, 112
n. 3 ; men's souls one of three
classes, ii. 112; souls of psychics re-
ceive further instruction in Heaven
of Sophia, ii. 115; Apostles receive


souls from Twelve Saviours instead
of from Archons (Pistis Sophia),
ii. 136 ; St John Baptist born with
soul of Elijah, ii. 137, 149, 150;
soul of Jesus taken from Great
Sabaoth the Good, ii. 139, 149;
souls of men during Millennium and
after death, ii. 164, 165; effect of
mystery of First Mystery upon
soul of dying, ii. 167 ; effect of
mystery of Ineffable upon man's
soul after death, ii. 170, 171;
punishment of sinning souls (Texts
of Saviour), ii. 182, 183, 186, 199;
the Counterfeit of the Spirit
duplicate of soul proper, ii. 184;
cup of oblivion given to soul after
punishment, ii. 187 ; fate of the
soul in Pharaonic Egypt, ii. 196,
197 ; passage of soul to sun in
Mithraism, ii. 264, 265 ; all lights
fragments of soul of world (Mani-
chaeans), ii. 295 n. 2 ; soul of man
according to Manes, ii. 307 ; fate
at death of soul of Perfect Mani-
chaean, ii. 309; of soul of Zoro-
astrian in Avesta, ii. 310, 311;
fate at death of souls of Manichaean
Hearer and of sinner, ii. 311,
312

Spain, monuments of Alexandrian
gods found in, i. 53, 66 n. 2;
Mithraic monuments found in, ii.
230

Spencer, Herbert, applies survival of
fittest theory to religions, i. lii ; his
Euhemerism, i. 19

Spenta-Armaiti, mother of Gayomort
in Avesta, i. lxi; one of the
Amshaspands and identified with
Wisdom (Sophia), i. 181 n. 1;
ii. 45 n. 1, 300 n. 2; identified
with Vedic Aramati, ii. 45 n. 1 ;
and with Mother of Life in Mani-
chaeism, ii. 300 n. 2

Sphinx, the, dream of Thothmes IV
concerning, i. 77 n. 2

Spirit, the Holy, called the First
Woman by the Ophites, ii. 40;
forms Trinity with Father and
Son, ii. 41 ; Christos son of, by the
Father-and-Son, ii. 42; birth of
Sophia from, ii. 44, 45 ; blue circle
in Diagram, ii. 68; with Christos
emanates from Nous and Aletheia
(Valentinus), ii. 105; with Christos,
makes the Ectroma into perfect
aeon, ii. 106; retires within Ple-
roma, ii. 106, 114

Spirit, the Living, in Manichaeism,


Index


417


recalls the First Man from Dark-
ness after his defeat, ii. 294;
discrepancy as to part played by
him in deliverance of First Man,
ii. 295 n. 1 ; creator of the lights
in Acta Archelai, ii. 298 n. 2;
Demiurge or Architect of Uni-
verse (Alex, of Lycopolis), ii. 302
n. 1 ; speaks word like pointed
sword, ii. 302 n. 1, 324; called "a
white dove" in Tun-huang MS.,
ii. 302 n. 1; the Third Person of
Manichaean Trinity (Faustus), ii.
319; member of second not first
triad in neo-Manichaeism, ii. 324

Splenditenens, great Angel in Mani-
chaeism who holds heavens by
their backs, ii. 298 ; son of Living
Spirit in Tun-huang MS., ii. 298 n.
1; and in Bar Kh6ni, ii. 325;
bewails captivity of the Light, ii.
332

Sr6sh or Sra6sha, the Angel of
Obedience in Mazdeism and the
Tertius Legatus of Manichaeism,
ii. 327 ; probably the "Father" of
St Augustine's "love song," ii. 331 ;
the "Mighty God" of the Khua-
stuanift, ii. 341 n. 2 ; mentioned by
name in Tun-huang MS., ii. 355

Stahelin, Prof. H. , his theory of forgery
in documents used by Hippolytus,
i. 175 n. 5; ii. 11, 12 n. 1

Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn, Roman
nobles and the Jewish synagogue,
i. lv n. 1

Statira, daughter of Darius and
Alexander's second wife, i. 6, 12

Stauros or The Cross, Valentinian
aeon projected by Bythos as guard
to the Pleroma, ii. 105, 124;
referred to in Pistis Sophia, ii. 140 ;
personified in Gospel of Peter, ii.
140 n. 2. See Cross

Stoics, the, not popular in Rome of
early Empire, i. 19; say all gods
different forms of one Divine
energy, i. 56 ; Alexandrian religion
may owe something to, i. 60;
Essenes take doctrine of Ecpyrosis
from (Hippolytus), i. 155 it. 2;
Tarsus one of principal seats of,
ii. 83; Marcion educated in
philosophy of, ii. 204; their
Ecpyrosis may pass into Mithraism,
ii. 250; their philosophy dear to
best Roman minds, ii. 274; their
Ecpyrosis may have come to them
from Persians, ii. 297 n. 1

Strabo, quotes Megasthenes' story of

i* n.


gold-digging ants, L 2 n. 1 ; men-
tions Candace Queen of Ethiopians,
i. 37 n. 1 ; gives Iacchos important
place in Mysteries, i. 40 n. 4

Stratiotici, a sect connected with the
Ophites (Epiphanius), ii. 27 n. 1

Sulayman Shah, xvnth century
inscription likening him to Alex-
ander, i. 14 n. 2

Sulla, worship of Alexandrian gods in
Rome, temp., i. 53; college of
Pastophori at Cenchreae date*
from, i. 74 n. 2; Chaldaeans in
Rome, temp., i. 108 n. 2

Sumer, probable source of First Man
legend, i. lxiii n. 1 ; astrology first
practised in, i. 113

Sunday, compromise of Church as to
coincidence of, with Lord's Day,
i. 118; kept as fast byManichaeans,
ii. 343 7i. 2, 349; Manichaeans
worship Sun on (St Augustine),
ii. 349 n. 4

Suriel, name of planetary world in
Diagram, ii. 70

Susa, one of the four capitals of
Persian Empire, i. 3 ; Alexander's
marriage of Europe and Asia at,
i. 5; Greeks flock to, i. 7; Ono-
macritos flees with Pisistratids to,
i. 121; Orphic legends possibly
learned by Greeks at, i. 122 n. 3,
126 n. 3

Swedenborg, Emanuel, ideas of Simon
Magus revived by, i. 202

Sykes, Major P. H., inscription in
Khorassan discovered by, i. 14 n. 2

Symmachus, Quintus Aurelius, life of,
described by Sir Samuel Dill, ii. 359

Syncrasis or Blending, member of
Valentinian Decad, ii. 101

Synesis, in Diagram, ii. 68; member
of Valentinian Dodecad, ii. 101

Synesius, bishop of Ptolemais, bis
hymn to the Ineffable Bythos
quoted, ii. 37 n. 1

Syria, Buddhist mission to, i. 20;
only road of attack on Egypt,
i. 29; Adonis legend in, i. 37;
Hadrian's visit to, i. 86 n. 5;
earth -goddess worshipped through-
out, i. 126 ; Palestine buffer State
between Egypt and, i. 151 ;
Antiochus Epiphanea' attempt to
consolidate power of, ibid.; Jews
call in Romans against, i. 163;
proconsul of, rebuilds cities destroy-
ed by Jews, i. 177; spread of
Simonians in, i. 199; name of
Highest applied to god of, ii. 31 ;

27


418


Index


the great goddess of, called Atar-
gatis and other names, ii. 45 n. 1 ;
Ophites spread throughout, ii. 76
Syria Dea. See Atargatis

Tacitus, the historian, on foundation
of Alexandrian religion, i. 44 n.
1 ; describes bringing of Bryaxis'
statue to Alexandria, i. 48 n. 3 ;
calls Jews enemies of the human
race, i. 167. See Manetho, Timo-
theos

Talmud, the, calls Babylonian Jews
the Ten Tribes, ii. 32; existence
of Cabala indicated in (Kuenen),
ii. 35 n. 2; Yahweh's Council or
familia (Taylor), ii. 43 n. 2 ; First
Man in (Harvey), ii. 52 n. 1 ;
Ophite stories find their way into,
ii. 53

Tammuz, analogy of Dionysos with,
i. 122 n. 3 ; women weeping for, in
Temple of Jerusalem, ii. 32

Tarentum, unnamed poet of, author
of "serpent father of bull" verse,
ii. 39 n. 4

Tarn, Mr W. W., attributes story of
Antigonos' deification to Antigonos
Gonatas, i. 19 n. 1

Tarsus, a centre of Stoic teaching, ii.
83

Tartarus. See Gehenna

Tatian, the heresiarch, a disciple of
Justin Martyr, becomes heretic
from ambition, ii. 8 n. 3 ; his
opinions and connection with
Marcion, ii. 220

Taurobolium, the (or blood bath),
adopted by Mithraists from worship
of Cybele, ii. 259; allusion to, in
St Augustine, ii. 261 n. 2

Taxo, mystic name of Antiochus
Epiphanes' opponent in Assumption
of Moses, i. 170

Taylor, Thomas, the Platonist, first
translator of Orphic hymns, i. 141
n. 2

Telesterion, the, Hall of Initiations
at Eleusis used for torchlight
meeting, i. 39; no entry into, for
uninitiated, i. 41 ; could not have
held more than 3000, i. 65

Tenedos, temple of Alexandrian gods
at, i. 53

Terebinthus, name of Manes' teacher,
ii. 285, 286; also called Buddha,
ii. 285; suggested meaning of
name, ii. 285 n. 4

Termessus, worship of Alexandrian
gods at, i. 53


Tertullian, interest of heathen in early
centuries in ethical questions, i.
xlix n. 1 ; ii. 86 ; supposed
astonishment of, at jra-^-Constan-
tinian ritual (Gibbon), i. 85; first
to formulate doctrine of Trinity
(Harnack), i. 89 n. 2; accuses
Gnostics of magic and astrology,
i. 109 n. 1 ; says Valentinians give
heavens reason and make angels of
them, i. 187 n. 2; tract Adversus
omnes Haereses wrongly ascribed
to, ii. 10 n. 1, 25; accuses Gnostics
of concealing their opinions, ii. 18
n. 1 ; the like of innovating on
doctrines of their leaders, ii. 27,
28; makes Valentinus give a con-
sort to Bythos, ii. 96; his jests on
piled-up heavens of Valentinians,
ii. 99 ; his explanation of names of
Valentinian Ogdoad,ii. 99, 100 ; says
Valentinus becomes heretic because
not made bishop, ii. 117; date of
Valentinus' separation from Church,
ii. 118; his own heretical views on
Trinity, ii. 122 ; his formal heresy
Montanism, ii. 123 n. 1 ; describes
respect paid by primitive Church
to martyrs, ii. 127 ; says Gnostics
make adherents in time of persecu-
tion, ibid. ; refers to baptism for
dead, ii. 168 n. 4; "the Sophia
not of Valentinu*. but of Solomon,"
ii. 178; had probably read the
Pistis Sophia, ii. 179; his account
of Marcion's life, ii. 204; of
Marcion's repentance and death, ii.
205; ''Marcionites make Churches
as wasps make nests." ii. 206;
his testimony to good morals
of Marcion and Marcionites,
ibid. ; on Marcion's rejection of all
Gospels but Luke's, ii. 208; Anti-
theses of Marcion can be recon-
structed from refutation of, ii. 209;
his dictum that Marcion can never
prove existence of highest God,
ii. 210 n. 2; on Marcion's anti-
Jewish views, ii. 211 ; on Marcion's
dealings with Pauline Epistles, ii.
212 ; controversy between Marcion
and T. recommended to Modernists
(Foakes-Jackson), ii. 215 n. 1;
says Marcionites sect largest but
one, ii. 216; his sophistry in refu-
tation of Marcion, ii. 218; quotes
Lucian the Marcionite's doctrine
on resurrection, ii. 220; "Mithras
is my crown," ii. 245, 253 n. 3;
says initiate into Mithraic mys-


Index


I!!.


teries baptized for remission of
sins, ii. 260 ; says Supreme Pontiff
of Mithras may only marry once
ii. 268 n. 4; quoted, i. xlix n . I,
109 n. 1, 187 n. 2; ii. 18 n. 1, 27
28, 86 n. 1, 96 n. 5, 99 n. 1, 100
n. 1, 117 n. 3, 118 n. 2, 127 nn. 1
3, 168 n. 4, 178 nn. 2, 4, 179
nn. 2-7, 204 ran. 3, 4, 5, 205 nn. 1
2, 206 nn. 1, 4, 5, 208 n. 1. 210
n. 2, 211 nn. 1, 3, 4, 5, 212
nn. 1, 6, 7, 8, 213 nn. 1, 2, 4,
215 n. 5, 216 nn. 1, 3, 6, 218 nn
1, 3, 220 n. 5, 260 n. 5, 263 n. 3,
268 n. 4
Testament, the Old, names of God in,
used for magical purposes, ii. 33;
Greek version of, belongs to
Western Diaspora, ii. 53 n. 2;
Ophites quote freely from, ii. 81 ;
known to Ophites in Peshitto
version, ii. 84 ; rejected by Marcion,
ii. 208 ; used by Marcion's follower
Apelles, ii. 219; scenes from, on
Mithraic monuments (Oumont), ii.
277; rejected by Manes, ii. 278,
350; quoted, i. 10 nn. 1, 2, 96 n. 3,
156 n. 4, 165 nn. 1, 6, 180 n. 1;
ii. 32 nn. 1, 2, 33 n. 1, 43 n. 2,
45 n. 1, 85, 94 n. 3, 114 n. 3, 136 n.
1, 155 n. 3, 210 n. 3. See Daniel,
Ezekiel, Habakkuk, Haggai, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Joel, Zachariah

Testament, the New, frequent mention
of magicians in, i. 108 ; account of
Simon Magus in, i. 176; Ophites
quote from all the Gospels and
most of the Pauline Epistles, ii. 81 ;
Marcion's treatment of, ii. 208;
Manes calls himself Paraclete
announced in, ii. 351 ; quoted, i.
108 n. 6, 145 n. 1, 176, 177 n. 5,
182 n. 4, 188 n. 1, 191 n. 3; ii. 3 n.
3, 4 n. 1, 6 n. 3, 25 nn. 5, 6, 28 n. 3,
29 n. 1, 32 n. 5, 42 n. 4, 53 n. 2,
57 n. 2, 64 n. 3, 89 n. 4, 117 n. 1,
123 n. 3, 131 n. 1, 135 n. 3, 159 n. 3,
161 n. 4, 169 n. 5, 170 n. 1, 172 n. 1,
180 n. 4, 212 nn. 1-5, 7, 9, 213
nn. 1, 3, 288 n. 3. /See Apoca-
lypse, Gospel the Fourth

Tetragrammaton, the four-lettered
name of Yahweh, i. 100 n. 4; ii.
47 n. 3 ; used in most spells, ii. 34 ;
Adonai substituted for original
name in O.T., ii. 71 n. 1. See
Akae, Beqa.

Thales of Miletus, his doctrine that
water is the beginning of all things,
ii. 36


Thartharaoth, magic word used in
Diagram, ii. 71

Thauthabaoth, the like, ibid.

Thebee, the Greek, i. 6, 13; the
Egyptian, succeeded by Memphis
as religious capital, i. 51

Thebuthis, leader of early Met men-
tioned by Hegesippus, ii. 6 *. 4;
said to be first who corrupted the
Church becauso not made biabop,
ii. 8 n. 3

Thekla, relations between her and
St Paul in Pagan eyes, i. 179 m. J

Theletos or Desired, member of Valcn-
tinian Dodecad and spouse of
Sophia, ii. 101

Themistius, the neo-Platonist, says
philosopher should know n.
gions, but belong to none, ii. 270

Themistocles, goes to 8 us* when
banished, i. 7

Theocrasia. See Egyptians, Greeks,
Ionia

Theocritus, the poet, shows Adonis
worshipped as form of Osiris, i. 66 ;
like Apuleius makes Thessaly home
of sorcerers, i. 108

Theocritus, Bishop of Chaloedon,
rabbles Ophites in vth century, ii.
77

Theodore bar Khoni, gives number of
Ophite planetary heavens as ten,
ii. 70 n. 2; says Bardesanes
teaches that world made from five
substances, ii. 291 n. 3; makes
surrender of First Man to Satan
tactical, ii. 294 n. 2; amplifies
earlier account of deliverance of
First Man, ii. 295 nn. 1. 2, 302 n. 1 ;
does not mention Wheel, ii 297 *. 2 ;
his elaborate account of creation of
man and other animals, ii. 304 n. 1 ;
his Book of Scholia, its date and
authorship, ii. 321. See Appellant
and Respondent, Ban, Kaahgar,
Manichaeism

Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia,
writes against Magi, ii. 237

Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, for
spread of Simonians, i. 199; on
Third Person of Ophite Tm.
ii. 42 n. 5; says Ophiomorphus
changes from good to evil, ii. 78;
boasts conversion of 100 Marcion-
ites, ii. 216
Theodosius, the Emperor, sanctions
demolition of heathen temples in
Alexandria, i. 83
Theodoti, Excerpta, preserved by
Clement of Alexandria, ii. 10 n. 1 ;


420


Index


represent teaching of Anatolic
School, ii. 109 n. 1; describe
repose of spiritual and psychic
souls until Consummation, ii. Ill
n. 1 ; astrological destiny of man
modified by baptism, ii. 115 n. 3;
Jesus receives tincture from plane-
tary worlds in His descent, ii.
116 n. 1; quote opening words
of Fourth Gospel, ii. 117 n. 1,
177 n. 4; date of, ii. 158 n. 1;
astrological doctrine among Gnos-
tics first prominent in, ibid. ;
quoted, ii. 109 n. 1, 111 n. 1, 115
n. 3, 116 n. 1, 117 n. 1, 177 n. 4

Theodotus the Valentinian, a native
of Byzantium, ii. 9 ; a leader of the
Anatolic School of Valentinians,
ii. 119; followers of, worship
Melchizidek 'Hippolytus), ii. 148
n. 1

Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria,
"the perpetual enemy of peace and
virtue" (Gibbon), i. 83; procures
destruction of the Alexandrian
Serapeum, i. 84

Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, first to
mention by name St John's Gospel,
ii. 178

Theophrastus, mentions in his Cha-
racters the Orpheotelestae, i. 140

Theopompos of Chios, Plutarch's
authority for statements about
Zoroaster, i. lxii; ii. 214 n. 2, 289
n. 3; gives independent principle
to evil, ii. 289 n. 3

Theoris, priestess of Athenian con-
fraternity convicted of sale of
poisons, i. 23 n. 2

Theotokos, the, worship of Virgin
Mary as, introduced at destruction
of Serapeum, i. 85

Thersites, murder of, by Achilles leads
to first instance of purification
among Greeks, i. 121 n. 4

Theseus, made immortal because son
of divine father, i. 18

Thessaly, inhabitants of, called Thra-
cians, i. 136. See Theocritus,
Thracians

Thian, Chinese god compared to
Egyptian Nu (Maspero), i. 73
n. 4

Thibet, Manes retires to, when exiled,
ii. 281

Thomas, the Apostle, in Pistis Sophia
one of the three recorders of the
words of Jesus, ii. 157; all
apocrypha attributed to, probably
Manichaean (Dufourcq), ii. 351


Thomas, missionary despatched by
Manes into Syria, ii. 352

Thomas, The Gospel of, used by
Ophites, probably not that now
extant, ii. 79

Thoth, the god, the ibis-totem brought
into legend of Osiris, i. 35, 36;
epithet of, made name of Roman
writer on magic (Maspero), i. 108
n. 1

Thothmes IV, King of Egypt, dream
of, regarding Sphinx of Gizeh, i. 77
n. 2

Thrace, gods of, early brought into
Athens, i. 16; Orphic teaching
comes into Greece through, i. 122,
136 ; worship of Theban Dionysos
comes from, i. 136

Thracians, the, to Greek writers,
inhabitants of Macedonia and
Thessaly, i. 136; their horror of
birth and delight at death (Hero-
dotus), ibid.

Thrasea, the "Stoic saint" (Dill),
ii. 87

Thueris, the goddess, called "great of
sorcery, cat of Ethiopia" in Magic
Papyrus, i. 37 n. 1

Tiamat, the goddess, heaven and earth
made out of her dead body in
Babylonian legend, ii. 44 n. 3;
story of, perhaps reproduced by
Ophites, ibid. ; and by Mani-
chaeans, ii. 295 n. 2

Tiberius, the Emperor, exiles wor-
shippers of Isis to Sardinia, i.
53, 78; no Christian converts of
rank in reign of, ii. 8 n. 5

Tiele, Cornelius Petrus, on dislike of
Hellenists for comparative method,
i. 1 7i. 2; says science of religions
long looked on with suspicion, i. liv

Tigranes, King of Armenia, his tyranny
in Phrygia, ii. 29

Timon of Phlya, his contempt for
philosophers of Museum, i. 45

Timotheos, the Eumolpid, with
Manetho founds Alexandrian re-
ligion, i. 44; name may be typical
only (Bouche-Leclercq), i. 44 n. 1 ;
his use of Eleusinian Mysteries, i.
61

Timothy, son of Eunice, of Jewish
descent, but not circumcised
(Ramsay), ii. 28 n. 3

Titan, name equated with Ham by
Moses of Chorene, i. lx

Titans, the, murderers of Zagreus, L
37; tear Zagreus in pieces from
jealousy, i. 42, 125 ; sons of Heaven


Index


421


and Earth, i. 125; in Orphic myth
entrap infant Zagreus, i. ibid. ;
blasted with lightning by Zeus,
ibid. ; introduced into Zagreus
legend by Onomacritos, i. 126 n. 3 ;
man in Orphic teaching made out
of ashes of, i. 127; Orphic con-
tempt for body which belongs to,
i. 128; disguise of, recalled in
Sabazian rites, i. 138; the second
Dionysos torn to pieces and eaten
by, i. 144 ; Orphic hymns invoke,
i. 146; parallel to jealousy of, in
system of Simon Magus, i. 190 n. 2 ;
representation of blasting of, on
Mithraic monument, ii. 254

Titus, the Emperor, repeated rebel-
lions of Jews after destruction of
Temple by, i. 163; ii. 5; Essenes
survive capture of Jerusalem by,
i. 170 ; Christians regarded as Jews
till time of, ii. 4

Tobit, The Book of, Ophites quote from,
ii. 81

Trajan, the Emperor, in his time
knowledge of Latin not necessary
at Rome, i. 9 ; atrocities committed
by Jews throughout East, temp.,
i. 172 n. 1 ; the Didache not later
than (Duchesne), ii. 7 n. 2; earns
title of Parthicus by his Eastern
victories, ii. 225; conquers Dacia
and colonizes it with Orientals,
ii. 271

Tranquillina, wife of Gordian III,
i. 24

Transmigration of Souls, doctrine of
Pythagoreans taken over by
Orphics, i. 127 ; origin of belief in,
i. 129 ; doctrine of, in Pindar, ibid. ;
initiation into Mysteries frees from,
i. 130, 134; taught by Simon
Magus, i. 196 ; variations of
doctrines in the Ophite system,
ii. 65, 75; in that of Valentinus,
ii. 1 15 ; in that of the Pistis Sophia,
ii. 164, 165, 173; in that of the
Texts of the Saviour, ii. 183, 187;
in the worship of Mithras, ii. 264,
265; in Manichaeism, ii. 308

Trees, the Five, of the Pistis Sophia,
powers of the Treasure-house, ii.
141 ; the Great Powers of the
Right emanate from, ii. 147

Tridynami, or Triple Powers of the
Pistis Sophia mentioned in the
address of the powers to Jesus, ii.
143 ; the Great Propator, Barbelo
and the Authade,s, ii. 150, 151 ;
give birth to 24 Invisible Powers


of whom Pistis Sophia is the last,
ibid.

Triparadeisos, treaty of, confirms
Ptolemy Soter in possession of
Egypt, i. 30

Triptolemus, shown at Eleusis as
setting out to spread knowledge of
agriculture through world, i. 41

Tryphera, Athenian courtezan who
was member of confraternity, i. 22

Tun-huang, Manichaean treatise dis-
covered at, ii. 352 ; quoted, ii. 323
n. 3, 327 nn. 2, 4, 329 n. 1, 330
nn. 1, 3, 339 n. 1, 341 n. 1, 346
n. 1, 352, 353, 354. See Buddhas,
Dove

Turfan, Manichaean texts discovered
at, ii. 316, 317 ; quoted, 323 nn. 3,
4, 324 nn. 1, 4, 327 n. 2, 329 n. 1,
350 n. 4, 356 n. 4. See Jesus,
Mithras, Srosh, Virgin of Light,
Zervan

Tzimiskes, the Emperor John, settles
Manichaeans in Bulgaria, ii. 357

Ulpian, the jurist, his maxim that all
men are equal before the law, ii. 86

Ulysses, purifies Achilles for murder
of Thersites, i. 121 n. 4. See
Odysseus

Unas, King of Egypt, represented as
eating gods to obtain their power,
i. 125 n. 3

Uranus or Ouranos, the god, emas-
culated by Kronos his successor, i.
123; Dionysos descendant of,
i. 133; never represented with
stars, ibid. ; with his wife G8
corresponds to Simonian syzygy,
i. 185: presides over Third Age of
Orphics, i. 186; his wife Ge type
of all earth-goddesses, ii. 45 n. 1

Uranus, the planet, not known in
classical times, i. 116

Valens, the Emperor, syncretism of
Pagan religion, temp., i. 83

Valentinian I. the Emperor, Mithraic
inscriptions in reign of Valens and,
i. 83

Valentinians, the, grow up in atmo-
sphere of Orphic teaching, i. 128 n.
1 ; like Simonians, make heavens
persons as well as worlds, i. 187 n.
2; Docetism of, i. 191 n. 4;
probably quote from Peshitto
version of O.T., ii. 81 n. 1 ; perse-
cuted by orthodox, ii. 96; divide
into two schools, ii. 1 18, 119 ; views
of, as to Devil, ii. 108, 256; not

27—3


422


Index


a secret sect like Basilidians, ii. 126 ;
their compliances with heathenism,
ii. 126, 127; high price of their
mysteries, ii. 127 n. 4; their suc-
cess in Egypt, ii. 132; protected
by Julian, ibid. ; superseded by
Manichaeism, ibid. ; assign cor-
porate existence to Decad etc.,
ii. 160 n. 1 ; sometimes delay
baptism till deathbed (Tertullian),
ii. 168; say Catholics only capable
of salvation, ii. 173 ; of Hadrian's
time, not responsible for Texts of
Saviour, ii. 180 n. 3; most
numerous of heretics, ii. 216

Valentinus, the heresiarch, accusation
of disappointed ambition against,
ii. 8 n. 3 ; said to have been a Jew
(Neander), ii. 9 n. 1 ; Docetism of,
ii. 17; followers of, innovate on
his doctrines (Tertullian), ii. 27, 28 ;
connection between systems of V.
and of Simon, ii. 45 n. 1, 93; first
makes Gnosticism workable form
of Christianity, ii. 93 ; importance
of system of, in eyes of Fathers,
ii. 95; his Supreme Being, ii. 96,
97 ; his system of aeons, ii. 98-103 ;
its possible explanation, ii. 99, 100 ;
his Fall of Sophia and its conse-
quences, ii. 104-108; his Four
Worlds or "Places," ii. 108, 109;
his three species of souls, ii. 112;
his Christology, h. 113, 114 ; his life,
followers and successors, ii. 117—
121 ; his religion contrasted with
that of Church, ii. 121-124; his
obligation to Ophites, ii. 124, 143;
moral dangers of teaching of, ii.
127, 128, 129 ; services of, to Chris-
tianity, ii. 132, 133 ; revival in Paris
of religion of, ii. 133 n. 1 ; system of
Pistis Sophia resembles that of,
ii. 135, 158, 159; boundary Powers
common to both, ii. 140 n. 2; the
Power of P.S. and the Logoi of,
ii. 149 n. 5; verbal juggling com-
mon to both systems, ii. 169; V.
probable author of first two books
of P.S., ii. 177, 178, 179; religion
of, derived from Ophites, but de-
generates under Egyptian influence,
ii. 197, 198 ; heresy of, contrasted
with Marc ion's, ii. 204; links with
Manichaeism through Bardesanes,
ii. 291; quoted, ii. 110, 112 n. 3,
113 n. 1, 125

Valerian, the Emperor, captured by
Sapor I, ii. 226, 281 ; his defeat lets
Goths into Dacia, ii. 271


Varanes or Bahram I, the Shah, puts
Manes to death, ii. 281 ; institutes
persecution against Manichaeans,
ii. 317

Varuna, the god, invoked in Vedas
with Mithras, ii. 230-232, 248;
god of sky and prototype of Zeus,
ii. 231 ; a god of Mitannians or
Hittites, ibid.

Vatican, monument of Isis-worship in,
i. 73; papyri of recluse of Sera-
peum in Library of, i. 80 n. 1

Vedas, the, religion of, may have come
from Asia Minor, i. 122 n. 3;
associate Varuna with Mitra, ii.
232, 248

Veil, "within the," of Hebrews and
P. S., ii. 135; guardian of, ii. 148
». 3

Vellay, M. Charles, shows fusion in
first centuries of legends of Osiris,
Attis and Adonis, i. 55 n. 4

Ventidius Bassus, Publius, drives
Parthians out of Palestine, i. 161
n. 3

Venus, the goddess, identified with
Greek Isis, i. 56. See Aphrodite

Venus, the planet, omen of distress
among Assyrians, i. 1 14 ; a benefic
to Chaldaeans, i. 116 ; and in Texts
of Saviour, i. 118 w. 1 ; one of the
Ophite hebdomad, ii. 48; her
sphere in Diagram, ii. 74 n. 1;
ruled by power from Pistis Sophia,
ii. 162 n. 3, 180, 186 ; one of the five
which control the stars of Adamas,
ii. 182

Verethragna, the god, represented as
Hercules on Mithraic monuments
(Cumonn, ii. 258

Vespasian, the Emperor, dream sent
to, by Serapis in Temple at
Alexandria, i. 77 ; siege of Temple
of Jerusalem by, ii. 23

Victorinus of Pettau, probable author
of pseudo-Tertullian's tract against
heresies, ii. 25 n. 3 ; his story that
Simon calls Helena, Sophia, ii. 45
n. 1

Vincentius, tomb of, in Catacomb of
Praetextatus at Rome shows links
between Sabazius and Mithras, ii.
259 n. 2

Virgin of Light, the, perhaps men-
tioned in Ophite address to Asta-
phaeus, ii. 73 n. 2 ; causes soul of
Elijah to be planted in St John
Baptist, ii. 137, 150 ; her place and
office, ii. 137 n. 3 : one of the two
Leaders of the Middle, ii. 150;


Index


}•_'::


working agent in salvation of souls,
ii. 158 ; her dealing with soul which
has received lesser mysteries, ii.
165, 174; the like with second
mystery of First Mystery, ii. 167 ;
in Texts of Saviour gives the
"Power," ii. 184; sends soul of
slanderer into afflicted body, ii.
187 ; reappears in Manichaeism,
ii. 299 n. 1 ; in Manichaeism retires
into Moon at end of world, ii. 323
n. 4

Vohu Mano,the Amshaspand,reference
to, in Apocalypse of Salathiel, i.
167 n. 2; first of Amshaspands
in Avesta, i. 181 ft. 1 ; receives
faithful soul at death, ii. 311

Vologeses or Valkash, King of Parthia,
collects books of Avesta, ii. 278,
283; his attempt at reformation
of Zoroastrianism unsuccessful, ii.
284

Vonones, King of Parthia, his phil-
hellenism offends his subjects, ii.
282

Vulcan, the god, on Mithraic monu-
ment, ii. 238 n. 3

Way, the Middle, in Texts of Saviour
Jesus transfers himself and his
disciples to, ii. 182; a place of
torment, ii. 187

Wesley, John, founder of a "Free
Church," ii. 19

Wesselv, Dr Karl, edits Magic Papyri,
i. 101

Wheel of Salvation, in Manichaeism,
ii. 297, 306, 308. See Zodiac

Winckler, Dr Hugo, his astral theory
of Oriental religion, i. 115 n. 1;
his discovery of worship of Vedic
gods in Asia Minor, ii. 45 n. 1, 231

Williams- Jackson, Prof. A. V., puts
date of Zoroaster at 700 B.C., i. lxii

Woide, librarian of British Museum,
first draws attention to Pistis
Sophia, ii. 134

Woman, the First, the Holy Spirit of
the Ophites, ii. 40 ; at first female
form of Ophite Supreme Being,
later proceeds from Father and Son,
ii. 41 n. 2; story of superfluous
Light which falls from, ii. 44;
Sophia springs from left side of,
Christos from right, ii. 46; not
mentioned by Sophia when un-
deceiving Ialdabaoth, ii. 51 w. 5

Xenocrates of Chalcedon, his date,
i. 47 ft. 1 ; speaks of'a supernal and


infernal Zeus, i. 47 n. 1 ; |
6; makes Zeus both male and
female, i. 47/1.4; calls stars and
planets, gods, i. 180 «. 2

Xenophanes of Colophon, says
Demeter and Persephone the same
goddess, i. 46

Xenophon, authority for visit* of the
King's Eye to satraps, Lift I :
treats Socrates as polytheist, i. 1 1

Xisuthros, the Babylonian Noah, i.
be

Yahweh of Israel, a mountain god
to Syrians, i. 10; Hebrew Pro-
phets' and Psalmists' monotheistic
conception of, i. 11; associated
in magic with Zeus and Sera pis,
i. 107; according to Jews, pro-
mises them exclusive temporal
advantages, i. 150; on same
authority, makes world for sake of
Jews, i. 165; stars the viceroys
of (Philo), i. 187; the "Father"
of second or intermediate world of
Simon, i. 188 ; called Hypsistos in
Asia Minor (Cumont), ii. 31, 85 n. 3 ;
Anat and Bethel assessors of, at
Elephantine, ii. 32 n. 4, 43 n. 2;
name of, specially used in magic,
ii. 33; name of, ineffable after
Alexander, ii. 37 ft. 1 ; Sophia his
delight and instrument, ii. 45 n. 1 ;
called Ialdabaoth by Ophites, ii. 47 ;
in Ophite system, power below the
Supreme God, ii. 84; called the
Great Archon by BasiUdes, ii. 94;
probably the Jefl of Pistis Sophia,
ii. 148

Yazatas, the. See Izeds

Yezdegerd II, the Shah, Zervanist
sect dominant in Persia, temp., ii.
285

York, Mithraic monuments at, ii. 239

Yung, Dr iSmile, his views on hypno-
tism and crystal-gazing, i. 1 10

Zacchaei, the, Gnostic sect mentioned
by Epiphanius, ii. 27 n. 1

Zachariah, the Prophet, shows hatred
of Gentiles, i. 167 n. 4

Zagreus, the god, secret worship of,
in Greece in early times, i. 1 7 .
Cretan legend of, i. 37 ; the same
as taught at Eleusis, i. 42; and
by Orphics, i. 124, 125; Orphics
connect Passion and Resurrection
of, with history of man, i. 126;
Orphics teach that man's soul is
part of, i. 127; initiate become*


424


Index


identified with Zagreus by eating
raw flesh of victim, i. 128; identi-
fied with Iacchos at Eleusis, i. 130 ;
and with Sabazius, i. 137 ; called
"Highest of All" (Aeschylus), i.
137 n. 3 ; rites of Sabazius ex-
plained by legend of, i. 138;
sewing of heart of, in thigh of
Zeus and its result, i. 145

Zarazaz, cryptographic name of power
in Texts of Saviour otherwise
Maskelli, ii. 75 ft. 1, 148 ft. 3;
perhaps Guardian of Veil of Trea-
sure-house, ii. 148 n. 3

Zeesar, cryptographic name of
heavenly river among Ophites, ii.
94 n. 3

Zeller, his view of Philo's powers of
God, i. 174

Zend Avesta. See Areata

Zeno of Cyprus, why not quoted by
Ophite writers, ii. 83

Zervan, said by Moses of Chorene to
be the Patriarch Shem, i. lx;
Supreme God of Light in Tun-
huang and Turfan texts, ii. 323.
342, 343

Zervan Akerene, supreme divinity of
sect of Zoroastrian heretics, ii. 236 ;
head of Mithraic pantheon and
father of Ormuzd and Ahriman
(Cumont),ii. 252 ; Mihr Nerses' pro-
clamation concerning, ii. 285; be-
lief in, denounced in Khuastwinift,
ii. 339

Zeus, Crete or Asia Minor birthplace
of, i. 16 ; identified with many gods
of Asia and Europe, i. 17 ; father
of Zagreus by Persephone, i. 37, 42,
138; union with Demeter shown
in Mysteries, i. 40, 61 v. 1 ; Hermes
sent by, to Hades for deliverance
of Persephone, i. 41 ; father of
Dionysos his destined successor,
i. 46 ; the Z. of Phidias model for
Serapis, i. 49; "Serapis is Z.",
i. 55; Achilles' flattery of, i. 95;
identified in magic spell with
Serapis and Yahweh, i. 106, 107;
Orphic, swallows Phanes and be-
comes father of gods and men,
i. 123; his relations with Orphic
Dionysos, i. 124; blasts Titans
after murder of Zagreus, i. 125;
Orphic "an initiate of Idaean Z."
(Euripides), i. 128; man's soul a
descendant of, according to Orphics,
i. 133; relations of Orphic, with
Demeter and Persephone, i. 142,
144, 145 ; Titans enemies of, ii. 146 ;


identified by Orphics with Dio-
nysos, ii. 147; Samaritans offer
Antiochus Epiphanes to dedicate
Mt Gerizim temple to. i. 177 ;
Orphics assign last age of world
but one to, i. 186; called Metro-
pator by Orphics, i. 190 n. 1 ;
Barnabas hailed as, in Phrvgia,
i. 191 ft. 3; ii. 42; legend of Z.
and Persephone referred to Asia
Minor, ii. 49; Varuna perhaps
prototype of, ii. 231; "the whole
circuit of the sky" to Persians
(Herodotus), ii. 234; identified
with Ormuzd, ii. 237 ; on Mithraic
monuments, ii. 238, 254. See Ju-
piter, Polycleitos

Zeus Chthonios, "the God" of Eleusis,
i. 47 ; mentioned by Hesiod, i. 126 ;
identified with Hades and Dionysos,
i. 130; and with Adonis, i. 137;
the serpent lover of Persephone,
i. 145 n. 2

Zeus Labrandos, double axe symbol
of, ii. 67 ft. 3. See Lairbenos

Zodiac, the. in Texts of Saviour salva-
tion determined by entry of benefic
planet into certain signs of, i. 118;
in Pistis Sophia Twelve Aeons
means, ii. 137 n. 1, 154; Pytha-
goras' division of, ii. 144 n. 8 ; the
Twelve "members of Light" in
Manichaeism, ii. 293 n. 2; the
Wheel with twelve buckets in
same, ii. 297 n. 2; the twelve
daughters of the Third Legate, ii.
328

Zoe or Life, member of second Valen-
tinian syzygy, ii. 98

Zoroaster, Parsi belief in special in-
spiration of, i. liii ; religion of, once
shared with Buddhism and Christi-
anity behef of civilized world, i. lviii ;
Plutarch's date for, i. lxii ; religion
reformed by, may be pre-Homeric,
i. lxiii; date of, 700 B.C., i. 126 n. 3;
ii. 232 ; both Bardesanes and
Marcion borrow from (Al-Biruni),
ii. 214 «. 2; name and doctrine
of, known in West long before
Plutarch, ii. 234; reform of,
directed against worship of Ahri-
man (Rosenberg), ii. 253 w. 5;
Ardeshir entrusts Magi with pro-
pagation of reformed religion of,
ii. 280; divine origin of teaching
of, acknowledged by Manes, ii.
316

Zoroastrianism, borrows from Baby-
lonia, i. lxi; our ignorance of


Index


4iT>


origin and dates of, i. lxii ; adopts
theory of seven planetary spheres
surrounding earth, i. 117; Orphic
poems seem reminiscent of re-
formed, i. 122; late form of,
derives origin of man from death of
Gaydmort, i. 126 n. 3; fire which
burns wicked like warm milk to
just, i. 134 n. 1 ; doctrine of
Essenes said to be derived from,
i. 156; doctrine of Amshaspands


in, i. 181 ; likeness between post-
Exilic Judaism and (Cheyne), i. 1 B 1
n. 1 ; Simon Magus ideas in part
derived from (Franck), i. 197; re-
volt of Gaumata perhaps directed
against, ii. 233 ; its restoration and
reform by Ardeshir, ii. 284 ; Manes'
description of lot of justified taken
from, ii. 310
Zwingli, founder of a "Free Church,"
ii. 19


"cAMBBIT^T PBINXEn BY aOHN OUT, M.A. AT TH. UNIV.BSITT PBBSS


SELECTION FROM THE GENERAL CATALOGUE

OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY

THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS


Paganism and Christianity in Egypt. By Philip David
Scott-Moncrieff, M.A. With a frontispiece. Crown 8vo. 6s net.

The Religion of Israel. A Historical Sketch. By R. L. Ottley,
Canon of Christ Church and Hon. Fellow of Pembroke College, Osfcfd.
Crown 8vo. 4s.

The Idea of God in Early Religions. By F. B. Jevons,

Litt.D., Professor of Philosophy in the University of Durham. Royal i6mo.
is net in cloth ; in lambskin 2s 6d net. Cambridge Manuals Series.

Comparative Religion. By F. B. Jevons, LittD. Royal i6mo.

is net in cloth ; in lambskin 2s fjd net. Cambridge Manuals Series.

Roman Stoicism. Being lectures on the history of the Stoic
philosophy with special reference to its development within the Roman
Empire. By E. V. Arnold, Litt.D., Professor of Latin in the University
College of North Wales. Demy 8vo. 10s 6d net.

The Problem of Evil in Plotinus. By B. A. G. Fuller,

sometime Instructor in Philosophy at Harvard University. Crown 8vo.
7s 6d net.

The Realm of Ends, Or Pluralism and Theism. The

Gifford Lectures delivered in the University of St Andrews in the years
1907— 10. By James Ward, Sc.D., Professor of Mental Philosophy,
Cambridge. Second edition, with Some Replies to Criticisms. Demy 8vo.
12s 6d net.

"The Son of Man," or Contributions to the study of the
thoughts of Jesus. By Edwin A. Abbott, F.B.A., Hon. Fellow of St

John's College, Cambridge. Demy 8vo. 16s 6d net.

Light on the Gospel from an Ancient Poet. By Edwin

A. Abbott. Demy 8vo. 12s 6d net.

The Fourfold Gospel. By Edwin A. Abbott.

Section I. Introduction. Demy 8vo. is 6d net.
Section II. The Beginning. Demy 8vo. us 6d net.

Miscellanea Evangelica (1). By Edwin A. Abbott. Demy

8vo. 2s net.

Primitive Christian Eschatology. The Hulsean Prize Essay
for 1908. By E. C DewiCK, M.A. Demy 8vo. 10s 6d net.

The Interregnum. Twelve Essays on Religious Doubt. By
R. A. P. Hill, B.A., M.D. Crown 8vo. 4 s 6d net.

\Continutd ovtrUaf


Evolution and the Need of Atonement. By Stewart A.

M c Dowall, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge, Assistant Master at
Winchester College. Second edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo.
4s 6d net.

Evolution and Spiritual Life. By Stewart A. M c Dowall,

M.A., B.D., Trinity College, Cambridge, Assistant Master at Winchester
College. Crown 8vo. Price 6s net.

The Concept of Sin. By F. R. Tennant, D.D., B.Sc. Crown
8vo. 4s 6d net.

The Origin and Propagation of Sin. Being the Hulsean

Lectures delivered before the University of Cambridge in 1901 — 2. By
F. R. Tennant, D.D., B.Sc. Second edition. Crown 8vo. 3s 6d net.

The Sources of the Doctrines of the Fall and Original

Sin. By F. R. Tennant, D.D., B.Sc. Demy 8vo. 9s net.

Forgiveness and Suffering. A Study of Christian Belief. By
Douglas White, M.D. Crown 8vo. 3s net.

Modern Study of the Old Testament and Inspiration.

By the Rt Rev. T. H. Sprott, M.A. Crown 8vo. 3s net.

The Gospels as Historical Documents. By Vincent Henry
Stanton, D.D., Fellow of Trinity College, Ely Professor of Divinity.
Demy 8vo. Part I. The early use of the Gospels. 7s 6d net. Part II.
The Synoptic Gospels. 10s net. To be completed in four parts.

The Bible of To-day. By the Rev. Alban Blakiston, M.A.

Demy 8vo. 3s net.

St Basil the Great. A Study in Monasticism. By W. K.
Lowther Clarke, B.D., formerly Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net.

Nestorius and His Place in the History of Christian

Doctrine. By F. Loofs, D.D., Phil.D., Professor of Church History in
the University of Halle- Wittenberg, Germany. Crown 8vo. 3s 6d net.

The Holiness of Pascal. By H. F. Stewart, B.D., Fellow

and Dean of St John's College, Cambridge. The Hulsean Lectures, 1914-15.
With a frontispiece. Crown 8vo. 4s net.

Twelve Cambridge Sermons by John E. B. Mayor, M.A.,

F.B.A. , late President of St John's College and Professor of Latin in the
University of Cambridge. Edited, with a Memoir, by H. F.. Stewart, B.D.
With portrait. Crown 8vo. 5 s net.

Twelve Parochial Sermons by John E. B. Mayor, M.A.,
F.B.A. Crown 8vo. 2s 6d net.


Cambridge University Press

C. F. Clay, Manager : Fetter Lane, London


r


BINDING SECT. JAN 2 1974"


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
